Title: The Bloody Theater, or Martyrs' Mirror of the Defenseless
  Christians, Who Baptized Only Upon Confession of Faith, and Who
  Suffered and Died for the Testimony of Jesus, Their Savior, From the
  Time of Christ to the Year A.D. 1660
Creator: Thieleman J. van Braght (compiler, 1660 Dutch original)
  (Joseph F. Sohm, Translator)
Publisher: Scottdale, Pennsylvania / Waterloo, Ontario: Herald Press,
  1886 English-edition preface (this printing's own publisher's preface
  is dated 1886, matching the dossier's own citation)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: 1886 publication date places this well out of US
  copyright (140 years before this session, 2026); no explicit
  archive.org copyright-status field present on this item, so the
  determination rests on the stated publication date alone, per this
  project's standing PD-by-date rule.
Source: Internet Archive item MartyrsMirror
  (archive.org/details/MartyrsMirror), fetched directly (curl, raw
  bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file, 2026-09-24, this
  session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors; not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  this session - a large (~6.6MB) scan, flagged for a future pass to
  quantify before heavy quotation reliance, especially since it embeds
  named primary documents (e.g. Michael Sattler's trial record, Anneken
  Jans's prison testament) a Representative build may quote directly.

THE BLOODY THEATER 


OR 


P 


I V 


OF THE 

DEFENSELESS CHRISTIANS 

Who Baptized Only Upon Confession of Faith, and Who Suffered and Died 
for the Testimony of Jesus, Their Savior, From the Time of Christ to the Year A.D. 1660 

Compiled from Various Authentic Chronicles, Memorials, 
and Testimonies, by 

Thieleman J. van Braght 

Translated from the Original Dutch or Holland Language from the Edition of 1660 by 

Joseph E Sohm 
Illustrations by Jan Luyken 



Herald 
Press 




Scottddle, Pennsylvania 
Waterloo, Ontario 


Publisher's Preface to English Edition, 1886 

As THE English language, year by year, becomes more prevalent among our Mennonite people, the necessity of pre- 
senting to them in that language the doctrines, teachings, and practices, as well as the story of the sufferings, the faith- 
ful endurance, and the final triumphant deaths, of those of like faith with us who lived in the earlier ages of 
Christianity, becomes apparent to every reflecting mind. 

These doctrines, teachings, and practices together with the examples of faithful devotion to Christ and his Word, 
and the unfaltering endurance under the severest persecution, are powerful incentives to Christians today, to inspire 
many sincere souls to live a more consecrated life, to practice greater self-denial, to live more separated from the world, 
and show a greater zeal in the work of the Lord and the salvation of souls; and they are especially precious to us, as 
Mennonites, because through these people it pleased God to hand down to us the living exemplification of the pecu- 
liar tenets and doctrines which we hold and practice at the present day. 

The reading of books of this kind will also help us to appreciate more highly the privileges with which God has 
blessed us above our forefathers. While they oftentimes were not permitted to have permanent places of abode, and 
were driven about and hunted down like wild beasts, compelled to dwell in caves and mountains, and other secluded 
places, hold their meetings in secret, and suffer every imaginable form of injustice and persecution, because to be a true 
follower of Christ in those days was considered the very worst of crimes, we enjoy all the privileges of citizenship and 
are protected in the fullest enjoyment of our religion and forms of worship. 

It is the duty of the church to maintain and teach the pure gospel of Jesus Christ and to transmit the same to com- 
ing generations, and as we contemplate these facts, what a glorious treasure of pure Christian devotion shines in these 
pages of the story of the martyrs, and how much this grand record of their sufferings has done, and may yet do to per- 
petuate the pure doctrines of the gospel, eternity alone will reveal. 

For these reasons and many others that might be referred to, the publishers of this edition, have, in the fear of 
God, for the promotion of his glory, undertaken the publication of The Bloody Theater or Martyrs Mirror and herewith 
give it to the public, in the hope that it may be the means of promoting the glory of God and of doing much good 
among the children of men. 

NOTE — The translation of this work was made from the Dutch Edition of 1660, and where questions of doubt 
occurred, the edition of 1685 as well as the German editions were consulted. 

Publisher's Preface to the Second English Edition 

In 1742 the Mennonites of eastern Pennsylvania wrote to their coreligionists in the Netherlands reporting their 
numerical growth in the New World and their fear of war being imminent. Three years later they wrote again, repeat- 
ing the contents of their first letter and making a special appeal for assistance in the publication of a German edition 
of van Braght's Bloody Theater or Martyrs Mirror. The six Skippack ministers wrote they were concerned to prepare their 
people for testing and suffering which war would bring. They said, "It becomes us to strengthen ourselves for such cir- 
cumstances with patience and endurance, and to make every preparation for steadfast constancy in our faith." 

Two hundred and fifty years after the publication of the first American edition of this sixteenth-century Dutch 
classic in 1748, we still desire to strengthen our churches in the nonresistant Christian faith. By printing the Martyrs 
Mirror oil. J. van Braght (1625-64), we hope to nurture loyalty to the historic peace principles of the faith. The pres- 
sures of the surrounding culture upon our churches to surrender their historic principles are strong. Vigorous efforts 
must be made to teach biblical nonresistance and peacemaking. May God bless this effort. 

The first English edition of Martyrs Mirror, translated from the German, was published in 1837 at Lampeter 
Square, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and reprinted in 1853 at London, England. The second English edition, 
translated from the original Dutch edition of 1660, was published in 1886 at Elkhart, Indiana, and reprinted in 1938 
and later years at Scottdale, Pennsylvania. Second English edition, thirty-third printing, 2012. 

Martyrs Mirror, published by Herald Press, Harrisonburg, VA 22802; published simultaneously in Canada by Herald Press, Waterloo, Ont., N2L 6H7. 

Copyright © 1 938 by Mennonite Publishing House. 

Printed in the United States of America. 

Inrernational Standard Book Number: 978-0-8361-1390-7 

International Standard Book Number: 978-0-8361-9230-8 (Gift Edition) 


CONTENTS 


Publisher's Prefaces 2 

Translator's Preface 4 

Invocation 5 

Author's Preface 6 

To the Readers in General 11 

Introduction 15 

Of the True Church of God, Its Origin, Progress, and 

Immovable Stability, Through All Times 21 

Poems in the Original Language 61 

First Part 

Account of Holy Baptism 

First Century 63 

Second Century 100 

Third Century 118 

Fourth Century 153 

Fifth Century 187 

Sixth Century 20 1 

Seventh Century 213 

Eighth Century 220 

Ninth Century 232 

Tenth Century 247 

Eleventh Century 259 

Twelfth Century 270 

Thirteenth Century 300 

Fourteenth Century 321 

Fifteenth Century 334 

Account of Those Who Suffered 

First Century 67 

Second Century 104 


Third Century 125 

Fourth Century 172 

Fifth Century 197 

Sixth Century 209 

Seventh Century 217 

Eighth Century 227 

Ninth Century 240 

Tenth Century 255 

Eleventh Century 264 

Twelfth Century 291 

Thirteenth Century 303 

Fourteenth Century 327 

Fifteenth Century 340 

Second Part 

To My Beloved Friends, etc 353 

Preface to Second Part 355 

Account of Holy Baptism in the Sixteenth 

Century 363 

Account of Those Who Suffered in the Sixteenth 

Century 410 

Old Book of the Martyrs Mirror 413 

Account of Those Who Suffered in the Seventeenth 

Century noo 

Editorial Notes on Indexes 1 144 

Index of Anabaptist Martyrs (1525-1660) 1 145 

List of Popes and Roman Emperors 1150 

General Index \\5\ 

For Further Reading 1158 


List of Illustrations 


Frontispiece "Noble Army of Martyrs" 

Crucifixion of Jesus Christ 68 

Stoning of Stephen, the First Christian Martyr 71 

Beheading of James, the Son of Zebedee 72 

Stoning of the Apostle Philip 73 

Martyrdom of James, the Son of Alpheus 74 

Burning of Barnabas, a Companion of Paul 76 

Mark Dragged to the Stake '. 77 

Peter Crucified at Rome 80 

Beheading of Paul 82 

Andrew the Apostle, Crucified at Patras 87 

The Apostle Thomas Cast into an Oven 89 

Matthew, the Evangelist, Beheaded at Nadavar 90 

Martyrdom of Simon Zelores and Judas Thaddeus 92 

Marthias Hung on the Cross, Stoned, and Beheaded 93 

Luke Hanged on an Olive Tree 94 

Antipas Burned in a Red-hot Brazen Ox 95 

John Banished to the Isle of Patmos 97 

Vitalus Buried Alive at Ravenna 99 

Ignatius Devoured by Wild Beasts 106 

Phocas Put to Death in a Lime Kiln 108 

Christian;. Burned in Their Meetinghouses 132 

Second Examination of Tharacus 148 

Eulalia Refusing the Idol Worship 177 

God's Judgment on King Honoricus 200 

Clement of Scotland Burned by the Romanists 231 

John Mocked and Tormented 243 

Fourteen Persons Burned at Orleans, France 266 


William White Burned at Norwich, England 347 

Leonhard Keyser on the Way to Execution 42 1 

Two Young Girls Led to Execution 50I 

Apprehension of Andries Langedul 634 

Jakob Dircks Led to Place of Execution 725 

The Martyr Pietet Beckjen Teaching in a Boat 739 

Dirk Willems Saving His Captor's Life 74 1 

Jacob de Roore Confessing the Faith 775 

Willem Janss Burned at the Stake 831 

Fortune of Ursel van Essen §43 

Arrest of Hans van den Wege 855 

Martyrdom of Anneken Heyndricks 873 

Execurion of Wolfgang Pinder 875 

Twelve Christians Burned at the Stake 886 

Jan Wourerss and Adriaenken Jans Burned 898 

Torture of Geleyn the Shoemaket 930 

The Martyr Hans Knevel as a Prisoner 946 

Martyrdom of Jan Smit 953 

Adriaen Wens at the Place of Execution of His Mother 980 

Thirty-seven Believers Burned ar Antwerp 993 

Hendrick Pruyt Burned in a Boat 1006 

Tortute of Hans Bret 1038 

Louwerens Janss Led to Execution 1055 

Drowning of Hendrick Sumer and Jacob Mandel 1058 

George Wanger in the Dungeon ] 08 1 

Mattheus Mait's Sreadfastness j 090 

Anneken van den Hove Buried Alive 1 094 

Catharina Mulerin Apprehended mi 


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 


The principal object in writing this preface is to 
point out the chief difficulties I had to contend with 
while engaged in this truly laborious and ex- 
haustive task. I do this not for the purpose of ex- 
citing sympathy on my behalf, but to convey to the 
reader an appropriate idea of the perplexing na- 
ture of the work that has engrossed my closest 
attention, and absorbed so much of my energy and 
care for nearly three years. The reader will there- 
by be prepared to view with greater leniency the 
unavoidable inconsistencies and other imperfec- 
tions his critical eye may discover. 

First of all, I will state, that the original is writ- 
ten in a language that has now been obsolete for 
many years; which proved a very great obstacle, 
since no dictionary obtainable could at all times 
give the desired information; hence the meaning 
of many words and phrases had to be ascertained 
by long and laborious research and comparison, 
which necessarily did not always preclude the pos- 
sibility of an error, though I have taken great 
pains to give as correct a rendition as possible. 

Another feature of the original that frequently 
proved very trying is, that it consists in great part 
of letters written by comparatively illiterate per- 
sons, in consequence of which the language used is 
very often ambiguous or obscure, necessitating an 
incalculable amount of weighing and comparing, 
without affording certainty of having apprehended 
the writer's true meaning. 

Still another perplexing obstacle was the fact, 
that, many proper names occurring in the work, 
and foreign to the language of the original, having 
apparently been incorrectly transcribed, it was not 
always possible to determine the exact spelling of 
such names ; which, though desirable, is, however, 
not of any material consequence. 

But the greatest and most harassing difficulty of 
all was the circumstance that the version of the 
Bible used by the various authors of the work 
differed in many, and, sometimes, in very essential 
points from our English translation, making it an 
utter impossibility, to adopt an inflexible rule, 
without involving one's self in countless errors and 


misconstructions. The course I generally pursued 
was, that when the rendering of the passage, or 
passages, given or used in the original, almost 
coincided with, or at least did not materially differ 
from that of our English Bible, I would take the 
quotation in question verbatim from the latter; 
while, when the discrepancy was too considerable, 
or an argument depended on the exact rendition, 
I translated the phrase or passage to be quoted 
literally from the original. Hence the reader will 
perceive, that this made an absolute impossibility 
to adhere to one, invariable rule; and if he but 
knew the amount of careful thought, and anxiety, 
expended in drawing the line, when to quote from 
the English version, and when to translate literally, 
he could not but heartily sympathize with the 
translator, and kindly overlook any shortcomings 
he may discover. 

With regard to the marginal notes or remarks, I 
would state that I have invariably translated them 
when they contained anything necessary for the 
complete understanding of the subject under con- 
sideration ; but frequently they are simply a resume 
of a paragraph, or side remark of the compiler, 
without any information or value for the reader ; 
in this case I have omitted them. 

These are the chief points I would have the 
reader consider, for by bearing them in mind he 
will be enabled to judge understandingly, and also, 
charitably, of the manner in which the translator 
has performed his task. To claim that this trans- 
lation contains no errors would be simply prepos- 
terous, when all circumstances are taken into con- 
sideration; but I can truthfully say that I have 
conscientiously striven to furnish the reader with 
as correct a translation as it was in my power to 
give. How I have succeeded I leave to the reader 
to judge. Trusting that the contemplation of the 
faith, the self-sacrificing zeal, and the religious 
fervor of these martyrs of former ages will leave 
its imprint for good upon the hearts of those who 
shall read this book, I now consign it to the hands 
of the printer. 

Joseph F. Sohm. 


AUTHOR'S INVOCATION 


To God, my Lord, the Creator, Preserver and 
Redeemer of my soul, be praise, honor and maj- 
esty, forever and ever. 

Pardon me, O my Lord and my God ! that I, 
who am but dust and ashes, approach Thee. Gen. 
18:27. I fear to come to Thee, because Thou art 
a consuming fire, while I am wood, hay and stub- 
ble, subject to be burned ; yet I must not remain 
away from Thee, because I have that which is 
Thine, yea, which is Thy most precious treasure, 
even the blood and offering of the saints ; I must 
needs come and offer it to Thee. 

May it be well-pleasing to Thee, my dear Savior, 
that I offer that which long since has been offered 
up to Thee. But I have full confidence that Thou 
wilt not reject me. I believe I have the assurance 
that this will be acceptable to Thee, for Thy servant 
David, a man after Thine own heart, sang, "Pre- 
cious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his 
saints." Ps. 116:15.* 

Moreover Thou knowest, O my Saviour and 
Redeemer, the steadfast faith, the unquenchable 
love, and faithfulness unto death, of those of 
whom I have written, and who gave their precious 
lives and bodies as a sacrifice to Thee. 

Besides, Thou hast. spared my life, that I un- 
worthy and weak as I am for such a task, might 
yet perform it ; for snares of death had compassed 
me, keeping me bound nearly six months during 
last fall, winter and spring, so that I often thought 
I could not survive; nevertheless Thy power 
strengthened me, Thy hand rescued me and by 
Thy grace was I led safely through, so that in the 
midst of my difficulties and contrary to the advice 
and opinion of the physicians (for -the zeal and 
love of Thy saints had taken complete possession 
of me), I wrote and finished the greater part of 
this work. 

The sacrifices which are acceptable unto Thee 
are a broken spirit, etc. Ps. 51 :17. But this offer- 
ing, O God, was accompanied with many tears, 
caused partly by my distress, as I, on account of 
the weakness of my nature, called upon Thee for 
help, partly through joy, as I found and ex- 
perienced Thy comfort and help. 

Yet that which more than all else caused my 
tears to flow was the remembrance of the suf- 
ferings and the death of Thy martyrs, who alto- 
gether innocent, as defenceless lambs, were led to 
the water, the fire, the sword, or to the wild beasts 


in the arena, there to suffer and to die for Thy 
name's sake. However, I experienced no small 
degree of joy as I contemplated the living confi- 
dence they had in Thy grace, and how valiantly 
they fought their way through the strait gate. 

Ah ! how often did I wish to have been a par- 
taker with them; my soul went with them, so to 
speak, into prison;* I encouraged them in the 
tribunal, to bear patiently, without gainsaying or 
flinching, their sentence of death. It seemed to me 
as though I accompanied them to the place of 
execution, scaffold or stake, saying to them in 
their extremity, Fight valiantly dear brethren and 
sisters; the crown of life awaits you. I almost 
fancied that I had died with them ; so inseparably 
was my love bound up with them ; for Thy holy 
name's sake. 

I therefore entreat Thee once more, O my God, 
to let this sacrifice be well-pleasing in Thy sight, 
and to accept it from me, Thy most humble 
servant, as a token of love towards Thee as well as 
toward Thy blessed martyrs. 

But before I leave this, strengthen me with Thy 
good Spirit, and arm me with the consolation of 
Thy grace, that I may not only confess Thee here 
with my mouth, but also honor Thee by a virtuous 
and pious conversation (Ps. 119:5), in the most 
holy faith, not refusing, if necessity require it and 
Thy honor be promoted thereby, to give my life 
and body into suffering and death, so that I may 
become like unto Thy dearest friends, my slain 
fellow brethren and sisters, and receive with them 
the same reward in the great day of Thy recom- 
pense. Song of Sol. 1 :4. 

This is the desire and petition of him, whose 
name is known to Thee, and who entreats Thee 
for grace now and in the hour of his death, and in 
the ages of eternity. O Lord, so let it be I For 
Thine, O God, is the kingdom, and the power, and 
the glory, forever and ever. Amen. 

T. J. van Braght. 
Dort, July the 23rd, 1659. 


* Not only oxen and sheep, but also turtle doves and young 
doves were formerly acceptable offerings to Thee, O my God, 
and how much more the blood and death of Thy Saints. 


Note. — The Advertisement by the Dutch 
Publishers is omitted, as we deem it irrelevant to 
the present Edition. It contains a few plain state- 
ments of some amendments introduced in regard 
to obsolete words and phrases; that many note- 
worthy additions compiled from authentic records 
have been made, etc. — Translator. 

* What is said of Onesiphorus according to the body, we have 
experienced in the spirit. Paul says: "The tord give mercy unto 
the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not 
ashamed of my chain." II Tim. 1 ;16. 


AUTHOR'S PREFACE 


TO MY BELOVED FRIENDS AND COM- 
PANIONS IN CHRIST JESUS OUR 
SAVIOUR 


Next to God we are joined to our fellow-believ- 
ers who have received the same faith with us; and 
we shall therefore address ourselves to them. 

But most beloved, do not expect that we shall 
bring you into Grecian theatres, to gaze on merry 
comedies or gay performances. Here shall not be 
opened unto you the pleasant arbors and pleasure 
gardens of Atlas, Adonis or Semiramis, which are 
said to have been built in the air, and of which the 
ancients used to sing their merry lays ; yet far be it 
from us to conduct you to places of sadness, surely 
not to such as can, in verity, be called places of 
sadness. 

True enough, we shall lead you into dark val- 
leys, even into the valleys of death (Ps. 23:4), 
where nothing will be seen but dry bones, skulls, 
and frightful skeletons of those who have been 
slain; these beheaded, those drowned, others 
strangled at the stake, some burnt, others broken 
on the wheel, many torn by wild beasts, half de- 
voured, and put to death in manifold cruel ways ; 
besides, a great multitude who having escaped 
death bear the marks of Jesus, their Saviour, on 
their bodies, wandering about over mountains and 
valleys, through forests and wilderness, forsaken 
of friends and kindred, robbed and stripped of 
all their temporal possessions, and living in ex- 
treme poverty. 

Yet to look upon all this will not cause real 
sadness, for though the aspect is dismal according 
to the body, the soul will nevertheless rejoice in it, 
seeing that not one of all those who were slain 
preferred life to death, since life often was proffered 
them on condition that they depart from the con- 
stancy of their faith. But this they did not desire ; 
on the contrary, many of them went boldly on- 
ward to meet death; some even hastened to out- 
strip others, that they might be the first, who did 
not shrink from suffering anything the tyrants 
could devise, nay more than could be thought 
possible for a mortal man to endure. 

Among a great number we perceived a godfear- 
ing hero and knight of Christ,* who, advancing 

* This hero and knight of Christ we may understand to be one 
of Christ's apostles, but it may also very properly be inferred that 
reference is had to "Gerardus," who went singing before his com- 
panions to suffer for Christ's name. See first book about Arnold, 
Marsilius, Theodoric, and five other men and two women, who 
were burnt alive with him at Cologne. 


before others, went cheerfully unto suffering and 
death, in which he acquitted himself so well that 
he fought or pressed his way with such force 
through the strait gate, that he left his flesh on the 
posts. 

When we had beheld this with the eyes of faith, 
and had meditated upon the matter, our spirit was 
kindled, and we almost seemed to welcome him, 
and to wish him everything good, in these words : 

Klimt op kk/ gulden Hoogtt', Voor-vechter van 

de bende 
Der heyl'ge Zielen, die God's roode Bloed-banier 
Navolgde, in't gedrang, in't midden der ellenden, 
Daer niet dan rook en damp van menschen offer- 

vyer 
Tot door de wolken vloog; noch gingt gy Held haer 

voor, 
Ja streed, door d' enge poort, ten ruymen Hemel 

door. 

[Climb up your golden height, champion of the 
band of holy souls, who followed God's red banner 
of blood, in oppression and in the midst of misery ; 
where naught but the smoke and vapor of human 
burnt sacrifices ascended to the clouds; yet thou, 
hero, didst go before them, yea, didst fight thy way 
through the strait gate to the wide Heaven.] 

Then followed a great multitude of very pious 
and virtuous people — men, women, youths and 
maidens, all clothed with the same armor of faith 
and walking in the same path. Some of these were, 
like their leader, deprived of life ; the rest were led 
to different places of execution, where they beheld 
many of their fellow brethren and sisters whose 
lives had been taken by the most dreadful means — 
burned and roasted at the stake. They nevertheless 
were not terrified, though they had to expect to be 
put to death in the same manner ; but were of good 
cheer, calling upon God for help, that they might 
not falter in their sufferings, but prove steadfast 
to the end ; this clone, they also were burned. 

This seemed almost to break our heart; our 
soul was horrified, and filled with pity on account 
of their misery; but when we remembered their 
constancy, and that now, for the heat endured, 
they found refreshing with God, nay, could expect 
the blessed crown of immortal glory, our grief 
subsided and sweet consolation filled our soul, so 
that we, to their memory, wrote the following 
words for ourselves and our fellow brethren : 


6 


PREFACE 


Het schriklyk offer-vyer, de glinsterende staken, 
Den smaed, die Zion leed, kon God's verkoren volk 
Belet noch hinder doen, noch geensins angstig 

maken 
Te dragen Christi naem, als in sen witte walk: 
Tot dat een heete vlam haer lyven heeft verslonden; 
Waer door haer zielen toen by God verkoeling 

vonden. 

[The dreadful sacrificial fire, the shining stakes, 
the shame which Zion suffers, could neither disturb 
nor hinder God's chosen people, nor make them 
afraid to bear the name of Christ, as in a white 
cloud: Until a burning flame has consumed their 
bodies ; whereby their souls found refreshing with 
God.] 

Some were not only bold, but went forth unto 
death rejoicing, which was evident from their con- 
duct. Others showed this by their words, as they 
spoke of the consolation in their heart and the glad 
hope dwelling in their soul, when they were placed 
at the stake. Many, when the fire was kindled, and 
even when they were enveloped by the flames, sang 
with a loud voice to the honor of their God and 
Saviour, because they had been counted worthy to 
be offered up as sacrifices for His holy name's 
sake. Acts 5:41. 

Were we to relate the joy and consolation of 
those, who, having escaped death, wandered about 
in foreign countries and solitary places, without 
friends or kindred, help or assistance, time would 
fail us and the words be inadequate to sufficiently 
describe it. Here the testimony of Paul is found 
true, "that all things work together for good to 
them that love God." Rom. 8:28. For those who 
were forsaken by friends and human assistance, 
found help with the angels of God, and protection 
under the wings of the Almighty. Those who had 
no eternal rest or dwelling-place found rest and a 
mansion of content in their souls and hearts. Those 
who went almost naked, having no clothes to put 
on, were most preciously clothed and adorned 
according to the soul, with the robe of righteous- 
ness and the garment of salvation and godly virtues. 
Those who had to abandon their secular business, 
and submit to despoilment of their money, goods 
and everything they had, so that outwardly they 
were very poor, possessed great riches within 
themselves through the grace of God which they 
received through the consolation of the Holy Spir- 
it, and the word of the Lord, which was more pre- 
cious to them than many thousand pieces of gold 
and silver. 

The inconvenient seasons of the year, the heat 
of summer, the cold of winter, the wetness of 
spring and fall, together with the contingencies of 
thunder, lightning, hail, snow, rain, wind, hunger, 
thirst, sickness, fatigue, and other innumerable 
troubles with which they met while wandering 
about and suffering persecutions, were to them 
sweet pleasures and recreations in the Lord, for 


they knew that this would afterwards be turned 
into joy to them, since it is written : "Blessed are 
ye that weep now : for ye shall laugh." Luke 6:21. 
Again: "That we must through much tribulation 
enter into the kingdom of God." Acts 14:22. And, 
in another place: "If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him." II Tim. 2:12. 

This caused them to say with the apostle : "For 
our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory." II Cor. 4:17. "For-I reckon that 
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be 
revealed in us." Rom. 8:18. "For whether we live, 
we live unto the Lord ; and whether we die, we die 
unto the Lord : whether we live therefore or die, we 
are the Lord's." Rom. 14:8, etc. 

Many of them would not have exchanged th< 
darkest and severest dungeons, or the caves of the 
earth, in which they had to hide themselves, for 
royal palaces. The wilderness was to them a de- 
lightful pleasure-garden, the howling of the wild 
beasts which surrounded them, as sweet music or 
the songs of birds; and water and roots or dry 
bread delighted them more than the daintiest 
viands and drink from the tables of the great. 

All this was granted them by the munificent 
hand of God, on account of the constancy of their 
faith, from which they could by no means be made 
to swerve, nor brought to waver in it ; on account 
of their living hope, which begat in their souls a 
longing for the future riches, so that they were 
enabled to esteem the present ones as of little 
worth and forget them ; and on account of their 
unquenchable love for God, His holy truth, and 
their beloved fellow-believers, whereby their souls 
were kindled into a flame far more intense than were 
their bodies through physical fire though these 
were reduced to ashes. 

But can carnal men comprehend this ? Will any 
of them believe these things? We think not; for 
how can a carnal man partake of the Spirit of 
God? How could one who is earthly-minded as- 
cend to heaven in his thoughts? I Cor. 2:14. 
How can one comprehend that which pertains to 
salvation, who himself is altogether unsaved and 
possesses no desire to obtain salvation through the 
grace of God? What fire of divine love can he 
feel, whose heart is totally cold, and who loves 
nothing but sin and sinful creatures. 

We maintain, therefore, that these are things 
which belong not to the blind worldly-minded, 
since they in their ignorance would not esteem 
them; but to the heavenly-minded, who, as spir- 
itual eagles, contemplate with the eyes of the soul 
the mysteries of God; who seek their food with 
God, and find their delight in His saints and well- 
beloved who sacrificed their lives for His holy 
truth. 

For this cause we have addressed ourselves to 
you, most beloved brethren and sisters, who, with 


8 


PREFACE 


us, and with our slain friends, the blessed martyrs 
of God, have received the same faith. This book, 
the humble work of our hands, but which is never- 
theless a precious jewel, in view of the persons 
and matters contained therein, we have dedicated 
to you. Receive it, then, with the same love with 
which it has been dedicated to you. Read it again 
and again, and with the same attention and emo- 
tion with which we have written and re-written it. 
We are fully confident that, if you do this, it will 
not be unfruitful to you. But, before all things, 
fix your eyes upon the martyrs themselves, note 
the steadfastness of their faith, and follow their 
example. 

Ruth, the Moabitess, said to Naomi, the mother 
of her husband : "Entreat me not to leave thee, or 
to return from following after thee : for whither 
thou goest, I will go ; and where thou lodgest, I 
will lodge ; thy people shall be my people, and thy 
God my God : where thou diest, will I die, and 
there will I be buried : the Lord do so to me, and 
more also, if aught but death part thee and me." 
Ruth 1:16, 17. 

With such inseparable love ought we, most be- 
loved in the Lord, to be joined to our blessed 
fellow brethren who have been slain for the testi- 
mony of the Lord, that we might follow their foot- 
steps unto the end ; for surely, the God whom they 
confessed and served, is also our God ; the Saviour 
on whom they placed their hope is our Saviour ; the 
faith which they all confessed is our faith (we 
speak of Anabaptists in general) ; the law and 
commandments of God which they received as 
their rule of life are also our laws and command- 
ments; they bowed their knees before God; they 
obligated themselves by the words of their lips to 
render obedience tp God, and thereupon received 
holy baptism ; we have done the same ; they prom- 
ised to continue steadfastly all the days of their 
life in the faith and due obedience, without depart- 
ing therefrom, yea, if necessary, to suffer death 
for it; we have promised the same. What dif- 
ference, then, is there between us and them? 
Certainly only this : that they all persevered unto 
the end nay, unto a cruel death, without departing 
to the right or to the left; which we have not yet 
done. They have taken by force the blessed 
Fatherland, the Canaan rich with milk, the true 
promised land which flows with honey ; which we 
have not yet done. They have therefore entered into 
rest, yea, have come to the Lord ; while we are yet 
in unrest, proceeding in our pilgrimage in the 
absence of the Lord. 

Therefore, my most beloved friends in Christ 
Jesus, let us also in this last respect seek to be 
conformed to our beloved slain fellow brethren, 
that we may continue steadfastly unto the end in 
the most holy faith which we have confessed with 
them. Oh! be careful in this matter; watch over 
your dear-bought souls ; for it is highly necessary, 
yea, more necessary than at any former time. 


OF THE GREATER DANGER THERE IS AT THIS TIME, 

THAN IN THE BLOODY AND DISTRESSING 

TIMES OF THE MARTYRS* 

These are sad times, in which we live; nay, 
truly, there is more danger now than in the time of 
our fathers, who suffered death for the testimony 
of the Lord. Few will believe this, because the 
great majority look to that which is external and 
corporeal, and in this respect it is now better, 
quieter and more comfortable; few only look to 
that which is internal and pertains to the soul, and 
on which everything depends, "for what is a man 
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose 
his own soul ? or what shall a man give in ex- 
change for his soul?" Matt. 16:26. 

These times are certainly more dangerous; for 
then Satan came openly, through his servants, 
even at noon-day, as a roaring lion, so that he 
could be known, and it now and then was pos- 
sible to hide from him; besides, his chief design 
then was to destroy the body: but now he comes 
as in the night, or in the twilight, in a strange but 
yet pleasing form, and, in a two-fold way, lies in 
wait to destroy the soul ; partly, to trample under 
foot, and annihilate entirely, if this were possible, 
the only saving Christian faith ; partly to destroy 
the true separated Christian life which is the out- 
growth of faith. Ps. 91 :5, 6. 

He reveals himself on the one hand as an angel 
of light, II Cor. 11 :14, 15, as a kind, pleasant, yea, 
even divine messenger, with humble countenance, 
downcast eyes, plain garb, and living in seclusion 
from the throng of the worldly-minded, even as 
the holiest people, yea, the martyrs of God, form- 
erly did. His words are modest, trembling and 
full of contrition — seemingly coming from deep 
meditation, inward fear and apprehension, lest he 
might speak amiss or untruthfully. Meanwhile, 
and before one is aware of it, he seizes hold and 
tears like a wolf in sheep's clothing, robbing the 
innocent lambs of Christ of their precious faith, 
which, he pretends to be of small importance, but 
without which faith it is impossible to please God, 
Heb. 1 1 :6, nay, without which we, according to 
the words of Christ shall be condemned, Mark 16 : 
16; for (says Paul), whatsoever is not of faith is 
sin, Rom. 14 :23. 

It grieves us to the heart that we must live to see 
these times, and therefore speak in this wise. O 
Lord, strengthen our faith ! help Thy weak, trust- 
ing lambs, that they may not be led into error, nor 
moved from the foundations of the most holy 
faith. 

On the other hand, through his instigation, the 
world now reveals itself very beautiful and glori- 

* When Israel under Pharaoh, in Egypt, had to burn brick, and 
to perform other hard labor, for the king, they remembered God, 
yea, cried unto the Almighty, so that God was moved to compassion, 
Ex. chap. 1, 2, 3, etc.; but when God had delivered them, and 
brought them into a goodly land, where it went well with them 
according to the body, they forsook the Lord, and became wanton. 
Deut. 32:15. This difference is found to exist also between the 
times of oppression and the times of freedom. 


PREFACE 


ous, more than at any preceding time, in a three- 
fold pleasing form — the lust of the flesh, the lust 
of the eye, and the pride of life.* Almost all men 
run after her, to worship her as a queen supreme ; 
but all are deceived thereby ; yea, many who have 
drunk of the poisoned wine of her lusts from the 
golden cup of her iniquities and deceptions, die a 
spiritual death. 

As the first design is aimed at the faith, so this 
is directed against the true Christian life. Here 
lies great clanger. Who shall escape these snares ? 
He that would at no time be taken unawares by it, 
must indeed be cautious and watchful. But our 
very flesh seems prone to it. Here must be fasting, 
watching, praying, and calling upon God for help, 
otherwise there is no escape. 

Many of the ancients who supposed that they 
had been circumspect and observed their duty, 
were deceived herebyf; some were lulled into a 
careless sleep, so that they paid no heed to them- 
selves or to their vocation ; others were brought to 
despair of the divine truth ; others were drawn 
away totally from God; some died a spiritual 
death ; others died both spiritually and bodily ; and 
some have plunged themselves helter-skelter into 
the abyss of the disfavor of God, to be punished by 
Him soul and body and forever. 

These things which we tell you are no riddles or 
blind speeches, for we speak the truth, or the Word 
of God must be false ; but as the Word of God 
cannot lie, what we have said is certain and in- 
fallible since God in His Word bears witness of it, 
yea, declares it emphatically and abundantly. 
Other histories which make mention of this, we 
pass by in silence and dismiss them altogether, 
because we do not hold them in equal estimation 
with the holy Scriptures. It was the world and its 
lusts that of old caused all the great calamities of 
which we have spoken; and not only this, but it 
has also caused thousands who live in various 
cities, countries, kingdoms, empires, yea, on the 
face of the whole earth, to mourn, weep and wail, 
on account of their natural misery as well as on 
account of their experiencing the wrath of God in 
their souls because of the magnitude and enormity 
of the sins perpetrated by them. 

It certainly was through worldly lusts that the 
old world perished; that Sodom, Gomorrah, Ze- 
boim, and Admah were consumed, overthrown 
and totally destroyed by fire from Heaven ; that in 
forty years, through serpents, fire, and other 
plagues, the wanton and lustful people of Israel 
perished to the number of over six hundred thou- 
sand in the wilderness ; and that the mighty mari- 

* John, the friend of Christ, has presented the deceptive, beauti- 
ful appearance of this world in its threefold view of the lust of the 
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. I John 2 :16. Solo- 
mon portrayed the same as & harlot or wanton woman, who allures 
young men unto her ; who is loud and stubborn, and whose feet 
abide not in her house ; but whither those^ who follow her are led, as 
an ox to the slaughter, to certain destruction, nay, to death and hell. 
Prov. 7. 

f The following and other misfortunes which were caused by 
worldly and carnal lusts cannot be numbered. O, that Solomon, 
the wisest among the children of men, might have known, con- 
quered, and taken care of himself in this respect. 


time cities, Zidon and Tyrus, whose ships were 
trimmed with embroidered, silken sails from 
Egypt; whose rowers sat upon benches of ivory; 
where incalculable riches were bought and sold 
and, from carnal incentives, almost inconceivable 
arts practiced were reduced to a heap of stones 
and so leveled to the ground, that the fishermen 
stretch out their nets to dry on the rocks upon 
which these cities stood. Gen. 7 ; Matt. 24 :37, 38 ; 
Luke 17:26, 27; II Peter 2:5.— Gen. 19:24, 25; 
Isa. 13:19; Jer. 50:40; Hos. 11:8; Amos 4:11; 
Luke 17:28, 29; II Pet. 2:6; Jude 7.— Compare 
Num. 1 :2, 3, 46 with Num. 14:22, 23. Also Num. 
11:1 and 16:31-35; 21:6; Jude 5.— Isa. 23:4, 5; 
Ezek. 27 :26-28; 28, the whole chapter. 

I will not now speak of Jerusalem, Chorazin, 
Bethsaida; Capernaum, and other mighty licentious 
and luxurious cities, which, with all their inhabi- 
tants who had in this respect sinned against God, 
have borne His wrath, and felt, to their destruc- 
tion, the plagues of His afflicting hand ; for this 
would consume too much time.* O awful judgments 
of God! O pernicious worldly-mindedness ! O 
corroding and cankering luxury, that draggest 
after thee such a train of unspeakable miseries! 
Help, Lord, that our soul be delivered from all 
these dangers. 

But what danger would there be, if none but the 
open enemies of God and His holy truth were 
guilty in this matter? What harm could be done, 
if they alone, and no others, would arouse and call 
down upon themselves the wrath of God? For 
then every pious and serious soul would beware of 
their example as of a savage beast, venomous 
serpent, or deadly basilisk. But now such is the 
state of things that many commoners and such as 
are not total strangers to religion or the worship 
of God ; who, as they say, would fain be saved ; and 
who, therefore, though they are not truly enlight- 
ened, glorify and praise God and His Word with 
their mouth, show nevertheless (to the seduction 
of the simple) that the world is their dear friend, 
yea lies nearest to their heart, since most of their 
works are directed to its service, that they may 
thereby partake of its glittering but deceptive 
reward. 

Hence arises that shameful and vast commerce 
which extends far beyond the sea into other parts 
of the world, Ezek. 27, but which notwithstanding 
cannot satisfy those who love it, but, on the con- 
trary, brings great danger, that that which has 
already been gotten, may be lost, others defrauded, 
and they themselves, both in soul and body, strip- 
ped and robbed of their possessions. 

Numerous large, expensive and ornamented 
houses, country-seats of splendid architecture and 
provided with towers, parks magnificent as a para- 
dise, and other embellished pleasure-grounds, 
which are seen on every hand indicate this in no 
small degree. Dan. 4:29, 30. 


* See Josephus on the Jewish wars; also Egesippus, Eusebius 
and Pamphilius. 


10 


PREFACE 


The wearing of clothes from foreign countries, 
whether of foreign materials, uncommon colors 
or of strange fashions as obtain in the course of 
time according to the custom of the openly world- 
ly-minded (which are as changeable as the moon), 
and which custom is followed by many humble 
and seemingly plain people, confirms greatly what 
we have before said. Gen. 35 :2 ; Zeph. 1 :8 ; Isa. 
3:16-24. 

The giving and attending great dinners, lavish 
banquets and wedding-feasts (though one may 
never be found in taverns or tippling-houses), 
where everything is in profusion, and where the 
beneficent gifts of the Lord which should not be 
used otherwise than with great thankfulness, and 
of which a portion naturally belongs to the poor, 
are squandered and consumed without the least 
necessity, even by those who are considered sober 
and temperate, is an incontrovertible evidence of 
a sensual and wanton heart ; and proves also that 
those who have much to do with these things, can- 
not be exculpated from living after the flesh; for 
which carnal life certainly has no promise of sal- 
vation, but on the contrary, many severe threaten- 
ings of the wrath and displeasure of God, nay, of 
eternal damnation, are recorded in the blessed 
leaves of the Word of God, which contains noth- 
ing but the truth. Esth. 1 :3-8; Dan. 5:1-3; Luke 
12:19, 20; 16:19. 

O how different is this from the life of a true 
Christian, who has forsaken himself and his lusts . 
How great the step that is between their walk and 
that of the holy martyrs, who delivered up, not 
only their carnal desires, but also their bodies and 
lives, unto death for the Lord's sake! But how 
great a difference will also be between the two 
classes afterwards ! When the former, having had 
their good things in this life, shall be shut out from 
the true, heavenly riches, but the latter, because 
they have love to God, renounced and abandoned 
their possessions, which might have led them into 
sin, be admitted to the true enjoyment of the 
heavenly riches and pleasures, and that for ever 
and ever! Mai. 3:18. 

Here shall obtain what is recorded concerning 
the end of the luxurious rich man and that of 
poor Lazarus: that the rich man, when he saw 
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, while he himself 
was in hell, received this answer to his doleful 
lamentations: "Son, remember, that thou in thy 
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise 
Lazarus evil things : but now he is comforted, and 
thou art tormented." Luke 16:25. Appropriate is 
here also Wis. 5:1, 2. 

Nevertheless, these and similar evil examples 
are constantly presented to our eyes, and they are 
the more pernicious and dangerous for the reason 
that some worldly-minded people pronounce them 
to be non-essential, unimportant for either good 
or evil, and therefore, allowable; while it is the 
same with them as with the fruit from the tree of 
knowledge, which stood in the midst of Paradise, 


and was pleasant to the eyes, but deadly in the use, 
for whoever ate of it, had to die, Gen. 2:17; or 
with the apples which grow in the land of Sodom, 
on the border of the dead sea; which possess a 
beautiful red appearance, but contain, as some have 
written, only dust and ashes, and are inedible, nay, 
even deleterious to health. Bijb. Naemb. edition 
1<>3 2 > fol. 881, col. 2, concerning the name Sodom, 
ex Philippo Melanchthone. Also Bernh. Bredenb. 
in Tract, super Siddim. Also H. Buntung, Itinerar- 
ium sacrce scripturce edition 1642, lib. 1, pag. 62, 
col. 2, etc. 

O that Satan would show himself, as he really 
is, and that the world, too, might come forth with- 
out disguise or mask ; then certainly no one pos- 
sessing reason would allow himself to be deceived 
by them. For in Satan nothing would be seen but 
deadly snares, traps and murdering daggers for 
the soul, poisoned arrows wherewith to destroy 
everything good in man, through unbelief, apostasy 
from God, impenitent obduracy, and despair; 
which are followed by a train made up of; the fears 
of hell and horrors of damnation. In the world men 
would perceive nothing but vanity, mingled with 
much vexation, sorrow, grief and misery, and this 
in such abundance, that if as many tears could be 
wept over it, as there is water in all the sea and all 
the rivers, yet the weight of the true sorrow that 
springs from them it could not be adequately ex- 
pressed, for they draw after them not only 
temporal but also everlasting miseries. 

But, O how lamentable! all this is hid under a 
beautiful appearance. Satan appears to be a prince 
or king, and the world a noble princess or queen. 
The servants and servant-maids who follow them 
as pages and maids of honor, appear as cavaliers 
and ladies, reveling in joy and delight ; though, as 
regards the soul, they are poor and deformed, yea, 
meaner than beggars, and without the true joy 
which delights the upright soul in God.* 

There is, therefore, great danger of being de- 
ceived. O, ye upright children of God, be on your 
guard.f Let your simplicity be coupled with pru- 
dence. Your faith as well as your life are the ob- 
jects aimed at. If Satan gain the mastery over you, 
your precious faith which has been commended to 
your keeping as dearly as your soul, is ruined. If 
ye are overcome by the world, it will soon put an 
end to your Christian and virtuous life, without 
which latter the best of faith is of no avail. Care, 
therefore, my dear friends, equally well for both, 
for the one is as important as the other. Faith 

* It is a very lamentable fact that the things fraught with dan- 
ger are not as they appear, and appear not as they really are. Is 
not the fish caught with a bait, in which is concealed the hook? 
Are not the birds ensnared in the net, in which berries or grains of 
corn are scattered for them to eat? Certainly. Is it to be wondered 
then, that blind, carnal and worldly-minded men are deceived and 
led into perdition by the wiles of Satan and the alluring lusts of a 
deceitful world? 

tMeanwhile the prudent knight and valiant champion of Christ 
must be on his guard and constantly in arms, that he may neither 
by the one nor by the other be diverted from his noble watch over 
his soul, which has been entrusted to him, and thus be led away 
and cast, either in soul or body, or according to both, into the dire- 
ful abyss of perdition. 


PREFACE 


11 


without the corresponding life, or the life without 
the faith, can, will, and may not avail before God. 
They are like two witnesses, who must agree, and 
of whom the one cannot stand or be received with- 
out the other. 

Knowing, then, that we must care for both, 
there remains nothing for us but to do it, however, 
this work must certainly not only be begun, but 
also finished, according to the example of the 
steadfast martyrs of God; with which finishing, 
whether it be brought about in a natural or a vio- 
lent manner, according as liberty or persecution 
brings about we must comfort ourselves, since it is 
certain that the crown is not to be found in the 
beginning or in the middle, but at the end.* 

But as necessary as it is to finish well, so neces- 
sary it is also to begin well, and, having begun, 
to go on well ; for without a good beginning and a 
good progress it is impossible to attain to a good 
end. 

We speak to you, then, most beloved in the 
Lord, who have begun with us ; received the sanie 
faith with us ; and with us as a token of this have 
been baptized. 

Surely, we have made a vow to the Lord, which 
we cannot recall, as David sings : "Offer unto God 
thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most 
High." Ps. 50:14. 

We have, through faith, received Christ, the Son 
of God, as our Prophet, Priest, King, Shepherd, 
Friend, and Bridegroom ; and in this we must go 
on and grow stronger. This, Paul teaches us, say- 
ing: "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus 
the Lord, so walk ye in him : rooted and built up 
in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been 
taught," etc. Col. 2:6, 7. Hereby we have come 
from the darkness of ignorance to the true light of 
knowledge; which we are commanded to keep in 
perpetual remembrance. In this direction tend 
the words : "But call to remembrance the former 
days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye en- 
dured a great fight of afflictions ;" etc. Heb. 10 : 
32. In short: "Nevertheless, whereto we have al- 
ready attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us 
mind the same thing." Phil. 3:16. "Building up 
yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the 
Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, 
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ 
unto eternal life." Jude 20, 21. "Now unto him that 
is able to keep you from falling, and to present you 
faultless before the presence of his glory with ex- 
ceeding joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be 
glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now 
and ever. Amen." Verses 24 and 25. Isa. 40:30, 
31; Phil. 4:13. 

We would now commend you, beloved brethren 
and sisters, to the Lord and to the word of His 
grace, which is able to build you up, and to give 
you an inheritance among all them which are sanc- 
tified. Our work which has been done for your 
benefit, is now finished in this respect; that you 

* O that this would be considered, as it should I 


may make good use of it, is our friendly desire. 
Remember us always in your prayers, until we de- 
part this life ; Phil. 1 :23, that God may be gracious 
unto us now and in eternity. We hope, on our 
part, to do the same for you. O that God would 
grant, that we all, without one missing, might be- 
hold one another, face to face, in the kingdom of 
God! I Cor. 13:12. 

Meantime we rejoice in the salvation of the 
Lord ; for it sometimes seems to us, as if Heaven 
had come down upon earth; or that we were as- 
cending from earth to heaven. II Cor. 12:1-12, 
etc; or that we, who are still among men, held 
communion with God and His holy angels ; or that 
eternal heavenly joy and glory were offered to 
us ; nay, that we had a foretaste of those things 
which mortal eye hath never seen, nor ear heard, 
nor heart experienced, in this life.* 

We walk no longer upon earth, with our 
thoughts; nevertheless, we are still encompassed 
by a cloud of earth, a body of clay, a heavy load of 
the soul. O, that we were free from it, and that 
our soul, liberated from this load, might return to 
God in heaven, her true origin ! like a freed dove 
which has been confined in a strange place, re- 
turns to her nest and abode. But we must wait 
for this until the time which God has appointed, 
comes. 

Let us be patient together, then, most beloved in 
the Lord, till the day come, which, if we remain 
faithful unto the end, will assuredly bring us that 
which we here wait for in hope. Then the tears, 
which we, sighing and longing for the highest 
salvation of God, have wept here, shall surely be 
wiped away from our eyes ; then shall we no longer 
see through a glass, darkly, but face to face ; then 
shall the heavenly be shown us no longer in thought 
or in spirit, but it shall be given us, and we be 
made participants of it, by experience alone, in 
truth and in deed. O great and precious subject ! 
we can go no further : our reason cannot compre- 
hend it ; our earthly tongue cannot express it ! 
Yours very affectionally in the Lord, 
Th. J. van Braght. 

Dort, July the 25th, 1659. 


TO THE READERS IN GENERAL 


Good friends and fellow citizens: 

Of old, among the heathen, the greatest and 
highest honors were accorded to the brave and tri- 
umphant warriors, who, risking their lives in the 
land of the enemy, conquered, and carried off the 
victory.f Thus Homer, the foremost of the writers 
of heroic poetry in Greece, has, in twenty-four 
books, extolled and embellished with many eulo- 

* These things can appropriately be understood to have been 
caused by meditation and holy contemplation; and in like manner 
the passage: For our conversation is in heaven." Phil. 3:20. 

t The victors at the Olympic games (so-called from Mount Olym- 
pus m Greece, where they were held) were crowned with wreaths 
of oak and laurel, which was considered a great honor 


12 


PREFACE 


gies the warlike deeds of Ulysses. Quintus Curtius 
described, in ten books, the deeds of Alexander, 
the son of Philip of Macedonia : how triumphantly 
he conquered and subjugated Europe, Asia, India, 
and the countries bordering on the eastern Ocean, 
till he ultimately lost his life in Babylonia. Plu- 
tarch composed a voluminous work devoted to the 
praise of illustrious and valiant men. Titus Livius 
has written of the Roman heroes, how praiseworth- 
ily they acquitted themselves in behalf of the coun- 
try of Romulus. Virgilius Maro and others eulo- 
gized the emperor Augustus. And this usage has 
obtained from ancient times, and obtains yet, in 
every land, yea, throughout the whole world. 

We say nothing of the honor and praise, which, 
many years after their death, was bestowed in 
public theatres, upon those who had been sacrificed 
to idols, for the narration of it would consume too 
much time. 

But God, in His Word, goes higher and farther 
yet, in this respect. He has caused the conflict, the 
sufferings, and the triumphs of His spiritual coura- 
geous heroes, children and favorites to be written, 
in language the most touching, glorious and tri- 
umphant, as an everlasting memorial for their 
descendants, and not only this, but as a full assur- 
ance of their happiness ; so that they should al- 
ways be remembered, and never forgotten. Yea, 
the whole volume of holy Scriptures seems to be 
nothing else than a book of martyrs, replete with 
numerous, according to the flesh, sorrowful, but 
according to the spirit, happy, examples of the 
holy and steadfast martyrs, whose sufferings, con- 
flicts and triumphs have been recorded in as holy 
and worthy manner as it is possible to imagine. 

However, they are variously spoken of, accord- 
ing to the importance of their merits. Some of 
them suffered and fought much, but not unto 
blood, nor unto death ; their victory and their hon- 
or are, therefore, not represented as of the highest 
degree. Others, however, suffered and fought not 
only unto blood and death, for the Lord's name, 
but even to the greatest pain and most bitter death. 
We shall first speak of the former class, and then 
of the latter; yet the last shall surpass the first. 
Abraham, the father of the faithful, and Isaac and 
Jacob, to whom God had promised the possession 
of the land of Canaan, lived, nevertheless, as 
strangers in the land of promise, and, sometimes, 
had to endure hunger, thirst and oppression. 
Compare Gen. 12:10; 26:20; 31 :22, 23 with Heb. 
11:9. 

Moses, the friend of God. had to flee from Pha- 
roah into the land of Midian, where he sat down 
by a well. Ex. 2:15. Afterwards he came very 
near being stoned by the disobedient in Israel. Ex. 
17:4. 

David, a man after God's own heart, was several 
times in peril of being transfixed to the wall by a 
javelin, I Sam. 18:11 ; 19:10; yea, his life was in 
such danger, that he complained to Jonathan: 
"There is but a step between me and death." I 


Sam. 20:3. For this reason he often called upon 
God for help, that he might not meet with an un- 
timely death. Among other things he says : "Con- 
sider and hear me, O Lord my God : lighten mine 
eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death." Ps. 13:2. 

In the days of Ahab and Jezebel a hundred 
prophets of the Lord had to flee on account of per- 
secution, and were hid in a cave, and fed with 
bread and water, by one Obadiah. I Kings 18:13. 

Elijah, for the same reason, was compelled to 
turn eastward and hide himself by the brook Che- 
rith, that is before Jordan. I Kings 17:3. His life 
was afterwards made so bitter to him, that he fled 
into the wilderness by Beer-sheba, sat down under 
a juniper tree, and prayed, "O Lord, take away 
my life; for I am not better than my fathers." 
I Kings 19:4. 

When Elisha, the servant of Elijah, proclaimed 
the word of the Lord in the city of Samaria, the 
king of Samaria swore, that the head of Elisha 
should not stand on him that day. II Kings 6:31. 

The prophet Micaiah, who had foretold in the 
name of the Lord the truth to the king of Israel, 
had to eat the bread of sorrow, and drink the 
water of sadness, in the prison in which he was 
confined, until the king was slain in a battle. I 
Kings 22:27-37. 

Jeremiah was cast into a mire-pit, in which he 
sunk down so deeply that he was in danger of 
death, until he was saved through Ebed-melech, 
the Ethiopian. Jer. 38:6-13. 

Amos was called a conspirator, and forbidden 
not only the city in which he prophesied, but also 
the land of the ten tribes of Israel. Amos 7 :10-13. 

All these, and many more, endured much suffer- 
ing and many conflicts yet not unto blood or death. 
But those of whom we shall speak now, suffered 
the bitterness of death, and are therefore, in this 
respect, of higher rank than they who have pre- 
ceded, just as the loss of life is a severer test than 
to suffer in the body or to lose temporal posses- 
sions; which is the only difference between the 
two classes named. 

This bloody army of the spiritual champions, 
who fought unto blood and death for the Lord, 
commenced with the beginning of the world, as 
though God's saints were born to suffer and fight ; 
and as though God had designed, that His church 
should be tried from the beginning and all through, 
even as gold in the furnace that her purity might 
become the more manifest. 

In the beginning we see Abel who, having in 
faith offered unto God a lamb as a sacrifice, was 
slain in the field by Cain, his brother. Gen. 4:8; 
I John 3:12. 

In the days of Ahab and Jezebel many prophets 
of God were slain by the sword of the rebellious 
and disobedient in Israel, so that Elijah thought 
he alone was left. I Kings 19:14. 

When the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah, 
the son of Jehoiada, so that he said to the disobedi- 
ent people: "Why transgress ye the command- 


PREFACE 


13 


merits, of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? be- 
cause ye have forsaken the Lord, he hath also for- 
saken you," they took stones and killed him at the 
commandment of the king in the court of the 
house of the Lord. II Chron. 24:21. 

When Urijah, the son of Shemaiah, of Kirjath- 
jearim prophesied in the name of the Lord against 
the city of Jerusalem, his life was sought, so that 
he fled into Egypt. But Jehoiakim the king sent 
men who fetched him back, and he slew him with 
the sword, and buried his dead body among the 
common people. Jer. 26 :20-23. 

The god-fearing young men, named Shadrach, 
Meshach and Abed-nego, who refused to worship 
the image of King Nebuchadnezzar, were cast, 
bound, in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, 
and their other garments just as they were, into a 
fiery furnace, in which they would have been im- 
mediately consumed, if God had not preserved 
them. Dan. 3:21-23. 

The prophet Daniel, because he would not wor- 
ship king Darius, but only the true God of Israel, 
was cast into a den of lions, to be torn by them ; 
but God protected him as He did those mentioned 
before. Dan. 6:16. 

Onias, the high priest, who, in a very praise- 
worthy and peaceful manner, led and kept the peo- 
ple at Jersualem, so that foreign kings were moved 
to honor the city and the temple of God with gifts, 
was falsely accused by Simon the Benjamite, re- 
moved from his office by Jason, his own brother, 
and stabbed to death without regard of justice and 
equity by perjured Andronicus; for the which 
cause not only the Jews, but also many Gentiles 
took great indignation. Compare. II Mace. 3:1, 
2 with 4:1, 34. 

Two zvomen, who had their children circum- 
cised according to the law of God, were led round 
about the city, with their babies tied to their breasts, 
and then cast down headlong from the wall. II 
Maccabees 6:10. 

Some who hid themselves in caves, to keep 
the Sabbath or day of rest of the Lord, and who 
would not defend themselves against the enemies, 
when it was discovered to Philip the tyrant, were 
burned. II Mace. 6:11. 

Eleazar, an old man of ninety years, because 
he would not sin against the law of God by eating 
forbidden meat, nor set an evil example to young 
persons, nor dissimulate, had to carry his hoary 
hairs with blood to the grave, and die a cruel death 
through many stripes. II Mace. 6:27-31. 

Seven brethren, for the same cause, were scourg- 
ed with rods and thongs, had their tongues cut out, 
their hands and feet cut off, and were roasted in 
pans, and killed in this terrible manner to the last 
one, together with their mother, who had wit- 
nessed it all, and likewise refused to depart from 
the law of God. II Mace. 7. 

This last mentioned class, from Abel to the 
Maccabees, are the true army of God and the 
heroes of the old covenant who, for the honor of 


God and the law of their fathers, did not spare 
their lives. 

These the writer of the epistle to the Hebrews 
has in view when he speaks of the great cloud of 
witnesses, who, looking through faith for the ful- 
fillment of the promises of God and the coming of 
the Son of God, in the flesh endured all sufferings, 
conflicts, and, at last, death, bravely and with an 
undismayed heart. But the others, says he mean- 
ing the steadfast saints of God of whom we have 
spoken, had trial of cruel mockings and scourg- 
ings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment : 
they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were 
tempted, were slain with the sword : they wandered 
about in sheepskins and goatskins ; being-destitute, 
afflicted, tormented; of whom the world was not 
worthy. Heb. 11:36-38. 

Hence the whole volume of holy Scriptures, es- 
pecially the Old Testament, seems to be almost ex- 
clusively, a book of martyrs, as we have stated in 
the beginning ; appearing from the examples which 
we have adduced, and of which we could point out 
many more, if it were necessary. 

As regards the heroes of the new covenant, that 
is, those who since the advent of Christ, and for 
the testimony of the holy gospel, have fought the 
good fight, even unto blood, yea, death ; have fin- 
ished their course ; and steadfastly kept the faith, 
notwithstanding the various horrible ferments ; it 
would be impossible to speak briefly of it here, and 
do the subject full justice; for which reason wc 
have done this in the following two books, to 
which we would refer the reader. 

All this was written for a perpetual remem- 
brance of the steadfast and blessed martyrs ; con- 
cerning whom it is the will of God that they should 
not only always be remembered here among men, 
but whom He Himself purposes never to forget 
but to remember them with everlasting mercy. 


THE SEQUEL COMPARED WITH THE BEGINNING 
OF THIS HISTORY 

We have already spoken of the great honor 
which custom conferred upon the brave and tri- 
umphant warriors ; yet not one of all these, how- 
ever great, mighty, valiant and victorious he may 
have been, or how great the honor and glory with 
which he may have been hailed, could in any wise 
be compared with the least martyr who suffered 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

Even aged and feeble persons, youths and maid- 
ens, and such as were not noticed, yea whom the 
world did not esteem at all, did infinitely more 
through the power of their faith, their ardent love 
to God, and, especially, their steadfastness unto 
death, whereby they were enabled to forsake, yea, 
despise, all visible things, and to put entirely out 
of their thoughts, forget, and bid, as it were, 
eternal adieu to, until the consummation oi all 
things, money, property, houses, farms, brothers, 


14 


PREFACE 


sisters, parents, children, dear friends and rela- 
tives, yea their own bodies and lives, and every- 
thing pleasing and delightful according to the 
flesh; whereas others, if possible, gladly enjoyed 
and retained all this, and would fain have retained 
it always, or still retain it. 

The honor, therefore, which is due to the holy 
martyrs, is infinitely greater and better than that 
of earthly heroes; just as the fight they fought, 
was infinitely more profitable, and their victory, as 
coming from the hand of God, infinitely more 
praiseworthy and glorious.* 

Through earthly wars countries and their inhab- 
itants are destroyed, the innocent killed, the fugi- 
tive robbed of their property, and much weeping 
and mourning caused among those who remain. 
But through the warfare of the martyrs, at least 
through the martyrs themselves, the prosperity of 
countries and their inhabitants was promoted be- 
cause of the fervent prayers offered up by the mar- 
tyrs to God for those who did them harm and for 
the common welfare of all the inhabitants. 

The life of the innocent, who otherwise would 
have had to die, yea, their spiritual and eternal life, 
was obtained and preserved through the medicine 
of their good teachings, admonitions, examples, 
and unwavering continuance to the end of life. 

The estates of men generally, both according to 
the soul and the body, they improved and multi- 
plied, causing them to increase thirty, sixty, and 
even a hundred fold, by their uprightness, fidelity, 
benevolence, compassion, and incomparable merci- 
fulness toward their fellow men. 

They caused no one to lament or weep, by doing 
him the least damage or injury, but they greeted 
everybody, even their enemies, with kindness, em- 
braced them with the arms of love, and gave them 
cause to rejoice and be glad, outwardly as well as 
inwardly, bodily and spiritually, here and (God 
granting them mercy) also hereafter. 

O most delightful warfare, which did injury to 
none, but good to all. O ye blessed heroes, who 
fought this fight ! No princes or kings can be com- 
pared to you; for all the honors won by earthly 
heroes on earth shall vanish with the earth; but 
your honor is an everlasting honor; your glory 
shall never cease, yea, shall endure, as long as God 
endures, whom you served. 

ADDRESS TO THE WORLDLY-MINDED 

Come now, ye earthly-minded and ungodly, and 
learn here to become heavenly and godly-minded ; 

* God is worthier than the creatures; heaven is worthier than 
the earth ; and the soul is more excellent than the body ; in the same 
manner the divine, heavenly and spiritual warfare is worthier and 
more excellent than the creatural, earthly and corporeal warfare; 
this is beyond contradiction. "He that is slow to anger is better 
than the mighty ; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a 
city." Prov. 16 :32. Of this the apostle Paul glories, when he says ; 
"I therefore so run, not as uncertainly ; so fight I, not as one that 
beateth the air; but I keep under my body, and bring it into sub- 
jection," etc. I Cor. 9:26, 27. This praiseworthy fight, when he 
had brought it to a good end, caused him to say about the time of 
his death : "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 
I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give 
me at that day /'etc. II Tim. 4:7, 9. 


ye impenitent, learn here to repent, and believe in 
Jesus Christ. Hither must come also all the self- 
willed, who, from a prejudiced opinion of their 
own do not consider the external commandments 
and ordinances of Christ as necessary, saying that 
there is not more required than repentance and 
faith, or a so-called irreproachable civil life. These 
shall learn here that the external commandments 
of Christ must be united with the internal, that is, 
the signs with the things signified ; or, to express 
it clearly: one must be baptized on his faith and 
repentance; must keep the Lord's Supper in re- 
membrance of Him, etc. ; for herein the holy mar- 
tyrs were to them an example.* 

Here the passionate must learn patience and 
meekness from the most patient and meek, who 
endured without murmuring the greatest reproach 
and ignominy, yea, even death. Here the unman- 
nered are taught modesty ; the proud, humility ; the 
discontented, contentment ; the avaricious, benevo- 
lence ; the insatiably rich, voluntary poverty ; those 
who live after their lusts, the forsaking of all car- 
nal desires ; the irreligious, piety ; and the waver- 
ing and inconstant, steadfastness unto the end in 
all these things. 

All this can be learned here, not so much by 
words as by deeds, from those who not only com- 
menced the above virtues, but continued in them 
unto the end, yea, confirmed them through their 
death, and sealed them with their blood. 


TO THE YOUNG, THE MIDDLE-AGED, AND THE OLD 

Besides, persons of every age may enter this 
school of practice in virtue ; the young, the middle- 
aged and the old, all shall be led to true godliness 
by the living examples of those who went before 
them. 

The young people who live after their lusts, and 
have not come to the light, will see here, that many 
of their equals, yea, who were only fourteen, fif- 
teen, eighteen, twenty years old, or even younger, 
had at that age already forsaken the vanities of the 
world and the lusts of youth ; nay, some so early 
that they had not yet come to know them, much 
less to practice, them; but that, on the contrary, 
so soon as they reached their understanding, they 
remembered their Creator and Saviour, bowed their 
youthful members under His yoke, accepted His 
commandments, obeyed Him with all their heart, 
and surrendered themselves willingly to Him, so 
that they, for His sake, did not spare their lives 
unto death. Eccles. 12 :1 ; Prov. 23 :26. 

The middle-aged, who, like the firmly-rooted 
oaks of Bashan, are so deeply engrossed in, and 
joined to, earthly affairs and household cares, that 
it is next to an impossibility to detach them there- 


* As we cannot look at heaven and earth at the same time, nor 
stand at once upon the mountain and in the valley, even so it is 
impossible to serve God and the world at the same time. Our 
Saviour says : "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thjr soul, and with all thy mind." Matt. 22 :37. Con- 
concerning this it should be observed that if we must love God with 
all our heart, then no love for the world or sinful flesh may remain. 


PREFACE 


15 


from because of their inseparable desire for the 
goods of this world; will see here people in the 
flower and prime of life, who might have gained 
much, but sought it not, because they would not 
miss the heavenly gain. These had a contented 
heart ; they were clothed with coats of skins, only 
against cold and nakedness ; they lived in huts or 
plain cottages, to be sheltered from rain, wind, 
hail and snow ; they ate bread to satisfy their hun- 
ger, and drank water to quench their thirst ; more 
they had not.* 

There they shall see that these contented people 
surrendered to God the strength of their bodies, 
their station in life, and whatever they had; so 
that they, having become members of His church, 
esteemed it greater riches to suffer with the same 
the reproach of Christ, nay death itself, than to 
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. 

The aged, who have neglected their youth and 
middle life, and are now come to the eleventh 
hour,f and yet are still not working in the Lord's 
vineyard, may here behold persons whose hoary 
head is a crown of glory, since they are found in 
the way of righteousness ; who devoted their feeble 
powers, the short span of their life, yea their last 
breath, to the service and praise of their God and 
Saviour, watching and waiting for the hour of their 
departure and the day of their redemption, that 


* Surely no man in the world can derive advantage from the 
abundance of his temporal possessions over and above the neces- 
saries of life. Why then, the manifold anxieties and cares to provide 
for the future in regard to the things which concern the body ; 
since nature is so soon separated by death from all this? "Seek ye 
first the kingdom of God." Matt. 6:33. "Casting all your care 
upon him," (the I<ord) etc. I Pet. 5 :7. 

t Though it is not advisable in temporal things to put off doing 
the day's labor until evening, yet it is better late than never. This 
holds good also in spiritual things. 


they might become an acceptable offering to the 
Lord. They longed for the clock to strike twelve, 
so as to be admitted by the Lord and be seated at 
His glad feast. 

When two of our last martyrs, Jan Claess of 
Alckmaer, and Lucas Lamberts of Beveren, an old 
man of eighty-seven years, received their sentence 
of death, at Amsterdam, Holland, in the forenoon 
of a certain day in the year 1544, Jan Claess said 
to the old man, Lucas Lamberts : "My dear broth- 
er, fear now neither fire nor sword. O what a 
glad feast shall be prepared for us, before the 
clock strikes twelve." See II Book, year 1544. 

All this and infinitely more the worldly-minded, 
ignorant and unbelieving are taught here. O that 
each of them would consider this well! 

Men are more easily converted by good ex- 
amples than by good teachings, because examples 
are more impressive ; yet here you have both. 

Let every one come hither, therefore; and no 
one remain behind ; all have need to be taught in 
the way of salvation ; no one would choose to be 
unsaved. Here you shall see the patience, the 
faith, and the constancy of the saints. Have com- 
passion upon your own souls, whom the Lord 
loves so dearly, seeking to lead them to heaven ; 
yea for whom the Son of God has shed His pre- 
cious blood, thus purchasing them with so great a 
price. We would commend this matter most ur- 
gently to you as well as to ourselves. O Lord, 
help ! O Lord, let it prosper ! 

But it is now time that we turn our attention to 
giving instructions concerning the proper under- 
standing and use of this work. 

Th. J. van Braght 
Dort, July the 27th, 1659. 


AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 


SUMMARY OF THE FOLLOWING WORK. 


This work comprises two books, each of them 
containing a different and independent topic. The 
first is a treatise of the holy baptism and of that 
which pertains to it. The second is a historical 
account of the holy martyrs who suffered on ac- 
count of baptism, or, generally, for the testimony 
of Jesus Christ. 

These two topics have been briefly, yet not less 
clearly, treated, throughout, in every century, 
from the days of Christ up to our present time; 
and this order has been followed: through every 


century first an account is given, through faithful 
and authentic authors, of the subject of holy bap- 
tism, and the proper administration of the same 
during that time ; to which we have each time add- 
ed our own comments, explanations, refutations 
of objections, etc., then every century is again 
taken up, and an account given of the holy martyrs 
who suffered during that time. So that each cen- 
tury treating of holy baptism is followed by a cen- 
tury treating of the holy martyrs ; and thus from 
beginning to end. 

This, then, is a summary and the order of the 
following work; which we shall directly explain 
more fully, and give our reason for doing so. 


16 


INTRODUCTION 


OF THE TITLE OF THIS WORK: THE BLOODY 
THEATRE OF THE ANABAPTISTS, etc. 

The first part of the title, consisting of the 
words, The Bloody Theatre, will, we think, not 
be subjected to any serious criticism, since no one 
can dispute that all that is treated here, so far as 
the martyrs are concerned, is a representation or 
exhibition of the blood, suffering, and death of 
those who, for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and 
for their conscience' sake, shed their blood ex- 
changing their life for a cruel death. 

But the second part, consisting of the words, 
"Of the Anabaptists," may easily meet with 
some opposition, because some will not admit that 
the Anabaptists, or those who maintain such a 
confession as they do, have existed through every 
century, from the days of Christ up to the present 
time; and, what is still more, that they have had 
their martyrs. B'ut in order to treat the matter 
systematically and in the best manner, we shall 
first speak of the name, and then of the thing 
itself. 


of the name: anabaptists.* 

The name "Anabaptist" was really not accept- 
ed by them by choice or desire, but of necessity ; 
for their proper name, if we consider well the 
thing in connection, should be, Christ-minded, 
Apostle-minded, or Gospel-minded, Gal. 3:26, 27, 
29, as they were called of old, yea, many centuries 
ago, because their religion agreed with the doc- 
trine of Christ, the Apostles, and the holy Gospel ; 
which appears from the confession of faith which 
they from time to time have published, and which 
we, as far as we know them, are ready to defend, if 
necessity requires it; of which also others boast; 
but how they prove it, they may answer for them- 
selves, and the impartial and intelligent may judge. 

The name Anabaptists which is now applied to 
them, has but lately come into use, deriving its 
origin from the matter of holy baptism, concern- 
ing which their views differ from those of all, so- 
called, Christendom. In what this difference con- 
sists, we will now briefly, and in the sequel more 
fully state. 

We could have wished that they had been called 
by another name, that is, not only after the holy 
baptism, but after their whole religion ; but since 
it is not so, we can content ourselves with the 
thought that it is not the name, but the thing itself, 
which justifies the man. For this reason we have 
applied this name to them throughout the work, 
that they may be known and distinguished from 
others.f 


* The word "Anabaptist" is here used to signify the same as 
"Taufgesinnte" in the German, and "Doopsgesinde in the Dutch 
language, for which the English language affords no better term, 
the literal signification of "Doopsgesinde being "baptism-minded." 

t Ancient Israel was called the circumcision because all Israel- 
ites were circumcised. I Cor. 7:19; Gal. 5:6; 6:15. 


OF HOLY BAPTISM, AND WHY WE HAVE PREFERRED 
IT TO ALL OTHER ARTICLES, IN OUR HISTORY 

We have chosen holy baptism in preference to 
any other article of the Christian and evangelical 
religion : 

1. Because it is the only sign and proof of incor- 
poration into the visible Christian church, without 
which no one, whoever he be, or whatever he may 
profess, or how separated and pious a life he may 
lead, can be recognized as a true member of the 
Christian church. This is fully, yet without con- 
troversy, shown and confirmed in the following 
history.* 

2. Because it is, beyond contradiction, the only 
article on account of which others call us Anabap- 
tists. For, since all other so-called Christians have, 
yet without true foundation, this in common that 
they baptize infants; while with us the baptism 
only which is accompanied by faith and a penitent 
life, according to the word of God, is admin- 
istered, to adults; it follows, that with us such 
persons are baptized who have received baptism in 
their childhood, without faith and repentance; 
who, when they believe and repent, are again, or 
at least truly baptized with us; because with us 
their previous baptism, being without true foun- 
dation, and without the word of God, is not con- 
sidered baptism at all.f 

3. Because the imperial decrees (when some 
so-called Christians began to tyrannize) in the 
days of Theodosius and Honorius, A. D. 413, 
were issued and proclaimed everywhere expressly 
against the Anabaptists and those who were 
rebaptized; namely against such who maintained 
the aforementioned article, as the Anabaptists 
of today do; which was also the case in the last 
persecution, during the reign of Emperor Charles 
V., more than eleven centuries afterwards, A. D. 
1535; when all who, having been baptized in 
infancy, had been rebaptized upon their faith 
and repentance; or who maintained these views, 
were punished with a severe death, as may be seen 
in our account of baptism, and of the martyrs, for 
the years 413 and 1535. 

4. Because it would not have been possible to 
write in detail of all the other articles of the Chris- 
tian faith and worship of God, as they, through all 
the centuries from the days of Christ up to the 
present time, have been believed and practiced ac- 
cording to the manner of the Anabaptists of this 
day ; without going beyond the bounds of the larg- 
est book ; since no book could possibly be printed 

* Paul asked the Church at Rome, whether they did not know 
that as many as were baptized (or incorporated through baptism) 
into Jesus Christ, were baptized into His death? Rom. 6:3. Com- 
pare with Gal. 3:27; I Cor. 12:13. 

t Notwithstanding Philips of Marnix; then, F. Beza: then Men- 
so Alting ; then, Abr. A. Doreslaer ; and then, the latest translators 
of the Bible, have come to another conclusion concerning the re- 
baptizing of the twelve Ephesian disciples who had been baptized 
by John, Acts 19:1-3; there has, nevertheless, as far as we have 
been able to discover, before the time of P. Marnix. yea, for more 
than fifteen hundred years, never been a 6ingle Greek or Latin 
divine who doubted that those Ephesians were baptized again, be- 
cause the first time they had been baptized without having a knowl- 
edge of the holy Ghost. 


INTRODUCTION 


17 


or planned on so large a scale, as to contain all 
this; wherefore we have been obliged to observe 
moderation in writing, throughout, so as not to 
become diffuse, or overstep the bounds of a rea- 
sonable book. 


THE REASON WHY WE HAVE POINTED OUT THE 
ARTICLE OF HOLY BAPTISM, AND THE ADHER- 
ENCE OF ANABAPTISM, FROM THE DAYS 
OF CHRIST TO THE PRESENT TIME. 

■For more than a century up to the present day, 
people have been made to believe that the Ana- 
baptists contemptuously so-called, have but re- 
cently sprung from some erring spirit, — some 
say, from the Munsterites,* etc. ; whose fabulous 


* Aside from the fact, that the Anabaptists did not spring from 
the Munsterites, but have existed through all the times of the Gos- 
pel, as has been sufficiently shown, we would, moreover, state that 
the pernicious and evil proceedings which took place at Munster 
about the year 1534, can, according to the truth, not be laid to the 
charge of the Anabaptists, who at that time, like innocent doves 
fleeing before the talons of the hawk into clefts of the rock, or into 
hollow trees, had to hide themselves but must be placed to the 
account of some Lutheran preachers, to whom a certain "Jan van 
Leyden" had recommended and taught Anabaptism. According to 
old and authentic authors these proceedings happened as follows : 

In the year 1532, Bernaert Rotman, a Lutheran (at that time 
called Evangelical) preacher, began to preach at Munster in St. 
Maurice church, against the doctrine of the Papists ; when, however, 
the Papists of Munster came to know this, they bribed him with 
money, to go away. 

But a few months afterward repenting of it, he came back, and 
drew such crowds, that he, being sustained by some of the chief 
men of the city of Munster, erected his pulpit in the entry of the 
church. He also sought to have other churches opened in order 
that this doctrine might be propagated the more widely ; — if this 
were not done, they should be opened by force, etc. In the mean 
time, on the 14th of February, 1533, there arrived at Munster, Jan 
van Leyden, a strange, odd and opinionated man, who, though he 
maintained baptism upon faith, yet in most other points never agreed 
with the Anabaptists. To be brief, after much controversy he 
brought the matter so far, that not only Bernaert Rotman, who 
had at first opposed him, but also his colleague, H. Staprede, and 
various others, began to preach against the practice of infant bap- 
tism. On the other hand, Jan van Leyden learned from them, espe- 
cially from B. Rotman, the doctrine that one might defend and 
propagate his religion with external weapons. 

In the mean while, the magistrates, apprehending serious mis- 
chief which might be expected to spring from this, forbade those 
who they thought were giving the most occasion to it, the city. 
They, indeed, left the city, yet on the instigation of B. Rotman, 
entered it again by another way. 

Finally matters came to such a pass, that the aforementioned, 
and other supporters of the Lutheran (or miscalled, Evangelical) 
doctrine, who had become agreed with Jan van Leyden, in the 
article of baptism collected together and resolved to bring about a 
total restoration of religion; deciding also, that to this end, as it 
could not be effected quietly, it should be done by force of arms ; 
further, that in Munster the beginning should be made. 

Jan van Leyden was constituted the leader; and through B. 
Rotman's proclamation much ignorant and simple people from the 
surrounding places were summoned, to help carry out said restora- 
tion, which however was not made known to them at first. These 
were promised ^ that, in Munster, they should receive tenfold for 
their goods which they had to abandon on this account. 

Without loss of time they opposed the power of the bishop. 
They erected fortifications, seeking not only to defend themselves, 
but also to exterminate their opponents, that is, the true adherents 
of Rome and the Pope. But matters took quite a different turn from 
what they had intended; they were defeated and the bishop and 
those of the city triumphed. 

Rotman himself, (notwithstanding that his associates were in 
equal distress) despairing of his life, ran to the enemies to be killed 
by them ; so that he might not, like Jan van Leyden, be taken alive, 
and come to a shameful end. 

This, then, was the tragedy enacted at Munster; the instigation, 
progress and execution can and may not be attributed to the so- 
called Anabaptists, but to the first-risen Lutherans, especially to 
B. Rotman and his followers. Had this restoration been successful, 
the Lutherans would not have been ashamed of it; on the contrary 
they would have boasted of it, and never would have let the honor 
of it remain in the hands of the Anabaptists. To this alludes the fol- 
lowing old ditty: 

Had successful been the glorious restoration, 

Never would the much-despised Anabaptists 

Have obtained the honor: Luther, or some other, 

By the sword of Rotman, lord would have been crowned. 


faith, life and conduct, the true Anabaptists have 
never recognized ; for no one will ever be able to 
show with truth, so far as we have been able to 
ascertain, that the articles of religion of those 
Munsterites, whereby they have drawn the atten- 
tion of the world upon themselves, and which con- 
sist in commotion, rebellion and such like, have 
ever been adopted or acknowledged as good, much 
less professed and lived, by any formal church of 
the Anabaptists, or by any well known member of 
the same. But, on the contrary, they have from 
that time on and ever since declared that they 
would have neither lot nor part with them or their 
transactions; and admonished one another, not to 
follow such ways, because these could not stand 
the test before God and His Word, nor before the 
mind of a true and meek Christian, as being con- 
trary to the Gospel of Christ, and the most holy 
faith. 

Were we disposed to pay them in their own coin, 
we might say : The Munsterites were fellow mem- 
bers of those who sanction war and claim that one 
must propagate and defend his religion with the 
sword. For this is what they did; but we speak 
against it with heart, soul, and mind. 

Nevertheless, the people were made to believe 
these things; and therefore, many simple people 
without experience or knowledge have adopted the 
above opinion, simply because their pastor, preach- 
er, or teacher told them so ; hence, many slanders 
have sometimes been, and are still, spewed out like 
bitter gall, against the so-called Anabaptists, who 
are despised and rejected by everybody. 

In order to show that the doctrines of the Ana- 
baptists, especially that article on account of which 
they are called Anabaptists, did not originate with 
the Munsterites, or any other erring spirits who 
have arisen in these last times, but have proceeded 
from the scource of truth— Christ and His apos- 
tles, we have placed their origin in the time of 
Christ, and shown that at that time already, this 
article, with other articles of the Christian religion, 
was taught and practiced ; and also after the death 
of the apostles, through every age, even to the 
present time. 

Now the point will be to give the reasons why 
we have called this whole work, with all the persons 
contained therein, after the Anabaptists; from 
which, as the second question, might be asked: 
whether all the persons mentioned, confessors as 
well as martyrs, none excepted, confessed the 
same as what the Anabaptists of this day confess ? 
or whether any believed, practiced, or maintained 
higher or lower, more or less, in this or that article ? 

We shall treat these matters separately, and one 
after the other, giving the reasons as well as the 
answers. 


[Compare tract Onnooselheyds Peyl. etc., edit. Harl. Anno 1631 
Annex Hist. Mart, a little before the introduction ; with the various 
attestations of Bernhard Rotman; Godfrey Stralensis, Rollins, and 
other Lutheran leaders at Munster ; whose writings concerning this 
matter were published shortly after the transaction, and have also 
come down to us. Also, the notes of Melanchton, Guido, Sleydan ■ 
and also in the great atlas, old edition.] 


18 


INTRODUCTION 


REASON WHY WE HAVE CALLED THIS WHOLE 
WORK AFTER THE ANABAPTISTS 

The reason which has induced us is twofold : 

1. Because, as we have shown clearly, there 
have been persons in every century, from the be- 
ginning of the Gospel all along, who have believed 
and taught the article of holy baptism, with other 
articles noted in the margin — on account of which 
the Anabaptists have received this name — in the 
very same manner as the Anabaptists, and have, 
each in his time, instructed, engrafted, and con- 
firmed their contemporaries therein, as may be 
seen in the whole history, especially in the first fif- 
teen centuries. 

2. Because we have not found mentioned in the 
writings of authentic authors anything concerning 
those persons whom we have noted as true witness- 
es, which conflicts with the above-mentioned doc- 
trines of the Anabaptists. And whenever some- 
thing has been laid to their charge, which is not in 
harmony with the uprightness of the faith pro- 
fessed by them, we have shown that the witnesses 
to such charge were not authentic or acceptable; 
or that the things brought against them, were com- 
mitted by them not after but before their conver- 
sion; or that, if they at any time have fallen into 
them, they truly forsook them before their death, 
and from which all this appears. 

But whenever we have found that any, as re- 
gards the faith professed, were actually guilty of 
serious errors, offensive misconceptions, or bad 
actions, for which the above excuses could not be 
brought forward ; we have dropped such entirely, 
and not mentioned them ; that the pious and most 
holy witnesses of Jesus Christ might not be de- 
filed with their unclean and unholy leaven. 


ANSWER TO THE QUESTION, WHETHER ALL THE 

PEOPLE MENTIONED IN THIS WORK, NONE 

EXCEPTED, HAVE CONFESSED THE SAME 

THAT THE ANABAPTISTS OF THIS 

DAY CONFESS 

Concerning this we say that a distinction must 
be made between the first and last martyrs ; — not 
that they have differed in the faith, for this we 
have not found ; but because they were not all ex- 
amined in regard to the same articles of faith; 
and consequently did not reply in one and the same 
manner ; and this from the fact, that some suffered 
among pagans, some among the Jews and the 
Mohammedans, and some among the false Chris- 
tians, that is, the Romanists. 

Those who suffered among the pagans were, for 
the most part, examined concerning the first article 
of the Christian faith, wherein we confess : "I be- 
lieve in one God, the Father, the Almighty Creator 
of heaven and earth," etc. ; and if the apprehended 
Christians confessed only this, viz., that they be- 
lieved in one God, they were condemned to death : 
for the pagans recognized many gods. 


Those who suffered among the Jews or the Mo- 
hammedans were examined concerning the second 
article, wherein we confess: I believe "in Jesus 
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, our Lord, 
who was conceived of the holy Ghost," etc. When 
they had confessed this, they had also forfeited 
their lives ; for the Jews and the Mohammedans do 
not acknowledge Christ as the Son of God, much 
less as His only-begotten (or own) Son, and that 
He was conceived of the Holy Ghost. 

On account of this article ma"hy believers were 
killed among the Arians. 

Those who suffered among the false Christians, 
especially among the Romanists, were examined 
concerning nearly all the articles of faith, in regard 
to which difference of opinion existed between us 
and them, viz., the incarnation of Christ, the office 
of the secular authorities, the swearing of oaths, 
etc., but above all others, the article of holy bap- 
tism, namely, whether they were denied infant bap- 
tism? or, whether they were rebaptized? which 
latter principally caused their death; as sentence 
of death was immediately passed upon them, and 
their life taken. 

Besides these articles (on account of which they 
also had to suffer among the followers of Zwingli 
and Calvin) the Papists laid before them also, 
either for denial or for confession, the manifold 
papal institutions, which at different times and 
above and contrary to the most holy faith and life, 
had originated, and been forced, as necessary 
articles for salvation, upon the innocent plain, and 
orthodox people, that they should believe, and live 
according to them, such as the invocation of de- 
ceased saints ; sacrifices for the dead ; pilgrimages 
to the sepulchres of the saints ; the worshiping and 
salutation of images made with hands; masses; 
vigils; ceremonial night watches; choral prayers 
whether paternosters, Ave Marias, or rosaries, or 
others ; the making the sign of the cross ; sprink- 
ling with holy water ; the tonsure ; the wearing of 
white, gray, black, or other clothes ; the chasuble ; 
and innumerable other things which it is almost 
impossible to mention. 

When the orthodox martyrs were examined by 
the Papists concerning these and similar matters, 
they must necessarily express their opinion in re- 
gard to them, and, therefore, unfold the articles of 
their own faith, which were opposed to them ; so 
that on such occasions frequently the whole foun- 
dation and all the particulars of the saving faith 
which they held in common with us, were dis- 
cussed. 

This is the reason, therefore, that only those 
martyrs who suffered among the false Christians, 
especially among the Papists, made confession of 
nearly all the articles of faith ; while all the others, 
though faithful and sincere confessors of the evan- 
gelical truth, who sacrificed their lives among the 
pagans, Jews, or Mohammedans, confessed but 
very little thereof : because they were not ex- 
amined concerning them. 


INTRODUCTION 


10 


Moreover, at first there were not so many 
articles of faith concerning which different opin- 
ions prevailed, than there were in later times; for 
which there was a reason; for, since in the be- 
ginning there were not so many apostates and dif- 
ferent sects than in later times ; the points which 
had to be asserted against those who disputed 
them originally, were fewer than afterwards, 
when many churches began to spring up, and each 
defended his own; from which the true believers 
had to distinguish themselves by their confession 
of the controverted articles of faith. 

No true Christian of the Anabaptists of this day 
will stumble at the fact that the first martyrs have 
not confessed so many articles of faith as the last 
ones, or as are confessed now ; which, as has been 
said, is founded on a satisfactory reason. 

However we have found, and are fully satisfied 
therewith, that although, for the reason already 
mentioned, some have confessed more, and others 
less, of the articles of faith, they notwithstanding 
did not differ from each other in regard to their 
purpose and meaning; we speak with reference to 
those things which are of considerable importance, 
and may be considered as necessary for salvation. 

But should it nevertheless be true, that one or 
the other (whereof one have not heard), on ac- 
count of the earliness, degeneracy, or darkness of 
preceding times, was not truly enlightened ; either 
in the faith or in the knowledge of it, or possessed 
some serious weakness or deficiency ; but neverthe- 
less, keeping the true foundation of salvation, that 
is, Christ,* though weak and frail, died, sacrificing 
his life through a violent death, with a good pur- 
pose, to the honor of God, the edification of his 
fellow brethren, above all, to the preservation of 
his own soul ; such a one should, according to the 
nature of love, be excused, and counted a true 
martyr.f because of his entirely good intention, 
and his total renunciation, even unto death, of his 
possessions as well as his own self; for which the 
Lord has promised everlasting life, yea, the crown 
of life, Matt. 19:29, compared with Rev. 2:10: 
"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee 
a crown of Life." 

This is what we have thought proper to call at- 
tention to in regard to the title and contents of 
these two books ; but before we dismiss the subject, 
it behooves us to make a brief statement in re- 
gard to the preceding or old work. 


STATEMENT IN REGARD TO THE OLD WORK 

It was our intention to leave the second book, 
that is, the history of the martyrs from the year 
1524 to 1614, unaltered, just as it was published 
before to the service of our fellow brethren in the 


* "For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which 
is Jesus Christ" (I Cor. 3:11). On this foundation built all the true 
martyrs, of whom we have given an account ; and unanimously 
kept it. 

f For this reason a considerable error, which could not be allowed 
in a common member of the church not laboring under trial and 
oppression, might be tolerated in a martyr. 


faith ; except that we proposed to add a few more 
martyrs of the same faith, inserting them where it 
might be suitable. But our original design in this 
matter has been far transcended, since we, besides 
the writing of the whole first book, have added not 
only a few, but many, martyrs to the second book ; 
and as many of the death sentences of the mar- 
tyred persons, which we have recently obtained, 
did not agree in date and other circumstances with 
the respective accounts contained in the old book, 
some of them differing very greatly from each 
other; which came from the fact, that, when the 
martyrs were put to death, the rest of the believers 
of the place were frequently scattered on account 
of the existing danger, in consequence of which 
neither the time nor the manner of their death 
could be recorded: therefore we have, whenever 
we discovered such discrepancies, rewritten the 
original accounts and ordered them according to 
the time and manner indicated in the death sen- 
tences recorded by the papal and other clerks of 
the criminal court ; in order that even the adver- 
saries, if possible, might become convinced by their 
own testimony of the shedding of the blood of the 
saints. 

This was no small task and burden for us ; yet 
we have labored through and finished it (thanks 
be to the Lord for His grace). But how this was 
accomplished, we let the impartial and intelligent 
judge. 

However, we consider it certain, that we shall 
not escape criticism ; the world, being evil, is wont 
to criticize everything good. Besides, we have not 
aimed to please everybody, but to write the truth ; 
and this we think, we have done without passion, 
prejudice, or partiality.* 

If anybody is displeased with this book, he may 
know that we have written it only for ourselves 
and for the well-disposed. With the evil-minded 
we have nothing to do. Therefore we shall console 
ourselves in regard to whatever we may meet with 
on this account. God and a good conscience shall 
be our support. 

The captious I cannot escape, 

Who fault will always find; 

But yet, my heart shall never fear, 

Since God my purpose knows. 

Yea, Lord ! Thou knowest all my thoughts ; 

To Thee my cause I trust. 

I care not what my haters say, 

So free my conscience is. 
Far be it from us, however, to acquit ourselves 
of all liability to err. No man in this world is so 
infallible, that he may not at some time err.f We 
consider it to be certain, therefore, that we, here 
and there (though not intentionally, but inno- 
cently), have erred; and this the more, as we have 

* Justus Lipsius says in the preface to his first book of "Stead- 
fastness : Few readers will suffice me; one suffices me; none 
suffices me also: for I have written this for myself." But this we 
leave to him, who had written it only for himself. 
/t? !I, Would to God ye could bear with me a little in my folly" 
, ,j r - 11:1) ' sa y s the apostle Paul, with whose wisdom we 
should not compare ours in the thousandth part. 


20 


INTRODUCTION 


compiled and written this to a great extent while 
we were in distress, severe illness, yea, on the bed 
of sickness, when death threatened us; for which 
reason we ought to be the more excused, though 
we, for truth's sake, do not seek it. 

If any one, therefore, no matter who, provided 
he does it in sincerity and good faith, can point 
out to us any errors,* we will consider the matter, 
forsake the evil, and follow the good. But if it is 
apparent to us, that not sincerity and faithfulness 
(that is, love of truth), but envy and ill will 
caused by prejudiced partiality against our faith, 
are the prime motors in the case, we shall not very 
easily be induced to give it closer consideration; 
but it shall only the more confirm and assure us of 
the truth of what we have written and do believe. 

No one must expect, that if he, for the purpose 
of refuting or assailing with the pen, attacks this 
book (that is, as far as the work which we have 
written is concerned) in one or the other point, and 
not in its entire extent ; we shall readily answer or 
oppose him; for we do not consider such a pro- 
cedure worth the trouble of replying to it. But 
should the whole work be attacked or contested, 
yet so that no alteration is made in the language, 
nor anything essential left out, we would state, 
that, if God will spare our health and grant us 
strength, we will attend to the matter; since, for 
the sake of our brethren and companions, we shall, 
like Paul, not be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, 
either to reply to, or refute the things advanced, 
or to do anything else we may deem necessary to 
the service of the defenseless and oppressed little 
flock of Christ. 

But judgment shall return unto righteousness: 
and all the upright in heart shall follow it. Psalm 
94:15. 


VALEDICTORY 


Hitherto hath the Lord helped us.f We have 
longed much for the hour that would bring us to 
the conclusion of our work. This hour has come ; 
and therefore we will now rest. 

Receive this according to the nature of love. We 
have had naught in view, but that it should pro- 
mote the honor of God, and your, our, and the sal- 
vation of all men. Your and our days are drawing 
to a close. Oh, may God grant, that the end of 
your and our life may be the beginning of the true 
and blissful life; that the setting of your and our 
days which are but misery and vanity, may be the 


* It is always easier to criticise a thing than to do it better. 
Therefore Karel van Mauder, at the completion of a great work, 
adds these words : "Ye stiff-necked critics must first consider that 
too great a mountain lies between doing and saying, before you 
accuse a free conscience with your audacious babbling. Many have 
mouth enough to contemn the work of everybody ; but not the hands 
to make something better. Saying is mere wind : but doing I 
esteem." We say the same, and will let the matter rest here. 

f "Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and 
Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer" (that is, stone of help), 
"saying, Hitherto hath the Lord helped us" (I Sam. 7:12). Thus 
say we in reference to our history. 


rising of the eternal and glorious day of immortal 
glory.* 

O Lord, bless us and all who may read this 
work ; that they and we, in the true faith and with 
a godly conversation, may spread abroad Thine 
honor, and afterwards, being honored by Thee, 
receive a like reward. 

We look forward with joy to the day which 
can bring us consolation. It will deliver us from 
this evil and perverse world. It will bring us to 
the true rest, where unrest will be no more. It 
will give us what our heart desires. O that this 
time had come already! 

The Lord Almighty calleth me: 

My earthly work is done; and now 

I long to get away from thee, 

C* world so vain ! O house of pain ! 

For though my flesh in thee yet moves, 

The soul immortal heavenward tends.f 

This was spoken by one of the ancients, when he 
thought that he had finished a good work, and that 
the hour of departure was near at hand. Cer- 
tainly a great confidence springing from a well- 
meaning heart. We say in the same manner : Our 
earthly work is now finished. We do not know that 
we shall be able to do much more good upon earth. 
But as long as we are here, we hold ourselves 
bound to our Creator, being confident that we have 
not lived in vain. We have, in our weakness, done 
what we could for the promotion of our own and 
the welfare of our fellow men. 

Be then, God, gracious unto the least of Thy 
servants, and grant that none of his natural or 
spiritual kindred, or of those who have been in- 
structed by him, may be lost; but that they all 
may come to the rest of Thy saints and be 
eternally saved. 

With this, beloved reader, whoever you may be, 
we commend you to the Lord ; and to you we com- 
mend the consideration of the things which you 
will find here; feeling assured that if you will do 
so, you will certainly receive that for which we 
have prayed the Lord in your behalf. 

Yours very affectionately, as seeking your soul. 

Thielem J. van Be 
Dort, July the 31st, 1659. 


Braght. 


The end of our work must remind us of the end of life ; 
and what we may yet lack in this, we shall ask of the Lord, "Lord, 
make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it 
is; that I may know how frail I am" (Psa. 39:4). 

t Then say we with Job: "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and 
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though 
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see 
God; whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and 
not another" (Job 19:25-27) and with Paul: "We know that if our 
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building 
of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens For 
in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our 
house which is from heaven" (II Cor. 5:1, 2). This caused John 
1o say: "Even so, come, Lord Jesus" (Rev. 22:20). The grjee 
of our Lord be with us all. 


INTRODUCTION 


21 


OF THE TRUE CHURCH OF GOD, ITS 
ORIGIN, PROGRESS, AND IMMOV- 
ABLE STABILITY, THROUGH 
ALL TIMES 


[As in the following work a survey is given, to 
some degree, of the succession and establishment 
of the church, we find it expedient in order that 
the same may not be misinterpreted, and because 
some of our good friends have requested and be- 
sought us (though we have intended to leave it as 
it was), to precede, by way of introduction, that 
which follows, by our exposition of the true and 
the false church, and of their respective good and 
evil succession and progress; also, to state the 
views we hold in regard to the right of succession. 
We will, therefore, begin here, and, so as not to be 
tedious, endeavor to be as brief as possible.] 

As there are two different peoples, two different 
congregations and churches, the one of God and 
from heaven, the other of Satan and from the 
earth; so there is also a different succession and 
progress belonging to each of them.* 

We shall first speak of the divine and heavenly 
church, and then of the last mentioned one. 

The divine and heavenly church, which is the 
separated holy flock and people of God, originated 
upon earth at the beginning of the world ; has ex- 
isted through all the ages up to the present time; 
and will continue to the end of the world. 


OF THE DIVINE SERVICE OF THE CHURCH 

The state and divine service of this church have 
varied from the beginning according to the differ- 
ent periods in which it existed and flourished. 

From Adam to Noah, from Noah to Abraham, 
from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to Christ, 
from Christ to the end of the world, God ordained, 
for each of these periods, different customs, as re- 
gards the external divine service of this church; 
also different signs, seals, and appurtenances; 
though it is, was and shall be, the same church, 
the same people, and also the same God whom they 
served, still serve, and shall serve unto the end. 

Before Adam fell, divine service had no respect 
to Christ ; He had not yet been presented to men 
as a means of salvation, much less as their only 
Prophet, Priest, and King, or the only true way, 
entrance and door to heaven, through whom alone 
men can be saved; but their happiness depended 
on their obedience to the command not to eat of 
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Gen. 
2:16, 17.f 


* Not only the word of God, but also experience, confirms the 
truth of our statement with reference to the two different churches ; 
since daily and universally we may observe people who lead a very 
modest, devout and godfearing life; and, on the other hand, such 
whose life is extremely profligate, impious and godless : thus it is 
also with the root of lite, that is, with the matter of faith or of unbe- 
lief. How can these be called or recognized by a different name 
than that of members of the two above mentioned churches? 

f The religion before the fall of Adam, with which we begin, 
was of short duration ; hence little is said of it in the word of God. 


After the fall, divine service had respect alto- 
gether to Christ, Acts 4:12. Truly God promised 
His Son to men, represented Him by types, and 
finally gave Him to them. In the meantime, the 
fathers who were before the advent of Christ, 
hoped in Him, longed for His coming, and ordered 
and founded all their divine services, whatever 
these, according to the time and the command of 
God, might be, on His only and eternal reconcil- 
iation. Compare Gen. 3 :15 ; 22 :18 ; 49 :10,18 with 
John 5:46; 8:56; I Peter 1:10, 11. 

Touching the external mode of divine service, 
this was not uniform at all periods, but varied very 
much ; for it seems that in the time from Adam to 
Noah, men followed the implanted light of nature, 
or, to speak properly, the engraven law of the con- 
science or the mind ; observing no essential and ex- 
press ceremonial commandments, excepting Abel's 
offering, and the commandment that the sons of 
God, that is, the members of His church, should 
not marry the daughters of men, that is, those who 
were not members of the church of God; which 
was enjoined under a severe penalty. Compare 
Gen. 4 :4 with Gen. 6 :3.* 

In the time from Noah to Abraham, there was 
added God's command, not to eat blood, nor to 
shed human blood. At that time God made a cov- 
enant with Noah and every living creature; that 
He would destroy them no more by a flood ; and 
He set the bow in the clouds as a sign of the cov- 
enant. Compare Gen. 9 :4, 5 with verses 11, 12, 13. 

In the time from Abraham to Moses God insti- 
tuted the circumcision among His people; which 
served for the purpose of distinguishing the de- 
scendants of Abraham, of whom the church of God 
consisted, from all other nations, and as a seal of 
the covenant which God had made with Abraham 
and his seed, in particular. See Gen. 17:10, 11, 12; 
compare with Rom. 4:11. 

From the time of Moses to Christ God gave, in 
addition to circumcision, many laws and command- 
ments, too numerous to mention, which were to be 
observed by His people. These consisted in mani- 
fold sacrifices, oblations, purifications, etc., for the 
performances of which holy times were set apart, 
as the passover, Pentecost, Feast of Tabernacles! 
new moons, and fast days; together with sacred 
places, as the Tabernacle of Moses, the Temple of 
Solomon ; Shiloh. Mizpah, Moriah, etc. ; also holy 
persons, as prophets, priests, Levites, singers, and 
doorkeepers. See Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, 
and Deuteronomy. 

From the time of Christ to the end of the world, 
God, through Christ, has taken away the cere- 
monies of the Mosaic law as well as the signs by 
which it is sealed ;_ and, to the acknowledgment 
of the grace of Christ, commended the observance 
of other ceremonies and signs, as baptism, supper, 
etc. These external commandments, together with 

* Abel's offering was by faith. Compare Gen. 4:4 with Il'eb 
11 :4 — The sons of God were commanded to render obedience to the 
Spirit of God; which injunction they did not heed in the days of 
Noah. 


22 


INTRODUCTION 


faith, and true penitence of life, which is the spir- 
itual and moral virtue, the Lord has very strictly 
enjoined upon all members of the church of 
Christ. See Matt. 28:18-20; Mark 16:15, 16, com- 
pared with I Cor. 1 1 :2-28 ; also the entire epistles 
of the apostles, which treat of the fulfillment of 
the Mosaic ceremonial law, as Rom. 10:4; Gal. 
4:10, 11 and 5:1-4; Col. 2:16. 

Having now briefly shown the diversity of the 
external divine service of the church of God, 
through all the times, it behooves us to state, on 
the other hand, in what points this church has 
always continued the same. 


IN WHAT POINTS THE CHURCH OF GOD HAS 
ALWAYS CONTINUED THE SAME 

God has always ordained teachers in His church, 
and, therefore, always caused His will to be pro- 
claimed to the people; which commenced princi- 
pally in the days of Enos, the grandson of Adam ; 
for then began men to call upon the name of the 
Lord. 4:26. 

Enoch, the seventh from Adam, preached of the 
judgment and the great day of vengeance of the 
Lord. Jude vv. 14, 15. 

Abraham, the father of the faithful, preached of 
the name of the everlasting God. Gen. 21 :33. 

Moses preached of the faithfulness, goodness, 
and righteousness of God; so that his doctrine 
dropped as the rain, and his speech distilled as the 
dew. Deut. 32 :2-5. 

David preached of the righteousness of God in 
the great (God's) congregation, and would not let 
his mouth be stopped, that is, he would not be 
overcome by his adversaries. Ps. 40 :10. 

Afterwards, all the holy prophets : Isaiah, Jere- 
miah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Oba- 
diah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zepha- 
niah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, preached 
of the laws, punishments and promises of God, 
and prophesied of the blessed and felicitous coming 
of the Messiah whom God had promised. Read the 
books containing their prophecies, throughout. 

After the time of the Prophets, Christ Himself 
preached of the fulfillment of the time, the coming 
of the kingdom of heaven, repentance, and faith 
in the Gospel. Mark 1 :15. 

The apostles followed the example and the com- 
mand of their Lord, in proclaiming the will of 
God ; and not that alone, but when their departure 
was nigh at hand, they appointed others in their 
stead, as Timothy, Titus, the seven teachers in 
the seven churches in Asia, who also, especially 
Timothy, were charged to appoint faithful men, 
who would be able to teach others also. II Tim. 
2:2. 

In order, moreover, that the church of Jesus 
Christ might always know, according to what rule 
persons were to be chosen for the ministry, the 
Holy Spirit, through the hand of Paul, has written 


concerning this matter, and transmitted it to pos- 
terity. I Tim. 3:1-7; Tit. 1:5-9. 

Besides the office of preaching, which has always 
belonged to the church, various other articles, in 
faith* and life as well as in outward worship, 
which have always obtained, and must still obtain, 
could be mentioned ; however, since we think we 
have pointed out the chief article, by virtue of 
which, principally, a church is a church, and 
through what the same is sustained, we will, so as 
not to bring too much of the same thing, dismiss 
the subject here, and proceed to the stability, dur- 
ability, and visible discernibility of this church, as 
we have promised in the beginning. 

OF THE STABILITY, DURABILITY, AND VISIBLE 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CHURCH OF GOD 

That this church, from the beginning to the time 
of David, was always visible, discernible, and dis- 
tinguished from other nations, is clear and mani- 
fest, and, as far as we know, not doubted by any- 
body. There remains, then, only to be proved, 
that the same after the time of David, has always 
been discernible, according to the preceding man- 
ner, and will continue to be so to the end.f 

To show this, the song of David of the city or 
church of God, Ps. 46:3, 4, serves an excellent 
purpose. "Though the sea rage and roll, so that 
through its tempest the mountains fall in, Selah! 
the city of God shall nevertheless remain glad with 
her fountains, where the holy tabernacles of the 
Almighty are." This passage, beginning with the 
preceding verse reads as follows according to the 
original text : "Therefore will not we fear, though 
the earth be removed, and though the mountains 
be carried into the midst of the sea; though the 
waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the 
mountains shake with the swelling thereof, Selah. 
There is a river, the streams whereof shall make 
glad the city of God, the holy place of the taber- 
nacles of the Most High. God is in the midst of 
her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, 
and that right early."J 

Who is there so ill versed in the Word of God, 
as to suppose that he is to understand by the words 
city of God and the holy place of the tabernacles of 
the Most High, etc., the city of Jerusalem in the 

* In the matter of faith all the pious, from the beginning, looked 
to the Messiah; to whom also we, in these last days, must look; 
for He is the foundation not only of the apostles, but also of the 
prophets. Eph. 2:20. — Divine worship, humility, righteousness, 
faithfulness, and many other virtues, have been common in the 
ancient church as well as now in the last church. 

t The discernibility of the church of God before the time of 
David, will, we think, not be disputed; and we shall begin, there- 
fore, from that period, leaving the time previous to that untouched. 

$ The swelling sea and the tempests of which David speaks here, 
must not be understood as having reference to elemental water, or 
a disturbance of the natural, created things ; but to the onset of the 
evil practices and doctrines of evil-minded and ungodly men, 
through the wiles of Satan, the hellish adversary. The removing of 
the earth and the displacing or falling in of the mountains through 
the aforesaid tempests may be understood to refer to the ruin and 
destruction of the earthly-minded and great of this world, who per- 
ish through the noxious waters and commotions of evil doctrines. 
The streams which make glad the city of God,' can very properly 
be applied as having reference to the saving doctrines through which 
the city or church of God is refreshed, gladdened, and through the 
divine promises contained in His word made to rejoice in the Spirit. 


INTRODUCTION 


23 


land of Palestine, and the Temple which was built 
in that city? for this city and the Temple which 
was in it, were laid waste and totally demolished 
and destroyed, first by the Chaldeans, in the time 
of Jeremiah, and subsequently by the Romans, who 
conquered the land of Canaan and Jerusalem; so 
that, according to the prophecy of Christ, not one 
stone was left upon another. We must, therefore, 
understand this as relating to the church of God, 
which is called, in holy Scriptures, the city of God. 
Heb. 12:22; for of the same it is said that God is 
in the midst of her, and that, therefore, she shall 
not be moved, etc., as shall appear more fully from 
the following testimonies, Isaiah 2:2: "And it 
shall come to pass in the last days, that the moun- 
tains* of the Lord's house shall be established . . . 
and all nations shall flow unto it." It is beyond dis- 
pute that here, by the words the Lord's house, we 
are to understand the church of the Lord, unless 
there be one who holds, with the Jews, that it must 
be understood as having reference to the house of 
stone, which, in former time, Solomon built, to 
the honor of God, on Mount Moriah ; which house 
is now in ruins, but was to be rebuilt. But this 
cannot be expected, for the prophet Daniel, with 
respect to this desolation, says clearly that it shall 
be poured upon the desolate, even until the con- 
summation (that is, the end of the world). Dan. 
9:27 compared with Matt. 24:15. 

No small proof of this is furnished by the fact 
that about forty years after the ascension of Christ, 
this very house was destroyed, demolished and 
burned by Titus Vespasian, and has not yet been 
rebuilt, though about sixteen hundred years have 
elapsed since; and, on account of the continual 
quarrels of the Palestinean and other eastern rul- 
ers, it is, viewing it from a human standpoint, not 
likely that it will ever be done. 

Since it is true, then, that by the words "the 
house of the Lord," we must understand the church 
of the Lord, there follows also what is said in 
connection with it namely: that the same shall be 
firmly, i. e., invincibly, established on the moun- 
tain, that is, Christ, the immovable foundation. 

Besides the adduced prophecy, Isaiah 2 :2, show- 
ing the firmness and immovability of the house 
(or the church) of God, which is founded upon 
the mountain of the Lord — Christ Jesus — the same 
prophet treating of the durability, glory and divine 
dignity of this church, under the type of the New 
Jerusalem, produces various commendatory testi- 
monies for this purpose, saying among other 
things, chap. 60, verse 1 1 : "Thy gates shall be 
open continually; they shall not be shut day nor 
night." 


* The mountain of which Isaiah says that the house of the Lord 
is built upon, must necessarily be understood as referring to Christ 
who in the language of the prophets, is called a mountain in holy 
Scripture. Dan. 2 :35. On the other hand, the house which Solomon 
built upon Mount Moriah, has been destroyed, and Iain waste now 
for about 1600 years, without being rebuilt. But Christ is such a 
foundation, that whatever is truly built on it, cannot fall: for 
"Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus 
Christ" (I Cor 3:11). 


This is a simile drawn from a peaceful city 
which has neither fear nor care that enemies will 
attack her, and, therefore, leaves her gates open 
by night as well as by day, for the accommodation 
of the citizens, and the messengers and strangers 
who are traveling in the night. Thus, he would 
say, will it also be with the future church of 
Jesus Christ. 

Then, in verse 14, speaking of the enemies of the 
church of God, and of those who had slandered 
her, he says: They "shall bow themselves down 
at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, 
the city of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of 
Israel." 

When a city has become so great that even her 
deadly enemies who had purposed to lay waste 
and destroy her, come bending their knees, and, 
as begging for favor, bow down before her, as is 
shown here of the enemies of the city and church 
of God ; there is no probability that such city will 
easily be conquered, laid waste, or subjugated. So 
it is, in a spiritual sense, with the city and church 
of Jesus Christ ; for it is this to which this proph- 
ecy has reference. 

Immediately after, in the fifteenth verse, the 
prophet declares that God will make this city or 
church an eternal excellency, a joy of many gen- 
erations. 

And, as though by this the durability and ex- 
cellency of this city, well-beloved of God, were not 
yet sufficiently expressed, he adds these words, 
verse 19: "But the Lord shall be unto thee an 
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory." 

And, lastly, verse 21 : "Thy people, O God, also 
shall be all righteousness : they shall inherit the land 
forever." Here no further explanation is required, 
since the text plainly and clearly expresses our 
meaning ; and we will, therefore let it suffice. 

We then proceed to what Christ, the Son of 
God, Himself testifies concerning this matter. Matt. 
16:18: "Upon this rock I will build my church; 
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." 

Christ, in another place, speaking by parable of 
a man who built his house upon the sand, adds the 
explanation : that the same was a foolish man ; be- 
cause such a foundation, and, therefore, also the 
building which is founded upon it, cannot stand 
before the floods, rains, and storms, which beat 
against it. 

On the other hand, He commends him as wise 
and prudent, who built his house upon a rock; since 
the same, being well-founded, is able to withstand 
all dangers. 

But the foundation of which the Lord speaks 
here, that He will build His church upon it, is 
much firmer than any material rock, for these 
must all pass away with time ; but the foundation 
which is Christ Himself, remains, shall remain, 
and shall never decay : for "the foundation of God 
standeth sure" (II Tim. 2:19). 

Yet not only the foundation, but also the build- 
ing of the church shall not decay, though in nature 


24 


INTRODUCTION 


it is otherwise; for a house, church, or tower, 
resting on an immovable foundation, but being 
not sufficiently firm or strong in itself, finally de- 
cays, yea falls to the ground ; but here it stands so 
that no opposing agencies, not even the devil him- 
self, can prevail against it, which is evident from 
these words : "And the gates of hell shall not pre- 
vail against it." 

In or under the gates councils were wont to be 
held ; and the gates were the strength and power 
of the cities. Compare Zech. 8:16 with Ps. 147 :13. 
Hence, by the words, "The gates of hell," etc., we 
are to understand the council and power of the 
hellish fiend. Yet, according to the last mentioned 
place of Scripture these shall not prevail against 
the church of Christ ;* and, consequently, no other 
opposing agencies; for these are the most power- 
ful and worst enemies. 

We pass on to other Scripture testimony written 
for the same purpose. Matt. 28:20: "And, lo, I 
am with you all the days, even unto the consumma- 
tion of the ages." Nearly all translators, in order 
to follow therein the Dutch way of speaking, ren- 
der the last words of this sentence : "unto the end 
of the world." But we have, for good reasons, 
preserved the Greek mode of expression, inasmuch 
as it serves better and more clearly to the end we 
have in view. For we have found that, after the 
common translation, the words, "unto the end of 
the world," have been misinterpreted, and 
stretched beyond their meaning, by some inex- 
perienced persons, so that these expound that 
which has been spoken of the consummation of 
time, as referring to the end of locality; even as 
though Christ had not here promised His apostles, 
to remain with them till all time should have come 
to an end; but only until, for the promulgation 
of the Gospel, they should have traveled unto the 
uttermost parts of the earth, which, because it is 
not possible to travel farther by land, are called 
the end of the world. 

This is a great error, for; according to his ex- 
planation, this promise would have belonged to the 
apostles alone, and been limited by their lifetime, 
since they traveled everywhere to preach, so that 
their sound went into all the earth, and their words 
unto the ends of the world.f Compare Mark 
16:20 with Rom. 10:18. 


* If Christ is so firm a foundation that not even the gates of hell 
can prevail against that which is built upon it, how very foolish 
careless and imprudent are they who forsake this foundation, and 
build upon, and trust in, the vain things of this world! Certainly 
everything under the sun, yea, all which our eyes behold, is vain 
and transitory. "Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, ... all is 
vanity" (Eccl. 1:2), understand: earthly things. But how much 
more vain are the sinful and evil things which God has forbidden, 
and concerning which He has warned us in His word, that we 
should have nothing to do with them! How great will be the fall 
of those who build upon these forbidden vanities! If we suffer 
damage, and complain, when a material house or building falls, be- 
cause its foundation is not firm, how much greater loss will they 
sustain, and what greater reason will they have to lament, who will 
fall both in soul and body, without ever being able to rise again! 

t The words of David, Psa. 19:6, which he spoke of the circuit of 
the sun around the whole earth every twenty-four hours, the apostle 
Paul applies to the traveling and preaching of the apostles through 
the whole world, saying, Rom. 10:18: "Verily their sound went 
into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world." 
Since the apostles, in their time, traveled through the whole world, 


But, in order that all true followers of Christ 
and His apostles, to the end of time, might comfort 
themselves with this promise, the Lord has ex- 
pressly spoken of the consummation of the ages, 
and declared that so long (understand: spirit- 
ually) He will be with them. 

We arrive now at the point we had in view from 
the beginning, and which we shall now present 
more plainly and fully. It is certain that the Lord 
has spoken here of the preaching of the holy Gos- 
pel, of faith, of baptism, and of the manner of 
establishing and building up His church, as it was 
His will that the same should be built up and 
maintained through all ages. After saying this, 
He gave the before mentioned promise. 

It is settled, therefore, that the visible church of 
Jesus Christ (for this is the one in whom the 
preaching of the holy Gospel, faith, baptism, and 
whatever there is more besides, have place) shall 
exist through all time, even unto the consumma- 
tion of the ages ; for, otherwise, the promise. "Lo, 
I am with you all the days," etc., can not be ful- 
filled in her. 

Even as, besides preaching and faith, baptism 
shall continue in the church to the end of time, so 
also the holy supper. This appears from the words 
of Paul, I Cor. 11:26: "For as often as ye eat 
this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew forth 
the Lord's death till he come." 

Thus, if mention is made here of the eating of the 
bread, the drinking of the cup, and the snowing 
forth of the Lord's death, with the additional clause 
that this shall be observed, and continue, till the 
Lord come (that is, the end of time, to judge 
the world), it follows that there will be, through- 
out all ages to the end of the world, a church which 
will observe the external ordinances of Christ not 
only in respect to holy baptism, but also to the 
holy supper, and the shewing forth of the Lord's 
death ; unless it can be shown that the words, "till 
he come," have another signification, such as we 
have never yet met with in any commentator, since 
the text is not only too clear, but also too con- 
clusive.* Compare this with Matt. 25 :31 ; John 
14:3; Acts 1:11; I Thess. -4:16; Jude 14; Rev. 
1:7; 22:12, 20. 


THE CHURCH OF GOD OBSCURED AND RENDERED 

ALMOST INVISIBLE IN SOME PLACES; AND 

WHAT HAS BEEN THE CAUSE OF IT 

FROM ANCIENT TIMES 

As the moon, notwithstanding her substance and 
body never perish, is not always seen in her full 

to preach the Gospel, and consequently, have been at the ends or 
uttermost limits of the earth, it would follow, according to our 
opponents' own words, that the promise of Christ, "Lo, I am with 
you" (or by you), etc., was completely fulfilled in the apostles, 
excluding their descendants from assuming any part of it whatever. 
This would certainly be a comfortless matter for us, their descend- 
ants ; but the case is quite a different one as is shown in this column. 
* Whenever, in the New Testament, the coming of Christ is 
spoken of, there is generally, yea, universally, meant by it His last 
coming to judgment. "Then . . . they shall see the Son of man 
coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory" (Matt. 
24:30). "Behold, he Cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see 
him, and they also which pierced him." Rev. 1 :7 ; also I Cor. 11 :26. 


INTRODUCTION 


25 


light by the human eye, either, because she sinks 
beneath the horizon, or, being too close to the sun, 
is obscured by him, or, being far from the sun, is 
darkened by the shadow of the earth, which is 
called an eclipse ; even so it is with the substance 
and appearance of the church of God on earth. 
The latter, though never perishing entirely, does 
not always show herself in her full form, yea, at 
times she seems to have vanished altogether, yet 
not in all, but only in some places, either through 
the slothfulness of some people, who, from want 
of regard, or for some other reason, neglect the 
external, manifest commandments of God, or on 
account of some misconceptions or errors that 
have arisen, and whereby sometimes many of the 
true believers have been perverted, and seduced 
from the true worship of God ; or in consequence 
of persecution, violence and tyranny, exercised 
against the faith and the practice of it, on ac- 
count of which the pious are compelled to hide and, 
as outcasts from mankind, seclude themselves in 
forests, wildernesses, and solitary places; so that 
its characteristics, light and virtue could not be 
seen, much less known, by the common world. 

When the church of God of the Old Testament 
was in Egypt, it could not observe its divine wor- 
ship, but had to request permission "to go three 
days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to 
the Lord." Ex. 8:26, 27, compared with Ex. 
10:26. 

During the forty years that this same people 
was in the wilderness, such remarkable events 
happened that all their children remained uncir- 
cumcised, not receiving circumcision until they 
had become old, and arrived in the land of Canaan, 
at mount Aralot. Josh. 5 :2-8. 

In the time of Elijah this church was so greatly 
obscured on account of persecution, that he 
thought that he alone was left, though God had 
reserved to Himself seven thousand persons who 
served Him, and had not bowed their knees to 
Baal. I Kings 19:14, 18; Rom. 11:3, 4. 

When this people had been carried away into 
Babylon, the house of God, at Jerusalem, where 
divine worship was wont to be made, lay waste, 
and the stones of the sanctuary were scattered in 
all the streets ; yea, among the people in Babylon, 
matters were in so bad a condition, in regard to re- 
ligion and the songs of praise with which they 
were wont to worship God, that they had hung 
their harps on the willows that were planted there 
by the rivers, Ps. 137:1-4; for which reason they 
were numbered among the dead and among those 
that go down to the grave. Bar. 3 :10-14. 

After the Babylonian captivity, in the time of 
the Maccabees, many of the church of Israel, be- 
cause of the existing danger, hid themselves in 
caves, in order that they might keep the Sabbath. 
II Mace. 6:11. 

All these obscurations, like sad eclipses in the 
divine worship, have happened in the church of 
God of the Old Testament, before the birth and 


advent of Christ into this world ; and much more 
might be said in regard to this, if it were necessary, 
but we consider it sufficient to have made simple 
mention of it from time to time. 

The same took place also after the advent of 
Christ in the church under the Gospel, which was 
composed of Jews and Gentiles ; she too, could not 
always raise her head with safety, but was oft- 
times, like the sun behind clouds, concealed from 
the common sight of men. 

Even in the time when Christ dwelt bodily 
among men, and had risen from the dead, His 
disciples, the chief members of His church, sat 
concealed, with closed doors, for fear of the Tews. 
John 20:19. 

After the ascension of Christ, the very numer- 
ous church which was at Jerusalem, dispersed, on 
account of persecution, through the land of Judea 
and Samaria, except the apostles ; so that this dis- 
tinguished church, which, it appears, was the chief 
one on the face of the earth, had to sojourn secret- 
ly in a strange land. Acts 8:1. 

Afterwards, when the emperor Domitian had 
banished John, the holy apostle and evangelist, for 
the Gospel's sake, to the island of Patmos, the 
Holy Ghost revealed unto him the future state of 
the church of Christ, namely, that she would have 
to flee into the wilderness, on account of the per- 
secution of Antichrist, and there be fed by God, 
a thousand two hundred and threescore days, 
which, reckoned according to prophetic language, 
means as many years. Rev. 12:6-11. 

Whether we begin to reckon these years from 
the death of the apostles; or with the year 300, 
when the so-called patriarchs had their origin ; or 
with the year 600 ; or a little later, when Moham- 
med rose in the east among the Greeks, and the 
pope in the west among the Latins, and raised no 
small persecution against the defenseless and inno- 
cent little flock of the church of Christ, so that all 
who did not wish to be devoured, either in soul 
or in body, had to hide themselves in deserts and 
wildernesses ; let it be reckoned as it may, say we, 
a very long period is to be understood by it, which 
has extended to this, or about this time. 

Here the rose has blossomed very gloriously 
among the thorns. Song of Sol. 2:2. Here the 
dove that was in the clefts of the rock and in the 
secret places of the stairs, let her sweet voice be 
heard.* Verse 14. Here the Lord said : "A garden 
enclosed is my sister, my spouse ; a spring shut up, 
a fountain sealed" (Song of Sol. 4:12). Here the 
Son of God has fed, sustained and preserved His 
church against the sentence of worldly and carnal- 
minded men, who, because they are carnal, cannot 
comprehend the things of the Spirit of God. 

But lest any should misconstrue our preceding 
proposition, let it be understood, that when we 
speak of the obscuration, concealment, or the be- 

* In the clefts of the rock and in the secret places of the stairs 
that is, in persecutions and in solitary and strange regions; just as 
among the thorns" signifies, in the power of evil-minded and 
bloodthirsty tyrants. 


26 


INTRODUCTION 


coming invisible, of the church of God, we do not 
mean the church in general, or in all places, for the 
church in general has never been obscured and 
hidden in all places at the same time ; but we mean 
thereby some parts of the church in general, name- 
ly, some particular societies, belonging to the body 
of the general ' church which is spread over the 
whole earth. 

It must be stated, also, that by the term, general 
church, we do not understand all the churches 
which bear the Christian name; but only those 
who express the Christian name by their upright 
faith and pure observance of the Christian and 
Evangelical commandments. 

Now the question arises, whether our church of 
the present day, called the Anabaptists, has truly 
descended, and derived her succession, from the 
aforementioned church of God which has existed 
from the beginning, and kept the commandments 
of God in purity. 

But, in order to do this briefly and in the best 
manner, we shall leave untouched the time and con- 
ditions of the church from Adam to Christ, as being 
an undisputed point; and only examine the time 
and condition of the church after the advent of 
Christ ; for the point of difference relates solely to 
those who and which, by virtue of true succession, 
have a right to the same. 


THE SUCCESSION OF THE CHURCH OF GOD, PER- 
SONAL SUCCESSION, AND SUCCESSION OF 
DOCTRINE 

From the Latin word succedo, that is, to go 
under, or to take the place of one, is derived the 
word, succession, which we, though improperly, 
have mixed into our Dutch language. The various 
branches proceeding from this root, that is, the 
numerous words taking their origin from it, to- 
gether with their significations, we leave un- 
touched ; in general we understand by it, to follow 
any one in his place, right, or reign. 

There is a twofold succession, natural and spirit- 
ual, political and ecclesiastical, or civil and ecclesi- 
astical ; but we have to speak here only of the spir- 
itual and ecclesiastical, and not of the natural, 
political, or civil, succession ; for only the former, 
and, by no means, the latter, belongs here.* 

Now, as succession is of twofold nature and 
kind, so also is each kind of the same twofold and 
distinct in itself. This will be shown plainly in the 
spiritual and ecclesiastical succession. 

In order to present this in a clear light, we say 
that the ecclesiastical succession may be considered 
in two ways : firstly, with respect to the succession 
of persons ; secondly, with respect to the succession 
of doctrine. 


The latter is a sign and evidence of the former, 
so that the former cannot subsist without the latter. 
Where the latter is, the former need not be looked 
for so carefully. But where both are found in 
truth and verity, it is not to be doubted that there 
is also the true and genuine church of God, in 
which God will dwell and walk; which has the 
promise of an eternal and blissful life ; and about 
which the holy Scriptures glory and teach so much. 


PERSONAL SUCCESSION 

As a great building, house, or castle, can be con- 
sidered, firstly, with regard to it as a whole, and, 
secondly, with respect to its different parts, so also 
the whole church of Christ can properly be con- 
sidered : firstly, in the whole or in general, as com- 
prising all the congregations in the whole world, 
which have in common the most holy faith, and the 
practice, which, according to God's holy Word, 
must follow therefrom ; secondly, in any particular 
part of the same, as, this or that church which is in 
accord with it, as for instance, the church at 
Amsterdam, Harlem, Dort, etc. 

Likewise there is also (or, certainly can be) a 
twofold personal succession: (1) a general, (2) a 
particular one. By the general is understood that 
succession, which has been, in general, throughout 
the whole world, through a succession of true 
teachers, whether few or many, according to the 
opportunity of the times ; who have rightly taught 
the truth, and propagated it according to their 
ability; concerning which (touching their doctrine, 
especially in regard to holy baptism, etc.) we have 
shown, which the true succession is, which, to- 
gether with the observance of all the other com- 
mandments of Jesus Christ, is recognized by us, 
according to the promise of the Lord given to the 
true teachers, Matt. 28:20. 

By the particular succession is understood the 
succession of teachers, from person to person, in a 
particular church, at a separate place, and sitting 
on a throne prepared for this purpose, as for in- 
stance, at Constantinople, of which the Greeks 
boast; but principally at Rome, about which the 
Latins, that is, the papists, make a great ado. But 
concerning this there is no promise, law, or com- 
mandment to be found in the whole Gospel, and 
we, therefore, pass on.* 


* There is not only a natural and spiritual succession, which 
could be considered as indifferent only ; but both, the natural and 
the spiritual, can be good or bad, (or in both we find either the one 
or the other. But we purpose to speak here only of a spiritual suc- 
cession, and moreover, of such an one that is good. This we shall 
consider with regard to good persons as well as to good doctrine. 


SUCCESSION OF DOCTRINE 

Here the words of Tertullian are applicable. He 
says : "The Christian church is called apostolic not 
just because of the succession of persons, but on 

* The twelve tribes of Israel, considered as a whole, were but 
one church ; but with respect to certain parts who had remained on 
the other side of the Jordan, namely, Reuben, Gad, and the half 
tribe of Manasseh (Josh. 22 :l-5) ; the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, 
who dwelt in Jerusalem, and formed also a part; and the residue of 
the multitude of Israel, who dwelt by the cities of Samaria, it could 
very properly be said, that Israel consisted of three churches: (1) 
on the other side of Jordan; (2) at Jerusalem; (3) in Samaria, etc 
Even so there is but one church, which, keeping the true faith is 
scattered over many places; but with respect to the multiplicity of 
places where they dwell, they may be called "many churches." 


INTRODUCTION 


27 


account of the kinship of doctrine, since she. holds 
the doctrine of the apostles." Lib. de praescript, 
etc. 

This doctrine everyone who boasts* of the true 
succession, must prove from the true apostolic 
writings, as the means by which the church was 
originally instituted, subsequently established, and 
maintained through all times (we speak of the 
Christian and evangelical church). Therefore, 
this doctrine must necessarily, also in these last 
times be the mark of the true succession. 

Now, if this is united with the common succes- 
sion of teachers, we have everything that is neces- 
sary for the demonstration of the true church. 
This stands so fast that it cannot reasonably be 
disputed, much less, refuted. 

The question now will be, in what church the 
true apostolic doctrine has been held from the 
beginning, and is still held; which is a privilege 
boasted of by many. We leave it to them, and 
content ourselves with the testimony of our con- 
science, compared with the holy Gospel of Christ 
and the faith of the holy church, of which men- 
tion is made, throughout, in the ancient church 
histories. 

To give evidence, then, of the faith professed by 
us, we declare, that we believe in our heart, and 
confess with our mouth : 

THE APOSTLES' CREED 

1. I believe in one God, the Father, the almighty 
Creator of heaven and earth. 

2. And in Jesus Christ, His only-begotten Son, 
our Lord. 

3. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and 
born of the virgin Mary. 

4. Who suffered under Pontius Pilate, was cru- 
cified, died, and was buried. 

5. Rose from the dead on the third day. 

6. Ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the 
right hand of God, the almighty Father. 

7. From whence He will come to judge the liv- 
ing and the dead. 

8. I believe in the Holy Ghost. 

9. I believe in a holy general Christian church, 
the communion of saints. 

10. Forgiveness of sins. 

11. Resurrection of the flesh. 

12. And an eternal life. 

This is the most ancient and simple creed, which, 
it appears, was confessed already in or about the 
time of the apostles ; and for which many, yea the 
greater part of the first Christian believers, have 
sacrificed their lives. But as, in the course of time, 
the true and simple meaning of the confession set 


* "Let no man glory in men," says Paul, I Cor. 3:21. We may 
not glory, therefore, in the succession of eminent persons, if they 
do not derive their eminence from the eminence and truth of the 
word of God. The prophet Jeremiah, going further yet in this point, 
has cursed that man who trusts in man, and maketh flesh his arm. 
Jer. 17:5. 


forth was assailed and disputed by the contradic- 
tion and perverse interpretation of contentious and, 
not less, erring persons going under the name of 
good Christians ; the true believers of the church 
of God were compelled, as often as this happened, 
and necessity required, to declare how they under- 
stood and interpreted this or that article. 

Hence it has come that at this day there are 
found among those who are called Anabaptists, 
various confessions, which differ in style, but not 
in faith, (we speak of the foundation of the same), 
in which confessions the creed set forth above is 
more fully interpreted and explained. 

Of these we shall present here principally three, 
which were acknowledged and adopted without 
contradiction as a unanimous confession, by a great 
number of teachers, assembled from various dis- 
tricts, in the year 1649, in the city of Harlem. 
Two of these had been drawn up at Amsterdam, in 
1627 and 1630, and the third at Dort, the 21st of 
April 1632; all on account of certain church unions 
which took place subsequently in these years. 

First Confession 

Drawn up at Amsterdam, the 27th of Septem- 
ber, 1627, called Scriptural Instruction, concerning 
who the people are, on whom the peace of God 
rests, and how they are bound to peace and unity ; 
given in answer to the following several questions, 
of which the first is: 

What are the fundainental and unmistakable 
marks by which the children of God and members 
of Jesus Christ (being the church of God) can and 
must be knozvn, according to the testimony of the 
word of the Lord? 

In order to answer this question correctly, we 
must consider what the means are, by which men 
become children of God, members of Jesus Christ, 
and the church of God. For although the blessed 
Lord Jesus Christ is the only meritorious cause of 
the justification of man, their adoption by God as 
His children, and the foundation of their eternal 
salvation (Rom. 3:24,25; I Cor. 1:30; Tit. 3:7; 
Heb. 5 :12; Eph. 1 :5 ; Col. 3:11 ; Acts 4:12) ; God, 
the heavenly Father, of whom all things are, I 
Cor. 8 :6 ; and who is the true Father of the whole 
family in heaven and earth, Eph. 3:14,15, has 
nevertheless been pleased to impute the merits of 
His Son Jesus Christ to man, and make him par- 
taker of the same, through the means of faith in 
His beloved, only, and only-begotten Son (Rom. 
3 :25 ; Gal. 2 :16; Eph. 2:8; John 3 :15, 36; 6:40) ; 
whereby He owns them as children, and adopts 
them as heirs of everlasting life, according to the 
testimony of John, who says: "He" (that is, 
Christ) "came unto his own, and his own received 
him not. But as many as received him, to them 
gave he power to become the sons of God, even to 
them that believe on his name: which were born, 
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of 
the will of man, but of God" (John 1 :11-13). Paul 


28 


INTRODUCTION 


confirms this with these words: "Ye are all the 
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus" (Gal. 
3:26). Through this means — faith — apprehended 
from the Word of God, and confirmed by the Holy 
Spirit, men are born of God; hence, the appella- 
tion, children of God, truly belongs to them, since 
they have God for their father, and Christ for their 
brother. God the Father acknowledges them as 
His sons and daughters; and Christ, for this rea- 
son, is not ashamed to call them His brethren. 
(Rom. 10:17; II Cor. 4:13; Rom. 8:16; John 
1 :12 ; I John 5 :il ; James 2 :18; I Pet. 1 :23 ; Matt. 
5 :45 ; John 1 :12, 13 ; 3 :2 ; 20:17 ; Rom. 8:15 ; Gal. 
4:16; Matt. 12:50; II Cor. 6:18; Heb. 2:11, 12). 
These children of God and brethren of Jesus 
Christ, are heirs of God, yea, joint heirs in the in- 
heritance of their brother Jesus Christ, as has 
been promised to them by God the Father, through 
the means of faith, all the acquired benefits of our 
Saviour Jesus Christ, which are, chiefly, forgive- 
ness of sins, justification, and peace with God; 
and, because they are children of the resurrection, 
they shall not come into condemnation, but are 
passed from death unto life; they shall enjoy sal- 
vation, eternal life, and unspeakable happiness, 
yea, possess all things that the Lord Christ pos- 
sesses. Rom. 8:17; Eph. 1:11; John 7:3; Acts 
10:43; Rom. 3:26; 4:5; 5:1; Gal. 2:16; Luke 
20:26; John 5:24; Matt. 16:16, 17; Mark 16:16; 
Rom. 10:9; I Pet. 1:9; John 3:16; 6:47; 17:3; 
20:31; I John 5:11; I Pet. 1:8; Luke 22; Rev. 
21:7. 

Hence, we reply, in conclusion to the question 
presented : That the fundamental, certain mark of 
the children of God and members of Jesus Christ, 
is that by virtue of which this appellation belongs 
to them in truth according to the promise of God, 
namely, the only saving faith which worketh by 
love; upon which God Himself looks with gracious 
eyes, and which alone avails before Him (Gal. 
5:6; Jer. 5:3; Hos. 2:2; Jer. 5:1; Acts 8:37; 
15:11; Isa. 26:2) wherefore we, being one or 
unanimous with God, must have respect to it 
alone, seeing that the Lord Christ Himself, promi- 
ising Peter salvation upon his faith and confes- 
sion, adds "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I 
will build my church ; and the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it" (Matt. 16:18). 

We shall now briefly show, what faith in Christ 
is, what is to be believed, what its design is, and 
what are the internal and external operations of 
faith. 

This faith in Christ, by which men become par- 
takers of all the acquired benefits of Jesus Christ, 
is neither an uncertain opinion nor merely a bare 
confession of the mouth, but a firm and sure con- 
fidence of the heart, which doubts not the things 
promised by God in Christ; but has a firm assur- 
ance that He who has promised them is able also 
to perform them. Heb. 11:13; 3:6; Rom. 10:10; 
4:20, 21. By this firm and sure confidence the 


believer in the promises of God is established in 
Jesus Christ his Saviour, because he knows that 
all the promises of God are yea and amen in Him ; 
on which he lays firm hold, as on an anchor of his 
soul, both sure and steadfast. Acts 10:43; I Pet 
1:10, 11; John 8:56; Heb. 11:26; II Cor. 1:20; 
Heb. 6:18, 19. He believes with his heart that 
God, — for the fulfilling of His gracious promises, 
willing to show His great love toward mankind 
who, through sin, had fallen into death and mani- 
fold corruptions, by redeeming them, — sent into 
this world for this purpose, when the time of all 
prophecies was fulfilled, His only, dear and be- 
loved Son, who from eternity was with His Father 
in great glory and beloved by Him before the 
foundation of the world, possessing great riches 
and being equal with God His Father, by whom all 
things were made, and without whom not any- 
thing was made of all that was made in heaven or 
upon earth, and in whom they all stand, since He 
upholds all things by the word of His power. Gen 
22:18; Deut. 8:15; Isa. 7:15; 9:6; 11:1; 40:9; 
Micah 5:2; John 3:16; Rom. 5:8; 9:31; I John 
4:9, 10; Gen. 3:19; Wisd. 2:24; IV Esd. 7:48; 
Rom. 4 :5, 12 ; I Cor. 15:21 ; Rom. 5 :16 ; IV Esd. 
3 :7 ; Gen. 3:17; Rom. 1 :2 ; 8 :3 ; Col. 1 :13 ; Eph. 
1:7; Gal. 4:4; Mark 12:6; 1:11; Matt. 17:5; 
3:17; Heb. 1:8; 7:3; 13:8; 1:3; John 16:28; 
17:5, 24; II Cor. 8:9; Phil. 2:6; Rev. 1:18. 

He left His divine glory, form, and riches, went 
out from God, His Father, and came down from 
heaven into this world, so that He was conceived 
by a virgin, and she brought forth this Son at 
Bethlehem, where God brings His first-born Son 
into the world in the likeness of sinful flesh. John 
13:3; 3:13, 31; 6:38, 51, 62; Eph. 4:9, 10; Isa. 
7:14; Matt. 1 :23 ; Luke 2:21; Isa. 9 :6 ; Luke 3 :6 ; 
Gal. 4:4; Micah 5:2; Matt. 2:6; Heb. 1 :6; Rom. 
8 :3. For the Word became flesh ; that which was 
from the beginning, which the apostles say, which 
they heard with their ears, and which their hands 
handled, of the Word of life; for the life was 
manifested, so that there was seen that eternal life, 
which was with the Father. John 1:14; I John 
1:1, 2; John 1 :9; 20:25, 27; Isa. 40:5, 9. There- 
fore, all true believers must show and ascribe to 
their Saviour, not as to a creature, but as to the 
Creator, all divine honor, even as they do unto the 
Father. John 5:23; 3:30, 31; 20:28. For, al- 
though, for a little while, He was made lower than 
the angels, yet all the angels of God must worship 
Him. Phil. 2:10; Matt. 14:33; Heb. 1:6; for He 
is worthy of this who hath so loved us that He pur- 
chased us with His death, and washed us from our 
sins in His own blood ; who died for our sins and 
rose for our justification ; who destroyed the pow- 
er of the devil, hell, and death ; who abolished the 
sinful handwriting of the law, and has forgiven 
all sins, reconciling to God the Father all things 
that are in heaven and earth, in that He made 
peace through the blood of His cross ; who brought 


INTRODUCTION 


29 


life and immortality to light, and unto whom we 
are appointed by God, to inherit eternal salvation. 
Rev. 5 :9; 1 :S ; Rom. 5 :10; Acts 20:28; Col. 1 :14; 
I Pet. 1:19; Rom. 4:25; 5:6, 8; Col. 2:13, 14, 
19, 20; Heb. 2:14; I Cor. 15:54, 55; Rev. 20:14; 
Isa. 25:8; II Tim. 1:10; Eph. 1:10; 2:13; I 
Thess. 5 :9. 

Thus the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the liv- 
ing God, is the true cornerstone, the way and door 
to eternal life, and there is no other name given 
unto man, either in heaven or on earth, whereby he 
can be saved, and become a child or heir of God 
than the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Isa. 28 
16; Rom. 9:33; Eph. 2:20; I Pet. 2:6; John 14 
6; 10:9; Acts 4:12. 

The believer, seeing, by faith, that God in His 
weightiest and unspeakably great promises is not 
mutable, but does, in truth, fulfill them through 
the giving of His only, dear, and beloved Son, feels 
assured by this, that there is nothing with God, 
which He shall not also give us with His Son. He, 
therefore, has firm confidence, that the benefits 
which God has promised in and through the suf- 
fering, death, shed blood, resurrection and ascen- 
sion of His Son, belong to the believer, and that 
he shall in truth receive them. Heb. 6:17, 18; Ps. 
33:4; John 3:16; I John 4:9; Eph. 1:6; Col. 1: 
12-14; II Tim. 4:8; Eph. 1:11-13; Rom. 8:32, 
34 : 38; II Pet. 1 :3 ; Gal. 2 :21 ; Eph. 2 :17; II Cor. 
4:6,7. 

This faith begets in the heart of the believer an 
inward taste of the kindness of God, and of the 
powers of the world to come; which is followed 
by gladness, joy, and a firm security of the Father's 
favor in the soul, whereby, in every time of need, 
he is enabled to say, confident that he will be heard, 
"Abba, Father ;" and doubts not, though the thing 
promised be not apparent to human eyes, nay, 
seem contrary to nature, and transcends the com- 
prehension, understanding and capability of man 
(Ps. 34:8; I Pet. 2:3; Eph. 2:7; Heb. 6:5, 19; 
II Cor. 4:17; Rom. 12:12; 14:17; II Cor. 6:10; 
John 8:56; Rev. 19:7; Rom. 8:31, 38; Ps. 32:1; 
Pet. 5:7; Ps. 55:22; Rom. 8:15; Gal. 4:6; Rom. 
4:20; James 1 :6; Heb. 11 :1 ; Rom. 4:18, 19; Heb. 
11:11; Heb. 11:29), for the believer, by faith, 
looks not only at the things which, through the 
creation and government of God, exist in nature 
(which man may comprehend and understand), 
but to the goodness and omnipotence of the Prom- 
iser, unto whom nature and all creatural power in 
heaven, earth and sea, nay t death itself, must bow. 
Upon this ground the believer stands fast, even 
when, with Abraham, the father of the faithful, 
and with many of the pious, he is tried of God by 
things seemingly contradictory; for he is assured 
that God cannot lie. Ps. 52:9; Rom. 4:21; Heb. 
11:19; Ps. 135:5; Isa. 40:26; IV Esd. 3:21, 23; 
Josh. 10:13; Hab. 3:10, 11; Matt. 27:44; Isa. 
40:12; Rev. 20:11; Prov. 8:29; Jer. 5:22; Ex 


14:22; Heb. 11:10; 35; II Cor. 1:10; Gen. 22:1; 
I Pet. 1 :7. 

But this faith of the heart is known the very best 
unto God, who also, being the only discerner of 
the intents and thoughts of the heart, will judge 
the internal signs of the faith of the heart, accord- 
ing as He finds it to be upright or dissembling. 
Jer. 17:10; Acts 1:24; Rev. 2:23; Heb. 4:12. 
But to man, who has no other way of judging this 
faith of the heart, than by the fruits of the same, 
which he hears and sees, there are given as signs 
by which to distinguish it, the confession of it 
with the mouth, and the obedience of faith as 
manifested in outward works. Therefore the be- 
liever, according to the command of Christ, must 
confess openly before men, to the honor of his 
Creator and Redeemer, what he believes and ex- 
periences in his heart, no matter, what sufferings 
may result to him on that account. He can not 
do otherwise, for he must hearken unto God more 
than- unto men (Mark 16:16; John 3:26; I Cor 
2:11; John 3:11; Rom. 10:10; 1:5, 16, 25; 
Acts 4:19, 20); for the Lord Christ hath said: 
"Whosoever therefore shall confess me before 
men, him will I confess also before my Father 
which is in heaven." Matt. 10:32; Luke 9:26. 
John says : "Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh is of God" (I John 
4:2), and Paul explains: "We having the same 
spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, 
and therefore have I spoken;* we also believe 
and therefore speak" (II Cor. 4:13). 

That, therefore, oral confession proceeding from 
sincere faith conduces to salvation, Paul testifies 
with these words : "If thou shalt confess with thy 
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine 
heart that God hath raised him from the dead, 
thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man be- 
lieveth unto righteousness; and with the mouth 
confession is made unto salvation" (Rom. 10-9 
10). 

This faith exhibits also its outward fruits of 
love worthy of the faith; wherefore the believer, 
according to the teaching of the apostle Peter, 
must give all diligence to show forth from his 
faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, 
godliness, brotherly love, and charity; and walk 
in the Spirit, whose fruits, as love, joy, peace, long 
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
temperance are seen on them outwardly. II Pet 
1 :5-7 ; Gal. 5 :16, 22, 23 ; 6 :1 ; Eph. 5 :9. By these 
good fruits, and by brotherly love, as external 
signs of the true life, they are known as good trees, 
the salt of the earth, the light of the world, a 
light which is put on a candlestick, to give light 
unto all that are in the house, a city set on a hill 
which cannot be hid. And thus they let their good 
works so shine before men, that they, seeing 
them, may glorify God, the heavenly Father. 
Matt. 7:17, 20; 12:35; 5:13-16. 

* These words of Paul, "I believed, and therefore have I spoken " 
are taken from the 116th Psalm of David. 


30 


INTRODUCTION 


For, as children who in their appearance and 
deportment show forth their father's form and 
qualities, are thereby judged and known to be the 
children of such parent, even so the believers, 
having, through the new birth, become partakers 
of the divine nature (inasmuch as they pattern 
after God in virtues), are thereby judged or known 
to be His children ; and, in order that they might 
well express this image, they are abundantly ad- 
monished by Christ and His apostles in regard to 
it. So, for instance, with these words: "Be ye 
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in 
heaven is perfect." "But as he which hath called 
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of con- 
versation." "And every man . . . purifieth him- 
self, even as he is pure." "Be ye therefore merci- 
ful, as your Father also is merciful." Forgive one 
another, as God hath forgiven you. II Pet. 1 :4 ; 

I Pet. 1 :23 ; John 3 :6 ; I John 4 :7 ; 5:1; James 
1:18; John 1:13; Rom. 8:16; Matt. 5:48; I 
Pet. 1:15; I John 3:3; Duke 6:36; Eph. 4:2; 
Col. 3:13. 

Again "Blessed are the peacemakers: for they 
shall be called the children of God" (Matt. 5:9). 
The Lord says further : "Love your enemies, bless 
them that curse you, do good to them that hate 
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, 
and persecute you ; that ye (show that ye) are the 
children of your Father which is in heaven : for he 
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, 
and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." 
Wherever, then, such similarity with God appears, 
through the putting on of the new man, which after 
God is created in righteousness and true holiness, 
these show forth the image of Christ in their mor- 
tal flesh. Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:10; Gal. 2:20; II Cor. 
5:17. They are an epistle of Christ, in which 
Christ can be seen, and read by all men ; and they 
are justly called Christians; and, consequently, 
are true children of God, and members of Jesus 
Christ : therefore they must be recognized and ac- 
cepted by all those who truly fear God, as belong- 
ing to one body, which is the church of the living 
God; and as having through this fruitful faith, 
fellowship with God the righteous Judge, with 
Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, with the 
church of the first-born, which are written in 
heaven, with an innumerable company of angels, 
and with all the spirits of just men made perfect. 

II Cor. 3 :2 ; Acts 1 1 :26 ; Rom. 12:5; Eph. 4 :4, 16 ; 
I Cor. 12:13; Acts 20:28; I Tim. 3:15. Of this 
church Christ is the foundation, Head, King, 
Shepherd, Leader, Master and Lord. I Cor. 3:11 ; 
Eph. 4:15; Jer. 33:15; Luke 1:33; John 10:11, 
14; 13:14. She alone is His body, adorned bride, 
dove, flock, and people, spiritual flesh of His flesh, 
and bone of His bones. Rom. 12 :5 ; Rev. 21 :2 ; 
Song of Sol. 2:14; 4:1. 

Now, although this fruitful faith is the only cer- 
tain fundamental mark by which the children of 
God and members of Jesus Christ shall be known, 
and through which alone they are also, by grace, 


made partakers of the (by us unmerited) benefits 
of Christ, God has notwithstanding been pleased 
to set forth and confirm to believers, by external, 
visible signs, the benefits and merits of His Son 
Jesus Christ, which, as has been said, are received 
only by faith, and retained by obedience, in order 
that the things signified (of the promises of the 
grace of God), might shine forth the more clearly 
by the external signs, partly to assure the con- 
sciences of the believers, in the new covenant of 
the grace of God, and partly to bind the members 
of Jesus Christ together in unity, as members be- 
longing to one body. For this purpose He has in- 
stituted in the church of the New Testament es- 
pecially two such ordinances or signs suited to 
the thing signified, in which all true believers find 
great benefit and comfort. These are the Holy 
Baptism, and the Holy Supper. Eph. 2:7; John 
1 :16; Mark 16:16; Luke 22:19; Acts 2:38; I Cor. 
11:24; Jer. 31:31; I Pet. 3:21; I Cor. 12:13; 
10:17; Rom. 6:5; Matt. 28:19, 26. 

OF HOLY BAPTISM 

Holy baptism is an external, visible ordinance, 
the rite of which consists in this: That all those 
who hear, believe, and receive gladly with a peni- 
tent heart, the doctrine of the holy Gospel, are 
baptized, for a holy purpose, with water, in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost, according to the institution of Christ, 
and the usage of His apostles. Acts 2 :41 ; Matt. 
3:11; Acts 1:35-38; 10:48. 

The benefit which the Lord God, on His part, 
declares through the sign of baptism, is the wash- 
ing away of the sinful corruptions of the soul, 
through the shedding of the blood of Christ ; which 
signifies the forgiveness of sins, obtained through 
this blood, to the assurance of a good conscience 
with God, by which believers comfort themselves 
with the promise of eternal salvation. Acts 22:16; 
Col. 1:14; I John 1:7; Heb. 1:3; Rev. 1:5. 

The obligations which baptism lays upon those 
baptized are : That they, burying their sins there- 
by into the death of Christ, .bind themselves to the 
newness of the life of Jesus, in order to employ, as 
members of the body of Christ (having put on 
Christ), each his several gift, for the maintenance 
and improvement of this body in spiritual and 
temporal things ; and further, that they as the true 
household of God, and citizens of the heavenly 
Jerusalem, must obey the civil laws of their King 
by observing all His commandments. Rom. 6:3,4; 
Col. 2:12; Gal. 3:27; I Cor. 12:25; Eph. 2:19; 
Matt. 28:20. 

OF THE HOLY SUPPER 

The holy Lord's Supper is an ordinance insti- 
tuted by Jesus Christ in remembrance of Himself, 
to be observed until His coming, by all who are 
baptized on true faith in Christ to be one body, in 
the church of the New Testament. Matt. 26:26; 
22:19; I Cor. 11:24,26. 


INTRODUCTION 


31 


This rite consists in this, that a minister of the 
Gospel, according to the institution of Christ, and 
the usage of His apostles, take bread and wine 
for a holy purpose, breaks the bread, and pours in 
the wine, and, after preparation and giving of 
thanks, dispenses both to the believing members. 
The broken bread is eaten, and the wine drank; 
Christ's passion or bitter suffering and death, and 
the shedding of His precious blood ; also the mo- 
tives for this, together with the benefits of His 
death, through which man receives the remission 
of his sins, which is signified by this visible sign — 
all this is proclaimed thereby, in order that the be- 
lieving church may give thanks to God for this 
benefit, and, as behooves members of one body, 
live and walk together here, as one heart and soul, 
in peace and love and unity. Luke 22 : 19, 20; Acts 
2:42; 20:11; I Cor. 10:16, 17; 11:23-25; Acts 
4:32. 

The sum of all that has been said is : ( 1 ) That 
the Lord Christ is the foundation and only merito- 
rious cause of eternal salvation; (2) that true faith 
in Him is the means whereby we become children 
of God and partakers of His merits; (3) that the 
children of God are to be known outwardly by the 
confession and fruits of their faith; (4) that God, 
through the external signs of Holy Baptism and 
the Supper, sets before the eyes of His children 
His gracious benefits, and binds them, as mem- 
bers of Jesus Christ, to one body, that is, to a 
church of God and Christ, whereby they are also 
admonished to the obedience they owe. 

Here the answer to the first question might be 
concluded, but, since the Lord God, for the welfare 
of His church, and propagation of the truth, as 
being promotive of the honor of His name and the 
salvation of mankind, has instituted other ceremo- 
nies and laws, besides certain offices, which, ac- 
cording to the circumstances of the case, the true 
members of the church of God are bound to ob- 
serve ; we shall, as briefly as is possible and prop- 
er, subjoin these to what has preceded ; and this 
the more, as our peace presentation to people of 
the same faith points partly to them ; that it may 
appear the more clearly, whether they agree with 
us, and we with them, in the order of the Christian 
household, to live according to it, through Chris- 
tian obedience, together in love, peace and unity, 
without thinking for any reason, ever again to 
separate one from another. 

OF THE OFFICE OF TEACHER AND DEACON IN THE 

church; also how THE election to, and 

THE CONFIRMATION IN, THESE OFFICES, 

MUST PROCEED, ACCORDING TO THE 

ORDINANCE OF GOD 

As a body consists of different members, each of 
them having its own and special function, accord- 
ing to the effectual working in the measure of every 
part, making increase of the body unto the edi- 
fying of itself, even so it is with the church of God ; 
for although each believer is a member of the body 


of Christ, yet not all are therefore pastors, teach- 
ers, elders, or deacons, for these are those who 
have been properly appointed to such offices. For 
this reason, the administration of these offices, as 
the public preaching of the Word of God, the ad- 
ministering of the holy ordinances of baptism and 
supper, according to the institution of Christ, and 
the usage of His apostles, appertains to persons 
thus ordained, and elected thereto — the pastors 
and teachers; just as it is the province of the dea- 
cons, to provide for the necessities of the poor. 
Rom. 12:4; I Cor. 12:12; Eph. 4:7; Acts 20:28; 
Tit. 1:1; Rom. 12:7; II Tim. 4:2; I Pet. 5:2; 
Matt. 28; Mark 16; Acts 6; I Tim. 3:8; 5 :9. 

Concerning their calling and election to these 
offices, regard must be paid to the conditions re- 
quired in those persons who will worthily fill said 
offices, according to the requirements of the 
apostle, I Tim. 3; Tit. 1. In order to obtain these, 
the church must prepare herself by a devout fear, 
by fasting and prayer, with constant invocation of 
the name of God, that as the discerner of all hearts 
He will show through the unanimous vote of the 
church, whom He counts worthy of such office; 
trusting that the Lord, who hears the prayers of 
those who are assembled in His name, and grants 
the petition of the godly, will, by His Holy Spirit, 
manifest His co-operation, and bring forth those 
whom He knows to be fit for this office ; wherer 
upon, after having been examined, they are con- 
firmed to this office, before the church, by the 
teachers, with the laying on of the hands. Acts 
1:24; 6; Luke 6:8; Matt. 2:8; I Tim. 3:10; 4:14; 
5:22; II Tim. 1:6. 

OF FEET WASHING 

Feet washing we confess to be an ordinance of 
Christ, which He Himself performed on His dis- 
ciples, and after His example, commended to true 
believers, that they should imitate it, saying : "If I 
then, your Lord and Master, have washed your 
feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. 
For I have given you an example, that ye should 
do as I have done to you." Again: "If yr know 
these things, happy are ye if ye do them" (John 
13:14,15,17). 

The purpose for which the Lord has instituted 
this ordinance is principally this: That we may 
remember in true humiliation, that by grace, we 
are washed from sin through the blood of Christ, 
and that He, our Lord and Master, by His lowly 
example, binds us to true humility towards one an- 
other. John 13:8, 10, 14. The apostle classes 
feet washing among the good works. I Tim. 5 :10. 

OF MARRIAGE 

Marriage we hold to be an ordinance of God, 
which was first instituted by God in Paradise, and 
confirmed in our first parents, Adam and Eve, who 
were created after the image of God, male and fe- 
male, while they both were yet in favor with God 
Gen. 2:22; 1:27. 


32 


INTRODUCTION 


In accordance with this first institution, and 
agreeably to Christ's ordinance. Matt. 19:5, the 
marriage of Children of God (who are not too 
nearly related by consanguinity) must be entered 
into, after prayer, and kept inviolable, so that each 
man shall have his own, only wife, and each wife 
her own husband ; and nothing shall separate them, 
save adultery. Lev. 18;20; I Cor. 5:1; Matt. 19; 
Rom. 7:2; I Cor. 7:2; Matt. 5:32; I Cor. 9:5. 

Thus, it is lawful for a brother to take a sister 
to wife; a sister, also, may be married to whom 
she will, only in the Lord, that is, according to the 
ordinance and pleasure of the Lord, as mentioned 
before. But we do not find that God has any- 
where, through His Word, ordained or instituted, 
that a believing member of the church should enter 
into matrimony with an unbelieving, worldly per- 
son ; on the contrary, we find, that God the Lord 
was very angry with those who did so, and de- 
clared that they were flesh, who would not be led 
by His Spirit ; therefore, we reprove all those who 
follow herein the lust of their own flesh, in the same 
manner as we do other carnal sinners. I Cor. 7 :39 ; 
Deut. 7:3; Neh. 10:30; 13:25-27; Gen. 6:6. 

OF THE OFFICE OF THE MAGISTRACY 

The secular power or magistracy is ordained by 
God in all countries, and bears the sword not in 
vain, for it is the minister of God, and a revenger, 
for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise 
of the good. Rom. 13 :2, 4; Sir. 17 :18, 1 Pet. 2 :14. 

Everyone is commanded to be subject unto the 
higher powers. Whosoever therefore resisteth the 
power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they 
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. 
Rom. 13:1, 2. 

All true believers are therefore in duty bound by 
the Word of God, to fear the magistracy, to ren- 
der honor and obedience to the same, in all things 
not contrary to the commandments of the Lord, 
and to pay tribute, custom, and taxes to them, 
without gainsaying or murmuring, seeing that, ac- 
cording to the words of Peter, we must submit 
ourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's 
sake, and pray to Almighty God for them ; also to 
give our greatest thanks to the Lord for good and 
reasonable authorities. Rom. 13:7; Acts 4:19; 
5:29; I Pet. 2:13; Jer. 29:7; Bar. 1:11; I Tim. 
2:2. 

Yet, we do not find, that the Lord Jesus Christ 
has ordained this office of secular authority in His 
spiritual kingdom — the Church of the New Testa- 
ment — or added it to the offices of His church ; nor 
has He given them laws adapted for such office and 
government; but He said to His disciples: The 
kings and lords of the Gentiles, and they that ex- 
ercise authority among them, are called gracious 
lords. But it shall not be so among you. Matt. 
20:25, 26; Luke 22:25, 26. Here we leave the 
matter, as we do not consider it necessary to enter 
into further details. 


OF THE SWEARING OF OATHS 

For the confirmation of a cause which was just 
and true in itself, the Old Testament fathers were 
permitted to swear by the name of God. Deut. 
6:13; Matt. 5:33. 

But the Son of the living God, the King and 
Lawgiver of the New Testament, whose command 
we are bound, through a voice from God out of 
heaven, to obey, has forbidden Christians all 
swearing, as does likewise, the apostle James; 
therefore, the swearing of oaths is forbidden to 
the believers of the New Testament. Matt. 3:17; 
17:5; 5:34; James 5:12. 

OF SEPARATION 

Separation, or the putting away from the 
church, is a decree or sentence of the same, by vir- 
tue and authority of the Word of God, against a 
member, or members, of the church, who, through 
open sin, a scandalous life, heresy, or stubborn- 
ness, have separated themselves from God and the 
fellowship of Jesus Christ, and no longer belong 
into Christ's kingdom, or to His church ; therefore, 
their brotherhood, or sisterhood, is renounced, by 
virtue of the Word of God, in the name of the 
whole church. I Cor. 5 :3 ; Matt. 18 :18 ; I Cor. 5 :1 ; 
Rom. 16:17; Tit. 3; Matt. 18:17; Isa. 59; Tit. 
1:16; I Cor. 6:9; Gal. 5:21; I Cor. 5:12; II Cor. 
2:8. 

The reason for which this is done, and to which 
the church must have respect in the separation, are 
principally these: (1) to show that her doctrine 
does by no means permit such sins, but is wholly 
opposed to them: that, by so doing, the doctrine 
may be preserved pure, and the name of God glori- 
fied. I Tim. 1 :20 ; Tit. 1:13; II Tim. 4:15, 23; (2) 
through separation to prove in fact that she is the 
enemy of sin, and will in no wise tolerate it, in 
order that all causes for reproach to the church 
may be averted. I Cor. 5:1, 2; Tit. 2:8; (3) that 
not, by constant intercourse and fellowship with 
the evil, the good become leavened or corrupted. 

I Cor. 5:7; II Tim. 2:17; (4) that the sinner, 
through excommunication and withdrawal may be 
convicted in his conscience, and moved to shame 
and reformation, that he may be saved. II Thess. 
3 ; I Cor. 5:5; and (5) that others, by hearing and 
seeing this, may be admonished, so that they will 
fear to follow such evil. 

But when the separated sinner shows genuine 
fruits of repentance, we must at all times be ready 
to receive him again in peace to the Christian com- 
munion of the church, if he earnestly requests it. 

II Cor. 2. 

OF SHUNNING 

Since daily intercourse and mingling with un- 
godly apostates, in common eating, drinking, buy- 
ing, selling, and similar unnecessary temporal or 
worldly transactions, is not only dangerous for 
the pious, who, thereby, may become contaminated, 
or be counted as companions of the apostate, but 


INTRODUCTION 


33 


is also hurtful to the apostate himself, since he, 
through such mingling, may probably harden in 
sin, and esteem his offence of less consequence, 
therefore, we understand from the Word of God, 
that — in order to avoid, according to the unction 
of the Spirit, the dangers of sin, and offenses, and 
to bring the apostate sinner to shame and repent- 
ance — the true member of Christ must withdraw 
from the daily intercourse and communion with 
impenitent apostates; must shun them, and have 
nothing to do with them ; and this without respect 
to persons, as far as they are not bound to the 
apostate by any command of God ; for as one may 
do anything in the matter of shunning, which is 
contrary to love, benevolence, Christian propriety 
and justice, which supreme virtues a Christian is 
in duty bound to show unto all men, even to his 
enemies, for which purpose God has given all 
laws, which may, for no reason, be diminished 
much less, broken or transgressed. I Cor. 5 :5 
II Tim. 2 :21 ; II Thess. 3 ; Tit. 3 ; II Thess. 3 :14 
II Pet. 1:6; Tit. 2:12; Rom. 13:8; Matt. 5:44 
Rom. 13:9, 10; I Tim. 1:5; Rev. 22:19; Matt. 
5:19; James 2:1. 

OF THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST, THE RESUR- 
RECTION OF THE DEAD, AND THE LAST 
JUDGMENT 

Finally, we believe, that the Son of the living 
God, the Lord Jesus Christ, our only Prophet, 
Priest and King, will visibly, as He ascended, de- 
scend from heaven, in the clouds, and all the holy 
angels of God with Him, with power and great 
glory, with a shout, with the voice of the arch- 
angel, and with the trump of God, which shall be 
heard everywhere. Then all men who have lived 
upon earth, and have died, good and evil, just and 
unjust, shall rise from the dead, in incorruption, 
with their own body, in which they have lived; 
but those who still live on that day, and have not 
tasted death, shall be changed, in the twinkling of 
an eye, to incorruption, at the last" sound of the 
last trumpet. Acts 1:11; Rev. 1:7; II Thess. 1 :7 
I Thess. 4:16; Matt. 24:50; Zeph. 1:16; Matt. 
25:7; II Cor. 5:10; Rom. 14:11; Jer. 5:29; Acts 
24:15; I Cor. 15 :42; Jer. 26:19; I Cor. 15:38,52. 

Thus, the whole human family shall be placed 
before the judgment seat of Christ ; that everyone 
may receive in his body, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad. For the Lord 
Jesus Christ shall then, as a shepherd, separate the 
sheep from the goats. Those who have done good, 
He shall set on His right hand, but those that have 
done evil, on the left; and He shall there pro- 
nounce the eternal, irrevocable sentence. II Cor. 
5:10; Matt. 25:32, 33, 46; Jude 14. 

To the true believers, who, through faith, have 
done works of love and mercy, He shall say: 
"Come, ye blessed of my father, inherit the king- 
dom prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world." These shall be caught up in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord, who shall take them away with 


Him into life eternal, in the heavenly glory and 
splendor, where they shall forever be with the 
Lord, in the innumerable company of the holy 
angels, in the society of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
and all the pious, with great, unspeakable joy and 
gladness. II Pet. 1:5; Matt. 25:35; Luke 16:9; 
II Pet. 1 :11 ; I Thess. 4:17, 14; John 14:3; 17:24; 
Dan. 12:12; I Pet. 1:8,9. 

But the unrighteous who have not known God, 
nor obeyed the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and have done no works of love or mercy, shall 
then be sentenced to everlasting fire, in these griev- 
ous and intolerable words : "Depart from me, ye 
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil 
and his angels;" "there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth." I Cor. 6:9; II Thess. 1:8; 
Rom. 2:9; Matt. 25:41; 22:13. 

These shall go, where their worm dieth not, and 
their fire is not quenched. There will come upon 
them tribulation and anguish, displeasure, wrath, 
and everlasting destruction from the presence of 
the Lord, and from the glory of His power. Isa. 
66 :24 ; Mark 9 :46 ; Mai. 4:1; Rom. 2 :9 ; II Thess. 
1:9; IV Esd. 9:10; Luke 16:24. 

May the God of grace and mercy preserve us, 
through Jesus Christ, His dear and beloved Son, in 
the power of the Holy Spirit, from this dreadful 
punishment of the ungodly, and grant us His grace, 
that we may live holy here on earth, and die happy, 
to a glad resurrection and joyful appearance in the 
presence of His glory. Amen. 

Here follow two other questions and the answers 
to the same, which we could adduce, but we deem 
it unnecessary, since the treatise given embraces 
the substance or whole sum of the confession of 
saving faith, if it is only well apprehended. 

Added was also a letter, as a preparative for 
peace, and signed by various persons (elders and 
teachers). 

Given at Amsterdam, the 26th of September, 
1627. 


Second Confession 

Also drawn up at Amsterdam, on the 7th of 
October, 1630, called: Confession of Faith, and 
the principal articles of the Christian doctrine. 

[Not divided into separate articles, except the 
articles of belief in God, and the manner of life in 
the church.] 

We believe with the heart, and confess with the 
mouth, that there is one only, eternal, incompre- 
hensible, spiritual Being, which, in Scripture, is 
called God; to whom alone is ascribed omnipo- 
tence, mercy, righteousness, perfection, wisdom, 
all goodness, and omniscience, and who is called 
a fountain of life, and the source of all good, the 
Creator of all things; and the Preserver of the 
same ; who in the Old Testament bears various ap- 
pellations—the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, 
the God Schadai, the God Jehovah, the God of 


34 


INTRODUCTION 


Israel, I am that I am, the Alpha and Omega, etc. ; 
but who in the New Testament is called by three 
distinct names — God the Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost, whom we confess to differ thus far, namely, 
that the Father, as far as He is Father, is another 
than the Son ; and the Son, as far as He is Son, is 
another than the Father, and the Holy Ghost, as 
far as He is a true Holy Ghost, is another than the 
Father and the Son, and that they, although dif- 
fering in name, are nevertheless in their divine na- 
ture and attributes, one only, undivided God, ac- 
cording to the testimony of the apostle : "For there 
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, 
the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three 
are one." Rom. 10:9; Deut. 6:4; Isa. 45:5,21; 
Rom. 3 :30; I Cor. 8:4; Eph. 4:6; Gen. 21 :33; Ps. 
90:2; Isa. 49:28; Ps. 145:3; IV Esd. 8:21; Gen. 
17:1; II Cor. 6:18; Ex. 34:6,7; Luke 6:36; Ps. 
11:7; Col. 3; Lev. 19:2; Matt. 5:48; I Tim. 1:2; 
Ps. 103:8; Matt. 19:17; Ps. 139; James 1:17; 
Gen. 1:1; Job 38 and 39; Ex. 3:6;6:6; 5:1 ; Rev. 
1:8; 22:13; Matt. 28:19; John 14:16; I John 5:7. 

That this Holy God, by His great power and in- 
comprehensible wisdom, created, in six days, out 
of nothing, heaven and earth, together with all 
things visible and invisible; and on the sixth day 
prepared man a body of the dust of the earth, 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and 
thus made him a living soul, or man ; that He ex- 
alted this man above all creatures, endowed him 
with wisdom, understanding and reason, and made 
him lord over all creatures; nay, above all this, 
created him in His divine image, in holiness and 
righteousness, for immortality, and placed him in 
the garden of Eden, where he might have been 
happy forever, yet requiring of him true obedience, 
saying : "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest 
freely eat ; but of the tree of the knowledge of good 
and evil, thou shalt not eat of it ; for in the day that 
thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." From 
this we see the free will of man. Gen. 1 :6, 9, 14,24 ; 
Jer. 32:17; Acts 17:24; Gen. 1:26,28; 2:7; 
Sir. 17:5; Wisd. 2:23; Gen. 2:8,9. 

That man, through the subtlety of the serpent 
and the envy of the devil, was brought to disobey 
his Creator ; whereby he, with all his posterity, fell 
into death and condemnation, and thus, from the 
most glorious, became the most miserable creature. 
Gen. 3 :il ; Wisd. 2 :24 ; IV Esd. 7 :48 ; Rom. 5:12; 
I Cor. 15:21. 

That the Lord God, seeing the fall of His most 
glorious creature, and that he could neither through 
himself nor through any other creature be re- 
deemed therefrom, showed that He was a gracious 
and merciful God, yea, the supreme or only good- 
ness, in that He sought to reconcile unto Himself, 
out of pure grace and without any merit, man and 
all who had fallen in him. Ps. 49:8; Rev. 5 :3 ; Ps. 
33 :5 ; Matt. 19:17; Rom. 5 :12 ; 3 :24; II Cor. 5 :19. 

But as the justice of God required, that the sin 
committed should not go unpunished, and as no 


creature could satisfy the former, he not only fre- 
quently promised man to send His only beloved 
Son as a Saviour, but prefigured it by various 
types. Gen. 3:15; 12:3,7; 16:18; 24:19; 7:14; 
9:6; 11:10; 53; Jer. 23:5,6; 33:15; Dan. 7:13; 
9:24; Micah 5:2; Hag. 2:23; Matt. 3:1; Ex. 
12:3; 25:17; Num. 21:9; Deut. 30:15; Sir. 15:14. 
That the Lord, after as well as before the fall, 
left man his free will to accept, through faith in 
the promised Saviour, the proffered grace of God, 
or to reject it, is evident not only from the send- 
ing out of His prophets, apostles, and disciples, 
but also from the kind invitation of His beloved 
Son; and this justly, in order that He, as a right- 
eous judge, might have just cause, on the last day, 
to punish the despisers with the pains of hell, and 
reward the obedient lambs with the joys of heaven. 
Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15; Acts 17:31 ; Matt. 11 : 
28; 22:9; I Tim. 1:15; Tit. 2:11; II Thess. 1:8; 
Acts 3:46; Rom. 2:5; Bar. 3:29; John 3:16,36; 
I Thess. 1:6; Heb. 6:10. 

That the Lord, being a true God, who does not 
repent of that which He has promised, when the 
time which He, in the secret counsels of His divine 
will, had determined was fulfilled, sent His only, 
own and true Son as a redeemer unto the world. 
I John 5:20; Deut. 7:8; Gal. 4:4. 

And since there has been for many years, and 
still is daily, much disputation, concerning this 
birth of our Saviour, according to the flesh ; there- 
fore, we believe and confess, that it is a supernat- 
ural birth, which cannot be fathomed by human 
reason. Yet, we believe and confess, by virtue of 
the Scriptures, that the eternal, not spoken, but 
itself speaking, real Word, which was before the 
foundation of the world in great glory with the 
Father, was before Abraham, was in the beginning 
with God, and was itself God ; whose goings forth 
have been from of old, from everlasting, and 
through which all things are created and have their 
being; that this same, real Word, in the fullness 
of the time, came forth from the Father, and 
descended from heaven into the lowest parts of the 
earth, and, according to the prophecy (Isa. 7), was 
(at Nazareth, that He might be called a Nazarene) 
conceived in the virgin body of Mary (who, 
although betrothed to Joseph of the house of David, 
yet was not known of him) by the power of the 
most high God, and the overshadowing of the Holy 
Ghost, and became flesh, remaining what He had 
been, namely, God and the Son of God, and be- 
coming what He had not been, namely, man and 
the son of man ; in this manner, that we confess that 
the child which Mary bore, and which was born at 
Bethlehem, grew up, and suffered on the cross, was 
outwardly and inwardly, visibly and invisibly, as 
He sojourned here, the only, own, and true Son of 
God, and the Redeemer of us all. John 1:1; 17 :5 ; 
8:58; Micah 5:1; John 1:3; 16:28; Eph. 4:9; 
Matt. 1:20; Luke 1:31; Matt. 2:23; John 1:14; 
Rom. 9:5; Ps. 2:7; Matt. 3:17; Luke 2:6,40; 
Matt. 27; 17:5. 


INTRODUCTION 


35 


We believe and confess also, that He came to 
redeem us from the curse, and, therefore, became 
obedient unto the law, was circumcised on the 
eighth day, and named after the name announced 
by the angel before He was born, namely, Jesus, 
that He might make His holy name to agree with 
His holy work, namely, to save His people from 
their sins. Gal. 3:13; 4:5; Gen. 17:12; Gal. 4:4; 
Luke 2:21 ; Matt. 1 :21 ; 18:11 ; Luke 19:10. 

We also confess that He is our only true high 
Prophet, High Priest, and spiritual King, who, in 
His office as a prophet has proclaimed unto us 
God's great, secret counsel of the eternal peace 
with God, through the holy Gospel, and, moreover, 
all that is necessary for us to the new life. Deut. 
18:15; Ps. 110:4; Heb. 3:1; Jer. 33:15; Matt. 
2:15; 13:35; Luke 10:5; John 3:3; Matt. 18:9. 

Who, in His office as priest, has not only offered 
up on the cross a sacrifice for His believing lambs 
that will avail forever; but, after His glorious 
resurrection, has entered into the holy of holies, 
yea, the most holy, namely heaven, not by the blood 
of goats and calves, but by His own blood; by 
which He has obtained eternal redemption for all 
those who believe in Him, yea, sitteth on the right 
hand of God His heavenly Father, where, as a 
high priest, He pours out His holy prayers for 
the ignorance of His people, and obtains forgive- 
ness for them. Eph. 5:2; Heb. 10:12; 9:12; Col. 
3 :1 ; Heb. 5 :2, 5. 

Who, in His office as king, as a victorious prince 
has vanquished death, the devil, hell, and all our 
enemies, and has prepared a place for the mem- 
bers of His kingdom; ruling with the scepter of 
His word, and protecting those who put their 
trust in Him, helping them to triumph till they 
receive the everlasting kingdom at His hand. 
II Tim. 1:10; Heb. 2:14, 15; John 14:2; Ps. 45: 
6;Eccles. 29:25; II Cor. 2:14. 

But since His kingdom was not of this world, 
He did not take possession of it by carnal weapons 
of iron or steel, but through suffering and fighting 
in the flesh; to which end He prepared Himself 
for temptation, tribulation and suffering, and took 
upon Him the cursed death of the cross, under 
Pontius Pilate; we confess, moreover, that this 
same Lord Jesus Christ, who was crucified at 
Jerusalem, and tasted death on mount Calvary, 
with exclamation of His groaning Spirit, and 
amidst the convulsions of heaven and earth, was 
the only and own Son of God, and that we are 
reconciled unto God by the blood and death of His 
Son, who by Himself purged our sins. John 18 :36 ; 
Matt. 4:1; Luke 4:1; Matt. 16:21; Gal. 3:13; 
Deut. 21:23; I Tim. 6:13; Matt. 27; Luke 23; 
I John 3:16; Rom. 8:22; 5:10; Heb. 1:3. 

Who, also, as a sign that He was really dead, 
was taken down from the cross by Joseph of 
Arimathea; who wrapped Him in a clean white 
cloth, and laid Him in a new hewn tomb, before 
which a great stone was rolled, and a guard 
placed. Matt. 27:57. 


But, since it was impossible that He should be 
held by the hands of death, or that the Holy One 
should see corruption, therefore we believe and 
confess also, that by the glory of the Father, ac- 
cording to the predictions of the prophets, He was 
raised from the dead on the third day, amidst the 
convulsions of heaven and earth, and arose bodily ; 
and that He certainly also confirmed His resur- 
rection for forty days by words, signs, and mir- 
acles, that He taught, comforted, and admonished 
His disciples, and finally, on Mount Olivet, was 
received by a cloud, and in their sight ascended 
visibly unto heaven, and entered into the holy of 
holies, seating Himself, as a true high priest, me- 
diator, and advocate between God and man, on 
the right hand of the Majesty on high, where He 
appears continually before His Father's face to 
make intercession for His believers. Acts 2:24- 
Ps. 16:10; Rom. 6:4; Acts 13:34; Matt. 28:2; 
John 20:4; Luke 24:36; Acts 1:12; Heb. 9:12; 
I John 2:1 ; I Tim. 2 :5 ; Rom. 8 :34. 

And since before His precious suffering He 
taught and comforted them, not to let their hearts 
be afraid ; that when He should have ascended to 
heaven, He would send them another comforter, 
the Holy Ghost; therefore, we believe that our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, blessed forever, 
was, as true God, also found true in this particu- 
lar, and did send, ten days after His ascension, the 
Holy Ghost in visible form to, or upon, His 
apostles in Jerusalem; which Holy Ghost is a 
wisdom, strength, and power of God, that pro- 
ceeds from the Father through the Son, and, no 
less than the Father and the Son, is with them an 
eternal, undivided God ; also a teacher, leader and 
guide to all godfearing and consolation-seeking 
souls, showing them the way to and into the 
spiritual Canaan. John 14:1 ; 15:26; 16:7; Matt 
21:3; Rom. 9:5; John 5 :20 ; Acts 2 :2 ; Luke 1 :35 ; 
Acts 5:3; John 14:26. 

We believe, also, that the Lord God chose, first 
the holy angels in heaven, then, two sanctified 
persons in Paradise, and finally, of all the various 
nations of the earth, a penitent and believing 
people for His people ; which is not only called a 
general Christian church or congregation of God- 
fearing men ; but which the Lord Christ has pur- 
chased with His precious blood, and washed and 
cleansed with the waters of the Holy Ghost, that 
He might present to Himself a glorious church, 
not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. 
And since the same is so dear to Him, He would, 
for the prosperity and growth of His kingdom, 
not leave this holy church unprovided for; but 
provided her, not only before, but also after His 
ascension, with faith, love, hope, and other ordi- 
nances, and also with two special ministries, 
namely, the ministry of the holy Word, and the 
pare for the poor, or the office of deacon; and 
appointed in it, some prophets, pastors, teachers, 
helpers and rulers, to provide by common counsel 
wisely for the church of God ; and sent them out. 


36 


INTRODUCTION 


Gen. 2 :22 ; IV Esd. 5 :27 ; Acts 20 :28 ; Eph. 5 :26 ; 
I Cor. 6:20; Luke 10:1 ; Eph. 4:11 ; I Cor. 12:28; 
Mark 16:15. 

In like manner, the apostles also commanded 
their followers, to choose such men with fasting 
and prayer. First, they shall be examined, then 
let them minister; and the believer shall honor, 
love and obey these men. Acts 6:3; 16:2; I Tim. 
3:10; I Thess. 5:13; Heb. 13:17; I Tim. 5:17, 18. 

And, inasmuch as this church bears the figure 
of the true church in heaven, they practice here 
on earth, externally in the preaching of the Word, 
of baptism, the supper, and other Christian ordi- 
nances, and internally in the spirit, a true com- 
munion, here and also in heaven with God and 
all the sanctified of the Lord, after which, in the 
last day, the true reality will follow. Acts 4:32; 
Heb. 12 :22. 

Matters, whereby those who unite in this 
church, submit willingly and obediently to the 
customs, laws and ordinances, which the Lord 
Christ, as the chief Head of His church, Eph. 
5 :32, and only Lawgiver of the New Testament, 
Matt. 28:20, has ordained in His church, and 
which are also taught and, in our weakness, prac- 
ticed by us, viz. : 

1. The Baptism of penitent and believing ad- 
ults, which is an external evangelical act, in which 
the man who truly repents of his sins, who clothes 
his heart with faith in Christ, and thereby mor- 
tifies and buries his earthly members, and arises 
to a new, penitent life, is baptized by an unblam- 
able minister ordained thereto, with common water, 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost, for the remission of all his sins; 
and such a man, once baptized upon true repent- 
ance and scriptural faith, we do not baptize again. 
Acts 2:38; Mark 16:15, 16; Acts 8:14,34,36,37; 
10:43; I Cor. 3:5; Rom. 6:4; Matt. 3:11; Acts 
10 ; Matt. 28 :19 ; Eph. 4 :5 ; Heb. 6 :2. 

2. The holy Supper of the Lord, also called the 
Christian communion, which is to be held among 
believers only, not with consecrated, but with com- 
mon bread and wine ; not only in remembrance of 
the precious, holy, and bitter suffering and death, 
and the glorious resurrection of our Saviour and 
Redeemer Jesus Christ, but also of the consolatory 
fruits thereby prepared for all believers; that 
they, by virtue of this, may not only be moved to 
sincerely deplore the bitter suffering and death 
of Jesus Christ, which He endured for the remis- 
sion of their sins ; but also to praise and bless the 
Lord, with an internal, spiritual thanksgiving, for 
the benefits which have sprung therefrom; and, 
also, to confirm their Christian, brotherly, and 
spiritual communion by a holy and godly life, to 
the praise of the Lord. Matt. 26 :26 ; Luke 22 :19 ; 
Acts 2:46; 20:7; Mark 14:22,23; John 6:51; 
I Cor. 10:16, 17; I Cor. 11:23,24. 

3. Then follows the Washing of the Saints' 
Feet; that is, when our fellow believers from dis- 
tant places come to visit us, we wash their feet, 


according as opportunity offers, after the custom 
of the Old Testament, and the example of Christ ; 
thereby declaring our humility toward God and 
our neighbor, with an humble prayer, that the Lord 
would strengthen us more and more in humility, 
and that, like as we have washed one another's 
feet, He would be pleased to wash and cleanse 
our souls with His blood and the waters of the 
Holy Ghost, from every stain and impurity of 
sin, that we may appear pure and blameless before 
His Father. Gen. 18:4; John 13:5; I Tim. 5:10; 
Luke 22:26; Phil. 2:3. 

_ 4. Likewise, The Works of Love, which we di- 
vide into three parts: (1) That a believer is 
bound to bring his alms, according as the Lord has 
blessed him, to the deacons, that they may have 
wherewith to properly support the poor believers. 
(2) To visit, comfort, attend, and nurse, according 
to the nature of the case, the sick, imprisoned and 
sorrowing hearts. (3) When we see our fellow be- 
lievers in oppressive household cares, bad circum- 
stances, or with an insufficient income, to assist 
them with advice and in deed, and by giving them 
our custom in preference to a stranger. Matt. 6:1 ; 
Luke 12:33; 16:9; Acts 6:13; Matt. 25:35; Heb. 
13:1-3. 

5. As Marriage which was good and rightly 
instituted in Paradise, was afterwards abused 
through lust by the children of the first world and 
also through hardness of heart by the Jews, the 
great Lawgiver of the New Testament restored it 
according to its original ordinance, Matt. 19:4; 
and the apostle says, I Cor. 7:39: "The wife is 
bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; 
but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be 
married to whom she will ; only in the Lord." By 
this we understand that a believer is not at liberty 
to unite in marriage with an unbeliever ; but only 
with one, who, with him, of one heavenly Father, 
of incorruptible seed, and thus of a spiritual gen- 
eration, is born anew, heavenly and spiritual ; for 
since they in baptism have offered up their mem- 
bers unto God, and have given them to the obe- 
dience of their Head, Christ, they cannot take 
away these, their members from Christ, their 
Head, and be yoked together with one who is un- 
regenerated. Gen. 2 :24 ; 6 :1, 2 ; Deut. 24 :1 ; Matt. 
19:8; I Pet. 1 :23; John 3:15; Rom. 12:1; I Pet. 
1:22; Eph. 5:23. 

* 6. The Office of the Secular Authority we rec- 
ognize as an ordinance of God, for the protection 
of the good, and the punishment of the wicked; 
we also recognize that we owe unto it honor, obe- 
dience, custom, taxes, and tribute, and that we 
should also pray for it ; but we do not find that 
Paul mentions it among the offices of the church, 
nor that Christ taught His disciples such a thing, 
or called them to it ; but, on the contrary, that He 
enjoined them to follow Him in His defenseless 
life and cross-bearing footsteps, prohibiting all 
revenge, not only that with arms, but also to re- 
turn railing for railing, and, on the contrary, com- 


INTRODUCTION 


37 


manding to pray for one's enemies, to do good unto 
them who do us evil; and much of a similar na- 
ture which is connected with the office of the mag- 
istracy; hence we are afraid to fill such offices in 
our Christian calling. Rom. 13:2,3; I Pet. 2:13; 
Acts 4:19; Matt. 22:17; Rom. 13:7; Tit. 3:1; 
Jer. 29 :7 ; I Cor. 12 :28 ; Matt. 20 :25 ; Luke 22 :25 ; 
John 8:12; 10:27; Heb. 12:2; I Pet. 2:21; Rom. 
12:19; Matt. 5:44. 

7. The Swearing of Oaths permitted in the Old 
Testament, and in which many abuses have crept, 
is prohibited by Christ and James, without any dis- 
tinction ; therefore it is not lawful for a Christian 
to swear the oath of blasphemy. Deut. 6:13; 
10:20; Matt. 5:37; James 5:12. 

8. But as in a good government ordinances 
without penalties lose their force the Lord also 
has not failed to place penalties to His ordinances ; 
for Paul says: "Them that sin, rebuke before all, 
that others also may fear" (I Tim. 5:20). Christ 
also, in Matt. 18, has taught us to rebuke sinners. 
Paul teaches to purge out the old leaven, and to 
put away from among us those that are wicked ; 
by which we understand the Christian Ban which 
is instituted for the shaming and conversion of 
the sinner, and for the purpose of keeping the 
church pure, lest a little leaven leaven the whole 
lump (I Cor. 5:6, 13; Deut. 13:5; II Thess. 3 :14; 
Gal. 5:9), according to Matt. 16:19: "I will give 
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven"; 
and Matt. 18:18: "Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven ; and whatsoever ye 
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 
This disciple is used against those who have once 
been enlightened, and have received for truth the 
sound doctrine of Christ, but who afterwards fall 
into false doctrine and heresy. These, after they 
have been admonished once or twice, but still per- 
sist in their evil principles, shall, by Christian Sep- 
aration, be avoided and shunned. Tit. 3 :10. Fur- 
ther, it is also used against persons who are going 
astray in the gross works of the flesh, upon suffi- 
cient confession of such persons themselves, or 
upon the testimony of other commendable wit- 
nesses ; for such the church must have, before she 
may proceed with the separation. Gal. 5 :21 ; Eph. 
5:5; I Cor. 5:3; 6:9. 

9. We understand that Marrying out of the 
Church is sinful, since it is contrary to the com- 
mand of the Lord, and has at various times been 
reproved by the Lord and His prophets, through 
deeds as well as through words ; and since it is a 
sin, arising either from a carnal, sensual life, or 
from a want of confidence in God, as though He 
would not provide him with a virtuous spouse; 
and is, moreover, committed with premeditation, 
for which reason it cannot be included in Gal. 6 :1 : 
"If a man be overtaken in a fault, . . . restore 
such an one in the spirit of meekness," but much 
rather in Num. 15 :30: "The soul that doeth aught 
presumptuously, . . . shall be cut off from among 
his people," therefore many God-fearing men, 


who were assembled at different times, have un- 
derstood, as also we understand, that marriage 
out of the church, with impenitents and unbe- 
lievers, is also to be punished with separation from 
the church, that they may the more earnestly seek 
repentance. 

But as all sins are not equally great, and do not 
actually reserve separation without previous ad- 
monition, there is observed in the reproving of 
sin between brother and brother the rule in Matt. 
18:15-18. And if any man is overtaken in a fault, 
then the rule Gal. 6:1 is followed. 

Now, since we also understand that there can 
be no separation where no withdrawing is found, 
we confess also that we are in duty bound to ad- 
monish (I Thess. 3:15) the one separated, to rec- 
oncile himself to the church by true repentance; 
and if there is in him a willingness to reconcile 
himself, to make haste with the anointing or 
reinstating, and not to wait with those who have 
married out of the church, until he or she bring 
with him, or her, the spouse married out of the 
church. II Cor. 2 :8. But if the good admonition 
should be heedlessly rejected, since the daily inter- 
course of the ungodly apostates is unedifying, 
polluting, offensive, and frequently hardens the 
sinner in his wicked life ; we confess that the per- 
son separated, or punished with a ban, is to be 
avoided and shunned, even without the aforesaid 
admonition, immediately after the separation, in 
common, free, worldly transactions, as: In eating 
and drinking, buying and selling, and such like un- 
necessary matters; yet with this distinction, that 
it be done with such moderation and discretion 
that the Word of God may everywhere retain its 
place, and the higher laws and commandments of 
the Lord, by which the believer is bound to the 
separated one, be not broken, but that everywhere 
necessity, word, promise, love, benevolence, mercy, 
justice, and Christian discretion be observed I 
Cor. 5:5; II Tim. 2:16-18; II Thess. 3:14; Tit 
3:10; Luke 6:36; II Pet. 1:6. 

Likewise, if one man understand the passage 
respecting shunning, in I Cor. 5, in a higher, and 
another man, in a lower sense, both men being 
God-fearing in their life, they should, until fur- 
ther enlightenment, be borne with in love, without 
contention or disputing. 

Whosoever seeks, in human weakness, to live 
according to these, the chief, as well as to other 
commandments, doctrines, and ordinances of the 
Lord (more explicitly defined in His holy Word), 
and thus to accomplish his pilgrimage on this 
earth, of him we believe that he will not only feel 
at his departure from earth a sure witness of his 
conscience, and have a glad hope ; but at the res- 
urrection of the dead will indeed find it to be so, 
that all his sins will be forgiven him through the 
holy merits and comforting intercession of Christ 
Luke 24:47; Col. 1 :14; Acts 13:38; I Tim. 2:5'; 
I John 2:1; Rom. 8:34. 


38 


INTRODUCTION 


Finally, we believe also, that our Saviour Jesus 
Christ, forever blessed, shall visibly come again in 
the clouds, like as He ascended before; not so 
humble, lowly, and serving, as He appeared to the 
world in His holy incarnation; but glorious and 
magnificent, with the power and glory of all His 
angels ; not to call the sinner to repentance, but to 
hold the last judgment ; to which end He will not 
only sit upon the throne of His glory, but, as the 
natural sun in springtime draws forth from the 
earth, not only flowers, herbs and good fruits, but 
also nettles, thistles, and thorns, so also, the true 
Sun of righteousness, Jesus Christ, blessed for- 
ever, will then, with the sound of the trumpet call 
forth and cause to arise from the earth, all the 
great number of the dead who from the beginning 
of the world up to the present day have lived, died, 
and sown their bodies in the earth to corruption, 
and as the womb her fruit so shall the sea, hell, 
and death give up their dead; then shall the dead 
be covered with their own skin, and with their own 
eyes behold God, yea, be clothed with their own 
bodies, in or with which they have here served or 
despised the Lord. And after those who then will 
be still living, will have been changed to immor- 
tality in the twinkling of an eye, the general mul- 
titude of all mankind will be placed before the holy 
throne of God, where the books of conscience shall 
be opened, and also another book, which is the 
book of life; and the dead shall be judged accord- 
ing to that which is written in these books, that 
every one may receive in his own body, either 
good or evil, according to what they have done, or 
how they have lived here. Then will the Lord, as 
a righteous Judge, separate the believers from the 
ungodly, as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the 
goats ; and will set the believers, as obedient lambs, 
on His right hand ; but the unbelievers, as wicked, 
rebellious stinking goats, on His left hand. He 
will look upon the lambs with His loving eyes, 
and say to them in a voice sweet as the honey 
comb: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the founda- 
tion of the world." But upon the goats His angry 
face shall be like the lightening, and His voice sound 
like the thunder, and He shall say to them : "De- 
part from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, pre- 
pared for the devil and his angels." Matt. 1:21; 
Acts 4:12; I Tim. 1:15; Acts 1:11; Rev. 1:7; 
Matt. 24:30; II Thess. 1:7; Matt. 25:31; 16:27; 
Acts 17:31; Jude 14; Dan. 7:9, 13; Mai. 4:2; I 
Thess. 4:16; Matt. 24:31 ; John 5:29; Dan. 12:2; 
I Cor. 15:42; IV Esd. 7:32; Rev. 20:13; Job 
19 :26 ; Rev. 1 :7 ; II Cor. 5 :10 ; Matt. 16 :27 ; Rom. 
2:6; I Cor. 15:51; Matt. 25:32; Ezek. 34:17; 
Matt. 25:33,34,41; IV Esd. 16:10; II Thess. 
1:8; Luke 17:24. 

And we also further confess that then the heav- 
ens shall pass away with a great noise, the sun shall 
be darkened, and the moon be changed into blood, 
the star.- shall fall from heaven, and the earth and 
all that is therein shall be burned with fire; and 


then shall the irrevocable sentence of the Greatest 
King be executed. II Pet. 3:10; Rev. 6:12, 13. 

Then shall the ungodly, like sheep for the 
slaughter, be driven to hell, and be cast into the 
great bottomless pit, where there will be no lack of 
fuel. There they shall not be laid on beds of down, 
but on biting moths, and be covered with gnawing 
worms, and tormented with flaming fire, so that 
their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be 
quenched, but the torment of their pain shall as- 
cend as the smoke of a fiery furnace, and it shall 
last forever and ever. But on the contrary, we con- 
fess, that the blessed of God shall be caught up in 
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and shall 
then be led by the Lord Christ, their spiritual bride- 
groom, into heaven, before the throne of God, 
where He shall deliver up again to the Father the 
kingdom and all power, that God may be all in all. 
Ps. 49 :14 ; Isa. 30:33; 14:11; II Thess. 1 :9 ; Mark 
9:48;Isa. 66:24; Rev. 9:2; 14:11; I Thess. 4:17; 
Matt. 25:6; I Cor. 15:28. 

Then shall the blessed of God be changed 
through the glory of God from glory to glory, their 
tears shall be wiped away; the crown of life, of 
glory, and of gladness, shall be placed .on their 
heads; palms of victory shall be put in their 
hands, and they shall be adorned with the white 
robe of the righteousness of the saints. Thus shall 
they be joined to all the saints of God, and be led 
to the fountain of living waters, there to be re- 
freshed for everlasting consolation; they shall be 
fed on the spiritual mount Zion, yea, shall follow 
the sweet Lamb, Jesus Christ, who has bought 
them with His blood and death, in the heavenly 
pleasure grounds, through contemplation of the 
holy God in His inestimable throne, the heavens 
in their beauty, and the angels in their joy. II Cor. 
3:18; Phil. 3:21; Isa. 25:8; Rev. 7:17; James 
1:12; II Tim. 4:8; IV Esd. 2:43,46; Rev. 7:9; 
19:8; Matt. 8:11; Rev. 7:17; 14:1,4; IV Esd. 
8:21; Bar. 3:24. 

Then shall the blessed of God abound in heav- 
enly joy, so that with angelic tongues and heavenly 
voices they will begin to sing with all the saints of 
God the new song, giving unto Him who sitteth 
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, praise, honor, 
glory, and blessing, for ever and ever. Amen. 
Rev. 14:3; 7:10,12. 

Thus done by us, the undersigned ministers, teach- 
ers, and elders of the United Friesic and High Ger- 
man Churches, for ourselves, as well as in the name 
of our fellow brethren and ministers, and strangers 
assembled at these proceedings with us, here at Am- 
sterdam. October the 7th, 1730, new style, and was 
subscribed to by fourteen persons, heads of the 
churches, for themselves as well as in the name of 
the churches by whom they were sent. 


Third Confession 

Drawn up at Dort, at a certain peace convention 
on the 21st of April, 1632, being a statement of the 
chief articles of our general Christian faith, as the 


INTRODUCTION 


39 


same are taught and practiced throughout in our 
church. 

I. OF GOD AND THE CREATION OF ALL THINGS 

Since we find it testified that without faith it is 
impossible to please God, and that he that would 
come to God must believe that there is a God, and 
that He is a rewarder of them that seek Him ; there- 
fore, we confess with the mouth, and believe with 
the heart, with all the pious, according to the holy 
Scriptures, in one eternal, almighty, and incom- 
prehensible God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, 
and in none more, nor in any other ; before whom 
no God was made or existed, nor shall there be any 
after Him : for of Him, and through Him, and in 
Him, are all things ; to Him be praise and honor 
forever and ever, Amen. Heb. 11:6; Deut. 6:4; 
Gen. 17:1 ; Isa. 46:8; I John 5 :7; Rom. 11 :36. 

Of this same one God, who worketh all in all, 
we believe and confess that He is the Creator of all 
things visible and invisible; that He, in six days, 
created, made, and prepared, heaven and earth, 
and the sea, and all that in them is ; and that He 
still governs and upholds the same and all His 
works through His wisdom, might, and the word 
of His power, I Cor. 12:6; Gen. 1 ; Acts 14:15. 

And when He had finished His works, and had 
ordained and prepared them, each in its nature and 
properties, good and upright, according to His 
pleasure, He created the first man, the father of us 
all, Adam; whom He formed of the dust of the 
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of 
life, so that he became a living soul, created by God 
in His own image and likeness, in righteousness 
and holiness, unto eternal life. He regarded him 
above all other creatures, endowed him with many 
high and glorious gifts, placed him in the pleasure 
garden or Paradise, and gave him a command and 
prohibition; afterwards He took a rib from Adam, 
made a woman therefrom, and brought her to him, 
joining and giving her to him for a helpmate, com- 
panion and wife; and in consequence of this He 
also caused, that from this first* man Adam, all 
men that dwell upon the whole earth have de- 
scended. Gen. 1:27; 2:7, 17,18,22. 

II. OF THE FALL OF MAN 

We believe and confess, according to the holy 
Scriptures, that these our first parents, Adam and 
Eve, did not continue long in this glorious state in 
which they were created, but that they, seduced by 
the subtlety and deceit of the serpent, and the envy 
of the devil, transgressed the high commandment 
of God and became disobedient to their Creator ; 
through which disobedience sin has come into the 
world, and death by sin, which has thus passed 
upon all men, for that all have sinned, and, hence, 
brought upon themselves the wrath of God, and 
condemnation; for which reason they were of God 
driven out of Paradise, or the pleasure garden, to 


* The old edition says : "only" or "one", 
hath made of one blood all nations of men." 


See Acts ,17:26: "And 


till the earth, in sorrow to eat of it, and to eat their 
bread in the sweat of their face, till they should 
return to the earth, from which they were taken ; 
and that they, therefore, through this one sin, be- 
came so ruined, separated, and estranged from 
God, that they, neither through themselves, nor 
through any of their descendants, nor through 
angels, nor men, nor any other creature in heaven 
or on earth, could be raised up, redeemed, or rec- 
onciled to God, but would have had to be eternally 
lost, had not God, in compassion for His creatures, 
made provision for it, and interposed with His 
love and mercy. Gen. 3:6; IV Esd. 3:7; Rom. 
5:12,18; Gen. 3:23; Ps. 49:8; Rev. 5:9; John 
3:16. 

III. OF THE RESTORATION OF MAN THROUGH THE 
PROMISE OF THE COMING CHRIST 

Concerning the restoration of the first man and 
his posterity we confess and believe, that God, not- 
withstanding their fall, transgression, and sin, and 
their utter inability, was nevertheless not willing 
to cast them off entirely, or to let them be forever 
lost ; but that He called them again to Him, com- 
forted them, and showed them that with Him there 
was yet a means for their reconciliation, namely, 
the immaculate Lamb, the Son of God, who had 
been foreordained thereto before the foundation 
of the world, and was promised them while they 
were yet in Paradise, for consolation, redemption 
and salvation, for themselves as well as for their 
posterity ; yea, who through faith, had, from that 
time on, been given them as their own ; for whom 
all the pious patriarchs, unto whom this promise 
was frequently renewed, longed and inquired, and 
to whom, through faith, they looked forward from 
afar, waiting for the fulfillment, that He by His 
coming, would redeem, liberate, and raise the fallen 
race of man from their sin, guilt and unrighteous- 
ness. John 1 :29; I Pet. 1 :19; Gen. 3:15; I John 
3:8; 2:1; Heb. 11:13,39; Gal. 4:4. 

IV. OF THE COMING OF CHRIST INTO THIS 

WORLD, AND THE PURPOSE FOR WiHICH 

HE CAME 

We believe and confess further, that when the 
time of the promise, for which all the pious fore- 
fathers had so much longed and waited, had come 
and was fulfilled, this previously promised Mes- 
siah, Redeemer, and Saviour, proceeded from God, 
was sent, and, according to the prediction of the 
prophets, and the testimony of the evangelists, 
came into the world, yea, into the flesh, was made 
manifest, and the Word, Himself became flesh 
and man ; that He was conceived in the virgin 
Mary, who was espoused to a man named Joseph, 
of the house of David ; and that she brought Him 
forth as her firstborn son, at Bethlehem, wrapped 
Him in swaddling clothes, and laid Him in a man- 
ger. John 4:25; 16:28; I Tim. 3:16; John 1:14; 
Matt. 1:23; Luke 2:7. 


40 


INTRODUCTION 


We confess and believe also, that this is the 
same whose goings forth have been from of old, 
from everlasting, without beginning of days, or 
end of life ; of whom it is testified that He Himself 
is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the 
ending, the first and the last ; that He is the same, 
and no other, who was foreordained, promised, 
sent, and came into the world ; who is God's only, 
first and own Son ; who was before John the Bap- 
tist, before Abraham, before the world; yea, who 
was David's Lord, and the God of the whole 
world, the first-born of every creature; who was 
brought into the world, and to whom a body was 
prepared, which He yielded up as a sacrifice and of- 
fering, for a sweet savor unto God, yea, for the 
consolation, redemption, and salvation of all man- 
kind. John 3:16; Heb. 1:6; Rom. 8:32; John 
1:30; Matt. 22:43; Col. 1:15; Heb. 10:5. 

But as to how and in what manner this precious 
body was prepared, and how the Word became 
flesh, and He Himself man, in regard to this we 
content ourselves with the statement pertaining to 
this matter which the worthy evangelists have left 
us in their accounts, according to which we confess 
with all the saints, that He is the Son of the living 
God, in whom alone consist all our hope, conso- 
lation, redemption, and salvation, which we neither 
may nor must seek in any other. Luke 1 :31, 32 ; 
John 20:31; Matt. 16:16. 

We furthermore believe and confess with the 
Scriptures, that, when He had finished His course, 
and accomplished the work for which He was sent 
and came into the world, He was, according to the 
providence of God, delivered into the hands of the 
unrighteous; suffered under the judge, Pontius 
Pilate ; was crucified, dead, was buried, and, on the 
third day, rose from the dead, and ascended to 
heaven ; and that He sits on the right hand of God 
the Majesty on high, whence He will come again 
to judge the quick and the dead. Luke 22 :53 ; 
23:1; 24:6,7,51. 

And that thus the Son of God died, and tasted 
death and shed His precious blood for all men; 
and that He thereby bruised the serpent's head, 
destroyed the works of the devil, annulled the 
handwriting and obtained forgiveness of sins for 
all mankind; thus becoming the cause of eternal 
salvation for all those who, from Adam unto the 
end of the world, each in his time, believe in, and 
obey Him. Gen. 3:15; I John 3:8; Col. 2:14; 
Rom. 5:18. 

V. THE LAW OF CHRIST, i.e., THE HOLY GOSPEL 
OR THE NEW TESTAMENT 

We also believe and confess that before His 
ascension He instituted His New Testament, and, 
since it was to be and remain an eternal Testa- 
ment, that He confirmed and sealed the same with 
His precious blood, and gave and left it to His dis- 
ciples, yea, charged them so highly with it, that 
neither angel nor man may alter it, nor add to it 
nor take away from it; and that He caused the 


same, as containing the whole counsel and will of 
His heavenly Father, as far as is necessary for 
salvation to be proclaimed in His name by His be- 
loved apostles, messengers, and ministers — whom 
He called, chose, and sent into all the world for 
that purpose — among all peoples, nations, and 
tongues; and repentance and remission of sins to 
be preached and testified of ; and that He accord- 
ingly has therein declared all men without dis- 
tinction, who through faith, as obedient children, 
heed, follow, and practice what the same contains, 
to be His children and lawful heirs ; thus excluding 
no one from the precious inheritance of eternal 
salvation, except the unbelieving and disobedient, 
the stiffnecked and obdurate, who despise it, and 
incur this through their own sins, thus making 
themselves unworthy of eternal life. Jer. 31 :31 ; 
Heb. 9:15-17; Matt. 26:28; Gal. 1:8; I Tim. 6:3; 
John 15:15; Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15; Luke 
24:47; Rom. 8:17; Acts 13:46. 

VI. OF REPENTANCE AND REFORMATION OF LIFE 

We believe and confess, that, since the imagi- 
nation of man's heart is evil from his youth, and, 
therefore, prone to all unrighteousness, sin, and 
wickedness, the first lesson of the precious New 
Testament of the Son of God is repentance and 
reformation of life, and that, therefore, those who 
have ears to hear, and hearts to understand, must 
bring forth genuine fruits of repentance, reform 
their lives, believe the Gospel, eschew evil and do 
good, desist from unrighteousness, forsake sin, 
put off the old man with his deeds, and put on the 
new man, which after God is created in righteous- 
ness and true holiness : for, neither baptism, sup- 
per, church, nor any other outward ceremony, can 
without faith, regeneration, change or renewing 
of life, avail anything to please God or to obtain 
of Him any consolation or promise of salvation; 
but we must go to God with an upright heart, and 
in perfect faith, and believe in Jesus Christ, as the 
Scripture says, and testifies of Him; through 
which faith we obtain forgiveness of sins, are sanc- 
tified, justified, and made children of God, yea 
partake of His mind, nature and image, as being 
born again of God from above, through incor- 
ruptible seed. Gen. 8 :21 ; Mark 1:15; Ezek. 12 :2 ; 
Col. 3:9, 10; Eph. 4:22, 24; Heb. 10:22, 23; John 
7:38. 

VII. OF HOLY BAPTISM 

Concerning baptism we confess that all penitent 
believers, who, through faith, regeneration, and the 
renewing of the Holy Ghost, are made one with 
God, and are written in heaven, must, upon such 
■> scriptural confession of faith, and renewing of 
life, be baptised with water, in the most worthy 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost, according to the command of Christ, 
and the teaching, example, and practice of the 
apostles, to the burying of their sins, and thus be 
incorporated into the communion of the saints; 
henceforth to learn to observe all things which the 


INTRODUCTION 


41 


Son of God has taught, left, and commanded His 
disciples. Acts 2:38; Matt. 28:19,20; Rom. 6:4; 
Mark 16:16; Matt. 3:15; Acts 8:16; 9:18; 10:47; 
16:33; Col. 2:11,12. 

VIII. OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST 

We believe in, and confess a visible church of 
God, namely, those who, as has been said before, 
truly repent and believe, and are rightly baptized ; 
who are one with God in heaven, and rightly incor- 
porated into the communion of the saints here on 
earth. These we confess to be the chosen genera- 
tion, the royal priesthood, the holy nation, who are 
declared to be the bride and wife of Christ, yea, 
children and heirs of everlasting life, a tent, taber- 
nacle and habitation of God in the Spirit, built 
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, 
of which Jesus Christ Himself is declared to be the 
cornerstone (upon which His church is built). This 
church of the living God, which He has acquired, 
purchased, and redeemed with His own precious 
blood ; with which, according to His promise, He 
will be and remain always, even unto the end of the 
world, for consolation and protection, yea, will 
dwell and walk among them, and preserve them, so 
that no floods or tempests, nay, not even the gates 
of hell, shall move or prevail against them — this 
church we say, may be known by her scriptural 
faith, doctrine, love, and godly conversation, as, 
also, by the fruitful observance, practice, and 
maintenance of the true ordinances of Christ, 
which He so highly enjoined upon His disciples. 
I Cor. 12: I Pet. 2:9; John 3:29; Rev. 19:7; Tit. 
3:6,7; Eph. 2:19-21; Matt. 16:18; I Pet. 1:18, 
19; Matt. 28:20; II Cor. 6:16; Matt. 7:25. 

IX. OF THE ELECTION, AND OFFICES OF 

TEACHERS, DEACONS, AND DEACONESSES, 

IN THE CHURCH 

Concerning the offices and elections in the 
church, we believe and confess, that, since without 
offices and ordinances the church cannot subsist in 
her growth, nor continue in building, therefore the 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself, as a husbandman in 
His house, has instituted, ordained, enjoined and 
commanded His offices and ordinances, how every- 
one is to walk therein, and give heed to and per- 
form His work and calling, as is meet, even as He 
Himself, as the faithful, great, chief Shepherd and 
Bishop of our souls, was sent, and came into the 
world, not to bruise, break, or destroy the souls of 
men, but to heal and restore them, to seek the lost, 
to break down the midd>e wall of partition, to 
make of twain one, and thus to gather of Jews, 
Gentiles, and all nations, one flock, for a church in 
His name, for which — that no one should err or 
be lost — He Himself laid down His life, thus min- 
istering to their salvation, and liberating and re- 
deeming them, (mark) wherein no one else could 
help or assist them. Eph. 4:10-12; I Pet. 2:25; 
Matt. 12:19; 18:11; Eph. 2:14; Gal. 3:28; John 
10:9, 11,15 ;Ps. 49:8. 


And that He, moreover, before His departure, 
left His church supplied with faithful ministers, 
apostles, evangelists, pastors and teachers, whom 
He before, through the Holy Ghost, had chosen 
with prayer and supplication ; that they might gov- 
ern the church, feed His flock, and watch over, 
protect, and provide for it, yea, do in all things' 
as He had gone before them, had taught, by ex- 
ample shown, and charged them, to teach to ob- 
serve all things whatsoever He had commanded 
them. Luke 10:1; 6:12, 13; John 2:15. 

That the apostles, likewise, as faithful followers 
of Christ, and leaders of the church, were diligent 
in this respect, with prayer and supplication to 
God, through the election of brethren, to provide 
every city, place, or church, with bishops, pastors 
and leaders, and to ordain such persons thereto, 
who would take heed unto themselves, and unto 
the doctrine and flock, who were sound in faith, 
pious in life and conversation, and of good report 
without as well as in the church ; that they might 
be an example, light, and pattern in all godliness 
and good works, worthily administering the Lord's 
ordinances — baptism and supper;— and that they 
might everywhere (where such could be found) 
appoint faithful men who would be able to teach 
others also, as elders, ordaining them by the lay- 
ing on of hands in the name of the Lord, and pro- 
vide for all the wants of the church according to 
their ability; so that, as faithful servants, they 
might husband well their Lord's talent, get gain 
with it, and, consequently, save themselves and 
those who hear them. I Tim. 3:1; Acts 23-24- 

TIV'-^J Tim - 4:16 : Tit 2:1,2; I Tim. 3:7| 
II Tim. 2:2; I Tim. 4:14; 5:2; Luke 19:13. 

That they should also see diligently to it, 
particularly each among his own over whom he 
has the oversight, that all places be well provided 
with deacons ( to look after and care for the poor), 
who may receive the contributions and alms, in 
order to dispense them faithfully and with all 
propriety to the poor and needy saints. Acts 6:3-6. 

And that also honorable aged widows should be 
chosen and ordained deaconesses, that they with 
the deacons may visit, comfort, and care for, the 
poor, feeble, sick, sorrowing and needy, as also the 
widows and orphans, and assist in attending to oth- 
er wants and necessities of the church to the best of 
their ability. I Tim. 5 :9; Rom. 16:1 ; James 1 :27. 

Furthermore, concerning deacons, that they, 
especially when they are fit, and chosen and or- 
dained thereto by the church, for the assistance and 
relief of the elders, may exhort the church (since 
they, as has been said, are chosen thereto), and 
labor also in the Word and in teaching ; that each 
may minister unto the other with the gift he has 
received of the Lord, so that through mutual serv- 
ice and the assistance of every member, each in his 
measure, the body of Christ may be improved, and 
the vine and church of the Lord continue to grow, 
increase, and be built up, according as it is proper! 


42 


INTRODUCTION 


X. OF THE HOLY SUPPER 

We also confess and observe the breaking of 
bread, or Supper, as the Lord Christ Jesus before 
His suffering instituted it with bread and wine, 
and observed and ate with His apostles, command- 
ing them to observe it in remembrance of Him; 
which they accordingly taught and practiced in 
the church, and commanded that it should be kept 
in remembrance of the suffering and death of the 
Lord ; and that His precious body was broken, and 
His blood shed, for us and all mankind, as also 
the fruits hereof, namely, redemption and eternal 
salvation, which He purchased thereby, showing 
such great love towards us sinful men; whereby 
we are admonished to the utmost, to love and for- 
give one another and our neighbor, as He has 
done unto us, and to be mindful to maintain and 
live up to the unity and fellowship which we have 
with God and one another, which is signified to us 
by this breaking of bread. Matt. 26:26; Mark 14: 
22 ; Acts. 2 :42 ; I Cor. 10 :16 ; 1 1 :23. 

XL OF THE WASHING OF THE SAINTS* FEET* 

We also confess a washing of the saints' feet, as 
the Lord Christ not only instituted, enjoined and 
commanded it, but Himself, although He was their 
Lord and Master, washed His apostles' feet, there- 
by giving an example that they should likewise 
wash one another's feet, and do as He had done 
unto them ; which they accordingly, from this time 
on, taught believers to observe, as a sign of true 
humility, and, especially, to remember by this feet 
washing, the true washing, whereby we are washed 
through His precious blood, and made pure after 
the soul. John 13:4-17; I Tim. 5:10. 

XII. OF THE STATE OF MATRIMONY 

We confess that there is in the church of God 
an honorable state of matrimony, of two free, be- 
lieving persons, in accordance with the manner 
after which God originally ordained the same in 
Paradise, and instituted it Himself with Adam 
and Eve, and that the Lord Christ did away and 
set aside all the abuses of marriage which had 
meanwhile crept in, and referred all to the original 
order, and thus left it. Gen. 1 :27 ; Mark 10 :4. 

In this manner the apostle Paul also taught and 
permitted matrimony in the church, and left it free 
for everyone to be married, according to the 
original order, in the Lord, to whomsoever one 
may get to consent. By these words, in the Lord, 
there is to be understood, we think, that even as 
the patriarchs had to marry among their kindred 
or generation, so the believers of the New Testa- 
ment have likewise no other liberty than to marry 
among the chosen generation and spiritual kindred 
of Christ, namely such, and no others, who have 
previously become united with the church as one 
heart and soul, have received one baptism, and 

* The forefathers before the time of the law had the custom of 
washing the feet of those who came to them friendly and peaceably. 
Gen. 18:4; 19:2; 24:32; 43:24. 


stand in one communion, faith, doctrine and prac- 
tice, before they may unite with one another by 
marriage. Such are then joined by God in His 
church according to the original order ; and this is 
called, marrying in the Lord. II Cor. 7 :2 ; I Cor. 
9 :5 ; Gen. 24 :4 ; 28 :2 ; I Cor. 7 :39. 

XIII. OF THE OFFICE OF THE SECULAR AUTHORITY 

We believe and confess that God has ordained 
power and authority, and set them to punish the 
evil, and protect the good, to govern the world, 
and maintain countries and cities, with their sub- 
jects, in good order and regulation ; and that we, 
therefore, may not despise, revile or resist the 
same, but must acknowledge and honor them as 
the ministers of God, and be subject and obedient 
unto them, yea, ready for all good works, especial- 
ly in that which is not contrary to the law, will, 
and commandment of God; also faithfully pay 
custom, tribute and taxes, and to render unto 
them their dues, even also as the Son of God taught 
and practiced, and commanded His disciples to do ; 
that we, moreover, must constantly and earnestly 
pray to the Lord for them and their welfare, and 
for the prosperity of the country, that we may 
dwell under its protection, earn our livelihood, and 
lead a quiet, peaceable life, with all godliness and 
honesty; and, furthermore, that the Lord would 
recompense unto them, here, and afterwards in 
eternity, all benefits, liberty and favor which we 
enjoy here under their praiseworthy administra- 
tion. Rom. 13:1-7; Tit. 3:1; I Pet. 2:17; Matt. 
22:21; 17:27; I Tim. 2:1. 

XIV. OF REVENGE 

As regards revenge, that is, to oppose an enemy 
with the sword, we believe and confess that the 
Lord Christ has forbidden and set aside to His dis- 
ciples and followers all revenge and retaliation, and 
commanded them to render to no one evil for evil, 
or cursing for cursing, but to put the sword into 
the sheath, or, as the prophets have predicted, to 
beat the swords into ploughshares, Matt. 5 :39, 44 ; 
Rom. 12:14; I Pet. 3:9; Isa. 2:4; Micah 4:3; 
Zech. 9:8,9. 

From this we understand that therefore, and ac- 
cording to His example, we must not inflict pain, 
harm or sorrow upon any one, but seek the highest 
welfare and salvation of all men, and even, if ne- 
cessity require it, flee for the Lord's sake from one 
city or county into another, and suffer the spoil- 
ing of our goods ; that we must not harm any one, 
and, when we are smitten, rather turn the other 
cheek also, than take revenge or retaliate. Matt. 
5:39. 

And, moreover, that we must pray for our ene- 
mies, feed and refresh them whenever they are 
hungry or thirsty, and thus convince them by well- 
doing, and overcome all ignorance. Rom. 12: 
19,20. 

Finally, that we must do good and commend 
ourselves to every man's conscience ; and, accord- 


INTRODUCTION 


43 


ing to the law of Christ, do unto no one that which 
we would not have done to us. II Cor. 4 :2 ; Matt. 
7:12. 

XV. OF THE SWEARING OF OATHS 

Concerning the Swearing of Oaths we believe 
and confess, that the Lord Christ has set aside and 
forbidden, the same to His disciples, that they 
should not swear at all, but that yea should be 
yea, and nay, nay; from which we understand 
that all oaths, high and low, are forbidden, and 
that instead of them we are to confirm all our 
promises and obligations, yea, all our declarations 
and testimonies of any matter, only with our word 
yea, in that which is yea, and with nay, in that 
which is nay ; yet, that we must always, in all mat- 
ters, and with everyone, adhere to, keep, follow, 
and fulfill the same, as though we had confirmed 
it with a solemn oath. And if we do this, we trust 
that no one, not even the Magistracy itself, will 
have just reason, to lay a greater burden on our 
mind and conscience. Matt. 5 :34, 35 ; James 5:12; 
II Cor. 1:17. 

XVI. OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL BAN, OR 
SEPARATION FROM THE CHURCH 

We also believe in, and confess, a ban, Separa- 
tion, and Christian correction in the church, for 
amendment, and not for destruction, in order to 
distinguish that which is pure from the impure: 
namely, when any one, after he is enlightened, has 
accepted Jie knowledge of the truth, and been in- 
corporated into the communion of the saints, sins 
again unto death, either through willfulness, or 
through presumption against God, or through 
some other cause, and falls into the unfruitful 
works of darkness, thereby becoming separated 
from God, and forfeiting the kingdom of God, 
that such a one, after the deed is manifest and 
sufficiently known to the church, may not remain 
in the congregation of the righteous, but, as an 
offensive member and open sinner, shall and must 
be separated, put away, reproved before all, and 
purged out as leaven ; and this for his amendment, 
as an example, that others may fear, and to keep 
the church pure, by cleansing her from such spots, 
lest, in default of this, the name of the Lord be 
blasphemed, the church dishonored, and offense 
given to them that are without; and finally, that 
the sinner may not be condemned with the world, 
but become convinced in his mind, and be moved 
to sorrow, repentance and reformation. Jer. 59 :2 ; 
I Cor. 5:5, 13; I Tim. 5:20; I Cor. 5:6; II Cor. 
10:8; 13:10. 

Further, concerning brotherly reproof or admo- 
nition, as also the instruction of the erring, it is 
necessary to exercise all diligence and care, to 
watch over them and to admonish them with all 
meekness, that they may be bettered, and to re- 
prove, according as is proper, the stubborn who 
remain obdurate; in short, the church must put 
away from her the wicked (either in doctrine or 


life), and no other. James 5 :19; Tit. 3:10; I Cor. 
5:13. 


XVII. 


OF SHUNNING THE SEPARATED 


Concerning the withdrawing from, or shunning 
the separated, we believe and confess, that if any 
one, either through his wicked life or perverted 
doctrine, has so far fallen that he is separated from 
God, and, consequently, also separated and pun- 
ished by the church, the same must, according to 
the doctrine of Christ and His apostles, be shun- 
ned, without distinction, by all the fellow mem- 
bers of the church, especially those to whom it is 
known, in eating, drinking, and other similar inter- 
course, and no company be had with him; that 
they may not become contaminated by intercourse 
with him, nor made partakers of his sins; but that 
the sinner may be made ashamed, pricked in his 
heart, and convicted in his conscience, unto his 
reformation. I Cor. 5:9-11; II Thess. 3:14. 

Yet, in shunning as well as in reproving, such 
moderation and Christian discretion must be used, 
that it may conduce, not to the destruction, but to 
the reformation of the sinner. For, if he is needy, 
hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, or in any other dis- 
tress, we are in duty bound, necessity requiring it, 
according to love and the doctrine of Christ and 
His apostles, to render him aid and assistance; 
otherwise, shunning would in this case tend more 
to destruction than to reformation. 

Therefore, we must not count them as enemies, 
but admonish them as brethren, that thereby they 
may be brought to a knowledge of and to repent- 
ance and sorrow for their sins, so that they may 
become reconciled to God, and, consequently be 
received again into the church ; and that love may 
continue with them, according as is proper. II 
Thess. 3:15. 

XVIII. OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD, 
AND THE LAST JUDGMENT 

Finally, concerning the resurrection of the dead, 
we confess with the mouth, and believe with the 
heart, according to Scripture, that in the last clay 
all men who shall have died, and fallen asleep, 
shall be awaked and quickened, and shall rise 
again, through the incomprehensible power of 
God ; and that they, together with those who then 
will still be alive, and who shall be changed in the 
twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the last trump, 
shall be placed before the judgment seat of Christ, 
and the good be separated from the wicked ; that 
then everyone shall receive in his own body ac- 
cording to that he hath done, whether it be good or 
evil ; and that the good or pious, as the blessed, 
shall be taken up with Christ, and shall enter into 
life eternal, and obtain that joy, which eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into 
the heart of man, to reign and triumph with Christ 
forever and ever. Matt. 22:30,31; Dan. 12 12 • 
Job 19:26,27; Matt. 25:31; John 5:28; II Cor! 
5:10; I Cor. 15 ; Rev. 20 :12 ; I Thess. 4:15; I Cor. 
2:9. 


44 


INTRODUCTION 


And that, on the other hand, the wicked or im- 
pious, as accursed, shall be cast into outer dark- 
ness, yea, into the everlasting pains of hell, where 
their worm shall not die, nor their fire be quenched, 
and where they, according to holy Scripture, can 
nevermore expect any hope, comfort or redemp- 
tion. Mark9:44; Rev. 14:11. 

May the Lord, through His grace, make us all 
worthy and meet, that this may befall none of us ; 
but that we may thus take heed unto ourselves, 
and use all diligence, that on that day we may be 
found before Him unspotted and blameless in 
peace. Amen. 

These, then, as has been briefly stated before, 
are the principal articles of our general Christian 
faith, as we teach and practice the same through- 
out in our churches and among our people ; which, 
in our judgment, is the only true Christian faith, 
which the apostles in their time believed and 
taught, yea, testified with their life, confirmed 
with their death, and, some of them, also sealed 
with their blood ; wherein we in our weakness 
with them and all the pious, would fain abide, live, 
and die, that we may afterwards obtain salvation 
with them through the grace of the Lord. 

Thus done and finished in our united churches, 
in the city oj Dortrecht, the 21st oj April, 1632' 
new style. 

And was signed by the mutually united: 

Dortrecht 

(On the other side.) 
By me Hans Cobrijsz. 
By me Jacuis Terwen. 
Claes Dircksg. 
Mels Gijsbertsz. 
Adriaen Cornelissz. 


Isaac de Koning, and in 
the name oj our min- 
ister 

Jan Jacobs 


MlDDLEBURG 

Bastiaen Willemsen. \ Jan Winkdmans. 

Vlissingen 
Oillaert Willeborts, \ by Jacob Pennen. 

Lieven Marijness. 


Tobias Govertsz, 
Pieter Jansz Moyer, 
Abraham Dircksz. 


Amsterdam 

(On the other side.) 
David ter Haer. 
Pieter Jansz van Singel. 


Jan Doom. 
Piter Grijspert. 


Haerlem 

(On the other side.) 
Dirck Wonteresz Ko- 

lenkamp. 
Pieter Joosten. 


Willem 
selt. 


Bom mel 
Jansz van Ex-\ Gijsbert Spiering. 


Balten Centen 

maker. 
M. Michielsz. 


Rotterdam 

(On the other side.) 
Schoen- Israel van Halmael. 
Hendrick Dircksz 

Apeldoren. 
Andries Lucken Jr. 


From the Upper Part of the Country 
Peter van Borsel. \ Antony Hansz. 

Krevelt do 
Harmen op den Graff. \ Weylm Kreynen. 

Zeeland 
Cornells de Moir. I Isaac Claessz. 


Cornells Bom. 


Schiedam 

I Lambrecht Paeldink. 


Leyden 
Mr. C. de Korlnk. \ Jan Weyns. 

Blockziel 
Claes Claessen. I Pieter Peters. 


Ziericzee 


Anthonls Cornelissz. 


Pieter Jansz Tlmmer- 
man. 


Herman Segers. 

Jan Hendrlcksen 

Hooghvelt. 
Daniel Horens. 


Utrecht 

(On the other side.) 
Abraham Spronk. 
Wllliem van Brcekhuy- 
sen. 


Gorcum 
Jacob van der Heyde\ Jan Jansz V. K. 
Sebrechts. 

Aernhem 
Cornells Jansz. \ Dirck Reuderson. 

Besides that the last mentioned confession was 
received by so many churches, and signed by their 
leaders, as has been shown, also all the churches in 
Alsace and in the Palatinate, in Germany, after- 
wards unanimously adopted and signed it ; where- 
fore it was undertaken to translate the same for 
their benefit and that of others, into French and 
into German. This is given as a remembrance. 
Here is the patience and faith of the saints. Rev. 
13:10. 


OF THE UNGODLY AND FALSE CHURCH, 

WHICH IS THE OPPOSITE OF THE 

CHURCH OF GOD, AND THE ORIGIN, 

PROGRESS AND SUCCESSION OF 

THE SAME THROUGH ALL 

TIMES 


Where God builds a temple, says the old prov- 
erb, there the devil builds another in opposition. 
This has been apparent ever since the beginning of 
the world. For at the same time that Abel became 
a martyr of God, and, therefore, a good leader of 
the children of God, Cain made himself a mur- 
derer, and became a leader of the children of Satan, 
who belong to the ungodly and false church, as 
members of one body. Gen. 4:8. 

He was followed by Lamech, one of Cain's de- 
scendants, who slew a young man, and afterwards 
spoke of it to his wives Addah and Zillah, in a 
boasting and presumptuous manner. Gen. 4:23. 


INTRODUCTION 


45 


The people of the first world universally, with 
the exception of eight, followed in the footsteps of 
Lamech in wickedness; they exercised tyranny, 
violence, and oppression, and would not be gov- 
erned by the Spirit of God. Gen. 6 :3, 4. 

The Sodomites followed in the same course, 
vexing with their unbecoming walk the righteous 
soul of Lot from day to day. Gen. 19; II Pet. 2 :8. 

These were succeeded by the Egyptians, who im- 
posed grievous and insupportable burdens upon 
the people of God, and finally sought their lives, 
yea pursued them even into the sea. Compare Ex. 
1:11 with Ex. 14:9,10,23. 

After these were the seven nations, or inhabi- 
tants, of the land of Palestine, who were greater 
and mightier than the children of Israel, but were 
banished by God on account of their wickedness; 
namely the Canaanites, Hittites, Girgashites, Ara- 
orites, Perizzites, Hivites, Jebusites, etc. Deut. 
7:1,2. 

After these manifested themselves the Amorites, 
Moabites, Midianites, Philistines, and many oth- 
ers, who disturbed, oppressed, and harassed in 
manifold ways the people of God, which was dwell- 
ing in quiet. See throughout in the book of the 
Judges, the books of Samuel, the Kings, and 
Chronicles. 

The Chaldeans, Assyrians, and the inhabitants 
of the land of Babylon, followed those already 
mentioned; they carried the church of God away 
into foreign lands, burned the house of God, and 
laid waste the city of Jerusalem, which God had 
chosen above all cities of the whole earth. II 
Kings 1-17; Jer. 52:1-20; Lam. 1:1-5. 

The mighty cities, Tyre and Sidon, in Phoenicia, 
and afterwards, Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, 
which defied the world itself with their greatness, 
and cast the threatenings of God to the wind, lifted 
up their heads after the last mentioned, but to their 
own destruction. Compare Isa. 23 :4, 5 ; Ezek. 27 
and 28 throughout, with Matt. 11:20-23. 

All these who have been mentioned, from Cain 
on, succeeded one another in regular order, and 
may be considered as members of the church of 
Satan; since they have neither in generation, nor 
in faith, nor in worship, nor in manner of life, 
agreed with the church of God, but opposed it in 
every respect. 

After the coming of Christ, many who had 
adopted the Christian religion and worship, apos- 
tatized, denying the. faith, and thus becoming fel- 
low members in the last mentioned, ungodly, and 
wicked congregation ; as, for instance : Simon Mag- 
us, who by confession of faith, and baptism had 
joined himself to the visible church of God, but 
fell from it, desiring to purchase the gift of the 
Holy Ghost with money, which, according to the 
apostle Peter, tended to his destruction, although 
he afterwards, as it appears, was again converted. 
Acts 8:13, 18-22. 

Hymenseus and Alexander, who concerning faith 
made shipwreck, and were full of blasphemies, 


wherefore they were put away from the church by 
Paul, and delivered unto Satan. I Tim. 1 :19, 20. 

Phygellus and Hermogenes, who with the great- 
er number of those in Asia, were turned away from 
Paul, and, consequently, also from the doctrine of 
the Gospel which they had received. II Tim. 1 :15. 

Hymenseus (the second) and Philetus, who, hav- 
ing erred concerning the truth, pretended that the 
resurrection of the dead was past already ; where- 
by they overthrew the faith of some. II Tim. 2:17, 
18. 

Demas, who forsook Paul, having loved the 
world. II Tim. 4:10. 

Alexander, the coppersmith, who did the apostle 
much evil, on account of which the church of 
Christ is admonished to beware of him. II Tim. 
4:14,15. 

Many others, who, though they bore the name 
of members of the Christian church, did not stand 
by but forsook the oft mentioned servant of God, 
when he was to answer before the Emperor Nero 
in regard to the Evangelical doctrine; for which 
reason their names did no longer belong among 
the pious. See last mentioned chapter verse 16. 

After these followed many who in the days of 
John went out from the Church of Jesus Christ, 
and did the works of antichrist; wherefore they 
were called antichrists, being forerunners of the 
great antichrist who was to follow afterwards. 
See I John 2:18, 19. Besides these who arose al- 
ready in the time of the apostles, and went out 
from the holy congregation of God, many others, 
who can not all be mentioned, followed in all ages 
and will follow to the last days. 

Of this the apostles prophesied when their de- 
parture was near at hand, and warned the be- 
lievers of their coming. 

When Paul knew and was fully assured through 
the revelation of the Holy Ghost that all those 
among whom he had traveled preaching the Gospel 
would see his face no more, he thus addressed, on 
the island of Miletus, the elders of the church of 
Ephesus, who had come to him : I know, beloved 
brethren, that after my departing shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking 
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. 
Therefore watch, and remember that by the space 
of three years I ceased not to warn every one night 
and day with tears. Acts 20:29-31. 

Afterwards when he was in the city of Laodicea, 
in Phrygia Pacatiana, he wrote in a certain letter 
to his beloved friend Timothy, concerning the 
apostasy which should be through some in the lat- 
ter times, thus : "Now the Spirit speaketh express- 
ly, that in the latter times, some shall depart from 
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,' and doc- 
trines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; hav- 
ing their conscience seared with a hot iron ; for- 
bidding to marry, and commanding to abstain 
from meats." I Tim. 4:1-3. 


46 


INTRODUCTION 


Who these apostates were that, in many in- 
stances, have forbidden marriage and meats it is 
unnecessary to point out, since the truth of the 
matter is clear and manifest to almost everyone. 

But at the close of his life, when he was im- 
prisoned at Rome the second time, and had already 
received his sentence of death, namely, to be exe- 
cuted with the sword, for the name of the Lord, 
he once more renewed the foregoing to his friend 
and spiritual son Timothy, in order that he might 
never forget it, but also put the church, . where he 
was a teacher, in remembrance of it with these 
words : "This know also that in the last days per- 
ilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of 
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, . . . 
having a form of godliness, but denying the pow- 
er thereof." II Tim. 3:1-5. 

Continually, he adds this declaration for further 
instruction: "The time will come when they" 
(namely, certain members of the Christian church) 
"will not endure sound doctrine; but after their 
own lusts shall heap to themselves teachers, 
having itching ears ; and they shall turn away their 
ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto 
fables" (II Tim. 4:3,4). 

In like manner, Peter also, as his departure drew 
nigh, expressly prophesied to the chosen strangers 
scattered abroad: That, as there were, in times 
past, false prophets among the people (Israel), 
there should also be false teachers among (or out 
of) them, who should privily bring in pernicious 
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. 
II Pet. 2:1. 

It would require too much time to recount what 
also John says on this subject, not only in his epis- 
tles, but especially in his revelation ; since he gives 
a description of the condition of both the church of 
Christ and of antichrist, from his time to the end of 
the world. 


OF THE EVIL SUCCESSION OF THE ROMAN CHURCH, 

CONSISTING ONLY IN THE SUCCESSION OF 

THE PERSONS, AND NOT OF THE 

DOCTRINE 

Here is to be considered the great error of the 
Romanists, when they without regarding the true 
succession of the doctrine build on, and parade the 
succession of the persons, who either from the be- 
ginning of the world, or from the time of the apos- 
tles have existed throughout, as they pretend up to 
the present time; surely a very insignificant mat- 
ter!* 

For, if they reckon from the beginning of the 
world, we have shown, that Cain, who was a mur- 
derer, has had his successors as well as Abel, who 
was slain for the sake of his faithf and godliness. 


And also, if they reckon from the time of the 
apostles, we have demonstrated that at that time 
already there were many apostates, yea, adversaries 
of the Christian religion and the true worship of 
God; and that more have followed, according to 
the prophecies and predictions which the holy 
apostles uttered and left to posterity. 

Hence it follows, that neither the antiquity, nor 
the long or great succession of persons, can assure 
the truth of any religion or church, since the evil is 
as ancient as the good, and the erring spirits and 
evildoers have had, and still have, as great a suc- 
cession as the true believers and good ; unless the 
antiquity, and the succession of persons be accom- 
panied with the divine truth and piety possessed 
by the upright ancients in the beginning. 

OBJECTION OF THE PAPISTS, BY MEANS OF THREE 
PASSAGES 

But, in order to maintain the aforementioned 
succession, the Papists are accustomed to say, that 
they do not reckon the same from the antiquity of 
some erring spirits who were before, in, or after 
the time of the apostles; but from the church of 
Christ itself, and from Peter, whom they styled 
the prince of the apostles, upon whom Christ Him- 
self, as they asserted, wished to build His church. 
Bell. lib. i. de pont Rom. cap. 10. Quansuy ex. 

To this they add as a second argument, that to 
him and no other, were given, by Christ, the keys 
of heaven, to open or to close the same according 
to his pleasure. 

And, thirdly, that the Lord thrice commanded 
him — more than the other apostles — to feed His 
flock, that is, His church. 

Moreover, that he occupied the Roman throne, 
and that the popes succeeded him therein. 

To prove this supremacy of Peter, and, conse- 
quently, the succession of the popes in his place, 
they have, for a long time already, misused three 
passages of holy Scripture, namely Matt. 16:18, 
19; and John 21 :15-17; to which we will reply in 
the following. 


* "Trust ye not in lying words," saith the Lord, "saying, The 
temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the 
Lord, are these" (Jer. 7:4). 

t "By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than 
Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God tes- 
tifying of his gifts: and he being dead yet speaketh" (Heb. 11 :4). 


REPLY TO THE FIRST PASSAGE 

Matt. 16:18, the Lord says: "Upon this rock I 
will build my church." 

The error of the Romanists consists in this, that 
they misinterpret the word petra, as though there- 
by was meant the apostle Peter ; but this is a great 
and palpable error. For the Lord there plainly 
distinguishes between the name Petros (Peter) 
and the word petra (rock) ; saying immediately 
before: "Thou art Peter," but afterwards: "and 
upon this rock;" upon which follows: "I will 
build my church ;" so that the Lord does not prom- 
ise there, to build His church upon Peter, but upon 
the rock; which he plainly mentions. 

Now it will depend upon the true meaning — 
who and what is to be understood by this rock. 
Some maintain the first mentioned meaning, which 


INTRODUCTION 


47 


we have refuted just now, namely, that Peter 
himself is meant thereby ; for which purpose they 
misapply the passage John 1 :42, where this apostle 
is called Cephas* which, in their opinion, signifies 
a foundation stone ; but this is also an error. 

It is true that, according to the explanation of 
orientalists, those versed in oriental languages, by 
this word there is to be understood a stone; but 
what kind of a stone ? Not a foundation stone, but 
a piece, corner, or chip of a stone, upon which no 
building could ever be founded. The word Cephas, 
they say, is derived from the Hebrew word Keph, 
which with them means a corner or edge of a stone ; 
while, on the other hand, the rocks or foundation 
stones are designated by the name Sela or Zurft 
according to Deut. 32 :13. Thus Peter is indeed 
called a stone in holy Scripture, yet not a founda- 
tion stone, but only such a one as is generally built 
upon a foundation. Christ is properly the foun- 
dation stone, as Peter himself declares, when he 
calls Christ the living stone, disallowed indeed of 
men, but chosen of God, and precious (I Pet. 2 :4) ; 
whereupon he adduces the words of the Prophet 
Isaiah saying: "Wherefore also it is contained in 
the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner 
stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on 
him" (that is built upon him through faith) "shall 
not be confounded." I Pet. 2:6 from Isa. 28:16. 

Therefore he admonishes the believers, to build • 
themselves, as living stones, to a spiritual house, 
upon the foundation which is laid — Christ. Verse 
5. 

Paul confirms this, when he says : "Other foun- 
dation can no man lay than that is laid, which is 
Jesus Christ" (I Cor. 3:11). In another place he 
calls Him the foundation of the apostles and 
prophets, etc. (namely, upon whom the apostles 
and prophets themselves were built up, and upon 
whom jthey, through their doctrine, built up others 
also) ; for he adds : "In whom all the building fitly 
framed together groweth unto a holy temple in the 
Lord: in whom ye also are builded together for 
a habitation of God through the Spirit" (Eph. 
2:20-22). 

It is not inconsistent with this, that the twelve 
apostles, of whom Peter was one, are called twelve 
foundation stones,| upon which, as John says, the 
city of God, that descended from heaven, was built. 
Rev. 21 :14. For, even if it were admitted that by 


* And he (Andrew) brought him (Simon Peter) to Jesus. And 
when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona : 
thou snalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone. 
John 1 :42. 

t He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he 
might eat the increase of the fields: and he made him to suck 
honey out of the "Sela" rock, and oil out of the "Zur" flinty rock. 
Deut. 32:13. 

$ "The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the 
names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb" (Rev.21 :14). In the 
first place it is questionable (even if it be admitted that by this 
description of the city of God we are to understand the church of 
God) whether thereby is meant the church of God as it is here on 
earth, or the glorified church of God, as it will be afterwards in 
heaven : for only the former, and not the latter, is to be considered 
here. In the second place, it is certain that the name "foundation 
stone" is ascribed here not to Peter alone, but to all the twelve 
apostles; hence he is here called a foundation not any more than 
any of the others. 


the words, city of God, in this place, there is to be 
understood the church of God here on earth, this 
would only prove, that Peter, as well as the other 
apostles, was one of the twelve foundation stones 
of the church of Christ ; which by no means con- 
firms the proposed objection, that Peter alone is 
the foundation stone, or joundaiion, oj the church. 
Again, the word "foundation stones" here does 
not signify the foundation itself, since, properly 
speaking, in nature, the foundation, as the ground 
or bottom of a building, is something different 
from the stones built upon it, which are called 
foundation stones; for, upon the ground or bot- 
tom the foundation stones are laid, and upon the 
foundation stones the building ; so that the ground 
of foundation must support both, the foundation 
stones and the building. Thus, Christ is the ground, 
bottom, or foundation of His church ; the apostles, 
through their doctrine, are the foundation stones ; 
and the church is the building erected upon these 
foundation stones and the foundation. It stands 
fast, therefore, that they err, who make Peter the 
only foundation of the church of Christ, and that, 
consequently the building which they erect there- 
on, is erroneous and false.* 

REPLY TO THE SECOND PASSAGE 

The second passage is taken from Matt. 16:19: 
"And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom 
of heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 

But this does not in the least tend to prove that 
church discipline or the power of expelling from, 
and readmitting unto the church, was given, among 
the apostles, to Peter alone, and to no other of the 
twelve; for in verse 13 it is written: "When Jesus 
came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked 
his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I, the 
Son of man, am ?" Whereupon it is related, that 
Peter (in the name of all) answered: "Thou art 
the Christ, the Son of the living God." 

Then follows, verse 19: "I will give unto thee 
the keys," etc., which promise, though addressed 
specially to Peter, extended to all the apostles in 
general, since the Lord did not ask Peter alone, 
but the whole of them collectively; upon which] 
when he (Peter) had answered in the name of all] 
followed the above mentioned promise. 

This is explained still further by the holy evan- 
gelist John, who says, chap. 20:19,22,23, that 
Christ, after His resurrection, standing in the 
midst of His disciples, breathed on them all, and 
said: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," adding: 
"Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted 
unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they 
are retained;" which words are of equal impor- 

„.,? " J S m "' 9. e ?H s l ( ST Pe T ter) > " and J° hn - who seemed to be 
pillars, etc. Gal. 2 :9. Here James is mentioned before Cephas (or 
f„ e r te p ) V,.A ga - ln ' John and James are called pillars as well as Cephas 
(or Peter) m order to show that the worthiness or the ministry of 
one was not more than that of the other, and that they, without dis 
tinction, were all equal therein. OI ais 


48 


INTRODUCTION 


tance with those just quoted from Matthew, con- 
cerning the giving of the keys. 

Moreover, that the church also has received this 
power, is expressed in words not obscure at all in 
Matt. 18:17,18: If he (the sinner) neglect to 
hear, the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen 
man and a publican. Verily I say unto you, what- 
soever ye (understand, according to the sentence 
of the church, which is here spoken of) shall bind 
on earth shall be bound in heaven ; and whatsoever 
ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 

Who doubts that these are the express words 
which were previously addressed to Peter, but, of 
course, are intended for all the apostles, and here 
for the whole church? 

We see that the Corinthian church, at the time 
of Paul, possessed the right of expelling and read- 
mitting, called binding and loosing; for, touching 
the expulsion of the sinner, it was said to them : 
"Purge out therefore the old leaven" (namely, the 
obstinate sinner), etc. I Cor. 5:7. Again: "Put 
away from among yourselves that wicked person." 
Verse 13. 

Concerning the readmittance of the one who 
manifested penitence, they are commanded : "Suf- 
ficient to such a man (namely, who repents of his 
sins) is this punishment (that is, the expulsion 
from the church) which was inflicted of many. So 
that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, 
and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should 
be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow" (II Cor. 
2:6,7). 

Besides, that this power of binding and loosing 
was not given to Peter alone, but to all the apostles, 
and also to the church, it is entirely different in its 
nature from that of which the pope of Rome as 
the imaginary successor of Peter boasts. For the 
power of which Christ spoke, must be limited by 
the rule of His Word, Matt. 7:24, 26; Gal. 1 :6-8; 
while on the contrary the power of which the pope 
boasts is unlimited, has no rule, and extends as far 
as his pleasure. Bald, in cap. Eccles. Also, dist. 
40. cap. S. Papae, etc. 

It follows then, that to the pope is attributed 
wrongfully a power which was not given to Peter 
himself ; moreover, that the power which was given 
him, was common to all the apostles, and also to 
the church. 

REPLY TO THE THIRD PASSAGE 

The third passage (or argument) is taken from 
John 21 :1S-17, where the Lord asked Peter three 
times whether he loved Him, and Peter answered 
each time : "Yea, Lord, I love thee ;" to which the 
Lord replied, three times: "Feed my lambs;" 
"Watch my sheep," etc. 

Some among the papists, in order to maintain 
the supremacy of Peter and, consequently, that of 
the popes of Rome, have so strained these words, 
that a certain celebrated author among them did 
not hesitate to write, that Peter is here appointed a 
ruler, watchman, and pastor, not only over the 


church, but over the apostles themselves. Bell. lib. 
1. de Pont. Rom. cap. 14 & 15. 16. Second S. 
Velt. etc. 

But herein they do violence to the text, since 
various arguments from the holy Scriptures over- 
throw this view. For, in the first place, it is certain, 
that at that time Peter had greatly and grievously 
gone astray, more than any of the other apostles ; 
since he, contrary to warning and his own solemn 
promise, had so faithlessly denied, yea, entirely 
forsaken, the Lord ; hence, there is no probability 
that the Lord exalted him above all the others, 
and appointed him ruler over them ; which would 
be altogether incompatible with the justice of 
Christ, and the nature of the case. 

In the second place it would not accord with 
what the Lord had taught His apostles in general, 
on a previous occasion, when strife had arisen 
among them, as to which of them, after His depar- 
ture, should be the greatest ; saying : "The kings 
of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and 
they that exercise authority upon them are called 
benefactors. But ye shall not be so : but he that is 
greatest among you, let him be as the youngest; 
and he that is chief, as he that doth serve" (Luke 
22:25, 26). Again: "Neither be ye called masters: 
for one is your Master, even Christ" (Matt. 23 :8, 
10). 

In the third place, if we examine the proposed 
argument, we shall find, that neither the threefold 
question of the Lord: Lovest thou me? nor His 
threefold injunction -."Feed, or watch, my lambs, 
and sheep," was directed to Peter any more than 
to the other apostles. 

For, as regards the question, Lovest thou me? 
what does it signify more than that Peter should 
examine himself, whether he did love Christ? Very 
well. What, then, had Peter more than any of the 
other apostles ? or than Paul afterwards had ? who 
said : "For I am persuaded, that neither death nor 
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor 
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor 
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to sep- 
arate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord" (Rom. 8:38,39). Again: "The 
love of Christ constraineth us;" etc. II Cor. 5:14. 
Yea, every Christian in particular, and all in 
general, are bound to this love, which is so neces- 
sary, that it is written : "If any man love not the 
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran- 
atha" (I Cor. 16:22). 

Concerning the injunction, Watch, or feed, my 
lambs and sheep, this is also enjoined upon all true 
teachers. "Take heed therefore," says Paul to the 
elders of the church at Ephesus, "unto yourselves, 
and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost 
hath made you overseers, to feed the church of 
God, which he hath purchased with his own blood" 
(Acts 20:28). 

Peter, moreover, has, in this respect, not placed 
himself above, but beside his fellow ministers, 
when he, exhorting them says : "The elders which 


INTRODUCTION 


49 


are among you I exhort, which am also an elder, 
and a witness of the sufferings of Christ . . . Feed 
the flock of God which is among you," etc. (I Pet. 
5:1,2). 

This is further confirmed by the fact, that the 
Lord did not command Peter only, but all the 
apostles in general, to go into all the world, to 
preach and baptize the believers. Matt. 28:18-20; 
Mark 16:15,16. 

Again, He said to them all: "Ye shall be wit- 
nesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, 
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of 
the earth" (Acts 1:8). 

It follows therefore, that in the matter of watch- 
ing over, and feeding, the sheep of Christ, that is, 
in preaching the holy Gospel, and taking care of 
the church of Christ, Peter possessed no more 
authority, power, and distinction than the other 
apostles and apostolic teachers. 

It now remains to give a solution, why the Lord 
thrice asked Peter alone, and none of the others, 
whether he loved Him, and thrice commanded him 
to feed His sheep. 

To this we reply : since Peter only a short time 
before had thrice forsaken the Lord, it was not 
more than right, that he should also confess thrice 
that he loved Him whom he had forsaken ; and that, 
therefore, this question should be put to him three 
times. 

Besides, since Peter, by his denial had entirely 
abandoned, or, at least, had become totally un- 
worthy of his office of teaching and feeding the 
church of Christ, none of the other apostles would, 
under any consideration, have recognized or re- 
ceived him therein; hence it was necessary, that 
the Lord Himself should earnestly, yea thrice, 
charge him with it, so that no one might come lo 
doubt the worthiness of his person (since he was 
now converted), or the validity of his office. 

Thence follows again the absurdity of those who 
make the matter in question say more than the 
Lord Himself has done : namely, that Peter hereby 
was not reinstated into his office, which he had 
abandoned ; but that he was appointed head of the 
whole church, yea, even over all the other apostles ; 
as can be seen in lib. I. de pont. Rom. cap. 11. 
Bellorm. 


THE GROUNDLESSNESS [OF THE ALLEGATIONS] OF 

THOSE WHO ARE ACCUSTOMED TO DEDUCE 

THE ROMAN SUCCESSION FROM PETER 

THE HOLY APOSTLE, AND WHEREIN 

THIS CONSISTS 

Besides that the three proposed passages are of 
no use to the papists in proving the supremacy of 
Peter over the other apostles and the whole Chris- 
tian church, there follow various reasons and cir- 
cumstances which show clearly, that the succession 
of the popes, which they would deduce from Peter, 
cannot stand, but is unfounded and untrue. 

For, to come to the point, it cannot_be shown, 
that Peter was ever at Rome, (where the seat of the 


pope is placed), except at the close of his life, and 
then he was not received as pope, but was put to 
death as a martyr, with Paul, his fellow apostle, for 
the testimony of Jesus Christ, as we have circum- 
stantially shown in the History of the Holy Mar- 
tyrs,of the year 69 A. D. Also, Egesipp. Hist, van 
de verstoring Jerusalem, j. Bock, 2 cap. Also, W. 
Band. Apopth. Christian, lib. i. ex Hieron. de vitis 
illustribus. Johan. Strac. in festo Johan. Evang, etc. 

Eusebius quotes from Dionysius, a teacher of the 
church at Corinth, concerning the coming of Paul 
and Peter to Rome, as also concerning their preach- 
ing, which was the cause of their death, these 
words: They (namely Paul and Peter) were both 
together in our congregation at Corinth, teaching 
(from) there (on) throughout all Italy; they 
taught also in this city (namely, Rome, of which 
he had first spoken) ; where they both were 
crowned martyrs at the same time. Euseb. Pamph. 
Chron. Eccl. Edition of 1388 lib. 2. cap. 23. 

He speaks of Peter's coming to, and preaching 
at, Rome, even as if having taken place at the close 
of his life ; and although he puts Paul's coming and 
preaching in the same time, Paul's coming to this 
city, nevertheless, happened much earlier than the 
coming of Peter, which took place shortly before 
their death ; in which time both together preached 
the holy Gospel in that city. 

That Paul was there much earlier and longer, 
appears from all the circumstances of the Acts of 
the apostles; for while Peter was preaching at 
Cesarea, Antioch, Jerusalem, and in other places, 
Paul was brought to Rome, and, having arrived 
there, "dwelt two whole years in his own hired 
house, and received all that came in unto him, 
preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those 
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with 
all confidence, no man forbidding him." Here the 
account of the Acts of the Apostles ends, without 
mentioning anything further of Peter. See Acts 
28:30,31. 


VARIOUS ARGUMENTS FROM THE HOLY SCRIP- 
TURES, SHOWING THAT PETER WAS NOT AT 
ROME DURING THE TIME PAUL WAS 
THERE, EXCEPT (AS HAS BEEN EX- 
PLAINED ABOVE) AT THE CLOSE 
OF HIS LIFE 

In this demonstration we shall forego the method 
employed by Sebastian Frank, Gysius, and others, 
who have written syllogistically upon this subject, 
and shall confine ourselves solely to the express 
testimony of (or, at least, plain inferences from) 
Holy Scripture, upon which we propose to found 
our arguments. 

Reason. — First Argument. — When Paul drew 
near the city of Rome, where he was to be arraigned 
before Cesar, the brethren* came out of the city 

* By which of the other apostles these brethren at Rome were 
converted, is not mentioned in the text; but it may have been that 
they were converted on the day of Pentecost at Jerusalem, for at 
that time strangers of Rome were there. Acts 2:10. 


50 


INTRODUCTION 


to meet him, as far as Appii Forum, and the Three 
Taverns, whom, when Paul saw, he took courage. 
Acts 28:15: But among these Peter is not once 
mentioned, which would undoubtedly have been 
the case, had he been with them and occupied the 
episcopal throne at that place, as is pretended. 

Second Argument. — When it came to pass, that 
Paul was to give an account before the emperor for 
the first time, he was forsaken by all, and no man 
stood with him, so that he complained of it to Tim- 
othy. II Tim. 4:16, Now, if Peter had been at 
Rome ; he certainly would not have forsaken Paul, 
whom he was wont to call his beloved brother, 
II Pet. 3:15; but would have stood by him with 
counsel and actual assistance, according to his abil- 
ity. This, however, did not happen ; which clearly 
shows that he was not there at that time; unless 
some one might conclude, that he, who before had 
forsaken his Lord and Saviour (which was a mat- 
ter of much consequence), now probably also for- 
sook Paul, who was inferior. 

To this may serve as reply : That Peter, at the 
time he forsook Christ, was not filled with the gift 
of the Holy Ghost, which was not poured upon the 
apostles until after Christ's ascension, Acts 2 :l-3 ; 
hence he could easily come to this fall; but now, 
being filled with the Holy Ghost,* it was quite 
otherwise, so much so, that he and his fellow apos- 
tles feared no suffering, not even death itself. Com- 
pare Acts 4:19-21 with 5 :40-42 and 12 :3, 4. Also 
I Pet. 3:14 and 4:16. 

Moreover, in Paul's complaint to Timothy not a 
word is mentioned as to Peter having forsaken him ; 
which, had it happened, would certainly, as a nota- 
ble matter, not have been passed over in silence; 
more especially, as he mentions some of those who 
forsook him, by name, as, Demas, Alexander the 
coppersmith, etc. 

Third Argument. — When Paul was confined in 
prison at Rome, and bound in chains, he com- 
mended Onesiphorus, because he had visited him, 
and was not ashamed of his chain; without men- 
tioning anything about others, saying: "The Lord 
give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus ; for he 
oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my 
chain" (II Tim. 1:16). 

But why does he not commend Peter as having 
visited him in his bonds ? or, if Peter was there and 
did not do so, but was ashamed of his chain, why 
does he not complain, that so great a man, who 
ought to have been a leader unto others, was so 
negligent therein? 

Doubtless, if Peter had been in the city at that 
time, and visited, or not visited, him in prison, Paul 
would not have passed it over in utter silence, with- 
out commending or complaining of it. 

Fourth Argument. — When many had departed 
from Paul, while he was in prison, he made men- 
tion of one who had remained by, or with him, 
namely, in the city of Rome. He calls him Luke, 


* Howbeit when He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide 
you into all truth. John 16:13. 


and says: Only Luke is with (or by) me. II Tim. 
4:11. It follows, therefore, that at the time when 
Paul wrote this, Peter was not at Rome, or it could 
not have been that only Luke was with him. 

Fifth Argument. — A little further on from the 
above mentioned words, Paul requests of Timothy, 
that when he came to him, he should bring Mark 
with him, since the same would be very profitable 
to him for his ministry, saying : Take Mark, and 
bring him with thee (when thou comest) ; for he 
is profitable to me for the ministry. II Tim. 4:11. 

Now, if Peter was in Rome at that time, why 
was Paul under the necessity of sending for Mark 
for the ministry ? or, if he was not there, why did 
he not send for Peter? Certainly, if he had sent for 
him, he would, unless prevented by some important 
cause, not have refused to come : and then it could 
be concluded, that Peter was there a considerable 
time, since, as we find, they both died considerable 
time afterwards. 

But it does not appear that Paul sent for him ; 
hence, it cannot be concluded, that he came in an- 
swer to his summons ; and even if he had come at 
that time, his stay there could not have lasted sev- 
eral years, much less twenty-five years, as the 
papists say, since death overtook him as well as 
Paul, as has been shown in its proper place. The 
preparation, however, of this whole argument is 
unnecessary and superfluous. 

Sixth Argument. — Paul wrote various epistles 
from his prison at Rome to the believers ; as to the 
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, to 
Timothy, Philemon, etc., in which he puts various 
salutations from believers of the church at Rome, 
as also, in the beginning of the same makes mention 
sometimes of his fellow laborers; but he never 
mentions Peter. We will show here the manner in 
which this is done. 

In the beginning of the epistle to the Philippians 
he writes these words: Paul and Timotheus, the 
servants of Jesus Christ. Now, why does he not 
add here: and Simon Peter? 

Nearly in the same manner he commences the 
epistle to the Colossians, saying; "Paul, an apostle 
of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timotheus, 
our brother." Why does he not add: and Peter, 
the chief apostle? 

In concluding these epistles he adds the saluta- 
tions of the saints who were with him. To the 
Philippians he writes: "All the saints salute you 
. . .chiefly they that are of Caesar's household" 
(Phil. 4:21,22). To the Colossians he addresses 
these words : "Epaphras, who is one of you, a serv- 
ant of Christ, saluteth you" (Col. 4:12). Also: 
Luke, the physician, greets you. Verse 14. 

Peter is not mentioned here at all, which, cer- 
tainly, had he been there, would have been highly 
necessary. 

This same manner he followed in all the other 
epistles which he wrote from Rome. To Timothy 
he says: "Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, 
and Linus, and Claudia" (II Tim. 4:21). 


INTRODUCTION 


51 


To Philemon: "There salute thee Epaphras 
. . . Marcus, Aristarchus" (Phil. 23,24). 

There might be much said upon this subject, but 
it would all amount to this: that it would be a 
strange thing, if Peter was at Rome, when Paul 
wrote his epistles from the Roman prison, that the 
latter did never mention in these epistles a saluta- 
tion from Peter (which, as has been shown, he did 
not) ; seeing he mentions salutations from differ- 
ent leaders and members of the Roman church, 
whom he calls by name: hence it is quite reason- 
able to conclude, that Peter was not there during 
that time. 

Besides the six arguments mentioned, proving 
that during the time Paul was imprisoned under 
Nero, Peter was not at Rome, as far as the testi- 
mony of Holy Scriptures go in regard to this, 
there follow various circumstances showing (by 
like virtue of Holy Scripture), that also during 
the time Paul was out of prison, Peter was not to 
be found in this city. 

First Circumstance. — Here is to be considered, 
why Paul wrote an epistle to the Roman church, as 
well for the confirmation of the Christian faith, as 
for stirring up in the moral virtues (which epistle 
is still in existence), if Peter was there at that 
time, and had the charge of said church? or, if it 
was necessary for important reasons, that he should 
write to them, why he did not send this epistle to 
Peter as their leader, like he did to Timothy, the 
teacher of the Ephesian church ; and to Titus, the 
teacher of the church in the Island of Crete? 

Or, at least, if we look at the contents of this 
epistle, we may well consider, why he did not ad- 
dress a salutation to him, or once mention him by 
name ? seeing he filled nearly a whole chapter with 
the names of those whom he salutes at Rome : as, 
Aquila with his wife Priscilla, Epenetus and Mary, 
together with Andronicus, Junia, Amplias, Ur- 
banus, Apelles, Herodion, those of the household 
of Narcissus (the women), Tryphena and Try- 
phosa, Persis, Rufus, Asyncritus, Phlegon, Her- 
mas, Patrobas, Philologus, Nereus, etc., Rom. 16 
throughout ; without mentioning in any way what- 
ever the person or name of Peter ; from which 
there may be concluded again with good reason, 
that which has been concluded before from the 
account of the salutations which Paul wrote while 
in prison at Rome, namely, that Peter was not in 
this city at tliati time? 

Second Circumstance. — When it afterwards 
happened that Paul, having traveled through Ara- 
bia and the country of Damascus, returned after 
three years, with a particular desire to see Peter ; 
he did not seek him at Rome, but at Jerusalem; 
where, when he had found him, he abode with him 
fifteen days: and then departed again into the 
regions of Syria and Cilicia. Gal. 1 : 17-21. 

Third Circumstance. — When fourteen more 
years had elapsed, namely, those spent by Paul in 
his Syrian and Cilician journey, where was Peter 
to be found? Certainly not at Rome, but at Anti- 


och ; for there Paul came to him, and rebuked him, 
because he had eaten with the Gentiles in the pres- 
ence of the Jews. Compare Gal. 2:1 with verses 
11,12. 

Fourth Circumstance. — When some came down 
from Judea, and troubled the brethren, saying 
that, unless they were circumcised after the man- 
ner of Moses, they could not be saved ; and Paul, 
Barnabas, and other pious men were sent to the 
apostles and elders, to consult about the matter; 
Peter as well as the others to whom they were 
sent, was found at Jerusalem. Acts 15:1-7. 

Fifth Circumstance. — Gal. 2 :7, we read, that the 
uncircumcision (that is, the Gentiles) was com- 
mitted to Paul, but the circumcision (that is, the 
Jews or the Jewish nation) to Peter; also, verse 
9, that Peter (there called Cephas) together with 
James and John gave to Paul and Barnabas the 
right hand and agreed, that these should go unto 
the heathen, but they unto the circumcision (the 
Jews) ; namely, to preach the Gospel unto them. 

It is, therefore, a settled fact, that Peter was 
properly a teacher of the Jews (after this agree- 
ment was made), and not of the Gentiles. But if 
he had taught among the Romans, who were Gen- 
tiles by nature, he would have gone altogether 
beyond his engagement and promise; which cer- 
tainly is not to be supposed of so great and emi- 
nent a man as Peter was at that time. 

Sixth Circumstance. — From the two epistles of 
Peter, especially from the words, I Pet. 1:1, it 
evidently appears, that he preached to the stran- 
gers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappa- 
docia, Asia, and Bithynia (namely those who were 
scattered there from the twelve tribes of Israel) 
according to the statement of James, chap. 1:1; 
for which preaching, since these countries are very 
far, some even a hundred and more leagues apart, 
several years were required, in order to travel 
through them ; during which time Peter apparently 
could not be there and at Rome at once; this is 
incontrovertible. 

Seventh Circumstance. — At the end of the first 
epistle of Peter, namely I Pet. 5:13, are these 
words: "The church that is at Babylon, elected 
. . . saluteth you." 

How could Peter send a salutation from the 
church at Babylon, unless he was with it in Baby- 
lon at that time ? But if he was in Babylon, he was 
not at Rome, unless he had two bodies ; of which 
we do not read anything, nor have we any reason 
to believe it. 

Eighth Circumstance. — Those who hold that 
Peter was bishop at Rome, make no distinction be- 
tween the words apostle, or messenger, and bishop, 
or overseer; yet there always has been a marked 
difference between the office of an apostle and that 
of a bishop. 

The office of an apostle was to travel from one 
country to another, yea, through the whole world, 
and preach the Gospel to those who had not yet 
heard it; without being bound to any particular 


52 


INTRODUCTION 


place or church, as appears from Matt. 28:19; 
Mark 16:15. 

On the other hand, the office of a bishop or over- 
seer was to watch over, care for, feed and govern, 
as a shepherd his flock, a particular church, unto 
which the Gospel had been already preached, and 
which had accepted faith and the sign of holy bap- 
tism. Compare Acts 20:28 with I Tim. 3:1-5; 
Tit. 1 :5-7. 

Now, it is a fact, that properly not the latter, 
but the former office was enjoined upon Peter, 
for he gives himself the first mentioned name — 
apostle (see I Pet. 1 :1 and II Pet. 1 :1) ; for which 
purpose Christ Himself had chosen him, Luke 
6:13, 14, and sent him out, as can plainly be seen 
in the last chapter of Matthew and of Mark. 

How could it be then, that Peter sat as bishop 
of the church in the city of Rome? and, what is 
still more — for a considerable number of years! 
unless it be said that Peter abandoned his charge, 
and accepted another office and ministry than the 
one to which he was called; which it would be 
difficult to prove, since nothing is mentioned of it 
in Holy Writ. 

Further Remarks on the foregoing circum- 
stances. — If one should confine himself solely to 
the testimony of the holy Scriptures, not accepting 
anything else as worthy of belief, it could in no 
wise be shown that Peter was ever at Rome ; but, 
since the holy Scriptures do not relate all that has 
happened, the testimony of some accepted authors 
of that time may be recognized as credible, as far 
as their testimony is not contrary to what is 
expressed in holy Scripture. 

We have shown from the apostolic writings, 
that during the time Paul wrote his epistles in the 
prison at Rome, and also during the whole period 
that he (Peter) was preaching in foreign coun- 
tries, Peter was not in Rome, but in Jerusalem, 
Antioch, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and in other 
places where the Jews were scattered. This we 
have plainly shown, first by six arguments, and 
then by eight circumstances, derived from the 
holy Scriptures. But as to where Peter was, or 
how he died, after Paul wrote his last epistle from 
Rome, the Scriptures are silent. 

Hence the testimony of those writers whom we 
have just mentioned cannot well be contradicted ; 
who maintain, that Peter shortly before his death 
came to Rome, and there laid down his life for 
the doctrine of the Evangelical truth; without 
mentioning anything there about his bishopric, 
much less, popedom. 


city, some fix it in the year 41 after Christ ; others 
in the beginning of the reign of the Emperor Clau- 
dius ; others in the second year of this same Clau- 
dius ; others in the fourth year ; others in the be- 
ginning of the reign of Nero ; others in the four- 
teenth year after Paul's conversion, etc., as it is 
noted in Irenaeus, Orosius, Damasus, Hornantius, 
Th. Aquinus, The Lives of the Saints, etc. 

Concerning the length of time he was bishop, 
there is not less disagreement ; as also in regard to 
how long he was absent from his bishopric so- 
journing in other places. Cortesius writes of eigh- 
teen years, Onuphrius of seven years; but the 
general opinion among them is, that he sat twenty- 
five years upon the chair governing their church ; 
although some flatly oppose it. See the last men- 
tioned three authors. 

Touching the person who succeeded him in his 
bishopric, there is much confusion and uncertain- 
ty in what is said concerning this subject. Some 
write that Clemens succeeded Peter; as Septimus 
Florens Tert. ; others, that Linus followed him ; as 
Irenseus, Eusebius, Epiphan., etc., De Praes 32 1. 
Contr. Jov.; others, that Linus discharged Peter's 
office two years before death of the latter; as 
Damasus, etc.; others, that Peter ordered that 
Clemens should succeed after the death of Linus; 
In Pontific. Petr. etc., Clem, in Epist. ad Jacobum, 
etc.; others, that the chair of Peter was vacant 
while Linus and Cletus lived, Clemens, who was 
ordained by Peter as his successor, not being 
willing, as they say, to occupy the chair in their 
lifetime ; which is testified to by Bellarminus ; oth- 
ers that Linus occupied the chair eleven years after 
Peter's death; see Eusebius; others, that Linus 
died before Peter, and consequently was not his 
successor in the bishopric; see Turrianus, Soph- 
ronius, etc.; others, that Anacletus succeeded 
Peter, and Clemens, Anacletus. See Homil. de 
Agon. Pet. and Paul. In Chron, in Anno Clem.; 
others, finally, that Peter and Linus were bishops 
simultaneously in the city of Rome; yet so, that 
Peter was the superior, and Linus, the inferior 
bishop. See Ruffinus, Sabellicus, Turrianus, In 
vita Petri. 


DISCORDANCE OF PAPISTIC WRITERS. 1. WHETHER 

PETER WAS AT ROME. 2. HOW LONG HE WAS 

BISHOP THERE. 3. WHO FOLLOWED HIM 

The common tenet of the papists is, that Peter 
sat as the chief bishop upon the Roman throne ; yet 
the authors whom they adduce for this purpose 
greatly differ. For, as respects his arrival in that 


OF THE RISE OF THE POPES AFTER THE YEAR 6o6, 

AS ALSO OF THE INTERRUPTION OF THE 

SUCCESSION OF THE SAME 

Besides, that in the first three centuries after the 
death of the apostles, nothing was known in the 
Roman church, as regards rulers of the same, but 
common bishops or overseers, until the time of Con- 
stantine the Great, and from that time on to the 
year 600, only archbishops and patriarchs, but no 
popes, till after the year 606, when, by the power 
of the Emperor Phocas, the Roman Bishop Boni- 
face III was declared and established the general 
head and supreme ruler of the whole church ; — the 
succession also of the following popes was inter- 
rupted by many important occurrences, with re- 
spect to the manner of the papal election as well as 


INTRODUCTION 


53 


to the doctrine and the life of the popes themselves, 
as also with regard to various circumstances 
pertaining to these matters. Of this an account 
shall presently be given. 

Note. — Besides what we have mentioned in our 
account of holy baptism, for the year 606, of the 
rise and establishment of the Roman pope, there 
is also found, concerning the cause of the same (in 
the Chronijk van den Ondergang der Tyrannen, 
edition of 1617, book VII, page 211, col. 2), this 
annotation : When the patriarch at Constantinople 
reproved the Emperor Phocas for the shameful 
murder he had committed, or would not consent 
to, or remit, it, while the bishop of Rome winked 
at, or excused this wicked deed, the Emperor Pho- 
cas, in his displeasure, deprived the church of Con- 
stantinople of the title, Head oj Christendom, and, 
at the request of Boniface III, conferred it upon 
the Roman church ; which was done amidst great 
contentions, for the eastern churches could not well 
consent to it, that the see of Rome should be con- 
sidered by everybody, and everywhere, as the head 
and the supreme (of the) church. Compare this 
with Platinae Reg. Pap. jol. 123; Fasc. Temp, 
jol. 122; Pol. VirgU, lib. 4. cap. 10; Hist. Georg. 
lib. 4; Conrad. Oclutar. jol. 15; Tract, called, 
Ouden en Niewiven Godt. lib. 1; M. Zanchij Tract. 
Pap. jol. 41; Zeg. Chron. Rom. Pap. jol.132. 

OF THE ELECTION OF THE POPE; AND OF SUCH AS 
HAVE USURPED THE CHAIR 

In the introduction to the Martyr's Mirror (edi- 
tion of 1631, fol. 25, 26, 27) mention is made from 
Cardinal Baronius (we have looked into his 
history, and found it to be so at the place referred 
to), of various popes who ran of themselves, with- 
out lawfuli election or mission ; and also of some 
who usurped the chair, without the consent of the 
church, merely by the power of princes and 
potentates. 

Among the popes who, without lawful election 
or mission, ran of themselves, are numbered 
Stephen VI, Christopher, and Sergius III, with 
whom it was as follows : 

Stephen VI expelled Boniface VI by force 
from the Roman see, after the death of Formosus ; 
and afterwards committed an abominable deed on 
the dead body of said Formosus, who was counted 
a lawful and good pope ; which deed the Cardinal 
C. Baronius describes from Luytprandus and 
others as follows : 

"In this same year was perpetrated the great 
wickedness which Luytprandus and others relate, 
but incorrectly by Sergius; since the acts of the 
aforementioned Synod under Pope John IX, to 
which doubtless more credence is to be given, 
impute it to the then existing pope, Stephen IX. 

He caused the dead body of Formosus to be ex- 
humed, and placed it on the pope's throne, dressed 
in all his papal robes; whereupon he upbraided 
Formosus, as though he were alive, that he, 


through great ambition, had come from the chair 
of Porto into that of Rome; anathematized him 
on this account, had the dead body stripped of all 
the robes, as also the three fingers with which 
Formosus according to custom used to ordain, cut 
off from the same, and thus thrown into the Tiber. 
Besides this he deposed all those who had been 
ordained by Formosus, and reordained them; all 
of which he did from pure madness." See C. 
Baron, histor. Eccl. Anno 897. num. 1. 2. 

After this the same Baronius relates of Christo- 
phorus, who also thrust himself into the papal 
chair, the following: 

"Further, in the following year of Christ . . . 
in the tenth indiction,* Pope Benedict IV died, and 
was buried in St. Peter's church. In his place suc- 
ceeded Leo, the fifth of this name, a native of 
Ardea, who held the chair only forty days, being 
expelled and imprisoned after that by Christo- 
phorus, who himself occupied the chair after him." 
Baron Ann. 906. 90/. num. 2. 

The aforementioned Christophorus, who had 
expelled his predecessor, Leo V, from the chair, 
and taken possession of it himself, was, in his turn, 
robbed of the occupancy of the chair by another, 
called Sergius III, who was ambitious of the same 
dominion ; which Sergius, although he attained to 
the papal dignity, without being elected or called, 
yea, more than that, was, according to the testi- 
mony of the papists themselves, fearfully tyran- 
nical and unchaste, is nevertheless recorded with 
the aforementioned upon the Register of the 
legitimate popes of Rome. See Baron. Ann. 907. 
num. 2., Ann. 908. num. 3. 

In the midst of this account this papistic writer 
declares, that these were the dreadjul times when 
every selj-constituted pope immediately nullified 
that which his predecessor had made. Ann. 908. 
num. 2. 

Confirmatory of this matter is also that which is 
adduced in the "Chronijk van den Ondergang," 
edition 1617, for the year 891, page 315. col. 1, 2. 
from the tract of "Den Onpartijdigen Rechter." 
If one will but consider, says this writer, the spir- 
itual or ecclesiastical perfidiousness and rebellious- 
ness of the popes, he will find in ancient history, 
that the Roman popes have at all times quarreled 
and contended with one another for the papal chair. 

Thus John XXIV, having come to Bononia with 
many soldiers, threatened all the cardinals severe- 
ly, if they would elect a pope who would not please 
him. When many had been nominated to him, and 
he would assent to none of them, he was finally re- 
quested to state whom he would elect thereto. He 
replied : "Give me Peter's robe, and I shall deliver 
it to the future pope." But, when that was done, 
he put the robe upon his own shoulders, saying: 
"I am the pope." And though this greatly dis- 

* A cycle of fifteen years, instituted by Constantine the Great, 
in connection with the payment of tribute, and afterwards made ■ 
substitute for Olympiads in reckoning time. It was much used in 
the ecclesiastical chronology of the middle ages, and is reckoned 
from the year 313 as its origin. — Webster's Dictionary. 


54 


INTRODUCTION 


pleased the other cardinals, they were nevertheless 
compelled to acquiesce in it. 

In the same manner John XXII elected himself 
pope when the election was committed to him. See 
9th book of the above mentioned chronicle, for the 
year' 891, at the place there referred to. 

Note. — In addition to what has been stated in 
the body [of this work] concerning the popes who 
exalted themselves to the papal reign, it is also 
proper to give what may be read in the "Chronijk 
van den Ondergang der Tyrannen" for the year 
537, where the popedom of Vigilius is thus spoken 
of: "This Pope Vigilius was certainly impelled by 
the spirit of ambition ; he greatly aspired to the 
popedom, and wrongfully ascended the papal chair, 
for he counseled the empress, how to expel Pope 
Silverius. He engaged false witnesses, who said 
that Silverius intended to betray the city of Rome 
secretly, and surrender it to the Goths (of which 
we shall afterwards speak more fully) ; therefore 
he was deposed from the popedom by force, and 
relegated into misery ; and thus Vigilius six days 
afterwards became pope. The Empress Theodora 
desired him to reinstate Anthenius at Constanti- 
nople, as he had promised to do ; but Vigilius re- 
fused, saying that one was not bound to keep a bad 
promise against one's conscience." Compared with 
the account of Platina, in his "Panselijk Register," 
fol. no. Also, Chron. Fasci. Temp. jol. iif. 


laity, would have communion or anything to do 
with him. Ann. 555. num. 2. 


OF SOME WHO ATTAINED POSSESSION OF THE 

ROMAN CHAIR THROUGH SECULAR POWER 

AND OTHER UNGODLY MEANS 

There is, moreover, mention made of another 
kind of popes, who attained possession of the 
Roman chair, not properly through themselves, 
inasmuch as they were too weak, but through the 
power of princes and potentates, yea, even through 
the Arians. Among these are particularly num- 
bered the two popes named Felix, both of whom 
were exalted to papal dignity, and put in their of- 
fice by Arian Kings, who ruled Italy, and con- 
sequently, also the city of Rome ; the one by Con- 
stantius,* the other by Theodoric, both of whom 
belonged to the Arian sect. Cees. Bar. Ann. 526. 
num. 2. 

But quite the contrary happened when Pope Sil- 
verius was reputed to favor the Goths, who sided 
with the Arians. Prince Belizarius deposed him, 
and sent him away into Greece, putting Vigilius in 
his stead as pope. According to the testimony of 
Procopius. Ann. 538. num. 2. 

After Vigilius, Pelagius was declared pope by 
two bishops only, and one from Ostien,f through 
the favor and assistance of the emperor Justinian ; 
notwithstanding, as Anastasius says, the bad sus- 
picion of having caused the death of the previous 
Pope Vigilius, rested on him; for which reason 
none of the other ecclesiastics, nay, not even the 


* This Constantius was a Roman emperor, while Theodoric wa3 
King of the Goths. 

■f Probably Ostia, a town at the mouth of the Tiber. (Pub.) 


OF THE DREADFUL TIME, CALLED BY THE PAPISTS 

THE IRON AND LEADEN CENTURY, WHICH 

WAS WITH RESPECT TO THE ELECTION 

OF THE POPES 

The oftmentioned cardinal Csesar Baronius, pro- 
ceeding in his account of the Register of the Popes, 
arrives at the year 901, the beginning of the tenth 
century, where he bursts out, as if with sorrow, 
calling this time hard, unfruitful, and productive 
of much evil; and comparing it to an iron and 
leaden century, full of wickedness and darkness, 
particularly in respect to the great irregularity 
practiced in the installing and deposing of the Ro- 
man popes ; which was done partly by the Roman 
princes, partly by the princes of Tuscany, who, 
now this one, then that one, usurped the authority 
to elect the popes, and to dethrone them; which 
happened in such a manner that all the preceding 
abuses committed with reference to the Roman 
chair were mere child's play in comparison with it. 

For now, as Baronius writes, many monsters 
were thrust into this chair as popes; which con- 
tinued throughout this whole century, yea, for a 
hundred and fifty years, namely from the year 900 
to about the year 1049, when the German Ottoes, 
who occupied the imperial throne, interposed be- 
tween both, although they, not less than their pred- 
ecessors, retained as their prerogative the right 
of electing and rejecting the popes. Baron. Ann. 
901. num. 1. 

The same cardinal relates, that in these awful 
and terrible times some popes attained to the pope- 
dom not only by the power of princes and poten- 
tates, but through the foolish love of certain dis- 
honorable and loose women, by whom Rome was 
ruled ; which we could in no wise believe, had not 
so eminent a man and rigid papist, as Baronius 
was, described it so plainly and circumstantially. 
See in Baronius' Church History, printed at 
Antwerp 1623 for the year 912. num. 1; also 928. 
num. 1 ; also 931. num. 1. 

Our soul is amazed, and we are ashamed to 
relate all that is adduced there from various 
papistic writers, concerning the election of some 
of the popes. 

O God! open the eyes of these blind lovers of 
papacy, that they may see, what succession it is, 
of which they have so long boasted in vain; so 
that they may truly turn to Thee and Thy church, 
and be saved ! 

Note. — With respect to this matter, the writer 
of the Introduction to the Martyr's Mirror, of the 
year 1831, says : "After that arose a time far more 
horrible, etc., for the margraves of Tuscany, and 
after them the emperors, exercised so much vio- 
lence with reference to the papal chair, that they 
thrust into it many monsters; among whom was 
John X, who was thrust into the chair by Theo- 


INTRODUCTION 


55 


dora, mistress of Rome, while Lando was de- 
posed." Introduction, jol. 26. col. 2. from Baron. 
Church History, Anno 912. num. 1. 

After that he relates, that John X was deposed 
by Theodora's daughter, who also reigned over 
Rome, and that John XI, a bastard child of Pope 
Sergius III, was put into it. "And thus," he 
writes, "have whores and rogues, according to the 
testimony of cardinal Baronius, ruled the papal 
chair, deposing and instituting whomsoever they 
would." Pol. 27. col. 1. from Baronius, Anno 931. 
num. 1. Continuing, the aforementioned author re- 
marks : "In this iron century it also happened, that 
Stephen IX, having illegitimately attained to the 
chair, was marked in the face by some rogues, for 
which reason he staid in his house." Same place, 
from Baronius Anno 940. num. 1. 

But, in order to give an account of those partic- 
ular ones only, who attained unlawfully to the 
papal chair, since we are treating of the succession 
and mission of the popes, we must also mention 
Pope John XII, who, being only eighteen years 
old, was forcibly put into the chair, and made pope 
by his father, the margrave of Tuscany. After- 
wards he was deposed by a council at Rome, on ac- 
count of his wicked life; but he remained pope 
nevertheless, since nobody would excommunicate 
the pope, however wicked his life might be, as Bar- 
onius relates. Compare Baron. Anno 935. num. 1. 
with Anno 963. num. 1. 2. 

After that, Albericus, the count of Tusculum, 
made his son, who was but ten years old, pope, 
and by his authority put him into the chair under 
the name of Benedict IX. After he had reigned 
about nine years, a certain faction of the Romans 
elected another pope. When Gratianus, a priest at 
Rome, saw this, he bought out both of them with 
money, and called himself Gregory VI. 

But the Emperor, not willing to tolerate this, 
deposed all three of them, and put Clemens II in 
their stead ; and then Damascus II ; after him Leo 
IX; and finally, Victor II. 

Thus the imperial line of the popes continued, 
until the clergy itself became powerful enough to 
elect the popes without waiting for the imperial 
mission, which formerly had been deemed neces- 
sary; this afterwards gave rise to great schisms 
and divisions in the Roman Church. Compare 
concerning all this Baron. Hist. Eccl. Anno 1033, 
num. 2. with Anno 1044. num. 2. 3; also, Anno 
I046. num. 1; Anno I048. num. 1; Anno I049 
num. 2; Anno 1055. 

With regard to the aforesaid matters, the writer 
"of the Introduction mentioned says (Fol. 27. col. 
2) : "This being taken into consideration, we say, 
that it is not true that they, namely the Romanists, 
have an uninterrupted succession from the days of 
the apostles to the present time, as they would 
make the people believe, with their long register 
of popes, whom they have connected as the links 
of a chain, as though they, through lawful mission 
had always maintained a continuous succession; 


but we have proved here that this chain of suc- 
cession is, in many ways, broken. 

"In the first place, by Stephen VII and his suc- 
cessors, who have forcibly thrust themselves into 
the chair. These certainly had no mission; and 
where the mission ceases, the succession ceases 
also. 

"In the second place, by those who were thrust 
into the chair, without the order or sanction of the 
church, only by kings and princes, yea, even by 
whores, through lewd love; or who bought the 
same with money, as we have shown. These also 
were certainly not sent; or, if they were sent, it 
must be proved, by whom : for two contrary things 
cannot consist together. If they were sent, they 
did not thrust themselves into the chair, as Bar- 
onius says notwithstanding; but if they thrust 
themselves into it, or were thrust into it by others 
through unlawful means, then they were not sent, 
and consequently, had no succession from the 
apostles." Introduction, fol. 28. col. 1. 


TWO, THREE, AND FOUR POPES REIGNING AT THE 
SAME TIME; THE CHAIR OF ROME OCCASION- 
ALLY WITHOUT A POPE FOR A LONG 
TIME 

Formerly, when the papal dominion was coveted, 
the aim was directed solely to the Roman chair, but 
now it was quite different ; for, instead of accord- 
ing to Rome, the honor of electing the pope, as had 
always been the case heretofore, they of Avignon, 
in France began, without regarding the Romans or 
Italians, to constitute themselves the electors of the 
pope; insomuch that they for this end elected a 
certain person, whom they call Benedict XIII, 
notwithstanding the Roman chair was occupied by 
a pope called Gregory XII ; thus setting not only 
pope against pope, but France against Italy, and 
Avignon against Rome.* 

Of this, P. J. Twisk gives the following account : 
"At this time there reigned two popes, who were 
for a long time at great variance with each other ; 
the one at Rome in Italy, the other at Avignon. 

"When Pope Innocentius at Rome was dead, 
Benedict XIII still occupied the papal chair in 
France. Then Gregory XII was elected pope." 
Chron. P. J. Twisk, 15th Book, for the year 1406. 
page 758. col. 1. ex Chron. Platinae, fol. 396. Fasc. 
Temp. fol. 187. 

The same writer, after narrating successively 
several other things which happened in the five 
subsequent years, again makes mention, for the 
year 1411, of this Pope Benedict, who was elected 
at Avignon; as well as of two others, who arose 
during his reign, namely, Gregory and John ; and 


* After pope Anastasius, Symmachus was elected pope in a 
tumult; and immediately also Laurentius was elected, with whom 
he had two contests, yet came off victor, as the papists say, for the 
clergy and king Diederik were on his side. But after four years, 
some of the clergy, who lusted after uproar and contention, and 
some Roman senators, recalled Laurentius ; but they were sent into 
banishment. This caused a fearful riot at Rome. — P. J. Twisk, 5th 
Book, Anno 499. page 171. col. 2 ex Platinal Chron. fol. 101. Fasc. 
Temp. fol. 114. 


56 


INTRODUCTION 


also of their mutual contentions. These are his 
words : 

"At that time there were three popes at once, 
who incessantly excommunicated one another, and 
of whom the one gained this potentate for his ad- 
herent, the other another. Their names were: 
Benedict, Gregory, and John. 

"These strove and contended with each other, 
not for the honor of the Son of God, nor in behalf 
of the reformation and correction of the adulterated 
doctrines or the manifold abuses of the (Roman) 
church, but solely for the supremacy ; to obtain 
which, no one hesitated to perpetrate the most 
shameful deeds. 

"In brief, the emperor exerted himself with 
great diligence, and traveled three years through 
Europe, to exterminate this shameful and per- 
nicious strife and discord which prevailed in Chris- 
tendom. Having, therefore, rejected these three 
schismatic popes, he brought it about, that Otto 
Columnius was made pope by common consent; 
for, within the last twenty-nine years there had 
always been at least two popes ; one at Rome, and 
the other at Avignon. When one blessed, the other 
cursed.* See aforementioned Chronicle, 15th 
Book, for the year 1411. page 765. col. 1, 2. 

Concerning the overthrow of these three popes 
the same author gives this statement : "In this year, 
Pope John XXIV, having been convicted in fifty- 
four articles, of heresies, crimes, and base villainies, 
was deposed from papal dignity, by the council of 
Constance, and given in custody to the palsgrave. 
When these articles were successively read to him, 
he sighed deeply and replied, that he had done 
something still worse, namely, that he had come 
down from the mountain of Italy, and committed 
himself under the jurisdiction of a council, in a 
country where he possessed neither authority nor 
power. 

After he had been in confinement at Munich 
three years, to the astonishment of everyone, he 
was released, and made cardinal and bishop of 
Tusculum, by Pope Martin V, whose feet he sub- 
missively came to kiss at Florence. Shortly after- 
wards in the year 1419, he died there, and was 
buried with great pomp and solemnity in the church 
of St. John the Baptist. 

After he had thus received his sentence, the other 
two popes were summoned ; of whom Gregory XII, 
who resided at Rimini, sent Charles Maletesta 
thither, with instructions to abdicate voluntarily in 
his name the papal dignity ; in reward of which he 
was made a legate in Marca d'Ancona, where he 
subsequently died of a broken heart, at Racanay, 
a seaport on the Adriatic Sea. 

Benedict XIII, the pope at Avignon, remained 
obstinate in his purpose, so that neither entreaties 
nor threats, nor the authority of the council could 
move him, to submit, or lay down his office, for 
the tranquillity of all Christendom. See the afore- 


mentioned Chronicle, 15th Book, for the year 1415 
page 773. col. 2. and 774. col. 1. 

Note. — Pope Benedict XIII, through the inci- 
tation of the King of France, and the University of 
Paris, sent his legates to Pope Boniface IX ; but 
they received as an answer, that their master could 
not properly be called a pope, but an antipope; 
whereupon they refuted him. See De Ondergang, 
15th Book, Anno 1404. page 757. col. 1. 

Here it is proper to note what the last mentioned 
author narrates concerning the plurality of the 
popes, who existed at one and the same time. 

"Besides this," he writes, "it is related that there 
were sometimes four, sometimes three, and some- 
times two popes at the same time." 

Victor, Alexander III, Calixtus III, and Pascha- 
lis, possessed together the papal authority, at the 
time of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa; and 
also Benedict VIII, Sylvester II, and Gregory V 
were popes together, till finally, Henry III deposed 
them. 

Likewise Gregory XII, Benedict XIII, and 
Alexander V arrogated, by excommunications, the 
papal authority.* 

Further, how Stephen III and Constantine, 
Sergius III and Christophorus, Urbanus V and 
Clemens VII, Eugene IV and Clemens VIII, and 
many other popes, whom to mention it would take 
too long, strove and contended with each other for 
the triple crown, their own historians have suffi- 
ciently elucidated. See in the pth Book of the 
Chronicle for the year 801. page 375. col. 2. from 
the tract, Den Onpartijdigen Rechter. 


HOW THE ROMAN CHAIR STOOD VACANT 

As great as was at times the inordinate desire 
manifested by some for the possession of the chair 
of papal dominion, so great was at other times the 
negligence and aversion as regards the promotion 
of the same cause ;f for it occasionally happened 
that the chair stood vacant for a considerable time, 
in consequence of the contentions and dissensions 
of the cardinals ; so that the whole Roman church 
was without a head ; without which, as the papists 
themselves assert, it cannot subsist. 

In order to demonstrate this matter, we shall (so 
as not to intermix all sorts of writers) adduce the 
various notes of P. J. Twisk, who gives informa- 
tion in regard to this subject from Platina's Reg- 
isters of the Popes, and other celebrated papistic 
authors, in his Chronicle, printed Anno 1617 at 
Room; from which we shall briefly extract the 
following instances, and present them to the 
reader. 


So writes Jan Crispijn. 


* Concerning this matter, P. J. Twisk gives this account: "At 
this time there were three popes at once, namely, Gregory XII 
Benedict XIII, and Alexander V. Thus was the great city, the 
spiritual Babylon divided into three parts, as a token of its approach- 
ing fall. — Chron. for the year 1409, page 762, col. 1. 

t Where no true foundation is, there is no stability; this is 
apparent here: for as immoderate as they were in seeking to possess 
the Roman chair, so immoderate they were also in leaving it vacant. 


INTRODUCTION 


57 


We shall, however, omit brief periods of a few 
days, weeks, or months, and pass on to intervals 
of more than a year, which, consequently, are not 
reckoned by months, or still lesser periods. In this 
we shall begin with the shortest period, and end 
with the longest. 

On page 225, col. 1, mention is made of pope 
Martin I (in the Register the seventy-sixth), that 
he was carried away a prisoner by Constantine, 
emperor at Constantinople, and sent into exile, 
where he died ; whereupon the chair stood vacant 
for over a year. Ex. Hist. Georg; lib. 4. Platin. 
fol. 135. Zeg. fol. 224, 225. 

Page 260, col. 2, the same writer relates of Paul 
I (the ninety-fifth in the Register), that he ex- 
communicated Constantine V, who had thrown the 
images out of the church ; and that Constantine, not 
heeding this, in his turn excommunicated the pope ; 
whereupon the latter died, and the Roman chair 
was without occupant, and the church without 
a head, one year and one month. Ex. Platinae Reg- 
ist. Pap. fol. 166. hist. Georg. lib. 4. Franc. 
Allars. fol. 54. 

After that he makes mention of Pope Honorius 
I (in the Register the seventy-second), that he, 
having instituted the exaltations of the Holy 
Cross, the Saturday processions, which had to be 
held at Rome, the special prayers in the invocation 
of the departed saints, etc., was deposed by a cer- 
tain council at Constantinople ; and that, he having 
died, the chair at Rome was vacant for one year 
and seven months. See above mentioned Chron- 
icle, page 218. col. 1. ex hist. Georg. lib. 4. Franc. 
Ala. Reg. fol. 44. Platin. Succ. Papae. fol. 130. 

When Pope John XXIV was deposed on ac- 
count of his wicked life and ungodly conduct, and 
placed in confinement somewhere, in the time of 
emperor Sigismund and the council of Constance, 
there was for the time of two years and five months 
no one who took charge of the papal government ; 
hence the chair was without an occupant for that 
length of time. See aforementioned Chronicle, for 
the year 1411, p. 769. col. v. ex Fasc. Temp. fol. 
187. Platin. fol. 401. Onuf. fol. 406. 417. Hist. 
Eccl. Casp. Hedio. part. 3. lib. 11. Chronol. Leonh. 
lib. 6. J oh. Stump ff. fol. 21. Hist. Georg. lib. 9. 
Hist. Mart. Adr. fol. 53. to 66. Jan Crisp, fol. 356. 
to 175. Zeg. fol. 326. 

Moreover, twice it happened, that for the space 
of about three years no one was pope, or general 
head of the Roman church ; first, after the deposi- 
tion of Pope Benedict XIII of Avignon ; secondly, 
before the election of Otto Calumna, called Martin 
V, thus named because he was consecrated or or- 
dained on St. Martin's day. Concerning the first 
time, see P. J. Twisk, Chron. for the year 1415. 
Page 774 col. 1 ; concerning the second, see in the 
same book, for the year 1417, or two years after- 
wards p. 781. col. 1. compared with Fasc. Temp, 
fol. 187 Platin. fol. 470. Hist. Georg. lib. 6. Mem 
fol. 913. Seb. Fr. (old edition) fol. 31. 


After the death of Pope Nicholas I (the 108th 
in the Register), information is obtained from 
Platina, according to the account of various other 
authors, relative to the condition of the Roman 
church at that time ; namely, that she had no pope 
or head for eight years, seven months and nine 
days. Compare Plat. Reg. Pap. fol. 197. with 
Georg. hist. lib. 5. Joh. Munst. fol. 14. Mern. fol. 
556. Francisc. Ala. fol. 60. Also, P. J. Twisk, 
Chron. 9th Book, edition of 1617. p. 297. col. 2. 

OF THE UNGODLY LIFE AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT 
OF SOME OF THE POPES 

Many of the ancient writers, even good Roman- 
ists, are so replete with the manifold ungodly and 
extremely disorderly conduct of some of those who 
occupied the papal chair, and are placed in the 
Register of the true successors of Peter, that one 
hardly knows how to begin, much less how to 
end.* 

We shall therefore, so as not to cause any doubts 
as regards our impartiality, not adduce all, but 
only a few, and these not the worst, but, when con- 
trasted with those whom we shall not mention, the 
very best examples of the kind; and shall then 
soon leave them, as we have no desire to stir up this 
sink of rottenness, and pollute our souls with its 
stench. 

Concerning the simony or sacrilege of some 
popes, a brief account is given from Platina and 
other papistic writers, in the Chronijk van den On- 
dergang, 9th Book, for the year 828. p. 281. col. 2. 
and p. 282. col. 1. The writer of said chronicle, 
having related the complaint of the king of France 

* ?, esi ?.! s what is told in the body of the work concerning the 
ungodly life and disorderly conduct of some popes, it is related by 
other authors, that some of them were accused (even by those of 
the Roman church) of heresy and apostasy from the Roman faith. 
From Platina s Register of the Popes, number 37," is adduced the 
apostasy of Pope Liberius to the tenets of the Arians; which hap- 
pened in this wise: The emperor being at that time tainted with 
the tenets of the Arians, deposed Pope Liberius, and sent him into 
exile ten years. But when Liberius, overcome by the grievousness 
of his misery, became infected with the faith and the confession of 
the Arian sect, he was victoriously reinstated by the emperor, into 
his papal chair at Rome Compare Chron. Platinae (old edition) 
S'-t 73 ~ F? s c T emp. f oI- 102. Chron. Holl. div. 2. cap. 20 with 
P.J. Twisk, Chron. 4th Book, for the year 353, page 150 coi 2 

Concerning the apostasy of Pope Anastasius II to the tenets' of 
Achacius, bishop of Constantinople, and, consequently to the 
Westonans, we find, from various Roman authors, this annotation- 
Anastasius was at first a good Christian, but was afterwards seduced 
by the heretic Achacius, bishop of Constantinople. This was the 
second pope of bad repute who adhered to the heresy of Nestorius 
5 v , en .2£ Liberius adhered to the heresy of Arius.— Plat. Resist Pan 
f °vwi?- rl SC - ?, emp - f 3'- "3- Chron. Holl. div. c. 20. compared' 
for th< : year'wl i.'m'lol"^"^ e<Hti ° n ° f 1617, Sth * ook ' 

Some time after Honorius' I had been exalted to the dignity of 
the Roman chair, it was found that he did not maintain the doctrines 
£ tl~?- m ?\^ m »' ty was pPP^d to them, although heT e e™ed 
to ingratia e himself with her in some external things Concerning 
^!f'i 5, fo l ]owm «. word | "e given by a certain author: Honorius I 
added the invocation of the saints to the litanies: he built many 
temples, and decorated them with great magnificence; but tins 
pope was afterwards condemned as a heretic, together^ with six 
prelates by the sixth council of Constantinople. Compare-H?st 
£. °E\ hb - 4 ;- Fra P^ A,a -.H 44 - Platin ' Resist- Pap. M. 137wrth 
2^8. col T n Chronic 'e. edition of 1617, for the year 622, "age 

p X T T d i; ; l° n - t0 '£ e , vi ,', tes . t!m °ny which is given of John XXIV, 
J ; i, glve , s the following account: "This Pope John asVome 
say, forcibly took possession of the papal chair, X&W 
ancient writers a true standard-bearer of all heroics and epicures 
3VT» a 7£ n better "Med for arms and war, than for thfserWce 
768 col 7 ° mJ ' • J " Twisk> 15th Book ' for the y<»r 14U?p 


58 


INTRODUCTION 


about the revenue of twenty-eight tonnen gold,* 
annually drawn by the popes from said kingdom, 
proceeds, to say : "How true the foregoing is, ap- 
pears sufficiently from the fact that John XXII at 
his death left two hundred and fifty tonnen gold 
($7,000,000) in his private treasury; as Francis- 
cus Petrarcha, a credible writer, plainly states. 

Boniface VII, finding that he could no longer 
remain in safety at Rome, surreptitiously took the 
precious jewels and treasures from St. Peter's 
coffers, and fled with them to Constantinople. 

Clemens VIII, and other popes, were at various 
times convicted of such sacrilege, by their own 
people. 

Gregory IX sold his absolution to the emperor 
for a hundred thousand ounces of gold. 

Benedict IX, being stricken with fear, sold to 
Gregory VI the papal chair, for fifteen hundred 
pounds of silver. 

The simony and sacrilege of Alexander VI is 
also sufficiently known, from his epitaph, which 
we, for certain reasons, omit. 

Further, how Leo X, through Tetzel, and many 
other popes, through their legates and nuncios, 
sold their letters of indulgence, is better known 
throughout all so-called Christendom than the 
popes of Rome desire. Compare this with Chron. 
Plat, (old edition) fol. 183. Fran. Ala. fol. 58 
Onpartijdigen Rechter, fol. 28. 

Concerning the open tyranny, secret treachery, 
and deadly poisoning, imputed to some of the 
popes, the following account is given from Ver- 
gerius and others : 

/. Their Tyranny. — Julius II had more than 
two hundred thousand Christians put to death, in 
the space of seven years. 

Gregory IX caused the emperor's envoys by 
whom he was informed, that Jerusalem was re- 
taken, to be strangled, contrary to all justice. 

Clemens IV openly beheaded Conrad, the son of 
the king of Sicily, without valid reasons, or legal 
proceedings. 

It is not necessary to give a recital here, of the 
innumerable multitude of true Christians, who, 
through the pretensions of some popes, were de- 
prived of life, in all parts of the earth, by fearful 
deaths at the hands of the executioner, only on ac- 
count of their religion; for this is sufficiently 
known, and needs no further demonstration. 

II. Their Treachery. — The Emperor Frederick, 
at the diet of Nuremburg, openly complained of the 
treachery of Pope Alexander III, and that in the 
presence of the princes of the empire, before whom 
he read the letter containing the treason, which the 
pope had sent to the soldiers of the Turkish em- 
peror. 

Gregory II secretly issued a prohibition, not to 
pay to the Emperor Leo his customary (and due) 
tax. 

Alexander VI availed himself of the assistance 


2,800,000 guilders, or $784,000. 


of the Turks (or at least, called upon them), 
against the French. 

III. Their Poisoning. — Ancient writers men- 
tion, that Pope Paul III poisoned his own mother 
and niece, that the inheritance of the Farnesi might 
fall to him. 

Innocentius IV, through a priest, administered 
poison to the emperor, in a host, thus removing 
him from this life. 

Moreover, how another pope, whose name is 
sufficiently known, put to death by poison, in ac- 
cordance with Turkish custom, the brother of 
Gemeno Vajazet, the Mohammedan emperor, 
which was contrary to common justice, because he 
was ransomed with two tonnen treasure, needs not 
to be recounted, as the fame of it has gone out both 
into the east and the west. 

This same pope had at a certain time determined 
to poison in like manner some cardinals, when the 
cupbearer made a mistake in the tankard contain- 
ing the poison (as the ancient writers have anno- 
tated), and he who had arranged this, was himself 
served with it, insomuch that he died with the 
cardinals who had drank of it. Compare De 
Tractaten Contarcene, Vergerij des Onpartijdigen 
Rechters, especially pp. 48, 49, 50, with the Chron- 
ijk van den Ondergang, first part, for the year 
1227. p. 544. col. 1. 2. Also p. 768. col. 2, of the 
bad conduct of Pope John XXIV, taken from 
Fasc. Temp. fol. 187. Platin. fol. 401 Onufr. fol. 
406. 417. Hist. Reel. Casp. Hedio. part 3. lib. 11. 
Chronolog. Leonh. lib. 6. Henr. Bull, of the coun- 
cils, 2d Book, chap. 8. J oh. Stumph. fol. 21. Hist. 
Georg. lib. 6. Seb. Fra. (old edition) fol. 31 fol. 
89. Hist. Andriani fol. 53 to fol. 66. Jan Crisp, 
fol. 256 to 369. Chron. Car. lib. 5. Zeg. fol. 326. 

OF THE DIVINE JUDGMENTS AND PUNISHMENTS 
VISITED UPON SOME OF THE POPES 

The divine vengeance for great misdeeds is some- 
times carried out in this life, and sometimes re- 
served for the life to come.* The vengeance which 
is inflicted in this life, is sometimes executed imme- 
diately by God Himself; at other times He uses 
means — either the elements, or things composed 
of the elements, yet without life; and sometimes 
He does it by means of living creatures as, men, 
beasts, etc. However, here we shall only speak of 
the judgment of God visited upon some of the 
popes in such a manner and through such means, 
as will be shown. 

In the eighth book of the Chronijk van den Un- 
dergang der Tyrannen, for the year 767, page 262, 
col. 2, several examples of this kind are succes- 
sively related, which we shall present here as is 
most suitable, and in the best possible order.f 

* But, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up 
unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the 
righteous judgment of God ; who will render to every man accord- 
ing to his deeds. Rom. 2 :5, 6. 

t Notwithstanding, the examples, related in the body of the 
work are recorded by P. J. Twisk, it is proper to state, that they 
were extracted from various papistic writers. 


INTRODUCTION 


59 


The author of said chronicle, after mentioning 
the ignominious expulsion of Pope Sylvester 
Campanus from the city of Rome, relates the sad 
ending of Constantine, Hadrian, John Benedict, 
Boniface, Lucius., Innocentius, Nicholas, Paul, 
Leo, Clement, etc. 

Pope Constantine II, having led an ungodly life, 
was deprived, in a council, of both his eyes, and 
the papal power, and then put into a convent. 

Hadrian III, fleeing from Rome, came to Venice 
in the habit of a gardener, where he was ordered to 
work in a garden. 

Hadrian IV was choked to death by a fly, which 
flew into his mouth, or, as others say, into his 
drink, while he was drinking. 

John XI,* being apprehended by the soldiers 
of a certain Guido, was smothered with a pillow, 
which they held upon his mouth. 

John XXII was crushed by the falling in of the 
vault of a pavilion, and thus departed this life. 

Benedict Vl.f was shut up in the Castle Angelo, 
by Cynthius, a citizen of Rome, and there strangled 
by him, on account of his great villainy. 

Benedict IX was killed by poison, which had 
been put into a fig by an abbess, who was consid- 
ered a devout, spiritual daughter. 

The body of Boniface VII, who had died a sud- 
den death, was dragged along the street, with his 
feet tied to a rope, and ignominiously buried in 
the common grave. 

Lucius II, about to storm the capital, whither 
the senators had fled, was so seriously pelted with 
stones, that he died soon afterwards. 

When Innocentius IV had unjustly sentenced to 
death Robert of Lincoln, because he had censured, 
with the mouth as well as with the pen, the nefar- 
ious deeds of the popes, and Robert therefore 
appealed to Christ, the Supreme Judge, the pope 
was found dead in his bed the following day.J 

Nicholas III died very unexpectedly of apoplexy 
(called the stroke of God). 

Paul II, having supped very merrily, died soon 
after, likewise apoplexy. 

Leo X died while laughing and frolicking at his 
cups. 

Clemens VIII, having conspired with Francis- 
cus, king of France, against the Emperor Charles 
V, was afterwards apprehended by the emperor's 
captains, derided above measure, ultimately rein- 
stated in the papal chair, but finally, in the year 
1534, suffocated, together with several cardinals, 
with the smoke of torches. From Onpar. Recht. 
Also, from various other accepted authors who 
have previously been referred to.§ 


* John XI was put for John XXII ; by the author from whom 
this was taken, but this is an error. 

t This Benedict VI was also put for his successor, Benedict IX ; 
which error we have corrected. 

t Our author relates, that before the death of Pope Innocentius 
IV a voice was heard in the papal court, saying "Come, thou 
wretched man, to the judgment of God !" 

§ Many more such examples might be related here, but, since 
by these few our aim is sufficiently understood, we deem it unnec- 
essary to enter more deeply into this subject, and shall, therefore, 
let this suffice. 


CONCLUSION OF THE MATTERS HERE RELATED 

We will now take leave of the popes, and let 
them pass. It is enough for us to know, that their 
succession, of which the papists boast so much, is 
confused and vain, or, at least, without tenable 
grounds. How we have proved this, is not for us 
to say; we let others judge. 

This would be a proper time — in order to ex- 
hibit the highly renowned Latin church, the Ro- 
man Babylon, in her full form — to bring up from 
the bottom, and present minutely and in the best 
order, the manifold and implacable contentions 
which have arisen from time to time in, with, and 
among them, on matters of faith, although they 
have so much to say about their extraordinary uni- 
ty : how the popes contended against the councils, 
and the councils against the popes ; how one an- 
nulled and rejected what the other had made and 
instituted ; yea, how they sometimes persecuted one 
another even unto death, and devoured and killed 
each other in the most cruel manner, even as 
though they were fighting with their avowed ene- 
mies ; to say nothing of the great amount of super- 
stition and human invention,* which, like horrible 
monsters and abortions, have proceeded, now by 
one, then by another, from the lap of the misnamed 
holy Roman church ; for to treat of this, as the sub- 
ject demands, would be almost an endless task, or, 
at least, require a whole book. What was once a 
comedy (with respect to the gay and merry regime 
of the papal dominion) has, through the begin- 
nings of its downfall, been changed into a tragedy. 
However, what we have shown, relates only to this 
present life; but the most mournful tragedy, ac- 
cording to the threatening of God (still we hope 
for the best), is yet to come, and concerns the 
future and eternal life.f 

Besides these most ungodly things which we 
have mentioned, they were drunk with the blood 
of the saints ; yea, they did not only pour out as 
water the blood of the beloved friends and children 
of God, and cool their thirst for blood therewith, 
but, besides inconceivable cruelties, they heaped 
also the greatest ignominy upon their bodies, 
throwing them like mire upon the earth, or giving 
them to the beasts for food, or, on stakes and 
wheels, to the birds to devour.f 

God shall certainly visit this yet upon them, and 
not let it go unavenged. "He that toucheth you," 
says Zechariah to the church of God, "toucheth the 
apple of his eye" (Zech. 2:8). 

* "But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the 
commandments of men," saith the Lord. Matt. 15:9. 

t Everything has its opposite : weeping is the opposite to laugh- 
ing; wailing and mourning, to shouting and rejoicing; but in all 
this it is better to rejoice last than before. "Woe to thee that spoil- 
est, and thou wast not spoiled ; and dealest treacherously, and they 
dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to spoil, 
thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make an end to deal 
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee" (Isa. 33:1). 

*. "Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment 
ye judge, ye shall be judged ; and with what measure ye mete, it 
shall be measured to you again" (Matt. 7:1, 2). "If any man have 
an ear, let him hear He that leadeth into captivity shall go into 
captivity: he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the 
sword" (Rev. 13:9, 10). 


60 


INTRODUCTION 


Oh, that they would become converted betimes ! 
Oh, that they would anticipate the uplifted rod of 
the divine wrath! Oh, that they would fear, and 
escape, through genuine repentance, the fearful 
kindled fire of his everlasting displeasure, which 
the wicked and impenitent shall certainly incur. 
That meanwhile all those who are still imprisoned 
in Babylon, and sit in the darkness and shadow of 
death, would, for the preservation of their souls, 
flee out of her ; that they would set out for Jeru- 
salem, the spiritual vision of peace (understand, 
the true church of God) ; that they would seek 
their souls' salvation while it is time, yea, that they 
would find, obtain and preserve it! This is cer- 
tainly a thing to be wished for. 

Note. — "Come out of her, my people, that ye 


be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her sins" (Rev. 18:4). 

These words as it appears are taken from the 
address of the prophet Jeremiah to the Israelites 
who were in bondage, in Babylon, saying as in a 
hasty and affrighted voice : "Flee out of Babylon, 
and deliver every man his soul; be not cut off in 
her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord's 
vengeance ; he will render unto her a recompense" 
(Jer. 51:6). 

In like manner men must also hastily come out 
of the spiritual Babel, out of the confusion and 
many corrupt, human forms of worship and van- 
ities of the world. "Save yourselves from this un- 
toward generation" (Acts 2:40). "The Lord give 
thee understanding in all things" (II Tim. 2:7). 


POEMS IN THE ORIGINAL LANGUAGE 


THE HOLY MARTYRS OF THE NEW 
COVENANT 


To all charitably inclined Anabaptists and non- 
resistant Christians: 

Re cht sinnig e ! die Christum hebt beleden 

Te volgen in een ware ootmoedigheydt; 
En die ter noodt den kruys-bergh wilt betreden, 

Die vol en dicht van scherpe doornen leydt; 
Vertoejt, en siet nu, in dees jammer-blaren, 

Wat ach, een wee, een weerloos Christen naeckt 
Wanneer sijn ziel met Christo soeckt te paren, 

En, door't geloof, na 't eeuwigh leven haeckt. 
Al siet gy u geloofs-genooten swerven, 

Om Christi naem, met kommer, angst en pijn, 
Verlaten van haer huysgesin, en erven, 

En dolen, in een woest landt, en woestijn, 
En waer sy zijn, als vluchtelingen, woonen: 

Dewijl men haer een vast verblijj ontseydt, 
En vyer en swaerdt en galgh en radt gaet toonen, 

Met grimmigheydt tot hare doodt bereydt; 
Laet daerom niet u vyer'ge liefd' verkoelen, 

Al waeyt den Noorden windt,* van kruys en smaedt, 
Maer scherper wilt na 't faligh leven doelen, 

En op gebeen u ziel tot Godt verlaet: 
Want als de rose en lelyef in de doornen 

Opwassen, en alsoo omcingelt staen; 
Soo Christi Kerck, en lieve uytverkoornen, 

Met druck en angst, oock somtijdts zinn belaen. 
Maer of al schoon, 't welck wonder schijnt, een moeder 

Het eenigh kindt, van haer gebaerdt, vergat; 
So blijft nochtans de Heer ons ziel-behoeder 

In eeuwighcydt, ons kroone, eer en schat. 
De waerdigheydt van alles dat magh blijcken, 

En 't beste dat een mensch op aerden heeft; 
Sachtmoedige ! is geensins te gelijcken 

By d' heerlijckheydtt van die hier deughtsaem leeft. 
Self Godes Soon, sijns Vaders wel-behagen, 

Die al 't geschep in eygendom geniet; 
Heeft, in veel smaedt, een doorne kroon gedragen, 

En van sijn volck onlijdelijck verdrict; 
Die heeft u voor-gegaen, en veel geleden, 

Ja den het kruys de seer vervloeckte doodt, 
Wilt hem dan op den Martel-wegh na treden, 

En achten niet het lijden, druck, en noodt. 
Want als gy hebt des werelts smaedt, en schanden, 

En sonden-drift, verwonnen heldelijck; 
Dan suit gy in het saligh leven landen, 

En wesen by Godts Helden meldelijck:$ 
Wanneer haer Godt, met sael'ge glory-meyen, 

En eeuw'ge vreught, en rijckdom, eer, en prael, 
Sal in 't Palleys der Heem'len binnen leyen, 

En wesen self haer loon, en bly onthael: 
Om dat sy t'saem de werelt niet en achten, 

En haer geloof bezegelden met bloedt: 
Een grondt, en steun, daer op gy meught verwachten 

Het Koningrijck vol eeuwigh blijvend goedt. 
Daerom, o Heer! leert ons ons doen besinnen, 

Door middel van het Nieuw" Verbondt, u Woordt; 
Dat wy u dock tot aen de doodt beminnen, 

En 's werelts korte vreught ons niet bekoordt; 
Want eeuwigh is soo long! ja is onendigh! 

En valt te bang, voor die gy uyt den Throon 
Van u genade stoot. Versterckt inwendigh 

Het Christ-geloof, en zijt ons Schildt, en Loon. 


Behoedt oock voor ziel-schadelijcke tijden 

D'Hooghmogende van 't Vrye Nederlandt; 
Die 't Helsch geblaeck en weerloos Christen lijden 

Nie 't dulden, reyckt altijdt u vrede-handt: 
Op dat wy doch, als ware Christen rancken, 

Hier onder haer Gebiedt, seer vryelijck, 
U met veel vrucht, en vollen wasdom dancken, 

Tot glory van u Hemelsch Koningrijck. 

Non est mortale quod opto. 


SONNET 


Wanneer Ierusalem, door's vyandts swaert en degen, 
Seer deerlijck was verwoest; en 't ed'le Iacobs zaet 
('t Welck, als doorlautert gout, uytblonck met veel 
cieraet) 
Gewentelt lagh in 't bloedt, en deerelijck verslegen; 
Stracks Ieremias sulcks neemt in sijn overwegen* 
Dat soo de slaende bandt des vyandts henen gaet: 
Hy treurt, dat selfs den rouw hem in 't gebeente slaet: 
En is in asch, en stof, al weenende, gelegen. 

Vreed-lievende! die oock het moort-gewelt aensiet, 
Dat in den Wijnbergh Gods, van oudis af, is geschi'et; 
W\e smeeckt de Heere niet, met t' saem-gevouwe handen: 
O Heer! die donck're wolck van 't Christendom at 

drijft; 
So met: ons Christ-geloof dan in de hope stiff t, 
Dat 't hert ons niet vertsaeght in 't worgen, mo'orden 
branden. 

lustus ex fide vivet. 

ON THE BLOODY THEATRE OF THE 

ANABAPTISTS OR NONRESISTANT 

CHRISTIANS 


* Song of Solomon 4:16. 
t Song of Solomon 2. 
t Rom. 8:18. 
§ Rev. 3 :5. 


To my brother T. J. van Braght: 
Een Hemelsyyer, van lust en yver, holp de snaren 
Van David aen den galm, van een bedroeft accoort: 
Wanneer den angst des doodts, uyt Zion, wiert gehoort 
Dat by sijn 's herten rouw, in Psalmen ging verklaren.i 
Soo sagh ick 't yver-vyer, o Broeder! uyt u varen, 
Als gy de Martelaers van 't Nieuw Verbondt bracht 

voort: 
Self, op die tijdt, wanneer door% sieckf, het klaeghlijck 
woort 
Tot u quant: 't Schijnt ghy sterft, wilt moeyt' en yver 
sparen. 
Maer hebt, des niettemin, dit bloedigh offer-werck 
Met krancke, en swacke leen, ten dienste van Gods 
Kerck, 
Door onvermoeyde vlijt, en yver, dus beschreven. 
Derhalven, wie gy zijt, die Christum onsen Heer 
Wilt volgen, in sijn woort, en Goodelijcke leer; 
Wort door dit lesen doch tot ware deught gedreven. 

P. van Braght. 

* Lamentations 1:1. 

<>A Of *he desolation of Jerusalem, David in his Lamentation sung • 

O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holv 

temple they have defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps'*' (Ps. 

"By the rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea, we wept when 

ni&^A^t:^* our harps ° n the wui ° ws io the 

.«.?. 1° 16S9 -l j an l8 f God was. 1 ?" 1 heavily upon my brother, in 
that he was visited with a severe sickness, so that to all appearance 
it seemed that he would not recover. •wtwi.c, 


FIRST PART 


THE BLOODY THEATER 


— OR- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


— OF THE — 


ANABAPTIST OR DEFENSELESS CHRISTIANS 

WHO SUFFERED AND WERE SLAIN FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 

CHRIST, THEIR SAVIOUR, FROM THE TIME OF CHRIST 

UNTIL THE YEAR A. D. 1660 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 

OF THE MARTYRS IN THE FIRST 

CENTURY, 

That is, from the first year of the ministry of Jesus 
Christ to the year 100. 


SUMMARY OF THE BAPTISM IN THE FIRST CENTURY 

[We have begun with the baptism of John, who 
in Holy Scripture is properly called the Baptist, 
because he was the first and chief one who truly 
administered baptism with all that pertains to it ; 
concerning which we have noted the time, place, 
persons, etc. From there we proceeded to Christ 
and the command which He gave concerning bap- 
tism ; thence to the apostles, and how they fulfilled 
Christ's command. But, since the apostles who 
wrote of baptism did not live to the close of this 
century, we, in order to accomplish our design, 
resorted to the fathers who lived shortly after the 
apostles, and wrote on baptism ; and thus the first 
century is concluded with their testimony.] 

We shall begin to give an account, from century 
to century, up to the present day, or at least, to the 
time of our fathers, how that the true baptism up- 
on faith, with rejection of infant baptism, has al- 
ways obtained, and been practiced, according as it 
was possible, by the true church of God, or at 
least, by some of the orthodox believers, according 


to the freedom, or the oppression prevailing at any 
particular time; and that this same faith, on ac- 
count of which the world calls us Anabaptists, 
was begun by God, through John, was confirmed 
by Christ and propagated and maintained 
by the apostles as well as by their successors, till 
the time of our fathers ; together with an account 
of the persons who suffered for that faith. 

Coming, then, to the article of baptism we shall 
thus begin and finish the subject : In the first cen- 
tury, embracing chiefly the time of Christ and His 
holy apostles, we shall place, not by inferences, 
but through express words, that which Holy Scrip- 
ture has to say in regard to it, as being the founda- 
tion of the matter, and afterwards, that which is 
recorded by trustworthy authors. 

CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF JOHN 

The holy evangelists tell us the time, place and 
manner of the same. Luke writes, chap. 3:1-3: 
"Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius 
Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, 
and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his broth- 
er Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and the region of Tra- 
chonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene, An- 
nas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word 
of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the 
wilderness. And he came into all the country about 
Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for 


64 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the remission of sins." Matt. 3 :1, 2 : "In those days 
came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness 
of Judaea, and saying, Repent ye : for the kingdom 
of heaven is at hand." Verse 11 : "I indeed baptize 
you with water unto repentance." Acts 19:4, Paul 
said : "John verily baptized with the baptism of re- 
pentance, saying unto the people, that they should 
believe on him which should come after him, that 
is, on Christ Jesus." 


THE PERSONS JOHN BAPTIZED 

Matt. 3 :5-9 : "Then went out to him Jerusalem, 
and all Judea, and all the region round about Jor- 
dan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confess- 
ing their sins. But when he saw many of the Phar- 
isees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said 
unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath 
warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? Bring 
forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: and 
think not to say within yourselves, We have Abra- 
ham to our father : for I say unto you, that God is 
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abra- 
ham." Luke 7 :29, 30 : "And all the people that 
heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being 
baptized with the baptism of John. But the Phar- 
isees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God 
against themselves, being not baptized of him." 
John 3 :23 : "And John also was baptizing in Enon 
near to Salim, because there was much water there : 
and they came, and were baptized." 


HOW, AMONG OTHERS, HE BAPTIZED ALSO JESUS 
THE SON OF GOD 

Matt. 3:13-17: "Then cometh Jesus from Gali- 
lee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him. 
But John forbade him, saying, I have need to be 
baptized of thee, and comest thou to me ? And Je- 
sus answering said unto him, Surfer it to be so 
now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all right- 
eousness. Then he suffered him. And Jesus, when 
he was baptized, went up straightway out of the 
water : and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, 
and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a 
dove, and lighting upon him : and lo a voice from 
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased." See further, concerning this : 
Mark 1:9-11; Luke 3:21-23. 


HOW CHRIST BAPTIZED THROUGH HIS DISCIPLES 

John 3 :22 : "After these things came Jesus and 
his disciples into the land of Judaea ; and there he 
tarried with them, and baptized." Chap. 4:1-3: 
"When therefore the Lord knew how the Phar- 
isees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more 
disciples than John (though Jesus himself bap- 
tized not, but his disciples), he left Judaea and de- 
parted again into Galilee." 


HOW CHRIST COMMANDED BAPTISM TO HIS DISCI- 
PLES, BEFORE HIS ASCENSION 

Matt. 28:18-20: "And Jesus came and spake 
unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in 
heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach 
(or make disciples of) all nations, baptizing them 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, 
lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
world. Amen." Mark 16:15,16: "And he said 
unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach 
the gospel to every creature. He that believeth 
and is baptized shall be saved ; but he that believ- 
eth not shall be damned." 


HOW THE APOSTLES EXECUTED THIS COMMAND 

OF CHRIST TO TEACH AND BAPTIZE, AFTER 

THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST 

Acts 2:37, 38: "Now when they heard this, they 
were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter 
and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, 
what shall we do ? Then Peter said unto them, Re- 
pent, and be baptized every one of you in the 
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins." 

Verses 41, 42: "Then they that gladly received 
his word were baptized; and the same day there 
were added unto them about three thousand souls. 
And they continued steadfastly in the apostles' 
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, 
and in prayers." 

Acts 8:12, 13: "But when they believed Philip 
preaching the things concerning the kingdom of 
God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were bap- 
tized, both men and women. Then Simon himself 
believed also : and when he was baptized, he con- 
tinued with Philip." 

Verses 36-39: "And as they [namely, Philip 
and the Ethiopian] went on their way, they came 
unto a certain water: and the eunuch said, See, 
here is water ; what doth hinder me to be baptized ? 
And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine 
heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I 
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And 
he commanded the chariot to stand still : and they 
went down both into the water, both Philip and 
the eunuch ; and he baptized him. And when they 
were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the 
Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw 
him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing." 

Acts 9:17, 18: "And Ananias went his way, and 
entered into the house ; and putting his hands on 
him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that 
appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, 
hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, 
and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And immedi- 
ately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales : 
and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and 
was baptized." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


65 


Acts 10:46-48: "For they heard them speak 
with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered 
Peter, Can any man forbid water, that these should 
not be baptized, which have received the Holy 
Ghost as well as we ? And he commanded them to 
be baptized in the name of the Lord." 

Acts 16:13-15: "And on the. sabbath we went 
out of the city by a river side, where prayer was 
wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake 
unto the women which resorted thither. And a 
certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of 
the city of Thyatira, which worshiped God, heard 
us : whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended 
unto the things which were spoken of Paul. And 
when she was baptized, and her household, she 
besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be 
faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and 
abide there. And she constrained us." 

Verse 40: "And they went out of the prison, 
and entered into the house of Lydia : and when 
they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, 
and departed." 

Acts 16:29-34: "Then he [namely the keeper of 
the prison] called for a light, and sprang in [the 
prison] , and came trembling, and fell down before 
Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said, 
Sirs, what must I do to be saved ? And they said, 
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved, and thy house. And they spake unto him 
the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his 
house. And he took them the same hour of the 
night, and washed their stripes ; and was baptized, 
he and all his, straightway. And he led them into 
his house, and seated them at the table, and re- 
joiced with all his house, that he believed in God," 
or [as the latest translators say], "he rejoiced, 
that he and all his house believed in God." 

Acts 18:8: "Crispus, the chief ruler of the syna- 
gogue, believed on the Lord with all his house ; and 
many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and 
were baptized." 

I Cor. 1:14-16: "I thank God [says Paul] that 
I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius ; lest 
any should say that I had baptized in mine own 
name. And I baptized also the household of Steph- 
anas ; besides, I know not whether I baptized any 
other." 

Compare this with I Cor. 16:15, 16: "I beseech 
you, brethren (ye know the house of Stephanas, 
that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they 
have addicted themselves to the ministry of the 
saints), that ye submit yourselves unto such, and 
to every one that helpeth with us, and laboreth." 


WHAT TESTIMONY THY HOLY APOSTLES HAVE 

GIVEN IN THEIR EPISTLES, CONCERNING 

BAPTISM 

1. That it signifies the burying of sins, and the 
resurrection into a new life. 

Rom. 6 :3, 4, "Know ye not, that so many of us 
as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized 


into his death. Therefore we are buried with him 
by baptism into death: that like as Christ was 
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, 
even so we also should walk in newness of life."* 
Note. — To the foregoing belongs also the pas- 
sage, Tit. 3 :5, where baptism is called, "the wash- 
ing of regeneration," and Eph. 5 :26, "the washing 
of water by the word." 

2. That through faith we become children of 
God, and through baptism put on Christ.^ 

Gal. 3 :26, 27 : "For ye are all the children of 
God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of 
you as have been baptized into Christ have put 
on Christ." 

3. That as the ark with eight soids was pre- 
served in the water, so also believing baptised 
Christians are preserved or saved in baptism 
through the answer of a good conscience. 

I Pet. 3 :20, 21 : "When once the longsuffering 
of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark 
was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls 
were saved by water.* The like figure whereunto 
baptism doth also now save us, (not the putting 
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a 
good conscience toward God)." 


MOREOVER, THE CONDITIONS REQUIRED IN, AT, 

AND ABOUT BAPTISM, INDICATE SUFFICIENTLY 

THAT IT WAS NOT ADMINISTERED TO 

CHILDREN, BUT TO PERSONS OF 

UNDERSTANDING 

In order to receive baptism in a worthy and true 
manner, there are required sorrow and repentance 
of sins, accompanied with a confession of the same. 
Matt. 3 :6, we read : "And were baptized of him in 
Jordan, confessing their sins." 

Besides this, it is required that we should bear 
good fruits. "Bring forth therefore," says John, 
to those who desired to be baptized, "fruits meet 
for repentance" (Matt. 3 :8) ; or, according to 
Biestken's translation: "Do genuine fruits of re- 
pentance." 

Mark 16:16, it is also required, that we believe, 
yea, that we believe with the hearts. Acts 8:37. 

In short, repentance or conversion, and baptism 
are joined together, Matt. 3:6, 11 ; as also, teach- 
ing, believing, and baptizing, Mark 16:15,16. 
Confession and baptism went hand in hand with 
the Ethiopian, Acts 8:37. Baptism is a burying of 
the old man, and a sign of resurrection into a new 

* He that is to have his son buried through baptism, must first 
have died unto it through repentance : and he that is to rise into, or 
walk in the new life, must first have been or walked in an old life ; 
this is incontrovertible, but whether it applies to infants, let the 
reader judge. 

t It appears, therefore, that none were baptized in Galatia, but 
those who had put on Christ. Concerning this putting on of Christ 
see Rom. 13:14. 

* In the ark, which was preserved through, or, properly speak- 
ing, in the water, there were none but believing and obedient per- 
sons, eight in number, namely, Noah and his wife, with their three 
sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and their three wives, eight persons 
in all : likewise, none but believng and obedient persons belong in 
the church of Christ, which is compared to the ark, and which 
must be preserved through or in baptism. 


66 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


life, Rom. 6 :3, 4 ; a putting on of Christ, Gal. 3 :27 ; 
and the answer of a good conscience toward God. 
I Pet. 3 :21. 

These and other conditions required in baptism 
cannot exist in infants, who know neither good 
nor evil, cannot discern between the right hand 
and the left hand, and do as children do, Deut. 
1:39; Jno. 4:11; I Cor. 13:11. 

Here we might adduce much more, but since it 
is not our purpose to dispute about this point, but 
simply to show from the unadorned testimonies of 
the holy evangelists and apostles, that baptism was 
administered in the first century only to adult 
(that is, penitent and believing) persons, we shall 
leave this subject, and proceed to give an account 
of those who, according to history, have, either 
by word or by deed, maintained this doctrine. 


OF THE TESTIMONY OF THE FATHERS CONCERNING 

THIS article; WHO LIVED FROM THE 

DECEASE OF THE APOSTLES TO THE 

END OF THE FIRST CENTURY 

Although we might entirely conclude this first 
century as touching baptism upon faith, with the 
testimony of Holy Scripture, we, so as not to ap- 
pear deficient, nevertheless deem it expedient, to 
add the testimonies of the fathers, till the end of 
this century. 

About the year 52. — Jac. Mehrn. Bapt. hist. pag. 
578. from Simon Metaphrastes, D. Vicecomes 
records the following incident (lib. 1. cap. 4. in 
the life of St. Auxibius) : When St. Mark, the 
apostle of Christ, saw that Auxibius had a desire 
for Christ, and that he was believing and in- 
structed, he descended with him into a pool and 
baptized him. This is the first example of which 
we read in history, outside of Holy Scripture, of 
those who were incorporated into the church of 
Christ, through baptism upon faith. 

About the year 60. — In, or very near this time, 
it is recorded, even by several papistic writers, that 
there were such people and such a sect as were 
afterwards designated by the name, The Poor of 
Lyons, Waldenses, Albigenses, who were also 
called Anabaptists, or Baptists, on account of the 
like faith which they had in common ; as shall be 
shown hereafter. Therefore the papists complain 
of their being considered of such high antiquity ; 
for some say that they existed in the time of 
Sylvester, A. D. 315, and others assert, with more 
justness, too, in the time of the apostles. Baptism, 
histor. pag. 615, from a very old book. Also, pag. 
670 and pag. 682. from Flaccius. Also, D. Balth- 
azar Lydius (though he misinterprets their doc- 
trine) in the tract, "Where the church was before 
the year 1160," printed at Dort, A. 1624. pag. 2. 
col. 1. from. Reynerius Priester. 

About the year 68. — It is stated that in the time 
of Nero, two daughters of Valentinian, a Christian 


at Aquileia, who had been brought up by their 
father in the Christian faith and the fear of God, 
were instructed by the priest or teacher Herma- 
goras, and baptized at a running water. See De 
gantsch klare en grondige bewijsinge van den 
Doop, printed A. D. [15] 81. letter Bv. 

About the year 70. — In or about the time of the 
death of the apostle Peter is placed the bishop or 
teacher Linus, of whom it is testified that he 
baptized, after preceding instruction, the son of 
Perpetua, a Christian woman. See the above. 
Also, Kort verhael van den loop der werelt, by 
F. H. H., printed at Franeker, A. 1611. pag. 47. 

From the year 71 till the year 111. — It is stated 
that between these years there flourished Ignatius, 
who was the second bishop of Antioch after Peter, 
and, according to the chronicles, discharged the 
duties of his office in the time of the apostle John. 
Writing of baptism, he employs no other manner 
of speech, than which clearly implies that baptism 
must be accompanied with faith, love and patience. 

In his letter to Polycarp, bishop at Smyrna, he 
writes among other things these words : Let none 
of you be found an apostate : "Let your baptism be 
your weapon, your faith your helmet, love a lance, 
patience a full armor." 

In a letter to the Trailienses he writes likewise : 
"It appears to me, that you do not live after the 
flesh, but after Jesus Christ, who died for our 
sakes; so that you, believing in His death, may, 
through baptism, be partakers of His resurrec- 
tion." 

Again, in the letter to those at Philadelphia he 
writes thus : "Seeing, then, that there is one only 
ungenerated God and Father; and one only be- 
gotten Son, Word, and Man; one Comforter, the 
Spirit of Truth; and one faith, one baptism, and 
one church, which the apostles have founded with 
their sweat and labor, in the blood of Christ from 
one end of the earth to the other ; therefore, you, as 
a peculiar people and holy generation, must also 
do all things with a unanimous heart in Christ." 

Who does not see here, that Ignatius by joining 
together in this order or sequence, preaching, faith, 
baptism, and the church, intends to say, that ac- 
cording to the ordinance of Christ, preaching has 
the first place, and, therefore, must precede; that 
after faith comes baptism, and that after baptism 
the one baptized is a member of the church? and 
that then the members of the church, as a peculiar 
people and holy generation, must do all things with 
unanimous hearts in Christ ? For this is the import 
of the words of Ignatius. See, concerning the 
aforementioned letters of Ignatius, H. Montanus 
in De nietigheyd van den Kinder-doop, printed the 
second time, pages 4 and 5. Also, Jac. du Bois 
(though he misinterprets these letters), Tegen 
Montanus, printed Anno 1648. pages 16-22. 

In the year 95. — It is here recorded that Clemens, 
the fourth bishop of the church at Rome, ordained : 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


67 


That the heretics' baptism is neither to be sup- 
ported nor accepted ; therefore, he that has received 
baptism in conformity with the truth of the church, 
shall not be rebaptized; but he who does not re- 
baptize the unclean, that is, baptized by the un- 
godly or heretics, shall be deposed, as one who 
mocks the cross and death of Christ, and does not 
distinguish the false priests, or teachers, from the 
true ones (distinct. 30. cap.). Again, in his second 
epistle he speaks of baptizing on the feast, and that 
the candidate for baptism is to be examined three 
months previously. P. J. Twisck, Chron. 1st 
Book, in the year 95. page. 32. 

It certainly appears clearly from these words of 
Clemens that at that time no other baptism obtained 
in the church, than that which was administered 
after preceding instruction : for when he speaks of 
baptizing on the feast, and that the candidate for 
baptism is to be examined three months previous- 
ly, it is certainly expressed, that then no new-born 
children were baptized; for who does not know 
that children are born throughout the whole year, 
and not only on feast days (namely, on Easter or 
Pentecost) ? Besides, infants cannot be examined 
in the faith three months previous to their baptism, 
as is required here of the candidates for baptism. 

Moreover, in the third letter of Clemens, the 
following words, which still more clearly express 
the preceding meaning, are found : If any one de- 
sires to become a believer, and to be baptized, he 
must prepare himself to lay aside the former 
wickedness ; so that he henceforth may obtain, by 
a good conversation, an inheritance of the heaven- 
ly riches, according to his own deeds. Let him 
that desires this, go to his priest, or teacher, and 
hear from him the mysteries of the kingdom of 
heaven; let him exercise himself diligently with 
fasting, and examine himself well in everything, 
so that after three months he may be baptized. 
Everyone shall be baptized in running water, and 
the name of the blessed Trinity be invoked over 
him. Jac. Mehrn. Bapt. Histor. 2nd part, on the 
second century, page 209. from Clem. Epist. 3. 

From the Constitutionibus Apostolicis, lib. 7. 
cap. 23. by the same Clemens, these words are 
taken: Concerning baptism we command you 
before, O bishop, and say this also : that you shall 
baptize as the Lord has commanded us, when He 
said: "Go, and teach all nations, baptizing them 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you" ( Matt. 
28:19, 20). Bapt. Histor. page 200. ex. Constit. 
Apostol. 

The above words of Clemens speak so plainly 
of the true order of the baptism of Christ, that 
they need no explanation whatever. We shall 
therefore pass on to the martyrs who suffered in 
or about this time. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE PIOUS MARTYRS 

AND WITNESSES OF JESUS CHRIST 

WHO SUFFERED DURING THE 

FIRST CENTURY 

That is, from the death of Christ to the year 
A. D. 100. 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE FIRST CENTURY 

This first century did not pass without the 
shedding of much blood of the saints ; for, since 
Jesus Christ Himself, the leader of all true be- 
lievers, was subject to it, it was just, that His 
members should follow in the same path ; yet John 
died before Christ. _ But after the death of Christ, 
the fire of persecution raged exceedingly, consum- 
ing nearly all of the beloved apostles and friends 
of Christ, according to the flesh. We have des- 
cribed those who followed Christ, their Captain, 
into suffering and death, according to the order of 
time ; they are the following persons : Stephen, the 
deacon; the apostles, James, Philip, Barnabas, 
Mark the evangelist, Peter, Paul; some com- 
panions and friends of Paul, as Aristarchus, 
Epaphras, Silas, Onesiphorus, Prochorus, Nican- 
or, Parmenas, Olympas, Carpus, Trophimus, 
Materus, Egyetus, Hermagoras, Onesimus, Dion- 
ysius of Athens, and Timothy ; but the latter was 
slain a few years after the others. In the meantime 
the preceding ones are followed by the apostles, 
Andrew, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew, Simon 
Zelotes, Matthias, Luke the evangelist, Antipas, 
the faithful martyr of Jesus, John, whom Jesus 
loved, Urticinus, Vitalus, etc., all of whom ob- 
tained the martyr's crown, as may be seen from 
the following account. 

To Jesus Christ, the Son of God, we have ac- 
corded the first place among the martyrs of the 
new covenant ; not in the order of time, for herein 
John was before, and preceded with his death ; but 
on account of the worthiness of the person, be- 
cause He is the head of all the holy martyrs, 
through whom they all must be saved. 


JESUS CHRIST THE SON OF GOD CRUCIFIED 
AT JERUSALEM 

About three thousand, nine hundred and seventy 
years after the creation of the world, in the forty- 
second year of the reign of Augustus, the second 
Roman emperor, when the whole world was at 
peace, Jesus Christ was born of the virgin Mary, 
in the little town of Bethlehem, being the only and 
eternal Son of God, the Word by which all things 
are made, yea, God blessed forever. Matt. 16:16; 
John 1:14, Rom. 9:5. 

But His entrance into this world, as well as His 
progress and end, was full of misery, distress and 
affliction, indeed it may be said: He was born 
under the cross ; brought up under the cross ! He 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Jesus Christ crucified outside Jerusalem 


walked under the cross, and finally died on the 


cross. 


Touching His birth, He was conceived of the 
Holy Ghost. His birth ushered Him into great 
poverty ; for He was not born in His maternal city, 
Nazareth, but on the journey to Bethlehem ; which 
was the cause, that no suitable place could be pre- 
pared for His birth ; yea, even more, He could ob- 
tain no place in the inn, but had to be born in a 
stable ; and when He was born, He was wrapped 
in swaddling clothes, and laid in a manger. 

Touching His bringing up, it was attended with 
much sorrow, for when He was still less than two 
years old, Herod persecuted Him even unto death ; 
on account of which His foster-father Joseph, 
and His mother Mary, had to flee into Egypt, and 
remain there until Herod's death. But meanwhile 
there were killed in His stead, that He also might 
be killed, all the children of two years and under, 
in and about Bethlehem, so that the voice of lamen- 
tation was heard in all the boundaries of that 
region; of which Jeremiah had prophesied: "A 
voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter 
weeping ; Rachel weeping for her children refused 
to be comforted for her children, because they 
were not." Jr. 31 :1S ; fulfilled, Matt. 2:18. 


As regards His life and conversation among 
men, He was considered an enthusiast and vagrant, 
because He had no permanent place of abode; 
which latter was nevertheless thus bitter for Him, 
that He complains : "Foxes have holes, and birds 
of the air have nests ; but the Son of man hath not 
where to lay his head" (Luke 9:58). Meanwhile 
He was reproached as being the friend of pub- 
licans and sinners, a glutton and wine bibber, yea, 
that He was possessed with the devil; and this, 
until the hour of His departure was nigh at hand. 

Concerning the end of His life, it was the most 
miserable, for it was, so to speak, the day, when 
all the fountains of the great deep broke forth 
over Him, and the floods of suffering overflowed 
Him, to swallow Him up altogether. 

First of all, He was betrayed by His disciple 
Judas, who sold Him for thirty pieces of silver to 
the high priests and Pharisees. Matt. 26:14-16. 
Then He was delivered unto them, sharply ex- 
amined, yea adjured by the living God, to say, 
whether He was the Christ, the Son of God. And 
as soon as the Lord had confessed this, they 
cried, "He is guilty of death." 

Then they spit in His face, and buffeted Him. 
Others covered His face, saying, "Prophesy unto 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


69 


us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?" 
(Matt. 27:67,68). This having continued till 
about morning, they delivered Him to Pontius 
Pilate, the judge, to pronounce the sentence of 
death upon Him, and to put an end to His life. 
Matt. 27:1,2. 

Pilate said, "What accusation bring ye against 
this man?" They answered, "If he were not a 
malefactor, we would not have delivered him up 
unto thee." Pilate said, "Take ye Him, and judge 
him according to your law ;" for he perceived that 
for envy they had delivered Him. They answered, 
"He perverts the nation, and forbids to give tribute 
to Caesar, saying that He Himself is a king. In 
short, 'We have a law, and by our law he ought 
to die, because he made himself the Son of God.' " 
(John 19:7). 

Thereupon Pilate took Jesus into the judgment 
hall, and, having examined Him, said, that he 
found no cause of death in Him. Therefore he 
sought a means to release Him; moreover, in 
order to move the Jews to pity on account of His 
innocence, he caused Him (though against his 
conscience) to be terribly scourged, crowned with 
thorns, mocked, and, thus disfigured, brought 
before the Jews, saying, "Behold the man!" so 
that they might now be satisfied with His suffer- 
ing, and spare His life. But it was of no avail; 
they cried the more, "Crucify him, crucify him ; if 
thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend." 
Verse 12. 

Finally, when Pilate saw that the Jews were 
not to be moved, and fearing that they might 
accuse him before Caesar, he went and sat down 
(at about eight o'clock in the morning, according 
to our reckoning) in the judgment seat, in the 
place called Lithostratos, and in Hebrew Gab- 
batha, a paved elevation in Jerusalem; and there, 
though quite against his conscience, pronounced 
the sentence of death upon Christ. 

Thereupon the soldiers again very dreadfully 
mocked Him, laid His cross upon Him, and drove 
Him out through the gate up to Mount Calvary, 
where they, after having stripped Him of His gar- 
ments, nailed Him to a cross, and raised Him up 
between two murderers, John 19:18; which was 
done, according to our reckoning, at about nine 
o'clock in the morning. 

In the meantime they gave Him vinegar and 
gall to drink, parted His garments, and again 
derided Him most shamefully and above measure, 
till a great darkness came, continuing for about 
three hours ; and then the Lord cried with a loud 
voice, "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani !" that is, "My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 
(Matt. 27:46). 

Then, having fulfilled all, He commended His 
soul into His Father's hands, saying, "Father, 
into thy hands I commend my spirit" (Luke 
23:46). 

Thereupon He bowed His head and expired, 
having suffered excruciatingly six hours on the 


cross, from nine o'clock in the morning till three 
in the afternoon.* 

Then the earth began to quake, the rocks were 
rent, the graves were opened, the vail of the temple 
was rent in twain, and many miracles happened, 
as a sign that He who died there was more than 
a common man, yea, that He was the Son of the 
living God. 

This, then, was the end, not of a martyr, but of 
the Head of all the holy martyrs, through whom 
they and we all must be saved. 


JOHN THE BAPTIST, SON OF ZACH ARIAS AND 

ELISABETH, BEHEADED IN THE CASTLE OF 

MACHAERUS, AT THE COMMAND OF 

HEROD ANTIPAS, A. D. 32 

This John, surnamed the Baptist, because he 
was ordained of God to baptize the penitent, wa« 
the son of the priest Zacharias, and his wife Elisa- 
beth ; whose name was made known to his parents 
through the angel of God, before he was born. 
Luke 1 :5, 13. 

When he was about thirty years old (about six 
months before the Lord Jesus Christ began to 
preach), in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tibe- 
rias Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor, and 
Annas and Caiaphas the high priests, he was called 
and sent of God, to preach the baptism of repent- 
ance for the remission of sins, to prepare the way 
for the Messiah, as an angel or messenger before 
the face of Christ, to turn the hearts of the fathers 
to the children. Luke 3:1,2; Mark 1:2,3; Luke 
1:17. 

Of the dignity of this man the angel of the Lord 
had said, that many would rejoice at his birth, that 
he would be great in the sight of the Lord, to make 
ready a people well-prepared (as not only the 
prophets, but also Zacharias had prophesied of 
him through the Spirit of the Most High), to give 
knowledge of salvation unto the people of the Lord 
for the remission of their sins. Luke 1 :14, 15, 77. 

John, being thus sent of God, to bear witness of 
Christ, that He is the true light, came to the 
Jordan, at Salim, and other places, teaching and 
baptizing. John 3 :23. 

In the meantime, while he was baptizing the 
penitent, Christ Himself came to him (to confirm 
this holy work), and asked to be baptized by him. 
But when John, from humility and good intention, 
declined, Christ instructed him that this was neces- 


* That the Lord lived six hours, yea, more than six hours on 
the cross, before He gave up the ghost, appears from the account 
of Mark, chap. 15; fot in verse 25 it says: "And it was the third 
hour, and they crucified him." That is according to our reckoning, 
nine o'clock in the morning. Then, in verse 33, we are told that 
when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole 
land until the ninth hour; which according to our reckoning, was 
twelve o'clock noon. Then, in verse 34, we read : "And at the ninth 
hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabach- 
thani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 
which, according to our way of reckoning time, is three o'clock in 
the afternoon. Again in verse 37, we read: "And Jesus cried with 
a loud voice, and gave up the ghost ;" which, as it appears, happened 
after the expiration of the ninth hour, so that the Lord lived on the 
cross from nine o'clock in the morning until three oclock in the 
afternoon, that is, fully six hours, and not before then did He give 
up the ghost, as has been shown from the account of Mark. 


70 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


sary, saying, "Suffer it to be so now : for thus it 
becometh us to fulfill all righteousness." Then he 
baptized the Lord. Matt. 3:13-16. 

He held the Lord Jesus in high estimation, call- 
ing Him the Lamb of God, the Bridegroom of His 
church, the true Messiah, whose shoes he was not 
worthy to bear. John 1:29; 3:29; Matt. 3:11. 

He himself possessed such great influence, 
though in humility, that many were in doubt 
whether he was not himself the Messiah; hence 
the Pharisees sent their messengers to him, to 
inquire of him his vocation, mission, authority, 
etc. To all this he answered candidly and with an 
humble heart, saying, "I am not the Christ." John 
1 :19, 20. 

When the course of his pilgrimage drew near 
its close, a certain matter occurred, which was the 
cause of his death, and happened as follows : King 
Herod Antipas had committed a wicked deed; 
namely, he had taken his brother Philip's wife, 
having put away his own wife, the daughter of 
Aretas, king of Arabia; which conduct John the 
Baptist, on account of his ministry, could not let 
go unreproved, but called Herod's attention to it, 
according to the law, saying, "It is not lawful 
for thee to have her" (Matt. 14:4). 

However, even as the ungodly will not be re- 
proved, so it was with Herod; for he conceived 
a hatred for John, and sought opportunity to kill 
him. But, since many had a very high opinion of 
this pious man, and great numbers, therefore, 
came to him, Herod, for the present, did not dare 
to lay hands on him, to kill him ; however he did 
not let him go free, but imprisoned him in the castle 
of Machaerus. Euseb. Hist. Eccl lib. 1 chap 11. 

In the meantime John did not relax in his call- 
ing, but even from prison sent some of his disciples 
to Christ, that they with the others might assure 
themselves through the doctrine and the miracles 
which they would there hear and see, that Christ, 
and none other, was the true Messiah. Matt. 
11:2; Luke 7:18. 

Thereupon, not only when these messengers 
came, but also on many other occasions, Christ 
testified of the greatness and worthiness of John 
the Baptist ; namely, that he was the true spiritual 
Elias, a burning and shining light, the greatest 
prophet among all those born of women. Matt. 
11:14; John 5:35; Luke 7:28. 

Time went on, meanwhile, and the hour of his 
departure was near at hand. As regards the cir- 
cumstances of his death, they are thus described by 
the holy evangelist Matthew, chap. 14 :3-12 : "For 
Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and 
put him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother 
Philip's wife. For John said unto him, It is not 
lawful for thee to have her. And when he would 
have put him to death, he feared the multitude, be- 
cause they counted him as a prophet. But when 
Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Hero- 
dias danced before them, and pleased Herod. 
Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her 


whatsoever she would ask. And she, being before 
instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John 
Baptist's head in a charger. And the king was 
sorry : nevertheless for the oath's sake, and them 
which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be 
given her. And he sent, and beheaded John in the 
prison. And his head was brought in a charger, 
and given to the damsel : and she brought it to her 
mother. And his disciples came, and took up the 
body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus." 

Josephus, the Jewish historian, also makes men- 
tion of the death of John the Baptist, in the 7th 
chapter of the 18th book of his history of the 
Jews, where he writes thus : 

"There was a common report among the Jews, 
that Herod's army was destroyed through the 
righteous judgment of God, on account of John, 
who is called the Baptist. For Herod, the tetrarch, 
caused this pious man to be slain ; who exhorted 
the Jews to all manner of virtue and righteousness, 
led them to baptism, and said, that their baptism 
would only then be acceptable to God, if they 
would abstain, not merely from one or two sins, 
but would earnestly purify the heart, through 
righteousness, and afterwards also the body. 

"Since great numbers flocked to him, and the 
people were very eager for his doctrine, Herod 
feared, lest he (John) might induce the people, 
with whom his influence was great, to sedition ; 
for it seemed, as if they would do everything 
according to his will and counsel. He therefore 
thought it best, to have him killed. For that reason 
he caused him to be imprisoned in the aforesaid 
castle Machaerus, and there put to death." 

This happened, according to our reckoning, in 
the year thirty-two after the birth of Christ, in the 
seventeenth year of Tiberias, the Roman emperor ; 
and thus was this great light of the church of God 
extinguished in the midst of its brightness, to the 
sorrow of many pious hearts. 

It is stated that his body rested at Sebasta, in 
Palestine, till the time of Julian, when his bones 
were burned by the enemies of truth, and his ashes 
scattered to the wind. Histor. Tripart. lib. 1. cap. 
15. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 6. 


STEPHEN, ONE OF THE SEVEN DEACONS OF THE 

CHURCH AT JERUSALEM, STONED WITHOUT 

THE GATE OF THE CITY, BY THE 

LIBERTINES, A. D. 34, SHORTLY 

AFTER THE DEATH OF CHRIST 

Stephen, which in Greek signifies a crown, was 
one of the seven deacons of the church at Jerusa- 
lem, a man full of faith and the wisdom of God. 
Acts 6:5. 

He was well versed in the holy Scriptures of the 
Old Testament, and very eloquent. It happened 
that there arose certain of the sect of the Liber- 
tines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and of them of 
Cilicia and of Asia, and disputed with Stephen; 
and they were not able to resist the wisdom and the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Stephen stoned outside Jerusalem, AD 34 


spirit by which he spake. Then they suborned a 
few men to say: We have heard him speak blas- 
phemous words against Moses, and against God. 
And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and 
the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, 
and brought him to the council, and set up false wit- 
nesses, to say, This man ceaseth not to speak 
blasphemous words against this holy place, and 
the law : for we have heard him say, that this Jesus 
of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall 
change the customs which Moses delivered us. And 
all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on 
him, saw his face, as it had been the face of an 
angel. Acts 6:9-15. 

Then said the high priest to him, Are these things 
so? Thereupon, this godfearing man explained 
himself and answered with many reasons; he, 
moreover, adduced, as if with a heavenly tongue, 
and with incontrovertible reasons, many scriptures 
of the Old Testament, to show that Christ is the 
true Messiah, and that the Gospel is true. Acts 7 : 
1-53, 

But when he began to speak with great warmth, 
and to set before the eyes of his accusers their 
bloodthirstiness, their wrath was kindled the more 
against him, for these things cut them to the heart, 


and they gnashed on him with their teeth. Verse 
54. 

But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up 
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus 
standing at the right hand of God, and said : Be- 
hold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of 
man standing on the right hand of God. Verses 55 
and 56. 

But they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped 
their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and 
cast him out of the city, and stoned him ; and the 
witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's 
feet, whose name was Saul. Verses 57 and 58. 

In the meantime he called and said, Lord Jesus, 
receive my spirit. He kneeled down, and cried 
with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their 
charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep. 
Verses 59 and 60. 

Such was the end of this upright man Stephen, 
to whom the honor of Jesus Christ was dearer 
than his own life. It is stated to have taken place 
in the year thirty-four after the birth of Christ, in 
the nineteenth year of the reign of Tiberius, which 
was the thirty-eighth year of his age. It happened 
in the seventh year after the baptism of Christ. 
Nic. lib. 2. cap. 3, 


72 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


This having occurred, some godfearing men at- 
tended to the body, and carried it to the grave, 
greatly lamenting this pious martyr. — The stones 
were to him as rivers of sweetness. August, cap. 22. 
Solil. 


JAMES, THE SON OF ZEBEDEE, PUT TO DEATH WITH 
THE SWORD, BY HEROD AGRIPPA, IN JERU- 
SALEM, A. D. 45 

James, surnamed the Greater, was the son of 
Zebedee and Salome, and a fisherman by occupa- 
tion ; but, Christ having called him to be His disci- 
ple, he abandoned fishing, and followed Christ. 
Matt. 4:21; Mark 1:19. 

He was instructed for a considerable time to- 
gether with the other disciples in the duties of the 
apostleship, until he was properly sent out in that 
capacity. Matt. 10:2; Mark 6:17; Luke 6:13. 

He was endowed with the gift of working signs 
and miracles, and on account of this special gift 
he was one of the three surnamed Boanerges, that 
is, sons of thunder. He was with Jesus on every 
remarkable occasion; so much so, that he was 
chosen by the Lord to behold His glory upon the 
holy mount; and, afterwards, to witness His suf- 


ferings in the garden of Gethsemane. Mark 3 :17, 
18; Matt. 17:1; 26:36. 

Of him Christ had predicted, that he should 
drink of the same cup, of which He (Christ) would 
drink, and that he should be baptized with the 
same baptism, with which He was baptized; that 
is, that he should be subject to His (Christ's) suf- 
fering and death. Matt. 20:22,23. 

After the death of Christ he joined the other 
apostles, to be a witness with them, of His suf- 
fering, death, and resurrection, and to be in- 
structed concerning His kingdom during the forty 
days after His resurrection. 

After Christ's ascension he also remained at 
Jerusalem; and when he, together with the other 
apostles, had there received the Holy Ghost, he 
preached the Gospel in Judea and Samaria. Acts 
1 :13, 14. 

From there, as some relate, he went to Spain; 
but, meeting with little success, he returned to Ju- 
dea, where, it is said, he was opposed by Hermo- 
genes, a sorcerer. But as Abdias, bishop of Baby- 
lon, and others, relate many things of him, which 
seem to be altogether fictitious, we shall not men- 
tion them. Petr. de nat. lib. 6. cap. 133. Abdias 
Babyl. van den Strijd der Apostelen. 



The Apostle James (the major) beheaded in Jerusalem, AD 45 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



The Apostle Philip stoned in Hierapolis, Phrygia, AD 54 


This apostle lived only until the fourth year of 
the Emperor Claudius, at which time, Agabus had 
predicted, there should be a dearth throughout all 
the world. Oros. lib. 7. cap. 6. 

At that time Claudius charged Herod Agrippa 
to suppress the church of Christ. Then Herod laid 
his bloody hands on this apostle and, on the feast 
of the passover, put him in prison. Shortly after- 
wards he was sentenced to death, and executed 
with the sword, in Jerusalem. This occurred in the 
year forty-five after the birth of Christ. Acts 
12:2. 

Clemens relates that the executioner, seeing his 
innocence, was converted to the Christian faith, 
and died with him. According to the annotation of 
Eusebius Pamphilius, from Clemens Alexandri- 
nus, the executioner was so moved on account of 
the death of James, that he professed himself to 
be a Christian ; and so, as he states, both were led 
forth together to death. As they were led out, the 
executioner asked James to forgive him. James, 
after a little deliberation, said, "Peace be with 
thee," and kissed him. And thus both were be- 
headed. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 9. ex Clem. Alexand. 
Also W . Baudart. Apophthegmat. lib. 1. page 4. 
from loach. Comer, in vita Christi, page 42. 


Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 3. Strac. in Festo Ja<cobi, page 
209. Cle. Circa, cap. 45. Annum. James was the 
first martyr of the apostles. This history shows the 
alacrity of the ancient believers. 


THE HOLY APOSTLE PHILIP, BOUND WITH HIS 
HEAD TO A PILLAR, AND STONED, AT HIE- 
RAPOLIS, IN PHRYGIA, A. D. 54 

Philip, a native of Bethsaida, in Galilee, had a 
wife and daughters of very honorable life. John 
1 :44; 12:21 ; Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 30; 
31. 

He was found of Christ, and called as His 
disciple to follow Him; which he did so faith- 
fully, that when he found Nathanael, he brought 
him to Christ, declaring to him, that he had found 
Him of whom Moses and the prophets had writ- 
ten, namely, Jesus of Nazareth, the true Messiah. 
John 1:45. 

From that time on, Philip constantly followed 
Christ, listening to His admonitions, and behold- 
ing the miracles He performed to the service of the 
word of God; so that Christ ordained him an 
apostle, and sent him out to preach the Gospel, in 
the first place to the scattered sheep of the house 


74 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of Israel ; which he also like his fellow apostles did. 
Matt. 10:3; Luke 6:13-15. 

The Lord esteemed him as one of His greatest 
friends ; for at the glorious miracle of the feeding 
of five thousand, Christ, in order to prove him, 
counseled with him, saying, "Whence shall we buy 
bread, that these may eat?" (John 6:5). 

He was also kindly instructed by the Lord, when 
he asked to see the Father ; for Christ said to him, 
Philip, he that hath seen me hath seen the Father, 
etc. John 14:8,9. 

Once when certain Greeks wished to see Jesus, 
and desired him to procure them access to the 
Lord, he came with Andrew and told it to the Lord, 
who answered, "The hour is come, that the Son of 
man should be glorified" (John 12:20-23). 

This pious and godly apostle remained with the 
Lord, even to His suffering; and, after their dis- 
persion, when Christ had arisen, he abode with his 
brethren, until they, according to the promise of 
Christ, received the Holy Ghost, after His ascen- 
sion. Luke 24 :32, 33 ; Acts 2 :4. 

After the distribution of the countries, he taught 
several years in Scythia, where he planted many 
churches; and since Syria and the upper part of 
Asia fell to his particular share, he laid the founda- 


tions of faith in many of these cities. Pet. de Nat. 
lib. 4. cap. 107. Nic. lib. 2. cap. 39. 

Finally he came to Phrygia, and wrought several 
signs at Hierapolis. There the Ebionites, who not 
only denied the divinity of Christ, but also wor- 
shiped idols, continued obstinately in their blas- 
phemous doctrines and idolatry, and did not listen 
to this pious apostle of Christ, but apprehended 
him, and, having made his head fast to a pillar, 
stoned him ; whereupon death ensued, and he thus 
fell asleep in the Lord. His body was buried in the 
aforementioned city Hierapolis. Konst-tooneel, 
van veertigh heerlijke afbeeldingen Christi, ende 
sijner Apostelen, etc. In the life of Philip. Bybelsch 
Naembceck van P. J. Twisk, letter P. on the name 
PhUippus, fol. 762. col. 2. Also, Introduction to 
the Martyrs' Mirror of the Baptists, printed in the 
year 1631, fol. 35. col. 1. 

JAMES, THE SON OF ALPHEUS, OR BROTHER OF 

THE LORD, CAST DOWN FROM THE TEMPLE, 

STONED, AND BEATEN TO DEATH WITH 

A CLUB, A. D. 63 

James the Lesser was the son of Alpheus, and 
Mary Cleophas, sister to the mother of Christ; he 
is called the Lord's brother. Matt. 10:3 ; Gal. 1 :19. 



The Apostle James (the lesser) stoned and clubbed to death, Jerusalem, AD 63 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


75 


After proper instruction he was ordained an 
apostle by Christ, and sent out to minister to the 
Jews; wherein he acquitted himself well, until 
Christ's death. After that, he, with others, was 
sent out to preach the Gospel, which he did in the 
Jewish church. Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15. 

And although Peter, and James and his brother 
John, of whom the last-mentioned two were the 
sons of Zebedee, were regarded as the special apos- 
tles, he was nevertheless considered to be one of 
the three pillars of the church, after the death of 
James the son of Zebedee, Gal. 2 :9. 

He was appointed by the apostles the first over- 
seer of the church at Jerusalem; this was shortly 
after the death of Christ. Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 5. and 
lib. 2. cap. 23. This office he discharged faithfully 
for thirty years, converting many to the true faith, 
not only (though principally) by the pure doctrine 
of Christ, but also through his holy life, on ac- 
count of which he was called the Just. Niceph. 
lib. 2. cap. 38. 

He was very steadfast and holy, a true Nazarite, 
in dress as well as in eating and drinking; and 
prayed daily for the church of God and the com- 
mon weal. 

This apostle wrote an epistle for the consolation 
of the twelve tribes who were scattered abroad, say- 
ing : James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered 
abroad, greeting. My brethren, count it all joy 
when ye fall into divers temptations. James 1 :1, 2. 

But although he comforted with many excellent 
reasons his own, who believed in the name of 
Christ, the unbelieving Jews could not endure his 
doctrine ; so that Ananias, an audacious and cruel 
young man among them, being the high priest, 
summoned him before the judges, that they should 
compel him to deny that Jesus is the Christ, and 
force him to renounce the Son of God and the pow- 
er of His resurrection. Josep. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 
8. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 1. verse 22. ex Egesipp. Hi- 
eron. Catal. 

To this end, the chief priest, scribes, and Phar- 
isees placed him upon the pinnacle of the temple, 
at the time of the passover, that he should deny his 
faith before all the people. But as he thus stood 
before the people, he confessed with much more 
boldness that Jesus Christ is the promised Mes- 
siah, the Son of God, our Saviour, and that he is 
sitting at the right hand of God, and shall come 
again in the clouds of heaven, to judge the quick 
and the dead. 

On account of this testimony of James, the mul- 
titude of the people praised God, and magnified the 
name of Christ. Then cried the enemies of the 
truth, Oh, the Just also has erred ; let us take him 
away for he is unprofitable. They accordingly cast 
him down, and stoned him. But as he was not 
killed by the fall and the stoning, having only 
broken his legs, he, lying on his knees, prayed to 
God for those who stoned him, saying, Lord, for- 
give them; for they know not what they do. 


On account of this, one of the priests begged for 
his life, saying, What do ye ? the Just is praying for 
us. Leave off stoning ! But another of those pres- 
ent, who held a fuller's stick in his hand, struck 
him over the head with it, so that he died, and fell 
asleep in the Lord. He was buried at the place 
where he had been thrown down from the temple. 
Hieron. Catalog, in Jacobo Justo. Also, W . 
Baudart. Apophthegmat. lib. 1. p. 6. ex Euseb. 
Pamphil. Ccesariense, in hist. Eccl. Strac. in Festo 
Philippi and Jacobi, p. 133. Anno 62. C. Aetat. 
Jacobi. 

This occurred A. D. 63, in the ninety-sixth year 
of his age, in the seventh year of the reign of 
Nero, during an interim in the governorship be- 
tween the death of Festus and the arrival of Albi- 
nus, under the high priest Ananias, who perpe- 
trated this lamentable deed on James. 

Concerning this James the following is con- 
tained in the Apophthegms of Baudartius: "He 
was on his bare knees so often and for such long 
periods, praying to the Lord God for the remis- 
sion of the sins of the people, that his knees were 
so hard and callous, that there was no sensation 
in them at all. lib. \.p.7.0 the great and constant 
piety of this holy martyr! 


BARNABAS, A COMPANION OF THE APOSTLE PAUL, 

DRAGGED OUT OF THE CITY AND BURNED, AT 

SALAMINA IN CYPRUS, A. D. 64 

Barnabas, also called Barsabas, and surnamed 
Joseph, Joses, or Justus, was a Levite from Cyprus, 
full of the Holy Ghost. He was called the son of 
consolation, and such a one he indeed proved him- 
self to the poor saints. Acts 11:24; 1:23; 4:36; 
Euseb. hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 1. 

_ It is maintained that he was one of the seventy 
disciples of Christ, and from the multiplicity of 
his names we can see his renown and eminence; 
which latter he gained by his zeal and piety ; for 
he brought Paul, after his conversion, to the apos- 
tles ; and when the Word of God was preached to 
the Grecians, at Antioch, by some men from 
Cyprus and Cyrene, he was sent by the apostles to 
investigate the matter; and when he found it to 
be so, he confirmed them in the truth. Acts 9 -27 • 
11:20-23. 

After this he went to Tarsus, to seek Paul, and 
brought him to Antioch, where they remained a 
whole year teaching. Also, when the dearth arose 
under emperor Claudius, he and Paul brought sub- 
stantial relief to the brethren who dwelt in Judea 
Acts 11 :25, 26, 29, 30; Oros. lib. 7. cap. 6. Euseb. 
hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 3. 9. 

On his return to Antioch, he was sent out by 
the Holy Ghost, to preach in many countries. On 
account of his eloquence he was frequently the 
speaker ; yea, he was held in such high regard, and 
was so godly, that the Gentiles at Lystra cried in 
the speech of Lycaonia, that he was a god, and had 
come down from heaven, and called him Jupiter. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Barnabas burned at Salamanca on Cyprus, AD 64 


And this was not all ; but the priest of that place 
came with oxen wearing garlands, and desired to 
do sacrifice to him and Paul. But he and his com- 
panion Paul utterly declined this, saying, "Sirs, 
why do ye these things? We also are men of like 
passions with you, and preach unto you that you 
should turn from these vanities unto the living 
God." Acts 12:25; 13:4-6; 14:1,2,11,12,15. 

Afterwards, when certain men came from 
Judea, and troubled the brethren, saying, "Ex- 
cept ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, 
ye cannot be saved," he and his aforementioned 
companion vigorously opposed them, according to 
the teaching of the holy Gospel ; wherefore he and 
several other pious men were appointed to go to 
Jerusalem, to the apostles and elders, to bring said 
matter to a good termination. When they arrived 
at Jerusalem, he and the others were received joy- 
fully by the apostles and the church ; yea, what is 
still more, they testified of him and his companion 
Paul, that they were men who had hazarded their 
lives for the truth; which indeed was apparent. 
Acts 15:1,26. 


For, when he came to Salamina, a large city in 
the island of Cyprus, at this day called Famagosta, 
to strengthen the church at that place in the faith, 
he was very badly treated, as ancient history tells 
us, by a Jewish sorcerer, who stirred up all the 
other Jews and the whole people against him, so 
that they apprehended him in an uproar, and were 
about to bring him to the judge, but fearing that 
the judge discovering his innocence, would per- 
haps release him, they, after treating him lament- 
ably, put a rope around his neck, dragged him out 
of the city, and burned him. Anton, p. 1. t. 6. cap 
18. Sabell. Eu. 7. lib. 2. 

Thus was this faithful servant of Christ hon- 
ored with the martyr's crown, in his fatherland, 
and fell asleep happy in the Lord, about the time 
that James the Just was slain at Jerusalem, under 
Emperor Nero; however, before the publication 
of the first heathen persecution, which began 
shortly after the burning of Rome. Plat, in vita 
Petri, and Pauli. Bybelsch Naemboek, p. 158, 159. 
letter B. ujt hist. Andr. jol. 8. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


77 


HOW MARK, THE HOLY EVANGELIST, DRAGGED 

TO THE STAKE AT ALEXANDRIA, DIED ON 

THE WAY, A. D. 64 

The holy evangelist Mark is supposed by most 
to have been that Mark whose surname in Holy 
Scripture is John. He was of the circumcision, and 
a nephew of Barnabas, whose mother was called 
Mary, a very godly woman, who gave her house 
in Jerusalem for the assembling of Christians. 
Acts 12:12; Col. 4:10. Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 33. 

He was first appointed a servant of Paul and 
Barnabas, but on a journey to Pamphylia he re- 
turned to Jerusalem. Acts 12:25; 13:13. 

Afterwards the apostle Paul recommended him 
to the church at Colosse, requesting them to receive 
him as a fellow worker in the kingdom of God. He 
also commanded Timothy, to bring Mark to him, 
since he was very profitable to him in his ministry. 
Col. 4:10; II Tim. 4:11. 

This Mark was in prison with Paul, and ren- 
dered him all faithful assistance in his bonds. 
Philem. verses 23, 24. 

The apostle Peter in his epistle to the elect scat- 
tered strangers, calls Mark his son, I Pet. 5:13; 
undoubtedly, because through the Gospel, he had 


regenerated him in Christ ; or, because he was his 
disciple, interpreter, and the writer of the Gospel 
which he had taught ; of which latter circumstance 
Jerome speaks thus : "Mark, a disciple of Peter, at 
the request of the brethren at Rome, wrote a brief 
Gospel, according to that which he had heard Peter 
relate. When Peter had examined it, he pro- 
nounced it good, and upon his word gave it to the 
church to read." Catalog. Marc, ex CI. Al Hypor. 
6. Also, Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 18, ex Clem. Al. and 
Papio Hierapolit. 

Egypt, he traveled through Aquilea, the capital 
city of Friol, where he converted many to the faith, 
and left Hermagoras as pastor over the church. 
Avent. au. Boi. lib. 2. 

Then he journeyed to Africa, filling Lybia, Mar- 
morica, Ammonica, and Pentapolis with the doc- 
trine of the holy Gospel. Finally he remained sev- 
eral years at Alexandria, where he made his abode. 
Nic. lib. 2. cap. 43 Atham. in Synopsi. 

Concerning the end of his life, Gelasius states, 
that he died there as a martyr. Concil. Rom Deer, 
de lib. Auth. and Apocr. Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 43. 

Mark, he writes, having been sent by Peter to 



Mark the evangelist dies on the way while being dragged to the site of his burning, Alexandria, AD 64 


78 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Egypt, faithfully preached the Word of truth 
there, and nobly sealed the testimony thereof with 
his blood. All the ancient and modern, Greek and 
Latin, martyrologies agree with this. 

Histories state the following concerning the 
manner of his death : That in the eighth year of 
Nero, when he, at the feast of the passover, 
preached the blessed remembrance of the suffering 
and death of Christ, to the church at Alexandria, 
the heathen priests and the whole populace seized 
him, and with hooks and ropes which they fastened 
around his body, dragged him out of the congre- 
gation, through the streets and out of the city; so 
that his flesh everywhere adhered to the stones, and 
his blood was poured out upon the earth, until he, 
with the last words of our Saviour, committed his 
spirit into the hands of the Lord, and expired. 
Anton, p. 1. cap. 6. 16. Procop. DiaMetaphr. Ado. 
25. Apr. de Pest. Apost. 

Another ancient writer relates: That he was 
dragged very inhumanly through the streets, his 
whole body torn open, so that there was not a 
single spot on it, which did not bleed; and that 
they then again thrust him, still alive, into prison, 
whence he, having been strengthened and com- 
forted by the Lord in the night, was taken. out 
again, and dragged to the place Buculi, they jest- 
ingly saying, "Let us lead the buffalo to the buffa- 
lostall." Konst-tooneel der veertig heerlijke afbeel- 
dingen Christi en der postelen, printed Anno 1609. 
Alos, Bybelsch Nosmboek, printed Anno 1632, let- 
ter M. p. 642. col. 1. 2. 

Death having ensued meanwhile, the aforemen- 
tioned heathen wanted, moreover, to burn him; 
but as they were prevented by a storm, the Chris- 
tians buried him. This happened, according to 
common reckoning, in the eighth year of Nero's 
reign, A. D. 64, on the 21st day of April. 


Of the Ten Bloody Persecutions which the 
Christians Suffered under the Hea- 
then Emperors of Rome; the First 
of which Began in the Reign 
of Nero, A. D. 66 

The First Persecution of the Christians, 
under Nero, Anno 66 

When the Jews were deprived of their power, by 
the heathen, and their time was past, in which they 
had persecuted and slain the saints of God, the Lord 
God nevertheless suffered His church to be visited 
by the refining fire of presecution, namely, through 
the power of the heathen ; of whom the Emperor 
Nero was the first tyrant. Introduction to the Mir- 
ror of the Anabaptist Martyrs, printed Anno 1631. 
p. 35. col 2. 

This Nero, according to the testimony of Em- 
peror Trajan, governed the monarchy of Rome 
in so laudable a manner during the first five years 
of his reign, that never an emperor had greater 
praise than he; for then he was so tenderhearted, 


that when he was asked to sign the death warrant, 
of a highwayman, he replied, "Oh, that I could not 
write !" signifying thereby his aversion to the kill- 
ing, of human beings. Trajan, in Tract. Also, 
Roomschen Adelaer, door D. P. Pers, printed 
Anno 1642, p. 100. in the life of Nero. Also, Suet, 
in Neron. cap. 10. 

But after the first five years he became so full 
of hatred, murder, and bloodshedding, that he 
seemed to delight in nothing more, than in killing, 
murdering, and fearfully torturing, not only male- 
factors, but even the saints of God who were 
praised even among their enemies for their God- 
fearing walk and conversation. 

I will not mention the cruelties and tyrannies he 
exercised against his own friends ; how he had his 
beloved son Britannicus poisoned, and his own 
mother Agrippina cut open, to see the place where 
he had lain ; how he had his faithful wife, Octavia, 
put to death with the sword, because she was bar- 
ren ; and Seneca, his faithful teacher, bled to death, 
and poisoned. We will only speak of the persecu- 
tions and unheard-of cruelties he practiced on the 
beloved friends of God, namely, the true Chris- 
tians. To this end we will begin thus: 

Once, desiring to see the burning of Troy repre- 
sented by its equal, he caused the city of Rome to 
be set on fire, and ascended a certain tower with- 
out, where he, beholding it, began to sing, "Troy 
is on fire," etc. Suet. Idem, in Ner. cap. 38. Rom. 
Adel. p. 102. in the life of Nero. 

After this was done he cast the blame on the 
Christians, saying that they had done it ; for, when 
the Romans, very much agitated on account of 
the immeasurable damage and the dire calamities 
which had sprung from this conflagration, began 
to murmur greatly, he, in order to shield himself, 
and to wreak his prejudiced hatred upon the Chris- 
tians, put the whole blame on them. Introduction 
to the Martyrs Mirror, p. 35, from Baron. Anno 
66. num. 1. 

For this reason there were proclaimed imme- 
diately, in the name of the Emperor, throughout 
the whole known world (then under the monarchy 
of the Romans), bloody decrees against the Chris- 
tians, that they should everywhere be put to death. 
The contents of these decrees were as follows : "If 
any one confesses that he is a Christian, he shall 
be put to death, without further trial, as a con- 
victed enemy of mankind." Joh. Gysii Hist Mart, 
edit. 1657. fol. 6. col. 2. 

Tertullian afterwards upbraided the Roman 
Senate, saying: "Read your own histories, and 
you will find, that Nero was the first who raged 
against this sect (so he calls the Christians), which 
then flourished the most in Rome." Apol. Contra 
Gentes. cap. 5. 

In another place he says: "Nero was the first 
who stained with blood the rising Christian faith 
at Rome." 

Shortly after this decree of Nero, a violent and 
unmerciful persecution of the Christians manifest- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


79 


ed itself in all the countries which were under the 
Roman dominion; which persecution lasted until 
the Emperor's death. The innocent Christians 
were accused not only of the burning of Rome, but 
also of every wickedness imaginable; that they 
might be tortured and put to death in the most 
awful manner. To this the Roman Tacitus (ac- 
cording to the translation of J. Gysius, and not 
that of Fenacolius)* refers, saying: "Then, Nero, 
in order to avert this report from himself, caused 
those called Christians by the common people, to 
be accused and exceedingly tormented. The author 
of this name is Christ, who was publicly put to 
death under the reign of Tiberius, by Pontius 
Pilate, the governor. Those who confessed that 
they were Christians, were first apprehended, and 
afterwards by making it known themselves a 
great multitude were all condemned, not so much 
on account of the conflagration, as of the hatred in 
which they were held by mankind. The taking of 
their lives was accompanied with much mockery ; 
they were covered with the skins of wild beasts, 
and then torn to pieces by dogs; or nailed on 
crosses; or placed at stakes and burned; serving 
also as torches for the spectators, when the day 
was over." 

Thus Tacitus, a Roman himself, has sufficiently 
confessed, in spite of himself, as J. Gysius writes, 
that the Christians were innocent of the burning of 
Rome, but that they notwithstanding had to suffer 
on account of their name. 

Who the great multitudes were, that perished in 
those awful persecutions, confessing the name of 
Christ even unto death, is not stated in the histo- 
ries of the fathers ; however, we shall content our- 
selves therewith, that God remembers them, and 
that their names are written in the Book of Life. 
Nevertheless, we meet with some, though but few, 
names of such who suffered in that persecution in 
the reign of Nero, and sealed the truth of Christ 
with their blood and death ; of these we shall speak 
in the proper place. 


OF THE UNHEARD-OF CRUELTIES NERO PRACTICED 
IN SLAYING THE PIOUS CHRISTIANS 

Touching the manner in which the Christians 
were tortured and killed at the time of Nero, A. 
Mellinus gives the following account from Tacitus 
and other Roman writers: namely, that four ex- 
tremely cruel and unnatural kinds of torture were 
employed against the Christians: 

Firstly, that they dressed them in the skins of 
tame and wild beasts, that they might be torn to 
pieces by dogs or other wild animals. 

Secondly, that they, according to the example 
of their Saviour, were fastened alive on crosses, 
and that in many different ways. 

Thirdly, that the innocent Christians were 
burned and smoked by the Romans, with torches 


and lamps, under the shoulders and on other ten- 
der parts of their naked bodies, after these had 
been cruelly lacerated with scourges or rods. This 
burning was done also with shavings and fagots, 
they (the Christians) being tied to stakes worth 
half a stiver.* Therefore they called the Christians 
sarmenticii, that is, fagot people, and semissii, 
that is, half stiver people ; because they stood fas- 
tened to half stiver stakes, and were thus burned 
with the slow fire of fagots. 

Fourthly, that these miserable, accused Chris- 
tian martyrs were used as candles, torches, or 
lanterns, to see by them at night. 

Of those who were burned, some were tied or 
nailed to stakes, and held still by a hook driven 
through the throat, so that they could not move 
the head when the pitch, wax, tallow, and other in- 
flammable substances were poured boiling over 
their heads, and set on fire, so that all the unctious 
matter of the human body flowing down made 
long, wide furrows in the sand of the theatre. And 
thus human beings were lighted as torches, and 
burned as lights for the wicked Romans at night. 

Juvenal and Martial, both Roman poets, and 
Tertullian, state this in a different manner, namely, 
that the Romans wrapped them in a painful or 
burning mantle, which they wound around their 
hands and feet, in order to melt the very marrow 
in their bones. 

Furthermore, it is stated by A. Mellinus (from 
the aforementioned authors), concerning those 
mantles, that they were made of paper or linen, 
and, having been thickly coated with oil, pitch, 
wax, rosin, tallow, and sulphur, were wrapped 
around their whole body, and then set on fire. 

For this spectacle Nero gave the use of his gar- 
dens, and appeared himself among the people in 
the garb of a charioteer, taking an active part in 
the Circusian games ; himself standing in the cir- 
cus, and, as charioteer, guiding a chariot. 

These proceedings, according to the testimony 
of Tacitus, although it had the appearance that 
the Christians were punished as malefactors who 
had deserved the extremest penalty, nevertheless 
moved the people to compassion ; for they under- 
stood well enough that the Christians were not ex- 
terminated for the good of the common weal, but 
simply to gratify the cruelty of one man, Nero. 
Compare Abr. Mellin. 1st book van de Histor. 
der vervolg. en Mart printed Anna 1619 fol. 11. 
col. 4. and fol. 12. col. 1. with Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. 
and Tertul. Apol. Contr. Gent. cap. 50 and adv 
Marc. cap. 5. MartincU. Epig. 25. lib. 25. 


* We quote Tacitus according to the annotation of John Gysius 
in Hist. Mart. fol. 6. col. 2., from which the translation of John 
Fenacolius differs greatly. 


SIMON PETER, THE HOLY APOSTLE, CRUCIFIED 

WITH HIS HEAD DOWNWARD, UNDER 

EMPEROR NERO, A. D. 69 

Simon Jona, afterwards called Cephas in Syriac, 
but Petros or Petrus in Greek, was the brother of 
Andrew, a native of Bethsaida in Galilee, and a 

* About one cent. 


80 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


fisherman by occupation. He had his abode at Ca- 
pernaum, with his wife's mother. His brother An- 
drew, who was a disciple of John, first brought 
him to Christ, and shortly afterwards he and his 
brother were called away from the fishery, to be- 
come fishers of men. Matt. 16:17; Mark 3:16; 
John 1:42; Matt. 4:18; John 1:44; Luke 4:31, 
38; John 1:41,42; Matt. 4:18, 19. 

He was diligently instructed by Christ, his 
Saviour, and made such progress therein, that he 
became the spokesman of all the apostles, being 
generally the most frank in asking and answering, 
as well as the most zealous for Christ, in order to 
prove to Him his love and fidelity, although at 
times he manifested a certain rashness therein; 
on which occasions the Lord, like a father his 
child, faithfully instructed, and, whenever it was 
necessary, kindly reproved him. Matt. 16:16: 
John 6:68; Matt. 18:21; 14:31; John 18:10,11. 

The Lord loved him in a special manner, and 
permitted him, together with James and John, to 
witness His glory on Mount Tabor; of which He 
afterwards made mention to the chosen scattered 
strangers, saying, We were eyewitnesses of his 
majesty. Matt. 17:1-3; II Pet. 1 :16, 17. 


He was the boldest in offering to suffer with 
Christ, but the weakest when the conflict began. 
The Lord selected him and the two sons of Zeb- 
edee, to watch and pray with Him in the garden ; 
but his eyes as well as those of the others were 
heavy with sleep; which showed that though he 
was specially loved by Christ, he was nothing 
more than a weak mortal. Matt. 26 :33, 36. 

About his denying Christ we shall not mention 
anything, as this is not the proper place for it, 
since we purpose to speak only of his faithfulness 
and steadfastness until death. 

After the aforesaid denial, the Lord forgave him 
his sin, and commanded him three times to feed 
His sheep and lambs ; which he subsequently faith- 
fully did to the full extent of his ability. John 
21:15,16; I Pet. 5:1-3. 

In one day there were converted to the faith, by 
his preaching, about three thousand souls; all of 
whom were baptized, and continued steadfastly in 
the apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in break- 
ing of bread, and in prayers. Acts 2 :41, 42. 

He confirmed his doctrine through the power of 
God by signs accompanying the same, according 
to the promise of Christ, as is evidenced in the 



The Apostle Peter being crucified upside down in Rome on orders of Nero, AD 69 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


81 


case of the lame man, Ananias, Sapphira, Eneas, 
Tabitha, and others. Acts 3 :7 ; 5 :5, 10 ; 9 :34, 40. 

The calling of the Gentiles was revealed to him 
in a vision from heaven; but as he was properly 
an apostle of the Jews, his ministry was most ef- 
fectual among the circumcision. Acts 10:10-12; 
Gal. 2 :8. 

But since he was so excellent and worthy a man 
in his ministry, it pleased the Lord, that he should 
also be one of His martyrs, to seal the truth of His 
doctrine not only with the mouth, but also with his 
blood, yea, even with his death. This the Lord 
showed to him shortly before His departure from 
this world, saying, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee. 
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and 
walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou 
shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and 
another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou 
wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by what 
death he should glorify God" (John 21 :18, 19). 

This was verified in him, for shortly afterwards 
he and John, his f ellowhelper, were brought before 
the Jewish council in Jerusalem, and severely 
threatened, to desist preaching in the name of 
Jesus ; to which they both boldly replied, "Whether 
it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you 
more than unto God, judge ye" (Acts 4:19). 

Afterwards he was again apprehended, together 
with the other apostles, but by night, miraculously 
delivered out of prison by an angel. Acts 5 :19. 

After that he was not only apprehended, but, 
together with the other apostles, scourged and 
commanded, that they should absolutely not preach 
in the name of the Lord Jesus; but they went 
away from the Council, rejoicing that they were 
counted worthy to suffer shame for His name. 
Acts 5 :40-42. 

Afterwards King Herod stretched forth his 
hands to vex certain of the church. And he killed 
James the brother of John with the sword. And 
when he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded fur- 
ther and apprehended Peter also, and put him in 
prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of 
soldiers ; intending after Easter to bring him forth 
to the people. But in the night the angel of the 
Lord led him out, through -the midst of the sol- 
diers, so that he returned to the believers, who 
rejoiced greatly on account of him. Acts 12:1. 

Finally there was fulfilled, according to the tes- 
timony of history, the prediction of Christ, that he 
should glorify God by his death ; for while he was 
at Rome, he was sentenced by the Emperor Nero 
to be crucified. But, esteeming himself unworthy 
to be crucified with his head upward, like his 
Saviour, he requested to be crucified with his head 
downward; which he easily obtained, for the ty- 
rants were forthwith willing and ready to in- 
crease his pain. 

This occurred, as is stated, after Peter had 
preached the Gospel for thirty-seven years, and 
when he was seventy years old.* Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 


25. and 3. cap. 2. from the writings of Origen. 
Egesipp. Hist, of the miserable Destruction of the 
City of Jerusalem'. 3d book, 2d chap. Also, Konst- 
tooneel van vecrtig heerlijke afbeeldingen Christi 
en sijner Apostelen, door N. D. C, printed Anno 
1609, in the Life of Peter. Also, W. Baudart 
Apophthegm. Christian, lib. 1. super Petrum. ex 
Hieron. de Vitis Illustribus. Johan. Strac. in Festo. 
Joh. Evang. Ambr. ad Aux. 


PAUL, THE APOSTLE OF CHRIST, SORELY PERSE- 
CUTED, AND FINALLY BEHEADED, AT ROME, 
UNDER THE EMPEROR NERO, A. D. 69 

Saul, afterwards called Paul, was of Jewish de- 
scent, a Hebrew of the tribe of Benjamin; but, 
as to who his father and mother were, we find in 
Holy Writ no record. Phil. 3 :5. 

As regards the place of his birth, it appears that 
his parents, either on account of persecution, or of 
the Roman war, or for some other reason, left 
their place of residence in the portion of Benja- 
min, and went to dwell in a Roman, free city in 
Cilicia, called Tarsus, where Paul was born, who, 
although he was a Jew, yet, by the privileges of 
this city, became a Roman citizen. Acts 22 :3. 

Respecting his early training, he was diligently 
instructed by the wise Gamaliel, in the law of the 
fathers; in which he became so proficient, that 
there were but few things in the entire Old Testa- 
ment, with which he was not acquainted. Gal. 1 : 

He lived blamelessly, according to the law of 
Moses and the holy prophets, and that in the 
strictest order of Judaism; but, having not yet 
been rightly instructed in the doctrine of the holy 
Gospel, he, although in accordance with the law, 
manifested a wrong zeal, and persecuted the 
church of Christ ; yea, at the death of Stephen he 
kept the garments of them that slew him. Acts 
7:58. 

But afterwards, having obtained letters from 
the priests at Jerusalem to the synagogues of Da- 
mascus, to bring as prisoners such men and women 
who confessed the name of Christ, the Lord, from 
heaven, arrested him in his course, calling, "Saul, 
Saul, why persecutest thou me ? And he said, Who 
art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus 
whom thou persecutest : it is hard for thee to kick 
against the pricks. And he trembling and aston- 
ished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? 
And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into 


. ., Th ? historians state that the apostle Peter wept very much 
daily after the ascension of Christ. When he was asked why he 
wept so much, he replied, "Desiderio Domini," that is, "Because I 
v t ry S 1 " " lon S for my Lord " There are ancient writers who state 
that Peter cried every time he heard a cock crow. When he saw his 
beloved wife being led out, to be put to death, on account of having 
confessed the faith, he addressed her in these words, "O my beloved 
wife! have the Lord Jesus always before thine eyes; this is the 
marriage of the saints." He was sentenced to be crucified in the 
usual manner. But he requested to be hung on the cross with his 
feet up, saying, I am not worthy to be hung on the cross, like the 
t>on of God hung and suffered on it."— W. Baudart. Apophtheem 
printed Anno 1640, first book, page 2. wi-uuiegni. 



The Apostle Paul beheaded in 
the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must 
do" (Acts 9:1-6). 

The men who journeyed with him stood speech- 
less, hearing a voice, but seeing no man. Then he 
arose from the earth, to which he had been pros- 
trated by fear; and when he opened his eyes, he 
could not see, so that they led him by the hand, 
and brought him into Damascus. Verses 7, 8. 

In the city of Damascus there was a disciple, 
named Ananias; and to him the Lord said in a 
vision, "Arise, and go into the street which is 
called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas 
for one called Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he 
prayeth." 

Ananias answered, "Lord, I have heard by 
many of this man, how much evil he hath done to 
thy saints at Jerusalem." 

Then said the Lord to him, "Go thy way: for 
he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name 
before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of 
Israel: for I will shew him how great things he 
must suffer for my name's sake. 

"And Ananias went his way, and entered into 
the house; and putting his hands on him, said, 


Rome on Nero's orders, AD 69 

Brother Saul, the Lord hath sent me, that thou 
mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the 
Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell from his 
eyes as it had been scales ; and he received sight 
forthwith, and arose, and was baptized" (Acts 9: 
7-16). 

Such was the conversion of Saul, who was after- 
wards called Paul, and was one of the chief apos- 
tles of our Lord Jesus Christ : yea, he labored more 
abundantly than they all. I Cor. 15:10. 

Immediately after his conversion, he preached 
Christ in the synagogues, that He was the Son of 
God. Acts 9:20. 

Some time afterwards, the Holy Ghost said to 
the prophets and teachers at Antioch, after they 
had ministered to the Lord with fasting and prayer, 
"Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work 
whereunto I have called them." And thus they 
were sent out by the Holy Ghost. Acts 13 :2, 3. 

In the meantime, Paul, formerly called Saul, 
was endowed with special gifts of the Holy Ghost, 
so that he had the spirit of discernment, prophecy, 
tongues, miracles. Acts 13:9,10; I Tim. 4:1; I 
Cor. 14:18; Acts 19:11. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


83 


He had also special revelations, so that, at a 
certain time, he was caught up to the third heav- 
en, yea, into the heavenly paradise, where he heard 
unspeakable words, which no man can utter. II 
Cor. 12:1. 

He was, moreover, adorned with many Chris- 
tian virtues, which he practiced with a good con- 
science ; as well as with faithfulness in his minis- 
try, paternal care over all the churches, and sin- 
cere love for them, even unto death, so that he 
said, "Being affectionately desirous of you, we 
were willing to have imparted unto you, not the 
Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, be- 
cause ye were dear unto us" (I Thess. 2:8). 

He was free from covetousness, of a benevolent 
disposition, and would rather labor with his own 
hands, than be a burden to the church, lest it might 
prove a hindrance to the holy Gospel. Acts 20:34. 

He vigorously withstood, and overcame through 
the Word of God, the erring spirits, sorcerers, 
Epicurean philosophers, and false prophets. 

He feared neither great nor small, noble nor 
ignoble, Jew nor Greek; but taught the Word of 
God in sincerity. 

What he suffered in seven great land and sea 
journeys, during the time of thirty years, during 
which he traveled in Judea, Syria, Asia, Mace- 
donia, Greece, Italy, Spain, France, Germany, yea, 
almost through the whole then known world, is 
sufficiently evident, from Holy Scripture as well 
as from history. 

It is computed, that until his first imprisonment 
at Rome, he had traveled over three thousand 
German miles, by water and by land, only for the 
Gospel's sake ; besides all the other arduous jour- 
neys he undertook, in order to strengthen, awaken, 
and comfort the newly-planted churches ; in which 
he met with much vexation, misery and grief from 
the hands of the unbelievers. The words which 
the Lord had spoken at the time of his conversion, 
were fulfilled in every part : "I will shew him how 
great things he must suffer for my name's sake" 
(Acts 9:16). 

Shortly after he was baptized, and his zeal for 
the truth of Christ began to break forth at Damas- 
cus, proving to the Jews that Christ was come, 
they took counsel to kill him; wherefore he was 
let down by the wall in a basket, that he might 
escape their hands. Acts 9:24,25. 

Afterwards, when he came to Iconium with his 
companion Barnabas, the Jews stirred up the Gen- 
tiles against him and his friend, intending to stone 
them. Acts 14 :2, 5. 

But when they had fled to Lystra, and had made 
a cripple able to walk, there came certain Jews 
from Antioch and Iconium, and stirred up the peo- 
ple, so that they stoned Paul, whom they first had 
worshiped as a god, and drew him out of the city, 
supposing that he was dead : howbeit, as the dis- 
ciples stood round about him, he rose up again. 
Acts 14:19,20. 


Afterwards, traveling with Silas, and having, at 
Philippi, delivered a damsel from a spirit of divi- 
nation, he and Silas were accused on that account, 
beaten with rods, cast into prison, their feet made 
fast in the stocks, and were kept in close confine- 
ment. But in the night God sent an earthquake, so 
that the foundations of the prison were shaken, 
the doors opened, and the bands (of the stocks) 
loosed of their own accord. By this means Paul and 
Silas were delivered, with the knowledge of the 
keeper, who accepted the faith, and was baptized. 
Acts 16:22-36. 

Subsequently, being at Thessalonica, and having 
preached the Word of God three Sabbaths, so that 
of the devout Greeks, a great multitude believed, 
and of the chief women not a few, the Jews, who 
believed not, were moved with envy; wherefore 
they took unto them certain lewd fellows — market 
loungers — and gathered a great company, and set 
the city in an uproar, and assaulted the house of 
one Jason, thinking that Paul and Silas were with- 
in, and sought to bring them out to the people. 
And when they found them not, they drew Jason 
and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city, 
crying, "These that have turned the world upside 
down are come hither also ; whom Jason hath se- 
cretly received" (Acts 17:1-7). From there, on 
account of the persecution, the brethren sent both 
of them away by night unto Berea. Verse 10. 

After that, "when Gallio was the deputy of 
Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one ac- 
cord against Paul, and brought him to the judg- 
ment seat, saying, This fellow persuadeth men to 
worship God contrary to the law." And when 
Paul was now about to open his mouth, to defend 
himself, Gallio said unto the Jews, to show to 
them the groundlessness of their accusations, "If 
it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O 
ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with 
you: but if it be a question of words and names, 
and of your law, look ye to it: for I will be no 
judge of such matters. And he drave them from 
the judgment seat." Acts 18:12-16. 

After this, there came down from Judea a 
prophet, named Agabus, who took Paul's girdle, 
and bound himself saying, "Thus saith the Holy 
Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the 
man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver 
him into the hands of the Gentiles." Thereupon 
the brethren besought Paul, not to go up to Jeru- 
salem. But he answered, "What mean ye to weep 
and to break mine heart ? for I am ready not to be 
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the 
name of the Lord Jesus." Acts 21 :10-13. Oh, the 
great resolution of the Apostle Paul ! 

After that, when he, standing on the stairs at 
Jerusalem, defended himself before those who had 
accused him, it came to pass that the Jews, having 
given him audience for awhile, cast off their 
clothes, threw dust into the air, and cried, "Away 
with such a fellow from the earth : for it is not fit 
that he should live." Acts 22:22,23. 


84 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


In the meantime he was bound, in order to be 
scourged; which he would not have escaped, had 
he not declared that he was a Roman citizen. 
Verses 25-29. 

"Paul, earnestly beholding the council, said, 
Men and brethren, I have lived in all good con- 
science before God until this day. And the high 
priest Ananias commanded them that stood by 
him to smite him on the mouth" (Acts 23:1,2). 

"The night following, the Lord stood by him, 
and said, Be of good cheer, Paul : for as thou hast 
testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear 
witness also at Rome" (verse 11). 

And when it was day, certain of the Jews 
banded together, and bound themselves neither to 
eat nor to drink till they had killed Paul. And 
they were more than forty which had made this 
conspiracy. Verse 12. 

But Paul was warned of this ambuscade by his 
sister's son, and when the latter made it known 
to the chief captain of the Romans, measures were 
taken to escape it; wherefore he was brought in 
the third hour of the night to Caesarea, unto Felix 
the governor. Verses 16-33. And Felix kept him 
in Herod's judgment hall, till his accusers should 
come. Verse 35. 

After five days Ananias the high priest descend- 
ed with the elders, and with the orator Tertullus, 
who informed the governor against Paul. And 
when Paul was called forth, Tertullus, after hav- 
ing saluted Felix with many flattering words, be- 
gan to accuse him, saying, "We have found this 
man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition 
among all the Jews throughout the world, and a 
ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes : who also 
hath gone about to profane the temple: whom we 
took, and would have judged according to our 
law. But the chief captain Lysias came upon us, 
and with great violence took him away out of our 
hands," etc. "And the Jews also assented, saying 
that these things were so." Acts 24:1-9. 

But that this was not so (although they sought 
to bring about his death by these accusations), is 
evident from the preceding facts mentioned in the 
Acts of the Apostles, and from the following de- 
dense of Paul, verses 10-21. 

"But after two years Portius Festus came into 
Felix' room: and Felix, willing to shew the Jew 
a pleasure, left Paul bound" (verse 27). 

Now when Festus was come into the province, 
after three days he ascended from Caesarea to Jeru- 
salem. Then the high priest and the chief of the 
Jews went to him, and desired favor, that he would 
send for Paul to Jerusalem ; laying wait in the way 
to kill him. Festus replied to the Jews, that Paul 
should be kept at Caesarea, and that those who were 
to accuse him, might come thither. Acts 25 :4, 5. 

And when they were come, they brought for- 
ward many and grievous complaints, which they 
could not prove, and which Paul briefly and con- 
clusively refuted, declaring that he had offended 
neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the 


temple, nor against Caesar. But being deceitfully 
asked by Festus, whether he was willing to go up 
to Jerusalem, to be judged there (where his mor- 
tal enemies were), he fearlessly replied, "I stand 
at Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be 
judged : to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou 
very well knowest. But if I be an offender, or 
have committed anything worthy of death, I refuse 
not to die." Acts 25:9-11. 

After this, Paul was examined by King Agrip- 
pa, in the presence of Festus. His defense caused 
Festus, who was a friend of the Jews, to exclaim : 
Paul, thou art beside thyself. Agrippa, however, 
declared that he was almost persuaded to become 
a Christian. He also gave as his opinion, that there 
was nothing worthy of death in him; wherefore 
he said to Festus, This man might have been set 
at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar. 
Acts 26:1-32. 

In the meantime it was determined that he 
should sail to Italy, to be examined before Caesar. 
To this end he and certain other prisoners were 
delivered to Julius, a centurion of the imperial 
band. Having embarked in a ship of Adramyttium, 
they sailed along Cyprus, Cilicia, Pamphylia, and 
other countries, to Myra in Lycia, where they were 
transferred into a ship of Alexandria bound for 
Italy. In this ship they sailed against Cnidus, as 
far as under Crete, over against the city of 
Salmone; thence to a place which is called the 
Fair Havens, nigh to Lasea. Acts 27:1-8. 

At this place Paul foretold them, that they would 
not complete this voyage without great damage, 
danger of shipwreck, and peril of life; but the 
centurion believed the master and the owner of 
the ship, more than those things which were 
spoken by Paul. Verses 10, 11. 

Departing thence, they hoped to winter at Phe- 
nice, a haven of Crete ; but they touched at Asson, 
and sailed close by Crete. Verses 12, 13. 

Then the ship was caught by a northeast wind, 
which had sprung up, and carried her, against their 
purpose, through the billows so that they had to 
let her drive before it ; however, they came to the 
Island Clauda, yet with fear, lest they should fall 
into the quicksands. Verses 16, 17. For many 
days and nights they saw neither sun nor stars 
through the mighty tempest, so that all hope that 
they should be, saved was taken away. Verse 20. 

Meanwhile God sent His angel on a certain 
night to Paul, saying, "Fear not: thou must be 
brought before Caesar: and, lo, God hath given 
thee all them that sail with thee." Verses 23, 24. 

Thereupon Paul urged them to take meat, for 
the preservation of their lives, for, on account of 
their deadly fear, they had not eaten anything for 
fourteen days; and breaking the bread, for to 
eat, he gave thanks to God in the presence of them 
all. Verses 33-36. 

And when it was day, they knew not the land : 
but they discovered a creek ; which however they 
could not enter, but ran aground, before the island 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


85 


of Melita (now called Malta) ; where the forepart 
of the ship stuck fast, but the hinder part was 
broken in pieces by the waves. Verses 39-41. 
Here the soldiers held a council and decided to kill 
the prisoners, including Paul, lest any of them 
should swim out, and escape. The centurion, how- 
ever, willing to save Paul, kept them from their 
purpose: and commanded that they who could 
swim should cast themselves first into the sea, and 
get to land which was done ; and the rest floated, 
some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the 
ship, so that all, namely, one hundred and seventy 
souls, escaped to land. Verses 42-44. Thus was 
fulfilled what Paul had foretold them, namely, that 
they should suffer shipwreck, and yet escape with 
their lives. 

Here Paul was first pronounced a murderer, but 
afterwards a god, by the inhabitants of the island ; 
and this, because they observed a viper fastening 
itself on his hand, which he shook off into the 
fire, without suffering any harm. Acts 21 :3-6. 

After three months they sailed for Italy in a 
ship which had wintered in the isle: yet they ar- 
rived first at Syracuse, in Sicily, and then at 
Puteoli, on the Italian border, where Paul found 
brethren, with whom he tarried seven days; 
others came to meet him as far as Appii Forum, 
and the Three Taverns. Proceeding, he came to 
Rome, where the centurion delivered him to the 
chief captain, to be brought before Caesar. In 
the meantime he was kept by a soldier, and bound 
with a chain. Verses 11-16, 20. 

We have narrated all these things the more cir- 
cumstantially (and this, according to Holy Scrip- 
ture) in order that it may be seen, how much this 
pious man suffered in his travels by sea and by 
land, for the sake of the holy Gospel. Of all 
this he gives a brief account in his second epistle 
to the Corinthian church, writing thus: "Of the 
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. 
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, 
thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I 
have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in 
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by 
mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, 
in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in 
perils among false brethren; in weariness and 
painfulness, in watchings often, in cold and naked- 
ness" (II Cor. 11:24-27). 

Yea, it appears from the first epistle to the Cor- 
inthians, that he was thrown before the wild beasts 
in a theater at Ephesus, to be torn to pieces, or at 
least, to fight for his life with them ; from which 
God at that time delivered him. Concerning this, 
the intelligent may judge ; he writes, "If after the 
manner of men I have fought with beasts at 
Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise 
not?" (I Cor. 15:32). 

As regards his imprisonment at Rome, most of 
the ancient writers are of the opinion that, although 
nearly all his friends forsook him at the time when 
he was to make his defense, he, being brought be- 


fore Caesar, defended himself so cleverly against 
the accusation of the Jews, that he was set free 
for this time. But how true this is, we leave to its 
own merits, and to the omniscient God. This much, 
however, is certain, that while in prison at Rome, 
he wrote to his spiritual son Timothy, that he was 
now ready to be offered as a drink offering, and 
that the time of his departure was at hand ; but that 
he took comfort in the thought, that he had fought 
a good fight, finished his course, and kept the faith, 
and that there was laid up for him a crown of right- 
eousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, 
should give him at that day. II Tim. 4 :6-8. 

According to ancient records he was then be- 
headed at the command of Nero, outside of Rome, 
on the road that leads to Ostia, called Via Ostiensis, 
where the Romans used to have their place of exe- 
cution, in the last year of Nero, or about A.D. 69. 
Joh. Gys. in the History of the Martyrs, from 
Joseph Scaliger, about Paul. Egesipp. Hist. De- 
struc. Jerusal., lib. 3, cap. 2. Konst-tooneel van 
veertig heerlijke afbeeldingen Christi en sijner 
Apostelen, printed Anno 1609; about the life of 
Paul. Itinerarium Sacrce, Scriptures per H. Bunt- 
ing, translated into the Dutch by Matthias 
Hazard; printed Anno 1624. in the Travels of 
Paul, page 162. col. 1. 


THE MARTYRDOM OF SOME OF PAUl/s FRIENDS AND 

BRETHREN WHO WERE IMPRISONED WITH HIM 

SHORTLY AFTER HE WAS OFFERED UP; 

BESIDES OTHERS WHO WERE SLAIN 

AFTERWARDS 

It is related that shortly after the death of the 
Apostle Paul, his brethren and fellowprisoners, 
whom he mentions in the epistles which he wrote 
from his prison, namely, Aristarchus, Epaphras, 
Aquila, Prisca, Andronicus, Junias, Silas or Sil- 
vanus, Onesiphorus, etc., followed in his footsteps 
in suffering for the name of Christ. 


ARISTARCHUS, A TRAVELING COMPANION OF PAUL, 

SLAIN AT ROME, UNDER NERO, 

ABOUT A. D. 70 

Aristarchus, a native of Thessalonica, was, with 
Gaius, Paul's companion in his journey from 
Macedonia to Asia; with which Gaius he was 
apprehended at a certain time, in an uproar at 
Ephesus, but for that time made his escape. After- 
wards, however, he was brought to Rome a 
prisoner, just at the time that Paul also was ap- 
prehended for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

This friend of God saluted the church at Colosse 
by the hand of Paul ; of which Paul makes men- 
tion, writing, "Aristarchus my fellow prisoner 
saluteth you" (Col. 4:10). 

This imprisonment, however, was not the end of 
it; for he was also devoured by that cruel lion. 
Nero, about the time of Paul's death after having 
been several years previously a faithful pastor of 


86 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the church at Thessalonica, A. Mell. \st Book, van 
de Hist, der vervolg. en Mart., printed at Dort, 
Anno 1619, foi. 17, col. 4, from Bedce Usuard. 
Adon Mart. Rom. 4 aug. Also, Menol. Graze. 
14 April. 


of those who fell into his hands escaped without 
bloodshed or a miserable death. See above. 


EPAPHRAS, A FELLOW PRISONER OF PAUL, SLAIN 
UNDER NERO, ABOUT A. D. 70 

Epaphras was a faithful minister of Jesus Christ 
for the church at Colosse, which, while in bonds at 
Rome, he saluted by the hand of Paul, as appears 
from the epistle Paul wrote from his prison at 
Rome to the Colossians, in which, among other 
things, he says : "Epaphras, who is one of you, a 
servant of Christ, saluteth you, always laboring 
fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand 
perfect and complete in all the will of God. For I 
bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, 
and them that are in Laodicea, and them in 
Hierapolis" (Col. 4:12, 13). 

Concerning his being a prisoner with Paul, or, 
apparently, sharing the same dungeon with him, 
Paul writes to Philemon, in the conclusion of the 
epistle: "There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow 
prisoner in Christ Jesus" (verse 23). 

Hence, it follows that those write not without 
foundation, who hold that Epaphras also suffered 
a violent death under the persecution of Nero. 
Idem, Ibidem, ex Mart. Rom. 19. Jul. 


FOUR FELLOWLABORERS AND RELATIVES OF PAUL, 

NAMELY, PRISCA, AQUILA, ANDRONICUS, AND 

JUNIA, MARTYRED AT ROME, UNDER 

NERO, ABOUT A. D. 70 

The apostle Paul, at the conclusion of his epistle 
to the church of God at Rome, very lovingly salut- 
ing different saints residing there, mentions, among 
others, two persons who had laid down their own 
necks for his life; also two others whom he calls 
his fellowprisoners, doubtless, because they were 
subject, with him, to like persecution and suffer- 
ing on account of the name of Christ. All these 
he mentions by name, and salutes them in apostolic 
manner. 

Of the first two he writes thus : "Greet Priscilla 
and Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus, who 
have for my life laid down their own necks" 
(Rom. 16: 3,4). 

The last two he mentions in this manner: "Sa- 
lute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my 
fellowprisoners, who are of note among the apos- 
tles, who also were in Christ before me" (verse 7). 

What was the end of these persons, is stated nei- 
ther in Paul's epistles nor in any other part of the 
New Testament ; but other writers hold, that, in the 
aforementioned persecution of Nero, they suffered 
and fought unto death for the truth of Jesus 
Christ ; which can not well be contradicted, since 
the bloodthirstiness of this emperor, especially 
against the Christians, was so great, that but few 


SILAS, OR SILVANUS, SCOURGED AT PHILIPPI, 

IN MACEDONIA, AND DIED A MARTYR, 

ABOUT A. D. 70 

Silas, also called Silvanus, together with Judas, 
surnamed Barsabas, was added to the apostles 
Paul and Barnabas. These men were leaders 
among the brethren, and were to bear testimony 
to those matters which had been considered and 
decided upon by the apostles at Jerusalem, for the 
welfare of the church of God. Acts 15 :27, 34. 

This Silas having once promoted, with Paul, the 
work of the holy Gospel, at Philippi, in Macedonia, 
he was apprehended together with Paul, brought 
before the rulers, publicly scourged, though with- 
out trial, and thus maltreated, cast into prison, 
against right and reason, with his feet made fast 
in the stocks; but was by divine Providence 
miraculously delivered, an earthquake at midnight 
opening the doors of the prison. Acts 16:19-39. 

According to the statements of some writers, 
he afterwards became bishop of the church at 
Corinth, and died a martyr after having done 
much preaching. This much is certain, according 
to the testimony of Holy Scripture, that he was 
not only apprehended and scourged for the 
Gospel's sake, but suffered many indignities be- 
fore his end. A. Mell., 1st Book, van de Hist, der 
Vervolg., fol. 18, col. 1. 


ONESIPHORUS, A FRIEND OF PAUL, AND PORPHYRIUS, 

HIS COMPANION, TIED TO WILD HORSES, 

AND DRAGGED, OR TORN, TO DEATH, AT 

HELLESPONTUS, THROUGH THE 

EDICT OF NERO, ABOUT A. D. 70 

Onesiphorus was an Asian, a citizen of Ephesus, 
in Asia Minor, and very virtuous and godly in life, 
so that he frequently came to visit, converse with, 
and comfort, the apostle Paul in his bonds at 
Rome ; on account of which Paul rejoiced with all 
his heart, and prayed to God to reward him for 
this kindness in the great day of recompense. 
Concerning this, Paul writes thus to Timothy. 
"The Lord give mercy unto the house of One- 
siphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not 
ashamed of my chain : but when he was in Rome, 
he sought me out very diligently, and found me. 
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy 
of the Lord in that day : and in how many things 
he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest 
very well" (II Tim. 1:16-18). In the conclusion 
of the same letter he affectionately salutes the 
household of Onesiphorus, saying, "Salute . . . 
and the household of Onesiphorus . . . Grace be 
with you. Amen" (II Tim. 4:19, 22). 

Some writers say that this pious man was bishop 
of (the church of) Colophon; others, of Coronia: 
but whether Colophon and Coronia at that time 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



The Apostle Andrew crucified at Patras in Achaia, around the year 70 


were not one and the same city, called by two 
different names; or, if they were two separate 
cities, whether he had the oversight over both 
churches at once, is a matter of little consequence. 
It is sufficient for us, that the historians agree in 
the fact that he and Porphyrius, his fellow servant 
of Jesus Christ, were first beaten with many severe 
stripes at Hellespontus, by the order of Adrianus 
the governor, and afterwards, both together, tied 
to wild horses, and thus dragged or torn to death, 
by virtue of Nero's bloody edict. A. Mellin., 1st 
Book van de historien der Vervolgmgen en Mar- 
tdaren, printed A. D. 1619, fol. 18, col. 2, jrom 
Doroth., in Synopsi Mart. Rom. 6 Sept. 


ANDREW, THE HOLY APOSTLE, CRUCIFIED AT 
PATRAS, IN ACHAIA, ABOUT A. D. 70 

Andrew, the son of Jona, and brother of Peter, 
was a native of Bethsaida in Galilee. He was first 
a disciple of John the Baptist, and since he was 
older than Peter, and knew Christ first, he brought 
his brother to Christ as to the true Messiah. Being 
also a fisherman, like Peter, the Lord called him, 


and promised to make him a fisher of men. Tohn 
1:44,40,42; Matt. 4:18,19. 

And because he zealously followed the Lord, 
and was instructed in the evangelical doctrine, so 
that he was worthy to be filled with the spirit of 
miracles, the Lord ordained him as one of His 
twelve apostles; in which ministry he, with the 
others, faithfully labored among the Tews. Matt 
10:2; Mark 6:7. 

He was held in no small esteem by the Lord ; 
for he had, as it appears, a freer access to Him, 
than Philip himself. Compare John 1 :40 with 
verses 42, 43. 

Further, although he fell through weakness, 
like all the other apostles, in forsaking his Master ; 
yet he recovered from his fall, and again joined 
himself to Christ and to his fellow brethren. Matt 
26:31; Luke 24:33. 

Afterwards he with all his fellow ministers 
received command to preach the Gospel in the 
whole world, and to all nations; to which end 
he was endued, on the day of Pentecost, with the 
Holy Ghost, whom he received in all fullness. 
Matt. 28:19. 


88 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Going out, in obedience to the command of 
Christ, he taught in many countries, as in Pontus, 
Galatia, Bethynia, as well as at Antropophages, 
and afterwards in Scythia. He also traveled in 
the northern and the southern countries, yea, as 
far as into Byzantium ; further, in Thracia, Mace- 
donia, Thessalia, and Achaia, everywhere preach- 
ing Christ; whereby he converted many to the 
Christian faith. 

He also confirmed the doctrine of his Master 
with many miracles, according to the words of the 
Lord: "These signs shall follow them," etc. But 
since other authors do not treat accurately of this, 
we shall omit the particulars of these signs. 
Abdias, van den strijd der Apostelen. 

Finally, when he had finished his course, accord- 
ing to the will of the eternal God, Aegaeas, the 
governor of Edessa, in the name of the Roman 
senate, caused him to be crucified in the city of 
Patras, in Achaia. Joh. Gys. His. Mart., fol. 10, 
col. 1, 2, from Sophronis and Aug. Solilo., cap. 2. 

Concerning the cause and manner of his death, 
the following is contained in Apophthegm. Chris- 
tian. Baudart., page 3 : At Patras, a city in Achaia, 
he converted besides many others, Maximillia., the 
wife of Aegaeas, the governor, to the Christian 
faith. This so enraged the governor against An- 
drew, that he threatened him with death of the 
cross. But the apostle said to the governor : "Had 
I feared the death of the cross, I should not have 
preached the majesty and gloriousness of the cross 
of Christ." 

The enemies of the truth having apprehended 
and sentenced to death the apostle Andrew, he 
went joyfully to the place where he was to be cruci- 
fied, and, having come near the cross, he said, "O 
beloved cross! I have greatly longed for thee. 
I rejoice to see thee erected here. I come to thee 
with a peaceful conscience and with cheerfulness, 
desiring that I, who am a disciple of Him who 
hung on the cross, may also be crucified." The 
apostle said further, "The nearer I come to the 
cross, the nearer I come to God ; and the farther I 
am from the cross, the farther I remain from God." 

The fyoly apostle hung three days on the cross ; 
he was riot silent, however ; but as long as he could 
move his tongue, he instructed the people that 
stood by the cross, in the way of the truth, saying, 
among other things: "I thank my Lord Jesus 
Christ, that He, having used me for a time as an 
ambassador, now permits me to have this body, 
that I, through a good confession, may obtain ever- 
lasting grace and mercy. Remain steadfast in the 
word and doctrine which you have received, in- 
structing one another, that you may dwell with 
God in eternity, and receive the fruit of His prom- 
ises." 

The Christians and other pious people besought 
the governor to give Andrew unto them, and take 
him down from the cross. v ( For it appears that he 
was not nailed to the cross, like Christ, but tied to 
it). When the apostle learned of this, he cried to 


God, saying, "O Lord Jesus Christ! suffer not 
that Thy servant, who hangs here on the tree for 
Thy name's sake, be released, to dwell again among 
men ; but receive me. O my Lord, my God ! whom 
I have known, whom I have loved, to whom I 
cling, whom I desire to see, and in whom I am what 
I am." Having spoken these words, the holy apos- 
tle committed his spirit into the hands of his heav- 
enly Father. M. W. Baudart. in Apophthegm 
Christian, lib. 1, super Andream, ex August, de 
Vera et Falsa Poenitentia., cap 8, Bernhard. in 
Sermon, de Andrea. Lanfrancus contra Berengar. 
Niceph., lib. 2, cap. 39, and lib. 15, cap. 39. Rem- 
igius in Psal. 21 and 40. Johan. Strac. in Festo An- 
dreae, p. 23, haec et alia. Also, Konst-tooneel van 
veertig, by N. D. C, Concerning the Life of An- 
drew. 


BARTHOLOMEW, THE HOLY APOSTLE OF CHRIST, 

FIRST GREATLY TORTURED, THEN FLAYED 

ALIVE, AND FINALLY BEHEADED, IN 

ARMENIA, BY KING ASTYAGES, 

ABOUT A. D. 70 

Bartholomew, which signifies, the son of Tholo- 
maeus, was a Galilean, like all the other apostles ; 
and also a fisherman, according to the opinion of 
Theodoretus; some, however, hold, that he was 
of royal descent, and the nephew of the king of 
Syria. 

Little is said of him in Holy Scriptures aside 
from what relates to his call to the apostleship to 
preach the Gospel with the others throughout Judea 
and Galilee, to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 
After Christ's resurrection he was confirmed in his 
apostleship, and, with the others who were in like 
ministry, received the gift of the Holy Ghost. Matt. 
10:3; Mark 3:18; Luke 6:14,15; Acts 2:1-5. 

After the separation of the apostles he exercised 
his ministry first in Lycaonia, then in Syria and 
the upper parts of Asia, and afterwards in India, 
where, as the chronicles relate, Pantenus, a teacher 
of Alexander, coming to the same place, about a 
century afterwards, found and took away with him 
the Gospel of Matthew, which Bartholomew had 
brought thither, and which he had taught the 
Indians in their native tongue. Isid. de part N. T., 
J. Gys. Hieron, Catal. Pantaleon, Euseb., lib. 3, 
cap. 10, /. Gys. 

Finally he spread the Gospel in Great Armenia, 
and there, in Albana, or Albanopolis, the capital 
and residence of the kingdom of Poleno, or Pale- 
monio, and converted King Astyages' brother, to- 
gether with his wife, two sons, and a daughter, to 
the faith. Hieron. Cat. Barthol., J. Gys. 

He moreover, as is stated by others, delivered 
from idolatry, and enlightened with the knowledge 
of Jesus Christ, twelve cities in that country, in 
which the devil was worshiped through the idol 
Ashtaroth. But the priests of Ashtaroth, being 
very much vexed on account of this, complained to 
King Astyages, who caused Bartholomew, this holy 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


89 


apostle of Christ, to be apprehended and brought 
before him. 

When Bartholomew stood before the king, the 
latter upbraided him, that he had perverted his 
brother, and unsettled the worship of the gods in 
his country. He therefore threatened him with 
death, unless he would desist preaching Christ, and 
sacrifice to his gods. 

When Bartholomew had replied to this accu- 
sation, saying, that he had not perverted, but con- 
verted, his brother, that he had preached the true 
worship of God in his country, and that he would 
rather seal his testimony with blood, than suffer 
the least shipwreck of his faith or conscience, the 
king gave orders, that he should first be severely 
tortured and beaten with rods, then be suspended 
on a cross with his head downwards, flayed alive, 
and finally beheaded with the ax. This having been 
done with him, he was united with Christ, his 
Lord. Niceph. lib. 3, cap. 39, Isid. Hisp. de vita et 
obitu sanct. J. Gys. Hist. Mart, super Barthol- 
omeum. 

Others relate that the sentence pronounced upon 
Bartholomew extended no further, than that he 
should be flayed on the cross, without any mention 


of decapitation; but that, as he, being still alive 
after having been flayed, exhorted the people, his 
head was struck off with an ax, in order to prevent 
this, he having committed his spirit into the hands 
of God. Konst-tooned van veertig, about the Life 
of Bartholomew. Also, Bybelsch Naemboek, print- 
ed at Horn, Anno 1632, letter B. on the name 
Bartholomew, fol. 159, col. 2. 


THOMAS, THE HOLY APOSTLE OF CHRIST, TOR- 
MENTED WITH RED-HOT PLATES, CAST INTO A 
FURNACE, AND HIS SIDE PIERCED WITH 
SPEARS BY THE SAVAGES, AT CALA- 
MINA, ABOUT A. D. 70 

Thomas, surnamed Didymus, that is, twin, was 
a native of Galilee, and his occupation, as it ap- 
pears, that of a fisherman. John 11 :16. Concerning 
his parents and the time of his conversion, we find 
no account in the Evangelists, who mention only 
his call to the apostleship. Matt. 10:3. 

His love and ardent affection for Christ appears 
from the fact that he exhorted his brethren, to go 
up to Jerusalem, that they might die with Christ. 
John 11 :16. But as he had not yet resisted unto 



Thomas, tortured by the natives in Calamina, thrown into an oven, and stuck through with spears, AD 


70 


90 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


blood, and labored also under a certain misappre- 
hension concerning the death of Christ, he with the 
others forsook the Lord in the time of need. John 
14:5; Matt. 26:31. 

Afterwards, when the Lord had arisen, and ap- 
peared to the other apostles, in the absence of 
Thomas, he could not believe it, as he said, unless 
he should put his fingers into the prints of the nails 
with which He had been crucified, and thrust his 
hand into the Lord's side, which a soldier had 
opened with a spear. But when the Lord came 
again, and appeared also to him, saying, "Reach 
hither thy finger, and behold my hands ; and reach 
hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side," etc., 
then he, being convinced, began to salute Christ 
with divine titles of honor, saying, "My Lord and 
my God." John 20:24-28. 

After this, he, together with the other apostles, 
received commandment to preach the Gospel in the 
whole world, and to baptize the believers ; to which 
end, ten days after, namely, on the day of Pente- 
cost, he, with all his fellow ministers, received the 
Holy Ghost in full abundance. Matt. 28:19, 20; 
Mark 16:15,16. 

According to history, he sent Thaddeus unto 


King Abgarus, shortly after Christ's resurrection. 
Euseb. Hist. Eccl., lib. 1, cap. 13. 

As Parthia, India, Ethiopia, and many other 
countries had as his portion, been assigned him, he 
traveled through them ; he dreaded, however, as it 
appears, to go to the moors and the savage nations 
of India. Nevertheless, God having strengthened 
him, he there converted many to God. Euseb. 
Hist. Eccl., lib. 3, cap. 1. 

Concerning the end of Thomas, the most prob- 
able account found by the ancients is this, namely, 
that at Calamina, a city in the East Indies, he put a 
stop to the abominable idolatry of the heathen, who 
worshiped there an image of the sun; so that 
through the power of God he compelled the Evil 
One to destroy the image. Thereupon the idola- 
trous priest accused him before their king, who 
sentenced him, first to be tormented with red-hot 
plates, and then to be cast into a glowing furnace, 
and burned. But when the idolatrous priests, who 
stood before the furnace, saw that the fire did not 
hurt him, they pierced his side, as he lay in the 
furnace, with spears and javelins; thus he con- 
formed in steadfastness unto his Lord Jesus 
Christ, whom he confessed even unto death. Je- 



Matthew the evangelist pinned to the ground and beheaded in Naddayar, Ethiopia, AD 70 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


91 


rome states that his body, which, it seems, was 
taken out of the fire, was buried in the same place 
where he died. J oh. Gysii Hist. Mart., fol. 1 1 , col. 
4. Konst-tooneel van veertig, in the life of Thom- 
as. 


MATTHEW, THE HOLY EVANGELIST, NAILED TO 

THE GROUND, AND BEHEADED AT NAD-DAVAR, 

UNDER KING HYTACUS, ABOUT A. D. 70 

Matthew , also called Levi, the son of Alpheus, 
was a publican in Capernaum. The publicans were 
detested by the Jews, because the latter did not 
consider themselves justly bound to pay toll or 
tribute to any foreign prince. Matt. 9:9; Mark 
3:18; Luke 5:29. As touching the condition of 
publicans at that time, it was such that they gener- 
ally exacted more from the people than was just; 
on which account they were shunned by the pious, 
so that open sinners, who were separated from the 
church, were compared to publicans. Matt. 9:11; 
18:17. 

When Matthew, or Levi, was still unconverted, 
and made his living in this unjust business, Christ 
met him with His grace, and commanded him to 
follow Him as a disciple. Obeying through an in- 
ward impulse, he forsook the customhouse, and, 
having prepared a great feast for the occasion of 
taking leave of his companions, he invited his 
fellow publicans, and also the Lord Jesus; ap- 
parently for an adieu, that they might find oppor- 
tunity to become converted through the discourse 
of the Lord Jesus. 

After this, Matthew immediately forsook all, 
and zealously followed his Lord, who had called 
him, and who, after He had more fully instructed 
him, placed him among the apostles, which office 
he, too, exercised among the Jews, till the death of 
Christ. Matt. 10:3; Luke 6:15. 

Afterwards, when he was sent out to teach 
among the heathen, Ethiopia fell to his lot. But 
before he left Judea, he, through the illumination 
of the Holy Spirit wrote his Gospel, in the He- 
brew language, and left it to them. Euseb. lib. 5, 
cap. 1. J oh. Gys. Niceph. lib. 3, cap. 20. Secund. 
J. Gys. 

In Ethiopia he accomplished much, with teaching 
as well as with miracles ; and there he also left 
unto posterity after his death his written Gospel, 
from which it can easily be seen what faith he 
maintained, namely, the faith in Jesus Christ, the 
Son of God, that He became a real man, through 
the power of the Holy Ghost, in His mother Mary. 
Matt. 1st chapter, throughout. 

History states that immediately after the death 
of King Aeglippus, who was attached to the 
Christians, his successor Hytacus, an unbelieving 
heathen, persecuted this apostle, and that at a cer- 
tain time, when this pious apostle of Christ was 
teaching the church of God, he caused him to be 
apprehended and, as some write, nailed to the 
ground, and beheaded, in Naddavar, the capital of 


Ethiopia, where he is also buried, according to 
Venantius Fortunatus, who wrote, over a thou- 
sand years ago, "For the great city Naddavar shall 
restore to us at the last day the eminent apostle 
Matthew." /. Gys. in Hist. Mart., fol. 12, col. 2. 
Also, Konst-tooneel van veertig, in the life of 
Matthew. Also, P. J. Twisck, Bybelsch Ncem- 
bceck, fol. 65, col. 2, letter M. This writer states 
that he was fastened to the ground with darts, 
whereupon death ensued. J oh. Gys., from Venan- 
tius Fortunatus, de Gaud. Vitce, lib. 7. 


SIMON ZELOTES AND HIS BROTHER JUDAS THAD- 

DEUS, BOTH SLAIN FOR THE TRUTH OF CHRIST; 

THE ONE CRUCIFIED, AND THE OTHER 

BEATEN TO DEATH WITH STICKS, 

ABOUT A. D. 70 

Simon the Canaanite, surnamed Zelotes, that is, 
Zealot, the son of Alpheus, the brother of James! 
Joses, and Juda, and a relative of Christ, was con- 
stituted by Christ one of His twelve apostles, to 
preach the Gospel, first among the Jews, and after- 
wards among the heathen; to which end he, to- 
gether with the others who were in like ministry 
with him, received the Holy Ghost on the day of 
Pentecost. Matt. 10:4; Acts 1:13; Matt. 13-55* 
Mark 6:3. 

He traveled in Egypt, Cyrene, Africa, Maurita- 
nia, throughout Lybia, and in the islands of Great 
Britain, where he preached the Gospel, hid. de 
Vita et Mort. 5, 5. Niceph., lib. 2, cap. 40. 

Afterwards having preached everywhere, writes 
N. D. C., he came to the Western Sea, also into 
England, and their neighboring places. 

Finally, it is stated by others, he went to Persia, 
where he found his brother Judas. Continuing to- 
gether steadfastly in the duties of their apostle- 
ship, they sealed the divine truth with their blood. 

Concerning Simon Zelotes in particular, it is 
stated that he was crucified in a very painful way 
by a certain governor in Syria. Bybelsch Ncem- 
bceck, Letter S. on the name Simon, fol. 570, col. 1, 
from Eus. and Niceph., and Hist. Androe, fol. 18, 
Konst-tooneel van veertig, in the life of Simon 
Zelotes. 

As regards his brother Judas, surnamed Leb- 
beus, and also, Thaddeus, who was likewise an 
apostle of Jesus Christ, nothing is said of him In 
Evangelical history ; only there is mention made of 
a question which he asked the Lord Jesus, saying, 
Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto 
us, and not unto the world? Matt. 10:3; Mark 
3:18; John 14:22. 

It was this apostle who alsu wrote a comforting 
letter to the believers, in which he admonishes 
them to remain steadfast in the faith once received ; 
and threatens the unbelievers with the severe judg- 
ment of God. 

In accordance with the division of the world 
made by the apostles for the preaching of the Gos- 
pel, he traveled in Mesopotamia, Syria, Arabia, 


92 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and as far as Edessa. Finally, having gone to Per- 
sia, he there reproved and opposed the pagan idol- 
atry ; on which account he was beaten to death by 
the idolatrous priests, who were losing their gain. 
Isidor. and Niceph., Sabell. Enece. 7, lib. 14. 
Bybelsch Neembceck, letter I., on the name of 
Judas Thaddeus, jol. 595. Konst-tooneel, etc., in 
the life of Judas Thaddeus, or Lebbeus. 

Simon the Canaanite, or Zelotes, who was a son 
of Alpheus, is not distinguished by some from 
Simon the bishop at Jerusalem, who was a son of 
Cleophas; hence has originated the error that Si- 
mon Zelotes is said to have been killed A. D. 108 
(see Byb. Ncemb., jol. 870, col. 1), which, prop- 
erly, is to be understood of Simon, the bishop at 
Jerusalem, the son of Cleophas; for Simon Ze- 
lotes and his brother Judas Thaddeus, according 
to testimony, were killed towards the close of the 
persecution by Nero, or about A. D. 70. 


MATTHIAS, THE HOLY APOSTLE OF CHRIST, TIED 

ON A CROSS UPON A ROCK, STONED, AND 

THEN BEHEADED, A. D. 70 

Matthias, according to the opinion of some, was 
of the royal house of David ; and from his youth 


was well instructed in the law of God, at Bethle- 
hem. He was one of the seventy disciples of 
Christ; but shortly after the Lord's ascension, 
Judas Iscariot, having faithlessly departed from 
his apostleship, and taken his own life, the remain- 
ing eleven apostles, and one hundred and twenty 
men, through prayer to God, and by the lot, unani- 
mously elected him in place of the aforementioned 
faithless Judas, an apostle and ambassador of 
Jesus Christ, to preach the Gospel, according to the 
command of the Lord, to all nations, and to baptize 
the believers. Acts 1 :23-26. 

Afterwards he and the other eleven apostles 
were scourged by the Jewish council, for the name 
of Jesus Christ, and commanded that they should 
preach no more in the name of Jesus Christ. Acts 
5 :38-40. But they departed from the council, re- 
joicing that they were counted worthy to suffer 
shame for His name. And daily in the temple, and 
in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach 
Jesus Christ. 

After the separation of the apostles, who went 
everywhere to preach, Matthias, according to the 
opinion of Jerome, penetrated far into Ethiopia, 
where no other apostle had been, into the very in- 



Simon the Zealot crucified in Syria, AD 70 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



The Apostle Matthew crucified, stoned, and decapitated, AD 70 


terior of the land, yea, to the uttermost ends, to the 
inlet of the creek or river Asphar and Hyssus; 
where the most ignorant and barbarous people 
were. Unto these people, sitting as they were, in 
the deepest darkness and ignorance, there arose, 
through the ministry of this apostle, the true light 
of the Gospel. But, after having there gained 
many souls to Christ, he returned, according to 
history, to Judea, Galilee, and Samaria; namely, 
as in consequence of the dispersion of the apostles, 
the Jews who dwelt in those parts, could not enjoy 
the benefits of the ministry of the holy Gospel, un- 
to their conversion. Hieron. in Catai. Script. Eccl. 
Isidor. Naucler. Sabell. and Anthon., in Hist. 
Matthiae. 

Concerning the end or martyrdom of Matthias, 
some write that he would not sacrifice to the false 
god Jupiter, and was therefore put to death by the 
heathen. Others, however, state that for the blas- 
phemy which the Jews said he had committed 
against God, Moses, and the law, he was sentenced 
by their high priest, first to be hung on a cross and 
stoned, and afterwards beheaded with an ax. In 
short, when he would not deny Jesus, his Saviour, 
but steadfastly confessed Him, his sentence was 


this : "Thy blood be upon thy head, for thine own 
mouth hath spoken against thee." Thereupon, 
having been tied on a. cross, as some write, or con- 
ducted upon a rock, as others say, he was stoned, 
and finally, according to the sentence, beheaded. 
Joh. Gys., in Hist. Mart., fol. 13, col. 2, ex Anton., 
in part 1. Also, Konst-tooneel, etc., in the life o\ 
Matthias. Also, P. J Twisck in the Bybelsch 
Naembceck, letter M. on the name Matthias, fol. 
652, col. 1, 2. 


SOME OF THE SEVENTY DISCIPLES OF CHRIST, AND 

SEVERAL FELLOW TRAVELERS OF THE APOSTLES, 

SLAIN, TOWARDS THE CLOSE OF THE 

PERSECUTION BY NERO, ABOUT 

A. D. 70 

Prochorus, one of the first seven deacons at 
Jerusalem, a nephew of the pious martyr Stephen, 
and companion of the apostle John, but afterwards 
bishop of the church at Bithynia, in Macedonia, 
suffered and died at Antioch. 

Nicanor, also one of the first seven deacons at 
Jerusalem, was likewise executed for the truth's 
sake. 


04 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Likewise Parmenas, also one of the seven dea- 
cons. 

Olympus was imprisoned at Rome with Paul, 
for the Gospel's sake. 

Carpus, a servant of Paul, and afterwards 
bishop of the church at Troas, was put to death in 
that place, for the faith. 

Trophimus, Paul's companion, was beheaded 
for the truth of Christ. 

Maternus and Egystus, two of the seventy dis- 
ciples of Christ, together with Marianus, the 
Christian deacon, were put to death in Germany, 
for the faith. 

Hermagoras, bishop of the church at Aquileia, 
ordained thereto by Peter, suffered likewise under 
Nero. 

Onesimus, Dionysius, Areopagitse, and others, 
also died at that time for the divine truth. 

This persecution, which was originated by Nero, 
continued a long time, extending even into the 
time of Vespasian; so that it is stated that in the 
third year of his reign, there was put to death in 
the city of Ravenna, for confessing Christ, 
Apollinaris, a disciple of Peter, with many others, 
whose names are not mentioned. 


Of the Second Persecution of the Chris- 
tians, UNDER DOMITIAN, WHICH COMMENCED 

A. D. 93 ; in which, among Others, there 

were Apprehended, Banished, or Slain, 

the following persons- - 

luke, the holy evangelist, hanged on a 
green olive tree, in greece, a. d. 93 

Luke, the third among the holy evangelists, was, 
according to the testimony of the ancients, a 
Syrian of Antioch, and by occupation a physician. 
Bybelsch Ncembceck, about Luke, from Euseb. 
and Hieron. Col. 4:14. 

It was the will of the Lord to use him as a phy- 
sician of souls ; to which end he has left to mankind 
two excellent books on spiritual medicine ; namely, 
his holy Gospel and the Acts of the holy Apostles. 

Concerning his parents there is nowhere any- 
thing mentioned ; hence little or almost no account 
can be given of his natural descent, excepting his 
birthplace, and that he descended from the Syrian 
nation. It is supposed that he had no wife ; though 
nearly all the other apostles and evangelists were 
married. 



Luke the evangelist hung from an olive tree in Greece, AD 93 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Antipas roasted alive in a "copper steer," AD 95 


According to the opinion of Jerome, he was, be- 
fore his conversion, a Jewish proselyte, though of 
Gentile descent; which is quite probable, since, 
according to the judgment of linguists, his style is 
far more excellent and perfect in Greek than in 
Hebrew. Joh. Gys., in Hist. Mart, ex Hieronimo. 

He afterwards, through the preaching of Paul, 
became a Christian A.D. 38, after he had come 
from Thebes to Antioch. Konst-tooneel, etc., in 
the life of Luke. 

He became a disciple of the apostles, but espe- 
cially a traveling companion of the apostle Paul, 
so that he was with him in many perils and 
difficulties on sea and on land. 

He was so intimate with Paul, and his special 
friend to such a degree that, according to the 
ancients, he wrote the Gospel under his dictation 
and instruction. He had also given a faithful 
account of Paul's principal travels until his first 
imprisonment at Rome. Joh. Gys. Hist. Mart., 
concerning Luke the evangelist. 

Paul makes frequent mention of him in his epis- 
tles; for to the Colossians he writes: "Luke, the 
physician, . . . greet you" (Col. 4:14). To 
Philemon: "There salute thee Epaphras, my fel- 


low prisoner in Christ Jesus ; Marcus, Aristarchus, 
Demas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers" (Philem. 23, 
24). Likewise, to Timothy: "Only Luke is with 
me" (II Tim. 4:11). 

Luke was therefore, as it appears, a companion 
of Paul, not only in his travels, but also during 
his imprisonment at Rome. So that he was twice 
brought, together with Paul, before the Emperor 
Nero. P. J. Twisck, taken from Paul's epistles to 
Timothy. 

Respecting his end, some write that, while 
preaching in Greece, he was hanged by the ungodly 
to a green olive tree ; others relate that he was in 
the eighty-fourth year of his age, at the time of his 
death. Bybelsch Ncembcech, letter L., on the name 
Luke, fol. 624, col. 1, Konst-tooneel van veertig. 


ANTIPAS, THE FAITHFUL WITNESS OF JESUS CHRIST, 

BURNED AT PERGAMOS IN A RED-HOT BRAZEN 

OX, A. D. 95 

Antipas was an upright man and a pious witness 
of the Son of God ; who, in proof of his faith, tasted 
death, rather than dishonor his Saviour, by deny- 
ing Him, or otherwise. This happened in the life- 


96 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


time of the apostle John. Hence he may be reck- 
oned one of the first of those who suffered, during 
the time of Domitian, for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ. 

Of this hero and knight of God, the Lord Him- 
self made mention to His servant John, yea, com- 
manded him, to write to the teacher at Pergamos 
concerning him, saying: "To the angel of the 
church in Pergamos write : These things saith he 
which hath the sharp sword with two edges; I 
know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even 
where Satan's seat is: and thou holdest fast my 
name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those 
days, wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, 
who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth" 
(Rev. 2:12-14). 

Touching the time and manner of his death, 
there is nothing stated in Holy Writ ; but some of 
the ancient writers maintain that he was enclosed 
in a red-hot brazen ox, and thus burned alive with 
great pain, yet in steadfastness. As regards the 
time when this happened, we ascertain from Holy 
Scripture, that he was killed in the lifetime of 
John. Some fix this occurrence in the time of 
Domitian of about A.D. 95. — See concerning this, 
A. Mell., 1st Book, van de Hist, der Vervolg, en 
Martel., printed A. D. 1619, fol. 22, col. 1. Also, 
d' Annotation der laetste Bybelsch Oversettinge, 
Rev. 2:12,13. 


JOHN, THE HOLY EVANGELIST, BANISHED TO THE 

ISLE OF PATMOS, BY EMPEROR DOMITIAN, 

A. D. 97 

John, the apostle and evangelist, was a son of 
Zebedee, and brother of James the Greater; he 
was born at Nazareth, and by occupation was a 
fisherman. Matt. 4:21. He was called by Christ, 
when engaged with his father and brother in 
mending their nets for fishing. Verse 22. As 
soon as he heard the words of Christ, he im- 
mediately left the nets, the ship, and his father, 
and, together with James, his beloved brother, 
followed Christ. Chrysost. Honul. 1., in J oh. 

Afterwards he became from a disciple an apostle 
of Christ, and was numbered with the twelve 
whom the Lord had specially chosen for His 
service. Matt. 10:2. 

He was greatly beloved by the Lord, so that at 
the Supper he reclined on Christ's bosom, and 
leaned, or rested, on His breast. John 13 :23 ; 21 : 
20. The Lord, moreover, had accepted him as 
one of His three most special friends, to bear 
testimony of His works, not only in His conflict 
and suffering in the garden of Gethsemane, but 
also in His glory, in the raising of the daughter of 
Jairus as well as in the showing forth of His 
majesty, when, on the holy mount, His face shone 
as the sun, and His raiment became white as the 
light. Matt. 26:36; Luke 8:51 ; Matt. 17:1-4. 

From an inward love, he followed the Lord not 
only into the house of the priest Caiaphas, but also 
to Mount Calvary, without the city of Jerusalem, 


where the Lord was put to death. There the Lord, 
hanging on the cross, addressed him, saying, "Son, 
behold thy mother!" (John 19:27). 

He was so eager after the resurrection of Christ, 
that in running to His grave with his fellow apostle 
Peter, he outran the latter, thus showing his affec- 
tion for his Lord, who had died an ignominious 
death, and was entirely forsaken by His other 
friends. John 20:4. 

Some years afterwards, in order to refute the 
errors of Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied the 
divinity of Christ, he wrote his Gospel, to the honor 
and magnifying of His Saviour, commencing thus : 
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word 
was with God, and the Word was God. The same 
was in the beginning with God. All things were 
made by him; and without him was not anything 
made that was made." "And the Word was made 
flesh," etc., John 1 :1-14. In these words he gives 
us to understand the true incarnation of the Son 
of God, to whom be praise and glory forever. 
Amen. 

John is called throughout the Gospel the be- 
loved of the Lord, or the disciple "whom Jesus 
loved;" because the Lord so especially loved him 
John 13:23; 20:2; 21:20. 

But since it is the will of God to bring His chil- 
dren to glory through much tribulation and dis- 
tress, this beloved friend of God, John, also could 
not escape, but was tried throughout his life, with 
manifold tribulations, according to what the Lord 
had told him and his brother James : "Ye shall in- 
deed drink of the cup that I drink of ; and with the 
baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be 
baptized," that is, ye shall also be subjected to 
my suffering and distress. Mark 10:39. 

This was afterwards fulfilled' in him in manifold 
ways; for, besides what ancient writers have re- 
corded concerning it, namely, that at Rome he 
was put into a vat full of boiling oil, but was 
miraculously delivered out of it, the merits of 
which account we leave unquestioned ; this much, 
according to the Scriptures, is certain, namely that 
he spent a long time on the desert island of Patmos, 
whither he had been banished, for the testimony of 
Jesus Christ. Concerning this, John himself makes 
this declaration, Rev. 1 :9: "I, John, who also am 
your brother and companion in tribulation, and in 
the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in 
the isle Patmos, for the word of God, and for the 
testimony of Jesus Christ." 

But by whom, and in what manner he was ban- 
ished to that desert island, is not stated in the 
Scriptures, except that he was in tribulation for 
the Word of God. Some of the ancient writers, 
however, state that he was banished by Emperor 
Domitian, about A. D. 97 ; who, in his wrath and 
displeasure, because he preached the Word of God, 
and confessed Christ as the Son of God, had him 
sentenced and banished thither. 

On this island, which lies in the Mediterranean, 
between Asia Minor and Greece, one hundred and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



John the evangelist abandoned on the isle of Patmos, AD 97 


twenty-five miles north-westward of Jerusalem, he 
was indeed forsaken of men, and had scarcely any 
companionship, aside from poisonous and noxious 
animals, which dwelt in the place ; nevertheless, the 
Lord God dwelt with him with His heavenly con- 
solation, and during his banishment presented and 
revealed to him, very beautiful scenes and glorious 
visions concerning the condition of the church of 
God to the end of the world. 

How he'wrote his Apocalypse or Revelation, an 
excellent book, full of divine and truthful proph- 
ecies, taken from the preceding visions and heav- 
enly sights; some of which are already fulfilled, 
and others remain to be fulfilled. 

As the time of his deliverance began to draw 
nigh, the Lord spoke to him on this island, saying, 
"Behold, I come quickly, Amen." Whereupon 
John replied with a well-comforted soul, "Even so 
come, Lord Jesus." Rev. 22 :20. 

When the Emperor Domitian, who had banished 
him to the aforesaid island, was dead, and Nerva 
reigned in his stead, he was delivered and brought 
back to Ephesus, where he had previously been 
bishop of the church. This occurred, according to 


history, about A. D. 99 ; consequently, his confine- 
ment there lasted two years. The ancients write 
that he suffered much yet for the name of Christ, 
and was compelled to drink poison, yet remained 
unharmed, according to the promise of Christ; 
and that he finally died in peace at Ephesus, in the 
time of the Emperor Trajan, having served in the 
holy Gospel for fifty-one years, and being eighty 
years old : and thus this great light rests in Asia. 
Joh. Gys. Hist. Mart., fol. 14, col. 2, from Euseb. 
Hist. Eccl. and Epiphanio., Joh. Gys., ibidem, 
from Euseb., lib. 3, cap. 20, 23, Niceph, lib. 3, cap. 
4, Iren., lib. 3, cap. 3. Also, Konst-tooneel, in the 
life of John. Also, Bybelsch Ncembceck, letter J. 
on the name John, fol. 538, col. 2, and fol. 539, col. 
1, 2, also, fol. 540, col. 1. 


TIMOTHY, THE SPIRITUAL SON OF THE APOSTLE 

PAUL, STONED TO DEATH BY THE HEATHEN 

IDOLATERS AT EPHESUS, ABOUT A D. 98 

Timothy was a native of Lystra in Lycaonia. His 
father was a Greek, but his mother and grand- 
mother, though of Jewish descent, were Christian 


98 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


believers, the one named Eunice, the other Lois; 
by whom he was instructed from his youth in the 
holy Scriptures. Acts 16:1; II Tim. 1:5. 

Timothy was well reported of by the brethren 
that were at Lystra and Iconium ; wherefore Paul 
received him as his companion in the ministry of 
the holy Gospel among the Gentiles. Acts 16:2, 3. 

Paul loved him with a godly love, and called him 
his dearly beloved son in the Lord. II Tim. 1 :2. 
He afterwards appointed him bishop or teacher of 
the church, and commended to him the flock of 
Jesus his Saviour, with the admonition, uprightly 
to feed and govern the same; to which end he 
wrote two special epistles to him. 

"O Timothy," he writes, "keep that which is 
committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain 
babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so 
called" (I Tim. 6:20). 

Further : "This charge I commit unto thee, son 
Timothy, according to the prophecies which went 
before on thee. . . . Through faith and a good 
conscience" (1:18). 

In another place : ."Thou, therefore, my son, be 
strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the 
things that thou hast heard of me among many wit- 
nesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who 
shall be able to teach others also" (II Tim. 2 :1, 2). 

In this ministry Timothy acquitted himself as an 
upright evangelical preacher, until it pleased God, 
to let him finish his course, not by a common death, 
but by martyrdom; so that he, with his spiritual 
father Paul, who had steadfastly preceded him, and 
especially with his Lord Christ Jesus, who had 
gone through the conflict many years before, might 
enjoy the unfading crown of honor in the life of 
bliss. Thus it happened afterwards, according to 
history, that, having been bishop at Ephesus for 
fifteen years, he was there stoned to death by the 
heathen, whose idolatry he had reproved. This is 
stated to have taken place in the reign of Domitian, 
or about A. D. 98, though some have fixed it in 
the time of Nero. Joh, Gysii Hist. Mart., jol. 14, 
col. 4, also, Bybelsch Ncembock, letter T. on the 
name Timothy, jol. 925, col. vjb. 


URTICINUS, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, BEHEADED WITH 
THE AX, AT RAVENNA, A. D. 99 

Next to Timothy is placed Urticinus or Ursini- 
us, a physician at Ravenna in Italy. Having been 
reported to the Judge Paulinus, as being a Chris- 
tian, he was tortured in manifold ways for the 
name of Christ. Having borne all with constancy, 
and still refusing to sacrifice to the gods of the 
heathen, he was finally sentenced by the judge, to 
be beheaded with the ax. 

When Urticinus received this sentence of death, 
he began to tremble and shake before the impend- 
ing death, and to deliberate with himself, whether 
he should deny Christ, or how he might the most 
easily escape death. 


But while he was thus counseling with flesh and 
blood, one of the company of Judge Paulinus, 
whose name was Vitalus, stepped up to him from 
behind, and strengthened him with these words: 
"My beloved brother in Christ, Urticinus, who, 
as a faithful physician, by the potions, didst so 
often and so happily restore to health the sick, take 
heed, lest by thy denial thou plunge thyself into 
eternal death and damnation." 

Through this admonition Urticinus regained 
such courage, that he joyfully prepared for death, 
and, having of his own accord offered his neck to 
the ax, he thus, through the separation of his head 
from the body, came to a godly and noble end. See 
concerning this, A. Mell., 1st book, van de Hist, 
der Vervolg., jol. 18, col. 3 and 4, according V en- 
ant. Fortunat., lib. 4. Vitce S. Martini, Hieronym. 
Rub. Hist. Raven., lib. 1. Beda, Usard. Ado.' 
Vincent, Spec. Hist., lib. 9, cap. 50. Volateran. in 
Antrhopal. Pet. Dam., in Serin, de S. S. Vitali 
and Valeria. 


VITALUS, BURIED ALIVE AT RAVENNA FOR THE 
NAME OF JESUS CHRIST; AND HIS WIFE 
BEATEN TO DEATH WITH STICKS, AT 
MILAN, ABOUT A. D. 99 

Vitalus, before his conversion, was a Roman 
knight and citizen of Milan. He had come to Ra- 
venna with Paulinus, the judge ; but when he per- 
ceived the bloodthirstiness of his lord, whom he 
had hitherto served faithfully according to the man- 
ner of the world, he bravely left him, and straight- 
way enrolled himself under the banner of Christ, 
but was very soon apprehended by the enemies of 
truth. For Paulinus, his lord, not knowing why he 
had left him, but having learned that he had en- 
couraged Urticinus — who had just before been be- 
headed with the ax, for the faith — when the latter 
wavered, and that he had restrained him from sac- 
rificing to the gods; likewise, that he had buried 
him after his death, conceived a suspicion that he 
also must be a Christian. Upon this suspicion, and 
through the accusations of others, he had the pious 
Vitalus apprehended, and having found from his 
own confession, that he was really a Christian, he 
caused him to be put on the rack, to try him 
whether he would not apostatize from Christ. 

Thereupon Vitalus addressed Paulinus, the 
criminal judge, in these words : "You must certain- 
ly be deprived of your reason, to think that I 
should be deceived by you, and brought to eternal 
suffering in soul and body, while I have sought to 
deliver others from the danger of delusion." 

A wicked heathen priest, perceiving that he ad- 
hered firmly to Christ, and would in no wise do 
honor to the gods, advised Paulinus to bury Vitalus 
alive. Paulinus, following the evil suggestion of 
this priest, had a deep pit dug down to the water, 
at the place where the Christians were usually exe- 
cuted — called ad Palmam because a palm tree stood 
there — and had Vitalus buried in it, up to the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Vitalus buried alive in Ravenna around the year 99 


middle ( of his body), and then covered up with 
stones and earth. 

Now when Valeria, the wife of Vitalus, after the 
death and burying alive of her husband, returned 
home from Ravenna to Milan, where she resided 
and had her children, she could not remain con- 
cealed long, but made herself known to be a Chris- 
tian woman ; for when she was constrained to eat 
of that which was offered to idols, she very stead- 
fastly refused and resisted, yea, moreover, openly 
reproved the idolaters, saying, "I am a Christian, 
and can, therefore, in no wise eat that which is 
offered to Sylvanus, your god." 

Thereupon these idolaters seized her, and beat 
her to death with sticks. She was buried at Milan 
by the Christians. This happened by virtue of the 
first persecution, or the edict of Nero, which, it is 
stated, remained in force under Vespasian and 
under Domitian. A. Mell. Hist., fol. 16, col. 3, 
about Luke. 

Concerning this martyrdom see the above men- 
tioned authors, annotated with regard to Urticinus. 


OF DIFFERENT OTHER PERSONS WHO WERE SLAIN 
FOR THE NAME OF CHRIST ABOUT A. D. 100 

According to ancient history there were also 
slain for the testimony of the Son of God; In 
France, Lucianus, bishop of the church of Bello- 
vaco ; Maximianus and Julianus, elders ; Nicasius, 
bishop of the church of Rouen ; Quirinus, an elder ; 
Scubiculus, a deacon; Pascientia, a virgin. In 
Italy, Romulus, bishop of the church of Fesula, 
and others, in different places. /. Gys. Hist. Mart., 
fol. 14, col. 4. 

It is further recorded, that Marsilius Glabrio 
also had to suffer for the name of Christ and the 
true faith. 

At this time (it is stated in the Introduction to 
the Martyrs' Mirror to the Defenseless Christians 
fol. 36, col. 2,) "The Christians were so little 
esteemed, that they were called cobblers, as may 
be seen from a heathen author, according to 
Baronius." 


100 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE BAPTISM OF THE 

HOLY MARTYRS IN THE SECOND 

CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE SECOND CENTURY 

The witnesses as regards the ordinance of the 
baptism of Jesus Christ, who have written in this 
century, are few, and their accounts are brief, but 
mostly clear and conclusive. First appears one 
Dionysius, surnamed Alexandrinus, who writes to 
his friend Sixtus about a certain brother, who con- 
sidered the baptism of the heretics no baptism at 
all, and, therefore requested to be rebaptized. 

He is followed by Justinus, who, in his letters 
written in defense of the Christians, as well as in 
his disputation with Tryphon, the Jew, speaking 
of baptism, treats of it throughout as of the) baptism 
of Christ, which was administered to adults. 

Then comes one Gratianus, who declares him- 
self against retaliation; and also another (noticed 
in the margin), who was censured because he 
held that the body of Christ was not of the sub- 
stance of Mary. 

Then follows Clemens Alexandrinus, who no- 
where speaks of infant baptism, though he treats 
much of baptism, and of its conditions and cir- 
cumstances. 

Then follows a certain testimony, from Wala- 
f ridus Strabo, proving that in those early times it 
was not customary to baptize otherwise than in 
running water, and that only such persons were 
baptized, who were able to know and understand 
the benefits to be obtained in baptism. 

The conclusion is taken from the 7th chapter of 
De Ratione Gubernationes Ecclesice, in which we 
read, that now there were baptized those who had 
previously been instructed in the principal articles 
of faith.. With this we have concluded this century. 

Note. — Since we have not come across any 
particular authors as regards the matter of bap- 
tism, with the first years of this century, we are 
compelled to begin with the year 126, and to 
proceed thence on; which method we shall also 
pursue in some of the other centuries. 

About the year 126. — The first place in our ac- 
count of baptism in the second century, we shall 
accord to Dionysius Alexandrinus,* of whom it is 
stated (from his 5th book on Baptism) that he 
wrote to Sixtus, the bishop at Rome, as follows : 
There was with us a brother who had been a be- 
liever a long time, before ever I or my predeces- 
sor Heraclas was ordained bishop. Being present 
among those who were baptized, and hearing the 
questions put to them, and their replies, he came 
to me weeping, fell down at my feet, and began to 
confess that he had received baptism from the here- 
tics in an entirely different manner, which baptism, 
since he saw that we administered baptism differ- 

* As regards the time of this Dionysius, we follow the date given 
by P. J. Twisk, A.D. 126; to distinguish between him and the mar- 
tyr Dionysius Alexandrinus, who suffered under Valerianus and 
Galhenus, about A. D. 260. 


ently, he did not consider baptism at all. He there- 
fore entreated to be cleansed and purified with the 
baptism of the Christian church, that he might 
receive the grace of the Holy Ghost. 

Finally he writes these words : He (namely, the 
man mentioned above, who wished to be rebap- 
tized) ceased not to sigh and to weep, and dared 
not to come to the Lord's table, and, admonished 
and constrained by us, would scarcely venture to 
be present at common prayer. 

In regard to this, Eusebius Pamphilius of Caesa- 
rea, who has annotated this, writes thus: These 
and many other such questions concerning rebap- 
tizing are noted by Dionysius throughout his 
books. Euseb., lib. 7, cap. 8, from Dionysius. 

Note. — P. J. Twisck discriminates this Diony- 
sius Alexandrius from another Dionysius, who, 
about A. D. 231, after Origen, was a teacher of 
the scholars of the faith, at Alexandria. See 
Chron. 3d Book jor the year 231, page 61, col. 1. 
Also, for the year 253, page 71, col. 1. 

Of the martyrdom of the latter we shall speak in 
the proper place, under the persecution of Valeri- 
anus and Gallienus. Others, however, hold that it 
was one and the same Dionysius, who wrote this, 
and suffered martyrdom. But this matters little, 
since the matters themselves, as stated by these 
writers, agree in general. We will leave this to 
the judgment of the intelligent reader. 

Frpm the above it is evident, first, that baptism 
was administered after previous examination, be- 
cause it is said : "Being present among those who 
were baptized, and hearing the questions put to 
them, and their replies;" which agrees with the 
manner in which Philip proceeded with the Ethio- 
pian, before he baptized him: the one asked, the 
other answered, and then followed baptism. Acts 
8:36-38. 

Moreover, since Eusebius states, that Dionysius 
notes many such questions of rebaptizing through- 
out his books, it follows incontrovertibly, that re- 
baptizing, or, at least, baptizing aright, those who 
had not been rightly baptized, must have been prac- 
ticed, or at least advocated by some at that time ; 
else it would not have been necessary to note any 
questions in regard to it ; whereas much was writ- 
ten in that day, concerning it, as Eusebius has 
shown from Dionysius. 

About the year 140. — Justinus, who was sur- 
named Philosophus, because, before his conver- 
sion, he was instructed in philosophy, comes next 
in order after Dionysius Alexandrinus. In his sec- 
ond defence of the Christians, to the Emperors Ti- 
tus, Aelius, Adrianus, Antonius, Pius, etc. (accord- 
ing to the annotation of H. Montanus Nietighz., 
p. 5), he writes thus : "We shall also relate to you, 
how we being renewed through Christ, have of- 
fered ourselves up to God, lest, this being omitted, 
it might seem, that in some parts of this state- 
ment we have not been faithful. As many, then, as 
are convinced, and believe that what we teach and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


101 


say is true, and promise to live accordingly, to the 
best of their ability, are admonished to pray, and to 
ask God, with fasting, for the forgiveness of past 
sins, we ourselves praying and fasting with them. 
After that, we lead them to the water, and they are 
then born again in the same manner of regenera- 
tion in which we ourselves were born again, for 
then they are washed with water, in the name of 
God, who is the Father and Lord of us all, and of 
Jesus Christ, who is the Saviour of us all, and of 
the Holy Ghost; for Christ says: 'Except ye be 
born again, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of 
heaven.' " 

These are certainly clear arguments, which con- 
firm the institution of Christ as regards baptism 
upon faith ; for, when Justinus writes : "As many 
then, as are convinced, and believe," and adds: 
"are admonished to pray," and finally says : "After 
that, we lead them to the water, and they are then 
born again in the same manner of regeneration," 
that is to say (speaking by way of metonymy), 
baptized; he certainly gives to understand with 
this, that the candidates for baptism, in his day, had 
to be convinced, namely through the preached 
word, and had to believe, and, also, that they had 
to be admonished to pray, before they were led to 
the water, to be baptized, or, as he calls it, regen- 
erated. 

A little further on in the same apology or de- 
fense, he writes thus : "This, concerning this mat- 
ter, we have learned from the apostles; for, since 
we are ignorant by our first birth, and have been 
brought up in evil practices and wicked habits; 
therefore, in order that we may not remain chil- 
dren of ignorance, but become children of free vo- 
lition and of knowledge, and may obtain the re- 
mission of sins committed, there is invoked over 
those who voluntarily desire to be born again, and 
who repent of their past sins, the name of God, the 
Father and Lord of all men; and, invoking Him 
alone, we lead the one to be baptized to the wash- 
ing of water ; and this washing of water is called 
an enlightenment, because the understanding of 
those who learn these things, becomes enlightened. 
But those who become enlightened, are also 
washed, that is, baptized, in the name of Jesus 
Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, 
and in the name of the Holy Spirit, who, through 
the prophets, has foretold all concerning Christ." 
H. Mont. Nietighz., page 6, ex Justino. 

From this it is again quite evident, that Justinus 
has in view, nothing else than to give an account of 
the true baptism, which Christ and His apostles 
taught that it should only be administered upon 
faith and repentance for sins ; for, when he says : 
"Those who voluntarily desire to be baptized again, 
and who repent of their past sins," and adds : "In- 
voking the name of God, we lead the one to be 
baptized to the washing of water," he certainly 
says nothing else than what was said to those bap- 
tized by John. Matt. 3:6: "And were baptized of 
him in Jordan, confessing their sins," and what 


Peter said to the contrite penitents, who inquired 
what they must do to be saved. Acts 2:38: "Re- 
pent, and be baptized every one of you in the name 
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins." The 
very same idea is expressed here by Justinus, as is 
shown. 

Further on in the same apology or defense, Jus- 
tinus writes these words : "But we, after he who, 
being convinced, has become of one mind with us, 
is thus washed, we lead him to those who are 
called brethren, where they are assembled, ardent- 
ly offering up the common prayers, for ourselves, 
for him who is enlightened, and for all other men, 
wherever they may be ; that we may be worthy to 
be disciples of the truth leading indeed a good con- 
versation, and be found observers of that which is 
commanded us ; in order that we may obtain eternal 
salvation." H. Mont. Nietighz., page 7, ex Jus- 
tino. 

This is the third citation from Justinus, from 
which it appears certainly no more, than from the 
first two, that he mentions any other baptism, than 
that upon faith and repentance. For, when he 
says : "After he who, being convinced, has become 
of one mind with us, is thus washed, we lead him 
to those who are called brethren," he gives to un- 
derstand with this, that those who were washed, 
that is baptized, must first be convinced, and con- 
sent to the doctrine, which agrees with Christ's 
command, Matt. 28:19: "Go ye therefore, and 
teach (or, make disciples of) all nations, baptizing 
them," and mark: "Preach the gospel to every 
creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall 
be saved."* 

Jacob Mehrning, in his account of baptism in the 
second century, cites from the Centurien van 
Mcegdenborg the following words : "The teachers 
of the church of that time held, that regeneration 
was effected through baptism and the Word, to 
both of which together they ascribed a power, 
namely, the forgiveness of sins, which required 
repentance from adults." Many clear testimonies 
concerning this are found in Justinus. 

In the disputation with Tryphon, the Jew, he 
writes : "Through the washing of water of repent- 
ance (Wasserbad der Busse), and the knowledge 
of God, which has been instituted for the forgive- 
ness of the sins of the people, as Isaiah says, we be- 
lieve and feel assured, that this is the blessed bap- 
tism, which was proclaimed in former times, and 
that this alone can cleanse the penitent, yea, that 
this is a water of life." 

A little further on he calls baptism a spiritual cir- 
cumcision acceptable to the merciful God. And in 
conclusion he says : "Through water and faith, the 
regeneration of the whole human race is effected." 
Jac. Mehrn., Baptism. Histor., 2d part, on the sec- 
ond century, page 202. 

* In the year 141, Justinus taught that in matters of controversy 
we must judge from the apostolic writings. "In the 119th question " 
Also, that the true church of Christ must not be known (is not dis- 
tinguished) by the great number of members, but by the doctrine 
In the answer to the first question." Also, in the "Geslacht- 
register der Roomscher Successie," second edition, 1649, page 114 


102 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Justinus writes further, in the disputation with 
Tryphon, the Jew, on the truth of the Christian 
religion : "Since we, through Christ, are converted 
to the true God, we are sanctified in baptism, and 
call upon Him as our helper, and call Him our Re- 
deemer. Before the power of this name, Satan 
himself must fear and tremble." Jac. Mehrn., page 
203. Baptism. Hist., 2d Prt. 

Who does not see clearly from these words of 
Justinus, in the disputation with Tryphon, in the 
first as well as in the second citation, that he em- 
ploys such words and phrases as can by no means 
be applied otherwise than to the true order of the 
baptism of Christ and His apostles, namely, bap- 
tism which is accompanied with faith and repent- 
ance ? For in the first citation he certainly says ex- 
pressly, that baptism is a washing of water of re- 
pentance, and the knowledge of God; also, that it 
alone can cleanse the penitent; and also, that 
through water and faith the regeneration of the 
whole human race is effected. In the second cita- 
tion he also plainly says: "Since we, through 
Christ, are converted to the true God, we are sanc- 
tified in baptism." How could any one more clear- 
ly indicate the true practice of baptism, which 
must take place with conversion to God ? And such 
baptism, Justinus states here, was practiced in the 
church of God in his time. O glorious, holy, and 
most Christian transaction! 


NOTICE CONCERNING THE BOOK "CjU^ESTIONUM 
ET RESPONSIONUM," THAT IS, "QUESTIONS 

and Answers," which is wrong- 
fully ATTRIBUTED TO JUSTINUS 

In the fifty-sixth question and answer of this 
book some words are employed from which pedo- 
baptists sometimes are wont to conclude, that in- 
fant baptism was practiced in the days of Justinus. 
But to this, various excellent and learned men have 
replied long since, namely, that this book was never 
written by Justinus ; to prove which, different rea- 
sons are adduced, as, for instance: That in the 
answer to the 115th question mention is made of 
Irenius, who lived twenty-five years after Justinus, 
but is nevertheless cited by the latter in his writ- 
ings as his predecessor. Moreover, that in the an- 
swer to the twelfth, and also in that to the eighty- 
sixth question, Origen is mentioned, who lived a 
whole century after Justinus. To this must be 
added, that neither Eusebius nor Jerome, both of 
whom have each compiled a complete catalogue of 
all the authentic writings of Justinus, enumerate 
this book Queestionus; whereas they mention the 
Second Defence of the Christians, and the Dispu- 
tation with Tryphon, from which we have adduced 
in full several citations concerning baptism. Hence 
the aforementioned book is justly rejected, as not 
being the work of Justinus. See concerning this, 
De Centuriator. Magdeub., Cent. 2, cap. 10, in the 
account of the life of Justinus. Also, Bellarm. in 
Tract van de Scribenten der Kerke. Also, Jacob 


Mehrn., Baptism. Hist or., 2nd Part, page 170, 171. 
Also, A. Montan. Nietighs. van den Kinder-doop, 
second edition, A. 1648, page 8, 9. 

Note. — In 152, Valentinus Romanus was cen- 
sured as a heretic, because he believed that the Son 
of God, Christus Jesus, assumed neither a human 
nature, nor flesh and blood from the substance of 
the virgin Mary. P. J. Twisck, Chron. for the year 
152, 2d Book, page 42, col. 1, from Herm. Med., 
fol. 330, Chron. Seb. Fr., 106., Jan. Cresp., fol. 34. 

About the year 160. — Gratianus quotes the 
words of the Lord : "When they persecute you in 
this city flee ye into another ;" and say then : "Here 
Jesus Christ teaches that Christians shall not repel 
weapon with weapon, but must flee "before weap- 
ons." P. J. Twisck, Chron., 2d Book, for the year 
160, p. 43, col. 1, 2, from Seb. Fra. in den Krieg des 
Fredes, fol. 63. 

From this explanation of Gratianus appears, how 
salutarily and rightly he believed and taught with 
regards to the words of Jesus Christ relative to the 
forsaking of revenge; from which we may infer 
his correct views concerning other matters of Holy 
Scripture and the Christian faith ; but since, either 
through default of the ancient writers, or for some 
other reason, nothing else has come down to us 
from him, we shall be content with what we have 
mentioned, and take our leave of him.* 

About the year 200. — About this time flourished 
Clemens Alexandrinus, who, though writing large- 
ly on baptism, nowhere mentions infant baptism, 
but employs throughout such language as suffi- 
ciently implies, that he knew nothing of infant bap- 
tism, but confined himself solely to the ordinance 
of Christ and the practice of His apostles, which is 
baptism that is accompanied with faith and re- 
pentance. 

In Pcedagog., lib. 1, chap. 6, he writes thus: 
"This is also done with us, whose example the 
Lord Christ has become. Being baptized, we be- 
come enlightened ; being enlightened, we are made 
children; having been made children, we are 
brought to perfection ; having been brought to per- 
fection, we are made immortal." A little after that 
he says: "Thus also, when we are baptized, we 
obtain a free, unobstructed, and clear eye of the 
Holy Ghost, as an avengement of blindness ; hav- 
ing trodden underfoot the sins which hitherto ob- 
scured the divine Spirit." Also : "That which was 
grievously bound by ignorance, is unbound by 
knowledge, and these bands are loosed through 
the faith of man and the grace of God, the mani- 
fold sins being forgiven through reasonablef bap- 
tism as a perfect remedy ; thus we are washed from 
all sins, and are henceforth evil no more; this is 
the grace of enlightenment, that the manner of life 
is no longer the same that it was before we were 


* A.D. 17S, Ireneus taught that the bread of the Supper was of 
the fruit of the earth, and he also calls the Supper not an offering 
but a thanksgiving. "Lib 4, contra Valent." See in the "Geslacht- 
register der Roomscher Successie," second edition, 1649, page 114. 

t The words, "reasonable baptism," indicate that he speaks of 
such a baptism as belongs to reasonable or intelligent persons. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


103 


baptized." Further: "Teaching or instruction pre- 
cedes faith, but faith conjointly with baptism is 
led and directed through the Holy Ghost." And : 
"Even so we who repent of our former sins sep- 
arate ourselves from them and are being cleansed 
through baptism, let us run to the eternal light, as 
children to their father." See further, concerning 
these citations, Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., 2d Part, 
pages 213, 214. Also, H. Montan. Nietighs van 
den Kinder-doop, pages 26, 27. 

What is there in this testimony of Clemens 
Alexandrinus, that can apply to infant baptism? 
yea, on the contrary, what is there that does not 
militate against it? He certainly says expressly: 
"These bands (namely, of sin) are loosed through 
the faith of man, and the grace of God, the mani- 
fold sins being forgiven through reasonable bap- 
tism." This certainly is a clear and obvious join- 
ing together of faith and baptism, as things which, 
through the providence of God, belong together, 
for the remission of sins. When he further says : 
"Teaching, or instruction, precedes faith, but faith 
conjointly with baptism is led and directed through 
the Holy Ghost," there is expressed, without con- 
troversy, the same thing that we have said just 
now; since here not only faith is joined together 
with baptism, but also instruction, which precedes 
faith, and the Holy Ghost, who follows and con- 
firms faith. 

It is true, he says soon after this, that those who 
are baptized are children, or, at least, ought to be. 
But what kind of children ? Not childen in under- 
standing, not infants in the cradle, but, as he 
further says, children in wickedness, but perfect in 
the understanding. Children, who, as children of 
God, have put off the old man, and the garment of 
wickedness, and have put on the incorruptibility of 
Christ, in order that, being regenerated, they may 
become a new and holy people, and keep unspotted 
the new man. See the treatise cited above. 

If at that time it was at all customary in Alex- 
andria to baptize infants, would it not have been 
appropriate here for him, to speak of irrational 
infants, or at least to mention with a word or two, 
that they, too, were entitled to baptism, although, 
on account of their youth they could hot under- 
stand the object of it? Truly, according to our 
opinion he could not well have omitted mentioning 
it ; but, inasmuch as he does not refer to it with a 
single word, it is good proof, that at that time this 
abuse was not known there, or, at least, not re- 
garded. 

Jacob Mehrning says {Baptism. Hist, concern- 
ing the second century, page 213) : "Of Clemens 
Alexandrinus we read that at Alexandria he pre- 
sided over the school in which the catechumens, 
that is those who received instruction preparatory 
to baptism, were taught the principles of the Chris- 
tian faith." Vicecomes, lib. 2, cap. 7. 

From this Pcedag., dementis Alexandrini, lib. 
1, cap. 6, Vicecomes would prove that there was 
given to those who were baptized, milk and honey 


to eat, and milk mixed with wine, to drink ; like- 
wise, that after baptism, preaching took place and 
peace was imparted to those baptized. 

As regards the statement, that there was given 
to the baptized, as a sign of God's blessing, milk 
and honey to eat, and milk mixed with wine, to 
drink, we leave it to its own merits, it being a 
matter of small importance, which, if done without 
superstition, could either be observed or omitted. 
But the preceding statement, that Clemens Alex- 
andrinus presided over the school in which the 
catechumens were taught the principles of the 
Christian faith, certainly implies that the candi- 
dates for baptism were first instructed in the 
school, in the principles of the Christian faith, be- 
fore they were baptized; and also, the final re- 
mark, that after baptism preaching took place, 
and peace was imparted to the baptized, certainly 
also indicates that those who were baptized were 
not infants, for then they could not have under- 
stood the preaching, much less would they have 
been qualified to receive with attention and ac- 
cording to the requirements of Holy Scripture the 
peace which was imparted to them. 

Note. — Baudartius writes of Clemens Alexan- 
drinus, that he proclaimed the true religion with his 
mouth as well as with his pen, saying among other 
things : "A pious and honorable man is well con- 
tent with little." Apophth., edit. 1640, lib. 2, page 


FURTHER REMARKS CONCERNING BAPTISM IN THIS 
CENTURY 

From the writings of Walafridus Strabonus we 
may clearly infer what manner of baptism was 
practiced at this time, in the first as well as in the 
second century, and also along afterwards, namely, 
that no infants, but adults, reasonable, and believing 
persons were baptized, and this according to the 
example of Christ a.id His holy apostles. Jac. 
1, cap. 4. Walafridus Strabo (in lib. de Rebus \ 
Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., p. 524, D. I. Vicecomes, lib'. 
Eccles., cap. 26,) writes: "We must know that 
originally believers were very simply baptized in 
streams and springs; for our Lord Jesus Christ 
Himself, in order to sanctify such washing for us, 
was baptized of John in Jordan ; even we read else- 
where : 'John was baptizing in Enon near to Salim, 
because there was much water there.' " 

Page 525, from D. Vicecomes, lib. 1, cap. 30; 
also, cap. 26, Strabo speaks thus concerning bap- 
tism: We must know that in those first times 
baptism was administered only to those who, in 
body as well as in soul, were washed clean and 
white, so that they could both know and under- 
stand, what benefit there was to be obtained in bap- 
tism, what was to be confessed and believed, and, 
finally, what was necessary to be observed by the 
regenerated in Christ." 

He then relates of Augustine, that he was in- 
structed in the faith before he was baptized (of 


104 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


which we shall speak in the proper place) ; but that 
subsequently, for the sake of improvement, as it is 
called, the church, that is, the Roman church, 
practiced infant baptism, with a view of freeing 
infants by this means from the punishment of God 
for original sin. Then the followers of the true 
faith (thus he wrongly calls the Romanists), in 
order that the children might not be lost, if they 
should die without means of regeneration, that 
is, baptism, resolved that they should be baptized 
for the remission of sins. Hence originated, he 
writes, the custom of having godfathers and god- 
mothers, who stand for the child at (literally, lift 
the child from) baptism, and answer for them all 
that they themselves, on account of the weakness 
of their infancy, are not able to confess. Thus for 
Strabo. 

N. B. — Concerning these words, D. Vicecomes 
writes thus: "Since Walafridus Strabo removes 
the custom of infant baptism from the primitive 
church, he also recognizes no older origin of the 
godfather's than which date from a period sub- 
sequent to the time of Augustine." Bapt. Hist., 
pp. 525, 526. 

Thus, in the first two centuries, and long after- 
wards, infant baptism was not known by the Ro- 
manists even, according to the above mentioned 
testimony of W. Strabo. Shortening this, we shall 
conclude with a statement contained in the H. 
Doophistorie, at the end of the second century, 
page 211, cap. 7, de Ratione Gubernationis Eccle- 
si<e: "Since also the administration of the Sacra- 
ment belongs to the government of the church, 
we see from the history of the time, that the bishops 
and teachers did not deem it burdensome to baptize, 
not bells and altars, but men whom they had in- 
structed in the principal articles of the Christian re- 
ligion ; and to them they also administered the holy 
Supper." We shall now proceed to the martyrs, 
who, during this time suffered for this same faith. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE SECOND CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE SECOND 
CENTURY 

[The two Roman, or, properly speaking, Greek 
Emperors, Trajan and Marcus Aurelius raised the 
principal persecutions against the Christians, in this 
century. This is amply shown in the following 
account, as well as what persons suffered for the 
name of Christ in these persecutions. 

In the persecutions through Trajan there were 
slain, after enduring much suffering, Simon Cleo- 
phas, who was a hundred and twenty years old, 
Rufus and Zosimus, the Ethiopian baptized by 
Philip, Ignatius, Onesimus, Dionysius Areopagita, 
Publius, Barsimeus, Barbelius and his sister Barba, 
Justus and Pastor, Phocas, Faustina, Jacobita, 
Felicitas with her seven sons, and Lucius. 


Under Marcus Aurelius there suffered, Justinus, 
Polycarpus, and twelve of his beloved disciples, 
who had come from Philadelphia to Smyrna, and 
were slain there ; Carpus, Papylus, Agathonica and 
many women, Germanicus, Vetius, Attalus, Alex- 
ander of Phrygia, Maturus, Sanctus Blandina and 
a youth, Photinus, ninety years old, Alcibiades, 
Epipodius, Alexander the Greek, Leoxides, Plutar- 
chus, Sagaris, Thraseas. All these fought unto 
blood under the blood-stained banner of Jesus 
Christ; their deaths may be read at large in the 
following account.] 

We shall begin the second century with the third 
general persecution which was raised against the 
followers of Jesus Christ, and shall forthwith pro- 
ceed to give an account of the time, place, persons, 
and circumstances. 


The Third Persecution of the Christians, 
Commenced under Trajan, A. D. 102 

With the beginning of the second century, A. D. 
102, arose the third heathen persecution against the 
Christians under Emperor Trajan, who attained to 
the reign of the Roman monarchy in the year 100. 

Being instigated by Mamertinus, the governor of 
Rome, and Targuinus, the superintendent of the 
worship of the heathen deities, he persecuted the 
Christians in an awful manner, and put them to a 
wretched death. 

He was called a good emperor, but very super- 
stitious as regards the heathen worship : by reason 
of which he was the more easily induced to under- 
take this sorry work. It also was no small help to 
this end, that the heathen priests and idolaters paid 
great taxes, to extirpate by sufferings and death, as 
the enemies of God and of man, those who were 
opposed to their gods, especially the Christians. 

Meanwhile we shall show what persons suffered 
under the bloody reign of Emperor Trajan, for the 
name of Jesus Christ. 


simon cleophas, one of the seventy disci- 
ples OF CHRIST, CRUCIFIED BY ATTICUS, 
UNDER TRAJAN, A. D. 109 

Simon Cleophas was the son of Cleophas and 
Mary, and a cousin of our Lord Jesus, because he 
was the son of the brother of Joseph, the supposed 
father of Christ. After the death of the apostle 
James he was chosen, by common consent, bishop 
of the church at Jerusalem ; hence he must be dis- 
tinguished from Simon surnamed Zelotes, who was 
one of the apostles, and was crucified in Persia. 
For, the latter was a son of Alpheus, but the for- 
mer a son of Cleophas, not one of the twelve, but 
of the seventy disciples of Christ, as Eusebius ad- 
mits, saying: "If any one should say that this 
Simon beheld Christ with his own eyes, and lis- 
tened to His preaching with his own ears, he would 
not be beyond reason and truth in this opinion, not 
only on account of the long duration of his life, 
being, a hundred and twenty years old, but much 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


105 


more by virtue of the testimony of the holy Gos- 
pel, in which mention is made of Mary, the wife of 
Cleophas, whose son he was, according to the testi- 
mony of Egesippus, who was the nearest historian 
to the time of the apostles." Hist. Eccles. Euseb. 
Pamphil., lib. 3, cap. 11. 

This is the Simon, of whom it is stated that he 
was an eyewitness to the stoning of James, the 
holy apostle of the Lord. Epiph. supra, in Sym. 
Alph. 

He was accused by some wicked men before At- 
ticus, the governor of Emperor Trajan, of being a 
Christian, yea a near relative of Christ, of the gen- 
eration of David. On this account he was dread- 
fully beaten for many days with scourges and sharp 
rods, so that everyone who saw him, had to lament 
and wonder, the judge himself being astonished, 
that a man of such a great age, a hundred and 
twenty years old, was able so long to endure such 
intolerable torturing. 

Finally, as he remained steadfast in his confes- 
sion, he became conformed in suffering unto his 
Lord, whom he confessed, and was sentenced by 
Atticus to be crucified ; which death he suffered in 
the tenth year of Emperor Trajan, which corre- 
sponds with the year of Christ 109. Compare the 
1st Book of A. Mellinus, printed A. D. 1617, jol. 
24, col. 1, 2, with Hist. Mart. J oh. Gysii, recently 
printed by /. Braat, A. D. 1657, jol. 15, col. 1. 


RUFUS AND ZOSIMUS, TWO PIOUS CHRISTIANS, BE- 
HEADED AT PHILIPPI IN MACEDONIA, FOR 
THE FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST, A. D. l09 

Rufus and Zosimus were disciples of Christ and 
His apostles, and had also been instrumental in 
founding and building up the church of God among 
the Jews and the Gentiles. 

Especially conspicuous is Rufus, from the greet- 
ings of the apostle Paul to the church at Rome, in 
which he includes Rufus, not merely as a common 
member of the same, but as a distinguished, yea 
chosen person, for he says: "Salute Rufus chosen 
in the Lord, and his mother and mine" (Rom. 
16:13). 

This Rufus and the aforementioned Zosimus, 
both pious and upright Christians, together with 
many of their fellow believers, were put to death 
for the faith, in the city of Philippi in Macedonia, 
Some write that both were beheaded in the days of 
Emperor Trajan, A. D. 109. Compare what A. 
Mellinus adduces in Het groot Christen Martel- 
cers-bcek, jol. 19, col. 4, from Polycarpo ad Philip- 
pens, with that which J. Gysius has noted in Hist. 
Mart., jol. 15, col. 3. 

THE ETHIOPIAN OR EUNUCH OF QUEEN CANDACE, 

WHO WAS BAPTIZED BY PHILIP, PUT TO DEATH 

FOR THE NAME OF CHRIST, IN THE ISLAND 

OF CAPROBANO, A. D. 110 

Immediately after Rufus and Zosimus, A. Melli- 
nus introduces the Ethiopian or eunuch of Queen 


Candace in Ethiopia, who was converted by Philip 
to the faith in Jesus Christ, and thereupon baptized, 
as we read in the Acts of the Apostles. 

It is stated of him, from Jerome, that he preached 
the Gospel of our Lord in Arabia Felia, and also in 
a certain island of the Red Sea, called Caprobano 
(some call it Ceylon), where, it is supposed, he suf- 
fered death for the testimony of the truth. See 
above, Mellin. ex Hieron. Catal. in Crescente, in 
53, cap. Esm. 


IGNATIUS, A DISCIPLE OF THE APOSTLE JOHN, DE- 
VOURED BY WILD BEASTS IN A CIRCUS AT ROME, 
FOR THE TESTIMONY OF THE SON OF GOD, 
A.D. Ill 

Ignatius, a disciple of the apostle John, and a 
successor of Peter and Evodius, was in the service 
of the church of Christ at Antioch in Syria. He 
was a very God-fearing man, and faithful and dil- 
igent in his ministrations. He was surnamed 
Theophorus, that is, The Bearer oj God, appar- 
ently because he often bore the name of God and 
his Saviour in his mouth, and led a godly life. He 
was wont to say frequently : "The life of man is a 
continual death, unless it be that Christ liveth in 
us." Likewise: "The crucified Christ is my only 
and entire love." And : "He that allows himself 
to be called after any other than Christ, is not God." 
And again : "As the world hates the Christians, so 
God loves them." A. Mellin., jol. 15, col. 1, jrom 
Iqnat. in Epist. ad Rom. et alibe. 

Having learned that the Emperor Trajan, after 
the victories which he had achieved against the 
Dacians, Armenians, Assyrians, and other eastern 
nations, gave thanks at Antioch unto the gods, and 
offered great sacrifices unto them, as though these 
victories had proceeded from them, Ignatius, as we 
are informed by Nicephorus, reproved the Em- 
peror for it, and this openly in the temple. 

The Emperor, exceedingly enraged on this ac- 
count, caused Ignatius to be apprehended, yet, for 
fear of an uproar, because Ignatius was held in 
great respect in Antioch, he did not have him pun- 
ished there but committed him into the hands of ten 
soldiers, and sent him bound to Rome, there to have 
him punished. 

In the meantime his sentence of death was made 
known to him — in what manner and where he was 
to die ; namely, that he should be torn to pieces by 
wild beasts at Rome. 

On his way thither, he wrote several consolatory 
epistles to his friends, the faithful in Christ Jesus ; 
and also to different churches, as to those of 
Smyrna, Ephesus, Philadelphia, Trallis, Magnesia, 
Tarsus, Philippi, and especially to the church of 
Christ at Rome; which letter he sent before his 
arrival there. 

It appears that the thought of being torn to 
pieces by the teeth of wild beasts was constantly on 
his mind during the journey ; yet not as a matter 
of dread, but of earnest desire. This he mentions 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Ignatius, a student under John, devoured by wild animals in Rome, AD 111 


in his letter to the church at Rome, writing thus : 
"Journeying from Syria to Rome, by water and by 
land, by day and by night, I fight with wild beasts, 
bound between ten leopards, who, the more I 
stroke, and show myself friendly to them, the more 
cruel and malignant they become. However, 
through the cruelties and torments which they daily 
inflict upon me, I am more and more exercised and 
instructed; nevertheless, I am not justified there- 
by. O that I were already with the beasts, which 
are ready to devour me ! I hope that, ere long, I 
shall find them such as I wish them to be, that is, 
cruel enough to destroy me speedily. But if they 
will not fall upon and tear me, I shall kindly allure 
them, so that they will not spare me, as they have 
already spared several Christians, but will quickly 
tear me in pieces, and devour me. Forgive me for 
speaking thus ; I know what I need. Now only I 
begin to be a disciple of Christ. I regard neither 
things visible nor invisible, at which the world is 
amazed. It is sufficient for me if I but become a 
partaker of Christ. Let the devil and evil men 
afflict me with all manner of pain and torment, 
with fire, with cross, with fighting against wild 
beasts, with scattering of the members and bones 


of my body ; all this I esteem very little, if I but 
enjoy Christ. Only pray for me, that inward and 
outward strength be given me, not only to speak or 
write this, but also to perform and endure it, so 
that I may not only be called a Christian, but also 
be found one in truth." Ignat. in Epist. ad Rom. 

Having arrived at Rome, he was delivered by the 
soldiers to the governor, together with the letters 
of the Emperor, which contained his sentence of 
death. He was kept in prison several days, until 
a certain feast-day of the Romans, when the Gov- 
ernor, according to the order of the Emperor, had 
him brought forth into the amphitheatre. First of 
all they sought by many torments, to induce him 
to blaspheme the name of Christ, and offer sacrifice 
to the gods. But when Ignatius did not weaken 
in his faith, but was only, the longer, the more 
strengthened in refusing to offer heathen sacrifices, 
he was forthwith condemned by the Roman Senate, 
immediately to be cast before the lions. 

As Ignatius was led away from the presence of 
the Senate, to the innermost enclosure, or pit of the 
lions, he frequently repeated the name of Jesus in 
the conversation which he, while on the way, car- 
ried on with the believers, as well as in his secret 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


107 


prayer to God. Being asked why he did so, he 
replied thus : "My dear Jesus, my Saviour, is so 
deeply written in my heart, that I feel confident, 
that if my heart were to be cut open and chopped 
to pieces, the name of Jesus would be found written 
on every piece." With this the pious man indi- 
cated that not only his mouth, but the innermost 
parts of his heart were filled with the love of Jesus : 
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh. Thus, also Paul, being filled with the 
love of Jesus Christ, has used, in his letters, as 
much as two hundred times (as has been counted) 
the words, "Our Lord Jesus Christ." The name 
"Jesus" he employs as much as five hundred 
times. 

When the whole multitude of the people were 
assembled, to witness the death of Ignatius (for 
the report had spread throughout the whole city, 
that a bishop had been brought from Syria, who, 
according to the sentence of the Emperor, was to 
fight against the wild beast), Ignatius was brought 
forth and placed in the middle of the amphitheatre. 
Thereupon Ignatius, with a bold heart, thus ad- 
dressed the people which stood around: "O ye 
Romans, all you who have come to witness with 
your own eyes this combat; know ye, that this 
punishment has not been laid upon me on account 
of any misdeed or crime ; for such I have in no 
wise committed, but that I may come to God, for 
whom I long, and whom to enjoy is my insatiable 
desire. For, I am the grain of God. I am ground 
by the teeth of the beast, that I may be found a 
pure bread of Christ, who is to me the bread of 
life." These words spake Ignatius, when he stood 
in the middle of the amphitheatre, and when he 
heard the lions roar; which the brethren of the 
church who also stood among the people heard and 
testified to. 

As soon as he had spoken these words, two 
dreadful, hungry lions were let out to him from 
their pits, who instantly tore and devoured him, 
leaving almost nothing, or, at least, very little, even 
of his bones. Thus fell asleep, happy in the Lord, 
this faithful martyr of Jesus Christ, A. D. Ill, in 
the 12th year of Emperor Trajan. Compare Abr. 
Mell. 1st book of the Hist, der Vervolg. en Mart., 
printed 1619, fol. 25, col. 1-4, and jol. 26, col. 1, 
with J oh. Gysii Hist. Mart., fol. 15, col. 2, 3. Also, 
W . Baudart. in Apophth. Christian, printed A. D. 
1640. The first book, in the second Apophthegm, 
on the name Ignatius, pp. 2>7 , 38, from different 
other authors. 


ONESIMUS, A FRIEND OF THE APOSTLE PAUL, 

BROUGHT FROM ROME TO EPHESUS, AND 

THERE STONED TO DEATH, A. D. Ill 

Onesimus, a servant of Philemon, by descent a 
Colossian, had run away from his master, and had 
come to Rome, where he was recognized by the 
apostle Paul — who was imprisoned there — and 
sent back to his master, with recommendatory let- 


ters tending to reconciliation, as may be seen in the 
epistle of Paul to Philemon, in which Paul calls 
him his son, whom he had begotten in his bonds. 
Philemon 10. 

He also carried a certain letter of Paul from the 
prison at Rome to the church at Colosse ; for in the 
conclusion of the epistle to the Colossians we read : 
"Sent from Rome through Tychicus and Onesi- 
mus." Col. 4 after verse 18. 

It appears therefore, that he was a beloved friend 
and faithful servant of the apostle Paul, notwith- 
standing he had left his external service in the 
house of Philemon. He also, after he was sincerely 
converted, was not permitted to finish his course 
without persecution, sufferings, and a violent 
death; but had to tread after the example of his 
Saviour, the wine press of suffering. According 
to the testimony of ancient historians, he was car- 
ried away bound from Ephesus to Rome, and 
there stoned to death, under Trajan, and the judge 
Tertullus, shortly after the death of Ignatius, A. D. 
111. See above, Idem. Ibidem, ex Act. Metaph. 
Mart., Rom., 16 Febr. Also, Ado. 


DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA, WHO WAS CONVERTED BY 

PAUL, MARTYRED FOR CONFESSING JESUS 

CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 112 

We read in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 17, 
verse 34, that among those who clave unto the 
doctrine of Paul, there was also Dionysius, one of 
the Athenian council, and a woman named Damaris. 

It is testified of this Dionysius, surnamed the 
Areopagite, that he so increased in the Christian 
religion, that Paul afterwards appointed him bishop 
at Athens; yet, that finally, after having made a 
most glorious confession of faith, and suffered 
many severe torments, he was crowned, as a vic- 
torious hero of Jesus Christ, with the martyr's 
crown, when he had got to be a very old man, and 
had commended his spirit into the hands of his 
heavenly Father. He now accomplished what he 
was wont to frequently repeat in his life: "The 
last words of my Lord Jesus, while on the cross, 
shall also be my last words in this temporal life, 
namely: 'Father, into thy hands I commend my 
spirit.' " Thereupon he was put to death, and thus 
fell asleep happy in the Lord. Compare A. Mell., 
\st book of the Histor. der vervolg. en Mart., 
printed A. D. 1619., jol. 26, col. 2, from Adone in 
Martyrol. ex Arist. lib. de Relig. Christ and Suida 
in Dion. Areopag. and Seger., in Chron. 10. Strac. 
in Pass, Part. S. Homil. 2, with W. Baudart, in 
Apophthegm Christian, 1st book 7th edition, A. D. 
1640, p. 17, on the name Dionysius Areopagita. 

Note. — Touching the manner of the death, or 
martyrdom, of Dionysius the Areopagite, we find 
nothing stated in ancient, trustworthy writers; 
hence we have said nothing about it, though some 
have written, that he was beheaded at Paris; for 
which statement we let them be responsible, since 
their accounts of this event differ in regard to the 


108 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


manner in which, as well as the time when, it is 
said to have occurred. See in the above-men- 
tioned Apophthegm Baudartii. 


this we find stated in different ancient writers. See 
above. 


PUBLIUS, BARSIMAEUS, BARBELIUS, AND HIS SISTER 

BARBA, SLAIN FOR THE NAME OF JESUS 

CHRIST ABOUT THE YEAR 112 

It is also stated that Publius, bishop of the church 
at Athens, a good and pious man, was slain for the 
name of Christ ; likewise, Barsimaeus, bishop of the 
church at Edessa, and with him, Barbelius and his 
sister Barba, who had been baptized by him ; all of 
whom, steadfastly contending for the truth, ob- 
tained the martyrs' crown. Compare Joh. Gysii 
Hist. Mart., fol. 15, col. 3, with the Introduction to 
the Martyrs Mirror of the Defenseless Christians, 
printed A. D. 1631, fol. 93, col. 1. 


JUSTUS AND PASTOR, SLAIN FOR THE FAITH AT 
COMPLUTUM, ABOUT THE YEAR 116 

That Justus and Pastor were deprived of life at 
Complutum, a city in Spain, for the same reason 
for which the aforementioned martyrs were slain, 
namely, for the testimony of Jesus, the Son of God, 


PHOCAS, BISHOP OF PONTUS, PUT TO DEATH IN A 

LIME-KILN, AND IN BOILING WATER, FOR 

THE NAME OF JESUS CHRIST, AT SINOPE, 

ABOUT THE YEAR 118 

Phocas, a son of Pamphilius, the first bishop of 
the church in Pontus in the city of Sinope, on being 
brought, in the time of Trajan, before Africanus, 
the Governor of Pontus, who urged him to sacrifice 
upon the alter of Neptune, steadfastly refused to do 
this ; on account of which he was sentenced by the 
Governor to die for the name of Christ; which 
death he suffered after many pains and torments, 
and was thus numbered with his slain fellow breth- 
ren. Regarding the death of this man, see A. Mell., 
1st book of the Hist, der vervolg. in Mart., fol. 27, 
col. 1, ex Adone, in Comment. At. 6. Aster. Orat. 
de Phoca. Also, concerning the time of his death, 
for the year 1 18, see Joh. Gysii Hist. Mart., fol. 15, 
col. 4. 

Touching the manner of his death, P. J. Twisck 
gives the following account : "Phocas, in Pontus, 



Phocus, bishop of Sineppe, thrown into a lime kiln filled with boiling water in Pontus, AD 118 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


100 


refusing to sacrifice to the gods, was thrust, accord- 
ing to the command of Emperor Trajan, and for 
the name of Christ, into a lime-kiln full of glowing 
coals, then cast into boiling water and thus killed. 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., 2d book, jor the year 118,1 
p. 37, col. 2. from Adon. Vinnens., lib. 6, jol. 166, 
Vinejol. 519. 


FAUSTINA AND JACOBITA PUT TO DEATH, FOR 

THE FAITH, AT BRESCIA; AND ELENTHERUS 

WITH HIS MOTHER ANTHIA, IN SICILY, 

A. D. 120 

About this time several persons were put to death 
for the name of Christ ; as Faustina and Jacobita, 
at Brescia in Italy; Elentherus with his mother 
Anthia, and others, at Messina in Sicily, etc. ; all 
of whom, contending steadfastly, even unto death, 
departed with joyful hope. As regards the perse- 
cutions of this time, compare Joh. Gysii Hist. 
Mart., jol. 115, col. 4, with A. Mellinus, P. J. 
Twisck, and others. 


SEVERE PERSECUTIONS OF THE BELIEVERS ABOUT 
THE YEAR 130 

About this time, writes P. J. Twisck, the instru- 
ments of the devil could not invent punishments 
severe enough, but what they considered the Chris- 
tians worthy of. For they were watched in their 
houses as well as without; men cried out against 
them in all public places; they were scourged, 
stoned, and dragged about ; their goods were plun- 
dered ; they were apprehended ; red-hot iron plates 
were applied to their bare bodies ; they were placed 
in a certain instrument made to torture malefac- 
tors; they were put into the deepest and darkest 
places of the prisons, where they were slain, yea, 
they were afflicted with excruciating torments. 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., 2d book, jor the year 130, 
page 39, col. 2, and page 40, col. 1, from Jan Cres- 
pin in den staet der Kerken. 

GETULICUS, SYMPHOROSA WITH HER SONS, CERI- 

ALUS AND AMANTIUS, PUT TO DEATH FOR 

THE FAITH, AT FRIVOLI; AND SAPPHIRA 

AND SABINA AT ROME, A. D. 136 

Getulicus, a teacher at Frivoli in Italy, Sym- 
phorosa with her sons, and Cerialus and Amantius, 
were put to death in that city for the faith. It is 
also stated that Sapphira, a maiden from Antioch, 
and Sabina, the widow of Valentinus, had to lay 
down their lives, at Rome, for the same reason. 
Joh. Gysii Hist. Mart., jol. 15, col. 4. 


mediately confessed that he was. After this con- 
fession, he was cast into prison, in which he suf- 
fered so long as to become completely emaciated. 
Finally he was delivered to the judge Urbicius, 
who shortly afterwards had him put to death ; and 
thus Ptolomeus became a faithful martyr of Jesus 
Christ. Compare Joh. Gysii Hist. Mart., printed 
at Dort, 1657, jol. 15, col. 3, wither. Mell., 1st 
book oj the Hist, der vervolg. Mart., also, printed 
at Dort, A. D. 1619, jol. 32, col. 2, from Just. 
Philos. Apol. prima Christian Euseb., lib. 4, cap. 
17. 


PTOLOMEUS, A GODFEARING MAN, PUT TO DEATH 

AT ALEXANDRIA, IN EGYPT, FOR THE FAITH 

IN JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 144 

It is stated that Ptolomeus was a pious and God- 
fearing man, who had converted his wife from the 
blindness of heathendom to the faith. He was ap- 
prehended for the truth of Christ. Asked, whether 
he was a Christian, he, as a lover of the truth, im- 


LUCIUS, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, ALSO PUT TO DEATH 
AT ALEXANDRIA, ACCORDING TO THE PRE- 
CEDING SENTENCE, TOGETHER WITH AN- 
OTHER, WHO MADE THE SAME PRO- 
FESSION, ABOUT THE YEAR 144 

In Historia Ecclesia Eusebii Pamphilii Ccesari- 
ensis, mention is made of a certain Lucius, who was 
greatly dissatisfied with the sentence and execution 
of the aforementioned pious man Ptolomeus, and, 
therefore demanded a reason for it from the judge, 
at the same time confessing himself a Christian; 
which cost him his life, even as it did the man for 
whom he interceded. 

The words in the book mentioned above are as 
follows : "When Lucius, who was also a Christian, 
perceived that so presumptuous a sentence was pro- 
nounced against Ptolomeus, he said to Urbicius 
(the judge) : 'Pray, tell me, for what reason do you 
sentence this man so hastily, and cause him to be 
led to execution, merely on account of one word, 
because he confesses himself to be a Christian ? If 
there were another, who would confess all manner 
of sin, such as murder, adultery, or any other 
crime, would you also act so hastily, and sentence 
him to death immediately? This is not proper, O 
Urbicius! it does not become a good emperor, a 
wise bachelor, the son of the emperor, or the sena- 
tors to act thus.' Then said Urbicius to Lucius: 
'It appears to me that thou also art a Christian.' 
When Lucius replied : 'It is true, I am one.' Then 
Urbicius commanded that he should be led forth to 
death. Thereupon Lucius said : T thank thee, for 
releasing me from these wicked lords, and sending 
me to the kind and best of fathers, the king of all 
things, namely, our God.' Another who also boldly 
confessed that he was a Christian, was put to death 
by virtue of the same sentence." Thus far, Euse- 
bius in the 4th book of his Church History, in the 
17th chapter, Dort edition, A.D. 1588, jol. 72, col. 
1, compared with A. Mellinus and Joh. Gysius, in 
the passages quoted concerning Ptolomeus. 

FELICITAS WITH HER SEVEN SONS, JANUARIUS, 

FELIX, PHILIPPUS, SYLVANUS, ALEXANDER, 

VTTALIS, AND MARTIALIS, PUT TO DEATH 

FOR THE FAITH, AT ROME, A. D. 164 

Felicitas was a Christian widow at Rome, and 
had seven sons, whose names were Januarius, Fe- 


110 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


lix, Philippus, Sylvanus, Alexander, Vitalis, and 
Martialis. These lived together with their mother 
in one house, as an entire Christian church. Of the 
mother it is stated, that by her Christian com- 
munion, (conversation) which she had with the 
Roman women, she converted many to Christ. 
The sons, on their part, also acquitted themselves 
well by winning many men to Christ. 

Now, when the heathen priests complained of 
this to Antonius, the Emperor — who had resumed 
the persecution which had begun with Trajan, but 
had subsided — saying, that there were not only 
men, but also women, who blasphemed the gods, 
despised their images, trampled under foot the 
Emperor's worship of the gods, yea, turned away 
many from the old religion of the Romans; that 
this was principally done by a certain widow, 
named Felicitas, and her seven sons, and that, 
therefore, in order to prevent this, they must be 
compelled to give up Christ, and sacrifice to the 
gods, or, in case they should refuse to do so, be 
put to death, the Emperor, prompted or instigated 
hereby, gave to Publius, the provost, or chief 
magistrate of Rome, full authority over them. 

Publius, willing to spare Felicitas, as being a 
highly respectable woman, first secretly summoned 
her and her sons into his own house, where he 
entreated them with fair words and promises, but 
afterwards threatened to punish them with severe 
tortures, unless they would forsake the Christian 
religion, and readopt the old Roman worship of the 
gods. Felicitas, remembering the words of Christ, 
"Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will 
I confess .also before my Father which is in heav- 
en," did not seek to evade the issue by using dis- 
simulating or indirect words, but answered briefly 
thus : "I am neither moved by thy flatteries and en- 
treaties, nor am I intimidated by thy threats ; for 
I experience in my heart the working of the Holy 
Ghost, which gives me a living power, and pre- 
pares me for the conflict of suffering, to endure all 
that thou mayest lay upon me, for the confession 
of my faith." 

When Publius could not move the mother from 
her steadfast purpose, he said to her : "Very well ; 
if it seems pleasant to thee, to die, die alone, but 
have pity and a mother's compassion for thy sons, 
and command them, to ransom their own lives at 
least, by sacrificing to the gods." 

Thereupon Felicitas said to the judge: "Thy 
compassion is pure wickedness, and thy admoni- 
tion is nothing but cruelty, for, if my sons should 
sacrifice to the gods, they would not ransom their 
lives, but sell them to the hellish fiend, whose 
slaves, yea, whose serfs in soul and body, they 
would become, and be reserved by him, in chains 
of darkness, for everlasting fire." 

Then, turning away from the judge, to her sons, 
she said: "Remain steadfast in the faith, and in 
the confession of Christ ; for Christ and His saints 
are waiting for you. Behold, heaven is open be- 
fore you ; therefore fight valiantly for your souls, 


and show, that you are faithful in the love of 
Christ, wherewith He loves you, and you Him." 

This filled the judge with rage against her, and 
he commanded them to smite her on the cheek, 
while he at the same time upbraided her vehe- 
mently, saying : "How darest thou thus impudent- 
ly exhort thy sons in my presence, and make them 
obstinate to disobey the commands of the Emper- 
or; whereas it would be far more proper for thee 
to incite them to obedience toward him?" 

Felicitas, notwithstanding that death had been 
threatened her, answered with more than manly 
courage, saying : "If thou, O judge, didst know 
our Saviour Jesus Christ, and the power of His 
Godhead and majesty, thou wouldst undoubtedly 
desist from persecuting the Christians, and wouldst 
not seek to draw us away from the Christian re- 
ligion by blaspheming His holy name ; for whoever 
curses (or blasphemes) Christ and His faithful 
ones, curses (or blasphemes) God Himself, who, 
by faith, dwells in their hearts." 

Thereupon, though they struck her in the face 
with their fists, in order to silence her, she did not 
cease to admonish her sons to remain steadfast, 
and to fear neither tortures nor rack, nor even 
death itself, but to die willingly for the name of 
Christ. 

Therefore, Publius the judge took each of her 
sons separately, and talked first to one and then to 
the other, hoping by this last resort to draw away 
from the faith, by promises as well as by threats, 
some of them at least, if not all. But as he could 
not prevail upon them, he sent a message to the 
Emperor, stating that they all remained obstinate, 
and that he could in no wise induce them to sacri- 
fice to the gods. Thereupon the Emperor sentenced 
the mother together with her seven sons, that they 
should be delivered into the hands of different exe- 
cutioners, and be tortured and put to death in 
various ways ; yet, that the mother was first to see 
all her sons die, before she herself should be put 
to death. 

In accordance with this sentence, they first 
scourged Januarius, the first-born, to death, in the 
presence of his mother. The scourges were made 
of cords or ropes, to the ends of which balls of lead 
were attached. Those who had to undergo this 
mode of torture were scourged with them on their 
necks, backs, sides, and other tender parts of their 
bodies, either to torture them, or in order to martyr 
them to death as was the case in this instance. 
Felix and Philippus, the two brothers next (in 
age), were beaten to death with rods. Sylvanus, 
also called Syllanus, was cast down from a height. 
Alexander, Vitalis, and Martialis were beheaded. 
Last of all, the mother was beheaded or put to 
death with the sword. This took place under Em- 
peror Antonius Pius. A. Mell, 1st book of the 
Hist., fol. 33, col. 4 and fol. 34, col. 1-3, ex Pru- 
dent, in Vincentio. Also, Acto. Adon. Mart., 23 
Novemb. Greg. P. in Natali. S. Felic. Homil. 3, in 
Eu. Bet. Chrysol. Serm. 134. Arta apud Mombrit. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


111 


torn 1. Beda Usuard. 23 Nov. Heur. Erfford. 
Chron., Mart. Rom. Touching the time when this 
took place, see P. J. Twisck, Chron. 2d book, for 
the year 164, page 45, col. 1, from Vincentio, in 
Col., fol. 35. 


Of the Fourth Persecution of the Chris- 
tians, under Marcus Aurelius and 
Lucius Verus, which was Com- 
menced about the year 166 

P. J. Twisck, in his Chronicle, gives as the be- 
ginning of the fourth persecution, the year A. D. 
162 ; the writers of the Introduction to the Martyrs' 
Mirror of the Defenseless Christian, fix the be- 
ginning in the year 164 (page 37, col. 2) ; J. Gy- 
sius, in Hist. Mart., fol. 16, col. 2, places it in the 
year 168, and A. Mellinus makes no mention at all 
as to the exact time of that persecution. However, 
all these writers abound with accounts of the inhu- 
man tortures, which the faithful martyrs had to 
suffer at that time.* 

We, in order to pursue a middle course between 
the abovementioned writers, have noted the year 
166 as the beginning of said persecution. How- 
ever, there is but little difference between the 
above writers ; for it is probable, that the decrees 
for the persecution of the Christians were first is- 
sued about the year 162 ; that about the year 164 
they were carried into effect; and that about the 
year 168 they exhibited their full force, insomuch 
that the persecution was then at the height of its 
fierceness. However, we shall proceed to see, 
how atrociously the pious witnesses of Jesus 
Christ were then treated. 


how atrociously the sincere christians were 
treated during this persecution 

Everywhere, in all the cities, writes P. J. 
Twisck, the imperial edicts and decrees against the 
Christians were posted up; by reason of which 
the magistrates and officers proceeded very cruelly 
against them, persecuting them even unto death, 
with great atrocity and fury. For, no mode of 
torture, punishment, or death, however great, se- 
vere, and unmerciful, could be devised, produced, 
or planned, by these wicked men, these tyrants, 
and instruments of the devil, but what it was 
thought, that the Christians, as accursed, as ene- 
mies of the Kingdom, and as the cause of all mis- 
fortune, deserved a thousand times more. To be 
publicly mocked, eternally imprisoned, exiled, 
scourged, stoned, strangled, hanged, beheaded, and 
burned, was deemed far too little. 

They began, at this time, to ply the poor people 
with red hot plates until they were dead ; to tear 
the flesh from their bones with red hot tongues; 
to place them upon iron stools over a slow fire ; to 

* Although P. J. Twisck has placed the fourth persecution, to- 
gether with the beginning of the reign of M. Aureiius, in the year 
162, he, nevertheless, gives to understand in the sequel of his 
account, that this persecution reached its climax in the year 168. 
Compare this with the time which the writers of the aforementioned 
Introduction, and "Joh. Gysius" have reewded. 


fry them in iron frying pans; to roast them on 
gridirons at a slow fire ; to cast them, enveloped in 
close netting, before wild bulls, to serve as sport 
for them, and be tossed into the air by their horns. 
All this was accompanied with still another cru- 
elty. The bodies of the slain were thrown before 
the dogs, and guards placed beside them, to pre- 
vent the Christians from taking away and burying 
these bodies. In short, the misery was so great, 
that at Lyons alone Bishop Irenus with nineteen 
thousand of his sheep were cruelly butchered. 
Thus far P. J. Twisck, in his Chronicle, 2d book, 
for the year 162, page 43, col. 2, from Chron. Mich. 
Sac. fol. 103. Chron. Sebmt. Fra. Also, Tyd. 
Thresor P. Mernla. 


justinus, first scourged, and then beheaded, 

for the testimony of jesus christ, a. d. 

168 

Justinus was called a son of Priscus Bacchus, 
and was born of Greek parents, at Neapolis in Pal- 
estine. 

In its proper place we have spoken of the views 
of Justinus concerning baptism on faith, and have 
shown that he was sound and correct in them. 
Now, however, it is proper for us to speak of his 
spiritual birth, of his heavenly fatherland, and how 
conclusively he showed that he was a child of God, 
and a citizen of the heavenly city, filled with all 
good things ; which appeared not only in the be- 
ginning and progress of his faith, but especially in 
the end, when he testified to its power with his 
death, and sealed it with his blood. 

In the days of his youth he was instructed in the 
Platonic philosophy, in which he acquitted himself 
so meritoriously, that he received the name Philos- 
opher, yea, he had been led to believe, that his 
learning would soon enable him to see God, which 
was the ultimate object of the Platonic philosophy. 
But it happened one day, as he was going toward 
the sea, in order to meditate in solitude upon what 
he had learned, that (as he himself has confessed) 
there followed him a very grave and gentle old 
man, who, having entered in a discourse with him, 
respecting the Platonic philosophy, taught him, in 
what true philosophy and happiness consisted, 
namely in the saving knowledge of the only, eter- 
nal, and alone immortal God. 

Now, when Justinus inquired for the teachers 
from whom he might learn this divine philosophy, 
the old man referred him to the writings of the 
prophets, who did not write according to the argu- 
mentation of human reason, but, as certain and in- 
fallible witnesses, left behind what they had seen 
and heard of the words of truth, and the wonder- 
ful signs and works of God among His people ; and 
that all their prophecies concerning the promised 
Messiah and Son of God, were fulfilled in the ad- 
vent of Jesus Christ, who was born in the reign 
of Emperor Augustus. He therefore admonished 
him, to pray to God, that He would enlighten his 


112 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


heart to this saving doctrine, through Jesus Christ, 
without whom it would not be possible for him to 
attain to this saving knowledge. 

"This and many more such discourses [writes 
Justinus] this old man had with me, showing me 
also, how I should further increase, and how I 
might obtain the things necessary to salvation. 
Then he went away, and I saw him no more. Im- 
mediately a burning desire was kindled in my 
heart, and a love for the Scriptures of the proph- 
ets and those men who had been dear friends of 
Christ, namely the apostles. Then only I became 
a true philosopher." 

As to how and by whom, beside the instruction 
of the aforesaid old man, he was first instructed 
and baptized, or from what cause he left his native 
land, and came from Syria, Palestine, or Samaria, 
to Rome, of this we find no account. 

He afterwards had a disputation with Tryphon, 
a Jew. Of this he himself has written an account, 
in which may be seen his correct views in regard 
to different matters of faith, especially to baptism. 
Of this we have spoken in another place. 

But finally, having entered into a controversy 
with Crescens, a Cynic philosopher, and having 
vanquished and confounded him, by the power of 
divine arguments, his uncertain life began to draw 
to a close, and his certain death to approach. For, 
by reason of this, this Cynic (that is, canine) 
philosopher, conceived such a deadly hatred for 
Justinus, that he swore to avenge it with his death ; 
and from that time on did not cease to lay snares 
for him, and accuse him as a Christian, until he had 
quenched his thirst for blood with the blood of 
Justinus. This, Tatianus, the disciple of Justinus, 
gives to understand in his oration against the 
Greeks, in language not at all obscure, namely, 
that the above mentioned Crescens did not only 
seek the life of Justinus, but also that of himself. 
Moreover, Photius states that he tasted a joyful 
and worthy death, by the hands of Crescens Cyn- 
icus, the person whom we have just mentioned. 

Touching the manner of his death : When Justi- 
nus had been apprehended, on the accusation of 
Crescens, and boldly refused to abandon his faith, 
or sacrifice to the gods, he was sentenced to death 
by Rusticus, the President, and, after having been 
scourged, he was beheaded with the ax, about 
A. D. 168, in the time of the reign of the Emperors 
Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Virus, and of the 
President Rusticus, as is annotated from Epiph- 
anius. Cor- are Abr. Mell. 1st book oj the Hist, 
der, fol. 37, c I. 1-4, and fol. 38, col. 1-4, from Just. 
Apol. 2, pro. Christi., concerning his descent and 
name ; Dialog, cum Tryphone Jod. Photius in Bib- 
lioth, and Jos. Seal, anvmad. Chron. Euseb., con- 
cerning his life and conversion; Iren., lib. 1, in 
Bibliotheca de Vita Justini Chron. Eus. A. D. 154, 
touching his end and death; Epiph. H ceres. 26 
and 46 touching the t' ne when this occurred. Also 
/. Gysii in Hist. M >-t., fol. 16, col. 3, 4. Also, 
P. J. Twisck, Chron. 2d book, for the year 154, 


page 42, col. 2, from Johan. Barl., fol. 7. Grond. 
bev/j letter A. 


POLYCARP, A DISCIPLE OF THE APOSTLE JOHN, AND 

BISHOP OF THE CHURCH AT SMYRNA, PUT TO 

DEATH WITH FIRE AND SWORD, FOR HIS 

FAITH IN THE SON OF GOD, A. D. 168 

We read in the Revelation of John, that the 
Lord commanded His servant John, that he should 
write a few things to the angel (that is, the bishop 
or teacher) of the church at Smyrna, for the ad- 
monition of the teacher as well as for the service 
of the church, saying: "Unto the angel of the 
church in Smyrna write: These things saith the 
first and the last, which was dead, and is alive ; I 
know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty 
.... Fear none of those things which thou shalt 
suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you 
into prison, that ye may be tried ; and ye shall have 
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death 
and I will give thee a crown of life" (Rev. 2 :8-10) . 
These words of the Lord Jesus indicate that the 
believers at Smyrna, and their teacher, were in 
tribulation and poverty, and that still more suffer- 
ing was appoaching them ; whereupon he exhorted 
them to constancy, and promised to give them the 
crown of life. 

As regards the teacher of this church, most of 
the ancient writers call him Polycarp, and say, that 
he was a disciple of the apostle John, inasmuch as 
he had heard John preach the Word of God, and 
had associated with those who had known the 
Lord Jesus Christ personally, and had had inter- 
course with him; and that John had appointed 
him bishop or overseer of the church at Smyrna. 

Touching the sufferings which the Lord said 
would befall him and the church of which he was 
teacher, this began some time afterwards ; in such 
manner that this good shepherd preceded, and 
many of the sheep of his flock faithfully followed 
him. However, we intend to speak here only of 
the shepherd, Polycarp. 

It is stated, that three days before he was appre- 
hended and sentenced to death, he was suddenly 
overcome by sleep, in the midst of his prayer, and 
while dreaming, had a vision, in which he saw the 
pillow on which he lay with his head, suddenly 
taking fire and was consumed. Instantly awakened 
thereby, he concluded that he was to be burnt for 
the name of Christ. 

When those who sought to apprehend him, had 
approached very close, his friends endeavored to 
conceal him, and, therefore, brought him to an- 
other country-seat, where he was nevertheless 
shortly afterwards discovered by his persecutors. 
For they had seized two lads, whom they, by 
scourging them, compelled to say where Polycarp 
was ; and although, from the chamber in which he 
was, he might easily have made his escape into an- 
other house near by, he would not do it, but said : 
"The will of the Lord be done." He therefore de- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


113 


scended the stairs, to meet his persecutors, whom 
he received so kindly, that those who had not 
known him before, regretfully said, "What need 
had we to make so great haste, to apprehend such 
an old man." 

Polycarp immediately had a table spread for his 
captors, and affectionately urged them to eat ; beg- 
ging of them to allow him an hour's time in which 
to pray undisturbedly in quiet, while they were eat- 
ing; which they granted him. When he had fin- 
ished his prayer, and the hour was up, in which 
he had reflected upon his life, and commended the 
church of which he was teacher, unto God and his 
Saviour, the bailiffs placed him upon an ass, and 
led him to the city, on the Sabbath of the great 
feast. 

Nicetes and his son Herod, called the prince of 
peace, rode out to meet him, took him from the 
ass, and made him sit with them in their carriage, 
seeking in this manner to induce him to aposta- 
tize from Christ, saying : "What matters it for you 
to say, Lord Emperor, and to offer sacrifice or 
incense before him, to save your life." At first, 
Polycarp made no reply at all, but when they per- 
sisted in asking him, and demanded an answer, he 
finally said: "I shall never do what you request 
and counsel me to do." When they saw that he 
was immovable in his faith, they commenced to 
revile him, and, at the same time, thrust him out 
of the carriage, so that in falling he severely in- 
jured his leg. He never showed, however, that he 
had been injured by the fall, but, as soon as he 
had risen, willingly surrendered himself again into 
the hands of the bailiffs, to be led further to the 
place of execution, walking as rapidly as though 
nothing hindered him. 

As soon as Polycarp had entered the circus or 
amphitheatre, where he was to be executed, a voice 
came to him from heaven, saying, "Be strong, O 
Polycarp ! and valiant in thy confession, and in the 
suffering which awaits thee." No person saw the 
one from whom this voice proceeded, but many of 
the Christians that stood around heard it; how- 
ever, on account of the great commotion, the 
greater part of the people could not hear it. It 
nevertheless tended to strengthen Polycarp and 
those who had heard it. 

The Stadtholder admonished him to have com- 
passion for his great age, and, by swearing by the 
Emperor's fortune, to deny Christ. Thereupon 
Polycarp gave the following candid reply, "I have 
now served my Lord Christ Jesus eighty-six years, 
and He has never done me any harm. How can I 
deny my King, who hath hitherto preserved me 
from all evil, and so faithfully redeemed me?" 

Thereupon the Stadtholder threatened to have 
him torn by wild beasts, if he would not desist from 
his purpose, saying : "I have the beasts ready, be- 
fore whom I shall cast thee, unless thou become 
converted betimes." Polycarp answered unterri- 
fied: "Let them come, for my purpose is un- 


changeable. We cannot be converted or perverted 
from good to evil by affliction; but it would be 
better, if they (the evildoers) who persist in their 
wickedness would become converted to that which 
is good." The Stadtholder replied: "If thou art 
not yet sorry, and despisest the wild beasts, I shall 
have thee burned with fire." Once more Polycarp 
answered, saying: "Thou threatenest me with a 
fire, which will perhaps burn for an hour, and then 
soon go out ; but thou knowest «ot the fire of the 
future judgment of God, which is prepared and 
reserved for the everlasting punishment and tor- 
ment of the ungodly. But why delayest thou? 
Bring on the beasts, or the fire, or whatever thou 
mayest choose : thou shalt not, by either of them, 
move me to deny Christ, my Lord and Saviour." 
Finally, when the people demanded his death, 
he was delivered by the Stadtholder to be burned. 
Instantly there was brought together a great heap 
of wood, fagots, and shavings. When Polycarp 
saw this, he undressed himself, and took off his 
shoes, in order to be laid on the wood without any 
clothes. This being done, the executioners were 
about to lay their hands on him, to nail him on the 
wood ; but he said : "Let it be so ; He that hath 
given me strength to endure the pain of the fire, 
will also strengthen me to remain still in the fire] 
though you nail me not to the firewood. They, ac- 
cordingly, did not fasten him with nails, but simply 
with a rope, tied his hands behind his back. Thus, 
prepared for a burnt offering, and placed upon 
the wood like a sacrificial lamb, he prayed to God, 
saying, "O Father of Thy beloved and blessed 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we 
have received the saving knowledge of Thy holy 
name ; God of angels and powers, and of all crea- 
tures, but especially of all the righteous who live 
in Thy sight, I thank Thee that Thou didst call me 
to this day and hour, and hast counted me worthy, 
that I may have my part and place among the 
number of the holy martyrs, and in the cup of the 
suffering of Christ, so I suffer with Him, and thus 
partake of His pains. I pray Thee, O Lord, that 
Thou wouldst this day receive me, as a fat offer- 
ing among the number of Thy holy martyrs, even 
as Thou alone, O God of truth, who canst not lie, 
didst prepare me thereto, and didst make it known 
unto me, yea, hast now ultimately fulfilled it. 
Therefore I thank and praise Thee, above other 
men, and honour Thy holy name, through Jesus 
Christ, Thy well-beloved Son, the eternal High 
Priest, unto whom, with Thee and the Holy Ghost, 
be the glory, now and forever. Amen." 

As soon as he had uttered the last word of his 
prayer (the word "Amen"), the executioners ig- 
nited the wood upon which he was placed; and 
when the flames circled high above the body of 
Polycarp, it was found, to the astonishment of 
everyone that the fire injured him but little, or not 
at all. The executioner was therefore commanded 
to pierce him with a sword, which was instantly 


114 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


done, so that the blood, either through the heat of 
the fire, or from some other reason, issued so copi- 
ously from the wound that the fire was almost ex- 
tinguished thereby ; and thus this faithful witness 
of Jesus Christ, having died both by fire and the 
sword, entered into the rest of the saints, about 
A. D. 168. Compare Euseb., 4th book, 15 chap., 
printed A. D. 1588, page 66-70 with Abr. Mell., 
1st book of the Hist., fol. 40, 41, col. 1-4, from 
Iren., lib. 3, cap. 3. Hares. Hieron. Catal. in 
Polycarp, Euseb., lib. 4, cap. 13, and lib. 5, cap. 19. 
Also, Joh. Gysii Hist. Mart, for the year 168, 
fol. 17, col. 2. Also, P. J. Twisck, Chron. 2d book, 
A. D. 168, page 45, col. 2. 


TWELVE PIOUS CHRISTIANS, WHO HAD COME FROM 

PHILADELPHIA TO SMYRNA, PUT TO DEATH 

ON THE SAME DAY, WITH POLYCARP, THE 

AFOREMENTIONED MARTYR, A. D. 168 

In the letter which the Holy Ghost directed John 
to write to the angel of the church at Smyrna, 
which we mentioned above, it is indicated, that not 
only the teacher, who is called an angel, namely 
Polycarp, but also some of the church, would have 
to suffer for the name of Jesus Christ. We read : 
"Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into 
prison, that ye may be tried" (Rev. 2:10). This 
was also fulfilled in truth. For it is stated, that not 
only Polycarp, the leader of the church at Smyrna, 
but with him also twelve members of the church, 
who had come from Philadelphia, were put to 
death for the same reason and in the same manner. 

The words of Eusebius concerning these mar- 
tyrs from Philadelphia, taken from the Smyrna 
letter, are, according to A. Mellinus, as follows: 
"These are the particulars of the martyrdom of 
Polycarp, who had come from Philadelphia to 
Smyrna, together with twelve others, who will- 
ingly suffered death in the same manner with him ; 
whose names are not mentioned, that of Polycarp 
alone being given, because, not only among the 
Christians, but even among the Jews and the hea- 
then, he was famous far and wide for his extraor- 
dinary godliness. These testimonies are finished 
and sealed with the precious blood of the Chris- 
tians. At the time of the fourth persecution ; un- 
der the Emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius 
Virus, about in the seventeenth year of their reign, 
coinciding with the 168th year of our Saviour." 

This is what we have found concerning these 
twelve pious witnesses of Jesus Christ, who, as 
the twelve celestial signs, shone forth in faith as 
well as in virtue, but especially in steadfastness ; 
wherefore the Lord, who is a rewarder unto His 
faithful servants, will hereafter crown and reward 
them with the unfading crown of glory. See, con- 
cerning this, Abr. Mell. 1st book of the Hist., fol. 
42, col. 2, from Euseb., lib. 4. 


CARPUS. FAPYLUS, AGATHONICA AND MANY OTHER 

WOMEN, PUT TO DEATH AT PERGAMOS, IN ASIA 

MINOR, FOR THE CONFESSION OF THE 

TRUE FAITH, ABOUT THE YEAR 168 

It is recorded that about the same time that the 
aforementioned Christians were martyred, several 
other pious persons suffered death for the name of 
Jesus Christ, and the confession of the Son of God ; 
among whom are mentioned by name, three very 
eminent persons, namely, Carpus, Papylus, and a 
woman called Agathonica, together with many 
other women; who were all crowned with the 
crown of the holy martyrs at Pergamos, in Asia 
Minor, for the saving confession of the true faith. 
Euseb., 4th book, cap. 15, fol. 70, col. 2. A Mell 
1st book, fol. 42, col. 1, 2. 


GERMANICUS, AN EMINENTLY PIOUS MAN, DE- 
VOURED BY THE BEASTS, AT SMYRNA IN ASIA 
MINOR, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, A. D. 170 

In P. J. Twisck's Chronicle is found the follow- 
ing account for the year A. D. 170: Germanicus, 
with other dear friends of God, had to suffer se- 
vere persecution and torture for the name of Christ, 
and was finally cast before the wild beasts, and 
thus willingly ended his life." 2d book, van den 
undergang, page 46, col. 1, from Euseb., lib. 4. 

Concerning the cause of his conversion, suffer- 
ing and death, other authors write thus : "When 
the bystanders (while the Christians were being 
miserably put to death) beheld with their eyes, 
that the flesh of the martyrs of Christ, by many 
scourgings and stripes, was lacerated and torn 
loose even to the inmost veins and deepest sinews, 
so that their entrails and the most secret parts 
could be seen moving ; and that the torturers then 
strewed potsherds, sea-shells, and even caltrops on 
the ground, over which they rolled, dragged, and 
on which they pressed the Christians thus tor- 
mented, with their naked bodies ; and that at last, 
when they, on account of the previous torments! 
could scarcely live or draw breath any longer, they 
cast them before the wild beasts, to be devoured 
by them ; I say, when the spectators of these trage- 
dies saw, how inhumanly these people were treated, 
and, on the other hand, how patiently the suffer- 
ing Christians endured the tortures, they were 
greatly amazed, yea terrified. 

"Among these was the aforementioned Ger- 
manicus, who, being strengthened through the 
grace of God, so powerfully overcame the natural 
and innate weakness of the mind, which so much 
dreads the bodily death, that, on account of his 
singular steadfastness, he could well be considered 
one of the most eminent martyrs. For, when the 
Stadtholder sought to persuade him, and to move 
him, and to move him by soft words, to spare the 
bloom of his youth, and to have mercy upon him- 
self, he despised his counsel, and, for the sake of 
the Lord Jesus Christ did not count his youthful 
life precious." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


115 


"After that, it is stated by the ancient writers, 
how the wild beasts were let out to him, and how 
greatly he desired to be devoured by them, that he 
might be delivered from this body of sin and death ; 
so that both Jews and heathen who stood by, were 
exceedingly astonished at him. Thus this pious 
witness of the Son of God departed this life with 
an immovable heart, and became united with 
Christ, his blood-bridegroom and Saviour." Com- 
pare Abr. Mell., 1st book, of the Hist., fol. 39, col. 
1, 2, with J oh. Gysii Hist., fol. 16, col. 4, and fol. 
17, col. 1, from Euseb., lib. 4. 


VETIUS, SURNAMED PAGATHUS, PUT TO DEATH ON 

THE RIVER RHONE IN FRANCE. ABOUT THE 

YEAR 172* 

When the persecution of the Christians on the 
River Rhone, at Lyons and Vienne, in France, did 
not cease, but increased the longer the more, so 
that those who confessed the name of Christ, were 
forbidden, first their houses, then their bath-rooms, 
and afterwards all public places, so that they could 
stay neither in the house, nor in the city, nor with- 
out, which was a cause of much suffering to them, 
it happened, that, some of the brethren of the 
church of God there, having been apprehended and 
brought before the President for examination, a 
certain brother, called Veti'us, and surnamed Paga- 
thus, young in years, but old and strong in the 
faith, went boldly before the judge, and made 
himself known as a defender of the apprehended 
Christians, whose cause he undertook to vindicate. 
The Judge, when he had heard his defense, re- 
fused it, and asked him, whether he also was a 
Christian, or believer in Christ, upon which he 
candidly confessed that he was. Immediately he 
was enrolled among the Christian martyrs, and 
was called the Advocate of the Christians. 

He was so pious and virtuous in his life that 
Eusebius Pamphilius calls him: "Filled with 
ardent and divine love of the Spirit ; yea, testifies, 
that he had a perfect love to God, and was upright 
towards all men ; and that his life, though he was 
a youth, was so tried and acceptable, that he 
excelled many old persons, since he lived justly 
and unblamably, being ever ready to minister to 
the servants of God." 

It is finally stated that he followed the holy 
teacher Zacharia, who had shown perfect love to- 
wards the holy martyrs, and assisted and supported 
them ; and also, that, according to the example of 
Jesus, his Saviour, he laid down his life for his 
sheep and friends; that is, gave his life for the 
truth, from love to the church of God, and to be a 
pattern of constancy to them. Compare Euseb., 
5th book, cap. 1, fol. 80, col. 1, 2, with Abr. Mell., 
1st book, fol. 43, col. 1, 2, on the title Vetius. Also, 
Joh. Gys., fol. 17, col. 3, though he differs with 
the others in regard to the time. 


ATTALUS, ROASTED IN AN IRON CHAIR, CAST 

BEFORE THE WILD BEASTS, HIS THROAT 

CUT, AND BEHEADED, ON THE RIVER 

RHONE, ABOUT THE YEAR 172 

At the time that this awful pressure of con- 
science continued under the Emperors Marcus 
Aurelius and Lucius Verus, ceasing not until those 
who endeavored to live a Christian life according 
to their faith, had ended their lives under many 
torments, it came to pass that a certain pious Chris- 
tian, called Attalus, who had been apprehended for 
the name of Jesus, his Saviour, was most inhu- 
manly tortured, to the extent even, that he was 
placed over the fire in an iron chair, and roasted. 
When he was asked, what name the God of the 
Christians had, he answered: "Where there are 
many gods, they are distinguished by names ; but 
where there is but one God, no name is necessary." 
He was finally brought into the amphitheatre, to 
be devoured by the wild beasts. But when these, 
either providentially, or because they were already 
sated, did not touch him, neither with their claws, 
nor with their teeth, he, together with other pious 
martyrs, was stabbed through the throat. Some 
write that he was then beheaded. Compare Joh. 
Gys., fol. 17, col. 4, and fol. 18, col. 1, with P. J. 
Twisck, Chron. 2d book, for the year 172, page 46, 
col. 1, from Hist. Andr. fol. 19. Also, Introduction 
to, etc., fol. 38, col. 1, taken from Euseb., lib. 5, 
cap. 2 and 3. 


* J. Gysius fixes the beginning of this persecution of the Chris- 
tians, at Lyons and Vienne, on the river Rhone, in the year 179 ; but 
other authentic writers commence it with the year 172. 


ALEXANDER OF PHRYGIA, FIRST DREADFULLY TOR- 
TURED, AND THEN EXECUTED WITH THE SWORD, 
FOR THE CONFESSION OF THE SON OF GOD, ON 
THE RIVER RHONE, ABOUT THE YEAR 172 

The ancient writers mention also a certain pious 
man, called Alexander, a physician, and native of 
Phrygia, who was put to death on the same day and 
place when and where the abovementioned Attalus 
laid down his life. Concerning the cause of his im- 
prisonment and death, it is stated, that, when At- 
talus and other Christians were being examined, 
this Alexander of Phrygia stood near the judg- 
ment seat, and considerably strengthened and en- 
couraged, by motions and signs, the Christians who 
were making their defense and confession before 
the Judge, to the end that they should continue 
steadfast in the truth once received. When the 
people that stood around, murmured on this ac- 
count, he was apprehended, and, being interrogated 
in regard to his views, he answered : "I am a Chris- 
tian," and made the same confession that Attalus 
and the others who had been apprehended and were 
standing before the tribunal, had made. He was 
therefore immediately sentenced to the amphi- 
theatre, there, together with others, to be forth- 
with torn or devoured by the beasts. Thither he 
was then taken but the execution was deferred 
until the following day. The next day he was 
brought forth, to fight with the beasts ; however, 
he was first exceedingly tortured with all sorts of 


116 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


executioner's instruments. In this he bore himself 
with such fortitude, that he was not once heard to 
sigh, or to utter the least word of complaint ; yea, 
he was not seen to manifest a single sign of dis- 
tress or pain; only that he spoke to God in his 
heart. Finally, instead of fighting with the wild 
beasts, he was executed with the sword, and thus 
sealed with his blood the truth of the Son of God, 
which he had maintained. Compare with the 
authors who have been adduced above in regard 
to the death of Attalus, Abr. Mellin., 1st book, 
fol. 43, col. 4, and fol. 44, col. 1. 


MATURUS, SANCTUS, BLANDINA, AND A YOUTH 

FROM PONTUS, MOST MISERABLY 

TORMENTED, ON THE RIVER, 

RHONE, ABOUT THE YEAR 172 

It is manifest from the ancient writers, that in 
and about the time that Attalus was slain, various 
other martyrs were likewise put to death for the 
sake of Jesus Christ, almost in the same manner, 
or, at least, with equally great torments. Some 
of these martyrs are not mentioned, while others 
are, namely, Maturus, Sanctus, Blandina, and a 
youth of fifteen years, from Pontus. Touching the 
circumstances of their suffering and death, we 
find that, in substance, it occurred, in the follow- 
ing manner: 

First, three of the aforementioned persons, 
namely, Maturus, Sanctus, and Blandina, were 
exceedingly and dreadfully tormented, especially 
Blandina, for whom the others stood in great fear, 
that, not being able to endure the pain, she might 
be in danger of denying Christ. But she was so 
steadfast in all her sufferings that the hands of the 
executioners grew tired before her heart would 
faint. It is a cause of great astonishment, what 
Eusebius Pamphilius has written concerning her, 
namely, that the executioners began early in the 
morning, and continued tormenting her all day 
until evening, so that they were much surprised, 
how it could be possible that life was not yet extinct 
in her. However, he explains this by saying that 
as often as she repeated her confession, crying: 
"I am a Christian," her heart was stengthened, so 
that she was again enabled to endure the pain. 

Sanctus, who was a deacon, or one who minis- 
tered to the poor, was tormented with red-hot 
plates of copper, which were applied to his belly. 
Being questioned, in the meantime, in regard to 
his name, parentage, and native country, he named 
neither of these, but simply said : "I am a Chris- 
tian ; that is my name, my parentage, and my coun- 
try; indeed, I am altogether nothing else than a 
Christian." This inflamed the tyrants with un- 
speakable rage against him, and they continued to 
torment him on his whole body, to such an extent, 
that it was but one wound. But he remained fear- 
less and undaunted ; for the heat of the fire was 
tempered by the heavenly consolations of Jesus 
Christ, which he experienced in his soul. 

Maturus was treated almost in the same manner. 


and remained equally steadfast. Having been thus 
dreadfully tormented, the aforementioned three 
persons were again cast into prison. Then they 
were again taken from the prison, and tormented 
once more ; first Blandina, and then Maturus and 
Sanctus. The mode of torture was, according to 
Eusebius, by many stripes; but Abr. Mellinus 
states, "That they were scourged a second or third 
time, with all kinds of rods, as well as beaten with 
sticks, cudgels, and three-cornered and barbed 
splinters ; and also, pinched, cut, carved and torn, 
with all sorts of hooks, cutting-knives, claws, pin- 
cers, and iron combs." Finally, when many thou- 
sands had collected about the amphitheatre, Ma- 
turus and Sanctus were placed, in the same man- 
ner as the aforementioned Attalus, on iron chairs, 
under which a great fire was kindled, so that their 
flesh, lacerated by many stripes, was forthwith 
consumed by virtue of the fire; however, when 
the enemies of the truth saw that their spirit was 
immovable, they beheaded both of them. 

Of Blandina it is stated that she was stretched 
out cross-wise, and tied to a stake, to be cast as 
food before the wild beasts; however, she was 
taken away again, and led into prison. But after- 
wards, on the last day of the games, she was again 
brought forth, together with a youth from Pontus 
(whom we have mentioned above), and who, by 
the command of the judge, had witnessed the suf- 
fering and death of the preceding martyrs, that it 
might strike terror into his heart. Being placed in 
the middle of the place of execution, before the 
Judge, they were commanded to swear by the 
gods, which they refused to do, reproving at the 
same time, the idolatry of the heathen. At this the 
heathen were much incensed, and again tormented 
them greatly, yea, so much so, that the youth, un- 
able to endure it, gave up the ghost. Blandina re- 
joiced so greatly in the steadfastness of the de- 
parted youth, whom she had adopted as her son, 
as well as in the death of her faithful friends, who 
had already gone through the conflict, that, being 
beaten by the tyrants, she leaped for joy. Touch- 
ing her death, it is stated, that she was roasted 
upon a gridiron, and afterwards wound in a net, 
thrown before bulls, which tossed her many a 
time high up with their horns, and then let her 
fall down again. She, however, not being dead 
yet, the judge commanded that her throat be 
cut, which was done ; though others say that she 
was thrust through with a sword. Thus did this 
pious martyress, and the other three martyrs of 
Jesus end their lives, and are now awaiting the 
blessed reward which the Lord will give on the 
great day of recompense to all those who have suf- 
fered and fought even unto death, for His name's 
sake. Compare Euseb., lib. 5, cap. 1-3, edit. Dord., 
1588, jol. 81-86 with Abr. Mell., 1st book, fol. 43, 
col. 2-4, about Blandina and Ponticus; also, fol. 
44, col. 1,2, about Sanctus and Maturus. Also, 
Introduction, etc., fol. 38, col, 1, 2. Also, /. Gvs 
1657, fol. 17, col. 3,4. y 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


117 


AN OLD MAN OF NINETY YEARS, CALLED PHOTINUS, 
MISERABLY MALTREATED FOR THE TESTIMONY 
OF JESUS CHRIST, BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL, 
AT LYONS, IN FRANCE; WHO AFTER- 
WARDS DIED IN THE PRISON, 
ABOUT THE YEAR 179 

In Eusebius' Church History, as well as in sev- 
eral other ancient writers, mention is made of a 
certain old man, of more than ninety years, called 
Photinus, a teacher of the church at Lyons, in 
France. It is stated of him, that on account of his 
great age he could not walk, but, having such a 
burning desire to die for the name of Christ, he, 
as A. Mellinus has recorded, had himself carried 
before the judgment seat, in order to be sentenced 
to death with the other martyrs. When he was 
brought to the tribunal by the soldiers, the mag- 
istracy of the city of Lyons, and the whole multi- 
tude of the people followed him, and began to cry 
out, that he was a Christian, together with much 
calumniating and abusive language. Eusebius 
says, that, as this old man stood before the Judge 
at the tribunal, the common people began to cry : 
"This is Christ Himself." 

When the Judge thereupon asked him, who the 
God of the Christians was, he answered with re- 
markable candor: "If thou art worthy of it, thou 
shalt know." This displeased the Judge so great- 
ly, that he commanded that this pious witness of 
Jesus should be struck in his face with fists. Upon 
this, he was most unmercifully pushed, kicked, 
pulled, and knocked by the by-standers, and 
thrown at with whatever they could get hold of, 
without regard to the feebleness of his age ; yea, 
they considered those accomplices with him, who 
did not show enough diligence in assaulting and 
every way abusing this aged man. 

Photinus, having been thus maltreated, yea, 
nearly beaten to death, so that life seemed almost 
extinct, was taken from the tribunal back into 
prison, where, after two days of great misery, 
having commended his soul into the hands of God, 
he died, and thus attained to a blessed end. Com- 
pare Euseb., 5th book, 2d chapter, fol. 83, col. 1, 2 
with J oh. Gys., fol. 17, col. 1, on the name 
Photinus. Also, A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 46, col. 2, 
from various other authors. Also, Introduction, 
fol. 38, col. 1, erroneously called Photimus. 


ALCIBIADES, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, MARTYRED AT 
LYONS IN FRANCE, ABOUT THE YEAR 179 

In the letter of the church at Lyons and Vienne, 
there is mentioned, among various pious martyrs 
who suffered for the name of Jesus Christ, Alcibia- 
des, of whom it is stated that he held a very retired 
and austere life, his diet consisting of nothing but 
salt, bread and water. This manner of life he also 
wished to continue in prison, but being instructed 
by the pious man Attalus, that thereby he would 
leave to his brethren and fellow-martyrs a seem- 
ing reproach for luxuriousness of life, if they 


would not do likewise, he thenceforth partook also 
of other food, with thankfulness. However, this 
did not last long, since he was soon deprived, not 
only of food, but of life itself ; for in the afore- 
mentioned letter he is called a martyr, which was 
generally understood to mean one of those who 
suffered a violent death for the name of Jesus, 
the Son of God, and had valiantly passed through 
the conflict. Compare Euseb., 5th book, cap. 3, 
with Abr. Mell, 1st book, fol. 49, col. 3,4. 

EPIPODIUS OF LYONS, AND ALEXANDER, THE GREEK, 
MARTYRED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF THE EVAN- 
GELICAL TRUTH, AT LYONS IN FRANCE; 
THE ONE BEHEADED, AND THE OTHER 
CRUCIFIED, ABOUT THE YEAR 179 

In the seventeenth year of the Emperor Marcus 
Aurelius, there were slain, among other pious 
martyrs at Lyons in France, Epipodius, a citizen 
of Lyons, and Alexander, a Greek by birth ; whose 
imprisonment, suffering, and death occurred in 
this wise: When the heathen thought that the 
Christian name was entirely extirpated at Lyons 
and Vienne, and that no person who confessed 
it was remaining, these two, as the remainder of 
the Christians there, were betrayed, accused, 
and, three days afterwards, placed before the tri- 
bunal of the Governor. There they were interro- 
gated in regard to their name and confession of 
faith, to which questions they candidly replied. 
Their answers enraged the judge beyond measure, 
and he commanded that Epipodius, who was the 
principal speaker, should be smitten on the cheek, 
which was done in such a manner that he bled 
from his nose and mouth. But this made this 
champion of Christ, though he was still young, 
only the bolder and firmer, and he said : "I con- 
fess that Christ, with the Father and the Holy 
Ghost, is the only true God ; and I deem it right, 
that I should pour out my soul (that is, my life) 
for Him who is my Creator and Redeemer; for 
thus, my life will not be taken from me, but 
changed into a better one. Besides, it matters but 
little, how and in what manner this weak body is 
released and separated from the soul, only so that 
the soul be returned to God, its Creator." 

When Epipodius had, in steadfastness, finished 
this confession, he was suspended, at the command 
of the judge, on a stake, on both sides of which 
the executioners stood, drawing deep gashes with 
cutting hooks or claws into his sides. In the mean- 
time the raging multitude cried, that he should be 
stoned to death, or torn limb from limb; for the 
Judge was much too slow in pronouncing his sen- 
tence of death. Then the Judge had him brought 
out with great haste, and beheaded, and thus this 
pious witness of the Son of God attained to a 
blessed end. 

Alexander, the abovemenfioned Greek, was 
brought out of prison, two days after the death 
of his beloved brother Epipodius, and placed be- 


118 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


fore the tribunal, where he defended himself most 
cheerfully, manifesting, at the same time, his great 
desire to be counted among the number of his slain 
brethren and sisters. The Judge immediately com- 
manded that Alexander should be stripped, and 
beaten by three executioners, with sticks, cudgels, 
etc. ; but in all these torments he steadfastly called 
upon God for help and succor. In short, the sen- 
tence of death was pronounced upon him, namely, 
that he should die on the cross. The executioners 
then tied him on the cross ; but having previously 
been wounded, by many stripes, to such a degree 
that his bones or bare ribs were visible, as well as 
the vital parts of his viscera, namely, the lungs, 
the liver, the heart, etc., which could be observed 
moving, he gave up the ghost, before the execu- 
tioners could inflict further tortures upon him; 
and thus, in steadfastness he died a blessed death. 
When this had taken place, he was buried with his 
friend Epipodius, who had been beheaded, on the 
24th of April 179. Abr. Mell., 1st book, fol. 48, 
col. 1-4. ex act. Proconsular. Homil. Eucherii 
Episc. Lugd. sub nomine Eus., Emisseni de 
Blandina and aliis Ado Vienn., Mart. 22 April. 

LEONIDES, PLUTARCHUS, AND OTHERS, PUT TO 

DEATH FOR THE NAME OF CHRIST, ABOUT 

THE YEAR 180 

Leonides, Plutarchus, and others, who had at- 
tained to the Christian faith, were now visited with 
many torments, and put to death for the name of 
Christ. P. J. Twisck, Chron. 2d book, for the year 
180, pag. 47, col. 1. 


WHAT TRANSPIRED WITH THE CHRISTIANS DURING 
THE FOURTH PERSECUTION 

This persecution caused an unexpected and terri- 
ble pestilence, which devastated countries and in- 
habitants, especially Italy, so that the Christians 
were forgotten; for there were villages that had 
been ravaged to such an extent, that they became 
entirely depopulated, and lay there waste and with- 
out inhabitants. Keyser's Chronijk, van Christi 
Geboorte tot op Carolus V ., printed A. D. 1563, 
fol. 17, col. 1, for the year of the beginning of this 
persecution, 164. 

Likewise, that besides the preceding martyrs 
whom we have mentioned by name, there were also 
put to death, during the preceding persecutions, 
the two pious men Sagaris and Thraseas, together 
with other believing Christians, is shown from 
Eusebius Pamphilius, by A. Mellinus, in the first 
book of his history, fol. 42, col. 2. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 

OF THE MARTYRS IN THE THIRD 

CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THIS CENTURY 

[Among the witnesses of true baptism we have 
accorded Tertullian the first place, because it was 


in the very early part of this century that he flour- 
ished and spread abroad the fame of his doctrine. 
He rebuked those who brought such as were too 
young to be baptized, justifying his rebuke with 
conclusive reasons. 

Leonilla, a Christian grandmother, had her three 
grandsons, Sosyphus, Cleosyphus, and Melosy- 
phus, baptized after previous instruction. 

Then comes Origen, surnamed Adamantius, who 
gives very excellent and salutary expositions, not 
only in regard to baptism, but also with reference 
to various other religious matters. 

Three very learned men, Virian, Marcellinus, 
and Justin, confer with one another, and are bap- 
tized upon their faith; likewise also Pancratius, 
the son of the believing Chonius; also, Bazilla, 
an honorable maiden, who was baptized after hav- 
ing been instructed by Protus and Hiacyntus; 
and thus also was baptized, after having been in- 
structed in the faith by Pontianus, Pontus, the son 
of a Christian, called Marcus. 

Nemesius instructed and baptized those who at- 
tained to the faith. 

Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus exhorted those who 
came to his baptism, that they should first fast forty 
days on account of their sins. 

We conclude with some who in regard to bap- 
tism and the Lord's Supper held views different 
from those of the Catholic (that is, Roman) 
Church, from which latter they had separated 
themselves, and with this completes the account of 
baptism in this country.] 

We do not find it stated by a single authentic 
author, as has been shown, that during the first two 
centuries any one departed from the foundation of 
Christ's true order of baptism, that is, from bap- 
tism upon faith, by changing this, the true baptism, 
into a vain or infant baptism ; but it appears that in 
the third century there were men who not only 
originated, but also put it in practice and admin- 
istered the same ; yet it was adopted only in a few 
places. /. Mehrn. in Baptism. Hist., page 164, 
num. 10. H. Montanus, in Nietighz. van den Kin- 
der-doop, second edition, p. 17. 

It would not be out of order to give a two-fold 
account of this matter : in the first place, by whom, 
how, and in what manner baptism was then prac- 
ticed in the true church of God; in the second 
place, by whom, how, and in what manner, infant 
baptism originated and was observed by some, at 
that time. But since it is not our purpose here to 
refute this error, but simply to show how true bap- 
tism, as instituted by Christ, and practiced by the 
holy apostles, has been observed, taught and 
preached from century to century; and how the 
church of God blossomed in that faith, as a rose 
amidst thorns ; therefore we will pass by this ques- 
tion, since it does not properly belong here; how- 
ever, we shall speak of it in a separate place, but 
proceed now in our account. 

About the year 204. — This is the time in which, 
it is stated, the celebrated Tertullian flourished, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


119 


who, seeing that baptism was administered to the 
catechumens (learners) too soon, inasmuch as some 
began to baptize them while they were yet children, 
wrote, in order to prevent this, as follows : "It is 
more expedient to defer baptism, according to the 
condition, circumstances, and age of each particu- 
lar individual, than to precipitate it. Again : "It is 
true, the Lord says: 'Forbid them not to come 
unto me.' Let them come, then, when they in- 
crease in years ; let them come, when they learn and 
are taught whereto they come; that they may be- 
come Christians, when they can know Christ. Why 
hasten ye the innocent youths to the forgiveness of 
sins? We should exercise more prudence in tem- 
poral matters, than to entrust with divine things 
those to whom we do not entrust earthly ; that they 
may know to desire salvation, in order that it may 
appear that it was given to him, who desired it." 
Lib. de Baptismo, cap. 18. Also, H. Mont. Nie- 
tigheyd, page 17. 

These words contain several dissuasions against 
baptizing too early. The first reason is based on the 
unprofitableness of hastening with it, and is con- 
tained in these words : "It is more profitable to de- 
fer baptism, according to the condition, circum- 
stances, and age of each particular individual, than 
to hasten it." The second reason is founded on the 
import of the words of Christ : "Forbid them not 
to come unto me ;" with reference to which he says : 
"Let them come then, when they increase in 
years." The third reason he bases on the innocence 
or simplicity of those children, saying : "Why has- 
ten ye the innocent youths ?" The fourth reason he 
founds on the imprudence manifested thereby, say- 
ing: "We should exercise more prudence in tem- 
poral matters than to trust with divine things those 
to whom we do not entrust earthly things." The 
fifth reason, finally, he bases on the desire for sal- 
vation which the candidate for baptism must have, 
saying : "That they may know to desire salvation, 
in order that it may appear, that it was given to 
him who desired it." 

It appears therefore throughout these words of 
Tertullian, how greatly he was opposed to having 
baptism administered too hastily to ignorant and 
inexperienced young persons; and, on the other 
hand, how gratifying would it have been to him, if, 
having reached the years of maturity, and been in- 
structed and taught, they would have been baptized 
upon their own desire to be saved. 

This manner of baptizing he mentions in another 
place, stating at the same time, how this baptism 
was administered by him and his own people. He 
says : "When we go to the water, and first begin 
with baptism, we confess there, even as we did be- 
fore in the church, under the hand of the overseer,* 
that we renounce the devil with all his adherents 
and angels ; after which we are dipped three times, 
which answers more than the Lord has laid down 


in the Gospel."* In lib. de Corona Militis, cap. 3 
and 4. Also, H. Mont. Nietigheyd, page 16. 

He states it still more clearly in Lib. de Specta- 
culis, cap. 4: "When we, having gone into the 
water, confess the Christian faith upon the words 
of his law, we testify with our mouth, that we have 
renounced the devil, his pomp, and his angels." 

And that this may be practiced and maintained 
in truth, he gives, to the candidates for baptism this 
instruction (Lib. de Baptismo, cap. 20) : "Those 
who are to be baptized, must supplicate with much 
praying, fasting, bending of knee, and watch- 
ing, confessing all their former sins, so that they 
may show forth John's baptism." "They were bap- 
tized," says he, "confessing their sins." Matt. 3 :6. 

Then he shows what baptism is, and what it sig- 
nifies ; from which we can clearly see that at least 
in his estimation infant baptism was not author- 
ized. He says : "The washing of water is a seal of 
the faith; which faith begins with, and is known 
by the penitence of the believer. We are not 
washed, in order that we may cease to sin ; but be- 
cause we have ceased, and are washed in heart, for 
this is the first immersion of him that hears."f 
Lib. de Pcenitentia,, cap. 6. Also, /. du Bois, 
Seckerheyd van, etc., printed A. D. 1648, page 47. 

If you wish to learn still more of the views of 
Tertullian concerning baptism as instituted by 
Christ, read lib. de Prescript, adversus Hcereticos, 
cap. 36, cited by H. Montanus, in Nietigh., page 23, 
and by /. du Bois (although he misinterprets this 
passage), Contra Montanum, page 44, where Ter- 
tullian writes thus : "Well, then, ye who would in- 
quire more fully into the matter of your salvation, 
take a view of the apostolic churches, in which the 
chairs of the apostles are still occupied by their 
successors, and where their own authentic epistles 
are still read, sounding their voices, and calling 
up their very forms. If Achaia is near you, there 
is Corinth ; are you not far from Macedonia, there 
is Philippi, and there Thessalonica ; can you come 
into Asia, there is Ephesus ; but are you near Italy, 
there is Rome. Let us see, what she (namely the 
church there) has said, what she has taught, and 
in what she has agreed with the African churches. 
She recognizes one God, the Creator of all things, 
and Christ Jesus from the virgin Mary, the Son 
of God the Creator, and the resurrection of the 
flesh ; she unites the law and the prophets with the 
evangelical and apostolical writings, and there- 


* The leader, or minister or bishop. — Publishers. 


* The above quotations from Tertullian, are given by Van 
Braght to show that he in no wise sanctioned infant baptism and 
from the remark at the close of the paragraph^ "which answers 
(says) more than the Lord has laid down in the Gospel," it appears 
that even Tertullian himself, though, as it appears, he practiced it, 
does not claim Gospel authority for it. — The Publishers. 

t Tertullian here speaks of repentance and regeneration, show- 
ing how that the heart must be changed and cleansed with the 
"washing of water by the word," and then says : "for this is the 
first immersion (indoopinge) of him that hears," by which he 
evidently means to show that this spiritual change of the heart is 
first in importance. Karl Tauchnitz in his Dutch — German Diction- 
ary gives the definition of "Indoopen: Einweihen," to consecrate 
or initiate, of which baptism is also a signification. In this sense 
we might say: This is the first baptism, or the first consecration, 
or the most important work of him that hears, or of him that would 
be saved. — The Publishers. 


120 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


from drinks this faith, which she seals with water, 
clothes with the Holy Ghost, feeds with the eucha- 
rist, or Lord's Supper, and confirms by martyr- 
dom; and receives no one contrary to this insti- 
tution." Thus far, Tertullian. 

To this we say : "It is indeed true, that he here 
speaks against the errors of Valentinus, Marcion, 
and the like ; but since this occasions him to say, 
that all the churches which he mentions, especially 
the one at Rome, in which the apostolic doctrine 
was still sounded at that time, sealed the faith, 
which he opposes to said errors, with water, and 
that they received no one contrary to this institu- 
tion; any one can clearly see, that all the above 
named churches administered baptism at that time 
to adults, who could drink that faith from the 
evangelical and apostolical writings; and not this 
only, but could also partake of it by the use of the 
eucharist, and confirm it by martyrdom, which are 
things that children cannot do." Ergo. 

tertullian's views concerning different 
other matters, according to the ac- 
count of p. j. twisck 

"Tertullian," says Twisck, "exhorts Christian 
women, in a book written to his wife, not to enter 
into marriage relations with the heathen, saying 
that it is impossible for them to live long in peace 
and friendship. He says : 'What must the heathen 
husband think, when he sees, or hears it said that 
his wife kisses on the cheek the first Christian 
whom she happens to meet ?' " 

"Again, In a book on patience, when speaking 
of the apostates and of withdrawing from them, 
he says that patience governs all manner of salu- 
tary doctrines, and remarks: 'What wonder then, 
that it also serve to repentance to those who are 
wont to come to the help of the apostate, whether 
it be man or wife, when separated one from an- 
other, nevertheless by such things as are lawful, 
to be led to maintain their widow or widowerhood. 
It is patience that waits for repentance, hopes for 
it and exhorts to it those who would yet at some 
time attain to salvation. How great the benefit it 
confers upon both — the one it preserves from 
adultery, the other it reforms.'* Again he says : 'Do 
you think that it is hard for a Christian to suffer ? 
He would rather die himself, than to kill others ; 
and if you smite a Christian, he glories in it.' " 

"Again, 'As the religion of others does not con- 
cern us, and neither profits nor harms us ; there- 
fore, it does not become any one religion to force 

* The foregoing quotation from Tertullian is ambiguous in the 
Holland language and appears to have been so also in the original. 
Dr. Karl Ad. Heinrich Kellner, Prof, of Theol. at Heidelsheim, in 
his German translation of the "Complete Works of Tertullian" 
renders this passage as follows, which he says he holds as the cor- 
rect rendering: "What wonder then that it (patience) also unites 
itself with repentance and is, aside from separation in the marriage 
relation, the usual means of relief for the apostate — this, however, 
only for the reason that we, whether it be for the man, or whether 
it be for the wife, in widowhood may hope for constancy. It is 
patience that waits for salvation with those who in their own time 
would seek repentance, that longa for it and prays for it. How 
great a benefit it works for both I The one it preserves from adul- 
tery, the other it purifies." — The Publishers. 


itself upon another, since it must be accepted vol- 
untarily, and not by coercion, for what is required 
is the offering of a willing mind.' " (This agrees 
with Ex. 25, 35 and 36. Chr. Leonh., lib. 1. Seb. 
Fr. in the Arke fol. 174. Stand der Religie, lib. 4. 
Grond. Bew. letter B. Menn. Sym. Doop. C, fol. 8. 
Th. Imbroek, fol. 28.) 

"Again, Tertullian (in his fourth book against 
Marcion) quoting the words of Christ : This is my 
body, that is, a figure of my body, says : 'It would 
not have been a figure, had His body not been real ; 
for a phantasm, or mere illusion, cannot have a 
figure or shadow?' With this he means to prove 
that Christ had a real body ; and what he here calls 
a figure, he, in the fifth book, calls a sacrament, 
with the express words : 'The bread and the cup.' 
Still more clearly he says in the first book: 'Nei- 
ther did he despise or reject the bread, by which he 
represented or typified his body.' " 

"He says : 'These words of Christ : This is my 
body, we must understand as though Christ had 
said: This is the sign and figure of My body. I 
pass over Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Paulinus, 
who both treat in the same manner of the above 
sacrament.' " Tertul. Apolog., cap. 39. Euseb. lib. 
6 and 9. Daniel Saut., lib. 1, cap. 6. 

"Again, Tertullian says : 'We must not seek the 
faith from the persons, but prove the persons by 
the faith.' " De Praescript, lib. 4. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron. 2d book, page 53, col. 1, 2. 

Note.— Tertullian taught at this time: "We 
have the apostles for authors, who established noth- 
ing according to their own inclination, but faith- 
fully taught the nations that which they had re- 
ceived from God." Lib. 1, Prescript. 

He writes further that "all churches are apos- 
tolic churches, though they may have been found- 
ed long after the time of the apostles, if they have 
but kinship with the doctrine." Lib. 1. Prase. See 
Samuel Veltius, in the Geslacht-register der Rootn- 
scher Successie, second edition, 1649 pages 115, 
116. 

Tertullian says among other things : "The em- 
perors would have believed in Christ, if the world 
had not prevented them; for they could not be- 
come Christians, because they had to serve the 
world, and carry on war." See, Grondelijke Verk- 
laringe Danielis ende Johannis, printed at Harlem, 
1635, on Tertullian. 

Vicecomes, in his first book on baptism, chap. 1, 
notes the following testimony from Tertullian (lib. 
1, cap. 4.) : "There is no difference between those 
whom John baptized in Jordan and those Peter 
baptized in the Tiber." With this he intends to 
prove that in the first days of Christianity there 
were neither baptismal fonts nor churches. /. M ., 
Baptism. Hist., page 276. 

Again says Tertullian : "Thus, when we go into 
the water of baptism, we justly confess our sins 
and the Christian faith." Vicecom., lib. 4, cap. 7, 
and J. M., Baptism. Hist., page 277. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


121 


These last two passages from Tertullian we have 
adduced over and above what was necessary, but 
they are not useless, since they confirm what we 
have said above about baptism ; for by the first the 
superstition which was wont to be connected with 
the water, the baptismal font, and the church in 
which baptism was administered, is removed, or at 
least (per consequentiam)controvzrted; and the 
second states that it is proper to confess our sins, 
and the Christian faith, at baptism. And therewith 
he proves that it is not proper to be baptized with- 
out confessing one's sins, and the Christian faith. 
What has been said is sufficient for the intelligent. 
With this we take our leave of Tertullian. 

A. D. 224. — Leonilla, a Christian grandmother, 
had three grandsons, Sosyphus, Cleosyphus, and 
Melosyphus. She begged Romigius that he would 
instruct the three lads in the Christian faith, and 
then baptize them. This was done in a godly 
manner. P. J. Twisck, Chron. for the year 224, 
3d book, page 60, col. 1, from Grond. Bew., letter 
B.. Also, Kort verhcel van den loop der werelt, 
printed 1611, page 47. 

From this it will be seen, that at that time and 
place Christians were not in the habit of having 
their children or grandchildren baptized, unless 
these had reached riper years, and been instructed 
in the faith, which, when they confessed it, they 
were baptized upon. This should be borne in mind. 

A. D. 231. — At this time there flourished as a 
writer the celebrated Origen, surnamed Adaman- 
tius, who, treating on baptism, writes thus (Homil. 
6, super. Ezechidem) on Ezekiel, 16:4: " 'Neither 
wast thou washed in water to supple thee,' etc.: 
We, who have received the grace of baptism in the 
name of Jesus Christ, are washed unto salvation. 
Simon was washed, and when he had received bap- 
tism, continued with Philip ; but not being washed 
unto salvation, he was condemned by him who 
through the Holy Ghost said to him : 'Thy money 
perish with thee.' It is a matter of great importance 
that he who is washed, be washed unto salvation. 

"Be very heedful of this, ye catechumens, or 
learners, and prepare yourselves by what is told 
you while you are yet under instruction and un- 
baptized ; and then come to the washing of water, 
and be washed unto salvation. But be not washed 
as some, who are washed, but not unto salvation ; 
like those who receive the water, but not the Holy 
Ghost. 

"He that is washed unto salvation, receives the 
water and the Holy Ghost. 

"Because Simon was not washed unto salvation, 
he received the water, and not the Holy Ghost ; for 
he thought he could purchase the gift of the Holy 
Ghost with money, wherein he was not washed 
unto salvation. 

"That which we now read as having been spoken 
at Jerusalem, is addressed to every sinful soul that 
seems to believe." Also, H. Mont. Nietigh., pp. 
36, 37. 


The above words of Origen indicate the manner 
of baptism which prevailed in his time, namely, 
that the candidates for baptism were first catechu- 
mens, that is, learners, who were instructed in the 
faith, and had to prepare themselves to this end, 
before they were baptized. For, when he says: 
"Be very heedful of this, ye catechumens, or learn- 
ers, and prepare yourselves by what is told you 
while you are yet under instruction and unbap- 
tized; and then come to the washing of water," 
etc., what else is meant by it, than that it confirms 
what John required of those who came to him to be 
baptized, saying: "Bring forth therefore fruits 
meet for repentance," Matt. 3:8; that is, prepare 
yourselves by a true reformation of life, so that 
you may receive baptism worthily. 

Then, on the words, Ezek. 16:5 : "But thou wast 
cast out in the open field," etc., he (Origen) com- 
ments thus : "If we sin again after the washing of 
regeneration, we are cast away, according to the 
Word of God, in the day that we are born: such 
are frequently found, who, after they have been 
washed by the washing of regeneration, do not 
bring forth fruits meet for repentance ; nor do they 
live up to the mystery of baptism, with more fear 
than they had while they were yet catechumens, or 
learners; or with more love than they exercised 
when they were still hearers of the Word ; or with 
holier deeds than they performed before. Beloved, 
observe what is said in the text : 'Thou wast cast 
out in the open field, for the wickedness of thy 
soul, in the day that thou wast born.' " H. Mont., 
same page as above. 

By these words he confirms the import of his 
former declaration, namely, "That those who are 
to be baptized, must first be catechumens, or learn- 
ers, and, being baptized, they must be truly regen- 
erated ;" and thus he calls baptism "the washing of 
regeneration," even as Paul, Tit. 3 :5. 

Moreover, he complains that those who were 
washed by the washing of regeneration, did not 
bring forth fruits meet for repentance. By this he 
certainly means to say, that the baptized person 
must be truly converted, and bring forth good 
fruits. But how can he be converted, that is, turn 
from his error, who never has erred ? And how can 
it be demanded of him to bring forth good fruits, 
who cannot be accused of ever having brought 
forth bad fruits? Hence it is evident that he does 
not say this with reference to the baptism of in- 
fants, since these, having never erred, or brought 
forth bad fruits, cannot, through baptism, be re- 
quired to turn from error, and bring forth better 
fruits than they have brought forth before. 

That such baptism, accompanied with the morti- 
fying of the flesh, and resurrection unto a new life, 
is taught and commended by Origen, is clearly ex- 
pressed in his comments on Rom. 6 :3 : "Know ye 
not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ were baptized into his death?" where he 
says : "But it seems to me that the apostle in this 
chapter does not prefix even the words : 'Know ye 


122 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


not,' without a purpose. He thereby proves that at 
that time, that is, in the days of the apostles, it was 
not as it is now, that those who were baptized, 
received only the outward figure of the mysteries, 
but that also the power and intent of the same was 
imparted to them, and this to those who understood 
it, and had been instructed concerning it : that those 
who are baptized, are baptized into the death of 
Christ, and buried with Him by baptism ; and that 
those who are baptized must walk in newness of 
life, even as Christ rose from the dead, through the 
glory of the Father." Also, H. Mont, page 37. 
This is certainly expressing plainly and unequiv- 
ocally, of what baptism he is treating,* namely, of 
such a baptism, of which the power and intent was 
imparted to those who understood it; by which 
they were buried into the death; by which they 
were raised, to walk in newness of life, etc., all of 
which are things that cannot be comprehended, 
much less undertaken and carried out, by infants. 
In this manner he speaks also in other places, as, 
for instance, in Homilia 5, 4th and 5th chapters of 
the book Joshua. Again, Homit. 9, 8th and 9th 
chapters; Homil. 15, Wth chap. Also, Homil. 7, 
15th chap, of the book of Judges. B. Hist. p. 291. 


NOTICE CONCERNING THE WRITINGS OF ORIGEN 
WITH REFERENCE TO BAPTISM 

There are a few passages, namely, Homil. 8, on 
the 12th and 13th chapters of Leviticus ; Homil. 14, 
on the 2d chap, of Luke; Comment, on the 6th 
chap, of the Epistle to the Romans, from which 
some who at this day uphold infant baptism sup- 
pose they can draw something to show that Origen 
was not a stranger to their views, but that he sanc- 
tioned them. But various eminent writers deny, 
yea, completely refute this, it being proved that 
these passages do not belong to Origen, but to 
Ruffinus, the priest at Aquileia, who, it is stated, 
more than one hundred and fifty years after Ori- 
gen's time translated the works of the latter from 
the Greek into Latin, adding from his own, that is, 
out of his own mind the abovementioned passages, 
and, on the other hand, leaving out other matters. 
To this explanation we assent. See Ruffinus' prefa- 
tory and concluding remarks on Origen's Com- 
mentary to the Epistle to the Romans. Also, 
Erasmus" account of the life of Origen, prefaced 
to the works of the latter, according to /. Mehrn., 
Bapt. Hist., pp. 283 and 291. Also, H. Mont. 
Nietigheyd van den Kinder-doop, pages 29-34, 
and 42, 43. 

Besides this, various gross errors have of old 
been imputed to Origen, as, for instance, that he 
believed, that the evil spirits would ultimately be 
saved. However, he himself desires this in a cer- 
tain letter written to those of Alexandria, in which 
he complains of the shamelessness of his adver- 

* At this time Origen taught that we must appeal to the Holy 
Scriptures ; for without these no credence can be given to what we 
say. On "Jeremiah, Homil. 1." See, Samuel Veltius, in "Geslacht- 
register der," etc., page 115. 


saries, who dared in his life time to defame him 
with slanders which not even an insane man would 
utter. What, then, must have been the treatment 
his writings received after his death! 

"We may plainly see," says Jacob Mehrning, 
"from what we still have of the writings of Origen, 
that many ignorant and grossly erring spirits have 
sought to palm off to the simple-minded, their own 
whims under the name of this eminent man, who 
by Jerome (in Prefatione ante Esechidem) is 
called the second master of the church after the 
apostles." Bapt. Hist. pp. 288 and 289. Also, 
H. Mont. Nietigh., pages 35, 36. 

TOUCHING DIFFERENT POINTS OF THE DOCTRINE 

OF ORIGEN, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT 

OF P. J. TWISCK 

A. D. 231. — "Origen, a man who abounds in 
spiritual allegories, and who practiced himself what 
he taught others, as church history testifies of 
him, began at this time to write his books, and says 
to the catechumens : 'Repent, that ye may receive 
baptism for the remission of sins.' Also: 'He that 
has resolved to come and be baptized, but is not 
willing to forsake his evil practices and habits, but 
continues in his former condition, does not come to 
baptism in the proper way.' With reference to this, 
you may read, George Vicelius, in his Form en 
Aenteekening , en Welke Gestalte en form de Kerb 
duysent jaer stond, fol. 127. 

"Again: Origen was appointed by Demetrius, 
at Alexandria, catechist, that is, teacher of the 
pupils of the faith, which office was filled before 
him (after the apostles) by Plautinus and Clem- 
ent. Of his pupils, Plutarch, Serenus, Heraclides, 
Heron, and a woman, were martyred for Christ, 
before they were baptized, thus obtaining the 
baptism of fire. 

"After Origen, Heracles, and after Heracles, 
Dionysius had charge at Alexandria of the schools 
of the catechumens, that is, of those who re- 
ceived instruction in the Christian doctrine, pre- 
paratory to baptism. 

"Again : Origen says, that no one should be per- 
secuted for his faith, and that he who would live 
according to the Gospel must not drive or compel 
his brother to an oath, nor swear such an one him- 
self, though it be demanded of him. 

"Again : On Matt. 23 he says : The Lord repre- 
hends those teachers who not only do not practice 
what they teach, but also, tyrannously and unmer- 
cifully, without considering the strength of their 
hearers, lay upon them burdens greater than they 
can bear, namely, forbid them to marry, and over 
and above what is expedient, would constrain them 
to an impossible chastity. 

"Again : He says that it is altogether a letter that 
killeth, that John should be understood literally 
and carnally. Hence he insists strongly upon it, 
that the natural eating, of Christ's body avails 
nothing, and that it must therefore be spiritually 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


123 


understood and eaten. Euseb., lib. 6. Chron. Seb 
Frank, fol. 101 Leonh., lib. 1. Joh. Anast., fol. 
313. 

"Again: In his 12th, 15th, and 18th Homily on 
the Book of Joshua, Origen writes thus: 'If the 
natural war of Joshua and his people were not a 
figure and antitype of the spiritual war of Christ 
and the Christians, the apostles, as peace-proclaim- 
ers, would never have accepted, nor sanctioned the 
reading of the books of Joshua in the heavenly Je- 
rusalem of the peaceful church and the peace- 
loving children of God.' And he further proves by 
many arguments, that Christ, the Prince of Peace, 
teaches peace, and not war ; and that we are not to 
fight with external, but only with spiritual weapons, 
against the devil, the world, flesh, sin, and death. 

"Again : Speaking of the destruction of Ai, and 
the extermination of the king and the people, he 
says: 'By this we must not understand that the 
saints, at this day in the new Testament, may shed 
blood, and kill with the natural sword : these and 
like events are full of mysteries.' He explains fur- 
ther, that we must utterly destroy Ai, that is, the 
kingdom of darkness and sin, through the spiritual 
Joshua, Christ Jesus. Col. 1 ; Eph. 6. 

"Again: Origen (Homil in Mattheo 7) says: 
'The text in Luke 22, about buying a sword, is per- 
nicious (namely, for the wicked) if understood lit- 
erally, and not allegorically : for he that should re- 
gard the letter, and not understand the will and in- 
tent of God, but sell his garment, and buy a 
sword, would understand the word of Christ con- 
trary to His will.' 

"Again: In the book against Celsus the Sec- 
ond, he says that 'war has been abolished by the 
only God.' 

"Again: Of antichrist he says, from II Thess. 
2, that he sitteth in the temple of God, and, a little 
further on, he says: 'Antichrist assumes merely 
the name of Christ, but does not do His works ; nor 
does he teach the words of truth. Christ is the 
truth; antichrist is the spurious truth. He shows 
himself here, as though he were Christ and the 
Word of God, but is nevertheless the abomination 
of desolation.' " P. J. Twisck, Chron. 3d book, p. 
61, from Chron. Seb. Fr., fol. 65, 78. Hieron. 
Zauch., fol. 56. Joh. Heyden Ncemb., jol. 226, 227. 

A. D. 251. — It is recorded at this time, Vir- 
ian, Marcellinus, and Justin, learned men, in the 
reign of Emporer Decius, conferred with one an- 
other about matters concerning the Christians, and 
were well pleased with this holy religion ; and hear- 
ing that Christian believers were baptized, they sent 
for a teacher* called Justin, and asked him to bap- 
tize them. 

Justin rejoiced that such learned men wished 
to take upon themselves the yoke of Christ. He 
began to instruct them, and then had water brought, 
and baptized them on confession of their faith. 
P. J. Twisck, Chron. 3d book, page 68, col. 2, from 


* The author employs the word "priest;" but priest is derived 
from the word "presbyter," that is, elder. We say teacher. 


Wicel. in Choro Sanctorum, Grond. Bew., letter 
B. 

A. D. 253. — For this year, we read in ancient 
authors, that Pancratius, the son of the believ- 
ing Clionius, was baptized at Mount Celius, when 
he was fifteen years old, after he had been un- 
der instruction twenty days. Compare this with 
P. J. Twisck, Chron. 3d book, page 71, col. 1, from 
Wicel. Grond. Bew. letter B. Leonh., lib., 1. 

Touching the circumstances of this matter, that 
is, of Dionysius, who traveled with him, and the 
bishop Cornelius who baptized him, to whom some 
have erroneously ascribed another office, we leave 
it in its own merit and mention it no further. It 
suffices us that it is evident from this, that at that 
time the believers did not have their children bap- 
ized, till they, having attained to understanding 
and riper years, themselves desired to be baptized 
on their faith. 

Same year as above. — Basilla, an honorable and 
discreet maiden, at Rome, in the reign of Emperor 
Galien, learned the Christian faith from the eunuch 
Protus, and Hiacynthus, and was also baptized by 
the above-mentioned bishop Cornelius. Grond. 
Bew. van den Doop, printed 1581, letter B., ij. 

A. D. 257. — Pontus, the son of Marcus, a Chris- 
tian, was orally instructed in the Christian religion, 
by the bishop, or teacher, Pontian, and then bap- 
tized. P. J. Twisck, Chron. 3d book, p. 73, col. 1, 
from Grond. Bew. letter B. Chron. Mich., fol 163. 
Also, Loop der Werelt, by F. H. H., printed 1611, 
page 47. 

Here notice again that the afore-mentioned Pon- 
tus was not of Jewish or heathenish, but of Chris- 
tian descent ; for he is called the son of Marcus, a 
Christian; from which, as in the case of Pan- 
cratius, it appears that the Christians suffered their 
children to grow up unbaptized, till they attained to 
the years of understanding. 

A. D. 264. — At Rome, under the Emperors 
Valerian and Galien, Nemesius and some others 
catechised; and, according to the custom of the 
church, when they had held a fast, he baptized all 
who believed. P. J. Twisck, Chron. 3d book, p. 57, 
col. 1 ; word for word. 

Note. — In the tract, Grondig Bewijs, en onder- 
rechting van den Doop, printed A. D. 1581, letter 
B., ij.; ex Codice Mariano, the name Nemesius 
is not put in the nominative, but in the accusative 
(objective) case ; so that in this place it seems that 
Nemesius was not the one who baptized, but one 
of those who were baptized. 

About A. D. 290. — The above cited examples 
of those who were baptized on their faith, after 
having been instructed, are confirmed by various 
teachings of Cyril of Jerusalem, who then showed 
how those who were baptized should conduct 
themselves before as well as after baptism. Jacob 
Mehrning introduces him about the end of this 
century, or about A. D. 290, and adduces from his 
writing various passages which apply in no wise 
to infant baptism, but very appropriately to the 


124 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


baptism which is administered upon faith and re- 
pentance. 

In Baptism Hist, pages 317 and 318, he has this 
annotation (cap. 8, ibid) : "Cyril himself exhorts 
some catechumens who before had spent several 
years in sensuality and lewdness, that they should 
not think it grievous to do penance for forty days, 
saying: 'Beloved, forsake that which is present, 
and believe in the things to come. So many years 
you have spent, and served the world in vain ; will 
you not, then, begin, and for the sake of your souls, 
abstain for forty days ?' " 

In Baptism Hist., page 318, we read (Cyril in 
Catech. 2, Mi j stag.) : "Repent, O man, and the 
grace of baptism shall not be withheld from thee." 

"Again: Cyril strenuously exhorts such newly 
planted ones unto godliness, so that when they go 
to receive baptism, they will not be rejected, like 
the guest spoken of in the Gospel, who did not have 
on a wedding garment. Therefore he says: 'Far 
be it, that any of those who have given in their 
names for baptism, and have been entered on the 
lists, should hear: Friend, how earnest thou in 
hither not having a wedding garment ?' " From 
Vicecom., lib. 2, cap. 12, on Cyril. 

"Again he says (Cyril in Catech. 3, Mijstag) : 
'Begin to wash your garments by repentance, that, 
being called to the marriage of the Lamb, you may 
be found worthy.' " 

"Again (Baptism. Hist., page 319, Cyril Cat- 
ech. 1, Mijstag) : 'Say to those who are to be bap- 
tized: Hear the voice of the prophet that saith: 
Wash ye, make you clean; put away from your 
souls the evils of your doings before mine eyes ; that 
the assembly of the angels may call unto you: 
Blessed are they whose transgressions are for- 
given, whose sins are covered.' " 

"Again cap. 6 (Vicec), Cyril admonishes the 
newly baptized : 'As you have put off the old gar- 
ments, and put on those that are according to the 
Spirit, you shall henceforth always walk in white 
garments.' By this we do not mean to say that it is 
necessary for you always to have on white gar- 
ments, but that you are to clothe yourselves in such 
garments as are white, bright, and spiritual before 
God. And in cap. 10, he says: 'Would to God, 
that we could all of a truth say : My soul is joyful 
in the Lord ; for he hath clothed me with the gar- 
ments of salvation, and with the robe of glad- 
ness.' " 

Then he shows how holy, divine, and blessed a 
thing it is, to have joined one's self by baptism to 
the nobility of Christ, that is, to His church. It is 
truly wonderful, how affectionately, sweetly, and 
comfortingly he addresses them, saying: "You 
have now given in your names to the nobility of 
Christ, and have received the bridal torches, the 
desire for the kingdom of heaven, the good pur- 
pose, hope, etc." And, cap. 38, he thus addresses 
the baptized: "Now the odor of salvation is on 
you, O ye enlightened ! Gather you heavenly flow- 
ers, to make heavenly crowns of them. Now, now ! 


the odor of the Holy Spirit smells sweetly on you. 
You have been at the gate of the King's palace. 
Would to God, that you were already led before 
the King Himself. The blossoms have now ap- 
peared on the trees ; but, oh ! that the fruit also were 
conceived!" lac. Mehrn. Baptism. Hist, on the 
third century, page 320. 

How could it be possible that Cyril of Jerusalem 
should have taught differently concerning baptism, 
than the Anabaptists today teach, namely, that it 
must be accompanied by faith and repentance ; see- 
ing he, as has been shown, employs throughout 
such manner of speech as cannot be applied other- 
wise than to this baptism, and by no means to 
infant baptism. 

For instance, in the first passage he admonishes 
the catechumens who had spent several years in 
voluptuousness, not to think it grievous, to do pen- 
ance before baptism for forty days ; which well ac- 
cords with what was said to those who were not 
prepared for baptism. Matt. 3:7,8. 

This he confirms in the five subsequent passages, 
using these arguments : That they must not neglect 
to repent, so that the grace of baptism may not be 
withheld from them. Again, that they would not 
have to hear it said to them, as the unprepared 
guest in the Gospel : "Friend, how earnest thou in 
hither?" Again, that they, being called to the mar- 
riage of the Lamb, might be found worthy. Again, 
that to this end they should hear the voice of the 
prophet, that saith: "Wash ye, make you clean; 
put away the evil of your doings." 

In the sixth passage he admonishes the newly 
baptized : As you have put off the old garments 
(that is, forsaken the old life) and put on those that 
are according to the Spirit (that is, put on a new 
life), you shall henceforth always walk in white 
garments, that is, henceforth you shall live a holy 
life and pay unto God your vows made unto Him 
when you were baptized. This is certainly a 
scriptural exposition, and is not obscurely ex- 
pressed in Cyril's words. 

We now come to the seventh or last passage, of 
which we shall say but little, as it contains not a 
single word which does not clearly indicate that 
he speaks of the baptism of the believers and peni- 
tent ; for he there says to the baptized, that being 
enlightened they now had on them the odor of sal- 
vation, and admonishes them, to gather heavenly 
flowers with which to make heavenly crowns, add- 
ing this wish : "The blossoms have now appeared 
on the trees ; but oh ! that also the fruit were con- 
ceived !" 

Any one with only a little understanding can 
easily see that these words of Cyril do not pertain 
to infants, and that he therefore does not speak to 
infants or of infant baptism, but is speaking to rea- 
sonable persons, and of the baptism that is adminis- 
tered to such. Moreover, from his having previ- 
ously mentioned the catechumens, it is evident that 
it was customary at that time in the church where 
he was teacher, first to instruct the youth in the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


125 


faith, and then, when they had accepted it, to bap- 
tize them upon confession of it. Without contra- 
diction, it was a scriptural and holy custom, which 
proceeded not from human reason like infant bap- 
tism, but from the mind of Christ and the under- 
standing of the holy apostles. With this we take 
our leave from Cyril. 

A. D. 300. — Arnobius, an old teacher says (in 
Psalms 146) : "You are not first baptized, and 
then apprehend the faith, and rejoice in it; but 
when you are about to be baptized, you state be- 
fore the teacher your perfect willingness, and 
make your confession with your own mouth." P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., 3d book, page 82, col. 1, 2, from 
Grond. Bew., letter B. 

These words of Arnobius are very excellent, and 
show that at his time they did not first baptize, and 
then apprehend faith ; but that the one to be bap- 
tized had to state his willingness before baptism, 
and then to make confession of faith with his own 
mouth. However, we shall speak more fully of 
Arnobius in the succeeding century. 

Same year as above. — It is recorded that at this 
time there were several persons who had separated 
from the catholic* (Roman) church, namely: Da- 
does, Sabas, Adelphius, Hermas and Simeones, 
who were accused of heresy by the Roman church, 
and, among other things, were charged with hold- 
ing erroneous views concerning the divine meat 
(that is, the sacrament of the Lord's Supper), and 
of baptism (that is, infant baptism). As regards 
the divine meat they were charged with holding 
the opinion, that it neither profited nor injured; 
that is, that the sacrament of the Lord's Supper 
had no intrinsic virtue or value ; and of baptism it 
was said that they maintained, that those baptized 
were not benefited by baptism, but that fervent 
prayer alone must expel the indwelling Satan. 

Concerning these and other matters with which 
they were charged, whether justly or unjustly, see 
Hist. Eccles. Tripart., lib. 7, cap. 11. 5". Fr., Chron. 
Rom. Rett., printed A. D. 1563, fol. 96, letter E, 
under the namfi Eraclit. Epulius. 

Hence, when they said that those baptized were 
not benefited by baptism, they thereby sufficiently 
rejected infant baptism, since the Roman church in 
general recognized no other than infant baptism. 
That this rejection of baptism, or deeming it use- 
less, has respect to infant baptism, is clearly evi- 
dent from what is added, namely, that they held 
that not baptism, but fervent prayer must expel 
the indwelling Satan; for those of the Roman 
church entertained the contrary view, namely, that 
Satan must certainly be expelled from the infants 
by baptism. However, we let every one judge 
for himself in this matter. 

Jacob Mehrning in concluding the third century, 
says: "All these are beautiful reminders, which 
were administered to the catechumens before as 
well as after baptism, and which can certainly not 

* Uset? in the sense of general. 


have place with infants. And thus it has been 
shown in this, the third chapter, that in these three 
centuries infant baptism cannot be proven by a 
single consistent and authentic testimony from the 
fathers and church historians." Baptism. Hist., pp. 
320 and 321. 

But this is further elucidated by the remark of 
P. J. Twisck, who, quite at the close of the third 
century, says : "Although infant baptism had been 
originated by some individuals, or by the church 
(that is, the Roman), as they themselves state, 
there were, nevertheless, many who devoutly re- 
ceived baptism upon faith and with a penitent 
life." Chron., 3d book, conclusion, pages 83 and 84. 

With this we close our account of baptism as 
practiced in the third century, and proceed to the 
martyrs who suffered during this same time for 
the truth and their upright faith. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE PIOUS MARTYRS 

AND WITNESSES OF JESUS CHRIST 

WHO SUFFERED IN THE THIRD 

CENTURY 

SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE THIRD 
CENTURY 


[There never was a time in the church of Jesus 
Christ, in which so many and great tyrants arose 
to_ destroy and extirpate the people of God, as in 
this century; for scarcely had one ceased, when 
another began ; excepting a short cessation under 
the Emperors Caracalla and Geta. 

The principal ones of those who tyrannized over, 
and put to death, the believers, were Severus, Max- 
iminus, Decius, Valerianus, Gallienus, and Aureli- 
anus, who, though the world hailed them as "Gra- 
cious Emperors," were in deed nothing less than 
unmerciful, cruel, and bloodthirsty tyrants. 

Under Severus suffered Rutulius, Manilius, 
Perpetua, Felicitas, Leonides, five God-fearing 
disciples of Origen, and two of his female disci- 
ples, also Origen himself, and Basilides. 

Under Maximinus suffered, in different meet- 
ingplaces, several thousand Christians, besides 
about seventy others. 

Under Decius suffered Cointha, Apollonia, an 
old man called Julianus, with his companion Eu- 
nus, Amonaria, Mercuria, Dionysia, Heron, Ater, 
Isidoris, a youth of fifteen years, Nemesius, Bab- 
ylas, the three youths, Urbanus, Philidianus, and 
Epilonius, also Maximus, Origenes. 

Under Valerianus and Gallienus suffered Dio- 
nysius, Fructuosus, Augurius, Eulogius, Marinus, 
the three peasants who sought heavenly crowns, 
namely, Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, and 
also, Philippus, Privatus, Florentinus and Pontius. 

Under Aurelian suffered, and were put to death 
Privatus of Gevauldan, Mamas, a shepherd and 
Symphorianus. 

Under Diocletian (in the preparatory period of 
his persecutions) were miserably put to death the 


126 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


three brothers, Claudius, Asterius, and Neon ; also 
Donuina, and Theonilla, Zenobius with his sister 
Zenobia, the three dear friends Tharacus, Probus 
and Andronicus. That all these suffered, and shed 
their blood for the name of Jesus Christ, is abun- 
dantly testified in the following account.] 

The third century began with the fifth persecu- 
tion of the Christians, hence we shall also begin 
with the same and show in what a distressing con- 
dition the church of God was during those times. 


Of the Fifth Persecutions of the Christians, 

under the emperor l. septimus severus, 
Commenced about the year 201 

Touching the cause which induced Severus to 
persecute and put to death the Christians, ancient 
authors differ. Some write that Severus was insti- 
gated to kill and persecute the Christians, in the 
tenth year of his reign, by Philip, the Governor of 
Egypt. Others think that in the time of Severus 
there were many cruel and bloodthirsty governors 
in the provinces of the Romans; as Lethus and 
Aquila, at Alexandria, in Egypt; Saturninus and 
Scapula, at Carthage, in Africa ; Claudius Hermin- 
ianus, in Cappadocia; Cecilius Capella, at Byzan- 
thium; who, at Rome, as well as elsewhere, were 
most pernicious firebrands in these persecutions, 
inasmuch as they instigated the Emperor and the 
Roman Senate against the Christians, in order that 
through this means they might seize on the posses- 
sions of the Christians. 

It is stated, that to this persecution and slaving 
of the Christians, contributed at that time, not a lit- 
tle, some jurists, who, through false interpretations 
of the Roman laws, or at least through their self- 
devised decrees, ruled nearly the whole Empire; 
as Emelius, Papinianus, Ulpianus, Paulus, Messius, 
Martianus, Ruffinus, Mauritianus, Tryphonius, 
Menander, Macer, Callistratus, Florentinus, Her- 
mogenes, Saturminus, Modestinus, Furius, and 
Anthianus. 

It was one of these jurist, namely Ulpianus, one 
of the chief senators, next to Papianus, who 
hunted up and collected the bloody edicts of the 
former .tyrants, in order that the Emperors, in- 
cited thereby, might institute new persecutions 
against the Christians. See concerning this, A. 
Mell. Hist., fol. 52, col. 4, from Euseb., 6, cap. 1, 
2, and Chron. Hieron. Catal. in Origen. Also, 
Oros., lib. 7, cap. 11, 18. Also, Baron.,' A. D. 204. 
Also, Dio. Hist. Rom., lib. 51. Also, Tert. ad. 
Scap., cap. 1-3. Tertul. de Fuga, cap. 5, ex Libris 
Jurist. Also, Sport. Caracal, and Sever. Also, 
Lactant., lib. 5. Just., cap. 11, 12, 19. 

Very credibly, however, is the cause of this per- 
secution accounted for in the Introduction to the 
Martyrs' Mirror, Ed. 1631, fol. 38, col. 2, from 
Baronius. The words are as follows : "In the year 
201 was commenced the fifth persecution of the 
Christians, under the Emperor Severus, in the sev- 
enth year of his reign. It originated thus : The em- 


peror having come forth victorious from a civil 
war, and the Christians having remained passive 
with regard to this, not manifesting any signs of 
joy by way of celebrating, hanging out of gar- 
lands, and other tokens of triumph, according to 
the manner of the heathen ; the latter, out of envy, 
accused the Christians of despising and hating the 
Emperor ; and the more so, because they would not 
swear by the Emperor's fortune. Besides this, they 
reported of the Christians, that in their evening 
assemblies they extinguished the lights, and then 
allowed themselves improper intercourse with each 
other, and in this manner it came that every one 
hated the Christians. See in the above citations. 
Others spread the report that the Christians were 
child-murderers and eaters of human flesh, that is, 
people who slew their children and ate them ; also, 
that they honored the head of an ass as their god ; 
worshiped the sun, and other like palpable and 
wicked falsehoods. Compare /. Gys. Hist., fol. 18, 
col. 2, for the year 201, ex Tertullian ad Sccp- 
ulam and in Apol. Cypr. de Bono Pascient. Also, 
P. J. Twisck, Chron. 2d book, for the year 124, 
page 51, col. 2. 

However, though these false accusations were 
brought against the Christians, their death was 
nevertheless owing entirely to the testimony and 
confession of Jesus Christ — that He was the Son 
of God, and the Saviour of the human family. 

The most violent persecution of this time, ac- 
cording to Eusebius and Tertullian, was in Egypt 
and Africa. From Egypt the Christians were 
brought in great multitudes to Alexandria, where 
they were put "to death in manifold ways, for the 
name of Christ. Among the principal martyrs of 
this time were the following: 

RUTILIUS, AFTER MANY ESCAPES, TORN ASUNDER, 

AND THEN BURNT, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 

JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 210 

"Rutilius, the holy martyr," says Tertullian, 
"after having so often escaped persecution by flee- 
ing from one place to another, and having pur- 
chased his freedom, as he supposed, from the dan- 
ger of death, and after having provided himself 
with all safe conduct, and, feeling easy, and free 
from anxiety, was nevertheless unexpectedly ap- 
prehended, and brought before the President, yea, 
torn asunder with manifold torments, and then 
committed to the fire ; and thus, thanking the mercy 
of God for it, he endured the suffering which he 
had sought to escape." "This Rutilius was mar- 
tyred somewhere in Africa," writes A. Mellinus, 
1st book of the Hist., fol 55, col. 1, from Tertul- 
lian. de Fuga, in Persecution, cap. 5, at the end. 

MAVILUS, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN OF ADRUMELEN, 

TORN BY THE WILD BEASTS, AT CARTHAGE, 

ABOUT THE YEAR 201 

Tertullian writes a very candid admonition and 
warning concerning the impending wrath of God 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


127 


over all the persecutors of the Christians, to Scap- 
ula, the Governor of Carthage, who, having suc- 
ceeded in the place of Vigellius Saturninus (who, 
on account of the persecution he had exercised 
against the Christians, had been struck with blind- 
ness, through the righteous judgment of God), also 
followed in his footsteps as regards cruelty. For at 
his accession to the Governorship, he immediately 
very cruelly sentenced Mavilus, a very pious Chris- 
tian of Adrumelen, a city in Africa, to be torn by 
the beasts ; who, though, through a severe death, 
attained to a blessed end. Immediately after his 
death great plagues were sent by the Lord over the 
city of Carthage, where the Governor resided ; as, 
great rains, high floods, terrible thunders, fiery 
signs in the air, etc. Idem Ibidem, col. c, ex Tertul- 
lian. ad Scapulam, cap. 3. 


PERPETUA AND FELICITAS, OF TUBURBI IN MAURI- 
TANIA, AND OTHERS, VIOLENTLY PUT TO 
DEATH, FOR THE FAITH OF THE SON 
OF GOD, ABOUT THE YEAR 201 

Perpetua and Felicitas were two very pious and 
honorable Christian women, at Tuburbi, a city in 
Mauritania, a province of Africa. Both were very 
untimely apprehended, to suffer for the name of 
Christ, as Felicitas was very far advanced in preg- 
nancy, and Perpetua had recently given birth to a 
child, which she was nursing. But this did not 
make them fainthearted, nor so surprise them that 
they forsook Christ, nor did it prevent them from 
going on in the way of godliness; but they re- 
mained equally faithful disciples of Christ, and be- 
came steadfast martyrs. 

According to the Roman laws, they waited with 
the pregnant woman, until she was delivered, be- 
fore they sentenced her and put her to death. When 
the pains of labor seized her in prison, and she cried 
aloud for fear and anguish, the jailer said to her : 
"Thou art so much afraid and distressed now, and 
criest aloud for pain ; how then wilt thou behave, 
when, tomorrow, or the day after, thou wilt be led 
to death ?" Felicitas replied thus : "Now I suffer 
as a poor woman the punishment which God on 
account of sin has laid upon the female sex ; but to- 
morrow I shall suffer as a Christian woman for the 
faith and the confession of Jesus Christ." By these 
words she sufficiently indicated that she had firmly 
and immovably founded her faith upon Christ, who 
never forsakes His own, even though they be in 
the midst of the fire, and are consumed, God also 
specially strengthened her, that she might be able 
to endure her sufferings. With reference to this, 
Tertullian says: "Perpetua, the very strong and 
steadfast martyr, had a revelation or vision of the 
heavenly paradise, on the day of her sufferings, in 
the which she saw none but her fellow martyrs. 
And why no others? Because the fiery sword 
which guards the door of paradise gives way to 
none but those who die for Christ." 

In the meantime these two pious heroines of 


Jesus Christ were martyred, that is, they died a 
violent death, for the name of their Saviour ; for 
which they will afterwards be crowned with the 
unfading wreath of immortality, as a triumpth over 
the foes they overcame, namely, the cruelties and 
pains of death. 

The names of their fellow martyrs are Revoca- 
tus, Satyrus, Saturninus, and Serundulus. It is 
supposed that the last-mentioned one of these died 
in prison from extreme hardship, but that the oth- 
ers were all thrown before the wild beasts, such as, 
bulls, lions, bears, leopards, etc., to be torn by them. 
Thus these exchanged their dear lives for death, 
for Christ's sake. Idem., fol. 26, col. 3, 4, ex Au- 
gust, in Psal. 74, and de Tempore Barbarico, cap. 
5, Beda Usuard. Ado Martirol. Rom. 7. Martii. 
Also, I. Pregnatis de Pen. Also, in Antiquo Lec- 
tionario. Also, Tertull. de anima, cap. 5. That 
the dead bodies of the two afore-mentioned women 
were brought to Carthage, and were buried there 
is testified to by Victor Uticensis, Pers. Vandal., 
lib. 1. 


LEONIDES, THE FATHER OF ORIGEN, BEHEADED AT 

ALEXANDRIA, IN EGYPT, FOR THE TESTIMONY 

OF JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 202 

Leonides, the father of Origen, was according 
to the testimony of Suidas, a bishop of the church 
of Christ, and also became a martyr, at Alexandria 
in Egypt. His imprisonment, suffering, and death 
occurred on this wise : When from nearly all the 
cities and villages of Egypt and Thebes, Christian 
champions, that is, martyrs, were brought, to fight 
and suffer for the name of Jesus Christ, Leonides 
was also one of those who were brought prisoners 
to Alexandria, the capital of Egypt. 

When he had been imprisoned for some time, 
his son Origen, then but seventeen years old, sent 
him a very comforting letter, in which he exhorted 
him to constancy, writing, among other things: 
"Be strong in the Lord, my father, and endure val- 
iantly the suffering which awaits thee. Let not re- 
gard for us induce thee to do otherwise." He means 
to say : "O father ! do not grieve too much for thy 
wife, or dear mother, or for us, thy seven be- 
loved children, of whom I am the oldest ; or become 
so wavering, that through desire to usward thou 
shouldest forsake thy faithful God and Saviour." 
This was in brief the import of the letter which 
Origen wrote to his father. It acted as a healing 
medicine in the wounds of the sorrowful mind of 
his father, so that he resolved to patiently suffer 
death for the honor of his Saviour. He was finally 
sentenced to be beheaded, and all his property was 
confiscated for the treasury of the Roman Empire. 
This happened in the time of Emperor Severus, 
about the year 201. Compare Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 2, 
with Abr. Mell., 1st book of the Hist., fol. 57, col. 
1, ex Hieron. Catal. in Orig. Also, P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., 2d book, for the year 195, page 51, col. 2. 
Also, Introduction to the Martyrs' Mirror, edition 


128 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1631, fol. 38, col. 2. Also, Joh. Gys. Hist. Mart., fol. 18, col. 3, after Leonides, the father of Origen. 
edition 1657, fol. 3. Also, Introduction, fol. 39, col. 1, from Eusebius. 


FIVE OF THE DISCIPLES OF ORIGEN, NAMELY, PLU- 
TARCH, HERACLIDES, HERO, AND TWO OTHER 
MEN, BOTH CALLED SERENUS, PUT TO 
DEATH FOR THE FAITH, AT ALEX- 
ANDRIA IN EGYPT, ABOUT THE 
YEAR 203 

At this time, Origen, though but eighteen years 
old, was a teacher of the faith, at Alexandria, in 
Egypt, where he taught with such excellence, not 
only to begin with Christ, but also to die with Him, 
that many of his disciples laid down their lives for 
the truth of Christ. Among these are mentioned, 
by name, Plutarch, Heraclides, Hero, and two 
other men, both called Serenus. Their suffering 
and death happened in this manner: Origen, the 
teacher of these pious people, was in the habit of 
going into the prison to the martyrs who suffered 
for the name of Jesus Christ, to strengthen them in 
the faith. Yea, even when they had already re- 
ceived their sentence of death, and were making 
their last defense, he stood by them, and, at parting, 
gave them the kiss of peace, as a token of his 
sincere love. 

When Plutarch, his beloved disciple, was led 
forth to death, he, according to his custom, com- 
forted him, for which the raging multitude would 
have killed him, had not divine Providence pro- 
tected him. This having happened, Plutarch was 
put to death for the name of Jesus Christ, and died 
as a martyr. 

After the death of Plutarch, the first of the two 
men named Serenus, was brought forth and burned. 
His faith, as is stated, was tried with fire, notwith- 
standing he was still a catechumen, that is, one who, 
though he had been instructed, had not yet re- 
ceived baptism. 

The third of these martyrs is called Heraclides, 
and of him the same is stated that is recorded of 
Serenus, concerning his faith, namely, that he too 
was still under instruction, and had not yet been 
baptized, but was preparing for it. And thus he 
sealed his faith not with water, but with his blood. 
He was beheaded with the ax. 

The fourth that was put to death for the same 
faith, was Hero, who is called a novice in the faith, 
that is one who had only lately accepted the faith 
with baptism. Having commended his soul into 
the hands of God, he was likewise beheaded with 
the ax. 

Besides these four martyrs, there is mentioned 
a fifth, who was the second of the aforementioned 
men named Serenus. Refusing to apostatize, he, 
after many severe torments, was beheaded, like the 
last-mentioned two ; and thus attained to a blessed 
end, together with his slain fellow brethren. Com- 
pare Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 4, with Abr. Melt., 1st 
book, fol. 57, col. 2, 3. Also, Joh. Gys. Hist., 


TWO FEMALE DISCIPLES OF ORIGEN, NAMELY, RHAIS 
AND MARCELLA, BURNED ALIVE AT ALEX- 
ANDRIA, FOR THE FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST, 
ABOUT THE YEAR 204 

Among the disciples of Origen, who became 
martyrs, there are also mentioned several women 
as faithful martyrs. However, we shall only refer 
to two of these, one called Rhais, the other Mar- 
cella, who suffered their faith and lives to be tried 
with fire, like gold that is refined. 

Rhais was a catechumen, that is, one that was 
receiving instruction preparatory to baptism, and 
hence, had not yet sealed her faith with water; 
however, as Origen himself declares, she was bap- 
tized with fire, that is, burned alive. 

Marcella was the mother of Potamiena (of 
whom the ancients speak in such commendatory 
terms, as having also laid down her life for the 
faith ; but whom we pass over, on account of cer- 
tain remarks which she addressed to Basilides, her 
executioner.) After insufferable and dreadful tor- 
ments, she was burned by degrees, in great con- 
stancy, until she was reduced to ashes; and thus 
she exchanged this temporal for an eternal life. 
See the above-mentioned authors, as compared with 
Mellinus, fol. 57, col. 4. 


BASILIDES, WHO, FROM AN EXECUTIONER BECAME 

A CHRISTIAN, BEHEADED FOR THE NAME OF 

CHRIST, AT ALEXANDRIA, ABOUT THE 

YEAR 204 

_ Not long after the death of Potamiena, who had 
died with the above-mentioned Rhais and Marcella, 
one of the executioners, named Basilides, who had 
brought her to death, was converted to the faith in 
Christ. Eusebius writes : "Being among his com- 
panions, and an oath being demanded of him on 
some special matter, he said, that he dared not 
swear at all, because he was a Christian, and did 
openly confess it before them. When they heard 
this, they thought at first, that he was joking; but 
when he persistently asserted it, and showed that 
he was in earnest, he was seized and cast into 
prison. When some of the brethren came to visit 
him, and inquired how it happened that he had be- 
come changed so suddenly, he fully satisfied them 
in regard to the matter. Having heard this, they 
gave him the sign of the Lord, that is (as A. Mel- 
linus explains it), he was baptized in the name of 
Christ. The following day he was beheaded for the 
confession of the Lord. Compare the preceding 
accounts concerning the disciples of Origen, with 
Eusebius, lib. 6, cap. 5, fol. 107, col. 1, 2. Also, A. 
Mellinus, 1st book, fol. 58, col. 1, 2. Also, P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., 3d book, for the year 204, fol. 55, 
col. 2, above. Also, Introduction M. Sp., fol. 39, 
col. 1. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


129 


IRENEUS, AN ANCIENT TEACHER, AFTER MANY 

TORMENTS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE NAME OF 

JESUS CHRIST, AT LYONS, IN FRANCE, 

ABOUT THE YEAR 210 

Ireneus, by descent an Asiatic, was born at 
Smyrna. In his youth he attended school, and was 
a disciple of Polycarp, who was appointed by the 
apostle John bishop of the church at Smyrna, and 
afterwards became a martyr, as we have already 
shown in the proper place. On account of his 
(Ireneus') special fitness, he subsequently became 
bishop of the church at Lyons in France, in the 
place of Photinus. His erudition was so great, that 
Eusebius extols him more than any of the learned 
who lived before and in his time. Tertullian called 
him "the most remarkable investigator of all man- 
ner of learning." Jerome said that he was "an 
apostolic man, who lived next to the time of the 
apostles." Epiphanius gave him the title of a 
"holy and ancient divine," yea, a "successor of the 
apostles." In his ministry he was so faithful a 
servant in the house of the Lord, that he had the 
oversight not only of the church at Lyons, where 
he was bishop, and other churches in France, but 
even of some churches in Asia and Phrygia. 

Concerning his death, the ancient historians have 
left us but little information of the time as well as 
of the manner of his martyrdom. We find, how- 
ever, in regard to it the following words : "That, 
when the persecution of the Christians, under 
Severus, had been instituted in all the countries of 
the Romans, the city of Lyons, too, pursuant to the 
command of the Emperor, was surrounded with 
soldiers, and all the Christians in it put to death 
with the sword, or beheaded ; but thai Ireneus, the 
shepherd of them all, was sought with special dili- 
gence, and, when found, was put to death with 
manifold tortures, and was buried by Zacharia, his 
elder." Ex actis Procons. Perditis hoc Tantum 
extat. Adr. Martyrol. 28 Jun. Abr. Mell., fol. 59, 
col. 3, and fol. 60, col. 1, ex Hieron. Catal, Iren. 
idem Hieron. epist. 84 ad Magnum, and 29 ad 
Theodorum Euseb., lib. 4, cap. 20. Tertull. lib. 
Contra Valentin., cap. 5. Hieron. epist. 29. ad Theo- 
dorum and in Catal. Epiph. Haer. 24 and 31. Also, 
J oh. Gys., 1657, fol. 18, col. 3, 4. Also, P. J. Twisck, 
id book, for the year 210, 28*/t June, p. 56, col. 1. 
He adds these words : "On the 28th of June, A. D. 
210, in the fifth persecution, Bishop Irenus (he 
means to say : Ireneus) was put to death, together 
with many citizens, for the confession of Christ." 

He says of the Lord's Supper : "There is some- 
thing heavenly and something earthly ; the earthly 
is bread, which is for the nourishment of the body, 
and points us to the heavenly, that is, Christ with 
His merits, which is the food of the soul." 

In the Revelation of John he writes that "anti- 
christ will arise in the Latin, that is, the Roman 
church, and will be a Roman." Also : "Antichrist, 
who is a thief and apostate, would be worshiped as 
God, and, though being but a servant, would be 


proclaimed king." From Histor. Georg., lib. 2. 
Vine. Col., fol. 352. P. P. Cock, fol. 59. 


HOW SEPTIMIUS FLORENS TERTULLIAN, THROUGH 
A CERTAIN APOLOGY, DEFENDED THE CHRIS- 
TIANS, AND SOUGHT TO HAVE THEM 
SPARED, ABOUT THE YEAR 204 

When the persecution of the true Christians 
would not cease, but increased the longer the more, 
the pious man Septimius Florens Tertullian wrote 
an apology in defense of the Christians against the 
heathen, in which he refuted all the slanders with 
which they were assailed at that time ; showing that 
they were innocent, and were persecuted — not on 
account of any evil deeds, as the heathen pretended, 
but simply on account of their name; and that 
nevertheless their religion was not weakened or 
injured by the bitterness of the persecution, but 
much rather helped and strengthened by it. 

Among other things he writes: "We are in- 
creased, and grow, when we are mowed down by 
you. The blood of the Christians is the seed (of 
the church). For who is there among you who, 
seeing these things, is not constrained to examine 
what there may be inside of this matter? Who, 
having examined it, does not join them, and, hav- 
ing joined himself to them, does not wish to suffer 
with them?" 

After this he said these words, or at least words 
to this import : "This sect (so he calls the Chris- 
tians, according to the view of the heathen) will 
never perish or be extirpated ; which, rest assured, 
when it seems to be cut down is built up. For 
everyone, seeing their great patience, when they 
are beaten and goaded, is incited to inquire into 
the cause of this ; and when he has come to the 
knowledge of the truth, he instantly follows." 
Compare J oh. Gys., fol. 18, col. 4, ex Tertulliano, 
aid Scapulam. Also, P. J. Twisck, 2d book, for the 
year 200, page 53, col. 1, from Chronol. Leonh., 
lib. 1. 


CESSATION OF THIS PERSECUTION, UNDER ANTO- 
NINUS CARACALLA AND SEPTIMUS GETA, THE 
SONS OF SEVERUS, ABOUT THE YEAR 213 

Septimus Severus having reigned eighteen years 
as Roman Emperor, his sons, Antoninus Caracalla 
and Septimus Geta, succeeded him as Emperors, 
about A. D. 213. These, although they were very 
unmerciful, cruel, and bloodthirsty, especially 
Caracalla, did not, to any extent, molest the Chris- 
tians, so that during their reign very little, indeed, 
almost no blood of the Christians was shed in the 
countries over which their dominion extended; 
which continued until about the year 219. Some 
write that the cessation of the persecution con- 
tinued for about thirty-eight years, during which 
time, however, Maximin the Giant greatly vexed 
many bishops, elders, and deacons, (that is, the 
overseers over some churches) ; but whether they 
were punished with death, will be shown in the 


130 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


proper place. However, it is stated, that this fifth 
persecution, which had just commenced, did not 
cease entirely, though it was a desirable time, as 
Tertullian writes, when compared with the pre- 
ceding severe and very bloody persecutions. See 
A. Mell., 1st book jol. 60, col. 1, as compared with 
Herod. Sever. Ejusd. Antonin., and Geta Spartian 
de Eisdem. 


REINSTITUTION OF THIS PERSECUTION, UNDER 

ALEXANDER SEVERUS, THE SON OF ANTIO- 

NINUS AND MAMMEA, ABOUT THE YEAR 

223 

The followers of Jesus Christ having enjoyed 
some respite during this time and a few years 
previous, the envy and hatred of some against the 
Christians increased to such an extent that even 
Alexander Severus, who otherwise favored the 
Christians, yea, had built them a church, and, 
according to the manner of the heathen, had placed 
Christ among the number of the so-called gods, 
commenced a persecution against them, or at least 
continued the one begun under Septimus Severus. 
This was occasioned principally, as Lactantius 
Firmianus states, by some of the Roman jurists, 
who, through wrong interpretation of the laws, 
but especially through a deadly hatred against the 
Christians, incited and urged on the Emperor to 
persecute them. 

Among those who instigated the Emperor, there 
is chiefly mentioned Ulpianus, who was not only 
a senator, but also a master of requests, and the 
Emperor's tutor, so that the latter considered him 
as his Father; hence the accusations of Ulpianus 
against the Christians found the more easily a 
willing ear with the Emperor. Lactantius Firma- 
nius calls this Ulpianus and his adherents mur- 
derers, because they made wicked laws against the 
godly. He says: "For we read of blasphemous 
laws and unjust disputes of the jurists against the 
Christians." 

Domitius, surnamed Ulpianus (mentioned 
above), in his seventh book of the office of the 
Governors of the Roman provinces, hunted out and 
collected the edicts and decrees of the princes, as 
of Nero, Domitian, Trajan, etc., in order to send 
therefrom instructions, how they should punish the 
Christians who served and confessed the true God. 
Thus far, Lactantius, according to the annotation 
of Mellinus, in the 1st book, jol. 61, col. 1, 2, ex 
Lamprid. Herodian, in Alex. Severo. Lactana. 
Firmian. Institut., lib. 5, cap. 11, 12, 19. Also, in 
Corras., lib. 1, Missel., cap. 10, although D. P. Pers 
calls this Emperor a pious and excellent prince. 
Roomschen Adelaer, printed 1642, page 154, on 
the name Severus Alexander, A. D. 224. On the 
other hand P. J. Twisck states, that in the begin- 
ning of his reign he was not favorable to the Chris- 
tians, so that, through misinformation, he caused 
some of them to be put to death for the name of 


Jesus Christ. Third book, for the year 223, page 
60, col. 1, from Chron. Mich., fol. 141, Merula. 

AGAPITUS, CALAPODIUS, TIBURTIUS, VALERIANUS, 

QUIRITIUS, JULIA, CECILIA, MARTINA, AND 

OTHERS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE NAME 

OF CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 223 

It is stated that in the last persecution resumed 
under Alexandrinus Severus there were put to 
death among different other persons, for the name 
of Jesus Christ and the testimony of the evangelical 
truth, Agapitus, a youth of fifteen years ; Calapo- 
dius, an elder (of whom P. J. Twisck writes, 
though two years earlier than J. Gysius, that he 
was apprehended for the doctrine of the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ, and, refusing to sacrifice to the hea- 
then gods, was dragged with great ignominy 
through the city of Rome, and drowned in the 
Tiber. 3d book, page 59, col. 2, from Bergomens, 
lib. 8.) ; Tiburtius and Valerianus, two brothers 
were likewise put to death, as well as Quiritius and 
his mother Julia, and Cecilia and Martina, both of 
them virgins ; all of whom were put to death for 
the name of Jesus Christ, either in the water, or in 
the fire, or by the sword, or in some other manner. 
See, J oh. Gys., fol. 19, col. 1. 


HENRICUS, NARCISSUS, JULIUS, EUSEBIUS, AND 
OTHERS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE FAITH, DUR- 
ING THIS PERSECUTION 

Besides those whom we have mentioned as hav- 
ing been slain in the fifth persecution, Seb. Franck 
names several very virtuous believers who suffered 
and were deprived of life for the same cause, 
namely, Henricus, bishop of the church at Lyons ; 
Narcissus, a patriarch at Jerusalem; Julius and 
Eusebius. Sebast. Fra. Keysers Chron. en Were- 
Itlijke Hist, van Christi geboorte tot op Car. V ., 
printed 1563, fol. 20, col. 2. 

Of the Sixth Persecution of the Christians, 
Commenced under Maximin, A. D. 237 

The sixth persecution of the Christians, writes 
J. Gysius, arose under the Emperor Maximin, a 
naturally cruel man, and was directed against 
persons of respectability (since he was of low 
origin), as well as against the Christians, but es- 
pecially against the ministers of the Word. Fortu- 
nately for the Christians, this persecution was 
brief, since he reigned but two years; and as he 
was a violent enemy of the ministers of the church, 
the persecution commenced on them, as the teach- 
ers and authors, it is said, of the Christian re- 
ligion; for it was thought that if they were re- 
moved, the common people could easily be drawn 
away from it. Then, Origen, a teacher of the 
church, in order to exhort the Christians to stead- 
fastness, wrote a book on martyrdom, dedicating it 
to Ambrose, overseer of the church at Milan, and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


131 


Proctotus, learned men of that time. /. Gys., fol. 
19, col. 1, 2, from Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 20, Oros. lib. 
7, cap. 19. 

Touching the cause of these persecutions, the 
author of the Introduction, etc., writes thus : The 
heathen had such hatred for the Christians at that 
time, that, whenever an earthquake, a storm, or the 
like, occurred, they laid it to the charge of the 
Christians, saying that their gods were offended, 
because their honor was waning on account of the 
Christians; from which it is to be inferred that 
they treated the Christians in an awful manner. 
Fol. 39, col. 2, frond Baronius, in Chron., A. D. 
237, num. 3, and A. D. 256, num. 5. 


SEVERAL THOUSAND PERSONS BURNED IN THEIR 

MEETING PLACES FOR THE EVANGELICAL 

TRUTH, ON DIFFERENT OCCASIONS, BY THE 

COMMAND OF MAXIMIN, ABOUT THE 

YEAR 237 

In the new Keysers Chronijk there is related a 
cruel and iniquitous deed perpetrated by Emperor 
Maximin on the Christians. The author says : The 
Christians were assembled in their churches or 
meeting places, praising their Saviour, when the 
Emperor sent forth his soldiers, and had all the 
churches or meeting places locked up, and then 
wood placed around them and set on fire, in order 
to burn all the Christians within. But before the 
wood was ignited, he caused it to be proclaimed, 
that whoever would come out and sacrifice to the 
god Jupiter, should be secure of his life, and, more- 
over, be rewarded by the Emperor. They replied 
that they knew nothing of Jupiter ; that Christ was 
their Lord and God, by the honor of His name, 
and calling upon the same they would live and die. 
It is to be regarded as a special miracle, that among 
so many thousand Christians there was not found 
one who desired to go out, in order to save his life 
by denying Christ ; for all remained together with 
one accord, singing, and praising Christ, as long as 
the smoke and vapor permitted them to use their 
tongues. P. J. Twisck, 3d book, page 64, col. 1, 
from Chron. Mich. Sack., fol. 146, Niceph., lib. 7, 
cap. 6. Htst. Mandri, fol. 10. 


ABOUT SIXTY NOTED, PIOUS MARTYRS PUT TO 

DEATH FOR THE NAME OF JESUS CHRIST, 

ABOUT THE YEAR 239 

In the preceding number of several thousand 
martyrs who laid down their lives under Maximin, 
in the sixth persecution, none of them are men- 
tioned by name, doubtless because in the estimation 
of the world they were mostly lowly and obscure 
people; but Sebastian Franck relates from some 
ancient writers that about sixty noted martyrs re- 
ceived the crown of martyrdom under this ty- 
rant ; which would be too long to recount. Chron. 
des Keysers, fol. 21, col. 3. 


ALEXANDER OF JERUSALEM, AFTER MANY TOR- 
MENTS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE TESTIMONY 
OF JESUS CHRIST, AT JERUSALEM, AND 
OTHERS AT DIFFERENT PLACES, A. D. 
247 

Alexander of Jerusalem, who was a bishop of 
the church of Christ in that place, had to suffer 
much for the Christian truth. Eusebius Pamphilius 
of Cesarea writes, that for confessing Christ he 
was brought before the Judge, bound with chains, 
and cast into prison. And he also writes, that 
when they had, time and again, drawn this ven- 
erable old man from the prison to the tribunal, 
and from the tribunal back to his chains, he con- 
tinually, in his suffering and pain, thanked God, 
and finally, through unspeakable torments, offered 
up his spirit. Histor. Eccles., lib. 6, cap. 29. 

P. J. Twisck fixes this occurrence in the year 
247, and adds these words : "About this time there 
were many martyrs in Alexandria, Judea, at Ces- 
area, Antioch, and elsewhere, who testified to the 
Christian faith with their blood and death." Third 
book, page 66, col. 1, from Euseb. Also, Hist. 
Adri., fol. 32, Jan. Cresp., fol. 48. 

Note. — Although it is stated that the afore- 
mentioned Alexander was put to death after the 
seven years' reign of Philippus, by the Emperor 
Decius, A. D. 247, we have nevertheless included 
him in the sixth persecution, since he, as it ap- 
pears, was apprehended long before the commence- 
ment of the seventh general persecution, which 
did not begin until A. D. 251, and was in full force 
in 253. 


Of the Seventh Persecution of the Chris- 
tians, UNDER DECIUS, BEGUN ABOUT THE 

Year 251 

Sebastian Frank, P. J. Twisck, and Joh. Gysius 
place the beginning of this persecution under De- 
cius in A. D. 251, while Abraham Mellinus and the 
author of the Introduction to the Martyrs' Mirror 
begin it with the year 253; which difference can 
easily be reconciled in this manner : namely, that 
the decrees against the Christians were sent out and 
published about the year 251, but that they were 
not actually put in force until about A. D. 253. 
Compare Seb. Frank, etc., fol. 21, col. 3, with 
P. J. Twisck, 3d book, page 67, col. 2. Also, 
Joh. Gys., fol. 19, col. 2. Also, A. Mell., 1st book, 
fol. 65, col. 4. Also, Introduction, fol. 40, col. 1. 

OF THE CRUELTY AND MISERY OF THIS PERSECUTION 

P. J. Twisck, after narrating something in com- 
mendation of this Emperor, begins immediately to 
give an account of the tyranny which he employed 
against the Christians, saying : "He caused public 
mandates and decrees to be issued and posted up, 
that if they would not apostatize from Christ, to 
persecute the Christians everywhere, and to exe- 
cute them without mercy with every kind of torture 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Emperor Maximus orders many thousands of Christians burned, AD 237 


that could be devised. The torments with which 
the poor Christians were put to death in that day 
were very severe, as we may read in Dionysius, 
Gregory, Cyprian, Eusebius, Vincentius, and oth- 
ers. They were exiled, spoiled of their goods, sen- 
tenced to the mines, scourged, beaten. Beheading 
and hanging were, thought far too insignificant, 
yea, no punishment at all for them. Hot tar was 
most invariably poured over them, roasted at a 
slow fire, stoned, pricked in the face, eyes, and the 
whole body with sharp pointed instruments, 
dragged through the streets over hard pebbles and 
rough stones, dashed against rocks, cast down from 
steep places, their limbs broken in pieces, torn 
asunder with hooks, rolled about on sharp pot- 
sherds, given as a prey and food to the wild beasts, 
stakes driven through their loins, etc. 

There was scarcely a place where persecution 
was not in vogue ; Africa and Alexandria especially 
could be called the school of the martyrs. In short, 
Nicephorus says in his 5th book, chap. 29, that to 
count the martyrs of this time would be as easy as 
to undertake to count the sands of the seashore. 
See, P. J. Twisck, 3d book, jor the year 251, p. 67, 
col. 2, and page 68, col. 1, jrom Buseb., lib. 7, cap. 


1. Chron. Mich., jol. 154. Chron. Carionis, lib. 3. 
Seb. Fr., jol. 17 Hist Andrei, jol. 177, 2d part, 
jol. 174. Paul Merul., jol. 212-214. Leonh. Krentz. 
Chronologiae, jol. 16, 17. Chron. Car., jol. 236. 
Jan Crispin., jol. 53. 

We shall begin with the persecution which at this 
time took place at Alexandria against the pious and 
defenseless Christians ; for which reason this place 
was called by the ancients the "Scaffold of all tyr- 
anny." 


METRAS, A GOD-FEARING OLD MAN, PIERCED WITH 

REEDS, AND STONED TO DEATH, FOR THE NAME 

OF JESUS CHRIST, AT ALEXANDRIA, A. D. 

252 

Metras, also called Metranus, a God-fearing old 
man, was now apprehended by the riotous people 
at Alexandria, and commanded to utter blasphe- 
mous words against God ; that is, to blaspheme the 
name of God, and to forsake the Saviour, Jesus. 
But as he refused to do so, they beat him on his 
whole body with sticks, pricked and pierced his 
face and eyes with sharp reeds, and, martyred thus, 
led him out of the city, and stoned him to death in 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


133 


the suburbs. Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 41, fol. 122, letter 
0, taken from the letter of Dionys. Alexandrinus 
to Fabian, concerning the martyrs in Alexandria. 
Compared with A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 67, col. 1. 
Also, J oh. Gys., fol. 19, col. 4. Also, Introduction, 
fol. 40, col. 1. 

COINTHA, A BELIEVING WOMAN, DRAGGED 

THROUGH THE STREETS OF ALEXANDRIA, AND 

STONED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF THE 

SON OF GOD, A. D. 252 

Afterwards, an honorable believing woman, 
called Cointha, or, as others call her, Quinta, was 
seized and brought into a temple of idols, and 
placed before these, in order to compel her to wor- 
ship them. But when she recoiled with abhorrence 
from the idols, they tied her feet together, and 
dragged her through all the streets of the city of 
Alexandria, beat her with rods, and as some writ- 
ers have recorded, rubbed her naked body against 
mill-stones. When they had dragged, beaten, and 
rubbed her long enough, so that her body was com- 
pletely lacerated, they at last dragged her into the 
suburbs, and there pelted her with stones until she 
was covered with them. Compare Euseb. with 
Abr. Mell. and J oh. Gys. in the places referred to 
above concerning the martyr Metras. 


APOLLONIA, AN AGED VIRGIN, AFTER MANY TOR- 
MENTS BURNED ALIVE FOR THE EVANGELICAL 
TRUTH, AT ALEXANDRIA, A. D. 252 

Apollonia was an aged virgin, whom the ene- 
mies of the truth apprehended, and with their fists 
and blows in the face, knocked every tooth out of 
her head. In the meantime a large fire of wood was 
kindled, and they threatened to burn her alive, if 
she would not worship the gods, and forsake Christ. 
But notwithstanding this miserable death, she 
would rather go into the fire, and lose her temporal 
life, than save it by abandoning Christ and losing 
her soul. 

Touching the manner of her death, and her great 
willingness to die, A. Mellinus makes this state- 
ment : "This virgin was sentenced to be burned, or 
to blaspheme the name of Christ ; but as she ab- 
horred the latter, she wished to show that she was 
ready and willing to die for Christ." See Eusebius, 
Mellinus, and Gysius, in the books and on the pages 
referred to in connection with the martyrdom of 
Metras and Cointha. 


SERAPION OF EPHESUS, A PIOUS MAN, TORN LIMB 

FROM LIMB, THROWN OUT OF THE WINDOW, 

AND KILLED, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 

JESUS CHRIST, AT ALEXANDRIA, 

A. D. 252 

As the afore-mentioned bloodthirstiness of the 
heathen at Alexandria did not abate, but increased 


more and more, against those who confessed the 
name of Jesus Christ, it came to pass that they laid 
their hands on a pious Christian, called Serapion, 
an Ephesian by birth. They dragged him out of his 
house, tore him almost limb from limb, and finally 
threw him out of a window; in consequence of 
which, after many torments, and having com- 
mended his soul to God, he tasted death, and thus 
was counted among the number of the steadfast 
and blessed martyrs. See the books cited above. 


JULIAN, AN OLD MAN, WITH HIS FRIEND EUNUS, 

LED ABOUT SEATED ON CAMELS, SEVERELY 

SCOURGED, AND FINALLY BURNED ALIVE, 

AT ALEXANDRIA, ABOUT A. D. 253 

There was at this time and place also an old man, 
who, on account of great pain caused by gout, 
could not walk, but had to be carried. His name 
was Julian, and the ancients greeted him as a very 
venerable man, on account of his virtue. In pur- 
suance of the imperial decree published against the 
Christians, he was brought by two carriers before 
the Judge, to give an account of his faith. 

Forthwith one of those who had carried him, 
fearing the severe examination, or the rack, aposta- 
tized from the faith; for which reason we deem 
his name unworthy of a place here ; but the other, 
called Eunus, continued very constant in the faith, 
together with the old man Julian, who was his dear 
friend ; hence both made a grand confession of it ; 
notwithstanding their many severe torments. 

Both were then seated naked upon camels, and 
led about the whole city of Alexandria, which is 
very large ; scourged with many severe stripes, and 
finally brought before a great, high-flaming fire, 
into which both were cast, and burned alive, in the 
sight of a great multitude of people that stood about. 
Compare Euseb., lib. 5, cap. 31, fol. 123, col. 1, 
letter B., from the letter of Dionys. to Fabius, 
bishop of Antioch. Also, A. Mell, fol. 67, col. 4. 
Also, J oh. Gys., fol. 20, col. 1. 


MACAR, EPIMACHUS, AND ALEXANDER, AFTER 
MANY TORMENTS, BURNED ALIVE, AT ALEX- 
ANDRIA, ABOUT THE YEAR 253 

There was yet another pious Christian, called 
Macar, or Macarius, a native of Lybia, whom the 
Judge advised with many words, to forsake Christ ; 
but he continued only the more steadfastly to con- 
fess his faith. Finally the Judge commanded that 
he should be burned alive ; which was done. 

Epimachus and Alexander did not remain pris- 
oners very long after Macar's death ; but, after suf- 
fering much pain, having been cut and slashed with 
razors, lacerated with scourges, and wounded on 
the most sensitive parts of their bodies, they were 
finally burned alive with flaming fire. See the au- 
thors cited above. 


134 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


FOUR GOD-FEARING WOMEN, NAMELY, TWO CALLED 

AMMONARIA, AND MERCURIA AND DIONYSIA, 

BEHEADED AT ALEXANDRIA FOR THE 

CONFESSION OF JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT 

THE YEAR 253 

At this time, God also wonderfully manifested 
His power in certain women, among whom four 
are mentioned by name, two called Ammonaria, 
and Mercuria and Dionysia. The last named two 
were aged women, one of them being the mother 
of many children, all of whom she nevertheless 
had forsaken, for Christ's sake. The other two, as 
it appears, were unmarried persons or young maid- 
ens, who loved their heavenly bridegroom, Jesus 
Christ, too much, to look for an earthly one. Of 
all these it is stated that they remained so steadfast 
in the confession of Jesus Christ, that the Judge 
felt ashamed on this account, and, in order to put 
an end to the matter had them beheaded. See the 
authors and books cited above. Also, A. Mell., fol. 
68, col. 1. 


HERON, ATER, AND ISIDORE, BURNED FOR THE 
FAITH J AND DIOSCORUS, A YOUTH OF FIFTEEN 
YEARS SET FREE AFTER HAVING BEEN 
GREATLY TORMENTED; AT ALEXAN- 
DRIA, ABOUT THE YEAR 253 

Heron, Ater, and Isidore, Egyptians by birth, 
and a youth of fifteen years, called Dioscorus, were 
committed to the Judge of Alexandria, at the same 
time. The Judge examined the youth first, suppos- 
ing it a very easy matter to persuade him, or de- 
ceive him by fair words, or, if not on this wise, to 
move him by torments (of which, as Eusebius says, 
many were inflicted upon him), to deny the Chris- 
tian faith. But this excellent youth, Dioscorus, 
could be induced neither by fair words nor by the 
force of torments, to obey the Judge. 

The three men, namely Heron, Ater, and Isidore, 
the Judge had most cruelly scourged, and exam- 
ined with all manner of stripes, intending to draw 
them away from the faith ; but when he saw that 
because of their faith in Jesus Christ they valiantly 
endured all the torments, he delivered them to the 
executioners to be burned alive ; except the youth 
Dioscorus, whom he released, on account of his 
courage as well as the astonishingly discreet an- 
swers which he gave to every one of his questions ; 
saying that in consideration of his youth he would 
wink at his perverseness for the present, so that, in 
the meantime he might reflect upon the matter, and 
repent. But the ancient writers state, that, coming 
to the church of Jesus Christ, God ordained him to 
be a bulwark and consolation of His people ; await- 
ing a longer and severer conflict, and a greater and 
fuller reward ; on account of which, as well as be- 
cause of his previous sufferings, he was reckoned 
among the pious martyrs. See the above-mentioned 
authors and books. 


NEMESIUS, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, BURNED FOR HIS 
FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST, TOGETHER WITH SEV- 
ERAL MALEFACTORS, AT ALEXANDRIA, 
ABOUT THE YEAR 253 

The malignity of the tyrants had now become so 
great that they called the defenseless lambs of 
Christ murderers, and sought to put them to death 
under this name. Among those thus accused was a 
pious follower of Christ, called Nemesius, or, also, 
Nemesis, who, being accused of the same crime' 
first of all candidly and clearly vindicated himself 
from it. Thereupon his accuser charged him with 
being a Christian, and, therefore, nevertheless 
guilty of death. Eusebius writes, that in this point 
the Judge observed no moderation, but caused him 
first to be tortured with twofold torments, and then 
commanded that he should be burned with the 
murderers, unconscious of the fact that through his 
cruelty he made this holy martyr resemble our 
Saviour, who, for the salvation of mankind, was 
crucified between murderers. In regard to' this 
A. Mellinus says : "The Judge made this martyr 
like unto his Lord Christ, and, according to his 
example, had him placed between highwaymen, and 
then burned alive." A. Mell, 1st book, fol. 68, col 
2, from Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 41. Also, P. J. Twisck, 
3d book, for the year 252, page 70, col. 1, on the 
name Nemesion. 


BABYLAS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH AT ANTIOCH, 

AND THREE YOUTHS, URBAN, PHILIDIAN, AND 

EPOLONIUS, BEHEADED AT ANTIOCH, FOR 

THE NAME OF JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT 

THE YEAR 254 

Babylas, bishop of the church of Antioch, the 
capital of Syria, situated on the river Orontes, was 
a very godly and faithful shepherd of the flock of 
Christ. Knowing beforehand that this severe per- 
secution was threatening the church of Christ, he 
very diligently instructed not only men and women, 
but also children in the principles of the Christian 
faith, and constantly admonished them in his 
preaching, not only to believe in Christ, but also 
to suffer for His name. Touching the cause of his 
imprisonment, the ancients have briefly described 
it thus : namely, that the Emperor Decius came to 
one of the congregations of the Christians, and re- 
quested to be admitted ; but that the shepherd of 
that congregation or church, namely Babylas, in or- 
der to spare the congregations, opposed him boldly, 
saying, that it was not lawful for him thus auda- 
ciously to enter the house of the living God, and to 
view the mysteries of the Lord with his polluted 
eyes, or to touch them with his murderous hands 
still covered with blood. The Emperor, unable to 
bear this, had Babylas, together with several oth- 
ers, seized, bound with chains, and placed in severe 
confinement. 

Those who were apprehended with him, and 
were finally put to death, were, as appears from the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


135 


records, three young men, brothers, and were called, 
Urban, Philidian, and Epolonius; who, as some 
suppose, were his bodily, but according to others, 
his spiritual children, because he had won them for 
Christ through the doctrine of the truth. 

When the hour of his departure began to draw 
near, that he was to be offered, and his disciples or 
other good friends came to visit him in prison, he 
earnestly .asked, as a last request of them, to bury 
him with his fetters, chains, and bonds. 

Concerning his death, Eusebius Pamphilius 
writes : "Bishop Babylas fell asleep in the Lord, in 
prison, at Antioch, after having made his confes- 
sion, in all things like Alexander." Hist. Eccl. 
Edit. A. D. 1588, lib. 6, cap. 39, fol. 121, letters 
F,G. 

But as all the other fathers who have written of 
Babylas speak of him as a martyr, they also state 
that he was executed with the sword. The records 
of his death, faithfully collected by Suidas and 
others from the most ancient writers, read thus : 
"When Babylas was sentenced by the Emperor 
Decius to be beheaded, together with the afore- 
mentioned three young men, he sang the comforting 
words of the 116th psalm, on his way to the place 
of execution : 'Return unto thy rest, Q my soul ; 
for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. He 
hath delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from 
tears, and my feet from falling. I will walk be- 
fore the Lord in the land of the living.' " 

When Babylas and the three young men had 
arrived at the place where they were to be be- 
headed, Babylas begged, that they would first put 
to death before his eyes, the three youths (whether 
they were his bodily or his spiritual children) so 
that they might not be deterred or discouraged by 
his death from dying for the name of Christ. 

While the executioners were busy executing the 
children, he prayed to the Lord, saying: "Here 
am I, Lord, and the children whom thou hast given 
me." And thus he encouraged the children, stead- 
fastly to suffer for the Lord. 

After this, Babylas also fell asleep very peace- 
fully in the Lord, having commended his soul into 
the hands of the Lord, to bring it to the eternal 
rest of which he had spoken immediately before 
his death. 

The mother of these children, and the brethren 
of the church of Antioch buried the dead bodies 
of these martyrs in a decent manner, together 
with the chains and fetters with which Babylas 
had been bound during his life. 

Thus, this good father and his dear children 
took an honorable departure from this world to- 
gether on the same day, and are awaiting now the 
blessed hope and the revelation of the great God, 
and their Saviour, Jesus Christ, for whose honor 
and glory they suffered these things. Abr. Mell., 
1st book, fol. 68, col. 4, and fol. 69, col. 1, 2, from 
Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 29. Epiphan. lib. de Mens, and 
Pond. Hieron. Catal. in Origene. Chrysost. Eunt. 
Gent, and HomU. 9 ad Ephes. Suidas in Babyla. 


acta ex Patribus Collecta. Suid in Hist. sub. nom. 
Babyla. 

Note. — P. J. Twisck, who begins this persecu- 
tion by Decius, with the year 251, fixes the death 
of this man, Babylas, in the second year of his 
reign, namely, A. D. 252, Chron. 3d book, p. 70, 
col. 1, from Hist. Andr., fol. 21. But Abr. Mel- 
linus, who begins the persecution with the year 
253, fixes his death in A. D. 254, (although the 
printer has erroneously made it A. D. 264; for 
Decius reigned only two years), and this is conse- 
quently the second year of Decius. We have fol- 
lowed the latter author. 


PIONIUS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH AT SMYRNA, 

NAILED TO A PIECE OF WOOD AND BURNED 

ALIVE, IN THE CITY OF SMYRNA, FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 

A. D. 254 

Mention is made in this time of a certain pious 
Christian, called Pionius, a man greatly noted on 
account of his remarkable virtue, who always 
stood fearlessly before the Judges, and, as Euse- 
bius declares, steadfastly replied to all their ques- 
tions, yea, taught and disputed in the court, so that 
those who wavered on account of the persecution, 
were thereby strengthened and encouraged. While 
in prison, he strengthened the brethren, and en- 
couraged them, to fight steadfastly even unto the 
end, in the faith, for the Lord, in which he pre- 
ceded them as a good leader. For, according to 
the testimony of Eusebius, he was finally nailed on 
a piece of wood, and cast into a flaming fire, and 
thus died a blessed death. Euseb., lib. 4, cap. 15, 
taken from the letter of those of Smyrna, concern- 
ing the death of Polycarp and some of the martyrs 
who followed him. 


FURTHER PARTICULARS CONCERNING THE DEATH 

OF PIONIUS, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNTS 

GIVEN BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 

We shall endeavor to be as brief as possible, and, 
instead of relating all that pertains to this, present 
only the last acts of his death. 

When the Governor, after much had been said 
on both sides, said to Pionius: "Why dost thou 
make such great haste to meet death?" Pionius 
answered: "I do not make haste to meet death, 
but life." Then said the Governor: "Thou dost 
not act wisely thus to hasten to meet death. Thou 
art like those who, despising death, for the sake of 
a little gain offer themselves to fight with the beasts. 
But since thou despisest death so much, thou shalt 
be burned alive." 

This sentence of death was read to him from a 
tablet inscribed with Roman letters: "We have 
sentenced Pionius to be burned alive, because he 
has confessed that he is a Christian." 

Having thus been sentenced, Pionius was 
brought to the place where he was to be burned. 
There he divested himself of his clothes, and, 


136 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


having looked at his naked body, he cast up his 
eyes to heaven, praising and thanking God for hav- 
ing kept him to this hour free and unspotted from 
the idols. 

With this, he voluntarily went and lay down on 
the firewood, stretched himself over it, and de- 
livered himself to the soldiers, to be nailed to the 
wood. 

When he was fastened to the wood, the servant 
said to him : "Be converted and alter your views ; 
and we shall remove the nails." Pionius answered : 
"I feel that they are in already." And reflecting 
a little, he said to God : "Therefore, O Lord, do I 
hasten to death, that I may rise the sooner (or the 
more glorious)." 

Having been nailed on the cross, he was raised 
up with his face towards the east. When a great 
heap of wood had been collected with which to 
burn him, he closed his eyes for some time, so that 
the people thought that he had already died. How- 
ever, he prayed secretly in his heart ; for when he 
had finished his prayer, he opened his eyes, and 
all at once the flame shot up to a great height, just 
as with a glad countenance he uttered the last word 
of his trust, saying: "Amen, O Lord, receive my 
soul," and calmly and without manifesting the least 
sign of pain, he gave his spirit over into the hands 
of God. 

This happened when Julius Proculus Quintil- 
ianus was Proconsul of Asia, and Emperor M. Q. 
T. Decius was Consul for the third, and Gratus for 
the second time, at Rome, in A. D. 254, by virtue of 
the seventh persecution under Emperor Decius, at 
Smyrna, in Asia Minor. Abr. Mell., 1st book, 
fol. 71, col. 3, 4, from Euseb., lib, 4. Also, Acta per 
Sym. Metaph. Genuma, and Vere pro Consularia. 


MAXIMUS, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, AFTER MANY TOR- 
MENTS STONED TO DEATH, AT EPHESUS, 
ABOUT THE YEAR 255 

It is stated that shortly after the death of Pionius 
and the preceding martyrs, there suffered a certain 
pious Christian, called Maximus, a citizen of Ephe- 
sus ; concerning whom, we, in order to present the 
matter in the briefest, clearest and plainest manner, 
shall, (instead of the testimony of the fathers) 
copy the records themselves, which were approved 
by the Proconsul, and written by the clerk of the 
court. They read thus: "Maximus, a citizen of 
Ephesus, having been apprehended and brought 
before Optimus, the Proconsul of Asia, the latter 
asked him: 'What is thy name?' 

"He answered: 'My name is Maximus.' 

"The Proconsul asked: 'What is thy estate?' 
which meant, whether he was free-born, or a serv- 
ant. 

"Maximus said: 'I belong to myself, and am 
free-born. Nevertheless, I am a servant of Christ, 
and manage my own affairs.' 

"The Proconsul said: 'Art thou a Christian?' 


"Maximus replied: 'Notwithstanding I am a 
sinner, I am nevertheless a servant of Christ.' 

"The Proconsul questioned : 'Knowest thou not 
the decrees of the invincible Princes, which have 
now been brought hither?' 

"Maximus asked back: 'What are they?' 

"The Proconsul answered : 'That all the Chris- 
tians are to forsake their superstitions, acknowl- 
edge the only true Prince, to whose power all things 
are subject, and worship his gods.' 

"Maximus said : 'Yea, I have heard the unjust 
decree of this Prince or Emperor, and hence have 
come, openly to declare myself against it.' 

"The Proconsul spoke: 'Then sacrifice to the 
gods.' 

"Maximus said : 'I sacrifice to none, except to 
God ; and I rejoice that from my childhood's days 
I have offered myself only to God.' 

"The Proconsul again said: 'Sacrifice, lest I 
cause thee to be tormented in divers manners.' 

"Maximus said : 'This is just what I have always 
longed for: to be deprived of this temporal and 
frail life, and thereby attain life eternal.' 

"The Proconsul then commanded his soldiers to 
beat Maximus with sticks. While he was being 
beaten, the Proconsul said to him: 'Sacrifice, 
Maximus, that you may be released from these 
torments.' 

"Maximus said : 'These torments, which I glad- 
ly and willingly receive for the name of my Lord 
Jesus Christ, are no torments at all ; but if I apos- 
tatize from Christ, I must expect the real and ever- 
lasting torments.' 

"The Proconsul therefore had him suspended 
on the torture-stake, and dreadfully tormented; 
and said to him : 'See, now, where thou hast come 
to by thy folly ; sacrifice, therefore, that thou may- 
est save thy life.' 

"Maximus replied: 'If I sacrifice not, I shall 
save my life ; but if I do, I shall lose it. For neither 
thy sticks, hooks, claws, pincers, nor thy fire hurt 
me ; nor do I feel any pain through it, because the 
grace of Christ abides in me.' 

"Then the proconsul pronounced the sentence 
of death, which was as follows : 'I command, that 
Maximus be stoned to death, as an example and 
terror to other Christians ; because he would not 
submit to the laws, and sacrifice to the great Diana 
of Ephesus.' Acta Proconsularia." Thus far ex- 
tend the words which the clerk of the court himself 
wrote. 

The Christian who copied these records, adds the 
following: "And presently this faithful champion 
of Christ was taken away by the servants of Satan, 
brought without the city walls, and stoned. While 
he was being led away, and stoned, he thanked 
God with all his heart, who had made him worthy 
to overcome the devil in the conflict; and thus 
committed his soul into the hands of his Lord Tesus 
Christ." 

Thus this pious witness of Jesus laid down his 
life amidst a volley of stones, for the honor of his 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


137 


Saviour, and thus was registered among the holy 
and steadfast martyrs. A. Mell., 1st book, fol 72, 
col. 3, 4, from Acta Procons. Also, Aug., lib. 2, 
de Doctr. Christ., cap. 26, Idem, contra Donatist. 
super alia acta citat. 

ORIGEN, A SON OF LEONIDES THE MARTYR, GREATLY 
TORMENTED AT ALEXANDRIA, FOR THE TES- 
TIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AND BANISHED 
TO CESAREA STATONIS, ABOUT THE 
YEAR 254 

In our account of baptism in the third century, 
with special reference to the year 231, we have 
spoken of the views of Origen and shown that he 
has left us very excellent and salutary teachings 
concerning baptism upon faith ; and also, that in his 
teaching he opposed the swearing of oaths, war, 
compulsory celibacy, the literal view of the Lord's 
Supper, those who taught something, and did not 
practice it themselves, the antichrist, etc. 

We have likewise shown there, that some very 
peculiar things were laid to his charge as his views, 
from which, however, the principal ancient writers, 
as well as later authors, have vindicated him ; all of 
which may be examined at the place indicated, and 
considered with Christian discretion. This we 
leave to the judgment of the judicious. We shall 
therefore proceed to treat of his martyrdom, and 
how much he had to suffer for the name of the 
Lord Jesus. 

From the very beginning of his knowledge he 
placed himself in great danger of being appre- 
hended or put to death for the testimony of the Son 
of God. For when he was but seventeen years old, 
and his father, whom he affectionately loved, had 
been apprehended for the Christian religion, and 
had nothing to expect but death (as we have noted 
for the year 202), he did not only comfort him by 
letter, but, as other writers state, desired to follow 
him into prison, yea even unto death; which he 
would have done, had not his mother prevented it 
by withholding or taking away his clothes. Intro- 
duction, fol. 38, col. 2, from Euseb. 

Besides this he often exposed himself to danger 
for the Christian martyrs, because of his extraordi- 
nary love for them. He would station himself near 
the tribunal, where the apprehended Christians 
were making their last defense, or were to receive 
their sentence of death, and when they were be- 
coming weak he would strengthen and encourage 
them ; he went with them to death, even to the place 
of execution ; he gave them the last kiss of peace, 
as a friendly and fraternal farewell; so that fre- 
quently he would have lost his life, had not God re- 
markably and miraculously preserved him. Sol- 
diers who were hired for the purpose by the ene- 
mies of the truth, lay in ambush for his person and 
for the house in which he lived, in order to appre- 
hend or kill him ; so that on account of the fierce 
persecution he could remain no longer in Alex- 
andria, the place where he had been brought up ; 


and this the more, because the believers there, on 
account of his conspicuousness, could no longer 
conceal him. 

His beloved disciples, whom he had faithfully 
taught the ways of God, had nearly all been put to 
death for the name of Jesus Christ, among whom 
were, Plutarch, Heraclides, Hero, the two pious 
men called Serenus, Rhais, Marcella, and others; 
whom we have mentioned in the years A. D. 203 
and 204. 

It may therefore be considered a miracle that 
Origenes lived so long in the midst of deadly perse- 
cutions, namely, from his seventh to his seventieth 
year, which is more than fifty years. 

But finally, sufferings beyond measure came 
upon him ; he was cast into the deepest prison, his 
neck loaded with iron chains, his feet placed in the 
stocks, and stretched so that four holes were be- 
tween them.* There he was tortured with fire and 
divers other means of torment ; but he bore it all 
with utmost patience. Nevertheless, it appears 
from ancient writers, that he was not put to death 
judicially, but, as Epiphanius writes, was banished 
to Cesarea Statonis; and that finally, having 
moved to Tyre, he died and was buried there, under 
Gallus and Valusianus. Compare the account of 
A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 57, col. 1, 2, under the name 
Leonides, but especially fol. 77, col. 3, 4, under the 
name Origen, from Euseb., lib. 6, cap. 2. Hieron. 
Apol. Ruffin. Suid. in Origene Epiphan. de Men- 
suris. Hieron. Catal. in Origene. Also, Euseb., 
lib. 6. Also, P. J. Twisck, 3d book, for the year 
231, page 61, col. 1, 2, from Georgius Vicelius. 
Also, Introduction, fol. 38, col. 2. Also, Joh. Gys., 
fol. 18, col. 3, about Leonides. 

There are some who accuse Origen of apostasy ; 
but different excellent authors have acquitted him 
of this charge; though in point of knowledge he 
had his weaknesses and failings. 

Eusebius Pamphilius of Cesarea praises his vir- 
tue above measure, saying that Origen wished to 
have no communion with Paulus Antiochenus, be- 
cause the latter was tainted with error. Of Otigen 
it was said: "This is he who lives as he teaches, 
and teaches as he lives. He sold his books of 
heathen philosophy, on condition that four pence 
a day should be given him for his daily needs, so 
that he would not be a burden to any one. He set 
all his disciples an example of poverty, that they 
should forsake whatever they possessed; hence 
he was beloved by everyone, because he contended 
with none about temporal goods, except that some 
were dissatisfied because he refused to accept what 
they offered to impart to him for the sustenance 
of his body." Eusebius further says: "It is said 
that for many years he went barefoot, using 
neither wine nor such like, but only the absolute 
necessaries of life, until disease in the breast, which 
endangered his life, compelled him to it." Lib. 6, 


* The number of holes reached indicated the degree of torture 
to which the prisoner was subjected. — Translator. 


138 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


cap. 1, 2, 3. Also, Baudart. in Apophthegm. Chris- 
Han., lib. 3, page 100. 

In refutation of those who accused Origen of 
apostasy, A. Mellinus writes (though he does not 
wish to defend his misconceptions or errors, as he 
calls them) : "If this account of the apostasy of 
Origen were true, Porphyrius, who wrote at this 
time against the Christians, and was especially bit- 
ter against Origen, would very probably have men- 
tioned it in his writings, and this the more so, as 
he dared unjustly to accuse Ammonius, Origen's 
teacher, .of Apostasy : how much more then, would 
he have exerted himself against Origen, if the latter 
had really apostatized ; whereas he acknowledges 
that Origen lived as a Christian to the end." A lit- 
tle further on he writes : "As regards his Christian 
life and steadfast confession of the name of Christ, 
we have no reason to call it in question, since even 
his enemies bear him a good testimony in this re- 
spect." Abr. Mell., 1st book, fol. 78, col. 1, from 
Porphyry. 

Of the Eighth Persecution of the Chris- 
tians, under Valerian and his son Gal- 
lien, which Commenced about the 
year 259 

After the death of the Emperor Volusian, the 
son of Decius, Aemilian, an Ethiopian, ascended 
the imperial throne; but since it is stated that he 
reigned only three months, and that Valerian had 
previously already been declared Emperor, his 
reign is not taken into account. It follows, there- 
fore, that Valerian was acknowledged Emperor; 
who, together with his son Gallien, began to reign 
about the year 255, as set forth by Seb. Frank ; but 
the persecution, according to the testimony of dif- 
ferent authors, did not begin until the year 259. 


of the originator and the cause of this 
persecution 

The author of the Introduction to the Martyrs 
Mirror writes, concerning this, as follows: "In 
A. D. 259 the eighth persecution against the Chris- 
tians arose under the Emperor Valerian. He is- 
sued an edict against the Christians, in which he 
commanded that the Christians were not to as- 
semble themselves ; and as this was not observed, a 
great persecution arose everywhere." Fol. 41, 
col. 1. 


further particulars about the originator 
and cause of this persecution 

Concerning this, J. Gysius records the follow- 
ing : "Valerian and Gallien, who in the beginning 
of their reign, were favorable to the Christians, 
soon afterwards changed their course, being misled 
by an Egyptian sorcerer, and by divers torments 
compelled the Christians to idolatry." Fol. 20, 
col. 3, 4. 


further amplification of the cause and cir- 
cumstances OF THIS PERSECUTION 

P. J. Twisck, speaking (for the year 255) of the 
beginning of the reign of Emperor Valerian, says : 
"Truly, this Emperor, as history tells us, was in 
the beginning a very pious and praiseworthy 
Prince, a censor, who excelled all others; in re- 
gard to which many commendatory passages may 
be read in the Tijdthresoor by Paul Merula. But, 
what of it ? Although at first he was very favorable 
to the Christians, and so honored their ministers, 
that his house was considered a. church of the Lord, 
he was nevertheless afterwards corrupted by a 
doctor, a wicked lord and prince of all the sor- 
cerers of Egypt; who> made the Emperor believe 
that fortune would not be on his side as long as 
he tolerated the Christians at his oourt, or in the 
land. Then the Emperor commanded that these 
holy and just men should be persecuted and put to 
death as such who were opposed to the sorcery 
with which he was polluted. 

This sorcerer also prevailed upon the Emperor 
to slaughter and sacrifice children and human be- 
ings in honor of the devil. He accordingly com- 
manded that little children should be put to death, 
so that he could perform his unclean ceremonies 
and abominable sacrifices ; and thus robbed parents 
of their children, and became such a despiser and 
oppressor of the Christian faith, that he spared 
neither old nor young, men nor women, nor any 
state and condition, but most miserably murdered 
all that were brought to him, in Alexandria and 
other places too numerous to mention. At Rome 
also there was much innocent blood shed at this 
time, even as this city has ever been a place of 
slaughter for the poor Christians." Third book, 
jor the year 255, page 71, col. 2. 

OF THE CRUELTY AND VIOLENCE OF THIS PERSE- 
CUTION 

P. J. Twisck, having concluded his account of 
the aforementioned matter, proceeds immediately 
to show how cruelly and lamentably the innocent 
Christians were treated at that time. "The martyr- 
doms," he writes, "were manifold : they were cast 
before wild beasts; they were beaten, wound- 
ed, executed with the sword, burned, torn limb 
from limb, rent asunder, pinched with red-hot 
tongs; red-hot nails were driven in their fingers 
and nerves. Some were hung up by their arms, 
and heavy weights tied to their feet, and thus 
were torn asunder gradually and with great pain. 
Others, whose wounded bodies had been smeared 
over with honey, were placed naked on the earth 
in the hot sun, to be tormented and stung to death 
by flies, bees, and other insects. Others were beat- 
en with clubs, and cast into prison, until they mis- 
erably perished." 

"Under the reign of the afore-mentioned cruel 
and tyrannical Emperors," he writes a little further 
on, "many Christians had to wander and roam 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


139 


about in foreign countries, in secluded places, along 
shores, in caverns, on mountains, in caves, amidst 
want and poverty; leaving comfort, honor, pros- 
perity, peace, friends, money, and property." 
Among many others, there is an account given in 
the Keyser's Chronijk, of a youth of sixteen years, 
called Paul, well versed in different languages, 
and the son of a rich man, who, in order to escape 
the persecution, went out into a village to live with 
his sister. But his brother-in-law was moved by 
avarice to betray him, that thus he might obtain 
possession of his property. His sister having 
warned him of his danger, he fled into the moun- 
tains, gladly leaving behind him all his posses- 
sions. However, God prepared him there a secret 
cave, where he could quench his thirst with pure 
water, and satisfy his hunger with roots, herbs, 
and the fruits of the trees. Idem. Ibidem, from 
Euseb. Fasc. Temp., fol. 94. Chron. Mich., fol. 
161. Chron. Seb. Franc, fol. 18, Hist. Andr., fol. 
177, 178, 2d part, fol. 174. Paul Merula, fol. 217, 
218, 221, Jan. Crespin, fol. 65. 


DIONYSIUS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH AT ALEXAN- 
DRIA, WITH TWO OF HIS FELLOW-BELIEVERS, 
GAIUS AND PETER, AFTER MUCH SUFFERING, 
EXILED INTO A DESERT PLACE OF LYBIA, 
THREE DAYS JOURNEY FROM PARAE- 
TONIUM, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 
JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 
260 

After different letters of Dionysius, bishop at 
Alexandria (recorded by Abr. Mellinus from Euse- 
bius), concerning the persecution he suffered, there 
follows one which Dionysius wrote to Domitius 
and Didymus, about the oppression of the Chris- 
tians under Valerian, as well as how he himself 
was oppressed at that time. Among other state- 
ments, it contains these words: "It is not neces- 
sary to mention all the names of the Christian mar- 
tyrs, because their number is very great, and you 
do not know them; but know ye of this persecu- 
tion, in general, that innumerably many men and 
women, old and young people, old women and 
young girls, of every state and condition, were, 
some scourged, some burned, some beheaded, or 
made martyrs in some other manner ; and still the 
proconsul continues in his cruelty; putting to 
death those that were made known to him, causing 
some to be rent asunder by divers torments, hold- 
ing others in bonds and severe confinement, and 
letting them perish through hunger and thirst, for- 
bidding all to come to them, yea closely watching 
those who but endeavor to get near them. 

"Nevertheless, the Lord has thus strengthened 
the hearts of the brethren, that they, for the name 
of Christ, have constantly visited these oppressed 
prisoners, notwithstanding it was interdicted un- 


der penalty of death. And although this persecution 
has lasted for a considerable length of time, there 
have still been some whom God did not deem wor- 
thy to take to Himself as martyrs. Among whom, 
says Dionysius, I myself yet remain, until the 
Lord will otherwise dispose of me ; since He doubt- 
less preserves me for some other time, which ap- 
pears to Him more suitable. At present I, together 
with Gaius and Peter, am separated from all the 
rest of the brethren, confined in a desert place of 
Lybia, three days' journey from Paraetonium." 
Compare A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 79, col. 2, from 
Euseb., lib. 7. 

We selected this letter of Dionysius from all the 
rest, because there is stated in it, on the one hand, 
the severity of this persecution in general, and, on 
the other hand, the oppression which this friend of 
God himself suffered ; inasmuch as he, after much 
wandering, was separated, together with his two 
dear friends, Gaius and Peter, from all the r6st of 
his brethren, and confined in a desert place of 
Lybia, there expecting death for the name of the 
Lord. 

Of Dionysius P. J. Twisck states, that he as well 
as Tertullian held a figurative or spiritual view of 
the Lord's Supper, i.e., that the words of Christ : 
"This is my body," signify : "This is a figure of 
my body." Second book, for the year 200, page 53, 
col. 1, concerning Tertullian. 

The same author, speaking of Origen, says 
among other things of Dionysius, that after Ori- 
gen and Heracles he presided over the schools of 
the catechumens (that is, those who were instruct- 
ed in the Christian doctrine, before baptism) at 
Alexandria. Third book, for the year 231, page 
61, col. 1. 

In another place the afore-mentioned author 
states that Dionysius, whom he calls a catechetical 
preacher, accompanied Pancratius, when the lat- 
ter was baptized at Mount Celinus. In the same 
book, for the year 253, page 71, col. 1, from 
Wicelius, in Chorosanctorum. Grond. Bern., letter 
B., Leonhard, lib. 1. 

In the second book, 13th chapter, D. Vicecomes 
cites Dionysius (from Eusebius) as saying: 
"Many heathen adopted at their baptism the name 
of the apostle John, from special love and admira- 
tion for him, as well as because of the zeal which 
animated them, to follow him, and because they 
desired to be loved by the Lord, as he was. For 
the same reason the names of Peter and Paul be- 
came prevalent among the believing children of 
God. 

"All these," says the writer who has recorded 
this, "are beautiful reminders, which were admin- 
istered to the catechumens before and after bap- 
tism; which certainly cannot apply to infants." 
Baptism. Hist., printed at Dortmund, A. D. 1646, 
and \€A7, 2d part, concerning the third century, 
page 320. 


140 


[ARTYRS MIRROR 


FRUCTUOSUS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH OF TARRA- 
GONA, WITH AUGURIUS AND EULOGIUS, HIS 
DEACONS, BURNED ALIVE FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT TARRA- 
GONA, ABOUT THE YEAR 261 

It is stated that at this time, Fructuosus, bishop 
of the church of Tarragona in Spain, and Agurius 
and Eulogius, his deacons, were apprehended at 
the command of Aemilian, the Proconsul, and held 
in prison six days, before they were brought before 
the tribunal of the Proconsul. When they were 
standing before the judgment seat, Aemilian com- 
manded them to kneel before the altars, and wor- 
ship the gods standing thereon, and sacrifice to 
them, saying to Fructuosus: "I understand that 
thou art a teacher of a new-devised religion, and 
that thou incitest giddy young women, no longer 
to go to the groves, where the gods are worshiped, 
yea, to forsake Jupiter himself. Go on, then, de- 
spising our religion, but know thou, that the Em- 
peror Gallien has, with his own lips, issued a de- 
cree by which he binds all his subjects, to serve 
the same gods which the prince, that is, the Em- 
peror, serves or honors." 

Thereupon Bishop Fructuosus answered: "I 
worship the eternal Prince, who has created the 
days and the gods, and is Lord even over the 
Emperor Gallien; and Christ, who is begotten of 
the eternal Father Himself, whose servant, and 
the shepherd of whose flock I am." 

The Proconsul derisively said : "Yea, who hast 
been it till now ; but thou art so no longer." With 
this, he sentenced Fructuosus and his two dea- 
cons, Augurius and Eulogius, to be burned alive. 

These faithful martyrs, having received the 
sentence of death, for the name of Christ, rejoiced 
in their impending martyrdom, and when they saw 
the people weep, as they were led to death, they 
forbade them to weep. When some offered Fruc- 
tuosus a drink on the way, that he might refresh 
his heart, he refused it, according to the example 
of Christ, saying : "Now is our fast-day. I do not 
wish to drink; it is not yet the ninth hour of the 
day (that is three o'clock in the afternoon, before 
which time those who fasted did not eat) ; and 
death itself shall not break my fast-day." 

When they arrived in the arena, where the exe- 
cutioner had been ordered to build a great fire in 
which to burn these pious martyrs, a dispute (pro- 
ceeding, however, from heartfelt love) arose 
among the faithful Christians, as to who should 
first untie the latchets of the shoes of the bishop, 
their beloved shepherd and teacher. But Fructu- 
osus would not permit it, saying : "I shall untie 
them myself from my feet, so that I can go un- 
hindered into the fire." And perceiving that they 
wept, he said: "Why weep ye? and why do you 
ask me to remember you? I shall pray for all of 
Christ's people." 

Standing with his bare feet by the fire, he said 
to all the people: "Believe me! what you see 


before your eyes is no punishment ; it passes away 
in a moment of time, and does not take away life, 
but restores it. O happy souls ! who through this 
temporal ascend into heaven unto God, and who 
on the last day, shall be saved from everlasting 
fire." 

All at once they hastened towards the fire, which 
indeed burned off in a moment the bands with 
which their hands had been fastened on their backs, 
thus freeing these; but their bodies remained in- 
tact in this great heat, so that with outstretched 
hands they prayed God to suffer the flames speed- 
ily to deliver them from the agony of death. Their 
prayer having been heard, they, leaving their 
frail bodies here as pledges, committed their souls 
unto God, and the three martyrs fell calmly asleep 
in the Lord, from whom, on the day of judgment, 
they will receive, in reward of their faithful serv- 
ices and steadfast testimonies, the martyr's crown, 
and white robes in token of their victory. Abr 
Mell, 1st book, fol. 81, col. 4, and fol. 82, col. 1, 2, 
from Prudent. Stephan. Hym. 6, ex Actis Procon- 
sul. 


MARINUS, OF NOBLE DESCENT, BUT PREFERRING 

THE GOSPEL TO THE SWORD, BEHEADED AT 

JERUSALEM FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 

JESUS CHRIST, ABOUT THE YEAR 262 

In the ancient records of the pious witnesses of 
Jesus Christ, an account is given of Marinus, a citi- 
zen of Jerusalem, of noble descent, who, although 
he belonged to the nobility, entertained a sincere 
affection for the true Christians, who at that time 
were oppressed beyond measure. On this account 
his enviers, who were jealous of the honor of his 
nobility, severely accused and charged him with 
being a Christian ; which he also confessed, when 
he was brought before the Judge ; yea, he declared 
with a loud and clear voice, that he was certainly a 
Christian. The Judge then gave him three hours' 
respite to consider, whether he would die as a 
Christian, or whether he would sacrifice to the 
gods and the Emperor. 

As he went away from the tribunal, Theotecnes, 
the bishop of the church in that city, took him by 
the hand, and led him to the meeting, in the meet- 
ing-place, strengthened him with many words in 
the faith, and, placing before him the sword which 
he was wont to carry at his side, and also the 
Gospel [book], he asked him which of the two he 
would choose? 

When Marinus, with a firm faith, stretched forth 
his hand for the Gospel, choosing it instead of the 
sword, Theotecnes said to him : "O my son ! keep 
that which thou hast chosen, and, despising this 
present life, hope for the eternal. Depart in good 
confidence, and receive the crown which the Lord 
has prepared for thee." 

Marinus accordingly returned to the tribunal, 
and was forthwith called by the lord's servant, for 
the appointed time had come ; he did not delay or 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


141 


wait until he was asked, but said of his own ac- 
cord : that he had considered the matter, and that 
it was established by the law of the fathers, that 
God must be obeyed rather than men. Eusebius 
Pamphilius writes, that when Marinus had an- 
swered thus, the Judge immediately gave sentence 
that he should be beheaded. Lib. 7 , cap. 15. 

P. J. Twisck gives the following account of this 
Marinus : "When Marinus confessed that he was 
a Christian, and chose the Bible in preference to 
the sword, he was called before the tribunal, 
sentenced, and beheaded." Third book, for the 
year 262, page 73, col. 2 ; from Euseb. Compare 
this with the Introduction, fol. 41, col. 2. 


God through their death; for this was their sole 
object." First book, fol. 79, col. 4. 


THREE PIOUS PEASANTS, PRISCUS, MALCHUS, 

AND ALEXANDER, WHO SOUGHT HEAVENLY 

CROWNS, TORN BY THE WILD BEASTS, 

AT CESAREA, IN PALESTINE, ABOUT 

THE YEAR 263 

In this persecution under Valerian there were 
three very noted and God-fearing martyrs at Cesa- 
rea, in Palestine, who nevertheless were but simple 
peasants, the first called Priscus, the second Mal- 
chus, the third Alexander. Eusebius writes, that, 
as they lived near the suburbs of Cesarea, a divine 
zeal for the faith was kindled within them, and 
they accused each other (and each himself, says 
Mellinus), of slothfulness, since heavenly crowns 
of martyrdom were distributed, or at least offered, 
in the city, and they were so little inclined to ask 
for them, notwithstanding our Lord and Saviour 
had said that the kingdom of heaven must be taken 
by violence, and therefore it did not become them 
to remain so earthly and slothful. Having ex- 
horted one another with such words, they went 
into the city, and addressed and reproved that 
cruel tyrant, the criminal Judge, demanding of 
him, why he shed so much Christian blood. The 
tyrant instantly replied saying: "They shall be 
thrown before wild beasts, to be torn by them, 
who do not like to see the blood of the Christians 
shed ; which, it is stated, was done to them." Com- 
pare Euseb., lib. 7, cap. 12, fol. 131, col. 1, 2, letter 
F, G, with the Introduction, fol. 4, col. 2. Also, 
J oh. Gys., fol. 21, col. 2. 

A. Mellinus, writing in defense of the afore- 
mentioned three peasants, against those who would 
pronounce them too bold, says after other remarks : 
"Who are you that judge your brethren? How do 
you know of what spirit they were? No one has 
courage of himself; but it is the gift of God, not 
only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for His 
name: hence, neither is of ourselves. They also 
did not seek their own honor, but to magnify the 
name of Christ by their death ; to which, no doubt, 
they were impelled by divine zeal, since their zeal 
was not without knowledge, but proceeded from 
the power of faith; wherejby they were prepared 
through the divine Spirit to proclaim the honor of 


PHILIP, PRIVATUS, FLORENTIN, PONTIUS, AND MANY 

OTHERS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE TESTIMONY 

OF JESUS CHRIST, IN DIFFERENT PLACES, 

DURING THIS PERSECUTION, TILL 

ABOUT A. D. 270 

Besides the afore-mentioned martyrs who were 
put to death in this persecution, certain other 
authors have noted various other pious witnesses of 
Jesus Christ, who, loving the honor of God more 
than their own lives, were put to death at that 
time, and under that same Emperor; which we 
shall presently relate. Besides the three hundred 
Christians whom P. J. Twisck places in the year 
264, as having been burned in a limekiln, because 
they would not throw incense on the coals, for a 
sacrifice in honor of Jupiter, as may be seen in the 
3d book, page 75, col. 1, from Histor. Adr., fol. 30, 
several names are mentioned, as, Philip, bishop of 
the church at Alexandria, who was put to death 
with the sword in this persecution, for the testi- 
mony of Jesus Christ. /. Gys., fol. 21, col. 2, from 
Vine. Spec. Hist., lib. 11, cap. 23. Henr. d' Oxf., 
lib. 6; cap. 21. Also, Florentin and Pontius, pious 
men, are stated to have been put to death in France, 
for the name of the Lord, together with others, 
who are also mentioned. Introduction, fol. 41, col. 
2, Seb. Franck, fol. 22, col. 4. 


Of the Ninth Persecution of the Christians, 

under aurelian, commenced about 

A. D. 273 

CONCERNING THE CRUELTY AND BLOODTHIRSTI- 

NESS OF THE EMPEROR AURELIAN AGAINST 

THE CHRISTIANS, AND HOW HE WAS 

PREVENTED THEREIN BY GOD 

A. Mellinus writes: "Aurelian was a stern, 
cruel, and bloodthirsty Emperor by nature, and al- 
though at first he had a good opinion of the Chris- 
tians, he nevertheless afterwards became averse to, 
and estranged from them : and having, undoubted- 
ly, by some talebearers, been instigated against 
the Christians, he allowed himself to be seduced 
so far, as to raise the ninth general persecution of 
the Roman monarchy against them, which per- 
secution he, however, did not carry out. For at 
the very moment in which the decrees written 
against the Christians, were laid before him by his 
secretary, that he might sign them, and when he 
was about to take the pen in hand, the hand of God 
suddenly touched him, smiting his hand with lame- 
ness, and thus preventing him in his purpose, so 
that he could not sign them." First book, fol. 87, 
col. 3, from Vopisc. Victor. Eus., lib. 7. Post, hit- 
eras, Aug. de Civit. Dei., lib. 18, cap. 52. Oras.. 
lib. 7, cap. 16. Theodoret. Hist., lib. 4, cap. 17. 


142 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


A MORE PARTICULAR ACCOUNT OF THIS PERSE- 
CUTION, ACCORDING TO P. J. TWISCK 

He writes : "Emperor Aurelian commenced the 
ninth persecution against the Christians. He was 
by nature inclined to tyranny, and was a furious 
bloodhound, as Eutropius writes, so that he did 
not hesitate to kill his sister's son, and finally, 
through the atrocity of his own wicked nature, and 
evil counsel suggested to him, he became an enemy 
and persecutor of the Christians. He sent letters to 
the Governors of the Roman country, that they 
should vex the Christians ; but when he was about 
actually to carry the persecution into effect, he 
could not sign the decrees which were to be issued 
against the Christians, because God smote him, 
so that his hand was paralyzed. Through divine 
judgment he was terrified by thunder, lightning, 
and fire-darts, at the time that he was constantly 
meditating how. he might slay and exterminate the 
Christians; and shortly after was himself killed 
by his notary." Third book, for the year 270, page 
76, col. 2, from Chron. Mich. Sac., fol. 178. Euseb., 
lib. 7. Chron. Seb. Fr., fol. 18. Chron. Carionis, 
lib. 3, Hist. Andrea, fol. 178, 2d part, fol. 175. 
Paul. Mer., fol. 226. Jan. Crespin., fol. 62. Chron. 
Andrea, lib. 13, fol. 343, 


WHAT THE AUTHOR OF THE INTRODUCTION, ETC., 
HAS WRITTEN ABOUT THIS PERSECUTION 

In A. D. 273 arose the ninth persecution of the 
Christians, under the Emperor Aurelian; but it 
was not as great as the former, because death 
suddenly overtook him as he proposed to himself, 
to begin it. Under him were killed . . . and many 
others, concerning whom no special accounts are 
extant. Fol. 41, col. 2. 

Notwithstanding Emperor Aurelian could not 
himself sign the above-mentioned decrees against 
the Christians, the persecution nevertheless pro- 
ceeded in some places, so that here and there some 
laid down their lives for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ; of whom we shall mention only a few, 
whom we have selected as true martyrs. 


PRIVATUS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS 

CHRIST AT GEVAULDAN, BEATEN TO DEATH 

WITH STICKS FOR THE TRUE FAITH, 

ABOUT A. D. 274 

When Chorus, the king of the Germans, in the 
time of Valerian and Aurelian, yea, up to the time 
of Probus, devastated France, he found among 
other martyrs who dwelt separated from men in 
deserts and mountains, a certain pious man, called 
Privatus, Bishop of the church at Gevauldan. This 
man, sojourning in the mountains, fasting and 
praying, was taken prisoner by the Germans, and 
because he, as behooves a good shepherd, would 
not deliver his lambs into the claws of the wolves, 
by himself sacrificing to Satan, which he would in 
no wise do, he was beaten with sticks by them for 


a very long time, till they left him lie for dead ; in 
consequence of which treatment he also died a 
few days after. This happened, as some have sup- 
posed, under Valerian and Gallien, but in reality, 
under Aurelian. Compare A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 
89, col. 1, from Greg. Turon. Hist., lib. 1, cap. 
34, with Introduction, fol. 41, col. 2, where he is 
called Privatus, Bishop of Gablen. 

MAMAS, A SHEPHERD, THRUST THROUGH WITH A 

THREE-PRONGED SPEAR, FOR THE TESTIMONY 

OF JESUS CHRIST, AT CAESAREA IN CAPPA- 

DOCIA, ABOUT A. D. 274 

Mamas, a shepherd, who pastured his sheep 
upon the mountains and in the wildernesses of 
Cappadocia, lived very poorly, without a hut, 
dwelling under the blue heavens, and subsisting on 
the milk and cheese of his flock, as Basilius tes- 
tifies. Nazianzenus adds, that the hinds also suf- 
fered themselves to be milked by him daily, and 
that he was thus fed by them. 

Basilius says, that from the course of the heav- 
enly bodies he learned to know the wonderful 
works of God, his Creator, and thus His eternal 
power and wisdom. However, the accounts writ- 
ten concerning him state that he had the Word of 
God with him in the desert, and that he read in it 
daily. 

It is quite probable, writes Mellinus, that this 
Mamas, in order to escape the persecution in the 
time of Decius and Valerian, went into the wilder- 
ness, and remained there till the time of Aurelian, 
whose proconsul of Cappadocia, Alexander, caused 
him to be brought out of the wilderness, and to 
appear before him, at Caesarea, the capital of 
Cappadocia. 

The proconsul called him a sorcerer or conjurer, 
because the wild animals of the wilderness so 
tamely submitted to him. 

Mamas answered: "I am a servant of Christ, 
and know nothing about sorcery ; but would rather 
live among the wild animals, than among you: 
for they feel the power of their Creator in and 
through me ; but ye will not know God. I cannot 
sufficiently wonder that you, who have attained to 
gray hairs, are still in such gross darkness of ig- 
norance, as to forsake the true and living God, and 
give divine honor to deaf and dumb idols." 

When he was requested to say at least with his 
lips, that he would sacrifice to the gods, so as to 
escape punishment, Mamas replied : "I shall never, 
either with my lips, or with my heart, deny the 
true God and King, Jesus Christ. So far am I 
from seeking to escape suffering for the name of 
Christ, that I, on the contrary, consider it the 
highest honor, the greatest gain, and the utmost 
benefit, which you can confer upon me." 

Upon this confession, the proconsul had him 
placed on the rack, cruelly scourged, tormented 
with pincers, burnt on his sides with lamps and 
torches, and tortured in various other ways. But 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


143 


seeing that in all these and other torments he re- 
mained steadfast, he finally had him thrust through 
with a three-pronged spear ; and thus Mamas be- 
came a faithful martyr for his Saviour, under 
Emperor Aurelian, at Caesarea in Cappadocia. A. 
Mell., 1st book, fol. 89, col. 2, 3, ex Basilii Concio, 
in Mart. Mamant. Nazianz. Orat. 43. Act. per 
Metaphrast. 


SYMPHORIAN, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, BEHEADED FOR 

THE NAME OF THE LORD JESUS, AT AUGUSTO- 

DUNUM, NOW CALLED AUTUM, ABOUT 

A. d. 275 

It is stated that at this time, as the heathen at 
Augustodunum, now called Autum, in Burgundy, 
on a feast-day of the goddess Cybele, whom they 
called the mother of the gods, carried around her 
image on a wagon, in procession, a certain pious 
Christian, called Symphorianus, met this image, 
and refused to worship it ; in consequence of which 
he was apprehended as an impious person, or 
despiser of the gods, and brought before Herac- 
lius, the Proconsul, who, in that city, exercised 
the strictest vigilance over the Christians. When 
he stood before the judgment seat, the Proconsul 
asked him for his name. Symphorian replied that 
he was a .Christian by religion, was born of Chris- 
tian parents, and had received the name Symph- 
orian. 

The Judge said : "Why didst thou not honor the 
mother of the gods, or worship her image ?" 

Symphorian answered : "Because, I am a Chris- 
tian, and call only upon the living God, who reigns 
in heaven. But as to the image of Satan I not only 
do not worship it, but, if you will let me, I will 
break it in pieces with a hammer." 

The Judge said: "This man is not only sacri- 
legious at heart, but also obstinate and a rebel; 
but perhaps he knows nothing of the ordinances or 
decrees of the Emperor. Let the officer, therefore, 
read to him the decrees of the Emperors." 

The decrees having been read to him, Sym- 
phorian said : "I shall notwithstanding never con- 
fess that this image is anything but a worthless 
idol of Satan, by which he persuades men that he 
is a god; while it is an evident demonstration of 
their eternal destruction for all those who put 
their trust in it." 

Upon this confession, the Judge caused him to 
be scourged and cast into prison, to keep him for 
some other day. Some time after, he had him 
brought again before his judgment seat, and ad- 
dressed him with kind words, saying: "Symph- 
orian, sacrifice to the gods, that thou mayest be 
promoted to the highest honor and state at court. 
If not, I call the gods to witness that I am com- 
pelled this day, after various tortures, to sentence 
thee to death." 

Symphorian answered : "What matters it, if we 
deliver up this life to Christ, since, by reason of 


debt, in any event we must pay it to Him ? Your 
gifts and presents are mingled with the sweetness 
of the adulterated honey, with which you poison 
the minds of the unbelieving. But our treasures 
and riches are ever in Christ, our Lord, alone ; and 
do not perish through age or length of time; 
whereas your desire is insatiable, and you possess 
nothing, even though you have everything in 
abundance. The joy and mirth which you enjoy 
in this world, is like fine glass, which, if placed in 
the radiance and heat of the sun, cracks and breaks 
in two ; but God alone is our supreme happiness." 

After Symphorian had said these and like things 
before the Judge, Heraclius, the Proconsul, pro- 
nounced sentence of death upon him, saying: 
"Symphorian, having openly been found guilty of 
death, because he hath blasphemed against the 
holy altars, shall be executed with the sword." 

When this godly confessor was led to death, to 
be offered up to Christ, his mother called down to 
him from the wall of the city this comforting ad- 
monition : "Symphorian, my son ! my son ! re- 
member the living God ; let thy heart be steadfast 
and valiant. We can surely not fear death, which 
beyond doubt leads us into the true life. Lift up 
thy heart to heaven, my son, and behold Him who 
reigns in heaven ! Today thy life will not be taken 
from thee, but be changed into a better one. If thou 
remainest steadfast today, thou shalt make a happy 
exchange: leaving this earthly house, thou shalt 
go to dwell in the tabernacle not made with hands." 

Symphorian, having been thus strengthened by 
his mother, was taken out of the city, and beheaded 
there, having commended his soul into the hands 
of God, in the time of Emperor Aurelian, and Her- 
aclius, the Proconsul, at Autum in Burgundy. His 
dead body was buried by certain Christians. Com- 
pare A. Mell, 1st book, fol. 19, col. 4, and fol. 90, 
col. 1, ex Actis Proconsul. Greg. Turan. Degl. 
Confess., cap. 77, and Hist., lib. 2, cap. 15, with 
different other authors concerning Symphorian. 


SEVERAL YEARS AFTER THE DEATH OF THE PRE- 
CEDING MARTYRS, A. D. 284, DIOCLETIAN AT- 
TAINED TO THE REIGN OF THE ROMAN 
EMPIRE, AND SHORTLY AFTERWARDS 
ISSUED HIS FIRST EDICT AGAINST 
THE CHRISTIANS, WHICH 
WAS FOLLOWED BY A SEC- 
OND IN 302, CALLED 
THE 

Tenth Persecution of the Christians 

Before the tenth general and severe persecution 
of the Christians began, A. D. 302, many Christians 
were put to death in different places, and through- 
out this whole period, by virtue of the first edict of 
Diocletian. Of these we shall present a few, and 
then, with the beginning of the next century, pro- 
ceed to the tenth and severest persecution. 


144 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


CLAUDIUS, ASTERIUS, AND NEON, THREE BROTH- 
ERS, CRUCIFIED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST; ALSO TWO WOMEN, DONUINA AND 
THEONILLA, TORMENTED TO DEATH 
FOR THE SAME TESTIMONY, AT 
AEG^A IN CILICIA, A. D. 
285 

It is stated that in the second year of the reign 
of Emperor Diocletian, which coincides with the 
year 285, three pious Christians, spiritual as well 
as natural brothers, called Claudius, Asterius, and 
Neon, were accused to the Judge of the City of 
Aegaea, in Cilicia, of being Christians, by their 
stepmother, who, as it seems, was a heathen 
woman. 

Two God-fearing Christian women, named Don- 
uina, and Theonilla, were also accused with them. 
They were all imprisoned till the arrival of Lysias, 
the Proconsul, who, on his tour through the prov- 
inces of Cilicia, also came to Aegaea, and there held 
criminal court against the Christians. 

How Claudius was examined first. — Claudius 
being first brought before his judgment seat, Lys- 
ias asked him for his name, and admonished him, 
not thus rashly to throw away the bloom of his 
youth, but to sacrifice to the gods, and thus obey 
the command of the Emperor, that he might es- 
cape the ready penalty. 

Claudius answered: "Our God does not need 
these sacrifices ; He has more pleasure in works of 
love and mercy towards our fellow men, and in 
holiness of life; but your gods are unclean evil 
spirits, and delight in such sacrifices, by which 
they bring eternal punishment upon those who 
offer them. You shall therefore never be able to 
persuade me to honor them." 

Lysias said: "Bind him, and scourge him with 
rods; for there is no other way to tame his folly." 

Claudius said: "By these severe tortures thou 
shalt not harm me, but wilt bring down upon thy- 
self eternal punishment." 

Lysias said: "Our lords, the Emperors, have 
commanded that the Christians shall sacrifice to 
the gods. It is their will, that the disobedient be 
punished; while to them who obey their com- 
mandment they promise honor and office." 

Claudius replied : "These gifts and benefits en- 
dure but a short time, but the confession of Christ 
imparts eternal glory." 

Lysias commanded that they should suspend 
him on the torture stake, put fire under his feet, 
and cut off pieces from his heels. 

Claudius said: "They who fear God with all 
their hearts cannot be overcome either by fire or 
by other torments ; for they know that even these 
things are serviceable to them unto eternal life." 

Lysias commanded: "Let him be tormented 
with pincers, scraped or cut with potsherds, and 
burned with torches." 

Claudius said : "I say nevertheless, that thou do- 
est all this for Satan, and that it conduces to my 


welfare, but tends to thy eternal perdition. Yea, 
thy fire and all these torments promote my salva- 
tion. Such is our condition, that those who thus 
suffer for the name of Christ, obtain eternal life." 

Lysias then commanded: "Desist from him; 
lead him back into prison, and bring forth an- 
other." 

Asterius examined. — When Asterius, the sec- 
ond brother, stood before the Proconsul, Lysias 
said: "Obey me, Asterius! sacrifice to the gods, 
and thus escape punishment." 

Asterius answered: "I shall not do it; for I 
worship the only true God, who has created heav- 
en and earth, and who shall come to judge the 
quick and the dead. 

Lysias said : "Throw him on the rack, tear his 
flesh from his sides with pincers, and say to him : 
'Believe now at least, and sacrifice to the gods.' " 

Asterius replied: "I am a brother of him who 
was tormented just now, and we hold the same 
confession of faith in Christ. Do what thou may- 
est ; my body is in thy power, but not my soul." 

Lysias commanded: "Bind him hand and foot, 
stretch him out, and torture him ; take the pincers, 
throw hot coals under his feet, scourge him with 
rods and thongs." 

Asterius said to the Proconsul: "Thou doest 
foolishly, since thou art preparing, not for me, 
but for thyself, much severer torments. Do thy 
best, for aught I care. I can stand it, if not one 
member of my body remains untormented." 

Lysias said : "Loose him, and keep him in cus- 
tody with the other; and let the third one be 
brought forth." This was done. 

Neon examined. — When Neon stood before the 
judgment seat, Lysias said to him : "Son, listen to 
me, and sacrifice to the gods, so that thou needst 
not suffer all this." 

Neon said: "There are no gods, neither have 
they any power. You worship idols, but I honor 
the God of heaven." 

Lysias said : "Take him by the throat and let 
the crier announce to him, to desist blaspheming 
the gods." 

Neon answered : "He that speaks does not blas- 
pheme the truth." 

Lysias commanded: "Stretch him out on the 
rack ; put coals under him ; beat and cut him." 

Neon said: "I know what is needful for me. 
Whatever, then, is profitable to my soul, that shall 
I do; but I cannot be moved from my faith." 

Lysias having gone within to the other members 
of the tribunal, and having drawn the cover over 
the court, determined with them upon the sentence 
of death for the three brothers. When he came 
out, he read from a tablet their sentence, which was 
as follows : "Claudius, Asterius, and Neon, broth- 
ers, who are Christians, who blaspheme the gods, 
and refuse to sacrifice, shall be crucified before 
the forum, and their bodies be given to the birds 
of heaven as food, to be devoured by them; and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


145 


this shall be executed by Eulalius, the jailer, and 
Archelaus, the executioner." 

However, before they were led forth to death, 
they were taken back to prison. Then Eulalius, 
the jailer, brought out Donuina, one of the wom- 
en imprisoned, to whom Lysias, the Proconsul, 
said: "See, woman, this fire and these torments 
are ready for you. If you desire to escape unhurt 
by them, sacrifice before the gods." 

Donuina replied: "I shall not do it, lest I fall 
into the everlasting pains of hell. I serve God and 
His anointed Christ, who has created heaven and 
earth, and all that is therein. Your gods are of 
wood and stone, and are made by human hands." 

Donuina examined on the rack. — Lysias said : 
"Strip her stark naked, stretch her, and lacerate 
all her members with rods." While they were 
beating her she died. Then said Archelaus, the 
executioner, to the Proconsul: "Your highness, 
Donuina has died." Lysias commanded : "Let her 
dead body be thrown into the river." 

Eulalius, the jailer, then said: "Here is Theo- 
nilla." Lysias said to her: "Woman, thou hast 
seen, what punishment they who were disobedient 
have suffered, and how they have been tormented. 
Honor the gods, therefore, and sacrifice, so that 
thou mayest be delivered from these punishments." 

Theonilla answered: "I fear Him who has 
power to cast both soul and body into the fire of 
hell ; and who will burn with it all those who de- 
part from God, and give honor to Satan." 

Lysias said: "Smite her on the cheeks, throw 
her down, bind her feet, and torment her greatly." 

Theonilla answered: "Does it seem to thee, to 
be right and proper, thus to maltreat a well-born 
woman? Thou knowest, that thou canst not con- 
ceal from God what thou doest to me." 

Lysias commanded : "Hang her up by the braids 
of her hair, and smite her on the cheeks." 

Theonilla severely examined on the rack. — Hav- 
ing been stripped naked, Theonilla said : "Art thou 
not ashamed to uncover my nakedness seeing that 
through me, thou puttest to like shame thy mother 
and thy wife, who are also women?" 

Lysias asked whether she had a husband, or 
whether she was a widow? 

Theonilla replied: "I have been a widow now 
for over twenty-three years, and have remained 
thus single, in order to more zealously serve God 
with fasting, watching and praying; which God I 
did not know until after I had renounced the world 
and the idols. 

Lysias commanded them, in order to disgrace 
her the more, to shave the hair from her head, put 
bundles of thorns around her body, and stretch 
her out between four stakes, then, to beat her over 
her whole body, and put hot coals upon her, that 
she might be consumed. When Eulalius, the jail- 
er, and Archelaus, the executioner, had done all 
this, death ensued, and they said to Lysias : "Sir, 
she is dead now." Lysias commanded that her 


dead body should be sewed up in a leathern bag, 
and thrown into the water ; which was done. Thus 
did these holy martyrs suffer, under Lysias, the 
Proconsul of Cilicia, in Aegaea, on the 23d of Au- 
gust, in the second year of Diocletian, when he 
was Burgomaster with Aristobulus, A. D. 285. 
These acts have for the most part been taken from 
the records of the clerk of the criminal court of 
the city of Aegaea, and were gathered by the an- 
cient Christians. These court documents were 
called Acta Proconsularia. Compare this with A 
Mell., 1st book, fol. 92, col. 3, 4, and fol. 93, col. I. 

ZENOBIUS AND HIS SISTER ZENOBIA, BEHEADED 
AFTER MANY TORMENTS, FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT AEGAEA 
IN CILICIA, A. D. 285 

Not long afterwards, under the same Emperor 
and Proconsul, and in the same year, Zenobius, 
Bishop of the church of Aegaea in Cilicia, and his 
sister, were apprehended; and when there were 
held out to him on the one hand, great wealth, 
honor, and position, if, in accordance with the 
command of the Emperor, he would serve the 
gods, but on the other hand, manifold torments, 
Zenobius answered: "I love Jesus Christ more 
than all the riches and honor of this world. Death 
and the torments with which you threaten me, I 
do not consider a disadvantage, but my greatest 
gain." 

Having received this answer from the martyr, 
Lysias caused him to be suspended on the rack, 
and inhumanly tormented on his whole body. 

While the executioners were busy with Zeno- 
bius, his sister Zenobia, having learned of it, came 
running, crying with a loud voice : "Thou tyrant, 
what villainy has my brother committed, that thou 
dost thus cruelly torment him?" 

Having thus addressed Lysias, and set at naught 
his entreating as well as his threatening words, 
she, too, was seized by the servants, stripped na- 
ked, and stretched out, and roasted beside her 
brother on a red-hot iron bed, or roasting pan. 
The tyrant, deriding the martyrs, said : "Now let 
Christ come and help you, seeing you suffer these 
torments for Him." 

Zenobius replied : "See, He is already with us, 
and cools, with His heavenly dew the flames of 
fire on our bodies; though thou, surrounded as 
thou art with the thick darkness of wickedness, 
canst not perceive it on us." 

Lysias, almost beside himself, commanded that 
they should be put naked into boiling caldrons. 
But seeing that the boiling water did not injure 
them, or at least, that they could not thereby be 
made to apostatize, he had them taken out of the 
city and beheaded. Their dead bodies were buried 
by Caius and Hermogenes in the nearest cave 
This happened A. D. 285, on the 30th day of Oc- 
tober, in the city of Aegaea in Cilicia. Idem. Ibid- 
em, ex Actis Zenobii procons. per Metaphorast. 


146 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


THARACUS, PROBUS, AND ANDRONICUS, THREE 

PIOUS CHRISTIANS, FIRST VERY DREADFULLY 

TORMENTED, THEN THROWN BEFORE THE 

WILD BEASTS, AND FINALLY THRUST 

THROUGH, FOR THE FAITH OF THE 

SON OF GOD, AT TARSUS IN CI- 

LICIA, A. D. 290 

At Tarsus in Cilicia, the birthplace of the apostle 
Paul, there were imprisoned, A. D. 290, three 
pious Christians, namely, Tharacus, Probus, and 
Andronicus ; who, having been brought to prison, 
before the tribunal, and to the rack, and having 
suffered beyond measure for the name of the Lord 
and the faith in Jesus Christ, were finally put to 
death, concerning which we shall notice and pre- 
sent to the reader the judicial proceedings, as we 
have found them in ancient authors. From Act. 
Procons. 

When Diocletian was Emperor for the fourth, 
and Maximian for the third time, Tharacus, Pro- 
bus, and Andronicus were brought by the captain 
Demetrius before Maximus, the President, at 
Pompeiopolis. 

First examination of Tharacus. — Maximus first 
asked Tharacus his name, because the latter was 
the oldest. Tharacus answered: "I am a Chris- 
tian." 

Maximus said: "Be silent about this ungodly 
name, and tell me your name." 

Tharacus again replied : "I am a Christian." 

Maximus said to his beadles :: "Break his jaws, 
and tell him not to answer me thus any more." 

Tharacus responded : "I have told thee my best 
name; but if thou desirest to know how my par- 
ents called me, my name is Tharacus, and when I 
followed war, I was called Victor." 

The President asked him : "Of what nation art 
thou, Tharacus?" 

He answered : "Of the noble nation of the Ro- 
mans, and was born at Claudianopolis, a city in 
Syria; but being a Christian I have abandoned 
war." 

The Proconsul said: "Thou art not worthy of 
the pay, but how didst thou leave the service ?" 

Tharacus replied: "I asked Publius, our Gen- 
eral, for permission, and he discharged me." 

The President said : "Have regard for thy age, 
then; (for I desire thee, too, to be one of those who 
obey the commands of our lords, the emperors; 
so that thou mayest be promoted by me to great 
honors. Come hither, therefore, and sacrifice to 
our gods, for the princes themselves, who are the 
monarchs of the whole world, honor the gods." 

Tharacus answered: "They err grossly; how- 
ever, they are seduced by Satan." 

The President said: "Smite him on the cheek, 
because he has said that the emperors err." 

Tharacus replied: "Yes, I have said it, and say 
it still, that they as men are liable to err." 

The President said : "Sacrifice to our gods, and 
forsake thy folly." 


Tharacus answered : "I serve my God, and sac- 
rifice to Him: not with blood, but with a pure 
heart; for these sacrifices (namely such as are 
stained with blood) are unnecessary." 

The President said: "I have pity for thy age; 
therefore I admonish thee, to forsake this folly, 
and sacrifice tO the gods." 

Tharacus replied: "I will not depart from the 
law of the Lord ; and because I honor the law of 
God, I shall beware of such wickedness." 

The President said: "Is there, then, another 
law besides this, thou wicked wretch ?" 

Tharacus answered: "Your law commands to 
worship wood, stone, and the work of man." 

Tharacus put to the rack. — The Proconsul or 
President then said to his hangmen : "Smite him 
on the neck, and tell him not to speak such folly." 

While they were beating Tharacus, he said : "I 
shall by no means abandon this confession, which 
saves me." 

The Proconsul said : "I shall make thee forsake 
this folly, and be more prudent." 

Tharacus answered : "Do what thou wilt ; thou 
hast full power over my body." 

Maximus, the Proconsul, said to his servants: 
"Strip him, and scourge him with rods." 

Tharacus answered, as he was scourged : "Tru- 
ly, thou hast made me more prudent, since by 
these stripes thou strengthenest me more and 
more in my confidence in God and His Anointed, 
Jesus Christ, who is His Son." 

The President said : "Thou accursed and un- 
righteous fellow ! how canst thou serve two gods 
at once? See, now thou dost certainly confess 
more than one god. Why then, deniest thou those 
whom we worship ? Dost thou not confess Christ 
and the Lord ?" 

Tharacus answered : "Yea, I do ; for He is the 
Son of God, the hope of all Christians, for whose 
sake we are wounded, and healed." 

The President said : "Leave off this useless bab- 
bling ; come hither, and sacrifice." 

"I do not say much," replied Tharacus, "but I 
speak the truth ; for I am now sixty-five years old, 
and have believed thus, and do not desire to de- 
part from the truth." 

Demetrius, the Centurion, said: "O wretched 
man! spare thyself, sacrifice, and follow my ad- 
vice." 

Tharacus answered: "Depart from me, thou 
servant of Satan, with thy advice." 

Maximus commanded them, to put heavy iron 
chains on him, and take him back to prison, and 
to bring forth another. 

Probus, examined. — Demetrius, the Captain 
said : "Lord, here is one already." 

Thereupon the President said to Probus : "Tell 
me first thy name." 

Probus answered: "In the first place, my no- 
blest name is, that I am a Christian ; secondly, men 
call me Probus." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


147 


The Proconsul asked again: "Of what nation 
and descent art thou?" 

Probus replied : "My father was from Thracia, 
a citizen, born at Pergamus, in Paraphilia; but I 
am a Christian." 

The Proconsul said : "Thou shalt not gain much 
by this name ; but listen to me, and sacrifice to the 
gods ; that thou mayest be honored by the princes, 
and be our friend." 

Probus answered : "I desire neither honor from 
the emperors nor thy friendship; for not small 
was the wealth which I forsook, in order faithfully 
to serve the living God." 

The Proconsul commanded them, to take his 
cloak off him, strip him, rack him, and scourge 
him with raw thongs. While they scourged him, 
Demetrius, the captain, said: "O wretched man! 
behold, how thy blood is spilled upon the earth." 

Probus replied : "My body is in your hands ; but 
all these torments are a precious balm to me." 

After he was scourged, the Proconsul said to 
him : "Thou wretch ! wilt thou not yet cease from 
thy folly? and dost thou still persist in thy obsti- 
nacy?" 

Probus answered: "I am not vain, but more 
courageous in the Lord, than you people are." 

The President said to his servants : "Turn him 
over, and scourge him on his stomach." 

Probus prayed, saying: "O Lord, come and 
succor thy servant." 

Maximus, the Proconsul, said to the execution- 
ers: "While you scourge him, ask him, saying: 
'Where is thy helper?' " 

Probus replied as they scourged him : "He has 
helped me, and shall still help me." 

The President said : "Thou wretched man ! do 
spare thine own body ; for the earth is soaked with 
thy blood." 

Probus answered: "Be assured, the more my 
body suffers for the name of Christ, the more my 
soul is healed and quickened." 

After he had been thus scourged and tortured, 
the Proconsul commanded them to fetter his hands 
and feet with irons, and thus keep him in prison ; 
however to bring before him another. 

Andronicus examined. — Demetrius, the Centu- 
rion, placed Andronicus before Maximus' judg- 
ment seat, saying : "Sir, here is the third one." 

The Proconsul said: "What is thy name?" 

Andronicus answered: "Wouldst thou openly 
know who I am ? I am a Christian." 

Maximus said : "Those who have preceded thee 
have gained nothing by this name ; therefore thou 
must answer me aright." 

Andronicus replied: "Men generally call me 
Andronicus." 

Maximus asked him of what nationality he was. 

Andronicus answered: "Of noble blood." 

Maximus said : "Spare thyself, and hearken to 
me, as to thy father; for those who have prated 
such nonsense before thee have gained nothing by 


it. But honor thou the princes and the fathers, and 
be obedient to our gods." 

Andronicus replied : "Thou didst well call them 
fathers ; for thou art of the father, the devil, and, 
having become one of his children, thou doest his 
works." 

Maximus said: "Wilt thou, a stripling, de- 
spise and mock me? Knowest thou not, what tor- 
ments are ready for thee?" 

Andronicus said : "Dost thou think I am a fool, 
that I should be willing to be found inferior to my 
predecessors, in suffering? I stand prepared to en- 
dure all thy torments." 

The Proconsul commanded that he should be 
stripped, ungirded, and suspended to the torture- 
stake. Demetrius, the Captain, moved by pity, 
said: "Listen to me, wretched man, before thy 
body be racked." 

Andronicus answered: "It is better that my 
body perish, than that thou shouldst do with my 
soul according to thy pleasure." 

Maximus said : "Take advice, and sacrifice, be- 
fore thou be tortured to death." 

Andronicus replied : "Never from my youth up 
did I sacrifice, and do still not wish to do so, though 
thou constrain me." 

Maximus said : "Lay on and rack him well." 

Anaximus, the horn-blower, who was to execute 
the sentence, spoke to Andronicus, saying : "I am 
old enough to be thy father ; I advise thee to the 
best: do what the Proconsul commands thee." 

Andronicus replied: "Because thou art older, 
and hast no understanding, therefore thou advisest 
me to sacrifice to stones and evil spirits. 

While he was being tormented, the Proconsul 
said: "Thou wretched man! Dost thou not feel 
any torments, seeing thou hast no compassion upon 
thyself, and dost not forsake thy folly, which can- 
not save thee?" 

Andronicus answered : "My sincere confession, 
which thou callest a vain folly, is perfectly good, 
as putting all hope and confidence upon the Lord 
our God ; but thy temporal wisdom shall die for- 
ever." 

The President asked : "Who is it that has taught 
thee this folly?" 

Andronicus replied : "The quickening word, by 
which we are quickened, teaches us that our Lord 
is in heaven, who works in our hearts the living 
hope of our blessed resurrection from the dead." 

Maximus said: "Desist from this folly before 
we torture thee still more severely." 

Andronicus answered: "My body is before 
thee ; thou hast full power over it ; do as it pleas- 
eth thee." 

The Proconsul said : "Torture him exceedingly 
on the mouth." 

Andronicus replied: "The Lord sees that you 
punish me even as a murderer." 

The President said : "Dost thou still despise the 
commands of the princes? and thinkest thou my 
tribunal is without power?" 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Tharacus, Probus, and Adronicus fearfully mistreated in Tarsus, AD 290 


Andronicus answered: "I trust in the mercy 
and truth of God's promise, and therefore I suffer 
all this patiently." 

Maximus asked : "Have, then, the princes trans- 
gressed, thou wretched man?" 

Andronicus replied : "Yes, according as I under- 
stand it, they have; for it is a transgression to 
sacrifice to idols." 

While he was being tormented, the Proconsul 
said: "Turn him over, and torment him on his 
sides." 

Andronicus said: "I am before you. Torment 
me as you please." 

The President said to the executioners : "Take 
potsherds, and scrape open the old wounds." 

When they had done this, Andronicus said: 
"You have strengthened my body by these tor- 
ments." 

Maximus said: "Ere long I shall exterminate 
thee ; ere long I shall kill thee." 

Andronicus answered: "I do not fear thy 
threats; my sentiments are better than all thy 
wicked thoughts." 

Then the Proconsul commanded that irons 


should be put on his neck and feet, and he be kepi 
with the others until the second examination. 


SECOND EXAMINATION OF THE THREE AFORE- 
MENTIONED CHRISTIANS 

When Maximus held court the second time over 
these faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ, and sat 
upon his judgment seat, he said : "Call in the un- 
godly Christians." Demetrius the captain, an- 
swered: "Here I am, my lord!" Then said the 
Proconsul to Tharacus : "Knowest thou not, that 
age is honored in many respects ? Hast thou, then, 
not considered it, whether thou wilt still persist in 
thy first intention? Yea, advise with thyself, and 
sacrifice to the gods, for the prosperity of the 
princes; that thou mayest attain to honor." 

Tharacus answered : "If the princes and others 
who are of the same opinion with you, knew what 
there is in this honor, they themselves would turn 
away from the blindness of their vain conversa- 
tion." 

Tharacus put on the rack the second time. — The 
Proconsul said to his beadles : "Strike him on the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


149 


mouth with stones, and say to him : Desist from 
thy folly." Thar'acus answered : "If I did not ex- 
ercise more care for my salvation than you people 
do, I would be as foolish as you are." 

The President said to him: "See, they have 
knocked thy teeth out ; do have compassion upon 
thyself." 

Tharacus replied: "Do not imagine this; for 
though thou shouldest cause everyone of my mem- 
bers to be crushed, I could still remain strong and 
steadfast in Him who strengthens me." 

The President said: "Believe me, it is better 
for thee, that thou sacrifice." 

Tharacus answered : "If I knew that it were 
better for me, I would not wait for this advice from 
thee." 

When Tharacus ceased to speak, the Proconsul 
said to his hangmen: "Smite him on the mouth 
and make him speak." 

Tharacus replied: "My cheeks are knocked to 
pieces ; how can I answer any longer ?" 

Maximus said: "And wilt thou, madman, not 
yet consent to worship, and sacrifice to the gods ?" 

Tharacus answered: "Although thou hast de- 
prived me of my voice, so that I cannot cry aloud, 
thou shalt nevertheless not injure my soul; but 
thou hast in this hour greatly strengthened me in 
my opinion." 

Maximus said to his servants: "Bring fire! 
stretch out his hands, and put fire on them." 

Tharacus replied : "I do not fear thy temporal 
fire; but I would have to fear eternal fire, if I 
should obey thee." 

When the glowing fire was laid upon his hands, 
the President said : "See, the fire is consuming thy 
hands; desist, therefore, from thy folly and sac- 
rifice to the gods." 

Tharacus answered: "Thou speakest to me, as 
though because of thy cruelty I had already yield- 
ed to thy wish ; however, but through the grace of 
God I am, in all my sufferings, as strong as ever." 

The Proconsul said : "Tie his feet together, and 
hang him up by his heels, and make a thick smoke 
under his face." 

Tharacus replied : "I neither regard thy fire, nor 
do I fear thy smoke." 

When he was hung up, Maximus said to him : 
"There shalt thou hang, until thou consentest to 
sacrifice to the gods." 

Tharacus answered: "Thou mayest sacrifice; 
for thou art accustomed to sacrifice human beings ; 
but for me it is not lawful." 

Maximus said to his servants : "Bring vinegar 
mixed with salt, and pour it into his nostrils." 

Note. — Here a whole leaf is wanting in the 
original, namely, of the tortures which Tharacus, 
Probus, and Andronicus suffered in the second 
examination on the rack; however, concerning 
Andronicus the following additional was found. 

The Proconsul said (namely, to Andronicus) : 
"All this nonsense can avail thee nothing. But 


come, and sacrifice to the gods, that thou mayest 
not perish under the punishment." 

Andronicus replied : "It is the same that thou 
hast heard the first and the second time ; for I am 
not a child, to be moved or turned by words." 

The President said: "You shall nevertheless 
neither conquer me, nor despise my tribunal." 

Andronicus answered: "We do not conquer 
thee, but our Lord Jesus Christ strengthens us." 

The President said: "The next time we hold 
court over these men, let other modes of torture be 
put in practice. In the meantime put him (Andro- 
nicus) in irons, and keep him in prison until to- 
morrow, and let no one see him." 


THE THREE MARTYRS EXAMINED ON THE RACK 
THE THIRD TIME 

The President said: "Call the ungodly Chris- 
tians in." Demetrius, the centurion, answered: 
"Here I am." 

Tharacus brought forth first. — When he had 
brought forth Tharacus, the Proconsul said : "Dost 
thou still despise imprisonment, bonds, punish- 
ments, and tortures? Follow my advice, O Thar- 
acus, and abandon this confession, which profits 
thee nothing. Rather sacrifice to the gods, by 
whom all things exist." 

Tharacus answered: "Woe shall come upon 
them. Thou thinkest that the world is governed 
by them; whereas they are destined for eternal 
fire; and not they only, but all those also who 
serve them." 

The President said : "And dost thou not yet 
desist, thou impious blasphemer ! or thinkest thou 
not that for thy rash words I should cause thee to 
be instantly beheaded?" 

Tharacus replied: "Then I would not die a 
lingering death, but a short one. But let me have 
a long conflict, that in the meantime my faith in 
the Lord may grow and increase." 

The President said: "Thou and thy fellow 
prisoners must die according to the laws." 

Tharacus answered: "What thou sayest is an 
evidence of thy ignorance; for those who do evil 
die justly; but we who know of no evil, that is, 
who have committed nothing worthy of death be- 
fore men, but suffer for the Lord, expect with 
confident hope the heavenly reward from the 
Lord." 

The Proconsul said : "Thou accursed miscreant ! 
what reward have ye to expect, seeing you die for 
your wickedness?" 

Tharacus replied : "It is not lawful for thee to 
inquire into, or to ask, what reward the Lord has 
laid up for us in heaven; and therefore we pa- 
tiently suffer the wrath of thy madness." 

The President said : "Darest thou thus address 
me, thou accursed [one], as though thou wert mine 
equal ?" 

Tharacus answered : "I am not thine equal ; but 
it is lawful for me to speak, and no one can silence 


150 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


me, for the sake of Him who strengthens me, 
namely, the Lord." 

The Proconsul said: "Thou miscreant, I shall 
deprive thee of the power." 

Tharacus answered : "No one can take away the 
power from me, neither thou, nor your princes, 
nor Satan, the father of you all." 

Tharacus put to the rack. — The President said : 
"Now, seeing thou art bound and suspended, in 
order that you may be tortured, sacrifice in time, 
before I cause thee to be punished according to thy 
deserts." 

Tharacus replied: "That thou mayest do; but 
since I was formerly a soldier, thou mayest not 
torment me with all manner of punishment. Yet, 
lest thou think, I might yield to thy perverseness, 
go on and devise and inflict upon me all sorts of 
punishment." 

The President said : "Do not think that I shall 
sentence thee at once. I shall cause thee to be put 
to death by degrees." 

Tharacus answered : "Whatever thou intendest 
to do, do at once, and do not threaten." 

The President said: "If thou think, that some 
women will come and embalm thy body, thou art 
greatly mistaken, for it is my intention that nothing 
shall remain of thee." 

Tharacus replied : "Do with my body as pleas- 
eth thee, now as well as after my death." 

"Maximian," said the Proconsul, "break his 
jaws, and tear his lips." 

Tharacus answered : "True, thou hast crushed 
and marred my face ; but thou hast quickened my 
soul." 

The President said : "Thou wretched man ! De- 
sist from thy vain thoughts, and sacrifice ; that thou 
mayest be delivered from these pangs." 

Tharacus replied : "Dost thou think I am a fool 
or a madman, and that I, who trust in the Lord, 
shall not live in heaven ? Thou mayest deprive me 
of this temporal life for a little while ; but thou wilt 
thereby cast thine own soul into eternal damna- 
tion." 

The President said to the executioners: "Put 
the branding irons into the fire, and brand him on 
his cheeks or shoulders." 

Tharacus answered : "Though thou inflict many 
more torments than these upon me, thou shalt 
nevertheless not turn the servant of God to the 
shameful idolatry of devils, to worship them." 
The President said: "Bring a razor; cut off his 
skin; shave his head bald, and put burning coals 
upon it." 

Tharacus replied : "And though thou cause my 
whole body to be flayed, I shall still not depart 
from my God, who strengthens me, to endure all 
the weapons of your torturing." 

The President said : "Get the branding irons ; 
let them get still hotter, and apply them to all his 
members and joints." 

Tharacus, as he suffered this, cried out : "May 
the Lord look down from heaven, and judge 1" 


The President said : "What lord dost thou call 
upon, thou accursed fellow?" 

Tharacus answered: "The Lord whom thou 
dost not know, and who recompenses every one 
according to his works." 

The President said : "And shall I not extermi- 
nate thee, as I have told thee ? Yea, even thy re- 
mains I shall burn, and scatter thy ashes to the 
wind ; that the women may not come, and wind thy 
dead body in cloth to embalm it with precious 
ointments and spices." 

Tharacus replied: "I have said it, and say so 
still, do what thou wilt : thou hast full power over 
my body in this world." 

The President said : "Put him back into prison, 
and keep him until the next time for the wild 
beasts. Let another be brought before the tribu- 
nal." 

Probus brought joward. — Demetrius, the cap- 
tain, said to the Proconsul: "Sir, here he is al- 
ready, namely, Probus." 

The President said to Probus: "Advise with 
thyself, Probus, that thou mayest not fall again into 
the same punishment ; for others, who on thy ac- 
count have persisted in their obstinacy have rued 
it. Sacrifice now, therefore, that thou mayest be 
honored by us and the gods." 

Probus answered: "We are all of one mind, 
serving God with one heart and soul. Think not, 
therefore, that thou wilt hear anything different 
from us; for thou hast ere this heard and seen 
enough to convince thee, that thou canst not turn 
us. Here I stand before thee the third time, and do 
not yet regard thy threats. What dost thou wait 
for, then?" 

The President said: "Ye have conspired to- 
gether to deny the gods. Bind him, and hang him 
up by his heels." 

Probus replied: "Dost thou not yet cease to 
fight for Satan?" 

Maximus said : "Believe me, before thou be tor- 
tured ; have compassion upon thine own body. See, 
what dreadful torments are being prepared for 
thee." 

Probus answered: "All that thou mayest do 
unto me, shall conduce to the comfort of my soul ; 
therefore, do what thou wilt." 

The President said : "Heat the branding irons 
red-hot, and apply them to his sides, so that he 
may desist from his folly." 

Probus replied : "The more foolish I appear to 
thee, the wiser I shall be in the law of the Lord." 

The President said : "Press the branding irons 
on his back." 

Probus answered as he was suffering: "My 
body is subject to thy power; but God will behold 
from heaven my humility and patience." 

In the meantime the President commanded that 
meat and wine should be brought, which had been 
sacrificed to the idols, saying to the executioners : 
"Pour wine down his throat, and take meat, and 
force it into his mouth." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


151 


While they were busy doing this, Probus said : 
"The Lord behold from His high throne the vio- 
lence ye do to me, and judge my cause." 

The President said: "Thou wretched man! 
thou hast suffered so much, and, behold ! thou hast 
thyself received the sacrifice." 

Probus replied: "Ye have not accomplished 
much, by doing me violence. The Lord knoweth 
my intentions." 

The President said : "Thou hast eaten and drank 
what was sacrificed to the gods." 

Probus answered: "The Lord knoweth it, and 
hath seen the violence I have suffered." 

The President said to the executioners : "Apply 
the branding irons to the calves of his legs." 

Probus replied : "Neither the fire, nor the tor- 
ments, nor thy father, Satan, can turn the servant 
of God from his confession." 

The President said to his servants : "Let sharp 
nails be heated, and put them into his hands." 

Probus answered as he suffered this : "I thank 
Thee, O Lord, that Thou hast made my hands 
worthy, to suffer for Thy name." 

The President said : "The many torments have 
deprived thee of thy mind." 

Probus replied: "The great power which thou 
hast, has not only made thee a fool, but also blind ; 
for thou knowest not what thou art doing." 

The President said : "Thou who hast been tor- 
mented on thy whole body excepting the eyes, 
darest thou speak thus to me?" "Pinch his eyes," 
said he to the executioners, "that he may gradually 
become blind." 

When this had been done, Probus said: "Be- 
hold, thou hast also deprived me of my bodily 
eyes, but thou shalt never be permitted to destroy 
the eyes of my faith." 

The President said : "Dost thou think thou wilt 
survive all these torments, or that thus thou shalt 
die happy?" 

Probus answered : "Fighting thus, I gradually 
approach the end, so that I may finish my good 
and perfect confession, and be put to death by 
you without mercy." 

The President said : "Take him away, bind him, 
put him in prison, and let none of his companions 
come near hinl, to praise him for having continued 
so steadfast in his wickedness. He, too, shall be 
cast before the wild beasts at the next show." 

Andronicus put to the rack. — Then said the 
President: "Let Andronicus come forth." 

Demetrius, the captain, said: "He is already 
here." 

The President said to Andronicus: "Have at 
least compassion on thy youth, if thou hast pru- 
dently advised with thyself to reverence the gods : 
consent and sacrifice to the gods, that thou mayest 
be released. 

Andronicus answered : "May God never suffer 
thee, O tyrant, that I do aught against the law of 


God. Thou shalt never shake my good confession, 
which I have founded upon my Lord. Here I stand 
ready, for thee to make manifest on me thy hard- 
ness." 

The President said : "Methinks, thou art raving, 
and possessed of the devil." 

Andronicus replied : "If I had the devil in me, I 
should obey thee ; but because I confess the Lord, 
I do not submit to the commands of the devil. But 
hast not thou the devil in thee? For, being de- 
ceived by the devil, thou doest the works of the 
devil." 

The President said to the Executioners : "Make 
bundles of paper, and put fire upon his body." 

When this was done, Andronicus said : "Though 
I burn from head to foot, the spirit nevertheless is 
alive in me. Thou shalt not conquer me ; for the 
Lord, whom I serve is with me." 

The President said : "Thou madman ! how long 
wilt thou remain thus obstinate? Seek at least to 
die upon thy bed." 

Andronicus answered: "As long as I live, I 
shall overcome thy wickedness." 

The President said : "Heat the branding irons 
red-hot again, and put them between his fingers." 

Andronicus replied: "O foolish despiser of 
God! Thou art full of the wicked thoughts of 
Satan. Seest thou not that my body is almost 
consumed through the manifold torments thou 
hast inflicted upon me. Thinkest thou that now 
at the last I shall begin to fear thy devices ? I have 
Christ dwelling in my heart, and despise thy tor- 
ments." 

The President said : "Thou miscreant ! knowest 
thou not that this Christ, whom thou worshipest 
became man, and was punished under the Judge 
Pontius Pilate?" 

Andronicus answered : "Be silent, for it is not 
lawful for thee to speak evil of Him." 

The President said : "What gainest thou by thy 
faith and hope in this man whom thou callest 
Christ?" 

Andronicus replied : "I have thereby in expecta- 
tion a great reward and gain ; hence I endure all 
this so patiently." 

The President said: "Break open his mouth, 
and take meat that has been sacrificed, from the 
altar, and force it into his mouth, and pour in wine 
also." 

Andronicus called God to witness, saying: "O 
Lord ! Lord ! behold, what violence I suffer !" 

The President said : "How long wilt thou thus 
obstinately endure the punishment ? See, thou hast 
certainly eaten of that which has been sacrificed to 
the gods." 

Andronicus answered : "Cursed be all who hon- 
or the idols, thou and thy princes." 

The President said: "Thou miscreant, cursest 
thou the princes, who have obtained for us so last- 
ing and tranquil peace?" 


152 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Andronicus replied : "They are cursed, who, as 
the pestilence, and as bloodhounds, turn the whole 
world upside down ; whom the Lord by His mighty 
arm shall confound and destroy." 

The President commanded the executioners: 
"Put an iron into his mouth, and with it break out 
all his teeth, and cut out his blasphemous tongue, 
that he may learn no more to blaspheme the 
princes. Take away his teeth, and burn his tongue 
to ashes, and scatter the latter all about, lest his 
fellow Christians, or some women, gather his re- 
mains, and keep them as precious relics. Take him 
away from here, and put him into prison, that at 
the next show he, together with his companions, 
Tharacus and Probus may be thrown before the 
wild beasts." Acta Procons. per Metaph. and alios. 

It is declared that the above account concerning 
the examination of the three afore-mentioned 
Christians was written entirely by the heathen 
themselves, who put them to death; only a few 
words having been altered, to make the sense 
clearer. A certain celebrated author mentioning 
this, writes as follows : "Herewith ends the third 
examination or inquisition on the rack, and thus 
far these proceedings with the martyrs have been 
recorded by the heathen clerk of the criminal court 
himself, and were doubtless afterwards bought 
for money by the Christians." 

Beloved reader ! I could not forbear to translate 
these records, just as they were, for the most part 
word for word; not only because I have found 
them to be true and genuine in every respect ; but 
also, because we can very clearly see therefrom, 
what form of inquisition or examination the 
heathen employed against the Christians; as well 
as with what manifold torments the obdurate 
heathen sought to compel the Christians to aposta- 
tize from the faith, and how remarkably God pre- 
served His own against the devices and wiles of 
the devil. 

It need not seem strange to the reader, that the 
proconsul or criminal judges so frequently put to 
the rack the same Christians, to cause them to 
apostatize from the faith; for Lactantius tells us 
of a president in Bithynia, who for two years en- 
deavored by all manner of torments to compel a 
Christian to apostatize, and who, when this Chris- 
tian finally seemed to yield, boasted of it just as 
though he had conquered a whole province of a 
barbaric country. 

As touching the rest of the matter, that is, how 
and when the sentence of the Proconsul was exe- 
cuted, the heathen have not recorded it ; but some 
Christian brethren, namely, Macarius, Felix, and 
Verus, probably bought those records from the 
clerk of the criminal court, and added from their 
own observation what was wanting, since they had 
been eyewitnesses of it at the theatrical drama the 
following day. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH OF THE AFORE-MEN- 
TIONED MARTYRS, WRITTEN BY SOME 
CHRISTIAN BRETHREN WHO 
WITNESSED IT 

Numerius Maximus, Proconsul of Cilicia, sum- 
moning Terentian, the provider of public sacrifices 
and theatrical performances which were held in 
Cilicia, commanded him to provide for the dramas 
for the next day. The following day a great num- 
ber of men and women assembled in the amphi- 
theatre, which was situated about a mile or one 
thousand paces from the city. When the amphi- 
theatre was filled with people, Maximus also came 
to witness the play, and in the first act of it, when 
many wild beasts were let out at the same time, 
many human bodies were devoured. We Christians 
kept ourselves concealed and waited with great 
fear for the bringing forth of the martyrs. Sud- 
denly the Proconsul commanded the soldiers to 
bring in the Christian martyrs, namely, Tharacus, 
Probus, and Andronicus. The soldiers compelled 
some to carry the Christian martyrs on their 
shoulders, for they were torn and lacerated to such 
a degree, that they could not walk. We then saw 
them carried thus disfigured into the amphitheatre, 
and seeing how they had been maltreated, we 
turned our faces, and cried bitterly. Thus the mar- 
tyrs were thrown down into the middle of the 
arena, as the offscouring or refuse of this world ; 
and when the multitude beheld them, they were all 
frightened, and the people murmured greatly 
against Maximus for having thus tormented them, 
and then yet sentencing them to be thrown to the 
beasts; yea, many went away from the amphi- 
theatre, censuring Maximus for his inhuman cru- 
elty. When Maximus saw this, he commanded the 
soldiers who stood near him, to note those who 
murmured against him, and were leaving ; so that 
he might afterwards examine them in regard to it. 
In the meantime he commanded that the wild 
beasts should be let out, to rend the martyrs. In 
Scriptura Christianorum Fratrum. 

In order to avoid prolixity, we shall sum up 
what follows here in the afore-mentioned account 
of the Christian brethren, in these words : "The 
wild beasts were let out, especially a frightful 
bear, and then a lioness ; both of which indeed, by 
roaring terribly, made a dreadful noise, so that also 
the spectators were frightened by it ; but they did 
not harm the martyrs, much less tear or devour 
them. The Proconsul in his rage commanded the 
spearmen, to thrust the bear through ; the lioness, 
however, on account of the fear of the people, was 
let out by a back door, which was broken in pieces. 
Then Maximus ordered Terentian, to let in the 
gladiators, who should first kill the Christians, and 
then fight with each other for life. These, when 
they came in, first thrust through the martyrs; 
which happened on the 11th day of October, 
A. D. 290, at Tarsus in Cilicia." When the drama 
was over, and the Proconsul was about to go home, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


153 


he left ten soldiers in the amphitheatre, charging 
them, to mingle the dead bodies of the martyrs with 
those of the heathen gladiators, that the Christians 
might not be able to distinguish them. However, 
it is stated in the above account, that the Christians 
removed their dead bodies, and buried them in a 
cave in a rock. 

In regard to this, A. Mellinus, who has referred 
to it, has the following remark: "They who did 
this, also wrote the conclusion of this history; 
hence we have not the least reason to doubt the 
veracity of this account of the proceedings against 
the martyrs." First book oj the Mart. 1619, fol. 
96, col. 1 ; but with reference to the previous pro- 
ceedings against the martyrs, see fol. 93, col. 3, 
and fol. 94, col. 1-4, fol. 95, col. 1-3. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 

OF THE MARTYRS IN THE FOURTH 

CENTURY 


BRIEF SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THIS CENTURY 

At the close of the third century the eminent Ar- 
nobius was introduced, and inasmuch as his life 
extended from one century into the other we refer 
to him again here in the beginning of the fourth 
century. He speaks of the virtue and benefit of 
baptism, as may be seen in the proper place. 

Fusca and the handmaid Maura were baptized 
after previous instruction. 

At this time (in the time of Sylvester) there ex- 
isted such sects as were afterwards called Walden- 
ses, Anabaptists, etc. 

One Donatus was called an Anabaptist, and his 
followers, Anabaptists. 

Athanasius, while yet a child, indicated, with 
other children, that at Alexandria they baptized 
upon confession of faith. 

In Canon 12, 13, 15, of the Council of Nice sev- 
eral good things are established with regard to 
baptism. 

Athanasius, having become a man, teaches whole- 
some doctrine, not only with respect to baptism, 
but also in regard to other matters of religion. 

Soon after him comes Marius Victorinus, who 
joins together faith, confession, and baptism. 

Then appears Hilarius, who wrote very appro- 
priately on baptism, and also opposes antichrist, 
images, and traditions. 

Monica, the mother of Augustine, was baptized 
in adult years, though she was born of Christian 
parents. 

In the Council of Neocesarea, the candidates for 
baptism, the baptizing of pregnant women, Christ's 
baptism, etc., were discussed. 

Again sects appear, who were like the Baptists. 

St. Martin was instructed from his twelfth to his 
eighteenth year, and then baptized. He strongly 
opposed war. 

Ambrose was baptized in adult years, at Milan, 
though his parents were Christians. He advanced 


sound views on baptism, against war, of the sacra- 
ments, etc. 

Ephrem, Gregory of Nyssa, the Councils of 
Laodicea and Elibertum, and also Optatus Mile- 
vitanus, give correct views on baptism. 

Gregory of Nazianzus, born of Christian par- 
ents, was already in his twentieth year when he 
was baptized. Nectarius was baptized in adult 
years. Basil, the son of a Christian, and Eubulus, 
consulted together, and were baptized on their 
faith, at Jerusalem. Posthumanius made a glori- 
ous confession at his baptism. John Chrysostom 
was suffered by his parents, though they were 
Christians, to remain unbaptized, not receiving 
baptism until he was twenty-one years old. Also, 
his views respecting baptism ; his teaching against 
war, confession, etc. 

Jerome, also born of Christian parents, was 
baptized at Syridon, when he was thirty years old. 

Augustine, Adeolatus, Alipius, Euodius, Epiph- 
anius, with his sister, all baptized upon faith. Con- 
clusion of baptism in the fourth century. 

That the holy order of the baptism of Jesus 
Christ was practiced also in the fourth century, 
appears from various teachings and examples of 
the fathers, from which, we shall present only a 
few, but such as are certain and genuine testi- 
monies. 

A. D. 301. — At the close of the preceding cen- 
tury, for A. D. 300, we introduced the eminent 
Arnobius, and showed that, speaking of baptism, 
he says : "That the candidates for baptism, when 
they are baptized, state before the minister their 
perfect willingness, and make their confession 
with their own lips." 

This Arnobius follows us also in the beginning 
of this century, namely through the years 301, 302, 
303, 304; and having not abandoned his previous 
views regarding this matter, he confirms them with 
the following testimonies. 

Speaking against the tenets of the Romanists, 
who ordain consecrated, or, properly speaking, ex- 
orcised water for baptism, he writes thus (in Psalm 
74) : "It is written : Thou breakest the heads of 
the dragons in the waters ; that is," says he, "the 
heads of the dragons in baptism ;" but by saying, 
in the waters, he means to signify that the same 
baptism can be administered in all kinds of waters, 
as, in rivers, lakes, wells, baths, seas, etc. In these 
the head of the dragon, that is Satan, is broken in 
all waters. Jacob Mehm. Bapt. Hist., page 323. 

Of the virtue and benefit of baptism be teaches 
as follows, Psalm 32, where the Psalmist says: 
"In the floods of great waters they shall not come 
nigh unto him," upon which he remarks: "that 
men, by the true water of baptism, draw nigh to 
God, who is a refuge from the fear of Satan that 
encompasses us." Jacob Mehm., page 324. 

Again, Psalm 32, he says : "Man is redeemed ; 
no angel, nor any other creature, but man alone 
praises his mercy, says the Lord, whose sins He 
forgives in baptism." Jacob Mehm., page 325. 


154 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Although these words of Arnobius are some- 
what obscure, yet they contain light enough, to 
emit rays of divine truth concerning the matter of 
baptism. For when in the first place he says, that 
the head of the dragon is broken in baptism (by 
dragon meaning Satan), he certainly indicates 
thereby, that he speaks of persons who, having 
attained maturer years, become subject to the as- 
saults of Satan, and that these, in baptism, break 
the head of the dragon, that is, Satan, by means 
of the true faith, through Christ; hence he does 
not speak of children — who are ignorant of the 
assaults of Satan — and, consequently, not of infant 
baptism. 

Secondly, when he says that men, by the true 
water of baptism, draw nigh to God, he certainly 
indicates that he speaks of men who have departed 
from God through disobedience, consequently, of 
persons who have arrived at the years of dis- 
cretion ; and not of infants ; for how can any one 
draw nigh to God by baptism, who has not de- 
parted from Him? Infants have not departed 
from God through disobedience; hence they can- 
not draw nigh to Him by baptism. 

Thirdly, when he speaks of man, who praises 
the mercy of the Lord, and whose sins the Lord 
forgives in baptism, he certainly indicates that he 
speaks of men who are capable of praising the 
mercy of the Lord, namely, men possessing under- 
standing, and who have sinned; for only he that 
has sinned can have his sins forgiven ; but with in- 
fants, who have never sinned, no forgiveness can 
take place, and consequently, no baptism for the 
remission of sins. By this the obscure words of 
Arnobius became clear. 

Note. — P. J. Twisck records, for the year 306, 
that Constantine the Great, the son of the believ- 
ing Helena, was baptized in Jordan, in the sixty- 
fifth year of his age, after having been instructed 
(Chron. 4th book, page 89, col. 1) ; from which it 
is apparent, that at that time Christians left their 
children unbaptized, in order that they themselves 
might believe and be baptized. 

A. D. 308. — Fusca, the pious maiden, conceived 
a desire for the Christian faith when she was quite 
young, and, having manifested this desire to the 
servant maid, Mauro, who also felt an inward 
drawing toward Christ, they were thoroughly in- 
structed in the Christian faith at Ravenna, by the 
teacher Hermola, and baptized. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron. 4th book, page 90, col. 1, from Grond. 
Bew. letter B, Leonh., lib. 2. 

A. D. 315. — It is stated that already in the time 
of Sylvester, there was taught and maintained the 
same doctrine which was afterwards maintained by 
countless numbers of the baptistic Waldenses, yea, 
that those churches which in the 11th, 12th, 13th, 
and in subsequent centuries were styled Waldenses 
Albigenses, and lastly, Mennonites, or Anabap- 
tists, had existed already at that time, and indeed, 
long before. Of this a certain celebrated author 


among the Romanists bitterly complains, in a very 
old book, saying : "These heretics (the people men- 
tioned above) have always had many sects among 
them ; but of all that ever existed, none was more 
pernicious to the church of God (understand the 
Roman church) than the Poor of Lyons (the Wal- 
denses or Anabaptists), and this for three reasons : 
In the first place, because of their antiquity ; some 
asserting that they existed already in the days of 
Sylvester, others referring them even to the time of 
the apostles." Jac. Mehrn., page 615. 

In another place Jacob Mehrning writes thus 
about the above-mentioned people : "This is not a 
new sect that originated only at that time (that is, 
in the time of Waldus) ; for the papistic writers 
themselves confess that they existed already in the 
time of Pope Sylvester, nay, long before him, even 
in the time of the apostles." B. H., page 670. 

In another place he writes that Flaccius has also 
recorded the same, from an ancient papistic book, 
namely, that they existed from the time of Syl- 
vester, yea, from the time of the apostles ; and that 
Thuanus, though he compares them to another peo- 
ple, states that their doctrine has continued through 
many centuries." Page 682. 

The time of the reign of Sylvester, who was the 
first pope of this name, and on the register of the 
Roman bishops the 34th, is fixed in the year 315. 
See P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, p. 93, col. 1 , 
from PlatincD, fol. 63. Fasc. Temp., fol. 99, Hist. 
Georg., lib. 1, Fr. Ala., fol. 22, Chron. Seb. Fr 
fol. 13. 

A. D. 317. — Donatus, an overlearned bishop 
at Carthage,* who had many adherents in Africa, 
taught among other things : "That the preaching 
of the divine Word and the administration of the 
sacraments by an ungodly minister, were of no 
avail. They (his followers) held that the church of 
Christ existed only among them, and hence, they 
rebaptized all who wished to adopt their religion, 
saying that the heretics, or the Pope, had no Chris- 
tian church, and consequently, no baptism, inas- 
much as there was only one God, one faith, one 
Gospel, one church, and one baptism. 'They, like 
the Anabaptists, also held,' says Franck, 'that no 
children, even in the extremity of death, should be 
baptized, but only believing adults who desired it." 
_ When he was imprisoned he upbraided Augus- 
tine, saying that no one ought to be imprisoned on 
account of his faith, God had given man his free 
will, to believe as he chose. Concerning all this, 
see, P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, p. 93, col. 2, 
and pa ge 94, col. 1, from Merula, fol. 255. Zeg'., 

n i *n Seb V Fra i ck notes as the time of the propagation of the doctrine 
of Donatus the year 334, under the Emperor Constantine "He 
taught says Franck "that the Son is less than the Father, and 
the Holy Spirit less than the Son." This is considered heresy by 
the Roman church but when rightly expounded, it may be correct 
For Christ Himse f with regard to His humanity says : "My 
Father is greater than I" (John 14:28). And of the Holy Ghost 

5™ a £ 8 ;i. If « I , dep # t ' Z wUI se , nd him unt0 y° u " <J° h " 16:7); as 
though the Holy Ghost were less than Himself. Franck further 
says, that Donatus was an overlearned bishop of Carthage who 
had come there from Numidia, and maintained that the true and 
only baptism existed exclusively in his church and faith.— Chron 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


155 


fol. 79. Seb. Franck, Chron. van de Roomsche' 
Ketters, letter D., fol. 76, printed A. D. 1563. 

As regards Donatus, if it be true that he erred in 
some things, or failed in some matter of faith, we 
will not defend him therein ; however, this much is 
certain, that owing to the absence of his writings, 
we have no other information concerning him, than 
that which comes to us through the mouth and 
hand of his adversaries. 

Concerning this, P. J. Twisck, in a certain place, 
expresses his regret, saying, that in his Chronijk, 
for the year 410, he wrote something derogatory to 
his followers, before he had been properly informed 
regarding it ; which he afterwards, for the year 417, 
refutes and explains more clearly by quoting from 
Bullinger: "That the followers of Donatus were 
simular to the Anabaptists (whom he calls Bap- 
tists) ; that they taught, that no one ought to be 
compelled to do good or to accept the faith." 
Again: "that every heretic should be left to fol- 
low his particular faith without restraint or com- 
pulsion." 

On this account, P. J. Twisck, in the same place, 
relates from another author, that it is quite prob- 
able that these people were burdened with many 
unjust accusations. "It would be desirable," writes 
he, "to have in our possession their writings, 
teachings, and deeds ; for if it be the case, that they 
were in all respects like the Anabaptists, and would 
compel no one in matters of faith, then it is suffi- 
ciently apparent, that they are unjustly charged bv 
other writers, with tyranny. I have given this a 
place here, because the year 410 was already ar- 
ranged when this reached me." Thus far, P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., 5th book, page 147, col. 2, from 
H. Bulling. Contra Anbapt., lib. 5, fol. 216, 222. 

Note. — We accept of the writings of Donatus 
only that which is good and true; for the rest we 
assume no responsibility. 

About A. D. 318. — It appears that when Atha- 
nasius was yet a boy, at Alexandria also, baptism 
was not administered otherwise than upon con- 
fession of faith ; at least, that it was not customary 
to baptize infants, is evident from the following 
circumstances of a certain occurrence related by 
Ruffinus and Zozomenus : "When the day of the 
martyr Peter was celebrated at Alexandria, by the 
Bishop Alexander, and he, after the solemn service 
was over, was awaiting his assistants, or pupils to 
dine with him, he observed in the distance some 
children playing on the seashore, who, very proba- 
bly, not for the first time were imitating the bishop 
and those things which are generally done in 
church. But when he observed the children more 
attentively, he noticed that they were performing 
some mysterious things. Astonished at this, he 
summoned his assistants to him, and showed them 
what he had seen from a distance. Then he com- 
manded them to seize the children and bring them 
to him. When they came, he asked them, what 
they had been playing, and what and how they had 


been doing ? They, as was natural for their years, 
at first were frightened, and denied the matter, but 
afterwards related it just as it had taken place, and 
confessed that they, through Athanasius, who in 
this game had imitated the Bishop, had baptized 
some catechumens, that is, boys who had not been 
baptized. Alexander then inquired of those who 
they said had been baptized, what questions had 
been put to them, and what they had answered; 
likewise interrogating him who had put the ques- 
tions ; and found that all was in accordance with 
the manner of our religion. Jac. Mehrn., 2d part, 
pp. 356, 357, from Nicephor., lib. 8, cap. 44. Also, 
H. Montan. Nietigh., pp. 64, 65, from Ruffin. Eccl. 
Hist. 1, cap. 14. Zozom. Eccl. Hist., lib. 3, cap. 16. 

From these circumstances it is evident that in- 
fant baptism was not customary there. First, when 
we take into consideration the conduct of these 
boys, we see that in the Christian church at Alex- 
andria the usual mode of baptizing at that time 
was this, namely, that the Bishop, or whoever ad- 
ministered baptism, first interrogated the candi- 
dates for baptism, and then, after they had an- 
swered him, they were baptized. 

Secondly, if we consider the boys themselves, 
who apparently were ten or twelve years old, 
which probability is increased by the fact that 
Ruffinus (as H. Montanus shows), calls them 
catechumens, that is, such as were being instructed 
in the faith, which is plainly indicated by their per- 
formance, since they were able to imitate in every 
particular such important services. These boys 
are nevertheless called unbaptized, wherefore 
Athanasius, though by way of play, baptized them. 

Moreover, that these boys were born of Chris- 
tian parents, appears in various ways, as, for in- 
stance, in this, that they diligently attended the 
Christian assemblies, for without this they could 
never have represented so completely in all its par- 
ticulars, the baptism practiced in the church. Like- 
wise, in the fact that Alexander and his assistants 
(as the account further sets forth), enjoined the 
parents of these boys, who before were unbap- 
tized, but had now been thus baptized, to bring 
them up in that vocation, namely, in the Christian 
religion, which certainly would not have been done, 
had their parents been heathen and not Christians. 
It is also stated that this was done with invo- 
cation and confession of God's holy name, which 
certainly would not have been the case with heath- 
en, who worshiped either no god, or many gods. 

As to what Alexander held of this performance, 
we leave it to its own merits ; it suffices us to have 
shown that at that time the Christians at Alex- 
andria suffered their children to remain unbap- 
tized ; inasmuch as they were first instructed, and 
then baptized upon confession of their faith, 
which, as has been shown, is clearly indicated by 
the course of the afore-mentioned boys. 

A. D. 333. — It is recorded that in the first great 
council at Nice, held against Arius, and various 


156 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


innovations in the church, it was resolved among 
other things: 

"Canon 21. The Paulianists and Photinians shall 
be rebaptized." 

"Canon 12. If any apostatize under persecution, 
without having been tormented, and sincerely re- 
pent, they shall be put among the catechumens for 
five years, and after two more years, shall be rein- 
stated among the faithful, with prayer." 

Canon 13. But they who, for the sake of the 
confession of the faith, have relinquished the mili- 
tary profession and again return to it, shall do 
penance for thirteen years, and then be received 
again ; however, if they truly repent, the bishop is 
authorized to mitigate the term of penance, pro- 
vided he sees that their repentance is fruitful and 
devout." 

"Canon 15. Concerning the catechumens who 
have apostatized, it is decided, that they shall be 
excluded from the prayers of the catechumens who 
have not apostatized, for three years, and at the 
end of that time be received back again." Jac. 
Mehrn., pages 352, 353, ex Concil. Nicen. Secund. 
Ruff in. 

This is the great Council which is extolled as 
orthodox and Christian by nearly all so-called 
Christians. Be this as it may, we see no reason to 
praise it so highly, seeing that we must honor the 
precepts of God's holy Word alone, whereas the 
rules of that council were made by fallible men. 
Yet, so far as these men have laid down precepts 
that accord with the precepts of God's holy Word, 
or, at least, do not militate against them, so far we 
accept, or, at least, do not oppose them.* 

When it is said, in Canon 21, that the Paulian- 
ist and Photinians shall be rebaptized, it estab- 
lishes, that, according to the Holy Scriptures, not 
every baptism is a genuine or true baptism, and 
that consequently there is but one baptism which 
can in truth be called genuine, namely, that baptism 
which is administered by the true church, and 
upon the true faith. This is also established at this 
day byrthe Anabaptists, and regarded as a precept 
from the holy Word of God. 

It is also said in the 15th Canon concerning the 
catechumens, that if they have fallen, they shall be 
excluded three years from the prayers of those 
catechumens who have not fallen. This is an 
indication of the carefulness exercised by that as- 
sembly, to admit to baptism, according to the doc- 
trine of the holy Gospel, no unprepared catechu- 
mens before they had truly repented after their 
fall. 

The 12th Canon, speaking of the penance to be 
performed by those who, under persecution, had 
apostatized without having been tormented ; and 
the 13th Canon, treating of the very great and long 

* In Canon 2, "Concil. Nicen.," we have the following: "No 
one who has recently been received from heathendom, and baptized, 
shall become an ecclesiastic (that is, a teacher or bishop), unless he 
have been very carefully examined previously." — Bapt. Histor., p. 
352, from "Ruffinus"; which quite agrees with Paul's words, I 
Tim. 3 :6, that no novice shall be ordained to the office of a bishop. 


penance to be endured by those, who, after having 
become Christians, had resumed the military pro- 
fession, and thus become apostates ; these precepts 
we say, militate neither against the holy Scriptures, 
nor against the views of the Anabaptists, but suffi- 
ciently confirm them both. 

Note. — It is recorded that at this time pseudo- 
apostles taught that the church of Rome was 
rejected of God, and that it was not His church, 
but Babylon, and the whore mentioned in the 
Apocalypse, who rides the beast with the seven 
heads ; and that we therefore do not owe obedience 
to the Pope ; that under the New Testament we are 
in no wise bound to give tithes to the priests ; that 
all manner of swearing is unlawful ; that a conse- 
crated church is not better to pray in than a pig- 
sty. Seb. Fr. Chron., jol. 120, col. 3. 

A. D. 335. — At this time, Athanasius vigorously 
maintained the cause of such as had been baptized 
according to order of Christ, against those who, 
it seems, asserted that baptism might take place 
without previous instruction, or confession of 
faith. He says (Serm. 3., Contra Arian.) : "Our 
Saviour did not simply command to baptize, but 
first said, teach, and then baptize; so that true 
faith may proceed from the doctrine, and then 
baptism be perfected with faith." P. J. Twisck, 
Chron. Ath book, page 99, col. 2; from Grond. 
Bew., letter A. Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., 2d Part, 
page 370. 

Note. — At this time Athanasius taught that it 
is the duty of every Christian, to read the holy 
Scriptures, on the 6th chap. Eph. Again, he pro- 
hibited the practice of making a likeness of God 
for the purpose of worshiping Him thereby, etc., 
as being an unlawful thing. Contr. Gent. Sam. 
Veltius, in the Geslacht-register, page 118. 

Notice concerning several writings attributed to 
Athanasius. — The pedobaptists, prone to bring for- 
ward everything that seems in anywise to favor 
their views, were wont to adduce the 114th and the 
124th question of a certain book called, Various 
Questions of Holy Scripture, attributed to Atha- 
nasius. But in answer to this we say: that said 
book is not the work of Athanasius, but of some 
other author who wrote subsequently to him; as 
in his 23d question he cites Athanasius as one hav- 
ing lived before him, saying: "This is the testi- 
mony of the great Athanasius, a man who was 
mighty in the divine Scriptures ; but we, who are 
enlightened by him." Moreover, that book con- 
tains many opinions foreign to Athanasius, as 
shown by the Centuriatores Magdenburgenses, 
Cent. 4, cap. 10, p. 1032. See also, H. Montan. 
Nietigh., p. 69, and J. M., Bapt. Hist., pages 360, 
361. 

Note.— A. D. 320.— Lactantius FirmianuS 
taught at this time: 1. "That the sacrifices of the 
Christian are, a good life, purity, and good works. 
2. That there is no religion in a place where there 
are images. Lib. 2, of the Divine Instruction. Also, 
Sam. Veltius, in the Geslacht-register., pp. 116,' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


157 


117. 3. He taught against compulsion of con- 
science, and revenge, as appears from the follow- 
ing. He writes to the Emperor Constantine (5th 
book, chap. 20) : "The more the religion of God 
is suppressed, the more it breaks forth and grows ; 
hence they should employ reasoning and admoni- 
tion; it is not necessary to proceed with violence. 
For religion admits of no compulsion; persuasive 
words can do more to promote the cause than 
blows." Again (5th book, chap. 21) he writes: 
"We Christians do not desire that any one should 
serve God, the Creator of all, against his will; 
neither are we angry if he does not serve Him; 
for we trust His Majesty, who can as easily avenge 
Himself against those who despise Him, as He 
does the vexations and injuries inflicted upon His 
servants. Therefore, when we suffer such shame- 
ful things, we say not one word against it, but 
commit all vengeance to God ; not doing as those 
who would be regarded protectors of their gods, 
and very cruelly assail those who do not worship 
them." Korte ontschuldiging , by P. V. K., edition 
of 1643, page 47, from Religions Vryheydt, 2d 
part, p. 10. 

About A. D. 340. — Marius Victorius writes in 
the fifth book against Arius : "Everyone that is 
baptized, and says he believes, and accepts the 
faith, receives the Spirit of truth, that is, the holy 
Ghost, and is made holier by him." /. Mehrn., 
Bapt. Hist., page 325. I find in authentic writers, 
no other account of baptism by this Marius, so 
that this seems to be the only thing he has written 
about baptism, and from this, too, it is obvious that 
he must have been a stranger to infant baptism, 
seeing he joins together confession, faith, and bap- 
tism, in the one that is to be baptized. 

A. D. 350. — About this time Hilarius attained to 
the faith in Jesus Christ, and having been bap- 
tized upon this faith, he proceeded to defend the 
truth which he had received and accepted, and, for 
the strengthening of the faith he had adopted, and 
that he might live according to the same, he prayed 
to God (lib. 12 de Trinit.) as follows: "Dear God, 
preserve my faith and the testimony of my con- 
science, that I may ever keep that which I con- 
fessed in the sacrament of my regeneration, when 
I was baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost ; namely, that I worship Thee, 
O God our Father, and Thy Son with Thee, and 
that the Holy Spirit, that proceeds from Thee, may 
be awakened." 

Again Vicecomes (lib. 2, cap. 27) quotes from 
Hilarius, on the 15th chapter of Matt, the follow- 
ing: "They that come to baptism confess first, that 
they believe in the Son of God, and in His suffer- 
ing and resurrection ; and this confession is made 
or pronounced at the sacrament of baptism." 

Again, Hilarius writes (vol. 2, de Trinitate) : 
"The Lord has commanded to baptize in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost ; that is, upon the confession of the Author 


(that is, Him who in the beginning created all 
things), and the First-born, and the Free Gift 
(that is, the Son and the Holy Ghost)." Jac. 
Mehrn. Bapt., Histor., 2d part, pages 371, 372. 


HILARIUS ON BAPTISM AND SEVERAL OTHER ARTI- 
CLES OF HIS FAITH, ACCORDING TO THE 
ACCOUNT OF P. J. TWISCK 

Hilarius, originally a heathen, who subsequently 
became a Christian, and was baptized at Rome, 
A. D. 350, was a very learned and eloquent man. 
He writes (lib. 2) : "The Lord has commanded to 
baptize on, or in, the name of the Father, of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that is," etc. 

He also defended the truth against the Arians, 
on account of which he was exiled : and he likewise 
vigorously opposed the arrogance of the see of 
Rome, and its dominion over other churches, and 
said that antichrist would devastate the earth 
through wars and murder. 

To those who concerned themselves more in 
wondering at the building of the temple, than in 
the consideration of the doctrine he says : "You 
are indeed, unwise, to look with wonder upon these 
things; for, you must know that antichrist shall 
once set his throne there. 

"The nature of the name antichrist is opposition 
to Christ, which he effects under a specious sem- 
blance of the Gospel. He transforms himself into 
an angel of light, that he may alienate the Chris- 
tian mind. He has already, to some extent, com- 
menced his progress, pretending to be Christ, 
though he is departed very far from Christ. 

"They (that is, the Antichristians) ambitiously 
desire the aid of the secular power, which they 
draw to themselves in order to advance their name 
and honor, and to protect their church ; thus work- 
ing with a worldly ambition, notwithstanding it is 
folly to employ secular power in defense of the 
Christian church. 

"Let me ask you, ye bishops, what aid did the 
apostles employ in proclaiming the Gospel ? by the 
assistance of what magistracy did they preach 
Christ, and convert the heathen from idolatry to 
God? 

"Now the church counts the favor of the world, 
and boasts that the world loves her, who could at 
no time have been the church of Christ, without 
being hated by the world." 

Again, on the 68th Psalm, he says: "God is 
now preached, honored, and worshiped in stone, 
wood, and metal, and the Master-builder of the 
world, the Father of us all, is fashioned in perish- 
able matter, to which they have been brought by 
the enticing words of philosophy. With these and 
like words he greatly censures the abuse practiced 
by the church of Rome." P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
4th book, page 104, col. 1, 2, from Socrat., lib. 3. 
Casp. Swine, epist. 1, fol. 877. Seb. Fr. 

Since the above passages from Hilarius are not 
only excellent, but also plain, so that they require 


158 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


no explanation, we leave them and proceed to 
others who confessed the same faith. 

Note. — At this time, Hilarius taught that all 
human traditions, on account of which God's com- 
mandments are transgressed, must be rooted out. 
On Matt. 15, Canon 14. Sam. Veltius, Geslacht- 
register, page 122. He also writes : "The Father 
revealed to Peter, who said : 'Thou art the Son of 
God,' that the church should be built upon this 
rock of confession." "This faith," he says, "is the 
foundation of the church; this faith has the keys 
of heaven." In the same place, as well as in the 
6th book of the Trinity. 

A. D. 350. — In the meantime we find that the 
parents of Augustine's mother, though they were 
Christians, did not have their daughter Monica 
baptized in her infancy ; inasmuch as she was not 
baptized until she had reached the years of under- 
standing, and this at the time when the followers 
of Cyprian practiced infant baptism to a very great 
extent. With regard to this, I find the following 
account : "Moreover, even in Africa, where Cyp- 
rian had held the aforesaid council — to determine 
on the precise time for baptizing infants — and re- 
solved that baptism should be administered to 
infants as soon as they were born, it was, about the 
year 350, not observed by all Christian believers. 
Of this, we have an example in Monica, Augus- 
tine's mother, a very pious woman, born of Chris- 
tian parents, who also was baptized when she had 
reached the years of understanding, as Augustine 
himself testifies." H. Montan. Nietigh., page 71, 
from Augustine, lib. 2. Confess., cap. 3, and lib. 9, 
cap. 8 and 13. 

A. D. 351. — It is recorded that the Christians at 
Neocesarea declared themselves openly against in- 
fant baptism, in a convention or assembly of the 
ministers, called the council of Neocesarea ; so that 
infant baptism, which then began to prevail in dif- 
ferent places, could gain no support there, as ap- 
pears from the various rules adopted by this body. 

In Canon 5, we read : "If a catechumen who is 
not yet baptized, and has his place among the cate- 
chumens in the church, has been seen in a sin, he 
shall hear the preaching on his bended knees ; that 
he may refrain from the sin he committed ; but if 
he persists in it, he shall be expelled." 

In Canon 6, we read : "Pregnant women may be 
baptized, whenever they desire it; for in this 
sacrament there is no communication between the 
mother and the child which is born of her; but 
everyone must in this confession himself declare 
his free will and good intention." 

Canon 11, after some other words declares: 
"The Lord was not baptized until He was thirty 
years old, and thereupon He preached." Jacob 
Mehm., Bapt. Hist., 2d part, pages 351, 352. 

First, when in Canon 5, mention is made of the 
catechumens, it certainly indicates that it was cus- 
tomary to instruct the young before baptism, in the 
articles of the faith, upon which followed the con- 


fession of the same, and baptism. This cannot be 
contradicted. 

Secondly, when in Canon 6 it is established that 
pregnant women may be baptized whenever they 
desire it, because there is no communication be- 
tween the mother and the child which is born of 
her, it clearly confirms that infant baptism had no 
place whatsoever among them, but, that they were 
indeed inimical to it. It appears that a difficulty was 
raised at that time, as to whether pregnant women 
might be baptized or not; for it was thought or 
feared that the fruit had such communion with the 
mother, that the child, too, would become a partak- 
er of the baptism received by the mother; which 
would have been contrary to the views held by the 
church, that no one should be baptized except upon 
his own confession of faith, and consequently, 
no infants, much less unborn children. But this 
apprehension or difficulty was removed, when it 
was declared that in the reception of baptism there 
is no communication between the mother and the 
child, and that for this reason the child does not 
participate in the baptism received by the mother. 
This is too clear to be refuted. 

Thirdly, when in Canon 11, mention is made of 
Christ being baptized when He was thirty years old, 
notwithstanding that preaching is here spoken of, 
and that the same ought .not to be undertaken by 
one before he is thirty years old, the baptism which 
is administered upon faith or in adult years, is nev- 
ertheless also recommended and deemed necessary. 
For, as Christ was baptized in adult years, and 
forthwith began to preach, so that the time of His 
baptism was also the time of His preaching, even so 
(the Canon apparently means to say), baptizing, 
like preaching, may only take place in adult years ; 
for as the one requires understanding, so does the 
other, according to the example of Christ. 

A. D. 360.— P. J. Twisck writes: "Notwith- 
standing that at this time, much bloody cruelty was 
practiced against the bishop who sided with Arius, 
so that this party was almost wholly crushed, still, 
according to history, there remained sects like the 
Anabaptists, etc. If their books were extant, we 
might give an account of what they taught concern- 
ing all these matters ; but as it is, we let it suffice 
with what others have written." P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., 4th book, page 106, col. 2, from Jac. P. 
Verm. Onsch., lib. 4, jol. 131. 

It is exceedingly to be regretted that so few of 
the writings of the Anabaptists who lived at that 
time, are extant ; for thereby we are compelled to 
receive information concerning them from the 
mouths of their enemies; which information, as 
we may readily judge, was not dictated by love, 
but by animosity. However, we owe thanks to God, 
that even this much has come down to us respect- 
ing their history ; since Satan, through the instru- 
mentality of his adherents, has always aimed to 
exterminate, not only their books, but also their 
lives, yea, their bodies and souls, if possible. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


159 


A. D. 362. — Saint Martin, born of heathen par- 
ents, when he was ten years old, went, contrary to 
the will of his parents, to the meetings of the Chris- 
tians, embraced Christianity and was baptized 
when he was eighteen years old. Being now a 
Christian, he desired to be discharged from the 
military profession into which he had been brought 
by his parents ; hence he said to the apostate Em- 
peror, Julian, that it was not lawful, for him to 
fight, because he was a Christian. 

But as the Minorite, Thomas van Heerentaals, in 
his Mirror of the Ten Commandments and Seven 
Sacraments, gives a somewhat fuller account con- 
cerning St. Martin, and especially of baptism as 
practiced at that time, we shall make a short extract 
from it. He says : "In former times it was custom- 
ary to administer holy baptism but twice a year, 
namely, on Easter eve and on Pentecost eve ; ex- 
cept in cases of necessity, which was fourfold : 1. In 
a siege. 2. In danger of martyrdom. 3. In peril at 
sea. 4. In dangerous sickness. In such cases they 
baptized all, and at all times, that no one might die 
without baptism. But when these four reasons did 
not exist, baptism was administered only on the two 
above-mentioned days, and that with great solem- 
nity and dignity, and all who were admitted to 
baptism, had attained the years of understanding ; 
even St. Martin, that holy man, was a catechumen 
for six years — from the time he was twelve, until 
he was eighteen years old — before he received 
baptism." P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, page 
110, col. 1, 2. 

A. D. 363 and 364. — In the time of Julian the 
apostates there lived and shone as bright lights, 
various excellent men, whose learning and piety it 
is not necessary to extol, since it is sufficiently 
known. They gave expression to their orthodox 
convictions by word and by deed, especially with 
regard to the matter of baptism, that it ought to be 
administered after previous instruction, upon faith 
and repentance. 

At the same time, A. D. 363, there lived Am- 
brose, who is stated to have been born of Christian 
parents. His father's name was also Ambrose, 
while that of his mother was Marcellina. He, too, 
was not baptized until the day on which he was 
chosen bishop of Milan, after having been instruct- 
ed in the catechism, that is, in the doctrines of the 
faith.* See concerning this, Tract van den loop der 
wereld, by F. H. H., printed 1611, page 47, 48, 
from Paul, de vita Ambrosii. Naucler. Chron. 
Generat. 13. 

Such a procedure, namely, thus precipitately to 
elect any one bishop or teacher, as is stated here 
concerning Ambrose, we do not commend ; but we 
notice here, that Christians at that time had not 


generally adopted infant baptism; nay, that some, 
notwithstanding the papal power, purposely did not 
have their children baptized ; causing them, when 
they had reached maturer years, to be instructed 
first, and then baptized, upon their own confession. 

Ambrose (Serm. 61) makes the statement: "It 
was customary for all people to be baptized at 
Easter." In Lib. de Jejunio, cap. 10, he says: 
"Now comes the day of the resurrection ; now the 
elect are baptized." Yet on I Tim. 4, he says that 
the sick were baptized on any day. Jac. Mehrn., 
Bapt. Hist., 2d part, page 334. 

These words of Ambrose confirm our preceding 
assertion ; for when he says that at Easter it was 
customary to baptize all people, he sufficiently de- 
clares that at that time infant baptism was not a 
custom. For not only at Easter, but throughout 
the whole year, children are born, the baptism of 
which, because of the danger that they might die, 
could never have been postponed until Easter, had 
infant baptism been deemed necessary for salva- 
tion. But Ambrose removes all doubt when he 
says what persons were baptized then, namely, all 
people; for by the word people there are generally 
understood adult or rational persons, and not in- 
fants in the cradle. 

Moreover, when he writes that the sick were 
baptized on any day, he proves thereby, that infant 
baptism was not practiced in the church of which 
he speaks. For, if it had been customary there, to 
baptize infants, it would not have been necessary to 
baptize the sick on any day, since they would have 
been baptized already in their infancy ; or our op- 
ponents must show that the sick, who were baptized 
any day, were also baptized in their infancy ; which 
they dare not maintain, seeing these churches 
would then have to be regarded anabaptists. Nev- 
ertheless, one of two things must follow. Either 
that the sick who were baptized in their infancy 
were rebaptized, or that the adults baptized had 
not been baptized in their infancy. If the former 
is true, then the Anabaptists, as they are called, 
flourished already in those early times. But if the 
latter is true, then there were at that time whole 
churches who rejected infant baptism, or, at least, 
suffered their children to remain unbaptized. This 
is so clear that it cannot be refuted. 


* Bullinger says that before the days of Ambrose (A.D. 363), 
Aurentius rejected infant baptism. See, P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 
114, col. 2, in the annotation. 

D. Vicecomes (lib. 2, cap. 6) records, from Nolanus, concerning 
Ambrose, that in his time, Frigitil, Queen of the Marcomans, hav- 
ing heard from a Christian man, what good things were said of 
Ambrose, believed in Christ, and recognized him (Ambrose) as his 
minister. To her, Ambrose wrote an excellent epistle. See, "Bapt. 
Hist.," page 462. 


OF SEVERAL OTHER ARTICLES OF FAITH TAUGHT 

BY AMBROSE, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT 

OF P. J. TWISCK 

"Ambrose (on Rom. 1 ) ridicules those who say : 
'We cannot come before God except through the 
mediation of the saints, just as we come before a 
king through the mediation of counts.' 'Well then,' 
says he, 'is not he guilty of contempt of majesty, 
who ascribes to counts the honor due to the king ? 
Certainly. Why then, will not they consider them- 
selves sinners, who give God's name and honor to 
creatures, and, setting aside the Lord, worship His 
servants ? Because kings are not acquainted with 


160 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the individual wants of every one, interpreters and 
advocates appear before them ; but God, to whom 
nothing is hid, needs no advocates or informants, 
but simply an humble heart.' 

"Again: 'They now bestow such names and 
honor upon the images, as they would never have 
dared to give to the living person, namely, divine 
honor; and this, when they are dead.' Thus 
Ambrose reproves the image worship of the Ro- 
man church, and (on Col. 1) positively asserts that 
'neither elements, nor saints, nor angels should be 
honored or worshiped, but Christ alone.' 

" 'It seems,' says he, 'that Ambrose, too, would 
seek antichrist at Rome;' for he says that 'anti- 
christ shall restore to the Romans their freedom, 
under his name,' and calls the city of antichrist 'the 
city of the devil.' He says further, that 'antichrist 
shall be revealed after the downfall of the Roman 
Empire, or when the Emperors shall have lost their 
power;' and history shows that the decline of the 
Roman Emperors was the augmentation of the 
power and dominion of the Popes or antichrists. 

"Ambrose says further: 'The violence of 
worldly opponents must not be overcome with 
worldly, but with spiritual weapons; and heretics 
must be punished only by exclusion from the 
church, for the champions of Christ seek neither 
weapons nor iron balls.' 

"Again, in regard to marriage he says: 'Purity 
of the body is something to be desired by us, and I 
commend it by way of advice, but do not enjoin it 
as a command ; for the virgin state may be advised, 
but not commanded.' Hist. Tripart., lib. 7, cap. 8. 
Adolphus Tectander Apol., fol. 163. Casp. Swinck, 
Epist. 1, fol. 877. Hier. Zanc, fol. 65. D. Anth. 1., 
fol. 116. 

"Again : The words of Ambrose clearly indicate 
that he means that the sacrament (the Lord's Sup- 
per), should be received under both forms, that is, 
with bread and wine. Lib. 9, cap. 30. Seb. Fr., 
fol. 50. 

"Again: 'The body of Christ is not material or 
earthly food, or bread, but a spiritual, eternal 
bread, which feeds believing souls. Regenerated 
men belong to this table, of which the ungodly 
cannot partake.' Chron. Seb. Fr. on Ambrose. 

"Again: Ambrose says also: 'We are in duty 
bound to examine the churches, and if there is one 
which rejects the faith, and does not hold to the 
foundation of the apostolical doctrine, we must 
leave it.' " In Lucam, lib. 6, cap. 9. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., 4th book, page 114, col. 2 and 115, col. 
1, 2. 

A. D. 364. — It is recorded that in or about the 
second year of Julian, the Apostate, there lived and 
wrote the very learned, yet humble, Ephrem, sur- 
named Syrus, who, in writing of baptism, relates 
that in his time it was customary for people, when 
they were baptized, to renounce with express words 
the devil and all his works. Jac. Mehrn. in Bapt. 
Hist., 2d part, page 328. 


Ephrem (Lib. de Poenit., cap. 5) also enumer- 
ates the works of Satan which we renounce in bap- 
tism, as fornication, adultery, uncleanness, lying, 
stealing, envy, etc. 

Page 336. He also states (Orat. 3, de S. La- 
vacro) that it is customary for the candidates for 
baptism to confess their sins. And from his book 
on Repentance, chap. 5, it appears that those who 
were thus baptized confessed their faith before 
many witnesses, and said: "I renounce thee, O 
Satan, and all thy works." 

Page 324. Vice come (Lib. 1, cap. 20) quotes 
the following from Ephrem Syrus : "This declara- 
tion of renunciation, as it is called, which we make 
in baptism, seems to be a small matter, but it has a 
deeper meaning, and he that observes it rightly is 
truly blessed; for with these few words, namely 
those spoken in baptism, we let go all that is called 
evil, and is hated of God, and renounce the same ; 
and these things are not one, two, or ten, but every- 
thing that can be called evil, for you say: T re- 
nounce Satan and all his works.' " "This," writes 
Jac. Mehrn., "is certainly not a meaningless or 
frivolous performance that can be imposed on in- 
fants." 

A. D. 365, — About the beginning of this year, 
Gregory of Nyssa is mentioned, who, observing, it 
seems, how some came to baptism, unprepared and 
with an ungodly mind, wrote the following for their 
instruction: "When we pass through the sacra- 
mental water of baptism, we must mortify in the 
water all that is evil and vicious, such as unchasti- 
ty, rapacity, luxury, frivolity, pride, vanity of the 
mind, envy, and the like. We must also drown and 
forsake in the water, as much as is possible, not 
only the gross vices, with their operations, but also 
the emotions and pollutions of the mind which, in 
some measure, cleave to human nature." Grey. 
Nyss., lib. de vita Mosis. Also, Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. 
Hist., page 328. 

When at this time dome thought it was needful 
to be baptized in consecrated water, he declared in 
a certain sermon, that this was not necessary, but 
that faith and the blessing of the minister were all 
that a person needed for baptism ; for every place 
is the Lord's, and all kinds of water may be used 
for baptism, if God only finds faith, for this He 
accepts, and the blessing of the minister, which 
sanctifies. Bapt. Hist., 2d part, page 376, from 
Vicecom., lib. 1, cap. 14, from Greg. Nyss. 

In another place he very earnestly admonishes 
some persons who deferred their baptism, that they 
should have their names registered among the cate- 
chumens, in order that, having been truly examined 
and instructed in the faith, they might receive bap- 
tism. Concerning this, I find the following annota- 
tion (Bapt. Hist., page 476, from Vicecom., lib. 2, 
cap. 12) : "Gregory of Nyssa says in a sermon, to 
those who had long deferred their baptism : 'Come, 
ye who are burdened to your sanctification ; give 
me your names, that I may write them with ink in 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


161 


earthly books ; but may God record them on tablets 
that never perish.' " 

Thus, also Gregory of Nyssa, as has been shown, 
wrote sound and correct doctrine respecting bap- 
tism. Besides this we have not been able to find 
any other testimony from him relative to this sub- 
ject. 

A. D. 366. — Infant baptism, as it appears, begin- 
ning to gain a foothold in some places, the teachers 
at Laodicea, in Phrygia Pacatiana, declared them- 
selves decidedly against it, in a public convention 
or assembly, in which, among other things, it was 
resolved : "That those whom it was the intention 
to baptize, should previously be instructed in the 
faith, and be examined concerning it, on Thursday 
of the last week of Lent." Compare Seb. Franck, 
Cons. Laod., with P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 112, 
col. 1, 2.* 

It is recorded that about this time, in another 
convention of ministers, called the 'Elibertine 
Council, it was resolved among other things: 
"That persons who embrace the Christian faith 
shall, if they lead a pious life, be admitted to bap- 
tism, in eighteen months or two years." Vicecom., 
lib. 2, cap. 8, from the 42d Canon of the Elibertine 
Council, as noted by Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., page 
372. 

Here we cannot but see the uprightness and care- 
fulness of the afore-mentioned ministers, who, so 
as not to act contrary to the command of Christ, 
and baptize any without true faith and repentance, 
deemed it preferable to defer for eighteen months 
or two years, the baptism of even those cate- 
chumens, whose life was well spoken of ; in order 
that, having in the meantime well counted the 
cost, they might erect a good building, and be built 
up by baptism as living stones in the Christian tem- 
ple of the church. 

In the meantime, it appears that an abuse ob- 
tained in the administration of baptism, namely, 
that a plate was presented to the candidates, that 
they might put some money on it (either for the 
minister, or for the poor). But this was also abol- 
ished at that time, with these words : "It has also 
seemed proper to us, to ordain that hereafter the 
candidates for baptism shall not put any money 
on the plate, as has been the custom." Bapt. Hist., 
page 372, ex Concilio Elibertino Vicecom., lib. 4, 
cap. 2. 

From this custom of presenting a plate to the 
candidates, that they might put money on it, and 
from its abolishment, the plain inference is, that 
the candidates were not little children, and that the 
decree enacted concerning them, did not concern 
little children, for these have neither the knowledge 
nor the ability to do it, or voluntarily to omit it. 

About A. D. 370. — We are informed that about 
this time there taught and wrote Opatatus Milevi- 
tanus, a catechist, who, it is stated, by virtue of 


* P. J. Twisck fixes this council of Laodicea in the year 364, 
while Seb. Franck states that it occurred in the year 368, but we 
follow a middle course, and assign the year 366 as its date. 


his office instructed the young in the articles of the 
faith, in order that after previous instruction, they 
might be baptized upon their own confession. 
Speaking of the things that are to be observed in 
and about baptism, he says : "We know that in the 
observance of holy baptism there are three essen- 
tials. The first relates to the Holy Trinity, the sec- 
ond to the believer, and the third to the baptizer ; 
but they must not all be weighed in the same bal- 
ance." Bapt. Hist., page 2>27, from Opt. Mil., 
lib. 3. 

Although these words seem somewhat obscure, 
they nevertheless contain enough light for us to 
perceive clearly, of what baptism, and of what 
matter he speaks. As regards the matter of which 
he here treats, it apparently is the dignity of bap- 
tism, in order to prove which, he alleges that in 
baptism there are three very worthy things. Men- 
tioning the most worthy first, he says that it is God 
or the Holy Trinity. As the second, he mentions 
the believer, namely, him who stands ready to be 
baptized ; for he is very worthy in the sight of God, 
since Christ says : "He that believeth and is bap- 
tized shall be saved" (Mark 16:16). As the third, 
he mentions the baptizer, namely, him who has 
received so worthy an office from God. From these 
three worthy circumstances he justly concludes the 
dignity of baptism. 

From this it is clear as sunlight, of what bap- 
tism he speaks, for in mentioning the believer, in 
connection with baptism, and speaking of him as 
the one to be baptized, he certainly indicates that 
he does not speak of children, or of infant baptism, 
but of the baptism of believers. Moreover, a little 
after the preceding words, he says concerning the 
candidate for baptism, of whom he speaks: "He 
follows the faith of the believers." 

Vicecomes (lib. 2, cap. 4), cites Optatus Mile- 
vitanus, and says that in the 5th book against 
Parmes he expounds the words of St. Paul, I Cor. 
3 :6, on this wise : " 'I have planted, Apollos wa- 
tered,' that is: O ye heathen, I have made you 
disciples of Christ; Apollos has baptized these 
disciples." 

Likewise in the 2nd book, 7th chapter, Vice- 
comes writes : "Optatus was a catechist at Carth- 
age." Also, Bapt. Hist., page 375. 

These things confirm our previous declaration; 
for, when he calls unbelieving and unbaptized per- 
sons heathen, and, on the other hand, pronounces 
those who had been instructed in the faith, and 
baptized upon it, disciples of Christ, without re- 
marking whether they were born of Christian, or 
of heathen parents, he declares thereby, that it is 
not birth, but unbelief and absence of baptism, 
which constitutes one a heathen, and that not 
Christian parentage, but faith and baptism, make 
one a Christian ; which well accords with the words 
of Paul, Gal. 3:26-28: "For ye are all the chil- 
dren of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many 
as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is 


162 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor 
female : for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." 

Again, the fact that Opatatus, as Vicecomes 
writes, was a catechist, indicates that at the place 
where he was teacher it was the custom, to teach 
the candidates for baptism the catechism, that is, 
to instruct them in the faith, before they were 
baptized; hence these candidates were called cate- 
chumens. 

Note. — Damascenus writes that "at this time, 
A. D. 370, the Gospel was preached in all the 
world, not by the force of arms, nor by subju- 
gating its adversaries through war, but by a hand- 
ful of poor, naked, and martyred people, that is, by 
patience and faith. For, how could the church have 
martyrs, if she made martyrs ?" Damasc, 3 Cent., 
cap. 33. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, page 1 16, 
col. 2. 

A. D. 380. — Gregory of Nazianzus, in Cappa- 
docia, born of Christian parents, was not baptized 
until he was in his twentieth year; concerning 
which, Jacob Mehrning gives the following ac- 
count : "His father, Bishop at Nazianzus, and also 
called Gregory, and his mother Nonna, a pious 
woman of Christian parentage, knew nothing of 
infant baptism, for they did not have their son 
(Gregory) baptized in his infancy. His baptism, 
according to history, did not take place until he 
was in his twentieth year. Bapt. Hist., page 354. 
Also, H. Mont. Nietigh., page 62. 

In order to show still further, how vain and use- 
less infant baptism was deemed at that time, by 
various pious and learned men, and how baptism 
was even deferred till late in life, we will adduce 
one or two brief examples.* 

A. D. 381. — It is stated that in this year there 
was baptized at Constantinople, Nectarius, after 
he had attained his full understanding, yea, such 
an advanced age and penetrating knowledge, that 
he was at the same time elected bishop or teacher 
of that place, the like of which occurred previous- 
ly, as stated concerning Ambrose, in the year 363. 
See P. J. Twisck, Chron. 4th book, page 122, from 
Histor. Tripart., lib. 9, cap. 13. Adolph. Apol., 
fol. 163. Leonh., lib. 2. Merula, fol. 312. 

As regards the statement how precipitately and 
unexpectedly Nectarius was elected bishop or 
teacher of that place, even as was related of Am- 
brose, it is not our purpose to defend or advocate 
it; but simply to show that he deferred baptism 
in his youth, and was not baptized until he had 
attained to quite an advanced age. 

Note. — In A. D. 382, Theodosius, born and 
bred by Christian parents, was baptized at Thes- 
salonica, by Bishop Ascholius. Hist. Eccl., lib. 5, 
cap. 6, Socrates. Also, H. Montan., page 70. 

A. D. 383. — Basilius* and Eubulus, said to each 


* About this time (A.D. 380), Ambrose taught that the heathen 
worshiped wood, because they judged it to be the image of God; 
but, says, he, "God's image is invisible." — Tom. 4, in Psal. 118, 
Ser. 10. Samuel Veltius, in Geslacht-register, page 119. 


other : "Let us sell all our goods, and distribute to 
the poor, and then journey to the holy city, that 
we may behold for ourselves the wonderful works 
of God, and thereby awaken within us a confidence 
towards God." Having done this, and taken with 
them the clothes necessary for baptism, they jour- 
neyed to Jerusalem. Vicecom., lib. 3, cap. 4, from 
Amphilochius. Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., 2d Part 
page 389. ' 

Amphilochius writes of a baptized Jewish phy- 
sician, who distributed the money he had gained 
by his profession, among the hospitals, and gave 
the rest to other poor people. Vicecom., lib. 5, 
cap. 46. Bapt. Hist., see above. 

We mentioned Basilius and Eubulus, who jour- 
neyed to Jerusalem, taking with them the clothes 
necessary for baptism, in order to be baptized. 
From this it appears that it was the custom at that 
time in Jerusalem — and one that remained in use 
long afterwards in many warm countries — to bap- 
tize the candidates in or at rivers, and that they 
went partly or with the whole body down into the 
water, and then came up again ; to which end they 
divested themselves of their own clothes, usually 
had on a white or linen garment. This is the kind 
of clothes that Basilius and Eubulus appear to have 
taken with them, in order to be baptized therein. 

Now, compare this with the baptism of infants 
in the cradle, and you will at once see that this 
mode of baptism cannot take place with infants, 
since they have neither the ability nor the under- 
standing necessary for the observance of such a 
mode of baptism. 

We will now proceed to the views of Basilius 
with regard to baptism, and what he, according to 
the testimony of ancient writiers, has taught and 
written concerning it. First, it is stated of him, 
that in writing of baptism, he in no wise mentions 
infant baptism but, on the other hand, the bap- 
tism of catechumens, that is, persons receiving in- 
struction in the faith. 

Concerning this, H. Montanus and Jacob 
Mehrning unanimously give the following testi- 
mony: "The afore-mentioned Basilius who was 
bishop of Csesarea, in Cappadocia, A. D. 386, ex- 
horts only the catechumens to baptism, without 
once mentioning infants, yea, he sufficiently indi- 
cates that infant baptism was not the custom there 
at his time, saying : 'Ye who haye been evangelized 
by the apostles, repent, and be baptized every one 
of you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.' " 

True, he exhorts also the young to baptism, yet 
not such as are altogether destitute of understand- 
ing, but those who can hear the words by which 
he admonishes them to baptism, that is, adults, 
and not infants. He uses such expressions 
throughout this entire exhortation, and also in 

* T . h S 4 th!s BasiIiu s was the son of Christian parents, appears 
from Bapt. Hist." page 365. Instances of this kind, it is stated 
there, occurred at that time also in other places; we mention 
Basilius, Jerome, Ambrose, etc., all of whom were born of Chris- 
tian parents, and baptized upon confession of their faith. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


163 


some of his other writings, as in the book of the 
"Holy Spirit," chap. 12, 14, and 27 ; but nowhere 
does he mention infant baptism. H. Montan. 
Nietigh, page 73. Jac. Mehm., Bapt. Hist., page 
365. 

Moreover, the words of Basilius, whenever he 
treats of baptism, clearly express that they cannot 
be applied to infants. For, showing the nature of 
baptism, and what it is, he says {Lib. 3, Contra 
Eunom.) : "Baptism is a seal of faith." Again 
(Exhort, ad Bapt.) : "Baptism is the mark of the 
Christian champion." Again (de Instr. ad Bapt. 
Ven.) : "Baptism is a likeness of death, burial, 
and the resurrection of the dead." Bapt. Hist., p. 
322. 

These things are so clear that they require no 
explanation, and we shall therefore proceed to 
what he says further. As regards the form of bap- 
tism, according to the institution of Christ, he 
writes (Lib. 3, Contra Eunom.) : "Our baptism is 
administered according to the institution of the 
Lord, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost." 

Again, concerning the faith which must accom- 
pany such baptism, he says (Lib. de Sp. S., cap. 
12) : "When we believe on the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, we are also baptized in the 
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." 
Bapt. Hist., page 323. 

Respecting the words of the candidates, and 
what manner of conduct they observed at baptism, 
he says, in the last named book, that the candidates 
for baptism renounced Satan and all his angels. 
Again (Exhort, ad Bapt.) he states that they lifted 
up their hands towards heaven ; that they kneeled 
down in prayer. Bapt. Hist., page 336. 

He makes mention, moreover, in many places, 
of various other circumstances and matters per- 
taining to baptism ; of which we will present the 
following to the reader. 

Basilius the Great writes (Contra Eunom., lib. 
3) : "Faith must precede, if the believer is to be 
sealed by baptism." 

D. Vicecomes adduces from Basilius, book 1, 
chap. 23, of his Exhortation to Baptism the fol- 
lowing: "When wilt thou become a Christian? 
When shall we recognize thee as one of our num- 
ber? Last year thou deferredst it till the present 
Easter ; and now thou wilt wait till the next. Take 
heed, lest thou be deceived in thy expectation of a 
long life." 

Again, chap. 31, Basilius, in the 128th epistle, 
commends C. Posthumanius, and wishes that he 
had been his godfather, since the same had made 
such a glorious confession at his baptism ; and this 
with great contrition, pain, and anguish of spirit; 
and had evinced in his life and conversation the 
moderation which the confession of the Christian 
name demands. 

Again, chap. 33, Vicecomes writes : "Basilius is 
greatly astonished (in the 23d epistle to Boniface), 
at infant baptism and godfathership, saying: 


'Since you cannot promise anything certain, either 
with regard to the child's future faith, or its pres- 
ent thoughts, I pray thee, beloved, what then does 
it signify that, when the children are brought to 
baptism, the parents, as sureties, answer in their 
stead, and say that the children do that which at 
that age they cannot even think, or, which if they 
can, is hid from us ? But those who bring the child 
are asked : Does it believe in God ? and, for this 
age, which knows not whether there is a God, the 
parents answer: It believes. Thus also the other 
questions are responded to. I am astonished that 
in such matters the parents answer so presumptu- 
ously for the child.' " Bapt. Hist., pages 390, 391. 

This can certainly be called a candid rejection 
of infant baptism, and not only of infant baptism, 
but of all the absurd questions and answers which 
customarily occurred at the baptism of children, 
and upon which infant baptism was founded. He 
accuses the children of ignorance, saying that they 
do not know whether there is a God ; the parents 
he accuses of presumption because they thus bold- 
ly dare answer in their stead, and say : "The child 
believes." The priests who baptize such children, 
he accuses of folly, because they presented such 
improper and unfounded questions respecting the 
ignorant infants, and demanded that they should 
be answered in the child's name. Infant baptism 
itself he charges with worthlessness and falsity, 
seeing, as Vicecomes says, he, in his 23d epistle to 
Boniface, is greatly astonished at infant baptism. 

Basilius, in order to still more fully state his 
views concerning this matter, adduces various pas- 
sages, which effectually overthrow infant baptism, 
and establish baptism upon faith. 

D. Vicecomes (Lib. 2, cap. 3) writes thus: 
"Basilius calls the catechumens nurtured ones, 
since they were fed and nurtured with instruction 
in the Christian faith." 

Again (cap. 4, Basilius Serm. 1, de Bapt.) he 
says : "We must know that we must first teach and 
instruct, and ultimately administer holy baptism to 
those thus rightly instructed." And, a little after 
this : "Instruction must precede baptism, and first 
of all everything which stands in the way of teach- 
ing and instruction, must be removed." 

Again, in book 3, chapter 4, of the Exhortation 
to Baptism, he writes : "Examine thy conscience ; 
go into the secret chamber of thy heart; awaken 
within thee for a time the remembrance of former 
things." 

Again, chapter 5 : "As soon as any one came to 
John, and confessed his sins, however great and 
heinous they were, he was baptized in Jordan's 
floods, and immediately received remission of 
sins." Bapt. Hist., page 392. 

All these passages of Basilius as cited by D. Vice- 
comes, himself a pedobaptist, and noted by /. M. 
in Bapt. Hist., are so clearly opposed to infant 
baptism, that further comment is unnecessary. We 
will therefore let this suffice, and proceed to the 


164 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


testimony of several other persons in the fourth 
century. 

A. D. 390. — John Chrysostom, born of Christian 
parents, was at this time baptized upon his faith 
by Bishop Melitius being twenty-one years old. 
Episcopii. Antew. op de proeve des Remonstr. 
Catechism., page 359. 


CHRYSOSTOM S VIEWS RESPECTING BAPTISM 

Chrysostom, though he lived in and under the 
Roman church, and was not fully enlightened in 
all respects, nevertheless wrote soundly and cor- 
rectly on the subject of baptism, as is shown by 
the following extracts from his writings. 

Jacob Mehrning, in Bapt. Hist., following the 
Centuries Magdeburgenses, says,, page 403 : "How 
baptism must be received, St. Chrysostom reminds 
us {Horn. 14, in Marc.) : 'Thus ye who desire to 
receive baptism, since we are all under the do- 
minion of sin, lay hold first of the feet of your 
Saviour; wash them with your tears; dry them 
with your hair ; and, this done, you may approach 
His head. When you then descend with your 
Saviour into the fountain of life, that is, the wa- 
ter of baptism, you may learn how the head of 
your Redeemer was anointed.' " 

Moreover, he explains still further, how one 
must prepare himself for baptism, and this with 
such affectionate words as should move every soul. 

In Bapt. Hist., page 445, Homil. 13, Marc, 
Chrysostom says: "Will you come to baptism? 
Oh how happy are you when you shall be regener- 
ated in Christ ! when you shall put on Christ ; when 
you are buried with Christ, that you may also rise 
with Him. At another day you shall be made ac- 
quainted in proper order with the things that are 
expedient for this mystery. In the meantime I tell 
you this, that you may know it, and may prepare 
yourselves for the coming day (namely, for bap- 
tism). But may the Almighty God strengthen your 
hearts, and make you worthy of His baptism. May 
He Himself come into you, at baptism. May He 
Himself hallow the water wherewith you are sanc- 
tified. Let no one go there with a doubting heart. 
Let no one say : Do you indeed think that my sins 
will be forgiven ? He that goeth there thus, his sins 
shall not be forgiven. It is better, not to go there at 
all, than in this manner. Remember this, especially 
you who thus receive baptism, that you may 
serve God." 

I beg you, dear reader, to observe attentively 
these words of Chrysostom. Does he say anything 
at all different from what the Anabaptist teachers 
of the present day say ? O no ! he follows the same 
course. For, first he says: "Will you come to 
baptism?" He does not say: Will you carry your 
infants to baptism? How could he speak more 
plainly? For, to come oneself, and to desire to 
come, is certainly no child's work. 

Then he says : "Oh, how happy are you, when 
you shall be regenerated in Christ? when you shall 


put on Christ?" (namely, in or through baptism). 
But what else is there said by this, than what the 
apostle Paul declares of believers, namely, that 
they are saved by the washing of regeneration, that 
is, baptism, Tit. 3 :5 ; and that they put on Christ 
by baptism, Gal. 3:27. 

Then he says: "At another day you shall be 
made acquainted in proper order with the things 
that are expedient for this mystery" (that is, bap- 
tism). In like manner, Christ teaches to instruct 
the candidates for baptism before they are bap- 
tized. Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15, 16. John like- 
wise first instructed those whom he baptized. Matt. 
3 :7, 8. Peter first instructed the Jews. Acts 2 :38. 
Philip first instructed the Ethiopian. Acts 8:34, 
35. Ananias first taught Saul the faith. Acts 9:17, 
18. 

He further adds this wish : "May the Almighty 
God strengthen your hearts, and make you worthy 
of His baptism." But who knows not, that new- 
born infants can not be strengthened in their hearts 
before baptism? and that, consequently, they can- 
not receive baptism worthily (that is, with a holy 
purpose and believing hearts), since they know 
neither good nor evil. Deut. 1 :39 ; nor their right 
hand from their left, Jonah 4:11 ; and do as chil- 
dren do, I Cor. 13:11. Hence, this wish of Chrys- 
ostom, respecting baptism, cannot apply to them. 

Finally, having declared, with what heart and 
purpose we must go to baptism, namely not with a 
doubting heart, he says: "You who thus receive 
baptism that you may serve God." These are cer- 
tainly plain words, which prove manifestly, that the 
baptism of which he speaks is far different from 
the baptism of infants, since these are incapable, 
not only of going to baptism with an undoubting or 
assured heart, but also of going there at all ; not 
less incapable are they of receiving baptism with 
the purpose of serving God. Compare this with the 
words of Chrysostom, and you will find that they 
are as different from infant baptism as heaven 
is from the earth. 

Bapt. Hist., page 461. Palladius, in the Life of 
Chrysostom, speaks of an uproar which the Em- 
peror Theophilus* raised against bishop Chrysos- 
tom, persecuting him ; which occurred shortly be- 
fore Easter. There was no other alternative for 
those who sided with the bishop, and fasted with 
him, than to go to the Emperor and the Empress, in 
the week of confession, and to entreat them with 
tears, that they would spare the church of Christ, 
especially on account of the feast, and for the sake 
of those who were to be baptized, having received 
sufficient instruction for this purpose; therefore, 
they should release their bishop. 

Here again are several items from which we 
may perceive that in the church of which Chrysos- 

* It is evident here that either the author is mistaken in the 
^m e ' 7 a i? trooBraphical error occurred. Theophilus was the 

% 4 ,°\ th , e f a ^ arch °f Alexandria, through whose instigation, 
with that of the Empress Eudoxia, the Emperor in question, whose 
Translator Arcad,us - was lndu «d 'o persecute Chrysostom.— 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


165 


torn was bishop or teacher, baptism was admin- 
istered after previous instruction, and upon faith. 
For, in the first place, mention is made of the time 
in which this took place, namely, shortly before 
Easter, in the week of confession. Any one who 
has but a little experience, will find that that was 
the time and week in which it was customary to 
instruct the candidates before baptism, hear the 
confession of their faith, and properly examine 
them, in order to baptize them on the following 
Easter day. In the second place, mention is made 
of those who were to be baptized, and had received 
sufficient instruction for it ; which so plainly illus- 
trates what we have aimed to show, namely, that 
baptism at that time was administered after pre- 
vious instruction, that we deem it unnecessary to 
add anything further with regard to it, and, hence, 
let it suffice. 


OF THE BENEFIT, VIRTUE, AND OPERATION OF 
BAPTISM 

Chrysostom on Phil., chap. 3, page 405, says: 
"Christ has given or ordained baptism as a purga- 
tive, and thus we have spewed out all wickedness, 
and by it have been made free from all our sins. 
The heat has abated, the fever is checked, all im- 
purities have departed, and through the Spirit all 
other evil things have been purged out — those 
springing from fornication as well as those having 
their origin in the vanity of the mind." 

Again, on Heb. 7: "Therefore God gives bap- 
tism, that it may wash away sin, and not increase 
it." 

Again, on Col. 3: "Truly, before baptism we 
were very impure, but after it we become golden."* 

Again, on Heb. 1 1 : "What then constitutes 
brotherhood, if not the washing of regeneration 
(that is, baptism) ?" 

Who does not perceive by these passages of 
Chrysostom, that the baptism of which he speaks, 
applies in no wise to infants, but only and exclu- 
sively to rational persons ; for, when he first says to 
those who wished to receive baptism, that they 
should (spiritually) take hold of the feet of Christ, 
and wash them with their tears, and then say that 
Christ has given or ordained baptism for a purga- 
tive, and that they had thus spewed out all wicked- 
ness (that is, sin), he sufficiently indicates thereby 
that he is not speaking of the baptism of infants, 
since, these cannot do the things which he de- 
scribes as being connected with baptism. 

All these things are still more clearly established 
by the following passages from his writings, as we 
shall show. 

In Bapt. Hist., page 406, Chrysostom, on I 
Cor. 10, says: "The passage of the Jews through 
the Red Sea was a type of the future baptism." A 
little further on, he explains this, saying: "For 
there it was water, here it is also water ; yea, here it 
is the washing, and there it was the sea ; here they 


* Pure as precious metal. — Pub. 


all go into the water, there they did likewise. But 
would you know the truth of the matter? There 
they were delivered from Egypt, but here from 
idolatry; there Pharaoh was drowned, but here 
the devil; there Egyptians perished, but here 
the old man of sin is buried." 

Again, on John 3, Horn. 27: "We have com- 
mitted many and grievous sins, and, from youth to 
old age, have not refrained from staining our souls 
therewith; yet God does not require an account 
from us, but absolves us therefrom, through the 
washing of regeneration (that is, baptism), and 
has freely given us righteousness and holiness." 

How could any one speak more plainly and 
clearly of the true baptism of believers ? For, when 
in the first passage he says that in being baptized 
we are delivered from idolatry, and that in or 
through baptism the old man of sin is buried ; and 
in the second passage declares that they, having 
committed many and grievous sins, from youth to 
old age, are absolved therefrom through the wash- 
ing of regeneration, that is, baptism, it again is 
very evident that this does not at all apply to chil- 
dren, since they, never having lived in idolatry, 
cannot forsake idolatry ; neither can they, who, be- 
ing yet in their infancy, have never lived accord- 
ing to the old man, much less have died unto it, 
bury the old man of sin in or through baptism; 
finally, they who being still infants, have not at- 
tained to old age, cannot or need not be absolved 
through the washing of regeneration (that is, by 
baptism), from the sins which they have not com- 
mitted in this life. 

Bapt. Hist., page 410. That baptism ought not 
to be deferred, Chrysostom (Horn. 1, on Acts) ex- 
pounds with these words : "If any one say : I am 
afraid, I answer : If thou art afraid, thou shouldst 
have received and observed baptism. But thou wilt 
say : Even therefore I do not receive it, because I 
am afraid. But art thou not afraid to die in this 
condition? Thou sayest: Ah! God is gracious. 
Well then, therefore receive baptism, seeing He is 
so gracious, and helps thee." He says finally : "It 
is impossible. I say impossible, that he, who on 
such a hope defers baptism, can do anything good 
or commendable." 

Bapt. Hist., page 420. The teachers of the 
church sometimes call baptism a consecration ; re- 
garding this Chrysostom says (Horn. 1, on Acts) : 
"Who will fully believe me, how it pains me to the 
heart, when someone dies, who has not been con- 
secrated," that is, baptized. And, a little further 
on he writes : "What anguish of soul I experience, 
when I see how others do not hasten to baptism 
till their breath is about to leave them," that is, 
when they must die. 

These passages of Chrysostom indicate how ex- 
ceedingly sorry he was, that some deferred their 
baptism to the end of life, who ought to have re- 
ceived it in time ; yet not before the time of faith or 
repentance, much less in infancy, since he speaks 
only of those persons who had voluntarily, and 


166 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


not less presumptuously, neglected their baptism. 
Hence it sometimes occurred that persons desired 
to be baptized in their sickness, yea, on their death- 
bed, which this good man opposed with conclusive 
arguments. Bapt. Hist., page 412, Chrysostom 
says : "The mysteries are glorious and greatly to be 
desired, but let no soul that is about to die, receive 
the washing ; for that is not the time for the mys- 
teries (baptism), but to make a will; the time for 
the mysteries (baptism) is when the mind is sound, 
and the soul purified." 

Finally, Chrysostom here again produces two 
things which do not apply to infant baptism. First, 
his saying that "the mysteries" (namely, of bap- 
tism), "are glorious and greatly to be desired ;" for 
such a desire cannot exist in infants. Secondly, his 
declaration, that "the time for the mysteries (or, 
for baptism), is when the mind is sound, and the 
soul purified;" for infants neither have nor know 
unsoundness of mind or impurity of soul. Hence 
neither the soundness of their minds nor the puri- 
fication of their souls can be promoted or had in 
view, and baptism can, for this very reason, have 
no place with them. 


CHRYSOSTOM S VIEWS RESPECTING SEVERAL OTHER 
ARTICLES OF FAITH, ACCORDING TO THE AC- 
COUNT OF P. J. TWISCK, IN HIS CHRONIJK 
VAN DEN ONDERGANK DER TYRAN- 
NEN, 5th BOOK, PP. 136 AND 137 

"John Chrysostom," he writes, "a celebrated, 
zealous, and eloquent teacher or bishop at Constan- 
tinople, was expelled from his bishopric, and rele- 
gated into misery; much ignominy and suffering 
were inflicted on him, and he died in banishment. 

"His adherents and people were greatly perse- 
cuted by imperial edicts commanding them also to 
attend church and hear their enemies (namely, 
those of the Roman church), which they would 
not do, but held their own meetings in the farthest 
outskirts of the city. When this was reported to 
the Emperor by the bishop, a squad of soldiers was 
immediately sent to the place, who with sticks and 
stones dispersed the meeting, robbed those who had 
assembled of their goods, and apprehended such 
as could not make their escape. Finding it impos- 
sible to meet in public, they chose voluntary ban- 
ishment, and forthwith departed, each his own way. 
Besides this, the adherents of Chrysostom were 
unjustly accused of having caused a conflagration, 
which the common people, out of spite towards 
Chrysostom, had kindled in the temple in which 
he had taught; on account of which they had to 
suffer much; the cruelty practiced being as great 
as that of the first persecutions. 

"Again, the aforesaid John Chrysostom, also 
called, John Goldenmouth* on account of his 
golden or excellent teachings, and his eloquent 
tongue taught from Matt. 5, that we ought not to 

* Although the Papists sometimes have this Goldenmouth in 
their mouth, they nevertheless regard his teachings as heresies. 


swear at all, neither rightly nor falsely, and con- 
cludes very forcibly, with many words from the 
passage, Matt. 5:34: 'Swear not at all,' that it is 
not lawful for a Christian to swear. He con- 
clusively refutes all objections, and maintains that 
now we ought not to swear. Read yourselves his 
full exposition of said passages." 

Prior to him, likewise Haimus, on Rev. 10, 
writes, saying, That all swearing is now prohibited 
unto men, it being lawful only for God and the 
angels, who neither deceive, nor can be deceived. 

Seb. Franck notes the following concerning this 
Haimus : "Haimus, the teacher also wrote a great 
deal against the pope and the Roman church; 
among other things, that swearing is lawful only 
for God and the angels, but to men all swearing is 
forbidden. On Rev. 10, Chron., Roman. Kett., 
letter H. 

Note. — This view (that we ought not to swear), 
is also ascribed to Isiodorus. Tract. Loop der 
Werelt, page 99. 

We return to the account of P. J. Twisck, con- 
cerning Chrysostom, page 136, col. 2. He writes: 
"This Goldenmouth, John Chrysostom, taught also 
mightily against cruelty, tyranny, war, and blood- 
shed, maintaining that it is altogether improper for 
Christians to wage war, and that peace and quiet 
are to be taught in the kingdom of Christ. Christ," 
he says, "compels not, drives not away, oppresses 
not, but accords to each His free will, saying: 'If 
any man will' " 

Read also, on Matt. 13, how he explains that the 
tares (to which the heretics are compared) are not 
to be rooted out, which, he says, Christ spoke for 
the purpose of preventing and forbidding war and 
bloodshed. No violence is to be employed in heav- 
enly things ; the wicked teachings which have pro- 
ceeded from heretics, are to be reprehended and 
anathematized; but the men we must spare 

Again, he is also greatly opposed to the worship- 
ing of the saints, saying that God is not like the 
tyrants, with whom intercession is necessary ; and 
that we are not to confess our sins to any one ex- 
cept to God alone. "Thou must confess thy sins," 
he says, "that thou mayest eradicate them. If thou 
art ashamed to confess to any one, confess them 
daily in thy soul. I say not, that thou shalt confess 
them to thy fellow servant, that he may curse them 
and upbraid thee ; but tell them to God, who alone 
can heal thee from them, and follow herein the 
prophet, who says: 'Commit thy way unto the 
Lord . . . and he shall bring it to pass'" (Ps 
37:5). 

And on Matt. 23, he says with many excellent 
words : That with human doctrines, we serve God 
in vain, and that there is no other testimony of the 
truth, no other certain test of heresy, than the 
Holy Scriptures, and no other way by which we 
may know which is the Christian church. 

Again, Chrysostom says: "When the Roman 
Empire shall be put down, then shall antichrist 
come." On Matt. 24, he says : "He speaks not un- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


167 


reasonably, who by the abomination of desolation 
understands antichrist, who, it is thought, will 
shortly afterwards rise, and will occupy the holy 
place of the church, under the name of Christ." 
Also, on II Thess. 2 : "When the Empire shall be 
waste and vacant, then antichrist shall occupy it, 
and endeavor to draw to him the kingdom of God 
and men." 

Further, on Matt. 24 : "Beloved, be not moved, 
when antichrist does the works of Christ, and in the 
sight of Christians, performs all the offices of 
Christ; for Satan himself can transform himself 
into an angel of light. What wonder then, that his 
servants assume the garb of servants of righteous- 
ness, and a semblance of Christianity. 

"The Jewish abomination is to be understood as 
having reference not only to the Jewish war, but, 
in a spiritual sense, also to antichrist, who in the 
last time, shall sit in the holy place, occupying the 
chief places of the church, and leading the souls 
of men away from God. This is very likely the 
one of whom Paul says that he shall oppose and 
exalt himself above all that is called God, or that 
is worshiped ; so that he as God sitteth in the tem- 
ple of God, shewing himself that he is God. He, 
standing in the holy place, has laid waste the 
church of God with multitudes of heresies." 

Then he says : "Since the Lord Jesus knew what 
great destruction would come in the last days, He 
commanded that the Christians who are in Chris- 
tendom, if they would always continue in the true 
faith, should resort only to the Holy Scriptures ; 
for, if they would look to other things, they would 
be offended and corrupted, and not understand 
what the true church is, and, in that way, fall into 
this horrible abomination, which sitteth in the holy 
place of the church." 

"Thus," writes Twisck, "Chrysostom, Augus- 
tine, Gregory, Ambrose, Jerome, and most of the 
ancient teachers, though the Papists esteem them 
greatly with their mouths, would be nothing better 
than Roman heretics, and if they were still alive, 
and would teach these doctrines, they would have 
to expect nothing but fire and sword." 

"Finally, in the year 408 Chrysostom was re- 
leased from his life of vexation and exile, in which 
he suffered much, and fell asleep in peace." 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., 5th book, pages 137 and 138, 
col. 1, from Chron. Sebastian Franck, fol. 56, 92. 
Tob. Fceri, fol. 73. Merula, fol. 338. Joan. Wales, 
fol. 166. Cornelius Hillenius, fol. 41. 

A. D. 390. — Jerome, born of Christian parents 
at Syridon, in Illyria, or Dalmatia, and instructed 
in the Christian doctrine from his youth, was bap- 
tized at Rome, yet not before he was in the thirtieth 
year of his age. Bapt. Hist., pages 841, 365, 366, 
373, 593. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, page 29, 
col. 1. Tract, van den loop der Werelt, page 47, 
from Erasmus and Wicelius, in the life of Jerome. 
In Bapt. Hist., page 27 A, we read the following : 
"Jerome writes in the 78th epistle, that he received 
his baptism and white garment at Rome, though 


we know that he was born of Christian parents, at 
Syridon, in Dalmatia. Hence, says the author, the 
Christians of that age must not have hastened so 
much with infant baptism, as is the case in the 
present time." This Jerome, though some pedo- 
baptists, yea, the Papists themselves, declare him 
a good and upright teacher, nevertheless wrote 
several things of such a nature, that at the present 
day they would be pronounced heresy by many of 
these same pedobaptists, especially by the Roman 
church; hence he is classed among the Roman 
heretics, that is, among those whose views are at 
this day pronounced heresy by the Roman church. 
Chron. Seb. Franck, letter H; P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
5th book, page 138, col. '1. 

Touching as to how it stood with baptism at the 
time of Jerome, I find, in substance, this annota- 
tion, Bapt. Hist., page 335 : "It is certain, that 
in the time of Jerome adults were still baptized in 
the occidental churches, as may be seen in his 
epistle against the errors of John of Jerusalem. 
He, in Epist. ad Pammach, and Ambrose, in 
Epistle 83, testify that those who desired baptism 
were called fellow desirers. 

H. Montanus writes thus: "Jerome, who also 
lived about that time, and, as some say, was an 
elder at Rome, or, much earlier, as others suppose, 
at Jerusalem, also testifies that in his time it was a 
prevailing custom, to baptize adults who had been 
brought up in the Christian faith, when they de- 
sired baptism, for which reason they were called 
Competents, as Jerome states in his letter to Pam- 
machius." H. Montan. Nietigh., pages 74,75. 

Having now shown how it stood with baptism at 
the time of Jerome, and that the same was admin- 
istered in the occidental churches to adults, we 
shall proceed to Jerome's individual views and what 
he has written on this subject, according to an- 
cient writers. 

In Bapt. Hist., page 373, Jerome writes to Pam- 
machius : "It is customary with us, publicly to in- 
struct for forty days, those who are to be baptized, 
and enjoin them to pray to the Holy Trinity." 

D. Vicecomes finally shows, page 375, chap. 41 
and 44, that Jerome wrote, that in his time they 
gave those who were baptized, milk and honey to 
eat, which, the annotator remarks, is no food for 
new-born infants. Moreover, he shows what is re- 
quired for true baptism ; namely, regeneration, con- 
sisting in the mortifying of the old, and resurrec- 
tion of the new man. This he expresses in the fol- 
lowing two passages: 

Jerome further writes, page 323, lib. 12, Com- 
ment, in Ezechiel.: "We need not only the first 
birth, but also the second, in order that we, who 
are born in the flesh, may be born again after the 
Spirit." 

Again, page 328, Apol. Contr. Ruff in. : "We 

say that the old man entirely dies in baptism, and 

that the new man is raised with Christ in baptism ; 

that the earthly perishes, and the heavenly is born." 

Then he admonishes the candidates for baptism, 


168 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


how they should conduct themselves before and at 
baptism; as well as how those who had already 
been baptized before many witnesses, and had made 
a good confession, ought to manifest themselves. 

Again, page 374, Epist. 83, ad Ocean, he writes : 
"The catechumens who are learning the Christian 
faith must observe not to have carnal intercourse 
with women before baptism." 

Again the words of Paul, I Tim. 6:12, he ex- 
pounds as follows: "Thou hast professed a good 
profession before many witnesses ; which was done 
through thy baptism, when thou didst renounce the 
world and its pomp, before the elders* or teachers, 
before the ministers, and before the heavenly 
hosts." 

In the tract called, Klare en Grondige Bewijsing 
van den Doop, printed 1581, it is stated, letter A, 
Jerome on Matthew : "The Lord commanded His 
apostles, that they should first instruct and teach 
all nations, and then baptize those instructed, in 
the sacrament of faith ; for it is not possible for the 
body to receive the sacrament of baptism, unless 
the soul have previously received the true faith." 

Who could ever believe that this man at any 
time defended, or at least, not opposed but ad- 
mitted infant baptism, seeing he opposes it in the 
places mentioned with such abundant clearness and 
explicitness. We note only the last-mentioned pas- 
sage, where he certainly says, without the least dis- 
simulation or exception, that it is not possible for 
the body to receive the sacrament of baptism, 
unless the soul have previously received the true 
faith. How can, may, or shall this be explained 
otherwise than that there cannot be or consist any 
other baptism than that which is received with 
true faith? for this is the very idea expressed by 
his words. 

Nevertheless, there are men who ascribe ro 
Jerome a certain dialogue against Pelagius, in 
which one Critobulus interrogates, and one Atticus 
answers, in this wise : Critobulus asks : "Why are 
children baptized?" Atticus replies: "That their 
sins may be forgiven them in baptism." "Why, 
what sins have they committed ?" asks Critobulus. 
Atticus answers : "Dost thou ask me this ? let the 
evangelic trumpet answer thee." 

But in order to prove that Jerome defended 
infant baptism, it would first have to be shown in- 
controvertibly, that this dialogue is Jerome's own 
production, which we have great reason to doubt, 
since the style as well as the matter of the same do 
not accord with his other writings, especially those 
in which he treats of baptism ; moreover, there have 
of old been forgers, who, in order to gain greater 
renown for their own productions, have ascribed 
them to celebrated men, or have interpolated their 
own opinions into their writings ; thus, it has been 
proved that the writings of Justin have been inter- 
polated. Bapt. Hist., page 170. H. Montan., 


* The translator says "priests," namely, such priests as John 
speaks of, Rev. 1 :6 : "And hath made us Icings and priests," etc. 


pages 7, 8, 9. Also, the writings of Origen. Bapt. 
Hist., pages 283 and 291. H. Mont., paqes 29-34, 
42, 43. 

Yea, in this manner, a whole book, also touching 
on infant baptism, has been falsely ascribed to 
Dionysius, the Areopagite, who, it is testified, lived 
in the time of the apostles; this the Magdeburg 
pedobaptists themselves show. Centur. 1, cap. 2. 
Also, Jac. Mehrning, Bapt. Hist., 177, 293, 341. 

Again, even if it could be shown, which is by no 
means certain, that this dialogue is Jerome's own 
production, it could nevertheless not be proved 
thereby, that Jerome himself held the views main- 
tained by one party in the dialogue, namely, that 
infants may be baptized. For, why should we not, 
with equal justice, ascribe to him the views of the 
other party, which demands reasons and proof why 
they may be baptized ? For one would certainly be 
his work as much as the other. 

Moreover, every intelligent person knows that 
books that are written in the form of dialogues, do 
not always express the author's individual views, 
but that frequently the views and debates of others 
are handled in them, either to censure them, expose 
their errors, or correct them. 

Finally, how could it be possible, that any one 
endowed with reason and sound judgment should 
do such contrary things at one and the same time ? 
We have shown how clearly and correctly he 
speaks of baptism of adults, yea, recommends 
it, and not only this, but how he, though he was 
born of Christian parents, remained unbaptized 
until he was in his thirtieth year— how then could 
he admit infant baptism, seeing he decisively op- 
posed it by doctrine and example? unless it be 
shown that Jerome wrote this article on infant 
baptism before his conversion, or that he subse- 
quently apostatized from his adopted views, to 
infant baptism; but as I can find no account of 
either we will hold to our previous declaration. 

jerome's views touching several other mat- 
ters OF FAITH, ACCORDING TO P. J. TWISCK's 
CHRONIJK, ETC., PAGE 129, COL. 1, 2 

"Jerome, born of Christian parents, and brought 
up and instructed in the Christian doctrine, was 
baptized at Rome, in the thirtieth year of his age." 
Erasmus, Grondig Bewijs, letter A., Mart. Ball 
jol. 102. 

"Again, Jerome plainly says, respecting the 
words of the Supper, that with this bread Christ 
intended to prefigure, represent, and show the truth 
of His body, and in many places He calls the cup a 
figure of the blood. 

"Again, he teaches, on Matt. 16, that the priests 
have no more, or just as little, power, to bind or to 
loose, than the priests of the Old Testament had, to 
pronounce the lepers clean or unclean. The words 
of the priest made them neither clean nor unclean, 
but simply indicated who, according to the law of 
Moses, was leprous or not leprous; so now the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


169 


bishop according to the law of Christ, pronounces, 
whose sins are retained, and whose are forgiven. 

"Again, he .also maintains that all days should be 
esteemed alike, and that man should constantly 
keep Easter and Sabbath. 

"He would likewise have that men should fast 
daily, 'for, what avails it,' says he, 'if you carry 
around an empty stomach, for two or three days, 
and then overload it ? Daily you must hunger, and 
daily you must eat ; you must fast so as not to in- 
jure the body, but to subdue and break the de- 
sires.' 

"Again: 'The Roman church is not to be es- 
teemed more highly than the church of the whole 
world, whether of France, or of Britannia, etc. 
But to worship one Christ, and to have one Ruler, 
or teacher, of the truth, this constitutes a church.' 
Chron. Fra., fol. 65, 86. 

"Again, of antichrist he says: 'And do we not 
know that the coming of antichrist is nigh at hand ? 
He shall sit in the temple of God, that is to say, in 
Jerusalem, or in the church, as I apprehended with 
more truth. Antichrist shall war against the hea- 
then and overcome them.' 

"Again : 'While man lives here, he may be justi- 
fied, but after death he has no more opportunity to 
do good works, though some controvert this, say- 
ing that man may increase or decrease even after 
they have died. While we are in this present life, 
we may help one another by prayer or deeds ; but 
when we come before the judgment seat of God, 
neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah, can pray for 
any one ; then every one must bear his own burden.' 
Valent. Vanius, fol. 112. 

"Again, Jerome says : 'He that is spiritual never 
persecutes him that is carnal. I have learned from 
the command of the apostles, to avoid a heretic, 
but not to burn him. Christ came not to smite, but 
to be smitten. He that is smitten, follows Christ ; 
but he that smites, follows antichrist.' 

" 'Again, the Lord commanded His apostles that 
they should first instruct and teach all nations, and 
then baptize those instructed, in the sacrament of 
faith ; for it is not possible for the body to receive 
the sacrament of baptism, unless the soul have pre- 
viously received the true faith.'" P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., 4th book, page 129. 

That also in Thessalia infant baptism was not 
much practiced at this time, A. D. 590, is shown 
by Socrates, Bapt. Hist., p. 363, book 5, chap. 21, 
with these words: "Besides, I also know of an- 
other custom in Thessalia, namely, that there they 
baptize only on Easter days ; hence nearly all, few 
excepted, die without baptism." See also, H. Mon- 
tan. Nietigheyd, page 71. 

But someone may ask: With what words is it 
expressed in the passage cited, that also in Thes- 
salia infant baptism was not much practiced in 
A. D. 390, which the writer so confidently asserts. 
I answer: He expresses two reasons whereby he 
proves it; in the first place, because, as he says 
that it was the custom there, to baptize only on 


Easter days, which indicates that said baptism was 
not, as Cyprian and his followers had commanded, 
administered to new-born infants, for these were 
not born just on Easter days, and, hence, could 
not be baptized on Easter days, from which it fol- 
lows that the custom of baptizing on Easter days, 
was not instituted for new-born infants, but for 
adult persons, who could prepare themselves for 
that time. In the second place, when he says that 
therefore nearly all, few excepted, died without 
baptism, it is certainly obvious from this, that all 
who died without baptism, had not been baptized 
in their infancy, and that, consequently, many per- 
sons were found at this time, who allowed their 
children to remain unbaptized. 

A. D. 391. — It is stated that Augustine (notwith- 
standing he afterwards became infected with the 
doctrine of infant baptism), though born of a 
Christian mother, and the descendant of Chris- 
tian ancestors, was not baptized before he was in 
his thirtieth year (Nauclerus, book 14, Generat., 
says, in his thirty-third year, by bishop Ambrose, 
at Milan, on Easter) . 

Jacob Mehrning and H. Montanus thus relate 
this, namely, that Monica, Augustine's mother, 
who, though born of Christian parents, was not 
baptized until she had reached adult years, likewise 
did not have her son Augustine baptized in his in- 
fancy; but that he was baptized when he was al- 
ready thirty-three, others say, thirty, years old. It 
is true, we read, say they, that, having become a 
youth, and fallen very sick, he desires to be bap- 
tized ; and also, that his mother was engaged then 
in preparing him for baptism. But when he sud- 
denly recovered from his sickness, his baptism was 
deferred. Augustine was at that time of such an 
age, that if he had been baptized, it would really 
not have been infant baptism, but a baptism which 
might have been counted with the baptism of adults, 
had it sprung from voluntary resolution, for it 
should have been connected, as Augustine himself 
declares with his faith and the confession of the 
name of Christ, which cannot be the case in the 
baptism of infants. 

Augustine there also relates why his mother at 
that time deferred his baptism, namely, because 
she, foreseeing the many and great billows of 
temptation which would roll over his head in his 
youthful years, feared that the guilt of his sins, af- 
ter the washing of baptism, would be the greater 
and more dangerous, which he himself and the 
whole family, with the exception of his father, then 
believed. He also tells us, that there were others, 
too, at that time, who put off or omitted the bap- 
tism of their children, from such considerations. 
Bapt. Hist., pages 363, 364. H. Montan. Nietigh., 
pages 71, 72. 

It appears, moreover, that on that occasion not 
only Augustine was baptized upon the confession 
of his faith, but also his son Adeodatus, and his 
friend Alipius, concerning which we find this no- 
tice. Bapt. Hist., page 444, Augustine, bishop of 


170 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Hippon, in Africa, when he was thirty-three years 
old, was baptized at Milan, by bishop Ambrose, to- 
gether with Alipius, and Adeodatus, his natural 
son, who was fifteen years old at the time. Of this, 
Augustine, in the 9th book, 6th chap., of his Con- 
fessions, says : "When the time had come, that I 
was to have my name entered on the register of 
the candidates for baptism, I left the country, and 
again journeyed to Milan. My dear friend Alipius 
desired to be baptized with me. Alipius, who was 
qualified for it, on account of his humility, and the 
dominion he had over his body, so that in case of 
emergency, he would have traveled barefoot in win- 
ter through the snow in Italy, accompanied me. 
We took with us the child (that is, the youth) 
Adeodatus, begotten by me in sin. Thou, O Lord, 
didst form him well, according to both soul and 
body. He was now about fifteen years old, and 
excelled many worthy and learned men." A little 
further on, he says : "We have made him our equal, 

Lord, in the reception of Thy grace, in order 
to be further trained up in Thy law and school ; 
we are baptised, and the care of our old life has 
been taken away from us. I could not be satisfied 
in those days, with the wonderful sweetness which 

1 experienced in the contemplation of the mysteri- 
ousness of Thy counsel, O Lord, with regard to 
the salvation of the human race. O how I wept, 
amidst songs of praise. The tears ran down my 
cheeks." Thus far, Augustine. 

_ Note.— A. D. 392.— The Apollinarians, who de- 
rived their origin from Apollinaris, denied that 
Christ adopted His humanity from the virgin Mary, 
saying that the word became flesh. P. J. Twisc'k, 
Chron., 4th book, page 130, from Tripart., lib. 9. 
Vincent. Hist., cap. 44. Zeg., fol. 189. 

A. D. 393. — Valentinian, or Valens, the son of 
Christian parents (Valentinian and Justina), was 
induced to journey to Milan, to be baptized by Am- 
brose, but was treacherously murdered on the way 
by one Arbogastes. H. Montan., page 70, from 
Socrat., lib. 4, cap. 9, 26. H. Montanus, however, 
erroneously, fixes the date of this occurrence 
about A. D. 380. 

My dear friends, is it not a sad thing, that this 
man, namely Augustine, who thus defended bap- 
tism upon faith, yea confirmed it with his own 
example, and the example of his son Adeodatus, 
and his friend Alipius, whom he had admonished 
thereto, should ultimately fall so far as to admit, 
yea to become a defender of infant baptism ! Surely, 
it is a lamentable matter. For, no one can deny, 
that in the beginning right after his baptism, he was 
exceedingly zealous in defense of the true baptism, 
which is received with a penitent heart ; but, that in 
the course of time he apostatized to infant bap- 
tism, can likewise not be denied by any lover of 
truth. Still, the example of Augustine, his son 
Adeodatus, and his friend Alipius, serves to con- 
firm our faith, inasmuch as we see that in Augus- 
tine's time the principal Christians allowed their 


children to remain unbaptized, until they were 
grown up and, of their own accord desired bap- 
tism; for, thus did Monica with her son Augus- 
tine, and Augustine with his son Adeodatus, and 
his friend Alipius, which is a clear proof of the 
matter in question, namely, that not infant bap- 
tism, but baptism upon faith, was practiced among 
the chief Christians. 


THE CONVERSION OF EUVODIUS, WHO FROM A 

WORLDLY WARRIOR BECAME A SOLDIER 

OF CHRIST, IN THE TIME OF 

AUGUSTINE 

_ In the 8th chapter of the 9th book of his Confes- 
sions, Augustine, after speaking of his own bap- 
tism, makes the following confession to the Lord, 
in regard to the baptism of Euvodius : "Thou, O 
Lord, who causest those that are of the same mind, 
to dwell in one house, hast joined to us a com- 
panion, a young nobleman, called Euvodius, a na- 
tive of our city. He, who, when following war, 
commanded the legions of the Empire, was, before 
us, converted unto Thee, and baptized, and, having 
abandoned secular war, has betaken himself to 
Thy war. We were together ; together we had one 
will to serve Thee, and considered in what place 
we might best do this." These are his own words, 
which we read at the place indicated above, and 
from them we may see how the church increased 
at that time — not through the addition of infants, 
but through the conversion and baptism of adult 
and rational persons. With this we leave Augus- 
tine, and the baptism of his companion Euvodius 

About A. D. 397.— About A. D. 397, it is stated 
that Epiphanius,* who subsequently became bishop 
of Cyprus, was baptized, together with his sister, 
as it appears, in the presence of his friend and 
spiritual father Lucian. Of this, D. Vicecomes 
gives the following account, from Simon Meta- 
phrastes, Bapt. Hist., page 578. Vicecom., lib. 1, 
cap. 30: "When the Gospel had been read, the 
bishop, after the baptism, went and commanded 
Epiphanius and his sister to go in, and with them 
also Lucian, who became Epiphanius' spiritual 
father in holy baptism. 

In Bapt. Hist., page 580, lib. 5, cap. 34, Meta- 
phrastes writes of Epiphanius, that immediately 
upon receiving the doctrine and baptism, the latter, 
together with an hundred and eight other persons, 
received the holy Supper, from Bishop Stephen. 

Note.— In the time of Arcadius and Honorius, 
about A. D. 397, it was resolved, at Toledo, among 
other things : "That if any one, after baptism, en- 
gages in war, though he have committed nothing 
special in the war, he shall never be ordained a dea- 
con." Seb. Franck, Chron. Rom. Concil., fol. 73, 
col. 1. 

As to the person who baptized Epiphanius and 

* P. J. Twisck places this Epiphanius in the year 377, but this 
™r y the e fi^eT err ° ri the figUre 7 havinB been substituted 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


171 


his sister, as well as administered the Supper to 
them, we pass by ; it suffices us, that this mode of 
baptism still obtained at that time and in the church 
where this took place ; and that persons were found 
who administered it, as well as such who were will- 
ing to have it administered unto them. Notwith- 
standing infant baptism had already made great 
inroads at that time into many places, this baptism 
was nevertheless administered to persons born of 
Christian parents, as has been sufficiently shown 
previously. 

A. D. 400. — About this time there nourished, as 
a writer, the afore-mentioned Epiphanius, who, 
by his writings, has shed much light on the subject 
of baptism, it being sufficiently apparent from all 
the circumstances relating to him, that he held 
sound views with regard to the same. Of this, 
Jacob Mehrning and H. Montanus have given the 
following account: "Epiphanius, Bishop of Sala- 
mina, in Cyprus, A. D. 400, or thereabouts, in 
speaking of baptism, which he frequently does in 
his writings, always speak of it in such a manner 
that it does not include infants; and. although oc- 
casion often presents itself to him, to speak of 
infant baptism, yet he never does so ; from which 
we may readily conclude that he did not esteem it 
much, or that in his time, it was not yet customary 
in that island." In Auchoratus he says : "You 
must not admit everyone who is instructed in the 
faith and desires to come to holy baptism, to this 
ordinance, simply because he has told your chil- 
dren, that he believes in the Lord ; but he must 
also, with express words, even as the church, our 
common mother, ours as well as yours, has re- 
ceived it, learn and say : 'I believe in one God, the 
Father, the Almighty.' etc." 

Again, in another place (Contra Haereses, lib. 1, 
Tom. 1, Haeresi 8) : "This great circumcision, 
baptism, circumcises us from sin, and seals us in 
the name of God." Bapt. Hist., page 366. Nietigh., 
page 74. 

When, therefore, Epiphanius, in the first pas- 
sage, says : "You must not admit everyone who is 
instructed iif the faith, and desires to come to bap- 
tism, to this ordinance," and then adds that he 
must also confess, saying: "I believe," he plainly 
indicates that such baptism can certainly not be 
administered to infants, because they are not only 
unable to confess the faith, but have not even the 
capability or qualification to believe, upon which 
faith and confession alone he admits baptism. 

When, in the second passage, he says: "This 
great circumcision, baptism, circumcises us from 
sin," he does not mean to say thereby, as our op- 
ponents at this day assert, that baptism has come 
in the place of circumcision, so that, even as in the 
time of the Old Testament, the male infants were 
circumcised, so now, in the time of the New Testa- 
ment, the infants must be baptized. O no ! for this 
appears by no means. But he says that baptism is 
a great circumcision, which circumcises us from sin, 


which certainly does not apply to infants, that have 
never sinned, and, consequently, cannot be circum- 
cised from their sins by baptism. With this we 
leave the views of Epiphanius on the subject of 
baptism, and proceed to what is related of his re- 
proving image worship, according to the account 
of P. J. Twisck. "Epiphanius," he says, "an an- 
cient teacher, flourished in this time, who greatly 
opposed the worshiping of images, of Mary, or of 
any other creature. He said : 'Beloved children, be 
mindful not to bring any images in the church, 
or to erect them over the graves of the saints ; but 
bear God constantly in your hearts.' " 

Once, when he went into a Christian church, and 
observed a painted curtain at the door, bearing the 
picture of Christ or of some saint, he tore it down, 
because it was contrary to Scripture, and advised 
the sexton to bury the corpse of some poor person 
in it ; and when he had sent another curtain in its 
place, he commanded that they should no more 
hang up curtains like the former, in the church, 
"Which," said he, "is contrary to our religion and 
faith." P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, page 119, 
col. 2, and page 120, col. 1, from Socrat., lib. 6. 
Tripart., lib. 10. Leonh., lib. 2. Chron. Seb. 
Franck, "135. Tob. Fabr., fol. 66, 67. Fransch. 
Ala., fol. 22. Dani. Saut., lib. 1. 

Note. — In regard to his teaching against image 
worship, see Samuel Veltius, in Geslacht-register, 
page 120. Epiphanius taught at this time that the 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are to be worshiped, 
but that no one should worship Mary, or any other 
woman, or human being, since this honor belongs 
to God alone, and must not be accorded even to 
angels. Again, that the women should not say: 
We honor the queen of heaven. Tom. 2. Haeres., 
lib. 3. Haeres. 79, in Geslacht-register, page 29. 

Concluding the fourth century, as also we will 
do, P. J. Twisck says : "Baptism was administered 
twice a year, at Easter and at Pentecost and this, 
to a great extent is still done to adult believers and 
catechumens." Chron., page 134. 

Note. — Besides this, that the true order of the 
baptism of Jesus Christ was practiced in this cen- 
tury by the orthodox believers, many who belonged 
to the Roman church deferred (though erring in 
other matters) the baptism of their children till 
they came to adult years, as is evident, for instance, 
in the case of Constantine the Great, whom Helena, 
his Christian mother, kept from baptism, but after- 
wards admonished to it; of Theodosius, who, be- 
ing born of Christian parents, was baptized at Mi- 
lan, upon his faith ; of Valens who was mentioned 
above. With regard to the baptism of Constantine, 
see Rom. Adelaer, edition 1642, page 211, from 
Eusebius and Socrat. Of the baptism of Theodo- 
sius, see tract van den loop der Wereldt, printed 
1611, in the article on baptism; also De gantsch 
Klare en Grondige Bemjsinge, nopende het doop- 
sel. 


172 


[ARTYRS MIRROR 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE FOURTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE FOURTH 
CENTURY 

[This lamentable time commenced with the 
Tenth General Persecution, instituted by Diocle- 
tian, and prosecuted by Maximian, his associate; 
which caused a very severe, and distressing state of 
affairs, with respect to the violence as well as the 
long duration of the persecution. 

In order to proceed systematically, we have pre- 
sented separately each year with its respective mar- 
tyrs. In the first year of this persecution Anthimus 
and many others at Nicomedia ; Phileas, Cassianus ; 
Eulalia and Eucratis, aged virgins, laid down their 
lives for the evangelical truth. 

In the second year, Euplius, Pancratius, a youth 
of fourteen years ; Justus ; Felix of Thibaris ; the 
two brothers, Primus and Felicianus, suffered 
martyrdom. 

In the third year : Apphianus, Ulpianus, Aedes- 
ius, Agathopius and Theodulus ; Julitta of Iconia ; 
forty youths, laid down their lives. 

In the fourth year Sylvanus, Januarius, Sosius, 
Proculus, Pelagia, Theonas, Cyrenia, and Juliana, 
were martyred. 

In the fifth year Theodosia, a virgin of Tyre, 
Pamphilius, a friend of Eusebius, at Caesarea, were 
put to death. 

In the sixth year Ennathas, a virgin from the city 
of Scythopolis ; Catharina, of Alexandria, suffered 
death. 

In the seventh year Ares, Promus, and Elias, at 
Askalon ; Peter Abselamus ; the three sisters, Bib- 
lis, Aquilina, and Fortunata, poured out their 
blood. 

In the eighth year two sisters from Antioch; 
Irene, with her two sisters, Peter Nilus and P. 
Mythius; forty who were beheaded; Martionilla, 
Euphratesia, seven brothers and others were com- 
pelled to die. 

In the ninth year Lucian, elder at Antioch, 
Peter, Faustus, Didius, and Ammonius, Anysia, a 
girl of Thessalonica, and Demetrius, suffered 
death. 

In the tenth year Eugenius Auxentius, Maoda- 
tius, and many others were put to death. 

Then follow two other persecutions, one under 
Lucinius, the other under Julian, which are called 
the eleventh and the twelfth persecutions. 

Under Lucinius suffered Basileus, Amnion ; the 
two brothers, Donatian and Rogatian, of whom 
the one was baptized, and the other not. 

Under Julian were slain John and Paul, who 
opposed war; and some were killed under the 
Emperor Valens. 

After these details we conclude the account of 
this century.] 


it A. D. 301.— "At this time," writes P. J. Twisck, 
"the persecution was very severe; for when the 
Emperor, namely, Diocletian would divert himself 
in the theater, the whole multitude of the people 
called to him ten times, that the Christians should 
not be tolerated, and twelve times, that they should 
be exterminated." Chron., 4th book, p. 85, col 1 
from Merul, jol. 237. Leonh. lib. 1. 

In the preceding century, in the year 284, we 
mentioned, in connection with the beginning of the 
reign of Diocletian, the first bloody edict, issued by 
this Emperor against the pious and steadfast Chris- 
tians, upon which followed the death of some of 
them,_ as may be seen in the cases of Claudius, 
Asterius, Neon, Zenobius, and the pious Christian 
women, Nuina, Theonilla, Zenobia, sister of the 
afore-mentioned Zenobius, etc., most of whom died 
at Tarsus, in Cilicia, the birthplace of the apostle 
Paul, for the testimony of Jesus, their Saviour. 
This continued from the aforesaid year until the 
close of that century, as we have related in the 
proper place. 

But in the same place we have also made mention 
of a second edict by the same Emperor, which, 
about nineteen years afterwards, was followed by 
the most violent persecution of the Christians. Of 
this we promised to speak more fully, and now 
purpose to do so, having come to the very time in 
which commenced this, the severest and most 
grievous persecution, which is called the tenth. 


OF THE TENTH GENERAL PERSECUTION OF THE 
CHRISTIANS, UNDER DIOCLETIAN, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 302 

Various eminent writers have made mention of 
this awful and lamentable deed of the Emperor 
Diocletian, and they cannot sufficiently wonder at 
two things : In the first place, that any one who is 
at all a human being could commit such great cruel- 
ties on his fellow men, as Diocletian inflicted upon 
the Christians. In the second place, that the Chris- 
tians, frail men as they were, could endure all 
this, and not only this, but that many of them, 
from love to Jesus Christ, and because of the cer- 
tain hope of their reward, manifested great joy in 
their sufferings. We shall first speak of the for- 
mer, and then of the latter as follows. 


THE CAUSE AND SEVERITY OF THIS PERSECUTION, 

ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT OF P. J. TWISCK 

FROM VARIOUS ANCIENT AND CELEBRATED 

AUTHORS 

These two Emperors (namely, Diocletian and 
Maximian) jointly governed the empire, in har- 
mony and constancy, and remained undivided. 
However, when they had reigned about ten years, 
they took counsel together, and resolved to ex- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


173 


terminate the Christians, because the discord of re- 
ligion caused great dissensions, both in the house- 
holds and in the Roman Empire. 

"The apostate Christians played the part of insti- 
gators and firebrands in the rising of this perse- 
cution, holding out to the Emperors the hope, that 
the Christians could be exterminated. The perse- 
cution which ensued thereupon, is considered the 
most grievous." 

Then he writes : "But the enemies of the truth 
took the occasion to incite the Emperor Diocletian 
against the Christians, from a certain conflagration 
in the city of Nicomedia — at that time the place 
where the Emperors were wont to reside — by which 
the palace of the Emperor was totally destroyed. 
With this calamity they charged the Christians. 
The Emperor, enraged beyond measure on this 
account, easily believed the slanderers, thinking he 
had sufficient reason for it. He accordingly, in the 
nineteenth year of his reign, which coincides with 
A. D. 302, issued a public decree (as was done in 
the days of Antiochus), that everyone, in every 
place, should sacrifice to the gods of the Emperors ; 
and that he who should refuse to do so, should be 
punished with death; also, that the churches or 
meeting places, and the books of the Christians 
should be utterly destroyed. Yea, there was scarce- 
ly a large city in the empire, in which not daily a 
hundred Christians, or thereabouts, were slain. It 
is also recorded that in one month seventeen thou- 
sand Christians were put to death in different parts 
of the empire, so that the blood which was shed 
colored red many rivers. Some were hanged, oth- 
ers beheaded, some burned, and some sunk by 
whole shiploads in the depths of the sea." 

As touching the fearful tortures inflicted, he 
then writes thus : "These tyrants had some of them 
dragged through the streets, tied to the tails of 
horses, and after they were mangled and bruised, 
they had them put back into prison, and placed 
upon beds of potsherds, so that rest might be more 
excruciating for them than actual torment. Some- 
times they bent down with great force the branches 
of trees, and tied one leg to one branch, and the 
other to another, and then let the branches spring 
back into their natural position, so that their limbs 
were shockingly rent in pieces. They cut off the 
ears, noses, lips, hands, and the toes of many, leav- 
ing them only the eyes, to inflict still more pain 
upon them. They sharpened wooden pegs, which 
they inserted between the flesh and the nails ; and 
had lead or tin melted, and poured as hot as possi- 
ble over their bare backs." Chron., Zd book, p. 78, 
col. 1, 2, and page 79, col. 1, from Euseb., lib. 8, 
cap. 2, 3, 16, 17, 18. Fasc. Temp., fol. 96. Chron. 
Mich., fol. 196. Chron. C ononis, fol. 248, 249. 
Chron. Seb. Fr., fol. 19. Paul. Mend., fol. 232, 
238, 239. Pieter Messice, fol. 148. Chron. Leonh., 
lib. 1. Hist. Andrce, fol. 175, 176. Jan Crcsp., 
fol. 66, 67, 68, 70. A. Schri., lib. 13, fol. 349. 
350. Hist. D. Matth. Jnd., lib. 4, cap. 3. 


FURTHER STATEMENT OF THE CAUSE AND SEVERITY 
OF THIS PERSECUTION, ACCORDING TO THE AC- 
COUNT IN THE INTRODUCTION TO THE 
MARTYR'S MIRROR 

In A. D. 302, commenced the tenth persecution 
of the Christions, namely, in the 19th year of the 
reign of Emperor Diocletian ; for although it had 
been smouldering previously already, it was in this 
year, that through the edicts, it was caused to break 
forth in flames. It was so great as to exceed, not 
only in cruelty, but also in duration, all the former 
ones, for under the tyrannous Emperors, Diocle- 
tian, Maximian, Maxentius, and Maximin, it lasted 
twelve years, and this principally in the east. 

"Eusebius, who lived to see this persecution, 
gives a full description of it. How awful it was, 
we may read in his church history, book 8. He 
writes that the cause of it was the great liberty en- 
joyed by the Christians, who had attained to great 
distinction. Thus it occurred, says the author of 
the Introduction, that Diocletian first issued de- 
crees commanding that all the churches or meeting 
places of the Christians should be demolished, and 
the Holy Scriptures burned. Then another decree 
followed, to the effect, that the leaders, that is, the 
teachers and ministers of the churches, should be 
compelled to sacrifice to the gods, or be put to 
death. Then the tormenting and putting to death 
was extended also over the common people of the 
Christians.* Some were torn with sharp irons, 
others lacerated with hooks, some burned with 
red-hot plates; some were compelled to sacrifice, 
and even though they did not sacrifice, it was nev- 
ertheless proclaimed that they had sacrificed." 
Introduction, fol. 42, col. 1, 2, from Baronius, 
in Chron., A. D. 302, num. 1. 


FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE CAUSE AND SEVERI- 
TIES OF THE ABOVE-MENTIONED PERSECU- 
TION, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT OF 
J. GYSIUS 

_ He writes : "In A. D. 302, in the 19th year of 
his reign, the Emperor Diocletian instituted a great 
and unmerciful persecution against the Christians, 
which is called the Tenth Persecution. Of this per- 
secution, Salpitius Severus, speaks thus: 'About 
fifty years after Valerian, under the reign of Dio- 
cletian and Maximian, there arose the most bitter 
persecution, which for ten consecutive years rav- 
aged God's people. At this time the whole world 
was stained with the holy blood of the martyrs; 
for men hastened emulously to these glorious and 
famous contests, that is, to martyrdom, for the 
name of the Lord ; and to obtain, through a worthy 
and honorable death, the honor which belongs io 
a martyr was then sought with more eagerness, 
than at the present time, through a false ambition, 

* The author writes: "In Egypt they were beheaded in such 
great numbers, that the executioners grew tired, and their swords 
became dull from cutting. The Christians went unto death gladly, 
without being bound, fearing lest they should not be there in time 
to die as martyrs. "—Fol. 41. 


174 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


men seek after a bishopric. Never was the world 
so greatly depopulated as through this persecu- 
tion, and never were greater triumphs gained by us, 
than when by these ten years of slaughter we could 
not be conquered.' " Salpit. Sever. Hist. Sacr. 

"In this persecution, Diocletian also employed 
his associate, Maximian Herculeus, a man hard, 
cruel, faithless, and licentious by nature, who in 
all things obeyed Diocletian's behests. In this per- 
secution Diocletian raged against those in the 
East, and Maximian against those in the West." 

The same author then mentions different causes 
for this persecution, one of which he describes in 
the following manner : "The Emperor Diocletian, 
determined to restore the Roman Empire to its 
ancient nourishing condition, and being desirous 
therefore, to re-establish all the customs which 
seemed to be trampled upon, endeavored also to 
prevent and abolish the difference which he found 
to exist in the matter of worship, seeking first of 
all to exterminate the Christian religion as one 
which cursed and rejected all idolatry. There were 
very many philosophers and sophists who insti- 
gated the Emperor to this, and confirmed him in 
his purpose. By violent and satiric writings they 
incited the Emperor and all the princes and judges, 
ridiculed the Christian religion and charged it with 
being an innovation, falsehood, and wicked super- 
stition. On the other hand, they extolled the 
heathen religion as the most ancient, together with 
the worship of the gods, who as they said, ruled the 
world by their power and majesty. 

"Among these instigators, besides Apollinius, 
were Porphyry, a philosopher, who from a Jew 
had become a Christian, and from a Christian an 
apostate ; and Hierocles, a man of great popularity. 
Against Porphyry wrote, Methodius, bishop of 
Tyre, Eusebius, and Apollinaris; and against Hi- 
erocles wrote this same Eusebius. Lactantius wrote 
against both, and all others of the same stamp. 

Touching the torments, he writes among other 
things the following: "It would take too long to 
recount in writing, all the different manners in 
which, through the instigation of the devil, the 
Christians were put to death at this particular 
time. Beating, scourging, and lacerating the skin 
with all manner of sharp instruments, were simply 
preparatories for severer torments that brought 
on death. Over some, molten lead was poured; 
some were roasted before glowing coals, with long- 
continued torments (as we have shown in another 
place) ; others had the fingers of both hands pierced 
with sharp awls and needles, which were inserted 
between the flesh and the nails ; of others we read 
that after having been beaten on the bare body 
for a long time with thin rods and leaden plates, 
they were cast as food before bears, lions, leopards, 
and other beasts." A little further on he says: 
"Some were suffocated with smoke of a slow 
fire of moistened combustibles; others, whose 
noses, ears, and hands had been cut off, were suf- 


fered to roam in misery about the country, as a ter- 
ror to other, unknown Christians." 

As touching the places where these crudities 
were inflicted upon the defenseless and innocent 
Christians, the afore-mentioned author writes: 
"This persecution extended over the whole world 
—Asia, Africa, Europe, and all the islands, es- 
pecially Cecilia, Lesbos, and Sonnus." 

Then, after having related the destruction of 
several cities, he says : "Many other cities had to 
taste in their whole body the bitter cup of this 
persecution; especially, Thebes and Antino, in 
Egypt; Nicopolis, in Thracia; Aquileia, in Italy, 
where all the Christian believers were slain ; Flor- 
ence, Bergamo, Verona, Naples, Beneventum, and 
Venusia ; in Gallia, Marseilles and Treves, where 
Rictionarus proceeded with such violence and 
cruelty, in this matter, that the blood which was 
shed, colored many rivers; in Germany, the city 
of Augusta, and even Spain, Britannia, Rhetia, 
and other provinces were not exempt." Joh. Gys. 
Hist., fol. 22, col. 2-4, and fol. 23, col. 1, 2, from 
Euseb., lib. 7. Oros., lib. 7, cap. 26, 27. Nic., lib. 7. 
Idem, lib. 7. Multis. cap. Vine, in Speculo, lib. 12. 
Sabell. Ennead, lib. 7 and 8. 


NOTICE TO THE READER 

Before we proceed to give a special account cf 
the martyrs who were put to death in this perse- 
cution, we deem it necessary to call the attention of 
the reader to the following points: 1. That after 
A. D. 300, that is, in the beginning of this century, 
many errors began to arise among some of those 
who were called Christians, especially among those 
who belonged under the Roman dominion. Yea, 
they went so far as to resort to carnal weapons 
(which, however, had already previously been done 
by some) ; through which the defenseless and meek 
lambs of Christ suffered not a little distress, fear, 
and sorrow. 

2. That, besides the martyrs of the true faith, 
some of the aforesaid class suffered themselves to 
be killed for their opinions ; whereby the death and 
the glorious martyrdom of the true Christian be- 
lievers were not a little obscured. 

3. That, in order to distinguish these from the 
former, we have exerted our utmost diligence, so 
that as far as we know, there are not found among 
the martyrs of whom we have given, or may yet 
give, an account, any who can be shown to have 
been guilty of gross errors, much less of the shed- 
ding of blood. At least we have not been able to 
detect it in any of them, and hence in accordance 
with the spirit of love, we must judge and believe 
the best of them. 

As this persecution under Diocletian and Max- 
imian was not only very severe, but also of long 
duration, we have deemed it well to present its 
years separately in consecutive order, and to show 
what the pious martyrs suffered in each year, stead- 
fastly confessing with their blood the truth of God 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


175 


FIRST YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION COMMENCED 
A. D. 302 

The sword of Diocletian had now been drawn 
from its sheath, and there remained nothing but 
the shedding of blood, and murdering and burning 
in manifold ways, all directed against the innocent 
and defenseless lambs of Christ ; of which we shall 
directly give some examples. 


regard for his wife and children, remaining stead- 
fast, nevertheless, was beheaded." Introduction, 
jol. 43, col. 1, compared with Mellinus, 1st book, 
fol. 101, from Euseb. 


ANTHIMUS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST, 

AT NICOMEDIA, AS ALSO MANY MEMBERS OF 

HIS CHURCH, BEHEADED IN THAT CITY, 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 

CHRIST, A. D. 302 

Among the first martyrs of the Tenth Persecu- 
tion is counted Anthimus, who was bishop of the 
church of Christ at Nicomedia. It is stated that he 
was beheaded in that city for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ ; as also a great number of that church, all 
of whom obtained with him, in great steadfastness, 
1st book, fol. 100, col. 1. Acta per Metaphr., 27 
the crown of martyrdom. See Abr. Mell. Hist., 
April. Niceph. Hist., lib. 7, cap. 6. Also, Acta super 
Euphrasiam. P. J. Twisck, for the year 204, in 
Chr., lib. 4. 


FULLER ACCOUNT OF THE MARTYRDOM AND DEATH 
OF ANTHIMUS, AS RECORDED BY J. GYSIUS 

He writes: "At this time there was also be- 
headed, after a glorious confession, Anthimus, 
bishop of Nicomedia, together with a great num- 
ber of the faithful. Nicephorus writes that he was 
first most cruelly beaten ; that they then bored his 
heels through with burning pins, threw him on 
potsherds, put red-hot slippers on his feet, tore the 
skin and flesh from his body, burned him with 
torches, stoned him, and finally beheaded him." 
The same way trod Tyrannion, bishop of the 
church of Tyre, Zenobius of Sidon, Sylvanus of 
Gaza, and Pamphilius, concerning whom Eusebius 
wrote a special book." Joh. Gys., fol. 23, col. 3, 
from Euseb., lib. 8, cap. 6. Cyprian., lib. 7, cap. 6. 


PHILEAS, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST, 

AT THUMIS, IN EGYPT, BEHEADED AT THAT 

PLACE, FOR THE EVANGELICAL TRUTH, 

A. D. 302 

It is related that after the death of the afore- 
mentioned martyrs, Phileas, Bishop of the Church 
of Thumis, in Egypt, was sentenced to death, and 
beheaded, by virtue of the edict of the Emperor, 
on account of his faith in Jesus Christ, and because 
he would not give honor to the gods, nor sacrifice 
to them. Jerome has written of him that after he 
became bishop, he wrote a very excellent book in 
praise of the martyrs. In Catalogo. 

The author of the Introduction, has left on record 
these words concerning him: "Phileas, Bishop at 
Thumis, who was entreated by the Judge to have 


AN EXTRACT FROM THE LETTERS WHICH TH£ 
AFORE-MENTIONED MARTYR PHILEAS WROTE 
CONCERNING THE PERSECUTION AT ALEXAN- 
DRIA, TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST AT 
THUMUS, AND LEFT FOR THE ADMONI- 
TION AND CONSOLATION OF ALL BE- 
LIEVERS; CONTAINING THE AW- 
FULNESS OF THE TORMENTS IN- 
FLICTED ON THE BELIEVERS, AND 
HOW STEADFASTLY THEY BORE 
UP UNDER THEM 

Note. — The first part of the letter of bishop Phileas is trans- 
lated thus by Eusebius in his "Church History, 8th book, 10th 
chapter." 

Phileas writes : "The holy martyrs who fought 
with us, have left us good examples. Being taught 
out of the divine Scriptures, they fixed the eyes of 
their hearts on God, and voluntarily, without the 
least fear, apprehended death for the sake of the 
truth. For they constantly bore in mind that our 
Lord Jesus Christ became man for our sakes ; and 
that He has taught us, to fight against sin even unto 
death. For, being equal with God, He thought it 
not robbery, but made Himself of no reputation, 
and took upon Him the form of a servant. And 
being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Him- 
self unto death, even the death of the cross. The 
holy martyrs followed His example, enduring all 
pain and torment, that they might not stain the 
conscience of their faith; for the perfect love 
which was in them cast out all fear. It is impos- 
sible for me to describe the power, patience, and 
steadfastness of the martyrs, yea, it is scarcely 
credible except for those who have seen it with 
their own eyes ; for they were exposed, and every 
one was at liberty to inflict upon them whatever 
contumely or torment he pleased, and if any in- 
vented a new mode of torture, he was permitted to 
torment them with it himself." 

Thus far Eusebius' translation; what now follows, is thus related 
by Mellinus, from the above letter of Phileas. 

"As every heathen had been given full power 
over the Christians, to inflict upon them all manner 
of vexation, mockery, and ignominy, yea, to put 
them to death in every way ; they beat some with 
sticks, others with rods, scourges, whips, thongs, 
ropes, or whatever they could the most readily lay 
hold of ; which spectacle was changed now and then 
by new kinds of torture and beating which the 
Christians had to undergo. Some of them had 
their hands tied behind their backs, and were sus- 
pended from a gibbet, and then all their members 
were stretched apart by executioner's instruments. 
They were then, through the command of the mag- 
istrate, scourged with iron rods on the whole body, 
not only on their sides, as was customary to do 
with murderers, but even on the belly, the shins, 


176 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


buttocks, and some on all the most sensitive parts 
of the body. Others were suspended by one hand 
to the ceiling of a gallery, and thus stretched limb 
from limb, which exceeds every other torture. 
Others were tied back to back to pillars or columns, 
but so that their feet did not touch the ground ; and 
the more the executioners or their assistants tight- 
ened the ropes, the more were the martyrs tor- 
mented by the weight of their own bodies. And 
this cruel torment lasted not only while the Presi- 
dent was engaged in examining them, but he often 
let them hang a whole day in this torment. While 
the President or criminal Judge would go from one 
to the other to examine them on the rack, he had 
his servants closely observe the first ones, to see 
whether any of them, overcome by the intensity of 
the torments, were ready to yield. He also com- 
manded his executioners that they should tighten 
the ropes on them the longer the more. But if they 
should see that the martyrs were almost ready to 
die, then they should take them down, and drag 
them over the ground, over stones, shells, pot- 
sherds, and caltrops. For they had no other con- 
sideration for the Christians, than how they might 
subject them, if it were possible, to a thousand 
deaths — just as though they were not human be- 
ings. 

"Over and above all the tortures mentioned, the 
enemies of Christ invented still another mode of 
torment for his anointed, or holy martyrs ; for after 
they had tormented them, they placed some with 
their feet in the block, and violently stretched apart 
their legs, as far as they possibly could, even to the 
fourth hole, and there fastened them, so that the 
bodies of the martyrs must of necessity lie back- 
wards over the block, yea, that they, on account of 
their many wounds, could neither move nor stir. 
Others, who had been taken down from the racks 
or torture-stakes, were thrown half dead upon the 
bare ground, which was far more horrible to behold 
than when they were still being tormented. Of these 
some died under the executioner's hands, while 
they were being tormented; others, in whom life 
was not yet extinct, were thrown half dead back 
into prison, and in a few days perished of pain; 
others, again, who triumphed over their long im- 
prisonment, were healed and restored. These be- 
came much stronger in the faith than they had been 
before, and when it was left to the free choice cf 
each of them, either to touch the shameful heathen 
sacrifices, and thereby be delivered from all trouble, 
yea, from death itself, and be invested with the 
former freedom ; or to refuse to sacrifice, and re- 
ceive sentence of death, they without the least de- 
liberation chose the latter, and boldly went 
unto death, knowing full well, that it is written in 
the Word of God : 'He that sacrifketh unto strange 
gods shall be cut off from the people.' Again : 
'Thou shalt have no other gods before me.' " 

Thus far the words of the martyr Phileas, which 
he wrote in a letter to the brethren of the church of 
Thumis, of which he was pastor, while he was still 


in prison, and before he had received his sentence 
of death ; by which letter he wished to inform his 
church of his condition in prison, as well as to ad- 
monish them in the true godliness in Christ, and 
that they should steadfastly continue therein after 
his death, which was soon to follow. Compare 
Eusebius, concerning the death of Phileas, with 
A. Mdlinus, 1st book, fol. 101, col. 2, 3. 

CASSIAN, A CHRISTIAN SCHOOLTEACHER, BY THE 

ORDER OF THE MAGISTRATE PUT TO DEATH 

BY HIS HEATHEN SCHOLARS, FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT 

FORUM CORNELII, A. D. 302 

It is stated that in this persecution Cassian, 
Bishop of the church at Brescia, in Italy, being 
compelled to flee on account of the violent perse- 
cution, settled in the city of Forum Cornelii (at 
present called Imola), where he established a 
school for children. However, the persecution, 
which also there broke forth, did not spare him; 
for shortly afterwards he was denounced as a 
Christian, and apprehended. When the Judges 
asked him what profession or trade he had, he 
replied that he was a schoolteacher, and taught 
children to read and write. He was also examined 
concerning his faith, and as he would not abandon 
it, or sacrifice to the gods, the Judges sentenced 
him to a very unusual death, for this was his sen- 
tence : "Let the scourger, that is, the schoolteacher, 
be pricked, cut, and stabbed to death by his own 
scholars, with styles, awls, pens, penknives, and 
other sharp instruments such as children make 
use of in school." 

Thereupon Cassian was stripped naked; his 
hands were tied behind his back, and he was thus 
delivered unto his scholars, to be maltreated by 
them in the aforesaid manner. Some of these then 
stoned him, some beat him with school-boards and 
wax-tablets, others stabbed him with styles, pens, 
penknives, and other sharp school utensils, till, after 
unspeakable torments, death ensued, and he hav- 
ing commended his soul unto God was thus re- 
leased from this vale of sorrows. Compare A. 
Mell, 1st book, fol. 104, col. 3, 4, with J. Gys., fol. 
24, col. 1, ex Prudent., in Hymno, Steph. Hvm 
9. Petr.de Nat., lib. 7. ' 


EULALIA, A CHRISTIAN MAIDEN, BURNED WITH 
LAMPS AND TORCHES, AND SUFFOCATED THERE- 
BY, FOR THE FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST, AT 
EMERITA IN LUSITANIA, A. D. 302 

At this time there was a Christian maiden, 
called Eulalia, not more than twelve or thirteen 
years old, who was filled with such a desire and 
ardor of the spirit, to die for the name of Christ, 
that her parents had to take her out of the city of 
Merida, to some distant country seat, and closely 
confine her there. But this place could not extin- 
guish the fire of her spirit, or long confine her 
body ; for, having escaped on a certain night, she 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Eulalia suffocated from smoke inhalation of lamp and torch fumes and then burnedin Villa Nova, Portugal, AD 302 


went very early the following day before the 
tribunal, and with a loud voice said to the Judge 
and the whole magistracy : "Are you not ashamed 
to cast your own souls and those of others at once 
into eternal perdition by denying the only true 
God, the Father of us all, and the Creator of all 
things? O ye wretched men! do you seek the 
Christians, that you may put them to death? Be- 
hold, here am I, an adversary of your satanical 
sacrifices. I confess with heart and mouth God 
alone ; but Isis, Apollo, and Venus are vain idols." 

The Judge before whose tribunal Eulalia spoke 
thus boldly, was filled with rage, and called the 
executioner, commanding him to take her away 
speedily, strip her, and inflict various punishments 
on her ; so that she, said he, may feel the gods of 
our fathers, through the punishment, and may 
learn that it will be hard for her, to despise the 
command of our Prince (that is, of Maximian). 

But before he allowed matters to proceed so far, 
he addressed her with these soft words: "How 
gladly would I spare thee! O that thou mightest 
renounce before thy death thy perverse views of 
the Christian religion? Reflect once, what great 
joy awaits thee, which thou mayest expect in the 


honorable state of matrimony. Behold, all thy 
friends weep for thee, and thy sorrow-striken, 
well-born kindred sigh over thee, that thou art to 
die in the tender bloom of thy young life. See, the 
servants stand ready to torture thee to death with 
all sorts of torments ; for thou shalt either be be- 
headed with the sword, or torn by the wild beasts, 
or singed with torches, which will cause thee to 
howl and wail, because thou wilt not be able to 
endure the pain; or, lastly be burned with fire. 
Thou canst escape all these tortures with little 
trouble, if thou wilt only take a few grains of salt 
and incense on the tips of thy fingers, and sacrifice 
it. Daughter, consent to this, and thou shalt there- 
by escape all these severe punishments." 

This faithful martyr did not think it worth the 
trouble to reply either to the entreating or the 
threatening words of the Judge, but, to say it 
briefly, pushed far away from her and upset* the 
images, the altar, censor, sacrificial book, etc. 

Instantly two executioners came forward, who 
tore her tender limbs, and with cutting hooks or 
claws cut open her sides to the very ribs. 

* A certain author speaks of her having spit into the face of the 
tyrant; which Is to be understood of the image or idol. 


178 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Eulalia, counting and recounting the gashes on 
her body, said : "Behold, Lord Jesus Christ ! Thy 
name is being written on my body; what great 
delight it affords me to read these letters, because 
they are signs of Thy victory ! Behold, my purple 
blood confesses Thy holy name." 

This she spoke with an undaunted and happy 
countenance, evincing not the least sign of distress, 
though the blood flowed like a fountain from her 
body. After she had been pierced through to her 
ribs with pincers, they applied burning lamps and 
torches to the wounds in her sides, and to her ab- 
domen. Finally the hair of her head was ignited 
by flames, and taking it in her mouth, she was 
suffocated by it. This was the end of this heroine, 
young in years, but old in Christ, who loved the 
doctrine of her Saviour more than her own life. 
A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 105, col. 4, and jol. 106, 
col. 1, 2, compared with /. Gys., fol. 23, col. 3, 
ex Prudent. Steph. Hym. 3. 

This happened in Lusitania, at Emerita, now 
called Merida or Medina del Rio Sacco, in the 
uttermost or lowest part of Spain, under the Em- 
peror Maximian and the Proconsul Dacian, as 
may clearly be seen in ancient writers, and also 
in the afore-mentioned authors. 


EUCRATIS, A VIRTUOUS MAIDEN, DIED IN PRISON, 
AT CESAR AUGUSTA, AFTER RECEIVING MANY 
STRIPES AND WOUNDS, FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS, HER SAVIOUR, A. D. 
302 

After the death of Eulalia an account is given 
(from Prudentius) of another Christian maiden, 
called Eucratis, who by her steadfastness in suffer- 
ing, and the violence with which she took the king- 
dom of heaven, put to shame the spirit of this 
world, at Caesar Augusta. The ancients tell us in 
what manner this heroine of Jesus Christ was 
martyred, namely, that she was not only tormented 
on her sides with rods and other iron instruments, 
but that her breasts were cut off, so that her liver 
could be seen; hence, having been put back into 
prison, she very miserably died (yet with a glad 
hope), in consequence of the putrefaction of the 
wounds, which she had received for the name of 
Jesus Christ. See Mell. as cited above, from Steph. 
Hym. 4. Flos. Sanct. Hisp. Mart. Rom., 16 April. 


THE SECOND YEAR OF THIS PERSECUTION BEGAN 
A. D. 303 

The persecution did not cease, though it had 
already risen to a very high degree. But it may 
have pleased God to bring His people through 
much tribulation into His kingdom. Acts 14:22, 
23. 


EUPLIUS, A PIOUS CHRISTIAN, BEHEADED IN THE 
CITY OF CATANA IN SICILY, FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, A. D. 303 

On the 12th of August, A. D. 303, a certain 
pious Christian, called Euplius, was surprised by 
the inquisitors of the Romans, in the city of Catan'a 
in Sicily, as he was engaged in reading the Gospel, 
and instructing other Christians. They appre- 
hended him and brought him near the tribunal, in 
which sat the clerk of the criminal court and the 
Judge. 

Meanwhile Euplius cried aloud : "I am a Chris- 
tian, and wish to die for the name of Christ." 

Calvisianus, the Proconsul, hearing this, said: 
"Bring him in here, who cried thus." 

When Euplius had entered the tribunal, carrying 
with him the Gospel books, one of the Proconsul's 
friends said : "It is not right for him to carry such 
papers with him contrary to the prohibition of the 
Emperors." 

The Proconsul asked Euplius, whence he had 
these writings? Whether he brought them from 
his house? 

Euplius answered : "I have no house. My Lord 
Jesus Christ knows that I have no house." 

Then the Proconsul commanded him with a 
loud voice, to read something out of the writings. 

Euplius, having opened the book, read these 
words : "Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness' sake : for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven." Also: "Whosover will come after me, 
let him deny himself, etc. 

When he had read these and like passages, the 
Proconsul said : "What does all this mean ?" 

Euplius replied: "This is the law of my Lord, 
of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God." 

The Proconsul, having heard this confession of 
Christ, said : "Let him be delivered unto the exe- 
cutioners, put to the rack, and thus examined." 

He was then very grievously, yea, inhumanly 
tormented, and commanded to deliver up the 
Scriptures he had with him, and to have them 
burned to the dishonor of Jesus Christ. All of this 
he steadfastly refused to do; moreover, he openly 
invoked the name of Jesus Christ, because he had 
been found worthy to suffer for His name's sake. 

Thereupon he was again led to the rack and 
dreadfully tormented in the same manner as before. 
But he suffered it patiently, and called upon the 
Lord, saying : "I thank Thee, O Christ ! help me, 
O Christ ! for Thy sake I suffer all this, O Christ !" 

In short, the Proconsul, still more enraged by 
this, went into the tribunal, and gave the sentence 
of death to the clerk of the criminal court, that he 
might write it out against this good man. Then, 
coming out again from the tribunal, and bringing 
with him the tablet containing the death sentence, 
he read the latter aloud, as follows : "I command 
that Euplius, the Christian, be slain with the sword, 
because he despises the gods of the Emperors, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


179 


blasphemes the other gods, and does not repent." 
He further said : "Lead him away." 

This sentence having been read, the Gospel book 
which he had with him when he was apprehended, 
was forthwith suspended to his neck, and the crier 
went before him, crying thus : "Euplius, the enemy 
of the gods and the Emperors, is led to death." 
Euplius went joyfully to the place where he was 
to be put to death, continually thanking Christ for 
His grace. Having arrived at the place of exe- 
cution, he with great reverence bowed his knees, 
and prayed to the Lord his God. As soon as he 
had finished, he offered his neck to the sword, 
and poured out his blood as a drink offering unto 
the Lord. His dead body was afterwards removed 
by the Christians and buried. This happened at 
Catana, in Sicily, A. D. 303, after the twelfth day 
of the month of August had passed. Acta M. S. 
Proconsular. Baron., edit, in Annal 1, 2, A. D. 
303. Alia per Metaphrastem, compared with 
A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 117, col. 2-4. 


PANCRATIUS, A YOUTH OF FOURTEEN YEARS, BE- 
HEADED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 
WITHOUT THE CITY OF ROME, A. D. 303 

There was at that time a Christian youth of four- 
teen years, called Pancratius, who, when he was 
brought before the Emperor Diocletian found such 
special favor in the eyes of the latter, that he prom- 
ised to adopt him as his son, if he would abandon 
Christ, and show honor to the gods of the Romans. 
But this youth, who was old in the knowledge and 
love of his Saviour, showed such steadfastness in 
defending his faith and despising the gods, that the 
Emperor, filled with rage, commanded that he 
should be decapitated, on the Aurelian way, just 
out of the city of Rome. Thus this youth loved the 
honor of his Saviour more than his own life, and 
hence he is justly reckoned among the number of 
the pious martyrs. Acta per Sicrium, bona fide 
edita, secundum Mellinum, in Tract super, fol. 139, 
col. 4. 


JUSTUS, A PIOUS AND GOD-FEARING YOUTH OF 

AUXERRE, IN BURGUNDY, DECAPITATED FOR 

THE FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST, NEAR LUPE- 

RAM, A. D. 303 

When the soldiers of the Emperor Diocletian 
were engaged in apprehending the Christians, a 
certain father, called Mattheus, and his two sons, 
Justinian and Justus, were journeying toward 
Auxerre, in Burgundy, their place of residence. 
But having been denounced, in the meantime, by 
some evil informers, they were pursued by the 
aforesaid soldiers and four horsemen sent by the 
Emperor's Proconsul. The younger son, Justus, 
perceiving this, communicated it to his father and 
his brother, who hid themselves in a cave, but Jus- 
tus kept watch without. When he saw the horse- 
men, he went to meet them. Being asked by them, 
who he was, and where his companions were, he 


replied : "I am called Justus, and I freely confess 
that I am also a Christian ; but since I regard you 
as persecutors of the Christians, it is not lawful 
for me to betray my companions." 

When they drew their swords, and threatened 
him with them, he answered : "Truly, I shall con- 
sider myself happy, if I may be permitted to suffer 
all manner of punishment, nay, death itself, for 
the name of Christ ; for I am ready to lose my soul 
in this world that I may keep it unto life eternal." 

Thereupon one of the soldiers drew his sword, 
and struck off his head. His father and his brother 
buried his dead body at Luperam, which place was 
near by. This occurred A. D. 303. Abr. Mell., 
ex Acta per Suriunu edita, ut apparet ex Bedd, 
Acris Rit. Micis de Sumpta. 


FELIX, BISHOP OF THE CHURCH AT THIBARIS, IN 
AFRICA, PUT TO DEATH WITH THE SWORD, 
IN THAT CITY, FOR DEFENDING THE EVAN- 
GELICAL TRUTH, A. D. 303 

When Constantinus Chlorus and Galerius Max- 
imianus were Caesars for the fourth time, the Em- 
perors Diocletian and Maximian issued an edict to 
the whole world, which was transmitted to the au- 
thorities of all the colonies or free cities of the 
Romans, and read to this effect : that they should 
demand the divine books and laws of the Chris- 
tians at the hands of their bishops and teachers. A 
copy of this edict, among others, was posted up in 
the city of Thibaris, in Africa, on the fifth day of 
the month of June. 

Now when it came to pass that the fiscal Pro- 
curator of that place demanded of Felix the divine 
and Christian books, in order to burn them, Felix 
answered: "It were better, that I should be 
burned, than the divine Scriptures, because we 
must obey God rather than men." 

The Procurator said: "Nevertheless, the com- 
mand of the Emperors must have the precedence 
to thy word." 

Felix replied: "God's command comes before 
the commands of men." 

The Procurator said : "Consider well, what thou 
doest." 

Note. — Here we might produce the whole of 
the court proceedings as believed to have been re- 
corded by the clerk of the criminal court; but in 
order to avoid prolixity, we shall present to the 
kind reader, word for word, only the last and 
principal part of those proceedings. 

Having arrived there, the Proconsul or General 
commanded them to loose Felix, and ask him, 
saying : "O Felix, why wilt thou not deliver up the 
books of the Lord thy God? Or perhaps, thou 
dost not have any?" 

Felix answered : "Indeed, I have them, but I do 
not wish to give them to you." 

The Proconsul said : "Put Felix to death with 
the sword." 

When Felix had received the sentence of death, 


180 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


he said with a loud voice : "I thank Thee, O Lord, 
that Thou hast redeemed me!" He was immedi- 
ately led to the place where he was to die ; at which 
time the moon was changed as into blood. This 
happened on the 30th of August. 

Having arrived at the place of execution, Felix 
lifted up his eyes toward heaven, and said with a 
loud voice : "O Lord God, I thank Thee, that I 
have lived to be fifty-six years old. I have kept 
myself pure ; have kept the Gospels or evangelical 
books; and have preached the faith and truth in 
their purity. O Lord God of heaven and earth, 
Jesus Christ ! I bow my neck to the sword, as an 
offering unto Thee, who abidest in eternity, with 
whom there is and abideth glory and majesty for- 
ever and ever, Amen." 

Thus far the account of the martyrdom of Felix 
has been translated word for word from the Acta 
Proconsularia, that is, the records of the proceed- 
ings which were approved by the heathen judges 
and proconsuls. Compare Abr. Mell., 1st book, 
fol. 117, col. 1, 2, with Act. Proconsul, extant sur 
torn 5, Octob. 24. 


PRIMUS AND FELICIAN, TWO BROTHERS, AFTER 

MANY TORMENTS, THROWN BEFORE LIONS 

AND BEARS, TO BE TORN BY THEM, BUT 

FINALLY BEHEADED, AT NUMENTA, 

IN ITALY, A. D. 303 

In the year 303 two brothers, Primus and Feli- 
cian, were brought prisoners before the criminal 
Judge of the city of Numenta, in Italy. He first 
examined Felician, and asked him, whether he 
would rather sacrifice to the gods, and live in hon- 
ors, and see good days, or be tortured unto death 
with all manner of torments? 

Felician answered: "How canst thou speak to 
me of pleasant days ? I am now eighty years old, 
and have been enlightened with the saving knowl- 
edge of Christ for about thirty years ; yea, I am 
still finding the greatest joy of my heart in His 
service. And thou wouldst persuade me to for- 
sake my Saviour, and accept instead of Him the 
vain lusts of this world ! Far be it from me ; for I 
have resolved to cleave to Christ, my Lord and my 
God, to the very last breath of my life." 

Thereupon this good old man was put in prison, 
and his brother Primus brought forth, whom the 
Judge endeavored to persuade that Felician, his 
dear old brother, had apostatized. But Primus was 
confident that the contrary was true ; therefore he 
said that it was a lie. Upon this he was beaten 
with sticks, and burned on his loins with lamps. 
But he sang with the prophet David : "O Lord, 
Thou hast proved us with fire, as silver is tried." 

Then both were tormented, in different ways. 
Molten lead was poured down Primus' throat, 
while Felician was beaten with leaded scourges, 
nailed with his hands and feet to a stake, and in- 
humanly tortured. Both were cast before the lions 
and bears ; but as these would not harm them the 


Judge caused the martyrs to be beheaded and their 
dead bodies laid on the ground for the dogs and the 
birds of the air. However, they were buried by the 
Christians. Acta per eundem. Also, A. Mell., 1st 
book, fol. 114, col. 2. 


THE THIRD YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 304 

In the third year of the persecution, the obdurate 
heart of the bloodthirsty Emperor Diocletian had 
not yet softened, seeing he and his associate Max- 
imian steadily went on putting to death the poor 
Christian believers, as appears from the death of 
the following persons. 


APPHIAN, A GOD-FEARING YOUTH, DROWNED IN 
THE SEA AT CESAREA, IN PALESTINE, BE- 
CAUSE HE DEFENDED THE HONOR OF 
JESUS CHRIST, AND REPROVED IDOL- 
ATRY, A. D. 304 

When the third year of the afore-mentioned per- 
secution had begun, the second oppression of the 
Christians arose in Palestine, through letters which 
had been sent in the Emperor's name to Urbanus, 
the Proconsul; whereby the magistrates of every 
city were commanded: to exert the utmost dili- 
gence, that all Christians, men and women, old 
and young, would sacrifice to the gods ; and that 
the criers should call together in the city of Csesa- 
rea, men, women, and children, to assemble in the 
temples of the idols ; and also that the chief men of 
every quarter of the city should read off from their 
lists, the name of every citizen, so as to make it 
impossible for any one to conceal himself. This 
caused great misery and distress throughout the 
whole city. 

When it came to pass, on the first day of the 
goddess Hecate, that the Proconsul of Palestine 
was engaged in offering his sacrifice, Apphian, who 
was not yet twenty years old, went undauntedly to 
the Proconsul, and reproved him for his wicked 
idolatry, admonishing him to desist from it. In- 
stantly the youth was frightfully torn as by wild 
beasts by the bodygards of the Proconsul, suffer- 
ing stripes without number from them, which he 
endured with great steadfastness. Thereupon he 
was imprisoned for awhile, but was then brought 
forth again, and dreadfully tormented. He was 
beaten so inhumanly in his face and on his neck, 
that owing to the wounds and the swelling of his 
face he was so disfigured, that those who formerly 
knew him well, now no longer recognized him. At 
the command of the Proconsul they also took linen 
cloths, which they had saturated with oil, wound 
them around his bare legs, and then set them on 
fire, so that the flames leaped up high, consuming 
not only the flesh off the bones, but even melting 
the marrow within them, causing it to trickle down ; 
which must have caused a pain beyond all com- 
parison. But in all this he remained steadfast. 
Three days after this he was again brought before 


ARTYRS MIRROR 


181 


the Judge, and received sentence of death, namely, 
that he should be drowned in the sea ; which sen- 
tence was executed on the second of April, A. D. 
304. Compare Abr. Mell., 1st book, jol. 123, col. 
1, 2, with Eus., lib. 8, cap. 14. 


ULPIAN, A PIOUS YOUNG MAN, CAST INTO THE SEA, 

AND DROWNED, NEAR THE CITY OF TYRE, FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, A. D. 

304 

About that time, almost in those very days, an- 
other youth, named Ulpian, was brought forth in 
the city of Tyre, who, after having been long and 
very severely tormented, was finally sentenced to 
an unusual death, for the testimony of Jesus Christ, 
namely : to be wrapped stark naked, together with 
a dog and an adder, in the fresh hide of an ox or 
cow and thus thrown into the sea. This sentence 
was executed near the city of Tyre; but the sea 
shall give up its dead, and then shall this pious 
witness of Jesus Christ, and his fellow brethren 
be rewarded and crowned by the Lord with the 
crown of immortality. Vide supra Mellin., ex 
Euseb. Hist., lib. 8, cap. 15. 


AEDESIUS, BROTHER OF THE AFORE-MENTIONED 

APPHIAN, FIRST BANISHED TO THE MINES OF 

PALESTINE, AND AFTERWARDS DROWNED 

IN THE SEA, AT ALEXANDRIA, FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF THE LORD, 

A. D. 304 

Shortly after the death of the martyrs Apphian 
and Ulpian, the enemies of the divine and Christian 
truth laid their hands on Aedesius, the brother of 
Apphian. After making many excellent confes- 
sions for the name of the Lord, he was sentenced 
to be sent as a slave to the mines of Palestine. 

Finally, when he happened to see, in the city of 
Alexandria, how the Proconsul pronounced sen- 
tence of death upon the Christians, and sometimes 
caused manifold indignities to be heaped upon aged 
persons, together with other wickednesses practiced 
by him, he boldly went into the court to the Judge, 
and openly ijeproved him on account of the unjust 
and wicked' sentences he pronounced upon the 
innocent Christians. For this he was most un- 
mercifully tormented, which pains he meekly and 
not less steadfastly endured. He was then thrown 
into the sea, and drowned, even as had been done 
with his brother. See the above cited books. 


agathopus, a deacon, and theodulus, a 

lector, of the thessalonian church, 

drowned near thessalonica, for 

the testimony of jesus christ, 

a. d. 304 

In that same year, two pious Christians of Thes- 
salonica, Agathopus, a deacon, and Theodulus, a 
lector, of the Thessalonian church, were appre- 
hended for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and 


brought before Faustin, the Governor of the city. 
He first took up Theodulus, the younger, to tor- 
ment him, causing him to be stripped and bound. 
While Theodulus was being tormented, the crier 
called to him: "Sacrifice, and thou shalt be re- 
leased." Theodulus answered: "You may strip 
my body, but you shall never turn my heart and 
mind from the faith in God." 

As they both went to hear their sentence of death, 
their friends cried and wailed most bitterly, so that 
the sound of it seemed to ascend to heaven; but 
Theodulus said to them, with a happy countenance : 
"If you weep for our friendship's sake, I tell 
you, that you ought rather to rejoice, because we 
are tried in so honorable a conflict ; but if you envy 
us this happiness, and are sad because you are not 
partakers of it, the door of blessedness stands open 
for you, too, and the proclamation of faith calls : 
Come ye all to Christ ; but it gives the crown of 
eternal life only to those who are drawn back nei- 
ther by riches, nor by voluptuousness, nor by the 
honor of this world." 

Finally, the Judge gave sentence, that their 
hands should be tied behind their backs, and heavy 
stones be fastened to their necks, and that they 
should thus be drowned; which they steadfastly 
endured,, and are therefore reckoned among the 
number of the holy martyrs. A. M. jol. 140, col. 1, 
ex Act. per Metaph. 


JULITTA OF ICONIA, AN HONORABLE WIDOW, AFTER 

MUCH FLEEING FINALLY BEHEADED FOR THE 

NAME OF THE LORD, AT TARSUS, IN 

CILICIA, A. D. 304 

When Diocletian's persecution was at its highest, 
a certain widow of Iconia tried to flee from it; 
wherefore she went with her child, which was three 
/ears old, from Lyconia to Seleucia, and from there 
to Tarsus, in Cilicia. But she could not remain con- 
cealed there from the heat of the persecution ; for 
Alexander, the Proconsul who had jurisdiction 
there, apprehended her. After many vain efforts to 
persuade her to renounce the Christian faith, he 
caused her to be scourged with tough cowhides. 

In the meantime he endeavored to quiet the 
frightened child, called Quiricus, by many pleasant 
and coaxing words; but the child resisted with 
hands and feet, refusing to be caressed by the ty- 
rant, and finally ran to his mother. However, the 
tyrant caught him up again ; but this did not turn 
out very peacefully or pleasantly, for the child 
scratched his face, and kicked his sides, so that the 
pain quite enraged him. He therefore took the 
child by his legs and pitched him head foremost 
down the stone stairs. The mother, seeing this, 
thus addressed the tyrant : "Thou needest not think 
that I am so timid as to be conquered by thy cruel- 
ties ; for the tearing of my body shall not intimidate 
me, nor the racking of my members move my 
spirit ; neither shall the threats of the fire, nor death 
itself be able to separate me from the love of Christ. 


182 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


The greater the torments are with which you 
threaten me, the more acceptable they are to me ; 
for I hope thereby the sooner to come to my dear 
son, and to receive with him the crown of righteous- 
ness at the hand of Christ." 

Upon this confession, the Proconsul had her sus- 
pended to the torture-stake, her flesh torn with 
iron combs, melted pitch poured over her naked 
body and fresh wounds, and finally caused her to 
be beheaded. Acta Fidelia, per M etaphrastem, 
compared with A. Mell., 1st book, fol. 140, col, 
1,2. 


FORTY YOUTHS, WHO CONFESSED CHRIST THEIR 

SAVIOUR, THROWN INTO A COLD POOL, AND 

BURNED ALIVE THE FOLLOWING DAY, AT 

ANTIOCH, A. D. 304 

When the East as well as the West was exceed- 
ingly disturbed on account of \be violence of the 
persecution, there manifested themselves in the 
East, namely at Antioch, forty pious youths, as val- 
iant champions of Jesus Christ, inasmuch as they 
openly and boldly confessed the Son of God, Jesus 
Christ, as their Saviour. Thereupon, the Governor 
of that place, after they had been apprehended, 
strenuously exerted himself to move them from the 
faith ; but when all his efforts proved unsuccessful, 
he had them stripped naked, in the coldest part of 
the winter, and cast into a very cold pool. But as 
they were still alive the next day, he caused them 
to be burned to powder. 

One of them, who in consideration of his ex- 
treme youthfulness had, through compassion, been 
restored to his mother, was placed by the latter 
with her own hands upon the wagon in which the 
others lay, and exhorted, to finish this blessed 
course with his fellow brethren. This happened in 
the third year of the persecution, A. D. 304. Joh. 
Gys., fol. 23, col. 3, ex Bas. de 40 Martyr. 


FOURTH YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COMMENCED 
A. D. 305 

Galerius Maximian, continuing in the persecu- 
tion which had been begun, and carried into execu- 
tion, with great bitterness, by Diocletian and Max- 
imian, exercised much cruelty, through Peucetius, 
Quintinian, Theotecnus, and other Proconsuls, 
against the poor Christians; burning them alive; 
throwing them before wild beasts, to be torn 
by them ; nailing them to crosses ; drowning multi- 
tudes of them in the sea ; starving them to death 
in the prisons; beheading them; cutting off their 
hands and feet, and then giving them their life; 
but when they would make use of the favor grant- 
ed them, spoiling them of all their goods, and 
driving them away into misery. 

Touching those who were slain there, the follow- 
ing, among others, are mentioned by name. 


SYLVANUS, JANUARIUS, SOSIUS, PROCULUS, PELA- 

GIA, THEONAS, CYRENIA, AND JULIANA, ALL 

OF WHOM LAID DOWN THEIR LIVES 

FOR THE EVANGELICAL TRUTH, 

A. D. 305 

Sylvanus, Bishop of the church of Emissa, a city 
of Apamea, in Syria, was, with many others, 
thrown before the wild beasts, to be devoured by 
them. 

Januarius, Bishop of the church of Beneventum ; 
Sosius, a deacon of the church of Misenum ; Proc- 
ulus, deacon, at Pussolis, and others, were beheaded 
together. 

Pelagia was suffocated in a red-hot ox. 

Theonas, with his companions, Cyrenia and Ju- 
liana, were deprived of life by other methods. Joh. 
Gys., about the death of Januarius and Sosius'. 
Abr. Mell., fol. 141, ex Act. per Johannem. Janu- 
arii Diaconum conscripta per surium edita. 


THE FIFTH YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 306 

In this year the persecution was not so severe as 
in some of the preceding ones; wherefore there 
were not many martyrs at this time. However, the 
ancients have recorded a few, whom we shall pres- 
ently mention. 


THEODOSIA, A GOD-FEARING MAIDEN OF THE CITY 

OF TYRE, WHO CAME TO COMFORT THE BOUND 

MARTYRS, DROWNED IN THE SEA AT C^SA- 

REA, A. D. 306 

When the fifth year of the tenth persecution had 
come, on the second day of the month of April, the 
Sunday of the resurrection of our Saviour, Theo- 
dosia, a God-fearing maiden of the city of Tyre, 
about eighteen years old, came to some bound 
martyrs at Caesarea, as they were standing before 
the tribunal, to receive their sentence of death. 
Her reason in doing so was affectionately to greet 
them, and to comfort them in their extremity. 

Thereupon she was instantly seized by the sol- 
diers, and brought before the Proconsul, who forth- 
with caused her to be maltreated as though he had 
been bereft of reason ; for he did not have her tor- 
tured with all manner of dreadful torments, on her 
sides only, as was generally the custom, but he also 
caused her breasts to be torn open to the very 
bones, and then cut off. All this she suffered stead- 
fastly and with a happy countenance ; but when by 
reason of the intensity of the pain she could scarce- 
ly draw her breath any longer, so that it seemed 
that she would soon cease to live, the Proconsul 
had her thrown into the sea ; and thus this faithful 
heroine of Jesus Christ was numbered among her 
slain fellow brethren and sisters. See A. Mell., 1st 
book, fol. 124, col. 2, 3, from Euseb., lib. 8. Also, 
/. Gys. on the name Theodosia. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


183 


PAMPHILIUS, AN ELDER OF THE CHURCH AT OES- 
AREA IN PALESTINE, MOST MISERABLY MAR- 
TYRED THERE, FOR THE NAME OF JESUS 
CHRIST, A. D. 306 

This Pamphilius was an elder of the church at 
Csesarea, and a very eloquent, learned and godly 
man. It is stated of him that after much suffering 
and tribulation he underwent the conflict of martyr- 
dom, for the name of Christ, and was thus num- 
bered among the heroes of the bloody banner of 
Jesus Christ. It appears that he was a special friend 
of Eusebius Pamphilius, so that some are of the 
opinion, that the latter took his surname Pamphil- 
ius from him. This much is certain, that he wrote 
the following concerning him, as ancient authors 
have informed us : "Among those who were vari- 
ously afflicted and vexed, and kept in chains and 
bonds at Caesarea, by Urban, the Proconsul of Pal- 
estine, was also Pamphilius, my most faithful 
friend, who probably was the chiefest martyr of 
our time, and the most celebrated in all manner of 
virtue and godliness." A. Mell., 1st book, jol. 124, 
col. 3, 4, from Eusebius and Jerome, compare with 
/. Gys., fol. 26, col. 4. 


THE SIXTH YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 307 

From among those who were put to death in the 
sixth year of Diocletian's persecution, we have 
selected the following. 


ENNATHAS, A CHRISTIAN MAIDEN FROM THE CITY 
OF SCYTHOPOLIS, BURNED ALIVE IN PALES- 
TINE, FOR THE CONFESSION OF THE 
CHRISTIAN FAITH, A. D. 307 

When some Christians, in their zeal for the 
truth, had reproved Firmilian, the Proconsul of 
Palestine, for his great idolatry, and were put to 
death on this account, on the thirteenth of No- 
vember, A. D. 307, a certain young maiden, named 
Ennathas, a native of the city of Scythopolis, 
came there on the same day, not of her own accord, 
however, but through compulsion, and, together 
with the others, boldly laid down her life for the 
name of Jesus Christ. She was at first most un- 
mercifully treated, nay, in a manner too shameful 
and horrible for description. Finally, when she re- 
mained steadfast nevertheless, in the confession 
of her faith, the Judge pronounced sentence of 
death upon her, namely, that she should be burnt 
alive ; and thus this pious martyr pressed through 
the strait gate, leaving her flesh on the posts ; which 
the Lord shall afterwards crown and reward with 
glory and majesty. See A. Mell., 1st book, jol. 
125, col. 4, jrom Euseb., J. Gys., fol. 26, col. 4. 


CATHARINA, AN HONORABLE MAIDEN OF ALEXAN- 
DRIA, BEHEADED AFTER MANY TORMENTS, 
FOR THE FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST, 
A. D. 307 

It is stated that on the 25th of November of the 
same year, Catharina, an honorable maiden of 
Alexandria, was beheaded, for the faith in Jesus 
Christ, after having suffered many torments. /. 
Gys., fol. 26, col. 4. 


THE SEVENTH YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 308 

It is stated that in the seventh year of the perse- 
cution the following persons were slain for the con- 
fession of the evangelical truth. 


SOME PIOUS CHRISTIANS WHO WENT TO VISIT 
THEIR CONFINED FELLOW BRETHREN, APPRE- 
HENDED AT CAESAREA, AND BANISHED TO 
THE MINES; BUT THREE OF THEM, 
NAMELY, ARES, PROMUS, AND 
ELIAS, PUT TO DEATH AT 
ASKALON, A. D. 308 

About the beginning of the year 308, some God- 
fearing Christians left Egypt, with the intention of 
journeying to Cilicia, to supply those, who for the 
confession of the faith had been banished to the 
mines there, with some needful things in their mis- 
ery and poverty. They were apprehended at Caes- 
area by the guard at the gate of the city. Some of 
them were sent into misery and slavery through the 
same sentence, which consisted of this, that the 
right eye was to be put out, and the left kneepan 
cut away, and the wound seared; and thus with 
one eye and one leg they were compelled to labor 
in this hard slavery. 

Three of their number were apprehended at As- 
kalon, in Palestine, and were tormented in various 
ways, because they steadfastly confessed their 
faith. One of them, named Ares, was burnt alive ; 
the other two, Promus and Elias, were beheaded, 
and thus departed this life in a godly manner. 
A. Mell, 1st book, fol. 126, col. 1, from Euseb. 


PETER APSELAMUS, A YOUNG MAN, BURNED ALIVE 

AT CBSAREA FOR THE NAME OF JESUS 

CHRIST, A. D. 308 

Shortly afterwards (on the 11th of January), a 
pious man called Peter, and surnamed Apselamus, 
was apprehended. He was a native of Amea, a vil- 
lage in the neighborhood of Elentheropolis. For 
some time he led the life of a recluse, having 
retired into solitude to give himself over to divine 
meditations. 

Though the Judge and the other members of the 
tribunal had begged him again and again, to have 
compassion upon himself and his youth (for he 
was yet in the bloom of life), he disregarded it 
all, putting his entire confidence in the living and 


184 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


true God, whom he loved more than all this world 
contains, yea, than his own life. Finally he suffered 
his confidence in Christ, his Saviour, to be tried, 
as precious gold, by fire, and was burned alive at 
Csesarea, for the name of Jesus Christ, having 
commended his soul into the hands of God. Idem, 
Ibidem, ex Euseb., lib. 8. 


BIBLIS, AQUILINA, AND FORTUNATA, THREE GOD- 
FEARING CHRISTIAN WOMEN, PUT TO DEATH 
FOR THE DIVINE TRUTH, IN PALESTINE, 
A. D. 308 

Among various other martyrs who suffered for 
the testimony of Jesus Christ in the seventh year 
of Diocletian's persecution, we have noticed that 
there were also several honorable Christian women 
who, from love to their Saviour, did not hesitate 
to give their lives for the truth. They were called 
Biblis, Aquilina, a girl of twelve years, and For- 
tunata, a maiden of Csesarea; who together laid 
down their lives for the truth, in Palestine. /. 
Gys., fol. 26, col. 3, compared with A. M., fol. 
131, col. 3, ex Mart. Rom. Memxol. Grec. Meta- 
phrast. 13 Junii. 


THE EIGHTH YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 309 

It is related that at this time the modes of torture 
and of putting to death were various. Some were 
beheaded with the axe, as was mostly done with the 
martyrs in Arabia. Some had their legs broken on 
the wheel, as was the case with those who confessed 
the name of Christ in Cappadocia. Others were 
hung up by their heels, with the head close to the 
ground, and then suffocated by a small fire, as was 
the case in Mesopotamia. Some had their noses, 
ears, hands, feet, and other members, cut off, as 
was done to those at Alexandria. At Antioch some 
were roasted on frying-pans, not unto death, but to 
intensify the pain. But the sufferings inflicted 
upon the poor martyrs in Pontus are horrible to 
relate; for some had sharp splints of reed thrust 
between the nails and the flesh of their fingers; 
others had melted lead poured over their naked 
bodies; some had their secret parts singed and 
seared, in the invention of which tortures the 
judges and proconsuls vied with one another, even 
as though they wished thereby to manifest their 
great ingenuity, and their tyranny against the 
Christians. See concerning this, A. Mell., fol. 128, 
col. 1, 2. 


TWO SISTERS AT ANTIOCH DROWNED IN THE SEA, 

BECAUSE THEY WOULD NOT RENOUNCE CHRIST 

THEIR SAVIOUR, A. D. 309 

In the eighth year of Diocletian's persecution, 
that is A. D. 309, there were at Antioch two sis- 
ters, young maidens, of modest manners and pious 
life, intelligent and well-informed in the way of 
godliness ; so that the world was not worthy, to con- 


tain them any longer. They were apprehended and 
examined, and, clinging steadfastly to Christ, cast 
into the depths of the sea, and drowned, by the 
servants of Satan. See the above-named author, in 
the same book, fol. 129, col. 1, from Euseb. 


IRENE AND HER TWO SISTERS, BURNED ALIVE FOR 
THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, A. D. 309 

In the records written, through the clerk of the 
criminal court, by the Proconsul Dulcetius, con- 
cerning some pious martyrs, there is pronounced, 
at the close, a certain sentence of death over three 
sisters, who steadfastly continued in the truth of 
Christ. The last part of the afore-mentioned rec- 
ords contain, in regard to this, the following 
words: "And when he (Dulcetius) had demanded 
paper, he wrote this sentence of death.: 'Whereas 
Irene would not obey the decree of the Emperors, 
and sacrifice to the gods, and does still remain a 
Christian, therefore I command that she be burned 
alive, as her two sisters were.' " 

When the criminal Judge had pronounced this 
sentence upon Irene, the soldiers took her and 
brought her upon an elevated place, where her 
sisters had died ; and when they had built a great 
fire of wood, they made her climb upon it, and 
there, after singing sweet psalms and hymns of 
praise to the honor of God, she was consumed by 
the flames. A. Mell., fol. 1 30 and 131, col. 1, ex 
Act. Ver. Proconsular, apud Metaph. Also, Acta 
cognitionis nowssime diei. 


PETER, NILUS, AND P. MYTHIUS, BURNED IN EGYPT ; 

FORTY BEHEADED; MARTIONILLA, EUPHRA- 

TESIA, SEVEN BROTHERS, AND OTHERS, 

PUT TO DEATH AT ANTIOCH, 

A. D. 309 

It is stated that besides the afore-mentioned 
martyrs there were put to death by fire in Egypt, 
for the name of the Lord, three pious Christians, 
named Peter, Nilus, and P. Mythius ; forty others 
were beheaded ; and for the same reason, Martion- 
illa, Euphratesia, seven brothers, and various oth- 
ers, also laid down their lives for the truth. / Gys 
fol. 27, col. 1. 


THE NINTH YEAR OF THE PERSECUTION, COM- 
MENCED A. D. 310 

The ancients tell us that Maximinus Jovius insti- 
tuted at this time a special persecution at Antioch, 
through the instrumentality of one Theotecnus ; to 
which end he caused an image to be erected, in 
honor of Jupiter Philius (the god of friendship), 
by which — whether through Satan or through jug- 
glery — certain oracles were uttered, to the effect, 
that God had commanded that the Christians, as 
His special enemies, should be driven out of every 
country, city, and field, and be exterminated, the 
sooner the better. A. Mell., fol. 134, from Euseb. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


185 


It is easy to judge that this false and blood- 
thirsty voice, having fallen as a true oracle into the 
hearts of the heathen, caused not a little shedding 
of blood, oppression, and burning among the inno- 
cent and defenseless lambs of Christ, as we shall 
presently in some measure show. 


LUCIAN, AN ELDER OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST 
AT ANTIOCH, AFTER HAVING CONFESSED THE 
FAITH, CAST INTO PRISON, AND PUT TO 
DEATH THERE, A. D. 310 

Among the many pious witnesses of Jesus Christ, 
who laid down their lives for the truth, Lucian, 
who was an elder of the church at Antioch, was not 
one of the least ; for it is stated of him, that he was 
a very godly, wise, and eloquent man, well versed 
in the Scriptures, but above all, that he boldly 
sealed all this with his blood and death, to the 
honor of God. 

The Judge asked him as he stood before his 
judgment seat, saying: "O Lucian, how does it 
come that thou, who art such a wise man, dost 
follow this sect, for which thou canst give no rea- 
son at all? Or, if thou hast any, let us hear it." 

Having obtained permission to speak, he made a 
very excellent and glorious profession of his faith ; 
which would well reserve a place here, were we 
not, in order to avoid prolixity, compelled to omit 
it. As soon as he had ended his confession, and 
the people had in some measure, been drawn over 
to his views, the Judge commanded them to lock 
him up again in prison, and to put him to death 
there; which, as the ancient writers relate, was 
accordingly done. But God shall reveal it all on 
the last day, and reward every one according to his 
works. Compare with A. M., jol. 135, col. 1-4, 
ex Eusebio and Ruffino, in Hist., Eccles. Hier. 
Catal. in Luciano. 

Note. — Some place this Lucian in the tenth 
year of the persecution, namely, in A. D. 311. 


PETER, FAUSTUS, DIDIUS, AND AMMONIUS, WHO 

MINISTERED TO THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST 

AT ALEXANDRIA, PUT TO DEATH FOR 

THE FAITH IN THE SON OF GOD, 

A. D. 310 

At this time there were persecuted, by virtue of 
the bloody decree of Maximian, a number of God- 
fearing and learned men, who adhered to Christ 
by a true confession ; of whom we shall briefly pre- 
sent a few, mentioning also the place and time of 
their death. Peter, bishop of the church of Christ 
at Alexandria, and Faustus, Didius, and Ammon- 
ius, all three elders, were put to death for the faith 
in Jesus Christ, on the 28th day of November, 
A. D. 310. There were also several other bishops 
in Egypt, who laid down their lives for the same 
reason. Compare /. Gys., jol. 27, col. 1, with A. 
Mell., 1st book, jol. 136, col. 4, from Eusebius, 
Epiphanius, Athanasius. 


ANYSIA, A YOUNG GIRL OF THESSALONICA, SLAIN 

IN THE TEMPLE, AT ALEXANDRIA, BECAUSE 

OF HER CHRISTIAN FAITH, A. D. 310 

Anysia, a girl of Thessalonica, born of wealthy 
Christian parents, was slain in the temple at Alex- 
andria, because of her Christian faith, at the time 
when Maximian had issued a decree authorizing 
everyone to kill the Christians wherever they might 
be found. /. Gys., jol. 27, col. 2. 

DEMETRIUS, A CHRISTIAN TEACHER, PUT TO DEATH 
FOR THE TRUE CHRISTIAN TRUTH, AT ALEX- 
ANDRIA, A. D. 310 

At the same time and place, also Demetrius, a 
remarkably virtuous and zealous teacher, sealed 
the genuine, divine and Christian truth with his 
blood. Idem, Ibidem. 


THEODORUS, PHILEMON, AND CYRILLA, PUT TO 

DEATH FOR THEIR LOVE TO THEIR SAVIOUR, 

A. D. 310 

Besides the preceding ones, we find that there 
were put to death, for the name of the Lord, and 
their love to their Saviour, Theodorus, a bishop of 
the church of Christ, Philemon, and Cyrilla. See 
the above-mentioned author, in the same book, 
jol. 27, col. 3, ex Vine., lib. 12, cap. 149. 

THE TENTH OR LAST YEAR OF THIS PERSECUTION, 
COMMENCED A. D. 311 

We shall speak but briefly of the last year of this 
persecution, since ancient writers have left us lit- 
tle information in regard to it. Nevertheless, there 
were some at that time, who laid down their lives 
for the truth; among whom the following are 
mentioned. 


EUGENIUS, AUXENTIUS, MAODATIUS, AND MANY 

OTHERS, AFTER MANY TORMENTS PUT TO 

DEATH IN VARIOUS WAYS, FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 

A. D. 311 

Eugenius, because he confessed Christ, and had 
reproved the wickedness of the heathen, had his 
tongue cut out, and his arms and legs broken, and 
thus departed this life, steadfastly continuing in the 
Lord. 

Auxentius, a deacon of the Christian church at 
Auracea, in Asia, was beheaded for the same rea- 
son — for the faith in Christ. 

Maodatius was hung up by his toes, and, having 
been pierced with red-hot awls, and burned with 
torches, was deprived of life, for the testimony of 
Jesus. 

Besides these, many others were put to death 
for the faith, whose name cannot be given ; hence 
we shall content ourselves with those already 
mentioned. See /. Gys., jol. 27, col. 4, at the foot, 
and jol. 28, col. 1. 


186 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


In the Introduction to the Martyrs' Mirror, fol. 
44 and 45, there are mentioned, besides the ten 
general persecutions, which we have described, two 
others, there called the eleventh and the twelfth 
persecutions ; of which the former is said to have 
begun, A. D. 316, under Lucinius, who, together 
with Constantine the Great, reigned in the east ; and 
the second, A. D. 362, under Julian the Apostate. 
But since other eminent writers do not pronounce 
these persecutions as general ones, we shall give 
no special account of them; however, if any true 
martyrs were put to death at that time, we hope to 
mention each in his proper place. Under Lucinius, 
there laid down their lives for the faith in the Son 
of God, according to the testimony of the ancients, 
the following persons. 


BASILEUS, BISHOP AT PONTUS ; AMMON, A DEACON; 

ABOUT FORTY WOMEN; AND OTHERS, PUT TO 

DEATH BY FIRE, WATER, AND ICE, 

A. D. 316 

When it was thought that the previous perse- 
cutions, especially that under Diocletian and Max- 
imian, should have quenched the bloodthirstiness 
of the great, Lucinius, who occupied the imperial 
throne in the east, was still not content therewith. 
For when the winds of blood, fanned on by Satan, 
blew through his head, he caused to be put to death 
without mercy, various pious Christians, namely: 
Basileus, bishop of the church of Christ at Amasen, 
in Pontus; Ammon, a deacon; and about forty 
women, whom he had killed, some by fire, and 
some by water ; as well as various other pious mar- 
tyrs, whom he had put in the cold ice, thus causing 
their death. This happened about the tenth year 
of the reign of Lucianius, which agrees with A. D. 
316. Introd., fol. 44, col. 1, 2. 


TWO BROTHERS, DONOTIAN AND ROGATIAN, BE- 
HEADED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, A. D. 360 

Thefe were two brothers, Donotian and Roga- 
tian, natives of Italy ; one of whom, Donotian, had 
accepted the true Christian faith, and been bap- 
tized upon it ; but the other, Rogatian, had not yet 
received baptism, was, however, a neophyte or cate- 
chumen, having been brought to the knowledge of 
the Christian truth through the instrumentality of 
his brother. Both were apprehended. Then Roga- 
tian wished greatly that he had been baptized, for 
he knew that he would have to die ; but that could 
not be, as there was no opportunity. His brother, 
Donotian, therefore prayed to God, that his blood 
might be accounted to him for the sacrament of 
baptism. The next day both were beheaded, A. D. 
360. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, fol. 106, 
col. 2, from the tract, Grondig Bewijs van den 
Heyligen Doop, letter B. Also, Leonh., in tract., 


lib. 2. These authors must be compared with each 
other. 

The persecution which took place under Julian, 
the Apostate, did not destroy the bodies as much 
as the souls. For since he was a very crafty man, 
and had an eloquent, yet deceitful, tongue, he did 
more harm to the church of God by his flattery, 
than by tyranny. Nevertheless, several of the true 
Christians were martyred under his reign; who 
would rather through the way of death enter life 
eternal, than through the way of temporal life, by 
flattery, fall into eternal death and damnation ; as 
shall presently be shown. 


JOHN AND PAUL, WHO OPPOSED WAR, PUT TO 

DEATH AS HERETICS, UNDER JULIAN THE 

APOSTATE, ABOUT A. D. 363 

There were two special friends, John and Paul, 
who opposed war and bloodshed. They were called 
to war, and urged to engage in it, but as they 
would not consent to it, they were therefore, as 
well as because of their true Christian confession, 
put to death as heretics. Concerning this, different 
authors write thus: "John and Paul had to die, 
because they would not engage in warfare, but re- 
plied to the Apostate : 'We are Christians ; it is not 
lawful for us to engage in war.' " In Grondelijke 
Verklaringe Danielis, en Johannis Openbaringe, 
printed by Harlem, A. D. 1635, page 56, from 
various other authors. 


SOME PIOUS PEOPLE, WHO, IN ACCORDANCE WITH 

THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST, REFUSED TO 

ENGAGE IN WARFARE, VERY CRUELLY 

PUT TO DEATH BY THE EMPEROR 

VALENS, A. D. 368 

After the death of the Emperor Julian, Jovian 
reigned, and after the death of the latter, the em- 
pire devolved on Valentinian, who is commonly 
called Valens. He, too, stained his hands with the 
blood of the Christians, yet not so excessively as 
some of his predecessors. Nevertheless, he cannot 
be excused, seeing he caused some pious people who 
observed the doctrine of Christ to be put to a very 
cruel death, because they, like the above-mentioned 
John and Paul, refused to perform military service. 
Compare P. J. Twisck, Chron., 4th book, p. 114, 
col. 1, with Jaw. Crespin, in his tract, treating of 
the oppressions, fol. 114. 

We might have adduced more martyrs for this 
century, but since that which the ancients have 
written with respect to their lives, as well as their 
faith and religion is doubtful, we have not deemed 
it well to proceed further, and shall, therefore, 
content ourselves with the true martyrs of whom 
we have already given account, and those of 
whom we hope to give an account in the following 
centuries. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


187 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 

OF THE MARTYRS IN THE FIFTH 

CENTURY 

SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE FIFTH CENTURY 

[We have begun this century with the fifth chap- 
ter of the Centurice Magdeburgenses, the contents 
of which may be examined. 

Vincent Victor opposes Augustine in the matter 
of infant baptism. 

Synesius Syrenus, baptized on his faith, by The- 
ophilus. 

The fourth council of Carthage establishes, that 
those who desire to be baptized, must first be ex- 
amined, and sounded relative to their faith. 

Sedulius maintains that baptism is a regenera- 
tion, and, moreover, exhorts the young to bap- 
tism. 

Hilarius of Syracuse asserts the salvation of chil- 
dren that die unbaptized. 

The edict of Honorius and Theodosius against 
the Anabaptists. 

The council held at Carthage, under Aurelius, 
against those who denied original sin, infant bap- 
tism, and predestination, adopts resolutions en- 
tirely different from the decree of the afore-men- 
tioned fourth council of Carthage. 

The edicts of Honorius and Theodosius, in sup- 
port of said council. 

Maximus teaches the baptism of Christ; Cres- 
conius and his adherents are pronounced Ana- 
baptists; Cyril of Alexandria speaks soundly on 
baptism, and opposes the errors of the Nastorians 
and Valentinians. 

An account, from Socrates, of many persons at 
Alexandria, who hastened to baptism, and were 
baptized on confession of their sins ; as also, of a 
sick Jew, who was baptized, and of one who re- 
ceived baptism after much fasting. 

Faustus Regiensis teaches that for baptism the 
will (consent) of him that is baptized is necessary. 

Evragius makes mention of the baptism of the 
candidates, that is, of those who had previously 
been instructed. 

Eucherius maintains that that believer who dies 
unto sin is rightly baptized. 

Carthaginian women who waited for baptism. 

In the Council of Arausica rules are made re- 
specting the baptism of the dumb, the weak, and 
catechumens. 

Nazarius, the son of Perpetua, a Christian 
woman, is baptized after previous instruction. 

In the margin mention is made of one Mont- 
luck, who adduces the resolutions of various coun- 
cils, against the killing of heretics; as also, the 
views of Gelasius concerning the holy Supper. 

Salvian of Marseilles, on renouncing Satan, 
confessing the faith in God, which it was custom- 
ary to do at baptism. 

Authymius, Sisinnius, and Sociorus, baptized 
after having been instructed for seven days. 


Nolanus mentions the hymns which it was cus- 
tomary to sing at baptism. 

Anabaptism condemned in the fourth council of 
Rome. 

An account of many who separated from the 
church of Rome, and, though baptized in their in- 
fancy, were baptized upon faith ; as also, what the 
Pope (or Bishop of Rome) decreed against this. 

Primasius' explanation of I Tim. 6:12 ; its appli- 
cation to adult candidates for baptism. 

Fulgentius calls baptism a sacrament of faith 
and repentance. 

In the margin it is stated how vehemently Leo 
inveighed against the bishops of Campania, etc., 
who, according to his judgment, did not administer 
baptism aright. 

The conclusion is from P. J. Twisck, who says 
that ancient church history, other writers ex- 
cepted, makes no mention of infant baptism before 
A. D. 500.] 

We shall begin the fifth century, concerning bap- 
tism, with the fifth chapter of Jacob Mehrn. His- 
tory of Baptism, who commences his account of 
baptism at that time thus: "Henceforth we shall 
not dwell upon quite so many testimonies taken 
from the ancient fathers and church historians, as 
had necessarily to be the case in the preceding cen- 
turies, in order to prove that during the first four 
centuries after the birth of Christ, infant baptism 
had neither in the holy Scriptures nor in the au- 
thentic books of the teachers of the church, a firm 
foundation; that is, that it had been ordained by 
Christ, or that it was an apostolic institution or tra- 
dition. But we shall in future content ourselves 
with such testimonies and historical records as 
best agree with the truth of the ordinance of the 
baptism of Jesus Christ, in order that we may 
thereby strengthen ourselves in that truth and in 
the true faith." Bapt. Hist., page 394. 

A. D. 401. — About the beginning of this cen- 
tury, opposition was made against infant baptism 
and its advocates, among which advocates in favor 
of infant baptism Augustine showed himself none 
of the least, although he himself had been baptized 
upon faith, as has previously been mentioned. He 
was opposed by a certain bishop, by the name of 
Vincent V ictor, who, notwithstanding Augustine's 
authority, attacked infant baptism, and, as it ap- 
pears, withstood it with conclusive arguments 
from holy Scripture. But how it finally ended be- 
tween the two parties, of this I find no account; 
mention is made, however, of the matter itself, by 
Vicecomes (ib. 2, cap. 1), who says that Augus- 
tine (lib. 3, de anima, et ijus orig., cap. 14), men- 
tions a bishop called Vincent Victor, who con- 
tended with him about infant baptism. Bapt. Hist., 
page 448. 

Note. — Vincent taught that in the Supper the 
figures of the body and the blood of Christ are 
administered. Also, that the bread and the wine 
continue in their own subsance. Book of the two 


188 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


natures. Also, Samuel Veltius, in Geslacht-regis- 
ter, page 124. 

A. D. 402. — About this time, the very old and 
excellent orator Victorinus was baptized on con- 
fession of his faith; of which we find the fol- 
lowing in the 2d chapter of the 8th book of Augus- 
tine's Confessions : "O Lord God, who hast bowed 
the heavens under Thy feet ; Thou hast come down 
and touched the mountains, and smoke has issued 
from them ; how wonderfully hast Thou long since 
come into the heart of this Victorinus !" 

"He read the holy Scriptures, as Simplician told 
me, and most diligently examined and investigated 
whatever he found written concerning the Chris- 
tian religion. He then said to Simplician, not open- 
ly, but secretly, as friend speaks to friend : 'Know 
that I am now a Christian.' Simplician answered : 
'I shall not believe it, I shall not count thee among 
the Christians, unless I see thee in the Christian 
church.' (A little further on:) But suddenly and 
quite unexpectedly he said to Simplician, as the 
latter told me : 'Come, let us go to the church ; I 
will become a Christian.' Simplician, not knowing 
where he was, for joy accompanied him there. 

"Having been instructed in the principles of the 
faith, Victorinus soon after had his name reg- 
istered that he might be regenerated through the 
sacrament of baptism. 

"Finally, when the hour had come for him to 
make his confession (for which confession, at 
Rome, a customary formula was learned, and then 
delivered from an elevated place, in the presence 
of all the Christians, by those who prepared them- 
selves for baptism), the overseers, as Simplician 
told me, offered to let him make it privately, as was 
the custom to propose to those who it was feared 
might, through diffidence, be unable to proceed. 
But he said that he would rather profess his sal- 
vation in the hearing of all the Christians, than 
otherwise. 

"When he had ascended the elevated place to 
make his confession, all who knew him pro- 
nounced his name with secret joy. But who was 
there that did not know him ? For, from the mouths 
of all that were assembled, in mutual rejoicing with 
him, there arose the glad shout : Victorinus ! Vic- 
torinus !" 

A brief account of this is also given in Bapt. 
Hist., page 461. 

From the above words quoted by us from Augus- 
tine, it certainly appears that at the time when said 
Victorinus was baptized, there existed even in 
Rome, where this baptism took place, churches 
which, notwithstanding antichrist began to lift up 
his head there in some measure, endeavored with 
all diligence to observe the true baptism of Jesus 
Christ, which is administered upon faith. For, the 
statement, that in Rome, that is, in the church 
which is spoken of here, was the custom, that those 
who prepared themselves for baptism, learned, for 
their confession, a customary formula, and then de- 
livered it from an elevated place in the presence of 


all the Christians, incontrovertibly indicates that 
there the pure doctrine of Jesus Christ was still ob- 
served in this respect. 

Matt. 10:32: "Whosoever therefore," says 
Christ, "shall confess me before men, him will I 
confess also before my Father which is in heaven." 
Again, Rom. 10:10: "For with the heart man be- 
lieveth unto righteousness; and with the mouth 
confession is made unto salvation." This faith and 
this confession are necessary to baptism. Acts 
8:37; 22:16. 

Bapt. Hist., page 459 ; Vicecom., lib. 3, cap. 24. 
At the time of Augustine, that is, at the time of the 
afore-mentioned Victorinus, when virtue and 
Christian simplicity were still reigning, the ex- 
aminations of the catechumens were conducted 
with much strictness, and great frequency, in the 
night watches of the believers, as is shown by his 
words. Lib. 2, de Symbola ad Catechum., cap. 1. 

A. D. 402. — Synesius Syrenus, an upright, pious 
man, became, from a heathen, a Christian; was 
baptized by Theophilus, and afterwards appointed 
by him bishop of Ptolemais. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
5th book, page 138, col. 1, from Evagrius, lib. 1, 
cap. 15. Mer., fol. 334. 

It is true, that it is stated of Synesius Syrenus, 
that his faith was not perfect with regard to all the 
parts of the Christian religion, concerning which 
historians specially mention one particular point ; 
but it is also stated that Bishop Theophilus, who 
baptized him, was in hopes, that, in the course of 
time, he would judge better on this point, which, it 
seems was also the case, since, as it is stated, The- 
ophilus afterwards appointed him bishop of Ptole- 
mais. 

However, we would not commend this part of 
the matter, namely, to baptize any one without per- 
fect faith or confession, especially if an essential 
point is wanting; but this we commend, that not 
children, but adult persons, who are commended as 
pious are baptized, and, from heathen, desire to 
become Christians, as is stated to have been the 
case here. 

A. D. 406. — At this time it was resolved at Car- 
thage, "That the candidates shall give in their 
names, and after they shall have been examined 
long, and diligently tried, with the imposition of 
hands, they shall be baptized." Also: "That a 
bishop, before he be allowed to minister, shall be 
well examined in doctrine and life." Also: "That 
fellowship with the excommunicated shall be 
avoided, and the penitent received back again." 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., 5th book, page 139, col. 2, 
from Grond. Bew., letter B. B. Valent. Beyer, fol. 
603. Also, Bapt. Hist., page 447. ex Cone. Carth. 
4, cap. 88. 

Here applies the annotation of P. J. Twisck, in 
Chron., 5th book, page 153, col. 1 : "In the fourth 
council of Carthage," he writes, "it was decreed 
that applicants for baptism shall first be examined 
for a long time, shall abstain for a time from wine 
and meat, and, having been diligently tried with 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


189 


imposition of hands, shall be baptized." From 
Chron., Seb. Franck, of the Latin councils held in 
Africa and Europe, letter C. The time of this 
council is fixed by P. J. Twisck (from Seb. Fr.) 
A. D. 436; but he has previously given A. D. 406 
as the date, and hence we leave it thus; others, 
however, give A. D. 416 as the date. 

Beloved reader, this is a very different decree 
from an earlier one, also made at Carthage, in 
the time of Cyprian, about A. D. 250, by sixty-six 
bishops, in which it was established, Contra Fulum, 
that infants should be baptized immediately. This 
is certainly, we say, a very different decree, since 
infant baptism is not confirmed, but, much more, 
annulled by it ; and thus we see that in the course 
of time some had grown wiser. Not, that it is our 
purpose to prove by councils, our view touching 
the true baptism, which must be administered upon 
faith ; not at all, for we find in nothing less pleas- 
ure, than in the decrees of councils, in so far as they 
come short of the Word of God. Besides, this point 
needs not to be proved by councils, as it is ex- 
pressed in the holy Scriptures ; we simply mean to 
show thereby that also at that time there were per- 
sons who, even in the very place where infant bap- 
tism had been ratified, confirmed the true baptism 
of Jesus Christ, which must be administered upon 
previous examination, and has its foundation in the 
holy Scriptures. As to this, that the candidates 
were commanded, first to abstain for a time from 
wine and meat, we leave that as it is, neither com- 
mending nor condemning it, as being a thing which, 
without sin, may be observed or omitted, provided 
no superstition is connected therewith. 

A. D. 410.— Bapt. Hist., page 408. Sedulius 
writes, on Rom. 5 : "No man suffers condemna- 
tion, except through Adam; from which men are 
redeemed through the washing of regeneration." 

But what else is the washing of regeneration, 
than the death of the old man, and the putting on 
of a new life, which is signified by baptism? See 
Rom. 6:3,4; Eph. 5:26,27; Tit. 3:5; I Pet. 3:21. 

Again, Sedulius, on Rom. 6, says : "Paul would 
have baptism so sure and perfect as to make it im- 
possible for the recipient to sin any more. When 
the grace of God came upon us through Christ, and 
the spiritual washing reigned in us through faith, 
we began to live unto God, being dead unto sin, 
that is, the devil. And thus, baptism is an earnest 
and figure of the resurrection ; and hence it is ad- 
ministered with water, that, as water washes away 
impurities, and even so we through baptism, we 
believe, are spiritually cleansed and purified from 
all sin." 

Further : "Know that through baptism you, who 
have become a member of His body are crucified 
with Christ. He hung on the cross with an innocent 
body, that you might hang on the cross the guilty 
one." 

Again, on I Cor. 5 : "O that you may be a new 
leaven ; that you may be mixed with the grace of 
holy baptism, as flour is mixed with water." This 


he seems to speak to those, who, though they had 
reached adult years, yet did not make any prepara- 
tions, but deferred both their baptism and their 
regeneration. 

Again, on II Cor. 5 : "If any man be in Christ, 
he is a new creature :" that is, he that is renewed 
through the sacrament of baptism. 

We will not detain you, dear reader, with expla- 
nations on the above passages of Sedulius, since 
they, without explanation, are so clear, that even he 
that has but little understanding in divine things, 
can manifestly see, yea feel, that the baptism de- 
scribed by Sedulius savors not in the least of infant 
baptism, since the conditions he mentions in con- 
nection with it, as faith, regeneration, crucifying 
the old man, can not be comprehended, much less 
fulfilled by infants. 

A. D. 411.— Bapt. Hist., page 444, ex Cen- 
turia 5. Magdeburgensis, fol. 664. Augustine writes 
that Hilarius, a teacher at Syracuse, wrote : "When 
an unbaptized child dies, it can not justly be 
damned, since it was born without sin." 

A person unacquainted with the condition of 
things at that time, may perhaps think that with 
these words Hilarius of Syracuse, contributed but 
little to the abolishment of infant baptism ; but he 
that is familiar with it, will instantly see that there- 
by he utterly denied infant baptism, and stripped 
it of its virtues. It deserves mention, that in those 
times infant baptism was based upon original sin, 
so that it was thought that infants, for the re- 
moval of said original sin, must necessarily be 
baptized ; from which the conclusion was derived, 
that infants that were not baptized, and, conse- 
quently (in their opinion), not cleansed from 
original sin, must necessarily be damned, as is 
still taught at the present day by the Papists. 

Whenever then, any one denied original sin, the 
foundation of infant baptism, he denied infant bap- 
tism itself, yea utterly annihilated it. This did 
Hilarius of Syracuse, who denied original sin in 
new-born infants, and consequently, infant bap- 
tism ; wherefore he, according to Augustine, frank- 
ly said : "When an unbaptized child dies, it cannot 
justly be damned, since it was born without sin." 

A. D. 412.— Bapt. Hist., page 407. Theodo- 
retus, in chap. 10, says: "In the law they used 
sprinklings, and frequently washed the body; but 
they who order their lives according to the New 
Testament, purify the soul by holy baptism, and 
free the conscience from previous stains." 

Again, in Epist. Divin. Decret.: "But instead 
of those sprinklings, the gift of holy baptism is 
sufficient for those who believe ; for it grants not 
only remission of old or previous sins, but it also 
implants (that is, into those who are thus bap- 
tized), the hope of promised good things ; it makes 
us partakers of the death and resurrection of the 
Lord ; it imparts the communion and gifts of the 
Holy Ghost ; it makes us children of God, and not 
only children, but heirs of God, and joint heirs 
with Christ." 


190 


Martyrs mirror 


Again, quaest. 19 on Levit. : "He that believes 
in Christ the Saviour, when he is sanctified by the 
water of holy baptism, is also cleansed from the 
stains of sin." 

Again, quaest. 1 on Jos. : "As the priests who 
bore the ark, went first into Jordan, whereupon 
all the people, with Joshua, the princes, and the 
prophets, passed through ; even so, when John be- 
gan to baptize, Jesus the Saviour hallowed, as it 
were the nature of the water; and the believing 
people entered through holy baptism into the king- 
dom of God." 

Who does not see that Theodoretus who wrote 
A. D. 412, and afterwards, indicates with all the 
circumstances, that he recognized no baptism, than 
that which is accompanied with faith and repent- 
ance ; for when, in the first place, he says "Those 
who order their lives according to the New Testa- 
ment, purify the soul by holy baptism," and then 
says: "Instead of those sprinklings, the gift of 
holy baptism is sufficient for those who believe," 
and finally adds: "The believing people entered, 
through baptism, into the kingdom of God," he 
certainly indicates that he does not in any wise 
speak of the baptism of infants, since they have 
neither the knowledge nor the ability, to order 
their lives in accordance with the New Testament, 
or to believe," which are here put down as abso- 
lute conditions in the candidates for baptism. 

Note. — Theodoretus taught that the figures of 
the Supper, namely, the bread and the wine, in no 
wise change their nature, but remain as they are, 
after consecration. Dialog. 2, Sam. Velt., in Ge- 
slacht-register, pages 123, 124. 

A. D. 413. — As those Christians greatly in- 
creased, who valued only the baptism which is ad- 
ministered upon faith, and, consequently rebap- 
tized (as not having been baptized aright) those 
who had been baptized by unbelievers or in infancy, 
when they attained to the true faith, the Emperor 
Theodosius, A. D. 413, issued an edict, against the 
Anabaptists, commanding that they should be put 
to death. Introduction, page 47, col. 2, jrom Chron. 
Baron., num. 6. 

But lest any one should think that the people 
who, under the name of Anabaptists, were threat- 
ened with death by the Emperor Theodosius, held, 
with regard to this point, views different from those 
maintained by the Baptists of the present day, who 
are likewise called Anabaptists, it is expedient to 
mention what was said about their views by the 
inquisitor of Leeuwaerden, in opposition to one of 
our latest martyrs, namely, Jagues d' Auchi. When 
Jagues wanted the inquisitor, who appealed to the 
Emperor's edict, to prove that said edict was just 
or founded on holy Scripture, the inquisitor made 
this reply to him : "I believe you think that all our 
fathers were received, and that your sect is saved : 
what do you say? It is now 1200 or 1300 years 
since the Emperor Theodosius issued an edict, that 
the heretics should be put to death, namely, those 


who were rebaptized like your sect." See the year 
1558, and, in the index, the name Jagues d' Auchi. 

When, therefore, the inquisitor says that they 
"were rebaptized like your sect," he certainly indi- 
cates thereby, that they were people like Jagues 
d' Auchi was, and, consequently, like the Anabap- 
tists who at that time, namely, A. D. 1558, gave 
their lives for the truth. 

A. D. 415.— Bapt. Hist., page 407, Prosperus, 
Resp. 2, ad Object. Gallorum, says: "Every one 
who, believing on the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost, is regenerated in baptism, is freed 
from his own, voluntary and actual, sins, as well 
as from original sin." 

Page 413. Prosperus, in his Epigrams, puts the 
martyrs and the candidates for baptism on an 
equal footing, when he says : 

"Sanctify, baptism will indeed ; 
But the martyr's crown doth all complete." 

In the first passage of Prosperus we see that 
faith, regeneration, baptism, forsaking of volun- 
tary sins, etc., are all joined together, even as this 
is done in the holy Scriptures of the New Testa- 
ment. Compare Mark 16:16; Eph. 5:26,27; Tit. 
3:5; I Pet. 3 :21, with Matt. 3 :6 ; Mark 1 :5 ; Luke 
3 :3 ; Acts 2 :37, 38 ; Rom. 6 :4. Hence it is a scrip- 
tural confession ; and there we will let it rest. 

In the second passage the martyrs and the candi- 
dates for baptism are compared to one another; 
but who does not know that infants cannot be 
martyrs, seeing they can neither believe nor con- 
fess, much less can they voluntarily confirm said 
confessed faith with death, which, nevertheless, is 
the own work of all the orthodox and faithful 
martyrs. Now then, if infants are not qualified for 
martyrdom, they are not fit for baptism. Therefore 
judge whether this is not comprised in the words 
of Prosperus which we have just mentioned. 

A. D. 418. — The doctrine of infant baptism 
having been openly controverted ever since the 
beginning of this century, its foundation, namely, 
original sin, being denied and refuted, it occurred, 
A. D. 418, that those of the Roman church in 
Africa, through the urgent request of Augustine 
and his fellow bishops, obtained the convocation 
of a council or synod under Aurelius, bishop of 
Carthage, composed of two hundred and fourteen 
bishops ; which council, in the name of the See of 
Rome, absolutely anathematized or condemned the 
views of those who did not admit infant baptism or 
recognize original sin in infants, as well as of those 
who, opposing predestination, held that the will 
of man was free. The 112th Canon contains the 
following resolution respecting original sin and 
baptism : "It is likewise thought proper, that every 
one who denies that infants who are baptized from 
their birth, are baptized for the remission of sins, 
and that they derive from the sin of the first father, 
Adam, that from which they must be cleansed 
through the washing of regeneration, be anathema, 
that is, accursed." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


191 


It is true, this anathema was aimed particularly 
at Pelagius and Celestius, as being the ones who 
had shown themselves the principal rejectors of 
infant baptism, since they positively said (accord- 
ing to Seb. Franck, Chron., letter P.) : "There is 
no original sin ; hence, baptism is not needful for 
children, yea, is useless to them." Again, article 7 : 
"Children are born without original sin; baptism 
avails them nothing." Again, article 13: "Though 
children be not baptized, they nevertheless have 
eternal life." 

But nevertheless this council, Canon 112, also 
anathematized or cursed all those who assented to 
these views (the rejection of infant baptism and 
original sin), for this is specially expressed with 
these words: "Everyone who denies that infants 
who are baptized from their birth, are baptized for 
the remission of sins, be Anathema." For, we know 
that the word everyone does not mean any particu- 
lar person, but many persons. 

It appears therefore, that at that: time many 
people separated from the Roman church, on ac- 
count of this view respecting original sin and infant 
baptism. However, we would not defend the views 
of Pelagius and Celestius, concerning some other 
points ; it suffices us, that there were people in those 
times, who, notwithstanding the excommunication 
of the pope, and the persecution of the councils, 
still opposed the Roman church, especially through 
the rejection of infant baptism, and even, some of 
them, sacrificed their lives. 

A. D. 419-421. — As the Anabaptists were not 
yet deterred by the above council, from maintain- 
ing their doctrine that baptism ought only to be ad- 
ministered upon true faith, therefore, in order to 
quench their doctrine, the authority of said council 
was confirmed A. D. 419, by the edicts of the Em- 
perors Honorius and Theodosius, and A. D. 421, 
by the additional edict of Constantius; whereby 
said council forcibly prevailed throughout the en- 
tire Roman empire. See concerning this, H. Mon- 
tan. Nietigh., page 79. 

From this it appears that this doctrine of bap- 
tizing only upon true faith, was accepted by very 
many at that time ; for otherwise it would not have 
been necessary for the Emperors to threaten its de- 
fenders with the great power of their edicts, and, 
as it appears, to persecute them even unto death. 

A. D. 425. — Bapt. Hist., page 411, Maximus 
(Homil. 71, de Baptism. Christi) says: "Jesus 
was baptized, not for Himself, but for us ; not that 
He might be purified with the water, but that He 
(so to speak), might sanctify the water. The new 
man was baptized, that He might confirm the mys- 
tery of the new baptism. 

When, therefore, Maximus introduces here the 
baptism of Christ, which took place when the latter 
was about thirty years old, and says that it was not 
done for Himself, but for us, that is, for an ex- 
ample to be followed, and that He thereby con- 
fiirmed the mystery of the new baptism, he cer- 
tainly indicates thereby, that he is not: speaking of 


the baptism of infants, since Christ, who, through 
His baptism, confirmed baptism, was not a child 
when He was baptized, but an adult person. More- 
over, as no other contrary testimony concerning 
him is found in the history of holy baptism, it 
seems probable, that he was not acquainted with 
any other baptism, and, consequently, not with in- 
fant baptism, or, at least, did not observe it. 

A. D. 428. — There were many persons accused, 
through the writings of Augustine, of being Ana- 
baptist, or at least, of defending Anabaptism, in- 
asmuch as they maintained that baptism admin- 
istered by heretics or unbelievers was not to be re- 
garded as true baptism, and that, therefore, those 
who had been baptized by such persons, ought to be 
rebaptized; in short, that there was no true bap- 
tism except that administered in the true church, 
and upon true faith. Among those thus accused 
Cresconius was not one of the least ; in Augustine's 
writings the following things are laid to his charge : 

Bapt. Hist., page 416: "That there is but one 
true baptism ; for it is written : One God, one faith, 
one baptism, one undefiled, true church : those who 
are not in it, the same cannot have any baptism." 

Again: "In baptism, regard is had to the cer- 
tainty that he who administers it is such a one that 
does it in a holy manner; but this certainly re- 
specting the one who baptizes, is not judged by the 
uprightness of his heart, which cannot be seen, but 
according to his good reputation, and the respect 
in which he is held." 

Again: "It is written: 'The oil of the sinner 
shall not anoint my head' : hence it follows it is not 
the will of God, that an open sinner shall baptize." 

Again: "In view of this passage, can anything 
more absurd be said, than that one polluted person 
should purify another? that one impure person 
should wash another? that one unclean person 
should cleanse another? or that a blasphemer 
should make any one innocent?" 

Again : "You, our gainsayers, do not distinguish 
between a believer and an unbeliever." 

Again: "If it were wrong [what we confess], 
and baptism may not be annulled [or re-admin- 
istered], no matter who has administered it, then 
the apostles would not have baptized those who 
had been baptized by John; but the contrary is 
seen," Acts 19:5. 

Again : "In Acts 2 :38, Peter commands every 
Jew to be baptized upon (or in) the name of Christ, 
though their forefathers had been baptized in the 
Red Sea (I Cor. 10:2) hence, the previous bap- 
tism (that is, the one which has not been admin- 
istered rightly), may justly be annulled or 
changed." 

These are the words, or, at least, the meaning, 
of Cresconius and his companions, as described by 
Augustine, and quoted in the History of Holy Bap- 
tism; from which it may be seen that also at that 
time but one baptism was recognized, which must 
be administered in the true church, by blameless 
teachers, and upon true faith, as stated elsewhere. 


192 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Leaving this, we proceed to others, who at that 
time, and afterwards, confessed the same faith, or, 
at least, as far as we know, did not oppose it. 

A. D. 429. — It is recorded that at this time there 
flourished Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, who, writ- 
ing, among other things, on baptism, has left some 
sound testimony concerning it. 

In Bapt. Hist., page 443, the Centuriatores 
Magdeburgenses have made some extracts from 
Cyril of Alexandria, page 613, where they say that 
he taught as follows, book 6, on John 14 : "Through 
the water of the flood, the sins of the whole 
world were reconciled (or brought to an end), and 
those who were concealed in the ark, were pre- 
served through the water (of the flood). This was 
a type of baptism, by which the impurity of all sin 
is put off, and the old life taken away." 

Again : "A catechumen is anointed (that is, in- 
structed with the Word of God), that he may be 
taught ; for the Greek word catechumenos means, 
in Latin, one that is being instructed; and he is 
baptized, that he may know the true light, and 
receive the remission of all sins; therefore, the 
virtue or significance of baptism ought not to be 
esteemed lightly, since it dispels the darkness of 
the soul, and imparts the light of heaven." 

Page 463, Vicecomes, lib. 2, cap. 24, Cyril of 
Alexandria {lib. 7, Contra Julianum) writes: 
"When we have put off the darkness of our mind, 
repelled the legions of Satan, and wisely cast off 
all their pomp and service, we confess the faith in 
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and are 
baptized thereupon." 

This finishes the testimonies respecting baptism 
which I have been able to find from Cyril of Alex- 
andria. There is certainly nothing contained in 
them, which in the least resembles infant baptism, 
nay, everything he says concerning baptism, op- 
posed it. For, when, in the first place, he says that 
the impurity of all sin is put off, and the old life 
taken away, it is certainly obvious that he does not 
speak of the baptism of infants, since they, having 
no previous impurity of sin, cannot put it off by 
baptism, and, having never walked in the old life, 
they cannot forsake it or put it away. When he, 
secondly, says of the catechumens, that they are 
baptized, it is certainly also obvious from it, that it 
does not concern infants, since these have not the 
qualification of being instructed. The third pas- 
sage is so clearly opposed to infant baptism, that 
it requires no explanation, inasmuch as it ex- 
pressly speaks of confessing the faith on God the 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of being bap- 
tized thereupon ; for this can never be done by in- 
fants in the cradle. 


TOUCHING SOME OTHER POINTS OF CYRIL S FAITH, 

ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT OF P. J. TWISCK, 

CHRON., 5TH BOOK, PAGE 152, COL. 1 

"Cyril, a celebrated teacher, strenuously opposed 
the heresy of Nestorius." 


Again: "Cyril says: 'Antichrist shall come 
when the time of the Roman Empire shall be ful- 
filled.' " 

"The mysteries of the faith ought not to be 
taught inconsiderately, without the holy Scriptures. 
If 1 shall merely tell you these things, without 
bringing any proof, do not believe me, unless you 
receive from me proof from holy Scripture ; for the 
salvation of our faith proceeds not from an eloquent 
recital, but from the demonstration of the divine 
Scriptures." Joh. Polii, jol. 93. 

"It is necessary that we follow the holy Scrip- 
tures, departing in no wise from their precepts." 
Joh. Polii, jol. 93. Valent Vanni, jol. 41. 

Cyril, in the 7th book against Valentinian, says 
also, in regard to spiritual eating, "That at the holy 
table we must not simply gaze on the bread and 
wine placed there, or be deceived thereby, but that, 
with uplifted hearts, we must apprehend by faith, 
that on this holy table there is also the Lamb 
which taketh away the sins of the world. This 
must be apprehended and eaten spiritually, by 
faith, and not with the hands." Chron., Seb. 
Franck, fol. 65, idem, Chron. Rom. Kett., jol. 77, 
col. 2. 

Thus Cyril wrote soundly, not only on the matter 
of baptism, but also respecting the authority of the 
divine Scriptures, as well as, that the substance of 
the Supper is not the body and blood of Christ, 
but bread and wine ; and that we must not become 
deluded thereby, that is, esteem it for more than 
it is ; yet that we must eat the Lamb of God, that 
is, Christ, by faith, or spiritually. 

Note. — At this time Cyril taught that those who 
have died, can add nothing to what they have done ; 
but that they must remain what they are, and 
await the day of judgment. Lib. 3, on Isaiah. In 
the Geslacht-register, page 123. 

A. D. 430.— In Bapt. Hist., page 392, quoted 
from Socrates by Vicecomes, lib. 1, cap. 27, Socra- 
tes writes, in the 7th book of the Church History : 
"A Jew, who was very sick, lying almost at the 
point of death, desired to be baptized. To this end, 
he was carried into the church, where the teacher 
instructed him in the articles of faith, and expound- 
ed to him the hope on Christ. And having thus 
been brought to baptism on his bed, he was bap- 
tized." 

Page 393, from Vicecomes, lib. 3, cap. 5, he 
(Socrates) writes (lib. 9, cap. 29. Tripart) : "In 
the city of Alexandria many hastened to holy bap- 
tism, and were baptized upon the confession of 
their sins. 

Again ( Vicecom., cap. 6, from Socrates, lib. 7, 
cap. 17) : "A Jew came to Paul, the bishop, and 
desired to be baptized by him. The latter com- 
mended him for his desire, but refused to baptize 
him until he should be instructed in the doctrine of 
the faith, and have fasted many days. But the Jew, 
compelled to fast contrary to the sentiment of his 
heart, importuned the more eagerly, and begged 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


193 


to be baptized, which request was finally complied 
with." 

As regards that which, page 393, is related ac- 
cording to the account of Vicecomes, lib. 5, cap. 5. 
from Socrates, lib. 7, cap. 30, how the Burgundians, 
having journeyed to a certain city in France, prayed 
the Bishop of that city, to make them Christians by 
baptism; and how they, after seven days of fast- 
ing, and having been instructed in the faith, wee 
baptized on the eighth day, and dismissed in peace ; 
about this we will not say more at present, because 
these Burgundians in a certain article in which 
they should have been taught, were not yet rightly 
instructed ; we notice, simply, that they were bap- 
tized upon their faith, and that baptism upon faith 
was customary at that place. 

Touching the above account from Socrates, re- 
specting the Jew, who was brought to church on 
his sickbed, and was baptized upon his faith, we 
would not praise or recommend the baptizing of the 
sick, when there is more danger of death than hope 
of life. Oh no! for baptism should and must be 
received at a time when one can voluntarily for- 
sake the old man, put on the new, and walk thence- 
forth in newness oi life (Rom. 6 :4) ; which no sick 
person, much less one that is at the point of death, 
can accomplish. Still, it is commendable in this 
case, that, according to the doctrine of Christ, faith 
was required before baptism, as is also stated of 
the other Jew, who was baptized in health ; for he 
asked for baptism, which, after previous instruc- 
tion and many days of fasting, was administered to 
him. We will say nothing about those of Alex- 
andria, who hastened to baptism, and were bap- 
tized upon confession of their sins ; for the matter 
speaks so clearly for the views of the Anabaptists, 
that an explanation of it is wholly unnecessary. 

A. D. 434. — Faustus Regiensus, a Bishop in 
France, taught that baptism required willingness 
on the part of him who comes to it. Lib. 2, de 
lib. Arb., cap. 8. Jacob Mehrning, Bapt. Hist., 
page 425. 

About the same time Evagrius is mentioned, who, 
in writing on baptism, (lib. 2), says "that after the 
water was blessed, the candidates, that is, those 
who had previously been instructed by the Word 
of God, in the catechism, and were found enlight- 
ened, were baptized." Bapt. Hist., page 421. 

These testimonies of Faustus and Evagrius 
prove that the baptism of which they speak, is en- 
tirely different from infant baptism; for, when 
Faustus says that baptism requires willingness on 
the part of him who comes to it ; and Evagrius de- 
clares that those who had previously been in- 
structed by the Word of God, in the catechism, 
were baptized, it is certainly very evident that this 
does not apply to infants, since these cannot come 
to' baptism with a will of their own, or voluntarily ; 
neither can they, before baptism, be instructed by 
the Word of God, in the catechism, much less be- 
come enlightened. 


Note. — It is recorded that in the time of Ho- 
norius A. D. 436, even those of Carthage passed 
this resolution : "Those who wish to receive bap- 
tism, shall previously be tried and examined for a 
long time." Seb. Fr., Chron. Rom. Cone., fol. 71, 
col. 4. 

^ A. D. 438.— Eucherius (in lib. 3, Reg.), says: 
"We are all baptized upon confession of the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." Bapt. 
Hist., page 403. 

Again (in lib. 3, Com. in lib. Reg.), Eucherius, 
in speaking of the imposition of hands, says : "The 
sacrifice is washed, when the water of baptism is 
poured upon a believer." 

In lib. 4, he says: "In descending to baptism, 
he that believes on Christ, dies unto original sin 
and all iniquity." Bapt. Hist., page 428. 

Truly, these are excellent testimonies, which 
very closely approach the form of the holy Scrip- 
tures ; for here mention is made of a certain con- 
fession of the candidates ; as also, that the water of 
baptism is poured upon the believer ; and that he 
who descends to baptism, dies unto original sin and 
all iniquity ; which matters are so frequently men- 
tioned in the holy Scriptures of the New Testa- 
ment, that it is unnecessary to adduce any proof 
concerning them, since they are sufficiently known. 
Compare, among others, Matt. 3:6; Mark 16:16; 
with Rom. 6:3,4. 

A.D. 446.— Notwithstanding those of Carthage 
swayed to and fro, like a shaking reed, in the mat- 
ter of baptism, as may be seen by their many coun- 
cils, there were, nevertheless, as it appears, many 
pious people there, who kept to the institution of 
Christ, and the practice of His apostles, inasmuch 
as they baptized upon faith, of which, among 
others, Augustine makes mention in the 22d book, 
8th chapter, of the City of God, saying, "That 
when Easter was at hand, and the women (that is, 
those who had made application for baptism), 
were waiting for baptism." 

But that which he relates in the same place, of 
the very pious woman Innocentia, namely, that, 
being afflicted with an incurable cancer, she went 
to the first woman that was baptized, to be marked 
by her. with the sign of Christ, in order that she 
might have her health restored, this we leave as it 
is, it being sufficient for us, that even in Carthage, 
where infant baptism had already been adopted, 
there were people who administered baptism to 
adults, or, at least, to believers ; and that this was 
done at a stated time, namely, on Easter. This is 
also mentioned in Bapt. Hist., page 433. 

A. D. 450.— It appears that about the middle of 
the fifth century, a departure began to manifest it- 
self even in the Roman church, among those who 
did not favor infant baptism; inasmuch as many 
were found, who had not been baptized in their 
youth. But as to whether these were known, or 
whether they kept it secret, we have no informa- 
tion ; however, it is apparent that, in the course of 
time, they became manifest, since, with reference 


194 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


to the matter, the Council of Arausica* established 
certain canons or rules in regard to the manner in 
which such persons should be treated. Bapt. Hist., 
p. 440, from Centuries Magdeburgenses, jol. 510, 
ex Concil. Arausic. 

Canon 12. "A person who has suddenly become 
dumb, shall have baptism, or repentance, admin- 
istered to him, if it be proved by his own testimony, 
or by that of someone else, that he has previously 
wished it ; or if he indicate it by signs." 

Canon 14 "The unbaptized weak (members), 
who are concerned about their purification, and 
commit themselves to spiritual guardians, follow- 
ing their admonitions, may commune, in order that, 
through the virtue of the sacrament received, they 
may be strengthened against the assaults of the 
devil." 

Canon 15. "Weak catechumens shall be pro- 
vided with baptism, according as necessity and 
opportunity demand." 

There were still other canons or rules, estab- 
lished by said council, from which it appears that 
at that time many people omitted to have their 
children baptized, so that the latter, when they 
had reached adult years, were still unbaptized ; as 
Canons 18, 19, 20. But it suffices us briefly to have 
shown this, since by our promise we are not bound 
to prove anything further than that in all the cen- 
turies, from the time of Christ, there were persons, 
few or many, who rejected infant baptism, and ob- 
served the true baptism upon faith, according to 
the institution of Christ and the example of His 
apostles. 

A. D. 454. — It is recorded for this year, that 
Nazarius, the son of Perpetua, a Christian woman, 
followed the religion of his mother, when he was 
still very young, and that he was baptized after 
previous catechization or instruction. Tract, 
Gantsck Grondig. Bewijs., 1581. Also, Kort ver- 
hael van den loop der Werelt, compared with P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., 5th book, page 160, col. 2. 

As to the teacher who baptized Nazarius, his 
name is differently given by different writers; 
hence, we pass him by, simply noticing the faith of 
Perpetua, and the baptism of her son; for it ap- 
pears from the circumstances, that Perpetua was a 
Christian woman, who herself professed the Chris- 
tian religion, but who nevertheless let her son re- 
main without baptism in his infancy, apparently 
regarding infant baptism as unlawful, or at least 
without benefit ; besides this it appears that Naz- 
arius, her son, regarded baptism upon faith as good 
and necessary, notwithstanding he was born of a 
Christian mother, else he would not have had him- 
self baptized, upon having come to adult years. 

Note.— A. D. 455. — Montluck, Bishop of Val- 
ence said before the King of France, it should be 
borne in mind, that there were 380 bishops in the 

* This council, also called "Concilium Arausione", is stated to 
have taken place, A.D. 441. In the same it was decreed, by com- 
mand of antichrist, that the Gospel should not be read to the cate- 
chumens, and that they should not be admitted to the place of 
baptism. See P. J. Twisck, Chron., 5th book, page 155, col. 1. 


council of Nice, 150 in the council of Constanti- 
nople, 200 in the council of Ephesus, and 300 in 
the council of Chalcedon, who would use no other 
weapons than the Word of God, against the Arians, 
Macedonians, Nestorians, and others. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., 5th book, page 161, col. 1, from Den Stant 
der Religie, 200. 

A. D. 456. — Gelasius taught at this time, that in 
the Supper there are celebrated the figures of the 
body and blood of Christ, and that, through the 
Holy Ghost we become partakers of divine things, 
though the bread and wine continue what they are. 
In the Book of the two Natures. See Sam. Veltius, 
Geslacht-register, page 124. 

A. D. 458.— Salvian of Massilia (Marseilles) 
lib. 6, de Providentia {Bapt. Hist., page 448), says 
to the candidates : "You say : 'I renounce the devil, 
his pomp, his adherents, and his works.' And what 
else? You also say: T believe on God the Father, 
and on Jesus Christ His Son.' Thus, one first for- 
sakes the devil, that he may believe on God ; but 
whosoever does not forsake the devil, does not be- 
lieve on God; and whosoever turns again to the 
devil, forsakes God." These things, says the an- 
notator, can in no wise be said of infants. 

From this formula, which the candidates at that 
time were obliged to confess publicly, we certainly 
see without controversy, that it stood altogether 
differently with the matter of baptism, than is now 
the case among many so-called Christians ; for then 
the candidates had to make confession themselves 
of their faith, before they were baptized ; but now, 
in many places, when infants are baptized, no con- 
fession is demanded, or, if demanded, is not made 
by the children themselves, since they cannot do it, 
but by their parents, or godfathers and godmoth- 
ers, who bring them to baptism; however, if the 
confession is demanded from the children them- 
selves, they do not make it before baptism (as is 
required by holy Scripture), but after baptism, so 
that twenty, thirty, sixty, or even more years, 
elapse, yea, that their baptism is forgotten by the 
time they make their confession; and some who 
are baptized, never make their confession. 

What is to be held of such a baptism, may easily 
be judged ; but as it is not our purpose to refute 
this error, we let this matter rest; in the mean- 
time it suffices us, that in the latter half of the fifth 
century there were people, yea, distinguished per- 
sons, who, notwithstanding the superstitions of 
popery, especially with regard to infant baptism, 
kept to the ordinance of Christ, baptizing only 
upon faith, or after previous instruction. 

A y D. 460. — About this time, according to the 
account of the ancients, the God-fearing and noted 
persons, Anthymius, Sisinnius, and Sociorus, be- 
took themselves, by baptism, under the peaceable 
banner of Jesus Christ, to be champions and serv- 
ants of His, having confessed the faith and ac- 
knowledged Him as their Lord ; which took place 
after they had been instructed for seven days. Ref- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


195 


erence is had to this, in Bapt. Hist., page 448, from 
Vicecom., lib. 2, cap. 8, where it is related that 
when they had been learning, for seven days, the 
mystery of Jesus Christ, that is, the faith, they 
were baptized. 

A. D. 465. — D. Vicecomes, lib. 5, cap. 48, gives 
an account, from Nolanus, of the hymns which the 
Christians at that time used to sing over the newly 
baptized believers. "Nolanus," he says, "also de- 
scribes, in a special hymn the extraordinary spirit- 
ual joy which the Christians were (then) wont to 
have over the newly baptized." Bapt. Hist., p. 463. 

What the contents of these joyful hymns were, is 
not stated, only that with them extraordinary spir- 
itual joy was expressed. It undoubtedly was the 
endeavor, to praise God with them, to edify the 
church, and to strengthen the newly baptized in the 
accepted faith, in order that they might pay their 
vows unto God ; always remember the day of their 
enlightenment; walk in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
whom they had now accepted, and if necessary, 
also lay down their life for Him, and. thus, having 
testified to the faith with their blood, obtain the 
unfading crown of honor. 

Note. — In the meantime, those of the Roman 
church sought to abolish Christ's true ordinance of 
baptism ; to which tended the canon established in 
the council held A. D. 469, at Chalcedon, which 
read as follows : "Those who are not baptized, shall 
not be baptized by heretics." Seb. Fr., Chron. der 
Rom. Rett., jol. 71, col. 1. 

A. D. 470. — It appears that at this time, through 
the power of the pope and the councils, they began 
to condemn Anabaptism, and, consequently, to ex- 
communicate and treat as heretics, the so-called 
Anabaptists ; which is stated to have been put into 
effect A. D. 470, in the fourth council of Rome. 
To this refers the annotation found in the Sth book 
of the Chronijk of P. J. Twisck, page 164, col. 1, 
from Valentinus Beyer, jol. 635 : "In the fourth 
council of Rome Anabaptism was condemned." 

But it did not stop here ; for, A. D. 487, seven- 
teen years afterwards, Pope Felix III, the fiftieth 
in the register of the popes, by the aid of a council 
then held, established different other articles 
against Anabaptism and the Anabaptists, very evi- 
dently, with a view to their suppression. 

A. B. 487. — Many now, from time to time, sep- 
arated from the Roman church, rejecting her 
superstitions and invented ordinances of worship, 
and desiring to have no fellowship with the mys- 
tery of wickedness, which just then began greatly 
to rise among the Romanists, so that not only many 
of the common people, but also, it appears, some 
eminent clerical and learned persons, separated 
themselves from the Roman religion in such a man- 
ner, that they, in token of this, were baptized 
upon faith, by those who were called heretics or 
Anabaptists, notwithstanding they had been bap- 
tized in their youth by the Romanists. In order :o 
prevent this, the pope or bishop of Rome, whose 


name was Felix, made the most strenuous efforts,* 
convoking for this end, A. D. 487, a synod or coun- 
cil, in the city of Rome ; concerning which the fol- 
lowing account is given in Bapt. Hist., page 442, 
from Centuriw Magdeburgenses, jol. 538: "In a 
synod held at Rome, A. D. 487, by Pope Felix, who 
had learned that in Africa, some eccelesiastics, 
priests, and bishops had been rebaptized together 
with numbers of the common people, it was de- 
creed : 

"1. If those that have been rebaptized are griev- 
ously sorry, and desire to do penance, they shall be 
received kindly, and, as usual, by the priests. 

"2. The priests and ecclesiastics that have fallen, 
and been baptized with the baptism of heretics, 
shall do penance to the end of their life. 

"3. Other ecclesiastics, as monks, nuns, and sec- 
ulars, who have fallen, and been rebaptized, shall 
remain three years among the catechumens, and 
seven years among the penitents ; shall not offer for 
the space of two years, but pray among the secu- 
lars ; however, if they be overtaken by death dur- 
ing this time, the bishop, or a priest shall absolve 
them. 

"4. Those who have been baptized or rebaptized 
by heretics, shall not be permitted to receive any 
ecclesiastical office, but must be content (that is, if 
they return) with being received into the number 
of the Catholics." 

All these articles — the fourth one we have passed 
over as irrelevant — sufficiently indicate that those 
who were then called Anabaptists must have in- 
creased greatly and commanded no small respect, 
since not only the common people, but also (as the 
second and third article declare) priests, ecclesias- 
tics, and other clerical persons, as monks, nuns, 
etc., though baptized in youth, were rebaptized, 
that is, baptized upon faith ; which is the more evi- 
dent from the fact that the pope considered the mat- 
ter of sufficient importance, to convoke, in order to 
weaken the so-called Anabaptists and maintain the 
Roman church, a public synod or council, and pub- 
lish laws and rules against them. Also P. J. Twisck 
makes mention of this, in his Chron., 5th book, 
page 167, col. 2, fixing, however, the date of this 
occurrence on the year 483, which is four years 
earlier than in Bapt. History. 

He says : "Felix III, the fiftieth pope of Rome, 
ordained that the churches should be consecrated 
by the bishops, and that annual wakes or church 
masses — real bacchanals — should be celebrated. In 
his time it was also decreed in a council, that per- 
sons baptized by heretics, or rebaptized, should 
not be received into any ecclesiastical order. Said 
council also had under consideration those who had 
been rebaptized in Africa, and desired to do pen- 
ance; as well as, what should be done with the 
bishops, priests, monks, and nuns, who had been 


The pope and the councils had commenced making such 
efforts, it appears, already A.D. 470, seventeen years earlier; for 
at that time Anabaptism was condemned at Rome, as has been 
shown. 


196 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


rebaptized." From Platina, jol. 91. Fasc. Temp., 
jol. 112. Hist. Georg., lib. 3. 

A. D. 494. — At this time flourished Primasius; 
he explains I Tim. 6:12, where the apostle says: 
"Thou hast professed a good profession before 
many witnesses," as having reference to baptism. 
See Bapt. Hist., page 483, from Joseph Vicecomes, 
lib. 5, cap. 37. 

But, beloved reader, how can this passage apply 
to baptism, or be interpreted with reference to it, 
unless we understand that the good profession of 
which the apostle speaks, is attributed to the candi- 
dates for baptism ; so that, as Timothy (of whom 
he says this) professed a good profession before 
many witnesses, even so must yet at this day all 
who are to be baptized, profess a good profession 
before many witnesses. But new-born infants can- 
not do this ; hence, the baptism of which Primasius 
here speaks does not relate to infants. 

Afterwards, in his first book on John's Revela- 
tion, he says : "He is arrayed in a white robe, who 
is clothed with Christ, and is strong in the faith 
which worketh by love ; but as many of you as have 
been baptized, have put on Christ." Gal. 3:27. 
Bapt. Hist., page 408. 

Nowhere in the holy Scriptures, are infants en- 
joined to put on Christ ; but this is throughout and 
without exception said to believers. See Rom. 
13:14; Gal. 3:27; Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:10. These 
epistles were written and sent only to believers. 
But to remove all doubt, Primasius himself ex- 
plains what he understands by this putting on of 
Christ, by adding: "and is strong in the faith." 
This is certainly not anything that children can do ; 
hence the baptism which he applies to such as he 
speaks of is not the baptism of infants. 

Note. — At this time mention is made, in a cer- 
tain African council, of certain people, as being 
agitators with regard to baptism, and how they 
should be suppressed. Compare Seb. Franck, 
Chron. Rom., Cone., jol. 48, col. 4, with our re- 
marks in the account of the martyrs of the fifth 
century, on the year 497. 

A. D. 498.— It is stated that at this time there 
lived a^nd wrote, the excellent teacher, Fulgentius, 
who, writing, among other things on baptism says 
{lib. de fide, ad Petrum, cap. 30) : "Rest assured 
of this, and doubt not in anywise." Continuing he 
says : "That no man can receive eternal life, who 
has not previously been converted from his sins 
through repentance and faith, and through the sac- 
rament of faith and repentance been redeemed, 
that is, through baptism ; this is absolutely neces- 
sary for adults, namely that they repent of their 
sins, understand the common faith, according to 
the truth, and receive the sacrament of baptism 
(upon it)." 

This is the only testimony of Fulgentius, re- 
specting baptism, which we have been able to find ; 
from which we can draw no other conclusion than 
that he esteemed baptism upon faith very highly, 
yea, that this, and no other, was considered true 


baptism by him; for when he speaks of baptism, 
he connects it with faith and repentance, and, 
hence, calls it a sacrament of faith and repentance, 
adding that it is necessary for adults. How could 
one speak more clearly and plainly of the true 
Christian and apostolical baptism, which is pe- 
culiar to believers and penitents. We will, there- 
fore, let the matter rest, as having been sufficiently 
explained by Fulgentius. 

Note. — It appears that the doctrine of baptism 
upon faith had at this time, A. D. 498, made its 
way even to the papal chair, which, however, we 
do not recognize. Bapt. Hist., page 463, Pope Leo 
I, in his epistle, declaims with great warmth against 
the Bishops of Sicily, Campania, Samnia, and Pi- 
cena, because they baptized not only on Easter and 
Whitsuntide, but also on Epiphany and other holi- 
days. Observe: this is utterly opposed to infant 
baptism, as we have shown elsewhere. On page 
464, Pope Leo (Serm. 1, de natia Dom,, cap. 4) 
thus exhorts those who had been baptized: "Re- 
main steadfast in the faith which you have con- 
fessed before many witnesses, and in which you 
are regenerated." Again, Leo writes (Epist. 4, ad 
Episcob., in Sicilia, cap. 6) : "You plainly see that 
two reasons must be observed, in which the elect 
(that is, believers) are to be baptized." 

See, beloved reader, such is the power of truth, 
that even the mouth of the liar, yea, of antichrist, 
must confess it. But though Pope Leo confessed 
this, other popes declared those who confessed the 
same, heretics, yea, cursed, persecuted, and killed 
them, as shall be shown in the proper place. 

At this time Fulgentius taught that the holy 
Scriptures contained all that was necessary for sal- 
vation—food for children, as well as for adults. 
■S". Veltius, Geschlacht-register, 1649, page 123. 

A. D. 500. P. J. Twisck, in the conclusion of 
his account of the fifth century, complains of the 
desolation, both in civil and spiritual affairs, occa- 
sioned chiefly by the power of the Pope of Rome, 
saying: "In this time, and still longer, through 
the desolation caused in the lands by the invasion 
of many different armies, and by other destroyers, 
as well as through immorality and heresies, the 
best people and chiefest authors perished, piety 
and learning diminished, and whatever of good re- 
mained, became for the most part corrupted. For 
although the baptism of adults was still adminis- 
tered, and church history from the time of Christ 
up to about this period, does not in the least, as far 
as I know, mention infant baptism, the latter never- 
theless, according to other writers, more and more 
lifts up its head, and this with papal pollution, is 
confirmed by a decree, and considered not neces- 
sary to salvation." Chron. 5th book, page 174. 

From this we may gather the reason why at times 
so few orthodox and good writers are found, and, 
hence, how it comes that in those early days, there 
was sometimes, for a long period, only one, or a 
few, who openly maintained baptism upon faith, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


197 


and other wholesome articles of faith, of which we 
will not speak further now. 

The statement, that church history, from the 
time of Christ up to about this time (A. D. 500), 
does not in the least mention infant baptism, gives 
rise to the grave suspicion, that the authors which 
appear to have written long before the year 500, 
were interpolated by some of their descendants 
who maintained infant baptism. A few instances 
of this kind we have already given, respecting the 
writings of Dionysius the Areopagite, Justin, Ori- 
gen, and others. 

But be .this as it may, posterity must make the 
best of the aforesaid writings, as we also must now 
do ; and, according to their account, infant baptism 
obtained at this time, and long before, in many of 
the (Roman) churches, though many kept aloof 
from it, so that even with them, it was not generally 
adopted until about the year 900, yea, almost to 
the year 1000, as we hope to show in the proper 
place, and as may be seen in various prominent 
authors. 

In the meantime we have shown (which suffices 
us) that the fifth century was not without men who, 
opposing infant baptism, maintained baptism upon 
faith, according to the teaching of Christ, and con- 
firmed it by doctrine and example. 

Note.— It is stated that about A. D. 500, Clo- 
dovius and his people were baptized upon faith, or 
the confession of the same, by Remigius, Bishop of 
Rheins. Bapt. Hist., page 435. But he did not 
show himself a Christian in every respect, which 
we would not commend. Moreover, his two sons 
were baptized before his conversion as Blondus 
writes (lib. 3, decade 1, also Bapt. Hist., page 436) , 
notwithstanding their mother, Clotildis was a god- 
ly, Christian woman, as is stated in Bapt. Hist., 
page 435. From this it appears that at that time, 
even among the Romanists, it was not, a general 
custom to baptize infants, but that some permitted 
their children to attain to the years of understand- 
ing, before they were baptized; however in other 
places, in the Roman dominion, infant: baptism was 
strictly observed. In the meantime the true Chris- 
tians kept quiet, and practiced baptism upon faith, 
as has been sufficiently shown. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE FIFTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE FIFTH 
CENTURY 

[First of all, mention is made of the tyrants who 
in the beginning of this century tyrannized over 
the defenseless lambs of Christ; among them are 
mentioned Isdigerdis, and his son Geroranes. 

The bloody edict issued by the two Emperors, 
Honorius and Theodosius, against the so-called 
Anabaptists, is adduced, according to different ver- 
sions, and explained. 

The couplet of Prosperus, which proclaims to 


the candidates for baptism, that their baptism must 
be perfected by martyrdom, is explained. 

Albanus, a pious teacher at Mentz,* and others, 
martyred. 

The threatenings of the Nestorian Emperor, 
Theodosius, against the upright teacher, Cyril of 
Alexandria. 

The tyranny of Theodosius, Bishop of Jerusa- 
lem, against many upright people, especially to- 
wards a pious teacher of the church of Christ, 
whom he first caused to be scourged, and then be- 
headed. 

Benjamin, a deacon, after suffering many tor- 
ments, put to death with a knotty stick, in Persia. 

The cruelty of Honoricus, the Arian King, 
towards certain bishops and elders who would not 
swear an oath, described at large, as also his 
destruction. 

Thereupon it is shown in the margin, that about 
this time, in different councils held in Africa, there 
were made five hundred and five laws, some of 
them relating to infant baptism ; the agitation about 
baptism, suppression of the same, etc. 

The bloody oppression of the believers, which, 
it appears, occurred in the time of Fulgentius. 

Two persons who denied infant baptism, con- 
demned in a certain council at Carthage (as is 
shown in the margin) ; but we commit them to 
God. With this we conclude the fifth century.] 

We now come to fulfill the promise we repeat- 
edly made in the Account of Baptism in the fifth 
century, namely, that we would show that of those 
who were baptized according to the ordinance of 
Christ, and of those who defended them and their 
views, a number had to lose their lives on this 
account ; and that others, who escaped death, were 
severely persecuted or had to suffer corporal pun- 
ishment. In order to show this properly, we shall 
first notice the tyrants of this time, and their 
tyranny; and then the persons who through this 
tyranny were oppressed and suffered unto blood. 

TOUCHING THE TYRANTS OF THIS TIME, AND THEIR 
TYRANNY, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT CON- 
TAINED IN THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE 
ONDERGANG DER TYRANNEN, FOR 
THE YEAR 401, PAGE 135, COL. 2 

Among all the cruel bloodhounds, and perse- 
cutors of the Christians may well be counted Isdi- 
gerdis and his son, Geroranes, who not only flayed 
and roasted the Christians alive, but also split reeds, 
and bound them, with the cut side inwards, tightly 
around the naked bodies of the martyrs, whom they 
then drew out by force, thus shockingly lacerating 
the bodies of the Christians. They also confined 
the steadfast martyrs, naked, in cells, bound them 
hand and foot, and then chased in a great number 
of rats, which, impelled by hunger, gnawed their 
bodies, and, in the course of time, entirely devoured 
them. Nevertheless, they could not, through these 

* Or Mayance. 


198 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and similar cruelties, force man)' Christians to a 
denial of their Redeemer. All this is related in 
order to convey an idea of the cruel tyranny which 
was at this time practiced against the Christians. 
Compare with Chron. Leonh., lib. 2. Will Baudart. 
Denckw., lib. 5. Hist. Joh. Wega, lib. 4, cap. 3. 
Theodoret., lib. 5, cap. 39. 


THE BLOODY EDICT ISSUED, A. D. 413, AGAINST THE 
SO-CALLED ANABAPTISTS, BY THE TWO EAST- 
ERN EMPERORS, THEODOSIUS AND HON- 
ORIUS 

In order to give a thorough account of this 
bloody edict, and this in the best possible manner, 
we shall present the different versions which we 
have found of it, word for word, and then state 
our own views in regard to the matter. 


FIRST VERSION, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT OF 

SEBASTIAN FRANCK, IN HIS CHRONIJK, 1563, 

FOL. 136, COL. 3 

"The most important matter in this transaction" 
he writes, "is the imperial code, which contains 
cap. 1, lib. 2, an edict issued by the Emperors Theo- 
dosius and Honorius, which reads thus : 'If any 
minister of the Christian church is found guilty of 
having rebaptized any one, he, together with the 
person thus rebaptized, provided the latter is 
proved to be of such an age as to understand the 
crime, shall be put to death.' " 


SECOND VERSION, ACCORDING TO THE ANNOTATION 
OF MARTIN BELLIUS, IN THE TRACT, VAN DE 
KETTERS, EN OF MAN DE SELVE SAL VER- 
VOLGEN, DEDICATED TO CHRISTO- 
PHER, DUKE OF WURTEMBERG, 
PAGE 53 

"Since we must speak," he writes, "of that im- 
perial code, we will relate the following, namely, 
about the law contained in the first codex prohibit- 
ing rebaptism. Joined to the other, it reads thus : 

"The Emperors, Honorius and Theodosius, to 
A. A. Antonius, the magistrate: 

"If information is obtained that any one has re- 
baptized a servant of the Catholic [general] re- 
ligion, he shall be put to death, together with the 
latter, who has committed a punishable crime, 
provided he is of an age admitting of the capabil- 
ity, to commit such (and has been instructed con- 
cerning the matter)." 


THE ABOVE EDICT, ACCORDING TO THE ANNALS OF 
CARDINAL CESAR BARONIUS, IN HIS CHRONI- 
CLES, A. D. 413, NUMBER 6 

In that year, he writes, the Emperor Theodosius 
issued an edict against the Anabaptists, command- 
ing that they should be put to death. 

This was subsequently also quoted by the in- 
quisitor of Leeuwserden, in his controversy with 
Jacques d' Anchi, in the year 1558. See register of 


the 2d booh, on the name Jacques. Also, Intro- 
duction, fol. 47, col. 2. 

These several versions of the edict of Honorius 
and Theodosius unanimously indicate three things : 
1. That at that time, A. D. 413, there were people 
who were called Anabaptists. 2. That on account 
of this matter of rebaptizing, these people were ex- 
ceedingly hated by the world, especially by the 
great. 3. It is shown how they were hated, namely, 
unto death, so that the command was given, that 
they should be punished with death. However, 
intelligent people well know, that Christ, our 
Saviour predicted long before, that such things 
would befall His disciples and followers. Matt. 
10:22; 24:9; Mark 13:9; Luke 21:12; John 
15:19; 16:2. 

Moreover, that the afore-mentioned people, 
against whom said edict was issued, were not 
strange, unknown, erring spirits, but such people 
as are also in our day styled Anabaptists ; this not 
only the inquisitor of Leeuwaerden, A. D. 1558, 
readily admitted, as has been shown in the proper 
place, but all the particulars of the last mentioned 
authors make it almost as clear as the sun at mid- 
day, that this is the general opinion of the Roman- 
ists. Nay, it appears that the edict of Honorius 
and Theodosius was carried into execution, not 
only A. D. 413, and in some of the subsequent 
years, but that it was no small cause of the last 
great persecution of the Anabaptists, which began 
about A. D. 1524, through the strong urging of the 
Papists, especially of their clergy, who, to all ap- 
pearance, by it induced the Emperor, Charles V, 
to renew said edict against the Anabaptists of their 
time, as being an identical people, and of the same 
faith, with those who lived in the time of Honorius 
and Theodosius. At least, that many papistic mag- 
istrates put to death innumerable pious Anabaptist 
Christians, by virtue of said ancient edict of A. D. 
413, appears with such certainty from various 
authors, that it cannot, with truth, be denied. Com- 
pare Seb. Framck, fol. 136, col. 3, with Martin 
Bellius, page 53. 

Now the couplet of Prosperus was verified, 
namely, that baptism did indeed sanctify the true 
candidate in some measure, but that all this was 
perfected by the crown of martyrdom. This was 
afterwards rendered in German, by Jacob Mehrn- 
ing, thus: 

"Was heylligs bringt die Tauffe schon: 
Solchs gants erfuellet der Martrer chron."* 
Bapt. Hist., 2d part, page 413, ex Prosp. in Epi- 
gramm. 

He means to say that those who were then bap- 
tized, had to expect martyrdom. We shall there- 
fore show what persons suffered at this time for 
the testimony of Jesus Christ, either by virtue of 
the above-mentioned edict, or otherwise. 

* In English this may be rendered thus: 
"Sanctify, baptism will indeed; 
But the martyr's crown doth all complete." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


199 


ALBANUS, A PIOUS TEACHER AT MENTZ, WITH 

OTHERS, MARTYRED FOR THE FAITH, 

A. D. 424 

In A. D. 424, eleven years after the Emperors 
Honorius and Theodosius had issued their bloody 
edict against the so-called Anabaptists, a pious 
teacher, who, intending to spread abroad the name 
of Jesus Christ, and promulgate the doctrines of 
the holy Gospel, had come to Mentz, was lament- 
ably slain ; as were also some others. Besides other 
authors, P. J. Twisck describes this, with these 
words : "When Albanus preached Christ at Mentz, 
he was martyred, together with others." Chron., 
5th book, page 149, col. 2, from Hist. Andr. 143. 


THE SEVERE THREATENINGS OF THE NESTORIAN 
EMPEROR THEODOSIUS, AGAINST THE FAITH- 
FUL TEACHER, CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA, 
BECAUSE THE LATTER WOULD NOT 
ACCEPT THE NESTORIAN ERRORS, 
A. D. 429 

The Emperor Theodosius, not content with hav- 
ing, together with his co-emperor, Honorius, A. D. 
413, threatened the aforesaid Anabaptists with 
death, seems to have finally been seduced so far as 
to endeavor to compel the orthodox believers to 
assent to the very absurd errors of the Nestorians. 
Among others, he intended to compel, as one of 
the chief opponents of said errors, Cyril of Alex- 
andria, the purity and uprightness of whose faith 
was very conspicuous. He threatened him with a 
certain edict (apparently with severe punishment), 
if he would not desist from his views, or at least 
accept the doctrine of Nestorius. Of this we find 
the following account in the Chronijk van den 
Ondergang der Tyrannen: "Cyril, a celebrated 
teacher, strenuously opposed the heresy of Nes- 
torius; but as the Emperor Theodosius, who, in 
many respects is greatly praised, was somewhat 
infected with the doctrine of Nestorius, he sent 
Cyril an edict, severely threatening him, if he 
would not assent to the doctrine of Nestorius." 
Fifth book, pag. 151, col. 21, from Merula, jol. 
352. 


THE TYRANNY OF THEODOSIUS, BISHOP OF JERUSA- 
LEM, TOWARD MANY UPRIGHT PEOPLE, BUT IN 
PARTICULAR, TOWARD A PIOUS TEACHER 
OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH, WHO 
WAS FIRST SCOURGED AND THEN 
BEHEADED, A. D. 453 

Not only the Emperor Theodosius, who was a 
secular judge, but also one Theodosius, Bishop of 
Jerusalem, who ought to have been a spiritual 
judge, yea, a shepherd and leader of the flock of 
Jesus Christ, caused no small disturbance among 
the orthodox, well-meaning, and beloved friends of 
God. 

Of Theodosius, the secular Judge and Emperor, 
we have already spoken ; we now speak of Theodo- 


sius of Jerusalem, who, though only the administra- 
tion of the spiritual law was committed to him, 
nevertheless, showed himself not less of a tyrant 
than the former, oppressing on account of their 
obedience to God, not only the souls and con- 
sciences of men, but also their bodies, even unto 
death. With regard to this, ancient writers fur- 
nish us among others, with the following example : 
That he had a certain pious minister of the church 
of Christ scourged and beheaded, and after his 
body had been dragged through the city, he caused 
it to be thrown before the dogs ; simply because the 
latter, together with other pious Christians, op- 
posed his wickedness. Compare Merulae Tract, 
jol. 370, with P. J. Twisck, chron. 5th book, paq. 
160, col. 1. 


BENJAMIN, A DEACON OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST, 

AFTER SUFFERING MANY TORMENTS, FOR 

THE NAME OF THE LORD JESUS, PUT TO 

DEATH WITH A KNOTTY STICK IN 

PERSIA, A. D. 456 

This Benjamin was a deacon of the Christian 
church in Persia, who, when opportunity offered 
itself, also proclaimed the doctrines of the holy 
Gospel to the people, at which Geroranes, the King 
of Persia, took such offense, that he caused him 
to be cast into prison, in which he remained with- 
out deliverance for two years. After this a certain 
ambassador came to the King to transact some 
state business. Having heard of Benjamin and his 
dreary confinement, he besought the King to set 
him free. The King consented, yet on the condi- 
tion, that the prisoner should not speak to any of 
his magi or priests of the Christian religion or dis- 
pute with them. The ambassador promised the 
King in Benjamin's name that his command should 
be heeded. But when he came to Benjamin, and 
admonished him to this, Benjamin answered: "I 
do not wish to do what you have promised in my 
name. I can not withhold the doctrine of the light 
of the Gospel, which I have received from God, 
from others, not communicating it to them ; for I 
have learned from the Gospel how severely those 
will be punished, who bury the talent which has 
been given them to gain something therewith, in 
the earth." 

In the meantime, the King, knowing nothing of 
the answer which Benjamin had returned to the 
ambassador gave command to release him from his 
confinement. Benjamin once more free, ceased not 
to exhort the people as before, and to set the light 
of the holy Gospel on the candlestick. When this 
had continued for about the space of one year 
after his liberation from prison, new complaints 
were brought against him before the King, who 
had him brought before him, and commanded him 
to renounce the God whom he served, on pain of 
bodily punishment. Then Benjamin asked the 
King : "What punishment, beloved King, does he 
deserve, who deserts and renounces thee and thy 


200 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Honoric, king of the Vandals, persecutor of Christians, consumed by worms and lice, AD 477 


government, and submits himself to, and serves 
another lord ?" The King answered : "Such a man 
deserves punishment on body and property, yea, 
the severest penalty of death." Benjamin asked 
again saying : "What punishment does the man de- 
serve who forsakes his God, the Creator of all 
things in order to exalt one of his servants as God, 
and to give to a creature the worship due to God 
alone?" 

These words so incensed the King, that he com- 
manded his guards to sharpen twenty reeds and to 
thrust them between the flesh and the nails of his 
fingers and toes. But when the King saw that the 
pious martyr endured all this with steadfastness, 
yea, regarded it but very little, he, after other tor- 
ments, ordered the executioners to prepare a knotty 
stick, which by cutting away the branches, was 
made as sharp as a stick of thorns. This he caused 
to be thrust into the nether part of his body, and 
then pulled backwards and forwards, until the 
faithful servant and professor of Christ ended his 
life under the hands of the executioners, like a de- 
fenseless lamb that is led to the slaughter and opens 
not its mouth. Compare the account of Abr. Mel- 
linus, 2d book, fol. 260, col. 1, 2, taken from 


Theod., lib. 5, pag. 38, and Mend, Graec, with 
the annotation of P. J. Twisck, Chron., 5th book, 
page 191, col. 1, from Hist. Eccl. Tripart, 2d part, 
lib. 11, cap. 33, Hist. Andr. Hondorff, fol. 20. 


THE CRUELTY OF THE ARIAN KING, HONORICUS, 

ALSO CALLED HUNNERICUS, THE SECOND 

KING OF THE VANDALS, TOWARD SOME 

BISHOPS AND ELDERS WHO WOULD 

NOT SWEAR, AND OTHER 

CRUELTIES, A. D. 477 

A. D. 477, Honoricus, King of the Vandals, an 
adherent of the Arian sect, arose with great vio- 
lence against those who would not assent to his 
views, cruelly persecuting, and lamentably mal- 
treating them. He had honorable women and 
maidens suspended naked; their bodies burned 
with torches ; their breasts and arms cut off ; hot 
pitch applied to their back, breasts and sides ; he 
also caused them to be drawn up, and heavy stones 
tied to their feet, etc. 

When he proposed to many that they should 
swear an oath, some thought it not contrary to God, 
but the bishops and elders of the church of Christ 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


201 


would not swear, saying that it was prohibited in 
the Gospel, since Christ says : "Swear not." There- 
upon they were martyred, or at least severely pun- 
ished. Those, however, who had been prevailed 
upon to swear, did not escape free, for, according 
to ancient writers, he punished both alike; these, 
because they had sworn contrary to the command 
of the Gospel, and those, because they refused to 
swear. 

In the meantime, the distress and misery were 
so great that scarcely a house could be found that 
was not filled with wailing and lamentations. 

After this terrible tyrant had put to death, by 
these and similar torments, as well as exiled, a 
countless number, God, after many plagues had 
been sent upon that country, awfully punished 
him : worms and lice so gnawed his flesh that his 
whole body became putrified, one member drop- 
ping off after another, so that he was buried piece- 
meal, thus coming to a horrible and not less igno- 
minious end — the evident vengeance of God for 
his tyranny against the Christians. Compare P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., 5th book, pag. 16(5, col. 2, with 
Chron. Carionis, lib. 3, fol. 29. Eccl. Caspar Hedio 
3d part, lib. 2, cap. 18-21, 25, 27, Chronol. Leonh. 
Krantz., lib. 3, fol. 87, 89. Paul. Merula, fol. 381, 
382. Hist. Andr., fol. 180. Jan. Crespin, fol. 139. 

Note. — It is stated that about this time, until the 
year 495, and afterwards, there were made in 
different councils held in Africa five hundred and 
five laws (called canons or rules), in which among 
other things it was resolved by the Roman church : 

1. "That the children of the Donatists, (namely 
those Donatists who had renounced the doctrine of 
Donatus) shall not be rebaptized." 2. "That those 
who say that a child is not to be baptized for the 
forgiveness of sins, etc., are excommunicated." 
3. Act. 23. "That the agitation about baptism 
should be suppressed by military force." Seb. 
Franck, Chron. der Roomsche Concilien, fol. 48, 
col. 2-4, etc. 

Note. — From the third article it appears: 1. 
That at this time there were people who stirred up 
agitation about baptism, that is, infant baptism, for 
this was now practiced by the Roman church. 

2. That these people were suppressed by military 
assistance or force. What views, besides this 
article, these people held, or in which manner they 
were suppressed, we have not been able to ascer- 
tain; hence we let this suffice. 


"Rest assured of this," he writes, "and doubt 
not that those who, for the name of Christ are bap- 
tized in their blood, without which no man shall 
receive eternal life, that is, who has not previously 
been converted from his sins through repentance 
and faith, and redeemed through the sacrament of 
faith and repentance, that is, through baptism." 

When Fulgentius here speaks of those who, for 
the name of Christ are baptized in the blood, etc., 
he plainly indicates thereby, that blood was shed 
then inasmuch as people were baptized with it as 
it were, that is, such people as he speaks of further 
on, namely, "who are converted through repent- 
ance and faith, and redeemed through the sacra- 
ment of faith and repentance, that is, through 
baptism," etc. 

However, if to any one the above words of Ful- 
gentius appear rather too obscure for the purpose 
in view, we leave him to the free and unrestrained 
enjoyment of his own judgment. 

Note. — At this time, namely about the close of 
this century, those who opposed infant baptism 
were so hated by the Roman church, that in a cer- 
tain council of Carthage, two persons, whose names 
we for certain reasons omit, were condemned, be- 
cause they had denied infant baptism. Bapt. Hist. 
2d part, page 436, taken from the 9th chapter van 
de Doop gerbruyken der Roomsche Kerke, fol. 
460. 

As to the persons themselves that were con- 
demned, we commit them to God, since our only 
aim is to show how exceedingly the afore-men- 
tioned doctrines were hated, and those, who de- 
fended them, oppressed, yea, condemned at that 
time. With this we conclude our account of the 
martyrs of the fifth century. 


THE BLOODY OPPRESSION OF THE BELIEVERS, 

WHICH IT APPEARS, OCCURRED IN THE TIME 

OF THE TEACHER, FULGENTIUS, A. D. 498 

It appears that at this time the persecution and 
martyrization of those who were baptized accord- 
ing to the ordinance of Christ was still in progress ; 
of which the God-fearing teacher Fulgentius makes 
mention to his contemporaries. Bapt. Hist., 2d 
part, page 464, num. 12, from D. Vicec, lib. 3, cap. 
3, from Fulgentius, lib. de fide ad petrum, cap. 30. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 

OF THE MARTYRS IN THE SIXTH 

CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE SIXTH CENTURY 

[Shortly after the beginning of this account, 
Alcimus is introduced who declares that baptism 
was prefigured in the suffering of Christ ; his testi- 
mony, however, in regard to this, is reserved for 
another place. 

Cassiodorus follows Alcimus, saying that in 
baptism believers are regenerated to new creatures. 

He is followed by Fortunatus, who speaks of the 
virtue and benefit of baptism, saying that those 
who are regenerated by baptism, become children 
of God. 

People who indicate that infant baptism is not 
in accordance with the holy Scriptures. 

The council of Ilerda, in Spain, establishes va- 
rious canons or rules against the Anabaptists and 
those baptized by them; forbidding to eat with 
them. 

The council of Agathe decrees that all Jews who 
desire baptism must first be instructed for eight 


202 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


months, with the catechumens. Confession of faith 
preached to those desiring baptism (see margin as 
well as column). 

In the first council of Constantinople it is de- 
creed that the Eunomians and Montanists must 
first walk for a considerable length of time with 
the church (brotherhood), hear the holy Scrip- 
tures, and shall then, if found faithful, be bap- 
tized. 

Of certain persons termed fanatics, who pre- 
vailed upon the imperial councilors, to abolish 
infant baptism. 

Justus Origelitanus says excellent things with 
regard to the nature and efficacy of baptism. 

One Peter, and his companion Zoroaras defend 
Anabaptism. 

An account, from Gregory, of certain Jews, 
some of whom were baptized on Easter, others on 
Whitsuntide, after- previous instruction. 

Vincentius shows that it was customary to re- 
nounce, before baptism, all pomp, and the works 
of Satan. 

Of the white robes put on the newly baptized, 
and the gifts it was customary to present to them. 
How Brunechildis, the daughter of Arthanagil- 
dus, was rebaptized. 

Of Euthimius, who entertained some that had 
been baptized, forty days ; and how he admonished 
them. 

Touching a certain prayer pronounced over the 
candidates, containing very beautiful sentiments 
respecting the dignity and benefit of baptism. 

It is held that Theophilus Alexandrinus differs 
from the Roman church, in regard to holy baptism 
and the holy Supper. 

The followers of Donatus again cited, and ex- 
cused in various things. 

Christian novices, before baptism, divided in 
two classes. 

Statements with regard to the corruption of the 
writings of the ancients ; yet that on the subject of 
baptism authentic testimonies still remain. With 
this we have abbreviated and concluded this cen- 
tury.] 

Although in the sixth century, Roman darkness, 
as regards the corruption of divine worship, began 
to rise more and more, and the divine and evan- 
gelical truth necessarily had to sink out of sight at 
times, inasmuch as the Roman Bishop and others, 
who held with him, began, as it were, with the 
black smoke of manifold superstitions, shame- 
fully and lamentably to darken the bright and 
transparent commands of Christ, as baptism, the 
holy Supper, the command not to swear, and oth- 
ers; so that baptism on faith was converted into 
infant baptism, the Lord's Supper into a super- 
stitious mass, the command not to swear, into a 
permission to swear, and other articles also greatly 
corrupted ; yet in the meantime nevertheless, there 
were people, yea, eminent persons, and even such, 
at times, as (living in quiet as they did) were reck- 
oned to belong to the Roman church, through 


whom the aforesaid darkness was illuminated, the 
superstitions removed, and the pure truth of the 
holy Gospel brought to light as a brightly shining 
sun; inasmuch as they, opposing infant baptism, 
recommended baptism upon faith ; abolishing the 
mass or transubstantiation, taught the simple Sup- 
per of Jesus Christ; rejecting, according to the 
doctrine of Christ and James, oaths and swearing, 
commanded the people not to use oaths, or to 
swear at all. 

But it would require too much time to treat on, 
and show, all these things ; hence we shall follow 
the custom we adopted in the beginning, and speak 
principally of baptism, showing briefly, by whom 
and in what manner the same was practiced accord- 
ing to the rule of Christ and the usage of His apos- 
tles, and confirmed by doctrine or example. 

Alcimus writes (lib. 1, de Orig. Mundi) in the 
6th Cent. Magdeburg., fol. 112, concerning the 
doctrine of baptism: "That baptism is prefigured 
in the suffering of Christ." Thereupon follows a 
certain verse from Alcimus, in which baptism is 
compared to the water which flowed from Christ's 
side, and to the blood of the martyrs ; of which, 
however, we will not speak further at present, as 
we intend to reserve it for a place where it will be 
more to the purpose. Jacob Mehrning also notices 
this verse in Bapt. Hist., page 467. 

A.D. 508.— Or at the time of the Emperor An- 
astasius, surnamed Flavius Valerius, the highly 
enlightened and gifted Cassiodorus, is stated to 
have lived and written, who says with regard to 
baptism (on Cant., cap. 7) "that it is a divine 
fountain, in which believers are regenerated to 
new creatures." /. M., Bapt. Hist., page 467. 

What else is this, than what our Saviour Him- 
self says (Mark 16:16), that believers must be 
baptized; and (John 3:5), that one must be born 
again of water and of the Spirit; which accords 
with the words of Paul (Tit. 3 :5), where he calls 
baptism the washing of regeneration, because, be- 
lievers, when they are baptized, must forsake the 
old life, and be regenerated into a new life. Rom. 
6:4. 

Cassiodorus, on Cant., cap. 4, teaches (Bapt. 
Hist., page 468), That all believers shall (or must) 
be baptized. "There can be," he says, "no be- 
liever without the washing of baptism (that is, no 
true believer, who can stand before God and His 
Word, without baptism; for He who commanded 
faith, also commanded baptism). 

Again, in cap. 7; "No one can enter the church, 
who has not previously been washed with the water 
of baptism, and made to drink of the fountain of 
wholesome doctrine. This well agrees with the 
words of the apostle, who thus testifies of himself 
and of the Corinthian church: "For by one Spirit 
we are all baptized into one body . . . and have 
been all made to drink into one Spirit" (I Cor. 
12:13). By this, the apostle (like Cassiodorus) in- 
dicates that all who are true members of the church 
of Jesus Christ, must have communion in two 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


203 


things : First, they must have been made one body 
with each other by baptism. Secondly, they must 
have been made to drink into the Spirit, or the 
doctrine of the divine Word ; which, as every intel- 
ligent person knows, are things that cannot be 
complied with by infants, but only by adult and 
intelligent persons. 

Cassiodorus, on Ps. 23 (page 469), says: "The 
water of refreshing is the washing of baptism, in 
which divine gifts are poured upon the souls that 
have become barren through the withering in- 
fluence of sin, that they may bring forth good 
fruits." 

Again : "The souls of the elect (or of the bap- 
tized) have, in baptism, forsaken the corruption 
of the old man, and are renewed in Christ." 

Again: "As the people (of Israel) were pre- 
served by the Red Sea, in which Pharaoh perished, 
even so, the church of the heathen, has been re- 
deemed, through baptism, from the bondage of the 
devil, and brought into the true promised land, 
the liberty of the Gospel ; and thus she (that is the 
church of the heathen) who was formerly a hand- 
maid of iniquity, has now become the friend of 
Christ, and been washed, through baptism, from 
the filth of sin." 

Beloved reader, attentively consider the last 
three passages of Cassiodorus, and you shall find 
that they, in every particular, indicate that the 
baptism of which he speaks, is not at all infant 
baptism, but such a baptism as Christ commanded 
to be administered upon faith ; for, when he says, 
in the first passage, that in (or through) the water 
of baptism, divine gifts are poured upon the souls 
that have become barren through the withering 
influence of sin, that they may bring forth good 
fruits, he certainly thereby indicates that he speaks 
of such candidates as had previously become bar- 
ren through the withering influence of sin, and to 
whom gifts were now imparted in (or through) 
baptism (namely, by God, for the strengthening 
of their faith), that they might bring forth good 
fruits, which, as everyone knows, can be done by 
none but adult and virtuous persons. By the sec- 
ond passage, in which he says, that the souls of the 
elect (or of the baptized) have forsaken, in bap- 
tism, the corruption of the old man, and are re- 
newed in Christ, he again indicates that the per- 
sons of whom he speaks, had lived, before baptism, 
in the corruption of the old man, wherefore it was 
necessary for them to forsake it in baptism, and, by 
a pious life, to be renewed henceforth in Christ; 
but how this applies to infants, may be judged. 

We now come to the third passage, in which he 
speaks of the passage of the people of Israel 
through the Red Sea. He compares the Israelites 
to those who, having been converted from heathen- 
ism, were baptized; the Red Sea, by which the 
people of Israel were delivered, he compares to 
baptism, through which those who had been con- 
verted from heathenism, had obtained their re- 
demption, according to the soul, depending on the 


merits of Jesus Christ ; Pharaoh, who was drowned 
with his people in the Red Sea, he compares to the 
bondage of the devil, from which believers are re- 
deemed in baptism, through the grace of the Son 
of God; the entrance of Israel into the land of 
Canaan, he compares to the entrance of believing, 
baptized Christians into the true promised land — 
the liberty of the Gospel. Finally he says, in the 
same passage: "Thus she who was formerly a 
handmaid of iniquity, has now become a friend of 
Christ, and been washed from the filth of sin." 

All these things militate so clearly against infant 
baptism, and confirm baptism upon faith, accord- 
ing to the ordinance of Christ, that it seems un- 
necessary to me, to add anything further respecting 
Cassiodorus. The impartial will judge aright. 

About A. D. 515. — Or properly after Cassiodo- 
rus, is placed, in the History of the Holy Baptism, 
the wise, but as it appears, excessively accused 
Fortunatus; from whose writings the author of 
said history adduces several passages, respecting 
which he makes the following annotation in the 
margin: "All the preceding commendations must 
be understood as referring solely to the true bap- 
tism of Christ, which is received as he has or- 
dained it, and which consists in the Word, Spirit, 
and water, and is obtained in (or upon) faith ; and 
not as relating to any self-invented infant bap- 
tism." 

He then shows, page 468 in his account, what 
Fortunatus himself writes concerning it, saying: 
"Of the virtue and benefit of baptism, Fortunatus 
teaches (lib. 10 in Expos. Orat. Dom.) : Man, 
when regenerated by baptism, becomes a child of 
God, who previously, through transgression, be- 
longed to his enemy, and was lost." "Man, before 
baptism," he further says, "is described as being 
carnal, but after baptism, as being spiritual." 

In a letter of the orientals to Symmachus, it is 
written: "Christ our Saviour has taken away, on 
the cross, our handwriting, that we might hence- 
forward, after the washing of regeneration (that 
is baptism) be no longer subject to the sins of our 
wickedness." 

These passages pertain only to adults, or at least 
to such as are possessed of understanding, but in 
no wise to those who have attained to neither years 
nor understanding; for it certainly means some- 
thing, to be regenerated by baptism, yea, to be 
made a child of God, which Fortunatus, in the first 
instance, so expressly confesses. 

Touching the regeneration of water and the 
Spirit, Christ did not command it to the unintelli- 
gent, but to a master of Israel, John 3:5; and of 
those who had put on Christ, through baptism, the 
apostle says : that by faith they became the chil- 
dren of God. Gal. 3 :26, 27. 

Thus also it is a matter of moment, to be carnal 
before baptism, and spiritual after baptism, which 
he nevertheless adds : For, beloved reader, what is 
it to be carnal, but to live after the lusts of the 
flesh ? This, says our author, is done before bap- 


204 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tism ; hence it is also evident that he speaks of a 
baptism before the reception of which one can live 
after the flesh. 

What, on the other hand, is it to be spiritual, 
but to live after the inclination of the spirit ? that 
is, according to the rule which agrees with the 
spirit, and the Word of God ; but this, he states, is 
done after baptism ; hence it follows that the bap- 
tism of which he treats, is of such a nature, that he 
who has received it, can live after the Spirit. 

But how can these two things, namely, to live 
after the flesh before baptism, and after the Spirit 
after baptism, apply to infants, of this he that has 
experience may judge. 

That which is written to Symmachus, in the 
letter of the orientals, is of the same nature ; for 
there it is said of regenerated baptized persons 
that after the washing of regeneration, that is, 
after baptism, they are no longer subject to the 
sins of wickedness; which sufficiently indicates 
that he speaks of such people as are subject, before 
baptism, that is, before they are baptized, to the 
sins of wickedness, but from which they are freed 
after baptism, through the grace of God and a 
holy purpose. Certainly, infants differ widely 
from this. 

A. D. 520. — That at this time, and thence for- 
ward, there were persons who not only taught bap- 
tism upon faith as ordained by Christ, but who 
also, now and then, opposed infant baptism; this 
is unanimously maintained by the well-tried Jacob 
Mehrning, scholar of the holy Scriptures, and the 
very learned Montanus, in these words: "Never- 
theless, as truth cannot remain suppressed, some 
were found, in the course of time, who, seeing that 
infant baptism did not accord with the holy Scrip- 
tures, dared candidly confess this. Of such there 
were many. A. D. 520, and from that time for- 
ward in this century, for several years in succes- 
sion, as may clearly be gathered from the fourth 
canon of the council of Gerunda, in Spain, held the 
afore-mentioned year, in which it was decreed 
concerning catechumens, that they should be bap- 
tized on Easter and on Whitsuntide; but in case 
of feebleness or sickness, also on other days. From 
Cent. Magdeb., Cent. 6, cap. 9, de Synodi. 

For, that those who were born of Christian par- 
ents, and had been brought up from their youth, in 
the Christian religion, were reckoned among the 
catechumens, is evident from the example of Am- 
brose, and his brother, Satyrus, sons of the Chris- 
tian parents Symmachus and Marcellina, as may 
be seen in the oration of Ambrose, on the death 
of Satyrus ; and it is further confirmed by the ex- 
ample of Theodosius, Ambrose, Jerome, Basil, M. 
Augustine himself, his natural son Adeodatus, and 
Alipius ; who though born of Christian parents, as 
already stated, were nevertheless reckoned among 
the catechumens, till the day after previous instruc- 
tion, they were baptized. Bapt. Hist., page 480. 
H. Mont. Nietigh., pages 79, 80. 

Perhaps someone may think, in which of the 


preceding words is infant baptism spoken against ? 
which is nevertheless so distinctly asserted by 
Jacob Mehrning and H. Montanus. We reply, 
that they do not express it in formal words, but 
indicate it by the circumstances which they adduce. 
For, when they, in the first place, speak of the 
fourth canon of the council of Gerunda, in Spain, 
in which it was decreed that catechumens should 
be baptized on Easter and on Whitsuntide, they 
thereby indicate that the baptism of new-born 
infants cannot have been practiced there, because 
infants are born not only on Easter and Whitsun- 
tide, but throughout the whole year; and in an- 
other place it is stated that not only no catechu- 
mens, but no one else, should be baptized at any 
other time than Easter and Whitsuntide. 

In the second place, when they declare that by 
the catechumens here spoken of, there are to be 
understood not only such youths, or scholars, as 
were of heathen descent, but also those born of 
Christian parents, as is proved by the example of 
Ambrose, Satyrus, &c, it shows that many Chris- 
tians, at that time, left their children unbaptized 
till they, after sufficient instruction, as was given 
to the catechumens, were baptized of their own 
accord, on either of the two feasts, Easter or Whit- 
suntide. 

Sebastian Franck calls the catechumens, of 
whom the afore-mentioned council speaks, schol- 
ars of the faith, and relates the decree of said coun- 
cil, as well as the time when the same was held, on 
this wise: "The council of Gerunda, held in the 
seventh year of King Theodoric, passed, among 
nine decrees, also this: That the catechumens, 
that is, the scholars in the faith, should be bap- 
tized only on Easter and Whitsuntide, except im- 
minent death should require it otherwise." Chron. 
Rom. Condi., jol. 73, col. 1. 

About A. D. 525.— Or in the 15th year of Theo- 
doric, King of France, those of the Roman church 
again found themselves in great embarrassment 
with regard to the so-called Anabaptists. The mat- 
ter rose to such a pitch that it was thought well to 
assemble a council against them, as had been done 
by Pope Felix, A. D. 487, at Rome. Accordingly, 
about A. D. 525, the second council against the 
Anabaptists was convened, not at Rome, as the 
first, but at Ilerda, in Spain ; to which there assem- 
bled, as was usually the case, many of the bitter- 
est papistic bishops— in order to extirpate, or at 
least check, the heresy, as.it was called — who made 
a number of rules and laws, not only against the 
Anabaptists, but also against those who, having 
separated from the Roman church, had been re- 
baptized by them; of which rules, among others, 
the following are noted : 

Canon 9. Concerning those who through trans- 
gression have been rebaptized, and have fallen 
without necessity, it is our will, that the statutes 
of the Nicene synod be observed respecting them, 
which are considered to have been passed for such 
offenders: that they shall pray for seven years 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


205 


among the catechumens, and two years among the 
catholics, and then," &c. 

Canon 14. "Godly believers shall not eat with 
the rebaptized." Bapt. Hist., pages 477, 478, from 
the 6th Cent. Magd., cap. 9, fol. 240, ex Decret. 
Synod, Ilerdensis. 

The 13th canon of this synod, also given in the 
same place, we suspect has been misquoted; how- 
ever, as it does not apply here, we leave it in its 
own merit. 

That the 14th canon, however, which speaks 
only of the rebaptized, concerns the so-called Ana- 
baptists, appears from the annotation of Sebastian 
Franck, of Wordens, in part 3 of his Chronijk, fol. 
73, col. 1, who translates this canon thus: "The 
clergy and believers shall not partake of meals 
with the Anabaptists." 

From this it can be seen in what detestation, yea, 
abhorrence, the so-called Anabaptists in the time 
past, were held by the Romanists, inasmuch as 
they were not considered worthy to eat with, even 
as once the Samaritans, publicans, and sinners 
had been regarded by the Jews. 

We will not investigate minutely, whether the 
so-called Anabaptists of that time held the same 
views, in regard to every article, with those who, 
at the present day, are designated by that name ; 
nor will we, if perhaps in some points they did not 
teach aright, or were not fully enlightened, defend, 
much less, praise them ; it suffices us, that they, be- 
sides other good and wholesome articles, men- 
tioned by us in another place, held this in common 
with the Anabaptists of the present day, namely : 
That they did not approve of the baptism which 
by the Romanists is administered to infants, but 
rejected it, so that they baptized, or, at least, bap- 
tized aright at first, those who, having come to 
adult years, embraced their faith. 

It also is praiseworthy in them, that they, not- 
withstanding the anathema of the pope and the 
councils, yea, regardless of persecution, suffering, 
and death, as shall be shown in the proper place, 
maintained and manfully defended their views. 
We know of nothing further that we could say of 
them, from authentic writers, but will commend 
them, as well as ourselves, to God and His grace. 
As regards the manner in which they were pro- 
ceeded against, in subsequent times, as well as 
how they conducted themselves herein, we shall 
show in the proper time and place. 

About A. D. 530. — D. Joseph Vicecomes, in his 
treatise records (Bapt. Hist., page 482), the fol- 
lowing testimonies from the sixth century. 

Of the decree of the Christians, at Agathe, about 
A. D. 530, he says, lib. 3, cap. 1 : "The council of 
Agathe, cap. 13, says: It is the will of all the 
church, that on the eighth day before Easter, the 
confession of faith be preached publicly in the 
church to those desiring baptism."* 

* Touching the Jews who embraced the faith, this rule was es- 
tablished: "A Jew shall be tried for eight months among the 
scholars of the faith, and then, if he assents to it, be baptized." — 
Seb. Franck, Chron., Rom. Cone, fol. 72, col. 3. 


We do not especially favor the decrees of coun- 
cils ; yet, when they agree with the Word of God, 
we accept them, not because men have uttered 
them, but because they have been pronounced al- 
ready in the Word of God. Thus, when it is said 
of all the churches which existed at that time, 
that it was their will that the confession of faith 
should be publicly preached on the eighth day be- 
fore Easter ; and also that it was added, how and 
to whom it was to be preached, namely, before 
those desiring baptism, we find not only that it 
well accords with the Word of God, Mark 16:15, 
16, but, moreover, that not only a few individuals, 
but all the churches, namely, those which dissented 
from the church of Rome, held that view, namely, 
to baptize after previous instruction. 

In the second place, when it is said here that the 
confession of faith should be preached to those de- 
siring baptism (this is, not to infants), it clearly 
follows that the candidates here spoken of, had 
themselves to desire baptism, yea, that they 
themselves had to profess the confession of faith 
preached to them, else there would have been no 
reason to preach it to them. 

Vicecomes (lib. 2, cap. 2, page 483), quotes the 
following words from the 7th chapter of the first 
council of Constantinople : "As many of the Euno- 
mians and Montanists as desire to embrace the 
faith, we receive, as we do the Grecians; on the 
first day we instruct them in Christianity, on the 
second day we receive them as disciples, and on 
the third day we bless them (or require them to 
renounce Satan) ; and thus we instruct them, tak- 
ing care that they walk in the church for a con- 
siderable time, and hear the holy Scriptures, and 
then, and not before, if they are found upright, we 
baptize them. 

This first council of Constantinople is placed, 
according to the order of D. J. Vicecomes, in Bapt. 
Hist., immediately after the council of Agathe, 
held about A. D. 530 ; and although we have long 
searched for it, we have not been able to ascertain 
the correct date of it ; hence we make no change in 
the order. 

After this, Vicecomes places the sixth council of 
Constantinople, in which several things illustrating 
the point we have in view respecting baptism upon 
faith are presented ; but since we find from other 
writers, that said council was not held in this cen- 
tury, but many years after, Vicecomes having 
greatly erred in this, we will not proceed further 
with it here, but reserve our account of it for the 
proper time and place. We therefore turn to what 
is quoted in the 7th chapter of the first council of 
Constantinople, where it is said in regard to those 
of the Eunomians and Montanists who should de- 
sire to unite with that church, that they should not 
be baptized until they had been instructed one, two, 
or three days, yea, had walked for a considerable 
time in the church, and heard the holy Scriptures. 

Take this matter, as you may, and it indicates 
that the Constantinopolitan teachers recognized no 


206 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


other baptism than that administered in their own 
church, namely, after previous instruction; not- 
withstanding the Eunomians and Montanists might 
have alleged that they had been baptized in their 
infancy; yet this was regarded as useless and of 
no value. 

About A. D. 538. — It is recorded that at the time 
of Justin and Justinian, the Roman Emperors, 
there were people, termed fanatics by their op- 
ponents, who brought over to them and persuaded 
the imperial councilors and ministers, that infant 
baptism should be abolished; against which the 
afore-mentioned Emperors set themselves to pre- 
vent it. Concerning this, Jacob Mehrning, in Bapt. 
Hist., page 487, says: "M. Rulichius, page 249, 
from whom M. Glaneus quotes this, acknowledges 
{page 627) that at that time there came forth 
many strange fanatics (he calls them fanatics, 
though they were far more pious teachers and 
Christians than Rulichius and Glaneus, and re- 
proved, 'from the ordinance of the baptism of 
Christ, the encroaching abuses of infant baptism) 
who prevailed on and persuaded the imperial 
councilors and ministers, that infant baptism 
should be abolished. But Justin, and other Em- 
perors would prevent the same by their authority 
and interdiction." 

He then relates, from the constitutions [laws] of 
the Emperors, Justin and Justinian, in what the 
interdiction, or, at least, the decree, ordained by 
these Emperors respecting this matter, consisted; 
from which it can be seen, that not only was infant 
baptism rejected and condemned by those con- 
temptuously called fanatics, but that even by the 
adherents of the Roman church it was not looked 
upon as a command, but merely as a matter which 
was permitted; though at other times again, 
through the decrees of popes and councils, it ex- 
ceedingly prevailed. 

In the meantime, it is gratifying to us, that even 
our opponents, who were strenuous advocates of 
infant baptism, I mean M. Rulichius and M. Glan- 
eus, confess that also at that time (about A. D. 
538), there were persons who sought to abolish 
infant baptism; from which it appears that the 
trujth of baptism upon faith could not be suppressed 
to such an extent that it did not, according to op- 
portunity, manage to raise its head ; and that, on 
the other hand, the error of infant baptism did not 
triumph to such a degree that it did not have its 
opponents when opportunity offered. Thus blooms 
the rose among thorns, Cant. 2:2. God remains 
faithful to His promises, Ps. 33 :4. Christ is with 
His church even unto the end of the world, Matt. 
28:20. 

About A. D. 542. — Justus Origelitanus says (in 
Cant., Bapt. Hist., page 469) : "They that are 
baptized in the name of Christ, are filled with the 
Holy Ghost." Doubtless, this has reference to Acts 
3 :37, 38, where Peter says to those who inquired 
what they must do to be saved : "Repent, and be 
baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus 


Christ . . . and ye shall receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost ;" which certainly was not spoken to 
infants. 

Again : "The fair church of Christ," says Jus- 
tus, "is cleansed by the washing of water (that is, 
by baptism)." 

Thus also Paul speaks, Eph. 5 :26, saying that 
Christ has cleansed His church with "the washing 
of water by the word ;" whereby he indicates that 
the believers of whom he speaks were cleansed not 
only with the washing of water (that is, baptism), 
but also by the Word, that is, the doctrine of the 
Gospel ; upon which passages Justus has based his 
declaration, though he, for the sake of being brief, 
it seems, is silent about the Word. 

Again: "They have ascended," he says, "from 
the washing of water, when they, having received 
the forgiveness of sins by baptism, have increased 
in Christ." 

His speaking here of ascending, that is, climbing 
up from, the washing of water, and of increasing 
in Christ, clearly shows that he does not speak of 
infants, but of persons who have the ability to 
climb up from the washing of water, and to in- 
crease in Christ, which is peculiar to believers 
only. 

He then gives some additional testimony, in the 
same place, corroborative of the point we have in 
view ; but as it is expressed in almost the same lan- 
guage as that quoted above, we pass it by, so as not 
to repeat the matter. 

About A. D. 545.— Or immediately after Justus 
Origelitanus, Olympiodorus is placed, who speak- 
ing of baptism, says : "The spiritual birth, which is 
effected by the washing of regeneration, resembles 
the death (of Christ) in that those who are re- 
generated, in this divine washing, are buried with 
Christ in Baptism." Bapt. Hist., 469, from Olym- 
piodor., in Eccles., cap. 3.* 

Certainly, this is clearly following, though in 
other words, that which the apostle presents to 
the consideration of the believing Romans (Rom. 
6:3), where he asks them whether they knew not 
that they all who were baptized into Jesus Christ, 
were baptized into His death ; that like as Christ 
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the 
Father, even so they also should walk in newness 
of life. We need not say anything further in re- 
gard to this, since the matter as to what persons 
and what baptism are here spoken of, is self- 
evident. 

About A. D. 548.— Or 550, it is related, that one 
Peter, as well as one Zoroaras, defended Anabap- 
tism; but as to how and in what manner it was 
done, whether they rejected infant baptism, or 
whether they recognized no other baptism than 
that upon faith and administered in their own 
church, or otherwise, of this I find no other ac- 
count than that recorded in Bapt. Hist., page 472, 

* Olympiodorus (in Eccles., cap. 9), says: "Through the washinit 

?L r =, egen i rat '° n 7 h,,e rob " a ? . also « iven us > wW^ doubttaS 
remain clean as long as we refrain from the evil of sin."— Bant 
xiist., page 474. Ffc * 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


207 


from Nicephorus, where it is said : "Nicephorus 
writes (lib. 17, cap. 9) : Peter, Bishop of Apamea 
in Spain, and Zoroaras, a Syrian monk, defended 
Anabaptism."* 

But if these men have erred in other respects 
perhaps, which in that dark age could very easily 
have been the case, we would not justify it; it 
suffices us that they, as regards this article, dared 
oppose the common doctrine of the Roman church ; 
which could not have been done without peril of 
life, or, at least, not without reaping calumny and 
obloquy. 

About A. D. 551. — That it was customary at this 
time, to baptize on Easter and Whitsuntide, is re- 
corded from Gregory, who says that several Jews 
were baptized on Easter, and several on Whitsun- 
tide. Bapt. Hist., page 472, from Gregor., lib. 5, 
Hist. cap. 11. 

That this custom of baptizing on Easter and 
Whitsuntide, pertained only to believing peni- 
tents, and in no wise to children, we have previous- 
ly sufficiently shown ;. to which we refer the read- 
er. But to remove all doubt, mention is also made 
in the same place, in the History of Holy Bap- 
tism, of the preaching or doctrine of faith which 
it was then customary to present to the novices, 
who were to be baptized. As an example of this 
is adduced the wife of Sigibert, who, having been 
rightly instructed in the faith through such holy 
preaching, was ultimately baptized. Bapt. Hist., 
page 472, from Greg. Turon., lib. 4, cap. 26. 

About A. D. 553. — When, as it appears, the good 
old custom of renouncing and forsaking Satan, 
which was wont to be done publicly at baptism, in 
connection with the confession of faith, began to 
cease, or, at least, fall into neglect, it was revived 
and again brought to remembrance, by the teacher 
Vincent ;f concerning which the following obser- 
vation is found in Bapt. Hist., page 473, from 
Vine, lib. 21, cap. 6: "It was the custom, to re- 
nounce (that is, forsake), before baptism, all pomp 
and the works of the devil, which can certainly not 
be done by children." 

About A. D. 556. — At this time white robes were 
put on the newly baptized, after baptism. Thus, 
Gregory Turon (lib. 5, cap. 11), says — that at 
Avernio five hundred Jews were baptized at once, 
and then went their way clothed in white robes. 

Gifts were also presented to the baptized ; thus, 
Guentheramus gave presents to Clotharius, when 
the latter had been baptized. Bapt. Hist., p. 484, 
from Gregor. Turon., lib. 10, cap. 27. 

This putting on of the white robes after baptism, 
signified that the newly baptized, having put off 
the garment of sin, must henceforth be clothed in 
the clean white robe of true righteousness and holi- 
ness; to which applies Eccl. 9:8: "Let thy gar- 
ments be always white" ; and Rev. 3 :4 : "They shall 


* P. J. Twisck, it appears, makes mention of this Peter, for the 
year 586, as we have also noted for that year. 

t This Vincent is to be distinguished from Vincent Victor, who 
is spoken of in another place. 


walk in white"; also, Rev. 19:8: "And to her was 
granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, 
clean and white: for the fine linen is the right- 
eousness of saints." 

As to the gifts presented to the newly baptized, 
this indicated that God thus imparts His heavenly 
gifts and blessings to them ; as Peter said to those 
whom he exhorted to be baptized : "And ye shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 2:38). 

However, if it should be, that with this putting 
on of white robes, and giving of presents, there was 
coupled any superstition (of which, however, we 
are not aware), we would not commend, but rather 
speak against it. What we have in view here, is 
simply this, that such ceremonies were not, and 
could not be, performed with infants, inasmuch as 
the latter are too weak in understanding to compre- 
hend, as well as in ability to perform, the same. 
Hence it follows, that such baptism, at that day, 
was not administered to infants, but to adult, rea- 
sonable, and believing persons. 

About A. D. 560.— It is stated, from Adon. 
Aetat. 4, and Turon., lib. 4, cap. 26, that Brune- 
childis, the daughter of Arthanagild, had been bap- 
tized, probably in her infancy, by the Arians, but 
that subsequently, having been married to Sigibert, 
she was rebaptized in the name of the Holy Trinity. 
This is related more fully by J. Mehrning, in Bapt. 
Hist., p. 475. But whether Brunechildis contin- 
ued in the true footsteps of the faith, after her re- 
baptism, of this we have no account ; it suffices us 
to know that having been baptized, probably in 
infancy, by the Arians, she was afterwards, in adult 
age, rebaptized, or, at least, baptized aright, upon 
confession of faith; the first baptism having no 
foundation. 

About A. D. 562.— Joseph Vicecomes (lib. 5, 
cap. 53), quotes Cyril Monachus, in the life of the 
Patriarch, Enthymius as follows : "When he had 
entertained for forty days, several persons that had 
been baptized, had admonished, and diligently in- 
structed them in godliness, and inculcated in them, 
in various ways, the things necessary to their sal- 
vation, he let them depart in peace." Bapt. Hist., 
page 484. 

In what place and manner, and under what cir- 
cumstances, the afore-mentioned persons were 
baptized, is not stated ; hence we must be content 
with what is shown, from which we can infer that 
those persons were baptized upon faith, seeing they 
were yet confirmed, after baptism, in the doctrine 
of faith and godliness ; and thus it follows that the 
custom of baptizing upon faith was practiced at 
the place where this occurred. 

About A. D. 570.— Vicecomes (lib. 4, cap. 12), 
quotes, from Severus Alexandrinus, a certain pray- 
er, which it was customary, at that time, for the 
teacher to pronounce over those who were bap- 
tized : "O God ! take out from them the old man, 
which destroys himself through the lusts of error', 
and clothe them with the new man, which is daily 
renewed in Thy knowledge." 


208 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Again (lib. 5, cap. 27) : "O Lord God ! who hast 
imputed unto us redemption through Christ, and 
through the water, in the Holy Ghost, hast given to 
these Thy servants, regeneration; Thou, O Lord, 
who lovest light, confirm and uphold them in holi- 
ness, that they, illuminated by the light of Thy 
grace, and standing before Thy table, may be 
made worthy of Thy eternal salvation." 

In chap. 38 he relates how the candidates, im- 
mediately after baptism, were brought to the holy 
Supper, and crowned with wreaths, and how the 
teacher then addressed them, exhorting them to 
joy and holiness of life, saying: "Dear brethren, 
sing a hymn of praise unto the Son of the Lord 
over all, who has crowned you with royal crowns. 
You have now, my beloved, received unfading 
crowns from the waters of Jordan, through the 
power of the Holy Ghost. Dear brethren, ye have 
put on today the glory of the baptism of the heav- 
enly Adam." 

He finally adds the wish addressed by the teach- 
er to God, saying : "The holy God give you holiness 
with this seal wherewith you are sealed, and mark 
you with the ring of a sweet-smelling anointing, by 
this baptism wherewith you are baptized ; may He 
make you worthy of His kingdom, and crown you, 
instead of this perishable crown, with the crown of 
righteousness and every good work." 

Having quoted this much, Jacob Mehrning says : 
"All this is utterly inapplicable to infant baptism." 
Bapt. Hist., page 486. 

Same year as above. — It is stated that about this 
time there also lived Theophilus Alexandrinus, 
who, it appears, held views entirely different from 
those of the Roman church, with regard to bap- 
tism as well as to the holy Supper ; so that he wrote 
against the manifold adjurations which were wont 
to be connected with the consecrating of the bap- 
tismal water, as also against transubstantiation or 
the essential change of the bread into the body of 
Christ, as follows: "A false Christian (namely, 
one who deems adjurations over the baptismal 
water necessary), does not consider that the water, 
in holy baptism, is sanctified by the Word of God 
(which was wont to be spoken to the candidates 
who confessed the faith), and the advent of the 
Holy Ghost; and that the bread of the Lord, by 
which the body of our Saviour is signified, and 
which we break for our sanctification, is conse- 
crated through invocation of the Lord." Observe, 
he does not say, transubstantiated, but conse- 
crated* See Bapt. Hist., page 486, from D. J. 
Vicecomes, lib. 1, cap. 14. 

A. D. 586. — Long since, namely, for the year 
317, we cited Donatus, and showed, according to 
Seb. Franck, Chron. Rom. Kill., letter D., that he 
was a very learned Bishop of Carthage, a native of 
Numidia, and that he taught that the pope and his 
adherents did not have a Christian church, and, 


* What he says about the water of baptism, is somewhat obscure, 
and hence every one may judge for himself; but that which he 
remarks about the bread of the Supper, is clearer. 


consequently, no true baptism; and hence held that 
those who had been baptized in the Roman church, 
needed to be rebaptized, saying that there was 
only one church, one baptism, one faith, one Gos- 
pel, and that no children should be baptized, but 
only believing adults who desired baptism. At first 
almost all Africa adhered to him. See the place 
indicated above. 

This doctrine, however, did not die with him, 
seeing mention is made of his followers much later 
(namely A. D. 586), that they at that time, under 
the leadership of one Peter, Bishop of Apamia, 
rebaptized those who had been baptized by the 
orthodox (or Catholic) church. See concerning 
this, P. J. Twisck, Chron., 6th book, page 201, 
col. 1, from Greg. lib. 8, Merul., fol. 446. Also our 
account for the year 548. 

Note. — The followers of Donatus, of whom we 
speak here, have of old been severely accused by 
their opponents of gross errors, tyranny, &c, but 
are acquitted thereof by other celebrated authors. 
Nevertheless, we would not accept them in every 
respect, but only in those of their teachings which 
are good and true. 

H. Bullinger compares them throughout to the 
Anabaptists, or as he calls them Baptists, saying : 
"Here our Baptists again disclose their ignorance, 
when they teach that no one should be compelled 
to that which is good, or to the faith;" and, contin- 
uing, he says : "They resemble the ancient Baptists, 
the Donatists, in every respect." "These," he 
writes further, "were of the opinion, that heretics 
should be allowed to live without restraint and with 
impunity in their faith;" that is, wjthout persecu- 
tion or blood shedding. They were opposed by Au- 
gustine. H. Bulling., lib. 5, fol. 216, 222* 

As to the accusations formerly brought against 
their faith as well as their life, these have been re- 
futed by several prominent authors. "It would be 
desirable," writes P. J. Twisck, "if we ourselves 
had their writings, doctrines, and deeds ; for, if it 
is true, that they resemble the Baptists in every re- 
spect, and are not willing that any one should be 
compelled in matters of faith." It is therefore 
sufficiently, as Bullinger says, evident, that they 
were unjustly accused. Chron., 5th book, page 147, 
col. 2. This is more fully spoken of in the ac- 
count for the year 317. 

About A. D. 600.— We will now bring the his- 
tory of baptism in the sixth century to a close. We 
would adduce more writers in confirmation of said 
matter, but we fear that many authors of that time 
did not write faithfully and uprightly; besides, 
that many of their decendants, in order to give 
color to infant baptism and similar doctrines, ap- 
pear to have corrupted their writings, of which 
many excellent men have complained. 

Jacob Mehrning, in his Indachtigmaeckinge over 
het Doopsel, of the 6th century, says : "Thus the 
Centuriatores Magdeburgenses, also the two doc- 

, * The writings of Bullinger against the said people are more 
fully explained elsewhere. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


209 


tors, Calixtus and Brandanus Detrius, in their dis- 
putations about baptism, must themselves confess 
that in this century, and much longer, the Christian 
novices were divided into two classes, as in the 
primitive church, which observed a distinction be- 
tween the catechumens and believing applicants for 
baptism, or the "elect," as they were called by the 
ancients. 

But continuing, he writes the following con- 
cerning the corruption of the writings of the true 
teachers: "Here must also be taken into consid- 
eration, that which the Centuriatores Magdeburg- 
enses, Dr. Calixtus, Dr. Meysner, Dr. Johan Ger- 
hard, Dr. Guil. Perkins, in Ementito Catholicismo, 
and many others so frequently complain of, namely, 
that the writings of the fathers and the primitive 
teachers of the church, have been so amazingly 
abused, in manifold ways, corrupted, interpolated 
and mutilated. Pray, who indeed will be our sure- 
ty, that Augustine and others of the fathers have 
written and taught about infant baptism, all that is 
ascribed to them. 

However, the fathers and teachers of the church, 
whose writings are extant; constitute but a very 
small part of the whole number. Were the writ- 
ings, books and testimonies of the countless hun- 
dreds and thousands of other teachers of the 
church, bishops, and laymen experienced in the 
Word of God, who have written, preached, taught, 
and spoken against it, in various parts of the 
wide world, to come to light, and could we also 
have the original manuscripts of the fathers, name- 
ly, those who have written against infant baptism, 
and compare them together, we would be aston- 
ished to see how faithfully the truth has been 
maintained in all ages, but also, how it has been 
suppressed by the innovators of baptism (that is, 
those who baptized infants). Yet, however muti- 
lated and corrupted the writings of the fathers as 
we now have them, are, there are nevertheless to 
be found in them many very excellent testimonies 
respecting Christ's true ordinance of baptism, and 
very confused ones as regards infant baptism ; for 
which we owe special thanks to God, and to Him 
only, who thereby mightily confirms us in the 
truth. Bapt. Hist., 2d part, pages 481, 482. 

Thus, not we, but those who have unfaithfully 
dealt with the writings of the fathers, are the cause 
that we must here close our account of the baptism 
of this time; however, in some of the following 
centuries, where we meet with more authentic 
writers, we shall be able to explain and amplify 
this more conclusively. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE SIXTH CENTURY 


duced, as the first proof of the martyrization of this 
time, and circumstantially explained. 

Mention is made of various severe persecutions 
that occurred about this time, of which fifteen are 
enumerated; it is also shown in what kingdoms, 
principalities, or countries they took place, as well 
as who the tyrants were by whom all this was com- 
mitted against the Christian believers. 

An explanation that it is hardly credible that all 
the countries in which the afore-mentioned fifteen 
persecutions occurred, were subject to the Roman 
See ; which is amplified, and its signification shown. 

Arnold, a teacher of the Gospel, martyred in a 
forest, in France, and buried by his wife, presented 
as a pious martyr in the year 511. 

In the margin (in connection with Arnold) a se- 
vere persecution in Arabia, A. D. 520, is spoken 
of; what inference may be drawn from it. 

The oppression of the church and the servants of 
God, under Granus, son of the King of France, is 
noticed, for the year 562 ; then, in the margin, men- 
tion is made of forty Christian peasants, who suf- 
fered under the Longobards; however, for cer- 
tain reasons, they are not absolutely accepted. 

After this, for the year 566, other forty persons 
are mentioned, the most of whom were put to 
death with the sword, because they would not 
commit idolatry, or forsake Christ; in the margin 
an explanation is given with reference to this, and 
they are recognized by us as true martyrs. 

Golauduch, a Christian woman of Persia, put to 
death, by the Persian Priests, A. D. 598. 

Some remarks respecting the time in which Eva- 
grius lived, who has recorded the last mentioned 
instance of martyrdom.] 

Here will be the proper place to sing, with 
mournful voice, the blood-red verse of Alcimus, 
mentioned by us on a former occasion ; as the au- 
thor of the history of holy baptism places Alcimus 
at the very beginning of this century, which ar- 
rangement meets our approbation. With regard to 
the oppression of the Christians of his time, he ex- 
presses, in the German language, as a song of 
mourning, the following lines: 

Der Kriegsknecht stack in Christi Seit; 
Wasser sprang aus der Wunden weit: 
Den Vcelkem das die Tauff bedeut; 
Der Martrer Blut auch so fleuszt heut. 

The soldier pierced the Saviour's side: 
There gushed forth the wat'ry flood, 

A sign* of the baptismal rite; 

Thus flows today the martyrs' blood. 

The question now is, what Alcimus meant to say 
by this verse. He treats of two things : 1. of Bap- 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE SIXTH CENTURY 

[The verse of Alcimus, reserved in the preced- 
ing account of baptism in this century, is now ad- 


* The reader will please insert here, "to the peoples," which is 
contained in the original, but had to be omitted in the translation, 
as the metre would not allow it. The words in question are virtually 
implied in the verse as translated by us, and we would not have 
deemed it necessary to call attention to the circumstances, were it 
not for the fact, that van Braght bases part of his following argu- 
ment on these very words. — Translator. 


210 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tism; 2. of Martyrdom, comparing thereto the 
water that flowed from Christ's side, when a sol- 
dier had pierced it with a spear. 

I. Of Baptism. — Of this we shall say but little, 
since this subject has been sufficiently discussed in 
our preceding account of baptism as practiced in 
this century ; yet, in order to proceed properly, and 
to pass by no part of said verse, we say that the 
resemblance which Alcimus here finds in the blood 
that flowed from Christ's side, saying that it was 
to the people, or to the peoples, a sign of baptism, 
neither can nor may be applied as referring to in- 
fant baptism; for not only the sense, but even 
the words of the verse, would contradict this. As 
to the words, he does not say that said water is 
to infants, a sign of baptism, which he certainly 
must have said, had he meant infant baptism by it ; 
but he says that it was to the people, or peoples, 
a sign of baptism, which word (people, or peo- 
ples), in holy Scripture as well as in secular au- 
thors, is generally understood to mean adult, or, 
at least, intelligent persons, who can be taught, 
or to whom something can be signified ; as, for in- 
stance, Christ said to His disciples : "Go and teach 
all nations, baptizing them," etc. Matt. 28:19. 
Moreover, that infants are unable to understand 
the signification of little things, even to say noth- 
ing of this great mystery of baptism, is so clear 
that it cannot, with truth, be controverted. 

II. 0} Martyrdom. — This is what we have 
chiefly had in view ; for he says in the last line of 
the afore-mentioned verse: "Thus flows today the 
martyrs' blood." Certainly, here he indicates that 
at the time when he wrote this, the blood of the 
(believing) martyrs was shed; for this is indi- 
cated by the word, today, which generally is un- 
derstood to mean the present day; but here prop- 
erly signifies the present current time. Moreover, 
as to the persons whom Alcimus notices as mar- 
tyrs, and of whom he says that their blood flowed 
today, they cannot be understood to have been 
other than orthodox martyrs, or, at least, such as 
held the same views and doctrines with him; for 
the first, ancient, and true Christians called none 
martyrs, but their fellow believers who had suf- 
fered or been put to death for the faith. From 
this, it would seem, has proceeded the old adage, 
which is still used: "Not the suffering, but the 
good cause from which he suffers, makes the 
martyr." 

Of the correct views of Alcimus, and, conse- 
quently, of those whom he calls martyrs, especially 
in regard to baptism, we have spoken before, and 
have also just now given some explanation with 
reference to it ; which must suffice for the present. 
The impartial reader may decide for himself. In 
the meantime it behooves us to investigate and, if 
possible, show when, where, why, and how said 
martyrs suffered. But, not being able, on account 
of the scarcity of ancient writers, to ascertain all 
this, we shall content ourselves with what we do 


find in regard to it, and shall therefore endeavor 
to follow the most faithful and truthful records. 


of various severe persecutions instituted in 
and about this time, against the chris- 
tians, in many kingdoms, principalities, 
provinces, and countries, by jews, 
heathen, and false or apostate 
christians; of which we shall 
briefly point out the 
principal ones 

We have counted from Abraham Mellinus alone, 
besides from many ancient writers referred to by 
him, who have more fully recorded the martyr- 
dom of this time, fifteen persecutions in this cen- 
tury, which were raised most vehemently against 
the Christians, in various countries. 

In order to condense this as much as possible, so 
as not to weary the reader, we shall not present 
the account of the afore-mentioned author word 
for word, but extract from it the pith and im- 
port thereof, and present it as clearly as is pos- 
sible for us to do. In the 2d book of the History of 
the Persecutions, etc., under the head: "Expo- 
sition of Satan bound a thousand years," fol. 293, 
col. 1-4, are described, in consecutive order, among 
other things, the afore-mentioned persecutions, 
within the bounds of the sixth century, namely, 
from A. D. 518 to the close of the century ; which 
we have briefly summed up thus: 

First of all, mention is made of many oppres- 
sions by the Jews, heathen, and others ; by which all 
Christendom was kept in commotion, from the 
reign of the Emperor Constantine the Great, to that 
of Justin the Great (fol. 293, col. 2) ; however, 
since said oppressions occurred before the time of 
Justin the Great, that is before A. D. 518, we will 
leave them, as not belonging to the number men- 
tioned by us. 


OF THE PERSECUTIONS WHICH TOOK PLACE AFTER 

THE TIME OF JUSTIN THE GREAT, FROM 

A. D. 518 TO THE CLOSE OF THIS 

CENTURY 

1. It is stated that besides the persecution insti- 
tuted in the beginning of the reign of Justin the 
Great, by Theodoricus, the Arian, against those 
who were called orthodox Christians, a certain 
Jewish tyrant, called Dunan, in the fifth year of 
Justin's reign, violently persecuted the Christians 
in the city of Nagra. Fol. 293, col. 3. 

2. Of Amalric, King of the West Goths, in 
France, it is stated that he heaped much vex- 
ation and contempt upon his own wife, Clotildis, 
because she was orthodox in the Christian faith! 
Ibidem, from Hist. Gall, and Isidor., in Chron. 

3. It is declared that in the third year of 
Justinian the Great, nephew of Justin the Great, 
a persecution against the Christians was raised by 
the Samaritan Jews in Palestine. Ibidem, col. 4. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


211 


4. Afterwards there was also a short persecu- 
tion of the Christian believers, by the Vandals, in 
Africa. Ibid. 

5. Also, the Arian persecution of the Chris- 
tians, by Totila, which is said to have taken place 
under Justinian, in Italy, is mentioned by the same 
writer. 

6. Besides these the persecution originated by 
the Jews and Samaritans, at Csesarea, in Palestine, 
was repeated in the 29th year of the reign of 
Justinian. See above. 

7. We read that in the time of Justin II., the 
Christian churches in Pers-Armenia were op- 
pressed by Chosroe, the King of Persia. See 
above. 

8. In the third year of said Justin, Alboin, the 
first King of the Longobards, invaded Italy, hav- 
ing sworn to annihilate all the blood of the Chris- 
tians with the sword. Ibid. 

9. At this time, also a Saracenic persecution 
against the Christians was carried on, by Man- 
ucha. 

10. After this, Chilperic, an enemy of the Chris- 
tians, exercised great cruelty towards them. Fol. 
294, col. 1. 

11. In the first year of Mauritius, Emperor of 
the Cappadocians, the Persians instituted a per- 
secution with fire and sword, in Armenia. Ibid. 

12. At this time, the Longobards, throughout 
Italy, did not cease to oppress the Christian be- 
lievers. See same place. 

13. About this time there was also a persecu- 
tion in France. 

14. Also in Spain. 

15. In England the heathen sought to exter- 
minate the Christians. For full information on the 
above persecutions, read, aside from the above ref- 
erences, A. Mell, pages 293, 294 and on to p. 303. 

Note. — In said fifteen persecutions that oc- 
curred in this century, we notice that twelve dif- 
ferent kingdoms, principalities, and other coun- 
tries, are mentioned, situated not only in Europe, 
much less in Italy (which can also be reckoned 
only as a single country), where the Roman 
Bishops chiefly had their seat and ungodly do- 
minion ; but also, yea, for the most part, in Asia 
and Africa, which were far remote from Italy, 
being different parts of the world. The countries 
mentioned, in consecutive order, are these: 1. 
Nagra, a place or region in Arabia. 2. France. 3. 
Palestine. 4. Some region in Africa. 5. Italy. 6. 
Caesarea. 7. Pers-Armenia. 8. A certain country 
where the Saracens persecuted the Christians. 9. 
Another country, where Chilperic tyrannized. 10. 
Armenia. 11. Spain. 12. England. These are the 
countries mentioned, besides those that are passed 
over, but were also subjected to persecution. 

Who will believe now, that all these countries 
were under the Roman Empire? Yea, more than 
that, what man of ordinary intelligence will think 
that they all adhered to the Roman See, and, con- 


sequently, that all the persons who were slain in 
said fifteen persecutions, professed the Roman re- 
ligion ? Surely, this does by no means appear ; but 
the opposite is quite evident. In the first place, 
because we do not find, in reliable authors, that the 
authority and power of the Roman Bishop, or 
Pope, was so great at this time, that not only 
Europe, but also Asia and Africa, constituting the 
whole of the ancient or then known world, bowed 
to him ; which would nevertheless have to be proved 
and established, for in these three divisions of the 
world are situated the above-mentioned kingdoms, 
principalities, and countries, and the afore-men- 
tioned persecutions occurred not only within, but 
also beyond their boundaries. 

In the second place, that at this time there were 
people in different countries, who, not only in re- 
gard to baptism, but also in other points of re- 
ligion, held views entirely different from what 
those of the Roman church understood and be- 
lieved, is so clearly evident from our previous ac- 
count of baptism in this century, that no reason- 
able person will dispute, much less be able to 
refute it. 

Hence it follows, that to all appearance, in the 
above-mentioned fifteen persecutions, not a few, 
or, at least, some, orthodox believers were put to 
death, as true martyrs; for such have of old been 
paramountly subject to persecution. We shall 
therefore investigate what people have at this 
time, as pious witnesses of Jesus, steadfastly testi- 
fied to the truth of their Saviour by their death, 
and sealed it with their blood. 


ARNOLD, A TEACHER OF THE GOSPEL AND THE 

CHRISTIAN FAITH, MARTYRED IN A FOREST 

NEAR PARIS, A. D. 511 

It is stated that in the eleventh year of the sixth 
century, a certain pious teacher, by the name of 
Arnold, not willing to bury the talent given him by 
God, in the earth, but if possible, to obtain some 
spiritual gain for Christ his Saviour, by preaching 
the Gospel, exchanged his life for death in the for- 
ests of France, and has thus been reckoned among 
the number of pious martyrs. Concerning this, 
P. J. Twisck, among others, notes the following, 
for the year 511: "When Arnold preached the 
Gospel of Christ and the Christian faith in a forest 
in France, near Paris, he was martyred, and was 
buried there by his wife." Chron., 6th book, p. 
117, col. 2, from Chron. Nicol. Gillem., fol. 44. 

Note. — All the particulars mentioned respect- 
ing said Arnold, clearly indicate the uprightness 
of his mind and views, as well as how far he stood 
aloof from the superstitions of the Roman church, 
which superstitions then had already risen very 
high. The latter especially appears from various 
circumstances. 

First, Because it is stated that he did not preach 
the traditions and legends of the Romanists, but 
the Gospel. 


212 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Secondly, Because it is shown what he preached 
from the Gospel, namely, Christ and the Christian 
faith, but nothing about the power of the Roman 
bishop, or about the Roman faith. 
_ Thirdly, because it is stated, according to an- 
cient writers, that having been martyred for said 
faith, he was buried there (where he had been put 
to death) by his wife ; but to have a wife the Ro- 
manists had many years before forbidden, to 
teachers and deacons, on pain of deposition. With 
regard to this, the article established about the 
year 495, in a certain papal council, reads as fol- 
lows : "The priests, that is, those who also preach, 
and deacons shall abstain from taking unto them- 
selves wives; if they do not observe this, they 
shall be deposed from their office." Seb. Franck, 
Chron. Rom. Concilen, fol. 48 col. 4, from Concil. 
Aphr. 

Fourthly, because we have found, in the ancient 
registers, in which the names of the principal an- 
cient teachers and martyrs are recorded, not the 
least charge laid against this man, either of super- 
stition, or anything else; although we searched 
diligently, and had others search. 

Note. — It appears that about nine years after 
the death of said martyr, Arnold, namely, A. D. 
520, a great persecution arose in Arabia against 
the Christians; of which P. J. Twisck writes the 
following: "A. D. 520, a seditious Jew, who pre- 
tended to be the second Moses, caused an awful 
massacre and persecution of the Christians, at 
Nagra in Arabia, in the reign of the Emperor 
Justin; he slew the pious Bishop Arethas and 
many thousands of Christians. Chron. 6th book, 
page 180, col. 1, from Nicephor., lib. 16, cap. 6. 
But as we have not been able to obtain reliable in- 
formation, except that which we have shown, con- 
cerning this Bishop Arethas, as to whether he was 
a true and orthodox bishop, as well as in regard 
to the many thousands of Christians who were 
slain with him, as to whether they professed a good 
profession of faith, which we doubt very much, we 
will not concern ourselves with them. Neverthe- 
less, it must be considered, that among so great a 
number there were at least some, here and there, 
who died in the true faith, seeing the same were 
sometimes scattered in various countries. Of this 
we will let the well-meaning reader judge for him- 
self. 


the oppression suffered by the church and 

the servants of god, under granus, 

the son of the king of france 

a. d. 562 

That believers and the leaders of the church of 
God had to suffer great oppression at this time, our 
beloved brother and coworker in Christ, P. J. 
Twisck, deceased, in his time, signified to his co- 
temporaries with these words: "About this time 
(562), the churches and the servants of God were 
greatly vexed by Granus, the wicked son of the 


King of France." Chron. 6th book, page 192, col. 
1, from Paul Merula, jol. 431, hist. Wenc, fol 
78.* 


ABOUT FORTY PIOUS CHRISTIANS SEIZED BY THE 

LONGOBARDS IN ITALY, AND MOST OF THEM 

PUT TO DEATH WITH THE SWORD, FOR 

REFUSING TO COMMIT IDOLATRY, 

A. D. 566 

Shortly after the death of the peasants just 
spoken of in the margin, as the heathen Long- 
obards, according to their custom, were offering 
to Satan the head of a he-goat, about forty meek 
and pious Christians were apprehended. When 
their captors, in honor of Satan, had gone round 
their sacrifice, consecrated it by their sorcerous 
incantations and conjurations, and had bowed their 
heads before it, and worshiped it, they wanted to 
constrain the captive Christians to worship with 
them this head of the he-goat. But most of the 
Christians, preferring to die and strive for life 
immortal, rather than to live and worship the idol, 
refused to bow their heads, which they had always 
bowed in honor to God their Creator, before a 
vain and perishable creature. Thereupon, the ene- 
mies of God and His Anointed, who had not hesi- 
tated to fight against the Lord, and to kick against 
the pricks, put to death with the sword, all of said 
captive Christians who would have no fellowship 
with their idolatry; and thus they (the latter), all 
became blessed martyrs of Jesus Christ. Compare 
A. Mett. 2d book, 1699, page 299, col. 4. from lib. 
5 Dialog., cap. 28. f 


GOLAUDUCH, A CHRISTIAN WOMAN OF PERSIA, 

MUCH TORTURED, AND PUT TO DEATH 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 

CHRIST, ABOUT A. D. 598 

About A. D. 598, in the time of the Emperor 
Mauritius, Golauduch, a woman of Persia, who 
had once been an adherent of the Persian religion, 
but subsequently become converted to Christ, and, 
consequently, had been baptized upon her faith, 
and remained steadfast in the confession of the 
Christian religion, even unto death. Of this, 
Evagrius makes mention, whom we take to be the 
same one of whom we have spoken elsewhere, and 
shown that he has described and commended as 
something praiseworthy, the baptism of candi- 
dates; that is of those who were baptized upon 

* I ?.u tll . e follow ' n 8 y ear > namely, A.D. 563, mention is made of 
forty Christian peasants, whom the Longobards seized and would 
constrain to eat of the food offered to idols; but as they refused to 
do this, they were beheaded together, for the faith in the only God 
, ,!?, Son J esus Cnrist - Compare P. J. Twisck. Chron. page 192, 
from Marianus Scotus," lib. 4, with A. Mell., 2nd book, fol 299 
col. 4, from "Gregor. Dialog.," lib. 5, cap. 27 from trustworthy eye- 
witnesses. Nevertheless, we dare not count them among the true 
defenseless martyrs, since we doubt whether, at their apprehension 
they showed themselves meek. 

t Concerning these martyrs, we have not found that anything 
has been laid to their charge, as regards the uprightness and stead- 
fastness of their faith (as has been stated respecting Arnold) ; nor 
have we discovered anything that is at variance with the views of 
*«? Anabaptists ; , e 1 ce we have accorded them a place among the 
faithful martyrs of Jesus Christ. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


213 


confession of faith. He writes the following of 
said Golauduch: "At that time (namely, in the 
reign of Mauritius), there lived among us, the 
godly martyrs, Golauduch, who, having suffered 
many and severe torments at the hands of the 
magi or Persian priests, finally obtained the mar- 
tyr's crown; of whose life, old Stephen, Bishop of 
Hierapolis, has written an account." Compare 
Evagr., lib. 6, cap. 19; also, Nicephor., lib. 18, 
cap. 25, ex Act. Sabulosis, with A. Mell., 1619, fol. 
301, col 1. 

Abraham Mellinus and J. Mehrning, however, 
differ in regard to the supposed time in which Eva- 
grius (who, it appears, wrote the above account of 
the martyrdom of Golauduch), is said to have 
lived, J. Mehrning referring him to the middle of 
the fifth century, while Abr. Mellinus, on the other 
hand, places him almost at the close of the sixth. 
This difference of chronology we leave to them, 
holding, nevertheless, that they both wrote of one 
and the same person; who was a good historian 
and well versed in ecclesiastical affairs. 

This person, then, called Evagrius, having com- 
mended as praiseworthy the baptism of the above 
mentioned candidates, that is, of those who had 
previously been instructed in the faith, afterwards, 
it appears, also makes mention of said martyress 
Golauduch, virtually calling her his sister in the 
faith, and a member of his church. For, when he 
says: "At that time, there lived among us, the 
godly martyress Golauduch," what else does 
he mean to indicate thereby, but that said woman 
belonged to, and lived in, the very church of which 
he was a member, or, at least, whose doctrine he 
loved and cherished? Besides, we have not found 
anything laid to her charge, as regards her faith 
and good conversation, as has been stated of the 
preceding martyrs ; hence we are satisfied with re- 
gard to her. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY 

[Adrian is mentioned as the first one who, in this 
century, declared himself, not so much in words as 
in deed, against infant baptism ; as to the manner, 
however, in which the Romanists proceeded against 
him, shall be more fully spoken of elsewhere. 

The Bracerensian papists, to prevent the decline 
of infant baptism, confirm it in a certain council. 

The pious adhere to the true ordinance of the 
baptism of Christ, notwithstanding the power of 
the pope and the decree of the afore-mentioned 
council. 

In the meantime there were baptized (that is, in 
adult age), Anastasius, the Persian; Theodorus or 
Theodus; many hundred Jews; some in Upper 
and Lower Saxony ; some in England. 

Probation or examination in the faith, was at 


this time practiced by the orthodox, as did, among 
others, Amandus, Birinus, another teacher. 

Those of the Jewish nation now became mem- 
bers of the Christian church ; some of whom, after 
confessing the faith, asked for baptism. 

How Zeno of Verona was wont to address the 
candidates; explanation of his address. 

The example of the Egyptian divines, who 
preached the doctrine of faith, before baptism, to 
the candidates, is followed by others at this time. 

The time for baptism, which was fixed on Easter 
and Whitsuntide, is ordained to everyday, on ac- 
count of infant baptism. The pope also decrees 
that during the mass the kiss of peace be offered 
to the people, in order that the mass, which, it ap- 
pears, was esteemed but little by many, might be 
regarded the more highly. 

The believers were not turned away from their 
faith, by said papal decree; nay, it appears that 
even some of the Roman church declared them- 
selves against the papal superstitions; as, 1. Isi- 
dorus, 2. Cesarius, 3. Adelheymius, 4. Agatho, 
5. Julian Pomorius. In the meantime, mention is 
also made of Isidorus of Spain, and what he has 
written on baptism, namely of the applicants for 
baptism, and fellow prayers. 

The Christian parents, Lutgerus and Libuga, left 
their son Lutgerus unbaptized, till he, having ac- 
cepted the faith in France, was baptized thereupon. 

Finally, the difference between those of the Ro- 
man church and those who administered baptism 
upon faith. 

Conclusion of the account for this century.] 

Notwithstanding in this century the seat of anti- 
christ was exalted to its highest altitude, inasmuch 
as the Emperor Phocas, A. D. 606, conferred upon 
the Roman Bishop the title of Papa, that is, pope 
or supreme father, which name was first assumed 
by Boniface III, writing, in the decrees emitted by 
him to enjoin obedience: "We will, we ordain, we 
decree, we command, etc.; thus I will, thus I or- 
dain, thus I decree, thus I command;" whereby 
many superstitions and human inventions were 
presented to the people as the Word of God ; such 
as image worship, salutation of the sacrament, ob- 
servance of infant baptism as necessary to salva- 
tion, etc. ; yet many pious people not only refused 
to obey all these things which the pope prescribed, 
but some even flatly opposed it, daring to censure, 
reject, and contume, some in this and some in that 
respect, the papal and Roman superstitions, as 
among other points, was done with regard to in- 
fant baptism and all that pertains to it, with which 
not only some of the common people, but also some 
eminent and learned men were dissatisfied, so that 
they abandoned it altogether, yea, indicated by 
words and actions, that they were opposed to it; 
which became manifest even in Rome, as will be 
shown in the proper place.* 

* A.D. 605. — At this time, Gregory the Great wrote: "If a 
bishop, whoever he be, is called a general bishop (that is, pope), 
the whole church decays." In Regist., lib. 8, cap. 188. Again: "I 
candidly say that any one who calls himself a general bishop, or 


214 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


A. D. 606. — In this very year, in which the pope 
was accepted, by Phocas, as the head of the gen- 
eral Latin church, the celebrated teacher and Bish- 
op Adrian publicly opposed infant baptism, wish- 
ing neither to baptize the children himself, nor to 
have them baptized, but utterly refusing them bap- 
tism; on account of which he was accused by 
Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, to John, 
Bishop of Larissa, as appears from a certain letter 
sent by Gregory to John, in which, among other 
things, the following is contained: "The second 
article of the accusation against Bishop Adrian is 
this : that he refused baptism to infants, thus let- 
ting them die." Centur. Magd., Cent. 9, cap. 4, 
page 141, according to the account in Bapt. Hist., 
page 496, and H. Mont. Nietigh., page 80. 

It appears, indeed, that this said Adrian was 
criminally punished for his views against infant 
baptism, and because he let the infants die un- 
baptized, as is stated by the ancients, and shall ap- 
pear more fully in our account of the martyrs.* 

A. D. 610. — Infant baptism, it appears, being at 
this time, held in very little esteem by many, 
whether in consequence of the teaching of the 
above mentioned Adrian, or for some other reason, 
so that it was considered useless and not necessary 
to salvation, those of the Roman church publicly 
opposed this sentiment, in order either to eradicate 
it, or, at least, to excommunicate it by the anathema 
of the pope ; wherefore, A. D. 610, in the second 
Bracerensian Council, among other articles, it was 
established, decreed, and published : "That infants 
must be baptized, as necessary to their salvation." 
Seb. Franck, Chron., Rom., Kett., jol. 74, col. 2. 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., 7th book page 213, col. 2. 

But how the true Christians, who rightly ob- 
served Christ's ordinance of baptism, conducted 
themselves with reference to this matter, and 
whether they suffered any persecution on account 
of it, is not clearly expressed, but, if necessary, 
shall be explained more fully in its proper place. 

About A. D. 620.— Although, through the 
authority of the Roman Pope, who had been chosen 
the supreme head of the church, and through the 
decree of said Bracerensian council, infant baptism 
was now so firmly established, that no one who 
wished to remain a member of the Roman church, 
dared utter a word against it ; yet, among those who 
loved Christ more than the pope, and esteemed the 
Gospel more highly than the decrees of popes and 
councils, the true faith and the true ordinances of 
Christ, especially the article of baptism, were never- 
theless maintained aright; concerning which very 
much might be stated, had not the books and writ- 
ings of the pious been so lamentably and tyran- 
nously destroyed by those of the Roman church. 

desires to be called such, is, in his exaltation, the forerunner of 
antichrist.' Lib. 4, Epist. 30, Sam. Velt., Geslacht Register, page 

* A.D. 608. — Theophilactus taught at this time, that everyone 
must and may read the holy Scriptures, if he would rightly instruct 
his children in the words of the IfOrd, On Eph. 6. Sam. Velt . 
page 152, 


However, we are in possession of as much testi- 
mony from authentic writers, as is necessary to 
establish said matter. 

As regards this, that baptism was at that time 
administered to adult persons, by those who were 
opposed to the decree of the Roman church in the 
matter of infant baptism, appears from three cir- 
cumstances: 1. from the time of baptizing; 2. 
from the place of baptizing; 3. from the persons 
baptized. 

As to the time of baptizing, Easter was expressly 
specified in the Anti-idiorensian council, where it 
was established, in opposition to those who bap- 
tized new-born infants everyday: That no one 
should be baptized at any other time than Easter, 
except in case of imminent death. In Deer. Antis.; 
until which time instruction in the faith was usually 
given to the candidates, as is sufficiently shown 
above. 

As regards the place of baptizing, it was not in a 
font or basin, but in the wilderness, here and there 
at the rivers, whither, as every one can easily judge, 
new-born infants cannot go ; neither can they ob- 
serve the manner then customary at baptism, name- 
ly, to kneel during baptism, and go in or under 
the water ; of which there were many instances at 
this time in warm countries. Among others, Bede 
(hb. 2, cap. 16), writes: "That Paulianus baptized 
many persons at noon, close by the city of Trovul- 
singa, in the river Trehenda." 

This manner of baptizing, by the ancients called 
immersion or submersion, has long been observed, 
even up to the present time, especially by the east- 
ern and southern nations, who understood the 
Greek word baptisma (baptism), or baptizo (to 
baptize), to signify a total immersion or submer- 
sion in water ; however, it is found that, according 
to the idiom of the Greek language, said words do 
not only signify an immersion or submersion in, 
but also a washing or sprinkling with, water. For 
instance, baptisma, baptismos, is translated sprink- 
ling, washing, dipping, etc. See Dictionar. Tetrag- 
lott., in quo voces Latine omnes cum Grceca, Gallica 
and Belgica inter pretatione. Amsterodami ex 
Typographic Ravesteniana, A. D. 1634. 

However, we leave the above mode of baptism to 
its own merits ; it suffices us to have shown that it 
could not be administered to infants, and that those 
who were baptized after this manner, must have 
been adult and intelligent persons. 

As to the third point, namely, what persons were 
then baptized, has been made sufficiently clear from 
the two preceding circumstances of time and place ; 
but over and above this, we will mention some per- 
sons. At this time there was baptized at Jerusalem, 
Anastasius the Persian; at Constantinople, the 
celebrated Persian woman, Csesarea, with her hus- 
band and many of her followers were baptized ; in 
Bavaria, Theodorus, also called Theodo or Theo- 
dus, with much people received baptism ; in Spain, 
many hundreds of Jews were baptized upon faith, 
the number of which are reckoned by some writers 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


215 


to have been several thousands, which number, 
however, in order not to overstep the bounds of 
truth, we have not dared to give or follow; the 
same, occurred in Upper and Lower Saxony, in 
England, and other countries, where at this time, 
it is stated, countless numbers attained to the 
faith, and were baptized upon it. This is stated in 
Bapt. Hist., page 491, from John Magnus, Paul 
Diaconus, Bede, Hist. Gaith, etc., which should be 
compared together. 

About A. D. 632. — At this time, probation and 
examination in the faith were practiced by the 
orthodox teachers. Those who presented them- 
selves for baptism, whether of Jewish, heathen, or 
Christian parentage, were first proved and ex- 
amined in the faith, which examination generally 
took place six or seven times in the week before 
Easter or Whitsuntide; to the end, that the can- 
didates, having made a good confession, and hav- 
ing been confirmed in the faith, might be bap- 
tized at the approaching holiday. This custom is 
noticed by many writers; we will, however, pre- 
sent only this brief extract from Bapt. Hist., page 
492: "The Bishop or teacher Amandus made the 
son of Dagobert a catechumen, before he baptized 
him." Regina, lib. 1. In Lower Saxony, Birinus 
observed it as a rule not to baptize people before 
he had catechized, that is, instructed, them. Bede, 
lib. 4, cap. 16. Another teacher, according to Met- 
aphrastes, instructed a certain Jewish virgin, before 
he baptized her. Vincent states of Arnulph, that 
he baptized (that is, after previous instruction), 
a sick person, who shortly afterwards got well. 
Lib. 23, cap. 76, by which we would not indicate 
that baptism possesses any virtue to heal the body, 
but that it is administered to intelligent persons, 
and that upon faith, according to the ordinance of 
the Lord, Mark 16:15,16. 

About A. D. 646. — As the doctrine of faith in 
Jesus Christ was now greatly spreading, and the 
believers increased in many places, so that the 
church, which at times, on account of persecution, 
had been wont to hide in dens and caverns, began 
to arise here and there, as herbs spring up from 
the earth in spring-time, her growth was seen to 
proceed not only fom those who, torn of Chris- 
tian parents, accepted the faith, nor only from 
heathen who became converted to the faith, but 
principally from the Jews, who had previously 
been very bitter against the Christians, but who 
now came in multidudes, as occurred not long since, 
to be baptized in the name of Christ, upon faith ; 
an example of which is given by Gregory of Turon 
(lib. 5„ Chron. Franc, cap. 11). Some Jews who 
desired baptism, said with one accord to the teach- 
er : "We believe that Jesus is the Son of the liv- 
ing God, promised unto us for a Prophet and Mes- 
siah ; therefore we pray to be washed by baptism, 
that we may not abide in our sins." The teacher 
rejoiced at this confession, and, in the night before 
Whitsuntide, when it was customary to watch and 
to pray, he went to the place of baptism, situated 


without the city walls ; where the whole multitude 
fell down before him and prayed to be baptized. 
Bapt. Hist., page 499. 

About A. D. 658. — D. Joseph Vicecomes quotes 
from Zeno of Verona, a certain address which the 
latter was accustomed to direct to the candidates, 
saying, when they were about to be baptized : "Re- 
joice (beloved friends) ; it is true, in baptism you 
are divested of your clothes, but adorned in the 
heavenly robe, you shall soon ascend again, white 
as snow ; whosoever will not defile it, shall inherit 
the kingdom of heaven." Bapt. Hist., page 501, 
from Vicecom., lib. 4, cap. 10, from Zeno's second 
homily on baptism. 

All these are certainly expressions that relate to 
intelligent persons, and not in the least applica- 
ble to infants; for, when, in the first place, it is 
said here: "Rejoice," this is the opposite of sor- 
row, which sorrow the candidates previously were 
wont to feel on account of their manifold sins, 
over which they wept and mourned ; but now, be- 
ing washed in baptism, through faith and the blood 
of Christ, they had reason to rejoice, even as the 
jailer, who, having been baptized, rejoiced with 
all his house, Acts 16; and as the Ethiopian, who, 
after baptism, went on his way rejoicing, Acts 
8:39. 

The putting off of the bodily clothes before bap- 
tism, and the putting on of the snow-white robe of 
righteousness in baptism, as well as the solicitude 
not to defile it with sin after baptism, referred to in 
the above address to the candidates, is no work for 
infants, but only for adult persons ; hence, the bap- 
tism spoken of there, is not infant baptism, but a 
baptism peculiar solely to the adult and those of 
reasonable minds. 

About A. D. 670. — At this time, the holy baptis- 
mal ordinance of Christ was still rightly observed 
in Egypt; namely, the doctrines of the faith were 
preached to the candidates before baptism; yea, 
this practice was so highly regarded there, that 
some in other countries, separating from the Ro- 
man church in this article resolved to restore the 
Christian religion according to the example of the 
Egyptian Christians ; hence they were styled begin- 
ners in the Christian religion. In allusion to this, 
quotation of Vicecomes (lib. 2, cap. 3), from 
Jacob Pamelius' book on Tertullian, is no doubt 
made, saying that the beginners in the Christian 
religion (that is, those who, separating from the 
Roman church, established the Christian religion 
upon the original apostolical foundation), adopted 
the practice of catechization (that is, teaching the 
doctrines of the faith), before baptism from the 
Egyptian divines. Bap. Hist., page 501. 

About A. D. 682. — As the believers who strictly 
observed the baptismal ordinance of Jesus Christ, 
increased in no small degree, as can be inferred, in 
many countries, yea, even in the Roman church, so 
that, in regard to the time when baptism should be 
administered, they had, here and there, settled on 


216 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


a fixed time ; namely, that it should take place on 
one of the two feasts, Easter or Whitsuntide, and 
that to this end, the catechumens should previously 
be notified and, in the weeks preceding said feasts, 
instructed in the faith; those of the Roman church, 
as may easily be judged, were not well satisfied 
with this, seeing it was a means to completely set 
aside infant baptism; and not only this, but to 
abolish entirely all other superstitions and human 
inventions, which, with so great labor and costs, 
by councils and otherwise, had been introduced into 
the Roman church, ostensibly for the best. It was 
therefore — in order to prevent this, it seems — 
deemed expedient to renew and republish the im- 
port of what had previously, A. D. 610, been de- 
creed in the second Bracerensian council, namely : 
"That infants should be baptized, as necessary to 
their salvation," that is, on pain of damnation. 
But what was really done in this matter, is not 
expressed in all its particulars; however, it has 
not been passed by unnoticed, seeing Pope Leo 
II, according to the Roman notation, the 82d, who 
then occupied the chair, ordained: That during 
mass the kiss of peace should be offered to the 
people, and that baptism might be administered any 
day. P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 233, col. 1, from 
Hist. Georg., lib. 4. Chron., S. F., fol. 19. 

From this it can be seen that the pope's principal 
concern was, not to lose the mass and infant bap- 
tism, both of which were chief points upon which 
rested the Roman church, as the temple of Dagon 
upon two pillars, which were threatened, now by 
this Samson and now by another, by the arms of 
the Spirit and the Word of God, yea, were in 
danger of being utterly pulled out and broken. 
Now, what does the pope to prevent this ? As re- 
gards the mass, he ordains that during mass the 
kiss of peace should be offered to the people. But 
how could he more insinuatingly and affably bind 
the common people to the superstition of the mass, 
than by offering to them the kiss of peace? But 
when the lion's skin will not reach, that of the fox 
is brought into requisition. 

As to infant baptism, what does he ordain to pre- 
serve it ? This : that baptism might be administered 
any day. But someone may think: This does not 
concern infant baptism ; consequently the latter is 
not confirmed by this decree. We answer, that the 
pope certainly sought to establish it thereby ; for, in- 
asmuch as infant baptism was weakened in no small 
degree by the practice of the believers who bap- 
tized their candidates only on Easter and Whit- 
suntide, as already stated, there was hardly another 
remedy to maintain infant baptism, than to ordain 
all times and days for baptism, for thus it could be 
administered to new born infants, who are born 
not only on Easter and Whitsuntide, but through- 
out the whole year, and who, according to his view, 
must then also be baptized. 

A. D. 699.— The decree of Pope Leo II, for the 
confirmation of infant baptism and the mass, as 
mentioned for the year 682, did not have the effect 


of causing the believers who had separated from the 
Roman church, and maintained the baptism upon 
faith, to swerve in the least from their faith and 
the practice of the same; on the contrary, it ap- 
pears that still more, yea, even learned men, sep- 
arated from the Roman church in this said article 
and joined the little flock of Christ, so that some of 
them who formerly had maintained infant baptism, 
the mass, the traditions, the meritoriousness of 
good works, and the seven sacraments, now taught 
differently, and opposed the pope in these points. 
Of these, five persons are mentioned in the Chron- 
icles, whom P. J. Twisck, in his seventh book, for 
the year 699, notes, saying: "Isidorus, Cesarius, 
Adelheymius, Agatho, and Julian Pomorius taught 
in opposition to the pope concerning the holy 
Scriptures, justification, good works, that there are 
but two sacraments, and concerning the name of 
the church, which was not built upon Peter, but on 
Christ." Page 238, col. 1, from J oh. Munst., fol. 
121. ' 

But pre-eminently is mentioned by other writers, 
Isidorus of Spain, who, having at one time been 
a strenuous advocate of infant baptism, now taught 
and wrote such things as could, with reason and 
judgment, in no wise be applied thereto. For, com- 
menting on John's baptism, which even our oppo- 
nents admit to have been administered only to 
adult, penitent sinners, he compares it to the bap- 
tism of his own time, saying : "I hold that all who 
were baptized by John unto repentance, were pat- 
terns of the catechumens." Bapt. Hist., page 498, 
from Vicecpm., lib. 2, cap. 4, from Isidorus of 
Spain, in lib. de Div. Officiis. 

What kind of persons these catechumens were, 
and how they were instructed before baptism in 
the doctrine of the faith, called the catechism, has 
already been sufficiently .explained, and it is 
not necessary to repeat it here : yet, over and above 
this, we will adduce the man's own words, as I 
have found them translated in Bapt. Hist., page 
499. "After the catechumens," he says, "there is 
the second grade — the applicants for baptism or 
fellow prayers, that is, those who are striving for 
the doctrine of the faith, and sobriety of life, in 
order to receive the grace of Christ in baptism, 
and, hence, are called fellow prayers, that is, such 
as pray for the grace of Christ." Lib. 2, de Div. 
Officiis, cap. 21. 

What took place ultimately with these appli- 
cants for baptism, in his time, he indicates with 
these words: "On Palm Sunday (that is, the 
Sunday before Easter), the Symbolium (that is, 
the twelve articles of faith) is delivered to the ap- 
plicants for baptism, on account of the approach- 
ing glorious Easter feast, in order that they, as 
striving to receive the grace of God (that is, bap- 
tism) should first learn the faith which we con- 
fess." Bap. Hist., page 499, from hid., lib. 2, de 
Div. Off., cap. 27. 

These words, compared with the preceding ones, 
clearly show, what custom as regards baptism, pre- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


217 


vailed at that time in the church of which he 
speaks ; namely, that the catechumens, or, at least, 
the novices, were first instructed in the catechism, 
that is, in the doctrine of the faith, until they were 
meet to be baptized ; and that from that time on, 
they were called applicants for baptism, and fel- 
low prayers, because they desired baptism and 
prayed for it. This could certainly not be done by 
new-born infants. 

As regards that which is noted elsewhere from 
Isidorus {exlib.de summo bono), with reference to 
other views on baptism which he is said to have 
entertained, we do not accept it as having been 
written by him, and this for good reasons, which, 
however, it would require too much time to relate ; 
unless it be said that he wrote it before he was con- 
verted, and had obtained light on the matter ; and 
here we would let the matter rest. 

A. D. 700. — We come now to the last year of 
this century, in which we perceive that at that 
time not only those of Jewish or heathen parentage, 
but also those born of Christian parents, were in- 
structed in the faith before they were admitted to 
baptism ; so that the Christians who sought the sal- 
vation of their children, left them unbaptized, till 
they were able themselves to confess their sins, 
profess the faith, and thereupon desire baptism 
as a sign of the same. Among these, the two pious 
Christians, Lutgerus and his wife Libuga, are not 
considered of the least. It is stated of them, that 
they left their son Lutgerus unbaptized, till he, 
having learned and accepted the faith in Jesus 
Christ, in France, was baptized thereupon, A. D. 
700. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 7th book, page 239, 
col. 1, from Grondig. Bewijs., letter B. 

We now leave this account of baptism in the 
seventh century ; in which, on the one side, the op- 
pressed believers practiced the true ordinance of 
the baptism of Christ upon faith; while, on the 
other side, the oppressing Roman church deviated 
the longer the more from it, so that they not only 
forsook, but also opposed the command of Christ 
to baptize only upon faith. 

On the other hand, infant baptism and many 
other superstitions were so firmly established, that 
almost no one except those who did not fear the 
anathema of the pope, and death, dared oppose 
these things. It is truly astonishing, what P. J. 
Twisck writes, and truthfully, concerning this, in 
his conclusion to the seventh century, with which 
we will also conclude this: "The Pope of Rome, 
having been declared head of all the churches by 
the Emperor Phocas, gradually established the 
boundaries of his power, authority and jurisdiction, 
not only in, but also beyond, Italy, yea, beyond 
Europe, and this with exceeding haughtiness. The 
pomp and greatness became unendurable ; yea, the 
avarice of the clergy generally was so great that 
they obtained ecclesiastical offices through pres- 
ents, in order to derive temporal gain therefrom, 


and would scarcely baptize an infant, unless mon- 
ey was given them for it." 

Herewith enough has been said regarding this 
matter, and we will therefore turn to the martyrs 
who suffered at this time for the truth of Christ 
their Saviour. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE SEVENTHy 
CENTURY 

[After the oppression exercised by the heathen 
and Arians, the Roman Pope also began to direct 
his arrows against the orthodox Christians. This 
forms the beginning of our account. 

Bishop Adrian, of whom we have already related 
that he refused baptism to infants, is now criminal- 
ly punished for this cause, A. D. 606. 

Concerning the chapter of criminal matters, some 
further observations are made ; also, as to whether 
said Adrian really suffered corporal or capital 
punishment. 

Thereupon follows a notice concerning the fol- 
lowing martyrs, noted by P. J. Twisck for the 
years 614 and 628, and recorded by us. 

Many Christians apprehended by the Longo- 
bards, and put to death, A. D. 614, because they 
refused to eat, in honor of the idols, food offered to 
idols. 

Of the sufferings of the Christians in Persia, 
and how a great many of them were delivered 
from imprisonment, given for the year 628. 

Mention made of eight severe persecutions insti- 
tuted against Christian believers, from A. D. 622, 
to the close of the century ; the places where these 
persecutions happened, and the names of some of 
the tyrants who originated them. 

Further observations concerning said persecu- 
tions and martyrs, which concludes the account of 
the martyrs of this century. 

When first the heathen and then the Arians, the 
former by open, wicked violence, the latter by 
secret, tyrannical hypocrisy, had for a long time 
not only scattered the flock of Christ, but devoured 
with wolves' teeth, as it were, many of its inno- 
cent and defenseless lambs, then, in this century 
(a thing almost unheard of), the Roman Bishop, 
now called pope, began to arise as the forerunner 
of antichrist, seeking to destroy those who op- 
posed the Roman church, not only by anathematiz- 
ing, excommunicating, and awfully threatening 
them, which alone would have been sufficient to 
strike terror into the heart, but, besides this, it 
seems, by criminal and actual punishments, which 
generally touched the body or the life. Of this we 
hope presently to show an example from which 
the rest of his wicked deeds may be inferred. 


218 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ADRIAN, A CHRISTIAN BISHOP OR TEACHER, CRIM- 
INALLY PUNISHED FOR REJECTING INFANT 
BAPTISM, ABOUT THE CLOSE OF THE 
YEAR 606 

In our account of baptism for the year A. D. 606, 
we made mention of the celebrated teacher and 
Bishop Adrian, and stated, from a certain letter 
sent by Gregory the Great to John, bishop of La- 
rissa, that Adrian was accused of having refused 
baptism to infants. But it seems it did not stop at 
said accusation, but that they, to all appearance, 
proceeded further and more severely and cruelly 
against him ; for the above was imputed to him for 
a crime or a heinous sin. Hence he was criminally 
proceeded against, which criminal punishment 
sometimes related to property, but most frequently 
it was of a corporal, or capital nature. 

Moreover, though said punishment was ordained 
for great crimes and criminals, yet in the case of 
Adrian, we can perceive, it was founded on noth- 
ing but his disregard and rejection of infant bap- 
tism, as appears from the sequel of Gregory's 
letter to John, which reads thus : "Pursuant to the 
chapter of criminal matters, a charge was pre- 
ferred against Bishop Adrian, or brought against 
him by way of punishment, concerning the chil- 
dren which, by his orders, had been kept from 
baptism, and died in darkness, unbaptized (or un- 
washed) from the filth of sin." Compare with 
the account in Bapt. Hist., page 546. 

If any one should object that said chapter of 
criminal matters, was not comprehensive and rig- 
orous enough, and that therefore, Adrian was 
probably not really punished corporally or with 
death, by virtue of the same, with such a one we 
do not feel inclined to dispute. It suffices us, to 
have learned, on the one hand, that this teacher 
Adrian, did not hesitate, even though he should 
incur severe penalty, to speak against infant bap- 
tism, yea, what is still more, to reject infants from 
baptism, and to let them die unbaptized, as being 
under the grace of God ; and on the other hand, 
that those of the Roman church were exceedingly 
dissatisfied with this, yea, to such a degree, that 
the chapter of criminal matters was opened and, 
apparently by form of sentence, set before this 
good man, either to send him (after preceding ex- 
communication) into banishment, or to strip him 
of his property, or to punish him corporally or 
capitally. But whether said sentence was actually 
executed on him, is not clearly expressed ; hence 
we commit the truth of the matter to God. 

In the meantime, there appears what we have 
said before, namely, that the pope or the Roman 
church did not hesitate, not only to anathematize, 
as had formerly been customary, their opposers, es- 
pecially those who spoke against infant baptism, 
but to proceed against them criminally or by way 
of corporal punishment. This was done with the 
said teacher Adrian, concerning whose departure 
we have a good hope, whether he died a natural or 


a violent death. The Lord knows His own, and 
shall in the hereafter not leave them unrewarded, 
who have suffered for testifying to His truth, and 
opposing error. 


NOTICE CONCERNING THE FOLLOWING MARTYRS 

NOTED BY P. J. TWISCK FOR THE YEARS 614 

AND 628, AND RECORDED BY US 

We have not been able to obtain certain or clear 
information as regards the confession of faith of 
the martyred persons of whom we shall presently 
speak ; hence we dare not reckon them all indis- 
criminately among the true and orthodox con- 
fessors of the true faith ; the more especially, as the 
sword of persecution then came upon all who bore 
the Christian name (as had before, yea, frequently, 
been the case), in places where such persecutions 
occurred. Persons were also not examined so very 
closely with regard to this or that controverted 
point of the faith (I speak of those who were ap- 
prehended by the heathen), for these were things 
of which the persecutors knew nothing, while it 
was quite different with those who fell into the 
hands of the papists mentioned above. The people 
were simply asked whether they would sacrifice to 
the idols, renounce Christ, etc. Hence the reason, 
that in the confession of the martyrs who suffered 
among the heathen, but little is said regarding con- 
troverted matters of faith which are now discussed 
among Christians ; but this is discussed more fully 
elsewhere. 

The negligence of the writers of those times, the 
absence of the art of printing, and the violence of 
persecution, which caused people to flee and roam 
about, are also no small cause why so little can be 
adduced concerning the confessions of the mar- 
tyrs. This has been more fully explained in our ac- 
count of baptism. 

Therefore we hold, according to the judgment 
and nature of love, that among the martyrs of 
whom we shall speak, there were, if not all, at least 
some, who viewed the matter aright, and whose 
martyrdom had for its foundation a good confes- 
sion; but to accept them altogether, or to enter 
deeper and more fully into the matter, we do not 
deem advisable, for reasons already mentioned. 

In order, then, to present the matter in the brief- 
est and simplest manner, we shall follow the ac- 
count of P. J. Twisck, as being a summary of 
what the ancients have recorded concerning it. 


OF MANY CHRISTIANS WHO WERE APPREHENDED 

BY THE LONGOBARDS, AND PUT TO DEATH BY 

THEM, BECAUSE, IN HONOR OF THE IDOLS, 

THEY REFUSED TO EAT FOOD OFFERED 

TO IDOLS. A. D. 614 

"The Longobards," says Twisck, "apprehended 
many Christians, and sought to compel them, to eat 
meat which they had offered to their idols ; and 
when they refused, they put them to death. They 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


219 


also put to death four hundred who would not wor- 
ship their gods." Chron., page 216, col. 1. 

As to what might be adduced concerning the 
confession of faith of these slain persons, and how 
far we accept them as martyrs, see the foregoing 
notice. 


OF THE SUFFERINGS OF THE CHRISTIANS IN PER- 
SIA, AND HOW AFTERWARDS MANY OF THEM 
WERE DELIVERED FROM IMPRISONMENT, 
A. D. 628 

Continuing in his account, the above-mentioned 
author finally speaks of the year 628, for which, in 
the beginning, he records these words : "About this 
time, the Christians had to suffer much also in Per- 
sia." He then relates that the Emperor Heraclius, 
having come into Persia, liberated many of the im- 
prisoned Christians ; the number, however, of those 
who suffered, as well as of those who were deliv- 
ered from imprisonment, is not expressed, and 
hence we can add no further explanation. Chron. 
page 221, from Hist. Eccl. Hedio., lib. 5, cap. 18 
and 19. 

All explanation further necessary, concerning 
the imprisonment and the sufferings of said Chris- 
tians in Persia, and how far they are recognized 
by us, must be looked for in the preceding notice. 

OF EIGHT SEVERE PERSECUTIONS INSTITUTED 

AGAINST CHRISTIAN BELIEVERS, FROM 

A. D. 622 TO THE CLOSE OF THIS 

CENTURY 

It behooves us to record here, that from A. D. 
622, to the close of this century, various other per- 
secutions and severe oppressions were instituted 
against those who were called Christian believers, 
among whom, to all appearance, there were here 
and there, some who died upon a pure confession 
of faith ; of which persecutions and oppressions of 
the Christian believers, among others, eight are 
enumerated, which we will briefly extract from A. 
Mellinus. Having spoken of the chronology of 
the Turks or Mohammedans, he proceeds to the 
year 622, and says : 

1. "In Italy a new persecution arose against the 
Christians who resided there, under the Arian 
King of the Longobards. 

2. "In France also some (namely, Christian be- 
lievers) were made martyrs. 

3. "Constantine, the son of Heraclius, having 
reigned four months, and Heracleonas six months, 
Constant, the son of Constantine, became Emperor, 
and reigned for twenty-seven years. He followed 
in the footsteps of his grandfather Heraclius, in 
espousing the cause of the Monothelites, and for 
the sake of this sect carried on a severe persecu- 
tion (namely, against those Christians who held 
different views). 

4. "In the twenty-eight years during which said 
three Emperors reigned, the Arabians or Saracens 


conquered many countries and cities, and put to 
death a countless number of Christians (namely, 
of those who lived under said reign). There was 
also considerable commotion in France and Eng- 
land (understand, on account of the Christian 
religion). He afterwards says: 

5. "But in France, during the seventeen years 
of his reign several were put to death as martyrs." 

After this, he speaks of the persecutions which, 
during the twenty-seven years comprising the reign 
of Justinian II, and the time of Leontius and Tibe- 
rius Apsimarus, arose against the Christians, 
through the Longobards as well as the Saracens. 
Finally he says: 

"Also in France, 6. in England, 7. in Germany, 
and in Spain 8. many became martyrs at this 
time." A. Mell, 2nd book, fol. 303, col. 1,2. 

What has been remarked concerning the martyr- 
dom of those slain in the years 614 and 628, ap- 
plies also to the eight persecutions just mentioned ; 
hence, see the above-mentioned notice. 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING THE ABOVE 
MENTIONED MARTYRS 

Here we are compelled to leave our account of 
the martyrs of this century, since the ancient writ- 
ers have left us no further information respect- 
ing this matter; at least we have not found any- 
thing more that would shed light on the subject. 
However, it will be sufficient for the defense of the 
cross-bearing church of the Anabaptists and de- 
fenseless Christians ; for, though among the great 
number of martyrs that have been noticed by us 
there are found but few open professors of the 
faith, but this diminishes neither the respectability 
nor the verity of said cross-bearing church ; since 
already in our account of baptism throughout this 
century various, yea, many, professors of said faith 
have been presented, to prevent and oppose whom 
divers means were frequently resorted to. See the 
account of baptism for the years 610, 682, 699, 
etc. 

Moreover, it seems hardly possible that all those 
who were, in such great numbers, it appears, desig- 
nated Anabaptists, in the fifth century, and against 
whom bloody decrees were ordained, A. D. 413, 
should all have been slain and exterminated so that 
none were left remaining. This, we say, seems 
hardly possible, since even in the severest persecu- 
tions the persecuted, especially if their number is 
great, cannot be spied out so closely as to make it 
impossible for any to escape, or that not one or 
the other will be able to conceal himself. This be- 
ing the case, those remaining (for it can scarcely 
be otherwise) allowed the living faith which was 
in them, to manifest and work out its power, in 
order to implant in the people of that age, but es- 
pecially, in their children and decendants, the be- 
lief and doctrine which they themselves professed, 
and for the sake of which they had imperiled their 


220 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


lives, escaping death however, through the grace 
of God. 

It certainly appears that in the following (sixth) 
century there were again people of such belief and 
doctrine ; and not only that, but such as to honor 
Christ their Saviour, did not hesitate, as true mar- 
tyrs, to pour out their blood like water. Concern- 
ing this, both with respect to the confession and 
the martyrdom, our observations on the sixth 
century may be referred. 

Is it a matter of surprise, then, that we hold it 
for certain, that the seventh century also was not 
destitute of persons who, having professed a good 
confession of faith, had to taste death thereupon ? 
Certainly, we have no reason to doubt it; or the 
ancients must not have well instructed their cotem- 
poraries and descendants, or there must have been 
no persecutions in this century. As regards the 
former, the very nature of love will lead us to 
believe otherwise ; while the latter has already been 
sufficiently refuted, seeing we have shown that 
various persecutions occurred during that time. 
We will now conclude, since our object has been 
sufficiently explained above ; besides, many of the 
confessors and martyrs noted for this century, 
will bear testimony to it. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE EIGHTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE EIGHTH CENTURY 

[The example of Lutgerus (adduced in the last 
year of the preceding century) is rehearsed, by 
way of introduction, in the beginning of this; to 
which is added an account of Herinigild, who was 
baptized by Leander, after previous instruction: 

Germanus, a father at Constantinople, states 
that it was customary to make confession of sins 
before baptism. 

Bede the presbyter treats of the baptism of the 
apostles ; of the baptism of the Angles who were 
baptized in the Rhine and Swalbe ; of the catechu- 
mens, to whom, before baptism, the confession of 
faith was delivered; of four things which do not 
apply to infant baptism; of Paulinus, the teacher 
at York, and how he baptized Eadfrid and Offrid, 
the sons of Edwin; that there can be no baptism 
without water and the word; that all believers 
must be baptized ; that the bread of the holy Sup- 
per is a figure of the body of Christ ; which latter 
is further explained in the margin. 

Amalarius Fortunatus states that the newly 
planted or, newly baptized, Christians were led 
to the church for eight days; he admonishes the 
candidates to fast for several days before bap- 
tism ; and, in the margin, it is stated that he taught 
against transubstantiation, etc. 

The views of Antharitis, who refused baptism 
to the infants of the Christians, are presented. 

Of some among the Romanists, who held that 
fasting, reading, and praying must be connected 


with baptism ; that the teachers should first baptize 
the men, and then the women ; what prayer should 
be spoken over the men and women to be baptized ; 
that the baptized must kneel clown and pray to 
God, etc. 

Wittikind becomes a catechumen, is instructed in 
the faith, and then baptized together with Albion. 

The baptism of the son of Carloman, and of his 
daughter Gisla ; what we think of it. 

Albinus requires faith at baptism, that is, that 
baptism must be received with faith ; he also says 
that with baptism there are connected three visible 
and three invisible things, of which the visible are : 
1. the body of the candidate ; 2. The baptizer ; 3. the 
water; and the invisible are: 1. the soul; 2. faith; 
3. the Spirit of God ; that baptism without the invo- 
cation of the holy Trinity is void ; that not only 
the creed, but also the Lord's Prayer was said at 
baptism; that examination in the faith took place 
at baptism; which custom, however, according to 
Vicecomes, was abolished after infant baptism 
came into vogue; that the factitious practices of 
the papists commenced when baptism ceased to be 
administered to adults. Thereupon follows the 
opinion of Jacob Mehrning, that about the year 
800, infant baptism was doubtful and hung by a 
thread. 

Seb. Franck quotes the statement of Beatus Rhe- 
nanus, (from Tertullian), saying that according 
to the usage of the ancients, the adults were bap- 
tized with the washing of regeneration ; which is 
also confirmed by the testimony of Polydorus. 

The conclusion taken from P. J. Twisck, is to the 
effect, that the ancient custom of baptizing adult, 
believing and penitent persons, seems to have still 
obtained in some measure, even with the general 
church. Conclusion for this century.] 

As in winter the sun does not always, but only 
at times, send down his bright beams upon the 
earth, even though he has risen above the horizon, 
and even reached the meridian, so it was also in 
the eighth century, with the true faith, and the 
baptism which is administered upon faith. For al- 
though the light of the holy Gospel had at that 
time risen in the hearts of many pious persons, so 
that they apprehended the faith, and, in token of it, 
were baptized thereupon, yet, there were but few 
who exhibited to mankind, by their writings, the 
bright splendor of the evangelical truth; at least 
this is true, that but very little has come down to 
the present generation. Nevertheless, we have met 
with enough to prove that this dark age also was 
not entirely destitute of persons who shone forth 
as flaming torches in the midnight of papal error, 
and shed abroad the radiance of God's truth, es- 
pecially in the matter of baptism. To prove this 
will not be difficult for us; hence we begin. 

A. D. 701.— For the last year of the preceding 
century, that is, for A. D. 700, we showed that Lut- 
gerus and Libuga, two Christian parents, left their 
son Lutgerus unbaptized till he, having accepted 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


221 


the faith, was baptized of his own accord. This oc- 
curred in France, at the time referred to, and it is 
also stated that the same year, in Spain, Herinigild, 
having attained to the faith through the instruction 
of Leander, was baptized; besides various other 
persons, both before and at that time, as the chron- 
icles show. 

From this it clearly follows that the people who 
held this belief must have existed also in the begin- 
ning of this century, since a religion that has once 
obtained a footing, cannot well be abolished in a 
year or two, especially if it is spread over differ- 
ent countries, and is zealously advocated, which 
latter, as has been shown, the true believers did. 
Hence we shall proceed to the persons who held 
this belief and whose names are mentioned in this 
century. 

A. D. 7l6.—-Bapt. Hist., page 534. D. Vice- 
comes {lib. 3, cap. 5), quotes from Germanus, a 
father at Constantinople, who lived in the time of 
Leo Isauricus, that it was still customary then, to 
make confession of sins before baptism. 

He speaks here of a general custom observed at 
that time in the East, in the Greek churches ; which 
custom consisted in this, that confession of sins 
was made before baptism ; which, as everyone can 
judge, could not be done by infants, but only by 
adult persons. 

If any one should object here, that this related 
only to the intelligent, but that infants were bap- 
tized, though they did not make such confession, 
we reply that this does not appear at all, nay, that 
the contrary follows clearly, since the custom spok- 
en of was a general one, binding for all who were 
to be baptized ; and as infants could not follow this 
custom, it is incontrovertible, that they were not 
admitted to the baptism which required it. 

From A. D. 72\ to 736. — At this time there was 
conspicuous in the kingdom of England, Bede,* 
surnamed the Presbyter, who, having at one time 
maintained the Roman superstitions, and among 
these, infant baptism, now openly declared to hold 
different views in many points. Touching baptism, 
he is stated to have declared the following (Bapt. 
Hist., page 532, on Acts 19) : "All who came to 
the apostlfes to be baptized, were first instructed and 
taught by them; and having been instructed and 
taught concerning baptism, they were baptized, by 
virtue of the apostolic office." Compare with Mark 
16:16. 

Page 533, D. Vicecomes {lib. 1, cap. 5) quotes 
the following testimonies from Bede. He writes : 
"Bede says that the Angles were baptized in the 
Rhine and in the Swalbe." Regarding the manner, 
compare this with Matt. 3 :6 : "And were baptized 
of him in Jordan, confessing their sins." Again: 
"And John also was baptizing in Enon, near to 
Salim, because there was much water there: and 
they came and were baptized" (John 3:23). This 
mode of baptism, as we have shown elsewhere, 


* Venerable Bede. — Transl. 


was not administered to infants, but only to adult 
and intelligent persons; nay, it is shown there, 
that this could not be otherwise. 

Bede, in his exposition on the book of Esdras 
(D. Vicecomes, lib. 2, cap. 3), writes, "To the 
hearers of the new life (that is, the catechumens) 
we deliver the confession of faith as laid down by 
the twelve apostles." 

From the circumstance mentioned here, that the 
confession of faith was delivered to the catechu- 
mens, namely, that they might learn it, and be bap- 
tized thereupon, it appears that at the time and 
place of which he speaks, no such haste was made 
to have infants baptized, as had been done pre- 
viously, and as was also done subsequently, by 
those of the Roman church. For these catechumens 
were certainly not baptized in their infancy, or 
presented for baptism by their parents; but, in 
order to be truly baptized, they first learned the 
catechism, which was the instruction in the faith 
of the Christians in those times ; and in order that 
they might be perfectly instructed therein, the 
whole confession of faith was delivered to them, 
before they were baptized. 

Bede (lib. 3, cap. 3), on Heb. 6, further says: 
"The separation from the Egyptians signifies the 
separation from sin, which those who are to be 
baptized (must) profess ... as Saint Peter has 
said, Acts 2: 'Repent, and be baptized every one 
of you, in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord ;' as 
though he would say: Depart from Egypt; go 
through the Red Sea. Moreover, in the epistle to 
the Hebrews, there is mentioned before baptism, 
repentance from dead works; but what else is 
repentance from dead works, than a being slain 
unto sin, that we may live unto God in holiness?" 

Here four things are mentioned which do not 
apply to the baptism of infants. 1. The separation 
from sin, which those who were to be baptized, 
must confess. 2. Peter's exhortation, Acts 2 : "Re- 
pent," etc., which was not spoken to infants, but to 
intelligent, penitent sinners. 3. The passage of 
Paul, from the epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 6, 
verse 2, where before baptism repentance from 
dead works is mentioned. 4. Bede's exposition of 
said passage: "What is repentance from dead 
works, but a dying unto sin, that we may live unto 
God in holiness?" 

I feel confident that even our opponents will con- 
cur with us in saying that the conditions which 
Bede here joins to baptism, do not relate to infants, 
and, hence, cannot be applied to the baptism of in- 
fants. 

Bede (inlib. 2, Hist. Anglic.) writes of Paulinus, 
the teacher at York: He preached the Word of 
God from that time on for six years, and there be- 
lieved and were baptized as many as were ordained 
(or destined) to eternal life, etc.; among whom 
there were Offrid and Eadfrid, the sons of King 
Edwin, who were both born to him in the misery 
of his exile, and were both taken out of this life 
while yet in their white garments." 


222 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


This is a noble example of Paulinus, who 
preached the word of God to the people, before he 
baptized them ; nor is it less remarkable, that those 
who believed were baptised, and that the sons of 
Edwin, though exiles, yet the scions of a great 
race, having accepted the faith, humbled themselves 
to baptism. It was to be lamented, however, that 
these two youths, who might long have been lights 
and ensamples in the church, were taken out of 
this life so suddenly, even while they yet had on 
their white garments, which it was customary to 
wear immediately after baptism, as a sign of 
purity. 

In the meantime we must rejoice that even in 
those benighted times, so much light of the faith 
shone forth, that not only some of the common peo- 
ple, but also the children of the great were enlight- 
ened by it, so that they willingly bowed themselves 
under the yoke of Christ, through baptism. 

Bede, on John 4, says: "Take away the water, 
and there is no baptism; take away the word of 
God, and there is also no baptism." Bapt. Hist., 
p. 505. 

By this he indicates that the water cannot be sep- 
arated from the Word, neither the Word from the 
water ; that is, that the doctrine cannot stand with- 
out baptism, and baptism not without the doctrine ; 
thus his meaning is, that both doctrine and baptism 
must go together. But how this applies to infant 
baptism, in which the Word is separated from the 
water, or the doctrine from the baptism, any one 
that has understanding can judge. 

That all believers must be baptized, Bede teaches 
in his exposition of Job 1 : "Through the obedience 
of faith all believers must come to baptism," and on 
chap. 2 he says : "No one is worthy to enter into 
the kingdom of God, unless he is born again of 
water and of the Spirit." 

In the first sentence he indicates that the believers 
must come to baptism ; of others he makes no men- 
tion ; even as Philip said to the Ethiopian : "If thou 
believest with all thine heart, thou mayest." Acts 
8:37. 

In the second sentence he speaks of the regen- 
eration of water and of the Spirit; concerning 
which Christ spoke to Nicodemus, who was not an 
infant, but a man of years, yea, a master in Israel. 
John 3:1, 10. Hence, it can or should be suffi- 
ciently understood, what kind of baptism it is of 
which he speaks in said place, namely, such a bap- 
tism as belongs not to children, but to the reason- 
able and regenerated. 

That which is adduced, in lib. 4, Cantic, of his 
belief respecting the faith of children, we do not 
accept as his work, but as the production of some 
one who chose to publish it under his name; be- 
cause, in the first place, its tenor throughout does 
not accord with the style of his writing ; and in the 
second place, because we know neither the writer 
nor the authenticity of said work. 

We will conclude this subject with the ac- 
count given by P. J. Twisck, in his Chronijk., 8th 


book, page 254, col. 2: "Bede, formerly a learned 
priest* and monk in England, died this year, A. D. 
736 (Merula says A. D. 734), aged 70 years. He 
wrote many good books, as history testifies. He 
says: "All who came to the apostles to be bap- 
tized, were instructed and taught by them, and 
having been instructed and taught concerning the 
sacrament of baptism, they accepted the holy ad- 
ministration of baptism." On Acts 19, Histor. 
Vine., lib. 24, Leonh., lib. 2, Grond. Bewiis., Utter 
A. 

Again: He calls the Lord's bread a sacrament 
and figure of the body and blood of Christ, and 
says: "Since bread sustains the body, and wine 
makes blood, Christ has compared the bread to His 
body, and the wine to His blood."f From Seb. 
Franc k, fol. 65. 

Thus Bede declared against the pope and the 
Roman church, and, as can be inferred, in favor of 
the belief of the Anabaptists, not only in the mat- 
ter of baptism, but also in regard to the holy Sup- 
per, and other points, which we have not mentioned. 

Note.— A. D. 732. Bede taught at this time, 
that Christ instituted a sacrament as a memorial of 
redemption. On Luke 22. 

Isidore explained the words of Christ : "Thou 
art Peter," etc., thus : "Upon this rock which thou 
hast confessed, I will build my church. For that 
rock," he says, "was Christ, upon which founda- 
tion also Peter was built." Lib. 7, Etim., cap. 9, 
Samuel Veltius, Geslacht-register, page 126. 

About A. D. 760.— D. Vicecomes (lib. 1, cap. 
35, Bapt. Hist., page 523), records that Amalarius 
Fortunatus,$ a learned man of this period, writes 
the following concerning the newly-baptized Chris- 
tians: "Our newly-planted Christians are led to 
the church for eight days by their leaders." 

This, as everyone knows, cannot be done with 
or by infants. Continuing, Vicecomes (lib. 3, cap. 
6 and 7) writes what advice Amalarius Fortu- 
natus gave to those who wished to be baptized, say- 
ing : "He that desires to be baptized, must fast for 
several days previous to it, according to the exam- 
ple of Cornelius, who, in order to receive baptism 
worthily, prayed at the ninth hour, and fasted in 
his house." 

He does not speak of such candidates as had no 
knowledge, and to whom baptism was administered 
without their knowing and wishing it, but of such 
as had come to knowledge, and desired to be bap- 
tized. Hence his words are : "He that desires to be 
baptized." 

In what Bede's priesthood or monkhood consisted, is not ex- 
pressed; hence nothing can be concluded regarding it. 

t He calls the bread of the Supper a figure, which does not 
accord well with the priesthood or monkhood. 

t The life of Amalarius Fortunatus is described in history short- 
X t ST the , middl e o( the eighth century, or about A.D. 760, though 

L* V. • '!, refers him to ,he year 836> the time of Ludovicus Pius 
which is 76 years later ; however, both may be true, if Amalarius 
wrote from his youth to old age, which may easily have been the 
case. As regards his belief, Twisck gives this account: "Amalarius 
iortunatus, at this time, in the reign of Ludovicus Pius, wrote sev- 
eral excellent treatises against transubstantiation and the corporeal 
presence of the body of Christ, of the internal sacrifice of believers 
and other fine things, as can be seen in Catal. Test., fol. 161 P T 
Twisck, Chron., 9th book, page 285, col 1 ' ' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


223 


The example of Cornelius, adduced by him in 
order to teach the candidates to fast and pray be- 
fore baptism, confirms our preceding view, name- 
ly, that he is not treating of infants, but of intel- 
ligent persons. 

Amalarius (lib. 1, de Offic. Eccles,, Vicecomes, 
lib. 3, cap. 14, page 524), writes: "The second 
meeting of the catechumens takes place four weeks 
from the time of fasting ; then, on the fourth day 
of said week is held the third examination; they 
are then instructed in the beginning of the four 
evangelists, and receive on that day the Lord's 
Prayer and the Apostles' Creed, which they recite 
(or profess) on holy Easter Eve. 

Concerning what is related between, and which 
we have not noticed, namely, how the teacher 
would touch the ear of the novices with his fin- 
ger, this we leave as it is, neither commending nor 
condemning it, seeing it is of small importance. In 
the meantime, it is gratifying to us, that the novices 
were then examined in the faith before baptism, 
which is a proof that the example of the first 
church, yea, of the holy apostles, was still followed. 
See Acts 8:35, 36,37. 

Besides the above, D. Vicecomes {lib. 5, cap. 
39) quotes the following from Amalarius: "On 
holy Easter and Whitsuntide, the church (of God) 
has always been wont to gather unto God new 
members, through baptism, and we justly rejoice 
over their salvation, since the white garments worn 
by them indicate the brightness of their purified 
minds." Bapt. Hist, page 524. 

As regards the custom of baptizing on Easter 
and Whitsuntide, and the white garments then put 
on the candidates, an explanation has been given 
elsewhere, namely, that this was done to none but 
believers. With this we leave the testimony of 
Amalarius Fortunatus. 

Note. — It is stated that about the same time 
there lived an eminent man and defender of the 
Christian religion, named Antharitis, who, how- 
ever, was opposed to the Roman church, and par- 
ticularly to the baptism of infants, holding the 
opinion that they should not be baptized; on ac- 
count of which it was reported of him that he re- 
jected baptism entirely; or, at least, that he said, 
no baptism should be taught ; which is to be under- 
stood of the baptism administered to infants. Con- 
cerning this, I find this annotation: "Gregory, in 
the Register of the Longobards, writes that An- 
tharitis refused baptism to the children of Chris- 
tians." Seb. Franck, Chron., Rom. Rett., fol. 
74, col. 2. 

About A. D. 768. — We find that at this time even 
among some of the Romanists, instruction in the 
faith was practiced before baptism, so that to this 
end they established certain rules, by which infant 
baptism was weakened not a little, and baptism 
upon faith, according to the ordinance of Christ, 
greatly strengthened. Touching the rules estab- 
lished at said time, the following, among other 
things, is recorded in Bapt. Hist., page 527, from 


Vicecom., lib. 1, cap. 26: "On the Sabbath (or 
Sunday) of holy Whitsuntide they shall all fast, 
and observe all the divine services, with reading 
and praying as well as with baptism." Cap. 27. 
Those who desire to be baptized, shall come to 
church (or to the assembly) with their leaders, 
after the third hour, on the Sunday before Easter. 
Cap. 29. Here it is taught, how the teachers are 
to descend to the baptismal water, and how they 
are to baptize first the men and then the women. 

Having noted these things, D. Vicecomes (cap. 
6) writes concerning it the following: "The men 
and the women were separately admitted to the 
catechism, that is, to the instruction in the faith; 
first the men, and then the women. Hence, in the 
ordination (for this purpose) there occurs the 
prayer: Almighty, eternal God, and Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, behold with gracious eyes 
these Thy servants, whom Thou hast made worthy 
to be called to the first principles of the faith." A 
like prayer was pronounced over the women. 

A little further on he writes : "When this was 
done, he (the teacher) went among them, and laid 
his hands upon their heads, saying: Sing with a 
loud voice, 'I believe in one God the Father.' Turn- 
ing then to the women, he did the same." 

This, the author says, was done for the sake of 
discipline and virtue, that these might be implanted 
together with the doctrine of the faith, in the cate- 
chumens; for Christ said to His apostles (Matt. 
28) : "Teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost ;" adding : "Teaching them to observe 
all things whatsoever I have commanded you." 

Understanding this to be the best course, the 
apostle Peter (Acts 2) first enlightened the people 
by preaching, and taught them to repent of their 
former wicked life; whereupon those who with 
eager ears heard the Word of God, and had de- 
rived profit therefrom, were baptized. 

"Would to God," says the writer who has quoted 
this, "that the Roman church had continued in the 
baptismal ordinance of Christ and His holy apos- 
tles ; never would there have become of it such an 
absurd infant baptism, and, thence, such a grossly 
barbarous and ignorant Christendom in Europe. 1 ' 
Bapt, Hist., page 528. 

Those who had been baptized thus (that is, 
upon faith), were then exhorted several times by 
a deacon, to pray on their bended knees. Bapt. 
Hist., page 532, ex Ord. Rom., and Amal. Fort. 

Who will believe that these persons, who have 
thus written on baptism, were members of the Ro- 
man church? I say nothing of the many other 
points which they, as can be inferred, maintained 
in opposition to the common Romanists. Who 
would not hold it certain, that these people were 
entirely separated from the papists, who observed 
the Roman superstitions ? Yea, that at the present 
day they would be declared heretics by the pope, 
and, should persecution arise, be placed at stakes 
and burned alive ? as has occurred not long since, 


224 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


yea, recently, to many of our fellow believers, on 
account of the same belief, as will appear more 
fully in the sequel of this history. 

We shall, therefore, commit these people to God. 
Whether they agreed in all other points with the 
common Anabaptists, we are not able to show ; it 
suffices us that they, though called Romanists, op- 
posed the belief of the common Romanists, and 
that they approach very near the truth in impor- 
tant points, especially in the article of baptism. 
With this we will leave them, and proceed to other 
testimonies. 

About A. D. 772. — We quote the following from 
Bapt. Hist., page 515: "Those who had come to 
adult years, had to be instructed first in the Chris- 
tian doctrine, and were then examined before bap- 
tism. 

"Wittikind became a catechumen, was instructed 
in the faith, and then baptized with Albion. 

"They had to say the creed and the Lord's 
Prayer." Syn. Ang., cap. 2. 

"The teachers had to instruct the people, how to 
renounce (Satan) at baptism, and what to be- 
lieve." Syn. Turon., cap. 18. 

Page 516: "They had to be tolerably instructed 
in the doctrine of Christ, and be given to godli- 
ness, for (in the council of Aries) it was enjoined 
upon the leaders to teach them." 

"They used to renounce the devil and his works ; 
which works are — murder, fornication, adultery, 
drunkenness, and such like ; the pomp is pride, pre- 
sumption, vanity, vainglory, temerity." Syn. Tur. 

Certainly, these were all wholesome and good 
rules, approaching very near the apostolical teach- 
ings ; hence we accept them as good instruction in 
this iron and corroded age. It is achieving a good 
deal, if one who stands at the point where many 
crooked roads meet, takes the right, or, at least, the 
best one. That these people who observed said 
rules, were entirely free from error in other points, 
it is not our intention to maintain. He that walks 
amidst the darkness of night, can easily miss the 
way ; so also they, living as they must, in the dark- 
ness of popery, could easily be misled in this or 
that point. We let God judge them, being content 
with this, that through the darkness we have seen 
the rays of their knowledge and good practice. 

A. D. 781. — This is the year which is mentioned 
by different writers as the one in which the far- 
famed Carloman, though he had accepted the 
Christian faith himself, presented his son, who 
was then several years old, and whom he had up 
to this time left unbaptized, for baptism, which 
was administered to him in the city of Rome, on 
Easter; likewise his daughter Gisla, of whom it is 
stated that she was baptized the same year, at 
Milan, by the Bishop or teacher Thomas. Bapt. 
Hist., page 523, H. Montan. Nietigh., pages 80, 
81, from Centur. 9, Magdeb., cap. 4, Annal. Fran- 
cor. Regino., lib. 2, Adon. Aetate, 6. 

From this manner of proceeding it appears, that 
at this time no such reasoning obtained, as was 


afterwards, and had also previously been, resorted 
to by those of the Roman church, who commanded 
parents, on peril of their salvation, yea, on pain of 
damnation, to have their children baptized. But 
those who took a proper view of the matter, and 
esteemed the command of Christ more than the de- 
crees and statutes of men, did not allow themselves 
to be intimidated by these threats, but deferred 
the baptism of their children, till they, having 
grown up, accepted the faith, and themselves de- 
sired to be baptized thereupon. 

We say nothing respecting Carloman, the father 
here spoken of, neither of him who baptized his 
son, and would conclude neither this nor that touch- 
ing their life and faith ; we simply commend their 
action in this matter; on the one hand, that the 
father, though he had professed Christ, and was 
called a member of the church, left his son and 
daughter unbaptized, as an evidence that he con- 
sidered infant baptism (as a human invention) 
useless; on the other hand, that those who bap- 
tized them, did not censure this course, but rather 
assented to and confirmed it with the deed, which 
is the more evident from the fact that the ordinance 
was administered with great pleasure, yea, joy, as 
history tells us. 

About A. D. 792.— Albinus teaches on John 1 
{Bapt. Hist., page 505), that baptism is to be re- 
ceived with faith. He writes : "It is aptly said that 
the forerunner of our Lord baptized in Bethabara ; 
for Bethabara signifies a house of obedience, that 
they should all through the obedience of faith, 
come to the baptism of Christ." 

This Albinus, surnamed Flaccus, was a remark- 
ably learned and beloved man of that age, but nev- 
ertheless called ignorant, and hated, by his adver- 
saries. In his confession he was greatly opposed 
to the common belief of the Roman church, es- 
pecially in the matter of baptism. In baptism he 
required faith, regeneration, and newness of life, 
declaring that these were the means to receive it 
worthily; which things, though highly spoken of 
with the mouth, yet in infant baptism are prac- 
tically ignored. 

In the defense of his belief he was bold, re- 
garding, it seems, neither the hatred nor the favor 
of the people, so that, besides what we have just 
mentioned, he left various excellent things con- 
cerning the baptism of adults; of which we will 
present a few instances. 

On John 15 {page 509) he says: "Why does not 
the Lord say : Ye are clean because of the baptism 
in which ye are washed ? but says : Through the 
word which I have spoken unto you. For, taker 
away the Word, and what is the water, but water ? 
When the Word meets the element, then it be- 
comes a sacrament. Whence derives the water the 
power, that, though it wets the body, the soul is 
purified, if the Word does not effect this ? But this 
is not effected, because it is spoken, but because it 
is believed. 

In baptism there are three visible things: 1. the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


225 


body (of the one baptized) ; 2. the water; 3. the 
teacher ; and three invisible things : 1 . the soul ; 
2. faith ; 3. the Spirit of God." 

We can almost see with our eyes, and feel with 
our hands, that this man here intended to oppose 
the belief of the common Romanists. He makes 
use of two special arguments, with which he suffi- 
ciently denies, yea, refutes, the Roman infant bap- 
tism. His first argument opposes the belief of those 
who were wont to tie salvation to the elementary 
water of baptism, and, consequently, to save them, 
as it were, baptized the infants; in opposition to 
which he averred that the element of water without 
the Word of God is merely an element, and no sac- 
rament; but that the water becomes a sacrament 
through the Word of God, not because the latter is 
spoken, but because it is believed. And thus he re- 
moves with his first argument also another error 
of the Romanists, who imagined that in baptism, 
through the saying of a few words, the water was 
consecrated and made a means of salvation ; which 
he refutes, however, by the declaration that the con- 
secration is not effected by the speaking of the 
Word, but because it is believed. 

If then, in baptism, the water is ineffectual with- 
out the Word, and the Word has no virtue unless 
it is believed, as Albinus declares, he flatly opposes 
infant baptism, since there the water only is used, 
without the instructing Word, and without the lat- 
ter being believed by the infants. 

His second argument is a sufficient refutation 
of those who administered baptism to infants, 
without regard as to whether they had intelligent 
minds, true faith, and the fruits of God's Spirit, 
or not; for, this belief he opposes when he says 
that in baptism there must be not only three visible 
things: 1. the body; 2. the water; 3. the teacher; 
but also three invisible things: 1. the soul [mind], 
(that is, an intelligent soul, for otherwise the soul 
cannot properly be so called) ; 2. faith (that is, 
that which consists in a sure confidence, for this is 
peculiar to true faith, Heb. 11 :1) ; 3. the Spirit of 
God (that is, that which is fruitful in virtues), for 
the Spirit of God is known by His fruits, Gal. 
5 :22. But who has ever been found that was able 
to discover such works of the soul, of faith, and of 
the spirit, in infants ? without which, indeed, bap- 
tism has no virtue, as conclusively follows from 
the arguments of Albinus, which are in accord- 
ance with the teachings of the holy Word of God. 
How this harmonizes with infant baptism, the im- 
partial may judge. 

Of regeneration, Albinus, in the 7th penitential 
psalm (page 510), says : "Thou art my God ; Thou 
hast created me. I can be recreated by no one but 
Thee, by whom I have been created. Thou hast 
created me by Thy Word, which, O God, abideth 
with Thee. Thou createst me again by the Word, 
which has become flesh for our sakes." 

The Romanists were accustomed sometimes to 
call baptism, by which they meant infant baptism, 
a regeneration, without respect to newness of life, 


merely on account of the water, which, with the 
speaking of a few words, was administered to the 
infants. But Albinus here declares that as he was 
created by the Word, even so he is recreated and 
regenerated by the Word. He says nothing at all 
about the water ; not to depreciate the outward ad- 
ministration of water baptism, but to show that re- 
creation or regeneration does not lie in it ; for, that 
the same must be effected by the Word, whereupon 
the administration of water baptism follows, as a 
sign of it, seems to be the burden of his whole 
argument. 

Moreover, it is also deserving of notice, that in 
the above passage, touching the incarnation of 
Jesus Christ, he says, that the Word (namely, by 
which all things were made) became flesh for our 
sakes, which accords with our confession, and also 
agrees with John 1 :14. 

Albinus (lib. 3, de Trin., cap. 17, page 512) says : 
"We are not to believe that He (Christ) then re- 
ceived the gifts of the Holy Ghost ; He who from 
His birth was always full of the Holy Ghost ; but 
that the mystery of the holy Trinity might be de- 
clared unto us in baptism, the Son of God was 
baptized, being a man ; the Holy Spirit descended 
as a dove; God the Father was heard in a voice, 
without the invocation of which, no baptism can 
avail anything. Therefore, the Son of God wished 
to signify by His own baptism, that the whole 
Trinity was present; who commanded the stew- 
ards of His mysteries (the apostles) : "Go teach 
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." 

Again: Why did the Lord have Himself bap- 
tized? Namely, that no one, though he might 
possess great gifts and power, should despise to 
be baptized. 

He makes use here of three modes of speaking 
which are incompatible with infant baptism. First, 
when he says that without the invocation of the 
holy Trinity no baptism can avail anything; for, 
who knows not that infants cannot invoke the holy 
Trinity? Secondly, when he adduces, as a foun- 
dation of baptism, the command of Christ : "Teach 
all nations, baptizing them," etc. ; for there teaching 
and baptizing are joined together, which, as even 
some pedobaptists declare, is inapplicable to in- 
fants. Thirdly, when he shows why the Lord had 
Himself baptized? Namely, that no one, though 
he might possess great gifts and power, should de- 
spise to be baptized. For, that this also cannot be 
understood of infants, even nature teaches; since 
they have no great gifts or power, and, conse- 
quently, can neither rely upon them nor despise 
baptism. 

D. Vicecomes (lib. 1. cap. 32, page 535) quotes 
the following from Albinus Flaccus: "At baptism, 
on holy Easter Day, the catechumens (the novices 
who have been instructed in the faith), if they de- 
sire baptism, recite the Lord's Prayer and the 
creed from memory." 


226 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


This is certainly clear testimony of the custom 
of the believers of that age, from which it is evi- 
dent, that their children and novices had to know 
the Lord's Prayer and the creed, yea, had to recite 
it from memory, and must themselves desire bap- 
tism, before they were baptized. Who would say 
that new-born infants can do this? Moreover, it 
was not only required, to recite the Lord's Prayer 
and the creed from memory, but also to give rea- 
son for it, and this not only once, but several times, 
on different days appointed for this purpose, in the 
week before Easter and Whitsuntide, as shown 
above, to which we refer the reader. See also, G. 
Durand., lib. 6. Ration. Div. Offic. de 4. Feria, 
Hebel. 4. Quadrag, etc. 

Page 536. Vicecomes {lib. 3, cap. 21), says: 
"He (Albinus) also makes mention of the exami- 
nation (in the faith) of the elect, that is, those 
chosen to be baptized, tracing them down from the 
times of the apostles." Cap. 22, he says: "Then 
took place the examination (in the faith), in order 
that it might be ascertained with greater certainty, 
whether, after the renunciation of Satan, the Word 
of God and the faith promised to it, had taken deep 
root in the heart." Cap. 26: "Albinus Flaccus, in 
the chapter on baptism, writes: 'For the baptism 
of the elect, who are examined (in the faith), ac- 
cording to the rule of the apostles, consecrated by 
fasting, and instructed by diligent preaching, two 
seasons are set apart, Easter and Whitsuntide.' " 

To this, D. Vicecomes adds this comment: "If 
these examinations were held according to the rules 
of the apostles, they must needs have been observed 
by all ; but subsequently, when infant baptism came 
into vogue, this necessary practice was abolished 
(or discontinued) by the church. A. D. 860, in the 
reign of the Emperors Louis the Pious and Lo- 
thaire; of which abundant proof exists." 

What do you think, beloved reader, of this last 
testimony ? to say nothing of the testimonies of Al- 
binus Flaccus. This Vicecomes was a pedobaptist 
and strenuous maintainer of pedobaptism ; yet he 
states that the necessary (yea, apostolical) practice 
of examinations (in the faith) was abolished or 
discontinued when infant baptism came into 
vogue; he also indicates the time when this oc- 
curred, namely, A. D. 860. As to how he came at 
this, we leave to him to answer. 

In the meantime, this is also quite a refutation 
of those who fix the origin of infant baptism very 
early, indeed according to some, in the time of the 
apostles. However, that infant baptism, together 
with many other superstitions, originated soon af- 
ter the death of the apostles, they can, in some 
measure substantiate; but that it wavered in the 
Roman church, for many centuries, till the year 
900, yea, almost 1000, being now established, then 
abolished, adopted in one place, and rejected in 
another, etc., appears sufficiently from the books 
in which we have read the same. 

We confine ourselves to the time of Albinus 
Flaccus, who lived about A. D. 792, when this 


intrusion was already rapidly gaining ground, 
which also D. Vicecomes has seen, for, when he 
mentions the chrism in baptism, and some other 
factitious practices of the papists, he adds that it is 
his opinion that all this did not begin until after 
the time of Albinus Flaccus, when they ceased to 
baptize adults. Lib. 5, cap. 5 and 19. 

I cannot forbear adding here the verdict of Jacob 
Mehrning, who, immediately after noting the pre- 
ceding passages from D. Vicecomes, writes : "Thus 
we see from the history of this time, that infant 
baptism hung yet as by a thread between both, be- 
ing received by some, and rejected by others, which 
is a strong proof that it is not apostolical, much 
less instituted by Christ Himself. But what im- 
measurable damage to souls, and what grossly bar- 
barous ignorance in Christendom, the introduction 
of this absurd infant baptism has brought about, 
many intelligent persons, even in that age, were 
able to discern. Bapt. Hist., page 537. 

A. D. 800. — Various writers state that at this 
time, the last year of the eighth century, infant 
baptism, although those of the Roman church in 
general stoutly adhered to it, was nevertheless not 
practiced, yea, positively rejected by many, inso- 
much that they observed the very ancient custom 
mentioned by us in different preceding centuries, 
of baptizing only adults, on Easter and Whitsun- 
tide. 

Sebastian Franck, writing of this time and cus- 
tom, and having referred to Tertullian's book, De 
Corona Militis, says: "Respecting this passage 
Beatus Rhenanus notes that it was the custom of 
the ancients, to baptize and wash adults with the 
washing of regeneration; which custom was ob- 
served till the time of Charlemagne and the Em- 
peror Louis, A. D. 800." Chron. Rom. Kett., 
page 123, col. 2. 

P. J. Twisck gives the following account for the 
year 800: "The ancient custom was, to baptize 
adults with the washing of regeneration, which 
was observed till the time of the Emperors Charle- 
magne and Louis. This is shown by the laws es- 
tablished by them, in which the priests (that is, 
the teachers) were prohibited from baptizing at 
any other time than Easter and Whitsuntide, ex- 
cept where death was imminent." Again : "It was 
the custom of the ancients (Polydorus says), to 
baptize mostly adults, and to put a white garment 
on them after baptism. This was done at Easter 
and Whitsuntide; in the meantime, before these 
feasts, those to be baptized were instructed in the 
mystery of the faith, and were called catechumens, 
that is, such as are being instructed; for, when 
they had apprehended the mystery, they were bap- 
tized." Chron., 8th book, page 271, col. 2, from 
Polydor. de Inventoribus rerum, lib. 4. Beatus", 
Rhenanus in Annat. super., Tertull., Grond. 
Bewijs, letter B., Chron. Seb. Franck., Thorn 
Imbr., fol. 26. 

Although this century, in the beginning, seemed 
to be doomed to darkness, as regards the true doc- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


227 


trine, especially with reference to the matter of 
baptism upon faith, yet the sun of truth rose to a 
considerable altitude, so that his beams shone out 
in every direction, illuminating the face, that is, 
the people, of the earth. For not only the sep- 
arate Christian communities, but even many of 
those who still adhered to the Roman church, ob- 
served baptism, to say nothing of different other 
articles, according to the original Christian and 
apostolical custom. 

P. J. Twisck, in the conclusion of the eighth cen- 
tury, though greatly deploring the manifold hu- 
man inventions which were then increasing in the 
Roman church, through the power of the pope and 
of the councils, declared nevertheless that the 
baptism of adults still obtained in some measure 
among them ; his words are : "The ancient custom 
of baptizing adult believers and penitents appears 
still to exist in some measure in the church."* 
Page 274. 

From this we can judge how much more this 
practice must have flourished among those who 
entirely free themselves from the Roman supersti- 
tions, and who had fled as from Babel, — I mean 
the members of the true Christian church, who had 
to hide themselves as doves before the eagle, as 
shall be shown. With this we will conclude our ac- 
count of baptism in the eighth century. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE EIGHTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE EIGHTH 
CENTURY 

[We commence with a certain severe persecu- 
tion of the Christians in the East, instituted by 
Haumar, King of the Saracens, about A. D. 718. 

Thereupon follows a note concerning said per- 
secution; it is related that those of the East had 
long before separated from those of the West (that 
is, from the Roman church) ; mention is also made 
of the Thessalonian churches, which, from the time 
of the apostles, are said to have continued un- 
changed in religion; from which it is concluded 
that apparently also some of these true believers 
were put to death for the true faith, in said eastern 
persecution. 

A very brief account of the great cruelty exer- 
cised by Elvelid, the Mohammedan, A. D. 739, 
against all Christian prisoners in the eastern coun- 
tries, whom without mercy, he caused to be put to 
death, because of the Christian worship; upon 
which follows a note containing more particulars, 
and some explanation with regard to Eutichius, 
Peter of Damascus, Peter Mavimenus, and others, 
who were put to death for the Gospel, in the East, 
particularly at Damascus. 

* This appears also quite clearly from the example of Charle- 
magne, who. about the year 781, had his son Carloman, who was 
then several years old, baptized by Pope Adrian I, at Rome, on the 
feast of Easter. His daughter Gisla was also baptized the same 
year, at Milan, by Bishop Thomas. H. Montanus refers this to the 
year 781, but others, to A.D. 800. 


Derthuin, Bertherius, Anabert, Hunored, and 
others, opposed the superstitions of Boniface, the 
papal Legate; whereupon they are deposed from 
their ministry, about A. D. 748. 

Albert of Gaul, and Clement of Scotland, follow 
the afore-mentioned persons, and reprove Boniface 
for introducing his superstitions; then it is re- 
lated, of each separately, what happened on this 
account to Albert and Clement ; and how they died, 
according to the most reliable testimony, about 
A. D. 748 ; a discrepancy among authors as to the 
time of their death; how the discrepancy can be 
reconciled. 

Two followers of the afore-mentioned martyrs, 
Samson and Sydonius, as well as some others, 
whose names are not mentioned, maintain their 
doctrine against the papists, especially against Bon- 
iface, the afore-mentioned papal legate; but 
whether for this they were martyred or put to 
death, is not stated. 

A circumstantial account of a severe and lament- 
able persecution instituted by Mady, King of the 
Arabians, against the Christian believers in the 
East, about A. D. 780. 

A note touching said persecution, as well as how 
the Arabians proceeded in persecuting the Chris- 
tians in other places; also, what might be ad- 
duced, as regards the matter of martyrization. 
from our account of baptism in this century. Con- 
clusion.] 


SEVERE PERSECUTION IN THE EAST, ABOUT 
A. D. 718 

There was now considerable tranquility in the 
western countries, but in the East commotions be- 
gan to arise; for about the year 718, Haumar,* 
King of the Saracens, issued bloody decrees for 
the persecution of the Christians. He prohibited 
wine, according to the laws of Mohammed, which, 
however, did not matter much ; but the most griev- 
ous of all was this : he endeavored to compel the 
Christians to apostatize and deny Christ ; he 
promised exemption from tribute and taxes to those 
who, forsaking Christ, should adhere to Moham- 
med; on the other hand, he threatened to punish 
with death, all those who should cling steadfastly 
to Christ. In the meantime he oppressed them 
with intolerable burdens, and deprived some of 
life, by various torments.f 

He also made a law that the testimony of a Chris- 
tian should not be valid, nor be accepted against a 
Saracen. In short, it is stated that by virtue of 
said decrees, many of the innocent and defenseless 
Christians became martyrs ; but in default of 
faithful historians of that time, the names of said 
martyrs have not come down to us, save a few, as 
shall appear. 

* Paul Diac., lib. 21. Hist. Rom. in Leone Isauro, compared 
with Abr. Mell. Hist., fol. 305, coi. 2. 

t In the year 720, the Saracens or Arabians came over into 
Spain, where they sorely persecuted and martyred many pious 
Christians. — Sigibert. Chron. Tudensis. Also, Abr. Mell., fol. 328, 
col. I Howevet, from this we would conclude neither the one nor 
the other. 


228 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Note. — Above all, it must be observed in this 
account of the eastern martyrs, that, as far as re- 
gards open churches or communities, those of the 
East had long before separated from those of the 
West, that is, from the Roman church, because 
they would not be subject to the power and do- 
minion of the pope of Rome, who, already, A. D. 
606, had been declared head of all the churches ; 
but as such they would by no means recognize or 
accept him. This separation, in the course of time, 
assumed such proportions, that, as far as we know, 
they have not united again even to the present day. 

Moreover, it is established by different writers, 
that, besides said separated churches, called the 
Greek, there are other churches in the East, prin- 
cipally in the region of Thessalonica, who are 
agreed in all respects with the Anabaptists of the 
present day, and have maintained such faith and 
practice uninterruptedly from the time of the 
apostles; of this, however, we shall speak more 
fully in the sixteenth century, in connection with 
baptism. 

This being the case, it would not be surprising, 
if in said persecution of the Christians in the East, 
not only this or that single person, but, what is 
more, very many true believers were martyred and 
put to death for the true faith in Jesus Christ, 
and the sincere practice of the precepts of the 
Gospel. Nevertheless, we can tell no more than 
what the ancient writers have left us, and shall, 
therefore, proceed accordingly, adding, whenever 
we think it necessary, our own opinion in the 
margin or in a note. 


THE GREAT CRUELTY OF ELVELID, THE MOHAM- 
MEDAN, TOWARDS ALL CHRISTIAN PRISONERS, 
WHOM HE, WITHOUT MERCY, CAUSED 
TO BE PUT TO DEATH, ON ACCOUNT 
OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, 
A. D. 739 

It is stated that A. D. 739, in the 23d year of Leo 
Isaurus, the Mohammedan Prince Elvelid caused 
all the imprisoned Christians in every city to be 
put to death, on account of the Christian religion. 
Among them is mentioned one Eutichius, who was 
carried away to Karras, in Mesopotamia, and, at 
the time when said slaughter and martyrization of 
all imprisoned Christian believers occurred, offered 
up, because of the same faith and testimony, for 
his Saviour Jesus. Compare Paul. Diac, lib. 21, 
with A. Mellinus, 2d book, jol. 305, col. 2, 3. 

Note. — Of said Eutichius we find no further 
account, touching the confession of his faith, save 
that, when the other martyrs were put to death, 
he, too, was offered up for Christ; which must 
also be understood of various others. See the 
above-mentioned authors, compared with what we 
have stated in the beginning of this century. 

We will say nothing of Peter, Bishop of the 


church of Damascus, Peter Mavimenus, and others, 
who, at this time, were also put to death in the 
East, particularly at Damascus, for the testimony 
of the Lord Jesus, about the year 742 ; since the 
ancient writers have left us no definite information 
respecting their particular confession of faith, 
only a general statement, namely, that they suf- 
fered for Christ, and for the Christian or evan- 
gelical truth. 

Hence it has come, that some who boast of 
Christ and His holy Gospel with their mouths, 
yet, by their singular expositions, yea, by their 
deeds and works, are very far therefrom, have 
nevertheless not hesitated, to claim as of their 
number, and produce as witnesses for their strange, 
and, in many respects, unchristian and unevan- 
gelical confessions, persons of whom we maintain, 
because of certain circumstances mentioned by an- 
cient writers, that they believed and lived in per- 
fect accordance with the true tenor of the holy 
Gospel, and, as a seal of this, testified to this with 
their blood and steadfast death. 

Oh, how greatly it is to be lamented that the 
ancients have not left us more definite and clear 
information with regard to this ! We feel confident, 
that it would still refresh many a well-meaning 
heart, and serve to confirm their faith, if they 
should see that in those early, and not less turbu- 
lent times, many of their fellow brethren and sis- 
ters had such love for Christ, their beloved blood- 
bridegroom, and for His heavenly doctrine (whicli 
they confess with them), that they did not hesi- 
tate, the one in the fire, another in the water, some 
under the teeth and claws of wild beasts, others 
under the sword, the deadly halter, or otherwise, 
to bear testimony to it. 

But we hope that in the right place, and through- 
out, we have given as much information and ex- 
planation in regard to it, as will satisfy a true 
Christian and well-meaning soul. All things can- 
not be discussed in one place. 

We will here leave this, and proceed from the 
East, of which we have hitherto spoken, to the 
West, where now we think we can find clearer 
information concerning several special points of 
the faith, namely, of such persons as did not suf- 
fer under the heathen, Mohammedans, Saracens, 
or the like, but under the pope of Rome, or the 
Roman church, where it was customary to con- 
demn people on some particular articles of wor- 
ship. But before we proceed to the martyrs who 
were punished as criminals and with death, we 
deem it well, by way of introduction to, and prep- 
aration for, this matter, to show first, how this, as 
by steps, took its rise ; namely, how first a few per- 
sons, whom we shall name, about this time, op- 
posed a certain papal Legate, with words and cen- 
sures, for introducing certain superstitions; and 
what occurred to them, on this account, from the 
pope. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


229 


OF DERTHUIN, BERTHERIUS, ANOBERT, HUNORED, 

AND OTHERS, WHO WERE DEPOSED FROM 

THEIR MINISTRY, BECAUSE THEY WOULD 

NOT ACCEPT THE SUPERSTITIONS 

OF THE PAPAL LEGATE, ETC., 

ABOUT A. D. 748 

A certain Boniface, Archbishop of Mayence, 
having been sent out, as an apostle, ambassador 
and legate, by Pope Zacharias I, to convert the 
heathen to the Roman see (as it was called), and 
to inoculate to those who already belonged to it, 
the Roman ceremonies and superstitions, and cause 
them to observe the same, many bishops, overseers, 
or teachers, in Germany, Bavaria, and France, op- 
posed it with spiritual weapons, namely, with re- 
proofs from the Word of God, refusing to obey 
in this respect, either the pope or his legate. 

Among those who thus refused, there are men- 
tioned by name, Derthuin, Bertherius, Anobert, 
and Hunored. These men were accused to the 
pope, and charged not only with said matter, but, 
from envy, also with being avaricious, proud and 
desirous of filthy lucre. Thereupon they were all 
deposed from their ministry, by authority of the 
pope and his legate ; but how it ended with them, 
is not stated, though it is to be presumed that 
some kind of ecclesiastical exclusion, anathemati- 
zation or excommunication followed; however, 
since this is passed by in silence, we can conclude 
nothing certain concerning it. 

In the meantime, there appears, on the one hand, 
the boldness of said persons in reproving the Ro- 
man superstitions, and, on the other hand, the 
shameless arrogance of the pope and his legate, 
in deposing and removing those who, loving the 
good, could not refrain, according to the doctrine 
of the Word of God, from reproving the evil. See 
A. Mell., fol. 328, col. 2, compared with Aventin. 
Annul. Boj., lib. 3. 


HOW ALBERT OF GAUL, AND CLEMENT OF SCOT- 
LAND, ALSO OPPOSED THE PAPAL SUPERSTI- 
TIONS, ABOUT A. D. 750; ON ACCOUNT 
OF WHICH THEY WERE MARTYRED 

It is stated that about A. D. 750, there lived two 
very eminent men, Albert, surnamed Gallus, that 
is, of Gaul or Prance, and Clement, surnamed 
Scotus, that is, of Scotland. Both opposed the 
superstitions of common popery in various points ; 
Albert began first, in some part of France, and 
was followed by said Clement, who came from 
Scotland and joined him. In consequence of this, 
both, yet each separately, had to feel the sting of 
the pope, in such a manner as the sequel will show. 
In order to present this, together with the circum- 
stances pertaining to it, in the most suitable way, 
we shall treat of each separately, beginning with 
Albert, since he was the first and principal one in 
said matter. 


ALBERT OF GAUL, FOR OPPOSING THE ROMAN 
SUPERSTITIONS, CAST INTO PRISON AT FULDA, 
IN WHICH HE, TO ALL APPEARANCE, PER- 
ISHED THROUGH WANT, ABOUT THE 
CLOSE OF THE YEAR 750 

Enlightened by the heavenly radiance of the doc- 
trine of the apostles, Albert, with voice and pen, 
had again and again reproved the errors and su- 
perstitions of the Roman church, asserting, name- 
ly, that priests or teachers should not be pro- 
hibited from marrying; that the relics, or bones, 
of the saints ought not to be venerated ; that im- 
ages should not be worshiped or saluted as a re- 
ligious service, and that the pope has no right to 
the primacy (or supremacy) over the church. He 
condemned the masses for the dead, purgatory, 
etc., as [human] inventions. Wicelius adds: He 
rejected as unnecessary and superstitious, cere- 
monies, the imposition of hands, the making the 
sign of the cross, confirmation, etc., and, in short, 
all such things as are practiced in popery for the 
purpose of confirming infant baptism. 

_ Boniface, the papal legate, therefore, accused 
him to the pope, fabricating and disseminating 
many slanders, which were spewed out against him 
as bitter gall. The pope lost no time, nor sought 
to delay the matter, but immediately condemned 
him unheard upon these false accusations ; and the 
above-mentioned articles, excommunicated him, 
and sent the sentence of excommunication to said 
false accuser, namely, to Boniface, his dear legate, 
that the latter should publish it against Albert 
throughout France. Hence it is, that the papists 
number him among the heretics, though they fail to 
show what heresy it was, for which he was con- 
demned and thus shamefully excommunicated; 
which matter must be gleaned from other writers, 
except the testimony quoted above from Wicelius, 
according to A. M. 

Having received said letter containing Albert's 
excommunication, from the pope, Boniface not 
only caused the same to be published throughout 
France, and deposed him from his ministry, but 
also incarcerated him in the monastery at Fulda, in 
which imprisonment he probably died of hunger, 
thirst, and divers wants. Compare Wilibald. in vita 
Bonifacii, Aventin. Annal., lib. 3. Nauc. Gen. 26, 
vol. 2. Balaeus. Cent. 14, cap. 30, 31, in Append. 
Epist. Zach. ad Bonif., Tom. 2, Concil Lutsenb. 
Haigiol. in vita Bon., with A. M., fol. 328, col. 3 ; 
also, /. Gys., edition of 1657, fol. 30, col. 2, 3. 

FURTHER OBSERVATION, RESPECTING THE TIME OF 
THE PRECEDING EVENT 

Most ancient writers, it seems, with whom also 
A. Mellinus agrees, fix the time of the excommuni- 
cation and martyrdom of said Albert, about A. D. 
750, A. M., fol. 329, col. 1, Seb. Franck fixes it 
ten years earlier, namely, A. D. 740. In Chron. 
Rom. Kett., fol. 64, col. 2. 


230 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


However, this discrepancy can easily be recon- 
ciled, if a distinction is made between the time 
when Albert commenced to teach against the pope 
and the Roman church, and the time when he was 
anathematized by the pope, and, ultimately, de- 
prived of life in the dungeon at Fulda; for ten 
years can easily have intervened, and Seb. Franck 
may therefore have had regard to the time when he 
began to teach, while the other authors, including 
Mellinus, may have referred to the time of his 
death. 

Regarding this it appears that John Gysius made 
a great error, either through incorrect authors, or 
for some other reason, when he fixes the time of 
the aforesaid martyr, A. D. 900. See in the margin 
of the place referred to above. 


CLEMENT OF SCOTLAND, A COMPANION OF ALBERT, 

EXCOMMUNICATED AND THEN BURNED, AS A 

HERETIC, BY THE ROMANISTS, ACCORDING 

TO THE TESTIMONY OF THE ANCIENTS, 

A. D. 750, FOR THE SAME REASON, 

NAMELY, FOR OPPOSING AND 

REJECTING THE ROMAN 

SUPERSTITIONS 

When Clement, having come from Scotland, had 
joined the aforesaid Albert as a companion, and 
united with him in regard to doctrine, he not only 
began, but ceased not, even as the friend whom he 
had found, to combat with the spiritual armor, 
and, if possible, to overcome, in an evangelical man- 
ner, the pope and the Roman church, in various 
points, touching mostly her ceremonies. There- 
upon he was also accused, and put to death in such 
a manner as in the proper place, we presently 
hope to show. 

The accusations brought against him were of the 
same nature as those preferred against Albert, his 
companion ; which was not at all strange, since he 
had placed himself under Albert, not only as a 
friend and companion, but also as a disciple. For 
this reason, the pope, through the accusation of 
Boniface, the papal legate, pronounced the same 
excommunication against him. 

But when he presented himself for the purpose 
of vindicating his conduct in a full synod, Boniface 
prevented him from taking this course, making the 
people believe that it were not lawful to admit a 
heretic who had been excommunicated or excluded 
from the church, to divine worship, or to a synodal 
assembly ; yea, that such an one should not be per- 
mitted to have the benefit (in whatever this might 
consist) of the laws or ordinances of the church. 

Seeing that by this pretense his lips were sealed, 
making it impossible for him to properly defend 
himself, he had recourse to his pen and wrote a 
book concerning this matter, against Boniface. 

Finally, it is stated and maintained that this 
steadfast witness of Jesus Christ, was burned as a 
heretic by the Romanists, even against the will of 
pope Zacharias, about A. D. 750, or a little after. 


Compare this entire account of Clement with 
WUlibaldi, Naucleri, Aventini. Balae. Alij ubi 
supra. Also, Annal. Boj. Bernhard. Lutz, in 
Catal. Hares., Tom. 2, Condi. Also, A. M., 2d 
book, H. M., 1619, fol. 328, 329. Hist. Mart. 
I. S., 1645, fol. 30. 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING THE CASE OF 

ALBERT AND CLEMENT, ACCORDING TO THE 

ACCOUNT OF SEBASTIAN FRANCK 

"In the year," etc., "these two men drew to 
them much people in France, pretending to be fol- 
lowers of the apostles, and speaking great things 
of the mysteries of God, and the life and conduct 
of man. Boniface, Archbishop of France, wrote 
the whole matter to the pope, who, in a council of 
the bishops, laid it before them. They rejected the 
opinion of the (supposed) heretic from the 
church." Finally he says: "They were unani- 
mously deposed and anathematized." Chron. Rom 
Kett., fol. 64. 


SPECIAL ACCOUNT OF CLEMENT, ACCORDING TO 
P. J. TWISCK 

"Clemens Scotus, a faithful disciple of Bishop 
Adelbert, taught with great power in France and 
Germany, especially in Bavaria and Franconia, 
that the pope ought not to have so much power ; 
that he (the pope) very improperly would forbid 
the priests (or teachers) to marry; that he intro- 
duced many new and unknown ceremonies into the 
church, and originated false doctrines. He (Clem- 
ent) was condemned without a hearing or ex- 
amination, and his writings or books were burned." 
Chron., page 258, col. 2, and 259, col. 1, from J oh. 
Munst., fol. 125. Aventin., lib. 3. Chron. Seb. Fr. 
fol. 54. 


OF TWO FOLLOWERS OF THE AFORESAID MARTYRS, 
NAMED SAMSON AND SYDONIUS, WHO, WITH OTH- 
ERS, MAINTAINED THEIR DOCTRINE AGAINST 
POPERY, PARTICULARLY AGAINST THE PA- 
PAL LEGATE, BONIFACE, ARCHBISHOP 
OF MAYENCE; BUT WHETHER FOR 
THIS THEY WERE MARTYRED, 
IS NOT STATED 

Samson was also a Scotchman by descent, and 
an elder and companion of said Clement. He and 
Sydonius, Bishop in Bavaria, and others of like 
purpose and belief, were as one heart and soul, to 
oppose with the Word of God, Boniface, the papal 
legate, who proposed to oppress the people with 
manifold superstitions and burdens. This, not only 
Samson, but also Sydonius and the others boldly 
did. They taught with word and pen, that the 
apostolical embassy (as it was called) of Bishop 
Boniface bore a closer resemblance to paganism or 
antichristendom, than to Christendom, and that he 
had deformed rather than reformed, France and 
Germany. Again, that he was a sycophant and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Clement the Scotchman burned as a heretic, AD 756 


flatterer of the pope of Rome, to whom he had not 
only bound, but completely sold himself, as a 
sworn slave. 

This they were able to prove, since, by a solemn 
oath, he had sworn to the two popes, Zacharias I 
and Gregory II : That he would bring all the per- 
sons whom he should draw to him, also into obedi- 
ence to the Roman see. These things were known 
from doouments written by himself and trans- 
mitted to said popes. 

They also censured him for his evil practices in 
the administration of baptism (that is, infant bap- 
tism), consisting in the saying of certain words, by 
way of exorcism. In this several questions were 
generally put to the unintelligent infants, namely : 
"Believest thou?" etc., whereupon the sponsors, 
in the child's name, answered: "Yea, I believe," 
etc. ; which things certainly deserved no little cen- 
sure, though without them, infant baptism had 
but little virtue or respectability. 

They were also greatly offended, because he 
would forbid them to marry, as contrary to the 
institution of God, Gen. 1 :27, 28, yea, as being a 
doctrine of devils, I Tim. 4:1-3. 


Finally it is stated, that said persons, and others, 
unable, in Germany as well as in France, to bring 
about any improvement with their doctrine, were 
greatly oppressed, partly through the tyranny of 
the popes of Rome, and partly through the author- 
ity of the kings of France, yea, were condemned in 
open synods, deposed from their ministry, and shut 
up in prisons and dungeons, and thus closely guard- 
ed that they might not escape. But as to what 
finally became of these persons, and others of like 
belief, A. Mellinus states, that the papistic histor- 
ians are ashamed to tell. Compare Aventin. 3, 
Annal. Centur. Balaei., 14, cap. 31, and in Append., 
Tom. 2. Concil. in Decret. Greg. 2, Epist. Bonifac. 
ad Zachar. Citante Balaeo. Hist. Bo]., lib. 3, with 
A. Mell, 2d book, fol. 329, col. 1, 2. 


SEVERE AND LAMENTABLE PERSECUTION, INSTI- 
TUTED BY MADY, KING OF THE ARABIANS, 
AGAINST THE CHRISTIAN BELIEVERS 
IN THE EAST, ABOUT A. D. 780 

About A. D. 780, in the fifth year of Leo IV, 
son of Constantine Copronymus, Mady, King of 
the Arabians, greatly devastated the church of 


232 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


God in the East, constraining the innocent and de- 
fenseless Christians to apostatize, especially the 
servants and slaves. To this end he had given full 
power to one Thesias, surnamed Zelotes, to inflict 
upon the Christians all manner of oppression. The 
latter, upon coming to Emesas, promised to con- 
strain no one to apostatize, or to become marked 
with the sign of Mohammed, except the Jews, or 
those who had long before not been Christians, 
but unbelievers. But when the Jews and the Chris- 
tians had been separated, he commenced to tor- 
ment the Christians far more cruelly than had ever 
been done by the Governors Lysias and Agricolaus, 
under the heathen Emperors; so that he put to 
death many of them, men as well as women, for 
the name of Jesus Christ. 

In the meantime something remarkable occurred 
here. Certain women whom he visited with various 
torments, to see whether he could not make them 
yield to his ungodliness, remained steadfast, over- 
coming, through the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, his fury with patience. He caused a thou- 
sand stripes to be given them, and had them 
scourged and tormented unto death, till they re- 
ceived from Christ the crown of victory. 

Proceeding thence throughout Syria, he demol- 
ished, as far as Damascus, all the meeting places 
of the Christians, and ravaged the churches, thus 
breaking the promise made by the Arabians to 
those of Syria, viz.: That under their rule they 
should live in peace and tranquillity, and enjoy the 
free and unrestricted practice of their religion. But 
(as the apostle says) as then, he that was born 
after the flesh persecuted him that was born after 
the Spirit, even so it was now, Gal. 4:29. See Abr. 
Mell., 2d book, fol. 306, col. 1, compare with 
Paul. Diac., lib. 23, Hist. Rom,., in Leone 4. 
Sigibert. Chron., A. D. 781 ; others, however, fix 
it A. D. 780. 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS RESPECTING THE AFORE- 
MENTIONED PERSECUTION 

We commenced this century in the East, thence 
proceeded to the West, and have now returned to 
the East, namely, to the countries situated east 
from Italy, and, consequently, far from Rome, 
and the Roman see of papal dominion. 

As regards the aforesaid persecutions, as well as 
the churches which existed in the East, especially 
in the Thessalonian regions, and the martyrs who 
fell there, namely, what and how much is to be held 
of them, can be gleaned from the explanation which 
we gave in the beginning, and to which we here 
refer the reader. 

These Arabians proceeded and brought still 
more persecution and misery upon many Christian 
believers in other countries ; however, for reasons 
already mentioned, we are again prevented from 
speaking more fully, or, at least, separately, of 
each person that may have been martyred there. 

The account of holy baptism, which we have 


given for this century, would furnish us with not 
a little matter, to fill these hundred years to the 
very end with true professors of the true faith, 
also with such as, to all appearance, did not hesi- 
tate, in testimony of their upright and unwaver- 
ing minds, to lay down their lives for the sake of 
Jesus Christ, which is the utmost that can be re- 
quired of any martyr ; but as we have not been able 
to find their names, they can have no place in this 
book. It is sufficient, we hope, that their names, 
by the hand of God, are written in the Book of 
Life and eternal salvation. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE NINTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE NINTH CENTURY 

[This account begins with a sad lamentation, that 
nearly all the learned and celebrated men were 
corrupted through the Roman superstitions. 

Immediately, however, a consolation follows, 
namely, that in this corrupt age there were still 
people who did not adhere to the Roman super- 
stitions. 

Then it is shown from Haimo, that teaching must 
precede baptism; that the candidate must first be 
instructed ; that he must first be enlightened, etc. 
Thereupon, in the margin, A. S. 821, it is noticed 
that Christus Taurinensus wrote against the invo- 
cation of images, of the cross, of relics, of the 
saints, and against the power of the pope, pilgrim- 
ages, etc. In the margin, for the year 825, a certain 
council of Paris is adduced, against image worship. 
In the same place, Gratian says that Christians 
must not oppose weapon with weapon, but flee be- 
fore persecution. 

Rabanus Maurus appears, A. D. 830, and teaches 
how in his time the catechumens were prepared for 
baptism. Of those who asked for baptism, and made 
haste for it. His exposition of Cant. 3 :6 : "Who is 
this that cometh up white as snow ?" Again, that 
the candidate must previously be instructed in the 
faith of the incarnation of Jesus Christ ; also, that 
in the sacrament of the Supper, the language is 
figurative. 

Angelomus follows Rabanus, teaching that the 
sins which have been committed through the 
senses, are washed away (that. is, forgiven) in or 
through baptism; which is more fully explained. 

Thereupon, A. D. 840, Bertram, Heymon, and 
Walafrid appear, who declare themselves against 
the Roman church, in various points, as in the 
matter of baptism, transubstantiation, justification, 
good works as practiced by the papists. 

The council of the Christians at Paris, in the 
time of Louis and Lothaire, is introduced ; lamen- 
tation on account of the encroachment of infant 
baptism, and the neglect of the instruction once 
connected with baptism. 

The conversion of the Slaves (of Slavonia) is 
stated; also, that they were baptized, though not 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


233 


according to the Roman custom, nor in the Roman 
language. Marginal notice, for A. D. 843, that 
Christus Lupim at Ferrara refuted the new Roman 
doctrines, as purgatory. 

A few good things respecting the baptism of 
adults are adduced, for the year 848, and explained 
in a simple manner. In the margin, for A. D. 858, 
it is stated of Gunther, Bishop of Cologne, that he 
calls the pope a tyrant, yea, a wolf. 

Idiota declares that in baptism we accept Christ 
as our bridegroom. In the margin, mention is 
made of Ulric, Bishop of Augsburg, that he ac- 
cused the pope of error. 

Hincmar, Bishop of Landun, opposes the bap- 
tism of infants, and prohibits their being baptized ; 
on account of which he is severely accused. 

Paschasius advances three things which are in- 
compatible with infant baptism. 

Remigius teaches against the pope; likewise, 
Tergand, Bishop of Triers, who calls him anti- 
christ, and Rome Babylon. Conclusion from P. J. 
Twisck and John Patrick.] 

Jesus Christ our Saviour, speaking of the griev- 
ous times which should come after His departure, 
says, (Matt. 24:12) : "And because iniquity shall 
abound, the love of many shall wax cold." This 
was experienced at this time ; for with the growth 
and increase, through very many ungodly and un- 
righteous superstitions, of the iniquities of the 
pope of Rome and the whole Roman church, the 
true love for God's commandments decreased, so 
that but few were found, who, as bright lights, 
penetrated the smoke that came up from the Ro- 
man pit; yea, nearly all men of learning and ce- 
lebrity were corrupt. O sad and lamentable mat- 
ter!* 

Nevertheless, as Noah and his family served 
God in the first world ; Lot, in Sodom ; Daniel and 
the three youths, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, in Babylon; Elijah and the seven thousand 
who were hidden and had not bowed their knees 
to Baal, in the land of Israel, where the prophets 
of the Lord were slain, and his altars thrown 
down; even so there remained some, though but 
few, at this time, who, living in the midst of pop- 
ery, did not adhere to the Roman superstitions, but 
abhorred them. 

However, in order to avoid prolixity, we shall 
confine ourselves, omitting, as has been our cus- 
tom, other points to the article of baptism, except 
where it may be found necessary to add something 
else ; and shall show when and by whom this article, 
with the rejection of infant baptism, was main- 
tained salutarily and in the fear of God, according 
to His words. Hence we will begin thus. 

A. D. 814 — In the days of Louis the Pious, the 
first of this name, who began to reign with the 

* A.D. 812, disputes began to arise in the Roman church, con- 
cerning transubstantiation, or the changing of the bread and wine 
into the sacrament ; so that the custom of the holy Supper was con- 
verted into idolatry. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 9th book, page 279, col. 
1, from Chron. Mich., 2d part, fol. 175, ?egh., fol. 245. 


year 814, there lived and wrote the celebrated 
Haimo, of whom various praiseworthy things con- 
cerning baptism upon faith are still extant. 

Haimo, on Matt. 28:19, (Bapt. Hist, page 561,) 
writes : "In this place the order how to baptize 
aright is pointed out to us ; in which it is ordained, 
that teaching must precede baptism, for he says: 
'Teach all nations;' and then adds: 'baptizing 
them.' He, then, that is to be baptized, must 
previously be instructed, that he may first learn 
faith, which he shall afterwards receive in bap- 
tism." 

How could any one give clearer testimony con- 
cerning the true baptism of Jesus Christ? How, 
also, could anybody more plainly reject infant 
baptism, than by such a declaration? Every word 
emphatically says it. 

He begins with Matt. 28:19, where the Lord 
says: "Go ye therefore, and teach," or, in other 
words make disciples of ; which he explains thus : 
"that teaching must precede baptism;" for the 
Lord first says : teach, and then, baptize, and that 
therefore he that is to be baptized, must first be in- 
structed, and learn the faith. Certainly, these are 
things which pertain only to the adult and intelli- 
gent, hence it would be sinning against the truth 
to apply them to unintelligent infants. 

Haimo (Serin. Domin. 12, Trinit., page 564) 
says : "Since those who are baptized, must first be 
enlightened with the grace of the Holy Spirit, then 
instructed by the teachers, and finally called to 
confess the faith, hence arises the custom that," 
etc. 

This accords fully with the preceding ; for he de- 
clares the same still more plainly, since here not 
only instructing is joined to baptizing, but the 
illumination of the Holy Spirit, the instruction of 
the teachers, and the confession of the faith are 
connected with, yea, required before baptism; 
which is so clear, according to the purport of the 
first declaration, that it is unnecessary to add an- 
other word ; the impartial may judge. As to what 
he further says in the same place, concerning the 
touching of the tongue, the saying of the word 
Hephphatha, etc., we leave as it is, neither praising 
nor censuring it, since it is of little consequence, 
if the truth and the signification of the matter is 
rightly preserved. 

Haimo, on Rom. 1 (page 542), writes: "At the 
time of baptism we confess that we believe on God 
the Father, and on the Lord Jesus Christ, and on 
the Holy Ghost; likewise, that we renounce the 
devil and all his pomp and works. If we observe 
this thus, we belong to God in faith ; but if we do 
not, we are convinced of unbelief."* 

A little before, in his exposition of Rom. 6 
(page 540), he makes mention of four different 


* A.D. 821 (writes P. J. Twisk), that is, in the time of the 
Roman Emperor Louis, there lived Christus Taurinensus, who 
wrote and taught against the invocation of the images, of the cross, 
of the relics, of the saints, and against the power of the Pope, ana 
pilgrimages. — Chron., 9th book, page 280, col. 2, from Toh. Munst., 
fol. 132. 


234 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


baptisms : 1. In the water only, as was John's bap- 
tism. 2. In fire and the Spirit, with which the 
apostles were baptized on the day of Pentecost. 3. 
In water and the Spirit, which baptism then ob- 
tained in the church. 4. In the shedding of the 
blood with which the Lord Himself and all the holy 
martyrs were baptized. 

These four different baptisms can pertain to 
none but the intelligent and believing; for, as re- 
gards the first, namely, John's baptism, it is ex- 
pressly stated that those to whom it was admin- 
istered, confessed their sins and repented. Matt. 
3:6, 8, 11. As to the second, namely, the baptism 
of fire and the Holy Ghost, which was admin- 
istered to the apostles by God Himself from heav- 
en, this did not at all relate to infants, seeing that 
all who were thus baptized, spake with tongues 
and magnified God. Acts 2 :3, 4. Concerning the 
third, namely, the baptism in water and the Spirit, 
which then obtained in the church, this likewise 
could not be peculiar to infants, since the fruits 
of the Holy Ghost, without which the Holy Ghost 
cannot be, do in no wise appear in them. See Gal. 
5:22. Respecting the fourth, namely, the bap- 
tism by the shedding of blood, this, according to 
his statement, is peculiar only to Christ and the 
martyrs ; consequently it cannot be regarded as ap- 
plying to infants, for these do not even know of 
confessing Christ, much less of suffering one's 
blood to be shed for His name's sake, and of dying 
in constancy. 

Continuing, he shows in the same place (Rom. 
6) that in him that is to be baptized, there must 
be three invisible things: 1. Faith. 2. The soul, 
which is washed from sin. 3. The Holy Ghost, by 
whose co-operation the forgiveness of sins is im- 
parted. We would explain these things more fully ; 
but since this is a passage expressed in almost the 
very words which Albinus, in the preceding cen- 
tury, for the year 792, wrote (on John 15), of 
which, we gave an explanation, we will, to avoid 
repetition, take leave therefrom, referring the 
reader to said explanation. 

Haimo teaches, on Canticles 4 {page 544), that 
all who desire to become brethren must be baptized, 
saying : "Without the washing of baptism, no one 
can be a true believer." 

What else is this than what the holy Scripture 
teaches, namely, that in baptism we put on Christ? 
and that by faith (which is professed in baptism) 
we become the children of God? Paul says: "Ye 
are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. 
For as many of you as have been baptized have 
put on Christ" (Gal. 3:26, 27). 

But someone may think: Haimo speaks of be- 
coming brethren by baptism ; whereas Paul speaks 
of becoming children of God, of putting on Christ, 
etc. True, beloved reader ; but who, with only a lit- 
tle experience in the holy Scriptures, knows not 
that to be a child of God, or to be a brother of the 
church of Christ, is one and the same thing? Cer- 


tainly, it is the same; for the same Spirit that 
make us children of God, also makes us brethren 
of Christ, yea, joint heirs with Him. Rom. 8 :15-17. 
For this reason, Christ calls them both His breth- 
ren and His children, saying: "I will declare thy 
name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church 
will I sing praise unto thee." And again : "Behold, 
here am I and the children which God hath given 
me." Heb. 2:12, 13. Who now shall say that Hai- 
mo, who calls the baptized, brethren, and Paul, who 
terms them children of God, contradict each other? 
Their accordance is sufficiently proved, and at this 
we will let it rest. 

Of the dignity of baptism, Haimo, on Hos. 2 
{page 547), says: "Baptism is sanctified by faith 
in the sufferings of our Lord." 

"What doth hinder me to be baptized ?" said the 
Ethiopian to Philip. Philip replied : "If thou be- 
lievest with all thine heart, thou mayest" (Acts 8: 
36, 37) ; indicating that, in order to receive bap- 
tism worthily, sincere faith is required, by which 
baptism is sanctified, which is just what Haimo 
has expressed in the above words; and thus his 
words agree with those of the holy Scripture which 
we have quoted.* 

The^ righteous, Haimo says, on Ps. 38 {page 
548) : "Live in baptism, in which they die unto sin 
and the world." 

Again, on Ps. 136, he says : "By the Red Sea we 
understand holy baptism, which (so to speak) is 
red, being sanctified through the blood of Christ," 
and a little further on : "By the impartation of the 
same, the believers begin (to proceed) in the way 
by which they come to God." 

On Zech. 13 he says: "When we receive the 
faith, we are regenerated in Christ, and in bap- 
tism we are washed from all our sins ; and they that 
through faith are regenerated in baptism, are made 
children of God. 

Again, on Cant. 1, he speaks thus: "As Israel 
was preserved in the Red Sea, but Pharaoh 
drowned, even so the church of the Gentiles, by 
baptism, is delivered from the bondage of the 
devil, and led into the true land of promise, to the 
liberty of the Gospel ; thus she who was formerly 
an handmaid of iniquity, is become a friendf [be- 
loved] of Christ, cleansed and washed, by baptism 
from the filth of sin." 

These passages are like the jets of a fountain, 
which, though they shoot forth in different places! 
proceed from one source. In the first passage, it is 
said of the righteous, that they "live in baptism, 
yea, die unto sin and the world." The life spoken 
of here signifies a spiritual life, and is contrasted 
with death, which comes by sin ; the dying unto sin 
and the world, signifies a forsaking and renounc- 

* The following passages by Haimo, from Ps. 38, to Cant 1 are 
apparently quoted by Idiota.— Bapt. Hist., pages 547, 548. 

t In the Dutch translation of the Bible, in the Book of Canticles 
the word corresponding to ''love," whenever this is apphed as a 
term of endearment to the church, by Christ, is "vriendinne " i e 
friend; hence the allusion is not so apparent in the pTssWe as 
translated here into English.— Translator. Passage, as 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


235 


ing of the same, which can be done only by those 
who previously adhered to, and loved, sin and the 
world. 

In the second passage, baptism is compared to 
the Red Sea, and it is said that "by the impartation 
of the same, the believers proceed." But is not this 
the very thing which Paul spoke of the figurative 
baptism of the believing patriarchs, saying: 
"Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, 
how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and 
all passed through the (Red) sea; and were all 
baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea" 
(I Cor. 10:1, 2) ; which is not to be understood of 
infants that were wont to be carried, but of adult 
persons, who were able to proceed and walk. 

In the third passage, faith, regeneration, bap- 
tism, and being made children of God, are joined 
together. "They that through faith are regenerated 
in baptism, are made children of God," he writes. 
But how can this be interpreted otherwise, than 
with reference to intelligent persons, who, having 
attained to faith, by the hearing of the Word of 
God, are regenerated, and, in token thereof, bap- 
tized, and adopted as children of God into His 
church? Faith certainly comes by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God. Rom. 10:17. Re- 
generation takes place after the death of the first 
birth, or after the mortifying of the old man. John 
3 :4, 5 ; Rom. 6 :4. Baptism is administered to the 
believing and regenerated, as a sign of faith .and 
regeneration. Acts 8:37 ; Tit. 3 :5. Those are made 
children of God, who, through faith, have put on 
Christ, and, in proof of this, have been baptized. 
John 1:12, compared with Gal. 3:26, 27. Judge 
now, whether these are things that can be done by 
new-born infants. I am fully confident that you 
will say : No. Yet, these things are connected with 
baptism, not only by Haimo, but principally by 
God, in the holy Scriptures; yea, without them, 
baptism is of no value. Hence we say : "What God 
has joined together, let not man put asunder" 
(Matt. 19:6). 

In the fourth passage it is said, that "The church 
of the Gentiles, by baptism, is delivered from the 
bondage of the devil," and that "she who was a 
handmaid of iniquity, is (thus) become a friend 
[beloved] of Christ." This certainly savors not at 
all of infant baptism, for it cannot be said of in- 
fants, that they are the church of the Gentiles, un- 
der the bondage of the devil, a handmaid of in- 
iquity, nor that they, by baptism, are delivered 
from the service of the devil, and become a friend 
of Christ. Certainly, no one can be delivered from 
the service of the devil, but he who has served the 
devil ; no other can be liberated from the servitude 
of iniquity except she who previously committed 
iniquity ; she who previously blasphemed ; no other 
can be adopted as a friend of Christ, than she who 
formerly, by wicked works, was at enmity with 
Christ; consequently it is indisputable, that this 
cannot be understood of infants, seeing these things 
can have no place with them ; this even those who 


maintain infant baptism, must admit, and hence 
we dismiss the subject. 

"The adult (candidates) also made confession of 
their sins, and a penance was imposed on them, 
for forty, twenty or seven days." Haimo, on Heb. 
6. (p. 552). 

Here adult and not infant candidates are spoken 
of, yea, such, upon whom, when they had made 
confession of sins, a penance (or amendment of 
life) was imposed ; which are things pertaining to 
adults, and not to little children ; this is too plain to 
be refuted. 

Said baptism was so firmly maintained and thus 
valued by Haimo, that he held that it should never 
be repeated, if it had been administered according 
to the rule of the holy Scriptures ; for, treating of 
the 6th chapter of Romans, he says, by way of ex- 
position: "If we have once died unto sin in bap- 
tism, we may not be baptized again." Bapt. Hist., 
p. 543. This well accords with the custom of the 
Anabaptists of the present day ; for, though they 
rebaptize such as have been baptized in their in- 
fancy, when they attain to the faith; regarding 
the baptism which is received in infancy as no bap- 
tism at all, because it is not according to holy Scrip- 
ture; yet no one is rebaptized by them, who has 
been baptized aright, that is, upon faith. 

Note.— A. D. 825.— The council held at Paris, 
A. D. 825, decreed against image worship. Sam. 
Veltius, Geslacht-registcr, page 127. Gratian said 
to his contemporaries : "The Lord, in saying to His 
disciples: 'When they persecute you in this city, 
flee ye into another,' teaches that Christians when 
persecuted, should not repel weapon with weapon, 
but flee therefrom." See Grondelijke Verklaringe 
Danielis cnde Johannis, printed at Harlem, in the 
year 1635, p. 56. 

A. D. 830.*— It is stated that A. D. 830, in the 
sixteenth year of the reign of Emperor Louis I, 
surnamed the Pious, there shone forth as a bright 
light, and wrote, one Rabanus Maurus, residing 
at Fulda, who, among various things written by 
him against the Roman church, also speaks of bap- 
tism, in the discussion of which he throughout em- 
ploys such language as pertains only to believers, 
and in no wise to infants; notwithstanding he at 
one time, it appears, had been a maintainer of in- 
fant baptism, and many other superstitions of 
popery, so much so that he had been an abbot. But 
passing this by, we shall show what he wrote of 
baptism, and how closely it agrees with the teach- 
ing of the holy Scriptures. 

In Jacob Mehrning's history of baptism, various 
passages from Rabanus Maurus are adduced, some 
of which, it is suspected, have been attributed to 
him unjustly, or, at least, that, if he has written 
them, he wrote them before he was enlightened or 
converted ; as, among others, in lib. 2, de Proprit. 

* The proper time for baptizing was still Easter and Whitsun- 
tide.— Bapt. Hist., page 550, num. 2. White garments were put on 
those baptized, which signified the innocence, salvation and purity 
of the Christian ; that they should henceforth, all through life keep 
themselvK unspotted from iniquity. — Page 553, num. 14 


236 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Serm., cap. 200; again, lib. 4, cap. 10; of which we 
let the intelligent judge. 

Nevertheless various things are found, which, we 
doubt not, are justly ascribed to him, as, for in- 
stance : Of the instruction of the catechumens be- 
fore baptism, and how the novices ought to learn 
the faith before they are baptized. In Decretis de 
Consecrat. dist. 4, cap. Ante Bapt., ex Rabano, 
Bapt. Hist., page 560. Likewise, the quotation 
made by Vicecomes {lib. 2, cap. 40) from Rabanus 
{in lib. de instruct. Cleric), which reads as fol- 
lows: "The order according to which the cate- 
chumens are prepared for baptism, is this: First 
they are interrogated whether they renounce the 
devil," etc. Bapt. Hist., page 562. The rest we 
omit. 

By this he indicates, that in his time, in the 
church of which he was a member, the custom of 
preparing the novices for baptism was still ob- 
served, inasmuch as first, the instruction of the 
faith, called the catechism, was presented and 
taught them ; also, that they had to renounce Satan, 
&c. ; which was observed not only at this time, 
but in nearly all the preceding times, as appears 
from this passage: "They are wont to renounce 
the devil with his works and pomp." Syn. Turon. 
Bapt. Hist., page 516, num. 7. 

That in the time of Rabanus the instruction of 
novices extended not only to those of heathen de- 
scent, but also to such as were born of Christian 
parents, is declared by Jacob Mehrning, Bapt. 
Hist., page 560, contra Rulichium. 

D. Vicecomes {lib. 3, cap. 9), quotes from Raba- 
nus Maurus {page 562) : "The fellow petitioners 
for baptism are those who, through the doctrine of 
the faith, and by refraining from disorderly con- 
duct, make haste to receive the grace of Christ in 
baptism." 

This confirms our former assertion, namely, that 
before baptism a preparation had to be made, in or- 
der that it (baptism) might be received worthily; 
which preparation is here called "the doctrine of 
the faith and refraining from disorderly conduct." 
In it are comprised both parts of the doctrine which 
John presented to those who came to his baptism, 
saying : "Repent ye, and believe," etc. Matt. 3 :2, 
compared with Mark 1:15, and Acts 19:4. 

Moreover, they are called fellow petitioners, and 
it is said that "They make haste to receive the grace 
of Christ in baptism," which are things that cannot 
be done by infants. 

Hence he writes, on Cant. 3 :6, {page 540) : 
"Who is this that cometh up white as snow?" ap- 
plying the same to the candidates, who, cleansed 
from their former sins, come up from baptism, and 
increase in virtue. "This mystery," he says, "is 
not otherwise than under the invocation of the 
Holy Trinity, that is, in the name of the Father, 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; thus the Lord 
says to the apostles, Matt. 28:19: 'Go and teach,' " 
etc. 


Hence, when he speaks of coming up from the 
water, and of the invocation of the Holy Trinity, 
as well as of the passage, Matt. 28:19, he suffi- 
ciently shows that he does not speak of the baptism 
of infants, since they cannot come up from bap- 
tism, nor invoke the Holy Trinity, nor fulfill the 
passage, Matt. 28; which is too clear to be refuted. 
We will therefore briefly conclude this accouut of 
Rabanus with that which P. J. Twisck records 
concerning him. 


THE VIEWS OF RABANUS MAURUS CONCERNING VA- 
RIOUS OTHER ARTICLES OF HIS FAITH, ACCORD- 
ING TO THE AFORE-MENTIONED AUTHOR 

He writes, A. D. 830: "Rabanus, an eminently 
learned man writes and says : 'The catechism, that 
is, the doctrine of the faith, shall precede baptism, 
so that the candidate (catechumen) may first learn 
the first principles of the faith.' " 

He further says : "The Lord Christ first anoint- 
ed the eyes of the man born blind, with clay made 
of spittle, before He sent him to the water of Si- 
loam; therefore, the candidate shall first be in- 
structed in the faith of the incarnation of Christ, 
and, if he then believes, admitted to baptism; that 
he may know what grace he obtains in baptism, 
and to whom he owes his service for it." 

Again : "Rabanus writes also, that in the sacra- 
ment the language is figurative, and that Christ, 
having gone to heaven (in order that we being re- 
generated by faith, should long the more ardently 
for Him) left us this sacrament, as a visible figure 
and symbol of His flesh and blood, so that we the 
more abundantly, might apprehend in faith the in- 
visible things." This language, Twisck writes, the 
Roman church now greatly curses. 

"He also taught contrary to the Roman church, 
of the authority of the holy Scriptures, of justifi- 
cation, repentance, the state of the soul after this 
life, and against other* papal errors, as his books 
testify. 

"The same thing was done at this time, by Ange- 
lomus, who treated of the grace of God, good 
works, and the keys of the church, in opposition to 
the pope. Chron., 9th book, page 283, from John 
Munst., fol. 120, 133. John Boea., lib. 4, Grond. 
Bewijs, letter A. Chron. Seb. Franck, fol. 77, Casp. 
Swinck, fol. 115. 

Same year as above.— This Angelomus just men- 
tioned is referred to in Jacob Mehrning' s History 
of Baptism, in which it is stated that, besides the 
afore-mentioned views held by him contrary to the 
Roman church, he left the following testimony 
with regard to the matter of baptism : 

Angelomus {in cap. 7, lib. 3, Reg. 1, page 548), 
says: "From all that we have sinned with the 

* , Tw . isck mi ght have used a less ambiguous phrase here, though 
we doubt not, that the intelligent reader will readily see what he 
means; but for fear that some one might misunderstand him, we 
will add a few words of explanation. The word "other," of course 
implies that some errors have already been adduced ; strictly speak- 
ing however, he has not adduced the errors, but rather the articles 
of faith m regard to which errors were held, by the Roman church 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


237 


sight, hearing, smelling, tasting and feeling, we are 
redeemed through the grace of God, by the wash- 
ing of the living fountain of water (that is, water- 
baptism). But the forgiveness of previous sins is 
not enough, if we are not diligent to lay up good 
works : for, otherwise, the devil who was gone out 
of the man, finding him empty of good works, re- 
turns, manifold, and makes the last state of that 
man worse than the first." 

Hence, when Angelomus here speaks of the sins 
which before baptism were committed through the 
senses, as, through the sight, hearing, smelling, 
tasting, and feeling, he certainly indicates thereby, 
that the persons of whom he speaks, are not unin- 
telligent infants, seeing these can neither use nor 
abuse their senses, and, consequently, as long as 
they lack the knowledge and power, they can not 
sin with them. 

Hence it also appears that the baptism of which 
he speaks, is not infant baptism ; for this can have 
no regard to sins committed previously through 
the abuse of the senses. The baptism in question, 
then, is such a baptism as is received by persons 
who can lay aside previous sins, and lay up good 
works ; who also give no room to the devil gone out 
of them, that the last state may not be worse than 
the first; for of all this, Angelomus speaks. We 
will, therefore, leave this, and proceed to other 
testimonies serving the same purpose. 

A. D. 840. — That at this time not only baptism, 
but also various other articles of Christian doctrine 
were maintained contrary to the belief of the Ro- 
man church. P. J. Twisck indicates, in his Chron- 
ijk., for the year 840, with these words: "Bert- 
ram, a courageous and learned man, now vig- 
orously assailed the doctrine of transubstantiation, 
in a remarkable book, dedicated to the King of 
France. Heymon, Bishop of Halberstadt, also con- 
tended against this doctrine, and wrote much of 
baptism, the Supper, justification, good works, 
and of the church and her office, in opposition to 
the opinion of the papists. Also Walafrid opposed 
the new doctrine of the Romanists very vigor- 
ously.* P. J. Twisck, Chron., 9th book, page 286, 
col. 2, and page 287, col. 1, from J oh. Munst., fol. 
129, and 132. 

A. D. 841. — It is recorded that at this time, in 
the reign of the Emperors Louis and Lothaire, a 
council was held at Paris, concerning which it is 
written (chap. 6) : "In the beginning of the holy 
church of God, no one was admitted to receive bap- 


* About this time, Bertram taught, in his book of the "Body and 
Blood of Christ," concerning the words: "This is my body," that 
this is to be understood figuratively, and that in the Supper, the 
faith is presented somewhat differently than the eyes externally see, 
and the taste perceives; also, that the bread and wine are figura- 
tively the body and blood of Christ, and represent to, or keep before 
us, the remembrance of the sufferings and death of Christ. — Sam. 
Velt., Geslacht-register, pages 126, 127. 

In the Scythian church, (A.D. 840), writes Valfrid Abbas, they 
used the common mother tongue, and taught that images should 
not be worshiped or honored ; that the paschal lamb should not be 
consecrated; yea, that it was better to aid the poor, than to deco- 
rate the churches. — P. J. Twisck, Chron., 9th book, page 286, col. 
2, from Casp. Grev., fol. 277. 


tism, who had not previously been instructed in 
the faith, and in the mystery of baptism, as is 
testified by the words of Paul, Rom. 6 :3 : 'Know 
ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into 
Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?' which 
passage of the apostle has reference to the sacra- 
ment of baptism." 

In the council of Laodicea (Tit. 46), it is also 
written, that "those who desire to come to bap- 
tism, shall learn the faith, and recite the same to 
the bishop or teacher, on the fifth day of the great 
week." 

Again (Tit. 47) : "That those who were bap- 
tized in sickness, shall, after recovery, diligently 
study their faith and know what great grace they 
have received; which words plainly indicate, that 
those who attain to the Christian faith, are also 
previously instructed concerning said faith and 
the mysteries of baptism. But now, sad to relate, 
also the infants of Christian parents are baptized, 
who, on account of their tender age, cannot com- 
prehend this matter, which to learn even persons 
of understanding must exert themselves diligently, 
and which, owing to the negligence of some, has 
gone out of use in the Christian church. Oh, what 
great neglect! Oh, what great mischief." Jacob 
Mehrning, Bapt. Hist., page 538. 

About A. D. 842.— It is stated that at this time a 
number of slaves who had become converted were 
baptized, yet not in the Roman manner, nor in the 
Roman language, as was customary with the Ro- 
man church, as well as with all other churches 
which adhered to the Roman see ; but in a different 
manner and in another language; so that it ap- 
pears from this occurrence that this church must 
have been separated from the superstitions of the 
Roman church not only in forms, but also, as may 
be inferred, in faith and practice. To this, the fol- 
lowing annotation (Bapt. Hist., page 552, num. 
9), among others, has reference: "They (those 
of the Roman church) used the Roman language 
not only in Italy, but also in other regions that 
were subject to the papal power; but that baptism 
was administered also in other languages, is proved 
by the history of the conversion of the slaves."* 
Ex. Historia Sclav. 

About A. D. 848. — That the instruction of nov- 
ices, before baptism, obtained also at this time, 
Jacob Mehrning, Bapt. Hist., page 550, informs 
us with these words : "The adults had (then) to be 
instructed in the faith, and were catechized before 
baptism, as has been proved above, from Rabanus, 
Haimo, and others ; thereupon they had to confess 
the faith, as Rabanus (lib. 1, de Cleric. Institutione, 
cap. 27) relates. They were asked, whether they 
believed in God the Father, the Almighty, and on 
His only Son, our Lord, and on the Holy Ghost, 
a general (Christian) church, forgiveness of sins, 


* A.D. 843. — Christus Lupim, at Ferrara, refuted the new 
Roman doctrines concerning purgatory, matrimony of priests, and 
other points. — P. J. Twisck, Chron., 9th book, page 288, col. 1, 
from Catal. Test., fol. 103. 


238 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


resurrection of the flesh," etc.* Bapt. Hist., p. 550, 
num. 4. 

These were good and salutary customs for the 
upbuilding of the church of God; by which the 
name of the Lord was praised, the church edified, 
the Word of God most strictly observed, and the 
salvation of many promoted. But the ancient say- 
ing: "Where God builds a temple, Satan builds 
one in opposition to it," was also verified here ; for, 
at the same time that those who loved the truth, 
baptized believers, upon the confession of their 
faith, nearly all the others, who were called Roman 
or Greek Christians, baptized infants, who, as 
every one knows can neither believe nor confess the 
faith ; this has been referred to above. 

About A. D. 854.— It is stated that very near the 
time of Haimo, there lived and wrote Idiota. In 
/. Mehrning's History of Baptism is found a quo- 
tation by him, relating to baptism, which reads as 
follows: "In holy baptism we accept Christ for 
our bridegroom, and enter His chamber, which is 
ornamented with manifold graces and virtues." 
De Innocentia, cap. 3. 

To accept Christ for one's bridegroom, to enter 
His chamber, is certainly not the work of children, 
but of believers. Those accept Christ for their 
bridegroom, who betroth themselves to Him by 
faith, and in token thereof, are baptized. John 
3 :26, 29. Those enter His chamber, who, through 
obedience, join themselves to His church ; for they 
are no more "strangers and foreigners, but fellow- 
citizens with the saints, and of the household of 
God." Eph. 2:18. 

That which is further said of the chamber of the 
bridegroom, namely, that it is ornamented with 
graces and virtues, has reference to the spiritual 
ornament of the church of God, which latter is the 
true chamber of our heavenly bridegroom Jesus 
Christ. This church of God cannot be ornamented 
with graces and virtues by infants, seeing infants 
are ornamented with neither actual graces nor real 
virtues ; hence, it has also respect to the believers, 
who, having come, through baptism, to the church 
of God, ornament the same with actual graces and 
real virtues. This concludes our exposition of the 
passage of Idiota. 

Note.— A. D. 859.— Huldricus or Uldoricus, 
Bishop of Augsburg, greatly complained of the vio- 
lence of the popes, and said : "What will become of 
this flock, when the shepherds become wolves?" 
He openly maintained that the pope was fallible, 
and that it was lawful to admonish him for his 
error, and to reject his bad decrees. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., 9th book, page 298, col. 1, from Merula, 
fol. 177. Jan. Crespin, fol. 211, 215, 216. 

A. D. 860. — At this time, there departed from 
the belief and practice of infant baptism, Hincmar, 
at one time Bishop of Laudun, inasmuch as he 

* A.D. 858. — At this time, Gunther, Bishop of Cologne, wrote to 
Pope Nicholas : "Thou art playing the tyrant : under the guise of a 
shepherd we find thee to be a wolf. The title, indeed, is father, but 
virtually thou showest thyself a Jupiter." — Sam. Veltius, Geslacht- 
register, page 127. 


would no longer baptize children, so that they grew 
up without baptism, and many also, who did not 
attain the years of understanding, died unbaptized ; 
on account of which he was then greatly accused by 
Hincmar, Bishop of Rheims, who to this end, 
wrote to him as follows : "And thou, who knowest 
that it is true what the Lord says : 'Except a man 
be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter 
into the kingdom of heaven;' hast nevertheless 
commanded, that infants shall not be baptized in 
thy church, not even when in peril of death, so that 
they should not be saved, though it is written : 'The 
Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but 
to save them.' Thou hast also acted contrary to 
the decrees of Syricius, Leo, Gelasius, and the 
African council, as I have informed thee now twice 
by writing." H. Mont. Nietigh., page 81, ex Bib- 
lioth, Patr., Tom. 9, part 2, page 137. Cent. Magd 
Cent. 9, cap. 4, pages 40, 41. 

In another letter, the Bishop of Rheims, with en- 
treating, and not less earnest words, endeavors to 
draw him away from his belief, writing: "Desist 
from preaching this (namely, that infants may not 
be baptized), the mere thought of which is awful; 
desist from scattering the flock of Christ (meaning 
thereby, through error, the Roman church), lest 
the destruction of all the people come upon thee ; 
and do not, from excessive love for thy belief, sever 
thyself from," etc. H. Mont., page 82, from' Cent. 
Magd., Cent. 9, pages 157, 158. Also, Bapt. Hist., 
page 545. 

From these two letters it appears that Hincmar, 
Bishop of Laudun, had not only departed from 
the doctrine of infant baptism, but also earnestly 
preached against it, so that many of the Roman 
church, particularly at Laudun, became his adher- 
ents ; for, what did the Bishop of Rheims mean by 
writing: "Desist from preaching this," but to say 
that Hincmar of Laudun should cease preaching 
against infant baptism ? What else does he indicate 
when he says : "Desist from scattering the flock of 
Christ, lest the destruction of all the people come 
upon thee?" Certainly, these words indicate that 
many had already left the Roman church on this 
account, yea, that the state of things was such that 
all the people at Laudun adhered to this doctrine. 

Moreover, from the last letter we see, how firm- 
ly, and almost immovably, said Hincmar must have 
stood, at Laudun, in his doctrine and belief against 
infant baptism, seeing such great endeavors were 
made to draw him away ; now by presenting his be- 
lief in the most odious light, as though he preached 
things the mere thought of which was awful ; now 
by flattery: "And do not, from excessive love for 
thy belief, sever thyself from," etc. But wheiher 
through this he was in any wise turned away from 
his belief, we have not been able to ascertain ; hence 
we will let the matter rest. 

In reference to what he may have taught with 
regard to other points, we can, on account of the 
default of history, give nothing certain ; it is suffi- 
cient for us, that in those perilous times he dared 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


239 


oppose the common Roman church, by rejecting 
infant baptism, and that much people adhered to 
him therein, as has been shown above. 

A. D. 867. — We have now come to the year in 
which an uncommon and quite unexpected matter 
is mentioned by ancient writers, of which we will 
forthwith give an account. Just now, for the year 
860, we told of a certain champion of the Roman 
superstitions, especially of infant baptism, namely, 
Hmcmar, Bishop of Rheims, who, once and again, 
by express letters, immoderately accused another 
Hincmar, Bishop of Laudun, because the latter re- 
fused to baptize infants, and would also not allow 
them to be baptized, though they were in danger of 
dying. This same person now, seven years after 
making the above accusations respecting the non- 
baptizing of infants, opposed the pope, not only in 
one point, but in many, among which infant bap- 
tism may also have been. Concerning this P. J. 
Twisck, from other authors, writes thus: "Hinc- 
mar, Bishop of Rheims, opposed Pope Adrian II 
in many points, in defense of the truth. He charged 
him with innovation, saying that he could not be 
bishop and king at the same time ; that he should 
have nothing to do with secular affairs." Chron., 
9th book, page 305, col. 2, from Hist. Georg., fol. 
314, Catal. Test., fol. 52. 

It is a pity and to be lamented, that the ancients 
have not left us more information regarding the 
particular points maintained by Hincmar, Bishop 
of Rheims, against the pope, and, consequently, 
also against the Roman church. 

It would not be very surprising, if among the 
points maintained by him against the pope, the de- 
nial of infant baptism was one ; for, when he, sev- 
en years before that, accused Hincmar, Bishop of 
Laudun, for not baptizing the infants, the latter ap- 
parently, either from the holy Scriptures, or by 
conclusive arguments, demonstrated to him the 
groundlessness and vanity of infant baptism in 
such a manner that he may easily have attained to 
very different views, not only in regard to infant 
baptism, but also in other points which were main- 
tained after the manner of the papists. But as this 
is not clearly indicated, we will not discuss it any 
further, but leave it as a probable conjecture. More- 
over, it is not our purpose to justify said bishop 
in every article of religion, nor to declare him 
orthodox on the whole ; but to show that the same 
person who had previously so stoutly defended the 
Roman church and the papal superstitions, especial- 
ly in the matter of infant baptism, now dared at- 
tack not only the Roman church, but even the pope, 
who is called its head, and to oppose him in many 
points, as has been shown. With this we take our 
leave of Hincmar of Rheims. 

A. D. 880. — At this time there lived Paschasius, 
a remarkably experienced and virtuous man, who 
wrote various things against the belief of the Ro- 
man church ; but as the thread of our account ex- 
tends only, or, at least, principally, over the matter 
of baptism, we will also here turn our special atten- 


tion to the same, and, so as not to be encumbered 
with many testimonies, present but one passage of 
his belief with reference to this matter, as recorded 
in Jacob Mehrning's history of baptism. 

Paschasius {de Corp. and Sang. Dom., cap. 10, 
page 594) says : "In the sacrament of baptism the 
door is opened to believers, to enter into the sonship 
of God, that we, being delivered from evil through 
this regeneration, may afterwards become one 
body with the members of Christ; in which bap- 
tism, when the Holy Ghost is shed abroad in the 
souls of the regenerated, the whole church of 
Christ is quickened, and becomes one body, by one 
Spirit received by all." 

Here he indicates three things incompatible with 
infant baptism. Firstly, when he says that "In the 
sacrament of baptism the door is opened to be- 
lievers, to enter into the sonship of God." For, that 
this cannot relate to infants, appears from the na- 
ture of faith and of the believers ; as to faith, it is 
a sure confidence of the things hoped for. Heb. 
11:1. This faith comes by hearing, and hearing 
by the Word of God. Rom. 10:17. That neither this 
sure confidence, nor hope, nor intelligent hearing 
of the Word of God, can have place in infants, is 
quite evident, since neither their powers nor their 
knowledge can reach these things. See Deut. 1 :39 ; 
I Cor. 13:11. 

Secondly, when he says: "That we, being de- 
livered from evil through this regeneration, may 
afterwards become one body with the members of 
Christ." For the word regeneration is no where in 
Scripture applied to infants, but to adults. John 
3:3; Tit. 3:5. Likewise, to be delivered from evil, 
is applied only to such persons as, through evil 
works, were previously ensnared and held captive 
by sin. II Tim. 2 :26. Hence, the second also does 
in no wise apply to infants. 

Thirdly, when he, expounding the utility of bap- 
tism, says: "In which baptism, the whole church 
of Christ is quickened and becomes one body, by 
one Spirit received by all." For, when mention is 
made here of the quickening Spirit of God, which 
in baptism is imparted to the church, or, at least, 
to those who, by baptism, are incorporated as mem- 
bers into the church, it follows almost incontro- 
vertibly, that this relates neither to infants nor to 
infant baptism; for, as regards infants, instead of 
becoming quickened by the Spirit of God, after 
baptism, that is, instead of becoming adorned with 
all divine and Christian virtues, we see, on the con- 
trary, that they generally, from that time on, as 
their powers increase, are led by their own spirit, 
so that with the increasing years, perverseness also 
increases, yea, sometimes gains the ascendency; 
hence, those who have reached their years, are ad- 
monished, that they must be born again, that is, 
that they must lead another and better life ; or that 
they cannot enter into the kingdom of God. John 
3:5, 7. 

This being the case, it stands fast, that Pascha- 
sius, in said passage, speaks neither of infants nor 


240 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of infant baptism. Leaving this subject here, we 
will conclude with the account of P. J. Twisck, who 
records of Paschasius, besides what we have stated 
above, that he mentions but two sacraments, name- 
ly, 1. baptism; 2. the Supper; or, as it was an- 
ciently called, the body and blood of the Lord; 
which militates against the seven sacraments of the 
Roman church. P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 310. 

Same year as above. — "Remigius," he writes in 
the same place, "also taught much against the pope, 
saying, among other things : That we must address 
our prayers not to idols, but to the living God ; and 
that the church must conform to the holy Scrip- 
tures." Chron., 9th book, page 310, col. 1, from 
John Munst., fol. 61, 131, 133. Perk., fol. 249. 

In the meantime, the pious were exceedingly 
oppressed in this century, by the power of the pope 
and the Roman clergy ; so that, on account of the 
smoke of the papistic errors, the fire of the pure 
doctrine could not burn freely, which was also the 
reason that not more learned and God-fearing men 
manifested themselves at that time, in defense of 
the truth of God. 

A. D. 900. — That at this time, some dared op- 
pose not only infant baptism and other tenets of the 
Roman church, but even the Pope of Rome, who 
might well be called the father of all supersti- 
tions, the example of Tergandus sufficiently indi- 
cates, who, at this time, dared designate him by the 
name of antichrist, wolf, etc. ; concerning which, 
Samuel Veltius (from other authors) has noted the 
following f orthe year 900 : "Tergandus, Bishop of 
Treves, called the Pope of Rome antichrist, yea, a 
wolf, and Rome, Babylon." Geslacht-register, page 
128. 

Note. — We will close with the account of P. J. 
Twisck, in his conclusion to the ninth century : "In 
this century, the occidental or western, Roman 
Empire, which has been at a standstill now for 324 
years, begins afresh. The clergy, through the folly 
of the Emperors, obtain power to elect popes and 
bishops. The Emperors are crowned by the popes, 
who will themselves to be the masters and lords and 
rule before and over others, as is evident from this, 
that some times, two, three, and four popes reign at 
once and seek to domineer over the others, expell- 
ing, driving away, exhuming, cursing, each other. 
Spiritual matters are still greatly on the decline, 
men seeking their salvation far more in so-called 
good works, in ceremonies and superstitions, than 
through justification by faith in Christ Jesus. Dis- 
putations about transubstantiation are inaugurated, 
though the Supper is still administered under both 
forms, that is, with bread and wine. The people, 
having been to the supper, offer money or some- 
thing else." 

What he further relates of exorcism at baptism ; 
of the mass ; of the power to canonize saints ; of the 
worship of saints and images ; of the ban of the 
bishops ; of the punishment of heretics ; of the con- 
secration of temples; of purgatory; of soul-mass- 
es, to redeem souls from purgatory, etc., would re- 


quire too much time to recount. See concerning it, 
Chron., page 320. 

This has been told simply to show how and 
whereby the orthodox Christians were oppressed at 
this time in their worship of God ; and why so few 
learned and pious people manifested themselves. 
We will now proceed to show what pious witnesses 
of Jesus Christ suffered as martyrs at this time 

Note.— A. D. 884.— John Patrick, a man well 
versed in the Chaldean, Arabian, and Greek lan- 
guages, in the monastery of Mabelsbury, greatly 
opposed the doctrine of an offering for the living 
and the dead ; on account of which he was stabbed 
to death with awls. See Geslacht-register, page 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE NINTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE NINTH 
CENTURY 

[The beginning is a repetition of the fourth prop- 
osition of the discourse of Haimo (for the year 
A. D. 814) respecting baptism by the shedding of 
blood, with which the Lord and all the holy mar- 
tyrs were baptized. 

Of the cruelties instituted by the Danish tyrant, 
Regnerus (A. D. 818) against the Christian be- 
lievers; which matter is further explained in a 
note. 

In the margin, mention is made that A. D. 826, 
the Saracens invaded the islands of the Romans, 
and, consequently, Creta ; where Cyril, Bishop of 
the church at Gortina was slain. 

The tyranny instituted by the King of Bulgaria 
against the Christians, about the year 842, is shown 
and confirmed by testimonies. 

Great persecution of the believers, caused by the 
mutual contentions of the kings in France noted 
also for A. D. 842. 

Very grievous and lamentable persecution of 
Christian believers at Cordova, in Spain, A. D. 
850, through the wickedness of the Saracens. It is 
shown that said persecution had commenced long 
before A. D. 850, but that at this time it raged the 
most violently. 

The distressing martyrdom of John, a tradesman 
at Cordova, A. D. 850. Note respecting the faith 
of said martyr. 

Nunilo and Aloida, sisters and Christian maid- 
ens, put to death with the sword, for the name of 
the Lord, in the city of Osca, about A. D. 851. 

Marginal note, for the year 852, that then the 
zeal of some to die as martyrs, was so great that 
multitudes of them confessed Christ, and ran after 
martyrdom ; among whom Emilas and Hieremias 
are mentioned, who were beheaded for said reason : 
however, every one is left to judge for himself. 

Aurea, a God-fearing maiden, after many severe 
trials, beheaded at Cordova, for the testimony of 
Jesus Christ, A. D. 856. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


241 


After adding a note, we prepare to flee from the 
Mohammedan persecutions, and turn to England 
and Italy, where more and clearer light has arisen. 

Marginal note of Hincmar, Bishop of Laudun, 
that, through the hatred of the Bishop of Rheims, 
and by a certain council held at Dusiacum about 
A. D. 866, he was condemned and finally sent into 
banishment. 

Johannes Erigena, a Scotchman, and hence, 
called Scotus, through the instigation of some 
monks, put to death by his scholars, for the con- 
fession of the evangelical truth, at Meldum, in 
England, A. D. 884. 

Observations about the time of this history, as 
well as some remarks upon the history itself, ac- 
cording to the accounts of Carion, P. Melancthon, 
C. Peucer, Sebastian Franck of Worth, P. J. 
Twisck, Caesar Baronius, and A. Mellinus. Finally, 
his belief is compared with that of Berengarius, of 
whom we shall speak in the eleventh century. Con- 
clusion.] 


About the year A. D. 814. — In our account of 
Holy Baptism for the year 814, we made mention 
of Haimo, a celebrated teacher of that day, as 
well as of some salutary and good testimonies, 
which he left respecting the baptism of believers. 
Writing on Rom. 6, he treats of four different 
kinds of baptism, the fourth or last of which he 
calls baptism by the shedding of blood, indicating 
withal, what he means thereby, as well as what 
persons were baptized in this manner. The fourth 
(baptism), he says, "is by the shedding of blood; 
with which the Lord Himself and all holy martyrs 
were baptized." B. H., 2d part, page 540, num. 2, 
from Centur. Magd. IX., cap. 4, jol. 75. 

Someone perhaps may think that in this passage 
by Haimo, nothing is said of a present persecution 
or martyrdom, but that it is simply shown that the 
shedding of the blood of the martyrs can, in some 
measure, be called a baptism, with which the Lord 
Himself and many of His followers, namely, all 
the holy martyrs, had, so to speak, been baptized. 
To this we will offer no objection, for it is well re- 
marked ; nevertheless, it will throw light upon the 
object we have in view, namely, to show the martyr- 
dom of this time. Hence, in order to reach this 
end, we say : It would not have been necessary then 
only to recount to the hearers the shedding of the 
blood of the martyrs, as well as that in a certain 
way this may be called a baptism, if at that time 
the exigency of martyrdom or the shedding of 
blood for the Lord's sake had not existed, or, at 
least, if there had been no danger of being per- 
secuted or martyred. 

Certainly, all good teachers regard the oppor- 
tuneness of the times, the condition of persons, 
and other circumstances, in the matter of teaching, 
lest the salutary and good words of God, by being 
spoken at the wrong time, or on an unsuitable oc- 
casion, should prove void, powerless, and vain to 
those who hear it. Thus we must believe that also 


said teacher (Haimo) proceeded, and that, conse- 
quently, when he called the shedding of the blood 
of the martyrs a baptism, and adduced this for the 
purpose of instructing his brethren, there must 
have been an exigency of martyrdom, either at the 
time, or near at hand ; otherwise the assertion and 
exposition of this excellent teacher would not have 
been adduced properly, or at the right time and on 
the proper occasion. 

We shall, therefore, ascertain from other au- 
thors the condition of that time, and whether then 
or shortly after, any persecution, bloodshedding 
or martyrdom arose against the Christian believers, 
to which the afore-mentioned teacher might have 
had reference in his instruction touching said mat- 
ter. 


TOUCHING THE CRUELTIES INSTITUTED BY THE 

DANISH TYRANT REGNERUS AGAINST THE 

CHRISTIAN BELIEVERS, ABOUT 

A. D. 818 

Four years after the admonition of the afore- 
named teacher, namely, A. D. 818, mention is made 
of a certain Danish tyrant, called Regnerus, the 
sixty-second king of Denmark; who, as regards 
military affairs, was greatly praised by the cham- 
pions of war, but, with regard to his cruelty and 
tyranny towards the Christian believers, deserves 
to be utterly contemned, yea, counted a tyrant and 
a blood-thirsty monster. 

Concerning this, P. J. Twisck (from various 
other writers) has left the following as a summary 
of his wickedness, and how he was punished for it, 
as a warning to all tyrants. "King Regnerus was a 
prodigy in matters of war, but a great enemy and 
persecutor of the Christians. He was conquered 
by Hella, king of the Britons, and cast into a pool 
of snakes, to be killed in this manner." Chron. 9th 
book, page 280. 

Note. — We have not been able to learn in par- 
ticular the manner in which said tyrant manifested 
his enmity against the Christians, or how he perse- 
cuted them ; nor the countries and places in which 
those persecutions occurred ; nor the names of the 
persons who then suffered; nor how long these 
persecutions and martyrdoms lasted; hence we 
cannot more fully speak of these things. 

In the meantime, it is our firm conviction, that 
not a few upright professors of Jesus Christ laid 
down their lives for the apprehended and accepted 
truth of the holy Gospel, and were offered up as 
steadfast martyrs for their love to their Saviour, 
and for the working out of their own salvation. But 
for the want of their particular confessions and 
names, we are constrained to break off, as we 
have had to do in several places in preceding cen- 
turies ; which things can be compared with the ac- 
count we have given here; which we commit to 
the intelligent and impartial reader. 

About A. D. 826, the Saracens invaded the 
islands of the Romans, and took possession of Crete 


242 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


(where Paul had ordained his beloved spirtual son 
Titus bishop and shepherd of the church), and put 
to death, Cyril, the bishop of the church of Gor- 
tina, for confessing Christ. Compare A. Mell., 
2d book, jol. 306, col. 2, with Zonar., Tom. 3, in 
Michaele Balbo Cedren. 


TOUCHING THE TYRANNY INSTITUTED BY THE KING. 

OF BULGARIA AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS, 

ABOUT A. D. 842 

When the afore-mentioned tyrant Regnerus, 
who commenced to reign about A. D. 818, had died, 
in the year 832, having been cast among the snakes, 
and the Christian believers in the devastated re- 
gions, had obtained, it seems, some freedom in the 
matter of living according to their faith, there arose 
against them, ten years afterwards, namely, A. D. 
842, another miscreant, no better, to all appearance, 
than the former, though for a time he had borne 
the name of a Christian, who instituted great ty- 
ranny against them. 

The last-mentioned author, proceeding to the 
year 842, speaks in his account concerning this 
matter as follows: "When this king of the Bul- 
garians had received the kingdom from his father, 
who wished to retire into privacy, he apostatized 
from the (Roman) Christian faith to heathen idol- 
atry, and re-established the latter, with much ty- 
ranny against the Christians. Chron., 9th book, 
page 287, col. 1, from Hist. Andrce, jol. 182. Leon., 
lib. 4, jol. 176. Compare this with the above note. 


GREAT PERSECUTION OF THE BELIEVERS, CAUSED 

BY THE MUTUAL CONTENTIONS OF THE 

KINGS IN FRANCE, IN SAID 

YEAR 842 

In the same year in which the above-mentioned 
Bulgarian tyrant reigned and instituted so much 
wickedness against the Christian believers, namely, 
A. D. 842, the kings of the Franks, through their 
wars, though they were brothers, it appears, griev- 
ously persecuted and martyred the poor believers, 
everywhere in the French territories ; so that said 
persecution and martyrdom is compared and re- 
garded as equal to the persecutions instituted in 
earlier times by the heathen emperors. Of this, the 
following is found in the last-mentioned chronicle, 
and in the same place: "The fraternal wars be- 
tween the kings of the Franks, were the cause of 
much calamity and distress to the poor believers 
throughout France, so that they might well be com- 
pared to the cruel persecutions which in former 
times occurred under the heathen princes." 

Concerning this, Remigius, bishop of Auxerre, 
who lived about this time, writes thus (on Ps. 69) : 
"There are different times of persecution; one, 
when the heathen fall unmercifully upon the Chris- 
tians; the other, when the evil purpose of the 
(false) Christians persecutes the believers, which 
time still continues in the church ; for, though the 


heathen kings, and others, are dead, still the devil 
is not dead, who secretly vents his cruelty, by secret 
instruments, that is, through bad Christians. 
Chron., 9th book, page 287, col 1, from Leonhard, 
lib. 4, histor. Georg., lib. 4, jol. 305. 


GRIEVOUS AND LAMENTABLE PERSECUTION OF THE 

CHRISTIANS, BY THE SARACENS, AT 

CORDOVA IN SPAIN, ABOUT 

A. D. 850 

About A. D. 850, the Saracens, who were adher- 
ents to the Mohammedan religion, invaded various 
islands of the Mediterranean Sea, and also the 
kingdom of Spain, in which they penetrated so far 
that their king had his court in the city of Cordova. 

In the meantime, in order to treat the inhabit- 
ants of said country kindly as it were, and thus 
draw them gradually over to the Mohammedan 
religion, the Christians were allowed to remain, on 
condition that they would not gainsay, revile, or 
refute their false prophet Mohammed and his laws ; 
also that they should no longer go into their 
churches, but pay their taxes, and live quietly under 
their jurisdiction. 

The Christians, thus limited, and obeying their 
conscience by calling evil, evil, and good, good, 
were easily apprehended by the Saracens, and ac- 
cused of capital crime; but, what is most to be 
deplored, these accusations proceeded sometimes 
from apostate, so-called Christians, yea, from such 
as bore the name of bishops (apparently political 
bishops, or such as were designated ordinaries by 
the Roman church), who, loving the favor of the 
Saracens more than the favor of God, declared that 
those who were put to death by them, because they 
obeyed their conscience, were no martyrs and could 
not be recognized as such ; and what is yet more, 
they maintained this in a public council. 

The persecutors, as can easily be judged, greatly 
encouraged by this, lamentably persecuted, mar- 
tyred, and put to death many innocent Christians. 
Oh, deadly piercings of antichrist, through the in- 
strumentality of his bishops ! 

It is true, no severe tortures were inflicted upon 
the Christians who were martyred in this persecu- 
tion, but for the most part they were simply be- 
headed; however, after their death their bodies 
were shamefully treated ; first they were suspended 
for a time on gallows, then burned, and their ashes 
strewed in the rivers ; or they were left unburied, 
to be torn to pieces by dogs and birds. 

It is stated that this persecution commenced long 
before A. D. 850, but that at this time it was at the 
height of its fury, for which reason, it seems, the 
ancient writers have ascribed it to this year. Com- 
pare Memor. Sanctor, lib. 1. Apal. Mart, and Doc. 
Mart. Eulog., lib. 2, cap. 8, 9, and vita Eulogii, 
with A. Mell, 2d book, jol. 506, col. 2, 3; also, 
Chron. van den Ondergang, 9th book, page 290, 
from Hist. Wenc, jol. 443. Chron. Nicoll. Gill., jol. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


243 



Johannes, the merchant of Cordoba, placed backward on a donkey and ridden to the place of his execution, 
AD 850 


172, Leonh., lib. 4. However, this persecution is 
here fixed one year later, namely A. D. 851. 

What has been said of this persecution, is to be 
further explained by the remarks made in the first 
note. In the meantime, we will investigate what 
martyrs mentioned by name, suffered during said 
persecution for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and 
the confession of the holy Gospel. 


JOHN, A TRADESMAN AT CORDOVA, SEVERELY 
SCOURGED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, SET REVERSELY UPON AN 
ASS, MOCKED, AND MISERA- 
BLY TORMENTED, 
A. D. 850 

A. D. 850, in the city of Cordova, John, an un- 
learned, but pious man, who kept a few things for 
sale, was accused to the judge, by false witnesses, 
for the sake of Jesus Christ, of deriding and revil- 
ing Mohammed. But as the witnesses in this case 
were not found reliable enough in their accusations, 
to condemn him to death, this faithful servant of 
God was sentenced to be severely scourged, and 
constrained to deny Christ. But this pious profes- 


sor of Christ cried aloud : That he would not for- 
sake the Christian religion unto death, and declared 
that he was innocent of the false accusations which 
had been brought against him. 

This firmness so enraged the judge against John, 
that he had him scourged with more than five hun- 
dred stripes, causing the executioners to continue 
beating him, till he, under their hands, fell to the 
ground apparently dead. But as he still lived and 
breathed after this torture, they set him backwards 
on an ass, and led him through the whole city, from 
street to street, with a crier, who cried : "Thus shall 
it be done with the revilers of our prophet, and with 
the ridiculers of our worship." 

This done they fettered him with heavy chains, 
and put him in prison ; but as to how he finally died, 
we have not been able to discover in the accounts of 
the ancients ; this much, however, is certain, that he 
contended for the name of Christ even unto blood. 
Compare Eulog. Memorial. Samctor., lib. 1, with 
the account of Abr. Mellinus, 2d book, fol. 307, 
col. 1, 2. 

Note. — From a want of fuller records by the an- 
cient writers, we have not been able to obtain fur- 
ther information regarding the cause of the mar- 


244 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tyrdom of the above-mentioned John, than that be- 
ing zealous of the truth of God and his Saviour, he 
suffered principally for the second article of our 
general Christian faith, in which we confess that 
we believe in Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son 
of God ; which justly, and according to the rule of 
God's Word, can be called a good profession, I 
Tim. 6:12. 

Moreover, we have found nothing derogatory to 
his faith, of papal superstition or the like, in other 
points; notwithstanding in the city of Cordova, 
where he suffered, there were also people, who, it 
appears, were not free from the Roman pollutions ; 
of which history has made mention. Hence, since 
nothing of this kind can be laid to his charge, we 
are bound, according to the nature of love, to judge 
the best both of his person and the other points of 
his faith, and this not only with regard to him, but 
also to others, who suffered for the same reason, 
and of whom the ancients, in regard to this matter, 
have given like testimony. 


NUNILO AND ALOIDA, SISTERS AND CHRISTIAN 

MAIDENS PUT TO DEATH WITH THE SWORD 

IN THE CITY OF OSCA, FOR THE NAME 

OF THE LORD JESUS, ABOUT 

A. D. 851 

For this contest for the name of Christ, the Lord 
prepared not only men, but also women, and young 
maidens so that in the following year, 851, as near 
as can be reckoned, two sisters, one named Nunilo, 
the other Aloida, did not hesitate to confess Jesus 
Christ, their heavenly Bridegroom, among the Mo- 
hammedans, not only with their blood, but also 
with their death ; which took place on this wise : 

Their father was a Mohammedan, and their 
mother a nominal Christian, but not very pious, 
since she, according to the testimony of the an- 
cients, after the death of her husband, married a 
Saracen (Mohammedan) or unbeliever. In con- 
sequence of this, these pious young women could 
not freely observe, and live up to, the confession 
of their faith, according to the doctrine of Christ, 
on account of the constraints placed upon them by 
their unbelieving stepfather. Compelled, therefore, 
to leave their mother's house, they went to live 
with their aunt or mother's sister, who, being a true 
Christian woman, brought them up farther in the 
Christian religion. 

The envious enemy of the human race, filled with 
jealousy because they, the children of a Saracen 
father, had become Christians, accused them 
through the instrumentality of wicked persons, to 
the chief officer of the city of Osca, so that shortly 
after they were brought before the judge. The 
latter, in order to draw them away from the Chris- 
tian religion made them great promises of gifts 
and presents. He moreover offered to secure their 
marriage with the most excellent young men, etc., 
if they would but embrace Mohammedanism. But, 
if they remained stubborn, and despised the advice 


of the president or judge, he threatened to torture 
them with divers torments, and finally to put them 
to death with the sword. 

Thereupon, these pious maidens being strength- 
ened by the Spirit of God, firmly and fearlessly 
answered the judge, saying: "O judge! how is it, 
that thou dost command us to turn away from true 
godliness? since God has made known to us, that 
no one in the world is richer than Jesus Christ, our 
Saviour ; and that nothing is more blessed than the 
Christian faith, by which the just live, and the 
saints have conquered kingdoms. For, without 
Christ there is no life, and without His knowledge 
there is nothing but eternal death. To dwell with 
Him, and to live in Him, is our only and true con- 
solation ; but to depart from Him, is eternal per- 
dition. From His communion we will never be 
separated as long as we live in this life; for, hav- 
ing given and entrusted our innocence (or youth) 
into His keeping, we hope eventually to become 
His bride. 

"For, the profit of the transient riches of. this 
world, with which thou didst think to allure us, we 
count as dung and loss, that we may gain Christ, 
because we know that everything under the sun, 
except Christ and true faith in Him, is vanity. 

"Nor are we moved by the threatened punish- 
ment ; since we know, that the torments endure but 
a short time ; yea, for death itself, which thou hast 
presented to us as the final terror, we long the more 
because we know that thereby we go without delay* 
to heaven, to Christ our Bridegroom, there to be 
embraced by Him inseparably, through His love." 

The judge, perceiving the steadfastness of their 
faith, and the power of their confession, deemed it 
well to commit these young maidens, each sepa- 
rately to certain Saracen women, to be instructed in 
the Mohammedan religion, strictly prohibiting 
them from conversing with each other, or with any 
others of the Christians. The women, who had 
undertaken to instruct them in the Saracen or Mo- 
hammedan religion, daily presented to them their 
idolatry and pernicious doctrine, seeking thus to 
poison them with the cup of the wrath of God, 
from the hand of Mohammed. But all in vain ; they 
remained steadfast, which was called stubborn- 
ness by their enemies. 

Finally they were brought before the tribunal 
and made a public spectacle ; where they, confess- 
ing Christ as before, and declaring Mohammed an 
enemy of the Christian faith, as well as rejecting 
his doctrine, were executed with the sword, in the 
city of Osca in Spain, on the 22d of October, A. D. 
851. Though others differ considerably in their 
chronology of this matter, we leave it to the de- 
cision of the intelligent reader. Compare the ac- 
count of A. Mellinus, second book, fol. 308, col. 1, 

* "To go without delay to heaven, to Christ," may fitly be under- 
stood as having reference to the commending of their souls into 
the hands of Christ ; as is stated of the holy martyr Stephen, name- 
ly, tha he saw the heavens opened, and Christ standing on the right 
hand of God; to whom, in his extremity, he commended his soul 
s ?? ,n F : , , Lor ° J e ,™5'. receive my spirit. And when he had said 
this, he fell asleep" (Acts 7:59, 60). 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


245 


2, with the authors from whom the same has been 
extracted. Eidog. Memor. Sanctor., lib. 2, cap. 7, 
and Interp. 

Touching these two pious martyresses, there is 
also to be observed what is said in the added note 
respecting John, the first-mentioned martyr. 

Note. — A. D. 852, the zeal of some to die for the 
name of Jesus Christ was so great that multitudes 
of them confessed Christ, and, hastening to martyr- 
dom, suffered themselves to be put to death as de- 
fenseless lambs, for Christ's sake. It is stated that 
among these there were two young heroes of Jesus 
Christ, namely Emilas and Hieremias, who, from a 
well-meaning and special zeal, spoke against Mo- 
hammed, and thus offered themselves, to suffer for 
Christ their Saviour. For this they were both exe- 
cuted with the sword, whereupon (according to the 
testimony of the ancients), though the weather had 
been fine in the forenoon, immediately at the hour 
of their death, there followed mighty peals of 
thunder, so that the earth quaked; terrible light- 
nings fell from the air ; great darkness, heavy hail- 
storms, furious whirlwinds, and storms manifested 
themselves, as though the insensible elements (ac- 
cording to Eulogius) were mourning the death of 
these pious martyrs ; whose dead bodies were taken 
across the river and suspended on stakes, on the 
15th of September, A. D. 852. A. Mell., fol. 309, 
col. 4, from Memor. Sanctor., lib. 2, cap. 2. For 
certain reasons, however, we will not comment on 
these persons, though we know of nothing; to cen- 
sure, as regards either their faith or their life. 


AUREA, A GOD-FEARING MAIDEN, AFTER MANY 

SEVERE TRIALS, EXECUTED WITH THE 

SWORD, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 

JESUS CHRIST, AT CORDOVA, 

A. D. 856 

Aurea was by descent a noble maiden, and a sis- 
ter to the martyr John, of whom we have already 
spoken, from the province Hispalis or Seville, who 
was betrayed and accused by some of her country- 
men. The judge, who was a relative of hers, en- 
deavored by every possible means to draw her away 
from Christ, in which he also succeeded. But 
shortly after, she repented of her apostasy, and 
went daily into the congregation of the believers, 
that by the hearing of the Word of God she might 
be strengthened in the Spirit against a like conflict 
in time to come. 

The enemy of mankind, who could not endure it, 
that Aurea now adhered more firmly to God her 
Creator, than before, instigated another to accuse 
this maiden to the judge, who instantly had her 
brought by his bailiffs, and threatened her as before. 
But in the second conflict she was as much stronger 
to obtain the martyr's crown, as, in her former 
apostasy, she had been too weak to resist the temp- 
tation; for she thus answered the judge, saying: 
"I have never separated myself from Christ my 
God; I have never forsaken the religion of true 


godliness ; I have never for one moment adhered to 
your impious worship; though I once, with my 
tongue, seemed to have apostatized from Christ, 
my heart was nevertheless far from it, and I had a 
firm confidence in my Lord Jesus Christ, who has 
again lifted up my contrite conscience, by His con- 
soling promises, saying : 'He that believeth in me, 
though he were dead, yet shall he live.' Though, 
with my words, I fell into the snare of denial, yet 
my heart was strengthened through the power of 
faith, for, as soon as I went away from you, I kept 
with heart and mind the faith which I had practiced 
from infancy. Hence, there is nothing left, but to 
execute me with the sword, or else you must give 
me liberty to freely serve my Lord Christ." 

Thereupon the judge said that she should be kept 
in prison until he had informed the king of the 
matter. The result was, that the following day, ac- 
cording to the king's command, she was put to 
death with the sword, and then, with a murderer, 
suspended by her heels on the gallows. Her dead 
body was sunk with several thieves and murderers 
in the river Betis. She died on the 19th of July, 
A. D. 856, at Cordova, under Mahumad, king of 
the Saracens. In this account, A. M., fol. 311, must 
be reconciled with Eul., lib. 3, cap. 17. 

Remark. — For further information we would 
remark that the afore-mentioned martyress, as re- 
gards profession in the matter of external religion, 
is to be distinguished from four other persons, 
Helias, Paulus, Isidore, and Argimirus, together 
with others, whom the last-mentioned authors, in 
their account, have noticed just before the martyr- 
dom of Aurea; for they, to all appearance, were 
of the Roman profession, of which we find no evi- 
dence in Aurea. She professed a good profession 
of Christ her Saviour, and died thereupon; on 
which account she is justly classed among the true 
believing martyrs, according to what we stated in 
the note respecting the martyr John, for the year 
850. 

Note. — Since we do not find sufficient light on 
the persecutions, with regard to the names, as well 
as the confessions of the martyrs, we will now pre- 
pare ourselves to take leave of them, and commit 
those whom we have not noticed, as being too dark 
before our eyes, to the omniscient God, who will 
bring all to light. Our purpose is, to turn to Italy 
and England, where more and brighter light has 
arisen, though it had its beginning in France; so 
that the papal darkness, particularly in the matter 
of transubstantiation and the mass, was illumi- 
nated by it. Yet, this shall end as a tragedv. for we 
shall show that the bright light of truth had to set 
in rays of blood and to sink under the earth as it 
were, to the sorrow of the true believing Chris- 
tians. 

Note. — In our account of holv baptism, for the 
year 860, we made mention of Hincmar, bishoo of 
Laudun, and stated that he desired that infants 
should be left unbaptized, on account of which he 
was greatly censured. But it seems that this was 


246 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


not the last of it, seeing other writers afterwards 
relate that he was sentenced and condemned in a 
certain council in the palace of Dusiacum, in the 
province of Rheims; moreover, that he was sent 
into banishment, laid in chains, and, two years 
after, deprived of both his eyes. However, these 
writers do not unanimously state that this happened 
to him solely on account of his rejecting infant bap- 
tism, but relate also, that it was done through the 
bitter hatred of the archbishop of Rheims, as well 
as from other reasons relating to popery. As to 
the time of this event, the papist Caesar Baronius 
fixes it, A. D. 871, though we, from comparison 
with other authors, should fix it five years earlier. 
Moreover, though we, as regards the life and walk 
of said Hincmar, have found nothing but what is 
good, we dare not give him a place among the mar- 
tyrs, because of the differing statements of the an- 
cient writers ; hence we commit him to God, who 
will judge his cause. 


JOHANNES ERIGENA, A SCOTCHMAN, PUT TO 
DEATH BY HIS SCHOLARS FOR THE CONFES- 
SION OF THE EVANGELICAL TRUTH, 
THROUGH THE INSTIGATION OF SOME 
MONKS, AT MELDUM IN ENG- 
LAND, ABOUT A. D. 884 

Johannes Erigena, a Scotchman, and, hence, 
called Scotus, flourished, in the matter of his doc- 
trine, in the time of the Emperor Louis the Pious, 
and his son Lothaire, somewhere in one of the 
cities of France. He was exceedingly virtuous, 
learned, and eloquent, and, consequently, for his 
eminent gifts, highly celebrated and esteemed. For, 
when Charles, one of the sons of the above Em- 
peror, was desirous of having a good translation 
and exposition of the books of Dionysius, the 
Areopagite, especially of the treatise Hierarchia* 
John executed the same very laudably, and with 
marked ability, so that one Anasasius, who was 
librarian at the time, and composed a preface to it, 
writes of him thus : "It is astonishing how this bar- 
barian, (that is, foreigner or Scotchman), who hails 
from the uttermost parts of the world, was able to 
comprehend with his understanding such high 
things, and to translate them (said book of Dionys- 
ius), into another language, namely, from the 
Greek into the Latin; I refer to Johannes the 
Scotchman, concerning whom I have heard that he 
is a very holy and godly man." 

This is the testimony even of one of his adver- 
saries, touching his learning and godliness ; so that 
it is not necessary for us to adduce additional testi- 
mony relative to this point, from other authors, 
hence we let it suffice. 

Afterwards, it seems he wrote a book on the 
Eucharist (that is, on the thankoffering of the Sup- 
per), in which he very profoundly and conclusively 
refuted the gross error of the papists in the matter 

* This was a treatise on the npme of God, and thr heavenly 
order of the angels. 


of transubstantiation, or the essential change of the 
bread into the body of Jesus Christ ; also, the mass 
and the sacrifice which thereby, in popery, is of- 
fered for both the living and the dead. This was 
the cause of his death, as the sequel shows. 

When he had written this book, it was greatly 
esteemed by some, among whom, subsequently, was 
Berengarius, deacon of the church at Angiers, of 
whom it is stated that he took and learned his belief 
respecting this point (and perhaps also against in- 
fant baptism, since he strenuously dissuaded from 
it), from the writings of Johannes Scotus; of 
which we propose to speak more fully in the proper 
place. On the other hand, said book was exceeding- 
ly hated by those who were zealous defenders of 
the Roman superstitions, especially of transub- 
stantiation and the mass ; so much so, that when it 
had come before Pope Leo IX, the result was, 
that both (as appears) he and his book were con- 
demned and anathematized as heretical ; which was 
done chiefly in the council of Vercellis. 

When this had thus happened, and he had in- 
curred the hatred of the pope and many of the 
papists, he left the city of Paris— where he was 
rector of the University— and also, France, and 
went to England, where he took up his residence at 
Meldum, supporting himself by teaching and in- 
structing inexperienced youths. But after a few 
years, when the spite and hatred of some monks 
could tolerate him no longer, on account of his 
faith against the Roman church, they instigated 
his scholars against him, so that they stabbed him 
to death with awls and penknives. 

Other writers are of the opinion that the monks 
did it themselves. Both may be true ; the monks, 
having instigated the young men, and probably 
finding them too timid, may have led off in the mur- 
der, the youths following, with penknives, awls, 
etc., so that said martyr lost his life under their 
hands. This much is certain, that he died a cruel 
death for his faith, and that the monks, through 
the instumentality of his scholars, were in no 
small measure the cause of it, as the records of his 
death inform us. Compare the account of A. Mel- 
linus, 2d book, fol. 343, col. 2, 3, and fol. 392, col. 
4, and fol. 393, col. 1, 2, taken from Trithem. de 
Script. Eccles., Item. Hist. Reg. Angl., in Alfredo, 
lib. 2. Hobed. Annal. parte Priore. Westmon., in 
Flor. Hist., A. D. 883. Idem, Hist, parte Prima. 
Chron. Car., lib. 4, sub. Henr. 4, Seniore. Lan- 
franc, lib. de Euch., contra Bereng. Baron. Annal. 
T. 11, A. D. 1059. Mamelsburi Regum Angl, lib. 
2.Testibus. Lanfranco, Guytnmndo and Aliis. 

CONCERNING THE TIME OF THIS HISTORY 

Note. — P. J. Twisck gives two different ac- 
counts concerning it ; in the first he fixes the date, 
A. D. 869. Chron. 9th book, page 306, col. 2, from 
Hist. Andr., fol. 160. In the second he fixes it, 
A. D. 884. Page 311, col. 2, from John Munster, 
fol. 83. In the first place he calles him Johannes 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


247 


Scotus, in the second, Johannes Erigena ; however, 
as the account itself declares, it is the same person. 
As to the dates 869 and 884, to which the history 
of said Johannes has been referred by him, some 
one might think that this could not very well be 
reconciled, which may, however, be easily done, 
if we take the year 869 as the time in which said 
martyr flourished and propagated his doctrine, and 
the year 884 as the time when he died and was 
martyred for the principles which he taught. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION TOUCHING THE HISTORY 

ITSELF, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT OF 

CARION, P. MELANCTHON AND 

C. PEUCER 

"In the time of Emperor Louis the Pious," said 
authors say, "Johannes Scotus read and explained 
publicly in the schools, Dionysius' treatise Hier- 
archia. This Johannes Scotus, when he censured 
and refuted with good reasons, the false and im- 
pious tenet of the sacrifice of the mass, concerning 
which others at that time taught that in the Sup- 
per Christ was to be offered up for the living 
and the dead, was stabbed to death by his disciples 
and hearers, with their penknives." Chron. Canon., 
from the beginning of the world until Chirles V ., 
enlarged by Phil. Melancthon and Casp. Peucer, 
printed 1586, 4th book, fol. 476, col. 1. 

CONCERNING SAID HISTORY, ACCORDING TO THE 
ACCOUNT OF SEBASTIAN FRANCK OF WORTH 

"Johannes, surnamed Scotus, not of the Gray 
Friars, wrote a treatise on the sacrament, denying 
the presence of the body and blood of Christ. He 
was condemned in the council of Vercellis. He was 
rector at Paris, eminently versed in the languages, 
and the phenix of his age. The Emperor Lothaire 
held him in great esteem. Of him there have writ- 
ten, Platina," etc. See Chron. Rom. Kett., jol. 
106, col. 4, letter J. 


P. J. TWISCK'S ACCOUNT OF SAID JOHANNES SCOTUS 

"Johannes Scotus," he writes, "lived under the 
Emperor Louis the Pious, and wrote strenuously 
against transubstantiation. On a certain occasion, 
when he, in an exposition, was severely censuring 
the delusion of the blasphemous oblation or of- 
fering up of the Lord Christ in the Supper for the 
living and the dead, his disciples and hearers killed 
him with iron styles." Chron., 9th book, fol. 306, 
col. 2, from Hist. Andr., fol. 160. 

FURTHER EXPLANATION TOUCHING SAID J. SCOTUS, 

ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT OF THE PAPIST 

BARONIUS, AS NOTED BY ABR. MELLINUS 

"But let us add," says he, "the opinion of Bar- 
onius, touching this Scotchman: As regards Jo- 
hannes Scotus, we have said above, in the proper 
place, that he was in bad repute with the Pope 


Nicholas I. Although he wrote so violently against 
the Catholic faith, yet, as he did not spread it among 
the people, so that his views became known to all, 
many had a good opinion of him, so much so, that 
they, though most inconsiderately (thus he speaks, 
from a papistic standpoint) gave him the title of 
martyr." Compare A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 393, 
col. 1, 2, with Ccesar. Baronius' account touching 
/. Scotus, Annal. T. 11, A. D. 1059. 

From this account it appears that the papist Bar- 
onius, who was a cardinal of the Roman see, was 
not pleased that many had a good opinion of Jo- 
hannes Scotus, and, what is still more, gave him the 
title of martyr ; but this is not to be wondered at, 
since the true papists have a good opinion of none 
but those who adhere to the Roman superstitions, 
and never dare to utter a word of censure against 
them; and they would confer the title of martyr 
upon none but those who have suffered for the Ro- 
man see and its traditions (which are a parcel of 
human inventions). However, we will let them an- 
swer for this, and leave it. 

We return to Johannes Scotus and say that, as 
regards his boldness, he showed himself as be- 
hooves a true martyr, since, to clear his conscience 
and defend the oppressed truth, he did not hesi- 
tate to incur the hatred of the pope and the papists, 
yea, the prospect of being anathematized, excom- 
municated, and, finally, miserably tortured and 
put to death for it. He died for the confession of 
the Christian and evangelical truth, particularly 
for the article by which we commemorate the 
Lord's death, and in which lies the consolation of 
the soul, with regard to our blessed redemption. 

But, since Berengarius, who opposed not only 
transubstantiation and the mass, but also infant 
baptism, was afterwards charged with having im- 
bibed and obtained his belief from Johannes Sco- 
tus, the afore-mentioned martyr, we may conclude 
that said martyr must have opposed infant bap- 
tism; otherwise it could not be said in general 
words, that Berengarius imbibed or obtained his 
views from J. Scotus, which is nevertheless fre- 
quently and confidently asserted by ancient writ- 
ers. With this we will take our leave of J. Scotus 
and also of our account of the martyrs of this 
century ; as being sufficient for the well-disposed — 
for the evil-disposed we care not ; hence, our soul 
shall rest, and content itself with the pious. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE TENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE TENTH CENTURY 

[The corruption of this century, caused by the 
papal superstitions, is sadly lamented by Jacob 
Mehrning and P. J. Twisck. 

Nevertheless, it is shown thereupon, that in the 
midst of papal darkness there were still some who, 
in the matter of holy baptism, did not differ from 
the institution of Christ and His apostles. 


248 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Giselbert teaches, that baptism must be con- 
nected with regeneration and a good will. 

Then follows Ansbert, who declares that Christ, 
through preaching and baptism, is still daily bring- 
ing unto Himself heirs ; that we must be baptized 
upon the confession of the holy Trinity ; and that 
after baptism we may sin no more. 

Smaragdus follows next and says that it is im- 
possible for the body to receive the mystery of 
baptism aright, if the soul has not previously ac- 
cepted the truth of the faith; that the excellent 
ordinance of the baptism of Christ commands the 
apostles first to teach all nations, and then to in- 
corporate them by the baptism of faith. 

Then appears Theophilact, who produces very 
excellent testimonies concerning baptism; as, 
among others, that the baptized have put on Christ, 
Gal. 3 :27 ; that the candidates are like the prodigal 
son when he was converted ; that he is not baptized 
aright, who has not believed ; that in baptism all 
believers are enlightened by the Holy Ghost ; that 
no one may be recognized as a believer, who is un- 
regenerated or lives after the flesh ; that the truly 
baptized may not drive away the Holy Spirit by 
wicked works, but must preserve the image of God 
unspotted ; that the good profession of which we 
read, I Tim. 6:12, must take place at the instruc- 
tion of those that are to be baptized ; that those bap- 
tized by John, were delivered by repentance from 
the bonds of the soul; that the novices repented 
before baptism ; that the Supper was administered 
to the baptized, etc. 

Thereupon it is stated, from D. Vicecomes, that 
the papists, when infant baptism was introduced 
among them, abolished the practice of administer- 
ing the Supper to the baptized. It is furthermore 
demonstrated, that the Romanists ought to have 
abolished infant baptism just as well as the infant 
Supper. 

The baptism of Olympius, his wife Exuperia, 
and his son Theodulus, is adduced, from Simon 
Metaphrastes ; also, of the baptism of Theridates, 
and Nemesius. 

Fulbertus Carnotenses is the last witness respect- 
ing holy baptism.] 


We now pass over to the tenth century after the 
birth of Christ, to find in it, as we have done in the 
preceding times, the marks of the Christian be- 
lievers, namely, the true baptism with its ob- 
servance according to the institution of Christ and 
the practice of His apostles ; which, as we shall 
show in the proper place, obtained and was prac- 
ticed also at this time, though under great diffi- 
culties. 

Yet, what shall we say of this century? Many 
well-disposed persons, who loved the truth, ab- 
horred and detested it, because the innumerable 
human superstitions of the Roman church had 
risen nigh unto heaven, and the pure command- 
ments of Jesus Christ, without the observance of 
which men cannot be saved, had been cast almost 


down into the pit. This was the century concerning 
which much woful lamentation was made, because 
papal tyranny, in the matter of worship, had in- 
creased so exceedingly. Of these things (after the 
title), the following is contained in Jacob Mehrn- 
ing's History oj Baptism. 


OF THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF THE WORSHIP OF 
GOD IN THE TENTH CENTURY 

"In the tenth century the dominion of the Ro- 
man pope had exceedingly obscured, and taken 
possession of, nearly all the churches in Europe, 
so that everything had to be done according to 
his pleasure, both in spiritual and secular govern- 
ments; hence, great darkness prevailed at this 
time, in which but very few learned, virtuous, and 
celebrated men lived. For fear of the great tyran- 
ny, one dared scarcely speak the least word of the 
adulteration of the doctrine, or the abuses in the 
false worship, and the increase of the abominable 
blasphemies ; for, as soon as those who knew bet- 
ter, and feared God, uttered the least word of op- 
position, the pope instantly thundered, with hail 
and lightning as it were, excommunications from 
the Roman chair, so that every one was terrified, 
since also the secular lords were bewitched and 
controlled by him. Was it to be wondered at, then, 
that the corruptions with reference to baptism, in- 
creased the longer the more?" Bapt. Hist., p. 
556, from Magd. Cent. 10, cap. 1. 

Touching the abuses in and about baptism, which 
were then introduced the decree of the pope and 
the councils, they are noticed by different writers, 
as may be seen in Cent. Magd., Cent., 10, cap 6 
10, 11. 

In short, whereas formerly the catechumens had 
not been baptized until, after proper instruction, 
they had given an account of their faith, either on 
Easter or Whitsuntide, it was now ordained, that, 
when death or peril of life was apprehended, they 
should be baptized immediately. Metaphr., lib. 2, 
cap. 5. 

Whereas baptism had formerly been admin- 
istered with unblessed or unconsecrated water, it 
was now blessed and consecrated, yea, the chrism 
was used, the sign of the cross on the forehead, the 
oil of chrism. Bapt. Hist., page 576, num. 13. 

But the most ridiculous of all was, that, whereas 
formerly only human beings had been baptized, 
Pope John XIV now commanded that the great 
bell in the Lateran church should be baptized and 
named after him. Bapt. Hist., page 577, ex Balaeo 
Centur. 2. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 10th book, for 
the year 965, page 341, col. 1. 

These exceeding great errors of the Roman 
church, and the dreadful darkness in which all 
nations, with the exception of a few pious peo- 
ple, sat during those dreary times, is described in 
P. J. Twisck's Chronijk, in the conclusion of the 
thousandth year, with the following words (after 
the title) : 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


249 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE DE- 
PLORABLE STATE OF THE WORSHIP OF 
GOD IN THIS CENTURY 

"As far as regards the preceding century, I can- 
not speak of any improvement, inasmuch as the 
secular affairs manifested themselves with much 
commotion, strife, misery, and distress. Papal do- 
minion prevailed more and more. The idolatrous 
ceremonies were very prolific ; the baptismal water 
was consecrated ; the oil was prepared by the bish- 
op alone, two days before Easter, as well as im- 
parted to others ; the Supper, or sacrament, was ad- 
ministered nearly every Sunday, at an altar or 
table prepared for this purpose. Excommunication 
or the ban of the church was used very frivolously, 
not only against common people, but also against 
emperors, kings, and princes. The punishment im- 
posed upon penitents consisted much in abstaining 
for seven years from certain food, meat and wine, 
or in the giving of alms, building of churches, 
founding of cloisters, and other like inventions and 
burdens, according to the ability and mind of each 
respective individual. 

"It was taught, that the saints must be wor- 
shiped ; not that they should save the supplicants, 
but that they should intercede, and ask God for 
help for them. 

"Holy people were presented, who had died be- 
fore the time of Christ, in the Old Testament, and 
who, as it was said, had been in hell, yet without 
pain — a strange notion and wicked doctrine re- 
specting the holy fathers. 

"It was said that there was a purgatory, where 
men had to atone after this life, and wash away sin 
by suffering. 

"The canonizing of ecclesiastical persons was 
very common. The holidays instituted in honor of 
the saints, were very many, and took away nearly 
one half of the year. The images and graves of the 
saints were greatly esteemed. Kings, princes, lords, 
ecclesiastics, and laymen, made pilgrimages to 
Rome, St. Jago, Jerusalem, and other places, where 
the bodies or bones of the saints were buried or 
preserved, as though dead bones without spirit, 
could impart life or benefit. 

"The sick would confess to the ear of the priest, 
and thereupon receive the sacrament of the unc- 
tion; after which they departed in full assurance, 
though without any good resulting from it. 

"The dead were buried with the ringing of bells, 
with tapers and torches, with much singing, with 
masses, vigils, and prayers for their souls, etc." 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., \0th book, page 361. 

Thus, the tenth century was utterly corrupted 
through the superstitions of popery ; but, as in the 
dark midnight the stars still sometimes give their 
light, so it was also here ; for, that the marks of the 
true church might not be swallowed up entirely in 
the darkness, some, though but few, manifested 
themselves, who, in one and the other point, but 
principally in the matter of baptism, showed, that 


they, as regards the matter itself, did not differ 
from the institution of Christ and the practice of 
His holy apostles ; which can be gathered from the 
writings they have left. 

About A. D. 910. — Or very close to the begin- 
ning of this century, the ancient writers place 
Giselbert, a man of learning, but accused of strange 
opinions by his adversaries ; whom the emergency 
of the time compelled to stoop and hide, under the 
ravages of popery. He, though others have re- 
garded him as a member of the Roman church, 
opposed, apparently as much as lay in his power, 
the pope and the Roman church, and this not a 
little in the matter of baptism. For, while the pope 
and the Roman church generally taught that it was 
necessary, yea, upon pain of damnation, to baptize 
the infants, notwithstanding they have not, and 
cannot have, either true regeneration or a good 
will [intention], which are nevertheless required 
of candidates (Matt. 3:7,8), he taught that it is 
indeed necessary to salvation, to be baptized, but 
that said baptism must be connected with regenera- 
tion, and a good intention ; which things, besides 
the grace of Christ, he considered the chief means 
to salvation, so much so, that any one who had 
these virtues, though he were not baptized (that is, 
if there had been no opportunity), could neverthe- 
less be saved because of the grace and power of 
God. Of this, there is, among others, the following 
annotation in Jacob Mehrning's History of Bap- 
tism, Page 567. 

Of the necessity of baptism. — Giselbert (Alter. 
1 ) , says : "It is true, God can save ; yet, man can- 
not be saved without baptism ; (that is, that bap- 
tism which is accompanied with regeneration, as 
the following words declare), for thus says the 
author of this sacrament himself: 'Except a man 
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot see 
the kingdom of God.' It is, however, not in the 
power of man, to reject this way, and to choose to 
salvation another. However, it is in God's power, 
if man cannot obtain this means (baptism), to ac- 
cept graciously His good will." Cent. Magd. X., 
cap. 4. 

Hence, when he here speaks of the good will of 
man, it is quite evident, that he treats neither of 
infants nor of infant baptism, seeing infants have 
no knowledge of either a good or a bad will, nor 
of baptism, nor of regeneration, to which said 
passage of Giselbert also has reference ; much less 
have they the ability to worthily begin and execute 
all this, for the proper reception of baptism. He 
intends simply to say, that baptism is indeed nec- 
essary, yet not without regeneration; which re- 
generation he regards as the most important of all, 
according to John 3:5,7, from which he con- 
cludes that it is not in the power of man to reject 
this way, namely, to separate regeneration from 
baptism, or baptism from regeneration, which is 
a stricture upon those who were wont to reject 
the baptism of the regenerated or penitent, and 
to go another way, as did the Pharisees in the days 


250 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of John the Baptist ; who, rejecting the counsel of 
God against themselves (namely, the baptism of 
John), were not baptized of him. Luke 7:30. 

But, in order that no one need sorrow, who, hav- 
ing attained to regeneration, could not receive bap- 
tism, on account of serious obstacles or the want of 
a fitting opportunity, and, hence, might imagine 
that there was no grace or mercy of God for him, 
he adds this consolation, namely: "That it is in 
God's power, if man cannot obtain the means 
(baptism), to accept graciously His good will." 

Whatever others, especially papistic writers, 
may have recorded of Giselbert's belief, detri- 
mental to, or, at least, against the point in view, 
we let them be responsible for it; this is certain, 
that we have not as yet been able to find anything 
to the contrary, in any authentic writer. 

About A. D. 925. — Shortly after, or very near 
the time of Giselbert, Ansbert is mentioned, who, 
writing on several matters of faith, or articles of 
religion, also makes mention of baptism, approach- 
ing herein very closely the language, or, at least, 
the sense of the holy apostles, which appears from 
the following testimonies : 

Bapt. Hist., page 568. Ansbert (on Rev. 19), 
says, according to the words of Christ, John 1 :13 : 
"Which were born not of blood . . . but of God." 
"Of God, that is, through the preached Word and 
the washing of regeneration, by which mysteries 
(namely, preaching and the washing of regenera- 
tion, that is, baptism) Christ still daily begets and 
brings forth unto Himself heirs. 

He here connects the Word of God, or preach- 
ing, with the washing of regeneration, or baptism, 
and says that by them Christ begets and brings 
forth unto Himself heirs. How could anybody 
more plainly declare: 1. what true baptism is; 2. 
what belongs to it ; and 3. what fruit proceeds from 
it. For, firstly, what true baptism is, he expresses 
by these words : Washing of regeneration, accord- 
ing to Tit. 3 :5, indicating thereby, that true bap- 
tism is peculiar only to the regenerate; that is, 
to the penitent. Secondly, what belongs to baptism 
he expresses by these words : The preached word; 
for, as the apostle declares, "Faith cometh by hear- 
ing, and hearing by the word of God" (Rom. 
10:17). The preached word is therefore the means 
by which to attain to the faith, and faith is the 
foundation upon which truly to receive baptism. 
As necessary, then, as faith is, in order to be truly 
baptized, upon it, so necessary also is the preached 
word, in order to truly believe ; consequently, Ans- 
bert has justly joined the preached word to bap- 
tism, as a proof that it belongs to it, according to 
the words of Christ (Mark 16:15, 16) : "Preach 
the Gospel ... he that believeth and is baptized." 
Thirdly, what fruit proceeds from such baptism, 
when it is accompanied with regeneration and the 
preached Word of God, he expresses with these 
words : "By which mysteries Christ still daily be- 
gets and brings forth unto Himself heirs," which 
well agrees with the words of Paul, Gal. 3 :26, 27 : 


"Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ 
Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized 
into Christ have put on Christ." These, then, who 
by this means become children of God, also become 
His heirs and joint heirs with Christ. Rom. 8:17. 
Hence, said words of Ansbert are conformable to 
the Holy Scriptures, and speak of the baptism of 
the regenerate, but in no wise of infant baptism. 

Page 569. Ansbert (on Rev. 21) teaches: "The 
trinity of the Godhead we dare not, and shall not 
pass by unnoticed, especially when we are bap- 
tized upon the confession of the holy Trinity, and 
are saved in the faith of the unity of the same." 

Here he again connects baptism with confession 
and faith, yea, he says that we are baptized upon 
confession, and saved in faith. Certainly, there is 
not a letter in the above passage, which savors of 
infant baptism, but every word denies, yea, op- 
poses it, inasmuch as here such a baptism only is 
spoken of, as is received with faith and the con- 
fession of the same ; but that this can be done by 
infants, militates not only against the holy Scrip- 
tures, but also against nature. 

Page 574.— Ansbert (on Rev. 1) says : "He that 
has been washed in baptism from dead works, and, 
after such washing, again commits sins unto death! 
it avails him nothing that he was washed ; hence, 
the Lord, through Isaiah (chap. 1, verse 16), ad- 
monishes thus: 'Wash ye, make you clean.' He 
washes and cleanses himself, who commits no new 
sins after baptism. But he that conducts himself 
thus that after such washing, he again pollutes the 
white robe with sin, let him still not despair of re- 
mission, if he desires to be washed again ; for there 
is yet another baptism, with which publicans and 
harlots are always baptized — and what other is it 
but the well-spring of tears? in which Mary Mag- 
dalene, polluted with many a stain of vice, and 
Peter, when he had thrice denied the Lord, washed 
themselves." 

This whole passage is a warning to those who, 
having committed sins unto death, were baptized 
for the remission of the same, that they should not 
rely upon this, otherwise they might be deceived ; 
hence, against such, there are spoken these words : 
"He that after such washing again commits sins 
unto death, it avails him nothing that he was 
washed." Then follows an admonition, not to fall 
into new sins after baptism ; yet that any who had 
fallen into them, should still not despair. But to 
such there is pointed out another baptism, namely, 
the baptism of tears, that is, weeping and sorrow- 
ing for committed sins. Then it is told what per- 
sons were once baptized with this baptism of tears, 
namely, publicans and harlots, Mary Magdalene! 
and Peter, for denying Christ. 

Judge now, whether the above-stated things can 
be done by infants, or whether they are peculiar 
only to the adult and intelligent, and we are fully 
confident, that, if you are impartial, you will choose 
the latter, and reject the former. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


251 


About A. D. 938. — Very near the time of Ans- 
bert, a place is accorded, in this century, to Smarag- 
dus, who, having, it seems, at some time previous 
to his conversion, or, at least, to his enlightenment, 
maintained infant baptism, now gave such testi- 
mony concerning baptism as completely excludes 
infant baptism, inasmuch as he, writing, of the na- 
ture, virtue, practice, and benefit of baptism, very 
closely follows the language of Christ and His holy 
apostles.* 

This appears from his exposition of the institu- 
tion of Christ respecting baptism. 

"First," he writes "all nations were taught, and 
then they were baptized with water ; for it is im- 
possible for the body to receive the mystery of 
baptism aright, if the soul has not previously ac- 
cepted the truth of the faith; for they were bap- 
tized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost." Again: "This excellent ordinance 
of baptism commands the apostles, first to teach 
all nations, then to incorporate them by the bap- 
tism of faith, and then, after faith and baptism, to 
teach them what they were to observe." Smarag- 
dus, on Matt. 28. 

N. B. "Thus," says the writer who has recorded 
this, "the light of truth must shine forth in the 
midst of darkness ; for, where did Christ institute 
another ordinance of baptism, for infants ?" B. H., 
page 570, num.. 7 . 

Though this last passage is very acceptable and 
worthy of being considered, and confirms in no 
small measure the point we have in view we will 
nevertheless let the writer keep it to himself, it 
being only a comment on the aforementioned mat- 
ter. 

We will, therefore, return to the matter itself, 
namely, to the words of Smaragdus, and we shall 
soon find that his aim was, to connect faith with 
baptism, yea, to admit no other baptism than that 
which is accompanied with the truth of the faith. 
For, what else does he intend to say with these 
words : "For it is impossible for the body to re- 
ceive the mystery of baptism aright, if the soul 
has not previously accepted the truth of the faith ?" 
May we not firmly conclude from this, that this 
man knew nothing of infant baptism, or, at least, 
that he, when he wrote this, utterly denied and re- 
jected it? Certainly, no one could oppose, or re- 
ject, infant baptism more flatly and plainly; for 
if it is impossible, as he says, to receive baptism 
aright without having previously accepted the truth 
of the faith, etc., he establishes that it is impossible 
to baptize infants aright, seeing they, because of 
their disqualification in regard to power as well as 
knowledge, cannot previously accept the truth of 


* What Smaragdus has written on I Pet. 2, saying: "Such holy, 
pure, and innocent childhood, the mother, the church of Christ, 
gains through the grace of baptism," gave cause to consider whether 
by the word "childhood" he meant infants of the cradle, and by the 
words "grace of baptism," infant baptism ; but it is also interpreted 
as having reference to the believing children of God, according to 
Gal. 3:26, and to the baptism of believers, according to Mark 16: 
16. As to the exposition, however, which he is stated to have made 
on John 13, it is held that it took place before his enlightenment. 


the faith. Unless some one would say that he held, 
that there is a certain faith or germ of faith, as 
others call it, in infants from their birth (as was 
afterwards advanced by the Lutherans), upon 
which, some were wont to assert, they ought to be 
baptized. But this is easily refuted; for, besides 
this, that in the time of Smaragdus, as far as can 
be seen, they knew nothing of this hidden faith, 
or germ of faith, in infants, much less baptized 
them upon it, he plainly indicates that he is speak- 
ing of another faith, which he calls the truth of 
the faith, that is, a true and genuine faith ; which 
true and genuine faith no one ever, to our knowl- 
edge, not even to the present day, claimed for in- 
fants, in order to establish infant baptism upon it. 
Moreover, Smaragdus required of the candi- 
dates for baptism, not only the truth of the faith, 
but also regeneration, as appears from his com- 
ments on John 3, where he says : "He that is re- 
generated through water and the Spirit, is invisibly 
changed into a new man, and from a carnal man is 
made a spiritual man; and he is therefore rightly 
called, not only spiritual, but also spirit." B. H., 
p. 573, num. 11. 

In this passage again there are several things 
mentioned, which indicate nothing else than that 
he is speaking of the baptism of adults. For, be- 
sides that the words, John 3, were not spoken to 
an infant but to Nicodemus, a master in Israel, the 
circumstances adduced by Smaragdus in regard to 
it also indicate, that it is to be understood of none 
but adult persons. For, what else does he mean to 
say by the word regenerated, than that the baptized 
person who has previously truly prepared himself 
for baptism, gives up his old, earthly birth, and be- 
comes a new creature? Thus also, when he says 
that the baptized person is changed into a new 
man ; for, how shall any one be changed into a new 
man, who was not an old man before? And also, 
when he adds, that such an one, from a carnal man 
is made spiritual; for, how is it possible, from a 
carnal man to become spiritual, if one has not pre- 
viously been carnal or lived after the flesh ? There- 
fore, to become spiritual, does not simply mean, to 
receive the Spirit of God, but to live after the Spir- 
it, in the fear of God, and in all the Christian vir- 
tues. Gal. 5 :21-24. 

This being so, we will leave the testimony of 
Smaragdus and proceed to others of his contempo- 
raries, who held the same belief and left it to us in 
their writings. 

A. D. 952. — It is stated that in the time of the 
Emperor Otho the Great there lived and wrote, in 
Greece, a very virtuous and learned man called 
Theophilact, who, writing on various matters of 
faith, also makes mention of baptism, not differing 
herein, as far as we have been able to ascertain, 
from the Anabaptists of the present day, but agree- 
ing with them very well on the subject of baptism 
upon faith. 

Bapt. Hist., page 571, Theophilact on Luke 15, 


252 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


says: "As many of us as have been baptized have 
put on Christ." 

These are the words of Paul, Gal. 3:27, which 
the apostle does not speak to infants, but to the 
believing saints of the Galatian church, namely, 
"that they had indeed, become children of God by 
faith, but had put on Christ by baptism." 

Continuing he says : "Then he puts on our hand 
(namely, to us who through baptism have put on 
Christ) the ring, the seal of Christianity, which 
works in us." Again: "Everyone that is bap- 
tized, is also made a child of God, yea, readopted 
as such ; he is also, when he is washed from sin, 
made a partaker of the fatted calf, and becomes the 
joy of the Father and His servants, the holy angels 
and men, even as one that has arisen from the 
dead, and who was lost, and is found." 

He here compares the candidates to the prodigal 
son who, repenting of his evil life, arose to go to 
his father, to seek grace, and was received by him 
with outstretched arms. Thus, he would say, it is 
also in baptism : The sinner seeks grace, confesses 
his sins, manifests sorrow for them, yea, prays and 
supplicates for forgiveness. God, the Lord, who is 
the true Father of all men by reason of creation, 
meets him, embraces him with the arms of His 
grace, yea, pardons all his past sins, and, in token 
thereof, commands one of His servants to baptize 
him. This he compares to the putting on of the 
ring, saying : "Then he puts on our hand the ring, 
the seal of Christianity." What he further says 
concerning the killing of the fatted calf; and the 
joy of the Father and His servants, has regard to 
the joy that is in heaven over the repentance of 
such a pentitent (and thereupon baptized) sinner, 
which is greater than over ninety and nine just 
persons, which need no repentance. Luke 15:7. 

Hence, when Theophilact compares the candi- 
date for baptism to the prodigal son, in the man- 
ner shown above, it is evident enough, yea, as clear 
as midday, that he is treating of no other bap- 
tism than the baptism of adults, and this of such 
adults as manifest sorrow for their past sins. 

Page 572. Theophilact on John 8, says : "Since 
Christ came to take away the sins of the world, we 
can obtain remission of sins in no other way than, 
by means of baptism (however properly speaking 
the blood of Christ is the effective cause of the 
remission and taking away of sins), yet it is impos- 
sible that he that has not believed, be baptized 
(aright) ; hence, the unbeliever must afterwards 
die in his sins, for he has not put off the old man, 
because he has not been baptized." 

Though several things are said here, which con- 
firm our preceding explanation of the words of 
Theophilact, we shall nevertheless notice only these 
words : "It is impossible that he that has not be- 
lieved, be baptized (aright) ;" for here certainly 
every baptism which is not received with faith is 
denied ; hence, infant baptism cannot be admitted 
here, because it is without all faith, yea, it is ut- 
terly denied here. And thus, the words of The- 


ophilact concerning baptism, are not only clear, but 
also Christian-like and apostolical. 

Page 572. Theophilact on II Cor. 3, says : "Even 
as silver, exposed to the sun, does itself emit rays, 
because the sun shines upon it ; so also we, when 
we are purified in baptism, by the Holy Ghost, and 
illumined by His rays, emit a spiritual radiance, 
perceived only in the soul, and are changed into 
the same image, by the Spirit of the Lord, to our 
glory." And, a little further on : "All believers are 
illumined in baptism by the Holy Ghost, that their 
souls shine (or, emit radiance) thereby." Again: 
"As we are all dead by one sinner, even so we are 
all made alive, and are risen through Christ, in bap- 
tism ; and we justly recognize no one as believing, 
who lives after the flesh, that is, who leads the old, 
carnal life; but all who are regenerated by the 
Spirit, begin a new, spiritual life." 

The words which Theophilact speaks from or on 
II Cor. 3, concerning the candidates, Paul speaks 
of believers ; and the simile borrowed by the afore- 
mentioned writer from the silver, which, when the 
sun shines upon it, reflects his rays, which he ap- 
plies to the candidates, who become illumined by 
the Holy Ghost, and reflect a spiritual radiance of 
virtues, confirms, in a good degree, that he is 
speaking of such candidates as can be illumined by 
the Holy Ghost, and live virtuously, to the honor 
of God, the edification of their neighbor, and to the 
salvation of their own souls. What he says after 
that, fully confirms our opinion, namely, that he is 
speaking of believing candidates ; for, this he clear- 
ly expresses with these words : "All believers are 
illumined in baptism by the Holy Ghost." What he 
adds finally, tends in the same direction, for he 
says that, "As we are all dead by one sinner 
(Adam), even so we are all made alive and are 
risen, through Christ, in baptism." Who does not 
see that this making alive and rising (in baptism) 
has respect to the renewing of the old life, accord- 
ing to the teaching of Paul (Rom. 6 :4) : "There- 
fore we are buried with him by baptism into death : 
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by 
the glory of the Father, even so we also should 
walk in_ newness of life." That this is his mean- 
ing, he indicates by the following words, when he 
calls those whom he has previously termed candi- 
dates, believers and regenerated persons, saying : 
"We justly recognize no one as believing, who 
lives after the flesh ; but all who are regenerated 
(thus he calls the candidates or the baptized) by 
the Spirit, begin a new, spiritual life." 

Page 573. Theophilact on II Tim. 1, says: "The 
Holy Ghost hovers over us at baptism ; now, if we 
keep this Spirit, and do not drive Him away by 
wicked works, He keeps us and what we have re- 
ceived from God ; therefore, use all diligence, that 
you keep the Holy Ghost, and He, who has been 
given you, will also keep you." 

It seems that in the days of Theophilact there 
was a failing among some of the candidates, or. at 
least, among the unbaptized Christians, that, in- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


253 


stead of stirring up the grace of the Spirit of God, 
which had been given them (after baptism), and 
thereby increasing and proceeding in virtues, they 
decreased and retrograded, yea, fell into wicked 
works. This, Theophilact opposed, warning them 
to be careful not to drive the good Spirit of God 
away from them by wicked works, seeing He will 
not dwell in a malicious soul, nor in a body that is 
subject unto sin. Wisdom of Sol. 1 :4. 

Secondly, he admonishes them affectionately and 
consolingly, to keep the gift of the Holy Ghost (af- 
ter baptism), pointing out also, the means by 
which this could be done, namely, by avoiding 
wicked works, and using diligence, that is, such dil- 
igence by which the worship of God and the com- 
mon edification could be promoted. The conso- 
lation which he, for such, adds to his admonition, 
is expressed in these words: "Therefore, use all 
diligence, that you keep the Holy Ghost, and He 
. . . will also keep you." But what fruit his 
warning, and consoling admonition had on those 
persons, is not stated there; hence we will take 
our leave, and proceed to other writings which he 
has left. 

Same page as above. Theophilact on John 3, 
says : "It is not enough for the preservation of pu- 
rity, to be baptized ; but one must also use great 
diligence, that the image of the sonship of God, 
which is represented in baptism, is kept unspotted. 
There are many who have received, in baptism, the 
grace of adoption as children of God, but who, 
through negligence, have not remained children 
of God unto the end. 

Here he greatly laments the apostasy of the chil- 
dren of God, namely, of those who, having been 
baptized, and having received the grace of adoption 
as children of God, but through negligence had 
apostatized so that they, as he calls it, had not 
remained children of God. Certainly, this was a 
sad matter; but notwithstanding we rejoice that in 
those times people were baptized upon faith (as has 
been shown above), that they might receive the 
grace of adoption as children of God; and that 
there were yet persons (as appears from Theophi- 
lact) who taught this doctrine and reproved the 
opposing abuses ; to which, has been our sole aim. 

Page 575. Theophilact (on I Tim. 6, where the 
apostle says : "Thou hast professed a good profes- 
sion before many witnesses"), writes: "This pro- 
fession takes place at the instruction of those who 
are to be baptized ; and we profess by it that we 
will forsake Satan, and pitch our tent with Christ, 
that we may fully adhere to Him." 

How could any one speak more clearly and truly 
of baptism according to the institution of Christ 
and the practice of the apostles ? He says here, that 
the good profession of which Paul writes (I Tim. 
6:12), took place at the instruction of those who 
were to be baptized ; by which he indicates that in 
his time the candidates were not only instructed at 
and before baptism, namely, in the Christian faith, 
but that they were also required to make a profes- 


sion of what they believed, which consisted (as can 
be gleaned not only from Theophilact, but also 
from other writers of that time) of two parts: 
firstly, in the confession of faith in God and in 
His Son Jesus Christ ; and secondly, in the renun- 
ciation of Satan, the world, the flesh, and all its 
lusts. 

Same page as above. Theophilact on Mark 1, 
says : "All who came to be baptized by John, were 
delivered through repentance from the bond of 
their souls, if they believed on Christ." 

He says of those who came to John's baptism, 
that they were delivered through repentance from 
the bond of their souls (that is, from sin), if they 
believed on Christ ; by which he indicates that two 
things were required of those candidates, in order 
that they might be delivered from sin; 1. repent- 
ance; 2. faith in Christ. Which things, since he 
adduces them for the instruction of his contempo- 
raries, were also required of the candidates of his 
time, namely, that they had to repent and believe 
on Christ. For, to what purpose should he other- 
wise, by way of instruction, have adduced them? 

Page 581. D. J. Vicecomes (lib. 3, cap. 3, on 
Heb. 6), quotes from Theophilact: "When you 
were to be baptized, you repented of dead works, 
that is, rejected the works of Satan." 

In Lib. 5, cap. 37. Vicecomes expresses the opin- 
ion, that in the time of Theophilact the holy Supper 
was still administered to the baptized, after bap- 
tism. 

Whether we cast our eyes upon the words of 
Theophilact, or upon those of Vicecomes, we see 
that both tend in the same direction. As regards 
the words of Theophilact, he informs us concern- 
ing the candidates of his time, that they, before 
baptism, or, at least, when they were about to be 
baptized, repented of dead works, which, as every- 
one knows, can only be done by adults, and not at 
all by infants ; for, one that is to desist from dead 
works, and repent, must first have committed dead 
works ; this is incontrovertible. 

As to the words of Vicecomes, they confirm the 
foregoing ; for, if the holy Supper was then admin- 
istered to the baptized after baptism ; which Sup- 
per, as is taught in I Cor. 1 1 :27, had to be received 
with proper examination, and qualification, as, 
according to history, was then still done, it follows 
that the baptism of infants could not have been 
maintained among those who practiced this, seeing 
infants are unfit for such examination and quali- 
fication, and, consequently, also unfit to become 
partakers of the holy Supper, which Vicecomes also 
notices ; for, referring, in the same place, to some 
among the Romanists, he says: "But when the 
baptism of infants was introduced, they [the in- 
fants] did not understand the virtue of the heav- 
enly food, the church abolished this custom (name- 
ly, of administering the Supper to the baptized), 
that this holy sacrament might not be dishonored 
thereby." 


254 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


From this it is quite evident, that at that time, 
not only some who had separated from the Roman 
church, but even some who belonged to the Roman 
church (perhaps, whole churches of the Roman- 
ists), still had the custom of administering the holy 
Supper to all that had been baptized, and this with 
all proper devotion; so that in those churches, it 
seems, nothing was known, even as late as that 
time, of infant baptism, or, at least, that it was not 
observed there, until the pope, or some council or- 
dained otherwise; for this is clearly expressed in 
the words : "But when the baptism of infants was 
introduced, the church abolished this custom." 

Touching what is adduced (B. H., p. 308, from 
D. Vicecomes, lib. 5, cap. 37), concerning the in- 
fant Supper, as though it might have obtained in 
the time of Theophilact, it is refuted by the writer 
himself, in said passage ; for he explains it as hav- 
ing reference to the Supper of believing, baptized 
Christians, saying, that it was administered to the 
baptized till infant baptism came into vogue, and 
that it was then (because infants were unfit for it) 
abolished. 

In regard to this, the writer who records it, has 
the following words to the shame of those who did 
so: "Cannot these foolish saints," says he "for the 
same reason, also abolish infant baptism, which is 
not a less, but, on account of the effectual regen- 
eration, a greater sacrament, than the Supper?" 
B. H., page 308. He means to say: If the Sup- 
per, which it was customary to administer to be- 
lievers after baptism, was abolished, when infant 
baptism came into vogue, because infants have not 
the ability to worthily prepare themselves for the 
Supper; how great a folly is it, then, that infant 
baptism was not also abolished for the same rea- 
son ; seeing that not less, but more, is required for 
baptism than for the Supper, namely, an effectual 
regeneration? For which reason also baptism is a 
greater sacrament than the Supper. Certainly, this 
was a forcible argument in refutation of those who, 
having introduced infant baptism, had therefore 
abolished the Supper which used to be administered 
after baptism; and who considered infants better 
qualified for baptism than for the Supper. 

About A. D. 980.— Bapt. Hist., pages 578, 579. 
Vicecomes quotes from Simon Metaphrastes, lib. 
1, cap. 5. the following occurrence: "That Theri- 
dates, with his wife and the chief persons of the 
land were baptized in the river Euphrates." 

Page 580. "Greg. Martyr enjoined upon Theri- 
dates and those who desired to be baptized, a fast 
of thirty days, then instructed them one after an- 
other, and thereupon baptized them in the Eu- 
phrates." From Vicecom., lib. 3, cap. 6. 

D. Vicecomes {lib. 1, cap. 14), relates how 
Namesius, came to the water, towards evening, 
descended into it, and was baptized, in the name 
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. From 
Metaphr., in vita Steph. 


In lib. 3, cap. 3, he writes, how Oilympius, with 
his wife, Exuperia, and his only son, Theodulus, 
in the night came to Sympronius, fell down at his 
feet, and said : "We have recently learned to know 
the power of Christ, that He is truly God. We 
therefore pray thee, to see that we receive baptism, 
in the name of Christ, whom thou preachest." 
Sympronius answered them : "If you repent with 
your whole heart, God will be so gracious as to 
receive you as penitents." Then said Olympius: 
"This we will immediately do." From Metaphr., 
in vita Steph. B. H., page 579, num. 10. 

Page 580, num. 14. "This same Olympius, when 
he desired to become a Christian, was bidden to 
break the idols with his own hands, to melt the 
gold and silver of which they were made, with fire, 
and to gather the poor, and distribute it among 
them. This, the writer says, Olympius faithfully 
did." D. Vicecom., lib. 3, cap. 13. 

Note.— Page 851, it is related of Placidus, his 
wife Trajana, and his two sons, how they went to 
the teacher, etc. ; and how the latter instructed and 
eventually baptized them; changed their names; 
administered the Supper to them; wished every- 
thing good to them, and said : "Depart ! the true 
peace of Christ go with you." From Metaphr., 
according to Vicecom., lib. 5, cap. 45. 

Still other similar examples, which it would take 
too long to recount, are adduced in said place, and 
elsewhere, in the History of Baptism. The persons 
mentioned in all these examples, those who were 
baptized as well as those who baptized, we pass by 
without commenting on them ; our object here be- 
ing simply to show that said Simon Metaphrastes, 
who is stated to have lived and written about this 
time, described the foregoing matters as good and 
praiseworthy examples of the believing, baptized 
Christians, and left them to posterity, for instruc- 
tion. 

About A. D. 1000.— Or at the close of the tenth 
century, there is noticed in Jacob Mehrning's His- 
tory of Baptism, Fulbertus Carnotanses, who com- 
pares the descending in baptism to the burying of 
Christ in the earth, and the arising from baptism 
to the resurrection of Christ from the grave, or, 
properly speaking, to the awakening of Christ to 
life.* 

His own words can be found, translated into 
German, page 581, from Fulbert. Carnot. in Epist. 
ad Adcodatum. Herewith we conclude our account 
of baptism in the tenth century, and proceed to the 
pious martyrs who suffered in those days for the 
name of Jesus Christ. 


What Fulbertus says, in this comparison, of baptism, is as 
tar as the sense is concerned, identical with that which Paul, Rom 
6 :4, declares of the baptism of believers, saying : "Therefore we are 
buried with him by baptism unto death: that like as Christ was 
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also 
should walk in newness of life." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


255 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE TENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS WHO SUFFERED 
THE TENTH CENTURY 


IN 


[About the year 910, we again refer to Giselbert 
(see our Account of Holy Baptism), who teaches, 
as it were, for the consolation of the martyrs who 
could not receive water baptism, that it is in God's 
power to show mercy to them on account of their 
good will. 

Lamentable persecution of the Christians in the 
region of Cordova, by the Arabians, instituted by 
their King Habdarrhaghman, A. D. 923. 

Eugenia, an upright Christian woman, beheaded 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ, near Cordova, 
in said year, 923. 

Pelagius, a lad of thirteen years, beheaded after 
his arms and legs were cut off, on account of the 
true Christian faith, at Cordova, A. D. 925. 

An extract from the account of P. J. Twisck, 
touching the martyrdom of the youth Pelagius. 

Note containing further explanation respecting 
the confession of faith of Eugenia and Pelagius. 

Of the cruel persecution instituted by the Dan- 
ish King Worm against the Christian believers, 
A. D. 926. 

A note containing further explanatory remarks 
concerning the last-mentioned persecution, and that 
other similar persecutions are to be understood and 
explained in the same manner. 

A deplorable persecution of the Christians, 
caused by Udo, the Sclavonian prince, A. D. 950. 

Marginal note, of the terrible pillage and burn- 
ing perpetrated by the Saracens among the Chris- 
tians in Syria, A. D. 964. 

Circumstantial account of the severe persecution 
of Christians by the Vandals, in the borders of 
Hamburg, Brandenburg, Havelburg, and the ad- 
jacent countries, A. D. 984. 

Marginal note, how, seven years afterwards, 
namely, A. D. 991, the Normans came from Den- 
mark into Germany, and there, for about forty 
years, greatly vexed the Christians ; and that the 
Arabians, from A. D. 622 to 1300, committed 
much mischief in nearly every country of Europe, 
or Christendom.] 


ABOUT THE YEAR, A. D. 910 

In our account of holy baptism for A. D. 910, we 
introduced the very learned, but, by his adversaries, 
much accused, Giselbert, who, through the ex- 
igency of that time, had to live under the Roman 
church, though he decidedly opposed her super- 
stitions, especially in the matter of baptism. He 
taught concerning holy baptism as connected with 
regeneration and a good will. He also added, for 
explanation (on John 3:5) : "If any one (through 
obstacles, or otherwise) cannot receive external 
baptism, it is in God's power to graciously accept 


his good will." Ex. Cent. Magd. 10, cap. 4. Bapt. 
Hist., 2d part, page 567. 

Hence, when Giselbert here consoles, in some 
measure, those who, from necessity, had to remain 
without baptism, with the mercifulness of God, 
who has it in His power to show mercy, even in 
the absence of baptism, to those who are of a good 
will, it seems that at that time there must have 
been an oppression or persecution of the Christian 
believers ; for at such times it frequently happens 
that there are people of a good will, namely, who 
desire to be baptized upon the true faith on Jesus 
Christ, but who nevertheless, on account of the 
persecution, and the dispersion of the churches and 
their teachers, cannot attain to it, as we have shown 
by living examples, in different places of our ac- 
count of the martyrs. 

Thus, when people who had not been baptized, 
yet had a desire to be baptized, were apprehended 
and put in bonds for the testimony of the Lord, it 
was frequently seen, that they could not obtain 
complete peace in their hearts, though they firmly 
believed in the Lord, and had resolved to give ex- 
pression to, and confirm, such faith not only by 
words, but also in deed, yea, with their blood and 
steadfast death. On these occasions, or against 
these emergencies, the pious and soul-seeking 
teachers often consoled such people, strengthened 
their hearts, and caused them to hope instead of 
despair; since God has it in His power, to show 
mercy to, yea, to save, such, even without baptism, 
for the sake of their good will or intention, if it 
has not been neglected on purpose and presump- 
tuously. 

This the above-mentioned Giselbert taught, and 
thus he consoled the well-disposed unbaptized; 
hence, our foregoing conclusion may be regarded 
as true, namely, that there was, at that time, a per- 
secution on account of the word of the Lord, which 
made it necessary to add said consolation for the 
afore-mentioned persons. But as this is based 
merely on a probable conjecture, since it is not ex- 
pressed in clear words, we will leave it, and give 
an account of a certain persecution which, about 
thirteen years after this, was raised by the Arabians 
against the Christians, and ended after much 
misery and distress. 


A LAMENTABLE PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS 
IN THE REGION OF CORDOVA, BY THE ARA- 
BIANS, INSTITUTED BY THEIR KING 
HABDARRHAGHMAN, A. D. 923 

A. D. 923, a terrible persecution was raised by 
the Arabians against the Christian believers, in the 
region of Cordova. This occurred mainly through 
the wickedness of the Arabian King Habdarrhagh- 
man IV, who allowed himself to be called protector 
of the law of God, and king of the believers ; but, 
being filled with bitter hatred against the true law 
of Jesus Christ, and, consequently, also against the 
true Christian believers, he considered and declared 


256 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


all Christians unbelievers and despisers of the law 
of God. But he did not stop at this, but raged 
against them" in an awful manner, yea, persecuted 
them with fire and sword. One thing, however, in 
connection with this grieves us to the very heart, 
namely, that the records of the pious witnesses of 
Jesus Christ who were killed by him, have all been 
lost, except of two, namely, Eugenia and a youth 
of thirteen years; of whom we shall give an ac- 
count presently. Touching said persecution, com- 
pare A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 312, col. 2, with 
Ruderic, Archiep. Tolet., and Alii. Rer., Hisp. 
Script. 


EUGENIA, AN UPRIGHT CHRISTIAN WOMAN, BE- 
HEADED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, NEAR THE CITY OF COR- 
DOVA, A. D. 923 

It is recorded that A. D. 923, an upright Chris- 
tian woman, called Eugenia, was apprehended in 
the afore-mentioned persecution, and, remaining 
steadfast in the confession of the faith in the Son 
of God, was beheaded, on the sixteenth of March, 
A. D. 923, through the tyrant and persecutor 
Habdarrhaghman. 

It is stated that in digging the foundation of 
some building, in a village called Marmolejos, near 
Cordova, where she was martyred, an epitaph was 
found, the first letters of each line of which spelled 
her name: Eugenia Martyr, that is, Eugenia the 
Witness (namely, of Jesus), as a token that she 
had died for the testimony of Jesus her Saviour. 
There could be gathered from it, further, the time 
when this took place, as well as the manner in 
which she was put to death, namely, that she was 
beheaded with the sword, at the time indicated 
above.* 


PELAGIUS, A LAD OF THIRTEEN YEARS, AFTER 
MUCH SUFFERING FOR THE TRUE CHRISTIAN 
FAITH, AT CORDOVA, HAS HIS ARMS AND 
LEGS CUT OFF, AND IS FINALLY BE- 
HEADED, A. D. 925 

It is stated that about two years after, namely, 
A. D. 925, a lad of thirteen years, called Pelagius, 
was put to death for the name of Christ, in Cor- 
dova, which occurred as follows : His uncle, Er- 
moigus (who by some writers is called a bishop), 
having been apprehended and imprisoned at Cor- 
dova, by the Arabian King Habdarrhaghman, said 
Ermoigus, in order to be released, left his nephew, 
who was then only about thirteen years old, in his 
stead, as a pledge, which for more than three years 
was not redeemed, either through the neglect of 
his friends, or because the king would not let go 
the youth, who was now very comely and well- 
mannered. 


* For further comments respecting Eugenia's confession of 
faith, see the explanation which we shall append to the account of 
the death of Pelagius. 


In the meantime, this lad exercised himself dili- 
gently in the Christian religion, to prepare himself 
for his martyrdom, which seemed to him to be 
drawing near. When he was about thirteen and a 
half years old, he was brought before the king, and, 
standing there, immediately began to confess his 
faith, declaring that he was ready to die for it.* But 
the king, having in view something else than to 
hear the confession of the Son of God, or of the 
Christian faith, proposed to the youth, who was 
quite innocent in evil, some improper things, which 
this hero of Christ valiantly and in a Christian man- 
ner refused, willing rather, to die an honorable 
death for the name of Christ, than to live shame- 
fully with the devil, and pollute both soul and body 
with such an abominable sin. The king, hoping 
that he could yet be persuaded, commanded his 
servants to ply him with fair promises, to the effect, 
that, if he would apostatize, he should be brought 
up with royal splendor at the court of the king. 
But the Lord, in whom he trusted, strengthened 
him against all the allurements of this world, so 
that he said: "I am a Christian, and will remain a 
Christian, and obey only Christ's commands all the 
days of my life. 

The king, seeing that he remained steadfast, 
was filled with rage, and commanded his guards 
to take him, suspend him by iron tongs, and pinch 
him and haul him up and down until he should 
either die or renounce Christ as his Lord. But 
having undergone all this, he was as fearless as 
ever, and refused not to suffer still more tortures, 
even unto death. 

When the tyrant perceived the immovable stead- 
fastness of this youth, he commanded that they 
should cut him limb from limb, and throw the 
pieces into the river. As he thus stood before the 
king, dripping with blood, from his previous tor- 
tures, he prayed to none than to Jesus Christ our 
Lord, saying: "O Lord, deliver me out of the 
hands of my enemies." When he lifted up his 
hands to God [in prayer], the executioners pulled 
them apart and cut off first one arm, and then the 
other ; thus also his legs, and, lastly, his head. When 
this was done, the pieces were thrown into the river. 

Thus this young hero and pious witness of Jesus 
Christ ended his life, on the 29th of June, A. D. 
925, his martyrdom having lasted from seven 
o'clock in the morning until evening. See the first- 
mentioned writer, who has given the account of 
the Arabian persecution, on the page referred to, 
third column, compared with Raguele in Append., 
ab Eulog., super Pelagium. 

EXTRACT FROM THE ACCOUNT OF P. J. TWISCK, 

TOUCHING THE MARTYRDOM OF THE 

YOUTH PELAGIUS 

"When Habdarrhaghman, the king of the Ara- 
bians, had, from bishop Ermoigus, his nephew 
Pelagiu s, as a pledge or hostage, the tyrant tore 

* "To die for the name of Christ," our author says. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


257 


him with redhot tongs ; and, having been torn limb 
from limb, he was thrown into the nearest river, 
when he was scarcely thirteen years old." Chron., 
10th book, fol. 329, col. 1, from Merulae., fol. 621. 

Note. — Neither of Eugenia nor of the youth 
Pelagius have we been able (as in the case of other 
martyrs before these), to ascertain the particu- 
lars of their confession of faith, though we have 
exerted ourselves not a little in this direction. It 
is almost as if the records which no doubt treated 
more fully of it, were buried in the earth, like the 
epitaph of Eugenia. Oh, that this were certain, 
and that the spot were known — without contradic- 
tion, no pains would be spared to obtain them, if 
it were possible; since thereby, according to our 
opinion, the bright light of evangelical truth would 
come to light pure and clear in many points; 
whereas now, others, especially those of the 
Roman church, have, whenever it has pleased them, 
dimmed and perceptibly obscured, with the smoke 
of their human inventions, the blessed confessors 
of Jesus Christ and their confessions. 

But what do our lamentations avail? We must 
content ourselves with what has remained. It may 
be that said particular confessions, together with 
the records of the suffering and death of many 
other martyrs (of which we spoke in the begin- 
ning) were lost through the violence of the perse- 
cution, or perished in some other way. 

This persecution has not been so fortunate an one 
for the searchers of ancient memoirs, as some of 
the preceding ones of which we know; for these 
other persecutions already spoken of, however 
severe and fierce they may have been, besides giv- 
ing clearer light as regards the confessions, have 
through the carefulness of some writers, generally 
furnished and left for remembrance, a respectable 
number of martyrs either mentioned or unmen- 
tioned ; while this persecution, although very many 
were slain in it, tells us of but two persons. 

But though we, unable to obtain more, must con- 
tent ourselves with the bare circumstances, still the 
afore-mentioned martyrs, Eugenia and Pelagius, 
shall not be esteemed the less by us ; yet not, that 
we would regard them without fault in all points, 
for who on earth is perfect ? but we hold that they 
were free from such blemishes as separate one 
from Christ or deprive him of the name of a true 
martyr, though he might suffer for his faith's sake. 
The uprightness of said persons, in faith as well 
as in life, may readily be inferred from the cir- 
cumstances mentioned in the account of the an- 
cients, which, though brief and few, nevertheless 
indicate these things. 

What the faith of Eugenia and Pelagius was, 
appears from their confessions. Eugenia is for this 
reason called martyr, which signifies according to 
the Greek language, the witness; by which name, 
even in and about the time of the apostles, those 
were wont to be called, who had laid down their 
lives, or, at least, had suffered much, for the pure 
and genuine testimony of Jesus their Saviour. 


Of the youth Pelagius, the authors write that he 
confessed his faith and declared that he was ready 
to die (upon said faith) for the name of Christ. 
Also, that in his suffering he called upon no other 
than his Lord Jesus Christ, saying : "O Lord, de- 
liver me out of the hands of my enemies." 

Concerning the life of both of these martyrs, it 
appears to have been upright in every respect, as 
regards the grand resolution which each severally 
had — not only to confess the Lord with the mouth, 
and to follow Him with works in the regeneration, 
but also to honor and magnify His holy name, by 
offering up their lives through a violent death ; as 
well as that they not only had resolved and deter- 
mined to do this, but also actually fulfilled their 
resolution, which is the most important of all. 

From the accounts given we have learned that 
Pelagius said : "I am a Christian, and will remain 
a Christian, and obey only the commandments of 
Christ all the days of my life." He desired to obey 
only the commands of his Saviour, and not human 
inventions, and this, to the end of his life; which 
he also did, according to his ability. Moreover, we 
have not found anything, either of Eugenia or of 
Pelagius, in authentic writers, which conflicts with 
the above good testimony respecting the faith and 
life of said two persons ; nor of priestcraft, nor of 
papal or episcopal inventions, nor of Roman facti- 
tious practices, although these things were much in 
vogue at that time. With this, we think to have 
treated the matter sufficiently, and hence we will 
leave it and proceed in our account. 


A CRUEL PERSECUTION, INSTITUTED BY THE DAN- 
ISH KING WORM AGAINST THE CHRISTIAN 
BELIEVERS, A. D. 926 

It is recorded that A. D. 926, there appeared, 
from another quarter than the one of which we 
have spoken, namely, from Denmark, a cruel ty- 
rant who was king of said country, and whose 
name accorded well with his deeds. His name was 
Worm, and whatever he did was gnawing, biting, 
and devouring, so that he inflicted much vexation, 
misery and grief upon the followers of the Chris- 
tian faith, in persecuting, tormenting, and, as ap- 
pears, killing and destroying them. 

Of this tyrant, P. J. Twisck makes mention with 
these words : "At this time, there was in Denmark, 
King Worm, a cruel tyrant and persecutor of the 
Christian faith." Chron., fol. 329, col. 1, from 
Leonh., Kb. 4, fol. 190. 

Note. — King Worm was not the first tyrant that 
had arisen in Denmark, seeing we spoke in the pre- 
ceding century of the tyranny which the Danes 
then practiced against the Christian believers. Just 
before the account of this Danish persecution we 
lamented, and this, for good reasons, that not 
more than two martyrs are mentioned in the whole 
persecution ; and but very little of their confessions, 
except the circumstances. But here we have still 
more reason for regret, since not a single person 


258 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


is mentioned of all those who were persecuted and 
martyred, though their number, it seems, was very 
great. Moreover, their confession of faith, upon 
which, nevertheless many, to all appearance, suf- 
fered and were martyred or put to death, is not 
mentioned at all. Still, this matter, is not utterly 
devoid of light or information, seeing it is stated 
of the tyrant who instituted said persecution, that 
he was a persecutor of the Christian faith. 

Whether, then, he persecuted all who bore the 
name of Christians, or only the Christian believers 
(who seem to have been had in view here), it is 
evident, that the true and sincere believers, who, 
having no settled place of abode, being scattered 
throughout the world, did not escape ; for they nec- 
essarily often had to live among the nominal, yea, 
among the wicked Christians, with whom they fre- 
quently, when distress arose, had to suffer, though 
not for the same reason. I will not speak of the fact 
that the wicked Christians themselves, whenever it 
pleased them, persecuted the faithful and good 
Christians exceedingly, and, after many torments, 
put them to death in a worse manner than the hea- 
then did; so that, to all appearance, said tyrant, 
when he persecuted the Christian believers, or, as 
our author says, the Christian faith, he puts to 
death not a few, or, at least here, and there some, 
of the orthodox and true Christians, on account of 
their faith; besides what they often had to suffer 
from others. 

Here we will let the matter rest, and will take a 
similar view, and judge in like manner, according 
to the nature and rule of divine love, also of other 
persecutions of the Christian believers, of which we 
may subsequently speak ; taking care, however, not 
to present persecutions concerning which there 
may be evidence that those persecuted were not 
faithful and sincere, but merely apparent or pro- 
fessed Christians ; for the former, we shall search, 
but the latter we shall avoid. We shall now proceed 
in our task. 


A MISERABLE PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS, 

CAUSED BY UDO, THE PRINCE OF THE SLAVES 

(SLAVONIANS), A. D. 950 

About twenty-four years after the beginning of 
the afore-mentioned persecution, instituted by the 
Danish king, a very dark cloud arose over the 
Christian believers, from Slavonia, which threat- 
ened a heavy rain or outpouring of the blood of the 
innocent and defenseless Christians. For, one Udo, 
Prince of the Slaves, manifested himself very cru- 
elly against the Christian believers, and proved to 
be a great tyrant over them. But he finally received 
his reward from one of his own stamp, though a 
Saxon, who took his life. Concerning this, we read 
in Chron. van den Onderg., page 334, col. 2, the 
following words (except the parenthesis) : "Udo, 
the Prince of the Slaves, an atrocious persecutor of 
the Christians, and a great tyrant (who lived at 


this time), was thrust through by a Saxon" From 
Hist. Andr., jol. 182. 

Compare this account with the explanation con- 
tained in the note on the persecution of A. D. 926 ; 
as the circumstances of the persecution of A. D. 
950 must be explained in the same manner. 

Note.— A. D. 964, fourteen years after the last 
persecution, the Christians in Syria had to suffer 
much ; yet not so much on their bodies as in their 
property. This was done through the violent pil- 
lage and burning perpetrated by the Saracens, of 
which I have found this account, among others: 
"A. D. 964, in the reign of this Emperor (namely, 
N. Phocas, the fifty-seventh who reigned in the 
Orient, at Constantinople), the Saracens did great 
damage to the Christians in Syria, by robbing and 
burning." See P. J. Twisck, page 340, col. 1, from 
Chron, Melancth., lib. 4. Who shall say that this 
was not brought upon them on account of the con- 
fession of the Christian faith ? or that among said 
people there were not some faithful and sincere 
Christians, who suffered for living according to 
their true faith ? This could hardly be said, much 
less proved, since the orthodox, though sometimes 
few in number, could be found in almost every 
country ; however, since said matter is obscure, we 
will not enter further into it. 


A SEVERE PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS, BY 
THE VANDALS, IN THE BORDERS OF HAM- 
BURG, BRANDENBURG, HAVELBURG, 
AND THE ADJACENT COUNTRIES, 
A. D. 984 

In the time of Emperor Otho III, or A. D. 984, 
Mistavus, King of the Vandals, instituted (accord- 
ing to the testimony of the ancients) a severe perse- 
cution against the Christian believers, in the borders 
of Hamburg, Brandenburg, Havelburg, and the 
adjacent countries ; we will say nothing of his tyr- 
anny at Altenburg, since this, as can be seen, was 
directed chiefly against the Romanists. 

This persecution was caused by the hatred which 
the King of the Vandals held against Otho III, 
because the latter, having intended to give him his 
daughter in marriage, afterwards refused to do it, 
on account of the opposition of Theodoric, Mar- 
grave of Brandenburg, who said that he ought 
not to give such a noble maiden to a dog (so he 
called Mistavus, the King of the Vandals). Mis- 
tavus, enraged at this, resolved to revenge himself 
of it, yet not on those who had injured him, name- 
ly, Otho and Theodoric, who were the chiefs of 
said countries; but on their subjects, who were 
certainly quite innocent of that which their chiefs 
had done ; but this is generally the case that sub- 
jects must suffer for the misdeeds of their rulers. 

He then assailed those Christians who lived near- 
est, persecuting them in an atrocious manner, a 
grievous matter for human nature, but pleasant for 
the spirit, namely, of those who, through love, were 
inseparably united to their God and Saviour, and, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


259 


hence, could say with Paul: "Neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor 
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor 
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to sep- 
arate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord" (Rom. 8:38,39). 

Concerning the tyrant Mistavus, the author of 
their distress, it is stated that he raised a violent 
persecution, A. D. 984, against the Christians liv- 
ing in the countries lying nearest ; also, that Ham- 
burg, Brandenburg, and Havelburg, had their 
share of said persecution. Compare P. J. Twisck, 
page 248, col. 2, with the account of Merula, fol. 
649, and Georg. Hist., lib. 5. 

The reader, in order to understand aright our 
object in noting this persecution, will please read, 
and accept as explanatory of the last-mentioned 
persecution, the different notes which we have 
placed throughout this century. 

Note. — Seven years after the persecution which 
we have just related, namely A. D. 991, the Nor- 
mans came from Denmark into Germany, where 
they began to greatly vex the Christians, which 
lasted about forty years, that is, for over thirty 
years after the close of this century. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 351, col. 1, from Chron. Avont, lib. 4. 
Vine, fol. 502. Moreover, that the Arabians (of 
whom we made mention in our account of the first 
open persecution in this century, for the year 923), 
not only at this time, but from A. D. 622 to 1300, 
like a swarm of destructive grasshoppers, overran 
nearly every country of the known world, to the 
great distress and misery of many Christian be- 
lievers, can be read at large in the history of the 
Turks; of which brief mention is made in A. Mell., 
2d book, fol. 312, col. 4, and fol. 313, col. 1. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

[In the beginning of the eleventh century, the 
celebrated Anselm is introduced, who declares that 
baptism is the "fulfilling of all righteousness ;" that 
the baptisijn of Christ is a "washing of water in the 
word;" that everyone, in his day, was baptized in 
the name and the faith of God ; that believers were 
then baptized upon, or in the name of Christ ; that 
the adults had first to be instructed in the Christian 
doctrine ; that after baptism one must not again lay 
the foundation of repentance from dead works, 
Heb. 6:1-3; that believers are brought into the 
church of Christ (understand, through baptism) ; 
that the twelve Ephesian men (Acts 19) were re- 
baptized by Paul. 

Algerus speaks of the power and operation of 
God in baptism ; also, that the lasciviousness of the 
flesh is quenched or washed off in or through bap- 
tism. 

Buchard of Worms gives an excellent explana- 


tion touching baptism, saying that the examinations 
in the faith were for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether the holy words of the faith confessed, were 
rooted deeply in the heart of the candidate, and 
whether he intended to continue steadfastly in the 
faith. 

Lanfrancus opposed infant baptism. 

The testimony of Bruno and Berengarius against 
infant baptism as well as against transubstantiation 
is presented and amply commented on; the time 
when they began their doctrine, and when they fin- 
ished the same ; also their death. 

A certain book of ceremonies by the ancient Be- 
roldus is introduced ; what we read in it concern- 
ing baptism ; namely, of the first address made to 
the novices at baptism, the way of wisdom and 
faith, being presented to them. 

An account of Ado Trevirensis, and to what he 
admonished the candidates of his time ; also, how 
he baptized the believing woman Syranna and her 
son, after previous instruction. 

The last witness adduced about baptism is Juo of 
Carnuto, who, besides various other matters, makes 
this salutary and true declaration with regard to 
baptism: "That the novices would confess the 
creed before baptism; that they were then, while 
answering, washed from the old wickedness ; that 
their baptism took place on the holy Easter Sab- 
bath, and that they were first instructed ; that those 
who desired baptism had to throw off, by prayers, 
the yoke of the devil ; that they were asked : Do 
you believe on God," etc. Thereupon it is noted 
what said passages of Juo indicate. Finally it is 
shown that he also opposed monachism, discrimi- 
nation as regards food. Conclusion.] 


The thousandth year is finished ; we have come 
to the years that follow it ; which time is called the 
eleventh century. We will wander through it in 
our thoughts, and investigate how it then stood 
with the true church of God, whether the ordi- 
nances of Christ, especially in the matter of bap- 
tism ; and its requirements, were rightly observed. 
In order to begin and finish this aright, we will 
turn to some of the ancient authors who wrote 
about the condition of said matters, at that time, or, 
at least, who subsequently made mention of what 
then occurred with regard to religion. 

About A. D. 1010, or, as Jacob Mehrning puts 
it, "In the beginning of the eleventh century," there 
manifested himself, by various writings, the cele- 
brated and almost universally known Anselm, who, 
having at one time, it seems, advocated infant bap- 
tism, with divers forcible, yet human arguments, 
now and also subsequently showed, that the oppo- 
site belief had taken root in him; concerning 
which, it is stated, that there have remained even 
to the present day, several excellent things, which 
cannot well be reconciled with infant baptism, yea, 
which, when viewed with spiritual eyes, militate 
against it. Of these we will present a few as ex- 


260 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


amples, confident that, if you judge impartially, 
you will concur with us, or, at least, assent to it.* 

In Bapt. Hist., page 582, from Cent. Magd. XL, 
cap. 4, of baptism, Anselm teaches on Matt. 3, that 
baptism is necessary, and says : "Baptism is a ful- 
filling of all righteousness ; a man may be never so 
righteous, pious, benevolent, abstemious, and 
chaste, yet, it avails him nothing, if he lacks the 
grace of holy baptism." 

It is evident that Anselm has regard here to what 
Jesus Christ our Saviour said to John, when the 
latter refused to baptize him with water. "Suffer 
it to be so now," the Lord said, "for thus it be- 
cometh us to fulfill all righteousness." Matt. 3:15 ; 
which took place, according to Luke 3 :23, when 
Jesus began to be about thirty years of age, and 
the people, who came from Jerusalem, were bap- 
tized by John in Jordan. 

It having been observed then that Anselm has 
regard to the baptism of Christ, and that Christ 
calls it the fulfilling of all righteousness, it is man- 
ifest, that he does not speak of infant baptism 
here, since in the same no righteousness at all, much 
less, all righteousness, can be fulfilled ; which is the 
more obvious, when he says, in the same place, 
that however righteous, pious, benevolent, abste- 
mious and chaste one might be, it would avail him 
nothing, if he lacked the grace of holy baptism: 
for, righteousness, piety, etc., are not exercises or 
works of infants, but only of intelligent, yea, of 
devout persons. 

On the same page, Anselm, on Ephes. 5, says: 
"The baptism of Christ is a washing of water in 
the word ; if you take away the water, it is no bap- 
tism ; if you take away the word, it is likewise no 
baptism." 

What else is indicated thereby, than that the 
Word of God cannot be separated from baptism? 
which Word of God, in baptism, does not consist 
simply in this, that a few words, of holy Scripture 
are pronounced in or over baptism, or over those 
who are baptized; but that the word of faith is 
preached to the candidates, before and at baptism. 
Mark 16:15, 16; Rom. 10:8. 

On page 583, num.. 6. Anselm (Enarrat. in 
Evang.) says: "That the Father was heard in a 
voice ; that the Holy Ghost descended in the form 
of a dove ; and that the Son, in His humanity, was 
baptized ; this clearly indicates the Holy Trinity, in 
whose name and in the belief of which, everyone 
of us is baptized." 

Here he again has reference to the baptism of 
Christ, concerning which the holy evangelists state, 
that, when He, being about thirty years of age, 
was baptized, the heavens were opened above Him ; 


* With regard to what is attributed to Anselm, concerning the 
suspicion in reference to infant baptism, namely, that he (on Eph. 4 
and Heb. 10.) agreed with Meginhard (de Fide at Gunth.), we let 
those say, who can show more evidence of it, than we have yet 
met with. In the mean time, we have weighty reasons, which induce 
us to show the contrary concerning him. The same is true also with 
regard to what he is said to have written, touching said doctrine, on 
Matt. 15; I Cor. 7, and in "Concordia Gratia, and lib. Arbitrii," 
Lie. ; which things as well as the above, we leave without comment, 
reserving our explanation of them to ourselves. 


that the Holy Ghost descended like a dove upon 
Him ; and that a voice came from heaven (or, from 
God, His heavenly Father) saying: "This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." Matt 
3:16,17; Mark 1:10,11; Luke 3:22. 

All this, as has been stated above, can serve only 
as a type of the baptism of the adult, intelligent, 
and believing followers of Christ ; which Anselm 
plainly indicates, when he says : "In whose name 
and in the belief of which, everyone of us is bap- 
tized." Notice, when he says, "Everyone of us," 
etc., he indicates each severally and all in general, 
namely, all who belonged as members to the church 
of Christ ; so that, according to the language em- 
ployed by him, each and all among them were bap- 
tized, not only in the name of the Holy Trinity, 
but also in or upon the belief of the same. 

On page 585, Anselm, on Rom. 6, says: "We 
are baptized into the death of Christ, that we, be- 
lieving in His death, and following it, may live as 
those who are dead ; but since we, through baptism, 
are dead to sin, we must not again live unto sin, so 
that it is necessary again to die unto it ; for, we are 
baptized into the death, that is, in the likeness of 
the death, of Christ ; that, as He once died, and 
ever lives, even so we, having once died to evil, 
should ever live to the good ; and, as a dead person 
can sin no more ; thus also we, if we have died with 
Christ, shall not let ourselves be entangled again 
in mortal sins. 

The sense of the words of Anselm is this : that 
we must be careful, not to live in sin again after 
baptism, since the former sins, in which we lived, 
have died through baptism, and have been laid in 
the grave as it were, through the death of Christ. 
Hence, said words can only be applied to the bap- 
tism of the believing and penitent, but in no wise to 
the baptism of infants ; because it is certain that the 
things indicated as requisite for baptism cannot 
exist in infants. For, how can baptism be, in in- 
fants, a dying of their former sins, when they have 
never lived in sin ? How can they have their sins 
buried, through baptism, into the death of Christ, 
who never could nor need die unto sin ? 

Thus, Anselm, in the afore-mentioned passage, 
speaks only of the baptism of the adult, intelligent! 
and penitent Christians, who, having died unto 
their former sins, had them buried through bap- 
tism into the death of Christ, to rise to a new life. 
(( Page 588, num. 6, Anselm writes on Matt. 3: 
"The adults had first to be instructed in the Chris- 
tian doctrine." S. Clement and others imposed 
upon those who had lived in wickedness, and, be- 
coming converted, desired to be baptized, a fast of 
seven days, and sometimes more, as a preparation ; 
moreover, a considerable time, before baptism was 
also prescribed to the catechumens who were to be 
baptized." 

N - ( B. "Thus," says the writer who has noted 
this, the light of the testimony of the truth shines 
forth brightly in the midst of the darkness of 
popery. ' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


261 


We will not enlarge on what the writer has added 
here, but turn to words of Anselm, which we can- 
not view without plainly seeing that he treats of the 
baptism of the believing and penitent; for, when 
he speaks of the adults ; of those who were first in- 
structed in the Christian doctrine; of those who, 
having lived in wickedness, becoming converted; 
of those who desired to be baptized ; of the seven 
days' fast imposed upon them ; of the considerable 
time prescribed the catechumens who were to be 
baptized, etc., it is clearly expressed thereby, that 
the baptism of which he here speaks, is far different 
from the baptism of infants, since these things can 
in no wise be said of them. 

On page 593, num. 5, D. Vicecomes quotes, 
lib. 2, cap. 4, the following language of Anselm on 
the words of Paul, Heb. 6:1-3: "We will not lay 
again the foundation of repentance from dead 
works, and of faith toward God, of baptism, of 
doctrine, etc., that is, the doctrine which was de- 
livered to you in the beginning." 

He explains the words of the apostle (Heb. 
6:1-3), which, as every one knows, were written 
to the believing Hebrew brethren, who, having ac- 
cepted Christ at the beginning of their faith, had 
had the same sealed through baptism. They are 
here exhorted to constancy in the faith accepted, 
and that they should not return to the principles 
of the Christian religion, upon which they had been 
baptized, but must go on to the perfection of the 
same. This is what Anselm, from said words, 
sought to impress, in his time, upon his fellow- 
believers in the faith, to the end, that they might 
observe their baptism and the confession of the 
same, to the honor of God, the edification of their 
neighbor, and the salvation of their own souls. 

On same page, Vicecomes, lib. 5, cap. 35, Anselm, 
on Luke 2, says : "Even as Jesus, after the purifi- 
cation, was brought into the Temple, so those who 
become believers, are brought into the church of 
Christ." 

When he speaks of those who, becoming believ- 
ers, are brought into the church of Christ, he has 
respect to such as, having been baptized upon faith, 
are through this means, recognized and received as 
members in the Christian church; for this is the 
purpose for which this passage of Anselm is ad- 
duced in Bapt. Hist. 

As to the twelve Ephesian men, of whom we 
read, Acts 19:1-5, who had been baptized with the 
baptism of John, he asserts in his explanation on 
Matt. 3, that they were rebaptized by Paul, assign- 
ing as a reason of this, that the baptism of John 
could not properly give remission of sins, because 
the blood of Christ which blots out sin, had not 
then been shed; again, because John, who was a 
forerunner of Christ's preaching, was also (ac- 
cording to his explanation) a forerunner of bap- 
tism. 

About A. D. 1024, close to, or a little after, the 
time of Anselm, a place is given to one Algerus, 
who, though writing somewhat obscurely on bap- 


tism, gives so much light on the subject, that an 
impartial Christian heart can readily decide from 
it, that, in said matter, he followed the evangelical 
truth, according to the doctrine of Christ and the 
practice of His apostles ; in proof of which we will 
present a few examples. 

In Bapt. Hist, page 583. — Algerus says {lib. 3, 
de Euchar, cap. 3) : "Who can regenerate a child 
of the devil to a child of God, except God the Fa- 
ther? Who can justify sinners, except He who 
died for our sins? And, since everything which 
is done in baptism, is spiritual, who can perform 
it, except the Holy Ghost?" 

He tells in the above place, whence baptism has 
its power, and whence its operations chiefly pro- 
ceed ; and certainly, he does not seek, find, or show 
it in the water, as is done by many who, at the 
present day, baptize infants, especially by the 
Romanists ; but he seeks, finds, and shows it in the 
operation of God the Lord, whom he calls by the 
name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. To God the 
Father he ascribes, that He regenerates the candi- 
date from a child of the devil to a child of God. 
Of the Son he states, that He, having died for our 
sins, justifies sinners when they are baptized. Of 
the Holy Ghost he says, that, since all that is done 
in baptism, is spiritual, so all that is effected in 
baptism, is spiritually performed by the Holy 
Ghost. Now, let everyone judge, without preju- 
dice, whether such operations can have place in 
infants, or in adults (when they are baptized) ; 
and we are confident that the instant reply will be, 
that not the former, but the latter, is conformable 
to the truth. 

Page 585, num. 9. Of the power and benefit of 
baptism, Algerus says (lib. 3, de Euchar., cap. 4,) : 
"In order that the grace of God may abound over 
us, it has reference, in the sacramental form 
(namely, of baptism) not so much to worthiness 
and respectability, as to their equal fitness ; for, as 
water quenches, cleanses and purifies, better than 
all other liquids, even so baptism quenches the 
lasciviousness of the flesh, and washes off the im- 
purity of sin, of actual sins as well as," etc. 

Here, again, several things are mentioned, which 
are not applicable to infant baptism, but speak 
sufficiently against it. For, in the first place, when 
it is here said of the grace of God, that it has ref- 
erence, in the sacramental form (namely, of bap- 
tism) not so much to the worthiness or respecta- 
bility, namely, of the persons to whom the sacra- 
mental form, or baptism, may be administered, as 
to their equal fitness ; there is certainly indicated, 
in the candidates, some fitness to which the grace 
of God has regard; but what fitness can there be 
in the candidates, to which the grace of God may 
have regard, if it is not faith in Jesus Christ, true 
repentance, obedience to God's commandments, and 
such like things as are requisite to baptism? 

In the second place, when it is averred in said 
passage, "that baptism quenches the lasciviousness 
of the flesh, and washes off the impurity of sin, of 


262 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


actual sin as well as," etc., it is evident, again, that 
he treats of such a baptism and of such candidates, 
wherein lasciviousness of the flesh, impurity of sin, 
yea, actual sins, etc., can be washed off ; for, other- 
wise he would contradict himself. But what kind 
of persons these are, in whom such sins can have 
place, and who need to be washed from them, 
whether infants or adult persons are meant there- 
by, the intelligent may judge. 

About A. D. 1042. — Or almost in the middle of 
the eleventh century, Buchard of Worms (in Ger- 
many) flourished, who makes mention, among other 
things, of the examinations in the faith, to which it 
was customary, either in his time or before, to sub- 
ject the candidates, at baptism. Concerning this, 
D. Vicecomes (lib. 2, cap. 28), in his allegations 
respecting baptism in the eleventh century, gives 
the following account, which is also found in Bapt. 
Hist., page 592, num. 1 : "Buchard of Worms 
(lib. 6, de Sacram. Eccles.) says: 'The examina- 
tions are for the purpose of ascertaining whether he 
(the candidate), after renouncing Satan, has the 
holy words of the faith confessed, deeply rooted in 
his heart, and intends to continue steadfastly in the 
faith.' " 

This is certainly plain language concerning bap- 
tism upon faith and the confession of the same, 
according to the institution of Christ, and the ex- 
ample of the apostles and the first apostolical 
church ; hence we need add not a word of explana- 
tion, and will therefore proceed to others who, in 
or about that time, taught the same doctrine, and, 
as much as lay in their ability, confirmed it in their 
deeds. 

A. D. 1051. — This is the year in which the 
learned Lanfrancus, who also showed himself op- 
posed to infant baptism, and dissuaded from it, is 
introduced by the writers. See P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 383, col. 1, from Guitmundus, and 
Sebastian Franck, fol. 58. 

A. D. 1060. — Two eminent, learned, and well- 
meaning persons, who were greatly celebrated on. 
account of their great learning and boldness, at 
this time displayed their greatest strength in re- 
jecting infant baptism and other articles of the 
Roman church. One of these was Bruno, Bishop 
of Angiers in France ; the other, Berengarius, his 
deacon. They had begun to teach said doctrine as 
early as the year 1035, and continued therein for 
many years, yea, Berengarius, besides the article 
against transubstantiation, maintained it, as the 
chronicles show, until the year 1079. 

But, in order to sum up all this briefly, we will 
present what is recorded, concerning this matter, 
in the Introduction to the Martyrs' Mirror, page 
48, col. 2, we read: "In A. D. 1035, Berengarius, 
arch deacon of Angiers, in France, together with 
Bruno, the Bishop of said city, began to teach 
against transubstantiation and infant baptism. 
Their doctrine immediately spread throughout 
all France and Germany. Against it, Pope Leo IX 
held, A. D. 1050, two synods, one at Rome, the 


other at Versailles (Baron., A. D. 1050, num. 1), 
in which the doctrine of these two men was con- 
demned. 

Afterwards, when Berengarius did not cease to 
promulgate his doctrine, another synod was held, 
A. D. 1055, at Tours in France (Baron., A. D. 
1055, num. 4), in which Berengarius feigned re- 
pentance ; but as soon as Hildebrand, who after- 
wards became pope, had gone away, he again main- 
tained his doctrine. 

"Afterwards, Pope Nicholas II held a synod 
(Baron., A. D. 1059, num. 3,4), and summoned 
Berengarius before it, who, for the second time, 
either from fear or human weakness, pretended to 
recant, burning the writings of Johannes Scotus, 
from which he had derived his views respecting 
transubstantiation ; but seeing immediately oppor- 
tunity again, he returned to his old belief ; and com- 
posed different writings concerning it, against 
which some others have written. 

"Subsequently, Hildebrand, who had now be- 
come pope, and was called Gregory VII, held a 
synod in Rome, A. D. 1079, where, as Baronius, 
who judges as a Romanist and papist says, Beren- 
garius, again renounced his doctrine. But how 
true this is, we leave to God. 

"It is evident," says the author to the Intro- 
duction, "that he maintained this doctrine for forty- 
four years, and filled Germany and France with it ; 
from which it can be inferred, that the same, even 
as it had itself proceeded from previously existing 
writings, in its turn left many disciples." Introd 
page 48, col. 2, and 49, col. 1. 

But though the doctrine of Bruno and Beren- 
garius commenced in the year 1035 and ended about 
A. D. 1079, as far as these two persons are con- 
cerned (for, otherwise it is a doctrine that began 
with Christ and will end only at the end of the 
world), yet, said doctrine displayed its greatest 
power, through these two persons, and encountered 
the most opposition, about the year 1060, as ap- 
pears from the account of Jac. Mehrning and H. 
Montanus, who unanimously state the following : 

"A. D. 1060, Bruno, Bishop of Angiers, and 
Berengarius, his deacon, rejected infant baptism." 
See Guitmundus, Bishop of Avers, and Durandus, 
Bishop of Luyck. These are their words : "Bruno' 
Bishop of Angiers, and Berengarius of Tours, an- 
nul the baptism of infants as much as is in their 
power; so that they, discarding infant baptism, 
counsel men to plunge themselves without fear into 
the deep abyss of all manner of wickedness ; say- 
ing that they are not to be baptized, until they at- 
tain to years of understanding." Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. 
Hist., pp. 591, 592. H. Montan. Nietighd., pages 
82, 83, from Guitm. in Principio Dialogi de Veri- 
tate Eucharistiae. Durand, in Epist. contra Brunon 
and Berengarium; also, Baron., A. D. 1035, num. 
1 ; also, Alan., lib. 1, contra Hceretic, sui Temporis 
pages 103, 104, 105. ' 

It seems that the matter of the accusation of 
these two men, Bruno and Berengarius, rose to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


263 


such a pitch, that they were subjected to an ex- 
amination, in order to ascertain the grounds of 
their faith, and to judge them accordingly. 

The author of an anonymous manuscript found 
in the library of Baron Caraw. de Clepton., writes 
of the examination of said Bruno, saying, that he 
himself was present when Bruno, the defender of 
Berengarius, was interrogated in regard to his 
faith ; and that they both, Bruno and Berengarius, 
said that infant baptism was not necessary to sal- 
vation. See also /. Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., page 685. 
About A. D. 1068. — D. Vicecomes quotes from 
a manuscript book of ceremonies, by Beroldus, 
which, treating of certain religious ceremonies of 
that time, makes mention also of baptism, and how 
it was administered then among those of whom he 
writes. But, to come to the matter ; when, noting 
from this book, the first address made to novices 
(whom he terms children, according to the manner 
of Christ, who also called His disciples children, 
John 21:5), he says, that, the door having been 
opened, they were thus addressed : "Enter, ye chil- 
dren, into the house of God ; hear your father (the 
teacher) teach you the way of wisdom." Bapt. 
Hist., page 592, num. 3, Vicecom., lib. 2, cap. 43. 
He then relates what occurred when the doors 
were closed, and the novices were in the assembly ; 
how the bishop or teacher then delivered to them the 
symbol, that is, the creed ; and how he presented or 
repeated to them the faith, according to the lan- 
guage of the gospels, and then said: "Hear the 
faith: I believe on God the Father." Above page, 
Vicecom., lib. 3, cap. 14. 

The other circumstances related there we pass 
by ; it suffices us to have seen that then the novices 
(before they were baptized), were taught the way 
of wisdom ; that the faith was presented to them, 
and that they were instructed in it, which are things 
that cannot be done with infants, and, hence, prove, 
that in the church where this practice was observed, 
infant baptism was unknown, or, at least, was not 
practiced there. 

About A. D. 1076, or right after Beroldus, one 
Ado, surnamed Trevirensis, a teacher of that 
time, is introduced ; of whom it is stated that, in 
administering baptism, he admonished the candi- 
dates not only in the knowledge of the faith, but 
also to the practice of it, that is, to fast, to humble 
themselves. Of these matters an instance is given, 
which is related as follows in Bapt. Hist., page 
593, num. 4: "When a certain woman, called 
Syranna, became a believer, he (Ado) thanked 
God for her, imposed a fast upon her, and told 
her how she should humble herself, and having 
thus instructed her, together with her son, he bap- 
tized them." Vicecom., lib. 3, cap. 12. 

A. D. 1090.— At this time lived and wrote, it is 
stated, the teacher and historian Juo, surnamed 
Carnotensis, from the place Carnuto, where he re- 
sided. According to the testimony of ancient writ- 
ers, he opposed common popery in various points of 
doctrine, teaching in such a manner concerning the 


only Mediator, Christ Jesus, church service, 
against monachism, against the difference of meats, 
and of the Supper, that the papists took offense 
thereat, and considered him a seditious and schis- 
matical person. 

Note. — Juo Carnotensis makes some mention 
also of the origin of infant baptism, how the same 
arose in the Roman church. "The church," he 
says, "having now been sufficiently spread and 
gathered among the Gentiles; in order that her 
children, who departed this life before they had 
attained to the years of understanding, might not 
remain strangers to the communion of Christ, it 
was desired to provide them with this medicine of 
salvation (with baptism) ; and thus they were bap- 
tized with the sacrament of faith." Bapt. Hist., pp. 
587, 588, from Cent. Magd. XL, cap. 6. 

However, it is not our purpose to write here of 
all these things ; partly, because this, through de- 
fault of the authors, cannot be done circumstan- 
tially; and partly, because we only intended to 
write something of baptism, with regard to which 
we will also adduce the testimony of Juo. What he 
may have written concerning this subject, in other 
respects, while he was yet unenlightened, we pass 
by, and will only speak of that which he, when he 
had become enlightened and had attained to knowl- 
edge, wrote salutarily and correctly on this article. 
Bapt. Hist., page 588, num. 6, Juo writes : "To 
the hearers of the new life, the apostolic creed is 
delivered, which they publicly confess before bap- 
tism." Ex Meginh. de Fide. 

Page 590, num. 14, the following is quoted from 
Juo: "During the answers to the threefold ques- 
tion, the catechumen (that is, the novice who has 
learned the faith) is washed from the filth of the 
old wickedness (namely, through baptism), and 
puts on the new man." 

Page 594, num. 7. D. Vicecomes (lib. 1, cap. 25) 
quotes the following account from Juo: "Then 
those who were to be baptized on the holy Easter 
Sabbath, were led, in the fourth week of the forty 
days' fast, and on the fourth day of said week, to 
the church (or, to the assembly), to be taught and 
examined in the catechism (that is, in the instruc- 
tion of the faith), and further instructed, how they 
should fight against spiritual wickedness ; yet, their 
baptism was deferred till holy Easter Sabbath." 
Serm. de Sacram. Initiat. 

Same page as above. "On that day, those who 
desire baptism, come to the church (or, to the as- 
sembly) , that they may be received into the order 
(or number) of the catechumens, and may throw 
off, by holy prayers, the yoke of the devil." D. 
Vicecom., lib. 2, cap. 30. 

Page 595. — Juo (from August.) adduces these 
words : "At the water of baptism, before we bap- 
tized you, we asked : Do you believe on God the 
Almighty?" D. Vicecom., lib. 4, cap. 7. 

From these five passages of Juo it is evident, vir- 
tually as well as from the circumstances, that he 
treats of no other baptism than that which is ac- 


264 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


companied with instruction, faith, confession of 
the faith, and observance of the same; in short, 
that he speaks of a baptism which, as appears from 
his own words, cannot well, yea, not at all, be rec- 
onciled with infant baptism. For, in the first pas- 
sage he makes mention of a creed, which the can- 
didates had to confess publicly before baptism. 
In the second passage he speaks of the answers 
which the catechumens gave to the threefold ques- 
tion put to them before baptism ; and that they were 
then washed from the filth of the old wickedness, 
and did put on the new man. In the third passage 
he relates how those who were to be baptized on 
the holy Easter Sabbath, were first examined in 
the faith, and further instructed, in the fourth week 
of the forty days' fast. In the fourth passage he 
says that on that day those who desired baptism, 
came to the church or assembly, to be received 
into the order or number of the catechumens, and 
to pray. In the fifth passage he mentions what the 
candidates were asked at the water of baptism, 
namely, whether they believed on God, the Al- 
mighty. 

All these are things that pertain only to the adult 
and intelligent, and cannot be comprehended, much 
less practiced by infants. 

We will conclude this with the account of P. J. 
Twisck, who, besides what he has mentioned con- 
cerning baptism, briefly notices several other ar- 
ticles which Juo taught contrary to the common be- 
lief of the Roman church. He writes : "Juo, Bish- 
op of Carnuto, zealously taught of Christ, the only 
Mediator, of church service, against monachism, 
against the difference of meats, and of the Supper." 
Chron., page 416, col. 2, from Catal. Test., Tom. 
2, fol. 346. 

It is very probable, since we have never heard 
of his having recanted, that this Juo, who began 
his doctrine, or, at least, maintained it the most 
vigorously, in the year 1090, continued therein to 
the end, and thus concluded the eleventh century 
with it. Hence, we will close here, and see which 
pious witnesses of Jesus Christ suffered at this 
time. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE ELEVENTH 
CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE ELEVENTH 
CENTURY 

[A simile of the moonlight and the stars, which 
shine most in the darkest nights, forms the begin- 
ning of our account, representing the condition of 
this time. 

Fourteen persons, the chiefest of whom was 
called Stephen, are burned as heretics, for the tes- 
timony of the truth, by the papists, A. D. 1022, at 
Orleans in France. 

Then follows a note concerning the accusations 
brought against the afore-mentioned persons ; and 


also, further observations touching said fourteen 
martyrs, according to the accounts of various pa- 
pistic and other writers, noted in the Second Book 
of the Persecutions, fol. 437, col. 3, 4. 

The great craftiness of the papist, Gretserus, in 
altering the titles of the books of the ancients, to the 
detriment of the belief of the Waldenses ; some of 
their martyrs called firstlings, which is circum- 
stantially noticed in the margin. 

Some pious Christians at Goslar, called Mani- 
cheans by the papists, hanged for the confession of 
the evangelical truth, A. D. 1052. It is shown, 1. 
that they claimed to lead a true apostolical life : 2. 
that they would neither lie nor swear ; 3. that they 
maintained that the sacrament of the altar was 
nothing but bread ; 4. that they denied baptism, that 
is, infant baptism. One papist, as Thuan against 
Radulph, etc., opposed to each other in their testi- 
mony against these people. 

Henry and Alfuard, two good Christians, the 
former beheaded in the uttermost parts of Sweden, 
the latter slain among the Normans, for defending 
the evangelical doctrine, A. D. 1067. 

Marginal notice explanatory of their belief. 

Bruno, Bishop of Angiers, and Berengarius, his 
deacon, are condemned in different councils, 
through the Roman pope, on account of their views 
against infant baptism, transubstantiation, the 
mass, etc. ; the first time, A. D. 1050, both together ; 
the second time, A. D. 1079, Berengarius alone. 
The inconstancy of Berengarius in some matters 
is shown, but also his sorrow for it, and his perse- 
verance to the end, on account of which he is ac- 
counted among the martyrs. 

Many of the followers of Berengarius, called 
Berengarians, are anathematized by order of the 
pope, at Piacenza, in Italy, A. D. 1095, and after- 
wards persecuted unto death, about A. D. 1100. 
Conclusion.] 


Even as the shining moon and the glittering stars 
give the most light, and adorn the blue expanse of 
heaven the most gloriously, in the darkest nights, 
so it was also after A. D. 1000, as regards spiritual 
matters, which concern the honor of God and the 
salvation of the souls of men. For, about the year 
1000, as well as many years before and after but 
particularly then, the world lay sunken, as it were, 
in an arctic, six-month's night, through the thick, 
and palpable darkness, which had arisen, with 
heavy vapors of superstitions, from the Roman pit. 
Yet, notwithstanding the state of the times, some 
undefiled persons, as bright heavenly signs, and 
stars, began to shine forth the more, and to let 
their light of evangelical truth illumine the dark 
nights of papal error. Yea, some, like the polar 
star, served as a sign to sail by; I mean, to accom- 
plish safely and in a godly manner, through the 
turbulent waves of perverted worship and human 
inventions, the journey to the heavenly father- 
land. Others, like the morningstar, or the lovely, 
blushing Aurora, announced the approaching day ; 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


265 


we mean, they pointed to the true day of the Chris- 
tian and evangelical worship of God, and revealed 
it, as much as they were able, to those who sat in 
the darkness of error. 

We will no longer speak by simile ; what we mean 
is this : That there were men in those dark times, 
who maintained God's truth, in various points, 
according to the needs of that time, and bore wit- 
ness to and sealed it not only with the mouth, but 
with the deed, yea, with their blood and death. 


FOURTEEN PERSONS, THE CHIEFEST OF WHOM WAS 

CALLED STEPHEN, BURNED AS HERETICS FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF THE TRUTH, BY THE 

PAPISTS, AT ORLEANS, IN FRANCE, 

NEAR THE CLOSE OF A. D. 1022 

A. D. 1022, near the close of the year, it seems, 
or, at the latest, A. D. 1023, there were appre- 
hended and publicly burned, in France, in the pres- 
ence of King Robert, on account of heresy (so- 
called by the papists), certain fourteen persons, 
some of whom were common people, while the 
others were of noble descent,* and of whom the 
chiefest was called Stephen. They were accused 
of having spoken evil of God, and the holy sacra- 
ments, that is, of holy baptism (namely, infant 
baptism, for this was what the papists generally 
practiced, and concerning which disputes were of 
frequent occurrence), and of the body and blood 
of the Lord (that is, the sacrament of the altar, 
which the Romanists were wont to call the body 
and blood of the Lord) ; also of marriage, etc. 

"This appears," says the writer, "to have been 
the first execution (that is, by burning), of persons 
accused of heresy in the Roman church." Contin- 
uing he says : "In an old book we find an account, 
that this heresy was brought into this country 
from across the sea, namely, from Bulgaria, and 
that thence it was spread into other provinces, 
where it subsequently was much in vogue, prin- 
cipally in Languedoc, around Toulouse, and in 
Gascony." 

He also states there, that the people who main- 
tained this doctrine, were called Albigeois, and also 
Bulgarians, because they came from Bulgaria. Vig- 
nierii Hist. Eccl., A. D. 1022, ex Glabro and Mas- 
sonio in Annalibus, and alio Autiquo Authore, 
compared with Abr. Mell., fol. 381, col. 2, and 
fol. 436, col. 1. 

Touching the accusations which were brought 
against the afore-mentioned fourteen persons, they 
were, as is related : That they had spoken against 
the article concerning God ; against the holy sacra- 
ments, both baptism and the sacrament of the altar ; 
against marriage, etc. ; on account of which there 
was inflicted upon them the very cruel, dreadful, 
and miserable death by fire. 

But what they believed and maintained with re- 
gard to said points, according to the account of 
impartial writers, shall be amply explained after- 

* Laymen and nobles, etc., the papist writer says. 


wards, in the Confession of the Albigenses and 
Waldenses, who held the same belief; since said 
persons are held to have been the firstlings of those 
who maintained the doctrine of the Albigenses 
(though long before their general rising). See the 
authors cited above, especially the last one. 

Then it will be seen, that they believed and spoke 
nothing but what we at the present day believe and 
speak ; also, as regards baptism, that they baptized 
believers, and opposed infant baptism ; and, touch- 
ing the Supper, that they observed it according to 
the institution of Christ, but rejected the mass and 
transubstantiation ; again, that they denied revenge, 
the swearing of oaths, auricular confession, the 
invocation of departed saints, purgatory, etc. 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING SAID FOUR- 
TEEN MARTYRS, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNTS 
OF VARIOUS PAPISTIC AND OTHER WRITERS, 
NOTED IN A. MELLINUS' SECOND BOOK 
OF THE PERSECUTIONS, FOL. 437, 
COL. 3, 4 

"Robert Altisidorensis states of said martyrs of 
Orleans, that they were of the best or chiefest lay- 
men of Orleans, and that for this reason a council 
was convened there against them, in which they 
were unanimously condemned and sentenced, as 
heretics, to the fire ; and that they were thus burned 
alive." 

This testimony is confirmed by Johannes, a monk 
of Floriax, who gives a somewhat fuller account 
of the matter, in his letter to Oliva or Olivarius, ab- 
bot of the church of Ansona, saying: "Meanwhile 
I will inform thee of this heresy (thus he calls the 
true faith of these people), which was on Inno- 
cent's day, in the city of Orleans; for it is the 
truth if thou hast heard ought of it. King Robert 
caused fourteen of the best or most nobly born lay- 
men of said city to be burned alive; who, (Oh, 
what a great falsehood!) abominable before God, 
and hated by heaven and earth, utterly denied the 
grace of holy baptism (he means infant baptism, 
for thereupon the grace of salvation was prom- 
ised to children, which these men denied) as well 
as the consecration of the body and blood of the 
Lord, and denied that one could thereby obtain 
remission of sins, after he had committed a crime." 
Masson Annal. Franc., lib. 3, in Hugo and Robert. 

Glaber Radulphus (in Hist. Gall., lib. 3, cap. 8), 
gives a much more circumstantial account of these 
martyrs, relating not only how this (so-called) 
heresy was discovered, but also how it was brought 
to Orleans and propagated ; which we, in order to 
be brief, pass by. 

He mentions, among others, two of these people 
by name, namely, Heribert and Lisoius, who were 
greatly esteemed and beloved by the king and the 
lords of the realm, as long as their case was not 
known. Glaber further relates how they were dis- 
covered. They sought, at Rouen, to bring a cer- 
tain priest over to their belief, through some whom 


266 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Fourteen persons burned as heretics in Orleans, AD 1022 


they probably had expressly sent to this priest, to 
expound to him the mystery of their doctrine, and 
who endeavored to persuade him by saying that 
very soon all the people would fall over to them. 

When the priest understood this, he immediately 
went to Richard, the Count of that city, and told 
him the whole matter. The latter instantly sent 
letters by express messengers to the king, inform- 
ing him of this secret pestilence (as he calls the true 
faith). King Robert, much grieved at this, without 
delay convened a council of many bishops, abbots, 
and other religious persons (thus he calls this 
blood-thirsty council), and, through them, caused 
very strict investigations to be made, both as to the 
authors and adherents of said heresy. When 
inquiry was made among the laymen, as to what 
the belief and faith of each several one was, the 
aforesaid Heribert and Lisoius immediately dis- 
covered themselves, that they differed in their be- 
lief from the Roman church, and afterwards others 
also declared that they adhered to Heribert and 
Lisoius, and that they could in no wise be drawn 
away from their faith. Being interrogated more 


closely, whence and by whom this presumption had 
originated, they gave this answer : "This is what 
you have long called a sect, which you now, though 
late, recognize. But we have waited for a long time, 
that you as well as all others, of whatever law or 
order, might come over and unite with this sect ; 
which, we also believe, will yet take place." 

They then immediately presented their belief, 
undoubtedly after the manner of the Albigenses 
and Waldenses, as shall be shown hereafter. 

When the king and all those present saw that 
they could not be moved from their belief, he com- 
manded that a very large fire of wood should be 
kindled not far from the city, in order that perhaps, 
terrified thereby, they might desist from their be- 
lief. But when they were about to be led out to the 
fire, they cried aloud, saying, that they greatly 
longed for it, and gave themselves into the hands 
of those who were to draw them to the fire. They, 
thirteen in number, were committed to the flames! 
and all who afterwards were found to be their ad- 
herents, were put to death by the same means. 

Again, in the records of the parish church of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


267 


Orleans, called St. Maximus' church, the time is 
specified, when this took place. It occurred, it is 
there stated, publicly at Orleans, A. I). 1022, in the 
twenty-eighth year of King Robert, on the fifth 
induction, when the arch-heretic Stephen and his 
companions were condemned at Orleans, and burnt. 

The above citations are taken from the writings 
of papists; hence, the reader is admonished, to 
judge charitably with regard to the accusations 
which these inveterate adversaries have so bitterly 
cast up against these pious witnesses of Jesus 
Christ. 

Note. — We have related above, that said four- 
teen martyrs have been considered, by the an- 
cients, as the firstlings of the Waldenses ; but the 
papists called them heretics. However, this is not 
to be wondered at; since, in the course of time, 
they adopted the practice of calling heretics and the 
Waldenses by the same name. Of this we will pre- 
sent a few examples. The priest Reinerius wrote 
a book, which he called, Summa contra Hcereticos, 
that is, "A Summary against the Heretics." To 
this book the Jesuits subsequently gave the title 
Contra Waldenses, or, "Against the Waldenses ;" 
as if all the errors opposed in said book, were pe- 
culiar to the Waldenses, which is as untrue as false- 
hood itself. Compare Reinerius' book with A. M., 
2d book, fol. 437, col. 4. 

Everhard Berthuniensis gave to his book the title, 
Antiheretism, which is equivalent to saying Against 
Heretics, etc. ; but the Jesuit Gretserus, when he 
published said book, called it, Everhardus contra 
Waldensen; as if Everhard had written only 
against the Waldenses, notwithstanding only the 
smallest part militates against them. Nevertheless, 
it was sought, by this title, to accuse the poor 
Waldenses of all the heresies mentioned in that 
book. 

Afterwards, one Ermegard wrote a book against 
the grossly erring spirits who maintained in their 
confession, that the world and all visible things 
were not created by God, but (Oh, what an awful 
falsehood!) by Satan; which belief is imputed, by 
most of the ancient writers, to the Manicheans; 
yet, the last mentioned falsifier, namely, Gretserus, 
has not hesitated to head such a page of said book, 
Ermegard against the Waldenses; though the au- 
thor specially refuted the Manicheans, with whom 
the Waldenses had nothing in common. See the 
above-mentioned authors and books, and also the 
comments of Balthasar Lydius on the disputations 
of said persons. Hence it follows from the fore- 
going, that it need not seem strange to the reader, 
that the papists called the orthodox Waldenses, or, 
at least, such as opposed the Roman doctrine, as 
well as the priests and monks, by the odious name 
of Manicheans or heretics, as was frequently the 
case, and shall presently be shown, with regard to 
the good martyrs, who, through the malice of the 
papists, were hanged at Goslar. 


SOME PIOUS CHRISTIANS, CALLED MANICHEANS 

AND HERETICS BY THE PAPISTS, HANGED FOR 

THE CONFESSION OF THE EVANGELICAL 

TRUTH, AT GOSLAR, A. D. 1052 

It grieves us to our very soul, that in regard to 
the testimonies of the holy martyrs, we have to 
resort to the writings of papists, their most inveter- 
ate enemies, as well as to other writers who did not 
hold the same faith with us, and who, consequently, 
made the faithful records of the pious witnesses of 
Jesus our Saviour incline to their opinion, and ex- 
plained them according to their own views. This 
mischief has met us before, and now again falls to 
our lot ; still, we hope that the intelligent and at- 
tentive reader will distinguish light from darkness, 
and judge impartially, and as a Christian. 

Herman Contractus, Count of Veringen, writes 
at the close of his life, hardly one or two years be- 
fore his death, of certain persons at Goslar, who 
were accused by their adversaries, the Romanists, 
of being Manicheans ; for at that time no other or 
better name was known for the true Christians, 
who were opposed to the Roman church, notwith- 
standing they had nothing at all in common with 
the Manicheans; and thus this Herman Contrac- 
tus, a strong maintainer of the papal religion, also 
called these persons, after Roman fashion, Man- 
icheans, saying: "The Emperor Henry III (some 
say II), A. D. 1052, celebrated, at Goslar, the 
Lord's birthday, and there caused some heretics 
(thus he calls the true Christians), who, among 
other perverse opinions according to the sect of 
the Manicheans, abhor the eating of all kinds of 
meat (which he unjustly imputes to these people, 
as shall be shown), and who were condemned, by 
common consent (of the bishops or lords of the 
realm), as heretics; to be hanged on the gallows, 
in order that the contagion should not spread fur- 
ther and contaminate many others. Herm. Contr. 
Chron., A. D. 1052. 

But they cared not so much (A. Mellinus 
writers), about the eating of flesh, as about many 
other points of doctrine, which Herman Contrac- 
tus passes over silently ; namely, such as Radulph 
Ardens makes mention of, relating that at the close 
of said century there were some (so-called) Man- 
icheans at Aix la Chapelle in France. He there 
says (Homil. Dominical 8, post Trinit.) : "Such 
are at the present day the Manichean heretics, who 
have polluted our country of Aix la Chapelle with 
their heresy ; who pretend to lead a true apostolical 
life, saying that they do not lie ; that they do not 
swear, and, under the cloak of abstemiousness, 
they reject the eating of flesh. They also maintain 
that the sacrament of the altar is nothing but mere 
bread ; they deny baptism (namely, infant baptism, 
for this was the point in question) and say that 
none can be saved but those who are baptized by 
their hands." 

It is true that said papistic writer charges them 
with several other things as belonging to their doc- 


268 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


trines, of which we deem it unnecessary to speak 
here, since Mellinus to whom we referred above, 
answers all these for us, saying (2d book, fol. 
437) : "All these errors, except that of baptism and 
of the mass or transubstantiation (that is, against 
the mass and transubstantiation), are unjustly im- 
puted to them by these papistic authors, as Thuan, 
writing of the Waldenses, himself confesses (Hist, 
sui temp. A. D. 1550). He then quotes from 
Thuan the confession of these people, in which no 
errors at all, much less Manichean heresies, are 
found ; but which contains chiefly such things as 
are publicly taught by us, at the present day, and 
maintained with the power and authority of the 
holy and divine Scriptures, against the super- 
stitions of popery. 

Having quoted the confession of these people, 
from Thuan, Mellinus says: "This is certainly a 
square and unfeigned confession of Thuan, which 
alone is sufficient to refute all the preceding slan- 
ders (namely, which had been flung against the 
holy martyrs)." 

Thus, even according to the testimony of the 
papist Thuan, and the statement of the Calvinistic 
Mellinus, the above-mentioned martyrs were not 
guilty of Manichean errors ; they only spoke against 
the Roman church, principally in the matter of 
baptism (that is, infant baptism) and in regard 10 
the mass or transubstantiation ; hence, they may be 
reckoned among the true witnesses of Jesus Christ, 
who testified to their living faith, not only with the 
mouth, but also with their blood, yea, with their 
death; and whom the Lord will hereafter, in the 
resurrection of the just, reward and crown, ac- 
cording to His promise. Rev. 2:10. 

Note. — We here place one papist against an- 
other; Thuan against Radulph. In the mean- 
time, we are induced to receive the best testimony 
concerning said martyrs from these two differing 
writers ; since they both had no other purpose than 
to speak to the detriment of said people. Thuan 
says: "Their points of doctrine are said to be 
these: That the Roman church has forsaken the 
true Christian faith; that she is the Babylonian 
whore, and the dead tree which Christ cursed and 
commanded to be cut down; that therefore no 
obedience is to be rendered to the pope and the 
bishops who consent to his errors ; that Monachism 
is a veritable sink of all the corruption of the 
church, and an infernal pool; that all monastic 
vows are vain and unavailing, and tend only to 
lasciviousness ; that the orders of the priesthood 
are marks of the great beast, of which mention is 
made in the Apocalypse ; that purgatory, the mass, 
church consecration, the worship of saints, masses 
for the dead, etc., are genuine inventions and insti- 
tutions of Satan. These, says the writer, are the 
principal and certain articles of their doctrine. 
The others, concerning marriage (that they deemed 


it evil), the resurrection (that they denied it), the 
state of the soul after death (that they spoke im- 
properly of it) , and concerning meats ( that they re- 
jected all eating of flesh), are unjustly imputed to 
them. Thuan in Hist, de Waldens. Temp., A. D. 
1550, compared with A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 437 
col. 3. ' 

We have shown this the more circumstantially, 
to demonstrate the innocence of said martyrs, and 
that their doctrinal points were not Manichean 
heresies, but strictures upon the Roman church, 
which stirred up the animosity of the papists, so 
that, as it seems, they vented the spleen of their 
manifold accusations against said people. 


HENRY AND ALFUARD, TWO PIOUS CHRISTIANS, 
THE ONE BEHEADED IN THE UTTERMOST 
PARTS OF SWEDEN, THE OTHER SLAIN 
AMONG THE NORMANS, FOR DEFEND- 
ING THE EVANGELICAL DOC- 
TRINE, A. D. 1067 

A. D. 1067, there was a God-fearing man, whose 
name was Henry, and whom the Romish historian 
calls a stranger, perhaps because he was obliged to 
live secretly or as a stranger among the Romanists. 
It is stated of him, that he preached the Gospel of 
Christ in the uttermost parts of Sweden, and that 
he was apprehended for this cause and beheaded 
for the name of Christ. 

Another pious Christian, named Alfuard, after 
living for a long time secretly, yet leading a pure 
and holy life among the Normans, could not thus 
even in secret remain Christ's own. Because he 
sought to protect, or to do good to, his enemy, he 
was slain by his friends, or those at least who ought 
to have been his friends. Adam., in Histor. Sued., 
1067, compared with Abr. Mell, fol. 384, col. 3. 

The records of these two martyrs, Henry and 
Alfuard, are very brief, because the writer, as he 
states, would neither add to, nor take from, the 
truth of the matter, but wished to record it just as 
it was stated to him, which is an evidence of the 
verity of said matter. Therefore we also did not 
feel at liberty to extend the relation of the same, 
or to add, for amplification, the opinions of other 
authors. However, this is not necessary, since, in 
said account, all that is needful for the cognizance 
of said martyrs, is briefly, yet sufficiently, shown. 
For, of Henry it is stated that he preached the 
Gospel of Christ (not papal traditions), and that 
he was apprehended on this account. Of Alfuard 
the author writes, that he lived for a long time 
secretly, though leading a pure and holy life, among 
the Normans ; also, that he could no longer secretly 
remain Christ's own; understand, not the pope's, 
or the so-called mother, the Roman church's own' 
but Christ's own. More might be added, but for 
the well-disposed we deem this sufficient. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


269 


BRUNO, BISHOP OF ANGIERS, AND BERENGARIUS, 
HIS DEACON, CONDEMNED IN SEVERAL COUN- 
CILS, THROUGH THE ROMAN POPE, ON AC- 
COUNT OF THEIR VIEWS AGAINST INFANT 
BAPTISM, TRANSUBSTANTIATION, THE 
MASS, ETC.; THE FIRST TIME, A. D. 
1059, THE LAST TIME, A. D. 1079 

In our account of holy baptism for the year 1060, 
we made mention of Bruno, Bishop of Angiers, and 
Berengarius, his deacon, and showed, according to 
the accounts of different writers, that they, in oppo- 
sition to the common belief of popery, denied in- 
fant baptism and transubstantiation, with all that 
pertains to it, as has been shown in said place. 

Of Bruno we find no further account, only that 
when he was examined he answered as has been 
related ; and that his doctrine, together with that of 
Berengarius, was condemned by Pope Leo IX, in 
two different synods, the one of which was held at 
Rome, and the other at Versailles. But what fur- 
ther happened to him after said papal condemna- 
tion, is not mentioned by the ancients, or, at least, 
has not come to our knowledge. 

But of Berengarius it is stated, that besides the 
afore-mentioned two condemnations by Pope Leo 
the Ninth, which he suffered together with Bruno, 
he was subjected to three examinations and as 
many condemnations, in three successive synods, 
once at Tours, and twice at Rome. But to our sin- 
cere regret we cannot omit mentioning that in the 
last three examinations, either from fear of death 
or for some other reason, he did not acquit himself 
altogether manfully or in a Christianlike manner ; 
inasmuch as in each examination, if what the an- 
cients have written concerning it is correct, he 
denied his belief before men; though after each 
denial, upon regaining his freedom, constrained in 
his conscience, he reavowed the same. 

His denial from whatever cause it may have pro- 
ceeded, was a fault of such magnitude that it could 
not be tolerated even in an ordinary Christian, much 
less in a martyr, unless it be that the name of a 
good Christian or martyr be withheld from him. 
However when, against this, there is taken into 
consideration, the heartfelt sorrow and grief which 
he manifested every time, and that he again taught 
the people as before, and this, as is stated by many, 
to the end of his life ; the name of a Christian, yea, 
even of a martyr (though in weakness), on ac- 
count of the manifold troubles he met with because 
of his belief, may still be accorded him. 

The holy apostle Peter, after his threefold denial 
of Christ, though this was a dreadful sin, was not 
rejected by Christ, when he manifested sincere re- 
pentance ; seeing the Lord afterwards commanded 
him to feed His lambs and sheep, yea, foretold him 
that he should be bound, for His name's sake, and 
glorify God by his death, that is, that he should 
have to die as a martyr, which also happened to 
him in the reign of Nero, as is shown in the first 
century, A. D. 69. 


Berengarius lived to the age of about ninety 
years, according to the papist Baronius, who says 
that he remained separated from the Roman 
church,* as a schismatic, to the end of his life, 
though Bellarmine thinks differently, which we 
leave to him, till better proof than the opinion of a 
monk of Malmsbury, from whom, it seems, Bellar- 
mine has derived his opinion, can be furnished. 
Compare Bellarm., in Chron., A. D. 1058, with 
Hist. Angl., lib. 3, touching the opinion of the 
monk of Malmsbury. 

As regards the time of his death, it is fixed 
A. D. 1088, on the day of Epiphany. The last 
words which he is said to have uttered, are adduced 
by a certain bishop of Cenomana, called Hildebert, 
in the third book of the English History, where he 
says that Berengarius, sighing deeply, said : "To- 
day, on this day of Epiphany, my Lord Jesus 
Christ will appear to me, as I hope unto glory, be- 
cause of my repentance, or, as I fear, on account 
of other things unto punishment." A. Mell., fol. 
395, col. 1. 

These words, it seems, are misinterpreted by the 
monk of Malmsbury, as though Berengarius, in 
speaking of his penitence and good hope, had in- 
tended to imply that, in the aforesaid articles, he 
had returned to the Roman church; and that, in 
mentioning his fear of punishment, he had ref- 
erence to the punishment of which he might have 
stood in fear, because of the views which he had 
maintained against the pope and the Roman church. 
But, besides that we see no clear proof in the opin- 
ion of said monk, this utterance of Berengarius can 
very fitly be taken in another and better sense, 
namely, thus: That Berengarius, when he spoke 
of his repentance and good hope in the appearance 
of Jesus Christ, was confident, that the merciful 
Jesus, his beloved Saviour, because he had now re- 
pented, and was sorry for his denial, to which the 
papists had compelled him, would graciously for- 
give his sins; since the Lord, when His disciple 
Peter had fallen into a like, or still greater sin of 
denial, forgave him when he repented of it. Yet, 
on the other hand, that he was not entirely without 
fear, because he had committed said denial against 
his conscience, and because the Lord is as just as 
He is merciful, especially in punishing sins that 
are committed against the conscience, or with pre- 
meditation. 

Nevertheless, from his words (if they have been 
quoted correctly), it is evident, that his hope was 
greater than his fear, since he speaks first of the 
former, as well as of his sorrow or repentance, yea, 
of the glory of the blessed ; for what else could he 
mean to indicate, when he said: "Today, on this 
day ... my Lord Jesus Christ will appear to 
me, as I hope, unto glory, because of my repent- 
ance" ? As to the words that follow, they seem to 
have been added from Christian carefulness and 
humility, since no living man could stand before 

* A. Mell., fol. 395, ex Baron., in Chron. Eccl., 1088. Art. 15, 
20, 21. 


270 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the justice of God, if He were not merciful ; much 
less one who had notably sinned against His most 
divine and holy Majesty; which agrees with Job 
9:2; Ps. 130:3; and 143:2. 

In the meantime, men had very different views 
respecting the decease of Berengarius; for some, 
namely those who were rigid Romanists, and pa- 
pists, had, it seems, an evil opinion of him ; hence 
they knew nothing good to say of him, as appears 
from the account of Papirius Massonius, who, in 
his history of France, for the year 1088, says : "In 
this year, on the day of Epiphany . . . that cor- 
rupt arch-heretic, Berengarius, who so often de- 
ceived the (Roman) church by feigning to repent 
of his views, departed this life." Annal. Franc, 
lib. 3. 

But others, who were his good friends, had a 
better opinion of him. Among these, the above- 
mentioned Hildebert was not the least ; he, as some 
have observed, composed a very beautiful epitaph 
upon his death, the last words of which were as 
follows: "He (Berengarius) was truly a wise 
man, and, in every respect, perfectly blessed; who 
enriched heaven with his soul, and the earth with 
his body. God grant, that after my death I may live 
and rest with him, and that my lot or inheritance 
may be no better than his." See the above cited 
book, compared with Abr. Mell., fol. 395, col. 1, 2. 

We will close here, and commit his cause to God. 
Meanwhile, the church of God, or, at least, the 
little flock of believers, sustained a great loss in his 
death. Hence, we may say, as was lamentingly 
said by one of old: "The day when Berengarius 
died was an evil day." Sam. Veltius., Geslacht-reg- 
ister, page 128. 


MANY OF THE FOLLOWERS OF BERENGARIUS, 

CALLED BERENGARIANS, ANATHEMATIZED BY 

ORDER OF THE POPE, AT PIACENZA, IN 

ITALY, A. D. 1095, AND AFTERWARDS 

PERSECUTED UNTO DEATH, ABOUT 

A. D. 1100 

It is stated that after the death of Berengarius, 
his doctrine (spoken of above) in reference to 
baptism and the Supper, against the belief of the 
Roman church, gained much favor among his fol- 
lowers, who were called Berengarians; so that 
England, France, Italy, Spain, Germany, and even 
part of the Netherlands, became filled with it. A 
certain writer says : "They did not adhere to Ber- 
engarius as to a reed which is swayed by the wind ; 
and their faith did not rest on men, however pious 
or godly these might have been, but upon the pure 
Word of God, which abides forever." 

Hence, Pope Urban II, A. D. 1095, by constraint 
as it were, convened a great council against them, 
in the city of Piacenza, in Italy; to which there 
came many bishops from Italy, Burgundy, France, 
Germany, Bavaria, and other countries, so that 
there was no church large enough to hold all the 


people, but they had to meet without the city, in an 
open field. 

Bertoleus Constantiensis says, that in this coun- 
cil a canon or rule was established, by which the 
views of Berengarius, which were called a heresy, 
were again, as had repeatedly been done previous- 
ly, anathematized or cursed, but the views of the 
Roman church, confirmed as a precious matter. 
Compare Bertho. Constant., in Chron., A. D. 
1095. Baron. Annal., T. 11, with A. Mell., fol. 395* 
col. 2, 3. 

Hence it came, that a great persecution and dire 
distress arose, particularly about A. D. 1100, over 
said Berengarians, so that, at first, some were ex- 
iled here and there, from the Roman dominion, 
some expelled, and some were punished with death, 
yea, with death by fire, as shall appear more fully 
in the account of the martyrs in the following cen- 
tury. In the meantime, see A. M. fol. 395. col. 3, 
from Thuan., Pref. Also, in Hist. Henr. 4. 

AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE TWELFTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

[The last year of the preceding century, namely, 
A. D. 1100, is introduced here by way of introduc- 
tion to the following century ; in which it is shown, 
that in and shortly after that time there existed the 
Waldenses and Albigeois, of whom we shall speak 
more fully about the middle of this century. 

For the year 1105, some persons are introduced, 
who opposed infant baptism, transubstantiation, 
and the Roman church; also some, for the year 
1119, who condemned the mass. 

Certain people, who held the same views as 
were afterwards held in the time of Peter Waldus. 
Their views against the pope, infant baptism, the 
mass, image worship, secular power of the church, 
persecution, etc. 

Rupert Tuiciensis gives an excellent exposition 
of the baptism of the ancients ; he teaches, that, in 
order to be baptized, one must first believe, and 
confess the faith ; that many who are baptized with 
water, are not renewed inwardly, because their 
heart is not right, though they make confession 
with the mouth ; that the truly baptized, from serv- 
ants of sin, become children of God; that the 
Word of God was preached to the Christian youth 
throughout the whole year to prepare them for 
baptism. What a certain pedobaptist, D. J. V., 
has written on said words of Rupertus; what 
P. J. Twisck and H. Montanus have noted from 
the writings of Rupert; that even some learned 
men of the Roman church accorded with Rupert. 
Johannes Bohemius and Ludovicus Vives, and their 
belief against the Roman church. 

Many Christians at Aries, Narbonne, Toulouse, 
m Gascony, and other parts of France, called 
Petrobrusians ; they, according to Peter, abbot 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


271 


of Cluny, reproved the abuses of the Roman 
church. 

Of Arnald of Brescia, and Peter Abelard, who 
also opposed infant baptism. 

Henricus Petri Tholossanus opposes fifteen ar- 
ticles to the papists, which are all fully stated. 

Some peasants in France, called Apostolics, also 
teach against infant baptism, purgatory, praying 
for the dead, invocation of the saints. 

The Albigenses, from the province Albi, and the 
Waldenses, the followers of Peter Waldus, now 
arise; the conversion of Peter Waldus, and how 
he, having separated from the Roman church, 
gathered unto himself much people, to whom he 
taught the doctrine of the holy Gospel, and who 
became his followers. 

Of the dispersion and the different names of the 
Waldenses; that there were three divisions of 
them, one of which agreed in all articles of re- 
ligion with the Anabaptists ; that said people were 
called Anabaptists ; that they rejected infant bap- 
tism ; their views with regard to the office of sec- 
ular authority, against war, the swearing of oaths, 
and against nearly all articles of the Roman church ; 
full statement of the confession of faith of the 
Waldenses, in fourteen articles; another confes- 
sion of theirs, in twelve articles, made to those of 
Merindol and Cabriere ; some precepts, which they 
left to their church ; some testimonies by ancient 
writers, respecting the virtuous life of the Wal- 
denses; how they have been unjustly accused by 
their inquisitors and accusers; the time in which 
the Waldenses lived and nourished, namely, more 
than three hundred years, in France, as well as in 
Italy; the places where they sojourned; that al- 
most a thousand towns were filled with them. 
Conclusion.] 


As a fire of small coals, when water is poured 
over it, though emitting a spark occasionally, yet 
smoulders for the most part, stifled as it were, by 
the smoke, but finally breaks forth with great pow- 
er, so that the flame, leaping above the smoke, can 
no longer be extinguished with water, or kept 
down ; so it was, in the twelfth century with the 
fire of the Gospel, and particularly as regards the 
article of baptism upon faith. Over this, the pope 
of Rome, with his cardinals, bishops, priests, and 
monks, had thus poured, in the preceding century, 
the water of so many false doctrines, that scarcely 
a few sparks could rise before it was instantly 
sought to extinguish them, till finally through the 
contentions and dissensions of the Romish so- 
called clergy, each striving to rise above the other, 
the fire of the Gospel, as having been, it was sup- 
posed, sufficiently quenched, was left, in some 
measure unmolested; in consequence of which it 
began to rekindle and burn with such power that 
its flames, having surmounted the smoke of papal 
superstitions, could not be extinguished by the 
water of persecution, suffering, or death ; yea, the 


severest persecutions and the greatest torments 
were, at that time, like oil in the fire. 

This shall be shown in the proper place ; but first 
we will speak of the persons who then opposed in- 
fant baptism and other Roman superstitions, and, 
in order to do this systematically, we will begin 
thus: 

For A. D. 1100, the last year of the eleventh, or 
the beginning of the twelfth century P. J. Twisck 
gives this account : "It appears from writers, that 
at this time and shortly after, there existed the 
Waldenses and the Albigeois, who opposed the 
papal errors, and infant baptism, and had to suffer 
much misery and persecution from the tyrants." 
Chron.j page 423, col. 1. However, in the proper 
place we shall speak more fully of it. 

A. D. 1105. — This is the year in which mention 
is made by writers of certain persons who were ac- 
cused of having no good opinion of infant baptism 
as well as of the transubstantiation of the bread 
and wine into the body and blood of Christ ; and of 
reviling the Roman church. P. J. Twisck, page 428, 
col. 2, from Mend., fol. 726 ; also, H. Mont., p. 83. 

We briefly mention this here, simply to show the 
belief of those people ; however, when we come to 
the account of the martyrs of this time, we shall 
show how many there were of these persons, what 
befell them on account of their faith, and where, 
and through whom this happened. 

A. D. 1119. — It is recorded that at this time 
there were certain people, who, under the name of 
religion, besides other things of the Roman church, 
also reviled infant baptism and the mass. /. Mehrn., 
Bapt. Hist., page 685, from J oh. de Oppido, in- 
quisit. Tholoss., in Chron. Also, A. Mell., fol. 422, 
col. 1. 

A. D. 1120. — Jean Paul Perrin Lionnois makes 
mention, in his History of the IValdenses and Albi- 
genses, 3d part, 3d book, cap. 1, pages 163, 164, of 
a certain manuscript dated A. D. 1120, containing 
certain sermons of such people as were afterwards, 
in the time of Peter Waldus, called Waldenses and 
Albigenses. Besides said sermons, there is also a 
tract against the pope of Rome, who is there called 
antichrist. 

But above all it is worthy of note, that among the 
marks ascribed there to antichrist, infant baptism 
upon a dead faith is also enumerated, and is called 
the third work of antichrist. Then there are further 
denounced, the mass, image worship, and relics, or 
the bones of the saints. 

"The sixth work of antichrist," these people 
said, "consists in this, that he tolerates open sins, 
and does not excommunicate or separate the im- 
penitent." 

"The seventh work of antichrist consists in this, 
that he does not govern or protect his unity through 
the Holy Spirit, but by secular power, uniting the 
latter with spiritual things, for his aid." 

"The eighth work of antichrist is, that he perse- 
cutes the members of the church of Christ, searches 
out, apprehends and kills them." 


272 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Thus it is quite evident, that in these early times, 
there were already very many who not only con- 
fessed the purity of the true faith, but even at- 
tacked, with spiritual weapons from God's holy 
Word, the Roman see, notwithstanding, as appears 
from the eighth work of antichrist, they were per- 
secuted, searched out, apprehended and killed ; <>f 
which we shall speak more fully in the proper 
place. 

A. D. 1124. — At this time, appeared Rupert 
Tuiciensis with many writings. He did not hesi- 
tate to point out the decay, and the manifold su- 
perstitions of the Roman church, presenting at the 
same time, the practice of the first Christian and 
the apostolic church; by which course he gave 
the Romanists of his time sufficient cause to be 
ashamed and convinced, especially with regard to 
the abuse of baptism, which originally had been ad- 
ministered upon faith, but was now given by them 
to infants. All this we hope to show in proper or- 
der, from the writings he has left. 

First of all he establishes, that in order to be 
truly baptized, faith and confession of the same 
are required. 

Jac. Mehrning, Bapt. Hist., page 659. Rupert 
(lib. 13, on John 18) says : "Everyone that is to 
be baptized, must first believe and confess, and not 
until then be baptized, upon (or into) the death of 
Christ, and be buried with Him by baptism in order 
to arise." 

Who does not see that Rupert here censures and 
refutes the practice of those who at his time, name- 
ly, among the Roman church, baptized infants, 
without regard to faith or confession of the same, 
as well as without dying unto, and burying of, for- 
mer sins, much less, with arising unto a new life, 
since these things cannot exist in infants ; for why 
should he have connected faith, confession of it, 
and baptism, if he had not considered them as be- 
longing together ? Why should he say, that every- 
one that is to be baptized, must first believe and 
confess? which is just what Christ taught, Mark 
16:16, and Philip required of the Ethiopian, Acts 
8:37. 

Thus it is also with what he says of being bap- 
tized upon, or into, the death of Christ, and of 
being buried with Him by baptism, in order to arise, 
etc. ; for this the apostle applies to those who, hav- 
ing been baptized upon their faith, had become 
members of the church at Rome, Rom. 6:3, 4, 
whose faith was spoken of throughout the whole 
world, Rom. 1 :8. 

Page 657, Rupert (lib., 11 on John 15) says: 
"They (the teachers) can visibly administer water 
baptism, but they cannot give the Holy Spirit, in 
whom, nevertheless, all the virtue of baptism con- 
sists." 

These are words that overthrow the authority 
and power of the Romish priests, who, when bap- 
tizing infants, were wont to pretend that they did 
not only wet them with water, but that they also 
expelled Satan from them, and imparted the Holy 


Ghost, which they supposed to bring about by cer- 
tain exorcisms and blessings; but this is op- 
posed by Rupert, with the afore-mentioned words. 
( Same page. Rupert (lib. 3, on John 2) says: 
"There are many who are indeed baptized with 
water, but are nevertheless not renewed in the spir- 
it of their mind, because they do not put off the 
works of the old man, though they are baptized in 
the water, and confess that they put on the new 
man." 

Here the reason is shown, why many, though 
baptized with water, are not renewed in the spirit 
of their mind ; however, the blame is charged upon 
the candidates themselves, and not upon the 
teachers, who had not blessed them ; but it is be- 
cause those who were baptized, did not themselves, 
though it was their duty, put off the works of the 
old man. For, God's wisdom (that is, the Spirit of 
God) does not enter into a malicious soul ; nor does 
it dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. Sap. 
1 :4. 

It must be noted, moreover, that when he speaks 
here of being baptized in the water, of confessing 
something, and of putting on the new man, and that 
all this is said of the candidates of his time, it is 
clearly evident, that then, in the church of which 
he speaks, adult and intelligent persons were bap- 
tized, who, confessing their former sins, could put 
on the new man, that is, a sinless and godly life. 
Page 662, num. 17. Rupert (lib. 2, on John 1) 
says : "To be baptized with the Holy Ghost, is to 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, who does not 
[only] point out sin, but helps against sin, making 
us, from servants of sin, children of God." Again : 
"He baptizes us with fire, when He, through the 
Holy Spirit, makes us strong in love, constant in 
faith, shining in knowledge, and burning with good 
zeal." 

He has respect here to the promise which John 
gave to those who came to his baptism, saying: 
"He (Christ) shall baptize you with the Holy 
Ghost, and with fire," Matt. 3:11; John 1:33; 
which as everyone knows, is a promise given not 
to infants, but to adult persons ; hence Rupert also 
has such in view here. 

This appears still more clearly, when he says of 
said candidates, that they, receiving the gift of the 
Holy Ghost, were made, from servants of sin, chil- 
dren of God ; for no one can in truth be called a 
servant of sin, who has not first served sin ; and no 
one can be made a child of God, who has not first 
been a child of the world ; for what one becomes or 
will become, he has not been before. 

With what he says further, of being "strong in 
love, constant in faith, shining in knowledge, and 
burning with good zeal," he certainly indicates that 
he is speaking of such persons as, having attained 
to the use of their reason, have knowledge and 
ability for true love, faith in God, the knowledge of 
Jesus Christ, and a good zeal for the observance of 
the commandments of the Lord ; for by such, and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


273 


none else, can these things be undertaken, and, with 
God's blessing, carried out. 

In another place Rupert relates what customarily 
took place as regards the candidates, baptism itself, 
and some of the circumstances pertaining to it. He 
says : "All the youth of the church, whom they had 
sought to win to God, during the year, through the 
preaching of the word, gave in their names, on the 
fourth day of the week in lent, when Easter ap- 
proached; and when each of them, in the subse- 
quent days till Easter, heard the rule of faith, in 
which he had been begotten and had grown up, he 
finally died (that is, he put to death sin), and rose 
with Christ (that is, to a new life), confessing the 
faith with full confidence, at baptism." Bapt. Hist., 
page 706, D. Vicecom., lib. 2, cap. 14, from Rupert, 
lib. 4, cap. 18. 

Upon this, a certain pedobaptist, D. J. V. (same 
page), once said: "But the Christian fear of God 
pleases us better, since the baptism of the ancients, 
and with it the ancient custom (namely, of baptiz- 
ing upon faith), are abolished, and the believers 
now give to their children their names, at baptism, 
before the eighth day after their birth; for this 
agrees best with the practice of the Jews, who gave 
to their children their names on the eighth day of 
circumcision, and with the custom of the heathen, 
who did the like to their children, on the eighth, 
ninth, or tenth day after their birth." 

This is certainly plain language. He says that the 
baptism of the ancients (that is, the baptism ac- 
cording to the institution of Christ, Mark 16:16), 
and with it also the ancient custom (namely, of bap- 
tizing upon faith), are abolished (that is, by those 
who have introduced infant baptism), and he 
praises this as a Christian fear of God, saying, that 
it pleases him better. How would any one dare 
speak with greater presumption and shamelessness 
of the commandments of Jesus Christ? It grieves 
me to say more about this and I will leave it, add- 
ing, however, the remarks of Jacob Mehrning in 
referring to these words: "A fine arrangement 
this ! Christians are no longer to conform to the 
baptismal ordinance of Christ, but Christ is to ac- 
commodate Himself with His baptism, to the prac- 
tice of the Jews and the custom of the heathen. 
Fie, Satan! how brazenly dost thou here disclose 
thy cloven foot!" 

P. J. Twisck and H. Montanus quote the follow- 
ing words from the writings of Rupert : "Former- 
ly it was customary to renew the children, through- 
out the year, with the Word of God, in order to 
present to them, on the approach of Easter, the 
faith, which they had to confess at baptism ; but, 
that Christianity might grow, and the net of the 
Gospel become full, it pleased the church (that is, 
the Roman church), because of the danger of tem- 
poral death, that the children of Christians should 
be baptized immediately." Chron., page 443, col. 
2, Nietigh., page 83, from Rupert, lib. 4, de Divinis 
Officies, cap. 18. 


"With Rupert," writes Twisck, "several learned 
men of the Roman church in this last century agree, 
as is adduced from their books. John Bohemius 
says: 'Formerly it was customary to administer 
baptism only to those who had previously been in- 
structed in the faith, and who were examined seven 
times in the weeks preceding Easter and Whitsun- 
tide ; but when baptism was afterwards deemed es- 
sential to eternal life, it was ordained that new-born 
infants should be baptized, and that sponsors should 
be provided, who, in their stead, confessed the 
faith, and renounced Satan.'" Same page, from 
/. Boh., lib. 2, de Gent. Morib., Loop der Werelt, 
page 41. 

"This is confirmed by Ludovicus Vives, who 
says : 'No one was brought to baptism among us, 
until he had reached his years, and when he knew 
what the mystic water signified, and himself desired 
to be washed with it.' " Same page, from Lud. 
Viv., in Annat. Cwit. dei Augustini, lib. 1, cap. 
27, also, H. Mont., page 88. 

But, to return to Rupert, Twisck says, he wrote 
not only on baptism, but also composed many other 
books, against the papal views, of the holy Scrip- 
tures, of justification, of two sacraments, of the 
Supper under both forms, and of the spiritual pres- 
ence of Christ. He also says of antichrist, that he 
will send his messengers and preachers throughout 
the whole world ; he will first convert (that is, turn 
to himself) and overcome the kings and princes, 
and then, through their instrumentality, will raise 
persecution over all the nations who will sincerely 
confess Christ. Chron., page 444, col. 1, from Ru- 
pert, in Apoc, lib. 3, cap. 13, Johan. Fobri., fol. 
158, Anth, Jac, fol. 113, John Munst., fol. 140. 

A. D. 1126. — At this time, there were many 
Christians at Aries, Narbonne, Toulouse, in Gas- 
cony, and at different other places in France, who 
were afterwards called Petrobrusians, after one 
Peter Bruis,* their most prominent teacher, and 
who also neither sanctioned nor practiced infant 
baptism. This is attested by Peter, abbot of Cluny, 
who says, in the beginning of his tract against the 
Petrobrusians : "They deny that infants who have 
not yet attained the years of understanding, can 
be saved by the baptism of Christ; and say that 
the faith of another cannot help those who cannot 
use their own faith ; for, according to their view, 
not the faith of another, but each one's own faith 
saves with baptism, because the Lord says: 'He 
that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved ; but 
he that believeth not, shall be damned.' " Bapt. 
Hist., page 598, H. Mont. Nietigh., page 83, from 
Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 12, part 2, fol. 206. Also, 
Baron., A. D. 1126. 

The foregoing is so clearly opposed to infant 
baptism and in favor of baptism upon faith, that 
it is unnecessary to add a single word of explana- 


* This Peter de Bruis, with his disciple Henry, was known, A.D. 
1130, throughout all France, on account of his learning and his 
boldness in reproving the abuses of the Roman church. — Bapt. 
Hist., page 686. 


274 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tion; hence, we will let the matter rest, and pro- 
ceed to the others who maintained and confirmed 
the same belief, both in and after those times. 

Note.— A. D. 1128. Arnulph, Bishop of Lyons, 
an excellent preacher of the Christian doctrine, 
was secretly murdered at this time, through crafti- 
ness, by the clergy, because he reproved too severely 
their luxuriousness, lewdness and gross errors. He 
presented to them, for their imitation, Christ's 
poverty, and His most holy life and walk. P. J. 
Twisck, page 446, col. 1, Chron. Platince, fol. 273, 
Histor. Andr., fol. 57; Histor. Georg., lib. 5. 

A. D. 1131.— About this time, also Hildebert, 
Bishop of Mayence, wrote and preached vehe- 
mently against the power and authority of the pope, 
whom he did not hesitate to charge with tyranny ; 
declaring also, that the city of Rome had been 
made by him the seat of all mischief and wicked- 
ness, because the fear of God and love were ban- 
ished from it. For this he was imprisoned at Rome, 
and treated very cruelly. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
page 448, col. 2, and page 499, col. 1, from Paul 
Merul. Tytthres., fol. 746. 

A. D. 1139. — A little before or after this time, 
as Baronius says, Arnald, a. lector, at Brescia, in 
Italy, taught against infant baptism; as did also 
Peter Abelard, of whom Arnald had obtained his 
doctrine, in France. Concerning this much might 
be related here, but, as we afterwards, in the prop- 
er place, shall have to speak of the martyrdom of 
these persons, we will say no more of this here, 
deeming the statement that they opposed infant 
baptism sufficient for the present. As regards their 
doctrine, as well as what happened to them, see 
Bapt. Hist., page 598, H. Mont. Nietigh., page 84, 
from Baron., A. D. 1139, Num. 3, also A. D. 1145, 
Num. 3, and A. D. 1147, Num. 6. 

Note.— "In the year 1139 or 1140," writes 
P. J. Twisck, "there was in Italy an honorable, 
godly, and learned man, simple in his life, called 
Arnold of Brescia, who dared teach and preach 
mightily against the power and authority of the 
pope and against the monks and priests; on ac- 
count cjf which he was excommunicated by Inno- 
cent, the pope of Rome, and greatly persecuted. 
Arnold, therefore, fled into Switzerland, and re- 
mained at Zurich, exposing all the abominations of 
the papists." Chron., page 466, col. 2, from Hist. 
Georg., lib. 5. Chron. Car., lib. 4. Leonh., lib. 5. 
Zegh., fol. 292. Hist. Eccl. Casp. Hedio., 3d part, 
cap. 11, D. Andr. Hond., lib. 2, cap. 26. Seb. 
Franck., fol. 26, 39. Merul. Tytt., fol. 750, 753, 
757, 760, 761, 853. Jan. Cresp., fol. 281. Of his 
death we shall speak in the history of the martyrs, 
for the year 1145. 

A. D. 1147. — Henricus Petri Tholossanus, that 
is, Henry of Toulouse, at this time and afterwards, 
vigorously attacked infant baptism, with the spir- 
itual weapons of divine truth ; which he had com- 
menced already in the time of Peter Bruis, as was 
mentioned for the year 1126; and he did not cease 
to pursue it until, and after the death of said Peter 


Bruis ; which matter is described by Jacob Mehr- 
ning, Bapt. Hist., page 664 as follows : "Now Peter 
de Bruis having been condemned and burnt, Henry 
strenuously maintained his doctrine ; for he was a 
co-worker with Peter, and had not a few followers 
of his doctrine." Peter Cluniacensis writes, that 
among other things, he taught: 

1. That children may not be baptized or saved 
through the faith of another; but they must be 
baptized and saved through their own faith; for 
baptism without individual faith, saves no one. 

2. That individual faith without baptism is also 
useless. 

3. That children that have not yet reached the 
years of understanding, cannot be saved by the 
baptism of Christ. 

4. That those who have been baptized in infancy 
must, when they become older, be rebaptized, for 
this, he says, is not rebaptizing, but, much rather, 
baptizing aright. 

5. That the body and blood of Christ are not 
offered up in the public mass ; and that this sacrifice 
has no virtue to the salvation of souls. Again, that 
the altars ought to be cast down or broken in 
pieces. 

6. That the doctrine of the forms and of the 
transubstantiation of the sacrament is false. 

7. That the Supper ought not to be administered 
any more (as their accusers charged them with 
maintaining), it having been given once by Christ 
to the apostles. 

8. That the sacrifice of the mass, prayer, alms, 
and such like, works of the living for the dead, are 
folly, wickedness, and of no avail. 

9. That monks and priests should marry, rather 
than commit fornication, and live continually in 
lewdness. 

10. That crucifixes should not be honored or 
worshiped; and the many crosses, which tend to 
superstition, ought much rather to be abolished than 
retained. 

11. That man ought not to build so many costly 
churches, which are frequently not used for hear- 
ing the Word of God; and those that are built 
should be demolished. 

12. That by the bawling church singing of the 
priests and monks God is mocked, and not recon- 
ciled. 

13. That flesh may be eaten on Sunday and 
other days. 

14. That they do not receive all the books of the 
Old and the New Testaments, namely those which 
are called apocryphal; but the Gospel only. 

15. That they believe only the holy Scriptures, 
but do not place the writings of the fathers on an 
equality with them. 

This doctrine, and these articles, Peter Clunia- 
census, who quoted them from the writings of 
Henry, undertook to refute ; but the Centuriatores 
Magdeburgenses accept them for the most part, 
and refute Peter. See concerning this, Bapt. Hist., 
pp. 665, 666. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


211 


Said articles certainly show of what faith and 
persuasion Henry was, and that he did not con- 
tinue to adhere to monachism, although he had first 
embraced it ; for, to be a monk and to make such 
a profession, are incompatible with each other. 
On this account he had to suffer much ignominy 
and calumny from Bernhard, who was regarded 
as a saint among the Romanists. The latter not 
only called him an ignorant fellow and an apostate 
from the Roman church, but also charged him with 
many unbecoming, and ungodly things, though by 
other writers, of greater note and credibility, he 
has been exempted, and acquitted of them. 

We will close our remarks concerning Henry, 
and give, if necessary, a fuller account of the 
matter, when we shall speak of his sufferings for 
the truth ; however, in reference to this, we refer 
the reader briefly, to Bapt. Hist., pages 685, 686, 
from A. M., fol. 423, 424, ex Petr. Cluniac. Duae, 
epist. 141 and 142, ad Comit. Tholoss. and Tholos- 
sanos, idem, Serm., 65, 66, super. Cant, vitae 
Bernh., cap. 3. Cent. Magd. XII., cap. 5, and Illyr. 
Cat. Test. Verit., lib. 15, tit. Petri de Bruis, etc. 

A. D. 1155. This is the time in which, accord- 
ing to Nicholas Sander (but according to Caesar 
Baronius. A. D. 1147), there were in the vicinity 
of Toulouse, in France, certain humble people, 
who, by other writers, are called peasants, but 
who properly were termed Apostolics, that is, fol- 
lowers of the apostles. It is stated of them, that 
they would hold only to the apostolic writings, and 
that they therefore condemned infant baptism, 
as well as purgatory, praying for the dead, the 
invocation of the saints, etc. 

More might be related here, but as some of them 
have attained to the martyrs' crown, and we conse- 
quently shall afterwards have to speak more fully 
with regard to them, we will leave the matter until 
then, being satisfied, meanwhile, that they pro- 
fessed this good profession, and rejected the evil. 
See concerning this, P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 
469, col. 2, from Nicol. Sand., Hist, der Mart. 
Doops-ges., A. 8, D. Anth. Jac., fol. 118 ; also Bapt. 
Hist., page 599. H. Montan. Niehtigh., page 84, 
etc. 

A. D. 1160. — This is the year which, of old, was 
noted with joy by many pious and well-meaning 
Christians, who detested popery; and in which, 
even to this day, not a few of the God-fearing re- 
joice. For then, and especially, shortly after, 
popery and her superstitions received the severest 
blow of which we read in history ; and the divine 
truth, which, almost to this very time, seemed, in 
many respects, to be trampled under foot most 
atrociously, now joyfully raised her head and tri- 
umphed. The doctrine against infant baptism, the 
swearing of oaths, war, in short, against nearly all 
the evil practices and perverted worship of the 
Roman church, of which one formerly dared speak 
only with fear and trembling, and that often only 
in private, was now boldly, yea, frequently, pub- 
licly preached and defended, and, notwithstanding 


the threats of the pope of Rome, maintained. This 
was first commenced chiefly by Peter Waldo at 
Lyons, in France, and carried out by his suc- 
cessors ; however, in order to treat the matter sys- 
tematically, we will begin with the conversion of 
Peter Waldo, and then go on to his successors. 


OF THE CONVERSION OF PETER WALDO, AND THE 
RISE OF THE WALDENSES, ETC. 

M. Matthias Flaccius Illyricus (in his Catalog. 
Testitum Veritatis, between fol. 263, and fol. 277, 
according to Jac. Mehrning in Bapt. Hist., page 
601), writes: "About A. D. 1160, several of the 
principal citizens of Lyons were together, con- 
versing on various matters, as is customary in the 
summer season, in Italy and France. As they were 
thus standing together, one of them suddenly fell 
down to the ground and expired, before their 
eyes. 

"This awful occurrence, an example of the mor- 
tality of man, and of the divine wrath, terrified 
one of their number, namely, Peter Waldo, a man 
who was very wealthy. He began to reflect and re- 
solved (impelled, no doubt, by the Holy Spirit), 
to repent, amend his life, and be more diligent in 
the fear of God than he had hitherto been. He 
therefore began to distribute alms liberally, and at 
convenient seasons, to put his household and others 
who came to him, in mind of the good, and to ad- 
monish them to repentance and true godliness. 

"When he had thus for some time, done much 
good to the poor, and was becoming the longer the 
more zealous to learn, as well as to teach others, the 
people also came to him more and more ; he there- 
fore began to present to them, not his own ideas, 
but the holy Scriptures, and to expound and ex- 
plain the same in the common French language. 

"But the bishop and the prelates, who, as Christ 
says, have the key of heaven, and yet do not go in 
themselves, nor will suffer others to enter, were 
greatly vexed that this (in their opinion) unlearned 
and common man, should bring the holy Scrip- 
tures into the vernacular language, and expound the 
same, and that already great numbers came into 
his house, whom he instructed and admonished. 

"However, he was greatly in earnest, to promote 
both the honor of God and the salvation of men ; 
and the people were so eager for the Word of God, 
which, in the churches, was not preached pure, nor 
publicly, that they could not be turned away by the 
command of these papistic Pharisees and high 
priests ; hence, both the teacher and those taught 
said, that one ought to obey God rather than men. 

"Waldo therefore resolved, notwithstanding the 
commands of the wicked, to sustain the hungry 
Christians not only with his temporal living, which, 
owing to the liberal distribution, decreased day by 
day, but also with the Word of God, and good in- 
structions and admonitions ; and since the prelates, 
by tyranny and unchristian decrees, sought to sup- 
press and exterminate the simple and true preach- 


276 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ing of the Word of God, sufficient reason was thus 
given to Waldo and his adherents, to inquire the 
more diligently into the religion and intentions of 
the priests, and to speak the more boldly against 
them. 

"The contest with the priests becoming the long- 
er the more violent, more confusions and super- 
stitions were discovered in the papistic religion, 
and attacked. At this time Waldo also read, in the 
vernacular, certain testimonies from the writings 
of the fathers, with which he defended his own not 
only with the holy Scriptures, but also with the 
testimonies of the ancients, against the enemies of 
the truth. 

"When the bishop with his papistic Pharisees and 
scribes saw with what constancy Waldo and his 
adherents taught the Word of God, and were 
pained, that their own infamy, ignorance, and 
fickleness in doctrine, and other adsurdities, were 
attacked by Waldo and his followers, they excom- 
municated them one and all. Not long afterwards, 
perceiving that also by excommunication they could 
not be deterred from their purpose, they relegated 
them into misery, persecuted them with imprison- 
ment, the sword, and fire, and treated them very 
atrociously, in order that they might be compelled, 
on account of the existing distress and danger, to 
remove from Lyons and disperse into various 
countries. 

"It is presumable, that the congregations of 
Waldo, or some of them, whom he taught at Lyons, 
were there for four or five years, until they were 
utterly driven away from that city ; for Waldo was 
a man of powerful abilities, and is said to have had 
many relatives, and, hence, could not be checked 
or suppressed in a trice ; besides, he did not imme- 
diately, at the beginning, attack the priests of the 
pope. 

"Finally, these godly people were proceeded 
against with great fury, throughout Christendom ; 
they were sent hither and thither by the inquisitors ; 
for which we have to thank those atrocious wolves 
that go about in sheep's clothing, and call them- 
selves monks." Bapt. Hist., pages 601-4, from 
Matt. Flacc. 

Claude de Rubis relates, that Waldo and his fol- 
lowers were completely expelled from Lyons ; 
while Albert de Capitaneis says, that they could 
not be expelled entirely. We have not been able to 
ascertain anything further about this first perse- 
cution, save that the Waldenses, so called after 
Waldo, after escaping from Lyons, followed him, 
and then dispersed, in different bands, into various 
countries. Balthas. Lydius, History of the Wal- 
denses, printed at Dortrecht, 1624, 1st book of the 
first part, cap. 1, page 3, col. I, from Claud, de Rub. 
Hist., p. 269. Albert de Cap., book of the origin 
of the Waldenses, page 1. 

Note. — Peter Blesensus, a learned man, well 
known by his writings, taught, A. D. 1167, that 
Rome was the true Babylon of which John has 
prophesied; that the officials of the Roman court 


were genuine harpies, and the priests, true calves 
of Bethel, priests of Baal, Egyptian idols, and that 
at Rome everything could be had for money. Chron. 
van den Onderg., page 479, col. 1, from Merula, 
fol. 767. 

About A. D. 1170.— For the year 1160, we gave 
an account of Peter Waldo and his conversion, as 
well as of his having brought many who sat in the 
darkness of popery, to the light of the holy Gospel. 
It is stated of these people, that in doctrine, faith, 
and life they were like the Apostolics, of whom we 
made mention for the year 1155, and stated, that 
they were opposed to infant baptism, purgatory, 
etc. The rise of these people, called Waldenses and 
Albigenses, is fixed about A. D. 1170, that is, ten 
years after Peter Waldo began to teach them; 
which matters shall hereafter be treated more fully 
and circumstantially. Compare Bapt. Hist., page 
599, with Nietigh., page 85 ; also, Introduction to 
the Martyrs'" Mirror, fol. 50, col. 1, 2, (although 
the principal rising of said people is there fixed 
A. D. 1176) from Bar. in Chron., A. D. 1176, 
num. 1, 2, 3. 

Note. — It appears from several ancient writers, 
that the Waldenses, or, at least, people who held 
the same belief, existed long before the year 1170, 
yea, before 1160; seeing that already in the year 
1160 they had increased to such an extent, that 
they were summoned to Rome before a synod, and 
were condemned there as obstinate heretics. Johan. 
de Oppido. The same occurred A. D. 1164, in the 
synod of Tours, Bapt. Hist., p. 676. Hence, when 
their beginning is fixed A. D. 1170, this must not 
be understood of their origin, but of their rising, 
progress, and greatest prosperity. 


OF THE DISPERSION AND THE VARIOUS NAMES OF 

THE WALDENSES OR FOLLOWERS OF PETER 

WALDO 

When Peter Waldo with his adherents, through 
the cruel hatred of the papists, had to leave the city 
of Lyons, on account of his faith, they became dis- 
tributed and scattered into different parts of the 
world, and, hence, received various appellations, 
with regard to the places where they resided, as 
well as with regard to their faith, and to the accu- 
sations _ brought against them, especially by the 
Romanists. 

In the History of the Waldenses, by D. Balthasar 
Lydius, 1st book of the first part, cap. 3, page 4, 
col. 2, and page 5, col. 1, the following account is 
found of the various names of said people: 

"They, in the first place, called them Waldenses, 
after Waldo, who was a citizen of Lyons : and, after 
the district of Albi, they called them Albigenses. 

"And because those who adhered to the doctrine 

of Waldo, left Lyons, stripped of all human means, 

having had to leave behind the most of their goods, 

they were derisively called, The Poor Men of 

.yons. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


277 


"In Dauphine they were by way of derision 
called Chaignards, that is, Dogs. 

"Also because a part of them crossed the Alps, 
they were called Transmontani. 

"After Joseph, one of Waldo's disciples who 
preached in the bishopric of Dije, Lower Dauphine, 
they were called Josephists. 

"In England they were called Lollards, after 
Lollardus, one of those who preached there. 

"After two priests, Henry and Esperon, who 
taught the doctrine of Waldo in Languedoc, they 
were called Henricians and Esperonists. 

"After Arnold, one of their pastors or teachers, 
who preached in Albigeois, they were called Ar- 
noldists. 

"In Province they were called, in an unknown 
tongue, Siccars. 

"In Italy they were called Fratricellii, that is, 
Little Brothers, because they lived like brothers in 
true unity. 

"Also, as they observed no other day of rest or 
holiday, than Sunday, they were styled Insabbathi 
or Insabbathas, that is, Sabbathless, or not observ- 
ing Sabbaths. 

"Because they were continually subject to, and 
underwent sufferings, they were called Patarins or 
Patariens, that is, Sufferers, from the Latin word 
paii, to suffer. 

"Because they, as poor wanderers, fled and 
traveled from country to country, they were 
termed Passagenes, that is, Travelers or Vagrants. 

"In Germany they were called Gazares, which 
signifies, Accursed and Abominable; but thus the 
pope of Rome has always been accustomed to call 
those who oppose the Roman faith. 

"In Flanders they were called Turilupini, that 
is, Dwellers with Wolves, because, on account of 
persecution, they were often compelled to hide and 
live in wildernesses and forests, in close proximity 
to wolves. 

"Sometimes they were named after the region 
or district where they lived, as Albigenses, from 
Albi; Toulousians, from Toulouse; Lombards, 
from Lombardy; Picards, from Picardy; Lyon- 
ists, from Lyons; Bohemians, from Bohemia." 

Thereafter, the origin and cause of said names, 
according to Jean Paul Perrin Lyonnois, who has 
noted the same, is further explained by D. Baltha- 
sar Lydius, in his treatise on the Various names 
of the Waldenses, 3d chapter of Perrin, from page 
48, col. 1, to page 82, col. 2 ; in which the true inno- 
cence and unrightness of said people, though they 
were sometimes called bad names, is demonstrated 
in all simplicity and clearness. 

But that nothing may be wanting here, we will, 
for additional information, subjoin several other 
names of the Waldenses, passed over by B. Lydius 
(from J. P. Perrin), but mentioned by Abr. Mel- 
linus, in his History of the Persecutions and Mar- 
tyrs, for A. D. 1619, fol. 449, col. 3, 4, by misprint, 
but, properly, fol. 439, col. 3, 4, and some of them, 
further explained. For, among other things, he 


writes there, that said people were also "called 
Catharists, that is, Heretics, because they were 
called heretics by their opponents. 

"They were called Publicans, because they were 
compared by the Romanists to publicans or open 
sinners. 

"From the Latin word lolium, signifying weed, 
they were called Lollards; though, as stated above, 
this name was also given them from Lollardus, 
a teacher; however, they were likened to lolium, 
a weed that grows among the corn, because they, 
(the papists said) ought to be rooted out like the 
tares from among the corn; this name they also 
retained in Germany, Sarmatia, Livonio," etc. 

"They were called Runcari because they lived 
near Runcalia, not far from Piacenza. 

"They were called Barrini, from Mount Barrio 
of Barian, a place in the district of Crema, in Italy. 
Also Cotterellos, because they lived on the moun- 
tains known as the Cottian Alps. They were also 
called Comists, because they lived in the city of 
Como, in Italy. 

"In Germany they were called Grubenheimer, 
that is, Cave-dwellers, because necessity compelled 
them to live underground, in pits and caves. 

"In France they were termed Texerants, that is, 
Weavers, because there were many weavers among 
them." 

These and similar names have been given the 
Waldenses in former times ; which we have deemed 
necessary to notice briefly, in order that the read- 
ers, in the sequel of our history, whenever these or 
similar persons are spoken of, may know who and 
of what belief they were. 


OF THE WALDENSES WHO IN ALL RESPECTS WERE 

OF ONE BELIEF WITH THE BAPTISTS (ALSO 

CALLED ANABAPTISTS) J OF WHOM WE 

SHALL SPEAK THROUGHOUT OUR 

ACCOUNT 

Although Peter Waldo, from whom the Wal- 
denses derived their name, was enkindled with a 
true zeal for the divine and evangelical truth ; yea, 
so that in the beginning very many, through his 
doctrine and life, burned as with a heavenly fire, 
and were zealous with him for God and the pure 
truth ; yet not all remained steadfast in the truth ; 
which appears to have been caused from their be- 
ing dispersed into different countries and becoming 
separated from one another, by reason of the perse- 
cutions. 

Some were also called Waldenses though they 
had no fellowship with them, and never were true 
brethren with these people. 

Others, though they had once been members of 
that church, had joined themselves to others, thus 
forsaking, either from fear of death, or for some 
other reason, their former confession, especially in 
the article of the meekness and patience of Jesus. 

Others, notwithstanding that they filled worldly 
offices, yea, even engaged in war, were sometimes, 


278 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


though perversely, as shall be shown in the proper 
place, called Waldenses or Albigenses ; only (as can 
be inferred) for the reason, that some Waldenses 
or Albigenses lived under their protection, who 
were tolerated by connivance, or otherwise counte- 
nanced by them. 

We shall therefore pass over all those concern- 
ing whom there is evidence that they only bore the 
name of Waldenses, but were not such in deed ; and 
turn to those of whom ancient history testifies that 
they confirmed the name by the deed in faith as 
well as in doctrine. 

Sebastian Franck, in Chron. van de Ord. en 
Sect, der Rom., fol. 153, col. 3, writes, that the 
Waldenses were divided into two, or, as some main- 
tain, three divisions, one of which, in all points, 
held the same tenets with the Anabaptists (Bap- 
tists), having all things in common. They baptize 
no infants, and do not believe at all in the presence 
of the Lord's body in the sacrament. A little before 
this, he says : "They invoke no saints or creatures, 
but only God. They do not swear at all, yea, they 
regard this as improper for a Christian. They also 
have no images, and do not bow before or worship 
them. They allege, that the sacrament ought not 
to be worshiped, but Christ, at the right hand of 
His Father, and God, in Spirit and in truth. They 
suffer no beggars among them, but help and assist 
each other as brethren." See concerning them, 
Seb. Franck, Chron. Rom. Ketter, fol. 121, col. 2. 
Introduction, page 50, col. 2. H. Mont. Nietigh., 
page 86, Jac. du Bois contra Montanum, page 158. 

These are the true Waldenses, whom we have 
chosen, and who shall be the aim of our whole 
account. 


HOW THE WALDENSES WERE CALLED ANABAPTIST 
BY THE ROMANISTS THEMSELVES 

This is stated by Jacob Mehrning in different 
places, after he has declared, upon the testimony of 
ancient writers, that they were called by the pe- 
culiar names of those who were previously already 
termed Anabaptists. "From Berengarius," says he, 
(Bapt. Hist., page 666), "they were called Beren- 
srarians ; from Peter de Bruis, Petrobrusians ; from 
Henry. Henricians ; from the apostles, Apostolics ; 
from Peter Waldo, Waldenses, and so forth. 
Among us Germans," he writes (pp. 695, 696), 
"the papist, Lutheran, and Calvinistic pedobaptists 
still contemptuously call them Anabaptists ; in the 
Netherlands they are called Mennists, from Men- 
no Simons, one of their principal teachers." 

Thus, according to this testimony, the ancient 
Waldenses a?reed in faith not only with Beren- 
garius, Peter Bruis, Henry Tholossanus, and the 
Apostolics. of whom we have given an account be- 
fore ; but also with the Mennonites or Baptists of 
the present day. who by nearly all the rest in so- 
called Christendom are stigmatized with the con- 
temptuous appellation of Anabaptists, even as their 
former brethren, the above-mentioned Waldenses, 


were called by those from whom they were sepa- 
rated, namely, the papists. 

On pages 677 and 678, these Waldenses are 
several times called Anabaptists, with the state- 
ment, that long before the time of John Huss, they 
lived in Poland and Bohemia, as well as in France, 
as is noted in that place. From Hagecus, Dubrav- 
ius, Micchovius, Cromerus, Jacob Usserius, Joun- 
etus, M. Glaneus, Keyser's Car. Edict. 

It is true, that by some of said papistic authors 
these people are represented in a very bad light, 
with regard to their faith, as well as their life; 
however, the writer of the History of Baptism re- 
futes said representation, saying (p. 679, from M. 
Flaccius and Cent. Magd.), that they were slan- 
dered by their accusers, and that in doctrine and 
life they were very pious, orthodox, and godly 
Christians. 

Although we might stop here, as having suffi- 
ciently proved, that the ancient Waldenses were 
one people with the Baptists of the present day, 
yet, since this is a much assailed point, we will add, 
for further confirmation, a few more testimonies 
from papistic writers. Abbot Peter Cluniacensis, in 
the first article of Peter Bruis and Henry Tholos- 
sanus, makes mention of the belief of the Wal- 
denses, and says, that "they (with said two men) 
denied that infants in the years of their irrational- 
ity can be saved by the baptism of Christ, and 
maintained, that the faith of another cannot help 
them, because they cannot use their own faith." 
Hence, they said: "Though the infants are bap- 
tized by the papists, yet, since they cannot believe, 
their infancy preventing them, they are by no 
means saved by baptism. But we choose a proper 
time of faith, and do not rebaptize men, as is al- 
leged against us, since they know their God, and 
are prepared to believe on Him ; but we then bap- 
tize them aright, lest it might be said, that they are 
rightly baptized, who, though baptized in infancy, 
are not baptized with the baptism by which sin is 
washed away." This the Waldenses are wont to 
say, says the writer. Bapt. Hist., page 687. 

The writer of the History of Baptism makes the 
following comments on the twelfth of the Magde- 
burg Centuries, pp. 428, 429: "Concerning the 
origin of the Waldenses, who sprung from Peter 
Waldo, Mellinus relates all that has been given 
above from Flaccius. Hence it came, that all his 
disciples, followers and adherents were at that time 
called Anabaptists by the malicious papists; and 
also, Poor Men of Lyons, of which name they 
needed not to be ashamed for Christ's sake, who 
also, for our sakes, became poor, that through His 
poverty He might make us rich. But when they 
subsequently, through persecution, became dis- 
persed from France into other countries, as Eng- 
land, Poland, Livonia, etc., other names were eiven 
them." B. H., p. 695. 

Here it is expressly stated that the Waldenses, 
from ancient times were designated by the papists 
by the name of Anabaptists; doubtless, because 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


279 


they baptized those who had been baptized in their 
infancy again, or, at least, aright, afterwards, when 
they had attained to the faith ; for these are words 
of the Waldenses themselves, as has been shown 
above. Moreover, that said people were scattered 
from France not only into England, Poland, and 
Livonia, but also into many other countries, yea, 
almost over the whole known world, has previously 
been proved in part, and shall hereafter, if neces- 
sary, be demonstrated still more fully. 

Bapt. Hist., page 710. D. Vicecomes {lib. 2, 
cap. 2), gives evidence from Bernhard, that the 
Waldenses were anabaptists, as the ungodly now 
call the Christian baptists (the Baptists), who did 
not believe in infant baptism. 

It is certainly clearly and plainly said, that the 
Waldenses were anabaptists, or, at least, that they 
were called by that name ; the reason why is also 
shown, namely, because they, like the Baptists of 
the present day, did not believe in infant baptism. 

Jacob Mehrning, having noted that the Wal- 
denses were called anabaptists, says (p. 696) : 
"But their right, proper, and true name is, and 
should be, by rights, Christians and Christian- 
baptists; because they, according to the command 
and ordinance of Christ, baptized none but those 
who, according to Christ's baptismal ordinance, 
know Christ from His holy Gospel, believe on 
Him, and upon such faith, are rightly baptized in 
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost." 


VARIOUS TESTIMONIES THAT THE WALDENSES RE- 
JECTED INFANT BAPTISM 

In Jacob Mehrning' s History of Baptism there is 
introduced the testimony of Reinerius, in former 
times a priest of the order of Dominicans, who lived 
in and about the time of the rise of the Waldenses, 
and who gives the following with regard to their 
belief : "They (the Waldenses) say, that the wash- 
ing of baptism given to infants is of no use." See 
concerning this, Bibliotheca Patrum, Tom. 13, 
page 300. Also, H. Montam. Nietigh., page 86, 
which also agrees with the confession that Jean 
Paul Perrin relates in his History of the Wal- 
denses, art. 7. 

On pages 618 and 619, several articles are quoted 
from a very ancient book, which, in papistic man- 
ner, are imputed to them as errors, though they 
spoke correctly and according to truth with regard 
to them. 

1. They reject all the sacraments of the church 
(that is, as they were administered according to the 
Romish custom). 

2. Of the sacrament of holy baptism they say, 
that the questions of the catechism are put in vain 
[that is, to infants, who do not comprehend such 
questions, and do not have the ability to reply to 
them; whereby they sufficiently rejected infant 
baptism, which it was not customary to administer 


without putting said questions to the unintelligent 
infants.] 

3. That the absolution which is pronounced over 
infants (at baptism) is useless. 

4. That the sponsors (who were accustomed to 
recite the creed as out of the child's mouth) do not 
understand what they answer to the priests. 

By the fourth as well as the third article, not only 
is infant baptism itself abolished, but also its ap- 
purtenances of absolution and sponsors are de- 
rided and declared a vain, useless, and ridiculous 
performance. But in the first article already, where 
it is said, that they rejected all the sacraments of 
the (Roman) church, among which sacraments in- 
fant baptism was not one of the least, but one of 
the chief ones ; it is plainly taught, that they did 
not believe at all in infant baptism, but like other 
ancient papal institutions, trampled it under their 
feet and rejected it. 

From said ancient book, which is ascribed to 
Reinerius, the Waldenses are charged with various 
other things respecting their faith; of which, in 
the ninth and tenth charge, the following is said 
with reference to baptism {page 629, art. 9) : "As 
regards baptism, some (he means the Waldenses) 
err, saying: 'Infants are not saved by baptism, 
Mark 16:16. But he that believes and is baptized, 
shall be saved ; but the child does not believe, and, 
hence, is not saved (by baptism).' Thereupon the 
priest Reinerius replies: 'The child is baptized 
upon the faith of the parents ;' ergo." 

Art. 10 confirms the preceding ; only it treats also 
of something more, namely, of the imposition of 
hands, which was customarily done among the 
Waldenses, at baptism, to the adult candidates. 
They also reprove therein the practice which the 
priests had, of interrogating the sponsors who 
would come with children to baptism, in an un- 
known tongue, to which the sponsors then replied, 
without knowing, however, what they had been 
asked. This the Waldenses also take as a reason 
for rejecting infant baptism and the pedobaptistic 
superstitions. However, to this, said Reinerius re- 
plies: "Suffer little children to come unto me." 
Matt. 19. 

On page 733, de Centuria XIII, cap. 5, fol. 216, 
217, it is stated from Cesarius, that the Waldenses 
and Albigenses rejected baptism and said that bap- 
tism possessed no virtue and was of no use ; which 
they understood of infant baptism, which is admin- 
istered without doctrine and faith; for otherwise 
the Waldenses esteemed the baptism of Christ, 
which is administered according to his ordinance, 
very highly. 

P. J. Twisck, beginning to write of the Wal- 
denses for the year 1100, calls them by the name of 
Brethren, and says that they opposed infant bap- 
tism. His words are these : "It is evident from the 
writers, that in these times and shortly after, there 
existed the Waldensian or Albigensian Brethren, 
who opposed the papal errors and infant baptism." 
Chron., page 423, col. 1. 


280 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


This is confirmed by the writers of the Introduc- 
tion to the Martyrs' Mirror, page 50, col. 1, who 
say, With, or from, Baronius, that among other 
things they held that infant baptism is not neces- 
sary to salvation. 

We finally come to the testimony of Jean Paul 
Perrin Lionnoys, who, according to the translation 
of B. Lydius, also confirms the foregoing, although 
the translator, Lydius, as well as J. M. V., after the 
manner of pedobaptists has endeavored to give 
said belief of the Waldenses a different appear- 
ance ; however, it will appear sufficiently from the 
matter itself, who has been the more honest, the 
author or the translator. We will therefore enter 
upon our work and commit this to the judgment of 
the reader. 

In the third chapter of the first book of the His- 
tory of the Waldenses, various things of which the 
papists accused the Waldenses are related, some of 
which were true, and some false. Among them, 
mention is made of their views against infant bap- 
tism, which is expressed in these words: "The 
fourth calumny was, that they rejected infant bap- 
tism." Lib. 1, part 1, Hist. Waldenses, cap. 3, 
page 6, col. 1, from St. Bernh., Horn. 66 on Cant. 

These things, B. Lydius {page 10) endeavors to 
refute, as though the Waldenses deferred the bap- 
tism of their children, not in consequence of their 
belief, but from necessity through want of teach- 
ers ; in which he agrees with his colleague, Abra- 
ham Mellinus, preacher of the Calvinists, in St. 
Anthony's Polder; who, remarking that various 
writers testify that the Waldenses left their chil- 
dren unbaptized, says (Hist. Mart. 435, col. 3) : 
"That the children of the Waldenses often got to 
be rather old, before they could receive baptism, 
was not a voluntary matter on their part, but was 
owing to the lack of teachers ; for the harvest among 
them was great, but the laborers few, who could 
administer the sacraments, especially baptism, 
which they held in great esteem. Hence, as their 
ministers were frequently scattered far and wide, 
through the violence of persecution, or had gone 
into other countries to preach, they were often 
compelled to postpone the baptism of their children, 
and thus it happened that their children not sel- 
dom got to be almost of age, before they could ob- 
tain baptism." Thus far, A. Mellinus. 

But who does not see, that this is only a fab- 
rication, yea, an artifice, by which not only Lydius, 
but also Mellinus, both strong Calvinists, seek to 
force it upon the Waldenses that they omitted 
infant baotism not as a matter of faith, but of ne- 
cessity. For, that they needed not to omit it from 
necessity, or through want of teachers who ad- 
ministered baptism, if, otherwise they had held 
infant baptism to be right, appears from various 
authors ; for they had their churches, which could 
not well be without teachers, not only in kingdoms, 
principalities, earldoms, and provinces, but even 
in nearly every city, as we shall show more fully 
in the proper place. Who, then, can believe, that 


they from necessity, through want of teachers, 
left their children unbaptized, yea, suffered them 
to grow up until they became of age, without bap- 
tism? 

It is evident, therefore, that they did not leave 
their children unbaptized from necessity or 
through want of teachers, but because of their be- 
lief; as holding that baptism without faith could 
not conduce to salvation, as is manifest from the 
confessions which they professed in those times al- 
ready. Thus both B. Lydius and A. Mellinus have 
committed no small blunder, in endeavoring to 
force infant baptism upon the Waldenses, of which 
they apparently never thought in such a light, and 
to deprive them of baptism upon faith, which they 
had confessed so many times. 

But, as the compass, though its point be turned 
East, West, or South, ultimately returns to North ; 
so it is also with the truth : though she be forced 
from her proper place, she will eventually return 
to it. This is the case here ; for, said translator, who 
first intended to prove, that the Waldenses admin- 
istered baptism not only upon faith, but also with- 
out faith, to infants, states in another place, that 
it was always administered with faith and re- 
pentance. For, what else is indicated by the words, 
that they received the sacraments (that is, not only 
the Supper, but also baptism) with faith and re- 
pentance, and this invariably? as is stated in the 
first book of the third part of the History of the 
Waldenses, cap. 9, page 138, col. 1, art. 8. 

If, then, not only the second, but also the first 
sacrament, as it is called, namely baptism, is re- 
ceived with faith and repentance, it cannot be said 
that it was administered to infants, seeing these 
have neither knowledge nor ability either to be- 
lieve, or to manifest repentance, and, hence, lack 
the whole foundation upon which baptism was ad- 
ministered by the Waldenses. 

In the tract of the Waldenses, as to which are the 
works of antichrist, several reproaches against the 
pope of Rome and the Roman church are treated 
of ; among other things, it is said, after the second 
article has been treated : "The third work of anti- 
christ consists in this, that he ascribes the renew- 
ing of the Holy Ghost to the external, dead faith 
(namely, to the creed which the sponsors used to 
recite at baptism, as from the mouth of the chil- 
dren), and that he baptizes the children in that 
faith, pretending that by it baptism and regenera- 
tion must be obtained." History of the Waldenses, 
3d book, 3d part. Tract aq-ainst Antichrist, Art. 3, 
page 162, col. 1, page 163, col. 2. 

In another place there is quoted, from Reinerius, 
this accusation against the Waldenses : "They also 
censure many things in the (oapal) sacraments, and 
say that the baptism of infants is of no avail to 
them." B. Lydius, Tractaet van de Kerke, page 
86, col. 1. 

Having, then, sufficiently proved, that the true 
Waldenses were not only called Anabaptists, but 
that they also actually rejected infant baptism, we 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


281 


will proceed to other articles of their doctrine, 
which they had in common with the present Bap- 
tists.* 


THE BELIEF OF THE ANCIENT WALDENSES RE- 
SPECTING THE OFFICE OF THE SECULAR 
AUTHORITY 

It is altogether manifest, that the true Wal- 
denses, in their beginning as well as in their prog- 
ress, did not accept of secular power and authority, 
but forsook, yea, fled from it. This appears, in the 
first place, from those who were the originators, 
or at least, no insignificant representatives of their 
religion, namely, Peter Waldo and John of Lyons, 
both of them influential and very wealthy men, who 
voluntarily abandoned their riches, and taught their 
followers to do likewise — to resign not only au- 
thority, but also the means which furnished occa- 
sion thereto, and to be content with such things as 
might be needful to them for a modest and sober 
manner of life. For this reason they were called 
not only Waldenses, but also Poor Men of Lyons. 
See Bapt. Hist., page 599. H. Mont., page 85. 

To this belongs also, that, though their number 
was great, they suffered themselves to be martyred 
like sheep for the slaughter, after their expulsion 
from Lyons, to which they had not offered the least 
resistance; concerning which, ancient history af- 
fords an abundant evidence, and which, God grant- 
ing us time, we shall notice more fully in the 
proper place. 

As regards what the Waldenses, long after they 
had left Lyons, believed and taught with reference 
to this point, it is expressed in one of their articles 
as follows: "But He (Christ) also exercised no 
temporal jurisdiction or authority, in the state of 
His humiliation." Abr. Mell., 2d book, fol. 446, 
col. 2. 

By these words the Waldenses indicate that even 
as Christ exercised no temporal authority in the 
state of Hris humiliation, so His followers also, 
here, ought not to exercise any such authority, 
but that they themselves should be subject to sec- 
ular authorities, as the whole article shows, both 
in the preceding and in the following words. 

In another article they say, that they are truly 
poor in spirit, and, for righteousness and faith's 
sake do not exercise authority, but suffer persecu- 
tion. Bapt. Hist., page 617, in the fourth error of 
their first article, as the Romanists call it. 


THE VIEWS OF THE ANCIENT WALDENSES AGAINST 
WAR 

Their departure from Lyons, their wandering 
about in foreign countries and cities, their innocent 
and patient suffering, their steadfastness unto 
death, and all this without any resistance, retalia- 
tion, or self-defense, sufficiently indicated the faith 
they had, and by what spirit they were actuated. 


* "Doopsgesinde", German, "Taufsgejinde". 


But in order to treat this subject in a proper man- 
ner, we will here add what they, as regards this 
matter, believed and, themselves or in the name of 
others, indicated. 

In an old book of parchment, supposed to have 
been written three hundred years ago, by a certain 
priest called Reinerius, various matters are alleged 
as charges against the Waldenses, which he, in a 
certain place, comprises in three articles, each of 
which he then divides into sections. In the tenth 
section he says, "That the pope and all the bishops 
are murderers, because of the war that they carry 
on." Bapt. Hist., page 617. B. Lydius, 3. Tract 
of the Faith of the Waldenses, page 85, col. 1, 
Art. 10. 

This he gives as an article of the faith of the Wal- 
denses, calling it, however, an error or heresy ; but 
how can he, who has not learned otherwise, speak 
differently ? 

Jean Paul Perrin Lionnoys, or his translator, 
charges the Waldenses also with the following, 
which accords well with the preceding: "Sev- 
enthly, (he says) that they (the Waldenses) main- 
tained, that the pope commits mortal sin, when he 
sends forth to make war upon the Turks ; and that 
they likewise commit mortal sin, who obey him in 
waging war against the heretics." History of the 
Waldenses, 1st part, 1st book, cap. 3, page 6, col. 1. 

Who cannot see, that this article of the Wal- 
denses opposes war and everything that can be 
called warfare ? yea, in such a manner, that it does 
not admit of it at all. 

For, if one should look for a just cause to wage 
war, how could he find one more just, than against 
the Turks ? howbeit, it is unjust against all men ; 
but we speak by way of comparison. How could 
one find greater reason to wage war, than against 
those whom he considers heretics? for of such it 
was customary to say that they were worse than 
murderers, seeing murderers kill only the body, 
but they, it was said, souls. Nevertheless, the Wal- 
denses reproved the pope for such action, yea, de- 
clared, that he committed mortal sin thereby ; as 
well as those who allowed themselves to be used as 
instruments by the pope for this purpose. 

What is added by the translator (lib. 1, part 1, 
Hist. Wald., cap. 4, page 11), for explanation, 
which however, serves much more to obscuration, 
we pass by, as unworthy of consideration and which 
will fall of its own accord. 

Yea, it seems, that the Waldenses not only held 
that they themselves might not wage war or kill any 
one, but that they also denied the right of secular 
authorities who wished to be called Christians, to 
kill, even if the persons whom they should put to 
death were malefactors. Concerning this, we find 
in P. J. Twisck's Chronijk, that the "Poor Men," 
"Insabbathi," or "Waldenses," taught, that no 
judge who would be a Christian, might put to death 
any one, not even a malefactor. Chron., page 534, 
col. 2, and page 535, col. 1, from Chron. Seb. Fr., 
fol. 202, and Enca Sylvio. 


282 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Moreover, in the account of Gabriel Prateolus 
and Guilielmo Reginaldus, who have noted the ac- 
cusations regarding the doctrine of the Waldenses, 
also this charge is found against them: Art. 17. 
"They (the Waldenses) teach that no judge may 
condemn any one to any punishment ; to which end 
they adduce that it is written : ' Judge not, that ye 
be not judged.' " A. Mell. 2d book, fol. 434, col. 1, 
Elench. Haeres. Tit. Paup. de Lugd. Calvin Tur- 
cismi., lib. 2, cap. 5. 

Touching what G. Prateolus and G. Reginaldus 
add by way of accusation, we let them answer for 
it. It suffices us that in this they came very near 
the truth ; but they went too far in what the Wal- 
denses understood with regard to capital punish- 
ment, namely, that authorities may punish no one 
with death ; this they applied to every kind of pun- 
ishment, as though the Waldenses had censured the 
authorities for punishing any one, even a great 
offender, in any wise ; which we are not aware that 
the Waldenses ever opposed in any formal article, 
unless some particular one among them held such 
views. 

In the meantime it appears, from the last as well 
as from the preceding testimonies, how exceedingly 
fearful these people were in the matter of punish- 
ing any one with death ; so that they not only de- 
sired to be clear from it themselves, but also spoke 
against the same in the secular authorities. Still 
more did they reprove open warfare, in which not 
only a few, but very many are killed, and this for 
trifling reasons. This being true, we will proceed 
to other points of their faith, which they had in 
common with the Baptists. 

Note. — That the Albigenses also, who were one 
with the Waldenses, were defenseless, peaceable, 
and meek people, living in quiet under certain pa- 
pistic authorities, who protected them. See, among 
others, Introduction, page 50, col. 2, and page 51, 
col. 1, from Baron, in Annal. 


THE VIEWS OF THE ANCIENT WALDENSES AGAINST 
THE SWEARING OF OATHS 

In regard to this point the Waldenses were of the 
same opinion with us, teaching that the fathers of 
the Old Testament were permitted, when necessity 
required it, to swear an oath, in or by the name of 
the Lord; but that for Christians it is quite un- 
lawful, according to the teaching of our Saviour, 
who says : "Ye have heard that it hath been said by 
them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, 
but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths: but 
I say unto you, Swear not at all" (Matt. 5 :33, 34). 

In the first book of the first part of the History 
of the Waldenses, written by Jean Paul Perrin 
Lionnoys, and translated by /. M . V ., chap. 3, page 
6, col. 1, the following point, among others, is ad- 
duced as an accusation against the Waldenses : 
"The sixth (tenet) which they (the Waldenses) 
maintained, was, that men should not swear on any 
account." From Albert de Capit. and Reiner. 


Also, P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 534, col. 2, page 
535, col. 1. 

How the compiler of these things seeks to ex- 
plain said matter, we here pass over, as this is not 
the proper place to speak of it. But when neces- 
sary, we shall consider it our duty to give an ac- 
count of it. 

Far more pertinent and important, however, is 
that which is recorded in Bapt. Hist., page 624, 
where it is stated that in regard to the swearing of 
oaths they believed thus : "Art. 9. That every oath 
is a mortal sin; saying: Swear not at all; but let 
your communication be, Yea, that is yea; Nay, that 
is nay." Extracted from an old book of parch- 
ment, ascribed to Reinerius. Also, A. Mell., 2d 
book, fol. 432, col. 4. 

In the articles ascribed by G. Prateolus and G. 
Reginaldus to the Waldenses, as having consti- 
tuted their faith, mention is made of their views 
in regard to the swearing of oaths, concerning 
which, the eighteenth article contains the follow- 
ing: They (the Waldenses) say that all manner 
of swearing is unlawful for Christians, so that it is 
nowhere lawful to swear, not even before the 
judge, when he constrains one thereto, to testify 
to the truth." A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 434, col. 1. 
Elench. Haeres. Calv. Turcism., lib. 2, cap. 5. 

_ It is true, Mellinus, after the manner of the Cal- 
vinists, of whom he was a leader, endeavors to ex- 
plain, as it were, this article of the Waldenses, as 
though thereby they did not prohibit all swearing 
of oaths, but only frivolous swearing. His words 
are these: "The eighteenth article has reference 
only to unjust and perjurious swearing, as said 
author owns, (he means the author who charges 
them with those articles) saying: 'The occasion 
which led them into this belief, was the fact that 
they so often and continually heard the people 
swear for trifling reasons, and because thereby 
one easily falls into perjury.' " 

But hear what he further says, as he adds a 
jeering comparison, saying: "That the heretics, 
who never swear, are like the devil, of whom we 
do not read that he ever swore." Page 434, col. 3. 

I pray thee, beloved reader, see now, by what 
author Mellinus seeks to establish his case. It is 
true, he first quotes this author when presenting 
the articles of the Waldenses, and this for the rea- 
son that the latter has presented them in such a 
manner that they in every part militate against the 
Roman church ; but now, seeing that said author 
has presented the article respecting the swearing 
of oaths (in which the Waldenses deny all swear- 
ing) in such a way that it militates against the 
Calvinistic church, he begins, in order to make the 
matter doubtful, and to deprive the Waldenses of 
the article relative to nonswearing, to quote from 
said author again, and this, in mocking and im- 
pious language. 

But becoming more discreet, he commences to 
extol that which is expressed in the eighteenth ar- 
ticle, relative to the swearing of the Waldenses, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


283 


above the manner of the papists, saying : "But they 
(the Waldenses) who have learned from Christ, 
'Let your communication be, Yea, yea ; Nay, nay ; 
for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil' 
(Matt. 5:37), will judge, that the papists, among 
whom the practice of daily swearing so frivolously 
is in vogue, are more like that Evil One, that is, the 
devil, than the Waldenses, who guarding against 
lying and swearing, and in their daily conversation, 
are wont to say only, Yea, yea ; Nay, nay ; as this 
same writer acknowledges in regard to them. They 
guard against backbiting, foul words, lying, and 
swearing, and, as another inquisitor has said: 
They are prudent in their words, avoid all lying and 
swearing ; also, they teach to avoid all lying, back- 
biting, and swearing." A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 434, 
col. 3, from Frehed. Hist. Bohem., page 232. 

With these and like passages from the preceding 
authors, Mellinus has sought to embellish the Wal- 
denses, to indicate, that they were pious, upright 
and moral people ; but in the meantime he forgot 
himself, not once thinking that thereby he abun- 
dantly establishes that which in other places he en- 
deavors to refute, namely, that the Waldenses re- 
jected all swearing of oaths. 

Here we see how excellent truth is, that it cannot 
remain hid, but is brought to light even by its oppo- 
nents, either unintentionally or otherwise. I should 
here leave this subject, but as Mellinus has helped 
me on the way to show him his perverted zeal, I 
find it necessary to enter more deeply into the mat- 
ter. This good, but perversely zealous man, having 
put all his arguments aside, plainly relates, from an 
old papistic work of three hundred years ago, that 
the Waldenses believed all oaths to be mortal sins ; 
yea, that they considered him who would com- 
pel another to swear, worse than a murderer. 
A. Mell. 2d book, jol. 432, col. 4, from Illyrie. 
Catal., lib. 15. Tit. Waldens. See also, Conferedit 
Freher. in Hist. Bohem. and Gretser. Sweluc. Tu- 
dens. 

Of such and similar passages the writers who 
present the views of the Waldenses, are full to over- 
flowing, so that it is as clear as the sun, that these 
people rejected the swearing of oaths and every- 
thing that resembled it, even to the saying of the 
word, Verily, or Certainly, etc. ; of which the afore- 
said writer also makes mention, saying : "They (the 
Waldenses) do not say to one another, Verily, Cer- 
tainly, or the like."* Fol. 432, col. 4. 

All this was done from fear of swearing in any 
wise, because the Lord had so expressly said, 
"Swear not at all." Matt. 5 :34 ; hence, they avoided 
all manners which bore any resemblance to the 
swearing of oaths. 

But, lest any should think that the Albigenses, 
who were one people with the Waldenses (though 
others distinguished between them), differed from 
them in their views, belief, and practice as regards 


this point, let him read what is noted in the Mar- 
tyrs' Mirror, edition of 1631, page 51, col. 2; 
where it is stated, from Baronius, for A. D. 1178, 
num. 3, 4: "That many of the Albigenses, from 
fear of severe punishment, feigned return to the 
Roman church ; but when an oath was demanded 
of them they refused to swear; hence they were 
pronounced heretics and solemnly, with burning 
tapers, excommunicated, with an injunction to all 
Catholics, to shun them; and to all (Romanistic) 
princes, to expel them from their dominions. 


* P. J. Twisck, in his Chronijk, shows expressly that the Wal- 
denses would not swear, etc. — Book 14, page 743, col. 2. from Henr. 
Boh., fol. 27. 


OF THE VIEWS OF THE WALDENSES AGAINST 

NEARLY ALL ARTICLES OF THE 

ROMAN CHURCH 

Reinerius, who has written against the Walden- 
ses, gives the following testimony respecting them, 
as the Jesuits confess in their own print. 

Cap. 2, Ingolstadt edition, page 54. "Among 
all the sects that ever were and still are, there is 
none more pernicious for the church than the sect 
of the Lyonists (thus he calls the Waldenses), and 
this for three reasons. 

"Firstly, because it is the most ancient ; for. some 
say that it has existed from the time of Sylvester ; 
others say, from the time of the apostles. 

"Secondly, because it is more general (that is, 
more widely diffused) than other sects ; for there is 
no country where this sect is not found. 

"Thirdly, because, whereas all other sects, by 
their abominable blasphemies against God, cause 
those who hear them, to loathe their belief, this 
sect, on the other hand, has a great semblance of 
godliness, because they lead a godly life before men, 
have a true belief in all things concerning God, and 
hold correct views in regard to all the twelve arti- 
cles of the faith; only they condemn the Roman 
church and the clergy, in which the unlearned too 
readily credit them." 

In the fifth chapter he says that their doctrine 
can be brought under these three heads : 1. Invec- 
tives against the Roman church and her institutions. 

2. Errors against the sacraments and the saints. 

3. Rejection of all church usages. 

He then specifies their doctrine in the following 
manner : 

1. That the Roman church is not the church of 
Christ, but the church of malediction ; and that she 
decayed in the time of Sylvester, when the poison 
of temporal riches insinuated itself. 

2. That all sins and defects are in the Roman 
church, and that they (the Waldenses) alone live 
holily. 

3. That almost no one observes the doctrine of 
the holy Gospel, except they( the Waldenses). 

4. That they, in truth, are poor in spirit, and 
suffer persecution for righteousness and faith's 
sake. 

5. That they are the church of Jesus Christ. 

6. That the Roman church is the whore de- 
scribed in John's Revelation. 


284 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


7. That they condemn all the statutes of the (Ro- 
man) church, because of their multiplicity and 
laboriousness. 

8. That the pope is the head of all errors. 

9. That the prelates are scribes, and the re- 
ligions, or members of orders, Pharisees. 

10. That the popes and bishops, with respect to 
the wars they carry on, are murderers. (This article 
is treated of in another place.) 

11. That God alone is to be obeyed, and not the 
prelates. 

12. That one is not greater than another (be- 
fore the Lord), but that all are brethren. Matt. 23. 

13. That no one may bow his knees before the 
priests ; because the angel said to John, "See thou 
do it not : for I am thy fellow servant." Rev. 22 :9. 

14. That men should not give tithes (to the 
papistic clergy), because it was not customary for- 
merly to give tithes to the church. 

15. That the clergy ought not to have property 
of their own ; because it is written, "The priests, the 
Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no part 
nor inheritance with Israel . . . the Lord is their 
inheritance, as he hath said unto them." Deut. 18. 

16. That the inmates of monasteries ought not 
to have prebends. 

17. That bishops are not entitled to the regalia ; 
these being things which are the prerogative of 
kings and rulers. 

18. That no churches and monasteries ought to 
be founded and endowed. 

19. That wills ought not to be drawn up by 
ecclesiastical persons. 

20. They reject the clergy, on account of their 
idleness, and because they do not labor with their 
hands, as the apostles did. 

21. They reject the names, pope and bishop. 

22. They will not admit any one should be 
compelled to the faith. 

23. They reject all ecclesiastical (papistic) of- 
fices, and pay little regard to ecclesiastical privi- 
leges. 

24. They do not admit, that churches and eccle- 
siastical persons should be exempt from the power 
and punishment of the secular authorities, for. 
under that cover of liberty the clergy used to do as 
they pleased. 

25. They hold in contempt councils, synods, 
and all (papistic) ecclesiastical assemblies. 

26. They say, that all human rules respecting 
persons in orders, are Pharisaical institutions. 

These and various other articles respecting the 
belief of the Waldenses, all directed against the 
pope, the clergy, and the whole Roman church, 
were found in an old parchment written three hun- 
dred years ago, and ascribed to Reinerius. It was 
afterwards followed by various authors. See Baith. 
Lyd. 3. Tract of the W oldens., page 84, col. 1, and 
page' 85, cols. 1, 2. A. Mett., 2d book, fol. 430, 
col 4, fol. 431, cols. 1-4. Bapt. Hist., pages 616, 
617, 618. P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 451, col. 2. 
Also, Nicol. Eymeric, printed at Rome, A. D. 1585. 


THE CONFESSIONS OF THE WALDENSES, OR THEIR 
OWN CREEDS 

Since the Waldenses were very ancient, and were 
spread over very many parts of the world, it came 
that they, from time to time were compelled, by the 
demand of those with and among whom they lived, 
to give an account of their faith ; hence it is, that 
different creeds of the Waldenses were made and 
are still extant. However, it is not our intention, to 
relate them all, but simply to present to you one or 
two, which have been celebrated from ancient 
times, and are judged to be of the best. 

Jean Paul Perrin Lionnoys, in his History of the 
Waldenses, translated from the French into Dutch, 
by J. M. V., first part, first book, page 43, makes 
mention of a certain confession of the Waldenses, 
in which they speak of various matters of faith, 
particularly of the holy Scriptures. It reads thus : 

Article I. We believe and hold fast all that is 
contained in the twelve articles of the Apostolic 
Creed ; and regard as error all that differs there- 
from, and does not agree with said twelve articles. 

Article II. We believe that there is one God, 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 

Article III. We confess and hold as holy canon- 
ical Scriptures, the books of the Holy Bible, namely 
these: The five books of Moses, called Genesis, 
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. The 
books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, The historical 
books, I Samuel, II Samuel, I Kings, II Kings, 
I Chronicles, II Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, 
Esther. The didactic books, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, 
Ecclesiastes, The Song of Solomon. The greater 
prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel. 
The lesser prophets, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, 
Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Hiabakkuk, Zephaniah, 
Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. 

Then follow the books of the Apocrypha, which 
were not received by the Hebrews ; hence we read 
them, as Jerome says, in the preface to the Prov- 
erbs, for the edification of the people, but not for 
the purpose of confirming church doctrines. They 
are : I Esdras, II Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Wisdom ; 
Ecclesiasticus, or Jesus Sirach ; Baruch, with the 
letter of Jeremiah; the additions to the book of 
Esther, from the tenth chapter to the end ; the Song 
of the Three Men in the Fiery Furnace ; the His- 
tory of Susanna; of the Dragon at Babel; the 
three books of the Maccabees. 

Then follow the books of the New Testament. 
The Gospels, by Matthew, Mark, Luke, John. The 
Acts of the Apostles. The epistles of Paul, Romans, 
I Corinthians, II Corinthians, Galatians, Ephe- 
sians, Philippians, Colossians, I Thessalonians, II 
Thessalonians, I Timothy, II Timothy, Titus, Phi- 
lemon, Hebrews, I Peter, II Peter, I John, II John. 
(How it comes that III John is not mentioned, we 
do not know). The epistle of Jude, the Revelation 
of John. 

Article IV. The afore-mentioned books teach 
this: That there is one God, who is omnipotent, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


285 


allwise, and alone good, who created all things 
according to His goodness ; for He created Adam 
after His image and likeness ; but that, through the 
envy of the devil and the disobedience of Adam, 
sin came into the world, and that we are sinners in 
and through Adam. 

Article V. That Christ was promised to the 
fathers, who received the law, that by it they might 
know their sin, unrighteousness and unfitness, and 
long for the coming of Christ; to which end He 
atoned for sin and Himself fulfilled the law. 

Article VI. That Christ was born at the time 
appointed by His Father ; namely, when all man- 
ner of wickedness abounded ; and this not for the 
good works' sake, for they were all sinners ; but to 
show us grace and mercy, as being the true and 
faithful one. 

Article VII. That Christ is our Way, Truth, 
Peace, Righteousness, Shepherd, Advocate, Sacri- 
fice, and High Priest ; who died for the salvation 
of them that believe, and was raised for our justi- 
fication. 

Article VIII. And, consequently, we maintain, 
that there is no other mediator and advocate with 
God the Father, than Jesus Christ. But as regards 
the virgin Mary, we hold, that she was holy, hum- 
ble, and full of grace ; likewise we believe of all the 
other saints, that they . . . wait for the resur- 
rection of their bodies in the day of judgment. 

Article IX. We believe that after this life there 
are but two places; the one for the blessed, the 
other for the damned ; and utterly deny purgatory, 
which is a dream and invention of antichrist against 
truth. 

Article X. We have likewise always believed, 
that all human inventions are an unspeakable abom- 
ination before God ; such as feast days, vigils of 
the saints, the so-called holy water, abstaining 
from flesh on certain days, and like things, es- 
pecially masses. 

Article XI. We abhor all human inventions, as 
proceeding from antichrist, and which carry with 
them destruction, and prevent the freedom of the 
spirit. 

Article XII. We believe that the sacraments are 
signs of holy things, or visible representations of 
invisible grace; and deem it well, that believers 
should from time to time use these visible signs or 
representations, when it is possible for them to do 
so ; nevertheless, we also believe and hold, that said 
believers can be saved, though they do not receive 
these signs ; that is, when they have no place or 
opportunity where to receive or use them. 

Article XIII. We have never confessed that 
there is any other sacrament than baptism and the 
Supper. 

Article XIV. We must honor the secular au- 
thorities with subjection, obedience, willingness, 
and taxes. 


The above fourteen articles are extracted from 
the book called by the Waldenses, "The Spiritual 
Almanac," and from the "Memoirs of George 
Morel." Also, "Hist, of the Waldens.," 1st part, 
1st book, cap. 12, pages 43-48. 

As regards said articles, they are wholesome and 
good, if observed in simplicity ; hence we will leave 
them and proceed to another confession, of said 
Waldenses and Albigenses, drawn up by those of 
Merindol and Cabriere, and sent to the king of 
France. The same was publicly read, as A. Mell- 
inus informs us, in the King's Parliament at Paris, 
and its contents are, word for word, as follows. 

CONFESSION OF THE WALDENSES AND ALBIGENSES, 

DRAWN UP BY THOSE OF MERINDOL AND 

CABRIERE, AND SENT TO THE KING 

OF FRANCE 

I. We believe that there is but one God, who is 
a Spirit, and the Creator of all things, the Father of 
all, over and through or in all, in us all ; who is to 
be worshiped in spirit and in truth ; to whom alone 
we look, as the Giver of life, raiment and food, as 
well as of health and sickness, prosperity and ad- 
versity ; Him we love as the author of all good, and 
fear Him as the discerner of our hearts. 

II. We believe, that Jesus Christ is the Son and 
the image of the Father, in whom dwells all the full- 
ness of the Godhead ; by whom we know the Fath- 
er ; who is our Mediator and Advocate ; and there 
is no other name under heaven given unto men, 
whereby we may be saved. In His name alone we 
worship the Father, and pour out no prayers before 
God, save those contained in the holy Scriptures, 
or which fully agree with the sense of the same. 

III. We believe, that we have the Comforter, 
the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and 
the Son ; by whose inspiration we pray, and through 
whose effectual operation we are regenerated. This 
Holy Ghost operates in us all good works, and by 
Him we are led into all truth. 

IV. We believe in a holy church, the congrega- 
tion of all the elect (believers) of God, from the 
foundation (or beginning) of the world unto the 
end; the head of this church is our Lord Jesus 
Christ. This Church is governed by the Word of 
God, and led by the Holy Ghost. All true Chris- 
tians are bound to live in her ; for she prays with- 
out ceasing for all, being acceptable to God, who 
is her refuge, and out of which church there is no 
salvation. 

V. It is an established rule with us, that the 
ministers of the church, namely, the bishops and 
the pastors, must be blameless in manner and doc- 
trine ; and if not, that they must be removed, and 
others put in their stead, who do better fill their 
place and office. No one takes unto himself this 
honor, unless he is called of God, like Aaron ; feed- 
ing the flock of God, not greedy of filthy lucre, r.or 
lording it over his church; but, with a willing 


286 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


mind, setting a good example to the godly, in word, 
intercourse, love, faith, and purity. 

VI. We believe, that kings, princes, and mag- 
istrates are ordained by the Lord as His ministers, 
to whom obedience ought to be rendered ; for they 
bear the sword, to protect the innocent, and pun- 
ish the evil ; hence we are in duty bound to show 
them all proper honor, and to pay tribute : and no 
one can evade this subjection, if he would be called 
a Christian, according to the example of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ, for He paid tribute; 
but exercised no temporal jurisdiction or domin- 
ion, drawing the sword of the heavenly word in 
the state of His humiliation. 

The last clause is translated by /. M. V., in Hist. 
Wald., thus : Who Himself would pay tribute, but 
was not willing to accept of worldly dominion. 

VII. We believe, that the water in the sacra- 
ment of baptism is an external, visible sign, repre- 
senting to us that which the power of God works 
within us, namely, the renewing of the Spirit, and 
the mortifying of our flesh in Christ Jesus, by 
whom we also become members of the holy church ; 
in which church we show forth the confession of 
our faith, and the reformation of our life. 

VIII. We believe, that the holy sacrament of 
the communion, or of the Supper of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, is a holy memorial and, a thanks- 
giving for the benefits bestowed upon us through 
the death of Christ ; which we all ought to observe 
and celebrate in the congregation of the godly, in 
faith, love, and self-examination ; and that in thus 
receiving the bread and the cup, we also become 
partakers of the body and blood of Christ, as we are 
taught in the holy Scriptures. 

IX. We confess, that marriage is good, honor- 
able and holy, yea, instituted by God Himself, and 
that therefore no one ought to be prohibited from 
marrying, unless the Word of God intervene. 

X. We believe, that the godly and God-fearing 
ought to conduct themselves praiseworthily be- 
fore God, keeping themselves engaged in good 
works, which God has ordained that they should 
walk therein; these works are love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, kindness, piety, modesty, temper- 
ance, and other good works commanded in the 
Scriptures. 

XI. On the other hand, we confess, that we 
must beware of false prophets, whose aim is, to 
draw the people away from the religious worship 
which we owe to the Lord our God alone, and to 
cause them to adhere to the creatures, and put one's 
confidence in them; to neglect the good works 
commanded us in the holy Scriptures, and to fol- 
low the fables of men. 

XII. We hold the Old and the New Testament 
as the rule of our faith, and follow the Symbol or 
Creed of the Apostles. If any one be found who 
says that we confess another doctrine, we shall 
show, if permitted to do it legally before the reg- 
ular judges, that he is greatly in error and deceives 
others. 


The above Confession of the Waldenses and 
Albigenses is taken from Carolus du Moulin' s book 
of the Monarchy of the French, p. 65. A. Mell., 
2d book, fol. 446, col. 1, 2, 3, from Joh. Crespin. 
Acta Mart., lib. 3. Lancelot du Voisin Poplin. Pop- 
linerii Hist. Franc, lib. 1, edition 1585, fol. 26. 
Joach. Comer. Hist. Narrai., p. 565. To be found 
in Car. Molin's book, De Manarchia Francorum, 
in the third volume of his works, edition Paris, 
A. D. 1612, part 2, pp. 578, 579, 616, 617. Also, 
Jean Paul Perrin, Hist, of the Wald., 1st part 
1st book, cap. 13, pp. 49, 50. 

Abraham Mellinus, having noted said confes- 
sion, in his large work, says : "Thus far extends 
the confession of faith of the Waldenses and Albi- 
genses, from whom those of Merindol and Cabriere 
have sprung ; which confession we have placed at 
the close of the twelfth, and in the beginning of the 
thirteenth century, in order to anticipate and refute 
all the shameful doctrines which have been un- 
justly imputed, not only to the Waldenses, as has 
appeared above, but, particularly, also to the Albi- 
genses, as though they had been Manicheans." 
Hist. Mart., 2d book, fol. 446, col. 4. 

But who cannot see from the above confession of 
faith, that it does not differ in substance from the 
confession of the Baptists? notwithstanding A. 
Mellinus endeavors to draw them to the Calvinists 
or so-called Reformed. For, to speak of but a few 
points, just look at their confession in the article 
concerning God ; what do the Waldenses say there ? 
"We believe," say they, "that there is but one 
God, who is a Spirit, the Creator of all things, the 
Father of all, over and through or in all things, in 
us all, who is to be worshiped in spirit and in truth." 
Here certainly no mention is made of three self- 
existent, separate persons in the Divine Being. 
However, by the confession of the Waldenses in 
this point, the truth of Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost constituting the one God, is not excluded ; 
neither is this done in any way by the Baptists. 

Besides the preceding, consider the article con- 
cerning the Son of God, or of the incarnation of 
Christ. What is the confession of the Waldenses 
is this respect? "We believe," say they, "that Jesus 
Christ is the Son and image of the Father, in whom 
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, by whom we 
know the Father." Certainly, nothing is said here, 
that the eternal Son of God took His whole human- 
ity, consisting of body and soul, from the sub- 
stance of the virgin Mary, and that this assumed 
humanity died for us, but that the true, eternal Son 
of God remained alive, as the Calvinists say ; but 
as the apostle says: "He (the man Christ) is the 
image of the invisible God," Col. 1 :15 ; and again : 
"In him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead 
bodily." Col. 2:9, as is also declared in the con- 
fession of the Anabaptists. 

Further, observe the article of the Waldenses re- 
specting the office of authority. "We confess," say 
they, "that kings, princes, and magistrates are 
ordained by the Lord as His ministers, unto whom 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


287 


obedience ought to be rendered." But what do 
they add by way of explanation, that a Christian 
may fill such an office, as the Calvinistic church 
says? Oh, no; but they say (that we must submit 
to it) according to the example of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ ; for He paid tribute, but ex- 
ercised no temporal jurisdiction or dominion, 
drawing the sword of the heavenly word in the 
state of His humiliation ; even as also the Anabap- 
tists confess. 

Continuing, notice their article respecting bap- 
tism. "We believe," say they, "that the water in 
the sacrament of baptism is an external, visible 
sign, representing to us that which the power of 
God works within us, namely, the renewing of the 
spirit and the mortifying of our flesh in Christ 
Jesus, by whom we also become members of the 
holy church, in which church we show forth the 
confession of our faith and the reformation of our 
life." Now, notice; is there a single word said in 
this whole article, about infant baptism, which 
latter is nevertheless so strenuously maintained at 
the present day, by the Calvinistic church ? Oh. no ; 
but the contrary is sufficiently expressed, when it 
is said : "That the water in the sacrament of bap- 
tism is an external, visible sign, representing to us 
that which the power of God works within us, 
namely, the renewing." For, who does not know, 
that infants have no knowledge of this external, 
visible sign? much less, that they should under- 
stand, that said sign represents to them that which 
the power of God should work within them, name- 
ly, the renewing? And, to be brief, how can in- 
fants, who have never walked in the old life, be 
sealed, by baptism, unto a new life? In said ar- 
ticle it is also said, "That baptism signifies the 
mortifying of the flesh." But how can children be 
reminded by baptism, that they must mortify the 
flesh, who, before baptism, never lived after the 
flesh? Hence it follows, that the Waldenses, in 
this article, did not once, it appears, think of in- 
fant baptism. 

Then, A. Mellinus presents certain doctrinal 
points which, for the most part unjustly, he says, 
were imputed, by their adversaries, to the Albi- 
genses, and consequently, also to the Waldenses, 
since they were one people ; they consisted of twen- 
ty-eight articles, the first half, or first fourteen of 
which, he promptly rejects, saying, after present- 
ing them : "These are the chief articles with which 
the Albigenses are charged by the papists; the 
first fourteen have been willfully fabricated, and 
falsely imputed to them, by their adversaries 
(which we will not dispute) ; the other fourteen 
they have, for the most part, in common with the 
Waldenses, as well as with us." 

But, beloved reader, what are the contents of 
these last fourteen articles which A. Mellinus 
seems to admit so unequivocally ? First of all, the 
first article (the fifteenth if we count the preceding 
ones), attracts our attention. "They (the Wal- 
denses) overthrow," says their accuser, "all the 


sacraments of the Roman Catholic church, and 
totally reject holy baptism (that is, the baptism of 
infants, for at that time nothing but infant bap- 
tism was known in the Roman church) as useless 
and unnecessary ; and say that the external water 
of holy baptism differs in no respect from the wa- 
ter in the rivers." 

Coming to the article concerning the swearing of 
oaths, which, reckoned with the preceding, is the 
twenty-sixth, it is expressly stated there: "They 
teach that it is utterly unlawful to swear." A. Mell., 
same book, jot. 447, col. 1. 

Here it is to be observed, that if these last ar- 
ticles, respecting baptism and the swearing of oaths 
are justly imputed to the Waldenses, which has 
previously been proved to be true, and is also ad- 
mitted here by A. Mellinus; whether those who 
made this confession, can justly be reckoned with 
the Calvinistic church, which, as regards said ar- 
ticles, has quite a different confession ; or whether 
they may be reckoned with the church of the Ana- 
baptists, who, as far as these articles are concerned, 
agree with their confession; namely, that infant 
baptism is useless, and that we ought not to swear 
in any wise. 

As regards the knowledge of God and Jesus 
Christ, the office of authority, and other points, it 
has been said above, that the Waldenses and Albi- 
genses did not differ from, but much rather, agreed 
with, the Anabaptistic Christians. 


SOME MORAL PRECEPTS LEFT BY THE WALDENSES 
TO THE CHURCHES 

We turn again to Jean Paul Perrin, whose testi- 
mony regarding matters of the faith of the Wal- 
denses has, from of old, been very highly esteemed. 
Among other things, he gives an account of the 
precepts which they left for the building up of a 
virtuous life ; in regard to which, the following is 
designed to promote a virtuous and God-fearing 
deportment towards those that are without. In the 
History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, 2d part, 
1st book, 10th chapter, page 1 53, we read literally, 
in the Waldensian and in the English [Dutch, the 
original says] tongue, as follows: 

En qual modo le poble se de aver a aquilli guae son 
de fora? 

"How shall our intercourse be with those that are 
without?" 

1. Non amar lo mond. 

We must not love the world. 

2. Fugir la mala consortia. 
We must shun evil company. 

3. Si es possible aver paz cum fuit. 

We must, if possible, live in peace with all 
men. 

4. Non contendre en judici. 
We must not go to law. 

5. Non veniar si meseine. 

We must not avenge ourselves. 


288 


[ARTYRS MIRROR 


6. Amar li ennemic. 

We must love our enemies. 

7. Voter sustenir trabails, calomnias, menasas, 
reprovance, vergognas, eriurias, & totas genera- 
tions de tormens per la verita. 

We must willingly bear labor, calumny, 
threats, rejection, shame, injuries, and all kinds of 
torment, for the truth's sake. 

8. Possessir las armas in patientia. 

We must possess our souls in patience. 

9. Non amenar joug cum li non fidel. 

We must not be yoked together with un- 
believers. 

10. Non communicar a las malas obras, & total- 
ment a las, sabent idolatria, & del servici sentent 
so meseine, & enaimi de las autes. 

We must have no fellowship with evil works, 
especially with such as savor of idolatry, and all 
services which tend in that direction ; and thus we 
are to judge of like matters. 

In said tenth chapter some further rules of these 
people are found, which have reference to the be- 
lievers themselves, how they must well govern their 
own lives and bodies. They read as follows : 

Encar en qual maniera li fidel debian regir li lor 
corps. 

"Also, how believers are to govern their own 
bodies, or themselves." 

1. Non servir a li desirier mortal de la cam. 
They shall not serve the deadly lusts of the 

flesh. 

2. Gardar li lor membres quilli non sian armas 
d'iniquitas. 

They shall keep their members that they do 
not become instruments of wickedness. 

3. Regir li lor sentiment. 

They shall govern well their thoughts. 

4. Sot mettre la corps a I'espirit. 

They shall keep the body in subjection to 
the spirit. 

5. Mortificar li membres. 

They shall mortify their members. 

6. Fugir la ocioseta. 
They shall shun idleness. 

7. Gardar sobrieta & mesura en maniar & bea- 
vre, & en parolas & en las curas del mond. 

They shall observe temperance and sobriety 
in eating and drinking, as well as in their words, 
and in the cares of this world. 

8. Far obras de miseridia. 

They shall practice works of mercy. 

9. Viore per fe, & per vita moral. 
They shall live in faith and morality. 

10. Combatre contra li desirier. 
They shall fight against lusts. 

11. Mortificar las obras de la corn. 

They shall mortify the works of the flesh. 

12. Istar en temp debit a la Religion. 

They shall, at the proper time, attend divine 
worship. 


13. Ensemp recordar la divina volunta. 

They shall speak to one another of the will 
of God. 

14. Examinar diligentament la conscientia. 
They shall diligently examine their con- 
sciences. 

15. Mundar & esmendar, & pacificar I' espirit. 
They shall purify, improve, and compose the 

spirit or mind. 

These and like precepts the Waldenses presented 
to their fellow believers, that they might know how 
to lead a virtuous and pious life, with regard to 
God, as well as to their neighbor, and to themselves. 


TESTIMONY OF ANCIENT WRITERS, REGARDING 
THE VIRTUOUS LIFE OF THE WALDENSES 

Above all things it is a matter of astonishment, 
that the most violent opponents of the Waldenses, 
who accused them the most on account of their 
faith, could nevertheless find nothing to censure in 
their life, notwithstanding exceeding attention was 
given to this point. It is true, that some, from 
deadly hatred against these people, vented many 
lies in order to tarnish their reputation ; but they 
were instantly contradicted by their copartners 
who had a somewhat higher regard for the truth. 

Jacob de Riberia, who allowed himself to be 
used as a persecutor of the Waldenses, says : "That 
for a long time they resided in Narbonne, or Gaule 
Narbonnoise, in the bishoprics of Albi, Rhodes, 
Cahors, and Aix la Chapelle ; and that at that time 
those who would be called ecclesiastics and bishops, 
were held in little esteem, because nearly all those 
priests were either unworthy or illiterate. Hence 
it was easy for the Waldenses, says he, to gain the 
ascendency among the people, by their eminent 
learning." Hist, of the Wold., 1st part, 1st book, 
cap. 5, p. 21, from Jac. Rib., in his account of the 
city of Toulouse. Chassagnon, in his History of 
the Albigenses, page 27. 

Reinerius, a Dominican friar and cruel inquisitor 
against the Waldenses, assaying to defame them 
because they frequently read the holy Scriptures, 
said : That when the Waldenses wished to display 
their learning, they adduced many things relating 
to purity, humility, and other virtues, showing 
that sin must be shunned, and quoting thereto the 
words of Christ and His apostles. 

He also adds, that they taught, from the Gospel 
and the writings of the apostles, how the followers 
or disciples of Christ must be, saying : "That those 
alone are followers of the apostles, who follow their 
lives." In conclusion he says : "That the pope, the 
bishops, and the clergy, who possess the riches of 
this world, and do not follow the holiness of the 
apostles, are no rulers of the church of Jesus 
Christ." Same page, from Reinerius' book, De 
forma Heret., fol. 98. 

Their extraordinary virtue is also very evident 
from the tract of Reinerius concerning the manners 
of the Waldenses, yea, it is astonishing, how excel- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


289 


lently this writer, who had no other intention than 
to say the worst of them, yea, to brand them as 
heretics, presented their virtue, so that the papists 
should justly feel ashamed over it; for, these are 
the words of him who was their inquisitor: "It 
can be seen also from their manners and words, 
that they are heretics ; for their manners are mod- 
est and grave ; they exercise no pride in their cloth- 
ing, for they wear neither costly nor very mean 
clothing; they do not engage in any commerce; 
they avoid lying, swearing, and cheating, but main- 
tain themselves by the labor of their hands, as 
mechanics. Their teachers are weavers and shoe- 
makers, who do not heap up great riches, but are 
content with the necessaries of life. The Lyonists 
(the Waldenses) are also chaste, temperate in eat- 
ing and drinking, and do not frequent taverns, etc." 
Bapt. Hist., pages 646, 647. 

Concerning the manner in which the Waldenses 
prayed, the following is found in an ancient pa- 
pistic book : "The Waldenses observe this manner 
in praying : they bow down with bended knees upon 
the ground, leaning against a bench or something 
suitable for this purpose. Thus, with bended knees, 
and body bowed down, they generally continue in 
prayer as long as it might take to repeat the Lord's 
prayer and the amen thirty or forty times. This 
they do every day with great reverence." Again : 
"They say, teach, or have, no other prayer than 
the Lord's prayer, or the paternoster. The angelic 
Salutation, or the Ave Maria they condemned." 
Bapt. Hist., page 647. 

Among other things, the ancients make mention 
of some of the Waldenses, who are called apostles, 
teachers, angels, and brethren ; but who neverthe- 
less obtained their names not because of their no- 
bility, high descent, or great worldly learning, but, 
to all appearance, on account of their virtue. For, 
as regards their descent, and standing in this world, 
they were very humble ; their names were : Nich- 
olas of Poland ; John of Poland, a peasant's son ; 
Walrich of Hardeck, a shoemaker by trade ; Con- 
rad of Gmund, in Suabia, a peasant's son ; Simon 
of Salig, in Hungary, a tailor by trade ; Herman of 
Mistelgen, a peasant's son, and blacksmith by trade. 

"But," says the writer who accuses them, "they 
lead this kind of life and walk ; first, they fast three 
or four days in the week, living on bread and water 
unless they have to do very hard work ; then the 
chief among them take care that their subjects ap- 
pear before them. (If by the terms, chief and sub- 
jects, there are understood teachers and common 
people, or master tradesmen and servants, or the 
like, there is no ambiguity). They pray seven times 
a day; the oldest (among them) begins the pray- 
er." Bapt. Hist., page 649. 

These and like testimonies respecting the virtues 
of the Waldenses, even from their bitterest ac- 
cusers, indicate that they were very merciful, vir- 
tuous, and God-fearing people, and that they were 
thus greatly calumniated by those who sought to 
maintain the contrary in regard to them. But, how 


unjustly some have proceeded in accusing said 
people, with regard to their faith as well as to their 
life, of this we will presently give some account. 


HOW THE WALDENSES WERE UNJUSTLY ACCUSED 
BY THEIR INQUISITORS, AND ACCUSERS 

In the second book of the first part of the History 
of the Waldenses, by Jean Paul Perrin, translated 
by /. M. V., 3d chapter, page 74, col. 2, there is an 
account of one Jan Veileti, a monk, and inquisitor 
over the Waldenses, and how very unfaithfully and 
deceitfully he or his clerk acted in the case of these 
people, from which it can be inferred, how it also 
was with others of their accusers. The words read 
as follows: 

But in the processes which were instituted by 
this monk Jan Veileti, we have observed an ex- 
quisite kind of villainy and low cunning ; for, hav- 
ing gotten these proceedings into our hands, we 
found in them little billets, upon which this com- 
missary (Jan Veileti) had noted the answers of 
the accused, simply, and just as they had come 
from their lips ; but these simple answers, we after- 
wards, in the proceedings found extended, and fre- 
quently given in a form contrary to, and quite dif- 
ferent from what the sumptum, that is, the afore- 
mentioned answer as noted in the proceedings, 
implied and contained; thereby perverting the 
meaning of the defendant, and causing him to say 
that of which he had never thought. 

For example, when he was asked whether he did 
not believe, that as soon as the sacramental words 
were pronounced by the priest, in the mass, the 
body of Christ was in the host, just as He was on 
the tree of the cross, and the Waldenses answered, 
No, Veileti or his clerk set down as his answer: 
That he had confessed that he did not believe in 
God. 

Again, when it was asked, whether the saints 
must not be invoked, the reply was, No, they wrote : 
That they had reviled, and spoken evil of, the 
saints. 

When it was asked, whether the virgin Mary 
must not be saluted and invoked in our extremity, 
and the answer was, No, they wrote : That they had 
reviled the virgin Mary. 

"Behold, such was the faithlessness of the monks 
and inquisitors in such important matters, and it is 
not without a certain evidence of God's provi- 
dence," says the writer, "that these villainies have 
been preserved and have remained to the present 
time, as a means by which to show, what spirit ac- 
tuated those men having, by manifold frauds, op- 
pressed and ultimately killed and burnt the be- 
lieving members of the church of Christ, yet have 
the audacity to ask us, where the church, and the 
believers, whom they themselves put to death, 
were before our coming." 

"Now, if the reader is desirous to know," says 
our author, "how said proceedings fell into our 
hands, we reply, that this occurred likewise through 


290 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the providence of God." He then relates, how the 
archbishops of Embrun, John Rostan, and others 
had these papers and proceedings under lock and 
key in their chests and chanceries, until the city 
where they resided, was taken, A. D. 1585. The 
house of the archbishop having taken fire on this 
occasion, many of these processes held in former 
times against the Waldenses, were thrown in bags 
into the street. One Calignon, chancellor of Na- 
varre and a certain councilor of Grenoble, who 
were present, ordered them to be picked up and 
delivered into their hands; and thus, it is stated, 
the perfidious calumnies against the Waldenses 
came to light, which, otherwise, would have gone 
among the papists, as true accusations against 
them. But it is as the common adage says : Lies fly 
swiftly, but truth overtakes them. We will now 
close our account of the true faith and good prac- 
tice of the Waldenses, and show, how long and in 
what times they existed. 


CONCERNING THE TIME OF THE WALDENSES 

Of this, H. Montanus gives this account : "The 
persuasion of the Waldenses or Lyonites obtained, 
in France as well as in some cities of Italy, secretly 
as well as openly, according to the condition of the 
times, for more than three hundred years, from the 
year 1170 or 1180 to 1545, as may be seen in 
Sleidanus, lib. 16, Comment." H. Mont. Nietigh., 
page 86. 

Their beginning we have fixed, according to the 
common reckoning of ancient writers, A. D. 1170; 
but it appears that they existed long before; for 
even as early as the year 1120, people of the same 
profession declared, by open writings, their views 
against the pope, whom they called antichrist, cen- 
suring him in many things, as stated above. 

Moreover, P. J. Twisck gives the following ac- 
count for the year 1168: "The Waldenses, of 
whom mention is made for the year 1159, had at 
this time so many followers and such great success 
with their doctrine, in France, Spain, Italy, and 
Germany, that those of their profession, as Guil. 
Nebriss, writes, numbered as many as the sand of 
the sea; who, when they were summoned by the 
pope of Rome, to give an account of their doctrine, 
would not appear, saying that they were not obliged 
to obey the pope, who was the antichrist and had 
declared them schismatics." Chron. page 479, 
col. 1. 

A. D. 1199. — It is stated that at this time the 
Albigenses, who were one church with the Wal- 
denses, had so increased in the earldom of Tou- 
louse, that, as the papists complained, "almost a 
thousand cities were polluted with them." Intro- 
duction M. M., page 52, col. 1, from Baron. A. D. 
1199, num. 13. 

With this the lord of St. Aldegonde concurs, 
when he says (irit Tafereel der Geschil., cap. 12, 


fol. 142) : "That, notwithstanding Peter de Bruis 
was burnt as a heretic, at St. Giles, near Nismes, 
their doctrine nevertheless was spread throughout 
the province of Gascony, into the earldom of Fois, 
Querci, Agenois, Bourdeloicx, and almost through- 
out all Languedoc, and the earldom of Jugrane, 
now called Venice. In Province also this doctrine 
was almost universally accepted, and the cities, 
Cahors, Narbonne, Carcassonne, Rhodes, Aix la 
Chapelle, Mesieres, Toulouse, Avignon, Mantau- 
ban, S, Antonin, Puflanrens, Castres, Minerve, 
Begiers, Beaucaire, Lombes, Pannes, and the coun- 
try of Bigorre were filled with it, together with 
many other cities which were favorable to them, as 
Tarascon, Marseilles, Perces, Agenois, Mar- 
mande, and Bordeaux; whereby this doctrine 
spread still further, from the one side into Spain 
and England, from the other, into Germany, Bo- 
hemia, Hungary, Moravia, Dalmatia, and even 
into Italy. 

"Indeed in such a manner did this doctrine 
spread that however sedulously the popes and all 
their minions exerted themselves, aided by the 
princes and the secular magistrates, to exterminate 
them, first by disputations, then by banishment and 
papal excommunication and anathemas, proclaim- 
ing of crusades, indulgences and pardons to all who 
would commit violence upon them, and finally, by 
all manner of tortures, fire, gallows, and cruel 
bloodshedding, yea, in such a manner that the 
whole world was in commotion on account of it; 
yet, they (the papists) could not prevent the ashes 
from flying abroad, and becoming scattered far and 
wide, almost even to all the ends of the earth." 
Introduction M. M., page 52, col. 1, 2. 

The above seems marvelous, but it is not marvel- 
ous with regard to the Lord God, with whom noth- 
ing is wonderful or impossible. In the meantime, 
we see how God permitted this grain of mustard 
seed of the Waldenses, or Poor Men of Lyons, to 
grow up a large tree, and this in the midst of their 
persecutions. Oh, the great power, wisdom and 
love of God, who never forsakes His people ! 

P. J. Twisck, having finished his account of the 
twelfth century, concludes as follows, with which 
we will also conclude our account: "As regards 
the state and condition of ecclesiastical affairs in 
the preceding hundred years, we find no special 
change, nor reformation, except that in this cen- 
tury we have many praiseworthy men who opposed 
popery with the holy Scriptures, rejecting images, 
pilgrimages, masses, and other papal superstitions, 
and also infant baptism ; concerning which you may 
consult the years 1145, 1159, 1168, 1182, 1198. 
Thus the Baptists and many others (who had 
better views than the papists), and their followers 
or fellow believers lived for a long period, or even 
to this time, in various countries and places, under 
many severe persecutions." Chron., Ylth book, 
Page 511. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


291 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE TWELFTH 
CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE TWELFTH 
CENTURY 

[In the beginning mention is made of this salu- 
tary, but bloody century, in which the pious wit- 
nesses of the Lord come in multitudes to receive 
the crown of martyrdom on the battlefield of 
Christ. 

Four persons, having no good opinion of infant 
baptism and transubstantiation banished from the 
bishopric of Treves, A. D. 1105. 

Some of the followers of Berengarius, in the 
same bishopric, follow their fellow companions, 
and are not only banished, but also expelled, one 
year after, namely A. D. 1106. 

The persecutions increase in violence ; some who 
maintained the doctrine of Berengarius, burnt alive 
at Treves and Utrecht, in the year 1135. 

Arnald, a lector at Brescia, opposes infant bap- 
tism and the mass ; on account of which he is per- 
secuted, and, finally, having come to Rome, de- 
prived of his life by fire, A. D. 1145. 

The teacher of said Arnald, namely, Peter Abe- 
lard, follows, in the persecution, in the footsteps 
of his disciple, and is, by order of the pope, impris- 
oned in the dungeon of a monastery, where he ends 
his life, same year as above. 

Peter Bruis, burnt at St. Giles ; Henry of Tou- 
louse, apprehended and put out of the way by the 
pope's legate; also many other persons put to 
death at Paris, for the true evangelical doctrine, 
about the year 1145, 1147. 

Certain peasants, called Apostolics, put to death 
for maintaining the doctrine of the apostles, near 
Toulouse in France, A. D. 1155. 

Gerard, with about thirty persons, men as well 
as women, come to Oxford, in England, where 
they, for maintaining the evangelical doctrine, are 
branded on the forehead, and scourged out of the 
city, where they perish from cold, A. D. 1161. 

Arnold, Marsilius, and Theodoric, together with 
five other men and two women, burned alive, at 
Cologne and Bonn, A. D. 1163. 

Many pious Christians, throughout all France 
and England, for maintaining their true belief, cast 
into the fire alive, where they expire under great 
pain, A. D. 1182. 

Many Christians in Flanders, put to death by fire 
for the same reason ; many others miserably perish 
in other places, in the year 1183. 

One year after the death of the last-mentioned 
martyrs, namely, A. D. 1184 or 1185, a decree of 
Pope Lucius III is published against the Wal- 
denses, who are called by various names. 

The bloody decree of Ilphons, King of Arragon, 
published against said Waldenses, A. D. 1194, 
circumstantially presented. 

Origin of the inquisition, instituted by Pope In- 


nocent III against the Waldenses and Albigenses, 
about the year 1198; to which end, mention is 
made of three letters which he wrote with regard 
to this matter; whereupon it followed that, A. D. 
1200, five men and three women were burnt at 
Troyes, in Campania, and some expelled from 
Metz.] 


Hereafter we shall not have to confine ourselves 
to such scanty material, in the account of the mar- 
tyrs, as we have necessarily had to do in some of 
the preceding centuries, when we, through the ab- 
sence of ancient histories and records, were fre- 
quently compelled to break off our account of the 
sainted confessors of Jesus Christ prematurely; 
which often grieved us to the heart. 

Now, however, comes the salutary, though 
bloody century, in which abundant matter is fur- 
nished us, from which to accomplish our object; 
the pious witnesses of the Lord now come in multi- 
tudes, who willingly suffer themselves to be put to 
death for the proclamation of the only saving truth ; 
crowns of martyrdom are now proffered to all 
Christian champions, who have well acquitted 
themselves on the field of martyrdom, under the 
bloody banner of Jesus Christ. 

Excommunication is the beginning of their con- 
flict; then follow fire, sword, and much other 
dreadful violence ; in and under which, they, call- 
ing upon God, end their lives, quit the earth, and 
take their rest under the wings of their Saviour, or 
under the altar of God, until the number of their 
slain brethren shall be fulfilled. We then turn, first, 
to the portal or entrance of the arena of the Chris- 
tian martyrs, where we perceive that some persons 
must leave their country, and are banished as 
heretics. 


FOUR PERSONS, WHO HAD NO GOOD OPINION OF 
INFANT BAPTISM AND TRANSUBSTANTIATION, 
BANISHED AS HERETICS, FROM THE BISH- 
OPRIC OF TREVES, A. D. 1105 

Here, that which is noted for the year 1105, con- 
cerning those who opposed infant baptism, in the 
twelfth century, claims our attention, namely, that 
then, under the archbishop of Treves, four persons 
were banished as heretics, because they had no 
good opinion of infant baptism, and denied, that 
in the Supper the bread and wine were changed 
into the real body and blood of Christ, Merul., 
fol. 726. P. J. Twisck, Chron. H. Montan., Nietigh., 
page 83. Joe. Mehrn., B. H., page 592. 


CERTAIN PERSONS, CALLED BERENGARIANS, BAN- 
ISHED OR EXPELLED FOR THE SAME REASON, 
AND FROM THE SAME BISHOPRICK (AS THE 
FORMER PERSONS), A. D. 1106 

We related, for the year 1035, of Berengarius, 
deacon of Angiers, that he, with Bruno, the bishop 
of said city, began to teach against transubstantia- 


292 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tion and infant baptism, and this, the most strenu- 
ously, about A. D. 1060; which the Roman popes, 
at different times, endeavored by councils and 
otherwise to put a stop to, as was shown in its 
place. And though Berengarius at times, from fear 
of death, showed himself wavering and very weak 
in his maintenance of said matter, he still effected 
so much, that many who were friendly to his doc- 
trine, concurred with him therein, so that some of 
them, who came into the bishopric of Treves, and 
maintained their (above-mentioned) views, were, 
like the four persons mentioned previously, ban- 
ished or expelled by the archbishop of that place, 
A. D. 1106. Dispersed thence, they departed into 
the Netherlands, into the country of Liege, and to 
Antwerp, and thereabouts, scattering, whither- 
soever they came, the good seed of their true belief. 
In the meantime, though these had been expelled 
from the bishopric of Treves, some nevertheless 
remained, who held their meetings in secret, and 
taught. In the 2d book of the History of the Per- 
secutions, page 395, col. 3, from Thuan. Prefat., in 
Hist, sui temp, ad Reg. Honr. 4, where for A. D. 
1060, read A. D. 1106. 

Note. — The authors state of the afore-men- 
tioned people only that they were expelled, etc., 
but as no formal expulsion can take place, without 
a previous condemnation, we are quite inclined to 
think, that they were first banished, and then ex- 
pelled. 


SEVERAL PERSONS WHO MAINTAINED THE DOC- 
TRINE OF BERENGARIUS, BURNT ALIVE AT 
TREVES AND UTRECHT, A. D. 1135 

We read in the ancient chronicles, that in the 
year 1135, several persons were burnt alive by the 
Emperor Lotharius, at Treves and Utrecht; con- 
cerning which the Chron. Sax., in particular, ex- 
pressly mentions, that they were burnt as heretics. 
However, in what their alleged heresy consisted, 
is not clearly expressed. This, however, is certain : 
that they separated from the Roman church, and 
opposed her errors. 

Abraham Mellinus concludes, from the circum- 
stances mentioned with regard to them, that they 
were Berengarians, or followers of Berengarius. 
"For," says he, "the reader must know, that after 
Berengarius' death very many were condemned as 
heretics, simply because they had the same belief 
with Berengarius, respecting the Lord's Supper, 
and opposed the bread-god of the mass." Second 
book, fol. 395, col. 3, from Chron. Sax. 


ARNALD, A LECTOR AT BRESCIA, AFTER MUCH 

PERSECUTION, BURNT AT ROME, FOR HIS 

VIEWS AGAINST INFANT BAPTISM, THE 

MASS, ETC., A. D. 1145 

In our account of those who opposed infant bap- 
tism, in the twelfth century, we made mention, for 


the year 1139, of one Arnald, a lector at Brescia, 
in Italy, and stated, that, having been instructed' 
by Peter Abelard, he, besides the doctrine he main- 
tained against the mass and transubstantiation, also 
taught against infant baptism ; on account of which 
Pope Innocent II commanded him to be silent. 
Thereupon he fled into Germany or Switzerland, 
where for a time he continued to teach. Thence! 
after the death of the aforesaid pope, he came to 
Rome. But obtaining there an incredible number 
of followers, and being severely persecuted by the 
Popes Eugenius and Adrian, he fled to the Em- 
peror Frederick Barbarossa, who delivered him 
into the hands of the pope ; and thus he was finally, 
at Rome, placed to the stake, burnt to ashes, and 
the ashes thrown into the Tiber, lest the people 
should show him honor. It is recorded that this 
occurred A. D. 1145, after he had, as is reckoned, 
strenuously maintained the above doctrine for 
about six years. Bapt. Hist., page 598, from Bar- 
on., A. D. 1139, num. 3, and A. D. 1145, num. 3 ; 
also, H. Montan., Nietigh., page 84. 

Abraham Mellinus, writing of the belief of Ar- 
nald, says : "He also taught quite differently con- 
cerning the sacrament of the altar, and (notice), of 
infant baptism, from that which was taught in the 
Roman church at that time. He doubtless, in this 
respect, held the views of Peter de Bruis and Henry 
of Toulouse (of whom we shall speak afterwards), 
rejecting transubstantiation, and denying that the 
mass is a sacrifice for the living and the dead, and 
that (notice again) either baptism or the faith of 
others saves infants." Thus far, A. Mell., 2d book 
page 425, col. 3. 

Note.— Abraham Mellinus, who states this con- 
cerning the belief of Arnald, was a preacher of the 
Calvinistic church, in St. Anthony's Polder, and, 
consequently, himself an advocate of infant bap- 
tism. Nevertheless, he distinctly says of Arnald, 
whom he recognized as a pious martyr, that he 
taught quite differently concerning infant baptism, 
and also that this baptism and the faith of others 
do not save children, etc., the opposite of which 
the Romanists maintained. 

Further Observation. — As regards the manner 
in which he maintained, promulgated, and incul- 
cated said doctrine, and himself kept it to the end, 
as well as what happened to him on this account ; 
that is, all the circumstances, and also a summary 
of the matter, see Otto Friesing, lib. 1, cap. 27, 28, 
and lib. 2, cap. 20, de Gest. Frid. L. Imp. Gunth 
Ligur., lib. 3, de Gest. Frid. 1. Bernhard. Epist., 
196, 189, 195. Sigon. de Regno Ital., lib. 11, from 
A. D. 1139 until 1146. Abent., lib. 6. Annal. Boio 
Gerhohus Reichersp., lib. 1, de Invest. Antichrist, 
apud Gretser in Proleg. Script, contra Walden., 
cap. 4, Tom. 4, Concil. edition 1612, p. 23 com- 
pared with Bapt. His., p. 686. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


293 


PETER ABELARD, ON ACCOUNT OF THE ABOVE- 
MENTIONED BELIEF, IS CONFINED, BY ORDER 
OF THE POPE OF ROME, IN THE DUNGEON 
OF A MONASTERY, AND DIES THERE, 
A. D. 1145 

H. Montanus states, from Caesar Baronius, that 
this Peter Abelard was the one from whom the 
afore-mentioned Arnald had obtained the doctrine 
against infant baptism, drawn, however, chiefly 
from the holy Scriptures ; which is not contradicted, 
but sufficiently confirmed, by Mellinus, when he 
says: "That said Arnald was a disciple of Peter 
Abelard, from France, where he had pursued his 
studies." Second book, page 425, col. 3. 

He then adds this account: "That Pope Inno- 
cent, after the great synod which he had held, at 
Rome, against the abettors of this doctrine, wrote 
letters to Samson, Archbishop of Rheims, Henry, 
Archbishop of Sens, and Bernhard, abbot of Clair- 
vaux, against Arnald of Brescia, and his teacher 
Peter Abelard ; charging the former, that wherever 
they should find these two, they should confine 
them each separately, in a monastery, as originators 
of a perverted doctrine, and antagonists of the 
Catholic faith, and burn their books or writings 
wherever they should discover them." 

"As to what was the belief of Peter Abelard," 
says Mellinus, "and in what points he assailed 
popery, can be seen and read in all his works, 
which have just been published in print in France ; 
where it will also be found, in his letters, how much 
he had to suffer for his belief." 

Touching his belief and death. — Concerning 
Peter Abelard and his belief, especially how he op- 
posed infant baptism, and instructed his disciple, 
Arnald, in this point, see Jacob Mehrn., Bapt. 
Hist., page 598. Baron., A. D. 1139, num. 3, and 
A. D. 1145. H. Montan. Nietigh., page 84. Also, 
Introduction, fol. 49. 

Mell inus finally states, from ancient writers, that 
Peter Abelard, after much suffering, died in the 
monastery in which he had been confined, by order 
of the pope, on account of his faith. This hap- 
pened, according to our reckoning, about the year 
1146, after the death of his disciple Arnald. 


PETER BRUIS, BURNT AT ST. GILES; HENRY OF 
TOULOUSE APPREHENDED AND PUT OUT OF 
THE WAY, BY THE POPE'S LEGATE; AND 
MANY OTHER PERSONS PUT TO DEATH 
AT PARIS, FOR THE TRUE EVAN- 
GELICAL DOCTRINE, - ABOUT THE 
YEARS 1145, 1147 

P. J. Twisck gives the following account in his 
Chronijck, for the year 1145: "About this time 
there were famous in France, Peter Bruis, former- 
ly a priest, and his disciple, Henry of Toulouse ; 
both had been monks, were learned men, and great- 
ly censured the papal errors, sparing neither great 
nor small. They called the pope the prince of Sod- 


om, and the city of Rome the mother of all unright- 
eousness, abomination, and execration. They spoke 
against the mass, images, pilgrimages, and other 
institutions of the Roman church. They renounced 
infant baptism, saying that none but the believing 
were entitled to baptism. 

When Peter had preached about twenty years, 
namely, from before the year 1126 until 1145, the 
people flocking to him in great numbers, he was 
finally publicly burnt in the city of St. Giles, also 
called St. Aegidius. 

His disciple Henry, who followed him in the 
doctrine, was intercepted and apprehended some 
time after by the legate of the pope, and put out of 
the way, so that his fate is not known. This is held 
to have occurred two years after the death of Peter 
Bruis, namely A. D. 1147. 

After their death a cruel persecution arose 
against all those who had followed their doctrine, 
many of whom went joyfully to meet death. In 
short, however assiduously the popes with all their 
shaven heads aided by princes and secular magis- 
trates, exerted themselves to exterminate them, 
first, by disputations, then by banishment and 
papal excommunications and anathemas, procla- 
mation of crusades, indulgences, and pardons to 
all those who should do violence* to said people, 
and, finally, by all manner of torment, fire, gal- 
lows, and cruel bloodshedding, yea, so that the 
whole world was in commotion on account of it; 
yet, could they not prevent this persuasion from 
spreading everywhere, and going forth into every 
country and kingdom, holding their worship secret- 
ly as well as openly, with great or small numbers, 
according to the tyranny, cruelty or persuasion of 
the times, and continuing until the year 1304; of 
whom over a hundred persons were put to death, 
or burnt, at Paris ; and thus their descendants, as 
history states, continued, though under much trib- 
ulation, until this time. P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 
450, from Philip Marnix Tajer, 3d part, cap. 12, 
fol. 141, 142. Morula, fol. 748, 853. Hist. Mart. 
Doopsg., fol. 15. Also, Introduction, page 49. 


CERTAIN PEASANTS, CALLED APOSTOLICS, PUT TO 

DEATH FOR MAINTAINING THE DOCTRINE 

OF THE APOSTLES, NEAR TOULOUSE, IN 

FRANCE, A. D. 1155 

It is stated, that about A. D. 1155 there were in 
the above part of France, certain simple but truth- 
loving peasants, who, pointing to no other author 
of their doctrine or belief, than to the apostles, 
called themselves Apostolics, as though they would 
say, that their doctrine and belief were derived 
from the apostles. Bernard,f abbot of Clairvaux, 
greatly inveighed against them in divers sermons, 
calling them a sort of despised, boorish rabble, ig- 

* "War", says the writer ; but this signifies violence, vexation, 
etc. 

t "Zealous Bernard," writes Mellinus, "allowed himself to be 
bribed, and dared to preach and write whatever he heard said." 
— Second book, fol. 438, col. 2, in the margin. 


294 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


norant and altogether weak. "They." he says, "are 
boorish people, idiots, and completely sold ; but 
they must not be dealt with imprudently." "From 
this it appears," writes Abraham Mellinus, "that 
they must not have been so very dull and ignorant 
after all." 

In the meantime, Bernard continues to rail 
against them, after papistic fashion. "Inquire," 
says he, "for their author; of what sect they are? 
They will not be able to name any one. But what 
heresy is there, that has not its author from among 
men? The Manicheans had Manes as their head 
and master ; the Sabellians had Sabellicus ; the Ari- 
ans, Arium ; the Eunomians, Eunomium ; the Nes- 
torians, Nestorius; likewise every other similar 
pest had its separate master among men, from 
which it derived both its origin and name ; but what 
name or title shall be given or accorded to these ? 
None at all," he says, "because they received their 
heresy neither from nor by men ; nevertheless, far 
be it from us to say that they received it through 
the revelation of Christ." 

Continuing, he shows in what their so-called her- 
esy consisted, saying: "They ridicule us, that we 
baptize infants ; that we implore the intercession of 
the saints, and the like. It has been found, that 
they would rather die, than be converted (namely, 
to the Roman church). Many a time the believers 
(he means the papists) laid hands on some of them, 
drew them forth ; and being asked concerning their 
faith, they would not confess their wickedness, but 
openly protested, that they taught the true godli- 
ness, and were ready to die for it. In the meantime, 
the people that stood by, were not less ready to put 
them to death: and falling upon them, they made 
these new heretics martyrs of their own faith." 

"Some wonder at this, that, when led forth to 
death, they were not only joyful, but also patient ; 
but it is to be deplored, that not only secular princ- 
es, but also, it is said, some ecclesiastics, yea bish- 
ops, who ought much rather to have persecuted 
them, upheld them for lucre's sake, saying : 'Why 
should we condemn them as heretics, who have not 
been convinced of heresy, nor have confessed the 
same?"* 

Thus far, Bernard, who was called, The Mellif- 
luent, but who nevertheless poured forth nothing 
but bitter gall against these people. In Serm. 16 
and 66, on Cant. Also, Epist. 240, oldest edition. 

From this it is sufficiently apparent, writes Melli- 
nus, that they persecuted these poor people unto 
death, not on account of Manichean doctrines, 
which Bernard unjustly and covertly imputes to 
them, but because they opposed the Roman church 
and her errors. Second book, jol. 438, col. 1, 2. 

Note. — These were the same people of whom we 
made mention, in our account of those who, in the 
twelfth century, opposed infant baptism, from 
Nicholas Sander, who states concerning them: 
"That they were called Apostolics, because they 
professed to walk in the footsteps of the apostles, 
and declared to hold themselves only to the apos- 


tolical writings ; that they contemned infant bap- 
tism, purgatory, praying for the dead, invocation 
of the saints, swearing of oaths, etc. ; that they ac- 
cepted no evidence save from the New Testament ; 
and went joyfully unto death." Nic. Sand., lib. 
and Histor. Doopsg., A. 8. D. Anth. Jac, jol. 118. 
H. Montan. Nietigh., page 84. Introduction, page 
50, Jacob Mehrning, Bapt. Hist., page 599. P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., page 469. B. 


GERARD, WITH ABOUT THIRTY OTHERS, MEN AS 
WELL AS WOMEN, FOR MAINTAINING THE APOS- 
TOLICAL DOCTRINE, AT OXFORD, IN ENG- 
LAND, ARE BRANDED IN THE FOREHEAD, 
SCOURGED OUT OF THE CITY, AND 
MISERABLY PERISH WITH COLD, 
A. D. 1161 

It is recorded* that A. D. 1161, in the eighth 
year of Henry II., King of England, about thirty 
persons, men as well as women, natives of Ger- 
many, sailed over to England. The papists called 
them erring spirits and publicans, saying that they 
had sprung from an unknown author ;f but others 
have called them Petro-brusians, Berengarians, 
Poor Men of Lyons, etc., because they, it appears, 
had their views against infant baptism, transub- 
stantiation, and other errors of the Roman church, 
in common with Peter Bruis, Berengarius, and the 
Poor Men of Lyons. 

"There were upwards of thirty of them," says 
the papistic writer, "who, concealing their errors, 
had peaceably come into the land, in order to prop- 
agate their belief. Their principal leader was one 
Gerard, upon whom they looked as their lord and 
master; for he alone had a little learning, while all 
the rest were illiterate idiots, a very low and boor- 
ish class of people, and of the German nation and 
language. But they could not long remain con- 
cealed, since some made very diligent inquiries re- 
garding them; and when it was found that they 
belonged to a strange sect, they were apprehended." 

THEIR ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS RESPECTING 
THEIR FAITH 

The king, not willing to release or to punish them 
unheard, convened, on this account, a council at 
Oxford ; where the most learned of the prisoners, 
namely, Gerard, being solemnly interrogated con- 
cerning their religion, answered in the name of all, 
saying : "That they were Christians, and regarded 
the doctrine of the apostles." And when they were 
properly questioned respecting all the articles of 
the faith, they answered well with regard to the 
nature of the supreme Physician; but as regards 
the means with which he has been pleased to heal 
our weakness, that is, respecting the divine sacra- 
ments, "they," says the papistic writer, "judged 

* Vignierus, in Hist. Eccl. 

„t . T ^. pa PJ s , t , i . c writer says: "From an unknown author." The 
Calvimstic Mellinus, however says: "But perhaps from Peter de 
fV". s ;„ Hen r y of Tou'ouse, or Berengarius himself."— Second book 
fol. 439. col. 4, in the margin. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


295 


perversely. For they aspersed baptism (he means 
infant baptism, for this was the baptism then held 
in esteem by the Roman church) and also the 
thankoffering (the mass)." 


SUMMARY OF THE DOCTRINE OF WHICH THEY 
WERE ACCUSED 

The doctrines with which they were charged, 
consisted of the following points (from Abr. 
Mellinus* 2d book, fol. 440) : "That their belief 
concerning the sacraments, of baptism and the 
Supper, as well as respecting marriage, was dif- 
ferent from what had been decreed by the Roman 
church, whom they called the whore of Babylon, 
because she had forsaken the true faith in Christ ; 
they said that she was like the barren fig-tree which 
our Lord Jesus Christ cursed. They also said that 
the pope and the bishops must not be obeyed when 
they command anything that is contrary to the 
Word of God ; also, that monachism was a stink- 
ing carrion, also, that all monastic vows are vain 
and useless, yea, that they foster lasciviousness ; 
also, that all the orders and degrees of the priestly 
dignity are marks of the great beast; also, that 
purgatory, masses, church consecrations, worship 
of the saints, anniversaries for the dead, etc., are 
genuine inventions of the devil." 

"These," says Mellinus, "were about the prin- 
cipal articles which the fathers of the Oxford coun- 
cil could not brook, and on account of which they 
scourged and banished them out of their country, 
yea, let them freeze to death." 


THEIR CONDUCT TOWARD THE FATHERS IN THE 
COUNCIL IN OXFORD, AND WHAT THE COUN- 
CIL DID IN THE MATTER 

We return to the papistic author, to hear from 
his own lips, how they dealt with these upright and 
simple people. "When the fathers of the council," 
he writes, "admonished them to do penitence and 
manifest sorrow for their belief, that they might be 
united with the (Roman) church, they despised 
this advice, as well as the threats with which they 
were menaced in order that they, through fear, if 
by no other means, might be driven to conversion ; 
yea, they scoffed at them, saying : 'Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.' " 

"In order, then," he writes, "that the poison of 
their heresy might not spread further, the bishops 
publicly pronounced them heretics, and delivered 
them over to the Catholic prince, for corporal pun- 
ishment. The latter commanded that they should 
be branded on their foreheads, as an infamous mark 
of their heresy, and publicly, in the sight of all the 


people, scourged out of the city, strictly prohibit- 
ing any one from taking them into his house, or 
affording them the least comfort or assistance." 
From William Neubrig. Hist. Engl., lib. 2, cap. 13. 


JOYFUL GOING OUT OF THESE PEOPLE TO CORPO- 
RAL PUNISHMENT, AND THEIR 
MISERABLE DEATH 

This sentence having been pronounced, they 
were led out to punishment. They went with glad- 
ness and in great haste, their leader, namely, 
Gerard, going before them, singing : "Blessed are 
ye," says the Lord, "when men shall hate you, 
for my sake." 

They were then, according to the rigor of the 
sentence, branded on their foreheads, their leader 
receiving a double brand, one on his forehead, the 
other on his chin, as a sign that he was their leader. 
Thereupon their upper garments, to the waist, 
were cut from their bodies, and they were publicly 
scourged, and cast out of the city. But it being 
a bitter cold winter, and no one showing them the 
least mercy, they miserably perished by the intense 
cold, which they were unable to bear on their naked 
bodies. William Neubrig. Hist. Engl., lib. 2, cap. 
13, &th year of Henry II, King of England. 


* All these passages, Mellinus has taken from the account of 
Guido Perpigna, in lib. de Haeresib. Bal. Cent. 2, in Append, ad 
Gervasium Giestrensem. Guido was of the opinion, that said peo- 
ple belonged to the Poor Men of Lyons, that is the Waldenses. 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING THE ORIGIN 
AND FAITH OF THESE MARTYRS 

"For further explanation of this history," writes 
Mellinus, "which has been written by a bitter pa- 
pist, the reader must be reminded to imitate the 
bee — which extracts honey from the same flower 
out of which the toad draws poison — and, con- 
temning the bitterness of the words of our adver- 
saries, to pay regard only to the matter itself. 

That he (the papistic writer) says, that these 
Christians, whom he calls Publicans, had their or- 
igin from an unknown author,* leads Vignierius to 
suppose, that they may have sprung from Peter 
Bruis, or from his companion, Henry of Toulouse, 
Guido of Perpigna, however, thinks they belonged 
to the Poor Men of Lyons, that is the Waldenses. 
In lib. de Haeresib. Bal. Centur. 2, in Append, ad 
Gervasium Giestrensum. See also Abr. Mell., 2d 
book, fol. 440, col. 1. 

Note. — In regard to what was the belief of Peter 
Bruis and his companion, Henry of Toulouse, as 
well as of the Poor Men of Lyons, that is, the Wal- 
denses, we have already shown, that it is not at vari- 
ance with the belief of the Anabaptists, but much 
rather accords with it ; and hence it is evident that 
these thirty persons, who made said confession, 
were true martyrs, since they suffered for the true 
faith, and the truth of Jesus Christ. Concerning 
these martyrs, see also five years later, Mart. Paris, 
lib. 5. 


* From the writings of Gascony. 


296 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ARNOLD, MARSILIUS, AND THEODORIC, WITH FIVE 

OTHER MEN, AND TWO WOMEN, BURNED ALIVE 

AT COLOGNE AND BONN, A. D. 1163 

"In the year of our Lord 1 163," says the papistic 
writer Orithemius, "certain heretics of the sect 
called Cathari," (by which are understood the Wal- 
denses, whose confession of faith we have above 
shown not to be at variance with the Anabaptists of 
the present day), "came from Flanders to Cologne, 
and there secretly abode in a certain barn, near the 
city. But as they did not come to church, even on 
Sundays, they were detected by those living near 
them. Having been brought to an examination 
therefore, by our mother, the holy church (he 
means Roman church), they were found to be con- 
firmed heretics." Orith. Chron. Hirsaug. With 
this he closes. And hence in order to explain the 
matter more fully, we must of necessity have re- 
course to papistic writers, though they were the ad- 
versaries of these people. 


ECBERT S ACCOUNT OF THE VIEWS OF THESE PEO- 
PLE, AS OPPOSED TO THE ROMAN CHURCH 

Concerning them, Ecbert, a monk of Schonaugh, 
who himself disputed with them, writes thus : "Be- 
hold, certain perverted, and perverting men (thus 
he calls good Christians), who had concealed them- 
selves for a long time in hiding places, and had 
corrupted the Christian faith in many plain and 
simple people, are at this time so greatly multiplied 
throughout all the lands, that the Christian church 
suffers great injury from the very pernicious poison 
(so he calls the truth of the Gospel) which they 
everywhere vent against her." Serm. 8, contra 
Catharos, T. 2. Auctor. Bybl. S. S. Patrum, edi- 
tion Paris, A. D. 1610, p. 831. 

TRITHEMIUS' ACCOUNT OF THEIR EXAMINATION, 

AND DISPUTATION WITH ECBERT; ALSO 

OF THEIR DEATH 

Trithemius gives a brief description, of their ex- 
amination and disputation with Ecbert, abbot of 
the monastery of St. Florian in Schonaugh, in the 
bishopric of Treves: 

The clergy and the chief men of the city of 
Cologne, by messengers and letters, requested Ec- 
bert to come to Cologne, as being a very learned 
man, in order to examine said heretics. Abbot Ec- 
bert arrived at Cologne, August 2, A. D. 1163, 
and entered into a public disputation with three of 
these heretics, Arnold, Marsilius, and Theodoric, 
who seemed to possess better abilities than the rest. 

However, he does not state precisely, what were 
the articles of the discussion, unless we are to glean 
them from his following words : "They contemned 
all the rulers of the church, prelates, priests, and 
clerks, calling them soul-deceivers and snares of the 
devil. They ridiculed the sacraments of the Roman 
church (among which was included infant bap- 
tism), and denied the holy body and blood of the 


Lord (that is, transubstantiation in the sacrament 
of the altar). Now, when they could neither by 
arguments, nor by authority (namely, from the 
testimony of the fathers), nor by admonitions, be 
induced to renounce their errors (thus he calls 
their true faith), but obstinately persisted in 
their purpose, they were utterly cast out from the 
church, and delivered into the hands of the laity, 
that is, into the power of the secular authorities, 
who led them, eight men and two women, out of the 
city, and committed them to the flames, on the fifth 
day of August of the same year." Frith., in Hist. 
Also, 2d book of the Persecutions, jol. 441, col 
3,4. 


OF THE CONSTANCY OF THESE MARTYRS IN THE 
FIRE J AND HOW ECBERT MOCKED THEM 

Csesarius of Heisterbach writes, that this took 
place in the Jewish cemetery, and that Arnold, as 
he stood with his disciples or fellow believers in the 
fire, said : "Remain steadfast in your faith, for this 
day you shall be with the holy martyr, Laurence." 
Casar., lib. 5, cap. 19. 

Ecbert made sport of the death of these pious 
people ; for it appears, that, despising infant bap- 
tism, they had said, that in order to be saved it was 
necessary first to be baptized with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire, in consequence of which this wicked 
man inquiringly said: "And has not the city of 
Cologne thus baptized (namely, with fire) your 
arch-heretic Arnold with his accomplices, and the 
city of Bonn, Theodoric with his co-partners?" 
Serm. 8, advers. Catharos. 

O awful blasphemy ! But the Lord shall render 
to every man according to his righteousness and 
faithfulness. I Sam. 26:23. 

Note.— P. J. Twisck relates of these people that, 
out of hatred, they were called Adamites, Cathar- 
ists, Patarini, and Passaginians, and that the Em- 
peror Frederick published some decrees against 
them. "But thus, those who seek to live in the fear 
of God, are always exterminated. In this manner, 
certain persons, eight men, two women, and a girl, 
who had gone from Flanders to Cologne, were 
burned in a barn before the city, on the fifth of 
August." Chron., page 476, col. 1, 2, from Abbot 
Trithem. Mer., jol. 765. Neoburgens., lib. 11, 
cwp. 15. 


MANY PIOUS CHRISTIANS THROUGHOUT FRANCE 

AND ENGLAND, CAST ALIVE INTO THE FIRE 

AND BURNT, FOR MAINTAINING THEIR 

ORTHODOX BELIEF, A. D. 1182 

William of Armorica and Roger of Hovedon 
state that at this time, namely, about the year 1182, 
in various places throughout the entire kingdom of 
France, very many Waldenses or Albigenses were 
burnt under the name of Publicans. 

Concerning this, the aforesaid William writes in 
his history of Philip, King of France as follows : 
"All the opposers of our faith, commonly called 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


297 


Publicans, having been compelled to come forth 
from their hiding places, were brought before the 
court, and, upon the law being applied to them, 
convicted of heresy, and, hence, were cast into the 
fire and burnt alive." Philippidos, lib. 1. 

Roger of Hovedon adds, for the end of the year 
1182, that the King of England, Henry II, not- 
withstanding there were very many of these Pub- 
licans, that is, Waldenses or orthodox Christians, 
in his land, he would in no wise tolerate them, but 
commanded that they should likewise everywhere 
be burnt, as in France.* Annal. part 2, at the close 
of the year 1182. 

As to the belief of the Waldenses and Albigenses, 
who were also called publicans by their enemies, it 
has already, in their own confession, been shown 
not to militate against the confession of the Ana- 
baptists ; as we have said once for all, and to which 
we here again call attention. 

MANY GOD-FEARING PEOPLE PUT TO DEATH, IN 

FLANDERS, ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR VIEWS 

AGAINST THE ROMAN CHURCH, BY THE 

COUNT OF ALSACE, A. D. 1182 

Magisterf John Andriess, P. J. Twisck, H. Mon- 
tanus, and various other authentic writers, unani- 
mously state, that A. D. 1182, there were put to 
death, by Count Philip of Alsace, many Christians, 
who were called heretics because they contemned 
infant baptism, the sacrament of the altar, and the 
sacrifice of the mass, etc. See /. Andr., in his 
History of the Antiquity of the Faith, letter E. 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 489. H. Montanus, 
Nietigh., p. 86. Also, Hist. Mart, der Doopsg., 
A. 8. Also, Martyrs Mirror, printed A. D. 1631, 
Introduction, p. 52. 

MANY CHRISTIANS BURNT IN FLANDERS, A. D. 1183, 

AND VERY MANY PUT TO DEATH IN OTHER 

PLACES 

For the year 1183 we read of many more such 
people, who were called publicans (of which name 
we have already spoken) and whom Philip, Count 
of Flanders, and William, Archbishop of Rheims, 
caused, most unmercifully, to be burnt. 

Concerning this, Rigordus, an ancient historian 
of those times, writes as follows for said year : "At 
this time, very many heretics (thus this papistic 
writer calls the true Christians), were burnt m 
Flanders, by the reverend bishop of Rheims, car- 
dinal priest of the title of Sancta Sabina, Legate of 
the Pope, and by Philip, the illustrious count of 
Flanders, Rig., p. 168, edit. Wechelian. 

"The same year," says the above author, "over 
seven thousand Cottarelli (thus he calls the pious 
witnesses of Jesus, also called Waldenses and Albi- 
genses), were slain in the province of Bourges, by 

* The reader must know that the writers who have given vent in 
this most odious manner to said testimonies respecting the holy 
martyrs, were papists. 

t Master, or sir; a title of the middle ages, equivalent to the 
modern title of doctor. 


the inhabitants of the land, who all united against 
them, as against the enemies of God." 

Notice here, that they must all have been defense- 
less people, since so great a number suffered them- 
selves to be put to death by so few people as there 
were at that time in the small province of Bourges ; 
however, we leave this to God. 

The same writer adds also this: "In the same 
year, Pope Lucius condemned as heretics those who 
in Italy were called Humilitani, and in France, 
Poor Men of Lyons (the Albigenses and Wal- 
denses), whereupon, as may well be supposed, no 
small persecution took place in those hot times. 

This decree, it seems, was first published, or else 
renewed, A. D. 1184, or, as others state, A. D. 1185, 
according to the account of Mellinus, 2d book, 
jol. 443, col. 2. 


DECREE OF POPE LUCIUS III AGAINST THE WAL- 
DENSES, ETC., WHO ARE CALLED BY VARIOUS 
NAMES 

In the year 1184, or, as others write, 1185, Pope 
Lucius made a decree in the city of Verona, in the 
presence of the Emperor Frederick, which reads as 
follows : 

"In order to eradicate the wickedness of various 
heresies that have begun to manifest themselves in 
many countries throughout the whole world, the 
power of ecclesiastical discipline must be called 
into requisition. 

"Therefore, relying on the presence and power 
of our most beloved son, the Roman Emperor 
Frederick, we, with the common advice of our 
brethren, as well as of other patriarchs, archbish- 
ops, and many princes, who have assembled here 
from different parts of the realm, have, by this 
general resolution of our present decree, set our- 
selves against the heretics, who from various errors 
have received various names, and by apostolical 
authority, through this our constitution, have con- 
demned all heresies by whatever name they may be 
called. First, the Catharists, and the Patarini, and 
those who falsely and fictitiously call themselves 
Humiliati (humiliated ones) or Poor Men of 
Lyons; as well as the Passaginians, Josephists, 
Arnoldists; all these we lay under an everlasting 
curse. 

"And since some, having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof, as the apostle says, 
have assumed the authority to preach, though the 
same apostle says. How shall they preach, except 
they be sent? all those to whom this is forbidden, or 
who, not being sent, presumptuously dare preach, 
secretly or publicly, without authority from the 
apostolic see, or consent from the bishop of the 
place ; and all who believe otherwise or do not fear 
to teach otherwise than the Roman church preaches 
and maintains, in regard to the sacrament of the 
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, or to 
baptism (namely, infant baptism), or to the con- 
fession of sins, that is, auricular confession, or to 


298 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


marriage, and other sacraments of the church; 
and, in general, all those who will not condemn 
those as heretics whom the Roman church, or any 
bishop in his bishopric, with the advice of his 
clergy, or, in case of the decease of their own 
bishop, the clergy themselves, with the advice of 
the neighboring bishops, have declared as such, all 
these, I say, we bind with the bond of an everlast- 
ing ban. Likewise those who take them into their 
houses, and defend them, and all who uphold said 
heretics, fostering in them the heretical wicked- 
ness, whether they be called Consolati, Credentes, 
Perfecti, or by whatever other similar name, we 
include them all in this sentence of condemnation." 

Thus far, the decree of Pope Lucius. We will 
now give some explanation of a few strange names 
that occur in the same. As regards the common 
names of the Waldenses, of which mention is made 
in the decree of Lucius, namely, that they were 
called Catharists, Patarini, Humiliati, Poor Men of 
Lyons, Passaginians, Josephists, Arnoldists, etc., 
these we have already sufficiently explained. There 
remain therefore to be explained only their special 
distinctive names, as Consolati, Credentes, and Per- 
fecti. Consolati, that is, comforted ; by this name 
were called those who had recently come into the 
church, and were not yet firmly established in the 
faith. 

Credentes, that is, believing ; by this name were 
called those who were confirmed in the faith, and 
had increased in it to a considerable extent. 

Perfecti, that is, perfect; by this name were 
called those who applied themselves to faith and 
godliness to the full extent of their ability, so that 
they seemed to be perfect therein. These were also 
called Boni Homines, that is, good men. 

The most of this can be gleaned from Alanus, 
who wrote at the close of the twelfth century, 
namely, A. D. 1194. In edit. Paris, A. D. 1612, 
P. 110. Also, Abr. Mell, 2d book, p. 443, col. 3. 
Thus, the diversity of names does not indicate a 
diversity of people or faith, but simply the lesser 
or greater perfection in the faith in those who to- 
gether were but one people. 


BLOODY DECREE OF ILPHONSUS, OR ALPHONSUS, 

KING OF ARAGON, AGAINST THE WALDENSES, 

PUBLISHED A. D. 1194 

"Hphonsus, by the grace of God, King of Ara- 
gon, to all archbishops, bishops, and other prelates 
of the church of our kingdom; to all earls, vis- 
counts, soldiers, and to all the people in our realm 
and under our dominion, greeting, and good wishes 
that the Christian religion may be maintained en- 
tire. 

"Whereas, it has pleased God, to place us over 
His people, it is right and just that we should con- 
stantly, and according to our ability, care for the 
safety, happiness and protection of said people; 
therefore, as faithful successors of our ancestors, 
and as being justly obedient to the ordinances of the 


church, who have deemed it well, that the heretics 
should everywhere be rejected, condemned and 
persecuted, from the face of God and of all Catho- 
lics; namely, the Waldenses or Insabbathi (that is, 
those who do not observe the Sabbaths or holy- 
days of the Roman church), who call themselves 
Poor Men of Lyons, and all other heretics, of 
whom there are so many that they cannot all be 
enumerated, who have been excommunicated by the 
holy church, from our whole realm and dominion 
as enemies of the cross of Christ, dishonorers of 
the Christian religion and our person, and open 
enemies of our realm, we command them to depart 
and flee from our kingdom. 

ur" If fr ° m this day on ' any one sha11 re ceive said 
Waldenses and Insabbathi, or other heretics of 
whatever confession, into his house, or hear their 
pernicious preaching in any place, or give them 
food, or dare show them any other favor, be it 
known to the same, that he has incurred the dis- 
favor of God and of us, that he is punishable for 
the crime of lese-majesty, and that his goods shall 
be confiscated without appeal. 

"And we command that this our decree and per- 
petual ordinance, in every city, castle, and village 
of our kingdom and jurisdiction, and throughout 
all the lands of our dominion, shall be read and 
presented every Sunday to the people for ob- 
servance, by the bishops and other rulers of the 
church, and by our governors, bailiffs, justiciaries, 
and other magistrates, and that upon all offenders 
the aforesaid punishment shall be inflicted. 

"Be it further known: If any person, noble or 
ignoble, shall find any of the afore-mentioned here- 
tics anywhere in our lands, who, after three days' 
proclamation, knowing this our decree, do not 
speedily depart, but obstinately remain ; and shall 
inflict upon them every evil, ignominy, and dis- 
grace, death and maiming alone excepted, he shall 
have to fear no punishment for it, but shall know, 
that he has much rather merited our favor thereby' 
and that his deed is pleasing and acceptable to us 

"We, however, give these infamous heretics, 
though above their deserts and against reason, a 
respite till tomorrow, which is All Saints Day to 
leave or to begin leaving, our land. If thereafter 
any do still remain, we give to each and all of our 
subjects full authority, to rob and plunder them, to 
beat them with sticks, and to maltreat them shame- 
fully. 

This decree was signed with the seal of Hphon- 
sus, King of Aragon, as well as with the seal of 
Bishop Regimund of Terragona, of the Bishop of 
Tiracisca, and of other bishops. The decree itself 
was made by William de Bassa, the kind's notary 
A. D. 1194. Abr. Mell., 2d book, fol. 444. A. froni 
Fr. Pegna Direct. Inqaisit., part 2, Comment 39 
Also, Joan. Mariana Prefat., in Lucani Tudens. 

But what sort of execution followed upon this 
decree of Ilphonsus against the poor Waldenses in 
the kingdom of Aragon, it is not easy to know 
since it seems that the historians of this century 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


299 


have purposely passed by the cruelty exercised 
against them, doubtless because they felt ashamed 
of the matter. 


ORIGIN OF THE INQUISITION AGAINST THE WAL- 
DENSES AND ALBIGENSES, BY POPE INNO- 
CENT III, A. D. 1198 

A. D. 1198, Innocent III became pope in the 
place of Celestine. At his consecration he applied 
to himself the words which John the Baptist spoke 
of Christ: "He that hath the bride is the bride- 
groom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which 
standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because 
of the bridegroom's voice." 

Upon these words Innocent addressed his brides- 
men, the cardinals, archbishops and bishops as 
follows : "And am I not the bridegroom, and every 
one of you a friend of the bridegroom ? Yea, I am 
the bridegroom; for I have the noble, rich, and 
highly exalted, yea, the honorable, pure, gracious, 
and holy Roman church for my bride, who, by the 
ordinance of God, is the mother of all the faithful, 
and the supreme mistress over all the churches. 
She is wiser than Sarah, more prudent than Re- 
becca, more fruitful than Leah, more agreeable 
than Rachel, more devout than Anna, purer than 
Susanna, more valiant than Judith, more beautiful 
than Edesssea. Many daughters have gathered great 
riches; but she has excelled them all. I have es- 
poused her sacramentally. This bride has not been 
wedded to me portionless, but has given me her 
rich dowry, namely, the fullness of spiritual and of 
temporal power." Innocent. 3, in Consecra. Pontif., 
Serm. 3, page 19. 

Pope Innocent III was the first who instituted 
the office of the inquisition, with ordained inquisi- 
tors ; to which end he also wrote a letter, in the first 
year of his popedom, on the first day of April, to 
the archbishop of Auxitana; in which he greatly 
complains of the enemies of St. Peter's Shiplet, as 
he calls it, and then speaks as follows: 

"We desire that you and your fellow bishops, by 
your prudence, shall guard the more vigorously 
against this malady (meaning the doctrine of the 
Waldenses and Albigenses), and oppose it the 
more strenuously, as you see the more reason to 
fear that the sound part of the body may become 
infected by the disease; lest by such contagions, 
which spread gradually like a cancer, the minds of 
the faithful become infected by a general corrup- 
tion. 

"Therefore we send you brotherly love, and 
charge you most earnestly by this apostolic letter, 
that you do your utmost, to exterminate (all) her- 
esy, and to banish from your province all those that 
are contaminated therewith ; and that against them 
and all those who are contaminated therewith, or 
have any fellowship with them, or who are openly 
suspected of having familiar intercourse with them, 
you do not only exercise all the rigor of church dis- 
cipline, without intervention of appeal, but also, if 


necessary, subdue or punish them by the power of 
the material sword, by princes or by the people." 
On these words the papistic commentator re- 
marks, in the margin: "Up to this time, no in- 
quisitors had yet been sent or appointed by the 
pope." 

In the same month, namely on the 21st of April, 
1198, twenty days after the writing of the first 
letter, Pope Innocent III wrote another letter, not 
only to the above-mentioned Bishop of Auxitana, 
but also to the archbishops of Aix, Narbonne, Vi- 
enne, Aries, Ebredun, Tarragon, Lyons, etc., and 
at the same time appointed one Reinerius and one 
Guido as his commissaries or inquisitors, to appre- 
hend those who sought to escape the dominion of 
the Roman church. The contents of the letter were 
directed against the Waldenses, and commanded 
that they should be caught, as little foxes that spoil 
the vineyards. Finally he commands them to be 
driven out of the country. Epist. de Cretal., lib. 
1, pages 56, 57, edit. Colon. 

In the following month, namely on the 13th of 
May, Innocent wrote still another letter for the 
same purpose ; in which he again commanded that 
the little foxes should be caught, and promises to 
send the inquisitors, adding : 

"We pray, admonish, and entreat you all to- 
gether, in the name of the Lord, and charge you, 
unto remission of sins, that you receive them (the 
inquisitors, Reinerius and Guido), kindly, aid them 
manfully and vigorously, and lend them a helping 
hand by good counsel and with the deed. 

"But, as brother Reinerius, for urgent and im- 
portant matter of the church, has first, by order cf 
the apostolical see, gone to Spain, we will and 
command nevertheless, that you archbishops and 
bishops, draw the spiritual sword, when requested 
so to do by said brother Guido, against the heretics 
whom he shall name to you ; but let the lay power 
confiscate their goods, and banish them from the 
country, and thus separate the chaff from the 
wheat. 

"Furthermore, to all who in this great difficulty 
which now threatens the church, shall faithfully 
and devotedly assist her in maintaining the Chris- 
tian faith, we grant the same indulgence, pardon, 
or remission of sins, which we have granted to all 
those who go on a pilgrimage to St. Peter's or St. 
Jacob's church. Given at Rome, on the above day, 
A. D. 1198." Page 98. 


FIVE MEN AND THREE WOMEN BURNT AT TROYES, 

IN CHAMPAGNE, A. D. 1200; AND SOME 

EXPELLED FROM METZ 

About two years after Pope Innocent III had 
issued those three bloody letters, for the persecu- 
tion and suppression of the true, defenseless Chris- 
tians, who were commonly called Waldenses, but 
by their enemies or persecutors, publicans and sin- 
ners, it came to pass, in the last year of the twelfth 
century, namely A. D. 1200, that in the city of 


300 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Troyes, in Champagne, there were apprehended, 
by order of the pope and the reigning authorities, 
eight persons, five men and three women, who made 
the same confession as was stated above with re- 
gard to the Waldenses, contradicting the authority 
of the pope, infant baptism, the swearing of oaths, 
the office of criminal authority, and whom the 
papistic author of the large Chronicle of the Neth- 
erlands calls Popelitatnos. 

However, these persons were not accused by 
the papists of any evil works, but simply on ac- 
count of their faith; in which faith they desired 
to remain steadfast unto death, without, in any 
wise departing from it. Hence they were all sen- 
tenced to the fire, in said year, and offered up their 
bodies unto God as a burnt sacrifice, having com- 
mended their souls into His hands. 


THE EXPULSION OF THE CHRISTIANS FROM METZ, 
AND THE BURNING OF THEIR BOOKS 

At the same time, many Christians at Metz, who 
professed the same faith and were called Wal- 
denses, were shamefully expelled from Metz, and 
their books burnt, because they had translated the 
Holy Scriptures into their mother tongue. 

The papistic author of the large Belgic Chron- 
icle, upon the authority of the ancient historian 
Albericus, calls them a Waldensian sect, and says : 
"That certain abbots were sent to preach against 
them; who burnt some books translated from the 
Latin into their mother tongue, and thus extir- 
pated said sect. Mon. Nuciensis Magn. Chron. 
Belgicum, edit. Frankfort, A. D. 1607, page 189. 

This serves to confirm the preceding narrative. 
We will now conclude our account of the persecu- 
tions which occurred in the twelfth century, and 
proceed to the thirteenth century. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE THIRTEENTH 
CENTURY 

[The thirteenth century is commenced with the 
thirteenth and last Centuria, with which the Mag- 
deburg Centuriators have concluded their Ecclesi- 
astical History; which is, as it were, a mournful 
farewell air, on account of the lamentable deso- 
lation caused by the Pope of Rome, in the worship 
of God. Several Roman superstitions mentioned, 
which were commanded as solemnly as the Word 
of God, and are called the baptism of necessity, the 
baptism by women, heretics, etc. ; etc. ; also, how 
to baptize a child that is in danger of death. 

Some strange passages from Thomas Aquinas, 
touching infant baptism ; added decree of the bish- 
ops of Nemansa, as to how to deal with a child, con- 
cerning which there may be doubt of its having 
been baptized aright ; also the formula of words to 
be used by the priest over the child. Explanation 


that all this was done to gain respect for infant bap- 
tism, among the common people. 

Of the true baptism, and how God, in the midst 
of these storms, preserved His church. 

The followers of the doctrine of Peter Bruis and 
Henry of Toulouse, who, in many respects, con- 
curred in the belief of the Anabaptists of the pres- 
ent day, increase to such an extent, A. D. 1206, that 
in the provinces of Languedoc, Narbonne, Gas- 
cony, but few people were found who did not ad- 
here to their doctrine; also the three articles of 
their doctrine against the Roman church. 

The ancient Waldenses again appear, A. D. 
1218, and, though excommunicated by the pope in 
the bull of the Lord's Supper, declare against the 
swearing of oaths, taking the life of evil-doers, the 
faith of the Roman church, ungodly priests, the 
pope. 

Circumstantial account, that these people, A. D. 
1230, were so numerous, that one traveling from 
his country to Milan, could lodge every night with 
one of his persuasion. 

The increase of the Waldenses in France and 
Flanders, is again stated for, A. D. 1238. 

Statement, for 1242, that they not only confessed 
their belief with the mouth, but also suffered for it. 

Thirty-eight years after, namely, A. D. 1280, it 
is shown, that their doctrine had penetrated not 
only into Lombardy, but even into Sicily ; several 
articles of their doctrine described in full. 

Their increase in various countries of Christen- 
dom is again shown, for the year 1284, as a proof 
that notwithstanding the persecutions raised against 
them, they did not diminish. 

A certain doctrine of Alexander, namely, that 
baptism must be administered on confession of 
faith; whereupon the Waldenses and Albigenses 
are introduced once more, for the last time, and it 
is stated that they considered infant baptism of no 
virtue. 

Conclusion, being Jacob Mehrning's reply to 
Mellinus, respecting baptism.] 

This is the century, writes Jacob Mehrning, with 
which the Magdeburg Centuriators have closed 
their church history, etc. Concerning this time 
they write in the preface as follows : "This is the 
calamitous time, in which the Roman pope exalted 
his might to the highest, in the occidental churches, 
and the Turk his power, in the Orient ; where, then] 
the divine and pure doctrine became most abom- 
inably adulterated in every respect. 

Yea, the ground of doctrine, and all external 
ceremonies, as well as all points of doctrine, — all 
these, without reservation, the Pope of Rome 
would have under his control ; in consequence of 
which such a blindness and darkness arose among 
men, that almost all of them took upon them the 
yoke, submitting whatever they spoke or wrote, 
with more fear to the judgment of the pope, than 
of God Himself, or of His church. Rules were es- 
tablished, by which all controverted articles were 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


301 


to be decided and judged; namely, the corrupted 
writings of the fathers, and the decrees or resolu- 
tions of councils. The Word of God entirely lost 
its honor, dignity and credit; yea, it was thence- 
forth accepted only as far as the opinion of the 
fathers and councils allowed. Moreover, the Word 
of God was no longer expounded from the Holy 
Scriptures, but according to the apprehension of 
their own imagination, etc. Besides, too much con- 
cession was made to the heathen subtleties of Aris- 
totle ; yea, with such folly, that the obscure writ- 
ings of this heathen were introduced into the 
schools, brought into the pulpit, and mixed with the 
articles of faith, etc. Jac. Mehrn. Bapt. Hist., p. 
717, from Cent. Magd. XIII, chap. 13. 

As regards infant baptism, because the same was 
much contradicted, yea, utterly rejected, at this 
time, by the Waldenses and Albigenses, those of 
the Roman church, in order to provide for this, and 
to maintain it, ordained various things, called bap- 
tism of necessity (private baptism), baptism by 
women, baptism by heretics. 

The Magdeburg Centuriators quote the follow- 
ing (chap. 6, fol. 242) from a synodal book, writ- 
ten jointly by some bishops, at Nemansa, A. D. 
1251: "We command, that an infant, just born 
and in peril of death, so that it can not be brought 
to the priest, be baptized by the men present, 
whether in warm or in cold water, but with no 
other liquid, and this in a wooden, stone or other 
vessel. But if there be no men present, let the 
women who are there baptize the child, or even 
the father or the mother, in case there be no one 
else present, to baptize the child." Bapt. Hist., 
pp. 727, 728. 

By these and similar means the Romanists at 
this time, sought to maintain the credit of infant 
baptism, which was greatly opposed ; to which end 
tended also the words of Aquinas, which are as 
follows: "The proper administrator of baptism 
shall be a priest, whose province it is by virtue of 
his office, to baptize ; but in cases of necessity, not 
only a chaplain, but also a layman, or a woman, 
yea, even a heathen or a heretic may baptize, if he 
only observes the form of the church, and pur- 
poses to do what the church does. But if a person, 
from necessity, is baptized by such an one, he in- 
deed receives the sacrament, so that he need not be 
baptized again; but he does not receive the grace 
of baptism, because he is considered as not hav- 
ing been baptized aright," Thorn. Aquin. de Art., 
Fid., chap. 14, in Bapt. Hist., p. 725. 

In the same direction tends what is adduced 
in Cent. Magd., XIII., chap. 6, fol. 242, from the 
above-mentioned synodal book of the bishops of 
Nemansa: "But," say they, "if a child, in case of 
necessity, has been baptized by a layman, according 
to the form prescribed, we command, that said 
child, if it survives, be brought as soon as possible 
to the priest, who shall diligently examine how 
it was baptized ; and if he find that the form pre- 
scribed was not observed aright, he shall baptize the 


child (again), according to the form of the church. 
But if he doubt whether it was rightly baptized, 
or not, since perhaps the baptizer did not properly 
consider the words which he spoke in baptism, 
or because the bystanders were not agreed in this, 
or because there is no certainty whether it was bap- 
tized or not, the priest shall baptize it with these 
words: 'If thou art baptized, I baptize thee not 
again ; but if thou art not baptized, I baptize thee in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost.' In such doubtful cases, however, one 
witness is sufficient when more can not be had." 
Bapt. Hist., p. 728. 

Who does not see that the Roman church, when 
infant baptism was contradicted, endeavored by 
these and similar absurdities, to make it appear 
to the common people as though infant baptism 
were absolutely necessary to salvation, yea, so 
necessary that rather than neglect it for want of 
a priest, even women, yea, heathen and heretics 
whom they otherwise were accustomed to burn, 
might baptize the infants if they only observed the 
form of baptism employed by the church. O 
strange theology! Merely to maintain the error 
of infant baptism, many other errors were main- 
tained. 


OF THE TRUE BAPTISM 

Nevertheless, in the midst of these storms and 
billows of antichrist, God preserved the ark of His 
church, so that many persons still remained, who, 
notwithstanding the manifold troubles and persecu- 
tions that came upon them on this account, prac- 
ticed and maintained the true worship of God, par- 
ticularly in opposition to infant baptism, the office 
of criminal authority, the swearing of oaths, and 
almost all other superstitions of the Roman church. 

A. D. 1206. — In the beginning, yea, before the 
beginning of this century, and so through a number 
of years, the doctrine of the ancient Anabaptists in- 
creased not a little, which appeared more par- 
ticularly in the year 1206, when they had so in- 
creased in many countries, that the wiles and power 
of the Roman church were not sufficient to bring 
them to apostatize, much less to exterminate them. 

Concerning this, P. J. Twisck gives the following 
description: "The adherents of the doctrine of 
Peter de Bruis and Henry of Toulouse, Anabap- 
tists, mentioned for the year 1135, which doctrine 
afterwards was also followed by the Waldenses 
(see the year 1159), multiplied so greatly about 
this time, namely, A. D. 1206, that few were 
found in the provinces of Albi, Languedoc, Nar- 
bonne, Gascony, Rouergue, and Toulouse, who did 
not adhere to said doctrine, notwithstanding Pope 
Innocent III very cruelly opposed it. See account 
for the year 1198. 

The principal points of their doctrine, besides 
others, were these: 1. That the Roman church 
was the whore of Babylon. 2. That her polity 
was impure and corrupted. 3. That the mass was 


302 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


a work replete with wickedness, and instituted 
neither by Christ nor for His disciples. Chron. p. 
523, col. 1 and 2, from Chron. Nicol. Gill, fol. 286 
Guil. Merul., fol. 798, Henr. Boxh., fol. 22. 

A. D. 1218. — For this year mention is made by 
Sebastian Franck, of the ancient Waldenses, whom 
he calls by three different names. The Poor, In- 
sabbatati and Waldenses. However, that they to- 
gether were but one people, has already been 
proved. Said author writes thus concerning them-: 
"These originated A. D. 1218, under Emperor 
Louis IV. They are also excommunicated in the 
bull of the Lord's Supper, and hold: 

1. "That men ought not to swear at all, not even 
to the truth. 

2. "That no judge, who would be a Christian 
may put to death any one, not even a malefactor. 

3. "That the pious person who holds to the faith 
of the Roman church, can not be saved. 

4. "That an ungodly priest can not consecrate. 

5. "That the church perished at the time of Syl- 
vester. 

6. "That they are not subject, neither intend to 
be, to the pope or to other prelates." 

Then follow several other articles of their doc- 
trine, which, for the sake of brevity, we will pass 
over ; for instance, that they held : "That outside 
of their church there was no sacrament nor bap- 
tism (which completely overthrows the infant 
baptism of the Roman church) ; that they denied 
purgatory ; that they counted the mass, alms, and 
prayers for the dead of no value, yea, that they re- 
garded them as the inventions of priestcraft ; that 
honoring the saints had not the slightest merit, 
and that they do not hear our prayers in heaven." 

These and similar articles are adduced there, 
from Aeneas, Sylvius and other writers, as charges 
against the Waldenses ; of which the intelligent may 
judge. Seb. Fr. Chron. der Rom. Kett., fol. 119, 
col. 4, letter P. 

A. D. 1230.— It is stated that the Waldenses, 
whose good confession we have already shown, 
declared at this time in the proceedings which it 
seems they had against the pope, that their num- 
bers were so great in Germany, France and Italy, 
and especially in Lombardy — where their teach- 
ers lived, to whom they annually sent sustenance 
from other countries — that any one of them trav- 
eling from his country to Milan, could lodge every 
night with one of his own persuasion, whom they 
recognized by certain marks on the door or upon 
the roof. P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 546, col. 2, from 
Henr. Boxh., fol. 25. 

A. D. 1238.— Or about 1239, the Waldenses had 
thus increased in France and Flanders, that a cer- 
tain Dominican monk, Robert Boulgre, sent as in- 
quisitor by Pope Gregory IX, put to death a count- 
less multitude of them ; of which more will be said 
hereafter. P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 554, col. 1. 

A. D. 1242.— At this time, said people had 
to suffer much from popery, on account of their 


faith and religion, which in the bishopric of Tou- 
louse alone, appeared in the case of about two hun- 
dred persons, who held said belief, and were called 
Waldenses ; of whose imprisonment and death we 
shall speak in the future. P. J. Twisck, Chron 
p. 557, col. 1. 

A. D. 1259. — At this time, or thereabouts, 
Gerard Sagarellas, an Italian, but a doctor of Paris, 
wrote a book against the Franciscans, whereupon 
Bonaventura, General of the Franciscan order, 
replied; however, of this Gerard and his belief, 
as also of that of the Waldenses, we shall speak 
more fully hereafter. We would only stop to say 
that from this time on, his disciples, the Fratricelli, 
or Little Brothers, after the year 1285, called 
Dulcinists, began secretly (from fear of persecu- 
tion) to hold their meetings in the mountains of 
Piedmont, and Novara, in Lombardy, professing 
the doctrine of the Waldenses. However, from the 
different places where they lived, they received 
different names ; but the appellation Fratricelli or 
Frerots, was especially given them, because they 
called each other brethren in Christ ; nevertheless 
the mouths of the scorners thus spoke only the 
truth, since Christ Himself so called His disciples, 
saying: "All ye are brethren" (Matt. 23:8) ; and 
"I will declare thy name (O God) unto my breth- 
ren; in the midst of the church will I sing praise 
unto thee" (Heb. 2:12). 

A. D. 1262.— At this time the Waldenses are 
again mentioned, who lived in Lombardy, and in 
the country of Genoa, and professed a sound pro- 
fession, though they were called heretics by the 
papists, and were oppressed and persecuted by open 
decrees of the Roman see ; which shall be spoken of 
more fully elsewhere. Compare Bzov., A. D. 1262. 
Art. 3, ex Decret. Epist. Alexand. IV. with 
A. Mell., Hist., fol. 470, col. 2. 

A. D. 1280. — In this year it is recorded that 
said people professing the above profession (name- 
ly, the Waldenses, then called Waldois, after Wal- 
do and his adherents, were expelled from Lyons), 
so multiplied in Lombardy that their doctrine, hav- 
ing spread in Italy, penetrated even into Sicily; 
as is attested by the open letters emitted against 
them by the Emperor Frederick II. 

As regards their faith, the following articles, 
over and above what has already been mentioned, 
respecting their views against infant baptism, the 
office of criminal authority, the swearing of oaths, 
etc., were laid to their charge, as can be gleaned 
from the writings of Reinerius, the priest: That 
in the matter of salvation we must believe only the 
holy Scriptures, and in no wise depend on men. 
That said Scriptures contain everything that is nec- 
essary to salvation ; and that nothing is to be re- 
ceived but what is commanded of God. That there 
is but one Mediator (Christ), and, consequently, 
that the saints ought not to be invoked. That there 
is no purgatory, but that all who are justified in 
Christ, enter into life everlasting, and those who do 
not believe, shall be cast into eternal death ; thus 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


303 


denying that there is still besides a third or fourth 
place. 

They accepted and admitted but two sacraments, 
namely, holy baptism and the holy Supper. They 
said that all masses, particularly those for the dead, 
should be rejected ; likewise all human institutions, 
and that they ought not to be considered necessary 
to salvation. They also taught that the chanting, 
the hours, the fasting connected with certain days, 
superfluous feast days, distinction of food, the 
many degrees and orders of priests, monks, and 
nuns, the benedictions and consecrations of crea- 
tures, vows, pilgrimages, in short, the vast med- 
ley of ceremonies which in the times past had been 
brought into vogue, ought to be abolished. They 
denied the supremacy of the pope, especially as ex- 
ercised by him over secular government, and ad- 
mitted no other degrees in church offices than 
bishops, teachers (then called priests), and dea- 
cons. They said that the Roman see is the true 
Babylon, and the pope the fountain of all misery ; 
that the marriage of the priests (or teachers) is 
good, and necessary in the church ; that those who 
hear and rightly understand the Word of God, are 
the true church, to which Christ has given the keys, 
to let the sheep in, and to drive away the wolves. 
"Behold here," says the writer, "the sum of the 
doctrine of the Waldoes (or Waldenses), which 
was oppugned by the enemies of truth, and on ac- 
count of which they, according to the testimony 
of their opponents, were persecuted." P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., p. 605, col. 2, and p. 606, col. 1, 
from the Staet der Kerchen, Jan. Cresp., fol. 314, 
315, 316. Merul., fol. 843. Henr. Boxh., fol. 19, 
25. 

A. D. 1284. — At this time the Waldenses, ac- 
cording to Twisck, multiplied more and more in 
France and other countries of Christendom, though 
they were sought with craftiness and cruelly per- 
secuted, and even previously every means and all 
diligence had been employed to utterly extirpate 
them ; which greatly astonished certain bishops of 
that time, and also certain lawyers of Avignon, in 
certain consultations held against them, and still 
extant. P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 611, col. 2. 

Concerning the form or mode of baptism, Alex- 
ander* (p. 4, q. 11, m. 1), in this century, says: 
"Baptism shall be administered in confession of 
faith in the Holy Trinity." Jac. Mehr., Bapt. 
Hist., p. 726. 

Centuria 13, of the Magdeburg Centuriators, 
cap. 5, fol. 216, 217, from Cesarius, states "That 
the Waldenses and Albigenses rejected baptism at 
this time, saying that it was inefficacious and use- 
less ; which they, as Jacob Mehrning writes, under- 
stood of infant baptism, which is administered 
without instruction and faith; for the Waldenses 
had a very high regard for the baptism of Christ, 
as administered according to His ordinance." Bapt. 
Hist., pp. 733, 734. 


Note.— A. D. 1287.— Probus, Bishop of Tullo, 
was at this time so enlightened of God that he not 
only opposed Pope Honorius IV, but also delivered 
an excellent oration, in which he freely exposed 
the errors of the papists. Compare Cental. Test, 
fol. 654, with the 13th book van den Ondergang, 
p. 614, col. 1. 

A. D. 1299.— In the year 1299 certain Albi- 
genses and Waldenses, called Fratricelli, or Little 
Brothers (of whose faith and life we have spoken 
elsewhere), became so odious to Boniface VIII, 
Pope of Rome, on account of their uprightness, 
which the papists called falseness, that he declared 
them heretics ; but as we intend elsewhere to speak 
more fully of their belief and walk among men, 
we will content ourselves here with merely men- 
tioning them ; it being sufficient for us that these 
people and their doctrine existed until the very 
close of this century. See in the large Christen 
Martelaersboeck, edition 1619, fol. 471, from 
Trithem. Chron. Hirsaug. 

Proceeding to the close of the century, we will 
close with the conclusion of Jacob Mehrning, which 
is a reply to A. Mellinus, who did his best to show 
that the Waldenses did not well accord with the 
Anabaptists in the article of baptism. Mehrning 
replies to him as follows: "Abraham Mellinus (in 
his large Nederlandtsch Martelaers book) dared 
to say : 'The Waldenses would not agree with the 
so-called Anabaptists in the article of infant bap- 
tism.' But the good man forgets that he himself 
has adduced testimonies from Bernard, Peter 
Cluniacensis, and from the Magdeburg Centuries,* 
which refute and condemn this supposed error of 
the ancient Waldenses, namely, that they should 
have believed in infant baptism." Bapt. Hist., p. 
736. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 


* We will say nothing of this Alexander, but merely speak of his 
doctrine. 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE THIRTEENTH 
CENTURY 

[The way and entrance to the martyrs of this 
century is through the valleys of Albi and through- 
out France, England, and other countries, where 
the pious witnesses of Jesus laid down their lives 
for the evangelical truth. 

From the year 1209 throughout this century, 
crusades are preached in the name of the pope; 
which were the cause of the destruction of thou- 
sands of Albigenses, who lived quietly and peace- 
ably under certain papistic authorities ; for certain 
reasons, however, we have not finished this ac- 
count. 

Remarks with eight reasons unanimously indi- 
cating the nonresistant principles of the true Al- 
bigenses; nevertheless, for important reasons, we 
have placed the account of their martyrdom for the 

* The following words are obscure in the author; hence we 
experienced difficulty in translating them. — Van. Braght. 


304 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


most part in a marginal note, for the years 1210 
and 1211. 

One hundred and eighty persons called Albi- 
genses, burnt without the castle Minerve, A. D. 
1210. 

Sixty of those people end their lives by fire, for 
their faith, at Casser, about A. D. 1211. 

About one hundred persons, who confessed the 
same doctrine, burnt alive in a tower at Cassas, 
about the close of A. D. 1211. 

Fifty of their fellow believers likewise lose their 
lives by fire, at Chastelnau d'Ari, about the close 
of A. D. 1211. 

Over four hundred persons, who professed the 
same profession, though called lnduti, at Lavaur, 
or Vaurum, rather suffer themselves to be burnt 
to death by the terrible flames than accept the 
Roman faith. 

ACCOUNT PROPER OF THE HOLY MARTYRS 

Great persecutions of the believers, A. D. 1206. 

A man, at London, in England, burnt alive for 
the faith of the Waldenses, A. D. 1210; and 
twenty-four persons at Paris, in France, likewise 
put to death by fire, for the same religion. 

In the year 1212, about one hundred persons 
called Waldenses, are put to death by fire at Stras- 
burg ; thirty-nine at Bingen, and eighteen at Mentz. 

Account of a cruel inquisition, A. D. 1214, over 
the doctrine of the Waldenses; Conrad of Mar- 
purg, the chief inquisitor, and his mode of exami- 
nation with red-hot iron, as well as with hot and 
cold water ; also, the oath which the inquisitors in 
the bishopric of Utrecht were wont to put to those 
who were then called heretics, abot A. D. 1215. 

About eighty persons called Waldenses, burnt for 
the faith, at Strasburg; also some Christians at 
Toulouse, about A. D. 1215. 

Gerard de la Motte, a deacon of the Christians 
called Albi- Waldenses, with some of his fellow- 
believers, sacrificed by fire, at Borriens, A. D. 
1227. 

Several papal statutes and ordinances against the 
Waldenses, related for the year 1229. 

Severe persecution, through the Inquisition, in 
Germany, where very many Waldenses are burnt 
for the faith, A. D. 1230. 

Three decrees of Emperor Frederick II are suc- 
cessively described, for the year 1230; another se- 
vere persecution of the Anabaptistic Waldenses, in 
Germany, A. D. 1231. 

Nineteen persons of the same profession, burnt 
in the bishopric of Toulouse, A. D. 1232 ; also, two 
hundred and twenty-four in a place near Toulouse, 
A. D. 1243 ; a rigorous inquisition in the aforesaid 
bishopric, A. D. 1251, which was carried also into 
the following year. 

Decree of Pope Urban III against the Waldenses 
and Albigenses in Lombardy and about Genoa, 


A. D. 1262; great persecutions, about A. D. 1280, 
1283, 1284. 

Gerard Sagarellus burnt at Parma, A. D. 1285 ; 
Herman, Andrew, and Guillemette [Wilhelmina], 
exhumed, A. D. 1299. Conclusion.] 


The valleys of Albi, the region around Toulouse, 
yea, all France, England, and other kingdoms, fur- 
nish us, during this century, many martyrs, who, 
though, they, with reference to the severity of their 
tortures, according to the flesh, were pitiable and 
most miserable, suffered nevertheless with good 
cheer, yea, with joy, in consideration of their sure 
hope and unshaken confidence in the Lord, as being 
their shield and exceeding great reward.* 

As regards the persecutions that occurred in this 
century, against the Waldenses and Albigenses, 
they by far surpass all other persecutions of which 
we read in the preceding centuries ; for it seemed 
now as if the very furies of hell, so to speak, had 
broken loose, to destroy all believers, yea, almost 
the whole earth. 

In the years 1209-12, 1225, 1234, yea, through- 
out the entire thirteenth century, crusades, or so- 
called holy, voluntary preparations of war were 
preached, by order of the pope, for the extermina- 
tion of the Waldenses and Albigenses, all over the 
world, but more particularly in the kingdom of 
France. 

These crusades consisted in great armies of Ro- 
man Catholics, who voluntarily enlisted in this so- 
called holy warfare; each distinguished by a white 
cross on his breast, or one of white cloth sewed on 
his garment; on account of which crosses these 
armies were called Crusades. 

But that they might acquit themselves the more 
courageously and intrepidly, in exterminating the 
Albigenses and Waldenses, yea, that they might 
suffer none of them to remain alive, but kill them 
by fire, sword, gallows, and other means, the pope 
most solemnly promised to all who by so doing 
should meet death, or fall by the weapons of the 
princes seeking to protect the Albigenses and Wal- 
denses, full remission of all their past sins, yea, 
that they should straightway go to heaven. 

This had the effect, that countless multitudes 
flocked together, as it were, to the honor of God, 
and for the extirpation of the so-called heresies, in 
order to obtain forgiveness of sins, and thus dying 
find salvation; and having, under certain chief- 
tains, been formed into armies they marched forth 
and engaged alone in murdering, burning, desolat- 
ing and tyrannizing among the Waldenses and 
Albigenses, sparing not even the infant in the 
cradle. It is impossible to relate how great a multi- 
tude of these innocent people perished, and under 
what severe torments, simply on account of their 
true faith. 


* Gen. 15:1. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


305 


REMARKS IN REGARD TO THE DISTINCTION OF THE 
PEOPLE CALLED ALBIGENSES OR WALDENSES 

I deem it necessary here, to insert a caution, 
which I desire that it be borne in mind wherever 
the Albigenses and Waldenses (who are introduced 
as witnesses of our faith) are spoken of, namely, 
that we here speak only of such people as, besides 
the confession of their and our most holy faith re- 
specting the points necessary to salvation, were 
opposed to war, and willingly and patiently, as de- 
fenseless sheep of Christ appointed for the slaugh- 
ter, entered the path of death through manifold 
torments inflicted upon them by the enemies of the 
faith, to the glory of God, the edification of their 
neighbor, and the salvation of their own souls. 

It is true, that in ancient histories mention is 
made of people who, though improperly, were 
called Waldenses or Albigenses, who resisted, yea 
slew their enemies ; but of such we do not speak 
here, indeed, all of whom there is reason so to 
think, we would positively pass by.* 

It must also be observed here, that the princes 
who had taken the defenseless Albigenses and Wal- 
denses under their protection, and even their sol- 
diers, were sometimes (through sheer ignorance) 
called Albigenses or Waldenses, simply because 
they protected them. However, of these we do not 
here speak, but only of those who, according to 
their confession, lived peaceably and meekly under 
their protection. 

That many of them dwelt, as defenseless sheep, 
under the government of such princes, and that on 
this account war was sometimes waged by their 
enemies against these princes, so that one had to 
suffer with the other, is evident from the accounts 
of the ancients ; however, we have, to the utmost of 
our ability, distinguished them ; so that as far as we 
know, not one of those whom we have mentioned 
as martyrs, had any part or lot with revenge, much 
less with war. 

In addition to this, I will briefly adduce from an- 
cient writers, for the benefit of the truth-seeking 
reader, several arguments, showing that the Wal- 
denses and Albigenses dwelt defenselessly and in 
all quiet under the protection of their magistracies ; 
and that in consequence of this, said magistrates 
were also called Waldenses and Albigenses, and 
war waged against them ; who, when they resisted, 
were the cause that it was said that the Albigenses 
or Waldenses had resisted, yea, actually fought. 

First Argument. — Abraham Mellinus, from In- 
nocent HI, epist. 84, states : That the pope, through 
letters, as well as legates, gave orders, throughout 
France, to the ecclesiastics as well as the seculars, 
to exterminate the Albigenses ; however, Raymond, 
count of Toulouse had already taken upon him to 
defend the Albigenses. For this reason Pope Inno- 


* In those times there was a sect sometimes, though improp- 
erly, called Albigenses. Their proper name, however, was "Ruptu- 
arii" or "Routiers" ; that is, desolators or rioters, because they made 
resistance. See 2d book of the Persecutions, fol. 460, col. 4. But of 
such we have purposely avoided to speak, as they do not belong 
here. 


cent wrote to the Archbishop of Narbonne, and to 
other bishops, abbots, and prelates, and among 
these especially to Radulph, canon of Narbonne, 
and also to the abbots of the great valley, and of 
Cisteaux, that they should speak to the count and 
persuade him to persecute the heretics (that is, the 
Albigenses) ; but, if he should reject their counsel, 
that they should excommunicate him ; both of which 
took place. Second book, fol. 449, col. 1. 

Second Argument. — Chassanion states: That 
shortly after the departure of the count of Toulouse 
and the King of Aragon, the abbot of Cisteaux, 
first legate of the pope, sent the bishop of Toulouse 
in France, to preach the crusade against Count 
Raymond, and to instigate the whole world against 
him and his country, saying that he rebelled against 
the (Roman Catholic) church, and protected all the 
heretics (namely, the Albigenses) that were with- 
in his territory. Chassan. Hist., lib. 3, cap. 10. 

Third Argument. — The legate of the pope sum- 
moned Raymond, count of Toulouse, to Aries, in- 
dicating that his case (namely, his protecting the 
Albigenses) would be considered there. When he 
came, several articles by which he was to be gov- 
erned were laid before him; one of which was: 
That he should expel from his territories all the 
heretics (namely, the Waldenses, who lived quietly 
and peaceably under him), together with their ad- 
herents, friends, and kindred. Also: That he 
should deliver up into the hands of the legate, and 
Count Montfort, all those whom they should name 
to him (namely, those who professed the same be- 
lief), that they might do with them according to 
their pleasure ; and this within one year. Chassan., 
Hist. Alb., lib. 3, cap. 9, 10. A. Mell., fol. 455, 
col. 1. 

Fourth Argument. — Robert of Auxerre con- 
cludes his Year-book with the papal excommunica- 
tion against Raymond, count of Toulouse, whose 
territory was given as a prey to all who wished : 
because he was found (says the writer) to extend 
favor and assistance to the heretics (the Albigenses 
and Waldenses), and was, therefore, declared a 
renegade of the faith and an open enemy of the 
(Roman) church. Chron. Altiss., A. D. 1211, De- 
ceased A. D. 1212. 

Who does not see that this Count was excom- 
municated simply bcause he permitted these so- 
called heretics, termed Albigenses and Waldenses, 
to live under him ? on account of which his whole 
territory was given for a prey. 

Fifth Argument.— In the year 1212 the city of 
Penne, or Pene, in the territory of Aix la Chapelle, 
was besieged by the count of Montfort ; but before 
the enemy arrived, the governor burnt the suburb, 
and retreated with his people into the citadel. Fi- 
nally the city was taken, and seventy soldiers who 
were in it ( the writer says) were hanged ; but all 
the rest (namely, the defenseless) that maintained 
the error of the Albigenses, were burnt. Thuan. 
Hist., lib. 6, A. D. 1550. Forte ex Vincentio Bello 
Vacensi and Petro Sam. 


306 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


From this also it certainly is more than evident 
that the Albigenses lived quietly under their mag- 
istrates, and offered no resistance to the enemies ; 
hence they were not hanged, like the conquered 
soldiers, but burnt as heretics. 

Sixth Argument. — "Thus the Count of Mont- 
fort," writes Paul Emilius, "scoured the whole 
country, and brought all the cities and castles, 
especially in Agenois and Rouergue, under his 
power. Not because they all held an ungodly doc- 
trine (that is, were Albigenses), but in order that 
they might not be able to protect or assist the un- 
godly," that is, the heretics, as they called them. 
Hist. Gal., lib. 6, in Phill., Aug. 2. 

Here it is also evident beyond contradiction, that 
the Albigenses who lived under those magistrates, 
did not only carry no arms, but also held a belief 
entirely different from that of their authorities; 
for, otherwise they would have called both by the 
same name, that is, ungodly, but as it is, only the 
Albigenses are called ungodly, while of the mag- 
istrates it is stated, that they did not hold this doc- 
trine ; although sometimes the magistrates and the 
subjects were called by the same name, as has been 
said. 

Seventh Argument. — This is still more con- 
firmed by the words with which the Dominican 
friars in those times were accustomed to conclude 
their sermons, saying : "Behold, here ye can per- 
ceive, most beloved, how great the wickedness of 
the heretics (the Albigenses) is, yea, what is still 
more, they have accepted the protection of the sec- 
ular lords." Vinbert. Burgund. Serm., part 2, 
Serm. 64. 

Prom this, and similar passages which we might 
adduce, it is sufficiently evident that not the Albi- 
genses or Waldenses, but the magistrates under 
whom they lived, had recourse to arms and carried 
on war ; hence, they do wrong, who confound the 
Albigenses with their magistrates, and lay, wheth- 
er through ignorance or on purpose, what their 
magistrates did, to the charge of the Albigenses. 
Their own confession has already been given ; in 
which they confess : That they follow the example 
of Christ, who exercised no temporal jurisdiction 
or dominion. 

Eighth Argument. — But, for still further proof 
of said matter, we will add the following, con- 
tained in the Introduction to the Martyrs' Mirror, 
edition 1631, p. 50, col. 1 : "A. D., . . . there ex- 
isted in Toulouse in France, the Albigenses, so 
called because they arose principally in the province 
of Albi ; otherwise they were of the same doctrine 
and belief as the former (the Waldenses) ; hence 
it is presumable, that they were one people not- 
withstanding that they are called by different 
names." 

"Baronius writes that their belief, among other 
things, was : That infant baptism was not necessary 
to salvation ; that an unworthy, sinful priest could 
not administer the sacrament ; that no one might 
become a bishop, who was not blameless ; that no 


churches ought to be erected to the honor of God 
or the saints; that confession (of sins) could be 
made to any one ; that it was not lawful to swear 
any oath, etc. ; all of which things they said could 
be found in the New Testament, to which alone 
they held." From Baron., A. D. 1176, num. 1, 2, 3. 

Continuing, we find, in the afore-mentioned In- 
troduction (same page, col. 2), respecting their 
views against war, and in refutation of those who 
impute this to them, the following words: "For 
this reason we must also consider, that when we 
read here of the wars waged against them, and the 
resistance which they offered, this ... is to be 
understood of the princes and magistrates who 
took them under their protection ; as the King of 
Aragon, the count of Toulouse, the count of Foix, 
and others; further, of those who were employed 
under the authority of the afore-mentioned per- 
sons; but it is neither probable nor reasonable, 
that such people should be counted among them, 
who, according to Baronius, regulated their con- 
duct only by the New Testament, which they ob- 
served so strictly, that they would not even swear 
an oath, which is much less than to engage in war." 

This is confirmed by what Baronius says, name- 
ly, that war was waged by the pope and his ad- 
herents, against the aforesaid princes, for the rea- 
son that the latter would not persecute the Albi- 
genses, and expel them from their territory ( but 
when this was done, after the said princes had been 
brought into subjection, the Albigenses, he writes, 
soon became extinct. Bar., A. D. 1210, num. 3, and 
1228, num. 3. 

This could not have been the case if so numerous 
a people had opposed their persecutors with force 
of arms. Introduction, page 51, col. 1. 


DEMONSTRATION OF A PLAIN DISTINCTION BE- 
TWEEN THE ALBIGENSES AND THEIR MAGIS- 
TRATES AND FELLOW CITIZENS 

The last-mentioned writer, proceeding to the vio- 
lence and vexation suffered by the Albigenses from 
the papists— ecclesiastics as well as seculars, makes 
mention of Raymond, count of Toulouse, and of 
the count of Turenne, saying : That they went to 
Peter, the cardinal and legate of the pope, in order 
that they should kill or slay the heretics (the Albi- 
genses), if the latter should not be converted to the 
Roman church through the cardinals' preaching. 
Having arrived at Toulouse, they made the citizens 
swear an oath that they would name all the Albi- 
genses they knew. Many of them were now be- 
trayed, and among these, also Peter Moranus, one 
of their principal men. When he was examined, he 
freely confessed his faith ; and was instantly con- 
demned as a heretic, and all his property confis- 
cated. Introduction, p. 51, col. 1, 2, from Baron 
A. D. 1178, num. 2. 

Note. — From the afore-mentioned eight argu- 
ments, but especially from this last demonstration, 
it appears incontrovertibly, that a great distinction 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


307 


must be made, between the Albigenses and their 
magistrates, as well as the citizens among whom 
they lived in the cities ; so that whenever resistance, 
war or conflict are spoken of, in which the inhabi- 
tants of this or that city or place engaged, it is to 
be understood throughout of the magistrates and 
their soldiers, who guarded said cities or places, 
as also, of the common citizens ; but not of the true 
Albigenses, since these, in accordance with their 
faith, as has already been sufficiently stated, ex- 
ercised no revenge or resistance against any one, 
but lived peaceably under their magistrates; to 
whom they also, as was proper, paid their taxes. 

However, that we may not give offense to our 
fellow believers, if any should entertain a different 
opinion in regard to this matter, although it has 
been sufficiently explained by us, we shall adduce 
the principal confessors who suffered in the be- 
sieged cities for the doctrine of the Albigensian 
religion, not as infallible witnesses, but as inci- 
dental matters ; which the kind reader will please 
regard as having been done by us from no other 
motive than Christian prudence. 


ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY PERSONS CALLED 

ALBIGENSES, BURNT WITHOUT THE CASTLE 

MINERVE 

In the year of our Lord 1210, a large sacrifice of 
believers, called Perfecti or Albigenses took place 
near the castle Minerve ; so that at one time about 
one hundred and eighty persons, men as well as 
women, who, forsaking the Roman antichrist, de- 
sired to adhere steadfastly to Jesus Christ and His 
divine truth, were publicly burnt; these, having 
commended their souls to God, are now waiting for 
the crown and reward of the faithful. 

As to the manner in which this occurred, dif- 
ferent papistic writers give this account : That the 
pope of Rome caused a second crusade or campaign 
to be preached, in order to annihilate with might 
and main the Albigenses wherever they might be 
concealed; promising forgiveness of sins, yea, 
eternal salvation to all who in this campaign should 
well acquit themselves in murdering and burning 
the Waldenses. 

In the meantime there were in the castle of Mi- 
nerve very many Albigenses called Perfecti (per- 
fect ones) , who resided under the lord of the cas- 
tle, and were protected by him. 

This castle, situated on a high rock, was besieged 
by the legate of the pope, and so hard pressed, that 
the lord of the same was finally, through lack of 
water, compelled to surrender. The legate com- 
manded that all who would not unite with the 
Roman church, should be put to death. 

Those within, however, (namely, the defenseless 
Albigenses) said: "We do not wish to forsake our 
faith ; we reject your Roman faith ; your labor is 
vain, for neither death nor life shall cause us to 
depart from our faith." Such was the answer and 


resolution of the men, who were all assembled to- 
gether in one house. The women, who were in an- 
other house, were found by the abbot so courageous 
and undaunted that with all his fine words he could 
make no impression upon them. 

The count of Montfort then caused them all 
(namely, these confessors) to come out of the cas- 
tle, the men as well as the women, and having 
ordered a large fire to be kindled, he had them all 
cast into it, to the number of one hundred and 
forty ; all of whom were burnt alive, except three 
women, who, having apostatized through weakness, 
escaped the fire. All the others that were in the 
castle (namely, the lord with his servants and sol- 
diers, who had guarded the castle), complied with 
the will of the papal legate. 

Peter Sarnensis, speaking of these people that 
were put to death, says, that these hundred and 
forty martyrs were of the Albigenses called Per- 
fecti ; and adds, that they would rather be burned 
alive, than unite with the Roman church. In Hist. 
Albigens. Also, Joh. Chassan., Hist. Albig., lib. 
3, cap. 7, ex Hist. Languedoc. 

From the account of Robert of Auxerre, a 
strong papist, who wrote at that time, and, it seems, 
was an eyewitness of the steadfast death of these 
people, it appears, that about forty more than the 
preceding writers have stated were burned ; which 
might well be the case, namely, that the former 
first, and the latter afterwards, confessed them- 
selves to be of the same faith, and thus were pun- 
ished alike with death. He writes as follows : "In 
A. D. 1210 a great expedition was undertaken by 
our bishops, as well as by the lords and princes of 
the realm, and by the common people. This ex- 
pedition was a very noted one, and was undertaken 
from pure devotion, or by vow; partly through 
the zeal of faith enkindled in the hearts of the be- 
lievers (so he calls the papists), against the de- 
stroyers of the faith (thus he calls the true Albi- 
genses), and partly, in order to merit the forgive- 
ness of sins, promised by the apostolical see (the 
Pope of Rome) ; hence they marched with their 
assembled army before the castle of Minerve, which 
was a very strong place." 

At last the besieged offered to surrender; but 
when it was proclaimed to all, that those who would 
turn from their heresy, should be left free and un- 
molested, about one hundred and eighty were found 
(namely, Albigenses) who rather suffered them- 
selves to be burnt alive, than desist from their heret- 
ical wickedness (thus he calls their true faith). 

Those who witnessed this, he writes, were as- 
tonished at the inexorable obstinacy of these mis- 
erable people, who would not listen to any salutary 
admonitions (thus he calls the fables of the pa- 
pists), because their reason was smitten, and thus 
they voluntarily hastened to the punishment of 
death. Rob. Aux. Chronol. Altiss., A. D. 1210, 
compare with A. MelL, 2d book, fol. 454, col. 2. 


308 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


SIXTY PERSONS CALLED ALBIGENSES, BURNT FOR 
THE FAITH, AT CASSER 

In the year 1211, or a little before, when the 
count of Montfort, by order of the pope, was exer- 
cising great tyranny for the purpose of extermi- 
nating the Albigenses, he learned, through an in- 
former, or in some other way, that in a place called 
Casser, there resided many of these people, under 
the protection of the lord of said place. He there- 
fore went to lay siege to it ; but those within (name- 
ly, the garrison), seeing that they would not be 
able to hold out long, notwithstanding the place 
was tolerably strong otherwise, capitulated, with 
this agreement, that they would deliver into the 
hands of the enemy, those called heretics (or Albi- 
genses) ; these the bishops sought to persuade to 
renounce their faith, but they could not prevail 
upon them in the least ; in consequence of which 
sixty persons were burnt for the sake of that re- 
ligion. Chass. Hist., Albig., lib. 3, compared with 
A. M. Hist., fol. 456, col. 4. 


ABOUT ONE HUNDRED PERSONS CALLED ALBI- 
GENSES, OR HERETICS, BURNT FOR THE 
FAITH IN A TOWER AT CASSAS 

About the close of the year 1211, it is recorded, 
the legate of the pope, having gone forth utterly to 
extirpate all those that professed the confession of 
the above-mentioned Albigenses, was apprised, that 
over eighty, but according to others, about a hun- 
dred of that sect or heresy, as it was called, were 
concealed on, or in, a tower at Cassas. They had 
been sent thither by those of Rogueville (who, it 
seems, were not willing that any of these defense- 
less people should remain among them), that they 
might save their lives, until this bloodthirsty man 
should have passed by. Having learned this, the 
legate very easily surprised, captured and demol- 
ished this tower, and caused all those that were in 
it — like sheep for the slaughter in the fold, who 
would not abandon their faith, to be burned alive 
as heretics. Chass., lib. 3, cap. 15. Also, A. Mell., 
2d book, fol. 457, col. 1. 


FIFTY PERSONS CALLED ALBIGENSES, BURNT FOR 

THE FAITH, AT CHASTELNAU D'ARI, AT 

THE CLOSE OF THE YEAR 1211 

This fire of the papal legate continued, like a 
thunderbolt, to burn and scorch among the de- 
fenseless flock of Christ, called Albigenses, or her- 
etics, who had concealed themselves here and there, 
wherever they thought they might be secure. 

In the meantime, there were fifty of these people 
at Chastelnau d'Ari, shut up and closely besieged, 
together with all that were in that place, by the 
count of Montfort, the commander-in-chief of the 
papal legate. Finally, the place having been taken, 
all these persons, as they would not depart from 
their faith, were burnt alive, and thus, having com- 


mended their souls unto God, they gave their bodies 
for a burnt sacrifice. 

Chassanion writes, that when the Count of Mont- 
fort had taken the city of Chastelnau d'Ari, fifty 
persons were found in it, who would rather be 
burnt alive than returned to the papistic religion. 
Compare Chassau., lib. 3, cap. 16, with A. Mell., 
2d book, fol. 457, col. 1. 


OVER FOUR HUNDRED PERSONS CALLED INDUTI, 

OR ALBIGENSES, BURNT FOR THEIR FAITH, AT 

LAVAUR, OR VAURUM, A. D. 1211 

Previously we stated, that the Albigenses, whose 
confession we showed to be good and Scriptural, 
were called by various names. Besides those names 
already explained, they were also called Induti, or 
Vestiti, that is, the clothed, or covered, either be- 
cause they had to cover or conceal themselves on 
account of persecution, or for some other reason. 

This, at least, is certain, that they are compared 
by Mellinus, 2d book, page 443, col. 3, to the Albi- 
genses, called Perf ecti ; who were also styled, as he 
shows, Boni homines, that is, good men, because 
they, as it seems, were good and upright in their 
walk. Very many of these good, upright, and not 
less believing people, were burnt for the faith, as 
heretics, suffering it innocently and patiently, in 
the city of Lavaur, also called Vaurum, about the 
year 1211. Their number, according to ancient 
chronicles, amounted to over four hundred. 

Nicholas Bertrand quotes the following from the 
papistic chronicle of William de Podio Laurentii : 
"Simon, count of Montfort, hastened with the 
Lord's (the Roman Pope's) army, to lay siege to 
the fortress or city, of Vaurum, which Amerius, 
lord of Montreal and Laurack, brother of the lady 
Geralda, had undertaken to defend for her sake. 
Within there was no small number of those heretics 
called Induti, who did not always reside there, but 
had congregated at that time from distant coun- 
tries." 

"The army of God, therefore," he writes, (name- 
ly, the army of the pope) "encompassed the fort- 
ress, or city, and gave the besieged no rest night 
and day. Those within perceiving, . . . surren- 
dered unconditionally to the beleaguers." 

He then goes on to relate how they dealt with 
those who had guarded the city, or fortress, and 
coming then to the above-mentioned people who, 
to live according to their faith, had resided quietly 
and peaceably among the other inhabitants, he says : 
"The heretics called Induti, that is, clothed, about 
three hundred, others write, over four hundred, he 
caused to be burned alive." Nich. Bertrand de Gest. 
Tholosan., fol. 27. The lives of the common people, 
however, were spared upon certain conditions. 

A large fire was made of wood, says Robert 
Altissiodorensis, and the choice was given to all, 
either to turn from their errors (so he speaks^ 
after the manner of the papists), or to be burnt 
alive ; whereupon a great number, over four hun- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


309 


dred, as stated, were found who were so obstinate 
in their error (as he calls their true faith) that they 
would rather be burnt than confess the Roman 
Catholic faith. Chronol., page 106. Also A. Mell., 
2d book, fol. 456, col. 2, 3. 

Commencement Proper of the History of the 

Martyrs of this Century 

great persecution of the believers,in 

THE YEAR 1206 

In the year 1206, it is recorded, that Pope Inno- 
cent III exercised great cruelty against the follow- 
ers of the doctrine of Peter Bruis and Henry of 
Toulouse, who, among other things, rejected infant 
baptism, the mass, and transubstantiation, as has 
already been stated. The manner, however, in 
which this cruelty was manifested toward them, is 
not expressed. P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 523, 
col. 1. 

Undoubtedly, the pope then caused to be carried 
out what he had threatened, A. D. 1198, in his 
three letters, against the Waldenses and others 
that were called heretics, namely, that they should 
be spoiled of their goods, expelled from the coun- 
try, and the material sword of the princes used 
against them. In regard to said three letters and 
threats, see A. Mell, 2d book, fol. 444, col. 2, 3, 
and fol. 445, col. 1. 

A MAN BURNT ALIVE, AT LONDON, IN ENGLAND, 

FOR THE FAITH OF THE WALDENSES, 

A. D. 1210 

In various ancient histories we read, that not 
only in France and Germany, but also in England, 
the doctrine of the Albi-Waldenses* obtained a 
foothold, so that in said Island, especially at Lon- 
don, numbers were found, who made this profes- 
sion, to the great detriment of the Roman religion. 
On this account, the popish clergy, unable to brook 
this, became filled with great bitterness against 
them, so that they, it seems, determined to punish 
one of them in such an exemplary manner, that it 
would deter the rest, and cause them to leave the 
country] or at least, to desist from confessing and 
speaking otherwise than those of the Roman Cath- 
olic church. 

Thereupon they apprehended one of their num- 
ber, whose name we have not been able to learn 
because they, afterwards perhaps, were ashamed 
of the deed, and in order to give their design some 
semblance [of justice], they charged him with 
having reviled the clergy, and that he, consequent- 
ly, was not fit to live, but deserved to die an igno- 
minious and miserable death. He was accordingly 
burnt alive, A. D. 1210. 

Concerning this, Balaeus writes, from the 
Chronicle of London : That the Albigenses in Eng- 


land (according to the Papists) reviled the clergy, 
and that in consequence thereof a man was burnt 
alive by them, at London, A. D. 1210. Cent. 3, 
Script. Britt., in Append, ad Gualterum Hor- 
ganium, page 258, compared with A. Mell. Hist., 
fol. 455, col. 4. 

P. J. Twisck, having given some account of many 
Waldensian martyrs at Strasburg, for the year 
1210, proceeds thus: "The Chronicle of London 
states, that also in England a great number, name- 
ly, of Waldenses, or, as has been stated, Albi- 
genses, who were of the same faith, were found, 
and that one of them was burnt at London." 
Chron., page 526, col. 1. 

Note. — P. J. Twisck, after relating said matter 
concerning the Albigensian martyr, at London, 
adds : "A. D. 1210. In the city of Narbonne one 
hundred and thirty persons were put to death by 
the priests, because they reproved the great abuses 
and idolatry of the popes. In the same year there 
were also killed at Paris, in France, twenty-four 
martyrs and witnesses of the truth, because they 
would not consent to the false doctrine of anti- 
christ." Chron., p. 526, from Guil. Mertd. Tijdt- 
thresoor, fol. 800. Hist, der Mart. Adri., fol. 39. 
Chron. Zeg., fol. 299. Henr., Box. fol. 23. 

TWENTY-FOUR PERSONS BURNT ALIVE FOR THE 

BELIEF OF THE WALDENSES, AT 

PARIS> A. D. 1210 

Christian Massaeus, having noticed the case of a 
great company of martyrs who, having been found 
in the castle Minerve, were all burnt alive as her- 
etics, adds this account: "At that time, namely, 
A. D. 1210, also at Paris, twenty-four who were of 
the same obstinacy (thus he, after the manner of 
the papists, calls the steadfastness of these people), 
were burnt alive." Christ. Mass. Chron., lib. 17, 
A. D. 1210, compared with the large Christen 
Martelarersboeck, edit. 1619, fol. 455, col. 4. 

The writer, after the manner of the papists, 
calls these people heretics, and their steadfast 
faith obstinacy; but how can anything good pro- 
ceed from the mouth of the wicked? However, 
this must not offend us, since not only these, but 
even the ancient holy prophets, apostles, and serv- 
ants of God, were stigmatized with many oppro- 
brious names, yea, titles of the devil, by evil world- 
ly men. 


* Albigenses, says the writer ; however they were of the profes- 
sion of the Waldenses ; but because of their origin from the province 
of Albi, they were called Albigenses. 


ABOUT ONE HUNDRED PERSONS CALLED WAL- 
DENSES, BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT STRAS- 
BURG,' THIRTY-NINE AT BINGEN ; AND 
EIGHTEEN AT MENTZ, A. D. 1212 

A. D. 1212, the true doctrine of the Gospel began 
to manifest itself to a great extent in Alsace, among 
the Waldenses, who were one people and of the 
same faith with the Albigenses. But the prince of 
darkness, unable to endure this great light, ex- 
erted every means to extinguish it, so that in said 
year, in Strasburg alone, about a hundred persons, 


310 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


men as well as women, were burnt alive on the 
same day, for this confession, by the servants of 
antichrist, particularly through the bishop of that 
city. 

Concerning this, the papistic writer H. Mutius 
writes : "A. D. 1212 a heresy arose in Alsace, by 
which noble and ignoble were led astray. They 
maintained that it was lawful to eat flesh every day 
throughout the whole year, and that there is as 
much excess in the immoderate eating of fish, as 
of any kind of flesh." Again : "That they do very 
wrong who forbid marriage ; since God has created 
all things, and everything may be used in a holy 
manner, with thanksgiving."* 

"This, their opinion," he writes, "they main- 
tained very firmly, and many believed them. More- 
over, they did not hesitate (hear how the papists 
speak) to revile the most holy lord, the pope, be- 
cause he prohibited ecclesiastical persons from 
marrying, and bade them abstain on certain for- 
bidden days from some kinds of food. The pope of 
Rome therefore commanded that these people 
should be made away with and put to death. Hence, 
about a hundred were burnt together on the same 
day, by the bishop of Strasburg. H. Mut., Chron. 
lib. 19. 

Bruschius, in his history of the Monasteries of 
Germany, relates, that at the same time, thirty-five, 
or, as others read, thirty-nine persons, inhabi- 
tants of Mentz, were brought to Bingen, and there 
burnt alive for the doctrine of the Waldenses ; and 
at another time, by the same bishop of Mentz, eight- 
een others for the same confession, Also A. Mell., 
2d book, fol. 457, col. 3 ; also P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
p. 526, col. 1, from Guil. Merulae Tijdt-thresoor, 
fol. 800. 


CRUEL MODE OF INQUISITION OVER THE DOCTRINE 

OF THE WALDENSES, OR OF THOSE CALLED 

HERETICS, A. D. 1214 

In the year 1214, Conrad of Marpurg, a Domin- 
ican friar, was appointed by Pope Innocent III, 
grand inquisitor of the faith over all Germany, and 
sent by him closely to search out and examine such 
as were said to have strayed from the faith of the 
Roman church. This commission he carried out 
with such cruelty for full nineteen years, that an 
incredible number of persons, declared heretics by 
him, were put to death, partly by fire and partly 
with the sword. 

Trithemius speaks of the manner of this inqui- 
sition, saying: "That this inquisitor, Conrad of 
Marpurg, used to try the heretics (the true Chris- 
tians), by giving them a red-hot iron into their 
hands, and to deliver all those that were burnt by it 
as heretics, unto the secular judge, to be sentenced 
to the fire." Hence it came that only very few es- 
caped, but that all who were once accused and 


brought to him for examination were, without 
mercy, condemned by him as heretics to be burned. 
"There were some," he writes, "who held that 
he condemned very many innocent persons, be- 
cause the red-hot iron, finding none without sin, 
although they otherwise had never been tainted 
with any heresy, burned almost everyone that took 
it." Trithem. Chron. Hirsaug., A. D., 1214 and 
1215. Also A. Mell, 2d book, fol. 459, col. 3; also 
fol. 466, col. 4. 


* What the Waldenses held with regard to infant baptism, the 
mass, and transubstantiation, hag been previously shown. 


THE PRECEDING INQUISITION CONTINUED 

This was the most cruel and dreadful time which 
one could live to see ; for this entire infernal in- 
quisition, which was carried on with red-hot iron 
and other intolerable means, had penetrated even 
into the Netherlands, so that there, not less than in 
Germany, this tyranny was carried on in the same 
manner, and even worse. 

I cannot forbear here to inform you, though with 
a terrified and shuddering heart, of what I have 
found with respect to this matter, in a certain ac- 
count which has just fallen into my hands, as it 
were, for this occasion. Marcus Zueris van Box- 
horn, author of the Nederlandtsch Historien, in 
his first book, p. 23, printed A. D. 1649, at Leyden, 
and dedicated to the H. M. Lords States, gives 
the following account with reference to it : 

The trial by red-hot iron. — If a person charged 
with holding sentiments contrary to the doctrine 
of the Roman church, from fear of a cruel death, 
denied it, the accused was delivered into the hands 
and custody of a priest, who was to find out the 
truth. Before making the trial, then commonly 
called the ordeal, they together spent three days os- 
tensibly in fasting and prayer. This done, they 
went together to the church, where the priest, in 
his sacerdotal attire, placed himself in front of the 
altar, upon which he laid a piece of iron, first chant- 
ing the song of the three children in the fiery fur- 
nace : "Praise the Lord, all His works," etc., and 
then pronouncing a blessing over the altar, and the 
fire in which the iron was to be laid. The iron, 
while heating on the coals, was repeatedly sprin- 
kled with holy water, and in the meantime mass 
was read. When the priest took the wafer into his 
hand, he adjured the accused, praying meanwhile 
(ostensibly) to God that by His righteousness He 
would discover the truth of the matter, using 
among others these words : 

The priest's prayer over the red-hot iron. — 

" 'Lord God ! we pray Thee that Thou wouldst 
clearly manifest the truth in this Thy servant; 
Thou, O God, who hast in former times done great 
and wonderful signs by fire, among Thy people; 
who didst deliver Abraham, Thy son, from the fire 
of the 'Chaldeans by which many perished; who 
didst preserve Lot, Thy servant, when Sodom and 
Gomorrah were justly laid in the ashes by the fire ; 
who, in the sending of the Holy Ghost by the light 
of fiery and flaming tongues, didst separate the be- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


311 


lievers from the unbelievers ; grant us the grace, 
while we make this trial, that through this red-hot 
fire we may discover the truth. If this, Thy servant, 
who is now being tried, is guilty, let his hand be 
seared and burnt by the fire. But if, on the con- 
trary, he is innocent, let him not be hurt by the fire. 
Lord God, to whom all secrets are known, however 
hid they are, fulfill, by Thy goodness, the expec- 
tation of our confidence and faith, while we make 
this examination; that the innocent may be ac- 
quitted; but the guilty detected and punished.' 

"When the priest had uttered this prayer," writes 
M. S. Boxhorn, p. 24, "he again sprinkled the red- 
hot iron with holy water, and pronounced this bless- 
ing over it : 'The blessing of God the Father, and 
God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, come down 
upon this iron, that by it we may be enabled to 
pronounce a true judgment.' " 

How the iron was given into the hand of the 
accused. — This having been said, the flaming iron 
was given into the hand of the accused, who had to 
carry it nine paces. The hand was then closely 
wrapped up with cloth by the priest, and sealed, 
for three days, at the end of which it was in- 
spected. If it was wounded, the accused was judged 
to be guilty ; if not, he was acquitted. 

Oh, cruel inquisition! by which not only men, 
but even God was tried and tempted to the utmost. 
"Thou shalt not," says Christ, "tempt the Lord 
thy God." Matt. 4:7. 

Another examination, by hot water. — Sometimes 
also a kettle with hot, boiling water was used, into 
which the accused had to thrust his hand up to the 
elbow, in order to ascertain his guilt or innocence. 
This procedure was called Ketel-vang, in the 
ancient Netherlands, and particularly in the Frie- 
sian statutes and laws. 

The trial by cold water. — Likewise, and for the 
same purpose, the cold and consecrated water of 
the canals or rivers was used. The accused were 
cast into it, and from the sinking or floating of their 
bodies, the righteousness or unrighteousness of 
their case was judged. This mode was carried out 
in the following manner at that time : A priest, one 
of the judges, went with the accused, and a great 
train of others, to a deep canal, ditch, or river, 
near-by; and standing on the shore or brink, he 
adjured the water with these words: "I adjure 
thee, O Water." However, first he gave the ac- 
cused a cup of holy water to drink, saying : "This 
holy water be for a test to thee this day." Turning 
then to the water, he exclaimed : "I adjure thee, 
O Water, in the name, etc., who created thee in the 
beginning, and would have thee serve to meet the 
necessities of man, and be separated from the 
waters above." Hie then adjured the water again in 
the name of Christ, and then in the name of the 
Holy Ghost, and finally in the name of the Holy 
Trinity ; and this, with such hard, stern and severe 
words that I am shocked, and afraid in my very 
soul to repeat them. 


"Thereupon followed," writes M. S. Boxhorn, 
"several additional solemn adjurations (these, 
however, he does not relate), which, when the 
priest had finished, the accused was stripped stark- 
naked, and cast or driven into the water. If he 
sank, he was considered innocent ; but if he floated, 
he was forthwith condemned and punished by fire, 
as being guilty." Page 26. 

If any one should desire to read a full account 
as regards said papistic adjurations over the water, 
let him consult M. S. Boxhorn, Nederlandtsch 
Hist., 1st book, pp. 25, 26. 


THE MANNER IN WHICH THESE TRIALS WERE COM- 
MENCED IN THE NETHERLANDS, 
ABOUT THE YEAR 1215 

Before bringing persons to the trial with red-hot 
iron, hot or boiling water, or in cold rivers, which 
was called the severest or extremest examination, 
milder means were employed, especially in the 
Netherlands; however, with such intricacies, and 
so many snares, that an honest soul, that would 
act candidly, and without dissimulation, could not 
escape but was in danger of losing his life. 

The above-mentioned Boxhorn, describing the 
manner of examination used at that time against 
the Vaudois, who also belonged to the Poor Men of 
Lyons, and were at that time one people with the 
Albigenses and Waldenses, but afterwards dif- 
fered with them in various articles, relates : That 
the Dominicans, a certain order of monks, were 
at that time sent by the pope here into the Nether- 
lands, as inquisitors ; who, in order to well execute 
their office as it were, had put in writing a certain 
mode of examination, which literally read as fol- 
lows: 

Examination. — "When any one in the Nether- 
lands is brought before the judge, suspected and 
accused of heresy, he shall first be asked: Why 
are you apprehended? Does any one know of 
your imprisonment? Have you not learned from 
any one the cause of your apprehension ? If he say : 
I do not know ; answer him : They say that you, se- 
duced by certain teachers who keep themselves con- 
cealed, have, to a considerable extent, departed 
from the Christian faith, as it is publicly taught in 
this country and elsewhere, throughout all Chris- 
tendom. Let him answer as well or as much as he 
will, and let forthwith an oath be demanded and 
put to him, unless his youth does not admit of 
his swearing. Before he takes the oath, these words 
shall be spoken to him : See, you are to swear here, 
that you will tell in all sincerity the truth as it is 
known to you, concerning yourself as well as others 
in regard to whom you will be questioned. If he re- 
fuses to swear,* he shall be suspected so much the 
more. 


* From this it is quite evident that said people had an aversion 
to the swearing of oaths. But some one may say : This has refer- 
ence to adjuring their belief. To this it may be replied, that the 
oath demanded nere did not aim at anything further than the tell* 
ing of the truth, as the preceding words declare. 


312 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


"See well to it also, that he have no reason to 
say that he was compelled by threats or otherwise 
to swear; but if he is ready willingly to take the 
oath, present these words to him: 

The oath administered by the inquisitors, near 
the chapter-house of Utrecht, to those who at that 
time were called heretics. — "I, N. N. N., swear to 
God Almighty, my Lord of Utrecht (or otherwise) 
and the lords present in his stead, that I will tell the 
pure truth, without fear, of all matters known to 
me, concerning which I shall be questioned here ; 
not only in regard to myself, but also to others. So 
help me God and His holy mother, in my last 
hour." Boxhorn, Nederl. Hist., p. 15. 

In this manner the inquisitors proceeded, and 
then observed the following mode of examination, 
which it seems they had to employ as their funda- 
mental rule, against those who were called heretics : 

"If he is not known to you (says this rule) ques- 
tion him thus: What is your name? Where were 
you born? Who was your father? Again: How 
often have you confessed to the teachers of the 
heretics, who secretly circulate that they have come 
into the world in place of the apostles, to go 
from place to place, preaching the Gospel ?* 

Again: "How long have you resided here? 
How old were you when you began to give audience 
to these heretics? When did you last confess to 
them? For whom did you take them? Do they 
also wear crowns [the tonsur] and the priestly 
garb? What penance did they impose on you? 
Did they not charge you to say an Ave Maria? 
Did you believe that it was in their power to for- 
give your sins? Who first directed you to these 
heretics? To how many heretics have you con- 
fessed? What was the name of the first? the sec- 
ond ? the third ? etc. 

_ "Did your parents also hold this heretical be- 
lief? How often have you received the body of 
Christ? Have you also confessed to our priests? 
Have you also confessed to them, that you hold 
this heretical belief? Why did you not confess it? 
How often have you heard them teach ? where first ? 
in what houses, or places ? in what room or cham- 
ber ? by day or at night ? in the morning or evening ? 
Who were there besides you? What did your 
teachers preach respecting purgatory? It there a 
purgatory? How many times a day do you pray 
for the souls of your parents, friends, and bene- 
factors? What alms have you given for them? 
How many days have you fasted for them ? How 
many masses have you had read for them? 

"Can you say the Ave Maria? Say it. Can you 
say any prayers to the saints ? Do you believe, that 
the holy Mary, and other saints, are acquainted 
with our distresses, and that they are filled with 
compassion on this account, and pray for us ? Who 
is the patron of your parish? When is his day 
celebrated? Have you properly celebrated him? 

* It seems that these inquisitors thought that these people also 
observed auricular confession; which is a grave misapprehension, 
seeing their confession avowed the contrary. 


What kind of a saint is it? Is it an angel? or a 
martyr ? or a confessor ? or an apostle ? or a virgin ? 
or a widow ? What did you bring as an offering on 
their feast day? Have you chosen for yourself a 
certain apostle? Who is your apostle? 

"What do you hold with regard to the worship 
of the holy cross? the nails? the crown of thorns? 
the spear ? and the images of the saints ? 

"Have you ever journeyed to Rome, to obtain 
forgiveness of your sins ? Have you sprinkled your- 
self with holy water ? Have you tasted the conse- 
crated salt ? Have you consecrated twigs and tapers 
in your house? Have you done this with a pure 
and upright heart, as do other Christians, who by 
your people are called Strangers? or have you 
done it merely for appearance' sake, so as not to be 
detected in your heresy? Tell the simple truth. 

"Do you not believe that St. Martin has become 
a saint, and that his holy soul is now in the king- 
dom of heaven? Will you drink in the name and 
to the remembrance of St. Martin ? Do you know 
any hymns to the honor of God, or His holy moth- 
er? and so forth. 

"Say, finally : Will you desist with all your heart 
from your errors, and separate yourself from the 
heretics, and henceforth have no fellowship with 
them ? If so, then swear thus : 

The second oath administered by the inquisitors 
to those who were at that time called heretics; 
which none of the true martyrs ever swore. — 
"I, N. N. N., swear an oath, to God Almighty, my 
lord, bishop N. N., and the lords present in his 
stead, without any dissimulation, that henceforth 
I will go no more to the people that call themselves, 
etc., and will have fellowship neither with them nor 
with their leaders, teachers, etc., as long as they 
remain heretics. Moreover, I forswear (see what 
paptistic tricks these are), all manner of unbelief 
that is contrary to the open faith taught and main- 
tained everywhere in the holy Roman church and 
in Christendom. And that I will also submit to 
penance for my transgressions, when and as it 
shall, though in mercy, be imposed upon me. So 
truly Jhelp me God and His mother, in my last 
hour." Boxhorn, page 18. Concerning the exami- 
nation, see page 15-17. 

Note.— Who does not see, beloved reader, that 
these were snares from which the pious could not 
extricate themselves without losing their lives ? for 
it was certain that the Poor Men of Lyons, in those 
times, whether called Vaudois,* Waldenses, or Al- 
bigenses, did not swear at all ; which, especially as 
regards the Waldenses and Albigenses, has been 
distinctly proved in our previous explanation. This, 
then, was the first snare which they could not 
escape. 

In the second place, by the form of that oath it 
was proposed to them, that they should forsake 
their entire religion, faith, and worship, and join 

* That the very odious name "Vaudois", was given the Poor Men 
of I^yons, need offend no one; since Christ Himself and His holy 
apostles were often called evil and opprobrious names, by their 
adversaries. ' ' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


313 


themselves to the Roman church which they held 
to be worse than Babylon. How could this be done 
by them with a good conscience ? In no wise. This 
snare, therefore, they could likewise not escape. 
What, then, had they to expect ? Nothing less than 
certain death; yea, a cruel, ignominious, and ac- 
cursed death, though blessed for those who, remain- 
ing steadfast, suffered it. 

I will say nothing now of the cruel and horrible 
manner of inquisition, by red-hot iron, hot water, 
as also in open rivers,* which generally followed 
upon the examination just stated. 

What heathen or barbarians have ever acted 
thus? It is true, they put the pious witnesses of 
Jesus to death in a very painful manner ; however, 
that was the end of it; and, besides, sometimes 
means remained by which it was possible to escape 
death, and yet keep the faith. And we nowhere 
read, that they ever had such a mode of inquisition 
over matters of faith ; but the Romanists, who call 
themselves Christians, were not afraid or ashamed 
of it. 

Certainly, here one or the other, either the body 
or the soul, had to be sacrificed by the martyrs ; 
for if they would save the body, by forsaking the 
faith, which they, in their conscience, recognized as 
the genuine, yea, the only and eternal truth, they 
were in danger, yea, fully assured of losing their 
souls ; on the other hand, if they sought to preserve 
their souls, by their good confession, and by for- 
saking the superstitions of popery, they had to lose 
their bodies, and this by the most cruel, horrible, 
and miserable death ; which, according to the cus- 
tom of that time, was to be placed alive into the 
flames until death ensued. 

In this manner, very many, yea, almost a count- 
less number, of pious Christians, called Albigenses 
and Waldenses, perished in those times ; who, con- 
strained by the love of Christ, to hold fast the 
confession of their faith, willingly exchanged this 
earthly for the heavenly; suffering here the tab- 
ernacle of their body to be dissolved, in order to 
have a building with God, a house not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens. II Cor. 5 :1. 

We will now see, what persons perished for the 
faith, in that cruel inquisition, particularly under 
the test of red-hot iron, not in the Netherlands, but 
in Germany, where it first originated. 

ABOUT EIGHTY PERSONS CALLED WALDENSES, 

BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT STRASBURG, 

A. D. 1215 

Now, when the throne of antichrist began to suf- 
fer much detriment through the doctrine of the 
Waldenses, and infant baptism, the swearing of 
oaths, the secular power and dominion, the author- 
ity of the Pope of Rome, the mass, purgatory, abso- 
lution or forgiveness of sins by the so-called clergy, 
pilgrimages, visitations of the holy sepulchres, 

* For further information respecting the method of the inquis- 
itors, see our account of the martyrs for the year 130i, etc. 


prayers, or sacrifices for the dead, and other things 
pertaining to popery, were opposed by them, they 
saying, that these things ought to have no place in 
the true church of Christ ; it came to pass, A. D. 
1215, that this cruel man, Conrad of Marpurg, of 
whom it was stated, for the year 1214, that he had 
been sent into Germany, as grand inquisitor, by 
Pope Innocent III, apprehended over eighty per- 
sons, both men and women, who were called Wal- 
denses and made the same confession. They were 
also examined, concerning their faith, in that hor- 
rible manner of which we have already spoken, 
namely, by taking a red-hot iron into their bare 
hands ; and having all of them endured it patiently, 
and remaining steadfast, they were finally con- 
demned to be burnt alive as heretics ; which was 
done to them all on the same day, at Strasburg, in 
said year of their apprehension, A. D. 1215. 

Of this the papistic writer Trithemius gives the 
following account: "At this time, namely A. D. 
1215, there were very many who were heretics se- 
cretly, men as well as women, who spread divers 
strange errors throughout all Germany, France, 
and Italy; of whom great numbers were appre- 
hended and burnt alive. For in said year more than 
eighty were apprehended in Strasburg, at the same 
time, among whom but very few were found inno- 
cent ; for if any of them deni ed the heresy,* Conrad 
of Marpurg, the pope's inquisitor, would try them 
by giving them red-hot iron into their hands, and 
deliver all those that were burnt by it, to the sec- 
ular judge, as heretics, to be sentenced to the fire." 
Trith. Chron. Hirsaug. Also, A. Mell., 2d book, 
fol. 459. C. Mellinus calls these martyrs Walden- 
ses, jol. 457, col. 3; and their confession he has 
shown, jol. 446, col. 1, 2. 


SEVERAL CHRISTIANS BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT 
TOULOUSE, A. D. 1215 

About that time, Pope Innocent III had advised 
Dominic, that by means of constant preaching and 
disputation he should wondrously execute the office 
of inquisition, which he had entrusted to him, 
namely, against the so-called heretics ; and that he 
should reconcile to the Roman church those who 
should ostensibly become converted; but should 
justly condemn such as remained refractory, that 
is, steadfast in their faith. Sixtus 5, in Diplom. 
instit. Festi S. Petri, Mart. 

Dominic discharged his inquisitorial office so en- 
ergetically in the city of Toulouse, against the here- 
tics mentioned, that is the Christians called Wal- 
denses, that several who had been cast into prison, 
were, by his advice, delivered to the secular judge, 
to be burned. For, when in those times people 
could not be overcome by way of argument, with 
the Word of God, they began to dispute with fire 

* It is necessary here to understand that by the word "heresy" 
those people did not mean their orthodox faith; but all that could 
truly be called heresy ; and this they then disavowed ; whereby this 
inquisitor, (to all appearance) though he was very crafty, was 
greatly misled. 


314 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and sword against them ; and then it was an easy 
matter to conquer them, not in regard to the truth, 
but in regard to their bodies and lives. This was 
also the case with these pious people of Toulouse, 
who would rather lose their lives than forsake the 
truth ; which they confirmed in the flames by their 
death, having commended their souls into the hands 
of God, in the year of our Lord 1215. 

The papist Theodoric, in his biography of Dom- 
inic, makes mention of these martyrs, saying: 
"When he (Dominic) was preaching, at this time, 
in the parts of Toulouse, it happened that some 
heretics were apprehended in that city and were 
convicted by him; whom, when they would not 
return to the Catholic church, he delivered to the 
secular Judge. When they had been condemned to 
be burnt." Theod. in vita Dotnmici, citate Bzov. 
ad A. D. 1215, Art. 11, 12. Also, A. Mellinus, 2d 
book, fol. 460, col. 4. 

Note. — A. D. 1220 lived the strong and cele- 
brated theologian Almaricus ; he reproved as idola- 
try the invocation of saints, and denied transub- 
stantiation ; on which account he was burnt at Paris. 
P. J. Twisck, page 537, col. 1, from Hist. Andr., 
page 162. 

A. D. 1218. — In a certain ancient history of the 
martyrs of this time, I have found the following ac- 
count, in which one of the orthodox believers pre- 
sents a summary of the doctrine of the papists, as 
opposed to the true doctrine of the true church of 
God in those times ; it reads as follows : 

1. "They found their church upon the succes- 
sion and derivation of the bishops (though erro- 
neously) from the times of the apostles. 

2. "They call those bishops, who consecrate 
churches, chapels, and altars; who make mass 
priests and sanctuaries of the altars. 

3. "They regard the pope as the supreme bishop, 
the head of their churches ; who may be reproved 
by none but God. 

4. "They are divided into many contending 
sects; some are ecclesiastics, some seculars. The 
ecclesiastics have separated themselves from the 
common people — whom they call the laity — and 
are themselves variously divided. Some are called 
monks and nuns ; who vow, not to marry ; to sub- 
mit to voluntary poverty ; to observe human insti- 
tutions, such as, to have nothing to do with money ; 
to wear a gray, white, or black cap ; to eat no flesh ; 
to be dumb at times ; and other similar false and 
invented forms of holiness. Others are called sec- 
ular priests ; who also may not marry, but like the 
others, have to do a great amount of muttering and 
reading. 

5. "They have priests, who are consecrated by 
the bishops, to offer up sacrifice for the living and 
the dead. 

6. "All these ecclesiastics hold themselves ex- 
empt from punishment by civil authority, and bear 
no burdens with the citizens, since they are ex- 
empt. 


7. "They seek their salvation out of Christ, in 
their own works and merits, which they also sell to 
each other for money ; such as masses, indulgences, 
pilgrimages, and the merits of departed saints, 
which they also sell to the dead, who, they say, are 
in purgatory. 

8. "They have an idol or patron for every city, 
village, or hamlet. 

9. "They divide the power and honor of God 
among the departed saints; thus, seamen invoke 
St. Nicholas, St. Christopher, and St. Anna ; wom- 
en in travail, St. Mary; for gum-boils, St. Appol- 
lonia; against pestilence, St. Rochus and St. An- 
thony. 

10. "They set up images in their churches; 
they light tapers, torches, and lamps before them ; 
they clothe them in cloth, silk, velvet, silver, and 
gold ; they carry them with great reverence on their 
shoulders ; they visit them in different places, and 
offer gifts to them (to which practice the popes 
and bishops append indulgence for sins) ; they 
kneel before them ; they kiss, and worship them. 

11. "In their oaths they swear by God and all 
His saints, etc. 

12. "They pray to, and call upon God, without 
considering their need, and without thinking why 
they call upon Him.; they give Him their prayers 
by the number, as apples are bought; they read, in 
the hours, rosaries, etc. 

13. "They create many sabbaths, which they 
call holidays, in honor of departed saints ; on which 
days manual labor is forbidden on pain of punish- 
ment; while drinking to excess, bartering, and 
gambling remain unpunished. On these days they 
generally commit shameful idolatry ; the services 
are read in an unknown tongue ; water is conjured ; 
the organ is played ; and the dead are called on for 
help and assistance. 

14. "To the two sacraments, or signs of grace, 
instituted by Christ in His church, namely, holy 
baptism and the holy Supper, which they have 
shamefully corrupted, they have added five others, 
namely, confirmation, matrimony, ordination of 
mass priests, auricular confession, and extreme 
unction. 

15. "In baptism they leave out the most impor- 
tant part, namely the preaching of the Gospel ; and 
add of their own, conjured salt, grease, spittle, and 
tapers, and exorcise the devil from the child which 
he never possessed. 

16. "They also baptize bells, giving them names. 

17. "They have changed the Lord's Supper into 
an offering for the living and the dead ; they con- 
jure the bread with five words,* and persuade the 
people, that the bread is changed into flesh, and the 
wine into blood. 

18. "They withhold the wine from the laity, con- 
trary to the command of Christ, who said : 'Drink 
ye all of it.' 

* "Hoc est enim corpus meum", i. e. for this is my body. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


315 


19. "They worship the bread, and say that it is 
their God ; they enclose it in coffers and ciboria ; 
they carry it through the streets ; they burn torches 
and tapers before it, also at noonday ; they address 
and salute it ; but it answers not. 

20. "In their churches they have altars draped 
with linen, upon which burning tapers are placed at 
daytime, when mass is read. 

21. "Mass is read by a mass priest, who is hired 
to do it for money, or a yearly salary ; he comes 
clothed in strange attire, after Jewish fashion, with 
a drinking cup of silver or gold in his hand, and 
accompanied by an attendant. He then says his 
confession before the altar, in Latin (though the 
attendant does not understand it) , and invokes the 
assistance of the dead saints. Then, having kept 
up his mummery for a considerable time, having 
spoken loud and low, turning himself hither and 
thither, kissing and licking, he finally takes bread 
and wine, and forthwith offers the same to God, 
for the redemption of souls, for the hope of salva- 
tion, and the health of those present. Thus they 
reject Thy sacrifice, O Christ Jesus, which Thou 
once didst make for our salvation. O God, says the 
writer, how canst Thou suffer this ? He then calls 
the dead saints to the feasts, desiring to be aided 
by their merits. Over the bread he breathes these 
five words : Hoc ist enim corpus meum, that is : 
For this is my body; supposing that thereby the 
bread will be changed into flesh. He then holds it 
above his head, for the people to worship it. So he 
does also with the cup. Then he prays for all those 
who sleep in Christ, that they may obtain a place 
of refreshing. Thereupon he prays to the Father, 
to accept His Son, whom they believe to have there, 
as graciously as he accepted the offerings of Mel- 
chisedec and of Abel. Finally, he worships the 
bread, calling it the Lamb of God. Having wor- 
shiped the Lamb, he breaks it in pieces, and eats 
it up, also quaffing the wine, which he imagines to 
be the Lamb's blood. This is the glorious mass of 
the papists, which, says our author, is a shameful 
corruption of the Supper of Christ, and has been 
reprehended by many godly men, who on this ac- 
count had shed their blood. 

22. "Such masses they read in honor of dead 
saints, of the sacrament, of the cross, the spear, 
and the nails. 

23. "They sell the same as a remedy against all 
sickness, against storm, thunder, lightning, hail, 
tempests at sea, and every calamity. Every man is 
served according to his money ; they who give lit- 
tle, have a dry mass, or a wet mass without sing- 
ing ; those who give much, get a half -sung mass, or 
one partly sung, according as to how much they 
give. 

24. "They teach, that their invented sacrament 
of confirmation is of more importance than the 
sacrament of baptism, instituted by Christ; and 
that baptism is incomplete without confirmation. 

25. "They dissolve marriage, in order that the 


husband or the wife may become spiritual, that is, 
a priest, monk, or nun, contrary to the command 
of Christ : What God hath joined together, let no 
man put asunder." 

"Time would fail me," writes this zealous man, 
"if I were to recount all the falsities of the papists, 
in life, doctrine, and sacraments ; and still they can 
endure no admonition to reform, but persecute with 
fire and sword, those who admonish and reprove 
them." Ex Author. Tempor., A. D. 1218, com- 
pared with the History of the Martyrs, by /. S., 
edition 1645, jol. 32, col. 1-3. Gerard de la Motte, 
deacon of the Christians called Albi-Waldenses, 
with some of his fellow-believers, burnt jor the 
jaith, at Borriens, A. D. 1227. 

When the believing defenseless Albi-Waldenses* 
had enjoyed rest for a season, and the lily of their 
true faith was beginning, in some measure, to grow 
and blossom, in all purity and beauty (as com- 
pared with former times), the thorns of persecu- 
tion immediately arose over it ; inasmuch as these 
pious and upright people were forthwith deprived 
of their liberty, by the Romanists ; so that as soon 
as it was noticed, that they increased, here or there, 
though secretly, under the protection of their au- 
thorities, means were sought without delay, to sub- 
due, yea, utterly to exterminate, them. 

This appeared A. D. 1227, when, upon the mere 
report that a few of these people resided in the town 
of Borriens, the whole place (in order to appre- 
hend them), was besieged and enclosed by Hum- 
bert of Beaujeu, who, having made himself master 
of the place, and having entered it, apprehended 
said people, and, as they would not desist from 
their faith, caused them to be burnt alive; all of 
whom testified to the truth and uprightness of 
their faith, as gold in the furnace, by their stead- 
fast death in the midst of the flames. 

Certain papistic writers say, that there were 
some in Borriens, who were said to be heretics, and 
who, as they would not desist from their belief, 
were burnt alive ; among whom there is mentioned 
one Gerard de la Motte, who, it is said, was their 
deacon or minister. This is stated to have occurred 
A. D. 1227, in the time of Humbert of Beaujeu, 
whom the king had left in Languedoc. Vignier, 
Hist. Eccles., from Vincentius and others already 
cited, and Chron. Montfortensi Hist. Adde Gag- 
uin., lib. 7, and Paul. Aemil., lib. 7, de Cest. Franc, 
in Lud. 8. Also, Abr. Mell., 2d book, page 464, 
col. 3. 


OF VARIOUS PAPAL STATUTES AND ORDINANCES 

INSTITUTED AGAINST THE WALDENSES, 

OR SO-CALLED HERETICS, ABOUT 

A. D. 1229 

Franciscus Pegna, a Romanist, in a tract written 
by him to John Calderinus, touching the manner of 
proceeding against the heretics, declares to have 


* Albigenses says one writer. 


316 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


found in past years, in the Vatican Library, as well 
as in an old parchment manuscript book, which had 
been brought from the inquisition from Florence 
to Rome, information respecting various councils 
held in those times against the Waldenses, in 
France. Among others, of one held in the year 
1229 in Toulouse, a place where the Anabaptists, 
called Waldenses, greatly increased. The statutes 
and ordinances enacted there were published by 
Cardinal Romanus, Legate of the Pope. Franc. 
Pegna. T. 11. Doctor., part 2, fol. 410, edition 
Venet., 1584. 

Among other things adduced by the afore-men- 
tioned Franciscus Pegna, in said tract, from the 
second council of the prelates of Prance, there is 
also found the ecclesiastical ordinance concerning 
the general abjuration of heresy, which reads as 
follows : 

Of the abjuration of heresy. — "In order that, 
through the help of God, the heretics may be 
more easily exterminated, and the Roman Catholic 
faith the sooner planted in the land, we decree, that 
you shall perfectly observe all the statutes, ecclesi- 
astical ordinances, laws, and commandments that 
have been enacted regarding this matter, by the 
apostolical see (the pope and his legates), and by 
the princes. Moreover, that you make all males as 
well as females, the male sex from fourteen years 
and upwards, the female sex from twelve years and 
upwards, abjure all heresy, and, besides, promise 
with an oath, that they will observe the Roman 
Catholic faith, defend the Catholic church, and 
persecute the heretics. All those who, after such 
abjuration, shall be found to have apostatized, and 
not to have observed or fulfilled the penance im- 
posed upon them, shall be punished with the proper 
punishment, such apostates deserve." 

Of the demolition of the houses of the Walden- 
ses. — The fifth chapter of the council of Toulouse 
contains the following brief ecclesiastical ordinance 
respecting the demolition of the houses of the 
heretics, namely, of the Waldenses and Albigenses : 
"We ordain, that the house in which a heretic is 
discovered, shall be razed to the ground ; and the 
land or farm upon which a heretic is found, shall 
be confiscated." 

Of the forfeiture of all their goods. — In the 35th 
chapter of the council of Beziers we read : "Also 
the houses in which any heretic shall be found, liv- 
ing or dead, accused or condemned, being there 
with the knowledge or consent of the proprietors 
of said houses, provided said proprietors have at- 
tained their legal age, you shall cause to be demol- 
ished, and shall confiscate all the goods of those 
who live in them, unless they can legally prove or 
show their innocence or ignorance." This much of 
the year 1229, in the second book of the History of 
the Persecutions, page 465, col. 3. 


SEVERE PERSECUTIONS BY THE INQUISITION IN 

GERMANY, VERY MANY WHO WERE 

CALLED WALDENSES, BURNT FOR 

THE FAITH, A. D. 1230 

In the year 1230, in many provinces of Germany, 
especially in the archbishopric of Treves, very 
many schools and secret congregations of those who 
professed the doctrine of the Waldenses, were dis- 
covered by Conrad of Marpurg, Inquisitor General 
over Germany. They were said to be heretics, be- 
cause they denied transubstantiation in the mass, 
and purgatory, saying that the prayers and interces- 
sions of the living for the dead served to no pur- 
pose, and could avail the deceased nothing. 

As regards their rejecting infant baptism, the 
swearing of oaths, revenge or wars, together with 
all the traditions of the Roman church, and their 
desiring to hold only to the truth of the Holy 
Scriptures, especially of the New Testament, this 
has already been shown. 

"From their processes, and from the confessions 
made by them on the rack," says A. Mellinus, "it 
was seen that the number of their adherents and ac- 
complices, throughout Germany, France and Italy, 
but especially in Lombardy, was very great." 

About this time a severe inquisition was raised 
against them, throughout Germany and Italy, by 
which very many were discovered and burnt alive. 

Abr. Mellinus (contra Trithemius) refutes the 
calumnies cast against them, saying: "This is a 
willful falsehood and slander, fabricated by this 
monk (Trithemius), because they accused the 
pope. A. Mell, 2d book, fol. 465, D. Also P. J. 
Tmsck, Chron., p. 546, col. 2. 

In the meantime we will produce some decrees 
by which, it seems, the aforesaid inquisitor was 
made the more bold and daring in putting into ex- 
ecution his unprecedented cruel inquisition and 
tyranny against the innocent Christian believers, 
who had separated from the Roman church. 

OF THE FIRST DECREE OF EMPEROR FREDERIC II, 

AGAINST THE DEFENCELESS ALBIGENSES AND 

WALDENSES, ABOUT A. D. 1230 

Mellinus relates, from Abraham Bzovius, who 
completed the Annals of Baronius, that Emperor 
Frederic II, at the request of Pope Gregory IX, 
issued his decrees against the Albigenses ; however! 
under different names given them by the Emperor' 
saying: "(Petr. de Veneis lib. 1, epist. 27.) Here 
commence the chapters or articles of the consti- 
tution of the Emperor against the Patarini (Wal- 
denses). He then adds some other names which do 
not properly belong here. 

"Men, as well as women, whatever name they 
may bear, we sentence to perpetual infamy, that 
neither oath nor faith shall be kept towards them ; 
but we banish them, and order that their goods be 
confiscated, never more to be returned to them. 

"We likewise ordain by this decree that all of- 
ficers, burgomasters, and rulers, in whatever office 
they may be, shall, for the defense of the faith 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


317 


publicly swear an oath that they will, in good faith, 
and to the best of their ability, endeavor to ex- 
pel from the districts under their jurisdiction, all 
heretics indicated to them by the church. 

"But if any temporal lord, having been requested 
and admonished thereto by the church, shall be 
found negligent in purging his land from heretical 
wickedness, let him be warned that, one year after 
the admonition, we shall give his land for a prey 
to all Catholics, who, after they shall have driven 
out the heretics, shall possess the same without 
molestation, and preserve it in the purity of the 
(Catholic) faith. 

"We also banish those who believe (the Wal- 
denses and Albigenses), or receive them into their 
cities or houses, protect or favor them, ordaining : 
That if any one having been noted as being in com- 
munion with these believers, does not satisfy the 
church within a year, he shall be considered in- 
famous from that time on. 

"We add here that one heretic may convict an- 
other, and that the houses of . . . , or of their har- 
borers, protectors, and favorers, or where they have 
taught or imposed hands upon other, shall be de- 
molished, never to be rebuilt. Given." 


OF THE SECOND DECREE 

By the chancellor of this Emperor, A. D., 1230. 
(Same place, Epist. 25, Petri, de Veneis). 

In another letter of Peter de Veneis, we find 
another decree of Frederic II, which reads as fol- 
lows: 

"We therefore decree and ordain that heretics, of 
whatever name, shall receive condign punishment, 
throughout the empire, wherever the church shall 
condemn them as heretics, and deliver or indicate 
them to the secular judge. 

"But if any of the aforesaid, after their appre- 
hension, deterred by the fear of death, shall desire 
to return to the unity of the Catholic faith, they 
shall according to the requirement of the church 
ordinances, be imprisoned for life, to do penance. 

"Moreover, all heretics, in whatever city, vil- 
lage or place, of the realm they may be found by 
the inquisition sent by the Apostolic see, or by 
other zealous adherents of the Catholic faith, shall 
receive like punishment. 

"All those, then, who shall have jurisdiction 
there, shall be bound, on the denunciation or in- 
timation of the inquisitors, or of other Catholics, to 
apprehend and closely keep them, until they, after 
their being condemned by the censure of the 
church, shall punish them with death. 

"We ordain like punishment for those whom the 
crafty enemy stirs up to be their advocates, or who 
are their improper protectors." 

At the end of the decree are these words : "But 
the heretics whom they shall point out to you, you 
shall, each in his jurisdiction, be bound to appre- 
hend and keep in close custody, so that they, after 
the judgement of the church, shall be punished ac- 


cording to their deserts ; knowing, that in the ex- 
ecution of this matter, if you will do your utmost 
unitedly with these brethren (the Dominicans and 
Franciscans)* to expunge from our dominion the 
blot of this unheard-of heretical wickedness (thus 
he calls the true faith), you will render unto God a 
pleasing, and unto us a commendable, service. 

"But if any be slack or negligent herein, and un- 
profitable before the Lord, he also shall be justly 
worthy of punishment in our eyes." Given at Pa- 
via. 


OF THE THIRD DECREE OF EMPEROR FREDERIC II 
AGAINST THE AFORE-MENTIONED PER- 
SONS, A. D., 1230 

Peter de Veneis (Lib. 1, Epist. 26) , relates in his 
letters a third decree of Emperor Frederic II, in 
which he gives fuller information concerning the 
surname of the Waldenses, namely, Patarini, as 
well as regarding their belief, and their spreading 
into all the provinces of the empire; it reads as 
follows : 

"The sects of these heretics (says the Emperor), 
are not called by the name of any ancient heretics, 
lest they should become known ; or, what is per- 
haps still more shameful, they are not content 
with the ancient names, that is, to borrow their 
names, like the Arians from Arius, the Nestorians 
from Nestorius, or from other like heretics; but 
after the example of the ancient martyrs, who suf- 
fered martyrdom for the Catholic faith, they like- 
wise, from their suffering, call themselves Patarini, 
that is, delivered unto passion or suffering. 

"But these miserable Patarini, who are estranged 
from the holy faith of the eternal Godhead (thus he 
speaks of the true believers), destroy with one 
sweep of their heretical wickedness, three things 
at once, namely, God, their neighbor and them- 
selves. They destroy God because they do not 
know the faith and the counsel of God ; they de- 
ceive their neighbor because, under the cover of 
spiritual food, they administer the pleasure of 
heretical wickedness; but far more cruelly they 
rage against themselves, because, after destroying 
their souls they, as extravagant squanderers of 
their life, and improvident seekers of their death, 
ultimately also expose their bodies to a cruel death, 
which they might have escaped by a true confes- 
sion of, and constancy in, the orthodox faith (thus 
he calls the priest's faith). 

"And what is hardest of all to say, those who 
survive are not only not deterred by the example of 
others whom they see die before their eyes, but 
they even strive to be burnt alive in the sight of 
men," as he afterwards speaks of it in this same 
decree. 

"Therefore we cannot refrain," says the Em- 
peror, "from drawing the sword of just vengeance 

•The Dominicans and Franciscans, though they seemed to be 
very simple and modest, were nevertheless the principal actors in 
this matter. r " 


318 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


against them, the more vigorously to persecute 
them, as it is judged and known that they practice 
the more extensively the knavery of their super- 
stition (thus he calls the virtue of these people), to 
the clear exclusion of the Christian faith, on ac- 
count of the Roman church, which is held to be the 
head of all other churches, as it is known that they 
came from the borders of Italy, and especially from 
Lombardy, where, as we have ascertained, their 
wickedness overflows far and wide, and that from 
thence they have directed the rivulets of their un- 
belief even into our kingdom of Sicily. 

"It is furthermore the will of the Emperor, that 
the crime of heresy, and all kinds of accursed sects, 
of whatever name, shall be reckoned among the 
public crimes, or those deserving of death; yea, 
that the heresy of the Patarini (also called Wal- 
denses), shall be considered, before all the world, 
as more abominable than the crime of lese-majesty, 
that is, than the crime of him that has offended 
the Imperial Majesty. 

"The Emperor also wishes that, as the Patarini 
(or Waldenses) walk in darkness, in order to con- 
ceal themselves from the heat of persecution, en- 
deavors shall be made to discover them, and to 
earnestly seek them out, even though no one 
accuses them, and that the officers of the Emperor, 
when they have found them, shall keep them in 
bonds, in order that at the proper time they may be 
called before the inquisition, or brought to the 
rack. 

"And if they are accused only upon slight sus- 
picion, we command that they shall be examined by 
ecclesiastical persons and prelates ; and though they 
may err from but one article of the (Roman) 
Christian faith, and, after admonition, continue 
obstinately in their error, we ordain by this, our 
present decree, that the Patarini (or Waldenses) 
shall be condemned to death, and burnt alive ; and 
let no one dare intercede for them, for against him 
that shall do this, we will justly direct our anger. 
Given, etc." Second book of the Hist, of the Per- 
secutions, p. 466, a. b. c. from Abr. Bzovius, and 
A. Bzopius, from Petr. Vine., lib. 1, epist. 26. 

GREAT PERECUTION IN GERMANY OF THE ANABAP- 
TIST WALDENSES, MANY OF WHOM WERE 
BURNT FOR THE FAITH, A. D. 1231 

The above-mentioned decrees against the Chris- 
tians called Waldenses, issued by Emperor Fred- 
eric II, were not long without their influence and 
effect; inasmuch as in the year following, A. D. 
1231, a severe persecution arose in Germany 
over the innocent lambs of Christ, who, keeping 
themselves concealed in quietness, were informed 
against and made manifest, through the rack and 
otherwise. The consequence was, that many of 
them, continuing steadfastly and immovably in 
their belief, were burnt to death, and thus, having 
commended their souls unto God, offered up an 
acceptable sacrifice well pleasing unto God. 


The following may serve as a confirmation of 
this account: 

Abraham Bzovius relates, from a fragmentary 
history by an unknown author, that in the year 1231 
a great persecution arose in Germany against the 
so-called heretics, who kept themselves concealed 
in great numbers among the papists, in cities, cas- 
tles and villages, and brought over to their belief 
all whom they could turn from their faith ; many 
of whom were apprehended and convicted in the 
presence of the clergy and the people and that they 
held the belief of the Waldenses. 

He writes further that "Brother Conrad of Mar- 
purg, a monk of the Dominican order, punished 
those who were convicted of heresy, according to 
the manner prescribed by the ecclesiastical ordi- 
nances, namely, with fire." Abr. Bsov., T. 13, An- 
nal. Baron., A. D. 1232, Art. 7. Also in the second 
book of the History of the Persecutions, fol, 466 
dot. 3, 4. ' 

"The Waldenses," writes P. J. Twisck, "suf- 
fered severe pesecution at this time, from the pa- 
pists, and though they sought to conceal them- 
selves in wildernesses, mountains and deep val- 
leys, yet, their schools were discovered, their as- 
semblies broken up, and all cruelly killed, especially 
in the bishopric of Treves, which state of things 
lasted three years." Chron., p. 546, col. 2. 

Note.— From this account of P. J. Twisck, it 
appears that the above persecution commenced al- 
ready in the year 1230, just when the decrees of 
Emperor Frederic II had been issued, and that it 
continued for three years, namely, to the close of 
the year 1233 ; during which time doubtless very 
many believers perished, of whom we shall notice 
a few with whom we have met. 


NINETEEN PERSONS CALLED WALDENSES, BURNT 

FOR THE FAITH, IN THE BISHOPRIC OF 

TOULOUSE, A. D. 1232 

In the year 1232 the bishop of Toulouse appre- 
hended, in his dominion or bishopric, nineteen per- 
sons, who were said to be heretics, because they ad- 
hered to the belief of the Waldenses, whose con- 
fession we have already shown not to be at variance 
with ours ; all of which persons the bishop of Tou- 
louse caused to be executed, that is, burnt alive. 
Vignier, A. D. 1232. Hist. Eccles. Also in the 
second book of the History of the Persecutions 
fol. 466, col. 4. 


TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOUR PERSONS, 

CALLED WALDENSES, BURNT FOR THE FAITH, 

IN A PLACE NEAR TOULOUSE, A. D. 1243 

When the north wind* of persecution, which, 
from the year 1233 on, had done but little harm in 
the garden of the true Christians, began to raise 
again, A. D. 1243, there were apprehended, near 

* Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my 
garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. — Solom. S. 4:16. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


319 


Toulouse, two hundred and twenty-four persons, 
called Waldenses, who are to be distinguished, 
and were also then distinguished from others, who 
carried arms and called themselves Albigenses, 
but had no communion with the true Albigenses 
and Waldenses, both of whom were opposed to 
all revenge, professed the same confession respect- 
ing suffering and bearing for the name of Christ. 

These two hundred and twenty-four defenceless 
and innocent lambs of Christ, having been appre- 
hended, and refusing to forsake the Great Shep- 
herd of the sheep, Jesus Christ, and His holy com- 
mandments, as also the faith in His name, were all 
condemned to death, and burnt alive, thus offer- 
ing up a living holy sacrifice, acceptable unto God, 
A. D. 1243 * 

Concerning these persons, as well as their impris- 
onment and death, see Vignier Hist., Eccl. A. D. 
1243 ; also, second book of the History of the Perse- 
cutions, fol. 469, col. 3, also in an old manuscript 
chronicle, same date. 

Note. — Besides the above authors, P. J. Twisck, 
also, it seems, makes mention of these two hun- 
dred and twenty-four persons, from the account 
of Henry Boxhorn, though he differs somewhat in 
regard to the time when this happened, as well as to 
the number of persons put to death ; for, instead of 
A. D. 1243, he has it A. D. 1242, and instead of 
two hundred and twenty-four, he has about two 
hundred. 

However, this difference is easily reconciled, if, 
first, in regard to the time, A. D. 1242, is under- 
stood to mean the end or close of said year, and 
A. D. 1243, the beginning; the number of persons 
put to death, about two hundred, to mean over two 
hundred, or two hundred and twenty-four, as ex- 
pressed. 

The words of his account are as follows : "A. D. 
1242, the Waldenses had to suffer much from 
popery, on account of their faith and religion. At 
this time, about two hundred persons, together with 
two of their preachers, were apprehended in the 
bishopric of Toulouse, by the bishop of Narbonne 
and Albi, and the Seneschal of Carcassonne, and 
were all burnt alive, continuing steadfastly in their 
religion." In the 13th book of his Chronicle, p. 
557, col. 1, from Henr. Boxhorn, fol. 25. 


SEVERE INQUISITION OF BELIEVERS IN THE COUN- 
TRY AROUND TOULOUSE, A. D. 1251 

At this time there was as yet no abatement of the 
constraint of conscience exercised over the faith of 
the orthodox Christians, who had fled from Baby- 
lon, and, for the sake of the welfare of their 
souls, could no longer trust themselves in Romish 
Egypt. This appeared from the new inquisition, 
which, by order of the pope, through appointed in- 

* This great number of martyred Waldenses, through the care- 
lessness of some writers, has been mingled under the mire of certain 
erring persons, from whence we have drawn them forth again, 
though not without labor. An ancient writer says: "I seek pearls 
in the mire." 


quisitors, suffered the minds of the true believers 
to have no rest, until they left the Roman terri- 
tories, or made an oral disavowal, or, remaining 
steadfast, exchanged their life for a violent death. 

Regarding the most wicked and unjust inqui- 
sition, I have found the following account : 

"In the year 1251, the pope appointed, or sent, 
inquisitors to Toulouse, from the orders of the 
Dominicans and Franciscans, who exercised an in- 
human tyranny over the Christians there. The 
same thing was done at Worms, by Conrad Dorfo 
and his disciple John, also Dominicans and inqui- 
sitors ; who, condemning there many innocent men 
to the fire, were therefore themselves, ultimately, 
as by the hand of God brought to a very lament- 
able, though just death." Bal. Cent. 4, in Append., 
ad Richard. Wich., p. 301, compared with A. Mell., 
fol. 470, col. 1. 


CONTINUATION OF THE PRECEDING INQUISITION 
IN THE YEAR 1252 

That the aforesaid inquisition or examination of 
the faith did not end with the close of the previous 
year, but continued also in the succeeding time, is 
so manifest that proof is almost unnecessary ; still, 
it experienced a brief cessation, caused through 
the sudden and unexpected death of Peter of 
Verona, who administered at that time the office 
of inquisitor. 

Concerning this, the above-mentioned author re- 
lates the following: "In the year 1252, Peter of 
Verona, inquisitor in Lombardy, justly perished 
near the city of Milan, on account of his tyranny 
against the Waldenses, and, twenty-four days after, 
was canonized, that is, placed on the register of 
the saints of the Roman church, by the antichrist, 
the Pope of Rome, Innocent IV." 

Note. — In the following year, namely, A. D. 
1253, Robert, bishop of Lincoln, was deposed from 
his bishopric, by said Pope Innocent IV, because he 
frequently in his preaching, though with discre- 
tion, had openly reproved the avarice, ambition, ar- 
rogance, and tyranny of the pope, yea, had express- 
ly written him severe letters, in which he accused 
him of exhausting almost all England, by unusual 
taxes, in order to enrich his illegitimate children, 
nieces and nephews. When the pope cited him to 
Rome, he appealed from the papal tyranny to the 
judgment and tribunal of Jesus Christ, whereupon 
the pope soon died. Bal. Cent. 4, cap. 18, in Roberta 
Grossoreste ex Annalis. Johan. Buriens. Ranulpho, 
Mattheo and Fabiano, compared with A. Mell., 
Hist., p. 470, col. 1. 

In the year 1258, the Jacobines and Dominicans, 
in the bishopric of Cambray, caused a great num- 
ber of Christians, whom they had condemned as 
heretics to be burned alive. Balens Cent. 4, cap. 
26, ad Matt. Paris. Append., p. 315, ex Th. C anti- 
prat., lib. 2, cap. 56. Also, A. Mell., Hist., lib. 2, 
p. 470, col. 2. 


320 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


In the year 1260, Pope Alexander IV wrote 
letters to the inquisitors from the order of the 
Dominicans, in Lombardy and the margravate of 
Genoa, to persecute the heretics (as they were 
called) there. Moreover, he decreed that the in- 
quisitors might compel, by excommunication, the 
secular authorities, whoever they might be, to exe- 
cute, without delay, the sentence of the inquisitors 
against those suspected of heresy. Compare the 
last-mentioned author, in the place cited, with 
Bzov., A. D. 1260, Art. 4, ex Decret. Epist Alex- 
and. 4. 


OF THE MANDATE OF POPE URBAN IV AGAINST 
THE WALDENSES AND ALBIGENSES IN LOM- 
BARDY AND AROUND GENOA, A. D. 1262 

The aforesaid distress among the believers, con- 
tinued on, through the severe inquisition com- 
menced eleven years before, namely, A. D. 1251 ; 
for, although the first inquisitors had departed this 
life, as by the vengeance of God, it did not remain 
so, since Pope Urban IV took up the pen to issue 
bloody edicts against the orthodox Waldenses and 
Albigenses who were scattered abroad in all parts. 
These decrees he caused to be proclaimed to his 
minions, who bore the name of ecclesiastics. This 
is stated in the following words by an ancient pa- 
pist: In the year 1262, Pope Urban IV made an 
ordinance against the heretics in Lombardy and in 
the margravate of Genoa, and sent a copy of it to 
the order of the Dominicans in said parts, to per- 
secute the Waldenses and Albigenses, who were 
mostly scattered there. Bzov., A. D. 1262, Art. 3, 
ex Deer. Epist, Alex. 4. also, A. M., Hist., fol. 
470, col. 2. 

Thereupon, as it appears, no small persecution 
arose; but as to the manner in which the same 
occurred, and the persons who then suffered for the 
faith, we have not been able to find any account, 
notwithstanding we have made diligent search. No 
doubt, it fell chiefly upon the heads of the Wal- 
denses and Albigenses, since they were mentioned 
by name in the mandate of the pope. 

We deem what we have here shown sufficient 
for this time; hence we will leave it, without 
adding any more. 

Note. — A. D. 1270, eight years afterwards, 
Peter Caderita and William Colonicus, Domini- 
cans, persecuted the (so-called) heretics in the 
kingdom of Aragon, Bzov., A. D. 1270, ex Surita, 
lib. 2. A. Mell., Hist., fol. 470, col. 2. 

In the year 1280, the moon was completely 
changed into the color of blood; which by many 
was held to signify the very bloody and lamentable 
state of the church of God ; the more so since at 
that time, not only a dire persecution prevailed, 
but also, a destructive crusade, under the sign 
of the cross, such as was formerly waged against 
the Saracens, was undertaken the following year, 


namely, 1281, by the papists, by order of the pope, 
against the Albigenses in Spain. Compare the large 
book of Christian martyrs, fol. 470, col. 2, 3, with 
Bal. Cent. 4, Append, ad Greg, de Brid. Lington., 
p. 446, from Everildenas. 


SEVERE PERSECUTION OF THE ANABAPTIST WAL- 
DENSES IN FRANCE, ABOUT A. D. 1280 

P. J. Twisck, having noticed, in the first part of 
his Chronijck, for the year 1280, the doctrine of 
the Waldenses, whom he calls Waldois, after their 
leader, Peter Waldus, finally he speaks of their 
persecutions, saying: "Matthias Illyricus, in his 
Register of the witnesses of the truth, says, that he 
has in his possession the consultations of certain 
advocates of Avignon, also, of the three bishops of 
Narbonne, Aries, and Aix, and of the bishop of 
Alban, tending to the extermination of the Waldois, 
or Waldenses, and written three hundred years 
previously ; from which it is evident, that at that 
time and before, a great number of the believers 
were scattered here and there throughout France. 

"We can also infer from the consultations of the 
aforesaid archbishops, that even as their number 
was great, so was also the persecution against them 
very cruel; for at the end of this consultation it is 
written : 'Who is so great a stranger in France, as 
to be ignorant of the damnatory sentence (thus 
speak these papists themselves) which has now, 
for a long time, been most justly used against these 
heretical Waldois (Waldenses); and should we 
doubt a matter so notorious and common, which 
has cost the Catholics so much money, sweat, and 
labor, and has been sealed with so many condem- 
nations and executions of unbelievers (thus he 
calls the true believers) ?' 

"Hence appears," writes Twisck, "what massa- 
cres of believers occurred at this time, and what 
cruelties the subjects of antichrist employed against 
them. 'And it can be proved,' says Boxhorn, 'even 
from the testimony of their greatest enemies, that 
they declared, maintained, and testified in the midst 
of the fire, that they had received this their faith 
unaltered, from hand to hand, from the times of 
the apostles ; and they continued even to the present 
time, having never been entirely exterminated.' " 
P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 606, col. 1, 2. 


CONTINUATION OF THE PRECEDING PERSECUTION 
A. D. 1283 

Mellinus writes that "A. D. 1283, the Waldenses 
had again greatly increased in France, as also in 
other countries throughout Christendom, notwith- 
standing they had been very cruelly sought out and 
persecuted up to this time." In the second book of 
the History of the Persecutions, fol. 470, col. 3, 
from Vignier, Hist. Eccl, A. D. 1283. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


321 


FURTHER SPREADING OF THE AFORESAID PERSE- 
CUTION, IN WHICH THE WALDENSES WERE 
BURNT IN GREAT NUMBERS, A. D. 1284 

P. J. Twisck gives the following account for the 
year 1284: "The Waldois or Waldenses, of 
whom, since the year 1159, much mention is made, 
increased at this time more and more, in France 
and other countries of Christendom, notwithstand- 
ing that they were craftily sought and cruelly per- 
secuted, and that all diligence and every means had 
first been employed, utterly to exterminate them ; 
which greatly astonished certain bishops and advo- 
cates of Avignon of that time." "They were 
burnt," he writes, "in great numbers." Chron., 
fol. 611, 612, from Henr. Boxhorn, fol. 26. 

GERARD SAGARELLUS, BURNT IN THE CITY OF 

PARMA, FOR THE FAITH OF THE WALDEN- 

SIAN ANABAPTISTS, A. D. 1285 

In the year 1285, there became known, and were 
proclaimed heretics by the adherents of popery, 
Gerard Sagarellus of Parma, and Dulcinus of No- 
varia. Both of them were particularly accused, on 
account of various articles opposed to the Roman 
church and her superstitions, with which they were 
charged, of having fallen into heresy, and having 
borrowed their belief from the Waldenses, which, 
writes Abr. Mellinus, is quite presumable. 

As to the articles which they confessed contrary 
to the belief of the Roman church, and on account 
of which they were called heretics, they are writ- 
ten in the second book of the Hist, of the Persecu- 
tions, fol. 470, col. 3. 

Finally, as Gerard Sagarellus would not depart 
from, but continue steadfast in, the truth of his 
Saviour, Jesus Christ, he was (in the same year, 
it is supposed) burnt alive in the city of Parma, by 
the bloodthirsty inquisitors. A. Mell., p. 470, col. 
3. Also, Bal. Cent. 4, cap. 30, in Append, ad Lau- 
rent. Angl. 

Dulcinus, who, besides the charge of his true 
faith, was also assailed with great calumnies, was 
put to death in great steadfastness some years 
afterwards. However, of this a fuller account will 
be given for the year 1308. 

Note. — Since the death of Dulcinus did not oc- 
cur the year in which Sagarellus died, but long 
afterwards, we will reserve the account of the 
same for the proper time and place. Bear this in 
mind. 


HERMAN, ANDREW AND GUILLEMETTE* EXHUMED 
AND BURNT, A. D. 1299 

A. D. 1299, the Fratricelli, that is, the Albi- 
Waldenses, who were called Little Brothers, were 
declared heretics, by Pope Boniface VIII, because 
their belief was contrary to the Roman church, as 
we have already shown. Said pope caused these 
Fratricelli (or Albigenses) to be persecuted with 

* Wilhelmina. 


so much violence that he not only spared not the 
living, but not even the dead; for he caused one 
Herman, who had been one of their principal 
teachers, to be exhumed twenty years after his 
death, and his bones burnt to ashes, notwithstand- 
ing the papists, who were his enemies, had, in his 
life time, regarded him as a holy man. Thus they 
did also with the dead bodies of one Andrew, and 
of his wife Guillemette, who were also greatly 
noted for their remarkable godliness. 

The Fratricelli (or Albi- Waldenses) were never- 
theless, though unjustly, accused of many and 
abominable crimes. Hence, many of the ancients 
presume that these slanders were invented against 
them for the express purpose of making them the 
objects of the hatred and envy of the people ; since 
they [the slanders] were utterly antagonistic to 
the doctrine which they professed, and with their 
life. For it is recorded of them, that they called 
themselves true followers of the apostles, and the 
true church of Christ, and that they on their part 
reproved the corrupt morals of the prelates. There 
were also ascribed to them all the opinions, or arti- 
cles of faith, of the Waldenses who, as already 
shown, also rejected infant baptism, the swearing 
of oaths, revenge towards enemies, the mass, and 
almost all the superstitions of the Roman church ; 
hence it is probable, that they were of their per- 
suasion and had only given themselves different 
names, according to the different places where they 
resided. In the second book of the Hist, of the 
Persecutions, fol. 471, col. 2, from Trithem., 
Chron., Hirsaug., A. D. 1299. Also Vignier, 
A. D. 1298. Hist. Eccl., exPlatina, Sabellico, Mari. 
Hist. Antonino Bernhardo de Lutzenb. Bal. Cent. 4, 
Script. Brittan. Append. 2, ad Joan Rufum, page 
384. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE FOURTEENTH CEN- 
TURY 

[The beginning is of the congregations or 
churches of the Waldenses ; concerning whom it is 
shown that they existed not only in this century, 
but long before and after, teaching that the baptism 
of infants is of no avail. 

The seventh article of the confession of the faith 
of the Waldenses, touching baptism, is presented ; 
which treats of their confessing the faith, and 
change of life. 

The belief of Dulcinus and his wife Margaret 
adduced, of whom the papists say, that they were 
exactly like the Waldenses. 

For the year 1315, persons are introduced, whom 
the papists regarded as heretics, because they held 
a belief different from that of the Roman church ; 
of which two articles are presented : 1. of baptism ; 
2. of the swearing of oaths ; which is further ex- 
plained by us. For the year 1218 there is also 


322 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


shown, by way of censure, the confession of the 
papists. 

Certain pious people, called apostate Minorite 
friars present themselves, who are accused, by 
Pope John XXII, of five articles, one of which is 
against the swearing of oaths, and the other four 
against the papal church and her clergy. 

Mention is made, for the years 1319, 1330, and 
1365, of the Waldenses, whose confession of faith 
has, in preceding centuries, been shown not to mili- 
tate against that of the Anabaptists ; a representa- 
tion of the severity with which the papists then pro- 
ceeded against them. 

John Wickliffe, A. D. 1370 adduces among other 
things, a certain article, declared to militate against 
infant baptism ; also an article against the swear- 
ing of oaths, etc. 

For the years 1372 and 1373, mention is made of 
certain people, who, by John Tilius, are called Tur- 
ilupins, but by others are declared to have been 
true Waldenses. 

Judicial proceedings (A. D. 1390) instituted 
against the Waldenses, in the countries on the Bal- 
tic Sea ; with the statement that people of this pro- 
fession existed in the Saxon countries full two 
hundred years before the time of John Huss. 

Walter Brute confesses, A. D. 1392, that it is 
not lawful in any case, to swear, neither by the 
Creator, nor by the creatures. He also makes a 
good confession regarding baptism. This is also 
called the doctrine of W. Swinderby. 

J. Mehrning cites a very ancient confession of 
faith of the Waldenses, which he has had in his own 
hands ; in which it is declared that in the beginning 
of Christianity no infants were baptized. 

Cursory notice of the Thessalian brethren, who 
agree with the so-called Mennists in all articles of 
religion ; also, of the custom in Thessalia, of bap- 
tizing on Whitsuntide ; and how Charles, Bishop of 
Milan, exhorted the teachers, diligently to expound 
the mystery of baptism to the hearers in order that 
the confession of the Christian name might become 
them. 

St. Barnabas preaching the holy Gospel at Milan, 
baptizes in running water. Thereupon mention is 
made, in a note, for A. D. 1394, of certain people 
in Bohemia, who sided with the Anabaptists. This 
is the conclusion.] 


"That the church of the Waldenses," says Jacob 
Mehrning, "after her origin in France and her vio- 
lent persecution in that country, spread far and 
wide into Bohemia, Poland, Lombardy, Germany, 
the Netherlands, and elsewhere, and remained there 
from the twelfth century until the year 1545 (as is 
recorded in Bibliotheca Patrum, Tom. 15, p. 300), 
teaching the invalidity of infant baptism, is testi- 
fied to by the histories adduced in the preceding 
centuries, and may be seen in Sleidanus Comment. 


16, Jac. Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., page 737, and H. 
Mont. Nietigh., page 86." 

Continuing, J. Mehrning in said place, gives an 
account of the article of baptism from the confes- 
sion of faith of the Waldenses, saying: "J. Paul 
Perrin of Lyons, in his history of the Waldenses, 
relates their confession, the seventh article of which 
is as follows: 'We believe that in the sacrament 
of baptism the water is the external and visible 
sign of the invisible power of God, working in us 
the renewing of the spirit and the mortifying of our 
members in Christ Jesus ; by which also we are re- 
ceived into the holy congregation of the people of 
God, testifying and declaring, before the same, our 
faith and a change of life.' " Concerning this, see 
also H. Mont. Nietigh., page 86, extracted from 
Charles du Meulin's book of the Monarchy of the 
French, page 65. 

Who does not see that in this place the Wal- 
denses expressly say that in baptism they testify 
and declare before God, their faith and change of 
life ? which was well observed afterwards by Jacob 
du Bois, preacher of the Calvinists at Leyden, 
though he endeavored to obscure it by his expo- 
sitions, Contra Montamum, printed A. D. 1648, 
pages 162, 163; but the truth of the command of 
Christ: "He that believeth and is baptized, shall 
be saved" (Mark 16:16), is stronger and prevails. 

A. D. 1305. — The learned Leonard Krentzheim, 
in his Chronicle writes the following concerning 
Dulcinus : "Dulcinus and Margaret founded a new 
sect or heresy (thus the papists speak) in every 
respect like the Anabaptists ; which continued until 
A. D. etc." P. J. Twisck, Chron., page (A6, col. 1. 

A. D. 1315. — D. A. Mellinus gives an account, 
for this year, of many orthodox Christians, as he 
calls them, who by the papists were nevertheless 
styled heretics. He notices several of their articles, 
which the papists charged as heresy against them, 
but which we, in order to avoid prolixity, shall not 
adduce here, save what is brought against them 
with regard to baptism and oaths. 

THEIR VIEWS ON HOLY BAPTISM 

Concerning baptism he writes, that it was report- 
ed of them, that they had ridiculed the sacrament 
of baptism. 

But who does not know, that if they ridiculed the 
sacrament of baptism, they meant it only as far as 
infant baptism is concerned ; for this was the moot- 
ed question at that time. However, Mellinus gives 
his opinion, which does not conflict with ours, as 
to what was their belief in this matter. His words 
are these: "As regards the article of the sacra- 
ment of baptism (namely, that they should have en- 
tirely rejected it), it must not be understood with 
reference to the true institution of Christ, but to 
the belief of the papists, who bind the grace of 
Christ and the power of the Holy Ghost to the ex- 
ternal water of baptism." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


323 


THEIR VIEWS IN REGARD TO THE OATH 

As regards the oath, the papists charged them 
with holding that perjury is no sin. "But" says 
A. Mellinus, "let us examine these false articles a 
little more closely." Coming to the article of the 
oath he speaks as follows, in order to demonstrate 
the falsity of this accusation: "How should they 
have considered perjury no sin, when the papists 
themselves (in the History of the Waldenses) de- 
clare of them, that they were so loath to swear an 
oath, desiring that they should be believed on their 
yea and nay, in order to avoid all lying, slandering, 
perjury, and frivolous swearing?" Thus far. Mel- 
linus, in the 2d book of the Hist., jol. 479, col. 1, 2. 

Hence, these people sought to avoid not only 
false oaths, but all manner of swearing, desiring 
on this account, to be believed on their yea and 
nay, in accordance with the teaching of Christ: 
"Let your communication be, Yea, yea ; Nay, nay : 
for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil" 
(Matt. 5:37). 

The same year as above, A. D. 1315. — At this 
time, Pope John XXII, issued a papal decree 
against some apostate (?) Minorites, in which he 
accuses them of the following points: 

"Firstly, that they asserted, that there were two 
churches ; the one, carnal, abounding in the riches, 
luxuries and lusts of this world, polluted with all 
manner of sin and shame, and governed by the 
pope of Rome and the prelates. The other, spirit- 
ual, temperate, pure, virtuous, honorable, and 
poor ; to which latter they and their adherents alone 
belong. 

"Secondly, that they declared the priests of the 
church, and all her ministers, divested of the juris- 
diction and authority of their order, so that they 
could give neither sentence nor advice, nor admin- 
ister the sacraments, nor teach the church under 
them thus depriving them of all their ecclesiastical 
power, and that, on the other hand, they boasted 
that all ecclesiastical authority rested with them 
alone, since they ascribed the holiness of the spirit- 
ual life only to themselves. 

"Their third error," as the pope says, "agrees 
with the error of the Waldenses ; since they both 
maintain that men ought in no case to swear, teach- 
ing that it is a sin unto death to swear an oath." 

The fourth supposed error, the pope acknowl- 
edges, likewise to proceed from the Waldenses: 
"That the priests who are confirmed or ordained 
legally, according to the form or order of the 
church (as he calls it), if they are laden with any 
crimes or sins unto death, cannot prepare, nor ad- 
minister, the sacraments of the church." 

The fifth error, as the pope says, was, that they 
said that the Gospel of Christ, which hitherto had 
been covered, nay, almost entirely extinguished, 
was, at this time, fulfilled in them alone. In expla- 
nation of this article, the pope adds that they said 
that they ascribed the promise of our Lord, con- 
cerning the sending the Holy Ghost, to themselves 


in such a manner as to exclude the general (the 
Roman) church from the general apprehension 
and observance of the holy Gospel. 

"But see," says A. Mellinus, who has recorded 
this, "how the pope perverts the meaning of these 
people ; for they never denied that the Holy Ghost, 
according to Christ's promise, was poured out 
richly upon the apostles ; but they denied that the 
popes of Rome, who called themselves apostolic, 
and successors of the apostles, had part or lot in 
the sending of the Holy Ghost." Second book of 
the Hist., jol. 480, col. 1, 2. 

Besides these five articles, the pope imputed ad- 
ditional errors to these pious people, though he did 
not mention them all. Hence, it appears that they 
concurred for the most part with the belief of the 
Waldenses; and that their belief was opposed, 
not only to the swearing of oaths, but also to infant 
baptism, revenge, the sacrament of the altar, the 
mass, and other superstitions of popery, has al- 
ready been more than sufficiently shown. 

A. D. 1319.— At this time, Pope John XXII, 
through his inquisitors, raged mightily against the 
Waldenses, who made the above-cited confession, 
which corresponds with that of the Anabaptists. Of 
their sufferings and end we shall speak afterwards, 
in the proper place. Concerning this, see Bzov. 
Anna!., A. D. 1319, art. 10, ex M. S. Bibl. Vati- 
cane. Also A. Mell., jol. 480, col. 3. 

A. D. 1330. — At this day said Waldenses were 
greatly oppressed by the inquisitors, in the king- 
doms of Bohemia and Poland (see the large Book 
of Christian Martyrs, jol. 483, col. 1) ; which is a 
proof that the defenders of the above confession 
existed then not only in France, but also in Bo- 
hemia and Poland. Yea, Matthias Flaccius Illyri- 
cus professes to have the inquisitorial books of the 
proceedings held at that time by the inquisitors, in 
Bohemia and Poland, under King John, against the 
Waldenses. Catalog. Test. Verit., I. 16, art. : The 
Waldenses. 

Note. — In Jacob Mehrning's History of Bap- 
tism we read, p. 609 : "I have in my possession the 
inquisition which, A. D. 1330, in the time of King 
John, was held, in Bohemia and Poland, against 
the Waldenses." 

A. D. 1365.— The author of the books of the 
Persecutions and Martyrs, records the following 
for the year 1365: "As there were everywhere 
throughout France innumerable Beghards and 
Beguines (in the second book, page 479, at the foot 
of the fourth column, he calls them Waldenses), 
who scattered their heresy, as the papists called it, 
far and wide, Pope Urban VI, A. D. 1365, charged 
all the prelates of France, and the inquisitors of the 
faith in that country, by an express bull, that they 
should not suffer the heretics to live with impunity, 
but should exterminate the erring spirits (thus the 
pope calls the true believers), together with their 
errors, with the sickle of ecclesiastical discipline." 
Second book of the History oj the Persecutions, 
jol. 488, col. 1, from Bzov., A. D. 1365, Art. 8. 


324 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


A. D. 1370. — "At this time," writes Jacob 
Mehrning and others, "John Wickliffe, a teacher 
in England, and pastor at Lutterworth in the 
bishopric of Lincoln, taught, among other things, 
that baptism is not necessary to the forgiveness of 
original sin; thereby sufficiently opposing, or, as 
H. Montanus says, rejecting, infant baptism, which 
is founded upon the forgiveness of original sin. On 
this account, forty-one years after his death, his 
bones, by order of the pope, were exhumed, burnt, 
and the ashes thrown into the water." /. Mehrn., 
B. Hist, pp. 737, 738, H. Mont. Nietigh., p. 87. 
Also Thorn. Waldens., Tom. 2, c. 96. Bellarm., 
Tom. 3, lib. 1, de Sacr. Bapt., cap. 4, Vicecom. 
de Observat. Eccles., lib. 2, cap. 1. 

Note. — Further explanation. — That the above 
words of John Wickliffe are to be understood in no 
other way than as having reference to the rejection 
of infant baptism, and not of baptism upon faith, is 
confirmed by the fourth article, extracted from 
Wickliffe's Trialogue, by William Widefort, a 
Minorite, and quoted by A. Mellinus. It reads as 
follows: "Those who say," says John Wickliffe, 
"that the children of believers, which die without 
baptism, are not saved, are much too presumptuous 
and bold." A. Mell, 2d book, fol. 494, col. 3. 

Moreover, that John Wickliffe opposed not only 
infant baptism, but also oaths sworn to men, is tes- 
tified to in the forty-second article of his confes- 
sion, delivered in the council of Constance, and 
condemned there. It reads thus : "Oaths sworn in 
civil contracts and commercial transactions are un- 
lawful."* Colon, apud Orthun. Grat. A. Mell., 2d 
book, fol. 496, col. 1. 

This article relative to the swearing of oaths, 
from the confession of John Wickliffe, is stated 
by some as follows : "An oath sworn for the pur- 
pose of confirming human contracts and proper 
transactions, is not appropriate." Seb. Franck, 
Chron., der Rom. Kett., fol. 105, col. 1, letter J., 
John. Also P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 720, col. 1, 2. 
Tract. Kort Verhael van den Loop der Werelt, by 
F. H. H., p. 99. 

P. J. Twisck and others write that John Wick- 
liffe, having fled from England to Bohemia, propa- 
gated his doctrine there jointly with the Walden- 
ses, who, for the most part, agreed with it. 

Wickliffe also taught that the substance and es- 
sence of the bread and wine remain in the sacra- 
ment of the altar after the consecration. 

That Christ is not bodily in the sacrament. That 
the mass is not instituted by Christ, but is the 
devil's obedience and word. That confirmation, 
fasts, consecrations of priests, the baptizing of 
temples, and bells, are retained by the pope and 
the bishops only from the desire for gain. 

That universities, studies, doctorates, colleges, 
grades, and masterships, are things which we have 

* Hence, when Wickliffe rejects the swearing of oaths in civil or 
human contracts, he rejects all swearing of all oaths that have ever 
been in question; for not the promises which are made to God, but 
the oaths that are sworn to men, have been from ancient times, 
and are still, the matter in question. 


inherited from the heathen, and are altogether of 
as much use to the church as the devil. An im- 
proper oath is, etc. 

Merula and others state that Wickliffe wrote 
full two hundred books, and diligently instructed, 
and turned from popery, John Huss (see A. D. 
1415 and 1416), when the latter was still young, 
together with many others. P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
p. 720, col. 1, 2, from Leonh., lib. 6. Hist. Andr. 
Junii, fol. 45. Jan. Crespin., fol. 354. Guil. Mer- 
ula, fol. 886. Toneel. Niclaes, fol. 119. Zegh., fol. 

Note.— That John Huss (though the Calvinists 
would like to claim him, as well as John Wickliffe), 
was opposed to the swearing of oaths, and had 
other articles in common with the Waldensian 
Anabaptist brethren, and that he learned this from 
John Wickliffe, and Wickliffe from said Walden- 
sian brethren, we hope to make clear in its proper 
place. 

As to the article which Wickliffe was said to 
have taught, namely, that everything happens by 
an absolute or unavoidable necessity, on this D. A. 
Mellinus, a Calvinistic preacher, remarks: "We 
suspect that this has been unjustly put on Wick- 
liffe, by the malicious enemies of the truth" (2jd 
book, fol. 495, col. 4). Afterwards, explaining it 
still further, he says that "This is a wanton slan- 
der and devilish lie, fabricated from nothing, and 
cast into the face of innocent Tohn Wickliffe." 
Fol. 496, col. 1. 

Thus it is evident, that John Wickliffe, even ac- 
cording to the testimony of the Calvinists, did not 
maintain the article of precise predestination, as 
some before him, though wrongly, have believed. 

Note.— If John Wickliffe did not hold the ar- 
ticle of predestination or unavoidable necessity, as 
one of the Calvinistic teachers here asserts and 
holds as truth, what, then, did he retain, in the mat- 
ter of his belief, that accords only with the Calvin- 
istic church ? Certainly nothing. 

A. D. 1372. — John Tylius, in his Chronicle of 
the Kings of France, writes, for the year 1372, con- 
cerning certain people whom he terms Turilupins, 
and, in papistic manner, very contemptuously calls 
a superstition, as follows : "The superstition of the 
Turilupins (a kind of Waldenses), who took their 
surname from the poverty common to them all, 
were this year condemned as heretics, together 
with their writings, books and clothes." /. Tyl., 
Chron., Reg. Gall. A. Mell., fol. 497, col. 3. Of their 
faith we shall presently speak. 

A. D. 1373. — Vignierus writes concerning these 
people called Turilupins, and their doctrine, that 
they were pronounced heretics at Paris, by the in- 
quisitors, and their books publicly burnt, together 
with one of their women. Hist. Eccles., A. D. 1373. 
ex Guil. de Nangis. A. Mell., same place. More 
anon. 

Note— A fuller account of the death of this 
woman will be given in its proper place, in the 
history of the martyrs. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


325 


OF THE UPRIGHTNESS OF THESE PEOPLE 

The author of the second book of the Perse- 
cutions, relating how these people, called Turilu- 
pins, were accused by some papistic writers, of not 
living honestly, replies in their stead, saying : "But 
these poor people are lamentably slandered; for 
they were upright Waldenses, to whom the papists 
imputed whatever they would." Fol. 497, col. 3. 


OF THE NAME OF THESE PEOPLE 

As regards their name, Joachine Caudarius 
states that they obtained the name of Turilupins, 
in Flanders, Artois, and Hainault, because they 
lived in wildernesses, among the wolves. In lugibri 
Narrctt. de excidio Wald. Alb., A. M., same place. 


OF THE BELIEF OF THESE PEOPLE 

It may be observed here, that if these Turilupins 
were true Waldenses, as has been declared, they 
rejected infant baptism, the swearing of oaths, re- 
venge towards enemies, the mass, and all other 
Roman inventions, as appears from their own con- 
fession shown above. 

Note. — Henry de Haffra, at Vienna, A. D. 1376, 
wrote on Genesis, and greatly reproved the lies of 
the Romish legends, and about the merits of the 
saints. In a letter he also censured the clergy and 
their head, the pope, for many errors. J oh. Munst., 
fol. 174, compared with the Chronicle of the De- 
struction of the Tyrants, p. 724, col. 1. 

Also: A. D. 1380, Michael Cesenas, formerly 
a Minorite friar, or monk, wrote against the pope, 
calling him (from II Thess. 2) antichrist, and the 
Roman church, Babylon, and the congregation of 
those drunk with the blood of the saints. The pope 
deposed him from his dignity; but he adhered 
steadfastly to his opinion. J oh. Munst., fol. 171. 
Catal. Test., fol. 691, compared with P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., p. 731. 

Also : In the same year Nicholas Clemongis op- 
posed the superstitious feast days, excessive eat- 
ing and drinking, (evil) speaking, and other im- 
proper things. See the last-mentioned chronicle, p. 
732, from J oh. Munst., fol. 170. 

Also: About A. D. 1382, M. Matthaeus Pari- 
siensis, a Bohemian, appeared, and wrote a large 
book concerning antichrist, (the pope), saying that 
he had already come, and could be found in Rome. 
Thus did also Lupoldus de Bedenborgh. Compare 
P J. Twisck, Chron., p. 734, col. 1, with Catal. 
Test., fol. 794, 796. Merula, fol. 890. 

Also: A. D. 1384, John Muntziger, Rector of 
the school at Olm, read in his oration, that the 
supposed body of Christ should not be made God, 
and, hence, should not be worshiped as God. See 
the last-mentioned author, fol. 736, col. 1, com- 
pared with Hist. Joh. Munst., fol. 171. 

A. D. 1390. — Or about that time, mention is 
made of the Waldenses in the countries lying on 
the Baltic Sea; concerning whom Matthias Flac- 


cius Illyricus states that he has an entire inquisi- 
torial book, full of the proceedings held against 
the godly Waldenses who lived in those countries. 

Said Illyricus also had among his writings, an- 
other brief inquisition or investigation against the 
Waldenses ; such as formerly was practiced against 
them in the bishopric of Mayence. He moreover 
says that he has still another, large book, full of 
proceedings held by the inquisitors against the 
Waldenses ; in which 443 Waldenses are mentioned 
by name, who about A. D. 1391, in Pomerania, 
the Mark, and the adjacent places, were put on the 
rack and examined on the articles once confessed 
by the Waldenses. Many of these martyrs or con- 
fessors freely testified and confessed that they had 
been, one twenty, another thirty years, among this 
sect. Also, that their forefathers held the same 
doctrine. Matth. Flacc. III. Catal. Test. Verit. 
lib. 18. Lib. 15, Title, De Waldensibus. 

Note. — From this it appears, writes a certain 
author, that the Saxon countries were full of Wal- 
denses, that is, orthodox Christians, already two 
hundred years, and more, before the time of Huss. 
For it can easily be computed, that when the 443 
Waldenses were examined at once, there must have 
been an incomparably greater number who were 
not examined in regard to their faith, but concealed 
themselves, or took to flight, in order to escape the 
danger. And, truly, those who are noticed in the 
book, as having been examined, frequently men- 
tioned very many others of their belief, who were 
not present. 

Among other points relating to their trials, re- 
corded in this inquisitional book, were these : "That 
they were sober and frugal people, discreet in their 
speech, careful to avoid lying, swearing, etc." 
A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 505, col. 3, 4. Also, P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., p. 743, col. 2, from Henr. Box- 
horn, fol. 27. In the margin of the same page, 
Twisck says: "The Wandenses (or Waldenses) 
will not swear." 

Note.— A. D. 1390, the Lord raised up Richard 
Withe, who wrote many glorious things against the 
pope, or the blasphemy of the so-called antichrist. 
Bal. Cent., lib. 7, cap. 10, compared with Chron. 
van den Ondergang, page 734, col. 1, 2. 

A. D. 1392.— On the 13th of January of this 
year, Walter Brute, a layman, but nevertheless a 
learned man, from the bishopric of Hereford, ap- 
pearing personally before Lord John, Bishop of 
Hereford, maintained, among several other articles 
militating against the Roman church, this point: 
"That Christians are not permitted, for any rea- 
son, in any case, to swear, either by the Creator or 
by His creatures." A. Mell, 2d book, fol. 506, col. 
3. 


NOTICE THE BELIEF OF WILLIAM SWINDERBY 

COMPARED WITH THAT OF WALTER BRUTE 

Since Walter Brute is called (Fol. 505, col. 4,) 
a defender of the articles of William Swinderby, 


326 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


who was afterwards burnt for the faith, in Smith- 
field, London, it is quite evident, that William 
Swinderby must have held the same belief, which, 
as well as many other articles, they both had in 
common with the Waldenses. Besides, this article 
of nonswearing, together with the other two re- 
lated in this connection, is unmistakably called 
William Swinderby's article (Fol. 506, col. 3,), so 
that both of them, speaking as with one tongue, 
are also together charged here, with having pro- 
hibited all manner of oaths. 


THAT, BESIDES THE ARTICLE RESPECTING THE 

OATH, HE ALSO MADE A GOOD CONFESSION 

IN REGARD TO HOLY BAPTISM 

It appears, moreover, from the confession of 
faith of Walter Brute, that also infant baptism 
was not recognized by him ; for he speaks in the 
following manner concerning the burial of Christ : 
He (Christ) was buried, that we all by baptism, 
might be buried together with Him into His death ; 
in order that having died unto sin (notice, this is 
no work for infants), we should live unto right- 
eousness.* A. M., from Fox Angl., p. 440. 


OF A CERTAIN ANCIENT CONFESSION OF FAITH OF 
THE WALDENSIAN BRETHREN 

Jacob Mehrning, writing on the fourteenth cen- 
tury, touching baptism, says: "I have had in my 
hands a very old confession of some Waldensian 
brethren in Bohemia, printed in the German lan- 
guage, in which they expressly confess that in the 
beginning of Christianity no infants were baptized ; 
and that also their forefathers did not do it," as 
John Bohemius writes. Lib. 2, Gentium Moribus : 
"In former times baptism was wont to be admin- 
istered only to those who were previously instructed 
in the faith, and examined seven times in the week 
before Easter and Whitsuntide; these were then 
baptized upon the confession of their faith; but 
when baptism was afterwards deemed necessary to 
salvation, it was also ordained, by the papists, that 
new-born infants should be baptized, and that 
sponsors should be assigned them, who confessed 
the faith, and renounced the devil, in their stead." 
Bapt. Hist., p. 738. 

About A. D. 1400. — D. J. Vicecomes cites from 
this century (from Nicephorus Callistus), lib. 1, 
cap. 23, that in Thessalia, baptism was administered 
only on Whitsuntide ;f on which account many died 
without baptism. 

"Thus," remarks Jacob Mehrning on this, "we 
are informed, that even at this day there are breth- 
ren and Christians in Thessalonica, who agree with 
the Mennists in all articles of religion." These are 
J. Mehrning's own words (page 739), of which 
we shall speak more fully hereafter. 

* This article has direct reference to the words which Paul 
wrote to the believing Romans : "Know ye not, that so many of us 
as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?" 
(Rom. 6:3). 

t Others say, on Easter, 


OF CHARLES, BISHOP OF MILAN 

Bapt. Hist., p. 740, D. Vicecomes, lib. 5, cap. 45, 
writes: "Charles, bishop of Milan, admonished 
the teachers, diligently to expound to their hearers 
the mystery of holy baptism, and to earnestly ex- 
hort them to a Christian walk, in order that the 
confession of the Christian name (upon which 
baptism was wont to be administered), might well 
become them." 

What else does this indicate, than that the teach- 
ers should exhort their hearers to the baptism, 
which ought to be administered upon confession of 
faith, and, consequently, not in infancy? 

Galvaneus, in the History of Milan, (B. H., 
page 741, D. Vicecomes, lib. 1, cap. 4), writes: 
"St. Barnabas, when he first preached the Gospel 
at Milan, baptized in running water." 

This manner and these circumstances plainly in- 
dicate, as stated elsewhere, that infant baptism was 
then not practiced at that place. 

Note. — For the year 1394, mention is made of a 
number of people in Bohemia, who sided with the 
Anabaptists. Seb. Fr. Chron. der Rom. Kett., 
p. 121, col. 2, letter P., Picardy. 

A. D. 1400. — It appears that when the last year 
of this century had come, various persons opposed 
popery, not only with regard to baptism, but also to 
many other articles ; of which, among other things, 
mention is made in the fourteenth book of the 
Ondergang der Tyrannen, p. 749, col. 1, 2, 3; 
where we have this declaration: "The pope has 
no absolute power or judgment, so that he cannot 
err ; so all, even the papists, have taught for about 
fourteen hundred years. The ancient fathers, the 
Greek as well as the Latin, regarded Pope Honor- 
ius I as a Monothelitic* heretic. Likewise, the 
sixth synod, in which he was condemned as a her- 
etic, and his letters burned. From Perkins, jot. 
421. ' 

Note. — If this condemning of the pope as a 
heretic, as also the burning of his letters, was 
done from envy, or bitterness, we would by no 
means defend, much less praise, but far rather con- 
demn it. But since, as the matter appears to us, it 
was done from a good intention and godly zeal, we 
find nothing censurable in it. For the word con- 
demn does not always signify eternal damnation, 
as the Holy Scripture uses it,f but it is also under- 
stood as meaning, to sentence or pronounce guilty. 
Thus, also, the name heretic, when rightly consid- 
ered, signifies only a schismatic, headstrong per- 
son, who follows his own opinion, instead of the 
Holy Scripture. Now, that the Pope of Rome was 
such a person, will not soon be contradicted by 
those who give due honor to God, and allow them- 
selves to be governed by reason. The burning of 

* Others say, a Monocholite. 

t To an English reader this explanation will seem not only 
superfluous, but, perhaps, even obscure and contradictory. Let him 
be reminded that the work originally was written in the Dutch lan- 
guage, in which such explanation of the word in question ("verdoe- 
men") is entirely in place. — Transl. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


327 


his letters we regard as having been done from 
carefulness, lest any might be seduced or brought 
into error by them. This will satisfy the well-dis- 
posed, who, imitating the bee, will extract honey, 
instead of gall, from it. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 


SAME YEAR AS ABOVE, A. D. 1400 

The universities of Prague in Bohemia, Oxford 
in England, and Paris in France, wrote against the 
apostasy of the Roman church, and demanded a 
reformation, saying that the scandalous life of the 
pope and the cardinals could not be tolerated ; that 
the popes and cardinals were liable to err, and had 
frequently erred ; and that the blessed Son of God, 
though having suffered much from the synagogue 
of the Jews, had to suffer much more from the 
princes of the papal synagogue. Concerning simi- 
lar censures, read the books of Ulric of Hutten, the 
Frankish knight, printed A. D. 1520. 


SAME YEAR AS ABOVE, A. D. 1400 

John Tauler, a German divine, said, at this time, 
in his book of sermons : "Our prelates (he means 
the rulers of the Roman church), are blind, and 
leaders of the blind ; and it is to be feared that they 
both together will be condemned." 

He also spoke much of the persecution, tribula- 
tion, hardship, and suffering, a Christian must ex- 
pect here ; but did not say that one should inflict 
sufferings one upon another. 

Read all his sermons, but particularly the 11th, 
15th and 31st chapters in his book, where he treats 
of suffering ; also the first-mentioned author, in the 
place indicated. 

Note. — That John Tauler was a very pious and 
highly educated man, appears from very many tes- 
timonies given concerning him. Truly, he was as a 
flaming torch in his time, to lighten up, by his doc- 
trine as well as his life, the dark night of perversely 
religious popery. But if he still erred in anything, 
which may easily have been the case, it is all over- 
balanced by his virtue and learning. Nevertheless, 
we could not defend errors, neither in him nor in 
others. Our love must never be so blind as to hin- 
der us from seeing a blemish (if there is any) in 
what we love. But he who has not lived so that 
his errors are apparent, should, herein, if he is 
otherwise well disposed, be borne with; and this 
the more, when he has to live among so disorderly 
a people, as popery was then composed of, and can 
obtain no other liberty. Such was John Tauler, and 
as such we will recognize him. Our love will and 
shall bear his weakness. Hence, dismissing this, 
we will turn to the pious witnesses of the Lord, 
who laid down their dear lives for the truth which 
they confessed. 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS OF THE FOURTEENTH 
CENTURY 

[The exordium to the entrance of this century is 
taken from the places where most of the martyrs 
suffered at this time, as also from the circum- 
stances of their suffering and death. 

The manner of inquisition over the believers in 
these times, shown in divers articles, for the year 
1301, according to the account of Jean Paul Perrin 
Lyonnois. 

Dulcinus and his wife Margaret, who, as L. 
Kreutzheim says, founded a sect alike in every re- 
spect to the Anabaptists, are torn limb from limb ; 
and with them one hundred and forty others, burnt 
for the same faith, at Novaria, in Lombardy, A. D. 
1308. 

Very many persons at Crema (probably Krems), 
in Austria, burnt for the religion of the orthodox 
Waldenses; also at Steyer, in the same Austrian 
territories, and at Zuidenitz, in Poland, all of 
whom are put to death by being burned, A. D. 
1315. 

Two years after, namely, A. D. 1317, four per- 
sons, called Brethren of the Poor Life, or Wal- 
denses, miserably perish, on red-hot coals, at Mar- 
seilles, in France. 

A persecution of the believing Waldenses, insti- 
tuted by Pope John XXII, set forth for the year 
1319, from the accounts of the ancients. This per- 
secution extended A. D. 1330, into Bohemia and 
Poland ; one Eckhard burned for the before-men- 
tioned faith. 

Note.— For the years 1336, 1340, 1350 and 
1360, of the frankness of John de Pistoia, Con- 
rad Hager, John de Landuno, John de Rupe Scissa, 
who did not hesitate to point out to the pope his er- 
rors. Also what happened to them on this ac- 
count. 

Another persecution of the Waldensian brethren 
in France, originated A. D. 1365, by Pope Urban 
VI, adduced from his own bull. 

Eight years after, namely, A. D. 1373, still an- 
other persecution is shown, which arose in Flan- 
ders, Artois and Hainault, in which Peronne, of 
Aubeton, a pious woman of the Waldensian re- 
ligion, offered up her life to God, by fire. 

Thirty-six persons called Waldenses are burnt 
for the faith, at Bingen, A. D. 1390. 

A severe persecution of ancient Waldenses arises 
again on the Baltic Sea, four hundred and forty- 
three of whom are severely tortured, and put to 
death, in the Mark and in Pomerania, A. D. 1391. 
The sufferings of the Christian believers, caused 
by those of the Roman church, in which one Wil- 
liam Santrus, who censured the pope, loses his life, 
circumstantially shown, for the last year of this 
century, A. D. 1400, 


328 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


In a note, the testimony of Franciscus Petrarcha 
against the pope is brought to recollection ; on ac- 
count of which opposition he had to suffer expul- 
sion and persecution from the Roman dominions. 
Conclusion of the tragedy of the fourteenth cen- 
tury.] 


With few steps we shall make a long journey, 
and our course will be not less wonderful than sad. 
The places through which we will first travel are 
the mountains of Lombardy, near Novaria. In the 
midst of our journey, we will come to the cities 
Crema and Steyer, in Austria, Zuidenitz, in Po- 
land, and Marseilles, in France. Thence we pro- 
pose to proceed into Bohemia ; and at last to finish 
our journey in the countries on the Baltic Sea. 

What will we meet on our way, dear friends? 
Certainly nothing that is pleasing to the flesh ; for 
fire and flames shall threaten us on our right hand, 
and deep waters on our left. Between them there 
is nothing but bloody scaffolds, gallows, wheels, 
stakes and countless horrible instruments of death 
and torture, which cause men to die slowly, as by a 
thousand deaths. The company is composed al- 
together of bodies burned, drowned, beheaded or 
otherwise murdered; so that our footsteps must 
tread through the midst of skulls and dead men's 
bones ; to say nothing of the crimson blood, which 
seems to flow in rivulets, yea, sometimes in large 
streams, along the ways which we must travel. 

Nevertheless, our heart is full of joy, and we are 
delighted with this journey, and draw life in the 
valleys of death ; for here is the portal of heaven, 
the door of the blissful palace, which is indeed 
strait, yea, on the posts of which flesh and blood re- 
main ; but through which is the entrance into the 
spaciousness of the heavenly halls, and into the in- 
finite and ever-blooming garden of the blessed 
paradise. Here are heard, with the ears of faith, 
as near by the glad voices of the holy angels,* to 
which no singing of nightingales in earthly groves 
can be compared ; nay, the most lovely instruments 
of music, when compared with these sound harsh- 
ly and unpleasantly to the ear. There are also be- 
held, as with unclouded eyes, the majesty of God, 
Jesus, the Saviour of the world, and the heavenly 
societies. We dare not further speak of it.f for 
human ear hath not heard nor eye seen; neither 
have entered into the heart of man, the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love Him. 
I Cor. 2 :9. 

All this is there perceived in the soul, though 
the bodies suffer great distress; but this is soon 
over. Have we no reason, then, to long for this 
journey? Certainly. Hence, let us go on. The 
Lord guide us and show us the right way, that we 
may not only begin well, but also finish well. 

O ye slain and martyred multitudes, who have 
testified with your blood to the name of your and 

* "Glory to God in the highest" (Luke 2:14). 
t And (he) heard unspeakable (unrevealed) words, which it is 
not lawful for a man to utter. II Cor. 12:4. 


our God, we have come to behold your martyr- 
dom, and to make it known, by writings, to our fel- 
low brethren ; not that we intend to make a pilgrim- 
age to the places of your death, to salute you in the 
manner of worship, or to bring you an oblation, 
after the manner of the priests, by no means; for 
this would profit neither you nor us ; but we seek 
to bring to remembrance your good examples. With 
this we will begin. 

Note. — Before we approach the sad mountains 
and fields of the miserable, but nevertheless well 
comforted martyrs, it will be necessary to give an 
account respecting the mode of the inquisition 
which, having commenced in the preceding century 
already, had continued even to this time, and was 
the cause of all the harm and distress which now 
came upon the believers, and through which they 
had to suffer, first in their consciences, and then in 
their bodies, yea, were subjected to the most bitter 
and cruel death. 

In the preceding century, for the years 1214 and 
1215, we showed the beginnings of the inquisition ; 
we now come to its progress and extension. 

OF THE MODE OF INQUISITION OVER THE BE- 
LIEVERS, IN THESE TIMES, ACCORDING TO THE 
ACCOUNT OF JEAN PAUL PERRIN LION- 
NOYS, AND THE TRANSLATION OF 
J. M. V v AND B. LYDIUS 

"As regards the deceitful course," says the 
translator, "which the afore-mentioned inquisitors 
were wont to take in the execution of their office, 
we would have no knowledge, save what some be- 
lievers who escaped the Spanish Inquisition, could 
have told us concerning it. But it was not the will 
of God that these, their wiles, should remain hid, 
and that we should obtain no copies thereof, writ- 
ten by themselves. Behold, then, the cunning arti- 
fices of the inquisitors, which served them for rules 
and instructions, in conducting the processes 
against the Waldenses. 

RULES OF THE INQUISITORS 

1. It is not permitted or advisable to dispute 
concerning the faith in the presence of the laity. 

2. No one is to be regarded as converted, if 
he will not accuse all those whom he knows to 
be such as he is. 

3. He who does not accuse those who are such 
as he is, must be severed from the church as a 
diseased member ; that the sound members may not 
become corrupted by it. 

4. After any one is delivered to the secular 
judge, great care must be exercised, that he be 
not allowed to prove his innocence, or show his 
harmlessness before the people; for if he is put 
to death, the people will take offense ; and if he is 
discharged, the (Catholic) faith will be endan- 
gered. 

5. Care must be taken not to promise his life, 
before the people, to him who is condemned to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


329 


death (namely, if he indicates his willingness to be- 
come converted) ; seeing that no heretic would al- 
low himself to be burned, if he could escape by 
such a promise; and if he should promise con- 
version before the people, and his life would not 
be granted him thereupon, the people would take 
offense at it, and think that he were put to death 
unjustly. 

6. Observe: The inquisitor must always take 
the deed for granted, without any consideration, 
and ask the questions only in regard to the cir- 
cumstances of the matter, not saying: Have you 
made confession to the heretics? but, How often 
have you made your confession to the heretics? 
Again, do not ask : Have they slept in your house ? 
but, In what room of your house did they sleep? 
and the like. 

7. The inquisitor may look into a book, as 
though he had noted down in it, the life and 
conduct of the accused, together with everything 
in regard to which he is interrogating him. 

8. The accused must be threatened with death, 
if he will not confess, and be told that his doom is 
sealed ; that he must regard his soul, and, first of 
all, forsake his heresy ; "For," it shall be said, "you 
must die ; accept with patience whatever shall befall 
you." If he then answer: "Since I must die, I 
would rather die in this my faith, than in the faith 
of the Roman church," rest assured, that previously 
he only pretended to be desirous of becoming con- 
verted ; and therefore he must then be brought to 
justice. 

9. The thought is not to be entertained of over- 
coming the heretics by skill of learning, or knowl- 
edge of the Scriptures, since the learned men are 
much sooner confounded by them; the result of 
which is, that the heretics are then still more con- 
firmed and encouraged, seeing they thus outwit 
even those who are educated. 

10. It is to be well observed, that the heretics 
never speak right out, and that, when compelled by 
much questioning, they generally allege that they 
are simple and unlearned men, and, hence, know 
not how to answer; and that, seeing that the by- 
standers are moved to compassion for them, as 
though they were wronged, regarding them as sim- 
ple and harmless people, they take courage from 
this and pretend to weep, as poor, miserable men, 
and, imploring their judges, make strenuous efforts 
to free themselves from the inquisition, saying; 
"My Lords, if I have erred in any matter, I will 
gladly accept the penance for it ; but assist me to 
free myself from this reproach, in which I have 
fallen through hatred and envy, without having 
transgressed." 

But the courageous inquisitor must then in no 
wise be moved by such entreaties, nor give credit 
to such dissimulations. 

11. Moreover, the inquisitor shall announce to 
them beforehand, that they will gain nothing by 
swearing falsely (from necessity) ; since they (the 
lords) have matter enough to convict them by wit- 


nesses ; and that therefore they need not think that 
by means of swearing they will escape sentence of 
death ; but it must be promised them, that as far as 
they voluntarily confess their error, they shall ob- 
tain mercy ; for in such perplexity many are found, 
who confess their errors, in. order to escape. 

"Behold," says the writer of this inquisition, 
"these are the cunning artifices formerly employed 
by the inquisitors throughout Europe, against the 
Waldenses," etc. In the second book of the first 
part of the History of the Waldenses, by /. P. 
P. L., pages 62, 63, 64. 

Note.— About this time (A. D. 1303) Peter Jo- 
hannis taught that the pope was the antichrist, and 
the Roman synagogue the great Babylon. About 
his martyrdom, however, we have not been able to 
learn anything. See P. J. Twisck, Chron., p. 643, 
col. 2, from Georg. Pac, cap. 11. 


DULCINUS AND HIS WIFE' MARGARET, TORN LIMB 

FROM LIMB; AND, WITH THEM, AN HUNDRED 

AND FORTY OTHERS BURNT FOR THE FAITH, 

AT NOVARIA, IN LOMBARDY, A. D. 1308 

About the year 1305, the light of the evangelical 
doctrine began to arise with power also on the 
mountains of Lombardy, called the Alps, through a 
pious man, called Dulcinus of Novaria, and his 
wife, who, having accepted the orthodox faith of 
the Waldensian brethren, excelled most gloriously 
in doctrine and life, so that Dulcinus by his doc- 
trine, and his wife by her good example, and both 
by their living and effective faith, opened the eyes 
of several others, and caused them to separate from 
popery, and follow Jesus Christ, in true penitence 
and uprightness of life, which they did in full 
earnestness for the love of Jesus Christ and the 
salvation of their souls. 

But even as it was in the time of John the Bap- 
tist, that many unregenerated Pharisees and Sad- 
ducees came to his baptism, so it seems also to have 
been here ; for it appears that some who seemed to 
adhere to his doctrine, lived at the same time in an- 
ger, revenge, and after the flesh; which, as may 
be presumed, grieved this good man and his wife, 
as also the church which he had founded, and 
which desired piously to adhere to the doctrine of 
Christ, very greatly. 

In the meantime, about the year 1307, Pope 
Clement V, receiving information thereof, con- 
demned said pious man Dulcinus and his wife Mar- 
garet as arch-heretics, and commanded them, as 
well as their adherents, to be exterminated. To ac- 
complish this, many Romanists, who had marked 
themselves with the sign of the cross, lent their 
services; who charged the misdeeds of the hypo- 
crites also upon the pious, and thus endeavored to 
extirpate them both together ; the pious, however, 
with far more severe and intolerable torments, than 
the hypocrites. 

Thus it happened that this pious man Dulcinus 
and his wife, refusing to depart from the faith, 


330 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


were torn limb from limb by them, burnt to ashes, 
and the ashes scattered to the winds. The principal 
members of the church, one hundred and forty in 
number, loving Jesus Christ, whom they had con- 
fessed, more than this temporal life, were all, as 
they steadfastly adhered to the accepted truth 
burnt alive, and thus, having commended their 
souls to God, offered up a living sacrifice accept- 
able unto God, about the year 1308. 

Note. — These were the people of whom Leon- 
hard Krentzheim has written in his Chronicle, as 
already noted, saying: "Dulcinus and Margaret 
founded a new sect or heresy (thus speak the pa- 
pists) alike in every respect to the Anabaptists, 
which continued until, etc." 

Touching their martyrdom, A. Mellinus writes, 
from some ancient books of history, that they were 
first torn limb from limb, and then, as we stated 
above, burnt to ashes. This martyrdom, the pa- 
pistic historians themselves confess, not only the 
men, but also the women, endured very steadfastly 
unto death, in the city of Novaria, in Lombardy. 
In the second book of the Persecutions, fol. 477, 
col. 4, fol. 478, col. 1, from Prat, de Haeres. Tit. 
Dulcin. ex Bernhardo Lutzenburgh. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION — WHAT P. J. TWISCK HAS 
WRITTEN CONCERNING IT 

"This year," he writes, "many pious people 
were cruelly destroyed for their religion, by order 
of Pope Clement V. Over four hundred persons 
were killed by hunger, cold, and the sword (of 
these, however, we do not speak here), and one 
hundred and forty were burned (these are the ones 
of whom we speak), the principal teacher of 
whom, together with his wife, very steadfastly 
endured death." Chron., page 649. A. from Henr. 
Boxh., fol. 26. 

Note. — The reader should observe here, that 
said hundred and forty martyrs, who at Novaria 
were put to death by fire, are called special fol- 
lowers of the doctrine of Dulcinus, are to be clear- 
ly distinguished from a certain other number of 
about four hundred persons who, having been sur- 
rounded on the mountain, by the pope's crusade, 
lost their lives by hunger, cold, and the sword; 
for not the latter, but the former, are the ones 
whom we would notice here. 


TOUCHING THEIR FAITH, ACCORDING TO THE AC- 
COUNT OF A. MELLINUS 

Concerning their faith, A. Mellinus says : "From 
this it can be clearly inferred, that Dulcinus and 
his wife, and many other martyrs with them, died 
for the true confession of the doctrine of the Wal- 
denses ; because they opposed the Pope of Rome, 
and the Roman church, maintaining him to be the 
antichrist, and her the Babylonian whore proph- 
esied of in John's Revelation." Second book, fol. 
478, A. 


VERY MANY PERSONS BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT 
CREMA, IN AUSTRIA, A. D. 1315 

A. D. 131 S, very many orthodox Christians were 
sought, found, and burnt as heretics, by the Do- 
minicans, or inquisitors, in the city of Crema, 
(probably Krems), under the bishopric of Passau, 
in the archduchy of Austria. In the second book 
of the Persecutions, fol. 479, col. 1, ex Trithem 
Chron. Hirsaug., A. D. 1315, p. 211, edit. Freheri. 

CONCERNING THESE MARTYRS, ACCORDING TO THE 
ACCOUNT OF TRITHEMIUS 

The papist Trithemius says: "There were fur- 
ther, in Austria, in different places, very many 
burnt alive at this time (namely, A. D. 1315), all 
of whom unanimously, yet obstinately (we say 
steadfastly), continued with great joy, unto death. 
Trith. in Chron. Hirsaug., and Chron. Sponh., 
same year. 


WHAT P. J. TWISCK HAS WRITTEN CONCERNING 
THIS 

In Austria, near Passau, a great number of the 
Waldenses or believers were apprehended for their 
religion, and publicly burned alive in the city of 
Crema, adhering steadfastly to their faith, and 
evincing in the midst of the flames, that the death 
and pain which they suffered for the honor of God, 
and the truth, were sweet to them. Chron., p. 657, 
col. 1, from Henr. Boxh., fol. 27. Phil. Marnix 
Tafer.,folU\. 

Note.— Immediately after the account of the 
martyrs, noticed for the year 1315, the same author 
speaks of their teacher, their great number, and 
comfortful martyrdom; for, after saying, that to 
many of them death and pain were sweet, he adds 
these words : "Which, among others, appeared also 
in the case of their teacher, called Lolhard, who 
confessed in his trial, that in the countries of 
Austria and Bohemia alone he could find eighty 
thousand persons who were one with him in re- 
ligion." Chron., page 657, col. 2, taken from the 
writers cited. 

Note.— These are the same people whose con- 
fession relative to baptism, the swearing of oaths, 
and other articles, we have shown to accord well 
with that of the Anabaptists. Concerning this, see 
our account of the orthodox faith for the four- 
teenth century, year 1315, and the testimonies ad- 
duced there. 


MANY PERSONS CALLED WALDENSES MARTYRED 

AT STEYER, IN AUSTRIA, AND GREAT NUMBERS 

OF THEM BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT ZUI- 

DENITZ, IN POLAND, A. D. 1315 

Matthias Flaccius Illysicus (Catal. Test. Verit., 
lib. 19, Tit. Stier.) declares to have heard from the 
lips of Michael Stifelius, that in a certain monas- 
tery, in the city of Steyer, situated between Austria 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


331 


and Bavaria, three large books containing the con- 
fessions and examinations of very many persons 
who had departed in belief from the Roman 
church, were found. 

I presume, says Illyricus, they were Waldenses, 
a great number of whom were formerly scattered 
not only in Austria and all Germany, but also 
throughout all the countries of Europe. 

"And truly," says a certain author, "Illyricus is 
not mistaken in his conjecture." In the meantime 
he calls them martyrs, but does not state in what 
their martyrdom consisted, or with what death they 
confirmed the power of their faith. See the large 
Book of Christian Martyrs, fol. 479, col. 3, 4. 


OF THE ACCOUNT OF ALBERT KRANTZ, CONCERN- 
ING THE DEATH OF THESE MARTYRS 

Albert Krantz also writes, in his History of the 
Vandals, of very many such (so-called) heretics, 
namely, Waldenses, in Poland, in the city of Zui- 
denitz, concerning whom, he says, according to the 
manner of the papists, that they disturbed the 
church there, in consequence of which, having been 
convicted of heresy against the Roman church, 
great numbers of them ended their lives in the 
flames. Hist. Vand., lib. 8, near the end. Also, 
A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 479. 

Their confession, which agrees with that of the 
Anabaptists has already been explained, which ex- 
planation it is not necessary to repeat ; hence it is 
not to be doubted, but is an established fact, that 
these people were all pious witnesses of Jesus 
Christ, who for His name's sake did not spare their 
lives even unto death. 


olic faith; hence they were excommunicated by 
him together with all those who in any measure 
defended or followed them, and therefore delivered 
to the inquisitors, to be examined concerning their 
faith. See Bzov., A. D. 1317, art. 18. 

In the meantime, it appears, the above four per- 
sons, refusing to depart from the truth which they 
had confessed and accepted, were condemned to 
death as heretics, and, having commended their 
souls to God, were burnt alive. 

In regard to this, the papistic writer Vignier 
says: "In the same year (A. D. 1317) four Minor- 
ite friars were burnt alive on St. Michael's eve, at 
Marseilles, in France, because they maintained 
against the pope the heresy of poverty." Also, A. 
Mell, 2d book, fol. 480. 

Note. — As regards their faith, said Pope John 
XXlII, who had first excommunicated them, made, 
the following year, A. D. 1318, in a certain decree, 
among other things, this statement: "Their third 
error coincides with the error of the Waldenses ; 
because they maintained that men ought not to 
swear on any account, teaching that it is a sin unto 
death." Bzov. Annal., Tom. 14, A. D. 1318, art. 1. 

At the close of the fourth article are these words : 
"So that it appears from this, that these Franciscan 
monks had apostatized from popery to the doctrine 
of the Waldenses." A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 480. 


FOUR PERSONS, CALLED BRETHREN OF THE POOR 

LIFE, OR WALDENSES, BURNT FOR THE FAITH, 

AT MARSEILLES, IN FRANCE, A. D. 1317 

Now when the light of the Gospel began to break 
forth greatly from the doctrine of the Waldenses, 
which militated against the papal inventions, this 
also manifested itself in a monastery, among the 
Franciscan monks ; so that particularly four of the 
order of the Minorites, their eyes being opened, 
separated from monachism, and at the same time 
from the superstitions of popery, desiring thence- 
forth to follow and serve Jesus Christ, their Sav- 
ious, not in a simulated, but in true poverty, with, 
in, or among the cross-bearing church of God, 
called the Poor Men of Lyons, Brethren of the 
Poor Life, or Waldenses ; who also opposed infant 
baptism, the swearing of oaths, revenge against 
enemies, and other articles of the Roman church. 

Against this, Pope John XXII issued a papal 
decree, directed against the Fratricelli (Little 
Brethren) or the Brethren of the Poor Life, pro- 
hibiting them from holding secret or public as- 
semblies, from electing pastors or teachers over 
them, and from practicing their worship ; becouse 
they despised the sacraments of the (Roman) 
church, and had departed from the Roman Cath- 


PERSECUTION OF THE BELIEVERS CALLED WAL- 
DENSES, BY POPE JOHN XXII, A. D. 1319 

A. D. 1319, Pope John XXII again began to 
persecute the Waldenses in France, through his in- 
quisitors, the Jacobine, or Dominican, monks ;who, 
having convicted many of them, as papistic writers 
say, of their belief (namely, that they were Wal- 
denses), delivered them to the princes and secular 
authorities for punishment. Bzov. Annal. A. D. 
1319, Art. 10, from a manuscript in the Vatican 
library. Also, in the second book of the Hist, of the 
Persecutions, fol. 480, col. 3. 

Touching the names of these people, as also the 
manner of their martyrdom, suffering and death, 
I have not been able to ascertain anything, except 
that, professing the belief of the Waldenses (as we 
have already stated), they were therefore subjected 
to persecution and suffering. 

Note. — A. D. 1328. At this time Marsilius de 
Padua enjoyed distinction; he wrote against the 
pope, and also various things against the Roman 
church, but his work was condemned as heresy, and 
the reading of it strictly prohibited. Merul., fol. 
870, Georg. Pac. cap. 11, compared with P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., page 685, col. 1. 


PERSECUTION UNTO DEATH AGAINST THE BELIEV- 
ING WALDENSES, IN BOHEMIA AND POLAND; 
IN WHICH ALSO ONE ECKHARD WAS BURNT 
FOR THE SAME FAITH, A. D. 1330 

A. D. 1330, the afore-mentioned persecution 
against the Waldensian brethren rose to its highest 


332 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


point in Bohemia and Poland; concerning which 
the following account is found in ancient histories : 
"In that year, A. D. 1330, very many of those who 
adhered to the doctrine of the Waldenses, were 
persecuted unto death and executed, by the inquisi- 
tors, in the kingdoms of Bohemia and Poland." In 
the large Book of Christian Martyrs, 2d part, fol. 
483. 


TOUCHING SAID PERSECUTION; ALSO ABOUT ECK- 

HARD, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT 

OF P. J. TWISCK 

Richard, also called Eckhard, formerly a Domin- 
ican monk, was condemned as a heretic, because he 
fearlessly preached the Gospel, and reproved the 
abuses of the papists. And in the kingdom of Bohe- 
mia and Poland many were put to death for their 
religion or faith. Chron., page 685, col. 2, extracted 
from Hist. Adri., fol. 64, Herm. Mod. fol. 271, 
Henr. Boxh. fol. 27. 

Note. — John Aston, a well learned man of Ox- 
ford, for teaching that the bread of the holy Supper 
remained unchanged, was apprehended as a heretic, 
A. D. 1330, by the archbishop of Canterbury, and 
died in prison. See the authors referred to above 
in connection with Eckhard. 

Others add here, says Nicholas Vignier, that in 
said year (A. D. 1330) a certain Jacobine monk, 
Eckhard by name, whom others, though errone- 
ously, call Richard, was publicly burnt, because he 
steadfastly maintained said opinions of the Wal- 
denses. Nich. Vign., Hist. Eccl., A. D. 1330. Also 
in the second book of the Hist, of the Persecutions, 
fol. 483. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION 

"I am of the opinion," writes A. Mellinus, "that 
this Eckhard is the same German (apostatized) 
Dominican, of whom Trithemius makes mention 
in his Register of Ecclesiastical Writers, stating 
that he was a very learned man, and wonderfully 
experienced in the Word of God." A. Mell., from 
Trithem. De Script. Eccles., fol. 483. 

Note.— A. D. 1336, on the 23d of June, John de 
Pistoia was publicly burnt at Venice, because he 
maintained the supposed heresy of the evangelical 
poverty. Chron. van den Ondergang, page 689, 
col. 2, compared with Merula, fol. 873. 

Also A. D. 1340, Conrad Hager, having about 
this time, taught for twenty-four years, that the 
mass was by no means a sacrifice either for the liv- 
ing or the dead, and, that the taking of money by 
the priests, for dying men, was nothing but theft 
and sacrilege — in consequence of which many de- 
parted from obedience to the Roman church — was 
apprehended and secretly murdered. See in the 
last mentioned chronicle, page 691, col. 2, from 
John Munst., fol. 169, Hist.' Andr., fol. 64, Pac. 
cap. 11. 

Also A. D. 1350, John de Landuno, of Ghent, a 
highly learned man, vigorously attacked and cen- 


sured the high power, supremacy, and false doc- 
trine of the pope ; but what happened to him on this 
account, our author has omitted to say. Page 703, 
col. 1, compared with J oh. Munst., fol. 168. 

Also A. D. 1360, John de Rupe Scissa publicly 
spoke against the pope, saying: "Who is there 
among you, most holy father, and most gracious 
cardinals (for these were the titles by which they 
were called) that dare say that Peter or Sylvester 
(namely, the upright) ever rode with a train of two 
or three hundred horses, as is now common for 
you ... to do? but they were reserved and quiet, 
and like other pastors and preachers, made no pa- 
rade or display, and were also well content with 
simple food and clothing." He also said that the 
popes employed the goods given, or received by 
them, in pride, wantonness, and tyranny. Who 
would think that the pope received this candid cen- 
sure in good part? Compare J oh. Munst. Tract., 
fol. 53, with the account in the Chron. van den 
Ondergang, page 711, col. 2. 

In the meantime, we learn that said John de 
Rupe Scissa, three years afterwards, was burnt at 
Avignon, because he defended the truth. See the 
last-mentioned chronicle, for the year 1363, ex 
Georg. Pac, cap. 11. 


PERSECUTION OF THE WALDENSIAN BRETHREN, IN 
FRANCE, BY POPE URBAN VI, A. D. 1365 

A. D. 1365, it is recorded that Pope Urban VI 
charged all the prelates in France, and the inquisi- 
tors of the faith there, by an express bull, that they 
should not suffer the heretics (the Waldenses, who 
were then called Beghards and Beguines) to live 
with impunity, but should exterminate these erring 
spirits (thus he calls these pious people) together 
with their errors, with the sickle of ecclesiastical 
discipline. See the papistic writer Bzovius, for the 
year 1365, art. 8; also, the Calvinist Mellinus, 2d 
book, fol. 488, col. 1. 

As to how the Waldenses in those times were 
called Beghards, and were persecuted, see A. M., 
same book, fol. 479, below in the fourth column. 

The confession of faith of these people we have 
shown in its proper place, and repetition is not 
necessary. 


SEVERE PERSECUTION IN FLANDERS, ARTOIS, AND 

hainault; in which peronne of aubeton, 

a pious woman, is publicly burnt for 

the faith, about a. d. 1373 

In the midst of these persecutions, which, in the 
years 1372 and 1373 were carried on against the 
Waldenses, who were called Turilupins, because in 
Flanders, Artois, and Hainault they had to live in 
forests inhabited by wolves (as we have already 
stated), it occurred, that among a great number of 
these people, who were burnt as heretics, with their 
writings, books, and clothes, also a certain woman, 
called Peronne of Aubeton, who had accepted that 
doctrine and faith, and refused to depart from it, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


333 


was condemned as a heretic to be publicly burned ; 
which, as is stated, took place with her, at Paris, 
A. D. 1373 ; and thus, continuing steadfast, she tes- 
tified that the "Trial of her faith was more precious 
than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire." (I Pet. 1:7). 

Note. — Respecting the offering of this woman, 
as also, the accusations, cast by the papists against 
the Waldenses, called Turilupins, and how A. Mel- 
linus, preacher of the Calvinists, replies in their 
stead, saying that these poor people were lament- 
ably slandered, and that they were upright Wal- 
denses ; also, that the papists imputed to them what- 
ever they would. See large Book of Christian 
Martyrs, 2d part, fol. 497. 

THIRTY-SIX PERSONS CALLED WALDENSES, BURN1 
FOR THE FAITH, AT BINGEN, A. D. 1390 

The holy apostle Paul very aptly wrote (II Tim. 
3:12), "And all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution ;" for this appeared, 
A. D. 1390, in the case of certain pious Christians, 
who, being citizens of the city of Mentz, in Ger- 
many, had not less their citizenship in the new and 
heavenly Jerusalem ; having accepted the faith and 
doctrine of the Son of God, whereupon they, as 
obedient followers of Christ (as may be inferred) 
had been baptized according to the confession of 
the Waldensian brethren, in order thus to work 
out, in the footsteps of faith, their salvation with 
fear and trembling, according to the rule, Phil. 
2:12. 

But since the rulers of darkness could not bear 
this light of truth, it came to pass, in the city of 
Bingen, that thirty-six (not of the least) of said 
children of light, were apprehended, and, refusing 
to depart from the truth once confessed, were con- 
demned to death, namely to be executed with fire ; 
that is, to be burnt alive ; which was also done with 
them, and thus they, through fire, offered up a liv- 
ing, holy sacrifice acceptable unto God. 

Concerning the offering of these people, mention 
is made in the 2d book of the Hist, of the Persecu- 
tions, fol. 505, col. 3, ex Matth. Flacc. Illyr. Catal. 
Test. Ver. Said Illyricus also confesses that at that 
time (A. D. 1390) thirty-six citizens of Mentz 
were burnt alive at Bingen, for the faith of the 
Waldenses. 

Note. — Someone may ask himself, whether 
these martyred persons, who were called citizens 
of Mentz, and were put to death at Bingen, were 
not the same martyrs spoken of in a certain place 
in the preceding century ; since it is also stated of 
them, that they were inhabitants of Mentz, and 
lost their lives at Bingen; however, this cannot 
well be reconciled, since there is a great discrep- 
ancy, in regard to the time, as well as the number 
of the persons. For as regards the time, the former 
lived one hundred and eighty-seven years earlier 
than the latter, as they were dead already in the 
year 1212 (according to the account of Bruschius, 


in his History of the German Monasteries; also 
A. Mell., fol. 457, col. 3) ; but these last-mentioned 
ones were put to death A. D. 1390, as has been 
shown. Regarding the number of persons, that of 
the former is given as thirty-nine, but that of the 
latter as thirty-six — a discrepancy of three. As to 
their citizenship or residence at Mentz, which is 
stated of both, as well as that they were both put 
to death at Bingen, are facts that need not cause 
any one to think, that because there is an agree- 
ment in these respects, that the same people have 
been noticed twice by the writers ; for it may be, 
that at that time those of Mentz had no court of 
their own, or power to pronounce sentence of 
death, and that, hence, they had to deliver those of 
their prisoners who were confined for capital 
crimes, to those of Bingen, or at least had to bring 
them to trial there, as is customary, even at the 
present day, in many other cities. 


GREAT PERSECUTION OF THE BELIEVING WAL- 
DENSES ON THE BALTIC SEA; FOUR HUNDRED 
AND FORTY-THREE OF THEM SEVERELY 
TORTURED AND PUT TO DEATH, IN 
THE MARK AND POMERANIA, 
ABOUT A. D. 1390 

About the year 1390 there began, in the countries 
on the Baltic Sea, the very severe persecution of the 
Waldenses, of which we made mention of our ac- 
count of the true faith in the fourteenth century ; 
which, continuing until into the year 1391, was the 
cause that, among very many others, four hundred 
and forty-three of these people, whose names are 
mentioned, in Pomerania, the Mark, and the adja- 
cent places, were brought to torture or the rack; 
who, refusing to apostatize, freely confessed their 
faith, and how many long years they had believed 
and confessed the truth of their faith, which was 
called a heresy. They are stated to have been sober 
and frugal people, discreet in their speech, careful 
to avoid lying, swearing, etc. Second book of the 
History of the Persecutions, fol. 505, col. 3, 4, ex 
Catal. Test. Verit., lib. 18. Matt. Flacc. Illyr., 
lib. 15. Tit. de Waldensibus. Vignier recutil de 
histoire de I' Eglise, A. D. 1391. 

Note. — It seems that these people were not only 
persecuted and tortured for the faith, but also put 
to death ; according to the account of P. J. Twisck, 
who says: "Of the believers or Waldenses more 
than four hundred and forty were apprehended 
and put to death for their religion, in the countries 
of Saxony and Pomerania, whose confession 
showed that they had received that doctrine from 
their parents, and that their teachers came to Bo- 
hemia; and the proceedings in their trial shows 
among other things that they were sober, and dis- 
creet in their speech, carefully avoiding lying, 
swearing, and all dishonorable practices."* P. J. 
Twisck, Chron., page 743, B., from Henr. Boxh., 
fol. 27. 

* These virtues have previously already been ascribed to them, 
and are distinctly asserted of them by various other writers. 


334 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


OF THE PERSECUTION AND SUFFERING OF THE 

CHRISTIAN BELIEVERS, BY THOSE OF THE 

ROMAN CHURCH, A. D. 1400 

That the intelligent and God-fearing J. Tauler 
called the prelates of the Roman church blind and 
leaders of the blind, and taught his fellow-believers 
much concerning the persecution and suffering of 
the true Christians, we set forth in our account of 
Holy Baptism, for the year 1400. 

In the meantime some of the sheep of the flock 
of Christ were devoured by the Roman wolf ; their 
names, however, are not known to us, except one, 
and even respecting him we have not been able to 
obtain sufficient information with regard to his 
whole faith, save this much, that in his belief he 
was opposed to antichrist, that is, the Pope of 
Rome ; on which account the cruel death by fire was 
inflicted upon him, because he would not aposta- 
tize. 

Concerning this, the following words, among 
others, are found in the Chronijck van den Onder- 
gang: "William Santraus also opposed the (Ro- 
man) antichrist at this time ; he fell into the power 
and custody of the archbishop of Canterbury, 
where he, after a whole year's confinement, ulti- 
mately, though with great steadfastness, ended his 
life in the flames." Chron., page 750, col. 1. 

Note. — A. D. 1400, Franciscus Petrarcha wrote 
mightily against the Pope, saying, 1. That the pope 
was antichrist ; 2. That his court was Babylon and 
the whore that sitteth upon many waters (of which 
we read in John's Revelation), yea, the mother of 
all idolatry and whoredom; 3. That Rome was a 
school of errors, a temple of heresy, and a nest of 
treachery. But speaking thus the truth, the writers 
say, he could find no shelter, but was persecuted 
and driven away by the pope. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 750, col. 1, compared with the twen- 
tieth letter of F. Petrarcha, and the poem com- 
posed on it; also, Phil. Mam. Tract, fol. 213. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE FIFTEENTH CEN- 
TURY 

[In the beginning of this century, the decree 
Statutum ex Officio, of King Henry IV, of Eng- 
land, published against the Wickliffites, is men- 
tioned. 

Thereupon follows a recital of fifteen articles of 
said Wickliffites, which by the inquisition were laid 
before them, for recantation ; the twelfth article of 
which declares, that a child, though it die unbap- 
tized, will be saved ; and the thirteenth article, that 
neither the pope, nor the prelates, nor any ordi- 
nary, can compel any one to swear ; the other arti- 
cles are against the superstitions of the Roman 
church. 

Another article charged against these people, 


namely : that if they had an infant, they would not 
have it baptized by the hands of a priest in church. 

William Thorpe is charged with five articles, the 
last of which is : That he taught that one ought not 
to swear. 

Thirteen articles, mostly against the Roman su- 
perstitions, are ascribed to John Huss, the thir- 
teenth or last of which declares that one ought not 
to swear in any wise. 

A notice concerning the followers of John Huss ; 
also, the articles of holy baptism, as professed by 
the Taborites. 

An account for the year 1455, of many Wal- 
denses in the bishopric of Reichstadt, who had 
twelve teachers; also of some of them who resided 
in Austria, A. D. 1471, and in the bishopric of 
Eichstsedt, A. D. 1475. 

The edict of King Matthias against the Mora- 
vians, or Moravian Brethren, who are called Old 
Waldenses, as also Baptists (Anabaptists), is 
shown for the year 1481. 

Conclusion to the fifteenth century ; in which it 
is shown by different reasons, how it comes, that 
there were so few public testimonies of the old 
continuous Waldenses. Here we take our leave, 
with the close of this century.] 

In this following century we find some persons 
who are opposed to oaths, some to war, some to 
infant baptism, and other articles in opposition to 
the Roman church ; of which we will give a brief 
account. 

A. D. 1401.— A certain celebrated writer relates, 
from John Fox's English History of the Persecu- 
tions, that then, in the month of January, King 
Henry IV held a parliament at London, in which a 
decree or bloody edict was issued against the Wick- 
liffites, of whose belief against infant baptism and 
oaths we have already written, in speaking of their 
leader John Wickliffe; and who at that time, after 
the English custom, were called Lollards. This 
decree or edict was called : Statutum ex Officio or 
Edict of King Henry IV against the disciples of 
Wickliffe, in England. See 2d book of the History 
of the Persecutions, fol. 514, and fol. 515, from 
John Fox's Angl., fol. 481. 

TOUCHING THE ARTICLES OF THEIR FAITH, LAID 

BEFORE THEM BY THE INQUISITION, FOR 

RECANTATION 

Continuing, said author relates, from Fox, some 
articles drawn up by the inquisition, with or besides 
the above-mentioned edict ; containing the principal 
tenets of the Wickliffites, which the inquisition 
placed before them for renunciation, or abjuration. 
They read as follows : 

1. "That the mass or the worship which is per- 
formed before the holy cross, and is ordained by 
the whole church, is idolatry. 

2. "That all who worship before the cross, com- 
mit idolatry, and are to be regarded as idolaters. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


335 


3. "That the real flesh and blood of our Lord 
Jesus Christ are not in the sacrament of the altar 
after the priest has pronounced the words of con- 
secration over them. 

4. "That the sacrament of the altar is sacramen- 
tal bread, without life, and only instituted in re- 
membrance of the suffering of Christ. 

5. "That the body of Christ, so-called, which is 
taken from the altar, is a figure of Christ's body, as 
long as we see the bread and the wine. 

6. "That the decrees and ecclesiastical ordi- 
nances of the prelates and the clergy, in the prov- 
ince of Canterbury, in their last assembly, held, 
with the consent of the king and the nobles, in the 
last parliament, against him who was recently 
burnt alive in the city of London, were not power- 
ful enough to change the purpose of that martyr ; 
because the substance of the material bread, in the 
sacrament of the altar, is the same as it was be- 
fore, and no change is made, in the nature of the 
bread by consecration. 

7. "That any layman, though he have not stud- 
ied at college, has a right to preach the Gospel 
everywhere, and that he may teach (provided he 
has been properly elected thereto by his church, as 
has been stated elsewhere) upon his own authority, 
without permission from his ordinary bishop. 

S. "That it is sin to give anything to the Domin- 
icans, Minorites, Augustinians, and Carmelites. 

9. "That we ought not to sacrifice at the funer- 
als of the dead. 

10. "That auricular confession of sins to the 
priest is unnecessary. 

11. "That every good man, though he be un- 
learned, is a priest before God. 

12. "That a child, though it die unbaptized, will 
be saved." 

Note. — This is putting down infant baptism out 
and out as of no value ; since the papists were not 
ashamed to say, that it were better, that a whole 
country should sink out of sight, than that a child 
should die without baptism; maintaining, that all 
unbaptized infants would go to hell, and be eter- 
nally damned. 

13. "That neither the pope, nor the prelates, nor 
any ordinary, can compel any one to swear, either 
by any of God's creatures, or by the Bible, or by 
the New Testament." 

Here it must be observed, that these people 
thereby denied all manner of swearing of oaths, not 
only that which is done by the creature, but also by 
the Creator Himself; since even in England they 
did not, at that time, swear by the creature ; but in 
the form of swearing this custom was observed by 
the papists, namely, he who was to swear, knelt 
down, and laid his hand upon the Bible, or the 
Testament, and said: "I swear by God and His 
holy Gospel, etc., so truly help me God." 

But who does not know, that the Gospel or the 
Word of God is no creature? And though it be 
that in swearing the hand was laid upon the Bible, 
or upon the Gospel book, in token of the testimony, 


the swearing was not done by the material book ; 
as also in our countries, when in swearing (among 
those who hold thus) the hand or the finger is held 
up, the swearing is not done by that hand or that 
finger. 

Hence, said people were opposed not only to the 
manner of swearing, but to swearing itself, even 
though they have been required to swear, not by 
the creature, but by the Creator Himself. Concern- 
ing this, see their own confession. 

14. "That the bishop as well as a common man, 
and a layman as well as the priest, are of equal 
authority, as long as they live aright. 

15. "That no one is bound to accord any bodily 
reverence (that is, by bending the knee and wor- 
shiping, as was then customary in England), to 
any prelate." 

These are briefly the chief articles which, ac- 
cording to the preceding decree of the king, and the 
ecclesiastical ordinance, or much rather inquisition 
of the archbishop, were laid before the Christians 
in England, for recantation. See large Book of 
Christian Martyrs, fol. 517, col. 3, 4, from John 
Fox, Hist. Angl. 485. 

A. D. 1402.— About this time, Thomas Walsing- 
ham, a bitter papistic historian records some articles 
of the above-mentioned people, which, as he states, 
one Louis of Clifford, formerly a defender of the 
faith of these people, had discovered to the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. The fifth of those articles 
reads as follows : "If they (the said people) had a 
new-born infant, they would not have it baptized 
in church, by the hands of the priest." Thorn. 
Wals., in Hist., Reg. Angl. and Hypodigmate 
Neustrie, A. D. 1402. 

To this article several words are immediately 
added; but these are denied by a certain writer, 
who quotes said passage, and says, that the apos- 
tate, Louis of Clifford, in order to please the arch- 
bishop, or the bishop himself, surreptitiously added 
these words; therefore we will leave it as it is. 
A. Mell., 2d book, fol. 518, col. 1. 

A. D. 1407.— Or about this time, William 
Thorpe, formerly an English priest, was appre- 
hended for the faith, who, as it is stated, had been 
persecuted greatly already in the year 1397. He 
was charged with holding as his faith these five 
articles : 

1. "That in the sacrament of the altar, also after 
the consecration, that is, after the priest has read 
the canon, it still remains real bread. 

2. "That images are not to be worshiped, nor 
any honor shown them. 

3. "That no pilgrimages ought to be made. 

4. "That the priests have no right to appro- 
priate the titles to themselves. 

5. "That men ought not to swear." 

These articles are fully acknowledged to be his 
articles; but, in order to give them a somewhat 
different coloring, especially with regard to the 
article respecting nonswearing, some of the Calvin- 
istic writers, one copying from another, as it seems, 


336 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


have made some expositions on them, as if Wil- 
liam Thorpe himself replied to them, and signified 
by the words: "Men ought not to swear at all," 
that he did not mean that men ought to refrain 
altogether from swearing; but only that one 
ought not to swear by the creature, neither trivial- 
ly, as is especially maintained by the Calvinistic 
Mellinus, preacher in St. Anthony's Polder, in his 
large book, 2d part, fol. 524, col. 2. 

But other writers, of no less credibility and re- 
pute, flatly contradict this, saying positively that 
he rejected all manner of oaths. 

Indeed, Mellinus himself, as if forgetful of what 
he wrote, indicates it quite clearly when he {page 
519, col. 3), compares this William Thorpe, in 
faith, to William Swinderby, who, being burnt for 
the faith, at London, among others, confessed this 
article, which Walter Brute understood to defend, 
namely: "That it is not lawful for Christians to 
swear on any account, in any case, either by the 
Creator, or by His creatures." A. Mell., 2d book, 
fol. 506, col. 3. This article is spoken of elsewhere. 

Further observation. — In Kort Verhael van den 
Loop der Werelt, compiled from various chronicles 
and histories by F. H. H., A. D. 1611, the follow- 
ing is contained in the account relative to the swear- 
ing of oaths, page 99: "A. D. 1397, William 
Troppe, otherwise called W. Thorpe, was much 
persecuted in England, on account of his religion. 
He confessed that the sacrament of the altar re- 
mained true bread after the consecration, and that 
men ought not to swear." 

Touching the same matter. — P. J. Twisck 
writes : "William Thorpe, a priest in England, dis- 
puted earnestly with the priests of antichrist. He 
taught against images, the oath, the sacrament of 
the altar, and like abuses." Chron., p. 758, col. 2. 

Conclusion. — Hence, it appears from the pre- 
ceding testimonies, that this man sincerely, plain- 
ly, and undisguisedly taught against oaths of what- 
soever kind, according to the words of the Lord. 
Matt. 5 :34, and James 5 :12 ;* to which more could 
be adduced ; but we think enough has been said in 
the matter, and, hence, we will dismiss it. 

A. D. 1412 — The loss to the Roman, and the 
upbuilding of the true Christian, church, were at 
this time facts existing in no small degree in the 
French country, around Paris, but particularly in 
that city itself; since various distinguished per- 
sons, and in point of learning not the least, did not 
hesitate to attack the Italian Babylon, that is, Rome, 
and her perverted worship ; however, not with ex- 
ternal but with spiritual and evangelical weapons. 
Notwithstanding the hatred of the papal clergy, 
they dared openly reprove the errors and abuses of 
the Roman church. But whether they expressly 
mentioned, or otherwise included, the article of in- 
fant baptism among the number, is not clearly stat- 
ed by the ancients; hence we must content our- 


selves with what they have written of it in a 
general way. 

Note. — John of Ferrara, ... in Italy, said 
about this time, among many other articles, that 
the pope, by sheer violence, and without right, had 
seized countries and cities ; that the clergy carried 
their conscience in their caps, and that they were 
more avaricious and worse than the laity ; that the 
churches and monasteries of the clergy were nets 
with which to draw to themselves the property of 
the laity, etc. P. J. Twisck, Chron. for the year 
1412, p. 770, col. 2. 

Concerning this there is the following account : 
"At this time (A. D. 1412), also at Paris, various 
excellent, learned men rose against popery, point- 
ing out the errors and abuses of the Roman church ; 
by which they gained small thanks from the 
clergy." Catal. Test., fol. 857, Meru., fol. 910, 
compared with the Chronijck van den Ondergang, 
p. 771, col. 1. 

A. D. 1415.— At this time John Huss lived, who, 
having examined and studied the books and writ- 
ings of John Wickliffe (of whom we said in the 
preceding century, that he opposed infant bap- 
tism, and the swearing of oaths), retained and ac- 
cepted therefrom, among other articles, that it does 
not become a Christian to swear. 

How and in what manner the writings of John 
Wickliffe fell into the hands of John Huss, and 
how eagerly he exercised himself therein, is de- 
scribed by A. Mellinus, 2d book, p. 495, col. 1 ; but 
that he ever, by this means or otherwise, learned 
the article of nonswearing, Mellinus, as well as 
other Calvinists, would deny, saying ; "That which 
is imputed to him, regarding his unwillingness to 
swear, has respect only to the abjuration of his 
faith, or religion, but not to the oath itself." 

Besides that I have never found such an explana- 
tion in any credible writer of that time, though 
I have earnestly sought to investigate it; the cir- 
cumstances of the matter itself, however, indicate 
that the article of nonswearing was one of the ar- 
ticles of his faith. 


* "But I say unto you, Swear not at all." Matt. 5 :34. 
above all things, my brethren, swear not." Jamei 5 :12. 


'But 


TOUCHING THE ARTICLES OF FAITH WHICH JOHN 

HUSS HAD DERIVED FROM THE WRITINGS 

OF JOHN WICKLIFFE 

Sebastian Franck writes as follows: "John 
Huss, a disciple and fellow believer of this Wick- 
liffe, received the Wickliffite doctrine from Jerome 
of Prague, who carried it with him from England 
to Bohemia as a sacred treasure. 

Continuing, he relates the articles which John 
Huss had learned and adopted from Wickliffe's 
writings. 

1. "That the Roman church has no right to 
divide the sacrament, and has wrongfully deprived 
the laity of one form. 

2. "That the Roman bishop is just like other 
(ordinary) bishops. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


337 


3. "That under all circumstances there is no 
purgatory. 

4. "To pray for the dead is vain and unavail- 
ing, and is invented by the avarice of the priests. 

5. "Images of God and the saints are not to 
be tolerated, and should be abolished. 

6. "The wicked devils have invented the un- 
spiritual mendicant orders. 

7. "The priests ought to be poor, and live only 
from alms. 

8. "Outward, auricular confession is altogether 
false and man's invention. It is sufficient to con- 
fess one's sins in the closet to God. 

9. "The ceremonies and usages of the (Ro- 
man) church are vain things. 

10. "Touching several things concerning the 
sacrament, etc. 

11. "The time is uselessly consumed by the 
seven hours.* 

12. "There is no merit in the fasts instituted by 
the church, and in many other errors. 

13. "Men shall not swear in any wise. Hence he 
said to those who urged him vehemently to swear 
an oath: T am afraid every way; if I swear, 
eternal death is my portion ; but if I swear not, I 
cannot escape your hands; but it is better that I 
fall into your hands without sin than to sin in the 
sight of God.' " 

Here we certainly clearly see that the doctrine of 
not swearing in any wise, was an article of his 
faith ; and if it was the case that he was requested 
to abjure his faith or religion, he refused to ab- 
jure it, not only because he would not forsake his 
faith or religion, but also because he held that one 
ought not to swear at all, as the 13th article de- 
clares : "Men shall not swear in any wise," that is, 
not at all. Seb. Fr. Chron., 3d part, fol. 105. Tract, 
van den Loop Werelt, fol. 100. Also P. J. Tzvisck, 
Chron., page 764. A. 


other princes, which they, after carrying it on for 
a long time, finally adjusted, and when said Huss- 
ites, as totally estranged from their teacher and 
leader, John Huss, united with the papists in many 
doctrinal points and church ceremonies, many of 
the Waldenses, who had at first joined the Huss- 
ites, found themselves shamefully deceived in 
their hope, and bethought themselves better, that 
is, according to the doctrine of the holy Gospel, to 
have nothing at all to do with such a bloody war. 
Again, they also began to protest against it. They 
also turned away from the Hussites, in the points 
of doctrine and church usages, and established a 
separate church, being afterwards called Taborites, 
Grubenheimer* dwellers in caves, etc. 

This greatly grieved the so-called Hussites, and 
they, therefore, through the instigation of M. John 
Rockenzahns and others, began to dreadfully hate 
and persecute, not only the old faithful Waldenses, 
who had never been united with them, but also 
these newer ones, who separated from them. Jac. 
Mehrn., Bapt. Hist., 2d part, from Lydius, in the 
Hist, of the Waldensibus. 


NOTICE CONCERNING THE FOLLOWERS OF JOHN 
HUSS, WHO, ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNTS OF 
JACOB MEHRNING, WERE VERY DIFFER- 
ENT FROM THEIR LEADER 

When in the fifteenth century, John Huss began 
to teach in Bohemia, and gained a great number of 
adherents, many Waldenses united with them; 
who rejoiced, and hoped that thereby the light of 
the Gospel, which, up to this time, had for so long 
a period been so abominably quenched and perse- 
cuted by the papists, would begin to shine more 
clearly, burn more vigorously, and proceed the 
more unobstructedly. But when, after the death of 
John Huss and Jerome of Prague, who had both 
been burnt by the papists, at Constance, on the Lake 
of Constance, contrary to the safe conduct granted 
by the Emperor, the Hussites in Bohemia, com- 
menced an atrocious and bloody war against Em- 
peror Sigismund and the German electors, and 

* Prayers which the priests of the Roman Catholic church have 
to read from the breviary at stated seasons of the year. — Trans. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION CONCERNING THE MIS- 
DEEDS OF THE FOLLOWERS OF JOHN HUSS 

From the above, we certainly clearly see that the 
orthodox Waldenses had existence also in the fif- 
teenth century ; some of whom, having, from a good 
intention, united with the Hussites, who followed 
their master John Huss, neither meekly nor faith- 
fully, were shamefully deceived by them, seeing 
said Hussites commenced to take up arms and wage 
severe wars against their enemies, something to 
which the Waldenses were certainly not accus- 
tomed, as is shown by their own confession. Hav- 
ing therefore separated from the Hussites, they, 
as well as their brethren, the old Waldenses, with 
them, were severely persecuted by them ; thus indi- 
cating that the church of Christ on earth is not a 
kingdom of triumph and victory, but a school of 
suffering and death for the name of Christ. 


THAT THE WALDENSES WHO HAD BEEN UNITED 

WITH THEM, CALLED TABORITES, WERE 

NOT RECEIVED BY THEIR OLD 

BRETHREN, AND WHY 

Now when these Waldenses, called Taborites 
who, having been united with the Hussites, had 
separated from them on account of war and other 
errors, desired to reunite with the old Waldenses, 
who had been their brethren, these, from sorrow 
of mind, refused them, that the unchristian con- 
duct of the Hussites might not be laid to their 
charge, seeing these seceders, as they thought, 
had been so intimate with the Hussites. 

See here, beloved reader, how pure, upright and 
unfeigned was the conduct of these old Waldenses 
in this respect; how steadfastly and blamelessly 

* These "Grubenheimer" are to be distinguished from others who 
also bore this name. 


338 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


they practiced their confession, desiring to bear 
not even the appearance of having fellowship with 
those who waged war and fought against their 
enemies. 


THAT THEY NEVERTHELESS PROFESSED A GOOD 
CONFESSION 

Nevertheless, these Taborites, because of their 
aversion to war and the superstitions, had sep- 
arated from the Hussites, and also truly held in 
those times, as cannot be inferred otherwise, the 
true confession of the Waldenses, although, as it 
is thought, some endeavored to force in infant bap- 
tism among them ; however, their confession in re- 
gard to this article, delivered in the year 1431, at 
Prague, in Bohemia, to M. John Rockenzahn, 
makes no mention at all of it, yea, they employ such 
expressions therein as is utterly impossible to apply 
to infant baptism. 

In /. Mehrning's History of Baptism, p. 611, 
we read these words : "I have before me the con- 
fession of the Taborites, drawn up A. D. 1431, 
which in all respects agrees with our doctrine, and 
which I intend to have printed at the proper time." 

Concerning the difference between the Hussites 
proper and Taborites, who were united with them, 
D. Balthazar Lydius gives this explanation : "The 
followers of John Huss were divided into two 
sects, the one called Praguers, the other Taborites; 
of whom the Taborites were the stricter. Tract en- 
titled: 'Where the church was before the year 
1160; or before the time of the Waldenses;' print- 
ed in the year 1624, p. 25." 

Their confession is as follows : "First, concern- 
ing the sacrament of baptism, — which is the first 
sacrament by which God imparts, especially the 
first sacramental grace, if we are spiritually re- 
generated ; because it is a sign of the spiritual re- 
generation proceeding from God, — we hold, ac- 
cording to the tenor of the holy Scriptures, and 
sincerely confess from the heart, that the sacra- 
ment of baptism is the ablution of man, performed 
by another with water, who pronounces the words 
prescribed by Christ, which effectually signify the 
ablution of the soul from sin, which is expressly 
founded in the Gospel ; for Christ, with words as 
well as by deed, taught that those who believe in 
Him should be thus baptized. He taught this with 
words when He said to the apostles : 'Go ye there- 
fore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost.' Matthew 23:19. He taught it by 
deed when He Himself was baptized by John, in 
Jordan. Matt. 3. Bapt. Hist., second part, pp. 
743, 744, from B. Lyd. Wald., pp. 10, 11. 

A. D. 1431.— At this time, also Scotland, though 
otherwise very superstitious, experienced no incon- 
siderable reformation in the true worship of God, 
which was effected by various persons zealous for 
the honor of God and the welfare of His church. 
So that some resolved and endeavored to reform 


not only the article of baptism, which was shame- 
fully, and not less to the detriment of many inno- 
cent souls, abused by the Roman church, but also 
various other articles which, from sheer .super- 
stition, were maintained by them according to hu- 
man opinion. They were determined to retain the 
good, and abolish the evil. 

Among those who at this time undertook the 
reformation of the same, one Paul Craus is espe- 
cially mentioned, who also opposed auricular con- 
fession, the invocation of the saints, the idolatrous 
sacrament, etc. For this he was condemned as a 
heretic ; but how he finally ended will be shown 
at the right time and place. Compare the account 
in the fifteenth book van den Ondergang, p. 796, 
col. 1, with Vine. Cal., fol. 368, Georg. Pac c ll' 
Herm. Mod., fol. 274. 

Note.— Whether this Paul Craus was fully en- 
lightened in all other articles pertaining to the wor- 
ship of God, we cannot definitely prove ; even as, 
on the other hand, we have found nothing which 
might tend to derogate his belief; though we have 
sought in good faith for that which would be derog- 
atory to him ; as well as for that which would make 
him acceptable ; hence we have deemed it well to 
accord also to him a place among the good confes- 
sors of the evangelical truth. 

A. D. 1455. — About this time there were many 
Waldenses (erroneously called Wandois) in Ger- 
many, in the bishopric of Reichstadt, of whose 
orthodox confession an account was given for the 
year 1170. They had among them twelve preach- 
ers, or teachers, of their religion, who, each in 
his district, went out secretly, on account of the 
severe persecution, to preach. P. J. Vwisck 
Chron., p. 829, col. 2, from Henr. Boxh., fol 27 

Note.— A. D. 1460.— At this time Roderic 
Simotensus severely reproved the human institu- 
tions and abuses of the papists, such as excom- 
munication, fasts, feasts, auricular confession, and 
the mass, as appears from his book, entitled The 
Mirror of Human Life. Chron., van den Onder- 
gang, p. 835, col. 1. 

Again, same year as above ; Nicholas Siculus said 
at this time, that a believing person who rightly 
adduces the holy Scriptures should be believed 
more than the pope, and a whole council that re- 
jects the holy Scripture. He further said, that a 
council may err; also, that some of the popes lived 
as though they did not believe that there would be 
a resurrection of the flesh after this life. See the 
afore-mentioned chronicle, in the place indicated 
taken from J oh. Munst., fol. 190. 

Also, same year, Dionys. Rickel, a learned man, 
said that in the primitive church the Sacrament (or 
Supper) was given to believers under both forms, 
that is, with bread and wine ; to which the Roman 
church acted contrary at this time. Compare the 
author first indicated with Joh. Fair., fol. 164. 

A. D. 1465. — Nicholas Casanus now vehemently 
attacked the pope with the Word of God ; he called 
him antichrist, rejected human institutions, etc. In 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


339 


his book on the Peace of the Faith, compared with 
P. J. Twisck, Chron. page 841, col. 1. 

A. D. 1467. — Anthony Rosellus, an Italian doc- 
tor, writes that the pope is not to be regarded as 
the lord of the world ; that he neither can nor ought 
to command the Emperor ; that he neither may nor 
ought to wield the secular sword. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron. page 845, from J oh. Munst., jol. 295. 

A. D. 1470. — At this time a book was issued, 
entitled Spiegel des heiligen kercken-Regements, 
without the name of the author, in which partic- 
ularly, the mendicant monks and the pope were 
censured. The author adduces Anthony the Her- 
mit, and says that the monks have departed from 
the Word of God, and, from hypocrisy, have adopt- 
ed all sorts of human institutions. Catal. Test. 
Verit., fol. 884, compared with P. /. Twisck, page 
847, col. 2. 

A.D. 1471. — At this time, says a celebrated au- 
thor, there were not very many Waldenses in Bo- 
hemia, on account of the violent persecution ; but in 
Austria there were still some, who had also been 
dispersed for the most part, through the cruelty 
of the torments, and the terror of persecution. 

But how they were afterwards united, as it is al- 
leged, by one Peter Textor, or (as Mellinus ex- 
plains), Peter the Weaver, in the city of Lands- 
kron, in Bohemia, with the Moravian and Bohemian 
brethren ; so that they subsequently held no sep- 
arate church meetings, save only with the Bohemian 
and Moravian brethren, is described by Mellinus, 
in the second book of the Persecutions, fol. 592, 
col. 4, and fol. 593, col. 1. 

Note. — The Bohemian brethren must here not 
be understood to mean the Hussites, to whom the 
name of Bohemian brethren was also given ; unless 
it be said that the Waldenses had separated from 
them. 

But that notwithstanding this opinion of Mel- 
linus, many Waldenses still remained scattered and 
persecuted in Germany and France, as well as else- 
where, who, unchanged in faith and worship, en- 
deavored steadfastly to serve their Saviour accord- 
ing to the rule of Christ and His holy apostles, ap- 
pears from various other authors. Yea, Mellinus, 
as though he jhad forgotten himself, writes that 
A. D. 1475, in the bishopric of Eichstaedt, in Ger- 
many, a great number of Christians were dis- 
covered and apprehended, who professed the doc- 
trine of the Waldenses. Second book, jol. 590, 
col. 4. Yea, that even sixty-nine years afterwards, 
namely A. D. 1544, the Waldenses of Merindol and 
Cabriere delivered a confession of faith, at Paris 
in the parliament, to the King of France, in 
defence of their innocence. Same book, fol. 446, 
col. 1, 2, etc. 

Moreover, that said confession does not militate 
against, but well agrees with, that of the Anabap- 
tists, may be found in the same place. 

Note.— A. D. 1472.— J. Guitode, . . . now 
greatly reproved the papal haughtiness and idol- 
atry; the running of pilgrims after images, and 


miracles invented by avarice. He undisguisedly 
said that they were viceregents, not of Christ, but 
of antichrist; yea, that they were possessed with 
the presumptuousness and pride of Lucifer. Chron. 
van den Ondergang, page 852, from Catal. Test. 
Verit., 883. 

A. D. 1481. — It is stated that in this year King 
Matthias, on the solicitation of some evil-disposed 
persons, issued a decree against the Moravians or 
Moravian brethren. Large Book of Christian Mar- 
tyrs, fol. 597, col. 2, from Joach Camer. Narr. Hist. 
Boh., page 118. 

These Moravian brethren are called Old Wal- 
denses by Jacob Mehrning, who also shows that va- 
rious excellent and learned men reckoned among 
the Anabaptists proceeded from them. His words 
are : "From among these Bohemian and Moravian 
Old Waldenses afterwards several excellent men 
proceeded; as, among others, Hans Koch and 
Leonhard Meister, who were both put to death at 
Augsburg, A. D. 1527. Also, the very learned 
Michael Sattler, who ministered to his church, 
A. D. 1527, at Horb, in Germany. Also, Leonhard 
Keyser, who, in the year 1529, was martyred in 
Bavaria ; to whom, while in prison, Dr. Luther ad- 
dressed letters of consolation, although he (Key- 
ser) did not agree with Luther in regard to infant 
baptism. Bapt. Hist., 2d part, page 748. 


CONCLUSION TO THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 
A. D. 1500 

Thus it appears clearly, that the old true Wal- 
denses existed, and practiced their worship not 
only throughout the fifteen century, but also long 
afterwards, as will be seen from the sequel of our 
account. But that the number of the witnesses 
which we have produced from the Waldenses, has 
not been very great in this century, of this not we, 
but the enemies of truth have been the cause, who 
have put the writings of these people out of the 
way. 

This the writer of the History of Baptism ex- 
plains, when he says, p. 749 to p. 750 : 

1. "That there are so few public testimonies ex- 
tant, of the faithful old Waldenses, in this fifteenth 
century, that is, between the years 1400 and 1500 
is the fault of their enemies and opponents, who, 
by strategy and violence, as much as they alone 
could, suppressed their writings and confessions. 

2. "Besides the Waldenses were always and 
everywhere most cruelly persecuted by their op- 
ponents, without a hearing ; which prevented them 
from bringing anything to good light. 

3. "Printing came into use only in the fifteenth 
century, and in its beginning did not become com- 
mon as it now is, for a long time ; hence the Wal- 
denses and their successors could not avail them- 
selves of it. 

4. "Besides, it was not so indispensably neces- 
sary; since their confessions regarding the true 
use, and abuse, of baptism sufficiently came to 


340 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


light through their martyrs, and through the in- 
quisitions and examinations ; which their enemies 
and murderers themselves had to copy in their 
chronicles and chronologies, much of which has 
already been adduced. From Catal. Test. Verit. 
Flacc. 

5. "Moreover, God, in the midst of His ene- 
mies, miraculously preserved, at all times, in the 
text of the New Testament, the right and true 
baptismal ordinance of Jesus Christ (that is, bap- 
tism upon faith), and also, in many, the Christian 
baptism of adults; to which they obediently sub- 
mitted, and suffered with patience all that befell 
them on this account. 

6. "Finally, the ancient writers throughout all 
the centuries from the time of Christ until now, 
yea, the teachers of the Roman church themselves, 
had to bear witness to the truth, in their books, 
and to confess, by whom infant baptism and all 
other abuses of baptism have been brought in and 
arbitrarily forced upon the church ; and by whom 
this has everywhere been opposed ; as has hitherto 
been shown. Hence it is neither profitable nor 
necessary, to write much about it; as it serves to 
no purpose. Truth is praised also through the 
enemy. 

This will suffice concerning the testimony of 
those who understood, taught, and practiced bap- 
tism and other articles, in the fifteenth century, ac- 
cording to the rule of the Anabaptists of the pres- 
ent day. Hence we will leave this matter, and see 
what persons in those times steadfastly testified 
with their blood and death to this confession. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE FIFTEENTH 
CENTURY 

[The beginning treats of the great distress in 
these times ; some definite information given, about 
some countries where the misery was the greatest, 
as concerning England, France, Germany, Flan- 
ders, etc. 

The first year of this century begins with a 
bloody decree published in England against the 
confessors of the holy Gospel; in consequence of 
which much innocent blood is shed. 

William Swinderby is put to death by fire, for 
the faith, in the city of London, A. D. 1401 ; some 
account is given respecting his belief and death, 
according to different writers. 

In a note, for the year 1405, mention is made 
of the belief of John Wenschelberg, against a cer- 
tain blood-red papistic host and the false miracles 
of the Romanists. 

William Thorpe, confessing his belief against 
the oath and other articles of the Roman church, 
is put to death by violence and fire, at Saltevoden. 
A. D. 1407. 


Ten years after, A. D. 1417, Catharine of Thou, 
Lorraine, coming to Montpellier, in France, and 
there offers up her life, by fire, to God, for the 
faith. 

A great number of Christians called Waldenses 
also willingly, for the faith, give their bodies to be 
burned, in the Flemish countries, A. D. 1421. In 
a note, by way of parenthesis, the flood of Dort is 
introduced, together with the destruction of sev- 
enty-two villages which were inundated in that 
year; also, concerning Henry Gruenfelder, Peter 
Torea, Jerome Savonarola, who, in the years 1423, 
1425 and 1427, opposed the errors of the pope and 
the Roman church. 

William White, father Abraham of Cholchester 
and John Waddon, miserably put to death by 

aK i r ^o eir true faith ' at Nof wich in England, 
A. D. 1428. 

Then follows Margaret Backster, who, on ac- 
count of her orthodox belief against images, the 
bacrament, the oath, etc., is put to death in prison 
or otherwise, A. D. 1430. 

In a note, for the years 1431, 1436, 1439, and 
1450, it is stated how Paul Crau, Thomas Rhedo- 
nensis Augustine de Roma, Alanus Chartetius 
and others, opposed the Roman church with spirit- 
ual weapons; and what happened to them on this 
account. 

Very many Christians called Waldenses, are 
put to death for the faith, at Eichstaedt, in Ger- 
many, A. D. 1455. Then follows a note concerning 
Laurence de Valla, John de Wesalia, George Mor- 

?^! te 7V™ tephen Brulifer > etc, who, in the years 
1465, 1470, and 1471 maintained their belief in 
opposition to the Roman Babylon ; and what they 
had to suffer on this account. 

The last Waldensian martyr in this century is 
Stephen, an elder of their church, who loses his 
life for the faith, by red-hot coals, at Vienna, in 
Austria. 

A severe inquisition, instituted by the Spaniards 
against the believers and all who opposed the 
Roman church, is circumstantially shown for the 
year 1492. 

In a note, for the years 1494, 1498, and 1499 
mention is made of John Bougton, Jerome Savon- 
arola, Paul Scriptor, etc., who declared against the 
Roman church; and what happened to them on 
this account. With this we conclude our account 
of the martyrs in the fifteenth century.] 


The times m this century are distressing. The 
places of the world, though very large, are never- 
theless very small and narrow for the pious. The 
holy confessors of Jesus, who seek to live accord- 
ing to the Gospel, find no rest anywhere. It seems 
that the earth, which ought properly to be a dwell- 

1 " g k P f ace for the good ' is possessed onl y b y the 

Is it not a matter of astonishment, and not less 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


341 


to be lamented : England,* which of old has been 
supposed to have derived her name from the good 
angels of heaven, is now found to be a pool of 
infernal and wicked spirits ; for the saints of God 
are cruelly put to death there ; to which Smithfield, 
at London, the murderous prison at Saltwoden, 
and the place of execution at Norwich, can bear 
testimony. 

France, which used to be called a free and frank 
country, yea, a kingdom of liberties, is now so 
devoid of freedom for the consciences of the true 
believers, that scarce a corner is found there, where 
they may confess their faith or practice their wor- 
ship. At Montpellier they are hurried to the place 
of execution, and in other places they are likewise 
miserably put to death. 

Germany is occupied by non-Germans, that is, 
by ignorant and unreasonable men, who do not fear 
to resist the will of God, and to imbrue their hands 
in the blood of God's saints. At Eichstaedt they are 
murdered ; at Vienna, in Austria, they are burnt. 

Flanders, this most beautiful and pleasant coun- 
try, upon which, from of old, the gracious blessing 
of the Lord descended as a refreshing shower and 
morning dew, is utterly ungrateful to the Lord, and 
acknowledges none of the benefits enjoyed; but 
there God is touched in the apple of His eye. O 
awful matter! the pious witnesses of God are 
placed alive into the fiery flames. 

It is time that we begin to give some account of 
this matter, lest some should doubt what we have 
said. 


christ." See above-mentioned chronicle, page 753, 
col. 1, from Hist. Adrian., fol. 85, Henr. Boxh., 
fol. 27. 


OF A BLOODY DECREE, PUBLISHED IN ENGLAND 
AGAINST THE CONFESSORS OF THE HOLY GOS- 
PEL ; IN CONSEQUENCE OF WHICH MUCH 
BLOOD WAS SHED AMONG THEM, 
A. D. 1401 

Tyrants generally find a reason for their tyran- 
ny, in the orders which they have received from 
their superiors in authority ; this is for them a wide 
cloak, which can cover much evil. In the meantime 
they vent their anger, yea, rejoice in their wicked- 
ness, while the unoffending and innocent have to 
suffer. 

Now, if this would obtain only with the world- 
ly, what would it matter, knowing that they are 
worldlyminded ; but even the so-called ecclesiastics 
or clergy, who are credited with everything good, 
are guilty in this matter. 

All this is briefly shown, in the beginning of the 
fifteenth book of the Chronijk van den Ondergang 
der Tyrannen, with these words: "In the year 
1401 a decree was issued in England, against the 
confessors of the Gospel, or those who gave them 
assistance or showed them favor; in consequence 
of which much innocent blood was shed by the 
ecclesiastical prelates, priests, and monks of anti- 


* "Anglia," England ; others, however, are of the opinion, that it 
comes from "Ango," that is, to strangle, torment, distress, oppress, 
etc.; or from "Angustla," that is, a narrow and straitened place. 


WILLIAM SWINDERBY, BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT 
LONDON, IN ENGLAND, A. D. 1401 

In the year 1389 it occurred as old chronicles 
show, that one William Swinderby, a priest of the 
bishopric of Lincoln, was accused of certain opin- 
ions, and brought before the bishop of Lincoln, who 
examined him concerning certain articles, in the 
church at Lincoln, according to the manner or order 
of the papal laws, agreeing with their usual cer- 
emonies. 

His accusers were the monks, friar Roger Fris- 
by, a Franciscan; friar John Hincely, an Augus- 
tinian, and Thomas Blaxton, a Dominican ; whom 
he refuted in all their accusations, showing that 
the eleven articles which they brought against him, 
and which they alleged to have extracted from his 
sermons, were altogether false, or, at least, mixed 
with much untruth. 

But said monks, not content with his disavowal 
and explanation, opposed him so vehemently with 
their testimonies, that they declared to have con- 
victed him of the articles with which they had 
charged him. They brought with them into the 
city dry fagots, according to the English custom, 
to burn him, and would not release him until he 
had promised, or, from fear of death, firmly as- 
sured them, that he would not hold, teach, or 
preach said articles any more, neither secretly nor 
openly, on pain of incurring like punishment. They 
moreover drew up in writing a form, which he was 
to repeat from memory, by way of recantation : to 
which they compelled him by severe threats. John 
Fox, Mart. Angl., ex Registro Hereford. 

But afterwards the aforesaid William Swinder- 
by did nevertheless not cease preaching his be- 
lief, so that he was apprehended, by order of King 
Richard II, in the fifteenth year of his reign, coin- 
ciding with the year 1392, and closely confined, by 
order of John, Bishop of Hereford, who had re- 
ceived this charge from the king. 

In the meantime he was examined in the faith, 
and it was found that he taught several articles 
which militated against the Roman church; but 
which or what kind of articles these were, is not 
clearly expressed by the writers ; yet it can be in- 
ferred from the confession of one Walter Brute, 
who, in the matter of faith, is compared to William 
Swinderby, by Abraham Mellinus and others ; yea, 
they declare that Walter Brute was a champion 
and defender of William Swinderby's articles, 
who, among others, maintained this article : "That 
it is not lawful for Christians to swear on any 
account, in any case, either by the Creator, or by 
His creatures." 

Concerning holy baptism, he made this confes- 
sion: "He (Christ) was buried that we might all, 
by baptism, be buried with Him into His death; 


342 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and that, having died unto sin (notice, this is not 
the work of children), we should live unto right- 
eousness." 

As to his views in regard to all other articles, we 
have found them very scriptural, salutary and 
good. In regard to this, see John Fox Anal., page 
440. 

It is certainly true, that William Swinderby's 
articles of faith thus shone forth through their radi- 
ance of divine truth, that the children of darkness 
(the Romanists) could not bear them, so that they 
finally, after a long and severe confinement, finished 
his trial, pronouncing sentence of death upon him, 
namely ; that he should be executed with fire, that 
is, burnt alive, as a heretic, in Smithfield, London. 
This it is stated, was done with him, twelve years 
after his first imprisonment. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION REGARDING HIS DEATH 

Concerning the death of this pious man, a cer- 
tain author gives the following account from John 
Fox: "Having received this commission and full 
power from the king, against William Swinderby, 
the bishop doubtless did his very best to procure his 
arrest without delay ; however, he did not immedi- 
ately proceed with the execution of death against 
him, but kept him in prison for a long time. At 
last A. D. 1401, he was burnt alive in Smithfield, 
at London." Second book of the Hist, of the Perse- 
cutions, fol. 505, col. 2, from John Fox, Hist. 
Angl., page 438, also, page 436. 

Again, A. Mellinus, page 515, col. 4: "Baleus 
also accords with this, saying that William Swin- 
derby, after his recantation, was strengthened in 
the confession of the divine truth, and was finally, 
A. D. 1401, burnt alive, in the sight of a great 
number of people, in Smithfield, at London." Bal. 
Cent. 6, Script. Britt., in Append, ad Jo. 1, 
Horesb., page 493. 

Note. — A. D. 1405, John Wenschelberg now 
wrote against the superstition in popery, and also 
against the deception practiced by the priests. 
Among other things he related of a Bohemian 
priest, who had colored the host of the Sacrament 
(of the altar) with his own blood, and had per- 
suaded the people, that the blood had of its own 
accord mingled with the bread. "These are," he 
said, "the lying signs and false miracles of anti- 
christ." But what happened to him on this account, 
from the papists, we have not found in the old 
writers. Compare J oh. Munst., fol. 181, with 
Chron. van den Ondergang, page 758, col. 1. 

WILLIAM THORPE PUT TO DEATH AND BURNT FOR 

THE FAITH, AT SALTWODEN, IN ENGLAND, 

A. D. 1407 

Now, when the abomination of desolation, 
through the papists, began to exalt itself more and 
more over the true faith, it occurred, about A. D. 
1397, that a God-fearing, pious man, named Wil- 
liam Thorpe, formerly a priest, was sorely perse- 


cuted for the truth of the Gospel, particularly for 
his belief against the sacrament of the altar, image 
worship, pilgrimages, the power of the priests, 
the swearing of oaths, etc. 

Of these articles of his accusation, especially of 
his belief against the swearing of oaths, and what 
is alleged against it by opponents, we have already 
given an explanation in the presentation of his 
faith. 

However, notwithstanding that he was already 
imprisoned, upon the intercession of some well- 
disposed persons, and through the fact that the 
archbishop of Canterbury, who had apprehended 
him, had fallen into disfavor with the king, he was 
released after the first persecution. But since this 
pious witness of God did not cease to preach against 
the Roman church, particularly against the swear- 
ing of oaths, (as divers old writers note), he was 
eventually, about A. D. 1407, apprehended at Sa- 
lopia, brought from there to Canterbury, and ulti- 
mately imprisoned in the castle of Saltwoden; 
where the archbishop and the prelates beset him 
very hard, in order to draw him from his faith. 

In the meantime, a number of disorderly per- 
sons having crowded into the prison, some de- 
manded that he should immediately be burnt ; oth- 
ers, that he should forthwith be thrown into the 
sea, which was nearby, and drowned. In this 
dreadful uproar, a priest from their midst fell upon 
his knees before the archbishop, entreating him, 
that he might do his utmost for this William 
Thorpe, to convert him, by the reading of his ma- 
tins or morning prayers, which he should perform 
for him, saying : "I venture to promise that after 
three days he will change so remarkably, that he 
will not refuse to do anything for the archbishop." 

But the archbishop, filled with anger, raged on 
with undiminished fury, threatening the martyr, 
that he would see to it, that he should get his de- 
serts. Thereupon, this pious witness of Jesus, as 
he refused to apostatize, was most cruelly mal- 
treated in the prison, in the castle of Saltwoden. 
Some hold that he was burnt soon after that severe 
examination, in the month of August of said year 
1407. See Vignier, A. D. 1407, from Guil. Tindal; 
but Baleus is of the former opinion. Cent. 7, 
Script. Britt., cap. 42, in Guil. Thorp., page 538. 

Note.— A. D. 1410. At this time a tradesman 
was condemned as a heretic by the (Roman) bish- 
ops, and delivered to the secular judge; because 
he believed and said that the bread in the Lord's 
Supper was given for a memorial ; thus denying 
transubstantiation, or the essential change of the 
bread into the body of Christ. For this he had to 
suffer the slow and dreadful death by fire. Compare 
Fasc. Temp., fol. 118. Hist, of the Mart. Adri., 
fol. 52, with P. J. Twisck's Chron., page 763. 

That all this happened to him, because he, be- 
sides opposing the Roman superstitions, also held, 
that men may not swear at all, has already been 
stated, and is confirmed by F. H. H., van den Loop 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


343 


der Werelt, page 99. Also, P. J. Twisck, Chron., 
page 758. 

CATHARINE OF THOU, IN LORRAINE, BURNT FOR 

THE FAITH, AT MONTPELLIER, IN FRANCE, 

A. D. 1417 

On the second of October, about two o'clock in 
the afternoon, it occurred at Montpellier, in France, 
that a certain sentence of death was pronounced, 
and executed the same day, upon an upright and 
God-fearing woman of Thou, in Lorraine, named 
Catharine Saube, who, loving the Lord her Saviour 
more than her own life, steadfastly fought through 
death, and, pressing her way through the strait 
gate* into the spacious mansions of heaven, left 
flesh and blood on the post, in the burning flames, 
on the place of execution, at Montpellier. 

The history of Catharine Saube is, as old writers 
testify, faithfully extracted from the town-book of 
Montpellier, commonly called Talamus; which 
word, Chassanion thinks, has been corrupted by 
passing from one language into the other ; and that 
by the Jews, who at that time resided in great 
numbers in France, especially at Montpellier, it 
was called Talmud, which among the Hebrews or 
Jews, signifies a very large book or roll contain- 
ing many and various things. Hence it may very 
easily have been the case, that the French, after the 
manner of the Jewish Maranes, who lived among 
them, erroneously called the word Talmud, Tala- 
mus, meaning to designate thereby the large book 
containing the civil records of the burgomasters 
of Montpellier. From this town-book the following 
acts were faithfully translated, from the ancient 
language of Montpellier into the French tongue, 
by a trustworthy person of Languedoc, and in 
Englishf read as follows : 

"On the 15th day of November, A. D. 1416, 
after mass had been read in the parish church of 
St. Fermin, at Montpellier, Catharine Saube, a 
native of Thou, Lorraine, came into that church, 
to present herself. About fifteen or sixteen days 
previously, she had asked the lords and burgo- 
masters of that city, for permission to be shut in 
with the other recluses in the nunnery on the 
Lates road. 

The aforesaid lords and burgomasters, and all 
manner of tradespeople, together with over 1500 
townspeople, men as well as women, came to the 
church, in this general procession. Said burgo- 
masters, as patrons, that is, fathers and protectors 
of the recluse nuns, conducted said Catharine, as 
a bride, to the abovementioned cloister, where they 
let her remain, shut up in a cell, after which they 
all returned home together." Acta Gallica Ibid. 
in Martyrolog Gallico. 

See, these are the identical words of the extract 
or copy taken from the town-book; we let the 
reader judge, as to what was her reason in apply- 

* "Enter ye in at the strait gate. Because strait is the gate, and 
narrow is the way which leadeth unto life" (Matt. 7:13, 14). 
t "In our Dutch," says the original. 


ing for admittance into the nunnery. Certainly, 
some did not presume so badly, who have main- 
tained, that experiencing in her heart the begin- 
nings of true godliness proceeding from an ardent 
faith, she was impelled by a holy desire to reveal 
to the other recluse nuns the true knowledge of 
Christ Jesus ; finding herself sufficiently gifted by 
the Lord, to do this. This is very probable ; since 
credible witnesses have declared that in said book 
Talamus it was also recorded, that some time after 
the death of Catharine Saube, the whole convent 
in which said Catharine had been confined was 
burnt, together with all the nuns ; doubtless on ac- 
count of their religion. 

The same public records state, that the year 
following, A. D. 1417, on the second of October, 
about two o'clock in the afternoon, when M. Ray- 
mond Cabasse, D.D., of the order of Jacobine or 
Dominican monks, vicar of the inquisitor, sat in 
the judgment seat, under the chapter which is be- 
side the portal of the city hall at Montpellier, in the 
presence of the Bishop of Maguelonne, the Lieu- 
tenant governor, the four orders, yea, of all the 
people, who filled the whole city hall square, he 
declared by definite sentence, that the aforesaid 
Catharine Saube, of Thou, in Lorraine, who, at 
her request, had been put into the cloister of the 
recluses, was a heretic, and that she had dissemi- 
nated, taught and believed divers damnable heresies 
against the Catholic faith, namely: "That the 
Catholic (or true) church is composed only of men 
and women* who follow and observe the life of the 
apostles." Again: "That it is better to die, than 
to anger, or sin against God." Again: "That she 
did not worship the host or waferf consecrated by 
the priest ; because she did not believe that the body 
of Christ was present in it." Again: "That it is 
not necessary to conf ess$ one's self to the priest ; 
because it is sufficient to confess one's sins to God ; 
and that it counts just as much to confess one's 
sins to a discreet, pious layman, as to any chap- 
lain or priest." Again: "That there will be no 
purgatory after this life." 

Said town-book Talamus contained also four 
other articles with which Catharine was charged, 
or at least which she professed ; from which it can 
be inferred that she rejected not only many papal 
institutions, but among these also infant baptism. 
The extract from the aforesaid town-book, con- 
cerning these four articles, reads literally as fol- 
lows: 

1. "That there never has been a true pope, car- 
dinal, bishop, or priest, after the election of the 
pope (or bishop) ceased to be done through mir- 
acles of faith or verity. 

* Here no third class of members of the church of Jesus Christ 
is mentioned, namely, infants; but only men and women, that is, 
believing and obedient persons. 

t Though she calls the bread of the Supper the host, yet she 
does not acknowledge, that the body of Christ is present in it; 
hence she refused to worship it. 

t The confession recognized by her, is not according to papistic 
manner, but agreeable to the teaching of James 5:16: "Confess 
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may 
he healed." 


344 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


2. "That wicked priests or chaplains neither can 
nor may consecrate the body of Christ, though 
they pronounce the sacramental words over it. 

3. "That the baptism which is administered by 
wicked priests, is of no avail to salvation. 

4. "That infants which die after baptism, before 
they have faith, are not saved ; for they do not be- 
lieve but through the faith of their godfathers, 
godmothers, parents, or friends." 

These are the last four articles found in the 
town-book of Montpellier ; from which it certainly 
is clearly evident, how very bold, ardent, and pene- 
trating the faith of this woman was; so that she 
did not stop short of attacking even the pope, the 
priests, and the superstitions practiced by them, 
and convincing them with God's truth. For, when 
she says, in the first article, that "there never has 
been a true pope," etc., what else did she indicate, 
than that there never has been a true pope, cardi- 
nal, bishop, or priest in the Roman church, seeing 
the election of the pope was never done through 
miracles of faith or verity? 

Secondly, when she says, that, "Wicked priests 
or chaplains neither can nor may," what else does 
she mean to say than that wicked priests, who are 
not holy themselves, need not imagine at all (which 
is nevertheless believed in popery) , that by uttering 
a few words they can consecrate a piece of bread, 
yea, transform it into their God and Saviour? 
which, Catharine had declared before, could not 
even be done by priests of upright life ; for there- 
fore she would not, as she said, worship the wafer 
consecrated by the priest, because she did not be- 
lieve that the body of Christ was present in it. 

Thirdly, when she says, that "The baptism which 
is administered by wicked priests is," etc., what 
else does this indicate than that the shameful life 
of the priests destroys the ministry itself, and that 
as little as the words which they pronounce over the 
host, tend to consecrate it, just as little tends the 
baptism practiced by them to salvation? 

Fourthly, when she says, that "Infants which die 
after baptism," etc., what is this but to say that in- 
fant baptism is not necessary to salvation, yea, con- 
duces in no wise to it ? because infants themselves 
do not believe, only their godfathers, godmothers, 
parents or friends, in their stead ; but that to be 
saved, one must believe himself, and be baptized 
upon this belief, as the Lord says, Mark 16 :16 ; for 
the faith of another cannot help any one in the 
world, and consequently, cannot help infants to 
salvation. 

Now ; when this pious heroine of God would in 
no wise depart from her faith, sentence of death 
was finally pronounced upon her ; and having been 
led to the place of execution, she was burnt, at 
Montpellier, in the afternoon of October 2, 1417. 

Concerning her sentence and death, the town 
book of Montpellier contains the following words, 
as translated from the original into the Dutch (now 
into the English) : "Having pronounced this sen- 
tence upon her, the vicar of the inquisitor, M. Ray- 


mond, delivered her into the hands of the bailiff, 
who was provost or criminal judge of the city. The 
people entreated him much in her behalf, that he 
would deal mercifully with her; but he executed 
the sentence the same day, causing her to be 
brought to the place of execution, and there burnt 
as a heretic, according to law." 

These are the words of the aforesaid Talamus, 
or town book, which also contains this further ad- 
dition: "That the bishop of Maguelonne, after 
singing a common mass, also preached a sermon 
before the members of the council, concerning 
Catharine Saube, against many who said that the 
sentence of death had unjustly been passed upon 
her; and rebuked the indignation of those who 
spoke against this sentence, with very vehement and 
severe words." 

This is briefly the extract concerning the martyr- 
dom of this God-fearing woman, by which many 
ignorant, plain people were prompted in their 
hearts to examine the truth a little nearer, and to 
apprehend the light of the Gospel in the midst of 
these dark times, which God blessed, as shall be 
seen hereafter. See also the second book of the 
History of the Persecutions, fol. 572, col. 2-4. Also 
fol. 573, col. 1. Also Hist. Mart, by /. S., edition 
1645, fol. 40. 


A GREAT NUMBER OF CHRISTIANS CALLED WAL- 

DENSES, BURNT FOR THE FAITH, 

IN FLANDERS, A. D. 1421 

Now, when the children of light, who confessed 
the doctrine of the Waldenses, in the midst of the 
darkness of popery,* began to lift up their hands 
more and more, in the Flemish countries, and 
to combat with the power of the Word of God the 
errors of the Roman church, and to reject princi- 
pally papal authority, the mass, transubstantiation, 
pilgrimages, the invocation of saints, purgatory, in- 
fant baptism, the swearing of oaths, revenge to- 
wards enemies, etc., as we stated concerning the 
belief of the Waldenses, in the account for the 
eleventh century ; the prince and king of darkness, 
through the instrumentality of his satellites, laid 
his hands on them, and ultimately brought the mat- 
ter so far that very many who would in no wise, 
neither for life nor for death, apostatize, were con- 
demned to be burnt alive, which was also done with 
them; and thus they endured the trial of their 
faith with great steadfastness, in the fire, at Donau, 
in Flanders, in the year 1421. Wherefore the cap- 
tain of the faith, Jesus Christ, shall hereafter 
eternally crown them, as pious champions, with 
the unfading crown of honor, according to His 
promise: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life" (Revelation 2:10). 

Of the sacrifice of these friends, mention is also 
made in the second book of the History of the 
Persecutions, p. 577, col. 4, where it says: "At 

* The people which sat in darkness saw great light ; and to them 
which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up. 

iVL3tt. 4>10. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


345 


Donau, in Flanders, A. D. 1421, a great number 
was discovered, who professed the doctrine of the 
Waldenses, many of whom, remaining steadfast, 
were burnt alive." Also, Vignier, Hist. Ecd., in 
the year 1421, ex Monstrelets. 

Note. — Whether those of Dort, in Holland, were 
also guilty at this time, of the blood of the saints, 
we have not been able to ascertain; nevertheless, 
the Lord severely chastised them in this year, 1421, 
so that, through heavy floods, the city became an 
island, and was deprived of seventy-two villages 
that lay round about, and were all swallowed up in 
the water. 

Hence, the following inscription is found carved 
on the outside of the Speuy Gate of said city, over 
the arch, in blue stone : 

"All land and water which here you see, were 
Seventy-two parishes, chronicles state, 
Swallowed by water's resistless power; 
Thousand four hundred seventy-one by date." 

This event is so generally known, and has been 
described by so many authors, that I deem it un- 
necessary to add anything by way of confirmation. 
A sad thing for the place of our birth. 

Note. — A. D. 1423. — At this time, writes P. J. 
Twisck, Henry Gruenfelder was burnt for the 
truth, in the city of Regensburg, in Germany ; and 
shortly after, in the same city, Henry Rathgeber. 
Chron., p. 787, col. 1, compared with Georg. Pac, 
cap. 11. 

A. D. 1425.— -About this time Peter Torea was 
executed at Speyer, in Germany, and others in 
Roman countries ; because they confessed the truth 
and opposed the Roman superstitions. Compare 
the last mentioned Chron., p. 788, col. 2, with 
Georg. Pac., cap. 11. 

A. D. 1427. — At this time, Jerome Savonarola, 
of Ferrara, preached throughout Italy that the pope 
was the antichrist ; for which he was burnt at Flor- 
ence. He wrote some meditations on the 51st and 
80th psalms, in which he reproves the tyranny of 
the pope and his clergy, saying that they are the 
boars and wild beasts of the field, which, according 
to the words of David, have devoured and utterly 
destroyed the Lord's vineyard, and wholly sub- 
verted the church of God. In the last-mentioned 
Chron., p. 762, col. 2, compared with Georg. Pac., 
cap. 11. 

WILLIAM WHITE, FATHER ABRAHAM OF CHOL- 

CHESTER, AND JOHN W ADDON, BURNT FOR 

THE FAITH, AT NORWICH, IN 

ENGLAND, A. D. 1428 

When the light of the Gospel began to break 
forth with power also in England, so that some 
persons not only believed and adhered to, but also 
taught and propagated the truth of Christ, the Ro- 
manists, proving themselves children of darkness, 
evinced their old nature towards these people, inas- 
much as they informed the King of England, then 


only a child of six years, of this matter, aiming to 
provide against it. 

Thus it happened A. D. 1428, that this child- 
king, induced by the fathers and heads of the 
Roman church, immediately resolved to give orders 
to the officers appointed thereto, to apprehend these 
persons and all who were of their persuasion, in or- 
der that they might be punished according to the 
laws of England. 


COPY OF THE LETTER OF KING HENRY VI, TO 
JOHN EXTOR, AND JACOLET GERMAINE, GOV- 
ERNORS OF CHOLCH ESTER, TO APPRE- 
HEND WILLIAM WHITE AND 
HIS ADHERENTS 

"Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England 
and France, Lord of Ireland, to his beloved friends, 
John Extor, and Jacolet Germaine, Governors of 
the Castle at Cholchester, greeting: 

"Be it known unto you, that, perfectly relying 
on your fidelity and prudence, we have charged you, 
both together and each separately, to arrest and ap- 
prehend William White, priest, and Thomas, chap- 
lain, formerly at Settling, in the county of Norfolk, 
and William Northampton, priest, and all others 
that are suspected of heresy, whoever they may be, 
and wherever they may be found, whether in free 
cities or without ; and to send them, as soon as you 
have apprehended them, to our nearest jails or pris- 
ons, until we shall have given orders for their 
release. 

"And, therefore, we charge you strictly to keep 
a close surveillance on the aforesaid persons, and 
to faithfully observe the above in the manner stated 
before. 

"We likewise command and charge each and all 
of our justiciaries, who have the care of the com- 
mon peace, as mayors, margraves, bailiffs, con- 
stables, and all our other faithful officers, by the 
contents of these presents, that they render you, 
both together and each separately, good assistance, 
and help and advise you to execute the preceding 
command, as becometh them. 

"In witness of this, we have ourselves caused our 
letters patent to be executed, and have signed them 
at Westminster, the sixth day of July, in the sixth 
year of our reign, coinciding with A. D. 1428." 
See John Fox, Angl., p. 607. 

In old records we find that by virtue of this com- 
mission of the King, John Extor, who was one 
of these commissaries, shortly afterwards appre- 
hended six persons at Bungay, in the bishopric 
of Norwich, and delivered them into the custody 
of William Day and William Rowe, constables of 
the city of Bungay, to be brought within ten days 
to the castle of Norwich. 

"The names, however, of these six persons," 
writes John Fox, "owing to the age of the writing, 
had almost entirely faded out, so that they could 
not well be read, except three or four." But what 
further transpired with them, and what sufferings 


346 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


or death befell them, we do not find clearly ex- 
pressed. 

In the meantime there were also apprehended 
and brought to Norwich, three eminent and vir- 
tuous men, namely, William White, formerly a 
priest, Father Abraham of Cholchester, and John 
Waddon, who, after preceding examination, made 
confession of the following articles : 

CONFESSION OF FAITH OF SAID THREE MARTYRS, 

TOUCHING THEIR BELIEF AGAINST 

THE ROMAN CHURCH 

1. "That the children of Christians are suffi- 
ciently baptized in the blood of Christ, and, hence, 
need not be baptized with water. 

2. "That no tithes need be given to the pastors 
of the Roman church. 

3. "That marriage properly consists in the con- 
sent or agreement of union between man and 
woman (with rejection, as it seems, of the super- 
stitions which the Romanists are wont to observe 
in connection with it). 

4. "That auricular confession is not necessary, 
and that one need not go and confess to the priests, 
but to God alone ; since no priest has power to for- 
give a sinner his sins. 

5. "That no priest has power to make the body 
of Christ, or to consecrate it in the sacrament of the 
altar; but that after the words are pronounced, 
there still remains purely material bread, just as it 
was before. 

6. "That each and every Christian believer is a 
priest before God. 

7. "That no one is bound on pain of damnation 
to observe lent or any other fast days commanded 
by the Roman church. 

8. "That the pope is the antichrist, and his prel- 
ates disciples of antichrist; and that the pope has 
no authority to bind or loose on earth. 

9. "That it is lawful for all Christians to per- 
form bodily works on holidays, except sins. 

10. "That it is lawful for priests to marry. 

11. "That the excommunications and ecclesiasti- 
cal punishments decreed by the prelates are not to 
be regarded. 

12. "That in particular cases it is not lawful 
to swear. 

(Note. — This article seems not to have been re- 
corded correctly by the notary ; for it appears that 
these people prohibited the oath not only in par- 
ticular cases, but in any wise, seeing the following 
martyress, Margaret Backster, pronounces these 
men faithful preachers of the Word of God, and 
confessed herself, that one might not swear at all, 
neither by God, nor by, etc.). 

13. "One ought not to go on pilgrimages. 

14. "That no worship at all is to be bestowed 
upon images, the crucifix, Our Lady, or any other 
saint or saintess. 

15. "That the holy water consecrated by the 
priest in the church, is not holier or more efficacious 


than any other river or spring water ; because the 
Lord blessed all waters together after their cre- 
ation. 

16. "That the death of Thomas Becket (arch- 
bishop of Canterbury), was neither meritorious nor 
holy. 

17. "That relics consisting in bones of the dead 
may not be worshiped, exhumed, placed on altars 
in the church, or inclosed in chests. 

18. "That prayers made in every place are 
equally acceptable to God. 

19. "Saints should not be worshiped, but God 
alone. 

20. "That bells and hand-bells in church, are 
instituted for no other purpose than to fill the 
purses of the priests. 

21. "It is no sin to oppose the commands of the 
(Roman) church. 

22. "That the (true) Catholic church is only 
the congregation of the beloved children of God." 

These are briefly the principal articles which they 
together unanimously maintained, and whereupon 
they also suffered death, inasmuch as they, after 
severe examination and manifold torments, re- 
fusing to apostatize, were condemned to be burnt 
alive; which also took place with them, namely, 
first with William White, in September, 1428, in 
the city of Norwich, and then with father Abraham, 
and John Waddon, who, having commended their 
souls into the hands of God, offered up a living 
and holy sacrifice, acceptable unto God. 

ACCOUNT OF THE IMPRISONMENT AND DEATH 
OF SAID MARTYRS 

Concerning the imprisonment and death of Wil- 
liam White, as also of father Abraham and John 
Waddon, we find the following account in the writ- 
ings of John Fox: "William White, who in- 
structed these people in the light of the Gospel, in 
the county of Norfolk, for the space of about four 
years, until he, as already stated, was apprehended 
by virtue of the aforesaid letter of the king, and 
brought before William, bishop of Norwich, by 
whom he was convicted and condemned on these 
and other articles, thirty in number, was burnt alive 
in the city of Norwich, in the month of September, 
A. D. 1428, under King Henry VI, then but a 
child of six years. 

"Having arrived at the stake, and about to open 
his mouth to address and admonish the people, and 
to confirm them in the truth, one of the bishop's 
servants struck him on the mouth, thus compelling 
him to remain silent." 

Thus did this godly man receive the crown of 
martyrdom, and ended this temporal life, to the 
great sorrow of all pious Christians in the county 
of Norfolk. His aforesaid wife, Johanna, who, ac- 
cording to her feeble ability, followed in the foot- 
steps of her husband by scattering said doctrine 
everywhere, and confirming many in the truth of 
God, had to suffer much on this account, in the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


347 



William White, a priest, burned as a heretic at Norwich, England, in 1428 


same year and from the same bishop, as Thomas 
Walden himself confesses, who, besides others, 
was present at the examination and condemnation 
of said William White. 

About the same time there were also burnt the 
aforesaid father Abraham of Cholchester, and 
John Waddon, priest, on account of the same 
articles mentioned above. Besides these, very many 
other godly men were most cruelly put to death. 
Second book of the History of the Persecutions, 
fol. 582, col. 4, and fol. 583, col. 1, from John Fox, 
in Actis Guil. White. Also from Bal., in Guil. 
White, in Append. 

SPECIAL ACCOUNT OF WILLIAM WHITE, TOUCHING 
HIS DOCTRINE, SUFFERING AND DEATH 

In the fifteenth book of the Chronijck van den 
Ondergang, page 788, are found the following 
words: "William Wicht, or William White, a 
learned, upright, honest, and eloquent man, a 
priest in England, forsook his ministry, and pub- 
lished the Gospel, by writing, preaching, and teach- 
ing, saying: 'that forgiveness of sins must be ob- 


tained from God Almighty alone; that the un- 
married life of the pope and his clergy was the 
very satanic state, and a severe captivity of anti- 
christ; and that the hooded, striped and shaven 
clergy were the mercenaries and servants of Lu- 
cifer.' " 

But upon being apprehended, he renounced his 
doctrine, A. D. — . Subsequently, however, he be- 
came re-established, and pious, and stronger, in the 
doctrine, and very boldly suffered burning for his 
confession, at Norwich, in England, A. D. 1428. 
Compare this with Hist. Andr. Hondorf, fol. 35. 
Vincent. Cat., fol., 134. Georg. Pac. cap. 11. 

Note. — Three years previous to the death of this 
martyr, A. D. 1425, a miserable persecution was 
raised by the Romanists against some orthodox 
Christians; concerning which the following ac- 
count is found, for the year 1425 : "About this 
time, Peter Torea was executed at Speyer, in Ger- 
many, and many others in the Roman countries; 
because they confessed the truth or opposed the 
Roman superstitions." Georg. Pac, cap. 11, com- 
pared with P. J. Turisck, Chron., page 788. 


348 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


MARGARET BACKSTER, IMPRISONED UNTIL DEATH, 

OR PUT TO DEATH IN PRISON, IN ENGLAND, 

A. D. 1430 

According to old chronicles, about A. D. 1430, 
a God-fearing woman, named Margaret Backster, 
was apprehended in England, for the truth of the 
Gospel of Christ ; and as she would not apostatize, 
it seems, she was imprisoned until death, or put to 
death in prison; which, though it has remained 
partly hidden before men, God will make manifest 
in that last, great and terrible day; so that those 
who have secretly suffered for the name of Christ, 
shall then be openly rewarded and crowned; and 
those who have secretly shed the blood of the 
saints, shall be banished with open shame from the 
face of God, to be tormented, as they have tor- 
mented others, yet without ceasing, for ever and 
ever. Rev. 14:11. "Then shall we discern between 
the righteous and the wicked." Mai. 3:18; Wisd. 
5:1,2; Matt. 5:46. 


CONCERNING THE ACCUSATIONS BROUGHT AGAINST 
THIS WOMAN, WE HAVE FOUND THE FOL- 
LOWING ACCOUNT IN OLD WRITERS 

Margaret Backster, wife of William Backster, 
was accused by Johanna (wife of Cleveland), of 
divers articles, as, of having told her, that she 
should not swear at all, neither by God, nor by 
Our Lady, nor by any saints or saintesses. 

Again : That she, the deponent, upon being asked 
by Margaret Backster, what she did everyday in 
church, answered, that she knelt before the, cruci- 
fix, repeated five Pater-nosters, and read as many 
Ave Marias in honor of Our Lady. Whereupon 
Margaret replied : "You do very wrong in kneel- 
ing or praying before such images as stand in the 
church; for God dwells not in such churches, nor 
will He come down from heaven ; neither will He 
give you any more a reward for such prayers, than 
a taper which is placed under the cover of the 
font, can give light at night, to those that are in 
the church." 

Again : Said deponent, Johanna Cleveland, being 
asked by Margaret, what she believed respecting 
the sacrament of the altar, said, that the sacrament 
of the altar, the consecration, is the true body 
of Christ, in the form of bread. Whereupon Mar- 
garet said to her : "Your belief is vain ; for if this 
sacrament were God and the true body of Christ, 
there would be a countless number of gods, since a 
thousand priests and more, make a thousand such 
gods every day, and then eat them." 

Again : She said she knew for certain, that the 
vengeance of God would speedily come upon the 
Bishop of Norwich, and others, who had caused 
the death of father Abraham, William White, and 
John Waddon, faithful preachers of the word of 
God, and of many other godly men with them. 

She also declared, that she had seen how one of 
those servants of Caiaphas smote William White on 
the mouth or lips, when he was about to be put to 


death, and wanted to address the people, and ad- 
monish them for the last time; and that he (that 
servant) stopped his mouth, so that he could not 
at all declare the will of God. From John Fox 
Hist. Angl. ' 

Then follow various other articles, believed and 
confessed by her, in opposition to the belief of the 
Roman church, and militating against images, the 
power of the priests, the forty days' fast, pilgrim- 
ages, the mendicancy of the monks, too numerous 
to mention. 

These, then, are the principal and most remark- 
able things extracted by John Fox from the old rec- 
ords concerning Margaret Backster; but since in 
said records no mention was made as to what befell 
her after these accusations, or what became of her, 
he did not venture to state it ; however, it is sup- 
posed, as some write, that they put her to death 
secretly in prison, or imprisoned her until death, 
since no mention is made of her penitence or apos- 
tasy. Second book of the Hist, of the Persecutions, 
fol. 583, from Joh. Fox Angl., page 610. 

Note.— A. D. 1431, one Paul Craus, in Scot- 
land, was apprehended by Bishop Henry, because 
he rejected auricular confession, the invocation of 
the saints, the idolatrous sacrament, etc. And as 
he would not depart from the truth confessed, he 
was finally sentenced to the fire, and burnt on the 
thirtieth of June, of the same year. Compare 
Vine. Cal, fol. 368. Georg. Pac., cap. 11. Herm. 
Mod., fol. 274, with the Chron. van den Ond., 
page 796; also, A. Mell., fol. 584, col. 1, ex Hist. 
Scoticae, lib. 17. 

A. D. 1436, five years after, one Thomas Rhe- 
donensis, a Frenchman, out of Christian zeal, went 
to Rome, hoping there to preach the pure doctrine 
of Christ. But when he found the opposite there, 
and noticed the great abominations, hypocrisy, and 
pomp, he could not forbear reproving the cardinals 
and ecclesiastics for their ungodly life, saying, 
that they ought to live modestly and virtuously like 
Christ and the apostles. By this he speedily drew 
upon him the envy and wrath of said persons, so 
that he was led before Pope Eugenius, and there 
cast into prison ; where he was greatly tormented, 
yea, ultimately, sentenced to the fire, and burnt! 
Compare the last-mentioned chronicle, page 800, 
col. 2, with Vine. Cal, fol. 145. Georg. Pac, 
cap. 11. 

A. D. 1439, there was condemned as a heretic, 
in the council of Basel (where the feast of the Con- 
ception of Mary was instituted and established), a 
certain upright man, named Augustine de Roma ; 
but as to what happened to him after said condem- 
nation by the council, has not been mentioned by 
the writers from whom we have quoted this. See 
the authors cited above. Also, P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 808. 

A. D. 1450, Alanus Chartetius wrote a book 
respecting the fruits reaped by the church from the 
unmarried life of the priests ; by which he greatly 
reproved and censured the abuses in the church of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


349 


the Romanists. See further on. In the same year, 
Peter de Luna opposed the pope and the ecclesias- 
tical power, and openly wrote against them, and 
was therefore also condemned as a heretic. From 
J oh. Munst., fol. 182. There were also at this 
time, many learned men, who discountenanced 
purgatory, confession, letters of indulgence, the 
mass, vigils, etc. ; which, to all appearance, caused 
them much misery according to the body ; but as 
we have not found the particulars in regard to it, 
we will pass them by. Compare the account of 
Fortalius Sidceus with the last mentioned chron- 
icle, page 823, col. 2, at the foot, and page 824, col. 
1, at the top. 


VERY MANY CHRISTIANS CALLED WALDENSES, PUT 

TO DEATH AT EICHST.EDT, IN GERMANY, 

A. D. 1457 

After the church of God in Germany had en- 
joyed peace for a season, so that she, as it appears, 
began to grow, flourish, and increase, the thorns of 
persecution immediately arose over her ; inasmuch 
as in the year 1475, particularly in the bishopric of 
Eichstasdt, through the envy of the Romanists, 
her meetings were broken up, the believers appre- 
hended, and all who remained steadfast, sentenced 
to death ; who, in great numbers, from love to their 
Saviour, and especially for the salvation of their 
own souls, gave their bodily life unto death, thus 
sealing with their blood, the truth which they had 
confessed at baptism before many witnesses ; for 
which the Lord, hereafter, shall give to them, as 
triumphant conquerors, palms into their hands, 
place crowns upon their heads, and put a new song 
of praise into their mouths, so that for all their 
suffering they shall rejoice, shout, and be glad 
forever. 

Touching the offering up of these friends of 
God, we have not been able correctly to ascertain 
it, namely, whether they perished by water, fire, 
or the sword ; except that they were put to death 
for the doctrine of the Waldenses. Of their suf- 
fering and death, mention is also made in the second 
book of the Hist, of the Persecutions, fol. 590, col. 
4, from Vignier Hist. Eccles., A. D. 1457. 

The above-mentioned author, or his printer, has 
made a chronological error, putting A. D. 1475, in- 
stead of A. D. 1457. Then follows : "A. D. -, a 

great number of Christians professing the doctrine 
of the Waldenses, were discovered and appre- 
hended in the bishopric or within the jurisdiction 
of Eichstsedt, in Germany; very many of whom 
were put to death." 

This year, 1457, P. J. Twisck fixes as the date 
of this event, though he does not make mention of 
their death, but only of their severe persecution. 
Chron., page 829, col. 2, calling the scene of their 
persecution Richstadt, instead of Eichstsedt. 

Note. — A. D. 1465. At this time, Laurence 
Valla, a man of great learning, vigorously attacked 
the power and supremacy of the pope, placing his 


salvation in the eternal merits of Christ. He re- 
proved the vows and the lasciviousness of the 
monks, yea, declared publicly, that the pope was 
the originator of all wars and dissensions ; as also, 
that he had for sale not only worldly, but also 
spiritual goods, yea, even the (so-called) Holy 
Ghost. On account of this he was driven into ban- 
ishment, and resided at Naples, where he died. 
Chron. van den Ond., p. 841, col. 1, from John 
Munst., fol. 192, Georg. Pac, cap. 11. 

A. D. 1470. — John de Wesalia (that is, John of 
Wesel) now taught at Worms, that all believers are 
saved by pure grace, through faith in Jesus Christ ; 
and that the supremacy of the pope is not to be 
regarded. He defended matrimony, and the dis- 
pensation of the Supper (called the Sacrament) 
under two forms, that is, with bread and wine. 
Human institutions, as fasts, letters of indulgence, 
feast days, pilgrimages, extreme unction, con- 
firmation, auricular confession and satisfaction,* 
he utterly rejected. In short, he was regarded as a 
heretic, and, in the year 1479, condemned and 
burnt at Mentz. Compare Joh. Munst, fol. 196. 
Chron., Fra., fol. 91, with the account in the 
Chron. van den Ond., page 847, col. 2. Others, 
however, make mention only of the burning of his 
books. See A. M., fol. 597; This the intelligent 
reader can easily distinguish, and, when necessary, 
reconcile. 

Again: Same year as above. George Morgen- 
stern wrote and taught at this time against the 
errors of popery and the manifold attires of the 
monks. He said that the world was full of monks, 
but that scarcely in one out of a hundred could a 
little virtue be found. Whether the monks and 
other priests received this in good part, we may 
readily judge, though we have learned nothing in 
regard to his suffering. Compare P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 847, col. 1, with Catal. Test. Verit., 
fol. 884. 


STEPHEN, AN ELDER OF THE WALDENSES, BURNT 

FOR THE FAITH, AT VIENNA, IN AUSTRIA, 

ABOUT A. D. 1471 

About the year 1471, an awful persecution arose 
in and around Bohemia, against the old, orthodox 
Waldenses whose orthodox confession we do not 
deem necessary to relate again. This persecution 
was excited by Johanna, the widow of King George 
of Bohemia, who, notwithstanding the death of her 
husband, earnestly solicited the princes of the 
realm, everywhere to exterminate not only those 
who were called Bohemian Brethren, but also the 
old Waldenses. 

For this reason many went and sojourned in 
Austria; but as it is peculiar to the rose of the 
church of God to bloom among the thorns, it hap- 
pened that also there no liberty could be found; 
so that the servants of antichrist, in the city of Vi- 
enna, in Austria, laid their hands, first of all, on 

* Or Penance imposed by the priest. — Translator. 


350 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Stephen, one of the elders of their church, besides 
raising a severe persecution over the believers in 
general. 

But since this pious man, as becomes a good 
shepherd of the flock of Christ, did not wish to give 
offense to his sheep, and would not flee from the 
wolf which threatened to tear them, nor would, for 
any torments, forsake either his office or his faith, 
sentence of death was finally pronounced upon 
him, namely, that he should be executed with 
fire, that is, burnt alive. This severe punishment 
of death he steadfastly endured, having commend- 
ed his soul into the hands of God. Of this hero of 
Christ, mention is also made in the second book of 
the Hist, of the Persecutions, fol. 592, col. 4, thus : 
"At this time there were not many Waldenses in 
Bohemia, on account of the violent persecution; 
but in Austria there still lived some, who were 
likewise for the most part dispersed, because of 
the cruelty of the torments, and the terror of per- 
secution, after Stephen, one of their elders, had 
been burnt alive at Vienna, in Austria." 

Note— A. D. 1471. Stephen Brulifer, a theolo- 
gian or divine, now maintained, that the doctrine 
was false, yea, a doctrine of Satan, which ascribes 
justification to the works and merits of men (who 
observe the religion of the priests) ; as also, that the 
church has no power to institute new sacraments. 
On account of these and like doctrines, he had to 
leave Paris, and come to Mentz, where he is said 
to have died in the year 1490. See the books cited 
above; also, John Munst., fol. 199; also, the last 
mentioned chronicle, £.851, col. 2. 

A. D. 1474. — D. V. P. Groningensis so clearly 
exposed at this time the darkness of popery that 
his friends called him a light of the world. Al- 
though he could expect nothing better, together 
with his fellow brethren, than fire and the sword ; 
yet he died in peace in the year 1490. P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., p. 855, col. 2, compared with Joh. Munst., 
Tract., fol. 198. 


SEVERE INQUISITION, INSTITUTED BY THE SPAN- 
IARDS, AGAINST THE BELIEVERS AND ALL 
WHO WERE OPPOSED TO THE ROMAN 
CHURCH, A. D. 1492 

This century, it appears, could not close without 
a new inquisition, which the Spaniards invented, as 
had formerly been done by the Germans. It was 
first instituted against those of the Jewish, Mo- 
hammedan, and Saracenic profession, forasmuch 
as some of them, either through fear of persecu- 
tion, or for some other reason, had accepted the 
Roman Catholic faith with the mouth, but whose 
sincerity was doubted. But subsequently it extend- 
ed to all who did not perfectly observe the Rom- 
ish commands; among whom the oft-mentioned 
Waldenses and Albigenses were none of the least, 
since they not only held the Romish belief in small 
esteem, but were also directly opposed to it in 


nearly every point, except the twelve general 
articles. 

(< Concerning this, there is the following account : 
"Thus their (the Spaniards') first decree was, in 
regard to the inquisition, to proceed only against 
the Jews, Saracens, and Mohammedans ; but sub- 
sequently much greater power was given to the in- 
quisitors, to try and punish all who did not observe, 
in every particular, the ordinances of the Roman 
church, and the Catholic faith. Pope Sixtus IV 
confirmed this royal scheme. See the account in 
the Chron. van den Ond., p. 900, col. 1. 

TOUCHING THE INQUISITION ITSELF THE 

NATURE OF THE SAME 

The same writer then relates what the inquisi- 
tion at this time was, and the manner in which it 
was instituted and executed ; concerning which we 
will give, not the exact words, as they are rather 
badly arranged, but only the sense, as nearly as we 
can possibly express it. He commences thus : "In 
order to relate briefly, what the inquisition is, the 
reader must know, that it is an investigation and 
examination of the faith, conducted by certain per- 
sons appointed thereto (called inquisitors or fa- 
thers of the Holy Office), with such means as they 
please, and upon whomsoever they will, but par- 
ticularly upon such persons as are denounced to 
them, or are suspected of erring in any article 
from the Roman church, or of holding any other 
belief. Those, then, whom they condemn as erring 
in this manner, are punished on body and property, 
according as the fathers of the Holy Office judge 
the points of their error of greater or lesser im- 
portance." Concerning this, read George Nigrinus; 
also, Peter Bor, in the Oorsprong van de Neder- 
landtsche Beroerten, compared with the author 
mentioned last, same page, col. 2. 

CONCERNING THE PLACES IN WHICH THOSE WHO 
FELL UNDER THE POWER OF THE INQUI- 
SITION WERE IMPRISONED 

As regards the place where each was separately 
confined and the narrowness of the same, it was as 
follows: If it is below, it is wet, damp, and filthy, 
so that it were better to call it a grave, than a jail 
or a prison. If above, it is warm in summer, yea, 
hot as an oven. When there are many prisoners, 
generally two or three are shut up together in each 
hovel or hole, who, when they lie down to rest, 
have not as much room left, as to once stir, save 
perhaps the space of a foot, where stands a vessel 
for their necessities and a pitcher with water, to 
quench their thirst. Sitting and lying thus day and 
night in darkness, these miserable beings emaciate 
and pine away by hunger and grief, to such a de- 
gree, that scarcely the skin remains over their 
bones ; besides that they are so severely tortured, 
racked and drawn with various cruel instruments, 
that their limbs are drawn from their joints. Same 
page. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


351 


HOW THE INQUISITORS DELIVERED THE SO-CALLED 
HERETICS TO THE SECULAR JUDGES 

Having condemned these people as heretics, 
after they had suffered a long season of misery, the 
inquisitors make a show of mercy, and deliver them 
to the magistrates, with these words: "Whereas 
the Lords of this holy Tribunal (the inquisitors), 
have exerted all proper diligence, to bring back this 
seduced person into the bosom of the Roman 
church, and have nevertheless accomplished noth- 
ing, he constantly remaining obstinate in his opin- 
ion, we hereby deliver him into the hands of the 
secular judge, to be punished according to the ex- 
tent and import of the Roman laws. Still, we sin- 
cerely pray, that, if he show any sign of confes- 
sion and repentance, he be treated with all clem- 
ency and mercy." 

HOW THOSE WERE DELIVERED WHO SEEMINGLY 
HAD RETURNED TO THE ROMAN CHURCH 

But when the inquisitors have condemned any 
one, on account of so-called heresy, to the fire, 
who, from fear, or for some other reason, returns 
to the Roman belief, they deliver him to the secu- 
lar judges with these words : "Whereas the holy 
Tribunal of the Inquisition cannot believe, that 
this man's conversion is sincere, and fears to ad- 
mit a wolf in sheep's clothing (notwithstanding his 
supposed conversion), we deliver him to the secu- 
lar judges, earnestly entreating them, to deal in all 
mercy with this (accused) one, without breaking 
a limb or bone, or shedding a drop of his blood."* 
Compare with the sense of these words the above- 
mentioned chronicle, page 900, col. 2, and page 
901, col. 1 ; also Hist. Georg., lib. 6, Peter Bor, lib. 
3. Oorsprong, fol. 9-12. Toneel Nicol., fol. 87. 
Guil. Merula, fol. 947. Eman. Met., fol. 40. 
Retuald. Gonsalv. in Tract, on the holy Spanish 
Inquisition, throughout. Hist. Wenc., fol. 187. 
Chron. Ph., Mel., lib. 5, Hist. Alons, de Ulb., lib. 2. 

Touching the persecution which resulted to the 
believers upon this new charge of the inquisition, 
we have not been able to learn the particulars re- 
lating to it. Doubtless not a few perished by those 
means ; since it is certain, that no one that had a 
good conscience, and was accused of heresy, could 
escape with his life. The contents of the above 
record inform us, that many had to suffer on this 
account, whose names, however, we have not 
learned. We commend them to God, who will 
judge their cause hereafter. His mercy be gracious 
to us and to them all. 

Remark. — From the time of Peter Waldo, about 
A. D. 1170, we have throughout followed, in the 
account of the martyrs, mostly the line of the Wal- 
denses proper, without digressing materially to 
other sects, though some of them very closely ap- 

* They desire, that not a limb or bone be broken, nor a drop 
of blood be shed, of the accused. Yea, command that he be dealt 
with in all mercy ; who themselves did not hesitate to condemn him 
to the fire. O most unholy wiles of the so-called "holy" tribunal of 
the inquisition ! 


proximated to the belief of the Waldenses. Hence 
it has come, that the number of those whom we 
have noticed as true martyrs, is not as large, as it 
might have been, if we had not purposed to follow 
the unmixed, pure line of the Waldenses. How- 
ever, in notes, we have placed some who ap- 
proached this belief very closely, and shall here 
add a few more. 

Note. — A. D. 1494. — In the fourth year of 
Henry VII, on the 28th of April, a very old, hon- 
orable widow of over eighty years, was appre- 
hended for maintaining eight of Wickiffe's articles 
(whose belief against infant baptism and the 
swearing of oaths, we have already shown), and 
as she would not apostatize, she was burned alive 
in Smithfield, at London. She said that God and 
His angels loved her so, that she was not afraid 
of the fire. When she stood in the midst of the 
fire, she cried aloud : "Lord, receive my soul into 
Thy holy hands;" whereupon she gave up the 
ghost. Compare the account in the second book of 
the Hist, of the Persecutions, fol. 599, col. 3, with 
Joh. Fox Angl., page 671. A. Bal., in Append. Al., 
page 627. 

A. D. 1498. — Jerome Savonarola now most 
zealously rejected, in his teaching the institutions 
of men, and maintained salvation in Christ alone. 
He defended the partaking of the holy Supper 
(called the Sacrament) under two forms; that is, 
with bread and wine ; in opposition to the practice 
of the papists, who gave the common people only 
a consecrated wafer. He also rejected letters of 
indulgence, saying, moreover, that the pope did 
not follow the doctrine and life of Christ, and that 
he was the antichrist, because he attributed to hu- 
man institutions more than to the merits of Christ. 
For all these reasons, he was strangled and then 
burnt to ashes, at Florence, by order of Pope 
Alexander VI. Compare Chron. van den Ond., 
page 910, col. 2, with Joh. Munst., fol. 201. Guil. 
Meru., fol., 950. Hist. Andr., fol. 36. Also, A. 
Mell., fol. 600, col. 3, to fol. 606 ; where it is stated 
that two others died with him for the same belief, 
and were likewise on the 23rd of May, in the 
marketplace at Florence, after preceding strangu- 
lation, burnt to ashes, and the ashes thrown into 
the river Arnus flowing by. 

A. D. 1499. — Paul Scriptoris taught at this time 
against transubstantiation (or the essential change) 
of the bread into the body of Christ ; as also, that 
all that is taught must be tried by the touchstone 
of the Word of God, adding that all who teach 
otherwise teach falsely ; hence he said there should 
speedily come a change in the (Roman) religion. 
For this reason he was driven into banishment by 
the Minorite monks; and, having lived full three 
years in exile, he died in the beginning of the year 
1504. Compare P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 912, 
with Joh. Munst. Tract., fol. 199. With this we 
conclude the fifteenth century, and, consequently, 
also the account of the martyrs who then suffered. 


352 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


CONCLUSION OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 

We long to take our leave from this century, 
since we cannot longer behold this misery. How- 
ever, we have only reached the summit of the 
mountain of martyrdom. In our ascent we have 
met scarcely anything but skulls, thigh-bones, and 
charred skeletons. In our descent deep pits, pools 
and blood-red rivers, into which the bodies of the 
saints are thrown, threaten us; to say nothing of 
the dark prisons, dungeons, torture-chambers, and 
countless instruments of torture. 

But the merciful Lord, who has led us by the 
hand, and thus far aided us, will lead and help us 
still further. His love shown to me in this matter, 
has been wonderful. For, when the bands of death 
were around me, by reason of a half year's severe 
sickness, which attacked me in the midst of this 
work, His gracious hand restored me, so that I have 
completed the work, thus far, though not without 
anxiety and labor. Hence, though still in the grasp 
of severe fevers, I wrote, for my own remem- 
brance, to the praise of my Creator, and to dedi- 
cate to my brethren this book, these words : 


My heart with anxious fear did beat, 
That I this work should not complete ; 
Since God had touched me with His hand, 
And sickness brought me near my end. 

Now thank I God with joyful song, 
Whose constant presence made me strong, 
Until I to the end have come, 
By ways oft sad and wearisome. 

My brethren, take this book, I pray, 
With ardent love, and favor, yea, 
Which for the truth of God doth burn ; 
For this my soul doth greatly yearn. 

It is time to proceed, in order that we may reach 
the end. We will conclude this first book, compris- 
ing fifteen centuries, the whole of which we had to 
bring up from the very depths ; and proceed to the 
second, where our labor will not be so great ; since 
the living memoirs of old writers and their accounts 
will serve us therein. Moreover, the entire work 
can be comprised in one great century; relying 
upon which, we take our leave, and turn to the 
following work, to which the Lord be pleased to 
grant us His grace, as much as is necessary. Amen. 


SECOND PART 

To my beloved Friends and Fellow Believers in Christ 

Jesus our Saviour 


Most Beloved: 

When, in former times, C. Vermander, one of 
our fellow believers, desirous of describing the Tro- 
jan war, followed the Greek poet Homer, called the 
Blind, relating in Dutch rhyme, the latter's Greek 
verses treating of this matter, he stopped when he 
had completed half, that is, the first twelve books of 
the Iliad,* writing these words: 

"When following the blind in Il'um's siege, 
I wearied when but half the way I'd reached." 

He became weary when he had traveled half the 
way, and certainly, he had good reasons for it ; for, 
who knows not, that by following a blind man, es- 
pecially on unknown and dangerous roads, one 
may easily be brought into error, yea, severe mis- 
fortunes? And what peaceful and loving person 
will delight in contemplating severe wars, and ter- 
rible storms and assaults, made upon a straitened 
and much distressed city, like Troy (called Ilium) 
was in Homer's time? Hence it was proper, and 
not less profitable for his soul, that he returned, 
for, as the proverb says, "It is better to turn back 
in the middle of the way, than to err still further." 

But we, much beloved, having come half the 
way, yea, through fifteen bloody centuries, became 
only the more desirous to proceed, so insatiable 
was our desire, from what we had already seen and 
heard. Yea, what is still more, though we ourselves 
suffered much heat and cold, hardship and illness ; 
yea, deadly sicknesses.f on the way, our desire was 
not quenched, but much rather spurred on and 
stirred up, to reach the end. For, truly, those 
whom we met here, were no Greek warriors, who 
had enlisted under the hero Agamemnon, or his 
general Hector. Nor were the storms and assaults 
which we beheld, made upon a city built with 
hands, much less upon the city of Ilium in Phrygia. 
Nor did the conquerors burn pitch-barrels, in token 
of victory. Neither did the heroes who had ac- 
quitted themselves well, and faithfully risked their 
lives, to obtain fading oak leaves, or laurel wreaths, 
as marks of honor. Or, if they had died, their 
graves were not ornamented with tombs, pyramids, 
or obelisks, which must eventually perish with the 
world. 


* Homer's account of the Trojan war, or the capture of the city 
of Ilium. 

t God visited me with a half year's, and almost fata!, sickness; 
during which time I nevertheless wrote much of the first book. 


Here things were quite different, beloved 
friends; yea, quite different. For heroes met us 
who served the King of kings and Lord of lords, 
Jesus Christ, who, though as a slain lamb, is truly 
the Prince of the kings of the earth.* 

The place which they stormed, was the city filled 
with all good things, or the new and heavenly Jeru- 
salem, whose foundations are all manner of 
precious stones, the gates of pearls, the streets of 
gold, like transparent glass. Her they took by 
force, to possess forever ; but the God-displeasing 
idolatrous city of Babel they destroyed, with spir- 
itual weapons, as much as lay in their power. 

The honor which they obtained for their victory, 
is an everlasting honor ; their joy a perpetual joy ; 
the triumphal crowns which were given them, are 
eternal and heavenly crowns. Here no earthly 
tombs, pyramids, or obelisks, need be mentioned, 
to honor their dead bodies ; since their souls were 
honored with God, and obtained rest under the 
altarf of God, the place of all the blessed mar- 
tyrs. 

In our thoughts we have wandered through the 
places where all this has happened, and with the 
eyes of faith have beheld these things. 

It is true, the sorrow which we, according to the 
flesh have met with, was almost insurmountable, 
seeing so many miserable, and not less God-fear- 
ing, persons laid down their lives for the truth 
confessed; these in the burning fire, those in the 
drowning water, others under the keen sword, 
some in the strangling rope, yea, in the most de- 
structive teeth of wild beasts; not to mention 
countless other means by which they miserably 
perished. 

But, on the other hand, the joy which we have 
seen with our spiritual eyes, and heard with the 
ears of the heart cannot be told, yea, can be de- 
scribed by no language. For, some embraced death, 
singing and praising God, and what is still more, 
who can comprehend this? he who was himself 
subjected to the death by fire, laid his hand upon 
the heads of his half-burnt fellow brethren, en- 
couraging them, and strengthening them in the 
faith. Another, who had tasted the pain of the 
fire, and had been drawn out of it, threw herself 

* Rev. 1 :5. 

t I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the 
word of God, and for the testimony which they held. Rev. 9 :9. 


354 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


upon one of the dreadfully charred bodies, in 
order to finish the conflict once begun, and also to 
obtain the crown of martyrdom.* 

This we relate over and above what we have 
noticed in the first book, although the persons are 
also there spoken of. We could adduce many such 
and similar examples, were they not sufficiently 
known, yea, as clear as the sun. 

We therefore proceed to the second Book, and 
will commence with the beginning of the sixteenth 
century, where we, as previously, will treat first of 
Holy Baptism, etc., and then of the Holy Martyrs 
who suffered in those times. 

However, our labor will be greatly lessened 
here (like one who, panting and perspiring, has 
climbed a steep mountain, and then leisurely de- 

* This is adduced, from Thuanus and Cesar Heisterb., by 
D. B. Lydius, speaking of the Waldensian martyr Arnold, whom we 
have noticed for the year 1163, and some of his fellow martyrs. He 
says : "This Arnold was burnt, together with nine of his disciples, 
among whom were two women, on the fifth of August, at the Jew- 
ish cemetery, at Cologne. Before his death (or before he was dead), 
he laid his hand upon the heads of his then half-burnt fellow breth- 
ren, saying: 'Adhere steadfastly to your faith; this day you shall 
be with the holy martyr, Laurence.' " 

One of the women, he writes, who from mercy, had been drawn 
out of the fire, with the promise that she should be married, or, if 
she were inclined this way, placed in a convent, asked where Ar- 
nold lay, who had been burnt, with his fellow believers, as a heretic. 
And when his body, which by this time was mostly burnt, was 
pointed out to her, she escaped the hands of those who led her, and 
threw herself upon Arnold's body, in order thus also to obtain the 
crown of martyrdom. — D. Bal. Lyd. Tract. Where the church was 
etc., page 59, col. 1, from Thuan., lib. 6, Hist. Also, Cesar Heisterb. 
dist. 5, cap. 19. 


scends, taking his ease), since, as far as the mar- 
tyrs are concerned, the previous accounts and 
printed copies will serve our purpose; in which 
we do not propose to make any essential change, 
for we do not wish to diminish the good work of 
our dear fellow brethren who, in this matter, have 
acted in a holy manner before the Lord, except 
where it may be necessary because of some account 
which we have added thereto. 

At the same time we hope to enrich these ac- 
counts with various pious witnesses of Jesus, from 
faithful memoirs and written records, which were 
never before made public; as also their examina- 
tions, death sentences, letters, and other things 
connected with this matter ; which we have obtained 
for this purpose from the hands of magistrates, 
criminal authorities, criminal clerks and other 
sources, at no small trouble and expense. 

This, then, shall be the order of the following 
work, which we wish may be acceptable to God, 
edifying to our neighbor and conducive to the 
profit and salvation of our own soul through Jesus 
Christ, our only and eternal Saviour, praised and 
blessed forever. Amen. " 

Yours, most affectionately in the Lord, 

Thielem J. van Braght. 
Dort, A. D. 1659. 


PREFACE TO SECOND PART 


Christian Reader: 

In this our address we shall present to you noth- 
ing new or uncommon, but that which in former 
times a certain lover of the holy and blessed mar- 
tyrs communicated to his contemporaries, for gen- 
eral edification, concerning the faith and steadfast 
death of many of them ; except a few passages in 
the beginning, and also a little further on (which 
do not properly belong here, and to which we have 
affixed certain marks to prevent mistakes.) These 
we have omitted here, and added, in bracketsf], 
something of our own, concerning which we stand 
ready to give an answer if required. 

Having concluded a certain censure concerning 
those of Horn, the above writer speaks thus of the 
immovable confidence of the pious confessors of 
Jesus Christ: 

"We are fully confident that all these witnesses 
were unanimous in regard to the essential articles 
of faith; they all believed in the one eternal, true 
God, the Father, and in His only Son, Jesus Christ, 
our Lord and Saviour. They all had respect to the 
sacrifice of the unspotted Lamb, in whom the Fa- 
ther had placed the reconciliation of our sins. 
They committed, yea, by the covenant of baptism, 
obligated themselves to serve this Lord, whom the 
Father had ordained as their teacher and lawgiver. 
They waited for the blessed resurrection and glori- 
ous recompense promised to all those who, through 
the grace of the Spirit, in the race of the Christian 
vocation, earnestly and steadfastly run for the 
prize set before them. They certainly, which is 
the most important, showed by their deeds, that 
they had not only a lip faith, and literal knowledge, 
which is found only in the brains of men, but an 
effectual and true faith, which, dwelling also in the 
heart and mind, is inspired by love, and through 
which they, according to the example of the saints, 
conquered all things." 

Proceeding to the sufferings of the martyrs, he 
says: 

"Contemplate the suffering which these pious 
martyrs endured, and how wonderfully God 
wrought with them ; how manfully, constantly and 
patiently they fought, through the effective and 
ardent love of God, confirming the truth of what is 
said in Cant. 8:6, namely, that 'Love is strong as 
death, and jealousy cruel as the grave.' For, here 
you see as in a mirror, that neither conjugal long- 
ing and love, nor parental affection and solicitude, 
nor the desirable company of near and confiding 
friends, nor anything which God has put into His 
creatures, for the delight of man, could move or 
restrain these heroes; but that they, contemning 
all this, and separating from wife, children, rela- 


tives and friends, house and property, they gave 
themselves up to severe bonds and imprisonment, 
to every adversity and hardship, to cruel tortures 
and martyrdom, undaunted by the threats of the 
most awful death on the one hand, and unmoved 
by the many fair promises, to forsake the whole- 
some truth, the love of God, and the blessed hope 
on the other; so that they could freely say with 
the holy apostle Paul : 'Who shall separate us from 
the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, 
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, 
or sword?' Romans 8:35. But they found and 
showed it to be true that according to the testimony 
of the apostle, neither death, nor life, nor things 
present, nor things to come, shall be able to sep- 
arate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus. Verses 38 and 39. Through this love they 
overcame all things, and performed glorious deeds 
beyond the power of man. Weak women exhibited 
more than manly strength. Maidens and young 
men in the bloom of youth were enabled, by the 
help of God, to despise the alluring world, with 
all her fair and great promises ; and these young 
and tender branches, by faith and patience, con- 
quered the mighty of this world ; the simple and 
unlearned confounded the sage doctors; so that 
these, silenced frequently through the truth, dis- 
puted with threats of fire and sword, and, though 
in vain, defended themselves thereby ; manifesting 
in this manner their impotence and malice. Christ 
strikingly fulfilled in them the promise made to His 
disciples, Matt. 10:19, namely, that He would give 
unto them what they should speak in that hour 
when they should be brought before kings and gov- 
ernors. In sight of scaffolds and wheels, of fire 
and sword, they fearlessly confessed the truth, so 
that the judges and inquisitors were sometimes 
astonished, sometimes confounded, and sometimes 
enraged and startled. Of this boldness, the mar- 
tyrs themselves boasted in their letters, thanking 
God, for, knowing their own weakness, they ex- 
perienced the strength of God in the cross, so that 
they could take upon themselves with a composed 
yea, with a joyful mind, that from which human 
nature beyond measure seemed to recoil and flee. 
Yea, they were filled with such an exuberant and 
great joy, begotten in them through the unhindered 
contemplation of the heavenly glory in faith and 
hope, that they would have preferred no royal ban- 
quet to this parting feast. 

They were endowed with such strength that even 
cruel and inhuman torture could not extort from 
them the names of their fellow brethren, so that, 
filled with divine and brotherly love, they sacrificed 
their bodies for their fellow believers. The brother- 


356 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


hood in general was thereby so enkindled with zeal 
and love, that each, despising the earthly and re- 
garding the heavenly, prepared his heart for the 
sufferings to which his brethren were subjected, 
and by which he himself was daily threatened. They 
shunned no danger, in the way of sheltering their 
fellow believers, visiting them in prison, calling 
boldly to them in the place of execution, and com- 
forting and strengthening them with words of 
Scripture. The tyrants found themselves deceived 
in their design ; they thought they could cause these 
Christians to apostatize ; they put them into assur- 
ance of their salvation ; they supposed they could 
destroy and extirpate those who opposed them, 
but, on the contrary, they raised up more oppo- 
nents ; for many of the spectators, at the said spec- 
tacle of killing people, who were harmless and of 
good name and report, yea, who would rather die 
than do ought by which they supposed to offend 
God, were thereby brought to reflection, and thus 
to investigation, and ultimately to conversion. 

Besides these noble examples of love, patience 
and constancy, we find in their writings many de- 
vout lessons, edifying teachings and comforting 
admonitions, written in dark prisons, hurried and 
negligently indeed, and on account of inconveni- 
ence and with poor materials, but sealed with the 
most glorious mark, their own blood. Then the 
words have power and weight, when their truth is 
confirmed and attested by the deed. Seneca, in his 
epistles, censures philosophizing with words, and 
not with life, as something shameful. Here you 
find words which devotion has penned, which the 
pressure of suffering has extorted from the in- 
most of the heart; words which have not been 
warped or bent by worldly considerations or car- 
nal passions; but which were sincerely and un- 
feignedly spoken to their friends, at the end of 
life, as a last will, and confirmed with death. 
Husbands in tribulation consoled their wives, ad- 
monished them to godliness, and incited them to 
steadfastness. Parents gave useful instructions to 
their children, presented to them the changeable- 
ness, vanity and perishableness of visible things ; 
they taught, counseled and commanded them to 
forsake the world and the lusts thereof, and to 
cleave to and alone serve God, the supreme and 
only good. You perceive here how they were some- 
times assaulted with many temptations and entice- 
ments, not only of wicked men, but of the devil ; 
how the enemy of souls, bringing them upon the 
pinnacle of the temple, as it were, showed them the 
splendor and glory of this world, in order to entice 
them to worship this ; Matt. 4 :5, 8. How he some- 
times, with the terror of impending suffering, as- 
sailed the soul with tearfulness, and how, by false 
imaginations, he endeavored to bring the minds to 
apostasy, despondency and despair; which these 
pious heroes, arming themselves with watching and 
constant prayer to God, valiantly overcame, fight- 
ing manfully through all temptations, promises 
and threats, even unto death, and gaining the vic- 
tory. 


Now, even as the reading of, and meditating 
upon, the pious fathers, is very profitable in every 
case, so these persons stand as instructive and con- 
soling examples, for all who are visited with 
crosses and temptations. Here manifest themselves 
shining beacons of living faith, of sure hope, and 
ardent love. Here is seen the positiveness of God's 
promises, in fearless and joyful hearts, in the midst 
of suffering. Matt. 10:19. Here is the steadfast- 
ness of the saints, whom Christ crowns with sal- 
vation. Matt. 24:13. It is true, by the worldly- 
minded they are accounted as filth and offscouring 
(I Cor. 4:13), and their actions stigmatized as 
sheer folly and madness ; but they comfort them- 
selves in God, and rely on His promises. They 
have learned that the cross must thus be taken up, 
if one would be worthy of Christ. Matt. 10:38. 
They know that they are strangers and pilgrims 
in this world, I Pet. 2 :11, and remember the words 
of their Master, who says: "If ye were of the 
world, the world would love his own ; but because 
ye are not of the world, therefore the world hat- 
eth you" (John 15:19). They are confident that 
if they lose their life here, they shall find it again 
hereafter. Matt. 10:39. They believe that we 
must confess the name of Christ, if we would 
have Him confess us before His heavenly Father. 
Matt. 10 :32. They know that their Lord and Mas- 
ter suffered Himself, leaving us an example that 
we should follow His steps ; who was thus minded, 
that when He was reviled, He reviled not again, 
and when He suffered, threatened not, but prayed 
for His enemies. I Peter 2:21, 23. They hold that 
if they would reign with Christ, they must here 
suffer with Him. II Tim. 2:12. They are mindfu! 
of the words of Christ, that the servant is not great- 
er than his master, Matt. 10:24, and that there- 
fore, as Christ suffered, they must arm themselves 
with the same mind. I Peter 4:1. They know them- 
selves to be defenseless sheep, a prey to the de- 
vouring wolves. But they do not fear them, who 
can kill only the body, but Him who holds body 
and soul in His hand. Matt. 10:28. They learned 
long ago that all that will live godly shall suffer 
persecution. II Tim. 3:12. Christ foretold them 
that they should be hated of all men for His name's 
sake, yea, should be delivered into tribulation, and 
be killed ; and what is still more, that those killing 
them should think that they do God service. Hence, 
they think it not strange when they are tried by 
suffering; but rejoice that they are partakers of 
the sufferings of Christ, knowing that, when His 
glory shall be revealed, they shall also rejoice with 
Him. I Peter 4:12, 13. They glory in tribulation 
(Rom. 5:3), believing that thereby their faith is 
tried and refined. I Pet. 1 :7. They experience that 
patient suffering begets a glad and constant hope, 
and that the cross, which to those who perish, is 
foolishness, is to them the power of God unto sal- 
vation (I Cor. 1 :18), and esteem it as the grace of 
God, when for conscience they suffer wrongfully 
I Pet. 2 :19. And though they be troubled, perse- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


357 


cuted and cast down here, yet they are not in de- 
spair, forsaken, or destroyed ; but with holy Paul, 
they always bear about in their bodies, the dying 
of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of the Lord 
Jesus might be made manifest in their bodies. II 
Cor. 4:8-11. They feel in the abounding of the 
sufferings of Christ, an abounding consolation 
through Christ. II Cor. 1 :5. They believe that the 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to 
be compared with the future glory. Rom. 8:18. 
Hence they arm themselves for tribulation and 
suffering, as true heroes of their captain, Jesus 
Christ. They have before them a great brother- 
hood, who finished their course in this way. Cain 
could not bear his brother's piety and favor with 
God, and slew him. Gen. 4:8. Violence and op- 
pression ruled the first world. Gen. 6:13. Pious 
Lot had to be the sport and lust of the Sodomites. 
Gon. 19. David had to flee before Saul. The 
prophet Isaiah lamented already in his time that 
he who departed from evil had to be everyone's 
prey and derision. Many holy prophets and men 
of God had to endure persecution and martyrdom 
from the wicked, as holy Zacharias, Amos, Micah, 
Jeremiah, Daniel, and the three young men, 
Eleazar, the mother with her seven sons, and oth- 
ers, who need not be mentioned, since the time and 
age of the New Testament, furnish abundant ma- 
terial in this respect. John, the forerunner of 
Jesus, had to offer his neck to the sword, in prison. 
Matt. 14:10. Our captain of the faith, Jesus 
Christ, had to enter into His glory through much 
derision, ignominy and suffering, and ultimately 
through the most shameful, death of the cross. His 
apostles and disciples, as the chronicles state, fol- 
lowed their Master. Peter and Paul were put to 
death by Emperor Nero. James, the brother of 
John, was killed with the sword by Herod. Acts 
12 :2. Matthew was nailed to the earth, in India. 
Bartholomew was flayed. Andrew was crucified. 
Thomas was thrust through with darts. Philip was 
nailed to a cross, and then stoned to death. Simon 
Zelotes was scourged and crucified. James, the son 
of Alpheus, was cast down from the temple, at 
Jerusalem, and then beaten to death with sticks. 
Judas Thaddeus was killed, in Persia, by wicked 
heathen priests. Matthias also obtained the mar- 
tyr's crown. Mark, the evangelist, was dragged 
about by a cord around his neck, at Alexandria, till 
he died. John, the apostle, banished in the island 
of Patmos, adorned the Gospel with suffering [as 
is circumstantially recorded in the first book, first 
century, in the account of the martyrs]. This was 
the way of the holy prophets. This is the path 
which our Saviour and His messengers, and after- 
wards many disciples, trod. Polycarp, the disciple 
of John, was burnt alive at Smyrna. Ignatius, 
bishop of Antioch, was torn by wild beasts [as 
is stated in the second century.] Even the Roman 
bishops, in the first three hundred years, were 
mostly all martyred, and subjected, with the com- 
mon Christians, to persecution by the heathen Em- 


perors [these, however, we commit to God]. Under 
the Emperor Diocletian, there was such an awful 
persecution that it seemed as though the Christian 
name would be utterly extirpated ; so that the first 
churches at the time of Emperor Constantine were 
so accustomed to persecution, that they deliberately 
prepared themselves for suffering. 

Since, then, the God-fearing who are visited with 
the cross, have so many holy martyrs as predeces- 
sors; and since the cross is foretold them; yea, 
since such glorious promises are given to those who 
suffer, it is a little thing for them that they, who 
gladly acknowledge themselves soldiers under the 
bloody banner of Christ, are therefore aspersed 
and ridiculed as fools. The Christian reader may 
here perceive and firmly conclude that the cross is 
also the ensign of those who serve and follow Jesus 
Christ, the Captain of the faith ; and that, on the 
contrary, those who afflict others, with crosses and 
sufferings, do not belong to this Captain, but are un- 
der another leader. For the true Christians have 
never persecuted the innocent, but were always 
persecuted themselves ; and in the primitive church, 
even in the time of Constantine, when the bishops 
began to rise a little higher in the world, and were 
protected by the Emperor, it was considered an 
abomination to persecute any one ; they, however, 
suffered persecution themselves. It was then 
deemed such a detestable thing, to put to death or 
persecute any one for heresy, that Bishop Ithacius 
was excommunicated and separated from the 
church, because he, through the tyrant Maximus, 
had brought about the death of Priscilian, the her- 
etic ; as the Roman cardinal, Csesar Baronius, very 
plainly describes in his church history, for the 
year 385. 

He also states further, that it is utterly incom- 
patible with the meekness of a pastor. Again, that 
none of the holy fathers even commended it, that 
an ecclesiastic should seek to bring a heretic to his 
death. So that, according to him, St. Martin would 
have no fellowship with the aforesaid Ithacius or 
his adherents, because their hands were stained 
with the blood of Priscilian. And though, induced 
by the threats of the tyrant Maximus, St. Martin 
feigned to have fellowship for an hour with Ith- 
acius, he nevertheless subsequently manifested 
great regret for it, since he felt that in consequence 
of his dissimulation, the gift of healing was partly 
taken from him. 

From this it is clearly manifest, how falsely they 
boast of being the successors of Christ and His 
apostles, and of the primitive church, who have so 
abominably stained their hands with the blood of 
innocent people, people who only confessed and 
practiced the Gospel according to the full dictates 
of their conscience ; yea, concerning whom the ty- 
rants themselves frequently testified, that their life 
was pious; that they would not willingly lie, or 
speak against their conscience ; and that they were 
not apprehended on account of any misdeeds, but 
only because they did not obey the mother, the holy 


358 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


church, and the decree of the Emperor. It is so 
far from such being the true and apostolical 
church, that there is no surer mark of the false 
and anti Christian church, than the killing of here- 
tics, or rather, so-called heretics; for however 
abominable heresy may be, this is the most abomi- 
nable of all. For what indeed is more opposed to 
the peaceable, meek, merciful, forgiving, and re- 
vengeless character of Christ, than to persecute 
any one for his faith? What can we conceive of 
that militates more against the holy laws and com- 
mandments of Christ, which chiefly consist in love, 
peace, humility, meekness, lowliness, mercy, for- 
giveness, compassion, etc. If Christians are called 
(as they do) to requite hatred with love, evil with 
good, cursing with blessing; yea, must they, ac- 
cording to the doctrine of Christ, pray for them 
who oppress and persecute them ; how, then, is it 
possible that they can remain Christians and them- 
selves oppress and persecute others who have never 
laid a straw in their way ? Can we believe, that any 
trace, yea, any true knowledge of the spirit and 
word of Christ remains where there is such a di- 
rect antichristian disposition and action? If, ac- 
cording to Christ, false prophets are to be known 
and judged from their fruits (Matt. 7:16), there 
can be nothing by which they may, more readily, 
be distinguished, than from their persecuting oth- 
ers; for they are witnesses unto themselves, as 
Christ said to the Pharisees, that they are the chil- 
dren of them who killed the true prophets, and 
who fill up the measure of their fathers. Our 
Saviour compares them to serpents and a genera- 
tion of vipers, who cannot escape the damnation 
of hell. Matt. 23 -.31-33. The disciples of Christ, 
who still entertained the hope of the establishing 
of an external and carnal Israel, asked their Lord, 
whether they should, according to the example of 
Elias, command fire to come down from heaven, 
upon those who did not receive Him. Whereupon 
Christ earnestly rebuked them, saying : "Ye know 
not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son 
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to 
save them." Luke 9:54-56. But these heretic- 
killers, who boast of being the vice-regents and fol- 
lowers of Christ, yea, doctors of divinity, dare, not 
only without asking Christ, but even against His 
express prohibition and example, whet the sword, 
and stir up the fire, not to murder those who refuse 
to receive Christ, but those who are ready to ad- 
here to and follow Him even unto death. By this 
they clearly indicate, first, that they are governed 
and impelled by the spirit not of Christ, but of the 
devil (who was a murderer from the beginning, 
John 8 :44) ; and, secondly, that they do not come 
like Christ and His followers, to save men's souls, 
but to destroy them; since they kill not only the 
bodies of the innocent, thus dishonoring the im- 
age which is created after God (Gen. 5:1), and 
making themselves guilty of the mortal sin of 
bloodshedding (Gen. 9:6) but, O awful deed! 
they purposely and as much as lies in their power, 


also endeavor to kill their souls, whom, being con- 
sidered by them in a state of damnation, they sud- 
denly cut off from the time of repentance. Matt. 
26 :52. They would presumptuously teach Christ, 
the perfect wisdom; for He deemed it well, and 
commanded His disciples, to let the tares grow 
until the harvest, lest they should root up the 
wheat with the tares, but these teach and do the 
opposite. Weeding contrary to the command of 
Christ, they root up not only the tares, but, passing 
by bad, unchaste, extravagant, pompous, avari- 
cious, mendacious, deceitful, envious, hateful, and 
vindictive men, they also, from the field of the 
world, root out the purest grain. 

They usurp the office of the Most High, and 
would command and compel the souls who are not 
under them, but under the sceptre of Jesus Christ 
(Matt. 10:28) ; yea, they set themselves not only 
beside, but above the Divine Majesty, demanding 
that men should obey them rather than God. God 
has commanded that we should serve Him with all 
our hearts (Deut. 6:5), but these prohibit men 
from serving God in this manner, and constrain 
them contrary to the convictions of their con- 
sciences to follow their laws and institutions. Matt. 
21 -.37. Christ constrained the people to conversion, 
by words of admonition, persuasion and reproof, 
and of those who were offended at His doctrine, He 
only said : "Let them alone : they be blind leaders." 
Matt. 15 :14. But these compel with fire and sword, 
so that they deliver to the executioner those who 
embrace the doctrine of Christ according to all their 
ability, and do not feel themselves at liberty to 
follow these blind leaders; bringing them into a 
strait, where they cannot without danger, escape 
either to the right or to the left ; for, if they obey 
these, they fall into the hands of God ; and if they 
adhere to God, they cannot escape the cruelty of 
these men. 

Now, in order to give a semblance and gloss to 
their unchristian and ungodly punishments of her- 
etics, they befoul these pious people with the stain 
of disobedience, and, washing their hands, as it 
were, from innocent blood, lay the guilt upon the 
edicts, which, however, were devised, and are 
daily executed, through their bloody advice and 
instigation. But, pray, who has given them power 
to make edicts against souls and consciences, to 
reign thereby in the kingdom of Christ, in which 
they themselves can be but subjects and servants ? 
Will this excuse them? By no means. The Jews 
who sought to bring the innocent Jesus to death, 
also said like these : "We have a law, and by our 
law he ought to die." John 19:7. They know, or 
ought to know, that at the tribunal of Christ judg- 
ment will be rendered, not according to human 
edicts, but according to the divine word : "The word 
that I have spoken," said the Lord, "the same shall 
judge him in the last day," (John 12:48), and, 
therefore, everyone is necessarily bound more to 
the law of Christ, than to their laws and edicts; 
yea, an account will have to be given of these edicts! 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


359 


at that tribunal, and that whereby they sentenced 
the innocent wrongfully to death, will then justly 
aggravate their own sentence. What will they offer 
as an excuse, when an account will be demanded 
of them, why they exercised such bloodthirsty tyr- 
anny over souls? why they wrested the sceptre 
out of the hand of Christ, and usurped His seat ? 
why they made themselves masters in that king- 
dom in which they, as servants, must themselves 
give an account of their actions ? why they, as evil 
servants, treated and beat their fellow servants so 
cruelly; though He (Christ) had warned and 
threatened, to cut such asunder, and to appoint 
them their portion with the hypocrites, where there 
is weeping and gnashing of teeth (Matt. 24:45, 
51) ? why they did not consider, that those shall 
have judgment without mercy, who have showed 
no mercy (Jas. 2:13) ? What terror, what anxious 
remorse and fleeing will it cause when, to convict 
them of their wickedness, there shall come forth 
those whom they fettered, chained, beat, killed and 
martyred, whom they then accounted fools and 
madmen, and whom they now behold in such great 
glory and esteem with God. 

In that day, when all hidden things must come 
to light, such empty and artificial excuses will not 
avail. Hence, now is the time to consider how un- 
christian it is, to persecute Christians ; how much 
deserving of death it is, to shed innocent blood ; 
how culpable it is, to dishonor the image of God ; 
how perverse and vain it is, to fight against spirit- 
ual truth with carnal weapons ; how unnatural and 
unreasonable it is, to do unto another that which 
we would not have done to ourselves, and who of 
all would like to be forced in the convictions of his 
conscience. How presumptuous it is, to usurp the 
seat of God, and to wish to rule over the conscience, 
whereas Christ commanded, to render unto Caesar 
the things which are Caesar's and unto God the 
things that are God's. Matt. 22:21. They should 
bear in mind, that Christ prayed for His persecu- 
tors, and learn from it, how unbecoming it is, that 
those who would be Christians, persecute others, 
who pray for them. Luke 23:34; I Pet. 2:19. 
They should contemplate, how great an evil it is, 
to compel any one's conscience by the terrors of 
fire, rope, and sword, when Paul so strictly for- 
bids to wound the weak conscience of the breth- 
ren. Rom. 14:15. They should remember, that, 
since the holy apostle commands no greater pun- 
ishment for heretics, than to shun them, they also 
need, yea may, use no greater. Tit. 3:10. Surely, 
if they would well examine themselves, they would 
not so readily proceed to condemn, but would 
suffer themselves to be restrained, since Christ de- 
clares that with what measure we mete, it shall be 
measured to us again. Matt. 7:2. They would 
fear, if they knew themselves aright, that in con- 
demning another they might condemn themselves ; 
since it might easily be the case, that before God 
the judge was as culpable as the one judged. 
They further produce, in defense of, or, rather 


as an excuse for, the punishments of heretics, these 
reasons: 1. Thereby to bring and compel them to 
conversion. 2. That their heresy might not prop- 
agate itself, and pollute others. 3. To prevent re- 
bellion. As regards the first, it is the duty of every 
Christian, to promote the salvation of his neigh- 
bor as much as is possible. But how is this to be 
done ? by external compulsion with fire and sword ? 
Impossible ; this touches and affects the body, but 
not the conscience, which must not be compelled, 
but led and instructed. The Word of God is the 
sword with which all error and heresy must be cut 
down. If the supposed error cannot be conquered 
with the power of truth, swords will be dull before 
it. And though a man, through dread of suffering, 
renounce his belief with the mouth, yet will he not 
do it with the heart ; and thus, instead of converted 
Christians, dissembling hypocrites are made. But 
if a man remain steadfast, and is put to death, how 
can this tend to his conversion, since every means 
of conversion is taken away? For, one of two 
things is certain: if he is a damnable heretic, he 
is cast down into hell; but if he is not, a saved 
Christian is put to death; choose whichever you 
please and an abominable crime is committed. 
What is it then, that urges them thus to promote 
any one's conversion? what binds them to this? 
who enjoins it upon them? who advises them to 
it ? yea, who gives them permission to do it ? and 
which of the apostles has set such an example? 
Truly, such reasons are but fig leaves and covers 
with which they seek to hide their shame and wick- 
edness. They pretend that they aim at the conver- 
sion of men, but in fact seek to secure their own 
pleasure, honor and lust, in order thus to exercise 
undisputed despotism in the kingdom of God. So 
far is this from being the case, that any one's 
conversion is promoted thereby, that on the con- 
trary, all impartial persons conceive an aversion 
against them; so that even the good, (if any good 
remains, or can be found, in the persecutors), is 
rendered suspicious ; yea, entirely destroyed, inas- 
much as their words, however entreating and flat- 
tering they may be, can obtain no entrance or cred- 
it, neither do they deserve it. For, who would ex- 
pect to learn anything godly or Christian from 
those who are pregnant with murder, and whose 
hands are stained with innocent blood? "Do men 
gather grapes of thorns?" Matt. 7:16. 

As to the second, it is so far from the fact that 
supposed heresy should be checked by tyranny, 
that it is almost always spread by it ; for, when 
hands are laid on people whose life is blameless 
and pious, and they are imprisoned, tortured and 
subjected to a painful death, only for the name of 
Christ, and because they, as they openly confess, 
dare consent to nothing contrary to their con- 
science, — this produces reflection and attention in 
all impartial minds, who, on investigating the mat- 
ter, discover the innocence of the persons accused 
and persecuted, and thus conceive an aversion to 
such degenerate Christians, who persecute others, 


360 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and associate themselves with those who so val- 
iantly bear the cross of Christ, as examples abun- 
dantly testify; which verifies what an ancient fa- 
ther has said. The blood of the martyrs is the seed 
of the church. When the tyranny of popery was 
at its height, apostasy from it was greatest, for 
martyrdoms are effectual sermons, which touch 
the heart, and awaken the slumbering eyes ; nor is 
this strange, for he that has a little knowledge of 
the Christian religion, and is not utterly blinded 
by malignant partiality comes easily to believe that 
the persecutors must be heretics themselves, since 
Christ and His disciples never persecuted any one, 
but always suffered persecution themselves. They 
easily perceive, that these cruel men are not inno- 
cent, meek and defenseless sheep, to which Christ 
compares His followers, but much rather ravening 
wolves, which have crept into the fold of Christ, 
and devour the sheep. John 10:1. The plain and 
pure truth, confirmed by an innocent life, is the 
means to overcome error and falsehood ; they who 
depart from this to carnal weapons, betray them- 
selves, and disclose their injustice and impotence ; 
for, since they cannot prevail against the truth, they 
endeavor, by exterminating and crushing the per- 
sons, also to exterminate and crush the truth. 
From all this it appears, how empty an excuse they 
seize to defend their tyranny, and what frail 
weapons they employ, to uphold the delusion. But 
it is a purely fictitious excuse, with which to 
disguise their purpose, and to attire in a strange 
dress the ugliness which cruelty presents to every 
eye, and, through deception, to make it pleasing 
to one another. They pretend to be zealous for the 
salvation of the people, but, in fact, endeavor to 
propagate their own kingdom of lies ; and if aught 
rises in opposition to it, they seek to subdue it with 
the arm of flesh. The Pharisees, in the time of 
Christ, objected to Christ for the same reason, 
namely, that He was perverting the people. Luke 
23 :2. Their self-love and thirst for political power 
begat in them a bitter hatred and envy against our 
Saviour, on account of which they sought to bring 
Him to death. This they cover; of this they are 
silent. They cry, as though they were filled with 
a godly zeal: "This fellow perverts the nation;" 
though they, as well as these sought to seduce the 
people from Christ, the truth, to their own lies. 

As regards the accusation of rebellion, this also 
is not an invention of yesterday or today. He 
(Christ), said the Pharisees, stirreth up the people 
with His doctrine ; whereas they stirred up the peo- 
ple against Christ, who preached nothing but peace, 
love, humility, meekness, and the like, and whose 
life and actions were nothing but an overflowing 
fountain of kindness, benevolence and mercy. Thus 
did they stain, without a shadow of evidence, with 
the slander of rebellion, people who lived in all 
simplicity and integrity, and made open confession, 
that they were bound by the law and example of 
Christ, to live without revenge, and exercise a for- 
giving spirit towards everyone, yea, to love those 


that hate them, and to do good to their enemies. 
He that examines the history of the Netherlands 
and Germany, for the last sixty years, will find 
that rebellion, contention, and dissension, yea, alien- 
ations and destruction of countries and cities, have 
been caused by persecution on account of religious 
differences; for religious zeal cannot be cut off 
with the sword, nor consumed by fire. On the con- 
trary, it is evident, and confirmed by present prac- 
tice, that many and various religious persuasions 
can live together peaceably and quietly, and that the 
cities and countries where liberty of conscience is 
maintained, have prospered, and experienced the 
special blessing of God. Hence, also, the H. M. 
Lords States of these countries, seeing the great 
mistakes of the King of Spain, have never been 
willing to follow in his steps, but expressly declare, 
as appears from the records of the Treaty of Peace 
at Cologne, page 38, "That religion does not con- 
cern men, but God, and that the king owed obedi- 
ence to it as well as the subject." They declare to 
have found by experience, that force and weapons 
are of little value for the spreading and preserva- 
tion of religion; and that, even as they would not 
have that violence should be done to their con- 
sciences, so it does not well accord with the law of 
God, for them to do violence to the consciences of 
others. Again on page 54, it is declared : "That the 
Christian religion is a great mystery, and that for 
the promotion of the same, God does not use wick- 
ed soldiers, nor bows or swords." Again on page 
57: "We have learned that the government of 
souls and consciences concerns God alone; and 
that He is the true avenger of violated or dishon- 
ored religion." And though some, forgetful of 
their own cross, or that of their ancestors, incited 
to a revival of the abolished slavery, yet their E. E. 
never lent a willing ear to it, nor suffered them- 
selves _ to be blind executors of such partial and 
pernicious counselors, who thereby sought to build 
and establish more their own kingdom, than the 
kingdom of Christ. But, through the goodness of 
God, we still have at the present day, authorities 
under whose protection we can lead a quiet and 
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, I Tim. 
2 :2 ; can meet and assemble without molestation ; 
preach and hear the Word of God ; use the sacra- 
ments as instituted by God, and openly practice 
our divine worship; for which kind privilege all 
subjects and Christian believers are under great 
obligations, to reverently show all gratitude to their 
authorities, high as well as low, to faithfully obey 
them, to honestly pay customs and taxes, and to 
pray earnestly and constantly to God, for the wel- 
fare of their persons and government, in order 
that this favor may descend from us to our children 
and posterity. We must also greatly thank the 
Lord for it, and magnify His name by a holy life, 
constantly seeking, more and more, to evince vir- 
tue from our faith, and to shine by good works in 
this benighted world. We must see well to it, that 
we do not neglect or abuse this time of grace, II 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


361 


Cor. 6:1 ; for if we employ it badly, and use lib- 
erty as an occasion to commit sin, it will undoubt- 
edly happen to us as it did to Israel, who, having 
waxed fat and strong, departed from God, and 
was therefore again cast into distress and misery, 
until necessity compelled them to seek God. Deut. 
32 :15. Oh, how many there are, it is to be feared, 
who with Demas have loved the world again! II 
Tim. 4 :10. How many there are, who, having for- 
saken their first zeal and love, have become cold 
and slothful in their devotions ! 

In former times, in the times of the cross, when 
men could assemble only under peril of their lives, 
our zeal drove us in the night and at unseasonable 
times, into nooks and corners, and into fields and 
woods. How precious was then one hour which 
could be employed in stirring up and establishing 
one another in godliness. How the souls then 
thirsted and hungered after divine food. How 
pleasantly then tasted the words of godliness. Men 
did not ask for ingenious or flowery sermons ; but 
hunger devoured all that was presented. Then soul 
treasure was diligently sought, since bodily posses- 
sions could give but little comfort. Then heavenly 
riches were sought for above all things ; for earthly 
possessions were altogether insecure. But how is 
it now ? Temporal avocations have the preference 
throughout ; the oxen must first be proved, and the 
field be inspected, before one can come to the 
heavenly marriage, Luke 14 :18, 19. Simplicity is 
changed into pomp and ostentation. Possessions 
have increased, but in the soul there is leanness. 
Clothes have become costly, but the inward orna- 
ment has perished. Love has waxed cold, and has 
diminished, but contentions have increased. Do 
you suppose that God will always behold this with 
the same longsuff ering ? Think ye, that He will 
never once use His uplifted rod ? He that did not 
spare Israel, when they departed from Him; He 
that did not pass David by, when he sinned through 
fleshly lust ; He who did not spare Solomon, when 
he turned his eyes to strange women, and fell into 
idolatry with them, shall He spare those who, 
through love of the world and the practice of sin, 
have so greatly departed from Him ? He often de- 
livered Israel from one tyrant to another, that they 
might learn to know Him, and reform. He chas- 
tised them as a father, that they might not serve 
Him with a divided heart, as in the time of Elijah, 
but that they might serve Him alone. I Kings 
18:21. He delivered Amaziah, the King of Judah, 
into the hands of his enemies, because he did not 
serve God with a perfect heart. II Chron. 25 :2. 
Now, examine your heart; whether it is not di- 
vided ; whether you do not seek to serve Christ and 
the world at the same time ; how feebly you hear 
and consider the Word of God, since your thoughts 
are entangled in earthly vanities ; how seldom and 
how slothfully the works of godliness are prac- 
ticed ; and how busy and zealous you are through- 
out in amassing money and property, and in feast- 
ing yourself on pleasure. It is true, you have cast 


away the dumb, wooden idols, but examine now, 
whether the idol of riches and avarice is not set 
up in your heart. Eph. 5 :5 ; I Tim. 6 :10. Plow 
through the inmost depths of your heart, and see 
whither most of your inclinations and desires tend ; 
whether, easily satisfied here, they penetrate the 
clouds, and have their conversation in heaven, or, 
whether digging with insatiable desire into the 
earth, you seek to increase your riches and to add 
house to house, and farm to farm ; whether Christ 
in heaven is your supreme treasure, or whether 
your treasure is here, against which Christ so 
earnestly warns His disciples. Matt. 6:19. If you 
would make a test of this, study attentively your 
intentions and thoughts in every occurrence ; con- 
sider once, how great a love you have for riches ; 
how much confidence you place in them ; how great- 
ly troubled you are with a heathenish solicitude for 
the future; how anxious and despondent you are 
when bad times and misfortunes threaten; and 
how securely you live when sailing before the 
wind ; how reluctant and miserable your love for 
your possessions renders you in the giving of alms ; 
how great contention and how many lawsuits you 
would rather engage in, than give up your right, 
and suffer damage; how soon joy and sleep for- 
sake you, when losses and misfortunes befall you ; 
how much time earthly contemplations detract 
from your proper devotions ; how feeble and spirit- 
less they render your prayers ; how deep the abun- 
dance of your treasures sinks you into sensuality ; 
how much you are pleased with yourself on this 
account, and exalt yourself above others; finally, 
how painfully you part from them, and how sadly 
you will bid them adieu on your deathbed. Let this 
serve as a test, I say, and examine yourself, and 
you will discover at the same time, what you love 
and serve most, and how much or little you have 
"crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof." Gal. 
5 :24. For, though outward persecutions now and 
then cease, yet every Christian is called to suf- 
ferings and conflicts ; each must take up his cross 
and follow Christ; each must live, not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit ; each must suffer in the 
flesh, that he may cease from sin. Matt. 10:38; 
Rom. 8:1 ; I Pet. 4:1. If you then find, that the 
time of freedom [from persecution] has given lib- 
erty and room to your lusts, persecute yourself, 
crucify and put yourself to death, and offer up 
soul and body to God. 

In times of persecution, words and colloquies 
consisted in edifying instructions, and awakenings 
to godliness, magnifying of the name of God, mu- 
tual consolations in suffering, exhortations and in- 
citations to constancy, and recommendations of 
eternal salvation. Examine once, whether at this 
time you have not lent your tongue to please friv- 
olous, worldly men with vain and useless talk; 
whether thereby you did not only not promote god- 
liness, but were also a hindrance and injury to it ; 
whether you did not defame your neighbor's 
good name and reputation; and whether your 


362 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tongue has not by lying and deceit ministered to 
avarice. In times of the cross, the time was spent in 
godly exercises, in consoling and edifying one an- 
other, in visiting those in prison, and in preparing 
for suffering by devout meditations. Consider once, 
on what you have bestowed the precious time ; how 
much of it has been squandered in voluptuous- 
ness and vanity; how much has been wasted 
in disputes and quarrels; how much has been 
lost by needless anxiety and labor ; and how little 
has remained for devotion. No doubt, you will 
find, that the absence of the chastening rod has 
rendered men impious and without reverence, and 
that "the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and 
the pride of life" have usurped the place of piety 
and humility. But the most dangerous of all is, 
that but few examine themselves; but few sigh 
over themselves. Without knowing it, many are 
poor, naked and blind, who with those of Laodicea 
think that they are rich and have everything in 
abundance, Rev. 3:17; but it is a wealth with which 
God is not pleased, and by which the spiritual 
riches, which consist in faith and love, in a living 
hope and a good conscience, are diminished. See 
in the writings of the martyrs, how their life was, 
how their suffering, how their constancy. It was 
the will of God, that the children of Israel should 
remember the ways of their fathers, and the in- 
struction of wisdom concealed therein; for they 
are all, ancestry and posterity, taken as one body. 
Deut.8 :2. Frequently it is said through the proph- 
ets : I have brought thee out of the land of Egypt ; 
though this had been done to their forefathers. 
Micah 6:4; Ps. 81 :10; Hbs. 11 :1. Examine your 
ways, and compare them with theirs, and see 
whether the love of the world has not blinded your 
eyes, and led them away from God. Many, when 
they could not use the world, turned of necessity 
to God, as their nearest refuge ; but as soon as a 
little breathing time set in, they again began to 
lean towards the world ; the parents became rich, 
the children luxrious and wanton; the world 
caressed them, and in course of time they became 
respected and lifted up ; the reproach of the cross 
was relinquished, and the honor of this world 
stepped into its place. And this, in the first church 
was the reason why God permitted a most awful 
persecution to come in the time of Emperor Dio- 
cletian, that His children might be chastised there- 
by, who already began to join in with the com- 
mon world. Ens., lib. 8, cap. 1. Hence, we must 
see well to it, that we do not incur like guilt, lest 
there come upon us what came upon them ; for no 


one fares worse in such times, than he who has 
not made good use of his time ; such an one will 
then be visited with woe, distress and misery ; but 
to them that love God, all things work together for 
good ; they are purified and tried by the refining 
fire ; hence it is necessary that God at times purge 
His threshingfloor with His fan, that the tares 
may not get the upperhand, to its own destruction. 
But we only have to ask His divine goodness, to 
chastise us as a father, and draw us by His love 
moving our hearts and minds to Himward, in order 
that we may lead a godly and holy life, in all love 
peaceableness, kindness, and long-suffering; not 
easily complaining of or grudging against one an- 
other, but bearing in patience one another's in- 
firmities, and bettering each other by good in- 
structions ; fleeing and avoiding all offenses, con- 
tention and dissension, separations, and schisms, 
which cause insufferable and damnable discord; 
striving for peace ; and seeking to heal, and restore 
to unity, quiet and peace, that which is broken and 
ruined, rent and torn asunder by the subtlety of the 
devil, and blind ignorance, and scattered into vari- 
ous factions, to the great offense and stumbling- 
block of many. If we do this, we shall cause the 
blessing and presence of God to be with us. Col 
3:12; I Pet. 4:8; James 5:9. 

In the meantime, let us constantly adhere to God, 
always pray for an increase of wisdom and divine 
knowledge, and run with patience the race that 
is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and 
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12 :1, 2; for we have the 
same conflict which David had in his time, and Job, 
and all the prophets, and Christ and His apostles! 
together with all the pious followers in the first 
church, as also before and in our time. They all 
had to overcome the world ; so de we ; they all had 
to deny themselves ; so do we ; one crown is to be 
gained, and the same kingdom is to be inherited. 
Heb. 12 :28. The times also, are just the same ; but 
the different life makes them different; however, 
all inequality must ultimately merge in the equal- 
ity of God. In order to make His followers par- 
takers of this equality and unity, Christ prayed, 
that they might be one with Him and the Father. 
John 17:20. This was also the sole aim of the 
apostles ; to this, as the eternal, supreme treasure, 
they exhorted every one; "For in Christ Jesus 
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncir- 
cumcision, but a new creature. And as many as 
walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and 
upon the Israel of God. Amen." Gal. 6:15, 16. 
Written out of love, to edification and amendment. 


THE BLOODY THEATER 


OR 


MARTYRS MIRROR 

OF THE 

ANABAPTISTS OR DEFENSELESS CHRISTIANS 

who baptized only upon Confession of Faith, and who suffered and died for the testi- 
mony of Jesus, their Saviour, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, that is, from 
A. D. 1500 to A. D. 1660. — Being an Enlargement of the preceding Martyrs 
Mirror, augmented from many authentic Chronicles, Memoirs and Tes- 
timonies ; together with an Account of the Holy Baptism, and other 
Articles of Divine Worship practiced in those times. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HOLY BAPTISM 
IN THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF BAPTISM IN THE SIXTEENTH 
CENTURY 

[The controversy of the so-called clergy the 
cause, in this century, that the Anabaptists in- 
creased the more, which forms the beginning of 
this account. 

In the meantime, the difference is shown, be- 
tween the old Waldenses and the apostate Huss- 
ites, respecting the article of holy baptism. 

The Waldenses in Hungary were now, in the 
year 1507, greatly persecuted; concerning whom 
it is stated, that they led an innocent life; and it 
is also declared that in their confession, which they 
delivered this year, as well as in their defense, in 
the year 1508, nothing at all is said about infant 
baptism. 

Ludovicus Vives is introduced, for the year 
1521, who, commenting on Augustine, says: That 
formerly the adults alone were admitted to bap- 
tism, and that even in his time said practice was 
still maintained in some cities of Italy. 

Two articles of the old Waldenses are related, 
one of which is against the pope, the other on holy 
baptism. 

For the year 1540, mention is made of the 
churches in Thessalonica, who were said to have 
remained unchanged in faith from the time of the 
apostles, and agree with the Anabaptists. From 
two different authors particulars corroborating the 
matter of said Thessalonian churches are given; 


from the testimony of other writers and credible 
memoirs. 

In a note it is shown, that in Thessalonica alone 
the Christians have more than thirty churches, or 
meetinghouses, while the Turks have only three. 

D. Vicecomes mentions the time when the Thes- 
salonian Christians administered baptism. 

We then proceed to some confessors who lived 
and were put to death in the time of our fathers ; 
some good and wholesome testimonies regarding 
this article, left by them as Thomas van Imbroeck, 
A. D. 1558; Jacob de Roore, A. D. 1569; John 
Wouters vanKuyck, A. D. 1572, Christian Gastay- 
ger, A. D. 1586; Bartholomew Panten, A. D. 1592. 
Finally, about A. D. 1600, an entire confession of 
faith follows, such as has been believed and prac- 
ticed for many years, by those called Mennists. 

With this we conclude the whole account of holy 
baptism and Christian worship in those times.] 


It is now our purpose to fulfill the promise we 
made in the preceding part, and to this end have 
come here, namely, to show also in this century, 
that the distinguishing mark of the believers, that 
is, baptism according to the institution of Christ, 
was at this time also correctly taught, practiced and 
maintained, by those who may be called orthodox 
believers ; notwithstanding said article had to suffer 
much opposition, violence and molestation, and this 
not only from the papists (who, however, have 
nearly always opposed it), but also from other per- 
suasions who had abhorred the doctrine of the pa- 
pists in many other points, and with fear and terror 


364 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


had fled from the Roman church, as from a con- 
fused Babel. 

However, all this, instead of obscuring the truth, 
tended only to illuminate and glorify it the more, 
just as gold when contrasted with copper, the 
mountain's height with the deep valley, and the 
light of day with the darkness of night, can be dis- 
tinguished the more plainly ; also the praiseworthy 
commended, and the contemptible contemned. 
This was the case at that time, not only with the 
assailed truth, but also with those who defended 
it, as shall be related and proven in the sequel. 

Jacob Mehrning's History of Baptism, making 
mention of the sixteenth century, that is the time 
from A. D. 1500 until A. D. 1600, begins with 
these words : Page 772 "At this time there arose, 
principally in Germany, a most severe persecution 
against the old Waldenses and their followers, 
through the violent controversy of the so-called 
clergy, and the disputations waged against them 
by the pens of the learned." [The Waldenses] in 
consequence of this, however, gained far more An- 
abaptists (namely Baptists), than there had ever 
before, in any country, been seen. 

This indicates that the old orthodox Waldenses, 
notwithstanding the severe persecutions, existed 
also at this time, yea, insomuch that now they in- 
creased more than ever before. 

But this was also the century in which Luther in 
Germany, Zwingli in Switzerland, and afterwards 
Calvin in France, began to reform the Roman 
dita -, :h ; and to deny, oppose and contend with the 
authority of God's holy Word against the sup- 
posed power of the Roman Pope, and many papal 
superstitions, however, in order to avoid too great 
dissatisfaction, as it seems, they remained in the 
matter of infant baptism, in agreement with the 
Roman church, though they abandoned many inci- 
dents which the papists observe at the baptism of 
infants, such as the salt, spittle, exorcism, and the 
like. 

They also have retained with the papists, the 
swearing of oaths, the office of secular authority, 
war against enemies, and sometimes also against 
each other, etc., of which things the old Waldenses 
had purified themselves, and would have no com- 
munion with any who would practice these things. 
Hence, we will leave them, and turn to our fellow 
believers. 

It is true, that already before the beginning of 
this century, some of the Waldenses had united 
with the Hussites, apparently in the confidence, 
that with the doctrine, these would also follow the 
meekness of their former teacher, John Huss. But 
when said Hussites would retain infant baptism, 
and avenge the death of their teacher, yea, began 
to wage a bloody war against those who had put 
him to death, those who had united with them 
found themselves greatly deceived, and left them, 
not daring to trust their salvation with such peo- 
ple; some, however, though few, remained with 
them. Thus the Waldenses returned for the most 


part to their old brethren, but the Hussites were 
received by the Lutherans, Zwinglians and Calvin- 
lsts, who, with them approved of infant baptism 
and war. 

But since, some Waldenses had united with the 
Hussites before the apostasy of the latter, and some 
though few, had still remained with them, it came 
that said Hussites received, though erroneously 
the name of Waldenses. Hence it originated, that 
they had a mixed confession of faith, which was 
partly conformable to the old confession of the 
Waldenses, and party adulterated with innovations 
or human institutions. For example, the article 
of the holy baptism of these Hussites reads as fol- 
lows : "The faith which God has given us, con- 
strains us to believe and confess such things re- 
specting baptism, which is the first sacrament- 
Whoever, now, in adult age, has become believing 
through the hearing of the Word of God, by which 
he, being regenerated and enlightened in his soul 
has received power, such an one is bound to be bap- 

u e , ^, the name of the Father > the Son » and the 
Holy Ghost, into the unity of the holy church by 
an external washing of water, in token of his' in- 
ward purification obtained through faith." 

(So far this article accords with the confession 
of the old Waldenses ; but what follows it, is held 
to have been added by said Hussites.) 

"This our confession extends also to infants 
who, according to the command of the apostles, as 
Uionysius writes, must be baptized, and afterwards, 
through the wise direction of their sponsors, who 
are taught in the law of Christ, be guided, or urged 
and trained to the life of faith, that is, to worthily 
practice the faith." 

We see here, a great departure of these Huss- 
ites, who have added to the old rule of the Wal- 
denses, which is confirmed by the authority of holy 
Scripture (namely, to baptize upon faith), a new 
rule, namely, to baptize also infants, and for proof 
of this, adduce not the testimony of Christ or His 
holy apostles, but of one Dionysius, who never was 
an apostle or teacher of Christ, but a fallible man 

And still, the preacher Mellinus would make the 
readers of his book believe, 2d book, page 614, 
col. 3, that this last part was also the confession of 
the Waldenses ; but the contrary is evident, as pre- 
viously stated ; yea, according to his own account, 
fol. 446, col. 1, the Waldenses, A. D. 1544 forty 
years after the Hussites, whom he calls Bohemian 
brethren, made the above article, issued a confes- 
sion and delivered it in the parliament of the King 
of France, in which, where speaking of baptism, 
they make no mention at all of any baptizing of in- 
fants ; but the work of the Hussites, according to 
the account of said preacher, is said to have orig- 
inated A. D. 1504. Compare fol. 611, col. 1, with 
fol. 614, col. 3. 

( A.D. 1507— "In this year," writes P. J. Twisck, 
the Vaudois, Waldenses, or believers were cruelly 
persecuted in Hungary, and delivered the confes- 
sion of their faith, together with an apology, to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


365 


Uladislaus, King of Bohemia, refuting the calum- 
nies of their enemies, and proving that they had not 
separated from the Roman church without good 
reasons. Of these people, papistic writers them- 
selves confess, that they led an innocent and pious 
life, though they nevertheless cruelly sought to kill 
and exterminate them." Chron., page 930, col. 2, 
from Henr. Boxh., fol. 27. 

Note. — Touching the confession which the 
afore-mentioned Waldenses, A. D. 1507, delivered 
to King Uladislaus, as well as their defense which 
they delivered A. D. 1508, nothing at all is therein 
said of infant baptism, though that would have 
been the proper time to explain themselves in this 
respect. See A. Mell., fol. 616, col. 1-4, and fol. 
617, col. 1-3. As to their confession of the year 
1504, which was corrupted or adulterated with 
human institutions, by the Hussites, we have al- 
ready spoken. 

A. D. 1521. — One Ludovicus Vives, of Valencia, 
commenting on the words of Augustine, in the 27th 
chapter of the Isft book of the City of God: With 
what admonition we address the baptized, says 
"That no one be misled by this passage, [I would 
state, that] no one was formerly admitted to holy 
baptism, save he who had attained his years, and 
understood himself what the holy water signified, 
and desired to be washed with it; yea, when he 
desired it a second time or oftener." 

Said Vives, in the same place, further declares : 
"I understand that in some cities of Italy the an- 
cient custom is, to a great extent, still observed." 

By this he indicates, that at, as well as before his 
time, many there did not practice infant baptism ; 
which is the purpose for which we have adduced 
this passage. 

"These apparently were," says H. Montanus, 
who has noted this, "a remnant from the Walden- 
ses, who were also scattered into different parts of 
Italy." Nietigh., page 89. 

He then states, that in the year 1544 they deliv- 
ered their confession of faith to Francis I, King of 
France, but that the following year, said king, 
through Minerius, miserably fell upon and extermi- 
nated them, in accordance with the sentence pro- 
nounced against them five years previously, at Aix, 
in the court of Provence, not far from Italy. 

Their faith is further thus described: "That 
they, according to their ancient custom, did not 
recognize the Pope of Rome, and had always had 
a pure religion." 

Concerning baptism, they professed: "That it 
is an external visible sign, which signifies to us 
the renewing of the Spirit, and the mortifying of 
the members." This confession, in substance, fully 
agrees with the one which we previously related 
from Jean Paul Perrin, as also, with what Reine- 
rius admonishes, among the articles of their con- 
fession, as these were in his time, saying : "That 
they deemed infant baptism useless." Mont., 
Nietigh., page 90. 


We could expatiate and give more particulars, 
touching the Waldenses, in confirmation of the 
flaith which they had in common with us, as also, 
that they confessed said faith until the times of the 
last martyrs, yea, also, that some of those martyrs 
proceeded from them ; but as it is not our purpose 
tio fill this book with words, but only to give the 
pith of the matter, which we think we have done, 
we will leave it as it is referring it to the judg- 
ment of the intelligent and impartial reader. 

Before we leave this, we would state that men- 
tion is made, in this century, not only of the Wal- 
denses, but also of certain churches in Thessa- 
lonica, in Greece, which are declared to have re- 
mained unchanged in faith from the time of Christ, 
and to agree in faith and practice with the Ana- 
baptistic churches, in Switzerland. I will quote 
the account verbatim, which I have found in regard 
to this, in a certain tract entitled : The Spectacles, 
by which the Anabaptists of one faith may see, 
etc., by a lover of the truth, J. S., printed at 
Harlem, by Hans Passchiers, van Wesbusch, 
A. D. 1630. 

In the preface, page 10, we read: "Since, my 
beloved, all the truly pious have a sincere joy and 
the greatest delight [to know], that many pious 
people are found upon earth, it has seemed good to 
me, to acquaint you with a brief testimony that has 
fallen into my hands : How, in the year 1540, or a 
little before, certain persons were brought captive 
by the Turks, from Moravia, to Thessalonica, in 
Turkey, and sold as slaves ; which slaves there be- 
came acquainted with the (Thessalonian) Chris- 
tians. Observing their life and conversation, they 
said to these Thessalonians, that in Moravia there 
lived a people who were like them in life and con- 
versation, and were called Anabaptists; which 
kindled in the Thessalonians a zeal to examine the 
truth of the matter ; and it further happened, as the 
testimony states," etc. 

Note. — Besides what we have noted concerning 
the churches at Thessalonica, Balthasar Lydius 
gives this account: "We will first speak of the 
Greek churches, who, in great numbers, are under 
the dominion of the Grand Turk ; for in the city of 
Thessalonica, by the Turks now called Salonick, 
the Christians or Greeks have more than thirty 
churches, while the Turks, on the other hand, have 
only three ; and so it is in other places in the vi- 
cinity. These churches do not recognize the pope 
as the general head of the church. This appears 
from the book of Nilus. Balth L,ydii, 3. Tract, of 
the Waldenses, p. 33, col. 1. Nilus de Primatu 
Papa, p. 48, 51 edit., Wechel, A. D., 1608. 

On page 42 of the book referred to above, we 
read : Brief account how through some Moravians 
who had been captured by the Turks, and had come 
to Thessalonica, in Turkey, the Christians at Thes- 
salonica obtained information that in Moravia 
there lived fellow believers of theirs, who were 
there called Anabaptists; and how, in order to as- 


366 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


certain the truth of the matter, they sent three oj 
their brethren to Moravia, in Germany. 

"I, the undersigned, testify that in Moravia there 
lived with me, for the space of three years, a man 
of our brethren, about a hundred years old named 
Leonard Knar, who related to me that in his time, 
when he was a servant in the common house of the 
common church at Popitz, under the Stewart, Hans 
Fuhrman, three brethren of the church of Thes- 
salonica were sent to Germany to inquire after 
their fellow believers, who, as they had learned 
from the prisoners, as stated above, were living in 
Moravia. 

"They first came to Nickelsburg, on the frontier 
of Hungary, where they went to a priest and in- 
quired after this people. He entered a carriage 
and rode with these three men to Pausrom, to those 
who are there called Hutterites, and in the Nether- 
lands, Moravians. 

"Having well examined their life and conversa- 
tion, they discussed with them, in the Latin lan- 
guage, in which they were well versed all the ar- 
ticles of the faith, but found that in three principal 
articles they did not accord ; namely, first in shun- 
ning, as this article was maintained by the Hutter- 
ites; secondly, in the community oj goods, which 
virtually consists with them more in dominion and 
servitude, than in equality ; thirdly, that they with- 
hold from those who fall away from their com- 
munion and leave them the property which they 
brought in, on account of which these three men 
parted from them with tears in their eyes, because 
they had performed such a difficult and laborious 
journey in vain. 

"The same priest then brought them in same 
place (Pausrom), to the Schwitzer church, who 
derive their name from Hans Schwitzer, who, 
through one of their brethren, named John Peck 
(who, with Hans Fuhrman and twelve other per- 
sons, had lain in prison for nine years, in the 
castle Passau on the Danube, in Bavaria, for the 
testimony of the faith), discussed in Latin all 
the articles of their faith. They agreed well in all 
points, on account of which they being mutually 
filled with great joy, acknowledged each other as 
dear brethren, and in token thereof, commemo- 
rated together the Lord's Supper, with great glad- 
ness, confessing themselves the true church of 
God. They stated further that the church of God 
at Thessalonica had remained unchanged in faith 
from the time of the apostles, and that they still 
preserved in good condition the letters which the 
apostle Paul wrote to them with his own hands. 

"All this having taken place, they parted in 
peace, and having commended each other with tears 
and the kiss of love, into the keeping of the Lord, 
the brethren journeyed back to Thessalonica. 

"One of them who was a tailor by trade, left his 
shears as a memento in the church at Pausrom. 

"This history is not only known to me, but is 
generally known, not only in Moravia, but also in 
the upper Palatinate." 


The father of this Leonard Knar, who saw and 
related all this,' was elder among the Anabaptists 
there who now consist of two principal divisions 
namely the Hutterites, here in the Netherlands 
called Moravians, and the Schwitzers here in the 
Netherlands called Germans, but who were then 
yet one people. This Elder Leonard Knar min- 
istered to these people in baptism, the Supper and 
intercessions according to the doctrine of the apos- 
tles. 

As Leonard was well acquainted with John Peck 
the latter orally related to Leonard all that he had 
discussed with the brethren from Thessalonica. 

We mentioned before, that Hans Fuhrman and 
John Peck, together with twelve other persons, lay 
imprisoned for nine years in the castle of Passau. 
From this long confinement they were released 
through bail furnished by a certain lord of Jamits, 
who traveled thirty-six leagues to release the pris- 
oners by becoming bondsman for them. He had in 
his town Jamits, a large society of these people liv- 
ing under his protection. 

To the above account the following testimony is 
given, subscribed to in these words: 

"By me, Jacob Meyster, resident at Amsterdam, 
fled from Moravia, to Poland, A. D. 1620; thence 
A. D. 1626, to Stettin, in Pomerania, and in the 
year 1627, to Amsterdam. I acknowledge that this 
account of Leonard Knar is as related." 

Of these things, Jacob Mehrning, of Holstein, 
gives this account: "Thus we have information, 
that even at the present day there are brethren and 
Christians at Thessalonica, who agree with the 
Mennists in all articles of religion, also in bap- 
tism, two of whom were yet in the time of our 
fathers, with the brethren in Moravia, and then 
also in the Netherlands, and communed with the 
brethren, who expressly declared that they still 
preserved in good condition, at Thessalonica, the 
originals of St. Paul's two epistles to the Thessa- 
lonians. Likewise, that many of their brethren 
were still living, scattered here and there in Ethi- 
opia, Greece and other oriental countries, as well 
as other Christians, who, like them, were pre- 
served by God, and remained in the same doctrine, 
and the true practice of baptism, constantly from 
the beginning of the apostles to this time. Bapt 
Htst., p. 739. t 

D. Vicecomes, lib. 1, cap. 23, quotes from Ni- 
cephorus Calhstus, that in Thessalia baptism was 
administered only at Easter; on which account 
many died without baptism. 

This harmonizes quite well with the foregoing ; 
namely, that the Thessalonian churches were not 
accustomed, or at least did not deem it necessary to 
baptize infants, seeing they waited with baptism a 
whole year ; on the other hand, those who consider 
infant baptism necessary, frequently dare not post- 
pone it one month, one week, yea, sometimes not 
one day, on account of the uncertainty of the in- 
fant's life; so that they appoint no definite time for 
infant baptism, as also, if necessity require it, no 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


367 


definite persons ; so much that the papists as also 
the Lutherans allow not only priests or teachers, 
but also laymen, yea, women to baptize, so that no 
child may die unbaptized. Anthon. Jac. Babel der 
Kinderdoopers, printed A. D. 1626, p. 107, &th 
chapter, quest. 5, from Bellarntt de Baptism, col. 
307. 

But that the Thessalonian churches had the cus- 
tom of baptizing only on Easter, that is, once a year 
came as may be inferred, because they deemed it 
necessary first to instruct the persons for a long 
time, almost a year, and to teach them the faith, 
before they might be baptized ; as has been shown 
from Rupert Tuiciensis, for the year 1124. 

Note. — Notwithstanding we might herewith 
close our account of Holy Baptism, since not only 
this article, but all that further belongs to it, has 
been sufficiently shown, and the known martyrs of 
our faith and their confessions have been plainly 
presented in our old book of the martyrs long be- 
fore this time; yea, already in the year 1524, we 
nevertheless, in order to satisfy, if this be possible, 
the critical, will proceed to bring this article to the 
end of this century, in which the confessions of the 
martyrs will render us no small service, as will 
appear. 

CONFESSION OF THOMAS VAN IMBROZCK, CON- 
CERNING BAPTISM 

A. D. 1558. — At this time a God-fearing and 
pious hero of Jesus Christ, named Thomas van 
Imbrceck, made a most excellent and explicit con- 
fession of Holy Baptism, as also a refutation of 
the opponents, which he delivered to the lords of 
Cologne, where he was imprisoned for the faith. 
It reads as follows: 

I believe and confess that there is a Christian 
baptism, which must take place externally and in- 
ternally ; internally with the Holy Ghost and with 
fire, externally with water, in the name of the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 

Internal baptism is imparted by Christ to the 
penitent, as John the Baptist said : "I indeed bap- 
tize you with water unto repentance : but he that 
cometh after me is mightier than I ; whose shoes I 
am not worthy to bear ; he shall baptize you with the 
Holy Ghost, and with fire." Matt. 3:11; Mark 1 :8. 

Christ confirms these words when He says to 
His disciples, "That they should not depart from 
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, 
which, saith he, ye have heard of me. For John 
truly baptized with water ; but ye shall be baptized 
with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." And 
this promise was fulfilled on the day of Pentecost. 
Acts 1:4, 5 ; 2, etc. 

Thus was also the house of Cornelius baptized 
when they believed what Peter spake: they re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost, and all spake with tongues, 
and magnified God. Acts 10:44, 46. 

But the external baptism of water, which is a 
witness of the spiritual baptism, and indication of 


true repentance, and a sign of faith in Jesus Christ, 
is administered, by the command of the Almighty 
Father, and His Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy 
Ghost, and in the name of the only God, by a true 
servant of the Lord, to those who have repented 
and reformed, believe the Gospel,* confess their 
faith and desire baptism; willingly offer them- 
selves up to God, and yield themselves servants 
unto righteousness, yea, to the service of God, and 
the communion of Jesus Christ and all the saints. 
This is fully comprehended and contained in the 
words which Christ speaks to His disciples: "Go 
ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you." Matt. 
28:19, 20. In Mark we read thus : "Go ye into all 
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. 
He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; 
but he that believeth not shall be damned." Mark 
16:15,16. 

These words of Christ fully comprise the ordi- 
nation and institution of the Christian baptism, and 
all that pertains to it ; for Christ, who is the eternal 
wisdom of the Father, has expressly and completely 
thus commanded it. Now, as He is the Light and 
the Saviour of the world, we find in this command, 
that teaching and believing must precede baptism. 
John 8:12; 3:17. 

The Scriptures cannot be broken, neither are we 
to take away from, or add to, the Word of God ; 
nay, not even the smallest tittle or letter of the Gos- 
pel may be changed. Hence, the ordinance of the 
Lord, respecting baptism must remain unaltered; 
for it is the Word of God, which abideth for ever. 
Deut. 4:2; Matt. 5:18; John 10:35. 

Hence, the words of Christ declare, that teach- 
ing must take place before and after baptism, in 
order that the person baptized may use diligence to 
observe, after baptism, the Gospel (which was 
presented to him before baptism), and all things 
commanded him ; for he is no more lord over him- 
self ; but, as a bride surrenders herself to her bride- 
groom, so he, after receiving baptism, surrenders 
himself to Christ, and loses his will, is resigned in 
all things, without name, without will, but leaving 
the name to Christ, and letting Him reign in him. 
For this is the signification of baptism, that the 
Christian's life is nothing but pure dying and suf- 
fering; because we are like unto the image of 
Christ, and baptized with Him, must die and suf- 
fer, if we would reign and live with Him. Rom. 
6:4. 

With this ordinance of Christ, accord also the 
apostles, as faithful stewards and dispensers of the 
manifold grace of God ; for thus did Peter and the 
other disciples preach the Gospel at Jerusalem, and 
they that heard it, were pricked in their heart by 
the Word, and said unto Peter and the rest of the 
apostles; "Men and brethren, what shall we do? 

* And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou 
mayest. Acts 8:37. 


368 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Then Peter said unto them: Repent and be bap- 
tized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ 
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the 
gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 2 :37, 38). Thus did 
also Philip, when he expounded the Scripture to 
the eunuch. And the latter, when he had accepted 
it, said: "What doth hinder me to be baptized? 
Philip answered : If thou believest with all thine 
heart, thou mayest." Acts 8:35-37. Thus also 
those of Samaria were baptized, when they believed 
the words of Philip. Verse 12. 

Again, when Peter preached Christ to the house 
of Cornelius, and spake the word of life, the Holy 
Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. "Then 
said Peter : Can any man forbid water, that these 
should not be baptized, which have received the 
Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded 
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord." 
Acts 10:44,47,48. 

Thus, Paul also found certain disciples at Ephe- 
sus, to whom he said : "Have ye received the Holy 
Ghost, since ye believed ? They answered : We have 
not so much as heard whether there be any Holy 
Ghost. Then said Paul: Unto what then were ye 
baptized ? They said : Unto John's baptism. Paul 
said : John verily baptized with the baptism of re- 
pentance, saying unto the people, that they should 
believe on him which should come after him, that 
is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they 
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus." So 
we read in the 19th chapter of Acts. 

Thus also Paul himself, when he had been pros- 
trated on the way, by the Lord, and had heard at 
Damascus, by the command of the Lord, from An- 
anias, what he should do; had again received his 
sight, and was filled with the Holy Ghost, in short, 
had become a chosen vessel and fit instrument, was 
baptized, and called upon the name of the Lord; 
as Luke writes, Acts 9:18. 

From these and other passages it is evident, that 
the apostles first taught, and that from teaching 
follow repentance and faith. For, how shall they 
believe, says Paul, without hearing. Faith cometh 
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Rom. 
10:17. Hence, penitent faith is confessed and, so 
to speak, sealed by Christian baptism. For, after 
baptism, a constantly good and godly life should 
follow;* this is the true ordinance of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and His apostles, as you may read 
everywhere throughout the Acts of the Apostles. 

Lastly, as the apostles established the church of 
God through the Gospel, so they all unanimously 
declare in their epistles the aforesaid foundation of 
Christ. For, thus says Paul to the Romans: 
"Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized 
into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? 
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into 
death : that like as Christ was raised up from the 
dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also 
should walk in newness of life. For if we have been 


* For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have out 
on Christ. Gal. 3 :27. 


planted together in the likeness of his death, we 
shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: 
knowing this, that our old man is crucified with 
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that 
henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that is 
dead is freed from sin" (Rom. 6:3-7). 

With these words, Paul tells us what the bap- 
tism of believers signifies, namely, the dying of 
the flesh, or mortifying of the old Adam, the bury- 
ing of sin, the putting off of the sinful flesh, and 
the resurrection of the new man and life; and this 
for this reason : since Christ died for our sins, was 
buried, and rose from the dead for our justification, 
and we, through the spirit of faith, have been in- 
corporated or grafted into Him, and hence, have 
become entitled to the merits of His death, yea, are 
made partakers of all that is His, and thus, in and 
through hope, are confirmed in His fellowship 
(unto which we are called through grace) ; there- 
fore we must also, for His name's sake, die unto 
sin,* bury it, and live unto righteousness, that we 
may be a true branch on the vine. 

In this manner the apostle Paul speaks also to 
the Colossians : "Ye are complete in him, which is 
the head of all principality and power: in whom 
also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made 
without hands, in putting off the body, of the sins 
of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ: buried 
with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with 
him through the faith of the operation of God, 
who hath raised him from the dead. And you, be- 
ing dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of 
your flesh, hath he quickened together with him." 
Chap. 2, verses 10-13, compared with Eph. 2 :4-6. 

These words, in the first place, declare, that cir- 
cumcision is not a figure of baptism, but of the cir- 
cumcision of Christ, which is not done on the fore- 
skin of the flesh, but on that of the heart, not with 
hands, nor with a knife of stone, but without hands, 
through the Word of God, in the Spirit. 

These words of Paul sufficiently indicate, that in 
baptism the past life must be buried with Christ, 
and, through faith, rise to a new life ; for the out- 
ward sign alone is of no value in the sight of God ; 
but faith, the new birth, a true Christian life— by 
these, man is united with God, incorporated into 
Christ Jesus, and becomes a partaker of the Holy 
Ghost. J 

Hence, external baptism does not conduce to 
salvation, if the internal baptism is wanting, name- 
ly, the transformation and renewing of the mind 
Once more Paul says to the Galatians : "For ye are 
all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. 
For as many of you as have been baptized into 
Christ have put on Christ" (Gal. 3 :26, 27). 

I hope that my lords will reflect a little on these 
excellent and explicit words; for when viewed 
aright, they are easily comprehended. Even as a 
man that is naked, hides himself and would not be 
seen because he is ashamed of his nakedness ; but 

* For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in (Jod. 
Coi. o :3. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


369 


when he has covered his shame, he comes forth 
without hesitation. So it was also with Adam; 
when God called him, he hid himself, and said: 
"Lord, I am naked." Nevertheless, he had cov- 
ered himself with a fig-leaf; but it availed him 
nothing; for the Lord could well see his shame, 
that is, his sin. Gen. 3. 

But when he knew himself, God clothed him 
with skins, which signified the sign of grace of 
Christ. Now when he had on the skin, his naked- 
ness was no longer seen. So it is also with Chris- 
tians; when they have put on the coat of skins 
(Christ), our sin is seen no longer, and the gar- 
ment which we have on is manifest to all. Compare 
Gen. 3:21 with Gal. 3:27. Therefore, he that is 
baptized aright, has put on Christ, and nothing is 
seen on him, but Christ and the life of Christ. Thus 
Paul says to the Ephesians: "Christ loved the 
church, and gave himself for it ; that he might sanc- 
tify and cleanse it with the washing of water by 
the word" (Eph. 5:25,26). 

Here we plainly perceive, that the washing of 
water is joined to the word ; for no one is cleansed 
by the washing of water, but by the word ; as the 
Lord says : "Now ye are clean through the word 
which I have spoken unto you" (John 15 :3). 

In another place, Paul calls baptism a washing 
of regeneration, Tit. 3 :5, because baptism repre- 
sents regeneration; even as circumcision is called 
a covenant, because it represented a covenant. 
Thus also, the paschal lamb is called pascha, that 
is, a passing over, though it was simply a memorial 
of the passover. Thus, is baptism called a washing 
of regeneration, because it belongs to the regener- 
ated children of God, who are born of incorrupt- 
ible seed, namely, the living Word of God, or, as 
James says : "Who are regenerated by the will of 
God, by the word of truth." I Pet. 1 :23 ; James 
1:18. 

Still another point is also to be considered here 
— that the apostles say, We must be regenerated by 
the Word, that is, through the preaching of the 
Gospel. But by what will those who say that chil- 
dren are regenerated, prove this? since neither 
preaching nor word obtains with them. 

Finally, Peter says also in his epistle : "When 
once the 'longsuffering of God waited in the days 
of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein 
few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. The 
like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now 
save us (not the putting away of the filth of the 
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward 
God), by the resurrection of Jesus Christ" (I Pet. 
3:20, 21). 

From the words of Peter we perceive, that bap- 
tism is represented by the flood, through which 
God punished the whole world; but Noah, with 
his house, whom God deemed righteous, was pre- 
served in the ark from the water; even as Israel 
passed dry-shod through the Red Sea, and were 
thus delivered from their enemies; but Pharaoh 


with his entire host, was drowned in it, so that not a 
single one escaped. I Cor. 10:1, 2. 

Thus it is with all the works of God ; that which 
is life for the pious, is death for the ungodly, as 
Paul testifies with these words : "We are unto God 
a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, 
and in them that perish: to the one we are the 
savour of death unto death; and to the other the 
savour of life unto life" (II Cor. 2 :15, 16). 

But in order rightly to understand the figure of 
the flood, we must consider Noah as the antitype of 
Christ ; his house the antitype of believers ; the ark, 
of the church ; and the flood, of baptism. For, even 
as Noah, in his time, was a preacher of righteous- 
ness, so also Christ was a true preacher of right- 
eousness, who proceeded from God, and came into 
the world. And as Noah prepared the ark, to pre- 
serve his household, so Christ prepared the spir- 
itual ark, namely His church, built by the apostles, 
as wise master builders, to preserve His children 
and His household, of whom He Himself says: 
"Behold, I and the children which God hath given 
me." And as through the flood all flesh was de- 
stroyed and perished, so must also, through bap- 
tism, all carnal lusts and desires be destroyed and 
perish. And as only few, that is, eight souls, were 
preserved in the time of Noah, so it is also with 
men at this present time. Though it is proclaimed 
unto them, and the light shines forth clearly, still 
they love darkness rather than light; hence there 
are so few who truly believe, and are translated 
from the past life into a spiritual life, that they 
may enter into the church of Christ, and thus be 
baptized unto the dying of the flesh, and the resur- 
rection to a new life. 

For Christ Himself says, that there are but few 
who find the true way ; "for many are called, but 
few chosen ;" few believe, and few shall be saved. 
Luke 13:24; Matt. 20:16. As also Luke says: 
"Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall 
he find faith on the earth?" (Luke 18:8). 

For. noble sir, and servant of God, I appeal to 
you, whether it is not now as it was in the time of 
Noah? They build; they plant; they buy one field 
after another ; they feast ; they drink ; they marry, 
and are given in marriage ; and all this without the 
fear of God ; and they who do this are well known, 
yea, all corners of the world are full of abomina- 
tions and idolatry. May the Lord convert them all, 
Amen. Luke 17:26, 27; Matt. 24:37, 38. 

The reason why they live without the fear of 
God, and without care, is, that they have no ex- 
ample. They console themselves only with this, 
namely: I am a Christian; for I am baptized. 
Thus they speak, thinking that it is sufficient if one 
is only baptized ; but they know little what baptism 
signifies ; for they have not yet drank of the living 
fountain, of which Jeremiah speaks ; but they drink 
of the wells which they have digged themselves; 
"For they have forsaken the true fountain, says the 
Lord" (Jer. 2:13). 


370 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


So it is now also with baptism, as I have suffi- 
ciently shown above, that believers only are to be 
baptized. But now the command of Christ is ig- 
nored, and those who dig or devise a well, or bap- 
tism, of their own, are received; and thus is ful- 
filled what Christ says : "Thus have ye made the 
commandment of God of none effect by your tra- 
dition" (Matt. 15:6). 

Still more might be shown from the Scriptures ; 
for Paul writes very clearly to the Hebrews, con- 
cerning the preparation of Christians, declaring 
that those who would receive this Christian ordi- 
nance, must first learn the principles of the Chris- 
tian doctrine, namely, repentance from dead works, 
then faith in God, and then baptism. Heb. 6:1. 

I fear it might become tedious to my noble lord 
and servant of God ; hence I will make it as brief 
as possible. 

Now, since there are many who believe that chil- 
dren that die without baptism are damned, as also 
the priests maintain, we will, by the grace of God, 
give a brief answer to our opponents, so that my 
lords may be relieved on this point. 


DEFENSE AGAINST THE OPPONENTS BY THOMAS 
VAN IMBE02CK 

In the first place, our opponents say, it is writ- 
ten : "Suffer little children to come unto me ; for 
of such is the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 19:14). 
Now, if they have the promise, why should they 
not also receive baptism, which is less than the 
promise ? 

Answer. — We believe and confess that infants 
are saved on account of the promise; but that sal- 
vation depends on baptism, we do not confess ; for 
when Christ promised the children the kingdom of 
God, they were not baptized, nor did He baptize 
them, but He embraced them, and spoke kindly to, 
or blessed, them. Mark 9 :36, 37. Christ also states 
the reason why the children are acceptable to God, 
since He sets them as examples for adults, and ad- 
monishes us, that we should be like them, for thus 
He says to His disciples : "Verily I say unto you, 
except ye be converted, and become as little chil- 
dren, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this 
little child, the same is the greatest in the king- 
dom of heaven" (Matt. 18:3, 4). 

Hence, since we are admonished to become as 
children, it is incontrovertible, that as long as they 
remain in a state of innocence, God holds them 
guiltless, and no sin is imputed to them ; and al- 
though they are of a sinful nature, partaking of the 
nature of Adam, there still remains something in 
them which is pleasing to God, namely, innocence 
and humility ; however, they are saved only through 
the grace of Christ. 

But if some condemn infants, if they die without 
baptism, it is a despising of the blood of Christ ; for 
the sin of Adam and of the whole world, is recon- 
ciled through the sacrifice of Christ, and no sin 


from Adam is imputed to children ; how then can 
children be damned? 

Who will accuse the children, for whom Christ 
shed His blood? Who will condemn them, to 
whom Christ has promised the kingdom of God ? 
Who will deny the holy Scriptures, which declare 
so emphatically, that the sin of Adam and of the 
whole world has been taken away ; the handwriting 
of the law, which was against us, blotted out, and 
nailed to the cross, and that grace has abounded 
over sin, and the life of Christ conquered death ? 

Hence, he who says that children are condemned, 
or accuses them on account of original sin, denies 
the death and blood of Christ. For, if the children 
are condemned because of Adam's death, then 
Christ died in vain, Adam's guilt is still upon us, 
and not reconciled through Christ, and grace has 
not abounded over sin through Christ. God forbid. 

For the grace of God has richly appeared to all 
men. Tit. 2:11 ; Rom. 5 :18. All malediction, curse, 
and the sin of the whole world have been taken 
away through Christ, and as adults are saved 
through faith, so children are saved through their 
innocence; but all through grace. 

An answer, then, remains yet to be given, why, 
if they are saved, they should not be baptized. 

In the first place, because we have no command 
from Christ for it. Abraham had received a com- 
mand from the Lord, to circumcize all males on the 
eighth day. Now, he had received no command 
respecting females, nor did he follow his own opin- 
ion, but, according to the command of God, caused 
only the male children to be circumcised ; and cir- 
cumcision was the sign of the covenant which God 
had established with Abraham ; and still, the wom- 
en were included in the covenant as well as the 
men, 

And afterwards, when Israel was in the wilder- 
ness, and had grossly sinned against the Lord, so 
that God said, they should not enter into the prom- 
ised land, and this on account of their unbelief, 
He (the Lord) said : But your children which now 
know neither good nor evil, they shall possess it. 

Now, if the children, whom the Lord had com- 
manded to be circumcised on the eighth day,* ob- 
tained mercy from Him, and He promised to give 
them the land, and that they should possess it, 
how much more should now His grace be upon the 
children for whom Christ died? 

In the second place, our opponents say, that the 
Lord said to Nicodemus : "Except a man be born 
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God" (John 3:5). From this, they 
say, it follows, that no one can enter into the 
kingdom of God, except he be baptized with water. 

Answer. — These words of Christ must not be 
understood with reference to children ; for the pas- 
sage which the Lord spake to Nicodemus, namely : 
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be 

* J' ro 1 m thi , s our opponents, nevertheless, form an argument 
which they, though without foundation, bring against us 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


371 


born from above, he cannot see the kingdom of 
God, declares differently; for here we hear that 
Christ presented to Nicodemus regeneration, which 
takes place only through the Word of God, as has 
above, in my confession, been sufficiently ex- 
plained; and then Nicodemus said: How can a 
man, when he is old, enter the second time into his 
mother's womb, and be born again? 

Mark, he says, when he is old ;* from which we 
well perceive, that the Lord did not speak of chil- 
dren. And thereupon Christ says : "Except a man 
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter 
into the kingdom of God." 

That this is not spoken of children, the following 
words prove, namely : "That which is born of the 
flesh is flesh ; and that which is born of the Spirit is 
spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must 
be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, 
and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not 
tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth : so is 
every one that is born of the Spirit."f 

By these words Christ indicates that the regen- 
erated man becomes spiritual, and is born of the 
Spirit, and of a spiritual nature; as Peter says: 
"We are become partakers of the divine nature, 
if we flee the corruptible lusts of this world." By 
this everyone may know whether he is born of the 
Spirit, namely, if he has the nature of the Spirit, 
even as one that is born of the flesh, has the nature 
of the flesh, each in his order. Birds have their 
peculiar nature; so also wild animals; likewise 
man ; each is minded like him of whom he is born.J 
Thus, he that is born of the Spirit, is also spirit- 
ually minded ; hence Paul says : "For as many as 
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God." 

Finally Christ says to Nicodemus: "If I have 
told you earthly things, and ye cannot comprehend 
or believe, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of 
heavenly things ?" 

Here the Lord deems it greater to comprehend 
heavenly things, than earthly things ; but children 
comprehend nothing of earthly things, how much 
less of heavenly. 

Hence Paul says : Be not children in understand- 
ing ; howbeit in malice be ye children, but in under- 
standing be men. For, faith cannot be compre- 
hended without understanding, even as Paul says 
to the Hebrews: "Faith is a sure confidence of 
things hoped for, and conforms itself to things not 
seen; so that faith has such power in itself, that 
it always conforms to heavenly things, and seeks 
those things which are above, where Christ sitteth 
on the right hand of God." 

* Nicodemus, though ignorant in the matter itself, understood 
well enough, that this did not have reference to children; hence he 
asked: How can a man be born, when he is old? 

t From the words : "That which is born of the flesh is flesh," 
Thomas concludes that this relates only to the adult; since no new- 
born infants, but only the adult can live after the flesh, and, conse- 
quently, must be born again. 

$ The descent of every one is known by his peculiar nature; 
for like produces like. Hence, if infants are truly regenerated of 
the Holy Spirit, the fruits of the latter must be evident in them 
from the workings of their nature. The fruit of the Spirit is love, 
joy, peace, longsuffering, etc. Gal. 5 :22. 


That children do not have such faith, experience 
and the holy Scriptures teach, though some say: 
God can easily give children this faith. So say I ; 
and not only faith, but also understanding, by 
which faith is comprehended ; yea, even language 
to confess it ; but what sort of faith children have, 
they show by their life and fruits. But though 
God is almighty, and does according to His will, 
which none can resist, He nevertheless observes 
order in all His works, according to His pleasure. 
Hence, let everyone see well to it, that he do not 
prescribe to God according to his own opinion; 
for He has made all things well. To Him be 
eternal praise and honor. Amen. 

Since these are the most important passages* 
with which it is sought to prove infant baptism, 
I have, in my weakness and simplicity, answered 
them. But that you, my noble sirs, may not be- 
come weary of my long writing, I will conclude; 
nevertheless, if my noble sirs desire a fuller an- 
swer, I am willing and ready to answer, as much 
as lies in my power. May God give His grace to 
us all. Amen. Your humble servant, 

Thomas van Imbrceck. 

A. D. 1569. — Now when the papists sat in such 
darkness, that they immediately put to death those 
who, having been baptized in infancy, were, when 
arriving at riper years and ■ understanding, bap- 
tized upon faith, a God-fearing teacher of the 
church of Jesus Christ, named Jacob de Roore, 
did nevertheless not hesitate to make, with regard 
to this matter, a salutary and good confession, 
writing in his bonds and imprisonment at Bruges, 
in Flanders, the following words: "Furthermore, 
I confess a Christian baptism, according to the 
tenor of the Word of God, as Christ commanded 
His apostles, saying: "Go, and teach all nations, 
baptizing them," etc. 

Afterwards he relates how the apostles executed 
this command of Christ, saying: "Thus did the 
apostles, according to their Lord's command," etc. 

Continuing, he explains the words of Peter, Acts 
2 :39 ; "For the promise is unto you, and to your 
children," etc. ; from which the opponents were fre- 
quently wont to prove (in their manner) infant 
baptism, or at least, to give it some plausibility. 
Thereupon he says as follows: "By this the 
apostle shows that the gift of the Holy Ghost was 
to be given, not only to the Jews and their children, 
but also to the Gentiles, who were far from the 
kingdom of God, and whom God should also call, 
as the prophet Joel had foretold.f 

Thus, he says finally, baptism must be received 
upon faith, for a burial of sin, a washing of regen- 
eration, a covenant of the Christian life, a putting 
on of the body of Christ, an ingrafting into the true 
olive tree and vine of Christ, an entrance into the 

* Understand, those which were the most important in his time ; 
for afterwards many others were, to the detriment of truth, im- 
agined in addition to them. 

t He adduces the prophecy of Joel for the purpose of showing, 
that the latter speaks of the prophesying of sons and daughters, 
and not of infants. Chap. 2, verse 28. 


372 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


spiritual ark of Noah, of which Christ is the true 
householder, as is written of Him (this He says of 
His church) : "Behold, here am I, and the children 
(the true believers) which thou hast given me." 
See in Martyrs Mirror, page 537, col. 2, 3, and 
afterwards, in the Account of the Martyrs, for the 
year 1569. 

It is not necessary here to say anything more ; 
since the views of this man, regarding this matter, 
are well known and in the memory of almost every- 
one. Hence we will conclude this, and proceed to 
others of like confession. 

A. D. 1572. — At this time there was imprisoned 
at Dort, in Holland, a man of great virtue and piety, 
named John Wouterss van Kuyck, who, in a letter 
written to his wife, relates what happened to him 
in prison on account of the faith. Among other 
things he speaks of what the bailiff, in his presence, 
demanded of the judges, namely: That pursuant 
to the decree of the king, he should be burnt alive 
at the stake; because he had departed from the 
Roman Catholic faith, and had (as he said), been 
rebaptized by the Anabaptists. 

Thereupon this pious witness of Jesus answered 
as he further writes, saying: "Then I replied: I 
have never departed from the Christian faith ; and 
I know no Anabaptists. I have been baptized only 
once upon my faith ; infant baptism I do not con- 
sider a baptism ; and when I was a child, I did as a 
child, as my parents led me. See in the last-men- 
tioned Martyrs' Mirror, page 692, col. 2, also in the 
following account of the martyrs, for the year 
1572. 

In another letter delivered by him to the bailiff 
and the council of said city, he makes this confes- 
sion of his own baptism : "Faith and inward bap- 
tism constrained me to obedience toward His word, 
to fulfill His righteousness. Hence I confess, that 
I was baptized upon my faith, and this on my re- 
quest, according to the command of Christ, re- 
nouncing the devil, the world, etc." Same book, 
page 701. 

Thus, this witness of Jesus openly, boldly, and 
unfeignedly declared the truth of God in this mat- 
ter, according to the testimony of the Word of 
God, and his conscience; to show which has here 
been our sole aim. 

A. D. 1586. — At Ingolstadt, in Bavaria, one 
Christian Gasteiger, after suffering much onset 
and opposition from the Jesuits, was, among other 
things, also assailed in regard to his belief re- 
specting baptism ; since he held that it should be 
administered to none but the believing and peni- 
tent. On a certain day, therefore, there came to 
him, where he was imprisoned, two of that order, 
saying: That a child had to be baptized or it 
would be damned. But he contradicted them with 
arguments and the authority of the holy Scrip- 
tures. This belief he held fast to the end, since he 
died thereupon, as shall appear more fully in the 
account of the martyrs, regarding his death, for 


the year 1586. Also, in Mart. Mir., page 886, 
col. 2. 

A. D. 1592 — We find, that besides a disputation 
held against some papists who maintained infant 
baptism, Bartholomew Panten, a pious brother, 
also left, before his departure from this world, a 
testament, as a last farewell, to his little daughter ; 
in which he, among other things, admonishes her, 
how she, when arriving at maturity, should act 
with regard to this matter, saying: "My dear 
child, take this to heart, and when you attain your 
understanding, my paternal request to you is, to 
join those who fear God, who are by far the least 
among all people, but who are nevertheless the true 
congregation and church of God; who practice 
their rule according to the ordinance of the Lord, 
and the practice of the apostles, namely, a bap- 
tism which is founded upon faith, and must be 
received as Christ has commanded, and as is writ- 
ten in Matthew." 

Then, treating of the words of the holy evangel- 
ists, respecting the unprepared condition in which 
the Pharisees came to the baptism of John, and 
that the latter rebuked them, saying : "O genera- 
tion of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from 
the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits 
meet for repentance," he says by way of explana- 
tion: "Here it is to be well understood, that con- 
fession is not sufficient, but that also sorrow of 
heart, and good works, must be evinced. For, all 
outward actions, without renewing the spirit, can- 
not please God." See the before-mentioned Mart 
Mtrr., p. 924, col. 1. This matter will be shown 
more circumstantially in the account of his mar- 
tyrdom, for the year 1592. 

Note. — We could have filled this century with 
a very great number of salutary confessors re- 
specting this article, had we not deemed this un- 
necessary and to no purpose ; for no one who has 
but a little experience in history, will doubt it; 
since this was not one of the least points, on ac- 
count of which an almost countless number of per- 
sons lost their lives in the last persecution, early in 
this century, and throughout to the close. 

Now, in order to bring this account to an appro- 
priate conclusion, we deem it not inadvisable, to 
add here a certain Confession of Faith, which very 
probably, was once contained in the History of the 
pious Anabaptist Martyrs, and is declared to have 
been the summary of their faith ; though it may be 
(which we would not contradict), that they did 
not confess all said articles in precisely this form, 
but maintain more or less in regard to this or that 
point ; which, however, if the true foundation of 
the same is retained, ought to, according to the na- 
ture of love, be borne with ; especially in such per- 
sons who did not spare their dear lives, but gave 
them unto death, for their God and Saviour. Nev- 
ertheless, we do not find that any of them enter- 
tained contrary views, much less, that they op- 
posed said confession ; which incited us the more 
to insert it here ; hoping that it will be productive 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


373 


of at least some profit or good in these latter sor- 
rowful and perverted times ; the more to confirm 
the steadfast in the faith, as well as to give an oc- 
casion to the weak, to prove themselves wherein 
they have become weak, and how said weakness 
can be removed. 

About A. D. 1600. — The time when this con- 
fession, which we have just mentioned, was origi- 
nated, we have not been able definitely to ascer- 
tain ; but as it is stated concerning it, that, as far 
as the sense is concerned, it was believed, taught, 
and practiced, by those called Mennonites, al- 
ready many years ago, even as at the time, when it 
was committed to the printer, namely, when the 
last persecution was almost over. We have there- 
fore given it a place about the year 1600; that is 
about the close of this century. The title of it is : 
Confession of Faith according to the holy Word 
of God. 


Confession of Faith, According to the Holy 
Word of God 


article I 


Of the only God of heaven and earth. By the 
grace of God, according to the import of the holy 
Scriptures, we believe with the heart, and confess 
with the mouth, that there is one only, eternal, al- 
mighty, and true God ; who is the Creator of heav- 
en and earth, with all things visible and invisible ; 
so that all things derive their origin and being 
from Him alone, and are all sustained, governed 
and upheld by His almighty word. He is a just, 
perfect, holy, incomprehensible and indescribable, 
spiritual Being; consisting of or through Himself, 
Ex. 3:14, and not needing the help or assistance 
of anything ; but is Himself the origin and foun- 
tain of every good thing. From His overflowing 
goodness every good and perfect gift proceeds and 
descends. And He is the living One, eternal, with- 
out beginning or end, an almighty, true God and 
Lord of Hosts, a commanding King over all, and 
above us all in heaven and earth, a terrible Judge 
and an avenging, consuming fire; the true Light, 
just, righteous and holy, full of grace and peace, 
and a God of love and of all comfort, longsuffering 
and of great mercy. 

And this only good, and only wise, exalted God, 
who is all in all, dwells with His worshipful, glori- 
ous existence above in heaven, in a light which no 
man has seen, nor can see, and is present every- 
where with His Spirit and power, filling heaven 
and earth, so that heaven is His throne, and the 
earth His footstool. From His all-seeing eye noth- 
ing is hid, but He is an omniscient hearer and be- 
holder of the hearts and secret intents and thoughts 
of all men ; all things being naked and open unto 
His eyes. I Cor. 4:5; Heb. 4:13. 

And since He is such an omniscient God, full of 
all grace and mercy, and a God of all comfort, with 
whom alone the fountain of wisdom and all good 
gifts are to be found ; and since He will not give 


this His divine honor to another, therefore all 
men are in duty bound, to seek, by ardent prayer 
and with a desiring heart, all grace, peace, for- 
giveness of sins, and eternal life, in God alone and 
in none other.* 

And to this only Potentate, the King of kings, 
and Lord of lords, before whose worshipful maj- 
esty the angels stand with trembling ; whose word 
is true, and whose command is powerful; who is 
a righteous Judge over all ; finally every knee shall 
bow, and every tongue confess, that He alone is 
Lord, to the praise of His glory. 

And this only, eternal, true God of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, consists in one true Father, and 
one true Son, and one true Holy Ghost. And be- 
sides this only God there never has been another, 
nor ever will be. 

Concerning this only, eternal God, read: Hear, 
O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord. Deut. 
6:4; Mark 12:29. 

Through Isaiah he speaks: For I am God, and 
there is none else ; I am God, and there is none like 
me. Isa. 46 :9 ; 45 :5 ; 44 :6 ; 43 :11 ; 41 :4. 

Through Paul he says : That an idol is nothing 
in the world, and that there is none other God but 
one. I Cor. 8:4; 12:6; Eph. 4:6. 

And in this only God we must necessarily believe 
to salvation, as the beginning and foundation of the 
Christian faith. Read : For he that cometh to God 
must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder 
of them that diligently seek Him. Heb. 1 1 :6. 

To believe in this God, is also called a principle 
of the Christian doctrine. Read Heb. 6:1; Jas. 
2:19; John 17:8; 14:1; Gen. 15:6; Rom. 4:9. 

ARTICLE II 

Of the eternal birth and Godhead of the only 
and eternal Son of God, we confess : That the Son 
of God was born and proceeded from all eternity, 
in an ineffable manner, from the true God, His 
Father; of the essence and substance of the al- 
mighty God, as a Light from the true Light, true 
God from the true God ; being in the form of God, 
the likeness of the invisible God, the brightness of 
His glory, and the express image of His person; 
so that He was born and proceeded from God His 
Father as the brightness of the everlasting light, 
the immaculate reflection of the power of God, 
and the image of His goodness ; being equal with 
His Father in essence, form, and attributes; as 
eternal, almighty, holy, and the like. For it is an 
inevitable consequence that like produces like. 

Thus, as the stone spoken of by the prophet 
Daniel, which was cut out of the mountain without 
hands, and itself became a great mountain, is of the 
same essence and substance with the mountain ; so 
also the precious, elect cornerstone, Jesus Christ, 
was born or proceeded from God the almighty Fa- 
ther (who is called a mountain and rock forever), 
and is of the same essence and substance with him. 


* Since God knows everything, believers can call upon Him with 
a firm confidence ; for He hears their cry and knows their wants. 


374 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Hence, Christ Jesus, the only begotten Son of God, 
is to be believed in, confessed, served, honored, 
and worshiped by all believers, as the true God 
with His Father. But as this is also a matter of 
faith, and not of reason or comprehension, all this 
must be viewed, believed, judged, and spoken of, 
not humanly, nor carnally, but divinely and spirit- 
ually. 

Concerning this high, eternal birth, issue, and 
Godhead of the Son of God, read : "Thou art my 
Son ; this day have I begotten thee." Ps. 2 :7. "For 
unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou 
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee ? And 
again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to 
me a Son. And again, When he bringeth in the 
first-begotten into the world." Heb. 1 :5, 6. 

"So also Christ glorified not himself to be made 
a high priest ; but he that said unto him, Thou art 
my Son, today have I begotten thee." Heb. 5 :5. 

"And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that 
the promise which was made unto the fathers, God 
hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in 
that he raised up Jesus again ; as it is also written 
in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day 
have I begotten thee." Acts 13 :32, 33. Observe, 
that this passage of Paul has reference not only to 
the raising up of Christ from the dead, but chiefly 
to His eternal birth from God His Father. 

The prophet Micah, speaking of Bethlehem, 
says : "Out of thee shall he come forth that is to be 
ruler in Israel ; whose goings forth have been from 
of old, from everlasting." Mic. 5:2; John 16:28, 
30. 

Again, Paul says: "Who is the image of the 
invisible God, the first-born (mark, the first-born) 
of every creature." Col. 1:15; Rev. 3:14. 

Also John : "No man hath seen God at any time ; 
the only begotten Son (mark, the only begotten 
Son) which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath 
declared him." John 1 :18 and 14. 

Read also: Prov. 8:23; Dan. 2:34, 45; Syr. 
24:13; Rom. 8:29. Concerning the Godhead of 
Christ, read: Ps. 45:6; Heb. 1:8; John 1:1 and 
20:28; Rom. 9:5; I John 5:20. 

ARTICLE III 

Of the Holy Ghost we believe and confess : That 
there is a true, real Holy Ghost, also comprehended 
in the only, eternal, divine essence; who proceeds 
from the Father and the Son and is the power of 
the Most High, by whom the Father and the Son 
operate, and through whom heaven and earth, and 
all the heavenly host were made. Hence, the divine 
attributes are ascribed to Him ; as eternal, almighty, 
holy, omniscient ; who searches the deep things of 
the Godhead, knows what is in God, and goes 
through and searches all spirits, however subtle 
they may be. He is therefore confessed as the true 
God with the Father and the Son. And He is the 
subtle breath of the power of God, who with His 
divine inspiration illuminates and enkindles the 
heart of man, and confirms and leads him into all 


truth. He is given by God unto all who obey Him. 
All that are led by this Spirit, are the sons of God. 
He that has not this Spirit, does not belong to God. 
He is called the real and earnest of the inheritance 
of all true children of God. He who blasphemes 
this Spirit, must never expect forgiveness. Christ 
also commands to baptize believers in the name of 
the Holy Ghost. 

Concerning this only Spirit of God, read : "In the 
beginning God created the heaven and the earth. 
And the earth was without form and void; and 
darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the 
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters " 
Gen. 1 :1, 2. 

Through Paul we are taught : "There are diver- 
sities of gifts, but the same Spirit." I Cor. 12 :4. 
"But all these worketh that one and the selfsame 
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. 
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, 
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be 
bond or free ; and have been all made to drink into 
one Spirit." I Cor. 12:11, 13. Read also: II Sam. 
23:2; Eph. 4:4; Matt. 10:20; Luke 12:12; Matt. 
3:16; John 1:32; Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:16. 

ARTICLE IV 

_ How Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are to be dis- 
tinguished in certain attributes. Of this we confess : 
That in the only eternal Divine Being there are not 
three mere names ; but that each name has its true 
signification and attributes ; so that there is a true 
real Father, of whom all things are; and a true, 
real Son, by whom are all things ; and a true, real 
Holy Ghost, through whom the Father and the Son 
operate. The Father is the true Father, who begat 
the Son before all time, and from whom the Son 
proceeded and came, and by whom He [the Fa- 
ther] created and made all things; and through 
whom the Son was sent to be the Saviour of the 
world. The Son was born of, proceeded and came 
from the Father ; by whom the Father created all 
things, and who was sent by the Father, and came 
into the world, and, through the effectual power 
of the Most High was conceived by Mary, and 
born as man. He suffered, was crucified, died, 
rose from the dead, ascended to heaven, and sit- 
teth at the right hand of His Almighty Father in 
heaven. The Holy Ghost is He that proceeds from 
the Father and the Son, and is sent by them; 
through whom the Father and the Son operate and 
work. He speaks not of Himself, but whatsoever 
He has heard from the Father; He takes of the 
things of Christ, to show them to His own. 

Hence there are, in the same divine Essence, in 
heaven, three true witnesses : the Father, the Word, 
and the Holy Ghost ; of whom the glory of the only 
begotten Son of God appeared really and distinc- 
tively, in the form of a servant, on earth, and was 
also seen by John the Baptist, at the Jordan. And 
the Holy Spirit was also distinctively seen by the 
same John to descend, in the form of a dove, from 
God out of heaven, upon Christ and abide upon 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


375 


Him. And the Father who is an invisible Spirit, 
and cannot be seen by mortal eye, let His voice be 
heard from heaven : "This is my beloved Son, in 
whom I am well pleased." 

These three true witnesses are distinctively spok- 
en of, as follows: "If I bear witness of myself, 
my witness is not true. There is another that bear- 
eth witness of me." John 5 :31, 32. 

"I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent 
me. It is also written in your law that the testimony 
of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of 
myself, and the Father that sent me, beareth wit- 
ness of me." John 8:16-18, 29, 54; I John 5:20; 
John 16:32 and 15:24. 

Again, Paul says: "There is one God, and one 
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ 
Jesus." I Tim. 2 :5. 

"Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in 
:he doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abid- 
;th in the doctrine of Cbrist, he hath both the Fa- 
:her and the Son." II John 1 :9. 

Of the Holy Ghost, Christ says : "I will pray the 
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, 
.hat he may abide with you forever ; even the Spirit 
)f truth; whom the world cannot receive." John 
14:11, 17; Matt. 12:32. 

"But if I depart I will send him unto you. . . . 
For he shall not speak of himself ; but whatsoever 
le shall hear, that shall he speak. . . He shall 
jlorify me ; for he shall receive of mine, and shall 
shew it unto you" John 16:7, 13, 14. 

How John, the man of God, saw the Holy Ghost 
in the form of a dove. Read, "And the Holy Ghost 
descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, 
and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou 
art my beloved Son ; in thee I am well pleased" 
Luke 3 :22. 

"And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit 
descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode 
upon him and I knew him not ; but he that sent me 
to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon 
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and re- 
maining on him, the same is he which baptizeth 
with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record 
that this is the Son of God" John 1 :32-34. Read 
also Mark 1 :10. 

"And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up 
straightway out of the water : and, lo, the heavens 
were opened unto him, and John saw the Spirit of 
God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him" 
Matt. 3:16. 

Mark, how awfully they sin against the Most 
High, who, contrary to all these express words of 
the Holy Ghost, still dare say and maintain, that 
John did not see the Holy Ghost, but only a nat- 
ural or created dove. 

Hear also how the voice of the Father was heard 
from heaven : "And lo a voice from heaven say- 
ing, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased." Matt. 3:17. 

"For he received from God the Father honour 
and glory, when there came such a voice to him 


from the excellent glory." II Pet. 1 :17. Read also : 
Ps. 110:1; IIEsd. 13:32; John 1 :1 ; I Cor. 12:5; 
I John 5 :7. 

"For there are three that bear record in heaven, 
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost." I John 
5:7; I Cor. 12:4; Rev. 3:14. 

ARTICLE V 

That these three true witnesses are but one only 
true God. Hereupon we confessed : That this must 
certainly follow, from the fact, that the Son pro- 
ceeded or came forth from the eternal essence and 
substance of the Father ; and that the Holy Ghost 
truly proceeds from the Father and Son, and is 
comprehended together with the Father and the 
Son in the only, eternal Divine Being.* 

Moreover, this is abundantly testified and con- 
firmed by the divine works and attributes, which 
are ascribed in the holy Scriptures jointly to the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, of which no 
angels in heaven, much less, any other creatures 
are capable, but which belong and are peculiar to 
the only God alone ; as the creating, governing, and 
upholding of heaven and earth with all things vis- 
ible and invisible ; the gracious Gospel sent from 
heaven ; the sending out of the apostles to preach 
the same among all nations; the raising of man 
from the dead, and the giving of eternal life ; and 
all divine worship, honor and reverence. Hence 
they are perfectly one, not only in will, words, and 
works, but also in essence, and in the eternal and 
indescribable Godhead. Thus also in the divine 
works, so that whatsoever the Father does, the Son 
does likewise ; and as the Father raises up the dead, 
even so the Son quickens whom He will; and all 
this they do in the power and with the co-operation 
of the Holy Ghost ; and hence they can with reason 
and truth be called the one God of heaven and earth. 
Besides Him, there has been no other God, neither 
shall another be found in all eternity. Hence in 
the term one God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost 
are comprehended. 

On this subject read the prophet Jeremiah : "The 
gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, 
even they shall perish from the earth, and from un- 
der these heavens. He hath made the earth by his 
power, he hath established the world by his wis- 
dom." Jer. 10:11, 12; Isa. 44:24; Ps. 96:5. 

"By the word of the Lord were the heavens 
made ; and all the host of them by the breath of his 
mouth." Ps. 33:6; Heb. 3:4; Acts 4:24. 

"All things were made by him (Christ) ; and 
without him was not anything made that was 
made." John 1 :3 and 5 :19. 

Concerning this perfect unity read: "My Fa- 
ther, which gave them me (says Christ) is greater 
than all ; and no man is able to pluck them out of 
my Father's hand. I and my Father are one." John 
10:29,30. 


* These things are very difficult to understand, and above hu- 
man reason ; hence they are not to be comprehended by reason, but 
must reverently be embraced in faith. 


376 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ said to Philip: "He that hath seen me 
hath seen the Father. Believest thou not that I am 
in the Father, and the Father in me ?" John 14 :9, 
10; 12:45; 17:21. 

How the Holy Ghost is also called God. Read 
what Peter said to Ananias: "Why hath Satan 
filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost?" And 
a little further on : "Thou hast not lied unto men, 
but unto God." Acts 5 :3, 4. 

"Them that have preached the Gospel unto you 
with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven." 
I Pet. 1 :12. 

"The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the 
love of God, and the communion of the Holy 
Ghost, be with you all. Amen." II Cor. 13:14. 

"For there are three that bear record in heaven, 
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and 
these three are one." I John 5 :7 ; Deut. 6 :4 ; Mark 
12:29; I Cor. 8:6; Gal. 3:20. 

ARTICLE VI 

Of the creation of all things visible and invis- 
ible, and of the creation of man we confess : That 
the only, almighty, and wonderworking God, who 
is the origin of all good, and for whose sake all 
things are created, and have their being, created, 
among other invisible things, also a multitude of 
many thousand angels, whom He has put as min- 
istering and immortal spirits in His worshipful 
glory, to minister unto their Creator, and to offer 
Him praise, honor, and thanks ; and who are sent 
forth by God, as messengers, to minister in mani- 
fold ways for men who shall be heirs of salvation ; 
and with which angels of God, Christ Jesus shall 
appear in the clouds of heaven, to hold judgment 
over all men. And He shall glorify all that believe 
and please God, and make them like the glorious, 
immortal angels, and crown them with all holy 
angels in everlasting glory. 

But as some of these angels became unfaithful 
and apostate to God, their Creator, they were, 
through their own voluntary sin or pride, rejected 
by the holy and righteous God, who is of purer 
eyes than to behold evil, and were cast down from 
the glorious estate of heaven to hell, bound with 
chains of darkness and reserved until the great 
day of judgment, to be sentenced with all unbe- 
lievers to eternal damnation. 

These impure spirits or devils are called: the 
prince of darkness and spirit of wickedness, who 
rules in the air and works in the children of dis- 
obedience ; with whom all unbelievers, who are 
governed and seduced by Satan, are in fellowship. 
And as all believers are in the society or brother- 
hood of the holy angels, and shall enjoy eternal sal- 
vation with them ; so, on the other hand, shall all 
unbelievers have to endure everlasting damnation 
with all impure or apostate angels, with whom un- 
believers are in fellowship. 

Likewise, God Almighty, in the beginning, from 
nothing, in a most wonderful manner, and above 
all human reason and comprehension, created heav- 


en, the earth, and the sea, with all their glorious 
adornment, He, the Blessed, only saying: "Let 
heaven and earth be made; and his word was a 
perfect work." He also adorned the heavens with 
many glorious lights ; two great lights, one to rule 
and illume the day, and the other to rule the night ; 
together with many glorious stars, which He or- 
dained to the honor of their Creator, and the serv- 
ice of men. 

Thus also, the Lord Almighty endowed the earth 
with many glorious fountains and running rivers, 
and adorned it with manifold trees and animals, and 
with all that lives and moves thereon. And He cre- 
ated the sea with great whales and various kinds of 
fish, for the wants of man, together with all that 
lives and moves therein. And He established the 
earth out of the water and in the water, by His al- 
mighty and everlasting word. They shall be pre- 
served until the last great day of judgment. 

After God, the Lord, in five days had most wise- 
ly and excellently created heaven, and earth, and 
the sea, together with all visible things, He, on the 
sixth day, formed man from the earth, and 
breathed into him the breath of life ; and from his 
rib made Eve, a woman, and gave her to him as a 
helpmeet. Moreover, He loved them above all 
other creatures, and clothed them like Himself with 
divine virtues, which are righteousness and true 
holiness ; endowing them with wisdom, speech, and 
reason, that they might know, fear, and love their 
Creator, and serve Him in voluntary obedience. 
He placed them as lords over all creatures, en- 
dowing them with immortality, that they might be 
and live before Him, and rule and reign over all 
creatures which God the Lord created. 

Concerning this wonderful creation, read : "Thou 
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor 
and power; for thou hast created all things, and 
for thy pleasure they are and were created." Rev. 
4:11. 

"For by him were all things created, that are in 
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, 
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or princi- 
palities, or powers ; all things were created by him, 
and in him." Col. 1:16; Ps. 33:6. 

Regarding the angels, read: "He maketh his 
angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. Are 
they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to min- 
ister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" 
Heb. 1:7, 14; Ps. 104:4. 

Concerning the apostasy of the angels, read: 
"For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but 
cast them down to hell, and delivered them unto 
chains and darkness, to be reserved unto judg- 
ment." II Pet. 2 :4 ; Jude 6 ; Luke 10:18; Isa. 14 :8 ; 
Rev. 12:4. 

Regarding the creation of the visible things, 
read: "In the beginning God created the heaven 
and the earth." Gen. 1:1; John 1 :3 ; Ps. 33 :6. 

God said : "Let heaven and earth be made ; and 
thy word was a perfect work." II Esd. 6:38. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


377 


"For thine almighty hand, that made the world 
of matter without form." Wisd. 11 :17. 

"I beseech thee, my son, look upon the heaven, 
and the earth, and all that is therein, and consider 
that God made them of things that were not; and 
so was mankind made likewise." II Mace. 7 :28. 

"Through faith we understand that the worlds 
were framed by the word of God, so that things 
which are seen were not made of things which do 
appear." Heb. 11:3; Acts 17:24; Ps. 146:6; 
148:5. 

Concerning the creation of man, read : "Let us 
make man in our image, after our likeness." Gen. 
1:26. 

"And the Lord formed man of the dust of the 
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of 
life; and man became a living soul." Gen. 2:7; 
Acts 17:25; I Cor. 15:45. 

How man was created, read : "This only have I 
found, that God hath made man upright." Eccl. 
7:29; Gen. 1:26; 5:1. 

"For God created man to be immortal, and made 
him to be an image of his own eternity." Wisd. 
2:23; Sir. 17:1. 

"And that ye put on the new man, which after 
God is created in righteousness and true holi- 
ness." Eph. 4:24. 

"And God saw everything that he had made, 
and, behold, it was very good." Gen. 1 :31 ; Deut. 
32:4. 

ARTICLE VII 

Of the fall and punishment of man we confess : 
The first man, Adam, and Eve, having been thus 
gloriously created after the likeness of their Crea- 
tor, unto eternal life, did not continue long in this 
estate ; but as they were created with a free will, to 
choose what they would, so that they could fear, 
serve and obey their Creator, or, disobey and for- 
sake Him ; and as their Creator had given them a 
command, not to eat of the tree of the knowledge 
of good and evil ; for in the day that they should 
eat thereof, they should surely die ; they, notwith- 
standing this, in their vain desire to be equal to their 
Creator in wisdom and knowledge, were led and 
drawn away from God, and deceived by Satan; 
and thus they disobediently and voluntarily trans- 
gressed the command of their Creator. The wom- 
an, last created, was first deceived, and turned her 
ears away from God to Satan, and, also seducing 
her husband, they through this sin, fell under the 
wrath and disfavor of God, and, with all their pos- 
terity, became subject that very day, to temporal 
and eternal death, and were thus divested of the 
divine virtue, which is righteousness, and tiue holi- 
ness, and became sinful and mortal. 

On this account, God the holy and righteous 
Judge, in whose sight wickedness can not endure, 
but who is of purer eyes than to behold evil, or to 
look on iniquity; and who threatens from heaven 
with His wrath and disfavor all disobedience and 
ingratitude of men; was so incensed by the sin 


thus committed by Adam and Eve, that thereby 
they not only fell into eternal condemnation, to- 
gether with all their posterity, but God the Lord 
moreover imposed upon Adam and Eve divers tem- 
poral, bodily punishments, which also continually 
extend themselves into all their generations. Who 
are so corrupted in Adam, that they are all from 
their youth, by nature, inclined to sin and evil, and 
are therefore deprived of the beautiful pleasure- 
garden, or paradise, but must eat their bread, all 
their life, in sorrow and in the sweat of their face, 
from the uncultivated earth, which because of this 
first sin was so cursed and marred, that it brings 
forth of itself weeds, thorns, and thistles ; and cov- 
er the shame of their bodies made naked by sin. 
The woman, as the chief transgressor, has to sub- 
ject her will and power to the man, and was con- 
strained to bring forth her children in pain and 
anguish. This punishment continues upon all men, 
until they finally return to the dust and ashes 
whence they came. 

Concerning how Adam, together with the whole 
human race, through sin, fell into temporal and 
eternal death, and, in consequence of this, became 
sinful, read : "Wherefore, as by one man sin en- 
tered into the world, and death by sin ; and so death 
passed upon all men." "Nevertheless death reigned 
from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not 
sinned." etc. "And not as it was by one that 
sinned ... for the judgment was by one to con- 
demnation," etc. "For if by one man's offense 
death reigned," etc. "Therefore, as by the offense 
of one judgment came upon all men to condemna- 
tion," etc. "For as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners," etc. Rom. 5 :12, 14-19. 

"For since by man came death, by man came 
also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam 
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." 

I Cor. 15:21,22. 

"Behold, I was shapen in iniquity ; and in sin did 
my mother conceive me." Ps. 51 :5. 

"Who can bring a clean thing out of an un- 
clean?" Job 14:4. 

"Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and 
through her we all die." Sir. 25:24; Tit. 2:14; 
Wisd. 2:24. 

The prophet Esdra says : "The first Adam bear- 
ing a wicked heart, transgressed, and was over- 
come ; and so be all they that are born of him." 
"And he transgressed, and thou immediately, thou 
appointedst death in him and in his generations." 

II Esd. 3 :21, 7. 

"O thou Adam, what hast thou done ! for though 
it was thou that sinned, thou art not fallen alone, 
but we all that come of thee." II Esd. 7 :48. Read 
also: John 3:6; Rom. 8:5; Eph. 2:3; Sir. 17:16; 
Gen. 6:5. 

Read further, how God announced unto Adam 
his punishment on account of sin, which punish- 
ment God extends unto all his posterity : "Because 
thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and 
hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, 


378 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the 
ground for thy sake ; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it 
all the days of thy life; thorns also and thistles 
shall it bring forth to thee ; and thou shalt eat the 
herb of the field: in the sweat of thy face shalt 
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; 
for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art 
and unto dust shalt thou return." Gen. 3:17-19, 
23, 24. Concerning the punishment of the woman, 
read: Gen. 3:16; I Cor. 14:34; I Tim. 2:12. 

ARTICLE VIII 

Of the restoration or justification of man. We 
confess that Adam and Eve having thus fallen un- 
der the wrath and disfavor of God, and into death 
and eternal condemnation, together with all their 
posterity, so that no remedy or deliverance was to 
be found in heaven or earth, among any created 
beings, who could help, and redeem them, and rec- 
oncile them to God, the Creator of all things, who 
is the Almighty God (against whose majesty they 
had sinned, and who alone could heal them), who 
is rich and abounding in all grace and mercy, had 
compassion upon Adam and his posterity, and, 
hence, promised them His only begotten Son as a 
comforting Redeemer and Saviour, whom He 
would put as enmity between Satan and the woman 
and their seed, to the comfort and help of fallen 
mankind, in order thus to bruise the head of Sa- 
tan, and to deprive him of his power ; and, in this 
manner, to deliver Adam and his posterity from the 
prison of sin, the power of the devil and eternal 
perdition, and to reconcile them to God. 

And even as God the Lord, through this prom- 
ise, clothed Adam and his seed internally, accord- 
ing to the soul, with His grace and mercy, He, in 
token of this, also covered the outward shame and 
nakedness of the body, making coats of skins, and 
clothing them therewith. 

And even as Adam, through this his first, one 
sin, brought, not only himself, but with him also 
his whole posterity, without exception of persons, 
and without their own actual evil works, into eter- 
nal death and condemnation; so also, God Al- 
mighty, through this promise of the only Saviour 
Christ Jesus, redeemed, delivered, and justified 
from condemnation, and placed into the state of 
grace and reconciliation, all men, without excep- 
tion of persons, without any of their good works, 
only from pure grace and mercy. Seeing that 
Adam's race was not born of him when he stood 
under disfavor and condemnation before God; 
but as all men proceed from Adam as being in a 
state of grace, peace, and reconciliation with God, 
he could bring forth none but such as stand with 
him in the same reconciliation. 

Thus none of Adam's race are created or born to 
condemnation, but all are born and brought forth 
into the world in the same state of grace and recon- 
ciliation with God. Hence, we hold it to militate 
not only against the holy Scriptures, but also ut- 
terly against the nature of God, which is just, 
righteous, holy, and merciful, that God should 


punish with eternal death and damnation, simply 
on account of Adam's sin, so great a number of 
Adam's race, who die in their infancy in a state of 
innocence, before they have followed Adam in sin ■ 
seeing j the good God, through Christ and for 
Christ's sake, so graciously forgave Adam, (who 
had himself committed the sin) and placed him in 
a state of grace. 

But men having attained the knowledge of good 
and evil, and, through the lust of the flesh, and 
their own desire, having been drawn away from the 
path of virtue and innocence, so that they follow 
Adam in sin, hence it comes that they separate 
themselves from their Creator, and, consequently, 
do not perish, nor are condemned on account of 
Adam's transgression, but because of their own 
unbelief and evil works. 

But the righteous God, who does indeed forgive 
sin, yet ofttimes does not suffer it to go entirely un- 
punished, permitted the temporal, bodily punish- 
ment to remain upon Adam and Eve, and their 
posterity, by which they ought to learn to know, 
fear, and serve their Creator, and to shun sin ; such 
as this, that from their infancy they are by nature 
inclined to sin and evil, against which they have 
a continual warfare, are barred out from the beauti- 
ful paradise, must cover their nakedness ; the wom- 
en must subject their power and will to their hus- 
bands, and must bring forth their children in pain 
and anguish ; and all must eat all the days of their 
life, with sorrow, of the corrupted earth, until they 
return to dust of the earth, whence they have come. 

But all believers receive in this life the restora- 
tion or justification of Christ only through faith, 
in hope, and afterwards in the resurrection of the 
dead they shall receive it truly and actually, and 
shall enjoy it forever. 

Concerning these glorious and comforting prom- 
ises of salvation, read : "And I will put enmity be- 
tween thee and the woman, and between thy seed, 
and her seed ; it shall bruise thy head." Gen 3 -15 • 
Eph. 2:14, 15. ' ' ' 

As to how this promise was renewed in the seed 
and race of Adam, read : "The Lord thy God will 
raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, 
of thy brethren, like unto me ; unto him ye shall 
hearken." Deut. 18:15; Acts 7:37. To Abraham: 
Gen. 12:3; 22:18; Acts 10:43. 

Concerning the fact that this promise of justifi- 
cation does not extend only to a particular class of 
persons, but to all men without distinction, read : 
"Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came 
upon all men to condemnation; even so by the 
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all 
men unto justification of life. For as by one man's 
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall many be made righteous " 
Rom. 5:18, 19. 

"For since by man came death, by man came 
also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam 
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive " 
I Cor. 15:21, 22. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


379 


"That was the true Light, which lighteth every 
man that cometh into the world." John 1 :9, 29. 

"And he is the propitiation for our sins : and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." I John 2:2. 

"For it pleased the Father that in him should all 
fullness dwell ; and, having made peace through the 
blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things 
unto himself ; by him, I say, whether they be things 
in earth, or things in heaven." Col. 1 :19, 20. 

"For the grace of God that bringeth salvation 
hath appeared to all men." Tit. 2:11. Read also: 
Rom. 3:24; 11:32; I Tim. 4:10; II Cor. 5:19; I 
John 4:10; Isa. 53:6; I Pet. 2:24. 

As to how the kingdom of heaven is promised 
by Christ to infants, without respect of persons, 
read: "Then were there brought unto him little 
children, that he should put his hands on them, 
and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. But 
Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them 
not, to come unto me ; for of such is the kingdom 
of heaven." Matt. 19:13, 14; 18:3; Mark 10:13; 
Luke 18:15. 

Concerning how God the righteous Judge will 
not punish infants for the sin of their parents, or of 
Adam ; but to requite each with righteousness, ac- 
cording to his own works, read: "For so much 
then as thou art righteous thyself, thou orderest all 
things righteously : thinking it not agreeable with 
thy power to condemn him that hath not deserved 
to be punished." Wisd. 12:15. 

"The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son 
shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither 
shall the father bear the iniquity of the son : the 
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him." 
Ezek. 18:20,4. "The fathers shall not be put to 
death for the children, neither shall the children be 
put to death for the fathers: every man shall be 
put to death for his own sin." Deut. 24:16; Jer. 
31 :29. 

"Because he hath appointed a day, in the which 
he shall judge the world in righteousness." Acts 
17:31; Ps. 7:11; II Tim. 4:8. 

"But he that believeth not shall be damned." 
Mark 16:16. "Tribulation and anguish, upon every 
soul of man that doeth evil." Rom. 2 :9. 

ARTICLE IX 

Of the free will or power of man before and 
after the fall; and of the saving grace of God. Of 
this we confess: That God Almighty in the begin- 
ning created the man Adam and his wife in His 
image and likeness, endowing them, above all crea- 
tures, with virtues, knowledge, speech, reason, and 
a free will or power ; so that they could know, love, 
fear, and obediently serve their Creator ; or could 
voluntarily and disobediently forsake their God; 
as appeared in the first transgression, when Adam 
and his wife, through the subtlety of the devil, 
who appeared in the form of a deceitful serpent, 
departed from the commandment of God; hence 
they did not sin through the foreordination or the 


will of God ; but as they had been created with a 
free will, and to do as they would, they sinned 
through their own voluntary desire, and trans- 
gressed the command of God contrary to His will. 
The man Adam and his wife having thus through 
their own sin fallen under the wrath and disfavor 
of God, whereby they became sinful and mortal, 
were again received into favor by God their Crea- 
tor ; so that they were not utterly divested of their 
former wisdom, speech, and knowledge, above all 
other creatures, nor of their previous free will or 
power, as may be seen from their voluntarily ac- 
cepting God's gracious promises unto life, and 
obeying the voice of the Lord ; and as also clearly 
appears from the fact that God the Lord very 
strictly appointed an angel with a flaming sword to 
keep the tree of life from Adam lest through his 
free will or power he should eat of the tree of life 
and live forever ; which would have been in Adam's 
power. And this free will or power has been trans- 
mitted to all their descendants, who proceed from 
them as branches from their stem ; so that even as 
men are endowed of God with knowledge, reason 
and voluntary power, by which they can perform 
manifold works, and seek and desire from God the 
health of their diseased and infirmed bodies, and are 
not without action, as the irrational creatures, 
blocks and stones, so likewise, man, through the 
grace of God, and the moving of the Spirit, by 
which men live, and are moved, may open the door 
of the heart to the salutary grace of God — which 
through the Gospel is offered to all men, and 
through which death and life is set before man — 
and seek the health of his wounded soul ; or he may 
voluntarily resist, reject and neglect this offered 
grace and moving of the Spirit. Thus also, as men 
have eyes and ears, to see and to hear, yet not of 
themselves, but only from God the Giver, so they 
also, through the grace of God, have a free will or 
power to do the good and to leave the evil. 

But men, considered in themselves, seeing they 
are without the grace of God, are of themselves in- 
capable of thinking anything that is good, much 
less are they able to do it. But it is Almighty God, 
who through His Spirit of grace works in man both 
to will and to do, moves, draws, and chooses them, 
and accepts them as His children, so that men are 
only recipients of God's saving grace. Hence all 
Christians are in duty bound, to ascribe the begin- 
ning, middle and end of their faith, with all the 
good fruits thereof, not to themselves, but only to 
the unmerited grace of God in Christ Jesus. 

We confess moreover: That this saving grace 
of God is not limited to a few particular men, but 
even as the Almighty God lets His sun rise and 
shine on the evil and on the good, so He has ex- 
tended His grace to all of Adam's race ; as it is also 
evident, that God, in His goodness, did not leave 
Himself without witness among the heathen, doing 
them good, and so moving their hearts, that their 
thoughts and consciences accused and excused 
them, so that they could do by nature, without the 


380 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


hearing of the law of Moses, the things contained 
in the law. This appears in still greater clearness 
in the coming of Christ, that Almighty God has pro- 
claimed the saving grace through the Gospel to the 
whole world, for a witness unto all nations, by 
which all excuse is taken from men, and as an evi- 
dence, that God is not willing that any should per- 
ish, but that all should repent and be saved. Ac- 
cording to the import of the holy and everlasting 
Gospel, a righteous, eternal, and irrevocable judg- 
ment shall be pronounced, in the last day, through 
Christ Jesus, the blessed, over all nations. Hence 
all men who now in this time of grace believe and 
accept the Gospel, attain unto life; but all who 
do not believe the Gospel, but voluntarily reject it, 
will receive death as their portion. 

On the other hand, we reject the belief of those 
who say that Almighty God has indeed caused the 
word of reconciliation to be preached to all, or 
many, but does nevertheless withhold His grace 
from many of them, so that the greater part of 
mankind cannot accept the word of reconciliation 
and be saved, but will, through the purpose or 
eternal counsel and will of God, inevitably have to 
perish forever, and be damned. 

On this subject, read various Scripture passages 
ascribing a will to man. And the holy Spirit does 
not speak in vain in the Scriptures : "He himself 
made man from the beginning, and left him in the 
hand of his counsel ; if thou wilt, to keep the com- 
mandments, and to perform acceptable faithful- 
ness. He hath set fire and water before thee; 
stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou wilt. Be- 
fore man is life and death ; and whether him liketh 
shall be given him." Sir. 15:14-17; Deut. 11:26; 
30:15; II Esd. 7:59. 

God the Lord said to Cain : "If thou doest not 
well, sin lieth at the door : and unto thee shall be 
his desire, and thou shalt rule over him." Gen. 4 :7. 

Concerning man's free will, read : "Let him do 
what he will, he sinneth not ; let them marry. Nev- 
ertheless he that standeth steadfast in his heart, 
having no necessity, but hath power over his own 
will." I Cor. 7:36-38. 

"And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace of- 
ferings unto the Lord to accomplish his vow, or a 
free will offering." Lev. 22:21, 23. 

"Who might offend, and hath not offended ? or 
done evil, and hath not done it?" Sir. 31 :10. 

And Paul also says : "For to their power, I bear 
record, yea, and beyond their power they were 
willing of themselves. Now therefore perform the 
doing of it ; that as there was a readiness to will, so 
there may be a performance also." II Cor. 8:3,11; 
Philem. 14; Mark 14:7; I Cor. 7:36. 

Man can do nothing good of himself, by his own 
power; but through the grace of God, he, in his 
imperfectness, is able to keep God's command- 
ments. "For it is God which worketh in you both to 
will and to do of his good pleasure." Philip. 2:13. 

"Thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, 


which have eyes to see, and see not ; they have ears 
to hear, and hear not." Ezek. 12 :2. 

"For to will is present with me; but how to 
perform that which is good I find not." Rom. 
7:18-21. 

Read here all the Scriptures which unanimously 
testify that God does not desire the death of the 
sinner, but that he be converted, and live. Ezek 
18:32; 33:11 ; Wisd. 1:13; Isa. 55:7. 

And that God has extended His saving grace not 
only to the elect, but to all of Adam's race ; and 
that He also died for those that perish. Concerning 
this, read : "For the grace of God that bringeth 
salvation hath appeared to all men." Tit. 2:11. 

"Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends 
of the earth." Isa. 45 :22. 

"Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation; even so by 
the righteousness of one the free gift came upon 
aU men unto justification of life." Rom. 5 :18. 

"Who in times past suffered all nations to walk 
in their own ways. Nevertheless he left not him- 
self without witness," etc. Acts 14:16, 17; Rom. 

"But there were false prophets also among the 
people, even as there shall be false teachers among 
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, 
even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring 
upon themselves swift destruction." II Pet. 2:1. 

"And that he died for all, that they which iive 
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but 
unto him which died for them, and rose again." II 
Cor. 5 :1.5. "For God so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son," etc. John 3:16. 

"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world !" John 1 :29. 

"For this is good and acceptable in the sight of 
God our Savior ; who will have all men to be saved, 
and come unto the knowledge of the truth." I Tim 
2 :3, 4. 

"He is longsuffering to usward, not willing that 
any should perish, but that all should come to re- 
pentance." II Pet. 3:9; Rom. 2:4; Jas. 4:6; Acts 
13:46. Read also: Matt. 23:36, 37; Luke 13:34; 
II Esd. 1 :30. 

As to how God the righteous Judge will pro- 
nounce the final judgment upon those who disobey* 
the Gospel, read : "When the Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in 
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know 
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." II Thess. 1:7,8; Mark 16 :16. "This 
is the book of the commandments of God, and the 
law that endureth forever: all they that keep it 
shall come to life ; but such as leave it shall die " 
Bar. 4:1. 

article x 

_ Of the providence of God, the election of be- 
lievers, and the rejection of unbelievers. Of this 
we confess : As we believe and confess that God is 

The original says "obey," which evidently is an error. Trans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


381 


omnipotent ; and that with Him nothing is impos- 
sible ; so likewise is He also prescient and omnis- 
cient, so that nothing is hid from Him in heaven and 
in earth, neither that which is to take place until 
the end of all things, nor that which has taken place 
from all eternity. And through this exceeding high 
prescience (foreknowledge), knowledge and wis- 
dom of God, which are unfathomable, He very well 
saw and knew from the beginning in eternity until 
the consummation of the world, who would be the 
truly believing recipients of His grace and mercy ; 
and, again, who should be found unbelieving de- 
spisers and rejecters of said grace. And, conse- 
quently, He from the beginning and from eternity 
knew, foresaw, elected and ordained all true be- 
lievers to inherit eternal salvation through Christ 
Jesus; and, on the other hand rejected all unbe- 
lieving despisers of said grace to eternal damna- 
tion. Hence the perdition of men is of themselves, 
and their salvation only through the Lord their 
God, without whom they can do nothing that is 
good. 

But in no wise is it true that the gracious, merci- 
ful, and righteous God (who conforms to His holy 
nature) has from eternity foreseen, ordained or 
predestinated, and created, at a convenient time, by 
far the greater number of the human race unto eter- 
nal damnation ; or that, they having fallen through 
the sin of the first man Adam, He let them re- 
main without help in eternal death and condemna- 
tion, into which they had come without their knowl- 
edge and own actual evil works, without having in 
this case seen and known the just cause of their re- 
jection. Far be it from us, to believe this from the 
only good and righteous God! 

But, on the other hand, all true followers of 
Christ believe and confess: That the righteous 
God, in the beginning, created man good and up- 
right, and gave him an existence, and He hates 
none of those things which He has created. And 
when through the subtlety of the devil they had 
fallen into eternal death, the blessed God, whose 
mercy is over all flesh, and who is not willing that 
any should perish, out of pure love and mercy, re- 
deemed, bought, and delivered, through the atone- 
ment of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, the 
whole human race, without exception of persons, 
from eternal condemnation ; so that, in considera- 
tion of the death of Christ, none shall perish on ac- 
count of Adam's sin ; but God the righteous Judge 
will judge the world in righteousness, giving as- 
surance unto all men, and rendering to every man 
according to his own works and deeds. The be- 
lievers, who by patient continuance in well-doing 
seek for eternal life, attain glory and honor and 
immortality, but the unbelieving and disobedient, 
tribulation and anguish, and the everlasting wrath 
of God. 

Concerning the foreknowledge or prescience of 
God, read : "And hath determined the times before 
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." 
Acts 17:26; Deut. 32:8. 


"She foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events 
of seasons and times." Wisd. 8:8; Dan. 2:28; 
5:17. 

"O everlasting God, that knowest the secrets, 
and knowest all things before they be." Hist. Sus. 
v. 42; Isa. 46:10; Job 42:2; Rom. 9:11; Acts 
2 :23, 31 ; I Pet. 1 :20. 

"My substance was not hid from thee, when I 
was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the 
lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my 
substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book 
all my members were written, which in continuance 
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of 
them." Ps. 139:15, 16. 

"He knew all things ere ever they were created ; 
so also after they were perfected he looked upon 
them all." Sir. 23:20; Acts 15:18. 

Here it is to be observed with attention, how God, 
through His prescience, from the beginning elected 
the believers in Christ, and rejected the unbelievers. 
Read : "Hearken, my beloved brethren, hath not 
God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith ?" 
etc. Jas. 2 :5. 

"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the 
world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen 
the weak things of the world to confound the 
things which are mighty; and base things of the 
world, and things which are despised, hath God 
chosen," etc. I Cor. 1 :27, 28. 

"I have even from the beginning declared it to 
thee ; before it came to pass I- shewed it thee : for 

I knew that thou wouldst deal very treacherously, 
and wast called a transgressor from the womb." 
Isa. 48:5,8; Mai. 1:2; Rom. 9:13; Eph. 3:11; 

II Tim. 1 :9. 

"Before they were sealed that have gathered 
faith for a treasure; then did I consider these 
things," etc. II Esd. 6 :5. 

"And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, 
and set it in order for me, since I appointed the 
ancient people?" Isa. 44:7. 

"We know that all things work together for 
good to them that love God, to them who are the 
called according to his purpose. For whom he did 
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed 
to the image of his Son, that he might be the first- 
born among many brethren. Moreover, whom he 
did predestinate, them he also called : and whom he 
called, them he also justified." Rom. 8 :28-30. 

"Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, 
and before thou earnest forth out of the womb I 
sanctified thee," etc. Jer. 1 :5. 

"According as he hath chosen us in him before 
the foundation of the world," etc. Eph. 1:4; II 
Tim. 1:9; John 15:16; Acts 13:48. 

ARTICLE XI 

Of the written Word of God, the law of Moses, 
and the Gospel of Christ. We confess : That the old 
law which was given by Moses and received by the 
disposition of angels, was a perfect doctrine and 
rule for the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and 


382 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Jacob, with whom God had made and established 
this His covenant. According to the doctrine and 
tenor of this law, this people had to conduct and 
regulate themselves, without transgressing any part 
of it, or taking away from, or adding to it, or fol- 
lowing their own opinion in regard to it, on pain of 
being exterminated, and falling under a great curse. 
On the other hand, those who hear, believe and 
fulfill this law, are promised life, and many glori- 
ous blessings. This blessing and curse extended 
mostly to temporal and bodily things. 

This law of God — the five books of Moses — em- 
bracing also all kings, priests and prophets, who 
prophesied and spoke, through the Spirit of God, 
among this people, Israel (agreeing with the law 
of Moses), which is the entire Old Testament, has 
through the grace of God been made known to us 
in the Bible. This law is also spiritual, the bringing 
in of a better hope, and the schoolmaster to Christ. 
By its various figures and shadows, as the Levitical 
priesthood, ceremonies and sacrifices, the land of 
Canaan, kings, the city of Jerusalem, and the Tem- 
ple, it pointed and led to Christ Jesus, because the 
old law was an intolerable yoke of bondage, which 
brought condemnation upon all who did not con- 
tinue in, and perform all that is written in the book 
of the law. And since men, through the weakness 
of the flesh, could not perfectly keep all this, they 
could not obtain the eternal blissful life through 
the law, but would have had to remain under the 
wrath and anger of God. But Christ Jesus came, 
who is the end and the fulfilling of the old law, 
and the beginner and author of the new law, of 
perfect liberty, and the real, true light, to which 
all the dark shadows pointed ; He came sent from 
God, with full power in heaven and on earth and 
is the one who has abolished death, and brought life 
and immortality to light through the Gospel. 

He has made a new covenant with the house of 
Israel, and the house of Judah, and has invited 
thereto all the Gentiles and nations of the earth, 
who in time past were strangers and enemies, but 
who now, through grace, are all invited, and for 
whcjm the way unto life has been opened and well 
beaten; so that by obedience through grace, they 
may now become fellow citizens with the saints, 
and of the household of God. And this is the word 
of reconciliation, by which Almighty God, through 
His Spirit, works faith, regeneration, and all the 
good fruits resulting therefrom in men; in which 
word of the New Testament are proclaimed to us 
full grace and peace, forgiveness of sins, and eter- 
nal life, together with all things that pertain unto 
life and godliness, yea, all the counsel of God. Ac- 
cording to this proclamation all believing children 
of the New Testament must necessarily regulate 
and conduct themselves in all matters relating to 
the faith; in accordance with which, finally, an 
eternal judgment will be held. And it is so much 
worthier, and better established than the Old Testa- 
ment, as it was given through a higher and worthier 
ambassador, and was sealed with a more precious 


blood ; and it shall not cease, but continue till the 
end of the world. And as a man's covenant, if it be 
confirmed, may not be changed, or anything taken 
from or added to it, so this New and everlasting 
Covenant, which is confirmed with the precious 
death and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, may still 
much less be diminished, or anything added thereto, 
nor may it be bent and distorted according to one's 
own individual opinions ; but all Christians are in 
duty bound to bow their whole heart, mind and 
soul under the obedience of Christ and the mind of 
the Holy Spirit expressed in the holy Scriptures, 
and to regulate and measure their whole faith and 
conversation according to the import thereof. 

The Old Testament is to be expounded by and 
reconciled with the New Testament and must be 
distinctively taught among the people of God: 
Moses with his stern, threatening, punishing law 
over all impenitent sinners as still under the law ; 
but Christ with His new, glad tidings of the holy 
Gospel over all believing, penitent sinners as not 
under the law, but under grace. 

To this new law of Jesus Christ all decrees, coun- 
cils and ordinances made contrary to it by men in 
the world, must give place ; but all Christians must 
necessarily, as far as the faith is concerned, regu- 
late and conduct themselves only in accordance with 
this blessed Gospel of Christ. And as the outward 
man lives outwardly by the nourishment of bread ; 
so the inward man of the soul lives by every word 
proceeding from the mouth of the Lord. There- 
fore the Word of God must be purely and sincerely 
preached, heard, received and kept, by all be- 
lievers. 

Of the law of Moses : how it was written with 
the finger of God on tables of stone, and given by 
the disposition of angels, concerning this read: 
Ex. 20:2; Deut. 5:6; John 1:17; Acts 7:53; Ex. 
31:18; 32:16. 

Of the severity of the law, and how we must 
neither take away from, nor add to, it ; in regard to 
this, read : "Cursed be he that confirmeth not all 
the words of this law to do them : and all the peo- 
ple shall say, Amen." Deut. 27:26; Gal. 3:10. 

"What thing soever I command you, observe to 
do it ; thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from 
it." Deut. 12:32, 8; 29:19; Prov. 30:6; Deut. 4:2. 

Of the imperfectness of the law, read : "For the 
law having a shadow of good things to come, and 
not the very image of the things," etc. Heb. 10:1 ; 
Col. 2:17. 

"For the priesthood being changed, there is 
made of necessity a change also of the law. For 
there is verily a disannulling of the commandment 
going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness 
thereof. For the law made nothing perfect, but the 
bringing in of a better hope did." Heb. 7:12, 18, 
19; Gal. 2:16; Acts 13:39; Rom. 8:3. 

How Christ is the end and fulfilling of the law ; 
with regard to this, read : "For Christ is the end 
of the law for righteousness to every one that be- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


383 


lieveth." Rom. 10:4; Matt. 5:17; Rom. 7:4; Gal. 
1:19. 

Of the power and dignity of the holy Gospel, 
read: "For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of 
Christ : for it is the power of God unto salvation to 
every one that believeth," etc. Rom. 1:16; John 
1:17; Luke 16:16; Mark 1:15; I Pet. 1:12. 

"Who hath abolished death, and hath brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel." 
II Tim. 1:10; I Pet. 1:25. 

Of the usefulness and power of the holy Gospel, 
read : "And that from a child thou hast known the 
holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise 
unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Je- 
sus. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, 
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for cor- 
rection, for instruction in righteousness : that the 
man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished 
unto all good works." II Tim. 3:15-17; II Peter 
3:15. 

"Search the Scriptures ; for in them ye think ye 
have eternal life." "He that believeth on me, as the 
Scripture hath said," etc. John 5 :39; 7:38; James 
1:21; Matt. 4:4; Deut. 8:3; Wisd. 16:26; Rev. 
22:18; Deut. 4:2; 12:32; Prov. 30:6. 

"For whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our learning, that we through pa- 
tience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have 
hope." Rom. 15:4. 

How Christ Jesus will pronounce the last judg- 
ment upon the obedience of the Gospel, read : "The 
word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him 
in the last day." John 12 :48. 

"When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire, tak- 
ing vengeance on them that know not God, and 
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ : 
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord," etc. II Thess. 
1:7-9; Matt. 24:14; Heb. 4:12; Rev. 20:12. 

ARTICLE XII 

Of saving faith. We confess : That saving faith 
is not a vain or hidden thing unborn in man ; nor 
does it consist in us having a historical knowledge 
derived from the holy Scriptures, and that we have 
much to say about it, without having the real sub- 
stance or signification thereof. But the real and 
true faith, which avails before God, is a sure knowl- 
edge of the heart in a sure confidence, which we 
receive from God, not through our own power, 
will, or ability, but through the hearing of the Word 
of God ; and which, through the illumination of the 
Holy Spirit is imprinted on, and written in, the 
heart, and works so effectually in us, that we are 
drawn away by it from all visible and perishable 
things, to the invisible and living God ; acquiring 
thereby a new spiritual taste for that which is heav- 
enly, and not for that which is earthly. For saving 
faith, accompanied with hope and love, is of such a 
nature that it conforms to things not seen. Hence, 
all true believers gladly and obediently submit 


themselves to all the commandments of God, con- 
tained in the holy Scriptures, and, when necessary, 
testify to and confess them with the mouth before 
kings, princes, lords, and all men, not allowing 
themselves to be drawn away therefrom by any 
means whatever, though, on account thereof, mon- 
ey, property, body and life be sacrificed unto spoil- 
ing, water, and fire. For the power of God, which 
preserves them in the faith, strengthens them, so 
that they esteem all the sufferings of this time brief 
and light, not avenging themselves, but praying 
for their persecutors, gladly suffering for the name 
of the Lord what is imposed upon them, because 
of the faith, hope, and love which they have to their 
Creator and His heavenly riches. 

Where this true faith is received in the heart, 
there the fruits of the Holy Spirit, as witnesses of 
the same, must follow and flow out. On the con- 
trary, unbelief, with its unfruitful works of dark- 
ness must flee, as darkness before the clear sun- 
light. By this faith, which is the beginning of the 
Christian doctrine, we become children of God, 
overcome the world, are armed against all the subtle 
wiles of the devil, become sanctified, justified, 
saved, and partakers of all the benefits of God 
shown in Christ Jesus ; and without this faith it is 
impossible to please God. 

In this true faith we cannot stand still, but, with 
humble fasting, praying, and supplicating in the 
Spirit, we must plead for help, assistance, and new 
strength in all divine virtues, unto the end, in order 
that God may strengthen and preserve us in the 
same. Where this is neglected men may fall from 
the faith ; the good Spirit may be taken away, and 
their names blotted out of the Book of Life, and 
written again in the earth. To this true faith, which 
is a noble gift of God, all men, who have attained 
to understanding and knowledge, so that they can 
hear and understand the Word of God, without dis- 
tinction of persons, are called through the divine 
word, and invited to come; but all infants, and 
those whom God permits to remain in their infancy 
are herefrom excepted and excluded. They are un- 
der the grace and pleasure of God through the 
atonement of Jesus Christ, by which He, through 
His blood, cleansed and redeemed the whole hu- 
man race from the fall of Adam, without requiring 
of them any other means than faith, hope, love and 
the observance of certain commandments of God. 
It is therefore a great error that some ascribe faith 
to new born infants ; or [that they say] that without 
this they cannot be saved. It is a sure sign that said 
persons do not know the true faith, and do not be- 
lieve the words of Jesus Christ, who has promised 
the kingdom of heaven to infants without this. 

For, as true faith consists in hearing, believing 
and accepting the good things which God offers us 
through His Word ; and, again, as unbelief consists 
in despising and rejecting those things ; and since 
infants have neither knowledge, ability, inclination, 
nor emotion concerning any of these things, as all 
intelligent persons see and know ; therefore it must 


384 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


truly follow that neither faith nor unbelief may be 
attributed to infants ; but they are simple and igno- 
rant, and in this state perfectly pleasing to God, He 
having set them as examples for us, that we should 
imitate them in their simplicity. 

How the true faith is a gift of God, and is 
wrought in the hearts of men through the hearing 
of God's Word, read : "For by grace are ye saved 
through faith ; and that not of yourselves ; it is the 
gift of God." Eph. 2:8; Rom. 12:3; Col. 2:12; 
Phil. 1:29; Jude 3. 

"So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing 
by the word of God." Rom. 10:17; Heb. 6:2. 

With regard to how we must believe in God 
through His Word, read: "Neither pray I for 
these alone, but for them also which shall believe 
on me through their word." John 17 :20 ; Eph. 1 :9 ; 
John 7:38; 14:1 ; Heb. 11 :6; I Pet. 1 :21 ; II Tim. 
3:15. 

Concerning how true faith is not vain, but mani- 
fests its effectual power and nature, read: "By 
whom we have received grace and apostleship, for 
obedience to the faith among all nations," etc. 
Rom. 1:5; 16:25; Acts 6:7. 

"When ye received the word of God which ye 
heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, 
but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which effect- 
ually worketh also in you that believe." I Thess. 
2:13. 

"In Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth 
anything, nor uncircumcision ; but faith which 
worketh by love." Gal. 5 :6. 

He that does not evince from his faith the seven 
virtues required, "is blind, and cannot see afar off," 
etc. II Pet. 1:9; Jas. 2:26. 

"But the just shall live by his faith." Hab. 2 :4 ; 
Heb. 10:38; Rom. 1:17; Gal. 3:11. 

By faith we become righteous and partakers of 
the benefits of God. Acts 26:18; Rom. 10:10; 
Gen. 15:6; Rom. 4:3; Gal. 3:6; Mark 16:16. 

We must pray to God, to be strengthened and 
kept in the faith. Luke 17:5 ; I Pet. 1 :5. 

When the grace of God is neglected through un- 
belief and evil works, one may fall away from the 
faith, and be blotted out of the Book of Life. Now 
the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith. I Tim. 
4:1; II Peter 2:1; I Tim. 6:10. 

"Which for a while believe, and in time of temp- 
tation fall away." Luke 8:13. 

"One that returneth from righteousness to sin : 
the Lord prepareth such a one for the sword." 
Sirach 26:28; Jer. 17:13; Prov. 3:21 ; Heb. 6:6. 

"The Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath 
sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book." 
Ex. 32:33; Rev. 3:5; Ps. 69:29; Isa. 1:2; 30:1; 
Jer. 18:7. 

How infants are simple and ignorant, and that 
therefore neither faith nor unbelief may be imputed 
to them; but that they are well-pleasing to God 
through His grace, without any other means, read : 
"Moreover, your little ones, which ye said should 


be a prey, and your children, which in that day 
had no knowledge between good and evil, they 
shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, 
and they shall possess it." Deut. 1 :39 ; Matt. 19 :14. 

"When 1 was a child, I spake as a child, I under- 
stood as a child, I thought as a child : but when I 
became a man, I put away childish things." I Cor. 
13:11; Heb. 5:13. 

"Brethren, be not children in understanding: 
howbeit in malice be ye children." I Cor. 14:20; 
Eph. 4:14; Matt. 18:2; 19:13; Mark 10:13; 
Luke 18:15. 

ARTICLE XIII 

Of regeneration and the new creature, we con- 
fess : Inasmuch as our first parents, Adam and Eve, 
through their transgression, separated themselves 
from God, and fell into temporal and eternal death, 
with all their posterity, and, consequently, lost the 
image of God, which is righteousness and true holi- 
ness; became depraved in their nature, and in- 
clined to sin and wickedness from their youth ; so 
that of all men none can attain unto faith and a 
godly conversation through the power of their first 
birth, which has sprung and proceeded from sinful 
seed; because that which is born of the flesh is 
flesh, and hence, carnally minded, and the natural 
man does not receive the things of the Spirit of 
God ; therefore, all men, having come of the earth, 
shall return to dust and earth, and, in part, are also 
like to the corrupted earth, which of itself does not 
bring forth good grain, but must thereto be pre- 
pared anew, and sown with good seed. Thus also, 
all men, when they have passed their youth, and 
have come to understand and discern good and evil, 
we perceive, that their carnal hearts and earthly 
life, being conceived in sin, are inclined to sin, 
which conceives by its own lust, which awakens sin 
in them, and allures and moves them to actual sin ; 
and thus they fall from grace,— to which they had 
been redeemed through the atonement of Christ— 
which plunges them into the death of sin. 

Hence, God the Lord requires and demands 
through His Word, of all men of understanding, 
a true reformation and a renewing from these their 
own actual sins ; that is, that through the hearing 
of the Word of God they receive the faith, become 
regenerated from above, of God, be created anew 
in the inner mind of the heart, according to the 
image of God, and circumcised, being translated 
from the carnal into the spiritual, from unbelief 
into faith, from that which is earthly-minded and 
like Adam into that which is heavenly-minded and 
like Jesus Christ; that they crucify and mortify 
their earthly members, and feel, prove, and taste 
that which is heavenly, and not that which is earth- 
ly. To this, God promises life, peace, and all heav- 
enly riches ; and it is the sanctification in the spirit 
of the mind, and the appropriation of all the ben- 
efits of Christ (which have been lost through our 
own actual sin), and has the promise of eternal 
salvation. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


385 


And wherever this renewing and conversion of 
the mind and the heart is not found (among all 
those who know sin have served it), there Christ 
and the life do not exist ; and without this renew- 
ing neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, bap- 
tism nor Supper, nor any ceremonies, however 
glorious they may appear, avail anything. 

And as man in the beginning is brought forth 
with pain and anguish from the flesh, so the sec- 
ond, spiritual generation is also called a birth; 
and it takes place with godly sorrow over sin, and 
with the crucifying and mortifying of the earthly 
members. 

And as men by the fall of Adam were not alto- 
gether deprived and divested of all godly virtues 
and qualities, so as to become like Satan in evil, 
but through the grace of God have retained many 
good principles, so the innate sinful nature, af- 
fection for, and proneness to sin are not utterly re- 
moved by regeneration, but remain until death in 
the regenerated ; so that the flesh lusts against the 
Spirit, and the lust or indwelling sin wars against 
the law of the new mind, so that the regenerated 
enter upon a continuous warfare, and must con- 
stantly crucify and mortify the lusts of the flesh, 
tame and bring into subjection their bodies, and ab- 
stain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul ; 
and thus fighting, they must keep the victory unto 
death. 

On the other hand, the assertion of those who 
ascribe regeneration to new-born infants, and say 
that without this they cannot be saved, is rejected 
as a grave error. Some of these found regeneration 
upon infant baptism, maintaining that as soon as 
they have their children baptized, they are also, 
through this ceremony of baptism, regenerated. 
Others build the regeneration of infants in the 
justification or general redemption of Christ, by 
which the human race has been reconciled from 
the fall of Adam and put in a state of grace ; saying 
that children are regenerated as soon as they are 
conceived by the mother ; thus putting regeneration, 
against all right and probability, before the first 
birth which is of the flesh. Some cannot tell 
whether infants become partakers of regeneration 
before, in, or after baptism; from which it is 
judged that the aforesaid persons treat of regen- 
eration without the holy Scriptures and all true 
reason, as the blind man of colors ; since Almighty 
God, nowhere in His holy Word speaks of the re- 
generation of infants. And though children are 
conceived in sin, or born from sinful seed, yet they 
have never known, served, or practiced sin, from 
which they might be regenerated, converted, and 
renewed in their mind and heart; but they have 
without this been born, and placed by God in so 
holy and God-pleasing a state, through the atone- 
ment of Christ, that no adult person can, through 
regeneration and the putting off of the sinful body 
of the flesh, and the renewing of the mind, become 
more sinless, holy and God-pleasing; seeing the 
innate sinfulness, lust or inclination to sin remains 


in the most pious, regenerated, adult persons until 
death (not less than in children, in their infancy), 
against which they carry on a constant warfare; 
and besides this, Almighty God, by His Word, re- 
quires of all men that have served sin, no higher 
or greater reparation than that they be converted 
by regeneration, and become like unto children in 
sin and malice. With what reason, then, can re- 
generation be applied to children, who have never 
committed sin, from which they could be regen- 
erated; seeing infancy has already the innocence 
which is acceptable to God, and has been set as an 
example before men, after which all the regener- 
ated must labor and strive until death. 

Of this heavenly birth from God, and how it is 
effected through the Spirit and the Word of God, 
read: "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obey- 
ing the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned 
love of the brethren, see that ye love one another 
with a pure heart fervently : being born again, not 
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the 
word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." 
I Pet. 1:22, 23; 2:2; James 1:18; I Cor. 4:15; 
Gal. 4:19; Philem. 10. 

"Not by works of righteousness which we have 
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by 
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the 
Holy Ghost," etc. Tit. 3:5. 

That regeneration is not a vain or hidden thing, 
but demands a new life and the following of Christ, 
and that eternal salvation is promised thereupon, 
read: "Verily, 1 say unto you, that ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of 
man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall 
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes 
of Israel." Matt. 19:28. 

"For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avail- 
eth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new crea- 
ture. And as many as walk according to this rule, 
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel 
of God." Gal. 6:15, 16. 

"But as many as received him, to them gave he 
power to become the sons of God, even to them 
that believe on his name : which were born, not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, but of God." John 1 :12, 13. 

To all who have served sin, and have not been 
regenerated, the kingdom of God is denied. Con- 
cerning this, read : "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God." 

"Except a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. 
That which is born of the flesh is flesh ; and that 
which is born of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not 
that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The 
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the 
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, 
and whither it goeth ; so is every one that is born 
of the Spirit." John 3 :3, 5-8. 

That the regenerated do not become perfect in 
this life, but must fight unto death against the flesh, 


386 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the world, and sin, read : "Not as though I had 
already attained, either were already perfect : but 
I follow after," etc. Phil. 3:12; 1 :30; Col. 1 :29; 
Rev. 2:10. 

" I keep under my, body, and bring it into subjec- 
tion : lest that by any means, when I have preached 
to others, I myself should be a castaway." I Cor. 
9:27. 

"For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the 
Spirit against the flesh ; and these are contrary the 
one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things 
that ye would. But if ye be led by the Spirit," etc. 
Gal. 5 :17, 18; I Pet. 2 :11 ; Rom. 7 :18, 23 ; Jas. 3 :2. 

ARTICLE XIV 

Of the incarnation of the eternal and only begot- 
ten Son of God. We confess : That the exalted and 
true God faithfully kept and fulfilled His exceed- 
ing great and precious promises, which He had 
made in the beginning concerning His Son, who 
had been foreordained to this end before the foun- 
dation of the world, but in these last times was 
manifest for our sakes. 

This glorious and cheering promise was orig- 
inally given to fallen Adam and Eve, and was after- 
wards renewed in their seed, as in Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob, Moses and David. Of Him did all the 
prophets prophesy, and on Him did all the pious 
fathers hope with a firm confidence (as though 
they had seen Him), that Shiloh would come from 
Judah, and that this beautiful star would arise out 
of Jacob. This truly and really took place as fol- 
lows : When everything was in tranquillity, when 
the royal sceptre had departed from Judah, and 
the seed of Jacob was under tribute to the heathen ; 
then the gracious God remembered His holy cov- 
enant, and sent His true, real Word or Son out of 
heaven, from His royal throne ; having to this end 
foreordained and elected the righteous Joseph, of 
the house and generation of David, whose espoused 
wife was Mary, whom God had blessed and chosen 
for this purpose above all other women. 

To this Joseph and Mary the Holy Ghost points 
from generation to generation, as well as to the 
town of Bethlehem, out of which this Light long 
before promised was to arise and come forth; in 
order that all the pious who waited and hoped for 
this salvation, might have a certain consolation and 
knowledge from which tribe, city and place they 
were to expect this Saviour of the world. 

Thus Mary received the message through the an- 
gel of God, and believed it, being overshadowed by 
the power of the Highest, and conceived of the 
Holy Ghost the true, real Word, which was in the 
beginning with God, and by which all things were 
created. The same, through the effectual power of 
the Almighty God, became flesh or man in her, and 
was born of her, the Son of the Most High God, 
whom she had before conceived of the Holy Ghost. 

Thus the eternal and only begotten Son of the liv- 
ing God became a visible man subject to suffering. 
He was wrapped in swaddling clothes, laid in a 


manger, and brought up at Nazareth under the care 
of His [imputed] father and His mother. He hun- 
gered, thirsted, was wearied with walking, sighed 
and wept, and increased in wisdom and stature, and 
in favor with God and man ; so that the eternal, 
only begotten Son of the living God, in the time 
of His incarnation, did not continue like His heav- 
enly Father in an invisible, impassive, immortal, 
and spiritual form, but for our sakes, humbled 
Himself into a visible, passive, mortal, and servile 
form, became like unto us men in all things, ex- 
cept sin; in order thereby to heal us from the 
poisonous bite of the serpent, and from everlast- 
ing torment. 

Hence, all true witnesses of Jesus Christ are 
bound, by virtue of the holy Scriptures, to believe 
and confess : That this same Word, which was in 
the beginning with God, and was God, by which all 
things were made, proceeded from God His Father, 
came into the world, and, through the power of 
God, became Himself man or flesh, so that the 
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full 
of grace and truth was touched and seen. 

Thus He who before was like unto His Father in 
brightness and glory— not given or usurped God- 
likeness, but one peculiar to Him by nature — left 
His brightness and glory, and humbled Himself, 
and became in form like unto us men ; He who be- 
fore was greater than the angels, and in an invisible, 
immortal form, like unto God His Father, was now 
made lower than the angels, and became like unto 
His brethren in a visible and mortal form. He who 
could have had joy with His Father, and was sur- 
rounded by eternal riches, became poor for our 
sakes, and suffered on the cross, despising the 
shame. He who in the presence of the apostles as- 
cended heavenward, was the same who before had 
descended from God out of heaven into the lower 
parts of the earth; and the same ascended above 
all heavens. This is the mystery of godliness, which 
is great, but on account of their carnal and flicker- 
ing reason, is believed by but few : that God the 
Son was thus manifest in the flesh ; and that He ap- 
peared, as a true Redeemer and Saviour, and 
eternal Light, to them who sat in darkness and in 
the shadow of death. 

And, as the food which the Israelites ate in the 
wilderness, is called, bread from heaven or heav- 
enly bread, because the substance of the bread was 
no fruit of this earth, but had come from heaven, 
though the same, was in this world, prepared in the 
form of bread; so also Christ Himself calls His 
flesh the true bread which came down from heaven ; 
and says that the Son of man should ascend up 
where He was before, because His flesh or body be- 
came flesh, not of Mary or of any created substance, 
but only of the Word of life which had come down 
from heaven. 

He it was who spake with Moses on the mount 
and in the wilderness ;and Him the fathers tempted 
in the wilderness, and resisted His Spirit. This is 
the same who was from the beginning. Him the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


387 


apostles touched with their hands, and beheld with 
their eyes ; herein the life was manifested, that they 
saw and proclaimed to men, that which was with 
the Father, and was manifested unto them, and was 
even the same Word which spake with them. 

And though it is true that the eternal Son of the 
living God forsook His divine glory, and, for a 
brief time, was made lower than the angels, and ap- 
peared in the visible form of a servant ; yet He did 
not thereby lose His eternal Sonship and Godhead 
with His Father ; but when God the Father brought 
this His first and only begotten Son into the world, 
He prepared Him a body, not of any created sub- 
stance, but only of the Word of life, which became 
flesh, and which by all the angels of God is hon- 
ored and worshiped as the true God. 

Likewise, Christ glorified Himself before His 
apostles, on Mount Tabor, that His face shone as 
the bright sun, and He was confessed by His Fa- 
ther from heaven as His beloved Son. Thus have 
also the highly enlightened apostles of Christ, and 
all true believers, confessed, pronounced, honored 
and worshiped this visible and palpable Christ 
Jesus as the true God, and Son of God. Hence all 
true believers, according to these testimonies of 
holy Scripture, and the examples of all the saints 
of God, must necessarily, unto salvation, follow, 
believe, and confess, that the whole crucified Christ 
Jesus, visible and invisible, mortal and immortal, 
is the true God, and the Son of God, God and man 
in one undivided person. To Him be praise forever 
and ever. Amen. 

Of these promises concerning the Saviour, read, 
how God the Lord, in the beginning promised fallen 
Adam and Eve, to put Him as enmity between 
Satan and the woman, and between their seed. 
"And I will put enmity between thee and the wom- 
an, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall 
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." 
Gen. 3:15; Col. 1:19; 3:15; Eph. 2:15. 

"The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a 
prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, 
like unto me ; unto him ye shall hearken." Deut. 
18:15; Acts 7 :37 ; Read also : Acts 3 :25 ; Gal. 3 :8 ; 
Genesis 49:10; Num. 24:17; Matt. 2:2; Jer. 23:5 ; 
33:15; Isa. 9:6; 11:1; Acts 10:43. 

And that this Saviour of the world originally did 
not spring from the fathers, Mary, or any creature, 
but was sent and came only from God, and was con- 
ceived and brought forth by Mary, read : "Behold, 
a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a 
son." Matt. 1 :23 ; Isa. 7 :14; Luke 2 :21 ; Gal. 4:4. 
"When as his mother Mary was espoused to Jo- 
seph, before they came together, she was found 
with child of the Holy Ghost." And further : "Jo- 
seph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee 
Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her 
is of the Holy Ghost." Matt. 1 :18, 20. 

The angel of God said unto Mary: "Behold, 
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a 
son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be 
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest ; 


and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne 
of his father David: and he shall reign over the 
house of Jacob forever ; and of his kingdom there 
shall be no end. Then said Mary unto the angel, 
How shall this be, seeing I know not a man ? And 
the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee : therefore also that 
holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called 
the Son of God." Luke 1 :30-35. 

Read in this connection St. John, who also gives 
thorough information regarding this matter: "In 
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God. The same was 
in the beginning with God. And the Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his 
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Fa- 
ther), full of grace and truth." John 1:1,2, 14; 
Bar. 3:37; Zech. 2:10. 

And further : "That which was from the begin- 
ning, which we have heard, which we have seen 
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and 
our hands have handled, of the Word of life; (for 
the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and 
bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, 
which was with the Father, and was manifested 
unto us,)" I John 1:1,2; John 8:25 ; Micah 5 :2 ; 
II Peter 1 :16; John 20:28; Wisd. 18:15. 

Of the humbling of the eternal and only Son of 
God, (Mark especially the word made; for no- 
where do we find anything about assuming man) 
read : "Who, being in the form of God, thought it 
not robbery to be equal with God : but made him- 
self of no reputation, and took upon him the form 
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men : 
and being found in fashion as a man," etc. Phil. 
2:6-8. 

"Thou madest him a little lower than the angels." 
"But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower 
than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned 
with glory and honor." Heb. 2:7,9; Ps. 8:5. 

"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes 
he became poor, that ye through his poverty might 
be rich." II Cor. 8:9; Eccl. 9:15. 

"Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of 
our faith; who for the joy that was set before him 
endured the cross, despising the shame," etc. He- 
brews 12:2. 

"I am the living bread which came down from 
heaven : if any man eat of this bread, he shall live 
forever : and the bread that I will give is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world." John 
6:51. Read also verses 58 and 63. 

How the saints of God confessed and worshiped 
this humiliated Jesus also in the days of His flesh, 
as the true God, and the Son of God, read : "Whom 
do men say that I, the Son of man, am?" And 
after a few more words : "Simon Peter answered 
and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living 
God." Matt. 13 :16. Understand, the true Son who 
was born and came forth from the essence of the 


388 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Father ; and not a Son become so in time, or as- 
sumed, as believers, who because of the faith, are 
also called sons and daughters." II John 1 :3 ; John 
1 :49; 10:36; 11 :27; Acts 8:37; Matt. 27:54. 

Jesus said to the blind man : "Dost thou believe 
on the Son of God ? He answered and said, Who 
is he, Lord, that I might believe on him ? and Jesus 
said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is 
he that talketh with thee. And he said, Lord, I 
believe. And he worshiped him." John 9 :3S-38. 

"Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord 
and my God. Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, be- 
cause thou hast seen me, thou hast believed," etc. 
John 20:28, 29. 

"In his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, 
and eternal life. Little children, keep yourselves 
from idols. Amen." I John 5:20, 21. Rom. 9:5. 

ARTICLE XV 

Of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, God and man 
in one person, and the necessity of believing it. Of 
this we confess : That it is necessary for all Chris- 
tians to believe that the knowledge of the only Son 
of the Father, is, as one of the principal articles of 
our faith, in the highest degree essential unto salva- 
tion. It is therefore not sufficient to know Christ 
only after the flesh, or His humanity ; as, that He 
was born of Mary, and become like unto us in all 
things, except sin ; but we must also (which is the 
most important) know Him after the Spirit, and 
His eternal Godhead; that is, that He before all 
time, in eternity, in an unspeakable manner, was 
born of or proceeded from the true God His Fa- 
ther, and that He is the true real Word and Wis- 
dom, which proceeded from the mouth of the Most 
High, and which for this reason, was equal with 
His Father in brightness, glory, power, might and 
eternal Godhead, before the foundation of the 
world. And that this only Son of God, for our 
justification, became a visible man, that by His 
present, visible humanity — which is not of this 
tabernacle or sinful substance, but in essence far 
different from sinners — He might give us a holy, 
unblamable example in doctrine and conversation, 
in order thus to incite all men to follow Him. 

And that according to His divine power and 
might He was able to deliver us from the captivity 
of sin, hell, the devil, and death, and save us for- 
ever ; seeing no other means or name in heaven or 
on earth is given unto men for salvation. To this 
end, Christ was made unto us, of God, wisdom, 
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemp- 
tion. Hence neither Moses with his threatening 
and punishing law of commandments, nor Aaron 
with the entire Levitical priesthood, and all their 
sacrifices and offerings, which were made only for 
remembrance of sins, and consequently, passed by 
polluted mankind without affording them any help 
(for no corruptible man could redeem his brother, 
and reconcile him with God ; as all human, sinful 
substance was not able to redeem the soul from eter- 
nal death) ; but this was fulfilled and accomplished 


by the slain Lamb, which was foreordained and 
was manifest in these last times. He restored that 
which He had not taken away. He, the innocent 
one, took the guilt of us all upon Him, and only He 
was found worthy in heaven and earth, to open the 
book with its seven seals. And by His coming into 
this world (which can never be sufficiently 
praised), He opened the entrance to the kingdom 
of God, which was closed by sin, not by the blood 
of bulls and goats, or of any corruptible man, nor by 
corruptible silver or gold ; but Christ paid and ac- 
complished this by His own dear and precious 
blood, thereby obtaining an eternal redemption. 

And as the sun in the heavens is endowed by God 
with a glorious splendor, so that it is the eye of the 
world, which illuminates the darkness, and spreads 
its beautiful light over all visible things, and re- 
ceives nothing from any of them ; so also Christ 
Jesus, the true Sun of righteousness, and what is 
still more, the Creator and Ruler of the sun, and of 
all things, did not take to His assistance any created 
substance, by which to accomplish the work of our 
salvation; but came with His most praiseworthy 
light from God out of heaven, and shone into this 
dark world, where He was received, and arose, as 
the beautiful day-star, in the hearts of many men ; 
and was thus a Giver, but not a recipient. Hence, 
the praise and honor for this redemption must be 
ascribed to the only God of heaven and earth, and 
not to any created man ; otherwise we would rob 
the Creator of His proper honor, and ascribe the 
same to sinful, created flesh like unto ourselves; 
thereby making flesh our arm, Redeemer, God and 
Saviour ; and thus departing with our hearts from 
God our salvation, we should fall into damnable 
idolatry, seeking life from the dead, where it can- 
not be found. 

Herein we are to know the love and goodness, 
and also the severity of God, and how greatly the 
Almighty God hates sin ; — His severity and justice, 
from the fact, that through the one sin of the first 
man, the whole human race became corrupted; 
and that this could be paid and atoned for by no 
other means than through the death and blood of 
God's own, only begotten Son. God's goodness and 
everlasting love are known from this, that He, the 
Blessed, so graciously looked upon and recognized, 
the weakness and nothingness of man ; and, hence, 
as He often sent angels, as His faithful messen- 
gers, in human form to men, upon the earth, know- 
ing that this sinful, mortal, earthly flesh and blood 
is not able to behold the immortal, heavenly glory 
of the angels ; much less can man with his sinful 
and mortal eyes behold the immortal, eternal, holy 
splendor and glory of the eternal Creator of all 
things; therefore the eternal, invisible and im- 
mortal Son of God, through His unfathomable 
love, had Himself to become a visible, mortal man, 
for a little while lower than the angels, and to ap- 
pear in the form of a servant, like unto His breth- 
ren ; so that the glory of the eternal and only be- 
gotten Son of God was felt and seen in human 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


389 


form, that He might be a true example for us to 
follow His footsteps. Herein we may especially 
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge : 
that the holy heavenly, only begotten, blessed Son 
of God, Jesus Christ, became man, died and rose 
for us, when we were yet ungodly and His enemies. 
And though Christ suffered for us in the flesh, 
and was crucified, and died; yet it was not pos- 
sible that He should be held by death, or that His 
holy flesh should see corruption. But He had Him- 
self the keys of death and hell, and the power to 
open and to shut, to lay down His life, and to take 
it again; and He it is that liveth, and was dead, 
and, behold, He is alive forevermore. 

Hence all true believers must believe that the 
true knowledge of Jesus Christ, both of His true 
divinity, and pure, immaculate humanity, is neces- 
sary to salvation. And to this, life and eternal sal- 
vation are promised by the Holy Ghost; and that 
Christ would build His church upon this foun- 
dation, and that the gates of hell should not prevail 
against her. On the other hand: that all un- 
believers, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come 
in the flesh (that is, that the Son of God became 
man, and thus coming, appeared in the flesh), are 
not of God, but of the spirit of antichrist, who be- 
gan already in the days of the Apostles, and is to 
exalt himself still more in the last times. 

Of the necessity of this knowledge of Jesus 
Christ, read: "And this is life eternal, that they 
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ, whom thou hast sent." John 17 :3 ; Hosea 
13:4. 

"If ye had known me, ye should have known my 
Father also," etc. John 14:7. 

"Though we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him no more." II Cor. 
5:16. 

"And that every tongue should confess that 
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Fa- 
ther." Phil. 2:11; Rom. 14:11 ; Col. 2 :2 ; Phil. 3 :8. 
"And Jesus said to Peter, after the latter had 
confessed and pronounced the man Jesus, to be 
Christ, the Son of the living God ; Blessed art thou, 
Simon Bar-jona : for flesh and blood hath not re- 
vealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven. And I say also unto thee, That thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; 
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." 
Matt. 16:17, 18. 

And after the apostle Thomas had confessed the 
visible and palpable man Jesus as his Lord and 
God, Christ did not reprehend him for it, but ac- 
cepted it as the belief of the truth, saying: "Thom- 
as, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed : 
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have 
believed." John 20 :29 ; 1 7 :20 ; I Pet. 1 :8. 

Read in this connection the various Scripture 
passages, how the apostles through the Holy Ghost, 
labored with all their might, to impress on men, not 
that the eternal Son of God dwelt concealed in the 
man Jesus; but, on the contrary, that the visible 


man Jesus was the Christ; that is the Anointed, 
and the Saviour of the world, sent down from heav- 
en ; and to this, the promise of life is given. Read : 
"And many other signs truly did Jesus in the pres- 
ence of His disciples, which are not written in this 
book : but these are written, that ye might believe 
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God ; and that 
believing ye might have life through his name." 
John 20:30, 31. 

"Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son 
of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God." 
I John 4:15; I John 5 :5 ; II John 1 :3 ; John 6 :47. 

"Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is 
born of God." I John 5 :1, 5, 10; Acts 18:5, 28. 

"Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is 
the Christ? he is antichrist, that denieth the Fa- 
ther and the Son." I John 2 :22. 

"Hereby know ye the Spirit of God : every spirit 
that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the 
flesh [that is, that the eternal Word became flesh, 
and being thus flesh, came into his own] is of 
God: and every spirit that confesseth not that 
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: 
and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have 
heard that it should come ; and even now already is 
it in the world." I John 4 :2, 3 ; II John 1 :7. 

Read further, how we have been redeemed and 
bought by no other means, than only by the death 
of the Son of God. 

"For God so loved the world, that he gave his 
only begotten Son," etc. John 3:16; Rom. 5:8. 

"For if, when we were enemies, we were recon- 
ciled to God by the death of his Son," etc. Rom. 
5:10; Heb. 5:9. 

"If God be for us, who can be against us? He 
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up 
for us all," etc. Rom. 8 :31, 32 ; I John 3 :16. 

"Ye know that ye were not redeemed with cor- 
ruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain 
conversation received by tradition from your fa- 
thers ; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of 
a lamb without blemish and without spot." I Pet. 
1 :18, 19. 

"In this was manifested the love of God toward 
us, because that God sent his only begotten Son 
into the world, that we might live through him." 
I John 4:9. 

ARTICLE XVI 

Of the life, suffering, death, burial, resurrec- 
tion, and ascension of Jesus Christ, and of His 
again receiving His glory with His Father. Of this 
we confess : That the Lord Jesus, in the time of 
His humiliation in the flesh, being about thirty- 
three years, did not only with words, but also by 
works and deeds, set us a holy, godly example, to 
be looked to as the Captain of the faith, by all be- 
lievers, and followed in the regeneration; for in 
His youth He was subject to His father and moth- 
er. And when His time was fulfilled, He entered 
in full obedience toward His heavenly Father, on 
the office and ministry imposed upon Him, pro- 


390 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


claimed unto them His Father's good pleasure, 
made the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the blind 
to see, cleansed the lepers, cast out devils, raised 
the dead from their graves, forgave men their sins, 
and promised eternal life to those who believe in 
Him. 

These things Christ did not do in the same man- 
ner and form as His apostles and others, who per- 
formed miracles through a power and gift only re- 
ceived, which had been conferred upon and given 
them by Christ. But such was not the case with 
Christ; for He Himself had all power in heaven 
and earth ; so that He said to the two blind men : 
"Believe ye that I am able to do this?" And fur- 
ther: "That ye may know that the Son of man 
hath power on earth to forgive sins." And still 
further : "I will raise them up at the last day ; and 
I give unto them eternal life." 

Thus the Lord Jesus completely fulfilled and ac- 
complished the works of His Father, and shone as 
a clear heavenly light into this dark world, con- 
vincing the same of her evil works, and pointing 
them out to her ; by which He incurred the hatred 
of the blinded scribes and Pharisees, who did not 
know the light of truth, and who, from hatred and 
envy, censured Him for all these divine deeds, at- 
tributing them to the devil ; and thus they delivered 
this innocent one into the hands of the unbelieving 
heathen, Pontius Pilate. They also examined this 
dumb Lamb with many severe threats, mocked 
Him, spat in His face, smote Him with their fists, 
scourged Him, wounded His head with a crown of 
thorns, and finally stripped Him and stretched 
Him naked on the cross, nailed His hands and feet 
thereon, and thus suspended Him, as the Prince 
and Captain of all malefactors, between two mur- 
derers. In His bitter thirst they gave Him vin- 
egar to drink, mixed with gall ; they pierced His 
side with a spear, so that blood and water flowed 
out therefrom. Thus He gave up the ghost with a 
loud voice, commending it into the hands of His 
Father. And when He had died, heaven and earth 
were convulsed by this precious death and resur- 
rection; so that the sun lost his brightness, and 
darkness came over all the earth ; the earth quaked ; 
the vail of the temple was rent in twain from the 
top to the bottom; and many bodies of the saints 
arose from their graves, and went into the holy 
city, and appeared unto many. 

And as in the time of His flesh, suffering and 
death, He showed that He had become man, so He 
also showed herein that this very man was also 
true God with His Father; and that He had the 
keys of the power of death and hell, that He could 
again raise up the broken temple of His body in 
three days, and had the power to lay down His 
life, and to take it up again ; so that it was im- 
possible, that He should be held by death, or that 
His holy flesh should see corruption, but rose tri- 
umphantly from the dead, on the third day, by the 
glory of the Father, revealed Himself to His apos- 
tles and others, and miraculously appeared unto 


them, as they were assembled with doors closed, 
ate and drank with them, and for forty days spake 
with them of many things pertaining to the king- 
dom of God. Then, in the presence of the apostles, 
He was taken up to heaven by a cloud, and sat down 
on the right hand of His Almighty Father in heav- 
en. 

Thus the only begotten Son of God suffered, was 
crucified and put to death according to the flesh ; 
but thereby was again glorified and made alive ac- 
cording to the spirit, and again fully received His 
previous divine glory, and His equality with the 
Father. He will now die no more neither will death 
have any more dominion over Him ; but He shall 
live and rule as a reigning King of kings, and Lord 
of lords over Mount Zion and the house of Jacob 
forever and ever. ' 

Of the unblamable life and conversation of 
Christ, and how He was subject to His father and 
mother, read: Luke 2:51 ; John 8:46; Acts 1 :1. 

And after His time was fulfilled, how He entered 
on the ministry imposed upon Him, and performed 
many glorious deeds in His Father's name, read • 
Mark 1:15; Matt. 8:16; 9:35; 11:5; 12 :15 : 
John 10; Acts 10:38; Isa. 53:7; I Pet. 2:24. 

And how He, as a light in the world, testified of 
their dark and evil works, and thus fell into the 
hands of sinners, read: "The world cannot hate 
you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that 
the works thereof are evil." John 7:7: 1 :5 ; 3 19- 
Matt. 27:18. ' ' 

How Christ in the time of His humiliation in the 
flesh was obedient to His heavenly Father, read : 
"He humbled himself, and became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross." Phil. 2:8. 

"Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedi- 
ence by the things which he suffered." Heb. 5 :8. 

Of the suffering, death, and burial of Christ, 
read: Ps. 22:16; 60:9,21; Isa. 53:7; 63:3; Acts 
8 :32 ; Matt. 27 ; Mark 15 ; Luke 23 ; John 19 ;Acts 
3 : 1 5 ; I Cor. 1 5 :4, 20 ; Matt. 27 :57 ; Isa. 53 :9. 

Of the resurrection of Christ, read: Matt 287- 
Mark 16:6; Luke 24:7; I Cor. 15:4,20; Acts 
3:26; 10:40. 

How Christ again received the divine glory and 
likeness which He had forsaken ; and how He as- 
cended unto heaven, read : "And Jesus came and 
spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto 
mein heaven and in earth." Matt. 28:18; Ps. 8:6. 

"Ought not Christ to have suffered these things! 
and to enter into his glory?" Luke 24:26. 

"Thou madest him a little lower than the angels ; 
thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and 
didst set him over the works of thy hands: thou 
hast put all things in subjection under his feet " 
Heb. 2:7-9; John 17:5. 

"The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom 
ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God ex- 
alted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Sav- 
iour," etc. Acts 5 :30, 31 ; Phil. 2:9; Acts 2:33, 36. 

'And when he had spoken these things, while 
they beheld, he was taken up ; and a cloud received 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


391 


him out of their sight. And while they looked 
steadfastly toward heaven as he went up," etc. 
Acts 1 :9, 10; Mark 16:19; Luke 24:51. 

ARTICLE XVII 

Of the office of Christ, and t\ie specific reason of 
His coming into the world. We confess: That 
Christ is the true promised Prophet, High Priest, 
and King, whom Moses and all the prophets fore- 
told and proclaimed, and to whom the former 
priests and kings pointed as figures and shadows. 
And the specific reason of His coming into the 
world was : to destroy the works of the devil, to 
seek that which was lost, to deliver the whole hu- 
man race from the captivity of sin, and the power 
of the devil, and to reconcile them with God His 
Father, and thus to save sinners. 

According to His prophetical office he went out 
from God, and came into the world to proclaim 
unto men, through the Gospel, the full counsel and 
will of God, which had been hid from the beginning 
of the world, and thus to preach deliverance to the 
captives, the Gospel to the poor, and the acceptable 
year of the Lord, according to which, as the last 
declaration and will of God, all the children of the 
New Covenant are required to live and walk, ac- 
cording to a perfect rule of faith, which shall obtain 
until the end of the world. 

According to His office as High Priest He ful- 
filled and changed the Levitical priesthood ; and by 
His one offering made on the cross, He opened the 
closed entrance to the Holy of holies ; and through 
this His one offering, which is of eternal value, He 
fulfilled and finished the sacrifice of the law, and 
obtained an eternal redemption. And thus recon- 
ciling mankind with the Father, He sat down on the 
right hand of the Majesty in heaven, and is become 
the believers' only Advocate, Mediator, High 
Priest, and Intercessor with God His Father, and 
ever lives to make intercession for them. 

And according to His office as King He came 
with full power from His almighty Father from 
heaven, to re-establish, as a mighty King of kings, 
and commander of the people, judgment and right- 
eousness on earth ; and He was the end and ful- 
fillment of all kings of Israel : But as His king- 
dom was not of this world, and He was a spiritual, 
heavenly King, He avoided all earthly kingdoms 
of this world, and desired and ftad only a spiritual, 
heavenly kingdom. Among His subjects He re- 
formed, improved and fulfilled the commandments, 
laws, and customs, given by Moses. As a com- 
manding King He dissuaded and prohibited His 
followers from all revenge, whether with words 
or by deed ; [and taught them] that they should beat 
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears 
into scythes and sickles, and should learn war no 
more; but that, on the contrary, they, according 
to the example of Christ, their Captain, should love 
their enemies, and pray for those who injure and 
persecute them — very far indeed from allowing 


them to wage war against their enemies with carnal 
weapons. But Christ armed His people only with 
the armor of God, and the sword of the Spirit, 
which is the Word of God, with which to fight 
against flesh and blood, the world, sin, and the 
manifold wiles of the devil, and thus finally to 
receive, through grace, from this eternal King, the 
crown of everlasting life, as their recompense and 
exceeding great reward. 

How Christ is the prophet promised by God, 
whom we must hear and follow as the perfect 
teacher of the will of God, read : "The Lord thy 
God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the 
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me ; unto 
him ye shall hearken." Deut. 18:15; Acts 7:37; 
3:22; Matt. 17:5. 

"We have also a more sure word of prophecy ; 
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a 
light that shineth in a dark place." II Pet. 1 :19. 

"God, who at sundry times and in divers man- 
ners spake in time past unto the fathers by the 
prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son," etc. Heb. 1:1,2. 

Of His prophecies, read : Matt. 24 throughout ; 
Luke 17:20; 19:41-44. 

Of His priestly office, read : "And having a high 
priest over the house of God ; let us draw near with 
a true heart in full assurance of faith," etc. He- 
brews 10:21,22. 

"For the priesthood being changed, there is 
made of necessity a change also of the law." Heb. 
7:12; 8:6; 10:12. 

"But Christ being come a high priest of good 
things to come," etc. Heb. 9:11. 

Of His preaching, read : Matt. 9:35 ; Mark 1 :14 ; 
Matt. 5:2; 11:1; Luke 4:15. 

Of His office of King, read: "Rejoice greatly, 
O daughter of Zion ; shout, O daughter of Jerusa- 
lem; behold, thy King cometh unto thee," etc. 
Zech. 9:9; Matt. 21:5. 

"Behold, the days come, that I will raise unto 
David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign 
and prosper, and shall execute judgment and jus- 
tice in the earth." Jer. 23:5; 33:15; Isa. 32:1. 

"Rabbi, thou art the Son of God ; thou art the 
King of Israel." John 1 :49; Acts 10:36; II Cor. 
4:5; Phil. 2:11. 

Of His spiritual kingdom and dominion, read : 
"And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne 
of his father David : and he shall reign over the 
house of Jacob forever ; and of his kingdom there 
shall be no end." Luke 1 :32, 33. 

"For he is Lord of lords, and King of kings : 
and they that are with him are called, and chosen, 
and faithful." Rev. 17:14. 

"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priest- 
hood," etc. I Pet. 2:9; Ex. 19:6; Rev. 5:10; John 
18:36,37; Ps. 22:28. 

Of His government, read : "Behold, I have giv- 
en him for a witness to the people, a leader and 
commander to the people." Isa. 55 :4. 


392 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


"There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and 
to destroy," etc. Jas. 4:12; I Cor. 9:21 ; Matthew 
12:8; 28:20; Jas. 1:25. 

ARTICLE XVIII 

Of the church of God and the communion of 
believers. Concerning this we believe and confess : 
Whereas men by reason of the natural birth of the 
flesh, follow sin and wickedness when they attain 
to their understanding, and thereby depart from 
God their Creator; therefore the high and holy 
God, before whom the sinners and ungodly cannot 
stand, from the beginning of the world, called and 
chose, from all the unbelieving nations of the world, 
an own special people, and separated them from all 
other nations. These are they who turn their ears 
to the calling voice of God, and thereby have sepa- 
rated themselves from the world with all its sinful 
lusts, and all false worship, and have again united 
themselves to Christ, bowing, as obedient members 
and sheep of Jesus Christ, under His head and com- 
manding voice, and shunning everything strange 
which militates against this. These are they who 
are renewed in the inward man, and are circum- 
cised, changed, and converted, and live after the 
Spirit. 

This church of God was first commenced on 
earth, with Adam and Eve in paradise, and after- 
wards, with Enoch, Noah, and all those who with 
them honored and called upon the high name of 
God ; which was the first period of time, that is, be- 
fore the law. 

After this God the Lord established His cove- 
nant or church with Abraham and his seed, giving 
them circumcision as a sign of the covenant, to- 
gether with many laws, ceremonies, statutes, and 
customs ; which continued till the coming of Christ, 
and was the second period, or the time of the law 
of Moses. 

Finally God sent His Son, who, as a potentate 
in heaven and earth, established a new and perfect 
covenant with the house of Israel, calling to the 
same all the Gentiles and nations of the earth, all 
those who amend their sinful life, and obediently 
yield their bodies under this covenant. With all 
these Christ has established His church and con- 
gregation ; this is the third and last period, which 
shall thus continue, without change in faith, walk, 
and laws, until the reappearing of Christ from 
heaven. 

And though the people of God in these three 
periods, had different and special laws and cere- 
monies, according to which they had to live and 
walk ; yet this was the will of God, and they were 
nevertheless only one people of God, and were 
moved and led by one Spirit. 

This church and congregation of believers has 
not always been visible to the eyes of all men, but 
has frequently vanished from the sight of the sin- 
ful and bloodthirsty world, the latter not being 
worthy of them. This can be seen in the case of 
Noah with his families in the ark, who concealed 


themselves from the whole world; in the people 
of Israel in the Red Sea, and here and there during 
the forty years in the wilderness ; in the pious in 
Judah, from the bloody sword of Manasseh ; and 
in all the God-fearing in Israel from the awful 
threats of Jezebel. Thus also the bride of the 
Lamb, the church of Jesus Christ, had to hide 
herself in the wilderness, forty-two months, or 
three times and a half a time,* from the abom- 
inable beast of antichrist, which with his tyran- 
nical sword and burning, exalted itself above 
everything which is called and worshiped as God 
Afterwards, through the grace of God, she again 
came to the light, and was built upon the first, 
ancient apostolical foundation. 

And as Solomon's temple was destroyed, and the 
second building continued until the first coming of 
Christ in the flesh, so we hold that the church of 
Jesus Christ, rebuilt upon the foundation of the 
apostles and prophets, shall also continue openly 
in the light until the second coming of Christ from 
heaven. 

This church of God, that is, all believers, are, as 
members of one body, joined together by faith and 
the bond of love; they are like-minded one to- 
ward another according to Christ Jesus ; they live 
according to the same rule of the divine word, and 
are bound together by the same love, thus having 
fellowship with one another. Those whom God 
has blessed with spiritual gifts, minister with them 
to the souls of their neighbors, out of love. And 
those whom God has provided with temporal pos- 
sessions, minister with them to the temporal needs 
of their neighbors ; thus showing that they have 
their temporal and spiritual goods in common, and 
suffer no want in spiritual and temporal gifts. This 
church of God has existed on the earth from the 
beginning of the world, either in greater or in 
smaller numbers, secretly or openly, and shall thus 
continue unto the end of the world, and Christ will 
be with her, with His Spirit, always. 

Of the Christian church, that is, of all believing 
regenerated persons, gathered and purified by the 
holy Spirit, read : "The Lord thy God hath chosen 
thee to be a special people unto himself, above all 
people that are upon the face of the earth." Deu- 
teronomy 7:6; 14:2; 26:18; I Pet. 2:9. 

"And among all the multitude of peoples thou 
hast gotten thee one people : and unto this people, 
whom thou lovedst, thou gavest a law that is ap- 
proved of all." II Esd. 5 :27. 

How the church of God, which is built upon 
Christ, must be subject, as members to their head, 
read: "And upon this rock (Christ) I will build 
my church ; and the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it." Matt. 16:18; 28:20. 

"Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also 
loved the church, and gave himself for it; that he 
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of 

* Understand, taking each time for a great year, there are as 
many years as there are days in three years and a half; which is 
about 1260 years. Num. 14:34; Ezek 4-5 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


393 


water by the word, that he might present it to him- 
self a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, 
or any such thing ; but that it should be holy and 
without blemish." Eph. 5 :25-27, 29, 32 ; 1 :22. 

"That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to 
behave thyself in the house of God, which is the 
church of the living God, the pillar and ground of 
the truth." I Tim. 3:15; Eph. 2:20; 4:16; He- 
brews 12:23. 

Of the fellowship of believers, read : "But if we 
walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have 
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus 
Christ his Son, cleanseth us from all sin." I John 
1:7. 

"They continued steadfastly in the apostles' 
doctrine and fellowship." Acts 2 :42 ; 4 :34 ; I Cor. 
12:12; Gal. 3:28; John 17:21. 

ARTICLE XIX 

Of the signs of the church of God, by which it 
may be distinguished from all other peoples, we 
confess the following: In the first place, all true 
Christians are known by the only saving faith, 
which works by love. It is wrought, through the 
grace of God, in the heart of man by the hearing 
of the Word of God, and hence, is not founded and 
built upon human decrees, but upon the Word of 
God alone ; and it works so effectually that by it 
we are drawn and impelled from all visible things 
and sinful lusts of this world to the invisible God 
and His heavenly riches. 

Secondly. All true children of God are known 
by the second or new birth, from above, of God ; 
which is wrought by the Spirit of God internally in 
the heart, through the putting off of the sinful lusts 
of the flesh ; so that, as man, through his first birth 
of the flesh, brings forth his human nature and 
mind ; so, through regeneration, he becomes a par- 
taker of the divine nature, by which he is also to 
bring forth godly and spiritual fruits, and the mind 
of Christ Jesus. 

Thirdly. The church, or the believers, are known 
by the good works which they evince as fruits of 
gratitude from their faith ; which may not be done 
according to human instructions, in a self-selected 
holiness, but in which we follow Christ and His 
apostles, as they prescribed and walked. And with 
these divine virtues all true believers must be 
clothed, that, as a light on the candlestick, and a 
city on a hill, they may excel and shine among all 
men, and may be known thereby, as a good tree is 
known and distinguished by its good fruits. 

Fourthly. The church of God is known by the 
glorious appellations by which she is described and 
honored by the Holy Spirit, as a city and temple 
of the living God, in which God will dwell and 
walk ; the bride of the Lamb, the daughter of Zion ; 
a chaste virgin, joined to Christ by faith ; so that, 
even as with all cities which are subject to the com- 
mand of their Lord and king, and it may thereby 
properly be known, under whose power and do- 
minion they belong, so also the church of God is 


known by this that she recognizes and obeys Christ 
Jesus as her only Head and King, in all matters of 
faith, and observes His commandments. And as a 
pure virgin and bride forsakes father, mother, and 
all strange company and subjects herself to the 
will and obedience of her only bridegroom ; so all 
true children of God must separate themselves 
from all false worship, flee from the stranger's 
voice, and unite themselves to Christ, to hear and 
obediently follow His voice, which is proclaimed 
by the ministers sent by Him. 

Fifthly. The people of God are known by their 
faithful ministers, who, according to the doctrine 
of Paul, are unblamable in doctrine and life, and 
feed the sheep of Christ, not for the milk and 
wool, but with a willing mind, with knowledge and 
understanding ; speaking not their own words, but 
only the words of their Lord, and executing His 
work ; rightly dividing and dispensing the Word of 
God, and bringing forth fruits with it ; in order that 
through this good message of the ways of the Lord 
men might, according to the counsel and will of 
God, be converted from their evil ways, and won 
to God. 

Sixthly, and lastly. All true disciples of Jesus 
Christ are known by the unfeigned godly love, 
which our Saviour Himself has put as a sign, by 
which His disciples should be specially known; 
which is comprehended in these things: That we 
love the Lord God our Creator with all our heart 
and strength, above all other things, which consists 
principally in the keeping of His commandments. 
And besides : That we love our brethren or neigh- 
bors as ourselves, not only in word or tongue, but 
in deed and in truth; so that those to whom God 
has given spiritual gifts, minister therewith, from 
love, to the souls of their neighbors; and those 
whom God has blessed with temporal possessions, 
minister therewith unto the temporal needs of their 
neighbors, in order that thus among this true Israel 
of God, there may be found no poor, nor any lack 
in spiritual or temporal things. Finally, we must 
show charity to all men, though they be our open 
enemies, who persecute and kill us, whom we may 
by no means resist with carnal weapons; but, as 
Christ did not open His mouth in revenge upon His 
enemies, but, as an humble and dumb lamb, prayed 
for them, so we must also follow this infallible ex- 
ample. And as all soldiers forsake their former 
avocation, and wear the livery of their lord and 
king, as a sign to distinguish them from all strange 
servants, and that they are bound to their captain 
even unto death ; so also, must all true servants of 
Jesus Christ be armed with the aforesaid marks, 
that thereby they may be known and distinguished 
from all other people. 

Where, therefore, men believe with the heart, in 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and in 
the incarnation, justification or redemption, suffer- 
ing, death, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus 
Christ, and the resurrection of the dead and the 
eternal judgment; and where, besides, the ordi- 


394 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


nances of the Lord, as baptism, Supper, separation, 
and the like, are rightly observed, according to 
Scripture, and Christ is followed therein, in the 
clean fear of the Lord, and in the regeneration — 
there is the city and church of the living God, the 
pillar and firm ground of the truth, the tabernacle 
of God with men, in which God will dwell and 
walk with His Spirit. Such a body [church] has 
Christ for its Head, Preserver, and Saviour. But 
where said marks do not exist, and where the ordi- 
nances of men are the rule of action, there is no 
church of God, but a vain boasting of the same. 

How the true faith is to be known, read : "So 
then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the 
word of God." Rom. 10:17. 

"He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath 
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living 
water." John 7 :28. 

"That your faith should not stand in the wisdom 
of men, but in the power of God." I Cor. 2:5. 

"For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avail- 
eth anything, nor uncircumcision ; but faith which 
worketh by love." Gal. 5 :6 ; Heb. 11:1; Hab. 2 :4 ; 
Heb. 10:38; Rom. 1:17. 

How the children of God are to be known by re- 
generation or the new birth, read: "Being born 
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 
by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for- 
ever." I Pet. 1:23. 

"Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, 
That ye which have followed me, in the regenera- 
tion when the Son of man shall sit in the throne 
of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel." Matt. 19:28. 

"For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avail- 
eth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new crea- 
ture." Gal. 6:15; John 3:8; II Cor. 5:17. 

How the true members of Christ are. to be known 
from their godly conversation, read : "Every tree 
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, 
and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits 
ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto 
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." Matt. 7:19-21; 5:16; 12:50; 
John 15:14; Sir. 19:24. 

"Do all things without murmuring and disput- 
ings : that ye may be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine 
as lights in the world ; holding forth the word of 
life." Phil. 2:14-16. 

"Little children, let no man deceive you : he that 
doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is 
righteous. He that committeth sin is of the devil." 
I John 3:7, 8. 

How the people of God are to be known from 
this that they have separated themselves from all 
other people, and put themselves under Christ 
their Head, hearing only His voice, and observing 
His commandments, read : "Wherefore, my dearly 
beloved, flee from idolatry. Ye cannot drink the 


cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils : ye cannot 
be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table 
of devils." I Cor. 10:14,21. 

"Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbe- 
lievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness 
with unrighteousness? and what communion hath 
light with darkness? Wherefore come out from 
among them, and be ye separate saith the Lord, and 
touch not the unclean thing." II Cor. 6-14 17- 
Rev. 18:4; Isa. 52:11 ; Jer. 15:19; 51 :6. ' ' 

"As I said unto you, My sheep hear my voice, 
and I know them, and they follow me. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from 
him ; for they know not the voice of strangers " 
John 10:26,27,5. S " 

"Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever 
I have commanded you." Matt. 28:20; II Thess 
2:15; John 8:31; 14:21; 15:10; Matt. 11:28, : 
I John 3 :7. 

How the false prophets are to be known and dis- 
tinguished from the true servants of Jesus Christ 
read : "Beware of false prophets, which come to 
you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are rav- 
ening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits " 
Matt. 7:15,16; Deut. 13:1. 

"He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own 
glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, 
the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him " 
John 7:18. 

"For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words 
of God." John 3 :34; 8:31 ; I Pet. 4:11. 

"But if they had stood in my counsel, and had 
caused my people to hear my words, then they 
should have turned them from their evil way and 
from the evil of their doings." Jer. 23:22, 31 ; Isa 
55:11; Matt. 23 throughout; Col. 1:6; read also 
Tit. 1 :6 ; I Tim. 3 throughout. 

How Christians are to be known by their love, 
read : "A new commandment I give unto you, That 
ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye 
also love one another. By this shall all men know 
that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to an- 
other." John 13:34, 35; I John 3:23. 

"In this the children of God are manifest, and 
the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not 
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth 
not his brother." I John 3:10; 15 :12 ; Matt. 22 -39 • 
Eph. 5:2; I Pet. 1:22; II Pet. 1:7. ' ' 

ARTICLE XX 

Of the ordinances of the church of God, and the 
sending and electing of ministers. Of this we con- 
fessed : That, as a house, city, or country cannot 
subsist unless it have laws and ordinances by which 
to be governed and upheld, and as no human body 
can subsist without the members performing the 
service appointed by God for the needs of the body ; 
so also, God the Lord has appointed in His church 
divers ordinances, laws and commandments, by 
which it is to be built up, edified, and improved. 

And, as the necessities of the body require, as its 
chief and most indispensable members, ' eyes, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


395 


mouth, hands, and feet, to see, speak, and labor for 
the body, that it may thereby be fed and sustained ; 
so Christ the Lord ordained as necessary in His 
church, first, by His own, present, commanding 
voice, His apostles, whom He sent out to preach the 
Gospel among all nations, and to teach them to 
observe His commandments, which He caused to 
be confirmed by signs and miracles. 

This the apostles, through the Holy Spirit again 
enjoined upon their followers; namely, that they 
should elect, in the church, pastors, teachers, help- 
ers and rulers, who as fit shining stars, by their 
good walk and sound doctrine, should shine to edi- 
fication in the spiritual firmament, and, as messen- 
gers of peace, proclaim the good new tidings every- 
where, that thereby men may be turned from their 
evil ways, added to the church, and thus the body 
of Christ be perfected and edified. 

And since it is a known fact that a lack of faith- 
ful ministers, and the erring of the sheep because 
of the lack of good doctrine, arise principally from 
the unworthiness of the people ; therefore the peo- 
ple of God, needing this, should not turn to such as 
have been educated in universities, according to the 
wisdom of man, that they may talk and dispute, 
and seek to sell their purchased gift for temporal 
gain ; and who according to the custom of the world 
do not truly follow Christ in the humility of regen- 
eration. But the true members of Christ, must, 
according to the counsel of God, with humble fast- 
ing and praying, turn to the Father of the harvest, 
who is the true Sender, that by His divine wisdom 
He will raise up men, whom He may set as faithful 
and wise stewards over His household, that they 
may give them proper meat in due season, and may 
enkindle them in their hearts with His Spirit, and 
urge them into His harvest, that they may feed the 
flock of Christ, not for the milk and wool, but of a 
ready mind, with knowledge and understanding, 
and lead them on the right way to the kingdom of 
God ; and thus execute the ministry imposed upon 
them by God, with the strength which God gives. 
Hence, believers who are in need, in this respect, 
shall, after having sought the face of God with ar- 
dent prayer, turn their eyes to a pious brother, who 
keeps under his own body, and brings it into sub- 
jection, and in whom the fruits of the Holy Spirit 
are perceived and seen. Having been chosen there- 
to by the voice of the Church, he shall be ex- 
amined in the faith by the elder and pastors of the 
church, whether he, according to the Word of God, 
agrees with the church in every article, that he may 
teach others the way of truth, which he himself 
knows. And having been found to be sound, he 
may stand forth in the name of the Lord, to pro- 
claim the will of God unto the people. And when 
it has thus been found that God has committed the 
preaching of the Gospel to him so that he rightly 
divides the Word of God, and brings forth fruits 
with it, the church, if she require it, and he, after 
examination, has been found, according to the 
Word of God, to be of the same faith with the 


church, may, by the voice of the church, choose 
him as an elder and teacher in the full ministry, 
and cause him to be confirmed by the imposition 
of the hands of the elders, and ordain him to 
labor and work in the vineyard of the Lord, and to 
administer and execute Christian baptism, and the 
Lord's Supper, with all that pertains thereto. 

In like manner, the church shall, by the voice of 
the church, elect deacons over the poor, and, after 
they have been examined in the faith, and found to 
be sound, cause them to be confirmed by the im- 
position of the hands of the elders, as helpers and 
governors, that willing givers may give their con- 
tributions to them, that they may thereby supply 
the wants of the poor members of Christ who ac- 
cording to their ability diligently labor and work 
with their hands, and still are not able to support 
themselves; that there may be found no poor 
among the people of God, nor any want in temporal 
things, and that the good gifts of the donor may be 
hidden from men, but become manifest before God, 
according to the doctrine of Christ. 

And if any of said ministers depart in faith or 
conversation from the adopted way of truth, the 
church which elected him when he was pious and 
sound, shall punish or remove him, according as 
his deeds deserve. Matt. 18:8; I Tim. 1:20. 

Of the ordinances of the church of Christ, read : 
"Joying and beholding your order, and the stead- 
fastness of your faith in Christ." Col. 2 :5 ; I Cor. 
11:33; 14:40; II Cor. 8:19. 

How men are to pray to God, who is the true 
Sender, for faithful laborers, read: "The harvest 
truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few ; pray ye 
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send 
forth laborers into his harvest." Matt. 9:37,38; 
Luke 10 :2 ; Matt. 23 :34 ; Luke 1 1 :49 ; John 1 3 :20 ; 
Matt. 10:40; Luke 10:16; Matt. 25:14; Luke 
19:12; John 20:21. 

How necessary these ministers are, and how they 
shall teach the Word of God, and be qualified, read : 
"Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, 
set a man over the congregation, which may go out 
before them, and which may go in before them, and 
which may lead them out, and which may bring 
them in ; that the congregation of the Lord be not 
as sheep which have no shepherd." Num. 27 :16, 
17. 

"I will give you pastors according to mine heart, 
which shall feed you with knowledge and under- 
standing." Jer. 3:15. 

"For him whom God hath sent, speaketh the 
words of God," etc. John 3 :34 ; 7 :18. 

"If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles 
of God ; if any man minister, let him do it as of 
the ability which God giveth ; that God in all things 
may be glorified through Jesus Christ," etc. I Pet. 
4:11. 

"For the prophecy came not in old time by the 
will of man; but holy men of God spake as they 
were moved by the Holy Ghost." II Peter 1 :21. 


396 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


"For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou 
shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, 
and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed 
thee : if any be blameless," etc. Tit. 1 :5, 6. 

Of their qualifications, and how they are to min- 
ister after their examination, read: I Tim. 3 
throughout; I Cor. 12:28; Rom. 12:7; Eph. 4:11. 

Concerning the mode in which they are to be 
chosen, read : "We have sent with him the brother, 
whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the 
churches; and not that only, but who was also 
chosen of the churches to travel with us, with this 
grace, which is administered by us to the glory of 
the same Lord, and declaration of your ready 
mind." II Cor. 8:18, 19; Acts 1 :23. 

"As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the 
Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul 
for the work whereunto I have called them. And 
when they had fasted and prayed and laid their 
hands on them, they sent them away." Acts 13 :2, 
3; ; 20:28. 

"The things that thou hast heard of me among 
many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also." II Tim 
2:2. 

"Feed the flock of God which is among you, 
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but 
willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind ; 
neither as being lords over God's heritage, but 
being ensamples to the flock." I Pet. 5 :2, 3. 

Of the election and confirmation of deacons, 
read : "It is not reason that we should leave the 
Word of God, and serve tables. Wherefore breth- 
ren, look ye out among you seven men of honest 
report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom 
we may appoint over this business." "Whom they 
set before the apostles : and when they had prayed, 
they laid their hands on them." Acts 6:2, 3, 6; 
I Tim. 3 :8-10. 

ARTICLE XXI 

Of Christian baptism we confess: That the 
same is a divine, evangelical transaction, practice 
and ordinance, which was first commenced by the 
man of God, John the Baptist, by the counsel and 
will of God, and was received by the worthy Son 
of God, Christ Jesus, who humbled Himself as a 
true example, and to whom the aforesaid John led 
and pointed with His doctrine and baptism, as be- 
ing the true Baptizer with the Holy Ghost and with 
fire. He proceeded and came from God with full 
power in heaven and earth, and sent out His apos- 
tles, commanding them to preach the Gospel to all 
nations, and to baptize all true hearers and be- 
lievers of it, in the name of the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, and to teach them, before and 
after baptism, to observe all things which He had 
commanded them. 

This the apostles of Christ, as obedient ministers 
of God, practiced according to this manner, begin- 
ning at Jerusalem, and preaching the Gospel in 
every country. And all who heard, believed and 


gladly received this heavenly doctrine were made 
disciples and followers, and were baptized with 
water, in the name of the triune God, and thus en- 
tered into covenant with Christ, to observe whatso- 
ever He had commanded them. 

And inasmuch as the doctrines and command- 
ments of Christ are not instituted for a certain 
time, but are commanded to be kept until the ap- 
pearing of Jesus Christ from heaven; and as He 
will continue with His Spirit to the end of the 
world with His followers; therefore all believers 
and followers of Christ are bound in no wise, to 
alter or reject according to human opinions, these 
doctrines and commandments which God has com- 
manded; but to practice and observe them con- 
stantly according to the form and institution of 
Christ, and the practice of His highly enlightened 
apostles; to preach the Gospel to the people; and 
all who believe the same, manifest repentance 
from sin and amendment of life, and submit to the 
will of God, shall, by an unblamable minister or- 
dained to this purpose, be baptized once with wa- 
ter, in the name of the Father, and the Son, and 
the Holy Ghost. 

This outward baptism with water does not prop- 
erly constitute the entrance to the kingdom of God, 
nor does the visible element of the water contain 
any power or holiness ; neither is it able to give any 
grace and salvation; but, as the waters of Jordan 
and Siloam did not, properly speaking, heal lep- 
rosy and blindness, but only the power of God, to 
which they were herein subject and obedient, so 
also the water in baptism has no power to forgive 
our sins, and to cleanse the filthiness of our flesh, 
but is simply a token and proof of the grace and 
blood of Christ in the washing away of sin, which 
man, through faith and regeneration, by grace, 
has received, in the heart, before baptism, in put- 
ting off the body of the sins of the flesh, which is 
proclaimed in baptism ; and without this internal 
baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, the ex- 
ternal, visible, water baptism is as useless and vain, 
as the seal on an empty letter. 

Since, then, Christian baptism is of such a na- 
ture that it was ordained and commanded by Christ 
only upon faith, repentance, and reformation, and 
was practiced and taught by His high apostles in 
this, and in no other wise ; therefore we herewith 
reject, with good reason, the baptism of unintelli- 
gent, speechless infants, which we regard as a hu- 
man institution, etc.* which ought justly to be 
rooted out and rejected. The principal originators 
of the same found this their infant baptism upon 
the fall of Adam, sayingf that thereby all men are 
born and placed into the world in an unsaved and 
condemned state, and that by the power of water 
baptism they are translated and changed from this 
unsaved and condemned state into a saved and God- 
pleasing condition ; thus binding not only the sal- 

"Invented in the kingdom of antichrist," says the writer, 
t This is an expression of the belief of the papists, who attach 
forgiveness of sins and salvation to the external water of baptism. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


397 


vation and condemnation of infants, but also the 
saving grace, death and atonement, of Christ to the 
willingness or unwillingness of man, and the weak 
element of water ; so that when an infant is bap- 
tized it is instantly saved, and when this is neg- 
lected, it dies condemned. 

Who that fears God can in any wise accept with 
a good conscience this human infant baptism, in- 
stead of the ordinance of God, since in the whole 
New Testament not the least is commanded or 
written concerning it, either by Christ or by His 
apostles. 

The pedobaptists themselves plainly confess, that 
in the sending forth of the apostles into the whole 
world by Christ, to teach and baptize, infant bap- 
tism is not commanded, nor comprehended in these 
passages ; neither is there any advocate of the same 
able to point out in the Word of God the author 
and first foundation of infant baptism (though 
every divine ordinance has its beginning where it 
was first commanded by God) — how then shall this 
fabric of infant baptism, of which no foundation 
can be found, stand in the sight of God? 

Infant baptism is in fact nothing less than a con- 
temning and trampling under foot of the true bap- 
tism of Christ, militating in many respects against 
it ; since Christ has attached to baptism the doctrine 
of the Gospel, faith and repentance, as a seal and 
token of the same. 

And, as infant baptism does not accord with, but 
militates against the baptism of Christ, even so 
does it not agree with the circumcision of the Jews, 
which was not commanded to children but to adults, 
namely, that on the eighth day, every male child 
among them should be circumcised, on pain of be- 
ing cut off. But it is not so with the baptism of 
Christ, concerning which no command is given to 
the parents, much less to any one else, to baptize 
their children, or to have them baptized. But bap- 
tism is an ordinance of Christ, similar in part to the 
Supper, which no one is commanded to cause to be 
administered to another, but which Christian ordi- 
nance each must desire and receive by His own 
faith, for which reason it does in no wise apply to 
new born infants. 

And as unqualified as infants are to observe the 
Supper (in which every reasonable person will 
agree with us), even so unfit are they also to re- 
ceive Christian baptism. And, as infant baptism, 
for want of testimony from the divine Scriptures, 
is demonstrated only by arguments and uncertain 
conclusions, so also, by such and similar conclu- 
sions, the Supper may be appropriated to infants, 
as was formerly done in the Roman church. And 
as we may by no means, on such human conclusion, 
admit infants to the Supper, just as little may we 
on these conclusions admit them to baptism ; but in 
all this all of us who do not wish to be seduced and 
deceived must necessarily adhere to the doctrine of 
Christ and His apostles. But, as the Jews adhered 
unchangingly to the circumcision on the eighth day, 
without following in any wise their own opinion, 


even so should all Christians still much more ad- 
here unalterably to the doctrine of Christ, and ad- 
minister baptism only upon faith and repentance, 
as Christ has ordained. 

But all Christians are commanded and in duty 
bound to walk before their children with a good 
example, and to bring them up in the fear of the 
Lord, by good teachings and instructions, without 
using on them baptism, the Supper, or any other 
ceremonies ; since it is known that it is impossible 
for any one to unite another to the Lord, without 
His will and knowledge. 

But as soon as men grow up and arrive at the 
years of discretion, it is found, that through their 
innate sinful nature they live after the flesh, and 
thereby fall from grace, to which they had been 
bought by the blood of Christ. Their souls then 
need the hearing of the Word of God, whence pro- 
ceed faith and regeneration, and, as a consequence 
thereof, Christian baptism; which by Christ has 
been appended to faith and regeneration, and may 
never be separated therefrom ; and which is repre- 
sented as a grave in which men are to bury their 
own actual sins which they have put off, and are 
thus to rise with Christ to newness of life, and walk 
after the Spirit. 

And as no bath to wash off the filth of the body 
can be used on an unborn child, but the child must 
first be born ; so Christian baptism, which is com- 
pared to the washing of new born infants, can, ac- 
cording to the will of God, be given to none but 
those who are regenerated by faith, dead to sin, de- 
sire the same, rise from the death of sin, and walk 
in newness of life, observing whatsoever Christ has 
commanded them. 

Hence no one can be recognized as a brother or 
sister in the church of Christ, with whom any 
Christian ordinance may be practiced, unless they 
have previously, according to the Word of God, 
received upon faith the • Christian baptism here 
spoken of, which is the first ordinance and the re- 
ception into the Christian communion, by which 
we submit and obligate ourselves to actually ob- 
serve all the commandments and ordinances of 
God. And as there is but one faith and one God, 
so there is only one Christian baptism, which, hav- 
ing been once received upon true faith, according 
to the institution of Christ, may not be repeated or 
renewed. 

Of the baptism of John, and how he as a messen- 
ger and forerunner sent before Christ, preached 
the baptism of repentance, and pointed to Christ, 
read: "John did baptize in the wilderness, and 
preach the baptism of repentance for the remission 
of sins." Mark 1 :4; Matt. 3 :6, 11. 

"I indeed baptize you with water ; but one might- 
ier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am 
not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with 
the Holy Ghost and with fire." Luke 3:16; John 
1:31. 

How Christ Jesus commands His disciples to 
preach the Gospel, and to baptize only hearers and 


398 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


believers of it, and not unintelligent, ignorant chil- 
dren, read : "All power is given unto me in heaven 
and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all na- 
tions, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost : teaching them 
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you : and lo, I am with you alway, even unto the 
end of the world." Matt. 28:18-20. 

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; 
but he that believeth not shall be damned." Mark 
16:16. 

How the apostles, pursuant to this high injunc- 
tion, preached the Gospel, and baptized only the 
hearers, believers, and self -desiring recipients, 
read: "When they heard this, they were pricked 
in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest 
of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we 
do? Then Peter said unto them. Repent, and be 
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus 
Christ for "the remission of sins." "Then they 
that gladly received his word were baptized." Acts 
2:37,38,41. 

"And the eunuch said, See, here is water ; what 
doth hinder me to be baptized ? And Philip said, 
If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest. 
And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus 
Christ is the Son of God. And he commanded the 
chariot to stand still: and they went down both 
into the water, both Philip and the eunuch ; and he 
baptized him." Acts 8 :36-38. 

How the apostles, according to this foundation, 
taught and baptized several households, after they 
had heard the Word of God, had believed, had been 
filled with the Holy Ghost, ordained to the ministry 
of the saints, and regarded as believers, read : Acts 
10:37; 16:15,32; I Cor. 16:15; Acts 18:8. 

How the apostles in their epistles described 
Christian baptism as a burying of sins into the 
death of Christ, a rising and walking in newness 
of life, a putting on of Christ, a washing of regen- 
eration, a being baptized by one Spirit into one 
body, and the answer of a good conscience toward 
God, read: Rom. 6:3; Col. 2:12; Gal. 3:27; Tit. 
3:5; I Cor. 12:13; I Pet. 3:21. 

ARTICLE XXII 

Of the Lord's Supper or the breaking of bread, 
we believe and confess : As baptism is an ordinance 
and institution of the Lord, by which believers are 
united with each other by one Spirit in fellowship 
with Christ ; so the Supper is a worthy ordinance 
and institution of Christ, by which believers who 
have been baptized according to the ordinance of 
Christ, are taught and admonished, to live and walk 
in Christ even as they have received Him by faith 
in baptism, and to be bound by brotherly love to 
their neighbors, with whom they are to live and 
walk in the unity of the Spirit, according to the 
same rule of the divine Word ; and that they are to 
remember hereby, with heartfelt contemplation, 
the bitter suffering and death of the Lord. 

And in order to put men in remembrance of this, 


it pleased the Lord Jesus for this purpose to use 
bread and wine, things well known among men, 
and thereby to implant into the hearts of believers 
heavenly and hidden things ; thereby teaching men 
to remember, that, as bread from many broken 
grains is made into one bread, and the wine being 
pressed from many grapes and made one beverage 
thereby being necessary, useful and adapted as food 
and drink for the body of man; even so Christ, 
from ardent love, suffered Himself to be broken on 
the cross, His blood to be shed, and trod the wine- 
press of suffering alone, to minister by His flesh 
and blood, as necessary meat and drink, to the souls 
of men; by which we are taught, that like as bread 
is of many grains broken and prepared as bread, 
and wine is of many grapes pressed and made a 
beverage; so also, many believers, from various 
places, are by one faith become one bread or 
church, and bound together in fellowship ; in order 
that thereby all those who worthily receive, and eat 
and drink with the mouth this bread and wine, may 
hereby through faith in the Spirit, receive, and be- 
come partakers of, Christ and all His heavenly 
riches, and thus be strengthened in the faith, fed 
in the soul, and be bound together by fervent love, 
with God and their neighbors, as members of one 
body. 

But believers must in no wise place any confi- 
dence in these visible memorials, as though they 
in themselves were more sacred and worthy than 
other like, common meat and drink, or had power 
to give unto men grace and forgiveness of sins. By 
so doing one should depart with the heart from his 
Creator, and seek grace from the creature, where 
it is not to be found. But believers must receive 
these signs as nothing more than bread and wine, 
confide with a firm heart only in that which is 
thereby taught and signified, and look upon and 
regard these signs as figures, as the Holy Ghost is 
wont, in the Holy Scriptures, to call the signs, that 
which is signified by them. And as in this insti- 
tution of the Supper by Christ the cup is called the 
New Testament in His blood, which cup is really 
not the New Testament itself, but is figuratively so 
called, because the blood of Christ which He shed 
for the sin of the world, is proclaimed and recom- 
mended to us through the New Testament ; which 
signifies, that as a testator by a testament be- 
queaths to his heirs his property, which they 
are to receive and enjoy after his death ; so has 
Christ in His last Supper — since He could not re- 
main with them — bequeathed His last will in the 
New Testament, together with all its heavenly 
riches, to His friends and followers ; in order that 
all those who in this testament are specified and 
recorded as children of God and heirs of Christ, 
shall enjoy His glorious riches; whereupon they 
receive in the Supper, with the mouth, only nat- 
ural bread and wine; but through faith there is 
received, according to the Spirit, Christ's flesh and 
blood, which He gave as an atonement for the hu- 
man race, of which the natural bread and wine, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


399 


and the supper are figures, signs, and representa- 
tions. 

Hence, believers are to use this worthy institution 
of Christ among each other, and thereby, through 
an ordained blameless minister, proclaim with 
great reverence the bitter suffering and death of 
the Lord. 

And after God has been thanked with an hum- 
ble heart, for His boundless grace and mercy, and 
been called upon by fervent prayers, the bread shall 
be broken by the minister, the wine poured out, and 
be received by all believers baptized according to 
the ordinance of Christ, and each shall, examining 
himself, use, and avail himself of the same, with 
heartfelt contemplation of the broken body and 
shed blood of the Lord Jesus. This shall con- 
stantly be observed by believers in this manner, 
when time and place permit, until the appearing of 
Jesus Christ from heaven. 

Of this institution and ordinance of Christ, read : 
"And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and 
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, 
and said, Take eat ; this is my body. And he took 
the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, say- 
ing, Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the 
New Testament, which is shed for many for the 
remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not 
drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that 
day when I drink it new with you in my Father's 
kingdom." Matt. 26:26-29; Mark 14:22; Luke 
22:19. 

How the apostles in accordance with this also 
practiced and observed it in the same form and 
manner, with bread and wine, read: "I have re- 
ceived of the Lord that which also I delivered unto 
you, That the Lord Jesus, the same night in which 
he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had 
given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat ; this 
is my body, which is broken for you: this do in 
remembrance of me. After the same manner also 
he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This 
cup is the new testament in my blood : this do ye, 
as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as 
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye 
do shew the Lord's death till he come. Wherefore 
whosoever) shall eat this bread, and drink this cup 
of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body 
and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine 
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink 
of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh un- 
worthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, 
not discerning the Lord's body." I Cor. 11 :23-29; 
Acts 2:42; 20:7, 11. 

How the bread and wine in the Supper are not 
the real body and blood of Christ, but signs of His 
communion with the believer, read : "The cup of 
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
of the blood of Christ ? The bread which we break, 
is it not the communion of the body of Christ ? For 
we being many are one bread, and one body : for 
we are all partakers of that one bread. Behold 


Israel after the flesh : are not they which eat of the 
sacrifices partakers of the altar?" I Cor. 10:16-18. 

Mark, the Israelites did not eat the altar, but 
only the sacrifice, and thereby were partakers of 
the altar. Thus also, Christians do not eat and drink 
with the mouth the real body and blood of Christ, 
but only bread and wine, as figures ; but according 
to the soul, they, by faith, receive Christ Jesus, 
with all His benefits, and are thus partakers of the 
true altar Christ Jesus. 

Read in regard to this : "I am the bread of life : 
he that cometh to me shall never hunger, and he 
that believeth on me shall never thirst. It is the 
Spirit that quickeneth ; the flesh profiteth nothing : 
the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, 
and they are life." John 6 :35, 63. 

ARTICLE XXIII 

Of tlte feet washing of believers we confess : Af- 
ter our Leader Christ Jesus had celebrated the 
Supper with His apostles, He, before His suf- 
fering, used another ordinance with them, and com- 
manded that they should observe it with each other. 
He rose from supper, girded Himself with a linen 
towel, poured water into a basin, washed the dis- 
ciples' feet, and wiped them with the towel; say- 
ing to them : "Ye call me Master and Lord : and ye 
say well ; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and 
Master, have washed your feet ; ye also ought to 
wash one another's feet. For I have given you an 
example, that ye should do as I have done to you." 
And He also added : "If ye know these things, hap- 
py are ye if ye do them." 

And we find that the apostles observed this ordi- 
nance of Christ in this manner, and that they 
counted it, in the ministry of the saints, among the 
good works, and required it of believers. Hence, 
the believers, as successors and followers of Christ 
and His apostles, ought also, when time and place 
permit, practice and observe this ordinance of 
Christ. When their fellow believers, out of love, 
visit them, they shall with heartfelt humility, re- 
ceive them with the kiss of love and peace into 
their houses, and as a ministration to their neigh- 
bors, according to the humiliation of Christ, wash 
their feet; sincerely considering how the most 
worshipful Son of God humbled Himself, not only 
washing the feet of His apostles, but much more, 
washing and purifying with His precious death and 
blood, all our souls and consciences from the stain 
of eternal condemnation. On this the pious ought 
herein to meditate with an humble heart. 

How Christ practiced this ordinance with His 
apostles, and commanded it to be observed, read, 
John 13:4-17. 

And also, how the apostles required it of be- 
lievers as one of the good works read : "Let not a 
widow be taken into the number under three-score 
years old, having been the wife of one man, well 
reported of for good works; if she have brought 
up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she 
have washed the saints' feet," etc. I Tim. 5 :9, 10. 


400 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


How the pious fathers practiced this ordinance 
with the guests whom they received, read : Genesis 
18:4; 19:2. And also: Luke 7:38; John 11:2; 
Acts 16 :33. 

ARTICLE XXIV 

Of good works. Of good works we believe and 
confess: That for every true Christian it is not 
enough, in every respect according to the Scrip- 
tures, to confess the faith aright with the mouth, 
and to regard Christ Jesus as our only Head, Re- 
deemer, and Saviour, but that above this we must 
necessarily manifest from our faith, as a fruit of 
gratitude, virtuous works. Thus also, it is not 
enough, that we put off all the accursed works of 
the flesh, and seek to bury them by baptism into 
the death of Christ ; but we must also rise from this 
death of sin, and live and walk after the Spirit in a 
new life adorned with good works ; and thus we are 
not only to put off the old man with his evil deeds, 
but it is also our duty to put on the new man with 
his good deeds, in righteousness and true holiness, 
and to let our light so shine before men, that they 
may see our good works, and glorify our Father in 
heaven ; in order that thus all believers, as a tree 
by its good fruits, may be known and distinguished 
by their good works from all unfruitful and unbe- 
lieving men. 

These good works must not be performed 
through an outward appearance of holiness to 
please mortal men ; nor must we follow herein the 
hypocrites and self-righteous Pharisees, and oth- 
ers, whose works mainly consist in [things of] 
their own choice, and self -in vented commandments, 
which, according to the Scriptures, is only a vain 
and unavailing worship; but we must work out 
from our faith such divine virtues as are taught, 
and required of us in the holy Scriptures, and in 
which we have the example of Christ and His 
apostles, whose footsteps we are so highly com- 
manded to follow ; and all this we must do from 
the heart, to the honor of Him who created us; 
thus learning from Christ to be meek and lowly in 
heart, and thereby to put off all pride, which latter 
is the beginning of all destruction, and proceeds 
from man's sinful heart, and manifests itself out- 
wardly in the adorning of and display in dress 
[in the style of], living, and in words and works ; 
and on the contrary, to adorn ourselves inwardly 
with an humbled spirit, which does not think much 
of itself, but in lowliness esteems his neighbor 
better than himself ; and outwardly in our conver- 
sation after our lowly Head and Example, Christ 
Jesus. 

Thus we must also put off avarice, which is called 
the root of all evil, whence, proceed many sinful 
desires and unrighteous works, and, on the other 
hand, put on the love and mercy of our heavenly 
Father, and manifest it towards our neighbors and 
all men by works of mercy ; seeing the practice of 
love and mercy is the chief sacrifice with which we 
can please our Creator in this present time. 


Likewise we must put off all unclean lusts and 
desires, fornication, and all uncleanness, each pre- 
serving, on the contrary, his body chaste, holy, and 
pure, and abstaining also from all drunkenness, 
reyelmgs, and banquetings ; in excessive eating and 
drinking, and on the contrary, live soberly, temper- 
ately, righteously, and godly in this world, with 
humble fasting and constant praying to God Al- 
mighty, and not to make provision for the flesh, 
to fulfill the lusts thereof. 

We also must not walk in the way of sinners, nor 
hold fellowship with light-minded persons, where 
foolish talking and lies are bandied about; but we 
must associate with the pious, whose conversation 
treats of godliness, and who speak with tongues 
truly circumcised ; and gladly attend the assembly 
of the believers, where we hear the praise of the 
Lord proclaimed; and furthermore, observe ac- 
cording to all our ability the commandments and 
ordinances of the Lord, and thus by patient con- 
tinuance in well doing seek for eternal life re- 
membering that Almighty God has promised eter- 
nal life to that faith which in this manner works 
by love ; just as He has pronounced the sentence of 
eternal death upon unbelief with its evil works; 
and that all boasted faith without good works (as 
the body without the spirit), in itself is dead. But 
all the pious who thus evince divine virtue from 
their faith, and seek to excel in good works, must 
not suppose that they are able to merit salvation 
by their good works, or that God does owe them 
anything for them ; but all true Christians are to 
consider themselves unprofitable servants, who of 
themselves can do nothing good ; but that Almighty 
God, by His grace works in them both to will and 
to do that which is good, and that they are en- 
compassed with a body of sin, which lusts against 
the Spirit, against which they have a continual war- 
fare until the last enemy, which is death, shall be 
vanquished. For this reason all the pious fall far 
too short in good works, are very imperfect and 
frail, and hence, are in duty bound to pray daily, 
with an humble heart, to Almighty God, for for- 
giveness and remission of sins, and to give heart- 
felt praise, honor and thanks to Him for His sav- 
ing grace which He has manifested towards us. 
And thus we hope to be saved only through the 
unmerited grace and mercy of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, and not through our good 
works. Tit. 3 :8 ; Luke 18 :10. 

Of the deadly works of darkness, which separate 
men from God, and which we must put off and lay 
aside by faith, read : "Seeing that ye have put off 
the old man with his deeds ; and have put on the 
new man," etc. Col. 3 :9, 10. 

Read further concerning the twenty-three sins 
which are worthy of eternal death. Rom. 1 :29-31. 

Of the ten works of unrighteousness which shall 
not inherit the kingdom of God, read: I Cor 
6:9, 10. 

Of the seventeen works of the flesh to which the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


401 


kingdom of God is denied, read : Gal. 5 :19-21 ; 
Matt. 7:23. 

Of the good and virtuous works which the be- 
lievers are to manifest from their faith as fruits of 
gratitude, read: "Let your light so shine before 
men, that they may see your good works," etc. 
Matt. 5:16; I Pet. 2:12; Phil. 2:15. 

"To them who by patient continuance in we ; i 
doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, 
eternal life." Rom. 2:7; John 8:39; James 2:22; 
Gal. 5:6. 

"But (which becometh women professing godli- 
ness) with good works." I Tim. 2 :10. 

"That they do good, that they be rich in good 
works," etc. I Tim. 6 :18. 

Of the nine beatitudes, read: Matt. 5:1-11. 

Of the seven works of mercy, read: Matthew 
25 :35, 36. 

Of the nine fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 5 :22, 23. 

Of the seven cardinal virtues which we are to 
evince from our faith, and that where this does not 
follow, we are blind, read : II Pet. 1 :5-7. "For as 
the body without the spirit is dead, so faith with- 
out works is dead also." James 2 :26. "And the sea 
gave up the dead which were in it ; and death and 
hell delivered up the dead which were in them : and 
they were judged every man according to their 
works." Rev. 20:13; II Cor. 5:10. 

How we are saved not through any works which 
we have done, but only through the grace of God, 
read : "But we believe that through the grace of 
the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved." Acts 
15:11. 

"Not by works of righteousness which we have 
done, but according to his mercy he saved us." 
Tit. 3 :5 ; Eph. 2 :5 ; II Tim. 1 :9 ; Luke 17:10; Acts 
4:12; 15:11. 

ARTICLE XXV 

Of marriage. Of marriage we confess : That the 
same is honorable and an ordinance of God, who 
in the beginning instituted this state with the two 
human beings first created in the image of God, 
blessed it, and joined them together. And since 
this divine ordinance, through the hardness of the 
heart and the evil wantonness of man had fallen 
into great disorder, so that men, through the lusts 
of the flesh, married whomsoever they would, and 
took unto them many wives, and then, for divers 
reasons, dismissed them by a bill of divorcement 
and married others ; therefore Christ as a perfect 
Lawgiver, rejected and abolished the writing of di- 
vorcement and permission of Moses, together with 
all abuses thereof, referring all that heard and be- 
lieved him to the original ordinance of his heavenly 
Father, instituted with Adam and Eve in Paradise ; 
and thus re-establishing marriage between one man 
and one woman, and so inseparably and firmly 
binding the bond of matrimony, that they might 
not, on any account, separate and marry another, 
except in case of adultery or death. 


Hence, every believer who desires to enter into 
matrimony, must follow this doctrine of Christ and 
the above example, and unite himself in marriage 
only with one person, who has been, by a like faith 
with him, born from above, of God, and renewed, 
and created after the image of God. And such per- 
sons, after their parents and the church have given 
their consent, shall, in the presence of the church, 
with fervent prayer to God, be joined together by 
a minister. This we believe to be marrying in the 
Lord, of which God is Himself the Author and 
Joiner. II Pet. 1 :1 ; Jno. 3 :3 ; I Jno. 5 :4. 

But all unregenerated persons, who are not yet 
sanctified by faith in Christ, and do thus marry, we 
also regard as being in honorable matrimony, but 
not in the Lord. Heb. 13 :4; I Cor. 7:12. 

And, as Christ accepts none as His bride and a 
member of His body, but those alone who are united 
with Him by faith ; so also, believers cannot sever 
their bodies which are sanctified and surrendered 
to God, as members of Christ and temples of the 
Holy Ghost from Christ, and unite them in mar- 
riage with the unregenerate, and thus be unequally 
yoked together with unbelievers, who are not 
known to the church, by faith and Christian bap- 
tism, as brethren or sisters in fellowship, seeing 
that baptism is the first Christian ordinance in the 
church, after which all other ordinances of God 
follow. Eph. 5 :30 ; Gal. 3 :26. 

Thus marriage is advised by the holy Ghost, to 
avoid fornication and all uncleanness ; but if any 
one does not need this, and can without it, keep 
himself pure and undefiled, in a virginal state, in 
order to serve the Lord the better and without hin- 
drance, it is commended still more highly. Hence, 
marriage is free for all, but no commandment. 

How God the Lord in the beginning instituted 
marriage, read : "And the Lord God said, It is not 
good that the man should be alone; I will make 
him a helpmeet for him." "And the rib, which the 
Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, 
and brought her unto the man." "Therefore shall 
a man leave his father and his mother, and shall 
cleave unto his wife : and they shall be one flesh." 
Gen. 2:18,22,24. 

How Christ rejected all abuses of marriage, and 
renewed the ordinance of His Father, read : "Have 
ye not read, that he which made them at the be- 
ginning made them male and female, and said, For 
this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and 
shall cleave to his wife : and the twain shall be one 
flesh ? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one 
flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, 
let not man put asunder." Matt. 19 :4-6, 8 ; I Cor. 
7:10. 

"Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed unde- 
filed : but whoremongers and adulterers God will 
judge." Heb. 13:4; I Cor. 7:2. 

"The wife is bound by the law as long as her 
husband liveth ; but if her husband be dead, she is 
at liberty to be married to whom she will ; only in 


402 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the Lord." I Cor. 7:39; Gen. 1:27; 24:4; Exo- 
dus 34:16; Num. 36:6; Deut. 7:3; Tob. 7:13. 

Concerning the transgressors of this, and their 
punishment, read : Gen. 6 :3 ; Num. 25 :1 ; Nehe- 
miah 13:26,27; I Kings 11:1. 

ARTICLE XXVI 

Of the swearing of oaths, we confess : That the 
people of the Old Testament were permitted to 
swear in various ways by the name of the Lord ; 
either by lifting up their hand toward heaven, or by 
putting it on the thigh of some one, which was done 
in various ways, and into which practice, through 
the artifice of man, many abuses were introduced, 
so that they would swear by heaven and earth, by 
Jerusalem, by their head, the temple, the gold of the 
temple, the altar, and the sacrifice; on account of 
which the Lord Christ, who had come from God, 
and been sent, to execute judgment and righteous- 
ness, being the only lawgiver, utterly abolished and 
prohibited all the aforesaid swearing, whether per- 
mitted or feigned and, in place thereof, referred all 
His hearers and followers, only to yea and nay, 
which is so in truth. 

And we also find that the high apostles of Christ, 
as obedient sheep of their only Shepherd, followed 
the doctrine of Christ in this respect. Hence all be- 
lievers are in duty bound obediently to follow this 
doctrine of Christ and the course of His apostles, 
putting away all lying, and dealing only in truth, 
and thus testifying in all true matters, whether be- 
fore authority, or however the case may be, only 
with yea that which is yea, and with nay that which 
is nay, without adding anything more ; and to keep 
these few words, little in sound, but great and 
strong in signification, as inviolable as an oath, 
thus showing themselves to be obedient followers 
of Christ and His apostles. 

Of the rejection and abolishment of the ancient 
custom of swearing, and how Christ commanded 
yea and nay in place of it, read : "Again, ye have 
heard that it hath been said by them of old time, 
Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform 
unto the Lord thine oaths: but I say unto you, 
Swear not at all ; neither by heaven ; for it is God's 
throne : nor by the earth ; for it is his footstool : 
neither by Jerusalem ; for it is the city of the great 
King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, be- 
cause thou canst not make one hair white or black. 
But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, 
nay ; for whatsoever is more than these cotneth of 
evil." Matt. 5:33-37; 23:21. 

"But above all things, my brethren, swear not, 
neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by 
any other oath ; but let your yea be yea ; and your 
nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation." James 
5:12. 

"When I therefore was thus minded, did I use 
lightness ? or the things that I purpose, do I pur- 
pose according to the flesh, that with me there 
should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? For all the 


promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen." 
II Cor. 1 :17, 20. 

ARTICLE XXVII 

Of the office of magistracy, and secular power, 
we confess : That the office of magistracy is an 
ordinance and institution of God who Himself 
willed and ordained that such a power should be 
over every country in order that thereby countries 
and cities might, through good policy and laws, for 
the punishment of the evil and the protection of the 
pious, be governed and maintained in quiet and 
peace, in a good civil life ; without which power of 
authority the world, lying as it is in wickedness, 
could not subsist. Hence, all believers are in duty 
bound, not only for wrath, but also for conscience 
sake, to submit themselves to this power, and as 
good subjects, to obey it with fear and reverence ; 
willingly and without murmuring to render unto 
their human ordinances and laws everything that 
is due to them, whether it be tribute, custom or ex- 
cise; and to pray with an humble heart for their 
life and welfare, and thus to seek with faithful 
heart the prosperity of the country and city in 
which they reside ; and though they, for the Word 
of God, may have to suffer persecution, the spoil- 
ing of their property, and death, from the author- 
ities, they may not speak evil of them, nor resist 
them in any wise with weapons and defense, but 
commit vengeance to God alone, and expect conso- 
lation with God after this life. Rom. 12:2; Wisd 
6:4;Ecclus. 17:14. 

But if the authorities, through Christian equity, 
grant liberty to practice the faith in every respect, 
we are under so much the greater obligation of 
submissive obedience to them ; but so far as the 
authorities abuse the office imposed on them, which 
extends only to the temporal, bodily government of 
men in temporal things, and encroach on the office 
of Christ, who alone has power over the spirits and 
souls of men, seeking, through their human laws, 
to press and compel men to act contrary to the 
Word of God, we may not follow them, but must 
obey God rather than men, seeing Christ has been 
set by God His Father above all authority and 
power, the head in His church ; and to this Father 
of Spirits we are directed, that in all things per- 
taining to the faith we should obey Him. 

And as the kingdom of Christ is not of this 
world, but spiritual, He has dissuaded and prohib- 
ited all His servants and followers from all secular 
government and highness, and has instituted in His 
church various ordinances, as pastors, teachers, 
helps and governments, by which the saints may be 
joined together, to edify the body of Christ; but 
the secular office* He left to the secular govern- 
ment, under which the followers of Christ as 
strangers and pilgrims, who have here no kingdom, 
power or continuing city, must sojourn, and fight 
only with spiritual weapons, which is the Word of 
God; s eeing neither Christ nor His apostles pre- 

* "But not the office of authority," then says the writer. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


403 


scribed to believers any laws or rules according 
to which they should govern the world; neither 
did they refer them to the laws of the Jews, much 
less to those of the Roman emperors, or heathen 
laws, according to which they might regulate 
themselves herein ; but they prescribed to believers 
only good doctrines, how they should conduct 
themselves in all Christian propriety as obedient 
subjects, under the government of the authorities; 
referring them to His own example, who shunned 
all the greatness of this world, and showed Himself 
only as a poor servant. Thus must also all His 
followers avoid the office of magistracy in all its 
departments, and not administer it, following also 
in this the example of Christ and His apostles, in 
whose church said offices were not administered, as 
is well known to every intelligent person. 

But as all Christians are not permitted, but very 
strictly prohibited by God, to speak evil of, judge 
or condemn any one that is without their com- 
munion, we would with this still much less speak 
evil or injuriously of the magistracy, but trust 
in the only good God, who keeps all the alms of 
man as a signet, and his good deeds as the apple of 
the eye, and has promised a true reward to him 
who will give only a cup of cold water in the name 
of a disciple; that he, the Blessed, will also be 
gracious to, and not leave unrewarded the good 
deeds of all authorities, particularly those who ad- 
minister their office aright according to the ordi- 
nances of God, which consists chiefly in protecting 
good, innocent, defenseless people, and in punish- 
ing the evil. Hence, all Christians are in duty 
bound to regard the authorities as God's ministers, 
and to pray for them, with a fervent heart, that it 
may please God to be gracious to them and give 
them eternal salvation. 

How government is of God, and for what pur- 
pose it is instituted, read : "For there is no power 
but of God: the powers that be are ordained of 
God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, 
resisteth the ordinance of God : and they that re- 
sist shall receive to themselves damnation. For 
rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the 
evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power ? 
do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise 
of the same : for he is the minister of God to thee 
for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be 
afraid ; for he beareth not the sword in vain : for he 
is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath 
upon him that doeth evil." Rom. 13:1-4; Sir. 
17:17. 

"Jesus answered Pilate: Thou couldest have no 
power at all against me, except it were given thee 
from above." John 19:11 ; Wisd. 6:3 ; Dan. 2:21; 
4:25; 5:21; Jer. 27:5. 

How Christ taught His followers not to accept 
magisterial office, read : "But Jesus called them to 
him, and saith unto them, Ye know that they which 
are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise 
lordship over them ; and their great ones exercise 
authority upon them. But so shall it not be among 


you : but whosoever will be great among you, shall 
be your minister : and whosoever of you will be the 
chiefest, shall be servant of all. For even the Son 
of man came not to be ministered unto, but to min- 
ister, and to give his life a ransom for many." Mark 
10:42-45; Matt. 20:25; Luke 22:5. 

Mark the words : But so shall it not be among 
you. This can not be applied to the apostles only, 
who were equal servants, the one being no greater 
than the other, and they soon separating from each 
other to preach the Gospel to all nations, could not, 
on this account, show to each other alone the duty 
of servants here required ; hence the words, among 
you, must necessarily be understood of the whole 
church, seeing Christ spoke to His twelve apostles 
many others of His principal doctrines and com- 
mandments, which relate to all believers, as His 
blessed lips say in the Gospel: "And what I say 
unto you I say unto all." Mark 13 :37. 

"Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this 
world: if my kingdom were of this world, then 
would my servants fight, that I should not be de- 
livered to the Jews : but now is my kingdom not 
from hence." John 18:36; 6:15; Matt. 5:39; II 
Cor. 10:4; Eph. 6:13; Isa. 2:4; Micah 4:3; Zech. 
9:10; Ps. 76:3. 

Read further, not according to what law the be- 
lievers are to govern the unbelievers, but only how 
the church of Christ shall be obedient to govern- 
ment. "Let every soul be subject unto the higher 
powers." "Wherefore ye must needs be subject, 
not only for wrath, but also for conscience' sake." 
"Render therefore to all their dues; tribute to 
whom tribute is due ; custom to whom custom ; fear 
to whom fear." Rom. 13:1, 5, 7. 

"Render therefore unto Caesar the things which 
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are 
God's." Matt. 22:21; Mark 12:17. 

"Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man 
for the Lord's sake : whether it be to the king, as 
supreme ; or unto governors, as unto them that are 
sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and 
for the praise of them that do well." I Pet. 2:13, 
14. 

"Put them in mind to be subject to principalities 
and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to 
every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no 
brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all 
men." Tit. 3:1,2; I Tim. 2:2; Jer. 29:7; Bar. 
1:11. 

ARTICLE XXVIII 

Of the discipline of the Christian Church and 
separation of offending members. Of this we con- 
fess : That, as a house or city cannot be maintained 
without doors, gates and walls by which evil men 
may be expelled, excluded and debarred, and the 
good and pious be taken in and protected; so 
Christ, for the preservation of His church, gave her 
the key of heaven, which is His Word, that by and 
according to the same she should judge and reprove 
according to truth, for their reformation, all those 


404 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


in her communion that are found to offend in doc- 
trine and conversation, that is, to act contrary to 
any commandment or ordinance which God has 
given to His church ; and thus to separate the diso- 
bedient from her communion, that the church may 
not be leavened and stained by their false doctrine 
and impure walk, and become a partaker of other 
men's sins; and that the pious thereby may be 
brought to fear, and restrain themselves from the 
commission of similar offenses. 

And, as God through Moses commanded this 
punishment of transgressors to be inflicted accord- 
ing to the magnitude of the offense, so that those 
who through ignorance, weakness, and otherwise, 
offended by minor sins against any of the com- 
mandments of the Lord, were reconciled to God 
by various offerings and the intercessions of the 
priests, but the open, great transgressors of the law 
could not be reconciled by such offerings, but had 
to die without mercy under two or three witnesses ; 
so Christ in the New Testament also taught to in- 
flict Christian punishment according to the magni- 
tude of the offense ; not to man's destruction, as in 
the punishment of Israel, which was death, by 
which the transgressor was cut off from repentance 
and reformation ; but Christ having come to save 
men's souls, instituted this punishment for the 
reformation of sinners and ordained that if any one 
see his brother commit a transgression which is 
obviously a sin, but not so great as to have brought 
forth death in him, he shall out of Christian love 
for his soul, speak to him privately, with the Word 
of God, and reprove him of his sin and admonish 
him. If he receive this Christian admonition, he 
has gained his brother, and shall, out of fervent 
charity, conceal and cover his sin. I Pet. 4 :8. But 
if he heareth him not, he shall take one or two more 
with him, so that in the mouth of these witnesses 
every word may be established. But if he shall 
neglect to hear them, then the matter must be 
brought before the church; and if he neglect to 
hear the church, all the members of which are 
judges, he shall be excluded from the brother- 
hood. 

But if any one fall into open works of the flesh, 
from which the church perceives that through these 
sins he has separated himself from his God, and in- 
curred the divine wrath, such an one the church 
shall, without any of the aforesaid admonitions and 
words as in the case of the offending sinner, on 
account of I = Is sins, exclude from the brotherhood, 
and point him to repentance and reformation, by 
which he may again find grace with God, even as 
he has become separated from God through the 
evil works of the flesh. Thus the church shall 
knowingly keep none in her communion who are 
separated from God through their sins; nor sep- 
arate any from her communion save those who 
have previously through their sins become sep- 
arated from God ; nor again receive any, and prom- 
ise life and peace to them, except those who 


through faith and true repentance have first been 
received into grace with God. 

This true repentance possesses the following 
properties: 1. That we have a sincere sorrow be- 
fore Almighty God for all the sins we have com- 
mitted ; 2. that we confess our sins from the heart, 
before God and men ; 3. that we desist from and 
do not continue any longer in sin, and, according to 
our ability, seek to make amends for the evil we 
have done, by doing good. This repentance and 
reformation again opens the entrance to the king- 
dom of God, which before was closed to us on ac- 
count of our sins. So that the church of God, by 
this her separation and reception, may according 
to His Word, follow the previous separation and 
reception by God in heaven, of which the action of 
the church is only a proof and proclamation. 

And since with God there is no respect of per- 
sons, therefore the church of God shall use this key 
of the Word of God aright, and, in punishing, 
spare no one, whether he be minister or brother, 
man or woman, but shall judge the small as well as 
the great after one rule and measure of the divine 
word, according to the truth. And, as all dis- 
obedient sinners by consent of the church, with 
sorrow and sadness of heart, are excluded from 
the brotherhood, and referred to repentance and 
reformation; so also shall all obedient, penitent 
sinners with the consent and concurrence of the 
church, be received, by the bishop of the church. 
And, as men are wont to rejoice over the finding 
of a lost sheep, piece of silver, or son, so shall be- 
lievers rejoice with all the angels of God over the 
repentance and return of their erring brother or 
sister. 

How the minor sins, whether caused through 
weakness or ignorance, were reconciled by the 
priest with various offerings, read : Lev. 4 :27 ; 5 ; 
Numbers 5:6; 15:22. 

But the open transgressors of the law were put 
to death without mercy under two or three wit- 
nesses. Of this read: Num. 15:30; Lev. 24:14; 
Deut. 17:12; 19:15; Heb. 10:28. 

In connection with this read also the words of 
the high priest Eli : "If one man sin against an- 
other, the judge shall judge him; but if a man sin 
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?" I 
Sam. 2 :25. 

How Christ commanded that small offenses be- 
tween brother and brother should be punished, 
read : "It thy brother shall trespass against thee, 
go and tell him his fault between thee and him 
alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take 
with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of 
two or three witnesses every word may be estab- 
lished. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it 
unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the 
church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and 
a publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye 
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven , and 
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


405 


in heaven." Matt. 18 :15-18 ; Luke 17 :3 ; Gal. 6 :1 ; 
Jas. 5 :19. 

"If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not 
unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life 
for them that sin not unto death." I John 5 :16. 

But open offending members Christ commanded 
to sever and cast away without exercising admoni- 
tion, intercession, or forgiveness in regard to them, 
before the separation. Read: Matt. 18:8; Mark 
9:42. 

Thus did also the apostles, according to the doc- 
trine of Christ, deny eternal life to all the known 
works of the flesh, condemning them to death, and 
in their assembly ; delivered the Corinthian fornica- 
tor unto Satan, with the word and power of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, without using the aforesaid ad- 
monition with regard to him. I Cor. 5:3. Read 
also: I Tim. 1 :20; 5:20; II Cor. 13:2. 

"There is a sin unto death : I do not say that he 
shall pray for it." I John 5:16; Numbers 15:30; 
Heb. 10:28; I Cor. 5:13; II Cor. 13:2; Ps. 1:5; 
II Tim. 2 :20; I Cor. 6 :9 ; Gal. 5 :21 ; Eph. 5 :5. 

ARTICLE XXIX 

Of the withdrawing from and avoiding of apos- 
tate and separated members, is confessed : As sep- 
aration is commanded by God for the reformation 
of sinners, and the maintenance of the purity of the 
church; so God has also commanded and willed, 
that in order to shame him to reformation, the sep- 
arated individual shall be shunned and avoided. 
This withdrawing proceeds from the separation, 
and is a fruit and proof of the same, and without 
it separation is vain and unavailing. Hence, this 
ordinance of God shall be practiced and main- 
tained, by all believers, with the separated persons. 
This withdrawing extends to all spiritual com- 
munion, as the supper, evangelical salutation, the 
kiss of peace, and all that pertains to it. This with- 
drawing extends likewise to all temporal and bod- 
ily things, as eating, drinking, buying and selling, 
daily intercourse and conversation, with all that 
pertains to it. 

Thus, believers shall, according to the Word of 
God, withdraw themselves, from the separated in 
all spiritual, evangelical matters, as well as in all 
bodily and temporal things. And as in separation 
no persons may be regarded or spared, but must, 
by consent, be separated from the true members of 
the body ; so also in withdrawing, extending to all 
spiritual and temporal matters, none may be spared 
or excepted, whether man or woman, parent or 
child, or whatever relation it may be; seeing we 
nowhere read, where God gave His church a gen- 
eral commandment or ordinance, that any member 
of said church was entirely exempted and excluded 
from such commandment; but on the contrary, it 
appears in many places, that the whole number, 
without exception, had to regulate themselves ac- 
cording to one rule set before them by God ; hence 
this ordinance of God must be practiced and main- 
tained by all the members of the body of Christ, 


without respect of persons, in the fear of God, to 
shame sinners to reformation, until the person pun- 
ished is again received into the church. 

But as all divine ordinances must be tempered 
with Christian kindliness and discretion, these also 
must have their place in this matter of shunning. 
Hence, the believers must conduct themselves with 
more discernment and equity with regards to sep- 
arated persons, than did the scribes and Pharisees 
with regard to the Sabbath; who, as it appears 
would rather let men perish, than that they should 
receive help on the Sabbath, thinking that the Sab- 
bath should be broken thereby, though they them- 
selves, in such a case, broke the Sabbath for various 
minor matters. But even as the pious followers of 
the law did not sin, nor break the Sabbath, when 
they, on this day, performed not their own, but 
only the works which God had commanded them, 
so the believers neither sin nor act contrary to the 
commandment of shunning, when they perform not 
their own works, but only the works which God 
has commanded them concerning separated per- 
sons ; as, in case of necessity, to minister to their 
bodies with food and other needful things, and to 
their souls with the Word of God, as well as to as- 
sist them by virtue of the commandment of God, 
in case of danger from water, fire and the like; 
these all believers are in duty bound to do ; and they 
must thus, with great carefulness, seek that which 
is lost, and lead that which has erred, back to the 
right way, reprove and instruct them with the word 
of God, where such Christian admonition may 
take place, according to the example of Christ; 
but in all human works believers must with all dil- 
igence withdraw themselves from the separated 
persons, until they have reformed and been united 
again with the church. 

In order rightly to understand this matter, it 
must be considered that the people of Israel at the 
time of Christ were under the power and dominion 
of the Romans, and could not punish transgressors 
according to the law of Moses, hence they sep- 
arated from their communion and avoided those 
who departed from the law of the fathers, and 
went over to the Gentiles, Samaritans, or open sin- 
ners. Concerning this read : They regarded them 
as unclean, abhorred them, compared them to 
heathens and enemies, avoided all dealings and in- 
tercourse with them, and hindered them in their 
business. Ill Mace. 2:34. Read also: John 18:31 ; 
4:9; Acts 10:28; 11; Gal. 2:12. 

This custom Christ also observed, and com- 
manded that the disobedient in the church should 
be so regarded, saying: "If he neglect to hear the 
church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and 
a publican." Matt. 18:17. 

This the apostles also practiced in like manner, 
according to the doctrine of Christ. Read: "I 
wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with 
fornicators : yet not altogether with the fornicators 
of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, 
or with idolaters ; for then must ye needs go out 


406 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of the world. But now I have written unto you 
not to keep company, if any man that is called a 
brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idola- 
ter, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner ; 
with such a one no not to eat." I Cor. 5 :9-ll. 

Here the holy apostle forbids us to company and 
eat with apostate brethren or sisters, which he did 
not mean or command with reference to the un- 
righteous of this world, but permitted it with them ; 
else we would needs have to go out of the world, 
seeing the whole world lies in wickedness ; hence 
it must necessarily be understood with reference to 
daily intercourse and eating, buying and selling, 
and the like. "A man that is an heretick, after the 
first and second admonition, reject." Titus. 3 :10 ; 
II Tim. 4:15; II John 10. 

"And if any man obey not our word by this 
epistle, note that man, and have no company with 
him, that he may be ashamed." II Thess. 3:14. 

How this withdrawing is to be observed by all 
believers, with regard to all apostates, walking dis- 
orderly, without respect of person, read : "Now, we 
command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourself from 
every brother that walketh disorderly, and not af- 
ter the tradition which he received of us." II Thess. 
3:6. 

Understand this withdrawing according to 
scriptures. Gal. 2:12; III Mace. 2:34, and the like, 
according to the spirit of the Gospel of Christ. 

How believers must seek the lost, and not count 
the separated as enemies, but admonish them, as 
brethren. Read: II Thess. 3:15; Jas. 5:19; Luke 
19:10; 15, the whole chapter. 

ARTICLE XXX 

Of the last day and the second coming of Christ 
from heaven, we confess: That the great God of 
heaven, who in the beginning created heaven and 
earth with all visible things out of nothing, also ap- 
pointed a day and time, which cannot be known by 
the angels of God in heaven ; much less by mortal 
men, but which shall unexpectedly overtake men, 
as the snare of the bird, and a thief in the night ; 
at which time the Almighty God will destroy this 
whole visible, earthly, realm, and burn it with 
everlasting fire, except those of the human race 
who shall have done the will of God ; these shall 
abide forever. 

In the last great day of the Lord the Son of God, 
Christ Jesus, who in the presence of the apostles 
ascended from the earth in a cloud, shall come 
again from heaven, in the clouds of the sky, but 
not in the humiliated form of a servant, as in His 
first coming into the world at Bethlehem. For at 
this His second coming He shall reveal Himself 
in the clouds as a King of mighty kings, and Lord 
of lords, with the power and glory of His Al- 
mighty Father, and all the angels of God with Him, 
and shall thus, with the trump of God, and the 
voice of the archangel, peal forth an unutterable 
sound and shout ; so that heaven and earth, all the 


mountains and islands, shall be moved ; the sun and 
moon shall lose their brightness, the stars shall fall 
from heaven, and all kindreds of the earth shall 
weep and wail over themselves, for fear and ex- 
pectation of the things which are to come ; and all 
shall see the Son of man coming, with power and 
great glory. 

Of this last day of the Lord, read : "And as he 
sat upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples came 
unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall 
these things be ? And what shall be the sign of thy 
coming, and of the end of the world?" Matt. 
24:3. 

"The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the 
night; in the which the heavens shall pass away 
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with 
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are 
therein shall be burned up." II Peter 3:16; Sir 
16:18; Mai. 4:1. 

"For yourselves know perfectly that the day of 
the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For 
when they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden 
destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a 
woman with child." I Thess. 5 :2, 3. 

"Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my 
words shall not pass away. But of that day and 
hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, 
but my Father only." Matt. 24:35,36; Mark 
13:31;Ps. 102:27 ;Isa. 51:6. 

Of Christ's coming from heaven, read : "Ye men 
of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? 
this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into 
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have 
seen him go into heaven." Acts 1:11. 

"For the Lord himself shall descend from heav- 
en with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God." I Thess. 4:16. 

"Behold, he cometh with clouds ; and every eye 
shall see him, and they also which pierced him: 
and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of 
him." Rev. 1:7; Matt. 24:30; Luke 21:27. Read 
also: I Thess. 1:10; II Thess. 1:7; Dan. 7:13; 
Jude 14. 

ARTICLE XXXI 

Of the Death of the body and the Resurrection 
of the dead, we confess : That, in the beginning, 
man was created immortal, but that through the 
envy of the devil and the sin of our first parents, 
death came into the world. And, as through the 
sin of Adam all men became sinful in him, so also 
through him, all men became subject to bodily 
death ; so that in consequence thereof it is appointed 
unto men once to die, but after this the judgment ; 
seeing this sinful, corruptible flesh and blood can- 
not inherit the eternal, incorruptible kingdom, but 
must be renewed and glorified through death and 
the resurrection, by the power of God. 

And, even as, when a man falls into a deep sleep, 
his heart, soul or spirit does not entirely sleep, as 
the body ; so also the spirit or soul of man does not 
die or fall asleep with the body, but is and remains 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


407 


an immortal spirit. Hence temporal death, in the 
Scriptures, is called a sleep, and the resurrection of 
the dead an awakening from this sleep of death. 

And as a sleeping man cannot receive and enjoy 
any good gifts, either according to the soul or 
the body, much less any punishment, pain and tor- 
ment, unless he be previously awakened from his 
sleep ; so also, believers cannot receive the perfect 
heavenly existence, nor unbelievers the eternal 
death or the pain of hell, either in the soul or in the 
body, except they have first been awakened from 
the sleep of death, and have arisen, through the 
coming of Christ. 

Until this last day of judgment the souls of be- 
lievers are waiting in the hands of God, under the 
altar of Christ, to receive then in their souls and 
bodies, the rewards promised them. So also the 
souls of unbelievers are reserved to be punished, 
after the day of judgment, in their souls and 
bodies. 

And as through the sin and transgression of 
Adam death came upon all men ; so also the resur- 
rection of the dead came upon all men through the 
Saviour Jesus Christ ; so that, as in the springtime 
the sun, through his glorious radiance and bright- 
ness, draws forth all sweet scented herbs from the 
earth, as well as thistles and thorns, which are re- 
jected and reserved for the fire; so also, shall 
Christ Jesus, the true Son of righteousness, in this 
great last day and hour, through His glorious com- 
ing and appearing in the clouds of heaven, draw 
forth from the earth, and cause to arise all men, 
the wicked and the pious ; so that this great God, 
through His power and commanding voice, by 
which He spake in the beginning : Let heaven and 
earth be made; and His word was immediately a 
perfect work; and who created all visible things 
from that which was invisible, and made man of 
the dust of the ground; this same God shall, 
through His unchangeable power and almighty 
word, in the last day, call all men who have been 
changed into dust and earth, and have been con- 
sumed by fire, birds, and fishes, from the dust, 
and cause each to rise with his own body, flesh, 
and bones, with which they have served either their 
Creator or sin. 

And, as a woman in travail, when her hour is 
come, cannot retain, but makes haste to deliver, the 
fruit of her womb, so also shall in this last hour, 
death, earth, or hell and sea make haste to deliver 
up the great number of the dead which in them 
have become dust and ashes, and passed away. 
These shall all arise, with their own bodies, incor- 
ruptible, which shall again be united with the soul 
and spirit, which through death had been separated 
from the body, and had remained immortal. At 
that time the pious shall be glorified and changed 
from the mortal and corruptible into the immortal 
and incorruptible, from the weak and frail, into the 
strong and glorious, being made like unto the an- 
gels of God, and the glorious body of Christ. Thus 
shall also those who shall live and remain at this 


sudden second coming of Christ from the heaven, 
be changed and glorified after the image of Christ. 

Of the first or temporal death, which came by 
the first transgression, read: "For dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." Gen. 3 :19 ; 25 : 
33. 

"And as it is appointed unto men once to die, 
but after this the judgment." Heb. 9:27. 

"For since by man came death, by man came 
also the resurrection of the dead." I Cor. 15 :21. 

( 'For God made not death : neither hath he pleas- 
ure in the destruction of the living." Wisd. 1 :13. 

"Nevertheless, through envy of the devil came 
death into the World." Wisd. 2:24; Rom. 5:12. 

How at the second coming of Christ the dead 
shall rise through Christ, read: "For the Lord 
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump 
of God : and the dead in Christ shall rise first." 
I Thess. 4:16. 

"Marvel not at this ; for the hour is coming, in 
the which all that are in the graves shall hear his 
voice, and shall come forth ; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life ; and they that 
have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation." 
John 5:28,29. 

"I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he 
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and 
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet 
in my flesh shall I see God : whom I shall see for 
myself, and mine eyes shall behold." Job 19 :25-27. 

Read also : Isa. 26:19; Dan. 12 :13 ; Matt. 22 :31 ; 
Luke 20:35 ; John 6:40; 11 :25 ; I Cor. 15 through- 
out; Ps. 90:3. 

How in the resurrection of the dead, men's vile 
bodies shall be glorified, read : "In the resurrection 
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but 
are as the angels of God in heaven." Matt. 22:30. 

"For our conversation is in heaven, from whence 
also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ : 
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fash- 
ioned like unto his glorious body, according to the 
working whereby he is able even to subdue all 
things unto himself." Phil. 3:20,21; I Cor. 15: 
42, 53. 

ARTICLE XXXII 

Of the last judgment; of hell, and the damnation 
of unbelievers, we confess: That in the last day, 
when Christ Jesus shall appear in the clouds of 
heaven, with power and great glory, all nations 
shall be gathered before His judgment seat, and He 
shall separate them as a shepherd separates the 
sheep from the goats, placing the sheep on His 
right hand, and the goats on His left. Over these 
Christ Jesus is ordained by His Father Judge of 
quick and dead, who will regard no person, nor 
need the testimony of any; for the heart, mind and 
thoughts of every one are manifest before Him as 
an open book. This righteous Judge will judge the 
whole world in righteousness, and as the great 
Shepherd of the sheep, pronounce an eternal, irre- 


408 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


vocable judgment upon them, rewarding each in 
his own body according to that he hath done. To 
all the believing, generated children of God who 
in this life, as obedient sheep, heard and followed 
the voice of Christ, He shall say: "Come, ye 
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from the foundation of the world." 
And to all unbelievers, who would not have Christ 
and His word in this life, but, as disobedient, ob- 
stinate goats, rejected them, He will say: "Depart 
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared 
for the devil and his angels." 

In that last day of the Lord the righteous God 
will deprive this world of all good gifts ; so that the 
sun, moon and stars shall lose their brightness, and 
all the light and glory of the world shall be changed 
into everlasting darkness. In that time the earth, 
waters and streams shall be turned into burning 
pitch and brimstone, which shall burn forever and 
ever. And, seeing this earth is called hell in many 
places in Scripture, and no other hell being any- 
where mentioned, the same is regarded as hell and 
the place of damnation ; in which fiery pool and 
outer darkness all unbelievers will finally have to 
suffer the burning of hell and eternal damnation ; 
and thus they shall at last be punished and tor- 
mented with the visible things, which in preference 
to the eternal and invisible, they chose and served 
in this life. 

Into that place of darkness and fiery pool all un- 
believers shall, after the resurrection, their souls 
having been united with their bodies, be sentenced 
by Christ. Then shall be fulfilled that which is 
written concerning this last, sad day of separation ; 
namely, that one of two shall be taken in the field, 
in the bed, and at the mill, and be caught up in the 
air to meet the Lord ; but the others shall be left, 
and be sentenced into said pool of darkness, where 
they shall be tormented with the devil and his an- 
gels, burning, and suffering in all eternity, forever 
deprived of all grace and mercy from God, which 
is the second death. 

Of the last judgment, and how the whole human 
race shall appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ, to receive each in his own body an eternal 
sentence, read : "And he commanded us to preach 
unto the people, and to testify that it is he which 
was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and 
dead." Acts 10:42. 

"Because he hath appointed a day, in the which 
he will judge the world in righteousness by that 
man whom he hath ordained." Acts 17:31; Ps. 
7:11. 

"For we must all appear before the judgment 
seat of Christ; that every one may receive the 
things done in his body, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad." II Cor. 5:10; 
Rom. 14:10. 

"And I saw the dead, small and great, stand 
before God; and the books were opened: and 
another book was opened, which is the book of 
life : and the dead were judged out of those things 


which were written in the books, according to their 
works." Rev. 20:12; Dan. 7:10. 

"When the Son of man shall come in his glory, 
and all the holy angels with him, then shall he 
sit upon the throne of his glory : and before him 
shall be gathered all nations : and he shall separate 
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats." Matt. 25:31, 32; 16-27- 
26:64; II Thess. 1:7. 

Of hell and the place of damnation, read: "For 
it is the day of the Lord's vengeance, and the year 
of recompenses for the controversy of Zion. And 
the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and 
the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land there- 
of shall become burning pitch. It shall not be 
quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall 
go up forever." Is. 34:8-10; II Peter 3:10; Sir. 
16 :18. 

"And it came to pass as he (Moses) had made 
an end of speaking all these words, that the ground 
clave asunder that was under them : and the earth 
opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and 
their houses and all the men that appertained unto 
Korah, and all their goods." Num. 16:31, 32. 

Read further concerning Sodom and Gomorrah 
how they were overturned and condemned and 
made an example ; and how the earth is called hell 
Gen. 19:24; Jude 7; Acts 2:27,31; Ps. 16:11. 

"That they might know, that wherewithal a man 
sinneth, by the same also shall he be punished." 
Wisd. 11 :16. 

"Your gold and silver is cankered ; and the rust 
of them shall be a witness against you, and shall 
eat your flesh as it were fire." James 5 :3. 

How the souls of unbelievers are reserved by 
God until the last day of vengeance, to be tormented 
with their bodies after the resurrection, read : "For 
after death shall the judgment come, when we 
shall live again: and then shall the names of the 
righteous be manifest, and the works of the un- 
godly shall be declared." II Esd. 14 :35. 

"For behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as 
an oven ; and all the proud ; yea, and all that do 
wickedly shall be stubble : and the day that cometh, 
shall burn them up, saith the Lord." Mai. 4:1. 

"The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly 
out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto 
the day of judgment to be punished." II Peter 

Them "he hath reserved in everlasting chains 
under darkness unto the judgment of the great 
day." Jude 6; Matt. 25:30; Rom. 14:10; II Cor. 

Read further concerning the fearful and intol- 
erable pain of hell. Judith 16:17; Mark 9:46- 
Matthew 22:13; 24:51; 25:30, 41; Rev. 19:20 J 
21 :8. 

ARTICLE XXXIII 

Of the kingdom of heaven and eternal life, we 
confess: That as there is a visible, perishable 
kingdom of this, which, through the sins and wick- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


409 


edness of men, lies in darkness ; of which darkness, 
Satan, the spirit of wickedness, who works in the 
children of unbelief, is the supreme prince, who at 
last, with all his servants, shall be brought to ever- 
lasting lamentation and remorse, and shall perish ; 
so also there is an eternal, immovable and invisible 
kingdom of heaven, of which Christ Jesus is King, 
Prince and Lord ; in which all believers shall live 
with God forever in everlasting joy. To this glori- 
ous kingdom of heaven, God, through His grace 
and goodness, from the beginning of the world, 
caused the fallen human race to be called; first 
through His servants, the prophets, and then 
through the Son Himself, who, leaving this His 
kingdom for a time, came to preach, and to invite 
all men, to flee the shadow of this world, and to 
make haste to enter into this eternal rest. For this 
end the fatlings are killed, and this glorious feast 
is prepared ; so that men are prevented from mak- 
ing any excuse concerning the piece of land, the 
oxen, and the wife, but the way, door and gate, is 
open and well prepared. 

This glorious kingdom of heaven is typified and 
represented to us by a city full of all good things, 
and the new Jerusalem, coming down from heaven, 
which is beautifully prepared by God, as a bride 
adorned for her husband ; the streets of it are pure 
gold, and the gates and walls built of and beauti- 
fully adorned with manifold pearls and precious 
stones. In this city is the glory of the Almighty 
God, which neither Moses on Mount Sinai, nor the 
eyes of any mortal man were able to behold. This 
brightness and everlasting light shall shine in this 
city forever and ever. Here all sorrow and mourn- 
ing, cold, nakedness, hunger and thirst shall be 
changed into everlasting, satisfying joy and con- 
solation. This glory and joy is so exceedingly great 
and unspeakable, that eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, 
the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love Him ; and into this heavenly state, which is 
beyond all praise, all believers and God-pleasing 
persons shall, at the resurrection of the dead, when 
their souls, which through death had become sep- 
arated from the body, and until this last time were 
preserved in the hand of God, shall be re-united 
with their bodies, be caught up from this earthly 
darkness, to meet the Lord in the air. 

And, a$ a bride is received by her bridegroom ; 
so also shall all true children of God then be re- 
ceived with body and soul through grace, by 
Christ Jesus, and be admitted to this glorious joy, 
where they shall see God as He is, in His unspeak- 
able glory, together with all the heavenly hosts. 
Then shall their robe of mourning, or the mortal 
clothing of the flesh be put off, and the immortal 
be put on ; and they shall be clothed in white, shin- 
ing raiment, and together with all God's chosen 
ones, be fed by the son of God, whom they con- 
fessed in the world, with the hidden heavenly 
bread, and shall eat of the tree of life, and drink 
out of the living fountain of water, and, being as 


the angels, shall, with joyful tongues and mouths, 
in gladsome voices, to the honor of the lamb, their 
bridegroom, sing the new song, with unspeakable, 
glorious joy, which no one can take away from 
them ; but they shall be kings and priests of God, 
and shall live and reign with Christ for ever and 


ever. 


May the God of grace and mercy, and of all 
comfort, who has from the beginning called us to 
this His heavenly kingdom and glory, endow us 
unworthy children of men with His good Spirit, 
make us worthy of Him and draw us Himward, 
that we may follow and run after this high prize, 
and by grace receive the same, through Jesus 
Christ, and enjoy it for ever. Amen. 

Of the everlasting kingdom of heaven, and its 
King, read : "Wherefore we receiving a kingdom 
which cannot be moved, let us have grace." Heb. 
12:28. 

"My kingdom is not of this world ; if my king- 
dom were of this world, then would my servants 
fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; 
but now is my kingdom not from hence." Tohn 
18:36. 

"Receive the gift that is given you, and be glad, 
giving thanks unto him that hath called you to the 
heavenly kingdom." II Esd. 2:37; Col. 1:13; 
Ps. 22:28. 

Read further how this eternal King, Christ Jesus, 
at His second coming from heaven, after the dead 
shall have arisen, and the eternal judgment been 
held, shall receive all the members of His kingdom 
in this His everlasting glorious kingdom of heaven, 
where they shall behold God in unspeakable glory. 
"Then shall the King say unto them on his right 
hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation 
of the world." Matt. 25 :34. 

"But the righteous live for ever more ; their re- 
ward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is 
with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive 
a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the 
Lord's hand." Wisd. 5:15, 16; I Peter 5:4; II 
Tim. 4:8; Rev. 2:10; Jas. 1:12. 

"Then we which are alive and remain shall be 
caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air : and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another 
with these words." I Thess. 4:17, 18; I Cor 2-9- 
I Peter 1:8; John 16:22. 

"Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be : but we know 
that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him ; for 
we shall see him as he is." I John 3 :2 ; Phil. 3 -20 
21. 

"When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then 
shall ye also appear with him in glory." Col. 3 :4. 

"Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty: 
they shall behold the land that is very far off. Thine 
heart shall meditate terror." Isa. 33 :17, 18. 

Of all who from a true faith shall show forth the 
required spiritual virtues, and shall continue to the 


410 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


end in this divine calling, read: "If ye do these 
things, ye shall never fall : for so an entrance shall 
be ministered unto you abundantly into the ever- 
lasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ." II Peter 1:10, 11. 

Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. 
Rev. 13:10. 

We feel now that we have fulfilled the promise 
which we made in the beginning concerning the 
matter of holy baptism, and other articles of 
Christian worship ; with which, we trust, those who 
fear God and love the truth will content them- 
selves ; hence we conclude this, and proceed to the 
steadfast martyrs who in the sixteenth century suf- 
fered for the name of Jesus Christ, and His holy 
truth. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE SIXTEENTH 
CENTURY 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE SIXTEENTH 
CENTURY 

[Mention of the inquisition which from the year 
1492 continued to 1660. It is noticed for the year 
1501. 

Persecution of the orthodox Christians in Hun- 
gary briefly, and plainly shown, for the year 1507. 

Two years after this, there is brought to remem- 
brance another persecution of the same people, in 
the principality of Mecklenburg, near Mooren, two 
years later, presented and noted for the year 1509. 

Several persons who opposed popery in various 
points of doctrine; as, Nicholas Rus, Bernhard 
Liblinensis, John Picus, John Hilten, William Bu- 
daeus, John Bugenhagius, etc. ; some of whom also 
felt the sting of the Roman scorpion, referred to 
in a note for the years 1509, 1510, 1512, 1513, 
1520, etc. 

The decree which by the Romanists was pub- 
lished, in the Netherlands, against all who believed 
otherwise than the Roman church, and what misery 
resulted thereupon, circumstantially noticed for the 
year 1521. 

In a note for the year 1522 mention is made of 
Charles Stadius, and for the year 1524, of Henry 
Zutphaniensis, touching their faith and death. 

Beginning of the old Martyrs' Mirror of the 
Defenseless Christians, together with the emenda- 
tion from various creditable chronicles, memoirs, 
testimonies, etc. 

The first martyrs mentioned are Hans Koch and 
Leonhart Meister; both of whom lost their lives 
for the truth of the holy Gospel, at Augsburg, 
A. D. 1524. 

Then follow so great multitude of professors of 
Christ, who gave their lives for His name's sake ; as 
well as so great a number of accounts of bloody 
decrees, examinations, sentences, and memorable 
memoirs, that it is impossible to enumerate them. 
From the year 1524 until 1597, almost until the 


close of the century, the pious martyrs were appre- 
hended, tormented, and put to death by fire, water, 
sword, burying alive ; with which last manner of 
death this century is concluded.] 


A great door is opened unto us to the arena of 
the martyrs and blessed followers of Jesus. None 
of the previous persecutions endured by the ortho- 
dox martyrs are to be compared to the present 
one. We have come through the time of fifteen 
centuries, each consisting of one hundred consecu- 
tive years ; but we must confess that we did not 
meet with what we have seen, or, at least, that 
which we shall see here. The length of the time, 
the severity of the persecution, and the number 
of the martyred persons shall testify to this. 

It is true, that fifteen hundred years extend over 
a longer period of time than about a hundred and 
fifty of like years ; and that the persecutions which 
occurred during this long time, when put in the 
balance, would be heavier than this last one, as well 
as the number of the persons who were persecuted ; 
but never in the preceding fifteen centuries did any 
persecution continue for so long a time without 
alleviation; never was there in so short (though 
actually long) a time so much innocent blood shed ; 
never were there in so small a space so many dark 
prisons, deadly tribunals, scaffolds, fiery stakes, 
and other instruments of death erected and made 
use of as were at this time in Germany and in the 
Netherlands. 

To prove this, without unnecessary words, we 
will forthwith enter upon our task, beginning with 
Germany, and ending with the Netherlands. 


SEVERE INQUISITION AGAINST THE BELIEVERS, 
ABOUT THE YEAR 1501 

The inquisition of which we gave an account in 
the first book, for the year 1492, continued against 
the orthodox believers, as is firmly believed, even 
until this time; so that many who were subjected to 
the same, and remained steadfast, had to suffer 
themselves to be put to death ; who, in the sight of 
God, came to an honorable, but in the eyes of the 
world, a shameful and not less miserable end, but 
who shall hereafter, with Christ their Saviour (who 
herein preceded them), be clothed with everlasting 
honor and joy, yea, be crowned as victorious kings 
in the heavenly Zion, according to His promise: 
"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a 
crown of life." Rev. 2:10. 

Concerning the beginning of this inquisition see 
the first book, for the year 1492, and how the same 
continued until this time and long after, compare 
Hist. Georg., lib. 6. Pieter Bor, lib. 3. Orsprong 
der Nederlandtsche Beroerten, fol. 9-12. Tooneel 
Nicol., fol. 87. Guil. Merulae, Tract. 9, 47. Eman. 
van Met. (old edition), fol. 40. Retuald. Gonsalv, 
in de H. Spanish Inquisition throughout. Hist 
Wenc., fol. 187. Chron. Phil. Mel., lib. 5. Hist. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


411 


Alons. de Vlb., lib. 2, with Chron. van Onder- 
gang, page 899, col. 1, 2, page 900, col. 1, 2. 


PERSECUTION OF THE ORTHODOX BELIEVERS IN 
HUNGARY, A. D. 1507 

That the old Waldenses, or orthodox believers, 
whose sound confession we have shown elsewhere, 
were now severely oppressed and persecuted in 
Hungary ; insomuch that they were necessitated to 
deliver a defense of their faith against the unfound- 
ed accusations on account of which they suffered 
persecution, to Uladislaus, King of Bohemia, we 
have partly shown in the Account of Holy Bap- 
tism, for the year 1507, and it is confirmed by H. 
Boxhorn, in his tract concerning this matter, fol. 
27 ; compared with P. J. Twisck, Chron., page 930, 
col. 2. 


ANOTHER PERSECUTION OF THESE PEOPLE IN THE 

PRINCIPALITY OF MECKLENBURG, NEAR 

MOOREN, A. D. 1509 

A. D. 1509, old writers state, that the afore- 
mentioned old Waldenses, on account of the envy 
of the pope and papists, could no longer enjoy their 
liberty in confessing and practicing their true be- 
lief, in the principality of Mecklenburg, near 
Mooren. See the last-mentioned chronicle, page 
937,col. 2, ex Catal. Test., fol. 902. 

Note.— A. D. 1509. — At this time, Nicholas 
Rus vigorously taught and wrote against the pope, 
saying: 1. That letters of indulgence were nothing 
but subtle deceptions to rob the plain and simple 
people of their money. 2. That the pope does not 
have as much power as people suppose. 3. That 
the popes, cardinals, bishops, and prelates were 
leading lascivious lives, etc. 4. That saints ought 
not to be invoked.* This Nicholas had many hear- 
ers in the principality of Mecklenburg, but from 
necessity, because of the papists, was soon com- 
pelled to leave the place. He went to Wismar, but 
there also he had no abiding place. See the authors 
last mentioned, for the year 1509. 

A. D. 1510. — Bernhard Liblinensis taught and 
wrote at this time : 1. That it is impossible that the 
whole world should obey a single man, as is the 
pope. 2. That the popes themselves were not of 
one mind ; for the one prohibits that which another 
has instituted to be observed. 3. That therefore it 
is sufficient to believe in Christ, and to obey Him 
alone. Chron. van den Ondergang, page 939, col. 2, 
compared with Catal. Test., fol. 911. However, 
what befell him as punishment from the pope on 
this account, is not stated. 

A. D. 1512. — John Picus, John Hilton, and oth- 
ers, vigorously spoke at this time against the abuses 
of popery, severely reproving their (the popes) 
life, deeds, and doctrine. However, what they suf- 

* This fourth article the writers enumerate as the third. 


fered because of this, is not indicated. See the last 
mentioned chronicle, page 946, col. 1 ; also J oh. 
Munst., fol. 203, 204. 

A. D. 1513. — William Budaeus, a very learned 
man in France, wrote at this time in a book : 1. The 
popes and bishops originate war between princes 
and potentates ; while they by rights ought to ad- 
vise and help to peace. 2. They fill the world with 
pride, avarice, gluttony, drinking, lasciviousness, 
whoredom, adultery, and other shameful things, 
surpassing in these vile deeds the laity. 3. They 
are Epicures, who do not care for eternal life, as 
they show by their works; and they are to their 
hearers the cause of eternal damnation. As to the 
end or death of this man, however, we have like- 
wise found no account. Compare P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 949, col. 1, with Catal. Test., fol. 908. 
J oh. Munst., fol. 208. 

A. D. 1520. — John Bugenhagius, surnamed Pom- 
eranus, a remarkably kind and moral man, was at 
this time very well known through his writings. 
Among other things he says, in a little book, treat- 
ing of Unborn Infants, that men erred for twelve 
centuries with regard to infants, whom (by rights) 
they could not, yet greatly desired to, baptize. Two 
days before his death there was an eclipse of the 
sun. He died at Wittenberg, aged 73 years. Com- 
pare the last-mentioned chronicle, page 985, col. 1, 
with Leonh., lib. 7. Jac. Verh. Afb., fol. 28, 30, 32. 


The time now draws near, when the account of 
the last of those who suffered death, in our old 
Book of Martyrs begins. We speak of those who 
gave their lives for the truth since the great Refor- 
mation, or, at least, since the establishment of the 
worship of God in the year 1524, and from that 
time forward. In the meantime it will be well for 
us to notice that the martyrs of whom we shall 
speak were of the profession of the Waldenses, 
even as were the preceding ones, of whom we have 
previously spoken. All the labor which we took 
upon ourselves from the middle of the twelfth cen- 
tury, tended to follow the line of these people. This 
has been our aim continually up to the present time, 
and, in this, as we hope, we have not been unsuc- 
cessful ; yea, we trust that we have shown this to a 
certainty. In the meantime the intelligent, to whom 
we gladly submit the matter, may judge with re- 
gard to it. The first work which is now before us, 
is to unite the first martyrs with the last, and to 
follow up what we have written with that which 
was written before. In order to give no offense to 
any one, we intend to leave the old accounts un- 
changed, excepting a few discrepancies and typo- 
graphical errors ; as well as what we shall add of 
our own from the testimonies of old writers ; which 
shall be plainly distinguished. By following this 
method, we hope to accomplish our purpose suc- 
cessfully. 


412 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


OF THE DECREE WHICH BY THE ROMANISTS WAS 

PUBLISHED IN THE NETHERLANDS, ABOUT THE 

YEAR 1521, AGAINST ALL WHO BELIEVED 

OTHERWISE THAN THE ROMAN 

CHURCH ; AND WHAT MISERY 

RESULTED THEREFROM 

About A. D. 1521, at the time of Emperor 
Charles V., a decree was made and issued by those 
of the Roman church, on account of the Lutherans 
and Zwinglians, against all those who were opposed 
to the Roman profession, and hence, also against 
the Anabaptists ; who were all threatened with cruel 
punishments of death, as appears from the follow- 
ing account in the Chron. van den Ondergang, p. 
975, col. 2. 

The account is as follows :* "From it was made, 
A. D. 1521," says the writer, "the first prohibition 
or decree concerning religion, and brought into the 
Netherlands without the consent of the States, etc. ; 
so that they (this and like decrees) were rather tol- 
erated than confirmed by the states; the more so 
since they were greatly favored by the pope and the 
clergy, as tending to promote obedience towards 
the mother — the Roman — church, and generally no 
complaint was heard from any of the common peo- 
ple against it ; that is, against the first. 

By virtue of this decree all who believed other- 
wise than the Roman church, or who had such 
books in their possession, or harbored such heretics 
or people, and all those whom the magistrates were 
commanded to apprehend, were strictly sentenced 
to death ; and not only these, but also all who in 
any wise were suspected of heresy ; every Roman 
Catholic being required to denounce every sus- 
pected person, who, upon the testimony of two wit- 
nesses, were, according to the instruction of the 
judges, sentenced to death, their property confis- 
cated, and one third of it given to the accusers and 
witnesses, though said witnesses had but little to 
say, only so that they were known as good Catholics 
by their pastor or priest. 

If any one from fear took to flight, no one was 
allowed to intercede for him, or plead his inno- 
cence, neither the father for the child, nor brother 
for brother ; but he was condemned on account of 
his flight, and his property confiscated. 

Though one did even desist from his so-called 
error, and suffered himself to be better in- 


* In the following a few words are changed, without altering 
the sense, however. 


structed, as it were, by the pastor, according to the 
Romish manner, he had nevertheless to die. No 
greater mercy was shown him than that he was not 
put to death by fire, but executed with the sword. 

The women were buried alive, and no judge 
could mitigate these decrees, unless he was willing 
to be regarded as a protector of the heretics, and 
be proceeded against as such. 

From this decree (the one first spoken of) made 
by imperial power and authority, others were pro- 
duced, and issued, almost every year. 

And by virtue of these decrees, none might have 
in his possession, buy, give, carry, read, or com- 
municate, the doctrines, writings or books, of the 
Lutherans, Zwinglians, etc. (he also makes mention 
of the Mennonites) , or dispute about them ; neither 
might they confer or dispute with any one about 
the holy Scriptures, or read the same to others, 
except (Romish) theologians or doctors of divinity, 
or those who were properly licensed. 

No one was allowed knowingly to receive sus- 
pected persons (called heretics) into his house, to 
lodge them, to give them food, clothes, or money ; 
but had to report them immediately, all on pain of 
death and confiscation of property. 

Extracted from various Biographies of Emperor 
Charles V, Chron. Mich., 4th part ; Chron. Sleyd., 
lib. 1, 2, to 25; Hist. Alons, Ullce, lib. 1-5; 
Chron. Hed., fol. 682; Chron. Saxon., fol. 649; 
Chron. Franc, (old edition), fol. 62, 63; Chron. 
Petr. Bor., lib. 1. Caprit., lib. 3. Pantal., lib. 3; 
Hist, der Mart. Doopsges., lib. 1. Eman. van Met., 
lib. 1 ; Mer., fol. 960 ; Chron. Petr. Scriv., fol. 593 ; 
D. Andries Hondd., lib. 1, cap. 15 ; D. Dirck Veli. 
lib. 2 ; Manl., fol. 255 ; W. Baud., lib. 16, an old 
chronicle of the life and deeds of Charles V, 
throughout, etc. 

Note.— A. D. 1522, Charles Stadius also de- 
clared his views, at this time, among the learned ; 
he secretly held with the Anabaptists, says Leon- 
hard Krantz in his German Chronology, lib. 7. 
Others, however, ascribe a different belief to him, 
which is not found with the Anabaptists ; namely, 
that he said, that Christ, through His blood, had 
also redeemed the (fallen) angels. Conrad Schless, 
1st paft, cap. 5, compared with P. J. Twisck, 
Chron., page 994, col. 2. What happened to him, 
however, on account of his belief, is not stated. 

A. D. 1524. — Henry Zutphaniensis was horribly 
put to death for the Gospel of Christ, by Ditmarish 
peasants. See the above cited Chronicle, p. 1001, 
col. 1. Also, Rob., part 3; Sleyd., lib. 4. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


OF THE 


DEFENSELESS CHRISTIANS 


Old Book 


ENLARGED AND IMPROVED FROM VARIOUS CREDIBLE CHRONICLES, 

MEMOIRS, TESTIMONIES, ETC. 


[The following part of Martyrs Mirror was not originally written by van Braght, but was the outgrowth of a 
compilation from different authors, and published in different editions, which from time to time were enlarged and 
improved. The original book, as appears from the writings of Samuel W. Pennypacker, of Philadelphia, Pa., was 
published in Holland, in 1562, under the title, Het Offer des Heeren. Later editions were printed in the years 1S67, 
1S70, 1576, 1578, 1580, 1589, 1595, and 1599. In 1617, a large quarto edition, containing 863 pages, written by Hans de 
Reis and Jacques Outerman, and printed by Zacharias Cornelisz, at Hoorn, was published, bearing the title, His- 
toric der Warachtighe getuygen Jesu Christi. This book was succeeded by a folio volume of ten hundred fifty-six 
pages, printed at Haerlem, by Hans Passchiers, von Wesbusch, in 1631, entitled, Martelaers Spiegel der Werelose 
Christenen, that is, The Martyrs Mirror of the defenseless Christians. This book, our author, van Braght, embodies 
as "Second Part," in his own work under the title of The Bloody Theatre, or Martyrs Mirror of the defenseless 
Christians, as he says, without change, except where some correction was needed, adding, however, such matter as 
seemed profitable and necessary. This will explain to the reader the above remark: "Old Book."— Publishers.] 


HANS KOCH AND LEONHARD MEISTER, DESCEND- 
ANTS OF THE ANCIENT WALDENSES, BOTH 
PUT TO DEATH AT AUGSBURG, FOR THE 
TRUTH OF THE HOLY GOSPEL, 
A. D. 1524 

From A. D. 1160 until this time (A. D. 1660) 
we have followed according to our ability the trail 
and footsteps of the ancient Waldenses, of which 
we have by no means, until this time, lost sight; 
neither have we now lost sight of them, but still 
keep them in view. 

This appeared in the case of two pious men of 
said profession (which agrees with that of the Ana- 
baptists) who, loving the truth of Christ, which 
they maintained more than their own lives, were 
put to death at Augsburg, in Germany, in accord- 
ance with the rigor of the court, there, in the year 
1524. 


Concerning this, we read in Jacob Mehrning's 
History of Baptism the following words, translated 
from the German: "From these Bohemian and 
Moravian Old Waldensian brethren afterwards 
sprang several excellent men; as, among others, 
Hans Koch and Leonhard Meister, who were both 

put to death at Augsburg, A. D. .* Bapt. Hist., 

page 748. 

Note. — The year 1160 was the. time in which 
Peter Waldo appeared against popery, at Lyons, 
in France, and made a sound confession, of which 
we gave an account in the first book. As regards 
his descendants, this Hans Koch and Leonhard 
Meister are counted as none of the least of them ; 
as also, afterwards, Michael Sattler, Leonhard 
Keyser, John Hut, etc. See Jac. Mehr., Bapt. Hist., 
page 748. 

* A. D. 1527, the printer had set it; but it is an error. 


414 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


PRAYER OF HANS KOCH AND LEONHARD MEISTER 

The following earnest prayer to God was spo- 
ken by Hans Koch and Leonhard Meister before 
their death, and left for the consolation of all their 
fellow believers : 

O God ! behold now from Thy high throne the 
misery of Thy servants, how the enemy persecutes 
them because it is their purpose to walk in the 
narrow way, and how abominably they are scorned. 
He who learns to know Thee, and holds fast to Thy 
words, is despised and scorned by them. O God 
of heaven ! we have all sinned before Thee ; there- 
fore chastise us in mercy. We beseech Thee, let us 
enjoy Thy grace, that Thy honor may not be pro- 
faned by us before this world, which now seems 
determined to extinguish Thy Word. We might 
well have peace with them, if we would not confess 
Thy holy name, and not believe on Thy Son, that 
He atoned for us on the cross, bore our sins, and 
paid our debt. The enemy has no other reason for 
his daily raging against us, than because we do not 
fulfill his will, but love Thee, O God, in our hearts, 
which neither Satan nor his adherents can endure. 
Therefore they compel us with great distress, and 
afflict us with much tribulation. Thus, our mis- 
deed, on account of which the enemy fights so hard 
against us, is, that we place our hope in Thee alone, 
and in Thy dear Son Christ Jesus, and in the Holy 
Ghost ; therefore we must suffer reproach, because 
we do not set ourselves against Thee ; if we would 
give ourselves up to idolatry, and practice all man- 
ner of wickedness, they would let us live unharmed, 
in peace and tranquillity. Therefore, O dear Lord, 
take up arms for us, and judge all those who dis- 
regard Thy power and might. If we would deny 
Thy Word, antichrist would not hate us ; yea, if we 
would believe his false doctrine, follow his error, 
and walk with the world on the broad road, we 
would have favor with them ; but because we seek 
to follow Thee, we are hated and forsaken by the 
world. But though the enemy brings us to torment, 
it does not happen to us alone, but was also done 
to Christ our Redeemer ; for they afflicted Him first 
with much reproach and suffering ; and thus it was 
with all that adhered to Him, and believed in His 
Word. Hence Christ says Himself : "Marvel not, 
if the world hate you ; for it hated me first ; they 
have not received my words ; thus shall they also 
not receive your words. If they have persecuted 
me, they will also persecute you; and when all 
these things happen to you, rejoice and be exceeding 
glad : for great is your reward in heaven." Christ 
comforts us still more through the mouth of His 
beloved apostles, saying: "If we suffer with him, 
we shall also rejoice with him, and reign in ever- 
lasting joy." What matters it, if we are ridiculed 
and scorned here for a little while? since God 
promises us eternal rest and bliss. O Lord, Thou 
seest and hearest the derision and contumely, and 
the suffering with which Thy children are afflicted. 
Thou also knowest their small and feeble ability; 


therefore we pray Thee, O God, that Thou wouldst 
protect Thine own honor, and sanctify Thy name, 
which is now so fearfully profaned by all those 
who, here on earth, are of high and low estate. 
Manifest Thy power, that the enemy may per- 
ceive and understand Thy divine strength, and may 
learn to be ashamed. O Lord God, have com- 
passion upon Thy poor sheep, that are scattered, 
and have no longer a true shepherd who will hence- 
forth teach them. Send them Thy Holy Spirit, 
that He may feed and satisfy them with Thy grace, 
and that they may not hearken to the voice of a 
stranger, unto the end. O God, in Thy high maj- 
esty, graciously hear our petition, and do not 
forsake us, since we are in great tribulation and 
conflict. Give us steadfast patience through Christ 
Thy Son, our Captain, who can vanquish Satan 
with all his host. To Him be honor, and praise to 
His holy name. Amen. 

Matt. 7:14; Ps. 106:6; Dan. 9:5; I Pet. 2:24; 
Matt. 22 :37 ; I Pet. 4 :3 ; Matt. 7 :13 ; John 17 :14 ; 

I Pet. 4:1; Isa. 53; Matt. 27; Luke 24:26; John 
15:18; I John 3:13; Matt. 5:12; Rom. 8:11; 

II Tim. 2:12; John 10:5. 

CASPAR TAUBER, A. D. 1524 

In this year, also Caspar Tauber, a tradesman 
and citizen of Vienna, in Austria, was apprehended 
for the Christian faith; and as he faithfully and 
steadfastly continued to confess Christ, without 
apostatizing, he was condemned and burned. 

OF A CERTAIN DECREE WHICH THOSE OF ZUERICH 

PUBLISHED AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS, 

A. D. 1525 

At this time not only the papists, but also the 
Zwinglians or so-called Reformed in the city of 
Zuerich laid their hands on the innocent and de- 
fenseless flock of Christ ; yet not, as far as we can 
learn, punishing them with death, or depriving them 
of life by the executioner, but confining them under 
severe imprisonment, until ultimately, as may be 
inferred, death followed. 

However, in order to determine from this time 
on, what course was to be pursued in this matter, 
the magistrate of said city ordained, among other 
things, the following: 

"Therefore we ordain and will, that henceforth 
all men, women, youth, and maidens forsake Ana- 
baptism, and practice it no longer from this time 
on, and that they have their infants baptized ; and 
whosoever shall act contrary to this public edict, 
shall, as often as it occurs, be fined one mark silver ; 
and if any should prove utterly disobedient and 
obstinate, they shall be dealt with more severely ; 
for we shall protect the obedient, and punish the 
disobedient according to his deserts, without bear- 
ing with him any longer. Let everyone act accord- 
ingly. All this we confirm by this public document, 
sealed with the seal of our city, and given on St. 
Andrew's day, A. D. 1525." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


415 


Compare Chron. van den Ondergcmg, page 1010, 
col. with Henr. Bull, against the Anabaptists, lib. 1, 
cap. 5, 6 ; also the open letter of the council of Zue- 
rich, published A. D. 1525. 

The Zwinglian church at Zuerich, where this de- 
cree was made, was at this time only about five 
years old, and was also subjected to the hatred 
and persecution of the papists ; certainly a lament- 
able matter, that those who had but a short time 
before purified themselves in many respects from 
the leaven of popery and were opposed to the tyr- 
anny of the pope, should nevertheless continue, in 
this respect, united with the papists ; that is, in per- 
secuting others who did not have the same faith 
with them. 

Still, it would have been well if they had stopped 
with this decree, since with one mark of silver one 
could have atoned for the first offense in neglect- 
ing to baptize a child. But this was not the end of 
it, as a few years later, especially in A. D. 1530, 
when they became a little bolder, they decreed, that 
the so-called Anabaptists should be punished with 
death, which we shall show in its proper place. 


FELIX MANTZ, A. D. 1526 

Felix Mantz was also an originator of the Refor- 
mation of the faith, in Germany, and when he, with 
great zeal, practiced, taught, and preached, the 
recognized truth of the Gospel, he was envied, ac- 
cused, and imprisoned by his adversaries, and final- 
ly drowned at Zuerich, for the evangelical truth, 
thus becoming a witness of the sufferings of 
Christ. This occurred in the year of our Lord 
1526. He left the following admonition to his fel- 
low brethren, for their comfort : 

"My heart rejoices in God, who gives me much 
knowledge and wisdom, that I may escape the eter- 
nal, and never-ending death. Therefore I praise 
Thee, O Lord Christ from heaven, that Thou dost 
turn away my sorrow and sadness; Thou whom 
God has sent me as a Saviour, and for an example 
and a light, and who has called me into His heaven- 
ly Kingdom, already before my end has come, that 
I should have eternal joy with Him, and should love 
Him and all His righteousness, which exists here, 
and which shall endure forever hereafter, and 
without which nothing avails or subsists ; hence so 
many who do not have this in truth, are deceived 
by a vain opinion. But alas ! how many are found 
at the present who boast of the Gospel and speak, 
teach, and preach much about it, but are full of 
hatred and envy, and who have not the love of God 
in them, whose deceit is known to all the world, 
as we have experienced in these latter days, that 
those who have come to us in sheep's clothing are 
ravening wolves, who hate the pious on the earth, 
and obstruct the way to life and to the true sheep- 
fold. Thus do the false prophets and hypocrites 
of this world, who curse and pray with the same 
mouth, and whose life is disorderly. They call 
upon the authorities to kill us, by which they de- 


stroy the very essence of Christianity. But I will 
praise the Lord Christ, who exercises all patience 
towards us; for He instructs us with His divine 
graces, and shows love to all men, according to 
the nature of God His heavenly Father, which 
none of the false prophets are able to do. 

"Here we must observe this difference, that the 
sheep of Christ seek the praise of God ; this is their 
choice, and they do not suffer themselves to be hin- 
dered either by possessions or temporal good, for 
they are in the keeping of Christ. The Lord Christ 
compels no one to come to His glory; only those 
that are willing and prepared attain unto it by true 
faith and baptism. Whenever a person brings forth 
genuine fruits of repentance, the heaven of eternal 
joys is, through grace, purchased and obtained for 
him by Christ, through the shedding of His inno- 
cent blood, which He so willingly poured out; 
thereby showing us His love, and enduing us with 
the power of His Spirit, and whoever receives and 
uses it grows and is made perfect in God. Only 
love to God through Christ shall stand and prevail ; 
not boasting, denouncing, or threatening. It is love 
alone that is pleasing to God : he that cannot show 
love shall not stand in the sight of God. The true 
love of Christ shall not destroy the enemy ; he that 
would be an heir with Christ is taught that he 
must be merciful, as the Father in heaven is merci- 
ful. Christ never accused any one, as do the false 
teachers of the present day ; from which it is evi- 
dent that they do not have the love of Christ, nor 
understand His Word; and still they would be 
shepherds and teachers ; but at last they will have 
to despair, when they shall find, that everlasting 
pain shall be their recompense, if they do not re- 
form. Christ also never hated any one; neither 
did His true servants, but they continued to fol- 
low Christ in the true way, as He went before them. 
This Light of life they have before them, and are 
glad to walk in it ; but those who are hateful and 
envious, and do thus wickedly betray, accuse, smite 
and quarrel, cannot be Christians. They are those 
who run before Christ as thieves and murderers, 
and under a false pretense shed innocent blood. 
By this we may know them that are not on the side 
of Christ ; for they, as children of Belial, prompted 
by envy, destroy the ordinances of Jesus Christ; 
even as Cain slew his brother Abel, when God ac- 
cepted the offerings of Abel. 

With this I will finish my discourse, desiring that 
all the pious be mindful of the fall of Adam, who 
when he accepted the advice of the serpent, and 
became disobedient to God, the punishment of 
death came upon him. Thus it shall also happen to 
those who do not accept Christ, but resist Him, 
love this world, and have not the love of God. And 
thus I close with this that I will firmly adhere to 
Christ, and trust in Him, who is acquainted with 
all my needs, and can deliver me out of it. Amen. 

I Pet. 5 :1 ; John 16:20; Gal. 5 :21 ; John 5 :42 ; 
Matt. 7:15; II Thess. 3 :7 ; John 10 :3 ; Acts 2 :38 ; 


416 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Luke 6 :36 ; John 8:12 ; John 10:1; Gen. 4 :8 ; 3 :6; 
I John 2:15; John 5:42. 

GEORGE WAGNER, A. D. 1527 

George Wagner, of Emmerich, was apprehend- 
ed at Munich, in Bavaria, on account of four arti- 
cles of the faith. First, That the priest cannot for- 
give sins. Secondly, That he does not believe that a 
man can bring down God from heaven. Thirdly, 
That he does not believe that God or Christ is 
bodily in the bread which the priest has upon the 
altar ; but that it is the bread of the Lord. Fourthly, 
That he did not hold to the belief that water bap- 
tism possessed any saving power. As he would not 
renounce these articles, he was most severely tor- 
mented, so that the prince felt great compassion for 
him, and personally came to him in the prison, and 
earnestly admonished him thereto, promising that 
he would call him his friend all his life time. Thus 
also the tutor of the prince, earnestly admonished 
him to recant, and likewise made him many prom- 
ises. Ultimately his wife and child were brought 
before him in prison in order, on this wise to move 
him to recant. But neither was he to be moved in 
this way ; for he said that though his wife and child 
were so dear to him that the prince could not buy 
them with all his dominion, yet he would not for- 
sake his God and Lord on their account. Many 
priests and others also came to him, to persuade 
him ; but he was steadfast and immovable in that 
which God had given him to know. Hence he was 
finally sentenced to the fire and death. 

Having been delivered into the hands of the ex- 
ecutioner, and led into the middle of the city, he 
said : "Today I will confess my God before all the 
world." He had such joy in Christ Jesus, that his 
face did not pale, nor his eyes show fear ; but he 
went smilingly to the fire, where the executioner 
bound him on the ladder, and tied a little bag of 
powder to his neck, at which he said : "Be it done 
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost;" and having smilingly bid farewell to a 
Christian, who was there, he was thrust into the 
fire by the executioner, and happily offered up his 
spirit, on the eighth day of February, A. D. 1527. 
The sheriff, however, surnamed Eisenreich von 
Landsberg, while returning home from the place 
of execution, traveling on horseback ; purposing to 
apprehend others of the brethren, died suddenly 
in the night, and was found dead in his bed in the 
morning, having thus been removed through the 
wrath of God. 

Note. — It is known that Balthasar Pacimon- 
tanus opposed infant baptism, and was therefore 
burned at Vienna, A. D. 1527. See second part of 
Jacob Mehrning's History of Baptism, page 777, 
ex Bellarm., Tom. 3, lib. 1, de Bapt., cap. 8. 


also served with him in the Gospel. He was burned 
in the time of Michael Sattler, at Drache, for the 
testimony of the faith and of the divine truth, 
which he boldly confessed. 


MELCHIOR VET. 


This Melchior Vet. was a companion of George 
Blaurock, who was of the same faith with him, and 


MICHAEL SATTLER, A. D. 1527 

After a long trial on the day of his departure 
from this world, the articles being many, Michael 
Sattler* requested that they should be read to him 
again and that he should have another hearing. 
This the bailiff, as the governor of his lord, op- 
posed and would not consent to it. Michael Sattler 
then requested permission to speak. After a con- 
sultation, the judges returned as their answer, that 
if his opponents would allow it, they (the judges) 
would consent. Thereupon the town clerk of 
Ensisheim, as the attorney of said Governor spoke 
thus : "Prudent, honorable and wise Sirs, He has 
boasted of the Holy Ghost. Now, if his boast is 
true, it seems to me, it is unnecessary to grant 
him this ; for if he has the Holy Ghost, as he boasts, 
the same will tell him what has been done here." 
To this Michael Sattler replied : "Ye servants of 
God, I hope my request will not be denied ; for 
said articles are as yet unknown to me." The town 
clerk responded: "Prudent, honorable and wise 
Sirs, Though we are not bound to do this, yet in 
order to give satisfaction, we will grant him his re- 
quest that it may not be thought that injustice is 
done him in his heresy, or that we desire to wrong 
him ; hence let the articles be read to him." 

ARTICLES OR CHARGES AGAINST MICHAEL SATTLER 

First, that he and his adherents have acted con- 
trary to the mandate of the Emperor. 

Secondly, he has taught, held and believed that 
the body and blood of Christ are not present in the 
sacrament. 

Thirdly, he has taught and believed that infant 
baptism does not conduce to salvation. 

Fourthly, they have rejected the sacrament of 
extreme unction. 

Fifthly, they have despised and condemned the 
mother of God and the saints. 

Sixthly, he has declared that men are not to 
swear before the authorities. 

Seventhly, he has commenced a new and un- 
heard of custom in regard to the Lord's Supper, 
placing the bread and wine on a plate, and eating 
and drinking the same. 

Eighthly, he has left the order, and married a 
wife. 

Ninthly, he has said that if the Turks should in- 
vade the country, no resistance ought to be offered 
them ; and if it were right to wage war, he would 
rather take the field against the Christians than 
against the Turks ; and it is certainly a great mat- 
ter^ to set the greatest enemies of our holy faith 
against us. 


.. * H . e "as. also one of the Waldensian brethren, as Jacob 
Mehrning writes. Bapt. Hist., 2d part, page 748. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


417 


Thereupon Michael Sattler requested permission 
to confer with his brethren and sisters, which was 
granted him. Having conferred with them for a 
little while, he began and undauntingly answered 
thus : "In regard to the articles relating to me and 
my brethren and sisters, hear this brief answer : 

"First, That we have acted contrary to the im- 
perial mandate, we do not admit ; for the same says 
that the Lutheran doctrine and delusion is not to be 
adhered to, but only the Gospel and Word of God. 
This we have kept; for I am not aware that we 
have acted contrary to the Gospel and the Word of 
God ; I appeal to the words of Christ. 

"Secondly, That the real body of Christ the 
Lord is not present in the sacrament, we admit ; for 
the Scripture says : Christ ascended into heaven 
and, sitteth on the right hand of His heavenly Fa- 
ther whence He shall come to judge the quick and 
the dead; from which it follows, that if He is in 
heaven, and not in the bread, He may not be eaten 
bodily. Mark 16:19; Acts 1 :9; Col. 3:1 ; Acts 10: 
42; II Tim. 4:1. 

"Thirdly, As to baptism we say : Infant baptism 
is of no avail to salvation ; for it is written, that we 
live by faith alone. Again: He that believeth and 
is baptized shall be saved. Peter likewise says: 
The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also 
now save us (not the putting away of the filth of 
the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience 
toward God), by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 
Romans 1:17; Mark 16:16; I Pet. 3:21. 

"Fourthly, We have not rejected the oil; for it 
is a creature of God, and what God has made is 
good and not to be refused ; but that the pope, the 
bishops, monks and priests can make it better, we 
do not believe ; for the pope never made anything 
good. That of which the epistle of James speaks is 
not the pope's oil. Gen. 1:11; I Tim. 4:4; James 
5:14. 

"Fifthly, We have not condemned the mother 
of God and the saints ; for the mother of Christ is 
to be blessed among all women; for to her was 
accorded the favor of giving birth to the Saviour 
of the whole world. But that she is a mediatress 
and advocatess, of this the Scriptures know noth- 
ing; for sh^ must with us await the judgment. 
Paul said to Timothy : Christ is our Mediator and 
Advocate with God. As regards the saints ; we 
say that we who live and believe are the saints ; 
which I prove by the epistles of Paul to the Ro- 
mans, Corinthians, Ephesians ; and in other places 
where he always writes: To the beloved saints. 
Hence we that believe are the saints ; but those who 
have died in faith we regard as the blessed. Luke 
1:28; Matthew' 1 :21 ; I Tim. 2:5; I Cor. 1:2; 
Eph. 1:1; Rev. 14:13. 

"Sixthly, We hold, that we are not to swear be- 
fore the authorities : For the Lord says : Swear not ; 
but let your communication be, Yea, yea ; Nay, nay. 
Matt. 5:34; James 5:12. 

"Seventhly, When God called me to testify of 
His Word, and I had read Paul, and also con- 


sidered the unchristian and perilous state in which 
1 was ; beholding the pomp, pride, usury, and great 
whoredom of the monks and priests, I went and 
took unto me a wife, according to the command of 
God ; for Paul well prophesies concerning this to 
Timothy : In the latter time it shall come to pass 
that men shall forbid to marry, and command to 
abstain from meats which God hath created to be 
received with thanksgiving. I Cor. 7 :2 ; I Tim. 4 :3. 

"Eighthly, If the Turks should come, we ought 
not to resist them ; for it is written : Thou shalt not 
kill. We must not defend ourselves against the 
Turks and others of our persecutors, but are to be- 
seech God with earnest prayer to repel and resist 
them. But that I said, that if warring were right, I 
would rather take the field against the so-called 
Christians, who persecute, apprehend and kill pi- 
ous Christians, than against the Turks.was for this 
reason : The Turk is a true Turk, knows nothing 
of the Christian faith; and is a Turk after the 
flesh ; but you, who would be Christians, and who 
make your boast of Christ, persecute the pious wit- 
nesses of Christ, and are Turks after the spirit. 
Ex. 20:13; Matt. 7:7; Tit. 1:16. 

"In conclusion : Ye ministers of God, I admon- 
ish you to consider the end for which God has ap- 
pointed you, to punish the evil, and to defend and 
protect the pious. Whereas, then, we have not acted 
contrary to God and the Gospel, you will find that 
neither 1 nor my brethren and sisters have offended 
in word or deed against any authority. Therefore, 
ye ministers of God, if ye have not heard or read 
the Word of God, send for the most learned, and 
for the sacred books of the Bible, of whatsoever 
language they may be, and let them confer with us 
in the Word of God ; and if they prove to us with 
the Holy Scriptures, that we err and are in the 
wrong, we will gladly desist and recant and also 
willingly suffer the sentence and punishment for 
that of which we have been accused, but if no er- 
ror is proven to us, I hope to God, that you will be 
converted, and receive instruction." Wisd. 6:4; 
Acts 25:8; Rom. 13:4; Acts 25:11. 

Upon this speech the judges laughed and put 
their heads together, and the town clerk of Ensis- 
heim said : 

"O you infamous, desperate villain and monk, 
shall we dispute with you ? The hangman shall dis- 
pute with you, I assure you." 

Michael said: "God's will be done." 

The town clerk said : "It were well if you had 
never been born." 

Michael replied : "God knows what is good." 

Town Clerk: "You arch-heretic, you have se- 
duced the pious ; if they would only now forsake 
their error, and accept grace." 

Michael: "Grace is with God alone." 

One of the prisoners also said : "We must not 
depart from the truth." 

Town Clerk: "You desperate villain and arch- 
heretic, I tell you if there were no hangman here, 


418 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


I would hang you myself, and think that I had 
done God service." 

Michael: "God will judge aright." 

Thereupon the town clerk said a few words to 
him in Latin, what we do not know. 

Michael Sattler answered him Judica. 

The town clerk then admonished the judges and 
said : "He will not cease from this talk today ; 
therefore my Lord Judge, proceed with the sen- 
tence; I will commit it to the law." 

The judge asked Michael Sattler whether he also 
committed it to the law. 

He replied: "Ye ministers of God, I am not 
sent to judge the Word of God ; we are sent to bear 
witness of it, and, hence, cannot consent to any 
law, since we have no command from God con- 
cerning it; but if we can not be discharged from 
the law, we are ready to suffer for the Word of 
God whatever sufferings are, or may be imposed 
upon us all for the sake of the faith in Christ Jesus 
our Saviour, as long as we have breath within us ; 
unless we be dissuaded from it by the Scriptures." 

The town clerk said : "The hangman shall con- 
vince you ; he shall dispute with you, arch-heretic." 

Michael : "I appeal to the Scriptures." 

Then the judges arose, and went into another 
room, where they remained for an hour and a half, 
and determined on the sentence. Matt. 6:10; John 
16:2; I Cor. 4:5 ; John 1 :8; Job 27 :3; Acts 25 :11. 

In the meantime, some in the room treated 
Michael Sattler most unmercifully, heaping re- 
proach upon him. One of them said: "What have 
you in expectation for yourself and the others, 
that you have so seduced them?" With this, he also 
drew forth a sword which lay upon the table, say- 
ing : "See, with this shall they dispute with thee." 
But Michael did not answer upon a single word 
concerning his person, but willingly endured it all. 
One of the prisoners said: "We must not cast 
pearls before swine." Matt. 27:14; 7:6. 

Being also asked, why he had not remained a 
lord in the convent, Michael answered : "Accord- 
ing to the flesh I was a lord ; but it is better so." 
He did not say more than what is recorded here, 
and this he spoke fearlessly. 

The judges having returned to the room, the 
sentence was read. It was as follows : "In the case 
of the Governor of his Imperial Majesty versus 
Michael Sattler, judgment is passed, that Michael 
Sattler shall be delivered to the executioner, who 
shall lead him to the place of execution, and cut 
out his tongue ; then throw him upon a wagon, and 
there tear his body twice with red hot tongs ; and 
after he has been brought without the gate, he shall 
be pinched five times in the same manner." 

After this had been done in the manner pre- 
scribed, he was burned to ashes as a heretic. His 
fellow brethren were executed with the sword, and 
the sisters drowned. His wife, also, after being 
subjected to many entreaties, admonitions and 
threats, under which she remained very steadfast, 


was drowned a few days afterwards. Done the 
21st day of May, A. D. 1527. 


A LETTER WRITTEN BY MICHAEL SATTLER, IN 
PRISON, TO THE CHURCH OF GOD AT HORB 

My beloved companions in the Lord ! grace and 
mercy from God our heavenly Father, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord, and the power of their 
Spirit, be with you beloved of God, brethren and 
sisters. 

I can not forget you ; though I am not present 
with the body (Col. 2 :5), yet I continually care for 
and watch over you, as my fellow members, lest the 
body be taken away, and the whole body [the 
church], with all its members be overwhelmed with 
sorrow, especially at this time, when the ferocity 
of the ravening wolf has risen to such a pitch, 
and increases in power, so that he has aroused also 
me to fight against him ; but eternal praise be to 
God, its head is completely broken, and I hope that 
his whole body shall soon be no more, as is writ- 
ten. 

Dear brethren and sisLers, you well know with 
what ardent love I admonished you the last time 1 
was with you, that you should be upright and 
godly in all patience and in the love of God, by 
which you may be known among this adulterous 
and ungodly generation, as shining lights (Mat- 
thew 5:14) whom God the heavenly Father has 
illuminated with His knowledge and the light of 
the Spirit. With like fervency I now beseech and 
admonish you ; that you walk surely and prudently 
towards those that are without as unbelievers, that 
our office, which God has imposed upon us, may 
in no wise be profaned and justly reproached. 

Remember the Lord, who has given you the 
talent, for He shall require it again with usury. 
That the one talent may not be taken from you, 
put it to usury, according to the command of the 
Lord, who has given you the talent. Matt. 15:19. 

I say to you through the grace of God, that ye 
be valiant, and walk as become the saints of God. 
Consider what the Lord metes out to idle servants ; 
namely, to utterly lukewarm and slothful hearts, 
unfit and cold for all love to God and the brethren. 
You have experienced what I now write. 

Be admonished by this, lest God let a like pun- 
ishment come upon you. Beware, beware of such 
as act contrary to the command of God lest ye learn 
their abominations ; but reprove it with strict atten- 
tion, and excommunication, according to the com- 
mand of Christ, yet with all love and compassion 
for their cold hearts. Matt. 18:17. If you do this, 
you shall readily see how the flock of God dwells 
among the wolves (Acts 20:29), and shall witness 
a brief and speedy separation of those who will not 
walk in the right paths and living ways of Christ, 
namely, through crosses, misery, imprisonment, 
self-denial, and ultimately through death. Then 
you can present yourselves to God your heavenly 
Father, a pure, godly, true church of Christ, which 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


419 


is cleansed through His blood (Eph. 5 :26), that it 
may be holy and unblamable in the sight of God 
and men, separated from all idolatry and abomina- 
tion, and redeemed, that the Lord of all dominion 
may dwell in it, and that it may be a tabernacle un- 
to Him. Beloved brethren, understand whether 
what I write unto you be truth, and use diligence to 
walk according to it. Let no one divert you from 
your aim, as has been the case with some even until 
now ; but go straight on in all patience, without de- 
viating, that you do not take up the cross which 
God has laid upon you, only to lay it down contrary 
to the honor and praise of God, and to the trans- 
gression and violation of His eternal, true, just, and 
life-giving commandments. 

Do not become weary, if you are chastened of the 
Lord (Heb. 12 :5) ; for whom God loves He chas- 
tens, even as a father that is well pleased with his 
son. To what will you have recourse, if you would 
flee from God? What can help you if you forsake 
God? Is it not God who fills heaven and earth? 
Does He not know all the secrets of thy vain heart, 
and the lasciviousness of thy reins? All things are 
manifest to Him, and there is nothing concealed 
from Him. Vain man, whither will you go, that 
God shall not see you ? Why do you flee the rod 
of your Father? (Heb. 12:8). If you will not be 
chastened according to the will of the Father, you 
cannot inherit His riches. Why do you love a short 
and transient rest more than the godly and moder- 
ate correction and chastisement of the Lord to your 
salvation ? How long will you eat flesh of the fat of 
Egypt? How long will you be carnally-minded? 
(Rom. 8 :8) . The flesh perishes, and all its glory ; 
the word of the Lord alone abides forever. 

Beloved brethren, mark what I write to you ; for 
it is necessary, since you see that there are but few 
who will endure the chastening of the Lord ; for by 
far the greater number when they suffer -a little in 
the flesh, become faint and weary, and do no longer 
look unto Jesus, the Captain and Finisher of our 
faith. They also forget all His commandments, and 
esteem the jewel which the calling of God every 
where presents and points out to those that over- 
come of small value; but they regard this temporal 
rest, which is before their eyes as far better and 
more profitable, than the eternal for which we must 
hope. Moreover, there are some who, when this is 
presented to them, accuse God, though very un- 
justly, of not being willing to keep them under His 
protection. You know whom I mean, take heed 
that you have no fellowship with them. 

Furthermore, dear fellow members in Christ, be 
admonished that you forget not charity, without 
which it is not possible for you to be a Christian 
flock. You know what charity is, from the testi- 
mony of Paul our fellow brother, who says: 
"Charity suffereth long, and is kind ; charity envieth 
not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 
doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her 
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil ; re- 
joiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 


beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all 
things, endureth all things." I Cor. 13 :4-7 : Under- 
stand this passage, and you will find the love of 
God and the love of your neighbor ; and if you love 
God, you will rejoice in the truth, and believe, 
hope and endure all that comes from God. In this 
way the aforesaid failing will be removed and 
avoided. But if you love your neighbor, you will 
not punish or excommunicate with fire, you will 
not seek your own, think no evil, not vaunt your- 
selves, and, finally, not be puffed up ; but will be 
kind, just, liberal in all giving, humble and com- 
passionate with the weak and imperfect. Rom. 
13:8. 

This love has been adulterated by some brethren 
(I know who they are) ; they have not been willing 
to edify one another by love, but are become puffed 
up and unprofitable with the vain knowledge and 
understanding of things which God would have 
remain hidden to all but Himself alone. I Cor. 8:1. 
I do not censure nor reject the grace and revelation 
of God, but the puffed up make use of this revela- 
tion. What would it profit, says Paul, if I should 
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and 
understand all mysteries and knowledge, and have 
all faith, tell me, what profit is all this, if love be 
not exercised? You have experienced what such 
presumptuous speaking and ignorance has pro- 
duced ; you still daily see their false fruits, though 
they have given themselves to God. 

And let no man remove you from the foundation 
which is laid through the letter of the holy Scrip- 
tures, and is sealed with the blood of Christ and of 
many witnesses of Jesus. Hear not what they say 
of their father, for he is a liar ; and do not believe 
their spirit, for he is entirely swallowed up in the 
flesh. Judge what I write to you ; take these mat- 
ters to heart, that this abomination may be sep- 
arated far from you, and that you be found hum- 
ble, fruitful and obedient children of God. Be- 
loved brethren, marvel not that I treat this matter 
with such earnestness ; for I do so not without rea- 
son. The brethren have doubtless informed you 
that some of us are in prison ; and afterwards when 
the brethren at Horb had also been apprehended, 
they brought us to Binzdorf. At this time we met 
with various designs of our adversaries. Once they 
threatened us with bonds ; then with fire, and after- 
wards with the sword. In this peril I completely 
surrendered myself into the will of the Lord, and 
together with all my fellow brethren and my wife, 
prepared myself even for death for His testimony • 
and then I thought of the great number of false 
brethren, and of you, who are but few, namely, a 
little flock ; and also, that there are but few faithful 
laborers in the Lord's vineyard (Matt. 9:37); 
hence I deemed it necessary to stir you up by this 
admonition, to follow after us in the divine war- 
fare, in order that you may comfort yourselves 
with it, that you may not become weary of the 
chastening of the Lord. 

In short, beloved brethren and sisters this let- 


420 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ter shall be a farewell to all of you who truly love 
and follow God (others I do not know) ; and also 
a testimony of my love which God has given into 
my heart towards you, for the sake of your salva- 
tion. I did indeed desire, and it would have been 
profitable, I trust, if I had labored a little while 
longer in the work of the Lord ; but it is better for 
me, to be released, and to await with Christ the 
hope of the blessed. The Lord is able to raise up 
another laborer to finish this work. 

Pray that reapers may be constrained into the 
harvest; for the time of threshing is nigh at hand. 
Luke 10 :2. The abomination of desolation is mani- 
fest among you; the chosen servants and hand- 
maidens of God are marked with the name of their 
Father on their foreheads (Rev. 13 :16) ; the world 
rises up against those who are delivered from its 
error ; the Gospel is proclaimed before all the world, 
as a testimony against it ; therefore it will be neces- 
sary that the day of the Lord do not tarry. 

You know, my most beloved fellow members, 
that it becomes us to conduct ourselves in a godly 
and Christian manner. II Tim. 3:12. Take heed, 
watch and pray, lest your wisdom bring judgment 
upon you. Pray without ceasing (I Thess. 5:17) 
that you may stand worthy before the Son of man. 
Remember your forerunner Jesus Christ, and fol- 
low Him through faith and obedience, with love and 
patience. I Peter 2 :20. Forget that which is carnal, 
that you may in truth be called Christians, and 
children of the Most High God. Endure the 
chastening of your father in heaven, and turn 
neither to the right nor to the left, that you may 
enter by the door (John 10:1), and will not have 
to walk in a strange path, in which sinners, sorcer- 
ers, idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, 
must go. Rev. 22:15. Remember our assembly, 
and strictly follow that which was resolved on 
therein ; and if anything has been forgotten, pray 
the Lord for understanding. Be liberal towards all 
that are in want among you (Heb. 13:3), but es- 
pecially towards those who labor among you in the 
Word, and are driven about, and cannot eat their 
bread in peace and quietness. Forget not to as- 
semble yourselves together, but give diligence that 
you constantly meet together, and be united in 
prayer for all men, and in breaking of bread ; and 
this with the more diligence, because the day of the 
Lord is approaching. Heb. 10:25. In this as- 
sembling you will make manifest the hearts of the 
false brethren, and will speedily rid yourselves of 
them. 

Finally, beloved brethren and sisters, sanctify 
yourselves for Him that has made you holy, and 
hear what Esdras says : "Look for your Shepherd ; 
he shall give you everlasting rest ; for he is nigh at 
hand, that shall come in the end of the world. Be 
ready to the reward of the kingdom, .... Flee the 
shadow of this world, .... Arise up and stand, 
behold the number of those that be sealed in the 
feast of the Lord; which are departed from the 
shadow of the world, and have received glorious 


garments of the Lord. Take thy number, O Sion, 
and shut up those of thine that are clothed in 
white, which have fulfilled the law of the Lord. 
The number of thy children whom thou longedst 
for, is fulfilled. ... I Esdras saw upon the mount 
Sion a great people ; whom I could not number, and 
they all praised the Lord with songs. And in the 
midst of them there was a young man of a high 
stature, taller than all the rest, and upon everyone 
of their heads he set crowns, and was more ex- 
alted ; which I marveled at greatly. So I asked the 
angel, and said, Sir, what are these ? He answered 
and said unto me, These be they that have put off 
the mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and 
have confessed the name of God: now are they 
crowned, and receive palms. Then said I unto the 
angel, What young person is it that crowneth them, 
and giveth them palms in their hands ? So he an- 
swered and said unto me, It is the Son of God, 
whom they have confessed in the world. Then be- 
gan I greatly to commend them that stood so stiffly 
for the name of the Lord." II Esdras 2:34-36 
38-47; Rev. 19:12; Matt. 13:43. 

Bear in mind most beloved members of the body 
of Christ, what I indicate by this scripture, and live 
according to it, and if I be offered up to the Lord, 
do for my wife what you would for me. The peace 
of Jesus Christ, and the love of the heavenly Fa- 
ther, and the grace of their Spirit, preserve you 
unspotted from sin, and present you glad and pure 
for the beholding of their glory, at the coming of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, that you may be found in 
the number of those called to the feast (Luke 
14:15) of the one essential, true God and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, to whom be eternal praise and glory, 
Amen. 

Beware of false brethren (Acts 20:39) ; for the 
Lord will perhaps call me to Him ; so take warning, 
I wail for my God. Pray without ceasing for all 
that are in bonds. God be with you all. Amen. 

Written in the tower at Binzdorf . Brother Mi- 
chael Sattler of Staufen, together with my fellow 
prisoners in the Lord. 

Of this hero and witness of Jesus Christ there 
are also other writings extant in print, treating of 
the atonement of Christ ; brotherly union ; divorce ; 
of evil overseers, and the hearing of false prophets. 


LEONHARD KEYSER, A. D. 1527 

When the believers greatly increased under per- 
secution and the cross (Ex. 1 :12), there was, in 
Bavaria, a learned priest of the mass, named Leon- 
hard Keyser, who examined the writings of Zwing- 
li and Luther, and also went to Wittenberg, where 
he conferred with the doctors and commemorated 
the Supper with them. 

Having returned to Bavaria, he examined the 
fruits and doctrine of the Anabaptists, as well as 
of Zwingli and Luther, and joined himself under 
the cross to the separated cross-bearing church of 
the Anabaptists, in the year 1525, and forthwith 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Leonard Kayser, a priest, burned as a heretic at Scharding, AD 1527 


continued in his ministry, with great power and 
zeal, undaunted by all the tyranny which arose 
over the believers, in the way of drowning, burning 
and putting to death. Acts 9 :20. In the second year 
of his ministry, Leonhard Keyser was apprehend- 
ed at Scharding, in Bavaria, and condemned by the 
bishop of Passau and other priests and capitulars, 
to be burned on Friday before St. Lawrence day, 
in August of the same year. Having bound him 
on a cart, they took him to the fire, the priests 
going alongside, and speaking Latin to him, but 
he, on account of the people, answered them in 
German ; even as they had refused to speak to him 
in German before the court, which he had fre- 
quently requested. When he came out into the 
field, and was approaching the fire, he, bound, as 
he was, leaned down at the side of the cart, and 
plucked a flower with his hand, saying to the judge, 
who rode on horseback along side of the cart: 
"Lord judge, here I pluck a flower; if you can 
burn this flower and me, you have justly con- 
demned me ; but, on the other hand, if you cannot 
burn me and this flower in my hand, consider what 
you have done and repent," Thereupon the judge 


and the three executioners threw an extraordinary 
quantity of wood into the fire, in order to burn him 
immediately to ashes by the great fire. But when 
the wood was entirely burned up, his body was 
taken from the fire uninjured. Then the three ex- 
ecutioners and their assistants built another great 
fire of wood, which when it was consumed, his 
body still remained uninjured, only his hair and 
his nails were somewhat burnt brown, and, the 
ashes having been removed from his body, the lat- 
ter was found smooth and clear, and the flower in 
his hand, not withered, or burnt in the least, the ex- 
ecutioners then cut his body into pieces, which they 
threw into a new fire. When the wood was burned 
up, the pieces lay unconsumed in the fire. Finally 
they took the pieces and threw them into the river 
Inn. This judge was so terrified by this occurrence 
that he resigned his office, and moved to another 
place. His chief servant, who was with the judge, 
and saw and heard all this, came to us in Moravia, 
became our brother and lived and died piously. 
That it might not be forgotten our teachers have 
recorded this as it came from his own lips, and 
now cause it to be promulgated and made known. 


422 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


FURTHER OBSERVATION CONCERNING THE DEATH 
OF LEONHARD KEYSER 

Seb. Frank, in his Chron. der Rom. Kett. letter 
L., gives the following account of this matter : 
"Having been brought a prisoner to Scharding, he 
was taken to the fire by three executioners, bound 
cross-wise on a ladder, and thrust into the fire. 
When he called upon Christ Jesus the ropes fell 
from his body and were burned ; and as he was still 
alive, he rolled out of the fire at one side. The ex- 
ecutioners instantly thrust him back into the fire, 
with hop-poles, that happened to be there, so that 
he rolled out on the other side. There the execu- 
tioners cut him alive into pieces, which they cast 
into the fire, without being able, however, to burn 
them, as I have read." etc. Concerning this, see 
also P. J. Twisck, Chron., fol. 1020, col. 2. 


THOMAS HERMANN, AND SIXTY-SEVEN OTHERS, 
A. D. 1527 

A. D. 1527, Thomas Hermann, a minister of the 
Gospel and Word of God, was executed. Some 
persons had been apprehended at Kitzbuehl, and, 
through the tyranny of the authorities, had been 
brought to apostatize from the truth. The latter 
furthermore brought them into a public place be- 
fore a great multitude of people, where the others 
reviled them shamefully, and said : "Ah, how finely 
your teachers and pastors now give their lives for 
you!" John 10:11 ; I John 3 :16. Then the before- 
mentioned Thomas Hermann made his way through 
the people, stepped forth and boldly said: "It is 
the truth which I have taught you, and I will testify 
to it with my blood." He was immediately appre- 
hended, tortured, sentenced to the fire, and burned. 
On his way to the place of execution, he composed 
and sang a hymn, which is still extant. They 
could not burn his heart ; hence, they threw it into 
the lake which was near the place of execution. 
After him sixty-seven of his fellow believers were 
executed in the same place. The judge of Kitz- 
buehl, who assisted in condemning and putting to 
death many of them, and who because of their faith, 
both before and after, called them heretics was 
afterwards suffered by God to come to such awful 
disgrace, that he was himself found to be a heretic, 
and justly regarded as such by all men ; which nev- 
ertheless, occurred not at all on account of the 
faith, but because God permitted him to fall into 
such disgrace, that he came to reproach and great 
infamy, also before the world. 

The vengeance of God also came upon the town- 
clerk of Kitzbuehl, who had likewise been instru- 
mental in this shedding of innocent blood, and had 
declared that he would not lay down his head in 
peace until he had helped to exterminate these 
people. For, as he was out riding in a sleigh in 
the town, and about to make a turn, the horse threw 
him against a wall, and an oak tree in the street, so 
that his brains were dashed out, and thus he did not 


lay down his head in peace, but came to a terrible 
end, as the brethren Hans Kitzbuehl and Christian 
Haring have testified concerning it. 

WEYNKEN, A WIDOW, DAUGHTER OF CLAES, OF 
MONICKENDAM, BURNT TO DEATH IN 
THE HAGUE, THE 20TH NOVEM- 
BER, A. D. 1527 

On the 15th of November, 1527, Weynken, 
daughter of Claes, was brought prisoner from the 
castle of Woerden to the Hague, whither on the 
17th day of the same month, came also the count 
of Hooghstraten, Governor in Holland. On the 
18th, the aforesaid Weynken was arraigned before 
the governor and the full council of Holland. There 
a woman asked her: 

"Have you well considered the things which my 
lords proposed to you?" 

Ans. "I abide by what I have said." 

Ques. "If you do not speak differently, and 
turn from your error, you will be subjected to an 
intolerable death." 

Ans. "If power is given you from above I am 
ready to suffer." John 19:11. 

Ques. "Do you then, not fear death, which you 
have never tasted?" 

Ans. "This is true; but I shall never taste death, 
for Christ says: 'If a man keep my saying, he 
shall never see death.' (John 8:51.) The rich man 
tasted death, and shall taste it forever." fLuke 
16:23.) 

Ques. "What do you hold concerning the sacra- 
ment?" 

Ans. "I hold your sacrament to be bread and 
flour, and if you hold it as God, I say that it is 
your devil." 

Ques. "What do you hold concerning the 
saints?" 

Ans. "I know no other Mediator than Christ." 
(I John 2:19.) 
Ques. "You must die, if you abide by this." 
Ans. "I am already dead." (Gal. 2:19.) 
Ques. "If you are dead, how can you speak?" 
Ans. "The spirit lives in me ; the Lord is in me, 
and I am in Him." (John 14:20.) 

Ques. "Will you have a confessor, or not ?" 
Ans. "I have Christ, to Him I confess; never- 
theless, if I have offended any, I would willingly 
ask them to forgive me." 

Ques. "Who has taught you this opinion, and 
how did you come to it ?" 

Ans. "The Lord, who calls all men to Him; I 
am also one of His sheep; therefore I hear His 
voice." (John 10:27.) 

Ques. "Are you alone called?" 
Ans. "No ; for the Lord calls to Him all that are 
heavy laden." (Matt. 28:11.) 

After many like words Weynken was led back 
to prison. During the two following days she was 
entreated and tempted by various persons, namely 
by monks, priests, women, and her nearest friends, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


423 


Among others, a woman came to her, prompted 
by sincerity, who commiserated her after this man- 
ner : 

"Dear mother, can you not think what you 
please, and keep it to yourself ? then you will not 
die." 

Weynken replied : "Dear sister, I am command- 
ed to speak, and am constrained to do so ; hence I 
cannot remain silent about it." 

Worn. "Then, I am afraid, they will put you 
to death." 

Ans. "Though they burn me tomorrow, or put 
me into a bag, I care not; as the Lord has or- 
dained it, so it must be, and not otherwise ; I will 
adhere to the Lord." 

Worn. "If you have done nothing else I hope 
you will not die." 

Ans. "As for me, it matters not; but when I 
come down from the hall, I cry bitterly, and it 
grieves me to see that these good men are all so 
blinded ; I will pray the Lord for them." 

Two Dominican friars also came to her, the one 
as a confessor, and the other as an instructor. 
The latter showed her the crucifix, saying: "See, 
here is your Lord and your God." She answered : 
"This is not my God ; the cross by which I have 
been redeemed, is a different one. This is a wooden 
god ; throw him into the fire, and warm yourselves 
with him." The other asked her in the morning of 
the day when she was to die, whether she would 
not receive the sacrament, adding that he would 
willingly administer it to her. She said: "What 
God would you give me? one that is perishable, 
and is sold for a farthing ?" And to the priest or 
monk, who rejoiced that he had read mass that day, 
she said that he had crucified God anew. He 
said: 

"It appears to me that you have fallen unto er- 
ror?" 

Weynken replied: "I cannot help it, my Lord 
and my God, to whom be eternal honor, praise, 
and thanksgiving (Rev. 4:11), has thus given it 
unto me." 

Ques. " What do you hold concerning the holy 
oil?" 

Ans. "Oil is good for salad, or to oil your shoes 
with." I Tim. 4:4. 

In the middle of the week she was brought before 
the Court, and when she came into the hall, the 
monk went up to her, and held the crucifix before 
her face, saying: "Do recant before sentence is 
passed." But Weynken turned from the crucifix, 
saying: "I adhere to my Lord and God; neither 
death nor life shall separate me from Him." (Rom. 
8:39.) As she stood before the judge, the monk 
whispered into her ear: "Fall down upon your 
knees, and ask the Lord for pardon." She replied : 
"Be still: did I not tell you, that you should not 
draw me from my Lord." 

The Dean of Naeldwijck, subcommissary and 
inquisitor, read the sentence, in Latin, from a doc- 
ument, and repeating it in Dutch, said briefly, that 


she was found to be in error with regard to the sac- 
rament, and that she immovably adhered to it; 
hence he decided that she was a heretic, and deliv- 
ered Weynken to the secular arm, with the protest 
that he did not consent to her death. He then re- 
tired from the council, together with his two asso- 
ciate ecclesiastics. 

The chancellor immediately read, that she, as 
reported, had been found obstinate, which could 
not be passed by without punishment, and that she 
should be burnt to ashes, and all her property be 
confiscated. 

Then Weynken said : "Has all been done now ? 
I beg you all, that if I have harmed or offended 
any, you will forgive me." 

The monk then said to her: "Now for once kiss 
your Lord and God." 

She answered : "This is not my Lord." 

As they were leaving the council chamber, the 
monk said to her that she should call upon our 
Lady to intercede for her. 

She replied : "Our Lady is well content in God." 

Monk : "Call upon her." 

Weynken : "We have Christ, who sitteth on the 
right hand of His Father; He prays for us." (Ro- 
mans 8:34.) 

On her way from the hall to the scaffold or place 
of execution, the monk said : "Behold for once your 
Lord, who died for you." 

Weynken: "This is not my Lord and my God; 
my Lord God is in me, and I in Him." 

Monk : "Consider ! will you condemn all these 
lambs, and are they all condemned?" 

Weynken: "Not all; judgment belongs unto 
God." (Heb. 10:30.) 

Monk : "Do you not fear the severe judgment of 
God?" 

Weynken : "God comes not to condemn sinners, 
but to give them peace." (Luke 9:56.) 

Monk : "Do you not fear the sentence which you 
must suffer in the fire?" 

Weynken: "No, for I know how I stand with 
my Lord." 

On the scaffold there stood one who said to 
Weynken: "Mother, turn to the people, and ask 
them to forgive you, if you have offended any." 
This she did. Then she assisted the executioners to 
put the powder into her bosom. Here the monk 
again tempted her with the cross ; but she pushed 
it away with her hand, turned around, and said: 
"How you tempt me? My Lord and my God is 
above." She then went gladly, as though she were 
going to a marriage ; and her face did not once be- 
token fear of the fire. 

The monk said : "Will you not always and firmly 
adhere to God?" 

Weynken said : "Yes, indeed." 

Monk : "Now you will have to go into the fire ; 
do recant." 

Weynken: "I am well content; the Lord's will 
must be done." 


424 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Monk: "This is not the will of the Lord; the 
will of God is your sanctification." 

The executioner said: "Mother, cleave to God 
and do not suffer yourself to be drawn away from 
Him." 

In the meantime this pious heroine went alone 
undauntedly to the bench, and stationed herself at 
the stake at which she was to be burned, saying : 
"Is the bench firm ; will I not fall ?" 

The executioner then made ready the ropes with 
which he was to strangle her. The woman took off 
her neckerchief or veil, and put the strap around 
her neck. 

Then the monk exclaimed : "Mother Weynken, 
will you gladly die as a Christian ?" 

Ans. "Yes, I will." 

Ques. "Do you renounce all heresy?" 

Ans. "I do." 

Monk: "This is well. Are you also sorry that 
you have erred?" 

Ans. "I formerly did err indeed, and for that I 
am sorry; this however is no error, but the true 
way, and I adhere to God." 

When she had said this, the executioner began 
to strangle her, which when she felt it, she cast 
down her eyes and closed them, as though she had 
fallen into a sleep, and gave up the ghost, on the 
twentieth day of November, A. D. 1527. 


JOHN WALEN, WITH TWO OF HIS FELLOW BRETH- 
REN, A. D. 1527 

In the year 1527, there was also a faithful broth- 
er (Rev. 2:10), named John Walen, residing in 
Waterlandt, on Crommenies Dijck, and with him 
two of his fellow brethren. These three were to- 
gether brought prisoners, for the testimony of 
Jesus (Revelations 2:13; 20:4), by the blood- 
thirsty papists, to Haarlem, and after a little while 
they were sent from there to Gravenhage, where 
they were examined very severely ; yet, through the 
power of the Most High (Eph. 6:10; Acts 1 :8), 
with which they were endued, they patiently en- 
dured it; thus valiantly overcoming by faith all 
their inquisitors and tormenters, together with the 
world and all visible things. I John 5 :4. On this 
account the rulers of darkness (Eph. 6 :12), at said 
place sentenced them to the following inhuman 
and tyrannous death : They were chained to stakes, 
and a fire built around them, and thus they were 
slowly roasted, until the marrow was seen to trickle 
down from their thighbones ; thus being burned and 
roasted till death came to their relief. After their 
death the garments on the upper part of their 
bodies were taken off piece by piece, the color of 
the cloth still being recognizable. And as they suf- 
fered all this for the name of Jesus and the Word 
of God, and not on account of any misdeed com- 
mitted, but only in order to testify to and confess 
the firm foundation of the truth before this false 
and adulterous generation, the Son of God shall 


hereafter, when coming in His glory, not be 
ashamed of them, but confess them before His 
Father and His chosen angels, and crown them 
with everlasting glory in heaven. Rev. 20 :4 ; I Pet 
4 : 14, 1 5 ; Mark 12 :39 ; Luke 9 :26 ; II Tim. 4 :8. 


LEONHARD SCHOENER, A. D. 1528; AND AFTER HIM 
ABOUT SEVENTY OTHERS 

In the year 1528, Leonhard Schoener of Becklas- 
burg was apprehended. He was a minister of God, 
and was well versed in the holy Scriptures, and also 
in the Latin language. He faithfully taught the true 
baptism of Christ and His apostles, the true Lord's 
Supper, and the articles of the Christian faith ; yea, 
the Word of God. He also testified against infant 
baptism, the abominable sacrament, and other 
abominations of antichrist. He had originally been 
a barefoot friar for about six years, but beholding 
the impurity, wantonness, hypocrisy (Matt. 7:15), 
and viciousness of the monks and priests, and judg- 
ing their lives by the Word of God, he left the mon- 
astery at Judenburg, in Austria, and went to Nu- 
remberg, learned the tailor's trade, and then trav- 
eling about as journeyman tailor, he came to Nulas- 
berg, in Austria. There he heard of Balthasar 
Heubmer and his baptism, and learned that a 
number of the same faith formed a little society 
at Veyen. He sought them out, came to them, 
heard them, and, led thither by Oswald, was bap- 
tized. After this he went to Steyen to work at his 
trade ; where he taught and baptized, having been 
elected teacher by them; and thus teaching and 
baptizing, he proceeded through Bavaria, as far 
as Rothenburg, in the valley of the Inn ; where he 
was apprehended for his faith, disputed much with 
his opposers, and was examined. Previous to this 
he proposed : that, if they regarded his faith and 
doctrine as wrong and heretical, they should pro- 
duce learned persons, doctors, monks and priests, 
to dispute with him concerning the matter. Should 
he, in disputing on true scriptural grounds, be 
found to be in the wrong, they should punish him 
as unrighteous ; and for still further confirmation 
of the truth, he offered, in order to confirm his as- 
sertion and his writings, that, if any of the learned 
could convince him with the truth of the Word of 
God, that his doctrine was not conformable to the 
holy Scriptures, he should, as having been van- 
quished be severed limb from limb by the execu- 
tioner, and, when deprived of all his limbs, have 
the ribs torn out of his body, until he should be 
dead. But if he should not be able to obtain a 
hearing and disputation, and they should judge and 
put him to death unheard, he asked all the wit- 
nesses of his death, and all those standing by, that 
they would be his witnesses before God, in His 
judgment at the last day. But by virtue of the man- 
date of the Emperor, and the edict of the King of 
Hungary and Bohemia, he was condemned, de- 
livered to the executioner, beheaded, and burnt to 
ashes, on the fourteenth day of January of said 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


425 


year, at Rothenburg, for the testimony of Christ, 
from which he would not depart. After the death 
of this Leonhard, about seventy persons bore wit- 
ness with their blood in the same place. Leonhard 
Schoener, among others, left the following ad- 
monition for the consolation of all those who suf- 
fer for the name of Christ 

"We beseech Thee, O eternal God, incline Thy 
gracious ear to us, Lord Sabaoth, Thou Prince of 
hosts, hear our complaint; for great distress and 
affliction prevails, and pride has entered into Thy 
heritage. And with it many supposed Christians 
have joined, and thus set up the abomination of 
desolation. Matt. 24:15. They rage, and destroy 
the sanctuary of the Christians. They have tram- 
pled it under foot, and the abomination of desola- 
tion is worshiped as God. II Thess. 2:4. They 
have destroyed Thy holy city, overthrown Thy 
holy altar, and killed the servants in it, wherever 
they could apprehend them. And now that we re- 
main as a little flock (Luke 12 :32), they have driv- 
en us with reproach and disgrace into every coun- 
try. We are scattered like sheep that have no shep- 
herd. We have to abandon house and home, and 
are as the night ravens, which lodge in the rocks. 
Our chambers are in caves and cliffs, and snares 
are laid for us as for the birds of the air. We go 
about in forests, and are hunted with dogs. We 
are led captive and bound as dumb lambs which do 
not open their mouth. Acts 8:32. We are pro- 
claimed rebels and heretics. We are led as sheep 
to the slaughter. Many sit in distress and bonds, 
and their bodies have perished. Some have been 
overcome by the severe sufferings, and died with- 
out any guilt. Here is the patience of the saints 
on earth ; and thus must we be proved by suffering. 
Rev. 13:10. The believers have here been hanged 
on trees, strangled, cut in pieces, drowned secretly 
and openly; not only men, but also women and 
maidens have testified here to the faith that Jesus 
Christ is the truth and the only way to eternal life. 
John 14 :6. Still the world is not at rest, but rages 
like a madman, and forges lies against us. They 
cease not to burn and kill. They make the world 
too small for us. O Lord how long wilt Thou be 
silent with regard to this ? How long wilt Thou not 
judge the blood of Thy saints? Rev. 6:10. Let it 
ascend before Thy throne. How precious in Thy 
sight is the blood of Thy saints. Therefore we have 
in all our distresses a comforting confidence in Thee 
alone, and in no other ; neither have we consola- 
tion, rest or peace in the earth. But he that hopes 
in Thee shall never be confounded. O Lord, there 
is no sorrow so great that it can separate us from 
Thee; hence we call upon Thee without ceasing, 
through Christ Thy Son, our Lord, whom Thou, 
out of pure grace, hast given us for our conso- 
lation, and who has prepared and made known to 
us the narrow path and the way unto eternal life. 
Matt. 7:14. Eternal glory, triumph, honor and 
praise be unto Thee now and in all eternity, and 
Thy righteousness abide forever. All nations bless 


Thy holy name, through Christ, the coming right- 
eous Judge of the whole world, Amen. Acts 17 :31." 


HANS SCHL^EFFER AND LEONHARD FRICK, IN THE 
YEAR 1528 

In the year 1528, Brother Hans Schlseffer, for- 
merly a Roman priest, but afterwards a teacher of 
the Word and Gospel of Christ, a highly gifted 
man, was apprehended at Schwartz, in the valley of 
the Inn, and with him Brother Leonhard Frick. 
They tried him greatly with many severe tortures, 
and disputed with him, through the priests, about 
infant baptism ; but he, orally as well as in writing, 
showed them his defense, as it is commanded, and 
as it will be found, throughout the entire New 
Testament, namely : That the Word of God must 
first be taught, and that only those who hear, un- 
derstand, believe, and receive it, are to be baptized. 
This is the true Christian baptism, and no ana- 
baptism. The Lord has nowhere commanded to 
baptize infants ; they are already the Lord's, and 
as long as they are in their innocence and sim- 
plicity, they are not to be condemned at all. They 
also asked him, in what the foundation of these 
anabaptistic sects did properly consist. To this he 
replied: "Our faith, practice, and baptizing is 
founded on nothing else than the command of 
Christ : 'Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved.' (Mark 16:16; Matt. 28: 
19) ; and many other Scriptures." 

They also asked what design lay concealed un- 
der this anabaptism, since they had thus exhorted 
them to raise a new uproar and sedition. But he 
replied that it had never entered his heart, to make 
an uproar; neither had he ever approved of it in 
others; yea, he had fled from a house in which 
they lived in contention ; which he could prove by 
all with whom he had ever lived. And there is no 
other design concealed under it, than to amend the 
life, and to forsake the vicious ways of the world ; 
so that in the doctrine which he teaches, this is 
not the least commandment, that we are in duty 
bound to be subject to the authorities in all good 
things; how, then, should he raise and purpose 
uproar and sedition? 

They also desired to know of him, who were the 
true authors and principals of these heretical and 
chief sects, as they falsely call them. He told them 
that he knew of no other principal of his faith, than 
the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who is the true Cap- 
tain of the faith. Heb. 12 :2. But as regards that 
they are called heretics and seditious sects, he re- 
ferred them to the complaints of the Jews against 
Christ before Pilate, and the complaints against 
the apostle Paul, before Felix the Governor. Mat- 
thew 27 :1 ; Acts 24 :2. 

He was likewise asked what had caused and in- 
duced him to forsake his office as priest. Concern- 
ing this he told them, that he had done it for con- 
science' sake, because he knew that he was in the 


426 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


place of a prophet, and believed that God had sent 
him. 

They would also know of him, who had told him 
to go into Germany, to plant the evil seed of Ana- 
baptism. He told them, that no one had ordered 
him thither ; but that, since he had no abiding place 
as yet, and had to go about in misery, he came 
there to one of his friends, with whom he stayed, 
and thence came to Schwatz, where he was appre- 
hended, according to and for the will of God. As 
to the evil seed of which they spake, he knew noth- 
ing at all ; he intended nothing evil, but much rather 
the pure divine truth. 

After this and other things, when he had been 
in prison for some time, and could not be moved, 
he and his fellow prisoner and brother were con- 
demned to death, and executed with the sword at 
Schwatz, thus testifying with their blood to the 
divine truth. He left the following admonitory 
thanksgiving to his brethren in Christ : 

O God, I beseech Thy grace ; do not impute to 
me my sins, since Christ atoned for them before 
I was born. Rom. 5 :10. I was Thine enemy, and 
Thou hast loved and graciously accepted me, and 
given for my redemption the innocent blood of Thy 
beloved Son (I Pet. 1 :19), though I still experience 
in me much molestation from remaining sin, which 
rises in my flesh. For when I would do good, evil 
is present with me. Rom. 7:21. For this cause 
I am sorrowful, and may well sigh and exclaim 
with the apostle Paul : O wretched man that I am ! 
who shall deliver me from the body of this death ? 
Romans 7:24. And I must reply to myself and 
say: But thanks be to God, which giveth me the 
victory through Christ. Thou art my comfort ; for 
if I thus believe with the heart, I can not be con- 
demned. The spirit is willing and ready, but the 
flesh is weak, so that it cannot fulfill the law of 
God, until Christ strengthens us with His Spirit. 
Where human laws reign on earth, there the dis- 
tressed minds are seduced ; yea, where Christ Jesus 
is not the sole Ruler, that which He does not build, 
is always torn and broken; and no building can 
stand, which He does not uphold. Though the 
world highly esteems other things, they are con- 
demned before God; and hence we all pray to- 
gether, young and old, great and small, that Thou, 
O God, wouldst have compassion upon us, and 
send us poor children faithful shepherds and stew- 
ards of Thy gifts (Matt. 9:38), that all human 
doctrine may be rooted out ; for it is time to truly 
repent and forsake evil ; for the severe judgment 
of God is at hand. Mark 1:15. Hence let us take 
our refuge to the chastisement of our Father, and 
submit ourselves in obedience, that He may chastise 
us as His children. The world is blinded, does not 
know the Christian life, abominates it, flees the 
cross, and thinks it is enough, if they can talk finely 
of the Christian life, but do little in deed. 

"But, my brethren, he that would be a true 
Christian, must put on Christ (Rom. 13:14), and 
resemble Him in His humble form while on earth, 


and be of good cheer in everything which happens 
to him in this world. No external semblance of 
loving Christ, and of suffering for His name, 
avails here ; we must not be ashamed of Him, who 
first loved us (I John 4 :19), and gave Himself for 
us to an ignominious death. It is in truth not other- 
wise, than that judgment must first begin at the 
house of God. I Pet. 4:17. Thus the Holy Scrip- 
ture is now fulfilled, so that the punishment with 
which the world is to be visited, is ready and at 
hand ; hence no one ought to be negligent ; for the 
sword is drawn, the bow is bent, the arrow laid 
upon it, and aim is taken. 

By this I do not mean that we are to seek any 
other refuge, than to accept the chastisement of 
the Father, as has been said above ; by which He 
refines us for that whereunto He has sealed us, 
that we may be assured of the eternal and im- 
perishable kingdom with Him, and forever to pos- 
sess it with Him in life everlasting; to this may 
God strengthen us all. Amen." 


LEOPOLD SCHNEIDER, A. D. 1528 

This Leopold Schneider was beheaded as a pious 
witness of the suffering of Christ, for the truth, at 
Augsburg, A. D. 1528. He left the following ad- 
monition for the comfort and instruction of others : 

"My God, I will praise Thee in my last hour; 
Thee who art high above in heaven, I will praise 
Thee with heart and mouth, for Thou art worthy 
of it ; strengthen my faith (Luke 17:5), now that I 
must go on this pilgrimage of suffering; remember 
me in mercy in the severe conflict. I commend my 
spirit into Thy hands (Luke 23 :46) ; in Thee I re- 
joice. Christ, help me to stand in my sufferings. 
Heavenly Father, forgive them, for they know not 
what they do. Because I cannot forsake Thy Word, 
I am hated, and they seek to separate my body from 
the soul. Therefore I call upon Thee, O God for 
gracious help ; I trust in Thee, for I have no other 
comforter. That which is so clearly written, Mark 
16:16; 'He that believeth and is baptized shall be 
saved,' can certainly not be contradicted by any 
one ; hence it is to be heeded. O ye blind, why are 
you troubled and grieved because the command of 
Christ is observed? acquaint yourselves with the 
holy Scriptures, and you will find what Christ the 
Son of God has commanded us to do. I beseech 
you all, beloved brethren and sisters, that you 
would firmly trust in God, and let not my bitter 
death grieve you; for God will richly reward it; 
we must once take our leave of this vale of sor- 
row. The Scripture clearly declares, that he who 
would have laughing and joy here, shall hereafter 
mourn and weep. Luke 6 :25 ; we must suffer here 
with patience ; the Lord grant that it be done inno- 
cently. He that would here bring his gift to the 
altar, and remembers that his brother has aught 
against him, must leave his gift at the altar, and 
first go and be reconciled to his brother, and then 
come and offer his gift. Matt. 5 :23, 24. Therefore 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


427 


I beseech Thee, O God, graciously to forgive those 
who put me to death. I commend my spirit and 
soul into Thy hand, O God ; deliver me out of all 
my distresses, and never turn away from me ; de- 
prive my flesh of all its power, that I may over- 
come and be victorious in Thee. Amen." Rev. 
2:11. 


( Ps. 69 :28) ; as Christian soldiers they, through 
grace, obtained the crown." II Tim. 4:8. 

Thus they were burned with fire, and are now 
awaiting everlasting joy. 


EIGHTEEN PERSONS BURNED AT SALZBURG, IN THE 
YEAR 1528 

These eighteen persons, besides many others, 
were kindled with zeal in the fear of God, and had 
turned to God from the world and its idolatry, and 
been baptized upon faith in Christ, entering upon 
obedience towards His holy Gospel. This the ad- 
versaries could not endure; these eighteen were 
therefore apprehended, and finally, as they, under 
many tortures, piously adhered to their faith, were 
all sentenced to the fire, and burned, on the same 
day, at Salzburg, about the year 1528. They left 
the following as a memorial: 

"O God of heaven, watch over Thy sheep : who 
are such a little flock, that they may not depart 
from Thee, or be led astray. Keep them under Thy 
protection, and deliver them from this lamentable 
distress; for the beast pursues them even unto 
death, which they must suffer, for they are thrown 
into severe prisons, where they, in the death of the 
dungeon, sing praises unto the Lord, and magnify 
Him with heart and mouth. Acts 16:25. O Lord, 
have compassion therefore, and let this our com- 
plaint come before Thee. Come quickly, and help 
us poor children, and sustain us in Thy will. They 
would drive us from Thee, and they beset us very 
hard with their great power and pomp. O God, 
grant us Thy divine power ; we have no other Lord 
in heaven and earth, than Thee. I Cor. 8:6. Grant 
us what we desire of Thee. The Lord Christ sends 
out His messengers, and through them offers us 
His heavenly kingdom, which is derided by the 
world : but we have accepted the Lord's kingdom 
and His grace with great joy and satisfaction; 
therefore the priests roar and rage against us, and 
terribly hate us. They have greatly hid the truth 
for more than five hundred years, and seduced the 
multitude of men with false doctrine : they trample 
the Word of God under their feet, and it is de- 
spised by them. O Lord, grant that they may 
amend their steps and do Thy will. 

"And is that which has been witnessed at Salz- 
burg not a lamentable matter ; namely, that eighteen 
persons were burned together on the same day, 
only for the doctrine of Christ, whom they con- 
fessed to be the only Lord ? They would not hon- 
or the image, nor worship the beast. They would 
not receive their words, nor the mark of anti- 
christ into their hand or on their forehead. There- 
fore they could neither buy nor sell in the land ; 
but they adhered to Christ, and received His mark, 
and their names are written in the book of life 


WOLFGANG ULMAN, A. D. 1528 

Wolfgang Ulman, a celebrated and excellent 
man in matters of faith, after maintaining and 
practicing the faith for some time, was burned, 
together with his brother and ten other persons, 
all steadfastly testifying to their faith with death, 
at Walzen, about the year 1528. 


HANS PRETLE, A. D. 1528 

Subsequently also Hans Pretle, who had been a 
preacher, but had afterwards become a minister of 
the church of Christ, having exercised his min- 
istry for a time, and pointed many to the knowl- 
edge of the Gospel, was burned for the testimony 
of Jesus Christ. Rev. 6:9. 


LITTLE HANS OF STOTZINGEN, A. D. 1528 

Little Hans of Stotzingen, having been in prison 
for a time, for the evangelical truth, at Zabern, Al- 
sace, was finally condemned to death, about the 
year 1528. On his way to the place of execution, 
he addressed the following admonition to the peo- 
ple, and was then beheaded with the sword. 

"In our extremity we now begin to cry unto our 
God, to deliver us from all our distress, that our 
hearts may offer up to Him a pure sacrifice accept- 
able in His sight. Rom. 12:1. The sacrifice which 
I mean is my whole body, life, skin and bones, and 
also wife and children. We are willing to offer up 
all our members, love impelling and constraining 
us. Pharaoh would fain prevent and alter this ; but 
we care not for it, and have not the least desire to 
desist from it, but to bring the offering before the 
Lord, and to press our way through with His as- 
sistance (Matt. 11 :12) ; He will aid and succor us. 
Come hither, beloved brethren, let us valiantly take 
hold of the matter : We are now members of Jesus 
Christ (Rom. 12:4, 5) ; He is our Captain (Ephe- 
sians 1 :22) ; He has prepared a glorious crown, 
with which He will crown those who shall persevere 
unto the end. Matt. 10:22. Be of good courage 
and undaunted, thou worm Jacob. Isa. 41 :14. The 
Red Sea shall stand open ; if Pharaoh will pursue 
thee, he will perish in it. Thou little flock, be not 
afraid, for it is but a little while here, and our flesh 
is of no consequence. But in the city which God 
has prepared us in the everlasting kingdom, we 
shall be as the angels of God. Heb. 11 :10; Mat- 
thew 22:30. Who can estimate their value? This 
God has promised us ; yea, through His Child, Jesus 
Christ, He promises us much comfort and joy, and 
everlasting rest, if we continue steadfast in Him. 
iBut we must also drink the cup of suffering, and 
suffer with His Son Christ Jesus (Matt. 20:23), 
and He will deliver and well succor us. Though the 


428 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


heathen slay us, He will not forsake us, but break 
their power in pieces, snatch us out of their hand, 
and through grace gloriously crown us. God is the 
Lord who can protect. He is also our shield (Gene- 
sis 15 :1), since we have Him for a Father, who is 
so good and gracious; that though men drive us 
away from them, yet will we always adhere to Him. 
His great power is over us, and He does not suffer 
them to faint, who keep His covenant ; therefore, 
though we be defamed and accused, rejoice over it 
in your hearts. Have confidence in God, and He 
shall help you. Therefore fear neither pain nor 
death. I give praise and thanks to my God, that 
I have become a sacrifice. I have long longed for 
it, for to die is gain for me. Phil. 1:21. O God, 
let me partake of the sacrifice of Thy Son Jesus 
Christ. Amen." Heb. 9:14. 

Thus he offered his neck, and was beheaded for 
the testimony of Jesus Christ. Acts 1 :8. 


THOMAS, BALTHASAR, AND DOMINICUS, A. D. 1528 

In the same year 1528, Thomas and Balthasar, 
both ministers of the Gospel, and with them one 
Dominicus, were apprehended, condemned to death, 
and burned, suffering it very steadfastly, for the 
faith and the divine truth, in the city of Bruenn, in 
Moravia. But before they were apprehended, they 
advised the council, that they should take care and 
not shed innocent blood, for God would not let it 
go unpunished. Jer. 7:6. One of the council, 
named Thomas Pelzer arose and did as though he 
were washing his hands, saying: "Thus shall I 
wash my hands in their blood, and think to do God 
service." John 16:2. But a few days after the 
judgment of God came upon him. He was found 
dead in his bed, beside his wife ; and thus by his 
sudden death, was not permitted, to see the death 
of these pious persons, which struck terror into the 
hearts of many. 

Brother Bastelwart well knew this Thomas 
Pelzer, who died so suddenly; and also Brother 
Andrew Gauper was acquainted with the circum- 
stance. 


HANS FEIERER, WITH FIVE BRETHREN AND THREE 
SISTERS, A. D. 1528 

About this time also Hans Feierer, a minister of 
the Word, and five of his brethren or fellow be- 
lievers were condemned and burned for the faith 
and divine truth, at Munich in Bavaria ; there three 
sisters, wives of three of them, were drowned, and 
boldly, cheerfully, and gladly surrendered their 
lives, being willing much rather to lose this tem- 
poral life, than to desist from what God had given 
them to know. They gave up a miserable life, in 
due time to find another (Matt. 10 :39 ; 24 :13 ; Rev. 
2:10), with Christ, and with Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, and all the saints and pious, in the kingdom 
of God, which is promised to all those who endure 
to the end. 


THREE BRETHREN AND TWO SISTERS, A. D. 1528 

A. D. 1528, Three brethren and two sisters were 
put in prison at Znaym, in Moravia. There was a 
Judge at Znaym, called Sir Louis, who greatly 
hated the brethren, as was manifest in the imprison- 
ment of these brethren and sisters. With stern 
words he asked the council what they intended to 
do with the Anabaptist heretics, since they had a 
royal command and mandate, and yet did not have 
them executed. He said he would himself go to the 
king, and inform him of their disobedience; but if 
they would have them executed, he would draw the 
wood to burn them with his own horses. There- 
upon the council answered and said: "Dear Sir 
Louis, we will commend them to thee; do with 
them as you please ; it is committed to you. Then 
he had the wood drawn with his own wagon, and 
caused the three brethren and two sisters to be 
burned, who were thus speedily executed, paying 
unto God, who permitted this true burnt offering, 
the vow made in baptism, and fighting unto death 
for the divine truth confessed. 

This Louis, actuated by the hatred and envy of 
the old serpent, was not yet satisfied with the blood 
of the pious and innocent sheep of the Lord, and 
had to fill up the measure of his judgment. He 
commanded money to be given to those who should 
tell him where the brethren assembled. A house 
having been pointed out to him, he took bailiffs and 
watchmen, and went with them to the place. There 
Judge Louis stepped unawares into an opening be- 
fore the house, used for letting down wine, and 
sprained his foot. He fell down and cried piteously 
that they should lift him up, and let the rascals go. 
The brethren heard the noise, and escaped from the 
house. After this Louis took sick unto death, and 
as he lay there in his agony and severe sickness, he 
suddenly began to exclaim: "O the Baptists, the 
Baptists!" He spoke nothing else, but repeated 
this cry innumerable times. Finally he roared like 
an ox, and like a wild beast and bit his own tongue, 
and foam and blood ran out of his mouth, so that 
his wife and children could not stay with him ; only 
hisservant woman, who was attached to him, re- 
mained with him until he was strangled in his own 
blood. This servant woman related the circum- 
stances to Brother Bastelwart, who was a minister. 
All his kindred do not like to have it spoken of ; 
and it was a common saying among the people that 
he had shed innocent blood. Prov. 6:17; Jer. 7 :6 ; 
22 :3. And thus God has often (more than is shown 
in this book, or can be related) checked the wicked 
with like examples, that thereby His work might 
make the greater progress among His people, to 
His praise, and to the salvation of many who seek 
that which is right, and the amendment of life ; for 
if God had not always sustained His work, the 
enemy would in the course of time, have extin- 
guished it, and not have left one spark or germ of 
truth remain ; but this God does not permit him to 
do. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


420 


NINE BRETHREN AND THREE SISTERS, A. D. 1528 

In this year 1528, nine brethren and three sisters 
were apprehended at Bruck, on the Mur, in Steyer- 
mark. They were condemned for their faith, and 
taken in bonds out of the city, to the place of exe- 
cution; but they were glad and of good cheer, and 
said : "This day we will suffer in this place for the 
word of God, and offer to Him our sacrifice." 
Rom. 12:1 ; II Tim. 4:6. They also earnestly ad- 
monished the lords of Bruck, that they should 
know that they rendered themselves guilty of inno- 
cent blood. A ring having been formed, they all 
knelt down (Acts 7:60; 20:36), and earnestly 
prayed to God; that they might now finish this 
their evening sacrifice. They then arose and sub- 
mitted to the sword. The executioner was sad ; for 
he did not like to do it. The youngest of them all 
entreated his brethren, that, since he felt of good 
cheer and bold, they should let him suffer the first 
pain ; he then kissed them, and said : "God bless 
you, my beloved brethren; today we shall all be 
together in Paradise." Luke 23 :43. Thus these 
nine brethren were beheaded in a green field ; they 
were so undaunted that it was astonishing to be- 
hold -it. They knelt down; and thus poured out 
their blood through the smiting of the sword. The 
three sisters were drowned ; they would in no wise 
depart from God and His truth. The youngest one 
laughed at the water ; which was seen by many a 
one there. Some held that the devil had hardened 
them; but others were moved in their hearts, so 
that they confessed that God must have given this, 
since otherwise it could not be possible. Thus they 
valiantly testified to the holy and divine truth. 


VILGARD AND CASPAR OF SCHOENECK, ABOUT THE 
YEAR 1528 

These two were beheaded for the truth, at Ries, 
in the Fluchtthal, near Brixen, and thus died as 
faithful witnesses of Christ, leaving the following 
admonition to their brethren: 

"Hearken, all of you, and take to heart, that 
God will visit all sinners great and small, who now 
despise Him and revile His name, and do not con- 
sider their sinful life. God shall speedily awaken, 
and deliver His children. If we consider the doc- 
trine of the prophets, we see that this is the last 
time, and in this time God calls upon all men that 
they should turn unto Him (Isa. 45:22), live ac- 
cording to His will, and keep His commandments ; 
and that if they do this, His wrath shall cease, and 
He will be their God and Father ; for God, because 
of His great goodness, is longsuffering in His 
judgment; therefore beware of sin, and do not 
follow the devil ; but free yourselves from unright- 
eousness, and your God will not forsake you in this 
last hour ; for God is rich and gracious, and with 
Him there is much grace; He willingly forgives 
the sinner who will forsake his sins, who believes 
in Christ, and calls upon His name ; to such He 
will not only, through grace remit his sins, but 


also freely give him the eternal reward. Heed 
well these things. Oh all of you who belong to the 
Church of Jesus Christ, and have become children 
of God. Praise God with shouting, young and 
old, great and small; you who have believed His 
Word, love God as His dear children, and walk be- 
fore Him with pure hearts, and you shall never be 
forsaken, but He will ever preserve you. O God, 
who art rich in grace, keep us Thy children, that 
we may hold to Thee, and that those who have 
come to Thee, may not be confounded ; lead them 
diligently with Thy right hand into the promised 
land, the eternal heavenly kingdom. O God, honor 
be unto Thee in Thy high throne, who hast given 
us Christ Thy Son, and imparted divine grace to 
us, by which we now confess Thee with heart and 
mouth, and are not ashamed to call them our breth- 
ren who call upon Thee in truth as their Father. 
Praised by Thy holy name, Amen." 

Note. — Sebastian Franck relates that the Ana- 
baptists in the beginning increased by many thou- 
sands, so that the world feared that they would 
cause an uproar ; but of this, as I hear, he writes, 
they were found innocent and, were persecuted 
with great tyranny; first especially in popedom. 
They were forcibly imprisoned, and tormented 
with the sword, fire, water, and manifold impris- 
onments, so that within a few years very many 
were put to death. Some compute the number of 
those put to death far more than two thousand. 
They were put to death in many places ; at Ensis- 
heim alone about six hundred were slain, all of 
whom patiently and steadfastly suffered as mar- 
tyrs. 

Compare the account of Seb. Franck, Chron, 
fol. 55, 109, with the old Offer-boeck, lib. 1. Leonh., 
lib. 7 ; also Chron. van den Ondergang, p. 1025. 


SIX PERSONS AT BASEL, A. D. 1529 

In the year 1529, those of Basel imprisoned nine 
of those who were baptized according to the com- 
mand of Christ ; six* of whom, as they write, were 
banished. 

They further write, that at Bomburg, a castle in 
the dominion of Basel, some of the chief Anabap- 
tists were imprisoned by one Bartholomew Sinck- 
en who was castellan there. However, what they 
ultimately did with them, the record does not state. 
Compare this with the account in the preface to the 
Offer-boeck der Doopsgesinde, of the year 1615, 
letter Y, p. 2. 


HANS LANGMANTEL WITH HIS MANSERVANT AND 
MAIDSERVANT, A. D. 1529 

Hans Langmantel, a wealthy citizen and of 
noble descent, during the re-establishment of the 
churches in Germany, received with his manservant 
and maidservant the truth of the Gospel, and, kin- 
dled with zeal, they believed the truth, forsook their 

* After many disputations three of the nine apostatized ; the res' 
remaining steadfast, were banished. 


430 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


sinful life, and were baptized upon their faith in 
Christ Jesus, for the remission and forgiveness of 
their sins; on which account all three were im- 
prisoned, and, after enduring many assaults and 
torments, they were finally put to death for their 
faith, which they constantly confessed. Hans 
Langmantel and his manservant were beheaded 
with the sword, while the maidservant was drowned 
in the water. When they were still in severe con- 
finement they sent the following, as a thank offer- 
ing and prayer to God, which they made use of in 
prison, to their brethren, for consolation, admo- 
nition, and as a memorial, about A. D. 1529. 

"O God, our heavenly Father, come with the 
power of Thy Holy Spirit, that Thou mayest re- 
joice our mind, heart and soul ; give all three of us 
a manful heart, that in this anguish we fight and 
overcome. Rev. 2 :7. Hold us with Thy right hand, 
for Thou art our strength ; fight the battle for us 
(Ex. 14:14), and watch over us in distress, that 
we may stand in the conflict, and not go back when 
it is at its height. Therefore, O Lord, keep watch 
over us, and take care of us in this extremity, now 
that the wicked rise up against Thy Word, and 
would drive us from it. O God, preserve us in Thy 
keeping, that we may not faint and abandon Thy 
Word. Let us enjoy the faithfulness which Thou 
hast shown us through Thy Son Jesus Christ; and 
in order that we may always earnestly contemplate 
this, send us Thy Holy Spirit, and kindle in us the 
fire of Thy divine love ; lead us, Thou who didst 
teach it in deed, that we may also exercise ourselves 
therein, and observe and practice it as Thy dear 
children, that this gift may come upon us, and that, 
even as we are called, we may by it order our lives 
in this Thy truth, maintain peace and unity, and 
love one another in truth with a pure heart. To 
this end, O God, let the light of Thy divine glory 
illuminate us, that we may walk in it. O Lord, keep 
us in it as Thy dear children, and let us never be- 
come obscured by the abominable darkness of this 
world, which has gained the upper hand with all 
unfaithfulness, and which will be followed by 
death. But Thou, our Father, dost love equity. 
In Thee there is no darkness (I John 1 :5) ; but the 
world is hardened with it. But Thou art the eternal 
light, which penetrates the darkness ; that we may 
no longer be children of the night, but children 
of the day. Watch over us with Thy Holy Spirit, 
and teach us thus to go in this light with de- 
light and joy according to Thy divine nature. 

"O God, we beseech Thee for one thing more: 
Send us, to this end Thy Holy Spirit, endue us 
with His power, renew our hearts, and make us 
strong in Thee, that we may obediently hear Thee 
in Thy obedience, and praise Thy name. When this 
world rises, and opposes Thy words, so that our 
soul sighs to Thee in all severe distresses by which 
they seek to tear us away, then, O Lord, grant us 
to look to Thee for aid, and help us to overcome. 
Grant, Lord, that we may not stain ourselves by 


any sin or guilt, and take from our flesh the fear 
by which they would draw us away, and stop us 
in this work ; that, when they shall lead us to death, 
we may not waver in the conflict, but may go to 
meet Thee with all the pious in the true, adorned 
wedding garment, at the marriage feast, prepared 
for Thy Son, when He shall receive His bride 
with everlasting joy and delight. Lord, assist us 
in every anguish and distress, and in the pain of 
death; give us the heavenly bread; send us Thy 
Comforter, for God is the Comforter of the mis- 
erable. He makes the poor rich, and strengthens 
the feeble; He can refresh the weary and give 
strength to the faint, that they may come to Thee. 
Through Thee they overcome, who have now en- 
tered the conflict, to fight for the truth. In Christ, 
Thy Son, help us to win the field on this earth, yea 
in Him alone. Be Thou alone our Helper, pro- 
tect us with Thy sword, that we may together, as 
Thy heroes, obtain the crown, and be forever with 
Thee. Amen." 


GEORGE BLAUROCK, AND HANS VAN DER REVE 
A. D. 1529 

About this time, George of the house of Jacob, 
called Blaurock, having for about two or three 
years, in Switzerland, but particularly in the earl- 
dom of Tyrol, whither he had gone, spread and 
proclaimed the doctrine of the truth, that he might 
put his talent to use (Matt. 25 :1 5), and by his zeal 
for the house of God be a means of salvation, was 
apprehended with his companions, at Gusodaum, 
condemned for the faith, and burnt alive not far 
from Clausen, for these articles, namely : That he 
had forsaken his office as priest, which he had for- 
merly exercised in popery ; that he disregarded in- 
fant baptism, and taught people a new baptism; 
that he rejected the mass ; that he likewise rejected 
the confession of the priests as founded by them, 
and that the mother of Christ is not to be invoked 
or worshiped. For these reasons he was executed, 
and laid down his life, as behooves a soldier and 
hero of the faith. On the place of execution he 
earnestly spoke to the people, and pointed them 
to the Scriptures. 

The love of the truth having begun to burn 
among the nations, and the fire of God having thus 
started, many were put to death for the testimony 
of the truth, in the earldom of Tyrol, especially in 
the following places : In the Gusodein district : at 
Clausen, Brixen, Stertzing, Balzen, Neumark, 
Katren, Terlen, Gundersweg ; in the valley of the 
Inn ; at Imst. Petersberg, Stejen in the Spruckthal, 
Schwatz, Rattenburg, Kufstein and Kitzbuehl. In 
these places a great multitude of believers constant- 
ly testified with their blood to the truth, through 
fire, water and the sword. Thus the people of God, 
as well as the great persecution increased daily.' 
Jacob Huter became one of the overseers and 
teachers in the earldom of Tyrol, and not long 
after, with his people, united with the church which 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


431 


was in Moravia. After Jacob Huter removed with 
his people from the earldom to Moravia, partly 
compelled by great persecution, the tyranny in 
the earldom of Tyrol became daily more vehement ; 
so that the pious had but few places where they 
could remain and many of them were apprehended, 
and put to death in various ways, for the faith. 
To this end the priests violently and furiously pro- 
claimed from the pulpit, that care should be taken, 
to ferret them out, and to destroy them with fire 
and sword. Much money was also repeatedly of- 
fered and promised to those who should inform 
against them ; by means of which they were several 
times betrayed. They were sought in every way, 
in forests and in houses, wherever their presence 
was suspected ; in every place, also in closed gar- 
dens, which had to be opened, or they would be 
broken open, and searched. There was a Judas, 
called Prabeiger, who made use of his subtle arti- 
fice, thinking to obtain a large reward. He went to 
the authorities, and betrayed them all, bringing 
with him bailiffs and children of Pilate, with 
swords, spears, and staves, and went before them, 
just as Judas the traitor did, Matt. 26:47. They 
caught a great number, and dispersed the rest. Not 
long after, when they again assembled, another 
Iscariot, called George Frueder, manifested him- 
self. He went to the priests, saying that if they 
would pay him, he would go, and none of the breth- 
ren should be able to conceal himself from him. 
Then the priests, the generation of the scribes and 
Pharisees, gave him money and good wages, and 
also a letter. This rogue then went out, assumed 
the form and semblance of an angel, and visited 
now and then such as he suspected of having 
knowledge of this matter. He inquired everywhere 
in the Pusterthal, where the brethren were, and 
how he could find them, desiring assistance to this 
end. With much weeping the rogue made this re- 
quest, pretending that he could not rest until he 
were with them. Thus he deceived them, so that 
he finally came to them. He appeared before them 
very sad, humble and tender. As one who seeks to 
repent and to amend his way. He then very sud- 
denly said: "My brethren, grant me this, and wait 
a little while, and I will go home and fetch my wife 
and child." Many thoughts came to the minister 
and he said to him: "If you are false of heart, 
and your intention evil, God will certainly find you, 
and you shall speedily bring down His judgment 
upon you." But he said: "Oh no, God preserve 
me from that ; come with me into my house." Thus 
he went away, and hastened to the judge, the mag- 
istrate, and the priests, who came with force, with 
swords and sticks, and apprehended the brethren 
and sisters. 

Several other villains of this class manifested 
themselves, especially one whose name was Peter 
Lantz, and one named Pranger. Some went about 
by night with much craftiness, acted in the same 
manner, and went to places and houses where they 
expected to find these people ; but God gave them 


the recompense which they deserved, so that they 
might have wished that they had never been born. 

Besides the above-mentioned George Blaurock, 
there was also one Hans van der Reve, both of 
whom belonged to the number of those who sin- 
cerely received the truth of the holy Gospel, and 
helped found and build the Christian church, in 
the time when the truth had long been obscured in 
popery and by other errors. And when they had 
thus for a time faithfully exercised their ministry, 
edified and instructed many, and put their talent 
effectually to usury (Matt. 25 :15), they were final- 
ly apprehended by the envious children of Cain, 
and burned at Clausen, in Etziandt, A. D. 1529. 

And in order to show that in all this they re- 
joiced in God, and also sought to console and 
strengthen their brethren, they left them the fol- 
lowing memorial : 

"Lord God, I will praise Thee now and until my 
end ; because Thou hast given me faith, by which I 
have learned to know Thee. Thou sendest to me 
Thy divine Word, which I am able to find and per- 
ceive that it is from pure grace. From Thee, O 
God, have I received it as Thou knowest. I firmly 
hope that it will not return unto Thee void. Isa. 
55:11. O Lord, strengthen my heart to this. My 
heart rejoices because I know Thy will. When I 
felt the heavy load of sin in me, which exceedingly 
troubled me (Ps. 38:6), I would have had to per- 
ish and suffer everlasting pain hadst Thou, O God, 
not come to me with the Word of Thy divine grace. 
Acts 10:37. For this I will now magnify and 
praise Thy glorious name forever, because Thou 
dost always show Thyself a merciful dear Father. 
Cast me not off but receive me as Thy child. 
Therefore I cry unto Thee, help, O Father, that I 
may be Thy child and heir. O Lord, strengthen my 
faith (Luke 17:5), else, if Thy help should not 
succor me, my building should soon fall. Do not 
forget me, O Lord, but be with me always ; Thy 
Holy Spirit protect and teach me, that in all my 
sufferings I may ever receive Thy consolation, so 
that valiantly fighting, in this conflict, I may gain 
the victory. I Cor. 9:25-27. 

"The enemy fights a battle with me in the field 
in which I now am ; he would fain drive me from 
the field. But Thou, O Lord, givest me the victory. 
He ran against me with sharp weapons, so that all 
my limbs quaked before the false doctrine and 
their constraints. But Thou, O Lord, hadst com- 
passion upon me, and didst help me, Thy son, poor 
man, with Thy grace, and powerful hand, and 
madest me to overcome. O God, how soon didst 
Thou hear me ; thou speedily earnest with Thy help 
and turnedst back mine enemies; therefore I will 
sing praises unto Thy name in my heart, and for- 
ever spread abroad the grace which has come 
to me. 

"Now, I pray Thee, Father, for all Thy children ; 
preserve us all forever from all the enemies of our 
souls. I must not trust in the flesh (I Peter 1 :24), 
which perisheth and abideth not; but I will firmly 


432 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


trust in Thy Word (Ps. 115 :9), this be my conso- 
lation, on which I rely ; it shall deliver me, from all 
my distresses, to everlasting rest. The hour of the 
last day, to which we all must come, is at hand. 
Dear Lord, help us to bear the cross to the destined 
place, and turn Thyself to us with all grace, that we 
may commend our spirit into Thy hands. I sin- 
cerely pray Thee for all our enemies, O Lord, how- 
ever many there may be ; do not lay their sins to 
their charge ; Lord, I entreat this according to Thy 
will. Acts 7:60. And thus we (I George Blaurock, 
and Hans van der Reve) will depart in peace. May 
the good God through grace lead us into His ever- 
lasting kingdom, as we firmly trust that He will, 
and finish His holy work in us and give us strength 
to the end, Amen." 

This evidently came to pass, when these two so 
steadfastly and boldly died and were burned, for 
the truth. 


HERE FOLLOWS ANOTHER CONSOLATORY ADMONI- 
TION LEFT BY GEORGE BLAUROCK TO 
HIS DESCENDANTS 

God administers a righteous judgment (Ps. 
7:11 ; Rom. 2:5), which no one can set aside, and 
him who does not His will, He will judge. But 
Thou, O Lord; art good, and sufferest Thyself to 
be found gracious, and all those who use diligence 
to do Thy will, Thou acceptst as Thy children. We 
justly give praise and thanks to Thee, through 
Jesus Christ, for all Thy benefits and goodness, 
and beseech Thee to preserve and guard us from 
sin. The sinner in this life brings a severe judg- 
ment upon himself, which he shall hereafter regret ; 
for though God faithfully warns him, yet will he 
not forsake his sinful life ; but when the Lord shall 
come in His glory to judge, then shall the sinner 
repent; for no excuse will then avail. 

He now causes His divine Word to be published, 
and instructs men, that they should turn from their 
sinful life, believe in Christ, be baptized upon faith, 
and obey the Gospel. Therefore, ye children of 
men, forsake your sins, and remain no longer hard- 
ened, sick, wicked and blind ; now that you can find 
the physician, who can heal all infirmities, and avail 
yourselves of his help without money. Matt. 9:12. 
Oh, how awful will it be with the sinner who now 
refuses help and counsel, when he shall be sen- 
tenced by God into everlasting pain, where he will 
have to remain and suffer forever and ever. Matt. 
25 :46. But Thou, O Lord, art a righteous God. 
Thou wilt deceive no one, but wilt preserve those 
that sincerely love Thee, from the second death. 

Thou, O Lord, art a strong God, who will cast 
into hell, which has now opened wide her mouth, 
all the wicked and those who hate and afflict Thy 
children. But Thy mercy is great over those who 
repent, and Thou, through Jesus Christ, forgivest 
their sins. This is what God requires: that the 
whole human race should fear and love Him, that 
they should follow His Son Jesus Christ, and ob- 


serve His divine doctrine. But when the sinner is 
exhorted to the love of God, he shows by the deed 
that he considers it a mockery ; for this however 
he shall pay dearly, for God can not be deceived 
by appearance. 

Antichrist threatens those who fear God with 
great severity and ignominy. Therefore we beseech 
Thee, O Lord, strengthen Thy feeble vessels : but 
we know, that if we patiently endure all this for 
Thy name's sake, Thou, in Thy faithfulness, wilt 
not forsake us ; but dost renew and strengthen us 
daily, that we may continue on Thy narrow way 
Matt. 7 :14. We cry to Thee through Christ, for the 
sake of His bitter suffering (Isa. 53), in which we 
recognize Thy faithfulness and love ; and this con- 
soles us on our pilgrimage. Do not forsake us, Thy 
children, henceforth unto the end; but constantly 
offer us Thy fatherly hand that we may finish our 
course ; for when we have finished our course, the 
crown is prepared by the young man (II ksd. 
2:43) who hung on the cross for us, on which he 
suffered greatly for our sakes. Grant, O Lord, 
that we may be thankful, so that we may joyfully 
behold Thee, our Father. O Father, through grace 
Thou didst choose us, and didst not despise to put 
us into Thy work; grant that, when the evening 
comes, we may receive the hire with reioicine 
Matt. 20:1,8. 

Through Christ Thy Son make us ready for the 
heavenly supper, and clothe us with Thy Holy 
Spirit. In that supper, Thy Son, our Redeemer, 
shall serve us at the table. Luke 12:37. Oh, how 
blessed are they which are called to this supper 
(Rev. 19:9), and who in all sorrow adhere to 
Christ unto the end, even as He steadfastly suf- 
fered for us on the cross ; and thus it is with all 
His followers on the earth ; and all who shall keep 
their wedding garment undefiled to the end. Upon 
their heads the young man shall set crowns. But 
he who is not clothed with this garment, when the 
King will inspect His guests, shall be sternly re- 
proved, bound hand and foot, and cast into outer 
darkness. O Lord, give us true love so to walk, 
that when we come we will not find the door closed' 
as was the case with the foolish virgins, who had 
no oil in their lamps, and said : "Lord, open to us," 
but could not go in : but that we may happily watch 
with the five wise virgins, and may also enter into 
the glorious marriage feast of eternal heavenly joy 
when the King, with His trumpets, shall call and 
assemble His elect. Therefore, O Zion, thou holy 
church of God, see that thou hold fast unto the 
end that which thou hast received, and keep thy- 
self unspotted from sin, and thou shalt, through 
grace, receive the eternal crown. I Cor 9-25- II 
Tim. 4:8. ' ' 


VIGIL PLAITNER, A. D. 1529 

In the year 1529, Brother Vigil Plaitner, a min- 
ister of Jesus Christ, at Scharding, in Bavaria, was 
condemned and executed, after great steadfastness 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


433 


(Matt. 24:13), for the faith and the divine truth. 
He would depart neither to the right hand nor to 
the left, and did not love his life unto death (John 
12:25), but surrendered it for Christ, in order that 
in the abode of the righteous above he might re- 
ceive it again forever with all the saints and pious. 
II Peter 3:13. 


LOUIS, AND TWO OTHERS, A. D 1529 

In this year also a brother named Louis,* a min- 
ister of Jesus Christ, learned and well versed in the 
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin languages, and experi- 
enced in the holy Scriptures, was executed with the 
sword, at Constance, on the lake of the same name, 
after being long imprisoned there. At his depar- 
ture he gave many excellent instructions, so that 
many were astonished, and were moved to weep 
with him. 


JOHN HUT, A. D. 1529 

In this year, John Hut,f a faithful minister of 
Jesus Christ, was apprehended for the divine testi- 
mony, at Augsburg, in Swabia, where he was 
brought into a tower. Finally they ceased their 
severe questions and tortures, and he was left lie as 
one dead. Then they went away, leaving a light in 
the prison, near the straw, by which the straw was 
set on fire. When they returned to the tower they 
found him dead. They then carried him, dead as 
he was, in a chair on a wagon, before the court, 
where he was condemned to be burned. His son, 
Philip Hut, fell asleep in the Lord, in the church 
at Heim. This John Hut composed a hymn of 
thanksgiving, which we sing at the memorial or 
supper of the Lord ; besides this he composed one 
or two other hymns. 


WOLFGANG BRANDHUBER, HANS NIEDERMAIR, AND 

MANY OTHERS, ABOUT SEVENTY IN 

ALL, A. D. 1529 

In this year, also Brother Wolgang Brandhuber 
of Passau, and Hans Niedermair, both ministers of 
the Word and Gospel of Christ, were apprehended, 
together with many of the pious at Lintz, in the 
country above the Enns, for the divine truth ; they 
were condemned to fire, water and the sword, and 
were immediately executed, in all over seventy per- 
sons. Among these also Peter Niedermair of 
Hirschberg, at Gminden, was apprehended, on St. 
Andrew's eve, A. D. 1529, and though, in the ex- 
treme fear of death, he was tempted in various 
ways, yet he remained faithful and constant. Rev. 
2:10; Matt. 10:22. Ultimately, through the prov- 
idence of God, he was set free, after being im- 
prisoned there for over three years. 


Concerning said Wolfgang Brandhuber, writ- 
ings are still extant in the church, how faithfully he 
taught the Christian church, and also said, that in 
everything which is not contrary to God, we should 
be obedient and subject to the authorities, and that 
he strictly held to the true baptism of Christ, and 
to the true Lord's Supper, rejecting infant bap- 
tism, the sacrament, and other antichristian abom- 
inations and anathemas, as is shown by his writ- 
ings, which are still extant. 


CARIUS PRADER, WITH SEVERAL OTHER PERSONS, 
A. D. 1529 

About this time also Carius Prader, a minister of 
the church of God, in the country of Salzburg, and 
several other persons were shut up together in a 
house and burned. A hymn is still extant in the 
church which this Carius composed. 


* Louis belonged to the church of the Waldenses, whose sound 
faith we have shown elsewhere. See the author cited below, in the 
same place. 

t This John Hut was also one of the old Waldensian Urethren. 
See Bapt. Hist. p. 748. 


SEVEN BRETHREN, A. D. 1529 

These seven brethren were executed together on 
the same day, with the sword, for the evangelical 
truth, at Gmuend, in Swabia, and thus steadfastly 
testified^ with their blood to the name of Christ, 
A. D. 1529. The account of it is as follows : 

"I could not forbear to acquaint my brethren 
with what is taking place here in Germany, even 
as it is known to many how the world rages and 
storms against the true believers, and how she robs 
the servants of God of life and property. For God, 
graciously looking down upon the children of men, 
gave them, in the midst of their blindness, His 
brightly shining Word for a light, that believing it, 
we should avoid all sin and shame. Many recog- 
nized this Word as the truth, accepted it with the 
mouth, and were called Christians, but continued 
nevertheless in their sinful life, supposing that the 
bare name was sufficient, if only the semblance ex- 
isted. Afterwards the Lord so ordered it that His 
Word did effectually work in some, so that, in the 
language of the prophet Isaiah (Isa. 55 :11), it ac- 
complished that whereunto God sent it, and did not 
return unto Him void, but guided many into the 
right way. And thus, those who sought to live 
faithfully, were hated, and despised as anabaptists 
by the rest, just as though they had apostatized 
from God, and turned to Belial ; while they earn- 
estly sought and desired nothing else, than to keep 
God's commandments with His assistance, ac- 
cording to all their ability (I Cor. 7:19) ; and yet 
they were reproachfully stigmatized as anabaptists, 
— they who sincerely forgave every one, assisted 
their neighbors by lending to them without usury, 
and prayed for their persecutors and enemies 
(Matt. 5:44), as was seen at the hour of their 
death, and who thus attested their faith with the 
deed, as was publicly witnessed, A. D. 1529, in 
the town of Gmuend, where the enemy employed 
manifold wiles with some of them, to terrify them, 
without being successful however. There they had 


434 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


apprehended a lad only fourteen years old, whom 
they put into the tower, where he lay very severely 
confined almost a year, suffering many an assault, 
but always remaining immovable, however fre- 
quently they came to him, to induce him to forsake 
his faith, with him six other brethren, pious men, 
were apprehended and imprisoned in the tower f or 
life. There they together praised God (Acts 
16:25), and comforted one another; and God as- 
sisted them with His grace, so that they faithfully 
adhered to the faith, and did not allow themselves 
to be moved either by threats or terrors. When the 
time of their departure from this world drew near, 
their death sentence was read to them, and it was 
added, that if they would desist from their faith, 
they need have no fear, but might return home to 
their wives and children. The prisoners turned 
to their enemies, and replied: "We have com- 
mitted our wives and children to God, who is well 
able to preserve them; hence cease these words; 
for we are willing and ready to die." A ring was 
then drawn on the spot, as is customarily done at 
executions, with the sword. As this lad stood in the 
ring, to be beheaded, a count rode up to him into 
the ring, and thus addressed him : "My dear child, 
desist from this error, and I will give you a preb- 
end, and always keep you with me." The youth re- 
plied: "Should I love my life (John 12:25), and 
therefore forsake my God, and thus seek to escape 
the cross ? this I must certainly not do ; thy wealth 
can be of no help to either of us, but I expect a bet- 
ter in heaven." Thus the youth fearlessly replied, 
adding, "in the kingdom of my Father, who has 
chosen me, and who can order and equalize all 
things as is best. Hence cease these entreaties ; to 
Him who has always fed and sustained me, I desire 
to show obedience also in this my last distress. To 
Him we must call from the bottom of our heart, 
when the hour is at hand, that we may depart with 
good cheer out of this world. If we do not depart 
from Him, He will give us the everlasting, glorious 
crown." 

At this a great tumult arose among the people, 
with spears and other weapons, and each spoke of 
the matter as he understood it. And thus they died 
through the sword, as pious heroes, and became a 
sacrifice unto the Lord, as faithful witnesses of 
Jesus Christ, A. D. 1529. 

While these seven brethren were still in prison, 
they together, each giving his own mind, wrote 
and practiced the following, and sent it to their 
brethren. 

The first made the following prayer: "Out of 
the depths of my soul I cry unto Thee, O God ; 
hear my cry. Send Thy Holy Spirit, even as Thou, 
O Christ, hast until now not withdrawn, but gra- 
ciously imparted Him to me. We rely on what 
Thou hast commanded us ; but the heathen seek to 
kill us." Ps. 130:1. 

The second prayed : "The flesh is weak, O Lord ; 
Thou well knowest that it fears the least pain; 
hence, fill us with Thy Holy Spirit, which we en- 


treat of Thee from the bottom of our hearts ; so 
that we may continue steadfast unto the end, and 
cheerfully and valiantly enter upon the suffering 
which now awaits us, and that we may fear no 
agony or pain." Matthew 26:41 ; 10:22. 

The third prayed : "The spirit is willing and ready 
to desire the suffering. O Lord, hear our prayers, 
through Jesus Christ Thy Son. We also pray for 
our enemies, who, alas ! are so ignorant, that they 
do not know what they are doing, and are not 
mindful of Thy wrath." John 15:16; Matt. 5 44- 
Luke 23 :34. 

The fourth prayed : "We beseech Thee, O Fa- 
ther, and dear Lord, through Christ Thy Son, in- 
crease Thy little flock. Kindle in them and also in 
us Thy divine life, and our hearts will rejoice; 
for after this our hearts do hunger and thirst " 
Matt. 6:9; Luke 12:32; II Cor. 3:18; Matt. 5:6. 

The fifth prayed : "O God, Thou hast received 
us in grace, and made us Thy ministers. Through 
Thy divine assistance we have also willingly ful- 
filled Thy ministry in our weakness. Preserve us 
still further firm in Thy Word ; we desire to obey 
Thee also henceforth ; come to our aid, and be our 
Comforter." I Cor. 1 :4. 

The sixth prayed: "Thou Lord God art my 
Protector ; we will cleave to Thee, and then pain 
will not seem severe to us ; though they deprive us 
of our life, Thou hast prepared it for us forever in 
heaven, and though here we suffer reproach and 
pain, it shall not be in vain." 

The seventh said : "The body, life, soul, and all 
members we have received from Thee O God; 
these we will now offer up to Thee, to the praise 
of Thy holy name. It is only dust and ashes. We 
commend our spirits into Thy hands. Amen." Ro- 
mans 12:1; Gen. 1:7; Luke 23:46. 


ANNA OF FREIBURG, A. U. 1529 

This Anna of Freiburg was zealous in the fear 
of the Lord and as she believed in Christ, and was 
baptized upon faith in Him, and thus sought to 
arise with Christ ; and walk in newness of life, the 
adversary could not endure it ; therefore Anna was 
envied, accused, apprehended by his ministers, and 
after steadfastly suffering many torments, sen- 
tenced to death, and drowned in the water, and 
afterwards burned with fire. This happened at 
Freiburg, in the year 1529. When she was about 
to die, she spoke the following prayer to God, 
and left these admonitions to all descendants. 

"Dear, eternal heavenly Father, I call upon 
Thee, from the depths of my heart ; do not let me 
turn from Thee, but keep me in Thy truth unto my 
end. O God, keep my heart and mouth ; guard me, 
that I may never separate from Thee, on account of 
impending sorrow and anguish, or any manner of 
distress ; keep me cheerful and glad in my suffer- 
ings. Eternal God, my dear Father instruct and 
teach me, Thy poor, unworthy child, that I may 
heed Thy ways and paths. O Father, this is my 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


435 


sincere desire, that through Thy power I may press 
even unto death, through all sorrows, sufferings, 
anguish and pain, and in this let me persevere, O 
God, that I may not be separated from Thy love. 
There are many who now walk in this way; but 
the cup of suffering is given them to drink. We are 
also accused of false doctrine, in order to draw us 
from Christ our Lord. But O God, I lift up my 
soul unto Thee and trust in Thee in every ad- 
versity; do not let me be confounded, lest my 
enemy exalt himself over me in this earth. I am 
now imprisoned here by him, but, O God, I sin- 
cerely wait for Thee with great desire, until Thou 
wilt awaken, and deliver Thy prisoners. O dear 
heavenly Father, make us prepared with the five 
wise virgins (Matt. 25 :2), that we may prudently 
wait for the bridegroom with His heavenly host. 
heavenly King, feed and refresh us according to 
the spirit with Thy heavenly meats, which never 
perish but abide in life eternal ; for if Thou should- 
est withdraw Thy food from us, all that we do, 
would with ourselves be in vain and perish. But, 
through Thy grace, we trust in Thee, that we shall 
not fail. I do not doubt in the least, the power of 
God ; for His judgments are honored. He will for- 
sake no one who firmly holds to Him in faith, and 
seeks to walk in His true ways. Heb. 13 :S ; Matt. 
7:14. O ye Christians, rejoice (Phil. 3:1), and 
always be of good cheer in the Lord Jesus Christ; 
may He increase love and faith in us. God comfort 
us by His holy word, in which we may firmly trust. 
I commend myself to God and His church ; may He 
be my Protector today, for His holy name's sake. 
O my Father, let it be done through Jesus Christ, 
Amen." 

Thereupon she voluntarily submitted to death, 
and was drowned in the water, as mentioned above. 


DANIEL KOPF, WITH TWO BRETHREN AND FOUR 
SISTERS, A. D. 1529 

Daniel Kopf , a minister of the Word, was appre- 
hended with six other persons, at Bairisch-Graitz, 
in Steyermark ; he and two brethren were sentenced 
to the sword, while the four sisters were drowned. 
They testified with their body and life, that this is 
the true way (Matt. 7:14; John 14:6) to eternal 
life in Christ Jesus, and though the executioner, 
fire, water and the sword sought to turn them 
away, they would nevertheless adhere to it as long 
as breath remained in them. Of this Daniel, writ- 
ings are also extant in the church, concerning bap- 
tism and other points ; as well as four hymns com- 
posed by him. 

FOUR BRETHREN AND FOUR SISTERS 

In the year 1529, four brethren, named Wolf- 
gang of Mos, Thomas Imwald of Aldein, George 
Frick of Wirzberg, and Mankager of Fuessen 
also four sisters, Christina Tolinger of Penon, a 
widow, Barbara of Thiers, Agatha Kampner of 


Breitenberg, and her sister Elizabeth, were appre- 
hended in the Ful, in Elschland, and led up to the 
castle, where they died on the sixteenth of Novem- 
ber. Each was separately examined concerning 
their faith in the following articles: 

Brother Wolfgang of Mos confessed that on the 
Sunday after the feast of our Lady, it was just one 
year that one Michael (who was afterwards exe- 
cuted with fire for this matter, at Goffedaum, and 
testified to the truth) presented and taught to me, 
Wolfgang, Martin von Neck, and another, the 
Gospel and the Word of the Lord, and then re- 
baptized all three of us according to the command 
of God. Matt. 28:19. He further said that he did 
not believe in infant baptism, that God the Lord 
had said nothing of it, nor had Christ commanded 
it. Matthew 15:13; 28:20; Mark 16:19. He also 
confessed that Christ is not bodily in the host, when 
it is consecrated by the priest. Furthermore, he 
said that he did not believe in fast days, Sunday, 
and other feast days, otherwise than in the man- 
ner spoken of in the New Testament. 

Thomas Imwald of Aldein confessed that he had 
been baptized before St. Ulric's day, at Breitenberg 
by a teacher who had formerly been a priest, but 
had forsaken his office as priest, and whose name 
was George Blaurock, from Switzerland. Of the 
mass, also, he believed that it is nothing but a hu- 
man invention and institution, and not a com- 
mandment of God. Concerning the sacrament he 
did not believe that the priests, by their conse- 
crating or blessing, could bring our Lord God into 
the host, or change it; and he also showed them, 
that Christ was to be received in the Word, and 
that the bread is only a sign and memorial. Neither 
does he believe in the confession as it is instituted 
by the priests; as it is not used according to the 
command of God. Again, to our Lady he assigns 
the position to which God has chosen her ; he be- 
lieves that she was a virgin and the mother of our 
Redeemer. He was furthermore asked whether 
if their number had become great, they would not 
have attempted to bring someone's country or peo- 
ple over to their faith by force. He answered: 
"No, that they did not believe in compelling any 
one to it ; since God desired a willing and uncon- 
strained heart, and Himself had constrained no 
one, but the Lord gave it into their minds." 

George Frick of Wirzberg, a tailor, confessed 
that on last St. Gallus' fair he was rebaptized by 
one Benedict, who belonged to their faith, at Philip 
Kopfler's in the Ful. He also did not believe that 
the priests could bring our Lord God into the host, 
or change Him into bread, since God had neither 
commanded nor instituted the mass, but the sacra- 
ment was only a bread of remembrance. In con- 
fession he likewise did not believe ; for how can one 
forgive sins, who is himself a whoremonger and 
idolater. II Pet. 2:19. Concerning our Lady he 
believed that God favored her and that before and 
after the birth she was a virgin ; for God is able to 
do more than this. Again he would adhere to his 


436 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


God, and not depart from this faith, but that the 
will of God should be done. Matt. 6:10. 

Mankager of Fuessen, a journeyman shoemaker, 
confessed that in the forepart of the summer, about 
St. James' day, he was baptized, at George Kar- 
niter's of Kunen, by one George of Chur, in Switz- 
erland, who had been a priest, but had resigned 
said office, and was burned in the summer, at Claus- 
en. He did not believe in infant baptism, nor in the 
mass ; neither did he believe that our Lord God is 
in the sacrament. He believed that Mary the moth- 
er of Christ, was a pure virgin ; but the idea of her 
intercession, as well as that of the saints, he re- 
jected, since Christ is the Mediator, between God 
and men. I Tim. 2 :5. In the auricular confession 
of the priests he did not believe at all. Again, con- 
cerning Sunday he said, that God Almighty, in the 
beginning, in six days, created the world, and rest- 
ed on the seventh; hence the origin of Sunday; 
there he would let it rest, — work was not prohib- 
ited, but we should rest and fast from sin. He fur- 
ther declared that in the forenoon the priests com- 
mitted idolatry, and in the afternoon fornication, 
and what he confessed with the mouth, he would 
testify to with his blood, and would not depart 
from the faith, but firmly adhere to it unto his 
end. 

Christina Tolinger, of Penon, confessed that 
Brother George Blaurock baptized in her house 
with the true Christian baptism. Concerning the 
sacrament as used by the priests, she did not believe 
at all, that they can bring our Lord God into the 
host or wafer ; it is only bread, and the performance 
of the priests is in every respect a deception. As to 
whether infants were worthy of salvation without 
baptism, the Lord said : "Suffer little children, and 
forbid them not to come unto me ; for of such is the 
kingdom of heaven." Matt. 19 :14. The priests bap- 
tize the infants, and have much unnecessary care 
while they are in their infancy; but though they 
wash them from sin, they do not attempt to draw 
them away from sin. Regarding our Lady she 
believed that she is the mother of Christ and a pure 
virgin. Matt. 1 :23. In confession as used by the 
priests, she did not believe; if one confesses his 
sins, and forsakes and desists from them, it is a 
true confession. Concerning holidays and Sundays 
she said that in six days God the Lord created the 
world, and rested the seventh day; and that the 
other holidays had been instituted by popes, cardi- 
nals, and archbishops, and that she did not believe 
in them. Since she lived in the world, she observed 
them as others did, to avoid giving offense; how- 
ever, none is condemned for working. Again, the 
priests commit idolatry in the forenoon, and forni- 
cation in the afternoon. With the help and grace 
of God she intended to die in this her resolution. 

Barbara of Thiers, wife of Hans Portzen con- 
fessed that about last St. Michael's day she was 
baptized with the true Christian baptism, at Craum 
on the Moss, near Eintempichel, by a teacher of 


the Word of God, named Benedict. Again, she did 
not believe in the idolatrous sacrament of the 
priests, nor in the mass ; since the priests commit 
idolatry in the forenoon, and fornication in the 
afternoon. In confession as used by the priests, 
she did not believe. Concerning our Lady, she had 
nothing to say. Regarding Sundays and holidays, 
she said that God the Lord had commanded to rest 
the seventh day, and there she would let it rest. 
With the help and grace of God she intended to ad- 
here to this, and to die therein, since it was the true 
faith and the right way in Christ. 

Agatha Kampner of Breitenberg confessed that 
next Christmas it would be about a year since she 
was baptized, in Switzerland, in a place called Auf 
der Tiefe, near St. Gall, by one Brother Topigh, a 
teacher of the Word of God. She did not believe in 
infant baptism, though they had all been baptized. 
If children die in or before baptism, they die in in- 
nocence, and are the Lord's. She did not believe 
in the mass, since Christ did not say to His dis- 
ciples : "Go and read mass ;" but : "Go, and preach 
the gospel." Matt. 16:15. Concerning the sacra- 
ment she said that since in the creed it is confessed 
that He (Christ) sitteth at the right hand of His 
heavenly Father, whence He shall come to judge the 
quick and the dead, she believed in no wise that 
He permitted Himself to be changed by the priests, 
into the host or bread. Regarding our Lady she 
said that she believed that she brought forth Christ 
the Lord, who alone has redeemed us, and that the 
Word of God became man in her and suffered for 
us on the tree of the cross. John 1 :14. As regards 
holidays, she said that one day is not any holier 
than another, and that Sunday was ordained for 
the purpose of assembling together, preaching the 
Gospel, and speaking of it ; but that it was abused 
through drunkenness and other forms of wicked- 
ness. With the help and grace of God she would 
steadfastly adhere to this her faith. 

Elizabeth, sister of the afore-mentioned Agatha, 
confessed that in the early part of the summer she 
was baptized at Breitenberg, by Brother Blaurock, 
according to the command of the Lord Christ, in 
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost. In the sacrament and mass of the priests 
she did not believe, since it is not found that God 
commanded it. Concerning our Lady she believed 
that she brought forth Christ our Redeemer, and 
was a virgin ; and that the saints had indeed to 
enter [into the kingdom] through tribulation (Acts 
14 :22), like we and others ; but that they are inter- 
cessors, she did not believe ; since Christ has re- 
served to Himself all power in heaven and earth. 
As to holidays, she esteems none more highly than 
the rest, but that we should always wait for the 
great day of the Lord, and rest from sin. To this 
she would constantly adhere. Thereupon they were 
executed as those who truly loved God (Luke 
10:27), and as innocent sheep of the Lord; and 
their names are written in heaven. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


437 


ANNA MALER, AND URSULA, A. D. 1529 

In the year 1529, two sisters, Anna Maler, and 
Ursula, were condemned to death for the divine 
truth, and drowned in the water, at Hall, in the 
valley of the Inn, and thus, though women, they 
were manful and valiant in God, so that many were 
amazed at their steadfastness, that thus in life and 
death they testified to the divine truth, as is de- 
clared by those who knew them, and are still alive. 

NINE BRETHREN, SEVERAL SISTERS, AND ANOTHER 
SISTER, A. D. 1529 

About the year 1529, the knowledge of the truth 
began to shine also in the places on the river Rhine, 
so that divine zeal and the fire of God arose, which 
the priests, by instigating the authorities, strenu- 
ously attempted to stop. First nine brethren and 
several sisters were apprehended for the faith, in 
the city of Altzey, without the order of the Elector 
or Palsgrave, simply through the instigation of the 
priests, and the aid of the nobility. They lay in 
prison for a considerable time, and as they were 
waiting how to deal with them, the Burgrave at 
Altzey inquired of the Palsgrave, his prince and 
lord, what he should do with them. The prince an- 
swered him that they had a court of justice at 
Altzey, and that he should let them examine and 
judge them. The Burgrave did so, and brought 
them before the court of justice, which, however, 
would not sentence them, because they had been 
apprehended simply for the sake of their faith, and 
no other cause of death existed. Acts 18:15, 16. 
In the meantime an imperial diet was held, at which 
the Palsgrave stated that he had some prisoners 
who had been apprehended on account of their 
faith for Anabaptism; and asked how he should 
deal with them. The matter was committed to 
the four inquisitors, as they are called; whom, 
however, they referred to the mandate of the Em- 
peror, where they would sufficiently find what im- 
perial constitutions, institutions and ordinances 
were made concerning such; according to which 
they should deal with them. 

For the constitution clearly implies that each and 
all Anabaptists and anabaptized, whether men or 
women, if possessing reason, and of adult age, are 
to be executed with fire, the sword, or some other 
way according to the character of the persons ; and 
that wherever they were found, they should be 
brought before the court, accused, and convicted, 
and be judged or dealt with in no other way, on 
pain of severe punishment. 

Moreover, when they would not apostatize, the 
mandate was also read to them ; upon which with- 
out further sentence, they were led out to death, by 
virtue of the imperial mandate. The brethren were 
executed with the sword, but the sisters drowned in 
the horse pond. While they were yet imprisoned, 
a sister came to them, and comforted the sisters 
(Matt. 25 :39) ; she told them valiantly and firmly 


to adhere to the Lord, and not to regard these suf- 
ferings, for the sake of the eternal joys which 
should follow. II Cor. 1 :5. When this was noticed 
she was also very speedily apprehended. She was 
afterwards burned, because she had thus com- 
forted and strengthened the others. 


TWO OTHER BRETHREN, AND TWO SISTERS, 
A. D. 1529 

Thus they meant to extinguish the light of the 
truth and the fire of God ; but it was kindled only 
the more. They then apprehended a man, a woman, 
a manservant and a maidservant. Whoever em- 
braced the faith, and desired to separate from the 
ways, society and idolatry of the world, was ap- 
prehended by them. In several places they filled all 
the prisons with them, intending to deter them by 
fear ; but they sang and rejoiced in prison, so that 
their enemies who had cast them into prison were 
more troubled and afraid than the prisoners. They 
knew not what to do with them, especially since it 
was only on account of the faith. 


ABOUT THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY PERSONS PUT 
TO DEATH FOR THE FAITH, NEAR ALTZEY, 
PURSUANT TO THE IMPERIAL MAN- 
DATE, A. D. 1529 

The Palsgrave, then, in pursuance with the im- 
perial mandate, in a short time, caused about three 
hundred and fifty persons to be executed for the 
faith; especially his Burgrave at Altzey, namely 
Dietrich von Schoenburg, caused many in the town 
of Altzey to be beheaded, drowned and otherwise 
put to death; even as the lords who came to the 
church, and at that time were residents in Altzey, 
saw themselves how they were taken from the 
houses in which they were known to be, and led as 
sheep to the place of execution. They could in no 
wise be persuaded to apostatize, but went joyfully 
to meet death ; while the others were being drown- 
ed, and executed, the rest who were yet alive and 
waited for death sang until the executioner took 
them. They were very steadfast in the truth con- 
fessed, and, assured in the faith which they had 
received from God, conducted themselves as val- 
iant soldiers. Matt. 10:22. All the learned and 
great of this world were confounded by them. I 
Cor. 1 :25, 26. 

Some whom they did not wish to execute they 
tortured and maimed their bodies ; of some they cut 
off the fingers, others they burned crosses on their 
foreheads, and subjected them to much wanton in- 
jury; so that even the aforesaid Burgrave said: 
"What shall I do? the more I cause to be exe- 
cuted, the more they increase." Ex. 1 :22. 

This Burgrave Dietrich, who had shed much in- 
nocent blood, died a sudden and terrible death, as 
he was rising from his table. Chron. van den On- 
dergang, page 1029, col. 1, from the old History of 
the Baptist Martyrs, lib. 1, 


438 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


PHILIP OF LANGENLONSHEIM, A. D. 1529 

One of the last brethren whom they executed in 
the town of Creitze, was Philip of Langenlonsheim. 
When the executioner struck off his head, some- 
thing flew into his face, so that he put up his hands 
to it, which was well noticed by the people ; how- 
ever they knew not what it was, or why he did it. 
Then the saying went abroad that something like a 
black hen had fluttered before his face, so that he 
defended himself with his hands; some said that 
the blood had squirted into his face ; and though he 
himself knew best what it was, it was nevertheless 
seen afterwards, what it must have been : for the 
executioner's nose dropped off close to his face. 
Thus God punished and visited him, because of the 
innocent blood, with which he had stained his 
hands to so large an extent (Prov. 6:17); and God 
openly and palpably made known thereby, how 
greatly they oppressed the pious. The Palsgrave 
also was terrified and troubled in various ways, so 
that afterwards he had no longer a desire to wash 
his hands in innocent blood, and would have given 
much, if it had never taken place. 


GEORGE BAUMAN, A. D. 1529 

About this time, a brother named George Bau- 
man was apprehended at Banschlet, in Wurtem- 
burg, for the faith and the Word of God. The 
nobleman whose subject he was, kept him impris- 
oned for a time, and also had him dreadfully 
racked and tortured, and did so much to him, by im- 
prisonment, torture and pain, and also by various 
promises, so that they persuaded him and gained 
his assent to follow them. They then demanded of 
him, that he should recant in church, and confess 
that he desisted [from his faith], which he did 
once or twice; went to church, and performed 
that for which his consent had been extorted from 
him. In the meantime he came to himself, and 
considered the honor of God and His holy name, 
and also whither he was going. 

Hence, when he came to church the third time 
for recantation, he said to the priest and the by- 
standers : "You have condemned me and through 
pain and fear prevailed upon me to follow you ; but 
now I renounce and revoke it all, and I am sorry 
that I did it." Thus he began, and confessed anew 
that this was the divine truth and the true faith; 
yea, the way to life in Christ, and that, on the 
other hand, the idolatrous life and ways of the 
world are a delusion and contrary to God. In this 
his faith and confession he intended to continue 
and persevere unto the end. For what should the 
priests and servants wait any longer? hence they 
quickly apprehended him again, and he was speed- 
ily sentenced to death. When he was led out to the 
place of execution, he sang joyfully on the way. 
It was very muddy in the village, but he walked 
briskly nevertheless; so that his shoes remained 
fast in the mud ; but he took no notice of it, left 
them there, hurried on to the place of execution, 


and sang for joy that God had again given him 
such courage and heart. Thus he was beheaded 
with the sword. The nobleman who caused his 
execution, and nearly all who had sat in judgment, 
and condemned him, died almost everyone of them 
a miserable death, and came to a dreadful end, so 
that their happy days in this world terminated in 
sorrow. 


THE SECOND EDICT BY THOSE OF ZURICH, IN 

WHICH ALL SO-CALLED ANABAPTISTS ARE 

THREATENED WITH DEATH, 

A. D. 1530 

There has existed, writes a certain author, in the 
Zwinghan churches, from their beginning, a great 
hatred and bitterness against the Anabaptists, or 
more properly speaking, against those baptized ac- 
cording to the ordinance of Christ as history certi- 
fies ; by which they commenced very early to tyran- 
nize over them; for we believe the Zwinglian 
church was not yet ten years old when said abuse 
occurred. Yet it did not stop at this, but they pro- 
ceeded, the longer the worse, in this tyranny; so 
that those of Zurich, A. D. 1530, emitted an edict 
very much like the bloody decrees of the Roman 
Emperor, in which they write as follows: 

"Therefore we strictly command all the inhab- 
itants of our country, and those who are in any wise 
united with them, particularly high and low magis- 
trates, bailiffs, constables, judges, elders of 
churches, and ecclesiastical officers, that, if they 
hear of any Anabaptists, they give us information 
concerning them, by virtue of the oath with which 
they are bound to us ; that they nowhere tolerate 
them, or allow them to multiply ; but that they ap- 
prehend them, and deliver them to us ; for we shall 
punish with death, according to the purport of our 
laws, the Anabaptists with all those who favor them 
or adhere to them ; and we shall also punish with- 
out mercy, according to their deserts, as having 
violated the faith and oath which they swore to 
their authorities," those who assist, and do not re- 
port, drive away, or bring as prisoners to us, all 
such persons. 

This we have taken word for word from the 
edict, as Bullinger (contra, etc.) has cited it. Com- 
pare the note in the preface to the Offerboeck der 
Doopsgesinde, A. D. 1615, letter Y, with P. J. 
Twisck's, Chron., p. 1031, col. 1, from different 
authors. 


GEORGE GRUENWALD, A. D. 1530 

In the year 1530, Brother George Gruenwald, a 
shoemaker, and minister of the Word of God, and 
of His flock, was apprehended for the divine truth, 
at Kufstein, on the Inn, condemned to death, and 
burned. Thus he valiantly testified with his blood, 
that which he had confessed and taught with his 
mouth, and confessed Christ, yea, His divine truth, 
before men, forsaking this earthly and perishable 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


439 


praise, that Christ at His day should confess him 
before His heavenly Father, and, moreover, give 
him immortal life in the eternal glory of heaven. 
Matt. 25:46. 


BROTHER ALDA, A. D. 1530 

A few days after the execution of the above 
person, Brother Alda was also executed for the 
faith, at Kufstein. 


GEORGE STEINMETZ, A. D. 1530 

This George Steinmetz was apprehended and be- 
headed for the testimony of Jesus Christ, at Port- 
zen, in Germany, A. D. 1530. He left the following 
admonition for consolation in suffering, to all be- 
lievers : 

"We sincerely thank Thee, O God, for Thy 
fatherly faithfulness. No one ought to mock at or 
despise His grace, lest at last, when his departure 
is at hand, he regret it. O Lord, help and assist 
us through Jesus Christ. God has called many 
to His eternal light, whom He also visits with suf- 
fering and pain, as we see in this earth; for it 
seems that here we must be refined by the fire of 
affliction, since we must all enter through much 
tribulation into the kingdom of God, and be puri- 
fied from all sin and vice (I Peter 1 :7; Acts 14: 
22) ; for he that herein follows Christ, walks in 
the true path. Christ says : I am the Way and the 
Door, the Truth and the Life ; enter in by me ; be- 
fore me there is yet a hedge ; the cross, which each 
who would come to the Father must carry, stands 
in the way. John 10 :9. And according to my experi- 
ence, I must state the truth, that the cross appears 
much heavier than it really is ; which deters many 
a one, as though he should not be able to bear it, 
and hence would pass it by, and seek another way. 
But we cannot come to God unless we bear the 
yoke of Christ. Matt. 11:29. For he that would 
enter in by any other way into the sheep fold, than 
through this door, the same is a thief and a mur- 
derer (John 10:1), and shall have to suffer the 
vengeance of God — everlasting pain. Christ would 
have such disciples as bear the cross after Him, fol- 
low Him in all His ways, as I hope to show, and 
carry his yoke unto the end. Matt. 16:24. But 
he that will not bear his cross, but allows himself 
to be moved and hindered by Satan, may take heed 
that Christ says : "Whosoever therefore shall con- 
fess me before men, him will I confess also before 
my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever 
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny be- 
fore my Father which is in heaven." Matthew 
10:32, 33. O God, sustain us to Thy praise and 
honor, that love may not wax cold in us. Mat- 
thew 24:12. To this end give us strength, wis- 
dom and understanding, through Thy holy spirit, 
who can guide us into all truth (John 16:13), 
that we may never despond, but keep good cour- 
age, and remain steadfast and proceed straight on 
in the narrow way, and at the risk of body-life, go 


on through Christ to the Father. John 14:6. 
Praised be the Lord our God, who has called us 
to be His servants and children. Him we will con- 
stantly praise forever and ever, because we may 
wash our robes in the blood of the Lamb (Rev. 
7:14), and afterwards, from this brief death and 
suffering, go into everlasting joy with Him. With 
this mind this witness of Jesus Christ was be- 
headed and died at Portzen, as stated above. 


MARTIN THE PAINTER; WOLFGANG ESLINGER, PAIN, 
MELCHIOR, AND THREE OTHERS, A. D. 1531 

In this year, Martin the painter, a minister of the 
Word of God, and six others from the Swabian 
church, were apprehended for the faith and the 
divine truth. After long proceedings, they were 
promised, that if they would renounce, they might 
go home unmolested to their wives and' children. 
But they answered frankly: "No," but that they 
would willingly die, and not renounce. Afterwards, 
having been imprisoned almost a year, all seven 
were sentenced to death. They were led under the 
town hall, and several articles of their doctrine were 
read to them. When the first article was read 
Brother Wolfgang Eslinger said: "As you judge 
today so shall God judge you when you come be- 
fore His face; God shall well know you." Matt. 
7:23. 

When the third article was read, Brother Pain 
said: "You stain your hands with our blood (Jer. 
7 :6) ; God shall certainly not remit it to you, but 
require it at your hands." 

When the fourth article was read, Brother Mel- 
chior said : "Today we will testify with our blood, 
that that wherein we stand is the truth." 

When the fifth article was read, Brother Wolf- 
gang Eslinger said: "Forsake your sins and un- 
righteousness, and repent, and God shall never re- 
member it to you." Jer. 26:13. All seven were 
then led under a guard, to the place of execution. 
There Brother Martin, and all the others com- 
mended themselves unto God their Lord, praying 
that He would grant them a happy end, and care 
for His sheep. When they were brought to the 
field, the miller's servant, who was about sixteen 
years old, said to the people present, that they 
should forsake their sins, and turn to God, since 
there was no other way to heaven, than through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who died on the cross, and 
redeemed us. Ps. 34:14; Isa. 45:24; John 14:6; 
Matt. 27 :50. When they were brought into the 
ring, a nobleman rode up to said servant, admon- 
ished and entreated him, saying: "My son, desist 
from your error, and renounce it. Why do you 
allow yourself to be thus persuaded? spare your 
young life. I will take you home with me, and al- 
ways keep you ; you shall enjoy good things with 
me all your life, if you obey me." But the servant 
said: "God forbid that this should ever come to 
pass; if I should keep this temporal life (Jno. 12: 
25), and lose the eternal, I would act foolishly. I 


440 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


will not do it ; your wealth can help neither you nor 
me; I expect one that is far better, if I persevere 
to the end. Matt. 10 :22. I will surrender my spirit 
to God, and commend it to Christ (Luke 23:46), 
that His bitter suffering, which He endured on the 
cross, may in my case not be in vain." This servant 
was inspired by God in his purpose ; for though he 
was younger in years than his brethren, they were 
nevertheless, as far as the purpose is concerned, of 
like age. Thus all seven valiantly and joyfully con- 
fessed God and His truth, even unto death and the 
shedding of their blood. The above-mentioned 
Martin, when he was led out over the bridge, said : 
"This once yet the pious are led over this bridge, 
but no more hereafter." This came true; for a 
short time afterwards, such a violent storm and 
flood came that the bridge was demolished and car- 
ried away. 


WALTER MAIR, AND TWO OTHERS, A. D. 1531 

In the year 1531, Walter Mair, a cooper by trade, 
and minister of the Word of God, was apprehend- 
ed with two others, at Walsburg, in Kaernthen, 
and executed with the sword ; and thus they stead- 
fastly testified in death, to the truth, and gave their 
lives for the covenant of God, and for His holy 
Word ; therefore their names shall also be found in 
the book of life, and the second death shall have no 
power over them. Phil. 4 :3 ; Rev. 20 :6. 


GEORGE ZAUNRINGERAD, A. D. 1531 

In the year 1531, Brother George Zaunringerad, 
a minister of the Word of God, who, through the 
help of Jacob Huter, had been placed in the min- 
istry of the Word of God, in the earldom of Tyrol, 
was sent by Jacob, with others, hither to the church 
in Moravia. Subsequently he, because of his office 
and ministry, was kept in Franconia, where he was 
executed with the sword, not far from Bamberg, 
for the divine truth ; thus testifying with his blood 
to his faith and doctrine, from which he would in 
no wise depart, and suffering with Christ, in order 
that through His grace he might also be made an 
heir of glory with Him in the eternal kingdom. 
I Cor. 1 :5. 


VEIT PELGRIMS, AT GLABBECK, A. D. 1532 

There must by no means be omitted here the 
manly and divinely confirmed steadfastness of Veit 
Pelgrims, a German brother ; who regarded nothing 
so much as he did the salvation of his soul. Not- 
withstanding the cruelty of those who follow the 
footsteps of Cain, in shedding innocent blood, he 
freely confessed the Gospel, and ordered his actions 
and conversation in accordance with it, in all up- 
rightness and simplicity. But as the world, through 
his holy life, was reproved of its wickedness it could 
not endure it; hence he was apprehended in the 


winter of A. D. 1532, at Glabbeck, in the Duchy 
of Juelich. He was ready to testify with suffering 
to his doctrine and life ; however through the aid 
of his friends and relatives he was released from 
prison for this time. But as nevertheless undaunt- 
edly walked, in holiness and godliness, in the same 
heavenly way, he again fell into the hands of the 
bloodthirsty, and had to suffer much from the 
wicked ; on the one hand, the priests and monks, 
by much crafty examining, and through wiles and 
strategies, sought, though in vain, to cause him to 
apostatize ; on the other hand, they endeavored to 
deter him by severe tortures ; but overcoming all 
these vexations and tortures, he valiantly con- 
firmed the truth, and showed that above all tem- 
poral and visible things, he had in view something 
higher, that is, the eternal and heavenly riches; 
hence, regarding not his own life, and esteeming it 
blessedness to suffer for the name of Christ, he said 
with remarkable frankness, he hoped that the sheep 
was now ready and fat for the slaughter. The 
bloodthirsty, seeing they could in no wise prevail 
upon this unconquerable hero and soldier of Christ, 
resorted to the most extreme means which cruelty 
could invent. They brought it about that sentence 
of death was passed upon him. The hour having 
come for him to offer up his sacrifice, they (O in- 
human tyranny!) opened his left side, and poured 
in boiling oil. Having then been contemptuously 
laid upon a sled, he was brought to the place of 
execution, where he commended his soul to God 
and was burned to ashes. 


LAMBRECHT GRUBER, HANS BECK, LAURENCE SCHU- 
MACHER, PETER PLAVER, HIS SERVANT PETER, 
AND HANS TALLER, A. D. 1532 

In this year six brethren, named Lambrecht Gru- 
ber, Hans Beck, Laurence Schumacher, Peter 
Plaver, his servant Peter, and Hans Taller, were 
apprehended for the divine truth, at Stertzing, in 
Etschland, and greatly tortured and racked, in 
order to compel them to apostatize ; but they val- 
iantly and firmly persevered in that which God 
had given them, and which they had promised God 
in Christian baptism. They were then sentenced 
to death and executed ; all six valiantly testifying 
with their blood to the truth of God, and greatly 
rejoicing (Acts 5:41) over the day of their de- 
parture from this world, because of the suffering 
and pain in the abominable wickedness of the 
world, which they had to endure for a long time, 
also because of the awful blasphemy and contempt 
of God (which causes pain to all lovers of God), 
which they had to hear during their imprisonment. 
They took leave from us, and admonished us not 
to be dull or heedless in hearing and retaining the 
Word of God, nor in prayer and the worship of 
God ; for if one comes to such places, it is neces- 
sary for him to have done so, and he regrets it if 
he has spent an hour unprofitably. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


441 


conrad feichter, and several others, 
a. d. 1532 

In this year, also Conrad Feichter was appre- 
hended for the faith, at Stertzing, and much pain 
was inflicted upon him. He was so racked and 
stretched that the ungodly executioners and chil- 
dren of Pilate themselves thought that he could 
not endure it, but would be torn asunder. There 
were also some imprisoned with him, who were 
much tempted by a multitude of priests and others, 
by perversion of the Scriptures, with knavery, 
craftiness, deceit and delusion, in order to subdue 
them ; it was also tried to gain them by promising 
to leave them in possession of home, wife, chil- 
dren, and life, but as they could by no means turn 
them from the truth, they sentenced and forthwith 
executed them ; and thus they steadfastly attested 
the truth with their blood. 


HUGO JACOB KR^EN, AND HIS WIFE MARY, WITH 
TWO OTHERS, A. D. 1532 

When the Word of God, through the grace of the 
Lord, came again to the light, and was accepted 
with great desire by many, and attested and con- 
firmed by the life and death of a great number, 
said Word of God was also received and accepted 
(Acts 8:14; 17:11) by one Hugo Jacob Kraen of 
Assersouw, his wife Mary, and two others, whose 
names we have not learned. And as it was fore- 
told by Paul, that "all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution" (II Tim. 3:12); and 
by Isaiah that : "He that departeth from evil mak- 
eth himself a prey" (Isa. 59:15) ; so it was also 
seen in the case of these persons; for as soon as 
they renounced this dark world (Eph. 6:12 ; I John 
1 :5), with its carnal walk, and false, invented wor- 
ship, and sought and followed the eternal light and 
glory of Christ Jesus (Matt. 19:28), they were 
hated, and persecuted unto death, by the children 
of darkness and Belial. John 15:18, 19. Finally 
Mary, the wife of Hugo Jacob, was apprehended 
at Haarlem, and after suffering many trials, was 
drowned at said place, in the year A. D. 1 532, en- 
during it with great steadfastness ; thus confirming 
with her death the accepted truth. Rev. 2 :10. But 
Hugo Jacob Kraen, with two of his fellow believers, 
were brought prisoners into Gravenhage, where 
they had to suffer much for the truth. But as they 
were founded upon a rock (Matt. 16:18), they 
could, by no torments, be brought to apostatize. 
Therefore the servants of antichrist condemned 
them to die, and this, such a terrible death, that all 
who saw it must justly have pitied them! for, in 
the year 1532, at said place, they were chained to 
stakes, a great fire built around them, and in this 
manner they were roasted until they expired. And 
as they did not love their lives here, but obediently 
surrendered them for the testimony of Jesus, and 
died steadfastly: they, at the appearing of our 
Saviour Jesus Christ, shall, for this mortal garment 


of the flesh, be clothed with the immortal, and be 
rewarded by God with the crown of everlasting 
glory. Rev. 12:17; 2:13 ; II Tim. 1 :8 ; Acts 22 :18 ; 
23:11; II Thess. 1:7; Phil. 3:21; Wisd. 5:16; II 
Esd. 2:43; I Cor. 9:25; I Pet. 5:4; James 1:12; 
Rev. 2:10. 


LUDWIG FEST, A. D. 1533 

In the year 1533, Ludwig Fest, a steadfast wit- 
ness of the divine truth, was sentenced to death, 
and executed, at Schwatz, in the valley of the Inn, 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ. He admon- 
ished us not to be selfish. In the beginning of his 
tribulation he besought us, by the mercies of God, 
that we should not burden or grieve one another ; 
for when one comes to this trial, it will cause him 
pain ; and it is no wonder that then it should trou- 
ble him in his heart. He also desired that we 
should have a good assurance concerning him, 
since he hoped, with the help and power of his 
heavenly Father, to remain faithful, which he also 
did. Rev. 2 :10. 


CHRISTINA HARING, A. D. 1533 

In the year 1533, a sister, named Christina Ha- 
ring, was apprehended, taken to Kitzbuehl, and 
there fastened to a chain ; she, however, remained 
steadfast in the faith. But as she was with child, 
and was soon to be confined, they let her go home 
until she should be delivered of her child; and 
though she knew that she would be apprehended 
again, and might have escaped ten times, or even 
more, she did not flee, but boldly remained. When 
she saw the officer coming, she went out to meet 
him, and asked him what he desired. He said: 
"I have come to take you away again ;" and thus 
they again took her to the town of Kitzbuehl, where 
shortly afterwards she was executed with the sword 
(which is not usually done with a woman), for the 
faith, to which she steadfastly adhered. Her body 
was afterwards burnt. Matt. 24:13. This cour- 
ageous, heroic woman or sister in Christ, who for- 
sook her husband, infant, house and home, and all 
temporal things, strengthened her womanly heart 
with such valiant manliness, and by the grace of 
God so armed herself in the faith, that she paid her 
vow unto the Lord, and joyfully went to meet 
Christ her bridegroom, with her lamp burning, and 
her light shining so that many were filled with 
astonishment. Matt. 25:1. 


SICKE SNYDER, A. D. 1533 

About the year 1533 there was another pious 
hero and follower of Jesus, named Sicke Snyder, 
who, according to the counsel of the Holy Ghost, 
separated from the Babylonian whore, and all her 
false, self-invented, imaginary worship, which was 
all contrary to God, and accepted Christ Jesus; 
seeking to follow the unblamable footsteps of this 
true Lawgiver (James 4 :12), and to hear only His 


442 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


voice as contained in the holy Scriptures. John 
10:4. Therefore he obediently submitted to the 
example and ordinance of Christ, and in accordance 
with the doctrines of His Word received Christian 
baptism upon his faith, as the sign of a regenerated 
child of God, seeking thus to live and walk in obedi- 
ence toward his Creator. For this reason he was 
put into bonds and in prison at Leeuwserden, in 
Friesland, and had to suffer much from the enemies 
of the truth. I Tim. 6 :20. And as he could by no 
tortures be induced to apostatize, he was executed 
with the sword at said place, enduring it with great 
steadfastness; thus attesting and confirming the 
true faith with his death and blood. Rev. 2:13; 
20:4. Hence he shall, as a good soldier of Jesus 
Christ, together with all true conquerors, be clothed 
in white, shining raiment, and inherit the blessing. 
II Tim. 2:3; Rev. 3:5; I Pet. 3:9. 

Concerning this account see, besides this, Menno 
Simon contra Gellius Fdber, fol. 98.* 

WILLIAM WIGGERS OF BARSINGHORN, IN NORTH 
HOLLAND, A. D. 1534 

About the year 1534, a God-fearing pious broth- 
er, named William Wiggers, residing at Barsing- 
horn, a village in North Holland, near Schagen, 
was brought thence to the castle at Schagen, for the 
true faith and the practice of it. In that place he 
was imprisoned for about eight days, and was then 
beheaded with the sword, at early dawn, in the 
gate of said castle, for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ, enduring it with great steadfastness. And 
as he was a Godfearing and an agreeable man, he 
was often employed by the lord of Schagen to 
transact his temporal business. Hence it came that 
when the servants of Schagen came to his house, 
for the purpose of apprehending him, he supposed 
they had come for former friendship and ac- 
quaintance' sake ; hence he sent his wife to get some 
viands with which to treat these servants ; but be- 
fore she returned, the dean with his servants, sent 
by the Roman antichrist, came and took this de- 
fenseless sheep of Christ with them to Schagen, 
notwithstanding the bailiff of Barsinghorn offered 
himself as security for the prisoner. Wigger Hen- 
dericks, father of the before-mentioned William 
Wiggers, who was also secular magistrate, hav- 
ing seen, that his God-fearing son had, without 
right and reason, been thus secretly murdered with 
the sword, instantly forsook his office, and would 
no longer administer the secular power. 


OF THE EDICT ISSUED BY EMPEROR CHARLES V. 
AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS, A. D. 1535 

By the Emperor: To our beloved and faithful 
commanders-in-chief, the president and members 
of our Privy-Council, the Chancellor and members 
of our council in Braband, the Governor and Coun- 

* See also Menno Simons' Works, Holland Edition of 1646, 
page 471. Also Complete Works of Menno Simons, English Edition 
of 1871, page 3. 


cilors in Limburg, the President and Councilors in 
Flanders, the Governor, President and Councilors 
in Artois, the chief Bailiff in Hainault, the Council- 
ors of Bergen, the Lieutenant, President and Coun- 
cilors of Holland, Namur, Friesland, and Utrecht, 
to the Lieutenant of Over-Yssel, the Governor of 
Rijssel, Douay and Orchies, the Bailiff and Coun- 
cilors of Doornick and Tournesis, the stewards of 
Bewest and Beoosterschelde, in Zealand, the Prov- 
ost of Valenciennes, the Bailiff of Mechlin, and all 
other judges and officers of our territories, cities 
and seigniories, and of our subjects, or their gov- 
ernors, to whom these presents shall come, happi- 
ness and favor. 

In order to guard against nid remedy the errors 
which many sectarians and authors of contempt, 
with their adherents, have dared for some time to 
sow and spread in our territories, against our holy 
Christian faith, sacraments, and the command- 
ments of our mother the holy church, we have at 
different times ordained, and caused to be executed 
and proclaimed many decrees containing statutes, 
edicts and ordinances, as also penalties to be incur- 
red by transgressors, so that by means thereof the 
common, simple people, and others, may beware 
of said errors and abuses, and that the chief pro- 
mulgators and sectarians may be punished and cor- 
rected, as an example unto others. And since it 
has come to our knowledge, that notwithstanding 
our aforesaid decrees, many and various sectarians, 
even some who call themselves Anabaptists, have 
proceeded, and still daily proceed, to spread, sow, 
and secretly preach their aforesaid abuses and 
errors, in order to allure a great number of men 
and women to their false doctrine and reprobate 
sect, to seduce them and to rebaptize some, to the 
great reproach and disregard of the sacrament of 
holy baptism, and of our edicts, statutes and ordi- 
nances; therefore we, intending to guard against 
and remedy this, summon and command you, that, 
immediately upon receipt of this, you cause it to 
be proclaimed within every place and border of 
your dominions, that all those, or such as shall be 
found polluted by the accursed sect of the Ana- 
baptist, of whatever rank or condition they may be, 
their chief leaders, adherents, and abettors, shall 
incur the loss of life and property, and be brought 
to the most extreme punishment, without delay; 
namely, those who remain obstinate and continue 
in their evil belief and purpose, or who have se- 
duced to their sect and rebaptized any ; also those 
who have been called prophets, apostles or bishops 
— these shall be punished with fire. All other per- 
sons who have been rebaptized, or who secretly and 
with premeditation have harbored any of the afore- 
said Anabaptists, and who renounce their evil pur- 
pose and belief, and are truly sorry and penitent 
for it, shall be executed with the sword, and the 
women be buried in a pit. 

And in order to better detect these Anabaptists, 
their adherents and accomplices, we expressly com- 
mand all subjects, to make known and report them 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


443 


to the officer of the place where they reside or shall 
be found ; and if any one shall know of persons of 
this sect, and do not report them to the officer of 
the place, he shall be punished as a favorer, adher- 
ent, or abettor of the sect of the Anabaptists ; but 
he who shall report or make them known, shall 
have, if the accused is convicted, one third of their 
confiscated property. 

Moreover, we prohibit all our subjects from ask- 
ing for mercy, forgiveness, or reconciliation for the 
aforesaid Anabaptists, or from presenting any peti- 
tions for this purpose, on pain of summary punish- 
ment ; for because of their evil doctrine, we will not 
have or permit that any Anabaptists shall have any 
mercy shown them, but that they shall be punished, 
as an example unto others, without any dissimu- 
lation, favor or delay. And in order to do this with 
all that pertains to it, we give each and all of you 
full power and special command. 

Given at Brussels, under our counterseal, 
stamped here in the margin, on the tenth day of 
June, in the year 1535. Subscribed by the Emperor 
and his council, and signed Pensart. 


PETER KOSTER, A. D. 1535 

In the year 1535, there was a pious brother, 
named Peter Koster, who had been sexton of the 
church at Sardam, in North Holland. But having 
come to the knowledge of the truth, he was or- 
dained a teacher of the church, and because of the 
persecution, went to reside at Amsterdam, where 
he was apprehended by the bailiff, having been re- 
ported by a woman living in his neighborhood, who 
through ill-directed zeal revealed the place where 
he had concealed himself. And as this took place 
at a time when some wicked rebellions and con- 
spiracies were taking place in the world, this friend 
of God was suspected of this matter ; but it ap- 
peared from his own writings, as well as in his con- 
fession, that he was innocent, and various credible 
witnesses testify that he had always sincerely op- 
posed these things. Nevertheless, as he had been 
baptized upon faith, according to the command 
and ordinance of Christ, and, moreover, had been 
a teacher, he was sentenced to death, and executed 
with the sword, at Amsterdam, and is now await- 
ing, with all the pious, the reward which Christ has 
promised, saying : "Blessed are ye, when men shall 
revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner 
of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad : for great is your reward in 
heaven." Matthew 5:11, 12. 


SYBRANT JANS, HENDRICK GIJSBRECHTS VAN CAM- 
PEN, STEPHEN BENEDICTUS, FEMMETGEN, 
DAUGHTER OF EGBERT, AND WEL- 
MUT, DAUGHTER OF JANS 

In the year 1535, three brethren and two sisters 
named Sybrant Jans, Hendrick Gijsbrechts van 
Campen, Steven Benedictus, Femmetgen, daughter 
of Egbert, and Welmut, daughter of Jans, were ap- 


prehended at Hoorn, in West Friesland, because 
they no longer sought to obey the Roman church, 
but the commandments of God. When they were 
examined, they freely confessed their faith, princi- 
pally with regard to baptism. When they were 
asked whether they had been rebaptized, they an- 
swered in the affirmative, saying that they were not 
sorry for it ; that they had been baptized according 
to the ordinance of Christ, to the remission or bury- 
ing of their sins, and the putting on of Christ, with 
the answer of a good conscience towards God. 
Rom. 6:4; I Pet. 3:21. The rulers of darkness, 
perceiving that they were not sorry for it, and in- 
tended valiantly to adhere to their faith, sentenced 
them to death, pursuant to the imperial edict, as 
the following sentence, which thev pronounced 
upon them clearly shows. 

"Whereas M. Anthony Sonck, Bailiff, has en- 
tered legal complaint against Sybrant Jans, Hen- 
drick Gijsbrechts van Campen, Steven Benedictus, 
Femmetgen, daughter of Egbert, and Welmut, 
daughter of Jans, that, contrary to the written 
laws, and contrary to our Christian faith, and the 
edict of his imperial Majesty our most gracious 
lord, they were rebaptized, without having re- 
pented of it, and without having obtained remis- 
sion therefor, therefore we determine that each 
and all of them have forfeited their lives and prop- 
erty, and that they be executed, namely, the men 
with the sword, and their bodies to be placed upon 
the wheel, and their heads upon stakes, and the 
women drowned with a stone tied to their necks ; 
and desire that the judges pass sentence accord- 
ingly." 

"My lords of the court, having heard the answer 
and defense of the aforesaid defendants, by which 
they openly confess that they were rebaptized, 
without having obtained remission therefor, deem 
it just, through their sentence, that all the afore- 
said, persons, according to the edict of his imperial 
Majesty, and the written laws, have forfeited their 
lives and property, by virtue of the privileges of 
this city, and that all are to die, namely, the men 
to be executed with the sword, their bodies placed 
upon the wheel, and their heads upon stakes, unless 
the lords are willing to show them mercy, especially 
those who renounce and are penitent; and the 
women to be drowned with a stone tied to their 
necks or bodies. Passed in the presence of all the 
judges and three burgomasters, the seventh of 
June, A. D. 1535." 

This sentence having been given, they were led 
forth to death ; they went boldly to the place of ex- 
ecution, and among other things said : "The servant 
is not greater than his master; if they have done 
this in the green tree, what will they do in the dry," 
and the like. Having come to the place prepared 
for this purpose, they were beheaded. The two 
women were. led to the sea, where stones were tied 
to their necks, and they were cast in, and drowned. 
Their bodies were ignominiously left to float about 


444 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


for a long time, until the rulers were moved to have 
them taken out and buried. 

Christian reader, here you can clearly see why 
and for what reasons these people had to die ; that 
what some blind zealots of idolatrous popery say, 
falsely charge and say is not true, namely, that no 
one was put to death because of his religion or 
faith, but on account of their rebelliousness and 
crimes. But how falsely and shamelessly they act 
herein, may be judged from this single fact that 
the same year when these persons were put to death, 
the siege of Munster took place, and that they 
were not accused of, much less participated in, this 
wicked crime. But herein they show the nature of 
the old Pharisees, who, when they brought Christ 
to death, did not say, that it was on account of His 
good doctrine that He had to die, but for His blas- 
phemy. This is the way of all tyrants, that, besides 
inflicting suffering and death upon the innocent, 
they also heap upon them false accusations. But 
when the day cometh that shall come, they shall 
see whom they have pierced, and say with astonish- 
ment : "Behold, these are they whom we had some- 
times in derision, and a proverb of reproach: we 
fools accounted their life madness, and their end to 
be without honor : how are they numbered among 
the children of God, and their lot is among the 
saints?" Wisd. 5:3-5. 


ANDREW CLiESSEN OF DROURIJP, BEHEADED FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, UNDER 

THE STADTHOLDER GEORGE SCHENCK, 

AT LEEUWAERDEN, A. D. 1535 

(Copy of a certain old document) 

"It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all accep- 
tation," which our Saviour spoke and left for our 
instruction, saying : "Whosoever will save his life 
shall lose it : but whosoever will lose it for my sake, 
or the gospel's, shall save it" unto life eternal. 
Matt. 16:25; Luke 9:24. 

This evangelical doctrine, given for admonition 
and consolation, many faithful witnesses of Christ 
have taken to heart, who voluntarily surrendered 
their lives for His holy name's sake, looking to the 
promises, arid the glorious reward which shall be 
given them not in this, but in the future world ; for 
in the third chapter of Wisdom we read: "The 
souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and 
there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of 
the unwise they seem to die : and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be 
utter destruction : but they are in peace. For though 
they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their 
hope full of immortality, and having been a little 
chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded : for God 
proved them, and found them worthy for himself. 
As gold in the furnace hath he tried them, and 
received them as a burnt offering." Verses 1-6. 

This a glorious testimony, and well accords with 
the words of the holy apostle Paul, that we must 
through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of 


heaven (Acts 14 :22) ; as also our Saviour says that 
the way is narrow, and the gate is strait, that lead- 
eth unto life ; and that there are few who walk in 
it ; few, when compared to the great multitude and 
majority who choose the broad way, and walk 
through the wide gate, to their own destruction and 
eternal perdition. 

Few were found at Sardis, who had not defiled 
their garments ; nevertheless these few were to be 
crowned as conquerors, clothed in white raiment, 
and their names were not to be blotted out of the 
book of life ; and the Son of God shall confess their 
names before His Father and His angels, which is 
promised to all that overcome. Rev. 3 :5. This was 
taken to heart by those who did not look upon 
what is visible and perishing, but upon the invis- 
ible, as appears in the pious witnesses and martyrs 
of Christ, who, for Christ's sake, gladly forsook not 
only all their property and the distinction which 
they enjoyed in this world, but also their own lives ; 
for neither persecution, nor any creature in the 
world could deter them from the love of God and 
Christ. Rom. 8 :39. 

Among others, it was seen also in the case of a 
manful hero and armed soldier of Christ, named 
Andrew Claessen of Drourijp, a village in Fries- 
land, situated between Leeuwaerden and Fran- 
neker; who, A. D. 1535, under the Stadtholder 
George Schenck, was apprehended, brought to 
Leeuwaerden, beheaded on the sixteenth of March, 
and placed upon a wheel. This took place three 
days after his imprisonment; however, the pious 
secretly took him down and buried him; and his 
soul is now also resting under the altar of God. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION 

He had seven children, who after the death of 
their father had to wander about in poverty and 
misery, yet were supported by some kindly dis- 
posed persons, though not without peril. These 
things we have recorded from the testimony of 
their descendants, who, to this end, have sent us 
their written attestations, from the town of Fran- 
neker, in Friesland, dated March the 13th, 1658, 
and subscribed, Jouke Wybes. 

SEVEN BRETHREN, A. D. 1536 

In this year, also seven brethren, namely, Hans 
Beck, Wolfert Schneider, Christian Alzeiter, Bal- 
thasar Gesel, Wolfert from Getzenberg, Hans 
Maurer, and Peter Kranewitter, from Gofedaum 
in Etschland, were apprehended. Various things 
were resorted to with them, in order to conquer 
them, and to draw them away; but as they could 
not be prevailed upon, but adhered to their faith 
and to the truth, they were sentenced to death by 
the children of Pilate, who, through the advice of 
the high priest, delivered them to "the executioner, 
who had to bring the matter to a close. Thus they 
were put to death, mightily admonishing the peo- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


445 


pie to repent, and that this was the divine truth, 
showing that no impure, false, idle, or heedless 
hearts can stand the test. Wolfert had once apos- 
tatized, and consented to the will of the wicked; 
but afterwards deplored and bewailed his course. 
When after a few days he was again called before 
the judge, he again confessed the Lord, and said 
that the devil had deceived him in what he had done 
against God. He was then put back into the tower 
to the others, and with them steadfastly suffered 
death, and in this manner they together testified 
with their blood to the truth, at Gofedaum. 


PETER GERRITS, PETER JORIS, PETER LEYDECKER, 
AND JOHANNA MELS, A. D. 1536 

In the year 1536, on St. Margaret's day, in the 
morning, the Bailiff at Zierichzee apprehended 
three brethren and one sister, named Peter Ger- 
rits, Peter Joris, Peter Leydecker, and Johanna 
Mels, whom he took with him half dressed, and 
put them in prison, where they were confined for 
seven weeks; but no suffering or misery inflicted 
upon them could induce them to apostatize. When 
they were examined, and many human institutions 
were presented to them, which they endeavored to 
refute with the Word of God, the Burgomaster 
said: 

"We care not for your Word of God, but hold 
to the mandate of the Emperor, and shall igno- 
miniously exterminate all those who act contrary 
to it." 

They answered: "Lord Burgomaster, by this 
you prove yourself to be a protector of the king- 
dom of Babel and of Bel for which you will indeed 
reap some reward here on earth, but hereafter, 
with antichrist and the crowned beast, eternal dam- 
nation in the lake of fire." I John 2 :18 ; Revela- 
tion 13; 19:20. 

They were then placed upon the rack, though 
contrary to their privileges, for they were mere 
citizens; however, they would not apostatize, 
though they were tortured so that the blood ran 
down their feet: but they trusted in and cried to 
God alone. After being tortured, they were brought 
up above again, where they comforted each other 
with the Word of God. I Thess. 4:18. 

Finally, on the 4th of September, they were sen- 
tenced to death. They were brought bound upon 
the scaffold, yet came forth boldly and humbly, as 
lambs of Christ, and finally knelt down, saying with 
Stephen : "Lord Jesus, receive our spirits into Thy 
hands." Acts 7:59. They were all then speedily 
beheaded, their bodies burned, and their heads 
placed upon stakes. Thus they offered up their 
sacrifice. 


JEROME KELS, MICHAEL SEIFENSIEDER, AND HANS 
OBERACKER, A. D. 1536 

In the beginning of the year 1536, Jerome Kels 
of Kufestein, Michael Seifensieder of Wald in Bo- 
hemia, and Hans Oberacker from Etschland were 


dispatched to go into the Earldom of Tyrol. Acts 
13 :2. But when they arrived at Vienna, in Aus- 
tria, they were apprehended, having been betrayed 
by the host with whom they had lodged. Acts 4 :3 ; 
5 :26. While they were eating supper, the people 
tried to ascertain their character by drinking to 
their health; but when they perceived that they 
would not respond, the host had some paper 
brought, and wrote a letter in Latin, which, among 
other things, read as follows : "Here are three per- 
sons who appear to me to be Anabaptists." But he 
did not know that Brother Jerome understood 
Latin. Then said Jerome to the other brethren, 
they would watch together, let things go as the dear 
Lord should please. Two hours afterwards the 
constables came and brought them bound before 
the judge, and when they had been examined they 
were put in prison. 

Eight days afterwards the judge had them 
brought before him and his assessors, where they 
were told to recant. Brother Jerome said that 
they themselves should forsake their unbelief, and 
not so falsely bear the name of God, or of Christ. 
Thereupon the judge became highly incensed at 
Jerome, and when the latter said they were no 
Christians, the Judge said : "You are a desperately 
wicked fellow." And though he was asked this as 
much as ten times, he constantly confessed as be- 
fore. The assessors then said: "This reprobate 
fellow is not worthy that your wisdom should be- 
come enraged at him." They were then led back 
into prison, and the judges were highly offended at 
Jerome and his brethren. After another eight days 
the judge again summoned all three before him, 
taking to him three of the most wicked priests. 
When these would speak with Jerome, contemned 
our calling, reviled our faith, and said that they 
were sent to instruct them regarding their error, 
Jerome boldly and fearlessly said : "We are in the 
right way : our calling is from God, and Christ has 
taught us that we should not hear a stranger's 
voice." John 10:5. He also said: "We are willing 
to give an answer to every man, and to show the 
ground of our hope; but with monks and priests, 
who are sent by the pope, who is the antichrist, 
we do not desire to speak, for they are great rogues, 
whoremongers, perjurers, deceivers and seducers, 
even as these." 

Thereupon the Judge said : "My good Jerome, 
you do not yet know these good lords." Jerome 
said : "God is my Lord, but not they." Matthew 
11:25; Luke 10:21. He then, for almost two 
hours and a quarter gave answer concerning the 
mass, original sin, infant baptism, calling, and their 
awful, idolatrous sacrament. Then followed many 
entreaties that he should regard his dear life, wife 
and child, and take to heart their sincere promise ; 
and that he should pray to God ; they would also. 
But he said that they had the truth and would 
adhere to it, they might do what they pleased, and 
as they could also not overcome the other brethren 
with their poison, the judge remanded them to 


446 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


prison, in which they sang comforting hymns to- 
gether, and rejoiced in God. And as they could 
hear each other, they called to one another, com- 
forting and strengthening one another. They also 
delivered their written confession of faith, with full 
proof from the holy Scriptures, to the lords at Vi- 
enna, and to the judge. 

To the aforesaid brother Hans Oberacher the 
day of the Lord appeared three times, as he in- 
formed us from prison, and he saw unutterable 
things with the eyes of the spirit, as also with his 
bodily eyes ; he saw the condition of the children of 
God, and how great grace they received from God ; 
on the other hand, how mighty and terrible this 
day is for the wicked ; so that he prayed that God 
would never let him incur this wrath, which is so 
great and dreadful upon wickedness. Mai. 3:17: 
4:1,2. 

Many attempts having been made to prevail upon 
these brethren, and they remaining steadfast in the 
faith, as strong soldiers, and lovers of God, they 
were condemned to death by the children of Pilate, 
and burned to ashes, at Vienna, on the Friday pre- 
ceding Judica, in Lent of the aforesaid year. 

GEORGE VASER, AND LEONHARD SAILER, 
A. D. 1536 

In this year, George Vaser, a minister of the 
Lord and His church, and Brother Leonhard Sailer, 
his companion, were apprehended at Neudorf, in 
Austria, where they were passing through, and 
were put in the stocks there. The next day, the 
Judge of Metling, and the whole council, as also 
other people with them, came and asked him on 
what account they were imprisoned there. They 
replied : "For the faith of Christ, and the divine 
truth." 

They then took them, and brought them into 
the market town of Metling, a distance of several 
furlongs from Neudorf, and two leagues from 
Vienna. On the whole way they testified with great 
boldness to the truth, and with many words de- 
clared to them the judgment of God, so that the 
Judge and all the others were amazed and dared 
not say a single word against it. Thereupon they 
put them all into the common prison, in which they 
met with all manner of ungodly and shameful im- 
propriety on the part of their fellow prisoners, 
which daily caused them great sorrow of heart, so 
that they would rather have been cast into an of- 
fensive dungeon where they would not have been 
obliged to listen to this impiety. 

During their imprisonment they were much 
questioned with regard to infant baptism, the sac- 
rament, and that we call them all ungodly and un- 
believing; but they told them, that, as regards 
infant baptism, they were entirely welcome to it, 
and also said: "Because they called themselves 
Christians, but falsely bore the name of Christ, 
and did not move with a finger the least of Christ's 
commandments; therefore they should know that 
they were of the devil (John 8:44) ; and if they 


would not repent of their sins, God would destroy 
their false boast, so that they, with the whole world, 
and the rich man would be cast into the abyss of 
hell, which would certainly come to pass, though 
they now did not believe it. Having been in prison 
nearly a whole year, and being fully prepared for 
death; yea, of good courage and cheer, and joyful 
in the Lord, they prayed that the Lord, the gracious 
God, would deliver them from this mortal taber- 
nacle, and this wicked, blind world ; for they had a 
good hope and great joy and a sincere desire to de- 
part, and expected every hour, to die manfully and 
boldly, through the help and power of God, for the 
divine truth, and for the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, notwithstanding all the pain and suffering, 
which might be inflicted upon them. 

However, through a special providence of God, 
they were wonderfully liberated, unharmed in their 
consciences, and came in peace to the church at 
Trasenhofen, and were joyfully received in the 
spirit, as good, worthy and beloved brethren. 

FURTHER ACCOUNT OF GEORGE VASER 

A. d. 1537 
In the following year, at the request of some of 
the zealous, the above-mentioned George Vaser, 
was sent to Pechstall, in Austria, where he gladly 
began to teach the Word of the Lord, notwithstand- 
ing he had just come out of the prison at Metling. 
He gathered the believers, and established a 
church, according to the command of God. But he 
could not escape a certain deceiver, a genuine tool 
of all treachery, who, under a false appearance, 
pretended to learn the grounds of the truth of him 
as a minister, but, in the meantime appointed many 
servants, commanding them at a suitable time to ap- 
prehend this George Vaser, which they faithfully 
did. 

He was then subjected to much cruel torturing, 
and while in prison was tempted in manifold ways : 
but he remained very steadfast and faithfully fol- 
lowed unto death Him whom he had proclaimed 
in the faith; thus testifying with his blood (being 
executed with the sword), to the faith and the 
truth of God. Matt. 24:13; John 10:4; I Peter 


SEBASTIAN GLASMACHER, AND HANS GRUENFEL- 
DER, A. D. 1537 

In the year 1537, also Sebastian Glasmacher and 
Hans Gruenfelder were apprehended for the faith 
and divine truth, at Imst. in the upper valley of the 
Inn. They were executed with the sword, and then 
burned. They confessed the Lord and His holy 
Word and truth with great gladness. A countless 
multitude were present at their execution. Hans 
called and spoke with a very loud voice, admon- 
ishing and warning the people, to the best of his 
ability ; so also did Sebastian, and in this they con- 
tinued, until their death. This greatly astonished 
the people. 

Their bones however could not be wholly 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


447 


burned; hence they were afterwards thrown into 
the water. The heart also of the one could not be 
burned, which was no doubt for a remarkable 
testimony. John 15:27. 

HANS PEIZ, AND SOME OTHERS, A. D. 1537 

In this year 1537, also Hans Peiz, a minister of 
the Gospel, and several of his fellow believers were 
apprehended for the divine truth, at Passau, on the 
Danube. They were imprisoned a long time, suf- 
fered much, and, together with others, who con- 
fessed their faith and the truth, fell asleep in pris- 
on, after great steadfastness, and heroic piety. 

HANS WUCHERER, AND HANS BARTEL, A. D. 1537 

In this same year 1537, Brother Hans Wucherer 
was apprehended in Bavaria, and with him another 
brother, named Hans Bartel, a weaver. They were 
taken to Mermes, where they were confined for 
sixteen days, and were twice examined by Caiphas 
and the priests, and twice through the torture. 
They were asked what they believed concerning the 
sacrament. They spoke mightily against it, that it 
was an abomination, and an idol before the Lord ; 
and that it was not to be believed that they could 
give the body of Christ, with flesh and blood, just 
as He hung on the cross to eat so many hundred 
thousand times ; but they said that the supper was a 
memorial of His suffering, death and the shedding 
of His blood, by which He redeemed us, Matt. 26 : 
25; Luke 22:19. To commemorate this, and to 
search their hearts, is the purpose for which believ- 
ers, who are members of His body, or His church, 
are to observe it, with sincere thanksgiving to Him. 
They then asked them concerning infant baptism 
and what they held of their priests and churches. 
They spoke against all these according to the truth. 
They then questioned them about their views 
regarding their matrimony, and the Ten Com- 
mandments. To this they also gave their reply. 
They were then brought bound to Bruckenhausen, 
where each was separately put in chains in prison. 
Six times they were brought forth and examined, 
in order to induce them to recant, which if they 
would do, mercy would be shown them. But they 
would in no wise exchange the divine grace for the 
favor of the world, since they felt assured that they 
were in the true faith and in the truth of God. 

The seventh time the priests came to them into 
the prison; but they adhered constantly to God. 
They also greatly tortured them, severely racking 
Hans, and Brother Bartel twice, without, however, 
prevailing upon them. 

The eighth time the Judge came to them, to- 
gether with three others. After maltreating them 
fearfully, he sentenced them to be burned; but 
they hoped in the Lord, to remain faithful and 
steadfast unto the end, in the divine truth, through 
the unspeakable riches and power of God. They 
were then burned for the faith, valiantly testified 
to the truth, and obtained the crown of the martyrs 
of Christ. 


PHILIP DE KEURS, A. D. 1537 

In the year 1537, there was at Cassel, in Flan- 
ders, a God-fearing pious brother, whose name 
was Philip Keurs, a joiner by trade. And since he 
had also separated from this present wicked world, 
and had entered upon the peculiar way of the cross, 
which leads to the kingdom of God, he, like his 
Lord and Master, Jesus, was hated, despised and 
persecuted by the servants of this world, so that he 
finally fell into the hands of tyrants, who cruelly 
maltreated him with severe imprisonment. But as 
he was not founded upon drifting sand, but upon 
the immovable Rock (Matt. 7:24, 26; 16:18), he 
remained steadfast in every respect, as gold which 
is tried in the fire. I Pet. 1 :7. And since nothing 
could move him to swerve from the truth, he was 
sentenced to death at said place; in this manner 
confirming the faith of the truth with his death 
and blood. And as he here became a partaker of 
the sufferings of his Lord and Master Christ Jesus, 
so he shall also, when His glory shall be revealed, 
receive and enjoy great gladness and joy, and in 
eternity the crown of everlasting glory. II Tim. 
4:8. 


TWELVE PERSONS, MEN AND WOMEN, BURNED AND 

BEHEADED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 

CHRIST, AT VUCHT, NEAR HERZ0- 

GENBUSCH, A. D. 1538 

(Copied from certain very old testimonies) 

In the year 1538, in August, there were appre- 
hended in the town ten or seventeen men and 
women, who were said to have been rebaptized, all 
of them humble (or poor) people, etc., except a 
goldsmith, who was among the number, whose 
name was Paul Vandruynen, and who was said to 
be their teacher.* 

This Paul, together with three other men, was 
strangled alive and burned, upon a scaffold at 
Vucht, on the ninth of September. 

The other three were named: Michael Stevens 
of Oosterhont, a potter ; John Block of Ghent, a 
tapemaker; and Adrain of Gravenhage, also a 
tapemaker. 

A rope was tied into the mouth of each that they 
should not speak or cry aloud. 

Two Minorites and two Dominicans were also 
present, who wanted to say much to them, and 
show them a crucifix ; but they would not look at 
it, saying that they had God in their hearts, and, 
therefore, would worship neither wood nor stone ; 
they also prayed for those who put them to death, 
and said that the servant was not better than his 
master, and that they did willingly die in His name, 
but would not listen to the monks. 

The trial was conducted by a commissary from 
the court, named Sir Adrian van de Grave a licenti- 
ate in both laws. He had with him a man of the 
aforesaid sect, whose misdeed had been remitted to 


"Bishop" says the writer. 


448 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


him (probably an apostate), who pointed out their 
residences. 

To said commissary seven judges were added, 
who together sentenced them ; namely : Sir Goosen 
van der Stege, Gisbert Heyn, and Matthew Stoot- 
ers, in the ring. 

The four other judges were : Hendrick Pelgrim, 
alias Ketelaer ; Sir Hendrick Luysterisan van der 
Stege, Heyligengcestmeister, and Govert Symons, 
jailer. 

On the eleventh of September, at the afore-said 
place, three women and one man were strangled, 
who were said to be rebaptized ; one of whom was 
the wife of Paul, the teacher, here also monks were 
present, to induce them to renounce. 

Paul's wife said : "O Lord, enlighten the eyes of 
those who inflict this suffering upon us, that they 
may see what they are doing. I thank Thee, O 
God, that Thou countest me worthy to suffer for 
Thy name's sake." 

The Dominican said to another woman : "Will 
you not adhere to the holy church ?" 

She said: "I adhere to God; is this not holy 
church enough for me?" 

The Dominican then said to the man, John van 
Capelle : "Ask God to forgive you for having set 
a bad example unto us." 

He answered : "I did not err, but dealt with the 
Word of God, and am sorry that I have been so 
long in darkness. I entreat you, citizens, read the 
Gospel, and live according to it; forsake your 
drunkenness, knavery, cursing and crossing your- 
selves," etc. 

The third woman said: "O God Almighty, do 
not lay upon me more than I can bear," etc. Thus 
they gladly died. 

The aforesaid Paul and his wife had an infant 
of nine months, which was still unbaptized; this 
they took from the mother in prison and baptized 
it. Lord Philip van Doom, dean of St. John, 
Postulia, wife of Sir John van der Stegen, and 
Anna, wife of Sir Goosen van der Stegen acted 
as sponsors to said child. 

All of them were then put to death, and on the 
fourteenth of September, at six o'clock in the 
morning, a young man of the above named sect 
was also beheaded. 

Thus far the old document sent to us from Fries- 
land. Compared with the account in the History 
van den Opgang van's Hertogenbosch, by Borre 
van Uytrecht, concerning the persons who were 
brought thither as prisoners. 

Note. — It appears that the entire above account 
was written by some one who had not yet come to 
the faith ; since he calls the true faith of said per- 
sons who were put to death a sect; of whose death 
he seems to have been an eye witness ; hence we can 
assume this with the greater confidence, since it is 
certain that the opponent of a belief will not em- 
bellish, but much rather speak against it. 


LEONHARD LOCHMAIR, AND OFFRUS GREIZINGER, 
A. D. 1538 

In the year 1538, Brother Leonhard Lochmair, 
a minister of the Word, in the Earldom of Tyrol, 
was apprehended, and taken to Brixen, where a 
great number of priests practiced all manner of 
craftiness with him, until they caused him to apos- 
tatize. They then demanded of him, that he should 
go about the country for a whole year, with Doctor 
Gallius, and preach against and renounce the di- 
vine truth. This he would not do ; hence they con- 
fined him in prison ; for he had been a priest be- 
fore he became a brother. He came to himself and 
repented of his apostasy, and great fear came 
upon him, for the judgment of God pressed upon 
him ; but since God knew his sorrowful heart, He 
so ordered it that he was restored again, as 'will 
follow in the sequel. 

In the same year, 1538, Offrus Greizinger, also a 
minister of the Word in the Earldom of Tyrol, was 
apprehended. He was sought on the mountains 
and in the valley, and spied on bridges and else- 
where. A large sum of money was also offered for 
his apprehension, and spies and traitors were sent 
out, who pretended to have a desire to become 
pious. When they had apprehended him, he was 
also brought to Brixen and put in prison there, his 
apartment being so near to that of Leonhard Loch- 
mair's, that they could converse together. There 
Leonhard greatly deplored his apostasy to Offrus, 
and sorrowed greatly on account of it. Offrus then 
gave him much consolation, when, after genuine 
sorrow and true repentance, he proclaimed to him 
the remission of his sins in the name of the Lord ; 
yea, through his intercession, re-established him in 
his faith, and received him again as a fellow mem- 
ber and brother. 

Not long after, when Brother Offrus, the faith- 
ful servant of the Lord and His church, was sorely 
tried in manifold ways, and much threatened with 
the torture, if he would not point out to them his 
brethren who had not yet been driven away, es- 
pecially those who had harbored him, and done 
good to him, he said to them : "I have resolved to 
endure all pain and suffering which man can en- 
dure, even unto death, through the power of God, 
before I shall tell you this, and become a traitor. I 
well knew beforehand that this would be my fate. 
You have me in your power, do whatever God will 
permit you to do ; if you want to tyrannize over 
me, you may do so ; God will find you. I have noth- 
ing to say or to show." They then assailed him with 
threats, and urged him that if he had the truth, 
they would admonish him in the name of the truth^ 
to show and speak the truth. Then Brother Offrus 
said : "I know you and your truth ; you have heard 
what I said." 

They also asked him whether it was not true that 
if our numbers should increase, we would rise up 
against and kill them, if they would not come over 
to our side? He told them that if we should do 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


449 


this, we would not be Christians, but only such in 
name; adding: "If you were true Christians you 
would not torture or kill any one." Hence they 
bound him, and drew him up, but speedily let him 
down from the torture, and threatened him, asking 
why he would have his members thus torn asunder. 
He replied: "I am in your hands; do with me 
whatever God will permit you to do ; you can take 
from me no more than my life." They then de- 
spaired of accomplishing anything with him. 

Eight days after, they again drew him up, this 
time twice, yet more gently: but he said: "I have 
told you once what I can tell, and be it known to 
you that God will find you for your tyranny." 
They again despaired, and thenceforth left him 
alone, torturing him no further. He was sick in 
consequence of the torture, so that he said the 
less. 

After another eight days, they again came to 
him, called him before them twice, but did not re- 
main with him long, because he laid before their 
eyes their rascality, roguery, and unrighteousness. 

After much suffering and tribulation he was then 
sentenced to death by the children of Pilate, placed 
alive into the fire, and burned to ashes ; thus val- 
iantly and steadfastly, as a Christian hero, testify- 
ing to and sealing his life and doctrine, with his 
blood, on Halloween, A. D. 1538. And though he 
had previously wrestled hard with death, yet when 
he went forth unto death, he was glad and joyful 
in his heart. 

But as Leonhard Lockmair had formerly been a 
priest, the priests prevented his dying together 
with Offrus ; for they intended first to divest him 
of their accursed ordination. In this, in order to 
bring to naught their counsel, God so ordered it, 
that the suffragan who was to do this, died. Thus 
he was executed with the sword, a few days after 
Offrus, and, as a true priest, offered up and gave 
himself as an acceptable offering unto God, and 
testified to His truth unto death. Rom. 12 :1 ; II 
Tim. 4:6. 


being imprisoned almost half a year, he was be- 
headed and burned. 


MICHAEL WIDEMAN OR BECK, A. D. 1538 

About this time also Brother Michael Wideman 
or Beck was apprehended at Ricten in Allgau, to- 
gether with some other persons, which other per- 
sons, however, were sent home, while this brother 
was put in prison for the faith. Many things were 
resorted to with him, and he was admonished to re- 
nounce, but he had a good assurance of his faith in 
Christ, and said: "When I was living with the 
world in all unrighteousness, in sins and wicked- 
ness, no one admonished me to renounce, but I was 
considered a good Christian before the world. But 
now that I have become converted, and amended 
my life, I am told to renounce ; but I have become 
converted once, and have renounced all unright- 
eousness, and in this conversion I will persevere 
unto the end, and will not be turned from it, for 
that in which I stand is the true foundation." After 


MARTIN OF VILGRATEN, AND CASPAR SCHU- 
MACHER, A. D. 1538 

In the year 1538, the brethren Martin of Vil- 
graten, and Caspar Schumacher, were both appre- 
hended for the divine truth, at Michelsberg, in 
Priesterthal, and, after great steadfastness, sen- 
tenced to death, and executed with the sword ; thus 
manfully persevering in the faith unto the end. 
They were of good cheer in their bonds and tribula- 
tion, and held fast to the love of God, from which 
they could not be separated through tribulation, 
fear, persecution, hunger, poverty, nakedness, or 
danger. No sword was so keen, no fire so hot, no 
devil so wicked, no man so diligent, as to turn them 
from God and His truth, and from their Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ ; but they, through the grace 
and power of God, kept that which God had given 
them to know, even unto death. 


JOHN STYAERTS, AND PETER, A. D. 1538 

About this year, there were, in Flanders, two 
cousins, one named Styaerts, the other Peter. 
These two blooming and God-seeking youths re- 
sided with their parents in a village called Mer- 
eedor, in Flanders. And as they were very zealous 
for God, and searched the holy Scriptures, they 
soon perceived, that the believing and regenerated 
— according to the doctrine of Christ, as a sign of 
having buried the former sins, and risen with 
Christ, and walking in newness of life — had to re- 
ceive Christian baptism, in the water; and since 
they were desirous of this, they journeyed to Ger- 
many, to seek others of their fellow believers. But 
as they could not find such as suited their wishes, 
they soon returned to their parents in Flanders, 
where they earnestly sought the Lord their God, 
so that they had a good report, doing much good 
to the poor, and saying with Zaccheus, that if they 
had defrauded any one, they would restore it four- 
fold. Luke 19 :8. When the blinded papists, who 
most bitterly hated the light of truth, perceived 
this, they took these two young lambs out of the 
houses of their parents, at Mereedor, and brought 
them beyond Ghent, into a village called Vinder- 
hout, where they most severely imprisoned them 
in a dungeon. Jer. 38:6. Once when their sister 
came to bring them some fine shirts, they told her 
that they could not keep them from the worms, 
which were in their food, eating it, and in their 
clothes and shirts on their bodies. They further 
said : "Here is a Bible, the contents of which, as 
well as the cause of our bonds, will yet come to 
light after our death." The aforesaid John Sty- 
aerts was once released from prison, on account 
of sickness, and, as is thought, could easily have 
obtained his liberty ; but he voluntarily returned to 
prison, desiring gladly to die with his dear brother 


450 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


for the name of Jesus. Thus after a certain time 
they were led to the slaughter. Peter, who came 
forth first to die, casting his eyes up to heaven, 
boldly called out to John Styaerts: "Fight val- 
iantly, my dear brother ; for I see the heavens open 
above us." Acts 7 :56. They were together put to 
death with the sword at Vinderhout. Thus these 
young branches in the court of the Lord ( Jer. 17 :8 ; 
Ps. 1 :3 ) , were also devoured by the awful beast 
which rose up out of the sea (Rev. 13 :1), but they 
had no power over their immortal souls, which 
escaped from them unto God, where they shall for- 
ever live in unspeakable joy. When their parents 
came from Mereedor to Vinderhout, and inquired 
for their children, the villagers told them that they 
had already been executed with the sword. And 
thus they were deprived of their children by these 
tyrants. 


HANS SEYEL, AND HANS OF WELS, A. D. 1538 

In the same year, 1538, on Wednesday before 
Christmas, Hans Seyel of Mur, and Hans of Wels, 
were apprehended for the faith and the divine 
truth, at Sandweid, in Kaernthen. After valiant 
steadfastness in the faith, they were condemned to 
death and executed with the sword ; thus, even unto 
death, boldly testifying with their blood to the way 
of truth, from which they would not depart as 
long as their eyes were open, and breath remained 
in their nostrils. 


OF A CERTAIN DECREE PUBLISHED IN ENGLAND 
AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS, A. D. 1538, 
AND WHAT FOLLOWED THERE- 
UPON, A. D. 1539 

"After manifold tyranny, persecution and put- 
ting to death," writes P. J. Twisck, "in various 
countries and kingdoms, against the Christian 
flock, also in England a decree was proclaimed, in 
December, A. D. 1538, against the believers bap- 
tized according to the ordinance of Christ. By vir- 
tue of the same, they, right in the face of cold 
winter, were banished from the country, and had 
to flee whithersoever they could. 

Thus it came, that some of them fled for refuge 
to Holland, and having come to Delft, they were 
there spied out by their enemies, and fell into the 
hands of the tyrants; and, after manifold trials, 
and steadfastness in their faith, they were sentenced 
to death for the truth, at said place, and, on the 7th 
of January, A. D. 1539, put to death. Sixteen men 
were beheaded with the sword, and fifteen women 
drowned. 

These sixteen men and fifteen women, thirty-one 
persons in all, who, in the year 1539, fled from 
England to Delft, and were there put to death in 
the same year, for the true confession, of Jesus 
Christ, must plainly and positively be distinguished 
from other twenty seven persons who lost their 
lives there one year earlier, namely, A. D. 1538; 


whose written examinations and death sentences 
we have seen ; but as we have not found sufficient 
light therein, we pass them by, commending them to 
God, and thus take our leave of them. 

APOLLONIA, WIFE OF LEONHARD SEYLE, 
A. D. 1539 

In the year 1539, one sister Apollonia, wife of 
Leonhard Seyle, having been with him in the upper 
country, was apprehended in the Earldom of Tyrol, 
and brought to Brixen ; but, through the immutable 
grace and power of God, who valiantly aided her 
womanly heart, she constantly and firmly continued 
in the true faith, and in what she had promised God 
in Christian baptism, and would depart neither to 
the right nor to the left. Hence she was then sen- 
tenced to death, and drowned, thus receiving the 
martyrs' crown. 


GREAT PERSECUTION IN AUSTRIA, A. D. 1539 

In said year, 1539, the church having dwelt for a 
little while at Steinborn, in Austria, and having be- 
gun to increase there, the old serpent, the envious 
and arch-wicked satan, who so miserably tormented 
the pious, could not endure or overlook it, but in 
his wrath stirred up the children of wickedness, es- 
pecially the priests, who in all this are his agents 
and executors; so that they constantly filled the 
ears of King Ferdinand with their unjust accusa- 
tions of the pious, and instigated him, so that he 
complied with their demand, and sent his Marshal 
from Vienna, with provosts and a number of horse- 
men, who unexpectedly came to Falkenstein, 
whence they took with them a great mob, and fell 
upon the church at Steinborn, on the 6th day of 
December, in the evening or at night, in the above- 
mentioned year. All the men whom they found, 
they put into one room, and thus they also did with 
the women and maidens. With great tumult and 
noise they kept watch during the night, and brought 
in all whom they could find. Their chief intention 
was to apprehend the elders and ministers of the 
church, hoping to obtain much money from their 
people, and thus deprive the poor people of their 
sustenance, notwithstanding God would severely 
punish such wickedness. But God through His 
providence prevented them, so that they could not 
find a single minister. In every nook and corner 
they rummaged for the sustenance of widows and 
orphans, and persevered greatly in their ungodly 
assiduity. But God brought to naught and folly 
their counsel, when they thought to find wealth 
among the poor. In their tyranny they appre- 
hended sick people, children, and pregnant women, 
so that it could have moved a heart of stone to the 
deepest, and enduring compassion. 

The imprisoned brethren and sisters made 
themselves ready to offer up their bodies and lives 
unto God, whether through fire or through the 
sword. On the evening when this persecution took 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


451 


place, some men of Philip's people had also come, 
with the intention of making known to them the 
ground of the church, and of their whole life. Thus 
as many as a hundred and fifty brethren were to- 
gether apprehended, and, well guarded, were 
brought up to the castle of Falkenstein. Among 
their number there were some who had not yet 
received the baptismal covenant of grace; as also 
some who had apostatized from the truth, and were 
now penitents. Having all arrived in the castle of 
Falkenstein, they conferred with those who had 
not yet bound themselves in the faith. These they 
asked what they purposed to do in this tribulation, 
and told them that, if they, for the testimony and 
honor of God, would firmly adhere, in all suffer- 
ing, to the Lord Christ, whatever distress and 
anguish might befall them, they would consider 
them fellow companions in the kingdom of Christ, 
and hope that God would be gracious to them; 
however, with this understanding, that with those 
who through the providence of God should be re- 
leased, and return to the church, the latter should 
have authority, by virtue of the Lord's command, 
to deal according to their confession, in the proper 
measure and order ; and since they had this inten- 
tion and resolution, they would write to the elders 
and the churches, and afterwards give them full 
information. 

Thereupon they all indicated their willingness, 
and, with a joyful heart and great thankfulness, de- 
sired to accept this covenant as a grace of God. 
Immediately upon this, the church was informed 
of it by letter. A written answer speedily came, 
that all the believers were well satisfied with this 
resolution ; since such as had not yet been incorpo- 
rated, according to divine ordinance, into the 
church, but agreed with it in all things, and desired 
to show forth an honest testimony of the truth, to 
suffer with it and to give their lives for it in this 
extremity, might well be received as fellow believ- 
ers. 

When they were again informed of the decision 
of the church, they willingly entrusted themselves 
to the Lord, manifested patience in all tribulation, 
as others of the pious, and made a good confession 
before many witnesses. While they were yet at 
Falkenstein, King Ferdinand sent his Marshal, 
several doctors from among the priests, and the 
executioner, that they should go to them. These, 
on Christmas night, which is customarily celebrated 
in every country, began to deal with much crafti- 
ness with the imprisoned witnesses of the truth; 
they also put subtle questions to some of them, as 
to what was their ground and hope, and where their 
treasure or money was. Thereupon they confessed 
in truth, that Christ was their Lord and Saviour, 
their only comfort, their only hope, their dearest 
heart-treasure and best portion, in whom they re- 
ceived God's help and grace. They also treated 
with them about other articles, and wanted to in- 
struct, teach, and convert them, as they said, es- 
pecially with regard to their sacrament, which they 


highly extolled, and would have them believe that 
the tlesh and blood of Christ were present in it, 
and that it was our Lord God, as they said but the 
brethren answered that it was a dumb god, and 
that the Lord's Supper had quite a different signi- 
fication than tliey perversely represented, tnus 
shamefully deceiving and seducing the world. With 
these and many other contessions the king's mes- 
sengers returned to Vienna ; but these imprisoned 
brethren remained in custody in the castle ot fal- 
kenstein. 

Thus it continued until the beginning of the year 
154U, when the king s marshal came, together with 
a Spaniard, the Provost of the Lmpire, and otuer 
horsemen with their equipments, 'i hese further ex- 
amined the imprisoned Drethren, and those who did 
not comply with their demands, Out held to the 
truth confessed, they speedily laid in iron chains 
and bonds, coupling them two and two together oy 
their hands, in the meantime many of tne sisters, 
their fellow believers, came into the castle of Fal- 
kenstein, when the prisoners were to be taken to 
the sea; some were waiting for the imprisoned 
brother Eegmachel, and others were particularly 
engaged in earnest and fervent prayer and suppli- 
cation to God Almighty, that He would keep them 
from all wrong and sinful action, on sea as well as 
on land, and also give them a steadfast mind, and 
grant that they might persevere in the truth unto 
the end. Alter this prayer, a Spaniard was com- 
manded to send all of them away. Hence they be- 
gan to take leave from one another, with many 
scalding tears and weeping eyes, affectionately ad- 
monishing each other, that each should firmly and 
unfalteringly adhere to the Lord and the truth con- 
fessed. Time and again they commended each 
other to the gracious protection of God, not know- 
ing whether in their lifetime they should ever see 
each other again with their bodily eyes. Thus man 
and wife had to separate from each other, and 
leave their little children; which flesh and blood 
would not have been equal to, had it not been done 
through the power of God, and for His sake. This 
leave-taking was so pitiful, that the king's marshal, 
and others like him, could not keep back their tears. 
When everything was arranged, and the escort was 
ready, the pious went forth, firmly trusting in God, 
that He would aid and deliver them. Thus they 
were brought from the tower, two and two to- 
gether, ninety in all, after having been confined 
five weeks and a half in Falkenstein ; but the sisters 
had to remain in the castle, and from the walls, 
looked after the brethren, with much sighing and 
sorrow, as long as they could see them. 

After this, the sisters were all sent away from the 
castle to the place where they resided; but the 
brethren whom they did not want to take to the 
sea, on account of infirmity or sickness, and some 
because of their youth, they retained as prisoners 
in the castle ; now and then they gave some of the 
young lads as slaves to Austrian nobles ; however, 
nearly all of them returned to the church ; the 


452 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


others remained in the castle, and for them God 
also wrought a gracious deliverance. 

The cause of this great distress of the pious was 
solely, that in antichristendom they testified against 
the idolatrous and unrighteous life and ways of the 
priests, for which, as an abomination, God should 
once severely punish them, and make an end with 
them and their sins. Hence, King Ferdinand gave 
the crew of priests, who are a band of robbers, and 
delight in killing and slaying, power to do with 
them as they pleased. These condemned them as 
worthy of death, that they should not be tolerated 
on the earth, but should be sent to sea, thus to wear 
out their lives in much anguish and distress, as a 
warning to other brethren ; and that the other three 
should be delivered into the hands of the Admiral 
of the Armada on the sea, and be employed on the 
galleons, in pillaging and waging war against the 
Turks and other enemies ; though these imprisoned 
brethren previously told the messengers of the 
king, that they would not go against the enemy, 
to pillage and wage war, neither would they con- 
sent to do wrong on the sea just as little as on the 
land, nor sin against God in heaven ; and that, since 
it was contrary to their faith and conscience, God 
through His unconquerable power, and His grace, 
could preserve them on the sea as well as on the 
land. Nevertheless, these witnesses of the divine 
truth were led, through the king's messengers and 
his strict command to the authorities, through 
cities, towns and villages, to be brought from one 
court to another. In this they suffered much and 
manifold adversity and great sorrow; but God 
always granted them gracious means, particularly 
in this, that every morning and evening they could 
all unmolestedly pray to God, and that one brother 
could without hindrance comfort the other ; which 
they accepted very gratefully as a special grace 
and gift of God. 

By this and the ordering of their whole life they 
convinced the people in many places, so that many 
who at their arrival regarded them as malefactors, 
had great compassion on them. Moreover, the 
king's servants, their conductors, frequently bore 
them testimony, and told them that they should not 
pass silently through the cities and towns, but 
should make their faith known by singing or other- 
wise. 

Thus the faithful company was led, like a flock 
of sheep, through countries and cities, to the sea ; 
journeying from the castle of Falkenstein to Vi- 
enna, thence to Neustadt and Schottwien, over the 
Semmering, to Bruck-on-the-Mur, to the borders 
of Bavaria, to Luebeck and Marburg, to Tiele, to 
Stein, in Carniola, over the Save to Laibach, but 
still no comfort came. During their imprisonment 
there they had to suffer much hunger and distress ; 
they were fed with the bread of anguish, and had 
to drink the water of sorrow ; but thus it was the 
will of God to reveal His Word and truth in every 
place and country, and to make it known to the na- 
tions that were ignorant of it, and to let them hear 


the sound thereof; even as He always provides 
gracious means to lure men away from unright- 
eousness, so also here, where these witnesses of the 
faith and the divine truth were led to many and 
various places, and also to places where strange 
languages were spoken, where the truth had not 
been heard, and where it was unknown and hidden 
among the nations. They caused some from Car- 
niola to search after the truth, and thereby some at- 
tained to a knowledge of it, who are still at this day 
serving God with a sincere heart. But how these 
captive brethren, while on their journey, were 
treated in many places, how they were beaten, 
driven, and coupled together with ropes and 
chains, and what resulted to them from this, would 
be too long to write; still, however great the tribu- 
lation they suffered, God always comforted them 
in their hearts. 

But since God always remembers His own for 
the best, even when in the greatest fear, and never 
entirely forgets them, He strengthened some in 
their imprisonment, so that they trusted in God 
with a good assurance and hope, that He would 
work for and show them a deliverance. Therefore 
they prayed with the others in the fear of God, 
though they were firmly resolved to suffer for the 
truth of God, and to die rather than to participate 
in wicked piracy; yet they had reason enough, 
constantly to persevere in prayer to God, with 
heartfelt lamentation and sighing, that He would 
promote His divine honor in them. In this God 
showed them, how they should hold proper con- 
verse with each other, the strong care for the weak, 
and assist one another. And though they had but 
very little sustenance, yet they trusted in the Lord, 
that He would provide for them, so that they should 
not have to beg for their bread. Then, on the 
twelfth night, at Trieste, they were all delivered 
from their chains and bonds, and went out of 
prison. Through the providence of God a place 
was shown them, where they all in the same hour 
let themselves down by cords from the walls of the 
city. Thus the very bonds in which they had been 
brought thither as prisoners, had to minister to 
their deliverance. 

From this it can be seen, that,- though the un- 
godly devise many things against the pious, God 
always turns it for the best to His people. Thus, 
through the providence of God, they escaped from 
the hands of their enemies, in spite of the watchful 
guards whom they had placed in the city and upon 
the walls ; for God changed their prudence to folly, 
so that they escaped over the walls right near the 
guardhouse. 

When all of them, both sick and well, had es- 
caped over the walls a good many of them gathered 
together, knelt down, and together offered praise 
and thanks to God. God thus sped them on their 
way, that the greater part of them returned with 
joy and glad hearts to the church in Moravia. 
Twelve of them, however, were recaptured by the 
wicked, who pursued them, and, together with the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


453 


other three, they were delivered to the Emperor's 
Admiral over the Armada, taken to sea, and 
brought upon the galleons, with the intention of 
employing them as pirates, but the pious risked 
their lives, and would rather be scourged. But as 
to the end of each one of these nothing certain is 
yet known, but, it is to be supposed that, if they 
constantly adhered to the Lord, they did not have 
many good days while they lived. But the above- 
mentioned brethren whom God had delivered, when 
they, about the year 1540 returned from Trieste to 
the church in Moravia, they were received with 
great joy and gratitude, as a gift from God. 


ANNA OF ROTTERDAM, PUT TO DEATH IN THAT 
PLACE, A. D. 1539 

The following is the Testament which Anna of 
Rotterdam left and presented to her son, Isaiah, on 
the twenty-fourth of January, A. D. 1539, at nine 
o'clock in the morning, as she was preparing her- 
self to die for the name and the testimony of Jesus, 
and took leave of her son, at Rotterdam. 

Isaiah, receive your testament: 

"My son, hear the instruction of your mother; 
open your ears to hear the words of my mouth. 
Prov. 1 :8. Behold, I go today the way of the 
prophets, apostles and martyrs, and drink of the 
cup of which they all have drank. Matt. 20:23. 
1 go, 1 say, the way which Christ Jesus, the eternal 
Word of the Father, full of grace and truth, the 
Shepherd of the sheep, who is the Life, Himself 
went, and who went this way, and not another, and 
who had to drink of this cup, even as He said : T 
have a cup to drink of, and a baptism to be baptized 
with; and how am I straitened till it be accom- 
plished!' Having passed through, He calls His 
sheep, and His sheep hear His voice, and follow 
Him whithersoever He goes ; for this is the way to 
the true fountain. John 10:27; 4:14. This way 
was traveled by the royal priests who came from 
the rising of the sun, as we read in revelation, and 
entered into the ages of eternity, and had to drink 
of this cup. I Peter 2 :9. 

"This way was trodden by the dead under the 
altar, who cry, saying : Lord, Almighty God, when 
wilt Thou avenge the blood that has been shed? 
White robes were given unto them, and it was said 
to them ; Wait yet for a little season, until the num- 
ber of your brethren that are yet to be killed f or 
the testimony of Jesus, be fulfilled. Rev. 6:9-11. 
These also drank of the cup, and are gone above 
to keep the eternal, holy Sabbath of the Lord. This 
is the way in which walked the twenty-four elders, 
who stand before the throne of God, and cast their 
crowns and harps before the throne of the Lamb, 
falling down upon their faces, and saying: Lord, 
unto Thee alone be praise, glory, power, and 
strength, who shalt avenge the blood of Thy serv- 
ants and ministers, and shalt through Thyself gain 
the victory. Great be Thy name, Almighty, which 
was, and is, and is to come. Rev. 4 :8, 10. 


"In this way walked also those who were marked 
by the Lord, and received the mark Thau upon 
their foreheads (Ezek. 9:6), who were chosen 
from among all nations of men, who were not de- 
filed with women (understand this), and who fol- 
low the Lamb whithersoever He goeth. Rev. 14:4. 

"Behold, all these had to drink of the cup of bit- 
terness, as will also all those have to do, who are 
still wanting to complete the number and fulfill- 
ment of Zion, the bride of the Lamb, which is the 
new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven (Rev. 
21 :2), the city and throne of God, in which the 
glory of the great King shall be seen, when the 
feast of tabernacles will be kept and celebrated in 
the days of eternal rest and joy. Zech. 14:16. 

"Behold, all these could not attain to this, with- 
out first suffering judgment and chastisement in 
their flesh ; for Christ Jesus, the eternal truth, was 
the first, when it is written : 'The Lamb slain from 
the foundation of the world.' Rev. 13:8. So Paul 
says : 'Thus it pleased the Father, that all whom He 
predestinated from eternity, He called, elected, jus- 
tified, and made to be conformed to the image of 
His Son.' Rom. 8 :29, 30. Our blessed Saviour also 
says : The servant is not above his Lord ; but it is 
sufficient for him, that, he be like his Lord and 
Master. Matt. 10 :24. Also Peter says : 'The time 
has come that judgment must begin at the house of 
God : and if it first begin at us, what shall the end 
be of them that obey not the gospel of God? And 
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the 
ungodly and the sinner appear?' I Pet. 4:17, 18. 
Read also in Proverbs (11 :31) : 'Behold, the right- 
eous shall be recompensed in the earth : much more 
the wicked and the sinner.' See, my son, here you 
can hear that no one can come unto life, except 
through this way. Therefore enter in through the 
strait gate, receive the chastisement and instruction 
of the Lord, bow your shoulders under His yoke, 
and cheerfully bear it from your youth, with 
thanksgiving, rejoicing and honor ; for He accepts 
or receives no son, whom He does not chasten. He- 
brews 12 :6. Paul further says : 'If you forsake the 
chastisement, whereof they were all partakers, ye 
are bastards, and not children, and shall be cast 
out from the inheritance of the children of God.' 

"If you, therefore, desire to enter into the regions 
of the holy world, and into the inheritance of the 
saints, gird your loins, and follow after them ; 
search the Scriptures, and it shall show you their 
ways. John 5 :39. The angel who spake to the 
prophet said : 'There is also another thing : A city 
is builded, and set upon a broad field, and is full 
of all good things : the entrance thereof is narrow, 
and set in a dangerous place to fall, like as if there 
were a fire on the right hand, and on the left a deep 
water : and one only path between them both, even 
between the fire and the water, so small that there 
could but one man go there at once. If this city 
now were given unto a man for an inheritance, if 
he never shall pass the danger set before it, how 
shall he receive this inheritance?' II Esd. 7:6-9. 


454 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


See, my son, this way has no retreats ; there are no 
roundabout or crooked little paths ; whosoever de- 
parts to the right or to the left, inherits death. 
Behold, this is the way which is found by so few, 
and walked by a still far smaller number ; for there 
are some who well perceive that this is the way to 
life; but it is too severe for them; it pains their 
flesh. 

"Therefore, my child, do not regard the great 
number, nor walk in their ways. Remove thy foot 
far from their paths, for they go to hell, as sheep 
unto death; even as Isaiah says: 'Hell hath en- 
larged herself, and opened her mouth without meas- 
ure ; and their glory, and their multitude . . . shall 
descend into it.' Isa. 5 :14. 'It is a people of no un- 
derstanding : therefore he that made them will not 
have mercy on them.' Isa. 27:11. But where you 
hear of a poor, simple, cast-off little flock (Luke 
12:32), which is despised and rejected by the 
world, join them ; for where you hear of the cross, 
there is Christ ; from there do not depart. Flee the 
shadow of this world ; become united with God ; 
fear Him alone, keep His commandments, observe 
all His words, to do them; write them upon the 
table of your heart, bind them upon your forehead, 
speak day and night of His law and you will be a 
pleasant tree and a sprout in the courts of the Lord, 
a beloved plant growing up in Zion. Ps. 92:13. 
Take the fear of the Lord to be your father, and 
wisdom shall be the mother of your understanding. 
If you know this, my son, happy are you if you do 
it. John 13:17. Observe that which the Lord com- 
mands you, and sanctify your body to His service, 
that His name may be sanctified, praised, and made 
glorious and great in you. Be not ashamed to con- 
fess Him before men ; do not fear men ; rather give 
up your life, than to depart from the truth. If you 
lose your body, which is earthly, the Lord your 
God has prepared you a better one in heaven. II 
Cor. 5:1. 

"Therefore, my child, strive for righteousness 
unto death, and arm yourself with the armor of 
God. Be a pious Israelite, tramole under foot all 
unrighteousness, the world and all that is in it, and 
love only that which is above. I John 2:15. Re- 
member, that you are not of this world, even as 
your Lord and Master was not. John 15:19. Be a 
faithful disciple of Christ ; for none is fit to pray, 
unless he has become His disciple, and not before. 
Col. 1 :7; John 9:31. Those who said: 'We have 
left all.' also said : 'Teach us to pray.' Luke 18 :28 ; 
11:1. They were those for whom the Lord prayed, 
and not the world (John 17 :9) ; for when the world 
prays, they call upon their father, the devil, and 
desire that his will be done, as is also the case. 
Therefore, my son, do not become like them, but 
shun and flee them, and have neither part nor fel- 
lowship with them. Rom. 12:2; II Pet. 1:4. Do 
not regard that which is before your eyes, but seek 
only those things which are above. Col. 3:1. O 
my child, be mindful of my admonition, and for- 
sake it not. May the Lord cause you to grow up in 


His fear, and fill your understanding with His 
Spirit. II Peter 3:18. Sanctify yourself to the 
Lord, my son ; sanctify your whole conduct in the 
fear of your God. Lev. 20 :7. Whatever you do, 
do it all to the praise of His name. Honor the 
Lord in the works of your hands, and let the light 
of ^ the Gospel shine through you. Love your 
neighbor. Deal with an open, warm heart thy 
bread to the hungry, clothe the naked, and suffer 
not to have anything twofold ; for there are always 
some who lack. Matt. 26:11. Whatever the Lord 
grants you from the sweat of your face, above 
what you need, communicate to those of whom 
you know that they love the Lord (Genesis 3 :19 ; 
Ps. 112:9) ; and suffer nothing to remain in your 
possession until the morrow, and the Lord shall 
bless the work of your hands, and give you His 
blessing for an inheritance. Deut. 28:12. O my 
son, let your life be conformed to the Gospel, and 
the God of peace, sanctify your soul and body, to 
His praise. Amen. Phil. 1 :27 ; I Thess. 5 :23. 

"O holy Father, sanctify the son of Thy hand- 
maiden in Thy truth, and keep him from the evil, 
for Thy name's sake, O Lord." 

Thereupon she sealed this with her blood, and 
thus, as a pious heroine and follower of Jesus 
Christ, she was received among the number of the 
witnesses of God who were offered up. 


TJAERT REYNERTS, A. D. 1539 

About the year 1539, there was also a God-fear- 
ing peasant, named Tjaert Reynerts, who lived near 
Harlinger, in Friesland. He was brought a pris- 
oner to Leeuwaerden, where he had to suffer much 
for the truth, from the bloodthirsty papists. Prov- 
erbs 29:10. The cause of his imprisonment was, 
that, out of compassion and brotherly love, he had 
secretly harbored Menno Simons in his great mis- 
ery, in his house. This having been brought to the 
notice of the enemies, he was apprehended and 
very cruelly examined ; but he, as a valiant hero 
and witness of Jesus (Rev. 2 :13 ; 20:4), would not 
forsake his Creator in this extremity, but freely 
and undauntedly confessed the faith of the ever- 
lasting truth against these tyrants and bloodthirsty 
men ; on which account he, at said place, as a chief 
of murderers (according to the example of his 
Lord Jesus), was placed upon the wheel, though 
even his greatest enemies bore witness that he was 
an upright and pious man. I Tim. 3 :7. 

At this time the tyranny and persecution against 
the God-fearing Christians was very dreadful, so 
that the envious papists, who hated the truth, 
caused likenesses of many of the principal teachers 
and overseers of the church of Jesus Christ to be 
made, and posted up on doors, gates, and other 
public places, promising a large sum of money, to 
such as should deliver them into the hands of the 
officers and executioners. And since the God- 
fearing Menno Simons, who was zealous for God, 
was one of the principal teachers and elders in this 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


455 


bloody and perilous time, who, by his glorious ad- 
monitions, and writings from the Word of God, 
so flourished, that none of his adversaries dared 
come before him in an open and free scriptural dis- 
putation, though he at various times and very earn- 
estly requested it; through which sound doctrine 
and Christian admonition, and the power of the 
Most High, said Menno Simons, drew, turned, 
and won to God a great number of men, from dark 
and erring popery; yea, from the dumb idols, to 
the living God. Therefore the servants of anti- 
christ were embittered the more against him, and, 
in order to quench and hinder this, caused, A. D. 
1543, a dreadful decree to be proclaimed against 
him throughout all West Friesland ; in which all 
malefactors and murderers were offered remission 
of their crimes, the pardon of the Emperor, the 
freedom of the country, and one hundred Carl 
Guilders, if they could deliver Menno Simons into 
the hands of the torturers and executioners. But 
though these envious men thirsted with such ex- 
ceeding tyranny and great bitterness for his blood, 
and sought and persecuted him unto death, yet the 
Almighty God preserved him, and most miracu- 
lously protected him from the designs of all his 
enemies, so that they could not execute their tyran- 
nical desires on him ; for he died a natural death, 
as God had appointed it to him, at Wuestefeld, 
near Luebeck, on the 13th of January, in the year 
1559, in his sixty-sixth year. Ps. 31 :15 ; Job 14 :5 ; 
Ps. 139: 16. 

He that desires, may read Menno Simons, contra 
Gallius Faber, fol. 23, where the offering of Tjaert 
Reynerts is referred to.* 

ARENT JACOBS, WITH HIS WIFE AND ELDEST SON, 
A. D. 1539 

Even as it was in the time of Esau and Jacob, 
that he that was born after the flesh persecuted 
him that was born after the Spirit (Gen.- 27:1; 
Galatians 4:29), so it was also abundantly wit- 
nessed in this time; which, among others, ap- 
peared in the case of one God-fearing brother 
named Arent Jacobs, and his wife and eldest son. 
These resided in the Rijp, and being born again 
from above of God, and seeking the eternal in- 
heritance which is reserved for such in heaven, 
they were hated and persecuted unto death by the 
followers of Esau, who brought them prisoners 
from the Rijp to Monickendam, in North Holland, 
where they had to suffer much for the truth ; but 
as they were built upon Christ, and suffered them- 
selves by no torments to be led away, they were, at 
said place, A. D. 1539, sentenced to suffer death 
by drowning, which was accordingly done. To this 
end heavy stones were used, which the executioner 
was not able to lift, so that the prisoners were 
obliged to assist him. Thus, like irrational beasts 
they were cast into the water, with stones tied to 

* "Menno Simons' Complete Works," English Edition, pub- 
lished by John F. Funk and Brother, Elkhart, Indiana, 1871, part 
first, page 8. 


their necks, and so departed this life. Thus they 
did not love their lives, but surrendered them unto 
death for the witness of Jesus, who at His glorious 
coming shall raise their rejected bodies from the 
dead, and crown them with immortality in heaven. 
Rev. 12:11; 20:4; II Thess. 1:7; Phil. 3:21; II 
Tim. 4:8. 


HANS SIMERAVER, A. D. 1540 

In the year 1540, Brother Hans Simeraver was 
imprisoned for the divine truth, at Schwatz, in the 
valley of the Inn ; but as they could not draw him 
from his faith, nor convince him with the holy 
Scriptures, they delivered him to their high priest, 
the executioner, who had to lead him out and con- 
quer him. Thus he was executed with the sword, 
and sealed his faith in God with his blood, thus 
resisting unto blood, or striving against sin and the 
abomination of desolation. Heb. 12:4; Matt. 24: 
15. Therefore he shall also, on Mount Sion, among 
the great number of those who testified to and con- 
fessed the name of God in the world, receive a 
palm in his hands, and be crowned with the un- 
fading crown of life. II Esd. 2 :45 ; II Tim. 4 :8. 


WALTER OF STOELWIJK, A. D. 1541 

On the eleventh of February, A. D. 1538, an- 
other pious and faithful brother, named Walter of 
Stoelwijk, at Vilvoorden, in Brabant, fell into the 
hands of the ravening wolves (Matt. 7:15), and 
had to suffer much for the truth, from these envi- 
ous papists. But he, as a wise builder, had founded 
his house upon the firm and immovable rock, Christ 
Jesus; and therefore remained steadfast in all 
these great trials, though he had to suffer cruel im- 
prisonment for three years, and much severe and 
tyrannous examining and torturing from these 
bloodthirsty men. Finally, on the 24th of March, 
in the year 1541, he was sentenced and burned at 
said place. Thus he remained faithful to his Lord 
and Creator unto death, and steadfastly confirmed 
with his death and blood the genuine faith of the 
truth, and his unwavering, living hope. He shall 
therefore, as an obedient sheep, also hear the 
voice of the great Shepherd of the sheep saying to 
him : "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world." John 10:3; Heb. 13:20; Matt. 25:34. 


A LETTER WRITTEN BY SAID WALTER OF STOEL- 
WIJK, TREATING OF THE SUFFERING AND THE 
GLORY OF CHRISTIANS 

Grace, peace, and mercy from God our heavenly 
Father, and from Jesus Christ our Lord and Sav- 
iour, be with all those who live godly in Christ 
Jesus, and therefore suffer persecution, to the glory 
and praise of the true God, to the trial of their 
faith, and the eternal salvation of their souls. Amen. 
Rom. 1:7; I Cor, 1:3; II Cor. 1:2; Gal. 1:3; 
II Tim. 3:12, 


456 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who in His unfathomable grace and mercy 
hath called us out of darkness unto His marvelous 
light, and still daily lets His face shine upon us, 
that we may know His way on the earth, and 
His salvation among the Gentiles. Yea, blessed, 
praised, and glorified be God our most blessed 
Lord and most merciful Father, who, through His 
unspeakable goodness, and not through the merits 
of our works, has chosen us, through Jesus Christ, 
to be His children, that we should be heirs of His 
eternal kingdom, and inherit all things as true chil- 
dren and heirs of God ; children of God and joint 
heirs with Christ, if we do the will of God our 
heavenly Father, that we may be glorified with 
Him, and enter into His glory. Tit. 3 :5 ; II Tim. 
1:9; Eph. 2:6; Rom. 8:17. For it is true what 
Christ says: "Not everyone that saith unto me, 
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heav- 
en ; but he that doeth the will of my Father which 
is in heaven." Matt. 7:21. Now it is the will of 
our heavenly Father, that we deny ourselves, take 
up our cross, and follow Jesus Christ. 

In the first place, we must deny ourselves ; that 
is, we must forsake our own will, and surrender 
ourselves wholly to Jesus Christ, so that accord- 
ing to the words of the apostle, we live no more 
unto ourselves, but unto Jesus Christ, who died for 
us, that He may be Lord both of the dead and liv- 
ing, and that no one shall live unto himself, but 
unto Him who died for him, and rose again. O 
to deny themselves, and desire only to do the will 
of God ; yea, how many do not yet know which is 
the true will of God, but hold to the doctrine and 
commandments of the Roman pope, and antichrist, 
and are in such a condition, that they do not know 
Jesus Christ. To these, the Almighty God, ac- 
cording to the pleasure of His will, must open the 
eyes of their understanding, with the radiance of 
His grace, that they may emerge from this blind- 
ness into the true light, and know with all the 
saints, what is the delusion and sorcery of the Bab- 
ylonian whore (Rev. 18:2), and that the teachings 
and commandments of Christ Jesus alone are to be 
kept, yea, that we must follow and preserve only the 
teachings and commandments of Christ Jesus, and 
that we may in no wise live according to our own 
will, but are to consider that Christ Jesus Himself 
did not His own will, but the will of His Father, 
who sent Him ; which was done and written for our 
admonition and instruction, that we should not 
fulfill our own will, which, because of the innate 
wickedness of our cursed nature, is prone to evil ; 
but the acceptable and perfect will of God, so that 
we may pray aright, as Christ has taught us, say- 
ing: Heavenly Father, Thy will be done in earth, 
as it is in heaven. Matt. 6 :9, 10. How many there 
are who do not say this with a good heart, but with 
false lips, even as Judas said to Christ: "Hail, 
Master" (Matt. 26 :49 ; Mark 14 :45 ; Luke 22 :47), 
at the same time betraying Him ; so they say with 


the mouth, that God's will is to be done ; while at 
the same time all their thoughts and works are 
contrary to the will of God. These are those real 
false Christians who say to Christ Jesus : "Lord, 
Lord," and yet do not what He has commanded 
them. These are the true Pharisees, the hypo- 
critical saints, who honor God with their lips, while 
their heart is far from Him. These are the true 
unbelievers of whom St. Paul says that with their 
words they profess to know God, but in works deny 
Him, so that they are abominable to the Lord, be- 
cause they are disobedient to Him, and reprobate 
unto every good work. Yea, these are the true 
hypocrites, the disciples of deceitful Satan, who 
have learned from their master, to disguise their 
inward craftiness, and outwardly to adorn them- 
selves with a beautiful appearance. Such hypo- 
crites the Lord will forever curse and cast out, 
and say to them : "Depart from me, ye workers' 
of iniquity ; I know you not." Matt. 7 :23 ; Ps. 6 :8. 
But He will bless the pious Christians and bless and 
glorify the good and true disciples of Jesus Christ, 
who deny themselves, and have surrendered them- 
selves unto the will of God, which is the true be- 
ginning of the Christian life, and without which 
life can not be begun. 

In the second place, we must take up our cross, 
namely prepare ourselves for suffering, according 
to the teaching of Jesus Sirach, who says: "My 
son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy 
soul for temptation. Set thy heart aright, and con- 
stantly endure, and make not haste in time of 
trouble. Cleave unto him, and depart not away, 
that thou mayest be increased at thy last end! 
Whatsoever is brought upon thee, take cheerfully, 
and be patient when thou art changed to a low es- 
tate. For gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable 
men in the furnace of adversity." Sir. 2:1-5; 
Wisd. 3 :6. With this accords also what Paul says : 
"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." II Tim. 3 :12. Yea Christ Himself 
says to His apostles : "Ye shall be hated of all men 
for my name's sake." Mark 13 :13. From all these 
words it must incontrovertibly follow, that all serv- 
ants of God, all godly men, all disciples of Jesus 
Christ, must suffer persecution for His name's 
sake; and be tried through manifold temptations. 

Therefore it is an awful blindness, that men 
boast of the Gospel and Christianity, and know 
what belongs to a Christian life, but, alas ! they have 
the least thought of suffering anything for the 
name of Christ Jesus ; yea, though they know and 
confess that all the works which take place in 
papal desolation are evil, and nothing but blas- 
phemy against God, yet have they fellowship there- 
with, and commit the most shameful idolatry, in 
order that they may avoid and escape the cross, — 
in which cross all pious Christians may glory (Gal. 
6:14)— and still they want to be considered good 
Christians. O what wicked servants I O what 
wicked disciples ! Wicked servants we say, because 
they would be above their Lord Jesus Christ; 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


457 


wicked disciples we say, since they reject and con- 
demn the doctrine of their Master Jesus Christ. O 
people, people, mockers of the living God! who 
think to deceive God with your dissimulation, and 
to pay Him with words, unmindful of the words of 
Paul, namely : that the kingdom of God is not in 
word, but in power ! I Cor. 4 :20. O people, true 
hypocrites ! who fancy that they serve Christ, but 
how far are they from glorying with Paul, the pi- 
ous and faithful minister of Christ, only in the 
cross of Christ! Gal. 6:14. O miserable people, 
who would rather now live for a little season in 
peace and voluptuousness with the Babylonian 
whore, and afterwards be tormented with her in 
everlasting pain, than suffer with Christ Jesus for 
a little while, and thus enter into eternal glory ! 

Ah! the true saints and servants of God did 
differently; they would rather suffer death, than 
transgress the commandment of God. Pious Jo- 
seph would rather go to prison; yea, into death, 
than offend the Lord his God, and commit adul- 
tery with the adulterous woman. Gen. 39:8. 
Moses, the ardent and jealous lover of God, 
through his faith, chose rather to suffer affliction 
with the people of God, than to live in carnal and 
worldly lusts with the Egyptians; esteeming the 
reproach of Christ greater riches than all the 
treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the 
recompense of the reward. Ex. 2:11 ; Heb. 11 :25. 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego feared God the 
Lord more than all the torments of the tyrannous 
king, and would rather die a temporal death, and 
adhere to their God, than deny Him. Dan. 3 :16. 
Daniel who was rich in spirit and strong in faith, 
did not shrink from the den of lions, in which he 
would rather be cast, than worship any strange 
God. Dan. 6. The pious Tobit would rather trans- 
gress the commandment of the king at the peril of 
his life, than to forsake God his Lord ; wherefore 
he also commanded his son, to fear God all his 
life, and never to let his will be set to sin, or to 
transgress the commandments of God his Lord. 
Tobit 1:18; 4:5. Eleazar, the pious Israelite 
would rather die for the law of God, than act con- 
trary to it ; yea, than to dissimulate once, and thus 
cause offense in Israel. The mother and her seven 
sons were so ardent in the love of God, that they 
were not afraid of all the tyranny of the wicked 
king, nor would they act contrary to the law of God, 
but much rather suffer a severe death for it. II 
Mace. 7. Yea, how many saints and witnesses of 
Jesus Christ are still hated, persecuted and slain 
by the Babylonian whore, because they will not 
drink of the wine of her fornication, or have fel- 
lowship with her idolatrous works. 

Therefore all hypocritical saints, all wicked 
hypocrites, who boast of being called Christians, 
yet will not suffer for the name of Christ, may well 
be ashamed. Christ may justly say to them : If I be 
your Lord, why do you not keep My command- 
ments? if I be your Master, why do you not hear 
and believe My words? Mai. 1 :6 ; Luke 6 :46. Well 


then, let all hypocrites, and falsely prudent, unfaith- 
ful servants, and falsely wise disciples of Jesus 
Christ, depart from their Lord and Master, we 
nevertheless, through the grace of God, intend to 
adhere to Christ, and are ready to suffer for His 
sake, even as He suffered for our sakes. But He 
suffered as Lord, and we as disciples; hence we 
servants and disciples must not bear the cross re- 
luctantly seeing our Lord and Master Himself 
bore it. 

In the third place, we must follow Jesus, but not 
as did many Jews, who followed Him, because they 
had eaten of the loaves ; which, alas ! many false 
Christians still do, who join the Christian church, 
not because they truly seek Christ Jesus, not be- 
cause they love the truth, but that they may be 
aided and fed by the Christian church (whom they 
perceive to be the most charitable). But to follow 
Christ in this manner is nothing but a mockery of 
God, and Christ will not have such followers, as we 
may clearly understand from the case of the scribe 
whom Christ condemned, because he wanted to 
follow Him from covetousness ; for the Lord be- 
held the heart of the scribe, and therefore did not 
answer him according to his words, but according 
to his thoughts, saying: "The foxes have holes, 
and the birds of the air have nests ; but the Son of 
man hath not where to lay his head." Matt. 8:20; 
Luke 9 :S8. Just as if Jesus had intended to say : 
If you will follow me, follow me in the manner 
in which I go before you. For Christ well knew 
his intention, namely, that he wanted to follow 
Him for gain, and thought that Christ should give 
him power to perform wonderful signs and mir- 
acles, as He had given to His apostles, by which 
he might have sought gain. But such designs are 
not good, and cannot succeed ; for the Lord Him- 
self was poor (Zech. 9:9), as He declares: If I 
the Lord and Master am poor, it is evident that 
My servants are poor, and that My disciples do not 
seek or desire riches. As though the good Lord had 
meant to say: He that would follow Me, must 
follow Me in the poverty in which I walk before 
Him. But, alas! many people at the present day 
think that gain is godliness, as Paul says (I Tim. 
6:5), and, under the semblance of the Gospel and 
the Christian name, seek their own profit. O what 
perverted men ! who will not go in the right way, 
but follow the way of the traitor and thief Judas, 
who loved the wages of unrighteousness, when he 
received the awful punishment of his wickedness, 
as everyone knows. Matt. 27:6; Mark 14:18; 
John 12 :4. O what blinded men, who can not take 
to heart that Ananias and Sapphira were put to 
such great shame, and punished, for their equivo- 
cation, by which the Almighty Lord God has un- 
doubtedly given us an example, that all hypo- 
critical and double-minded men shall be thus put 
to shame and punished ; as we find in Jesus Sirach : 
Woe unto those that are of a double heart, to those 
of wicked lips that enter the land by two ways. 
Therefore the wise man also teaches us, that our 


458 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


hearts should be without any deceit and dissimu- 
lation, saying: "Be not obstinate, and distrust not 
the fear of the Lord . . . and come not unto him 
with a double heart. Be not a hypocrite in the sight 
of men, and take good heed what thou speakest. 
Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall, and bring dishonor 
upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, 
and cast thee down in the midst of the congrega- 
tion, because thou earnest not in truth to the fear 
of the Lord, but thy heart is full of deceit." Sir. 
1 :28-30. 

O that all hypocrites would earnestly consider 
the words of Jesus Sirach, and reform, before they 
be confounded and punished by God, which shall 
be done to all the double-minded, if not now, yet in 
the day of judgment, when the ungodly shall not 
stand, nor sinners remain in the congregation of 
the righteous. Ps. 1 :5. Then Christ will bring to 
light what is now in darkness, and make manifest 
the counsels of the hearts ; yea, He will take the fan 
into His hand, and purge His floor, and gather the 
wheat into the garner, but the chaff will He burn 
up with unquenchable fire. Matt. 3:12; Luke 3:17. 
Hence, let everyone beware of hypocrisy, and let 
him truly follow Christ Jesus, as is proper, not with 
the Jews, for the sake of the loaves, nor with the 
scribe, from covetousness. But, O ye Christians, 
follow Christ, your Lord and Master with a pure 
heart, a clean conscience, unfeigned faith, and 
ardent love, without turning to the right or to the 
left. But those who follow Christ Jesus differ- 
ently, are among good Christians what chaff is 
among the wheat, and their end will be everlasting 
fire, from which the Almighty Father preserve us 
through Jesus Christ. 

Moreover, we must, from ardent love, follow 
Jesus Christ even unto the end, and not do as did 
some of His disciples, who forsook Him, and be- 
came offended at His words, saying: "This is a 
hard saying ; who can hear it ?" John 6 :60. O how 
many are unwilling to hear the divine words of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, yea, rave, when told that 
Christ Jesus promises tribulation and suffering to 
all His servants and disciples. From a stony heart 
and an embittered mind they say: Must one al- 
ways suffer ? Must one always be persecuted ? This 
is a hard saying; who can hear it? O God, how 
is the sweet honey changed into gall, and the clear 
wine into bitter water ! Alas ! how have they come 
to loathe that precious, heavenly bread, and how 
has the eternal medicine, by which every soul must 
be healed, become a deadly poison to them ! And 
how do men who will not believe the Word of God, 
nor receive the holy doctrine of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, condemn the comforting Gospel, which has 
been sent us from heaven through the Holy Ghost, 
and sealed by Christ with His own precious blood ; 
but if a lying prophet comes, a messenger prophe- 
sying of temporal peace and happiness, though it 
never comes to pass, he is heard, while the good 
Lord Jesus Christ, who has promised us the eternal 
peace of His heavenly kingdom, can not obtain a 


hearing; so that it is as Christ said to the Phari- 
sees: "I am come in my Father's name, and ye 
receive me not : if another shall come in his own 
name, him ye will receive." John 5 :43. Yea, many 
now do as did the rebellious and unbelieving Israel- 
ites, who forsook God the Lord, who had delivered 
them out of Egypt, and desired other gods for lead- 
ers and protectors. Num. 14:2; Ex. 32:1; Acts 
7:39. Thus also now many Christians forsake 
Jesus, who has freed them from the power and 
tyranny of Satan, and delivered them from the 
jaws of the lions, who devoured them, yea, had 
hastened with them in the way to eternal damna- 
tion, utterly to destroy them.— Then Christ deliv- 
ered them, and placed them again in the way of 
eternal salvation. John 1 :29. Many now forsake 
the good Shepherd, who spared not His life for 
our sakes, but delivered it unto death, because of 
the great love which He had to us ; and trust in 
men, of whom the prophet says that their assistance 
availeth not, and they cannot help ; for their breath 
must go forth and return to the earth, and the 
thoughts of all them that put their trust in men and 
follow false prophets, who delight in unrighteous- 
ness shall perish. Hence all pious Christians must 
follow no other than Christ Jesus, who, as Peter 
says, suffered for us, leaving us an example, that 
we should follow His steps. I Peter 2:21. The 
same is declared also by Paul, with these words : 
"Let us lay aside all guile and hypocrisy, and the 
besetting sin, and let us run with patience the race 
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author 
and Finisher of our faith ; who for the joy that 
was set before him, endured the cross, despising the 
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the 
throne of God." Heb. 12:1,2; Mark 16:19. In 
these words of the apostles we may perceive, that 
we are to follow Jesus Christ, and look to Him as 
the Captain of the faith, the Bishop and Shepherd 
of our souls, yea, the good Lord and Master, who 
has given an example to all His servants and dis- 
ciples, that they must suffer even as He suffered 
Heb. 2 :10 ; John 10:11 ; I Peter 2 :25. But, O God' 
how much Christ had to suffer ! He who was Lord 
of heaven and earth became so poor for our sakes, 
that He had not where to rest or lay His head : 
when He was in the form of God, He humbled 
Himself, and took upon Him the form of a servant 
(Phil. 2 :6, 7; John 13:5), that He might serve us, 
and gave His life for our redemption ; yea, though 
He was the eternal wisdom of the Father, who up- 
holds all things by the word of His power, He had 
nevertheless to hear the Pharisees call Him a flat- 
terer and deceiver of the people, a sinner, yea, a 
demoniac and madman, and many other abominable 
blasphemies, reproaches and mockeries; in short, 
though He was the only begotten Son of God, the 
Almighty Father, yet He was counted a malefac- 
tor, and had to die the most bitter death, so that 
Isaiah could well say of Him : "He hath no form 
nor comeliness ; and when we shall see him, there 
is no beauty that we should desire him. He is de- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


459 


spised and rejected of men ; a man of sorrows, and 
acquainted with grief : and we hid as it were our 
faces from him ; he was despised, and we esteemed 
him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and car- 
ried our sorrows : yet we did esteem him stricken, 
smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded 
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our in- 
iquities." Isa. 53 :2-5. Hence He could justly say : 
"I restored that which I took not away. For, for 
my friends' sake I have suffered pain ; shame hath 
covered my face. I am become a stranger unto my 
brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children. 
And I looked for some to take pity, but there was 
none ; and for comforters, but I found none. They 
gave me also gall for my meat ; and in my thirst 
they gave me vinegar to drink. All they that see 
me, laugh me to scorn : they shoot out the lip, they 
shake the head. They gaped upon me with their 
mouths, as a ravening and roaring lion. I am 
poured out like water, and all my bones are out of 
joint : my heart is like wax ; it is melted in the midst 
of my bowels. My strength is dried up like a pot- 
sherd-; and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws ; and 
thou hast brought me into the dust of death. For 
dogs have compassed me : the assembly of the wick- 
ed have enclosed me : they pierced my hands and 
my feet. I may tell all my bones : they look and 
stare upon me. They part my garments among 
them, and cast lots upon my vesture." Ps. 69 A, 7, 
8, 20, 21; 22:7, 13-18; Matthew 27:34; Matt. 
15:23; John 19:23. Yea, as He says through the 
prophet : "I am a worm, and no man ; a reproach 
of men, and despised of the people." Ps. 22:6. 
Yea, my beloved brethren, God the heavenly Fa- 
ther laid the chastisement of our peace upon Him ; 
for by His stripes we are healed. All we went 
astray, as sheep that have no shepherd ; we have 
turned everyone to his own way; but the Lord 
laid on Him the iniquity of us all. "He was op- 
pressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his 
mouth : he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, 
and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he 
opened not his mouth." I Peter 2 :24, 25 ; Isaiah 
53:5-7; Acts 8:32. 

Are you pious Christians? Then consider what 
Christ Jesus suffered for us poor sinners ; the Lord 
for His servants, the Master for His disciples, the 
Shepherd for His sheep, yea, God for men. I Peter 
4:1 ; John 10:11 ; Ezek. 34:23. O deep humility of 
the Master, that He would serve His disciples, and 
give Himself unto death for them! John 13:5. O 
great grace of the Lord, that He would suffer so 
much for His servants ! O infinite righteousness of 
the Shepherd, who would give His life for His 
sheep! John 10:11; 17:9. O unspeakable love of 
God to us poor mortals, that He would redeem us 
by His own precious blood : This every Christian 
should at all times remember, and feel grateful to 
Jesus Christ for these benefits, not only with words 
but also with works. But alas ! some have gone so 
far, that they can indeed talk of Christ, that He 
suffered and atoned for us, and are desirous also 


of partaking of the redemption purchased for us 
with the blood of Christ; but they never once 
think of suffering with Christ Jesus, though they 
nevertheless hope to be glorified with Him. But 
it is a faithful saying, says Paul, that if we are 
dead with Christ, we shall also live with Him; if 
we suffer with Him, we shall also rejoice with 
Him forever ; if we deny Him, He also will deny 
us. II Tim. 2:11, 12; Rom. 6:23; Luke 12:9. Let 
all apostate Christians, who return to the Roman 
Babylon, from which they had separated, and make 
friendship with the whore whom they had hated 
bear this in mind. What shall we say to such un- 
stable persons ? How can men who once knew the 
truth be so blinded as to depart from Christ Jesus 
their only Saviour, and return to the infamous ac- 
cursed whore of Babylon, the mother of all un- 
righteousness, and queen of all the children of un- 
belief and cursing, who has become their comfort 
and protection, yea, their idol. Woe unto such 
perverse men, who depart from righteousness, 
from light to darkness, from life to death, and go 
from Jesus Christ to antichrist, seeking consola- 
tion from Satan, and not in God. Woe unto such 
fearful ones, who fear those who can kill only the 
body, more than God, the Almighty Lord, who can 
cast both body and soul into eternal damnation. 
Revelation 21 :8; Matt. 10:28; Luke 12:4, 5. Woe 
unto such, that they were ever born unless they re- 
markably amend their ways and go out of Baby- 
lon ; for the Scripture says not in vain : "Go ye out 
of the midst of Babylon, my people, and touch not 
the unclean thing, that ye be not partakers of her 
plagues, or sins." Isa. 52:11; II Cor. 6:17; Rev- 
elation 18:4. These are the clear words of the 
Lord ; Who can blot them out ? Who can endure 
the stings of a guilty conscience? let him begin as 
he may, he will find it a hard undertaking, and shall 
not be successful in it. Acts 9:5 ; 5 :5. 

Here also no excuse will avail, as is clearly shown 
in the parable of the wicked servant, who, out of 
fear, had buried his Lord's pound into the earth, 
but was not heard when he wanted to excuse him- 
self to his lord. Matt. 25 :26; Luke 19:22. By this 
wicked servant we understand all the fearful, who 
are not fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and relish and seek all earthly things more 
than heavenly things. They may excuse themselves 
as ever they will, their excuse shall not avail, but 
eternal damnation will be their recompense ; for ev- 
ery tree which does not bring forth good fruit, shall 
be hewn down, and cast into the fire. There must 
be fruits ; leaves alone will not avail. Matt. 21 :19. 
Christ is our example; He practiced and taught. 
He taught His disciples to suffer and endure, for 
He Himself suffered and endured; hence Paul 
teaches us to look unto Christ Jesus, saying : "Con- 
sider him (Christ Jesus), ye Christians, that en- 
dured such contradiction of sinners against him- 
self, lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds. 
Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against 
sin. And ye have forgotten the exhortation which 


460 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, de- 
spise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the 
Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, 
God dealeth with you as with sons ; for what son 
is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye 
be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, 
then are ye bastards, and not sons. Furthermore 
we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected 
us, and we gave them reverence : shall we not much 
rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, 
and live ? For they verily for a few days chastened 
us after their own pleasure ; but he for our profit, 
that we might be partakers of his holiness." Heb. 
12:3-10; Prov. 3:11; Rev. 3:19. 

By these words the apostle indicates to us, how 
necessary and profitable chastisement is for us, 
yea, so necessary and profitable that we can not be 
children of God unless we are chastened by our 
God and heavenly Father, as is clearly declared in 
these words : "For what son is he whom the father 
chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, 
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and 
not sons." With this accord the words of Judith, 
namely : that Abraham was tried by many tribula- 
tions, and became the friend of God ; so also Isaac, 
Jacob, Moses, and all that pleased God were found 
faithful through many tribulations. Judith 8:26. 
But those who did not receive their trial in the fear 
of the Lord, and showed their impatience and the 
evil of their murmtirings against the Lord, were 
destroyed by the destroyer, and killed by the ser- 
pents. I Cor. 10:6; Num. 21:6. Therefore, as 
gladly as we have God for our Father, so readily 
must we receive the chastisement of our heavenly 
Father ; and as unwillingly as we would be counted 
bastards by God, so unwillingly must we also be to 
be without chastisement and correction, and so 
willing must we also be to be tried by tribulation. In 
short, as much as we love God and the salvation of 
our souls, and as much as we fear the punishment 
of God, so cheerfully must we receive all sufferings 
imposed upon us by God, and remember that Christ 
says : "He that taketh not his cross, and f olloweth 
after me, cannot be my disciple." Matt. 10:38; 
16:24; Mark 8:54; Luke 9:23. Also: Whosoever 
will save his life shall lose it ; but whosoever loses 
his life in this world, for the Gospel's sake, shall 
save it forever. Where now are the false Chris- 
tians, who do not lose their life for Christ's sake, 
and still think to keep it in eternity? Yea, so Saul 
thought that he could please the Israelites, and still 
remain the friend of God ; but God rejected him 
for his double-mindedness. I Sam. 15:26. Thus 
they may also think to save their temporal life, and 
still obtain eternal life ; but they shall find them- 
selves disappointed in their hope. O Lord God, 
how can men be so blinded as to so love this' 
transient life, seeing they know neither the day 
nor hour when they must die ; even as the apostle 
James says that this life is but a vapor, which ap- 


pears for a little time, and then vanishes away. 
Jesus Sirach also says that our life, compared with 
the days of eternity, is as dust or as a grain of 
sand to all the sand of the sea, or as a drop of wa- 
ter unto all the water of the sea. What then is 
man! and what is his beauty? or what are his pos- 
sessions on which he would rely? 

Since then our life is so uncertain and brief, it 
is a lamentable matter, that men take so much 
care for it, and bestow so little thought upon the 
eternal life. This is partly owing to false teachers 
and deceitful laborers, the adversaries of Christ 
and His apostles, who openly teach that Christians 
are not to suffer any more. 

They shall be confounded with their people, who 
prophesy lies in the name of the Lord ; they shall 
be punished with Zedekiah and Ahab who shame- 
fully sin, and seduce the Israel of God, causing 
them to trust in vain things. They shall be put to 
shame with the Egyptian magicians, who now resist 
the truth, even as they resisted Moses. They shall 
be accursed with Balaam the son of Bosor, who 
with him forsake the right way, and go in crooked 
paths ; yea, they shall sink into hell with Dathan, 
Korah, and Abiram, who with them caused conten- 
tion and offence in the church of God, and despise 
the godly doctrine of Jesus Christ, by which they 
awaken, the wrath of the Almighty God, and treas- 
ure up unto themselves the wrath of God against 
the day when Christ Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire, 
taking vengeance on them that knew not God, and 
obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ 
(Rom. 2 :5 ; Matt. 25 :31 ; II Peter 3 :4; II Thess. 
1 :7-10) ; who shall suffer pain and everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord, when 
He shall come to be glorified in His glory, and 
glorified in all them that believe in Him. Isa. 2 -10 • 
Wisd. 5:2. 

Now, who are these unbelievers, who do not be- 
lieve the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and shall therefore 
suffer everlasting pain? They are those who now 
do not observe the commandments of Jesus Christ, 
and will not suffer for the name of God, or confess 
the truth according to the instruction of the Gospel ; 
hence Christ shall also not confess them, or know 
them before His Father, and before His angels, 
with whom He shall come from heaven, to punish 
such unfaithful and fearful servants, and to glori- 
fy the faithful and valiant soldiers, who have come 
out of great tribulation, and have washed and puri- 
fied their robes in the blood of the Lamb Matt 
10:33; Mark 8:38; Luke 9:26; II Tim. 2:12J 
Matt. 25 :31 ; Rev. 7 :14. Therefore are they before 
the throne of God, and serve Him day and night in 
His temple : and He that sitteth on the throne shall 
dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, 
neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun 
lighten them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which 
is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and 
shall lead them unto living fountains of water; 
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes! 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


461 


Rev. 7:15-17; Isa. 49:10. The prophet Esdras 
says : "I Esdras saw upon the mount Sion a great 
people, whom I could not number, and they all 
praised the Lord with songs. And in the midst of 
them there was a young man of high stature, taller 
than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads 
he set crowns, and was more exalted; which I 
marveled at greatly. So I asked the angel, and said, 
Sir, What are these? He answered and said unto 
me, These be they that have put off the mortal 
clothing, and put on the immortal, and have con- 
fessed the name of God : now are they crowned, 
and receive palms. Then said I unto the angels, 
What young person is it that crowneth them, and 
giveth them palms into their hands? So he an- 
swered and said unto me, It is the Son of God, 
whom they have confessed in the world. Then be- 
gan I greatly to commend them that stood so stiffly 
for the name of the Lord." II Esdras 2:42-47; 
Matt. 16:16; 10:32; Mark 8:29. 

O what joy and glory are prepared for all pious 
Christians! Who now is so faint hearted and 
fearful, as to be unwilling to suffer a little for such 
joy and glory? It is indeed true, that suffering 
and tribulation are hard for the flesh ; but we must 
remember the words of Paul : "Now no chastening 
for the present seemeth to be joyous, but griev- 
ous ; nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the peace- 
able fruit of righteousness unto them which are 
exercised thereby." Heb. 12:11. Christ says the 
same to His apostles: "Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world 
shall rejoice ; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when 
she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is 
come : but as soon as she is delivered of the child, 
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy 
that a man is born into, the world. And ye now 
therefore have sorrow; but I will see you again, 
and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man 
taketh from you." John 16:20-22; Isa 26:17. 

Behold, all ye believers, who now suffer tribula- 
tion, anguish and persecution for the truth, for a 
little season, consider these words, and take com- 
fort : do not let it terrify or grieve you, and though 
tribulation is not pleasing to the flesh, remember 
that for a little sorrow you shall receive eternal 
joy ; yea, remember that it is written : "The souls 
of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there 
shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the 
unwise they seem to die; and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be 
utter destruction: but they are in peace. For 
though they be punished in the sight of men, yet 
is their hope full of immortality, and having been 
a little chastised they shall be greatly rewarded: 
for God proved them, and found them worthy for 
himself. As gold in the furnace hath he tried them, 
and received them as a burnt offering. And in the 
time of their visitation, they shall shine, and run 
to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over 


the people, and their lord shall reign forever. They 
that put their trust in him shall understand the 
truth : and such as be faithful in love shall abide 
with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints." 
Wisd. 3 :l-9 ; Deut. 33 :3 ; Phil. 1 :21 ; Wisd. 5 :1 ; 
I Peter 1:7; Matt. 13:43; I Cor. 6:2. Oh, what 
beautiful promises are these for all that are perse- 
cuted for the truth ; and how comforting are the 
promises made to us by Christ in the Gospel, namely 
that we are blessed when we mourn, for we shall be 
comforted ; and that we are blessed when we are 
persecuted for righteousness' sake, for the king- 
dom of heaven is ours ; in short, that we are blessed 
when men shall despise and revile us, and say all 
manner of evil against us falsely, for Christ 
Jesus' sake; then shall we rejoice and be exceed- 
ing glad : for great is our reward in heaven. Matt. 
5:4, 10-12; Luke 6:22; I Peter 2:20. Yea, great 
is our reward, as Isaiah tells us: "that eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love him." Isa. 64:4; I Cor. 
2 :9. And the prophet David says : "O Lord, how 
great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for 
them that fear thee ; which thou hast wrought for 
them that trust in thee before the sons of men!" 
Ps. 31 :19. 

But how few now labor for this great glory? It is 
as represented in the parable of the Lord, where it 
is said that the householder prepared a supper to 
which he invited many, for all things were ready. 
But one had bought a farm, and had to go and see 
it. Another had bought five yoke of oxen, which 
he must needs go to prove. Another had married 
a wife, and therefore could not come. But when 
the householder heard of this, he was wroth, and 
said that none of those who would not come should 
taste of his supper. Matt. 22 :2 ; Luke 14 :16 ; Rev- 
elation 19 :7. Oh, what severe judgment and sen- 
tence is uttered against all those who will not come, 
despising the call of the Lord, and loving anything 
rather than God; that is, those who for father, 
mother, brother, sister, wife, child, wealth, poverty, 
praise, or reproach, forsake God, and do not obey 
His voice ; yea, who do not count all earthly things 
and excellence, but dung, that they may win Jesus 
Christ, even as Paul did, and also the Hebrews of 
whom the apostle says that they took joyfully the 
spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in 
heaven a better and enduring substance. Matthew 
10:37; Phil. 3:8; Heb. 10:35. But, O God, how 
little do men now regard heavenly things. Oh, how 
little do they think, what difference there will be be- 
tween the righteous and the wicked. Yea, there 
will be such a difference as the Lord has declared 
through Isaiah. "Behold, my servants shall eat but 
ye shall be hungry ; behold, my servants shall drink, 
but ye shall be thirsty ; behold, my servants shall re- 
joice, but ye shall be ashamed ; behold, my servants 
shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sor- 
row of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit." 
Isa. 65:13. 14. Hence Christ says in the Gospel: 


462 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


"There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, 
when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, 
and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and 
you yourselves thrust out." Luke 13:28. Oh, how 
glad shall the pious Christians then be, who fight 
valiantly for the name of Christ, and through Him 
overcome. Yea, how glad, say we, will they be, 
when they shall receive the beautiful promise of 
which the Spirit of God says : "To him that over- 
cometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is 
in the midst of the paradise of God. Fear none of 
those things which thou shalt suffer; behold, the 
devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may 
be tried ; and ye shall have tribulation ten days : be 
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a 
crown of life. To him that overcometh, will I give 
to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a 
white stone, and in the stone a new name written, 
which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it. 
And he that overcometh and keepeth my words unto 
the end, to him will I give power over the nations : 
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron ; as the 
vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers : 
even as I received of my Father. And 1 will give 
him the morning star. He that overcometh, the 
same shall be clothed in white raiment ; and I will 
not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I 
will confess his name before my Father, and before 
his angels. Because thou hast kept the word of my 
patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of 
temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to 
try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come 
quickly : hold that fast which thou hast, that no man 
take thy crown. Him that overcometh will I make 
a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no 
more out : and I will write upon him the name of 
my God, and the name of the city of my God, which 
is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heav- 
en from my God : and I will write upon him my new 
name. As many as I love, I will rebuke and chasten ; 
even as a father the son in whom he delighteth : be 
zealous therefore, and repent. Behold, I stand 
at the door, and knock ; if any man hear my voice, 
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will 
sup with him, and he with me. To him that over- 
cometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, 
even as I also overcome, and am set down with my 
Father in his throne." Rev. 2:7, 10, 17, 26-28; 
3:5, 10-12, 19-21; Prov. 3:12. Yea, my beloved 
brethren, that they shall shine as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father, and possess all things. 

Oh, how sorrowful will the persecutors of the 
Christians be, when the righteous God will mete to 
them with the same measure with which they meas- 
ured to the Christians. Where shall murderous 
Cain then hide himself, when the sorrowful and 
innocent blood of righteous Abel shall cry unto God 
for vengeance against him ? Where shall the Baby- 
lonian whore, who now sits in her pleasure house 
and pomp, and has become drunken with the blood 
of His saints, and of the martyrs of Christ Jesus, 
escape the punishment of God, when the Lord will 


avenge the blood of His saints and witnesses, and 
require it at her hands? Which shall undoubtedly 
come to pass, as has been said through the prophet : 
"Behold, the innocent and righteous blood crieth 
unto me, and the souls of the just complain con- 
tinually. And therefore, saith the Lord, I will 
surely avenge them, and receive unto me all the in- 
nocent blood from among them:" II Esd. 15:8, 9. 
Christ says: "Shall not the God avenge his own 
elect, which cry day and night unto him, though 
he bear long with them? I tell you that he will 
avenge them speedily." Luke 18:7, 8. Oh, how 
fearful will the punishment be, with which the Al- 
mighty God will avenge all the blood of His saints ! 
How dearly had tyrannous Pharaoh to pay for the 
blood, of the innocent children, which he had shed ! 
Ex. 1 :22 ; 14 :28. How severely was Amalek pun- 
ished, because he had shed the innocent blood of 
the Israelites! I Sam. 15:33. The bloodthirsty 
Jezebel was thrown into the field, so that the dogs 
licked her blood, because she had shed innocent 
blood. II Kings 9:33. O Jerusalem, thou that 
killest the prophets that are sent to thee, and ston- 
est the Levites, thou art therefore trodden down 
by the Gentiles, and art become a sport unto all 
nations! Thus shall God punish those who now 
shed innocent blood, and it shall come to pass as is 
written in the book of Wisdom : "Then shall the 
righteous man stand in great boldness before the 
face of such as have afflicted him, and made no ac- 
count of his labors. When they see it, they shall 
be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed 
at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond 
all that they looked for. And they repenting and 
groaning for anguish of spirit shall say within 
themselves : This was he, whom we had sometimes 
in derision, and a proverb of reproach: we fools 
accounted his life madness, and his end to be with- 
out honor : How is he numbered among the chil- 
dren of God, and his lot is among the saints! 
Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, 
and the light of righteousness hath not shined 
unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not 
upon us. We wearied ourselves in the way of 
wickedness and destruction: yea, we have gone 
through deserts, where they lay no way, but as for 
the way of the Lord, we have not known it. What 
hath pride profited us ? or what good hath riches 
with our vaunting brought us?" Wisd. 5:1-8. 

All these things shall they say ; who are in hell, 
having sinned: "For the hope of the ungodly is 
like dust that is blown away with the wind ; like a 
thin froth that is driven away with the storm ; like 
as the smoke which is dispersed here and there with 
the tempest, and passeth away as the remembrance 
of a guest that tarrieth but a day. But the righteous 
live forever more; their reward also is with the 
Lord, and the care of them is with the Most High. 
Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, 
and a beautiful crown from the Lord's hand : for 
with his right hand shall he sever them, and with 
his arm shall he protect them." Wisd. 5:14-16. O 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


463 


unfathomable grace of the Almighty God ! O un- 
speakable love of the heavenly Father, how 
abounding is Thy grace, and how infinite is Thy 
goodness, that Thou hast prepared such glory for 
Thine elect? Who can thank Thee aright for all 
the benefits which Thou hast so richly shown us, 
and dost still daily show? Blessed be Thy name 
forever. Therefore we pray and admonish all 
pious Christians, all who love their salvation, to 
deny themselves, to take up their cross, and to fol- 
low Christ Jesus, and thus to do the will of God, 
that we may receive the promise. Let no one be 
afraid of or terrified by the ungodly tyrants ; but 
let each do as Matthias taught his sons, saying: 
"Now, therefore, my sons, be ye zealous for the 
law, and give your lives for the covenant of your 
fathers. Call to remembrance what acts our fathers 
did in their time; so shall ye receive great honor 
and an everlasting name. Fear not then the words 
of a sinful man: for his glory shall be dung and 
worms. Today he shall be lifted up, and tomorrow 
he shall not be found, because he is returned into 
his dust, and his thought is come to nothing. 
Wherefore, ye my sons, be valiant, and show your- 
selves men in behalf of the law ; for by it shall ye 
obtain glory." I Mace. 2:50, 51, 62-64. 

O ye pious Christians, take these words of God 
to heart, and arm yourselves therewith, to do battle 
for righteousness, even unto death, and God shall 
fight for you and subdue your enemies. "And fear 
not them who are able to kill the body, and after 
that, have no more that they can do ; but fear the 
Almighty God, the righteous Lord and Judge, who 
is able to cast -soul and body into eternal perdition." 
Matt. 10:28; Luke 12:4, 5. Him alone let us fear, 
and walk in His ways, serving Him in holiness and 
righteousness all the days of our life ; yea, suffer- 
ing death for His name, that we may say with 
Paul : "I have fought a good fight, I have finished 
my course, I have kept the faith : henceforth there 
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which 
the Lord Christ shall give me." II Tim. 4 :7, 8. May 
God, the Father of mercy, and the God of all com- 
fort, by whom it is given unto us, not only to 
believe on Him, but also to suffer for His name, 
strengthen, confirm and establish us with His Holy 
Spirit, that we may not become weary of suffering 
for the truth, but continue steadfast unto the end, 
and rejoice with all the pious and true saints, when 
we are reviled and persecuted for the name of 
Christ Jesus. This grant us the Almighty Father, 
through Jesus Christ His only begotten Son, our 
Saviour, unto whom be glory, majesty, blessing, 
the kingdom, and everlasting dominion, Amen. 

Be manful, strong and very courageous, to keep 
and do all things, even the words and the law of 
God. Depart not therefrom, neither to the right 
nor to the left; add not thereto, nor take away 
therefrom, that you may act wisely. Whithersoever 
you go, be not terrified, and fear not, for the Lord 
your God is with you, when you pass through the 
waters, or into the fire; and though through hy- 


pocrisy or dissimulation you may now evade pain 
and punishment, you can neither alive nor dead 
escape the power of Almighty God. I Pet. 3:14; 
II Mace. 6:26. 

Therefore let us forsake all that is in this world, 
for it lieth in wickedness ; and let each tak< up his 
cross, and follow Jesus Christ ; for He is nigh unto 
and with all those who are in distress, and will de- 
liver them, and bring them to honor, if they are 
of a broken heart, and contrite spirit. Oh, what 
great comfort is it, to have such a powerful and 
faithful companion, and what great honor is it, that 
He Himself will so kindly aid us! But we must 
know that our Lord Christ Jesus is our Companion 
and Helper only at His own proper time, according 
to the counsel of the divine will and pleasure, in 
which He has ordered everything after one meas- 
ure and weight; for even as He is the Head of the 
holy church, and beholds her sufferings, so He has 
also appointed the number, measure, and weight, 
how far He will permit the wicked to go, how far 
they shall reach, and not longer nor farther, even 
as the Babylonian captivity should continue sev- 
enty years. Jer. 29 :10. Yea, when the distress is 
at its height, and men think that God has utterly 
forsaken and forgotten them, at this very time the 
help of God is nearest them ; yea, properly speaking, 
the Lord comforts before and in the midst of all 
affliction, for the Christian has in his heart the 
Spirit of God, the fountain of living water, by 
which he is always refreshed, comforted, rejoiced, 
and made glad. John 4 :10; 7 :37 ; II Cor. 7 :7. Yea, 
the more sufferings increase, the greater the help 
and aid we receive; "for God will not suffer us to 
be tempted above that we are able ; but will with 
the temptation also make a way to escape, that we 
may be able to bear it." I Cor. 10:13. Behold, in 
these words Paul tells us for our great consolation, 
that God will not suffer us to be assailed or tempted 
above that we are able to bear; for if the suffer- 
ings of Christ abound in us, our consolation also 
abounds by Jesus Christ our Lord. II Cor. 1 :5. 
As a captain makes his soldiers valiant by en- 
couraging words and promises, how then should 
not the true and faithful God make us manful and 
strong by His divine Word of the Gospel, which 
is the power of God unto salvation to everyone 
that believeth. Rom. 1:16. Yea, the righteous God 
does not stop at mere words, but is present with us 
with His Spirit, who, as an earnest, assures our 
hearts of His divine grace and help, and strength- 
ens our weakness. Eph. 1:13; Gal. 4 :6 ; Rom. 8 :23 ; 
II Cor. 1 :22. For if the devil, by his lying spirit, 
so animates men, that they are perfectly willing to 
commit wickedness, though it cost their life ; why 
should not the grace of God, by His true Spirit, 
make us equally ready unto every good work, in all 
distresses and tribulations ? This the gracious God 
also does, not only through His Spirit, but also 
through angels, stars, elements, beasts, men, and 
all manner of creatures. For instance, Elisha said 
to his servant: "Fear not: for they that be with 


464 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


us are more than they that come against us." 
II Kings 6:16. The Red Sea and Jordan di- 
vided, so that the children of Israel passed through 
them dry-shod. The sun and the moon stood still 
for Joshua at the time when he defeated the five 
kings. Elijah was miraculously fed by the ravens. 
The children of Israel were delivered by the hand 
of a woman from their wicked enemies. Judith 14 : 
18. God the Lord generally comforts men through 
their fellows : for all the saints and Christians on 
earth have fellowship with one another, in ad- 
versity as well as in prosperity ; for when one suf- 
fers pain and grief, he suffers it not alone, but 
Christ and all Christians suffer it with him. For 
He says in the Gospel : Ye have fed, clothed, en- 
tertained, and comforted me. And all Christians 
are one body, one bread, one drink in the Lord 
Christ Jesus. Acts 9 :4 ; Matt. 25 :35 ; I Cor. 10:17. 

Now if Christ Jesus our Lord frequently spent 
whole nights in prayer, and also prayed in the gar- 
den before His death, we should also pray without 
ceasing, especially in our distress, to the Father 
of lights, from whom alone is every good and per- 
fect gift, that He may forgive our sins, for the 
death of His dear Son, who was delivered for our 
offenses, and was raised for our justification. Matt. 
14:23; Luke 6:12; Matt. 26:36; Mark 14:32; 
Luke 22 :41 ; I Thess. 5 :17 ; Jas. 1 :17 ; Rom. 4:25. 

Hence we are to pray that He would deliver, or 
punish us, not according to our judgment, but ac- 
cording to His divine wisdom, lest we utterly per- 
ish. Yea, we must give praise and thanks to God 
also in our tribulation, that He do not forget us, 
but chasten us according to His fatherly mercy, 
and graciously help us to bear every burden, even 
as Paul thanked God in his affliction, saying : 
"Blessed be God, the Father of mercies and the 
God of all comfort ; who comforteth us in all our 
tribulation. Amen." I Cor. 1 :3, 4. 


PRAYER 

Merciful Father, look upon me with eyes of com- 
passion, as Thou didst look upon the prodigal son ; 
for to Thee only, O Father, belongs praise and 
honor, but unto us nothing but shame before Thy 
face; hence, good Father, I commit soul and body 
into Thy divine and gracious keeping: guide me, 
through Jesus Christ Thy dear Son, into all things 
that are well pleasing to Thy divine Spirit; and 
bring to folly and madness the counsel of the un- 
godly, and preserve us by Thy divine Word now 
and forever. Amen. 

Composed by Walter of Stoelwijck. 


DIRK pieters krood, pieter trijnes, claes ro- 

DERS, PIETER CLAES JANS, OF WORMER, IN 
WATERLANDT 

The Word of God having, according to His will, 
been proclaimed in many and various countries, 
and attested and confirmed by the blood of many 
Christians, it came to and was accepted also at 


Wormer, in North Holland, where, among others 
there were Dirk Pieters Krood, Pieter Trijnes, 
Claes Roders, Pieter Claes Jans. These turned their 
ears away from the papistic fables, amended their 
corrupt life, and, in place thereof, through the en- 
lightenment of the Holy Spirit, willingly received 
the Word of God into their hearts, and regulated 
their whole conduct according to it. I Thess. 2:13. 
And even as Christ predicted : "The time cometh| 
that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth 
God service" (John 16:2), so it was also very 
clearly manifested in the case of the aforesaid per- 
sons ; for because they lived according to the Word 
of God, they were brought prisoners to Enchuysen, 
and being built upon Christ, they all remained 
steadfast and faithful in all this trial and severe 
temptation ; for which reason they were sentenced 
to death at said place, and offered up their bodies 
as a sweet savor to the Lord, thus obtaining a 
glorious crown. 

With regard to this offering, we have not been 
able to ascertain the year in which it took place. 

JACOB AND SELI HIS WIFE, OF WORMER, A. D. 1542 

Among many others who voluntarily forsook 
and delivered up their property and life for the 
truth of the holy Gospel, there were also a brother 
at Wormer, in Waterlandt, named Jacob, and his 
wife Seh. These sought and also found the pearl 
of great price, which was hid in a field and for joy 
thereof renounced all earthly riches, the lusts of 
this world, and the papal superstitions, which mili- 
tate against God, and sought to order and regulate 
their whole life according to this precious treasure 
of the divine Word. Thus it came to pass, that the 
envious papists, in order to stop this, apprehended 
them, and brought them to Amsterdam, where they 
had to suffer much for the truth. And as they 
could by no temptation be moved from it, but 
unto death adhered to Christ and His holy Word, 
they were condemned to death at said place, and 
burned, suffering it with great steadfastness. Thus 
they delivered their bodies up to the fire, and 
commended their souls into the hands of 'God, 
and are now waiting under the altar, until the 
number of their fellow brethren will be fulfilled. 

JAN EGTWERCKEN, CLAES MELISS, AECHT MELISS, 

WILLIAM HER HUSBAND, HEYNE WALINGS, 

TRIJN AMKERS, CORNELIS LUYTS, CLAES ' 

DIRKS, CLAES CLAESS, AND JONKER 

DIRK GERRITS VAN DEN BUSCH, 

NEAR KROMMENIERSDIJCK 

A. D. 1542 

As the Word of God was proclaimed in many 
places, and received with great thankfulness by 
many, it was also heard, believed and accepted in 
Waterlandt, on Krommeniersdijck. It wrought so 
effectually, that some were by it drawn away from 
their sinful life and dumb idols, and converted to 
the true and living God ; which, among others, ap- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


465 


peared in the case of Jan Egtwercken, Claes Meliss, 
Aecht Meliss, William her husband, Heyne Wal- 
ings, Trijn Amkers, Cornelis Luyts, Claes Dirks, 
Claes Claess, and Jonker Dirk Gerrits van den 
Busch. These together separated from the pope 
and his adherents, and put themselves under the 
faithful Shepherd Christ Jesus, inclining their ears 
to His heavenly voice, and preparing their bodies 
for His service. Rev. 18:4; II Cor. 6:17; John 
10:4; 15 :20. And as Christ predicted the cross and 
persecution to His faithful followers, so the above- 
mentioned persons also richly experienced it; for 
they were apprehended and tormented by the 
bloodthirsty papists, and, after suffering many as- 
saults, put to death, all of which they suffered in 
patience for the name of Jesus, thus obtaining the 
crown of life ; and are now waiting for the reve- 
lation of Jesus, their Saviour for their full and 
eternal reward. 


BALTHASAR HUBMOR, AND HIS WIFE 

At the time of Zwinglius there was also one Bal- 
thasar Hubmor of Friedberg, whom the papists 
called a doctor of the Holy Scriptures, a learned 
and eloquent man. He was first a teacher and 
preacher at Ingolstadt, and subsequently came to 
Reinsburg, where he preached mightily against the 
Jews and their usury. Through the enlightenment 
of the Holy Spirit, the abomination of popery was 
made manifest to him, in consequence of which he, 
according to the counsel of God, separated there- 
from. Subsequently he rejected, together with 
other errors, the self-invented infant baptism, and 
taught with all his might the baptism of believers, 
as commanded by Christ. But as the eyes of this 
dark world can not bear the clear light of the holy 
Gospel, and since in this way their false faith and 
evil works are testified against, the above-men- 
tioned Balthasar Hubmor, together with many 
others, was hated and persecuted by the world. 
After many temptations, expulsions and imprison- 
ments, he came to Nichlasburg, in Moravia. After- 
wards they apprehended him and his wife, and 
brought them to Vienna, in Austria, where, after 
manifold trials and long imprisonment, he was 
burned to ashes, suffering it with great steadfast- 
ness, and his wife drowned ; and thus both stead- 
fastly confirmed with their death the faith which 
they had received from God. Eph. 2 :8. 

Read also Sebastian Franck, on the Roman 
Heretics, letter B. 

Note. — This Balthasar Hubmor published a 
small book, in which he complains of Zwinglius and 
his followers. He writes that they brought about, 
that at one time twenty persons, men, pregnant 
women, widows, and young girls were miserably 
cast into a dark tower, and this sentence passed 
upon them, that they should never more, in their 
lifetime, see either sun or moon, and conclude their 
last days on bread and water ; so that they all, dead 


and alive, should remain and decay together in the 
dark tower, until none should be left alive. 

Thus some did not taste a morsel of bread for 
three days in order that the others might have 
something wherewith to sustain their lives. 

"O God," he further writes, "what a terrible, 
severe, and rigorous sentence against pious Chris- 
tian people, of whom none could say any evil thing, 
only that they, according to the command of Christ, 
had received water baptism !" 

O sad deformation, we say, of the so-called 
Reformed! May the Lord forgive them and be 
gracious to their blindly zealous souls. See com- 
plaint of Balthasar Hubmor, against Zwinglius, 
throughout; also, the Preface to the Offerboeck, 
A. D. 1615, letter I., etc., also, Chron. van den 
Ondergang, etc., p. 1031, col. 2. 


LEONARD BERNKOP, A. D. 1542 

In the year 1542, Brother Leonard Bernkop was 
apprehended for the faith, at Salzburg. Much was 
tried to induce him to apostatize, but as he stead- 
fastly persevered in the narrow way of the truth 
of God, and there was no hope that he would 
apostatize, they condemned him to death, led him 
out to the place of execution, and built a fire close 
to him, at which they immediately roasted him; 
but he adhered firmly to the Lord, and said to the 
bloodhounds and executioners: "This side is 
roasted enough ; turn me around, and scorch and 
roast also the other ; for through the power of God 
this suffering is insignificant in comparison with 
the eternal." Rom. 8:18. Thus he gained the vic- 
tory over the beast and his image, over the abomi- 
nation of desolation and his mark. Rev. 15:2. 
Rather than receive his mark, or do aught which 
was contrary to God His heavenly Father, he, like 
the seven valiant and God-fearing sons (II Mace. 
7), gave his body to be roasted and executed by fire, 
which could in no wise separate him from the love 
of God (Rom. 8:39), hence he shall also have in 
his hands the harp of God, and, together with all 
conquerors in the faith, who have come out of 
great tribulation, shall have his mouth filled with 
laughter, and his tongue with praise, and shall sing 
the new song with the servants of God, and the 
song of the Lamb, yea, he shall forever behold the 
Almighty God. Rev. 15:2; 7:14; 14:3. I Cor 
13:12. 


HANS HUBER, A. D. 1542 

In this year, Brother Hans Huber, or Schu- 
macher, was imprisoned at Waserburg, in Bavaria, 
under the Count of Oting. Much having been re- 
sorted to, to draw him from the faith, but he re- 
maining quite steadfast, constantly confessing and 
testifying, that this wherein he stood was the true 
ground of truth, and the true faith in Christ Jesus 
our Saviour wherefore he also said that it was not 
hard for him to suffer this for Christ's sake, and 


466 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


was sentenced to death, and led out to the place of 
execution. The fire having reached his face, so that 
his hair and beard were singed off, they asked him 
whether he would recant, and they would let him 
live. He, however, would not recant, but remained 
steadfast in Christ. Hence he was immediately 
burnt alive, and thus faithfully paid his baptismal 
vow unto the Lord Christ, and delivered up his life 
as a true burntoffering for the Word of God ; for 
he would rather lose this temporal life, than be- 
come unfaithful to the Lord, thus showing himself 
to be a steadfast lover of God. 


DAMIAN OF ALGAU, A. D. 1543 

About this time, a brother named Damian, from 
Algau, was apprehended at Ingolstadt, in order to 
draw him away from the faith ; but when he could 
in no wise be turned from it, he was condemned to 
death. On his way to the place of execution, he 
admonished the people, and gave answer concern- 
ing his faith, so that a student said that one of two 
things was certain: that this man had his faith 
either from the wicked devil, or from the Spirit 
of God, since his knowledge was so extensive, be- 
cause to all appearance he was a simple man. 
Someone also admonished him, and asked him 
whether he would die as a pious Christian. 

He replied. "Yes." 

He again asked him : "What sign will you give 
us by which we may know this?" 

The brother said: "Pay attention when they 
burn me ; the smoke shall ascend straight to heav- 
en." 

This also came to pass. 

When he was executed, the executioner inquired 
the direction of the smoke, whether he had justly 
executed him. The judge answered: "You have 
executed him according to your pleasure ; I did not 
judge." Thus this witness of God and Christ ob- 
tained the martyrs' crown. 


OF A CERTAIN DECREE PUBLISHED IN ALL WEST 
FRIESLAND AGAINST MENNO SIMONS, AND, 
CONSEQUENTLY, AGAINST ALL AD- 
HERENTS OF HIS DOCTRINE, 
ABOUT A. D. 1543 

In Chronijk van den Ondergang, page 1104, 
col. 2 and 3, we find these words : 

About this time the servants of antichrist caused 
a dreadful decree to be proclaimed throughout all 
West Friesland, in which all malefactors and mur- 
derers were promised pardon for their crimes, the 
favor of the Emperor, freedom of the country, and 
one hundred carl-guilders, if they would deliver 
Menno Simons into the hands of the tormentors 
and executioners. 

This decree, when properly considered, indicates 
the extreme wickedness and tyranny of the West 
Friesian Regents of those times, against those who 
maintained or at least favored the true faith. All 


malefactors and murderers, who certainly, accord- 
ing to the laws of the country, were subject to very 
severe punishment, yea, to death, because of their 
crimes and murders, were here accounted better 
than a pious Christian, who injured no one; yea, 
their crimes were remitted them, and over and 
above this, a large sum of money, according to that 
time, was promised them, merely to deliver into the 
hands of the criminal judges, a single person, who 
maintained the true doctrine. How much may we 
suppose would they have promised them, had they 
been able to exterminate all orthodox believers, 
and, consequently, the entire church of God ? We 
certainly have just cause for the belief, that this 
came down very severely upon the heads of the 
true witnesses of Jesus in general ; that is, on those 
that resided in these regions; in regard to which 
we shall also show in the proper place, how very 
unmercifully the authorities there, through the 
instigation of some so-called spiritual persons, 
dealt with the innocent and defenseless sheep of the 
flock of Christ. 


GEORGE LIBICH, AND URSULA HELLRIGLING 
A. D. 1544 

About the year 1544, George Libich was impris- 
oned for the faith and the divine truth, at Fille- 
burg, near Innsbruck, and as this is a place of par- 
ticular danger because of evil spirits, as is well 
known, this brother therefore had much to resist, 
and was greatly tempted by the Evil One (I Peter 
5:9), who tempted him in visible form. He es- 
pecially tried him in various ways during the first 
year. Once he came to him in the form of a maiden, 
and wanted to embrace him. When the brother 
knelt down and prayed, he put something into his 
way, to prevent his praying. He also tried to take 
him off with him, but was not able to effect it. He 
further came to him in the form of a youth, and 
also in that of a soldier ; thus trying many and var- 
ious means; but when he could not accomplish 
anything, he went out of the tower at the top. He 
also told him much what happened among the 
church in the country ; that he had conversed with 
such brethren, and that they had told him such and 
such things. But when brother George reproved 
him, he finally let him be in peace, and attempted 
but little with him afterward. But the enemy 
tempted him not only himself, but also through his 
children. Thus once there came to him one wearing 
the garb of a brother, and acting as one. He sa- 
luted him, saying: "The Lord be with us, my 
brother," and wished him peace, in order to seduce 
and deceive him by such craftiness. But George 
asked him whence and from whom he came. He 
answered: "From Moravia, from the church of 
God." Then George asked him what message he 
brought, and how matters stood there. He told 
him that the church and the brethren were utterly 
driven away and dispersed; that each was sep- 
arated from the rest, and that it was all over with 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


467 


them. Then George perceived that it was decep- 
tion, reproved him for his craftiness, of which he 
was well aware, and drove him away by his earnest 
admonitions, which in all probability he did not 
soon forget. Over and above all this, when all 
temptation from Satan and his children was about 
to come to an end, a sister named Ursula Hellrig- 
ling, a beautiful young woman, who had also been 
apprehended for the faith, was put to him in prison, 
placed at the feet of George, and much of the time 
left with him. It is easy to imagine, what the devil 
and his seed would have liked to see. But they 
[these two pious witnesses of Christ] were valiant 
and God-fearing, and could by no allurements be 
moved or caused to fall. 

This George Libich knew beforehand the day 
and year when he was to be released. There were 
several others imprisoned near him, who were all 
liberated on the same day, returned to the church, 
and afterwards fell asleep in the Lord. 

Sister Ursula, who was imprisoned with him, 
through the providence of God, also obtained re- 
lease, and unharmed in her faith and conscience, 
returned to the church, and there fell asleep in the 
Lord. 


MARIA VAN BECKUM, AND URSULA, HER BROTH- 
ER'S WIFE, A. D. 1544 

In the year 1544, there was a sister in the Lord, 
named Maria van Beckum, whom her mother had 
driven from home on account of her faith. This 
having become known in the Bishopric* of Utrecht, 
and reported to the Stadtholder, he sent one Goos- 
sen van Raesveldt with many servants, to appre- 
hend this maiden at her brother's, John van Beck- 
um, whither she had fled. She was compelled to 
rise from her bed, and accompany them ; and 
when she saw the great number of people who had 
come on her account, she asked Ursula, her broth- 
er's wife, whether she would go with her and keep 
her company. The latter answered : "If John van 
Beckum is satisfied, I will gladly go with you, and 
we will rejoice together in the Lord." When 
Maria put this request to her brother, he consent- 
ed, and Ursula went with her. Here love was 
stronger than death, and firmer than the grave. 
Cant. 8:6. Her mother and sister had come from 
Friesland to see her ; but this could not move her ; 
she took leave of them, for she chose to suffer 
affliction, rather than to have worldly joy ; hence 
she went with her sister Maria. They were to- 
gether brought to Deventer. There blind leaders 
came to them, who with subtlety sought to win 
them to human institutions. But they answered : 
"We hold to the Word of God, and do not regard 
the dictates of the pope, nor the errors of the whole 
world." Friar Grouwel also sought to teach them 
much, but was not able to prove his assertions by 
the Scriptures. 


* Province. 


Now as he could not overcome them, he said: 
"The devil speaks through your mouth, away with 
them to the fire." 

They greatly rejoiced that they were worthy to 
suffer for the name of Christ, and to help bear His 
reproach. Acts 5:41. 

They were then brought to the house at Delden, 
where many efforts were made to cause them to 
apostatize, yet all in vain. A commissary came 
from the court of Burgundy, who greatly extolled 
the mass and all the institutions of the pope ; but he 
could not prevail against the Scriptures which they 
adduced. He then asked them whether they were 
rebaptized. They replied: "We have been bap- 
tized once according to the command of Christ and 
the practice of the apostles; for there is but one 
true baptism, and he who receives it, has put on 
Christ, and leads an unblamable life through the 
Holy Ghost, in the answer of a good conscience." 
Eph. 4:5; Gal. 3:27; I Pet. 3:21. He also asked 
them, whether they believed that Christ was wholly 
present in the sacrament. This they considered a 
blind question, and said : "God will have no like- 
ness or image, neither in heaven nor on earth 
(Exodus 20:4) ; for He says through the prophet: 
T, even I am the Lord; and beside me there is no 
Saviour.' Isa. 43:11. But as regards the Supper, 
we find that Christ left it as a memorial of His 
death, with bread and wine; as often as we com- 
memorate it, we are to show forth His death till He 
come." I Cor. 11: 26. 

Now as Maria and Ursula regarded all the insti- 
tutions of the pope as heresy, they were brought 
into open court at Delden, on the thirteenth of No- 
vember, before the children of Pilate and Caiaphas, 
where they were sentenced to death, in which they 
rejoiced, praising God. When they were led to the 
stake, many of the people, seeing their steadfast- 
ness, wept. But they sang for joy, and said : "Weep 
not on account of what is inflicted upon us." "We 
do not suffer," said Maria, "as witches or other 
criminals, but because we adhere to Christ, and 
will not be separated from God; hence be con- 
verted, and it shall be well with you forever." 

When the time of suffering drew nigh, Maria 
said : "Dear sister, heaven is opened for us ; for 
what we now suffer for a little while, we shall 
forever be happy with our bridegroom." They 
then gave each other the kiss of peace. Thereupon 
they prayed together to God, that He would forgive 
the judges their sins, since they knew not what they 
were doing; and that as the world was sunk in 
blindness, God would have compassion on them, 
and receive their souls into His eternal kingdom. 
They first took Maria, who entreated the author- 
ities not to shed any more innocent blood. Then 
she fervently prayed to God, and also prayed for 
those who put her to death; whereupon she joy- 
fully arose, and went with such great gladness to 
the stake, that it cannot be told, saying : "To Thee, 
O Christ, I have given myself ; I know that I shall 
live with Thee forever. Therefore, O God of heav- 


468 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


en, into Thy hands do I commend my spirit." The 
executioner swore because the chain did not suit 
him ; but she said : "Friend, consider what you are 
doing ; my body is not worthy that you should blas- 
pheme Christ on account of it; repent, lest you 
burn for it in hell." The preacher, a teacher at 
Delden, turned Ursula around, but she turned back 
again, and urgently said : "Let me behold the end 
of my sister, for I also desire to receive the glory 
into which she shall enter." 

After Maria was burned, they asked Ursula, 
whether she would not yet apostatize. "No," said 
she, "not for death; I will not thus forsake the 
eternal riches." They would also honor her with 
the sword, but she said : "My flesh is not too good 
to be burned for the name of Christ." To one of 
her relatives she said: "Bid John van Beckum 
good night, and tell him to serve God, to whom I 
am now about to be offered." When she came to 
the wood, she clasped her hands, and said : "Our 
Father which art in heaven." "Yea," said the 
priest, "there you will find Him." "Because I 
seek Him there," she said, "I must die this tem- 
poral death. If I should confess Him in the bread, 
I might live longer." When she stepped upon the 
wood, her foot slipped. "I think I am falling off," 
she said. "Stop," cried the tyrant ; "she means to 
apostatize." "No," said she, "the block slips from 
under me ; I will not faint in the Word of God, but 
constantly adhere to Christ." Thus both remained 
steadfast unto the end, and sealed the Word of God 
with their death, in great patience and boldness, 
leaving us a good example. 


JOHN CLAESS, AND LUCAS LAMBERTS, AN OLD MAN, 
CALLED GRANDFATHER; TOGETHER WITH 
SEVERAL TESTAMENTS WRITTEN BY JOHN 
CLAESS, WHILE IN PRISON AT AMSTER- 
DAM, TO HIS WIFE, CHILDREN, 
AND OTHER FRIENDS, IN 
THE YEAR 1544 

A testament to his wife 

An affectionate salutation in the Lord, to my 
beloved wife, whom I no longer love after the 
flesh, but after the soul. Hear my admonition: 
You know that as long as we enjoyed prosper- 
ity with Israel according to the flesh, we were 
ignorant of ourselves ; but now that the good Fa- 
ther lays His hand upon us, we feel that we are 
sick, weak, miserable, poor, and naked. Therefore, 
my dear wife, take Jesus Christ for an example, 
and behold the way in which He went before us, 
and that we must through much tribulation enter 
into the kingdom of heaven. Jas. 5 :10; II Tim. 3 : 
12. Forget my flesh and all your sensuality and all 
your carnal desires, and pray to God for faith that 
you may overcome. And I will willingly give my- 
self to the Lord in the same manner as He comforts 
my heart by His grace. You have yet time for 
amendment, but I am bound to His grace, in which 
I trust. Hence think not of what is past, but per- 


severe with a firm confidence in the Lord ; He will 
help you in everything for the best ; give yourself 
up to this and always join yourself to those who 
fear the Lord, for this will be for your best in- 
terests. For "blessed is the man that walketh not 
in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the 
way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scorn- 
ful ; but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and 
in his law doth he meditate day and night." Ps. 
1 :1, £. 

My beloved wife, the God-fearing speak of it, 
and thereby men depart from evil ; for by the fear 
of the Lord men depart from evil, and through 
love every good thing is accomplished. Prov. 16 :6. 
Awake, for we have both been negligent. Let the 
word of the Lord incite you to all good. Ask Him 
for His holy Spirit, who can comfort you ; for the 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in 
us. Romans 8 :18. For this is the trial which must 
be found in our faith, being much more precious 
than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire. I Peter 1 :7. 

My dear wife, if we might have entered into the 
kingdom of God as we began, and have so long 
been doing, the way would not have been narrow. 
But our Saviour had to enter through suffering and 
anguish into His own glory, — how then will we en- 
ter by the broad way ? For narrow is the way, says 
the Lord, which leadeth unto life, and few there be 
that find it, and still fewer who rightly walk in it. 
Matt. 7:14. The good Father did indeed show me 
this way, but my evil flesh was too powerful and 
forced me away from it. Nevertheless, I hope to 
be saved through the grace of the Lord ; for Paul 
says : "Though I bestow all my goods to feed the 
poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and 
have not charity, it profiteth me nothing;." Eph 
2:4; I Cor. 13:3. 

Consider what this charity is, and you shall be 
able to accept for the best whatever the Lord sends 
you. How should I be able to express it, love is 
the nature of God ; may it be with you and us all. 
I give it to you as an affectionate salutation. May 
the good and merciful Father shed it abroad into all 
our hearts, through His beloved Son. Amen. 

Salute all dear friends in the Lord. Pray the 
Lord for me ; all that He gives me, I will impart 
again. Ill John 14; I Thess. 5 :25. 

Another testament of John Claess, to his wife 
A. D. 1544 

Know, my dearly beloved wife, that it is my 
will and testament to you in no wise to depart 
from the word of the Lord, but always to comfort 
yourself with it ; for the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory 
which shall be revealed in us, if we continue in 
the faith. Oh, let us thereby overcome, and not 
turn away, and we shall receive the crown which 
the good Lord has promised unto all that love His 
appearing. II Tim. 4:8. If we desire to remain 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


469 


here, we do not love His appearing ; but if we ask 
Him for the Holy Spirit, the same will teach us in 
all things, and comfort and strengthen us through 
His grace, O let us pray; for through prayer we 
must receive everything. Hence, my dear wife, 
take no thought for the things that concern the 
body; but seek the kingdom of God, and His 
righteousness, and all these things shall be added 
unto you. Herewith I commend you to God, and 
to the word of His grace, which is able to strength- 
en and keep you in all temptation. The grace of the 
Lord be with you and us all. Amen. Bring up my 
dear children in the admonition of the Lord, this is 
my will to you; and associate with the good, for 
they prosper. Care not for temporal things ; for 
that which is visible must perish. What you can 
get take with you, and commit the rest to faithful 
friends; and remove with your little ones far 
enough to be out of danger, from men. Bring them 
up in the admonition of the Lord, and keep with 
those that fear the Lord. Deut. 6:20. My dear 
wife, be well contented ; if the Lord had taken me 
away by a sudden sickness, it would have been 
your duty to thank Him ; do so now. I leave you 
this as a testament. Watch every day of your life 
for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. I 
Tim. 6:14. The grace of the Lord be with you. 
Amen. 

A testament to his children, and then to his wife 

My dear little children, Claes Jans and Gertrude 
Jans, I leave you this as a testament when you come 
of age. Hear the instruction from your Father. 
Hate all that the world and your carnal nature love, 
and love the commandments of God. I John 2 :16. 
Let this instruct you, for it teaches : "If any man 
will come after me, let him deny himself ;" that is, 
let him forego his own wisdom and earnestly pray : 
"Lord, Thy will be done." Luke 9 :23 ; Prov. 3 :5 ; 
Matt. 6:10. If you do this, the Holy Spirit will 
teach you all that you ought to believe. Believe not 
what men say, but obey the commands of the New 
Testament, and ask God to teach you His will. 
Trust not to your understanding, but trust in the 
Lord, and let all your counsel be in Him, and ask 
Him to direct your paths. 

My children, how you are to love God the Lord, 
how you must honor and love your mother, and 
love your neighbor, and fulfill all other command- 
ments required of you by the Lord, the New Testa- 
ment will teach you. Matt. 22 :37, 39. Whatever is 
not contained therein, believe not ; but obey every- 
thing that is embraced in it. Associate with those 
who fear the Lord, who depart from evil, and who 
do every good thing through love. Oh, look not to 
the multitude or the old custom, but to the little 
flock which is persecuted for the word of the Lord ; 
for the good do not persecute, but are persecuted. 
When you have given yourselves to this, beware 
of all false doctrine ; for John says : "Whosoever 
transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of 
Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doc- 


trine of Christ he hath both the Father and the 
Son." II John 9. The doctrine of Christ is : Love, 
mercy, peace, chastity, faith, meekness, humility 
and perfect obedience to God. Gal. 5 :22, 23. 

My dear children, surrender yourselves to that 
which is good, and the Lord will give you under- 
standing in all things. I give you this as my last 
farewell. Regard the chastening of the Lord ; for 
if you do evil, He will punish you in your souls. 
Job 5:17. Hence desist, and cry to the Lord for 
help, and hate that which is evil, and the Lord shall 
deliver you, and you shall prosper. May God the 
Father, through His beloved Son Jesus Christ, give 
you His Holy Spirit, that He may guide you into 
all truth. Amen. John 16:13. 

I, John Claess, your father, have written this 
while in prison for the word of the Lord. May the 
good Father grant you His grace. Amen. 

My dear wife, I request you to bring up my 
children, in all good instruction, to have my testa- 
ment read to them, and to bring them up in the 
Lord, according to your ability, as long as you re- 
main with them. And I desire of you, that you love 
neither yourself nor your children more than the 
Lord and His testimony. Luke 14:26. Suffer not 
your flesh to overcome you. I Peter 2:11. If they 
do not tolerate you in this city, remove into an- 
other. Matt. 10 :23. But this I earnestly request of 
you : always keep with the good ; for blessed is he 
that associates with them. He who has always been 
the helper of the lowly, that is, the good Father, 
will help you. Luke 1 :48. If you cannot stand 
alone, take a husband that fears the Lord (I Corin- 
thians 7 :2) ; but whatever you do, forsake not the 
Lord for a little mess of pottage. Gen. 25 :34. May 
your excuse be never so great, but not for all Am- 
sterdam forsake the Lord. By His grace I will not 
forsake Him for the whole world, and do you also 
likewise. Matt. 16:26. Oh, let us press our way 
through by force ; I must, through the grace of the 
Lord, lose my flesh ; forsake yours also. Matthew 
11:12;16:25. 

My dear wife, if we should consider suffering, 
we would never get out of it; but we must look 
beyond it to the eternal reward. I joyfully comfort 
myself in the Lord ; do so also. The Lord might 
have taken me from my bed and you would have 
had to content yourself ; how much more now, for 
you know not how long you will remain here? 
Therefore do as the Lord counsels you : be always 
ready for His appearing, and you shall be able to 
overcome all things, to those that overcome ever- 
lasting rest is promised. Rev. 21 :7. 

A firm faith, a sure hope of the eternal reward, 
and a burning love to God and our neighbor be 
with you and me, and us all. Amen. Matt. 21 :21 ; 
I Peter 4:8. 

Write to me immediately how you are, and I 
shall be the more comforted if you comply with my 
request. Pray ; the Lord will be entreated ; this I 
now experience. Pray together all of you, that the 


470 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


will of the Lord be done in me and in us all. Amen. 
Matt. 6:10; 7:11. 

A testament of John Class to his brothers and 
sister after the flesh 

Know, my dear brothers, Cornelis Claess, and 
Gerritt Clsess, and my dear sister Adriaentgen 
Claess, that I affectionately desire of you, that you 
turn to the Lord, and forsake all your pride, covet- 
ousness, and all wickedness, as also all bad com- 
pany, and be quiet, and associate with the good. 
Search the Word of the Lord, and ask Him for 
His Holy Spirit, and the same shall instruct you in 
everything which is needful for you. This will 
come to pass, if you deny yourselves and forego 
your own will ; for the Lord says : "If any man 
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross daily and follow me." Therefore die 
unto all your lusts, and you shall never die, for the 
wages of sin is death. Col. 3 :5 ; Rom. 6 :23. But 
ask God for His Holy Spirit, who will so change 
your minds, that you will hate evil and shun it. 
Oh, my most beloved, hate that which is evil, and 
love the good, and God, who alone is good, will be 
with you. But if you will continue in your wicked 
sensuality, I testify to you from the mouth of the 
Lord, that you will condemn yourselves. Rom. 8 : 
13. But I am persuaded better things of you, 
though I thus speak. Heb. 6 :9. Oh, keep what the 
Lord hath made known to you, namely : "Whatso- 
ever ye would that men should do to> you, do ye 
even so to them," and it will be well with you, and 
you shall prosper in every good thing. To this end 
may the good God help you, through Jesus Christ 
His beloved Son. Amen. 

Another testament of John Class, to all his 
kindred 

Be it known to you, dear brothers and sisters, 
cousins and relatives, and all my kindred, that I do 
not suffer as a thief, murderer or evildoer, but for 
the ordinance which the apostles of the Lord taught 
and instituted, namely the ordinance of the holy 
church, made fifteen hundred years ago, which Je- 
sus Christ enjoined upon His dear disciples, and 
sealed with His blood, and which the apostles 
preached and taught, and confirmed with their 
blood. I Pet. 4:15; Mark 16:15; Heb. 9:14; Acts 
2:14; 7:58; 12:2. My dear friends, do not be de- 
jected or cast down on my account, because men 
say that I died as an Anabaptist and heretic. There 
is but one baptism given, and that upon faith ; be- 
fore faith God has not commanded baptism. Now 
someone might ask : "What ! ought infants not to 
be baptized ?" No ; but they are nevertheless saved 
through the merits of Jesus Christ, and are bap- 
tized in His blood; for it is written: "For as in 
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made 
alive." I Cor. 15:22. This is done through pure 
grace, without any sign. Acts 15 :11. But my dear 
friends, the Lord has commanded to preach the 
Gospel, and they that believe it, are to be baptized. 


Mark 16 :16. He also commanded that the believers 
should observe His Supper, in remembrance of 
Him, in such a manner as He instituted, and the 
apostles practiced it. Matt. 26 :26 ; Acts 2 :42. Be- 
sides these, He did not command them anything ; 
no mass, no infant baptism, no auricular confes- 
sion, nor any other outward worship. But He 
commanded to love God alone, to obey His Word, 
and to love our neighbor as ourselves. Luke 10 :27. 
Oh, where are they to be found who do this? 
Search the Word of God ; there is no Christian who 
does not know this. You cannot maintain thereby, 
what they teach, namely, that you should continue 
in the holy church. You must know what the holy 
church is, namely, the assembly of believers born 
by the Word of God (I Pet. 1 :23) ; for you well 
know that no one can come into this world without 
being born, so no one can come into the future 
world, unless he is born again as Peter declares : 
"not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by 
the word of God, which liveth and abideth for- 
ever." John 3:3; I Pet. 1 :23. Oh, well for him who 
is born of it ! they that are thus regenerated, prac- 
tice the true baptism and the true Supper. They 
also separate themselves from all who teach a 
scandalous doctrine, or live disorderly ; they do not 
destroy their bodies, for this is not taught in the 
Word of God ; but they avoid their company until 
they repent (II Thess. 3 :6) ; for they are the Chris- 
tian church, the community of the saints; they 
have forgiveness of sins; for there is none other 
name given in heaven or on earth whereby they 
can be saved, but the name of Jesus; that is, 
through His merits. Acts 4:12. They believe and 
live only according to His ordinances. He did not 
kill those who did not believe in Him, neither did 
His holy church do this. But He and His own have 
been slain from the beginning, and thus it shall 
continue. Rev. 13:8. By this you shall know who 
are His own. Not those who boast of His name, 
and maintain their cause with the sword ; but those 
that live according to the example of their Lord, 
and confirm their cause with the Word of God, 
which is the sword of the true believers. I Pet. 2 : 
21 ; Eph. 6:17. Now some might say: "What has 
become of the forefathers, who did not know bet- 
ter?" We leave this to God. It might also be said 
that the Lord promised to be with us even unto the 
end of the world. Matt. 28 :20. He is always with 
believers — but never with unbelievers — namely, 
with His word and the right use of His signs, 
that is, baptism and the Supper, and will always 
be with those who walk aright, and live conform- 
ably to His Word. 

Dear friends, at the time of the apostles there 
arose seven different sects among them, but the 
true doctrine was therefore not to be rejected. Now, 
though many wicked miscreants have arisen under 
the Gospel, the Word of God has not depreciated : 
he that would be saved must submit to it. Romans 
9 :6. In the time of the righteous Tobit all Israel 
worshiped golden calves, which king Jeroboam had 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


471 


caused to be made ; he [Tobit] alone adhered to the 
Lord his God, and did what He had commanded 
him. 

Friends, look not to the multitude, but to the 
Word of God, which will not deceive you. "Cursed 
be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh 
his arm ; but blessed is the man that trusteth in the 
Lord." Jer. 17:5, 7. I trust in this, that He prays 
to His Father, not only for those who were with 
Him, but also for all them who shall turn to Him 
through the word. John 17:20. May the good Fa- 
ther, through His only Son Jesus Christ, give you 
a true understanding, that you may henceforth 
learn to know Him. II Tim. 2 :7. 


ACCOUNT OF THE SENTENCE PASSED ON JOHN 
CL^ESS, AND THE OLD MAN NAMED LUCAS LAM- 
BERTS OF BEVOREN, ALSO CALLED GRAND- 
FATHER ; AND HOW THEY DIED 

When John Clsess, and Lucas Lamberts, an old 
man of eighty-seven years, called grandfather, 
came into court, they greeted each other with a kiss. 

John Clsess said to the grandfather : "My dear 
brother, how do you feel?" 

The grandfather replied pleasantly with a glad 
countenance : "Quite well, my dear brother." 

Then said John Clsess: "Fear neither fire nor 
the sword; Oh, what a joyful feast will be pre- 
pared for us before the clock strikes twelve !" 

Upon this they were separated. 

The bailiff then said : "You are rebaptized." 

John Clsess answered : "I was baptized upon my 
faith, as all Christians ought to be, according to the 
Scriptures; read this." Matt. 28:19. 

They said to him again : "You belong to the ac- 
cursed Anabaptists, who originate strange sects, 
opinions, errors and contention among the people." 
Acts 16:20; 17:6. 

John Class : "We are not such people ; we de- 
sire nothing else than the true Word of God; if 
I am to suffer therefore, I demand the seven 
'judges."* 

He was then asked whether he did not confess 
that he was rebaptized four years ago or there- 
abouts. 

John Clsess replied : "Three years ago or there- 
abouts I was baptized as all Christians ought to be." 

The court said: "You acknowledge it then?" 

John Class: "Yes." 

Court : "Well, since you confess it, we have full 
power from the seven judges." 

John Class: "Can I not obtain the full court? 
it is granted even to thieves and murderers, why 
should it not be granted to me ?" 


* We have in our possession the original sentence of thes« two 
persons; but as the gist of the same is given here, it is not neces- 
sary to adduce it verbatim. 


The four judges then went out to pronounce the 
sentence. 

Lifting up his voice, John Clsess said : "O mer- 
ciful Father, Thou knowest that we do not desire 
revenge" (Rom. 12:19), and he wrung his hands, 
saying : "O merciful Father, grant them Thy Spirit, 
that Thou mayest not count this to them as wicked- 
ness." Acts 7 :60. 

The four judges now returned into the court, 
and sat down to declare the sentence, saying : "John 
Clsess, a native of Alkmaar, who has taught the 
people false doctrines, errors and new opinions — " 

Upon this John Clsess answered : "It is not so." 

The lords of the court then forbade John Clsess to 
speak, and good John Clsess observed silence, that 
he might hear his sentence. They then proceeded 
with their sentence, and said to the clerk : "Read 
his crime." He read that he had caused to be print- 
ed at Antwerp six hundred books, which he had 
concluded with Menno Simons, and scattered 
abroad in this country, containing strange opinions 
and sectarianism, and had kept school and held 
meetings, to introduce errors among the people 
(Acts 17 :6), which is contrary to the decree of the 
Emperor, and our mother the holy church, and 
which it is not proper for my lords of the court to 
tolerate, but to correct. 

Here John Clsess reproved them as before, say- 
ing: "They are not sectarianisms, but it is the 
Word of God." Acts 24:14. 

Then the lords of the court said : "We sentence 
you to death, to be executed with the sword, the 
body to be placed on the wheel, and the head upon 
a stake; we do not sentence you, but the court 
does." 

As John Clsess went out of the court, he said : 
"You citizens bear witness that we die for no 
other reason than for the true Word of God." 
This occurred in the court. Having ascended the 
scaffold, John Clsess audibly addressed the people 
with these words: "Hear, ye citizens of Amster- 
dam ; be it known unto you, that I suffer not as a 
thief or murderer, or because we have sought the 
property or life of others. However, do not under- 
stand me as justifying or exalting myself ; but I 
come with the prodigal son, and depend only on the 
pure Word of God." 

Upon this the executioner struck him on his 
breast. John Clsess turned around, and exclaimed 
with a loud voice: 

"O Lord, forsake me not, now or in eternity. 
Lord, Thou Son of David, receive my soul." 

Thus the dear brother John Clsess confirmed the 
Word of God with his crimson blood, his head then 
being placed upon a stake, and his body on the 
wheel, as food for the birds and wild beasts. And 
the old grandfather of eighty-seven years, also will- 
ingly, for the truth of Christ Jesus, yielded his 
hoary head and beard to the sword of these tyrants. 
They now rest together under the altar. 


472 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


A NUMBER OF BELIEVERS BAPTIZED ACCORDING TO 
THE COMMAND OF CHRIST, HAVING ASSEM- 
BLED TO HEAR THE WORD OF GOD, ARE 
PUT TO DEATH AT ROTTERDAM, IN 
THE YEAR 1544 

As Saint Paul, through the Spirit of God, fore- 
told that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution, so it was also verified in the city 
of Rotterdam, about A. D. 1544, where a number 
of the pious followers of Jesus Christ had assem- 
bled together in the name of the Lord, to converse 
with each other about the Word of God, and thus 
to edify and strengthen one another in the accepted 
truth of the holy Gospel ; also to pray with an hum- 
ble heart and with one accord to the great God of 
heaven and earth, for forgiveness and remission 
of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and thus 
to give praise and thanks with one mind to His 
most adorable name. Eph. 5:1 ; Heb. 10:24; 3:13; 
I Thess. 5:11; Rom. 15:16; Acts 1:14. 

This good exercise in godliness the papists, who 
hate the truth, sought to prevent and stop as much 
as lay in their power, so that said God-fearing as- 
sembly fell into their hands, having been betrayed 
by a woman who came to the house to borrow a 
kettle. The defenseless sheep having thus fallen 
into the claws of the wolves, these, according to 
their nature, treated them in the most cruel manner, 
in order to draw them away from the truth ; all of 
which they willingly suffered and endured in pa- 
tience for the name of Jesus, in the firm hope of 
His imperishable kingdom. Therefore, since they 
could by no tortures be brought to apostatize, they 
were sentenced to death, which sentence was exe- 
cuted in the following manner : The men were be- 
headed with the sword at the said place, while the 
women, in the most cruel manner were thrown 
into a boat, and thrust under the ice until death fol- 
lowed. Thus these two assemblies, or classes of 
people, that is the church of God, and the congre- 
gation of Satan clearly evinced of which spirit 
they were children (I John 3:10; Luke 9:55); 
which can! easily be seen by their fruits and nature. 
The anti-Christians by this, that, as ravening and 
devouring wolves, they were born by nature to 
seize and destroy. The congregation of Jesus 
Christ by this, that, as humble sheep and lambs, 
dumb, and with no desire for revenge, they were 
thus led to the slaughter, and willingly gave their 
bodies for the name of the Lord. Matt. 7:15; 10: 
16 ; Ps. 44 :22 ; I Peter 4 :13. Therefore, these sheep 
shall, at the reappearing of the great Shepherd, 
hear, together with all faithful servants, the joy- 
ful voice : "Enter into the joy of your Lord." Heb 
13:20; Matt. 25:23. 

Among those that were thus offered, there was 
also a young maiden of but fourteen years. She 
composed the hymn in the old hymnbook, begin- 
ning thus : 


Emanuel die is uytgetogen, uyt sijns Vaders rijck 
ins werelts pleyn.* 


FRANCIS OF BOLSWEERT, A. D. 1545 

At Bolsweert, in Friesland, there was a true lamb 
of Christ, named Francis, who lived uprightly in 
the fear of God. Job 1 :1. He was therefore appre- 
hended, and conveyed in a sleigh to Leeuwaerden, 
where he was asked before the council, why he 
would not swear, nor observe the Supper with them 
in the church. He answered: "My lords, Christ 
teaches us that we must not swear at all ; and be- 
cause you people are unbelieving and unclean, I 
will not keep fellowship with you?" At these 
words the lords were offended, and said : "We are 
neither thieves nor murderers; what uncleanness 
then have we ? but it seems to us, that you hold a 
false doctrine, and of such heretics there are still 
more, all of whom we intend utterly to extermin- 
ate." Francis said : "My lords, be not angry ; but 
you high priests, show me the false doctrine which 
I hold, and this from the Bible, for I have brought 
one with me ; come and instruct me from it." 

The lords then counseled with the priests of Jeze- 
bel, and said : "He has despised our mass ; he con- 
demns our customs, and we have a strict mandate, 
to which we must be obedient, and according to 
that he must die. Thus he was sentenced to be 
burned to ashes on Palm Sunday eve, A. D. 1545. 
For this sentence he undauntedly thanked the 
Lords and said : "I will forgive you all this from 
my heart, wishing that the Spirit of God would en- 
lighten you unto reformation, that you may repent 
and live according to the Word of God ; I now go 
to the holy city, and the inheritance of my Father." 
He was then led to death, as a sheep to the slaugh- 
ter. Many that saw it wept ; but he said : "Weep 
not, but prepare yourselves to die unto your sins, 
for this is the true way to enter into life." He also 
spoke many other comforting words. 

After he had openly prayed : "Lord God, receive 
my soul and guide it into Thy peace," the execu- 
tioner commenced his work. Having stripped him 
of his clothes, and fastened him to the stake, he 
was about to strangle him with a rope, when the 
rope broke, and he fell down. This frightened the 
executioner, and he endeavored quickly to burn 
him to ashes with much peat and wood ; but God 
manifested His miraculous power, so that the fire 
lost its natural force, and the body could not be 
burned entirely ; on which account the lords became 
angry at the executioner, and said that he had not 
brought enough wood ; but it was the will of God 
that he should thus be received into the number of 
the martyrs. 


OSWALD OF JAM NITS, A. D. 1545 

In this year, Brother Oswald of Jamnits, was 
impriso ned for the faith, at Vienna, in Austria, and 

wortd 5 " 13 """ 1 Went f0r "' fr ° m H ' S Father ' s kingdom into this 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


473 


various means were tried to cause him to aposta- 
tize. The citizens came to him in prison, and in a 
friendly manner earnestly admonished him to re- 
cant, or they would have to drown him in the Dan- 
ube. But he said : "Though you drown me, I will 
not depart from God and His truth. Christ died 
for me, and Him will I follow, and also die for His 
truth, far rather than forsake it." No matter what- 
ever they said, they could not make him apostatize. 
Two brethren then came to him, who comforted 
him; to them he commended his wife and child. 
They embraced each other, and thus took leave 
from one another, wishing him patience in his suf- 
fering, which he innocently had to endure. After 
having been confined for one year and six weeks, 
they took him from prison on a certain Wednesday 
night ; took him out of the city, that the multitude 
of the people should neither see nor hear anything, 
and drowned him in the Danube. There was no 
trial held over him, nor was his crime made known. 
Since he patiently and cheerfully persevered 
unto the end, God shall also confess him; and 
though they executed him secretly and at night, yet 
he shall appear in the open judgment of the Lord 
in the valley of Jehosaphat, where another judg- 
ment will be held. Joel 3:2. And that judgment 
will fall a hundredfold more heavily upon the 
heads of those who thus presumptuously condemn 
innocent blood on earth ; yea, it shall be more tol- 
erable for those of Sodom and Gomorrah in the last 
day, than for such. Matt. 10:15. 


ANDREW KOFLER, A. D. 1545 

In the year 1545, one Andrew Kofler from 
Etschland was also apprehended for the faith and 
the divine truth, at Ips, on the Danube. As he 
would not renounce, and could not be made to 
apostatize by the priests and false prophets, he was 
sentenced to death by the children of Pilate, and 
delivered to the executioner, who executed him 
with the sword, thus satisfying the ungodly. Thus 
he valiantly confessed and testified to the truth of 
God even unto death, and is now gone before into 
eternal light and life, and rests in Abraham's bos- 
om, yea, under the altar, under which those lie, 
who have been beheaded and slain for the Word of 
God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, until the 
number of their fellow brethren who shall also be 
killed as they were, shall be fulfilled. 


HANS BLIETEL, A. D. 1545 

In this year, also Brother Hans Blietel, who had 
been sent by the church, was apprehended at Ried, 
in Bavaria ; for those of Ried had offered a sum of 
money to the one who should apprehend him. 
Hence, there was a traitor, who addressed him with 
fair words, pretending to be very zealous, and un- 
der a desire to be with him, decoyed him into his 
house. The brother supposed that he was con- 
cerned for the salvation of his soul, and went with 
him. He then locked him into his house, and said : 


"Hans, you are a prisoner." But Hans replied: 
"God forbid that you should do this; have I not 
come to thee for good?" 

The traitor demanded money of him, and he 
would release him ; but when the brother refused to 
accede to this demand, he went to the authorities 
and betrayed him. While he went, the wife of the 
traitor also demanded money of him ; for, said she, 
the authorities would take him along any way ; she 
wanted fifteen guilders, and they would let him go 
away from the house. But Brother Hans Blietel 
would not consent to give her one farthing; but 
would with the help of God await all tribulation. 
In the meantime, the authorities came with a great 
number of armed men, and apprehended the 
brother, together with the traitor and his wile, se- 
curing them well with ropes, bonds and straps. 

Having arrived in the market town of Ried, they 
took them, and tormented them dreadfully, the 
traitor as well as the brother; for the authorities 
thought that he had taken money from the brother, 
because they found so little on him. The traitor's 
wife also had her hand squeezed until the blood 
flowed from it ; for they wanted her to tell it. And 
though they had not received anything, their 
treachery became a source of sore grief to them. 

When Brother Hans had lain in prison for four 
or five weeks, he was sentenced to death, about St. 
John's day, to be burnt alive. He was led out to the 
place of execution, where the priests attempted to 
induce him to desist from and forsake his faith; 
but he said to them : "You may well desist from 
your wicked deception; I will not hear or em- 
brace your false doctrine ; I have at this day some- 
thing else to do, than to listen to you false prophets ; 
I must follow the Lord my God in Christ, and ful- 
fill what I have promised." The priests, therefore, 
stood back, and left him be in peace. On his way 
to the place of execution he met one of his ac- 
quaintances, named Michael Dirks, or Kramer. 
Hans Blietel looked at Michael with a smiling 
countenance, and pointed him to heaven. The lat- 
ter was astonished that he could smile, going as he 
was to death and the fire. This produced a com- 
plete contrition of heart in Michael, as also in his 
wife, who did not eat anything for three days, but 
sought to join the church, and become pious, and 
others with them. 

When the dear Brother Hans arrived at the place 
of execution, he thought of the church, and cried 
with a loud voice unto the multitude of the people 
assembled : "Is there any one here, who has 
courage to tell the church of God in Moravia, that 
I, Hans Blietel, was burned for the Gospel, at 
Ried, in Bavaria ?" Thereupon a zealous man, full 
of piety, kindled thereby, revealed himself, and 
though he could not get to him, he called to him, 
that he would inform the church in Moravia, that 
he was burned at Ried, for the faith; which en- 
couraged Brother Hans, so that he again cried out 
to the people : "This my faith is the divine truth, 
which I will show to you ; and I say unto you, re- 


474 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


pent, reform, and desist from your unrighteous, 
wicked, and vicious life ; for if you do not do this, 
the eternal God shall visit you for your sins, and 
punish you with the everlasting pain which is pre- 
pared for all sinners, and He shall require the in- 
nocent blood at your hands, and punish you for it." 
The fire having been kindled and prepared, he 
was tied upon a ladder. In the meantime, he testi- 
fied again that this was the truth and the way to 
eternal life, and the true church of God, appealing 
to heaven and earth as His witnesses. "And to- 
day," said he, "shall God give a sign in heaven, to 
testify that this is the way to eternal life." This 
also occurred ; for the sun in the sky was darkened 
and became full of spots, so that he gave forth no 
shadow. Though the sky was quite clear and bright, 
yet the sun emitted a very pale and yellow light 
upon the earth ; for God intended to confirm it by 
this sign. This lover of God also sang in the fire, 
in which he lived for some time, praising God by 
his singing, and praying for all men who were 
worthy, that God would enlighten them. And thus 
he was found constant and steadfast in the faith, 
in the trial of the fire, even as the precious and 
pure gold. He had also foretold as a sign, that his 
smoke would quickly rise on high over him, and 
his soul ascend in it unto heaven ; which came to 
pass, the smoke ascending straight up to heaven. 
Some said that a beautiful white dove flitted in the 
fire, and flew over him to heaven. Thus God as- 
sisted him very powerfully. 

MICHAEL MATSCHILDER, ELIZABETH HIS WIFE, 
AND HANS GURTZHAM, A. D. 1546 

In the year 1546, Brother Michael Matschilder, 
also called Little Michael, a minister of Jesus 
Christ and His church, and two others, namely, his 
wife, Elizabeth, and Hans Gurtzham, a shoemaker, 
were apprehended and examined at Altenburg, in 
Upper Ksernthen. A doctor and a learned man of 
Villach disputed with them ; but this brother gave 
them such answers, that they had to withdraw in 
confusion, unable to accomplish anything. 

They were then led in iron chains through Styria, 
and delivered into the bailey, at Vienna, to the 
jailer, who said: "Come, I will bring you into a 
vault, where others of your brethren are. In there 
were Hans Stautdach and three fellow prisoners. 

When they met, they embraced and kissed each 
other, and praised God, who had brought them to- 
gether for the glory of His name. Hans Stautdach 
and his three fellow prisoners were then executed ; 
but these others were kept in prison longer ; that 
is, about three years, namely, until the year 1549, 
when a conflagration occurred in the city. Then, 
as is customary in that city when a conflagration 
occurs, the gates of the city were closed, and the 
prisoners released. After the fire was extin- 
guished^ Brother Michael and his wife, through 
the providence of God and the assistance of a citi- 
zen, escaped from the city, and came to the church. 


Thus God delivered them unharmed and in peace. 
But Hans Gurtzham went back to prison, and was 
confined there one year longer, namely, until the 
year 1550, when he was executed, about June, be- 
ing drowned in the Danube, early on a certain Fri- 
day morning. 


QUIRINUS PIETERS OF GRCENINGEN, BURNT ALIVE 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT 

AMSTERDAM, IN HOLLAND, ON THE 

16TH OF APRIL, A. D. 1545 

When the constraint of conscience and faith did 
not cease, but increased and broke forth more and 
more through the adherents of popery, against the 
pious Christians, who, according to the command 
of Christ had been baptized upon their faith, it oc- 
curred, that a certain pious brother, named Qui- 
rinus Pieters, a native of Grceningen, also separated 
from popery, and joined the cross-bearing church 
of Jesus Christ, called Baptists, or, contemptu- 
ously, Anabaptists, having been received into the 
church through baptism upon confession of his 
faith, by Menno Simons, who was at that time 
one of the most eminent teachers in Friesland. 

But when he, about six years ago, went to Hol- 
land, and settled down at Amsterdam, there to live 
in quiet according to his faith and conscience, he 
was very speedily discovered by the authorities, 
apprehended, and finally, as he would not aposta- 
tize, sentenced to death, on the sixteenth of April, 
A. D. 1545, namely, to be burned to death; which 
dreadful and severe punishment this pious hero of 
Christ steadfastly endured, having commended his 
soul into the hands of God. 

All of this we have taken from the following sen- 
tence, which was publicly read to him, on the day 
of his death, by the rulers of darkness, and a true 
copy of which, extracted from the book of criminal 
sentences, has now been transmitted to us through 
the secretary there. The contents of the same, with 
the exception of the title, are as follows : 

Sentence of death pronounced upon Quirinus 
Pieters oj Grceningen 

Whereas Quirinus Pieters, a native of Grcenin- 
gen, has embraced the unbelief and heresy of the 
Anabaptists, having been rebaptized about six years 
ago, by Menno Simons, a teacher of the aforesaid 
sect, and whereas he holds pernicious views con- 
cerning the sacraments of the holy church, and, 
moreover, has induced others, into such unbelief 
and errors, persuading them into it, directly con- 
trary to the holy Christian faith, the ordinances of 
the holy church, and the decrees of his Imperial 
Majesty, our gracious lord ; and whereas he obsti- 
nately continues in the aforesaid unbelief, there- 
fore, my lords the judges, having heard the demand 
made by my lord the bailiff concerning the afore- 
said Quirinus Pieters, as also his answer and con- 
fession, and having fully considered the circum- 
stances of said matters, sentence the aforesaid Qui- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


475 


rinus Pieters to be burnt by the executioner ; and 
furthermore, declare his property confiscated for 
the benefit of the exchequer of his Imperial Maj- 
esty. Pronounced this sixteenth of April, A. D. 
1545, in the presence of the entire bench of judges, 
except Sir Henry Dirks, Burgomaster. 

Pursuant to this sentence, Quirinus Pieters was 
executed by the executioner on the same day. 

The whole of this was extracted from the book 
of criminal sentences, in the keeping of the sec- 
retary of the city of Amsterdam. N. N. 

HANS STAUDTACH, ANTONY KEYN, BLASIUS BECK, 
AND LEONHAED SCHNEIDER, A. D. 1546 

In the year 1546, four brethren, namely, Hans 
Staudtach of Kaufbeuren, Anthony Keyn, a tailor 
of Gunzenhausen, Blasius Beck and Leonhard 
Schneider, both of them also of Kaufbeuren, while 
on their way, with their wives and children, to the 
church in Moravia, were apprehended in Austria. 
On the third of August they were brought to Vi- 
enna, two and two fettered together, with great 
chains on their feet, and led through the city like 
criminals, with their wives and children following 
after them. They were brought into prison, with 
their wives and children, and left for four days. 
In these four days they were examined, and sorely 
assailed, w^i ier they would continue in this faith ; 
this they confessed, with the help and power of 
God they would do. Thereupon the four brethren 
were put into another prison. Afterwards they ex- 
amined them again, and brought their wives and 
children into the house of the judge, but prevented 
the brethren from talking much with them. 

On Sunday, the sixteenth of August, much peo- 
ple came to them in prison, and talked with the 
brethren, and concerning their wives. But how- 
ever hard they were pressed to recant, they re- 
mained valiant and steadfast, though they threat- 
ened to take away their children from them. In the 
meantime, however, their wives were released, and 
came to the church. Subsequently much craftiness 
was resorted to, to intimidate them, and cause them 
to apostatize. Four times they were brought be- 
fore the authorities at Vienna, also before monks, 
priests and doctors, whom Christ does not in vain 
designate ravening wolves, of whom we are to be- 
ware ; for their priests are like wolves, and indeed 
come under a fair appearance, to devour them; 
yea, would have them all killed and destroyed. 
Hence, it grieves the false prophets to leave any 
one pious and unseduced, and therefore they labor 
much and in many various ways. They have 
enough who follow the doctrine of their false 
prophets, and walk after their ungodly and vicious 
life ; they might well leave the pious in peace. 

Thus they also tempted these lovers of God, yet 
could not gain them, but were put to shame and 
reproach : for no one can pluck Christ's own out of 
His hand. John 10 :28. They also read to them the 
mandate of the king, and threatened them with fire, 


water and the sword, or that they should be kept 
on bread and water, and separated, or drowned in 
the night, like Brother Oswald of Jamnits, as re- 
lated previously. By these things they endeavored 
to intimidate them ; but there was no intimidating 
these soldiers and heroes of the truth of God. 

On the fifth day after St. Michael's they were 
subjected to another hearing, whether they would 
renounce their faith; if not, they had orders to 
put them to death by fire, water or the sword. This 
was the last warning. But when they could accom- 
plish nothing by their threats, they brought all four 
of them back into the Joppen (a prison). Hans 
Staudtach was left in prison, Blasius in the wood- 
room, and Leonhard, with another, in a vacant 
apartment; but afterwards, about All Souls Day, 
they were put together again. 

After all this, as they remained constant and 
steadfast, and continued to confess that they were 
going in the true way of the divine truth, which 
they were willing to seal with their blood, they were 
condemned to death, a little after St. Martin's day, 
on the 22d of November, and delivered to the exe- 
cutioner, who bound them, and, in order to avoid 
too great a sensation, and not to have a large con- 
course of people come together he led them out to 
the place of execution, in the morning, at day- 
break. 

When they were being led out to the slaughter, 
they boldly and joyfully sang. A ring was made, 
as the executioners usually do. The brethren then 
knelt down and fervently prayed, offering up this 
burnt offering as their final farewell to the world. 

The executioner became sad, acted with reluc- 
tance, and was grieved in his heart that he had to 
perform this execution. The other children of Pi- 
late also wished to be innocent, yet they had to do 
it because of their superiors in authority, and by 
virtue of their office ; but they would much rather 
have been excused. 

They then blessed each other, and exhorted one 
another to steadfastness, to be strong and of good 
cheer, saying : "Today we shall be together in the 
kingdom of our heavenly Father," etc. 

Thus all four were beheaded with the same 
sword and undauntedly and boldly surrendered 
their necks for the name of Christ. 


dirk pieters smuel and jacob den gelders- 

man, burnt alive at amsterdam, on the 

24th of may, a. d. 1546 

After manifold tribulations and afflictions upon 
the pious followers of Jesus Christ, it came to pass, 
that the procurator from the Hague, and the bailiff 
of Amsterdam, Waterlandt and Zeevanck, came to 
Edam with a whole troop of beadles. These came 
on the 12th of March, that is on the Friday preced- 
ing Shrove Tuesday, A. D. 1546, at night, with 
torches, and lanterns, to the house of Dirk Pieters 
Smuel and Jacob den Geldersman, both of them 
citizens of Edam, of one faith, and seekers of the 


476 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


truth. They took them out of their own houses 
from their beds, and led them from the east end out 
of the stone portal to the west end, where they were 
put into a boat, and thus brought prisoners to Am- 
sterdam, whence, after a certain time, they were 
brought to the Hague, where, on the 16th of May 
of the same year, they were examined concerning 
their faith, and as they would steadfastly adhere to 
the accepted truth, were sentenced, on the 22d of 
May, in the high court of the lords of this world, to 
be burnt alive. Thereupon they were again brought 
to Amsterdam, where, after suffering many trials, 
they were bound on ladders, and burned alive, en- 
during it with great steadfastness. They joyfully 
surrendered and forsook their earthly habitations, 
and are now awaiting a building of God, which 
shall endure forever in heaven. II Cor. 5:1. 


ANDREW SMUEL AND DIRK METERS. THE DEFENSE 

AND CONFESSION OF FAITH WHICH THEY 

MADE AT AMSTERDAM BEFORE THE 

COMMISSARIES, AND CONFIRMED 

WITH THEIR DEATH, IN 

THE YEAR 1546 

Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ forever and ever, Amen. Hear my confes- 
sion to the princes of this world. In the first place, 
they inquired concerning my faith. I therefore said 
to them : "A scribe came to the Lord, and asked 
Him, saying : 'Master, which is the great command- 
ment ?' The Lord said to him : 'Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as 
thyself ; this is the greatest commandment, and 
there is no other.' The scribe answered and said : 
'Thou hast answered well, that there is one God, 
and to love him with all the heart, and with all the 
soul, and with all the strength, and to love our 
neighbor as ourself, is more than all whole burnt 
offerings and sacrifices.' " 

To this they replied : "We know that there is 
one God ; but do you believe, that when the priest 
stands at the altar, God is in his hands ?" 

I said, "No. Stephen said: 'Behold, I see the 
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on 
the right hand of the Almighty Father.' " Acts 
7:56. 

They again said : "Then you do not believe that 
he is there?" 

I said: "No." 

Question: "We have been told, that when your 
pastor went on one side of the street, and you and 
two others on the other, you gave no honor either 
to him or to the sacrament ; is this true ?" 

Answer: "Yes." 

Ques. "Why did you do this?" 

Ans. "I will tell you, my lords : the Lord says 
through the prophet Isaiah, chapter 2, verse 8: 
'They worship the work of their own hands : that 
which their own fingers have made : and the mean 


man boweth down, and the great man humbleth 
himself : therefore forgive them not.' " 

Ques. "Did you do it for the reason that it was 
made by the hands of men ?" 

Ans. "Yea, my lords, because I would not offend 
my Lord and my God with it." 

Ques. "How long ago is it since you went to 
confession the last time?" 

Ans. "About two or three years." 

Ques. "Why so?" 

Ans. "Because the Lord has said : 'Come unto 
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest.' " Matt. 11 :28. 

Ques. "Did you do it on this account?" 

Ans. "Yes." 

Ques. "How long is it since you attended the 
sacrament ?" 

Ans. "Also about two or three years." 

Ques. "Why so ?" 

Ans. "Because Paul says : 'Christ presented to 
himself a glorious church, not having spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be 
holy and without blemish.' " Eph. 5 :27. 

Ques. "Did you do it because you were not 
worthy of it?" 

Ans. "Yes, because I have spots and wrinkles." 

Ques. "What do you believe concerning the holy 
church ?" 

Ans. "I know of no holy church, except the 
congregation of the apostles, of which Christ is the 
cornerstone." 

Ques. "We well know this, that there was a holy 
church then." 

Ans. "Can another foundation be laid, than that 
is laid ? I Cor. 3:11. Paul says to the Galatians, in 
the first chapter : 'I marvel that ye are so soon re- 
moved from him that called you into the grace of 
Christ, unto another gospel : which is not another ; 
but there be some that trouble you, and would per- 
vert the gospel of Christ. But though we, or an 
angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto 
you, than that which we have preached unto you, 
let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I 
now again, If any man preach any other gospel 
unto you than that ye have received, let him be ac- 
cursed. For do I now persuade men, or God ? or 
do I seek to please men ? for if I yet pleased men, 
I should not be the servant of Christ. But I certify 
you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached 
of me is not after man. For I neither received it of 
man, neither was I taught it.' Gal. 1 :6-12. He 
further says, to the Corinthians : 'For I determined 
not to know anything among you, save Jesus 
Christ, and him crucified.' " I Cor. 2 :2. 

Ques. "Well, what do you hold concerning Mary 
the mother of God?" 

Ans. "Much, for she humbled herself before the 
Lord, and was exalted through her humility." 

Ques. "You have answered well. What do you 
hold with regard to purgatory?" 

Ans. "I know of only two ways." Matt. 7:13. 

Ques. "Do you know your pastor well?" 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


477 


Ans. "I know him well by sight; but I have 
never spoken to him, nor he to me." 

Ques. "Why did you not hear him?" 

Ans. "Because James says in his first chapter : 
'A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.' " 

Ques. "Well, what did he say?" 

Ans. "I have heard say that he said that man 
can not be saved through the death of Christ alone." 

Ques. "Did he say amiss in this?" 

Ans. "Yes; Paul says: 'By him all that believe 
are justified from all things, from which we could 
not be justified by the law of Moses.' " Acts 13: 
39. 

Ques. "It is well known that we can not be saved 
through the law." 

Ans. "Peter says that there is none other name 
under heaven given among men, whereby they can 
be saved, than through the name of Jesus Christ." 

Ques. "How long is it since you were bap- 
tized?" 

Ans. "Ever since I was born." 

Ques. "Are you satisfied, that you can be saved 
by baptism?" 

Ans. "I believe to be saved through the death of 
Christ." 

Ques. "We nevertheless must know whether 
you believe that you will be saved by it?" 

Ans. "I believe to be saved through the death of 
Christ." 

Ques. "If you had the opportunity, would you 
not be baptized again ?" 

Ans. "I know not ; for God knows both to will 
and to do." 

Ques. "Still, we want to know whether you re- 
gard the baptism which you received in your in- 
fancy as the true baptism, or that which is ad- 
ministered on faith?" 

Ans. "If this is all you want to know, it is writ- 
ten that the Lord said to His apostles : 'Go ye into 
all the world, and preach the gospel to every crea- 
ture. He that believeth and is baptized shall be 
saved ; but he that believeth not shall be damned.' 
Mark 16:15, 16. Further, the men said to Peter 
and the other apostles : 'What shall we do to be 
saved? Repent, he said, and be baptized every one 
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remis- 
sion of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to 
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as 
many as the Lord our God shall call. And with 
many other words did he testify and exhort, say- 
ing, Save yourselves from this untoward genera- 
tion. Then they that gladly received his word were 
baptized : and the same day there were added unto 
them about three thousand souls. And they con- 
tinued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fel- 
lowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. 
And fear came upon every soul : and many wonders 
and signs were done by the apostles._ And all that 
believed were together, and had all things common ; 
and sold their possessions and goods, and parted 


them to all men, as every man had need. And they 
continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and 
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their 
meat with gladness and singleness of heart, prais- 
ing God, and having favor with all the people.' " 
Acts 2 -.37-47. 

Ques. "There you say yourself that the apostles 
went into the temple ?" 

Ans. "Yes, this is true ; that was a temple which 
God had commanded to be built." 

Ques. "The apostles certainly went forth to 
teach ; where did they go to teach ?" 

Ans. "Whithersoever they came, they went into 
the synagogues, and preached the Gospel of Christ." 
Acts 13:14. 

Ques. "We have heard that you also teach 
wherever you go ?" 

Ans. "O Lord, what should I preach ; we may 
have read the Gospel together." 

Ques. "Where did you read it together?" 

Ans. "At the dyke." 

Ques. "With whom did you read it?" 

Ans. "This I do not know." 

Ques. "How should you not know with whom 
you read it?" 

Ans. "How should I know it, sometimes with 
this one, and sometimes with another." 

They therefore mentioned the names of a good 
many, and said : "Do you know this and that one ?" 

Ans. "Yes, I know them well." 

Ques. "Have you any books of Menno Simons 
and of David Joris?" 

Ans. "No, I have no books in the house, except 
a Bible and a Testament, and a little book on the 
faith." 

Thus they asked me many questions, and said, 
that so much had been reported, how we had 
preached in this and that place, and that there 
was no town where he had been, but they knew 
it better than myself. 

Now, my dear brethren, I commend you to God, 
and to the Word of His grace, which is able to 
strengthen and keep you, and to give you an 
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. 
Acts 20:32. Hence, let everyone see to it, that 
no one be so presumptuous as to pour water into the 
living fountain ; for the Lord says, John 6 :44-46 : 
"No man can come to me, except the Father which 
hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up 
at the last day. It is written in the prophets, and 
they shall be all taught of God. Every man there- 
fore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Fa- 
ther, cometh unto me. Not that any man hath seen 
the Father." Isa. 54:13. Therefore dear brethren 
and sisters, let us with one accord pray to God for 
wisdom, as the apostle James teaches us, and be- 
ware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees, 
which is hypocrisy ; hence let us follow our supreme 
Lord and Shepherd Christ, and praise Him through 
God the Father, unto whom be praise forever and 
ever, Amen. 


478 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


TESTAMENT WRITTEN BY DIRK PIETERS SMUEL, DE- 
CEASED IN PRISON, TO HIS WIFE, WHEN HE WAS 
PREPARING TO DIE FOR THE NAME AND TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS J IN WHICH HE COMFORTED 
AND ADMONISHED HER DILIGENTLY TO 
PROVIDE FOR THE BRINGING UP OF HER 
CHILDREN THAT THEY MIGHT LEARN 
TO FEAR GOD FROM THEIR YOUTH 

Grace and peace from God the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. I beseech you, therefore, 
my most beloved sister and wife Wellemoet Claes, 
that you present your body a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serv- 
ice, and be not conformed to this world. I Cor. 
1:3; Rom. 12:1, 2. James says: "Whosoever 
therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy 
of God." James 4:4. For the Lord Jesus says: 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep 
and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and ye 
shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be 
turned into joy. A woman when she is in travail 
hath sorrow, because her hour is come : but as soon 
as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no 
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into 
the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow ; 
but I will see you again, and your heart shall re- 
joice, and your joy no man taketh from you." John 
16:20-22. Therefore let us say with St. Paul: 
"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword ? As it is 
written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long ; 
we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay 
in all these things we are more than conquerors 
through him that loved us." Rom. 8 :3S-37. "He 
that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white 
raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of 
the book of life, but I will confess his name before 
my Father, and before his angels. He that hath an 
ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the 
churches." Rev. 3 :5, 6. Hence, I beseech you, 
my most beloved, "See then that you walk circum- 
spectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the 
time, because the days are evil. Wherefore, be ye 
not unwise, but understanding what the will of 
the Lord is ;" "for the time past of your life may 
suffice you to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, 
when you walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess 
of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable 
idolatries." "Wherefore let him that thinketh he 
standeth, take heed lest he fall. There hath no 
temptation taken you but such as is common to 
man : but God is faithful, who will not suffer you 
to be tempted above that you are able ; but will with 
the temptation also make a way to escape, that you 
may be able to bear it." Eph. 5:15-17; I Peter 
4:3; I Cor. 10:12, 13. 

"Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idol- 
atry" (I Cor. 10:14), and "Know, that ye were 
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and 
gold, from your vain conversation . . . but with 


the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without 
blemish and without spot : who verily was foreor- 
dained before the foundation of the world, but was 
manifest in these last times for you, who by him do 
believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, 
and gave him glory ; that your faith and hope might 
be in God." I Peter 1:18-21. Now, the end of 
the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, 
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned."' 
I Tim. 1 :5. "These words spake Jesus, and lifted 
up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour 
is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may 
glorify thee : as thou hast given him power over all 
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as 
thou has given him. And this is life eternal, that 
they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ, whom thou hast sent." John 17:1-3. "For 
such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher 
than the heavens ; who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own 
sins, and then for the people's: for this he did 
once, when he offered up himself. For the law 
maketh men high priests which have infirmity ; but 
the word of the oath, which was since the law, 
maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore " 
Hebrews 7 :26-28. 

Therefore I admonish you, my most beloved, 
seeing we have such "a high priest over the house 
of God, let us draw near with a true heart in full 
assurance of faith." Heb. 10:21, 22. John says: 
"My little children, these things write I unto you, 
that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an 
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the right- 
eous : and he is the propitiation for our sins." I 
John 2:1, 2. "And now ... I commend you to 
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able 
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them which are sanctified."* Acts 20:32. 

The grace of our Lord be with you now and 
forever, Amen. 

So I admonish you, my most beloved mother 
[wife], diligently to see to it, that you teach the 
children from their youth to fear God. 

A LETTER OF CONSOLATION AND ADMONITION, 

WRITTEN IN PRISON BY DIRK PIETERS SMUEL, 

DECEASED, WHO WAS BURNT ALIVE AT 

AMSTERDAM, IN HOLLAND, FOR THE 

NAME AND TESTIMONY OF JESUS ; 

TO ALL LOVERS OF THE 

EVANGELICAL TRUTH, 

A. D. 1546 

"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ ; the Father of mercies, and the God 
of all comfort ; who comforteth us in all our tribu- 
lation, that we may be able to comfort them which 
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we 
ourselves are comforted of God. For as the suf- 

* He deems eternal salvation of greater value than temporal 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


479 


ferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation 
also aboundeth by Christ."* II Cor. 1 :3-5. Hence 
Paul says : "I desire that ye faint not at my tribu- 
lations for you, which is your glory. For this cause 
I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and 
earth is named." Eph. 3 :13-15. He Himself says : 
"I thank thee, O Father Lord of heaven and earth, 
because thou hast hid these things from the wise 
and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. 
Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy 
sight . . • And no man knoweth the Son, but the 
Father ; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal 
him." Matt. 11:25,26,27. 

He therefore says : "Come unto me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. 
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I 
am meek and lowly in heart : and ye shall find rest 
unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my 
burden is light."t Matt. 11 :28-30. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, seeing we have 
such "a high priest, let us draw near with a true 
heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies 
washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the pro- 
fession of our faith without wavering; for he is 
faithful that promised : and let us consider one an- 
other to provoke unto love and to good works : not 
forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as 
the manner of some is, but exhorting one another : 
and so much the more, as ye see the day ap- 
proaching. . . . For we know him that hath said, 
Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, 
saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge 
his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the 
hands of the living God." Heb. 10:21-25, 30, 31. 
For he says : "Whosoever will come after me, let 
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow 
me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; 
but whosoever shall lose it for the Gospel's sake, 
shall save it."j Mark 8:34, 35. 

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I 
give you a new commandment, says Christ : "Love 
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good 
to them that hate you, and pray for them which 
despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye 
may be the children of your Father which is in 
heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil 
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and 
on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, 
what reward have ye? do not even the publicans 
so?" Matt. 5:43-47. 

"Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear chil- 
dren; and walk in love, as Christ also has loved 
us, and hath given himself for us an offering and 

* Having abundance of consolation in his sufferings, lie com- 
forts his brethren. 

t He who has not Christ in him, is poor and miserable. 

t He loves his brethren according to the soul; hence he ad- 
monishes them, to seek their salvation. He that desires the heav- 
enly riches, hates everything which hinders him therein. 


a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour."* 
Eph. 5 :1, 2. 

"Flee youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, 
faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the 
Lord out of a pure heart. But foolish and un- 
learned questions avoid, knowing that they do gen- 
der strifes. And the servant of the Lord must not 
strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, 
patient ; in meekness instructing those that oppose 
themselves; if God perad venture will give them 
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth ; and 
that they may recover themselves out of the snare 
of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his 
will."t II Tim. 2 :22-26. 

"Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge 
among you ? let him show out of a good conversa- 
tion his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye 
have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory 
not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom 
descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, 
devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is 
confusion and every evil work. But the wisdom 
that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, 
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and 
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypoc- 
risy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in 
peace of them that make peace."$ Jas. 3:13-18. 

"Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in 
the doctrine of Christ hath not God. He that 
abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the 
Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, 
and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into 
your house, neither bid him God speed : for he that 
biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil 
deeds." II John 9-11. "Beware of false prophets,§ 
which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inward- 
ly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them 
by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or 
figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth 
forth good fruit ; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth 
evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, 
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is 
hewn down, and cast into the fire." Matt. 7 :15-19. 
"Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is 
merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged : 
condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned : for- 
give, and ye shall be forgiven : give, and it shall be 
given unto you ; good measure, pressed down, and 
shaken together, and running over, shall men give 
into your bosom. For with the same measure that 
ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again. 
And he spake a parable unto them ; Can the blind 
lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the 
ditch? The disciple is not above his master: but 
every one that is perfect shall be as his master." 
Luke 6:36-40. "He that overcometh the world, 


* He who seeks God in visible things, will not find Him. 

t In God are life and peace; he that desires peace and life, let 
him enter into Him. 

4: Pure love loves a blameless life. 

s A person can have a Pharisaical holiness, without the Spirit 
and righteousness' of Christ. 


480 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


shall inherit all things ; all things are in God, and 
God works all in all." I John 5 :4. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, "Let your conver- 
sation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ : that 
whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I 
may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one 
spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith 
of the gospel; and in nothing terrified by your ad- 
versaries : which is to them an evident token of per- 
dition, but to you of salvation. . . . For unto you 
it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to be- 
lieve on him, but also to suffer for his sake ; having 
the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now 
hear to be in me."* Phil. 1 :27-30. 

"Therefore, my most beloved brethren, think it 
not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try 
you, as though some strange thing happened unto 
you: but rejoice,f inasmuch as ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings ; that, when his glory shall be re- 
vealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. If 
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are 
ye ; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon 
you : on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your 
part he is glorified. But let none of you suffer as a 
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a 
busy-body in other men's matters. Yet if any suf- 
fer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed ; but let 
him glorify God on this behalf. For the time is 
come that judgment must begin at the house of 
God : and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be 
of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And 
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the 
ungodly and the sinner appear? Wherefore, let 
them that suffer according to the will of God com- 
mit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, 
as unto a faithful Creator." I Peter 4:12-19. 

"It is a faithful saying : For if we be dead with 
him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we 
shall also reign with him : if we deny him, he also 
will deny us : if we believe not, yet he abideth faith- 
ful: he cannot deny himself."! H Tim. 2:11-13. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, let us "walk cir- 
cumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming 
the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be 
ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of 
the Lord is." Eph. 5:15-17. 

"Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which 
are these : Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, las- 
civiousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, 
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envy- 
ings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such 
like : of the which I tell you before, as I have also 
told you in time past, that they which do such 
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But 
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffer- 
ing, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temper- 
ance : against such there is no law. And they that 
are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affec- 

* The nature of God is made manifest in His children, who love 
Him in godly works. 

t It is a joy to the godly, when they see men living in accordance 
with the word of God. 

t What great boldness, through the power of God I 


tions and lusts." Gal. 5 :19-24. Yea, say the wise 
of this world, the heretics do not believe that God 
is in the sacrament. Indeed, they are right in not 
believing it, for Paul says : "He dwelleth not in 
temples made with hands; neither is worshiped 
with men's hands." Acts 17 :24, 25. "I give thee 
charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all 
things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pon- 
tius Pilate witnessed a good confession ; that thou 
keep this commandment without spot, unrebuke- 
able, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ 
. . . the blessed and only Potentate, the King of 
kings, and Lord of lords ; who only hath immor- 
tality, dwelling in the light which no man can ap- 
proach unto ; whom no man hath seen, nor can see : 
to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen."* 
I Tim. 6:13-16. 

"No man hath seen God at any time ; the only be- 
gotten Son . . . he hath declared him." John 
1:18. Stephen said: "I see the heavens opened, 
and the Son of man standing on the right hand 
of God." Acts 7:56. "At the appearing of Jesus 
Christ: whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, 
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory : receiving 
the end of your faith, even the salvation of your 
souls.'; I Pet. 1 :7-9. I say that it is great pre- 
sumption for men to undertake to say that they 
handle God. For John, concerning whom the Lord 
Himself declared, that a greater was not born of 
women, than John the Baptist, did not consider 
himself worthy to unloose the latchet of His shoes.f 

And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but 
after this the judgment: so Christ was once of- 
fered to bear the sins of many ; and unto them that 
look for Him shall He appear the second time with- 
out sin unto salvation. But this is my belief : That 
to those who through faith in Christ Jesus are dead 
from the rudiments of the world (Col. 2:20), and 
have crucified the flesh with its evil affections 
and lusts (Galatians 5 :24). Christ left the Lord's 
Supper in remembrance of His death, that they 
should show the Lord's death till He come (I Cor. 
1 1 :25, 26) , as Paul says : "I speak as to wise men ; 
judge ye what I say. The cup of blessing which we 
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of 
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ? For we being 
many are one bread, and one body : for we are all 
partakers of that one bread. Behold Israel after 
the flesh : are not they which eat of the sacrifices 
partakers of the altar? What say I then? that the 
idol is anything, or that which is offered in sac- 
rifice to idols is anything? But I say, that the 
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sac- 
rifice to devils, and not to God : and I would not 
that ye should have fellowship with devils Ye 
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of 

me*n1n I tha S t d w £ hfch t ii S g^d! Peaking ° f G ° d ' a " d in ^ngthening 
of^hewSldf' " 8 COn9tant,y Iament ,he vain boasting and unbelief 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


481 


devils ; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, 
and of the table of devils."* I Cor. 10:15-21. 

End of these letters, translated and finished the 
12th of January A. D. 1614. 

RICHST HEYNES, A. D. 1547 

About the year 1547, there was a God-fearing 
woman, whose name was Richst Heynes (so named 
after her husband, according to the custom of the 
country), and who lived in the list, not far from 
Sneeck, in Friesland. She also bowed her shoul- 
ders under the easy yoke of the Lord Jesus, hear- 
ing and following His blessed voice, avoiding that 
of strangers opposed to Him. The enemies of God 
perceiving this, very speedily sought to hinder and 
stop it; to which end, they sent forth tyrannical 
servants, who came as ravening wolves, and appre- 
hended this defenseless sheep. Her husband per- 
ceiving it, escaped with great peril of life. She was 
very roughly handled, and cruelly bound, without 
the least mercy or compassion, though she was 
pregnant, and very near the time of her delivery, so 
that the midwife had already been with her. But 
notwithstanding all this, they took her with them, 
though her little children cried and wept piteous- 
ly. They brought her to Leeuwaerden in prison, 
where after three weeks imprisonment, she gave 
birth to a son. The child, to the great astonish- 
ment of all who beheld it, very plainly showed on 
his arms the marks which his mother had received 
from the cruel fetters. They afterwards tortured 
her so cruelly, that she could not lay her hands 
upon her head. Thus she was maltreated with in- 
human tortures, mainly for the reason that she 
would not betray her brethren, for these wolves 
were as yet by no means satisfied, but thirsted 
greatly after more innocent blood. The faithful 
God, however, who is a fortress in time of need, 
and a shield to all them that trust in Him, guarded 
her lips, so that none were betrayed by her. Hence, 
as nothing could move her to separate from Christ, 
she was sentenced at said place, thrust into a bag, 
like an irrational brute, and cast into the water and 
drowned. All this she as an innocent lamb of 
Jesus Christ patiently and steadfastly endured for 
the name of the Lord, remaining faithful unto 
death; hence she is worthy ultimately to receive 
the crown of everlasting life from God, and to 
enjoy it forever and ever. 

CLAES LECKS, A. D. 1548 

Claes Leeks, a native of Ostende, was summoned 
to the town-house, in the year 1 548, on account of 
certain reports that were circulating about him. 
Having arrived there, he was examined respecting 
his faith, and, making a good confession, he was 
committed to prison. He was a man of very good 
reputation, on account of the many alms which he 
gave to the poor. When he was examined, he re- 
nounced the papistic, Roman church, and also 

He that gives heed to the Word of God will gather wisdom. 


infant baptism, which he refuted with the holy 
Scriptures. Thereupon, as he steadfastly adhered 
to his faith in God, he was sentenced to be strangled 
and burned. As he was being led out to death, the 
priest presented the crucifix to him to kiss it, which 
he refused to do. The priest also said to the people : 
"Pray for this deceiver; for he is going from this 
fire into the eternal fire." To this he simply replied : 
"This is what you say, but I have a better assur- 
ance." Thus he offered up his sacrifice as a true 
child of God. 


ELIZABETH, A. D. 1549 

Elizabeth was apprehended on the 15th of Jan- 
uary, 1549. When those who had come to appre- 
hend her entered the house in which she lived, they 
found a Latin Testament. Having secured Eliza- 
beth, they said : "We have got the right man ; we 
have now the teacheress;" adding: "Where is 
your husband, Menno Simons, the teacher?" 

They then brought her to the town-house. The 
following day two beadles took her between them 
to prison. 

She was then arraigned before the council, and 
asked upon oath, whether she had a husband. 

Elizabeth answered: "We ought not to swear, 
but our words should be Yea, yea, and Nay, nay ; 
I have no husband." 

Lords: "We say that you are a teacher, and that 
you seduce many. We have been told this, and we 
want to know who your friends are." 

Elisabeth: "My God has commanded me to love 
my Lord and my God, and to honor my parents ; 
hence I will not tell you who my parents are; for 
what I suffer for the name of Christ is a reproach 
to my friends." 

Lords: "We will let you alone in regard to this, 
but we want to know whom you have taught." 

Elizabeth: "Oh, no, my lords, let me in peace 
with this, but interrogate me concerning my faith, 
which I will gladly tell you." 

Lords: "We shall make you so afraid, that you 
will tell us." 

Elisabeth: "I hope through the grace of God, 
that He will keep my tongue, so that I shall not be- 
come a traitoress, and deliver my brother into 
death." 

Lords: "What persons were present when you 
were baptized ?" 

Elizabeth: "Christ said: Ask them that were 
present, or who heard it." John 18:21. 

Lords: "Now we perceive that you are a teach- 
er ; for you compare yourself to Christ." 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords, far be it from me ; for 
I do not esteem myself above the offscourings 
which are swept out from the house of the Lord." 

Lords: "What then do you hoid concerning the 
house of God? do you not regard our church as 
the house of God?" 

Elisabeth: "No, my lords, for it is written: *Ye 
are the temple of the living God ; as God hath said, 


482 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


I will dwell in them, and walk in them.' " II Cor. 
6:16. 

Lords: "What do you hold concerning our 
mass ?" 

Elizabeth: "My lords, of your mass I think 
nothing at all ; but I highly esteem all that accords 
with the Word of God." 

Lords: "What are your views with regard to 
the most adorable, holy sacrament?" 

Elizabeth: "I have never in my life read in the 
holy Scriptures of a holy sacrament, but of the 
Lord's Supper." (She also quoted the Scripture 
relating to this.) 

Lords: "Be silent, for the devil speaks through 
your mouth." 

Elizabeth: "Yea, my lords, this is a small mat- 
ter, for the servant is not better than his lord." 
Lords: "You speak from a spirit of pride." 
Elizabeth: "No, my lords, I speak with frank- 
ness.", 

Lords: "What did the Lord say, when He gave 
His disciples the Supper?" 

Elizabeth: "What did He give them, flesh or 
bread?" 
Lords: "He gave them bread." 
Elizabeth: "Did not the Lord remain sitting 
there ? Who then would eat the flesh of the Lord ?" 
Lords: "What are your views concerning infant 
baptism, seeing you have been rebaptized?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords, I have not been re- 
baptized. I have been baptized once upon my faith ; 
for it is written that baptism belongs to believers." 
Lords: "Are our children damned then, because 
they are baptized ?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords, God forbid, that I 
should judge the children." 

Lords: "Do you not seek your salvation in bap- 
tism?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords, all the water in the 
sea could not save me; but salvation is in Christ 
(Acts 4:10), and He has commanded me to love 
God my Lord above all things, and my neighbor 
as myself." 

Lords: "Have the priests power to forgive 
sins ?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords ; how should I believe 
this? I say that Christ is the only priest through 
whom sins are forgiven." Heb. 7:21. 

Lords: "You say that you believe everything 
that accords with the holy Scriptures ; do you not 
believe the words of James?" 

Elizabeth: "Yea, my lords, why should I not 
believe them ?" 

Lords: "Does he not say: 'Go to the elder of 
the church, that he may anoint you, and pray over 
you?" James 5:14. 

Elizabeth: "Yea, my lords; but do you mean to 
say that you are of this church ?" 

Lords: "The Holy Ghost has saved you already; 
you need neither confession nor sacrament?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords, I acknowledge that 
I have transgressed the ordinance of the pope, 


which the Emperor has confirmed by decrees. But 
prove to me that I have transgressed in any article 
against my Lord and my God, and I will cry woe 
over me, miserable being." 

The foregoing is the first confession. 

Afterwards she was again brought before the 
council, and led into the torture chamber, Hans, 
the executioner, being present. The lords then 
said : "We have thus long dealt with you in kind- 
ness ;. but if you will not confess, we will resort to 
severity with you. The Procurator General said: 
Master Hans, seize her." 

Master Hans answered : "Oh, no, my lords, she 
will voluntarily confess." 

But as she would not voluntarily confess, he 
applied the thumbscrews to her thumbs and fore- 
fingers, so that the blood squirted out at the nails. 

Elizabeth said: "Oh! I cannot endure it any 
longer." 

The lords said: "Confess, and we will relieve 
your pain." 

But she cried to the Lord her God : "Help me, 
O Lord, Thy poor handmaiden ! for Thou art a 
helper in time of need." 

The lords all exclaimed : "Confess, and we will 
relieve your pain; for we told you to confess, and 
not to cry to God the Lord." 

But she steadfastly adhered to God her Lord, 
as related above; and the Lord took away her 
pain, so that she said to the lords : "Ask me, and I 
shall answer you: for I no longer feel the least 
pain in my flesh, as I did before." 

Lords: "Will you not yet confess ?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords." 

They then applied the screws to her shins, one 
on each. 

She said : "O my lords, do not put me to shame ; 
for never a man touched my bare body." 

The Procurator General said : "Miss Elizabeth, 
we shall not treat you dishonorably." 

She then fainted away. They said to one an- 
other : "Perhaps she is dead." 

But waking up, she said : "I live, and am not 
dead." 

They then took off all the screws, and plied her 
with entreaties. 

Elizabeth: "Why do you thus entreat me? this 
is the way to do with children." 

Thus they obtained not one word from her, 
detrimental to her brethren in the Lord, or to any 
other person. 

Lords: "Will you revoke all that you have pre- 
viously confessed here?" 

Elizabeth: "No, my lords, but I will seal it with 
my death." 

Lords: "We will try you no more; will you 
voluntarily tell us, who baptized you?" 

Elizabeth: "Oh, no, my lords ; I have certainly 
told you, that I will not confess this." 

Sentence was then passed upon Elizabeth, on the 
27th of March, 1549; she was condemned to death 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


483 


— to be drowned in a bag, and thus offered up her 
body to God. 


SIX BRETHREN AND TWO SISTERS, NAMELY : PIETER 

JANS, TOBIAS QUESTINEX, JAN PENNEWAERTS, 

GIJSBERT JANS, ELLERT JANS, LUCAS MI- 

CHIELS, BARBARA THIELEMANS, AND 

TRUYKEN BOENS, ALL BURNT ALIVE 

AT THE STAKE ON THE SAME 

DAY, AT AMSTERDAM, ON 

THE 20TH OF MARCH, 

1549 

In the year 1549 there were imprisoned at Am- 
sterdam, for the truth of Jesus Christ, about twenty 
persons, men as well as women, all of whose names 
are not known, especially since some of them es- 
caped from prison in the following manner : One of 
the prisoners had two brothers living in Waterlandt, 
who were rough fellows, and spent much of their 
time in taverns. So at a certain time it happened, 
that as they were sitting in the tavern, they began 
to think of their imprisoned brother, and supposing 
that the time when he should be offered up, was 
drawing nigh, they deliberated among themselves, 
how they could best liberate him, and swore an 
oath that they would shrink from neither labor nor 
peril, even though it should cost their lives ; in con- 
firmation of which they held up their fingers, tossed 
their hats in the air, and called God to witness. In 
the morning, when they were awake and had be- 
come sober, their perilous plan somewhat troubled 
them; but remembering the solemn oath which 
they owed to God, as also the sad departure of 
their dear brother, they manifested the firmness of 
Romans, and proceeded in the following manner. 
They took a rope with a block, which had been 
well greased, so that the dry block should make no 
noise. This they packed into a basket, and took it 
to the house of Jan Jans, who lived opposite the 
prison, in the crescent, and said to him : "Jan Jans, 
may we leave this basket here, and call for it late 
in the evening, as it may suit us ?" 

Jan Jans assented, without ever thinking of the 
dangerous plan, till they came to get their basket. 

This Jan Jans had a cousin among the prisoners, 
named Ellert Jans, who had a wooden leg and was 
a tailor whom the Bailiff had taken from his shop 
on the new dyke. Therefore these two brothers 
availed themselves of a dark evening, and brought 
a boat hook with them, which they thrust into the 
window, and then climbed up by it. They then 
made fast a rope, and broke open the windows with 
a crowbar. Having thus effected their purpose, 
they let their brother down from the window with 
a rope, and forthwith, went to other prisoners, all 
of whom they let down through the window, except 
Ellert Jan, who refused to go out, telling them as 
his reason, that he was of such good cheer to offer 
his sacrifice, and felt so happy that he did not ex- 
pect even through a long life to become any better, 
since he feared that on the way through the long 


desert his courage might fail him, and thus he 
would never get across the Jordan, and reach the 
promised land. He also said that he was too well 
known by his wooden leg, so that he could easily 
be described for the purpose of apprehension. 

But Tobias, Pieter, Grietgen, Jan, Lyntgen and 
Barbartgen were confined in other dungeons, where 
they could well hear, but not get to, them. They 
remained in confinement till the time of their offer- 
ing up was fulfilled, except Lyntgen, who was 
spared on account of her pregnancy. She also gave 
birth to a child while in bonds; but the pain of 
delivery so affected her, that she became utterly 
deranged in her mind ; after this she laid yet for a 
long time at Amsterdam, in a little house, in which 
she also died. 

When the day had arrived, on which the afore- 
mentioned persons were to offer up their sacri- 
fices, said Jan Jans stationed himself close to the 
tribunal, to see what spirit his cousin Ellert Jans 
would show in the last hour of his life. As soon as 
Ellert Jans perceived his cousin, he addressed him 
with such a happy countenance that all the hearers 
listened with astonishment. He also handed him 
a testament through the iron bars of the tribunal ; 
but the bailiff cried out like a ferocious lion: 
Where is the book ? but could not find it out. 

With many good arguments he admonished every 
one, principally his cousin Jan Jans, that he should 
no longer suffer himself to be seduced by the 
adorned woman, the whore of Babylon, but should 
enter upon the way to the city of all good things. 
Yea, he said, that he never had lived a happier 
day ; which Jan so took to heart, that he afterwards 
also took upon him the burden of the cross. Thus 
all the afore-mentioned friends ended their lives 
in great joy, and were burnt alive. Shortly after 
a lover of the truth composed a hymn in remem- 
brance of them, the first letter of each verse of 
which accords with the first letter of the names. It 
is found in the old hymnbook, and is the first of 
those beginning with T : " 'Tis nu schier al ver- 
vult," etc. 


The sentence of these six brethren and two sis- 
ters, we obtained from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, through the sec- 
retary of said place ; excepting the title which reads 
as follows : 

SENTENCE OF DEATH OF PIETER JANS, TOBIAS 

QUESTINEX, JAN PENNEWAERTS, GIJSBERT 

JANS, ELLERT JANS, LUCAS MICHI- 

ELS, BARBARA THIELEMAUS, AND 

TRUYKEN BOENS 

Whereas Pieter, son of Jans, a native of Lin- 
inckhuysen, Tobias Questinex, citizen of this city, 
shoemakers, by trade ; Jan Pennewaerts of Loenen, 
Gijsbert Jans of Woerden, Ellert Jans, also citizen 
of this city, tailors, Lucas Michiels of Dortrecht, 
glazier by trade, Barbara Thielemaus of Dortrecht, 
and Truyken Boens, daughter of William Boens of 


484 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Antwerp, have been rebaptized by one Giles of 
Aix-la-Chapelle, and have joined the sect and here- 
sy of the Anabaptists, holding pernicious views 
with regards to the sacraments of the holy church, 
contrary to the holy Christian faith, the ordinances 
of said holy church, and the written laws and de- 
crees of his Imperial Majesty, our gracious lord ; 
and, moreover, obstinately persist in their unbelief, 
errors and heresies ; therefore, my lords the judges, 
having heard the demand made by my lord the 
bailiff concerning said persons, together with their 
confession, and having duly considered the cir- 
cumstances of said case, condemn said persons to 
be burnt by the executioner ; and, furthermore, de- 
clare all their property confiscated for the benefit 
of his Imperial Majesty, as Count of Holland and 
our gracious lord, without prejudice to the privi- 
leges of this city. So pronounced and ordered to be 
executed, this 20th day of March, 1549, in the 
presence of the bailiff, Egbert Gabriels and Joost 
Buyck, burgomasters, and all the judges. 

Of these delinquents three were subjected to the 
torture, namely, Tobias Questinex, on the 14th of 
February, Pieter Jans, on the 15th of the same 
month, and Ellert Jans on the 8th of the present 
month, March. 

Extracted from the book of criminal sentences 
of the city of Amsterdam, in the keeping of the 
secretary there. N. N. 


FIJE AND EELKEN AT LEEUWARDEN, A. D. 1549 

In the year 1549, about three weeks before 
Easter, two beloved men, named Fije and Eelken, 
were apprehended at Boorn, in West Friesland. 
They were brought before the lords, where they 
boldlv confessed their faith. 

They first interrogated Eelken, saying: "Who 
has authorized you to assemble the people, to teach 
them?" 

Ans. "God has authorized me." Heb. 10 :25. 

Ques. "What have you taught?" 

Ans. "Ask them that heard it, what we taught 
among ourselves; for you have apprehended a 
woman that heard it." 

They then asked the woman what she had heard 
from Eelken. 

Ans. "He read the four Evangelists, Paul, 
Peter, the epistles of John, and the acts of the 
apostles." 

Eelken was then asked again: "What do you 
hold concerning the sacrament?" 

Ans. "I know nothing of your baked God." 

Ques. "Friend, take care what you say; such 
words cost necks. What do you think of the 
mother of God ?" 

Ans. "Much." 

Ques. "What do you say; did the Son of God 
not receive flesh and blood from Mary?" 

Ans. "No : With regard to this, I believe what 
the Son of God Himself declares concerning it." 
John 1 :14. 


Ques. "What do you hold concerning our holy 
Roman church?" 

lAns. "I know nothing of your holy church. I 
do not know it ; I nqver in all my life was in a holy 
church." 

Ques. "You speak too spitefully ; I have com- 
passion for you," said one of the lords of the coun- 
cil, 'and fear that you will lose your neck. Are 
you not baptized ?" 

Ans. "I am not baptized, but greatly desire bap- 
tism. 

Ques. "What do you think of these false teach- 
ers who run about and baptize the people ?" 

Ans. "Of false teachers I think nothing, but 
have greatly longed to hear a teacher sent from 
God ? 

They said : "But we have heard that you are a 
teacher ?" 

Eelken said: "Who made me a teacher?" 

They replied : "We do not know." 

Eelken said : "If you ask me what you do not 
know yourselves, how should I know it? I know 
of no one that has made me a teacher ; but God has 
given me all for which I have besought Him." 

They said : "We have now written down all the 
articles concerning which we have interrogated you 
on this occasion ; if there is anything of which you 
repent, we will gladly strike it out !" 

Ans. "Do you think that I should deny God ?" 

Eelken and Fije were then both sentenced and 
brought together ; they embraced each other, yea, 
kissed one another's hands and feet with great 
love, so that all that saw and heard it were aston- 
ished. The beadles and servants ran to the lords 
and said : "Never men loved one another as do 
these." Eelken said to Fije : "Dear brother, do not 
take it amiss, that you have been brought into suf- 
fering through me." Fije answered: "Dear 
brother, do not think so, for it is the power of 
God." 

Their execution was deferred till the third day 
after the sentence was passed. Eelken was first ex- 
ecuted with the sword. When Fije's sentence was 
read, he did not listen to it, because of his great 
joy ; and, ignorant of what had happened, or was 
to happen, to Eelken, he sang and leaped, praising 
and thanking God, saying : "This is the only way." 

They led Fije into the boat in which Eelken lay 
beheaded, and beside him the wheel upon which 
Eelken was to be placed, and the stake at which 
Fije was to stand, to be burned. In the boat Fije's 
hands became loose, but he sat still nevertheless. 
The monks then said: "Bind him again." The 
hangman replied : "You bind him." But the cas- 
tellan commanded him to bind Fije again. Some 
women who beheld it wept bitterly. But Fije said : 
"Weep not for me, but for your sins." 

He further said to the executioner : "What are 
you going to do to me ?" 
Ans. "That you will see." 
"Yea, yea," said Fije, "do what you will ; I have 
committed myself into the hands of my Lord." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


485 


The brethren went out with him, together with 
the common, people, and when Fije saw some of his 
acquaintances, he cried out : "Friends, rejoice with 
me over this marriage feast which is prepared for 
me." 

When he arrived at the place of execution, some 
brethren, who greatly rejoiced with him, spoke to 
him, saying : "This is the narrow way ; this is the 
Lord's wine press ; from this depends the crown." 
But when the castellan heard this cry, he called out : 
"Let no man lay his hands on him, on pain of life, 
and property." 

The executioner had forgotten his instruments, 
and ran to the town to get them. In the meantime, 
the castellan and the two monks had Fije in the 
confessional, greatly tempting him with bread and 
wine ; but they could not prevail upon him, for Fije 
did nothing but sing and speak, praising and thank- 
ing God. 

When they could not prevail on him, and the 
executioner returned, they said to Fije : "How is 
it that you are so obstinate, when you say that you 
are a member of Christ ? Why then will you not do 
the works of mercy, and receive this bread and 
wine as bread and wine, for our sakes." 

Ans. "I do not hunger for your bread and wine ; 
for there is food prepared for me in heaven." 

When they could not prevail upon him, they 
said : "Begone, you heretic, begone !" 

The castellan said : "I have seen many a heretic ; 
but in all my life I never saw a more obdurate one 
than this." 

Fije, standing prepared for death, said to the ex- 
ecutioner : "Master, have you finished your work ?" 

He replied: "Not yet." 

Fije said: "Here is the sheep for which you are 
wanted." 

The executioner then went up to Fije, tore open 
his shirt, took the cap from his head, and filled it 
with gunpowder. Standing at the stake at which 
he was to be strangled, Fije exclaimed : "O Lord, 
receive Thy servant." 

He was then strangled and burnt, and thus fell 
asleep in the Lord. The common people cried out 
saying : "This was a pious Christian ; if he is not 
a Christian, there is not one in the whole world." 


JACOB CLAESS OF LANTSMEER, AND CECILIA JER- 
ONYMUS HIS WIFE, BURNT IN GREAT CON- 
STANCY FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, AT AMSTERDAM, IN THE 
YEAR 1549* 

The tribulation, anguish and distress of the be- 
loved friends and children of God continued ; for 
they did not cease to persecute and kill them, yea, 
to put them to death in a dreadful, miserable and 
lamentable manner, which, in the year 1549, ap- 

* We have had some doubts as to whether these two persons 
were not the same ones who, under the names of Jacob and Sell, 
have been noticed previously, for the year 1542, and whom we al- 
lowed to remain there; but as we find some contrary circumstances, 
we took cause to regard them as not the same, but different per- 
sons; hence we have put them here in their proper place. 


peared also in the city of Amsterdam, in Holland, 
in the case of two pious and very God-fearing per- 
sons, named Jacob Claess of Lantsmeer, and Cecilia 
Jeronymus of Wormer, who, as they, after suffer- 
ing many assaults, conflicts and tribulations from 
secular as well as ecclesiastical persons, who sought 
to draw them away from the faith, remained con- 
stant, were sentenced to the fire as heretics, which 
punishment of death they steadfastly endured, on 
the 9th of November, A. D. 1549, as appears from 
the following two sentences, which were publicly 
pronounced on the day of their death, in the court 
of Amsterdam; true copies of which, obtained by 
us through the clerk of the court there, we shall ad- 
duce here, for the further confirmation of said 
matter. 


SENTENCE OF DEATH OF JACOB CLAESS OF LANTS- 
MEER 

Whereas Jacob Claess of Lantsmeer has joined 
the doctrine, sect and heresies of the Anabaptists, 
having been rebaptized, and holding pernicious 
views in regard to the sacraments of the holy 
church, contrary to the holy Christian faith, the 
ordinances of the holy Christian church, and the 
written laws and decrees of his Imperial Majesty 
our gracious lord ; and, moreover, obstinately per- 
sists in his errors and heresy, notwithstanding the 
instruction which has been given him concerning 
the true faith ; therefore, my lords the judges, hav- 
ing heard the demand made by my lord the bailiff, 
in the name of his Imperial Majesty, concerning 
said Jacob Claess, together with his confession, 
and having considered the circumstances of said 
case, sentence said Jacob Claess, pursuant to the 
aforesaid decrees, to be burnt by the executioner, 
and, furthermore, declare his property confiscated 
for the benefit of his Imperial Majesty, as Count of 
Holland. So pronounced, and executed by the ex- 
ecutioner, on the 9th of November, A. D. 1549, in 
the presence of the bailiff, Sir Hendrick Dirks; 
burgomaster, Jan Willems; Claes Meeuwess, 
Simon Claess Kops, Florus Marts, Jan Claess 
van Hoppen, and Hendrick Jans Croock, Judges. 

Jacob Claess was subjected to the torture on the 
22d of October, A. D. 1549. 

Extracted from the book of criminal sentences, 
in the keeping of the secretary of the city of 
Amsterdam. N. N. 


SENTENCE OF DEATH OF CECILIA JERONYMUS 

Whereas Cecilia, daughter of Jeronymus, of 
Wormer, has joined the doctrine, sect and heresies 
of the Anabaptists, having been rebaptized, and 
holding pernicious views in regard to the sacra- 
ments of the holy church, contrary to the holy 
Christian faith, the ordinances of the holy Chris- 
tian church, the written laws and decrees of his 
Imperial Majesty our gracious lord, and, more- 
over, obstinately persists in her errors and here- 
sies, notwithstanding the instruction which has 


486 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


been given her concerning the true faith; there- 
fore, my lords the judges, having heard the demand 
made by my lord the bailiff, in the name of his Im- 
perial Majesty, concerning said Cecilia, together 
with her confession, and having maturely con- 
sidered the circumstances of said case, sentence 
said Cecilia Jeronymus, pursuant to the aforesaid 
decrees, to be burnt by the executioner, and, fur- 
thermore, declare her property confiscated for the 
benefit of his Imperial Majesty, as Count of Hol- 
land. Done and executed as above. 

Extracted from the book of criminal sentences, 
in the keeping of the secretary of the city of Am- 
sterdam. N. N. 


HANS VAN OVERDAM PUT TO DEATH AT GHENT; 

ALSO HIS CONFESSION, WRITTEN IN PRISON, 

AND AFTERWARDS SEALED WITH HIS 

BLOOD, IN THE YEAR 1550 

Hans van Overdam, together with his fellow- 
prisoners for the testimony of Jesus Christ, wishes 
all brethren and sisters in the Lord, grace, peace, 
and an ardent love, from God the Father, and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise, honor, and 
majesty forever and ever. Amen. 

My most dearly beloved, grieve not on my ac- 
count (Eph. 3:13), but praise the Lord that He is 
so good a Father to me, that I can suffer bonds 
and imprisonment for the testimony of Christ, for 
which I also hope to go into the fire. The Lord give 
me strength through His Holy Spirit. Amen. 
Walk in the fear of the Lord, even as you are 
called. I Cor. 7:17. And though we see one an- 
other no more in the flesh, may we behold each 
other hereafter, in the kingdom of our Father, 
where I hope soon to be. The peace of the Lord 
be with you. Amen. 

O dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, my 
heart's deepest desire and prayer is (Rom. 10:1), 
that you may constantly give more and more dili- 
gence to make sure the calling whereunto you are 
called by God the Father, through Christ, to the 
majesty and glory of the kingdom of His beloved 
Son, who purchased His church with His own 
blood, and gave Himself for it; that He might 
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water 
by the word, that He might present it to Himself 
a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but that it should be holy and 
without blemish. Eph. 5 :25-27. 

Therefore, O dear friends, mark here what great 
love the Father has shown us, that He did not spare 
His only begotten Son, and how Christ so willingly 
delivered Himself up, and suffered the most igno- 
minious and shameful death of the cross, and shed 
His precious blood, for us, to wash and cleanse us 
from our sins. O dear brethren and sisters, let us 
take heed, and diligently pray and watch, lest the 
saving grace of God, and the unspeakable love of 
the Father, and of Christ, be neglected or for- 
gotten by us (Heb. 12:15), through the cares and 


anxieties of this world, or through the lusts and 
desires which kill the soul, and we be washed and 
scoured off as spots and wrinkles from the glorious 
church of Christ; yea, cut off as unfruitful 
branches, and destined to the fire. For, my most 
beloved, it is not enough, that we have received 
baptism upon faith, and been engrafted by it into 
Christ, if we do not hold the beginning of our con- 
fidence steadfast unto the end. Heb. 3:14. There- 
fore, if there is any one that feels that he is be- 
come a spot or wrinkle, let him see to it that he 
make haste, before the day come upon him, as the 
snare upon the bird ; let him repent with true sor- 
row and penitence, lift up the hands which hang 
down, and the feeble knees, and run with full 
strength the race that is set before him, lest that 
which is lame be turned out of the way; but that 
it may much rather be healed and strengthened, 
that we may pass the time of our sojourning here 
in the fear of God, and keep ourselves unspotted 
from this wicked evil world, which is full of deceit, 
snares, and nets, which the devil sets for the pur- 
pose of seducing the souls of men, and of taking 
them captive by manifold lusts and wiles. 

O Lord, preserve (from this murderer) Thy pil- 
grims who walk in the hope of Thee, and expect 
their help and comfort from Thee alone. O heav- 
enly Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord, pre- 
serve us that Thou mayest perform the good work 
which Thou hast begun in us, to the praise and 
glory of Thy holy name. O Thou Almighty and 
everlasting God, how utterly incomprehensible is 
Thy grace and fatherly mercy upon those that fear 
and love Thee. O Father, who should not fear such 
a God, who knows how to deliver His own ; though 
they may seem to be forsaken here for a little sea- 
son, despised of all men, rejected and cursed on this 
earth ; yet He does not forsake His own through 
the consolation of His Holy Spirit in our hearts, 
who makes us bold and joyful, that we may suffer 
reproach for His name. And we hope through the 
goodness of God; that our pilgrimage will soon 
end, and we shall be delivered from this miserable 
world and vale of tears, and that this earthly house 
of our tabernacle will be dissolved, that we may be 
brought home to our heavenly Father, and re- 
ceive the crown of everlasting life, which is set 
before us, and which we hope no creature shall 
take from us. To this end, may the Almighty and 
eternal God, the merciful Father, strengthen us 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 

Dear friends, let me tell you, how it went with 
me before my imprisonment, and how they treated 
us after my imprisonment. 

At the time when the four friends concerning 
whom I composed the hymn, and whose burning I 
witnessed, were offered up, I heard it stated that 
they had assailed the friends who yet remained in 
prison, with great cunning and deception, through 
the advice of the false prophets, whose minds are 
constantly filled with the subtlety of the devil, 
even as they had boasted that they would do. Our 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


487 


friends that remained there, were two lads and a 
girl, for whom we daily very diligently prayed the 
Lord, fearing, lest they might by some means be 
moved from the faith. We daily expected that they 
would also be put to death, and because of their 
youth I was impelled in my heart to station myself 
at the scaffold, when they were to be put to death, 
in order that, if they should be troubled on any ac- 
count, I might comfort them, and also reprove the 
monks, who greatly distress and vex our friends 
when they are led to death. But, alas ! the poor 
children did not get so far ; for they imprudently 
allowed themselves to be drawn into disputations 
with the false prophets, though they had been 
sufficiently warned to beware of it as they valued 
their souls ; for it is not given to everyone to dis- 
pute, but boldly to confess the faith. This when 
received from the Lord, well becomes Christians. 

But when these poor lambs engaged in contro- 
versy, they became perplexed in their consciences, 
and apostatized from the truth, which gave the 
false prophets cause for great boasting, since they 
had won their souls, and brought them back to the 
holy church. When I heard this, my soul and spirit 
were greatly grieved on account of the loss of the 
poor sheep, and because the false prophets, and 
also the councilors gloried so much in the fall and 
destruction of the poor lambs and children, whom 
they had driven to this by adjuring them as you 
shall hear in the sequel. 

Being thus sorrowful, I sighed and complained 
to God over the violence and power of the devil, 
which he exerts through the children of unbelief. 
Then the thought came to me, to write a few let- 
ters — for the purpose of informing them in several 
places — reprehending their vain joy over the loss 
of the poor lambs whose souls they had murdered. 
I then began to write, and while thus engaged, my 
soul was so kindled, that what I had intended to 
be a little letter of a handbreadth, became a letter 
of a whole leaf. The Lord opened my understand- 
ing, so that in a wonderful manner I proved to the 
lords, by references to the Scriptures, their punish- 
ment with the whole Roman Empire and its end. 
In the letter I wrote, that I desired and requested 
liberty publicly to dispute with all their learned 
men, in the presence of a great fire, into which 
the defeated party should be cast; also, that they 
should let the poor lambs in peace, and that they 
should leave the sword to the secular power, and 
contend with the Word of God. 

Having completed this letter, I showed it to the 
brethren, who were well pleased with it. I then 
had a brother, who was a better writer than I, 
make six copies of it. In the meantime, the poor, 
ruined lambs were released from prison, and re- 
canted everything. One of the lads died the same 
day on which he came out, a league from the city, 
and thus became an example to those who seek to 
save their life. 

At the time that this occurred I came with Hans- 
ken Keeskooper from Antwerp, and we made all 


our arrangements for the disposing of our letters. 
On Saturday evening we sent the letters to the 
lords of the city, and also posted two open ones in 
the middle of the city, that everyone might read 
them. We greatly praise and thank the Lord, that 
we did this before we were apprehended : for we 
were all betrayed by a Judas, who was among us, 
and who seemed to be one of the most pious of all 
the brethren that were there, so successfully could 
he practice his deception. It had long been his aim, 
as we now perceive, to betray a large number of 
the friends. This traitor was present when the 
letters were posted. We had appointed to meet to- 
gether on Sunday morning, to speak of the word 
of the Lord: for I desired to take leave of the 
brethren, intending to go on a journey the next 
day. But the Lord be praised, who had ordered it 
otherwise. Early in the morning, Hansken went 
with me to the woods where we were to assemble. 
We did not find our friends at the place where we 
expected to meet them. We hunted for them a 
good half hour, and came to the conclusion that 
they had not yet come, as there had been a heavy 
rain the evening before. We were about to turn 
back, when I said : "Let us go ; they may be here 
ahead of us," and sang softly; that, if they were 
there, they might hear us. I then heard a rustling 
in the woods, and said to Hansken : "Our friends 
are here." We stood still, and looked to see who 
should come out. Then three men with weapons 
and sticks came forth. 

I said: "Well, boys, have you been hunting a 
hare, and have not caught it?" 

Their faces turned pale as death, and they step- 
ped up to us, and seized me by the arm, saying: 
"Surrender." 

Thus they apprehended us, saying: "We have 
caught a great number besides." 

We then saw a whole wagon full of our brethren 
sitting bound, and three judges with all their serv- 
ants, a great number, who guarded them. When 
we came to them, we saluted our brethren with the 
peace of the Lord, and comforted them with His 
words, boldly to contend for His name. 

We then reproved the judges for being so de- 
sirous of shedding innocent blood. Thereupon they 
coupled Hansken and me together with iron fet- 
ters, and also our thumbs. We expected they would 
take us to the city ; but as we had been apprehend- 
ed in another seigniory, we had to go half a league 
further. We regarded it as very fortunate that we 
could be together so long, thus being enabled to 
comfort one another on the way, with the Word 
of the Lord, before they separated us. 

We were then taken to a castle, a league from 
the city, where we were all kept together in one 
room, remaining there three days; for this was 
the law of the seigniory where we had been appre- 
hended. There we thanked and praised the Lord 
our God for having ordered it so well, that we had 
so much time freely to admonish one another. Much 
people also came from the city, to see and hear us ; 


488 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


but towards the last no one was permitted to come 
into our room. There the chief bailiff of the coun- 
try of Aelst examined us in regard to our faith, 
which we freely confessed to him. We expected to 
be taken to Aelst ; but as the bailiff of Ghent had 
put us into the wagon when we were apprehended, 
to take us to Ghent, all of us had to be taken to 
that city. The traitor who had betrayed us, was 
apprehended with us, that we might not notice it. 
He was put into a separate room, and we felt 
much compassion for him, because he could not be 
with us ; for we knew not that he was our betrayer. 
He was also taken along in the wagon, to the prison 
at Ghent, where we first learned that he had be- 
trayed us. 

When we were brought out of the castle, to be 
taken to the city, much people had come from the 
city to see us ; there my brother's wife, who was a 
sister, was apprehended, because she spoke to me, 
and was put into the wagon ; also a man who wished 
us Godspeed. We freely spoke to the people that 
had come, telling them that those who would turn 
from wickedness, and follow Christ, had to be a 
prey for everyone. Isa. 59:15. There were many 
who would have liked to talk with us, but did not 
dare do so, because of the wicked judges. There 
were ten of us ; two were ready [for baptism], and 
four were novices ; the other two were apprehended 
because they spoke to us. Thus they took two 
wagon loads to the city, in broad daylight. On the 
way, they also apprehended a woman, only because 
she said to us : "God keep you." She also had to 
sit in the wagon. But if they had apprehended all 
who spoke to us when we came into the city, and 
to whom we replied with the Word of God, they 
could not have carried them in twenty wagons, as 
the people came running from every corner which 
we passed; as water which runs down from the 
mountains, and becomes a large stream, so the 
people flowed together, which continued from one 
of the gates of the city to the castle of the count, 
which stands at the other end of the city, a walk- 
ing distance of about one hour. We were led up to 
the castle, and the judge of the country of Aelst, 
delivered us over into the hands of the lords of the 
Imperial Council. Here we were separately con- 
fined, some into upper rooms. The women also 
remained above ; but eleven of us were led into a 
gloomy, deep dungeon, containing divers dark cells 
built of masonry, in which we were put in sep- 
arate parties of three and three. But Hansken and 
I were put into the darkest of all, in which there 
was a small quantity of crumbled straw, about an 
apron full, with which we might help ourselves. I 
said : "It seems to me that we are with Jonah in the 
whale's belly, so dark it is here ; we may well cry 
with Jonah to the Lord, that He will be our com- 
forter and deliverer ; for we are now deprived of 
all human comfort and assistance." This did not 
deject us, but we praised and thanked God, that we 
were permitted to suffer for His name. We also 
spoke to our brethren that lay in other cells ; for we 


could easily hear each other speaking. After we 
had lain there for three or four days, Hansken and 
I were both summoned before the lords, where we 
were examined, and interrogated concerning the 
ground of our faith, and when we had been bap- 
tized. 

The Lord then, according to His promise, gave 
us a mouth, to speak boldly, and we requested to 
be allowed publicly to defend ourselves with the 
Word of God. They replied to us, that they would 
send us learned men, who would instruct us ; where- 
upon we were taken below again. 

Shortly after, I was taken above into another 
room, to two councilors and a clerk. There they 
interrogated me very closely, where I had been 
and if I knew that I had been banished six years 
ago, in the time of Martin Huereblock, and where 
we had held our meetings ; all of which they knew 
for the traitor had already told them. I said : "Why 
do you ask me, who have come from foreign coun- 
tries?" (For I purposely did not wish to ask 
much, that, in case I should be apprehended, I 
might not have much to answer.) "Why do you 
question me so closely? Have you not yet enough 
innocent blood to shed? Do you thirst for still 
more?" "Ask as closely as you want to," said I- 
the righteous Judge shall ask you again, if you do 
not repent." 

They then asked me still more, and adjured me 
by my baptism, that I should tell them ; "For," 
said they, "we know that you people do not lie * 
hence tell us." ' 

I said : "That you know that we do not lie, is to 
us a testimony of salvation, but to you of perdition 
(Phil. 1:28), because you put such to death; but 
your adjuration has no power against the truth." 

All that I said was written down, and they threat- 
ened to torture me if I would not tell them every- 
thing. ^ I said: "I can not tell you what I do not 
know." Thus they tormented me for a very long 
time. Thereupon I was taken below again. In this 
manner they dealt with all our friends, with each 
separately. 

One Saturday I was taken above again into the 
same room. Four monks were present ; the guard- 
ian of the Minorites, with another, and the Su- 
perior of the Jacobines, with another. With me 
there came a young brother, who had not yet re- 
ceived baptism, but was ready for it. 

When I had seated myself, I asked them what 
they wished. They said they were sent by the lords, 
to instruct us, and to converse with us concerning 
the ground and articles of faith. I replied that I 
was ready to be instructed with the Word of God, 
and to hold converse concerning the ground and 
articles of faith, and this publicly, in the presence 
of the judges who were to judge us, and of our 
brethren and sisters that were imprisoned with us. 

Arts. "This they will not permit." 

Hans van Overdam. "Well, let them do what 
they please ; we will not dispute secretly and alone, 
lest our words be perverted behind our backs." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


489 


Ans. "We will not pervert your words." 
Hans. "No, we know you well." 
Ques. "What do you take us for? What evil did 
we ever do you? Pray, tell us what evil do you 
know of us?" 

Hans. "If you would know it then ; I regard you 
as false prophets and seducers." 

Here we got into a dispute concerning their spir- 
itual semblance, and the command of the pope re- 
garding the purity of the priests and monks, and 
why they were called spiritual, and others secular, 
when all ought to be spiritual. 

They then said: "This is not profitable; let us 
dispute about the articles of faith." 

Thereupon I said: "What I have said I have 
said." 

They replied that they would tell it to the lords. 
Thus we separated, having disputed with each 
other for fully two hours. Two days after, Hans- 
ken and I were summoned before the lords; the 
four monks were present, and attempted to engage 
us in a disputation. 

I then said to the lords : "My lords, I ask you, 
in what house are we, in a house of justice, or of 
violence ?" 

Ans. "In a house of justice." 
Hans. "God grant that it be so ; but, my lords, 
of what do you accuse us, that you keep us im- 
prisoned and confined like thieves and murderers? 
Have we wronged any one, or do you charge us 
with violence, murder, or roguery?" 

Ans. "No ; we know no such thing of you." 
Hans. "Well, my lords, why then have you im- 
prisoned us?" 
Ans. "Your adversaries will tell you that." 
Hans. "Are you our adversaries ?" 
Ans. "No, but we are judges." 
I then said to the monks : "Are you our adver- 
saries ?" 
Ans. "No." 

Hans. "Well, if no one is our adversary, why 
are we imprisoned?" 

A councilor then said: "The Emperor is your 
adversary." 

Hans. "We have not offended against his Impe- 
rial Majesty according to the power which he has 
received from God, and will obey him in every 
ordinance, as far as we can do so consistently with 
the truth." 

Councilor. "You have held meetings of this new 
doctrine, and the Emperor has commanded that 
this should not be done." 

Hams. "God has not authorized him to make 
such commandments; in this he transcends the 
power which God has given him, and in this we do 
not recognize his supremacy ; for the salvation of 
our souls concerns us more, so that we show obedi- 
ence to Goci." 

The monks then said: "We are your adver- 
saries, in that your doctrine is not good ; for if it 
were good, you would not preach in woods and 
corners, but openly." 


Hans then said : "Grant us a free place in the 
market, or in your monasteries and churches, and 
see whether we then shall go into the woods ; but 
no, you are afraid that you would be reproved; 
hence you have brought it about, that you cannot 
be reproved, and have driven us from cities and 
countries." 

Monks. "Alas! we have not done it; the Em- 
peror does it." 

Hans. "You have urged him to it." 

Monks. "We have not." 

The lords also then began to speak against us, 
why we were not content with the faith of our par- 
ents, and with our baptism. 

We replied : "We know of no infant baptism, 
but of a baptism upon faith, concerning which the 
Word of God teaches us." 

We then had many other words, and reproved 
them for undertaking to be judges in matters of 
faith, when they did not understand the Scriptures. 
"If you would be judges, be impartial, and let the 
matter proceed in regular order; let both parties 
appear together, and let our brethren and sisters 
that have been brought prisoners here together with 
us, be with us. Then one of us, whose mouth the 
Lord shall open, will speak, and the others shall 
listen in silence while he is speaking ; and thus shall 
also our adversaries do." 

Lords: "We will not let you come together ; we 
would have you dispute alone here." 

We then said : "My lords, it would be the most 
convenient for you, and the whole matter could be 
finished with one disputation; otherwise you will 
constantly have to dispute anew with one or two at 
a time." 

Lords. "What then ? We will not have it so." 

Then a councilor said: "They want to have 
them together, in order to seduce one another still 
more ; therefore they cannot be allowed to come 
together." 

Hans. "My lords, you say that you are judges, 
but we regard you as our adversaries ; for you seek 
to injure us in every way, and to cause us and our 
brethren by violence and subtlety, to apostatize 
from our faith." 

Ans. "Why should we not do this, in order to 
bring them back?" 

Hans. "Well, my lords, hear this : since we see 
that you are no judges, but our adversaries, and 
employ, wherever you can, all violence and subtlety, 
to your advantage, and our detriment : Firstly, you 
have by violence deprived us of our testaments, in 
which we find our consolation ; secondly, you have 
confined us separately, some in deep, dark dun- 
geons, others in rooms up above ; and thirdly, you 
seek to outwit and deceive us by separate disputa- 
tions, afterwards to say behind our backs, to our 
brethren, that you had overcome us, and, vice versa, 
to say the same to us concerning our brethren and 
sisters; therefore, my lords, we will not dispute 
here, unless our brethren and sisters are present." 


490 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


When they heard that their design against us 
did not proceed according to their wish, they be- 
came greatly enraged, and also the monks. We saw 
easily enough to what it amounted, and that all 
they did was pure deception; for though it was 
proved by the Scriptures, with regard to several 
articles, that they were in the wrong, yet they 
would not acknowledge it, and excused themselves 
with the Emperor and his mandates, and the monks 
with the long continued customs of the Roman 
church (Wisdom 14:16), and the great number of 
our forefathers : and when the contrary had been 
proven to them from the Scriptures, it was just as 
before, even as though one should have talked to 
the stove. 

We then said : "My lords, will you not permit 
us, to dispute in regular order, as we have re- 
quested ?" 

Ans. "No." 

"Well then," said we, "You know the ground 
of our faith, which we have freely confessed to 
you; you may now do with us as you please (Jer. 
26:14), as far as God will permit; but take good 
heed what you do, for there is a Judge still higher 
than you. Eph. 6:9. May the Lord open the eyes 
of your understanding, that you may see how mis- 
erably you are seduced and deceived by the false 
prophets, indeed so that you fight against God and 
the Lamb, for which it will go hard with you, un- 
less you repent." 

_ We were then led away again, as we would not 
dispute further ; for we had agreed upon this, when 
we were together yet in the castle, out of the 
city, lest they should take the simple unawares by 
disputations. Hence they could not persuade any 
that they had overcome them, all knowing that they 
were not to dispute, except in the presence of the 
others, in which case the disputation would tend to 
the consolation and admonition of our brethren 
and sisters who should hear it; for when we saw 
that they did their best we would not let anything 
be wanting on our part, seeing necessity demanded 
it. When they perceived that this did not promise 
success, they tried another scheme. They sent a 
councilor and two friars, a grey and a black, into 
a room, before whom a brother or sister, one at a 
time, were brought, to dispute with them and to 
defend the ground of their faith; but they de- 
clared that they would not dispute alone in a room, 
but openly, when we should be together before the 
lords. They then said : "We adjure you by your 
faith and baptism, that you dispute here." The 
brother replied: "I know my faith and baptism; 
but with your adjuration I have nothing to do ; 
hence let us come together; for this is just what 
we wish, to dispute openly with you, but not thus 
alone in a room." Another was then summoned, 
and thus it went until all had been brought before 
them; but no one would dispute in this manner. 
Thereupon I also had to appear alone in a room, 
before a councilor and two monks, who likewise 
began to adjure me. I then said: "Why would 


you adjure me, to cast roses before dogs, and pearls 
before swine, that you may trample on them? 
No, this the Lord has forbidden m e to do. Matt. 
7:6. Nay, I esteem the words of God far too pre- 
cious, than that I should let the light shine in vain 
here, whereby no one would be enlightened, but it 
would only be blasphemed and mocked, as you do 
when the truth is told you." 

Then they adjured me still much more; but I 
replied : "Why do you adjure so much ? I care not 
for your adjuration ; for it is the manner of sor- 
cerers, who adjure against the truth. II Chron. 
33 :6. But I now see clearly, how the souls of our 
two brethren and sisters were murdered and se- 
duced (Ezek. 13:19), it was through your sorcer- 
ous adjuration, as they did not guard themselves 
against the subtlety of the devil, and had not the 
gift to dispute." 

The guardian then said : "You boasted in your 
letter, that you would dispute publicly; why do 
you not dare do it now?" 

Hans. "You monk, I still desire with all my 
heart to defend my faith with the Word of God 
publicly before all men (I Pet. 3:15); but your 
cap would shake quite differently, if you had to 
dispute with me at the risk of the fire, and if the 
authorities would not protect you." 

Councilor. "No, we have no desire to let you 
dispute publicly; you are now in our hands." 

Hans. "I desired it, before I knew that I should 
fall into your hands ; but I see well now, that I have 
fallen into the talons of the eagle (II Esd. 11), and 
whoever gets into them cannot escape without los- 
ing soul or body." 

Councilor. "Who is the eagle, the Emperor ?" 

Hans. "No, it is the Roman Empire or power; 
read the letter I wrote you ; it will tell you." 

We then exchanged many more words, and the 
monks became angry at me, and commenced to 
utter puffed-up words. I then said that Paul had 
prophesied correctly concerning them, that they 
were blasphemers, proud, and puffed up. II Tim. 

Thereupon friar Jan de Croock became so en- 
raged that he began to cry : "Fools, fools, heretics, 
heretics are you !" 

Hans. "Behold, is this not a fine teacher? but 
Paul says that a teacher must not be a brawler, nor 
angry." I Tim. 3 :3 ; Tit. 1 :7. The councilor felt 
ashamed that the monk acted so disgracefully, and 
commanded him to be silent. 

At another subsequent time there came two sec- 
ular priests : Sir Willem of Nieuwenland, and the 
parish priest of St. Michael. I asked them what 
they desired. They replied: "We have come to 
seek your soul." This time I kept under cover as 
much as I could, in hopes that we might dispute 
openly before the lords, as they told me that they 
would use their best endeavors in this direction. 
But when I heard that it could not be, I thought^ 
when they came again with the clerk, we must ac- 
cost each other in quite a different way, from what 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


491 


we did the last time. I then asked : "What do you 
wish?" 

Ans. "We desire that you suffer yourself to be 
instructed ; for, behold, we seek your soul." 

Hans. "Do you then take so much pains to 
seek souls?" 
Ans. "Yes." 

Hans. "Well then, go into the city, to every 
place, to the drunkards, whoremongers, swearers, 
railers, covetous, proud, idolaters, revellers, glut- 
tons, and murderers, who shed innocent blood ; all 
these are still your brethren ; go, seek their souls ; 
Christ has found mine." 

Ans. "We admonish them, and then we have 
delivered our souls." 

Hans. "That is not enough; you must go to 
them, and reprove them, and if they will not hear 
you, you must bring them before the church, and 
reprove them openly; if they still refuse to hear, 
exclude them from the church, and let them be 
unto you as heathen and open sinners, as Christ 
teaches, and Paul writes to the Corinthians. Re- 
prove also your judges, who do violence and injus- 
tice, yea, who shed innocent blood." 

One of the priests then said : "Should we go and 
reprove the magistrates ?" 

I asked whether God was a respecter of persons. 
Ans. "No." 

Hans. "Would you be a minister of God, and 
have respect to persons?" 

Ans. "This would cause an uproar in the city, 
and they would kill us." 
Hans. "Then suffer for righteousness' sake." 
But it seemed to me they had no great desire to 
suffer for it. In short, we treated so much of the 
ban, that if the words of Christ and Paul were fol- 
lowed, the pope, prelates, emperor and king, yea, 
they themselves with all their multitude would be 
excluded, and only a very small number remain. 

I then told them that their house was all on fire, 
kindled by the flames of hell, and that they should 
first extinguish that, before coming to see whether 
our house was in danger of fire. Whereupon they 
went away ; one of the priests came no more. In 
this manner I dealt also with Sir Anthony van 
Hille ; he tormented the others, but let me alone. 

Herewith I commend my dear brethren and sis- 
ters in the Lord into the hands of the Almighty 
God and Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen. 

Written while in prison for the testimony of 
Christ. I lay in a dark dungeon for a month ; I am 
now in a deep, round hole, where there is a little 
more light, and here I have written this letter. I 
hope to offer up my sacrifice this week, if it is the 
Lord's will, together with those whom the Lord 
has foreordained thereto; for if it does not take 
place this week, it will no doubt be deferred for 
two months yet, because no court will be held 
for six weeks. Know, that our brethren and sis- 
ters are of good cheer and courage, through the 
grace of the Lord; God be praised for it. I be- 


seech you, by the brotherly love which you bear 
to me, that you send this letter to Friesland, par- 
ticularly to Emdenland; I mean this same letter, 
as soon as you can; you may copy it, but make 
haste with it. I kindly desire that it be preserved, 
so that it may not be torn or soiled. The brethren 
that are in the dungeon with me, greet you all with 
the peace of God. We daily pray to the Lord for 
you ; do so also for us. Walk in the peace of the 
Lord, and it will be well with you. When this let- 
ter has been read, send it to Antwerp, that it may 
be sent to the church at Emden, so that it may be 
read to everyone ; this I desire of my dear breth- 
ren, through the brotherly love which you bear to 
me. 


A LETTER BY HANS VAN OVERDAM, WHICH HE 

SENT TO THE LORDS OF THE LAW, AT GHENT 

AND TO THE COUNCILORS, THE DAY 

BEFORE HIS APPREHENSION 

Understand well: 

He that hath ears to hear, let him hear, and he 
that reads, let him attend, and judge with the un- 
derstanding of the holy Scriptures; but woe to 
him that judges without understanding. Hearken, 
I speak to you, O carnal generation, you Ishmael- 
ites, who boast of being Christians, because you are 
born of water without the Spirit, and persecute the 
children of the promise, who, through faith in the 
Word of God, are born of the water and of the 
Spirit ; yea, you persecute them, as Ishmael perse- 
cuted Isaac, as Esau did Jacob, and as the Jews 
persecuted Christ. Even so the antichristians, who 
are born of the flesh, now persecute the Christians, 
who are born of the Spirit, who shall receive 
the promise of the everlasting kingdom through 
Christ, who is the heir of all things, and causes His 
kingdom to be proclaimed through the Gospel, 
unto repentance and true sorrow for dead works, 
through faith in Him ; they contemn his witnesses, 
etc. This is the wind, O eagle, mark ! which blow- 
eth where it listeth, and thou canst not tell whence 
it cometh, or whither it goeth. Hear now His voice, 
which the Most High has reserved unto the latter 
times, to reveal to thee thy transgressions and 
punishment, who now begins to deliver His people 
through much misery and tribulation. 

Therefore, mark! O thou eagle, the end of thy 
time is very nigh; art thou not the fourth beast? 
Oh, yes, thou art the beast seen by Daniel (Dan. 
7:7), which devoured everything with his iron 
teeth, and stamped the residue with his feet, and 
brought forth the most wicked little horn. Dan. 
7 :7, £. Thou hast dwelt a long time upon the earth 
with deceit, and hast not judged the earth with 
truth. For thou hast afflicted the meek, thou hast 
hurt the peaceable, thou hast loved liars, and de- 
stroyed the dwellings of them that brought forth 
fruit, and hast cast down the walls of such as did 
thee no harm. Therefore is thy wrongful dealings 
come up unto the Highest, and thy pride unto the 


492 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Mighty. And therefore appear no more, thou 
eagle, that the earth may be refreshed, and may re- 
turn, being delivered from thy violence, and that 
she may hope for the judgment and mercy of Him 
that made her, whose judgment shall be better and 
more just than thine, O thou eaglet Therefore, 
shall thy wicked heads which remain to the last, 
be the end of the eagle to accomplish his most 
wicked wickedness, together with his wicked 
feathers, which also are kept unto the last. There- 
fore hear, vain body of eagle, who vainly boast 
of what you are not, namely, Christians. Hear 
also, you most wicked claws, which are willing and 
ready to destroy and rend what your most wicked 
heads command you, through the counsel of liars, 
whom they love. Why do you rejoice in the misery 
and fall of the poor lambs and sucklings, who feed 
still on milk, and whom you keep imprisoned with 
violence, and whose souls you murder with false, 
deceitful wiles; who have heard the truth only a 
year or two at the most ; you have none as yet, that 
can instruct you in all the articles of faith? Be 
ashamed of your boasting, that through your car- 
nal, blind, learned men you have overcome the in- 
nocent, with subtle, deceitful wiles and broken 
Scriptures. Oh, woe, woe! for the great misery 
and the terrible times, that wickedness has gained 
so much the upper hand, that truth is not per- 
mitted as much as openly to defend itself. Let the 
misery, violence, and great distress of the pregnant 
and the sucklings of these times ascend to the ears 
of the Most High, because no help, comfort, or 
assistance can be rendered them by those whom 
the Lord has endowed with more grace and gifts 
to stop the mouths of adversaries. 

But perhaps you say : "Let them come forward 
then, that are better endowed, and have received 
more grace." To this we reply, that the wolf might 
call for a long while before the sheep would come ; 
they well knowing that he would tear them with 
great cruelty, and without right and reason. Alas, 
alas ! what awful judgment and terrible punishment 
from the fierce and devouring wrath of God shall 
fall upon those who without mercy distress, per- 
secute and murder the innocent and God-fearing, 
and themselves live so ungodly in all the unright- 
eous works of the flesh, so that they shall not in- 
herit the kingdom of heaven. O thou spiritual 
Babylon, how shall the Lord visit and avenge upon 
you the innocent souls and the blood of His wit- 
nesses ; for all this is found in thee. Thou hast made 
the kings of the earth, and all nations, so drunken 
with the wine of spiritual whoredom, that they can 
neither see nor hear the truth. Oh, that we might 
once freely defend ourselves publicly with the 
Word of God, in the presence of a large, flaming 
fire, against all you learned doctors, licentiates, 
priests and monks, who help strengthen, protect, 
preserve and maintain the kingdom of antichrist, 
and that the vanquished party should be cast into 
the fire ; then it would not be necessary to torment 
and distress the poor, innocent lambs, and your 


faith could be tried, as to how it accords with the 
truth; then there would be no need of washing 
the hands with Pilate, or of the imperial mandate, 
and the authorities would remain free from the 
blood of the innocent, if they would not let the 
Word of God be judge over the faith. But no, the 
false prophets and deceivers well know that their 
trickery and deceit would be made far too much 
manifest thereby. Therefore they cry just as assid- 
uously as did the scribes and Pharisees ; "Crucify 
him, crucify him." The mandate of the emperor 
must prevail. Thus it was in the beginning of the 
fourth beast, and so it is now at the end of it. Let 
him that can comprehend with it, observe with un- 
derstanding, that the end is the worst of all. 

"Princess, repent and amend your ways ; for the 
end of all things is at hand. Woe unto you false 
prophets who resist the truth, even as the Egyptian 
magicians resisted Moses; but your wickedness 
shall yet be made manifest to all men, even as it 
already begins. Woe unto you champion anti- 
christ, who put on the time-honored customs of the 
Roman church as an armor with which to defend 
yourselves against the truth, and use the mandate 
of the emperor as a shield, and wield the sword of 
the magistracy, in every country to shed the inno- 
cent blood of those who will not defend themselves 
with temporal or carnal weapons, but only with the 
Word of God, which is our sword, and which is 
sharp and two-edged. But we are daily greatly 
slandered by those who say that we defend our 
faith with the sword, as did those of Munster. May 
the Almighty God preserve us from such abomina- 
tions. 

Be it known to you, noble lords, councilors, 
burgomasters and judges, that we recognize your 
officers as right and good ; yea, as ordained and in- 
stituted of God, that is, the secular sword for the 
punishment of evildoers, and the protection of the 
good, and we desire to obey you in all taxes, trib- 
utes and ordinances, as far as it is not contrary to 
God. And if you find us disobedient in these things, 
we will willingly receive our punishment as male- 
factors. God, who is acquainted with every heart, 
knows that this is our intention. But understand! 
ye noble lords, that the abuse of your stations or 
offices we do not recognize to be from God, but 
from the devil, and that antichrist, through the sub- 
tlety of the devil, has bewitched and blinded your 
eyes, so that you do not know yourselves, who you 
are, and how sorely you have incurred the wrath of 
God. Be sober, therefore, and awake, and open the 
eyes of your understanding, and see against whom 
you fight, that it is not against man, but against 
God. Therefore we will not obey you ; for it is the 
will of God, that we shall be tried thereby. Hence 
we would rather, through the grace of God, suffer 
our temporal bodies to be burned, drowned, be- 
headed, racked or tortured, as it may seem good to 
you, or be scourged, banished, or driven away, and 
robbed of our goods, than show you any obedience 
contrary to the Word of God, and we will be pa- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


493 


tient herein, committing vengeance to God ; for we 
know Him that hath said, "Vengeance belongeth 
unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord." And 
again, "The Lord shall judge his people. It is a 
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living 
God." Hebrews 10:30, 31. And the spirit testifies, 
that this is at hand, and has already commenced. 

Hearken, thou whose time for bearing is half ful- 
filled : Prepare thy bed ; for thou shalt bring forth. 
What shall I bring forth? The fruit of thy labor, 
with pain and anguish, and afterwards death. 
Hearken, thou on the right hand: Prepare the 
measure. What shall I prepare it for ? To measure 
thy neighbor, and then shalt thou also be measured. 
Get thee ready, thou fire, and do not tarry. Heark- 
en, I speak to you who are of one mind with the 
horns (Rev. 17 :13), the day of your feast has come, 
your meat is ready ; eat quickly the fat flesh of the 
drunken, that the power may be given to the beast. 
It has been put into your hearts, so to do. After 
the beast you shall have power for a little while. 
You fight against the Lamb, but the Lamb shall 
overcome you ; He is King of kings, and Lord of 
lords, and His kingdom will endure forever. 
Amen. 

We testify of Him that it is He that shall come, 
yea, He comes quickly, the Lord Jesus, who shall 
reward every man according to his works. 


a letter of jannijn buefkijn, called hans 

keeskoopee, a native of verurcke, which 

he wrote while in prison at ghent 

a. d. 1550 

A holy conversation, a living, spiritual faith, 
hope, and a true evangelical confidence in God the 
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, our only Helper 
and Saviour, I wish to my beloved friends, for glad 
tidings and an affectionate salutation, that through 
said faith and confidence in God you may grow up 
in a new and pure life, which life is perceived and 
richly found in the holy Gospel. Oh, blessed are 
they who purify and sanctify themselves according 
to the tenor of the Gospel ; without which purifi- 
cation and sanctification no man shall see God nor 
the Lord. Thus follow the advice of the Lord 
Jesus, who says: "Search the Scriptures." John 
5 :39. I have done nothing else ; as I and my fel- 
low prisoners said before the lords of the Imperial 
Council; and they can not, in truth, bring any 
charge against us. They asked us, me first, and 
then the others, one after another, whether we 
were baptized. 

I said : "Yes, my lords." 

Ques. "How long since?" 

Ans. "Four years, my lords." 

Ques. "What do you hold concerning your bap- 
tism received in infancy?" 

Ans. "Nothing at all, my lords." 

Ques. "Concerning the sacrament of the priests, 
do you not believe that flesh and blood is there, and 
that it is God?" 


Ans. "No my lords, how should it be flesh and 
blood and God," said I before the priests of Jezebel. 
"Cover over this whole table with them [with 
wafers], and I will blow them away like dust; 
hence they are not God, for God can not be handled 
or eaten bodily." 

They then asked whether I would hold to this. I 
replied : "Yes, my lords, till the contrary is proved 
to me with the Scriptures." 

Thereupon I was led away from the council, 
and another brought forward, until ten had made 
this confession, one of whom is not baptized yet, 
but he confessed that it is right and good, and 
said that he once went to the teacher to be bap- 
tized. 

The lords then asked him : "How came it that 
he did not baptize you ?" 

The person, a mere lad yet, and a dear child, 
replied: "My lords, when the teacher presented 
the faith to me, and had interrogated me, he well 
perceived that I was still young in understanding, 
and bade me search the Scriptures still more; 
but I desired that it be done. He then asked me 
whether I knew that the world puts to death and 
burns such people. I replied: T know it well.' 
He then said to me : 'Hence I pray you, that you 
have patience for this time, until I come again an- 
other time. Search the Scriptures, and ask the 
Lord for wisdom ; for you are yet a youth. Thus 
we parted.' " 

The lords then asked : "Are you sorry that you 
are not baptized?" 

He said : "Yes, my lords." 

They asked him further : "If you were not im- 
prisoned, would you be baptized?" 

He replied : "Yes, my lords." 

He was then led away from the council. 
See, dear friends, these are beautiful signs and 
miracles; open your eyes, and behold when such 
young persons give themselves for the truth, deliv- 
ering their bodies into prison, and even unto death. 
We have told the lords, that they should bring for- 
ward all their learned men, and we would prove to 
them with the truth, that they are all false prophets, 
and that they have deceived the world for almost 
thirteen hundred years with their deceitfulness, 
and that we would rather dispute with them pub- 
licly upon a scaffold, in the midst of the market- 
place, than secretly ; but this the priests will not do, 
and will spare no pains to escape it. Thus all the 
learned men were called to dispute in the consistory, 
all the lords of the council being present, and also 
four of the most learned priests of Ghent; I was 
present and heard it myself. 

Therefore, search the Scriptures, which the Lord 
commands you to do, and to act according to them, 
on pain of the damnation of your souls, and of be- 
ing cast into everlasting fire, where there will be 
weeping and gnashing of teeth forever; which 
Scriptures the priests forbid you to read, on pain 
of being hated by all men all the days of your life, 
and of having your body burned at the stake ; which 


494 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


is soon done, as may be seen. Hence we rather do 
what the Lord commands, though we are despised 
for a little while, and by men cast out of this miser- 
able world, and rest in the Lord, than do what men 
command, and be forever the enemy of God, in the 
horrible pit of hell. Therefore, search the Scrip- 
tures with an upright heart towards God, and the 
Lord will give you understanding. The Lord be 
with you. My love to you. 

From me Jannijn Buefkijn, imprisoned at Ghent, 
for the testimony of Jesus. I wish salvation to all 
that seek the Lord with an unfeigned heart. Writ- 
ten in the dark with poor materials. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH OF HANS VAN OVER- 
DAM AND HANS KEESKOOPER 

When these two lambs had been sentenced, the 
procurator-general said : "That you are sentenced 
as heretics, is for the reason that divers learned 
men disputed with you, and you would not suffer 
yourselves to be instructed." 

Hans van Overdam. "My lords, if we could 
have disputed publicly, it would soon have been 
seen what kind, learned men they were." 

Procurator-General. "It is too late now; it is 
too late now 1" 

Both were sent away then, going with a smile 
on their lips. 

Hans van Overdam. "Yes, yes, it is too late 
now!" 

Hans Keeskooper had agreed with Hans van 
Overdam, that on the scaffold he would take off his 
stockings, and in the meantime Hans van Overdam 
should speak to the people ; which was also done. 
When the executioners would assist Hansken, the 
latter desired to do it alone, that Hans van Over- 
dam might speak the longer to the people. This 
done, each was placed at a stake, and they offered 
up their bodies to God. 


GOVERT, GILLIS, MARIKEN, AND ANNEKEN, 
A. D. 1550 

On the last of January, 1550, there were offered 
up for the faith, at Lier, in Brabant, four pious 
Christians, named Govert, Gillis, Mariken and An- 
neken, who, as sheep for the slaughter, had been 
apprehended without violence. When they were 
brought before the council, and questioned con- 
cerning their faith, they made a frank and un- 
feigned confession of it. The bailiff then said: 
"You stand here to defend yourselves?" 

Govert replied: "As regards my faith, I have 
freely confessed it, and shall turn to no other; 
though it cost my life, I will adhere to it." 

Forthwith the imperial edict was read to them, 
and the bailiff asked them whether they under- 
stood its contents. 

Govert said : "God has commanded us through 
Christ, as is recorded in the sixteenth chapter of 
Mark, that all who believe and are baptized shall be 


saved, and that those who do not believe shall be 
damned ; but the emperor, in his blind judgment, 
has commanded that whoever is baptized upon his 
faith, shall be put to death without mercy. These 
two commands militate against each other'; one of 
the two we must forsake ; but everyone ought to 
know that we must keep the command of God; 
for though Satan teaches that we are heretics, yet 
we do not act contrary to the Word of God." 

When they were led to the tribunal, Govert said 
to the priests : "Take off your long robes, put on 
sack cloth, put ashes on your heads, and repent 
like those of Nineveh." ' 

In the court the bailiff asked him whether he 
desired no favor. 

He replied : "I will not ask for your favor ; for 
what I cannot do without, the most high God will 
give me." 

The bailiff said also to Anneken : "Do you not 
desire a favor, before sentence is passed upon 
you ?" 

She answered : "I shall ask favor of God my 
refuge." 

Mariken, an old woman of seventy-five years 
was asked whether she would confess her sins to 
the priest. 

She replied : "I am sorry that I ever confessed 
my sins to the mortal ears of the priests." 

Seeing some brethren, Govert turned his face 
and joyfully comforted them, saying among other 
things: "I pray God, that you may be thus im- 
prisoned for His glory, as I now am." 

The bailiff very fiercely said : "Be still, for your 
preaching is of no account here." 

"My lord bailiff," said he, "I speak only five or 
six words, which God has given me to speak, does 
this give you so much pain?" And when the peo- 
ple murmured on this account, he said : "This has 
been witnessed from the time of righteous Abel, 
that the righteous have suffered reproach ; hence 
be not astonished." The two servants that stood 
by him said : "You must not speak; the bailiff will 
not have it; hence be still." 

Immediately God closed his mouth, which 
grieved many. Gillis was not questioned, and he 
said nothing at all ; but they were led back to prison, 
where they rejoiced together, and sang : Saligh is 
den man, en goet geheeten; and also the forty-first 
psalm. The bailiff then came into prison, and asked 
Govert, whether he had considered the matter ; to 
which he replied : "Unless you repent, the punish- 
ment of God shall come upon you." The bailiff 
looked out of the window, and said : "Will God 
damn all this multitude of people ?" 

Govert replied: "I have spoken the Word of 
God to you ; but I hope there are still people here 
who fear God?" 

The bailiff then turned to Anneken, and asked 
her what she had to say to it. 

She replied: "Lord bailiff, twice I have been 
greatly honored in this city, namely, when I was 
married, and when my husband became emperor ; 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


495 


but I never had a joy that did not perish, as I now 
have." 

On his way to death, Govert delivered an excel- 
lent admonition, reproving the wicked railing, and 
said : "Be it known to you, that we do not die for 
theft, murder or heresy, but because we seek an 
inheritance with God, and live according to His 
Word." 

The executioner commanded him silence, but 
he said : "Leave God be with me for a little while ; 
repent, for your life is short." 

A brother then said: "God will strengthen 
you." 

"Oh, yes," said he, "the power of His Spirit is 
not weakening in me." 

The monk attempted to speak to Mariken, but 
Govert said: "Get you hence, deceiver, to your 
own people ; for we have no need of you." 

Entering the ring, Govert said to the gild-broth- 
ers : "How you stand here with sticks and staves ? 
Thus stood the Jews when they brought Christ to 
death; if we had been afraid of this, we would 
have fled in time." 

They then knelt down together, and prayed; 
whereupon they kissed each other. Anneken im- 
mediately commenced to sing : "In thee, O Lord, 
do I put my trust." Ps. 71 :1. The servants told 
her to be still ; but Govert said : "No, sister, sing 
on," and helped her sing. Enraged at this, the 
bailiff called to him a servant, and whispered some- 
thing in his ear. The latter went to the assistant of 
the executioner, who, upon receiving the order, im- 
mediately put a gag on Govert ; but the latter held 
his teeth so firmly closed, that the gag did not hin- 
der him much, and he laughingly said: "I could 
easily sing with the gag on ; but Paul says : 'Sing 
in your heart to God.' " Eph. 5 :19. 

The executioner, in order to put her to shame, 
made Anneken stand in her bare chemise. A serv- 
ant asked Gillis whether he did not see some of his 
people. Gillis said : "Do you know of nothing else 
to torment us with ?" "What does he say ?" asked 
Govert. "He inquires for our fellow brethren," 
replied Gillis. Govert said : "Though I could count 
twenty, I would not mention a single one. You 
think that by killing us you can suppress the Word 
of God ; but of those that hear and see this, hun- 
dreds shall yet come forth." Standing at the stake, 
he said : "Amend your ways and repent ; for after 
this there will be no more time for repentance." 
A servant who had a bottle of wine, asked them 
whether they wished to drink. Govert said : "We 
have no desire for your insipid wine ; for our Fa- 
ther shall give us new wine in His eternal king- 
dom." Matt. 26 :29. When it was thought that the 
old woman had been strangled at the stake, she 
began to sing a hymn in honor of her Bridegroom, 
which when Anneken heard it, she, from ardent 
love, sang with her. When they all stood at their 
stakes, each with a strap around the neck, they 
smiled at and nodded to one another, thus affec- 
tionately saluting and comforting each other, and 


commending their souls into the hands of God, 
they fell asleep in the Lord, and were burned. 


WILLEM, MARTIGEN, DIEUWERTGEN, AND MARIT- 
GEN JANS, A. D. 1550 

In the year 1550, there were apprehended at 
Leyden, in Holland, four lambs of Christ, namely, 
a brother and three sisters, named Willem, Marit- 
gen, Dieuwertgen and Maritgen Jans, who, having 
frankly confessed their faith, and no pain or suf- 
fering have power to cause them to apostatize, 
were finally sentenced to death as heretics. 

When they were brought forth, Willem said: 
"We suffer not as thieves or murderers, but for 
the name of the Lord ; therefore, O Lord, forgive 
them that do this to us." 

Maritgen said: "Lord, strengthen us, who suf- 
fer for Thy Word, which few are willing to do. I 
am not worthy to suffer for Thy name ; but, Lord, 
Thou shalt make me worthy." Acts 5 :41. 

Dieuwertgen came forward singing, and then 
said : "Dear citizens, do not avenge this ; for it is 
done for the name of the Lord." She further said : 
"Lord, look upon us, who suffer for Thy word; 
for our trust is in Thee alone." 

Maritgen Jans said: "This is the narrow way 
to salvation. O Lord, receive my spirit. And you 
lords of the council, only consider what great in- 
jury you are doing to your souls, in shedding inno- 
cent blood; hence repent, like those of Nineveh; 
for we suffer not on account of heresy or sedition ; 
we seek not to contend, save with the sword of the 
Spirit, which is the Word of God." Thereupon, 
commending their souls into the hands of God. 
they offered up their sacrifice, presenting an ac- 
ceptable savor to God, for which they will here- 
after not lose their reward. 


TEUNIS VAN HAUSTELRAED, A. D. 1550 

As this Teunis van Haustelraed was a zealous 
man in the fear of God, and very diligent with the 
talent which the Lord had committed to him, to get 
gain for the Lord, to bring many to the knowledge 
of the truth, and to strengthen those who had re- 
ceived the truth, in the same ; and as he thus most 
faithfully oversaw and served the church of Christ, 
he was finally apprehended, and imprisoned at 
Limmick, a city in the province of Jueelick, where 
he had many a severe contest with many subtle 
and shrewd spirits, and had to suffer and endure 
many torments for his faith. The controversy was 
principally about infant baptism and the sacra- 
ment, in which he did not agree with the papists. 
And as he could not be overcome or moved by 
them, but adhered firmly to the truth, he was final- 
ly condemned to be burned. They led him out of 
the city into the open field, and there burned him 
to ashes, about the year 1550. 

While he was yet in prison, he remembered his 
brethren and sisters with a consolatory admonition, 


496 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


which he sent to them from prison; it reads as 
follows : 

"O God, grant that in my great suffering I may 
unceasingly press to Thee, and not fear any pain, 
or death. Yea, dear Lord, I beseech Thee, who art 
God over all things, that I may not be ensnared by 
whatever may and will yet come upon me, which I 
shall suffer with Christ, unto salvation ; for I know 
that the crown of life is prepared for those who 
persevere herein. Therefore, O ye pious, despair 
not, but earnestly betake yourselves to your Cap- 
tain Christ, for He can win the field ; and He shall 
come at the last day, in flaming fire, and hold a se- 
vere judgment over all the ungodly. He shall then 
say to the sheep on His right hand : 'Come, inherit 
the kingdom of my Father, prepared for you from 
the foundation of the world.' Matt. 25 :34. O all ye 
Christians, cast from you all that burdens you, and 
stand with your loins girt, and watch for the Lord. 
Heb. 12:1; Luke 12:35. 

"If you are righteous, become still more right- 
eous ; for, believe me, you will need it all. O all ye 
members of Christ together, I beseech you, wake 
up now, that you may not sleep when the Bride- 
groom comes ; for then the wise will be admitted 
to salvation, but the foolish will be shut out into 
eternal damnation. Matt. 25 :10. 

"The Lord, to whom belonged the talent entrust- 
ed to you, will come again, and strictly inquire what 
each has gained. He shall then commend the wise, 
saying : 'Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.' But 
the slothful shall be reproved for his wickedness, 
and committed to torment. Matt. 25 :26. O ye 
lambs of the Lord, feed now, that you may become 
ready, so that you may not be unprepared when 
you are to come to the wedding. Otherwise the 
king will say : 'Friend, how earnest thou in hither 
not having a wedding garment?' Then the man, 
having no good answer, shall be speechless. But 
the king will command him to be cast into ever- 
lasting darkness. Matt. 22:13. 

"Do not become buyers of lands, but rather sell, 
you that are bidden, and give to the poor. Luke 
14:18; Matt. 19:21. O dear brethren, have com- 
passion on the poor, and comfort and assist them. 
I have nearly fought the fight, and my course will 
soon be finished; God grant that I may keep the 
faith, and the crown of life will be prepared for 
me. II Tim. 4 :8. O Lord, raise up faithful serv- 
ants, and make them rulers over thy household, that 
they may give them meat in due season. Matt. 24 : 
45. Pious Christians, I give you this as a brotherly 
adieu, for your good. It has been written with a 
faithful heart, and I hope to seal it with my blood." 


TIJS VAN LINDT, A. D. 1550 

Tijs van Lindt was a zealous and devout man, 
a resident of Remunde, in Guelderland, and 
walked, according to the knowledge which God had 
given him, devoutly in the fear of the Lord ; he was 
especially gifted with a sympathizing and merciful 


heart towards the poor and needy, so that, through 
the manifold alms and assistance which he rendered 
to the poor in general, he had a good report with 
many ; for, with that which God had given him, he 
comforted many in their distress. But as he had 
forsaken popery, with its idolatry, accepted the 
evangelical truth, received the saving faith in Jesus 
Christ, repented of his sinful life (abused in igno- 
rance), been baptized upon his faith, and daily 
sought to go on in the new and holy life, to the 
honor of God, the edification of his neighbor, and 
the enlightenment of those who still sat in blind- 
ness, in order thus to present his body a living sac- 
rifice, holy, acceptable unto God, the adversaries 
of the truth could not bear it, and this pious man 
was reported and charged with heresy. He was 
put into prison, where he had to endure many con- 
flicts and assaults ; they assailed him severely with 
torments, that he should apostatize from his faith. 
But as he notwithstanding all sufferings and tor- 
ments steadfastly adhered to his faith, he was 
finally condemned by virtue of the imperial man- 
date, and burned to ashes. 

Shortly after the burning of this pious witness 
of Jesus Christ, in Remunde, the city itself took 
fire, and was almost entirely reduced to ashes. How 
it was is not known, unless of its own accord. Many 
think that it was a punishment for the innocent 
blood, which judgment we leave to God. 


PALMKEN PALMEN, A. D. 1550 

Palmken Palmen was a resident of Borren, near 
the bailiwick of Millen, and was very zealous to 
live in the truth of the holy Gospel, and to follow 
Christ his Lord in obedience, whom he had put on 
when he was baptized upon his faith. But as the 
light is hated by darkness, and there was at this 
time a severe persecution in the country, by certain 
bloodthirsty authorities, instigated by the priests 
there, this good man was often in great distress, 
and was finally imprisoned, in which imprison- 
ment he suffered much reproach and many as- 
saults ; and as he immovably kept his faith in every 
fear and distress, he was finally sentenced to be 
burned to ashes, which sentence, as appeared, he 
received with gladness; for, when he was taken 
away from the house at Borren, he joyfully kept 
singing a hymn until the last moment, that is, as 
long as he had breath, while he was standing at the 
stake at which he was burned to ashes ; which took 
place between Sittert and Limmerich, in the open 
field, where a gravestone still marks the place 
where he is said to have died. 


ELEVEN, AND THEN SEVEN, PUT TO DEATH IN 

THE BAILIWICK OF MILLEN AND BORREN 

A. D. 1550 

A short time previously there were seven breth- 
ren at one time, and eleven at another, executed 
with the sword, in the bailiwick of Millen and Bor- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


497 


ren, and thus bore testimony with their blood to 
the name of Christ. 


REMKEN RAMAECKERS, A. D. 1550 

There was also a pious and devout brother and 
fellow member of the church of Jesus Christ, 
named Remken Ramaeckers, burned for the evan- 
gelical truth, near Sittert. 


GERRIT VAN KEMPEN, A. P. 1550 

In like manner, Gerrit van Kempen was burned 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ, at Wislen. 


THREE BRETHREN AT ANTWERP, OF WHOM THE 

OLDEST WHO WAS SPOKESMAN WAS NAMED 

JAN, A. D. 1550 

The malice of the priests was so great that they 
could not bear it, that those who sought in quiet- 
ness to serve God the Lord in simplicity and sin- 
cerity should reside in Antwerp; but they so in- 
stigated the Margrave, that rather than lose his 
office, he went about to apprehend them, and having 
to this end sent out his servants, he arrested three 
of them, which caused the priests great joy ; The 
captive brethren, on the other hand, also rejoiced 
that they were worthy to suffer for the name of the 
Lord. They were sharply examined concerning 
their faith, of which they made a good confession, 
with regard to baptism, and the sacrament, as well 
as to other articles; and though greatly assailed 
with subtlety by the priests, and the doctors of 
Louvain, they so .sagaciously defended themselves 
with the Scriptures, that the margrave himself de- 
clared that he had never heard so clear an exposi- 
tion of the Scriptures, and that if he were with 
them only two weeks they should persuade him. 
Thereupon the brethren said : "Judge yourselves, 
whether it is not the true faith and the truth for 
which we pledge our lives, and from which we will 
not depart, but persevere therein to the praise and 
the glory of the Lord, who did not forsake us, even 
when we were sitting in darkness." Heb. 10:28; 
Matt. 24 :13 ; Heb. 13 :5 ; Matt. 4 :16. 

Now when the doctors produced many Scrip- 
tures in a perverted and wrong manner, the breth- 
ren said : "How dare you be so presumptuous as to 
teach the way of the Lord so pervertedly ?" One 
of the doctors replied : "It is because we are not 
willing to be imprisoned and in fear and tribulation 
with you ; but in about seven or eight years I will 
promulgate the truth aright, and make great gain 
by it. "Poor man!" said one of the brethren, 
"you trust in a vain hope, since you are sure of 
neither evening nor morning, hour nor time, which 
came true ; for he died shortly after." Luke 12 :20. 
"Behold," said they, "you acknowledge your- 
selves, that we have committed no crime ; why then 
will you take our lives ?" The council said : "The 
decree of the emperor commands us to put you to 
death." "Take then," said they, "the decree with 


you into the judgment of the Lord, and see what it 
will avail you; indeed nothing." 

They were then sentenced, each to be burned 
at a stake. This sentence did not terrify them ; but 
they greatly rejoiced, and comforted each other. 
The council said to the youngest : "Pray the mar- 
grave, and lie will very probably release you." 
"Oh, no," replied he, "I will suffer with my breth- 
ren tor the truth." Thus they went together gladly 
and boldly to the stakes, saying to one another: 
"We go in peace to the peaceable house of God, 
there to obtain an everlasting habitation." They 
also prayed for the lords, that God would not lay 
this deed to their charge, but enlighten them, that 
they might come to repentance. Finally, standing 
at the stake, they cried out: "Heavenly Father, 
receive our spirits into Thy hands," and thus they 
offered up their sacrifice as true children of God. 


ANTHONY VAN ASSELROYE, A. D. 1550 

The Lord Jesus said to Peter, who was not only 
a lamb of Jesus Christ, but also a faithful shepherd, 
elder and overseer of the flock: "Verily, verily, I 
say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou gird- 
edst thyself and walkedst whither thou wouldest: 
but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth 
thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry 
thee whither thou wouldest not." "This spake he," 
says John, "signifying by what death he should 
glorify God." John 21 :18, 19. Here no great bish- 
opric, benefice, or yearly stipend is promised to the 
high apostle Peter, by his Master Christ Jesus, for 
this his faithful service, which he should begin and 
carry out in watching and feeding the sheep and 
lambs of the Lord; but much rather tribulation, 
bonds, and the bitter death with which he should 
meet. John 16:33; 15:20. 

But even as his Master entered through tribula- 
tion and suffering into His glory, so it was His 
will, that His servants should follow His footsteps. 
This was exemplified, about the year 1550, in the 
case of one Anthony van Asselroye, a faithful fol- 
lower of Christ and His chosen apostle Peter. He 
also bowed his neck under the easy yoke of our 
Lord Jesus, following Him from the whole heart 
in the regeneration, so that he was chosen by the 
church of God, to feed and pasture, like Peter, the 
souls of the sheep of the Lord with the Word of 
God ; which he faithfully did in that dark, perilous 
and bloody time, until he fell into the hands of the 
bloodthirsty papists, who bound him, and carried 
him whither he would not; for no chastening for 
the present seemeth to be joyous to the flesh, but 
grievous. Heb. 12:11. 

Thus this teacher and elder was compelled to 
tread the bloody wine press, and suffered and en- 
dured many torments from these persecutors. And 
as he patiently passed through all this, and no 
tyranny could move him to apostatize, he was con- 
demned and put to death, and thus torn and de- 
voured by these ravening wolves, according to the 


498 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


flesh, but in no wise according to the Spirit. But 
even as this hero and soldier of Jesus Christ obe- 
diently followed Christ and His faithful followers, 
in the faith and the regeneration, so he, at the 
appearing of the Lord, shall sit with them upon 
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
Matt. 19 :28. There he shall receive again, in glo- 
rious immortality, like unto the glorious body of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, the members which he 
delivered into bitter death, for the truth and the 
name of the Lord, and shall live with Him forever. 
Phil. 3:21; I Thess. 4:17. 

Peter Bruynen, who was offered up at Antwerp, 
A. D. 1551, confesses that he received Christian 
baptism upon his faith, by said Anthony van Assel- 
roye. 


JOHN KNEL OR BUCHNER, AND ANNA CANTIANA, 
A. D. 1550 

In the year 1550, there were imprisoned in the 
city of London, in England, two pious witnesses 
of Jesus, a man by the name of John Knel or Buch- 
ner, and a woman named Anna Cantiana ; who, 
among other things, believed and confessed with 
Menno Simons and all true believers, that the Son 
of God became man for our sakes, and that He did 
not receive His humanity from Mary or any other 
source, but that the eternal Word or Son, became 
Himself flesh or man. As the afore-mentioned 
could by no means be brought to apostatize, but 
would firmly adhere to the truth accepted, they, 
after suffering many torments, were condemned 
to death at said place. John Knel was burned the 
second of May, A. D. 1550. Anna Cantiana was 
also burned to ashes the same year. According to 
the testimony of John Fox she was ever ready to 
render service to others especially to those who 
were in bonds and imprisonment, with whom she 
constantly was, to minister to them. And as these 
above-mentioned martyrs suffered all this for the 
testimony of Jesus, and not on account of any 
crime, and steadfastly died for the truth, and were 
not ashamed of Christ and His word ; in this life, 
before men, He shall also not be ashamed of them 
before His Father, but, out of grace, bestow upon 
them and all the blessed, the kingdom prepared for 
them from the beginning. 

Concerning this, see preface to the old Offer- 
boeck of the year 1616, letter J, other side. 


JACQUES DOSIE AT LEEUWAERDEN 

At a certain time, which we have not been able 
precisely to ascertain, a lad named Jacques Dosie, 
was imprisoned at Leeuwaerden, in Friesland, for 
the truth of the holy Gospel. It is said that he was 
only about fifteen years of age ; but the wonder- 
working God, by the holy Spirit, manifested His 
power through this little one, and perfected His 
praise out of the mouth of this young child. Matt. 
21 :16; Ps. 8:2. For, on a certain occasion, when 
the lord and lady of Friesland, with many nobles 


and ladies, were assembled at Leeuwaerden, they 
summoned Jacques before them, conversed with 
him, and examined him, whether he was contami- 
nated with any heresy. But the faithful God, ac- 
cording to His promise (Luke 21 :14; Matt. 10:19; 
Mark 13 :11 ; Luke 12 :11), gave him a mouth and 
wisdom, which they could in no wise resist or 
quench. 

Thus it came, that after a few words the lord of 
Friesland went his way, because the people were 
waiting for him ; but the lady of Friesland, moved 
to compassion, it seems, talked with him, asking 
him why he, who was still so young, was thus se- 
verely imprisoned and bound. 

Jacques answered : "This was done only because 
I believe in Christ, adhere to Him alone, and will 
in no wise forsake Him." 

The lady asked him : "Do you not belong to the 
people who rebaptize themselves, perpetrate so 
much evil in our country, make rebellion, run to- 
gether, and say that they are dispersed on account 
of the faith, and boast of being the church of God, 
although they are a wicked set, and cause great 
commotion among the people?" 

Jacques. "My lady, I do not know any rebel- 
lious people, nor am I one of their number; but 
we would much rather, according to the teachings 
of the Scriptures, assist also our enemies, satisfy 
them, if they hunger and thirst, with food and 
drink, and resist them in no wise with revenge or 
violence." Rom. 12:20, 17; Matt. 5:39. 

Another said : "It would be seen, if you only had 
the power. 

Jacques replied : "Oh, no my lady, believe ; if it 
were permitted among us, to resist the evil with 
the carnal sword, know, that no seven men should 
have brought me here, and I should have kept out 
of your hands, for there would have been power to 
do it." 

Lady. "I know there are such sects, who are 
very wicked and kill the people, and also have their 
goods and wives in common." 

Jacques. "Oh, no, my lady, we are quite unjust- 
ly charged with these wicked things, and occasion 
is thereby sought, to persecute us; but we must 
suffer and endure all this with patience." Matt 
5:11; Acts 21:38; II Tim. 2:3. 

Lady. "Was it not your people, who with great 
dishonor took up arms against the government at 
Amsterdam and Muenster?" 

Jacques. "Oh, no, my lady; for those people 
erred greatly; but we regard it as a doctrine of 
the devil, to seek to resist the authorities with 
the external sword and violence, and would much 
rather suffer persecution and death from them, to- 
gether with everything that is inflicted upon us " 
Rom. 13:1; I Pet. 2:13; Tit. 3:1. 

Lady. "Nevertheless, it is imputed to you, and 
they who make uproar do very wrong ; however, I 
believe what you say concerning it." 

Jacques. "My lady, do we not read much of this 
character, how wicked men spoke evil of the apos- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


499 


ties themselves, and the whole band of Christians, 
and, by many wicked things, sought to incite the 
authorities to vengeance against them, though it 
was all falsehood ?" Acts 28 :22 ; 24 :5 ; Luke 2 :34. 

Lady. "Do you not believe that all are damned 
who are not baptized according to your way ?" 

Jacques. "Oh, no, my lady, for judgment with 
regard to this belongs to God alone, who shall re- 
ward everyone according to his works, as is clear- 
ly evident in many places of the holy Scriptures. 
Moreover, the water has not power to cleanse us 
from sin, as Peter says, but is merely a sign of all 
obedience." I Peter 3 :21 ; Matt. 3 :15. 

Lady. "When you are baptized, tell me, can you 
still sin?" 

Jacques. "Yes, my lady, for this appears very 
clearly from the words of Paul ; since we are still 
clothed in a weak and sinful body, and sin in many 
things. Rom. 7:14, 18; Gal. 5:17; Jas. 3:2. But 
we must constantly crucify and mortify it, and not 
practice or fulfill the works of the flesh; or the 
righteousness of God will condemn us to eternal 
death." 

Lady. "Wherein do you still differ with the in- 
quisitor, let me hear once ?" 

Jacques. "My lady, because I will in no wise ac- 
cept his doctrine, unless he first clearly prove to me 
that it accords in every respect with the Word of 
God ; otherwise he labors in vain ; for my faith is 
founded on the pure Word of God alone. As re- 
gards the practice of infant baptism, we contradict 
it with reason, since it is not a command of God 
Almighty, but much rather the invention of men, 
seeing infants have not the least knowledge or dis- 
cernment of what is required or comprised in bap- 
tism. But Christ in His love for such innocent ones 
has promised them the kingdom of God through 
grace, without requiring any of these conditions. 
Matthew 19:14; Mark 10:14; Matt. 18:3. My 
lady, I find that popery is infected with many 
other errors besides this; for they seek to make 
Christ come into the bread, or that the bread should 
become changed into His flesh and blood; which 
we in no wise believe, but regard as an exceeding- 
ly gross error and absurdity. But we believe that 
Christ truly ascended to heaven, and sits on the 
right hand of His Father. Mark 16:19; Luke 24: 
51 ; Acts 1 :9. Thus we do not believe that there is 
any salvation in their flour, mass, purgatory, or 
any of their services for the dead, and all like 
human inventions, of which they have a great 
number, and all of which are nowhere recognized 
in the holy Scriptures, but excluded therefrom. 
Gal. 1:14; I Tim. 4:2. But, on the contrary, we 
call upon God and seek our salvation in Him, and 
not in any creature, that we may not corrupt God's 
own glory, and give it to any of His creatures. 
Jer. 13:16; Josh. 7:19. 

The provincial having come, he began to speak, 
and said : "Will you not believe in the sacrament, 
which Christ Himself instituted?" 


Jacques. "My lord, Paul says that the bread is 
broken in remembrance of Him, and that the cup 
of blessing is the communion of the blood of 
Christ." I Cor. 11 :24; 10:16. Thus he ended his 
words. 

Lady. "I consider this the worst thing in you, 
that you will not have the children baptized ; for all 
Germany and every kingdom regards your doings 
as heresy." 

Jacques. "My lady, it is indeed true that we are 
everywhere despised, and, like the apostolical band, 
evil spoken of in all the world; but do not think 
that such shall therefore perish at the last day." 
I Cor. 4:9; Matt. 5:11 ; II Pet. 2:2. 

Lady. "My dear child, behold, I pray thee, 
come over to our side, and repent, and you shall 
get out of this trouble, and I promise to procure 
your release." 

Jacques. "My lady, I thank you very much for 
your affection and favor towards me; but I will 
not change my faith, to please mortal man ; unless 
it be proved to me with the Scriptures, that I err ; 
for I have given myself entirely to God, to be His 
friend, and herein I hope to live and die." Galatians 
1:10; Phil. 3:8; John 15:14. 

Lady. "My son, behold this multitude of men ; 
I have compassion for you, and entreat you, re- 
pent of your baptism and do not remain so obsti- 
nate ; if you, so young a child, should die for this 
cause, it would be a heavy cross for my heart; 
hence see that you are released, and may go home." 

Jacques. "My lady, I can not see that there is 
any crime at all in my baptism, seeing I herein 
have not followed my own, but the holy institution 
of our Lord Jesus Christ ; had I been able to find 
another, better way to the kingdom of God, it 
would not have happened ; for I was inclined with 
my whole heart to seek the Lord my God." Isaiah 
56:6. 

Lady. "Should they then all err, so many learn- 
ed men that have been before you ; do you dare be 
so presumptuous as this?" 

Jacques. "My lady, in Israel four hundred 
prophets were against the single Micaiah, who 
alone spoke the truth, and was kept imprisoned on 
bread and water; which King Ahab experienced 
in his distress, but too late." I Kings 22 :27 ; II 
Chronicles 18:5. 

The lady finally said : "I find many good things 
in you ; but your greatest error I consider to lie in 
your baptism, which does not seem to me to be of 
God." 

In this manner she had him brought before her 
many times ; but as he, young in years, but old in 
the knowledge of Jesus Christ (Wisd. 4:8; I Cor. 
14:20), had built his foundation upon the rock 
Jesus Christ, he valiantly repelled all the subtle 
devices of Satan — whether consisting in many 
severe threats, or in fair promises of the kingdom 
of this world (Matt. 4:8) — with the sword of the 
Spirit, which is the Word of God ; and as nothing 
could move him to forsake Christ, he was con- 


500 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


demned to death by the rulers of the darkness of 
this world (Eph. 6 :12), and thus testified and con- 
firmed the true faith of the truth with his death 
and blood, and, through grace, obtained the crown 
of everlasting glory. 

Concerning this, see a hymn in the Gulden Harp, 
beginning: Tot Leeuwaerden op eenen dagh. 


HANS VAN MONSTER, AND BARTEL, AND OLD JA- 
COB, PUT TO DEATH IN THE CASTLE OF 
BERCHEM, NEAR ANTWERP 

As it has from the beginning been abundantly 
heard and seen, that the truth is envied and tram- 
pled upon by its enemies and haters, and that its 
pious confessors have had to suffer from them in 
manifold ways; so, among many other examples, 
it was verified, at a certain time after Mary van 
Beckum and her sister had been offered up at 
Delden, in the case of a faithful brother named 
Hans van Monster, who lay imprisoned for the 
truth, in the castle of Berchem, near Antwerp. And 
since Jesus very earnestly teaches and recommends 
to us the visiting of the sick and imprisoned, in 
their tribulation (Matt. 25 :36;Heb. 13:3), a single 
man named Old Jacob, and another by the name 
of Bartel, moved by the spirit and brotherly love, 
went from Antwerp to Berchem, to comfort their 
brother, according to their ability, in his tribulation. 
When they arrived there, the enemies watched 
them, supposing that old Jacob was a teacher and 
elder ; for at that time the bloodthirsty papists had 
put a reward of three hundred guilders upon teach- 
ers, to be given to any who should deliver them into 
the hands of the executioners ; and as old Jacob was 
very eloquent, and could defend himself very ably 
with the Word of God, they hoped to earn said 
money by him, in which, however, they failed, as 
Jacob was no teacher. Nevertheless, they kept them, 
and imprisoned them with their fellow brother; 
and as they together were built upon the immovable 
rock Christ Jesus, they remained steadfast in all 
these tempests ; and since no torment could induce 
them to depart from the truth, they were together 
put to death in the castle of Berchem, valiantly 
offering their lives for the truth, and are now wait- 
ing with all the saints of God, the blessed resur- 
rection unto eternal life. Rev. 6:11 ; I Thess. 4:16. 

In the beginning of the conversion of the before- 
mentioned Bartel, and another, named Gerrit, it 
occurred that these two young men were present 
when Mary van Beckum and her sister were offered 
up in the castle of Delden ; and they testified that 
they heard Mary van Beckum declare publicly be- 
fore the people, when she was placed at the stake, 
to be burned: "You shall see this stake at which 
I am to be burned grow green, by which you may 
know that it is the truth for which we here suffer 
and die." These two young men, who heard this 
themselves, some time afterwards went of their 
own accord to the stake, and saw it flourish. Ter- 
rified thereby, they went together to Antwerp, to 


inquire for such people; and having come to an 
elder by the name of Hendrick van Aernem, and 
Jan Lubberts of B., they related the above to them. 
Thereupon Hendrick van Aernem replied: "I 
would not dare repeat this after ycu." They said : 
"Should we not tell what we have heard and seen 
ourselves?" Thus they adhered to their assertion 
concerning what had occurred with regard to Mary 
van Beckum, and, accordingly, lent their ears to 
the truth, repented, became converted, and united 
with the church of God. Afterwards Gerrit went 
to Amsterdam, where he resided until his death; 
but Bartel lost his life for the truth, as has been 
heard. 


TWO YOUNG GIRLS, ABOUT A. D 1550 

About the year 1550, it happened in the bishop- 
ric of Bamberg, that two young girls espoused and 
received Christ by faith, were baptized upon their 
faith, according to the doctrine of Christ, and aris- 
ing from sin, sought to walk in newness of life 
with Christ. On this account the antichristians 
sought to hinder them in this good resolution, and 
to quench their good intention as much as lay in 
their power. They therefore cast these two young 
lambs into prison, where they tortured them with 
great severity, and sought also with other unchris- 
tian means to cause them to apostatize ; but as they 
were firmly built upon Christ, thev remained faith- 
ful and steadfast during the entire trial. Col. 2:7; 
Rev. 2 :10. Hence, the authorities, who herein gen- 
erally follow the advice of the false prophets, con- 
demned them to death ; at which they were joyful 
and undaunted. When they were led out to execu- 
tion, their persecutors, by way of reproach and 
mockery, placed wreaths of straw upon their 
heads ; whereupon one said to the other : "Since the 
Lord Christ wore a crown of thorns for us, why 
should not we wear these crowns of straw in honor 
of Him? The faithful God shall for this place a 
beautiful golden crown and glorious wreath upon 
our heads." Thus these two young branches armed 
themselves with patience, according to the example 
of their Captain Jesus, remained faithful unto 
death, died steadfastly, and obtained, through 
grace, the glorious crown with God in heaven. 

To these girls their adversaries accord the praise, 
that they died quite undauntedly and steadfastly, 
and that they had the true foundation and ground 
of the Christian faith in their Redeemer Christ 
Jesus, whom they openly confessed, and called 
upon in their distress, wherein they steadfastly 
died with a firm hope ; so that doubts were enter- 
tained among their adversaries, as to whether they 
themselves were not in greater error before God, 
than these young girls, though they were Anabap- 
tists. 

He that wishes may read, with regard to this 
account, Johannes Manlius, printed at Frankfort 
A. D. 1550. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Two young ladies executed in the bishopric of Bamberg in 1550 


A LAD OF FIFTEEN YEARS, A. D. 1550 

At the same time a lad of fifteen years was put 
to death, suffering it with great steadfastness, at 
Leeuwaerden ; whose faith is compared to that of 
the aforementioned two young girls put to death 
at Bamberg. See Ondergang, page 1130, col. 1. 


OF A DECREE FOR THE INTRODUCTION OF THE 
INQUISITION, A. D. 1550 

It appears that at this time the bitterness of the 
Romish clergy increased and broke forth more and 
more, against those who sought to follow the evan- 
gelical doctrine of Jesus Christ ; so that they pre- 
vailed upon the Emperor, through decrees, to re- 
vive the inquisition over the consciences of the in- 
habitants of the Netherlands, which for a time had 
seemingly abated, and to introduce it with greater 
rigor than before ; which was accordingly done in 
the manner prescribed, which caused great dissatis- 
faction and sorrow to the common people of said 
countries. In regard to this, a certain author writes 
thus: 

"Though many severe decrees had been pub- 


lished before at different times, for the oppression 
of the evangelical believers, whereby many thou- 
sands were miserably put to death for the faith, in 
the Netherlands ; yet the hatred and ill will of the 
people increased to an unwonted degree, in the year 
1550, in consequence of the decree in regard to the 
inquisition, issued by Emperor Charles V, at Brus- 
sels, on the 29th of April ; for thereby it was de- 
clared, that it was the intention, from that time 
forth publicly to introduce the spiritual inquisition, 
but to have the cruel and bloody mandates never- 
theless rigorously executed by the secular power." 
Chron. van den Ondergang, page 1129, col. 1, com- 
pared with Eman. de Met., lib. 1. Pieter Bor., lib. 1. 
Oorspronch der Nederlantsche Beroerten, old edi- 
tion, fol. 5, 6. 

Further Observation. — Though the writer says 
in the sequel, that some magistrates would not pub- 
lish this decree concerning the inquisition, and that 
some, by humble petitions to the Emperor, obtained 
a mitigation; yet it had come so far, that actual 
means were secretly employed to carry out this pur- 
pose, through the inquisitors; in consequence of 
which, the minds of the people became the more 
agitated and disaffected, so that many emigrated 


502 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


from the cities of Brabant, particularly from West 
Flanders. See the authors cited. 


REYER DIRCKS, A BOATMAN, BURNT AFTER DREAD- 
FUL TORTURE, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, AT AMSTERDAM, IN HOLLAND, 
IN THE YEAR 1550 

At this time, also Reyer Dircks, a pious hero and 
valiant soldier, of Jesus Christ, though of small re- 
pute in the eyes of the world, who gained his liveli- 
hood with a little boat on the river Amstel, enlisted 
under the bloody banner of his Saviour, and united 
with the cross-bearing church, contemptuously 
called Anabaptists. Having been with them about 
three years, he virtually experienced that the king- 
dom of heaven suffers violence, and that the violent 
take it by force ; inasmuch as he could not enter the 
spacious halls of the blessed palace of God without 
pressing through the strait gate, so that his flesh, 
yea the whole body, remained on the posts, and 
this in the fire, as food for the birds and wild 
beasts. 

He was imprisoned at Amsterdam, in Holland, 
and, though he was most miserably tortured, he 
nevertheless refused to depart from his faith, and 
the promise which he had made to God in baptism. 
He was then condemned to death as a heretic, and 
very cruelly executed with flaming fire. 

The foregoing may be clearly seen from the fol- 
lowing sentence, which was read on the day of his 
death, in the court at Amsterdam, by the ecclesias- 
tical rulers. 

Sentence of Death of Ryer Dircks 

Whereas Ryer Dircks, boatman, citizen of this 
city, did, about three years ago, embrace the doc- 
trines, errors, sects, and heresies of the Anabap- 
tists, and is holding pernicious views with regard 
to the sacraments of the holy church, contrary to 
the holy Christian faith, the ordinances of the holy 
church, and the written laws and decrees of his 
Imperial Majesty, our gracious lord, and, more- 
over, persists in his errors and heresies, notwith- 
standing the instruction given him in the true 
faith; therefore, my lords of the court, having 
heard the demand made by my lord the bailiff, in 
the name of his Imperial Majesty, concerning the 
afore-mentioned Ryer Dircks, as also his confes- 
sion, and having duly considered the circumstances 
of the case, condemn said Ryer Dircks, pursuant 
to the aforesaid decrees, to be executed with fire 
by the executioner; and, furthermore, declare his 
property confiscated for the benefit of his Imperial 
Majesty, as Count of Holland, without derogation 
and prejudice to the privileges of this city. 

Thus pronounced, and committed to the execu- 
tioner for execution, this sixteenth day of August, 
A. D. 1550, in the presence of the bailiff, all the 
burgomasters, and all the judges, with the excep- 
tion of Jan Dunen. 


Ryer Dircks was examined by torture the ninth 
of July, A. D. 1550. 

Extracted from the book of criminal sentences, 
in the keeping of the secretary of the city of Am- 
sterdam, n. N. 


A SMITH AT KOMEN, A. D. 1551 

In or about the year 1551, a smith was appre- 
hended for the divine truth, at Komen, in Flanders. 
He freely confessed his faith, and as he would not 
depart from it, he was sentenced to death in two 
ways, namely, if he recanted, he was to be exe- 
cuted with the sword ; otherwise to be burned alive. 
To this end, twofold preparations were made; but 
seeing the multitude, and fearing trouble, the 
authorities kept the brother in prison. Hence, some 
climbed to the top of the prison and broke through 
the roof, to see what was being done with the 
doomed man. At last, one knocked at the door of 
the prison, desiring to know whether the brother 
was alive or dead. Having been admitted, he imme- 
diately returned with blood on his hand, which he 
showed to the people, saying : "He is dead ! He is 
dead !" The dead man was then brought out on a 
ladder, with his head lying between his legs, and 
the ladder placed upon the wall of the churchyard, 
where the priest made a long speech (a sermon 
probably), saying among other things, that he had 
renounced his heretical belief, and reaccepted the 
Roman church and her saving faith ; and "holding 
now a good resolution," said he, "he was instantly 
executed, lest he might fall back into his old error." 
But it was firmly believed that the priest slandered 
the dead man, and this the more so, since after 
relating the sentence, he said that he obstinately 
adhered to his previous confession. Thus God con- 
strains the wicked, in the telling of their lies, them- 
selves, unawares, to reveal the truth of the matter. 

GILLIS AND ELIZABETH, A. D. 1551 

On the 21st of July, A. D. 1551, two pious Chris- 
tians, a brother by the name of Gillis, and a sister 
named Elizabeth, were sentenced to death as here- 
tics, pursuant to the imperial decree, at Ghent, in 
Flanders. They were not led forth to death at the 
usual time, but at 1 o'clock in the afternoon. Hav- 
ing ascended the scaffold, they prayed to God. In 
the meantime, the executioner unlaced the gown of 
Elizabeth, which, when she arose, fell down, so that 
she stood there in her shift and linen trousers, 
which the executioner, by way of mockery, had 
made her put on. Feeling greatly ashamed on this 
account, she immediately went to the stake, and 
then said : "I thank Thee, O Lord, that I am worthy 
to suffer for Thy name. I now stand at the touch- 
stone, at which God's elect are tried. O Lord, 
strengthen me, and delay not." 

Gillis said : "Dear sister, be patient in your suf- 
fering, and comfort yourself in God ; He will not 
forsake you." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


503 


"O dear brother," said she, "I will never depart 
from Him." 

Gillis then cried: "O Lord, forgive them their 
sins, who inflict death upon me ; for as they do not 
know Thee, they know not what they do." 

Finally they cried out: "O heavenly Father, 
into Thy hands we commend our spirits." And 
thus, through fire, they died a blessed death well 
pleasing unto God. 


JORIS, WOUTER, GRIETGEN AND NAENTGEN, IN 
THE YEAR 1551 

On account of the severe and great persecution 
which was carried on everywhere in the Nether- 
lands, against the true Christians, four pious 
believers, among others, named Joris, Wouter, 
Grietgen and Naentgen, fled, in the year 1551, 
from Lier in Brabant, to Ghent in Flanders. They 
had not resided long in the latter place when they 
were betrayed by a Judas, and brought prisoners 
from their houses to the castle of the count, where 
they joyfully thanked God, and sang praises to 
Him, because they were counted worthy to suffer 
for His name. When assailed by the monks and 
other sophists, they freely confessed their faith, 
from which no subtlety could turn them ; but they 
valiantly withstood, with the truth, the seducers 
who sought to murder their souls, and were then 
condemned to death by virtue of the imperial man- 
date, because they had apostatized from the Ro- 
man church, condemned infant baptism, and had 
been baptized upon faith. They were sentenced to 
be burned at the stake without being strangled. 
They thanked the lords, and Grietgen said: "My 
lords, save three stakes ; we can all four die at one ; 
for we are spiritually of one mind." Rom. 12:16. 
They were joyful in the Lord, and thanked God 
greatly. Naentgen said : "This is the day for which 
I have longed so much." Eight monks then came, 
to torment them; however, they did not accept 
their advice, but Grietgen said: "Take off your 
long robes and teach yourselves, before you under- 
take to teach others." They were led to death like 
sheep to the slaughter, the monks accompanying 
them, to whom they said : "Stay back ; let us in 
peace, for we know you well, and do not wish to 
hear you." 

Having ascended the scaffold, Joris said to the 
people: "Be it known to you, that we do not die 
for theft, murder, or heresy." At this the monks 
became enraged, and contradicted it. 

They then fell upon their knees, prayed to God, 
and arose and kissed each other with the kiss of 
peace. But when they with glad countenances ad- 
dressed the people, the monks, to hinder them, 
went and stood before them ; but one of the people 
cried out : "You furious antichristians, stand back, 
and let them speak." 

Wouter said : "Citizens of Ghent, we suffer not 
as heretics or Lutherans, who hold in one hand a 


beer mug, and a testament in the other, thus dis- 
honoring the Word of God, and dealing in drunk- 
enness; but we die for the genuine truth." The 
executioner then hung each of them by a rope to 
a stake, but did not strangle them. They then 
strengthened each other, saying: "Let us fight 
valiantly, for this is our last pain; hereafter we 
shall rejoice with God in endless joy." Matt. 25 : 
23. As they were hanging in pain, before the fire 
was kindled, Joris fell through the rope, and Wou- 
ter cried: "O brother, be of good cheer!" "O 
Lord!" exclaimed Joris, "in Thee do I trust; 
strengthen my faith." Luke 17:5. The fire then 
commenced to burn, and they cried out: "O God 
Father, into »Thy hands we commend our spirits." 
Thus they offered up their sacrifice according to 
the will of the Lord, and their faith was tried like 
gold in the fire, and found good, and so accepted 
of God. 


CATHARINE BURNED AT THE STAKE, A. D. 1551 

Eight days after the sacrifice of the preceding 
persons, a woman named Catharine was also sen- 
tenced to the fire. While yet in prison, she was 
greatly tormented by the monks, in order to make 
her apostatize, but she said : "I stand so firmly to 
my faith that for it, to the honor of God, I will suf- 
fer my self to be burned at the stake. What would 
you do for your faith ? not much, I think. Hence 
repent, before you be brought to shame." 

Having been sentenced to be burned alive, and 
on her way to death, she was saluted by a brother. 
When she arrived on the scaffold, her hands were 
untied at her request. She then knelt down, and 
prayed fervently to God for strength, which He 
also gave her; for when she had arisen, and was 
tied to the stake, she boldly said: "I am put to 
death for the truth's sake ; whatever you are able 
to inflict upon me, I am freely ready to suffer." A 
seducer then came up, to comfort and strengthen 
her, as he said, but she replied: "Be still, I am 
tired of your tormenting; forbear comforting me, 
and comfort yourself ; for He whose name I suffer, 
shall now be my comfort." 

Thereupon, calling with a firm confidence upon 
God, she was burned alive in the sight of all men, 
steadfastly offering up soul and body to God, as a 
burnt sacrifice. 


BROTHER JOHN BAIR, OF LICHTENFELS, A. D. 1551 

In the year 1528, on the Wednesday after All 
Saints Day, Brother John Bair of Lichtenfels, was 
apprehended for the faith and the divine truth, 
and was confined for twenty-three years in a tower 
at Bamberg, in Franconia, on account of his con- 
stancy, as is seen from the following letter, writ- 
ten by him from there to the elders of the church. 
It reads thus : 

"Dear brethren, I have received the writing 
tablets and the account of the doctrine and faith 


504 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of our religion, as also six candles and pens ; but 
most important, the Bible, I did not receive, as is 
written in the forepart of the tablets; but it is 
my request, that you will send it to me, if it can 
still be found; for I would like to have it above 
all things ; if it can be according to the will of God ; 
for I am sadly in want of it, and suffer great hun- 
ger and thirst for the Word of the Lord these many 
long years. To God and His church I make this 
complaint; the days of my miserable imprison- 
ment are twenty years, wanting eight weeks; the 
Wednesday after All Saints Day will be the anni- 
versary. I John Bair of Lichtenfels, the most mis- 
erable of the miserable, and the most forsaken of 
the forsaken, captive in Jesus Christ our Lord, 
again make the complaint to God and His angels, 
and to all His laborers and churches. Now, my 
most dearly beloved brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, pray to God for me, that He will deliver me 
from this peril and great distress, a distress which 
is unspeakable ; this God knows, and I poor man, 
and you know it with me. Adieu." 

Written at Bamberg, in a dark dungeon, in the 
year 1548. 

After this writing, he remained in prison three 
years longer, that is, twenty-three years in all; 
when, in the year 1551, he cheerfully fell asleep 
in the Lord, in his prison, and obtained the mar- 
tyr's crown. 


JEKOME SEGERS, WITH HIS WIFE LIJSKEN DIRCKS, 
AND BIG HENRY, A. D. 1551 

In the year of our Lord 1551, Jerome Segers, 
with his wife Lijsken Dircks, and Big Henry fell 
into the hands of the tyrants, for the testimony 
of Jesus, at Antwerp in Brabant. They suffered 
many severe torments and sharp examinations, but, 
through the grace of God, endured them all. And 
as they, through faith, were so firmly bound to their 
Captain Christ Jesus, that nothing could induce 
them to apostatize, they brought Jerome Segers 
and Big Henry to the slaughter, on the second day 
of September, A. D. 1551. Both, each at a stake, 
surrendered their bodies in great steadfastness to 
God as a well pleasing sacrifice. Lijsken Dircks, 
the wife of Jerome Segers, who was pregnant, was 
(after her delivery) thrust into a bag early in the 
morning, between three and four o'clock, and mur- 
derously thrown into the Scheldt and drowned, be- 
fore people were up. Nevertheless, there were some 
that saw it, who testified to her firm and steadfast 
faith unto death. They now rest together under 
the altar. Read the following beautiful letters 
written by them, which attest their strong faith, 
firm hope and ardent love to God and His holy 
truth. 


A LETTER FROM JEROME SEGERS, WRITTEN IN THE 

PRISON AT ANTWERP, TO HIS WIFE LIJSKEN, 

WHO WAS ALSO IMPRISONED THERE 

A. D. 1551 

Always fear God 

in narrow prison walls I lay, well guarded and confined- 
Because for Christ I testified, sore troubles I did hnd: 
But it cometh from the Lord, 
Who to me doth strength afford. 

Grace, peace, joy, gladness consolation, a firm 
faith, and good assurance, together with an ardent 
love to God, I wish to you, my most beloved wife, 
Lijsken Dircks, whom I wedded before God and 
His holy church, and thus took to wife, according 
to the command of the Lord ; may consolation, glad- 
ness and joy be increased and multiplied to you my 
dear wife. 

I earnestly pray the Lord, that He will comfort 
you, and remove from you that which is too griev- 
ous. I well know, my chosen lamb, that you are in 
great sorrow on my account ; but lay aside all sor- 
row, and look to Jesus the Captain and Finisher of 
our faith, and let us henceforth walk in all right- 
eousness and holiness, as children of peace, and let 
us make good use of the time of grace, and con- 
sider what great mercy the Lord has shown us. O 
my dear wife, remember how faithful a God we 
serve ; He will not let us be confounded. Remem- 
ber how faithfully He led the children of Israel 
with an outstretched arm, from Pharaoh's house 
of bondage, and out of Egypt, through the Red 
Sea, and remember how they had to prepare 
themselves, before they could go out, and how 
they did eat the paschal lamb with unleavened 
bread. They had to eat the paschal lamb standing, 
and the unleavened bread which they had, they 
bound up in their clothes, and began to go out to 
the wilderness. And the angel of the Lord went 
before them, by day in a pillar of cloud, and by 
night in a pillar of fire, and thus He gave them 
light. But when they were closely pressed by 
Pharaoh and his host, the people began to mur- 
mur against Moses ; for they had not firm confi- 
dence in the Lord, that He would lead them out. 
But the Lord told Moses, what He would do, and 
how He would show His power on Pharaoh and his 
host ; and He commanded Moses, to take the rod 
and smite the sea ; and when Moses smote the sea, 
it dried up, and the waters were divided, and stood 
like walls to the right and to the left, so that they 
went through the sea on dry ground. Pharaoh fol- 
lowed with his host, and was drowned, with all his 
lords and people; but Israel passed through un- 
harmed, and praised and thanked God, that He 
had delivered them from Pharaoh's house of bond- 
age. But they were not yet in the promised land ; 
they came into the dreadful wilderness, where there 
was no bread. The bread which they had brought 
from Egypt, was but a small quantity ; it was the 
unleavened dough which they had bound up in 
their clothes, when they left Egypt, Then they 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


505 


were troubled, because they had nothing to eat; 
but the Lord fed them with bread from heaven. 

So also, my most beloved wife, we have not 
gained all, when we have confessed the truth, sep- 
arated ourselves from the world, and renounced 
all lusts and desires ; but we must also fight against 
the enemies, that is, we must here contend against 
emperors and potentates, and the princes of this 
world. We must suffer in this world; for Paul 
has said that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution. I Tim. 3:12. We must 
overcome the world, sin, death and the devil, not 
with external swords or spears, but with the sword 
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, and with 
the shield of faith, wherewith we shall be able to 
ward off all sharp and fiery darts of Satan, and 
with the helmet of salvation on our head, and with 
the breastplate of righteousness, and our feet shod 
with the preparation of the Gospel. If we are thus 
strengthened with these weapons, we shall get 
through the wilderness with Israel, and overcome 
and withstand all our enemies : they shall be con- 
founded, who fight against the truth. II Tim. 3 :8. 
Now, when the children of Israel were out of the 
wilderness — the dreadful and horrible wilderness, 
where the serpents spewed fire, — after they had 
been wandering forty years through it, had passed 
through so many dangers, and taken so many cities 
and countries on this side of Jordan ; they never- 
theless were not yet in possession of the promised 
land, for they had not yet crossed the Jordan; 
however, the Lord showed Moses the promised land 
from afar. O my dear wife, I have also seen the 
promised land from afar; I hope soon to come 
into the beautiful city of which John writes; 
which is greatly adorned; her foundations are 
twelve precious stones, and her walls and streets 
are of pure and clear gold ; and the city has twelve 
gates, each gate of one pearl ; and there is no night 
there, for the Lord her God lightens her. Rev. 21. 
And the Lord told Moses, that he should not lead 
the people into the promised land; but Joshua 
brought them into it, and the Lord led them over 
Jordan dry-shod, and commanded them to keep 
His commandments and laws, and He should drive 
out their enemies from before them. But when 
they transgressed His commandments and laws, 
the Lord delivered them into the hands of their 
enemies, so that they were defeated by them. _ After 
they had passed over Jordan, they still did not 
have the promised land, which flowed with milk 
and honey; but they had to take it by sheer force, 
destroy all their enemies, and burn the cities with 
fire. So must also we take the promised land by 
force ; for Christ says that the kingdom of heaven 
suffers violence. Not until now have I known what 
it is to contend ; no one knows it better than he who 
has tried it, such is the subtlety with which they 
come to seduce us. 

Know, that I received your letter through my 
mother. I read it with tears. I thank you, that you 


so affectionately comfort me thereby, and I re- 
joiced when I heard that you are so well contented. 

Let me inform you, my chosen and beloved wife 
Lijsken, that I have been before the margrave. 
He had with him two Dominicans, two judges, and 
the clerk of the criminal court. He asked me 
whether I had changed my mind yet, and added 
that he had prevailed upon these two good men 
or lords, to try and win my soul, if I would repent. 
I replied that I would not forsake my faith, since it 
was the truth. They then asked me what my faith 
was, I said to the monks : "Ask the margrave, I 
have confessed my faith to him ; ask him." They 
tormented me much, but I would not tell them any- 
thing. They asked whence I knew that it was the 
truth — whether God had spoken orally with me. 
When they could get nothing else out of me, my 
confession was read, namely, that I had no regard 
for the sacrament. I said : "No, it is nothing more 
than a god of bread." The priests were angry, be- 
cause I thus despised their god. They all wished 
to talk with me. I said: "I will not hear you, nor 
talk with you ; but let my brother come here to me, 
and I will talk with you, and confess our faith." 

They then asked me whether I was not strong 
enough in my faith, since I appealed to my brother. 

I replied : "Yea, my faith is strong enough ; but 
that you may not pervert our words." 

They then said: "We shall not pervert your 
words." 

I said : "I know you and your roguery well." 

The margrave said: "It shall be granted to 
you." 

I understood him to say, that he should bring a 
Bible with him. 

The priests said that when the children are bap- 
tized, they then have faith. 

I laughed at it, and said : "Why then do you not 
go into Turkey, and baptize the Turks; if thereby 
men become believers, as you say, they would all 
become believers." 

They replied: "Though the Turks should be 
baptized, they would still remain Turks." 

They importuned me greatly, to apostatize, and 
become a child of the Roman church. And the mar- 
grave and the judges felt such unrighteous compas- 
sion for me, that they said : "If your life should be 
spared, and you should repent and become a good 
child of the Roman church, I should have good 
hopes of you ; for you have been brought to this in 
your youth and innocency. I well know by whom 
(he meant Jelis of Aix-la-Chapelle) ; and because 
you descended from such good parents, and your 
mother is almost dead with grief." 

I replied : "Though the door should stand open, 
and you should say : 'Go, only say : "I am sorry ;" 
I should not go; for I well know that I hold the 
truth.' " 

The margrave then said : " I shall cause you to 
be burnt alive, if you will not hear." I laughed 
again, and said : "All that you inflict upon me for 


506 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


my faith, I will willingly suffer." He said: "His 
wife is the greatest heretic in the city." 

I cannot thank the Lord enough for all the great 
strength and power which He gives me in this dis- 
tress. I perceive now, that the Lord is with us ; for 
He helps us so faithfully out of all distress (Psalm 
91 :15) ; He is such a faithful Captain, He gives 
His servants such courage and strengthens them, 
that they are not afraid (Job 5 :22) ; they neither 
fear nor tremble, because of the great love which 
they have to their heavenly Father : for Paul says : 
"Who shall separate us from the love of God? 
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril or sword? As it is 
written, For thy sake we are killed all the day 
long ; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. 
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquer- 
ors through him that loved us. For I am per- 
suaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor 
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
other creature, shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our 
Lord." Rom. 8:35-39. 

Therefore, my most beloved wife Lijsken, re- 
deem the time, be patient in tribulation, continue 
instant in prayer, and look constantly to the beau- 
tiful promises that are promised us everywhere, if 
we persevere unto the end. And let us guard well 
the treasure ; for we have this treasure in earthen 
vessels (II Cor. 4:7), and cannot conceal it; it 
breaks out everywhere ; it is far too precious to be 
hid. We rejoice greatly in this treasure, which 
treasure is our faith, hope, and love ; and these will 
not leave us destitute, even though they put us 
singly into dark dungeons, separated from one an- 
other. The treasure is of such a nature that it will 
not be hid ; one calls to the other, and so pours out 
his treasure, that it may be seen. We are so cheer- 
ful, eternal praise and thanks be to the Lord ! we 
call, we sing with each other, we have such joy in 
comforting and strengthening each other ; the Lord 
gives us such strength and power, that we cannot 
thank Him sufficiently for the great grace which 
He shows us. Mai. 3 :16. "For which cause we 
faint not ; but though our outward man perish, yet 
the inward man is renewed day by day. For our 
light affliction, which is but for a moment, work- 
eth for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory; while we look not at the things which 
are seen, but at the things which are not seen." 
II Cor. 4:16-18. 

Hence, my dear wife, cease not to serve the Lord 
thy God with the whole heart, and to follow His 
footsteps ; "For we know that, if our earthly house 
of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a build- 
ing of God, a house not made with hands, eternal 
in the heavens. For in this we groan, earnestly 
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which 
is from heaven . . . not for that we would be un- 
clothed, but clothed upon . . . for whilst we are 


at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord " 
Mark 12 :30; I Pet. 2 :21 ; II Cor. 5 :1, 2, 4, 6. 

Therefore, my dear wife, give diligence that you 
pass the time of your sojourning here in fear and 
trembling (I Pet. 1 :17) ; not with such fear and 
trembling as that we should fear the world, and 
tremble before it, because they rage so against us ; 
but we are to fear and tremble before the Lord, so 
that we shall keep His commandments and stat- 
utes, and thus pass the time of our sojourning here 
in the fear of the Lord, and receive the end of our 
faith, even the salvation of our souls; then shall 
we rejoice forever with the Lord, and go to meet 
Him in the resurrection of the dead. Isa. 51 :11 ; 
Philip. 3 :11. Therefore do not fear the world ; for 
the very hairs of your head are all numbered ; they 
have no power, except it be given them from above 
Matt. 10:30; John 19:11. And Christ says: "Be 
not afraid of them that kill the body; but fear him, 
who after he has killed the body has power to cast 
the soul into hell; there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth, and their worm shall not die, 
and they shall have no rest day nor night." Luke 
13 :28; Isa. 66:24; Rev. 14:11. May the Almighty, 
eternal and strong God so strengthen and comfort 
you with His blessed Word, that you will remain 
faithful unto the end, and you shall also come 
under the altar to all the dear children of God, 
where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes. Rev! 
2:10; 6:9; 21 :4. There all tribulation will have an 
end, and there shall our vile body be glorified, and 
be like unto the image of His glory. Philip. 3 :21. 
Then shall our weeping be turned into laughter, 
and our sorrow into joy (John 16:20) ; then shall 
we, who for a little while have been despised and 
rejected, yea, persecuted and dispersed, and put to 
death with great ignominy, pain and reproach, for 
the testimony of Jesus Christ, triumph forever, 
and live eternally with the Lord. We shall be 
clothed with white robes, as John testifies in his 
Revelation concerning the souls of them that were 
slain for the Word of God, and for the testimony 
which they held. And they lay under the altar, and 
they cried with a loud voice, saying, "How long, 
O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth ? 
And white robes were given unto every one of 
them ; and it was said unto them, that they should 
rest yet for a little season, until their fellow serv- 
ants also and their brethren, that should be killed 
as they were, should be fulfilled." Rev 7-9- 20-4 ■ 
6:9-11. ' ' 

Oh, what a. glorious people shall we be, when 
we shall be with that great multitude of which 
Esdras writes, and John in his Revelation, says : "I 
beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man 
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and 
people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and 
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and 
palms in their hands ; and cried with a loud voice, 
saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon 
the throne, and unto the Lamb. These are they 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


507 


which came out of great tribulation, and have 
washed their robes and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the 
throne of God, and serve him day and night in his 
temple : and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell 
among them. They shall hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on 
them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the 
midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead 
them unto living fountains of waters : and God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." Rev. 
7:9, 10, 14-17. Esdras also declares of the same 
multitude: "that they stood upon Mount Sion, 
and were clothed in white, and that in the midst 
of them stood one taller than all the rest, who gave 
palms into the hands of every one, and set crowns 
upon every one of their heads." II Esdras 2 :42, 
43, 46. And John says : "I saw as it were a sea of 
glass mingled with fire ; and them that had gotten 
the victory over the beast, and over his image, and 
over his mark, and over the number of his name, 
stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God. 
And they sing the song of Moses, the servant of 
God, and the song of the Lamb." Rev. 15:2, 3. 
Behold, my dear wife, what glorious promises we 
everywhere find, which God will give to all His 
dear and true children who here faithfully adhere 
to Him, who have ended their lives to the praise of 
the Lord, and washed their robes, and made them 
white in the blood of the Lamb. I Cor. 2 :9. 

O my dearly beloved wife, I cannot thank the 
Lord enough for all His great goodness shown to 
me ; He gives me such strength and power that I 
cannot express it. Oh, now I experience that the 
Lord is a faithful helper in time of need ; He does 
not forsake those that trust in Him, for He that 
trusts in the Lord shall not be confounded. Isa. 
45 :17 ; Rom. 9 :33. He will keep us as the apple of 
His eye ; He will deliver us from all the power of 
the devil, and the tyranny of this world ; yea, He 
will keep us, that we shall not go into hell, if we 
remain faithful to Him unto the end; for Christ 
says: "He that shall endure unto the end, the 
same shall be saved." Matt. 24:13. 

O my dearly beloved wife, continue faithful to 
the Lord unto death ; for the crown is not at the 
beginning, nor in the middle, but at the end. If 
you continue faithful to the Lord, He will not for- 
sake you; He will give you the crown of eternal 
life, and lead you into His kingdom. Jas. 1 :12. 
He will crown you with glory and honor ; and will 
wipe away all tears from your eyes. 

Dear Lijsken, if He will wipe away all tears, 
tears must here first be shed. Matt. 5 :4. He will 
heal us from our sufferings; hence we must first 
suffer in this world. Yea, we must fight and con- 
tend against ferocious lions, dragons, and bears 
(Ps. 91 :13), yea, against the wicked and perverse 
generations of vipers (Matt. 3:7) and serpent 
rulers, and against the subtle serpents of this 
world, and the wicked seed of Cain ; for Paul says 
that we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but 


against the rulers of darkness, and the principali- 
ties and powers of this world, yea, against the spir- 
its that work in the air, which is the old serpent 
and Satan (Rev. 20:2), who, as Peter says, walks 
about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may 
devour. I Pet. 5 :8. Therefore defend yourself 
diligently, with prayer and supplication to the 
Lord, and hold fast to the doctrine of Jesus Christ 
our Saviour, that you may receive the end of your 
faith, even the salvation of your soul. Fight with 
Paul the good fight. Herewith I commend you, 
my dearly beloved wife and sister, to the Almighty, 
eternal and strong God, and to the word of His 
rich grace, that you may be able to stand against 
all the gates of hell. Amen. 


A LETTER FROM JEROME SEGERS TO THE BRETHREN 
AND SISTERS 

The eternal joy, peace and grace of God the Fa- 
ther; and the unfathomable mercy, favor, and love 
of the Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who has been 
sent through grace, by God the Father, to the sal- 
vation of all those that are born again with Him, 
through His imperishable Word or Gospel, and do 
His will; and the deep and unspeakable consola- 
tion, power, strength and communion of the Holy 
Ghost, who is sent by both from heaven, to the 
everlasting consolation, joy, and gladness of all 
true, penitent and obedient children of God, who 
have amended their life, and thus have risen with 
Christ, through His Gospel, into newness of life. 
May this only God strengthen you all in His eter- 
nal truth, and uphold you with the mighty Word 
of His grace in all righteousness, holiness and truth 
unto the end, and keep your understanding, and 
your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. To Him 
be praise, honor, glory, might, power, and strength 
forever and ever. Amen. 

My dearly beloved and chosen brethren and 
sisters, and all lovers of the unfeigned and eternal 
truth, I wish you the true, penitent faith, which 
works by love, and avails before God, and a pure, 
chaste and holy conversation and walk in the fear 
of God, and an ardent love to God our heavenly 
Father, and your neighbor, and to His eternal, 
clear and unchangeable truth. And I pray the Lord 
for you day and night without ceasing, that He will 
open the eyes of your understanding, and enlighten 
your hearts with knowledge, that you may know 
that it is the truth, and that He will strengthen you 
with His divine Word, and confirm you in the 
faith, that you may walk in this truth, in all hu- 
mility and meekness, being a light to all men, and 
may continue steadfast unto the end. I also pray 
the Lord, that He will keep you from all ravening 
wolves, that have gone out from us, and will yet 
rise up among you, who will not spare the flock, 
and from all false, heretical and satanic teachers, 
who rise up under the name of Christ, and come 
forth in a semblance of holiness, as though they 
were sent by Christ, while they have proceeded 


508 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


from and are sent by the devil. Acts 20 :29 ; II Cor. 
11:15. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, be vigilant, watch 
and pray ; for it is very necessary ; and remember 
after my departure, that I warned you from prison 
against false prophets. Thus, with the help of God, 
I have briefly written to you, and with Peter ex- 
horted you, well knowing that shortly I must put 
off my mortal clothing and sleep with my brethren 
and sisters in Christ. Though you are yourselves 
taught and strengthened in this present truth, I 
nevertheless deem it profitable to admonish you yet 
a little more, if haply thereby someone may be bet- 
tered, edified and strengthened, the name of the 
Lord be praised and thanked, and I be remembered, 
how I have been an example unto you in that which 
the Lord gave me, and have walked among you in 
all humility. Tit. 2 :7. 

Hence I admonish you now, my dearly beloved 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, and beseech you 
with Paul, by the mercies of God, that you present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service. And be not 
conformed to this evil, wicked and perverse world, 
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind, that you may prove what is that good, and 
acceptable, and perfect will of God. Rom. 12:1,2: 
Eph. 5:17. 

O my dear brethren, I earnestly beseech you, 
that you will all amend your lives, and forsake the 
world and its lusts, and will look to the life of 
Christ, how He walked before us ; for John says : 
"He that would boast of Christ ought himself also 
so to walk, even as he walked." I John 2 :6. 

Behold, my dear friends, it is not enough that 
we are baptized in the name of Christ, that we are 
called brethren or sisters of Christ, and bear the 
name of Christians. Oh, no, all this cannot save; 
for John says : "Little children, let no man deceive 
you : he that doeth righteousness is righteous. He 
that committeth sin is of the devil. In this the 
children of God are manifest, and the children of 
the devil." John 3 :7, 8, 10. And Christ says : "Ye 
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command 
you." John 15 :14. Again: "If a man love me, he 
will keep my words and commandments; and he 
that hath my commandments and keepeth them, 
he it is that loveth me." John 14 :23, 21. For John 
says : "He that saith he loveth God, and keepeth 
not His commandments, is a liar, and the truth is 
not in him." I John 2 :4. And you know that a 
liar has no part in the kingdom of God. Rev. 21 :8. 
Therefore, be not Christians with the mouth, nor 
with the tongue, but in deed and in truth. I John 
3 :18. For it is utterly in vain to bear the name of 
Christ, so long as we are not conformed to Him in 
word, work and thought; for Paul says: "Whom 
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be 
conformed to the image of his Son, that he might 
be the first-born among many brethren." Rom. 
8:29. If He then has called and predestinated you, 
use diligence that you become conformed to Him, 


so that you may be found true Christians in deed 
when you come into the tribulation in which we 
now are ; for though we are in it now, tomorrow 
you may also be in it. Therefore watch and pray ; 
for you know neither the day nor the hour ; and be 
ddigent to please the Lord ; for we must all ap- 
pear before the judgment seat of Christ; that 
everyone may receive the things done in his body, 
according to that he hath done, whether it be good 
or bad. I Thess. 4:1 ; II Cor. 5 :10. 

Now, as the Lord is to be feared, I counsel and 
humbly beseech you, to conform your life to the 
Gospel. For, to bear the name of a Christian, and 
to be called a brother, avails nothing ; but the ful- 
filling of the commandments of God alone; for I 
have seen many among us who boast of being 
Christians, who love Christ with the tongue, but 
with the deed forsake Him (Tit. 1 :16), which is 
greatly to be deplored ; for they are like counterfeit 
money, which from the outside seems to be good 
gold ; but, when brought to the touchstone, or to 
the fire, it is nothing but copper within. Thus they 
walk among the pious, as though they were true 
Christians ; but when the Lord begins to try them 
in tribulation, it is seen that all is built upon the 
sand, and that they love their belly more than 
Christ, as appears now in the case of those that are 
in bonds with us ; for so long they allowed them- 
selves to be called pious brethren, but now they 
talk differently. Matt. 13:21 ; 7:26; Rom. 16:18. 

Therefore, my dearly beloved brethren and sis- 
ters in the Lord, all who desire to offer up an ac- 
ceptable sacrifice to the Lord, take us for an ex- 
ample (Jas. 5:10) and be followers of us, and be 
no longer so slothful or lukewarm in love ; so that, 
when you are also imprisoned, you will not sorrow 
because you did not lead a better life ; for with this 
the devil tempts us night and day. Hence I warn 
you, out of brotherly love, to take heed to your- 
selves while you have time ; for Paul says : "The 
grace of God that bringeth salvation hath ap- 
peared to all men, teaching us that, denying un- 
godliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, 
righteously, and godly, in this present world, look- 
ing for that blessed hope, and the glorious appear- 
ing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ ; 
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us 
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a pecul- 
iar people, zealous of good works " Tit. 2-11-14- 
Eph. 5 :2. 

Behold, my dear friends, such a people Christ 
has chosen, who are not vain or light-minded, but 
who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for 
eternal life ; hereunto he has called and chosen us, 
that we should be holy and without blame before 
him in love ; for such a holy church he has chosen, 
which has not spot or wrinkle, but that should walk 
holily and unblamably before him in love. Rom 
2:7; Eph. 1:4; 5:27. Therefore be holy in ali 
your conversation ; since it is written : "Ye shall 
be holy, for I am holy." Lev. 11 :45. Oh, see my 
dear brethren, it is time for you to take heed ; for 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


509 


the axe is now laid at the root of the trees ; every 
tree which bringeth not forth good fruit shall be 
hewn down, and cast into the fire. Matt. 3:10. 
"For not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, 
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven ; but he that 
doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." 
Matt. 7 :21 . For, "being dead unto sin, and puri- 
fied by the knowledge of the truth, you must not be 
empty, lest the devil take with him the seven spirits 
and return into you, and the last state be worse 
than the first." Rom. 6:11 ; Matt. 12 :45. 

"Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, 
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Neither 
yield ye your members as instruments of unright- 
eousness unto sin ; but yield yourselves unto God, 
as those that are alive from the dead, and your 
members as instruments of righteousness unto 
God ;" and "pray that your flight be not in the win- 
ter, neither on the Sabbath day ;" and be not found 
in darkness, dear brethren, lest that "day should 
overtake you as a thief." Rom. 6:12, 13; Matt. 
24:20; I Thess. 5:4. For if ye do so, ye shall be 
children of light and of the day ; for they are not 
the children of God, who boast of the faith, but do 
not fulfill it with the works, for Christ says: "If 
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." 
John 13:17. For he that knows it, and does it not, 
is likened unto a fool ; and the servant that knows 
the will of his lord, and does it not, shall be beaten 
with many stripes. Matt. 7 :26 ; Luke 12 :47. But 
those who believe with the heart, and do as they 
believe, are the true children of God, and shall also 
be accounted believers in the kingdom of heaven. 
Hence I counsel you, and beseech you with Peter, 
that, giving all diligence you add to your faith, 
virtue ; and to virtue, knowledge ; and to knowl- 
edge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; 
and to patience, godliness ; and to godliness, broth- 
erly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, charity. 
For if these things be in you, and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor un- 
fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ ; 
but an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into everlasting life. But he that lack- 
eth these things is blind and cannot see afar off, 
and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old 
sins. II Pet. 1 :5-8, 11, 9. Therefore, purify your 
souls in obeying the truth, in true unfeigned love 
of the brethren, and love one another with a pure 
heart fervently : being born again, not of corrupt- 
ible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, 
which liveth and abideth forever. I Pet. 1 :22, 23. 
Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober and place 
all your hope in God; have fervent love among 
yourselves, and be of one mind ; mind not high 
things, but condescend to men of low estate ; let no 
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth 
nor spend your time in vain conversation, which in- 
creases only unto more ungodliness ; but speak that 
which is good to the use of edifying that it may 
minister grace unto the hearers : let your speech be 
always with grace, seasoned with salt (Col. 4:6) ; 


for Peter says : "If any man speak, let him speak 
as the oracles of God ;" ( I Pet. 4:11) that you may 
be an example unto all men ; for Christ says : "Ye 
are the salt of the earth ; but if the salt have lost 
his savor, it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to 
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men 
. . . Neither do men light a candle, and put it un- 
der a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it giveth light 
unto all that are in the house." "Ye are the light 
of the world." "Let your light so shine before men, 
that they may see your good works, and glorify 
your Father which is in heaven." Matt. 5 :13- 
16. And Peter says: "Have your conversation 
honest among the Gentiles; that, whereas they 
speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be 
ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversa- 
tion in the fear of God." I Pet. 2 :12, 3 :16. 

He further says : "He that will love life, and see 
good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, 
and his lips that they speak no guile : let him es- 
chew evil, and do good ; let him seek peace and en- 
sue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over the 
righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers : 
but the face of the Lord is against them that do 
evil." I Pet. 3:10-12. Hence, take good heed, that 
the angry face of the Lord do not look down upon 
you ; for in the last day the ungodly shall exclaim : 
"O ye hills and mountains, fall upon us, and cover 
us, that we may not see the angry face of him that 
sitteth on the throne." Hos. 10:8; Rev. 6:16. And 
Christ says : "Except your righteousness shall ex- 
ceed the righteousness of the scribes and Phari- 
sees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of 
heaven." Matt. 5 :20. Again, "Except ye be con- 
verted, and become as little children, ye shall not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 18:3. 

See, my dear brethren and sisters, if you are not 
thus humble, give diligence that you become so ; for 
Christ's words are no lies ; He says : "Many will say 
to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten 
and drunk in thy presence ? and in thy name have 
cast out devils ? But then will I profess unto them, 
I never knew you : depart from me, ye that work 
iniquity." Matt. 7 :22, 23 ; Luke 13:26. And Paul 
says : "He that lives after the flesh, shall die." 
Rom. 8:13. O friends, there is a great number of 
you, that are like unto asses and mules, which are 
so lazy that they have to be urged on with blows 
and kicks. Oh, this is not walking according to 
love. Lift up the hands that hang down, and the 
feeble knees ; you have slept long enough, for Paul 
says: "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from 
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light !" Heb. 
12 :12 ; Eph. 5 :14. "If ye then be risen with Christ, 
seek those things which are above, where Christ 
sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affec- 
tions on things above, not on things or the earth." 
Col. 3:1,2. 

O my dear brothers and sisters in the Lord, be 
followers of God, as chosen children and walk in 
love, as He also hath loved us and hath given Him- 


510 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


self an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet- 
smelling savor. But fornication, and all unclean- 
ness, or covetousness, let it not be once named 
among you, as becometh saints ; neither filthiness, 
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not con- 
venient, but rather giving of thanks. For this ye 
know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, 
nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any in- 
heritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Be 
ye not therefore partakers with them. For ye were 
sometime darkness, but now are ye light in the 
Lord: walk as children of light; for the fruit of 
the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and 
truth. And have no fellowship with the unfruit- 
ful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. 
Ephesians 5:1-5, 7-9, 11. I therefore admonish 
you, as fellow helpers, for the Lord says : "I have 
heard thee in a time accepted, and in a day of sal- 
vation have I succored thee : behold, now is the ac- 
cepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation." 
Let us give no offense in anything, that the minis- 
try be not blamed ; but in all things approve our- 
selves as the ministers of God, in much patience, 
in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, 
in imprisonments, in tumults, in nakedness, in per- 
ils, under the sword; by pureness, by knowledge, 
by long suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, 
by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the 
power of God, by honor and dishonor, by evil re- 
port and good report, as deceivers, and yet true ; 
as unknown, and yet well known; as dying and, 
behold, we live; as chastened and not killed; as 
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, 
and yet possessing all things. II Cor. 6:1-10; 11, 
26, 27. 

My dear friends, my mouth is open unto you, 
out of brotherly love, and I humbly beseech you, 
let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ 
Jesus, showing such love with the deed among 
yourselves ; for this is the message that ye heard 
from the beginning, that ye should love one anoth- 
er; for he that loveth not, abideth in death. But 
whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his broth- 
er have need, and shutteth up his bowels of com- 
passion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in 
him? My dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
let us no longer love in tongue, but in deed and in 
truth. II Cor. 6:11; Philip. 2:5; I John 3:11, 14, 
17, 18; 4:8. Always remember the poor, and let 
each give according to his ability, with joy; for 
God loveth a cheerful giver, and Paul says : "He 
that sheweth mercy, let him do it with cheerful- 
ness." Tobit 4:7; II Cor. 9:6; Rom. 12:8. For, 
consider once, whether, if you were as fervent in 
love, as you have been in the world, you would not 
as easily know to find two or three stivers to give 
to the poor, as you found them for drinking or 
gambling purposes? Not my dear friends, that I 
would burden or oppress you, only that each show 
his love herein, according to his weak ability ; for 
you cannot take your possessions with you. You 
may take me for an example ; for they have taken 


everything, yea, all the money we had, and asked 
us yet whether we did not have more. 

It is therefore far better, that you help the poor 
with it, than that the lord* have it, and if you are 
willing to give your life for your brother, how much 
more ought you to assist him with your temporal 
goods! that it be as it is written: "They that 
gathered much had nothing over, and they that 
gathered little had no lack." I John 3:16; Jas. 2:16; 
Ex. 16 :18 : And see to it also, that all be done hon- 
estly, that it be as a matter of bounty, and not as 
of covetousness, and that the offering be acceptable 
unto the Lord. For the administration of this serv- 
ice not only supplieth the want of the saints, but 
aboundeth also in many thanksgivings to God. 
II Cor. 9 :5, 12. Hence give diligence, to show your 
love herein, that the Lord may be glorified and 
thanked thereby, and that you may approve your- 
selves in all things as ministers of God. I Pet. 4:11. 
Read what Paul says to the Corinthians; he will 
teach you how to conduct yourselves herein ; and I 
humbly beseech you, that when you have read it, 
you will also act according to it ; for it is necessary! 
Furthermore, I beseech all of you young married 
people, that you live together in all humility, sim- 
plicity and harmony. Young wives, submit your- 
selves unto your husbands, in the fear of God : and 
you, young men, love your wives as your own 
selves ; support and bear them with all humility and 
kindness, and affectionately admonish and instruct 
them with the Word of the Lord ; for you know 
neither the day nor the hour when the Lord shall 
separate you. I Pet. 3 :1 ; Eph. 5 :22 ; Matt. 25 :13. 
Take me and my wife for an example, — how soon 
the Lord separated us, to His glory. Hence, live 
together in all humility, so long as the Lord per- 
mits you to be together: for your time is short 
here, seeing the Lord delights to have His chosen 
with Him. Job 14:1. And furthermore, I beseech 
you, my dear brethren, that you also give diligence 
to get usury (Matt. 25:27); for I trust in the 
Lord, that through seeing and hearing this, many 
shall yet turn to the truth, and I will also do my 
best with those who come here to see me. And 
gather the poor, scattered flock, for which I am 
greatly concerned ; for they scarcely know where 
to go or dwell, and are in greater distress than we 
here. Acts 8:1-4. But be of good cheer, my dear 
brethren and sisters in the Lord ; though we enjoy 
more freedom than you, be patient in your perse- 
cution : you shall not have gone over the cities of 
Israel, till the Lord shall deliver you. Matt. 10 :23. 
Be diligent, therefore, in assembling together, and 
in comforting and admonishing one another with 
the Word of the Lord, that love may not wax cold 
among you. Matt. 24:12. 

Thus, admonish and instruct one another in the 
love of God : and I beseech you, not to forget us 
in your prayers, and now and then to write a letter 
to my wife, to comfort her, since she will be con- 

* The worldly ruler. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


511 


fined a long time yet. I would further tell you, 
that I am in great joy, and cannot sufficiently 
praise and thank my Lord day and night, for His 
great love shown us, in that He has made both of 
us worthy to suffer for His name; and for the 
power and strength He shows in us, and for His 
promises given us; for this is the hour for which 
I so long prayed the Lord, not considering myself 
good enough, that I should be worthy to suffer for 
His name. Therefore I am so rejoiced, because 
my hour is come, that I shall be delivered from 
this flesh. 

Thus strengthen yourselves in the love of God, 
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ 
unto eternal life. Now unto Him that is able to 
keep you from falling, and to present you fault- 
less before the presence of His glory with exceed- 
ing joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be glory 
and majesty, dominion and power, both now and 
ever. Amen. Greet one another with a holy kiss 
of peace. Jude 21, 24, 25; I Cor. 16:20. 

Let all the friends hear this letter; for I have 
written to you out of brotherly love, and am sorry 
that I can write to you no more. I commend you 
all to the Lord. Salute G. S. H. D. in the Lord — 
whom I sincerely love, — and also all brethren and 
sisters in the Lord. Receive this brief admonition 
in good part (Heb. 13 :22) ; for my spirit impelled 
me to admonish you a little. 

Written in prison, by me, Jerome Segers. 


A LETTER FROM JEROME SEGERS, WRITTEN TO HIS 
WIFE LIJSKEN DIRCKS 

The grace and mercy of God the Father, the 
loving kindness and love of the Son, and the com- 
munion and peace of the Holy Ghost, who is sent 
us by the Father, through the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, for the consolation and joy of all true 
and faithful children of God, and by whom we are 
impelled, taught and led ; the same keep your 
hearts, understanding and mind in Christ Jesus, to 
the praise and glory of the Father, to the salvation 
of your afflicted soul, and to the edification of all 
brethren and sisters that fear and love the Lord ; 
to this only wise God, be glory, honor, power and 
strength, for ever and ever. Amen. 

I wish to you, my dear wife, a true, genuine, 
godly love, a true, unfeigned, penitent faith, which 
works by love, a firm hope and confidence in God, 
and a firm steadfastness in your faith towards God 
the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. To Him I 
commend you, and to the Word of His grace ; and 
since I cannot converse orally with you, my dear 
wife Lijsken, I have, with the help of God, written 
to you a little from the Word of the Lord; for 
though we are absent from each other in the flesh, 
yet are we present in the Spirit; for I remember 
you day and night in my prayers, beseeching the 
Lord to strengthen you with His Spirit of truth, 
since I well know that you will have much conflict 
yet, before you will be released; and I also know 


that you will be greatly tempted by the cunning 
foxes and ravening wolves, yea, which are much 
more lions and dragons ; yea, a generation of vi- 
pers, who will not spare your soul, but destroy, 
devour and murder it. 

Hence Paul says: "Beware lest any man spoil 
you through false philosophy and the sleight of 
men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." Col. 2 :8 ; 
Eph. 4:14. Yea, Christ Himself has warned us in 
this respect, saying that in the latter days many 
false prophets, and many false Christs, shall arise, 
insomuch that, if it were possible, they should de- 
ceive the very elect ; but this is impossible : for the 
Lord preserves them with His strong arm, so that 
the gates of hell cannot harm them. Matt. 24 :24 ; 
16:18. Yea, Paul says: "That in the latter times 
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to se- 
ducing spirits, and doctrines of devils ; forbidding 
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, 
which God hath created." I Tim. 4:1, 3. And: 
"Let no man deceive you with vain words : for be- 
cause of these things cometh the wrath of God upon 
the children of disobedience." Eph. 5 :6. Christ has 
also warned us of the doctrine of the Pharisees; 
yea, of those who come in sheep's clothing ; for in- 
wardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know 
them by their fruits. Matt. 16:6; 7:15, 16. Even as 
Paul says : "Marvel not, that the ministers of anti- 
christ will transform themselves into ministers of 
God; since Satan himself can transform himself 
into an angel of light ; for they come in a feigned 
holiness, and will speak lies." II Cor. 11:14, 15. 

Therefore see, my most beloved lamb, how faith- 
fully Christ and His apostles have warned us of the 
false and subtle serpent, that we should not suffer 
ourselves to be deceived by the old serpent, which 
is the devil and Satan, who seeks nothing but to 
bring our souls into everlasting damnation, even 
as Peter says that he walks about us as a roaring 
lion, seeking whom he may devour; him resist 
with a firm faith. Rev. 12:9; I Peter 5 :8. There- 
fore I beseech you, my dear wife, from the bot- 
tom of my heart, since we are so faithfully warned 
of the false prophets, who have nothing but the 
doctrine of devils, and seek nothing but to ruin and 
devour souls ; therefore I beseech you once more, 
not to hearken to them, and to have nothing to do 
with them; for Paul says: "Have no fellowship 
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather 
reprove them." Eph. 5:11. Yea, John says that he 
that has not the doctrine of Christ, has not God. 
II John 9. And Paul says: "Though an angel 
from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you 
than that which I have preached unto you, let him 
be accursed." Gal. 1 :8. If they then have not God, 
and have nothing but a false, heretical, accursed 
and devilish doctrine, how can they teach us any- 
thing good? Therefore Christ and His apostles 
have so faithfully warned us, that we should not 
suffer ourselves to be deceived by the cunning 
foxes, and subtle philosophy and craftiness; for 
there shall never any other foundation be laid, than 


512 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


that is laid, namely Christ, upon whom you have 
founded and built; and no other Gospel may be 
preached, than that which is preached, in which 
you believe, and for the testimony of which you 
are also in bonds. 

Hence I beseech you, my dear wife Lijsken, by 
the mercies of God, constantly to have the Word of 
the Lord before your eyes, and not to suffer your- 
self to be moved from your faith, by the sleight of 
men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive you; for 
I know that you will suffer much temptation yet. 
Therefore, my most beloved, look not unto men; 
for cursed is the man, says the prophet, that trust- 
eth in man ; yea, the fear of man bringeth a snare, 
says the wise man. Jer. 17:5; Prov. 29:25. And 
regard not the torture of flesh and blood ; for this 
is the heat of the sun, yea, the storms by which the 
work of the Lord is tried. Matt. 13 :6 ; 7 :25. Hence 
confess Christ now, and He shall confess us before 
His heavenly Father ; for He will try the third part 
with fire, as gold in the furnace, and all that re- 
mains shall be found pure gold. Matt. 10:32; 
Zech. 13:9; I Pet. 1:7. You have partly passed 
through the trial, and have remained steadfast in 
it, eternal glory, praise, and honor to the Lord, and 
may the gracious Lord strengthen- you, that as you 
have commenced, you may be found pure gold be- 
fore God and all His church. 

Thus, my most beloved, continue steadfast in 
the doctrine of Christ ; for now is the day of which 
Christ spoke, that we should be brought before 
lords and princes, for a testimony to His name, 
and that we should be rejected by all men ; but he 
that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be 
saved. Matt. 10:18; 24:13. And Christ says : "If 
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute 
you; and the time cometh, that whosoever killeth 
you will think that he doeth God service. But these 
things have I told you, that when the time shall 
come, ye may remember that I told you of them. 
And these things will they do unto you, because 
they have not known the Father nor me." John 
15:20; 16:2, 4, 3. Behold, my dear wife, thus 
Christ has warned us how they should deal with 
us. Therefore, my dear, fear not, neither despond, 
though you now are confined with Daniel in the 
den of lions; trust in the Lord, and He will pre- 
serve you, that they shall not destroy you ; He will 
also deliver you from their teeth, that they shall 
not tear you. Forsake Him not and He will not 
forsake you; for He says: "He that despiseth 
you, despiseth me ; he that persecuteth you perse- 
cuted me ; he that toucheth you, toucheth the ap- 
ple of mine eye." Luke 10:16; Acts 26:14; Zech. 
2:8. 

If they then do not persecute us, but the Lord, 
fight valiantly, as a pious soldier of Christ, and con- 
tend for His glory. And even as He fought unto 
death, so by the grace of God do also you ; for Paul 
says : "If a man strive for masteries, yet is he not 
crowned, except he strive lawfully." II Tim. 2:5. 
Therefore, my dear, put on the whole armor of 


God, and be not ashamed to confess His Word be- 
fore men, but always remember the words of 
Christ: "Whosoever shall confess me before men, 
him will I confess also before my Father which is 
in heaven ; but whosoever shall be ashamed of me 
and of my words, of him also shall I be ashamed 
before my heavenly Father. For whosoever shall 
seek to save his life shall lose it; but whosoever 
loses his life for the sake of the Gospel, shall find 
it. But he that loveth aught more than me, cannot 
be my disciple ; yea, no man, having put his hand 
to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the king- 
dom of God. And Paul says : It is a faithful say- 
ing : For if we be dead with him, we shall also live 
with him ; but if we deny him, he also will deny 
us." Eph. 6:11 ; Matt. 10 :32 ; Mark 8 :38; Matthew 
16:25; 10:37; Luke 9:62; II Tim. 2:11, 12. 

Hence, my most beloved, do not forsake the 
Lord ; for we are nothing but dust and ashes, yea, 
nothing but mortal flesh, which must die in dis- 
honor, but is raised in glory. Gen. 18:27; I Cor. 
15:43. Be patient, therefore, in tribulation; for 
it is the true way, which leads to life eternal, which 
all the saints of God, the prophets and apostles, 
yea, Christ Himself went, all having to drink of 
this cup. Therefore look not to death, but through 
death, lest another come before you, and take your 
crown. Hence, my most beloved, be long-suffering 
in your tribulation, and patient in suffering, and 
wait for your deliverance, even as the husbandman 
waits for his fruits ; for blessed is the man that en- 
dureth temptation : for when he is tried, he shall 
receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath 
promised to them that love Him. James 1 :12. For 
Christ says : "Blessed are they which are perse- 
cuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven." Matt. 5:10. Behold, we 
count them happy which endure, says James. Jas. 
5:11. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an 
example, that we should follow His steps : foras- 
much then as Christ hath suffered, arm yourself 
likewise with the same mind. I Peter 2:21 ; 4:1. 
With this agree the words of John, who says that 
Christ laid down His life for us, and that we ought 
fdso to lay down our lives for the brethren. I John 
3:16. 

Hence, be not discouraged, chosen and beloved, 
at their threatening; but praise and glorify the 
Lord in this matter ; for Christ says : "Blessed are 
ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
for my name's sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding 
glad; for great is your reward from my Father 
which is in heaven." Matt. 5 :11, 12. My dear, this 
is not said that we should be sad, but that we should 
rejoice that we are worthy to suffer for His name. 
Paul says : "Ye have not received the spirit of bond- 
age again to fear ; but the spirit of adoption, where- 
by we cry, Abba, Father. The spirit itself beareth 
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of 
God; if so be that we suffer with him, that we 
may be also glorified together; for the sufferings 
of this present time are not worthy to be compared 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


513 


with the glory which shall be revealed in us; for 
eye hath not seen, nor heart known, neither mouth 
confessed, but God alone, what shall be revealed 
to those that love him, and keep his word." Rom. 
8:15-18; I Cor. 2:9. And Paul says that it is not 
enough for you to believe in Him, but also to suffer 
for His name. Phil. 1 :29. 

Hence, my most beloved, be a willing bride, and 
prepare for the conflict ; for He will not suffer you 
to be tempted above that you are able; but will 
with the temptation also make a way for you to 
escape. I Cor. 10:13. For though a mother forget 
her child, yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord. 
Isa. 49:15. He will preserve you as the apple of 
His eye. Zech. 2 :8. Therefore, fear not men, who 
perish like grass (Isa. 51 :l2) ; but valiantly 
journey with Joshua and Caleb to the promised 
land ; wait with Noah for the day of the Lord ; for 
Christ says: "My sheep hear my voice, and they 
follow me; but the voice of strangers they hear 
not ; and no man shall pluck them out of his hand, 
since it is impossible, that the elect of God should 
be deceived ;" as Paul says : "Who shall separate 
us from the love of God?" Nay, no torments of 
this world-; "for we know that all things work 
together for good to them that love God ; for our 
light affliction, which is but for a moment, work- 
eth for us a far more exceeding weight of glory." 
John 10:27; Rom. 8:35, 28; II Cor. 4:17. Since 
it is the will of the Lord, I hope that this your 
trial will also be for your good; for the Lord 
has appointed your time, which we cannot pass. 
Hence, fear not, for God is your Captain; He 
is your strength ; He is your guide (II Esd. 16 :76) ; 
forsake Him not ; He will not forsake you ; trust in 
Him, and you shall not be ashamed (Ps. 31 :1), be 
faithful unto death, the crown of life is prepared 
for you. Rev. 2:10. I desire willingly to offer 
up my body to the praise of God, yea, not only my 
body, but if every member, yea, every hair were a 
body, I would, through the power of God, offer 
them all up to the praise of the Lord, in order to 
obtain His promises ; for what manner of love the 
Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be 
called the sons of God ; therefore the world know- 
eth us not, because it knew Him not. "Beloved, 
now are we the sons of God, and we know that, 
when he shall appear, we shall be like him." John 
3:1, 2. Yea, Peter says that we shall be partakers 
of His divine nature ; yea, we shall be where Christ 
Himself will be, and shall with Him judge all na- 
tions ; yea, we shall follow the lamb whithersoever 
he goeth; yea, we shall sing the new song on 
Mount Sion, and we know assuredly that, if our 
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we 
have a building of God, eternal in the heavens. II 
Peter 1:4; John 12:26; Matt. 19:28; Rev. 14:4; 
II Esd. 2:42; II Cor. 5:1. Who would exalt this 
corrupt, decaying flesh, which is nothing but a 
heap of earth, over these beautiful promises! O 
see, what beautiful promises Christ has given His 
own, who remain steadfast unto the end ; for there 


is no other way to eternal life, than this way ; for 
all righteous souls, from the beginning, have had 
to suffer, and thus gain possession of the kingdom 
of God. Gen. 4 :8. Hence, my most beloved wife, 
since there is no other way, be a willing bride, pre- 
pared to receive your bridegroom; and you shall 
then be crowned with praise and honor. 

Thus, my most beloved, I have written a few 
things, with which you may somewhat strengthen 
yourself through the Word of the Lord; for 
Christ says : "The world shall rejoice, and ye shall 
be sorrowful ; but be of kind cheer ; I have over- 
come the world ; and your sorrow shall be turned 
into joy, and your joy no man taketh from you; 
for he that worketh in us is stronger than he that is 
in the world." John 16:20. And John says that 
our faith is the victory that overcometh the world. 
I John 5:4. Always remember Lot's wife (Gen. 
19:26), and the man of God who was slain by the 
lion, because he had eaten bread contrary to God's 
command, being deceived by the false prophet. I 
Kings 13:1. Thus you also suffer yourself in no 
wise to be deceived by false prophets; but fight 
with the prophet David against Goliath, and you 
shall devour him like bread; for the kingdom of 
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent who re- 
main steadfast take it by force; for Joshua and 
Caleb took the promised land by force, and those 
that were not steadfast, could not enter into it. 
Hence, be not dismayed though you are tried here 
for a little season ; for it is His will. Therefore, 
receive willingly from His hand whatever He 
sends you; for Paul says: "We know that all 
things work together for good to them that love 
God." Rom. 8:28. For Christ means to show His 
wonderful power and strength in you, against the 
dragons and the generation of vipers, yea, against 
the ravening wolves, who daily resist Christ, and 
fight against you to destroy you. But be bold and 
trust in Christ ; He will not forsake you ; for He is 
your strength. He cares for you (I Peter 5 :7) ; He 
is your Protector, by whom you shall overcome 
all your adversaries ; for He shall feed you with the 
bread of life, yea, with the bread of understanding, 
and give you the water of wisdom to drink, and 
shall comfort you in all your tribulation, and im- 
press into your heart a firm and steadfast faith, 
which they shall not be able to resist. Sir. 15 :3. For 
He who has begun this good work in you, will, 
through His grace and power, also carry out and 
finish it, to His praise, to the salvation of your soul, 
and to the edification of all them that fear the Lord. 
Phil. 1 :6. To this God, who can deliver you from 
all tribulation, and preserve you from all the snares 
of the devil, and from all false doctrine, be praise, 
honor, power and strength, for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

See, my dear wife, as I can not help you with my 
weeping, or with my blood, I have written a few 
things; to comfort you, and for a memorial or a 
testament, that you may remember me by it, how I 
walked before you; for I hope to seal this letter 


514 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


with my blood, namely, that it is nothing but the 
pure truth, for which I desire to lay down my life, 
to the praise of the Lord and the edification of all 
that fear Him. I pray the Lord that He will let 
you follow me as I through His grace hope to go 
before you ; and I trust in the Lord that He will 
let you follow me thus, and have confidence in you, 
that you will follow me thus steadfastly, through 
the grace of the Lord ; and I pray the Lord, that 
He will let the fruit grow up to His praise, that it 
may also be found worthy to suffer for His name. 
Thus I have commended the fruit to the Lord, 
who is more able to preserve you and it, than I 
am. And that the Lord will preserve you, I do not 
doubt. I hope that my blood will be the seal of this 
letter. 

Thus I commend you to the Lord, and to the 
word of His grace, that He will keep you in all 
righteousness, holiness and truth; and though we 
must separate here, I know, and firmly trust in 
the Lord, that we shall be together in life eternal ; 
hence, I will freely bring my offering. 

Oh, that I might suffer for you ; I should gladly 
offer my flesh for you. I am sorry that I can write 
to you no more. I herewith commend you to the 
Lord. Be not solicitous about the child ; for my 
friends will take good care of it, yea, the Lord will 
care for it. Hendrick of Deventer salutes you 
much in the Lord, whom he entreats day and night 
for you, that you may continue steadfast unto the 
end. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JEROME SEGERS TO HIS 
WIFE 

Grace, peace, heartfelt joy, through the knowl- 
edge of Jesus Christ, be with you, my dear wife 
Lijsken in the Lord. I wish you, my dear wife 
Lijsken, an ardent love to God, and a joyful mind 
to Christ Jesus. Know, that I remember you day 
and night in my prayers, supplicating and sighing 
to God for you ; for I am very sorrowful on your 
account, because you have to be imprisoned so 
long; and I would fain wish, had it been the will of 
the Lord, that you had been released ; but now the 
Lord has willed it otherwise, because He means to 
try you, and to reveal His power and strength in 
you, against all those who resist the truth. Hence, 
I can do nothing against the will of the Lord, lest 
I tempt Him; but I will much rather praise and 
thank Him, that He has made us both worthy to 
suffer for His name ; for thereto are all His chosen 
lambs elected; for He has redeemed them from 
among men, as first fruits unto God. Rev. 14:4. 

Furthermore, my most beloved, I have greatly 
rejoiced until this hour, praising and thanking the 
Lord for having fitted us for this purpose, but 
when I heard from you, that your sorrow was 
greater than your lips could express, it caused me 
to weep many tears, and grieves my heart ; for it 
is a great affliction. And I understood that it is be- 
cause you often told me to depart from Assuerus, 


which I did not do ; this has cost me many a tear, 
and I am very sorry ; yet I can do nothing against 
the will of the Lord (Rom. 9:19), and had it been 
His will, He would have provided a deliverance for 
us; but He has appointed our bounds, which we 
can not pass. Job 14 :5 ; Tob. 13 :2. Thus, we can- 
not escape from the Lord; hence let us not be 
grieved at His work, but much rather, as Christ 
says, let us rejoice and be exceedingly glad, for 
great is our reward in heaven ; and as Peter says, 
we ought to praise and glorify God on this behalf. 
Matt. 5:12; I Peter 4:16. O my dear, this is not 
said that we should sorrow. Be patient, therefore, 
in your tribulation and suffering; for Paul says 
that all things work together for good to them that 
love God ; hence, I have confidence in the Lord, 
that it will also be for your good, that you have to 
be imprisoned so long. Therefore receive willing- 
ly at His hand whatever He sends you; for He 
suffers no one to be tempted above that he is able. 
Hence, be a partaker of the sufferings of Christ ; 
for all that are without chastisement, are bastards' 
and not sons. Heb. 12:8. And James says: 
"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation : for 
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, 
which the Lord has promised to them that love 
him." James 1 :12. 

Be therefore a follower of Christ, patiently and 
joyfully take up your cross, and follow Him with 
gladness, since He has suffered so much for our 
salvation ; hence let us also suffer for His praise. 
Since our hour has now come, let us joyfully strive 
for the crown of life, which is prepared for us. 

Therefore I pray you, my love, that you will not 
sorrow any longer ; for the Lord will preserve you 
as the apple of His eye ; yea, though a mother for- 
get her child, yet shall I not forget thee, says the 
Lord, yea, my sheep hear my voice, says the Lord, 
and they follow me, and no man shall pluck them 
out of my hand. Therefore, my most beloved, be 
content, and trust in the Lord ; He will not forsake 
you. Moreover, I learned partly from my sister, 
that you also grieved because you were not more 
patient with me. See, my dear lamb, you have not 
been obstinate towards me, and we have not lived 
together otherwise than we were in duty bound to 
live ; why then will you grieve. Be content ; Christ 
will not lay it to your charge, for He will not re- 
member our sins. I thank the Lord, that you have 
lived so humbly with me as you did. Gladly would 
I be imprisoned for you for a whole year, on bread 
and water, yea, and then die, a tenfold death, if you 
could be released. Oh, that I could help you with 
my tears and with my blood, how willingly should 
I suffer for you ; but my suffering can avail you 
nothing. Hence, be contented ; I will pray the Lord 
still more for you. I have written this letter in 
tears, because I heard that your grief is so very 
great. I pray you, that you will write to me how 
you are. Herewith I commend you to the Lord. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


515 


A LETTER FROM LIJSKEN, JEROME'S WIFE, WHICH 

SHE WROTE TO HIM IN PRISON AT 

ANTWERP, A. D. 1551 

Grace and peace be to both of us from God the 
Father, and the love of the Son, and the commun- 
ion of the Holy Ghost be with us, to the strength- 
ening, consolation, joy, and salvation of our souls. 

My beloved husband in the Lord, know that at 
first the time seemed very long to me, because I 
was not used to imprisonment, and heard nothing 
but temptations to depart from the Lord. They 
said: "Why do you trouble yourself with the 
Scriptures; attend to your sewing. It seems that 
you would follow the apostles ; where are the signs 
which you do? They spake with different tongues, 
after they had received the Holy Ghost." Mark 
16:17; Acts 2:4. And they said: "Where is your 
language which you received through the Holy 
Ghost ?" But it is sufficient for us, that we have be- 
lieved through their word, as John tells us, where 
Christ says : "Neither pray I for these alone, but 
for them also which shall believe on me through 
their word." John 17:20. Herewith I commend 
you to the Lord ; the grace of God be with us al- 
ways. 

Thanks be to God the Father, who had and 
showed such love to us, that He gave His dear Son 
for us ; may He give us such love, joy, wisdom, and 
such a steadfast mind, through Christ, and through 
the power of the Holy Spirit, that we may prevail 
against all ravenous beasts, dragons, serpents, and 
all the gates of hell, which are now using great 
subtlety to seize, deceive, destroy, and seduce our 
souls. Well may we therefore humbly pray the 
Lord without ceasing, day and night ; for the de- 
vourer walks about us, seeking whom he may 
devour; for we are not ignorant of his designs. 
But though they are very crafty, yet the Lord's 
hand is not shortened, in them that love Him, and 
do His will ; for the eyes of the Lord are upon those 
that love Him, and His ears are open unto their 
cry ; but the face of the Lord is against them that 
do evil. Isa. 59:1 ; Ps. 34:15, 16. Hence, let every- 
one take good heed, that the face of the Lord be not 
against him ; for the soul that sinneth, it shall die, 
unless he repent before the Lord come. But we are 
not assured of the time when the Lord will come ; 
for He shall come as a thief in the night. I Thess. 
5 :2. Hence, we may well pray the Lord for one 
another, that our flight be not on the Sabbath Day, 
when we are idle, nor in the winter, when we have 
no fruit on our trees, for every tree which bring- 
eth forth not good fruit shall be hewn down, and 
cast into the fire ; but every tree that beareth good 
fruit, He shall purge, that it may bring forth 
fruit abundantly. Matt. 24:20; 3:10; John 15:2. 
The mouth of the Lord also tells us : "If any man 
sin willfully . . . there remaineth no more sac- 
rifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of 
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour 
the adversaries. The law of Moses was so strict, 


that he who transgressed it had to die without 
mercy under two or three witnesses ; of how much 
sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who 
hath trodden under foot the Son of God?" Heb. 
10:26-29. The Holy Ghost also declares: "If we 
be dead with him, we shall also live with him ; if 
we suffer we shall also reign with him : if we deny 
him, he also will deny us : if we believe not, yet he 
abideth faithful : he cannot deny himself." II Tim. 
2 :11-13. "Seeing we are compassed about with so 
great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every 
weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, 
and let us run with patience the race that is set 
before us, looking unto Jesus the author and fin- 
isher of our faith; who for the joy that was set 
before him endured the cross, despising the shame ; 
who threatened not, when he suffered for our sins 
unto the salvation of our souls." Hebrews 12 :1, 2 ; 
I Peter 2 :23. Thus we also, my most beloved in 
the Lord, to His praise, and to the consolation of 
all dear friends. I wish to us both the crucified 
Saviour for an everlasting joy and strength. I 
trust to the Lord, who alone is wise, and who has 
given His wisdom only to the simple, the innocent 
and outcasts of this world, that He will comfort 
us till our travail is over. Rev. 12:5. 

My dear husband in the Lord, whom I married 
before God and His church, and with whom they 
say I have lived in adultery, because I was not 
married in Baal ; but the Lord says : "Rejoice, when 
all men shall speak evil of you, for my name's sake : 
rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your 
reward in heaven." Matt. 5:11, 12. 

Know, that I have wept much, because you were 
grieved on my account, having heard that I said 
that I had often spoken to you about moving away 
from Assuerus, and that you did not do it ; be con- 
tent concerning this, my most beloved in the Lord, 
if it had not so been the will of the Lord, it would 
not have happened ; the Lord's will must be done, 
for the salvation of both our souls, for He will not 
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able. Be 
of good cheer therefore, my most beloved in the 
Lord, and rejoice in Him as before, praising and 
thanking Him for having chosen us to be im- 
prisoned so long for His name, having been found 
worthy thereto ; He knows for what end He has 
ordered it so. Though the children of Israel were 
a long time in the wilderness, yet, had they been 
obedient to the voice of the Lord, they would have 
entered the promised land with Joshua and Caleb. 
Thus also we are here in the wilderness, among 
these ravening beasts, which daily spread out their 
nets, to catch us (Ps. 35 :8) ; but the Lord, who is 
so strong, does not forsake His own, who trust in 
Him ; He preserves them from all evil, yea, as the 
apple of His eye ; hence let us be content in Him, 
joyfully and patiently take up our cross, and wait 
with a firm confidence for the promises which He 
has given us, not doubting them, for He is faithful 
that promised ; that we may be crowned on Mount 
Sion, and adorned with palms, and may follow the 


516 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Lamb, I pray you, my beloved in the Lord, be of 
good cheer in Him, together with all dear friends, 
and pray to the Lord in my behalf. Amen. 


A LETTER FROM JEROME SEGERS TO HIS WIFE 

Grace and peace be with you from God the Fa- 
ther, and the mercy and love of the Son, and the 
power and communion of the Holy Ghost strength- 
en your faith, heart, mind and understanding in 
Christ Jesus. Amen. This I wish to my beloved 
wife, whom I before God and His holy church 
espoused as my own wife. Even as Abraham took 
Sarah, Isaac, Rebecca, and Tobias, the daughter 
of his uncle to wife; so did I take you to wife, ac- 
cording to the Word and command of God, and not 
as this wicked, blind world. For this reason I 
praise and thank the Lord night and day, that He 
spared us so long, till we became acquainted in part 
with each other, and had attained unto the knowl- 
edge of the truth ; on which account they say that 
we lived in adultery, because we were not married 
like this idolatrous generation, in an idolatrous, 
carnal, vain, proud, and gluttonous manner, which 
is nothing but an abomination in the eyes of God. 
On this account they slander us, as they did Christ. 
Matt. 12:24. And though they may tell you to at- 
tend to your sewing, this does not prevent us ; for 
Christ has called us all, and commanded us to search 
the Scriptures, since they testify of Him; and 
Christ also said that Magdalene had chosen the 
better part, because she searched the Scriptures. 
Matt. 11:28; John 5:39; Luke 10:42. Moreover, 
my most beloved, though they ask you where your 
signs and tongues are, this must not hinder you; 
for the believers whom Peter and John baptized 
did not speak with tongues, but it was enough for 
them, that they believed in Christ Acts 2 :38. And 
also Stephen, who was full of the Holy Ghost, did 
not speak with tongues ; nor did any of the bishops 
or teachers who were with Paul, perform signs, 
and speak with tongues ; yet they taught the Word 
of God blamelessly. And Paul says that the Holy 
Ghost distributes His gifts in the church ; one has 
the gift of healing; another of prophecy; another 
of speaking with tongues ; another the working of 
miracles ; another the gift of exhortation ; another 
of showing mercy ; another of firm faith ; and all 
these worketh the Holy Spirit, through whom they 
mutually assist each other to their own edification, 
and thus grow into a holy temple; and let every 
man abide in the same calling wherein he was 
called. I Cor. 12:7; Eph. 4:16; 2:21 ; I Cor. 7:20. 
Moreover, it is enough for us, that Christ prayed 
not only for His disciples, but also for those who 
should believe on Him through their word. John 
17:20. 

Behold, my beloved wife in the Lord, how gladly 
the ravening wolves would murder the souls of the 
simple, with their lies and subtlety, whereby they 
lie in wait to deceive, in order to bring your soul 
into eternal death. Hence, beware of them, and 


hearken not unto them, since they are very crafty ; 
but do as Christ says : "My sheep hear my voice ; 
they hear not the voice of strangers ; hence no man 
shall pluck them out of his hand." See, my be- 
loved, how Christ has warned us of this time ; let 
us therefore look well before us, lest the subtle 
serpent deceive us. And know, that I have also been 
before the lords once, when I called to you, and 
that I then spoke in such a manner, that they let me 
in peace ; though the others were arraigned twice 
after this, yet I was left unmolested. Once I also 
had a discussion with the priests in regard to the 
calling,* in which I so reproved them with the 
word of the Lord, that they became so angry that 
they struck on the table with their fists, and did not 
know what to say ; for they said that Peter was a 
pope, and that St. Andrew read the first mass. I 
replied that they could not prove it in truth, and 
told them they were seducing spirits, and held the 
doctrine of devils. Then they went away. 

Moreover, know, my beloved wife in the Lord I 
am sorry that you wept; for, when I heard that 
you grieved, I prayed the more fervently to the 
Lord, day and night, for you, and know assuredly, 
that He will preserve you as the apple of His eye I 
constantly praise the Lord, that He has made us 
both worthy to suffer for His name, for which 
cause I greatly rejoice. When I read your letter, 
and learned how it was with you, and that you 
wished the crucified Christ to me, for a salutation, 
my heart and my spirit leaped up for joy in my 
body ; so that I could not finish reading the letter, 
but had to bow my knees before the Lord (Eph. 
3 :14), and praise and thank Him for His strength, 
consolation and joy, although I was afflicted on ac- 
count of our brethren and you, because you have 
to be imprisoned there so long. I have committed 
you, together with the fruit, into the hands of the 
Lord, being confident beyond a doubt, that He will 
give you the same joy which He gives to me, and 
keep you unto the end. I experience such joy and 
gladness in His promises, that I never think on 
these torments, but only on the great promises 
which He has given to those who remain steadfast 
untothe end. I have such gladness, consolation 
and joy as I never had, yea, such joy, that I cannot 
utter or describe it, yea, that I did not believe that 
a person could have such joy in prison ; for day or 
night I can scarcely sleep for joy, nor sufficiently 
thank and praise the Lord ; for it seems as though 
I had not been here a day yet. Sir. 43 :30. Oh, 
that I might break my heart into pieces, and give 
it to you and our brethren ! Oh, that I could help 
them with my blood ; I should so gladly suffer for 
them! 

O my beloved in the Lord, I now experience 
how mightily, strongly and fatherly He preserves 
those who trust in Him, and seek nothing but His 
glory ; yea, what strength, consolation and joy He 
gives them; and how ignominiously He permits 

* Calling or sending of ministers. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


517 


them to fall, who trust in men, and forsake and 
deny Him ; so that they get a torturing conscience, 
a sorrowful heart, and dreadful horror, yea, look 
for nothing but eternal damnation and the pain of 
fire, and expect to hear the terrible words : "De- 
part from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire ; for 
the face of the Lord is against them that do evil." 
Matt. 25 :41 ; Ps. 34:16. Behold, therefore, my be- 
loved wife in the Lord, let us look unto Jesus the 
Finisher, how He went before us into death, for 
our salvation ; for, behold, the crown of life is pre- 
pared for us; we shall sit with Him upon His 
throne ; we shall be clothed in white robes. Here- 
with I commend you unto the crucified Christ for 
consolation and joy; that He will keep you, sat- 
isfy you with His divine Word, feed you with the 
bread of life and of understanding, and give you 
to drink the water of wisdom and the unadulter- 
ated milk, from the fountain of life. May He keep 
your soul unto salvation. Amen. 


A LETTER FROM LIJSKEN, JEROME S WIFE 

The grace, peace, joy and love left by Christ to 
His disciples be unto you. I earnestly beseech Him, 
that He will give us such love and such a steadfast 
mind, that we may be found fit to receive the beau- 
tiful promises which He has given to us, if we con- 
tinue steadfast unto the end. To this Christ be 
praise and honor forever and ever. Amen. 

I cannot thank or praise the Lord sufficiently for 
the great grace, the unfathomable mercy, and great 
love which He has shown us, that we should be His 
sons and daughters, if we overcome, even as He 
overcame. II Cor. 6:18; Rev. 3 :21. Oh, well may 
we say that true faith, which works by love, and 
which will bring us to glory, if we suffer with Him 
is actuated by things not seen. Gal. 5 :6 ; Romans 
8:17; Heb. 11 :1. Let us consider, dear friends in 
the Lord, what great love worldly men have to- 
wards one another. There are some in prison, I 
have heard say, who rejoiced when about to 
go to the rack, because they should then be nearer 
those whom they loved, though they could not come 
together in person. Hearken, my beloved brethren 
and sisters in the Lord, if the world has such love, 
what love, then, ought we to have, who expect 
such glorious promises ! I also have before me the 
beautiful example of a bride, how she adorns her- 
self, to please her bridegroom of this world. Oh, 
how ought we then to adorn ourselves, to please our 
bridegroom ! Oh, that we might be adorned as were 
the five wise virgins with oil in their lamps, to 
meet our bridegroom, that we might also hear the 
sweet voice: "Come, ye blessed, inherit the king- 
dom of my Father." I pray the Lord day and 
night, to give us such fervent love, that we may 
not regard the torments which they may inflict 
upon us; yea, may say with the prophet David: 
"I fear nothing of all that men can do unto me." 
Ps. 118:6. And this our pain, which is light and 
temporal, is not worthy to be compared with the 


glory which shall be revealed in us. Rom. 8:18. 

Since, then, it is the will of the Lord that with 
Daniel I must remain so long in the den of lions, 
and await the howling and ravening wolves and 
lions, and the old serpent, which was from the be- 
ginning, and shall be unto the end ; therefore, I 
entreat all my dear brethren and sisters, to remem- 
ber me in their prayers ; I will gladly do the same, 
according to my ability. O my dear friends, how 
can I sufficiently thank my heavenly Father, that 
He has made me poor sheep fit to remain in bonds 
so long for His name's sake. I pray the Lord day 
and night, that this my trial may tend to the sal- 
vation of my soul, to the praise of the Lord, and to 
the edification of my dear brethren and sisters. 
Amen. 

Nicholas op de Suyckeruye brought two priests 
to me, to instruct me, whom I answered by the 
grace of the Lord. They told me they were sorry 
that I had embraced this opinion, which they could 
not call a faith, but only an opinion, since we ob- 
served nothing commanded by the Christian church. 
I replied to them: "We desire to do or believe 
nothing but what the church of Christ commands 
us ; but we will have nothing to do with the temple 
of Baal, or with other temples made with hands, 
after the doctrines and commandments of men, 
and not after Christ. With these we will have noth- 
ing at all to do ; for Stephen says that the Most 
High dwells not in temples made with hands ; but 
he said that he saw the heavens opened, and Christ 
sitting on the right hand of His Almighty Father. 
Acts 7:48, 56. And Paul says, that we are the 
temple of the living God; if we do His will, He 
will dwell and walk in us." II Cor. 6:16. They 
said that they were the sent, and those who sit in 
Moses' seat. I replied to them, that in that case 
the woes spoken of in Matt. 23 applied to them. 
They asked me whether I meant to say that he who 
taught me these things, was sent of God. I said : 
"Yes, I assuredly know that he is sent of God." 
They then asked me, whether I knew how a teacher 
ought to be. I answered: "A teacher must be 
the husband of one wife, blameless, having his 
children in subjection, no drunkard, winebibber or 
whoremonger." I Tim. 3 :2. They replied : "If we 
do wrong, it will fall on our own heads ; the Lord 
is merciful." I then asked, whether they would 
sin upon the mercy of God, and said it was written 
that we should not add sin unto sin, and say : "The 
Lord is merciful." Sir. 5 :5. We said much more ; 
but it would take too long to relate it. 

I told them that they were ever learning, and 
never able to come to a right knowledge of the 
truth. II Tim. 3 :7. They then said that Christ said 
to His apostles : "To you it is given to understand, 
but to others in parables." Matt. 13 :11. I replied: 
"They who now rightly understand it, to them it is 
also given." 

Finally they crossed themselves over and over 
and said that I should find it out when I should 
stand before the judgment. That is true, I said : we 


518 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


shall there be appointed judges, to judge this dis- 
obedient and adulterous generation. Matt. 19:28. 
With this they went away. I also told them, that 
they had come from Satan, to murder my soul. 

Once more I wish to my dear husband in the 
Lord, and to myself, the crucified Christ, as an 
imperishable joy and love, forever. Amen. 

Know, my dear husband in the Lord, when I 
read that you rejoice so greatly in the Lord, I 
could not finish reading the letter, but had to pray 
the Lord, that He would give me the same joy, 
and keep me unto the end, so that we may offer 
our sacrifice with joy, to the praise of our Father 
who is in heaven, and to the edification of all dear 
brethren and sisters. Herewith I commend you to 
the Lord, and to the word of His grace. Know, 
that I thank you very much for the letter you wrote 
me. The grace of the Lord be with us always. 

ANOTHER LETTER FROM LIJSKEN TO HER HUS- 
BAND 

The abundant grace of God be with us both al- 
ways, and the love of the Son, and His unfathom- 
able mercy, and the joy of the Holy Ghost be with 
us forever. Amen. To Him who has begotten us 
again from the dead, be praise forever and ever. 
Amen. 

I wish to us both the crucified Christ for the pro- 
tector and guardian of our souls ; may He keep us 
in all righteousness, holiness and truth unto the 
end. And He will preserve us as His sons and 
daughters, yea, as the apple of His eye, if we hold 
the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the 
end. Hebrews 3:14. Hence, let us trust in Him, 
and He will never forsake us, but preserve us, as 
He has preserved His own from the beginning of 
the world, and will let no temptation come upon 
us, but such as is common to man. Heb. 13 :5 ; I 
Cor. 10:13. 

The Lord is faithful, says Paul ; He will not suf- 
fer us to be tempted above that we are able. Bless- 
ed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who has made us fit to suffer a short, 
transient affliction for His name, through His 
beautiful promises, which He has given us and all 
those who remain steadfast in His doctrine. We 
may suffer here a little, but we shall be greatly 
rewarded. Wisd. 3 :S. 

My dear, beloved husband in the Lord, you have 
partly passed through the trial, and have remained 
steadfast, eternal praise and glory to the Lord for 
His great grace! And I beseech the Lord with 
tears, to make me also fit, to suffer for His name ; 
for all His chosen lambs are appointed thereto, 
since He has redeemed them from among men, to 
be the first-fruits unto God. Rev. 14 :4. Yea, we 
know, as Paul says, that if we suffer with Him, we 
shall also reign with Him ; if we be dead with Him, 
we shall also live with Him. II Tim. 2:12, 11. 
Hence, let us not despise the chastening of the 
Lord; for, whom He loveth He chasteneth, and 


scourgeth every son whom He receiveth, as Paul 
tells us. Heb. 12 :5, 6. Herewith I commend you 
to the Lord, and to the word of His grace and 
glory ; with which He will glorify us, if we adhere 
to it unto the end. The grace of the Lord be with 


us 


A LETTER FROM JEROME SEGERS TO HIS WIFE 

The grace, joy, and peace from God the Father, 
and the loving kindness and love of the Son, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion and con- 
solation of the Holy Ghost, strengthen, console and 
confirm and keep us, both in all righteousness and 
holiness unto the end. To Him be praise forever 
and ever. Amen. 

I wish to my chosen wife in the Lord, and to me, 
eternal joy, and the imperishable and incorruptible 
life, and may He grant, that we both adhere un- 
changingly to His divine Word and eternal truth, 
unto the end ; which He will also do, since He has 
promised it to us, if we continue faithful in what 
He has given us, and are willing to contend for it 
for His glory, even as He contended for our sal- 
vation, and was obedient to His Father unto death. 
If we also continue thus faithful unto death, we 
shall receive the crown of life, and inherit eternal 
life with Him, and He will never forsake us ; for 
the Lord will or can do nothing contrary to His 
Word, for His Word shall never pass away. Matt. 
24 :3S. And He has so faithfully promised to keep 
us, if we do not forsake Him ; so that no one shall 
pluck us out of His hand ; He will keep us as the 
apple of His eye, yea, as His sons and daughters. 
For, behold, my beloved, how faithfully He pre- 
served those who faithfully served Him; even as 
Noah was preserved in the ark, as Lot was led out 
of Sodom, as Jacob was preserved from his broth- 
er Esau, who sought to kill him, and as Joseph was 
preserved from his brothers, the sons of Jacob, 
Joshua and Caleb from all the heathen, and en- 
tered into the promised land, David before Goliath ; 
Susannah before the false witnesses : Daniel from 
the lions ; and many other examples too lengthy to 
recite. Hereby we may perceive, how faithfully 
He preserves those who sincerely fear and love 
Him, and how ignominiously they fall who for- 
sake Him, as we may see from the beginning of 
the world, how it perished, on account of its wick- 
edness, and how Lot's wife was punished. Esau 
could not find his birthright again, and the whole 
house of Israel perished in the wilderness. See, 
my beloved wife, all this the Lord permitted to 
happen not only for the sake of those who had 
sinned, but also for our sakes, that we should see, 
how Christ is with the righteous, and preserves 
them, and how He forsakes and brings to nought 
the ungodly; for Paul says: "Whatsoever things 
were written aforetime were written for our learn- 
ing." Rom. 15:4. 

Hence, let us diligently take heed, that we seek, 
fear and love the Lord from the bottom of our 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


519 


heart, faithfully serving, and not forsaking Him ; 
for Christ says : "He that is not with me is against 
me ; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth" 
(Luke 11 :23) ; even as we daily see how mightily 
He preserves those who trust in Him, and how soon 
they fall who forsake Christ, and put their trust in 
man. Therefore, my beloved wife in the Lord, let 
us trust in the Lord Almighty, constantly look to 
Jesus, the Captain and finisher of our faith, always 
keep the crucified Christ before our eyes, faithfully 
follow Him as He went before us, and patiently 
take up our cross, always remembering the words 
of Christ, where He says that they shall kill us, 
and will think that they do Him service; and re- 
membering that this is told us beforehand, that 
when it happens to us, we may not be offended ; for 
the servant is not greater than his lord. And these 
things will they do unto you, because they have 
not known the Father, nor Me. John 16 :3. For the 
preaching of the cross is to them that perish, fool- 
ishness, but unto us, the power of God. I Cor. 1 :18. 
Hence, let us always remember the words of Christ : 
"Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will 
I confess also before my Father which is in heav- 
en. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him 
will I also deny before my Father which is in 
heaven, and before his holy angels." Matt. 10:32, 
23. Let us firmly trust in Him, and He will not 
forsake us ; for He does not forsake His own, but 
He prayed His heavenly Father, that where He is, 
He will that we shall be with Him. John 17 :24. 

Hence, let the world call us heretics and Ana- 
baptists and condemn us as much as they please ; 
for Paul says: "Who shall lay anything to the 
charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. 
Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, 
yea rather, that is risen again, who is ever at the 
right hand of God, who also maketh intercession 
for us. He that spared not his own Son, but deliv- 
ered him up for us all, how shall he not with him 
also freely give us all things ! Now, if God so loved 
us, when we were yet enemies, how much more 
shall we be preserved from wrath, seeing we are 
justified through his blood: for being justified by 
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by faith 
into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in 
hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we 
glory in tribulations also ; knowing that tribulation 
worketh patience; and patience, experience; and 
experience, hope ; and hope maketh not ashamed ; 
because the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us." 
Rom. 8:33, 34, 32; 5:10,1-5. 

My dearly beloved, let us therefore firmly trust 
the Lord, and patiently wait for His promises, even 
as the husbandman waits for his fruits ; and let us 
not forsake Him, and He will not forsake us. I 
have committed us both and also the fruit into His 
hands, to do His divine will with us, that His name 
may be glorified thereby, and that it may tend to 


the salvation of our souls, and to the consolation 
and joy of all that fear the Lord, and I firmly trust 
Him, and doubt not, that He will preserve us as 
His sons and daughters, yea, as the apple of His 
eye. Know, that I rejoiced greatly, when I read 
your letter and that you write, that you pray the 
Lord with weeping eyes, to make you fit to suffer 
for His name. My beloved, be not anxious, but 
pray the Lord with a humble heart, to give us what 
is best for our souls, which He will doubtless do, 
and will not tempt us above that we are able. May 
He keep us in all righteousness, holiness and truth, 
unto the end. 

Know also, my beloved, that they greatly tor- 
tured me, to find out the midwives where our sis- 
ters lay in childbed ; but the Lord, who kept my 
lips, was stronger than all their tortures. Eternal 
praise and glory be to the Lord, who does not for- 
sake His own. They obtained no names from me, 
save one or two, which they had read to me from 
a letter, and which I told them, to see what they 
would say. But they asked me whether I was mak- 
ing sport of them, and tortured me still more, de- 
manding that I should tell them concerning the 
women, and others, or they would torture me till 
the next morning, and stretch me a foot longer than 
I was. They told Gileyn to rack, and his assistant 
racked vigorously, and Gileyn poured my body 
full of water. They had me lying stark naked on 
the bench, with nothing but the shirt to cover my 
shame. I was bound to the bench with four cords, 
so that it seemed to me, as though my head and 
legs were severed ; but they obtained nothing more, 
praise and glory be to the Lord. When they re- 
leased me, two or three of them had to lift me 
from the bench, and dress me; yea, it would not 
have been possible to endure the pain without the 
help of the Lord. They told me to consider the 
matter, and become a good son of the Roman 
church, and that I should indicate all those whom 
I knew, or they would deal more severely with me. 
I replied that I had not erred, and would far rather 
die than forsake my faith. They then said that 
they would come again ; but they can do no more 
than the Lord permits them. John 19:11. Eternal 
praise to the Lord, who has made us fit for this, 
may He further fit us to become children of His 
kingdom. Amen. My beloved wife, I commend 
you to the Lord and to the Word of His grace. 


A LETTER OF JEROME SEGERS TO BIG HENRY, WHO 

WAS ALSO IMPRISONED THERE, IN 

THE YEAR 1551 

The grace and peace of God the Father, and the 
great mercy and love of the Son, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who was sent by the Father, out of grace, 
for the salvation of all those who are dead unto 
their sins, and thus have risen with Christ into 
newness of life, and the eternal, unfathomable joy, 
consolation and communion of the Holy Ghost, 
strengthen your heart, understanding and mind in 


520 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ Jesus. To Him be praise forever and ever. 
Amen. 

I wish you, Henry, my dear brother in the Lord, 
whom I love from the bottom of my heart, for the 
steadfastness of our faith in Christ Jesus, true, 
penitent faith, which works by love, which you 
have, and a firm, constant mind, and steadfastness 
unto the end in this same effectual, saving faith. 
Col. 2 :5 ; Heb. 3 :14. I am greatly rejoiced at your 
steadfastness, that you are again so cheerful and 
content, the Lord be praised forever. I pray the 
Lord night and day, to strengthen you with His 
divine Word, and confirm you in the faith, pre- 
serve you in the den of lions, as He preserved 
Daniel and keep you with His strong arm, and to 
give you the New Jerusalem for an inheritance, 
which He will also do, for He is faithful that 
promised. Heb. 10:23. 

Therefore, my dear brother in the Lord, let us 
fight manfully against all devouring beasts; for 
life is prepared for us ; and let us not be afraid of 
their threatenings nor be terrified by their tor- 
tures, for they can do nothing without the will 
of the Father. I Pet. 3:14; John 19:11. The Lord 
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able. The Lord is our Captain, whom will we fear ? 
The Lord is with us, who can be against us? For 
He will preserve us as the apple of His eye, yea, as 
His sons and daughters ; for no man shall pluck 
His sheep out of His hand, yea, it is impossible 
for God's elect to be deceived. Matt. 24 :24. 

Hence, behold my dear brother in the Lord, 
be not dismayed, though they growl and snarl at 
you in an ugly manner ; they can do nothing else to 
you. Let us fight valiantly against all dragons and 
lions. Put on the armor of God, take the sword of 
the Spirit, and resist them undauntedly, and re- 
gard no one ; they will have to take to flight ; for 
the sword which the Lord has given us is much too 
sharp for them, and the Lord helping us to fight, 
who is there able to prevail? For our God is a con- 
suming fire, which devours His enemies. Deut. 
4:24. 

Hence, I pray you, my dear brother, not to let it 
grieve you, though they keep you so long in this 
den of lions; for hereby the Lord tries us, since 
He tries His chosen as gold in the furnace. There- 
fore be patient in your tribulation ; for where no 
conflict is, there is no victory ; hence, we must have 
conflict, if we are to overcome ; but he that over- 
cometh shall inherit all things. Rev. 21 :7. Let us, 
therefore, take up the cross with humility and 
patience, and wait for our promises, even as the 
husbandman waits for his fruits ; and let us keep 
the Lord before our eyes, and be faithful to Him 
unto death, for we must here suffer a little, but we 
shall be greatly rewarded ; for He will set us upon 
His throne, and give us to eat of the hidden heav- 
enly bread, and make us pillars in the temple of 
His God. Rev. 2:10; Wisd. 3:5; Rev. 2:17; 2:12. 
Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to the 
Word of His grace; may He strengthen you in 


His righteousness unto the end. Furthermore, I 
let you know, that I have been told that you heard 
I had forsaken the Lord ; I was greatly surprised 
at this. It is not so, nor ever shall be ; but they have 
said it to draw you off and trouble you. They have 
lied about me ; for I have never stood otherwise in 
my faith, than is proper, and am still of the same 
mind as I was when I lay with you, the Lord be 
praised. I have never wavered, for I would rather 
be tortured ten times a day, and ultimately be 
roasted on a gridiron, than forsake my faith, which 
I have confessed. 

Therefore, though they tell you ever so much 
about my having apostatized, believe it not, for the 
devil does this, in order to seduce and deceive you 
thereby, for by the grace of God I shall never for- 
sake the Lord. But I have been sick in my flesh 
for many days ; however, my spirit was so much 
the stronger. I prayed the Lord, to send me still 
more suffering, if it would conduce to my salvation, 
and He gives me more and more strength and con- 
solation, for which I cannot sufficiently thank Him. 
Herewith I commend you to the Lord. When you 
sing aloud, I can well hear you. I thank the Lord, 
that He still gives you so much strength that I hear 
you sing. 


LAST LETTER OF JEROME TO HIS WIFE, WRITTEN 
THE NIGHT WHEN HE WAS SENTENCED; HE 
WAS PUT TO DEATH ON THE 2d OF SEP- 
TEMBER, A. D. 1551 

Grace and peace from God the Father, the un- 
fathomable mercy of the Son our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the loving kindness and communion of 
the Holy Ghost be unto you, for an everlasting con- 
solation, joy, gladness, and strength in your bonds, 
tribulation, sufferings, and vexation in your labor, 
and for strength in your faith, love and tribulation. 
To Him be praise for ever and ever. Amen. 

I wish unto you, my dearly beloved, chosen wife 
in the Lord, the true, genuine, penitent faith, which 
works by love, and a very firm, immovable, stead- 
fast mind in my and your most holy faith. I fur- 
ther wish you the crucified Christ for a bride- 
groom, who has chosen you for a daughter, bride 
and queen. To this King of the Most High, to the 
everlasting Father and jealous, loving God, I have 
now commended you, my beloved in the Lord, that 
He will now be your Comforter and Bridegroom, 
since He has called and taken me first, with which 
I am well content, seeing that it was the will of the 
Lord ; eternal praise and glory be to the Lord for 
His great power which He has manifested in us. 

Therefore, my most beloved in the Lord, do not 
complain, or grieve much, because He has taken 
me first ; for He has done all for our best, that I 
should be an example unto you, and that you may 
follow me as valiantly as I, through the grace of 
the Lord, who has made us both worthy to suffer 
for His name, shall go before you. Oh, my dear 
lamb, I humbly entreat you, not to listen to the pa- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


521 


pists or other sophists, but steadfastly to follow 
your Bridegroom, your immovable Bridegroom. 
Follow His footsteps, and fear not their threats, 
nor let their tortures terrify you ; for they can do 
no more than the Lord permits them ; they cannot 
hurt a hair of your head without the will of the 
Father which is in heaven. Matt. 10 :30. 

Hence, fear not, but continue firmly and stead- 
fastly in the doctrine of Christ, and in the right 
truth ; for the Lord will not forsake you, but will 
preserve you as the apple of His eye ; yea, as His 
daughter and child, since it is impossible for God's 
elect to be deceived ; for His sheep hear His voice, 
and follow Him; but they hear not the voice of 
strangers. Hence, no man shall pluck them out 
of His hand ; for He is their Shepherd and Pro- 
tector. Hence, fight valiantly, my chosen lamb, for 
the glory of the Lord, even as He fought so valiant- 
ly, for the salvation of our souls. Be therefore of 
good cheer, even though you have to lie yet a little 
longer in this den of lions. Your deliverance is 
nigh ; it tarries not, but comes ; and when He comes 
that will come with power, He will receive you as 
His bride and queen ; for it is His pleasure to have 
His chosen with Him, since He delights in behold- 
ing them; and the day of the Lord is at hand. 
Habakkuk 2:3; Ps. 45:14; Isa. 13:6. 

Therefore, my dear wife in the Lord, fight val- 
iantly now, and fear not man, but rather say with 
Susanna, that you would much rather fall into the 
hands of man, than into the hand of God ; for it 
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living 
God. Susanna 24; Heb. 10:31. Go to meet the 
Lord with ardent love as you have done hitherto 
by the grace of the Lord, who works in you ; and 
fight valiantly, for the crown of life is prepared for 
you, since to those that overcome all things are 
promised, and they shall also inherit all things ; for 
Christ says : "Blessed are ye, when all men speak 
evil of you ; for great is your reward in heaven." 
Matt. 5:11. He also says : "Blessed are they which 
are persecuted for righteousness' sake ; for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven." The Lord also said that 
when they have brought us before lords and princes, 
and tortured and killed us, they shall yet think to 
have done Him service thereby. John 16 :2. There- 
fore, trust firmly in Christ alone, and the Lord will 
not forsake you, and the crown of life is prepared 
for you. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
to the Word of His grace, and take leave of you, 
here in this world ; for I do not expect to see your 
face any more; but I hope to see you under the 
altar of Christ before many days. Therefore, my 
beloved wife in the Lord, though the world counts 
us liars, and separates us bodily, yet the merciful 
Father will soon bring us together again under His 
altar, together with our brother ; for I do not doubt 
it, but am firmly trusting in Him ; for I have com- 
mended us three into His hands, to do His divine 
will with us, whereby His name may be most 
praised and thanked, to the salvation of our souls, 


and to the consolation and strengthening of all 
those that fear the Lord, and serve and love His 
name; this He will also do, I doubt not; for He 
does not forsake His own who trust in Him ; hence 
I go with a glad heart, to offer up my sacrifice to 
the praise of the Lord. If I could yet have come 
to you, I would have done so ; but Joachim would 
not have it. But Christ will soon bring us to- 
gether again under His altar; this men will not 
be able to prevent. Herewith I bid you adieu, till 
we meet, under the altar. I commend you to the 
Lord. Big Henry salutes you much in the Lord. 
See, my dear wife in the Lord, the hour is now 
come that we must part ; and thus I go before, with 
great joy and gladness, to my and your heavenly 
Father (John 20:17), and I most humbly entreat 
you, not to grieve on this account, but to rejoice 
with me. Rom. 12:15. However, I am sad in one 
respect, because I leave you among these wolves ; 
but I have commended you and the fruit to the 
Lord, and know assuredly, that He will preserve 
you unto the end, and herein I rest content. Be 
valiant in the Lord. 


how lijsken, jerome's wife, valiantly 

fought, and confessed the ground of her 

faith before all the people, remaining 

steadfast unto the end ; and how they 

by night put her into a bag, and 

threw her into the scheldt, she 

thus sealing her faith with her 

DEATH 

Lijsken, our sister, who was in bonds for a long 
time, fulfilled the time of her sojourning, contin- 
uing most perfectly and steadfastly in the Word 
of the Lord unto the end, the Lord be praised for- 
ever, and confessed her faith very frankly and un- 
feignedly, in the court, before the authorities and 
the common people. In the first place, they ques- 
tioned her concerning baptism, to which she re- 
plied : "I know but one baptism, which Christ and 
His saints practiced and left us." 

"What do you think of infant baptism?" asked 
the bailiff? 

Lijsken answered : "That it is nothing but infant 
baptism, and a human institution." 

The lords then arose and put their heads to- 
gether. In the meantime Lijsken clearly con- 
fessed and explained the ground of her faith to 
the people. Thereupon they passed sentence upon 
her. Lijsken thus addressed herself to the judges : 
"You are judges now, but the time will come when 
you shall wish that you had been shepherds,* for 
there is a Judge and Lord over us all, who will 
judge you in due time ; 'but we wrestle not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this 
world.'" Wisd. 5;Ps. 7:11 ;Eph. 6:12. The lords 
therefore said : "Take her out of the court." 


* In Dutch "Schaepheaderen," signifying the most menial oc- 
cupation. — Trans. 


522 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


The people then ran together in great crowds to 
see her. Lijsken boldly said to them : "Be it known 
to you, that I do not suffer for theft, murder, or 
any other evil deed, but solely for the incorrupt- 
ible Word of God." Thereupon they came to the 
Bargkerk,* when she said : "O thou den of thieves 
(Matthew 21 :13), how many a soul is murdered 
in thee !" As she was thus going along between the 
servants, though not led by them, the latter said 
[to the people] : "Arise, make room." Then 
Lijsken said: "They do not hinder me; they may 
look on me, and take an example from me, all who 
love the word of the Lord." Phil. 3:17. 

Speaking on, she went back into prison. The 
common people were greatly agitated, but the 
friends rejoiced. Hence, in the afternoon, some of 
our friends went to the prison to visit her, much 
other people also coming. The friends talked a 
little with her, and said : "It is well that you suffer 
only for well doing, and not for any evil deed." 
I Pet. 2:20. But she had to avoid them, on ac- 
count of the other people that were in the prison. 
She spoke boldly and valiantly to the people, and 
sang a beautiful hymn, so that the people were 
greatly astonished. Two monks came, to torment 
her yet, and the three were locked together in a 
room. Lijsken utterly refused to listen to them. 
Once the door of the room was opened, much peo- 
ple standing before it, and Lijsken came and stood 
in the door, and said to the monks: "Go away, 
until you are sent for ; for I will not listen to you ; 
if I had been content with your leaven, I should 
not have come to this." The three were again 
locked into the room, and the erring spirits or stars 
(I John 4:1 ; Jude 13) made another attempt with 
their false and deadly poison ; but, God be praised, 
Lijsken was undaunted and of good cheer, and 
commenced singing a hymn in the presence of the 
monks. One of the friends present said: "Sister, 
fight valiantly." When they [the monks] heard 
this, they were very angry, and said: "There is 
another of her people, who encourages her, whom 
it were better to burn than her. Thus they went 
away in a rage ; for their voice was strange, and 
they were not heard there." John 10:5. 

Lijsken was then shut up alone in the room, 
which fronted the street, where she used to sit; 
and no one could get to her, save he that had the 
keys. When the monks came out into the street, to 
go away, some friends who were there asked them : 
"Will she not be converted ?" The monks replied : 
"No ; for there was one of her people there, whom 
she preferred to hear." Towards evening, the Lord 
granted, that one of the friends came to the place 
where Lijsken sat, and conversed with her a long 
time, so that the people in the street began to hear 
it, and all looked up to the place where the friend 
was, so that some who were with him became un- 
easy, and told him to go away ; but he replied : "I 
must first bid her adieu." He then said: "Arise, 

* Name of a church. 


sister, show yourself, and look out at the window." 
She immediately did so, and as she looked out upon 
the people standing in the street, some friends who 
were among the crowd, also called out, saying; 
"Dear sister, fight valiantly ; for the crown of life 
is set before you." She then said to the people : 
"Drunkards, whoremongers, adulterers, all these 
are tolerated ; they indeed read and speak of the 
Scriptures ; but they that live and walk according 
to the will of God, are troubled, oppressed, perse- 
cuted and put to death." II Tim. 3:12; John 16:2. 
And forthwith she began to sing : "Behold, what 
poor sheep we are," etc. Rom. 8 :36. Before the 
hymn was finished, the lords came with the serv- 
ants into the prison. Some friends said: "Just 
finish it, Lijsken." But before she could finish the 
hymn, they drew her away from the window, and 
evening approaching, she was seen no more. Sat- 
urday morning we rose early, some before daylight, 
others at day break, to see the marriage which we 
thought should come off. But the crafty murderers 
had anticipated us ; we had slept too long ; for they 
had perpetrated their murderous work between 
three and four o'clock. They took the lamb to the 
Scheldt, thrust her into a bag, and drowned her, 
before the people arrived, so that but few witnessed 
it. There were some, however, who saw that she 
went boldly unto death, and valiantly said : "Fa- 
ther, into Thy hands I commend my spirit." Thus 
she was delivered up, and departed, to the praise 
of the Lord ; so that through the grace of God it 
moved much people. When the people arrived, 
and learned that she was dead already, it caused a 
great commotion among them, and as much sorrow 
as though she had been publicly executed ; for they 
said: "Thieves and murderers are brought pub- 
licly before all men." Thus their perfidy became 
the more widely known. Some plain people asked : 
"Why must this people die ? for many give a good 
testimony of them." Some friends who were there 
openly said to the people: "The reason is, that 
they obey the commands of God more than that of 
the Emperor, or of men, because they have sin- 
cerely turned to the Lord their God ; from lies to 
the truth, from darkness to light, from unright- 
eousness to righteousness, from unbelief to the 
true faith ; have thus amended their life, and, after 
becoming true believers, been baptized according 
to the command of Christ, and the practice of His 
apostles." They moreover showed to the people 
from the Word of God, that the papists are those 
of whom the apostle Paul prophesied ; that is, the 
seducing spirits who teach the doctrines of devils ; 
and also, that the righteous had to suffer from the 
beginning, from the time of Abel until now, even 
as Christ also had to suffer, and thus enter into 
the glory of His Father, leaving us an example, 
that we should follow His steps; "for all that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution " 
I Timothy 4:1 ; Luke 24:26; I Pet. 2 :21 ; II Tim 
3:12. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


523 


PIETER BRUYNEN, JAN, PLEUNIS, AND JAN THE 
OLD CLOTHES BUYER, AND ANOTHER BROTHER, 
ALL PUT TO DEATH, ON THE 2d OF OC- 
TOBER, A. D. 1551, AT ANTWERP 

A letter from Pieter Bruynen van Weert, which he 

wrote in prison at Antwerp, where he and jour 

others were put to death for the Word of 

the Lord, on the 2d of October, 

A.D. 1551 

Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be the God of 
mercies, who has with His divine Word begotten 
us again unto a lively hope, reserved in heaven 
for us, who by the power of God are preserved in 
the faith, and tried for the kingdom of God, where- 
fore we suffer, for which thanks be to the Lord, 
because He has chosen us thereto, and made us 
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light. Rom. 1:7; Jas. 1:18; Col. 1:12. 
Therefore, dear brethren, be valiant and fearless, 
and walk with a firm and unchanging faith before 
God and His church, and firmly resolve, not to de- 
part from the Lord, nor to separate from His love, 
on account of any distress or tribulation ; and He 
can give you assistance and comfort, when you are 
forsaken, being deprived of all human help and 
consolation ; for He comes to the help of him that 
forsakes and denies himself, since He dwells and 
will dwell alone in the hearts of men, and will not 
have it that we should serve any one but Him. 
Matt. 4:10. Thus, be established and built up in 
Him, and let love increase among you, whereby 
one sustains the other, and each joyfully endeavors 
to be the chiefest in virtue. Pay no regard to the 
walk of the slothful and heedless, to follow their 
example, namely those who are called Christians 
in ease of life (Matt. 11 :8), adornment of cloth- 
ing, or external appearance, but consider those 
whose life and confession of faith conform to the 
doctrine of Christ ; so that you may go neither too 
high nor too low, neither too broad nor too long. 
Eph. 3 :18. For many go astray by looking to one 
another, in consequence of which they grow cold. 

Hence, my dear brethren, if you be risen with 
Christ, seek those things which are above, that your 
mind may be directed towards the incorruptible, 
and let your hope be set on the things which are 
not seen, and be patient herein ; for there must be 
patience, if we would receive the promise. II Cor. 
4:18; Heb. 10:36. Stablish your hearts; for the 
coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Jas. 5 :8. Put 
off the old man, and put on the new man (Col. 3 :9, 
10) ; deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and be 
transformed by the renewing of your minds. If 
you would be partakers of the resurrection of 
Christ, know, that you must first have crucified 
the old man, that the body of sin may be destroyed. 
Rom. 6:6. And do not become weary in well- 
doing, since your labor shall not be in vain ; for 
you are made partakers of Christ, if you hold the 


beginning of your confidence steadfast unto the 
end. I Cor. 15:58; Heb. 3:14. Be therefore not 
shaken by anything, neither be afraid of the sons 
of men, who pass away as grass ; for they can do 
you nothing without God's permission. But fear 
God for this is perfect wisdom. Humble yourselves 
before Him ; for the great Glory is honored by the 
lowly. Count yourselves always with the humble, 
and you shall be great in the eyes of God. Do not 
think yourselves to know something, or to be some- 
thing, lest you deceive yourselves. Always forsake 
yourselves, and regard not those who may inflict 
evil or suffering upon you, though you be wronged ; 
for this is thankworthy, if a man of conscience 
toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. 
Matt. 5 :39; I Pet. 2:19. Hence, be patient in your 
tribulation, and be partakers of the sufferings of 
Christ, that you may inherit the promise ; for the 
reproach suffered here is brief when compared with 
the eternal joy. Rom. 12:12; I Peter 5:1. And 
this light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory ; for though our life is poor, yet we shall 
be rewarded with much wealth. And though death 
reigns over us now, an east wind shall come from 
the Lord, and dry up His torments. For it is sown 
in dishonor, it is raised in power; it is sown a 
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. I Cor. 
1 5 :43, 44. Hence, the house of this tabernacle must 
be dissolved, if we would obtain the building pre- 
pared us by God. We need therefore not fear 
them that kill the body, since they cannot harm the 
soul ; for the greatest of which they deprive us, is 
also that for which God will give us the greatest 
reward ; and after that they have no more that they 
can do to us. Matt. 10:28. Wherefore, gird up the 
loins of your mind, be sober, watch in prayer, al- 
ways giving thanks unto God the Father, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, for His abundant grace, 
and that He has made known unto us His will, 
manifested the savor of His knowledge, and given 
us the most glorious and precious promises, who 
were sometime estranged in our minds by wicked 
works, and alienated from the life of God, of 
which we had no hope in the promises. But after 
that the kindness of God appeared toward us, not 
by works of righteousness which we have done, 
but according to His mercy He saved us, by the 
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the 
Holy Ghost, in whom we are sealed until the 
time of redemption, who is the earnest of the 
future inheritance, and who assures us, and 
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the 
children of God, and teaches us all things, and 
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and right- 
eousness, sanctification, and redemption. To 
God the Father, who only hath immortality, 
and to whom alone belong power and might, 
praise and glory, be honor and thanks, through 
Christ our Lord, for His unspeakable grace, 
now and forever. I Pet. 1 :13; Eph. 1 :9; II Cor. 


524 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


2:14; Eph. 4:18; Tit. 3:4; Eph. 1:13, 14; Rom. 
8:16; I Cor. 1:30; I Tim. 6:16; Rev. 4:11. 

As regards our present condition, the Lord be 
praised for it, whom we cannot thank enough 
for the joy, that He has counted us worthy to 
suffer for His name, and for the joy given us by 
Him, which we have in our imprisonment ; for 
He is faithful, so that with the temptation He 
also provides for His own a way of escape, and 
He does not suffer His own, who trust in Him, 
to be confounded. The grace of the Lord be 
with you. Greet one another with a holy kiss, 
Jan, Pleun, and I, also greet you much. Here- 
with I commend you to God, and to the Word 
of His grace. Written by me, Peter Van Weert, 
while in prison with two others. 
Peter's second letter, in which he takes leave 
Herewith we commend you all, dear brethren, to 
the Lord, wishing that you may finish your course 
to the praise of the Lord, so that you may obtain 
the crown, and remain steadfast unto the end, in 
order that you may obtain salvation ; for no one ob- 
tains the prize, except he strive valiantly. I Cor. 
9 :24 ; II Tim. 2 :5. Run, therefore, that you may 
obtain the prize; fight as soldiers of the Lord; 
firmly resolve to take no thought how or what you 
shall speak when you shall be brought before the 
magistrate, for God the Lord suffers not His own 
who trust in Him to be confounded. Matthew 
10:19. Though they are arraigned as malefactors, 
yet He does not forsake His own ; for though weep- 
ing come in the evening, joy shall return in the 
morning. Ps. 30:5. And though He, to chasten 
us, be angry for a moment, yet through His mercy 
He keeps us alive. Heb. 12 :8 ; Isa. 54 :8. Hence, 
we are not forsaken by Him, though we have more 
adversity than the world. 

My brethren, the servant is not greater than his 
Lord or Master. Remember, that though Christ 
was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor, and 
though He was exalted, yet for our sakes He suf- 
fered and accepted reproach, that we through His 
poverty might be made rich, and through His re- 
proach become heirs of His promises. II Cor. 8 :9. 
Let us go forth therefore unto Him without the 
camp, and help bear His reproach. Heb. 13:13. 
Let us long for the future possessions. And be not 
in darkness, nor overcharged with eating or drink- 
ing; neither entangle yourselves with the cares of 
this life; walk as children of the light; be always 
ready like those who constantly wait for their lord ; 
for He will come as a thief in the night. Luke 
21 :34 ; 12 :36 ; Rev. 3 :3. Make yourselves ready, 
take the staff into the hand, gird up your loins, and 
journey to the promised land ; you shall possess it, 
if you do not fall into unbelief. It is pleasant and 
beautiful; we have seen it from afar, for which 
we thank and praise the Lord. 

On this account, we desire of you, lovers of the 
truth, that you help us thank the Lord. For I once 
made a vow to the Lord, that I would live to Him 
all the days of my life (Luke 1:75), which He has 


helped me fulfill, for which I praise Him, and have 
often earnestly done so, with outstretched arms. 
The reason I write this, is, that you may not for- 
get to thank and praise the Lord, for He is greater 
than all our lives ; for you cannot so magnify Him 
that He is not still more wonderful. Sir. 43 :30. 
Continue in His words, and keep His command- 
ments. Love one another sincerely. I Pet. 1 -22 
We also praise Him for His faithfulness accord- 
ing to His promises, which He shows in us, in that 
we cannot sufficiently describe the joy He gives 
us ; for in the beginning of our confinement, when 
we were imprisoned, we were joyful and fearless 
likewise before the lords, and were filled with joy 
also afterward on the bridge and in our prison 
Moreover, we hope that God will give us boldness 
unto the end. 

Hence, our dear brethren, be not terrified, if they 
inflict more than one death upon us, since much 
can be done in a quarter of an hour, yet it is as 
nothing to the pain of hell, and not worthy to be 
compared to the future joy. For after we have 
suffered this distress, and pass through this strait 
we expect joy and amplitude; then shall all our 
tears be wiped away, and we shall weep and cry 
no more, but pass from one joy to another. O my 
brethren strive to enter into His joy. Lead hence- 
forth a Christian life and see that the Gospel be 
not evil spoken of on your account. Rom. 14-16 
Be always meek, and have an unspotted conscience 
and whatsoever you take in hand remember the 
end, that you will not do amiss. Matt. 11 :29; Sir. 
7 :36. And forget not the ardency of the spiritual 
reformation in the beginning of the Christian life 
lest when you think you are a perfect Christian] 
reformation of life be still necessary. We com- 
mend you to God, and to the Word of His grace 
We, Jan, Pleun, and Peter, greet you in the Lord. 
Pray the Lord for us, that we may finish our course 
to His praise. We also pray for you. 


CONFESSION OR DEFENSE OF FAITH, OF JAN, THE 

OLD CLOTHES BUYER, WHEN HE LAY IN 

PRISON AT ANTWERP, A. D. 1551 

Question. "What do you think of infant bap- 
tism ?" y 

Answer. "I do not think it to be anything but 
a human institution." 

Ques. "By what then will you prove or main- 
tain your baptism?" 

Ans. "Mark 16." 

Ques. "What are your views concerning the 
sacraments ?" 

Ans. "I have nothing to say of the sacraments of 
men, but the Supper, as Christ held it with His 
apostles, I approve and esteem ; for I think there 
are many who do not know what sacrament means " 

Ques "What do you think of the Roman 
church ? 

Ans "Nothing, but I esteem the Christian 
church, which is the church of Christ." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


525 


Ques. "What do you hold concerning the host 
which the priest holds in his hand ? do you not be- 
lieve that our Lord is in it with flesh and blood ?" 

Ans. "No ; for it is written, Acts 1, that He shall 
come again in like manner as He ascended into 
heaven." 

Ques. "What do you think of the pope?" 

Ans. "That he is the antichrist." I Thess. 2 :3. 

Ques. "What do you think of the mass, cere- 
monies, and confession observed in the church?" 

Ans. "Nothing, since the tree from which they 
spring, is good for nothing." 

Ques. "Where were you baptized?" 

Ans. "My lords, if you know it, why do you yet 
ask me ?" 

The bailiff then said : "I adjure you by your bap- 
tism, that you tell us where you were baptized." 
Matt. 26:63. 

Ans. "My baptism I hold to be good and right ; 
but your adjuration I do not regard." 

They then read to me the names and surnames of 
all that had been baptized with me and said : "As- 
suerus has confessed it to us." I then said : "It is 
true." 

Ques. "Who baptized you?" 

Ans. "It does not behoove me to tell." 

Ques. "We shall make you tell." 

Ans. "My flesh is before you ; do with it as you 
please." 


resigned his office of judge, and died a brother in 
the church. Besides him, another brother, named 
Windel Rauens, was put to death at Cleves ; who 
like the aforesaid, exchanged his life for death, 
after he had commended his soul into the hands 
of God. 


WILLEM THE CABINETMAKER, BEHEADED IN 

CLEVES ; WINDEL RAUENS ALSO PUT TO 

DEATH THERE, A. D. 1551 

(Copied from an old Writing*) 

Willem, the cabinetmaker, resided in Weesz, a 
village belonging to the country of Cleves ; he was 
a very peaceable and pious man, who on account of 
the Christian faith had to leave his native coun- 
try, and when he would not conform to the world, 
he was brought prisoner from Weesz to Cleves, 
and having there been imprisoned for about a 
year, finally beheaded. He wrote several letters 
from prison. 

When Willem the cabinetmaker was to be con- 
demned by the judges at Cleves, Claes Meselaer, 
one of them, would not sit in the court to condemn 
him, but pretended sickness and went to bed. The 
Burgomaster, therefore, with the six judges, came 
to his bedside, to obtain his assent to the sentence. 
He said he did not want to condemn so pious a 
man. Thereupon the Burgomaster said : "By this 
you will incur the great displeasure of our gracious 
Prince and lord." Claes replied : "I will rather in- 
cur the displeasure of Duke William, than of the 
Most High." "Then I will take it upon myself," 
said the Burgomaster, who was afterward visited 
by the avenging hand of the Lord, so that he was 
tormented by lice, and lost his speech for a time, 
and thus died in great misery. But Claes Meselaer 

* This copy was sent to us by some one from the country of 
Cleves, as a very old relic. 


MARIA OF MONJOU, A. D. 1552 

As it is known and manifest according to the 
testimony of the divine Scriptures, that all who 
have been righteous, and lived godly in Christ 
Jesus, have had to suffer, from the beginning of 
the world, so this Maria, as a pious, God-fearing 
woman, also partook of said suffering. For as she, 
according to the requirement of the Scriptures, had 
been baptized upon the true faith, as a member of 
the body of Christ, and had conducted herself for 
a time in an edifying manner among the brethren 
and all men, the envy of the dragon manifested 
itself, and the bailiff of Monjou caused her to be 
brought and imprisoned at Monjou, where she re- 
mained in confinement over a year. And though 
she had to suffer much, yet she bore it with joy. 
Her constant admonition to all the pious was, that 
they should walk in love, and hold fast the cove- 
nant of Jesus Christ. Eph. 5:2. She was herself 
constantly endeavoring to present her body a liv- 
ing sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, and that 
she might be built up a spiritual house well 
adorned inwardly with the Word of God. Rom. 
12:1; I Pet. 2:5. 

The authorities tormented her for three days in 
succession, but could not induce her to forsake her 
faith, since she would adhere to Christ; for ac- 
cording to the Scriptures, no one is ever confound- 
ed, who fears God from the heart. The bailiff 
entreated her to go to church and he would release 
her, and give her her board for a whole year ; but 
she would not consent, but desired to adhere to 
Christ, and to give her life for His sake; where- 
upon she was condemned to be drowned. 

On her way to the water, she sang with a joyful 
heart, because this day had come, and she had lived 
to see this hour; and thus she proceeded, like a 
sheep is led to the slaughter, in the hands of Pilate, 
even as they did with Christ, as the Scripture tes- 
tifies : "They shall kill you, and think that they do 
God service." John 16:2. 

On the way, Maria said : "I have been the bride 
of a man; but today I hope to be the bride of 
Christ, and to inherit His kingdom with Him." As 
they approached the water, one of the hypocrites 
said : "O Maria, repent, or it will not go well with 
you." At the water, they delayed with her over 
two hours, thinking that they could induce her to 
apostatize, forsake the truth, and follow them. 
Thereupon Maria said : "I adhere to my God ; pro- 
ceed with what you have come here for ; the wheat 
is in the straw ; it must be threshed, so the Word of 
God has begun, and must be finished." With this, 
she undressed, willingly surrendered herself, and 


526 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


said : "O heavenly Father, into Thy hands I com- 
mend my spirit," and was thus drowned, and died, 
confessing the name of God, and sealing it with 
her death to the consolation of all believers. 


BARBEL PUT TO DEATH A. D. 1552 

About this time, also a pious, God-fearing wom- 
an, named Barbel, was drowned, at Guelich, be- 
cause she had forsaken popery and idolatry, and 
become obedient to the holy Gospel. I Cor. 10:14. 

WILLEM OF BIERCK, CHRISTOFFEL FROM GEISTENS, 

CHRISTIAN FROM EUKERAET, AND TIELLE- 

MAN FROM NUNKERKEN, A. D. 1552 

The four brethren, Willem of Bierck, Christoffel 
from the Geistens, Christian from Eukeraet, and 
Tielleman from Nunkerken, were executed to- 
gether on the same day, with the sword, at Blank- 
enburg ; they willingly suffered death for the testi- 
mony of Jesus, and with their blood testified to 
their faith. 


MARIKEN AND ANNEKEN, A. D. 1552 

Those who hold only to God and His holy Word, 
and seek to fulfill the latter, are not only perse- 
cuted but also imprisoned and put to death, as was 
very evident, in the year 1552, at Ley den, in the 
case of two women, named Mariken and Anneken, 
who were apprehended and brought into a house, 
where they were asked by the bailiff, what views 
they held with regard to the Roman church. They 
replied that for the most part it was nothing but 
the doctrine of devils. He further questioned them 
respecting the sacrament of the priests, whether 
Christ was not bodily in it. They said : "It might 
be a hidden devil; for God does not suffer Him- 
self to be locked up in silver or golden caskets." 
They were then led to prison, and passing the 
church they said : "O den of murderers and choir 
of devils I" "Why do you speak such presumptuous 
words?" said the bailiff's servant. "Because so 
many a poor soul is murdered in it," they replied. 
Being kept imprisoned for a time, and examined, 
they boldly confessed their faith and firmly adhered 
to it, in consequence of which they were sentenced 
to death. In the sentence of the one it was charged 
that she had denied infant baptism, rejected the 
sacrament, and, contrary to the decree of the Em- 
peror, had attended unlawful assemblies, and that 
she should therefore be put to death as a heretic. 
The other, not having been baptized, would have 
been set at liberty, had she been willing to aposta- 
tize from her faith, which she was greatly impor- 
tuned to do ; but she remained immovable, and as 
she had said : "Your bread god is eaten by spiders 
and worms ; I will not be a partaker of it," and re- 
mained steadfast also in other articles, she was 
likewise sentenced to death. Thus these two had 
to lose their lives for the truth, to satisfy the blood- 
thirsty judges, who have feet that are swift in run- 


ning to mischief, and hands to shed innocent blood 
Prov. 6:18, 17. 


WILLIAM VAN ROBAEYS, A. D. 1552 

In this same year, a brother named William van 
Robaeys, was persecuted, apprehended, examined, 
tortured and finally put to death, at Komen, in 
Flanders, for righteousness for the truth, and for 
following Christ. 


HENDRICK DIRKS, DIRK JANS, AND ADRIAN COR- 
NELLS, A. D. 1552 

In the same year, three brethren, named Hen- 
dnck Dirks, Dirk Jans, and Adrian Corneliss, 
were apprehended at Leyden, and examined in 
regard to their faith; but when they boldly con- 
fessed it, and would in no wise depart from it, they 
were also sentenced to death. Hendrick Dirk's ad- 
vancing joyfully, said : "Blessed are they that weep 
now ; for they shall laugh, and be rewarded with 
shining robes; yea, with an eternal crown, if they 
strive steadfastly. This is the sabbath of the Lord, 
which I have long desired ; not that I am worthy 
to suffer for His name, but He has made me 
worthy ; and thus we suffer not for theft or mur- 
der, but for the pure word of God." Luke 6-21 • 
Matt. 13:43; II Tim. 4:8; Matt. 24:13; Isa '58-' 
13; Acts 5:41; I Peter 4:15. 

Dirk Jans said: "Though all men despise us, 
God does therefore not despise us. Remember, 
lords, that on high there is a Judge over all, and 
believe that He will once judge and pass sentence. 
This suffering," said he, "is not so great; Christ 
had to suffer much more, when He shed His blood 
for us. He will strengthen us in what we suffer 
for His name ; for we suffer not for schism or any- 
thing evil; for there is no other true faith to be 
found than that which we maintain. Therefore, 
O God, have compassion upon me, and receive me 
into Thine arms." Ps. 7:11; Matt. 25 :31 ; Isa. 53 • 
Matt. 26:28. 

Adrian Corneliss intrepidly said: "Christ has 
gone this way before us ; and His beloved apostles 
likewise, and we His servants are not above our 
Lord." Luke 24:26; Acts 14:22. 

They then fell upon their knees, earnestly prayed 
to God (Acts 20:36), and rising, said: "They 
think by killing us to exterminate the God-fearing ; 
but for one whom they kill, a hundred others shall 
arise. Hence, fear not them that kill the body; 
but fear him who is able to cast both soul a-nd body 
into everlasting torment." Matt. 10 :28. Standing 
on the bench, they exclaimed: "Fear not that 
which is temporal, but fear that which will last 
forever; for eternity is so long." With this, they 
commended their souls into the hands of God, and 
offered up their burnt sacrifice. They now rest 
under the altar, and wait to be clothed in shining 
robes, and to receive the new wine in the throne 
of heaven. Matthew 26 :29. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


527 


SEVERAL LETTERS WRITTEN IN PRISON, BY ADRIAN 
CORNELISS, INCLUDING A PRAYER, AN ADMONI- 
TION, AND A CONFESSION OF ADRIAN CORNE- 
LISS, GLAZIER, WHO WAS IMPRISONED AT 
LEYDEN, AND ALSO PUT TO DEATH THERE 
FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS, IN THE 
YEAR OF OUR LORD, 1552 

His prayer to God 

O Lord of heaven and earth, who hast made all 
things out of nothing, who hast given me members 
after the image of Thy Son, I hope to offer them up 
now for Thy holy name; for Thou art the Lord, 
before whom every knee must bow, both in heaven 
and upon earth; hear my prayer, and let my in- 
cense be acceptable before Thee. Take not Thy 
grace from me, a polluted man of unclean lips; 
purify my mouth, that Thy name may be praised 
thereby. Incline Thine ear to me, and Thou shalt 
see how they fall upon me ; but it is better for me 
to fall into the hands of men, than to sin in Thy 
sight; for Thine eyes are as a flame of fire, and 
Thy Word as a sharp, two-edged sword, piercing 
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and 
of the joints and marrow, and Thou art a discerner 
of the thoughts and intents of the heart, and there 
is nothing hid before Thine eyes. Therefore I ex- 
claim with David, Thy dear prophet, that it is bet- 
ter to fall into the hands of men, than into Thy 
wrath. Matt. 11:25; Gen. 1 :27 ; Rom. 12 :1 ; Phil. 
2:10; Isa. 6:5; Susanna 23; Rev. 1:14; Heb. 
4:12, 13. 

O Lord, lead me into the land of Haran, in 
which I have not so much inheritance as to set my 
foot on, namely, the promised land, which I pray 
Thou wilt givei me, out of grace and not for my 
own works or merits. Acts 7:4, 5. Deliver me 
with Lot from this generation. Preserve me, Lord, 
from the fierce teeth of the lions, which are many, 
yea, from the ferocious evening wolves, that let 
nothing remain till the morning, whose feet make 
haste to shed innocent blood. Zeph. 3 :3 ; Prov. 1 : 
16. O Lord, preserve me with Shadrach, Meshach, 
and Abednego, that the fire of blasphemy which 
proceeds out of their mouth, may not harm me. 
Dan. 3 :27. O Lord, let my prayer be heard with 
that of Tobit and Sarah ; hear my prayer with that 
of Elijah, and receive me as a burnt offering, liv- 
ing, holy and acceptable unto Thee, that the proph- 
ets of Jezebel may be confounded, and seduce Thy 
people no longer. Tobit 3:1, 11; I Kings 18:36; 
19:4. Lord, preserve me with Joseph from the 
wicked woman, that I may rather suffer myself to 
be deprived of my garment, namely, my first body ; 
for we read : "He which is joined to a harlot is 
one body with her." Genesis 39:7; I Cor. 6:16. 
Preserve me, Lord; for I call heaven and earth 
to witness, that I die innocently; for whosoever 
seeks to save his life, shall lose it ; and whosoever 
loses his life for Thy sake, Lord, and the Gospel's, 
shall preserve it. I Mace. 2:37; Matt. 16:25. 
Hence, I cry with old Eleazer: "I will rather die 


gloriously than live stained with abomination." II 
Mace. 6:19. 

O Lord, behold, the burning wrath of a great 
multitude is kindled over us, and they shall take 
away certain of us, and feed the idle with things 
offered unto idols ; but Thou, Lord, preservest me, 
Thou givest Thy servant bread in time of need, and 
water when he is thirsty, and in the day of tribula- 
tion Thou forgivest sins. II Esd. 16:68; Sir. 2 :11. 
And Thou has said to Thy dear prophet, that 
though a mother forget her child to which she 
herself has given birth, yet wilt Thou not forget 
us; for it is Thy Word, Lord. Isa. 49:15. Thou 
hast spoken through Thy dear apostle Paul : "Come 
out from this wicked generation, and touch not 
the unclean thing. Then Thou wilt deliver us, and 
be our Father, and we shall be Thy sons and 
daughters." II Cor. 6:17, 18. We now also go 
forth without the camp, and will help bear Thy 
reproach. Heb. 13:13. Lord, teach us to pray ac- 
cording to Thy will, that we may pray in spirit and 
in truth, that we may truly call Thee Father; for 
a son must honor his father, and a servant his 
master. Mai. 1 :6. Grant us therefore to be par- 
takers of the Word which declares : "These are 
they who have not loved their life, but have deliv- 
ered it into death ; for those that are slain by men, 
have a better hope to expect from God, namely, 
that they shall be raised again ; for Thou provest 
Thy chosen ; Thou triest them as gold in the fur- 
nace, and Thou receivest them as an offering of 
burnt sacrifice." Ps. 66:10. Lord, now let Thy 
servant depart in peace. Holy Father, sanctify 
Thy Son, that I may be found unblamable at Thy 
appearing. Keep me, holy Father for Thy holy 
name's sake. Amen. Luke 2:29; John 17:11. 

An admonition of Adrian Corneliss, to the 
friends 

The rich grace and peace of God our heavenly 
Father, who has purified us by the washing of 
regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, 
has enlightened our hearts, and opened the eyes of 
our understanding through the hope of the Gospel, 
and warned us, that denying ungodliness and 
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, 
and godly, in this present world, and keep our- 
selves unspotted from this world, before God the 
Father, who will have all men to be saved, and to 
come unto the knowledge of the truth, that at the 
time of revelation we may have hope and consola- 
tion, and be counted among the number of the elect. 
The Father and His blessed Son Jesus Christ fit 
you for this, now and evermore. Amen. Tit. 3 :5 ; 
II Cor. 4:6; Eph. 1:18; Tit. 2:12; Jas. 1:27; I 
Tim. 2 :4. 

We, fellow citizens with the saints, and of the 
household of God, built upon the foundation of the 
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being 
the chief cornerstone, in whom all the building 
fitly framed together groweth unto a holy temple 
in the Lord, to the twelve tribes which are scattered 


528 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


abroad through cruel edicts and severe persecu- 
tion, greeting. Eph. 2:19-21; I Peter 2:6; James 
1:1. Hence, my dear brethren and sisters, do not 
become weary because you now suffer for a season, 
and have to flee from one city into another; but 
remember, my dear friends, that it all conduces to 
your happiness, and take for an example Tobit, 
with his wife and son, how he had to flee, and to 
be hid naked ; likewise, Matthias with his sons and 
those who loved him, when he said : "Whosoever 
is pious and of good cheer, let him make his testa- 
ment, and follow me." Matt. 10:23; Rom. 8:28; 
Tobit 1:19; I Mace. 2:27. 

Take also Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob for ex- 
amples, who dwelled in tents, and also others; 
for here we have no continuing city ; they wandered 
about in sheepskins and goatskins, in hunger, want 
and affliction, of whom the world was not worthy. 
Genesis 12. See, my dear friends, think not that 
you are the only ones, or that you are forsaken by 
the Lord, when some tempest assails you ; but re- 
member that we must through much suffering take 
the kingdom of God. Sir. 2:10; Acts 14:22. If the 
above-mentioned had been mindful of the country 
from whence they came out, truly, they might 
have had opportunity enough to have returned; 
but they declare plainly that they sought a country, 
a city which has foundations, whose builder and 
maker is God ; wherefore God was not ashamed to 
be called their God. Ex. 3:6. Thus, also, my dear 
friends, will He not be ashamed of us ; for He says 
through His pious prophet Isaiah : "Can a mother 
forsake her own child, to whom she herself has 
given birth? Yea, she may forget it, yet will thy 
God not forget thee." Isa. 49:15. Consider, there- 
fore, how the gracious Father has been with all 
the pious children of God, and how He has pre- 
served and upheld them under His powerful hand, 
as we may clearly understand from Abraham ; for 
when he went into a strange country, he often had 
had God for his comforter. He gave Jacob courage 
when he fled before his brother Esau. He fed 
Hezekiah three days and three nights, who com- 
plained of the blasphemy of Sennacherib. II Kings 
19 :6. He delivered the Jews through Judith, when 
they were besieged by Holof ernes. Judith 13:8. 
He delivered the three young men from the heat 
of the fiery furnace, and was in the pit with Daniel, 
so that the lions did not devour him. Dan. 3 :25 ; 
6:22. He delivered Israel from the bondage of 
Pharaoh. He delivered Rahab from the shadow of 
death. Josh. 6:25. He saved Susanna through 
Daniel. He delivered Peter from prison. He de- 
livered John from the Isle of Patmos. He com- 
forted Paul by the vision on the way to Damas- 
cus. He comforteth the apostles through the Com- 
forter, the Holy Ghost. He turned Joseph's great 
sorrow into great joy in Egypt. Thus, God will 
also turn the sorrow of everyone of you into great 
joy, even as He Himself declares : "The world 
shall rejoice ; but ye shall mourn and be sorrowful ; 
but be of good cheer, God shall turn your sorrow 


into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sor- 
row, but as soon as she is delivered of the child, 
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy 
that a child is born into the world. And ye now 
therefore have sorrow : but I will see you again, 
and your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and 
your joy no man taketh from you." John 16 :20-22. 

Therefore, my dear friends, be not afraid of the 
sons of men, who pass away as grass. "Fear not, 
little flock ; for it is your Father's good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom." Luke 12 :32. Be not afraid, 
my dear friends, of this tyrannous generation; 
fear not them that kill the body; but I will show 
you whom you shall fear : fear him who after you 
are dead has power to cast into eternal fire. And, 
my dear friends, we have here a little suffering of 
tribulation, but it is very small in comparison with 
the everlasting torment or punishment. 

John the Revelator says : "Fear God, and give 
glory to him." Rev. 14 :7. And the prophet Esdras 
says : "Behold, God himself is the judge, fear him : 
leave off from your sins, and forget your iniquities, 
to meddle no more with them forever : so shall God 
lead you forth, and deliver you from all trouble. 
For behold, the burning wrath of a great multitude 
is kindled over you, and they shall take away cer- 
tain of you, and feed you, being idle, with things 
offered unto idols. And they that consent unto 
them shall be had in derision and in reproach, and 
trodden under foot. For there shall be in every 
place, and in the next cities, a great insurrection 
upon those that fear the Lord. They shall be like 
mad men, sparing none, but still spoiling and de- 
stroying those that fear the Lord. For they shall 
waste and take away their goods, and cast them out 
of their houses. Then shall they be known who 
are my chosen ; and they shall be tried as the gold 
in the fire." Therefore, my chosen, behold, the days 
of trouble are at hand, but the Lord will deliver you 
from the same. Be ye not afraid, neither doubt ; 
for God is your guide, and the Lord will not leave 
you orphans ; for He cares for us all, and will pre- 
serve us as the apple of His eye. II Esd. 16 -67- 
75;Wisd. 3:6; Jno. 14:18. 

Hence, faint not at the tribulation in which we 
are, but adhere to the Lord, and the tempest will 
soon attack you ; but, my dear friends, remember, 
as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our con- 
solation also aboundeth by Christ, since eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love Him. Eph. 3:13; Matt. 
7 :25 ; II Cor. 1 :5 ; I Cor. 2 :9. Let everyone there- 
fore, that has this hope in him, purify himself, 
even as He is pure, and go out from this sinful gen- 
eration, and have no fellowship with the unfruit- 
ful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. 
For it is a shame even to speak of those things 
which are done of them in secret. But all things 
that are reproved are made manifest by the light ; 
for whatsoever doth make manifest is light. Where- 
fore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


529 


from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. 
I John 3:3; Eph. 5:11-14. 

Hence, my dear friends, if there should be yet 
some among you, that are slothful or drowsy, let 
them wake up now, or they will be shut out with 
the foolish virgins. O my dear friends, it will not 
avail that some of you know the way. O my dear 
friends, knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth ; 
for it avails not to know the way, but it must be 
walked : and though it is strait and narrow, and 
fraught with much labor, it must nevertheless be 
walked. I Cor. 8:1 ; John 13:17; Matt. 7:14. 

Therefore, my dear friends, who have become 
partakers of the heavenly calling, make good use 
of the time of grace, and look not to those who pro- 
ceed so lukewarmly and slothfully; but strive to 
enter in at the strait gate; for many will seek to 
enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13 :24. Why, 
my dear friends ? Because they seek to enter in by 
another way, which is not commanded us. But 
those who enter in by Christ, since He is the way, 
they are the ones that shall inherit the city, whom 
the Bridegroom will make sit down at the table, and 
will serve them. But, my dear friends, the luke- 
warm, who are neither cold nor hot, God will begin 
to spew out of His mouth, who say they are rich, 
and increased with goods, and know not that they 
are poor, miserable, naked and blind. Hence, Sol- 
omon says : "Go to the ants, thou, sluggard, and 
consider their labor; they gather in the summer 
their sustenance for the winter." And Jeremiah 
says: "The crane and the swallow observe the 
time of their coming ; but my people observe not the 
time." O ye ignorant, the ox knoweth his master's 
crib. Ye who say, It will be fair weather tomor- 
row, and it cometh to pass ; O ye, who can discern 
the face of heaven and earth, why can ye not dis- 
cern among yourselves that which is right? Matt. 
16:3. Therefore, my dear friends, take heed that 
none of you be found slothful ; but let your loins 
be girded, and have your staff in your hand, to 
eat the passover; for we have a passover to eat, 
which is Christ; Therefore let us keep the feast, 
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of 
malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth. Ex. 12:11; I Cor. 
7:8. 

Hence, my dearly beloved friends, think it not 
strange, if you are tried by the fire of tribulation, 
as though some strange thing happened to you; 
but be partakers of Christ's sufferings, that in the 
time of revelation, you may have hope and consola- 
tion. Let none of you suffer as a thief or murderer ; 
yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be 
ashamed ; but let him glorify God on this behalf. 
For the time is come that judgment must begin at 
the house of God ; and if it first begin at us, what 
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel 
of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, 
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 
Hence, Solomon says: "If the righteous are 


recompensed, how much more the wicked and the 
sinner." I Pet. 4:12, 13, 15-18; Prov. 11 :31. 

Therefore, my dear friends, take heed and flee 
the shadow of this world, and seek not to escape the 
cross, so that you go into other countries, to obtain 
great liberty. Oh, no, my dear friends, but always 
submit to the cross ; for the children that are under 
the rod are therefore obedient, fearing lest their 
Lord should come, and find them sleeping ; hence, 
they are always watchful, that they may not be 
found sleeping; for as soon as the flesh obtains 
a little freedom, it takes still more of its own ac- 
cord. My dear friends, though I have written this 
thus boldly, accept it nevertheless in good part; 
for I am not your lord in this matter ; but I write 
as my own flesh testifies. Hence, my dear friends, 
walk in wisdom toward them that are without ; re- 
main among the scattered flock of Israel ; for where 
blood is shed, gain is to be had; there put your 
pounds out to usury, each according to the gift re- 
ceived from God ; in honor preferring one another ; 
and endeavoring to show yourselves tried ministers 
unto God. Col. 4 :5 ; I Pet. 1 :1 ; Matt. 25:15; Ro- 
mans 12:10. Lay aside all malice and hypocrisy, 
and, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of 
the word, that ye may grow thereby: if so be ye 
have tasted that the Lord is gracious, to whom ye 
have come, as unto a living stone; hence, build 
yourselves up a spiritual house, a royal priesthood, 
a holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye, as obedient 
children, should show forth the praises of him 
who hath called you. I Pet. 2:1-5,9. 

If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles 
of God; fulfill your ministry wisely, that your 
treasure be not evil spoken of ; and as you were dil- 
igent in going astray from God, so give now so 
much the more diligence to turn to the Lord, and 
abound therein. I Pet. 4:11 ; Baruch 4:28; Rom. 
6:19. Do good unto all men, especially unto them 
who are of the household of faith, and see that you 
add to your faith virtue ; and to virtue, knowledge ; 
and to knowledge, temperance ; and to temperance, 
patience ; and to patience, godliness ; and to godli- 
ness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kind- 
ness, charity; for if these things be in you, and 
abound, they make you that ye shall neither be 
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our 
Lord ; but he that lacketh these things is blind, 
and gropeth for the wall, and hath forgotten that 
he was purged from his old sins. Gal. 6:10; II 
Pet. 1 :5-9. Let it not be so with you, my friends ; 
make to yourselves friends of the mammon of un- 
righteousness, and if you are partakers in the 
spiritual things, share also the temporal things 
with one another, and let this be done in order, and 
remember that it is more blessed to give than to 
receive ; for we read, John 6, that some followed 
the Lord, to whom He said : "Ye follow me, not be- 
cause ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat 
of the loaves, and were filled." Luke 16:9; Rom. 
15:27; I Cor. 14:40; Acts 20:35; John 6:26. 

Therefore, my dear friends, labor not for the 


530 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


meat which perisheth, but for that meat which en- 
dureth unto everlasting life ; for man doth not live 
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God ; for "meats for the belly, 
and the belly for meats; but God shall destroy 
both it and them." Luke 6:27; Deut. 8:3; 1 Cor. 
6:13. 

Thus, my dear friends, if you live according to 
the Gospel, you will be fruitful branches of the 
true vine Christ, comely olive branches grafted 
into Christ. My dear friends, be not moved away 
from the Gospel by the enemies of the cross of 
Christ, who would preach the Gospel without the 
cross. Do not believe them, for they are those who 
love your flesh, and kill your souls, and put pillows 
under the arms, or under the head. Avoid them, 
for such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their 
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches 
deceive the hearts of the simple. For we are not 
ignorant of the devices of the devil ; since he can 
transform himself into an angel of light; what 
wonder is it then that his ministers assume this 
appearance? Phil. 3:18; Ezek. 13:18; Rom. 16: 
17, 18; II Cor. 11:14, 15. 

O my dear friends, a thief cometh not, but for 
to steal, and to kill ; hence, beware, lest you be de- 
ceived by them, and thus fall from your own stead- 
fastness. John 10:10; II Pet. 3:17. Therefore, 
hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take 
thy crown; and let him that standeth take heed 
lest he fall ; for what hast thou that thou didst not 
receive? for every good gift and every perfect gift 
is from above, and cometh down from the Father 
of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning. Rev. 3:11 ; I Cor. 10:12; 4:7; 
James 1 :17. 

Therefore, exhort one another daily, my dear 
friends, the more so, as the day of Christ is at hand, 
and while it is called today. Heb. 3:13. And 
see that you care for one another; and, my dear 
friends, when you assemble together, make not 
many inquiries concerning others, or as to where 
each particular one lives ; in such things be igno- 
rant, and in malice be children ; but in understand- 
ing be old and hoary, and keep the doors of thy 
mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom. I Cor. 
14:20; Micah 7:5. My dear friends, if you have 
understanding, answer your neighbor; if not, lay 
your hand upon your mouth, lest you be caught 
in an unseemly word, and put to shame. Sir. 5:12. 
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your . 
mouth, but that which is good to the use of edify- 
ing, and may minister grace unto the hearers. And 
grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are 
sealed unto the day of redemption. Eph. 4 :29, 30. 

My dear friends, herewith I hope to take leave. 
Do not take it amiss that I have written you a little ; 
I hope it will tend to edification ; I have done my 
diligence with the little gift the Lord has given me. 

By me, Adrian Corneliss, glazier, your unworthy 
brother, who am not meet to be called a brother. 
I Cor. 15:9. Written in my imprisonment, sitting 


in the stocks, with two fellow companions, and one 
who is separately confined, and two sisters that are 
below us. We wait daily for the redemption of our 
body; and our pilgrimage, I trust, is half finished. 
I hope that we shall soon have completed the rest. 

We commend you to the Lord, dear brethren. 
Remember the prisoners ; we remember you in our 
prayers. Heb. 13:3. Salute all lovers of the only 
salvation by name ; the times are too perilous now, 
to mention them ; hence we must govern ourselves 
accordingly. 

Let me inform you, how it went with us in our 
last time. When we were to be offered up on Mon- 
day, a priest came to us on Sunday, who talked to 
us, and said : "You have to die." 

Answer. "Thus did also the Jews, who said: 
'We have a law, and by our law you must die.' So 
must we also, as the decree of the Emperor shows." 
But we asked the priest, whether their things were 
right. 

He replied : "Not all ; for we have also abuses in 
our church." 

We then said: "A little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump." I Cor. 5 :6. 

He replied : "It has to be leavened." 

By this we may perceive that their things are 
not good. But beware of such ; for they are not 
sent from God. Jer. 14:15. Salute all lovers of 
the divine word. 

Confession of Adrian Corneliss before the magis- 
trate and the priests, together with an account 
of the manner of his apprehension 

My dearly beloved brethren and sisters, to the 
twelve tribes which are scattered throughout Pon- 
tus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, with 
all that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, in 
their and in our places, greeting. Jas. 1 :1 ; I Pet. 
1 :1 ; I Cor. 1 :2; II Tim. 2:22. I must yet write 
to you a little, hoping herewith to take my leave. 
Let me tell you how it went in my imprisonment. 
I had come to Leyden, and there conversing with 
a brother, we wondered how it came that they kept 
our friends confined so long. We therefore agreed 
that I should go and see Jan of Delft, the Bailiff's 
servant, and ask him, how it stood with the pris- 
oners, and whether they would not soon be offered 
up. He replied : "I hear nothing at all concerning 
it." I then said: "This long imprisonment gives 
you much trouble." 

Jan. "I would be well satisfied to see it come to 
an end soon." 

Adrian. "You can hardly get away any more." 

Jan. "Yes, that is so." 

Adrian. "You ought to have some rest." 

Jan. "It would soon be time." 

Adrian. "Jan Jans, I should like to have a little 
conversation with you about certain things." 

Jan. "I have something to do yet ; I shall speak 
with you ; just wait here a little while for me." 

I waited a little, and he returned, even before he 
had attended to the prisoners or brought them their 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


531 


food. He came and spoke to me in a friendly way, 
and accepted my words with such suavity (Psalm 
55:21), that I knew not but that he would also 
embrace our faith. 

I then said : "Jan Jans, what do you think, will 
you abandon this service, and release the prison- 
ers ? I shall see that you will not be a loser by it ; 
for it is in your power, you have the keys." 

Previous to my saying this to him, he had said 
to our friends in prison: "Shall I leave the door 
open some time that you can escape?" "Why 
should you do this ?" replied our friends. On this 
account I spoke the more boldly to him, remember- 
ing the words concerning Paul and the jailer (Acts 
16:29), if peradventure the Lord had showed like 
grace to this man ; and having been urged by our 
friends, I had a long conversation with him. He 
asked me whether I knew those whom he named 
to me. I said: "No, but I have heard of them." 
One, however, he mentioned, whom I well knew. 
"Yes, I know him well," I said. He asked me, 
where I was from. I replied: "I am a native of 
Schoonhoven," but I did not tell him that I resided 
at Delft. But with all my prudence, the devil, as 
is well known, was still more cunning. Gen. 3:1. 
When we had walked together for a long time, we 
arrived again at the prison. He then said: "Do 
you want to talk with the prisoners?" I went in 
without any fear, and coming to our dear sisters, 
we conversed together, without manifesting previ- 
ous acquaintance, however. This servant then went 
off a little ways, and spoke to another servant. I 
then plainly saw what I had got myself into. 

Now, someone may ask: Why did you go in? 

dear friends, my flesh and blood did not impel 
me to go in there. In vain we run ; it is just as the 
prophet says: "We may flee, but cannot escape." 
Ps. 139:7. Hence, we must all come whither our 
destiny calls us. I had anticipated that my journey 
to Leyden would not be a fortunate one. 

The other servant then asked me whether I 
wished to go above to the others. I thought to 
myself that it was now as bad as it could ever 
become, and went above. They then shut the door 
after me, and one of them went for the bailiff. 
Having been above for a little while, and conversed 
with our friends, I went below again. They opened 
the door, and the night bailiff stood before it. He 
said : "You will have to remain here a little while." 

1 then asked whether I should go above. He re- 
plied : "Yes." I then said : Christ had twelve apos- 
tles, and one was a Judas; but here were only 
two, and one was a Judas. However, the Lord be 
praised for His grace. Without much delay, they 
shut me up above alone, whereupon I immediately 
began to sing the hymn : "0 Waerheydt hoe zijt 
gy nu vertreden!" Isa. 59:14. 

I did not, however, enjoy a very long respite; 
since much people came, and hence they immedi- 
ately came and took from me my Testament, and 
the hymn about our four friends, which I had com- 
posed. They then shut me up with E. S. Soon 


after, the bailiff came with the whole council. The 
gates were shut, and it was reported that there 
were a dozen in Leyden; hence they were very 
assiduous, thinking they had caught a great gentle- 
man or captain ; but alas ! they had not. 

The bailiff then asked: "Where is your ra- 
pier?"* 

I replied: "My Master has not taught me to 
carry a rapier." 

Bailiff. "Who is your Master?" 

Adrian. "Christ is my Master." 

Bailiff. "Christ is the Master of us all." 

Adrian. "If Christ were your Master, you would 
not dare fight against Him ; but it will be hard for 
you to kick against the pricks." Acts 9 :5. 

Bailiff. "We are responsible for that." They 
then asked me where I had slept. 

Adrian. "I have slept well; did you sleep 
badly?" 

Bailiff. "No, I shall make you tell." One of 
the lords then asked me whether I had been re- 
baptized. I replied: "No, I was baptized aright 
once." 

Bailiff. "Who baptized you?" 

I asked him whether he also wished to be bap- 
tized. 

Bailiff. "Don't be ashamed to tell; I will tell 
you, where and by whom I was baptized : here in 
St. Peter's church." 

Adrian. "If you wish to be also baptized, I will 
tell you." 

Bailiff. "I have no desire for it as yet." 

Adrian. "Neither are you fit for it." 

Bailiff. "Where is the servant with the hat, that 
accompanied you?" 

Adrian. "I know nothing of a servant with a 
hat." 

Bailiff. "We saw him walk with you." 

Adrian. "Lord bailiff, you lie ; if you are a serv- 
ant of Christ, you ought not to lie." Eph. 4:25. 
They then showed me the hymn about the friends 
and asked me who had written it. 

I replied : "I wrote it." 

Thereupon they asked whether I had also com- 
posed it. I told them I wrote it, but said nothing 
about composing. The under bailiff then said: 
"You were at my house one Friday, and taught 
me a refrain about Mary Magdalene?" 

Adrian. "You have also lied; for my Master 
has taught me no refrains." 

Under bailiff. "Or an exhortation ?" 

Adrian. "It is not so." 

The servants and others then said : "The fellow 
is drunk." 

Yes, dear friends, then I remembered the words 
of Peter, Acts 2; as they were drunk, so was I, 
having tasted neither beer nor bread all day. They 
were then about to leave, but found themselves at 
a loss where to put me ; for John of Delft, the serv- 
ant, said : "It is all right with E. S. ; but now this 


* A light sword with a very narrow blade. — Trans. 


532 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


rogue will spoil him again." Nevertheless, they 
put me with him. All this took place the same 
Monday on which I was apprehended. 

The following Thursday the bailiff came, with 
two judges, and a commissary from the Hague; 
they asked me many questions, which I could not 
answer, and also demanded to know where I had 
slept, which I would not tell, together with many 
other things too tedious to relate. They also asked : 
"Do you know Jelis of Aix-la-Chapelle ?" I re- 
plied : "I never in my life was at Aix-la-Chapelle." 
As they kept on asking me for a long time, I final- 
ly said : "I know him." They then asked where I 
had been with him. I replied : "I cannot tell you 
this ;" more I would not say. "We shall make you 
tell," said they. "My lords," I replied, "I have 
always been careful not to know much, so that in 
case I should be apprehended, I might not have 
much to tell." They then laid before me the letters 
I had sent them, and also the hymn ; they readily 
saw that it was the same handwriting ; but I did not 
confess it. I thought to myself : "There is plenty 
of time yet for it; for I will have to tell them 
something any way, when they torture me." For 
the matter concerned myself ; hence I did not keep 
it secret, when I was tortured; but as regards 
others, I had no warrant to accuse them, and 
hence I did not want to know where the friends 
lived, when I talked with any one. And let me tell 
you, dear friends, this matter is sadly overlooked 
by some, who are continually inquiring after this 
one and that one, and take it amiss, if you do not 
give them the desired information. O dear friends, 
if you knew what suffering it would mean if you 
were imprisoned, you would not make such in- 
quiries. Hence, if you wish to make any inquiries, 
inquire after the faith that can save your souls. 
See, my dear friends, accept this in good part ; for 
I have written it out of love. All the torture I 
have suffered was inflicted upon me, to make me 
inform on others; hence, the less you know, the 
less you have to answer. The commissary then 
examined my Testament, and said : "This is a 
proscribed testament." I replied : "There you have 
also lied." Thereupon he was silent, and evening 
came on. They then went away, promising to con- 
sider my case in the daytime. 

Saturday morning they all came before eight 
o'clock, and took me into the torture chamber, 
where the executioner was. They then asked me 
whether I had not changed my mind, and would 
answer their questions. I began to admonish them. 
They said : "We have not come here to be taught 
by you ; but we ask you whether you will answer 
our questions." But this I did not intend to do. 
The executioner then stripped me, and bound my 
hands behind my back. There was a windlass there, 
and tying a block to my feet, they drew me up and 
left me hanging. While thus suspended they inter- 
rogated me, but I did not answer. They then let me 
down, and the bailiff asked me where I had worked 
since I left Flanders. At Delft, I replied. There- 


upon they asked me still other questions, and as I 
refused to answer them, they drew me up again, 
and untied the block. The executioner then placed 
a piece of wood or iron between my legs, which had 
been bound together, and stood on it. Being let 
down again, I was asked by the bailiff, whether I 
and six of my friends had not been at Leyden at a 
certain time, which he specified. I did not confess 
it. Again the executioner drew me up, they having 
blindfolded my eyes, and they took rods and 
scourged me. After I was let down, the bailiff said • 
"Tell it, or I shall tell you?" I would not accuse 
an y ° n< r- They drew me up again, pulled my beard 
and hair, and beat and scourged my back ; but as 
my eyes were blindfolded, I could not see who did 
it. They might also have asked: "Who smote 
you?" Luke 22:64. This continued until I had 
been beaten with seven or eight rods. When they 
let me down, and I did not answer for a long time 
they, fearing that I should faint away, poured 
water over me, which they had also done while 
1 was suspended. I sat down, and as I did not 
speak for a long time, the bailiff said : "You will 
not ten rt ; I will tell you : you slept at Stephen 

Adrian. "That is true." 
. Bailiff. "You were here before the prison, with 
six of your friends, and exhorted the prisoners 
that they should strive valiantly, and adhere to 
their faith ; and you went and hired a boat for six 
stivers. Who was the fellow to whom the boat be- 
longed, and the one who was in the other boat 
who gave the skipper half a stiver, into whose 
charge he committed his chest, because he was to 
sail with you ? And he knew the fellow's name, 
and knew also what we had done, and that a woman 
was with us, and how we had read, and that two 
sat there, bareheaded, and where we had gone up' 
I then acknowledged that it was so, and they wrote 
it down ; however, I excused the two from those 
that were in the boat ; but it was of no avail and 
thus the matter was left. They then showed me 
the letters, about four or five in number "Yes " 
said I, "I wrote them." Upon this they said • "This 
is the placard writer." "It is certainly not proper " 
said the judges, "that you disparage the Emperor 
in such a manner." I replied : "I do not disparage 
the Emperor ; however great the Emperor is, the 
Supreme Emperor is still greater. Bring me a 
-Bible ; I shall prove to you what I have written " 
Thereupon they said: "Why did you write these 
letters? I replied: "I wrote them because my 
grief was stirred, and that you might no longer 
stam your hands with blood, and might repent, as 
did those of Nineveh." Jonah 3:5. Thus the mat- 
ter rested. 

They then asked me what I thought of the sacra- 
ment of the altar. I told them that it was good for 
nothing. " 

Ques. "How long have you not been to it?" 
Ans. "Not for four years." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


533 


Ques. "Have you belonged to this belief so 
long?" 

Am. "No." 

Ques. "Why did you not go, then?" 

Am. "Even in my ignorance I knew that it was 
good for nothing?" 

Thereupon they went away, having been engaged 
with me from eight o'clock until half past eleven in 
the forenoon. 

This is what I said on that occasion. "Dear 
friends, be not discouraged, though what I have 
written presents rather a gloomy aspect ; the Lord 
helps His own; if the Lord had not helped me, it 
would not have been possible for me to bear it ; but 
we can do all things through Him who strengthens 
us, that is, Christ. And as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so also our consolation aboundeth 
by Christ." I Cor. 10:13; Ps. 46:1 ; Phil. 4:13; II 
Cor. 1:5. 

Here I will let this matter rest. I bear in my body 
the marks of the Lord Jesus, spoken of by Paul. 
Gal. 6:17. 

On Sunday morning they came, and read to me 
my examination, and asked me whether it was cor- 
rect: Then I remembered the words of the proph- 
et : "They are evening wolves, that let nothing re- 
main till the morrow, yea, whose feet run swiftly 
to shed innocent blood." Zeph. 3:3; Prov. 1 :16. I 
then asked the bailiff whether he was not yet sated 
with innocent blood, since he was so diligent in the 
way of unrighteousness. He replied: "I do not 
put you to death." I said : "The Emperor's edict 
puts us to death ; but you ought therefore be sat- 
isfied with what you have, and not ask for more. 
By what will you prove that you may put us to 
death? It is written : Tf thy brother shall trespass 
against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone; if he will not hear thee, then take 
with thee one or two more ; and if he will still not 
hear, tell it unto the church ; and if he will then not 
hear, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a 
publican.'" Matt. 18:15-17. Here the Scripture 
says nothing about putting to death. 

Bailiff. "We have another Scripture, where 
Paul says : 'The powers are not ordained in vain ; 
for God himself has ordained them.' " Rom. 13:1. 

Adrian. "Yes, for the protection of the good, 
and the punishment of the evil (I Peter 2 :14) ; but 
it seems to me the order is inverted, that they are 
for the punishment of the good, and the protection 
of the evil." 

Bailiff. "We shall prove to you from books, 
that we may put you to death." 

Adrian. "You can not do this with the Gospel ?" 

Under bailiff. "What do you know about the 
Gospel?" 

Adrian. "It is written : 'Repent ye, and believe 
the gospel.' " Mark 1 :15. 

Under bailiff. "There are eight Gospels writ- 
ten." 

Adrian. "I am well content with four ; if these 
cannot teach me, neither can the others." 


Bailiff. "Shall we send you learned men, to in- 
struct you with the Word of the Lord ?" 

Adrian. "I am willing to be instructed with the 
Word of the Lord." 

Bailiff. "Well said." 

Adrian. "I will not speak with them except in 
the presence of the court, and of those that are im- 
prisoned with me." 

This did not please them, and they went away, 
the bailiff leaving immediately for Delft. 

Three weeks after this, the bailiff came into the 
prison where we three in number were sitting, and 
asked us whether we were not almost beginning to 
get tired of it.. We said : "No." I then said : "James 
says : 'Take it for an example of suffering afflic- 
tion.' " James 5:10. It surprised them greatly 
that we minded it so little. I then said to the Bailiff : 
"As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our 
consolation also aboundeth by Christ." II Cor. 
1:5. 

Bailiff. "I should chink it would weary you?" 

Adrian. "Don't you also begin to get weary of 
shedding this blood?" 

He did not reply. Thereupon he asked whether 
they should send us learned men. We replied: 
"We are always willing to be instructed with the 
words of the Lord." 

Bailiff. "You will, not be instructed otherwise 
than with the Word of the Lord?" 

Ans. "We are always willing to give our faith 
for a better one, that it may not be said that we are 
obstinate; and our adversaries ought to do the 
same." 

Bailiff. "That is so ; suffer yourselves to be in- 
structed, perhaps your stay here is but brief ?" 

Adrian. "You do not know whether your stay 
here will be long. Though we are now as forsaken, 
the Lord will soon be gracious to us." 

With this it rested. He then said: "We shall 
send you someone." We called to him, as he 
descended the stairs, that he should bring a Bible or 
Testament with him. 

In the afternoon there came a priest with two 
servants ; he advanced in fine style and laid out his 
wares, thinking to sell something, and his words 
were full of suavity. And when one of us spoke, he 
had much to say. Thereupon I said that the Lord 
had warned us of the leaven of the Pharisees, and 
of them that go in long clothing. 

Priest. "The clothing don't make it." I then 
told him that their things, as infant baptism, ring- 
ing of bells, mass, and all other trumpery, were 
good for nothing. Upon this he replied that holy 
baptism of infants was right. I asked where the 
authorization for it was to be found. 

Priest. "In the 16th chapter of the first epistle 
to the Corinthians." 

Adrian. "There it is written : The house of Ste- 
phanas are the first in Achaia who addicted them- 
selves to the ministry of the saints. These certainly 
could not have been infants ; infants cannot addict 


534 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


themselves to the ministry of the saints, but have 
themselves to be ministered unto." 

He asked us in regard to the jailer and his house- 
hold, whether there were no infants there. 

Ans. "No." 

Priest. "How do you know it?" 

Adrian. "It is written there : 'The jailer rejoiced 
with all his house, that he had become a believer in 
Christ Jesus.' Infants cannot rejoice in faith; for 
they have no faith." Then he was at his wit's end 
again. He fared likewise in regard to Lydia, the 
seller of purple. 

Priest. "When I was young, my faith was as 
perfect as it is now." 

Adrian. "What did you say then?" 

He made no reply. He also said : "When I was 
born, I had my hand, and was not conscious of it ; 
so also, my faith, which was hid in me ; and the 
original sin which I had was taken away through 
the regeneration of the water which takes place in 
the font." I asked him whether the water had been 
crucified for him, or Christ. 

Priest. "Christ." 

Adrian. "And yet you seek your salvation in 
the water ?" He was silent. Dirk Jans then asked 
him where it was written that bells ought to be 
baptized. 

Priest. "This is instituted by the holy church." 
He also asked him concerning the reading of mass. 
He replied that he had God in the mass, corporeal- 
ly in flesh and blood. I then told him that he was 
a deceiver. 

Priest. "Did not God say : 'Take, eat ; this is my 
body ; and drink, this is my blood, and as often as 
you eat this bread, ye do shew the Lord's death ?' " 

On this point we had much discussion. I then 
asked him whether he had read I Tim. 4? 

Priest. "Yes." 

Thereupon I inquired as to whether he had 
brought a Testament with him. 

Priest. "Yes, here is a Latin Testament." 

Adrian. "We have not studied in Latin uni- 
versities, but in the highly celebrated school of the 
Gospel, of which the Spirit of God is teacher." 
John 16:13. 

He said he could read it in Dutch. He then read 
the passage relating to the forbidding to marry, 
and the commanding to abstain from meats. I Tim. 
4:3. I asked him concerning whom this was 
spoken. He replied that he did not know. 

Adrian. "If you are a teacher you ought to 
know this ?" 

Priest. "It relates to the end of the world." 

Adrian. "It speaks there of the latter times; 
now do you mean to say that these are not the lat- 
ter times ?" 

Upon this he replied nothing, but said that he 
had not forbidden marriage, nor meats. 

We said: "Your father, the pope, has done it, 
and you exerted yourselves with Haman to obtain 
mandates to put us and our people to death, and 


contributed in giving the Emperor ten thousand 
pounds of silver?" 

Priest. "I did not." 

Adrian. "Are you Christians? Christians ought 
not to persecute any one." 

Priest. "We do not persecute you." 

I then asked him, whether the Christian church 
persecuted, or suffered persecution. 

Priest. "It suffers persecution." 

I asked him wherein he suffered persecution, 
whether we were not the ones that suffer persecu- 
tion. 

Priest. "We suffer persecution from the devil." 

We then demanded to know where it was writ- 
ten that we might be put to death for our faith. 
He replied that it was ordained on account of the 
evil sects. We said : "We belong to no sect." 

Priest. "It is suspected that it might also be the 
case with you." 

Thereupon Dirk Jans said: "Is a man hanged 
because he is suspected of having stolen; though 
he has not done so? So neither may we be put to 
death before we are convicted." 

The priest finally went away. We had silenced 
him in many things concerning which he had no 
understanding. I also said that he was one of those 
who rob God of His glory by their confession, pre- 
suming to forgive sins. Herein he was likewise 
defeated, whereupon he went away. I hope that 
we shall soon offer up our sacrifice together. 

O my dear friends, see that you exercise a care 
for one another, and walk prudently ; because men 
are so incensed, and make such strenuous efforts to 
apprehend our brethren, wherever they find them. 
Hence, walk a little more wisely herein, than some 
of you do for, dear friends, if the Lord permitted 
it, they would deal roughly with them if they had 
them. Therefore, take it in good part; for there 
are so few laborers in the harvest; hence, take 
good care of them that are in it. Moreover, dear 
friends, when you meet to speak of the Word of 
the Lord, spend not your time in idle talk, and old 
wives' fables, but exercise yourselves in godliness, 
that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, 
and stand protected in all things ; and always give 
diligence, in honor to build up the spiritual temple 
until the appearing of the Lord. I Tim. 4:7; Eph. 
6:13; I Pet. 2:5. He that is holy let him become 
holier still ; he that is pure, let him become purer 
still ; as Paul writes to the Thessalonians, that they 
need not that he should write unto them, but he 
said that they should increase more and more. Rev. 
22:11 ; I Thess. 4:9, 10. Thus also you, my dear 
brethren. Read the exhortation I have written you, 
which will no doubt be shown you. Salute all the 
friends in the Lord, especially our Brother G, who 
is a faithful minister; all that are in bonds salute 
him, and they also greet all lovers of the truth. 
We commend you to the Lord ; know, that we are 
all of good cheer yet ; the Lord be praised always. 

My dear friends, I must write you yet a little 
more. The paper was not sufficient before, for, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


535 


dear friends, paper is a precious article when we 
are in bonds ; but as Habakkuk brought me some 
more, I write you a few additional lines concerning 
certain things that occurred in our imprisonment, 
which were forgotten before. It happened that the 
servant who had betrayed me, came to bring us 
our food. I then asked him to forgive me, if I had 
injured him in any way, and thus I often talked to 
him as kindly as I could, which we are commanded 
to do. Matt. 5 :44. He replied : "You have not 
injured me, nor have any of your people." My kind 
words, and the love I manifested, caused him to 
feel ashamed that he had betrayed me, and that I 
spoke to him so affectionately. Rom. 12 :20. 

A few more things about the priest that came 
to instruct us. I asked him whether he had faith. 
"Yes," he replied. 

Adrian. "If you should sit here in prison with 
us for a month, I think you would deny your faith." 

Priest. "Possibly not." 

He then commenced speaking about faith, and 
said that faith was incomprehensible. 

I said : "If faith is incomprehensible, how then 
can we be saved ?" Then he was beaten. Thereupon 
we touched upon the calling of preachers, and the 
words of Paul, that teachers must be blameless, 
and following the passage further on, "given to 
hospitality." I then said : "You would rather be a 
guest, than entertain one, and receive strangers ;" 
adding : 

"If I should come to your house, would you re- 
ceive me?" 

Priest. "Possibly." 

We also discussed infant baptism, which he 
would prove by the households. I asked him to 
whom the Scriptures speak ; do they not speak to 
them that have ears to hear, and hearts to under- 
stand? 

Priest. "Yes." 

I then asked him whether any Scripture be- 
longed to infants. 

Priest. "No." 

Adrian. "If no Scripture belongs to infants, 
neither does baptism." Then he was caught and 
had nothing more to say about his infant baptism. 
He also spoke in regard to eating the flesh of 
Christ, and drinking His blood, how Christ gave 
His apostles flesh from His flesh, and blood to 
drink outwardly. I then said that he was worse 
than the Jews. 

Priest. "Why?" 

Adrian. "The Jews murmured and said : 'How 
can this man give us his flesh to eat ?' but you now 
come and would eat it." "Be assured," said I to 
the priest, "Christ did not speak this passage in 
the sense in which you adduce it." In short, he 
would gladly have retreated, could he have done 
so honorably, for there was no market for his 
merchandise. 


SIX PIOUS BRETHREN, NAMELY, LIEVIJN JANS, MEY- 

NERT HERMANS, METER THYMANS, REYER 

EGBERTS, HENDRICK ANTHONISS, CLAES 

GERBRANTS, ALL BURNT ALIVE FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 

AT AMSTERDAM, ON THE 6TH 

DAY OF AUGUST, A. D. 1552 

"The blood of the martyrs," said one of the 
ancients, "is the seed of the church ; the rose grows 
in and among the thorns ; so also the rose of the 
blooming church of Christ." This appeared in these 
sore and sorrowful times, when scarcely anything 
was heard of but slaying, burning, murdering and 
shedding of the blood of the innocent and defense- 
less lambs of Christ ; so that in that very time far 
more persons were stirred up to follow them and 
embrace their faith, than had been slain before. 
Whole bands so to speak, marched to the spiritual 
conflict, yea, to the places where nothing but cer- 
tain death was to be expected. Each was ready to 
become an offering for God (if He accounted him 
worthy for it.) Neither fire nor sword was feared 
for the testimony of the Lord : for they looked to 
His comforting and most glorious promises which 
He has given to the steadfast. 

This appeared in the year 1552, in the month of 
August, in the case of six pious Christians, who, 
having fled from Babel, betook themselves to the 
vision of peace, to the spiritual Jerusalem of the 
true church of God, notwithstanding many as- 
saults and storms were made upon them insomuch 
that it cost them their lives through the cruel and 
terrible death by fire. 

The circumstances of the case were as follows : 
Three of them had already through baptism been 
accepted as members of the church, and the other 
three were ready for it. In the meantime they were 
all apprehended, and brought to Amsterdam, where 
they all made a good confession of that most holy 
faith, which dwelt in their souls, though the last- 
mentioned three greatly deplored the one fact, 
namely, that they were not baptized to which they, 
if it had been possible, would have yet attended 
before their death. 

In short, sentence of death was passed upon them 
all, namely that they should be executed as heretics 
with fire, that is, in common language, burnt alive ; 
which cruel death they all steadfastly endured, as 
appears from the following sentence, which we re- 
ceived from the book of criminal sentences of the 
city of Amsterdam, just as it was read in the court 
immediately before their death, and which we shall 
therefore here adduce as an indubitable attest of 
the afore-mentioned matter. 

Sentence of death of the afore-mentioned six per- 
sons, Lievijn Jans, Meynert Hermans, Pieter 
Thymans, Reyer Egberts, Hendrick 
Anthoniss, Claes Gerbrants 
Whereas Lievijn, son of Jans of Ghent, other- 
wise called Lief ken de Keyser, weaver by trade; 


536 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Meynert Hermans of Balch, wood sawyer; Pieter 
Thymans of Sutphen. formerly cooper, now book- 
binder by trade ; Reyer Egberts, citizen of this city, 
Hendrick Anthoniss, of Leyden, both of them 
weavers ; and Claes Gerbrants, native of Wormer, 
have resorted to the conventicles and gatherings 
of the Anabaptistical sect, and gone to hear the 
doctrines of the heads or teachers of said sect, 
namely, said Claes Gerbrants the doctrines of 
Menno Simons, ten years ago, and said Lievijn of 
Ghent, and all the others, the doctrines of Gillis, 
of Aix-la-Chapelle; and forasmuch as they, ad- 
hering to the doctrines, errors and heresies pro- 
mulgated by the aforesaid false teachers, have sep- 
arated from the faith, obedience and unity of the 
holy Christian church, and hold pernicious views 
with regard to the sacraments of the holy church, 
insomuch that the aforesaid Lievijn, Meynert and 
Pieter, have been rebaptized by said Gillis, of Aix- 
la-Chapelle, thus renouncing the baptism which 
they received in their infancy, and the aforesaid 
Reyer Egberts, Hendrick Anthoniss, and Claes 
Gerbrants, likewise renouncing their aforesaid bap- 
tism have confessed themselves to be ready for re- 
baptism, if they can attain to it, all of which is con- 
trary to the holy Christian faith, the ordinances of 
the holy church, and the written laws and decrees 
of his Imperial Majesty, our gracious lord ; and as 
they moreover, obstinately persist in their unbelief, 
heresy and errors; therefore, my lords the judges, 
having heard the demand made by my lord the 
bailiff, concerning the aforesaid delinquents, to- 
gether with their confessions, and having duly re- 
garded the circumstances of the aforesaid case, 
condemn said delinquents to be executed with fire 
by the executioner, and furthermore declare their 
property confiscated for the benefit of his Imperial 
Majesty, as count of Holland and our gracious 
lord, without derogation or prejudice to the privi- 
leges of this city. Done and pronounced in the 
court, on the 6th day of August, A. D. 1552, in 
the presence of all the judges, dempto Andries 
Boelen, by the advice of the Burgomaster. 

Concerning the Torturing of Hendrick An'thoniss 
and Reyer Egberts, and when it Occurred 

Of these, two were examined by torture, namely, 
Hendrick Anthoniss, on the 28th of June, and 
Reyer Egberts on the last of June, 1552. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences, preserved at Amsterdam, in the keeping 
of the secretary of the city. N. N. 


PIETER VAN OLMAN, OR VAN WERWIJCK, PUT TO 

DEATH AT GHENT, ALSO A LETTER, WHICH 

THE SAID PIETER VAN OLMAN, OR VAN 

WERWIJCK, WROTE IN PRISON IN 

THAT CITY, WHERE HE GAVE HIS 

LIFE FOR THE TESTIMONY 

OF JESUS, A. D. 1552 

The abundant grace and peace from God the Fa- 
ther and the Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Grace 
and peace be with you from God our Father and our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Father of mercies, 
and the God of all comfort, who comforteth us in 
all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort 
them which are in any trouble, by the comfort 
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God. 
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our 
consolation also aboundeth by Christ. For our light 
affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory ; while we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen ; for the 
things which are seen are temporal ; but the things 
which are not seen are eternal. For we know that 
if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dis- 
solved, we have a building of God, a house not 
made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For in 
this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon 
with our house which is from heaven: if so be 
that being clothed we shall not be found naked. 
For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being 
burdened : not for that we would be unclothed, but 
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up 
of life. Now he that hath wrought us for the self- 
same thing is God, who also giveth unto us the 
earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are always 
confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home in 
the body, we are absent from the Lord; for we 
walk by faith, not by sight. We are confident, I 
say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, 
and to be present with the Lord. I Cor. 1 -3-5 • II 
Cor. 4:17, 18; 5:1-8; Rom. 8:22; Rev. 3:18. ' 

I admonish you, dear brethren and sisters, by the 
mercies of God, that you will diligently assemble 
yourselves together, to give each other good in- 
struction in the eternal truth of our Saviour, while 
you have time ; for here we have no continuing city, 
but we wait for one, and this through patience. 
Heb. 10:25; 13:14. 

Therefore, dear brethren and sisters, take the 
Word of the Lord well to heart, and understand 
well what the Lord says, that you may stand fast 
valiantly, when you are tried ; for I tell you, dear 
brethren, that valiant fighting must be done to a 
much greater extent than I thought ; for they ap- 
proach us with such subtle questions, and honeyed 
words, in order that they may catch us in some 
word, and thus cause us to apostatize. Hence, 
dear brethren, teach one another well to discern 
which is the way of the Lord, and the way of the 
devil, and which is the true worship of God, and 
the worship of the devil and of idols, and which 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


537 


are the children of the Lord, and the children of the 
devil ; for the children of the Lord are not of this 
world ; hence the world hates them ; they all suffer 
persecution ; they are led to death, as sheep for the 
slaughter, and are hated by all men ; they are a prey 
to all ; they have nowhere a certain dwelling-place ; 
they are the off scouring of all men ; they weep and 
lament, and the world rejoices; they suffer re- 
proach, because they trust in the living God. In 
this the children of God are manifest, and the chil- 
dren of the devil: he that doeth righteousness is 
righteous, even as he is righteous ; he that commit- 
teth sin is of the devil. Therefore, O dear little 
children, love not the world, neither the things that 
are in the world; for if any man love the world, 
the love of the Father is not in him. For all that 
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust 
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Fa- 
ther but is of the world. And the world passeth 
away, and the lust thereof, but he that doeth the 
will of God abideth forever. Jas. 1 :27 ; John 
17:16; Ps. 44:22; Isa. 59:15; I Cor. 4:11, 13; 
Jno. 16:20; I Tim. 4:10; I Jno. 3:10; 2:15-17. 

My most beloved, know that I fought a great 
conflict against the rulers of darkness and false 
prophets ; for they said that one may nevertheless 
hear, and be taught by, them, though they do not 
live according to the commandments of the Lord. 
I then asked : "Is not he a stranger to the Lord 
who walks not in his commandments?" They re- 
plied : "Yes." Then I said that Christ says (John 
10 :27) : "My sheep hear my voice, and they follow 
me ; but they hear not the voice of strangers, but 
flee from them :" hence, if I should hear strangers, 
I would not be of Christ's sheep ; for His sheep hear 
not strangers. They replied: "They certainly 
preach the truth ; the word is therefore not dimin- 
ished." I replied: "John says (I John 2:4) : He 
that saith that he knoweth God, and keepeth not 
his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in 
him. Now, if there is no truth in him, how can he 
speak the truth ? Else John must lie. Christ says 
(Matt. 7:18) : A corrupt tree cannot bring forth 
good fruit. Again (Matt. 12:34): How can ye, 
being evil, speak good things ? Solve this question, 
and I will believe you." I tell you, though he should 
take a Testament, and read it from beginning to 
end in your church, as the apostles have written 
it, yet I will prove to them, that they lie. But let a 
man speak the same words, who walks in the ways 
of the Lord, and he will speak the truth. If one of 
your people should preach these words in your 
temple, with regard to drunkards, adulterers, 
thieves, murderers, covetous, defamers, evil-speak- 
ers, etc., and say: Ye are a chosen generation, a 
royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people; 
that ye should shew forth the virtues of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light: which in time past were not a people, but 
are now the people of God ; which had not obtained 
mercy, but now have obtained mercy (I Pet. 2:9, 
10) ; if he should speak these words with regard 


to this wicked people, would he not lie? But if a 
God-fearing man were to speak these words with 
reference to the God-fearing people, he would 
speak the truth. Again, if you should preach : For 
thy sake we are led to death, as sheep for the 
slaughter ; would this not also be a lie from you ? 
But a God-fearing man would speak the truth. 

Thus we had many words, but all to no purpose. 
I then asked whether the children of the Lord must 
not all be spiritual. "Yes," he replied. Thereupon 
I asked, why then they were called spiritual, and 
the others secular, when they must all be spiritual. 
This they were not able to explain. I then said: 
Christ prays not for the world, but for them that 
are not of the world (John 17:9) ; now, if you are 
spiritual, how comes it that you are not all of 
one mind? for some may only go in gray; are 
not allowed to handle money, and their shoes must 
have an opening on the top ; others must all go in 
black ; some, again, all in several colors ; and others 
may not eat cooked food, and may not talk with 
father or mother when they see them; but when 
they do not see them, they talk with them. I said : 
"These are all different sects, planted by men, and 
not by God ; therefore they will all be rooted up." 
Matt. 15:13. To this they did not have much to 
say. I then said: "Your doctrine is the doctrine 
of the devil ; for all that is done and observed, is 
contrary to the truth, as Paul says (I Tim. 4:1,3): 
That in the latter times some shall depart from the 
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines 
of devils ; forbidding to marry, and commanding to 
abstain from meats, which God hath created. Now 
I see that you teach this ; for you forbid to marry, 
and command to abstain from meats." Then they 
bade me go away. 

Soon after, the Dean of Ronse came, and with 
him another priest ; they assailed me most severely 
with subtle questions ; but the Lord preserved me, 
so that I was not betrayed. He asked me whether 
I did not believe that the bread which Christ gave 
His apostles was the body of Christ, when He said : 
"Take, eat ; this is my body, which is broken for 
you?" I replied: "That bread was not the body of 
Christ, which was broken for us ; it was for a me- 
morial." He rejoined : "The bread became changed 
into His body." But I said, that it was for a me- 
morial, and was not the body itself. They then 
questioned me in regard to baptism, whether in- 
fants did not have to be baptized. I said : "There 
is nothing written of infant baptism, but of bap- 
tism upon faith." Then they said. "Behold, we 
will prove that infants must be baptized. Does not 
Christ say, John 3 : 'Except a man be born again, 
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God ?' " I said : "This is not spoken 
to infants, but to those who can hear." But they 
said : "It is," and would thereby prove and estab- 
lish infant baptism. Thus we had many words, but 
agreed in nothing. 

_ Therefore I admonish you, dear brethren and 
sisters, to instruct one another well in all matters, 


538 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


namely, concerning the Supper, baptism, the incar- 
nation of Christ, and in regard to the spiritual chil- 
dren and the children of the world ; and walk wise- 
ly in the fear of the Lord, and fear not men, though 
they rage furiously. I also admonish you, dear 
brethren and sisters, by the love of our Lord, that 
you will all pray the Lord for me, so that I may 
stand fast valiantly, when I am tried. I further- 
more entreat you, that you will diligently instruct 
my beloved mother, in all matters, and also my 
brother, and my wife, if haply they might become 
converted. The Lord fill you with His Spirit, 
Amen. Written in fear on account of the people 
who were constantly here. The abundant grace and 
peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you. Amen. 
He that jeareth the Lord will do good. Sir. 15 :1. 


THE LAD CORNELIS VAN KULENBURGH, A. D. 1552 

In the year 1552, there was apprehended under 
the administration of the Count of Kulenburgh, for 
the testimony of Jesus, a lad called Cornelis ; he was 
kept imprisoned at said place about three years, 
and then burnt for the truth of Christ. During his 
imprisonment he was greatly assailed by priests, 
monks and prelates, who were gathered in the 
castle of Kulenburgh. These ministers of said Ro- 
man antichrist laid many snares for said youth, to 
entrap his soul ; they inflicted severe tortures upon 
him, that he should name his fellow-believers, and 
then plied him again with fair promises of this 
world, herein following the example of their mas- 
ter, Satan, with our Saviour Jesus. But this pris- 
oner, though young in years, yet old in the faith, 
through the grace of God valiantly resisted this 
temptation, on which account he was [condemned 
to death]* by said count, the latter being con- 
strained to this by the so-called spirituals (priests) , 
and his desire to remain a friend of the pope. Jno. 
19:12. Thus this pious youth had to pay for it; 
he was placed at a stake, and while there, the priests 
yet came to him, and tried to make him apostatize : 
but he chose much rather to die for the name of 
Jesus, than to depart from the truth, and was 
therefore burnt at the stake, thus becoming a par- 
taker of the sufferings of Christ, for which he 
will be rewarded with everlasting joy, when the 
great God shall be revealed. 

Concerning this, see hymn in History Liedt- 
Boeck. 


HERMAN JANS OF SOLLEM, BURNT ALIVE FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT AMSTERDAM, 

ON THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY, 1553 

The distress of this time was very great, and did 
not cease ; insomuch that all who truly left the idol- 


atrous Roman Babel, and turned to the spiritual 
Jerusalem of the peaceable church of Jesus Christ, 
were forthwith declared to have forfeited their 
lives. 

This appeared in the beginning of the year 1553, 
at Amsterdam, in the case of Herman Jans, a na- 
tive of Sollem and a pious, God-fearing novice, 
who stood prepared to receive baptism on the con- 
fession of his faith. Being yet in his first zeal for 
the divine truth, he was apprehended by the rulers 
of wickedness, and brought a prisoner to Amster- 
dam, where he had to surfer much vexation and tor- 
ment, inflicted upon him for the purpose of draw- 
ing him from the faith ; but remaining immovable 
and steadfast, he was sentenced to death, to be 
burnt as a heretic; which sentence was publicly 
read to him in the court, on the 14th day of Jan- 
uary, 1553, and also executed on him the same day ; 
as appears from the following sentence, which we, 
in proof of this matter, have received from the 
criminal records of the city of Amsterdam. It 
reads as follows : 

Sentence of death of Herman Jans of Sollem. 

Whereas Herman Jans, a native of Sollem, has 
frequented the assemblies of the Anabaptists, re- 
ceived their admonition, doctrines and errors, and 
attended certain conventicles (gatherings), in 
which, by Gillis of Aix-la-Chapelle, as also by 
others, improper things were taught concerning the 
Scriptures, so that renouncing the baptism admin- 
istered to him, he has confessed to have desired to 
receive another baptism, if he should be able to at- 
tain it, and also holds pernicious views with regard 
to the holy sacrament of the altar, all of which is 
contrary to the ordinances and the faith of the holy 
Christian Church, and the written laws and de- 
crees of his Imperial Majesty, our gracious lord ; 
and as he, moreover, obstinately persists in his un- 
belief, heresy and error, notwithstanding the in- 
struction given him by the truly sent ; therefore, 
my lords the judges, having heard the demand 
made by my lord the bailiff, concerning the afore- 
said Herman Jans, together with the confession 
of the latter, and having duly regarded the circum- 
stances of the case, condemn said Herman Jans, 
pursuant to the aforesaid decrees, to be executed 
with fire by the executioner, and furthermore de- 
clare his property confiscated, for the benefit of his 
Imperial Majesty, as count of Holland. Thus pro- 
nounced and executed on the sixteenth day of Jan- 
uary, A. D. 1553, in the presence of the bailiff, 
Pieter Cantert and Joost Buyck, Burgomasters, and 
all the judges, by the advice of the other two burgo- 
masters. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, in the keeping of 
the secretary there. N. N. 


* As indicated by the brackets, these words are not found in 
the original, but have been inserted by us, to complete the sense, 
which has apparently been marred by a typographical, or other, 
omission. — Trans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


539 


FELISTIS JANS, SURNAMED RESINX, BURNT AT 

AMSTERDAM, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 

CHRIST, ON THE 16TH OF JANUARY, IN 

THE YEAR 1553 

On the same day, in the court, and for the 
same reason, also a certain maiden, named Felistis 
Jans, and surnamed Resinx, a native of Vreden, in 
Westphalia, was sentenced to the fire, as appears 
from the written sentence which we have concern- 
ing it, from the original criminal records of the city 
of Amsterdam, as also the date when she was tor- 
tured, all of which we could here adduce verbatim ; 
however to avoid prolixity, we will briefly extract 
the substance from it, making distinct divisions, so 
that it may be clearly seen upon what her death 
was founded. 


BRIEF EXTRACT FROM THE SENTENCE OF DEATH 

OF FELISTIS, DAUGHTER OF JANS, OR 

FELISTIS RESINX 

After giving her name, and the place of her na- 
tivity, there are presented first the accusations with 
which she was charged, comprised in the following 
divisions : 

1. That she had resorted to the assembly of the 
sect of the Anabaptists. 

2. That she had separated from the obedience 
and faith of the (so-called) holy (that is, the Ro- 
man) church. 

3. That she held pernicious views with regard to 
the sacrament of the altar. 

4. That she had harbored in her house such per- 
sons as she knew to belong to said sect (that is, to 
the sect of the so-called Anabaptists) . 

5. That she had seduced several persons from 
the obedience of the (Roman) church, to her be- 
lief. 

6. That she herself obstinately adhered to the 
afore-mentioned (so-called) errors, refusing to 
abandon them. 

7. That all this was contrary to the ordinances 
of the holy church, and the decrees of his Imperial 
Majesty. 

Thereupon follows the conclusion, namely : That 
for this she should be executed with fire by the ex- 
ecutioner, and that all her property should be con- 
fiscated or forfeited, for the benefit of the Em- 
peror. 

Thus pronounced, etc., as above. 

Then the time is mentioned, when she was tor- 
tured, in regard to which these words are found : 
"This Felistis was subjected to the torture or rack 
the 2nd of January, 1553." 

Extracted from the book of criminal sentences, 
in the keeping of the secretary of the city of Am- 
sterdam. N. N. 

Note. — The year in which the death of this Fe- 
listis occurred, was not correctly noted* by the pre- 
ceding writers of the History of the Martyrs, nor 


was her full name* given, until we, by means of the 
afore-mentioned sentence, made the necessary cor- 
rections. 

Besides the above, it is also worthy of note that 
old writers state that she was a virtuous and hon- 
orable young maiden, and that through her long 
imprisonment she became so intimate with the jail- 
er's wife, that the latter employed her as maid- 
servant, to assist her in her household duties. 

When it happened upon a time, that the jailer's 
wife had some filth to carry out doors, but had no 
one around her whom she could order to do it, Fe- 
listis said: "Shall I do it?" whereupon the jailer's 
wife replied: "Would you not run away?" Felistis 
said : "No." _ But reflecting a little on the matter, 
and considering the frailness of human intentions, 
she would not undergo this test, and hence, de- 
clined to do it, which was certainly a good reso- 
lution on the part of a seemingly weak young 
maiden. 

Shortly after, the old writers state, she was seen 
coming to the scaffold, to be burnt, cleanly attired 
and having on a white apron, as though by her 
outward garments she meant to indicate how purely 
and uprightly a Christian virgin ought to be 
adorned inwardly, in order to be acceptable before 
her beloved heavenly bridegroom, Christ Jesus. 

Thus she offered up her sacrifice, and was num- 
bered among the holy and God-pleasing martyrs. 
Compare this with the Martyrs Mirror of the De- 
fenseless Christians, edition 1631, page 125. 


WOUTER VAN CAPELLE, A. D. 1553 

In the year 1553, a God-fearing brother, named 
Wouter Capelle, was apprehended at Diexmuyde, 
in Flanders, for living according to and following 
the Word of God, and confessed and sealed the 
faith of the truth with his death and blood at said 
place; as an instructive example worthy of imi- 
tation to all true believers, to look at his end, and 
to follow their faith, especially the Captain of the 
faith, Christ Jesus, blessed for ever. And since 
this witness of God suffered for the truth and 
testimony of the Word of God, and not for any 
crime, he obtained, through the grace of God, the 
crown of eternal life, promised by God to all those 
put to death by men for the Word of God: that 
they shall be raised up in great glory at the last 
day. 


TIJS, A YOUNG MAN, AND BEERENTGE, A YOUNG 
MAIDEN, A. D. 1553 

In the year 1553, a bachelor, named Tijs, and 
a maiden by the name of Beerentge, were drowned 
at Leeuwaerden, in Friesland, for the testimony of 
Jesus. They were two zealous followers of Christ ; 
for this reason they had a great desire, to meet at 
some time for the purpose of rejoicing with each 
other in the Word of God. However this could not 


* The year 1551 was given. 


She was simply called Felistis. 


540 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


well be, since Tijs was lame, and Beerentge was 
constantly confined to her bed. But at last God 
permitted them to come together; for the perse- 
cutors went out to apprehend the people of God, 
who, having perceived this, escaped their hands for 
this time : however, the former were not willing to 
return empty handed, and hence, took with them 
the afore-mentioned two invalid persons, and 
brought them prisoners to Leeuwaerden, where 
they were confined together for some time, during 
which they rejoiced very greatly with each other in 
the Lord their Creator, so that love, which is 
stronger than death, and firmer than hell, shone 
forth most fervently. Cant. 8 :6. Sentence of death 
was therefore then passed upon them, namely, 
that both should be drowned. This was taken 
greatly amiss on the part of Tijs; it grieved him 
much, and he said : "Cats and dogs are drowned." 
Hence they sought to obtain a transmutation of 
the sentence and requested to be executed on the 
place of execution, so that they might obtain the 
crown with their beloved brethren, and that the 
people present might hear and see for what cause 
they died. But this was refused them, and the ex- 
ecution of the sentence was proceeded with. They, 
about midnight, (ashamed as it were, to put to 
death such infirm persons) put both together into 
a bag, with their mouths gagged, threw them into 
a boat, and had them cast into the moat on the 
outside of the wall, and having been tied to the 
boat, the two were dragged along the moat until 
death ensued. Thus they rid themselves of these 
pious lights and witnesses of Christ, whom their 
eyes could not bear to look upon. Wisd. 2:15. But 
the righteous God, who goes with His people 
through water and fire (Isa. 53:2), will avenge 
this deed in due time, and give these worthy chil- 
dren of God rest and peace with Him forever; 
and this murder, which was perpetrated in the 
dark, will be justly avenged in His great day, 
when every secret shall be brought into the light 
of open day. 

Concerning this, see hymn in History Liedt- 
boeck. 


SIMON THE SHOPKEEPER, A. D. 1553 

About the year 1553 there was at Bergen op 
Zoom, in Brabant, a shopkeeper, named Simon, 
who stood in the marketplace, to sell his wares. 
When the priests passed him with their idol, this 
Simon did not dare give divine honor to this idol 
made by human hands (Dan. 3:18), but, accord- 
ing to the testimony of God presented in the holy 
Scriptures, would worship and serve only the Lord 
his God. He was therefore apprehended by the 
maintainers of the Roman antichrist, and exam- 
ined in the faith, which he freely confessed, re- 
jecting their self-invented infant baptism together 
with all human commandments, and holding fast 
only to the testimony of the Word of God ; hence 
he was sentenced to death by the enemies of the 


truth, and was thus led without the city, and burnt 
for the testimony of Jesus. Many of the people 
present were therefore greatly astonished when 
they beheld the great boldness and steadfastness 
of this pious witness of God, who thus through 
grace obtained the crown of eternal life. 

The bailiff who had him executed, on returning 
home from this deed, was laid upon a bed of se- 
vere sickness, and constantly exclaimed with sor- 
row and remorse: "O Simon, Simon!" and al- 
though the priests and monks sought to absolve 
him, they were nevertheless not able to give him 
the least comfort, but he soon died in despair, an 
instructive and memorable example to all tyrants 
and persecutors. II Mace. 9:9, 28; Acts 12:23. 

JOOS KINDT, A. D. 1553. A LETTER OR CONFES- 
SION OF JOOS KINDT, IMPRISONED AT KORT- 
RIJCK, WHERE HE SUBSEQUENTLY LOST 
HIS LIFE AT THE STAKE, FOR THE 
TESTIMONY OF JESUS, A. D. 1553, 
RECKONING THE BEGINNING 
OF THE YEAR FROM NEW 

year's DAY 

Grace be with you, and peace, from God the 
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ ; may He com- 
fort and strengthen us with His Holy Spirit, that 
we may be able to stand against the assaults of 
the devil, who, as Peter says, walketh about us, as a 
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, and re- 
sist him with a firm faith. Know then, dear friends, 
that I have such a conflict against the carnal 
lords, insomuch that they assail me with their 
sophistries, seeking to draw me from the obedience 
of our dear Lord ; however, I trust that the Lord 
will succor me, which I do not doubt; for God, 
comforting His own, says through the prophet 
Isaiah (49:15): "Though a mother forsake her 
child, yet will I not forsake thee ;" which the Lord 
shows in me in a wonderful manner — let every 
tongue praise Him. Yea, if I had as much paper as 
I ever wrote on, and time to write, I could not de- 
scribe the joy and gladness I experience ; yea, my 
joy is unspeakable. 

But N. is sick, and asks that you would diligently 
entreat the Lord for him ; for he is ready to go into 
the fire, but he cannot resist the enemies of the 
cross ; for they assail him with sophisms, for their 
teacher, the devil, knows much sophistry, which he 
showed when he came to tempt our Saviour in the 
wilderness, as is written in the Gospel. Now, if he 
employed his sophistry on our Saviour, I am not 
cast down, though I have a little of conflict ; for, 
dear friends, they could easily be resisted if they 
used arguments, but they assail him altogether 
with lies. Since their father is a liar, as our 
Saviour also told them, they have the nature of 
their father, which they partly manifested with re- 
gard to me, all of which I cannot communicate to 
you; but I hope that the Lord will give me so 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


541 


much grace that I may write a little about the dis- 
putation with the carnal. 

Know then, that Ronse and Polet came into the 
prison on Saturday afternoon, and summoned me 
before them. When I came to them, I asked them 
what they wished of me. They replied : "This will 
be told you." They inquired how old I was. I 
replied: "That I do not know; if you want cor- 
rect information on this point, you must ask my 
mother." 

Ronse. "Tell us as near as you know." 

Joos. "Between twenty and thirty years." Then 
their clerk wrote : "Between thirty and forty." 

Ronse. "When were you to confession last ?" 

Joos. "Why do you ask this ?" 

Ronse. "I want to know it." 

Joos. "You did not have me apprehended ? you 
well know how it is with me." 

Ans. "We do." 

Joos. "Of whom are you, or in whose name have 
you come to me ?" 

Ans. "In the name of God." 

Joos. "I don't believe this." 

Ques. "Why?" 

Joos. "Because you have apprehended me, to 
find out how it is with me ; for all whom the Lord 
has sent to go and teach, imprisoned no one ; for 
He sent them out, and commanded them, that if 
they came to a place, and were not received, they 
should shake off the dust from their feet, and de- 
part from there." Matt. 10:14. 

Polet. "You have doubtless read, that Paul de- 
livered some to the devil." I Cor. 5 :5. 

Joos. "Show me where Paul cast them into 
prison ; this I want to know of you." 

Polet. "I don't know." 

Joos. "Why then do you undertake to quote 
Scriptures to any one, which you do not under- 
stand yourself ? yea, more than that, to apprehend 
people, to bring them to the faith, even if your 
faith were good, which I do not hold to be the case, 
for I do not believe that you are from God." 

Ques. "Why?" 

Joos. "Because the Lord says: 'I will have 
obedience, and not sacrifice' (I Sam. 15 :22) ; and 
because ye do not obey Him." 

Ques. ("Wherein?" _ 

Joos. "Because Christ commanded to point the 
erring to the right way ; now, you say that I have 
gone astray — why then did you not show me what 
is right? for I seek nothing but what is right." 

Ans. "For this purpose we have come." 

Joos. "Then you should have come to the place 
where I lived." 

Ans. "We did not know where you lived." 

Joos. "You knew it well enough to send the 
bailiff." 

Ans. "Had you been a good sheep, it would not 
have been necessary." 

Joos. "Christ left the ninety and nine, and went 
to seek that which was lost." 


Then Ronse said : "Do you not believe that I 
am appointed your superior, by our holy father, 
the pope, and our gracious lord, the Emperor ?" 

Joos. "I know no superior save Christ." 

Ques. "How ; don't you recognize the Emperor 
at all?" 

I told him, that I was well content to have 
him be my superior according to the flesh. Then 
they wrote that I recognized no superior accord- 
ing to the spirit save Christ, and the Emperor ac- 
cording to the flesh. 

Ronse then said : "When were you to confession 
last, tell me this?" 

Joos. "1 do not wish to speak to you here." 

Ques. "Why?" 

Joos. "I shall speak before the lords in full 
court." 

"There," said they, "it would be at the risk 
of your life, if you should say anything of conse- 
quence. Tell me," said he, "what do you think of 
infant baptism?" Being urged to speak, I replied: 
"Nothing." 

Ronse. "Yea, in what baptism then do you be- 
lieve?" 

Joos. "I know of but one faith, and one bap- 
tism." 

Ronse. "How long since you were baptized?" 

Joos. "Half a year, or thereabout." This they 
noted down. 

Ques. "What do you hold concerning the Ro- 
man church?" 

Joos. "I do not hold the least article of all they 
hold." 

This was also written down. They asked me so 
much, that I said to them : "I have freely confessed 
my faith, and am ready to go alive into the fire for 
it; hence be content that you know my faith." 
They asked a great deal. I said : "Go away from 
me ; I regard you as enemies of the cross of Christ ; 
hence, go away from me, for you know the ground 
of my faith, which I have freely confessed to you. 
Do therefore to me what you please; for it is 
through the grace of the Lord that I have these 
members, and I am also ready to give them up by 
the grace of the Lord, yea, to present them for His 
holy praise." II Mace. 7:11. They spoke much, 
but I said : "Go away from me, and come no more 
where I am, for you are against God. Matt. 12 :30. 
Do you not fear the Lord? See what is written 
Matt. 13, concerning the tares of the field. Now 
since you say that I am evil, the Lord has com- 
manded that it should be left to grow until the 
harvest." 

Ans. "If we were to let it grow up, you would 
corrupt us all." 

Polet. "Does not Augustine say" — 

Joos. "Don't speak of Augustine, for I do not 
know him; I hold no doctrine save that of the 
apostles and prophets, and of the words which our 
Saviour brought from high heaven, from the 
mouth of His heavenly Father, and sealed with 
His precious blood ; for this I want to go into the 


542 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


fire; but Augustine, Gregory, Ambrose, these I 
know not." 

Ronse. "Yea, do you not believe that our blessed 
Saviour is concealed in the holy sacrament ?" 

Joos, "I do not believe this." 

Ronse. "Where then is He ?" 

Joos. "At the right hand of His heavenly Father, 
and He will at the last descend with the glory of 
His Father, to judge the quick and the dead. Fear 
this strict judgment, and amend your ways ; put on 
sackcloth and clothing of hair; repent, and go to 
the people, whom you keep running after your false 
worship ; warn them, for you murder their souls, 
since you say that you have the key of the kingdom 
of heaven, from the time of St. Peter, and that the 
same has always remained in your possession. Well 
does Christ say that you have the key, and that you 
will not enter yourselves, and those that desire to 
go in you hinder." Matt. 23 :13. 

Ronse. "Who baptized you? did Jelis the Bap- 
tist, baptize you?" 

Joos. "You know how it is with me; be sat- 
isfied." 

Polet. "It was Adam Pastor." 

Ronse. "Or David Joris." 

I kept silent. 

Ronse. "Joos, tell me who were your sponsors ?" 

Joos. "I know of no sponsors." 

Ronse. "Your witnesses ?" 

Joos. "I have told you that it took place; hence 
be content therewith; for I have such confidence 
in the Lord, that I trust He will keep the door of 
my mouth so that I shall tell you nothing, though 
you should tear me to pieces." 

They asked me a great deal. I said : "Go away 
from me ; for you are not of God." They replied : 
"We are." I said : "Away ! go away from me, go 
from me, and come no more where I am." Much 
more yet took place, but it would take too long to 
write it. Finally they went away, and I was led 
back into my cell. 

On Sunday I was taken to the house of the 
judges where the court was assembled. There were 
also present there Salome, Sir Cornelis, Dean of 
Kestenne, Ronse, and Polet. I was placed in the 
middle, firmly bound and held by two thief-catch- 
ers. I said : "My lords, what is your wish ?" 

Ronse. "This will be told you." 

They then read the confession of my faith, 
which they had written in prison, and asked me 
whether I was still of the same mind. I replied : 
"Yes : I am still ready to go into the fire for it." 
Ronse asked whether I did not believe that Christ 
had taken His flesh from Mary. I said: "No." 
Then it seemed as though Sir. Cornelis would faint 
away; he blessed and crossed himself much, and 
all were horrified. There was a little discussion 
about it; but they, like dragons, breathed their 
poison into the judges, each taking a judge, and 
said : "True, it is written so ; but he has not the 
understanding; the Scriptures want to be under- 
stood." And they adduced many far-fetched soph- 


isms, and filled the ears of the lords, and asked me 
many sophistical questions. I said: "I have con- 
fessed my faith to you ; be satisfied therewith ; and 
I pray you, not that I am worthy of it, but by the 
crimson blood of our dear Lord, let me in peace ; 
you have my faith, and hold me in your hands here ; 
be satisfied, and do what you please." 

Then Ronse asked me whether I had not been 
present somewhere, and adjured me three times by 
my baptism, that I should tell who was present. I 
told him that I would not tell him one word. Ronse 
said : "You have denied your baptism ; Menno will 
take it ill, that you deny your baptism." I said : 
"My faith and baptism I know, but with your ad- 
juration I have nothing to do ; I thereby know that 
you are sorcerers." Then Polet said: "We may 
swear." I replied : "See Matt. 5, whether he does 
not prohibit swearing altogether." They said: 
"No." I said: "Yes." Then Polet looked into a 
Bible which they had brought with them, a large 
book, and it read there just as I had said. 

Thereupon Sir Cornelis said: "The Bible is 
false; our Latin Bible reads differently." I said: 
"Do you bring false books to me? Why do you 
say it is false ? And it is privileged— why then do 
you let them circulate with privilege, seeing you 
examine them?" He replied: "I did not examine 
them." I said: "Some of the learned men at 
Louvain." Then Ronse whispered to Sir Cornelis 
Roose and said: "It is true, they are examined, 
and were good, but the printer had a boy, who mis- 
printed them, while his master was gone to town. 
Ronse asked me how it came that I so easily be- 
lieved a man whom I perhaps would never more 
see, and suffered myself to be baptized by him ; and 
that I would not believe them, whom I saw daily, 
yea, them who were present and had instructed me 
at this time and before, as they said, and why I 
would not believe my pastor, who daily preached 
the Gospel. I replied [that I did not believe him] 
because he was a liar, and that I had heard him 
preach that it could nowhere be found written that 
Mary was a mother and a virgin. But (he said) 
because their church taught it, therefore it had to 
be believed. Therefore, said I, I will not hear him, 
since I had read the contrary in Isaiah (7:14), and 
in Matthew and in other places. Having thus heard 
lies proceed out of your mouth, I after this heard 
neither you nor any other, and I hope by the grace 
of the Lord I never shall." He said : "No." I said : 
"Yes, and I offer my body to the rack, against 
yours." But he had no desire for it, and said: 
"What ! should I go to the rack ? You assert that 
our church is not good, because we are not blame- 
less ; are you blameless ? There are such of your 
people that have committed murder, because men 
would not believe them, nay, would not adhere to 
their doctrine." I said : "Did you see this in me, 
or anything else that is unseemly? I am here in 
the hands of the judges, that they punish me for it." 
Ronse said : "We know nothing of this kind of 
you." I said: "Then don't tell me what another 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


543 


does, nor considers me bad on account of the mis- 
deeds of others. No one is to bear the burden of 
another; you are not to bear mine, nor I yours. 
The soul that sinneth, it shall die." Gal. 6 :5 ; Exe- 
kiel 18:20. 

Much more yet was said by them, but it is not 
worth-while to write it. They also said that Christ 
had said that the scribes and the Pharisees sat in 
Moses' seat, and that He had commanded us to do 
after their commandments, but not after their 
works ; therefore, said they, do what we advise you, 
but do not after our works, since Christ teaches 
this. Matthew 23:1, 2. I asked: "Who did Christ 
say sat in Moses' seat?" Ans. "The Pharisees." 
I asked again: "Does this Scripture belong to 
you?" Ans. "Yes." I said: "Then you confess 
that you are of their generation ?" 

Then Sir Cornells, the parish priest, asked me 
why I did not believe in one article of the Roman 
church. I doubtless believed that Christ was cruci- 
fied, which the Roman church also believes, which 
was certainly an article; and why I believed that 
Matthew's Gospel was gospel, which was nowhere 
written [he also said that] he would show me that 
Paul 'wrote before the evangelists. I then said : 
"Show me that Paul wrote before Matthew." Sir 
Cornells said : "What have you to do with that ?" 
I replied: "Should I have nothing to do with it? 
my life and soul are at stake, according to what you 
say." Sir Cornells said : "He is overcome." I said : 
"Be silent, you are not worthy of being spoken to, 
and see that you do not say in my absence, that you 
overcame me, or that I have the devil in me, or 
condemn me among the simple people, and deceive 
them still more." Then Ronse said: "You are 
damned, if you remain so." I said: "Why?" 
Ronse replied : "Because you believe not." I said : 
"I do believe, and I adhere so firmly to my faith, 
that I would rather go into the fire, than transgress 
a single point." 

Much more took place which would be too long 
to write. Finally I was led back into prison, where 
two shackles were put on me. I said : "I am ready, 
not only to suffer myself to be shackled, but also to 
die the most ignominious death for the name of the 
Lord." Acts 21 :13. 

On Monday Polet and the fat-monger came, and 
asked me how it was with me. I told them that it 
had never been as well, for which I praised the 
Lord. They said that they were very glad of it. 
Polet then said: "Joos, how can your cause and 
your church be good — the Germans have a congre- 
gation, and the English have one; but where are 
the members of your congregation ? You alone are 
not a church. Let us hear whether you are also a 
flock, and who your members are." Then said I 
five or six times : "Get thee behind me, and depart 
from me, Satan ;" whereupon they both ran away. 
Then I said: "Now you speak; at the judgment 
another shall speak." Thus I saw them no more. 
I have heard that I am to be severely tortured ; for 
they think to obtain from me all the particulars ; 


but I trust the Lord, that He will keep my lips. 
Hence, pray the Lord for me, that He will succor 
me, for they thirst for much blood ; but they can do 
no more than the Lord permits them. Therefore I 
commend myself into the hands of the Lord ; and 
anything you may hear which is not in this letter, 
regard as lies. In token of the truth I hope to 
seal this letter with my blood. To this end may 
God give His grace, that His name may be praised 
thereby. 


ANOTHER LETTER OR CONFESSION OF JOOS KINDT 

To the praise of the Father. 

I, Joos Kindt, imprisoned for the testimony in 
Jesus Christ, entreat and admonish all dear friends, 
and all dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, with 
the grace of the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost, entreating by this grace, that they not only 
heed or live according to my entreaty or admoni- 
tion, but that each (as I hope by the help of God) 
will heed the warning of the Lord, and that each 
endeavor to amend his sinful life, which I doubt not 
everyone does who fears the Lord with all his 
heart ; for the Scripture says : "He that feareth the 
Lord will do good ; yea, the fear of God is the be- 
ginning of wisdom." Sir. 15:1 ; 1 :14. Since then 
the fear of God guides us to virtue, let us fear the 
Lord; for Christ Jesus requires this of us with 
His blessed lips, when He says: "Fear not them 
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul ; 
but fear him which after he hath killed, hath power 
to cast soul and body into eternal damnation." 
Matt. 10 :28. Therefore I admonish you with these 
words, and not with them alone, but with the whole 
sum of the Scriptures, that each will strive to keep 
them (Luke 12:28) ; for Christ says: "Therefore 
whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and do- 
eth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which 
built his house upon a rock ; and the rain descend- 
ed, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and 
beat upon that house ; and it fell not : for it was 
founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth 
these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be 
likened unto a foolish man, which built his house 
upon the sand: and the rain descended, and the 
floods came, and the wind blew, and beat upon that 
house ; and it fell : and great was the fall of it." 
Matt. 7 :24-27. 

Therefore, let everyone strive to give diligence 
to take heed to himself, and to redeem the perilous 
time ; for Paul says : "Redeem the time, because the 
days are evil." Eph. 5 :16. Hence, make good use 
of the time, and exhort one another ; for necessity 
demands it ; and let each arm himself well, even as 
Paul admonishes us : "For we wrestle not against 
flesh and blood." Eph. 6:12. Paul was right when 
he taught this. I well experience it now. The Lord 
be praised, who assists me so faithfully with these 
weapons, and, even as He promised to give us a 
mouth to speak, when we should be brought before 
such, has now opened my mouth, praise to Him, so 


544 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


that through the grace of the Lord I valiantly 
defend myself with the Word of my Lord, and have 
manfully resisted my enemies five times, not only 
my enemies, but the enemies of the cross of Christ, 
as you will hear further. 

Know, that on the afternoon of the day called 
St. Thomas, in Babel, as I was lying in the cell I 
have always occupied, I saw and heard that carnal 
and worldly lords came into the prison, and also 
the chief bailiff. The servants then came and said : 
"Joos, come out." Then said I in my heart: "O 
Lord, open thou my lips ; and my mouth shall shew 
forth thy praise." Ps. 51 :15. With this I came in 
before them. Then Ronse and Polet both lifted 
their caps, and said : "Joos, God greet you," and 
nodded their heads to me. I also lifted my cap, 
saying: "I esteem God worthy of such greeting, 
yea, and more, I am ready to give back these mem- 
bers — which He has given me through His grace — 
for His name and to His praise; I deem the 
Lord worthy of so much ; for He has deemed us of 
sufficient value in His sight to die a better death for 
us." Then the inquisitors said: "Joos, have you 
not yet considered the matter? Will you not yet 
desist ?" I said : "Yes, always from doing evil. 
Why did you not ask me this, when I yet ran in 
wickedness, and practiced all manner of unright- 
eousness ?" They replied : "You could have gone 
and heard the sermons." They also inquired con- 
cerning my faith, which I freely confessed. Then 
they said : "Speak to us, and tell us whether you 
have not yet considered the matter." I said: "I 
will not speak to you ; for you are not of God ; how 
should I believe in you ? Christ died for me ; in this 
I believe ; but you would not be willing to die for 
me; neither this dean nor that (there were two 
deans present, Ronse and Olymaecker) ; neither 
this curate nor that, would be willing to die for me. 
I am imprisoned for my life; set me free and die 
for me." Ans. "Who teaches this?" I said: 
"Christ. He says: 'The good shepherd loves his 
sheep, and gives his life for his sheep.' John 10:11. 
You say that I shall be damned, if I persist in my 
purpose." Ronse said : "Yes." I said further : "It 
is surprising, then, that you should kill me ; seeing, 
therefore, that I hold a purpose for which I shall 
be damned ; let me go until I exchange it for a bet- 
ter." Ans. "We will leave you." "Yes," said I, 
"and deliver me over." Matt. 27:2. Polet said: 
"Paul delivered some into the hands of the devil." 
I Cor. 5 :5. I said : "So do you also ; you have 
damned me ; hence, be satisfied, without delivering 
me into the hands of the judges. Paul did not do 
so, nor did Christ teach it in Matt. 28 and Mark 16, 
where He says : 'Go, and preach the gospel to every 
creature.' Christ says not: 'Them that will not 
believe you, shut into cells, or put great fetters on 
their legs.' Did they all believe Christ, who heard 
Him preach? Did all believe the apostles, who 
heard them?" Rom. 10:16. Ans. "No." Joos. 
"Were they put to death, then, who did not believe 
the apostles." Ans. "No." "How comes it then, 


that the apostles did not do this, and that you, who 
say that you are vice regents of the apostles, dare 
put us to death ? even admitting that we were evil, 
as you say, but you have a better opinion of us, 
than you say?" Polet said : "That I will tell you: 
have you not read how Elijah put to death the 
priests of Baal!" I said: "Yes; and this is just 
what is wanting yet to subdue you ; for you serve 
Baal even more than they did, and you carouse and 
banquet with Jezebel much more than they did?" 
Ans. "What does that concern you? You are 
always looking to our works." I said : "Christ has 
taught me to know the tree by the fruit, and says 
that a corrupt tree cannot bear good fruit, nor a 
good tree evil fruit," etc. And I further said: 
"Since your works are not good, I do not believe 
you to be good." Ques. "Are you good?" Joos. 
"You do not hear me say this ; there is none good 
but God alone, and though we were to say that we 
are good, which we do not, you, on the other hand, 
say that we are evil, and this for the reason you 
told me when we were in the hall of justice, namely, 
that when men will not believe us, we kill them." 
Ronse. "I say this yet." Joos. "Where did you 
see this in me ; since you say that I taught the peo- 
ple? did I kill any one or hurt a single hair, on 
account of my doctrine, which you say I teach as 
an opinion?" Ans. "We do not know anything 
of such a character of you." Joos. "But I know 
such things of you ; you burn or murder those who 
will not adhere to your false worship. You have 
justly judged yourselves in this matter." II Samuel 
12:7. Ans. "This brings us no further; let us dis- 
pute about the faith?" Joos. "I will not dispute 
here alone." Then they said : "Do you acknowl- 
edge yourself vanquished?" and would have de- 
livered me to the judges, had I said, yes. I replied : 
"No ; wherein have you overcome me ? I have said 
it not once, but fifty times : Show me a better way, 
with the word of the Gospel, and I will renounce." 
Ans. "Let us begin then." Joos. "Very well, 
before the hall of justice, near a big fire, and the 
one that is overcome shall be cast into it." Ans. 
"This will not be granted you." The under-bailiff 
then said : "You seek to make disturbance/' Joos. 
"You have made it by apprehending me ; if you had 
let me work, Kortrijck would not be in the condi- 
tion it is in now ; it was not in such a state for seven 
years." Polet. "You will not be taken there, and 
this for the reason that you may not spread your 
poison." Joos. "You ought to come before the hall 
of justice, and the more people present, the better, 
for if I have the lies, and you the truth— are you 
ashamed of the truth before the people? Take me 
there, and show me that I am in the wrong, and 
you will stop the mouths of the people, and when 
you have overcome me, say : 'This is the man who 
has taught contrary to the Christian faith ; we now 
prove to him with the Scriptures, that he is in the 
wrong,' and then throw me into the fire, and the 
people will be edified. If you will not do this, you 
are not willing that the people should know the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


545 


truth." Ronse. "You will not be brought thither 
to speak ; when you are brought there, speaking on 
your part will be prevented." Joos. "Why? the 
people have their five senses, and he that hath five 
senses, will hear whether I speak good or evil." 
Ronse. "You will be prevented from speaking 
there." Joos. "Do it then; put me boldly into 
a bag, and smother me by night, so that no one will 
see it; if He sees it, who searches the hearts and 
reins, enough people see it ; and He will see it, and 
avenge Himself ; I leave it to Him, for I am ready 
any way, to put off this flesh, whether in the fire or 
in the water, before the hall of justice or here in 
this fire (the fire on the hearth) ; it is not big 
enough, make it bigger." 

They then again proposed to me to dispute, and 
said that they were sent from God, and appointed 
His vice regents. I said : "This is not so ; for you 
have bought your benefices, or they have been giv- 
en you, or you have gained them by serving; but 
those whom God has sent, from the beginning of 
the world, have been sent differently." They said 
that they would prove it to me by the Scriptures, 
that they were sent. I said: "Prove it?" Ans. 
"This is it, that to Peter the key was given, and he 
was pope, and it was given to him and his succes- 
sors." Joos. "Show me, that anything is said there 
about successors?" Ans. "This will be shown you." 
Joos. "Show me then ?" Then Ronse read from a 
Testament, Matt. 16, from the place where Christ 
asks : "Whom do men say that I, the Son of man, 
am?" to where He says : "I will give unto thee the 
keys ;" but there was nothing said about successors. 
He then said : "You have heard it, have you not, 
Joos ? it is so long : I would read further, but it is 
too long a task?" Joos. "I desire that you read on." 
Ronse. "How far?" Joos. "To where it speaks 
about successors." Ronse. "You have heard that 
he says : 'Upon this rock I will build my church.' 
Hence it is founded upon St. Peter, and he was 
pope." Joos. "Christ is the foundation, as Paul 
says (I Cor. 3:11) : 'Other foundation can no man 
lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.' But 
Peter is not the foundation, nor did Christ found 
the church upon Peter, but upon the confession of 
his faith where he confesses : T confess that thou 
art the Christ, the Son of the living God ;' there- 
fore, Christ is the foundation. But," said I, "let 
us speak about the key ; you skip from the key to 
the church ; you say that I run from one thing to 
another, stick to your text yourselves, and show 
me, as you have asserted, that Christ says : T give 
unto thee the key, and unto thy successors.' " They 
replied: "We shall show it to you. But listen, it 
is this," said Polet, and produced a sophism. I 
said: "You cannot satisfy me with arguments; 
show it to me in the book?" Then Ronse said : "We 
know it by heart, and so do you ; hear us repeat it 
from memory?" I said: "Read it?" They replied: 
"Is it not the same whether we read or speak it? 
Joos, hear what I shall tell you ?" I said : "Telling 
will not satisfy me." 


When they would not read it, I addressed the 
chief bailiff, and Roegaergijs, and said : "My lords, 
I demand that you assist me in this matter, and 
compel them to read it; else I say that you are 
tyrants and not judges." Then said they, "Read it 
to him." Thereupon they read Matt. 16. Ronse 
read, and when he could not find it, he turned 
as white as a sheet, and then said : "It is not here." 
Polet said: "These words are not there, but the 
sense is in Matt. 28." He then read : "I am with 
you alway, even unto the end of the world." I said : 
"This is not where he says : T give unto thee the 
keys, and unto thy successors.' " Polet. "Would 
you have just these very words ; they are not here ; 
why make so much ado about it?" Joos. "No, 
but because you will say you will show it to me." 
Ronse. "Be silent, you are not worthy to speak." 
Joos. "Why should I keep silence, when you with 
your false mandates have brought about, that 
neither proctor, nor attorney, nor friend may speak 
for us ; if you are not willing to let me speak, you 
ought to have let me remain in my cell ; but I shall 
keep silence neither for you nor any one else ; I am 
neither a thief, nor a murderer, nor a ravisher 
of women ; why should I forbear speaking? I shall 
defend myself, because my life is at stake, and not 
keep silence as long as I can move my tongue ; but 
do you N. keep silent; you are not worthy to 
speak, you soul murderers, you enemies of the 
cross of Christ." Again they proposed to me to 
dispute. I said : "Before the hall of justice, but not 
here." Ans. "You will not be taken there." Joos. 
"Well then, do as you please ; I have confessed my 
faith to you when I first came here, and I have told 
you more than fifty times before, and tell you again, 
that I think nothing of all your trumpery, nor of a 
single point held by the Roman church." Ronse. 
"Do you think nothing of the sacrament? Let us 
hear what you think of it?" Joos. "An idol, a little 
flour; and if I had your oil, I would grease my 
shoes with it." Ronse. "We can hear that you 
are audacious enough." 

Then a contention arose, and they thought to fall 
upon me ; but I defended myself valiantly with the 
Word of the Lord, as behooves a servant who loves 
his master. And the Lord gave me such a mouth 
to speak, that for three hours I did not make one 
assertion, which they were able to refute. Then the 
incarnation was made the subject of discussion, 
which they would carry out to the dead letter. 
Matt. 1 : The book of the generation of Jesus 
Christ, the son of David. Thereupon I said that 
in Matt. 22 :41 it was written : "Then Christ asked 
the scribes and the Pharisees : 'What think ye of 
Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him the 
son of David. He saith unto them, How then doth 
David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord 
said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till 
I make thine enemies thy footstool? If David then 
call him Lord, how is he his son? And no man was 
able to answer him a word.' " I also told them of 
the figure of Melchisedec, and the last chapter of 


546 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Revelation, that He is the root of David ; which 
they would not hear, but adhered to their dead 
text. 

When I perceived that they would not ac- 
knowledge their error, I said: "If you want to 
speak of the incarnation, or of any other matter of 
the faith, come before the city hall." Then Polet 
said: "Who should judge there, who is right or 
wrong?" I said: "These good lords." Polet said: 
"They do not understand the Scriptures." I said : 
"They understand them well enough for you, to 
dispute here, or in the hall of justice ; hence they 
ought also to understand them, to dispute in the 
city hall. And if they do not understand the Scrip- 
tures, then they ought to feel ashamed that they are 
judges in this matter, when they do not understand 
the Scriptures." So much was said, that as much 
paper as I could hold in my hand would not suffice 
me to write down all their sophistry. I commend all 
dear friends, and all brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, into His hands, and entreat them all, to arm 
themselves wisely, for it is necessary; and when 
they come as far as I am, not to engage in dispu- 
tation, for, if it were possible, they would draw us 
away from the truth. Know, that I am of such 
good cheer, that it would be impossible for me to 
describe the joy or gladness I have, and I hope that 
the seal of this letter will be the putting off of my 
body. To this end, may the Lord give me His grace, 
that His name may be glorified thereby ; for I seek 
nothing but the glory of the Lord. Nothing more ; 
I commend you to the Lord, and to the Word of 
His grace. Pray the Lord for me; I will gladly 
pray Him for you also. 

They say that Christ by origin is David's Son; If He be Da- 
vid's Son, He's not the Father's Son : For no one has two Fa- 
thers — 'twere unnatural; He's God's only Son, and not crea- 
tural. 


ELIZABETH AND HADEWIJK; OF WHOM THE FOR- 
MER WAS DROWNED AT LEEUWARDEN, AND 
THE LATTER ESCAPED DEATH, IN THE 
YEAR OF OUR LORD, 1549 

This Elizabeth was of a noble family, and had in 
her youth been put by her parents into the convent 
of Tieng, near Lier near East Friesia, there to learn 
various arts, and also the Latin language. There 
she accidently, or rather through the direction of 
God, came into possession of a Latin Testament, by 
the constant reading of which and meditating upon 
it she obtained so much knowledge of the will of 
God, that she became distressed on account of her 
state of life, and seeing no chance to alter her life 
according to the rule of said Word in the convent, 
much less under the parental roof, she resolved, 
after much conflict and reflection, secretly to es- 
cape from the convent, trusting to the fatherly 
providence of Almighty God for help and guidance. 
To this end, she made an agreement with a milk- 
maid of the convent, that she should change clothes 
with her, and thus assist her to escape from the 


convent early in the morning, in the guise of a 
milkmaid; which having been accomplished, she 
first came to Lier, and without her knowing it, to 
a certain house, in which there lived Anabaptists, 
who upon learning her circumstances and con- 
dition, took her in, and instructed her still more 
fully in the way of God, and, after some time, fear- 
ing that search might be made for Elizabeth, 
brought her to Leeuwarden, and there left her with 
a pious sister of the Anabaptistic church, named 
Hadewijk, with whom she was afterward appre- 
hended. 

This Hadewijk was married to a certain drum- 
mer of the company quartered at Leeuwarden, 
who, having neither to go marching, nor to mount 
guard, etc., worked in a certain shop to gain a live- 
lihood for his wife and children. There was work- 
ing there together with him a very pious Anabap- 
tist brother* who at that time was put in bonds 
and condemned to death for the sake of his re- 
ligion. Said company having been ordered to the 
place of execution, when this pious brother was 
to be offered up, to form a circle around him, to 
prevent an uproar, the aforesaid drummer ob- 
jected to serve in his capacity as a drummer at that 
time and under such circumstances which he also 
indicated to his wife Hadewijk, who opposed him 
in this matter, and advised him to proceed in the 
discharge of his duty. This then he resolved to do ; 
but as he was first also to get himself partially in* 
toxicated, in order to feel less of compassion for 
the innocently doomed man, but this intoxication, 
instead of depriving him of his sense of compas- 
sion, only increased it, and he became so bold that 
he told the spectators of the piety and virtues of 
this martyr so well known to him, why he was so 
maltreated, how wickedly the authorities, insti- 
gated by the clergy, acted in this matter, and 
that it were better to apprehend and treat after this 
manner, wicked men, whoremongers, adulterers, 
unrighteous, and such like, of whom there were 
plenty in the city, yea, even among the clergy. 
Some laughed, others laid it to heart ; some said : 
"The drummer is drunk ;" others : "He is crazy," 
etc. But when he had become sober and was him- 
self again, he reflected on what he had done, and 
what in all probability he now had to expect, and 
resolved to leave the city of Leeuwarden, his com- 
pany, and the Roman church. He entreated his 
wife to go with him, but she could not approve of 
it, and after his departure, never knew whither he 
had gone. But coming to reflection some time 
after, she inquired after the Anabaptists, found 
opportunity to attend the exhortations, embraced 
the faith, and was not only baptized upon her faith, 
but also suffered herself to be apprehended to- 
gether with Elizabeth. Being confined in a sep- 
arate room from Elizabeth, it was announced to 
her that on the following day she should be ex- 
amined and have to defend herself in a considerable 

* It is supposed that this was probably Sikke Snijder. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


547 


number of articles, which caused her exceeding 
great distress and anxiety of heart, especially since 
she could neither read nor write, and was more 
pious and willing than experienced. Hence, she 
earnestly importuned God, that the exceeding good 
and man-loving Father would be pleased to look 
with compassion upon her, His poor handmaiden, 
whose inability and unfitness He knew best, and 
not to try her above her ability, but to deliver and 
save her by His divine hand, whereupon a voice 
came to her while she was thus engaged in prayer, 
exclaiming : "Hadewijk !" Looking up and around 
her, and seeing no one, she continued in her fer- 
vent prayer. A second time she heard the voice, 
but again seeing no one, she persevered in her sup- 
plications until the same voice said to her the third 
time: "Hadewijk, I tell thee, come out!" Seeing 
the door open, she put on her hood, and went out 
of the prison, but did not know where to conceal 
herself. She went provisionally into the church, 
where she soon heard those who came there relate 
that the gates of the city had been closed because 
a certain Anabaptist woman had escaped from 
prison, no one knowing how, there being great 
reason to suspect sorcery in the matter, for which 
reason very diligent search was being made for her 
everywhere. Just as she left the church she heard 
the drummer in the street exclaim that whoever 
could point out her person, should receive one hun- 
dred guilders, but whoever concealed her should 
forfeit one hundred and fifty guilders, which in- 
creased her fear more and more. Trusting herself 
by no means into her own house, and yet compelled 
to seek shelter somewhere, she went to the house of 
her former master and mistress, whom she, before 
she was married, had served very faithfully for 
sometime, and who therefore thought much of her. 
These she entreated whether they would not please 
give her shelter in this distress, but they refused to 
do it ; whereupon she went away as in despair, and 
came before the priest's house, where lived a cer- 
tain half-witted fellow, well-known to her, whom 
she, as he was standing at the door, addressed, ask- 
ing him to conceal her ; which he did, taking her up 
into the garret, and providing her with food and 
drink ; but in the night he came to her, and made 
indecent advances to her. Here the embarrassment 
was greater than ever ; she had to deal with one 
who was strong of body and passions, with whom 
reasoning had little influence ; if she made an out- 
cry her life was in danger ; she therefore lifted up 
her soul, and betook herself to her Redeemer, and 
called upon Him for help in this great distress, and 
also entreated this fellow to desist from so evil a 
deed, because it would be adultery and she had a 
husband; and adulterers and adulteresses had to 
burn forever in hell; whereupon he left her in 
peace and went away, saying: "The jade is too 
wise in the Scriptures; I have no chance with 
her." The next day he went to the Zuypmarket, to 
Hadewijk's brother-in-law, who daily brought but- 
termilk there for sale, and told him that he had. 


unknown to anyone, concealed his sister-in-law 
in the priest's house, and advised him to come 
with his boat to the back stairs of the priest's house, 
there to take her into the boat, and carry her out 
of the city through the floodgate, which he did, 
and thus this lamb Hadewijk, through the miracu- 
lous hand of God, escaped the claws of the raven- 
ing wolves, fled to Emden, and lived the remainder 
of her life in the meetinghouses of the Anabaptists, 
where she fell asleep in the Lord. 

Remmeltje Wubbers, from whom I have this ac- 
count, heard it only frequently from her parents 
and others, but also from the woman who attended 
Hadewijk in her last sickness, to whom Hade- 
wijk related it with her own lips. 


OF A PIOUS BROTHER WHO WAS PUT TO DEATH FOR 

THE WORD OF GOD, IN THE CITY OF VUREN 

IN FLANDERS, A. D. 1553 

About the year 1553, there was put to death with 
the sword, in the city of Vuren, in Flanders, for the 
testimony of Jesus, a God-fearing, pious brother, 
who had to endure many severe conflicts from the 
papists, the adversaries of the truth; but as a 
valiant hero of Christ he would not fear them that 
kill the body, but sought much rather to please 
Him who after this temporal death has power also 
to cast into hell, into everlasting fire, where the 
worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. He 
therefore comforted his sorrowful wife, who was 
pregnant, and whom he loved dearly, with the 
Word of God, fearing that adversity was in store 
for her ; that she should not regard the torments 
inflicted upon him for the Word of God. They 
sentenced him to be executed with the sword; 
hence he took affectionate leave from all his breth- 
ren, and, as a humble lamb, following the footsteps 
of his Leader Jesus, ascended the scaffold ; but the 
evening wolves, which let nothing remain until 
the morning, by which and other fruits they may be 
known, retained their wolfish nature, so that they 
killed this friend of God with seven cruel blows, 
and finally sawed off his head, so that through great 
sorrow many a tear was shed by the people who 
were present and witnessed this martyrdom. His 
poor, pregnant wife lamented greatly, so that she 
died with her fruit from excess of grief. Many 
witnessed this heinous murder, perpetrated by the 
bloodthirsty ; but the great and faithful God, who 
regards the sufferings of His own, as though the 
apple of His eye had been touched, will avenge 
this in due time. O how will these bloodthirsty 
men excuse themselves, when the chief Shep- 
herd shall appear in the clouds, and require an 
account of this matter ! But those faithful heroes 
and adventurers of God, who did not dare deprive 
their Creator of His divine honor, but would serve 
Him rightly according to His Word, and gave their 
lives therefor, they have the promise from the 
mouth of Jesus, that He will confess them before 
His Father in heaven, that it is the Father's good 


548 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


pleasure to give this little flock His glorious king- 
dom, and that all who here suffer with Christ for 
righteousness' sake, shall rejoice forever with God. 
Matt. 10:32; Luke 12:8, 32; Matt. 5:10. 

Concerning this, read hymn in the old hymn- 
book. 


PIETER WITSES, A MASON, STRANGLED AT THE 
STAKE, AT LEEUWARDEN, AND HIS CONFES- 
SION WHILE IMPRISONED IN THAT CITY 
WHERE HE LAID DOWN HIS LIFE FOR 
THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS, IN 
THE YEAR 1553 

In Questions and Answers 

Question. "What is your name?" Answer. 
"Pieter Witses." Ques. "How old are you?" Ans. 
"Twenty-seven years." Ques. "When were you 
to confession last?" Ans. "I confess everyday, 
and acknowledge that I am a sinner." Ques. 
"What do you think of the sacrament?" Ans. "I 
esteem it highly." Ques. "What do you think 
of the sacrament which the priest gives on Easter ?" 
Ans. "Nothing." Ques. "Christ said: 'Take, 
eat ; this is my flesh.' " Ans. "It is true ; but He 
spake it to those who were obedient to Him." Ques. 
"Are you also rebaptized ?" Ans. "I know of no 
rebaptism ; I was baptized once, and that according 
to the teaching of God." Ques. "How long ago ?" 
Ans. "About a year and a half." 

Then Pieter was put into a dungeon, and having 
been there for about an hour, was again taken be- 
fore the lords, and asked anew : "Pieter, are you 
seduced? will you not suffer yourself to be in- 
structed?" Ans. "Yes, gladly; he that rejects 
reproof and instruction is miserable. Prov. 10:17. 
Take a Testament, and instruct me." Ques. "We 
are no teachers ; will you not suffer yourself to be 
instructed by priests?" Ans. "God is the best 
priest ; He will instruct me, and to this I shall ad- 
here by the grace of God." Ques. "Some vaga- 
bond has been preaching to you." They further 
said that they had read in the Old Testament, that 
many children were baptized. Pieter replied : "I 
have read nothing about this; I have read that 
Christ commanded to baptize believers. Matthew 
28:19; Mark 16:16; that it was practiced by the 
apostles, Acts 2 :38 ; and that Peter taught : 'Re- 
pent, and be baptized every one of you in the name 
of Jesus Christ, and ye shall receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to 
your children,' " etc. He also quoted John 3. 

Then they said : "Pieter, you are deceived ; are 
your brethren also thus minded?" He replied: 
"What do I know about my brethren ? I can speak 
of what God has given me ; that I know." He fur- 
ther quoted the words of Christ, where He says : 
Go into all the world ; preach and teach : he that be- 
lieveth and is baptized shall be saved. Mark 16 :16. 
Also, that Christ came to John at the Jordan, to be 
baptized of him, in order that He might fulfill all 
righteousness for us, to be an example, that we 


should follow His steps. Matt. 3 :13, 15; I Pet. 2 : 
21. And after Christ's suffering the apostles, who 
were His body and church, practiced it. 

Concerning their supper, he confessed, that he 
thought nothing at all of it. They admonished him 
with the Gospel, which he regarded as all right, but 
not as having been said with reference to their 
church ; for Christ, said he, said to His apostles : 
"Take, eat ; this is my body, which is broken for 
you." Also the cup : "Drink ye all of it ; for this is 
the cup of the new testament in my blood, which is 
shed for many for the remission of sins." Matthew 
26 :26-28. 

Christians are to observe it, as Paul teaches the 
Corinthians, where it is clearly expressed. I Cor. 
10:16. They said that the supper which they eat 
and drink was true flesh and blood, and asked me 
whether we did not also thus eat and drink it I 
replied: "Christ said: 'The flesh profiteth noth- 
ing, eaten outwardly; but the word is spirit and 
life.' John 6 :63. And our church is not without 
the body of Christ." 


A BRIEF ADMONITION FROM PIETER WITSES 

Christ said, Matt. 24 :5 : "Many shall come in my 
name, paying, I am Christ; and shall deceive 
many ; ' which words are true ; for when you con- 
fess your sins to them, they forgive them, as they 
say. This they have carried on since the Gospel 
has been hid, and they do it yetL Paul also fore- 
told this to Timothy (I Tim. 4:2; II Tim. 3:2) ; 
Christ says, Matt. 7:15: "Beware of false proph- 
ets," etc., and John also writes much concerning 
this, in the tenth chapter of his Gospel. Also, Jude 
and Peter. But these are as natural brute beasts, 
made to be taken and destroyed ; they speak evil of 
the things that they understand not. Again : They 
hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web. 
Isa. 59:5. They daub the wall with untempered 
mortar, and put pillows under men's arms. Ezek. 
13 :10, 18. And although the church flee into caves, 
the confession abides forever. They cannot resist ; 
for they deny the power of God; they love the 
broad way; the cross of Christ is foolishness to 
them. II Tim. 3 :5 ; I Cor. 1 :18. 

Concerning these, God gave me something to 
speak. I perceive nothing but the abomination of 
desolation of which the prophet Daniel speaks, and 
of which Christ also says that He will scarcely find 
faith upon earth. Dan. 9 :27 ; Luke 18 :8. But be of 
good cheer ; and fight in faith, well knowing that it 
is the word of truth, which cannot fail. Upon this 
through the grace of Christ, I have built and He 
will keep me, and I will daily trust in Him, knowing 
and feeling confident that there is no power, might, 
or dominion in heaven or on earth, save only of 
Him. Hence, give diligent heed ; prove yourselves 
in your consciences, as to what you seek — every 
work will be made manifest. Read and examine 
diligently for it greatly concerns us all. The au- 
thorities can by no torturing seduce one, but the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


549 


erring spirits come with deceitful snares, in the 
name of Christ; but we are sufficiently warned. 
Matt. 7:21; I Tim. 4:1; II Tim. 3:5; Tit. 1:10; 
Rom. 16 :17 ; Phil. 3 ; II Pet. 2 ; Jude 1. 

My dear friends, they thus assail me with ques- 
tions as much as they can. Give the young and sim- 
ple hearts good instruction regarding the Lord's 
Supper, for I know what happens to me. If the 
house is truly built upon the cornerstone, it cannot 
fall. Let everyone take good heed ; for the time of 
trial is at hand, and we know that it will not always 
stop at mere words ; for Christ Himself suffered. 
If they laid their hands on His blessed body, they 
will do the same to us. Let us arm ourselves with 
the Word of God ; for the Word of God is the true 
door. It is the bread of life. The time of weeping 
is come ; hence our deliverance is nigh. Let us pray 
for grace. The time is come that judgment must 
begin at the house of God ; and if it first begin at us, 
what shall the end be of them that believe not in 
the Word? I Pet. 4:17. My brethren, do not for- 
get us poor sheep in your prayers, for us who for 
the truth are kept in bonds by the authorities. Care 
for them that live among you ; for Christ will say : 
"I was naked, and you clothed me," etc. Matt. 25 : 
36. Pray and watch; the abomination of desola- 
tion is drawing nigh; cease not, but be of good 
courage, for greater is He that is in us, than he that 
is in the world. I John 4 :4. I affectionately desire, 
that you be diligent, lest you be deceived, for the 
times now are perilous. Know, that whenever I 
was brought before them, I kept down my own 
thoughts, and prayed Almighty God, that He would 
open my mouth according to His good pleasure, and 
believe it freely, He gave abundant comfort to the 
humble. They assented to me in many things, when 
I spoke with them with a meek spirit by the grace 
of God. My dear friends receive it kindly. May 
the Lord preserve you from wicked deceivers. Pray 
and watch, the times are perilous ; and do not forget 
us in your prayers, and visit us sometimes, it is 
very edifying ; may the Lord preserve us all. 


PIETER WITSES TO HIS WIFE 

My dear chosen wife, abide in God, and mingle 
not with the wicked; for if the righteous draw 
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, says 
the Lord. John 2:28; Ps. 1:1; Heb. 10:38. The 
time of my departure seems to be nigh ; may it take 
place with God. When the hour of parting comes, 
fear not, but guard your lips. My dear wife, abide 
in the grace of God given you. 


DAVID AND LEVINA, A. D. 1554 

In the year 1554, there was imprisoned at Ghent, 
in Flanders, for following Christ and living ac- 
cording to God's commandments, a young brother 
named David, who, when examined, freely con- 
fessed his faith. Being asked what he thought of 
the sacrament, David said, that he considered it 
nothing else than idolatry. Then a priest said to 


him : "Friend, you err greatly, that you so readily 
confess your faith, for it will cost you your life, if 
you do not change your mind in time." Thereupon 
David sweetly replied: "I am ready to shed my 
blood for the name of Christ, even though it should 
be here in this place ; for God is my salvation, who 
will keep me, and preserve me from all evil." The 
priest said : "It will not be as good as though you 
were put to death secretly here in this place ; but 
you will be burnt publicly at the stake, for an ever- 
lasting reproach." He was then brought into the 
court, where he was condemned to death, and his 
sentence was read, namely, that he had fallen from 
the true faith into heresy, and was therefore, ac- 
cording to the imperial edict, sentenced to be 
strangled and burned. David said : "No one will 
ever be able to prove by the Scriptures, that the 
faith for which I must now die is heresy." 

There was also sentenced to death with him a 
woman named Levina, who rather forsook, not 
only her six dear children, but also her temporal 
life, than her dear Lord and Bridegroom Jesus 
Christ. Arriving on the scaffold, David attempted 
to kneel down in order to offer up his prayer to 
God, but he was prevented, and they were immedi- 
ately driven away to the stakes, standing at which, 
David said to Levina: "Rejoice, dear sister; for 
what we suffer here is not to be compared with the 
eternal good that awaits us." Rom. 8:18. When 
about to offer up their sacrifice, both exclaimed: 
"Father, into thy hands do we commend our spir- 
its." A little bag of gunpowder was tied to each 
of them, whereupon they were strangled and 
burned. But there happened a manifest miracle of 
God ; for though they were completely burned, and 
the fire was as good as extinguished, David was 
seen to move his head, so that the people ex- 
claimed : "He still lives." The executioner seized 
the fork, and thrust it three times into his bowels, 
so that the blood flowed out ; yet even after this he 
was still seen to move, hence, the executioner threw 
a chain around his neck, and bound him to the stake, 
and thus broke his neck. 

Thus these two valiantly fought their way 
through, firmly trusting in God, who did not let 
them be confounded, since they had firmly built 
their building upon the only foundation; where- 
fore they shall never perish, but abide forever. 


WILLIAM VAN LOUVAIN, A. D. 1554 

In the year 1554, there was put to death for the 
testimony of the truth, at Ghent, in Flanders, a 
pious witness of God, named William Van Lou- 
vain, the grandfather of Jan Doom. He did not suf- 
fer for any crime or heresy, but only for the testi- 
mony of the truth, in a good conscience, having re- 
nounced the Babylonian whore, together with her 
lovers, and all her false worship, and united him- 
self with Christ, following Him with the whole 
heart in the regeneration, and through faith, over- 
coming this world with all that is therein, whereby 


550 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


he finally, through grace, obtained the end of the 
faith, that is, eternal salvation, through Christ 
Jesus. 


PIETER WITH THE LAME FOOT, JAN DROOGH- 

SCHEERDER, HANS RORDUERWERCKER, AND 

FRANS SWEERDTVEGER, A. D. 1555 

In the year 1555, the young nobleman Jan van 
Immerseele having become Margrave, four breth- 
ren were apprehended at Antwerp, for the testi- 
mony of the truth, namely, Pieter with the lame 
foot, Jan Drooghscheerder, Hans Borduerwerck- 
er, and Frans Sweerdtveger, who, as they valiantly 
adhered to it, and could not be brought to aposta- 
tize, were finally sentenced to death, and had to lay 
down their lives publicly in the marketplace, for the 
name of the Lord, for which He will well reward 
them. 


TANNEKEN VAN DER LEYEN, A. D. 1555 

In said year there was also apprehended at Ant- 
werp, a young maiden from Ghent, named Tanne- 
ken van der Leyen, who loved God and His truth 
more than all that was in the world ; hence, since 
she preferred the doctrine of Christ and His apos- 
tles to all human doctrine, and immovably adhered 
to it, she was condemned to death, and drowned 
in the Scheldt. 


BARTHOLOMEW THE POTTER, A. D. 1555 

Bartholomew the potter, who was a vessel of 
honor in the house of God (II Tim. 2 :20) , was also 
apprehended for his faith, at Antwerp, examined, 
much afflicted, and finally, sentence having been 
pronounced, publicly put to death in the market 
place, as a pious witness of Jesus Christ. 


ROMMEKEN PUT TO DEATH, A. D. 1555 

About this time, also Rommeken, a noted child 
of God, publicly declared and sealed with his blood 
the divine truth, in the marketplace at Antwerp ; 
wherefore Christ will also declare and confess him 
before His Father in heaven. 


HANS PICHNER, OF SAL, A. D. 1555 

In the year 1555, Hans Pichner of Sal, was ap- 
prehended at Vorst, in Etschland or Vintschgau, 
and taken by the beadles to Schanters, before the 
judge, who was a dreadful tyrant and of a very 
fierce disposition. He immediately examined John, 
rigorously questioning him, that he should betray 
the one that had lodged him ; but when he would 
not do it, he was speedily tortured from the first 
day. All their torturing, however, was in vain, and 
they were greatly vexed that they could obtain 
no information from him. Several times he was 
stripped, and, while being tortured, left suspended 
by cords for several hours, yea, he was so 
stretched, that he could not stand upon his feet, or 


take a single step, nor bring his hand to his mouth 
to eat ; yet he was not to be seduced, but remained 
steadfast in the Lord. After this, they bound him 
hand and foot, and kept him imprisoned in a dark 
dungeon for more than six months. They also 
brought to him many men of worldly erudition (if 
peradventure they might be able to draw him away 
from his faith), as priests and monks, also some 
noblemen, who mightily assailed him for two days 
and one whole night ; but they were put to shame ; 
for he convinced them with the truth, and was not 
to be intimidated. 

After this, they sentenced him to death, and led 
him out to the place of execution, where he ex- 
horted the people, who had gathered in great num- 
bers, to repentance. Finally he was placed with 
his back, in a sitting posture, against a block of 
wood, and thus beheaded ; for they had racked and 
tortured him so lamentably that he was unable to 
kneel. But he nevertheless adhered firmly to the 
Lord and His truth ; therefore God kept him in the 
hour of his temptation, and he shall henceforth not 
be hurt of the second death ; he shall not see the 
eternal fire, but shall enter into an innumerable 
company of angels, to the supper and marriage of 
the Lamb, clothed in linen clean and white, where 
will be exceeding joy forever and ever. Rev. 3-10* 
2:ll;Heb. 12:22; Rev. 3:20. 


CHRISTIAN EXECUTED WITH THE SWORD, IN THE 
YEAR 1555 

In the year 1555, a brother named Christian was 
apprehended, in Bavaria, and taken to Worms, and 
although he had been in the church only a short 
time, he nevertheless faithfully adhered to the di- 
vine truth, which he had embraced and confessed, 
and firmly kept until death what he had promised 
God in the covenant of his Christian baptism ; and, 
through divine power and strength, testified to the 
faith with his blood. He was executed with the 
sword, at Worms. Thus he fought a good fight 
even unto death, strove for the truth, safely finished 
his course, and refused to be led astray, preferring 
a valiant death to a shameful life. Hence, there is 
promised to him the crown of righteousness, which 
the Lord, at the last day, will give him, and unto 
all them that love His appearing. II Tim. 4 :8. 

DIGNA PIETERS, AFTER ENDURING MUCH AFFLIC- 
TION, PUT INTO A BAG AND DROWNED, IN PUT- 
TOX TOWER, AT DORDRECHT, FOR THE 
TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, ON THE 
23RD OF NOVEMBER, 1555 

A. D. 1555, unholy hands were laid, at Dor- 
drecht, in Holland, upon several of the saints of 
God, of whom, among others, there is mentioned 
by name, a God-fearing woman, named Digna 
Pieters, who being a citizeness of said city, had 
at the same time a citizenship also in the spirit- 
ual city of God, that is, in the church of Jesus 
Christ on earth, yea, also, because of her integrity, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


551 


in the new and heavenly Jerusalem, which is above, 
in which, and of which, she was regenerated by the 
Word of truth. 

On account of the faith which she had in com- 
mon with the dear friends and children of God, 
she was imprisoned, and severely proceeded against 
in various ways, for the purpose of causing her to 
apostatize from the faith. But as they could make 
no progress in the matter, since she was founded 
upon the immovable cornerstone, that is, Christ 
Jesus, they resolved to put an end to her citizen- 
ship, and at the same time also to her life. There- 
upon it followed that the chamber of justice, 
through the instrumentality of the bench of judges 
and the council of said city, with public striking 
of the bell, disfranchised her, before the steps lead- 
ing up to the city hall, on the 17th of November 
of said year, to be further dealt with as the lords 
of said chamber should find or judge proper. 

Concerning this, there remains, though almost 
obliterated by age, the following act in the book 
of records of said city, in the keeping of the secre- 
tary there: 

Actum per Campanam* the \7th of Nov., 1555. 

Whereas Digna Pieters, citizeness of this city, at 
present a prisoner, has without pain of iron bonds, 
openly confessed before the bench of judges, and 
the council of this city, to have been rebaptized, 
etc.,f also to have held conventicles, contrary to 
the faith, holy sacraments, and other services and 
ceremonies of the holy church ; therefore, the coun- 
cil of the aforesaid city has disfranchised said 
Digna Pieters, and disfranchises her by these pres- 
ents, further to be proceeded against, as the afore- 
said council, according to the exigency and circum- 
stances of the case, shall deem proper. 

Thereupon follows in said book, how the cham- 
ber of justice proceeded against her, six days after- 
wards, in regard to which the following words are 
found. 

Digna Pieters drowned 

Today, the 23rd of November, A. D. 1555, Digna 
Pieters, by virtue of a certain sentence given and 
pronounced^ by the bench of judges, and the coun- 
cil of this city, (by the mouth of Wouter Barthouts, 
judge in the law) was put into a bag, and drowned, 
in Puttox Tower. 

Extracted from the book of records of the city 
of Dordrecht, commenced the last day of October, 
1554, and concluded the 16th of June, 1573. 

This was the end of this valiant heroine of Jesus, 
who, though she was secretly murdered in a tower, 
like Joris Wippe and others, will hereafter, in the 
great day of the Lord, be brought openly to light ; 
then it shall be seen what difference there will be 


between those who did this, and her who suffered 
it, since everyone shall receive in his body accord- 
ing to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. 
II Cor. 5 :10. 

This Puttox Tower, where this martyrdom took 
place, stood close by the gate of the Grootehooft 
of the city of Dordrecht; but it afterwards fell 
by reason of great age, or as a signal warning of 
God on account of this murder. In its place stands 
now a house, in the gable of which these words are 
carved in hard stone: 

"Through the falling of Puttox-Tower 
I was built, and stand to this hour." 

As to the persons who in said year administered 
criminal (or capital) justice, and, consequently, ex- 
ecuted this work, they were, according to John 
Beverwijck's history of the government of the city 
of Dordrecht, the following: Adrian van Blyen- 
bergh Adriaenss, bailiff; and nine judges as fol- 
lows: Jacob Adriaenss; Philips van Beverwijck 
Ogierss; Maerten Schrevel Dirckss; Jacob Oem 
Sir Jacobss; Pieter Muys Jacobss; Schrevel Sir 
Ockerss ; Wouter Barthouts ; Cornells van Beveren 
Sir Claess ; Wouter van Drenkwaert Sir Wilmss. 

But whether all these judges, together with the 
bailiff, concurred in the aforesaid sentence; or 
whether Wouter Barthouts, who was present at her 
death, was the chief instigator of this work, is not 
expressed ; however, it seems that the majority did 
not have much pleasure in it, since Wouter Bar- 
thouts alone, as it seems, with the executioner and 
the servants of justice, was present at the death of 
this woman. 


* "Actum per Campanam", i.e., done through the bell (or strik- 
ing of the bell). 

t "And to hold pernicious views with regard to baptism," etc., 
it seems to read here. 

t Whether it was customary in the city at that time, to read in 
court sentences of death passed in matters of faith, we have not 
been able to ascertain. 


RENEWAL OF THE PREVIOUS BLOODY DECREES OF 

EMPEROR CHARLES V, AGAINST THE BAPTISTS 

OR SO-CALLED ANABAPTISTS, BY PHILIP II, 

KING OF SPAIN, A. D. 1556 

Up to this time, Emperor Charles V was alone, 
or at least chiefly responsible for the shedding of 
the blood of the saints in the Netherlands, as also 
for the most cruel tyrannies which, through the in- 
strumentality of the Inquisition, and through what 
followed afterwards, were inflicted upon them, by 
fire, water, sword, and otherwise ; but in this year, 
his son, Philip II, King of Spain, following in his 
father's footsteps (instead of lightening the con- 
straint of conscience) caused all the previous 
bloody and cruel decrees which his father had is- 
sued against the so-called heretics, to be renewed 
and confirmed, especially the most cruel decree 
published on the 25th of September, 1550, the con- 
tents of which we have reserved until the present 
time, but will now, as renewed A. D. 1556, adduce 
here, however not with all its particulars, but 
only so far as it was directed (principally) against 
the Anabaptists and their doctrine. 

In the book in which the prince of Orange, Wil- 
liam I, defends himself against the false charges, 
which his adversaries sought unjustly to bring 


552 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


against him, printed 1569, mention of this is made 
(p. 165, letter L. VI.), in the following words. 

Of the ordinances and decrees made for all times, 

and for general observance, and proclaimed 

everywhere, from the 25th of September, 

1550, and renewed and confirmed by 

his Royal Majesty in the year 1556 

We likewise forbid all lay persons, and others, to 
converse or dispute concerning the holy Scriptures, 
whether openly or secretly, especially in doubtful 
and difficult matters ; or to teach, expound or inter- 
pret the holy Scriptures to others, unless they [who 
do so] be theologians and versed in divinity and 
spiritual law, and approved by some notable uni- 
versity, or others authorized thereto by the ordinary 
of the place ; be it well understood, however, that 
this is not to be regarded as relating to those who 
simply and exclusively converse together on the 
aforesaid holy Scriptures, adducing thereto the ex- 
positions of holy and approved doctors; but to 
those who, in order to seduce others, or to teach 
and instruct them in that which is forbidden, main- 
tain and teach, contrary to the ordinances of our 
mother, the holy church, evil and false propositions 
and doctrines, who are notoriously considered her- 
etics; or to preach, defend, allege or maintain, 
openly or secretly, any doctrines of the afore-men- 
tioned authors. 

On pain, that if any be found to have acted con- 
trary to any of the above stated points, they shall 
be punished as seditious persons, and disturbers of 
our realm and the common peace, and be executed 
as such: 

Namely, the men with the sword, and the women 
buried alive ; that is, if they will not maintain or de- 
fend their errors ; but if they persist in their errors, 
opinions, or heresies, they are to be executed with 
fire ; and in every case all their property is declared 
confiscated, and forfeited for our benefit. 

And as regards what we had ordained in our 
previous decrees and our last ordinances, that from 
the day they had acted contrary thereto, or had 
fallen into the aforesaid errors, they should be dis- 
qualified from disposing of their property, and that 
all alienations, gifts, cessions, sales, conveyances, 
transfers, testaments, or last wills, made and exe- 
cuted by them from said day on, should be null, 
invalid and void. 

Again (page 168) : Since many, from our afore- 
said countries, suspected of heresy, especially of the 
sect of the Anabaptists, change their place of abode, 
to infect the simple in places where their character 
is not known ; we, in order to guard against this, 
will, ordain, and decree, that none of the inhabitants 
of our aforesaid Netherlands, of whatever state, 
quality or condition he be, shall be admitted or re- 
ceived into any city or village, of said countries, 
there to live, except he brings with him a certificate 
from the parish priest of the place where he last 
resided. 


Which certificate he shall be obliged to show and 
deliver into the hands of the principal officer of the 
city or village where he intends to live; on pain 
that those who do not bring such certificates shall 
not be admitted there to live. 

And we charge the officers diligently to inform 
themselves with regard to them, and to proceed 
therein as shall be proper, without our aforesaid 
officers, or the particular lords, and their officers, 
being permitted to grant such persons any pass or 
safe conduct. 

Again (page 171) : That all who have knowledge 
of any that are tainted with heresy, shall be bound, 
immediately and without delay to accuse, report! 
and indicate them to all spiritual judges, deputies of 
the bishops, and other proper persons. 

Likewise, if any be found to have acted contrary 
to these our ordinances and prohibitions, showing 
himself to be infected, or favorer of the heretics, 
or committing any act contrary to these our ordi- 
nances and prohibitions, especially anything tend- 
ing to scandal or sedition, that those who have 
knowledge of them shall be bound, immediately to 
report it to our proctors, or their substitutes and 
commissaries, or to the officers of the place where 
such tainted favorers or offenders shall live ; and 
this on pain of arbitrary punishment. 

In like manner, they shall be bound, if they know 
the place where any of such heretics keep or shel- 
ter themselves, to indicate it to the officer of said 
place, on pain of being considered, as stated before, 
favorers, entertainers and adherents of heresy, and 
punished with the same punishment as would be 
inflicted upon the heretic or offender, if he should 
be apprehended. 

And in order that the aforesaid judges and offi- 
cers, who shall apprehend said heretics, Ana- 
baptists, and transgressors of our aforesaid ordi- 
nances and prohibitions, may have no reason, under 
the pretence that the punishments seem too great 
and severe, and were only decreed to deter the de- 
linquents (Anabaptists), and offenders, to dis- 
semble with them, their accomplices and favorers, 
or to punish them less than they have deserved, as 
has been found to have frequently been done here- 
tofore; therefore, we will that those whom they 
know to have acted contrary to these ordinances, or 
who have kept in their possession, printed, sold, dis- 
tributed, or published any heretical scandalous 
books, writings ... or have contravened the 
points already indicated, or to be stated hereafter, 
or some of them, shall be actually punished and 
corrected with the punishments set forth above. 

We forbid all our judges, justiciaries and officers, 
as also our vassals and subjects, temporal lords, 
who exercise high justice, and their officers, in any 
wise to alter, mitigate or change the aforesaid pun- 
ishments (those ordained to be inflicted with the 
sword, earth, or fire) ; but; on having taken cog- 
nizance of such contravention plainly do declare 
and decree the aforesaid punishments, pursuant to 
these present ordinances, on pain of being severely 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


553 


punished ; unless that in some particular case, said 
judges, because of great and important considera- 
tions, should find difficulty as to the exact execution 
of the punishment decreed against the transgressor 
by our aforesaid ordinances. 

In which case they may nevertheless not mitigate 
the punishment of their own accord ; but shall be 
bound to carry or send the criminal process, faith- 
fully closed and sealed, to the sovereign or provin- 
cial council, under whose jurisdiction they shall be- 
long, there to be examined and deliberated on as 
to whether any alteration or mitigation of the afore- 
said punishment is proper or not. 

And if our aforesaid councilors find, that in good 
justice, according to right and reason (in regard to 
which we charge their consciences), any mitigation 
or alteration is proper, in such a case they may ad- 
vise them by writing, and send it all to said judges 
and officers, that the latter may finish and terminate 
said process in accordance with it. 

We command them to do nothing less, and en- 
join them very expressly and strictly, on pain of 
being arbitrarily corrected and punished, not to 
make use of said consultations without great and 
important reasons, but be governed, as much as 
they can, by the contents of these present ordi- 
nances. 

Extracted from the great book of decrees of 
Ghent in which are collected all the decrees, man- 
dates, and ordinances of Emperor Charles V, and 
of King Philip II ; and cited by William I, Prince 
of Orange, in his defense against his adversaries, 
edition 1569, from p. 165-174 inclusive. 


AUGUSTINE THE BAKER, A. D. 1556 

A. D. 1556, or thereabouts, there was in Bever- 
wijk, a brother named Augustine, a baker by trade, 
who had forsaken the world, and been baptized 
upon his faith, according to the ordinance of 
Christ, which the papists could not endure. There 
was at that time a burgomaster who was very bitter, 
and filled with perverted zeal, who sometimes said 
that he would furnish the peat and wood to burn 
Augustine. The bailiff had said that he should not 
apprehend Augustine without previously warning 
him ; but he did not keep his word ; for he came 
upon a time when Augustine was at his work, 
kneading dough. Perceiving him, _ Augustine at- 
tempted to flee, but was instantly seized by his pur- 
suers, and cast into prison ; and as he was a man 
who was much beloved, it greatly grieved the bail- 
iff's wife, who said to her husband : "O you mur- 
derer, what have you done !" but all in vain, he had 
to follow his Lord Jesus as a lamb is led to the 
slaughter. As he steadfastly adhered to his faith, 
they passed a cruel sentence on him, namely that 
he should be tied to a ladder, and thus cast alive 
into the fire, and burnt. On his way to death, he 
saw one of his acquaintances, to whom he said : 
"Farewell, Joost Cornelissen." The latter, prompt- 
ed by his good opinion of him, replied in a friendly 


manner: "I hope that we shall hereafter be to- 
gether forever;" whereupon said burgomaster re- 
plied out of a heart judging with partiality: "He 
will not get to the place whither you will go ; but 
he goes from this fire into the eternal." There- 
upon Augustine said to the burgomaster : "I cite 
you to appear within three days before the judg- 
ment seat of God." As soon as the execution was 
over, the burgomaster was instantly smitten with 
a raging sickness, and continually cried with a 
guilty conscience: "Peat and wood, peat and 
wood !" so that it was terrible to hear ; and before 
the three days had expired, he died ; which was a 
great sign of the all-seeing eye of God, who would 
not suffer such cruelty to go unpunished, as an ex- 
ample to all those who from perverse blindness 
should commit such deeds. For it is often seen 
that those who think to do God service by exer- 
cising tyrannical cruelty over the pious, come to a 
bad end ; for the apostle James also says that they 
shall have judgment without mercy that have 
shown no mercy. May the Lord enlighten those 
who are in such blindness. 


FRANCIJNTGEN, GRIETGEN, AND MAEYKEN DOOR- 
NAERTS, A. D. 1556 

At Belle, in Flanders, three women were appre- 
hended for the testimony of the truth, namely, an 
old woman named Francijntgen, a young maiden 
named Grietgen, and niece to the former, and an- 
other young maiden, named Maeyken Doornaerts, 
all of whom suffered much tribulation and torment. 
The old woman, when they wanted to torture her 
naked, said to the lords: "Remember that you 
were born of women ; therefore, do not put me to 
shame ;" by which she obtained leave to keep on her 
shift on the rack. Great pains were taken to draw 
the young maiden Grietgen from her faith, since 
she was still very young ; but it was all in vain, for 
she would much rather expect eternal joy for this 
temporal pain or suffering, than purchase this brief 
and transient pleasure with everlasting suffering. 

The other young maiden, Maeyken Doornaerts, 
also had to lie naked on the rack, and when they 
could by no pain or suffering cause her to aposta- 
tize from her faith, they began to accost her with 
asking her, whether she was not ashamed to lie 
there so nude. She replied : "I did not place my- 
self here naked; but you, who inflict this misery 
and disgrace upon me who am innocent, shall here- 
after have to suffer eternal shame and pain for it." 
And though she was tortured to such a degree, that 
her blood flowed down by the rack, she neverthe- 
less, through the grace of God, who always 
strengthens His own, remained steadfast in the 
faith. Thereupon all three were sentenced to death, 
and burnt. Standing at the stake, Maeyken Door- 
naerts said : "This is the hour for which I have 
greatly longed, that it might put an end to all my 
tribulation." Thus these three heroines, valiantly 
fought their way through, suffering all this, be- 


554 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


cause they were baptized upon their faith (accord- 
ing to the teaching of Christ), and thenceforth 
sought, in all simplicity, to serve and please the 
living God more than mortal men ; for which they 
also expect the joyful crown of eternal and im- 
perishable life. 


ABRAHAM PUT TO DEATH A. D. 1556 

In the year 1556 there was at Antwerp a very 
pious and God-fearing brother named Abraham, 
who was apprehended for his faith, and, after a 
bold confession, and steadfast adherence to the 
same, condemned to death, and thus publicly in 
the marketplace, offered up an acceptable sacrifice 
for God, sealing the truth with his blood. 

JAN DE KUDSE, A. D. 1556 

Shortly after, also Jan de Kudse, an ardent lover 
of God, who had likewise been apprehended for the 
truth, from which he would not depart, meekly 
suffered death as an innocent lamb of Christ, in the 
marketplace at Antwerp, in order to follow his 
Lord ; and thus violently entered through the strait 
gate into the kingdom of God. 

CONFESSION OF CLAES DE PRAET WHO FOR THFJ 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AND HIS WORD 

WAS IMPRISONED AND BURNT AT GHENT, 

AND LAID DOWN HIS LIFE AS A 

BURNT OFFERING UNTO THE LORD 

A. D. 1556 

Grace and peace from God our Father, and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all, my most beloved 
brethren and sisters in the Lord. 

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual bless- 
ings in heavenly places in Christ ; according as He 
hath chosen us in Him before the foundation of the 
world, that we should be holy and without blame 
before Him in love. Let everyone among you walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called so 
that Satan may not torment you in your trial ; and 
diligently exhort one another in love; for I would 
willingly write you an exhortation, but the time is 
not convenient for it, because I am closely watched 
by the jailer, who stands in great fear of the dean. 
Nevertheless, I am greatly inclined to write you 
something about my examination, and the malice 
and forged lies of the priest, by which they think 
to condemn me, but God be praised, who helps me 
gain the victory. I write you this, if haply some 
that are yet young may be edified thereby. 

At first after I was imprisoned, until the sixth 
day I was in great sorrow ; my heart was weighed 
down and heavy, and my flesh feared greatly. I 
said to myself: "Now I must undergo this and 
many other conflicts;*' 1 thought of wife and chil- 
dren ; and Satan went round me to devour me, with 
many strange temptations which it would take too 
long to relate. On the sixth day, in the forenoon, 


the jailer came and called me out of the place where 
I was confined, saying : "Claes, come down, and 
follow me ; and he led the way. My heart kindled 
within me with joy to the Lord my God ; so that all 
my trouble and anxiety was driven from me, as 
dust is swept from the street. Then thought I :'"0 
gracious God ! now I find that Thou art faithful to 
Thy promise. Heb. 10:23. Lord, direct now my 
speech, as Thou hast promised." Heb. 10:23; 
Luke 21 :14. He then led me into a room, where 
sat the chief judge with two other judges, the 
bailiff, and a man with a long beard, who had a 
large book before him, in which to write. They 
regarded me very intently, when I entered the 
room, and I did them great reverence, and bade all 
of them peace. Rom. 13:7. The jailer placed a 
chair for me, and said : "Claes, sit down here ; it 
is so ordered." I sat down with good cheer, the 
heart lifted up to the Lord my God, forgetful of 
myself and the things that are in this world. 

Then they said: "Cover your head." I said- 
Tt is not proper now." The bailiff asked me- 
'What is your name!" I replied: "Claes de 
Praet." Then said he: "Write this, and born in 
this city." The clerk then asked me : "Were you 
born here?" I replied: "I know nothing to the 
contrary." Bailiff. "Where have you been so 
long, Claes? The last time you were away from 
home so long?" Claes. "In Emderland." Bailiff 
What did you do there?" Claes. "I tried to 
learn whether I could not buy or sell, or do some- 
thing, by which to earn my bread." Bailiff. "Yes, 
and to see the brethren, I well perceive." Claes 
Yes, sir bailiff." Bailiff. "Yes, Claes, have you 
received any other baptism than the one you re- 
ceived in your infancy, when you were christened ?" 
Claes. "I don't remember so far back." Bailiff 
Have you received a baptism which you remem- 
ber?" Claes. "Yes, sir bailiff." Bailiff. "How 
long ago?" Claes. "About four years." Then 
they were all greatly astonished. The bailiff asked 
me once more : "How long did you say ?" Then 
the other judge said : "About four years." Then 
the bailiff looked at me very sharply, and asked 
who they were, that had intercourse with me, and 
which of my brethren were also baptized. I replied • 
It is not our way to ask each other : Where are 
you from? or where do you live? or what is your 
name? or what do you do?" Bailiff. "You don't 
want to know it?" Claes. "No, sir bailiff." Bailiff. 
You do it, so as not to bring any one into trouble ?" 
Claes. "Yes, sir bailiff ; for we well know that our 
blood is much sought, and the Lord has permitted 
us to be as wise as serpents." Prov. 1:11; Matt 
10:16. Then the bailiff snarled at me, and they 
talked much Latin with each other. 

The bailiff then asked : "Where was it that you 
received your baptism?" Claes. "At Antwerp" 
Bailiff. "Where there?" Claes. "Between St 
George's gate and the Koeper gate." Bailiff "I n 
what house?" Claes. "In a small, new house." 
Bailiff, "What trade was carried on in it?" Claes 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


555 


"I saw no trade carried on there." Bailiff. "Yea, 
Claes, who was present ? there must have been wit- 
nesses present to testify that you were a brother ?" 
Claes. "There were three or four persons present 
who lived in the house, and the one who brought 
me there." Bailiff. "Who was it that brought you 
there?" Claes. "It was a young man." Bailiff. 
"Where was he from?" Claes. "I did not ask 
him." Bailiff. "How many were baptized with 
you?" Claes. "Three of us." Bailiff. "Where 
were they from?" Claes. "I did not ask them." 
Bailiff. "What trade did they follow?" Claes. 
"One was a journeyman mason, it seemed to me." 
Bailiff. "How did he that brought you there know 
where to find you ?" Claes. "He set the day when 
he would meet me at the Koeper gate." Bailiff. 
"How did you know that the baptizer was in the 
city?" Claes. "I had made inquiries at different 
times, while out trafficking, and thus heard that he 
was there." Bailiff. "Where did you hear that he 
was there?" Then said the chief judge: "They 
know all their people." Bailiff. "Do they still live 
in the house where you were baptized, or don't you 
know this either?" Claes. "Shortly after they were 
all driven from the house." Bailiff. "Then you 
can't tell us anything about it, can you?" Claes. 
"One went to England; another was burnt, and 
where the rest went to I don't know." Bailiff. 
"What kind of man was he who baptized you?" 
Claes. "He appeared to me to be a blameless man." 
Bailiff. "Yes, Claes, how do you know that the man 
that baptized you was blameless?" Then one of the 
judges said: "He said it appeared to him that 
he was blameless." 

The chief judge then said : "These people also 
preach, do they not?" Then the bailiff remarked to 
him : "We used to ask all these questions, but we 
do it no longer." And they rang the bell for the 
jailer to come and take me away. This they put 
on record. 

The clerk asked me what persons from Ghent I 
had left at Emden. I would give him no answer, 
because it was not his business to ask. The judges 
then said to me: "Claes, we will send you men 
that will teach you the true faith." Claes. "I trust 
I have the true faith, and if they will confirm me 
therein, they will be welcome; but if they want 
to draw me away from it, I don't want them." 
Then they said, urgently. "Claes, hear them; 
hear them always." I then heartily thanked the 
judges and the bailiff, since they had been molested 
with me. The jailer's servant then told me to go 
above, and I went. I felt very gloomy, because they 
had not asked me concerning my faith. Two serv- 
ants who had stood at the door and listened, came 
up above to me, and tormented me with many 
things and said : "Poor fellow, that you are, to give 
your life for it, and leave your wife and children in 
want ; it is not right for you to break your mar- 
riage, since God Himself has instituted it." I said : 
"I do not break my marriage, nor does my wife; 
but they are to blame for it, who take me from my 


wife ; they may well take heed what they do." They 
said I should speak that which they wanted to hear. 
I replied: "God did not teach me this;" and ad- 
monished them, to beware of staining their hands 
with such blood. I spoke to them earnestly, and 
they went away, and asked God to grant me my 
greatest happiness. Then I sat there alone, and 
Satan came to tempt me, saying within: "Poor 
man, are you here for the sake of your faith? The 
lords don't ask you concerning your faith, but re- 
garding the baptism you received from such and 
such a man, as you well know." And he tormented 
me with all that he could produce, doing his very 
best to cast me down. Then thought I ; "O thou 
wicked tempter, thou murderer, I well feel that 
thou art the same that tormented Peter, and of 
whom he warned us." I Pet. 5 :8. And I fled to God, 
and commenced a hymn, singing joyfully, and be- 
came glad and happy that I had fought through 
this storm, James 5 :13. I was there about ten 
weeks. 

Then the jailer came, and said : "Claes, come 
hither; here are two royston crows;" and enjoined 
me much to think of my wife and children. I said : 
"I think of them enough; but Christ has said: 
'Whosoever will not forsake father and mother, 
sister and brother, wife, child, yea, his own life, for 
my name's sake, is not worthy of me.' " Matthew 
10:37; Luke 14:26. He said f "It is true, if one 
can do it." He then led me into a room where were 
two Jacobines . They took off their caps, and I did 
the same with mine. They bade me good evening, 
and I them. The one asked me: "What is your 
name, my friend ?" I answered : "Claes," and 
said: "What is your name?" He replied: "Brother 
Peter de Backer," and told me, that he had 
been at the chief judge's, and that the latter had re- 
quested that he should come and instruct me in the 
true faith. I said: "This I have received from 
God." Ques. "What is your faith?" Claes. "I 
believe only in Christ Jesus, that He is the living 
and true Son of God, and that there is no other 
salvation either in heaven or on earth." Ques. "Is 
there nothing else to be believed? What becomes 
of the mother, the holy church, in whom we must 
believe ?" Clones. "Do you know which is the holy 
church?" Ques. "Do you know it, let me hear it?" 
Claes. " I ask you; for you speak of it?" Ans. 
"The same which was it from the time of Christ, 
and of the apostles, and which the apostles main- 
tained and still maintain." Claes. "What one is 
that?" Ans. "The mother, the holy Roman 
church?" Claes. "Is this the apostolic church?" 
Ans. "Yes." Claes. "Did the apostles thus main- 
tain it?" Ans. "Yes, just as we, neither less nor 
more." Claes. "Did the apostles read mass?" 
Ans. Yes." Claes. "Where is this written?" 
Ans. "I will show you ;" and he referred me to the 
Corinthians, where Paul speaks of the supper. 
I Cor. 11:20. I said: "He speaks here of the 
breaking of bread; but did he read mass as you 
do?" Ans. "Yes, neither less nor more than we 


556 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


do." Claes. "Did the apostles persecute and 
maintain their church with fire and sword, as you 
do?" Ans. "Yes, they shed blood, betrayed and 
killed." does. "Peter shed the blood of Malchus, 
and Judas betrayed; but where did they kill any 
one?" Ans. "Peter smote Ananias and Sapphira 
with the sword of his mouth, so that they fell down 
dead." And he laughed and held up his finger. 
Then said I : "It seems to me you belong to those 
of whom Paul speaks (II Tim. 3 :5), whom we are 
to flee ; for your folly does not remain hid, but be- 
comes manifest before men; for you sit and mock 
and loiter, and show plainly, that you are men of 
corrupt minds, ever learning, and never able to 
come to the knowledge of the truth." And I re- 
proved him much. They wanted to prolong the con- 
versation much longer, and question me with re- 
gard to baptism, the incarnation of Christ, and 
other articles of faith ; but I had resolved not to 
dispute with them, without judges being present ; 
but to confess as I confessed above before them. 
When they perceived that I would hear them no 
longer, and was on the point of leaving, one of 
them said: "O Claes, how lamentably you have 
gone astray ; and yet I love you so much ; I would 
tlhat you were of our mind with me, and that I 
might give my body to be burned. O poor man, I 
wifi pray for you, and have others pray for you, 
when I preach." Claes. "I don't want you to 
pray for me, nor that you have others pray for 
me ; for your prayer is vain, and is not heard by 
God, so long as you people continue in your wicked- 
ness." Ans. "Perhaps there are one or two in 
the whole number, that are good." Claes. "Begone ; 
for you only want to talk." Then he went away 
laughing, saying: "I shall have you prayed for, 
whether you desire it or not, for I like you well ; 
and I will come again." 

About two weeks afterwards, there came two of 
the same band ; the one was a large fat man, who 
had much talk in him; the other was very fierce 
and captious in his remarks, and wanted much to 
engage me in a disputation ; but I would not enter 
into any, only that I put many questions to them, 
as I had done to the others, and made them ex- 
pose thejr wickedness themselves ; for very many 
prisoners had come and stationed themselves back 
under the window of the room, and behind the door, 
to listen; which I well knew; hence I asked the 
more, because the one was so loquacious, which 
was owing to him having imbibed too much. 

Having been confined about seven weeks, I was 
called down and led into a room, where sat the 
Dean of Ronse, with his clerk, and another person. 
The dean told me to be seated, and I took a seat 
forward at the table, beside him, whereupon he 
gave me a long lecture, to which I listened. He said 
that it was impossible to please God without faith, 
and that he that did not believe was damned. Final- 
ly he asked me : "Why did you allow yourself to be 
thus seduced, and led into error, and apostatize 
from the holy church?" I replied: "Since it is 


written that it is impossible to please God without 
faith, I was diligent in examining the faith, and 
asking God to strengthen me in it, through His 
grace and mercy. This He has done abundantly, 
and I want to keep it faithfully unto His praise, 
and not to forsake it on account of any suffering 
nor for aught that is in the world." 

Dean. "You think you have the faith, but you 
have departed from it. And that you people are so 
bold and of good cheer even unto death, is all ow- 
ing to the devil, who can transform himself into 
an angel of light. Hence, when you read the Scrip- 
tures, you were instructed by some poor, simple 
tradesman, who taught you the same according to 
his reason ; therefore you are now deceived. You 
should have let those teach you, who have re- 
ceived the true doctrine, the ministers of the holy 
church, that is, the pastors." Claes. "Are they the 
ones that have received the true doctrine?" Dean 
Yes. Claes. "Why, then, do they live the life of 
devils ; as may be seen ?" Dean. "What does that 
concern you ? It is written, Matt. 23 : 'Do after their 
commandments, but not after their works.' " Claes 
'Are you, then, the scribes and Pharisees, of 
whom Matthew has written?" Dean. "Yes." 
Claes. "Then all the woes come upon you, that 
follow further on, in said chapter." Dean "No 
they do not." 

We had much additional discussion yet, with ref- 
erence to this. He would have liked to engage me 
in a disputation concerning the articles of faith; 
but I would not enter into one, confining myself 
to the asking of such questions. The man was will- 
ing in speaking, and very mild, and wanted atten- 
tion to be given to what he said, and also gave 
good attention himself. And I thought : "I have 
heard so long and so much of this man, that he 
persecutes and troubles the church so greatly; I 
must see now, how he will prove it with the Scrip- 
tures, when I speak with him; for I don't know 
that I have ever seen him." 

I asked him, where he found it written, that he 
should run so bloodthirstily after innocent blood, 
which no one could accuse of any crime. Dean. 
"My friend, I don't run after or seek the blood 
of any one." Claes. "You send out your servants 
for that purpose." Dean. "I do not, my friend." 
Claes. "Do you persecute no one, then?" Dean. 
"No, my friend." Claes. "Have you no mandates 
either, by which you cause it to be done?" Dean 
"No, my friend." Claes. "You have certainly de- 
livered to the law my fellow brethren who fell into 
your hands, and remained steadfast in the faith; 
this has been manifest to all the world." Dean "I 
don't do this, my friend." Claes. "Why do you 
come and sit with the judges, and have so much to 
say, if you don't concern yourself about the mat- 
ter? One by hearing you talk, would think you had 
no hand in it." Dean. "No, my friend ;" and he 
rubbed his hands together. Claes. "Who then 
does it?" Dean. "The secular, or the lord who 
has received the sword." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


557 


We had yet much more discussion on this sub- 
ject, so that he did not know which way to turn. 
He asked from Deut. 17 :12, upon which passage 
he founded it, that the priests had the authority, 
etc. I told him that, that was under the law of 
revenge, but that now we were under the law of 
grace. Exodus 21 :23 ; Rom. 6 :14. And I asked 
him, how he dared do something which the Lord 
had forbidden, namely, concerning the tares, Matt. 
13 :30, that both the wheat and the tares should be 
suffered to grow together. I asked him which of 
the two I was, that I must certainly be either the 
wheat or the tares? Dean. "You are the tares." 
Claes. "Why don't you let me grow until the day 
of harvest?" Dean. "What the lord of the field 
commanded his servants was for the reason, that 
they should not spoil the wheat by pulling up the 
tares. But I can go along the edges, and here and 
there pluck out a handful or two, yea, sometimes, 
six, eight, ten, twelve, yea, now and then a hun- 
dred or two, without spoiling the wheat." Claes. 
"Then you are wiser than the servants of the 
Lord." Dean. "1 can certainly well do this." 
Claes. "When I held with the priests and 
walked according to your will, was I a good 
blade?" Deem. "Yes." Claes. "Am I now a bad 
blade?" Dean. "Yes." Claes. "Well, then, if I 
am a bad blade, according to your own words, you 
have yourselves spoiled me, and others, who have 
gone before, by your plucking, and yet you say that 
you can do it so well. O you miserable plucker, 
that you are, when you plucked the four blades 
of Lier, in the Verle place, five years ago, when you 
stood on the scaffold, and preached, and the people 
said : "Antichrist preaches." It was then that I be- 
gan to investigate, what faith it was for which those 
people died so boldly there; and I examined the 
scripture which you quoted from II Tim. 2 and 3. 
And I found that I had to separate from such a 
people as is plainly enough spoken of there, with 
regard to you ; and I separated from such a multi- 
tude, and do so yet. What becomes now of you 
and your plucking, poor plucker; the more you 
pluck, the more you spoil ; according to your own 
words, it were better if you would stop. And I 
told him a great deal from the Scriptures, so that 
he was ashamed, and knew not what to answer. 

At last he said : "Those were not my people ; it 
seems to me, that you have searched the Scriptures 
well; where did you hold your church?" Claes. 
"Where Christ and His apostles held it, behind 
hedges, in the woods, in the field, on mountains, on 
the seacoast, sometimes in houses, or wherever 
they found a place." Luke 6:17; Matt. 5:2; Acts 
1:13. Dean. "Christ preached openly (Jno. 18: 
20) ; but you people cannot be found, where you 
are, or who you are." Claes. "It is certainly a 
great cross for you, that you cannot find them, nor 
know them, and that you people are known so well. 
I hope that God will not permit you to find them ; 
but though you sometimes cut into the branches, I 
trust that you will not cut off the vine. Christ 


Jesus, the living Son of God, will keep and feed 
His branches, so that they may bring forth fruit, 
although you now do your very best to tear and de- 
stroy them." 

We spoke much more yet of the church, and of 
his people, whom he exalted greatly. I asked him 
many questions in regard to whether infants that 
died without baptism were damned. He said: 
"Yes." I asked him whether the apostles had read 
mass and persecuted. And he replied "Yes" to 
everything, so that it seemed to me that the more I 
asked him, the more he lied ; and I reproved him 
for the lies in which I found him. He said : "They 
are not lies, but it is the truth ; but you don't be- 
lieve what is told you; you remain hardened and 
unbelieving." And according to his words, it 
seemed that the life of the apostles was not a whit 
different from that of the priests. He said: "As 
regards your life, your walk or conversation is 
good towards all men, and you do unto your neigh- 
bor as you would have men do unto you, and live 
in peace, love and unity with one another, which 
is very good ; and you assist each other in need and 
distress, and lay down your lives for one another, 
which is also very good, I can say nothing against 
it ; and you expel from your church them that live 
disorderly, as you expelled Jelis of Aix-la-Chapelle, 
who led such a life, as I well know ; against this I 
have nothing to say, it is all well done; but of 
what use is it to your people to have the life, if 
you have not the faith ? it is not able to save you." 
I replied : "We have also the faith ; but you don't 
understand it, or will not understand it ; but it will 
yet be revealed to you, in the last day of the Lord, 
whom you have served." And I assailed him very 
severely. 

He rang the bell for the jailer to let him out. The 
latter came into the room, and the dean rose to go. 
I thanked him much that he had come here for my 
sake. He turned around and said : "I should like 
to see you suffer yourself to be brought on the right 
way ; but you persist obstinately in your unbelief ; 
you are like your master." I asked : "Who is my 
master ?" He replied : "The devil." I assailed him 
with many Scriptures, in order that he should come 
no more, and he went away ashamed, because the 
jailer was present, and other prisoners, who came 
running to the door. I had asked him for informa- 
tion concerning Jelis, and he could tell me every- 
thing, which greatly astonished me. 

The third day after this, the jailer came once 
more for me, and I went down very willingly. He 
directed me to go into a certain room. When I en- 
tered it, there were sitting there the chief judge 
with another judge, and a pastor or priest, who 
was exceedingly bent upon examining our friends, 
and very mordacious in his words, so that he could 
listen to nothing that was said, without interrupting 
it. But one of the judges had never been a judge 
before, and he constantly forbade him; for he 
paid very close attention. When I entered the 
room, I did the lords great reverence, and they did 


558 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the same to me. I Pet. 2:17. I took a seat at the 
table, and the priest made a lengthy harangue, as 
had the dean ; I kept silent till I was asked. When 
he had ended his sermon, he asked me : "Why did 
you suffer yourself to be seduced so miserably 
from the faith into error?" Claes. "I have not 
been led into error, but from error into the true 
Christian faith." Priest. "What then is your 
faith; let us hear?" Claes. "I believe that Jesus 
Christ is the true, living Son of God, and that there 
is no other salvation either in heaven or on earth, 
either under it or above it." Chief Judge. "This 
we all likewise believe in our church." The priest 
laughed, saying: "This I also preach; tell us 
something else, and speak freely ; for Christ said : 
'When you are brought before kings, and princes, 
and magistrates, fear not what ye shall speak ; for 
it shall be given you in that same hour, of my 
heavenly Father, what ye shall speak; yea, my 
spirit shall speak through your mouth.' Matt. 
10:19. Now, if you have received the Holy Spirit, 
speak freely through the Holy Spirit." And the 
chief judge sat there and kept nodding his head, 
and smiling, and saying : "Yes, yes, Claes, yes ;" 
before I could say a single word. The priest con- 
tinued instantly. "Christ promised His church, 
that He would be with them unto the end of the 
world. Matt. 28:20. And I can find none among 
you that can tell me of a longer existence of your 
church than about thirty years; for before that 
it did not exist ; or do you know of any books of 
your people, that are older, then name them to us." 
Claes. "Since Christ promised His church, that He 
should be with her unto the end of the world, I 
doubt not that He has been the preserver of His 
body, and is yet, and will be as long as the world 
will endure, according to His promise, Matt. 28: 
20; Eph. 5 :23. Although she was sometimes extir- 
pated in some countries, through bloodshed and 
persecution, and through the false doctrine of the 
Roman Empire, or otherwise; she was therefore 
not annihilated throughout the world; for the 
world is great, and she could linger in some corner 
of the world, and from one to the other, without 
perishing utterly. And as to your asking me to 
name to you any books of our church, the Bible 
is our book, which has reigned in the church from 
of old." Priest. "Is it big enough for you people, 
and have you enough with one?" Claes. "Yes; 
it is too big yet for us." The priest laughed and 
said: "What becomes then of all the books writ- 
ten from the time of the apostles by learned men, 
who also received the Spirit of God, as well as 
the apostles? have they all written in vain; as 
Jerome, Gregory, Augustine, and Ambrose ; these 
were certainly good and virtuous men, were they 
not?" Claes. "Were these the four pillars upon 
which your church is founded?" Priest. "Yes." 
Claes. "I did not know them, only by hearsay; 
they were pious scullions, if they founded your 
church as it yet is as may be seen." The priest 
drew back, and said : "Why, why !" I said : "Christ 


did not thus found His church, neither did Peter, 
Paul, Stephen, and John; they rather received rods 
on the back, stones on the head, and the sword in 
the neck, and so forth." II Cor. 11 :25 ; Acts 7 :58 ; 

The priest was disconcerted, and said : "Tell us 
the truth about your church; for no one knows 
where to find it ; if it were good, it would certainly 
come to the light ; you people have neither head 
nor authority, nor do you know one another ; this 
is a strange thing." Claes. "Paul teaches us in his 
epistle to the Ephesians, concerning the true church, 
which Christ has presented to Himself, that it is 
glorious, holy and without blemish, without spot or 
wrinkle ; that they are baptized together into one 
Spirit, and into one body, the head of which is 
Christ, and are joined together as members of His 
body. These have one Lord, one faith, one bap- 
tism, one God and Father, of us all, who is through 
us all, and in us all. This is the true temple of God, 
in which dwells the Spirit of God. This church 
Christ has bought and redeemed with His blood " 
Eph. 5:27; I Cor. 12:13; Eph. 4:5, 6; I Cor. 6-19 
20; I Pet. 1:19. Priest. "Did not Christ redeem 
all men, but only these ?" Claes. "It is written in 
divers places, that the unbelieving shall be damned ; 
how then will the death of Christ benefit them? 
or what will it avail. them that Christ died? It is 
to be feared that they will regret it, that Christ 
died. But those who have believed in the Word of 
the Lord, and followed it, they are the ones who 
will inherit the kingdom of heaven, and triumph 
with the Lord on mount Zion, who have death, 
devil, hell and the world under their feet, though 
the world in her frenzy hastens to tear, devour and 
destroy them. If they were of the world, the world 
would love them ; but because they are not of the 
world, therefore the world hates them, as Christ 
said." John 15:19. Priest. "You people don't 
believe that Christ is God and man." Claes. "I be- 
lieve that Christ is true God and man." Priest. 
"Do you not believe that Christ is man from 
Mary's flesh?" Claes. "No; for if He had become 
man from Mary's natural flesh and blood, He must 
have had His beginning with Mary ; but it is writ- 
ten that He has neither beginning of days, nor end 
of life. Heb. 7 :3. And the Word would not have 
become flesh, if He had assumed flesh from Mary; 
nor would He have come in the flesh, as John de- 
clares; but He would have come from the flesh, 
had He assumed it from Mary. John 1:14; II 
John 7. And it is written: 'He that confesseth 
not that Christ is come in the flesh, is that spirit of 
antichrist.' I John 4:3. And if He were such a 
carnal man, He could not have ascended to heaven ; 
for it is written (I Cor. 15 :50) that flesh and blood 
will not inherit the kingdom of God." Priest. 
"Still, did not the angel Gabriel say to Mary: 
Thou shalt conceive and bring forth a son?' " 
Luke 1:31; Isa. 7:14. Claes. "Well, understand 
the word rightly; for he said: 'Thou shalt con- 
ceive, and bring forth ;' now, what Mary conceived 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


559 


could not grow from her." Priest. "What word 
became flesh?" Claes. "The same word of which 
John testifies to us, in his first epistle, saying: 
'That which was from the beginning, which we 
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, 
which we have looked upon, and our hands have 
handled, of the Word of life ; for the life was mani- 
fested.' I John 1 :1 ; John 9:37; 20:27. What else 
do you want to know?" Priest. "Where did 
Christ assume His flesh, in heaven, or on earth ?" 
Claes. "That which I cannot prove with Scrip- 
tures, I will not say." Priest. "Don't you believe 
anything but what is written?" Claes. "No." 
Priest. "You certainly believe that you have a 
soul ; but what do you know as to what your soul 
is, how large, how long, how wide, or of what color 
it is?" Claes. "What does that concern me? my 
salvation does not lie in that." Priest. "You be- 
lieve that the dead will rise ; but how can any one 
comprehend that what has perished will rise and be- 
come alive?" Claes. "I am well satisfied with the 
explanation Paul has written," I Cor. 15. Priest. 
"Do you not believe that Mary is mother and vir- 
gin?" Claes. "Yes." The priest smote his hand 
upon the table, drew himself up to his full height, 
and said : "This you cannot prove to me ; we find 
nothing of this kind written in the Scriptures." 
Claes. "The prophet Isaiah prophesied that He 
should be born of a virgin. Isa. 7 :14. Again, when 
Gabriel said to Mary: 'Thou shalt conceive and 
bring forth a son ;' Mary answered : 'How shall this 
be, seeing I know not a man?' " Luke 1 :31, 34. 
Priest. "Yes, thus you may glean it here and 
there; but that she remained virgin until her 
death?" Claes. "This I do not say." Priest. "That 
is what I mean. And what do you think of the 
Supper ? do you not believe that when Christ took 
bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, saying: 
'Take, eat; this is my body;' He gave them His 
natural flesh and blood?" Claes. "No." Priest. 
"Did He not say ; 'Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you ?' 
And did He not say that this was the true heavenly 
bread, which came down from heaven?" John 
6:53, 51. Claes. "The bread of which Christ 
speaks (John 6), is this the bread which you give 
the people to eat, namely, which you people call 
the sacrament?" Priest. "Yea, it is the same 
which He left us." Claes. "According to this, then, 
no one will be damned of all those that eat of it ; 
for Christ said : 'If any man eat of this bread, he 
shall live forever ; but now everyone comes, whores, 
knaves, thieves, murderers, of whom it is written 
that they shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven.' " 
Gal. 5:21. Priest. "They have sorrow for their 
sins, before they receive it ; and the Lord said : 'If 
the sinner sighs over his transgression, I will re- 
member it no more forever.' " Ezek. 18:21. 

In regard to this we had much discussion ; but it 
is too long to write. At last I asked the priest, 
whether he believed that when he takes the host 
into his mouth, he receives Christ's body, in flesh 


and blood, as large as He hung on the tree of the 
cross? Priest. "Yes." Claes. "When you swal- 
low Him, where does He go then ?'" The priest was 
highly offended. The chief judge asked me : "Why 
could you not be satisfied with your first baptism, 
but had yourself baptized a second time?" Claes. 
"I know of but one baptism." Eph. 4:5. Priest. 
"Your sponsors well know that you were baptized 
once! you can ask them." Claes. "Though I had 
known that I was baptized, yet I now know that 
it was done without faith ; but it is written (Romans 
14:23) : 'Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.' " Chief 
Judge. "Your sponsors believed." Claes. "I do 
not know that the apostles baptized any one, unless 
he himself believed, and confessed his faith. But 
what did I confess when I was baptized in in- 
fancy ?" Priest. "Ask your sponsors. And what do 
you think of our father the pope, and his domin- 
ion ?" Claes. "The pope, with all his trumpery, and 
mass, and all that is therein, is good for nothing, 
bag and baggage. You priests sell masses to the 
people, by the dozen, by twenties, and thirties at a 
time ; they have neither edge nor point ; they neither 
cut nor stab ; and yet you promise the people that 
they are good and effectual — is this not deception ? 
You preach to the people, that one should not drink 
to excess, and you go about the streets, as drunk 
as hogs. You preach that one ought not to be covet- 
ous; but where is more covetousness than in the 
priests and monks ? You preach that one ought not 
to be idle ; but where is more idleness than among 
you? You will rather tramp from door to door 
with a bag or basket, than work, as may be seen." 
The priest was angry, rose, and said : "This is the 
first thing you teach each other, to reveal the fail- 
ings of your neighbor. Claes. "Why should we not 
apply the knowledge Christ has given us, when He 
says that the tree shall be known by its fruit?" 
Priest. "This is to be spiritually understood ;" and 
he went out of the room. 

The chief judge asked me whether I would re- 
nounce my second baptism, and all that I had said. 
I replied : "No, my lords, I will in no wise deny 
that which was administered to me in the name of 
the Lord." Hearing this, the chief judge arose. 
Then they rose and began to go out. I then 
thanked them, that they had been molested with 
me. The chief judge turned around and asked me 
again, whether I would renounce ; or I should see 
what should result to me from it. Then my heart 
was enkindled to tell him and the other judges, 
that they should take heed what they were doing, 
and I said : "My lords, renounce I will in no wise, 
and what will result to me from it, according to the 
imperial mandate, I well know ; but there are two 
mandates, the one from the supreme King, the 
other from the mortal emperor, and these two run 
counter to each other ; the one says that both are 
to be let grow, the good with the bad ; the other 
that the tares are to be rooted up. Therefore, my 
lords, I pray you, to warn the other judges, that 
they consider what is the best; for you have not 


560 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


received the sword, to punish the innocent." I told 
them a great deal, as the Lord gave me utterance. 
He stood there, with his cap in his hand, as did 
also the other judge, and the jailer, and they kept 
very silent. Finally they prayed God, that He would 
grant me my greatest happiness, and went away. 

Thus I greet the whole church, scattered in every 
country, with the peace of the Lord ; for I now ex- 
pect from day to day, to offer up my sacrifice. Pray 
God to keep me steadfast unto the end. I pray 
daily for you. Written in bonds. 


GERRIT HASEPOOT BURNED, A. D. 1556 

In the summer of 1556 there was in the city of 
Nimeguen, a faithful brother, named Gerrit Hase- 
poot, a tailor by trade. Having fled from the city, 
on account of severe persecution, he secretly re- 
turned, since his wife and children were still living 
there. He was seen by the bailiff's guard, who re- 
ported it to their master. The bailiff, a very blood- 
thirsty man, immediately went after him, and took 
him with him. Thus this friend of Christ had to 
separate from his wife and children, and go into 
prison, tribulation and misery, for the name of 
Jesus. When very severely examined by the lords 
of this world, he freely confessed his faith, and was 
not ashamed of the truth. Rom. 1 :16. He was 
therefore sentenced to death by them, that is, to be 
burnt at the stake, which sentence he received very 
bravely. This having taken place, his wife came to 
him, into the city hall, to speak with him once 
more, and to take leave and bid her dear husband 
farewell. She had in her arm an infant, which she 
could scarcely hold, because of her great grief. 
When wine was poured out to him, as is customary 
to do to those sentenced to death (Prov. 31 :6), he 
said to his wife : "I have no desire for this wine ; 
but I hope to drink the new wine, which will be 
given to me above in the kingdom of my Father." 
Thus the two separated with great grief, and bade 
each other adieu in this world ; for the woman could 
hardly stand on her feet any longer, but seemed to 
fall into a swoon through grief. When he was led 
to death, and having been brought from the wagon 
upon the scaffold, he lifted up his voice, and sang 
the hymn : 

"Father in heaven, I call : 
Oh, strengthen now my faith." 

Thereupon he fell upon his knees, and fervently 
prayed to God. Having been placed at the stake, 
he kicked his slippers from his feet, saying: "It 
were a pity to burn them for they can be of service 
still to some poor person." The rope with which 
he was to be strangled, becoming a little loose, hav- 
ing not been twisted well by the executioner, he 
again lifted up his voice, and sang the end of said 
hymn: 

"Brethren, sisters, all, good-bye! 
We now must separate, 


Till we meet beyond the sky, 
With Christ our only Head : 

For this yourselves prepare, 
And I'll await you there." 

The executioner again twisting the rope, this 
witness of Jesus fell asleep in the Lord, and was 
burnt, voluntarily surrendering for the truth, his 
perishable body, which he had received from God, 
and thus fought the fight, finished his course, and 
kept the faith, and there is now laid up for him the 
crown of eternal glory. 

Previous to the year 1557, under the reign of the 
Palsgrave of the Rhine, several of those baptized 
according to the ordinance of Christ were cast into 
prison, and exiled from the country, as appears 
from the preface to the Frank enthalische Ge- 
spraech, and also in the preface to the Oude Offer- 
boeck, of the year 1616, letter Y, on the other side. 

From this it appears that the Baptist Christians 
at this time had to suffer not only from the Ro- 
manists, but also from those who had forsaken the 
Roman church and many of her superstitions ; from 
which it may be seen what great distress the church 
of God then had to suffer, insomuch that freedom 
of conscience was nowhere to be found, since 
among the papists they were deprived of their lives, 
and among other denominations of the liberty to 
practice their religious worship. 

HANS BRAEL SEVERELY PERSECUTED A. D. 1557 

In the year 1557, a few days before Ascension 
Day, Brother Hans Brael, while on a journey, was 
apprehended in the Pusterthal, for the faith ancl tes- 
timony of Jesus Christ. Nearly a league from the 
castle, he met the judge, who not knowing him, 
rode past him, and saluted him, Hans Brael thank- 
ing him : but the actuary rode up to him, and asked 
him : "Where are you going and what have you 
been doing here?" He replied that he had been 
with his brethren. The actuary asked him whether 
the Baptists were his brethren. "Yes," he replied. 
He then seized him, and the judge turned about^ 
dismounted, and taking the brother's own girdle 
from his body, bound him with it and made him 
walk like a dog alongside of his horse, through mud 
and mire, for a whole league, until they arrived in 
the castle. He was so fatigued from walking, and 
from being bound so hard, that he could stand no 
longer, but fell down in the field, so that even the 
lord of the castle reproved the judge for having 
bound him so hard. There they examined him, tak- 
ing from him whatever they found on his body, and 
put him into prison. The next day he was forthwith 
brought out, and the lord of the castle examined 
him himself, and asked him concerning his faith 
and baptism, and what he thought of the sacrament. 
When he made confession of his faith and the di- 
vine truth, they abandoned everything, and pressed 
him hard to recant. But when he plainly told them, 
not to count on his renouncing the truth confessed,' 
they brought him back into prison. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


561 


Eight days after, he was brought out again, and 
the lord with six others examined him ; but being 
unable to accomplish anything, they remanded him 
to prison. After another eight days they arraigned 
and examined him before the whole council, and 
the judge called his faith a delusion, and his church 
a sect. Acts 24:14. But Hans said: "It is neither 
a sect nor a delusion ; but it is the church of God." 
The judge said : "It may be the devil's ; how could 
it be God's church ?" and became angry over it and 
said again, "On what account should it be called 
the church of God?" But Brother Hans boldly ad- 
hered to it, that it was the church of God. Then 
said the judge: "Since he knows who has come 
from the seignioralty of Innsbruck, we also want 
to know where those are whom they send out into 
this country, what their names are, who has fed and 
harbored them ; all this we want to know." But he 
answered them : "We are not sent out to the harm 
or detriment of any one ; but our calling is, that we 
shall seek the salvation of men and exhort them to 
repentance and reformation (Matt. 10:5; Acts 2: 
38) ; but the things that are asked here are not ar- 
ticles of faith, nor are they necessary to know ; 
hence I do not wish to tell them, nor to accuse any 
one." The judge admonished him urgently, to spare 
himself, since his body should be tortured, if he re- 
fused to name the persons, and to confess who had 
harbored him. Hans asked the judge and the whole 
council, whether he could be considered good if he 
adopted the proposed means, and betrayed those 
who had shown him such kindness, by feeding and 
lodging him. The members of the council looked at 
each other, and said themselves that they should 
not consider it good, if it were done to them. But 
the judge became enraged, and asked whether he 
meant to charge the honorable council with re- 
quiring treachery of him, and again admonished 
him very solemnly, to spare himself, or they should 
deal very severely with him. But as he would not 
confess to them, they remanded him again to pris- 
on, to see what he should resolve upon. 

After this they brought him forth again, and took 
him to the rack, where he himself took off his 
clothes, lay down before them, and patiently sub- 
mitted to the torturing ropes, so that the eyes of 
the bystanders filled with tears, and they could not 
refrain from weeping. 

The executioner suspended him by the rope, but 
the judge earnestly admonished him to spare him- 
self, and to indicate the persons required ; but he 
said he would betray no one but would bide what- 
ever God permitted them to inflict upon him. Then 
they tied a large stone to his feet. The judge be- 
came angry, when he perceived that he could accom- 
plish nothing, and said : "You swear to each other 
that you will not betray one another." He replied : 
"We do not swear, but we do not betray any one, 
because it would be wrong." Then the judge said : 
"You are a rogue ; I have detected you in a lie ; why 
will you suffer yourself to be tortured." The broth- 
er said : "I am no rogue, and in what lie have you 


detected me?" The judge said : "You said that you 
were no teacher, but we find that you certainly are 
one." He answered: "I am no teacher; but if I 
were one, I would not be ashamed of it ; for it is an 
honorable thing before God." I Tim. 3:1. 

Thereupon they left him hanging by the rope, 
and went away ; but the executioner staid with him. 
In the meantime the officers assembled, and he was 
admonished to confess; or they would not cease 
racking him until they should have rent his limbs 
asunder. He replied that he would bide what God 
should permit them to inflict upon him, since they 
could do no more than God permitted them. The 
executioners said : "Are you not a fool, to think 
that God looks down to see what we are doing in 
this hole ; for this would be ridiculous." Then the 
council returned and said that the lady of the castle 
had interceded for him, that they should torture 
him no longer, and, hence, they would let it rest ; 
and they sent him back to prison. 

Thereupon the lord very joyfully rode to Inns- 
bruck, to the government, and when he returned, 
he had the priests dispute with and examine Hans 
for two days in succession, namely Saturday and 
Sunday, he himself being present. But when they 
could accomplish nothing by their various disputa- 
tions, and false and deceitful doctrine, which it 
would take too long to relate, and he remained 
steadfast, and constantly confessed that that in 
which he stood, and would remain steadfast, by the 
protection and help of God, was the truth, the lord 
at last became exasperated at him, and said: "O 
you obdurate dog, I have tried all possible means 
and ways with you, and will still do so, and place 
you on a sharp pile, and see how you will trust your 
God in this trial." But he answered : "I shall not 
suffer on account of any wrong-doing, but only for 
the truth and the faith ; and God will overlook no 
wrong." After three days they put him into a 
deep, dark and filthy tower, where he could see 
neither sun nor moon, nor daylight, so that he did 
not know whether it was day or night, only he per- 
ceived now and then that it was night, when it 
was a little colder in the tower than at other times. 
It was also so moist and damp in the tower, that his 
clothes rotted on his body, so that he became almost 
naked, and was without a single garment for a long 
time, only he had a coarse blanket that had been 
given him, which he wrapped around his body and 
thus sat in misery and darkness. The shirt on his 
body had so rotted, that he had not a shred left of 
it, except the collar, which he hung on the wall. 

At one time when these children of Pilate had 
him brought out to try him whether he would not 
apostatize, the light so hurt his eyes, that he was 
glad when they let him down again into the dark 
tower. There also proceeded such a fetid stench 
from the filth that was in this dark hole, that no one 
could stay in his presence ; when they brought him 
in, they instantly had to go away from him again ; 
yea, the councilors said themselves, that they had 


562 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


never smelled such a horrible stench. Thus he lay 
in this filthy tower, in which were also many ver- 
min and loathesome reptiles, so that at first he for a 
long time protected his head with an old hat, which 
had been thrown to him out of pity. The tower, for 
a long time had not had an occupant ; hence the ver- 
min were very numerous, and they caused him 
much terror, until he got used to it. The vermin 
sometimes also ate his food, so that when they let 
down his food, he had to eat it all up, before he set 
down the dish ; otherwise the vermin so covered it, 
that he could not well eat it. When he got a dish of 
soup, and set it down but once, they ate it up in a 
moment in short, he could keep neither bread nor 
anything else ; for as soon as the vermin smelled it, 
instantly they were at it. However, this was his 
least care, inasmuch as he was so tormented with 
hunger, no great abundance being given him so that 
he could easily eat it up, if he was only well. The 
vermin sometimes got also in his drink, and 
drowned therein, until he finally obtained a large 
stone, which he placed on top of his pitcher. 

His chief affliction, however, in this great trial 
was, that he could get no tidings from the church 
or the brethren. At that time there was in the high 
country one Hans Mein, a servant of the Lord, 
who also had a great desire to hear some tidings 
from him. He sent word to him in the tower, that 
if it were still well with him, and his heart adhered 
firmly to God and his church, he should send him a 
certain token : and if he had nothing else, he should 
send him a little bit of straw, however little it might 
be. But such was the misery and poverty in which 
he sat that he could not even find that much in the 
tower. Then he bethought himself of his rotten 
collar which he had hung on the wall ; he was glad 
of it, and took the collar and sent it from the tower 
to his brother, as a token that he was still unchanged 
in his faith in God, and in peace with the church. 
When the brother received the collar, and thereby 
perceived his misery and poverty, he and his church 
felt great compassion for him, and after weeping 
bitterly and sorrowfully, they sent word back to 
him, that they were very willing to send him clothes 
or anything else, in his great poverty, if he only 
could get it. But he would not have it, because 
that if they had discovered it, they would have 
thrown him on the rack and tortured him again, in 
order to get the names of others. Hence he sent 
them word, that he should let the garment of 
patience do him. 

Thus he lay in this filthy tower all summer, until 
after Michaelmas, in autumn, when they saw that 
the frost was approaching ; then they took him out, 
and put him into another prison, which could like- 
wise not have been worse. There he had to sit, with 
one hand and one foot in the stocks, for thirty- 
seven weeks, being unable to lie or sit properly, but 
only to stand ; besides, he had to endure much re- 
proach and ridicule from the ungodly, who said : 
"There lies a holy man ; nobody is as wise as he ; 
there he sits as a light of the world, and as a witness 


of the people of God and His church," and such like 
taunting remarks. 

Again, since he could get no comforting tidings 
from the church, God so ordered it that he was 
comforted by the unbelieving ; for on a certain oc- 
casion a nobleman came to comfort him, telling him 
to be courageous, and not to suffer himself to be 
intimidated since he well knew that he had the 
truth on his side, and that his faith was the true 
one, but that it were impossible to follow it, or 
to suffer what he suffered ; whereupon the brother 
earnestly admonished him. Once it also happened 
that his soul was kindled in God, and he sent for the 
actuary who had apprehended him, that he should 
come to him in prison. The latter very quickly 
came to him, sat down, and asked him what he 
wished, that he had sent for him. The brother 
said: "The sole reason is, that I cannot forbear 
showing you, that, as you well know, that you are 
the chief cause of my imprisonment and miserable 
sufferings, though I have never in all my life done 
you an injury." The actuary sat there frightened 
and dumb, saying not a word, save that he had 
to do it. "The brother said: 'Yes, the judgment 
of God impelled you to it; because you were so 
bloodthirsty against the pious, it also fell to your 
lot to fulfill your judgment thereby. You have in- 
curred a heavy judgment ; God will certainly find 
you for this, require it at your hands, and punish 
you for your sins.'" The actuary was dumb- 
founded and could not utter a word ; so frightened 
was he ; and thus he went away. About a fortnight 
afterwards he died very suddenly in the night, be- 
ing both well and dead within a quarter of an hour. 
God had smitten him with great fear, so that he 
cried and moaned terribly, and lamented that he 
had done wrong and sinned. 

Thus it goes with those, who will serve the devil 
and his minions. I say nothing of the fact that he 
was severely reprehended for this by his master and 
his mistress, and reaped the devil's thanks for it 
from his own ; for they said to him, so loud that 
the brother heard it himself : "How came the devil 
so to possess you, that you would not let this man 
go, though you might easily have done so ?" and 
they wished that the devil rather had carried him 
off, since he had committed this deed, for which 
he at last had to pay so dearly. 

In the same night that he died, a great joy came 
over the brother, so that with praying and thanks- 
giving he could not praise God sufficiently ; for on 
that night it came into his mind that he should yet 
return to the brethren and the church. In the morn- 
ing a servant came to him, and told him, that the 
actuary had died very terribly and suddenly during 
the night. Ps. 73 :18. This having transpired with 
the actuary, the lord and his spouse were seized 
with great terror. 

About eight days afterwards, the servant who at- 
tended to the tillage of the land came into the castle, 
and, towards evening, came to the brother, with the 
keys, and asked whether he hoped to get out. He 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


563 


replied: "I will see what you will do with me." 
The servant wanted to open the stocks, but could 
not find the right key. The brother told him not to 
do it, since it might go ill with him. But when he 
could not find the right key, he told him that he 
could set him at liberty, but it would probably not 
be at that time. The lady of the castle also sent 
a servant before the prison, who called to the broth- 
er, and said : "The gracious lady would have me 
tell you, that she will send for the judge and the 
jurate, and if you will say but two words, that 
you will suffer yourself to be instructed, and con- 
fess that you have erred, you will be set at liberty, 
and she will take upon her the sin which you com- 
mit by it, so that no guilt will fall upon you." But 
he replied : "She has sins enough already, let her 
desist from them : she needs no sins from others." 
I Tim. 5 :22, 1. Hence he had to lie in prison and 
sorrow for another winter. 

Then an order came from Innsbruck, from the 
council, which the lords came to read to him. It 
contained the following : Since he was so obdurate, 
and would receive no instruction, he should be sent 
to sea- ; and thither he should go the next morning ; 
there he should find out, how evildoers are stripped 
and scourged. But he replied that he would trust in 
God his Lord, who was on sea as well as on the 
land, to help him, and give him patience. II Cor. 
1:9; Matt. 14:31. 

They then let him out of prison, and walk about 
in the castle for two days, that he should learn to 
walk again; for he was not well able to walk, so 
greatly had he become impaired in the use of his 
limbs by imprisonment, stocks, fetters and bonds, 
in which he had lain for two years, less five weeks, 
having not seen the sun for about a year and a 
half. 

He was then given in the custody of one of the 
servants, who was to take him to the sea. Hence he 
took leave from everyone in the castle, and ex- 
horted them to repentance. The lady of the castle 
sent word to him that he should come to her, which 
he did. She called him into her study, where he 
took leave from her, and exhorted her also to re- 
pentance, and entreated her not to molest the pious 
(who do no hurt, in the exercise of their religion) 
and not to apprehend any more of them, to which 
she consented, and began to weep, so that the tears 
flowed down her cheeks, and said : "Nevermore in 
my life shall I lay hands upon them." She gave him 
some money for the journey, and dismissed him. 

This servant then took him away with him. The 
servant was a wicked man ; he called the brother a 
rogue on every occasion, or applied some other op- 
probrious epithet to him. 

Having led him two days, the servant so filled 
himself with wine, in a tavern, at Niederdorf ( for 
those present had so often drank his health), that, 
instead of going to bed to sleep, he stretched him- 
self upon the table, and instantly falling asleep like 
a dumb beast, he rolled off the table. 

Seeing this, the brother opened the door of the 


room, and also that of the house, locked them again, 
and went away. 

Thus did God help him to make his escape that 
night, which took place in the year 1559, and thus 
he returned in peace and with joy to the church 
of the Lord, his brethren. Subsequently he again 
went up into the country, several times, as the 
ministry of the divine Word had been committed 
to him. 

From this it may be seen how God succors and 
helps His own, and how He can give to those who 
cleave to Him with a true heart, much strength and 
patience in suffering, through their strong faith, 
which would otherwise be impossible. II Tim. 
4:17; Philip. 4:13; Matt. 17:20. And it is also 
seen how He casts out His enemies and adversaries, 
and knows where to find them ; for not only did the 
actuary die a very dreadful death, as has already 
been stated ; but, while Hans Brael yet lay in pris- 
on, the lord of the castle died suddenly; and the 
servant who was to take Hans to the sea, also died 
miserably, even before the brother left the country ; 
and about two years afterwards also the judge died, 
yet not an ordinary, but a most miserable death. 
II Mace. 9:5. 


JANNEKEN WALRAVEN BURNED, A. D. 1557 

In the year 1557, on Pentecost eve, there was 
burnt alive, at Antwerp, in Brabant, for the im- 
movable foundation of the truth, and the testimony 
of Jesus Christ, Janneken Walraven, the mother of 
Jacques Walraven, who was a minister of the Word 
at Amsterdam, among the Baptists, and, conse- 
quently, well known to many. His mother, though 
one of the weaker vessels, I Pet. 3 :7, was never- 
theless not weak in faith, but valiant and steadfast, 
and fought the good fight of faith, and gained the 
victory through the grace of God, who never for- 
sakes His own, but succors them, and goes with 
them through water and fire, lest they should suffer 
detriment to the salvation of their souls. There- 
fore, since she conquered with her bridegroom, by 
suffering and dying for His holy name, her im- 
mortal soul is under the altar with all the holy 
martyrs, and is patiently waiting for full salvation 
at the coming of her Bridegroom, when He shall 
appear in the clouds of the sky, to unite and glorify 
body and soul, and to make them like unto His own 
glorious body, that she may rejoice with Him for- 
ever. 


JORIAEN SIMONS, CLEMENT DIRKS, AND A WOMAN 
NAMED MARY JORIS, A. D. 1557 

At this time three other pious witnesses of the 
truth fell into the hands of the tyrants, at Haarlem, 
in Holland. They were Joriaen Simons, Clement 
Dirks, and a woman named Mary Joris. They all, 
as faithful servants, through the grace of God, 
steadfastly endured, at said place, hard imprison- 
ment and severe examinations for the truth of 


564 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ, and did not, with the slothful servant, hide 
the talent which they had received, into the earth, 
but did very earnestly put it out upon usury, and 
boldly proclaimed from the door of their prison the 
Word of the Lord to the edification of everyone, 
and, moreover, through a hymn composed by them, 
made known the cause of their imprisonment; 
namely, that they did not suffer as thieves and 
murderers, or as such as coveted other men's prop- 
erty, but that they suffered only for the faith of 
the truth, and a pure conscience ; and that they, on 
the other hand, because of the pure fear of God, 
could not follow falsehood. Of this they set forth 
the principal points in a hymn, as follows : 

1. That they with all true witnesses of God be- 
lieve and confess, by virtue of the holy Scriptures : 
That Jesus Christ, blessed forever, came from 
above from heaven, and proceeded from God His 
heavenly Father, and is therefore pure and spot- 
less, and is not of Adam's sinful and corruptible 
nature. 

2. Because they were baptized upon their faith, 
according to the ordinance of Christ, and, on the 
contrary, confessed that infant baptism was not of 
God, but contrary to His Word ; and that it is well 
known, from Christ's own words, that infants are 
fully in the grace of God, and in a saved condition, 
without baptism or any other ceremony having to 
be administered to them, they therefore hold, that 
all that is done by such means, as being necessary 
for the salvation of infants is nothing but vain hu- 
man presumption. 

3. Concerning the Lord's Supper, they confess, 
that they also observed it, according to the com- 
mand of the Lord, and according to the institution 
of Christ, as He, blessed forever held it with His 
apostles ; in which each is to examine himself well, 
before he goes to this table, and that Christ did not 
hold His supper with drunkards and adulterers, or 
with such of whom evil things were known, as is 
customary with the papists. 

4. On the contrary, they emphatically rejected 
the papists' little piece of baked bread, or conse- 
crated host, which they recommend to people as 
the true, essential Son of God, from whom to en- 
treat grace and salvation in time of need ; and con- 
fessed that they do grossly err, who worship such 
bread, or put any divine confidence in it. 

5. Because they could not recognize the pope 
and the Roman church as the church of God, but 
opposed it and all its ceremonies; neither could 
they hold the traffic which they carry on therein, 
to be of God. 

6. Because they recognized no other punishment 
of transgressors in the church, than evangelical 
separation; by which the evil can be kept away 
from the good,_ in order to present to the Lord 
a pure church, in which none that are unclean or 
polluted may dwell, but from which they are ex- 
pelled. This church they confess to be the queen 
and bride of Christ. 


By this and the like the fire of the Gospel burned 
so mightily in Haarlem, notwithstanding the vio- 
lence of these tyrants, that in the very night when 
they were thus accused, a glorious exhortation was 
fearlessly preached to the edification of all, by the 
God-fearing Bouwen Lubberts, in Schouts' street ; 
which exhortation did much good. 

When, on the 26th of April 1557, the above- 
mentioned Joriaen and Clement were brought forth 
to death, the common people greatly commiserated 
them; but they said: "Weep not for us, but for 
your sins, and repent truly." After they had offered 
up their prayer to God with a fervent heart, each 
was placed at a stake, and they said : "We suffer 
not for evildoing, but only for the obedience of 
the truth." And having, with a firm trust, com- 
mended their spirits or souls into the hands of God, 
they courageously offered their necks for the truth, 
and were first strangled, and then burnt ; and thus 
they, to the consolation and joy of many pious 
persons, continued steadfast unto the end in the 
accepted truth of the holy Gospel. 

When they had finished their tyranny by stran- 
gling and burning, they, in order to quench their 
doctrine, also thought to burn their books (for as 
old writers tell us, Joriaen Simons was engaged in 
selling books) ; but when the books were perceived 
to be on fire, there arose such an uproar among the 
people, that the lords took to flight, whereupon 
the books were thrown among the multitude, who 
reached for them with eagerness ; so that, through 
divine providence, the truth, instead of being 
quenched, as it was sought to do, was spread the 
more, by the reading of so great a number of these 
books. 

The above-mentioned Mary Joris also remained 
faithful in this trial, and likewise confessed her 
faith boldly before the lords, and was ready to sur- 
render her life, together with her brethren, for the 
name of the Lord. But being pregnant, she had to 
wait until her delivery ; however, the Lord ordered 
it otherwise — she died in travail, and was thus re- 
leased from the flesh, so that these tyrants could 
not fulfill their desire with her. And thus she fell 
asleep in the Lord, with her brethren. 

If any desire, let him read this account in the old 
hymn book, as put into verse by these witnesses 
themselves, in prison, as also by the pious Bouwen 
Lubberts. 


A TESTAMENT LEFT BY JORIAEN SIMONS TO HIS 

SON SIMON, WHEN HE WAS IMPRISONED FOR 

THE WORD OF THE LORD, AT HAARLEM, 

WHERE HE WAS AFTERWARDS PUT 

TO DEATH, ON THE 26TH OF 

APRIL, IN THE YEAR 1557 

May God through His great mercy grant to my 
son Simon, to grow up virtuously, and if the 
Lord permit him to reach the years of understand- 
ing, to confess Him, and having learned His will, 
to order his life in accordance with it, in order to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


565 


obtain eternal salvation, through His beloved Son 
Jesus Christ, together with the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

My child and dear son, incline your ears to the 
admonition of your father, and hearken to my ac- 
count, how and in what manner he commenced and 
finished his life. 

The beginning of my life was unprofitable, 
proud, puffed-up, drunken, selfish, deceitful, and 
full of all manner of idolatry. And when I attained 
maturity, and began to be my own master, I sought 
nothing but what pleased my flesh, an indolent and 
luxurious life. I was greedy of filthy lucre; I 
sought to bring my neighbor's daughter to fall, as, 
alas ! appears from my work ; and what I did in se- 
cret, is too shameful to mention ; yea, I was a vessel 
full of iniquity. But, my dear child, when I be- 
took myself to the Scriptures, and searched and 
perused them, I found that my life tended to eter- 
nal death, yea, that everlasting woe was hanging 
over me, and that the fiery pool which burns with 
brimstone and pitch was prepared for me. This, 
I say, was approaching me, according to the words 
of Paul, who says: "They which do such things 
shall not inherit the kingdom of God." Gal. 5 :21. 

When I took this to heart, I began to be greatly 
alarmed and frightened, and took the Word of God 
for my counselor, as to which should be the more 
advisable for me : to lead here, for a little while, a 
voluptuous life, and to expect the everlasting pains 
of hell ; or to suffer here a little misery (if misery 
it can be called), and then to enjoy eternal hap- 
piness. I found in the Scriptures : "What is a man 
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose 
his own soul ? or, what shall a man give in exchange 
for his soul?" Matt. 16:26. Hence, my beloved 
son, I deemed it better, like Moses, to suffer afflic- 
tion with the children of God for a little while, 
than to live in every luxury with the world, which 
will perish. Thus I abandoned my ease, volun- 
tarily and uncompelled, and entered upon the nar- 
row way, to follow Christ, my Head, well knowing 
that if I should follow Him unto the end, I should 
not walk in darkness. Now, when I had partly for- 
saken and cast from me the old damnable practices, 
and wanted to be a new divine creature, and to 
lead a pious, penitent, godly life, I was immediately, 
like all the pious that had been before me, hated, 
yea, imprisoned in Haarlem, in St. John's gate. 

This, my beloved son, was my life till the Lord 
enlightened me. First of all, my dear child, I would 
affectionately warn, admonish and entreat you, to 
beware of and shun all wickedness, and to walk 
from infancy in the fear of the Lord, which is the 
beginning of wisdom; and if God reveal His wis- 
dom to you, hesitate not to walk in it, since death 
pursues the young as well as the old. Improve the 
time given you by God for repentance. Have your 
intercourse with the good, and beware of the per- 
verse. If sinners entice you, consent not, and have 
no fellowship with them; refrain your foot from 
their path, for their steps take hold on hell. Hence, 
touch not pitch, lest you be defiled ; for an evil end 


draws nigh to the wicked, which will bear the bur- 
den everywhere. Of this and every evil, my dear 
son, beware, and remember that Paul says, that we 
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 
that everyone may receive the things done in his 
body, according to that he hath done, whether it 
be good or bad (II Cor. 5:10), but the flesh will 
advise you to nothing good. Hence Paul may well 
say : "To be carnally minded is death, yea, they that 
are in the flesh, cannot please God." Rom. 8 :6, 8. 
Therefore, mortify your carnal members here on 
earth. Read Paul, or have him read to you ; he will 
tell you, which are the works of the flesh. Gal. 5 : 
19. If you have time and opportunity, use diligence 
to learn to read and write, that you may learn and 
know the better, what the Lord requires of you. 

Beloved son, my heart's desire and prayer to 
the Lord for you is, that your soul may be pro- 
tected from the deluge of God's wrath, that shall 
come upon all the ungodly who did not care for the 
Lord, and walked not in His commandments. This 
impending wrath of God you can escape in no bet- 
ter way than by looking to Jesus Christ, the Son of 
the Almighty and eternal Father, who is the Head 
and Pattern of all believers, yea, the Captain and 
Finisher of the faith, that is, Jesus Christ. Ask Him 
for counsel, as to what is best and most necessary 
for you to do, and He will tell you, knock at the 
door of His Holy Trinity, and worship Him ; He 
will open to you, and give you what is needful for 
you. Have a desire and appetite for the truth, and 
you shall be satisfied. Seek not high temporal 
things; though they that obtain them, are called 
and commended as happy by the common people; 
they are nevertheless unhappy and rejected before 
God. Hence humble yourself under the mighty 
hand of God, that you may be exalted in eternity. 
I Peter 5 :5. 

Behold how He fared, and likewise all the pious 
before and after Him ; His birth was poor and mis- 
erable; immediately He had to flee from Herod, 
who sought His life; when He suffered, He had 
not where to rest His head, and the thanks for all 
His great and glorious benefits were that they 
called Him a deceiver, wine-bibber, Samaritan, and 
one who had a devil, besides, He had to expect be- 
ing stoned by them, until they, when the time was 
fulfilled, condemned Him to the most shameful 
death. And previous to the law, pious Abel had to 
suffer from his brother Cain, who killed him, out 
of pure hatred and envy, because his brother's 
works were good and acceptable to God, and his 
own evil and rejected. And all the dear prophets, 
who practiced and maintained the Word of God, 
had likewise to suffer much, without any respect 
of persons. Micaiah, who alone was found true 
among four hundred false prophets, in the days of 
King Ahab, was beaten by Zedekiah, and after- 
wards cast into prison. I Kings 22 :24. Elijah, the 
only true prophet among the four hundred and 
fifty false priests of Jezebel (I Kings 18:19), also 
had to suffer much ; so that Paul may well say (for 


566 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


he had experienced it himself) that all that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 
II Tim. 3:11. 

This also all other pious witnesses of Christ ex- 
perienced, and remained steadfast unto the end; 
wherefore, according to the Scriptures (James 1 : 
12), the crown is prepared for them, since Christ's 
own mouth declares that he that shall endure unto 
the end, shall be saved ; he that overcometh shall 
inherit all things, shall be clothed in white, and 
shall eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of 
paradise. Matt. 24:13 ; Rev. 21 :7 ; 2 :7. 

Consider this, my beloved son; meditate night 
and day, how to die unto the world, and to fulfill 
the will of Christ. In the first place, and before 
everything else, beware of all false prophets and 
hypocrites, which in my time were the priests and 
monks, and who, I apprehend, will not be lacking 
in your time, so long as rich emoluments follow 
them. Do not believe them, for they deceive men, 
and murder their souls. My son, he that wrote you 
this, learned it by his own experience and investi- 
gation ; he drank of this cup himself. Neither live 
among any sect, of whom there were many in my 
time already, as Lutherans, Zwinglians, and others, 
who, though they have a good semblance, yet, in 
fact, are evil and deadly poison. Look for the little 
flock, whose entire rule of life agrees with God's 
commandments, and whose ordinance or sacrament 
is in conformity with the command of Christ and 
the practice of the apostles ; this is the true church 
of Christ, without spot or wrinkle; this church is 
flesh of His flesh, and bone of His bones. These 
also have teachers according to the teaching of 
Paul (I Tim. 3:2), blameless in everything, who 
have obedient children and believing wives, who 
are strangers to litigations and processes, to cursing 
and swearing, to hatred and envy, to lying and 
cheating, to lasciviousness and adultery. There 
everything is love, peace, unity and truth, as Paul 
will teach you, which are the fruits of the Spirit. 

My dear son and beloved child, this is my chief 
and last will, my testament to you, which I desire 
you to read diligently, to meditate well upon it, and 
to compare it to the Scriptures, in order to govern 
your steps in accordance with it. Mark well, my 
son, what I write : many will appear in the garb of 
good teachers, saying that they have medicine for 
your sick soul ; but the ones that will profit you, are 
those who have the truth ; adhere to them. Water 
and fire are set before you : stretch forth your hand 
unto whether you will, unto death or life. Sirach 
15 :16. This, my dear son, will at first be very hard 
for you to hear, since it is contrary to your first 
birth, which is of the flesh; but you must be born 
again, and converted, if you would enter into the 
kingdom of God. You cannot understand this so 
long as you are carnally-minded, yea, so long as 
you do not become the fool and enemy of the 
world. Dearly beloved son, I entreat you again, as 
I did before, to consider this, and to govern your- 
self in accordance with it. Out of a faithful father's 


heart I have left you this, when about to depart 
from this world, and to die for the Word of the 
Lord. May the Lord grant you, and all who read 
this, or hear it read, that they may take it to heart, 
act according to it, and be eternally saved. 

My son's testament, written in the year 1557, 
the first Monday in April, and confirmed by death, 
the 26th day of the same month. 

THREE OTHER BRIEF ADMONITORY LETTERS BY 

JORIAEN SIMONS AND HIS FELLOW 

PRISONERS 

May God grant peace, joy and consolation in all 
trouble and suffering to all those who have to suf- 
fer for His Word, through His beloved Son, in the 
power of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

We would inform our most beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, and all who seek to fear the 
Lord with the whole heart, that we are all (the Lord 
be praised forever) of very good cheer, and hope 
to adhere to the Word of the Lord, and not to de- 
part from it, for any visible thing, yea, neither for 
life nor death, since there is nothing, we trust, 
which shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God ; we shall be able to do all things through Him 
who strengthens us ; we trust by our God to leap 
over walls. Rom. 8:35; Phil. 4:13; Ps. 18:29. 

Dear friends, rejoice with us; why should we 
fear, when there are so many in the world, who, 
for a little gain, expose themselves to the greatest 
danger, both of soul and body, on water and on the 
land, not knowing withal, whether in case of suc- 
cess there will be gain or loss? But we know that 
when we have completed this journey by the help 
of the Lord, all is gain, and there can be no loss ; 
for we run not as uncertainly ; we fight not as one 
that beats the air ; but we are assured by the grace 
of the Lord, that, if we fight through valiantly, as 
we trust we shall do, we shall receive that which is 
promised us. We intend to return to them four- 
fold ; we shall not keep silence, but proclaim aloud, 
what the Lord gives and reveals to us. Our Sister 
Mariken is also of very good cheer, and has right- 
fully confessed her faith, to which she wants to 
adhere as long as there is breath in her ; she is of 
such courage and good cheer, that she delights and 
rejoices us all. We exhort each other with the 
Word of the Lord, as much as God gives each to 
speak, now by words, now by hymns ; yea, I have 
many hours in which I never once think of it that 
I am prisoner; such is the joy which the Lord 
gives us. I thank you with all my heart, that you 
have fulfilled my request, also for your affection- 
ate exhortation. Do the best you can as regards 
my H. F. I commend you to the Lord, and to the 
Word of His grace. 


JORIAEN SIMONS IN BONDS 

Our most beloved brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, and all who desire to fear and follow the 
Lord with all their heart, we, the prisoners in the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


567 


Lord, wish you a valiant and steadfast mind, and 
perseverance in the truth, unto the end, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord, Saviour and Redeemer, in 
the power of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

Greatly beloved brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
be it known to your love, that through the grace 
of the Lord we all strive for the best, seeking it 
with the whole heart, so that we want to offer our- 
selves up into the hands of the Lord, whether it 
bring. us life or death. We also seek with the 
whole heart, that the Lord will magnify His glo- 
rious name through us, and we keep before our 
eyes the Author and Finisher of our faith, Jesus. 
We know that the servant is not greater than his 
lord. It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all ac- 
ceptation, that if we suffer with Him, we shall also 
rejoice with Him. To this all the pious witnesses 
of Christ had respect, and unto His great promises, 
which we have in the Old Testament, and which 
were given to the pious fathers, who hoped for the 
grace that should come, and therefore valiantly 
fought for the law of God, and would have no inter- 
course with the surrounding nations, and there- 
fore voluntarily surrendered their lives, because 
they would not worship or honor their molten or 
carved images ; even as pious Eleazar, who would 
not eat swine's flesh, contrary to the law. II Mace. 
6:18. By the grace of the Lord we hope to take 
His salutary words for our pattern, namely, that 
it is best to adhere to the Lord ; for though through 
hypocrisy (from which God preserve us) we 
should save our lives, yet should we not escape the 
Almighty hand of God, neither alive nor dead. 
Therefore we will surrender ourselves entirely into 
the hands of the Lord, as did the pious Maccabean 
mother and her seven sons (II Mace. 7 :1) ; and as 
did all the pious witnesses of Christ, who even 
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer 
for the name of Christ. Acts 5 :41. Thus, beloved 
brethren, we are minded in the Lord, and not 
otherwise. We trust by the grace of the Lord to 
be unto the weak babes that still feed on milk, an 
example of piety and steadfastness. 

This was written by me on Monday, after I had 
been before the lords twice, and been interrogated 
whether I would adhere to my confession. 

Our greatly beloved brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, and all who want to fear and follow the Lord 
with the whole heart, we, the prisoners in the Lord, 
wish you that the gracious heavenly Father will 
preserve you from all harm from within and with- 
out, through His dear, beloved Son Christ Jesus, 
and the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

Dearly beloved brethren in the Lord ; faint not, 
though you now have to wander from friends and 
kindred, house and home, not knowing whither you 
shall go, since the heat of the sun now begins every- 
where to scorch the seed that has sprung up. Mat- 
thew 13:6. Brethren, be not cast down; let the 
seed in you get and retain moisture ; sit under the 
shadow of the Scriptures, and they will be a glori- 
ous protection unto you. We know that we must 


through much tribulation enter into the kingdom 
of heaven. When the head suffers, all the mem- 
bers suffer with it; hence, if we would be mem- 
bers, of Christ, we must also be partakers of the 
sufferings of the Head; if we, then, suffer with 
Him, we shall also rejoice with Him. 

Therefore, dear brethren, if the Lord suffer you 
to live for awhile longer among this wicked gener- 
ation, pass the time of your sojourning here in 
fear ; stand out as lights in this evil, wicked world, 
and let your faith manifest itself in works, else it 
is dead. Keep your eyes fixed on Jesus Christ, the 
Captain and Finisher of the faith ; He is the only 
cornerstone in Zion, and other foundation can no 
man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 
Hold that fast which you have, that no man take 
your crown. We commend you to the Lord ; may 
He guide you into all truth. 

I, Joriaen Simons, your dear brother, and my 
dear fellow prisoners, wish you every good thing, 
and we seek the best with all our heart. 

As we, through the secretary of the city of Haar- 
lem, have come into possession of the sentence of 
death passed upon the afore-mentioned friends 
Joriaen Simons and Clement Dirks, we deem it 
well, here to adduce the same, so that everyone 
may be fully assured with regard to the foregoing 
account. It reads (except the title) as follows: 

Sentence of death of Joriaen Simons of Hallmen, 
and Clement Dirks of Haarlem 

Whereas Joriaen Simons, of Hallmen, in Fries- 
land, and Clement Dirks, of Haarlem, both weav- 
ers, and now prisoners, have confessed, without 
torture and iron bonds, to have been rebaptized, 
and to hold most pernicious views with regard to 
the worthy, holy sacraments of the altar and con- 
fession, and to the circumstances and ceremonies 
of the holy church, and have also undertaken, said 
Joriaen to sell and distribute divers false books, 
and Clement to read and teach them, and since 
both continue stubborn, obstinate and hardened in 
said errors and pernicious views, therefore, the 
lords of the court, having heard the address and 
conclusion made by Pieter van Zouteland, bailiff 
of this city, against and concerning these persons, 
pursuant to the decrees and edicts of his Royal 
Majesty, last confirmed by his Royal Majesty, 
our gracious lord, have condemned said Joriaen 
Simons of Hallmen, and Clement Dirks, as rebap- 
tized heretics and disturbers of the common peace 
and of the Christian religion, and hereby sentence 
them, each to be placed at a stake, and executed 
with fire, pursuant to the aforesaid decrees and 
edicts, and declare the entire property of said 
Joriaen, and the property of said Clement Dirks 
to the sum of sixty pounds, and no more, if it ex- 
ceed said sum, confiscated and forfeited, according 
to the privilege of this city, for the benefits of his 
Royal Majesty. Thus resolved, the 26th of April, 
A. D. 1557, by Joost van Hitgem, and Dirk van 
Berkerve, Burgomasters, Wilm Harmans Ramp, 


568 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Jan Koninks, Jan Matthijss, Jan Raet, and Adriaen 
Willems, judges, and pronounced in the court the 
same day in the presence of the bailiff and the 
afore-mentioned judges. 

Extracted from the first book of criminal rec- 
ords, beginning the 29th of November, 1539, and 
ending the 27th of October, 1582, in the keeping of 
the secretary of the city of Haarlem, with which 
book this copy is found to agree. 

By me, the undersigned secretary of said city, 
the 10th of July, A. D. 1659. Foil. 


SIX BRETHREN STRANGLED AT THE STAKE IN 
VOLEWIJK, NEAR AMSTERDAM, A. D. 1555 

It occurred A. D. 1555, when the first separation 
took place among the Anabaptists, because Gillis of 
Aix-la-Chapelle and others began to introduce that 
to which the other brethren of Waterland could not 
subscribe or consent, that these brethren maintained 
themselves as a separate people, without, however 
having been separated or banished from the others ; 
but they became a forgotten, yea, a lost people : so 
that the Waterland brethren, on account of the se- 
vere persecution, could not live in houses, but had 
to keep themselves in boats and in the field, because 
they knew not where to hide themselves from the 
constables, who were looking for them everywhere, 
and sought their lives. It was at this time that six 
brethren, who were together in a boat, were appre- 
hended in the Oostsaner field, and brought to Am- 
sterdam, where they were sentenced to death. It 
was in the beginning of the winter when they were 
brought in the Volewijk, and all strangled at the 
stake. There was freezing weather for thirteen 
weeks from this time on, and, what is remarkable, 
during all these thirteen weeks a light like a candle 
stood over each stake to which the bodies of the six 
brethren were fastened, and burned all night. After 
the expiration of the thirteen weeks, a violent 
storm and rain arose, and, consequently, a great 
thaw ensued so that the water rose very high, and 
the ice was rent asunder by the wind. Around the 
body of one of the six brethren the water stood so 
high, that the stake, through the force of the ice 
pressing against it, was broken in two, and fell 
down upon the ice. His body drifted hither and 
thither on the ice, with the tide, between Sparen- 
dam and Volewijk. In that neighborhood there 
were two persons, each in a boat, who were both 
novices in the church. Passing along there in the 
night, they saw the aforesaid light like a candle on 
the ice. Looking sharply, they thought it stood on 
Jaapje Maet (so they called this brother). As soon 
as it was daylight they went to two sisters that were 
concealed in the city, which was known to these 
two novices. To them they related what they had 
seen in the night. Thereupon they suffered them- 
selves to be barred out, and each entering a boat, 
they rowed to the most northern point, where they 
waited for the ice to come. In the meantime said 
light came drifting on the ice. They rowed up to it 


and saw that it stood on Jaapje Maet. They took 
him into their boat, and brought him to the other 
brethren who also kept themselves in a boat in the 
field.* These took the body into their own boat. 
But as soon as they touched it, in order to take it 
to the place where they intended to bury it, the 
dried up and frozen body, which had stood at the 
stake for thirteen weeks waiting to be burned, 
burst, so that the blood flowed copiously into two 
or three baskets which were at the bottom of the 
boat. The persons who saw all this, and did as has 
been stated with his body, were his chief brethren 
and associates,' pious and credible persons, who 
related it to many, in order that this miracle should 
never be forgotten, but be remembered, to the edi- 
fication of the pious. 


MAERTEN ZAEYWEVER, JORIS OUDKLEERKOOPER, 

WILLEM DROOGSCHEERDER, VICTOR AND PIE- 

TER DE BACKER, A. D. 1557 

The bloodthirsty constrainers of conscience, not 
yet satiated, apprehended at Antwerp, in the year 
1557, five pious Christians, namely, Maerten Zaey- 
wever, Joris Oudkleerkooper, Willem Droogscheer- 
der, Victor and Pieter de Backer, whom they as- 
sailed with many wiles, threats and tortures, in or- 
der to rob them of their precious treasure, which 
they so faithfully kept in earthen vessels, to the 
honor of God, that it could not be taken from them ; 
on which account the others were so filled with 
envy, that they inflicted an ignominious death upon 
them, publicly in the market place; but God will 
crown them, together with His faithful servants, 
with great honor and joy, when the others will have 
to go with shame into everlasting misery. 

A LETTER BY WILLEM DROOGSCHEERDER, WRITTEN 
IN PRISON AT ANTWERP, WHERE HE, WITH FIVE 
OTHERS, WAS PUT TO DEATH FOR THE TES- 
TIMONY OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, 
AS ALREADY STATED, A. D. 1557 

Grace, peace, and mercy from God the Father, 
and our Lord Jesus Christ, who has called us to 
His imperishable kingdom, and chosen us before 
the foundation of the world, and cleansed us with 
the washing of water by the Word, in order that 
we should be blameless in His sight. 

Written to you, my beloved brother N., and to 
my dear sister N. Although I am here in fetters 
and bonds, for the testimony of Christ, and am 
ready to seal it with my blood through the grace 
of the Lord, yet I do not neglect or forget my fel- 
low members in my prayers, which I almost always 
offer with tears before the Lord, since you are still 
traveling in the wilderness, among dragons, lions 
and bears, which constantly run and seek to mur- 
der the innocent blood, which cries for vengeance 
from the time of Abel. For they bring us to death, 
as the Jews did Christ ; for we are grievous unto 

* The reader will bear in mind that large portions of Holland 
are traversed by numerous canals, in place of roads. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


569 


them to behold; because we do not conform to 
them; hence they counsel and say: "Let us con- 
demn him with a shameful death ; for by his own 
sayings he shall be respected." Wisd. 2 :15. 

Therefore, my chosen in the Lord, we will not 
be afraid of their threats and blows, though 
they run like mad dogs. The Lord holds their 
hearts in His hand ; they cannot hurt a hair of our 
head without the will of our Father. The Lord 
preserved the three young men in the fiery furnace, 
Daniel in the den of lions, Hezekiah in Jerusalem, 
Moses in Mesopotamia, Elijah in the mountains ; 
yea, all that trusted in the Lord, were never con- 
founded; for His mighty hand, says the prophet, 
is not shortened ; and though a mother should for- 
sake her own child, yet will I not forget thee, saith 
the Lord ; for he that toucheth you, toucheth the 
apple of Mine eye. Isa. 59:1; 49:15; Zech. 2:8. 
Therefore let us prepare our souls for temptation ; 
our deliverance draweth nigh, and the day of tribu- 
lation is at hand. II Esd. 16:74. Hence let us 
always sanctify and magnify our Lord, that we 
may inherit all the beautiful promises which He 
has promised to the Christian people, so that we 
may not become wearied or faint in our distress, but 
may be fervent in spirit, rejoicing in hope, patient 
in tribulation, and continuing instant in prayer. 
Heb. 13:3; Rom. 12:11, 12. When Israel left 
Egypt, they rejoiced greatly, that they were de- 
livered from bondage ; but when they came into the 
wilderness, where it did not please the flesh, they 
were very discontented, and murmured, so that 
they wanted to return, to which they had no right, 
since they had taken all their possessions with 
them, that they should have no cause to return. 
For this reason they were not permitted to enter 
the promised land except Caleb and Joshua; for 
these were of good courage, so that they destroyed 
their enemies like a piece of bread. 

The Lord was also with David, so that he slew 
the giant Goliath. They girded a sword to his side 
to slay the giant with it ; but David was not accus- 
tomed to it, since he was a shepherd, and he laid 
aside the sword, and took his sling, with which he 
smote the giant on the head, so that the latter fell 
to the ground, whereupon David took the giant's 
sword, and cut off his head. Therefore, my chosen 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, let us turn neither 
to the right, nor to the left, since we have so great 
a King, who will not forsake us, if we remain 
faithful to Him ; He is so faithful that has prom- 
ised it that I cannot doubt it ; for the city into which 
we shall come is full of all good things, but it lies 
in humility. II Esd. 7:6. 

Know, dear brother N., and sister N., that I give 
you a hymn for remembrance, and will hereby 
commend you to the Lord, until we come upon 
Mount Zion, and there sing the new song with all 
God's chosen. II Esd. 2 :42. Dear brother and sis- 
ter, when I composed this hymn, a great torment 
and temptation came upon me, so that I was very 
sorrowful, and it seemed to me that the Lord had 


utterly forsaken me. I fell down upon my knees, 
and wept bitterly before the Lord, and prayed for 
strength and power. And the Lord heard my pray- 
er and lifted me up again ; for He does not suffer 
us to be tempted above that we are able, and will 
with the temptation make also a way to escape, that 
we may be able to bear it. I Cor. 10 :13. I then re- 
ceived such grace and joy, that for joy I composed 
this hymn, to the edification of my fellow men. 
Greet J. de H. much with the peace of the Lord, 
and you, N., greet your master likewise much with 
the peace of the Lord, and say good night to your 
wife ; 1 cannot offer her peace, for it is written : 
"Woe unto them that comfort men with a vain 
hope." Know, dear friends, that I greatly rejoiced 
when I went to the court, so that it seemed to me 
that there could be no joy like this, that I should 
confess my Lord and God, before the world. The 
bailiff asked me whether I was rebaptized. And 
the Holy Ghost spake through my mouth and said 
that I was baptized according to the doctrine of 
Christ, and that they were Anabaptists,* since they 
baptize against Christ, hence the name by which 
you call us, belongs to you. And I asked them to 
let me go to my brethren, since we had the same 
faith, but they gave me no answer. Thus, my 
dear friends, we will await you under the altar. 


JERONYMUS, LAURENS VAN GUELDERS, PIETER 

THE MILLER, JACOB VAN YPERES AND MAER- 

TEN THE WALLOON, A. D. 1557 

In the same year, 1557, there were also appre- 
hended at Antwerp, five brethren of Christ, named 
Jeronymus, Laurens van Guelders, Pieter the mil- 
ler, Jacob van Yperes, and Maerten the Walloon, 
who trusted so firmly in the promises of God, and 
were so fervently united to the love of Christ, that 
they were not to be drawn away therefrom by any 
man, nay, not even by great promises, severe perse- 
cutions, perilous temptations, or threatenings with 
the sword ; for which reason all five were beheaded 
in prison, for the testimony of their faith, and firm 
adherence to the same ; and even as they lost their 
heads for the truth, so God shall set them as heads 
to convict and judge those who judged them. 

MARGRIETE, WIFE OF JERONYMUS, KLAERKEN 
AND JANNEKEN OF DEXTELAER, A. D. 1557 

In the year 1557, there were drowned in prison, 
at Antwerp, three women, namely Margriete, wife 
of the afore-mentioned Jeronymus, and Klaerken 
and Janneken of Dextelaer, because they stead- 
fastly adhered to the truth, and would not depart 
from it. After being drowned, they were ignomin- 
iously thrown naked into the Scheldt ; but they shall 
be clothed, and enter in honor, with their Bride- 
groom, to the marriage of the Lamb, where they, 

* The reader will understand this otherwise obscure assertion, 
when we state that it is based upon an ingenious application of the 
Dutch adverb "weder, weer," the first part of the word "Weer- 
doopers," (Anabaptists), — which may mean "against" as well as 
"again." — Translator. 


570 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


together with all the chosen of God, shall joyfully 
sing the new song, and live in eternal, imperishable 
joy. 


ALGERIUS, A YOUTH, A STUDENT OF PADUA, MIS- 
ERABLY BURNED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 
JESUS, AT ROME, A. D. 1557. A CON- 
SOLATORY LETTER FROM HIM.* AN 
ACCOUNT OF HIS SACRIFICE 

To my beloved brethren and fellow servants of 
Jesus Christ, who have gone out of Babylon unto 
mount Zion, whose names I do not omit without 
cause, grace, peace and mercy from God our Fa- 
ther, and the Lord Jesus Christ, our Lord and Sav- 
iour. Amen. In order somewhat to sweeten or take 
away the pain which you suffer on my account, I 
would communicate to you the sweetness which I 
experience, that you may rejoice with me, and 
shout for joy with thanksgiving in the presence of 
the Lord. 

I will tell to the world an incredible thing, 
namely, that I have found infinite sweetness in the 
bowels of the lion. And who will in any wise be- 
lieve what I am going to relate here? Who can 
believe it ? 

In a dark hole I have found pleasure ; in a place 
of bitterness and death, rest and hope of salvation ; 
in the abyss or depths of hell, joy; where others 
weep, I have laughed; where others fear, I have 
found strength ; who will believe this ? In a state of 
misery I have had very great delight ; in a lonely 
corner I have had most glorious company, and in 
the severest bond, great rest. All these things, my 
fellow brethren in Jesus Christ, the gracious hand 
of God has given me. Behold, He that at first was 
far from me, is now with me, and Him whom I 
knew but a little, I now see clearly ; to whom I once 
looked from afar, Him I now behold as present; 
He for whom I longed, now offers me His hand ; 
He comforts me; He fills me with joy; He drives 
from me bitterness, and renews within me strength 
and sweetness; He makes me well; He sustains 
me ; He helps me up ; He strengthens me. Oh, how 
good is the Lord, who does not suffer His servants 
to be tempted above that they are able! Oh, how 
easy, pleasant and sweet is His yoke ! Is there any 
like God the Most High, who sustains and re- 
freshes those that are tempted? He heals them 
that are bruised and wounded, and restores them 
altogether. Isa. 41; 43:20. None is like Him. 
Learn, most beloved brethren, how sweet the Lord 
is, how faithful and merciful ; who visits His serv- 
ants in trial (Isa. 43:2); who humbles Himself 
and condescends to be with us in our huts and hum- 
ble abodes. He gives us a cheerful mind and peace- 
ful heart. 


* In this letter we found so much wisdom, holiness, and excel- 
lence, that we have read it innumerable times with attention and 
deep emotion. It kindled our love to God, and our zeal, not only to 
live with Christ, but also, if necessary, to die with Him and for His 
holy truth. Oh, that we were worthy, that His holy name might 
be praised through us unworthy creatures! 


But will the blind world believe these things? 
No; she will much rather say (since she is unbe- 
lieving) : "You will not be able long to endure the 
heat, cold and discomfort of this place. And how 
then will you be able to bear the cross, the thou- 
sandfold contempt, wrong reproaches, and unde- 
served ignominy? Will you not regard your dear 
native country, the riches of this world, your par- 
ents, rank and honor at the court? Will you be 
able entirely to dismiss from your mind your glori- 
ous learning, which strengthens and recreates for 
all labor spent ? Will you lose so much for nothing, 
yea, all the labors you have undergone, your much 
watching, laboring and assiduity? For what pur- 
pose have you labored and studied so much, even 
from your very youth up ? 

But, last of all, have you then no fear at all of 
death, which awaits you, though you are innocent ? 
Oh, what extreme folly and ignorance it is, to be 
able with a single word to avoid all this, and to 
escape death, and yet you will refuse to do it ! Oh, 
what a despicable thing it is to be able to obtain 
something from such excellent, just, God-fearing, 
wise and good (or pious) councilors and illustrious 
men,* and voluntarily to refuse to receive any- 
thing. J 

But hearken, ye blind and mortal men, what is 
hotter and more intense than the fire which is pre- 
pared for you? What is colder than your own 
heart, which is yet in darkness, and has no light at 
all? John 1 :5. What is harder and more confused 
and restless than your life ? What is more ignoble 
and repulsive than your age? Tell me, my dear, 
what country or home is sweeter than the heaven- 
ly ? II Cor. 5:1. What treasure is greater than eter- 
nal life? And who are our parents and friends, ex- 
cept those alone who keep the Word of God? 
Where are greater joy, riches, and honor than in 
heaven? Tell me, ye ignorant, is not all learning 
given to know God, whom if we do not know in 
truth, all our labor, watching and exertion, yea, all 
our undertakings are expended to no purpose? An- 
swer me, ye unhappy men : what comfort or balm 
can he have, who misses God, who is the cure and 
refreshing of all ? Ex. 15 :26. How can he say that I 
fear death, if he himself is dead in sins, and thus 
prefers death to life ? I Tim. 5 :6. For if Christ is the 
way, the truth, and the life, can life be found out 
of Christ? The heat is to me a refreshing pleas- 
ure, and winter a joy in the Lord. I who do not 
fear the burning of the fire, shall I be afraid of 
simple heat? Is he tormented by ice, who con- 
sumes, melts, and falls asleep in the love of God ? 

This place is indeed hard and severe for the 
guilty and evildoers ; but to the innocent and right- 
eous it is very pleasant and sweet; hence issues 
honey ; hence flows the heavenly drink ; here wells 
up milk; here springs forth the abundance of all 
good things. 

It is true that this place is esteemed lonesome 

The powerful nobility or aristocracy of Venice is meant here. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


571 


and base ; yet it is to me as a spacious valley, and 
one of the most excellent places in the world. 

Tell me, ye miserable men, whether I could have 
a pasture or meadow more pleasant than this ; for 
here I behold kings, princes, states and nations; 
here I see war (or conflict) ; these cut in pieces, the 
others victorious; some that have fallen into low 
estate, others, who have attained to great honors. 

Here is Mount Zion ; here I rise and enter into 
heaven; Jesus Christ stands before my eyes; 
around me stand the fathers, prophets, evangelists, 
apostles, and all the servants of God. He (the 
Lord) embraces and nourishes me; these exhort 
me, those show me holy things ; these comfort me, 
others escort me with music and song. 

Shall I now say that I am alone, among so 
many ? For here I have whom I may take for com- 
panions, comforters and examples, since I see some 
that are crucified, some beheaded; some stoned; 
others cut in twain ; some roasted ! others fried in 
pans, ovens, and chaldrons of oil ; some whose eyes 
are put out ; others whose tongue is cut out ; these 
with their skin pulled over their head ; others with 
hands and feet cut off; some that are cast into 
fiery furnaces ; others given as food to wild beasts ; 
yea, It would require too much time, were I to 
relate it all. 

Finally, I see still others, who have suffered man- 
ifold tortures and martyrdoms, and this only be- 
cause they now live and are free from all pain. 
And for all these there is but one remedy, one med- 
icine, which can cure all their infirmities ; and this 
remedy gives to me also strength, and life, and 
cheerfulness to suffer all these fears and afflictions, 
which are but momentary, and not worth speaking 
of ; this is the hope which I have placed in heaven. 
I do not fear those who unjustly revile and perse- 
cute me, since He that dwells in heaven, will reject 
and extirpate them, but will heal and restore these. 
I shall not be afraid if a thousand surround me ; for 
the Lord my God will always deliver me ; He is my 
shield and protector ; He is my comfort ; He is my 
head ; He will beat down those who oppose me 
without cause ; He will break the teeth of sinners ; 
for salvation, blessing, might and dominion are 
His. The reproach which we suffer for Christ's 
sake gives us nothing but joy and gladness ; for it is 
written: "If ye be reproached for the name of 
Christ, happy are ye ; for the Spirit of glory and 
of God resteth upon you." I Pet. 4 :16. If we, then, 
are so assured of our salvation, we are not to re- 
gard the unjust reproaches of those who revile us. 

On earth I have no continuing city or place 
of rest ; my home and country are in heaven ; I seek 
the new city of Jerusalem, which I see before me, 
which comes to meet me. Behold, I am already on 
the way; there is my sweet home, my riches, my 
parents and my friends, my pleasure and my honor ; 
I have no fear that I shall miss them. 

All these earthly things are but shadows; they 
are all transient, and a vanity of vanities to those 
who miss the hope and essence of eternal life. 

The accomplishments, arts, or gifts which God 


has given me, were at first pleasant companions and 
recreations; now they yield me holy fruits. It is 
true, I have sweated, suffered cold, and as much 
as I was able, watched night and day ; but this my 
labor has tended and redounded to make me more 
perfect ; there never passed a day or hour without 
some improvement. Behold, the true countenance 
of God has been revealed over my life, and the 
Lord has caused me to experience great joy in my 
heart. In Him alone I shall rest in peace. I Pet. 
1:8. 

Who will now dare say that I have lost my age 
and years ? Who will say that I have lost my cour- 
age? For my soul has said : "The Lord is my por- 
tion ; therefore will I seek him." Lam. 3 :24. Hence 
since dying in the Lord is no dying, but leading a 
blessed life, why then does a reprobate to God op- 
pose me, to prevent me from dying ? All this will 
be the greatest joy, if I only may taste the cup of 
the Lord. And what surer pledge of my salvation 
could I find? Has He not said : "Men will do unto 
you what they have done to me?" John 15:20. 
Therefore let this fool keep silence, who has now 
so long deceived himself in the light of the sun. 
Let the blind world cease, I say, to imagine such 
things. For I will say with the apostle: "Neither 
tribulation, nor distress, nor famine, nor naked- 
ness, nor care, nor persecution, nor sword shall be 
able to separate us from the love in Christ. We 
are killed all the day long: we are led to death 
like sheep for the slaughter." Romans 8:35, 36. 
Thus we are partakers with Christ, who has said 
that the disciple is not greater than his master, and 
the servant not more than his lord. He also left 
us the command, that each should take up His cross 
and follow Him. 

Comfort yourselves, O most beloved fellow serv- 
ants of God, comfort yourselves, for we fall into 
manifold temptations. Let our patience be perfect 
in every place, since these things are promised us 
here on earth, for it is written that those who kill 
us will think that thereby they are doing God a holy 
service and sacrifice. John 16:2. Hence fear and 
death are only parts and things which teach us to 
understand our calling, and we rejoice in a future 
life, and shout joyfully in the Lord, since we are 
(far from all sin) beaten, and delivered unto death. 
For it is better to suffer for righteousness sake (if 
thus it be the will of the Lord) than for evildoing. 
We have an example in Christ, and the prophets, 
who spoke in the name of the Lord, and the chil- 
dren of unrighteousness put them to death accord- 
ing to their manner and custom. Behold what do 
we now? Blessed are they that have continued 
steadfast ! ! We rejoice in our innocence and (God- 
given) righteousness. God will punish them that 
persecute us. 

I have been called a fool, since I do not conceal 
the knowledge of God, and do not care whether I 
speak in secret or openly ; to which I could reply 
with a single word. "O poor man, who or what are 
you, who do not see the sun, and never once think 
of God's words." 


572 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


My dear, remember the words of Christ : "Ye 
are the light of the world. A city that is set on a 
hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, 
and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick ; and 
it giveth light unto all that are in the house." Mat- 
thew 5 :14, 15. And in another place He says : "Ye 
shall be brought before governors and kings, and 
others. Therefore, fear not them which kill the 
body ; but much rather him which is able to kill the 
soul. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before 
men, him will I confess also before my Father 
which is in heaven." Matt. 10:18, 28, 32. 

Since then the Lord has spoken so plainly of this 
subject, by what authority then do they advise and 
seek to persuade me ? For I shall never forsake the 
counsel of God, and follow the advice of men, since 
it is written : "Blessed is the man that walketh not 
in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the 
way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scorn- 
ful." Ps. 1 :1. 

I shall never deny Christ, but will confess Him 
whenever it is necessary. I shall not esteem my life 
more highly than my soul ; I shall not exchange the 
future for the present. Oh, how little does he un- 
derstand and know who thinks us to be in the way 
of folly. Wisd. 5:4. 

I do not deem it to be improper, though I do not 
please the so-called most mighty, just, wise, merci- 
ful, good and illustrious senators of this place, 
whose grace is offered me, if I apostatize. 

But since we are instructed by the apostles of the 
Lord, that we must obey God rather than men, etc., 
therefore I do not accept this grace of them. 

I wish that they were more perfect in the sight of 
the Lord ; it is true, they are mighty here, but they 
should also perfect themselves in the Lord ; they 
are indeed just, but they are still without Christ, 
who is the foundation of righteousness; they are 
wise, but where the beginning of wisdom is, there 
is also the fear of God; they are called merciful, 
but I wish that they might be more patient or sub- 
dued in Christian charity ; they are good, but I wish 
them the foundation of goodness, namely, the best 
and most high God ; they are called illustrious, but 
they have not accepted our Saviour, the most il- 
lustrious. 

Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth ; 
serve the Lord with fear, and approach Him with 
trembling. Receive instruction, and understand it, 
lest the Lord be angry, and ye perish from the right 
way. Why do ye rage, O ye people; and ye na- 
tions, why do ye imagine vain things against the 
Lord ! Ye kings of the earth, and ye princes, why 
are ye united together against Christ, the Holy 
One of God ? How long will ye seek lies, and hate 
truth. Be converted, and turn to the Lord our God, 
and harden not your hearts. For one cannot but 
know that he. who persecutes God's servants, perse- 
cutes God Himself; since He has said: "Whatso- 
ever men shall do unto you, they shall do to me, and 
not to you." Zech. 2 :8. 


But, my dear, pray tell me, in what manner I 
have deserved to be condemned ? Is it that I have 
not answered the most illustrious senators, my 
lords, according to their pleasure ? If I have said 
anything, it was not I at all that said it, since the 
Lord says that before the authorities it will not be 
us that speak, but the Spirit of our Father which 
will be in us. Matt. 10 :30. Now, if the Lord is 
faithful and true, which He is in truth, I am inno- 
cent. It was He who made me speak. And what 
am I, that I could withstand the will of God ? Acts 
11:17. Therefore, he that would reprove such 
words, reproves the Word of the Lord, who work- 
ed in me. But if he thinks that the Lord is not to be 
reproved, Oh, then let him not accuse me any more, 
since I am innocent of this work; for I did what I 
would not, I spoke what I thought not. But if the 
things which I have spoken are not good and true, 
and this is found and proved to me, then I will con- 
fess that they proceeded from me alone, and not 
from God ; but if I have said things that are good 
and proved, and cannot with justice be reproved, 
whether we will or not, it will have to be acknowl- 
edged that they proceeded from the Lord. Now, if 
all this is so, who then will accuse me? The most 
wise people? Who will condemn me? The most 
righteous judges (who are nevertheless unwise and 
unjust) ? 

Do what you will. Shall the words of the Lord 
be made void? Shall the Gospel be of account no 
longer? Certainly not; but the kingdom of God 
shall be only the more precious and sweet to the 
true Israelites, and come the sooner to the chosen of 
Jesus Christ. But they who do such things, shall 
experience the great judgment of God. They that 
kill the righteous shall not escape unpunished. II 
Thess. 1 :6. 

O most beloved, lift up your eyes, and take to 
heart the counsel of God. Not long ago the Lord 
showed you a sign of pestilence, in order to lead 
you to repentance ; but if this will not be received, 
he will unsheathe the sword entirely, and smite with 
the sword, pestilence and famine the people which 
exalts the horn against Christ. May God, through 
His mercy, avert this scourge from this place. To 
all believers their most zealous servant, the im- 
prisoned and bound Algerius. 

Written in the most delightful pleasure garden 
of the prison, called Leonia, the 12th of Tulv, A D 
1557* 


HOW ALGERIUS WAS OFFERED UP 

This Algerius,f though very young in years, was 
a student from the kingdom of Naples, and studied 
at Padua, where a brother who spoke his language 
came to him, of whom he diligently inquired the 
way and the will of the Lord, listening very earn- 

* Some had given 1555 as the year, but this is an error. 

t Some old writers did not know that this youth, Algerius, 

..n™ U e /°* ' S ■? e ! th '-A ad L thr0Ug \ baptism wh!ch he received 
upon his faith, united with the cross-bearing Church of the Ana- 
baptists; hence they ignorantly ascribed to him another religion 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


573 


estly, and was forthwith baptized into the Lord's 
death, which he immediately afterwards manfully 
and undauntedly as a bold hero and young soldier 
of Christ, forcibly proved with the deed, and sealed 
with his blood, and thus became like his Master, 
since he was also, even as Christ, when He came up 
out of Jordan, immediately assailed by the enemy, 
the tempter and his instruments, and cast into pris- 
on, in which he went through and endured many 
severe conflicts, but was always greatly strength- 
ened and comforted with great joy, by the Lord, 
whom he had set before his eyes, as his present 
writing abundantly shows, which he wrote in pris- 
on at Padua to the brethren in Italy, to strengthen 
and comfort them in their sorrow, which had come 
upon them on his account, because they were so- 
licitous for him as being a novice in the faith. But 
the Lord clothed him with great power, and hence, 
through him, as one of His chief weapons, glorified 
His name. For after many temptations, he was 
sent to Venice, where the entire senate or nobility 
tried to prevail upon him, as did the tempter finally 
try to do with Christ, and meant, by solemn en- 
treaties, flattery, and the offer of all manner of 
worldly aid and friendship, certainly to catch 
and alienate him, which was not one of the least 
darts ; but, as an immovable pillar, he rejected it 
all and despised it for Christ's sake, in order that 
he might with Moses and Paul win and keep Christ 
alone. Matt. 4:8; Eph. 6:16; Phil. 3:8; Hebrews 
11:26. 

When they could not prevail upon him, though 
they tried for a long time, he was therefore sent to 
Rome, and delivered to the pope, where he finally, 
after severe and hard imprisonment, offered up his 
life in great steadfastness, as a sweet savor, to the 
Lord, very eagerly and joyfully following in the 
footsteps of all his forefathers and the glorious 
confessors of Christ; and thus he rightly partook 
of the sufferings of his Lord and Master ; yea, his 
end was crowned with great triumphant praise even 
also by all his despisers, and thus the desired cup 
was drained. 

Many different means having been tried with 
him, he was at last sentenced to be burnt, but not in 
the same manner as others, who were, also on ac- 
count of the faith, with shortened pain, executed 
according to the Italian or French custom of being 
first hanged and strangled, and then burnt. But 
this pious Algerius was held in greater honor by 
the Lord Christ, and for this reason also had to 
begin and bring to a triumphant issue a far more 
exalted and honorable conflict. 

Having been brought in a wagon to the place 
called Mercado, a final attempt was made upon him. 
A Carthusian monk — in Rome called Capadocl- 
nes*, and holy people — was appointed to take him 
in hand. The same constantly held a crucifix be- 
fore him, and admonished him, to remember once 
more, before his departure, his Lord and Re- 


deemer, and not to die thus hardened and desperate 
in error. At the same time he constantly held be- 
fore his eyes the crucifix, which Algerius vigor- 
ously pushed aside with his hands, which had not 
been bound, as I understand, saying aloud in his 
language, with his eyes lifted up to heaven: "My 
Lord and God lives above in heaven." etc. 

At this the spectators cried with a loud voice, 
and said : "Oh, he struck it," meaning the crucifix. 
"Oh, away, away with him ; he is utterly hardened 
and blinded, all is lost on him." For at Rome it is 
thought something great, when these Carthusians 
cannot convert one; hence they are generally re- 
served for the last. Thereupon he was stripped to 
his waist, and bo'iling oil was first poured over his 
head and bare body, which good and pious Alge- 
rius patiently suffered, but doubtless severely felt. 
He rubbed his hand over his face, and pulled off 
the skin and the hair. Thereupon only was he 
burnt to ashes, an unusual thing in Italy, since I 
have seen it with my own eyes, that they were only 
roasted and singed in the fire, whereupon the dead 
body was carried to the grave. But as has been 
said, this blessed Algerius had to glorify our Lord 
and God much more highly. To him and to the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who wrought this through him, 
by the power of the Holy Ghost, be praise and 
glory forever. May He help us poor and weak mor- 
tals to follow Him. Amen. Yes, O Lord Jesus, 
Amen. 

Brother Da. Gr., who wrote this account, as the 
old copy shows, also writes : "This was done with 
him in the year 1557, a little while before I came to 
Rome, since at that time Algerius was still on every- 
body's tongue. I have also heard with my own 
ears, from the mouth of some who counted them- 
selves good papists and witnessed his execution, 
how wonderfully steadfast he died; and that he 
truly believed in his heart what he there in his se- 
vere martyrdom and pain confessed with his mouth 
before all the people. Hence there is no doubt but 
he ascended immediately to heaven, and was saved. 
Thus must the adversaries bear testimony to the 
saints of God, even against their will. Deut. 32 :31. 

Shortly afterwards, the flood occurred at Rome, 
when the Tiber overflowed, and did great damage, 
so that some Romans say that Rome suffered as 
much damage as if it had been plundered with 
haste ; which I for my part, found to be true in- 
deed, having never seen a greater famine of bread. 
It is impossible for me to tell how fearful the sight 
and distress was, especially among the poor people. 
But they do not recognize that it was a just [rec- 
ompense]. Wisd. 19:13. 


* Wc arc much inclined to the view that this is an error, and 
that the Capucins are meant. — Transl. 


KONRAD SCHUMACHER, A. D. 1558 

In this year a young brother by the name of 
Konrad Schumacher left Swabia with his people, 
and was apprehended at Stein, near Krems on the 
Danube, taken to Vienna, and there delivered into 
the hands of the authorities. There he lay in prison 


574 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


a year and several weeks, for the faith and the 
divine truth. In the prison he suffered great want 
and hunger among the thieves and other malefac- 
tors, of whom there were several imprisoned with 
him. Nothing was given them, except what others 
brought and gave to them. Besides, when these 
malefactors had been tortured, as is customary, 
they treated him most shamefully, so that he suf- 
fered great hunger, before he could get something 
to eat, when they even had something. Thus he had 
to suffer much misery in prison, aside from the 
tyranny. 

About this time Emperor Ferdinand attended a 
great diet at Augsburg, during which time the 
Bishop of Vienna had the brother brought before 
him twice, each time in the early morning before 
daylight, and was intending to have him executed 
in the house. The first time they brought him 
forth, and briefly examined him, and wanted him 
to tell whether he would desist from his faith or 
not. He briefly answered and said that they should 
not expect such a thing, since he would die in his 
belief ; that it was the truth, and the way to eternal 
life, and this he should confess with his mouth as 
long as there should be strength enough in him. 
Now their intention was frustrated, so that they 
could accomplish nothing that day, only that they 
disputed with him from early morning until noon, 
whereupon they remanded him to prison, saying 
that he should consider the matter for three days 
longer, and then tell them what he would do. After 
three days they again brought him forth, early in 
the morning, before daylight, and led him before 
the bishop and his monks and priests, before whom 
he most faithfully defended the truth. The execu- 
tioner was also at hand, waiting without, thinking 
to behead him early, before any people should 
come ; for they feared lest the truth should come to 
light, and the people learn that injustice was being 
done him. But the Lord again hindered them, so 
that he was brought back to prison. In the mean- 
time, however, the priests disputed much with him, 
and gave him no rest. 

After this they threatened to put him into a filthy 
tower, which had not had an occupant for eight 
years, where he should end his life. He said that 
he would bide it, and would put his trust in the 
Lord, who was well able to deliver him out of the 
filthy tower, and from all their power ; he thought, 
however, that the Lord had accepted him for a wit- 
ness of the truth. 

He showed himself so undaunted in everything 
that many of them were astonished at him. Others 
said they would try something new with him, 
whereby they should certainly frighten him enough. 
In the meantime King Maximilian's steward ad- 
monished the bishop for the best, and also spoke of 
the matter to the Lutheran preachers of the king, 
who then told it to the king, and spoke most favor- 
ably of the matter, saying that he was very young 
yet, and that it would be a pity to put him to death 
on account of the faith. Thereupon King Max- 


imilian concluded to free him from further tyranny 
and suffering, whereupon he was released from 
prison, and thus returned in peace to his brethren 
and his church. 


EXAMINATION, TORTURE, AND SENTENCE OF ANh 

NETGEN ANTHEUNIS, STIJNTGEN JANS, EVERT 

NOUTS, AND PIETER VAN EYNOVEN, AT 

ROTTERDAM, IN THE YEAR 1558* 

On the 20th of February, 1558 stilo coj., in 
presence of Adriaen Fijck, Adriaen Adriaens, 
Adriaen Robberts, Pieter Hendricks, Cornells 
Joosten, and Willem Muylwijck, judges, there was 
orally examined, Annetgen Antheunis, aged over 
thirty years, born at Buuren. 

She says that she always lived at Buuren, except 
one year that she resided here in the city, which she 
afterwards left, but returned about last St. Victor's 
day, and has since resided here until the present 
time. 

She says that she did not inquire the name of the 
people where she formerly worked. 

She says that she and another woman, named 
Stijntje van Ick, or Maurick near Buuren, have 
lived here in the city since St. Victor's day, and 
that she came here with said woman, from Buuren. 

She says that Evert is from Antwerp, and that 
he came to her yesterday, at the house where she 
was apprehended. 

She says that she learned to know said Evert 
only about two or three months ago, and that he 
came in the daytime, to the house of Arent Will- 
ems, in the woodyard, to buy a cheese. 

She says that she did not go to confession either 
at last Easter or Christmas. 

She says that she observes all that God has com- 
manded. 

She says that she was baptized according to the 
command of the Lord, but does not know the exact 
day ; but that it took place at the house of the afore- 
said Arent Willems, in the woodyard, and that 
she did not inquire the name of him that baptized 
her. 

On the 20th of February of said year, in the 
presence of the above-mentioned, there was orally 
examined, one Jan Hendricks, of Utrecht, aged 28 
or 29 years. 

He says that he has lived here in the city since 
Bamessche, in the house of Maritgen Jancheelen, in 
the fishmarket, and last in Willem Reyer's house, 
where he was apprehended. 

He says that at Dordrecht he lived near Starke 
Neele. 

He says that he does not want to tell where or 
from whom he heard the doctrine. 

He says that he thinks much of the sacrament, 
but nothing of the sacrament of the priests, and 
that, since he embraced this doctrine, he has never 
been to the sacrament. 

* Extracted from a certain book of criminal sentences of the 
city of Amsterdam. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


575 


He says that he was baptized since he believed, a 
certain time ago, and that he does not wish to tell 
when, where, or by whom it was done. 

He says that his child was washed a little by the 
priest, but does not want to tell when. 

On the aforesaid day, in the presence of the 
aforesaid judges, there was orally examined, 
Stijntgen Jans, aged 40 years, from Maurik, in 
Guelderland. 

She says that she has been here in the city 
about two or three years, with Annetgen Theunis, 
and that they lodged in the woodyard, and after- 
wards resided in a house where lace is made, and 
which stands behind a stable. 

She says that she has no faith in the sacrament 
which the priests administer, but esteems the sacra- 
ment as God has instituted it, and that she cannot 
believe in the sacrament of the church, because she 
cannot comprehend it. 

She says that she was baptized at a certain time, 
not yet twelve years ago, and not here in this city, 
but at Utrecht. 

On the same day, and in the presence of the 
above, there was orally examined, one Evert Nouts 
of Antwerp, aged about 27 years. 

He says that it is about three months since he 
came here into this city, and that he lodged for a 
time in the woodyard, and wove lace near the 
house called the Falcon. 

He says that he believes in the sacrament so far 
as the Scriptures speak of it, but does not believe 
that God is in the sacrament of the altar, since the 
Scriptures do not assure him of this; but he be- 
lieves concerning it in this manner that it is so, as 
far as it goes. 

He says that he was baptized according to the 
doctrine of Christ, a little over three years ago, just 
outside of Antwerp, in a certain place, by one Gillis 
of Aix-la-Chapelle, as he heard him called, who 
was executed this summer at Antwerp. 

On the same day, and in presence of the above- 
mentioned judges, there was orally examined one 
Pieter van Eynoven, born at Antwerp, aged 28 
years. 

He says that he has worked here in the city, at 
his trade of silk weaving, since fourteen days be- 
fore Christmas, in the house of one Christian, 
whose wife is named Anneken. 

He says that he believes on the foundation of the 
apostles and prophets. 

He says that he believes that the administration 
of the sacrament in the church is a great abomina- 
tion before God. 

He says that he was baptized according to the 
doctrine of Christ, about two years ago, but does 
not want to tell by whom or where it was done. 

On the \9th of March, 1558, stilo coj. in the 
presence of Adriaen Fijck Dirks van Hove, Adri- 
aen Adriaens, Adriaen Robbertszoon, Pieter van 


Neck Hendricks, Cornelis Joosten, Willem Cor- 
neliss Muylwijk, and Dirk Dirks, judges, there was 
examined by torture, in the morning, at six o'clock, 
in the city hall, Pieter van Eynoven, bom at Ant- 
werp, aged about 28 years. 

Pieter, when tortured on the rack, said that he 
was baptized at Antwerp, about two years ago, by 
one Leendert, whose surname he does not know, 
nor whence he is, and he had never seen him, ex- 
cept when he baptized him. 

He says that several others, whose names he 
does not know, were present when he was bap- 
tized. 

When asked concerning the women with whom 
he spoke at the time of his apprehension, he said 
that he did not know where they were going, or 
who they were. 

He says that he who baptized them, is called a 
teacher among them. 

He says that before he was baptized he had heard 
that he had to live according to the command of 
Christ, and that he took a Bible and Testament, and 
read therein, and found that it was as had been told 
him ; but he does not know the names of those who 
had previously instructed him herein, because they 
often do not inquire the names of others, nor want 
to know them, so as not to bring their brethren into 
trouble. 

He says that his master, Christian, and his wife, 
had the same faith as he, but does not know 
whether they are baptized. 

Jan Hendricks of Utrecht, aged 28 years, se- 
verely tortured on the rack. 

He says that he was baptized by one Leenert, but 
does not know whence he is, nor had he ever seen 
him previously, and that he was baptized by him 
here in the city, in the woodyard, a year and a 
half ago. 

He says that his child was baptized by the priest, 
at the font, at Dortrecht, and that no others whom 
he knows were present when he was baptized. 
Stijntgen Jans, aged about 40 years, of Utrecht 

Stijntgen says that he who baptized her is named 
Leenert, and that it took place in Utrecht, five or 
six years ago, in the house of one Gerrit, and that 
she does not know the surname of the aforesaid 
Leenert, nor whence he is, because they do not 
inquire nor have much desire to know the names 
or surnames of their fellow members, so as not to 
bring them into trouble. 

She says that others were baptized with her, but 
she did not know them. 

The judges being all assembled, resolve to post- 
pone the matter of the aforesaid prisoners to a 
limited day, until the executioner's return, in order 
that said prisoners shall consider the matter, and 
that it may be seen whether they can be induced by 
kind means : and that they shall then comply with 


576 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the wishes of the bailiff, by expediting the matter 
and justice, if the judges are all at home. 

On the 28th of March. — The judges resolve, 
since Cornelis Joosten and Dirk Dirks, judges, are 
not at home, to postpone the case of the aforesaid 
prisoners, until the former return. 

The bailiff protests costs and interests, since the 
judges will not consent to limit a day for said pris- 
oners. 

The judges protest and say that since Cornelis 
Joosten and Dirk Dirks, of their number, are ab- 
sent, and they have agreed together to be present 
in full number to consider the case of said prison- 
ers, they adhere to their former decision. 

On the 26th of March all that they had orally 
confessed at torture was read to the aforesaid five 
prisoners, who publicly, in front of the city hall, 
acknowledged it to be true, in the sight of everyone, 
and a day, namely, Monday, the 28th of March, 
was limited for them, by the bailiff, Gerrardt van 
der Mersche. Done as stated above, in presence of 
Adriaen Fijck, Adriaen Adriaens, Adriaen Rob- 
brechts, Pieter Hendricks, Cornelis Joosten, Wil- 
liam Corneliss, and Dirk Dirks, judges. 

Sentence of Death, on the 28th of March, 1558, 
stilo coj. 

According to the written laws pursuant to the de- 
crees of his Imperial Majesty, confirmed by his 
Royal Majesty, who will have them observed in all 
their points and articles ; and through the demand 
of the bailiff, and the confession of the prisoners, 
Evert Nouts, Pieter van Eynhoven, both of Ant- 
werp, and Jan Hendricks of Utrecht, said prisoners 
shall be executed according to the decree. Done in 
the presence of Adriaen Fijck, Adriaen Adriaens, 
Adriaen Robbrechts, Pieter Hendricks, Cornelis 
Joosten, Willem Corneliss, and Dirk Dirks, judges, 
and Sir Roeland, pensionary. 

In regard to Stijntgen Jans and Annetgen An- 
theunis, decision of their case is deferred for cer- 
tain reasons, the judges moving postponement until 
after Easter. 

Note.— On the 28th of March, 1558, stilo coj., 
after the above sentence had been pronounced by 
Matthijs Bark, the secretary, and the aforesaid 
prisoners had been condemned to be executed with 
fire, all the necessary preparations were made here 
before the city hall ; three large stakes were placed 
near together, at which to strangle said prisoners 
first, before burning them; and the place having 
been shut off with planks and stakes, it was pro- 
claimed in the name of the bailiff, magistrate, bur- 
gomasters and judges, in front of the city hall, with 
the striking of the bell, that every one should leave 
the ring, on pain of forfeiting his upper garment ; 
and that no one should hinder or resist justice by 
word or act, on pain of life and property. Between 
eleven and twelve o'clock, every preparation nec- 
essary for the execution having been made, the 
aforesaid Jan Hendricks was first brought out to 
be executed, and placed at the middle stake upon a 


little stool, and a cord put around his neck, to 
strangle him. Thereupon Master Aert, the young 
constable, as substitute for Master, Jan van Haar- 
lem, the executioner from behind, twisted said cord 
tight with a stick, and then took away the little 
stool from under Jan Hendricks' feet, and while 
thus hanging pulled him with all his might by his 
body and legs ; whereupon said Master Jan came 
with a bundle of oat straw, into which a quantity 
of gunpowder had been put, and held it before his 
face, to singe it; but Master Aert had a pair of 
tongs with a red-hot coal, to cast into the gun- 
powder. He threw it three or four times, without 
being able to touch the gunpowder, so that the 
straw smoked, but the powder was not ignited. 

In consequence of this a great cry arose, one say- 
ing: "You throw the fire badly;" another: "You 
inflict a thousand deaths upon the man ;" and final- 
ly, "Stone the constable to death," and the like. 
Then a woman threw a slipper, and others of the 
bystanders began to throw stones at the constable. 
Master Hans was then pushed by the citizens, into 
the house of Jan Sampel, in the Golden Waggon, 
opposite the City Hall and concealed; while the 
young constable, called Master Aert, together with 
the servants of the procurator-general, also of 
Schielandt, and of this city, who had been sum- 
moned to the assistance of justice, fled into the city 
hall, followed by Gerrit van der Mersche, the bail- 
iff ; leaving said Jan Hendricks still suspended by 
the cord. The judges, the pensionary, and the sec- 
retary, seeing the great tumult and uproar, took ref- 
uge up in the square of the city hall tower. The 
first ones who arrived there were Adriaen Rob- 
berts, the judge, and Matthijs Bark, the secretary, 
who, from the square of the tower, saw Jan Hend- 
ricks still hanging at the stake. With great violence 
the planks were torn off, and the stakes pulled out, 
from the enclosure that had been erected to keep 
the people from getting to the officers of justice. A 
lad then came and passed the stake, intending to 
cut the cord by which said Jan had been strangled ; 
but he did not venture to do it, whereupon another 
came, who cut the cord, so that Jan fell to the 
ground. And as the perpetrators of this crime were 
mostly strangers, the citizens who lived in the 
neighborhood, locked their doors. The bailiff, to- 
gether with the servants of the procurator-general, 
and of Schielandt, barricaded the front of the city 
hall with benches, planks, and other wood, in order 
to keep the two others that had been sentenced, and 
the women. But as the tumult and uproar increased 
more and more, the rioters pulled out the stakes, 
and other stakes from the street, and came with vio- 
lence before the door of the city hall, in order to 
force it open. The door, however, being firmly bar- 
ricaded, they went with the stakes upon the hos- 
pital stairs, and forced open the back door of the 
city hall, which leads to the chamber of Schielandt, 
and the treasury. Hearing this, the bailiff and his 
servants, who were there with the prisoners, left 
the two women behind, since Annetge was a crip- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


577 


pie, and not able to walk, and took the other two 
prisoners that had been sentenced, and fled with 
them from the lower part of the city hall up into the 
tower. The rioters thus forced open the front as 
well as the rear of the city hall, broke the doors in 
pieces, and first took the aforesaid two women, 
brought them without the city, and led them away. 
Thereupon they returned into the front of the city 
hall, and smashed in the door leading up into the 
tower, calling and crying aloud for the two men 
prisoners ; or they would kill them all, and set the 
tower on fire; so that the servants released said 
prisoners, whom the rioters then brought without 
the city. 

After this they cried as loud as ever, and de- 
manded the young constable, and also the bailiff 
and the members of the court. And as the servants 
were in a story of the tower below the one occupied 
by the lords of the court, they told the rioters aloud 
that the lords and the constable had already left the 
city hall. Deeper silence could not have reigned in 
a convent, than prevailed at this time among the 
lords ; for though some did not make an outward 
manifestation of the regret which they felt in their 
hearts, he that had sharp eyes, could read it in their 
face. And though it was past noon, and no one had 
eaten much that day, yet I believe, if there had been 
an abundance of the most tempting viands, none 
would have made very great inroads upon them. 

But at last, God be praised for it, the tumult and 
uproar ceased ; so that through the faithfulness of 
Adriaen Jacobs Tromper, councilor of said city, 
who had left the ark, but returned with an olive 
twig, and informed the lords of the court, in their 
anxiety, that the uproar had subsided, and that the 
rioters had all gone away. Thus, about two o'clock 
in the afternoon, the lords left the tower ; but the 
city was still in great commotion, and Jan Hend- 
ricks, the prisoner that had been cut down, was 
brought into the house of one Kers Goverts Brou- 
wer, near the city hall, where he remained until 
about five or six o'clock in the evening, when he 
was openly put into a boat, and taken out of the 
city, and it is said that he is still living. 

That evening the arquebusiers were ordered on 
guard. The next day, the 29th of March, a delega- 
tion went in behalf of the city to the Hague, to the 
lords of the council, where they reported the mat- 
ter, presented an excuse in behalf of the city, and 
requested that commissioners be sent to inquire into 
the matter, that the city might be exculpated from 
the uproar. Next day, Sir Guiljand Zeegers, Lord 
van Wassenhoven, and Sir Christian de Waert, 
procurator-general, arrived here, and made some 
inquiries concerning the crime, and reported the in- 
formation obtained to the council. His Royal 
Majesty, having been informed that full control 
had been gained over the city, speedily dispatched 
(since my lord the margrave van Veere was sick) 
the count of Boussu and my lord of Cruyningen, 
who passed through here secretly, on Easter eve, 
on their way to the Hague, where they, on Easter 


Day, convened the whole council. They wrote to 
the bailiff, to close the gates and bars, and to fetch 
those who had been designated and reported, from 
their beds, in the night ; which was done after the 
close of Easter Day, and there was apprehended in 
the night, with the assistance of the arquebusiers, 
and in presence of the burgomasters, one Chiele 
Pot. On the following day, the second Easter Day, 
there arrived in the city the Count of Boussu, my 
lord of Cruyningen, Sir Gerrit van Assendelft, 
President of the Council, Guiljand Zeegers, lord of 
Wassenhoven, Sir Cornells Zuys, Aernoult Sas- 
bout, Comelis van Weldam, and Dominicus Boot. 

On the 2lst of April, 1558, after Easter 

Whereas Jacob Theunis, alias Mosselman, born 
at Rotterdam, at present a prisoner, has confessed, 
without torture and iron bonds, before the count of 
Boussu, knight of the order of the Golden Fleece, 
the lord of Cruyningen, as commissaries from his 
Royal Majesty, and the court of Holland ; that he, 
the prisoner, after the tumult and uproar in this 
city of Rotterdam had taken place, went to the city 
hall, to see what was going on there, and that as he 
ascended the steps of the city hall, a crutch was 
thrown at his neck, whereupon he picked it up, 
went with it into the city hall, where the servants 
were still in the tower, and threw it up from below 
at the servants ; all of which are things of bad ex- 
ample, and must not go uncorrected, but must be 
punished, as a warning example unto others ; there- 
fore, the aforesaid court, after mature deliberation, 
in the name of the King of Spain, of England, of 
France, etc., as Count of Holland, Zeeland and 
Vriesland, has condemned and does sentence by 
these presents, the aforesaid prisoner Jacob Theu- 
nis, to appear in audience, and there to ask, with 
uncovered head, on his knees, the forgiveness of 
the court, on behalf of his Royal Majesty and 
justice, and to declare that he is sincerely sorry 
that he threw the crutch at the servants, in the city 
hall : and that after this is done, he is to be brought 
upon the scaffold erected in front of the city hall 
of this city, and to remain standing there until after 
the execution of the rioters. Done at Rotterdam 
by Sir Geraerdt van Assendelft, Emskerk, etc., 
first president of the council, Guiljand Zeegers, 
lord of Wassenhoven, etc., knight, Sir Cornelis 
Zuys, Aernout Sassebout, Cornelis van Weldam, 
Dominicus Boot, Damas van Drogendijk, Quintijn 
Weytszoon, and Aernout Nicolai, Councilors of 
Holland, and pronounced on the 21st of April, 
1558, after Easter. 

Whereas Avicenna Jans, born at Delft, at pres- 
ent a prisoner, has confessed, without torture and 
iron bonds, before the count of Boussu, Knight of 
the Golden Fleece, and the lord of Cruyningen, as 
commissaries of his Royal Majesty and the court 
of Holland, that he, the prisoner, at the time of the 
tumult and uproar which recently occurred in this 
city of Rotterdam, stood at the house of Kors 
Goverts Brouwer, and that after said uproar was 


578 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


almost over he, intending to go home, in his con- 
sternation went eastward, and again passed the 
house of the aforesaid Kors, and having seen that 
the condemned and strangled man, who had been 
cut down from the stake at which he had been 
strangled, was brought to the house of the afore- 
said Kors Goverts, he, the prisoner also went into 
the house ; and that, while the strangled man was 
yet lying in the street near the door, and because 
some of the other bystanders had said to him : 
"Take the man (meaning the strangled man) 
further back," he, the prisoner, also seized hold 
of him ; and that after the strangled man had been 
lifted up and carried into the house, he, since some 
had told him to see whether there was yet life in 
the strangled man, tapped the soles of his feet, and 
afterwards, in the evening, returned home from the 
aforesaid house — 

Here the account in said book of criminal sen- 
tences abruptly ends ; so that it remains uncertain 
what was further done in the matter. 


THOMAS VAN IMBROECK, THE 5TH OF MAY, IN THE 
YEAR 1558 

At- Cologne, on the Rhine, a God-fearing broth- 
er, named Thomas van Imbroeck, a printer's serv- 
ant, was apprehended for the truth, in the year 
1557, and imprisoned in a tower. When afterwards 
examined in regard to baptism and marriage, he 
met them with the Word of God, in such a man- 
ner that they desisted from examining him further 
and put him into another tower. His wife wrote 
him a letter exhorting him to fight valiantly, and 
to adhere firmly to the truth. For these comforting 
words he affectionately thanked her, and showed 
by many Scriptures that the righteous have always 
suffered, and that he stood with a good conscience 
void of offense before God, to follow them, for- 
sake wife, children, and all visible things, and take 
up the cross of Christ, and follow Him, for which 
he prayed God that he might be found worthy. 
Afterwards there came to him two priests, who dis- 
puted with him concerning infant baptism; but 
they disagreed among themselves; for the one 
would have that the infants that died unbaptized 
were damned, while the other admitted that they 
were saved. They insisted that he should become 
converted. But he said: "That which I maintain, 
the Scriptures have taught me, and if any one will 
teach me a better way from the Scriptures, I will 
gladly follow him." They said: "You despise our 
church, and refuse to be taught by us." He replied : 
"That I condemn your church and do not come 
under your communion, is for the reason that you 
do not keep your church pure; for perjurers, 
whoremongers, and the like are pious brethren 
among you." They also asked him why he did not 
have his children baptized. He answered: "The 
Scriptures teach no infant baptism, and those that 
are to be baptized according to the Word of God, 
must first believe." Then they said that he was a 


heretic, but were not able to prove it. He was then 
brought to the rack, where he was sharply ex- 
amined, but not tortured, though the executioner 
had everything ready for it ; for the lords were not 
agreed among themselves. This happened three 
different times. After this he was brought into the 
house of the count, who would gladly have set him 
at liberty had he not so greatly feared the imperial 
decree and the displeasure of the bishop. Thomas, 
however, was bold, of good cheer, and ready to lay 
down his life for the name of Christ, and to adhere 
so firmly to the truth and the love of God, that 
neither fire, water, sword, nor any other thing 
should move him therefrom. When they took him 
away from the house of the count, he suffered 
much temptation all night from the count's people 
and others, who undertook to teach and instruct 
him, but all in vain ; for they were such as were 
themselves not instructed or taught of God. 

Finally he was brought before the high court, 
where he was condemned to death, in presence of 
the count, who then ; for the first time, pronounced 
judgment, staining his staff with Christian blood. 
Thus he was beheaded, as a pious witness of Jesus 
Christ, for his steadfast continuance in the faith, 
on the 5th day of March, 1558, being twenty-five 
years old. 

From his prison he wrote letters to his wife and 
brethren, and also a confession of his faith regard- 
ing baptism, of which a special book has been pub- 
lished, all of which is very instructive and comfort- 
ing for the God-fearing, as you shall see by the fol- 
lowing part, which is here presented to you. 

A letter by Thomas van Imbroeck, written from 
prison to his wife and brethren 

Much grace and peace from God the heavenly 
Father, who is a true Father; for He shows His 
fatherly faithfulness to all His children, according 
to His promise, when He says : "I will be a Father 
unto^ them, and they shall be my sons and daugh- 
ters." May this Father so speak to your hearts, 
that you may believe me with a good conscience, 
that you are His children, and it will not fail you. 

This grace I wish you, my dear wife, and also the 
wife of my Lord (you understand whom I mean), 
through the Author and Finisher of life, Jesus, to 
whom alone we must take refuge, that we may be- 
come conformed to Him in this world, according to 
the words of the prophet, who says : "He hath no 
form nor comeliness ; and when we shall see him, 
there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is 
despised and rejected of men ; a man of sorrows, 
and acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were 
our faces from him." Isa. 53 :2, 3. 

But what says the Scripture: "Wherefore God 
also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name 
which is above every name . . . and that every 
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to 
the glory of God the Father." 

Hence I deem it necessary for us, O wife of the 
Lord, to reflect on this ; for though we are now the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


579 


reproach of all men, yea, as the filth and offscouring 
of everyone, so that they say: "Away with him. 
for he is not fit to live ;" they shall in due time con- 
fess and say: "Behold, how are they now num- 
bered among the children of God and their lot is 
among the saints. We accounted their life mad- 
ness, and their end to be without honor." Wisd. 
3 :5, 4. Now we sigh, but when He shall come for 
whom we wait; then they shall sigh, and be dis- 
tressed with great pain ; who shall be without hope ; 
for their worm shall never die, and their fire shall 
not be quenched. 

Hence, there is a great difference between the 
pious and the ungodly ; for the souls of the right- 
eous are in the hands of God, and there shall no 
torment touch them, for their hope is full of im- 
mortality. Wisd. 3:1, 4. 

This, my brethren, we are to consider well ; for 
if we look back, we still look upon deadly or mortal 
things, and there cannot apply to us the comforting 
words of Paul, where he says: "Our light afflic- 
tion, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory ; 
while we look not at the things which are seen, but 
at the things which are not seen." II Cor. 4:17, 18. 

Now I know that wife and children are visible, 
and though they are dear to me, yet I will count 
them but dung, and say : "Henceforth know I no 
man after the flesh ; but the knowledge of the spirit 
abideth forever." Phil. 3:8; II Cor. 5:16. And 
thus I hope to know you all when we shall appear 
together in the eternal joy, which is prepared from 
the beginning for them that are not ashamed of 
Christ ; but this is not to be ashamed, when we, as 
malefactors, go without the gate, for Christ's sake, 
and help Him bear His reproach, without the camp. 
Heb. 12:13. 

Hence I desire that the rich seek no excuse, and 
say: "Yea, I cannot forsake everything, it would 
create great wonderment and sensation before the 
world, if I should so completely forsake my rank." 
Yea, they should imagine that they were doing too 
much in this. Ah no! He who is over all, God 
blessed forever, humbled Himself much more than 
this; for He was King over all, and Lord of the 
whole world, even as David in spirit calls Him 
Lord : He came not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister unto all ; for He became the servant of us 
all, that He might make us free. Rom. 9 :5 ; Phil. 
2:7; I Tim. 6:15; Rev. 17:14; Matt. 20:28; John 
8:36. 

If we therefore have received freedom through 
Him, let us be grateful, and not cast it from us ; for 
it has a great reward, though some say we ought 
not to serve God for the reward. This view, I say, 
is not right; for I say with Paul: "If in this life 
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most 
miserable." I Cor. 15:19. 

Yet, let no one think, that he shall be justified 
and saved by his good works alone; for this we 
must wholly ascribe to the grace of God, and to 


the merits and innocently shed blood of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who works the good in us. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, beware of such 
spirits ; for they would experience greater per- 
fection, but fail in those things which are least. 
Adhere to the doctrine you have learned. One 
thing I desire and request : that the simple may be 
better and more thoroughly instructed, lest your 
labor be burned in the fire ; for the scripture says 
not in vain : "In that he himself hath suffered be- 
ing tempted, he is able to succor them that are 
tempted," for experience brings perfect wisdom, 
even as Paul says. "Blessed be . . . the Father of 
mercies and the God of all comfort, who com- 
forteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by 
the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted 
of God. For, as the sufferings of Christ abound 
in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ" ; 
yea, through Him, I say, we shall gain the victory ; 
for He is our life, and to die is gain for us, since 
He says: "Though you were dead, yet shall you 
live." Heb. 2:18; II Cor. 1:3-5; John 11:25; 
II Tim. 2:11. 

Hence it is good to die with Christ ; for He was 
raised up by the glory of His Father, and, hence, 
will draw unto Him all that the Father has given 
Him. Rom. 6:4; John 12:32. Therefore, my 
brethren, and my dear wife, let us be valiant ; for 
the apostle says: "My strength is made perfect in 
weakness." II Cor. 12:9. Hence I deem it good, 
to be in weakness, (mark) if it be followed by be- 
ing in reproach, distress, persecution, and fear 
for Christ's sake. 

Yea, if the Lord should count me worthy to tes- 
tify with my blood to His name, how greatly 
would I thank Him, for I hope not only to bear 
these bonds with patience, but also to die for 
Christ's sake, that I may finish my course with joy ; 
for I would rather be with the Lord, than live 
again in this abominable, wicked world; however, 
His divine will be done. Amen. 

And if anything should be defective yet in my 
life, that I may not have been diligent enough 
(which I confess), may the Lord blot it out and 
purge it, through the fire of His love and mercy, 
in the blood of Jesus Christ through which every- 
thing must be purified, and purged. I John 1 :7. 

Dear brethren, I desire that you will all pray to 
God for me, that He will keep us through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord and Saviour. Amen. 
Another letter by Thomas van Imbroeck, written 
in prison to his wife 

May grace, peace and mercy from God the heav- 
enly Father, and the pure love of His Son Jesus 
Christ, be perfect in your heart, my dear wife, that 
you may thereby be drawn from all visible things 
to the invisible and eternal, through the help and 
co-operation of His Holy Spirit, who is the Gov- 
ernor and Guide of the children of God; to Him 
be glory and praise forever and ever, Amen. 


580 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ for His great and unspeakable grace, which 
He has imparted to us through His gracious good- 
ness, and has drawn us into the kingdom of His Be- 
loved Son, through whom we have received re- 
demption from all our sins, in His blood. Eph. 1 :3. 

Hence it is right and just that we ought not to 
cease constantly to serve Him with great humility 
as grateful and obedient children, and not disesteem 
the grace which has been given us, but diligently 
consider why and for what purpose it has been giv- 
en us, namely, that we should use it and get gain by 
it, that we may hear the sweet voice which says : 
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou 
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make 
thee ruler over many things." Matt. 25 :21. 

Be admonished by this, that the merchant sold 
all that he had, and bought the field in which lay 
the treasure. Matt. 13:44. Thus you should also 
think now, that you willingly give your husband to 
the Lord, like Jephtha, who offered up his daughter 
to the Lord ; or remember also Abraham, the pious 
father of all the faithful, who did not become weak 
in faith, but willingly delivered up his son Isaac to 
show obedience to the mighty God, who gives life 
and breath to all men, Judg. 11 :39; Heb. 11 :17. 

Remember also patient Job, who in his trial with 
all meekness said : "Naked came I out of my moth- 
er's womb, and naked shall I return thither; the 
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed 
be the name of the Lord." Job 1 :21. 

Oh, James may well say : "Ye have heard of the 
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the 
Lord." Jas. 5:11. And also Paul says : "Consider 
him that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself." Heb. 12:3. He knew no sin; 
but we must confess that we deserve more punish- 
ment than we suffer, though the same is profitable, 
as is written that He chastises us for our benefit, 
and that all things work together for good to us. 
Rom. 8:28. 

Hence I desire of you, my dear friend, that you 
be of good cheer in the Lord, and do not grieve, 
for I have well perceived that you have lost flesh 
and become emaciated. Rejoice with me, and thank 
God that we are not bastards, but that He receives 
us as a Father, yea, as children and fellow heirs of 
His kingdom, who here on earth receive like re- 
ward with His Son, and this for the sake of His 
testimony. 

Why should we not suffer the evil, seeing we 
have received the good from Him ? However, if we 
would sorrow, we have cause enough for it, for 
godly sorrow I mean; for we may with truth la- 
ment, that we are still very unfit ; even as you write 
me, that you cannot pray well, even as I also, alas ! 
am imperfect. Jas. 4 :3. But the reason of it, in my 
opinion, is this, that we are not sufficiently dis- 
pleased with ourselves, and also, that we do not per- 
ceive the thorns that are in our flesh. 

May the Lord have compassion upon us, and 
open the eyes of our understanding, so that we may 


hate sin, even as God Himself hates it ; for then He 
takes pleasure in us, even as also holy David when 
he says : "Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am 
weak : O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed. 
My soul is also sore vexed ; but thou, O Lord, how 
long? Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: oh save 
me for thy mercies' sake. ... I am weary with 
my groaning ; all the night make I my bed to swim ; 
I water my couch with my tears." Ps. 6 :2-4, 6. 

But where are the tears which we have shed, my 
dear wife, over our past sins, when our souls were 
wounded even unto death, yea, sunk in hell ? True, 
we sing: "I acknowledge my transgressions, and 
my sin is ever before me :" but it were far better 
for us, to lament from deep distress of heart, and 
to pray with a broken, contrite and fervent heart, 
if we experience the same, now that tribulation and 
suffering happen to us in the flesh. 

Thus also Esther learned to pray, where she 
says : "O my Lord, thou only art our King : help 
me, desolate woman, which have no helper but 
thee ; deliver us and help me ; for thou knowest all 
things; O Lord, thou knowest that I hate the 
glory of the unrighteous, and abhor the bed of the 
uncircumcised, and that I abhor the sign of my 
high estate." II Esther 14:3, 15. 

We must observe here that the pious woman had 
an aversion for the costly apparel, and hated it more 
than she loved it. Do you also beware of it, and re- 
prove it sharply in those whom you see given to it • 
for it proceeds not from a humble heart. The 
proverb says: "Don't put moths into the fur;" 
neither must we give the flesh occasion for sin, 
since it is, alas! evil enough without that. Gal! 

Therefore, my dear sister, do not respect per- 
sons; for the faith of Jesus does not suffer re- 
spect of persons (Deut. 1 :17; Jas. 2:1) ; but re- 
prove that which is evil with all kindness and hu- 
mility, out of love, and show yourself in all things 
a pattern of good works and sobriety to all women, 
with piety and silence ; for he that bridles not his 
tongue, deceives his own heart, and his religion is 
vain. 

Hence I affectionately exhort you, while you 
have time now, that you will use all diligence ; for 
it is not enough, that we confess the name of the 
Lord with the mouth in prison, but we must first 
demonstrate our confession in power ; for we know 
that he who transgresses out of prison, sins just 
as much as he that sins in prison, though through 
weakness, while the other, sins from wantonness. 

Therefore take heed to yourselves, and be always 
prepared ; for we know not the hour. Watch there- 
fore, and keep your garments clean, lest you walk 
naked, and your shame become manifest. Be al- 
ways ready for conflict ; for David says : "Many 
are the afflictions of the righteous : but the Lord 
delivereth him out of them all. He keepeth all his 
bones: not one of them is broken." Ps. 34:19, 20. 
"He saveth the poor from the sword of the' un- 
godly, and the needy from the hand of the mighty." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


581 


Job 5:15. Job further says: "Happy is the man 
whom God correcteth : therefore despise not thou 
the chastening of the Almighty : for he maketh sore, 
and bindeth up : he woundeth, and his hands make 
whole." 5:17, 18. 

Paul also says, that he wants to know Christ, and 
the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship 
of His sufferings, being made conformable unto 
His death ; if by any means (he says) I might at- 
tain unto the resurrection of the dead. Phil. 3:10, 
11. Hence we must mourn with Him, that we may 
also rejoice with Him. Does not Christ say: 
"Blessed are they that mourn and lament ; for they 
shall be comforted ; yea, the tears shall be wiped 
away." Matt. 5 :4. And the Lord does not forsake 
the widow that is oppressed, as it is written : "He 
hears the prayer of the distressed and oppressed, 
and He does not despise the prayer of the widows, 
if they pour it out before Him with lamentation and 
sighing ; yea, their tears ascend to heaven, and the 
Lord will hear them." Sir. 35 :24. 

Therefore let us be resigned, and say within our- 
selves : "O Lord, Almighty King, all things are in 
Thy power ; if it is Thy will to restore unto me my 
husband, there is none that can resist Thy will. 
Thou hast made heaven and earth, and all that is 
contained in the circuit of heaven. Thou art Lord 
of all things. Thou preservest us as the apple of 
Thine eye, and hast said through the mouth of Da- 
vid, that we shall cast our burden upon Thee ; for 
Thou wilt sustain us, and never suffer the righteous 
to be moved." Ps. 55 :22. Then will your prayer be 
fulfilled, as you write me, that you cannot pray 
otherwise than only: "Lord, Thy will be done." 
And I wish to God for you, that this may be found 
in you in truth, and not as Israel cried to the Lord, 
when they drew near Him with their mouth, and 
magnified Him with their tongues ; but their heart 
was not right with Him, and they were not found 
faithful in His covenant. Isa. 29:13. But they that 
keep His commandment, shall pray, and whatso- 
ever they shall ask (in accordance with His will) 
shall be granted unto them. John 15 :16. 

Hence be of good courage, and bring up your 
children in good manners, and in the fear of God, 
that their natural propensities may be mortified; 
and take an example from yourself, how you bring 
them up in their weakness, with great labor and 
trouble, and give the breast to them to whom the 
Lord has commanded milk to be given. 

You are also to give them the rod, according to 
the command of the Lord, when they transgress 
and are obstinate ; for this is also food for the soul, 
and drives out the folly which is bound up in their 
hearts. Prov. 23:13, 14. Remember the words of 
Sirach, where he says (7:26) : "Shew not thyself 
cheerful to thy daughter, nor laugh with her, lest 
she become bold against thee, and thou have to 
bear shame on her account in the end. But teach 
her the law of our God, that she may put her hope 
in the Almighty and Most High, and may never 


forget the benefits bestowed upon us through 
Christ." 

I also pray you, that they, as far as possible, be 
kept away from intractable children ; do not allow 
them to run about in the streets, but keep them 
with you as much as possible, that you may have 
joy and sorrow with them ; and forget not the kind 
of widow mentioned by Paul in his letter to Tim- 
othy (I Tim. 5 :4) ; but place your hope firmly in 
the Lord, and wait for Him with patience. 

Now I understand that you would gladly die ; but 
when I was still with you, and we lived together in 
peace, then life was no cross for you. Remember 
therefore now what I often told you, namely, that it 
is good for the believer to have tribulation and dis- 
tress, that we may learn to say with Paul: "We 
groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with 
our house which is from heaven : if so be that being 
clothed we shall not be found naked. For we that 
are in this body, are burdened, and willing rather 
to be absent from the body, and to be present with 
the Lord, than to walk in his absence in much afflic- 
tion." II Cor. 5 :2. Alas ! friend, how few there are 
that say this ; I mean among those who enjoy peace 
and rest. 

Therefore thank the Lord, that He has given this 
grace, and perhaps removed me from your sight 
for the best; for He is a jealous God; He will be 
loved the most, and have sole possession of the hu- 
man heart. And you have also asked Him to re- 
move from your path everything that might be in 
the way of your salvation. Hence think that He is 
proving us both, and let us willingly take the yoke 
upon us, and count it all joy. Jas. 1 :2. For what 
are the sufferings of this world? Nothing but a 
dream, as David says: "When the Lord turned 
again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that 
dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter." 
Psalm 126:1. 

Thus it is with us as with a woman in travail ; 
when the child is brought forth, she would not sur- 
render it, because of the former pain. So also we, 
when we have been delivered from the child, we 
would not take the whole world for it. 

Hence take good heed, that you be not startled 
or frightened, that the child may be born in due 
time. Take food and nourishment from the hus- 
band Christ, that you may have strength for labor ; 
and neglect not to receive the true food, the Word 
of God. Remember Israel, who were satiated with 
bread from heaven. May the Lord give you a sound 
soul, and a fervent stomach of love, so that the food 
may be well digested. Amen. 

May the grace of the Lord be increased unto you, 
my dear wife. Be always subject to the God-fear- 
ing, and associate with the pious, and pray God to 
keep me in the truth ; for truth abides and is strong 
forever ; it lives, and will forever prevail. 

Greet all the saints with the kiss of love, and all 
who love the Lord Jesus, and tell them to be kind ; 
for God is the Hero and Captain, who so faithfully 
succors in time of need. He is like a shower upon 


582 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the parched earth in a dry summer. Thus He re- 
freshes the afflicted souls, that thirst for Him, He 
is a shadow from the heat of the sun. Matt. 1 1 :28 ; 
Isa. 55:1; 25:4. 

Tell the brethren to take care of the novices, and, 
to pray earnestly for me. I will also pray for them, 
as much as is in my power. Remember my bonds. 
The Lord be with your spirit. Amen. 

Your dear husband, Thomas van Imbroeck, 
imprisoned for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

P. S. This Thomas van Imbroeck composed an 
excellent confession of baptism, as also a defense 
against the adversaries, in regard to the same mat- 
ter, and delivered it all to the lords of justice of the 
city of Cologne. Concerning this, see our Account 
of Holy Baptism, for the year 1558. 


GOVERT JASPERS, PUT TO DEATH A. D. 1558 

About this time a lay brother by the name of 
Govert Jaspers, with two others, left the monas- 
tery of the Cross-brethren at Goes. However, they 
did not continue together long ; for one of them ut- 
terly forsook the good way, and accepted the love 
of this world ; the other, from fear of persecution, 
went to Friesland, where he became a brother in 
the church, and died a pious man ; but this Govert 
Jaspers was apprehended by the bailiff, soon after 
he left the monastery, as he was sitting in the field, 
reading in a Testament. He was brought to the 
city of Brussels, in Brabant, where he had to suf- 
fer much, yea, finally even death, for the testimony 
of the truth, in which he steadfastly persevered 
and thus, as a valiant soldier of Jesus Christ, 
pressed through the strait gate, in order to take 
by force the kingdom of God, which he had pre- 
ferred far above all the kingdoms of this world. 


MAERTEN BOSSIER SUFFERED, A. D. 1558 

About the same time there was apprehended at 
Werwijck, in Flanders, for the truth, one brother 
Maerten Bossier, who, after much temptation and 
trial, also had to suffer temporal death (by burn- 
ing) ; but now the second death shall have no power 
over him. 


ABSALOM VAN TOMME, OR THE SINGER, A. D. 1558 

All that would follow Christ, must take His cross 
upon them; this was experienced by one brother 
Absalom van Tomme, or the Singer, who was ap- 
prehended for the truth, at Kortrijck, in Flanders, 
in the year 1558. After he had' been examined, 
and had made confession of his faith, he was se- 
verely assailed with threats and tortures, in order 
to cause him to apostatize ; but he remained stead- 
fast in everything, and firmly trusted in God, so 
that he was sentenced to death, and burned, show- 
ing himself a good disciple or servant of Christ, 
who did not wish to be above his Master, but like 
Him, namely, suffer with Him, in order to enter 


into the kingdom of God, even as Christ had to suf- 
fer, to enter into His glory. 


WILLEM VAN HAVERBEKE, A. D. 1558 

William van Haverbeke also not only suffered 
persecution for the name of the Lord, but also suf- 
fered himself to be apprehended, and to be led be- 
fore lords and princes, where he freely confessed 
his faith, and steadfastly continued in the same, no 
amount of suffering, pain or torment being suffi- 
cient to cause him to apostatize, so great was the 
love of God shed broad in his heart ; hence he was 
finally condemned, and confirmed the same with 
his death, at Kortrijck, in Flanders, in the vear 
1558. } 


DANIEL VERKAMPT, A. D. 1558 

About this time, also a young man named Daniel 
Verkampt, after suffering much persecution, was 
apprehended at Kortrijck, in Flanders, for living 
truly according to the Word of God. Being sharply 
examined by the deans of Ronse and Polet, he will- 
ingly and freely confessed his faith, and said that 
he would firmly adhere to it even unto death ; but 
of his fellow believers he would betray no one. 

Thereupon Ronse and Polet summoned the 
mother of this young man before them. She was a 
little old woman, and walked with a staff. When 
she appeared before them, they told her with se- 
vere words, that according to the imperial decree 
she had forfeited life and property for having 
harbored her son, whom they had found to be a 
heretic. 

To this she meekly replied : "My lords, shall I 
forfeit life and property, for having now and then 
given shelter to my own son in his distress — whom 
I carried under my heart, brought forth in pain, 
and nourished in affliction — when he is neither a 
thief nor a rogue, but is called the most excellent 
young man of our village; and this merely because 
you say that he is a heretic? I think that if the 
Emperor were present, from whom you say you 
have a decree, he would say that you abuse his de- 
cree against me, and he would commend me, that 
the mother's heart was moved with compassion for 
her child, that has never merited any thing else. 
Truly, my lords, this is contrary to your proper 
wisdom and urbanity; for, know, that if in that 
hour when you came to apprehend him, I could 
have concealed him from you in my body, by car- 
rying him again for nine months, giving him birth, 
and raising him, as I have done once, God knows 
how gladly I would have done it." This she said 
with such pathos, that all the lords who were pres- 
ent and sat in court declared her innocent, and said 
that she had not acted contrary to the nature of a 
true mother's heart ; and hence the mother was set 
at liberty, but the son had to purchase with fire the 
constancy of his faith, and the love of God, with 
which he was inflamed, and was burnt for the testi- 
mony of Jesus Christ, who will make him free for- 
ever. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


583 


MARCUS DE LEDERSNIJDER, A. D. 1558 

Not long after the above, also a brother named 
Marcus de Ledersnijder was apprehended for the 
truth, at Kortrijck, in Flanders, who, having been 
much importuned and tortured, yet constantly re- 
maining steadfast, was condemned to death, and 
burned with fire, thus offering up his soul to God, 
who also most graciously accepted it. 


JACOB DE MELSELAER, A. D. 1558 

In the year 1558, Jacob de Melselaer, a brother, 
was apprehended at Antwerp, for living according 
to and keeping the Word of God ; who, after much 
examination and torment, as he would not renounce 
or apostatize, was condemned to death, and brought 
forth into the marketplace, with a gag in his 
mouth, to prevent him from speaking. Neverthe- 
less, he went to death with boldness, and valiantly 
testified with his blood to the faith he had con- 
fessed. 


LOUWIJS DE WEVER, A. D. 


1558 


In this same year brother Louwijs de Wever was 
beheaded in prison at Antwerp, for the confession 
of and steadfast adherence to his faith. 


FRANS TIBAN AND LITTLE DIRK, A. D. 1558 

A short time after this, also two brethren named 
Frans Tiban and Little Dirk, were apprehended for 
their faith, at Antwerp, examined, tortured, af- 
flicted with much torment, and, finally, as they 
would in no wise apostatize, condemned to death, 
and beheaded in prison. 


HENDERICK LEERVERKOOPER, ANTHONIS AND 
DIRK DE SCHILDER, A.D. 1558 

Three brethren, namely, Henderick Leerver- 
kooper, Anthonis and Dirk de Schilder, were also 
apprehended at Antwerp, for the truth; who, as 
diligent followers, and true sheep of Christ, had to 
taste death for His sake, being executed with the 
sword. 


WAECHLING DIRKS, MAERTEN SCHOENMAECKER, 
AND ADRIAEN PIETERS, A. D. 1558 

In the year 1558, Waechling Dirks, Maerten 
Schoenmaecker, and Adriaen Pieters, all three of 
them natives of Wijnckel, were apprehended for 
the Gospel and the divine truth, and as they stead- 
fastly adhered to the same, without departing there- 
from, all three were finally condemned at Graven- 
hage, in Holland, and put to death, as pious wit- 
nesses of Jesus Christ, and are now awaiting the 
crown of life. 


WOUTER VAN HONSCHOTEN, A. D. 1558 

In this year, a young brother named Wouter van 
Honschoten was apprehended, at Honschoten, in 


Flanders, for following the Word of God, and as 
he freely confessed his faith, and would in no wise 
depart from it, he was finally sentenced to death 
and to the fire, and was burnt as a pious witness 
of God. 


JACOB DE SWARTE, HANSKEN VAN DEN BROECKE, 
AND OTHERS, A. D. 1558 

In the year 1558, a brother named Jacob de 
Swarte (son of Jan de Swarte), and Hanscken van 
den Broecke, went from Ostende to Bruges, to 
hear the preaching of the Word of God, and were 
apprehended there, together with others. No suf- 
ferings being sufficient to deter or separate them 
from the love of God, they were finally sentenced to 
death, and thus valiantly ended their lives for the 
testimony of the Gospel, about St. John's day, in 
midsummer. 


HANS DEN DUYTSCH, A. D. 1558 

About this time, also a brother named Hans den 
Duytsch was apprehended at Antwerp ; who freely 
confessed his faith, and would firmly adhere to it ; 
for he chose rather to die a temporal death for the 
truth, and thus gain eternal life, than to purchase a 
short wicked life with everlasting death. They had 
him beheaded in the prison, whereupon they, like 
madmen, threw his body into the Scheldt. 

SANDER HENDRICKS, HANS DE SMIT, HANS VAN 

BURCULO, PIETER IN DE VETTEWARIJE, ARENT 

AND GERAERT PASSEMENTWERKER, IN THE 

YEAR 1558 

Very soon after, also six brethren, namely, San- 
der Hendricks, Hans de Smit, Hans van Burculo, 
Pieter in de Vettewarije, Arent and Geraert Passe- 
mentwerker, were publicly put to death for the 
truth in the marketplace, in the presence of all the 
people. They all valiantly confessed the name of 
Christ, and are now waiting for the crown of glory, 
which is promised to all heroes of the Lord. 


GRIETGEN, TANNEKEN, LIJNTGEN, AND STIJNTGEN 
OF AIX-LA-CHAPELLE, A. D. 1558 

Not long after the above, also four sisters, named 
Grietgen, Tanneken, Lijntgen and Stijntgen of 
Aix-la-Chapelle were apprehended at Antwerp, on 
account of thir faith, and severely examined; but 
as they could in no wise be moved therefrom, and 
fought as heroines for the name of Christ, always 
firmly adhering to the truth, they were finally tied 
crooked and drowned in prison. 


JANNEKEN AND NOELE, A.D. 1558 

There was also a young maiden named Janneken 
apprehended for her faith, at Antwerp; who, 
when she appeared before the lords, freely con- 
fessed her faith. The Margrave said: "Janneken, 
if you will renounce, I will show you favor ; do ac- 


584 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


cording to my will, and I will give you your life." 
But she replied: "The life that you would give 
me, I desire not ; for your promises are vain and as 
wavering as a reed, and would only bring me into 
greater sorrow : cursed is every one that trusts in 
man." Jer. 17:5. 

There was a preacher named Balthazar, who en- 
deavored to make her believe that God was in the 
sacrament ; however, she would not confess it, but 
said : "You thus disgrace God in your body ; but 
read the Lord's Prayer once." And when he read 
it, she said : "There, you see, you read that He is 
in heaven, and how dare you say then, that He is 
in the sacrament?" 

In the court she was asked by the bailiff, whether 
she was rebaptized. She said: "Question me in 
regard to my faith, and I will freely confess it to 
you ; or are you ashamed of it ? I confess one bap- 
tism, which must follow faith, and does not pertain 
to infants, but requires previous amendment of 
life." The bailiff said : "We have done enough to 
gain you ; if you had suffered yourself to be pre- 
vailed upon to recant, you should have done well." 
She replied : "You have loved my flesh, but not my 
soul, which you would have gladly devoured ; but 
God will receive it as a child, and make it an heir. 
And though you are now a bailiff in your glory, 
you will deplore it in the judgment of God, and 
wish that you had rather been a herdsman* in the 
fear of God." Thereupon she was sentenced to 
death, and, having commended her spirit into the 
hands of God, was drowned in a tub, together 
with another woman, named Noele. 


ADRIAEN VAN HEE, JOOS MEEUWENS, WILLEM, 

GOOSSEN AND EGBERT DE HOEDEMAECKER, 

AND LAMBERT VAN DOORNICK, A. D. 1558 

As the Jews in the time of the apostles envied 
the assemblies of the Christians, and disturbed 
them wherever they could, so have also their suc- 
cessors, the ministers of antichrist, universally 
done, which appeared also in the year 1558, near 
Doornick, where some Christians and faithful chil- 
dren of God had assembled, in order to be re- 
freshed, edified and bettered by the preaching of 
the Word of God. They were also spied out, dis- 
persed, partly scattered, and six of them appre- 
hended, namely, Adriaen van Hee, cutler, Joos 
Meeuwens, Willem de Hoedemaecker, Goossen de 
Hoedemaecker, Egbert de Hoedemaecker, and 
Lambert van Doornick. They were together 
brought to Doornick, and having been imprisoned 
there a fortnight, they were condemned to death 
for their steadfast adherence to the true faith in 
God, and taken without Doornick, into a forest 
belonging under the jurisdiction of Hainault, and 
there burnt, as pious witnesses of God, who shall 
not taste the fire of hell, but shall live in joy with 
all the chosen of the Lord. 


* See note in a former page. 


JORIS WIPPE, JOOSTEN'S SON, PUT TO DEATH AT 
DORTRECHT, A. D. 1558 

Joris Wippe, when he still lived in the darkness 
of popery, was a burgomaster at Meenen in Flan- 
ders, his native place; but having subsequently 
come to the knowledge of the Gospel, he had to flee 
the country, and went to live at Dortrecht, in Hol- 
land, where he established himself as clothdyer. 
When he had lived there for a while, and was be- 
coming known, he, through the instigation of the 
enemies of the truth, was summoned to appear be- 
fore the lords in the large church. Somewhat 
alarmed on this account, Joris consulted with sev- 
eral drapers, for whom he dyed, and who were 
men of influence, as to what he should do. They, 
placing entire confidence in the magistracy, deemed 
it advisable that he should appear before them, and 
hear what they had to say to him. 

When he came there, and the lords saw him, 
they were filled with consternation, and would have 
preferred that he had taken their summons as a 
warning to secretly make his escape, since they did 
not thirst much for innocent blood ; but as he had 
appeared, the bailiff, when Joris was about to leave 
the church, seized him as one who, according to 
the imperial decree, had forfeited life and property 
This happened on the 28th of April, 1558. 

After his apprehension, the lords tried every 
means to save him from death; he was sent to 
Gravenhage (that is, to the court of Holland), and 
there examined ; but as he was a resident of Dor- 
drecht, and had been apprehended there, he was 
sent back thither, and ultimately put to death there. 

He left behind him a good testimony as regards 
his liberality to the poor; for when he was sen- 
tenced to death, the executioner lamented with 
tears in his eyes, that he had to put to death a 
man who had so often fed his wife and children, 
and would rather forego his office, than put to 
death this man, who had done so much good to 
him and others, and had never harmed any one. 
Hence he was finally drowned, in the night, in a 
wine cask filled with water, by one of the thief- 
catchers, who, at the command of the lords, per- 
formed the executioner's office on him, pushing 
him backward into the water. Thus he offered up 
his life to the Lord, on the first of October, being 
forty-one years old. The next day he was hung by 
his feet to the gallows, in the place of execution as 
an object of derision to the people, being thus, 
like his Master, numbered among the malefactors. 
The day following, several criminals were scourged 
and banished ; whereupon the executioner, after he 
had executed this punishment, still lamenting the 
death of Joris Wippe, said: "They have crucified 
Christ, and released Barabbas." 

He wrote several letters in prison, three of 
which have come into our possession. He doubtless 
would have written more ; but great watchfulness 
was exercised that he should have no ink, so that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


585 


he wrote his last letter (to his children) with mul- 
berry juice. 

Note. — Inasmuch as we, after long search in the 
archives of this city, found the sentence of death of 
this friend of God, Joris Wippe, and copied it our- 
selves from the criminal records of this city, we 
deem it well to add it here, so that the truth of the 
above account concerning the death of this man 
may appear the more clearly and incontrovertibly. 

Sentence of death of Joris Wippe done and pro- 
nounced in the chamber (of justice), the 4th of 
August, 1558 

Whereas Joris Wippe, Joosten's son, born at 
Meenen, in Flanders, has dared to have himself 
rebaptized, and has held* pernicious views con- 
cerning baptism, according to testimony and truth, 
and all the evidence which the judges and the coun- 
cil have seen and heard with regard to it, and ac- 
cording to his own confession, therefore, he shall, 
to the honor of God,f and the edification of the 
lords and the city,J be drowned in a cask, and his 
body then be brought to the place of execution, and 
there be hung to the gallows, and his property shall 
be confiscated, and placed in the lord's exchequer. 

Extracted from the book of criminal records of 
the city of Dortrecht, commenced on the last of 
October, 1554, and ended on the 16th of June, 
1573 

This is the first sentence of death publicly pro- 
nounced upon any one with regard to matters of 
faith, which we found in this book. As to whether 
it was pronounced in the chamber of justice, in the 
presence of the lords alone, or publicly proclaimed 
in court, before all men, is not expressed ; nor is it 
of much importance to know. This much is cer- 
tain, that his death resulted in consequence. 

But since, according to the testimony of old writ- 
ers, the executioner was not willing to execute this 
man, and the lords of justice themselves were not 
a little troubled in this matter, though they had 
allowed themselves to be persuaded by the priests 
and monks, the execution of the sentence pro- 
nounced was postponed for over seven weeks, 
namely, from the 4th of August until the first of 
October, A. D. 1558. 

The following night, having commended his soul 
into the hands of God, he was drowned in a wine 
cask, by one of the thiefcatchers, as related above, 
in the Vuylgate at Dortrecht, where he was im- 
prisoned. 

Further Observation. — According to John van 
Beverwijck's account of the government of the city 
of Dortrecht, the following persons sat in court 
when sentence of death was passed upon this pious 
man: 

Adriaen van Blyenberg Adriaens (who also sat 


* "Has held," etc.; an error of the writer of this sentence; for 
Joris still held these views at that very time. 

t How can God be honored by what He has forbidden? 

t What edification could the lords derive therefrom, who, by do- 
ing this, made themselves tyrants, yea, murderers? 


in court when sentence was passed upon Digna 
Pieters), bailiff of Dortrecht; together with nine 
judges: Mr. T. Schoock Sir Pieters; Cornelis 
Krooswijck Jans ; Frans Anthoniss ; Mr. Aert van 
der Lede Sir Staess; Willem Boucquet Blasiuss; 
Adriaen van Nispen Gerrits; Frans Adriaens; 
Heyman van Bleyenbergh Adriaens ; Cornelis van 
Beveren Claess. 

But whether they all unanimously passed this 
sentence, is not stated ; however, it appears that the 
majority concurred therein, which can not have 
taken place without grief and compunction of con- 
science on their part, since but a short time before 
they had sought to get rid of the doomed man, and 
for this purpose had sent him to the Hague, to the 
court of Holland, that he might be judged there ; 
but when he returned they sentenced him to death 
— certainly a lamentable matter on their part ; but 
on the part of the martyr a matter of rejoicing, 
since death was for him the entrance to an eternal 
and blissful life. 

The first letter of Joris Wippe, written to his 

wife, when he was sent from Dortrecht 

to the Hague 

The eternal joy and gladness which ear has not 
heard, nor eye seen, nor has entered into the heart 
of man, this same joy and gladness I wish you my 
dearest wife and sister, whom I love in God, for a 
heartfelt salutation. Amen. 

My most beloved wife and sister in the Lord, I 
wish you the joy of the Holy Ghost in your heart, 
for a heartfelt greeting in God our Saviour and 
Lord; which joy of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meek- 
ness, temperance; against such there is no law; 
and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh 
with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5 :22-24. 

Therefore my dear wife in the Lord, take heed 
to yourself, that you abound with this precious 
Spirit ; for of that with which one is filled He will 
bring forth. Regard not the joy and pleasure of 
this world; "for whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh 
shall of the flesh reap corruption : but he that sow- 
eth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life ever- 
lasting." Gal. 6 :7, 8. O dear sister in the Lord, let 
us "not be weary in well doing ; for in due season 
we shall reap if we faint not. As we have there- 
fore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, es- 
pecially unto them who are of the household of 
faith." Gal. 6 :9. Hence, pray always with all pray- 
er, watching and supplication in the Spirit, in all 
your requests to the Lord (Eph. 6:18), and let 
your modesty and obedience, and your love to God, 
be an example and pattern to all our dear obedient 
children, whom the holy Lord has given us, to the 
praise and glory of His Father. And use diligence 
in teaching and admonishing them; and chastise 
them, lest the Lord requires them at your hands. 
Do your very best, so that I may see you all again 
at the resurrection of the just. Luke 14:14. Be 


586 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


well content, and always fix your heart and mind 
upon the living God ; for He will not forsake the 
widow and the fatherless; but His eyes behold 
the afflicted widows and fatherless, and His ear is 
open unto their prayer. Hence, be patient, and 
commit all your concerns to the Lord ; He will be 
a kind Protector to you. If you remain faithful to 
Him, He will be faithful to you; He will not be 
wanting on His part. 

I further let you know, that my mind and heart 
are still fixed upon the living God, and I trust 
by His great mercy not to separate from Him, and 
I daily wait for my redemption. I thought that 
your sister had just come in time to witness my 
offering. I knew nothing to the contrary for a 
time; but my hour had not come yet: the Lord 
knows how to reserve His own for the proper time. 
O dear wife, pray the Lord for me as long 
as I am in this poor, weak flesh. I trust to remem- 
ber you also in my prayers, and I most affection- 
ately thank you in the Lord for sending me so kind 
an exhortation, which is food for the soul ; I also 
thank you for the temporal things. 

Herewith I commend you to Almighty God, and 
to the Word of His grace. Amen. Greet all the 
brethren and sisters much in the Lord. 

Written by me, Joris Wippe, your husband and 
brother in the Lord, imprisoned at the Hague, in 
Holland, for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

The second letter of Joris Wippe, written to his 

wife, when he, through those of Dordrecht, 

lay imprisoned at the Hague 

Everlasting joy, grace and peace from God our 
heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord 
and Saviour, and the joy of the Holy Ghost in your 
heart and conscience, be with you, my most beloved 
wife and sister in the Lord; I wish it to you as 
an affectionate salutation in the Lord, and to all our 
dear children, whom God has given us ; to Him be 
praise forever and ever. Amen. 

My most dearly beloved wife and sister in the 
Lord, I salute you with a loving heart in the Lord 
with the salutation of Christ, and also all my dear 
obedient children, whom the holy Lord has given 
us to the praise and glory of His Father. My most 
beloved wife in the Lord, I also inform you with 
joy that my mind, heart and soul are still fixed up- 
on the living God and Father, through Jesus Christ 
His dear, beloved Son, our Saviour; and I trust, 
through His fatherly love, which He shows to me 
poor, unprofitable servant, through His great 
mercy, not to separate from Him and His holy 
Word ; for His Word is truth, and His command'- 
ment, life everlasting. He went before us with 
much misery and tribulation ; we must follow His 
footsteps, since the servant is not above his Lord. 
For He has so kindly admonished us with regard 
to this, saying : "If they have persecuted me, they 
will also persecute you, if they have excom- 
municated me, they will also excommunicate you ; 
and all these things will they do unto you, because 


they have known neither me nor my Father." John 

Hence, my dear wife, whom I love in God, be 
well content, and fix your whole heart and hope 
upon the living God; He will not leave you an 
afflicted widow, with all your fatherless children ; 
for His eyes are upon the righteous, and His ears 
are open unto their cry, and He will succor the 
cause of the widow and the fatherless. Ps. 34:15. 

Therefore, my dearly beloved wife, take the 
Almighty God for your Protector, and plant a 
valiant spirit into your heart, like the Maccabean 
mother with her seven sons. II Mace. 7. Pray the 
holy Lord for wisdom and understanding, and in 
all your concerns pray God with supplication in the 

/S mt 'oo at you may brin & U P a11 our olive Pknts 
(Ps 128:3) to His honor and the magnifying of 
His holy name, so that they may not be required at 
your hands. So far you have done your best with 
admonishing and chastising; keep them thus with 
the Lord's help. Always submit yourself to the eld- 
ers of the church ; for they watch for your souls 
[as they that must give account] that they may do 
it with joy. Heb. 13:17. And if you need counsel 
or help in any matter, consult with the elders, as 
we have hitherto done. Use hospitality and forget 
not to communicate. I Peter 4:9; Heb. 13:16 
Think often of the poor, afflicted widow (Matthew 
12 :42, 43), who threw but two mites into the treas- 
ury;— Verily, said Christ, she hath cast more in, 
than they all— that you may be found a true widow 
before the Lord, who has washed the saints' feet 
relieved the afflicted, brought up children in the 
fear of God, and diligently followed every good 
work. I Tim. 5 :10. Pray the Lord diligently to rule 
you with His divine Spirit, since He is the true 
Comforter of all the children of God ; that you may 
live your widowhood to His praise and honor, as 
long as it is His pleasure. I sincerely thank you 
people much for the love you have shown me in the 
kind exhortation you have sent me. I have also 
very earnestly prayed the Lord for you, and hope 
to do so as long as I shall be in this temporal life. 
Remember me also in your prayers, until I have put 
off this mortal clothing. II Esd. 2 :45. 

Herewith I commend you people to Almighty 
God, and to the Word of His grace, and take leave 
forever until at the resurrection of the just. Then, 
I trust, we shall meet in one fold. Then shall we 
hear the sweet voice of our Bridegroom : "Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from the foundation of the world " 
Matt. 25 :34. Blessed and holy is he that hath part 
in the first resurrection ; on such the second death 
hath no power. But we shall be priests of God and 
of Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand 
years; for Christ is the resurrection and the life, 
and we must be partakers of Him, if we are to hear 
that voice. Rev. 20:6; Rom. 8:11. 

Salute me the friends much in the Lord, es- 
pecially those of Meenen, and Claes Moykaert and 
Janneken his wife; and greet Victor Martens— I 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


587 


saw him at Dordrecht, when I lay in the den of 
lions — and greet all that fear the Lord, and exhort 
them to diligence, that we may all meet together in 
the new Jerusalem. The God of peace be with you. 
Phil. 4 :9. Greet your sister much and all that are 
with her. 

Written by me, Joris Wippe, your husband and 
brother in the Lord, in bonds at the Hague, in Hol- 
land. 


THE THIRD LETTER OF JORIS WIPPE, TO HIS CHIL- 
DREN, WHEN HE WAS RETURNED FROM 
THE HAGUE TO DORDRECHT 

My dearly beloved and obedient children, I wish 
you an honorable, virtuous and godly life in the 
fear of God, all the days of your life, to the praise 
of the Father, and the salvation of your souls, as 
an affectionate greeting. Amen. 

My most beloved sons, all three of you, you are 
well aware now, I trust, that I am in bonds here for 
the testimony of Christ our Saviour, to the praise 
of His Almighty Father, and wait with patience 
daily, when it pleases Him to offer up my body and 
soul to the magnifying of His holy name. I entreat 
you, my dear sons, with aged Tobias, that you will 
honor your poor bereaved mother, who is deprived 
of everything for the name of the Lord, all the 
days of your life ; for she brought you forth with 
great suffering and pain, which I well know, and 
has with great care and diligence helped to bring 
you so far with the help of the Lord. Tob. 4 :3. I 
have also been your protector hitherto, with great 
care and diligence to bring you up in the fear of 
God, to His honor. Now it is the will of the Lord, 
that we must part ; but let it not grieve you. For if 
you pursue virtue, and walk in the fear of God, and 
keep His commandments all the days of your life, 
we shall hereafter, meet in one fold (John 10:16) 
with all God's chosen children, at the resurrection 
of the just. And I admonish you with Tobias, that 
you will fear God all the days of your life, never 
consent to sin, nor transgress God's command- 
ments; and that you will eat your bread with the 
hungry, and give alms of that which the Lord gives 
you. In short, I give you the same testament which 
Tobias gave his son ; you are able to read. I pray 
that you will often read it. And all that our holy 
fathers commanded their children, I also leave unto 
you; may you diligently observe it. And I now 
bless you all my obedient, most dearly beloved chil- 
dren, with that God with whom Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob and all God's chosen friends, blessed 
their children. Further, I admonish you Joos, as 
my eldest son, that you and Hansken, my second 
son, will be the protectors of your poor mother, in 
the fear of God, all the days of your life. And I 
also charge you, Barbertgen, my dear daughter, to 
be obedient to your mother, and to help care for 
all your little sisters, and for Pierken. Learn also 
to read, and be diligent in every good work, that 
you may spend your life in holiness and in all the 


fear of God, like Sarah, the wife of young Tobias 
(Tobit 3:15), and associate not with the wanton 
and frivolous daughters of this world, whose end 
will be destruction; but be sober, honorable and 
just in all your dealings, so that you may be pru- 
dent, being adorned with every virtue, and that 
when Christ our Bridegroom comes you may 
be ready with the five wise virgins, to enter with 
the Bridegroom into the kingdom of His Father. 
And now I charge you, Joos and Hansken, that to- 
gether with Barbertgen, your obedient sister, you 
will care for your three little sisters, and for Pier- 
ken, and teach them to read and to work, so that 
they may grow up in all righteousness, to the hon- 
or of God and the salvation of their souls. Be dili- 
gent to work with your hands that which is hon- 
orable, remembering the words of the apostle : "It 
is more blessed to give than to receive ;" so that you 
may not be burdensome to any through idleness. 
Eph. 4 :28 ; Acts 20 :35. Remain with your mother 
as long as it please the Lord, and in all things show 
yourselves a pattern of good works. Tit. 2 :7. But 
if ye be servants, I exhort you, to be obedient to 
your lord or master, and to please them in all 
things, not answering again, not purloining, but 
showing good fidelity in all things ; that you may 
adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. 
For the grace of God [that bringeth salvation] hath 
appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying un- 
godliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, 
righteously, and godly in this present world ; look- 
ing for that blessed hope and the glorious appear- 
ing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ ; 
who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem 
us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a 
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2:9- 
14. I admonish you all, my dear children, that you 
will do this ; and comfort your mother, and often, 
when you have time, read to her a chapter or two. 
And spend the time which God gives you, in all 
sobriety and righteousness, with prayer and suppli- 
cation to God, that He would keep you from the 
evil. Have no fellowship with the children of this 
world, that you may not become partakers of their 
evil deeds; always walk with wise men, and you 
shall become wise, namely, strong and very bold, 
so that you may eschew evil. Do all things accord- 
ing to the law of God, and depart neither to the 
right nor to the left; neither add nor take away 
therefrom, so that you may walk wisely whitherso- 
ever you go. Be not terrified; for the Lord your 
God is with you wherever you go, and will be your 
Protector. Always speak the truth, and let not 
your mouth become accustomed to lying, for the 
mouth that belieth, slayeth the soul ; but when you 
speak, speak the Word of God, and the Lord your 
God will bring you from righteousness to right- 
eousness ; for nothing is hid before Him ; His eyes 
are as a flame of fire. Zech. 8 :16 ; Lev. 19 :1 1 ; Rev. 
1:14. 

Herewith I take leave from you forever, my dear 
children, until at the resurrection, and commend 


588 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you all to Almighty God and to the Word of His 
grace. Amen. And may God's Spirit ever be pres- 
ent with you, to comfort and strengthen you in all 
righteousness. 

Written by me, Joris Wippe, your father, im- 
prisoned at Dordrecht, in the Vuylgate, for the tes- 
timony of Jesus Christ. 

HANS SMIT, HENDRICK ADAMS, HANS BECK, 

MATTHIJS SMIT, DILEMAN SNIJDER, AND 

SEVEN OTHERS, A. D. 1558 

In the year 1558, Brother Hans Smit, a minister 
of the Word of God, was sent forth by the church 
to seek and gather those that were eager for the 
truth. Acts 13:3. When he therefore, being divine- 
ly called, undertook to travel through the Nether- 
lands, he, together with five brethren and six sis- 
ters, was apprehended in the city of Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle, on the ninth of January. While they were as- 
sembled there in a house, to speak of the Word of 
God, and were engaged in prayer, many servants 
and children of Pilate came there in the night 
through treachery, with spears, halberds, and 
bare swords, and well provided with ropes and 
bonds, and surrounded the house, and bound and 
apprehended these children of God. They even 
took with them a mother with her infant that lay 
in the cradle. But the prisoners were valiant and 
comforted one another, to be undismayed, since 
they were imprisoned for the truth of God ; and be- 
ing thus of good cheer, they began to sing for joy. 
They were very soon separately confined, in which 
the sisters rejoiced, and sang, so that the people 
were astonished. In the morning they were brought 
before the judge, who talked with each separately, 
and then remanded them to prison, when he per- 
ceived their steadfastness. However, the next day 
the minister was again summoned before the lords, 
that he should tell them, how many he had bap- 
tized, who they were and where the church held 
their meetings. But he told them, that they should 
know that he would rather lose his life (John 15 : 
13) than by telling this become a traitor, where- 
upon he was tortured and racked for about a quar- 
ter of an hour, to which he willingly submitted, 
himself taking off his clothes, and going to the 
rack. When they could accomplish nothing by it, 
they went away, but soon returned, and said : "You 
must tell us what we have asked you, or we shall 
torture you so as to rack your limbs asunder." 
They also questioned him with regard to infant 
baptism. He replied that infant baptism was a hu- 
man institution, and that as such he regarded it, 
and not as the true Christian baptism. 

They also asked him what he thought of the sac- 
rament. He replied, "I think much of it ; but that 
which the priests use is not at all the true supper 
of Christ, but a piece of idolatry." 
_ Thereupon they bound him hand and foot, and 
tied to his feet a large stone weighing little less than 
a hundred pounds, and thus drew him up, so that 


the ring on the stone broke, and the stone remained 
on the ground. But they took a rope, fastened it to 
the stone, in place of the broken ring, and hung the 
stone to his foot, and left him suspended thus for 
some time; however, they could not accomplish 
their purpose. Hence they let him down, and put 
him in prison until Sunday morning, when the 
lords came from the city with seven priests, who 
asked him concerning his calling; whereupon he 
said that he had not put himself into the ministry, 
but God and His Spirit in His church; for as God 
sent His Son, and the Son the apostles into all the 
world, so He still sends His ministers through His 
Spirit, that thay should first preach the Word of 
God, and then baptize such as hear, understand and 
believe it, but not young infants. They also asked 
him concerning the magistracy, whether he re- 
garded it as Christian or not. He replied that in 
the first place he regarded them as ministers of 
God, but that they were deceived and wrongly 
taught by the priests, and not incorporated into the 
Christian church. They also inquired of him the 
origin of the magistracy. He replied that office 
and power are of God. They then asked him, 
whether they were Christians. He answered that 
if they denied and forsook themselves, took up the 
cross, abandoned their tyranny and pomp, and fol- 
lowed Christ, they could be Christians, not other- 
wise. They also interrogated him with regard to 
swearing. He said that Christ had forbidden it. 
And much more, which it would take too long to 
write. 

Finally they asked him concerning the incarna- 
tion of Christ. He said that he believed that Christ 
was true God and true man, sin alone excepted. At 
last they told him, that if he would renounce his 
baptism, and confess that he had erred, they would 
show him favor. But he replied that he had taught 
the pure truth, so he would adhere to it. Thereupon 
they said that he was in their city, and that he 
could not do so there; and that if they did not 
punish this, the king or the new Emperor should 
punish them on their bodies ; thus they defended 
themselves like Pilate. But the brother said that it 
would go hard with them for this ; for though God 
forgave every sin, yet He should judge the inno- 
cent blood, and they should not think that they 
should escape punishment, if they killed him, since 
the matter should come before Christ, who should 
judge it, and take care of it, at His day. After this 
they put him back into prison, where they left him 
until Monday evening, when the judge came again, 
with several others, and also a monk, to dispute 
with him. But they did not accomplish much, for 
he put the monk to utter confusion, so that the lat- 
ter was glad to get away. Many other monks and 
priests were sent yet, to dispute with him; but 
they were all put to shame and derision, and were 
not able to cause this pious man to apostatize. 
Shortly after they were brought forth again and 
examined; but God continually gave them bold 
utterance, and wisdom, so that they could find no 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


589 


fault, or cause of death in him, save only that they 
did not sufficiently esteem the Emperor. At one 
time they brought to Brother Henderick alone a 
subtle serpent and blasphemer, and said: "You 
don't want any ecclesiastics (monks and priests) ; 
hence we have brought to you a learned layman, to 
instruct you." But Henderick said that he did not 
want to be instructed by him, unless he were suffi- 
ciently instructed by God and His Word, since he 
did not want to seek life from the dead. This 
learned man then wanted to prove infant baptism, 
asserting that the apostles had ordained it. But 
Henderick replied and spoke to him in such a man- 
ner that he had to confess openly, that no infants 
were baptized in the days of the apostles, and that 
they had no faith during their infancy. This, 
Henry wrote upon the table with a piece of chalk, 
and called upon the obstinate lords to bear witness 
to it, and also how he had been silenced. He fur- 
ther said : "Thus will all your learned men be con- 
founded before the Word of the Lord." 

Several of the lords said that if these should be 
put to death, they should leave home. Once the 
brethren and sisters were all twelve left together 
from four o'clock in the morning until ten in the 
evening. They were joyful and of good cheer, and 
conversed with one another from the Word of God, 
and began to pray and praise God. 

Brother Hans, as the minister, led them in pray- 
er, as loud as he could, so that the people ran to- 
gether and listened. But when the lords heard of 
this, they sent the bailiff thither, who asked them 
why they had made such a loud noise. They re- 
plied that they had been praying; however, they 
had concluded just before he came. Brother Mat- 
thias said : "We will call upon God whether any- 
body opposes or not." In the evening about ten 
o'clock they were separated again, and led away. 
On their way through the city, they joyfully sang, 
and made known their faith. Some of the coun- 
cilors were bloodthirsty, and desired to put them 
to death ; but others were opposed to it ; for they 
felt persuaded, and confessed, that they were inno- 
cent. The executioner came at least five times, ex- 
pecting to execute them, but his intention was 
frustrated each time. They intended to execute the 
minister and Brother Henderick (who had defend- 
ed themselves and contradicted the most) first, if 
perhaps the others might be deterred thereby. 
When the minister heard that he was to die, he 
commenced to sing joyfully and thanked God for 
it, and earnestly besought Him to count him accept- 
able. 

The 23d of August was the day fixed for the ex- 
ecution of the minister, Hans, and brother Hen- 
derick. They were brought before the court into 
the vault near the pillory. Much people flocked 
together, also some who were their friends, and had 
sent them food and drink. They went smilingly 
through the people to the place of execution, and 
seeing the great concourse of people coming from 
every direction, the minister said : "O what a beau- 


tiful feast day we shall have, since so much people 
are coming." They were very joyful, and hoped to 
get into paradise the same day, to their brethren 
and sisters that had preceded them, and to all the 
pious, of whom he had known very many. Revela- 
tion 6:11. There also came two monks, who sought 
to mislead them with false doctrine. For awhile 
the minister contradicted them, showing them how 
deceitfully they dealt; but finally he refused to 
speak with them any longer, and said : "I will ad- 
here to the truth, and the hour of my departure is 
at hand ; I have something else to attend to now, 
than to talk with you." When the time had come 
that sentence was to be passed upon them, the 
seven judges could not agree in the sentence, and 
sent word to them, that they would send them an- 
other learned man to instruct them, whom if they 
should hear, they would defer the matter for their 
best; otherwise they would have to put them to 
death, though they did not like to do it. But Hans 
and Henderick boldly said they would remain 
steadfast, and depart from the truth neither to the 
right nor to the left, and that on their account they 
need not spare them or delay any longer, but might 
pass sentence ; but if they thereby sought more ac- 
cusation against them, they acquiesced in what it 
pleased the Lord to do. The lords put their heads 
together, and dismissed the people assembled. 
When the two men perceived that sentence was 
not passed, they were sorry, since they had com- 
pletely resigned themselves to death, and thought 
that they had contended long enough against the 
wiles of the serpent. Thus the multitude dispersed, 
each going to his own, like people that had lost a 
battle. When evening came, they had to go back 
to prison, which caused them sorrow, since they 
had hoped now to seal the truth with their blood ; 
but they had to wait for another time. Their be- 
ing taken back to prison, caused much thought 
among the people ; some said that God opposed the 
matter, and had frustrated it. 

One of the councilors had firmly resolved that 
their execution should take place at the end of 
eight days, and not be deferred any longer ; how- 
ever, this also proved futile ; for they remained in 
prison until in autumn, and had to suffer and be 
tempted much yet; after which they were con- 
demned and executed. 

Hans Smit, as the minister, was first executed. 
When being led through the city, he sang joyfully ; 
he did not speak much afterwards, but went briskly 
to the place of execution, as a patient, dumb lamb. 
There he was strangled at the stake with a rope, 
and then bound fast with a chain, and singed with 
fire. Thus he offered his sacrifice, on the 19th 
of October, A. D. 1558. Three days after, the oth- 
ers were brought forth, and sentenced to death, 
namely, Henderick Adams and his brother-in-law, 
Hans Beck. There was one among the councilors 
at Aix-la-Chapelle, who was always violently op- 
posed to the brethren, and hence it happened on 
one occasion, when they were disputing with Hen- 


590 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


derick, and the latter would not be moved, that this 
councilor became angry, and said: "Away with 
them, away with them, to death and the fire ; for all 
is lost on them ; no pardon should be offered them 
any more," etc. But Brother Henderick said to 
him : "You will not live to see my death ;" which 
was verified, for he died three days before Hen- 
derick, on the same day that the minister Hans 
Smit was executed. When on his deathbed, and 
near his end, he fell into great despair, plucked out 
his beard, and cried out most dreadfully, declaring 
that he had judged many persons, and had cer- 
tainly sinned therein, and that God would punish 
him for his bloodthirstiness. He also said many 
other things of a similar character. Ps. 55 :23. 

Now when Brother Henderick Adams and the 
other brother were led to death, the executioner 
bound his hands so tightly that his fingers turned 
black ; but he lifted up his hands to God, praising 
Him, that he was counted worthy to suffer this. In 
the meantime the bonds on his hands became loose. 
They were tied again, just as hard as before ; but 
it was of no avail ; for when he lifted up his hands 
again, the bonds fell off as before, which occurred 
several times, so that the judge became angry, and 
said to the executioner, that he should bind them 
fast ; but the executioner replied : "You can easily 
see that binding is of no use here." The last time 
Henderick flung the bond away among the people, 
so that he was not bound any more, and said : "It 
is not God's will, that I should be bound." He also 
said that such violence was contrary to God, and 
continued to speak boldly unto the end. Thereupon 
these two brethren, Henderick Adams and his 
brother-in-law were (like previously the minister) 
strangled at the stake, with a rope, and then bound 
to the stake with a chain, and singed with fire; 
which took place on the 22nd day of the month of 
October, A. D. 1558. A great number of people 
were present on this occasion, as was also the case 
afterwards when the brethren Matthijs Smit and 
Dileman Snijder were executed, on the fourth of 
January, 1559. Thus all five valiantly and stead- 
fastly testified with their blood to the divine truth, 
though some of them had not yet become united 
with the church. 

The sixth brother that had been apprehended 
with the others, through much disputation with 
the ungodly, apostatized from his faith; but after 
he was released he sincerely bewailed his apostasy, 
earnestly and truly repented, and again joined the 
church. The six sisters that had been apprehended 
at the same time, were severely scourged with rods, 
and then allowed to go their way, and thus returned 
joyful in the Lord, and constant in faith, to their 
fellow believers that were known to them. 


GOTTHARD OF NONENBERG AND PETER KRAMER, 
A. D. 1558 

Gotthard of Nonenberg and Peter Kramer were 
both of them faithful men, who walked to edifica- 


tion among the brethren in the duchy of Berg, 
where the truth of the Gospel began to shine again 
at that time, and very many came to the faith and 
knowledge of the truth. Thus these two men were 
called and chosen ministers of the church and pro- 
viders for the poor [deacons], which office they as- 
sumed, and for a time faithfully discharged, and as 
they sought to live godly in Christ Jesus, the conse- 
quence was that they had to suffer persecution, as 
also appeared, since both were apprehended in one 
night, and brought to Winnick. There the steward 
took them, to vent upon them his arrogance, and 
to treat them with contumely. But they firmly re- 
solved in their hearts, to adhere to the truth. 

They lay there in prison a long time, and had to 
endure many temptations and conflicts in order to 
make them forsake the truth, in which case they 
should be free to return to their wives and children ; 
and their lives should be spared. But the love 
which they had for their Lord would not permit 
them to abandon the truth, and turn to the doc- 
trines of men. They much rather forsook their 
wives and children, and their temporal possessions, 
yea, finally even their lives, flesh and blood, which 
they would rather give for a spoil, that they might 
enjoy the crown, and that their names might be 
found in the book of life. When the time for their 
trial had come, they were brought before the 
learned, who employed many subtle stratagems 
against them. But these men, with the divine help, 
repelled all their subtle and insidious wiles un- 
dauntedly and fearlessly, and sought no other 
counsel or way ; but as Christ had gone before, so 
they endeavored to bear His cross after Him; 
whereupon they were sentenced to be executed 
with the sword. 

When brought forth from prison, to be taken to 
the place of execution, these men were and re- 
mained firm and immovable as a wall, and deter- 
mined to adhere to the truth, and not to separate 
from the faith. When all saw their boldness, and 
perceived that they were upright, pious persons, 
and had to die simply on account of their faith, 
nearly every one wept; the steward, the judges, 
deputy, and executioner as well as the common 
people. But the hearts of these people were full 
of gladness, and they joyfully sang with a cheerful 
mind. Again they were approached with various 
wiles, the comfort of life being held out to them, 
in order to bring them into despondency. This con- 
tinued for a long time, until two o'clock in the 
afternoon ; so long did the steward delay the mat- 
ter, thinking to intimidate them, in hopes that they 
should turn. For this reason he made strenuous 
efforts to bring them over to his views, so as to in- 
duce them to go to church, and hear the doctrine of 
the priests. But when the steward did not succeed 
in bringing them over to his views, he called the 
executioner, into whose hands the prisoners were 
delivered. The executioner acted with reluctance, 
and received them with tears ; for his heart misgave 
him. But Gotthard said to him: "How I have 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


591 


longed for this day; why do you delay so long?" 
When the executioner began to bind them, he said 
to them : "Dear men, be not afraid ; for Christ also 
was bound innocently." When the steward heard 
these words he said to the executioner : "You must 
not speak in this manner." Then Peter said : "We 
will adhere firmly to the covenant of the Lord, 
which we trust we shall not break." Thereupon 
Gotthard began to speak, and said : "Here we must 
suffer tribulation. He that would hereafter be 
crowned, must fight valiantly now. As the bride- 
groom went before, so the bride must enter into 
joy through much suffering and tribulation. This 
we are taught by the words of Christ. The fact 
that the Lord was executed between two murder- 
ers, lightens the cross and affliction ; hence we fear 
neither slaying nor killing. For if they have done 
this in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry ? 
Luke 23:31. The servants of God must drink the 
sour wine now here upon earth ; but when we get 
to Christ, we shall drink new and sweet wine with 
Him. Matt. 26 :29. We must first bear affliction." 
With this, they reached forth their hands, and 
willingly suffered themselves to be bound, which 
astonished many. Yea, the common people were 
amazed, and said : "What marvelous thing behold 
we here ! these men so willing to go to death, when 
they could easily obtain their liberty." Gotthard 
said : "We do not die, but pass through death into 
life eternal, to God and to all His dear children; 
of this we have a sure hope ; hence accept this death 
with joy, and trust that we shall please God." 
When the time had come for them to die, they rose 
to their feet, called upon God in heaven, and, as 
brethren in Christ, and as a token of brotherly love 
and unity, kissed each other with the sweet kiss of 
peace, as those that were united with God, and 
were thus beheaded standing. But since they were 
executed unjustly, the executioner said with great 
fear and trepidation, that he should never execute 
such men again. 

After their heads had been severed from their 
bodies, the common people began to go home; 
but the steward called out to them, saying : "Don't 
be in such a hurry, but help bury these pious men 
first; they did not die for any crime; they are 
neither thieves nor murderers ; they were pious of 
life and conduct ; they embraced a faith which the 
lords and princes could not understand, and hence 
they had to suffer." Thus these pious witnesses of 
God were buried, and the seed of their blood did 
not remain without fruit in that place. To God 
be all the glory. Amen. This happened about the 
year 1558. 


JACQUES D'AUCHY, IMPRISONED A. D. 1558, BUT 

PUT TO DEATH AT LEEUWARDEN, FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, IN THE 

YEAR OF OUR LORD 1559 

A Confession of faith of Jacques d'Auchy, made 
when in prison in the city of Leeuwarden, in Fries- 


land; which confession he afterwards sealed with 
his death. 

I believe in one only God, the Father Almighty, 
Creator of heaven and earth, as is written, in whom 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and all the proph- 
ets believed. Gen. 1:1; Heb. 11. 

I believe in Jesus 'Christ the only Son of the Fa- 
ther, who was from the beginning with God. And 
when the time which God had promised was ful- 
filled, this Word became flesh, and was born of the 
house of David, of a pure virgin espoused to a man 
named Joseph, of the house of David ; which virgin 
is blessed among women. I believe that this true 
Son of God proclaimed the word of His Father 
through many signs and wonders. And after this 
He was delivered unto death under Pontius Pilate, 
and crucified and buried. I believe that this same 
Jesus Christ suffered for us. When we were His 
enemies, He suffered death for us, that those who 
believe in Him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life. I believe that this our Saviour was 
raised up from the dead, as He had predicted, and 
sits on the right hand of God His Father. John 
1 :14; Micah 5 :2; Gal. 4 :4; Rom. 1 :3 ; Matt. 1 :18; 
Luke 1:42; John 15:24; Matt. 27:2; Isa. 53:7; 
Rom. 5:10; John 3:16; Matt. 28:6; Mark 16:9, 
19; Acts 7:56. 

I also believe in the Holy Ghost, as testified by 
John in his first epistle, 5th chapter, and 7th verse, 
where he says : "There are three that bear record 
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy 
Ghost : and these three are one." I also believe in 
the communion of the saints, whose prayer avails 
much. Jas. 5 :16. 

I also believe in the holy church, in which are 
those who believe in Jesus Christ, who by one 
Spirit are baptized into one body, as Paul says; 
and Christ Jesus is the Head thereof, namely, of 
the holy church, as is written. I Cor. 12:13; Eph. 
5:23; Col. 1:18. 

I believe that this holy church has power to open 
and to shut, to bind and to loose; and whatsoever 
they bind on earth is also bound in heaven, and 
whatsoever they loose on earth is also loosed in 
heaven. I believe that God has ordained in this 
holy church, apostles, prophets, teachers, bishops 
and deacons. Matt. 16:19; I Cor. 12:28. 

I also believe and confess a baptism in the name 
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, even 
as commanded and ordained by our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and practiced and written of by the apos- 
tles. And I also believe that all who have received 
this baptism are members of the body of Jesus 
Christ, in the holy church. Eph. 4:5 ; Matt. 28:19; 
Acts 2:38, 41 ; 16:31 ; Rom. 6:4; Col. 2:12; 1 Cor. 
12:13. 

With regard to the holy supper of Jesus Christ, 
I believe and confess what Christ has said concern- 
ing it, as is written : "As they were eating the sup- 
per, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, 
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take eat; 


592 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave 
thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink, and di- 
vide it among yourselves ; for this is my blood of 
the new testament, which is shed for many for the 
remission of sins : this do in remembrance of me." 
I believe this according to the declaration of Paul, 
who says : "The cup of blessing which we bless, is 
it not the communion of the blood of Christ?. The 
bread which we break, is it not the communion of 
the body of Christ?" "Whoso eateth my flesh, and 
drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will 
raise him up at the last day." Matt. 26 :26 ; Luke 
22:14; I Cor. 10:16; John 6:54. 

I confess marriage to be an ordinance of God ; 
namely, a man and a woman united in the name of 
the Lord, in the holy church. For this cause shall 
a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to 
his wife : and the twain shall be one flesh. Where- 
fore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What 
therefore God hath joined together, let not man put 
asunder. The bed is undefiled ; but whoremongers 
and adulterers God will judge. Gen. 2:24; I Cor. 
7 ; Matt. 19:5,6; I Cor. 6:16; Heb. 13 :4. 

I also confess that fasting and praying is very 
profitable, as practiced by the apostles. Matt. 6:16; 
Acts 13:2. 

1 regard the words of St. James as good and 
true, where he says : "Confess your faults one to 
another, and pray one for another that ye may be 
healed." Jas. 5 :16. I believe that this must be done 
with an upright heart. 

I also confess that the higher powers are or- 
dained of God, for the punishment of the evil, and 
the protection of the good; for they bear not the 
sword in vain ; to which powers the Scriptures com- 
mand us to be subject, and instruct us to pray for 
them, in order that, as Paul says, we may lead a 
quiet and peaceable life. Paul also calls the power 
the minister of God. Therefore since he is the min- 
ister of God, I would pray him that he would be 
pleased to be merciful to me, even as God is merci- 
ful. I hereby disclaim all fellowship with those 
who would resist the power with the sword and 
violence, which I regard as a doctrine of devils. 
Wisd. 6 :3 ; I Pet. 2 :13 ; Rom. 13 :1, 4 ; I Tim. 2 :2. 

I also believe in the resurrection of the dead, as 
it is written, that all men shall rise from the dead in 
their own bodies, when the Lord shall come in the 
clouds, with His angels ; then He shall judge every 
one according to his works. Dan. 12 :2 ; Job 19 :25 ; 
Matt. 25:31; 16:27. 

In short, I believe all that a true Christian is 
bound to believe of the holy church ; and I believe 
with my whole heart in the articles, of the faith, and 
will live and die therein. I hereby renounce all false 
doctrines, heresies and sects, which are not in ac- 
cordance with God and His Word. And if I have 
erred in any respect through false doctrine, I pray 
the Almighty God, to forgive me through His great 
love and mercy. 

Also, if I have sinned in any matter against the 


Emperor, the king, or others, I pray them to for- 
give me through the great love and mercy of God. 

CONFESSION OF JACQUES D'AUCHY, MADE BEFORE 
THE COMMISSARY AND THE INQUISITOR 

When I had been in prison ten weeks, my first 
examination took place. On the third day of Jan- 
uary, A. D. 1558, reckoning the beginning of the 
year from New Year's day, the jailer came to me in 
the afternoon, saying that I had to appear before 
the commissary, in order to be examined concern- 
ing my faith. I was ready with a glad heart, and 
went thither with the jailer. When I entered the 
room where the commissary sat, I humbly saluted 
him. He returned my salutation, and said : "Jac- 
ques, is your name Jacques d Auchy ?" 

Jacques. "Yes, my lord." 

Com. "Jacques, I have come here commissioned 
by the king, and the procurator general, to exam- 
ine you with regard to the articles of faith." 

Jacques. "Well, my lord, be it done then in the 
name of the Lord." 

After we had had many words together concern- 
ing the faith, he began to ask me regarding the 
place of my nativity, my residence, and my life 
from my youth up to the present time ; all of which 
I confessed to him. Thereupon I was led back to 
prison by the jailer. 

In the afternoon of the next day, namely, the 
fourth of January of the same year, I was again 
brought before the same commissary. As I stood 
before him, he commenced to revile, vituperate and 
blaspheme the pastors and the flock of Christ, say- 
ing : "Is it not a pity that we suffer ourselves to be 
so deceived?" 

Jacques. "Yes, my lord." 

Com, "I speak of you and others, who forsake 
our mother the holy church, and suffer yourselves 
to be deceived by a set of mischievous idlers and 
vagabonds." 

Jac. "I have not suffered myself to be deceived 
by such." 

Com. "No ! when you believe such accursed vil- 
lains and beggars as Menno, Leenaert, Henderick 
van Vreden, Frans de Kuyper, Jelis of Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle, and other such rascals, and forsake us and 
the true Word of God, do you not then suffer your- 
selves to be deceived ?" 

Jac. "I have not forsaken the Word of God ; for 
my faith is founded upon the Word of God, and 
not upon men, nor upon the doctrines of men, since 
the prophet Jeremiah exclaims: 'Cursed be the 
man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm.' 
Jer. 17:5." 

A little after this the commissary cried out, say- 
ing : "O the miscreants, such as Menno and Leen- 
aert, how many have they deceived and led to all 
the devils and into perdition." 

Jac. "My lord, I entreat you not to say such 
words ; for it would be difficult and hard for you 
to prove that they are such as you assert them to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


593 


be." And, again: "They have not deceived, but 
have clearly taught the Word of God. And I do not 
believe that those who have believed in the Word 
of God, will go into perdition ; but the Lord shall 
judge all things well." 

Com. "I will not dispute ; for I myself receive 
instruction from those that are taught in the holy 
church. But I well know the character of you peo- 
ple, and of your doctrine : had you but the power, 
you should gladly cut our throats, which, as has 
been seen, you people have done at Munster, Am- 
sterdam, and other places." 

Jac. "O my lord, don't say such words against 
your own conscience ; for I am persuaded that you 
know much better, since you have been in the 
council here for twenty years, as you say (this he 
had told me before) ; hence it seems to me that you 
know us better ; for if we had such wicked hearts 
as to intend murdering people, we should not thus 
deliver ourselves into your hands; for were we 
only to speak against our conscience, and conceal 
the truth from you, you would have no power over 
us, since you can find no one that can accuse us 
with truth of having wronged or injured any one." 

Com. ."Whence then originate so many sects 
and heresies ? whence springs so much uproar and 
mutiny ?" 

Jac. "As far as the sects and heresies that are 
in the world are concerned, as those of Munster or 
Amsterdam, or elsewhere, we have in no manner 
fellowship or part with their works, nor with their 
doctrines, but we regard them as doctrines of 
devils. All these things cannot prevent the truth 
from being truth, and the Christians from being 
true Christians, any more than could in the days 
of the apostles all the sects and heresies that were 
round about them, and had some semblance of the 
Word of God." 

After these and many other words which we had 
together, he began to get milder in his manner, and 
said to me : "You must not study so high, but suf- 
fer yourself to be instructed by those who are more 
learned and wise than you, and you must believe 
in the Word of God." 

Jac. "O my lord, how should I not believe in 
the Word of God ? For this same Word I am im- 
prisoned here, and stand now before you, to give 
answer concerning it." 

Com. "You are not imprisoned for the Word of 
God, but for your evil deeds." 

Jac. "My lord, have you heard any one com- 
plaining that I wronged or injured him in any 
way?" 

Com. "No ; I have not heard that any complaint 
has been made against you." 

Jac. "The Lord be praised, that it is not for my 
iniquity, but for the testimony of the true faith." 

Com. "Not so; but for your crimes, since you 
have offended against his Imperial Majesty, and 
transgressed the command of the king our lord." 

Joe "If I have transgressed the king's com- 
mand, it is a small matter, since I have fulfilled the 


command of that King who is the true God and 
eternal King." 

Com. "You have also transgressed the command 
of God, and of our mother the holy church." 

Jac. "My lord, you cannot prove to me by the 
holy Scriptures, nor can any one else, that herein 
I have transgressed God's command." 

Com. "It shall be proved to you. Well then, 
let us begin to finish the articles in which I have 
been charged to examine you." 

We had many more words, which it would take 
me too long to relate here, besides that I do not 
remember them well. The commissary was some- 
what discouraged, 4 and listened attentively to what- 
ever I wished to say. 

Thereupon he asked me when I came to Emden, 
and where I had taken up residence, and whether I 
had been directed to these people. I answered: 
"Yes." Com. "Who directed you?" Jac. "A good 
friend." Com. "In whose house were you?" Jac. 
"I do not know the house in which I was." Com. 
"Who was it that brought you to Leenaert?" Jac. 
"They were men and youths, women and maid- 
ens." Com. "What were their names?" Jac. "As 
to their surnames, I should have had much to do, 
to know them all by their names and surnames, 
since I was not there long enough to learn them all." 
Com. "When you came into the house, where was 
Leenaert? What did he preach about ?" Jac. "He 
preached the pure Word of God." Com. "Of what, 
and of which articles did he preach?" Jac. "He 
taught amendment of life, and that we must put off 
the old man, and put on the new; he forcibly 
showed by the Scriptures that those who walk 
after the flesh, and after their lusts, have no part 
in the kingdom of God." Com. "Did he not speak 
of some other things?" Jac. "My lord, I should 
have much to do, to retain all, even as it 
would cost you, I think, much trouble and labor 
to retain a sermon that was preached eighteen 
months or two years ago." Com. "Did you there 
receive your second baptism?" Jac. "I have re- 
ceived but one baptism, and that according to the 
ordinance of Christ." Com. "Did you not also re- 
ceive a baptism in your infancy?" Jac. "I do not 
know what was done to me in my infancy, I have 
no remembrance of it." Com. "Did not your fa- 
ther or your mother tell you that you were baptized, 
and did you not have sponsors ?" Jac. "Yes, I think 
they told me, and I have also called some persons 
godfather and godmother, but this was not in ac- 
cordance with the Scriptures." Com. "Well, was 
that not enough? Have you besides this received 
something more from Leenaert, namely, water or 
baptism according to your notion?" Jac. "I re- 
ceived from him baptism according to the Word 
of God." Com. "Do you not consider the baptism 
good which you received in your infancy?" Jac. 
"Had I considered it good, and a baptism, I should 
not have received another; for it is written that 
there is one Lord, one faith, and one baptism, and 
not many baptisms." Eph. 4:5. Com. "Did you 


594 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


receive the baptism which Leenaert administered 
to you in the house in which you were assembled ?" 
Jac. "Yes." Com. "Was it after or before preach- 
ing?" Jac. "After preaching." Com. "Did he not 
speak of baptism?" Jac. "Yes and he showed by 
the holy Scriptures what it was, and what baptism 
signified; he humbly admonished the applicants 
for baptism, to observe well and take good heed 
what they accepted, and showed the cross and 
persecution which result to them that have come 
so far; and many other demonstrations from the 
holy Scriptures." Com. "Were you not afraid of 
the decree of the Emperor?" Jac. "No; neither 
am I now." Com. "Jacques, it will go hard with 
you, unless you submit to mercy for your misdeed." 
Jac. "My lord, I expect mercy from the Lord ; but 
I am not aware that I have offended against the 
Emperor or the king, for which I should look for 
mercy. And if the decree is contrary to the Word 
of God, it does not appear to me that in fulfilling 
the command of God, I offend against any one 
whoever he be!" Com. "Jacques, Jacques, think 
what the decree says." Jac. "My lord, I well know 
that it has more authority in this world than the 
Word of God to put to death those who believe 
on His name and depart from unrighteousness, as 
is written that it should be so. (Isa. 59:15; Matt. 
10:17). But what will it signify when you shall 
have done with me according to the decree, and 
shall have put me to death ? You will have nothing 
but a vile and mortal body, which is subject to cor- 
ruption ; but as regards the soul, you cannot touch 
it, and when you appear before God's judgment, 
you shall know what you have done." Matt. 10 :28. 
Com. "Jacques, I do not seek your death, God 
knows; I should be sorry to see you suffer in the 
least." Jac. "My lord, this will be seen in the end, 
how comes it then that you thus shed the innocent 
blood here, when you do not understand the faith 
as you have told me ? Why do you not ordain then 
that those who cannot recognize your faith to be 
true and good, be banished from the country, with 
retention of their life and property, as is done 
throughout Germany, and also in Oostland,* which 
countries do not judge the Word of God, to shed 
blood?" 

After many other words he asked: "What do 
you think and believe of the sacrament of the 
altar?" Jac. "Do you mean the breaking of 
bread?" Com. "Yes." Jac. "I confess and believe 
as Christ ordained it, as the apostles practiced it, 
and as Paul writes concerning it to the Corinthi- 
ans." Com. "How do you understand it?" Jac. 
"Just as it is written ; I do not want to comment 
on the Word of God." This satisfied him, and he 
so wrote it down on his paper. Com. "What do 
you think of the mass, confession, and absolution 
of the priest ?" Jac. "As regards the mass, I know 
it not, nor do the Scriptures ; I have never read this 
name in the Word of God." Com. "What shall I 

* "East country," probably Austria or the Orient is meant 
here. — Trans. 


write then in regard to this ?" Jac. "I do not know ; 
whatever you please, my lord." Com. "Will you 
not confess simply that you believe in the ordi- 
nances of the true and holy church, according to 
the teaching of the Scriptures and as a good Chris- 
tian is bound to believe?" Jac. "Yes, my lord, 
with all my heart." He wrote this down. Com. 
"Who were your instructors in this doctrine, and 
with whom did you converse in the beginning, and 
in what place?" Jac. "I had my conversation at 
Antwerp, speaking of the Scriptures with many, 
but my principal instruction and foundations I de- 
rived from reading the holy Word of the Lord." 
He also wrote this down. 

Com. "Now, see here is an important article, 
namely, whether you have not been a minister, or 
a deacon over the poor, or an exhorter, or have held 
some^ other office in the assemblies of the breth- 
ren ?" Thus it was written on his paper as well as 
I could perceive or see. I did not know at first 
what he meant by calling this so important an 
article : I answered thereupon : "No ; I do not feel 
myself qualified for it, but am a humble member 
in the congregation." Com. "Were you never in 
a meeting, before you received baptism?" Jac. 
"Yes, two or three times at least." Com. "In what 
place was it, and in what houses?" Jac. "As re- 
gards the houses, I do not know to whom they be- 
long." Com. "What kind of houses were they, 
large or small?" Jac. "We assemble wherever we 
best can, as opportunity offers itself, and I remem- 
ber to have been in very poor little houses, that 
resembled stables more than houses." He thus 
wrote this down on his paper. Com. "Did you 
also attend the meeting with the brethren, after 
you received baptism?" Jac. "My lord, this an- 
swers for itself; you may well suppose that if I 
was there before, I was there still more after- 
wards." Com. "Is your wife of the same doctrine 
as you are, and is she also rebaptized?" Jac. "I 
have enough to do to answer for myself without 
answering for my wife ; and if she were here she 
could answer for herself ; but nevertheless, I regard 
her as a woman that fears the Lord." This satisfied 
him. 

On Saturday morning, the 8th of January of said 
year 1558, I was brought into the same room, be- 
fore the inquisitor, who had lately been appointed 
here by the King of Spain, with full power from 
him to bind or to loose, to release or to put to death. 
When I came before him, I humbly saluted him ; he 
returned my salutation and said to me : "Jacques, I 
am very glad of one thing, namely, at what the pro- 
curator general has told me, that you are ready to 
confess your guilt, if it can be proved to you by the 
Scriptures that you have transgressed the com- 
mandment of God ; and are in error ; are you still 
of the same intention, and will you accept the 
Scriptures ?" Jac. "Yes ; and I am ready to listen 
to all good instruction according to the Word of 
God." He had the confession which I had made be- 
fore the commissary, and asked me: "Will you 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


595 


still confess that you received baptism from Lee- 
naert?" Jac. "My word is not yea and nay, but 
yea, yea, and as I confessed, so I still confess 
openly." Inquisitor. "Was not the baptism you re- 
ceived in your infancy enough for you, without re- 
ceiving another?" Jac. "I do not regard the bap- 
tism which I received in my infancy as baptism 
according to the Word and ordinance of God." 
Inq. "I shall prove to you ; but do you not believe 
that infants are born in original sin ?" Jac. "David 
indeed says that he was conceived in sin, even as 
all infants are ; but sin is not imputed unto them, 
since Christ has died to take away sin, as Paul tes- 
tifies everywhere in his epistles. And as by one 
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, 
so grace has abounded through Jesus Christ." 
Rom. 5:12, 15. Inq. "How are infants purified, 
if it is not done through baptism?" Jac. "They 
are purified through the blood of Christ, since 
He is the Lamb which taketh away the sin of the 
world." Inq. "How are they purified from original 
sin?" Jac. "My lord, I have told you, namely, 
through the blood of the Son of God, who died 
for us when we were yet enemies, and unbelieving." 
Inq. "Do you not believe that infants bear their 
sin from Adam, till they are purified through bap- 
tism?" 

Jac. "This must be proved to me by the Scrip- 
tures ; I believe the word of the prophet, who says : 
'The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, 
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son ; 
but the soul that sinneth it shall die.' " Ezekiel 
18:20. Inq. "It is not to be understood thus; but 
the child is impure until it has received baptism." 
Jac. "Are the infants purified through the external 
sign of the water?" Inq. "No; but they must be 
purified with water, and then with the Holy 
Ghost." Jac. "Which washing precedes ; the exter- 
nal or the internal?" Inq. "The external; and after 
these words : 'In the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost' have been spoken, they 
are purified internally." Jac. "My lord, you say this 
without warrant of Scripture ; for Christ says that 
those are hypocrites who first make clean the out- 
side; but that first, that which is within shall be 
cleansed, and the outside will be clean also." Matt. 
23 :25, 26. Inq. "You err, and do not understand 
the Scriptures, and have suffered yourself to be de- 
ceived by a set of vagabonds." Jac. "My lord, 
I rely not upon men ; but it has not been given me 
to understand it differently, and men can not 
give me the faith ; for it is written in the prophets : 
'They shall all be taught of God.' Isa. 54:13. And 
Jesus Christ says that no man can come to Him, 
except it be given him of the Father. John 6:44. 
But now, my Lord, prove to me exclusively by the 
Scriptures, that the baptism of little infants is a 
planting and ordinance of God, and that it was 
practiced by the apostles, and I shall believe it." 

Inq. "The ordinance was made by Jesus Christ, 
when He said: 'Except a man be born of water 
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom 


of God.' " John 3 :5. Jac. "Christ is not speaking 
to infants, but to a doctor in the law ; nor does He 
speak of little infants that have just been born ; for 
He says afterwards in the same chapter: 'That 
which is born of the flesh is flesh ; and that which 
is born of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I 
said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The wind 
bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound 
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and 
whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of 
the Spirit.' " Verses 6-8. 

After I had read this in his German testament, 
printed at Zurich, I said: "My lord, if the ex- 
ternal baptism of infants is the new birth, we know 
whence it comes, for we can see it with our eyes." 
Inq. "How do you understand it then?" Jac. "I un- 
derstand it to be the new birth of him that was in 
the old Adam, in the body of sin ; that we must put 
him off, and mortify and crucify the body of sin, 
together with all its lusts and affections, in order to 
be born again unto newness of life, after the new 
man Christ Jesus, as Paul testifies at length." Inq. 
"This is to be understood with reference to adult 
persons ; but the little infants that are impure, must 
be cleansed with water, that they may obtain salva- 
tion." Jac. "What do you believe concerning in- 
fants that do not receive baptism here, according to 
the faith which you hold, namely, from the pope ?" 
Inq. "They all go to the devils." Jac. "O my 
lord, it is written: 'If you judge, judge right- 
eously.' And Christ says: 'With what judgment 
ye judge, ye shall be judged.' Matt. 7 :2. You 
condemn innocent infants, notwithstanding Christ 
says that theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Mat- 
thew 18:3. Inq. "Those children were baptized or 
at least had received circumcision, which served 
them instead of baptism." Jac. "The Scripture 
does not state that they were circumcised, and you 
cannot show whether they were Jewish or Gentile 
children." Inq. "The inhabitants of Jerusalem 
and thereabouts in Judea, were all Jews." Jac. 
"Luke makes a different statement, saying (Acts 
2:5) that at Jerusalem, in Judea, every kind of 
tongue under heaven was represented." Inq. "Is it 
not a sad thing of you people, that you thus err in 
the Scriptures? Does not Paul say that He 
[Christ] cleansed His church with the washing 
of water?" Jac. "Paul says: 'With the washing 
of water by the word.' Eph. 5:26. Now, then, 
can you cleanse infants by the Word? or only by 
the washing of water ? for they cannot believe the 
Word." Inq. "Then they are damned, since they 
do not believe." Jac. "Don't speak thus ; for they 
are innocent and poor in spirit, and to such belongs 
the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 5:3. He said as 
before: "First of all they must be purified by 
water baptism, in order to attain salvation." Jac. 
"The apostle Peter clearly declares that as the ark 
which Noah had made preserved from death and 
the wrath of God those who had forsaken the com- 
pany of the wicked and of the world, and had en- 
tered into it, so baptism is to us for salvation ; but 


596 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the apostle does not at all esteem the baptism which 
takes away the filth of the flesh, unless there be a 
good testimony of a good conscience before God ; 
and I do not believe that infants have the testimony 
of a good conscience, since they know neither good 
nor evil." I Peter 3:21. 

He made no reply to this, but looked at me 
sharply, and, after a few moments said : "Is it Cal- 
vin who writes : 'Attestation (that is, testimony) 
of a good conscience ?' These are the false proph- 
ets that deceive you, people ; but the genuine text 
does not read so." Jac. "I am not imprisoned for 
the doctrine of Calvin." I begged him again and 
again to let me read in his book, how the apostle 
wrote it, namely, in his own testament which he 
had before him, or in his Latin Bible, which was 
of very small size, and translated and printed by 
Rombertus Stephanus, at Paris. But however I 
prayed him, he would not let me read; hence I 
said to him : "My lord, you ought not prevent me 
from proving the word, since you contradict it." 
After additional words he said to me : "Since you 
will not believe in the holy teachers, such as St. 
Ambrose and St. Augustine (and a host of other 
saints whom he named to me), and in the ordi- 
nances instituted by the holy church, what then 
will you believe?" Jac. "I believe only in the ordi- 
nance of Christ ; or prove to me that the apostles 
baptized little infants, and I shall believe it." 

He attempted to do this by the households that 
were baptized, in which, he said infants might well 
have been included. I replied that the Scriptures 
said nothing about there having been any infants 
there, but that they clearly prove that those house- 
holds heard and believed the Word, as is written 
of the jailer, and also of Cornelius, the centurion, 
and all that were of his house, who received the 
Holy Ghost as well as the apostles ; namely, those 
who heard the Word. Acts 16 :34 ; 10 :45. "Hence, 
my lord, you cannot prove to me, that there were 
infants there." Inq. "I will not insist upon it that 
there were infants there, or that there were none 
there, since it admits of doubt ; but you must believe 
what the fathers and the holy doctors have ordained 
concerning it in the church, and practiced until the 
present time." Jac. "Did those teachers institute 
this ordinance with a good intention ; or did they 
institute it because it was an ordinance of God, con- 
tained in the Scriptures?" Inq. "They did it ac- 
cording to the Word of God, with a good intention." 
Jac. "My lord, you well know how strictly the 
people of Israel were forbidden to do anything ac- 
cording to their own opinion, but that they were 
only to do what the Lord commanded them. Deu- 
teronomy 4 :2. For Saul was rejected of God, be- 
cause he had not acted truly according to the word 
of the Lord which had been commanded him, but 
had followed his own opinion." I Sam. 15 :23. 

After many other words, which we had together, 
he went away from me, saying: "Jacques, I beg 
you, that you will well consider this matter ; for you 
are in error and deceived." Jac. "I am neither in 


error nor deceived, and I have already considered 
the matter : since you cannot prove to me by the 
Scriptures that the baptism of infants is an ordi- 
nance of God, hence I do not believe it." Inq. 
"Why do you want me to prove it, since you do 
not believe in the holy teachers of the Catholic 
church, nor their ordinance." Jac. "My lord, it 
is written : 'Every plant which my heavenly Father 
hath not planted shall be rooted up.' " Matt. 5 :13. 
Aftermany other words he went away, saying to 
me : "Farewell, Jacques ; consider the matter well 
and pray diligently to God." I also bade him adieu, 
and said that I did indeed hope always to call upon 
the name of the Lord for help. Ps. 116:4. 

There were many other words that we had to- 
gether, which I have not written, because I do not 
remember them well, and I was seized with an 
attack of fever. I have forgotten to write his alle- 
gations with which he sought to prove that circum- 
cision was a figure of baptism, and hence, it [the 
latter] had to be used in like manner ; whereupon 
I proved to him by the Scriptures, that circum- 
cision was a figure of the covenant, and signified 
nothing but that they were included in the covenant, 
and children to whom belonged the promise. Gen. 
17:11. But Paul shows us that he is not a Jew 
or child of Abraham, who is one outwardly, or ac- 
cording to the flesh of his seed ; but he that is one 
in the heart, as Christ says, that they are Abraham's 
children, who do the works of Abraham, though 
they be Gentiles according to the seed of the flesh 
Rom. 2 :28, 29; John 8 :39. And I showed him that 
baptism signifies the true regeneration, even as 
Christ showed Nicodemus, and the putting off of 
the old man, in newness of life, and that hence we 
had to be regenerated, and not born anew, as they 
would assert ; and that where there was no regen- 
eration, there was no need of a sign, since this were 
only mocking God. John 3 :5 ; Rom. 6 :4. He said 
to me : "Shall the infants have no part then in this 
sacrament?" I told him that the sacraments had 
been left to be used in the holy church, for those 
who have ears to hear, and hearts to comprehend, 
and to understand the sacraments ; and not for in- 
fants. We conversed much more yet on this article, 
and I showed to him the abuse which they have in 
their baptism, contrary to the Scriptures, and con- 
cerning the baptism of prudent midwives, how that 
they regard it as good, and yet rebaptize the recip- 
ients of it; I therefore told him that they were 
Anabaptists. 

On Monday, the 10th of January of the same 
year, I was again brought before the same inquis- 
itor, who, after a few words asked me : "Have you 
made up your mind with regard to baptism ?" Jac 
"I have nothing else to say, than what I have told 
you already : since you cannot prove to me with the 
Scriptures, that the baptizing of little infants is an 
ordinance of Christ, I do not believe in it, but hold 
to the baptism which Jesus Christ ordained, and 
which He commanded His apostles." Inq. "This 
the false prophets have taught you, of whom the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


597 


Scripture says that they shall come, and who have 
gone out from us." Jac. "Such false prophets 
shall be known by their fruits, says the Lord. And 
as regards your remark that they went out from 
you, Paul, when at Miletus, showed to the elders 
of Ephesus (Acts 20:30), that among them, and 
out from the flock, there should arise wicked men, 
teaching perverse things — is it not so, my lord?" 
Inq. "Yes." Jac. "Is not, then, my lord, the bap- 
tism which you people practice, a perverse and ut- 
terly contrary thing, since Christ commanded to 
baptize those who believed and were instructed and 
taught. And the apostles baptized only those who 
received the Word ; but you people baptize only 
those that do not believe, and cannot be instructed 
or taught, nor receive the Word, since they are in- 
fants: which appears to me utterly contrary, and 
like putting the cart before the horse." Inq. "This 
is because you are in heresy, my child, and do not 
believe the holy teachers ; see how it will go with 
you. Well then, let us speak of another article." 
And having seen and read the confession which I 
had read before the commissary, as I said before, 
he asked me : "What do you believe of the eucha- 
rist?" Jac. "What is that?" Inq. "Of the sacra- 
ment of the altar." Jac. "Do you mean the Lord's 
Supper, or breaking of bread?" Inq. "Yes, it is 
the same thing, eucharist, sacrament or supper." 
Jac. "My lord, it is not the same name ; for, see, 
how the apostles named it: Luke says that they 
brake bread from house to house, and not the 
body of Christ." Acts 2:46. Inq. "That which 
Luke speaks of there, is the Word of God, which 
they distributed to every one." Jac. "My lord, so 
say also David Joris and other heretics, who abolish 
the breaking of bread. But observe, when Paul 
was at Troas and they had gathered together in 
the night, so that a young man fell down from the 
high loft, Luke says that Paul continued his speech 
until midnight, so that the young man fell through 
a window ; and when they had come up again, Paul 
having raised him up, they brake bread and eat it — 
they did not eat the word ; after which Paul talked 
till break of day, and then departed." Acts 20:7. 
When he heard this he looked at me sharply, and 
did not know what to say. "Do you not believe," 
said he "that when the priest has pronounced the 
words, our Lord is in the bread, in flesh and blood, 
just as the Jews had it in their hands, and crucified 
it ?" This question he asked me very many times, 
and as I did not seek to dispute with him, I said : 
"My lord, if you can prove it to me by the Scrip- 
tures, I will believe it." He urged me, saying: 
"Say yes or no, what do you believe of.it?" Jac. 
"That which the Scriptures testify with regard to 
it." Inq. "I ask you whether you do not believe 
that He is in the sacrament, in the flesh and blood, 
just as He was on the cross ?" Perceiving that he 
became heated, I delayed a little with my answer. 
Inq. "Well, what do you say?" Jac. "Nothing, 
my lord." Inq. "That I hear, but why do you wait 
so long with answering, yes or no?" Jac. "My lord, 


it is written : 'Be swift to hear and slow to speak.' " 
James 1 :19. Inq. "Well then, Jacques, say but 
yes or no ; if you believe that He is in the bread, in 
flesh and blood, say yes." Jac. "My lord, if I were 
to say yes to you, how could I prove it to you by 
the Scriptures, that He is there in flesh and blood, 
after the priest has pronounced the words? for I 
have never read it in the Scriptures, and since I 
could not prove it to you, therefore I will not say 
that it is so." Inq. "Then you do not believe it, do 
I hear, No ?" Jac. "I believe nothing further con- 
cerning it than what the Scriptures testify, and 
how should He be in the bread, my lord ? since it is 
written, that He ascended into heaven, and sits on 
the right hand of His Father, until He shall have 
made His enemies His footstool." Mark 16:19. 
Inq. "Do you not believe that He is able to sit on 
the right hand of His Father, and also to be in the 
bread?" Jac. "I believe that He is the Almighty; 
but He cannot do contrary to His word ; for He 
must be true, and He is the only truth Himself." 
John 14 :6. Inq. "Will you not believe this Scrip- 
ture : 'Take, eat ; this is my body, which is given 
for you ?' Do you not believe then that it is His 
body ?" Jac. "Which do you believe to be His body, 
that which was delivered and suffered for us, and 
sat at the table, and spoke, or that which He held 
in His hand, namely, the bread ? Was this deliv- 
ered for us, and did the bread die on the cross for 
our sins? and did not the bread represent His 
body?" Inq. "Both." Jac. "I have never read 
that there are two Christs, but only one only Son of 
God." This I had often told him before. Inq. 
"These two are but one ; and the wine, too, is His 
blood, after the priest has pronounced the words." 
Jac. "Does the wine become His blood, after the 
word has been spoken, and does it always remain 
blood, and not wine?" Inq. "After the word has 
been spoken, the bread is His true flesh, and the 
wine is the true blood of Christ, and they remain 
flesh and blood." Jac. "What then did Christ 
mean to indicate to His disciples, when He said : 
'This is my blood of the new testament, which is 
shed for many for the remission of sins. But I 
say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this 
fruit of the vine.' Matt. 26 :29, etc. My lord, 
Christ calls it His blood of the New Testament, 
and yet He indicates to His apostles, that it is still 
a fruit of the vine, seeing He still calls it so, after 
He has said that it is His blood." Inq. "Where do 
we find this written?" 

I then took his German testament, which he had 
before him, and read the passage to him. After I 
had showed and read it to him, he said to me: 
"You must not govern yourself according to your 
own understanding, but according to the exposition 
of the holy teachers, such as St. Augustine, Am- 
brose, and others of the ancient church." Jac. "I 
am well satisfied with St. Paul's exposition, without 
seeking for many other expositions." Inq. "Where 
has Paul expounded the sacrament of the altar?" 
Jac. "Paul has expounded and indicated to the 


598 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Corinthians, what the Lord's supper and the break- 
ing of the bread is." Inq. "Show it to me?" I 
still had his testament, and read to him the tenth 
chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians, where 
Paul says : "I speak as to wise men ; judge ye what 
I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not 
the communion of the blood of Christ ? The bread 
which we break, is it not the communion of the 
body of Christ?" Verses 15, 16. 

I had scarcely read this when he hastily replied : 
"This is against you, for the apostle there clearly 
proves that there is flesh and blood in the bread and 
wine, and that we are partakers of the body of 
Christ." Jac. "My lord, if you please, let me read 
a little further, and you shall see that Paul is not 
speaking of the body of Christ in flesh and blood, 
as it hung on the cross ; but of His church, which 
is His body ; for when He says that we have com- 
munion, and are partakers of the body of Christ, he 
says : 'For we being many, are one bread, and one 
body : for we are all partakers of that one bread.' " 
Verse 17. Inq. "The apostle speaks here of an- 
other body, namely, of his church." Jac. "I do 
not find that Paul makes any distinction between 
two bodies, but that he speaks of but one body of 
Christ." Inq. "What then do you understand by 
eating His body and drinking His blood?" Jac. 
"Just what Paul indicates, that it is the communion 
or partaking of the body of Christ." Inq. "My 
child, how deceived you are! Do you understand 
then, that you can by communion be a partaker of 
the body and blood of Christ, without eating and 
drinking thereof?" Jac. "My lord, I am not de- 
ceived, but my foundation is thr Word of God." 
Inq. "Well then, what do you understand by this 
communion?" Jac. "The apostle tells us this, 
when he says, in the same chapter: 'Behold Israel 
after the flesh : are not they which eat of the sacri- 
fices partakers of the altar?' Verse 18. Behold, my 
lord, here is the simile by which Paul indicates it to 
the Corinthians ; do you not also understand it so, 
my lord?" Inq. "Yes." Jac. "My lord, I do not 
think that you mean that those who were par- 
takers of the altar, therefore ate the altar, but only 
the sacrifices which lay on the altar." Inq. "Do 
you think that the same obtains with the sacra- 
ment?" Jac. "My lord, it seems to me, that when 
we eat the bread, we thereby signify that we have 
part in the body of Christ ; and yet we eat only the 
bread, and not Christ, just as Israel did not eat the 
altar, but only the sacrifices and yet, by eating the 
sacrifices, indicated that they were partakers of the 
altar." 

Looking sharply at me, he said : "What an error ! 
and do you not believe that in eating the conse- 
crated bread we eat the body of Christ?" Jac. "Paul 
does not teach this, neither do I understand it so." 
Inq. "Is it not a sad thing of you people, Jacques, 
that you do not believe the Word of God, which 
says : 'This is my body ; this is my blood ; do this in 
remembrance of me ?' " Jac. "I believe the Word of 
God; Christ clearly indicated that He should not 


be there bodily, since He said that it should be done 
in remembrance of Him. Paul also says : 'As often 
as ye eat this blead, and drink this cup, ye do shew 
the Lord's death till he come.' I Cor. 11 :26. Hence 
He is not there bodily, seeing He has not come 
yet." Inq. "He is certainly there bodily, according 
to the word of Christ, and all the holy teachers ex- 
pound it so." Jac. "I think more of Paul singly, 
than of all the other teachers, and I hold only to 
Paul's exposition." Inq. "You must also believe 
the holy teachers of the Catholic church." Jac. "I 
believe the holy Scriptures, and only the Word of 
God." Inq. "If you believe the Word of God, you 
must believe that he that (when the bread is conse- 
crated, and the words have been pronounced), re- 
ceives it bodily, receives the body and blood of 
Christ, since Christ says so, and He does not lie, 
but speaks the truth." Jac. "I know full well that 
Christ speaks the truth, but we must understand 
how He speaks when He says: 'I am the bread 
which came down from heaven, and the bread that 
I will give is my flesh' (John 6 :51 ) ; do you believe 
this?" Inq. "No, do you believe it?" Jac. "I shall 
not tell you, neither do we now dispute about it; 
but because you say that we must believe as Christ 
says ; behold, when He says : 'I am the vine and 
my Father is the husbandman.' John 15:1. Paul 
also says that the Rock of which the children of 
Israel drank was Christ." I Cor. 10:4. Inq. "No, 
no, all these words are not to be believed thus ; they 
are only types of Christ." Jac. "So is this ex- 
pression." Inq. "But this is a sacrament which is 
left us as a memorial of the body of Christ." Jac. 
"My lord, behold Israel after the flesh; the lamb 
which they ate was called the Passover and a per- 
petual memorial, that through the mighty hand of 
God they had gone out of Egypt, out of the house 
of bondage; and so is also the bread which we 
break, a memorial of Christ, who has redeemed us 
from sin and eternal death, delivering us from the 
bondage of the devil and the enemy." Inq. "Yes, 
according to the opinion of your pastors, Calvin 
and Zuinglius, and like heretics, who have intro- 
duced new doctrines ; but we have been in this faith 
over fourteen hundred years ; why do you not be- 
lieve us?" Jac. "My lord, should I believe because 
of the long time? there were many heretics, such 
as the Sadducees, Nicolaitans, Gentiles, and many 
others, who erred much longer yet. Turn to the 
Scriptures alone, according to the example of the 
good King Josiah." II Kings 22:11. Inq. "Do 
you think so my son? No, No." Jac. "My lord, so 
did the children say to Jeremiah, when they were 
out of the way. Jer. 18:18. You also well know 
how they abused the grace of God, making a golden 
calf, praising it and saying : 'This is the god which 
brought us up and delivered us out of Egypt.' Ex. 
32 :4. Thus your people now say of the bread. It 
is Christ who died for us." 

He became angry, and asked me : "Are we idol- 
aters, because we worship Christ?" Jac. "No, if 
He is in the bread ; but if He is not in it, what else 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


599 


are you?" Inq. "Well then, what do you believe 
concerning it? say but a word, yes or no." Jac. 
"My lord, you have heard that I believe that He 
sits on the right hand of His Father in heaven." 
Inq. "But in the bread?" Jac. "My lord, I have 
told you that I believe in regard to this according 
to the testimony of Paul." Inq. "Then you do not 
believe, I perceive, that the holy flesh of Christ is 
eaten as a sacrament?" Jac. "Do all who receive 
the bread, also receive the body of Christ?" Inq. 
"Yes, completely, whoever they may be." Jac. 
"Does a robber, murderer, rogue, or other person 
who is full of treachery, deceit and wickedness and 
who feels no sorrow or grief for his evil deeds, but 
does still intend to lead such a wicked life, does 
such an one receive the body and blood of Christ ?" 
Inq. "Though he were the worst man in the world, 
yea, even a Turk or heathen, if he came to the sac- 
rament, he would receive the body and blood of 
Christ, as well as any other person, yea, what is 
more yet, if he were a beast." Jac. "How, my 
lord, could it be possible, that the unbelieving, un- 
godly and unrighteous, to whom eternal damnation 
is promised, should receive the body and blood of 
Christ? It would necessarily follow, contrary to 
all Scripture, God willing or not, that they would 
have eternal life, and the beasts as well as we, be- 
cause the Lord has promised that whosoever eats 
His flesh, and drinks His blood, has eternal life; 
and thus the ungodly would have part in the body 
of Christ and of Belial, in light and in darkness, 
which is impossible, as Paul says." John 6:54; 
II Cor. 6:15. Inq. "How? do you not understand 
what Paul says, that he that eats this body, receives 
his judgment?" Jac. "Hold on, my lord; do not 
break the Scriptures, for Paul says: this bread, 
and not : this body." I Corinthians 1 1 :27. Inq. 
"Well then, whosoever eats of this body, or this 
bread, and drinks this cup, unworthily, receives 
damnation to himself." Jac. "My lord, he that 
receives his judgment is far from receiving the 
body of Christ; but it is the sentence of his 
death that he receives." Inq. "Well then you 
certainly acknowledge these words of Jesus Christ : 
'Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, 
hath eternal life' (Jno. 6:54); hence you must 
certainly believe that we can eat and drink Him, as 
He says." Jac. "I believe the words of Jesus Christ 
but not in the manner the Jews did, who were of- 
fended at Him, and said : 'How can this man give 
us his blood to drink, and his flesh to eat?' yea, 
even His disciples." Inq. "This was because they 
did not understand it well." Jac. "This I readily 
believe; for if they had understood it well, they 
would not have said it, and His disciples would not 
have forsaken Him because of these words, as they 
did." Inq. "Understand well, my son, this was 
because they understood that His flesh had to be 
eaten roasted or boiled, like other meat; but He 
spoke of the sacramental eating ; otherwise the eat- 
ing would not have availed anything. But do you 
not believe that we eat His flesh sacramentally, 


which is a sacrament, which He left us under the 
form of bread and wine, into which He has trans- 
formed Himself?" Jac. "Then He left behind 
Him things that are good for nothing." Inq. "How 
so?" Jac. "For this reason, my lord, when His 
disciples understood it so grossly, as you and oth- 
ers do, He said to them that the flesh profiteth noth- 
ing, but the Spirit that quickeneth ; and my words, 
said He, are spirit and life (Jno. 6:63); hence, 
what profit is it, if we eat His flesh?" Inq. "This 
was because they did not understand it well, as I 
have already told you." Jac. "My lord, I indeed 
believe that if they had understood it well, it would 
not have been necessary for Him to indicate to 
them that He had allusion to His Word." Inq. 
"How do you know that He was speaking of His 
Word?" Jac. "My lord, I know that it was of His 
Word, even as it is written that man shall not live 
by bread alone, but by the word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God, which alone quickens 
us in God unto eternal life." Matt. 4:4. Inq. "Be- 
hold, how your deceivers have instructed you in 
their new doctrines." Jac. "My foundation does 
not rest upon men, but upon the Word of God." 
Inq. "Why then will you not believe, like your 
mother the holy church, that after the words are 
pronounced, the bread and the wine are changed ?" 
Jac. "My lord, I have already told you that it is 
because there is nothing of this kind written in the 
Scriptures, for neither the bread nor the wine 
which Christ gave were changed." Inq. "Oh, cer- 
tainly it was." Jac. "My lord, I have proved to 
you, that He still calls it a fruit of the vine, after 
the words were spoken." Inq. "Do you not be- 
lieve then, Jacques, that Jesus Christ is Almighty, 
and that He had power to give His disciples His 
blood to drink ?" Jac. "I know, my lord, that He is 
Almighty, and that He was able to do it ; and even 
if He had done it, my lord, has He promised you, 
that you people should also perform such a work ?" 
Inq. "But is Jesus Christ not able to leave us this 
in His sacrament, for a testament?" Jac. "Yes, 
my lord, had He said so ; for He had power over 
the winds, and the devils, to change water into 
wine, and to make Himself invisible. Matt. 8:26; 
John 2 :9 ; Luke 4 :30. In short, I believe that He is 
Almighty in all things ; but a sinful man does not 
have this power." Inq. "Not ! if he utters the same 
words of Christ ?" Jac. "The power does not lie in 
the words ; this would be the same as sorcery. And 
if any one were to say to a sick man: 'Be thou 
whole,' in the same manner in which Christ said it, 
it would not heal him." Inq. "Then you do not be- 
lieve that Christ Jesus is in the bread?" Jac. "My 
lord, I think you have heard my resolution as to 
what I believe with regard to it. Christ said that 
we should do it in remembrance of Him: now, if 
He were present, how could it be done in remem- 
brance of Him?" Inq. "Oh, how these villains, 
Zuinglius and Calvin, have deceived you; those 
profaners of the sacrament, who pervert all Scrip- 
ture into the contrary." Jac. "My faith is not 


600 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


founded upon the doctrine of either Calvin or 
Zuinglius." Inq. "Upon what then?" Jac. "Upon 
the Word of God, and the foundation of the apos- 
tles." Inq. "How? you do not believe the Word 
of God." Jac. "My lord, how should I not believe 
the Word of God? For this same Word I am a 
prisoner, and stand here in chains before you, to 
bear witness to it." Inq. "My son, it is for the word 
of Satan, and not for the Word of God." Jac. "My 
lord, take care what you say, lest you blaspheme ; 
for I have not quoted the word of Satan for my 
doctrine and faith, but the pure Word of God ; but 
you quote to me the word and exposition of men." 
Inq. "It is the word of the holy teachers of the 
church, whom you reject ; behold here the cause of 
your error." Jac. "I do not reject them, but I leave 
them undisturbed ; for I find material enough in the 
Word of God to lay a good foundation, and water 
of life enough to drink in the pure fountain, with- 
out running to the brooks or pools, which are most- 
ly filthy and turpid." Inq. "Well, this does not 
bring us any further ; it is late already ; since you 
will not believe as our mother the holy church in- 
structs you, take heed and consider the matter well ; 
for you are in such error, that if you die in this 
state, you will be damned to all the devils, in the 
depths of hell." Jac. "My lord, it is written that 
judgment belongs to God alone; how then do you 
so presumptuously usurp God's place? God will 
judge me." Inq. "Jacques, this is all clear; for you 
do not believe, and he that believeth not is damned, 
says Christ." Mark 16:16. Jac. "It is written: 
'Judge not according to appearance, but judge 
righteous judgment.' John 7 :24. If I did not be- 
lieve it, I would not quote the Word of God in my 
defense." Inq. "All heretics do this. Well then, 
pray earnestly to God, that you may return to the 
holy church." Jac. "I trust through the grace of 
God, that I have become a member of the true and 
holy church, which has been cleansed and pur- 
chased with the blood of Jesus Christ." 

Thereupon he arose, and said to- me: "Adieu, 
Jacques, see that you come to a good conclusion ; 
for your time is short; consider the matter well. 
I also bade him adieu, and told him that I was 
ready always to follow that which was best, in 
what should be proved to me by the holy Scriptures, 
and nothing else. 

We had many other words yet concerning this 
matter, for about two hours ; but I have forgotten 
them. He listens attentively, and does not easily 
become heated ; we spoke sometimes in Flemish, 
and sometimes in French ; for the most part, how- 
ever, I spoke in Flemish, because of the listeners 
whom I heard before the door. 

Behold here the two articles in regard to which 
one is most tormented by them. Every time that 
he returned to me, he brought some subtle Scrip- 
ture with which to catch me; but, the Lord be 
praised, I was always victorious. I have been be- 
fore them full eighteen or twenty times, and were 
I to write all the discourses which I had with them 


in regard to these two articles, I should require a 
ream of paper, so great was the number of un- 
scriptural comparisons and similes which they 
adduced to me ; but I always referred them to the 
Scriptures. If there be anything in my hymns, 
which does not accord with this writing, it need 
surprise no one ; for though I were to write never 
so much, I should not be able to write all that was 
spoken between us. Thus they tormented me. 

On Friday afternoon, the 14th of January 1558, 
I was again brought before the inquisitor. I ap- 
peared before him, and he saluted me cheerfully, 
for, as much as I could perceive, wine had made 
him very merry ; he brought no books with him. 
After we had exchanged a few words with each 
other, he said to me : "Jacques, the reason why I 
have come here, is simply to learn your decision : 
for I will no more dispute with you about the arti- 
cles of faith, such as the mass, confession, indul- 
gences, purgatory, and invocation of the saints, or 
other ordinances of our mother the holy church." 
lac. "My lord, I am well satisfied ; I also do not 
seek to dispute, but simply to believe what we are 
bound to believe, as far as the articles of faith are 
concerned." Inq. "Yes, we have not much to do 
with disputing; for Paul says: 'A man that is a 
heretic after the first and second admonition, 
avoid.' Tit. 3 :10. Jac. "My lord, how can you re- 
prove me for heresy, seeing you have not yet con- 
victed me of being a heretic." Inq. "Not? are you 
"°' a .heretic, since you contradict the Christian 
faith ?" Jac "I do not contradict the faith, for all 
my purpose tends to it ; but you take one view of 
the Scriptures, and I another, and no one can 
judge which is right, and which is wrong, except 
spiritual men through the Spirit of God." I Cor. 

^ .10, 

He laughingly asked me: "Have you the Spirit 
of God?" Jac. "My lord, you must not ask me this 
in jest; for I do not boast of it; nevertheless I 
trust through the grace of God, that I am not ac- 
tuated by the spirit of Satan." Inq. "Nevertheless, 
you are deceived and in error, and Paul says that 
such shall be avoided after the first or second ad- 
monition." Jac. "Since then you regard us as 
heretics, Oh, that God would give, that you would 
at least use Paul's advice, that is shun us, and with- 
draw from us, and not persecute us unto death, 
and shed our blood in every corner." Inq. "Jacques 
I do not seek your death, God knows." Jac. "My 
lord, my God truly knows it well, and it will be 
seen in the end." Inq. "Yes, we only do what we 
have been charged with and commanded to do." 
Jac "By whom, my lord, by God or by men?" 
Inq. "We are commanded by God to avoid false 
prophets." Jac. "It is indeed true, my lord, that 
Christ admonishes us to beware of false prophets, 
but He gives us a sign whereby to know them] 
namely, like a tree is known by its fruits. What 
fruits have you seen on us, by which you could 
judge that we are false prophets?" Inq. "Enough 
everyday." Jac. "Wherein?" Inq. "In this that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


601 


you have a false doctrine, which teaches men amiss, 
and leads them into damnation." Jac. "My lord, 
that our doctrine is false, is merely your opinion ; 
nevertheless, you cannot know that we are false 
prophets, except by the fruit of the works, by 
which it may be known whether we are false 
prophets or not; for Christ says: 'Ye shall know 
them by their works' (Matt. 7:16) ; but He does 
not say, by their faith." Inq. "You people justify 
yourselves by your works." Jac. "No; but it is 
impossible to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of 
thistles, or that a corrupt tree should bring forth 
good fruit, according to the testimony of the 
Lord." Inq. "Well, Jacques, as I told you, I have 
not come here for the purpose of disputing, but 
simply to learn your decision." Jac. "I do not wish 
to dispute either ; but I want to reply to you, that 
you unjustly accuse us of heresy and deception." 
Inq. "Well, let us dismiss that ; to what conclusion 
have you come in regard to your confession? do 
you still hold to the views which you confessed be- 
fore the commissary?" Jac. "Yes." Inq. "Will 
you not then suffer yourself to be instructed ?" Jac. 
"I seek nothing else, but always to follow that 
which is best, most righteous and most virtuous, 
and I am not so obstinate in my faith ; if I would 
know a better way to eternal life, than the one 
which I now have, I would accept it." Inq. "Well 
then, concerning baptism and the sacrament, of 
which we spoke together, what do you think in re- 
gard to it?" Jac. "Only that, my lord, which shall 
be proved to me by the Scriptures ; that shall I be- 
lieve, and nothing else." Inq. "Then you do not 
believe the holy teachers of the Catholic church, 
do I hear no ?" Jac. "I believe only the holy Scrip- 
tures." Inq. "This is the reason why you are in 
heresy ; that you think more of yourself than of the 
holy teachers." Jac. "I glory not, save in the cross 
of Christ ; but I will not trust in any man ; for it is 
written: 'Cursed be the man that trusteth in 
man.' " Jer. 17:5. Inq. "I know that; but you do 
not believe the Word of God either." Jac. "My 
lord, do not say this ; for it is not so." Inq. "Not ? 
If our Saviour, taking the bread, says : 'This is my 
body; and, taking the cup: This is my blood'; 
why then do you not yet believe Him ? why do you 
doubt it?" Jac. "My lord, I believe Christ's words, 
and do not doubt them." Inq. "Yes, according to 
your own opinion, and with a different meaning." 
Jdc. "My lord, I trust that I do not understand it 
differently from what the apostles understand it, 
even as Paul expounds it." I Corinthians 10. Inq. 
"You say so." 

We had many more words yet about this article, 
also about baptism, and a little afterwards about 
purgatory, and the decree, in all for about an hour 
and a half ; whereupon he left me, showing me a 
very nice and friendly countenance, whether it 
came from the heart, I do not know. 

On the 20th of January of said year, I was again 
brought before the same inquisitor. He asked me : 
"To what conclusion have you come in regard to 


what I laid before you concerning baptism and the 
sacrament, and what are your views in the matter ?" 
Jac. "I have nothing to tell you other than that you 
have already heard from me." Inq. "Then, if I hear 
right, you remain opinionated and obstinate?" 
Jac. "My lord, I should be sorry to be obstinate 
against my own conscience; but as you cannot 
prove to me by the Scriptures that which you be- 
lieve, namely, that the baptism of infants is an ordi- 
nance of God, and an apostolical practice, and also, 
that the bread and the wine are changed into flesh 
and blood, when the priest has pronounced the 
words over the bread, this seems to me sorcery, 
and I cannot understand it so." Inq. "You may 
not doubt that the change takes place through the 
power of God, for I have sufficiently proved it to 
you by the Scriptures of God ; but you will not be- 
lieve." Jac. "My lord, do not say so ; for if you 
had proved it to me by the Scriptures, I should 
gladly believe it ; for all my salvation lies in God's 
holy Word." Inq. "I have quoted to you the Word 
of God ; but you believe nothing but your fanati- 
cism and opinion." Jac. "My lord, I beg you not to 
think this ; if I knew better, or understood it differ- 
ently, I should not wish to resist the Word of God 
against my conscience, being in the state in which I 
am, namely, imprisoned for my life, in daily expec- 
tation of death ; or it might well be said that I was 
the most miserable and unfortunate man that ever 
lived upon earth, that I should voluntarily and pre- 
meditatedly seek pain and suffering here until 
death, in order to obtain eternal damnation." Inq. 
"Yes, my child, take good heed what you do ; for if 
you die in this evil faith and doctrine you have, you 
are damned to all the devils." Jac. "O my lord, how 
dare you speak so ? It is written : 'Judge not, that 
ye be not judged ; for with what judgment ye judge 
(says the Lord), ye shall be judged.' " Matt. 7:1, 
2. Inq. "I judge you according to truth." Jac. "My 
lord, do not say that ; for you know not what you 
judge." Inq. "Oh, yes, I do." And taking up an 
inkstand, which stood on the table, he said to me : 
"As sure as I know that I hold this inkstand, so 
assured am I, that if you continue in this doctrine, 
and die thus, you will never see the face of God, 
but will be eternally damned." Jac. "My lord, do 
not judge so ; for you usurp God's place, and rob 
Him of His honor; for judgment belongs unto 
Him alone." Inq. "Do you think that I do not 
know what I am saying ? and that I do not see that 
you are in error ? no heretics shall enter into para- 
dise." Jac. "My lord, you think that we are in 
error ; but as you people think of us, so we think of 
you." Ipq. "Oh, it is easy to know through the 
Word of God, who are in error and heresy." Jac. 
"True, it is easy to know for those to whom the 
Lord has given the grace and wisdom. And for 
this reason I beg you, my lord, not to take it amiss, 
if I speak somewhat boldly with you, and open my 
heart to you." Inq. "No indeed." Jac. "My lord, 
as you people think that we are false prophets and 
deceivers, so we think that you are ; as you think 


602 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


that we err, so we think that you err ; as you think 
that we deceive the people, so we think that you de- 
ceive them, and upon this we forsake life and all 
that we have in the world, to show to you people, 
and to seal with our blood, the faith which we have 
in God." Inq. "Nevertheless, this only tends to 
your damnation." Jac. "If it tends to our damna- 
tion, we are of all men under heaven the most mis- 
erable (I Cor. IS :19) ; for we are cast out, despised 
and rejected as abominable before all the world (I 
Cor. 4:9), and flee from place to place, so that we 
suffer continually in the flesh, and have no rest, 
and, according to what you say, we are also to suf- 
fer after this life : no, no, my lord, we feel quite a 
different witness and promise through the Word 
of God." Inq. "This arises from the fact that you 
are deceived; but it will avail you nothing." Jac. 
"Where then is the people who must follow their 
Master through suffering and affliction to eternal 
life, as Christ has said that they should be hated for 
His name's sake." Matt. 10:22. Inq. "This was 
spoken to the apostles only." Jac. "How comes it 
then that Paul says that all that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution? II Tim. 3: 
12. And the prophet says that the afflictions of the 
righteous shall be many, but that the Lord delivers 
them out of all evil." Ps. 34:10. Inq. "This means 
that the devil will always cause them enough temp- 
tation and affliction." Jac. "Paul speaks of perse- 
cution, and not of temptation; nor can I conceive 
that Christ spoke of temptation, when He said: 
'They will scourge you in their synagogues, and 
persecute you unto death, and will think that they 
do God service thereby; and ye shall be hated of 
father and mother, brethren and friends, and some 
of you they shall put to death." Matt. 10:17,21 ; 
John 16:2. Inq. "Well, this was spoken only to 
the apostles." Jac. "Does not Christ speak there of 
all that believed in His name?" Inq. "He spoke 
to the apostles only, who should suffer when go- 
ing about proclaiming the Gospel; but that after- 
wards they should cease to persecute them." Jac. 
"How came it that the churches suffered such cruel 
persecution? and yet they were not all apostles." 
Inq. "How so?" Jac. "Even as Luke testifies, 
Acts 17:13, and Paul I Thess. 2:14. Yea, you 
yourself, my lord, know full well what Eusebius, 
one of the ancient teachers, writes in the eighth 
chapter of his fourth book. In writing of the primi- 
tive church, in what suffering and contempt they 
were, does he not say that the people regarded them 
as robbers, murderers, infanticides, and abominable 
men, and said that they committed incest with their 
mothers and sisters, shed human blood in their 
worship, and sacrificed their children unto idols; 
they were also considered seditious persons, ac- 
cursed villains, and enemies of God and every crea- 
ture, and were charged with many other wicked- 
nesses imputed to them by the world, is it not so, 
my lord? as also the ancient writers Cyprian and 
Tertullian write." Inq. "It is so; this is all very 
true ; but it was done by those who had no knowl- 


edge of the Gospel." Jac. "I indeed believe that if 
they had believed the Gospel, they would not have 
persecuted them, nor uttered such slanders against 
them; but it has always been so, that even those 
who boasted of having the Word of God persecuted 
them that sought to fear the Lord, and to serve God 
with all their heart, even as you see in Israel, those 
who ought to have confirmed the honor and law 
of God, put to death the prophets that were sent to 
them, and those who knew the Lord from a pure 
heart." Jer. 18:18. Inq. "For this reason the 
wicked are always among the good, and the chaff 
remains with the good grain to the end." 

We had much more conversation yet in regard 
to this matter ; finally he asked me my decision con- 
cerning baptism and the sacrament, to which I re- 
plied as I had done at other times. He then left 
me, enjoining me to ask God to give me under- 
standing to return, as he said, to the holy Catholic 
church. 

On the 27th of January of the afore-mentioned 
year I was again brought before the same inquisi- 
tor. After a few words he asked me to what con- 
clusion I had come with regard to what he had said, 
namely, with reference to baptism and the sacra- 
ment. Thereupon I replied to him as I had done at 
other times, that I knew nothing better than to ad- 
here to my first confession, seeing I could not find 
in the Scriptures that which he laid before me, and 
which he would constrain me to believe. Inq. "Will 
you then remain obstinate herein, and not believe 
otherwise ?" Jac. "I am not obstinate, but I do not 
find in the Scriptures that which you say I must be- 
lieve." Inq. "Not? Do you not find in the Scrip- 
tures what you must believe concerning the sac- 
rament?" Jac. "Yes, but not in the manner in 
which you believe ; for I cannot understand it so." 
Inq. "The reason is you do not want to understand 
it." Jac. "How, my lord, do you mean that I want 
to resist God against my conscience? in this case I 
should be worse than an irrational beast." Inq. 
"Why then do you not understand it?" Jac. "Be- 
cause it is not given me to understand it differently ; 
and be not surprised at this, for it is written in the 
prophets, where the Lord says : 'They shall all be 
taught of God.'" Is. 54:13. Inq. "Nevertheless, 
it seems to me, that if I lay it before you with the 
Scriptures, it is nothing but opinionativeness and 
obstinacy, if you do not want to believe it." Jac. "I 
cannot understand it so ; think not that if I under- 
stood it differently, I should want to find my pleas- 
use and amusement here in being imprisoned and 
chained day after day, having forsaken my wife 
and family, to my great damage, expecting death 
from day to day, for this were contrary to human 
nature." Inq. "Well then, believe only in the Word 
of God as it is written there, and I will be satisfied, 
namely, that when we eat the bread, we partake of 
the body of Christ, and when we drink the wine, 
we have part in His blood, as Paul testifies to the 
Corinthians." I Cor. 10:16. Jac. "Be satisfied 
then; I believe as Paul testifies there." Inq. "Do 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


603 


you believe then that there is a communion of the 
body of Christ?" Jac. "Yes." Inq. "Well then, 
you cannot be a partaker of the body without eat- 
ing of it ; hence you must certainly say that it is the 
body of Christ which you eat." Jac. "Paul does 
not say this." Inq. "How can you be a partaker of 
the body without eating of it?" Jac. "How did 
Israel become partakers of the altar, who did not 
eat the altar, but only the sacrifices?" I Cor. 10: 
18. Inq. "Ha ha! See how Calvin or Zuinglius has 
instructed you." Jac. "I do not hold the doctrine 
of Calvin or Zuinglius." Inq. "Whose then, Men- 
no Simons' ?" Jac. "My doctrine and faith are not 
founded upon men, but upon the Word of God." 
Inq. "Who then is the head and captain of you 
people?" Jac. "Christ." Inq. "But who is it that 
instructs you here upon earth, who is your teach- 
er?" Jac. "The Word of God." 

When I perceived that he did not know to what 
church I belonged, I did not want to tell or indicate 
it to him. 

Inq. "Nevertheless, you must be instructed here- 
in by some men." Jac. "We are not founded upon 
men, but upon the living Rock." Inq. "Have you 
then no pastor or bishop?" Jac. "Yes." Inq. 
"Who is it?" Jac. "Christ the Son of God." 
Inq. "You know very well what I mean ! but you 
do not want to answer ; however, have you any ad- 
herents of Calvin or Zuinglius ? are you opposed to 
Menno Simons?" Jac. "I believe that there is not 
much difference between my faith and Menno Si- 
mons'." Inq. "Do you then believe like Menno, 
that Christ did not assume our flesh in the virgin 
Mary?" Jac. "My lord, you said that you would 
not dispute about the matter; have you changed 
your mind ?" Inq. "Well then tell me simply what 
you believe concerning it." Jac. "I believe that He 
is the Son of God in every respect, in flesh and 
spirit ; but as to whence He took His flesh, this I 
leave in the mystery of God ; the apostles did not 
dispute concerning it." Inq. "Yes, yes." We had 
also many other words yet, which I have not writ- 
ten here. 

On Monday, the 1st of February of the same 
year 1558, 1 was again brought before the same in- 
quisitor. After we had exchanged a few words, he 
asked me, "Have you not prayed the Lord for 
wisdom?" Jac. "Yes, and I need to pray to Him 
daily." Inq. "How is your conscience at ease?" 
Jac. "Very well ; the Lord be praised for it." Inq. 
"What are your views concerning baptism and the 
sacrament, about which we spoke?" Jac. "I hold 
the same views which I clearly stated to you be- 
fore." Inq. "Will you not believe differently?" 
Jac. "I would believe differently, were it given me 
to understand differently ; but I will not speak as a 
hypocrite against my heart and conscience; for it 
is written that the Spirit of God fleeth all deceit." 
Wisd. 1 :S. Inq. "Then, as I perceive, you have 
come to a full determination in regard to it." Jac. 
"Yes, until I am instructed differently. My lord, 
do you suppose that these, namely, baptism and the 


sacrament, are the only objectionable things to me 
in your church?" Inq. "Well, what else is there 
objectionable to you?" Jac. "Many of the ordi- 
nances and institutions in your church, concerning 
which I do not find a word in the holy Scriptures." 
Inq. "Yet we have no ordinance or institution, 
which I could not prove to you by the Scriptures." 
Jac. "Where is the word mass recorded, or purga- 
tory, or praying for the dead?" Inq. "I will prove 
it to you, namely, purgatory, and that we must 
pray for the dead." Jac. "Where is it written in 
the holy Scriptures?" Inq. "Will you receive the 
books of the Maccabees?" Jac. "Yes, indeed, for 
apocryphal books." Inq. "What does apocryphal 
mean?" Jac. "The ancients used this name, to in- 
dicate that they are not authentic books, from 
which rules or ordinances may be taken." Inq. "It 
is true that the doctors had some difficulty therein, 
but you may therefore not reject them." Jac. 
"Yes, my lord, the reason why I will not receive 
them, is not only this, that I will not trust in what 
men have said, but also because I do not find that 
Christ or His apostles received them, or quoted 
any testimony from them." Inq. "Yes, yes, where 
have you found that Christ or His apostles quoted 
anything from the books of the Kings?" Jac. 
"Enough." Inq. "Where then?" Jac. "My lord, 
in the first place it is written in Matthew (12:1), 
that the Pharisees censured Christ, because His 
disciples plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath. 
And Christ answered them: 'Have ye not read 
what David did when he was a-hungered and they 
that were with him ; how he entered into the house 
of God and did eat the shewbread, which was not 
lawful for him to eat?' Hence I say, that since 
Christ refers them to that which is written in the 
books of the Kings, He thereby shows that He re- 
ceives them as authentic."* Inq. "Well, do you find 
anything in the book of Joshua?" Jac. "Yes, my 
lord." Inq. "What is that?" Jac. "My lord, you 
well know that James in his epistle (2:25) ad- 
duces a testimony or example from the book of 
Joshua, namely, the second chapter, when he 
speaks of Rahab the harlot, who was saved by her 
works in faith." Inq. "Then you will not receive 
the books of the Maccabees, because Christ and 
His apostles have not quoted any testimony from 
them?" Jac. "No, and this for the reason, that 
they contain a doctrine which is contrary to all 
Scripture, namely, that of sacrificing and praying 
for the dead." Deuteronomy 13:1. Inq. "If I 
would take the trouble, I could prove all our ordi- 
nances with the Scriptures, such as mass, confes- 
sion, image worship, invocation of the saints, and 
others." Jac. "I think not, and even if we were 
agreed, my lord, in every article, I should yet not 
want to unite with you, unless you should prove 
to me by the Scriptures that it is Christian-like to 
shed innocent blood on account of the faith, as 

* The passage referred to is I Samuel 21 :6. The reader will bear 
in mind that formerly the two books of Samuel were called re- 
spectively the first and second book of the Kings. — Translator 


604 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you do." Inq. "This is on account of errors." Jac. 
"And even though it were because the Scriptures 
were understood amiss, yet I do not find in the 
Scriptures, that we may put any one to death on 
account of his faith." 

Inq. "Oh, I can soon prove that heretics may be 
put to death ; for it is written that if any heretics or 
false prophets should arise, they shall be put to 
death." 

Jac. "Yes, I have read the 13th chapter of 
Deuteronomy, where it is written that if a false 
prophet, or other person among them, should arise 
and teach them to go after other gods, which they 
had not known, that false prophet should be put to 
death, and stoned with stones." Inq. "Well then, 
see here a testimony that heretics may be put to 
death." Jac. "My lord, we are no more under the 
law, but under the Gospel ; and even if we were un- 
der the law, we would not teach you to go after 
other gods, but after Him who created heaven and 
earth, and His Son Jesus Christ." Inq. "You cer- 
tainly do it by your ordinances." Jac. "The 
Israelites were not all allowed to put any one to 
death because of difference in the use of the ordi- 
nances, since they believed in the same God ; but all 
this does not answer our purpose; for what was 
commanded in the law is not commanded in the 
Gospel of Christ." Inq. "Not, how so?" Jac. 
"Because, my lord, in the law it was commanded, 
Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and to love one's 
neighbor, and to hate one's enemy; but through 
Christ we are commanded quite the contrary, not 
to resist evil, and to love our enemies." Matt. 5 :38 ; 
Lev. 24:20; 19:18. Inq. "True, but He did not 
command that heretics should not be put to death." 
Jac. "What does Christ mean then, when He says 
that we must not root up the tares which are among 
the good grain, fearing that in rooting up the tares, 
we might also pull up the wheat; wherefore He 
commands, to let both grow until harvest ; but the 
harvest is not come yet." Matt. 13 :29, etc. Inq. 
"You do not understand this very well; for it is 
easy to see whether they are tares or wheat." Jac. 
"Yes, for Him that knows the seed." Inq. "Yes, 
that is true." Jac. "My lord, it is written that car- 
nal men know only carnal things ; but the things 
that are spiritual knoweth no man, but the Spirit of 
God." I Cor. 2:11, etc. Inq. "This is very true." 
Jac. "For this reason, my lord, I should like to 
ask you something." Inq. "What is it?" Jac. "Have 
you the Spirit of God, or has the council received 
the Spirit of God ?" Inq. "No, I will not answer 
this." Jac. "How then shall you or those of the 
council be able to judge spiritual things? for the 
matter of which we speak is spiritual, and must be 
judged by the Spirit of God." Inq. "You are 
judged only because you have transgressed the de- 
cree of the prince." Jac. "If his command had not 
been contrary to God's command, I should not have 
transgressed it." Inq. "It is not contrary to the 
command of God." Jac. "I wish you would prove 
to me by the Scriptures that the decree of the Em- 


peror or King is upright and just?" 

Inq. "I believe you think that all our fathers 
were deceived, and that your sect is saved. What 
will you say? it is full twelve or thirteen hundred 
years since Emperor Theodosius caused the proc- 
lamation of an edict or mandate, to put to death 
the heretics, namely, those who were then rebap- 
tized, like your sect." 

Jac. "Yes ; my lord, you say that our sect has 
existed only twenty or thirty years, but it has al- 
ways been the case that those who would live godly 
in Christ Jesus, have had to suffer persecution, ac- 
cording to the words of Paul." Inq. "Thus speak 
all heretics." Jac. "Paul said it first; yet he was 
not a heretic." Inq. "I am well aware that he was 
no heretic ; but they all use the words of Paul ; but 
I tell you, decrees and mandates for the putting to 
death of heretics are not a recent invention, but this 
has obtained for fourteen hundred years already." 
Jac. "But it remains to be seen whether Emperor 
Theodosius, of whom you spoke, did well, and a 
good work according to the will of God, in issuing 
such a mandate." Inq. "Yes, he certainly did, 
since he well knew that they were heretics." Jac. 
"My lord, in his opinion they were heretics ; but in 
the opinion of those who gave their lives for the 
testimony of their faith, he himself was a heretic 
and tyrant." Inq. "How do you know that ?" Jac. 
"This is self-evident ; for those who put us to death 
for our faith, we esteem no better than heretics and 
tyrants, as may easily be presumed that also they 
did who were put to death by Emperor Theodosius. 
Hence, this matter cannot be judged save by the 
Spirit of God." Inq. "No, no, you must not think 
that so many learned doctors as were then in the 
Catholic church, would have then permitted it, if it 
had been wrong to put heretics to death." Jac. "I 
will not rely upon the ordinances or wisdom of 
men ; for I adhere to the instruction of Christ and 
His apostles, who constantly admonish us to sep- 
arate from false prophets, and to shun heretics; 
but not to pursue them, or to persecute them unto 
death." Matthew 7:15; Tit. 3:10. Inq. "My son, 
do you know why they did not put them to death ?"' 
Jac. "I Relieve it was because it was not pleasing 
to God." Inq. "No, no, Jacques, it was because 
they were not powerful enough, and had neither 
king, nor prince, nor magistrate." Jac. "Christ had 
power enough to call to His aid more than twelve 
legions of angels, and the apostles had power 
enough through the Holy Spirit, but they were 
called to be a flock of sheep and lambs, as harmless 
as doves, and so changed as to be like little chil- 
dren." Matthew 26:53; 10:16; John 10:27. Inq. 
"It is true, it was so at that time." Jac. "And shall 
now, my lord, the children of God be of a different 
nature from what they were then, shall they have 
the nature of wolves?" Inq. "Certainly not; I do 
not say that." Jac. "Yet it appears to me, my lord, 
that those who now boast of being children of God' 
have the genuine nature of ravening wolves." 
He looked at me sharply and said to me : "Why 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


605 


do you think so?" Jac. "Because, my lord, Christ 
calls His people sheep and lambs ; and it is the na- 
ture of a flock of sheep, that if they see any beast 
approaching, and perceive that it is a wolf, they all 
flee, yea, though they were a thousand of them 
against one wolf, and they do not pursue the wolf, 
to devour him, and to shed his blood ; but they who 
boast of being the flock of Christ, do the very op- 
posite; whence do they get this nature?" Inq. 
"This comparison is good for nothing, and the alle- 
gations are useless; for it does not obtain with 
the flock of Christ, as with a flock of sheep." 

Seeing that he rejected this, I asked him: "Is it 
not necessary that the children of God should be 
born of God, as John testifies? (John 1 :13) and 
must they not be of such a nature and disposition 
as their Father and Lord ?" Inq. "Yes, but why ?" 
Jac. "Because it is written that the Son of God was 
led as a lamb or sheep to the slaughter, and opened 
not His mouth; hence His children must be of 
such a nature, since they are born of God." Isaiah 
53 :7 ; Luke 8 :32. Inq. "This 1 it had to come so. 
Jac. "Why?" Inq. "That the Scriptures might 
be fulfilled." Jac. "Thus it must also be with re- 
gard to His children, in order that the Scripture 
may be fulfilled." Inq. "What Scripture?" Jac. 
"This : 'If they have persecuted me, they will also 
persecute you ; remember the word that I said unto 
you, the servant is not greater than his lord.' " 
Inq. "This He said to His apostles." Jac. "I un- 
derstand it as having been spoken by Him of all 
His children, and as having been written for our in- 
struction." Inq. "No, no, my son; you must un- 
derstand that the apostles were sent to proclaim 
and preach the Gospel to every creature, and the 
Lord predicted that much suffering should come 
upon them, and that they should be put to death ; 
but after they had gained a prince to the faith, they 
had rest, and might well put to death the heretics 
in their country." Jac. "My lord, the Scriptures do 
not say this, nor can I conceive that it can be the 
nature of a lamb, to kill and devour a wolf ; for 
you people say that you are the flock of Christ, and 
that we are ravening wolves, and you put us to 
death ; this does not seem right to me." 

Thereupon he laughingly asked me: "Jacques, 
was not Peter also a sheep of Christ?" Jac. "My 
lord, if he was chosen of God, he also belonged to 
the flock." Matt. 10:1. Inq. "Answer, yes or no." 
Jac. "I believe that he was not only a sheep of the 
flock of Christ, but even a shepherd." Inq. "Well 
then, he, who was a sheep, killed two persons." 
Jac. "Whom ?" Inq. "Ananias and his wife Sap- 
phira." Jac. "How did he kill them, seeing he had 
neither stick nor sword? Was it not the Spirit of 
the Lord ?" Inq. "Nevertheless, he did it." Jac. 
"My lord, do not give the glory to men, as though 
they could do this by their own power ; for they 
were killed through the Spirit of the Lord ; more- 
over, it was not for such a cause as that for which 
you put people to death; but it was because they 
lied against the Holy Ghost." Acts 3:12 ; 5 :3. Inq. 


"Well, Jacques, my son, this brings us no further ; 
see that you consider the matter well, reform, and 
become converted to the faith of your fathers, for 
you are in error ; hence believe as a good Christian 
is bound to believe, and do not attempt so many 
things." Jac. "Faith is the gift of God, says Paul." 
Eph. 2:8; Rom. 12:3; I Cor. 12:9. Inq. "Yes, 
it is truly the gift of God." Jac. "Hence men can- 
not give it." Inq. "Certainly not; we must pray 
to God for it." Jac. "How comes it then, that they 
want to compel me to believe, by threats of death ?" 
Inq. "Time is given you, to become converted." 
Jac. "My lord, how much time? six, seven, or eight 
days, as I have seen in Brabant ; can one change his 
faith so speedily?" Inq. "I know nothing about 
Brabant, but here we give people six weeks at least, 
to see whether they will believe, when the Word of 
God has been presented to them." Jac. "Why do 
you say, my lord, if they will believe it ? You talk 
as though they could believe of their own accord, 
and yet you say that faith is the gift of God. The 
apostles had heard the Lord Jesus, who was full of 
wisdom and truth, for two or three years, and yet 
they could not comprehend well, as you may gather 
from the two disciples who went to Emmaus. Luke 
24:13. Paul also had heard the apostles and dis- 
ciples ; yet he could not comprehend, but cast them 
into prison. Acts 9:1. But when it pleased God, 
He made manifest His will to them, at the time 
which He had prepared, and not at any man-ap- 
pointed time." Inq. "That was because they had 
not yet this doctrine, and as it was in the beginning, 
they could not comprehend it." Jac. "It was be- 
cause it was not given them, or because they were 
not drawn by the Father (John 6 :44) . Why do you 
not also wait until God does His will with us ?" Inq. 
"You have heard for a long time, and time is still 
given you for consideration ; you have three weeks 
yet from this day, to consider the matter." Jac. 
"My lord, do you not mean that after three weeks 
I shall be put to death ?" Inq. "You may turn yet 
in the meantime." Jac. "But if it be not given me, 
to understand differently, and I cannot comprehend 
otherwise, how shall I turn ?" Inq. "For this rea- 
son time is given you, in order to see whether God 
will not show you mercy that you may become con- 
verted." Jac. "My lord, I have in mind just now 
the children of Israel, who were besieged in the city 
of Bethulia, and suffered from scarcity of water, so 
that their wives and children died for thirst, and 
they said : 'There is no hope from God for us any 
more ; let us deliver the city into the hands of the 
enemies.' Judith 7:23, etc. Thus you people also 
say : 'There is no more hope that he will turn ; let 
us deliver him to death.' And as Ozias, the ruler of 
the city, thinking to give good counsel, said to the 
inhabitants : 'Let us yet wait five days, and if with- 
in these five days there come no help from the Lord, 
we will deliver the city to our enemies.' My lord, 
were they not sharply rebuked by a widow named 
Judith, who said to them : 'Who are ye that have 
tempted God this day, and stand instead of God 


606 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


among the children of men, and would comprehend 
his purpose.'" etc. Judith 8:12, etc. Inq. "This 
cannot be compared to your case." Jac. "My lord, 
it appears to me to be the same thing ; for you peo- 
ple say that if no help comes from God within the 
time appointed us by you, we must be delivered 
to death, and according to what you say, we are 
damned to all the devils." Inq. "Jacques, there is 
no doubt about it." Jac. "But how do you expect, 
my lord, to escape God's judgment, since you thus 
send us away to damnation ? why do you not leave 
us in the hand of God until the end? for as long 
as we live here, hope may always be entertained of 
reformation, seeing you think that we are damned ; 
but after death there is no longer any hope." Inq. 
"I do not drive you to damnation; for I am not 
the one that judges you; nor will I be guilty of 
your death." 

Jac. "My lord, when Susanna was unjustly con- 
demned to death, who bore the punishment, the 
judges, or the witnesses?" 

Inq. "They that were guilty." 

Jac. "My lord, the judges were rebuked by Dan- 
iel ; but the witnesses were rebuked and punished." 
Inq. "Do you think that I am witness in your case ? 
I have come here simply to instruct you." Jac. 
"My lord, yet I regard you as the principal wit- 
ness; for upon your testimony will the judges sen- 
tence me to death, or release me, since for this pur- 
pose you have been sent here, and appointed by the 
king." Inq. "I do not wish them to condemn you 
upon my testimony ; nor do I want to judge." Jac. 
"My lord, when the judges will ask you in regard 
to me, what will you answer ? will you not say that 
I am a heretic, and have deserved death?" Inq. 
"No." Jac. "My lord, I pray yo.u, what will you 
say?" Inq. "That you are deceived, and seduced 
from the right way." Jac. "To be seduced, to err, 
or to be a heretic, my lord, appears to me to be all 
the same thing." Inq. "Well, my son, think not that 
I have come here to condemn you to death ; for you 
will be sentenced only upon the confession which 
you made before the commissary ; for, as regards 
myself, I do not wish them to sentence you upon 
my word, nor would I have anything to do with it." 
Jac. "My lord, I have not followed my business so 
long, and sat in the council for seven or eight years, 
so that I should not know what this amounts to ; 
but the reason why I tell you this, is to warn you 
not to stain your hands with my blood ; for I well 
know for what purpose you have been sent here." 
He now arose, and went away. The words just re- 
lated we frequently had together afterwards. 

On Monday, the 7th of February, 1558, I was 
again summoned before the same inquisitor. When 
I appeared before him, he saluted me, and asked : 
"How are you; have you the fever yet?" Jac. "I 
am well, the Lord be praised for it ; the fever left 
me three weeks ago, or thereabouts." Inq. "How 
are you at ease in your conscience?" Jac. "Very 
well, the Lord be praised for it." 


He then made a long speech, too long to be 
briefly related, the sum and substance of which was, 
that he entreated me very much, that I should re- 
turn to the holy Catholic church, and believe as 
becomes a good Christian, without investigating 
such high things, and wanting to be so wise. There- 
upon 1 replied : "I investigate nothing but what I 
am permitted to believe; and I am well content, 
simply to believe that which a good Christian is 
bound to believe." Sir. 3:21. Inq. "You indeed 
say that you want to believe as a good Christian, 
and yet you have a heretical faith." Jac. "I have 
no such faith ; but my faith is founded only upon 
the pure Word of God ; and if you were content 
with the Word of God, you would also be satisfied 
with my faith." Inq. "True, you quote the Word 
of God ; but in your heart you understand differ- 
ently." Jac. "As we believe, so speak we ; and since 
we adduce to you the Scriptures, which are the 
Word of God, for a testimony of our faith, why 
are you not satisfied with it ? for it belongs to God 
alone, and not to men to search the heart." Inq. 
"What then do you believe concerning Jesus 
Christ; whence did He take His flesh?" Jac. "Do 
the Scriptures teach you that you must ask me 
this ?" Inq. "Because Menno says that He brought 
His flesh from heaven." Jac. "I have not heard 
him say this." Inq. "Yet he believes it." Jac. 
"Menno's belief is that the Word was made flesh, 
acording to the testimony of John 1 : 14, or as the 
text in your Testament reads : became flesh." Inq. 
"What do you believe concerning it?" Jac. "I be- 
that Christ is the Son of the living God." Inq. 
"Whence did He take His flesh?" Jac. "I do not 
know, except that He is born of the Father." Inq. 
"Do you not believe that He took His flesh in the 
womb of the virgin Mary ?" Jac. "My lord, if you 
can prove to me that Jesus and His apostles com- 
pelled any one to confess this, I will also confess 
it to you ; for when Peter confessed Christ, that He 
was the Son of the living God, Christ did not ask 
him of whom He was made, but said that upon this 
rock He should build His church. Matt. 16:18. 
Again, when Candace's eunuch said to Philip, that 
he believed that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, 
and desired to be baptized upon this faith, Philip 
was satisfied, without inquiring as to whence He 
had taken His flesh." Acts 8 :36. Inq. "It was not 
necessary at that time to make such inquiry, since 
no difficulty existed yet concerning the matter." 
Jac. "What need is there now?" Inq. "Because 
there are so many heretics." Jac. "There were 
enough heretics also in the days of the apostles ; 
but the reason is this, that Satan always causes 
some vain controversy, to corrupt men's under- 
standing, and to draw them into error." Inq. 
"Then you will not confess that He took His flesh 
and blood in the virgin?" Jac. "I will not investi- 
gate that which is above my understanding, name- 
ly, whereof the Son of God was made; for this 
was a miraculous work. However, that you may 
not think me a heretic, I confess Him to be the Son 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


607 


of God in every manner, in power and might, in 
spirit, in flesh and blood, begotten of the own sub- 
stance of one only Father, namely, the eternal God, 
as the Scriptures testify to us; who was with the 
Father from eternity; and when the time of the 
promise was fulfilled, the eternal Word became 
flesh, and was conceived in a virgin, of the Holy 
Ghost, and born of said virgin Mary." Inq. "He 
assumed His flesh from, and was made of, our 
flesh; will you say nothing with regard to this?" 
Jac. "I am satisfied with believing in regard to it 
acording to the Scriptures, without further in- 
vestigation." Inq. "Do not the Scriptures say that 
He took upon Him our flesh?" Jac. "I have never 
read it, and I do not wish to dispute further; be- 
sides, you said that you would not dispute about it ; 
why then do you ask me so much concerning it ?" 
Inq. "In order to see whether your faith is not 
like the faith of Menno Simons." Jac. "You have 
heard that I do not receive the testimony of men, 
as a foundation for my faith." 

Perceiving that he could get nothing else out of 
me, he asked me: "What is your determination?" 
Jac. "I have declared my faith to you, and there- 
upon I have made my determination, until the con- 
trary be proved to me." Inq. "I have proved it to 
you sufficiently; but you will believe nothing but 
your fancy and obstinacy, and have forsaken the 
holy church." Jac. "My lord, I have not forsaken 
the holy church; for if I had recognized your 
church as the holy church, I should not have for- 
saken it, to join another." Inq. "Nevertheless, 
though Satan has thus deceived you, and you think 
that we are not the holy church, yet it is the same 
that it has always been from the times of the apos- 
tles, and been maintained through the holy teach- 
ers until the present time." Jac. "If it is the same 
church which existed at the time of the apostles, it 
must have the same or like bishops and pastors as 
were then." Inq. "Yes, and so we have." Jac. 
"Well then, my lord, show me in your whole church 
only one bishop or pastor who is blameless in 
doctrine and life, even as Paul, or Timothy, or 
Titus, and I will follow him with all my heart." 
Inq. "Have you such pastors among you?" Jac. 
"My lord, you say. that we are Satan's congrega- 
tion, and that your church is the same which was 
in the time of the apostles ; hence show me those 
people, whereby I may know them." Inq. "Where 
do you think to find such? for they had the Holy 
Ghost, who is not given now." Jac. "Not! How 
comes it then, that Paul says that he that has not 
the Spirit of God, is none of His?" Rom. 8:9. 
Inq. "This has another meaning." Jac. "My lord, 
what meaning?" Inq. "He there speaks of those 
who do not walk after the Spirit." Jac. "Well, for 
what else do I ask you, than for bishops and pas- 
tors who walk and are led by the Spirit of God, 
who are holy, just, vigilant, and blameless in the 
doctrine, in life and conversation, as Paul teaches 
that they must be." Inq. "I could easily name 
such bishops or pastors as are blameless, but you 


do not know them." Jac. "Where are they?" 
Inq. "In Italy and in Spain." Jac. "Is the church 
of God there, and not here?" Inq. "There is also 
a cardinal or bishop in England, who truly is a man 
blameless in doctrine and conversation." Jac. "My 
lord, pray release me from these chains, and let me 
go, and I shall use all diligence to get to him, to 
see whether it is true." 

He laughingly replied : "No, no ; you must be- 
lieve what is told you." Jac. "My lord, it is written : 
'Cursed be the man that trusteth in man.' Jer. 17 :5. 
Shall I depend upon your word alone?" Inq. "Do 
you think that I lie?" Jac. "I do not say that; but 
I want to see it first before I believe it." Inq. "Yes, 
yes, but you cannot now." Jac. "Since I cannot 
see it, I cannot believe it either." Inq. "Why will 
you pay so much attention to their conversation, 
seeing they have the doctrine of the apostles?" 
Jac. "This is yet to be proved to me, and it would 
be difficult for you to prove to me by the Scrip- 
tures, that they have the doctrine of the apostles." 
Inq. "Nevertheless they have it; but you are hard- 
ened, and cannot comprehend it." Jac. "This as- 
sertion lacks the support of the Scriptures, and if 
they are trees from the roots of the apostles, show 
me the fruits, that I may know them." Inq. "Can 
you then know the faith by the works, whether it is 
good or bad?" Jac. "My lord, our Master has 
taught us that we shall know the false prophets by 
their fruits (Matt. 7:16); for when we find 
grapes on the vine, we dare not say, like you peo- 
ple do, that we have plucked them from thorns." 

He laughingly said to me: "Do we say that?" 
Jac. "Do you not ? do you not say we are evil, vile 
and useless trees, that must be cast into the fire? 
And yet you have confessed to me, that our fruits 
are good, but that it is our faith." Inq. "It is 
true, you do good works before men; but the in- 
ward is good for nothing, for your faith is not 
good." Jac. "Our works spring from our faith; 
the vessel cannot give forth anything but what is in 
it; hence the Lord calls those a generation of vi- 
pers, who confessed that the fruit was good, and 
the tree corrupt, saying: 'Either make the tree 
good, and his fruit good ; or else make the tree cor- 
rupt, and his fruit corrupt.' Luke 6 :45 ; Matt. 
12:34. Inq. "Therefore you would say that our 
bishops and pastors can have no good faith, unless 
their works are good." Jac. "My lord, I can an- 
swer with Paul: 'They profess that they know 
God; but in works they deny Him, being abomi- 
nable, and disobedient, and unto every good work 
reprobate' (Tit. 1 :16) ; and such pastors I will 
not follow." Inq. "No, no, Jacques, they are not 
so abominable as you think, though they are also 
sinners, even as we all are." Jac. "My lord, you 
know better than you say ; for I should be ashamed 
to discover the shameful acts of this people, who 
boast of being the light and salt of the earth, and 
the leaders of the blind and ignorant." Inq. "What 
shameful acts? tell me freely." Jac. "My lord, 
since you desire me to tell you, you know very 


608 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


well yourself, what unnatural whoredom, too 
shameful to mention, such as was committed by 
Sodom and Gomorrah, those of Rome commit 
namely, the pope, who boasts of being a holy man, 
and God upon earth, and the cardinals and bishops 
that are there; to say nothing of the pride, pomp 
and wickedness of which these holy people are 
guilty." Inq. "It is true, that there are some who 
commit great abomination before God, so that it is 
abominable of some; but, Jacques, we must not 
condemn the good on account of the bad ; they are 
not all bad ; there are also some that are righteous." 
Jac. "I believe that the righteous are thinly sown ; 
for from my youth I have lived mostly among 
priests, canons and monks, and it were a shame to 
relate the abounding wickedness which I have seen 
there." Inq. "My son, not all, not all." Jac. "My 
lord, so far as I have ever seen and known, I do 
not know that I have seen a single one walk after 
the rule prescribed to a bishop or pastor, even as 
you know better yourself what occurred two or 
three weeks ago in this city of N. in the convent 
of the Jacobines." 

The monks of Jacobines had driven their prior 
out of the convent, because he had reproved them 
for their licentiousness and wickedness. 

Inq. "Jacques, though there have been wicked 
popes, cardinals, bishops, priests, and monks, there 
have, on the other hand, also been good ones ; do 
you not know that the good grain is not without 
chaff ? No, no, there are good grains and good pas- 
tors, though you do not know them." Jac. "Show 
me then but a single upright pastor, such as I de- 
manded of you, according to the Scriptures, and I 
will follow him." Inq. "Though I should name 
them to you, you do not know them any way, and 
will not believe me ; but even if it were true, name- 
ly, that they are wicked, yet they have the true 
faith." Jac. "I hold to the testimony of Paul, that 
light has no communion with darkness." II Cor. 
6:14. Inq. "Do you mean to say then, that a man 
who commits evil works cannot have the true 
faith?" Jac. "If a man that has received knowl- 
edge, yield himself to the commission of wicked- 
ness, his faith will not last long, or will soon be 
darkened." Inq. "Who has told you this?" Jac. 
"Paul writes to the Romans, that some held the 
truth in unrighteousness, since that which might 
be known of God, God had showed them; and 
though they knew God, they glorified Him not as 
God, neither were thankful; wherefore God gave 
them up to the lusts of their hearts, filled with 
darkness." Romans 1 :18. Inq. "Paul speaks there 
of the philosophers, who turned to the heavens, 
stars, planets, etc., for guidance." Jac. "That is 
all the same to me, of whom he speaks, philoso- 
phers or others ; but Paul shows that through their 
works and ingratitude their hearts were filled with 
darkness. Moreover, he also says : 'Because they 
received not the love of the truth, that they might 
be saved, . . . for this cause God shall send them 
strong delusions;' which also came to pass." II 


Thess. 2:10, 11. Inq. "Did not Judas Iscariot 
commit a wicked work in delivering up the Son of 
God?" Jac. "The Scripture says that it would 
have been better, if he had not been born." Matt. 
26 :24. Inq. "Yet he had a true faith ; what do you 
say to this?" Jac. "Had he a true faith before or 
afterwards?" Inq. "Before and also afterwards, 
though he was a thief." Jac. "Though his heart 
was wicked, yet his walk was good, so that they 
did not dare think that it was he who should com- 
mit the deed, but all asked : 'Is it I ? is it I ?' " 
Mark 14:19. Inq. "Look also at Demas, did he 
not have the true faith? Yet his heart was bound 
up in things o*f this world ; nevertheless, Paul re- 
garded him as a brother." Col. 4:14. Jac. "It is 
true that Paul regarded him for a time as a broth- 
er and companion in the work of the Lord; but af- 
ter he said that Demas had forsaken him, having 
loved this present world, and no longer calls him 
a brother or companion." II Tim. 4:10. Inq. 
"That you do not know." Jac. "The Scriptures 
say nothing about it." Inq. "That proves nothing 
either way ; you must believe that a sinful man can 
have the faith and the Gospel ; do you think that we 
must therefore not hear him, and believe his 
word?" Jac. "My lord, wherein do you reprove 
Paul of sin, after he had received the knowledge 
of the truth?" Inq. "Is it not written: 'He that 
saith that he hath no sin, maketh God a liar?' " I 
John 1 :10. Jac. "True, but it is also written in the 
same epistle : 'Whosoever is born of God doth not 
commit sin ; for his seed remaineth in him : and he 
cannot sin because he is born of God.' I John 3 :9. 
And Paul said : 'How shall we, that are dead to 
sin, live unto sin'." Rom. 6:2. Inq. "Paul there 
simply asks a question ; but do you therefore think 
that he did not sin ?" Jac. "You know that Paul 
said that Christ was living in him ; did Christ then 
commit sin? Gal. 2:20. He also exhorts the Cor- 
inthians, to follow him, even as he had followed 
Christ, and calls God and men to witness, how 
holily and justly, and unblamably he had walked 
among them. I Cor. 11 :1 ; I Thess. 2 :10. Of what 
sin then, my lord, will you accuse Paul?" Inq. 
"Nevertheless, he was a sinner ; this you certainly 
cannot deny." Jac. "I do not want to deny it; for 
he says himself, that he was the chief of sinners, 
blasphemers and persecutors while in unbelief, 
but not after he had received the knowledge [of 
the truth]. I Timothy 1 :15. Well then; but what 
I ask you for, are pastors that are blameless in life, 
doctrine and conversation ; for I well know that all 
men are born in sin; but he that abideth in sin, 
hath not known God." Ps. 51 :5 ; I John 3 :6. Inq. 
"You must not thus understand the passage ; for a 
sinful man does have knowledge of God." Jac. 
"Yes, with the mouth: or it would not be true 
what the apostle Peter has said, that he that has 
not the fear of God, and brotherly and living love, 
is blind, and gropes with the hand for the way." 
Tit. 1 :16; II Pet. 1 :9. Inq. "No, he says that he 
is like the blind." Jac. "My lord, with your per- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


609 


mission, he says that such a blind man gropes for 
the way, which is a sign that he has not found it ; 
now, shall I follow such people?" Inq. "Your 
Menno, is he so just, holy and blameless?" Jac. 
"1 have not had sufficient intercourse with him, to 
find anything blamable in him." Inq. "With 
whom then have you had your intercourse? can 
nothing be said of your teacher? is he unblam- 
able?" Jac. "My lord, can you produce anything 
against him, or accuse him of anything?" Inq. 
"1 do not know the rascal." Jac. "Then do not de- 
fame him ; for you would find it a difficult task to 
prove that he is what you call him." Inq. "This 
would not be difficult for me to do ; for he has se- 
duced enough people to be called this." Jac. "My 
lord, take care that you are not yourself one who 
seduces the people." Inq. "Is he not a native of a 
certain village in Zealand ?" He named the village, 
but I have forgotten it. Jac. "I do not know where 
he was born." Inq. "What kind of looking man 
was he? What sort of beard and clothes did he 
have?" Jac. "My lord, you are certainly inquiring 
very diligently for him ; I think you would like to 
betray him ; do you know no other way, my lord ?" 
Inq. "I wish him no harm." Jac. "I hear that you 
say so; nevertheless, you would like to have him 
here in my place, would you not, my lord ?" Inq. 
"Yes, if he would become converted." Jac. "And 
if he would not be converted to your views, would 
you not place him to the stake?" Inq. "I should 
leave this to the judge." Jac. "Well, would you 
not then wish him harm ? Would you want to have 
this done to you?" 

Perceiving that he could not answer me, and that 
two or three persons were listening at the door, be- 
sides the jailer, who is always with the prisoners, 
he commenced to give me a long talk, saying that I 
must not inquire so deeply into the Scriptures, but 
suffer myself to be instructed by those more learned 
than I, and that I must believe that a sinful man, 
of wicked life could have the faith as well as an- 
other and that I must hear his words, but not do 
after his works. Jac. "Must I believe this by the 
Scriptures, or without the Scriptures?" Inq. "I 
have proved it to you by the Scriptures." Jac. "By 
what Scriptures?" Inq. "By the cases of Judas 
and Demas, who had faith, and yet were wicked 
of life." Jac. "My lord, it appears to me that our 
words are mere child's play ; have I not replied to 
this, and proved to you, that it becomes us not to 
take those who have apostatized from the faith for 
leaders and pastors ?" Inq. "Where do you expect 
to find blameless pastors such as you demand? do 
you not see that the world is full of knavery?" 
Jac. "If you do not know any, I know some, and 
such I will follow." Inq. "Where are they?" Jac. 
"They are unknown to you ; do you not know that 
when the prophet thought that all the righteous in 
Israel had been slain by Ahab and Jezebel, the 
Lord said that there were seven thousand left yet, 
who had not bowed their knees unto the idol Baal." 
I Kings 19:10. Inq. "It was because of the per- 


secution raging at that time, that they were so scat- 
tered." Jac. "Thus it is yet at the present day on 
account of persecution, that they are scattered, and 
unknown to the world." Inq. "But must you for a 
Menno, or any other single individual, who seem 
to lead a good life, must you therefore follow him, 
and forsake all the other bishops and pastors, who 
do not walk just as uprightly?" Jac. "My lord, 
do you think that if Ahab, the King of Israel had 
forsaken the counsel of the four hundred prophets, 
and followed the single advice of poor Micaiah, 
he would have done amiss ?" Inq. "Certainly not ; 
for Micaiah was a prophet of God." Jac. "Did not 
the others say that they were too ? and did they not 
smite poor Micaiah on the cheek, because he 
prophesied against them, and say to him : 'Do you 
think that the Spirit of God has departed from 
us ?' " Inq. "They boasted of the Holy Spirit, 
but falsely; for they did not have Him?" Jac. 
"Ahab did not know that; for because Micaiah 
had alone prophesied against the four hundred 
prophets, the poor man of God was cast into prison 
on scanty bread and water, till Ahab should re- 
turn from the battle at Ramoth-gilead ; but he 
found that the counsel of the four hundred proph- 
ets cost him his life, as Micaiah had foretold 
him." Inq. "The events recorded in these passages 
occurred in former times." Jac. "Paul says that 
all was written for our learning; and the same 
things still happen at the present day." Rom. 15 :4. 
Inq. "Well then, you will not hear or follow any 
pastors, except they practice what they teach?" 
Jac. "No ; for it is written : 'The light of the body 
is the eye ; if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall 
be full of darkness.'" Matt. 6:22. Inq. "Then you 
will not follow the advice of Jesus Christ, namely, 
to do after their words, and not after their works." 
Jac. "To whom does He say this?" Inq. "To His 
disciples." Jac. "Of whom does He say it?" Inq. 
"Jesus Christ says : 'The scribes and the Pharisees 
sit on Moses' seat: all therefore whatsoever they 
bid you observe, that observe and do ; but do not ye 
after their works.* " Matt. 23 :1, 2. Jac. "What 
kind of seat was it, wooden or stone?" Inq. "It 
was the seat that was there." Jac. "How could so 
many people sit in one seat? Was it so large? Or 
was it not the law Christ alluded to?" Inq. "It is 
the same thing, the law which they proclaimed." 
Jac. "The law was a command of God, and not of 
men, and when Christ said this, He did not choose 
them to feed or lead His flock." Inq. "When He 
said: 'Do after their words, and not after their 
works, did He not appoint them pastors ?' " Jac. 
"Have you not read what the Lord says : 'Except 
your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness 
of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case en- 
ter into the kingdom of heaven.' Matt. 5 :20. Behold, 
here they are already excluded ; how then shall they 
lead others?" Inq. "Do only after their words." 
Jac. "Have you no other pastors among you, to 
proclaim the Word of God, than such scribes and 
Pharisees, whom God has threatened with so many 


610 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


curses ? Does not the prophet say : 'Blessed is the 
man that has not sat among the ungodly' ? Ps. 1:1. 
And Christ admonishes us to beware of their leav- 
en." Matt. 16:6. Inq. "You must not understand 
it thus, but believe that an ungodly man can indeed 
speak good things." Jac. "It is written: 'Praise is 
not seemly in the mouth of the ungodly, because 
they are not sent of God.' Sir. 15:9. 'And how 
shall they preach, except they be sent ?' " Romans 
10:15. Inq. "It is true, it is not seemly, but he 
does not say that it is not good." Jac. "If it is not 
seemly, then it is not acceptable; for what repent- 
ance can an impenitent man proclaim? For, if a 
thief admonish his companion not to steal any 
more, will his word have any effect? Will not his 
companion say : 'If it is wrong to do it, why do you 
do it yourself?' Rom. 2:21. Ye hypocrites, cast out 
the beam out of your own eyes, and then shall you 
see clearly the dust in my eyes." Matt. 7:5. Inq. 
"You pervert every Scripture into the contrary, ac- 
cording to your own notion and understanding; 
you must not build upon yourself so much, but 
subject your understanding to the understanding 
of those that are wiser than you are." Jac. "My 
lord, I always speak, with your permission, that if 
anything better is proved to me, I will follow it." 

He arose and said : "It is time for me to go ; see 
that you consider the matter well, and pray dili- 
gently to God." Jac. "I know of nothing to con- 
sider, since you cannot prove to me anything dif- 
ferent." Inq. "What should I prove to you?" 
Jac. "I have asked you to show to me what pastors 
I must follow, and whether they are such as the 
Scriptures decree that they ought to be in life, doc- 
trine and conversation." Inq. "Follow those whom 
your parents followed." Thereupon he left me. 

Here I finished writing, because I was finally 
surprised by many persons and gainsayers. 

This confession of Jacques was translated from 
the French into the Dutch. 


"Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner 
of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, 
and be exceedingly glad ; for great is your reward 
in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets 
which were before you" (Matt. 5:11, 12). 


HOW JACQUES DAUCHY WAS BETRAYED, APPRE- 
HENDED, AND FELL INTO THE HANDS OF THE 
TYRANTS, AND WITH WHAT PUNISHMENT 
THE RIGHTEOUS GOD VISITED THIS 
TYRANT AND TRAITOR A MEM- 
ORABLE AND INSTRUCTIVE EX- 
AMPLE TO ALL TYRANTS 
AND TRAITORS 

There was a councilor at Harlingen, by the name 
of Mr. de Wael, who very diligently sought 
Jacques, addressed him in a friendly manner, and 


invited him to his house, saying that he had a letter 
for him. When Jacques arrived there, he cordially 
welcomed him, and urged him much to be his guest, 
seeming to be kindled with great love for old ac- 
quaintance' sake. When he learned that Jacques 
could not stay, he, with friendly words, but the 
heart of a Judas, asked him to come again and 
bring of his wares and work with him, ostensibly 
for the purpose of buying of him, Jacques being a 
peddler. In the meantime he secretly sent a mes- 
senger to Leeuwarden, to the council, for a com- 
missary and a bailiff. When Jacques came again 
to him, he affably greeted him, sending in the mean- 
time for the bailiff. When the latter arrived, the 
traitor malignantly said : "Apprehend him, behold, 
this is the man." Thus they handled him with 
great severity, saying : "Hold still," and searched 
him all over. 

Then Jacques said : "Oh my lord, what have you 
done, that you have thus betrayed me, who trusted 
you with my life and all my property ? why do you 
seek my life, and thirst thus for my blood ?" He 
replied: "Be content and suffer yourself to be 
bound : you must go with me to the prison." He 
said he had to do this, to fulfill his oath, and read 
to Jacques his cruel, tyrannous mandate. He also 
made very strict inquiry for four other men. 
Jacques replied that he would not betray or de- 
ceive any one, but if he had aught against him, or 
had heard any one complain of him, he should tell 
him of it. The traitor replied that he had not heard 
anything of the kind, and that he was not appre- 
hended on account of any crime, but simply be- 
cause he had adhered to heresy; he, moreover, 
asked him whether he was not an Anabaptist. 
Jacques denied having adhered to heresy, and be- 
ing an Anabaptist, saying that he had received but 
one baptism, according to the Word of the Lord, 
upon his faith. When asked concerning the Roman 
church, Jacques replied that it was not of God. 
Upon this the traitor was seen to sigh deeply, his 
countenance simulating great sorrow as he said: 
"Oh! Jacques, must you fall into my hands?" 
Jacques replied : "My lord, I had placed confidence 
in you, on account of our old acquaintance, and be- 
cause I had intercourse with you so long; but I 
will gladly and from my heart forgive you for this, 
and it is my earnest desire that the Lord may have 
mercy upon you." He thanked Jacques for this 
favor, opining that in this he had not sinned before 
God, since he had to act according to his oath. 
Jacques said: "Do you consider this transaction 
right before God and men? The time will come 
when you will find it otherwise." Wisd. 5 :2. He 
then sent Jacques into the room and said to him : 
"You will be examined at Leeuwarden concerning 
your faith and doctrine." While Jacques was im- 
prisoned there, his wife came to him, upon which 
this friend of God was filled with great sorrow 
and anxiety, beholding her in such exceeding grief 
since she was also pregnant. The turnkey thrust 
her from him with great cruelty, but many of the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


611 


bystanders most heartily wept with her, and en- 
treated the turnkey, saying: "Oh, let her go to 
him;" but it could not last long. Jacques said to 
her : "O my beloved, go home, and comfort your- 
self in the Lord ; for 1 am imprisoned here for the 
Word of God; and it will tend neither to your 
shame nor disgrace, since I have injured no one." 
She said: "May the Lord strengthen you in the 
truth; for after this conflict there is prepared for 
you an eternal crown. Oh, that I could die with 
you, and inherit that blissful life with you, then 
my heart would rejoice." Jacques said: "O sister 
in the Lord, let not this grieve you, though I must 
go a little before you; it is the Lord's will." The 
turnkey could not bear this, but said: "Begone, 
quick !" Thereupon Jacques entreated him, saying : 
"Oh, let us alone with God for a little while." And 
thus these two dear lambs were separated, but hope 
to meet again at the resurrection of the just, where 
wailing and parting will be heard no more forever. 
Phil. 3:11; Rev. 7 :17 ; 21 :4 ; Isa. 25 :8. 

Having, through the grace of God, undergone 
and endured manifold assaults, by way of numer- 
ous examinations and threats from the blood- 
thirsty, he died in great steadfastness for the testi- 
mony of Jesus. He was not put to death at the 
place of execution, but secretly murdered by night. 
Until quite recently trustworthy persons were still 
living, who early in the morning, after the night 
in the forepart of which he had been murdered, 
saw him in his leather clothes, lying dead in his 
blood. He now rests under the altar of Jesus, 
awaiting, with God's chosen, a blessed resurrection 
and eternal life. 

The above-mentioned traitor, Mr. de Wael, was 
not long after this deed most severely smitten by 
God in punishment for his murderous treachery, in 
consequence of which he departed out of this world 
in a most awful manner, as a solemn and significant 
warning to all that are inclined to follow his ex- 
ample in this respect ; for he was soon driven from 
Leeuwarden, with great reproach and ignominy 
from the common people, so that the boatman, who 
was to convey him away, was with him in danger of 
his life, so that he begged most urgently that his 
life might be spared; for the traitor was most 
unmercifully pelted with stones by the common 
people and the children, and ignominiously re- 
proached for his treachery, being called a Judas, 
rogue, miscreant and arch-heretic. To his great 
disgrace and reproach they sang of him the follow- 
ing verses, which had been composed by Jacques : 

"He said: I had to find you — 
Now from my oath I'm free ; 
Submit and let us bind you ; 
To prison go with me." 

And also: 

"And is it right your dealing, 
Before the Lord and men? 
The time is surely coming 

When you will doubtless ken," etc. 


God the Lord had also punished him with severe 
leprosy, with which he was likewise most ignomin- 
iously taunted. Whenever they had sung a stanza 
of said hymn, they would derisively exclaim: 
"You leprous Judas and treacherous rogue, do you 
ken it now?" The stones increased the longer the 
more, so that the boatman who was to convey him 
away, saw his own life imperiled, and cried out 
that he had to convey him off by order of the lord. 
Thus he was driven from Leeuwarden with great 
disgrace and ignominy, and had to roam about 
from place to place, an object of scorn and con- 
tempt, until he was finally consumed by leprosy, 
and, like Antioch and Herod, died a terrible and 
premature death, an example to all his followers. 
II Mace. 9 :9 ; Acts 12 :23. The reports among the 
common people concerning this matter, are of a 
still much more horrible nature, than the account 
we have given here. 


CONFESSION OF A WOMAN CALLED CLAESKEN, WHO 

LAID DOWN HER LIFE FOR THE TESTIMONY 

OF JESUS, A. D. 1559 

Questions and answers between the commissary 
and Claesken 

The commissary first interrogated me concern- 
ing my name, the place I was from, my age, and 
other like things. He then asked me: "Are you 
baptized?" Claesken. "Yes." Com. "Who bap- 
tized you?" CI. "Jelis of Aix-la-Chapelle." Com. 
"The deceiver ; he himself has renounced his belief. 
How did he do when he baptized you?" CI. "He 
baptized me in the name of the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Ghost." Com. "Where did you receive 
baptism?" CI. "At Workum, in the field." Com. 
"Were there others present?" CI. "Yes." Com. 
"Who were they?" CI. "I have forgotten." Com. 
"What brought you there?" CI. "I have for- 
gotten." 

I could truthfully give this answer both times. 

Com. "Are your children not baptized?" CI. 
"My youngest two are not." Com. "Why did you 
not have your children baptized?" CI. "Because 
I was satisfied with them as the Lord had given 
them to me." Com. "Why were you so satisfied 
with Abraham and Sicke, and not with Douwe; 
you had Douwe baptized?" CI. "I did not know 
it then." Com. "What did you not know then?" 
CI. "What I know now." Com. "What do you 
know now?" CI. "What the Lord has given me 
to know." Com. "What has the Lord given you 
to know ?" CI. "That I cannot find it in the Scrip- 
tures, that this ought to be." Com. "How long 
have you not been to church?" CI. "Not for nine 
or ten years." 

These are the questions which he put to me ; but 
he used far more words, and when I did not readily 
answer him, he said that I had a dumb devil in me, 
that the devil transformed himself into an angel of 
light in us, and that we were all heretics. He then 


612 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


read to me the articles I had confessed, and said it 
should come before the lords, and that if I desired 
it, he would write it differently. I replied : "You 
need not change anything." 

Questions and answers between the inquisitor and 
Claesken 

Inquisitor. "Why did you have yourself bap- 
tized ?" Claesken. "The Scriptures speak of a new 
life. John first calls to repentance, Christ Himself 
also, and afterwards the apostles ; they taught the 
people to repent and reform, and then to be bap- 
tized. Thus did I repent and reform, and was bap- 
tized." Against this he did not say much. Inq. 
"Why did you not have your children baptized ?" 
CI. "I cannot find in the Scriptures that this ought 
to be." Inq. "David says: T was shapen in in- 
iquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.' 
Ps. 51 :5. Since children are born with original sin, 
they must be baptized, if they are to be saved." 
CI. "If a man can be saved by an external sign, 
then Christ has died in vain." Inq. "It is written, 
John 3 :5, that we must be born again, of water and 
of the Spirit; hence, children must be baptized." 
CI. "Christ does not say this to children, but to 
the adult ; therefore did I become regenerated. We 
know that the children are in the hands of the Lord. 
The Lord said : 'Suffer little children to come unto 
me ; for of such is the kingdom of heaven.' " Mat- 
thew 19:14. Inq. "The household of Stephanas 
was baptized, which probably also included chil- 
dren." I Cor. 1 :16. CI. "We do not depend on 
probabilities ; we have the certain assurance." He 
did not say much against this either. Inq. "What 
do you think of the holy church?" CI. "I think 
much of it." Inq. "Why then do you not go to 
church?" CI. "I think nothing of your church- 
going." Inq. "Do you believe that God is Al- 
mighty?" CI. "Yes, I believe this." Inq. "Do you 
then also believe that Christ consecrates Himself, 
and is present in the bread? Paul says: 'The 
bread which we break, is it not the communion of 
the body of Christ ? And the cup which we bless, 
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ ?' " 
I Cor. 10 :16. CI. "I well know what Paul says, and 
believe it, too." Inq. "Christ said: 'Take, eat; 
this is my body ;' and Paul likewise." Matt. 26 :26 ; 
I Cor. 1 1 :24. CI. "I well know what Christ and 
Paul say, and thus I believe." Inq. "Do you be- 
lieve that Christ consecrates Himself, and is pres- 
ent in the bread ?" CI. "Christ sitteth at the right 
hand of His Father ; He does not come under men's 
teeth." Inq. "If you continue in this belief, you 
will have to go into the abyss of hell forever. It is 
what all heretics say. Jelis of Aix-la-Chapelle has 
deceived you ; he himself has renounced his belief, 
because he saw that he had erred." CI. "I do not 
depend on Jelis, or any other man, but only on 
Christ ; He is our foundation, upon whom we have 
built ourselves, even as Christ teaches us in His 
Gospel : 'Whosoever heareth my words, and doeth 
them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built 


his house upon a rock ; and though storms come, 
and beat against the house, yet it will not fall.' 
Matt. 7 :24. These now are the storms that beat 
against our house; but Christ is our stronghold, 
and He will preserve us." Inq. "You do not un- 
derstand it; there are many other writings, of 
which you know nothing." CI. "We need no 
other writings than the holy Gospel, which Christ 
Himself, with His blessed mouth, has spoken to 
us, and sealed with His blood ; if we can observe 
that, we shall be saved." Inq. "You should suffer 
yourself to be instructed; the holy fathers insti- 
tuted churching* fifteen hundred years ago." CI. 
"The holy fathers did not have this holiness ; these 
are human commandments and institutions. Nei- 
ther did the apostles practice this holiness ; I never 
read it." Inq. "Are you wiser than the holy 
church?" CI. "1 do not wish to do anything 
against the holy church ; I have yielded myself to 
the obedience ol the holy church." Inq. "You 
should think: Do I know better than the holy 
fathers fifteen hundred years ago? You should 
think that you are simple." CI. "Though I am 
simple before men, I am not simple in the knowl- 
edge of the Lord. Do you not know that the Lord 
thanked His Father, that He had hid these things 
from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them 
to the simple and unto babes ?" Matt. 1 1 :25. 

At one time there were also two monks with 
him, who were to instruct me. They had but little to 
say, only that we were people of corrupt minds, 
reprobate concerning the faith, ever learning, and 
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth 
I Tim. 6:5; II Tim. 3 :7, 8. I replied : "When the 
day of the Lord will come, you will find it to be 
otherwise ; take heed lest you then be of those who 
will say : 'These are they whom we had in derision ; 
behold, how they are now numbered among the 
children of God, and their lot is among the saints.' " 
Wisd. 5 :3, 5. Then they said : "Behold, she judges 
us." I replied : "I do not judge you ; but I tell you 
to take heed unto yourselves. Now our life is ac- 
counted madness, and our end to be without honor ; 
but when the day of the Lord comes, it will be 
found quite different." The sum of the matter was, 
that I had a devil, and was deceived. I said : "Is 
Christ then a deceiver?" He replied : "No ; Christ 
is no deceiver." I said : "Then I am not deceived ; 
I neither seek nor desire anything else than to fear 
the Lord with all my heart, and (knowingly) not 
to transgress one tittle of His commandments." 
After he had talked to me still further, he said: 
"I can tell you nothing else ; you may consider the 
matter." I replied : "I need not consider it other- 
wise ; I know full well that I hold the truth." 

When I came before him again, he said : "Claes- 
ken, to what conclusion have you come?" CI. "I 
have concluded to adhere to that to which the Lord 
has called me." Matt. 20:1. Inq. "The devil has 


Den Kerck-gang, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


613 


called you, who transforms himself into an angel 
of light in you people." 

When he examined me the sixth time, he asked 
me : "When Christ held His supper with His apos- 
tles, did He not give them His flesh to eat, and His 
blood to drink." CI. "He gave them bread and 
wine, and He gave them His body for redemption." 
Inq. "Christ certainly clearly says : 'Take, eat ; this 
is my flesh ;' you certainly cannot contradict this." 
CI. "Paul says : 'I have received of the Lord that 
which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord 
Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, 
took bread ; and when he had given thanks, he 
brake it, and gave it to his apostles, and said, Take, 
eat ; this is my body, which is broken for you ; this 
do in remembrance of me. After the same manner 
also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, 
This cup is the new testament in my blood : this do 
ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this 
cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come.' 
I Cor. 11 :23-26. Thus Christ left us His supper, 
that we should remember His death by it, that He 
gave His body and shed His blood for us. This 
supper I want to hold with the people of God, and 
no other." 

He held to his twaddle : that we must eat Christ's 
flesh, and drink His blood, since these were clearly 
implied by the words of Christ and of Paul. 

CI. "Since the words are so plain, I can well 
understand them ; but it is as Paul says : that those 
who do not turn to the Lord, have a vail before 
their hearts ; but those who turn to the Lord, from 
their hearts the vail is taken away. II Cor. 3 :14- 
16. We have turned to the Lord ; nothing is hid 
to us." Inq. "In the 6th chapter of John (verse 
53) Christ also clearly says that we must eat His 
flesh, and drink His blood." CI. "It is also written 
there : 'Then the Jews murmured, and said : How 
can this man give us his flesh to eat ? Then Christ 
said : Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, ye 
have no life in you.' Again, He says : 'Whoso eat- 
eth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal 
life :' He also said : 'Flesh and blood profit noth- 
ing : the words that I speak unto you, they are spir- 
it, and they are life.' Those who believe in God, 
and walk in all righteousness, they are temples of 
God, in whom God will dwell and walk, as Paul 
testifies." II Cor. 6:16. 

When he examined me the seventh time, he said : 
"Do you not believe that the apostles ate the flesh 
of Christ?" CI. "Christ took the bread, gave 
thanks, brake it, and gave it to His disciples, and 
His body He gave for their redemption." Inq. 
"Do you not believe otherwise ?" CI. "I do not be- 
lieve otherwise than Christ has spoken." Inq. 
"Then I declare unto you, that I am clear of your 
blood ; your blood be upon your own head." CI. "I 
am well satisfied with this." Inq. "Herewith I 
commit you to the lord." 

He afterwards examined me once more, and 
asked me : "Do you not yet believe that the apos- 


tles ate the flesh of Christ ?" CI. "I have told you." 
Inq. "Tell it now." CI. "I will not tell it again." 
Inq. "Do you still persist in your views respecting 
baptism?" CI. "You certainly well know that the 
penitent ought to be baptized." Inq. "This is true 
enough, if for instance a Jew comes, who is not 
baptized yet. Are you still of the same opinion in 
regard to infant baptism?" CI. "Yes." Inq. "Do 
you not believe otherwise ?" CI. "I do not believe 
otherwise than Christ has commanded." Inq. 
"Then I declare unto you, that you will be torment- 
ed forever in the abyss of hell." CI. "How dare 
you judge me so awfully, seeing judgment belongs 
to the Lord alone? Acts 17:31. I am not terrified 
by this ; I know better, when the day of the Lord 
comes, it will be found different." 

I then asked him: "What does my husband 
say ?" Inq. "Your husband also still persists in his 
views ; may the Lord enlighten you." CI. "We are 
already enlightened, the Lord be praised." 

Concerning my baptism he did not say much, nor 
about infant baptism ; but the whole of his talk was 
that we must eat the flesh of Christ, and drink His 
blood, and that this had been instituted fifteen hun- 
dred years ago, and that I was simple and had 
hardly once read the Testament through. I said : 
"Do you think that we run on uncertainties? We 
are not ignorant of the contents of the New Testa- 
ment. We forsake our dear children, whom I 
would not forsake for the whole world, and we 
stake upon it all that we have — should we run on 
uncertainties yet ? We seek nothing but our salva- 
tion ; you certainly cannot prove to us by the Scrip- 
tures, that we practice and believe one tittle against 
the Word of the Lord." But he only said that we 
had all from the devil, and that we were possessed 
of the devil of pride. I said : "We know that the 
proud are cast down from their seats." Luke 1 :52. 
He talked so long, that he sometimes already fan- 
cied that I would heed him ; hence I had to speak 
now and then, because I did not want him to think 
this ; I could not bear to hear him speak so awfully 
against the truth. 

A letter by Olaesken to her friends according to the 

flesh, and also according to the spirit, written in 

prison, the 14th of March, A. D. 1559, at 

which time, or thereabouts, she, her dear 

husband, and her brother Jacques, were 

put to death for the testimony of Jesus 

The Lord, through His great grace and mercy, 
grant that all those who hunger and thirst after 
righteousness may be filled. 

My dearly beloved friends, N., my heartfelt 
prayer and request of you is once more, that you 
will peruse and search the holy Scriptures, and 
learn to fear the Lord from the heart ; for "the fear 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Prov. 
9:10. "Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her 
voice in the streets ; she crieth in the chief place of 
concourse, in the openings of the gates : in the city 
she uttereth her words, saying, How long, ye sim- 


614 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


pie ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners 
delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowl- 
edge ? Turn you at my reproof : behold, I will pour 
out my spirit unto you, I will make known my 
words unto you. Because I have called, and ye re- 
fused : I have stretched out my hand, and no man 
regarded ; but ye have set at nought all my counsel 
and would none of my reproof : I also will laugh at 
your calamity ; I will mock when your fear cometh ; 
when your fear cometh as desolation, and your de- 
struction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress 
and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they 
call upon me, but I will not answer ; they shall seek 
me early, but they shall not find me ; for that they 
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of 
the Lord : they would none of my counsel : they de- 
spised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of 
the fruit of their own way and be filled with their 
own devices . . . but whoso hearkeneth unto me 
shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of 
evil." Prov. 1:20-31, 33; Isaiah 65:12; Ps. 2:4; 
Job 27 :6. 

Behold, my dear friends, lay this to heart, that 
the Lord will not hear those who do not fear Him 
now (John 9:31) ; and how precious the fear of the 
Lord is to him that will choose it ; for nothing is to 
be compared to her. The fear of the Lord is honor, 
and glory, and gladness, and a crown of rejoicing. 
The fear of the Lord maketh a merry heart, and 
giveth joy, and gladness and a long life. Whoso 
feareth the Lord, it shall go well with him at the 
last, and he shall find favor in the day of his death. 
The love of God is honorable. Those to whom wis- 
dom showeth her face, love her through seeing her, 
and in the knowledge of her benefits. The fear of 
God is the beginning of wisdom; and the fear of 
the Lord is true religion. The knowledge of re- 
ligion shall keep the heart, and justify it ; it shall 
give joy and gladness. The God-fearing shall pros- 
per in the day of life, and at his end he shall be 
blessed. To fear the Lord is fullness of wisdom. 
The fear of God is a crown of wisdom, making 
peace and perfect health to flourish. The root of 
wisdom is to fear the Lord: but unto the sinner 
wisdom is a curse. The fear of the Lord driveth 
out sin ; for he that is without fear cannot be justi- 
fied. Sir. 1:11. Be not faithless; for into a mali- 
cious soul wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in the 
body that is subject unto sin. John 20:27; Wisd. 

My beloved friends, lay it to heart, how great a 
difference there is between those who fear the 
Lord, and them that do not fear Him. Mai. 3 :18. 
Search well the Scriptures, that you will not be 
like the cities concerning which Christ says in the 
Gospel, that because they did not lay to heart His 
mighty works, which were done in their presence, 
it should be more tolerable for those of Sodom and 
Gomorrah at the day of judgment, than for them. 
Matthew 1 1 :20. Therefore dear friends, the Lord 
does yet even now show such mighty works 
through us before your eyes ; let it strengthen you, 


as Paul says that many of the brethren waxed 
confident in the .Lord by his bonds, and were much 
more bold to speak the word without fear. Phil. 
1 :14. My dear friends, consider well, when the 
Lord did His mighty works, He did not do them 
for the sake of a single individual, as we read in 
John, when He raised Lazarus from the dead 
(John 11:42), but that the people should see His 
mighty deeds, and believe in Him, though only 
some believed in Him, and some were offended at 
Him, and said: 'Could not this man, which opened 
the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this 
man should not have died ?' Thus it is also at the 
present day with those who do not believe; for 
though they well see how strong and mighty the 
Lord is with us, yet they are offended at it, and say 
that we do this from stubbornness. And when we 
say that the righteous must suffer persecution, 
they say that we are persecuted for anabaptism. 
Thus it is to them a cause of offense ; but those who 
believe God well know that we must suffer for 
righteousness' sake ; these, I hope, it will strength- 
en, and to us, be a trial unto our eternal salvation, 
through the grace of God. I Pet. 2 :6, 8; Matthew 

My dear friends, lay to heart how great glory is 
promised to those who fear the Lord with the 
whole heart, and what great anguish shall come 
upon every soul of man that has not obeyed the 
Gospel; these shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord. II 
Thessalonians 1 :8, 9. Therefore become obedient 
to the truth, and be transformed in your mind, that 
you may prove what is that acceptable and perfect 
will of God. I Pet. 1 :22 ; Rom. 12 :2. Meditate day 
and night in the law of the Lord, and do not suffer 
yourselves to be prevented from praying without 
ceasing, as the Scriptures teach us in many places ; 
he that asketh receiveth: to him that knocketh it 
shall be opened. Ps. 1 :2; I Thess. 5 :17; Matt. 7, 
8. Hence, my dear friends, have your hearts trans- 
formed, and the Lord will give you even before you 
ask Him ; for blessed are those who are of a good 
will. Luke 2:14. 'Blessed are they which do hun- 
ger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall 
be filled.' " Matt. 5 :6. 

Therefore desire with a sorrowful heart for the 
Lord, and say : "Shew me thy ways, O Lord ; teach 
me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me ; 
for thou art the God of my salvation ; on thee do I 
wait all the day. Remember, O Lord, thy tender 
mercies and thy lovingkindnesses ; for they have 
been ever of old. Remember not the sins of my 
youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy 
mercy remember thou me for thy goodness' sake. 
Good and upright is the Lord : therefore will he 
teach sinners in the way. The meek will he guide 
in judgment : and the meek will he teach his way." 
Ps. 25:4-9. Therefore, my dear friends, repent 
sincerely, and confess your sins before the Lord 
with all your heart ; the Lord is found of them that 
are of a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Is. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


615 


66:2. Humble yourselves therefore under the 
mighty hand of God, that you may be exalted in 
eternity. I Pet. 5 :6. Herewith I commend you to 
the Lord ; may He guide you into all truth. 

My dearly beloved friends, lay it to heart, for it 
is done out of sincere, ardent love, which I have 
for your souls, because I am certain and assured, 
that there is no other way by which we can be 
saved ; hence I warn you out of a pure heart, and 
it will never be found otherwise. Therefore, 
though, some have much to talk or say, they do 
this because they do not want to take upon them 
the cross of Christ, and be persecuted for it, as 
Paul says (Gal. 6:12) ; but [let us] take for an ex- 
ample, that we are to follow Christ's steps, and 
that all the Scriptures constrain us, to submit our- 
selves to and prepare for suffering, even as also 
Paul says: "If we suffer with him, we shall also 
rejoice with him" ; and as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth 
by Christ ; and we also read that all the holy men of 
God were tried by many tribulations and sufferings 
(Judith 8:25), and how that they would joyfully 
receive sufferings; yea, that they greatly rejoiced 
that they were counted worthy to suffer for the 
name of God ; but those who do not truly love the 
Lord want to be exempt from suffering, and love 
this temporal life more than their Lord and God, 
although Christ says: "Whosoever shall seek to 
save his life shall lose it ; but whosoever shall lose 
his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall 
save it forever." Mark 8:35. Not that we must 
all die for the Word of the Lord; but the mind 
must be in such a state, that we would rather die, 
than once knowingly and willingly transgress one 
of the Lord's commandments ; hence Christ says : 
"He that loveth aught more than me is not worthy 
of me." Matt 10:37. 

Therefore, my dearest friends, whom I love with 
all my heart, do not regard what men say, but look 
only to Christ Jesus, how He went before us in 
tribulation and suffering. Love the Lord your God 
with all your heart, and with all your power and 
strength ; yea, though the whole world should rise 
up against and assail you, no one can harm you, if 
you have God for your Father, and if you have true 
love to God and His saints ; for love can do all 
things (I Cor. 13:7) ; but where there is no true 
love, there will soon be confusion, when persecu- 
tion and distress come (Matt. 13 :21 ) ; but for him 
that commits himself to the Lord, and is possessed 
of love, nothing is difficult ; had I not experienced 
this myself, it were impossible for me to know that 
it is so easy. Hence Christ says : "My yoke is easy, 
and my burden is light." Matt. 1 1 :30. Yes, dear 
friends, thus I am still minded, and I so love my 
Lord and God, that if I could save my life by a 
thought, and would know that it did not please the 
Lord, I would rather die than think such thought. 
Not that I am boasting ; the Lord well knows how 
vile I have shown myself before Him; but it is 


through the great grace and mercy and love shown 
us that we are elected to His heavenly kingdom. 
Eph. 2 :7. Now only do I feel within me the inex- 
pressible grace and mercy of God, and His love, 
and how we therefore ought to love Him in return 
(I John 4 :19) ; yea, this grace and love are so great 
before my eyes, that my sorrow is turned into joy. 

I must further relate to you something of the sor- 
row which I had before I was apprehended. Now I 
remember the words of the apostle, that I have had 
godly sorrow, and that godly sorrow worketh re- 
pentance to salvation. II Cor. 7:10. Yea, I had 
such sorrow at times, that I did not know whither 
to turn, and sometimes cried to the Lord with a 
loud voice saying: "O Lord, crush my old heart, 
and give me a new heart and mind, that I may be 
found upright before thine eyes." Ezek. 36:26. I 
said to my dear husband : "When I apply the rule 
of the Scriptures to my life, it seems to me as 
though I must perish." Well may I say with David : 
"Mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as a 
heavy burden they are too heavy for me." Ps. 38 : 
4. 1 said : "My dear husband, pray the Lord for 
me; I am so harassed — the more I direct my 
thoughts to the Lord, the more the tempter assails 
me with other thoughts." I Pet. 5 :8. Thus I cried 
to the Lord, and said : "O Lord, thou surely know- 
est that I desire nothing but to fear Thee." My 
husband would comfort me sometimes ; it seemed 
to him that I did nothing but what could stand in 
the sight of the Lord. I said : "I have not my first 
love (Rev. 2:4) ; therefore I grieve, so that I can- 
not sleep. There is no hope to die unto sin, I ap- 
prehend to live a long time yet; though I strive 
never so much to reform, yet I remain as vile as 
ever : 'O wretched man that I am, whither shall I 
go?'" Rom. 7:24. 

I should have written more to you, but the mes- 
senger came and informed me that we were to go 
[die]. My dearly beloved friends, such was the 
joyful sentence my husband, and I, and our broth- 
er heard : we showed each other such love, and had 
such a glad heart. I thanked the Lord so greatly, 
that the lords all heard it. They bade me keep si- 
lence, but I spoke fearlessly. When we had heard 
our sentence, all three of us spoke, and said that 
they had condemned righteous blood, and other 
words. My dear husband spoke so friendly, and 
said so often, with a glad countenance, that all the 
people beheld it: "Yes, we thank the Lord!" 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord. Hasten 
to come to us, and that we may live with each 
other in eternity. 

Another letter or confession of Claesken 

When we were before the full council, we were 
addressed by the Procurator General of the council, 
who presented to the lords a general statement of 
what we had confessed before the commissary, and 
made a long speech, how long we had not been to 


616 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


church, that we had not had our children baptized, 
and that we were Anabaptists, and said that ac- 
cording to the decree we had forfeited our lives, 
and that our property had lapsed into the hands of 
the king. Thus he accused us before the lords, and 
harangued us upon life and property, and when he 
had related how and where we had received our 
baptism, he asked us whether we would adhere to 
our baptism. We boldly and fearlessly said with a 
glad heart, that we had received one baptism ac- 
cording to the command of the Lord. Our brother 
Jacques said that if the contrary could be proved to 
him with the Word of the Lord, he did not want to 
act contrary to His Word. 

My husband said that he would adhere to his 
baptism. And I said, as our brother had said, that 
we had received one baptism according to the Word 
of the Lord. Every time he said: "Just as you 
think." He then asked us, whether we did not wish 
an advocate. Our brother said : "The Lord is our 
Advocate." I John 2:1. With this we went away. 
We went from the council glad and joyful, though 
it was to cost our lives. Acts 5 :41. 

Since that time, my husband and our brother ap- 
peared once before the pastor of the Old Court, 
and on Sunday in Lent all three of us were before 
the steward, our brother first ; he had a long con- 
versation with him ; and proved it to him with the 
Scriptures, so that he could not say a word against 
it, except that it was from the devil, since there 
were many in hell, and that ours were the worst ; 
thereupon my husband was brought before him, 
and then I. When I appeared before him, he be- 
gan to speak of infant baptism, of my baptism, the 
necessity of eating the flesh of Christ, and many 
other things. I said: "You need not bring these 
matters up ; it is not given me to dispute with you. 
I tell you flatly, I will adhere to that wherein the 
Lord has called me." He replied that the devil had 
called me. I said: "Is it the nature of the devil 
now, to desist from evil, and do good? It is with 
us as the prophet says: He that departeth from 
evil maketh himself a prey. Isa. 59:15. Thus it 
has gone with us ; from the first day that we for- 
sook our vain, wicked life, we were hated of every 
one, as Christ says : 'Ye shall be hated of all men 
for my name's sake.' " Matt. 10:22. He says : "Be 
not afraid of them that kill the body, and after 
that have no more that they can do ; but fear him 
which hath power to cast soul and body into hell." 
Luke 12 :4, 5 ; Isa. 51 :7. Yes, Him alone we fear. 
He insisted that I should express myself with re- 
gard to infant baptism, and the eating of the flesh 
of Christ. I said : "It is not worth-while for me to 
answer your questions; they are so useless. I 
have told it to you enough ; I shall tell you no more ; 
we have had enough of it." I said : "Wake up, and 
give heed ; you certainly see that it is not in human 
power what the Lord enables us to do, that we can 
leave our dear children, yea, joyfully resign our 
lives, for the honor of God." I said : "Take heed 
what you do, we are God's holy people, His chosen. 


Though all your learned men in the whole world 
should agree, they cannot prove to us with the 
Word of the Lord, that we believe or act contrary 
to the Word." He said that we at least did not be- 
lieve that the apostles ate the flesh of Christ, and 
drank His blood, and Christ says: "Take, eat, 
this is my body." I said : "Christ took the bread, 
gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to His apostles. 
When He took the bread, brake it, and gave it to 
them, the bread was certainly no flesh; He surely 
did not give them His living body to eat, when He 
stood alive among them; but He gave His body 
for redemption, not for them alone, but for all 
who should believe in Him." However, he was not 
to be convinced, but held to his old tune. 

Our brother had proved everything to him so 
clearly with the Scriptures, that he could not say a 
single word against it. Our brother spoke very loud 
in order that those who stood without the chancery 
should hear how clearly he proved it to him. I also 
spoke as loud as I could, with a glad heart ; what- 
ever the Lord gave me to utter I spoke fearlessly ; 
to relate all of which would take too long. He con- 
stantly reiterated that we had the devil in us, that 
the devil transformed himself into an angel of light 
in us, that we were possessed of the devil of pride, 
and that we must forever go into the abyss of hell. 
Thus he did every time we were before him. I 
said : "As lightly as you consign us to the abyss of 
hell, so highly are we exalted with the Lord." 

As regards infant baptism he knew nothing to 
say, except Christ says : "You must be born again 
of water and of the Spirit." John 3:5. I said: 
"Children cannot understand the new birth ; Christ 
said this to the adult; hence we have put off 
our old life, and put on a new life. We well know 
that our children are saved before the Lord." He 
then cited David, how he was born in sin. Ps. 
51 :7. Our brother had explained it to him clearly, 
yet he remained as ignorant as ever. When we had 
ended our conversation, I asked him what my hus- 
band said. He replied : "Your husband also per- 
sists in his views." I said : "What will you do with 
my poor husband, who cannot read a word ?" He 
replied: "Your damnation will be greater than 
that of your husband ; because you can read, and 
have seduced him." With this I left him. After- 
wards Claesken, her husband, and brother Jacques 
were drowned, for the testimony of the truth, at 
Leeuwarden, in Friesland, in March, 1559. 


JELIS DE GROOT, AND MAHIEU VAN HALEWITN 
A. D. 1559 

At Kortrijck, in Flanders, there were two God- 
fearing and simple brethren, one named Jelis de 
Groot, the other Mahieu van Halewijn, who would 
much rather suffer affliction with the people of 
God, than enjoy every vain pleasure with the wick- 
ed world; which affliction they also could not es- 
cape; for in the year 1559 they were apprehended, 
and immediately examined concerning their faith, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


617 


which they freely confessed, and adhered to unto 
the end, notwithstanding the threats made against, 
and the torments inflicted upon, them on this ac- 
count, so that they were finally sentenced to death 
for their steadfastness, and, as valiant heroes of 
God, publicly, in the sight of many, passed through 
temporal death, to await, with their fellow breth- 
ren, gone before, under the altar, the day of their 
avenging. Rev. 6:9. 

KAREL VAN TIEGEM, A. D. 1559 

About the same time there was also apprehended 
at Kortrijck, for the love of God, and living ac- 
cording to His Word, a brother named Karel van 
Tiegem, who was not ashamed freely to confess 
Christ his Lord before men, and to make a good 
confession of his faith, in which he also persevered 
unto the end ; but however greatly he was torment- 
ed, he would not implicate others ; hence the rulers 
of this world seizing occasion against him, as 
Pilate, instigated by the priests to remain Caesar's 
friend, did against Christ, condemned him to 
death, and caused him to be burnt with fire ; where- 
fore they must expect the sentence of eternal fire, 
which shall have no power over him. 

WOLFGANG MAIR, AND WOLFGANG HUEBER, IN 
THE YEAR 1559 

In this year 1559, two brethren, named Wolf- 
gang Mair and Wolfgang Hueber, were appre- 
hended for the faith, in the district of Lutzenburg, 
and taken to Titmain, whence they were brought 
to Saltzburg, in both of which places they had to 
suffer and experience great torment and tyranny. 
Wolfgang Mair was twice brought to the rack, 
stripped each time, and severely tortured; but he 
could not be induced to say aught that was con- 
trary to his faith. The secretary said : "You must 
tell who took you into his house or lodged you ; or 
you will have to die upon the rack." He replied : 
"If I die, I die ; I will nevertheless not say aught 
against my conscience, nor betray those that have 
done me good." Then they left off torturing, and 
priests came to them with manifold allurements, 
and labored long and much with them ; they also 
sought to turn them with many threats and en- 
treaties, and denied all hope to them, with many 
blasphemies, all of which they earnestly contra- 
dicted, defending the truth with great zeal, since 
the Lord gave them such strength, that they had 
already surrendered their lives for the truth. 

After this there was much consultation con- 
cerning them, especially among the priests ; once it 
was resolved to imprison them for life; but God 
brought to nought this purpose. Afterwards they 
were much tempted yet by one and the other, of 
those who wanted to make them renounce their 
faith; but it was in vain, they put them all to 
shame with the Word of God, and freely declared 
to them, that their faith was the way of divine 
truth in Jesus Christ, to which they would stead- 


fastly adhere by the help of God, no matter what 
anybody should say or undertake against it. There- 
upon they were taken back from Saltzburg to 
Titmain, to be sentenced to death. When their 
sentence was read they vigorously contradicted it, 
saying that it was not true, and that their faith 
was profitable unto all things, and that it was nei- 
ther heresy nor deception. 

When they were led out of the city, some women 
wept for compassion, that they were thus to be 
put to death on account of the faith ; but they said : 
"You need not weep on our account ; but weep for 
yourselves, and for your sins." They also sang for 
joy that their end and redemption were so near at 
hand. 

When they were at the place of execution, 
brother Wolfgang Mair cried to the people : "To- 
day I will offer unto my God a true burnt sacrifice, 
pay my vows, and testify with my blood to the di- 
vine truth." Thus they were executed with the 
sword, and then burnt with fire, cheerfully, val- 
iantly and boldly resigning their temporal life, to 
inherit eternal life. 

Some who were the principal cause of their 
imprisonment and death were signally smitten by 
the judgment of God, so that some of them died 
soon after, while others did not meet with a natural 
death, but were so touched by God, that it was 
easy to see that they were visited by the wrath of 
God. 


JAN JANS BRANT, A. D. 1559 

In the year 1559, on the 9th of November, it 
happened that a brother by the name of Jan Jans 
Brant, was apprehended for following Christ and 
the Gospel, at Geervliet, in South Holland. When 
he was examined by the learned, he steadfastly ad- 
hered to his faith, and confessed it freely, saying 
further: "This is the true way to eternal life, 
which is found by so few, and walked by a still 
smaller number ; for it is too narrow for them, and 
would cause their flesh too much pain." On ac- 
count of these and like words, they became em- 
bittered against him more than against any male- 
factor, so that they would have made away with 
him in a fortnight, had not his life, through the 
intercession of certain persons, been spared a little 
longer, so that in all, he lay in prison one month. 
Afterwards they sentenced him to be drowned in 
a sack, for which he was well prepared. The exe- 
cutioner tied him into a sack, and cast them from 
the high Hofbrugh.* The sack bursting open, 
the executioner struck him with a stick on his 
body, so that he called from the water : "Oh, how 
you murder me !" Many were moved to pity, that 
he had to die so miserably. Thus he offered up his 
sacrifice, and rests now from his labor, and is 
awaiting the glorious Sabbath spoken of in Isaiah, 
yea, the rest with Christ in Paradise. Phil. 2:17; 
Rev. 14:13; Luke 23:42. 

* Name of a bridge. 


618 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


TRIJNKEN KEUTS, A. D. 1559 

Trijnken Keuts was a widow who lived in the 
city of Maestricht. Having come to the knowledge 
of the divine truth through the holy Gospel, she 
in her simplicity laid the matter to heart, and con- 
tinued day and night in earnest prayer, until the 
Lord further enlightened her with the clear, shin- 
ing light of His divine grace, and endowed her 
with power of faith, so that she, believing and 
penitent, had herself baptized, upon the true faith, 
in the name of Jesus Christ, a member of the body 
and church of Jesus Christ ; and as she lived ac- 
cording to her faith and no longer resorted to the 
papal idolatries, but abstained from every abomi- 
nation, and entered upon a new life, the venomous 
beast could not endure this, and she was therefore 
accused and reported as a heretic to the authorities 
of said city. Thereupon the burgomasters cited her 
to appear in the Landtskroon (the house in which 
the burgomasters and the council hold their court) . 
When she received this summons, through a serv- 
ant of the burgomasters, she went to the Landts- 
kroon. Arriving there, she was asked and ex- 
amined by the burgomasters, in regard to what had 
been 'reported to them, as to whether it was so with 
her; and when she frankly answered them, and 
confessed the truth, they imprisoned her there. 
Having been confined for a time, in the meanwhile 
undergoing many importunities and conflicts, she 
was finally caused to be rigorously examined by the 
priests (one of whom was a Dominican monk), 
before whom she freely confessed her faith. When 
asked whether she was rebaptized, she replied: 
"I was baptized upon my faith according to the 
doctrine of Christ ;" in regard to which they had 
yet many more words together; but she adhered 
to the truth. The priests also questioned her con- 
cerning the sacrament, whether she did not believe 
that when the priest had pronounced five words 
oyer the bread, Christ was present in it, essentially 
with flesh and blood, just as He had hung on the 
cross. Trijne said that she believed that Christ 
had ascended to heaven, and was sitting on the 
right hand of God, His heavenly Father. And she 
asked, saying: "How should He come into the 
bread?" 

When she thus steadfastly adhered to the truth, 
these priests condemned her to be burnt to ashes 
here, and to burn forever in hell. Trijne said: 
"When you, in a few days, will follow me before 
the judgment seat of God; you will find it to be 
otherwise." Upon this judgment, Trijne was de- 
livered to the bailiff and the judges, by whom she 
was sentenced, that she should be led forth, ac- 
cording to the imperial mandate, and be burnt to 
ashes ; which Trijne gratefully received, willingly 
submitting to it. She was therefore, with her 
mouth gagged, led to the Vrijthof, where she put 
off her tabernacle, and was burnt to ashes, having 
commended her soul into the hands of God. I Pet. 
1 :14. This occurred in the year 1559, on Palm 
Eve, in Lent. 


It was currently reported as true, that one of 
the afore-mentioned priests, namely, the Domini- 
can monk, three days after Trijnken was offered 
up and burnt, was unexpectedly (he not having 
been known to be sick), and secretly found dead 
in his cell, and that he was being eaten up by lice ; 
but what part God had in this matter, this we leave 
to His righteous judgment, who will give to every- 
one his merited reward. 


FRANSKEN VROEVROUWE, NAENTGEN LEERVER- 

KOOPSTER AND PLEUNTGEN VAN DER 

GOES, A. D. 1559 

There were also at Antwerp three sisters, name- 
ly, Fransken Vroevrouwe, Naentgen Leerverkoop- 
ster, and Pleuntgen van der Goes, who were kin- 
dled with the love of God, and, as lambs and sheep 
of Christ, heard and followed the voice of their 
Shepherd, so that, having been apprehended on 
this account in the year 1559, they steadfastly ad- 
hered to the truth amidst all solicitations, tortures 
and sufferings ; hence all of them finally died for 
the name of Christ, being drowned in a vat, in the 
prison. 

But those who condemned them to death, must 
therefore expect from the Lord the severe judg- 
ment that shall come upon them on this account 
Matt. 7:2. 


BETGEN, NEELKEN, AND MARIKEN FRANSS, IN 
THE YEAR 1559 

In this year also three other sisters, namely, Bet- 
gen, Neelken, and Mariken Franss, were appre- 
hended at Antwerp, for living according to their 
faith in God, and as they, with a firm confidence, as 
those that were born of God, steadfastly contended 
for the accepted truth, they were finally sentenced 
to death and drowned. Thus they had to press 
their way through the strait gate, this temporal 
death, in order to enter in, and inherit, together 
with all the valiant witnesses of God, His eternal 
and imperishable kingdom. 

ADRIAEN PAN AND HIS WIFE, A. D. 1559 

In the year 1559, also Adriaen Pan, the faithful 
friend of Christ, and his wife, were in the claws of 
the wolves, at Antwerp, in Brabant, where they, 
through the grace of God, endured severe impris- 
onment and cruel examinations ; but through true 
faith and living hope they were so firmly united to 
their Captain, Christ Jesus, that they could by no 
means be brought to apostatize. Hence they were 
condemned to death by the rulers of darkness, who 
knew not the light of truth ; and thus Adriaen Pan 
was most miserably put to death with the sword, 
his wife, who was pregnant, bearing it all for 
Christ's sake, however much it pained her. After 
she had given birth to her child, she was drowned 
suffering it with great steadfastness. And thus 
they entered into eternal rest with the Lord. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


619 


A letter by Adriaen Pan, written in prison, in 
the year 1559 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
through the merits of Jesus Christ His beloved 
Son, with the true illumination of the Holy Ghost, 
we wish all lovers of the eternal truth. Amen. 

My dearly beloved and longed-for brethren, 
whom we love from the bottom of our hearts, and 
bear in our hearts, as those with whom we are one 
soul and one body, though we are now apparently 
deprived of you, you are nevertheless the more in 
our hearts, and we entreat you, that no one will 
faint at our tribulations to which we are now sub- 
jected; for we hope that you will be rejoiced to 
hear it since we know for certain, that it is for the 
truth. II John 1:1; Acts 4 :32 ; Eph. 3:13; I Thess. 
3:3. 

Peter says : "Let none of you suffer as an evil- 
doer, or as a thief ; but if you suffer as a Christian, 
happy are you; for the glory and Spirit of God 
rest upon you ; but on their part he is evil spoken 
of." Paul says that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory 
which shall be revealed in us ; yea, that eye hath 
not seen, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love Him. As the sufferings of Christ abound 
in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 
My dear brethren, how should we not be of good 
courage, when we hear such comforting words! 
My dear friends, the more tribulation there is to 
try us, the more we are comforted. This we ex- 
perienced at the start, when we were apprehended, 
when they assailed the house, as though they meant 
to destroy it with all that was in it. Then was my 
heart strengthened, as though I was a different 
person. True, my wife was somewhat distressed 
before they laid hands on us; but when she saw 
that it had to be, fear left her, as a garment put off, 
and she began to sing. 

"Dus weest bedacht, ende op hem wacht; 

Want hy sal komen als een die] in der nacht."* 

For we had not expected them yet, and had 
packed our things, intending to depart soon; but 
the Lord ordered it otherwise, praised be He for- 
ever. As they were busily engaged in plundering, 
I would fain have sung : Noyt meerder vreught in 
w.y en was, dan nu is in desen tijden.i But I re- 
strained myself from singing, because I thought 
that many more trials were awaiting me yet ; but 
the Lord be praised, who does not suffer us to be 
ashamed. Ps. 25 :3. They began to upbraid us 
much concerning Munster and Amsterdam ; but I 
told them that I was innocent in the matter, and 
that it was for the truth that we suffered. I also 
said: "I am not yet thirty-three years old; how 
then could I have been there ?" Some railed, others 


* Take heed therefore and watch for Him; for He shall come 
as a thief in the night. 
+ I never had greater joy than at this present time. 


lamented : but I said : "Weep not for us, but weep 
for yourselves, and for your children." Methinks, 
we could well have said with David: "Though I 
were compassed about by ten thousands of people, 
who should come upon me, I should not fear them ; 
yea, they have compassed me about ; they compass 
me about like bees, but in the name of the Lord I 
will destroy them." Psalm 3:6; 118:12. 

My dear brethren, we do not say this to boast 
but for joy, and to thank God for the great power 
and strength which He grants us ; and for the joy 
of all lovers for the truth, who may hear this. Pray 
for us that we may continue steadfast unto the end. 
We beg you to receive our few lines in good part. 
The 1 5th day of our imprisonment, and the 9th of 
May. My wife and I salute you much, and all with 
whom we are acquainted, or who may inquire after 
us. 

Another letter by Adriaen Pan, written after he 
was sentenced 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
through the merits of Jesus Christ, with the true 
illumination of the Holy Ghost, we wish all lovers 
of the eternal truth. Amen. 

My dear N., I still remember you at the end of 
my life, and pray Almighty God to comfort you 
with His Spirit, and instruct you with all spiritual 
wisdom and understanding that may conduce to 
your salvation. Col. 1 :9. I further inform you, 
that I was on the rack the 2d of June, and on the 
16th day I was brought into court, where they 
asked me whether I was baptized, or rebaptized. 
I asked whether I was permitted to speak. They 
consented. I said that I believed all that was writ- 
ten in the law and in the prophets, and would live 
and die by what Jesus Christ and His apostles 
taught and commanded; and that I was baptized 
upon acknowledgement of my sins, that I was sorry 
for them, and upon confession of my faith, in the 
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 
Thereupon they sentenced me; hence I expect 
nothing else than that they will do their will with 
the body; may the Lord receive the spirit. I am 
quite ready to live and die for the name of the 
Lord. I cannot sufficiently praise and thank God, 
that He has called me to suffer for His name. O 
my dear N., I am of good cheer ; the Lord, I trust, 
will give me strength unto the end. I cannot say 
that I ever had a happier day in prison, than when 
I was apprehended, and when I was sentenced. 
My dear N., be of good cheer; it will soon be over 
here ; and let us not fear them that kill the body ; 
but Christ tells us whom we shall fear. I and my 
wife salute you most affectionately with the peace 
of the Lord. Receive my brief letter in good part ; 
I would fain have written you more, but I am not 
much gifted for it ; however, I thank the Lord for 
all that He has given me. 

Greet the dear friends much, with whom we are 
acquainted, or who inquire after us. Farewell! 

Written by me, Adriaen Pan. 


620 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


HANS DE VETTE, AND ELEVEN OTHERS, PUT TO 
DEATH FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 
CHRIST, AT GHENT, IN FLAN- 
DERS, A. D. 1559 

A confession written by Hans de Vette, at Ghent, 
where he was imprisoned with eleven others, 
in the year 1559, touching his ex- 
amination 

On the first Friday after Whitsuntide there were 
imprisoned at Ghent for the Word of the Lord, the 
following named persons : Pieter Coerten of Mee- 
nen, Kaerle Tanckreet of Nipkerck, with Proent- 
ken, his wife, of Belle, Jacob Spillebout, Abraham 
Tanckreet, and Maeyken Floris of Nipkerck, An- 
,:honis van Cassel, Hans de Smit, Marcus his 
brother, Hans de Vette, with Maritgen, his wife, 
of Waesten, and Tanneken, the wife of J. de S. 
These had been delivered by treachery to the Pro- 
curator General, who, with three thief-catchers, 
took them away prisoners from their lodging place, 
in the evening. 

The next day we were visited by the authorities, 
who asked us, each separately, for our names, and 
where we came from, which we told them. They 
then asked us whether we confessed another bap- 
tism than infant baptism, and whether we had also 
received another. We all renounced idolatrous in- 
fant baptism, and confessed that we had received 
Christian baptism, except Marcus de Smit, who 
confessed that he had not yet received it, but that 
if he had opportunity, he wished to receive it with 
all his heart. They then asked us whether we de- 
sired learned men to instruct us ; that they would 
send us some, and just such as we wanted, ecclesi- 
astics or secular men; they also said that they 
should not hurry us. But since they almost always 
asked us separately the same questions, I, the 
writer of this, said that by the grace of the Lord I 
wanted no other instruction than I had received, 
though an angel should come from heaven. Gal. 
1:8. 

Besides this, they nevertheless, about eight days 
afterwards, sent one Friar Peter de Backer (who 
had partly spied us out), with one of his compan- 
ions,— two false prophets, called jacobines, as I 
believe. After we had appeared before them, and 
exchanged a few words, we came to infant bap- 
tism, which he declared to be a divinely instituted 
doctrine, saying that circumcision was a figure of 
it; also, that the apostles had baptized entire 
households, and that Christ had commanded it, 
John 3. But when I had proved to him, that he had 
not spoken the truth, and that the apostles had bap- 
tized none without faith, as is clearly found in the 
Acts of the Apostles, he endeavored to speak about 
another article, saying that we should not be able 
to agree. But I told him that I desired to see the 
first finished before proceeding further, and begged 
him to repent, proving to him, that their worship 
was a rotten and putrid idolatry, contrary to all the 


commandments of God, and a human plant; and 
that God's commandments were sufficient for us 
that no lies need be added to them, and that it 
availed nothing to regard what God has not com- 
manded. Then he said that I was deceived, and 
had looked too much at their abuses : that it was 
true there were some abuses in their church, but 
that the principal of what was observed in it, was 
good. After many words we parted. 

A few days afterwards the Dean of Ronse, an 
inquisitor in the country of Flanders, came, and 
with him, said Peter de Backer, who had visited us 
first, and other false prophets. When I appeared 
before them, the Dean asked my name. I replied 
that my name was Hans de Vette. Then he asked 
me whether I was married. I replied : "Yes." He 
then asked me whether my wife was also of Waes- 
ten. I replied : "Yes." He asked me how long I 
had been married. I said : "Not very long." He 
asked me, in what church and by what parish priest 
I had been married. I asked him whether we found 
anything said in the Scriptures, that a parish priest 
was required for it. He said that in the world 
whores and knaves come together without parish 
priests. Then I said that I had done this accord- 
ing to the direction of the Scriptures, as permitted 
by Paul, in order to avoid fornication, it being bet- 
ter to marry than to burn (I Cor. 7 :2, 9) ; whores 
and knaves on the contrary will much rather burn 
than marry, as is abundantly seen and heard in 
this wicked world in many thousands of instances. 
He then said that this was a small matter, and that 
if I had done nothing more, it could easily have 
been arranged; however, I should only tell him 
where it took place. I told him that I did not in- 
tend to tell him. Then he adjured me by the living 
God, that I should tell him ; but I made no reply. 
Thereupon he asked me why I had not continued 
in the faith of the Roman church, and in her wor- 
ship. My reply was, that I had separated from her 
so as not to become a partaker of her plagues, since 
darkness can have no communion with light, nor 
Christ with Belial, nor the righteous with the un- 
righteous, etc. Hence we must come out from 
among her. Rev. 18:4; II Cor. 6:14, 17. 

He then asked me what I thought of the seven 
sacraments, part of which he named to me. I re- 
plied that I considered them utterly worthless, be- 
cause of all the abominable idolatry observed by 
them; but since the Lord has commanded us to 
confess His name before men, I said that I would 
confess my faith to him. He said that I should. 
I then began to make my confession; as that I 
believed in one God, the Creator of heaven and 
earth, sea and waters, and all there is therein ; and 
who created man after His image. Him alone we 
must serve, honor, worship, and love with all our 
soul, with all our strength, and with all our 
thoughts, since He alone is good; forsaking all 
idols, whether of gold, silver, stone, metal, wood, 
bread, or of whatever other make or substance 
they may be, even as they are rejected and pro- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


621 


hibited in the holy Scriptures ; for we know that 
an idol is nothing in the world. I Cor. 8:4. 

As I continued to speak, the Dean of Ronse said 
to me that I was making it too long, to write it all 
down. "You would make us too much work," he 
said, "if you should thus confess your faith from 
the beginning of the Bible." "I also believe," said 
he, "what you have said here; but what do you 
say of the sacrament of baptism as used in our 
church, to which everyone must come, in order to 
be saved?" I replied that I considered infant bap- 
tism worthless, since it was not commanded of 
God. He said that circumcision was a figure of it, 
and that all the children that were not circum- 
cised in the Old Testament, or are not baptized in 
the New Testament, must be damned. I then said, 
in accordance with his own words: "Then the 
female children in the Old Testament must all be 
damned." He became angry, and said that what I 
advanced was only sophistry. I told him that he 
should be ashamed to say that children were 
damned, to whom as the Lord says, the kingdom 
of heaven belongs. He said that I lied in this. And 
another priest told me that one of Paul's disciples 
writes that he had learned infant baptism from his 
teacher, Paul. Thereupon I said that Paul writes 
that we should not be shaken in mind, neither by 
spirit nor by word, nor by letter, as sent from 
them ; or even though an angel from heaven should 
come, and teach us anything different from what 
is written in the holy Gospel, he should be accursed. 
II Thess. 2 :2. I also asked him to show me where 
the Lord had commanded to baptize children, or 
to prove that the apostles baptized infants ; which 
he could not do. 

Again, he asked me how long ago I had been 
baptized. I replied: "Not yet a year." He asked 
me where and by whom I had been baptized ; but I 
did not tell him. He then adjured me three times by 
the living God, and by the baptism which I had re- 
ceived, that I should tell him. I said that Caiaphas 
so adjured Christ. He replied that Christ spoke. I 
said that Christ spoke for Himself ; but that when 
He was questioned concerning His disciples, He 
did not speak. 

He then asked me what I held concerning the 
sacrament of the altar. I told him that I considered 
it nothing less than an unclean, rotten, putrid idola- 
try, and an abomination before God. He asked: 
"How? Do you not believe that He is present in 
it in flesh and blood, just as He walked upon the 
earth, or as He hung upon the tree of the cross ?" 
"Far be it from me," said I, "that I should believe 
that Christ's flesh and blood are here upon earth ; 
for Christ Himself said to His apostles, that we 
should always have the poor with us, but that we 
should not always have Him." Matt. 26:11. 

He thereupon told me that He was not thus pres- 
ent in the sacrament, but that it was in spiritual 
substance, and that I did not understand the mat- 
ter; but that this argument had been established 
many centuries before my time; for when Christ 


held His supper He said, He took the bread and 
gave it to His disciples, and said : "Take, eat ; this 
is my body." I replied that the bread which Christ 
gave to His disciples, He gave them as an emblem 
of His body which was to be broken for them; 
even as He has represented Himself by figures in 
many places of Scripture. In John (15:1) He 
says : "I am the true vine ;" yet in reality He was 
no vine, but He compared Himself to a vine. Thus 
the bread which Christ brake for His disciples, 
was spiritually a figure of His body ; for He says in 
John 6; "Flesh and blood profit nothing; but the 
words that I speak are spirit and life." He said that 
this was irrelevant; "for if Christ were not pres- 
ent," said he, "how could we eat damnation there- 
by?" But I replied: "If it were the flesh and blood 
of Christ, we would not eat damnation thereby: 
for Christ says Himself ; 'Whoso eateth my flesh, 
and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life.' John 
6:54. Hence these words must not be understood 
literally, but spiritually, namely, that if one who 
was still a drunkard, or covetous, or an idolater, or 
the like, should go to the Lord's Supper with the 
church of Christ, whose head is Christ, such an one 
would be unfit to break bread with the members of 
Christ, not discerning Christ's body." I Cor. 1 1 :29. 
Then he said that there were many among us, who 
were drunkards, adulterers, and the like, and that 
they were well known to him. I then asked him : 
"Who are they ?" He said : "J. de R." I then asked 
him where he lived. He replied : "I shall not tell 
you." I said that I well knew if there were such 
in our church, and were known, they would, ac- 
cording to the Scriptures, be put away and ex- 
cluded. I Cor. 5:11. 

He then asked me, who had baptized me. And 
when he could not learn it from me, he adjured 
me, but I did not tell him. Then his secretary said : 
"I will wager you a pot of wine, that you will tell 
it before a fortnight has passed ;" but I would not 
bet. He then asked me how often I had observed 
the Supper. I replied that I had sometimes ob- 
served it, when opportunity offered itself, with 
many dear brethren and sisters. He asked : "With 
whom? What are their names?" I gave him the 
name of one of them, whom he specially named 
in his question. He then inquired concerning oth- 
ers, whether I regarded them as my brethren, or 
whether they were only friends or novices ; "for I 
have learned all this Flemish," said he, "about nov- 
ices [aencomelingen, i. e., newcomers] friends and 
brethren." I said : "I thought you were from Bra- 
bant; do you understand so much Flemish?" "I 
hardly know what I am," he said ; "perhaps I am a 
foundling." "Yes," said I, "John's Revelation 
( 13 :1 ) speaks of a beast, which rose up out of the 
sea ; you may belong to that race." 

He then asked me whether I did not believe that 
Jesus Christ had assumed flesh and blood from 
Mary. I replied that I believed that the Word 
which was in the beginning with God, and by which 
the world was created, became flesh. Then he said 


622 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


that according to the flesh He was David's son. I 
replied: "If He is David's son, Christ Himself 
says: 'How then doth David call him Lord?' " He 
said that Christ only adduced this to the Pharisees 
by way of argument ; but Matthew, said he, de- 
scribes His generation from Abraham to Mary. I 
replied, that Matthew traces the generation of 
Christ only to Joseph, the husband of Mary of 
whom Christ was born ; and Luke says that Jesus 
was supposed to be the son of Joseph. "But," said 
he, "do you not believe that Mary is the mother of 
Christ?" I said: "Yes; Christ says: 'Whosoever 
shall do the will of my Father, the same is my 
mother, sister and brother.' " Matt. 12 :S0. 

He then said that Christ was of the seed of the 
woman. But I told him, that women had no seed 
themselves ; for as the woman is of the man, even 
so is the man also by the woman. I Cor. 11 :12. 
Then he said that He was of Mary's substance and 
blood. But I replied that Christ said to the Jews, 
that He was from above, but they from beneath; 
"ye are of this world," He said, "I am not of this 
world." John 8 :23. Moreover, the apostle says : 
"The first man is of the earth, earthy : the second 
man is the Lord from heaven." I Cor. 15:47. I 
then told them that they should repent of their un- 
righteousness, persecution, and false, idolatrous 
doctrine. They said : "We have the true doctrine." 
I said that Paul nevertheless commands us to avoid 
such as command to abstain from meats, which 
God has created for the use of them that believe ; 
and who forbid to marry, and have their con- 
science seared with a hot iron; for it is better to 
marry than to burn; but you people, contrary to 
the Scriptures, command to abstain from meats, 
and forbid to marry, and will rather burn than 
marry. I Tim. 4:2, 3; I Cor. 7:9. 

Dean. "We do not forbid to marry." 

Hans. "Certainly you do; you know that be- 
cause of your commandment a person may neither 
eat meat nor marry, in Lent, and on many other 
days; and you have entered into a covenant that 
restrains you from marrying; but you commit 
such fornication that it is a shame to speak of it, 
as is daily seen from the bastards that are brought 
to your houses, and Paul says that we shall not eat 
with such, namely, fornicators, drunkards, etc., 
but that they are to be delivered unto Satan, for 
the destruction of their flesh." I Cor. 5 :5. 

Dean. "We are not so bad; we do not want to 
deliver them to Satan, we are so much the better." 

Hans. "Poor man, would you be better than 
Paul ? But all that is told you is of no avail ; for 
you will not repent; but if you want to dispute 
with us in the market or any other public place, 
we are ready, in hopes that some of the ignorant 
might be drawn thereby." 

Dean. "This shall not be; who should judge 
there ? boatman, fish-mongers, and the like ? That 
would be just the way to excite a tumult; but we 
are fools that we dispute so much with you; the 


proper way to do would be, simply to tell you our 
faith, and if you will not believe it, pass sentence." 
We had many other words yet as about the wor- 
shiping of saints, the Pope of Rome, confession, 
fasting, purgatory, and the sleeping of the saints, 
which it would take much too long to write. The 
foregoing I have written down from memory, even 
as they often occurred ; but since it happened long 
ago, I should not be able to write it down word for 
word. But since I well know that it is of no avail 
to tell them anything, and that they are arrogant 
and shameless. I sometimes give them very brief 
answers, offering to dispute with them in public, 
which they refused. They often put the same ques- 
tions repeatedly to our brethren and sisters that are 
in bonds with us, who are all still of good cheer, the 
Lord be praised ; for we feared the false prophets 
much more before we spoke with them, than after- 
wards. But the Lord knows how to give His 
chosen a mouth in such hours as He has promised, 
better than we can imagine ; for those who seemed 
weak when not in bonds, are so courageous, that 
it is astonishing to see and hear it. The Lord alone 
be praised forever and ever. Amen. 

The Dean also asked me whether we did not 
pray for him. I said: "Yes," "What do you peo- 
ple call me?" said he; "Do you call me Saul?" I 
replied : "I have sometimes heard you called the 
Inquisitor (they all laughed) ; sometimes the Dean 
of Ronse." He said : "That is my name." We had 
many more words yet ; however partly from lack of 
paper, I forbear writing more ; but I beg all who 
see this, to receive it in good part, and if possible 
let a copy of this be sent to our acquaintances at 
Antwerp, and one to our acquaintances in the 
West. 

Thereupon these twelve friends (whose names 
are mentioned in the beginning of Hans de Vette's 
letter) all courageously laid down their lives for 
the truth. First four valiantly passed through the 
conflict, who offered up their burnt sacrifice in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a short time 
afterwards, six others, who, after steadfast con- 
fession of their faith, were also brought forth 
and being asked whether they would not yet recant' 
they answered: "No," but if they had committed 
any crime, they should be dealt with accordingly 
I hey were speedily sentenced to death as heretics' 
and when they were taken out to death in two' 
wagons, two monks sat beside them, who prevented 
them from speaking much, so that they could only 
with great difficulty speak a word or two, namely 
Fear not them that kill the body; for after that 
they have no more that they can do.' but O men 
repent, for the apostle says that he that lives after 
the flesh shall die." Rom. 8:13. 

When they were led into a hut of wood and 
straw in which they were to be burnt, they mani- 
fested great joy, and commending their souls into 
the hands of God, they put off the corruptible to 
put on the incorruptible. 

There remained yet two pregnant women, who 
after giving birth to their children, and lying in,' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


623 


were both secretly beheaded in the count's castle. 
Thus all these, continuing steadfast unto the end, 
went to rest with the Lord and shall also enter into 
eternal joy with Him, in the company of all the 
dear children of God. Matt. 25:21; John 1:12. 


MAEYKEN KATS, OF WERVICK IN FLANDERS, 

MAGDALEENTKEN, AECHTKEN OF ZIERICKZEE, 

OLD MAEYKEN, GRIETGEN BONAVENTUERS, 

AND MAEYKEN DE KORTE, A. D. 1559 

On the 20th of May, 1559, the Margrave of Ant- 
werp, seeking one upon whose head a price of three 
hundred guilders was set, went forth with many 
servants, and surrounded and entered two houses, 
in which they found six sisters, namely, Maeyken 
Kats, Magdaleentken, Aechtken of Zierickzee, Old 
Maeyken, Grietgen Bonaventuers, and Maeyken 
de Korte. But however much they searched the 
houses they could not find the one whom they 
sought. Then the Margrave wished these women 
in Hoboken Heath. But nevertheless, when he 
could not accomplish his purpose, he took all six 
with him, and shut them in a dark prison. After- 
wards they were examined. They freely confessed 
their faith, and could not be brought to recant, 
neither by the imperial decree, nor by threats or 
torture; nor did they betray any one. Hence, on 
the 8th of June ; the first three were sentenced to 
death, and drowned in prison by night. 

Afterwards, on the 11th of October, the other 
three were also condemned to death ; old Maeyken, 
the honorable widow, who was worthy of double 
honor, was drowned, while Grietken Bonaventuers 
and Maeyken de Korte had to taste death by the 
sword (unusual with women) for the truth, for 
which their Lord, whom they loved and did not 
forget, will likewise not forget them, but gladly re- 
ceive them into His kingdom and joyfully feast in 
paradise. 


A LETTER FROM MAEYKEN DE KORTE 

My dear sister, pray for us, that the word of the 
Lord may have free course, and be fruitful in all 
longsuffering and holiness, to wait for Him with 
patience ; for He shall come quickly, and bring His 
reward with Him; He is faithful that promised, 
who also will do it. II Thess. 3 :1 ; Rev. 22 :12 ; I 
Thess. 5 :25. It is as I say : "Our life is a continual 
conflict upon earth." Know that I am of tolerably 
good cheer; the flesh is pretty well, the Lord be 
praised. We are here indeed as the filth of the 
world, and constantly long to get home, and for a 
building not made with hands, eternal in the heav- 
ens. We, according to His promise, look for new 
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth right- 
eousness. I Cor. 4:13. How ought we to be pre- 
pared with a godly life! I often find myself cast 
down : I also discover so many shortcomings in me, 
and that there is so much yet to die unto ; I have to 
commit it all to the Lord, with an humble heart, and 


trembling, contrite spirit, asking Him for grace, 
and not for justice. I feel that the more I humble 
myself, the more the mighty God works in me, and 
pours His grace into me. Then I cry most bitterly, 
fall upon my knees, and thank my God, and say : 
"O my Lord and God, what am I, child of Adam, 
that Thou art mindful of him,* Thou hast given 
him dominion over all Thy works. Whence is it that 
Thou dost visit us so abundantly, and dost so gra- 
ciously open unto us Thy treasures, and causest the 
bright morning star to arise and shine in our hearts, 
and hast drawn us out of this dark night to the im- 
perishable light ?" What shall we render unto Him, 
my dear sister, but a penitent and contrite heart, 
and a broken spirit, with love and great gratitude, 
there rests the spirit of the Lord, says David. Let 
us love one another fervently, for God is love, and 
constantly exhort each other, lest we wax cold 
through the deceitfulness of sin ; so that God may 
be glorified in us, and we may be delivered from 
pride, and from unreasonable and wicked men ; for 
all men have not faith. The Lord is faithful ; He 
will strengthen and keep us. I John 4:8; Heb. 
3:13; II Thess. 3:2. Know, that my sisters vere 
here, and desired to have a word of comfort from 
me. The Lord gained the victory. I do not know 
how it is with me, I do not feel drawn to them, 
just as though they were not related to me; I can- 
not rejoice, though I see them, and it seems to me 
that they are afraid of me. They caused me so 
much cross. They had sent a monk named Balten 
here, to examine me, and were willing to give him 
three caps, if he should be able to convert me. He 
came with fine words, but I would not speak, being 
sick at the time. Then my sisters said : "Why do 
you not speak?" I replied: "I have no desire at 
present ; we have talked with him so often ; he well 
knows our intention." 

This irritated Balten, and he complained greatly 
of me, that I had strongly resisted the Scriptures, 
that I maintained salvation erroneously, and that 
I had no hope. Then they wept greatly, but it was 
all the same to me, whether he kept silence or 
spoke. He made all leave the room, only my two 
sisters ; he and I remaining. He then entreated me 
much, saying: "My dear Maeyken, have compas- 
sion upon your poor soul." I boldly replied : "This 
I hope to do." "Say that you are sorry, and that 
you have erred; it is sufficient, and you need say 
no more ; an instrument shall immediately be drawn 
up for you, according to my direction, and I myself 
and your two brothers-in-law will sign it. It shall 
remain a secret, and all shall be done for you that is 
possible; give your consent to it, my dear sister." 
Then I was moved in my spirit, and said: "You 
may give your head rest, yours is all lost labor ; I 
am not at all inclined to say that I am sorry. I am 
so sorry for it, that if I had not done it, I should 
yet do what I have in mind. I want to abide in it 

* An implied substitution of gender, peculiar to the genius of 
tlie Dutch (as also, the German) language; the exclaimant, losing 
sight of her own individuality, views herself only as a representa- 
tive of Adam's race, and recipient of God's munificence. — Trans. 


624 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


by the help of God, neither entreaties, nor tortures, 
nor death, nor life shall turn me, and I want to die 
therein ; hence do not torment me." Phil. 4:13. I 
wish I could speak with Lauwerens Huysmaeker, 
and see all of you ; but I must be patient. 

I commend you to the Lord, and to the Word of 
His grace; greet Andries, and Mattheus. I greet 
you both ; greet Lauwerens, and Hans ; greet Adri- 
aen much, and Lauwerens' wife, and the wife of 
Lauwerens the broom-maker, and Hansken's wife. 


A TESTAMENT WRITTEN BY JELIS BERNAERTS TO 
HIS WIFE, WHEN HE LAY IN PRISON AT ANT- 
WERP, WHERE HE WAS PUT TO DEATH FOR 
THE WORD OF THE LORD, A. D. 1559 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, my dear 
and most beloved wife and sister in the Lord, ac- 
cording as His divine power hath given unto us all 
things that pertain unto life and godliness, through 
the knowledge of Him that hath called us to glory 
and virtue : whereby are given unto us exceeding 
great and precious promises. II Pet. 1 :2, 3. 

Thus, my most beloved, that by these you are a 
partaker of the divine nature, if you flee the cor- 
ruptible lusts of this world, as you have also done, 
and by renouncing the same, and accepting regen- 
eration, faith, and manifestation of obedience, 
which you proved by baptism, in which you put on 
Christ, and thereby became a partaker of the divine 
nature. And this was not done for works of right- 
eousness which you did, but according to His mercy 
He saved you, by the washing of regeneration, and 
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3 :5. If you con- 
tinue herein unto the end, and are patient in what- 
ever befalls you, you shall inherit what is promised 
you. Praise God, and thank Him for all His glori- 
ous benefits which you have received; and bless 
God the Father through Jesus Christ, though 
tribulation has now come upon you, through my 
departure for the Lord's sake ; and know that ac- 
cording to His abundant mercy He hath begotten 
you again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance in- 
corruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away, reserved for you and all that are in the same 
faith, who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last 
time, wherein you, my dear and beloved wife, 
greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need 
be, you are in heaviness through manifold temp- 
tations :_ for, know, my most beloved, we are tried 
in manifold ways, in order that it may become 
manifest whether we truly love the Lord. I Pet. 
1:3. 

Hence be of good cheer, my most beloved, even 
though still much more tribulation should come 
upon you ; for know that we must through much 
tribulation and suffering enter into the kingdom of 
God. And as also Ecclesiasticus says, in the sec- 
ond chapter, first verse: "My son, if thou come to 
serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation. 


Set thy heart aright, and constantly endure, and 
make not haste in time of trouble. Cleave unto 
him, and depart not away . . . For gold is tried 
in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of 
adversity." 

But, my most beloved, even as James writes in 
his first chapter : "My brethren, count it all joy 
when ye fall into divers temptations, knowing this 
that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But 
let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be 
perfect and entire, wanting nothing;" for when we 
are in tribulation, we need patience. Hence I en- 
treat you from the bottom of my heart, and from 
my inmost soul, to be of good cheer, and with pa- 
tience to let the trial of your faith become mani- 
fest, as Peter says, that the trial of your faith, be- 
ing much more precious than of gold that perish- 
eth, though it be tried with fire, might be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing 
of Jesus Christ : whom having not seen, ye love ; in 
whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, 
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory : 
receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation 
of your souls, I Pet. 1 :7-9. Then all suffering, 
tribulation, reproach, persecution, sighing, weep- 
ing, and lamenting will have an end. Rev. 21 :4. 
Therefore be of good cheer, and consider that the 
suffering which may happen to us here, will all 
pass away, and all the glory and pleasure of this 
world must also perish and come to naught; but 
look constantly to the future glorious promises 
that have been made us, and which shall be ful- 
filled to us that believe, if we remain steadfast 
since He is faithful that promised, for the Lord is 
not slack concerning His promise. Matt. 24-13- 
Heb. 10:23; II Peter 3:9. But be of good cheer! 
and trust m Him, for He will not forsake you • 
and cast your care upon Him, for He careth for 
you ; for He that has called and chosen you hereto 
is a God of all grace, as Paul says. 

But the God of all grace, who hath called us 
unto His eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that 
ye have suffered a [little] while, (mark, He says: 
A little while) make you perfect, stablish, strength- 
en, settle you in that which you have accepted 
namely, the faith in Him, and His only begotten 
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, unto whom be praise 
honor and glory, now and forever. Amen. I Pet! 

After all heartfelt and affectionate greetings to 
you, my dearest, chosen and most beloved wife and 
dear sister in the Lord, I have received your letter 
in which you write me to write you a testament,' 
which I will not refuse to do, if the Lord gives me 
time; for if I could help you with my blood, I 
would do it. But now I cannot help you, save by 
writing, which I do to your comfort, out of true 
brotherly love, and from the bottom of my heart 
intending to finish this, by the help and grace of the 
Lord, with the same mind with which I com- 
menced it. Know therefore, my dear wife and 
sister m the Lord, how that God visited His people 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


625 


in former times, when they were in Egypt, in the 
bondage of King Pharaoh, whom they had to 'serve 
for about five hundred years. And when it was 
His will to deliver them, He raised up Moses for 
their leader, through whom God delivered them 
out of Egypt's bondage and led them through the 
Red Sea, in which He drowned and brought to 
naught King Pharaoh and all his host — with which 
the latter pursued them — thus delivering them out 
of his hands. Thus they came into the wilderness, 
to go on to the land which was promised them; 
and the Lord God, through Moses their Leader, 
gave them laws and customs after which they were 
to walk. But they did not continue in His law; 
wherefore God became angry, and sware in His 
wrath, that they should not enter into His rest. 
Concerning whom did He swear, but concerning 
unbelievers? And we see that they did not enter 
therein, and this because of their unbelief. This 
having thus happened, the Lord spoke through the 
prophet, and said: "Behold, the days come, saith 
the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with 
the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah : 
not according to the covenant that I made with 
their fathers, in the day that I took them by the 
hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; 
which my covenant they brake, although I was a 
husband unto them, saith the Lord : but this shall 
be the covenant that I will make with the house of 
Israel ; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put 
my law in their inward parts, and write it in their 
hearts ; and will be their God, and they shall be my 
people. And they shall teach no more every man 
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, 
Know the Lord : for they shall all know me, from 
the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith 
the Lord : for I will forgive their iniquity, and I 
will remember their sins no more." Now in these 
last days He has revealed this covenant, given 
through His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the 
true Moses, who has taken us by the hand, and led 
us out of Egypt, wherein we all sat and served the 
hellish King Pharaoh, under whom we were cap- 
tive by sin ; from which bonds and slavery we are 
redeemed through Christ, who through His death 
and the shedding of His blood redeemed and recon- 
ciled us, and delivered us from the hellish King 
Pharaoh, whom He destroyed and suffocated in 
his blood, thereby fulfilling the Old Testament; 
for all had to be fulfilled that was written in the 
law and in the prophets. Heb. 1 :2 ; Matt. 5 :17 ; 
Luke 24:44. Thus the fulfillment was accom- 
plished, and the new testament confirmed with His 
blood ; which, as already stated, He had promised 
through the prophets, and which is proclaimed to 
us through the Gospel, and confirmed with signs 
and wonders by Him and His holy apostles, whom 
after His resurrection He sent out to preach to all 
nations, that whosoever should believe and be bap- 
tized, should be saved, also commanding them to 
teach them to observe all things whatsoever He 
had commanded them. Heb. 2 :4 ; Matt. 28 :20. 


And now, my most beloved, are we the people 
which God chose before the foundation of the 
world, and made a better testament with us, than 
He made with Israel, who daily had to offer up sac- 
rifice for sins, by which they could nevertheless not 
atone? Eph. 1 :4; Heb. 7:22, 27. For burnt offer- 
ings and offering for sin He would not, neither did 
God have pleasure therein, which were offered by 
the law; then said He (namely Christ), "Lo, I 
come to do thy will, O God." He taketh away the 
former, that He may establish the second. By the 
which will we are sanctified through the offering of 
the body of Jesus Christ once for all. And every 
priest then stood daily ministering and offering 
oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never 
take away sins : but this man, after He had offered 
one sacrifice for sins forever, sat down on the right 
hand of God; from henceforth expecting till His 
enemies be made His footstool. For by one offering 
He hath perfected forever them that are sanctified. 
Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us : 
for after that He had said before (as is written 
Jer. 31 :31). This is the covenant that I will make 
with them after those days, saith the Lord ; 1 will 
put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds 
will I write them ; and their sins and iniquities will 
I remember no more. Now where remission of 
these is, there is no more offering for sin, as Paul 
writes. Heb. 10:8-18. 

Therefore, my dear and beloved wife, we have 
(verse 19) a free and secure entrance into the 
holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living 
way, which He hath consecrated for us, through 
the vail, that is to say, His flesh ; and we have a 
high priest over the house of God, which is the 
church, which He cleansed with His blood, that it 
might be holy, without spot or wrinkle ; of which 
you are a member, for it is the body of Christ, and 
we the members of that same body, and Christ the 
head and priest of the house of God, as stated. 
Eph. 5 :26, 27 ; 1 :22. Hence, my most beloved, ad- 
here to it diligently, and let us always, draw near 
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having 
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and 
let us wash our bodies with pure water, that is, put 
off all uncleanness of the heart and the flesh, and 
perfect all righteousness and holiness; and hold 
fast the profession of your faith without wavering, 
for He is faithful that promised ; and always con- 
sider yourself — this I entreat you, my most beloved 
— to provoke unto love and to good works. He- 
brews 10:22-24; II Cor. 7:1. 

Since you are a child of the New Testament, I 
write you this for a testament according to your 
request. Hence it is my request of you, my dear 
lamb, despised of men, but chosen of God, and 
called to His Testament, since He left us the Testa- 
ment, that we should thereby remember His death ; 
namely the breaking of the bread, showing by it 
that He was broken for us on the tree of the cross, 
and that we should also remember thereby, that we 
are delivered through Him from the hand of our 


626 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


enemies. This He left us for an everlasting Testa- 
ment, to observe it, even as the children of Israel 
were commanded to eat the Passover, and to ob- 
serve it yearly for a memorial of their having been 
delivered from King Pharaoh ; all of which was a 
figure and shadow, of which we now have the true 
substance, in the true observance of our redemption 
through the true Passover Christ, and His com- 
munion, in which you are certainly included, since 
it is but a short time ago that we showed it among 
the others by the breaking of bread, and drinking 
of wine, that you are a partaker of the New Testa- 
ment, and of all the glorious promises which are 
promised the children of the New Testament. 
Hence it is my request that you will faithfully con- 
tinue therein unto the end, so that you may inherit 
all the promises, for he that overcometh shall in- 
herit all things ; to him that overcometh will I grant 
to sit with Me in My throne ; he that overcometh, 
the same shall be clothed in white raiment ; he that 
overcometh, him will I confess in heaven before 
my Father, and will write his name in the book of 
life ; and other beautiful promises that, as you well 
know, are promised to all that overcome. Revela- 
tion 21 :7; 3:5, 21. 

Therefore, my most beloved, see that you remain 
faithful; for you are still in the wilderness, where 
you must be proved yet, even as Israel was proved 
in the wilderness forty years, that God might make 
manifest thereby, what was in their hearts. Hence 
know that all perished who did not remain stead- 
fast, and that they could not inherit the promises, 
as stated before. But now we have a better testa- 
ment, which is for ever, and not as Israel, a law 
written in tables of stone, but written in the tables 
of our hearts. Heb. 8:6. 

Hence, my most beloved, since we have a better 
testament, walk the better in it, and continue stead- 
fast in the faith, and let this be manifested by the 
fruits of faith, and the law which is now written in 
your heart, by the Spirit of God ; let him be read 
from you, and this by fulfilling the works of the 
Spirit, that you may thus be an epistle of Christ, 
which may be read by all to whom you are mani- 
fest as Paul testifies of the Corinthians (II Cor. 
3 :3), that they were the epistle of Christ ministered 
by them, written not with ink, but with the Spirit 
of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in 
fleshly tables in their hearts; for Christ also says 
(Matthew 5:16): "Let your light so shine before 
men, that they may see your good works, and glori- 
fy your Father." For if we now have a new testa- 
ment given by Christ, who is our Leader and Law- 
giver, we must keep His commandments, follow 
Him (as I wrote to you in the other two letters), 
and show forth His image, even as the image of 
the Father was shown forth through Him, as He 
said to Philip : "Philip, he that hath seen me hath 
seen the Father ; and how sayest thou then, Shew 
us the Father ? Believest thou not that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me? the words that I 
speak unto you I speak not of myself : but the Fa- 


ther that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works " 
John 14:9, 10. 

Now, my most beloved, since through the grace 
of God you have heard the Gospel, which has been 
preached in all the world (Rom. 8:18), and believe 
in it, and have been obedient to it, and are yet, as I 
trust through the grace of the Lord, and have put 
on Christ, let Him therefore be shown forth in you, 
even as the image of the Father is shown forth in 
Christ, through words and miracles, as you have 
also always shown Him forth by a pure Christian 
conversation; and thus truly follow Christ, since 
He is the true Moses, who went before us. Fol- 
low Him valiantly, no matter what you meet with 
in this wilderness, whether it be tribulation or af- 
fliction, suffering or persecution ; be of good cour- 
age, Christ is gone before ; follow Him boldly, for 
the servant is not better than his lord ; nor the 
disciple above his master, nor the wife above her 
husband, nor the maid above her mistress ; but it is 
enough for the disciple that he be as his master, 
the servant as his lord, the wife as her husband' 
the maid as her mistress. 

Therefore, dear sister in the Lord, be of good 
cheer, and consider the long suffering and patience 
of Christ, and all the pious witnesses who from the 
beginning until now have followed Christ. Jas. 
5 :10. He did not leave them without comfort, nor 
does He leave us, who are imprisoned here for 
the same testimony's sake, without comfort, but 
wonderfully comforts and strengthens us through 
the power of the Holy Ghost, eternal praise to 
Him for it. 

Hence be of good courage, continue without 
ceasing in prayer and supplication, and thus show 
that you are a child of the New Testament, that the 
law of the Lord is written in your heart, and is 
thus read. May the merciful Father strengthen you 
to this end, through His Son, and the power of His 
Holy Spirit. Herewith (since my paper is ex- 
hausted) I commend you, my dear wife, to the 
Lord, and to the word of His grace. 

Written in my bonds, on Monday, by me, 

Jelis Bernaerts, your dear husband. 

A LETTER WRITTEN BY JELIS BERNAERTS TO HIS 
WIFE 

Grace and peace from God the Father, which 
has come to us through Jesus Christ His only be- 
gotten Son, our Lord. May He comfort you in all 
your tribulation by the power of the Holy Spirit, 
which spirit is the comforter of all the afflicted, 
and is sent us from the Father through Jesus Christ 
His Son, as the teacher of all believers, and com- 
forter of all the afflicted, who are in godly sorrow, 
which sorrow worketh repentance to salvation. II 
Cor. 7:10. This same only, undivided, unchange- 
able, eternal almighty, strong God, expressed in 
three names, namely, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 
in one Being, as is written. John 5:7: There 
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


627 


the Word, and the Holy Ghost : and these three are 
one ; may He be your Comforter unto the end ; this 
1 pray from the bottom of my heart, through His 
dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 

After all heartfelt and affectionate greeting 
which I have written you, my dearest and beloved 
wife, and sister in the Lord, whom I love as my 
own soul, according to the spirit and the flesh, since 
you are flesh of my flesh, and I with you, I cannot 
(perceiving your sorrow) omit or neglect always 
to comfort you by my writing, as long as I have 
time. And know', my most beloved, that my part- 
ing from you is hard for me ; but I console myself 
with the Word of the Lord, who has said that we 
must hate and forsake everything : father, mother, 
wife, children; and that he who does not take up 
his cross daily, cannot be His disciple. Luke 14 :26 ; 
Matt. 16:24. And when I also consider that the 
union of the flesh which we have formed together, 
cannot last forever, and as the parting does thus 
take place according to the will of the Lord, I re- 
nounce my own will herein, and submit myself to 
the will of the Lord. Thus you also, my most be- 
loved, I entreat you, give yourself over to the Lord, 
for He is your life and your death, as we read 
Rom. 14:8: Whether we live, we live unto the 
Lord ; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord ; 
for we are the Lord's. And when I, my dearest, 
contemplate the unity in which we still stand, 
namely, in the spiritual body of Christ, since by 
one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, then 
I rejoice that you also stand in communion with 
me, and have become a partaker of the divine na- 
ture, yea, that we have become branches on the 
vine, which is Christ, sheep of the true Shepherd, 
children of the promise, born of the free woman, 
heirs of God's kingdom, with Christ in the king- 
dom of His Father, since we are born of God 
through Him, by the incorruptible seed, the word 
of truth, which He is, since He is the Word of the 
Father, and the Word became flesh, through which 
Word and Spirit we came into this communion, 
and became flesh of His flesh, and bone of His 
bone, and are members of His body, namely, of 
His church, of which He is the Head ; and when I 
contemplate that we both stand herein, I rejoice, 
as also you, my most beloved, this I pray you ; for 
this union shall endure forever, if we remain faith- 
ful to Him with whom we are united herein, and do 
not commit adultery, and we shall enjoy hereafter 
all the glorious riches with Him in His Father's 
kingdom. But know, my dear lamb, that Christ, 
when He had forsaken the glory of His Father, and 
came upon earth, had to take it again by much 
tribulation and suffering; and if He, who is the 
Head, went thus before, we, the members, must 
follow ; and as there is but one way, and one door, 
the members must follow in and through the same 
— the body cannot enter the house divided. Hence, 
my most beloved, if we would be members with the 
Head, namely, enter with Christ into His Father's 
house, and enjoy the glorious riches, we must enter 


by the same way, and accept all that may befall us ; 
for if we would reign with Him, we must suffer 
with Him. 

If we are children, we are also heirs, heirs of 
God, and joint heirs with Christ; if so be that we 
suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified to- 
gether. For I reckon that the sufferings of the 
present time are not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall be revealed in us. Rom. 8:17, 
18. And Christ says: "Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world 
shall rejoice ; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into joy." A woman when 
she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is 
come : but as soon as she is delivered of the child, 
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that 
a man is born into the world. John 16:20, 21. 
Thus, my most beloved, take these words of Christ, 
for an example, that it must be thus with us until 
we have born Christ. 

Therefore, my most beloved, consider well the 
Scriptures, how He constantly speaks of tribulation 
and suffering in this present time, always, however, 
adding comfort, even as He says : "Blessed are ye 
that mourn; for ye shall be comforted." Matt. 
5 :4. Again : "In the world ye shall have tribu- 
lation : but be of good cheer ; I have overcome the 
world." John 16:33. And again: "Fear not, I 
will not leave you orphans." John 14:18. And 
even as He speaks through the prophet Isaiah: 
"Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she 
should not have compassion on the son of her 
womb ? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget 
thee." Isa. 49:15. 

Hence, my most beloved, be comforted by these 
words, and by all the glorious riches of which you 
have become a partaker through faith, and you 
need not be astonished that you now weep, since 
you certainly well know, that in this present time 
nothing is promised us, but tribulation, suffering, 
persecution, and weeping, but it is written : "Bless- 
ed are ye that weep now : for ye shall laugh. Woe 
unto you that laugh now ! for ye shall weep." Luke 
6:21, 25. Hence it is better to weep now, than 
afterwards, since the time is coming which will en- 
dure forever ; and the things which now are must 
soon perish. Therefore, my most beloved, cast 
your care upon the Lord, for He cares for you; 
and be strengthened with all might, according to 
His glorious power, unto all patience and long- 
suffering with joyfulness : giving thanks unto the 
Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers 
of the inheritance of the saints in light : who hath 
delivered us from the power of darkness, through 
His beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, unto whom 
be praise, honor and glory, now and forever. 
Amen. Colossians 1:11-13. 

Herewith, I your faithful husband, commend 
you, my most beloved wife, to the Lord, and to 
the word of His grace. Amen. May the Lord 
strengthen and stablish you by His Spirit, that you 
may keep unto the end that which you have and 


628 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


thus receive the crown of life, and wait with 
patience for the time of your redemption. The 
peace of the Lord be with you, and with all that 
fear and love the Lord, and keep His command- 
ments. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JELIS BERNAERTS TO HIS 
WIFE 

The grace and peace from God the Father, and 
the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the com- 
munion of the Holy Spirit, by which Spirit we are 
all baptized into one body, of which Christ is the 
Head, and we members together, flesh of His flesh, 
and bone of His bone, and He is the Saviour of His 
body, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against 
or withstand it, if we remain firmly united in love 
among ourselves, and do not suffer ourselves to be 
deceived, but hold fast the faith in Christ Jesus, 
and do not neglect the grace given us of God 
through Christ Jesus, His only begotten Son, our 
Lord, unto whom be praise, honor, glory, and 
thanksgiving now and forever. Amen. 

After all heartfelt greeting written to you my be- 
loved wife and sister in the Lord, of whom I am 
now deprived through the bonds in which I now 
am for the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and the faith in God, which I hope to seal with my 
blood and death, and thus to enter into rest with all 
the saints of God under the altar — which altar is 
Christ — and wait for all my fellow brethren and 
sisters, where we shall be gathered together and 
remain forever and ever, and thus be in everlasting 
joy, where parting will be heard no more, but we 
shall reign forever with God and the Lamb, and all 
the saints. There neither sighing nor weeping shall 
be heard any more, but all tears shall be wiped 
away from our eyes ; our tribulation shall be turned 
into joy and gladness, our weeping into laughing, 
our parting into eternal gathering, where there will 
be nothing but joy and gladness. "For eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love him. But God hath re- 
vealed them unto us by his Spirit." I Cor. 2:9. 
Therefore let us be of good cheer, and patient in 
tribulation, knowing that we must through much 
tribulation and suffering enter into the kingdom of 
heaven ; and let us continue instant in prayer, and 
firmly persevere with prayer and supplication in the 
Spirit, that He will always comfort, strengthen and 
stablish us, so that we may always be steadfast in 
all tribulation and suffering that may befall us ; in 
which suffering He will not leave us without com- 
fort ; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, 
so our consolation aboundeth by Christ. II Cor. 
1:5. 

Now, my most beloved, we may be of good 
cheer, and have good courage, and rejoice in hope, 
that we have obtained such glorious promises, and 
expect so unhoped for a salvation. For we who 
sometime were far off, are now come nigh ; yea, we 


who sometime were strangers and foreigners, are 
now become fellow citizens with the household of 
God ; and are built upon the foundation of the apos- 
tles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the 
chief cornerstone, and are thus framed together 
unto a holy temple, even as Peter says (I Peter 
2:5) : "Ye also, as lively stones, be ye built up a 
spiritual house, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, ac- 
ceptable to God by Jesus Christ ; for He loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and 
hath made us kings and priests unto God and His 
Father (Revelation 1 :5, 6) ; even as Peter also 
writes in his first epistle, second chapter; "But ye 
are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy 
nation, a peculiar people ; that ye should show forth 
the virtues of him who hath called you out of dark- 
ness into his marvellous light : which in time past 
were not a people, but are now the people of God : 
which had not obtained mercy, but now have ob- 
tained mercy." Verses 9 and 10. For we must 
know that we were without God in the world, when 
we served the lusts of our flesh, and walked ac- 
cording to the course of this world, whose friend 
we were, yea, what is more, we were praised by 
the world ; but, alas ! despised by God ; for, even as 
James says : "Whosoever will be a friend of the 
world is the enemy of God." James 4:4. Then we 
were of those who had not obtained mercy of God ; 
for, even as Christ says: "Ye cannot serve two 
masters : ye must hate the one, and love the other." 
Matt. 6:24. And if we renounce the world, and 
forsake our own life, to live no longer according 
to the will of our flesh, but according to the will of 
God, He will have mercy upon us; and turn us 
from lies to the truth, from darkness to the light, 
from the serving of idols to the worship of the liv- 
ing God. Then we who were not a people, become 
the people of God, and can proclaim all the virtues 
and glorious benefits which the Lord has shown us, 
having also adopted us as His children ; for it was 
such a people, converted and changed into newness 
of life, to whom the apostle Peter wrote: "Ye are 
a chosen generation," etc. And observe, my be- 
loved, that he commences his epistle as to a people 
who were scattered abroad everywhere for the 
faith in Christ Jesus ; hence it need not surprise us, 
though we are dispersed, scattered, apprehended 
and put to death ; for thus, as you may hear and 
read, it has been from the beginning, and will be 
made unto the end, since darkness does not love the 
light. 

Thus, my most beloved, let us not fear; God is 
our_ Leader; and if God be for us, who can be 
against us? He that spared not His own Son, but 
delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with 
Him also freely give us all things? It is God that 
justifieth. Who is He that condemneth ? It is Christ 
that died, yea, rather, that is arisen again, who is 
even at the right hand of God, who also rhaketh in- 
tercession for us. This we know, yea, what is 
more, we know that He preserves us as the apple 
of His eye, and has said : "I will never leave thee, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


629 


nor forsake thee." So that we may boldly say: 
"The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what 
man shall do unto me," (Heb. 13:5, 6), even as 
He has also admonished us, not to fear them that 
can kill the body; since after that they can do no 
more. But let us fear Him who has power to cast 
soul and body into hell. Even as He also says 
through the prophet: "Who art thou, that thou 
shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of 
the son of man which shall be made as grass?" 
Isaiah 51 :12. 

Hence, my most beloved, fear not that which 
may befall you yet: neither be without comfort: 
but be of good cheer out of bonds, and be patient in 
tribulation, even as I am by the help of the Lord, in 
my bonds ; and let us firmly continue in faith and 
love, and say with St. Paul: "Who shall separate 
us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or 
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, 
or peril, or sword ? As it is written ; for thy sake 
we are killed all the day long : we are accounted as 
sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things 
we are more than conquerors through him that 
loved us." Rom. 8:35-37. 

Therefore, my most beloved, have good courage, 
and be of good cheer and patient in all your trib- 
ulation, and stand firm in the faith, steadfast unto 
the end, so that, even as we are now separated from 
each other by much tribulation and suffering, we 
may meet in the day of resurrection, and thus re- 
joice forever with one another, and reign with the 
Lord and all the saints, and all the angels of God, 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

To this end, may the Almighty God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ strengthen you, and me 
(and all that love the Lord and keep His command- 
ments) through" the power of His Holy Spirit. 
Amen. Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and 
to the word of His grace. Amen. The peace of the 
Lord be with you. 


A LETTER WRITTEN BY JELIS BERNAERTS TO 

BRETHREN AND SISTERS, AFTER HE 

WAS SENTENCED 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
and His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who gave Him- 
self for our sins, that He might deliver us from this 
present evil world, according to the will of His 
Father ; to Him be praise, honor, glory and thanks- 
giving, now and forever, Amen. Gal. 1 :4 ; Revela- 
tion 5:13. 

My most beloved wife and sister in the Lord, 
and all dear brethren and sisters of the church at 
Gh., after I was sentenced to death, my heart felt 
inclined to write something to you, and to my be- 
loved wife, whom I commend to you and to the 
Word of God, out of a true, affectionate heart, 
and genuine, unfeigned brotherly love, which I 
have to you even unto death. Hence it is my broth- 
erly exhortation and epistle to you all, not to fear 
those who can kill the body ; since after that they 


can do no more. And, as Peter says : "Be not 
afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; but 
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts." I Pet. 3 :14, 
15. And as he further says (dear brethren and 
sisters in the Lord) : "Think it not strange con- 
cerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as 
though some strange thing happened unto you: 
but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings ; that when his glory shall be revealed, 
ye may be glad also with exceeding joy." I Pet. 
4 :12, 13. Well might the apostle exhort us to re- 
joice; for I can write it with truth, since every- 
thing has now befallen me, except death ; however, 
sentence has been passed upon me. In the first 
place I had great joy according to the spirit when 
I was delivered into bonds ; though many thoughts 
and misgivings came to the flesh, yet I rejoiced ac- 
cording to the spirit, that I had been chosen of 
God, to suffer for His name. In the second place, 
when I had confessed my faith before the author- 
ities, and was then greatly tortured, I felt that 
God was with me ; for He gave me such strength, 
that no matter what sufferings and tortures they 
inflicted upon me, they could get nothing out of 
me, but what tended to the praise of the Lord, and 
to my salvation; wherefore they became angry, 
and asked me whether I would not yet tell; for, 
said they, "We have power to torture you thus 
every day." I said: "My body is before you; do 
with it as you please." After all this had taken 
place, my joy was still greater; I could not ex- 
press the praise of the Lord, nor sufficiently thank 
Him for the grace He gave me, that I was counted 
worthy to suffer for His name, and to seal His 
Word, with my blood ; for the marks which I then 
received, and the pain, remained in my members 
unto the last day; the Lord be praised forever, 
since I well deserved to be chastised for my sins 
and transgressions. Afterwards I was twice 
brought before a monk. The first time he wanted 
to know my faith. I said: "Ask the authorities 
before whom I confessed it." He thereupon com- 
menced to talk a great deal about incarnation, and 
baptism. When he had finished speaking, I asked 
him whether he meant thereby to maintain his 
ground ; or if he meant, that I should interrogate 
him, and prove the contrary to him ; but he would 
not hear my defense, and began to rail greatly 
against Menno and his books, which, as he said, he 
had read much, and found many lies in them. 
I said: "Bring them all here, and let us discuss 
them for a week." He replied : "You are not the 
man ; so much trouble will not be taken with you." 
We had many other words yet about his doctrine 
and church, which it would take too long to write. 
And thus I left him. 

Afterwards I was brought before him again, 
when another was with him. He wanted to dispute 
much about the sacrament, baptism, and incarna- 
tion. But I said : "You would not let me defend it, 
when I was with you the last time ; hence I do not 
want to speak with you now," He was not satisfied 


630 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


with this, and said he should compel me to speak, 
with the instruments of the Margrave; he also 
asked me whether I was ashamed of my faith. I 
replied: "I was not ashamed to confess it before 
the authorities ; but I do not want to have anything 
to do with you people." We resolved among our- 
selves that we would all do so ; and I would advise 
everyone, to observe this ; for it profits nothing to 
dispute with them, since they are carnal men. I 
was then sentenced to death, when my joy became 
complete, so that I could not express it, since my 
deliverance was so nigh, and I considered the words 
of the apostle, where he says: "Rejoice, inasmuch 
as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, 
when his glory should be revealed, I might be glad 
with exceeding joy;" and what he further says: 
"If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy 
are ye ; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth 
upon you ; on their part he is evil spoken of, but on 
your part he is glorified." I Pet. 4:13, 14. When 
I thought upon this, and other passages of Scrip- 
ture, and when I saw how transient tribulation and 
suffering were, and what beautiful promises were 
given me, and that I was to enter into rest with 
my dear brethren and sisters who went before and 
are under the altar, and wait for all our fellow 
brethren and sisters that must yet follow us, then 
all tribulation had to flee from me, when I beheld 
this with the spirit. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, I do not write you 
this out of vain glory, but for the consolation and 
strengthening of your hearts, so that you may 
not be afraid of those who can kill the body, since 
after that they can do no more ; but that you, dear 
brethren and sisters, may always be manful, and 
ever remember your leaders, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God, even as Paul says : "Remem- 
ber them which have the rule over you, who have 
spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith 
follow, considering the end of their conversation." 
Heb. 13:7. Hence, my most beloved, give attend- 
ance always among yourselves, to exhortation, to 
reading, to praying ; and do not forsake the assem- 
bling of yourselves together, but exhort one an- 
other to love and good works, and be firmly united 
in love, and use hospitality one to another ; always 
be of one heart and of one soul among yourselves, 
so that when you get into bonds (if this be the will 
of the Lord) your heart may be unencumbered. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. Amen. Farewell, farewell 
to you all, my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord. 

Written by me, Jelis Barnaerts, to you, my dear 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, from the bottom 
of my heart, and out of true love. Amen. 


JAN BOSCH, OF BERGH, OR JAN DURPS, A. D. 1559 

This Jan Bosch, commonly called Jan Durps, 
was a pious, honorable man, and a linen weaver by 
trade. He lived at Maestricht, and though the 
divine knowledge of the truth was greatly es- 


tranged and obscured, the light of divine grace ap- 
peared unto him, and the true evangelical truth 
was presented to him, and he thus joined the 
church of the Lord, fulfilling the obedience insti- 
tuted and commanded by Christ, the Son of God 
(Mark 16:16) ; and as he for a time gave good 
heed to his calling, it was entrusted him of the 
church, and he was ordained, that he should take 
the oversight somewhat of the church, and min- 
ister to her with the Word of the Lord, by reading 
as well as exhorting ; which, when he, though with 
much reluctance, had consented, he faithfully did, 
putting his talent to usury, to the best of his 
ability. 

As this tended to the glory of God, and to the 
edification of the church, Satan, who is ever the 
enemy of everything that is good and God-pleasing, 
sought to destroy this good work, and to this end 
inspired his ministers to report this good man to 
the authorities, as a heretic and Anabaptist. The 
authorities, deceived by this spirit, thought they 
were doing God service, and proceeded with rash- 
ness. One of the burgomasters, in broad daylight, 
went with the constables to the place where Jan 
Durps, under his master, was working at the loom : 
he apprehended him, and, leading him through the 
city, brought him to the Landtskroom (the city 
hall), and imprisoned him there. He was immedi- 
ately examined by priests and monks, who ap- 
proached him in many ways. He plainly confessed 
his faith to them, and that he was baptized upon 
faith in Christ Jesus ; also, what he thought of the 
sacrament. All this he confessed according to the 
Scriptures, reproving the idolatry which they com- 
mitted therewith. 

When this petty council and the priests had ex- 
amined him, and he had confessed his faith, and 
immovably adhered to it, they deemed the case so 
grave as to be criminal in its nature; hence they 
delivered him to the lords through the bailiff. These 
took him, and put him in prison, in which Jan re- 
mained for a time in confinement. In the mean- 
time his wife sent him a letter, in which she ex- 
horted him, to be of good cheer in his sufferings, 
and to adhere faithfully to the truth unto death ; 
which he very thankfully received, comforting, in 
return, his wife, and exhorting her, and the friends 
together, that they should adhere to the truth, and 
continue therein unto the end ; he also earnestly re- 
quested the prayers of the faithful. He suffered 
many tortures, because they sought to extort from 
him who, in the city, were his brethren and fellow 
believers. But the Lord kept his lips, so that not a 
single name could be obtained from him, however 
greatly he was tortured for it. 

The time having arrived, sentence was pro- 
nounced upon him, namely, that he should, accord- 
ing to the imperial decree, be burnt alive to ashes ; 
to which he listened with good cheer, and submit- 
ted to it, suffering himself to be bound, and led be- 
tween many sergeants armed with sticks and hal- 
berds, which now and then descended upon the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


631 


head of some individual approaching Jan too close- 
ly, in order to hear his words ; for on his way from 
the prison to the Vrijthof, Jan spoke much to the 
people, telling them to remember that a man had 
been among them, who had told them the truth. He 
urged them hard to repent, amend their life, and 
seek God's grace. When he arrived in the Vrijthof, 
where the scaffold had been erected, said place 
was found to be filled with arquebusiers fully 
armed, all the four companies of arquebusiers of 
the city having been commanded to appear there 
with their arms. Jan artlessly ascended the scaf- 
fold, too, and was led into a hut by the executioner, 
who then set fire to the same in several places. As 
Jan stood in the flames, he cried aloud several 
times : "O Lord, into Thy hands I commend my 
spirit : and was thus burnt to ashes as a faithful wit- 
ness of Jesus Christ." This took place on the 23d 
of September, in the year 1559. 


HANS VERMEERSCH, ALSO CALLED HANS VAN 
MAES, PUT TO DEATH AT WAESTEN 
IN FLANDERS, FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 
A. D. 1559 

Confession of Hans Vermeersch, written by him 

while imprisoned at Waesten in Flanders 

A. D. 1559 

In October, A. D. 1559, I was brought before 
the inquisitor to confess my faith before him. He 
demanded to know my age, my name, and where I 
had been ; he then asked me whether I was rebap- 
tized. I said : "I know but one baptism, as is writ- 
ten in Ephesians (4 :5) ; which is the baptism of be- 
lievers, as is stated by Matthew and Mark in their 
gospels. And also as Peter said (Acts 2 :38, 41) to 
the people that heard it : "Repent, and be baptized 
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for 
the remission of sins. Then they that gladly re- 
ceived his word were baptized." Mark, in the 
same chapter, and read with attention: "They 
brake bread ; fear came upon them ; they were all 
of one soul, and had all things common;" all of 
which an infant cannot do. Verses 42, 43 ; and 4 : 
32. He then asked me why I believed that the Gos- 
pel was true. I replied: "Because every word is 
established in the mouth of two or three witness- 
es." Deut. 17:6; Matt. 18:16. Now there are four 
evangelists, as Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, 
who all together testify and speak of one Christ 
and Messiah, who is the Son of God, and God is 
His Father. That there is a God, is also clearly 
seen from the creation of the world, and the signs 
and wonders which we daily behold, as causing 
corn, grass, apples, cherries, nuts, etc., to grow 
as may be seen. That the Gospel is true may fur- 
ther be seen from this : I have read that Christ 
says : "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, 
for my name's sake." Matt. 5:11. Christ also says : 


"Ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake," 
10:22. When I read this, I believed it, and now I 
find it to be true in me and in others, and believe 
that the Gospel is true. Now everyone may know, 
see and understand that it is as Paul says: "All 
that will live godly shall suffer persecution." II 
Tim. 3:12. Hence I say: "By all these witnesses, 
who cannot lie, we may boldly say that the Gospel 
is true, let every one take good heed." With this 
they tormented me greatly. 

They then asked me concerning the Roman 
church, whether I did not believe that it was the 
true church, which is built upon the rock which is 
Christ. I said: "No." Then he asked me which 
church I believed to be the true church. I replied : 
"The congregation of believers in the name of 
Christ, as Christ said to Peter: 'Thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock I will build my church' (Mat- 
thew 16:18) ; that is to say : those who have such a 
faith as Peter had, as can easily be seen in the sec- 
ond epistle to the Corinthians, (6:16), where Paul 
says: 'What agreement hath the temple of God 
with idols ? for ye are the temple of the living God ; 
as God hath said, I will be their God, and they shall 
be my people?' Thus, all believers who assemble in 
Christ's name are the true church." 

They also asked me whether the sacrament used 
by the church in the mass is not flesh and blood 
after the consecration by the priest — whether it is 
not the body of Christ in flesh and blood. I replied : 
"How should this be possible ; for it is written in 
Acts ( 1 :9) , that He ascended to heaven ; and in the 
seventh chapter (v. 56) Stephen says : 'I see the 
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on 
the right hand of God.' And Peter, in his first 
epistle, third chapter, says that He is risen, and 
gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God ; 
hence He is not here." He then asked me, whether 
He was not able to be here by His divine power. I 
said: "He can do nothing contrary to His word; 
He is Almighty, I know ; but He does not act con- 
trary to His word." They further said that when 
He held His supper with His disciples, He gave 
them His body as is written in the text, since He 
said: "Take, eat, this is my body." Matt. 26:26. 
But I replied that He did not give His body, but a 
morsel of bread ; for it is obvious that it [the body] 
was immediately delivered into the hands of the 
Jews, and suffered, and was hung on the cross; 
hence He certainly could not give His body to eat, 
as He says Himself: "I will not henceforth drink 
of this fruit of the vine ;" namely, the wine which 
He before called His blood. Read the tenth and 
eleventh chapters of the first epistle to the Corin- 
thians, where you can obtain a fuller under- 
standing. Hence He did not give His apostles His 
body ; but it represented His body. He then asked 
me what I thought of the service performed in the 
church. I said I regarded it as a great and abom- 
inable idolatry. Thereupon he said: "Then you 
consider her the whore of Babylon?" I replied: 
"Yes, as is written Rev. 13:4, of the beast that 


632 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


caused himself to be worshiped; hence, as many 
as would not worship him, or receive the mark in 
their hand, or in their foreheads, etc., who op- 
poseth himself against God in His elect." He then 
told me that we could not show that our church, 
namely, that of the Anabaptists (as they called it) 
had been in existence forty years ago; and that 
their church had continued, etc. I replied : "We do 
not keep a register for our church, as does the Ro- 
man church; she would soon be discovered; for 
everyone seeks to destroy or kill her, and she has 
not (as has the Roman church) the emperor or 
the king for her helper, but emperor, king or prince 
diligently seek to destroy her. But I will show you 
that she is fifteen hundred and fifty-nine years old. 
For Christ is the foundation stone and it is that 
long since He was crucified." They rejoined: 
"Yes. the Roman church; for she was instituted 
by Peter ; he was the first ; after him all the holy 
popes, and all the holy doctors [teachers], as 
Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, Bernard, who are 
the four doctors of the holy church, will you not 
believe these, who were such learned men?" I 
said : "I believe only the Word of God." 

They also asked me whether I did not believe in 
God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy 
Ghost; three persons, and one true God. I said: 
"I find but one person in the Scriptures." They 
asked me who it was. I said: "Christ, who was 
seen and heard ; but the Father no one has ever 
seen. Who then can say what person it is ? for He 
is invisible. John 9:37; 1 :18. Neither has any one 
ever seen the Holy Ghost. True, He has been seen 
to descend as a dove upon Christ, but a dove can- 
not be a person." Then they said: "You do not 
believe that there are three persons?" I replied: 
"No, unless it be shown me by the Scriptures ; but 
I confess that they are three in essence, yet only 
one true God. The Father is not the Son, nor the 
Son the Holy Ghost. The Father I confess as the 
Father; Jesus Christ as His Son, who proceeded 
from Him ; and the Holy Ghost, as proceeded from 
both the Father and the Son ; yet, inseparably one 
true God." John 17:8; 15:26. 

He then asked me whether Christ did not as- 
sume His flesh and blood from Mary. I replied : 
"This will have to be shown to me." They said: 
"He is of the seed of David." I said : "That He 
assumed His flesh and blood from Mary, this the 
Scriptures do not say. Read Luke, first chapter, 
where the angel said : 'Thou shalt conceive in thy 
womb;' and, further on, when Mary said: 'How 
shall this be, seeing I know not a man ? The angel 
answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall 
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 
overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son 
of God.' Consider these words ; he says : 'that holy 
thing.' And Paul says that the first Adam is of the 
earth, earthy; but the second is the Lord from 
heaven. Read in the first epistle to the Corinthians, 
in the fifteenth chapter (verse 47), where you can 


see it clearly. Also, Heb. 10:5, where Paul says: 
'Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he 
saith. Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but 
a body hast thou prepared me.' Again, John 16 28, 
where Christ says that He came forth from the Fa- 
ther, and came into the world; and many other 
places, as in chapters eight and nine. Examine the 
Scriptures, John's Gospel, and the epistles." He 
then asked me, whether He took no substance from 
Mary, in the way of nursing, etc. I replied that she 
offered Him up ; when He had been brought forth 
she wrapped Him in swaddling clothes, and laid 
Him in a manger. We further find that she cared 
for Him ; as when at the age of twelve years He 
was lost, they sought Him, when they returned 
from Jerusalem. It says that they sought Him dili- 
gently, and sorrowing (Luke 2:48). He then 
asked, whether she did not suckle Him. Ans. 
"Christ spake (when the woman said : 'Blessed are 
the paps which thou hast sucked') : Yea, woman, 
blessed is he that heareth my word, and keepeth 
it." Luke 11:27, 28. Ques. "What do you think ; 
tell us your opinion?" Ans. "I must not speak of 
that concerning which the Scriptures give me no 
information; suppositions are of no value." He 
also asked me, whether Christ was not of the seed 
of David. I said: "How should He be of the seed 
of David; for Christ said Himself (when the 
Pharisees asked whose Son He was, whether He 
was not the Son of David) : 'How then doth David 
call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my 
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine 
enemies thy footstool? If David then call him 
Lord, how is he his son ?' " Matt. 22 :42, 45. They 
did not know what to say. I then said : "I know 
that He is born out of the seed of David, but not of 
the seed of David." Rom. 1:3.* They replied: 
"Gal. 4^4 it is written that He was made of a 
woman." I said : "It is preposterous, that a woman 
should make a child. Do not all the other Scrip- 
tures say: 'Born of a woman?'" He said: "I 
could show in forty places, that He is of the seed 
of David." But he would not show it. I then said : 
"If she conceived Him of the Holy Ghost, He can- 
not be of the seed of David." 

He also asked me, where men went to, when they 
leave this world. I replied : "They fall asleep in 
the Lord, as the Scriptures testify, namely, the be- 
lievers." Acts 7:60. He asked whither the souls 
went. I replied : "Paul said that he was willing to 
fall asleep according to the flesh, and to be present 
with the Lord ; and thus am I minded." II Cor. 
5 :8. He then asked where the other souls went to. 
Ans. "The Scriptures say nothing about it; nei- 
ther can I say whither they go." Ques. "What do 
you think about it? They go somewhere." Ans. 
"I leave this to Divine Providence." 

He then asked what I thought of the resurrection 

* The author of this confession apparently bases his argument 
upon a version of the Scriptures in which the preposition, or prepo- 
sitions, on which his argument hinges, are different in signification 
at least in his view, from those occupying corresponding posi- 
tions in our English translation. — Trans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


633 


of the dead. I replied: "As is written I Cor- 
inthians 15 :53, where Paul says that this mortal 
shall put on immortality, and this corruptible, in- 
corruption, and that this same body shall rise." 
He was unable to reply to this. He then asked me 
whither children went that died without baptism. 
I said : "Where it pleases God." He asked whether 
they were saved. Ans. "Christ blessed the chil- 
dren, and said : 'Of such is the kingdom of heav- 
en.' " Matthew 19:14. Ques. "Then you say 
that they are saved ?" Ans. "If they have the king- 
dom of heaven, they are happy enough." Ques. 
"Behold, they are damned, this is clear." Ans. 
"Read Romans 5 -.17-19, where it says that as by 
one man's disobedience death comes, so by the 
obedience of one life comes upon all men." He 
further asked me whether I would not be obedient 
to the magistracy. Ans. "Yes, my lords, so far as 
it is not contrary to the command of God; for 
Peter says we ought to obey God rather than men." 
Acts 5 :29. He then asked me whether I would not 
swear before the lords. Ans. "No." Ques. "We 
must obey the magistracy; Paul and Peter teach 
this." Ans. "Christ says: 'Swear not at all; nei- 
ther by thy head, etc.; but let your yea be yea; 
and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than 
these cometh of evil.'" Matt. 5:34; Jas. 5:12. 
Also II Cor. 1 :17. He then asked me whether we 
were not bound to tell the truth. Ans. "Yes." 
Ques. "Tell me who your accomplices are?" Ans. 
"To accuse our neighbor is not the truth ; Christ 
does not teach that." He then adjured me by Jesus 
Christ, the Son of the living God, that I should tell 
him. I said : "I care not for your adjuring ; it is 
sorcery." Then he said that we were bound to act 
contrary to the command of God, on account of 
the adjuration. 

They greatly tormented me with those who 
brought the man that was sick of the palsy ; they 
said that his sins were forgiven through the faith 
of those who brought him ;. and that thus it was, 
through the faith of father and mother, with in- 
fants, in baptism. But he does not say : through 
the faith of those who brought him ; it simply says : 
seeing their faith. Matt. 9 :2 ; Mark 2 :5. 

I have written this much out of love ; if I have 
not written you truly, bear with me ; but I think I 
have written according to the Scriptures ; receive 
it kindly. Farewell. I must affectionately greet the 
friends everywhere, requesting that they pray for 
me. Know that I am of good cheer, the Lord be 
praised. The grace of the Lord be with you all. 
Amen. 


a meeting had just been held in his house for the 
preaching of the Word of God. Someone had 
spied it out, and thus the margrave came there just 
after the congregation had dispersed, and while 
Andries was sitting on his porch, reading the Bible. 
He arrested him on the spot. 

His wife was confined at the time, which the 
margrave discovered when he walked towards the 
chamber, and saw that the midwife had the child 
on her lap ; for the woman had just been delivered. 
Perceiving this, the margrave withdrew from the 
chamber, but apprehended also the women who 
had come to assist the woman in her distress, and 
caused the lying-in woman to be guarded by some 
of his servants. But the nurse, vexed at this, pre- 
vented the apprehension of the woman, by enter- 
taining them very liberally, and plying them with 
wine, so that the sick woman was, without their 
knowledge, conducted, on planks, across a well be- 
longing to the two neighbors in common, and thus 
went from her neighbor's house to the house of 
Christian Langedul, her husband's brother, whose 
wife was also confined at that time. 

It has not come to our knowledge, on what par- 
ticular day Andries Langedul was apprehended, 
but he offered up his sacrifice with Mattheus Potte- 
backer and Lauwerens van der Leyen on Thurs- 
day, November the 9th,- A. D. 1559, and this not 
publicly, but they were beheaded in prison, in a 
place where the other prisoners, of whom there 
were many at that time, could see it from the win- 
dows of their cells. 

When Andries knelt down to submit to the 
sword, he folded his hands, saying: "Father, into 
thy hands I commend" — but: "I commend my 
spirit" was not finished, the rapid descent of the 
sword preventing it. Thus all three were put to 
death as lambs of Christ for the slaughter. 

Lauwerens van der Leyen wrote several letters 
in prison, the following of which have come to our 
hands. 


ANDRIES LANGEDUL, MATTHEUS POTTEBACKER, 
AND LAUWERENS VAN DER LEYEN, 
A. D. 1559 

At Antwerp three brethren, named Andries 
Langedul, Mattheus Pottebacker and Lauwerens 
van der Leyen, were apprehended for the truth. 
Andries Langedul was apprehended at a time when 


THE FIRST LETTER OF LAUWERENS VAN DER 
LEYEN 

Grace and peace be unto all the brethren resid- 
ing at Emden, especially to my two brothers, and 
Tonijntgen, Lieven's wife. May the Lord Jesus 
Christ strengthen you and us all, through His di- 
vine Spirit. Amen. 

I, Lauwerens van der Leyen, imprisoned for the 
testimony of Jesus Christ on the 21st of May. On 
the 22nd I confessed my faith before the Prome- 
teur, Mr. Claes ; for he came alone, in hopes that 
I should say what he wanted to hear ; but the Lord 
kept my lips. Asked, before whom I had been to 
confession and to the sacrament on Easter, I re- 
plied : "Before Mr. Lieven Biestman, but not last 
Easter; for he has been dead for two or three 
years." I was asked: "Do you not believe that 
God is in the sacrament in flesh and blood?" I 
said : "No." What then do you think the sacra- 


634 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Andries Langedul beheaded in the prison of Antwerp in 1559 


merit to be? "An idol," I replied. I was asked 
whether I did not believe in the Roman church, of 
which the pope is the head. I replied : "No ; for I 
loathe the Roman church, for she is utterly con- 
trary to the truth ; but I believe in the apostolical 
church, of which Christ is the head." "What do 
you think of infant baptism?" "I regard it as 
worthless and an abuse; for I renounce my first 
baptism." "Then you are not baptized?" I said: 
"No." "Is baptism not necessary, then?" I re- 
plied: "Yes, it is necessary to perfection." 

"Why then are you not baptized?" I replied: 
"I was not good enough yet." "Why?" "Because 
I was too much involved in this world, for I was, 
and am still, greatly in debt, and I thought that if 
I should be apprehended, people would say that 
I was a cheat, and thus many should be offended ; 
for this reason I forbore to receive baptism. But 
I consider it good and right, and want to live and 
die herein ; and though I have not been baptized, 
the Lord in His mercy will save me, through His 
sufferings and precious blood ; for I believe all that 
a Christian is bound to believe; and herein I will 
abide, you may do with me what you please, for 
I am now in your power." 


I was further asked what I believed concerning 
the incarnation; whether I did not believe that 
Christ came from Mary's flesh and blood. I said : 
'I believe as the Scriptures testify concerning it, 
John 1 and Luke 1." And I stated it at length. 
Thus it remained, and I had to note it down. This 
was the severest assault; it lasted two or three 
hours. 

On the 24th of May the Dean of Ronse and two 
others came. He approached me with many fine 
words, and said: "Lauwerens, you must suffer 
yourself to be instructed ; it will not do for you to 
depend upon a few lay men, who have made stock- 
ings for thirty or forty years." I replied: "Do you 
think that I depend upon men ? He that trusteth 
in man is cursed, as the Scripture says. I put my 
trust in God alone, and in His living Word ; and 
herein I will abide as long as God grants me life " 
Jer. 17:5; I Tim. 6:17. But they wanted with 
many words to show me, that God was in the sacra- 
ment ; however, I would not believe it at all. With 
these words we parted, having been together at 
least two hours. 

Written in haste, by me, Lauwerens van der 
Leyen, the 25th of May, A.D. 1559. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


635 


THE SECOND LETTER OF LAUWERENS VAN DER 
LEY EN 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, my 
most beloved brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
Know that I was examined, and that the margrave 
wanted to know much from me. I said I wanted 
to tell him all that concerned my faith. He said: 
"You shall tell me all." I said: "What do you 
wish to know?" He asked me: "What do you 
think of the baptism you received in your infancy ?" 
I said : "Nothing at all." He then wanted to know 
where it was written that infants should not be 
baptized. I said: "Mark 16:16; Matt. 28:19." 
Much incensed at me, he asked me : "What do you 
think of the seven sacraments?" I replied: "I have 
never read anything about it." This question he 
repeated twice or three times. I said: "I have 
never read about it ; but I believe that Christ is sit- 
ting on the right hand of His Father, where I hope 
to be with Him, when the time will be fulfilled." 

He then asked me concerning auricular confes- 
sion. I said: "I acknowledge a confession; but I 
think nothing of auricular confession; but I con- 
fess daily before my heavenly Father." This en- 
raged the margrave, and he said that he should 
have me placed to the stake, or thrown into the 
water. I told him to do with me as he pleased, since 
my flesh was at his disposal. He then told me, that 
he should send other learned men. I replied that I 
already had the faith I wanted to believe. He 
said: "You must hearken to them." I answered: 
"Though you cut me limb from limb, I trust I shall 
not deny the Lord my God." Then the margrave 
and his judges were very angry at me ; for one of 
the latter said, that he should put me on a galley ; 
but I replied : "Do with me as you please." Then 
the margrave said: "I shall not be so lenient to 
him; but we will have him placed to the stake." 
I said : "I remind you of my sentence ;" and told 
him, how, when I was apprehended the last time, 
I had been prohibited, on pain of decapitation or 
the stake, from singing any hymns, and that I 
should take care not to be one of such people. 
"But" [said I] "I do not say this because I am 
therefore now the bolder ; for even if I had never 
previously been prohibited from it, I should not 
want to deny my Lord and God." 

The margrave then asked me: "Does your 
mother also belong to them?" I replied: "I wish 
she did." And I said: "When I used to gamble 
and get drunk, and to follow the world, I was left 
unmolested ; but now that I truly confess the name 
of God, I am persecuted ; but it is as the prophet 
Isaiah says: 'Truth is fallen in the street, and 
equity cannot enter; and he that departeth from 
evil maketh himself a prey.' " Isa. 59:14, 15. 

One of the judges then said to me : "Have you 
also stolen?" I asked him twice or three times: 
"Did you ever hear that I did?" but he made no 
reply. They then began to speak very suavely to 
me, and said: "If you will renounce all that you 


have said here, we shall tear this paper in pieces, 
and show you mercy." And the margrave said: 
"You certainly know, how your sister fared on this 
account, whom I caused to be thrown into the 
Scheldt." But I replied that she had died for the 
truth; and as regards myself: "I do not want to 
deny my Lord and God, who created and made 
me ; I will rather let you do with me whatever you 
please." Then the margrave said: "Do you think 
we cannot also read ? We, too, daily read the Scrip- 
tures; but these cobblers and tailors want to be 
wiser than we are. I am very glad that you have 
fallen into my hands ; for doubtless God the Lord 
sent you into that house, that I might punish you, 
so that others should take an example from you." 
And he applied many ugly epithets to me, and said : 
"You have often eaten and drank in my house ; 
I am sorry I did not tie up your throat." And he 
asked me : "If you were not a prisoner, would you 
have yourself rebaptized?" I said: "If you will 
release me tomorrow, I will use diligence to have 
myself baptized: for this behooves believers." 

He then asked me: "Will you confess nothing 
else ?" and interrogated me concerning princes and 
lords, and the Pope of Rome. I said: "I hold God 
Almighty to be my Supreme Creator, and my 
King." Then the margrave said : "I have at home 
a little book, covered with chamois." I said : "My 
lord, that book belonged to me, and if you will 
read it, you will therein find what our faith is." He 
replied: "They were first published by the Pope of 
Rome," I said : " I do not regard them thus ; but 
it is the Testament, left us by God for memorial." 
He was enraged at me, and said: "I wish I had 
never seen you ;" and irefully said : "Begone ; for 
I and these lords, the judges, came to instruct you ; 
but we shall send you other learned men." I 
thanked him much for the trouble they had taken. 

My dear friends, I did not fear them, no matter 
however they threatened me. Luke and Matthew 
say: "Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall 
lose it; but he that loseth it for my name's sake 
shall find it." Luke 17:33; Matt. 10:39. They 
thought they were afflicting me greatly ; but I was 
not afraid of them at all. I hope soon to be released 
from this flesh. My dear friends, do not fear them 
that kill the body, but fear Him who created and 
made you, and has power to cast you into the eter- 
nal fire of hell. Luke 12 :5. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord ; and may 
the mighty hand of God guide and keep you, my 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord. They also 
asked me, whether I should be saved, because I had 
not received baptism. I replied : " Yes, for I trust 
that the Lord will have respect to my willingness, 
since He had respect to Abraham's willingness." 
Gen. 22 :12. Brethren and sisters, pray for me, 
that with the help of God I may remain steadfast 
unto the end. I trust that you regard me as your 
brother, though I have not attained to perfection.* 

* Apparently an allusion to the fact of his not having been bap- 
tized. — Translator. 


636 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Written by me, Lauwerens van der Leyen, July 
the 10th, 1559, at Antwerp. 


A BRIEF CONFESSION OF FAITH, AND PART OF THE 

DISPUTATION WHICH I, LAUWERENS VAN DER 

LEYEN, HAD ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 

1559, WITH THE LORDS OF THE LAW, 

AT ANTWERP, AND THE DEAN OF 

RONSE 

(To relate it all would require too much time) 

A confession of faith, and a confession of the 
eternal God, who is from everlasting, and who will 
abide forever, without beginning and without end, 
who is and was ; this same only One is an eternal 
God ; and there is no other ; Him I confess to be 
an eternal God, namely, an eternal Father, and I 
also confess His only Son to be one with His eter- 
nal Holy Spirit. Thus He is a perfect God, and be- 
sides Him there is no other, namely, Father, Son 
and Holy Ghost. I John 5. According to my belief 
and the testimony of the holy Scriptures they are 
one. Amen. The almighty, eternal God, with His 
eternal, almighty Son, who is also the Word of the 
Father; to this great, incomprehensible, unblam- 
able, and invisible God, who by His eternal Word 
made the world, and without Him was not anything 
made that was made, that is in heaven and upon 
earth, the invisible became visible; to this eternal 
Son, who also is the Word of the Father, be 
praise forever and ever. Amen. John 1:1, 2; 
Colossians 1 :10. 

Of Him we want to speak, of this eternal Son, 
who was with His Father, and was with Him in 
essence or in divine form, through whom and with 
whom He operated from everlasting ; for by Him 
the world was made, and all that is in it, and with- 
out Him there is not anything made ; to this eternal 
Son, who is one with His eternal Father, who is 
from the beginning of the creation of God (Rev. 
3 :14), without beginning and without end, to Him 
be praise and glory forever and ever. Amen. 

For when God made man, He created him after 
His image, and made him ruler over all things, and 
gave him a commandment, which he was not to 
transgress. But as man was frail, and the devil sub- 
tle and cunning, and deceived man by fair pre- 
tenses, the devil induced him to transgress the 
faith ; and man thus transgressing, sin was brought 
into the world ; and he was ashamed and hid him- 
self from the face of God, and thus the curse came 
upon the whole world ; so that God said : "Cursed 
is the ground for thy sake." And thus man re- 
mained under the curse ; so that no one could make 
atonement for sin, since it was impossible for man, 
because he was weak through the flesh, was com- 
passed with infirmities, by sin or weakness, ac- 
cording to the holy Scriptures. Hence sin could 
not be taken away or atoned for by man, because 
all were subject unto sin. Now as it was not pos- 
sible that reconciliation for sin could be made by 
man, God promised His eternal Son, even as He 


often spoke to the people through the prophets, 
that He should raise up Jesus, the Saviour, whom 
He had promised through many generations, as 
we find written in Matthew 1. These promises 
were fulfilled from Abraham to Jesse, the father 
of David ; from David to Jacob, the father of Jo- 
seph, the husband of Mary, the pure virgin, whom 
God honored, and who also waited for the promise 
that the Saviour should be raised up, and was not 
unbelieving when the angel said to her : "Behold, 
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a 
son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be 
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest." 
Luke 1 :31, 32. Here we have the assurance that 
the promises are fulfilled which He had promised 
from generation to generation, Matt. 1, which are 
now fulfilled in that generation; hence there is 
fulfilled the word, Acts 13 :22. I have found David 
the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which 
shall fulfill all my will. Of this generation was 
born the Saviour Jesus, the Son of the most High 
God, though He existed before; but He was man- 
ifested in the latter days, to redeem us, and to 
gather those that were scattered, of whom Paul 
says that He gave many precious promises in the 
Holy Scriptures concerning His Son, which was 
made of the seed of David according to the flesh ; 
and declared to be the Son of God with power, ac- 
cording to the Spirit. Romans 1 :2, 4. 

One of the judges said to me: "If Christ is not 
of Mary s flesh, then the promise is not fulfilled 
yet. ' I said: "It is not written that Christ is of 
Mary s flesh." This dean said to me : "It is writ- 
ten; you lie, for it is written: 'That holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son 
of God.' Again : 'A virgin shall conceive, and bear 
a Son. Again: 'That he was born of the seed of 
David, according to the flesh.' " I said : "My lords, 
it is true; but it is not written as you have said' 
Hear, my lords, I call you to witness, he has bru- 
tally called me a liar ; nevertheless, it is not written 
thus." Again he said: "You lie." I replied: "If 
I were disposed to call you a liar, I would say that 
you he yourself." I said: "My lords, listen: Luke 
1 :26, etc. The Angel was sent from God to a virgin 
espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the 
house of David ; and the virgin's name was Mary, 
and she was a pure virgin. And the angel came in 
unto her, and said, 'Hail, thou that art highly fa- 
vored, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou 
among women. Thou shalt conceive in thy womb, 
and bring forth a son. He shall be great, and shall 
be called the Son of the Highest : and the Lord God 
shall give unto him the throne of his father David, 
and of his kingdom there shall be no end.' Mary, 
said : 'How shall this be, seeing I know not a man ?' 
The angel said unto her : 'The Holy Ghost shah 
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 
overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing 
which shall be born shall be called the Son of God.' 
That which was conceived in her was of the Holy 
Ghost. Matt. 1 :20. It does not say there, that He is 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


637 


of Mary's flesh." One of the judges again said: 
"The promise is not fulfilled yet." I replied : "It 
is fulfilled ; if you will listen to me, I will tell you." 
I then told him that the Saviour and Redeemer 
came, and suffered much here for our sakes, even 
as is written that Christ the Saviour Himself said : 
'God so loved the world that he gave his only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life.' John 3 :16. 
And thus He came into the world. And He left us 
an example, that we should follow His steps. I 
Peter 2:21." 

Again Zachariah truly said: "Blessed be the 
Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and re- 
deemed his people, and hath raised up a horn of 
salvation for us in the house of his servant David ; 
as he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, 
which have been since the world began : that we 
should be saved from our enemies, and from the 
hand of all that hate us ; to perform the mercy 
promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy 
covenant ; the oath which he sware to our father 
Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we, be- 
ing delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might 
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteous- 
ness before him, all the days of our life." Luke 
1 :68-75. Thus we find indeed, that the promise 
is fulfilled ; but that Christ is of Mary's flesh, this 
we find nowhere written. The Dean of Ronse asked 
me : "How then did He become flesh?" I told them 
that He who was from everlasting with His Father, 
by whom all things were created and made, that are 
in heaven and upon earth, visible and invisible, 
yea, the living Word of the Father, who was with 
the Father, came from His kingdom on high, and 
became man, and thus came into the world, and 
saved us with His own blood. Rev. 1 :S. The dean 
asked: "Did He then become changed?" I told 
him as is written : "The Word was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us." John 1 :14. The dean said to me : 
"You are the vilest sect that ever was upon earth." 
I told him that he was a rotten sect, in presence of 
all the judges, or the court; and (said I) I will 
prove to you that you are a sect ; for your people 
cannot prove a single point of all that you observe, 
with the Word of the Lord ; and Christ says : 
"Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not 
planted, shall be rooted up." Matt. 15:13. I then 
asked him, where he found anything written con- 
cerning the institutions observed by them, such as 
the christening of bells, tonsure, the consecrating of 
water, that one wears shoes with holes, and another 
stockings without toes, each in his own way, all of 
which is certainly not sanctioned by the Word of 
God. I further said: "My lords, I have offered 
to dispute from the holy Bible, publicly, before the 
whole court." The dean said to me : "You will be 
thrust into a bag, and suffocated with a ball in 
your mouth." I said : "You hypocrite, do you not 
fear the Word of the Lord, which says that with 
the breath of His lips shall he slay the unmerciful? 
Isaiah 1 1 :4. Again : 'A man that doeth violence 


to the blood of any person shall flee to the pit ; let 
no man stay him.' Prov. 28:17. 'Ye serpents, ye 
generation of vipers, how can ye escape the dam- 
nation of hell?' Matt. 23:33. 'Repent ye, and be- 
lieve the gospel ; for your days may be brief.' " 
Mark 1 :15. 

He asked me how I knew that the Gospel is the 
Gospel. I said to them: "This is a strange ques- 
tion; but if you will listen to me, I will tell you. 
Should I not know, said I, that it is Gospel, that 
Almighty God said and taught: 'Repent ye, and 
believe the Gospel ?' and that He came down from 
His kingdom above, and suffered so much for our 
sins ; yea, He who was rich, became poor, that we 
through His poverty might become rich ; when He 
called men unto Him, that they should follow Him, 
and commanded His apostles to preach it through- 
out all the world : 'He that believeth it, and is bap- 
tized, shall be saved; but he that believeth not, 
shall be damned.' " Matt. 28 :19 ; Mark 16 :16. They 
asked how I knew that His apostles had written 
this ; and said : "Other men printed it ; you have 
never spoken with or seen the apostles — how then 
do you know it ? There are other evangelists whom 
you have never seen : how then do you know wheth- 
er this is the Gospel ? Men wrote this to suit them- 
selves." 

O subtle devil, thought I in my heart, and told 
them that the holy Scriptures were given through 
the Holy Ghost, and not without Him, since Paul 
says : "I will not dare speak of any of those things 
which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the 
Gentiles obedient, by word and deed." Rom. 15:18. 
And, as the apostle Peter has said, that no prophets 
ever produced the Scripture by human will; but 
holy men of God spake as they were moved by the 
Holy Ghost. II Pet. 1 :21. Thus, the Holy Ghost 
bears testimony, that the Gospel which we have, is 
the word of the living God, which He has given us, 
that we should live according to it, and thus be 
saved at the last day; even as it is written that 
these words are written, that we might believe that 
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believ- 
ing ye might have life through his name. John 
20:31. A monk asked me concerning infant bap- 
tism, whether I did not think it good. I said: 
"Baptism does not belong to children, but to be- 
lievers." Mark 16:16. He said : "Are the children 
damned, then?" I replied: "No; the kingdom of 
heaven belongs to them." Matt. 19:14. He said: 
"Those who are not baptized are damned." I said : 
"This is nowhere written, neither, that children are 
to be baptized." He said : "It is written." I said : 
"It is not; children have no faith; but they are 
assured of eternal life." Matt. 19. He said: "It is 
written: 'Except ye be born of water and of the 
Spirit, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God.' " 
John 3:5. I said: "They cannot be born again, 
for they have no sin." He said : "They have ; for 
it is written that all are under sin." I asked him 
what sins children had. He said : "Original sin." 
I asked him why Christ had died. He said that He 


638 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


had made atonement ; but that we must first be 
baptized, before original sin is taken away. I said : 
"This is speaking contrary to the Word of God; 
for when John saw the Lord coming to him, he 
said : 'Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world I This is he of whom I said, 
After me cometh a man which is perferred before 
me ; for he was before me.' John 1 :29, 30. Of 
whom it is also written that He Himself bare our 
sins in His own body on the tree. I Pet. 2 :24. As 
John tells us, that He was manifested to take away 
our sins (I John 3:5), and as Paul says that they 
are justified freely by His grace, through the re- 
demption that is in Christ Jesus. Rom. 3 :24. Paul 
further tells us, that we should thank Him who 
hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and 
hath translated us into the kingdom of His dear 
Son: in whom we have redemption through His 
blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Col. 1 :12-14. 
The apostle says that He upholds all things by the 
Word of His power, and has by Himself purged 
our sins. Heb. 1 :3. Again Paul says : 'But God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more 
then, being now justified by his blood, and thus 
reconciled to him, we shall be saved from wrath.' 
Rom. 5 :8, 9. He says : 'Therefore, as by the of- 
fense of one, judgment came upon all men to con- 
demnation: even so by the righteousness of one 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life.' Ver. 18. Even as the prophet Isaiah says : 
'He took our sins upon him.'" Isa. 53:11. They 
asked me whether I had not yet changed my mind. 
I asked them: "In regard to what should I have 
changed my mind ?" They replied : "In regard to 
your errors." I said: "I do not err; but I trust in 
the living God, in His holy Word, and in nothing 
else ; and from this I will not depart, for Christ has 
said : 'He that shall endure unto the end, the same 
shall be saved.'" Matt. 24:13. They said: "Shall 
none be saved but you people, who began but twen- 
ty or thirty years ago, while our church has ex- 
isted already fourteen hundred years, and has re- 
mained united — shall we all be damned — ?" I 
said: "The Word of the Lord, which was before 
ever your church existed shall judge men in the 
last day; it shall judge all men. Jno. 12:48. This 
[Word] is given us through His Holy Spirit, that 
through teaching we should observe all things 
whatsoever He has commanded us. Matt. 28:20. 
Hence, those who will not observe it have no prom- 
ise of eternal life, but indignation, wrath, tribula- 
tion, and anguish will come upon them. Rom. 2 :8, 
9. Yea, He will take vengeance on them that have 
not known God, and have not obeyed the Gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ : who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction. II Thess. 1 :8, 9. We 
must therefore believe that which has been spoken 
and written through the Holy Ghost, as it is writ- 
ten that all Scripture is given by inspiration of 
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness: 
that the man of God may be perfect, throughly 


furnished unto all good works. II Tim. 3 :16, 17. 
Therefore we are assured concerning the 'holy 
Scriptures which we have, that they were written 
by the apostles through the Holy Ghost, as Peter 
has said: 'We have not followed cunningly de- 
vised fables, when we made known unto you the 
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but 
were eye witnesses of his majesty. For he received 
from God the Father honor and glory, when there 
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, 
This is my beloved Son, in whom 1 am well pleas- 
ed ; hear ye him.' Should we not then believe these 
words, where he says : 'We have also a more sure 
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye 
take heed?' and thus we do take heed to these 
words." 

They asked me concerning the sacrament of the 
altar. I told them that I found nothing written 
about it ; but of a supper which the Lord observed 
with His apostles, when the time had come that He 
was to fulfill that for which He had come, that it 
might be fulfilled which was written of Him, and 
that He should return to whence He had come. 
When it was two days yet until Easter, He said : 
"The Son of man shall be delivered up, to be cruci- 
fied." And His disciples asked Him : "Lord, where 
wilt thou that we eat the passover ?" He told them 
a place to which they should go, and went with 
them. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, 
and gave thanks, and brake it, and said : "Eat ; 
this is my body : likewise he took the cup, saying : 
Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the new 
testament, which is shed for many; this do in 
remembrance of me." Matt. 26:20; Mark 14:17- 
Luke 22:14. I also asked them: "Did each eat 
His body, as He was with them, in flesh and 
blood?" They said: "Yes; they there ate His 
flesh, and drank His blood." I asked them once 
more : "How did they eat Him ? Just as He was 
with them? Did each eat a Christ?" They said 
"Yes; just as He hung on the tree of the cross." 
I said to them : "But He had only one body, and 
that had to be given as a ransom for the sins of 
the world, and was delivered into the hands of the 
Jews, and they hung Him to the tree of the cross, 
and killed Him, and thus He redeemed us with His 
blood, even as is written. I Pet. 1 :19. He took 
upon Him our sins, and bare them on the tree." I 
I Peter 2 :24. They said that they had also now had 
Him even as He had hung on the cross. I said to 
them : "I do not believe that such a great Lord is 
eaten of you people, who are utterly contrary to 
the Word of God, and full of wickedness, and dis- 
obedient to the Word of the Lord; but believe 
that He ascended to heaven, and is sitting at the 
right hand of God His Father in heaven (Acts 1) 
from whence we also look for Him to come again 
(Philip. 3:20) ; and that you do not have Him; 
for if you had Him, He should be crucified once 
more, hence, you people cannot be believed, since 
you all act contrary to the Word of God ; for it is 
found written that the apostles of God held their 
supper with a unanimous faith ; and were all of one 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


639 


mind, and continued steadfast in all that they had 
seen of God (Acts 4 :32) ; nevertheless they did not 
teach or say that they ate Christ's flesh, and drank 
His blood, just as He hung on the tree of the cross ; 
but that He ascended to heaven, and is sitting on 
the right hand of God, this they taught. I Peter 
2:2; Mark 16. Yet, all that they taught was 
through the power of the Holy Ghost, and they 
continued steadfast in the faith which God had 
commanded them. For other foundation can no 
man lay, than that is laid, which is Christ, and 
upon this His apostles laid their foundation, and I 
want to remain upon it, without ever departing 
therefrom." Hence I said to them: "If you want 
to dispute with me publicly, with the Holy Bible, 
I shall answer you with the Word of God, con- 
cerning all that you shall speak with the Word of 
the living God. He that is right, shall be heark- 
ened to ; but he who is wrong, shall proclaim and 
confess that to this day he taught a false doctrine." 
This is a small part of the words which we had 
with the judges, the bailiff, and ecclesiastics. 


THIRD LETTER OF LAUWERENS VAN DER LEYEN 

The peace of the Lord be with you. Amen. 
Grace be to you ; and peace, from God the Father, 
and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave Himself 
for our sins, that He might deliver us from this 
present evil world, according to the will of God and 
our Father, to whom be glory forever and ever. 
Amen. 

A most affectionate greeting with the peace of 
the Lord to you, my dear brother Nathanael, I, 
your imprisoned brother Lauwerens, wish you the 
grace of the Lord for a greeting, and inform you, 
that I am of reasonably good cheer, the Lord be 
praised; which, I trust, will continue so unto the 
end through the grace of the Lord ; yea, I hope thus 
to appear in the day of the Lord. Know that we are 
waiting for the redemption of our flesh from day 
to day. Know further that I send you two hymns 
composed by Lauwerens de Huyvemaecker in his 
bonds. My dear brother, let us always hold fast 
those things which we have wrought, that we re- 
ceive a full reward (II John 8) ; and let us not be 
moved from our purpose, since we are certain 
that we have the truth ; and that no other will ever 
be found ; of this our conscience assures us. I am 
heartily sorry that I frittered away my time so 
long with the wicked and blind world, and did not 
improve it better. But though I have not been long 
in the better way, and am now a prisoner, I hope 
nevertheless to keep what I have, trusting in the 
grace of the Lord that He will not forsake me. 

Know dear brother, that I should have written 
you much more Scripture ; but you are yourself 
taught of God, and know the truth. See that you 
continue in it ; may the Lord preserve you and all 
friends therein. 


Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the word of His grace. We twelve, imprisoned to- 
gether, greet you all with the peace of the Lord. 

Andries Langedul, Sander Hendricks, Anthonis 
Claes, Hans de Luyckener, Mattheus de Potte- 
backer, Lauwerens van der Leyen, Lauwerens de 
Huyvemaecker. The women, Adriaentgen, wife 
of Jockem ; Kalleken, wife of Lauwerens de Pese- 
maecker; Claertgen, wife of Jan Beun; Catelijnt- 
gen, wife of Lauwerens de Huyvemaecker ; Maey- 
ken, daughter of Andries Langedul; Grietgen 
Bonaventuers, old Maeyken, and Maeyken de 
Korte. 

By me, Lauwerens van der Leyen 

Greet all the friends much, especially Tanneken 
and Pierijntgen, in the Blind Ass, and Maeyken, 
daughter of Andries. Greet Tanneken much, Lau- 
werens de Huyvemaecker, and his wife, greet 
Prijntgen with the peace of the Lord. 

I, Lauwerens, your brother, bid you farewell; 
my dear brother, farewell. 


FOURTH LETTER OF LAUWERENS VAN DER LEYEN 

The peace of the Lord be with you. Amen. 
Grace and peace be with you, from God the Father, 
and the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be God, even 
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
mercies, and the God of all comfort; who com- 
forteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be 
able to comfort them that are in any trouble, by 
the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted 
of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in 
us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 
And whether we be afflicted, it is for your conso- 
lation and salvation, which is effectual in the en- 
during of the same sufferings which we also suffer : 
or whether we be comforted, it is for your conso- 
lation and salvation. And our hope of you is stead- 
fast, knowing, that as ye are partakers of the suf- 
ferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation. II 
Cor. 1 :2-7. 

I affectionately greet you, my dear brothers 
Nathanael and Lieven, with the peace of the Lord ; 
I earnestly commend myself to you, and inform 
you that I am of tolerably good cheer, the Lord be 
praised for His great grace, which He has mani- 
fested so richly towards me, in that He has re- 
deemed me from this present evil world ; and that, 
whereas you once saw me in so exceeding wicked- 
ness, the light of truth is now revealed to me, for 
which I greatly thank the Lord, and trust that I 
shall continue therein by the grace of the Lord; 
for, my dear brothers, know that we have nothing 
of ourselves, but that all must come from the 
Lord, for the Lord says : "Whosoever shall seek 
to save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall 
lose his life for my name's sake, shall preserve it." 
Luke 17:33. Seeing then that we have a great 
high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus 
the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For 
we have not a high priest which cannot be touched 


640 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


with the feeling of our infirmities ; but was in all 
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. 
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to 
help in time of need. Hebrews 4:14, 16. O my 
dear brothers, as we have and know the truth, let 
us not part from it, but let us always lay our foun- 
dation upon the cornerstone Jesus Christ, so that 
our building may be firmly joined together (Eph. 
2:20-22), when we are tried as gold in the fur- 
nace, that is, in all manner of tribulation, whether 
in or out of bonds ; for Satan sometimes torments 
us greatly. Eph. 6:11. Hence, let us take heed, 
that our crown be not taken from us (Rev. 3 :11) ; 
that we may be prepared for conflict ; that we may 
have the helmet of salvation on our head, and have 
the sword of the Spirit. Ephesians 6:17. 

Dear brothers, he that overcometh shall inherit 
all things ; yea, he that overcometh shall be clothed 
in white linen raiment ; then the crown of life will 
be prepared for us. O dear brothers, fear not them 
that kill the body ; but much rather fear Him who 
after He has killed the body, can also cast the soul 
into hell. Luke 12 :5. 

My dear brethren, you know that I have had this 
written to you out of love. Excuse my little under- 
standing. I send you a hymn. Herewith I com- 
mend you to the Lord, and to the Word of His 
grace, and bid you farewell; farewell, my dear 
brothers, farewell. All my fellow prisoners greet 
you most cordially. Hans de Luyckener greets his 
brother most affectionately, and Anthonis Claes 
greets Elsgen Aerts much. Greet all the friends 
much, all that fear the Lord, and remember them 
that are in bonds, as bound with them. Matt. 25 : 
36 ; Hebrews 13 :3. Dear brothers, greet also Tan- 
neken, wife of Lenaert de Lettersetter, very affec- 
tionately, and bid her farewell in my name. 

Written the 25th of October, A. D. 1559, by 
me, Lauwerens van der Leyen, imprisoned at Ant- 
werp for the testimony of Christ. 

note — The very severe decree of Emperor 
Charles V, made in September, A. D. 1550, and re- 
newed and confirmed six years afterwards by 
Philip II, King of Spain, against the Baptists (as 
we have circumstantially shown for the year 1556), 
was now, A. D. 1560, again renewed by said Philip 
II, and proclaimed everywhere in the Netherlands. 
See afore-mentioned defense of William I, Prince 
of Orange, against his adversaries, edition 1569, 
page 165, extracted from the large book of decrees 
of Ghent, etc. 

It appears that in consequence thereof the blood- 
shedding, slaying and burning of the saints in- 
creased the more, as is evident from the following 
martyrs. 


ANTHONIS CLAES, JORIS TIELEMAN, AND HANS 
DE BACKER, A. D. 1560 

In the year 1560 three brethren, named Anthonis 
Claes, Joris Tieleman, and Hans de Backer, were 


apprehended, examined and tortured ; but they ad- 
hered unswervingly to their faith and the truth they 
had learned and accepted, and thus walked in the 
narrow path to the new Jerusalem ; wherefore they 
were condemned to death by the enemies of the 
truth, and drowned in a tub. But even as they had 
to drink in the temporal death, so eternal life will 
be poured out to them by God. 


PETER OF SPAIN, GOMER THE MASON, AND JACOB 
THE GOLDSMITH, A. D. 1560 

In the same year three other pious brethren 
sealed the truth with their death at Antwerp. One 
of them was Peter, a Spaniard, to whom, a few 
years previously, while yet in Spain, a brother from 
Amsterdam, named Jacob Jans Ruytenburgh, had 
spoken, and conversed with him different times 
about God and His Word. He finally came with 
the brother, by ship, to Antwerp, leaving his wife 
and children at St. Lucas, with the intention of re- 
turning to them after a while, or to come and get 
them. After his arrival at Antwerp, he, through 
ignorance, was at first shunned by the brethren, 
who feared treachery, since he was a Spaniard; 
however, upon sufficient examination and instruc- 
tion, he was admitted not only to the assembly, 
but also as a brother and fellow member of the 
church of God, and received baptism upon confes- 
sion of his faith, which he truly and frankly de- 
clared before the congregation. Shortly after, 
when he was about to return to Spain, to gain his 
wife and children, as also, some of his friends and 
acquaintances, and to bring them to the true knowl- 
edge of the truth, he was apprehended by the mar- 
grave, who was himself astonished to have a Span- 
iard fall into his hands. He was kept imprisoned 
for a long time, and the Spaniards took great pains 
with him; but he, orally as well as in writing, 
clearly demonstrated the truth to them, in his own 
language, notwithstanding which they sought to 
induce him to apostatize. But as nothing could 
move him, remaining steadfast, he finally boldly 
sealed the truth and his love to God with his death, 
with Gomer the mason and Jacob the goldsmith, 
who were together drowned in a tub, for the name 
of Christ. 


DEAF BETGEN, BETGEN OF GHENT, AND LIJSKEN 
SMITS, A. D. 1560 

A. D. 1560, also three imprisoned sisters, name- 
ly, Deaf Betgen, Betgen of Ghent, and Lijsken 
Smits, were sentenced to death and drowned in a 
tub, in the city of Antwerp, because they could not 
be brought from the truth and the love of their 
Saviour. 


LENAERT PLOVIER, JENNEKEN AND MAEYKEN OF 
AIX-LA-CHAPELLE, A. D. 1560 

There was a pious man named Lenaert Plovier, 
about thirty-six years of age, who was a native and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


641 


resident of Meenen, in Flanders, and by occupation 
a woolen-draper ; and as he was a man of good re- 
port among all, he was elected appraiser of woolen 
cloths. 

Thus said Lenaert Plovier, through the grace of 
God, came to the knowledge of the truth, about 
A. D. 1555. Having, on account of his competency, 
been re-elected, to continue his appraisership, he 
refused to take the oath; but his fellow drapers 
were nevertheless satisfied with him, saying: 
"Only come with us to the city hall, and show your- 
self ;" for they thought that the bailiff would pay 
no attention to the matter. But the bailiff could not 
endure his views, and from that time on Plovier 
had to suffer much persecution, and dwell in se- 
crecy. Afterwards, about the year 1558, he fled 
with his wife and children to Antwerp, where they 
gained their livelihood by dealing in silk. But as a 
great persecution was raging also there, he re- 
solved to take up his residence in Friesland. He 
sent his wife and their four children ahead, after a 
sojourn of a little over a year at Antwerp, intend- 
ing to follow them as soon as he had finished his 
business. He then traveled with his merchandise 
to the cold Ypres fair, whence he returned to 
Antwerp, where, stopping a while, he learned that 
the margrave was about to sally forth for the pur- 
pose of apprehending those who would not live 
according to their institutions. Lenaert left the 
city in order to warn some of his fellow believers 
by night. He met the margrave and his troop, who, 
accosting him, perceived from his answers that he 
was not like they, and hence asked him, whether 
he did not have a testament with him. He replied : 
"Yes." Thereupon they apprehended him, and he 
was thus taken to Antwerp and imprisoned there. 
When his parents heard of this, as also his father- 
in-law, who resided at Meenen, and was a promi- 
nent man, they came to Antwerp in haste, with 
Lenaert's mother. The father thought to pro- 
cure his release from prison by shrewdness, or by 
bribing the margrave, representing that his son- 
in-law was not a resident of Antwerp, but had only 
come there to transact his business. The margrave 
gave them fair words, saying to the mother, who 
had been several nights in prison with her son: 
"Go home; your son will soon be released from 
prison." They therefore departed, supposing that 
the promise given them would be kept. When the 
parents had gone away, Lenaert was examined and 
questioned concerning his faith, and whether he 
was baptized, which he freely confessed, express- 
ing his determination to adhere to the truth he had 
accepted, not considering his wife and his four 
children, whom he nevertheless dearly loved, as ap- 
pears from six letters which he wrote to them from 
prison ; two of which letters are given here. 

After a brief imprisonment, this pious brother 
Lenaert, with two young maidens, named Janne- 
ken and Maeyken of Aix-la-Chapelle, was sen- 
tenced to death, to be drowned, which was done 
in the following manner : They were put into bags, 


and thrust into wine casks, and thus drowned in 
prison by night, about a fortnight before Easter, 
in the year 1560 (reckoning the beginning of the 
year from New Year's day). Some of his fellow 
believers having learned that pious Lenaert Plovier 
and Janneken and Maeyken of Aix-la-Chapelle 
were to offer up their sacrifice in the night, they 
came to listen at the door of the prison. Among 
them were Joost Nose and Kestine van Damme, 
who gave a good testimony concerning it; they 
both died at Franeker, in Friesland. Thus the 
aforesaid three pious witnesses of Jesus Christ 
were tried as gold in the fire, and as they were 
found upright, they shall receive the eternal crown 
of honor and joy, with all the saints of God. Amen. 
This was written by the son of the aforesaid 
Lenaert, and testified to be true. 


A LETTER FROM LENAERT PLOVIER TO HIS WIFE 

Dear and much beloved wife Maeyken, after af- 
fectionate greeting, know that I am still of good 
cheer, and that I am also well according to the 
flesh, which I hope is the case also with you and 
those with you. But I should like to hear that it 
is your determination to follow the Lord in all 
righteousness ; for we know not when the Lord will 
visit us, that we must appear before the judgment 
seat of Christ, where everyone will receive his re- 
ward, according to that he hath done, whether it be 
good or bad. Hence, dear Maeyken, be obedient 
to the Gospel ere that day comes, since it will come 
as a thief in the night (I Thess. 5 :2) ; for this is 
the true way that leads to life eternal, which has 
sometimes been presented to you, and besides which 
there is salvation in no other ; for Christ says : "I 
am the way, the truth, and the life ; no man cometh 
unto the Father, but by me." Now if Christ is 
Himself the way, the truth, and the life, let us seek 
to follow the truth, and to walk this way, that we 
may have life. For it is written, that the Lord shall 
come to be glorified in His saints, and to be ad- 
mired in all them that believe, and for the punish- 
ment of all them that have not obeyed the Gospel, 
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord. II Thess. 1 :7. 

Dear Maeyken, though sometimes persecution, 
tribulation and distress arise, yea, bonds and im- 
prisonment, as is daily seen in us and in others 
who want to be obedient to the truth ; let us not on 
this account cease to walk this way, or to follow 
the truth. For Christ says : "The world shall re- 
joice, but ye shall mourn and be sorrowful; but 
your sorrow shall be turned into joy." John 16:20. 
Hence, dear Maeyken, regard not father or moth- 
er, or children, nor anything that is in the world ; 
for Christ says : "He that loveth aught more than 
me is not worthy of me. He that loveth father or 
mother more than me is not worthy of me : and he 
that loveth son or daughter more than me is not 
worthy of me." Matt. 10:37. For to be carnally 
minded is death, yea, enmity against God, because 


642 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


it is not subject to the law of God, but this is a 
carnal mind: to love father, mother, children, or 
aught that is of the world, more than God, or for 
their sakes to cease to follow the truth, or on ac- 
count of temporal occupation, or temporal loss, or 
because we have many children and have anxiety 
how we are to provide food for them. Christ says : 
"Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his right- 
eousness ; and all that you need shall be added unto 
you!" Matt. 6:33. Therefore do your best herein, 
my dear Maeyken, this is my heart's request of you, 
this 1 pray you. 

I also inform you, that I was at the Ypres fair. 
Having returned to Antwerp, our cousin Hendrick 
and I took a walk out of the city, so that it grew 
rather late; and when we drew near the city, we 
met the servants (or thief catchers) of the city, 
who apprehended us, so that we could not escape 
their hands and keep our faith. Therefore, dear 
Maeyken, though the Lord has now so ordered it, 
that I have been apprehended, and the time is come 
that the Lord will visit me, be not discouraged, 
neither grieve very much, though I know that you 
will grieve; but do not grieve too much, lest you 
have to take to your bed, or fall sick ; for it is for 
the truth. Some of the hardest things for my flesh 
to bear are, that I must leave you and the children, 
that I cannot help you to provide food for them, 
nor be a protector, and that you are not minded 
like we are ; but I hope that this will come about in 
course of time. Hence, dear Maeyken, do your best 
to be obedient to the Gospel, that, if we never see 
each other again according to the flesh, we may 
find each other hereafter. I should have liked to 
see and converse with you once more ; but my time 
is but brief perhaps. It also would be very hard for 
you and for me, to part from each other, although 
it is very hard for me now, though we do not talk 
with each other; but we must love God above 
everything else; rather forsake all, than forsake 
God. Hence, if you come here, or intend to do so, 
do your best to follow the truth, and to bring up 
the children in the fear of the Lord. Herewith I 
commend you to the Lord. Written at Antwerp, 
in bonds. This occurred on Sunday evening after 
the Ypres fair. By me Lenaert P., your husband. 
Greet me Franse much, and tell him to pray the 
Lord for me, that I may finish my course to the 
praise of the Lord. 


A TESTAMENT OF LENAERT PLOVIER, WHICH HE 

LEFT HIS CHILDREN, WHILE IMPRISONED FOR 

THE WORD OF THE LORD, AT ANTWERP, 

WHERE HE LAID DOWN HIS LIFE IN 

THE BEGINNING OF THE YEAR 

1560 

Dear and much beloved children N., aged, etc., 
when your father was taken from you, it was not 
for any crime, but for the testimony of Jesus, and 
because I loved you unto death, and I wish that 
when you have reached the years of understanding, 


you would seek your salvation, as Christ has taught 
us. Matt. 6 :33. Hence I have written you a brief 
admonition, that when you have come to the years 
of understanding, you, remembering this, may 
seek your salvation. 

Therefore, dear children, see that you obey your 
mother, and honor her, for it is written : "Honor 
thy father and thy mother, that thou mayest live 
long in the earth, and that it may be well with thee ; 
for he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall 
surely be put to death." Ex. 20:12; Eph. 6:2, 3; 
Ex. 21 :17. And be not obstinate, or gainsaying, 
or quarrelsome, but kind. Neither lie; for it is 
written : "The mouth that lieth slayeth the soul ; 
for a har has no part in the kingdom of God, nay, 
his part shall be in the burning lake." Wisd. 1:11; 
Revelation 21 :8. Be industrious with your hands' 
so as to help your mother gain a living. Gen. 3:19,' 
Eph. 4 :28. Be not backward in learning to apply 
yourself to books, so that when you have attained 
to years of understanding, you may seek your sal- 
vation. Be always modest in your words, as be- 
comes children. And when you have come to years 
of understanding, take a Testament, and see what 
Christ has left and commanded us there; for all 
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is 
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness: that the man of 
God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all 
good works. II Tim. 3:16, 17. For the grace of 
God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all 
men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and 
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, 
and godly in this present world ; for man doth not 
live by bread alone, but by every word that pro- 
ceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord. Tit 2-11 
12; Deut. 8:3; Matt. 4:4. 

Behold, dear children, that the Word of the Lord 
is food for the soul, by which the soul must live ; 
and he that does not govern his life according to 
these words, is threatened with eternal damnation, 
as Christ says: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God." John 3 :3. Hence Christ says : 
"Repent ye, and believe the gospel ; for the axe is 
laid unto the root of the trees ; therefore, every tree 
which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, 
and cast into the fire." Mark 1:15; Matt. 3:10. 
Therefore, dear children, see that you escape pun- 
ishment; for those who do not obey the Gospel 
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from 
the presence of the Lord. II Thess. 1 :9. 

O dear children, behold what punishment shall 
come upon him who does not obey the Gospel — 
eternal banishment from the face of God, and ever- 
lasting punishment. Hence, dear children, prepare 
while you have time. Though some tribulation may 
arise over those who seek to obey the Gospel, it 
will not last long when compared with that which 
is eternal : for we must enter into the kingdom of 
God through much tribulation. Acts 14 :22. There- 
fore Peter says : "Think it not strange concerning 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


643 


the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some 
strange things happened unto you : but rejoice, in- 
asmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings ; 
that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy." I Pet. 4:12, 13. 
Even Christ our Teacher and Master had to enter 
into the kingdom of God through tribulation and 
suffering ; and the servant cannot be more than his 
master ; but it must be enough for the servant that 
he be as his master. Matt. 10:24, 25. Hence He 
says that He came not to bring peace upon earth, 
but a sword; for He saw beforehand, that the 
world should ill endure it, even as from the begin- 
ning it could not endure it ; for they persecuted the 
prophets from the beginning, though they boasted 
that they had God for their Father ; yet they could 
not endure the good things the prophets told them, 
nor their warnings; hence they persecuted, yea 
stoned and killed them; they did not even know 
Christ Himself, who did so many signs and mighty 
works among them, but crucified Him. O dear 
children, lay to heart what Paul says: "All that 
will live godly shall suffer persecution" (II Tim. 
3 :12) ; and neglect not, on account of a little suf- 
fering, .to seek your salvation ; for these sufferings 
are not worthy to be compared with the glory 
which shall be revealed in us ; for as the sufferings 
of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also 
aboundeth by Christ; for it is written: "Behold, 
the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye 
may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten 
days : be thou faithful unto death, and I will give 
thee a crown of life. Because thou hast kept the 
word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the 
hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the 
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Be- 
hold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou 
hast, that no man take thy crown. Him that over- 
cometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my 
God, and he shall go no more out ; and I will write 
upon him the name of my God ; yea, to him that 
overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, 
which is in the midst of the paradise of God ; yea, 
he shall not be hurt of the second death; yea, he 
that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in 
white raiment ; and I will not blot out his name out 
of the book of life, but I will confess his name be- 
fore my Father, and before his angels; yea, to 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in 
my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set 
down with my Father in his throne." Rev. 2:10; 
3:10; 2:7, 11; 3:5,21. 

Yes, dear children, behold what beautiful prom- 
ises are given to those who overcome. Hence, fear 
not men, who can afflict us here for a short time 
only ; for after this tribulation we shall rest from 
all our labors, under the altar, with those who were 
also slain for the Word of God, and shall appear 
with many thousand saints, clothed with white 
robes, and palms in their hands, crying with a loud 
voice, "Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the 
throne, and the Lamb." They shall hunger no 


more, neither thirst any more ; neither shall the sun 
light on them, nor any heat ; for the Lord will be 
their light, and shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes ; and there shall be no night there ; and they 
shall need no candle, neither light of the sun ; for 
the Lord God shall give them light, and they shall 
reign forever and ever. Rev. 14:13; 6:9; 7:9, 10, 
16, 17; 22:5. 

Therefore, dear children, lay this to heart ; look 
to these beautiful promises given to them that over- 
come, and not to those who apostatize, for these 
are written in the earth. Rev. 2:7; Jer. 17:13. 
Hence, dear children, see that you fear the Lord, 
while He gives you time ; for He shall come when 
it is not expected. Watch therefore, and wait for 
His coming. Isa. 55:6; Matt. 25:13. 

This is the testament I leave you. Written at 
Antwerp, in prison, where I was confined for the 
testimony of Jesus. By me, your father, 

LENAEET PLOVIER. 


NICHOLAS FELBINGER AND JOHN LEYTNER, IN THE 
YEAR 1560 

In the year 1560 brother Nicholas Felbinger, or 
Schlosser, a willing minister of the Word of God, 
who was on trial yet, was apprehended, with an- 
other brother by the name of John Leytner, not far 
from Neumarkt, in Bavaria, where they had come 
on the first day after Judica,* in Lent, on their 
flight on account of the faith. They were taken 
to Neumarkt, where they were twice examined by 
the judge and his assessors, and interrogated es- 
pecially with regard to infant baptism. But having 
clearly and thoroughly shown that Christ had not 
commanded it, but only the baptism of adults, who 
hear, understand, believe, and accept the Word of 
God, they were, early next morning, placed in a 
cart, and, escorted by horsemen and guards, sent 
to Landshut, where each was imprisoned separate- 
ly, and Nicholas kept chained. Afterwards the 
council met, and summoned them before them; 
they spoke much with them, but could accomplish 
nothing. 

They then sent two learned men, namely, two 
Dominicans, to them, who conversed with them 
about the sacrament, infant baptism, and why they 
had left the papal church; but the brethren an- 
swered them from the Word of God, that they had 
to leave it. 

Hence they then tried them by torture, racking 
them severely, especially most severely when they 
wanted to know where they had lodged, and whith- 
er they intended to go. But Nicholas said: "We 
are not bound to tell you these things." They 
asked: "Why?" He said: "Because you con- 
fiscate their property, torture and kill them for it, 
and sin against them. Should we betray those who 
do us good? we do not betray even our enemies — 
why then our friends?" They said: "Then we 
will not cease to torture you, till you tell us," and 

* Fifth Sunday in Lent. 


644 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


left them lying on the rack a long time, until the 
executioner himself interceded in their behalf, and 
said : "Do desist ; for though they be tortured all 
day, you will get nothing out of them." 

Then the judge became enraged, and called them 
rogues and condemners of others. But Brother 
Nicholas said: "We condemn no one; but your 
sins condemn you, if you do not desist from them, 
this we testify according to the truth." 

The superior judge asked: "What is truth?" 
The brother replied : "You would not understand 
it, though I should tell you ; for you know as much 
what truth is, as did Pilate, who asked the same 
question." John 18:38. 

After this, two doctors were sent from the 
monks to them, a distance of over nine leagues; 
who endeavored in many and various ways to turn 
them, but were not able to do it. Likewise the 
chancellor and the lord of Landshut came to them 
once, and assailed them; but they found them 
steadfast in their faith, and had to leave them 
steadfast, being unable to gain them by their false 
and seductive counsels. 

Two priests and a doctor in the Scriptures then 
came to them, and vehemently argued with them 
about infant baptism; but Nicholas vigorously 
withstood them with the Scriptures, and drove 
them from him. 

After these, the chancellor and several Domini- 
cans came to them, and sought to move them by 
suavity ; but they valiantly withstood all the gates 
of hell, fully assured that they stood in the divine 
truth, which they faithfully and thoroughly defend- 
ed, and said that they wanted to adhere to it in the 
simplicity of Christ. Thereupon the chancellor 
said to Brother Nicholas: "Are you simple? I 
cannot believe this ; a hundred might come, before 
there should be one who could defend himself like 
you; but I consider you an enthusiast, even as 
many are found at present, who roam about with- 
out reason." But they boldly confessed and de- 
fended their faith, and God gave them a mouth and 
wisdom which the others were not able to resist. 
Luke 21 :15. 

After all this, they were sentenced to death by 
the children of Pilate, and Brother Nicholas' 
tongue was tied fast, that he should not speak to 
the people at the place of execution ; towards the 
close, however, his tongue was freed so much that 
the two brethren could converse together. 

John Leytner, whom the executioner proceeded 
to execute first, said to Nicholas : "Dear brother, 
if my death should terrify you, go forward first, 
and I will wait for the last." But brother Nicholas 
said : "Oh, no, Oh, no ; I do not dread it." And 
thus John valiantly offered his neck to the sword, 
and was beheaded, Nicholas beholding it with in- 
trepidity and boldness, as though it did not con- 
cern him. He then advanced also, knelt down, 
and offered his head, which was struck off for his 
faith, as had been done to the other. Thus these 


two testified to the divine truth with their blood, 
which took place on the 10th of July, 1560. 


JORIS AND JOACHIM, A. D. 1560 

A. D. 1560 there were brought before the court 
at Antwerp two pious Christians, named Joris and 
Joachim. As they were standing as sheep for the 
slaughter before the lords, the bailiff asked Joris 
whether he was rebaptized. He replied: "I am 
baptized according to the doctrine of Christ, as 
He commanded His apostles, saying: 'Go and 
preach to all nations. He that believeth and is bap- 
tized, shall be saved.' Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:16. 
Hence they must first be taught and believe, and 
then be baptized in the name of the Father, the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost." 

The bailiff also asked Joachim whether he was 
baptized. He replied: "I hold to one baptism, 
one faith, one Lord, and God." Eph. 4 :5, 6. 

Then the lords sentenced them according to the 
king's mandate, whereupon Joachim, hearing his 
sentence, said : "My lords, we thank you for your 
trouble with us ; but may God forgive you the blind- 
ness of your heart, and grant that you may become 
enlightened." 

As they were coming out of the court, they said : 
"We are not ashamed of the Gospel" (Rom. 1 :16) ; 
and while walking in the street, they sang : 

"O Lord forever in my thought Thou art ; 
My soul doth long to be close to Thy heart." 

Ps. 143 :8. 

Thereupon Joachim said : "Fear not them that 
kill the body ; for hereafter, when they mourn, we 
shall rejoice." Luke 6 :23. 

Thus they as giants in the faith pressed through 
the strait gate to the new Jerusalem. After they 
had come to the place where they were to offer up 
their burnt sacrifice, they gave each other the kiss 
of peace. Standing at the stake, Joachim said : "O 
Father, forgive them that inflict this suffering upon 
us ; but we thank Thee that Thou hast made us 
worthy to suffer for Thy name ; therefore, O Lord, 
assist us, and succor us with Thy help in this last 
extremity." Joris said : "Lord Thou knowest that 
I have sought Thee and my salvation ; and for this 
cause I must now die. Therefore, O Lord, receive 
me graciously." He further said: "Citizens of 
Antwerp, fear not; though we die for the truth, 
Christ our Lord went before us, and we must fol- 
low Him." They then began to sing this farewell 
hymn: "Farewell, brethren and sisters all," etc. 
Thereupon they commended their spirits into the 
hands of God, and ended their lives in the fire. 
They now lie under the altar, and wait to be 
clothed with white linen raiment, and to shine forth 
as the sun in the kingdom of the Father, where 
they shall be served with new wine and heavenly 
bread. Rev. 6:9; 19:8; Matt. 13:43; 26:28; Rev. 

^ • 1/ . 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


645 


WILLEM DE KLEERMAECKER, A. D. 1560 

In the year 1560 a brother named Willem de 
Kleermaecker was apprehended for the truth, and 
sentenced to death, at Antwerp. 

Having been brought into the court, he was 
asked by the bailiff, whether he was rebaptized. 
He replied: "Why do you ask concerning my 
baptism, and not regarding my life and faith ; then 
you could pass a right judgment upon me, and this 
people could follow it?" The bailiff asked again 
whether he was not rebaptized. Willem said: 
"You want but one word, and I made a confession 
before this: judge rightly, and once more con- 
sider the matter well." The bailiff asked whether 
he was rebaptized. Willem said : "You alone have 
asked me until this ; may I not now ask you ?" The 
bailiff said : "Answer first ; then I shall tell you." 
Willem said: "I wish you would once think of 
that day that shall burn as an oven, when the un- 
godly shall perish like stubble." Mai. 4:1. He fur- 
ther said (Mark 16:16) it is written: "He that 
believeth and is baptized shall be saved." The 
bailiff said : "You are not asked concerning that." 
Willem said: "Infants cannot believe; therefore 
I had myself baptized upon my faith." 

The lords then went in, and Willem said to the 
people: "Repent and amend your ways." The 
bailiff forbade him to speak, but he said : "Do let 
me speak; for it cannot last long." Presently the 
lords returned, and Willem said : "My lords, judge 
not according to the king's decree, if you do not 
want to be lost ; but think of that day which no one 
can escape, in which you will regret it, unless you 
become converted." He was then sentenced, and 
his sentence read to him; whereupon, though it 
was still early in the morning, he was taken to the 
marketplace, and there strangled and burnt at the 
stake. Thus he fought his way through as a valiant 
soldier of Christ. 


JOHN KORBMACHER, GEORGE RAECK AND EUSTACE 
KUTER, A. D. 1560 

In the same year, on the first Friday after St. 
Martin's day, brother John Korbmacher, a minister 
of the Word of God and of His church (who was 
frequently sent out into the work of the Lord) , was 
apprehended for the faith and the Word of God, 
near Rosenhaus, in Bavaria, together with George 
Raeck, a deacon, and another brother named 
Eustace Kuter, who were together taken to Inn- 
spruck, and there delivered over to the authorities. 
John Korbmacher, on account of his being a min- 
ister, was taken to Fulleburg, where he was put into 
a deep tower full of vermin ; bats fluttered about 
him; mice carried off his victuals, and numerous 
spooks haunted his abode, so that it would have 
terrified a person not possessed with a firm trust 
in God. 

When the lord wanted to speak with him, he had 
him called by name, that he should quickly get 


ready and prepare himself for suffering. The oth- 
er two brethren were imprisoned at Innspruck, in 
the Krauterthurm ; and all three remained in con- 
finement until the close of the year 1560. After- 
wards, on the 2nd of January, the authorities se- 
verely examined John Korbmacher, as also Eu- 
stace, and George Raeck, each separately. They 
faithfully answered many articles, all of which 
were written down, together with their confession 
concerning them, and this was then sent to Vienna 
and elsewhere, as something new. 

After this they were led back into the afore- 
mentioned towers or prisons, where they remained 
until the Friday after St. Vitus' Day, which was 
the 13th of June, when they were sentenced to 
death. On that occasion a great multitude was 
present, and the brethren spoke boldly to the lords 
of the court and jurors, showing to them, that the 
sentence and judgment which they passed upon 
them in the sight of God, since they condemned in- 
nocent blood, should rise up for a testimony of 
their condemnation. And when they said that they 
had to judge according to the imperial decree and 
mandate, John Korbmacher said: "O you blind 
judges, we must certainly judge according to our 
heart and conscience, if we want to render an ac- 
count of it before God. Hence, if you judge ac- 
cording to the imperial mandate, how will you an- 
swer for it before God?" And Eustace said: 
"What have we to do with the imperial mandate 
that you read it to us ? Read our confession, which 
we have testified with the holy, divine and biblical 
Scriptures to be the truth of God, for which we 
must suffer." Thus they boldly spake, and ex- 
horted the people to repent. The brethren George 
Raeck and Eustace were led out of the court first, 
when George began to cry to the people, to repent, 
desist from sin, and also enter upon the way of 
truth, since it was the truth for which he was to be 
executed today. 

Then John Korbmacher was also led out, so that 
they joyfully met at the place of execution, and 
praised God. A brother named Leonard Dax, went 
to them, and shook hands with them, and they took 
farewell of one another ; on account of which they 
greatly rejoiced, and praised God, that they had 
seen a pious brother yet, who should inform the 
brethren and the church of their end. Then John 
Korbmacher, the minister, began to speak to the 
people, and to admonish them, to repent of their 
sins, and to follow the truth of God, that they 
might not be damned, but saved in Christ Jesus. 
Yea, he lifted up his voice with the utmost bold- 
ness, and said : "What I have taught and confessed 
is the divine truth, and I will testify to it with my 
blood." Thus he did not cease to preach repent- 
ance, so that the judge said several times: "O 
John, stop a little." John then stopped for a little 
while ; but presently he spoke again, so that he be- 
came almost hoarse from speaking. Almost up to 
their last moment they exhorted the people to re- 
pentance ; nor were they prevented from speaking, 


646 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


but full liberty was given them to speak. They 
were also permitted to converse with each other. 
They also fervently prayed to God, praising and 
glorifying Him, that He had hitherto kept them 
courageous and stedfast, and praying Him that 
He would continue to thus faithfully keep them 
until death (which was now at hand), and receive 
their spirits into His hands, now that body and 
soul were about to separate. 

Their sentence was then read, in which, among 
others, these articles were particularly mentioned. 
First: They do not believe that the holy body of 
Jesus Christ is in the sacrament, but observe the 
Supper as Christ observed it with His disciples. 
Secondly: They do not believe in infant baptism, 
but in the baptism of adults ; as Christ commanded 
it. Thirdly: They believe in marriage (which ar- 
ticle they confessed, and did not deny) ; and the 
like articles, which were written there, and read: 
as also, what they thought and confessed of the 
Roman church ; but this was written in as vituper- 
ative language as it had been possible for the judge 
to put it. 

They were then led to the place of execution, 
called the Schweinacker, near the Schafhuetten. 
There Eustace, who was feeble and sick according 
to the flesh, was beheaded first. After him Brother 
George Raeck cheerfully stepped forward to the 
executioner, and exclaimed with a joyful heart: 
"Here I forsake wife and children, house and 
home, body and life, for the faith and the divine 
truth." He then knelt down, and the executioner 
beheaded him also. 

John Korbmacher was reserved for the last, 
who, when he beheld the other two lying there 
beheaded, said : "My brethren, you who have over- 
come shall inherit all things." The executioner 
then took him, tied him to a ladder, kindled the 
fire, and threw him alive into the same. He also 
laid the two beheaded bodies upon a pile of wood, 
and burnt them to ashes. 

Thus did they testify their faith in Christ with 
their word, life and death, yea, voluntarily and 
patiently, with their body and blood, confessing 
that God gave them such strength as a blessing; 
and thus they with firm confidence departed from 
this world to go to the eternal fatherland. 

SOETGEN VAN DEN HOUTE, AND MARTHA, 
A. D. 1560 

At this time also a pious woman named Soetgen 
van den Houte fell into the hands of the perse- 
cutors of the truth, so that after severe assaults 
and imprisonment she testified and confirmed the 
faith of the ever enduring truth with her death 
and blood, on the 27th of November, 1560, in the 
city of Ghent ; and with her another woman, named 
Martha. Soetgen van den Houte also states that 
her husband had previously likewise valiantly trod- 
den the winepress of suffering and fearlessly testi- 
fied the truth, and gave his life for it, as the follow- 
ing testament clearly shows. 


A TESTAMENT OF SOETGEN VAN DEN HOUTE, WHICH 
SHE LEFT HER CHILDREN, DAVID, BETGEN AND 
TANNEKEN, FOR A MEMORIAL, AND FOR 
THE BEST, AND WHICH SHE CON- 
FIRMED WITH HER DEATH, AT 
GHENT, FLANDERS 

In the name of the Lord: 

Grace, peace and mercy from God the Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ, this I wish you, my dear 
little children, David, Betgen, and Tanneken, for 
an affectionate greeting, written by your mother in 
bonds, for a memorial to you of the truth, as I hope 
to testify by word and with my death, by the help 
of the Most High, for an example unto you. May 
the wisdom of the Holy Ghost instruct and 
strengthen you therein, that you may be brought up 
in the ways of the Lord. Amen. 

Further my dear children, since it pleases the 
Lord to take me out of this world, I will leave you 
a memorial, not of silver or gold; for such jewels 
are perishable: but I should like to write a jewel 
into your heart, if it were possible, which is the 
word of truth, in which I want to instruct you a 
little for the best with the Word of the Lord, ac- 
cording to the little gift I have received from Him 
and according to my simplicity. 

In the first place, I admonished you, my most be- 
loved, always to suffer yourself to be instructed by 
those who fear the Lord ; then you will please God, 
and as long as you obey good admonition and in- 
struction, and fear the Lord, He will be your Fa- 
ther and not leave you orphans. For David says : 
"What man is he that feareth the Lord ? him shali 
he teach in the way that he shall choose." Ps. 25 : 
12. He also says: "The eye of the Lord is upon 
them that fear him, upon them that hope in his 
mercy ; to deliver their soul from death. The angel 
of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear 
him. O fear the Lord, ye his saints : for there is 
no want to them that fear him ; for the fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Ps. 33:18 19- 
34:7, 9; 111:10. 

Therefore, dear children, learn to fear the Lord, 
and you will receive wisdom. The wise man says : 
"A wise son heareth instruction. Whoso loveth 
correction and instruction loveth knowledge. A 
wise son feareth and escheweth evil. A wise son 
maketh a glad father ; but a foolish son putteth his 
mother to shame. He that walketh with wise men 
shall be wise ; but the companion of fools shall be 
like them. He that refuseth correction and instruc- 
tion destroyeth his own soul ; but he that heareth 
reproof will become wise." 

O my most beloved, depart not from correction. 
The wise man savs : "Chasten thy son while there 
is hope." Prov. 19:18. 

Hence, my most beloved, grieve not when you 
are corrected, and speak not crossly to those 'who 
correct you. A soft answer turneth away wrath ; 
but grievous words stir up anger. Prov. 15:1. If 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


647 


you are crossly spoken to, learn to answer kindly, 
and you will be loved by all men ; for humility and 
meekness are acceptable to both God and men. 

Furthermore, my dear children, I admonish you, 
to beware of lying; for liars have no part in the 
kingdom of God. Rev. 21:8. It is also written: 
"Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, and 
he whose mouth lieth, his soul shall die." Prov. 
12:12; Wisdom 1:11. Therefore, my dear chil- 
dren, beware of it ; for he that deals in lies is loved 
by no one. 

My dear children, keep this in your hearts ; my 
dear lambs, guard your tongue, that it speak no 
evil ; neither practice deceit with your lips ; nor be 
guilty of backbiting, for thereby come contention 
and strife; but Paul teaches us, to live peaceably 
with all men if it be possible. I Pet. 3:10; Ro- 
mans 12:18. 

My most beloved, keep this sent you from your 
mother ; and obey your parents ; and those whose 
bread you eat, and all who admonish you to virtue. 
Eph. 6:1. Always be diligent to do your work, 
wherever you be ; for Paul says that if any will not 
work, neither shall he eat. II Thess. 3 :10. 

It is also written : "Be diligent to labor, that you 
may have to give to him that needeth." Eph. 4 :28. 
Hence, turn not your face away from the poor. 
"Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, 
he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard." 
Prov. 21 :13. Tobit taught his son, saying: "Son, 
if thou hast abundance, give alms accordingly: if 
thou have but little ; be not afraid to give according 
to that little." Tob. 4 :8. Alms given of one's labor 
is acceptable to God. The wise man says : "Alms 
purge out sin." We also read of Cornelius and 
Tobit that the angel said : "Thy prayers and thine 
alms are come up for a memorial before God, 
whom thou didst beseech with tears, and didst 
leave thy dinner to go and bury the dead." Acts 
10:4; Tob. 12:13. 

Therefore, be diligent in prayer, and love the 
poor ; for Christ also was poor for our sakes. II 
Corinthians 8 :9. Be therefore also merciful, even 
as your heavenly Father is merciful ; for such shall 
be blessed, and shall obtain mercy. Also learn to be 
meek and lowly in heart ; for such are blessed and 
shall inherit the earth. Luke 6 :36 ; Matt. 5 :5. And 
blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see 
God. 

Hence, my dear children, let no impure thoughts 
remain in your hearts, but engage yourselves with 
psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, and evil 
thoughts will have no room. Neither let filthiness 
proceed out of your mouth ; for of this an account 
will have to be given. Eph. 5:19, 4; Matt. 12:36. 

Furthermore, my most beloved, wherever you be 
esteem yourselves as the least, and be not wise in 
your own conceit, but always suffer yourselves to 
be instructed by those who are above you, and al- 
ways be silent when others speak. Humble your- 
self beneath all men; for whosoever shall exalt 
himself shall be abased ; but he that shall humble 


himself shall be exalted. Matt. 23 :12. For Christ, 
who is the greatest, made Himself the least, for 
an example unto us. Ps. 8:6; John 13:13. And, 
as is written : "The greater thou art, the more hum- 
ble thyself and thou shalt find favor before the 
Lord ; for the power of the Lord is great, and he is 
honored of the lowly." Sir. 3 :18, 20. 

My children, be also just in all your dealings; 
for in the way of the just there is life, and in the 
beaten path there is no death. It is joy to the right- 
eous to do that which is right, but fear to evildoers. 
Further, choose to earn your bread by the labor of 
your hands, and to eat your bread with peace. 
Seek not to be a merchant, nor be anxious for great 
gain. Better is little with the fear of God, than 
great treasure and trouble therewith. Better is a 
dry morsel, and quietness, than a house full of sac- 
rifices with strife. Prov. 15:16; 17:1. 

My children, love not dainties, nor wine. He 
that desires costly feasts will not become rich ; but 
be content with the labor of your hands. Overtax 
no one, but be satisfied with what is reasonable, as 
you have seen of me. Be burdensome to no one, as 
long as you can obtain the things needful. It is 
more blessed to give than to receive. Acts 20:35. 
And Paul says : "If ye have food and raiment, be 
therewith content." I Tim. 6 :8. 

Hence, my dear children, take an example from 
this, and always go on in the ways of the Lord with 
sobriety and thankfulness, as you have heard me 
read of Daniel, of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed- 
nego, who were selected by the king of Babylon, 
to be nourished with the same wine and meat which 
the king drank and ate at his table, in order that 
they might be beautiful, to serve the king. But 
they would have nothing but pulse and water ; they 
wanted to observe the law and commandments of 
their fathers with sobriety and thankfulness in the 
fear of God, and they were fairer and fatter than 
those who ate of the king's dainties. Dan. 1. 

Thus faithfully they walked in the ways of the 
Lord, with prayer and supplication made them- 
selves acceptable to Him ; therefore God did great 
things through them, and delivered them from the 
den of lions, and out of the fiery furnace. And Jo- 
seph; when he was sold into Egypt, desired no 
dainties, nor wine, because the Egyptian women 
sought to seduce him ; but he feared God, and God 
preserved him. He pleased God by sobriety and 
prayer, so that he was appointed ruler over Egypt. 
Gen. 37, 39, 41. 

My dear children, take an example from this, in 
your youth, and you will please God, and He will 
keep you from all seduction. 

O my lambs, you are still in your youth, in your 
infancy; you have yet your part in your Father's 
kingdom, see that you keep it well and do not as 
Esau did, who gave his inheritance or birthright 
for a mess of pottage ; not regarding his father's 
blessing, he gave it away for perishable food. Gen. 
25 :33. But Jacob chose the better part, and was 


648 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


obedient to God and his father, walking the ways 
of the Lord with all righteousness. 

My most beloved, seek instruction, so that you 
may be taught, and know which is the true way; 
for you may now choose life or death, good or evil ; 
whichever you desire, shall be given you (Sirach 
15:17); namely, if you delight in evil, so that you 
choose the pleasures of the world (from which 
springs all unrighteousness), namely, lying and 
cheating, gambling, playing, swearing, cursing, 
backbiting, hatred, envy, drunkenness, banqueting, 
excess, idolatry, covetousness, lasciviousness, van- 
ity, filthy conversation, dancing, and so forth; 
which things, though the world does not consider 
them sins, but amusements, are nevertheless abom- 
inations in the eyes of the Lord. I Pet. 4 :3. 

Therefore, my dear children, take heed ; if you 
take pleasure in these things, you sell your birth- 
right or the inheritance from your father, for a 
mess of pottage, namely, for a few temporal pleas- 
ures, which lead you to damnation. See whether 
all the great multitude do not choose to walk this 
way. Hence Esdras has truly said that there is 
much more earth found, to make earthen vessels, 
than gold, to make golden vessels. And as the 
wave is greater than a drop, so there will be more 
that will be damned. II Esd. 8:2, 3 ; 9 :15, 16. For 
many are called, but few are chosen, for they do 
not heed their call ; as Christ says : "My sheep hear 
my voice, and they follow me ; but these follow the 
great multitude of the ungodly and false prophets." 
John 10:27. 

Hence Isaiah says : "Hell hath opened her mouth 
wide, to receive the proud and all that do unright- 
eousness, and all that will not repent." Isa. 5 :14. 

Therefore, behold, my most beloved, if you suf- 
fer yourselves to be instructed in virtue, you will 
follow the voice of the Lord, as from the time of 
Abel until now many who suffered have done; 
they were rejected, despised, persecuted and killed 
because they would not follow the wicked world 
and her false prophets. 

Behold, my most beloved, choose rather to suf- 
fer affliction with the children of God, so that you 
may be rewarded with them ; for they are the ones 
to whom belong all the beautiful promises, but they 
must suffer much, for the kingdom of heaven suf- 
fereth violence, and the violent take it by force. 
Matt. 11 :12. It is also written : "Ye must through 
much tribulation enter into the kingdom of heaven." 
For David says : "We are led to death as sheep for 
the slaughter." And Paul says: "We which live 
are always delivered unto death." It is also writ- 
ten: "Ye shall weep and lament, but the world 
shall rejoice ; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into joy. Ye shall have 
tribulation for a little while, but be of good cheer 
and be faithful unto death, and I will give you a 
crown of life." Revelation 2:10. In the world ye 
shall have tribulation ; but be of good cheer ; I have 
overcome the world. John 16:33. And God shall 
wipe away all tears from their eyes. We further 


read : "The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his 
wife hath made herself ready. And to her was 
granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, 
clean and white ; for the fine linen is the righteous- 
ness of saints." "Blessed are they which are called 
unto the marriage supper of the Lamb." Rev. 
19:7-9. "Then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom of their father." Matt 
13:43. 

See, my most beloved, this is the better part and 
reward of all those who fear the Lord, walk in His 
ways and keep His commandments. These are they 
to whom the Lord says: "Fear not, thou worm 
Jacob, and ye few men of Israel : I will not leave 
you orphans ; but I will be your God, and ye shall 
be my people ; and I will keep you as the apple of 
mine eye; yea, if ye keep my commandments, 
though ye were cast out unto the uttermost part 
of the heaven, yet will I gather you from thence, 
and will bring you unto the place that I have cho- 
sen." Isa. 41:14; 51:7; Zech. 2:8; Deut. 30:4; 
Neh. 1:9. 

Oh, who would not love such a Lord and Father, 
who has chosen us, as He chose Israel, and has 
given us His commandments and laws, namely, 
His Gospel, which teaches us to do His will, and 
His pleasure ; and such He has made heirs of all the 
riches of heaven. Isa. 49:7. 

O my dear children, I have written this in tears, 
admonishing you out of love, praying for you with 
a fervent heart, that, if possible, you might be of 
this number. For when your father was taken 
from me, I did not spare myself day or night to 
bring you up, and my prayer and solicitude were 
constantly for your salvation, and even while in 
bonds my greatest care has always been that my 
prudence did not enable me to make better pro- 
vision for you. For when it was told me, that you 
had been taken to Oudenarde, and thence to 
Bruges, it was a hard blow for me, so that I never 
had a greater sorrow. But when I thought that my 
coming or providing could not help the matter, and 
that for Christ's sake we must separate from all 
that we love in this world I committed all to the 
will of the Lord, and I still hope and pray con- 
stantly, that He in His mercy will preserve you, as 
He preserved Joseph, Moses and Daniel in the 
midst of wicked men. And He will do this, if you 
give diligence to follow the truth; then the angel 
of the Lord will be with you, even as He was with 
Tobias, guiding him until He brought him to his 
father's house, where he rejoiced with his father 
and his friends, thanking God for His great good- 
ness. Tobit 7:11. 

Thus also, if you will follow good instruction, it 
will guide you safely through every danger, and 
bring you to your Father's house, where there is 
such joy prepared, that ear has not heard, nor eye 
seen, nor has it entered into the heart of man, what 
joy is prepared for the elect; but to the elect God 
has revealed it by His Holy Spirit. Isa. 64:4; I 
Corinthians 2:9, 10. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


649 


May the word of the Father bring you to this, 
through the mercy of the Son, and may the wisdom 
of the Holy Ghost strengthen you, that you may 
apprehend it. Amen. 

David, my dear child, I herewith commend you 
to the Lord. You are the oldest, learn wisdom, that 
you may set your sisters a good example ; and be- 
ware of bad company, and of playing in the street 
with bad boys; but diligently learn to read and 
write, so that you may get understanding. Love 
one another, without contention or quarreling ; but 
be kind to each other. Let the one that is wise bear 
with him who is simple, and admonish him with 
kindness. Let the strong bear with the feeble, and 
help him all he can, out of love. Let the rich assist 
the poor, out of brotherly love. Let the younger 
obey the older in that which is good. Admonish 
one another to be industrious, so that people may 
love you. Exhort one another to good works, to 
modesty, honorableness and quietness. Always 
care for one another ; for the time has come, that 
love shall wax cold; yea, if it were possible, the 
very elect would be deceived. Matt. 24:12, 24. 
Hence, take heed and learn diligently to search the 
Scriptures, so that you may not be deceived ; but 
always hold to the first and second commandment, 
which will teach you aright. Do not easily believe 
it, when evil is told you of another, but examine 
the matter ; and make no commotion when you are 
slandered, but bear it for Christ's sake. 

Love your enemies, and pray for those who 
speak evil of you, and afflict you. Rather suffer 
wrong, than that you should grieve another ; rather 
suffer affliction than that you should afflict an- 
other ; rather be reproached, than that you should 
reproach another; rather be slandered, than that 
you should slander another ; rather be robbed, than 
that you should rob another ; rather be beaten, than 
that you should beat another, and so forth. 

Behold, my most beloved, all this is wrought 
through brotherly love, and is all comprehended in 
the second commandment; hence, you must con- 
stantly see that you do not seek solely your own 
profit, but always care for those with whom you 
have dealings, whether they be young or old. 

Further, my dear children, Betgen and Tanne- 
ken, my beloved lambs, I admonish you in all these 
same things, as that you obey the commandments 
of the Lord, and also obey your uncle and aunt, 
and your elders, and all who instruct you in virtue. 
To those whose bread you eat, you must be sub- 
ject in all that is not contrary to God. Always dili- 
gently admonish yourselves to do your work, and 
you will be loved wherever you live. Be not quar- 
relsome, or loquacious, or light minded, or proud, 
or surly of speech, but kind, honorable and quiet, 
as behooves young girls. Pray the Lord for wis- 
dom, and it shall be given you. Diligently learn to 
read and write, and take delight therein, and you 
will become wise. Take pleasure and engage in 
psalms, hymns and spiritual songs. Seek for the 
only joy. Learn to please the Lord from your 


youth, as did the holy women and virgins, as 
Judith. Judith 8. 

Esther also was a virgin who feared God; she 
was adorned with humility, was gracious, honor- 
able, kind, and humble of heart ; hence she pleased 
King Ahasuerus above all the other virgins. Esther 
2:17. But in heV high estate she was not proud; 
though she shone in royal apparel, she humbled 
her heart, with fasting and prayer to the Lord, 
for her brethren, that they might be delivered out 
of the hands of their enemies ; she did not esteem 
herself better than one of the least of her brethren. 
See, my most beloved, when you have attained 
the years of understanding, see that you adorn 
yourselves with good works, namely, the works of 
the Spirit, that is, with all manner of goodness, 
gentleness, meekness, humility, obedience, long 
suffering, righteousness, modesty, honorableness, 
purity, peaceableness, steadfastness, mercifulness, 
wisdom, diligence in good works, faith, hope and 
love ; to love God above all that is in the world, and 
to do to your neighbor as you would have men do 
unto you, on which hang all the law and the proph- 
ets. Gal. 5 :22, 23 ; Matt. 22 :37, 40. 

Behold, my dear children, this is the adornment 
of the saints, etc. 

O my most beloved, labor for such a wedding 
garment, so that you may enter in among the num- 
ber of the children of God to the marriage of the 
Lamb, where they shall shine forth as the sun in 
the kingdom of their Father. Rev. 19 :7 ; Mat- 
thew 13:43. 

May the strong hand of the Lord bring you to 
this ; may He lead you as He led Israel out of 
Egypt, and bring you to the New Jerusalem, that 
we may see each other with joy in the day of the 
resurrection. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, the God 
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob ; may He keep you to the end of your lives. 
Amen. 

My dear children, this I leave you as a memorial 
or testament. If you put it to good use, you will 
gather more treasure by it, than if I had left you 
many riches, which are perishable; for the riches 
of this world may be lost through fire, war, or 
misfortune. 

Hence, he is not wise who sets his heart upon 
anything that is perishable, since we have no assur- 
ance of it for an hour ; we must leave it all behind ; 
therefore, grieve not, though what we had is scat- 
tered or lost, as the prophet says : "We are a prey 
to every one." Isa. 59 :15. Hence you are to thank 
the Lord yet, that He let us have it until I have 
brought you up so far : and if you walk in all right- 
eousness, the Lord will give you enough. Take an 
example from Tobias. Tob. 4:19. David also says 
that the righteous shall not want, nor his seed go 
begging bread. Ps. 37:25. 

Therefore covet no one's property or treasures ; 
nor envy any one because he has more than you. 
Neither regard any person for his gifts, but follow 


650 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the little flock, who walk truly in love ; for love is 
the bond of perfectness, and the command of love 
is superior to all others. Luke 12:32; Col. 3:14. 
Therefore, see constantly that you follow those 
who walk most in love; for the tree is known by 
its fruit, though these are hid from all men; but 
Christ was too, and the servant is not better than 
his lord. Matt. 10:24. 

Herewith I will bid you adieu: adieu my dear 
children, and adieu all my dear friends. 

My most beloved, though our adversaries tell 
you, that your father and I are not of the same 
faith, do not believe them; for he confessed the 
truth concerning baptism and the incarnation of 
Christ, in all that he was able to comprehend, and 
he valiantly testified to righteousness, giving his 
life for it, pointing out to you for an example, the 
same way which the prophets, the apostles and 
Christ Himself went. He had to go before through 
the conflict with much tribulation and suffering, 
and leave his children behind for Christ's sake; 
hence do likewise, for there is no other way.* Give 
diligence to read the Testament. Amen. 

A LETTER OF SOETGEN VAN DEN HOUTE TO HER 

BROTHER AND SISTER, AS ALSO TO 

HER CHILDREN 

Written out of love: 

The peace of the Lord be with you ; my dear 
brother and sister, know that I have received two 
letters, with their contents, and I thank you most 
cordially for all the friendship you have ever shown 
me, and shall yet show me, I hope, in my three 
lambs whom I leave behind, commending them to 
the Lord and to those whom He shall direct thereto 
in His grace. 

Herewith I take leave once more; I think it is 
now the last time. We are of such good cheer to 
offer up our sacrifice that I cannot express it. I 
could leap for joy when I think of the eternal 
riches which are promised to us as our inheritance, 
and to all who persevere in what the Lord has 
commanded us. Matt. 10:22. 

I know not how I shall praise the Lord that He 
has chosen Martha and myself to this estate, us 
who are such poor, simple lambs, for we have nev- 
er been esteemed in the world, except as outcasts ; 
and that God has chosen such rejected, miserable, 
simple worms of the dust, that He will work 
through us, that we should be His witnesses, we 
who are not worthy of ourselves to receive the very 
least gift which the Lord might bestow, etc. 

Oh, who can comprehend the power of God, that 
He should be most merciful to those who are here 
the most rejected, if they call upon Him with con- 
fidence and firmly place their hope in His grace 
unto the end; it were impossible that the Lord 
should reject them. Hence I pray all that love the 

* From what is related here, it appears that also Soetgen van 
flen Houte's husband died for the truth, as a valiant witness of 
Jesus ; although we have not been able to learn the time, place and 
manner of his death. 


Lord, that they humble their hearts, for the Lord 
says through the prophet Isaiah "I will dwell with 
him that is of a contrite Spirit, and of a broken 
heart, and trembleth at my word." Isa. 57 ; 66 :2. 

Yea, those who thus humble themselves before 
the Lord, and do not think themselves to be some- 
thing before God, and before men, them shall God 
exalt and enrich with heavenly riches. Matt. 23:12. 
Remember how Christ chose humility, when He 
left the glory of His Father and descended into 
the lower parts of the earth. From obedience to 
His Father, and out of great love He became man ; 
with great humility He came to serve us, suffered 
pam and reproach, enduring it with patience and 
longsuffering, out of obedience to His Father, even 
unto death, until He had finished all, so that He 
might save us. Phil. 2 :8. Oh, what love did He 
show us by His anxiety and sighing, when He said, 
according to His humanity: "How am I straight- 
ened till it be accomplished!" Luke 12:50. 

O my most beloved, consider our Leader, Jesus 
Christ, how He regarded the humility of Mary, 
that He would be born of her. And though she was 
chosen to such a high estate, she humbled herself 
saying : "Behold the handmaid of the Lord. For 
God hath regarded the low estate of his hand- 
maiden ; therefore, henceforth all generations shall 
call me blessed. For his mercy is on them that fear 
him from generation to generation; for he hath 
scattered the proud. He hath put down the mighty 
from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. 
He hath filled the hungry with good things, and 
the rich hath he sent empty away. To the poor the 
gospel is preached. Blessed are they which do 
hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they 
shall be filled." Luke 1:38, 48; etc.; 7:22; Matt. 
5 :6. 

O my dearest, my heartfelt desire and request is, 
for the last time, that you give diligence to walk 
in love, simplicity, and harmony among yourselves, 
always in the fear of God, that you may be filled 
with the heavenly good things, and satisfied now 
and forever. Amen. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. May He comfort, strength- 
en, stablish you all with His Spirit, that you may 
finish that whereunto you are called, to the praise 
and glory of the Lord, so that vou may rejoice to- 
gether, and set down at the Lord's table, where He 
shall serve us with new wine, in the kingdom of 
God, His Father. 

This was written when we had eaten our last 
supper, as far as we know. Herewith I bid adieu 
to all my brethren and sisters. I and Martha, my 
sister in the Lord, salute you much with the peace 
of the Lord, for the last time all who are known 
to us or not, wherever they be. We rejoice in the 
Lord, we bid adieu till we meet above, in the New 
Jerusalem. Heb. 12:22. 

Read this last farewell to all who desire to hear 
it, before you send it away ; and then send it to my 
sister Betgen. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


651 


Further, my dear child Betgen, I rejoice greatly 
that the Lord spared me so long, that I was made 
glad before my death through your letter, by 
which you have strengthened me. I pray the Lord 
to strengthen and confirm you with His Spirit, that 
you may go on thus, and follow that which is best, 
as you wrote to me. 

O my dear lambs, see that you do not spend your 
youth in vanity, or pride, or drinking, or gluttony, 
but in sobriety and humility in the fear of God, 
and diligence in every good work, that you may be 
clothed with the adornment of the saints, so that 
God may make you worthy through His grace, to 
enter in to the marriage of the Lamb, and that we 
may see you there with joy. Your father and I, 
and many others, have shown you the way. Take 
an example from the prophets and apostles, yea, 
Christ Himself, who all went this way ; and where 
the head has gone before, there the members must 
certainly follow. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
to the Word of His grace. This is my last fare- 
well, my dear lambs ; always remember each other 
in love; diligently learn to read and write, and 
obey everyone in that which is good. When your 
brother David and Tanneken come to you, greet 
one another with a friendly kiss of peace, in my 
name. 

Herewith I bid you adieu, my dear child Betgen ; 
adieu, my dear children David and Tanneken; 
adieu, all my dear brethren and sisters, and friends 
everywhere. 

Once more we say adieu ; greet uncle and aunt 
much with the kiss of peace, in my name. 

Written by me Soetgen van den Houte, your 
mother in bonds ; written in haste (while trembling 
with cold), out of love for you all. Amen. 


JOOST JOOSTEN, BURNT AT VEER, IN ZEALAND, 
A. D. 1560 

It occurred in the year 1560, that at Veer, in 
Zealand, there was apprehended a young brother 
named Joost Joosten, a native of Goes, a small 
town in Zealand, who was considerably versed in 
the Latin language. When he was a student of 
about fourteen years, it happened that King Philip 
was in Zealand, and that this Joost Joosten was 
singing choral in church, in the organ loft, as is 
customary in papistic churches. The king was 
so delighted with the lad's singing, that he wanted 
to take him with him to Spain ; on which account 
Joost kept himself concealed for six weeks, as he 
"did not want to go away. Thus, he afterwards be- 
came converted to the true faith, and conse- 
quently, was baptized upon his faith, and thus 
led a Christian life. This the enemies of the truth 
could not endure; hence thev aporehended him 
when he was eighteen vears old. He had to suffer 
many assaults, and divers times attempts were 
made to draw him from the faith. He disputed 
with four inquisitors concerning many articles of 


faith; they made strenuous efforts to draw him 
over to their religion. When they could not move 
him with such means, they tortured him dread- 
fully, especially with instruments called iron teer- 
lingen, which they thrust into his knees so that 
they came out again at the ankles. But all this he 
steadfastly endured with great patience, and faith- 
fully kept the treasure which he had in an earthen 
vessel. Hence the children of Herod sentenced 
him to death by burning ; which they executed on 
him on a Monday before Christmas. On his way 
to death he rejoiced greatly in the Lord, and sang 
yet as he was going into the hut of straw in which 
he was burnt, the last verse of the hymn composed 
by himself, which begins thus : "O Lord, thou art 
forever in my thoughts." He also wrote a confes- 
sion of faith, of five sheets of paper, which, how- 
ever, through course of time has been lost. 


KOOLAERT, THE COOPER, A. D. 1561 

At Honschote, in Flanders, there was appre- 
hended for the truth, in the year 1561, a brother 
named Koolaert the cooper, who, after freely con- 
fessing his faith, was taken to Wijnoxberge, and as 
he also there, notwithstanding the tortures inflicted 
upon him, would depart neither to the right nor to 
the left, he was sentenced to death, and burnt alive, 
about St. Martin's Day, for the testimony of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 


JOOS VERBEECK, A. D. 1561 

On the 7th of June 1561 the margrave of Ant- 
werp went out with a large retinue, well armed 
with sticks and staves, and they apprehended Joos 
Verbeeck, a minister of the Word of God and of 
His church. On the 9th he was examined ; he con- 
fessed his faith very freely, as also his ministry ; 
of which the margrave and the lords made much 
sport. He was also very severely tortured; but 
God kept his lips in everything, so that he incul- 
pated no one. Although he was treated so un- 
mercifully that a rope broke in two on his body, 
and that in four days he had to go to the rack 
twice, and was once scourged till his blood flowed, 
he bore all patiently ; this, however, he greatly la- 
mented, namely, that they had broken, or lamed 
by torturing, his right hand, and thus disabled him 
from writing. 

On the 20th day of the month he was brought 
into court, where the bailiff asked him whether he 
was rebaptized. He answered: "Ask me for my 
faith, which I confessed in prison before the lords 
and the margrave." The bailiff then asked him 
what he thought of infant baptism. He said: "I 
confessed that it is not of God, but a human insti- 
tution." The bailiff asked again whether he was 
rebaptized, and said : "Say yes or no ; for I know 
you will not lie ; therefore, tell me the truth." He 
said: "I was baptized upon my faith, as Christ 
teaches." Matt. 28, Mark 16. 


652 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Having confessed his faith, baptism and doc- 
trine, he could not well say much more. The lords 
concluded his sentence, he, in the meantime saying 
to the people: "Dear citizens, I have lived here 
eleven years, and no one can complain of me, since 
I have never wronged any one, and my life and 
doctrine agree with the Word of God." "That is 
true," exclaimed a brother: upon hearing which, 
the thief catchers arose and searched for his broth- 
er, but did not find him. 

Joos said: "Oh, that I might publicly defend 
myself against the priests who came to me in 
prison; as Paul could do before Agrippa; but we 
are forbidden to speak." Acts 26 :2. 

Coming out of the court, he said : "He that de- 
livered Daniel out of the den of lions, will also pre- 
serve me ; for what I suffer is for the name of the 
Lord, and not for evil-doing." 

"That is true," cried a brother ; and others cried : 
"Fight valiantly, dear brother." Joos boldly and 
cheerfully said : "Dear citizens, thus must all the 
children of God suffer; this way was trod by the 
saints of God, the prophets, and so many pious 
men." 

When he approached the little house, yea, stood 
before the door of the hut in which he was to offer 
up his burnt sacrifice, he cast his eyes up to heaven, 
saying: "O holy Father, assist Thy servant in 
this extremity." The executioner's servant wanted 
to thrust a gag into his mouth, to prevent him from 
speaking ; but he did nevertheless not keep silence, 
for he was heard to exclaim : "O Lord, Thou Son 
of David, have compassion upon me." 

The executioner performed his task, trembling 
with fear. When the fire was kindled, Joos cried : 
"O heavenly Father, into Thy hands I commit my 
spirit. O Lord of hosts, who didst separate me 
from my mother's womb, succor Thy servant in 
this last extremity, since I suffer for Thy name." 
Jeremiah 1 :5 ; Gal. 1 :15. Once more he cried : "O 
heavenly Father, into Thy hands I commend my 
spirit." And with this, he quietly offered up a 
fiery sacrifice, for an example and pattern to us all. 


A BRIEF LETTER FROM JOOS VERBEECK, WRITTEN 
IN PRISON AT ANTWERP, TO HIS WIFE 

Grace and mercy from God our heavenly Father, 
and our Lord Jesus Christ, be to my dear wife and 
sister in the Lord, for an affectionate greeting, all 
the days of your life, in the true earnestness of the 
Holy Ghost. Amen. 

I greet you and all my five children most affec- 
tionately. Bring them up in the nurture of the 
Lord, and behave yourself as beqomes holy women, 
in order to teach the young women to be sober, to 
love their husbands, to be discreet, chaste, and 
obedient to their husbands ; and firmly persevere 
in the same rule in which you stand. Eph. 6:4; 
Tit. 2:2. 

May the Lord fit you for every good work that 
becomes your calling. Herewith I commend you 


to Almighty God, and to the Word of His grace; 
may He grant that we may see each other in eter- 
nity. 

By me, Joos Verbeeck, your husband, and broth- 
er in the Lord ; written at Antwerp in prison,— 
where I am confined for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ— with my left hand, with great trouble, as 
my right hand has been tortured lame. 

Greet all the friends, especially the ministers. 

JULIUS KLAMPHERER, A. D. 1561 

In the year 1561, Brother Julius Klampherer, 
from Italy was imprisoned at Venice, for his faith 
and the divine truth. Again and again they ar- 
raigned and examined him, and disputed with him, 
to cause him to apostatize; but he always de- 
fended himself wisely: He was permitted to put 
in writing that which he discussed, concerning his 
faith, with the papistic commissaries appointed 
for this purpose, and thus to defend himself, and 
give an account of his faith in his own handwrit- 
ing. When he had done this, and steadfastly ad- 
hered to it, they finally sentenced him to be cast 
into the depth of the sea ; whereupon he answered 
and said : "This is nothing strange to me, for it 
was told me in the beginning of my conversion, 
that I must expect to die for the testimony of the 
truth; but it does seem strange to me, that the 
lords of Venice concur in such a purpose, and do 
not consider or weigh, that at the last day they 
will have to give an account before God, for inno- 
cent blood." 

Thereupon they replied to him, that they did not 
ask him concerning this. And as they did not relish 
what he said, they did not allow him to say any- 
thing further, but hurriedly remanded him to 
prison. 

And being resolved to execute the sentence which 
they had pronounced, and to proceed with it, they, 
according to their custom, since he had been a 
priest, desecrated him, and then, in the dusk of an 
evening, under the pretense of leading him before 
the lord, took him out and unexpectedly cast him 
into the depth of the sea, and drowned him. How- 
ever, he had expected nothing else ; hence he was 
joyful, and constantly sang and praised God with 
a glad and valiant heart, until he obtained the crown 
of the pious martyrs and faithful witnesses of 
Jesus Christ. And though they drowned him se- 
cretly by night, yet it will be revealed at the great 
day of the Lord, and severely avenged. 


LAUWERENS VAN DE WALLE, ANTONIS SCHOON- 

VELT, KALLEKEN STRINGS, AND MAEYKEN 

K0CX, A. D. 1561 

In the year 1561 several brethren and sisters, 
after suffering much persecution, took up residence 
near Ypres in Flanders, at a place called ten Hoo- 
gensiecken. Having left money, property, friends 
and kindred, to follow Christ, and live there in 
quietness, engaging in tape-weaving, in order to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


653 


gain a living by their trade, they were spied out 
while they sat and worked together, and the in- 
quisitor came to apprehend them. He was ac- 
companied by a large force well provided with 
sticks, swords and ropes, and they arrived just 
at the time when Antonis, who had made them a 
visit, and had taken leave, stood at the door, ready 
to go. 

As they thus arrived with great noise, Stijntgen 
Potvliets (who was pregnant) ran out of the 
house first, and was apprehended. Karel N. also 
ran out at the door, and master Klaas (who was a 
great persecutor, and fellow helper of the inquisi- 
tor) pursued him, struck at him with a bare sword, 
and though Karel was wounded by it, yet he es- 
caped. Maeyken Kocx (who was also pregnant) 
was attacked by the inquisitor, who held a naked 
sword in his hand, and as she cried aloud to him 
to spare her child, and he acted in a very blood- 
thirsty manner, he, like a madman, wounded him- 
self. 

Lauwerens van de Walle, Antonis Schoonvelt, 
and Kalleken Strings were also apprehended, but 
Hendrick N. made his escape. 

While they were being bound, they comforted 
one another much with the Word of God, and 
when they were brought out of the house, they 
cheerfully spoke to the neighbors, saying: "Can 
any one complain of us? It is for the name of 
Christ that this is inflicted upon us ; we need not 
be ashamed of it." Matt. 10:22; I Pet. 4:16. 

On their way to town, Kalleken commenced to 
sing a hymn. Then said master Klaas : "The apos- 
tles did not sing, as you do; nor do I want to 
dance; why then do you sing?" Antonis said: 
"Sister, do not fear these; just sing as much as 
you want to;" and Lauwerens helped her sing. 
When they came into the city, there was a great 
concourse of people, and they made known the 
Word of God by singing and speaking. Among 
other things, Lauwerens said : "That we are ap- 
prehended, is not on account of evil doing, but be- 
cause we live according to the word of God." 

Kalleken Strings said : "Strait is the gate, and 
narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life (Mat- 
thew 7 :14) ; repair to it, do good and forsake evil, 
and fear not the rulers of this world, but buy Testa- 
ments, read therein the counsel of God, and follow 
it." They were then confined in the court of the 
prison, where they remained for several months 
and days, patient and of good cheer, waiting until 
they should offer up their sacrifice, and being vis- 
ited and comforted in the meantime by many 
brethren and sisters. They were also sometimes 
examined in regard to their faith, which they freely 
confessed, and from which no pain or suffering 
could induce them to depart. 

Finally, having suffered many tortures, on the 
rack as well as elsewhere, Lauwerens van de Walle, 
Antonis Schoonvelt, and Kalleken Strings, as they 
adhered valiantly and steadfastly to the truth, were 
delivered by the inquisitor into the hands of the 


secular authorities, to be dealt with according to the 
import of the royal decree. In delivering them, the 
inquisitor also, in the hearing of the ignorant peo- 
ple, read severe charges (as he thought) against 
them, as, among other things, that they confessed 
the Pope of Rome to be the antichrist. I John 2 :18. 
That they held the Roman church to be the whore 
of Babylon. Rev. 17 :5. That they pronounced the 
sacrament to be an abominable idol, etc. 

Thereupon Lauwerens commenced to say that he 
had not said or confessed this without a fuller ex- 
planation. He was instantly and savagely told to 
keep silence, but he said : "Thieves and murderers 
are allowed to have some one who speaks for them ; 
but you have brought it about that neither a pro- 
curator nor an advocate may speak for us ; hence 
we must speak for ourselves." 

Kalleken Strings also, who sat there with her 
head resting on her hand, exhausted from exces- 
sive torture, let her voice be heard boldly. 

On the testimony of the inquisitor, Lauwerens 
van de Walle and Antonis Schoonvelt were both 
sentenced by the authorities, to be publicly stran- 
gled and burnt at the stake, and to this end a scaf- 
fold with two stakes, as also wood and straw, was 
prepared in the marketplace. 

They were brought out with their arms tied to- 
gether, and coming to the place where they were to 
be offered up, they fell down upon their knees, and 
prayed to God. When they had arisen, the execu- 
tioner asked their forgiveness for what he was 
about to do, and they kindly forgave him, accord- 
ing to the teaching of Christ. Matt. 6:14. 

Lauwerens said with a loud voice to the author- 
ities, that of a truth he would gladly forgive them 
and all who were guilty in the matter. He also 
boldly said, like the third of the Maccabean breth- 
ren : "These limbs God from heaven gave ; there- 
fore I will willingly surrender them for His law's 
sake." II Mace. 7:11. As they went into the hut, 
both cried farewell to all the brethren and sisters 
scattered in many countries, cities and villages, and 
with this commending their spirits into the hands 
of God, they departed this world. 

In the month of October of the same year, also 
Kalleken Strings, a very fine and well-bred maiden, 
was delivered to the secular authorities. She was 
modest, fearless and steadfast, so that neither many 
fair promises of riches and money, or temporal 
prosperity, nor pain or severe torments (though 
she was tortured to such an extent, that she was 
taken from the rack for dead), could in any wise 
draw her from her faith; yea, even her mother, 
when she visited her in prison for this end, could 
not move her, nor accomplish her purpose, but 
hearing and seeing her daughter's steadfastness 
and kind treatment of her, she said : "My daugh- 
ter is better than I am." 

Afterwards she was also sentenced to be stran- 
gled and burnt ; whereupon she said : "You have 
now sentenced me to the fire, according to the Em- 


654 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


peror's decree; fear the judgment of God, which 
He shall hold, to condemn you to eternal fire. 

When it was thought that Kalleken was about to 
be executed, a great multitude of people flocked to- 
gether from far and near, to see it. Seeing this, and 
fearing a disturbance, the authorities did not have 
her brought forth; only the executioner came out 
of the city hall, and said to the people, that she 
was dead already. Thus, the people went away, 
thinking that she had been privately beheaded. 

But early the next day, and unexpectedly, no 
scaffold having been erected, but other prepara- 
tions made, she was brought into the marketplace, 
and when she had offered up her prayer to God, 
and commended her spirit into His hands, sentence 
was executed on her, and thus she departed this 
world, going with a burning lamp to meet her 
bridegroom. Matt. 25 :1. 

In the meantime, Stijntgen Potvliets, not con- 
tinuing steadfast, was set at liberty ; but Maeyken 
Kocx, who remained immovable, was retained and 
kept until she was delivered of her child, and was 
out of childbed, whereupon (though her heart 
clung dearly to her husband and children, yet lov- 
ing God above all, and, out of love to Him, ad- 
hering to the truth known and accepted, esteeming 
this precious treasure of greater value than her 
own life) she was sentenced to be publicly stran- 
gled and burned at the stake, which was also exe- 
cuted. Commending her spirit into the hands of 
God, she joyfully departed this world, well know- 
ing that she should inherit eternal joy, and be 
permitted to enter in with the five wise virgins, 
when the cry shall be made at midnight: "Be- 
hold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet 
him." 


ORVEL, JAN AND PLEUNIS, A. D. 1561 

About this time Orvel, Jan and Pleun were sev- 
erally apprehended for the truth, at Cologne, and 
as they steadfastly confessed the truth, and could 
not be moved by any kind of torture or crafty 
seduction, but remained faithful, they were finally 
taken out on the Rhine, and drowned, having com- 
mended their souls into the hands of God, in the 
year 1561. 


FRANCHOYS VAN ELSTLANDT, A. D. 1561 

A brother, Franchoys van Elstlandt, also called 
France van Meenene, a mason by trade, went from 
Meenene to Arien in French Flanders, to work at 
his trade there, and thus earn his living. There, on 
St. Denis' day, the ninth of October, 1561, just as 
he was leading a horse to water for the master for 
whom he worked, he was apprehended, because he 
did no longer worship the priest's idol, and when 
he, after many solicitations, threats, and much suf- 
fering, would not renounce his faith, he was final- 
ly, on the 21st of October, burnt alive, as a wit- 
ness of God. On this occasion, a monk shameless- 
ly cried: "Go thou accursed, from this into the 


eternal fire." But Franchoys bore it with patience, 
committing vengeance unto God, who will judge 
righteously in due time. 


JOHN SCHUT, A. D. 1561 

In the year 1561 another valiant hero and soldier 
of Jesus Christ, named John Schut, fell into the 
hands of the tyrants and persecutors, for following 
Christ, and living according to God's holy Word, 
in the city of Vreden, in Westphalia. There he 
suffered and, through the grace of God, endured, 
severe imprisonment and threats of death. When 
brought bound before the lords, to give an account 
of his faith, he freely confessed the same, saying 
that he believed according to the Word of God : 

1. They asked him concerning his baptism, and 
what he held in regard to infant baptism. He re- 
plied that he was baptized upon his faith, as Christ 
his faithful Saviour has commanded us in Mark 
16, that baptism is to be given only to believers, 
and not to ignorant children, and that he had never 
read of infant baptism in the holy Scriptures, and 
that it could therefore by no means be proved'with 
the Word of God, but that baptism belonged only 
to those who had amended their sinful life. They 
angrily asked him, whether he would not give up 
these views. He answered that it were by no means 
expedient for him, to forsake the Word of God, 
and die an eternal death, but that he would rather 
suffer for the truth, though the pain should be as 
great again. 

2. In regard to the Lord's Supper, he also thor- 
oughly confessed before them that it must be ob- 
served according to the institution of Christ, and 
that we must by it remember, with an humble 
heart, His bitter sufferings and innocent death, 
and how He shed His precious blood on the cross 
for us poor sinners. 

3. They all asked him with many words, wheth- 
er Christ our Saviour was not of Mary's flesh and 
blood. But as this point is a principal article of our 
Christian faith, he likewise answered thoroughly 
upon it, saying that he had never read this asser- 
tion of theirs in the Word of God. He asked them : 
"How could He be of the earth whom God the Fa- 
ther sent down from heaven? But He was con- 
ceived of the Holy Ghost by the pure virgin Mary, 
and became man through the effectual power of 
the Most High, so that the holy thing which was 
born of her is called the Son of the most high God, 
without partaking in the least or most of man's 
polluted or sinful flesh. But the Word, according 
to the testimony of John, became flesh or man, so 
that the glory of the only begotten Son of the Fa- 
ther was handled and seen. Thereby the promises 
of God concerning His proceeding from the seed 
of David, are completely fulfilled in Christ, through 
whom we all who were lost have been redeemed 
and reconciled to God. 

4. They asked him concerning their magistracy, 
whether they were not of God. He replied : "Yes[ 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


655 


for the protection of the pious, and the punishment 
of evil-doers; they are ordained of God to rule 
their dominions in peace." 

5. They asked him what he held in regard to 
marriage. He replied that a man and a woman are 
united together in marriage, and that such union 
may not be dissolved, save on account of adultery ; 
following herein the teaching of Christ. Matt. 19. 

6. They asked him concerning uproar and sedi- 
tion. But he answered that he did not approve of 
such evil things ; but that he and his fellow breth- 
ren, on the contrary, were taught to love their ene- 
mies, and to do good to them that do us evil and 
persecute us. And that with truth nothing else 
should ever be heard of him and his fellow breth- 
ren. 

7. They asked him who his captain was. He re- 
plied that it was Christ with His doctrine, who had 
called him in peace. And to this his faithful 
Saviour, and his blessed doctrine he hoped to ad- 
here, and to confirm it with his death and blood. 

Thereupon he was sentenced by these tyrants, 
and executed with the sword. The chief judge 
who had passed this sentence, riding by the body 
of John Schut, a few days after his execution, 
called out mockingly: "Schut, sing us a song;" 
for Schut had been cheerful in his tribulation, and 
sung much in prison and on his way to death. 
Upon this the judge was struck with apoplexy, and 
never spoke again, but died in a short time ; which 
by many was looked upon as the vengeance and 
punishment of God upon him. 

Concerning this account, read his own hymn, in 
the old hymn book; it begins: "O Heer ick magh 
wel klagen." 

JAN, HENDRICK, BASTIAEN, HANS, MARIKEN VAN 
MEENEN, BEETKEN VAN BRUGH, AND LIJ NT- 
GEN, THE 15th OF AUGUST, A. D. 1561 

A. D. 1561, there were imprisoned at Antwerp 
in Brabant, for the testimony of Jesus, seven pious 
witnesses of the truth, named Jan, Hendrick, Bas- 
tiaen, Hans, Mariken van Meenen, Beetken van 
Brugh and Lijntgen. All these had the house of 
their faith built so firmly and immovably upon 
their head and cornerstone Christ Jesus, that nei- 
ther the philosophy and crafty seduction, nor the 
tyranny and violence of the papists could in any 
wise bring them to apostatize, but their faith was 
found much more precious than gold that perish- 
eth, though it be tried with fire (I Pet. 1:7) ; so 
that they, on the 15th of August of said year, at 
said place surrendered their lives for the truth, 
and obtained the end of their faith, eternal salva- 
tion, through the grace of God, and are waiting 
now to receive, together with all the pious, the 
crown of everlasting glory, in eternity. 

Read, concerning this, the beautiful long hymn 
composed for the comforting of these prisoners, 
and dedicated to them, in the second hymn book. It 


begins : "Lieve broeders wy groeten u met sang- 
en." 


TWELVE CHRISTIANS AT BRUGES: ADRIAEN BRAEL, 
LUCAS HENDRICKS, MARIJN AMARE, NIKASEN 
AMARE, HANSKEN LISZ, ANDRIES DE MEULE- 
NAER, ANTHONIS KEUTE, HANSKEN PAR- 
MENTIER, JAN N., JELIS 0UTERMAN, 
FRANCIJNTGEN MEULENAERS, MAEY- 
KEN TRAMS, IN THE YEAR 1561 

In the year 1561, on the evening before St. Mar- 
tin's day, some Christians were assembled together, 
at Bruges, in Flanders, who instructed one another 
with the Word of the Lord, concerning the amend- 
ment of life. When the lords learned of this, they 
sent thither the servants of the bailiff, who came 
running in, and cried : "Surrender, or we will run 
you through; and deliver up all your arms and 
books." They replied : "We are not a people who 
seek to avenge themselves ; but we leave vengeance 
to God, who will avenge it in due time." They were 
then fettered, two and two together, and taken to 
prison ; they walked on boldly, comforting one an- 
other with the Word of God. Three escaped, 
namely, Rutsaert, and his wife, and one named 
Maeyken; but the others who were imprisoned 
were joyful. Francijntjen Meulenaers said to 
Maeyken: "Dear sister, let us remember that the 
kingdom of heaven is nigh, and let us be sincerely 
faithful to our Bridegroom." 

Jelis and Hansken Parmentier each sang a hymn 
for joy. On St. Martin's day they were brought be- 
fore the lords, where they boldly confessed their 
faith, as also, that they had been baptized aright 
according to the command of Christ. 

These ten brethren and two sisters remained in 
prison for about thirty days, where they praised 
and thanked God, and prepared themselves to 
suffer for His name. During this time they were 
once more brought before the lords, where they 
again confessed their faith, and said that they 
would firmly adhere to it. 

Afterwards, on the 10th of December, six of 
them were offered up, namely Adrian Brael, 
Lucas Hendricks, Marijn Amare, Nikasen Amare, 
Hansken Lisz, and Andries Meulenaer, who, bold- 
ly comforting one another, said, among other 
things: "Now the fight is fought, the course al- 
most finished, the faith kept, and henceforth, as 
Paul says, the crown of life is prepared for us." 
I Tim. 4:7, 8; Jas. 1:12. 

The following day, the 11th of December, the 
other six were put to death, namely, Teunis Keute, 
Hansken Parmentier, Jan, Jelis Outerman, Fran- 
cijntgen Meulenaers, Maeyken Trams, who also 
boldly and joyfully, with their lamps, and adorned 
with their wedding garments, went to meet their 
Bridegroom, with such great love that for His 
sake they did not fear bitter death. Francijntgen 
called to one of her acquaintances, enjoining her 
cordially to greet the brethren and sisters in the 


656 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Lord, and to tell them that she so gladly suffered 
for the name of the Lord, and would boldly fight, 
together with her Bridegroom. 

Thus all these, the first as well as the last six, 
were strangled and burnt for the name of God and 
His truth. They are now at rest, and wait for the 
coming of our Lord, who will avenge their suffer- 
ings. 


JAN HULLE, AT YPRES, A. D. 1561 

As it is found that the wolf will generally follow 
his innate ravenous nature, and therefore the sheep 
can make no firm compact with him, but stand in 
constant danger of being devoured by him, so it 
appeared in the year 1561 in the city of Ypres, in 
Flanders, where a God-fearing lamb of Jesus 
Christ, namely, an old man named Jan Hulle, was 
seized and apprehended by these devouring wolves. 
He there had to undergo and endure many severe 
conflicts with them, not on account of any crime, 
but only for living according to the Word of God, 
from which they by tyranny sought to draw him 
and make him apostatize. But as he, as behooves 
an obedient follower of Jesus Christ, had yielded 
himself under the voice of his only Shepherd, he 
fled from these strangers, and would not hear 
them. On this account he was condemned to death 
by the lords of this world, and was thus burnt at 
said place. In all this he, as a valiant soldier of 
Jesus Christ, armed himself with patience, and, 
through faith, steadfastly endured all these suf- 
ferings inflicted upon him. And as he herein was 
not ashamed of Christ and His truth but openly 
confessed Him before lords and princes, and testi- 
fied and confirmed it with his death and blood; 
therefore Christ, when He comes in the clouds of 
heaven, in the glory of His Father, will not be 
ashamed of him, but confess him before His 
Father, and set him on His right hand, and bid 
him with all the blessed to enter into the kingdom 
prepared for them from the beginning, that is, into 
the eternal glory of heaven. 


PIETER VAN MALDEGEM, PIETER VAN MALE, 

JACQUES BOSTIJN, AND LAUWERENS 

ALLAERTS, A. D. 1562 

In the year 1562 four brethren, named Pieter 
van Maldegem, Pieter van Male, Jacques Bostijn, 
and Lauwerens Allaerts, were apprehended at 
Ghent, in Flanders, because they no longer sought 
to follow the Roman church, but the command- 
ments of God. When they were examined, they 
freely confessed their faith, and valiantly contend- 
ed for the truth, with the spiritual sword of the 
Word of God ; and as they in no wise could be 
moved therefrom, they were sentenced to death, 
and had to testify with their blood to the name of 
Christ. They now rest under the altar, and wait 
until the number of their brethren be fulfilled, that 
they may be rewarded, and vengeance taken on 
their enemies. 


VIJNTGEN, GOUDEKEN, AND JANNEKEN DE JONK- 

HEER, BETGEN VAN MALDEGEM, AND SIJNTGEN 

VAN GELDER, A. D. 1562 

In the same year there were also apprehended at 
Ghent three sisters, namely Vijntgen, Goudeken, 
and Janneken de Jonkheer, and two others, namely, 
Betgen van Maldegem, and Sijntgen van Gelder. 
All five freely confessed their faith, and undaunt- 
edly adhered to it unto death— which they had to 
suffer for it — and firmly clung to the love of their 
Bridegroom Jesus Christ. Hence they shall also, 
when the cry is made at midnight, go to meet Him 
with their burning lamps, and with oil in their 
adorned vessels, and shall, as ready virgins, go in 
with Him to the marriage of the Lamb. 

GULJAME VAN DALE, A. D. 1562 

Shortly after, also an imprisoned brother named 
Guljame van Dale, who adhered so firmly to the 
truth and love of God that he feared no pain, suf- 
fering, fire or sword, had, for following Christ 
(whom he thanked that he had made them worthy 
for it), to taste bitter death, at Ghent. Hence 
Christ shall exalt him, and give him to inherit His 
eternal kingdom of heaven full of imperishable 
joy. 


JELIS STRINGS, WITH PIETER AND JELIS POTVLIET, 
A. D. 1562 

Jelis Strings, a thoughtful young single man, and 
a man named Pieter Potvliet, with his brother Jelis 
Potvliet, a young man, all three natives of Tielt, in 
Flanders, having come to the knowledge of the di- 
vine truth, and joined the church of God, finally, 
after suffering much persecution, took up residence 
at Wervijck, where they supported themselves by 
tape weaving. Thus it happened about the middle 
of the summer of the year 1562, that one night the 
inquisitor came with many servants, surrounded 
the house, entered the same, and apprehended these 
three brethren. 

When daylight came, they were put into a wag- 
on, securely bound, the inquisitor and his com- 
pany riding alongside on horseback. They were 
thus taken through Meenen to Kortrijck, a distance 
of about three hours walking, where they remained 
in confinement for three months, very closely 
guarded, and had many discussions in reference 
to the faith, with the inquisitor and other ecclesi- 
astics ; but they valiantly and steadfastly adhered 
to the truth known and accepted. Hence, the in- 
quisitor and the lord of Everbeke (in whose do- 
minion they had been apprehended), and a great 
company on horseback and on foot, took these 
pious witnesses of the truth, in a wagon, back the 
same way, to Werwijck, where, in the marketplace, 
called the Steenacker, an enclosure had been pre- 
pared, together with stakes and wood, to burn 
them. But as it had rained excessively, while they 
were on the way between Meenen and Werwijck, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


657 


so that the wood and straw, prepared for the pur- 
pose, had become very wet, and as the bailiff also 
was averse to cause them to be burnt, all three were 
sentenced to be beheaded. 

First Jelis Strings was brought forth, who, as he 
was going to death, said, among other things : "Be- 
cause I believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of 
the living God, born of the Virgin Mary, I must 
die." Thereupon a monk, who walked at his side, 
instantly said : "You lie." Jelis further said, con- 
cluding his remark: "And because I believe that 
the pope is the antichrist." Finally, kneeling down, 
he said with a trembling voice: "O heavenly 
Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit." A 
few moments more, and the executioner had dis- 
patched him, and covered the dead body with wood, 
that the others who were to follow should not see 
it lie there. 

Pieter Potvliet was next brought forth, who, on 
his way to death, said : "It has been so before for 
the name of the Lord." He also quoted, in confir- 
mation of his faith, from Eph. 4 :5, that there is one 
Lord, one faith, one baptism, etc. And having 
kneeled down, he also exclaimed : "O heavenly 
Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit." 
The executioner soon wielded his sword, dealing 
him five strokes, on shoulder, head and neck, be- 
fore he finished his work on him; whereupon he 
covered the dead body, as he had done the others. 

Jelis Potvliet (still young in years) was the third 
one brought forth, who, as he was going to death, 
quoted, among other things, the words of Christ : 
"Fear not them that kill the body," etc. And 
kneeling down, he also said : "O heavenly Father, 
into Thy hands I commend my spirit" — but before 
he had fully uttered the last word, his head was 
off. Their bodies were placed upon wheels, be- 
tween Werwijck and Meenen, but soon after se- 
cretly taken down and buried by some of their fel- 
low believers. 

Of Jelis Strings two letters are still extant, 
which he wrote while in prison at Kortrijck, and 
which we have added here for the gratification of 
the Christian reader. 


THE FIRST LETTER OF JELIS STRINGS 

Grace, mercy and peace from God our heavenly 
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the 
Father in truth and in love. May He strengthen 
and confirm you people, who now have to suffer 
persecution for a little while, and may He grant 
you to be strengthened with might in the inner 
man, and that Jesus Christ may dwell in your 
hearts by faith, and you be rooted and grounded in 
love, so that you may be able to comprehend with 
all the saints of God, the height, and depth, and 
length and breadth of His mercy, and to rightly 
walk and remain immovable therein unto the end 
of your life; this we wish you all who love the 
Lord, for a cordial greeting, dear brethren and 
sisters in the Lord. 


Further, after all greetings, be pleased to know 
that we are tolerably well yet, the Lord be praised 
forever for His grace. Pray the Lord for us that 
He will order it according to His will. We are of 
pretty good courage, the Lord be praised. 

Further, I earnestly pray you, that you will 
rightly instruct the simple in the faith, concerning 
all things, and frequently speak of these things in 
the exhortation, for there is great need of it. They 
greatly torment those that are imprisoned, when 
they perceive that they are weak, yea, as much 
again as them that are sure of their faith. And you 
that are weak take it well to heart, and be not 
ashamed to ask questions for the benefit of your 
souls, until you have a good understanding, before 
it comes to the test. Take this warning to heart, 
for it is such a blessed assurance, if one is sure of 
his faith. For Sirach says : "A man whose heart 
is established is like a house which is firmly bound 
and nailed together ; it feareth not though a storm 
arise." Sir. 22:16. Thus, dear friends, let us also 
build upon Christ Jesus ; this must be the founda- 
tion, namely, His Word ; for Christ Himself says : 
"He that heareth my word, and doeth it, I will 
show whom he is like : He is like a man who pro- 
ceeded to build his house ; but he digged deep, and 
laid the foundation upon the rock: though floods 
and rains come against it, it remaineth standing, 
for it is founded upon the rock. But he that hear- 
eth my word, and doeth it not, is like unto a fool- 
ish man that buildeth his house upon the sand: 
when the floods come, or the winds blow, it falleth, 
and great is the fall of it." Matt. 7 :24-27. Ob- 
serve friends, He says : "Great is the fall of it." 
Hence, dear friends, dig deep, which, according to 
my understanding, means, to examine and take 
well to heart, so that we may not be found fools ; 
for James admonishes us to be doers of the Word, 
and not hearers only, deceiving our own selves. 
For if any be a hearer of the Word, and not a doer, 
he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in 
a glass: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his 
way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of 
man he was. But whoso examineth himself in the 
law of God, arid is a doer of the Word, and not a 
hearer only, this man shall be blessed. Jas. 1 :22- 
25. Yea, Christ Jesus says Himself : "Blessed are 
they that hear the word of God, and keep it." 
Luke 11:28. John also, admonishes us: "Blessed 
are they that hear the words of the prophets, and 
keep those things which are written therein." 

Behold, dear friends, if we hear His word, and 
keep it well in our hearts, we are entitled to all 
these promises of blessedness; for it is the true 
food of the soul, by which all Christians must be 
fed, if they are to live; for Christ says that man 
lives not by bread alone, but by every word that 
proceeds out of the mouth of God. Matt. 4 :4. Yea, 
as the prophet Jeremiah says, in the 15th chapter, 
verse 16: "Lord, thy word sustains me, since I 
have obtained it; and thy word is the comfort and 
joy of my heart." Solomon, also, says: "Every 


658 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


word of God is pure, and they are a shield unto 
them that put their trust therein." Prov. 30:5. 
Therefore, dear friends, let us always put our 
trust in God's Word; it will not deceive us; for 
John says : These sayings of God are true ; heaven 
and earth shall pass away, but the words of God 
shall not pass away. Rev. 19:9. O dear friends, 
let us heed it well, for it is what will judge us in 
the last day; for Christ says: "I shall not judge 
you; but the word that I have spoken, the same 
shall judge you in the last day." John 12 :48. O 
dear friends, if it is that which will judge us, 
then we must well examine, and constantly prove 
ourselves, whether our life accords with the Word 
of God; and carefully view ourselves in it as in a 
mirror, whether there is nothing condemnable in 
us ; and if we find aught in us that is unclean, then 
let us do according to the counsel of the prophet, 
who says: "Wash ye, make you clean; put away 
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; 
cease to do evil, learn to do well ; seek judgment ; 
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead 
for the widow. Come now, and let us reason to- 
gether, saith the Lord : though your sins be as scar- 
let, they shall be as white as snow; though they 
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." He 
says : "If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat 
the good of the land: But if ye refuse and rebel, 
ye shall be devoured with the sword : for the mouth 
of the Lord hath spoken it." Isa. 1 :16-20. 

Dear brethren and sisters, let us not be diso- 
bedient, nor murmur against God, like Israel, who 
were rejected for it. I Cor. 10:10. If we have 
heard His voice today, let us not harden our hearts, 
but let us take care that we do not forsake the 
promise of entering into His rest, and that none of 
us be found to remain without; for we have been 
sufficiently admonished and invited, as was also 
Israel ; but the Word preached them did not profit 
them; because they did not firmly believe it. He- 
brews 3:7, 6; 4:2. But let us have a steadfast 
faith, like Joshua and Caleb had, who feared nei- 
ther the great stature of the Canaanites, nor the 
strength of their cities, though their walls reached 
up to heaven. Num. 14:30. Mark, their walls 
were high, and the inhabitants of the land were 
like giants; they were only grasshoppers in their 
sight. But Caleb and Joshua trusted in God, and 
said : "God is with us ; their defense is taken from 
them; we shall devour them like bread." Num. 
14:9. And by their faith they overcame every- 
thing, and entered into the promised land. Joshua 
3:17. 

Thus, dear friends, also our enemies are great, 
strong and numerous ; but if we have a faith like 
Caleb and Joshua, so that we do not see our own 
strength, but go out from ourselves, and rely upon 
Him with the whole heart, then we shall come off 
conquerors ; for David says : "Commit thy way 
unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall 
bring it to pass." Ps. 37:5. Solomon, too, says: 
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart ; and lean 


not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways 
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." 
Proverbs 3:5,6. Yea, Paul, also, says: "Let. your 
conversation be without covetousness ; and be con- 
ten with such things as ye have : for he hath said, 
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that 
we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I 
will not fear what man will do unto me." Heb. 
13:5, 6; Deut. 31 :6. Yea, David says: "The Lord 
is my shepherd ; I shall not want. He maketh me 
to lie down in green pastures ; he leadeth me beside 
the still waters. He restoreth my soul : he leadeth 
me in the paths of righteousness for his name's 
sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of 
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil ; for thou 
art with me ; thy rod and thy staff they comfort 
me." Ps. 23 :l-4. 

O dear friends, where do we find such a God in 
Babylon? He says: "When thou passest through 
the waters, I will be with thee ; and through the 
rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou 
walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned ; 
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee." Yea, 
He says: "The mountains shall depart, and the 
hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart 
from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace 
be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on 
thee." Isa. 43:2; 54:10. Brethren and sisters, if 
we have such a God, who helps thus in time of 
need, who are we, that we should be afraid of 
men, and of the children of men that must perish 
like grass. Isa. 51 :12. Yea, Christ Himself said: 
"Fear not them that kill the body; but fear him 
that hath power to cast soul and body into damna- 
tion." Matt. 10:28. Behold, friends, though the 
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consola- 
tion also aboundeth by Christ. II Cor. 1 :5. There- 
fore, let us sincerely humble ourselves and keep 
His commandments, and pray before Him with 
tears, that He will show us mercy according to 
His pleasure, so that, as we now have to mourn on 
account of their pride, we may rejoice after this 
distress, because we do not follow the sins of our 
fathers, who forsook their God, and went after 
strange gods, wherefore the Lord delivered them 
into the hands of their enemies. I Pet. 1 :6 ; Deut. 
32:16. Therefore, dear brethren who are elders, 
comfort the people with your words, and admon- 
ish them to remember that our fathers were 
tried in many ways, and had to overcome manifold 
temptations, in order that they might be proved 
whether they served God with their hearts. Thus, 
Isaac, Jacob and Moses remained steadfast, and 
had to overcome much affliction; but the others, 
who would not accept affliction, but impatiently 
murmured against God, were destroyed by the de- 
stroyer and by serpents. But let us remember that 
we are chastised of God, to make us better, and 
not for our destruction, and that the punishment 
is far less than our sins. For whom the Lord lov- 
eth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom 
He receiveth. But if ye be without chastisement, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


659 


whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and 
not sons. Hebrews 12 :6, 8. Hence, dear friends, 
let us be patient in this tribulation for a little 
while; for the sufferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed in us. Romans 8:18. But the 
God of all grace stablish, strengthen and settle us 
all, this I wish you all for a greeting. I Pet. 5 :10. 
I, Peter, greet you much, and earnestly desire 
that you would see to my wife ; she hopes to do her 
best, she told me. We ask you to pray for us, that 
we may finish our course to the praise of God and 
the salvation of our souls. We also enjoin you, 
that if Pauwels has not moved, he would better do 
so ; we advise it for the best. We would write more 
explicitly, but we fear that the letter might fall into 
wrong hands. I, Pieter Potvliet, greet you much, 
and give you a testament. Continue steadfast and 
immovable in the work of the Lord ; see that your 
labor be not in vain. I commend you to God. 
By me, Jelis Strings. 


THE SECOND LETTER OF JELIS STRINGS 

Grace, mercy and peace from God the heavenly 
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the 
Father, in truth and in love. May He stablish, 
strengthen and settle you who have to suffer for 
a little while for Christ's sake ; and many He grant 
you, according to the riches of His glory and pow- 
er, to be strengthened with might in the inner man, 
and that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, 
and you be rooted and grounded in love, so that 
you may all be bound together with the bond of 
love, and thus, through the uniting of the Holy 
Spirit, and obedience to the Lord, according to the 
Gospel, be built up together harmoniously a holy 
temple and city of God; this I wish you all who 
love the Lord, for a cordial greeting, dear breth- 
ren and sisters in the Lord. 

Further, after all greeting, I hope to write a lit- 
tle again concerning the disputation we had with 
our adversaries, though it is not very much; for 
when we were apprehended, we resolved among 
ourselves, not to dispute, unless we might all come 
together, which was also observed, so that they 
should have nothing to lie behind our back, and 
that if they should hear a word more from one 
than from another they might not confuse the 
simple. On account of this they were much in- 
censed, and said that they all depended on me. 
They often came to dispute; but we would not, 
unless we might all come together, and in the 
marketplace. This angered them much, and they 
said: "Where was it ever seen that a disputation 
was held in the marketplace ? You people want to 
introduce new doctrines." Finally, we consented 
that we would dispute in prison, provided we 
might all come together ; but they would not have 
it otherwise than each separately, and this we 
would not do. Thus they came twice or three times, 
and we had some conversation with them each 


time, in order that they might not say that we re- 
fused to hear them. Our conversation was about 
the three persons and the incarnation. The first 
question he put to me was whether I did not be- 
lieve that if men believed in Christ Jesus, and 
henceforth forsook all evil they would be saved. 
I said : "Yes ; all who believe that Jesus Christ is 
the Son of God, who died for us, and through this 
faith show obedience to the Gospel, shall be saved." 
"Well then," said they, "If they believe that chil- 
dren may be baptized, they will be saved, accord- 
ing to your own words." I said: "My lord, it 
seems to me, that you are like the scribes; they 
sought to censure Christ by subtlety, and it ap- 
pears to me that you do the same." Matt. 22:15. 
"Yes," said he; "Christ knew how to answer the 
scribes, and so will you, if you have the Spirit of 
Christ." I said: "If they show obedience to the 
Gospel, they will not baptize children, nor cause 
them to be baptized ; for it is not instituted or com- 
manded of God, to baptize children ; but you people 
have planted it, and whatever men have planted 
shall be rooted up of God, and thus it will go with 
your infant baptism." Matt. 15:13. He forthwith 
said that the Anabaptists believed that Christ 
brought His flesh from heaven. I said that it was 
a lie; "are you not ashamed (I said) to sit here 
and lie in this manner in my presence ?" He said : 
"What you believe, I know not ; but others believe 
thus." I said that it was a lie; "I have never 
heard," I said, "of any that held such a faith ; yet 
I have had more intercourse with them than you 
have ; are you not ashamed to sit here and lie thus 
in my preesnce ?" Then he became very boastful ; 
three or four other priests and the bailiff were also 
sitting there, and they said : "Jelis, talk decently." 
I said : "Then do not lie so." I spoke loudly, that 
my comrades should hear it. 

He then asked: "What is your faith, then?" 
"I believe with all the apostles, that He is the Son 
of God, as Peter confessed" (Matt. 16:16; John 
20 ; 6 :69) , "visible and invisible ; that the Word by 
which all things were made became flesh in Mary, 
through the power of the Most High." He asked 
whether the Word became flesh like Lot's wife be- 
came a pillar of salt, or the water, wine. I said: 
"No." He asked: "How then?" I said: "It be- 
came man, and it continued to be the Word ; that 
is, the Word which was invisible became visible ; 
that which was impalpable became palpable; that 
which was impossible became possible." He said : 
"Was the Word not God?" I replied: "It is God 
and man." "Did God die?" he said. I replied: 
"He died according to His humanity, as Peter says : 
'put to death according to the flesh, but quickened 
according to the spirit.'" I Pet. 3:18. 

I then asked him, how he confessed the unity. 
He confessed three persons and one God. I asked 
whether the Holy Ghost were a person. He said : 
"Yes." I said: "When Mary was greeted by the 
angel, that she should conceive, and she did not 
know how this should come to pass, as she had 


660 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


never known a man, the angel said: 'The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee.' Luke 1 :26. Now, if 
the Holy Ghost is a person, then one person con- 
ceived another. And in the Acts of the Apostles it 
is written that when the apostles received the Holy 
Ghost, He sat upon each of them. Acts 2 :3. But a 
person can sit only upon one man. And in the first 
chapter (v. 7) of the Book of Wisdom it is written 
that the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world. To 
what person would you compare Him?" He did 
not know what to say. He then said : "I do not 
consider them persons such as Pieter, Klaes, and 
Jan." I said: "To whom then do you compare 
them?" They then exchanged a few words in 
Latin, and said : "We only call them persons : did 
you think that we considered them three human be- 
ings?" I said: "Yes." He said: "If you have 
taught men so, you must confess that you have 
slandered us, and that you are a false teacher." 
I said : "I am no teacher ; I have enough to do to 
teach myself." I added : "You call them persons ; 
are they not such ? Why then do you call them three 
persons?" He said: "It amounts to the same 
thing." I said : "It does not ; a person is a human 
being, and you certainly cannot compare them to 
human beings." Then he said ; "God the Father is 
not the Son ; the Son is not the Father ; the Holy 
Ghost is neither the Father nor the Son. And these 
are three; the one is what the other is not, and 
though they are three, yet are they but one God." 
I said : "This is also my faith, and in accordance 
with it I know but one person, that is Jesus Christ, 
who was visible and palpable; but the others I do 
not know what to compare them to." On this point 
we agreed, and he let go his persons. He then 
asked again whether God had died. I said : "You 
have sat here and acknowledged to me that you do 
not consider the Word to be the Father, nor the 
Father to be the Word, though they, according to 
the Godhead, are one God; but you regard them 
as three witnesses ; and two of these witnesses did 
not become man, but the Word, by which all things 
were made, became flesh, as John says in the first 
chapter [of his Gospel]. Although this Word be- 
came man, it therefore does not cease to be one 
God with the Father ; else it could not be God and 
man." 

Then he said : "Jelis, you err." And they ad- 
duced Rom. 1 :3 in their Testament where it read : 
"Who became of the seed of David according to 
the flesh, is declared to be the Son of God with 
power, according to the Spirit." I said that in ren- 
dering it became they had mistranslated the word ; 
that it ought to read : born of the seed of David. 
"Go," I said, "and examine the Testaments which 
you had printed thirty or thirty-six years ago, see 
whether in them it reads thus. I have read it there- 
in: born, as it ought to be; but you have now 
caused it to be altered thus, to deceive the simple 
hearts." This made them very angry. I then said : 
"Say it as it ought to be: born; for a woman can 
certainly not make a child." Then he said : "Be- 


came or assumed is the same thing ; as it is written : 
'He took not on him (the nature of) angels, but he 
took on him the seed of Abraham.' " Heb. 2 :16. I 
said : "This also is changed ; it ought to read : 'He 
receiveth not angels ; but he receiveth the seed of 
Abraham as his children ; and believers are counted 
for the seed' (Rom. 9:8) ; for Paul says (I Cor. 
11 :8), that the man is not of the woman, but the 
woman of the man." They said : "This is spoken 
of Adam and Eve." I said: "Here God has plainly 
shown that the man is not of the woman, but the 
woman of the man, which is in direct opposition to 
your belief. Paul speaks still more fully on gen- 
eration ; for he says : As the woman is of the man, 
even so is the man also by the woman; but all 
things of God.' v. 12. This certainly has reference 
to generation, for Adam was not by Eve." He said 
that it had to be understood so. I said : "I do not 
understand it so." We had many more words yet 
concerning the promises ; but I have not the space 
to write it. 

All these words I had with the parish priest of 
St. Martins, a very crafty customer, craftier than 
any one I ever heard ; all the others are as nothing 
compared to him. Written in haste, in the dark, 
with ink made of coals ; bear patiently with it. The 
day before we were delivered to the secular lords, 
we were brought before the Dean of Ronse. He 
asked uswhether we had come to a determination. 
I said: "I am always determined to eschew evil, 
and to do that which is good, as far as I know." 
There were three or four judges present, and the 
under-bailiff. He said it was great arrogance that 
I pretended to be wiser than all the world ; there 
were Ambrose and Augustine, and other holy men : 
and they understood it so. I said : "I do not pre- 
tend to know anything ; but I know the faith to be 
the truth, and herein I want to abide." Farewell ; 
I commend you to God. 

Your weak brother in the Lord, 

Jelis Strings. 

heyndrick eemkens, a. d. 1562 

In the year 1562 there was apprehended at 
Utrecht, for the testimony of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, a brother named Heyndrick Eemkens, a 
tailor, who, after all solicitations and pains suf- 
fered, finally received word that he was to die at 
which he rejoiced that he should also have the 
privilege of being a witness for the name of the 
Lord. This message was brought him by the pastor 
of the Buerchurch and a Franciscan monk named 
Friar Jan van Herentals, who in a few words in- 
formed himof it, and then left him. He said to 
friar Jan : "You need not come again tomorrow, 
for I do not need you." In the morning he was 
brought out from his prison into another room, 
where he had many words with the monk, who 
forthwith condemned him. Thereupon he replied : 
"Judge not, and ye shall not be judged." Luke 
6:37. The monk said: "You confessed that you 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


661 


did not believe that Christ assumed flesh from 
Mary." He replied: "I have said it once in my 
confession ; shall I tell you again ?" and he referred 
him to John 1. 

The monk then asked him whether he would 
not confess to him. He answered: "I have con- 
fessed to God." The monk said : "Have you lived 
to be so old without ever confessing?" "No," 
said he, "I have indeed confessed to men ; but God 
knows I heartily regret that I submitted so long to 
your confession." The monk then asked him 
whether he did not want to hear a mass. He re- 
plied: "I have read so many, that I loathe the 
mass ; and even though I do not want to have it, 
yet if you want to read it, nevertheless, how can I 
prevent it ? Hence, if you want to do it, do so, but 
not on my account ; for I do not wish it." Then the 
monk asked him whether he would not have the 
sacrament ; but he said : "No, but if I could par- 
take of the Lord's Supper as instituted and com- 
manded by the Lord, and observed by the apostles 
and their churches, this I should heartily desire, 
and thank the Lord for it, but your deception I do 
not want." Upon this the monk again damned him 
two or three times. 

The thief-takers then came, and wanted to give 
him something to drink, but he refused it. Then 
came one of the jailer's daughters, a wanton girl, 
and wanted to put it into his mouth with a spoon, as 
they were sitting and drinking with the thief-tak- 
ers, but Heyndrick said to her : "I have certainly 
told you that I do not want it; hence, let me in 
peace, if it is possible." Thereupon one of the 
thief -takers said: "Do you want to go out of this 
world on an empty stomach ?" He said to him : "I 
thirst for the true wine, of which I shortly hope to 
drink." But the monk said : "God does not put 
new wine into old bottles." But he said to the 
monk: "Because I have become renewed, there- 
fore you hate me." Much more was said yet, which 
has been forgotten, since he himself could not 
write. This was written by one who was present 
when Heyndrick spoke with the monk. Though 
he was not a brother or fellow member with Heyn- 
drick in the church, yet his friendly disposition 
prompted him to write down what he remembered 
of it, just as he saw and heard it, for the remem- 
brance of all lovers of the truth ; and the follow- 
ing was seen and heard not only by him, but also 
by all the citizens generally, who can with him 
testify to it. 

When Heyndrick had ascended the scaffold, he 
began to speak much to the people, saying, among 
other things: "Good citizens, repent, and believe 
only the Gospel and not the traditions of men." 

When they led him to the lords, to hear his sen- 
tence, he again turned his face to the citizens and 
said that all the practices observed were only hu- 
man traditions, and that whoever would not fol- 
low them had to be the reproach and offscouring 
of all men, yea, must thus suffer death. Matt. 1 5 : 
6; I Corinthians 4:13. 


The sentence having been read, many of the peo- 
ple, who pitied him, and did not wish to see him 
die, went away. But Heyndrick Eemkens fell 
upon his knees and face, on the scaffold, to pour 
out his earnest prayer before the Lord. When the 
executioner saw him fall down, he drew his cloak 
from his shoulders, and pulled him up by his shirt, 
so that he could not finish his prayer. 

Heyndrick then said to the people : "Dear citi- 
zens, repent, for it is more than time. Live accord- 
ing to God's commandments and the words of the 
holy Gospel." And he called again with a loud 
voice: "This is the narrow way, and the strait 
gate ;" and named the chapters where it was writ- 
ten, and many other Scriptures having the same 
bearing. He then stepped of his own accord, with a 
glad heart, upon the bench where he was to be 
strangled and burnt, and said again : "This is the 
strait gate, press through it ; through this pressed 
the men of God, for he that fights steadfastly unto 
the end shall be saved ; of this I have no doubt." 
With great courage he put his body and neck to 
the stake, and said again with a joyful heart: 
"Dear citizens, repent ; believe the Gospel and not 
men ; for this is the narrow way which a Christian 
must walk." The executioner then took a chain, 
putting it around his body, and fastened a little 
bag of gunpowder to his neck, so that it hung over 
his breast. Heyndrick spoke boldly to the very 
last, but his words could not be understood very 
well, for the executioner took a cord, laid it around 
his neck, and twisted it tightly. Heyndrick closed 
his eyes, just as though he had fallen into a swoon, 
and he was not seen to move any more, save that 
he cast up his eyes to heaven once more, and then 
immediately lost consciousness. Thereupon the 
executioner drew away the bench from under his 
feet, and seizing a fork, thrust the same into a 
bundle of straw and held the latter to a pot with 
fire standing on the scaffold, until it caught fire, 
whereupon he applied it to the gunpowder. The 
blaze flashed up to his eyes but did not burn his 
hair. He lifted up his hands to heaven once more, 
after which he showed no further sign of life. 

Thus did Heyndrick Eemkens offer up his sac- 
rifice, as a valiant witness of the Lord, on the 10th 
of June, 1562, about between 10 and 11 o'clock, 
A. M. 


GEORGE FRIESEN, A CABINETMAKER, AND WILL- 
IAM VAN KEPPEL, A. D. 1562 

This George Friesen, a cabinetmaker, and 
William van Keppel, formerly a mass priest, were 
both apprehended at Cologne, A. D. 1562, for the 
evangelical truth. When William was sought and 
found he willingly went with his captors, who first 
took him into a tower of the city, where, however, 
he did not remain long, since they removed him into 
the count's dungeon, whither those were taken who 
were condemned to death. In this dungeon he 
found said George Friesen, who was his brother 


662 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


in the Lord, and also a prisoner, and whose com- 
pany was a great comfort to him. 

Manifold were the nets spread and the snares 
laid, to catch their souls ; but the principal ado and 
clamor was about infant baptism, which their ad- 
versaries claimed to be right ; but as they could not 
prove it by the Word of God, they employed hu- 
man wisdom, but to God be the praise, with this 
they could not move these men. Now the lords en- 
treated them, now they severely threatened them 
with torture and death ; but the prisoners rejoiced 
in it. The others said things sweet and things bit- 
ter, but this could not move the prisoners, for 
through the help of the Lord their hearts stood 
firm as a wall. 

The count offered to give George money, and his 
servant maid to wife, if he would renounce his 
faith. But George would adhere to the truth and 
said to the count : "Your servant maid, riches, or 
money cannot take me to God, but I have chosen 
something better, for which I hope to strive." 
There also came to William a subtle individual, 
who made him fair promises and said that he would 
take him to England, who would soon have drawn 
the net of delusion over his head if the Lord had 
not succored and preserved him. 

When the last hour arrived that they were to be 
prepared for the offering, for which they greatly 
longed, they were both brought out of prison — the 
count's dungeon — to the house of the count, into 
a hall, at one o'clock in the night. There much arro- 
gant and scornful language was used against them, 
and they were much tormented, to which George 
said nothing. William, also, answering but little. 
This continued half the night, till break of day or 
twilight, when the two prisoners were hurriedly 
taken to the Rhine, where they were to be drowned. 

When George saw how hurriedly they were tak- 
en to the Rhine in the early morning, he called to 
the count, saying: "Sir count, what becomes of 
the promise you made us? for you said that you 
should put us to death in broad daylight." But no 
one paid attention to these words, but they were 
hurried to the place where they were to be put to 
death, namely the Rhine. And thus were fulfilled 
the words of David, where he says: "They have 
privily slain the upright." Ps. 1 1 :2. May the Lord 
forgive them, for they know not what they do. 

When they were taken out on the water, in a 
boat, William divested himself of his clothes, and 
laid his hands upon his feet, to be bound thus ; for 
he thought that he was to be drowned and get 
home first. But this was not to be his fate, they 
made him put his clothes on again, and told him 
that he should wait. 

And thus George was compelled to be the first 
one, to be made ready for an offering. When he 
was ready for death, he took brotherly leave from 
William, and they kissed each other with a holy 
kiss of love. Then George was thrown over-board, 
and drowned in the Rhine, thus testifying with his 


death that he was a partaker of Christ's sufferings, 
to receive at His hands, through grace, the crown 
upon mount Sion, and rejoice forever with Him 
II Esd. 2:43. 

After George was drowned, the executioner said 
to William: "Put on your clothes; I will take you 
to the shore, and there behead you." William, 
through the grace of God, was willing and ready 
for it, and said : "You may do with me whatever 
God wills and permits." 

When they came on shore, they set William at 
liberty. The executioner said to him: "Go your 
way." Whether they did this because William had 
been a priest, and they would have had to desecrate 
him, before putting him to death, and whether they 
therefore rather released him, than go to such 
trouble is not known. 


AN ADMONITION WHICH GEORGE FRIESEN SENT 
FROM PRISON 

I proclaim unto you, O men, one and all, a new 
message and glad tidings, through the Word of the 
Lord, which is, that you shall turn from your sinful 
life to God that your sins may be forgiven ; cleanse 
your hearts, and forsake the world and its false 
show to which it lends so beautiful an aspect. 

Behold, I proclaim unto you much joy, which I 
experience, as Christ the Son of God promised, 
saying : "I will not leave you comfortless." Those 
who trust in me, them will I help bear their sor- 
row, and deliver them out of all distress. For He 
Himself bound up our putrefying wounds, and 
healed them, which none other could do. Luke 10 : 
34. He healed us without merit on our part ; when 
we were yet enemies, He washed us with clean 
water, and sent us the Comforter, the Holy Ghost 
—as the faithful gracious Saviour Christ prom- 
ised—who shall bring to our remembrance all that 
we have heard. Rom. 5:10; Ezek. 36:25; John 
14:16. If we firmly abide in Him, and bring forth 
good fruits, He will give us a mouth and wisdom, 
as His divine Word says, if we diligently live ac- 
cording to His will; yea, such a mouth He will 
give us, that none of the wise of this world, who 
are yet in sin, and fail of the truth, shall be able to 
contradict us. Luke 21 :15. 

I daily find that, as the raging waves of the sea, 
driven by fierce winds, cast up their mire and dirt, 
and cannot rest, so it is also with these; if there 
were anything good in them, it would come to light. 
Isaiah 57 :20. Now, even as the flowers of the field 
drop off, so it goes with those who consider too 
late ; for the grass withereth, and the flower fad- 
eth; but the Word of God abideth forever Isa 
40:8. 

I find still another matter which concerns me 
greatly, namely, that so many shall knock and say : 
"Lord, open unto us, and let us enter in also ; to 
whom the Lord shall say : I know you not ;" and 
that it will avail them nothing to say : "Did we not 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


663 


believe that thou art the true God, and that he 
whom thou anointest, and whom the Jews mocked 
is thy Child?" Luke 13 :25. If they persist in their 
evil deeds, anguish shall come upon them, so that 
they shall cry, woe, woe, upon all the priests of 
Baal who have deceived them here, and who now 
sit in Moses' seat, persecute Christ, and honor Baal, 
saying : "Do according to our words, and not after 
our works; by which they show that they do not 
walk aright." Matt. 23 :2. O generation of vipers, 
who hath made you believe that you shall escape 
the wrath of God and the damnation of hell? Can 
the Lord not say to them : "If you were so wise as 
to know me, why then did you not seek me by fol- 
lowing the kingdom of my Father. Therefore, de- 
part from me, all ye hypocrites, to the devil and 
his angels, into the lake of fire, and eternal dam- 
nation." Matt. 7:23. But you, brethren and sis- 
ters, who are called to the marriage supper of the 
Lamb (Revelation 19:9), make yourselves sincere- 
ly ready in these latter times, for the marriage sup- 
per; and do not suffer yourselves to be deprived 
of the food that is set before you, lest you perish 
with hunger ; cling firmly to Jesus Christ ; see that 
you lose not those things which you have wrought ; 
and let no one lead you astray on this earth, nor be 
afraid of the princes of this world ; for when they 
shall appear before the face of Christ, they will all 
be put to shame. II John 8; Matt. 24-A; 10:28. 

Betake yourselves now to the Lord, for now is 
the right time ; and let not the world confound you, 
lest you be deceived. Watch, you that are on the 
ocean, lest you perish; believe in the Lord with 
all your heart, and you will weather the tempest. 
May the King of kings, to whom all things are 
known, uphold us with His mighty hand, that we 
may on account of no adversity depart from Him, 
but may faithfully adhere to His Word even unto 
death. Hereby I will gladly resign my life at this 
time, and enter this narrow way through Christ; 
by His help I will gladly bear His yoke, and in this 
yoke alone pull my plow. O God, that I might be 
so fortunate as to see the work begun in me brought 
to such a happy end, to the salvation of my soul and 
to Thy glory, and this solely through Thy power — 
richer or more highly exalted as a mortal I could 
not become! I should praise and magnify Thee 
for it through Christ Thy Son. Dear brethren and 
sisters, I have written this in my severe imprison- 
ment, and give it to you for an admonition. I, 
George Friesen, have composed this in the night, 
while others slept; I hope that daylight will soon 
shine brightly. O Lord that Thou wouldst speedily 
come to me in prison, deliver me from my chains, 
and free me from my bonds, and protect me from 
the wicked — O then I should stand well before 
Thee! My brethren, if you would rejoice in the 
spirit, and herein understand me thoroughly, then 
beware of sin, and you will see clearly. And if you 
would spiritually understand the divine law, go to 
the Lord, and He will help you in it. 


MARTIJNTGEN AELMEERS, A. D. 1562 

In the year 1562 there was apprehended at Hon- 
schote, in Flanders, a young girl named Marti jnt- 
gen Helmeers, of Steenwijcke, because she had 
been baptized upon her faith, and ordered her walk 
and conversation according to the doctrine of the 
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

After great steadfastness she was sentenced to 
death, and burnt, and thus offered up to God an 
acceptable, living sacrifice, and escaped the tor- 
ment of eternal fire. 


NIKASEN VAN AELMEERS, A. D. 1562 

The same year, Nikasen Aelmeers, the brother 
of the afore-mentioned Marti jntgen, was appre- 
hended for the faith and the divine truth, at Bruges 
in Flanders, and when no pain or torture could 
draw him from his faith, he was condemned and 
burnt, as a true witness of our Lord Jesus Christ. 


KAREL VAN DEN VELDE, WITH PROENTGEN HIS 

WIFE, FRANCHOYS DE SWARTE, WITH KLAES- 

KEN HIS WIFE, JASPER THE SHOEMAKER, 

CHARLO DE WAEL, AND MARTIJNE 

AMARE, IN THE YEAR 1562 

In the year 1562, there were apprehended at 
Honschote in Flanders, for the testimony of the 
truth, seven persons, namely, Karel van den 
Velde, of Ghent, with Proentgen his wife, Fran- 
choys de Swarte, of Belle, with Klaesken his wife, 
Jasper the shoemaker, Charlo, a lad, and Martijnt- 
gen Amare, a young maiden, all of whom stead- 
fastly adhered to the truth and the Word of God. 
Five of them, namely, the four male persons and 
the girl, were very soon after their apprehension 
burnt for their faith ; but the two women, sisters, 
were sometime afterwards secretly drowned in a 
tub. One of the women, when she saw that they 
intended to put her to death secretly, complained 
of it, since she would have preferred publicly to 
testify to the truth with her death ; whereupon her 
sister said : "It is all the same, for God sees it ; 
He will reward us, and avenge our wrongs." II 
Chron. 16:9; Rev. 6:10. 

Thus they all passed through the conflict as val- 
iant heroes, and obtained leave to eat of the tree of 
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. 
Rev. 2:7. 


JAN GRENDEL, A. D. 1562 

In the year 1562, a man named Jan Grendel, 
from Kortrijck, in Flanders, came from Oude- 
water to Goes, and was the same evening on which 
he arrived in town apprehended by bailiff Vijt- 
wijck, who, upon having taken him to his house, 
interrogated him concerning his faith, of which he 
made open confession, whereupon he was put in 
prison, where he lay for about a year. Bailiff Vijt- 
wijck having,, for maladministration, been deposed 


664 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


from his bailiwick, another named Floris Schaeck, 
stepped into this office, and under the latter, Jan, 
after many solicitations and sufferings, was pub- 
licly burnt, or put to death, in the marketplace, for 
his faith, in Lent of the year 1562. 


FRANCIS VAN DER SACH AND ANTHONY WELSCH, 
A. D. 1562 

In the year 1562 Brother Francis van der Sach, 
a native of Rovigo in Italy, and minister of the 
Word of God (still on trial) and one who had been 
sent with him, named Anthony Welsch, were ap- 
prehended at Capo d' Istria, about one hundred 
Italian miles from Venice, as they were about to re- 
turn to the church in Germany, accompanied by a 
large number of people, who, however, were not 
taken along, but suffered to go. Francis was ironed 
on his feet like a malefactor, and they were sep- 
arately confined. There at Capo d' Istria they 
tempted and assailed them in a satanic manner, as 
they are accustomed to do at such times, and they 
employed all their might to entrap them into their 
snares, in order to cause them to stumble, and to 
make them despond and apostatize from God ; es- 
pecially was Francis severely assailed; but they 
valiantly resisted it all. Having been heard and ex- 
amined at Capo d' Istria concerning everything, 
they were left in confinement yet for three days, 
ironed hand and foot, and then sent to Venice. On 
this voyage they lay still for three days and nights, 
on account of the tempestuous sea, in the meantime 
comforting each other, and admonishing one an- 
other to constancy or steadfastness, so that it seem- 
ed as though they scarcely felt the pains resulting 
from the iron fetters and from other causes, which 
nevertheless hurt them greatly day and night. 

Arriving at Venice the first day of September of 
said year, they were immediately separately con- 
fined in the dark dungeons of the chief senators, 
where they lay for a whole month, when they were 
brought before three Venetian secular, and also 
several so-called spiritual, lords, who sat there in 
great pomp, most magnificently arrayed, and they 
asked brother Francis, whether he still adhered to 
the belief which he had indicated to the examiners 
and lords who had examined him at Capo d' Istria 
in regard to his doings, and whether he still held it 
to be the truth. He said to them : "I hold it to be 
the truth, and it is the truth." 

They then asked him whether he believed all that 
the holy, Catholic, apostolical, Christian church 
believes. He replied : "As far as the faith is con- 
cerned, I believe every article of the apostolical 
Christian faith." They then asked him also con- 
cerning baptism, the sacrament, confession, and 
many other things; but when he thoroughly an- 
swered everything, they urged him very hard, be- 
rating him most severely, and then remanded him 
to prison. They also examined Brother Anthony, 
who likewise made a good confession of faith to 
them. 


Shortly after, they examined Francis again, es- 
pecially in regard to infant baptism, but did not 
accomplish their purpose. After this, they had 
them brought before them several times yet, and 
argued with them. They also sent monks to them, 
who when they replied to their questions, contin- 
ually called them heretics and gainsayers of so 
many councils, and said that if they would not de- 
sist, they should have to die, and with this they had 
them taken back to prison. 

Soon after the lords again sent a monk, an in- 
quisitor, to them, who was to speak with them con- 
cerning the faith. He first asked them whether 
they belonged to the transmontane church. Francis 
replied : "Yes." Thereupon the monk said : "This 
is the first error ;" and asked whether he had also 
broken bread with them. Francis answering in the 
affirmative, the monk said : "This also is an error." 
And thus he spoke with regard to everything ; no 
matter what they answered, the monk always said 
that they were heretics and deceivers. 

The monk also said : "Tell me, who is the head 
of the church?" Francis replied: "Christ." The 
monk said : "This, too, is an error." Then Francis 
said : "You call us heretics, but you yourself are a 
heretic, and not we, for Christ is certainly the head 
of His church." But the monk said : "The pope is 
the head here on earth." Francis said : "A body 
with two heads is a hideous thing." Thereupon 
the monk again began to call him a heretic, and to 
admonish him to desist. But Brother Francis 
told him that he could not desist before he should 
have proved this to him by the holy Scriptures. 
The monk said : "We are not bound to prove this 
to you by the Scriptures." They were then taken 
back to prison, where Francis put his confession 
and defense in writing, and delivered it. 

After this, they lay in prison for a long time yet, 
in all about two years, always steadfastly contin- 
uing, in many disputations, in the truth confessed, 
which they had accepted, and were then sentenced 
to death, and, in the year 1564, cast into the sea, at 
Venice, and drowned. But the sea will have to give 
up her dead at the judgment day of the Lord, 
when such murderers of the pious will be dearly re- 
quited, and will see with great terror, how heinous 
an offense against God it is, thus to touch His be- 
lievers. See Zech. 2 :8 ; Acts 9 :5. 


JAN DE SWARTE, KLAESKEN HIS WIFE, KLAES, 
CHRISTIAN, HANS AND MAHIEU, HIS FOUR SONS; ' 
PERCEVAL VAN DEN BERGE, JAN MAES, PIE-' 
TER THE SHOEMAKER, HENDRICK AERTS, 
THE HATTER, JANNEKEN CABILJAUS HIS 
WIFE, KALLEKEN STEENS, AND HER- 
MAN, IN THE YEAR, A. D. 1563 

Jan de Swarte, a very good-hearted man, of Nip- 
kerke, with his wife and adult children, came to the 
knowledge of the truth, and united with the church 
of God. Afterwards he was chosen and ordained a 
minister of the church, in which ministry he, ac- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


665 


cording to his ability, and in simplicity, so con- 
ducted himself (not only in the deaconship, by car- 
ing for the poor, but also, according to his gift re- 
ceived from God, in dispensing the Word of the 
exhortation), that he endeared himself to all that 
knew him. I Cor. 12:4; II Tim. 2:15. 

And as the apostle Paul foretold, that all that 
will live godly in Jesus Christ shall suffer persecu- 
tion, so he also met with it, on which account he 
resided in various towns and villages of Flanders, 
as in Honschote, Rijssel, Wervick, Meenen, and 
finally at Halewijn, supporting himself mostly with 
tapeweaving. With his wages he was very benevo- 
lent and liberal to the poor, not only to those of the 
household of faith, but to all in general (II Cor. 8 : 
1 ; Gal. 6:10), by which especially he left behind 
him a good name, to the praise and glory of God, as 
also by hospitality, as taught in the Scriptures (Ro- 
mans 12:13), in which he was not negligent, since 
it appeared that when he was apprehended, there 
lodged with him a brother from Doornick, named 
Perceval van den Berge, a native of Zwevegem, 
and another, who had come from Honschote, 
whose name was Jan Maes. 

At that time there resided at Halewijn various 
other God-fearing brethren and sisters, which be- 
ing greatly envied by N., the priest of the castle, he 
betrayed them into the hands of the Dean of Ronse, 
the inquisitor in Flanders, who, on a Saturday 
night, the 7th of March, 1563, quietly came thither 
with a great number of servants, from Rijssel, sur- 
rounded several houses, entered them, and appre- 
hended the afore-mentioned Jan de Swarte, with 
Klaesken his wife and four sons, namely, Klaes, 
Christian, Hans, and Mahieu (who was only about 
sixteen years old), and also Perceval van den 
Berge, and Jan Maes, already mentioned. Besides 
these he also apprehended one Pieter the shoe- 
maker, with Jacomijntgen his wife, which latter 
did not remain steadfast. Also, one Heyndrick 
Aerts the hatter, with Janneken Cabiljaus his wife, 
and another sister, Kalleken Steens, the wife of a 
brother whose name was Augustijn. 

When Jan de Swarte was apprehended, his two 
younger sons were not present, but came in the 
meantime. When they came to the house the 
neighbors warned them, that those who appre- 
hended their father and mother were in the house. 
The one said to the other : "Do not let us flee, but 
let us die with father and mother." In the mean- 
time Jan de Swarte was led out of the house a 
prisoner, and seeing his sons, he said to them: 
"Children, do you want to go along to the New 
Jerusalem?" They replied: "Yes, father;" and 
were thus led captive with them. 

The inquisitor brought them all prisoners to 
Rijssel, and there had them very closely confined 
in the castle. Jan was put into a hole by himself, 
which was called the "Paradise," and was so small 
that he could neither stand upright in it, nor lie 
down full length. 


It happened one day that divers brethren and sis- 
ters, prompted by love and compassion, had come 
from without the city, and were standing over 
against the castle, calling to the prisoners over the 
fortification, for their consolation, that among 
them there was one brother named Herman, who 
being noticed by one of the beadles of the town, 
who came out secretly, was also apprehended. 

After an imprisonment of ten days, the inquisi- 
tor delivered these prisoners into the hands of the 
secular authorities, who first took out Jan de 
Swarte with his son Klaes, Pieter, the shoemaker, 
Hendrick Aerts, the hatter, Percival van den Berg, 
and Jan Maes, all six of whom, because they val- 
iantly and steadfastly adhered to the divine truth, 
they sentenced to death, and took them in a wagon 
to the marketplace, where stood the scaffold, pro- 
vided with earth and stakes. There they were taken 
up one after another, and two and two fastened to 
a stake. 

As they were going to death, the clock struck. 
John asked what time it was. He was told that it 
was four o'clock. He consoled himself with this, 
saying : "At five o'clock we hope to be in our lodg- 
ing or resting place." His son Klaes, said : "We 
have to die for the reason that we believe that 
Jesus Christ, the Son of the eternal God, is from 
heaven and not of the earth." 

Pieter was gagged, to prevent him from speak- 
ing. When they stood at the stakes, wood and straw 
were placed around them, to which fire was then 
set, and they were thus burnt alive to ashes. 

A few clays afterwards also Klaesken, the wife 
of Jan de Swarte, with her three sons, and Her- 
man, because they adhered immovably to the love 
of God, were all five sentenced to death by the au- 
thorities, and also burned alive to ashes, perse- 
vering unto the end as valiant witnesses of Christ. 

Almost a year after this, after very long im- 
prisonment, Janneken Cabiljaus and Kalleken 
Steens, were sentenced to death, placed alive into 
the fire, and burnt to ashes, as valiant and stead- 
fast witnesses of the divine truth. 

It also came to pass that the priest of the castle, 
N., who had so spitefully betrayed these dear 
friends of God, was very sorely punished by 
God ; for such putrefaction entered his flesh, that 
it fell off piecemeal, or was cut off from time to 
time, from his body, no physicians being able to 
cure the disease. Thus it happened on one occasion, 
a large piece, of putrid flesh having dropped, or 
been cut off from his body, that the same was 
eaten by a dog, while he beheld it with his own 
eyes. How he must have felt on this occasion, it is 
easy to imagine, especially when viewing it as the 
fulfillment of a curse said to have been pronounced 
upon him. "That he should yet with his own eyes 
see the dogs eat his flesh." 
_ It also happened that while the priest was lying 
sick, a man came to visit him, who, when the for- 
mer complained to him of his great misery, re- 
marked to him : "It is the coals from the fire at 


666 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Rijssel" — namely, from the burning of the friends 
mentioned above ; — which did not please the priest 
very much; but he had to bear this taunt as well 
as the punishment sent him from God. And in 
this way he at last died most miserably, even as we 
read that in former times it happened to Antiochus 
and Herod. II Mace. 9:9; Acts 12:23. 


DIRK LAMBERTS, CHRISTIAN VAN WETTEREN, AND 
ANTONIJN DE WALE, A. D. 1563 

At Ghent in Flanders there were apprehended, 
for the faith, three brethren, namely, Dirk Lam- 
berts, Christian van Wetteren, and Antonijn de 
Wale, who contended valiantly and heroically for 
their faith and the truth, from which they would 
not depart for any temptation, pain or suffering, so 
that they were finally sentenced to death. First 
Dirk Lamberts, and shortly afterwards the other 
two, had to follow Christ by entering through death 
into life; therefore they shall be clothed in fine 
linen with all the elect of God, and receive palms 
into their hands, and the crown of life upon their 
heads. 


JOOS JANS PUT TO DEATH, A. D. 1563 

The same year a brother named Joos Jans was 
apprehended at Somerdijck, for living according to 
the truth, and was immediately taken to Zierickzee, 
where he suffered much examination and hardship, 
but suffered himself nevertheless in no wise to be 
moved or turned away from the Word of God and 
the love of Christ, so that he was finally sentenced 
to death and beheaded, thus valiantly testifying 
with his blood to the truth. 

Note — The repeatedly mentioned decree of 
Emperor Charles V, enacted in the year 1550, and 
confirmed by Philip II, King of Spain, A. D. 1556 
(for which year we have circumstantially shown 
the same), as also, A. D. 1560, was at this time, 
namely, A. D. 1564, renewed and established the 
third time, for the annihilation and destruction 
of the innocent and defenseless Christian believers, 
as may be seen in the large book of decrees of 
Ghent, and cited by William I, Prince of Orange, 
in his defence against his adversaries, edition 1 569, 
page 165, etc. 

Thereupon followed no small persecution, as 
may be seen from the history of the following mar- 
tyrs. 


DANIEL KALVAERT, BURNED, A. D. 1564 

Daniel Kalvaert, a native of Thielt, in Flan- 
ders, was apprehended, A. D. 1564, at Armentiers, 
for the testimony of the truth, and thence taken to 
Rijssel, but after being subjected to some solici- 
tation and torture, he was brought back to Armen- 
tiers, escorted by forty beadles, and there sen- 
tenced by the authorities, to be burnt alive to ashes ; 
which offering he boldly brought, after which his 
ashes were thrown into the river Leye. 


PIETER VAN OOSTHOVE, A. D. 1564 


Pieter Floriss, called of Oosthove, a native of 
Nipkerke in Flanders, was apprehended for the 
divine truth, at Armentiers, A. D. 1564, and, 
through many solicitations and sufferings, was pre- 
vailed upon to apostatize from his faith, induced by 
the promise that he should not die, and be released. 
But when again in his prison, and coming to him- 
self, he reflected how greatly he had suffered him- 
self to be deceived, for though he should escape 
temporal death for a little while, he should there- 
for have to taste eternal death. This produced in 
him such an agonizing sorrow, that he, like Peter, 
betook himself with earnest supplication to Al- 
mighty God, and besought Him with scalding tears 
for forgiveness for the great offense he had com- 
mitted, and for a more steadfast mind than he had 
shown before. His prayer was not left unheard, 
for when he was brought before the authorities 
again, he utterly renounced his apostasy, and 
thenceforth boldly confessed his faith, and stead- 
fastly adhered to it, so that he was finally sentenced 
to death, to which he went with glad constancy, and 
was thus strangled and burnt. 


STEVEN DE GRAET, AND SIJNTGEN, A. D. 1564 

In the year 1 564 there was apprehended at Ghent 
in Flanders, for the truth, a brother named Steven 
de Graet, with Sijntgen, his aged mother. They 
were both well confirmed in the faith, and con- 
tinued in it amidst all solicitations and sufferings, 
even unto death, which they, for the name of 
Christ, had to suffer publicly ; hence they shall also 
openly praise the Lord, in the throne of heaven, 
and help sing the glad new song, in honor of the 
Lamb, and of Him that sitteth upon the throne 
Rev. 14:3. 


FIERIJNTGEN KETELS, LEENTGEN HER MOTHER, 

WITH PIERIJNTGEN AND MARIJNTGEN VAN 

MALE, IN THE YEAR A. D. 1564 

In the same year four sisters of Christ were ap- 
prehended at Ghent, namely, Pierijntgen Ketels, 
with Leentgen her mother, and two sisters, Pier- 
ijntgen and Marijntgen van Male. These did not 
counsel with flesh and blood, but with God. who 
was able to strengthen them, for whose name they, 
after many assaults and unwavering steadfastness, 
had to lay down their lives in the monastery of St. 
Peter, without the city of Ghent. Therefore they 
shall be crowned by the Young Man upon Mount 
Sion, and be joyfully received by their bridegroom 
II Esdras 2:46; Matt. 25:10. 


PIETER VAN DER MEULEN, A. D. 1564 

Shortly afterwards, also one brother Pieter Vein 
der Meulen contended so valiantly, at Ghent, for 
his faith in Christ, that, with firm faith and confi- 
dence in God, he withstood all who sought to turn 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


667 


him away from it, even unto death, so that he de- 
parted this world, and went with Christ into peace 
and rest, to help judge at the last day those who 
judged him here. Luke 23 :43 ; I Cor. 6 :2 ; Matt. 
7:2. 


MAEYKEN BOOSERS BURNT TO ASHES FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, IN THE CITY OF 
DOORNICK, THE 18TH OF SEPTEM- 
BER, A. D. 1564 

A confession and letter of consolation of Maeyken 

Boosers, imprisoned at Doornick, where she 

sealed her faith with her death 

The eternal, unfathomable grace of God, and the 
power of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, my be- 
loved friends and brethren. I let you know that I 
am well according to the flesh ; but according to the 
spirit I might be better, for I find weakness in me ; 
but my hope is fixed upon God, who strengthens 
the feeble, and comforts the afflicted. My heart 
constantly longs to be fit in His sight, that I might 
finish to His praise that which He has commenced 
in me. Therefore I pray you, my beloved brethren, 
not to forget me, even as I well perceive that you 
do not, for which I thank you very much, and hope 
that the Lord will preserve you in His holy truth. 
I further inform you that the lords wanted to know 
of me, who were baptized with me, and whether 
none were in the city, and what were their names 
and surnames. I said: "What I do not know I 
cannot tell." But it was all to no avail. They or- 
dered the executioner to strip me. I felt very much 
ashamed, and I pleasantly entreated them to be- 
lieve me ; but it was of no avail. I then said : "Your 
will be done," and undressed myself. They led me 
to the rack and bound me to draw and rack me. 
The commissary said that I should name them. I 
told him that I could not do it; whereupon they 
loosed me, without my having named any one, for 
which God on high be praised. However of Pieter 
and George they had knowledge already ; hence I 
had to name them too, but their surnames I did not 
know. Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, 
and to the Word of His grace. May the Lord keep 
us all in one faith to the end of our lives. Amen. 

Another letter from Maeyken Boosers to her 
parents 

I greet you from my inmost heart, my beloved 
father and my much beloved mother, with all that 
are in your house. Please know that I am well and 
unchanged in purpose, the Lord be praised forever, 
as I trust through the goodness of God it is also 
with you. Further, I thank you heartily for the 
kind greeting you wrote me, on account of which I 
greatly rejoiced, learning your feelings and affec- 
tion for me; and for remembrance' sake I will 
write you something about my imprisonment. 

In the first place the commissary asked me how 
old I was when I was baptized. I replied : "About 
twenty-three or four years." They asked me why 


I had it done. I said: "Because God had com- 
manded it." They asked me whether I did not 
know that I had been baptized previously. I said : 
"I know nothing of it; neither has God com- 
manded it." They asked me whether I did not 
have sponsors. I replied: "It may be; — they may 
have died." They then said that they should send 
me learned men. I said: "You ought to be wise 
enough to talk with me ;" but no, they would send 
learned men. They then sent the parish priest of 
our lady's church, who came and asked me why I 
had not been in his church so long, and that he had 
not known of me. I told him that I had quietly kept 
at home. They asked me where my church was. I 
answered : "My church is not known to you ; for 
if you knew her, you would not let her in peace 
very long." 

We had many words about baptism. I said that 
Christ sent out His apostles into all the world, and 
that they first taught all nations to observe all 
things whatsoever He had commanded them, bap- 
tizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. Infants cannot learn; but 
he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved. 
Then they said that the apostles had baptized whole 
households. I said : "Yes, then they rejoiced that 
they were become believers in God ; this children 
cannot do. Acts 16:34. Christ called the children 
to Him and said that to such belonged the kingdom 
of heaven, but He did not command that they 
should be baptized." They then brought forward 
Adam's sin, saying that they were born in it. I re- 
plied that Christ had died for them. I asked them 
whether they meant to remove sin by baptism; 
since infants can have no sin, therefore they cannot 
die unto sin, and rise through baptism into a new 
life. Then the lords said : "Your doctrine is : 'He 
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved,' is it 
not?" I said: "Yes." They then asked whether 
Christ was not of Mary's flesh. I said that Mary 
had conceived Him of the Holy Ghost, even as the 
angel said to her. "The Holy Ghost shall comt 
upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall over- 
shadow thee : therefore also that holy thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of 
God." Luke 1 :3S. They asked once more whether 
He did not assume flesh from her, since He had not 
brought it from above. I replied that I believed 
the testimony of John, where he says : "The Word 
became flesh, and dwelt among us." John 1 :14. 
They asked whether I did not believe that He is 
Mary's son according to the flesh, and the Son of 
God ; according to the spirit. I replied that He was 
God's own begotten and only begotten Son, with- 
out beginning of days, nor end of life, and was 
now at the last born of Mary, through the power 
of the Holy Ghost. Heb. 7:3. Hence He is not 
of the earth, earthy, like Adam, nor will He return 
to earth [dust] ; for He is the Lord from heaven. 
I Cor. 15 :47. Now if He had flesh of our flesh, He 
would have to see corruption, for God said : "Dust 
thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return;" but 


668 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


this was not spoken of Adam alone, but of all his 
descendants. Gen. 3:19. 

They then asked me whether I did not believe 
that in the sacrament there were Christ's flesh and 
blood. I said: "No; He is ascended, and sits on 
the right hand of God His Father." They then 
asked me whether I would not believe that all the 
saints are in heaven. I said : "What I have not 
read I cannot answer ; but this much I have read ; 
'The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, 
and the torment of death shall not touch them.' " 
Wisdom 3:1. To this they did not say much, but 
asked what I held with regard to Mary. I replied 
that she was a pure and holy vessel, and blessed 
above all women, since she was worthy to conceive 
and give birth to the Son of God. 

They asked whether I did not confess that there 
is a purgatory. I said : "I find two ways on record, 
the one very broad and leading to damnation, the 
other very narrow and leading to eternal life." 
They also asked what I held in regard to the pope. 
I said : "The pope I do not know ; but if this is his 
doctrine, which is observed here, I hold him to be 
like his doctrine." Much more was spoken, but I 
only write this to while away time. Farewell. 

Another letter from Maeyken Boosers, to the 
brethren 

My dearest and much beloved brethren in the 
Lord, I let you know that my heart is of good 
cheer and courage, the Lord be forever praised, 
for He preserves us by His right hand, and de- 
livers us out of the midst of our enemies, for with- 
out Him I would be lost, since they, both spirituals 
and seculars, come to assail me in manifold ways, 
as could be seen this Sunday, when Mr. Massaert, 
with a judge and a secular, a learned man, held me 
to be the vilest sect that ever was under heaven. 
But when I told them my faith, I moved them all 
to tears, so that they could scarcely speak, and ulti- 
mately left me in a friendly manner. 

No more for the present, except that I commend 
you to the Lord ; may He constantly keep and pre- 
serve you in His holy truth. I hope it will soon be 
over with me ; for I desire nothing so much, than 
that I might please the Lord, and die a blessed 
death. Amen. 

A testament from Maeyken Boosers to her children 

A heartfelt and affectionate greeting to you, my 
beloved children. Give ear to your mother, who 
is now in bonds for the truth; for it has pleased 
God, that all who will live godly must suffer perse- 
cution. Hence I am well satisfied and of good 
cheer, that the servant must follow his lord. His 
blessed will be done with me; if it had been His 
pleasure, He would have prevented these bonds. 
My dear children, it has been so from the begin- 
ning, that the righteous must suffer, and that the 
unrighteous always prevail. But their day shall 
soon come, that they will lament and cry out in 


their distress: "Mountains, fall on us, and hills, 
cover us from the face of the Lord." Luke 23 :30. 
Alas ! when the righteous shall shine forth as the 
sun, and the ungodly shall go into eternal fire. O 
beloved children, search the Scriptures, and con- 
form to them, that you may hear the blessed words : 
"Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom of my 
Father." Pray the Lord for wisdom, and learn to 
fear God, and you will get true understanding. Do 
not conform to the world, in pride, dancing, run- 
ning, and idle gossip; but evince by your walk a 
godly life, adorn yourselves like the holy women, 
accept the Scriptures and live according to them, 
that your souls may be saved, and that we may 
meet hereafter. May the Almighty God, the King 
of kings, grant you His grace according to the 
riches of His goodness, to be strengthened in the 
inner man, and that Christ may dwell in your 
hearts; and may He guide you into all truth. I 
pray you, my dear children, be peaceable among 
yourselves, for this is a fruit of the Spirit. Wil- 
lingly help one another, without gainsaying, and 
always remember the poor ; communicate willingly 
of all that you have ; make yourselves friends of 
the mammon of unrighteousness ; love that which 
is eternal, and not what is temporal; seek the 
heavenly, and not the earthly, for all flesh is as 
grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of 
grass, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into 
the oven ; the glory of man perisheth, but the Word 
of the Lord abideth forever. Isa. 40:6. Love not 
the world, neither the things that are in it, namely, 
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, which are 
not of God, but of the world ; and the world shall 
perish, with all that is in it ; but he that doeth the 
will of the Father abideth forever. I fohn 2-15 • 
I Cor. 7:31. 

My children, do according to the will of the 
Lord ; I, your mother, hope to walk the way before 
you. Mark wherein and how I go before you, and 
regard not the honor of the world, but esteem it an 
honor, to suffer for the name of our God. For He 
who was King over all was not ashamed to leave 
His glory, and came into the world, and suffered 
the most ignominious death for us, and, though 
He was innocent, was beaten and marred, that 
there remained not one sound spot on His blessed 
body. Thus did He love us, thereby leaving us an 
example that we should follow His steps. He is 
the light that came into the world, that all who fol- 
low Him should not walk in darkness, but have 
the light of life. John 8:12. The Lord grant that 
that light shine also around you, and that you walk 
in it. Amen. 

Another, short letter from said mother to her 
children 

My children, I greet you most cordially, and 
send you back your letters, that you may fulfill the 
promises you therein made to me. Always be sub- 
ject to those who instruct you in righteousness, and 
reprove you when you transgress. Farewell, and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


669 


herewith adieu to you in this world. My dear chil- 
dren, fear God, and eschew all evil. 

Another letter from Maeyken Boosers, to her fa- 
ther and mother 

My most beloved father and mother, I commend 
myself to you from my inmost heart, praying the 
Lord that He will comfort you and me with the 
consolation of the Holy Ghost — the promise of the 
Lord, — whom He promised to send to His disci- 
ples, saying : "I go unto the Father, and shall send 
you another Comforter, whom the world cannot 
receive, for it knoweth him not." John 14:16, 17. 
Hence, my dear father and mother, be of good 
cheer and await with patience what the Lord wills 
to do with me. I, too, wait patiently for His com- 
fort. What has passed I esteem not more than a 
breath of air, and it gives me no trouble, the Lord, 
in whom I hope, be praised ; for He it is who com- 
forts the humble, and puts down the proud from 
their seats. Luke 1 :52. Though there is now trib- 
ulation before us, yet we know full well that the 
day of the Lord will soon come, and that all un- 
godliness will be brought to nought. And God 
shall judge them without respect of persons, and 
reward every one according to his works. There- 
fore, my dear and much beloved father and moth- 
er, worry not on my account; let the Lord finish 
His work. I hope that He has predestinated me 
poor unworthy one for an offering acceptable unto 
Him, for I have hoped in His mercy ; and that He 
will not enter into judgment with me, for if He 
should judge me according to my deserts, I should 
be worthy of eternal death ; but the Lord, I hope, 
will have mercy upon me. 

I further let you know that I was brought be- 
fore the dean once more, but neither of us yielded, 
and as he was leaving he said to me : "If you per- 
sist in this belief, you are eternally damned." I 
said: "How can you speak so? seeing God shall 
judge." "Yes," said he, "I dare indeed say it, for 
it will be so." Then Master Klaes followed me and 
asked : "Where have you kept yourself so long? I 
have long sought you." I replied : "You have me 
now, sure." "I have not," he said ; "If you were in 
our hands, we should keep you longer than these 
will, I think." Herewith, my dear father and 
mother, I will commend you to the Lord ; may He 
preserve you and me unto the end. Grieve not for 
me, but rejoice that the Lord counts me worthy; 
for I will cheerfully resign for His sake these my 
members, which He has given me. Farewell al- 
ways. 

Another letter from Maeyken Boosers to her breth- 
ren and sisters 

my dearest and much beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, I greet you once more with the 
peace of the Lord, that the same may remain with 
you forever. Amen. 

1 let you know that these my enemies still keep 
tormenting me about baptism ; but of the incarna- 


tion of Christ they say nothing to me. The dean 
told them my faith, and they asked me nothing ex- 
cept whether I believed that Christ was David's son. 
I replied that He was the Son of the living God. 
"Oh! oh!" said the dean. The lords asked: "Is 
it not written : 'Out of the seed of David according 
to the flesh'?" Acts 13:23. The dean answered 
them, for there was no hearing ; he frequently told 
me I lied, because I withstood him, that he could 
not show me that the apostles had baptized chil- 
dren. They all fell upon me at once, and said that 
no one could enter the kingdom of heaven, except 
he were born of water and of the Spirit. They 
hastily asked me whether I did not confess this 
too. I said: "This Scripture belongs not to chil- 
dren, but to the adult, who have ears to hear." Then 
they arose and said: "You labor under an opin- 
ion." 

Thus, my dear friends, I expect to be brought 
before them once more tomorrow. Hence I pray 
you to entreat the Lord for me, that He would di- 
rect my mouth to His praise and glory. Herewith 
I will commend you forever into the hands of God, 
and kindly ask you to receive my simple writing in 
good part, for I seek nothing but to please God, 
from the simplicity of my heart ; and I wish noth- 
ing, alas! save, that I might please the King of 
kings and Lord of lords in my calling; then I 
should indeed have been born at a blessed time. 
Herewith peace ; farewell ; nothing more after this. 
Take this for an eternal adieu. 

After this, Maeyken Boosers was burnt to ashes, 
at Doornick, having commended her soul into the 
hands of the Lord. 


WILLEBOORT CORNELISS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE 

EVANGELICAL TRUTH, AT MIDDELBORGH IN 

ZEALAND, THE 14TH OF SEPTEMBER, IN 

THE YEAR 1564 

A letter of Willeboort Corneliss, written from his 

imprisonment at Middelborgh, and which he 

sealed with his blood 

The grace and peace of God the heavenly Father, 
which have come to us through Jesus Christ, His 
only Son, our Lord, comfort you in all your tribu- 
lation, my dearest sister in the Lord ; and the Holy 
Ghost guide you into all truth and righteousness 
unto the end ; and the mighty hand of God keep 
you and me in the straight way, that we may walk 
aright unto the end. Amen. 

For, my dearest and beloved sister in the Lord, 
in this miserable and sorrowful world we are 
counted a prey to every one, as the prophet tells 
us. Isaiah 59:15. Yea, Christ Jesus Himself says : 
"Ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake." 
Matthew 10 :22. Yea, we are counted as deceivers, 
and yet are true ; we are become a spectacle ; we 
are troubled on every side, yet not distressed ; we 
are perplexed, but not in despair ; persecuted, but 
not forsaken ; cast down, but not destroyed. II Cor. 
6:8; I Corinthians 4:9; II Cor. 4:8, 9. We are 


670 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


accounted as sheep for the slaughter; but in all 
these things we are more than conquerors through 
Him that loved us. Rom. 8 :36, 37. For, my dear 
lamb, we know that we must through much tribu- 
lation and suffering enter into the kingdom of 
heaven; knowing that, whilst we are at home in 
the body, we are absent from the Lord. Acts 14: 
22 ; II Cor. 5 :6. Hence Peter says : "I beseech 
you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly 
lusts, which war against the soul." I Pet. 2:11. 
Therefore, my dear lamb, though you have now 
with Abraham left our fatherland, be therefore not 
slothful in your business ; but be fervent in spirit ; 
redeeming the time; rejoicing in hope; patient in 
tribulation: continuing instant in prayer; dis- 
tributing to the necessity of saints; and see that 
you are given to hospitality. Romans 12:11-13. 
For, my dear lamb, though our outward man per- 
ish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. 
"For our light affliction, which is but for a mo- 
ment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory ; while we look not at the 
things which are seen, but at the things which are 
not seen." II Cor. 4:16. 

Therefore, my dear sister, look constantly unto 
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith ; who for 
the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, 
despising the shame. Consider Him that endured 
such contradiction of sinners against Himself, lest 
you be wearied in your distress, and faint in your 
mind. For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, 
and scourgeth every son whom He loveth, and re- 
ceiveth. Heb. 12 :2, etc. For our Saviour Himself 
suffered so much for our sakes that Isaiah may 
well say : "He hath no form nor comeliness ; and 
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we 
should desire him. He is despised and rejected 
of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with 
grief : and we hid as it were our faces from him." 
Isa. 53 :2, 3. So that He may well say through the 
prophet : "They gave me gall for my meat ; and in 
my thirst they gave me gall and vinegar to drink ; 
and all men laugh me to scorn ; they shoot out the 
lip, and shake the head." Yea, as He says through 
the prophet: "I am a worm, and no man; a re- 
proach of men, and despised of the people." Ps. 
69:21; 22:7, 6. 

My dear sister in the Lord, if the head thus suf- 
fered, the members must follow. Grieve not that 
you must wander about yet in this world or wilder- 
ness ; for it is God which worketh in you both to 
will and to do, according to the good purpose of 
your mind. Phil. 2:13. My dear lamb, always let 
your light shine among this wicked and perverse 
generation, that, whereas they speak against you 
as evildoers, they may by your good works, which 
they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visita- 
tion. I Peter 2 :12. 

My dearest sister in the Lord, wait patiently for 
the time ; be patient unto the coming of our Lord. 
Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious 
fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, 


until he receive the early and latter rain. Therefore 
be patient, and stablish your heart ; for the coming 
of the Lord draweth nigh. My dear sister, you 
have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen 
the end of the Lord ; that the Lord is very pitiful, 
and of tender mercy. Jas. 5 :7, etc. 

My dear lamb, let us keep unto the end that 
which we have ; He is faithful that promised it us. 
Heb. 10:23. My dear sister, humble yourself al- 
ways; cast all your care upon Him, for He cares 
for you, and for us all (I Peter 5 :6, 7) ; for we 
know our reward beforehand, if we hold fast His 
commandments unto the end, according to our 
weakness, and we wait for it with patience. Hence 
Paul says that love is the bond of perfectness. 
Col. 3:14. And Peter says: "Have perfect charity 
among yourselves: for charity shall cover the 
multitude of sins." I Pet. 4 :8. My dear sister in 
the Lord, though we must now be the laughing 
stock of the world, and wander about in foreign 
lands, we will be none the worse for it when the 
Lord shall say: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world" Matt. 25:34. Then 
shall the child be born ; then there shall be no more 
reviling ; then shall all our enemies be conquered ; 
then shall the tears be wiped from our eyes ; then 
shall no harm happen to us any more ; then shall 
we drink of the fountain of life, without price ; for 
whatsoever things were written for our learning, 
that we through patience and comfort of the Scrip- 
tures might have before. Rom. 15:4. 

The God of patience and consolation grant you 
to be likeminded one toward another according to 
Christ Jesus : that ye may with one mind and one 
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, 
as Christ also received us, to the glory of God, the 
Father of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Farewell, 
my dear sister in the Lord. Amen. 

By me, Willeboort Corneliss. 

Written in bonds. 


PRIJNTGEN AND MARTIJNTGEN MAELBOUTS, IN 
THE YEAR 1564 

On the 12th of November A. D. 1564, there was 
beheaded with the sword, at Ghent in Flanders, one 
Prijntgen Maelbouts, widow of Jacob de Backer, 
brother of Pauwels van Meenen, and with her, her 
sister, Marti jntgen Maelbouts, a young girl, a na- 
tive of Thielt ; not for any reported evil deeds, but 
simply for the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
in a good conscience, since they, according to the 
teaching of the holy Scriptures, had separated 
from the papal church of antichrist — as being pol- 
luted with much uncleanness of the impure works 
of darkness, and the doctrines and commandments 
of men, militating against the holy Word of the 
Lord — and united with the true members of 
Christ, and sought with them, according to their 
weak ability, to observe the commandments and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


671 


ordinances of their Lord. On this account the per- 
secutors and enemies of the truth deprived them of 
their lives, which, to please their Lord and re- 
deemer, they willingly resigned, in the living hope 
and firm faith, that at the resurrection of the just, 
they should receive back into great glory these their 
corruptible members, which they here resigned for 
His name's sake, and reign with God and His 
saints in eternity. II Maccabees 7:11, 14; I Cor. 
15:43. 


MR. JELIS MATTHIJSS, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT MIDDEL- 

BORGH, IN THE YEAR A. D. 1564 

A letter of Mr. Jelis Matthijss, written in prison, 

at Middleborgh, A. D. 1564, where he laid 

down his life for the name of the Lord 

The foundation of God standeth sure. — II Tim- 
othy 2:19. 

Grace, peace, and the abundant love of our God, 
with the deep and unspeakable love of His Son, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the chosen gift of faith, are 
revealed to us by God, the merciful dear Father, 
through Christ Jesus, and given to His saints, 
whom He, through His fatherly love, has now cho- 
sen, called and ordained thereto, yea, delivered 
from the chains and heavy bonds of the perpetual 
darkness of unbelief, with which this evil, wicked 
and perverse world is bound ; and has, according to 
His fatherly mercy, begotten us again unto a liv- 
ing, saving hope, and translated us into the king- 
dom of His dear Son, in whom we have the for- 
giveness of our sins through His blood, that we my 
dear sheep, should henceforth serve Him without 
fear in all obedience, righteousness and holiness, 
all the days of our life. I Peter 1:3; Col. 1:13, 
14; Luke 1 :74, 75. To this end may the merciful 
dear Father help and strengthen us with the pow- 
er of His Holy Spirit. Amen. 

Since you people have requested me, through 
your letter, and through greetings heard from you 
at different times, as also previously, by the letter 
of your dear wife, who also requested the same of 
me [to write], know that I have frequently pur- 
posed in my heart to do so according to my little 
gift, although I trust it is not really necessary, yet 
I hope that it will nevertheless assure and confirm 
you the more. But as I had rather much writing 
to do, and was engaged also with other matters, I 
could not very well attend to it; yet I have con- 
stantly cherished a father's care for you, frequently 
beseeching my God with a fervent heart, accord- 
ing to my weakness, that He would preserve you 
both, under the shadow of His wings, in this hor- 
rible and perilous time full of all wickedness, and 
fill you more and more with His Holy Spirit, and 
open the eyes of your understanding, that you, 
my dear sheep, may learn to know well the snares 
and outspread nets of the devil, which he now in so 


manifold ways daily lays for the regenerated, 
though you are not ignorant of them partly, well 
knowing his devices ; wherefore you have watched 
until the present time, in which I greatly rejoice, 
as also in this, that your faith grows and increases 
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto 
whom I have begotten you and the others, in my 
bonds, by tears, with the power of the Holy Ghost. 
And you became followers of me, and of the Lord, 
and received the Word of the Gospel of the cross 
of Christ with much sighing and godly sorrow, and 
have obeyed it from the heart, in the form of the 
doctrine wherein you now stand, so that you have 
become ensamples to all those in Middelborgh, 
who want to amend their lives, and take up the 
cross of the Lord. I Thessalonians 1 :6, 7. Not 
only these, but many saints are made to rejoice, be- 
holding your obedience and humility in the fear of 
your God, which, I hope will increase and become 
manifest still more from day to day, so that, my 
dear sheep, it may be clearly evident, that you are 
truly born again from above, of God the Father, 
and renewed by the renewing of your mind. Rom. 
12:2. Remember that your conversation must be 
heavenly, namely, according to the new man, who 
after God is created in all manner of righteousness 
and holiness; for since He who has called and 
chosen you to this service is holy, you must also ac- 
cording to your ability, lead a holy, chaste and god- 
ly life in the fear of your God. Eph. 4 :24 ; I Peter 
1:15. For to whom we have yielded ourselves, his 
servants we are, as the apostle says : whether of sin 
unto death, or of obedience unto life. Rom. 6:16. 
God be praised and thanked forever, my dear 
sheep, that you were the servant and handmaid 
of sin, but are now washed and cleansed with me, 
by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of 
the Holy Ghost, whom God the Father shed on us 
abundantly through Christ our Saviour, not for 
the works of our righteousness which we had 
done ; for we were by nature the children of wrath, 
even as others ; but God, the merciful, dear Father, 
who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith 
He loved us, when we were dead in sins and un- 
righteousness, quickened us together with Christ, 
or by Christ, His dear Son, through faith. Tit. 3 :5 ; 
Eph. 2 :3, etc. 

Therefore, my affectionately beloved sheep in 
Christ Jesus, whose souls I love from the heart, 
and for whom I have a fatherly and godly care, I 
admonish and beseech you as a prisoner in the 
Lord, frequently to call to remembrance the day 
in which the merciful dear Father had compas- 
sion upon you, and took the vail from your eyes 
and hearts, which still hangs before the eyes and 
hearts of so many thousands, who walk such hard 
ways and know not the way of the Lord, because 
they are drunken with the wine of the Babylonian 
whore, namely, the false doctrines, by which the 
whole earth is covered; but you, my sheep, have 
become sober, and come out of her, and I also hope 
that you will no more touch her uncleanness, lest 


672 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you perish with her plagues. II Cor. 3:16; Wisd. 
5:7; Rev. 17:2; 18:4. 

Hence watch sharply in righteousness, so that 
you, my dear sheep, be not put to confusion after 
my departure in this horrible and perilous time, 
for you can plainly see and hear that now is cer- 
tainly the time of which Christ Jesus and His holy 
apostles have so diligently warned us, even as 
Christ Himself said that the love of many should 
wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the end, 
the same shall be saved. Matt. 24:12, 13. O my 
dear sheep, ponder the words of Christ, and let 
them lodge in your hearts. It is indeed not spoken 
with regard to the world ; for in the world the love 
of God cannot wax cold, since it has not received 
it, neither knows it ; but it is spoken with reference 
to the true Israelites. And you see that this hap- 
pens abundantly among them, which is certainly a 
lamentable matter, as that the devil and spirit of 
the old serpent has gained such strength and power 
in the present time, through the manifold, subtle 
and dexterous snares which he daily lays, to cap- 
ture anew in his net of unbelief the souls of the re- 
generated, who have escaped him through the 
knowledge of God, whom he does capture again, 
my dear sheep, some of them through false doc- 
trine, not only through the Roman antichrist, since 
now there are many antichrists in the world. For 
this reason he has put on another cap, which is no 
longer like the Roman, well knowing that his game 
with it will soon be played; hence he has trans- 
formed himself, and appears now as an angel of 
light, and does his diligence to mingle with the 
children of light, there to set forth his wares anew. 
For, my dear sheep in the Lord, formerly he came 
with human ordinances and commandments, but 
now he knows that men want to hear Scripture ; 
hence he now comes adducing many Scriptures, so 
that it seems to be all right, even as he presump- 
tuously did with Christ, quoting to Him from the 
prophet David, that it was written that He [God] 
should send His angels, who should bear Him up 
in their hands, lest He should dash His foot 
against a stone. Matt. 4:6; Ps. 91:12. See, my 
dear sheep, he did indeed quote Scripture, just as 
it read ; but it had not been spoken or prophesied 
with any such meaning; thus these also, though 
they quote many Scriptures, and presumptuously 
say: "Thus it is certainly written; by which he 
easily captures in his outspread net the wavering 
and those whose ears itch to hear something new." 

Others he gets through deceitful riches that 
come to them, which bring men into destruction 
and perdition, since covetousness is the root of all 
evil. I Tim. 6 :9, 10. Nevertheless, some yet desire 
that their temporal possessions increase, and are 
so busily engaged therewith, that in the meantime 
they forget the exercise of godliness, and bring 
upon themselves many sorrows. Alas, my dear 
lamb, it shall go with them as it went with certain 
of the Israelites ; they that had gathered much had 
nothing over ; and they that had gathered little had 


no lack. Ex. 16:18. Hence, if we have food and 
raiment, O that we could therewith be content ; for 
we brought nothing into this world, and it is cer- 
tain we can carry nothing out. I Tim. 6 :7. For we 
see, dear sheep, that the words of our dear Lord 
Jesus Christ are true, namely, that the deceitful 
riches choke and suppress the good seed, namely, 
the Word of God, whereby many also come to 
shame. 

The third class [he deceives], through the loss 
or spoiling of their goods, who do not rightly con- 
sider that, like the merchantman, they have found 
the most beautiful pearl, which is certainly well 
worthy of all this, and far above comparison with 
it. The fourth, through crosses and suffering, 
namely, persecution. The fifth, through the en- 
treaties and solicitations, of father and mother, 
friends and relatives. The sixth, through wife and 
children. The seventh, by their own evil, subtle 
flesh. The eighth, because they become weary of 
the way of righteousness, and turn back to Egypt 
and Sodom, to live at ease and peace for a short 
time with the Babylonian whore, and afterwards 
to be tormented with her in everlasting pain. 

Behold, my most chosen and beloved sheep, all 
this is wrought and set in motion by a single spirit, 
the old serpent, who neither sleeps nor slumbers, 
but constantly walks about us, seeking whom he 
may devour. I Pet. 5 :8. Hence resist him man- 
fully and with a believing heart, and let it not ter- 
rify you, though they so lightly forsake the com- 
mandments of the Lord. Oh, regard not the neg- 
ligent, slothful and unfaithful ; but let all faithless 
servants and false disciples forsake their Lord and 
Master, yet we hope nevertheless to adhere to 
Him, and you with me, and are ready to suffer 
whatever He imposes upon us. Ah ! what should 
we do or undertake, if we should forsake His 
commandments ? whither should we flee, where He 
should not find us? Oh! heaven and earth must 
obey Him with trembling ; mountains and caverns 
must quake before Him, and can not stand in His 
presence; how much more the children of men, 
who dwell in houses of clay. Ps. 114:7; Job 4:19. 
O my dear sheep, wherewith shall they excuse or 
justify themselves when He shall visit them, who 
now so unfaithfully depart from Him? 

Alas ! alas ! it is indeed a lamentable matter, that 
they have conceived such a loathing for the noble 
heavenly bread, and that the only medicine by 
which all the souls of the regenerated have been 
restored, is become such a deadly enemy to them. 
Yea, my dear sheep, we may well sigh and lament 
with the prophet over the destruction of Israel, 
and over Jerusalem the fair city of God, and this 
the more because so many Israelites drift into the 
wilderness of this wicked world, and are again de- 
stroyed and slain by the subtle spirit of the serpent. 
Also, because some of the watchmen are become 
apostates, and the citizens of Jerusalem, too, are 
becoming slothful and drowsy, though he who 
walks around the camp neither rests nor pauses, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


673 


but diligently seeks day and night, whom he may 
find idle or sleepy, to sow his tares into the field 
of the heart, even as he, alas! did not a little in 
my time, and will still do, the longer the more, ac- 
cording to my opinion. For the more the people 
of God increase, the more will he reign among 
them ; nor will he rest until he succeed in getting 
some of them to submit to his will again ; and God 
permits him to torment the pious, and also to se- 
duce them, that the others may be tried. See, my 
dearest and much beloved children in the Lord, it 
is therefore my fatherly entreaty and humble re- 
quest of you, for the sake of the eternal salvation 
of your souls, that you will henceforth exercise 
great care that you may remain in the way of right- 
eousness, and always be mindful how you from 
this time on ought to walk in the house of God, 
which is the church of God, unto which you have 
come, whereof I was very glad, when I heard it, 
and thanked and praised my God for His great 
fatherly goodness and grace which He has shown 
you, and has received you as His son and daugh- 
ter, yea, as heirs of His heavenly riches, on which 
account you have so voluntarily betaken yourselves 
under the yoke and rod of the cross, and, with the 
holy apostle Paul, counted your gain loss, that you 
might gain your souls in Christ, even as you have 
done. Hence, take heed to yourselves, and depart 
or waver neither to the right nor to the left, lest 
you fall from your own steadfastness, and eternal 
fire be your inheritance ; but as you, my dear sheep, 
have now put on the Lord Jesus Christ, so con- 
tinue to walk in Him, and remain firmly established 
and rooted in His doctrine, lest you wax cold or 
lukewarm in love, and thus lose what you have re- 
ceived and so willingly accepted. II Peter 3:17; 
Col. 2:6; I Cor. 4:7. 

I also beseech you, by the mercy of our dear 
Lord Jesus Christ, that you neglect not, to thank 
and praise God the merciful dear Father day and 
night, through Christ His dear Son, for the great, 
unspeakable benefits which He has shown us poor, 
miserable creatures ; and has foreseen and chosen 
us from our mother's womb, and this to the end 
that we should truly live and confess His name 
among this wicked and adulterous generation, and 
thus may hold fast unto the end, the beginning of 
the Christian life. For though, my dearest sheep 
and much beloved children, you are now become 
true heirs of eternal life, through obedience to the 
Gospel, and are written with me and all saints in 
the book of life, yea, have been brought to an in- 
numerable company of angels, yet, O my dear 
sheep, he can soon blot us out again, and write our 
apostate names in the earth (Jer. 17:13), if we do 
not faithfully, according to our weakness, walk in 
God's commandments unto the end of our lives; 
for we know that the glorious promises given to 
the pious, and the crown of eternal life, lie neither 
in the beginning nor in the middle ; but he that en- 
dures, and continues faithful unto the end, shall 
receive the same from the hand of the Lord. For 


it is evident, that it availed the outward Israel (in 
whom we have a clear example) nothing, my dear 
sheep, that they by the strong hand of the Lord, 
had been delivered out of Egypt from the service 
and bondage of Pharaoh; yea, all the benefits 
shown them on the way by the faithful, merciful 
dear Father, were certainly for the most part lost 
or in vain. Though He fed them with angels' food, 
and gave them all that their soul desired, yet they 
became impatient and murmured, and did not re- 
ceive their trial in the fear of God, or in patience, 
wherefore the Lord was wroth, and destroyed 
twenty-three thousand at one time. O my dear, 
chosen sheep, think on it ; it certainly occurred for 
our instruction and admonition, as the holy apostle 
says, that we should not fall into the same example 
of unbelief ; for what could it avail us, that we have 
now also gone out from spiritual Egypt and Sod- 
om, and been delivered from the service of the 
hellish Pharaoh, through the Red Sea of the blood 
of Christ Jesus, and been baptized in the name of 
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, 
upon the confession of our faith, and have thus, 
having renounced our own selves, entered into the 
true Noah's ark — Christ Jesus. O my dear sheep, 
it all cannot avail or save us, if we do not observe 
the fulfilling of the commandments of our God; 
for the apostle John says : "He that saith, I know 
God, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, 
and the truth is not in him." I John 2 :4. But you, 
my most beloved, have always obeyed not only in 
my presence, but much more in my absence ; there- 
fore work out your salvation with fear, and con- 
stantly walk as becomes the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, after my departure, that you may 
always stand fast in one spirit and mind; and be 
not terrified in any wise by your adversaries, 
whether from within or without, which is to them 
an evident token of perdition, but to you of eternal 
salvation, and that of God. For, my dear sheep, it 
is not enough that you believe on Christ, but you 
must also suffer for His name, if not in bonds or 
imprisonment, then in the daily conflict and temp- 
tations, which at the present time arise in many and 
various forms, and may come upon you still more. 
Phil. 2:12; 1:27. For God proves and tries His 
chosen in manifold ways. Bonds and imprison- 
ment are regarded as the greatest trials of faith; 
but, my dear lamb, I write and confess to you at 
this time, that to me it is the least, compared with 
the perils and temptations I tasted and met with 
in the wilderness of this world, or which I saw 
before me, so that I often did not know which way 
to turn, for anxiety of heart and spirit, and sighed 
and wept to my God on account of the manifold 
subtle and adroit snares which the old serpent is 
now laying, fearing that I might yet become entan- 
gled in her snares of human weakness, and of the 
wisdom of my own flesh, because I saw and heard 
that such high, strong and firmly rooted trees were 
completely torn up by the roots, and such lofty 
mountains brought low most miserably. Besides, 


674 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


I felt that in me there dwelt no good thing ; more- 
over, I considered that at His righteous day much 
chaff will be found, when He will look over His 
own. O then He will see those who will not have 
on a wedding garment. 

For this reason also I was in great anxiety, fear- 
ing that through my daily mistakes and polluted 
walk I should not be able to stand at His coming ; 
hence I often besought Him with tears, that 
through His fatherly mercy He would make me, 
poor, miserable man, fit, that I might suffer for 
His name's sake, to go into bonds and imprison- 
ment, and even into death, for His holy testi- 
mony ; — then I should be sure of my soul's salva- 
tion, and not fear to come to shame in the day of 
His wrath, — whereto He, through His fatherly 
mercy, has now chosen me and made me worthy, 
to declare His holy testimony before this evil and 
adulterous generation, in my bonds ; on which ac- 
count I am greatly rejoiced in my soul, and sin- 
cerely regret that I cannot thank or praise my and 
our merciful dear Father enough for His unspeak- 
ably great benefits which He has shown and is still 
daily showing me miserable creature ; for I trust 
in His fatherly grace and mercy, that He will 
further fit me and make me worthy to go into death 
for His holy testimony ; for He knows that I have 
for a long time longed to be at home, and this on 
account of the manifold dangers I behold in the 
way. Hence, my affectionately beloved sheep in 
the Lord, as I still have a fatherly care for you, 
and love you with a godly love, I cannot forbear, 
seeing I am still in this tabernacle for a little while, 
to admonish you a little by my writing, praying you 
not to think that I rule over you ; but I seek to build 
you up with all kindness unto the full stature of the 
fullness of Christ, so that you, my dear sheep, may 
be found a true letter of Christ, not written with 
ink on paper, but by the Holy Spirit of the living 
God, whereby you are also sealed unto the day of 
your redemption, who has written God's statutes 
and laws into your hearts and minds, whereby you 
are now become an epistle of Christ, which is seen 
and read by all men who behold your holy, chaste 
conversation in the humility of your heart and de- 
preciation of yourselves. II Cor. 3:2; I Pet. 3 :2. 

Therefore, my dear lamb, I beseech you once 
more, though you are humble, humble yourselves 
still more ; though you are clean, cleanse yourselves 
yet more; yea, though you have become holy, 
sanctify yourselves yet more and more, that you 
may be found pure and blameless, the children of 
God, in the midst of this crooked and perverse gen- 
eration, among whom you shine as lights in the 
world, holding forth the word of life ; that I may 
rejoice in the day of Christ, so that I may not have 
labored in vain with you ; for though I am to be 
offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand, 
yet I joy and rejoice in my heart, on your account, 
and of the others whom I have begotten in my 
bonds, who in time past were unprofitable to the 
house of God, but are now useful and profitable, 


whom I love for the truth's sake, and desire that 
they shall also have a part herein, hoping that it 
will also rejoice them in the spirit and faith, for an 
assurance and confirmation of all your minds in 
Christ Jesus. John 15:3; Rev. 22:11; Phil. 2:15 ■ 
II Tim. 4:6; Philem. 10, 11 ; II Jno. 1, 2. Hence, 
my final and affectionate request to you all is, that 
you love one another with a pure heart fervently, 
being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of 
incorruptible, namely, by the living, powerful and 
saving Word. John 13 :34; I Pet. 1 :22, 23. And re- 
member the words of Paul our fellow brother, 
where he says : "The end of the commandment is 
chanty out of a pure heart, and of a good con- 
science; yea, it is the bond of perfectness." I Tim. 
1 :5 ; Col. 3 :14. O how blessed is he who is truly 
girded about with this bond; for he does not live 
unto himself, but unto his Lord ; and he observes 
the words of Christ in everything, also where He 
says : "Be merciful, as your heavenly Father also 
is merciful." Luke 6:36. 

Hence, my dear sheep, I beseech you yet, by the 
mercy of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, and also for 
the sake of the eternal salvation of your souls, that 
you forget not to do good and to communicate ; for 
the administration of this service supplieth not only 
the want of the saints, but is abundant also by many 
thanksgivings unto God ; for by such offerings God 
is pleased. II Cor. 9:12. Remember also the words 
of the wise man, where he says: "He that hath 
pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord : and that 
which he hath given will he pay him again." Prov- 
erbs 19:17. He further says: "He that giveth unto 
the poor shall suffer no sorrow ; but he that turneth 
away his eyes shall decrease." 28:27. "The right- 
eous useth his wealth to life, but the wicked useth 
it to sin." 10:16. He also says: "There is that 
scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that 
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to 
poverty." 11 :24. Tobit, also, commands his son to 
remember the poor, saying: "Turn not thy face 
from the poor, and the face of God shall not be 
turned away from thee. Wherever thou be able, 
help the needy. If thou hast abundance, give alms 
accordingly ; if thou have but little, give according 
to that little with a faithful heart." And he adds : 
"For alms deliver from death, and blot out sin." 
Job. 4:7. With regard to this, also Sirach says: 
"Alms maketh an atonement for sin." Sir. 3:30. 
Alms also preserve the giver in everlasting habita- 
tions; wherefore Christ commanded: "Make to 
yourselves friends of the mamman of unrighteous- 
ness ; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into 
everlasting habitations." Luke 16 :9. 

Christ has well said : "For the poor always ye 
have with you." John 12:8. Hence He shall say 
at His righteous day : "All that ye have done unto 
the least of these my brethren, ye have done unto 
me." Matt. 25 :40. From this it follows, my dear 
sheep, that the words of Paul will also be verified, 
namely: "He which soweth sparingly (here) shall 
reap also sparingly ; and he which soweth bounti- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


675 


fully shall reap also bountifully . . . for God lov- 
eth a cheerful giver." II Cor. 9 :6, 7. My affection- 
ately beloved sheep in the Lord, though I thus 
write, I nevertheless know that you are taught of 
God and His Holy Spirit, and that this will do 
more for you than all I can write ; yet, from heart- 
felt Christian love, I write it to you ; for the reason, 
that you may remember the former times, when 
you were so diligent in all manner of unrighteous- 
ness, sparing no expense in the way of numerous 
costly banquets or feasts, yea, in pomp and display, 
which God abominates. Oh, think once, my dear 
sheep, what delight you then took [in these things] . 
Oh, should you now not give the much more dili- 
gence in the things which God has commanded you, 
to lay up treasures in heaven, where neither moth 
nor rust doth corrupt. Oh, we should be able now 
to spare a bit of money occasionally, to give to poor 
saints, just as easily as we formerly could provide 
large amounts, to spend in unrighteousness. O my 
dear, beloved children, I do not write this to op- 
press your hearts, but that your love may increase 
yet more and more from day to day : for you know 
not how much time you will have yet, or when rob- 
bers may get possession of your treasure. Further, 
my faithful sheep, it is my fatherly request, that 
you live together in peace, harmony and unity. 
Help to bear in love one another's burdens, since 
you know not how long you will live together ; and 
remember that you are called children of peace, 
since your King and Prince is the King and Prince 
of Peace (Isa. 9:6); hence you must be found 
children of peace, as I also trust you are, though I 
thus write. 

Herewith I will commend you to the great Shep- 
herd of the sheep, who, I faithfully trust, will keep 
you under the shadow of His wings; if you only 
continue in His statutes and commandments, and 
depart on no account out of His hand, then I am 
certain that no one shall pluck you out of His hand. 
Once more I beseech you, and this by the wounds 
of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, and also for the sake 
of the eternal salvation of your souls, that you will 
take to heart my letter and faithful admonition 
written at the close of my life ; and do not let it lie 
unused among you after my departure, nor look 
upon it then as a dead history or fable ; but receive 
it as a testament, and let it be a perpetual memorial 
to you, and remember me by it, how I was an ex- 
ample unto you, according to my weakness, and fol- 
low my footsteps which I trust to walk before you 
through the power of my God, namely, to adhere 
to the truth unto the end, to testify to you and to 
all who seek to fear God with a pure heart, that this 
is the true grace of our God, as Peter says, yea, the 
sure road and highway to eternal life ; wherein you 
now stand. I Pet. 5:12; Ps. 25. Hence, let no one 
divert you from your present purpose, or cause you 
to waver, but give more and diligence to make your 
calling and election sure. Oh, if you do these things, 
my dear sheep, you shall never fall ; but an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 


everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. II 
Peter 1 :1U, 11. Watch rigidly therefore in right- 
eousness all the days of your life ; for it is neces- 
sary indeed. I also kindly request that you receive 
this prescription in love ; for I have certainly writ- 
ten it out of Christian love. Herewith I want to 
bid you all adieu, until in eternity. Amen. 

Furthermore, my affectionately beloved sheep in 
the Lord, as regards how it is with me and my fel- 
low combatants, know that it still tends to the pro- 
motion of the Gospel. Know also, that the Lord 
faithfully succors me in my conflict and defense, 
and has given me strength to gain the victory, and 
delivered me out of the mouth of hell, and the teeth 
of the lions. I believe I have been in combat with 
them ten or twelve times ; the others, however, they 
did not torment so much. In short, I hope that the 
fight is fought, the course finished, the life [faith] 
kept. Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown 
of glory, which, I hope, no creature shall ever take 
from me; for faithful is He that has begun this 
good work in me ; He will doubtless help me finish 
it, according to the good purpose of my heart, so 
that I may pass through Jordan unharmed. Phil. 
1 :6. May God grant us His grace. Amen. 

Communicate this among yourselves, commend 
it to God, meditate upon it diligently, understand it 
wisely. Oh, if you do this, it will be evident that 
you seek your salvation and esteem my letter. 

Finished the 6th of October, in the twenty-third 
month of my imprisonment. Once more, my dear 
children, valiantly adhere together to the cross of 
Christ, and do not depart from it. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM MR. JELIS MATTHIJSS, 
WHICH HE WROTE TO HIS WIFE 

I wish unto my flesh and blood, strength of spirit 
and a steadfast mind in all her tribulation and se- 
vere distress. Amen. 

My dear and beloved wife, whom I wedded be- 
fore God and His church, as the time of my depar- 
ture is now at hand, may you people know that my 
heart and mind are concerned about you, being 
indeed desirous of writing you something, but hav- 
ing so ill an opportunity for it, because it stands 
thus with us that we are now watched and guarded 
by eight or ten servants, so that I feel little strength 
of spirit in me, to write anything to you, love, as it 
comes upon us so unexpectedly, since we had not 
heard a word. Willeboort, my faithful comrade, 
had partly undressed already, when our host and 
hostess came up stairs, saying: "Mr. Jelis and 
Willeboort, come down." When we came down, 
we saw the stadtholder, and the bailiff also came 
and upbraided us with this, whereupon I had a few 
words with him. In short, my dearly beloved cho- 
sen flesh and blood, I shall now go the way of all the 
prophets and witnesses of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, in which I greatly rejoice and am of good 
cheer at the present time ; yea, I find such joy and 
comfort in me, that I cannot well describe it to you, 


676 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and I do not as yet experience the least fear ; but 
am concerned most about you, because of the ex- 
cessive grief which oppresses you, but I trust to my, 
and your God, that with the temptation He will 
also provide a way of escape, through the consola- 
tion of the Holy Spirit, whereby He will comfort 
you. I Cor. 10:13. 

O my flesh, my blood, I beseech you by the 
bleeding wounds of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, be 
patient in your tribulation, that you be not found 
as one who would fight against God, but rather say 
with Mary: "Behold, Lord, be it unto me accord- 
ing to thy will." Luke 1 :38. For at the very hour 
of meeting, the hour of separating was known to 
the Lord, and He in His fatherly mercy has fore- 
seen and chosen you, also to suffer tribulation and 
pain now for His name's sake. And though, my 
chosen lamb, I now experience greater joy, be- 
cause my pilgrimage has come to a close ; yet I be- 
seech you, be of good cheer in the Lord, and re- 
ceive it in patience and sorrow. Humble your 
heart, and endure it. Sir. 2:2. Oh, I know that 
your grief is very great. Oh, if it were God's will, 
and I might die for you, yea though I were to 
taste a twofold death for you, I should not shrink 
from it, since it does not come hard to me. Oh, 
then I should certainly have the assurance that you 
should not be deceived by strange lovers ( Jer. 2 : 
25), nor by the noonday devil, nor by your own 
flesh ; however, I trust nevertheless from the bot- 
tom of my heart, that you will follow the footsteps 
of my faith, that is, to adhere to the truth unto the 
end. Oh, the reason of my writing and my last and 
great request is, that you adhere to what God, out ' 
of great grace has given you. Oh, do not yield nor 
waver on account of your great grief, or because 
of any conflict that may arise, not known to you 
as yet; but in all your concerns pray with confi- 
dence to God the merciful dear Father ; He will not 
forsake you, I am sure of it. Eph. 6:18. And 
though, my dear chosen lamb, we shall now be 
separated for a little while, we shall meet each oth- 
er again hereafter in the resurrection of the dead, 
and shall forever be with the Lord. I Thess. 4:17. 
Oh, then our small sorrow shall be changed into 
eternal, unspeakable joy, and all tears shall be 
wiped away from our eyes, and we shall hear the 
words: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the kingdom prepared from the foundation of the 
world." Isa. 25 :8; Rev. 7:17; Matt. 25 :34. O my 
dear lamb, comfort yourself with these promises, 
and with the words of the Gospel, where Christ 
Himself says : "Blessed are they that weep now ; 
for they shall be comforted. But woe unto them 
that laugh now, for they shall weep. For the time 
shall come when they shall cry out: O ye moun- 
tains and hills, fall on us, and cover us from the 
face of the Lord." Matt. 4:5; Luke 6:25; Hos. 
10:7. 

Oh, then it will be at an end with all our perse- 
cutors, executioners, and rackers, and with all de- 
stroyers ; yea, then shall be fulfilled the word of the 


prophet Isaiah, where he says : "O ye destroyers, 
think ye that ye shall not also be destroyed ? and ye 
despisers, think ye that ye shall not also be de- 
spised ? When ye shall have made an end to de- 
stroy an end shall also be made with you." Isa. 33 :1. 
But unto you, my flesh, my blood, and unto me, and 
all saints, shall the Sun of righteousness arise, and 
happiness and eternal prosperity shall encompass 
us. O my dear sheep, [flock], how gladly would I 
comfort you and come to your aid in your tribu- 
lation ; but it cannot be at this time. But I sincerely 
pray you, remember my words which I spoke to 
you in times past, and follow them, this I pray you, 
and let them be a perpetual foundation stone. Fur- 
ther, I cordially entreat you, and this for the eternal 
salvation of your soul, that you live in quiet and 
bring up your child (my own offspring), in the 
fear of the Lord, as I trust you will. Once more, 
my dearest, chosen lamb, I entreat you from the 
bottom of my heart, and my inmost soul, remember 
frequently what I said to you in times past, and also 
wrote in some measure, namely, that you adhere all 
the days of your fife to that which you voluntarily 
so willingly accepted, since it is the true ground, 
foundation, and way to eternal life. Oh, there shall 
never be found another, than this way of the cross, 
and if it should be withal the will of your merciful,' 
dear Father, to prove you with His fatherly rod of 
the cross, that is, with bonds or imprisonment, I 
pray you for the sake of the eternal salvation of 
your soul that you will not fear our enemies; for 
it is impossible to write or express, how God the 
merciful, dear Father comforts those who have 
entirely committed themselves to the Lord ; so that 
I should not have thought that I could have such a 
heart and mind, so that I almost wondered how 
they could depart from the word of God ; but they 
forgat the comfort of the future glory, and became 
heedless, and the oil of righteousness and love 
failed their earthen vessels. Matt. 13 :43 ; 25 :3. 

Hence, my faithful, dearest flesh and blood, be 
warned, that you may not, through slothfulness 
and heedlessness, find yourself deceived with the 
heedless, foolish virgins. Therefore be watchful 
in the spirit, and give diligence still from day to day, 
to put off more and more (Eph. 4:22) ; for, my 
dear lamb, it is necessary that you watch, since not 
all shall enter into the promised land, who have 
gone out of this present spiritual Egypt and Sod- 
om ; and this because of the power and might of 
the old serpent, who does not rest nor pause day or 
night, but goes around the camp, seeking whom he 
may find drowsy ; whom resist stoutly in the faith 
take upon yourself a valiant and believing heart. 

Furthermore, dearly beloved lamb, it is my re- 
quest that you conform to all humility, and be little 
in your own eyes, and mind not high things, but 
condescend to men of low estate. Rom. 12:16. 
Always be ready and anxious to hear the Word of 
God, and remember the words of Christ : "Where 
two or three are gathered together in my name, 
there am I in the midst of them." Matt. 18:20. O 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


677 


my dear lamb, have fervent love for the church of 
God, and forget not to Communicate of that which 
the merciful, dear Father has given you. Remem- 
ber that mercy glorifieth against judgment, for 
with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Jas. 2:13; 
Hebrews 13 :16. But I know, my beloved lamb, and 
have confidence in you, that you will herein follow 
the teaching of our dear Lord Jesus Christ. Matt. 
6:1. Herewith, my dearest, I take farewell and 
leave from you, my flesh and blood, on this earth, 
and commend you into the hands of Almighty God, 
our Saviour, Jesus Christ, who is able to preserve 
and build up you and your child (Acts 20 :32), and 
to strengthen you in every distress, even as He is 
faithful, and will do it, if you, my dear lamb, only 
continue in His statutes and laws, and do not be- 
come weary in the way of the cross, though it be 
full of anxiety and hardship for you. Oh, that you, 
my dear lamb, could take courage and praise and 
thank your God, that you are found worthy also 
to suffer for His name. Oh, think of the words of 
the wise man where he says : "Having been a little 
chastised, we shall be greatly rewarded; for God 
trieth his chosen as gold in the furnace." Wisd. 
3:5, 6. 

Therefore, my dearly beloved lamb, let the try- 
ing of your faith work patience, and let patience 
have her perfect work (Jas. 1 :3, 4), and remember 
the words of the wise man: "A patient man is 
better than a strong man; and he that ruleth his 
spirit (mark) than he that taketh a city." Prov. 
16:32. Further, the prophet Jeremiah says : "It is 
good and a great thing to be patient, and that one 
that is forsaken wait for help of the Lord." Lam. 
3 :36. Hence possess your souls in patience for a 
little while yet, this I beseech you from my inmost 
heart. Luke 21 :19. 

O my dearly beloved lamb, once more I entreat 
you, acquit yourself valiantly. Oh, if you love me 
(as you abundantly do), follow the footsteps of 
my faith; for the time is fulfilled, the days are 
spent, my years are ended which I lived in this 
wilderness amidst many dangers. I have not run 
or fought as uncertainly; hence I rejoice in the 
spirit, that God the merciful dear Father has been 
with me, so that I have fought the fight, and fin- 
ished my course. Henceforth there is laid up for 
me the crown of eternal life which God, the mer- 
ciful, dear Father, shall give me, and not to me 
only, but unto all them also that love his appear- 
ing. I Cor. 9 :26; II Tim. 4 :7, 8. And I shall now 
enter into the precious land, which I have tasted 
and seen by faith, wherefore my inner man, has a 
desire for it, so that I am not afraid of my enemies, 
nor shrink back from Jordan, which though it is 
most terrible to behold in the eyes of some, we 
are certain and assured that our faithful God of 
Israel will be with us, and will make it ready with 
His strong arm, so that we shall pass through un- 
harmed, and thus encourage the young valiant 
Israelites. In short, to all who want to fear God 
from the heart we are, through the grace of God, 


a savor unto eternal life ; and those who hate us, a 
savor of death. II Cor. 2:16. Adieu, my flesh, 
my blood ; under the altar I hope to wait for you 
all. Rev. 6 :9. Let my blood be a perpetual testa- 
ment and memorial unto you. Farewell, until we 
meet in eternity. Amen. 
_ Oh, keep valiantly, I pray you in the way of 
righteousness; for I testify unto you with my 
blood, before God and His angels, that it is the true 
road and highway, yea, the true grace of our God, 
on and in which you stand. I Pet. 5 :12. The grace 
of God be with you. Amen. The 24th of October, 
five o'clock A. M., A. D. 1564. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM MR. JELIS MATTHIJSS TO 
HIS WIFE 

My dearly beloved chosen wife and sister in the 
Lord, I wish you folks much strength and comfort 
from God the merciful dear Father, through the 
consolation of the Holy Ghost, whereby He com- 
forts all afflicted, sorrowing hearts that are op- 
pressed for His testimony, even as is the case with 
you at this present time, so that it troubles you 
greatly though you have been so much taught by 
the Holy Ghost, that you well know that it is the 
will of our Lord and Master to whom we have 
bowed our knees, to serve and be faithful to Him in 
every distress, tribulation and temptation ; for He 
has chosen and called us both to the end that we 
should keep His name amidst much tribulation and 
pain, and should not become weary of these few 
stripes and fatherly chastenings (Job 5:17); for 
thereby He makes us true heirs of His heavenly 
kingdom, if we receive them in resignation and 
patience, and are exercised thereby ; to which may 
the merciful, dear Father strengthen us with the 
power of His Holy Spirit. Amen. 

Further, my dearly beloved wife, since I pre- 
sume that your heart is much troubled and sorrow- 
ful on my account, and you, as I believe, would like 
to hear and know how it is with me, I cannot for- 
bear to write you a little about how it went with us. 
I did write to you on our last night (as I thought), 
and asked the bailiff whether I might write a little 
yet to my poor, sorrowing wife. He said, "Yes." 
But we were not allowed to go upstairs again, and 
had to remain in the kitchen; and Huyge would 
not consent to my writing, except he might hold it, 
and hand it to the bailiff, as I think he has done ; 
yet I hope that you will yet get it. Further, my 
clear lamb, know, first of all that my purpose is still 
unchanged, and I am ready to await in patience all 
that God the merciful, dear Father and the enemies 
of the truth will impose upon me. Further know, 
you folks, that we had not heard of any trouble of 
the flesh; but in the evening, about nine o'clock, 
Huyge came up stairs with his wife, saying: "Mr. 
Jelis and Willeboort, come down; there is some- 
body that wants to speak with you." Then our 
women, especially Maeyken, began to cry and weep 
greatly. I asked him whether we were not to come 


678 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


up again, to which he gave me but little reply. 
Hence I immediately divested myself of my cas- 
sock, and put on my old jacket. I then kissed my 
blood, namely, the child, took off my hat, and 
briefly addressed myself to God, the merciful, 
dear Father, that He would preserve the child all 
the days of its life; my heart experienced some 
sadness over it, but it did not last long. When I 
came down, the stadtholder was standing there, and 
a short time afterwards also the bailiff came, and 
catching sight of me said: "Well, Mr. Jelis, the 
time has come," or some such words. I then step- 
ped up to him a little closer, my heart being quite 
joyful, and said to him in a very friendly manner : 
"My lord, I have known you for eight or ten years, 
and looked upon you as an honest man ; how comes 
it that you want to take us in this manner by sur- 
prise? We certainly have not heard a word of 
it." 

He replied: "There is time enough; it will not 
be yet ; but make yourself ready for tomorrow at 
five o'clock." I then exchanged a few more words 
with him, saying : "O man, man, what a great bur- 
den you put upon yourself ; I would from my heart, 
that you were not a judge over us, not however for 
our flesh's sake, for we are of very good cheer as 
regards that ;" and I took up a tankard that stood 
there, and drank his health. When he had gone 
away, I began to write, and wrote until about five 
o'clock, when he returned and gave orders that the 
servants should take us up ; and as to how it went 
up in the city hall, you probably have heard. When 
we came away from there, we were both locked 
up in a room, and as I was fettered, I could not 
write to you. 

I inform you further, that the next day, that is, 
this morning, the bailiff and the stadtholder sum- 
moned us down, and brought us both into a sepa- 
rate subterranean dungeon, which was very dark, 
and they had also darkened the window. They 
said : "You will have to remain here until it will be 
otherwise." The stadtholder said: "We are all 
mortal, we do not know ourselves when we are to 
die." I said nothing. When I stood in the dun- 
geon, the bailiff looked at me, and I cast my eyes 
up heavenward, and said: "O God, preserve us," 
or such a word or two. 

It seemed as though the bailiff wanted to say: 
"Yes, it comes through you ;" however, he did not 
give utterance to it, and went away with the other, 
and our God was not far from us, with the consola- 
tion of His Holy Spirit, and made my heart joyful, 
so that I could not refrain from singing a hymn. 

In the afternoon we were given a bit of a candle, 
and I commenced to write this, which I should have 
liked to send to you before night, but I was not 
able to do so; hence accept it in love. 

O my affectionately beloved lamb, I think our 
hour is fast approaching ; for it seems that the ruler 
of this world will come this night. Hence I beseech 
you by the bleeding wounds of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, and for the sake of the eternal salvation of 


your soul, that you will never let it leave your 
heart, how I walked before you; and when my 
blood — which I hope you will bring up in the fear 
of God — has attained to years of understanding, 
admonish him with it, and do you, my most be- 
loved, not forget it either ; but let my blood be a 
perpetual testament and memorial to you, how I, 
according to my feeble ability, have been an ex- 
ample to you. Still, I would that I had been able 
to walk more holily and blamelessly before you; 
but you know that according to my feeble ability I 
sought to please the Lord, and, according to my 
weakness, walked with boldness in the way of the 
cross, which it is my heart's desire, that also you 
will do ; and do not forsake it ; but it is my fatherly 
entreaty, that you give more diligence to make your 
holy calling and election surer and surer ; for the 
day of the Lord is not far off, in which He will 
reward every one according to his works. Then, 
my faithful lamb, He will find the lukewarm, sloth- 
ful and heedless, who now bear the name of Chris- 
tians, and do indeed bear the vessels, but have not 
the oil of love and righteousness in them. Hence, 
my flesh, my blood, I entreat you kindly, not to re- 
gard the lukewarm, slothful, heedless, and fearful ; 
but prove yourself, and daily examine yourself, 
whether you are truly walking in the faith of the 
Son of God. If you thus examine yourself, you 
may prove and know what is yet necessary for vou 
to put off. II Cor. 13:5. 

Oh, always strive for humility, since a humble 
heart is in the best condition for self-examination ; 
for such an one constantly bewails his weakness and 
insignificance before the Lord, fearing lest at last 
he might yet come to shame in this perilous, fearful 
time, through the manifold and subtle snares and 
nets ; wherefore such a regenerate child of God has 
a heartfelt desire to be at home, and to be delivered 
from this miserable, spotted garment of the flesh, 
knowing full well that he is walking amidst great 
perils ; hence he rejoices when he hears of the cross 
of Christ ; he is not minded, lightly to flee before 
the ungodly, except when necessity demands it. 
But the lukewarm, slothful and heedless, who 
sometimes think that they are rich enough, and 
have need of nothing, they in the meanwhile, as 
soon as they hear aught that the ungodly only form 
a _ compact to extirpate the righteous, are greatly 
disconcerted or are more fainthearted, and this 
sometimes is not yet all, but they come to their 
neighbor, whose heart they ought to encourage, 
and make him fainthearted too. 

But you, my faithful lamb, be courageous, this I 
heartily entreat you, and look not to the aforemen- 
tioned, nor to those who now so unfaithfully depart 
from the Lord, whether through cross, or persecu- 
tion, or false doctrine. Oh, if they previously had 
daily examined themselves, and had had a taste 
for heavenly things, they would not have suffered 
themselves to be deceived so easily, or have dreaded 
the cross so much ; but they would heartily desire 
to confess the name of their God among this wicked 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


679 


and perverse generation, and entreat their Lord 
from their hearts, that they might be strangers in 
the land, to the praise of their God, and the edifi- 
cation of their neighbor. 

Further, my dear, faithful, beloved, and chosen 
wife, whose soul I love as dearly as my own, it is 
yet my Christian and fatherly request, that you will 
take care all the days of your life, that you may 
come to the place where I shall soon be, so that we 
may not be separated in the eternal habitations. O 
that it might be God's holy will and pleasure, and 
be possible, that I might drink the cup of bitterness 
for you. Yea, though it were thrice, I think I 
would most willingly do it, from the heart, so that 
you might also be saved. 

Oh, then I should accept my departure with a 
still much more joyful heart, and should certainly 
have no apprehension that you should ever be 
moved from the simplicity of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ ; however, I feel no apprehension, as long as 
you continue as I now leave you ; for you fear the 
judgment of the ungodly. Hence I desire with 
Sirach, that you remember in all your undertakings 
what he says, namely : "My son, whatsoever thou 
takest in hand, remember the end, and thou shalt 
never sin" ( Sir. 7 :36) , namely, such sins as could 
keep you out of God's kingdom; for as regards 
your daily frailties and mis-steps before God, they 
will not condemn you or bar you out, for with ref- 
erence to this the holy apostle John says : "If any 
man sin, we have an advocate with God the Father, 
who maketh intercession for us," which is Christ 
Jesus, the high priest, who entered in, namely, into 
the holy of holies, and made an eternal offering 
and atonement for His people and generation, and 
sat down on the right hand of God His Father, as 
an advocate and intercessor for our daily stum- 
blings and fallings, as the apostles say, I John 2:1; 
Rom. 8:34; Hebrews 9:12; Ps. 110:1; Col. 3:1. 
See, my faithful and dearly beloved lamb, to this 
intercessor and advocate I direct you, and not to 
the deceased saints, as the blind leaders of this 
world do. 

Therefore, flee to Him, for refuge in your great 
distress ; remember that His ear is not heavy that 
He cannot hear you, and His hand not shortened 
that He cannot help you ; for His eyes are upon His 
saints (Ps. 34:15), whom He has so dearly pur- 
chased with His own precious blood ; and He lis- 
tens to their calling, sighing and crying: for He 
calls those blessed already, who here weep and 
suffer for righteousness' sake, of whom you are 
one now. Matt. 5 :4. Hence, O my flesh, my blood, 
comfort yourself with these promises, this I pray 
you; for those who sow here in tears, shall here- 
after reap in great joy. Ps. 126:5. Oh, therefore 
do not think, my dear lamb, that the tears you now 
weep will have been wept in vain ; for they have 
already come before the face of the Lord. Hence, 
be patient yet for a short time, this I entreat you ; 
for He will not have you here long, I hope, but will 
also take you away from the evil to come, and bring 


you to sure rest in His chamber, as the prophet 
Isaiah (57:1,2) says, Because you, according 
to your feeble ability, desire to walk uprightly unto 
the end, to which may the merciful, dear Father 
help you, through the help and power of His Holy 
Spirit; faithful is He who will doubtless do it. I 
Thes. 5 :24. Further, my dear, chosen and be- 
loved wife and sister in the Lord, as I cannot yet 
draw my fatherly and solicitous heart away from 
you, but would so gladly from my inmost soul, pre- 
sent you, in and according to your weakness, per- 
fect and blameless before God, it is my humble and 
kindly request, that you will sincerely love your 
neighbor, and always remember the poor saints of 
the household of God, even as you have hitherto 
had such a disposition. Let your love herein not 
grow less, but much rather increase. Always re- 
member Christ's words, where He says : "The poor 
ye will always have with you." Matt. 26:11. And 
it is manifest that there are always poor among or 
in the house of God. Heb. 3 :6. Bear in mind that 
it is a great and acceptable work before the Lord ; 
wherefore Sirach says that the alms of a man is as 
a purse on the way with him ; and it will spare him 
in the judgment. Yea, it blotteth out sin, and cov- 
ereth the multitude thereof; for mercy glorieth 
against judgment, says James (2:13). Hence, give 
diligence also in this, as I am confident you will ; 
and though there is no necessity for writing you 
this, yet I hope it will tend to your best interests, 
so that after my departure you will not grow slack. 
I furthermore, entreat you yet, my dearly beloved 
lamb, that you will always associate with the pious, 
that you may attain to greater piety and discretion. 
And desire the reasonable, sincere milk, namely, 
to hear the Word of God, that you may thereby 
grow and increase in every good work. I Peter 
2:2. And live in quietness (you know what I 
mean) ; this I earnestly entreat you ; and wait for 
the day of your redemption, which, perhaps, is not 
far off. Herewith I will take my leave and eternal 
adieu from you, my flesh, my blood, and humbly 
entreat you once more, for the sake of the eternal 
salvation of your soul, and by all the great love that 
you have ever had to me, that after my departure 
you will be mindful of my writing, and heartfelt 
entreating and admonishing; whether done by 
writing or orally; and do not let it remain with 
you as a dead letter or a fable, but make frequent 
use of it as a prescription tending to your health, 
and keep it in the strong box of your heart as a 
perpetual treasure and memorial ; for it will bring 
you more profit than many pieces of fine gold and 
silver. Oh, the time is approaching rapidly, and I 
will therefore cease writing and everything else ; 
hence it is my affectionate request, if you love me 
and the eternal salvation of your soul, fulfill my 
request, according to your feeble ability, and de- 
part neither to the right nor to the left, whether 
through the cross of bonds or imprisonment, or any 
other cause ; and if God, the merciful, dear Father 
makes you worthy to suffer for His name, be not 


680 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


afraid ; for I should never have thought that bonds 
and imprisonment could cause so little conflict to 
one that has renounced himself, and has a heartfelt 
desire to be at home ; hence, fear them not. Now, 
my affectionately beloved, chosen lamb, and dear 
sister in the Lord, my time is fulfilled, the days are 
spent, the years are finished ; I have fought a good 
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the 
faith (II Tim. 4:7) ; so that my enemies who set 
themselves against me have been put to shame 
(Psalm 53 :5) ; for through my God I have gained 
the victory, who has delivered me out of the jaws 
of the lions and the mouth of hell, and shall also 
deliver me from every evil (II Tim. 4 :17, 18), and 
save me at His coming, and give me the true prom- 
ised land, which I have seen by faith, and tasted 
of its fruits, wherefore I have a heartfelt longing 
for it. Oh, assist me to thank and praise the merci- 
ful, dear Father, that I have safely come through 
the wilderness of this evil, wicked and perverse 
world, and am now standing before Jordan, 
through which only I have yet to pass. Though it 
is somewhat terrible to behold, yet I do not fear it 
at all, for I am sure that my God will succor me, 
and make me ready, so that I shall pass through it 
safely and unharmed; for faithful is He that 
promised it to me, and He will never leave me, nor 
forsake me, so that I may boldly say : "The Lord 
is with me ; I fear not what man may do unto me." 
Ps. 56:4; Heb. 13:5, 6. They have come for me. 


JAN GERRITS, BURNT AT THE HAGUE, FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, THE 15TH 

DAY OF DECEMBER, A. D. 1564 

A testament by Jan Gerrits, made while imprisoned 

at the Hague for the testimony of Jesus 

Christ, in December, A. D. 1564 

Grace and peace from God the heavenly Father, 
and His Son Jesus Christ, be with you. Amen. 

My dearest and much beloved brethren and sis- 
ters in the Lord, I inform you that I have received 
your communication, which I have read with great 
joy ; for its object is, in the first place, to incite to 
steadfastness in the faith, and to a perfect end, and 
this through Jesus Christ, wherefore I entreat the 
heavenly Father with all my heart and mind, that 
not only I, but all the God-fearing may attain to an 
upright end, according to the will of God, as I 
hope. For I have suffered stripes and great pain, 
and this, according to the words of John, for the 
brethren. I John 3 :16. I desire to suffer not only 
this, but also, if it is the will of God, to die for His 
name, Word and truth, no matter what kind of a 
death it may be ; for I should not have thought that 
it should last so long ; but as not a hair of my head 
can be hurt, without the Lord's permission, I want 
to await the end with Him, in patience, as behooves 
a Christian. 

Therefore, my much beloved brethren and sis- 
ters, it is my heartfelt request that you and all the 
God-fearing will entreat the Lord for me your 


weak brother, that I may receive the end of my 
faith ; for the prayer of the righteous avails much, 
and is effectual. I Peter 1:9. They use every 
artifice to rob me of the beautiful treasure which I 
have received from God ; but I trust to the Lord, 
that He will preserve me. 

In the second place, dear brethren, it is a great 
joy for me and the Lord, to learn that the vineyard 
of the Lord is enlarging, and that its branches are 
spreading wide, bringing forth upright fruits of the 
most high God, which I have so long desired. 
Hence I thank my and your God, that I hear what 
you have written, and rejoice that the light is rising 
in every nook and corner, and shines over every 
mountain, as I hear from many friends, who come 
to comfort me in my bonds. Therefore, my dear 
friends, be diligent, everyone according to the gift 
he has received from God, and put it diligently out 
upon usury, so that you may get much gain, and 
may hear these words of the Lord: "Well done 
thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler 
over many things : enter in to the marriage of the 
Lord." Matthew 25 :21. 

Thus, let everyone build up the house with lively 
stones, that it may become a glorious priesthood, 
and that they may offer up spiritual sacrifices, ac- 
ceptable to God by Jesus Christ. I Peter 2 :5. We 
may always be of good cheer in the Lord, for His 
power is so great with those who fear Him, that 
all death, devil, hell, fire and sword, must yield to 
Him. All this cannot hinder those who are built 
upon Christ ; for we can do all things through Him 
who makes us worthy, and through His love every- 
thing is overcome, and it casts out fear (I John 4: 
18), as I can indeed say; for when I was brought 
into the king's hall, and stood there almost an 
hour, before the lords came, and saw how every- 
thing was being put in readiness to torture me, I 
again and again thought in my mind : "O Lord, un- 
less Thou now succor me, I am utterly lost ;" and I 
prayed Him to give me a mouth to speak to His 
praise and glory, and to close it against everything 
tending to blaspheme His holy name and that of 
my neighbor. 

While I thus spoke and they were getting ready 
to torture me, I felt neither fear nor apprehension ; 
however, they handled me in a very severe and 
fierce manner, so that the president said: "Why 
will you not tell the truth?" Ans. "Because Christ 
spoke nothing but what tended to the glory of His 
Father, and what concerned His own divinity: 
about all other things He was silent. And I want 
to do the same ; wherever His honor and the doc- 
trine of His commandments are concerned, I do 
not want to be silent either before emperor, or 
king, or duke, or count." Instantly the order was : 
"Handle him without gloves : a drowned calf is a 
small risk." Behold, my dear brethren and sisters, 
how unmercifully they treated me. Nevertheless, 
the Lord was with me, blessed be His holy name ; I 
had no control of myself, but the Lord directed my 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


681 


mouth, so that they could obtain nothing according 
to their will. See, my dear friends, how faithful 
the Lord is ; him that trusts in Him He does not 
suffer to be confounded. Sir. 2 :10. 

Hence I write again, always be of good cheer in 
the Lord, and admonish one another at all times, 
for Peter deems it expedient and profitable to help 
bear one another's burdens, and this in love; for 
whether one member suffer ; all the members suffer 
with Him ; or whether one member be honored, all 
the members rejoice with Him. II Peter 1 :13; I 
Corinthians 12:26. 

In the third place, I let you know that my wife 
has been here, and brought me your kind greeting, 
which I was very glad to hear ; as also that she de- 
sires to follow that which is best, according to her 
feeble ability. For she confesses that the life which 
she has hitherto led is evil, as we may indeed all 
confess that ours also was unprofitable in times 
past. Tit. 3:3. Hence I entreat you, my dear 
brethren, that you would exercise a watchful care 
over her, and admonish her to a better life, and this 
in love; and if you should be able to accomplish 
anything, and write it to me, it would greatly re- 
joice me. If you write to me before I offer up my 
sacrifice to God, send your communication to my 
aged mother, or to N., and I shall get it. More- 
over, I gave her some spices, namely, a nutmeg, 
three or four hands full of ginger, and some cloves, 
that she should give them to J. C, or to some one 
else, that they should be cut up in pieces and prop- 
erly distributed around, as a perpetual greeting, 
and this in the Lord. Here upon earth, an eternal 
adieu in Christ, peace and farewell, in case this be 
the last opportunity, before we all meet in the 
presence of Christ, and there see one another in 
His glory. Amen. 

My much beloved brethren, I have lived with 
you, and rejoice that you are so courageous in 
building the city and the temple of Jerusalem, 
which have lain waste and in ruins so many years. 
Hence do not lose courage, brethren, though you 
be mocked and reviled as was Israel. When they 
rebuilt the wall (mark), they waxed stronger as 
they worked. Though the enemies raged, that the 
work might not progress, yet they did not cease 
from it, but kept watch the more diligently, holding 
in one hand the spear or the sword, and in the oth- 
er the trowel, and were of good cheer, for God was 
with them and fought for them. Neh. 4. Behold, 
my dear friends, let us take an example, how val- 
iant these heroes were ; they were not daunted by 
their enemies. Thus let us also do, however much 
they cry or write, yea, revile and say: "Behold, 
these people come, and want to lay a new founda- 
tion to the city, and do not know an a from a b. 
Whence have they this ? Where did they learn it ? 
We have studied at universities, and spent our 
money for this purpose. Now, should these asses 
come and teach us ? One is nothing but a cobbler ; 
another, a weaver or furrier, and these want to 
quote Scripture. Let them remain at their trades ; 


that [quoting Scripture] is our province; nor will 
we tolerate it ; it must be opposed with fire, water, 
and the sword." Nevertheless, do not let us fear or 
be intimidated, however much the dogs bark, and 
the lions roar ; for God, who is with us, is a strong 
God; He will preserve His own, and help them 
gain the victory. They can do no more than what 
the Lord permits them. My dear brethren, excuse 
this my simple letter; it was for the most part 
written in haste, the day after I received your 
letter. Herewith I will commend you once more 
to the Lord, and to the Word of His grace. Tell the 
friends in Vlieland, that I affectionately greet 
them with the peace of the Lord, that they shall 
contend valiantly for the law of the Lord. Pray 
the Lord for me ; I will also pray for you ; do not 
forget me in your prayers; think as though you 
were imprisoned, too. Heb. 13:3. Farewell. The 
fear of the Lord preserve you all. Amen. 

I also send you here another letter; perhaps it 
may refresh you in the assault you suffer from the 
adversaries of baptism. [What prompted me to 
write it is a controversy] which I had with a 
Lutheran preacher. The following is a reply to 
his letter, which he sent me, since we had often con- 
versed together. The Lord be with your spirit. 
Amen. 


A LETTER FROM JAN GERRITS TO THE LUTHERAN 
PREACHER 

My much beloved good friend, herewith I will 
bid you adieu, for after this I hope to dispute with, 
or write against, neither you nor any other man; 
for Paul says : "Avoid contentions, or profane 
babblings, and unprofitable disputations; for they 
will increase unto more ungodliness, and their 
word will eat as doth a canker." Tit. 3 :9 ; II Tim. 
2 :16, 17. Hence I want to be delivered also of you, 
and that my soul may rest in peace with God. 
Farewell always. 

See, my good friend, here are the arms and 
weapons of my faith, and this, in part, briefly 
shown. Behold, with these, and no other, whether 
of iron or steel, spear or sword, will I attack the 
kingdom of antichrist; for spirit must be over- 
come with spirit, and flesh with carnal weapons. 
Hence I say with the apostle: "The weapons of 
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty before God 
to the pulling down of everything that exalteth it- 
self against the truth; for we wrestle not only 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of this world, 
against spirits of wickedness under heaven." II 
Cor. 10:4, 5; Eph. 6:12. Hence ah" Christians 
must put on the armor of God, that they may be 
able to stand against the wiles of the devil ; and 
also be ready in every respect. Hence Peter says : 
"Be sober, be vigilant ; because your adversary the 
devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking 
whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in 


682 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the faith." I Pet. 5 :8, 9. This is our weapon, with 
which we are satisfied. 

In the first place, a Christian does not know war, 
but must patiently bear all that comes upon him, for 
the Lord's sake; for Christ taught His disciples 
only love for their enemies. Moreover, He forbade 
them, when they asked Him : "Lord, wilt thou that 
we command fire to come down from heaven, and 
consume this people?" "No," He said, "ye know 
not what manner of spirit ye are of." Matt. 9: 
54, 55. Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is 
merciful. When He suffered He threatened not. 
I Pet. 2:23. These examples we follow with all 
diligence, according to our feeble ability, com- 
mending our souls to the mercy of God, as the 
faithful Creator. From this you may see or under- 
stand, what kind of people we are, and what spirit 
we have. 

See, my good friend, with these weapons and 
arms I will meet you, as a little and unrenowned 
David, meeting the great Goliath and presump- 
tuous champion who mocked and reviled the army 
of God, and relied upon his own strength, even as 
you now trust in your learning, and are proud of 
the name "Rabbi," and because of the great repu- 
tation and renown of your understanding, might 
and power, you begin to say with Goliath : "Am I 
a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? I can 
and will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air to 
eat." I Samuel 17:43. Thus spoke Goliath, and 
you no less ; for you say that without strength I 
am deceived and dead. Yes, my friend, I am well 
aware, that I and those like me are always looked 
upon by you as little and unlearned. 

Behold, by your presumptuousness you have 
brought it so far, that I dare boldly step forth with 
my sling and stone, and say to you, as to Goliath, 
the champion and defender of the Philistines: 
"Behold, thou hast come out to me, relying on thy 
spear and shield; but I come to thee from confi- 
dence in God, in the name of the God of Israel, and 
will give thy flesh this day unto the fowls of the 
air to eat, and slay thee with thine own sword," 
namely with your own writing or disputation, 
which serves me to overcome you, not by the spirit 
of the universities, but by the Word and power of 
God, and this in Dutch, my mother tongue, to the 
greater glory of God, and to your shame. And the 
dumb ass shall cause your madness to be manifest ; 
you Balaam have beaten me, poor ass, so long until 
I spake by the power of God, Num. 22 :28. You 
Goliath have so long reviled and defied me and the 
army of Israel, that I slay you with your own 
sword, which I should not have done, had you not 
snapped with such sharp teeth, and flourished your 
pen so boldly ; how could I let this pass. Now, if I 
receive no thanks for it, as I presume will be the 
case, you may blame yourself for it, for one cannot 
be silent and speak the words of God : 

"O men, men, it were well for you, that like Ga- 
maliel you would leave the people of God in peace ; 
for if this work is of men, it will come to naught, 


but if it is of God, you cannot overthrow it : hence, 
take good heed, lest you run against the sword 
of the Lord, and be found even to fight against 
God. Persecute Jesus of Nazareth no longer, and 
leave Israel unmolested." Acts 5 :34, etc. ; 9. 

To come now to the purport and beginning of 
your letter, which you sent me in order to instruct 
me in all the arguments and intelligence pertaining 
to the faith, I find that you greet me in the name 
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. To 
this I reply. Since you boast of being a Christian, 
and regard me as a reprobate and unbeliever, and 
as laboring under a false opinion, therefore I say 
that you are wrong in writing thus, for John says, 
If there come any unto you, and bring not this 
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither 
greet him ; for he that greeteth him is partaker of 
his evil deeds." II John 10, 11. And Paul says that 
if any man that is called a brother be nevertheless 
a fornicator or the like, he, as also an unbeliever, 
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Hence, since 
they cannot inherit the kingdom of God, we are not 
to eat bread with them, for the destruction of their 
flesh, that they may consider from whence they are 
fallen. I Cor. 5. 

In the second place, you call me your brother. 
Why am I your brother, seeing we differ in faith? 
Is it because vye are all created of God the Father ? 
I say no to this ; for if we were brethren according 
to the spirit, and according to the doctrine of Christ 
and the apostles, we must be in one faith and prac- 
tice, and be led by one spirit, which, however is 
far from being the case; for the brotherhood must 
spring out of the heavenly regeneration, through 
the hearing of the divine Word, from the earthly 
into the heavenly. This brotherhood is not as- 
cribed to unbelievers, nor does it originate in carnal 
descent, as Paul clearly indicates, when he says • 
tie not unequally yoked together with unbelievers • 
for what fellowship hath righteousness with un- 
righteousness? and what communion hath light 
with darkness? and what concord hath Christ with 
Belial ? or what part hath he that believeth with an 
infidel? and what agreement hath the temple of 
God with idols?" etc. II Cor. 6:14, etc. For the 
brotherhood consists in this: "Endeavoring to 
keep the unity of the Spirit ; to abide in one hope 
of the calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism " 
Lph. 4:3. Mark, you are satisfied with your bap- 
tism, whether administered by the midwife, or by 
confirmation, and the like; not considering that 
Crod would dwell above all, and in us all, through 
His Word. 

Since, then, you are so contrary to me, and I to 
you, in faith, doctrine, life and spirit, why do you 
call me brother, I ask you once more ? Or, if I am 
a heretic and a renegade from the truth, why do you 
not avoid me, after I have been admonished once 
or twice ? for this is commanded by the Scriptures 
But alas ! you do not obey the divinely inspired 
Scriptures, but choose them unto your own de- 
struction. II Pet. 3:16. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


683 


In the third place, I find in your deceptive letter 
of instruction, that I am accused and decried only 
with reference to error and misapprehension re- 
garding baptism, no other articles being mentioned. 
What shall I say to this? Are all your gods an 
abomination to you? and is it all over with your 
false doctrine and church usages ? I think not ; you 
are too fond of deceitful gain. But I well know 
your intention; you think that when you shall 
have deprived me of one, you will also get the rest, 
according to what you yourself said in Delft. Oh, 
what a brother you are to me, fine, indeed, in ap- 
pearance! But my Teacher and Master Christ 
Jesus has warned me against you, to "be wise as 
serpents, and harmless as doves." Matt. 10:16. 
Yes, you are such a brother to me, as the old, lying 
prophet, who deceived the man of God by his lies ; 
for God had commanded the man of God to proph- 
esy against the altar, and to eat no bread, nor drink 
water at that place, until he should have returned 
into his own country. But the seed of the serpent, 
the old prophet, said: "Eat bread with me, and 
drink water." The man of God answered: "God 
has forbidden me this." But the deceiver said : "I 
am alsd a prophet of the Lord, as thou art, and the 
Lord spake to me, that you should eat bread here, 
and drink water." Then the man of God went in 
with him, and transgressed the commandment of 
the Lord; wherefore, in punishment of his diso- 
bedience, he was slain by a lion on the way. I Kings 
13. 

This example is a great terror to my soul ; for 
after deception, and transgression of the Word of 
the Lord, he sends lions, dragons, and bears, that 
they may get dominion of my soul, and kill it ; for 
if my faith were feeble and wavering, I should be 
overcome and certainly be killed, but the anchor 
of my faith is steadfast. 

In the fourth place, I come to your unreasonable 
or willful stupidity, that you want to maintain your 
infant baptism by the circumcision of the law, or 
Israel's sign of the covenant. For Paul says that 
circumcision (which you understand to be a figure 
of baptism), is made without hands, in the spirit, 
for the putting off of the sinful flesh ; whose praise 
is not of men, — as was done with the hand on Israel 
—but of God. Col. 2:11; Rom. 2:29. Now, is 
your infant baptism in the spirit, without hands, 
and this for the putting off of the sinful flesh, and 
for sin which they have not yet committed ? For to 
put off the sinful is this, as Paul says: "Mortify 
your members which are upon the earth; forni- 
cation, adultery, uncleanness, lasciviousness, evil 
concupiscence;" see, whether this can be under- 
stood as having reference to your children. 

And through your infant baptism you cause it 
that we are called Anabaptists, though we do not 
baptize, nor are baptized twice, but once, and this 
according to the truth, and pursuant to the com- 
mand and practice of the apostles ; and with this 
we are well satisfied. 


In the fifth place, I will tell you our confession 
and practice, to show you that our baptism origi- 
nates not in an opinion, but in the command of the 
most high God. After this, I hope to write against 
or dispute with neither you nor any one else, as 
said before; for great, presumptuous wisdom, I 
have not, but an assured heart and a firm faith in 
my ground. Listen to this brief statement: 
"Touching circumcision, I confess that it was a 
token of Abraham's covenant, to him and to all 
his seed (Gen. 17:9) : and also the entering into 
Israel, the church of God." The external circum- 
cision of Israel was a figure of the future, in- 
ward circumcision of Christ, as may clearly be un- 
derstood from the spirit of the New Testament, 
even as Paul says that that is not circumcision, 
which is outward in the flesh ; but circumcision is 
that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, 
or law; whose praise is not of men, but of God. 
Rom. 2 :28, 29. Nor are you those who are cir- 
cumcised in Christ, with the circumcision made 
without hands, in putting off the sinful flesh. Col. 
2:11. Further, what people are they who are 
buried with Him through baptism ? Listen, I pray 
you : Are you risen ? through what ? Through faith. 
What faith? What faith have the sponsors, through 
which God works, as you people understand it? 
Mark here, no infants ; but such as believe and un- 
derstand. And this you put forth as your strongest 
argument. O friend, do not willfully kick against 
the goad ; or it will be hard for you to speak against 
God, and to drive His Word and truth from you so 
stoutly. For, if you claim outward circumcision to 
be a figure of baptism, well, then, who makes you 
pedbbaptists so presumptuous that you baptize in- 
fants before the eighth day ? And why do you bap- 
tize female children? for, under the law, these were 
not circumcised ; from which it would follow that 
female children are not to be baptized ; for truth is 
consistent. 

You are at an end with your figures of baptism ; 
but we have a better explanation concerning the 
figures of baptism, and Paul and Peter shall help 
us keep it by their spirit and testimony. Peter says 
that the entrance through the water into Noah's ark 
signifies to us baptism. Gen. 7:7; I Pet. 3:20,21. 
He who dares deny this, may also contradict us, 
who are little and unlearned in their estimation, yet 
are taught of God. Matt. 1 1 :25. 

Our second witness with regard to the figures 
of baptism is the great apostle Paul, who declared 
the counsel of God. Acts 20 :27. He says that the 
Exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt, their 
passage through the Red Sea, and that they were 
baptized under the pillar of cloud, through Moses, 
was a figure, and for our instruction. Ex. 14 :22 ; 
I Cor. 10:1. But we, who are of the substance in 
the spirit and the New Testament, confess a clear 
ordinance, doctrine and command of God, and then 
the rule, practice and the clear examples of the 
apostles, regarding baptism; this is explanation 
enough for us. 


684 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


The command of Christ is : "Go ye into all the 
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; 
teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have 
commanded you, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: 
he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; 
but he that believeth not shall be damned." Mark 
16:15, 16; Matt. 28:19, 20. [Baptism is,] in the 
first place, a grave of sin, an entering in the church 
of God, a putting on of Christ, a fleeing from the 
wrath of God, a washing of regeneration, and the 
seal of a good conscience or assurance toward God ; 
and he that rejects this rejects the counsel of God. 
The practice of the apostles was this : "If thou be- 
lievest with all thine heart, thou mayest." Romans 
6 :4 ; Gal. 3 :27 ; Tit. 3 :5 ; I Pet. 3:21; Luke 7 :30 ; 
Acts 8:37. 

The following was written by Jan Gerrits, al- 
though it is not contained in the first edition. 

Thus they were first asked. If you also ask the 
brethren this, and they say, "Yes, it is well ; for the 
apostles baptized upon faith and not otherwise." 
For if the eunuch had said: "I cannot believe," 
Philip would not have baptized him. But he said : 
"I believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the 
living God." Acts 8 :37. This is my faith, too, and 
nothing else. Again, when the multitude at Jeru- 
salem heard Peter's exhortation, they were 
alarmed, and asked : "What shall we do ?" Hear 
the good advice : "Repent, and be baptized every 
one of you in the name of Jesus, and ye shall re- 
ceive the gift of the Holy Ghost." And they that 
gladly received the word were baptized. Acts 2: 
37. Do your infants also do thus? Then you are 
the old foundation; for other foundation can no 
man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, His 
Word and example. The jailer rejoiced with all 
his house that he had become a believer. Acts 16: 
34. Are your infants also believers? Then it is 
well. Peter preached in the house of Cornelius, 
the centurion of the Italian band, and the Holy 
Ghost fell on the Gentiles as well as on the Jews. 
Acts 10:44, 45. Were there also infants present, 
on whom the Holy Ghost fell ? And this is what I 
asked you before we parted, when the servant came 
to spread the table, and you said : "That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh," and this with reference 
to infant baptism. I then asked what became of 
the Spirit, but you gave me no reply. For John 
says: "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and 
thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell 
whence it cometh." John 3:8. Do children feel 
the Holy Spirit? Nicodemus was a carnal man, 
and experienced nothing concerning the Spirit of 
God ; hence Christ referred him to a child as we 
find stated, Matthew 18:3. To be born again 
through the water from carnality into the Spirit 
is as Christ Himself says, John 3:5. "Verily, 
verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom" of God. A man, what else does this sig- 
nify, than, he that is carnally minded, as the afore- 


said Nicodemus ; for to be carnally minded is death ; 
it does not mean children, for they do not feel it. 
But to be spiritual is life and peace, as Paul tes^ 
tifies. And to the Galatians he says : "If ye be led 
of the Spirit, ye are not under the law. Now the 
works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, 
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness' 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, 
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, mur- 
ders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like. But 
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suf- 
fering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
temperance: against such there is no law." Gal. 
5 :18. As also Peter says : "Wherefore laying aside 
all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and 
envies, and all evil speakings, as new-born babes, 
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may 
grow thereby." I Peter 2:1, 2. Thus do also; lay 
aside the great conceitedness and presumptuousness 
of your heart, and build yourself up, a lively stone 
in the house of God, a holy priesthood, to offer up 
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ. These sacrifices are the works of right- 
eousness, and not human inventions, reason, or 
ordinances of outward sacrifices. Behold, with 
this consciousness we go on, or, this assuranc.e 
is sufficient and valuable enough to us, to forsake 
property and life for Christ's sake, which is far 
from being the case with you people. In short 
we do not seal the epistle of Christ before it is 
written; we do not sow before the field is well 
plowed with the Spirit and Word of God ; we do 
not sail, before we have favorable weather and 
wind ; but you would have the child of the mother 
before it has been borne its proper time. But we 
can well wait till it has been borne its proper time 
and is brought forth by the mother. Who can for- 
bear to speak of what everybody sees? And thus 
we recognize baptism in the Scriptures as a com- 
mand of the Lord, and a certain clear practice of 
the apostles. Moreover, we also clearly see, what 
cause baptism has, why it is administered, what 
benefits it brings, to what people it is adapted, 
and what other name it has in the Scriptures. It 
is, in the first place, a grave of sin, an entering 
into the church of God, a putting on of Christ, 
a fleeing from the wrath of God, a washing of re- 
generation, and the seal of a good conscience to- 
ward God. And he that forsakes or rejects this for- 
sakes and rejects the counsel and Word of God. 

In the sixth place, as regards this, that I spoke 
tartly and insolently to you, I answer. Behold, my 
Lord and Master taught me nothing else, when He 
says : "Beware of false prophets, which come to 
you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are rav- 
ening wolves." Matt. 7:15. Seeing you came to 
me with so fair an appearance, to slay my soul, 
as you indeed boasted, why then should I not speak 
or write the truth? For what do you but seek to 
devour or tear me, to entice a poor sheep away 
from Christ's pasture. No, no! God the chief 
Shepherd preserve me from this. No one shall 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


685 


pluck them out of His hand, but if one goes out 
himself, then the case is different. Yet, you have 
been assiduous, and struck your sharp fangs into 
my soul ; and yet you call me brother. Hence I call 
you a wolf in sheep's clothing; however, be con- 
verted and become a lamb. O friend, what have 
you come to? 

In the seventh place, you strewed sweet roses and 
down before my feet, and made the bank slippery 
that I might glide off, saying: "Mind not what 
those who deceived you without the Scriptures will 
say. Yet see, is this without the Scriptures ?" Just 
as if I had relied upon the fair words of men. No. 
no; had it depended on fair speeches, you would 
have laid enough snares for me ; your works con- 
stantly testify to this. See, my good friend, I 
think that this is enough for you, namely, my own 
faith and confession; and I pray you, not so to 
damn and condemn little infants, and this for 
Adam's transgression, lest you be condemned and 
damned ; since Christ, by His death, has redeemed 
us therefrom, as was stated when I was with you ; 
for Paul says : "As by the offense of one judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation ; even so by 
the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all 
men unto justification of life." Rom. 5:18. John 
says ; "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world." John 1 :29, [Paul says] to 
the Galatians : "Christ hath redeemed us from the 
curse of the law." Galatians 3:13. And to the 
Ephesians: "That he abolished in his flesh the 
enmity, on the cross." Moreover, He has promised 
them His kingdom, when He says : "Suffer little 
children to come unto me . . . for of such is the 
kingdom of God. And He received them, blessed 
them, laid His hands on them, and said : Except ye 
receive the kingdom of God as a little child, you 
shall not enter therein." Mark 10:14 to 16; Luke 
18:16, 17; Matt. 19:14, 15. Now when He says, 
of such, there is no difference, even as Paul says ; 
that both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin. 
But you separate them, and say that it is only 
spoken to Jewish children, as though they were 
Jewish children, I replied that you should prove 
this to me by the Gospel ; but you could not do it, 
and gave me no answer. For Christ showed His 
divine miracles on the children of the Gentiles as 
well as on those of the Jews, as, for instance, on the 
Gentile woman and the centurion's servant; and 
He gives this testimony concerning the centurion, 
that he has not found so great faith in Israel. And 
enough other such examples. 

Finally, I beg you to make the best allowance for 
my simple writing, for it is rustic work. If I had 
received better talents from God, I should indeed 
desire to do better ; but now I thank Him for what 
He does give me. Farewell. 

Below there was written: I, Jan Gerritts Ket- 
elaer van Tessel, confess but one Lord, one faith, 
one baptism, one Spirit, and one Father of all, who 
is above all, and through all, and in us all. I come 
quickly: hold fast that which thou hast, that no 


man take thy crown. Yea, the Lord Jesus comes. 
Ephesians 4 :4, 5 ; Rev. 3 :11. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JAN GERRITS, TO HIS AC- 
QUAINTANCES 

After all affectionate greeting, dear brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, here is what you requested of 
me. I have complied with your wish, according to 
my feeble ability, as much as in me is ; for which I 
most heartily thank God the Father and His be- 
loved Son Jesus Christ, that He does not forsake 
His own, but always helps them to gain the vic- 
tory ; for His gracious eyes are ever upon His own, 
and His ears are constantly open to their prayers. 
Ps. 34:15. For it is written: "When thou passest 
through water and fire, I will be with thee." Isa. 
43 :2. Hence I give Him alone praise and honor 
for His great succor and working, which He has 
shown in me poor sinner, in my tribulation, suffer- 
ing and pain, yea, thus, my dear brethren, that the 
dogs, lions, and bears have not been able to harm 
me, however much they bark, roar, and growl ; 
for the Lord was my protector ; even as I put my 
hope of faith in Him, that through His great grace 
He will also preserve me unto the end ; for if God 
is with us, who can harm us, and if the Lord keeps 
the house (as David says), who can injure it. My 
friends, I wish I could describe to you the state of 
my heart and mind when I was suspended, and 
severely beaten for the testimony of our Lord 
Jesus Christ; for His Word, and His bitter suf- 
fering which He endured for us poor sinners, was 
thus present with me that I thought of nothing else. 
Behold, my brethren and sisters, how the Lord can 
keep and protect His own that trust in Him, even 
as the apple of His eye. I would further inform 
you, my dear brethren and sisters, that they first 
plied me with questions, namely, what my name 
was, where I was born, how old I was, and how 
long I had lived in Tessel. In the second place, 
when I received baptism. Ans. "Five years ago." 
Ques. "Where did it take place?" Ans. "I do not 
wish to tell you." Then they rejoined : "You will 
be made to tell," and pointed to the executioner, 
saying, further : "If you are asked concerning the 
truth, you certainly ought to tell it." Ans. "All 
that concerns the faith, I am willing to tell you ; 
but God has not commanded me to tell this." In 
the third place they asked me whether my wife 
was also of this persuasion? Ans. "No, I regret 
to say." In the fourth place : "Who had admin- 
istered it?" Ans. "I do not wish to tell you." 
Ques. "Was it N?" Ans. "God has not com- 
manded me to tell it ; and even if I should tell you, 
he does not reside in the king's dominions." Ques. 
"Christ, when He was placed before the authori- 
ties, answered when He was interrogated; why 
then will you not do the same?" Ans. "When He 
was asked questions that concerned the honor of 
His Father, and His own divinity, He answered; 
otherwise, He was silent. Anything that you may 


686 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ask me concerning His law, Word, commandments 
or prohibitions, I am willing to confess before em- 
perors, kings, dukes, counts, princes, and other 
lords, and not to keep silent concerning it." He 
forthwith briefly said to the executioner: "Seize 
him." In short, when they laid hold on me, I fell 
down prostrate and besought the Lord for His 
assistance. He immediately said to the rackers: 
"Lift him up." Thus, they fell upon me, and dealt 
with me as the Lord our Master was dealt with, 
when He was divested of His garments. They 
tied my hands behind my back unmercifully, blind- 
folded me, drew me up, and then beat me, belabor- 
ing me as though I had been a tree, so that the rods 
cracked like hemp stalks. They said: "Speak; if 
you have a dumb devil in you, we will soon drive 
him out." But the Lord, blessed be His holy name, 
closed my mouth, so that not a single exclamation 
of pain, nor any other sound, escaped my lips ; for 
the suffering of our Lord, as already said, and His 
testimony, so filled my heart, that it is impossible to 
express it. In short, when they saw that faintness 
seized all my members, they said : "Let him down ; 
perhaps the dumb devil will speak sooner then." 
When they let me down, I fell with my head against 
the boards ; they therefore took me and set me upon 
a bench, where I would have fainted again, had 
they not held me. They stood there like lions and 
bears, demanding that I should answer their ques- 
tions; but the Lord was my help and strength, 
praise and glory be to Him for His grace, so that 
nothing escaped my lips. 

Then the president said: "Have you no stout 
rods to drive out this dumb devil?" He replied: 
"No; but I have rope." They would have blind- 
folded me again, but he said: "Let him see it." 
When he struck, I thought: "O Lord, thou seest 
it," and closed my eyes. Yea, my friends, if they 
had continued to beat as long as there was breath, 
I think they would have got nothing out of me ; so 
was the strength of the Most High with me. When 
they saw that it was of no avail, they fetched the 
hundred pound weight, and hung it to my feet. 
Then went my heart to the Lord : "Keep, keep, my 
treasure." In short, all their endeavors proved 
fruitless. Then they asked whether I understood 
Latin. I replied: "Yes, as much as it is." Ques. 
"Do you understand French?" Ans. "No." Ques. 
"Where did you go to school?" Ans. "At Delft." 
Ques. "When?" Ans. "At the time when Delft 
was burned." They also asked me whether I had 
read the books of Menno or Dietrich Phillips? 
"Yes," I said; for Boshuysen had taken my doc- 
trinal books, namely, the New Creature, by Menno, 
and the Spiritual Restitution, by D. P. They asked 
me how I had come by it. My lips were sealed. 
Then the order was : "Fetch water 1 candles ! the 
dumb devil must come out." But the Lord was 
my preserver, for which I cannot thank Him 
enough. Sir. 43 :30. Finally, the order was given : 
"Loose him ; he must cool off a little ; we shall give 
it to him better yet." As they were leaving I told 


them to take heed what they were doing ; the day 
of the Lord should also come upon them ; thus they 
left me. My dear brethren and sisters, herewith I 
bid you my last adieu, with the peace of Christ. I 
would have written more, but time does not permit 
me. If it pleases the Lord, I want to stand at the 
stake with Him. The Lord be with you all. Amen. 

ADRIAEN DEN BURRY, A. D. 1565 

After manifold persecution and fearful tyranny 
against the flock of Christ, there was also appre- 
hended, in the year 1565, at Oudenaerde, in Flan- 
ders, a faithful brother named Adriaen den Burry, 
who, after undergoing and enduring manifold 
temptations, and severe conflicts against the devil 
and his tools, was burnt at said place, in the year 
1565, and testified to and confirmed the upright 
and genuine faith of the truth with his death and 
blood, to the true conviction of all bloodthirsty 
tyrants and persecutors, and all carnal men, who 
seek to walk the broad way to eternal damnation, 
according to the lusts of their flesh, and to the con- 
solation and strengthening of all true believers, 
that they might follow this friend of God in true 
obedience, even as he followed Christ, wherefore 
his name is written in the book of life, and worthy 
to be recorded in this book, for long remembrance. 

WILLEM DE DUYCK, A. D. 1565 

In the year 1565, at Ghent in Flanders, Brother 
Willem de Duyck, after much tribulation and un- 
wavering steadfastness, being not willing to apos- 
tatize in any wise, also had to bear witness with his 
blood to the name of Christ, and suffer temporal 
death for it ; wherefore he shall also, at the resur- 
rection, with all the children of God, hear the 
blessed words : "Come, ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." Matt. 25 :34. Then shall 
he as one of the righteous enter into life eternal. 

CONRAD KOCH, A. D. 1565 

This Conrad Koch was kindled with the light of 
the knowledge of God, when this light, in these lat- 
ter days, began to rise again, along the River Rhine 
as well as in the country of Berg, and the truth of 
the holy Gospel commenced to shine. Hence he 
sought, by the divine help, to leave the darkness, 
and to walk in this brightly shining light ; he for- 
sook popery and the worldly and ungodly life, and 
betook himself to the church of the Lord, heard and 
laid to heart the Word of the Lord, believed the 
Gospel, and was baptized, according to the com- 
mand of Christ, upon faith in Christ Jesus, and 
confession of his sins, and accordingly, conducted 
himself in a brotherly and Christian manner in 
the church, and, in weakness, showed himself 
edifying and honorable toward all men. But as he 
that walks in darkness cannot bear or endure the 
light, and the envy of the adversary works in his 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


687 


followers, this man was envied by the papists, and 
accused to the intendant of the revenue ; who was 
judge and ruler of the country in the name of the 
prince of Juelich. Thereupon the intendant sent 
his servants to Houf, where Conrad lived, and 
they apprehended him; he was ready, and as a 
lamb, willingly went with them to Loewenburg, 
one of the seven castles which, on account of their 
high situation, can be seen from a great distance. 
There they brought Conrad into the tower, and 
placed him in severe confinement, in which he re- 
mained nearly half a year ; however, he was great- 
ly comforted by the Lord, though he had to suffer 
much hunger. 

The intendant ofttimes browbeat him and threat- 
ened him most severely, that his life should be tak- 
en if he should refuse to renounce his faith. They 
tried him very hard with entreaties and solicita- 
tions, then with hunger, and also with threats to 
put him to death ; but he remained inmovable. His 
heart was of good cheer. 

Now when he had boldly confessed his faith, and 
no tortures could intimidate him, and the time drew 
near that he was to die for the truth and depart 
from this world, the door of his prison was opened, 
and he went of his own accord, free and unfettered, 
from the tower of Loewenburg to the village of 
Houf. His guide was Barabbas, that is a male- 
factor who went with him. His departure took 
place in great secrecy ; and thus he came to Houf, 
which is some distance from Loewenburg. But 
even as Christ was crucified, and Barabbas re- 
leased, so it was also here. Conrad was taken to 
the town hall of Houf, where it was proposed to 
him, that if he should renounce his faith, his young 
life should be spared, and his liberty be given him. 

Manifold wiles were employed against him with 
great deceitfulness. The sophists sang things sweet 
and sour, saying: "Go to church at least once a 
year and if they do not preach the pure and clear 
truth, stay away from it thenceforth." One of these 
hypocrites said to Conrad: "My dear Conrad, 
though we be false, subtle and evil, it cannot harm 
your soul ; do you only fear God and keep peace 
with all men ; what is it to you if our faith is lit- 
tle." Conrad replied to the magistrates: "O you 
ministers of God, you must know that God wants 
no hypocrites. This was seen exemplified in old 
Eleazar, who would rather surrender his life than 
dissemble. II Mace. 6:24. Therefore I also hope 
to die before I go into your congregation." Con- 
rad further said: "Christ is the Head of the 
church ; he that would please Him must show him- 
self a member of His body ; now, one must not sev- 
er himself from Christ the Captain. With this 
Head I want to remain, though it cost my flesh and 
blood." They asked Conrad what he thought of 
infant baptism. He said: "Of this I can only 
think that it is also one of the pope's greatest abom- 
inations ; however if you can prove it by the Word 
of God, I will suffer myself to be instructed by the 
church of the Lord." "O God," said Conrad, "to 


Thee I bring my complaint ; O God, what calamity 
this, that they put to death those who speak the 
truth! They can certainly not allege that I have 
committed anything criminal, and yet they malig- 
nantly seek to kill me. O Lord, forgive them." The 
mandate of the prince of Juelich was then read to 
him, whereupon the judges passed sentence, upon 
which the intendant broke the staff. The sentence 
was, that Conrad should suffer death, if he did not 
recant. And when he had been thus sentenced 
twice, they took him out [to the place of execu- 
tion]. When he arrived there, he began to sing: 
"O God, how gently Thou dost chasten me. Reach 
me Thy gracious hand, that my flesh may now shun 
all sin, vice and shame, that I may rend the old 
garment, and have eternal joy with Thee. Christ, 
I praise Thee, O my supreme God, that I have 
lived to see this day and hour, that I may now testi- 
fy to Thy name with my blood. My dear brethren 
and sisters, I commend you all to the Lord. Keep 
the Gospel of Christ firmly fixed in your hearts ; 
this I leave you for an admonition : fear God, and 
be valiant; be my followers, even as I am willing 
to follow Christ the Lord, and to deliver up my 
life." And thus they put this pious man to death 
with the sword secretly, so that many did not hear 
of it. When thieves and murderers are condemned 
there it is customary to let the whole land know it ; 
but the pious are murdered in secrecy, which is a 
shame for the judges. Thus Conrad was beheaded 
with the sword standing and proved himself a faith- 
ful witness of the sufferings of Christ, at Houf, 
in the land of Berg, which belongs to the prince of 
Juelich and Cleves. 

In the year 1565, under the same intendant, who 
was a very bloodthirsty man, also seven other per- 
sons, four brethren and three sisters, had been pre- 
viously apprehended. These four brethren were 
also sentenced that they should be put to death, if 
they refused to renounce their faith. But the Lord 
protected them, and delivered them all out of pris- 
on unharmed in their faith, for this bloodthirsty 
tyrant was smitten by God with sudden death, so 
that the prisoners were liberated from prison, keep- 
ing their faith, and adhering to the truth. 


HERE FOLLOW TWO LETTERS WHICH CONRAD KOCH 
WROTE FROM PRISON 

First Letter 

Grace, peace and mercy from God the Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ, is what I, Conrad Koch, 
a prisoner in the Lord, in Loewenburg, wish my 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord. Amen. 

I herewith inform you, that I had a call from the 
executioner, and they tried me hard with words, 
but did not torture me. The Lord kept me, so that 
I did not consent to them. Then they said that 
they would go to dinner, and then return and tor- 
ture me. But before meal time was over yet, the 
intendant returned to me and told me much about 
the prince's preacher, that I should let him come 


688 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and see me once more, since he knew the errors 
which we held. I replied: "I do not want him; 
the Word of the Lord has taught me. Did I not 
tell you, that I want no preacher?" He said: "It 
is true; but still I wish you would do my will so 
much as to say that you want him to come to you. 
Though you do not agree then, all right; it does 
not matter, so we only get rid of the man." I re- 
plied: "I do not want to lay the cross of Christ 
aside." Then he said : "Then I cannot alter it," 
and left me. 

Thus, my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
did the Lord preserve me from them. Pray the 
Lord faithfully for me, to keep me in His faithful 
Word unto the end of my life, that I may adhere 
to it; for I am still of good hope, and willing with 
all patience to await, by the help of the Lord, all 
that He shall suffer to befall and come upon me for 
His name's sake. May He not suffer more to be 
laid upon me, than I am able to bear, that His name 
may not be blasphemed through me. Hence help 
me entreat the Lord ; I expect also not to forget to 
remember all my dear brethren and sisters, nor all 
those that fear the Lord. May the Lord come to 
our assistance, that we may pray according to His 
will, so that we may be heard with all the pious ; 
to this end, may the Lord help us by His grace. 
Amen. 

I have also been informed that our fellow mem- 
bers at Cologne have been released from prison; 
the Lord be praised for His great love which He 
manifests toward us in these latter days, preserving 
us so safely from the deceitful serpents, who come 
to us so subtly with fair words, which are nothing 
but mere hypocrisy employed by them to seduce us 
from the covenant of the Lord. From this, may the 
Lord preserve all those who have accepted His 
covenant. Amen. Herewith I commend you to the 
Lord. 


THE SECOND LETTER, WRITTEN TO HIS BROTHER 
A. OF B. 

Grace, peace, and a heart steadfastly fixed upon 
the Lord, is what I wish you, A. of B., my dear 
brother in the Lord, and I thank the Lord for the 
letter you wrote me. Thanks to the Lord for it, 
and I also request of you, my dear brother, that 
you help me to entreat the Lord, that I may be- 
come worthy of what you wished me, and desired 
of me. However, I still have a good hope, thanks 
to the Lord for it. I also am still willing to suffer 
for His name's sake ; but may He give me strength 
for it. Amen. 

I also desire you, my dear brother, to wish our 
brother H. K. much good in my name. May the 
Lord make us worthy of every good thing; how- 
ever, I cannot write you as much as I should like 
to see you have. May the Lord, according to His 
great mercy, give us what will tend to our salva- 
tion. Amen. And I ask you to wish all my brethren 
and sisters with whom the Lord will cause you to 


come in contact, much good, and to admonish them 
to faithfully pray the Lord, to uphold me in His 
faithful Word until death. I expect not to forget 
to remember you, as much as shall be possible for 
me. May the Lord assist us to pray in true love, so 
that we may be heard, and hereafter, with all the 
pious, inherit His kingdom ; to this end, may the 
Lord help us. Amen. 

I also inform you, that on Hallowe'en two priests 
visited me, who desired to take me to church ; and 
when I did not consent to it, they commended me 
to the Lord ; there were also three judges here, and 
did their best ; but the Lord preserved me, praise 
and thanks to Him for it, and may He preserve you 
and me as long as we live. Amen. O my dear breth- 
ren and sisters, beseech the Lord diligently for me, 
that.since He suffers me, unworthy servant, to be 
cast into prison, it may redound to His praise, and 
to my salvation; this I desire with all my heart. 
May the Lord come to your and my assistance. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. Amen. 

I, Conrad Koch, have written this letter from 
Loewenburg, in prison, A. D. 1565. 


MATTHIAS SERVAES, OF KOTTENEM, A. D. 1565 

As this Matthias Servaes was an elder and teach- 
er of the church, it happened, A. D. 1565, that one 
evening he had met with some friends at a certain 
place in Cologne, to minister unto them with the 
Gospel. But there was a Judas, to whom this was 
known; the same went and fetched the double 
watch, who immediately came fully armed, and en- 
tering the house in which the meeting was held 
from the rear, broke up the meeting and captured 
the flock, with beating, raging and fury ; but those 
assembled went with them like sheep, to the Beyen 
tower. There all their names were taken down, and 
they were brought into other, separate places. They 
were asked with great importunity, who their 
teacher was ; in response to which question, Mat- 
thias Servaes himself confessed that he was the 
man. They sought to draw him from Christ and 
His holy Word, attempting it in various ways, with 
deception and subtilty, with entreaties and threats ; 
and as he repelled all these wiles, he was severely 
tortured ; however, he was not terrified by any tor- 
ture or pain, but firmly kept in his heart that which 
God had revealed to him. Afterwards, in the morn- 
ing, he was taken to prison, where also many a 
snare was laid to catch his soul. From prison he 
was brought bound before the penal court, where 
the imperial mandates were read to him, and he 
was delivered into the power of the executioner, to 
be put to death by the latter, according to the man- 
date. 

Matthias was ready, and suffered himself to 
be led like an innocent lamb to the slaughter. He 
lifted up his eyes toward heaven, folding his hands 
and said : "O my Father, I praise Thy name, that 
I am counted worthy of this." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


689 


Much people flocked together, to see this ; some 
of them felt sympathy for him, and said : "It is a 
pity indeed, that this fine man has to die for such a 
deed." 

On the way a young woman happened along, 
who wanted to speak to him ; but they apprehended 
her, and thrust her from him. Also a lad wanted 
to greet him, whom they seized likewise, but the 
count commanded them to let him go. Before he 
arrived at the place of execution, he looked around 
him and said : "I have many people present on my 
day. It were a pity indeed, if all these should per- 
ish." And when he was now about to die, he said 
aloud: "O God, Thou dost know lull well, for 
what I have striven and what I have sought in my 
life, from the beginning, day and night." And to 
the count he said . ''You well know, sir count, how 
you have treated me ; but I have forgiven you all ; 
it is all out of my heart." And thus terminated the 
life of this pious man, he being executed with the 
sword. Now, as to what was his confession before 
and afterwards, what he met with in prison, and 
how he admonished, comforted and strengthened 
his brethren, all this may be found in the following 
letters written by him. 


THE FIRST LETTER, WHICH MATTHIAS SERVAES 

WROTE FROM PRISON TO H. K., HIS BROTHER 

IN THE LORD, AND ALSO TO HIS OTHER 

FELLOW MEMBERS 

The saving grace of God and the peace of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, be multiplied to all 
believers, through the ministration and unction of 
the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

Further, my most beloved brethren in the Lord, 
I inform you that I am still very well, both accord- 
ing to the flesh and the spirit, in body and in soul, 
outwardly and inwardly. For I esteem it all very 
good whether it be joy or sorrow, yea, life or death ; 
for I live not to myself, nor do I die to myself ; for 
whether I live, I live unto the Lord, and whether I 
die, I die unto the Lord ; for I am in His hand, and 
I am sure that no man shall pluck me out of it; 
yea, I now look upon death as gain ; I have a desire 
to depart, and to be with Christ, my Lord; for 
whatever I meet with, all tends to my comfort. Ro- 
mans 14:7, 8; II Cor. 5:15; John 10:28; Phil. 1: 
21, 23. I am now confined here for the promotion 
of the Gospel, and my bonds become manifest only 
to the praise of the Lord, I trust, and not to mine 
own, and to the consolation of all the pious that are 
under like chastisement, and to the strengthening 
of their purpose. Hence I rejoice in my sufferings, 
that I am counted worthy by the Lord to suffer re- 
proach for His name (of which I nevertheless 
count myself unworthy), to fill up that which is be- 
hind of His afflictions, and entailed on His mem- 
bers. Colossians 1 :24. And as the sufferings of 
Christ abound in us, so I find my consolation 
abounding much more by Christ, who abundantly 
comforts me in all my sufferings, and by His help 


I shall succeed, and also all those who recognize 
Him as the supreme good, and are thereby induced 
to love Him above all, so that they gladly hate and 
depart from everything for His sake, that they may 
be loved only by the Lover. That we may do all 
this from filial love, this I wish you and me, and all 
those who sincerely desire it, through Jesus Christy 
firmly and unwaveringly unto the end. Amen. 

Further, my L. B. H., and all that are appointed 
to watch over the souls of men, exercise your office 
with diligence, that you may not be found slothful, 
drowsy or negligent in it; but that you may be 
faithful watchmen, who truly and honestly lead out 
and feed the flock of Christ, and this with all hu- 
mility and meekness ; yea, as a father over his chil- 
dren who severely reproves the wrong-doing of his 
children ; and though he cannot bring them to the 
point where he would like to have them, yet his 
fatherly nature will not allow him to forget them, 
>=o that he should not regard them as his children ; 
and though his heart is often grieved by their dis- 
obedience and folly, he does not cease to chasten 
and instruct them, hoping that they will yet become 
obedient ; and though it causes him much sadness 
and sorrow, he does not regard it, nor ceases to ad- 
monish, chasten and correct them. Thus do also 
you ; give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to 
reproof, and this with all discretion, in the fear of 
the Lord, not too severely, lest they become em- 
bittered ; neither too leniently, lest they wax sloth- 
ful and negligent. I Tim. 4:13; Col. 3:21. Hence 
apply to them oil and wine, as did the true Samari- 
tan to the wounded man. I think you understand 
what I mean. Be therefore not slothful or careless 
with the gift that has been bestowed upon you ; be 
faithful to Him that has esteemed you faithful, and 
accepted you as His ministers, and stewards of 
His mysteries. But it is required in stewards, that 
a man be found faithful. Hence be diligent labor- 
ers of the Lord in His vineyard, and faithful build- 
ers in His house. And put the pound which you 
have received from the Lord diligently out upon 
usury, and remember the punishment of the sloth- 
ful servant, who did not give his money into the 
bank, but put it into a napkin and hid it in the earth. 

Remember it, I say, my dear brethren, and let it 
be a warning to you, even as Solomon says that the 
field of the slothful, and the vineyard of the man 
void of understanding were a warning to him, when 
he says : "I went by the field of the slothful, and 
by the vineyard of the man void of understanding ; 
and, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, and net- 
tles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall 
thereof was broken down. Then I saw, and con- 
sidered it well : I looked upon it and received in- 
struction." Prov. 24:30-32. Thus also you, my 
dear brethren be careful, and diligently dig through 
the vineyard of the Lord, with the plow or the hoe 
which breaks in pieces the hard stones, which is 
the word of God. ( Jer. 23 :29) ; so that the nettles 
and thorns may not oppress, destroy or choke the 
good seed that has been sown. Take also the sharp, 


690 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


two-edged sword (Eph. 6:17), and cut off clean 
the unfruitful, evil and dry branches, that the others 
may be more healthy and vigorous to bring forth 
fruit. Inspect also carefully the wall of the vine- 
yard; if it begins to give way anywhere, prop up 
that part; if there are any openings in it, go to 
work and close them ; and if it has fallen down in 
any place, build it up again speedily, that the little 
foxes may not run into the Lord's vineyard, and 
dig up and spoil it. Cant. 2:15. And what more 
shall I say ? Faithfully feed the flock of Christ, and 
watch with all carefulness over the souls of men. 
I Pet. 5 :2. Take heed also, that you administer 
needed reproof, and act and judge without respect 
of persons, and remember that judgment is God's 
and not yours. Deut. 1 :17. Weigh, therefore, ev- 
ery matter in the balance of the divine Word, so 
that when you reprove, judge, or forgive anything, 
it may be truly reproved, judged or forgiven also 
before the judgment of God, and thus your reproof 
agree with God's reproof, your judgment with 
God's judgment, and your forgiveness with God's 
forgiveness. Take heed also, that you do not carry 
avoidance too far, lest it prove a stumbling-block 
to you. For avoidance is good indeed if it is not 
abused ; however its purpose is solely to avoid of- 
fenses (to which end it is instituted) ; hence we 
must take heed that we do not, while seeking to 
avoid little offenses by it, cause greater ones. Matt. 
18:15-17; I Cor. 5:11; II Thess. 3:14. Bestow 
great attention upon the first commandment with 
promise, namely : "Children, obey your parents in 
the Lord." Eph. 6:1. This is an express word; 
hence be careful herein. Show a friendly face to 
all apostates, and admonish them with all kindness 
to that which they have surrendered and forsaken, 
and from which they have fallen: I mean such as 
receive admonition ; for blasphemers and mockers 
are to be left alone. II Thess. 3:15; Tit. 3 :10. 

Dear brethren, I do not write you this as some- 
thing new, but to remind you of the old; for I 
should like to see carefulness exercised, and that 
one Scripture should not be observed so strictly 
and rigidly as thereby to violate another. For 
sometimes some resort to avoidance all on a sud- 
den, without the least discretion, and pity for the 
fallen. Hence I advise carefulness. For if we are 
to have the mind of our Lord Jesus ; yea, are to be 
perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect, then let 
us from the heart consider His longsuffering, and 
how He has borne with us, and let us also show 
ourselves thus toward our fellow servant, that we 
may give offense to no one, neither to the world, 
nor to the church of God. Phil. 2 :3, 5 ; Matt. 5 :48 ; 
Col. 3 :12 ; Matt. 18:29 ; I Cor. 10:32. And be also 
not slothful in seeking men's souls ; wherever you 
have some hope, there go. Say not : "It will be 
labor lost." Put your hand to the plow first, in the 
fear of the Lord, and ask Him to give the blessing ; 
but you do the planting and watering. Pray the 
Lord to give the increase. And if then your en- 
deavors are unsuccessful, you are free. For I have 


often felt accused, that we have not much more 
sought men's souls, to the praise of the Lord. 

O brother, beware of contentious tongues. 
Wherever you go, there make peace, if it can be 
done by the grace of God. O my dear brother, how 
greatly I am grieved on account of what was done 
in the upper country. Not, that you should think 
that I am doubtful ; Oh, no, my brother ; for I am 
still of the same mind as indicated in the letter 
which I wrote to them ; but I am fearful simply of 
the discord, by which many who would like to see 
it remedied, and are innocent, might perish. I do 
not know what account can be given for this before 
God. Oh, that those who are found guilty in this 
matter might fall down with weeping before God, 
and repent of their sins ! I am also concerned about 
the lower country, and should like to see them 
helped, and put under good order, for I find them 
still wanting in many things ; yet I sincerely love 
them, but I should like to see them yet put off much 
of their pride, and that they would consider what 
kind of people they ought to be, and to what they 
are called, so as to govern themselves accordingly, 
and that the elders do not stay at home when meet- 
ing is held. I do not say that it can be remedied 
right away. Do you also heartily receive it ? O my 
dear brethren, be little and low in your own eyes, 
and be not self-complacent, so as to think : I have 
done this, and the like. It is nothing ; the Lord, and 
He alone, does all things, and this by man. Hence, 
give Him alone the praise. And let no one esteem 
himself better than others; yea, let each esteem 
other better than themselves. And let all submit 
one to another, and in lowliness of mind let each 
serve the other. Phil. 2:3; Eph. 5:21. And I 
desire of all brethren and sisters, that they beware 
of all those who leave the church. And if you can 
tell L. to advise with himself in the time of grace ; 
for how shall he be able to give an account in the 
day of judgment? For his own conscience, if he 
properly considers the matter, will accuse him. O 
L., O L., come back ; for you are not in the best 
way. O my brethren, how much I had to suffer on 
account of the many factions! Hence beware of 
divisions. Seek peace, if you can, and ensue it. 
I Pet. 3:11. 

O my dear brethren, what liars I have had before 
me! Cassander, a man little and feeble of body, 
who led astray Joachim Suycherbacker, visited me, 
and laid many little snares, to take captive my 
mind. He read to me a book printed in Latin, 
which stated that infant baptism was considered a 
clear commandment and a unanimous practice 
throughout the whole world, no one gainsaying it, 
and he declared, though not with power of divine 
Scripture, that they had received it from the apos- 
tles ; and when I denied this with the New Testa- 
ment, they asked me, how, if I denied and did not 
believe this, I could believe that the New Testa- 
ment was true ; for, said he, we had the latter from 
them, who recognized infant baptism as right; 
and that there had been many other writings that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


691 


were also called apostolical, but were nevertheless 
not acknowledged as authentic, but rejected by 
them, but that they testified that all teachers con- 
fessed that this (namely, the New Testament,) 
was the true apostolical doctrine, as also their bap- 
tism. They wanted to know, how, if we meant to 
reject one, we would maintain the other; for, said 
they, you must believe it from them, else you could 
not know it. Thus, also with baptism; and he 
further said that if we were right, it would fol- 
low from it, that there was no church for 1,500 
years. 

Of this nearly all treated who conversed with 
me: for many and various persons visited me. 
There was there one who, as they said, had just 
come from Egypt; him they also brought to me, 
and he claimed that in Egypt they had received in- 
fant baptism from the eunuch who was baptized 
by Philip, and that he knew of no other baptism ; 
but that if an adult person that had not been bap- 
tized desired baptism, the faith should first be pre- 
sented to such an one. This, they said, had always 
been the sole practice there, and that if any one 
opposed it, they said to him : "We have this prac- 
tice from the apostles." But I denied it all with the 
New Testament, and said, that whatever agreed 
with the same, I would gladly accept, and believe 
by the help of God ; and nothing else. Then I had 
to hear again, that the New Testament had been 
handed down to us by the teachers; otherwise, if 
we did not have it from them, we could not tell 
whether it were true or false. This they said many 
times. I replied to them : It did not avail the King 
of Assyria anything, that God used him for the 
conversion of his people, since he did not become 
converted himself. Isaiah 10:5. Thus also it did 
not help Pharaoh, in his wickedness, that the power 
of God was made known and manifest to him. 
Thus, also, Caiaphas was not benefitted by his 
prophecy concerning Christ (though the same was 
true), because he himself was not ebedient to the 
doctrine of Christ. With this I gave God alone the 
praise, saying that we had His Word from Him. 
Thereupon they began to seek to move me by many 
entreaties and solicitations; but when they could 
accomplish nothing thereby, they commenced to 
threaten me severely ; and when they perceived that 
all this was of no avail, but only labor lost, they 
tortured me and our Brother Herman, which hap- 
pened on the 17th of July. But thanks be to the 
good God — who does not forsake His own, but, in 
time of suffering and affliction, comforts them at 
the right time — He kept our lips, so that they did 
not obtain one word (according to their will) 
from us, concerning what they asked us. Herman, 
however, was soon released. The chief reason why 
we were tortured, was, that we should tell how 
many teachers there were, what their names were, 
where they lived, where in the city I had taught, 
how many I had baptized, where the ministry was 
imposed upon me, and what teachers were present 


upon that occasion ; and that I should acknowledge 
the magistrates as Christians, and infant baptism 
as right. Then I pressed my lips together, commit- 
ted it to God, and suffered patiently, remembering 
the words of the Lord, where He says: "Greater 
love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his 
life for his friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do 
whatsoever I command you." John 15:13, 14. I 
also remembered that John says that we ought to 
lay down our lives for the brethren, I John 3 :16. 
It seems as though I must suffer much yet ; how- 
ever, the Lord alone holds it in His hand ; nor can 
I pray otherwise than that the will of the Lord be 
done. 

O my brethren, knowledge or talk is of no ac- 
count here, but a living faith which is adorned with 
the power of love, patience, hope, and with obedi- 
ence, and that through the power of faith one can 
say with the three men Shadrach, Meshach and 
Abednego : O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful 
to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God, 
whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burn- 
ing fiery furnace, and Pie will deliver us out of thine 
hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, 
(O antichrist) that we will not serve thy god, nor 
worship the image, or the two golden calves which 
thou hast set up. Dan. 3 :16-18. And that, if they 
should attempt to instruct one with high-sounding 
words of human wisdom, yea, with soft words and 
entreaties (Col. 2 :4, 8), we could say through the 
power of faith: "Begone, I want none of your ad- 
vice : and should then keep his lips sealed. But if 
one enters into more discussion with them than 
necessity requires, he will not escape unharmed. 
Hence I wish that all prisoners were instructed in 
this matter." 

Few days pass that we do not talk together ; yet, 
I observed as much brevity as possible in confess- 
ing and speaking, though frequently three or four 
hours were spent in this manner. O warn all pris- 
oners, whenever you can, that they refuse every- 
thing ; and remember us day and night, by praying 
to God. Thus we are also minded toward you, and 
I desire that you greet all believers much with the 
kiss of love, in our name. 

Oh, how all believers lie at my heart, so that I 
very seldom forget them; yea, I remember them 
with earnest prayers and requests (as much as is 
possible to me through the grace of God) before 
the Lord. I cannot write you much, for writing is 
more precious than gold with me. Do not write us ; 
as to the reason why, ponder it yourselves. The 
God of Israel keep you and us. Amen. 

Matthias Servaes, your brother and prisoner of 
the Lord for the truth's sake. As regards the chil- 
dren the bringing up of whom devolves upon the 
church, I adhere to the opinion you have heard of 
me. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us 
all. Amen. 


692 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


THE SECOND LETTER WHICH MATTHIAS SERVAES, 

OF KOTTENEM WROTE IN PRISON TO 

HIS BROTHER 

The saving grace of God be with us all. Amen. 
I desire that as soon as possible a Dutch Testament 
be procured for my wife (who then was not im- 
prisoned), for she cannot read the German print. 

Further, my dear brother, I inform you that I 
am alone now, but the Lord is with me. It seems 
evident to me, that I shall have little opportunity 
of seeing our brethren that are also imprisoned, 
and it is quite probable that for the first my con- 
dition shall not be the best. Hence I know not how 
to thank God enough, and though I should like to be 
with my brethren, yet I prefer it much more as it 
is ; for since it pleases God thus, I also deem it the 
best and most conducive to my salvation. And 
though it grieves me not a little, yet I do not count 
it pain, because the Lord has so ordered it with me. 
The following Thursday, the same morning that 
they brought me, at a very early hour, from the 
Franken tower, to our prison, our brethren were 
also to be tortured, for the tapers and candlesticks 
stood near the rack, and everything was ready; 
but when they brought me there, they began to talk 
with me, and to question me ; and before they had 
done questioning me, and I had confessed my faith 
and office before many of them, and, in turn, had 
also put many questions to them, to which I was 
impelled by certain reasons, half the day had slip- 
ped by, and after long and much talking, when they 
could not answer me any further (for which I 
gave the praise to God alone, and not to me), one 
of them (he who had chiefly done the questioning 
and talking) said to me that baptism was our great- 
est error. Thereupon I replied: "If that is our 
greatest error, and you therefore apprehend and 
rack us, why do you not first place the abominable 
errors and ungodly life of the priests by the side of 
ours, and then judge one against the other, without 
respect of persons, as before the eyes and the 
judgment of God ; and, whichever error then be 
found the greater, visit summary punishment upon 
it (if you have any for it)." But he did not deign 
me a reply. 

When I perceived this, I said : "We are never- 
theless also human beings, and you no more ; nor 
can I, from fear of God, esteem you more than men. 
Hence, consider fhe matter well, and do not deal so 
cruelly and tyrannically with us ; for the Lord will 
visit and punish all violence, and He is the Judge 
over all this. Amos 5:12. Remember also, that in 
due time you will have to let us stand by the side of 
you, when the Lord will judge you and us together ; 
for, as the Scripture says, we shall all stand before 
the judgment seat of Christ; and there everyone 
shall receive in his body, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad. Rom. 14:10; II 
Cor. 5:16. Yes, then your judgment will appear 
again, and be sifted there by the Lord. And I de- 
sire of you, my dear sir, that you do not take this 


as an insolent answer or threat, but accept it as a 
warning ; for as such I say it to you, because I wish 
you eternal rest, as well as I wish it to my own soul. 
Therefore lay it well to heart, and take good heed 
how you deal with us." Here it rested, and thus our 
brethren were for this time exempted from tor- 
ture, and I put in their stead. They led me to the 
rack (where I still lie) and wanted to torture me 
simply because I would not tell where I had been 
with Henry last, and how many teachers there 
were, and where they lived. When they had asked 
me this many times, I wanted to know of them the 
reason, why they were so anxious to know it; 
whereupon the count replied to me : "If we were 
to tell you this, you would probably answer that 
you did not want to betray any one." Then I said : 
"You answer yourself;" after which I spoke sev- 
eral times with him yet. As they persisted in de- 
manding to know this, and the sole object was 
treachery, I determined to give the matter into 
their hands before proceeding to confess; hence I 
told them to retire into their own hearts and con- 
fess the truth, as before God in heaven, and then to 
say whether they would or dared advise me this. 
In this manner I asked them several times, but re- 
ceived no answer; and thus they desisted and 
turned away from me, and said among themselves : 
"The matter were well enough, if it would not 
finally give rise to an insurrection." 

I commend you all to God. I have not the time, 
for the present, to write you more. Remember us 
always before the Lord. Amen. 

Matthias Servaes, of Kottenem. 

THE THIRD LETTER OF MATTHIAS SERVAES, 
WRITTEN TO J. N. 

_ Peace and joy in the heart, through the opera- 
tion of the Holy Ghost, be multiplied unto you, 
and unto all believers that are in Christ Jesus! 
Amen._ Yea, also unto those who are willing to 
recognize God as the supreme good, and desire, 
solely from love, as an obedient child his father, to 
serve and follow Him with a true and firm confi- 
dence, through faith in Jesus Christ, steadfastly 
and immovably unto the end. Amen. 

Dear brethren, we have received the breakfast 
you sent us, thanks to God for it. I send you in 
return a little out of my poverty; receive it also 
with thanks, and communicate it to our other fellow 
members, wherever it is profitable for edification 
and improvement, wherever it is needful, wherever 
it is edifying for the hearers. Whenever you com- 
pose, write or speak anything, do all to the praise 
of the Lord, and compose it for a hymn of thanks- 
giving, through Christ, to the God of heaven, that 
He has given His people such a faith, which is not 
dead, but works by love, so that they have forsaken 
and hated everything, and out of love (such as a 
child owes to his father), adhered faithfully to 
their God even unto death. But leave out the count 
and everything else, as much as possible ; for he 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


693 


says that he has been villified in the hymn of 
Thomas the printer which was certainly not the in- 
tention, though it is taken thus. He says that 
though he meant it well, he was reprehended for 
it by many. Therefore, my brother, whatever you 
do in word and in deed, do all to the praise of the 
Lord, and give thanks to God the Father through 
Him. 

Furthermore, my dear brother, I inform you, 
that Henry Altruyscher, who resides in the Egel- 
stein, and generally retails red wine there, has been 
here to see me. He entered into conversation with 
me, and wanted to know whence I had my office 
or ministry. But I recognized him, and wanted 
him to tell me his name. He said he did not know 
that. But I asked further, and said : "Do not peo- 
ple call you Henry?" He said several times that 
he did not know. Then I told him to go away and 
repent, since I dfd not want to talk with him. The 
count was displeased, and incensed at me, and de- 
termined to persuade me to engage in conversation 
with Altruyscher; but I said: "No; I will not do 
it." 

I wanted to inform you of this very briefly, my 
dear brother ; for I have not time to write much ; 
besides, I am closely watched. And I desire that 
you walk steadfastly in the fear of God, with all 
humility, meekness, kindness, and goodness. And 
do not please yourself ; but much rather endeavor 
to please your neighbor for his good to edification ; 
and tell this also to the others. Herewith I com- 
mend you to the grace of God. Remember us in 
your prayers before the Lord, as also we, through 
the grace of God, are purposed to do for you and 
all men, as much as the Word of the Lord teaches 
us. But the God of peace and of all grace, who has 
called us unto His eternal glory by Christ Jesus, 
make us perfect in every good work, to do His 
eternal, immovable will, and cause that our works 
may be pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ. 
Yea, may the same also confirm, strengthen, stab- 
lish, and prepare us who are ready here to suffer, 
through Him, reproach for His name's sake, if this 
is to be. To Him be honor and might forever. 
Amen. Otherwise, we are still well in body and 
soul. We are in good hopes that we shall help ful- 
fill the number of those that lie under the altar, 
and shall rest with them, and wait for the glorious 
reward of all the pious. Greet the brotherhood in 
Christ Jesus, in my name. The grace of God be 
with us all. Amen. 

Matthias Servaes, of Kottenem. 


THE FOURTH LETTER, WHICH MATTHIAS SERVAES 

WROTE FROM PRISON TO ALL BRETHREN AND 

SISTERS IN GENERAL 

The grace of God that bringeth salvation, and 
the peace of Jesus Christ, be multiplied unto all be- 
lievers that are scattered here and there, according 
to the foreknowledge of God the Father, sanctified 
and justified through faith in Jesus Christ His dear 


Son, and washed in His own blood from all our 
sins, in order that we should henceforth be holy 
and without blame before Him in love, to His 
praise and honor, now and forever. Amen. 

O my most affectionately beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, we ought justly to thank God 
the Father without ceasing day and night, through 
Jesus Christ His Son, for our salvation, yea, for the 
fatherly grace He has shown us, and has foreseen 
and ordained us from the beginning, before the 
foundation of the world, that we should be holy 
and without blame before Him in love, which lat- 
ter He did not forget to show us. Though for a 
time we regarded Him but little, yet He, according 
to His goodness (as He alone is good) did not for- 
get us. Yea, when we were dead through infirmi- 
ties and sins, He called us to life ; and this not ac- 
cording to our works (for these were evil), but ac- 
cording to_ His great mercy he saved us ; and while 
we were sinners, He reconciled us by the death of 
His Beloved. And though we have set at naught 
and disregarded all this, He notwithstanding, at 
the end of the world, yea in these evil days and de- 
plorable times, now that wickedness is at its height, 
has manifested His longsuffering toward us, and 
not desired our death (nor that of any sinner), 
but that we should be converted, and live, and com- 
mit the keeping of our souls to Him in well-doing, 
as unto a faithful Creator and Shepherd. Hence it 
behooves us, dear brethren and sisters, that we at- 
tend in the fear of God to the calling wherein we 
are called ; for we are called with a holy calling ; 
mark, to what: not to uncleanness, not to lasciv- 
iousness, not to fornication, not to gluttony, not to 
carousing, not to pomp and pride, that one should 
please himself, or put on a pleasing appearance be- 
fore others, in order thereby to seek praise with 
men, which praise is not of God, but contrary to 
God; for all the above-mentioned points, if we 
practice them, shut us out from the kingdom of 
God. Neither are we called to covetousness, which 
is idolatry, that we should lay up treasures for our- 
selves, and seek riches, that we should prepare an 
earthly, present kingdom, or to trust in uncertain 
riches, and thus be conformed to the world. Mark, 
he says : to the world. But whom does the world 
serve ? Who is its lord ? Who is its prince ? What 
does Christ say on this subject? He calls the devil 
the prince of this world. What is it like, with all 
its glory, the lust of the eyes, and its pride? It is 
like the grass with its beautiful flowers, which to- 
day is pleasant, green and glorious to behold ; but 
in the morning, yea, also in the evening, all its 
beauty and all its glory are vanished. Thus it is 
also with all the comeliness of man ; but few know 
themselves. I speak not only of those that are 
without, but include also ourselves. For who is 
there that, if riches come to him, does not to some 
extent set his heart upon them ? Or who does sin- 
cerely pray with King Solomon : "Lord, give me 
neither riches nor poverty ; but give me only that 
which I need." Prov. 30:8. Oh, consider it well, 


694 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


all you who profess to be Christians, and give dil- 
igence to walk with a pure conscience in the truth 
before God, that in the melting furnace (if you 
should get into it yet) you will have no regrets to 
cause you to prove dross, or to look back. For, 
my dear brethren, in this trial a dead faith is of 
no account, however glorious the same may seem 
in the eyes of men, and with however many Scrip- 
tures it may be clearly demonstrated, and pro- 
fessed with the mouth ; much less will it avail be- 
fore a strict God and His righteous judgment; for 
whatever is to stand here and there must be gen- 
uine; yea, it must be done through a living faith 
which works by love. And such a faith is not in 
him who does not firmly grasp God, and believe 
and confess that heaven and earth, and all crea- 
tures, the sea and all that therein is, owe to Him 
praise and blessing, thanks and honor (to Him 
alone, and to none else, I say, it is due) ; and who 
does not write it in his heart and inmost thoughts, 
and learns to know himself, that he is preeminently 
created and made exalted and glorious, namely in 
the image of God and after His likeness, a posses- 
sor and ruler of the things that in this world are 
created for Him ; yea, adorned and endowed with 
reason and knowledge, to discern between good and 
evil, and to know Him who is the Creator of all 
things, and who has given us our free will, whereby 
we present ourselves to Him, not by constraint, as 
other creatures, but in voluntary surrender, and 
from pure, filial love, thus : "Lord, here am I ; what 
wilt thou have me to do ? For I acknowledge that 
I owe it to serve Thee, and to do only Thy will, 
with all my ability, yea with all my strength, so that 
I am to withhold nothing in this earth, whatever 
it be, not even my life, nor to refuse in my thoughts 
to pay Thee the willing debt of obedience, which I 
owe to Thee, and am to give Thee, not because I 
expect a reward from Thee, but only that I show 
thereby that I love Thee ; so that we learn to hate 
all visible things for the Lover's sake, that we may 
love Him alone above all, and may also be loved 
by Him." 

I write this, my brethren and sisters, in order 
that we may learn to know God, and why He cre- 
ated man, yea, what He requires of him that he 
shall do and not do, and why we are to show Him 
love and obedience ; so that we may not seek right- 
eousness or salvation from our works, from what 
we do or not do; for by the works of the law 
shall no flesh be justified before the Lord, as Paul 
says. Gal. 2:16. Nor shall we be able to pay what 
we owe ; but we hope to be justified and saved only 
through the grace of God, through the merits of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 15:11. Hence let 
everyone take heed that (as said above) he so love 
God, that he obey Him only from such love, with- 
out hoping for a reward for any works or merits of 
his own ; but let him commit everything to Him, 
so that He may give us what He will, and do with 
us what is well-pleasing to Him. If we are thus re- 
signed in everything, we shall not miss it, and our 


hope will not be vain, but sure. But if this (as said) 
be not found thus with us, though we speak with 
the tongues of men and of angels, and have a faith 
so that we could remove mountains, and bestow 
all our goods upon the poor, and give our bodies 
to be burnt, what is it all if it is a work of con- 
straint, and not a voluntary work of love ? 

Therefore wake up, all you that have to be driven 
to piety like horses and mules, that must be driven 
and beaten to the field. As soon as driving and 
beating is left off, there is no more work. Oh, the 
unfaithful Christians and slothful servants, who 
have in their faith no more force to work than that 
if they are told : "Do this and leave undone that," 
they are impelled to take a few steps forward. I 
say, alas! for such poor Christians, that do not 
drive themselves ! Hence let also those take good 
heed who show liberality or minister of their sub- 
stance, that the Pharisaical trumpet of boasting be 
not blown or heard before them ; for if any show- 
eth mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness and 
gladness ; and if any giveth, let him do it with sim- 
plicity (Rom. 12:8) without seeking any glory, 
for it is a work which we are in duty bound to 
show to our neighbor out of love. Therefore, all 
our works are to be done in love, that we may not 
show such ministration through hope of reward, 
but from sincere love and mercy. For it is not 
man's but the Lord's. I Cor. 10 :26. Hence I be- 
lieve that if righteousness came by our works, then 
Christ would have died in vain; but God forbid. 
Gal. 2:21. Therefore let also every one that re- 
ceives (< such benefactions, take heed, for Christ 
says: "Ye gave me meat, ye gave me drink, ye 
clothed me, ye took me in." Matt. 25 :35. Hence if 
we give food or drink to Christ, they who receive 
such benefaction must be ingrafted members of 
Christ. And if one receives the ministration who 
is none of His, how will he be able to answer for 
it when he is placed before Him ? 

Hence, you that receive the alms dispose of them 
in the fear of the Lord, that you may be able to 
stand before God; for there account and answer 
must be rendered for everything. And watch dili- 
gently over the poor, and over the forsaken widows 
and orphans, and let them have a place in your 
heart, as your own children. 

Remember the words of Sirach where he says : 
"Be as a father unto the fatherless, and instead of 
a husband unto their mother : so shalt thou be as a 
son of the Most High, and he shall love thee more 
than thy mother doth." Sir. 4:10. Beware also 
with all diligence that no discriminating may be 
found to exist among you, in the matter of bring- 
ing up, and of showing love; for herein some err 
greatly so that it is not a service of love, but of 
constraint ; which is not pleasing to God. 

And I desire of the widows, that they be quiet 
and attend to their business, and not think that they 
are more than others. No, that is neither the mean- 
ing nor intention of Paul (I Tim. 5 :3), but this is 
what is meant. "That they should be watched over, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


695 


and counsel and instruction given them, if they need 
such, and that they should also follow brotherly ad- 
vice, and beware of unprofitable conversation, of 
wantonness, and of the lust of the flesh; also of 
slothfulness, and going about from house to house, 
for this, first of all, ought not to be, and she that is 
a widow indeed, and desolate, will also beware of 
it ; and she trusteth in God alone, and continueth in 
supplications and prayers to God day and night; 
but she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she 
liveth." 

I also sincerely desire of all believing brethren 
that have wives (over whom they are placed as 
the head, even as Christ is the Head of His 
church), that you watch over them; and diligently 
attend to your office, so that you may rule your 
house, and your wives, even as Christ His church. 

Thus also, you wives, watch with all carefulness, 
and attend with discreet prudence to your office, — 
into which you are placed by the Lord, — that you 
be obedient unto your husbands as unto the Lord, 
so that you may be able to stand before the right- 
eous God; and bring up your children in such a 
manner that you can account for it before God; 
and beware of being too indulgent towards them, 
lest you incur the same punishment before the 
Lord as did Eli, who also was too indulgent to- 
wards his sons. Ephesians 5 :22 ; Sir. 7 :23, 24. 

Likewise you children, obey your parents in the 
fear of God with all humility ; and do not set your- 
selves against them, lest you incur the wrath and 
displeasure of God, like the sons of Eli, like Absa- 
lom, Esau, and others like them. 

In like manner, I also desire of all manservants 
and maidservants that you be obedient in all things 
to your masters according to the flesh, not with eye- 
service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, 
and in the fear of God ; and remember that you are 
serving the Lord and not men, for of the Lord you 
shall receive the just reward. Eph. 6:5-8. 

Thus also, you masters, forbear your threaten- 
ing, and do to your servants whatever is right and 
equitable, and know that you also have a Master in 
heaven with whom there is no respect of persons. 
Eph. 6:9. Consider if you were servants as you 
then would have your masters do unto you, even so 
do now to them. Matt. 7:12. But finally, dear 
brethren, order your lives and strive to walk only 
so that it will be conformable to the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. And since we are to be a chosen 
generation, and a holy nation, acceptable to the 
Lord as His peculiar people (I Pet. 2:9), that we 
should walk before Him as lights, and should also 
be a light unto the world ; therefore it is necessary 
for us to give diligence that we may in every re- 
spect be found holy and blameless before Him, so 
that we may see the city of God exalted above all 
the mountains of unrighteousness that are seen in 
righteousness, and that it may in no wise be hid. 
Hence, let also become manifest now the holy ra- 
diance of the divine brightness, before all that are 
still walking in darkness and show yourselves to all 


men a pattern of good works, and do not suffer the 
gift given you by God to remain idle or unemployed 
but put it out upon usury with the greatest dili- 
gence ; for the Lord, from whom you have received 
it, will, at His coming, require it back from you 
with gain and usury. Matt. 25:14. O my brethren, 
and all fellow members in Christ, watch diligently, 
and have your ears open to learn when something 
may be gained, and grudge not to toil and labor for 
it, for you will also partake of the gain, yea, you 
will as faithful servants, be adjudged to eternal joy. 
But a servant should nevertheless be prudent, that 
he do not carelessly invest his Lord's money, but 
with all prudence, yea, with fear and trembling, and 
he should always before he invests it, consider and 
calculate whether it may bring gain or loss, lest the 
Lord's money be eventually lost through careless- 
ness. And since the Lord will require His own 
with usury, how could we account to the Lord, if 
we did not have the sum received, nor were able to 
produce it. 

O my dear brethren, let it become manifest who 
dwells in you (Rom. 8:9) ; let love and your faith 
become manifest before all men, and love one an- 
other, with a pure heart as members of one body, 
of which Christ is the Head. And forgive one an- 
other, if any one have a complaint against any ; and 
even as God, in Christ forgave you, so also do you. 
Col. 3:13. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so 
fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6:2. And be not 
pleased with yourselves. Let each esteem other 
better than themselves. Phil. 2 :3. Diligently be- 
ware of frivolity. And all young brethren and sis- 
ters I would faithfully warn against wanton scoff- 
ing and mocking, spiteful words and foolish bab- 
blings, which are not becoming. 

And you older ones, lay this to heart, too, and let 
neither in your words nor in your works any hypoc- 
risy be found, for I have perceived that some are 
very subtle or cunning of speech, which I cannot 
praise, nor have I praised it; for if we are to be 
simple, we certainly must lay aside craftiness, for, 
mark, whatsoever is more than yea and nay cometh 
of evil. Matt. 5 :37. However, hereby is not meant 
that we should not say more than yea and nay, but 
that we should end and confirm our words, without 
anger or dissimulation simply with yea and nay, 
and thus use moderation, and cut off all excess; 
that is, we should deal with the simple truth. If one, 
when asked in regard to something, does not reply 
with reference to this, but to something else, and 
then says that he did not err, since what he replied 
was true, such action is not noble, my brethren. It 
also happens now and then that when one has 
erred in some matter and is then reprimanded for 
it, he gives a reason, but which, in fact, is not the 
reason, doing this to cover himself, and to prevent 
the error from coming to the light. This is the na- 
ture and disposition of the old Adam (which ought 
justly not to obtain with Christians regenerated by 
the word of truth), that he would always cover his 
nakedness with fig leaves; for when he was ad- 


696 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


dressed by the Lord on account of his transgres- 
sion, a reason immediately presented itself by 
which he thought to cover himself ; namely, "the 
woman whom thou gavest me," he said, "gave it 
me, and I did eat." Gen. 3:12. And, likewise, when 
Eve was addressed, she laid it to the serpent. But 
if they had wanted to plainly tell the fundamental 
cause of their transgression, it would have been: 
"Our curiosity and pride brought us to it, namely : 
we desired to have our eyes opened ; to be wise, to 
know good and evil, to be like God; in short, we 
saw that the tree was good for food, pleasant to the 
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, 
hence we allowed ourselves to be persuaded, and 
did eat of it." Had they thus answered the Lord, it 
would have been a true answer. The answer which 
they gave was true ; but it was not yet the true 
kernel or fundamental cause of their fall and trans- 
gression. But in order that you may thoroughly 
comprehend the true sense and meaning of what we 
have written here, we will present to you a single 
comparison by way of example. Suppose a believ- 
ing husband had an unbelieving wife, who should 
give birth to a living child ; and the husband would 
fain retain the friendship of his neighbors and the 
world, and remain in possession of his house and 
home, and yet wished also to be at peace with 
Christ and His people (though this, according to 
the Word of God, is impossible, for no one, as 
Christ says, can serve two contrary masters at the 
same time). Hence he should say to his wife that 
he did not intend to consent that the abomination of 
antichrist, (you understand what I mean), should 
be applied to the child. And though he could 
change it, and persuade his wife to obey him in the 
matter, yet he should allow it to be done without 
himself taking any notice of it, thinking with him- 
self : "If she does it, I can notwithstanding remain 
at ease, and in the enjoyment of my possessions : 
and shall not be persecuted by the world, and if the 
brethren take me to task for it, I can say that it was 
done without my consent by my wife." See, my 
brethren, this would certainly not be a true, simple 
answer, as you may judge for yourselves. Many 
other like examples and comparisons might be ad- 
duced ; however, for the sake of brevity I will for- 
bear for the present. I desire that you will your- 
selves meditate more deeply on this, than I have 
shown you here ; and be warned hereby to beware 
of such dissimulation. For though a man cover him- 
self before his fellows (with such fig leaves, made 
by him into an apron), so that his nakedness is not 
seen, yet God beholds his reins and can search the 
heart, and He knows the thoughts and intents of all 
men, and will also judge all works and purposes ; 
also, all secrets and hidden things, whether they do 
good or evil. Therefore give diligence that in all 
your words and works, in all your walk and con- 
versation, you practice simple sincerity, as becomes 
the children of God, and our calling demands. And 
if any among you be overtaken by a fall, let him 
confess it simply and truly, without dissimulation, 


just as it is, and let him not be ashamed to confess 
it, since he was not ashamed to commit it ; else it 
might be to his sorrow. He that covereth his sins, 
it is written, shall not prosper, but whoso confess- 
eth and forsaketh them shall have mercy. Prov. 
28:13. I have told you before, and tell you again, 
that before men one can sometimes justify himself 
with a fair pretense, and cover himself with an 
apron of fig leaves ; but whether it shall stand the 
test when brought to the touchstone, each may see 
for himself. 

This ought to be well considered by those whose 
daily business is that of trading, whom I would 
rather see engaged in some honest kind of labor, 
than in trafficking, and this not without reason. 
For as a nail sticketh fast between the joinings of 
the stones, so doth sin stick close between buying 
and selling, as Sirach says. Unless you hold your- 
self diligently in the fear of God, your house shall 
soon be overthrown. Sir. 27 :2, 3. And in what- 
ever I may in all these things have erred, or grieved 
any one, I am sorry for it from the bottom of my 
heart. But thanks be to God in heaven, who has 
given me poor weak servant an unwounded or un- 
condemned conscience (of which I acknowledge 
myself unworthy) ; for I never had greater joy on 
earth as long as I can remember, than I now have. 
May the Lord preserve me from speaking boast- 
ingly; however, I have no doubt that He, whose 
unworthy servant I have been in my weakness, will 
not suffer me to be confounded. I have heartily de- 
sired, and so still heartily desire it, if I, of God, 
should be counted 'worthy, I might be led through 
the whole city of Cologne, and scourged with rods, 
and then cast back in prison. Not that I seek any 
merit by it, Oh no, but that what the Lord has put 
into me might become known and manifest before 
all men, to His praise, and not to mine. However, 
the will of the Lord be done ; nor do I wish any- 
thing else, the Lord knows, cost what it may. And 
I desire from the bottom of my heart, yea, com- 
mand in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
you keep that which God has entrusted to you, for 
it is the truth ; this I testify before God and man. 
No matter who shall approach you, do not listen 
to them. Let the Hutterites* slander as much as 
they please. God keep me from them, namely from 
the doings of their teachers. I am free in my heart 
on their account, in regard to all the dealings I 
have had with them. And if they say that I dared 
not renounce because of the people (as I under- 
stand that they have said concerning our brother 
Thomas), I reply, "No;" for I know no man on 
this earth, so dear to me that without the faith I 
would lay down my life for him. But thanks to 
the Lord I have found this in me, and do still 
find it strongly in me, that I will much rather lay 
down my life for my brethren, than bring into 
troubles reveal any one, in order thus to save my 
life; this I say, God knows, from faith, and not in 


Or Moravians. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


697 


a spirit of boasting. But as many among them as 
please God, whether I have seen them or not, these, 
as also others, I do not judge, for they stand to the 
Lord. Rom. 14:4. 

I likewise tell you to leave the others be where 
they are except they sincerely come back in the 
matter of marriage, and the other articles, and 
humble themselves before God, and also use a little 
more restraint in their lives than they now do ; for 
pomp and pride stink before the Lord. Therefore 
they are also not acceptable or pleasing in my eyes. 
Hence put them off, for they are an abomination 
unto God ; and let not pride and presumption have 
dominion either in your words or actions; for in 
pride has originated all destruction, as Tobit 
teaches his son. Hence humble yourselves from 
the heart under the mighty hand of God ; for He 
giveth grace to the humble, but resisteth the proud. 
1 Peter 5 :5. As regards how it is with me, I inform 
you that I have entirely committed myself into the 
hand of the Lord. What His will is, is mine also. I 
know of nothing better to choose for myself, than 
that I might be an acceptable offering to Him, and. 
might offer up my sacrifice without the gate, in the 
daytime (Heb. 13:12) ; Oh, how greatly would I 
thank Him. Oh my dear fellow members, out of 
what great sorrow the Lord has delivered me, 
which I carried in my heart day and night, on ac- 
count of the Nederland journey: but Oh, what a 
faithful God ! how well He knows how to deliver 
out of temptation, at the right time, those who can 
trust Him for it from the heart. I Cor. 10:13; II 
Peter 2 :9. 

It often occurred to me that I should not get 
away — that the Lord should order it otherwise ; as 
my dear wife and sister in the Lord well knows, for 
I often conversed with her about it, the Lord be 
thanked forevermore. I took leave from all the 
churches, and heartily asked every one among them 
to forgive me if I had grieved them. I did the same 
towards them, and then went away. But a far bet- 
ter journey was in store for me, on which I now 
am, the Lord be praised for it, for I am in good 
hope that, through the grace of God, it will tend 
to my great advantage. Oh, my brethren, my heart 
is full of joy, yea, it is running over with it. It 
seems to me, for very joy, that I see the heavens 
opened. Oh, that I might by writing (since I am 
prevented from conversing with you), pour out my 
heart to you and refresh it. My ink is almost ex- 
hausted. As it is with me, so it is also with 
Joosken and Herman, my dear fellow prisoners 
and brethren. We wait for our God, and greet 
you all with a holy kiss. And the salutation with 
mine own hand is this : "The grace of the Lord 
Jesus Christ be with all believers in Christ unto 
the end. Amen." I Cor. 16 :26, etc. 

Care for my young orphan children, as also all 
other orphans, as you would for myself; bring 
them up with reproof and correction, to piety; 
teach them to read, and when the time has come, 
keep them at work. Get Aelken cured, if you can ; 


X bequeath to him the three pieces of money, the 
silver piece and the two others ; also a Testament 
to each ; this shall be their inheritance from their 
father. 

I likewise commend to you my wife, as long as 
she fears God, as I hope that she will do unto the 
end, if she gets out. The Lord own what I have 
told you, and what I have sought concerning all be- 
lievers, — not riches or treasures on this earth, but 
the salvation of men's souls. And I desire that you 
firmly keep together, with teaching, admonishing 
and reproving. And follow your leaders and sub- 
mit to them, for they watch over your souls. He- 
brews 13:17. And you ministers, show yourselves 
a pattern of good works to all believers, not in 
semblance only, but in sincerity. Read how Paul 
admonishes Timothy and Titus; be you also ad- 
monished by it. May the Lord give you under- 
standing. Amen. 

Dear brethren, concerning our examination and 
hearing, I wrote to you previously very briefly, as 
you know. But if I am to write to you, one by one 
all the questions they put to me, and the answers I 
gave them, I should require much ink, paper and 
time; especially, for what was spoken during the 
day between me and the count, in a friendly man- 
ner and also with sharpness; for it is very much. 
Yet, if we were where the count wishes us, we 
would be released. His conscience is not easy, but 
accuses him. May the Lord put true repentance 
into his heart, and give it a clear sight, to know the 
will of God, and to discern light from darkness, 
and that he, in consequence thereof, may hate and 
utterly forsake darkness and love the true light, and 
adhere to it with his whole heart, so that he may 
also, in that day, with the true children of the light, 
receive his part from the hand of the Lord. This I 
wish him and all our enemies and opponents, from 
God (as much as possible) from the bottom of my 
heart. Otherwise, it goes still well with us in every 
respect, in body and soul. We hope to help fulfill 
the number of the righteous, and to rest with our 
fathers, and to wait for the glorious reward of all 
the righteous. I greet all the believers with a holy 
kiss. Greet one another with a kiss of love. And 
do not forget us, nor any of the prisoners ; but per- 
severe in strong prayer for us to God, for this is 
highly necessary. For, it seems to me, it was an 
easy matter to be imprisoned in the time of our 
brother Thomas ; for the subtlety of men increases 
every day. Hence, pray diligently for us ; we trust 
also not to forget you; the Lord be with us all. 
Amen. 

By me, Matthias Servaes, 

Your weak brother, and unworthy minister and 
prisoner of Jesus Christ, whom I serve in the Gos- 
pel in my bonds. I hope that my dissolution is near 
at hand. 

I desire of you, J. N. B., that you properly tran- 
scribe this, and see that my wife (who is also 
imprisoned) gets a copy of it. If it pleases you, it 


698 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


may also be read before the brethren ; but if you do 
not deem it expedient, or promotive of the glory of 
God, then dispense with it, for I do not in the least 
seek my own glory by it, but the praise of the Lord 
and the consolation and joy of believers. My 
mother I greet in particular, and desire that she 
serve the Lord without guile ; the same I desire of 
my brother John and my sisters. Written and read 
with many tears, and this from the heart. You 
know my brethren, that I did not lightly take up my 
ministry, but with many tears; in like manner I 
now resign it. Then I wept for sorrow ; but now 
I weep for heartfelt joy. With tears I received the 
ministry from you (I believe, also from God); 
but with many tears of great joy I surrender it back 
to the Lord (if it pleases Him) and to you. May 
the Lord manifoldly fill my place with faithful 
servants. Amen. 

Oh, how my heart is in yours. Show a fatherly 
heart to all, with all humility; and whether it go 
well or ill with you, ascribe the praise to the Lord, 
for He causes and does everything, and not we. 
And do not, under any circumstances, forsake the 
people in the Nederland ; reprove them sharply for 
pride; this is my desire. H. and F. and all, keep 
well that which is committed to your trust, and do 
not forget it. Greet T. W., my dear brother, whom 
I love from the heart. Concern yourselves in a 
godly spirit in the affairs of the Upper Country ; 
prevent divisions among the people wherever you 
can. This is written to all those who desire that I 
should write to them, for I cannot write to each 
individually. I do not seek any glory therein. The 
grace of God be with us all. Amen. Given the 9th 
day of July, 1565. 


THE FIFTH LETTER WHICH MATTHIAS SERVAES 

WROTE FROM PRISON, TO HIS MOTHER, HIS 

BROTHER JOHN, HIS BROTHER-IN-LAW 

LEONHARD, AND HIS TWO SISTERS 

Grace and peace from God the Father, and the 
prompting of the Holy Ghost to all righteousness, 
I wish unto you all, my beloved, through Jesus 
Christ. Amen. 

Further, I inform you, dear mother, and brother 
John, and Frances and Barbara, my dear sisters, 
that according to the flesh it is very well with me 
(excepting these bonds which I nevertheless also 
deem good) ; and according to the soul it is still 
much better. Praise and thanks for it be to the eter- 
nal God, who has ordered it so well with me, un- 
worthy, weak servant ; for it had already been de- 
termined (as you yourselves partly know) that 
I was to leave you ; but of this journey, on which I 
now am, we all knew nothing. This was the jour- 
ney which I was to take. I have now proceeded on 
it a little way, and am (thanks to the Lord), not 
yet worthy of it, though I have hitherto traveled a 
very dangerous and painful way, and it has cost me 
many a drop of sweat. I also well know that the 
delicate children of the Lord must go rough ways, 


and though I have suffered, and still daily suffer 
much, from robbers, evil workers, false brethren 
and deceitful, lying apostles, yet I trust that I shall 
not look back, but go on joyfully by the help and 
succor of God, till I come to the blessed end and 
inherit the beautiful city. Baruch 4:26; II Corin- 
thians 11 :26; Rev. 2:2. But He who sent a guide 
with Tobias, preserved the prophet Daniel in the 
den of lions, and deprived the fire of its power, so 
that it could not harm the three men in the fiery 
furnace, the same, and no other, has also mightily 
preserved me hitherto, and I feel confident that He 
will also safely keep me unto the end. Amen. 

Hence, my dear mother, and John my brother, 
and my two sisters, it is my multiplied entreaty and 
fatherly and brotherly exhortation, that you stead- 
fastly walk in piety before God ; for it will avail 
nothing to cry: "Lord, Lord," if we do not dili- 
gently perform what He has commanded. There- 
fore put your own wisdom and your pride far from 
you, and beware of sudden anger and violent pas- 
sions; for they produce no good, but pollute the 
mind, and defile prayer ; and let each take heed that 
his conscience be not sullied with deceitful, mali- 
cious, and perverse thoughts; for they separate 
from God. And I desire of you, my dear mother, 
who are very dear to my heart, that you be content 
with humble fare, and not allow evil thoughts to 
come into your heart; but thank God for every- 
thing, and remember that at Kottenem you often 
did not have enough to eat. And if you now were 
still there, and held all the property still in your 
possession, and had to run and go day and night, 
laboring and toiling, you would scarce get a living 
from it. Receive this in good part, my dear mother, 
for it is all done for your good, that you may keep 
a pure heart, free from evil thoughts, and thus see 
God, and be saved. Matt. 5 :8. Thus I also desire 
of you all, that whatever you do, you do voluntarily, 
without murmurings and disputings, that no one 
may accuse you. I Cor. 10:10; Phil. 2:14, 15. I 
had set apart three Koenigs Thaler* as a lesson for 
you brother John, for your and my mother. If you 
do not already have them, I think you will get 
them yet. Keep Barbara at work, and admonish 
her to fear God from the heart ; and this I desire 
of you all, for there is no one among you with 
whom I have had more trouble and anxiety. I 
wish my brother-in-law the highest good from 
God. Finally, I desire of you, my dear mother, 
that you do not complain, or grieve too much, on 
account of my bonds and imprisonment ; but thank 
the Lord, who has kept me, that I have not come 
into these bonds and imprisonment for evil doing, 
but for His name's sake ; hence neither I nor you 
need feel ashamed of it. Pray also diligently for 
me, that He would henceforth preserve me from 
all evil, and give me a steadfast mind, and true pa- 
tience, that I may in all temptations and afflictions 
steadfastly adhere to His word unto the end. And 

* King's Dollars. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


699 


take, my dear mother, for an example, the man- 
fulness of the mother of the seven sons, of whom 
we read in II Mace. 7. For said mother of the 
seven brothers, from perfect wisdom, stirred up 
her womanly heart with manly thoughts, and said 
to her sons: "I cannot tell how ye came into my 
womb; for I neither gave you breath nor life, 
neither was it I that formed the members of every 
one of you ; but doubtless the Creator of the world, 
who formed the generation of man, will also of His 
own mercy give you breath and life again, as ye now 
regard not your own selves for His law's sake." 
Behold, mother, what a manful spirit this was ; 
hence be you also manful now, and surrender me 
willingly to the Lord, from whom you received me ; 
for we are also sure that we shall receive again in 
that day, and keep forever, the life which we now 
gladly despise and lose for the name of Christ. 
This, my affectionate beloved mother, I wanted 
to present to you very briefly, so that you might be 
valiant and of good cheer while I am in bonds, and 
might also not love your life, but willingly resign 
it for the name of Christ, if it should come to that. 
And as the Lord has called you almost at the elev- 
enth hour, and sent you into His vineyard, give all 
the diligence you possibly can, faithfully to do the 
work of the Lord for this one hour ; and remem- 
ber the words of the prophet where he says: 
"Cursed be the servant that doeth the work of his 
Lord slothfully." Jer. 48:10. Hence be faithful, 
and wait patiently for the evening, and you will 
also receive the penny, yea, the beautiful crown, 
and the glorious kingdom, from the hand of the 
Lord, together with all the children of God. But 
may this God, who only is wise, make us prepared 
unto every good work, to do His will, and grant 
that our works be acceptable before Him, through 
Jesus Christ, to whom be honor and might forever 
and ever. Amen. 

I commend you all to God ; we must part here ; 
entreat God for me, as I for you. I salute all be- 
lievers. 


THE SIXTH LETTER WHICH MATTHIAS SERVAES OF 

KOTTENEM WROTE FROM PRISON, TO HIS DEAR 

WIFE AND SISTER IN THE LORD, WHO WAS 

ALSO IMPRISONED 

Grace, peace, and joy in the heart, through 
Christ, be with you my dearly beloved wife, whom 
I love from the heart, yea, as my own soul and also 
with all the prisoners that are in Christ Jesus. 
Amen. 

Further, my dear sister in the Lord, I reply to 
your first remark, by which you indicate that it 
grieves you that I am alone. But, my dear child, I 
am not alone, but have the comfort of all believers 
(John 14:26) with me. I do not know whether I 
ever had greater joy on earth ; for I am certain and 
truly assured that the Lord will not lay on me more 
than I can bear ; for I do not wish to be freed from 
suffering (if it be the will of the Lord that I suf- 


fer) ; but may His holy will be done. Hence, my 
dear child, dismiss this grief from your mind, this 
I desire. In the second place, you lament your dis- 
obedience, that you have not been much more obe- 
dient to me ; thus I also deplore it from the heart 
before my God, that I have not been more diligent 
than I have hitherto been ; hence we have no cause 
for boasting, but much rather for lamenting, for I 
say with Solomon : "Who can say, I have made my 
heart clean, I am pure from my sin ?" Prov. 20 :9. 
And with this agree also the words of Esdras, 
where he says: "Let not the sinner say that he 
hath not sinned: for God shall burn coals of fire 
upon his head, which saith before the Lord God 
and his glory, I have not sinned. II Esd. 16:53. 
On this wise, also the apostle John speaks in his 
first epistle (1:8), saying: "If we say that we 
have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth 
is not in us." Therefore, dear wife, we may well 
lament, and pray with David : "O Lord, enter not 
into judgment with thy servant, but according to 
thy loving kindness have mercy upon us, and ac- 
cording to the multitude of thy mercies blot out our 
transgressions." Ps. 143:2; 51:1. Yea, even 
though we have done all that we are in duty bound 
to do, it behooves us nevertheless to say : "We are 
unprofitable servants : we have done that which 
was our duty to do." Luke 17:10. Hence we are 
not to place ourselves by the side of them that 
would be saved and justified by their works ; but 
much rather by the side of those of whom the 
Scripture says : "Blessed are they whose iniquities 
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed 
is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin." 
Rom. 4 :7, 8. Perhaps our appointed time upon 
earth will soon be spent, and the Lord wants to 
purify us before the end comes ; or perhaps we, by 
reason of weakness, could not have truly known our 
transgression, except in this manner, in order that 
it may be truly repented of before we are taken 
hence. For one can work no truer repentance than 
thus in the chastisement of bonds. Of this we have 
a clear example in Manasseh, the King of Judah, 
who cared not how much the Lord warned him 
through the prophets ; yea, all was of no avail, until 
he was carried to Babylon into captivity by his 
enemies. There he first learned to know his sins, 
and repented. II Chron. 33. The Lord certainly 
loves us, that He has called us to this place ; do not 
doubt it, my dear wife. Heb. 12 :6. Hence let us 
fully trust the Lord, and cast all doubt from us, 
lest we fall into greater sins. But if we have sinned, 
let us do it no more, lest something worse happen 
to us (John 5 :14) ; and this is also the best re- 
pentance, namely to do it no more. 

O my dear wife, be of good cheer, and cast your 
sorrow or care upon the Lord, for He will care for 
us ; despair not. Remember the kind words of the 
Lord, where He says : "Come unto me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." 
Matt. 1 1 :28. For the Lord will remember us, and 
not forget us. Yea, He will forget us much less, 


700 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


than a mother will forget her child which she has 
borne nine months. And though a mother forget 
her child, yet will He not forget us, but will pre- 
serve us as the apple of His eye. Isa. 49:15; Zech. 
2:8. But that the Lord permitted our imprison- 
ment, is all for our best, that through such chastise- 
ment we may learn true obedience ; for thus we can 
be truly cleansed, and also truly tried, whether we 
love aught more than our Lord Jesus Christ. It is 
comparatively easy to forsake husband, wife, chil- 
dren, father, mother, sisters, brothers, houses, or 
fields, for the name of Christ ; but when it comes to 
a man's own person, and his life is concerned, then 
it is that he is truly tried and refined, for a man 
will give skin for skin, yea, all that he has, for his 
life, as is written in Job. But Christ says that one 
must hate and forsake all this, and his own life also, 
and take up the cross, and follow Him. And who- 
soever does not do this, cannot, He says, be His 
disciple. Luke 14:26, 27. But we can hate or re- 
nounce ourselves in no fitter way than by fully sur- 
rendering ourselves into the hand of the Lord, so 
that we may say in truth : "Lord, Thy holy will 
be done, that is: Lord, what Thou wilt, that be 
done." Behold, my dear wife, this is true renun- 
ciation. 

I further desire of you and all prisoners, that 
each, as much as he finds himself accused in his 
conscience, humble himself therefore the more be- 
fore his God ; for the time of grace, and the day of 
salvation, yea, the acceptable time, is still at hand. 
Let us not cease knocking, until He have mercy on 
us and open the door for us, and give us, because 
of our importunity the things we need. For He is 
a gracious God; He forgives very willingly, and 
soon repents of the evil ; and from those who turn 
to Him from the heart He will not turn away His 
face ; but they that depart from Him, their names 
shall be written in the earth. Jonah 4 :2 ; II Chron. 
30:9; Jer. 17:13. Therefore, the man that asks 
Him for grace ought to examine himself as to 
whether he does it from the heart ; for though man 
lament with the mouth, the Lord knows the heart ; 
hence let everyone be in earnest, for if this be not 
the case, he cannot succeed. Judith 8. Now let it 
become manifest whether you truly love God, yea, 
whether you love Him above all. 

Oh, what a great word it is which Peter utters : 
"That our faith' might be found much more pre- 
cious than perishable gold, which is tried by fire." 
Show now the true virtue of faith, and pay what 
you promised and vowed to the Lord, and allow 
not yourself to be turned aside either to the right 
or to the left, but remain in the middle of the road, 
and you will enter in. For he that perseveres in 
the way of the Lord unto the end, he, and no other, 
shall be saved ; to this end, may the gracious God 
help us all, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 

I have to write in great fear. O my dear wife, 
and you altogether, I commend you into the hand of 
the faithful God ; may He keep you and me stead- 


fast unto the end. Amen. The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 

Receive one another with a holy kiss of love, and 
remember me from the heart, which I trust to do 
with regard to you. And if we may see one an- 
other no more on this earth, may the Lord grant 
us grace and strength, so to acquit ourselves here 
that we may see one another face to face hereafter, 
in the eternal joy, with all the children of God. 
Amen. 

my dear Aeltgen, do not forget what I have 
often admonished you, namely, that you should 
firmly keep God before your eyes, and walk up- 
rightly before Him. I mean all of you with this 
letter. O Lord, uphold us. Amen. 

Now be of good cheer, my dear wife and sister in 
the Lord, and lay aside all grief ; for what man is 
there (as said above) that can say: I have not 
sinned, my heart is clean, I am pure from sin, I 
also might have walked more diligently before 
you than I have done; however, may God take 
from us all that is displeasing to Him in us. Amen. 
Be watchful, my dear sister in the Lord ; for the 
devil seeks to disquiet men. 

1 have written this in Cunebert's tower, but now 
we are in the count's house, namely, I Matthias and 
Herman, and are in daily expectation of being 
offered up, with which we are heartily satisfied, if 
God count us worthy. Preserve this letter very 
carefully from the eyes of those who sharply ex- 
amine us, lest others get into trouble thereby. The 
peace of God be with us all. Amen. 


THE SEVENTH LETTER OF MATTHIAS SERVAES, 

WRITTEN FROM PRISON TO J. N. AND 

HIS BRETHREN 

Grace and peace be with all believers in Christ 
Jesus. Amen. 

Know further, dear brethren and sisters, that it 
is still very well with us, namely, with me and Her- 
man; for our hearts are full of joy, yea, running 
oyer with it. Time seems as short to us as it ever 
did. In the night we praise our God with one ac- 
cord. We are now alone. Eberhard, the bishop's 
chaplain, visited me again, on the Saturday after 
St. James' Day, and conversed very affably with 
me about infant baptism and the resurrection of the 
dead. And the count entreated me, saying : "Dear 
Matthias, tell us your fundamental views concern- 
ing these articles, for I told you that your people in 
the other tower confessed that the dead bodies will 
not rise ; but from you I have received no clear an- 
swer, and as you have taught them, they must have 
it from you." I replied : "It is true, Sir Count, you 
had such a conversation with me the last time, and 
I then answered to you. as also now, namely, that I 
call all the prisoners to witness, that I presented no 
further views in my doctrine (which is not mine, 
but Christ's), than that the time will come when all 
the dead will rise from their graves, the righteous 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


701 


unto life, the wicked unto eternal death, and that 
we must all appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ, that everyone may receive in his body, ac- 
cording to that he hath done, whether it be good or 
bad. But that this same flesh and blood which we 
now have should inherit the kingdom of God, this 
I did not teach, but the contrary, namely : 'That 
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God ; 
neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.' " I 
Cor. 15:50. 

Then Eberhard, the chaplain, said that he too 
did not believe that this flesh and blood should in- 
herit the kingdom of God. I also said : "We shall 
be changed." Now, he that would know how this 
will come to pass, and how the dead will rise, and 
with what bodies they will come, to him Paul says : 
"Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quick- 
ened, except it die : and that which thou sowest, 
thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare 
grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other 
grain : but God giveth him a body as it hath pleased 
him." (I Cor. 15 :35). This, I said, is my ground, 
Oh, that I might become worthy to rise with the 
righteous, this is my care ; as to how the Lord will 
give me a body, this I leave to Him, and am well 
satisfied therewith. More than this I shall confess 
to neither you nor any other man. Herein, he said, 
we do not differ much. 

I then further said : "The cry now raised against 
us is: This one has confessed this, and that one, 
that, and another one something else. My good 
friend, go among the people, and interrogate each 
individual separately concerning all the articles; 
what do you think, would they answer or confess 
to you anything certain ? Certainly nothing at all, 
or at least but very little." "It is true," he replied. 
We had much additional conversation yet, concern- 
ing what ancient writers say on infant baptism. I 
rejected them all, and left them to God; but he 
begged me to consider it. I put the same request 
to him, and said : "I feel assured and confirmed in 
my heart, that it is the pure truth, and I want to 
live and die for it." I also told them something in 
regard to their unclean and defective church — the 
brothel, gambling-house, fencing-school, and their 
daily life, which they lead in an utterly heathen 
manner ; and also concerning the injustice and vio- 
lence they, by way of torture, had inflicted upon us, 
only because we would not be traitors ; all this I 
told him to consider, if he were a shepherd of the 
sheep. He replied that he was heartily sorry for it, 
and the count's countenance fell, as it seemed to 
me. They arose, and Eberhard gave me his hand, 
and in a very friendly manner commended me to 
the Lord. 

Thus, it is still very well with us, the Lord be 
thanked. Amen. Remember us day and night in 
your prayers, which we also intend to do for you. 
And I wish that all prisoners might be admonished 
and warned to decline all conversation: they are 
quite at liberty to refuse it. O brethren, how sub- 


tilly and craftily they spread their nets, to chase my 
soul into them, but they shall not capture it, this 
I confidently hope ; for in vain the net is spread in 
the sight of any bird. Prov. 1 :17. 

Hence, I desire of all prisoners, that they guard 
their lips, and bridle their tongues. While the 
wicked is before you, as David says (Ps. 39:1), 
make not haste to speak, lest you deceive your 
heart; and wait with patience until Christ speaks 
in you, or His Spirit, according to His promise, 
through you. Matt. 10 :20. And though you reply 
not to every question, you need not be ashamed of 
it, for He who was the wisdom of God, namely, 
Christ, was also not ashamed of it, as the scriptures 
of the Old and the New Testament sufficiently tes- 
tify. And if you are asked concerning others who 
are still at large or in prison, as to whether they are 
of our number or not, or whether they are bap- 
tized or not, you may reply : "I am not imprisoned 
here for another, but for myself; hence, I may 
speak for myself, and not for another." And if 
they then threaten you with the torture or long im- 
prisonment, let them threaten, let them torture; 
only do you firmly trust in the Lord, and they shall 
not be able to do more than God, who has the king's 
heart in His power, will permit. Prov. 21 :1. If it 
then be the will of the Lord, that you suffer, re- 
member that you often said : "Lord, Thy will be 
done." And, surely, if you firmly trust the Lord, 
the very hairs of your head are all numbered, and 
not one of them will fall from it without the Fa- 
ther's will. Matt. 6:10; 10:30; Luke 12:7. 

Therefore, fear not their threats in the least, and 
be not terrified ; but submit to the Lord with pa- 
tience and longsuffering in all that befalls you on 
account of the truth. Trust God ; He will not for- 
sake you even unto death. Amen. 

But if I could see, my dear fellow members, that 
it might promote the glory of God, and your, and 
their salvation, if you should answer all their ques- 
tions,! would not only admonish you to wait until 
they ask you, but I would heartily urge you by en- 
treaty and admonition, to tell and confess it to them 
of your accord, before they ask you. But how they 
herein seek the glory of God, and the welfare and 
salvation of your, yea, of their own, souls, this I 
will leave to the consideration and impartial judg- 
ment of every God-fearing lover of the truth. 

Therefore guard your lips, my beloved, as said 
above. I have composed a hymn, doing it not from 
wantonness ; hence I wish that it be sung not to my 
honor, but to the praise of God. 

Dear brethren, faithfully remember me in your 
prayers. I greet you all with the peace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ ; he that loves Him not is Anathema, 
Maran-atha. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and the love of God, and the communion of the 
Holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen. 


702 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


THE EIGHTH LETTER OF MATTHIAS SERVAES, WRIT- 
TEN FROM PRISON TO AELTGEN, HIS WIFE 

The grace of God be and abide with you and all 
fellow believers in Christ that are with you and 
elsewhere ; together with true peace, friendly love, 
constant patience, and steadfast perseverance, to 
bear unto the end all that is laid upon us of that 
which is still left of the afflictions of Christ. Amen. 

Further, my dear wife, whom I from the very 
beginning of our coming together (of this I trust 
the Lord is my witness), have loved more accord- 
ing to salvation than according to the flesh, and 
have cared for your soul as for my own, and ad- 
monished you to that which we have now come. 
The Lord be praised for it forever, For, my dear 
sister in the Lord, you well know the grief I felt 
on account of the removal, and though some may 
perhaps have thought that I took delight in it, it is 
not so at all ; for since that time I have often wished 
that, if it be for my salvation, I might through some 
means be relieved from it, whether it be through 
imprisonment or by death. But since it pleases the 
Lord, that we are here on earth first, through suf- 
fering, to be witnesses of His Word and name ; as 
you, in a measure, have wished more than once, 
that I might through suffering be taken home to 
God, and I have desired that you might be appre- 
hended with me, as has now happened; therefore 
let us also be patient, and thank the Lord, that He 
has heard us, and fulfilled our prayer, and let us 
not pray otherwise now than we have hitherto 
prayed namely, thus : "Lord, Thy will be done." 
Surrender me willingly into the hand of the Lord, 
whom I have served; and be not troubled on my 
account. But if you should perhaps think that we* 
may meet with much suffering yet (which, how- 
ever, is in the hand of the Lord), think also that 
if there is much suffering prepared for us, there is 
also much more consolation in store for us, for as 
the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our conso- 
lation also aboundeth by Christ. II Corinthians 
1 :5. I have not time to write more, except this : 
"Persevere steadfastly till you are taken hence. 
Then, and not before, the crown of life is pre- 
pared." This is also written to you, my dear sister 
Anna, and all that are with you. The salutation 
with mine own hand. The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you all. Amen. 

Greet one another with a holy kiss. Our breth- 
ren salute you all. Remember us, and be of good 
cheer for this is the first inheritance promised us 
here, which we must also possess, if we are to gain 
the eternal, where all tears that now flow from our 
eyes will be wiped away, and all sorrow be turned 
into everlasting joy ; for our affliction, which is but 
temporal and light, compared with that which is 
eternal, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory, who look not at the things 

* The construction of this clause in the original seems to indi- 
cate, with great probability, a typographical error, consisting in 
the substitution, in the pronoun, of an "m" for a "w", and that, 
accordingly, it ought to read "I," instead of: "we." 


which are seen but at the things that are not seen. 
II Corinthians 4:17, 18. Hence turn your eyes 
from all that is visible. Herewith I commend you 
all to the grace of God. Amen. 

THE NINTH LETTER OF MATTHIAS SERVAES, WRIT- 
TEN FROM PRISON TO F. V. H. 

The saving grace of God be multiplied unto you 
and all the pious, through Jesus Christ ; with the 
power of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

O. F., my greatly beloved friend* in the Lord, 
I cannot out of love to you forbear to inform 
you how gladly I would fulfill your request, but 
I lack many things, as for instance, paper and ink, 
and besides am watched as closely as gold, that I 
might neither receive nor send off any letters. 
Hence accept this brief letter in good part, for I 
have written it for your good. Therefore the 
heartfelt admonition and request I now address to 
you is, that you sincerely take heed to your life, and 
order it so that it is conformable to the Word of 
God, yea, to the example of Jesus Christ, and con- 
sider it diligently, as you said in conversation with 
me. Love God above all, and do not forsake the 
assembly (Hebrews 10:25), as hitherto; for if you 
still love aught more than Him, you are not worthy 
of Him. Take good heed, my friend in the Lord ; 
for a lip faith is of no avail, as you well know 
yourself; but it must be a living faith, yea, that 
works by love ; if we are to stand here, and here- 
after before God. May God Schadai (Ex. 3:14), 
work such a faith in you, and in all who heartily 
desire it. Amen. As regards how it is with me, I 
cannot write enough, for the Lord grants me great 
joy in my heart, so that I would desire of God, if it 
were His will, that I might be led bound through 
Cologne, and beaten with rods from street to street, 
so that His name might become manifest ; and that 
my body might be refined on the rack, only to the 
praise of God, and not to mine; which has also 
partly occurred. The Lord be praised, Amen ; the 
Lord who sealed my lips, and endued me with 
strength, which He still daily increases ; and who 
will sustain me unto the end. Amen. 

Herewith I commend you to God. Remember 
us as we will you. Greet them that are with you, 
to whom my salutation in the Lord is acceptable. 
By me, Matthias Servaes, of Kottenem. 

THE TENTH LETTER OF MATTHIAS SERVAES, 

WHICH HE WROTE FROM PRISON TO 

MAR. WEST 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you and all 
believers, from God the Father, through Jesus 
Christ ; with the power of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 

O my well beloved sister in the Lord, M. W., 
out of great love, which we have mutually felt 
through the knowledge of God, since we have 
known each other, I cannot forbear to tell you that 

The word used in the original denotes a female friend. Trans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


703 


I often think of you, and, likewise, of all the pious ; 
for they lie at my heart day and night. I have been 
informed that you think of me with much sorrow, 
and that you wished, if it could be, that the Lord 
had ordered it otherwise, for which I do not pray, 
nor can I wish it, since I know not how He could 
have ordered it better for me ; for great sorrow was 
resting upon me, as you also well know, and the 
good God has thus delivered and relieved me from 
this load : and not only this, but I am also free from 
all anxiety. Not that I am weary of laboring ; Oh, 
no, for, if I could have been profitable to the Lord, 
how gladly I would have served Him, and would 
still gladly serve Him ; but I deem it better thus, for 
we must go hence at some time. And I trust that 
the Lord will fill my place with faithful servants 
who may be more fully endowed of Him than I am. 
For the Lord knows with what anxiety, fear and 
solicitude I have served you, and esteemed myself 
little and unworthy before you and God, yea, so 
much so that I did hardly dare lift up my eyes in 
meeting. But by the grace of God I have been 
what I have been; and His grace, which was be- 
stowed upon me was not wholly in vain among 
you. I Cor. 15 :10. I also took up my ministry with 
many tears, as you know ; but now, thanks to the 
Lord, it is all joy, indeed I cannot express all the 
joy. 

O my dear sister, how sweet is the yoke of the 
Lord, how light is His burden upon my neck! By 
His help I will hold still to my God, may it cost 
what it will. But I desire that you and all believers 
entreat the Lord for us, which we also trust to do 
for you. I sincerely pray that His will be done. O 
my dear sister, walk steadfastly and quietly in 
piety, that you may be able to stand. Grace be with 
you all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sin- 
cerity. Amen. Eph. 6:24. 

By me, Matthias Servaes, 
Your brother in the Lord. 


FORTY-TWO PERSONS, NAMELY, THIRTY-FOUR MEN 

AND EIGHT WOMEN, PUT TO DEATH FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, IN THE 

COUNTRY OF BERNE, PRIOR TO AND 

UNTIL THE YEAR A. D. 1556 

As we were very desirous to know the present 
condition of our fellow believers in Alsace, as also, 
what transpired among them prior to this, with re- 
gard to the persecutions suffered, we received, 
through the instrumentality of a good friend of 
ours, H. Vlaming, at present residing at Amster- 
dam, an extract from a certain document which 
the elders and teachers in Alsace drew up con- 
cerning this matter, and sent hither. Translated 
from the Alsatian vernacular, the extract reads as 
follows : 

As regards the brethren that were executed for 
the faith, in the country of Berne, there were exe- 
cuted from the year 1528 until the year 1566, forty- 
two persons, among whom were eight women. We 


have in our possession a brief abstract of their 
names, and surnames, as also, in what year and on 
what day each of them was executed, etc. 

Thus far the extract of said letter, signed, as a 
whole, with the names and surnames of the elders 
and teachers in Alsace, which we would insert here, 
did we not fear that it might even at the present 
day tend to augment persecution against them, of 
which they are not entirely free, as shall be shown 
in the proper place. 


JOHN GEORGE, A. D. 1566 

In the year 1566 brother John George, a Count 
from Italy, having lived in Germany for several 
years, as a refugee, who sojourned with the church, 
and conducted himself as a very humble and excel- 
lent Christian, went from Grossenstein back to 
Italy, where he had left his wife ; but there he was 
denounced and betrayed, so that men came from 
Venice, and apprehended him. When they were 
on the water, on their way to Venice, they cast 
him into the sea, and drowned him, dispatching him 
thus in order that it might be done in quietness, 
lest much trouble should arise on his account, if 
they should bring him to Venice, since he was of so 
noble a race. Thus he had to lose his temporal life 
for the faith. Through faith he forsook and aban- 
doned all nobility of this world, choosing rather to 
suffer reproach with the people of God, than to 
enjoy temporal honor and distinction among his 
own people ; and esteeming reproach for the name 
of Christ great riches, far above the treasures of 
Egypt or the nobility of this world ; for he had re- 
spect to the future, and the eternal reward, which 
will be great in heaven, and will not be withheld 
from him as a witness, follower and valiant soldier 
of Christ. Heb. 11 :24, 26. 


JOHN MANG, IN THE YEAR 1567 

In the year 1567 John Mang, a hatter by trade, 
was imprisoned at Senthoffen,* in Suabia, for the 
faith and the divine truth. In his imprisonment he 
suffered great cold, so that he could not get his feet 
warm at night. Besides this, he had to assist the 
ungodly in many an assault and conflict. Finally, 
he fell asleep in the Lord, in prison, having kept 
his faith, and patiently persevered therein unto the 
end ; hence he will also inherit the glorious crown 
of life, with all the elect of God. 


NICHOLAS GEYER, A. D. 1567 

In the same year also Bro. Nicholas Geyer, a 
miller, and deacon, was apprehended for the faith, 
at Innspruck, in the earldom of Tyrol. There the 
Jesuits and others assailed him in many and various 
ways, and, in the examination, dealt with him in a 
cruel and satanical manner ; but he did not suffer 
himself to be moved from the faith, but steadfastly 
persevered as a Christian hero, and having evinced 

* Probably, Sonthofen (in Bavaria), 


704 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


great constancy, he was condemned to death by 
the children of Caiaphas and Pilate. The priests, 
like the daughter of Herodias, were determined to 
have his head, which they also obtained, for he 
was executed with the sword, and then burnt, thus 
valiantly gaining the victory in Christ, in the noble 
fight of faith, as a true lover of God, whom no 
tribulation, torture or vexation could cause to de- 
spair. No water could quench his love, no sword 
separate it, no fire consume it ; but it was to him a 
way of God to eternal life, for through love to 
God, we, by His grace, will enter into paradise, if 
we do not suffer ourselves to be led astray from 
love. 


KAREL HALLING, A. D. 1567 

Karel Hailing, a native of Steenwerck, who had 
fled from there to Armentiers, for the testimony 
of the Lord, was apprehended at the latter place, 
and, as he was determined steadfastly to adhere to 
the knowledge of the truth and faith he had con- 
fessed, the lords sentenced him to death, and he 
was thus burned alive for the name of God. 


ADRIAN DU RIEU, A. D. 1567 

Adrian du Rieu, called Adrian Olieux, a native 
of Halewijn, and minister of the Word of God, 
and of his church at Armentiers, was apprehended 
at the latter place, for the truth, and after boldly 
confessing his faith, from which no torture could 
cause him to apostatize, but in which he constantly 
firmly persevered, was sentenced to death, and 
burnt alive. 


CHRISTIAN LANGEDUL, CORNELIS CLAESS, 
THEUS DE VICK, AND HANS SYMONS, 
IN THE YEAR A. D. 1567 


MAT- 


In the year of our Lord 1567, one Sunday morn- 
ing, being the 10th of August, Christian Langedul 
went out to take a letter to his brother R. L., and 
then proceeded to a place called the Schelleken, 
whither he had been summoned to help mediate a 
difference between two persons. I Cor. 6 :5. 

This meeting having been spied out, a captain 
named Lamotte (who was at that time in Antwerp) 
came there, under the pretense of seeking some of 
his soldiers, and seeing the assembly, he had his 
armed soldiers (who were waiting for it) occupy 
the house, and immediately dispatched his servant 
boy for the Margrave. In the meantime Christian 
spoke with the captain, in French, to show him why 
they had come together, during which some of the 
assembled company escaped through a back door. 

When the Margrave arrived on horseback, and 
entered the house with his people, he took the rest 
prisoners, and marched them off to prison, where 
they spent the time in great tribulation and patience 
until the following day, when they were examined 
in regard to their faith, which four of them, namely, 
the aforesaid Christian Langedul, Cornells Claess, 


Mattheus de Vick, and Hans Symons, boldly con- 
fessed. They were then so cruelly tortured and so 
lamentably treated that they did not fear death so 
much as the torture, as Christian mentions in a let- 
ter to his wife. 

Having spent over a month in great longing, 
they were finally sentenced to death. When they 
received information that they were to die, they 
were bold and of good cheer ; Christian, however, 
lamented greatly on account of his wife and chil- 
dren (previously throughout his imprisonment, but 
especially in this last night), and their grief was a 
great sorrow to his heart. 

On the 13th of September, being on a Saturday, 
early in the morning, these four friends were 
brought out and, two and two coupled together, led 
to the great market place before the city hall, where 
a circle of soldiers had been formed. In the midst 
there was a hut with four stakes, to which they 
were tied. Hans Symons and Mattheus went first, 
and then Cornelis and Christian. While going^ 
Christian said to the people : "Had we been willing 
to speak lies, we would have escaped this." Mat- 
theus said : "Citizens, that we suffer here, is for 
the truth, and because we live according to the 
word of God." Hans Symons exhorted his breth- 
ren, not to fear them that kill the body, but him 
who has power to cast the soul into damnation. 
And thus they arrived at the place where they were 
to be offered up : There the executioner's assistant 
first took Christian, and placed him to a stake in the 
hut, from where he called to his brethren that were 
still without, exhorting them to contend valiantly 
for the truth, who then gave one another the last 
kiss of peace. Thereupon Cornelis was also placed 
to a stake, then Mattheus, and finally Hans Symons. 
The drums were beaten, in order that they should 
not be heard to speak. The executioner strangled 
them, and then set fire to the hut, and thus these 
four friends came to a blessed end, according to the 
words of the Lord : "He that endureth to the end 
shall be saved." Matt. 10:22. 


LETTERS OF CHRISTIAN LANGEDUL WRITTEN 
DURING HIS IMPRISONMENT 

The first letter of Christian Langedul, written to 
Jus wife, Maeyken Raedts, on the Uth of Au- 
gust; in which he relates the joy of his mind, 
as also, on the other hand, his sorrow for his ' 
wife and children, and, finally, how he 
and his fellow prisoners were examined 
I wish you grace and peace all the days of your 
life, from God our heavenly Father, through Christ 
Jesus, in the power of His Holy Spirit. Amen. 

My chosen and most affectionately beloved wife, 
and sister in the Lord because of the faith, as I 
hope by the grace of the Lord, and that this rela- 
tionship will exist forever. Matt. 12 :50; Gal. 3 :26. 
Had it been possible for me, I should have writ- 
ten you sooner the great grace, joy and comfort 
that I have enjoyed during this brief time in prison ; 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


705 


and I pray the Lord to let me enjoy said blessings 
unto the end, to my salvation; however, the Lord 
knows the great sorrow and tears I have had, and 
still have, and shall yet have, before my departure 
comes, for you, the children, grandmother, and for 
all the friends. 

I have wondered, and am still unable to compre- 
hend what a God it is that we have ; for He is the 
God of all comfort, who comforts me in all my 
temptations ; and I hope that He will also comfort 
you whenever you need comfort. II Cor. 5 :3. 

My most beloved wife, be of good cheer in all 
your sufferings which you have with me; for the 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared to the glory which shall be revealed in 
us ; for we have thus accepted our pilgrimage, and 
always counted these costs. Hence comfort your- 
self with the Word of the Lord, as I hope you will 
do ; and I also have confidence in you, that you will 
not make me more sorrowful than I am already ; I 
know you to be too brave for it. Thus I hope that 
the Lord will strengthen us unto the end. Always 
pray the Lord for us, for we need it, for the prayer 
of the righteous avails much, of whom you are one 
in my heart's estimation, and I hope to see you 
after this life in the eternal, where we shall part 
no more. And in whatever I have at any time 
grieved you, forgive me for the Lord's sake, for I 
gladly forgive them everything, who have sinned 
against me, so that I hope that the Lord will for- 
give me everything ; all my sins and weaknesses. I 
cannot sufficiently wonder at, nor thank the Lord 
enough for what He does for me ; He is too won- 
derfully good a God, this I now truly realize. 

Thus I inform you that we were all examined to- 
day before the margrave, and of us six we four 
freely confessed our faith, for it had to be; either 
the soul or the body had to be sacrificed ; the Lord 
had to be either forsaken or confessed. 

Thus, Hans Symons, Cornelis the shoemaker, 
and Mattheus, confessed as also, I unworthy one, 
and I hope to keep it to the praise of the Lord, but 
not through my own power or merit, but by the 
power and grace of God ; for through weakness we 
are made strong, this I must confess. Eph. 1 :19; 
II Cor. 12 :9. Hence be of good cheer in the Lord, 
and do the best with the children, of whom I dare 
not think, for they lie heavily on my heart. 

When the margrave examined me today, con- 
cerning my faith he asked me about nothing but 
baptism, and I held out against him as long as I 
could, by saying that I knew but one baptism ac- 
cording to the Gospel and Christ's own command 
and injunction; but his constant question was: 
"Say yes or no, whether you are satisfied with the 
baptism you received in your infancy, or whether 
you have received another?" 

I replied that I knew nothing to say about infant 
baptism; but this did not suffice, I had to confess 
that I had received another, and thus I confessed 
it, the Lord be praised, and I have not regretted it 


yet, and I hope that I shall not regret it unto the 
end, for it is the truth. 

I must stop, since my paper will reach no further. 
Greet all the friends much in the Lord, whenever 
you have a proper opportunity, as also, all friends 
according to the flesh; especially, greet grand- 
mother, and comfort her as best you can, since I 
have great anxiety for her sake, and for you and 
my children. I often think of my sweet P., but I 
am glad when he is out of my thoughts. Do the 
best in everything ; I greet you with a holy kiss of 
peace. I hope the Lord will shorten my days, be- 
cause He loves me. To L. E., I hope to write yet, 
when I get time; greet her much in my name. 
Herewith I commend you to the Lord. Written as 
above. 

By me, your very weak husband, Christian Lang- 
edul, from prison, in which I am for the testimony 
of the Lord. 

The second letter of Christian Langedul, in which 
he relates how cruelly he was tortured, and the 
misery oj his body after the torture, as 
also, his sure hope and firm confi- 
dence in the Lord 

Know, my beloved wife, that yesterday about 
three o'clock I had written you a letter, which I 
now send you. I could not send it then, for soon 
afterwards the margrave came here to torture us ; 
hence I was not able to send the letter, for then all 
four of us were one after another severely tortured, 
so that we have now but little inclination to write ; 
however, we cannot forbear, we must write to you. 

Cornelis the shoemaker was the first ; then came 
Hans Symons, with whom also the captain went 
down into the torture chamber. Then thought I : 
"We shall have a hard time of it; to satisfy him." 
My turn came next— you may think how I felt. 
When I came to the rack, where were the lords, the 
order was : "Strip yourself, or tell where you live." 
I looked distressed, as may be imagined. I then 
said: "Will you ask me nothing further then?" 
They were silent. 

Then thought I: "I see well enough what it 
means, it would not exempt me from the torture," 
hence I undressed, and fully resigned myself to the 
Lord, to die. Then they racked me dreadfully, 
twisting off two cords, I believe, on my thighs and 
shins; they stretched me out, and poured much 
water into my body and my nose, and also on my 
heart. Then they released me, and asked : "Will 
you not yet tell it?" They entreated me, and again 
they spoke harshly to me ; but I did not open my 
mouth, so firmly had God closed it. 

Then they said : "Go at him again, and this with 
a vengeance." This they also did, and cried : "Go 
on, go on, stretch him another foot." Then thought 
1 : "You can only kill me." And thus stretched out, 
with cords twisted around my head, chin, thighs, 
and shins, they left me lie, and said: "Tell, tell."' 

They then talked with one another of my ac- 
count which J. T. had written, of the linen, which 


706 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


amounted to six hundred and fifty-five pounds ; and 
that it was so much cash and rebate. Then the 
margrave said : "He understands the French well ;" 
and I lay there in pain. Again I was asked : "Will 
you not tell it ?" I did not open my mouth. Then 
they said : "Tell us where you live ; your wife and 
children, at all events, are all gone away." In short, 
I said not a word. "What a dreadful thing," they 
said. Thus the Lord kept my lips, so that I did not 
open them; and they released me, when they had 
long tried to make me speak. 

Thereupon two of them, the executioner and his 
assistant, bore me from the rack. Think how they 
dealt with us, and how we felt, and still feel. Then 
they half carried, half dragged me from the tor- 
ture chamber up into the jailer's room, where was 
a good fire of oak wood. There they, once or twice, 
gave me some Rhenish wine to drink, which re- 
vived me in a measure. And when I had warmed 
myself somewhat, they again half dragged me up 
over the porter's room. There they had such com- 
miseration for me ; they gave me wine again ; they 
gave me spices, and of everything you had sent me, 
all of which rendered me very good service. They 
had wine brought and helped me to bed. But the 
sheets were very coarse, and greatly hurt my shins 
and thighs; however, soon afterwards the sheets 
and pillow you sent me arrived, and there were also 
two or three pocket handkerchiefs. They then cov- 
ered me with the sheets, which came very conven- 
ient to me, as did also the spices. Had the sheets 
not come, I know not how I should have passed 
the night; but so I slept tolerably well. But I am 
hardly able to stand yet, and the lower part of my 
legs is as though they were dead from racking; 
however, it is all well, as I trust by the grace of the 
Lord. 

We have such a God, so mighty, that He did not 
suffer me to be tempted above that I was able to 
bear, and I hope He will also not in the future, so 
firmly I trust in Him ; for I know assuredly that 
there will never be found another way or another 
truth. Hence be instant, whether in season or out 
of season. II Tim. 4:2. 

I received your letter, and thank you much, that 
you remember me so kindly, as you have always 
done. I wrote you in my first letter, before I re- 
ceived yours, the right answer to the letter you sent 
me. I have still much to write to you, but am not 
well able to do so now, for it is too soon. 

After me Mattheus was tortured ; he named his 
house and the street in which we live, and said it 
was in a gate; however, I am of the opinion that 
there are no longer any gates in that street. Hence 
move away altogether, if you have not done so yet ; 
for I think the lord will find his way there. Let 
therefore no one who stands in any danger go into 
the house. He also named R. T.'s house, and the 
street where F. V. St. lives. Do herein immediately 
the best you can. He is very sorry for it. 

Cornelis and Hans told nothing. I have much 
to write yet, but the time is too short. I hope to 


write today yet, if it is the Lord's pleasure. I wish 
that H. T. would once come out. I greet you all 
most affectionately. It was well that J. T. went 
away yesterday, for the margrave came soon after. 
But I cannot write you much more, for the time 
until daybreak is too short. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. Pray the Lord diligently 
for us, for he that asketh receiveth. I dare not let 
my thoughts dwell much on the children and you ; 
it is so exceedingly hard for me to part from you 
and them. Satisfy all the friends as best you can, 
for I am tolerably well content, only it grieves me 
much on their account; however, the Lord has 
ordered it so. 

By me, your weak husband, Christian Langedul, 
in prison at Antwerp, the 12th of August 1567. 

I have not fully recovered yet from the torture, 
as may be imagined ; but I trust it is all well ; do 
not grieve too much about it. If J. T. could bring 
along my account book, I should be glad ; I should 
show him everything, or write it down for him. 
Bring us something to seal letters with. 

Another letter of Christian Langedul, in which he 

shows the assurance of his mind, the nothingness 

of his own self, his love to his son-in-law, 

J. T., and, lastly, the fear which they had 

of being tortured again, and why 

Grace, mercy, and joy in the Holy Ghost, from 
God our heavenly Father, through Christ Jesus, 
this I wish you, my chosen and greatly beloved 
wife in the Lord, and all them that love His appear- 
ing. II Tim. 4 :8. PP 

Dearly beloved wife in the Lord, I hope you 
partly know by this time how it is with me, by the 
two letters I wrote you yesterday, which I hope 
you have already received. In them I wrote to you 
partly concerning the state of my mind, which is 
still unchanged, praise the Lord forever for His 
grace, which He gives to me, poor, unprofitable and 
exceedingly great sinner; for I deem myself un- 
worthy and unfit for this glory, to which the Lord 
now calls me. Of myself or by my own strength 
I cannot attain it ; hence I hope by His grace to ad- 
here unto the end to the truth and the faith once 
delivered to the saints; for I am assured in my 
heart, and have certainly known it all the time of 
my pilgrimage (which is now about twelve years- 
true, only a short time, and imperfectly spent), 
that there will never be found another. Hence I 
hope to adhere to it, only by the strength and grace 
of the Lord, and not through my own ; and I hope 
by the grace of God to rejoice, by my death, all 
those whom I may at any time in my life have 
grieved. And I hope that all those whom I may 
have wronged in any way will forgive me, since I 
have always been very ready to forgive, whenever 
any one wronged me ; I hope that all men and the 
Lord will also do so towards me. I am greatly con- 
cerned for J. T., for I know his kindness ; hence I 
will let this suffice, and wish him, as I have often 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


707 


done, true faith. This the Lord must give him ; 
but he must also pray for and heartily desire it. 
Oh, that I might die another death for him, and 
all the friends, that they might be saved ; how glad- 
ly I should do it ! O J. T., how much you have done 
for me, and, I hope, will yet do for my weak wife 
(your mother), and my children, on whom I dare 
not let my thoughts dwell much. She (your moth- 
er) is a woman who fears God with all her heart. 
Associate with her, for she will seek nothing but 
your common salvation. I will let this suffice for 
the present, else I should not have time to send this 
letter. I wrote you yesterday that I hoped to write 
to you during the day, but I could not do it ; Mat- 
theus and I lay in bed until two o'clock, so greatly 
were we afraid, because the margrave came here 
to torture Cornelis again, and we feared that we 
should also be tortured a second time, of which we 
had a great dread, more than of death, for it is an 
excruciating pain. Cornelis was tortured and 
scourged to such a degree the second time, that 
three men had to carry him up, and they say that 
he could scarcely move a member, except his 
tongue. He sent word to us, that if they come again 
it is his opinion it will finish him. Thus the Mar- 
grave did not come yesterday, but we expect him 
today again; may the Lord help us, for it is a 
horrible pain. Yesterday I received a small basket 
with eatables and a nightcap from J. T. I have 
lent the nightcap to Mattheus, and should like to 
have another, when convenient, as also a comb, 
and a Testament, a hymn book, or something else 
to read, that we may delight ourselves a little with 
the Word of the Lord. There is a turnkey here, by 
the name of Pieter, who will see that we get it. En- 
closed I send you a little memento, and W. D. B.'s 
account. Yesterday evening we were told that J. T. 
and P. V. D. tried hard to get to me ; but it could 
not be, because the margrave had said that he 
should come again ; however, he did not come, for 
he attended a great banquet at Mansfield. 

While I am sitting here, and writing, we are in- 
formed that the margrave will hold a penal court 
today; I hope it is for us. Pray for us. I hope 
God will strengthen us by His power, which sur- 
passes everything. Oh, that we might be delivered 
thus soon ; but I am afraid it will not be. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. Always adhere to the truth, 
which, and nothing else, I have confidence you will 
do. I heartily greet you and all the God-fearing 
with the peace of the Lord ; and Mattheus does the 
same. Greet all the friends, especially grandmoth- 
er, most heartily, when convenient. Mattheus 
would say to you and all the God-fearing, that if he 
has grieved you in that he did not guard his lips 
better, he is sincerely sorry for it. Written in 
bonds, at Antwerp, on the 13th of August, 1567, 
by me, your weak husband, 

Christian Langedul. 
Do the best, and be of good cheer, and pray for us. 


Another letter of Christian Langedul, in which he 

exhorts his brother R. L. to perseverance in the 

pilgrimage begun; and, being assured in his 

mind, requests, for completion, the prayers 

of the saints; commends his wife to him, 

and relates how a little priest came to 

speak with him 

The eternal, Almighty God and Father of mercy, 
through His Son, our Lord and Saviour, the same 
almighty, eternal, worshipful, only wise God and 
merciful Father of all grace, strengthen and stab- 
lish you unto the end with His Holy Spirit, my dear 
brother and sister in the Lord, and also according 
to the flesh ; that you may receive the crown of life 
with all the saints and elect children of God ; here- 
with I will bid you final farewell and greeting in 
this present time, with all dear brethren and sisters 
in the Lord who live with you and know me. Amen. 

My dearly beloved brother and sister, whom I 
love from the bottom of my heart, I feel prompted 
now at the close of my life to write you a little for 
a memorial. I trust you will accept in good part, 
so that it may be a perpetual memento and admo- 
nition from this your second brother now that has 
been imprisoned here in the city of Antwerp for the 
testimony of the Lord, for which I hope to lay 
down my life by the grace of God, and hope that 
you will not faint on account of this our tribu- 
lation which we now suffer for Christ's sake, hop- 
ing that it happens for the furtherance of the Gos- 
pel, and to the awakening of many who possibly 
have long walked drowsily and half asleep, (that 
they may become awakened and sober) ; and I 
hope by the grace of the Lord that it will not tend 
to your abatement, but much rather to your greater 
edification, and that it will serve you as a per- 
petual direction in your pilgrimage which you have 
yet to take through a dismal wilderness, in which 
you may yet meet with many trials. Phil. 1:12; 
Eph. 5:14; I Thess. 5:6; I Pet. 2:11. Hence take 
diligent heed, and lust not after evil things ; neither 
be like those who murmured ; but give diligent care 
that you constantly press on to the promised land, 
with valiant Joshua and Caleb, so that you may 
take it by force. I Cor. 16:6, 10. And be content 
with the Word of the Lord, and look to the prom- 
ise, for He is so faithful, and you know that the 
Israelites remained without for no other reason, 
than because of their unbelief. Heb. 3:19. Hence, 
my dear friends, believe God's work, and adhere '.o 
it unto death, and God will give you the victory. 
Though they seem like giants in our eyes, we shall 
devour them as bread, and this through our faith, 
by which we overcome the devil, hell, death and 
the world. Num. 13 :33 ; I John 5 :4. 

O dearest friends, you know that all the pious 
overcame by faith, as you yourself, my dear broth- 
er, know better than I can write it to you. Hebrews 
11. Take good heed, my beloved, that you fall not 
in the wilderness, as so many do ; for in that case it 


708 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


were better for us not to have known the truth, yea, 
never to have been born ; for if we lose our birth- 
right, wherewith will we obtain the blessing again ? 
for it is written that Esau sought it with tears, but 
found it not. II Pet. 2 :21 ; Heb. 12 :17. Therefore 
faint not, but firmly persevere, it is the true grace 
of God wherein you stand, as I hope you yourselves 
know. I doubt not that there will never be found 
another way. I Pet. 5:12. 

O brother, were another to be found, than this 
anxious, narrow and strait way, how gladly should 
the flesh put up with it ; but it must pass the strait 
gate, and O how narrow this is, so that flesh and 
blood will adhere to the posts. But, dear and faith- 
ful brother, what great salvation the merciful 
Father has provided for me, who am so utterly un- 
worthy ; what great thanks shall I give Him for it, 
who has so endowed me with His grace and provid- 
ed such a salvation for me. Continue in it, my dear 
brother and sister, and pray the Lord for us, that 
He may preserve us in our sorest distress, and 
comfort us when we are most in affliction, and in 
extreme need of consolation and help, as I hope 
He -will do, for He is faithful that promised it. He 
also will do it, and will be with us even unto death, 
and not forsake us ; for who was ever confounded 
that trusted in Him ? I hope He will not suffer us 
to be confounded, and that He will finish the good 
work which He has begun in us, and this through 
His unfathomable mercy and grace. To this end, 
help us to fight, with your prayers to God in our 
behalf ; this is my desire and the desire of us all ; in 
this you can now aid us the most. 

My dear brother, why do you grieve for me; 
rather take comfort in it, for the Lord has ob- 
viously ordered it so. He loves us, and means to 
bring us into rest. I feel that it is all of the Lord, 
for when I for a time hear of no deliverance, I re- 
ceive great joy in my heart and refreshing from the 
Lord ; but as soon as something comes again, and 
the flesh lusts greatly after it, joy departs, and we 
have great difficulty to get it back from the Lord. 
Therefore I hope that you will resign yourselves 
better herein, for the Lord intends to deliver us 
from this body of death, and to help us out of this 
anxiety. The Lord be praised forever for the love 
He shows me, and that He so helps me. I hope He 
will keep also you in His truth ; hence be of good 
cheer, and comfort yourselves with His beautiful 
promise, with which also we comfort ourselves 
entirely. 

Therefore, dear brother, I will herewith con- 
clude my letter; and I kindly ask you to accept it 
in good part, for it has been written to you and 
your dear wife out of heartfelt brotherly love, for 
a perpetual farewell and memorial. I herewith also 
thank you for the great trouble and labor you have 
put yourself to for my sake and for the great ex- 
pense you have on my account. I can never repay 
it to you ; but I hope that the Lord will recompense 
it to you and yours, now and hereafter ; also as re- 
gards that other matter, which you well know. O 


brother, do not let it vex you that I was so situated ; 
I should so gladly have done it for you and yours, 
as God knows, who is acquainted with every heart. 
If convenient for you, lend my wife a little assist- 
ance while you are here, in the things in which she 
may need your services, and comfort her in the ex- 
ceedingly great sorrow in which she now is ; this I 
kindly request of you. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
to the Word of His grace ; may He strengthen and 
stablish you in His truth unto the end of your lives, 
to His praise, and to your salvation, and the salva- 
tion of us all. 

This afternoon a little, lean priest visited us. I 
believe he is a Jesuit, and that he sometimes 
preaches in Koppenken's church. There is very 
little in the man. The bailiff accompanied him. He 
(the priest) damned us exceedingly, which was 
about all he had to say. I was with them about 
two hours. It would take too long to write all. His 
arguments were very weak. It seems strange to me 
that the lords are not ashamed to come with such 
men, who will by no means defend themselves with 
the Holy Scriptures, but with the teachers of the 
Roman church, with Ambrose, Jerome, and Au- 
gustine, whom [they say] we are to believe. I then 
confessed that it could not be proved with the 
apostolical writings that the apostles baptized in- 
fants; also, that baptism belonged to believers, 
and that infants had no faith. But he constantly 
asserted that the ancient teachers had written it, 
and that the holy Roman church so observed it, 
hence also we had to observe it. A poor argument! 
The others had something at least, but he was too 
wretchedly deficient. Hence it would be too tedi- 
ous to write about it. 

Herewith I commend you to God. Written at 
Antwerp, in prison, by me, your weak brother in 
the Lord, and also according to the flesh, Christian 
Langedul, imprisoned for the testimony of the Lord 
and my conscience, the 10th of September, 1567. 

Christian Langedul 's leave and last adieu to Maey- 
ken Raedts, his wife after he was sen- 
tenced to death 

Grace and peace from our heavenly Father, 
through Christ Jesus, this I wish you, my dear and 
chosen wife and sister in the Lord; and may the 
Comforter, the Holy Ghost comfort you in your 
tribulation, as He will do according to His promise. 
And I trust, my wife, that all (whether tribulation 
or sorrow), will tend to salvation to the Christian, 
as I also trust it will conduce to your salvation, and 
also to mine, although no tribulation for the pres- 
ent seems to be joyous, and this according to the 
words of the apostle. Heb. 12:11. However, after- 
ward, my beloved, it will work the peaceable fruit 
of righteousness unto them that by good works 
seek eternal life, as we have done according to our 
weakness, for thus I may well say, and I speak it 
from the heart. Nevertheless, I expect to inherit 
salvation through the grace of the Lord, and am of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


709 


good cheer herein ; I will therefore thank the Lord 
forever for His love. O my love, the winepress 
must now be trodden ; and I am quite ready for it, 
the Lord be praised. Truly, He is a God of all com- 
fort who comforts us in all our tribulation. Oh, 
that I could fully thank the Lord for all the com- 
fort and strength He grants to me, unworthy one. 

Therefore, my beloved, comfort yourself in the 
Lord, and in His word ; therein you will find such 
great consolation and refreshment; and may the 
Holy Ghost dwell in you with all wisdom as I doubt 
not that the Spirit of God does dwell in you, and 
that He will guide you into all truth and righteous- 
ness. 

Your letter I received this noon; I thank you 
very much for it. J. was here, but we could scarcely 
speak together. I felt somewhat sorry on account 
of it afterwards, when I parted from him ; but the 
jailer drove us away, saying that the lord was com- 
ing, which I half thought was not so ; nor was it so, 
for the lord did not come. I would fain not have 
parted from him in this manner, but the Lord dis- 
poses. Tell J. T. and his wife; that I wish their 
salvation from all my heart, and that he and she, 
and all men, might know the truth. If I promised 
it to him in weakness, I hope, by the grace of God, 
tomorrow to demonstrate it in power. J. told me 
that you were writing me another letter. O my 
love, you put yourself to too much trouble, I fear ; 
do rest, for it will soon be over with me. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to the 
word of His grace. Greet all the friends most cor- 
dially with the peace of the Lord ; greet warmly R. 
Langedul; also your sister, and all the friends, 
whenever it is convenient, and bid them all adieu. 
Adieu, my dear lamb, adieu. Written on the 12th 
of September, 1567 by me, Christian Langedul, 
your husband and weak brother in the Lord, im- 
prisoned and sentenced to death for the testimony 
of Christ, and for our conscience. All four of us 
greet you very much in the Lord. We are of good 
cheer and courage in the Lord, as Kalleken, who 
visited us, will tell you. Thank R. most heartily in 
my name for his letter; it rejoiced my heart, the 
Lord be praised. Amen. 

Note. — As there has been put into our hands a 
letter written by Hans Symons (who was burnt at 
Antwerp, A. D. 1567, together with Christian 
Langedul and two others of our fellow believers) 
to his wife, shortly before his death, we deem it 
well herewith to insert the same; the copy of the 
letter reads as follows : 


COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY HANS SYMONS 
TO HIS WIFE, IN HIS BONDS OR IMPRISON- 
MENT AT ANTWERP, IN SEPTEMBER, 
IN THE YEAR A. D. 1567 

Grace, peace and mercy from God the heavenly 
Father ; also steadfastness in the faith, and con- 
stant adherence to God in all temptations and trib- 
ulations, by the power and operation of the Holy 


Ghost; unto Him, blessed forever, be praise and 
thanks. This I wish you, my most beloved wife 
and sister in the Lord, whom I love after a godly 
manner, as my own flesh, yea, have loved more 
than my own self, as evidenced by many favors and 
acts ; this is my heartfelt greeting to you, and that 
it may go well with you, both in soul and body. 
Amen. 

Further, my dear and much beloved wife, and 
sister in the Lord, know that I have received your 
letter, which comforts me in my bonds, because I 
learn that you still remember me and my fellow 
prisoners in the Lord, in your prayers, that the 
Lord would strengthen and comfort us, and help us 
finish the good work by Him begun in us, to His 
praise and the salvation of our souls. 

O dear lamb, I also beseech you on high from 
the bottom of my heart, to keep you from all error 
of unbelief, and to help finish, to His praise and 
honor, and to the salvation of your soul, the good 
work which He has begun in you. 

Let us pray together with a broken heart, an 
humble spirit and a pure conscience, lifting up holy 
hands, without contention or strife, praying to God 
steadfastly in the faith, then will our prayer be a 
sweet savor and an acceptable offering to God ; for 
every gift comes from the Father of lights. 

my dear wife, lay to heart the virtues which 
the Lord has caused to be proclaimed to you, as the 
prophet says : "He hath shewed thee O man, what 
is good ; and what doth the Lord require of thee, 
but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk 
humbly with thy God." Micah 6 :8. 

Always remember those who have walked the 
way before you through much tribulation, and have 
always remained valiant in the faith, with a firm 
confidence. "Who was ever confounded that trust- 
ed in the Lord?" says the prophet. Hence, dear 
wife, do not slightly esteem the great grace which 
the Lord has shown you. Always persevere stead- 
fastly, and trust in the Lord with a firm confidence ; 
He will not forsake you, nor will He leave you 
without comfort; for in time of need He succors 
His own, and says: "A mother may forget her 
child, yet will I never forget thee." 

Be of good cheer, I pray you, in your trial, which 
the Lord sends you, and take Job for an exam- 
ple, how patient he was; and the Lord blessed 
him. 

1 trust the Lord will let His merciful eyes rest 
upon you and upon all sorrowing and afflicted 
hearts, to comfort them by the Spirit by which 
He Himself was comforted in His sufferings. 

I am much troubled and afflicted in my heart, 
when I think of you, and of my four poor little 
lambs, whom I must all leave. 

I pray you, Tanneken, remember them in your 
heart as long as you live. 

Do not forget my request of you, namely, that 
you walk in the law of your Lord all the days 
of your life, and that you be to my and your chil- 
dren, whom the Lord has given us during the time 


710 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of our wedlock, a pattern in all humility and obe- 
dience, in instruction in righteousness; and take 
for remembrance the Maccabean mother, how she 
strengthened her children, that they should not 
forsake the law of God. 

I commend them to you, my dearest wife, and to 
the Lord. He will help you ; His hand is not short- 
ened, that He cannot help us. For better is one 
child that fears God, than a thousand ungodly chil- 
dren; yea, it were better to die childless, than to 
leave ungodly children behind. I pray you, exer- 
cise good care over them ; I commit them to you, 
and to the Lord, for I am taken from you and 
them, which greatly troubles me according to the 
flesh; but I remember that it is written: "Whoso- 
ever forsaketh not everything, father, mother, sis- 
ter, brother, wife, children, property, lands, yea, 
also his own life, the same is not worthy of me;" 
in short, "Whosoever loveth aught more than me, 
is not worthy of me." I do not know what the Lord 
has seen in me, when I consider that I am so mis- 
erable and unworthy to suffer for His name. I 
can praise and thank the Lord for the great bene- 
fits which He has shown me in my bonds. Well do 
I now find, that the Lord has helped us unworthy 
ones, especially me. 

According to the Spirit, my heart rejoices in the 
hope of future glory. I hope that I shall soon put 
off this mortal garment, and put on the immortal ; 
may the Lord direct our hearts thereto, for we need 
help from the Lord of hosts, in our tribulation. 
See, my dear and much beloved wife and sister in 
the Lord, take this, with your little children, as a 
testament and as a remembrance from him who has 
lived with you in the bonds of wedlock for about 
five years. We must now part, because of the cove- 
nant which we made with God, never to depart 
therefrom ; hence I must now depart from the mar- 
riage covenant, for the sake of the covenant which 
we made with God; I now go (though unworth- 
ily), the way which the prophets, Christ, and His 
apostles went, through much tribulation and pain, 
with many tears, and must drink the cup of bitter- 
ness which they all drank. Though the Lord Him- 
self said : "Holy Father, if it be possible that this 
cup pass from me, let it be done ; but if not, Holy 
Father, thy will be done ;" yet He was given us for 
an example, that we should follow His footsteps 
in obedience; for Christ entered into His glory 
through much suffering, thereby leaving us an ex- 
ample that we should follow His steps. 

Therefore, my beloved in the Lord, comfort 
yourself with His Word, and remember that John 
writes, that the Lord said to His disciples and to 
His friends: "In the world ye shall have tribula- 
tion ; but be of good cheer, your tribulation shall 
be turned into joy." Hence, dear Tanneken, re- 
joice in the hope of future happiness ; be patient in 
tribulation, continue instant in praver, that the 
Lord would comfort you and not suffer you to fall 
into temptation, but with it also make a way of es- 
cape. Commend your matters to the Lord ; I hope 


and trust in God that, if you continue in His laws, 
and constantly keep the Lord before your eyes, 
He will raise up some one who will help, comfort 
and assist you. Never separate from the God-fear- 
ing. How pleasant it is to be among the Lord's 
people ! I say with Moses : "I would rather suffer 
affliction with the people of God than enjoy tem- 
poral pleasure." 

Always associate with the saints of the Lord; 
for among the holy, one becomes holy, says the 
apostle. And remember the words of the Lord: 
"He that overcometh shall inherit all things, and be 
clothed in white raiment, and God shall wipe away 
all tears from our eyes." 

O dear Tanneken, it seems that there must be 
tears ; for where no tears are, none can be wiped 
away. The Lord grant (as I trust in Him that He 
will) that after this tribulation, which has come 
upon us for His name's sake, and which is a sore 
affliction to my heart, we may rejoice together in 
the kingdom of God and of Christ. For, my dear 
and much beloved wife and sister in the Lord, 
whom I love from the bottom of my heart, together 
with my four little children, it is very hard for me 
when I think of your heavy burden, the spoiling of 
our property, and that the Lord has deprived you 
of the provider of your daily bread. I fain would, 
had it been the Lord's pleasure, that He had spared 
us this affliction ; however as it cannot be other- 
wise, we will commend our affliction to the Lord. 

When I consider, Tanneken, our past time, I 
think that it is a fatherly chastisement, for He says • 
"Whom I love I chasten." I well know that we 
have merited it at the hands of the Lord, since we 
ofttimes were disobedient in the sufferings sent us 
by Him. When we (as is true enough) had little 
success, as the world counts success, we complained 
and murmured against God, because we had not 
more to live on, and many children were born to 
us; just as though God's hand had been shortened, 
that He could not have fed us. And now that little 
vanishes away as a prey, and we must be satisfied • 
however, it is for the Lord's sake ; and for His sake 
I gladly suffer. The Lord gave it me, and for His 
sake I will also gladly resign it. 

Hence, dear Tanneken, I have often before told 
you this. I do not write it to trouble you, but to 
indicate to you that God is chastening us ; for He 
shows that He still loves us. Though the Lord 
chasten us, let us not cast His chastisement from 
us; for He that rejects chastisement and instruc- 
tion will perish. 

Therefore, my beloved, I earnestly pray the Lord 
for you, and for my four children whom God has 
given me— which you bore me, and brought forth 
in pain — that He would not forsake you, but com- 
fort, strengthen and stablish you, and feed all my 
four little orphans, and their mother, both accord- 
ing to the soul and body. Always trust in the Lord ; 
I trust He will not forsake you. Take counsel with 
the Lord, and with them that fear Him ; and take 
better heed to walk in the obedience of Christ I 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


711 


am sorry from the bottom of my heart, that I have 
not improved my time better. And I ask you to 
excuse and forgive me in whatever I have grieved 
you; for I am heartily sorry for it; and wherein 
you may have grieved me, I forgive you all from 
the bottom of my heart. And I pray the Lord, that 
He would also forgive us the same, as I hope, and 
also trust in Him, that He has done. I thank you 
for the good intercourse we had together during 
the time of our wedlock; and I thank also all the 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, for the intercourse 
I had with them in the faith, for their faces were 
always pleasing to me. The Lord grant us grace 
that hereafter we may all live together in joy with 
the Lord, and be crowned with the crown of sal- 
vation, with which all the saints of God will be 
adorned, and this out of pure grace. Amen. 

This is my testament, my dear and much beloved 
Tanneken. In parting, let me tell you, that my 
mind is still unchanged in the Lord, namely, I, un- 
worthy one, am determined to bear testimony to 
the Lord, and to seal the same with my blood, in 
token that it is the truth ; nor do I know any other 
way to be saved through grace, for a witness to the 
world, to the honor of God, and to the salvation of 
our souls. Amen. 

Cornelis, Mattheus, and Christian are also thus 
minded. Entreat the Lord for us all, that He would 
help us finish the good work by Him begun in us, 
to His honor and to the salvation of our souls. 
Amen. 

Pray the Lord for us all, and remember the pris- 
oners, as being imprisoned with them. All four of 
us heartily greet you and them that live in the same 
house with you, with the peace of the Lord. 

No more for the present ; excuse my letter, for 
my mind is not in the best condition for writing. 
Herewith I commend you to God, and to the rich 
Word of His grace. Amen. 

By me, Hans Symons, your husband in the 
Lord, confined in prison at Antwerp. 


A LETTER OF HANS SYMONS, WHICH HE WROTE 

IN PRISON AT ANTWERP, WHERE HE, WITH 

THREE OTHERS WAS BURNT, ON THE 

13TH OF SEPTEMBER, 1567 

Grace and peace be unto you from God our Fa- 
ther, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be 
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort ; who 
comforted us in all our tribulation, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by 
the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comfort- 
ed of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound 
in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 
And whether we be afflicted or comforted, it is all 
for our good, and for our salvation. II Cor. 1 :3-6. 
This I wish you, my dear brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, Vincent, Kaerle, Willem, and Hans Sy- 
mons, and Tanneken, Vincent's wife, as a heart- 
felt greeting in the Lord. And brethren and sisters 


in general, I write this that you may remember me, 
what tribulation and distress I suffered in Antwerp 
for the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ; and 
because the time has come that I must part from 
you all. Amen. 

Further, my dear brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, and coworkers and followers of the Gospel, 
whom God has shown great mercy in this world, in 
that He, out of grace, revealed His will. Hence, 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, I beseech you 
from the depth of my heart, that you receive not the 
grace of God in vain, for He says : "I have heard 
thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation 
have I succored thee." Therefore, dear brethren, 
let us not give offense to any one, that our min- 
istry be not blamed ; but let us approve ourselves 
as the ministers of God, in much patience, in ne- 
cessities and distresses. II Cor. 6:1-4. Hence, dear 
brethren, accept this as a sincere request from me, 
that you take heed to your calling, wherein you are 
called to holiness, for He says : "Be ye holy ; for I 
am holy." I Pet. 1 :16. And I pray you, that you 
show love to one another all the days of your life, 
for Christ says : "By this shall all men know that 
ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." 
John 13 :35. If any prosper more than others, let 
one assist the other, and do not become alienated 
from one another, lest one be grieved on account of 
another ; but exhort one another with the law of the 
Lord when ye come together, and always remem- 
ber the days when you were illuminated — how 
zealous we all were when we came together, to 
speak of the great benefits which God has be- 
stowed upon us, in that He has called us from the 
power of darkness into His marvelous light, which 
is kindled in our hearts, so that we have sur- 
rendered ourselves to serve the Lord all the days 
of our life, and no more to live to ourselves. Heb. 
10:32; I Pet. 2:9; Romans 14:7. 

O dear brethren and sisters, always write the law 
of the Lord into your hearts, and keep Him ever 
before your eyes, and serve Him faithfully unto the 
end of your lives ; for if there is anything that is 
not clear, be it ever so small, in which the con- 
science is troubled, Satan produces, by way of ac- 
cusation, all he can produce, in order that he may 
at least lead astray or trouble us ; however, he fre- 
quently has cause, for we all sin in many things, as 
James says. Rev. 12 :10 ; Jas. 3 :2. 

Therefore, dear brethren and sisters, awake, and 
make straight paths for your feet, that you may 
always be prepared for the Gospel of peace, which 
calls us only to peace, for beautiful are the feet of 
them that fear the Lord. Eph. 5:14; Heb. 12:13; 
Eph. 6:15; Rom. 10:15. Never separate from the 
church of the Lord ; for it is the body of Christ, and 
He is the Saviour of His body. And though some- 
times there are some in it who do not truly follow 
the Lord, think : "Lord, I have no right to sin, too, 
because another sins, since the Lord has no pleas- 
ure in the multitude of sin, but that everyone turn 
from his evil way, and he shall live." And I pray 


712 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you and all the brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
that they do not think it a small thing to grieve 
their neighbor, whether by word or deed, or by the 
putting on of apparel. We can avoid this some- 
times, but we will not, caring not that our neigh- 
bor is troubled thereby. 

O dear brethren, when one is apprehended or 
put into bonds, or the Lord takes us from this 
world, it greatly troubles our conscience. And our 
stay here is so brief; hence prepare well your 
lamps, that when the bridegroom comes, you will 
not have to go for oil, for the doors will then be 
shut. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the 
whole world, and lose his own soul? or what will 
you give in exchange for your soul? Matt. 16:25. 
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, 
but sanctify God in your hearts, and give thanks 
unto the Father, who has made you meet to be par- 
takers of the inheritance of the saints in light. 
Rom. 6:12; I Pet. 3 :15 ; Col. 1 :12. O dear breth- 
ren, how true and certain we daily find it to be, that 
it is the truth for which we must suffer, of which I 
am becoming convinced more and more every day, 
though I never doubted that it was the truth. 

O dear brethren and sisters, continue herein 
unto the end, and you will prosper ; and do not suf- 
fer yourselves to be deceived through philosophy, 
or vain deceit, through vain pomp and subtle in- 
ventions; for men are soon corrupted from their 
simplicity which they have in Christ, for it is a 
great grace which we have received from God, that 
the truth is revealed to us, which is hid from so 
many thousands. Col. 2:8; II Cor. 11:3; Eph. 1 :9. 
Hence, my dear brethren and sisters, think now of 
us, how many tortures we have endured, how many 
sighs we have spent, how much weeping and sup- 
plicating to God we have done, with strong crying 
and tears unto Him for help, that you might be able 
to keep unto the end the faith wherein you stand. 

O dear brethren, it is so hard for us, and the cup 
which we must drink is so bitter. O how am I 
straightened till the child is born ! These woes are 
so bitter, dear brethren ; I speak the truth ; it is im- 
possible to make any one believe what pain it is to 
bring forth a child, except him who has experi- 
enced it ; however, when it is born, then the pain is 
remembered no more. Thus it is also with me and 
my fellow prisoners ; we are now in the throes of 
travail, many a heart grief fills us with anguish, 
and we must cry to God for help. And He com- 
forts us, for He is a God of comfort, who can com- 
fort all troubled hearts, as He also does. But I hope 
that we shall soon have brought forth; then we 
shall remember the anguish and distress no more, 
and all the tears, that now ofttimes course down 
our cheeks, so that at times we almost, with David, 
water our bed with our tears, will be wiped away ; 
for He is faithful that promised it us, and will also 
keep it. We comfort one another much with the 
Lord's promises. John 16:21 ; Isa. 26:17; TI Cor. 
1:3, 4; Ps. 6:6; Isa. 25:8; I Thess. 5:24. 
Therefore, dear brethren and sisters, exhort one 


another daily, and be subject to one another in love. 
And I pray you, dear brethren and brothers-in-law 
in the Lord, I pray you, exercise good care over 
my sisters, for you are placed over them ; the watch 
over them is committed to you. Dear brothers, 
live with them according to knowledge, as I also 
trust you will do. I commend them to you from 
the heart. And you sisters in the Lord, and accord- 
ing to the flesh, I pray you from mv inmost soul, 
in my bonds, which I suffer for Christ's sake, that 
you bear with all modesty your husbands, whom 
the Lord and His church have given you, that you 
should live with them in all subjection and obedi- 
ence. It well becomes women to honor their hus- 
bands, for a woman of understanding is the crown 
of her husband, and the wife is honored through 
the husband, and the husband through the wife. 
Therefore I entreat you, dear sisters, assist your 
husbands with all willingness, lest you discourage 
them. Oh, if the wife knew what trouble and grief 
she can cause her husband in his work, she would 
shun to do it as she would shun poison ; for the wife 
can cause her husband to consume soul and bodv 
in his labor. Encourage each other in spiritual and 
temporal matters, and always shun whatever might 
give rise to trouble, for Satan is wily ; he is satis- 
fied with any means by which he can cause con- 
tention; he walks about man, as a roaring lion, 
seeking whom he may devour. Hence I beseech 
you for the Lord's sake, lay to heart what I write 
you with sighing ; I do it because I love you all in 
my heart, and also all them that fear the Lord. T 
say with Moses : "I would rather suffer affliction 
with the children of God, than enjoy the pleasures 
of sin." Always associate with those who fear the 
Lord, and pray, lest Satan take you unawares ; for 
when it is least expected, the Lord comes, as I and 
my fellow prisoners can testify. I trust the Lord 
has thus ordered it with us. We are now in it; 
may the Almighty God help us through, as I trust 
He will do. Help pray the Lord for us ; for the 
effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails 
much. Acts. 12:5; Jas. 5:16. I beseech you, my 
dear brethren and sisters, take heed unto your- 
selves ; the time is short, and it is a fearful thin?- to 
fall into the hands of the Lord. I Cor. 7 :29; Heb. 
10:31. Call to remembrance the dav when you 
were illuminated, how ardent we were in the law of 
God, to walk in it. v. 32. I hope you are better in- 
structed in everything, than I can write. And 
above all, I prav you, keep the Lord before your 
eyes above all else, and love one another fervently : 
thereby men shall know that you are children of the 
Most High, for love abides forever, it never per- 
ishes. John 13:35; I Cor. 13:13, 8. Be hosnitable. 
remember them that are in bonds, comfort the sor- 
rowing, remember the poor, each according to his 
circumstances. Oh, it gives such peace to the con- 
science. T wish indeed I had done much more 
Heb. 13 :2. 3 ; II Cor. 1 :4. 

Herewith I commend you all to the eternal, Al- 
mighty God; may He comfort, strengthen ' and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


713 


stablish you all, and us poor, forsaken sheep, de- 
prived of all men, unto the end of our lives ; for it 
lies not in the beginning, nor in the middle, but he 
that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be 
saved. Matt. 24:13. Behold, dear brethren, I go 
before, and hope to wait for you under the altar, 
where they cry: "Lord, Lord, when wilt thou 
avenge the blood of thy saints?" Rev. 6 :9, 10. But 
the Lord will shorten the days for His elect's sake ; 
and then will He clothe them in white raiment, and 
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and they will 
see sorrow no more, for it has never entered into 
the heart of man what God has prepared for them 
that love Him. Matt. 24 :22 ; Rev. 3 :5 ; I Cor. 2 :9. 
Herewith I bid you all a final adieu in this world, 
and thank you all for the good intercourse I have 
had with you in my life. And wherein I have 
grieved you, or any one else, forgive me; I am 
heartily sorry for it. I hope and trust to God that 
He has forgiven it me ; and if there be any one who 
has wronged me, I forgive him from the bottom 
of my heart, no matter who he be. We four, Hans, 
Cornelis, Mattheus, and Christian, in bonds for the 
testimony of Jesus, greet you and all that fear the 
Lord with His peace. Amen. 

The mighty God keep you all from evil. Greet 
my mother, Charles and his wife; and Maeyken, 
who took care of my wife. Adieu to you all. This 
is my testament to you all, Vincent, Kaerle, Neel- 
ken, Willem, Hans, to each with his wife. 

By me, Hans Symons, your dear brother, im- 
prisoned at Antwerp for the testimony of Jesus. 


A LETTER WRITTEN BY CORNELIS THE SHOEMAKER, 
TO HIS WIFE WHILE IN BONDS. HE WAS AFTER- 
WARDS BURNED WITH THREE OTHERS, 
SEALING THIS LETTER WITH HIS BLOOD, 
IN THE GREAT MARKETPLACE AT 
ANTWERP, THE 13TH OF SEP- 
TEMBER, 1567 

The grace and mercy of God the Father, the love 
of the Son, and the communion and peace of the 
Holy Ghost, who is sent us from the Father, 
through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the 
comfort of all true and faithful children of God; 
by whom we are led, taught and healed ; the same 
keep your heart, understanding and mind in Christ 
Jesus, to the praise and glory of His heavenly Fa- 
ther, to the salvation of your troubled soul, and to 
the protection of all the brethren and sisters that 
fear and love the Lord. This I wish you, my affec- 
tionately and much beloved wife, as a heartfelt 
greeting. 

My dearest wife, whom I wedded before God 
and His church, and took to wife according to the 
ordinance of the Lord, I wish you comfort, joy and 
gladness in all your great sorrow which has now 
come upon you through my bonds and imprison- 
ment. O my dear wife, I most earnestly pray the 
Lord for you, that He would comfort you, since I 
well know, my dear lamb, that you are very sor- 


rowful on my account. But I pray you, lay your 
grief aside, if possible, for a little while, and com- 
fort yourself with the Author of the faith, and look 
to Jesus the Finisher. Heb. 12:2. Walk hence- 
forth in all righteousness; make good use of the 
time of grace, and always remember what great 
grace the Lord has shown you ; and bear in mind 
what a faithful God you serve, who will not for- 
sake you. Rom. 6:13;Eph. 2:7; I Cor. 1 :9. 

O my most beloved lamb, I cannot fully praise 
or thank the Lord for all the great power and 
strength which He gives me in all my distress. 
Isa. 40:29. He is so faithful a God, He gives me 
such courage, so that I may say with Paul: "Who 
shall separate us from the love of God ? shall trib- 
ulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or 
nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, 
For thy sake we are killed all the day long ; we are 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all 
these things we are more than conquerors through 
him that loved us. For I am persuaded that nei- 
ther death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, 
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, 
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." Rom. 8:35- 
39. 

O my dear wife, I pray and exhort you, be 
patient in your tribulation, continue instant in 
prayer, and always remember the beautiful prom- 
ises which are so abundantly promised us in the 
Scriptures, if we persevere unto the end. Matthew 
10:22. 

Oh, let us well guard the treasure given us, so 
that no man may by any means deprive us of it. 
Hence continue steadfastly, and faint not; for 
though the outward man perish, yet the inward 
man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while 
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are not seen, for these are eternal. 
II Corinthians 4:7, 16-18. 

Hence, my dear and much beloved wife, do not 
cease to serve the Lord your God with all your 
heart, and to follow His footsteps. For we know 
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not 
made with hands, eternal in the heavens, and that 
we shall be clothed with it: if so be that being 
clothed we shall not be found naked. For we that 
are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: 
not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed 
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. 
Now He that hath wrought us for the selfsame 
thing is God, who also hath given unto us the 
earnest of the Spirit. II Cor. 5:1-5. 

O my dear wife, since we shall put off the flesh, 
and inherit such a dwelling, let us walk fearlessly 
in faith before God and His church, and purpose 
not to depart from the Lord, nor to separate from 
His love — which He has shed abroad in our hearts 


714 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


by the Holy Ghost — on account of any affliction or 
tribulation; then He can succor and comfort you 
in your request, when you are deprived of all hu- 
man help and comfort ; since He comes to the help 
of those who forsake their own selves, and of the 
despairing, for He dwells and will dwell alone in 
the hearts of men, and would not have us serve any 
one besides Him. 

Thus, my dear sheep, be firmly founded and 
built up in Him, as you are taught, and let love 
grow and increase in all righteousness and holi- 
ness, which avail and are acceptable before God; 
and always give diligence to excel in virtue, and 
look not to the walk of the idle and heedless, but 
consider them that live conformably to the doc- 
trine of Christ ; have your intercourse always with 
them, so that you run neither too high nor too low, 
nor too wide nor too long ; for many go astray be- 
cause one looks to the other, whereby they some- 
times wax cold. 

Therefore, my dear and much beloved wife, al- 
ways seek those things which are above, and let 
yorr mind constantly be fixed on the things which 
are not seen ; put off the old man, and put on the 
new man, and deny ungodliness and worldly lusts ; 
be transformed by the renewing of your mind, and 
you will have part in the resurrection. Col. 3:1 ; 
II Cor. 4:18; Col. 3:9, 10; Tit. 2:12; Rom. 12:2; 
Luke 20 :35. Hence know that you must first have 
crucified the old man, so that the body of sin may 
cease. And be not weary in well doing, since your 
labor will not be in vain. For we are made par- 
takers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our 
confidence steadfast unto the end. Heb. 3:14. 

Hence, my dear wife, suffer not yourself to be 
moved from your purpose or faith, for it is the 
true grace of God wherein we stand. "For though 
an angel should come," says Paul, "and teach you 
anything else than what has been preached unto 
you, let him be accursed." Gal. 1 :8. Neither fear 
such men as would draw you away from this doc- 
trine ; for they will perish like grass ; nor can they 
do anything without God's permission. Therefore 
fear God and humble yourself under Him, for He 
is honored of the lowly ; always condescend to men 
of low estate, and you will be great in the eyes 
of God ; think not yourself to be something, lest 
you deceive; always forsake your own self, and 
regard not what men may do unto you, though you 
be wronged ; for it is acceptable with God, if a man 
for conscience' sake gets into grief, suffering 
wrongfully. Hence be patient in all that comes 
upon you for the Lord's sake, so that you may be a 
partaker of Christ's sufferings, and thus inherit 
His promise ; for the time that reproach must be 
suffered here is short, compared with the joy which 
shall be revealed in us in the last time ; for though 
we have a miserable life here, we shall enjoy much 
good hereafter; we are accounted here as dying, 
but we enter into certain rest and peace. It is sown 
in weakness, it is raised in power ; it is sown a nat- 
ural body, it is raised a spiritual body. I Corinthi- 


ans 15:43, 44. Therefore our house of this taber- 
nacle must be dissolved, if we want to obtain the 
house prepared us of God. Hence fear not them 
that kill the body ; for they cannot harm the soul. 
Let us therefore not grieve because of the work 
of the Lord, but as Christ says, rejoice and be glad 
therein, for it shall be rewarded you in heaven: 
and, as Peter says, Praise and glorify the Lord in 
this matter. Matt. 5:12; I Pet. 3:15; 4:16. 

O my dear lamb, this is not said, that we should 
grieve. Thus, be patient in your tribulation and 
sufferings ; for Paul says that all things work to- 
gether for good to them that love God; hence I 
trust to the Lord, that it will conduce to your good. 
Therefore receive willingly from the hand of the 
Lord the sufferings and afflictions He sends you, 
for He will not suffer you to be tempted above that 
you are able to bear. Thus, bear patiently Christ's 
sufferings ; for all that are without chastisements 
are bastards, and not children. Heb. 12:8. James 
says: "Blessed is the man that endureth tempta- 
tion; for when he is tried, he shall receive the 
crown of life, which God hath promised to them 
that love him." James 1 :12. 

Thus, my dear wife, follow Christ, and take up 
your cross with patience and joy, and follow Him 
all the days of your life, for He had to suffer so 
much for our sakes, to save us. Therefore let us 
suffer for His sake; since it is our hour, let us joy- 
fully contend for the crown of life, which is pre- 
pared for us and them that fear and love the Lord. 
Hence let us be satisfied in Him, and take our 
cross upon us with joyfulness and patience, and 
wait with firm confidence for the promises which 
He has made us, and that we may be crowned upon 
Mount Sion, and adorned with palms, and may fol- 
low the Lamb. II Esdras 2 :42 ; Rev. 14 :4. 

Thus, strengthen yourself, and wait for the 
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ in the eternal life. 
"Now unto him that is able to keep you from fall- 
ing, and to present you faultless before the pres- 
ence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only 
wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, do- 
minion and power, both now and ever. Amen " 
Jude 24, 25. 

See, my dear wife and sister in the Lord, since I 
can no longer serve you with my presence, I have 
written you a little to comfort you; and this for 
a memorial or testament, that thereby you may re- 
member me, how I walked before you. I hope to 
seal this letter with my blood, that it is the truth ; 
and for this I want to lay down my life, to the 
praise of the Lord, and to the edification of all 
who fear the Lord from the heart. I commit you 
to the Lord and to the Word of His grace, that He 
would keep you in all righteousness and truth. And 
though we must separate, yet I know and firmly 
trust the Lord, that we shall be together in the life 
eternal. I hope that you will always so order and 
regulate your way all the days of your life, that 
you may obtain salvation. 

Herewith I bid you adieu, my dear lamb ; adieu 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


715 


till in eternity. Adieu and farewell to all that fear 
the Lord. Pray the Lord for all four of us, that 
we may offer up unto Him an acceptable sacrifice, 
so that our souls may be saved forever ; to this end 
may God the Lord give His grace. Amen. 

Written by me, Cornelis the shoemaker, im- 
prisoned for the testimony of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


JACQUES MESDAGH, WILLEM AERTS, JOOS KAS- 
TEEL, AND KAREL, A. D. 1567 

This Jacques Mesdagh was apprehended (with 
three others, as he writes) on the 1st of March, 
1566, and was afterwards, on the 8th of Novem- 
ber, 1567, burnt with three others, for the Word 
of God, at Kortrijck, in Flanders, in the market- 
place before the city hall, having been confined, 
with iron fetters on his feet, for more than twenty 
months. He was from Capelle te Poele, a league 
and a half from Ypres. With him died a young 
single man, named Willem Aerts, and two other 
men, one of whom was Joos Kasteel, from the 
vicinity of Kortrijck, and the name of the other 
was Karel. All four were of very good cheer and 
valiantly testified to the truth, and confirmed it 
with their death. 


A LETTER FROM JACQUES MESDAGH 

I, Jacques Mesdagh, imprisoned at Kortrijck for 
the Word of God and the testimony of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, apprehended the 1st of March, 1566, 
wish you my dearest and much beloved chosen 
sister,' from the bottom of my heart and from my 
inmost soul, that you may always prosper, and 
be well in soul and body ; and grace, mercy, peace, 
joy, love, a living spiritual hope, a true evangeli- 
cal mind and trust, a true unfeigned faith which 
works by love, and the illumination, comfort and 
communion of the Holy Ghost, be unto you as 
a grace from God the heavenly Father, and through 
our Lord Jesus, by whom this grace has come to 
us ; for Paul says : "The grace of God [that bring- 
eth salvation] hath appeared to all men, teaching 
us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we 
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this 
present world ; looking for that blessed hope, and 
the glorious appearing of the great God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, 
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and 
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of 
good works" (Tit. 2:11-14). For He came and 
preached the Gospel of peace to us who were afar 
off, and to them that were nigh. Therefore we are 
no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citi- 
zens with the saints, and of the household of God ; 
and are built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief 
corner stone, whom the builders rejected (Eph. 
2:17, 19, 20; Matt. 21:42); who His own self 
bare our sins, in His own body, on the tree, that 
we, being dead to sin, should live unto righteous- 


ness; by whose stripes we were healed. For we 
were as sheep going astray ; but are now returned 
unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, the 
King of kings, and Lord of lords; who loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and 
hath made us kings and priests unto God and His 
Father; to Him be praise, glory and dominion, 
and thanks for ever and ever. Amen. I Peter 2 :24, 
25; I Tim. 6:15; Revelation 1:5, 6. 

This I wish you, my dearest chosen sister in 
Jesus Christ our Saviour, whom I love from the 
depth of my heart and from my inmost soul, as an 
affectionate and friendly greeting, and for a per- 
petual remembrance, my dear lamb, since it may 
easily happen that we shall soon have to separate 
here ; for it seems that the abominable beast thirsts 
greatly for our blood. Rev. 13:1. But I hope that 
though we must now separate here for the Lord's 
name, we shall nevertheless hereafter meet to- 
gether in life eternal, where there will be nothing 
but joy and gladness, which will endure for ever 
and ever; there tyrants will not be able to sep- 
arate or harm us; for when they have killed the 
body, they have no more that they can do, as Christ 
Himself says. Luke 12:4. 

Hence, my affectionately and much beloved sis- 
ter, be not afraid of their threats, neither be trou- 
bled. Even as the Lord also spake through the 
prophet Isaiah: "Hearken unto me, ye that know 
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law ; 
fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye 
afraid of their revilings. For the moth shall eat 
them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat 
them like wool ; but my righteousness shall be for 
ever, and my salvation from generation to gen- 
eration." For "I am he that comforteth you : who 
art thou that thou shouldest be afraid of a man 
that shall die, and of the son of man which shall 
be made as grass?" Isa. 51:7, 8, 12. "For be- 
hold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; 
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, 
shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall 
burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall 
leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you 
that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness 
arise." Malachi 4:1,2. "And everlasting joy shall 
be upon their head, they shall obtain gladness and 
joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away." 
Isa. 51:11. "Yea, the righteous shall shine forth 
as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." Matt. 
13 :43. "And they shall hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on 
them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the 
midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead 
them unto living fountains of water : and God shall 
wipe away all tears from their eyes." Rev. 7:16, 17. 
"And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow 
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain." 
Rev. 21 :4. "For he that overcometh shall not be 
hurt of the second death; and he shall inherit all 
things, and receive the crown of life." 

Therefore, O my dear and chosen sister Susan- 


716 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


nah, let us always faithfully adhere to Christ our 
Bridegroom, even unto death, so that hereafter we 
may altogether receive the crown of life, and may 
hear, in the great day of the Lord, the welcome 
voice : "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world;" when He shall say to the others: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, 
prepared for the devil and his angels." Matthew 
25:34, 41. 

Oh, what a great difference will then be between 
them that obeyed and feared the Lord, and those 
who did not obey or fear Him ; the latter will have 
their part in the lake which will burn with fire and 
brimstone : which is the second death ; but the for- 
mer in eternal life. Rev. 21 :18; John 3:16. 

For he that hateth his life in this world shall 
keep it unto life eternal. Christ also said : "Whoso- 
ever will lose his life for my sake shall find [or 
keep] it." Hence, my dearest and much beloved 
sister, whom I love from all my heart, let us here- 
in always be of good courage and cheer in the Lord, 
though the tyrants deprive us of our temporal life 
for the Lord's name, and separate us; for we 
know, says Paul, that, if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of 
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens, whose builder and maker is God. II Cor. 
5:1; Hebrews 11:10. 

O my dear and much beloved sister, that we had 
put off this body of our earthly house in Christ 
Jesus, and were thus at home with Him, who shall 
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like 
unto His glorious body ; for here we have no con- 
tinuing city, but we seek one to come, as the 
apostle says. Phil. 3:21; Heb. 13:14. 

Oh, that we were there in the beautiful and de- 
lightful city, which is full of all good things, where 
they will need neither sun nor moon, nor the light 
of a candle, to give them light, for the glory of 
God shall lighten them, and they shall reign for 
ever and ever. Rev. 21 :23 ; 22 :5. But we must 
here first go the narrow way, as Christ Himself 
said (Matthew 7:13, 14), before we can enter 
there ; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, 
that leadeth to destruction, and many there be 
which go in thereat ; but strait is the gate, and nar- 
row is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it ; and still fewer, alas ! who de- 
sire to walk it, since sometimes it is so hard for the 
flesh. For here in this wicked world not much be- 
sides tribulation and suffering is promised to those 
who desire to walk the narrow way, to follow 
Christ, and to live godly, in this vale of tears, ac- 
cording to their weak ability, for, in the first place 
Paul expressly says: "All that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." II Tim. 
3 :12. "For truth is fallen in the street, and equity 
cannot enter; yea, truth faileth; and he that de- 
parteth from evil maketh himself a prey." Isa 
59:14,15. 

O my chosen sister, whom I love in God since 


the Lord has given us so much grace that we have 
found the way of peace, this is the true grace of 
God wherein you stand, says Peter. Oh, let us al- 
ways walk faithfully therein unto the end, accord- 
ing to our feeble ability, though we must here for 
a short time have tribulation and suffering for the 
name of Christ ; for we must through much tribu- 
lation enter into the kingdom of God. Acts 14:22. 
And also Christ Himself says: "In the world ye 
shall have tribulation : but be of good cheer ; I have 
overcome the world." John 16:33. He also says: 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep 
and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and ye 
shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned 
into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sor- 
row, because her hour is come : but as soon as she 
is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more 
the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the 
world. And ye now therefore have sorrow : but I 
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, 
and your joy no man taketh from you." Verses 
20-22. Thus are also we with child, and in travail, 
so that we can scarcely draw our breath, as is also 
written in the prophet Isaiah (Isa. 26:18) ;* but 
when we too have here brought forth all tribula- 
tion and sorrow, and have put off our body in the 
Lord, we also shall hereafter rejoice with tongues 
unspeakable, though we are now here in the pangs 
of delivery, my dear and much beloved sister, for 
the name of Christ, namely, in tribulation and suf- 
fering for a short time, and hated of all men ; for 
Christ Himself says : "Ye shall be hated of all men 
for my name's sake : but he that endureth to the 
end shall be saved." Matt. 10:22. And Paul, also, 
says: "For unto you it is given in the behalf of 
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suf- 
fer for his sake." Phil. 1 :29. 

But, my very dear and chosen sister in the Lord, 
whom I love from true, unfeigned, godly and 
brotherly love, it will hereafter not be to our detri- 
ment, all that we have suffered here for the name 
of Christ; for He will reward us for it with joy 
most abundantly; for as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth 
by Christ. II Cor. 1 :5. For it is a faithful saying. 
Paul also says, "If we be dead with him, we shall 
also live with him ; if we suffer, we shall also reign 
with him ; if we deny him, he also will deny us." 
II Tim. 2:11, 12. And Christ Himself says, "If 
we confess him before men, he will also confess us 
before his Father, which is in heaven." 

Hence, my dear lamb, let us always give diligent 
heed, that we here, in no wise forsake Christ our 
Bridegroom, on account of the sufferings which 
men may inflict upon us ; for the time that we have 
to spend here is very short, compared with eternity. 
Though we should be compelled all the days of our 
life to lie in a dark dungeon for the name of the 
Lord, it could not yet be compared to eternity, 
and to the glory which shall be revealed in us ; for 


German version of the Bible. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


717 


Paul says: "I reckon that the sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall be revealed in us; for our 
light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory; while we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen : for the 
things which are seen are temporal ; but the things 
which are not seen are eternal." Rom. 8:18; II 
Cor. 4:17, 18. 

Therefore, O my most beloved sister, let us not 
look at that which is temporal and perishable ; but 
let us always wholly renounce ourselves, and daily 
take our cross upon us, to follow Christ faithfully 
and willingly in all that may come upon us for His 
holy and glorious name's sake ; and think and look 
on the reward and the beautiful promises, which 
will endure forever. Let us herewith always com- 
fort ourselves with the beautiful promises of the 
Lord, which He has given His own who fear and 
love Him, and obey Him in everything unto the 
end. 

Thus, my dear and much beloved sister Susan- 
nah, let us constantly obey Him in all things, to do 
His divine will unto the end, according to our weak 
ability, and always wait with great patience for His 
beautiful promises, as did all the pious, holy men 
who died according to faith, not having received 
the promises, but having seen them afar off, and 
were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on 
the earth. They had trials of cruel mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprison- 
ment : they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword: they 
wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; be- 
ing destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the 
world was not worthy : they wandered in deserts, 
and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the 
earth, and were obedient to their God. For by faith 
Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place 
which he should after receive for an inheritance, 
obeyed ; and he went out, not knowing whither he 
went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, 
as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles 
with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the 
same promise : for he looked for a city which hath 
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And 
by faith, Moses, when he was come to years, re- 
fused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter ; 
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people 
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a sea- 
son; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater 
riches than the treasures in Egypt : for he had re- 
spect unto the recompense of the reward. Heb. 1 1 . 

Thus, my affectionately and much beloved cho- 
sen sister, let us, too, always be obedient to God our 
heavenly Father, even unto death, and also rather 
choose, as did Moses, to suffer affliction with the 
people of God for a little season, here in this vale 
of tears, and to look at the beautiful promise which 
is to be realized hereafter; for eye hath not seen, 


nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart 
of man, the things which God hath prepared for 
them that love him. I Cor. 2 :9. 

Oh, see, my dear sister, how richly those are re- 
warded who love and fear God. Oh, why should 
we not fear and love the Lord with all our hearts, 
who will so richly reward us for it, since not a 
single word of His promises shall fail, for He is 
so faithful that promised it ; though we must suffer 
tribulation and persecution here for a little while, 
for the name of Christ our Lord. For if the holy 
men and prophets, and the apostles, had to suffer, 
yea, Christ Himself, who is one Head and Master, 
how much more ought we, who are poor, sinful and 
frail men to suffer, if we want to be found little 
members of His body ; for the members are surely 
not better than the head, nor the servant greater 
than his lord, says Christ Himself. If they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you ; if they 
have kept my sayings, they will keep yours also. If 
the world hate you, ye know that it hated me be- 
fore it hated you. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love his own ; but because ye are not 
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you. John 15: 
20, 18, 19. And John, also, says in his epistle : 
"Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you. 
We know that we have passed from death unto 
life." I John 3:13, 14. 

See, my dear lamb, how it has been told us be- 
fore that we must be hated and reviled of the 
world. Hence, let us not be surprised, though this 
comes upon us in this evil, wicked, perverse, and 
blind world for the name of Christ ; but let us re- 
joice therein, that we are partakers of Christ's suf- 
ferings; that, when His glory shall be revealed, 
we may be glad also with exceeding joy, as the 
apostle Peter says: "If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye." I Pet. 4:13, 14. 
And Christ says : "Blessed are ye, when men shall 
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your 
reward in heaven." Matt. 5:11, 12. He also says: 
"Blessed are they that weep now: for they shall 
laugh." Luke 9:21. Oh, see, my dearly beloved 
chosen sister, what consoling words, again, these 
are, for those who are here reviled and persecuted 
for the name of Christ, and have tribulation and 
suffering. Oh, how can we grieve on this account, 
or become weary or faint, when this comes upon 
us for the name of Christ ; seeing so great comfort 
and reward are promised hereafter to those who 
are faithful to Him unto death, as is written. Rev. 
2:10: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." O my dear lamb, con- 
sole and rejoice yourself with the comforting 
Scriptures left us for the refreshing and strength- 
ening of our mind and faith, when you are perse- 
cuted and driven from city to city, and they inflict 
tribulation and suffering upon you for the name of 
Christ, as may easily happen yet, since I hear that 


718 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the cruel and abominable beast begins to exalt itself 
greatly again over the little flock of the Lord. But 
they have no more power than the Lord permits 
them to have, though they greatly exalt them- 
selves, and rage, as though they were determined 
utterly to annihilate the little flock, as is evidently 
their purpose. But the Lord holds everything in 
His hand ; He that can bring to naught the counsel 
of the ungodly, will, I trust, order it all well, ac- 
cording to His divine will. Let us always firmly 
trust and hope in Him, and cast all our care upon 
Him ; for it is He that careth for us, says the apos- 
tle Peter. I Pet. 5 :7. For, whom did the Lord ever 
forsake, of those who firmly trusted in Him ? and 
did ever any trust in the Lord, and was confound- 
ed? or did any abide in His fear, and was for- 
saken ? or whom did He even despise, that called on 
Him? Sir. 2:10. Can a woman forget her sucking 
child, that she should not have compassion on the 
son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will 
I not forget thee, says the Lord through the 
prophet. Isa. 49:15. And Christ says: I will not 
leave you comfortless. John 14:18. 

Therefore, my most beloved, let us always be 
content with such things as we have ; for He hath 
said: "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." 
So that we may boldly say, "The Lord is my helper, 
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me." 
Hebrews 13 :5, 6. For whosoever believeth on him 
shall not be ashamed. "And if God be for us, who 
can be against us? He that spared not his own 
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he 
not with him also freely give us all things?" says 
Paul. Who shall lay anything to the charge of 
God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he 
that condemneth ? It is Christ that died, yea rather, 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who 
then shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is 
written, "For thy sake we are killed all the day 
long ; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. 
Nay, in all these things we are more than con- 
querors through him that loved us. For no crea- 
ture shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord." Rom. 
8:31. Hence, O my affectionately beloved sister, 
who is he that will harm you, if you be a follower 
of that which is good ? And be not afraid of their 
threats, neither be terrified, if they persecute you, 
and inflict suffering and tribulation upon you ; for 
it is better that you suffer for welldoing, if it be 
God's will, than for evil doing. For this is thank- 
worthy, if a man for conscience toward God en- 
dure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory 
is it, continues Peter, if, when ye be buffeted for 
your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when 
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto 
were ye called : because Christ also suffered for us, 
leaving us an example, that we should follow His 


steps : who did no sin, neither was guile found in 
His mouth ; who, when He was reviled, reviled not 
again ; when He suffered, He threatened not ; but 
committed Himself to Him that judgeth righteous- 
ly. I Pet. 3:13, 14; 2:19-23. 

Hence, my dear sister, let us always take diligent 
heed unto ourselves, to walk in Christ's footsteps 
unto the end, according to our poor, weak ability ; 
and when they persecute and afflict us for the truth, 
let us also commit vengeance* unto Him who will 
judge righteously, and before whom all things are 
naked and opened (Heb. 4:13): and, as Christ 
Himself teaches us, pray for those who persecute 
and afflict us, that they would repent, and turn from 
all this wickedness to the truth, so that they might 
also all be saved, and lead a quiet and peaceable life 
in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and 
acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who 
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth, says Paul, I Tim. 2 :3, 4 ; 
for He is longsuffering, and not willing that any 
should perish, but that all should come to repent- 
ance. II Pet. 3:9. 

But now they will not repent nor turn from all 
evil to the knowledge of the truth; for they still 
delight in persecuting the people of the Lord, and 
in shedding innocent blood, even as the prophet 
Isaiah says : "Their feet run to evil, and they make 
haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are 
thoughts of iniquity ; wasting and destruction are 
in their paths. The way of peace they know not, 
and there is no judgment in their goings; they 
have made them crooked paths ; whosoever goeth 
therein shall not know peace." Isa. 59 :7, 8. And 
Paul also says : "Their throat is an open sepulchre ; 
with their tongues they have used deceit ; the poison 
of asps is under their tongues ; whose mouth is full 
of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift to 
shed blood: destruction and misery are in their 
ways : and the way of peace have they not known : 
there is no fear of God before their eyes" (Rom. 
3:13-18), as may be seen and heard in every di- 
rection, so that it is lamentable that so many are 
deceived, and walk in the broad way; erring so 
deplorably from the true way of truth which leads 
to life everlasting; and, what is more, those who 
want to turn to the way of truth, they would gladly 
prevent from it were they able. But they shall ex- 
ceedingly rue it hereafter, if they repent not ; but 
alas ! it will be too late then, when they shall say 
to the mountains and rocks : "Fall on us, and hide 
us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, 
and from the wrath of the Lamb ; for the great day 
of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to 
stand?" Rev. 6:16, 17; Hos. 10:8; Luke 23:30. 
"And they shall [says Isaiah 2:19], go into the 
holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, 
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his 
majesty; when he ariseth to shake terribly the 
earth." And in John's Relevation it is further 

* In regard to the passage here alluded to (I Pet. 2:23) see Ger- 
man version of the Bible. — Trans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


719 


written : "In those days shall men seek death, and 
shall not find it ; and shall desire to die, and death 
shall flee from them ; and shall be tormented with 
fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy an- 
gels and in the presence of the Lamb, and the 
smoke of their torment ascendeth up forever and 
ever : and they have no rest day nor night who wor- 
ship the beast and his image: and whosoever re- 
ceiveth the mark of his name, and whosoever was 
not found written in the book of life was cast into 
the lake of fire." Revelation 9:6; 14:11; 20:15. 
Then they will get their reward for having thus 
lorded it over the little flock, and lived after the 
thoughts of their wicked hearts, and tormented and 
persecuted the people and slain those who desired 
to live, according to their weak ability, according 
to the word and doctrine of the Lord. But they 
who have suffered for the truth and the Word of 
God, shall then be much better off and happier than 
those who have persecuted them, and inflicted trib- 
ulation and suffering upon them, and lived in 
wickedness and iniquity; for when the Lord will 
begin to say to them : "I know riot whence ye are ; 
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity," there 
will be weeping and gnashing of teeth; "for not 
every one," Christ further says, "that saith unto 
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom ; but 
he that doeth the will of my Father which is in 
heaven." Luke 13:27, 28; Matt. 7:21. 

O my affectionately and greatly beloved sister, 
let us always well see to it, and take good heed to 
ourselves ; that we always do the will of the Father, 
according to our weak ability even unto the end, so 
that we may not hear with the others: "Depart 
from me, all ye that work iniquity," and thus with 
them receive reward in the fiery lake which will 
burn with fire and brimstone ; which is the second 
death (Revelation 21 :8) ; but that we may enter 
into the kingdom of heaven with all the elect chil- 
dren of God, where it will endure forever and ever. 
All that we have suffered here, and this for a short 
time, for the name of the Lord, namely, perse- 
cution, tribulation, or affliction, will then in no 
wise be to our detriment. Matt. ,5:11, 12. 

O my most beloved, always be resigned and 
patient in all tribulations and sufferings which may 
come upon you for the name of Christ ; and let us 
ever diligently watch and pray, and prepare our- 
selves, till Christ comes, and constantly "lay aside 
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily be- 
set us, and let us run with patience the race that is 
set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and 
finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set 
before him endured the cross, despising the shame, 
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of 
God. For consider him that endured such contra- 
diction of sinners against himself," lest ye faint 
in your distress, and be wearied in the way of 
truth, and in the love of Christ, on account of all 
that men may do unto you. But always think of 
Christ's great love toward us, how much He suf- 
fered for us poor sinful men on the tree of the 


cross, and shed His blood for us, <is the four evan- 
gelists testify in order to redeem and save us ; for, 
surely He "hath borne our griefs, and carried our 
sorrows . . . the chastisement of our peace was 
upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." 
Isa. 53:4. 

O my dear beloved sister, if Christ so loved us 
that He suffered for us in the flesh, let us arm our- 
selves likewise with the same mind, as Peter says, 
I Peter 4:1. And also Paul: "Let this mind be in 
you, which was also in Christ Jesus : who being in 
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal 
with God ; but made himself of no reputation, and 
took upon him the form of a servant, and was made 
in the likeness of men : and being found in fashion 
as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedi- 
ent unto death, even the death of the cross." Phil- 
ippians 2 :5-8. And "though he was the Son of the 
living God, yet learned he obedience by the things 
which he suffered ;" for He said Himself : "I came 
down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but 
the will of him that sent me" (John 6:38) ; and 
though He prayed His Father to take the bitter 
cup from Him, He nevertheless said: "Not what 
I will, but what thou wilt." Mark 14 :36. 

Behold, my dear lamb, how Christ our Head 
abased and humbled and utterly renounced Him- 
self, and was obedient to His heavenly Father, 
even unto the death of the cross, and became poor 
for our sakes (II Cor. 8:9), that He might in all 
things be an example unto us (I Pet. 2:21), and 
redeemed or reconciled us in the body of His flesh 
through death (Col. 1:21, 22) ; and we have the 
forgiveness of sins, through His blood, according 
to the riches of His grace. Eph. 1 :7. Hence my 
dear sister, let us also, in return, love Christ even 
unto death, and always walk in love, as Christ also 
hath loved us, and hath given Himself for us an 
offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling 
savor. Eph. 5 :2. Therefore let us also willingly 
deliver up ourselves for His holy name; always 
wholly forsake ourselves; renounce our own will 
and mind; abase and humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God; no longer live to ourselves, 
but unto Him who died for us and rose again (II 
Cor. 5:15) and always be obedient to Him, con- 
stantly fearing and serving Him all the days of our 
life, in all righteousness and holiness (Luke 1 :74, 
75), as obedient children, so that we may not resort 
to former lusts, in which we were when we did not 
yet know Christ, even as Peter says: "But as he 
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all 
manner of conversation; because it is written: Be 
ye holy ; for I am holy." I Pet. 1 :15, 16 ; Lev. 19 :2. 
"For to be carnally minded is death ; but to be spir- 
itually minded is life and peace," says Paul. For, 
know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves serv- 
ants to obey ; his servants ye are to whom ye obey ; 
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto 
righteousness? Hence, as ye have yielded your 
members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity 
unto iniquity; even so now yield your members 


720 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


servants to righteousness unto holiness. What fruit 
had ye then in those things whereof ye are now 
ashamed ? for the end of those things is death, says 
Paul. For the wages of sin is death. For if ye 
live after the flesh, ye shall die : but if ye through 
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall 
live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, 
they are the sons of God. And ye are the temple of 
the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in 
them, and walk in them ; and I will be their God, 
and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out 
from among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing ; and I will 
receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye 
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord 
Almighty. Rom. 8:6; 6:16; 8:13, 14; II Cor- 
inthians 6:16-18. 

Therefore, O my most beloved sister in Christ 
Jesus, let us always separate ourselves entirely 
from all worldly lusts and desires, and touch noth- 
ing unclean, but constantly cleanse ourselves from 
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and continue in 
the fear of God, according to the Spirit, constantly 
to serve and honor the Lord all the days of our life, 
that we may be of His sons and daughters ; for if 
we are His sons and daughters, we shall also be 
heirs in His eternal kingdom and possession. Rom. 
8:17. Hence let us always give diligent heed, con- 
stantly to fear and serve Him alone, according to 
our weak ability, unto the end ; for we cannot ac- 
ceptably serve two masters, that is, God and the 
world, for, "Know ye not," says James, "that the 
friendship of the world is enmity with God ? who- 
soever therefore will be a friend of the world is 
the enemy of God." Matt. 6:24; Jas. 4:4. John, 
also, says : "If any man love the world, the love 
of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the 
world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, 
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of 
the world. And the world passeth away, and the 
lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God 
abideth forever." I John 2:15-17. Paul, also, 
teaches us : "And be not conformed to this world : 
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and ac- 
ceptable, and perfect will of God." Romans 12:2. 

Therefore, my affectionately beloved sister, let 
us by no means love this world, nor be conformed 
to it, nor again lust for this wicked world, to run 
with it to the same excess of riot (I Pet. 4:4), lest 
we perish with it ; but let us constantly go on in the 
true way of truth, in newness of life, to serve the 
living God all the days of our lives (Heb. 9:14), 
without looking back to Sodom ; and let us always 
well heed and do what the holy Scriptures teach 
and admonish us to, so that we may in eternity 
rejoice with God our heavenly Father, and with the 
Lamb on Mount Sion ; for "all scripture is given 
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doc- 
trine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction 
in righteousness : that the man of God may be per- 
fect, throughly furnished unto all good works." 


II Timothy 3 :16, 17. Therefore let us always take 
good heed to the holy Scriptures, and accept them 
for doctrine, reproof and correction, that we may 
thereby fit ourselves for every good work ; and let 
us always exhort one another with them, and take 
heed, as the apostle teaches us, where he says: 
Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you 
an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the liv- 
ing God. But exhort one another daily, while it is 
called today; lest any of you be hardened through 
the deceitfulness of sin. For we are made par- 
takers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our 
confidence steadfast unto the end." Heb. 3 :12-14. 
O my beloved sister, always be steadfast, immov- 
able, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 
"forasmuch as you know that your labor is not 
in vain in the Lord," says Paul. I Cor. 15:58. 
John, also, says. "Look to yourselves, that you 
lose not those things which ye have wrought, but 
that ye receive a full reward. For whosoever trans- 
gresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, 
hath not God ; but he that abideth in the doctrine 
of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son " 
II John 8, 9. Oh, hold that fast which thou hast, 
that no man take thy crown ; and always be faithful 
to Christ your Bridegroom, unto death; this I 
pray you, my dear lamb. And ever be patient in all 
your tribulations and sufferings, and stablish your 
heart; for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. 
Behold, the judge standeth before the door, and we 
count them happy which endure, says James. Jas. 
5 :8. 

Therefore be patient, and comfort yourself with 
the words of God ; for it is becoming a Christian, 
that he should both hope and quietly wait for the 
salvation of the Lord. Lam. 3 :26. Let the peace 
of God rule in your heart. Col. 3:15. He which 
hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting conso- 
lation [and good hope] through grace, comfort 
your heart, and stablish you in every good word 
and work, and sanctify you wholly, that your whole 
spirit and soul and body may be preserved blame- 
less unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Faithful is He that calleth you, who also will do it 
And, may He grant you, according to the riches of 
His glory, to be strengthened with might by His 
Spirit in the inner man ; that Christ may dwell in 
your heart by faith ; and that you mav be rooted 
and grounded in love. Eph. 3:16, 17. This I pray 
Almighty God from the depth of my heart, to grant 
to you, and me, and all that fear and love Him. 

O my dear chosen sister, whom I love so greatly 
with all my heart, I should not be able to describe 
to you, I think, with what true, unfeigned godly 
and brotherly love I love you. Oh, adhere always 
valiantly to the true, pure truth and doctrine of 
Christ, as I, through the grace of the Lord, most 
■ confidently trust you will do, though I thus write. 

O my dearest sister, I also trust, through the 
great grace and mercy of the Lord, to do myself 
according to my weak ability, all that I have writ- 
ten you; for it is still my unwavering mind and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


721 


purpose rather to lay down my life, though it be 
tomorrow, than to forsake the truth. For I am 
still willing to resign my life for Him who gave 
it me, if it shall come to this ; and, again, if it be 
His divine will, that I am to remain in iron bonds 
yet for a long time, I will also gladly suffer it for 
His holy name; for He suffered so much for us. 
And I cannot fully thank or praise the Lord for the 
great grace, mercy, and the benefits which He has 
shown me in prison ; and for patience, that the lying 
in bonds has so little affected me — it seems to me 
that you could hardly believe how little it has af- 
fected me. I am not conscious, it seems to me, that 
I was imprisoned, or that it lasted too long, or that 
I was thus imprisoned; eternal praise, glory and 
thanks to the Lord, for His abundant grace and 
mercy. However I have sometimes wished, if it 
could have been, to be with you, if it had been for 
the good of my soul, and the Lord had permitted 
it; and this chiefly because of the love which I 
have towards you, and you to me. My dear lamb, 
the Lord be praised, I have never grieved much on 
account of it, since it was for the name of the Lord, 
and I know that we must once separate here. 
Though we should be together here a hundred 
years yet, the time of separation would neverthe- 
less come, and it is better to die honorably than to 
transgress the law of God and live in disgrace, as 
is written in the second book of the Macca- 
bees (6:19). And Christ, also, said: "Whosoever 
shall seek to save his life shall lose it ; and whoso- 
ever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, 
the same shall preserve it. But whosoever loveth 
father or mother, or sister, or brother, or wife, or 
children, more than me, the same is not worthy of 
me." Luke 17:33; 14:26. 

Therefore, my dearest, when it comes so far that 
we are apprehended and put into bonds, everything 
must be forsaken for the sake of His holy will and 
name, if we wish to be of His number (Rev. 6:11); 
for he that does not forsake all that he has cannot 
be His disciple. 

Thus, my affectionately and so greatly beloved 
sister, when we think on and well consider these 
words, why should we not gladly forsake all that 
we have for the name of Christ, and why should 
we be sad, burdened or troubled, when this comes 
upon us for the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, 
since Christ Himself has foretold it. I cannot fully 
thank and praise Him for His great, unspeakable 
grace and mercy, which He daily shows me, that 
my mind and purpose are so gladly, joyfully and 
tranquilly fixed upon the Lord. It is at present as 
well with me according to the spirit, as it ever was, 
I think; praise, glory, honor, and thanks be for- 
ever to the eternal, almighty, merciful God, for 
His great grace and kindness, that He, through 
His Holy Spirit, so strengthens and comforts me, 
poor, simple, weak, frail servant, in my mind and 
purpose; and I pray God, always to strengthen, 
confirm and comfort me by His Holy Spirit, unto 
the end, and also all those who fear Him, and to 


give us what is most needful to us all for the 
salvation of our souls. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
take affectionate leave, with the comforting and de- 
lightful Word of His grace, from you, in regard to 
this matter, for this time. O my dearest S.J.H., 
excuse my simple letter and the small talent I have 
received from the Lord ; for I have written it from 
true, unfeigned, godly and brotherly love, which 
I bear to you, my dear, chosen sister, of which the 
Lord is my witness, who knows all hearts, and tries 
the reins, and before whom all things are naked 
and open. Jer. 17:10; Acts 15:8. And all that I 
have here written to you, my dear lamb, I wish also, 
from the bottom of my heart, as a heartfelt and 
affectionate greeting, and for a perpetual memor- 
ial, to my deeply beloved father and brother, whom 
I both love so affectionately. Let all of you pray 
the Lord for me, that I may accomplish and finish 
what I have begun, to my soul's salvation, to His 
praise and honor, and to the edification of my 
fellow men. I trust to pray the Lord most diligent- 
ly for you, according to my weak ability. Greet 
one another with a kiss of charity. Peace be with 
you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen. I Pet. 
5:14._ 

This last has been written in the year 1567, the 
ninth day of September, by me, Jacques Mesdagh, 
after being imprisoned for eighteen months, in iron 
bonds, for the testimony of Jesus Christ our Lord, 
for the sake of the Word of God, and for the right 
truth. Herewith I take cordial leave from you. 
Adieu, dear friends. 


ADRIAN WILLEMS, A. D. 1568* 

In the year 1568 the tyranny and persecution 
waged against the Christians became very sore and 
grievous, so that in said year many were appre- 
hended and slain. 

On the 4th of April of the above year, between 
one and two o'clock in the morning, Adrian Wil- 
lems, my father, was apprehended by Steven de 
Wit, the bailiff of Vianen, and taken to the castle 
of Batesteyn, where he was kept confined fifty 
weeks and one day. 

On the 8th of May the bailiff and part of the 
members of the court came from Vianen, to ex- 
amine him concerning his faith, which he freely 
confessed to them. Being then asked as to who 
were of the same faith with him, he refused to tell 
it to them ; hence the bailiff threatened him again 
and again with severe examination [the torture], 
and accordingly, on the 5th of June, he had the ex- 
ecutioner come, caused his hands to be tied behind 
his back, and made him climb up a ladder, threat- 
ening to have all his members dislocated, or he 
would know who were his fellow believers; but 
when he saw that he could not extort it from him, 
he suffered him to come down, without inflicting 
any torture upon him. 


* This Adrian Willems was not mentioned in previous editions. 


722 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Said bailiff also had a Franciscan monk come, to 
delude him from his faith; but after many words 
and much disputation the monk left him, without 
having accomplished anything. Afterwards, at di- 
vers times, others also came, namely, priests and 
monks, to draw him from his faith ; however, they 
all left like the former. 

The letters speaking of the conversations with 
these priests and monks, and of his confession, as 
also other letters written in prison and received by 
us, lay, or were put with the others by me, behind 
the bedstead under the roof, on account of the 
great fear of persecution and the monstrous tyran- 
ny existing at that time. Afterwards it happened, 
in the year 1570, in February, that the water came 
rushing from the Diefdijck with such force or vol- 
ume, that many houses drifted away, and some had 
their walls broken in, so that said letters fell into 
the water and perished. I greatly mourned the loss 
of them, because our children might in them have 
seen or read how valiantly and cheerfully their 
grandfather confessed the Gospel, and died for it, 
and how glad he was when he was visited in prison ; 
for I was there myself at great peril. 

On the 29th of June of said year 1568, the afore- 
said bailiff announced that he should hold a court 
the following day, the 30th of said month; on 
which he preferred his accusation, demanding that 
he should be burned at the stake, until death en- 
sued, and his property confiscated for the benefit 
of the king. Afterwards, many court days having 
been held, and both parties having presented their 
papers, the bailiff did not cease to request that sen- 
tence be passed, whereupon the judges decided 
that thirty-two guilders be paid in, to go and get 
advice by way of consultation. This having been 
done, they of the court went to the court of Hol- 
land, and returned with the sentence of death. 

Shortly after, the 21st of March, 1569, he was 
informed that he should receive his sentence the 
following day. Well knowing that it should be a 
sentence of death and not of life (according to the 
time appointed) , he resolved to write his wife and 
children a last farewell letter. When he had begun 
to write, a monk came to harass him, in order, if 
possible, to hinder him in his faith. He withstood 
him, and left the monk in the evening, desiring to 
rest a little while. The next day at four o'clock in 
the morning the monk again came to him, to tor- 
ment him as much as possible. Afterwards about 
eight o'clock the same day he was taken from the 
room in which he had been confined during his 
entire imprisonment, with heavy iron fetters, with 
which he was shackled night and day, except that 
they unlocked them when he took off or put on his 
garments and stockings, namely, in the evening 
when he went to bed, and in the morning, when 
he rose. They brought him into a kitchen, where 
stood a table with victuals, of which he partook 
a little, and thereupon received a drink from Steven 
de Wit, which he accepted in a friendly manner, 
to leave the former no ground for suspecting that 


he bore any ill will, though he delivered him to 
death. The monk (as heard before) persisted in 
his attempts to draw him from his faith, but did 
not effect his purpose. From there they took him 
to the city hall to receive his sentence; with his 
hands tied, a monk at his side, and the executioner 
and two beadles before and behind him, all well 
armed ; and thus they led him as a defenseless lamb 
to the slaughter. When they arrived in the city hall, 
the court assembled, and the bailiff himself demand- 
ed the sentence. Then the judge said: "Adrian 
Willems, do you wish to say something yet in re- 
gard to this ?" He replied : "I know of nothing to 
tell you, save that you would remember that you 
must also appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ, who shall pass a righteous judgment upon 
the good and the evil, or the dead and the living." 
Then they arose. When they came out of the coun- 
cil chamber, they pronounced the sentence, passing 
judgment, that said Adrian Willems should be exe- 
cuted with the sword, and his body be put into a 
coffin and buried under the scaffold. They then 
rose again, with pale and sad countenances, without 
closing the court, and left him in the hands of cruel 
men, who stripped him, took him out of the city 
hall with his eyes blindfolded, and hastened to exe- 
cute the sentence of the judges, which they also did. 
Thus the afore-mentioned Adrian Willems volun- 
tarily delivered himself up to death, choosing rather 
to keep his faith, than to retain his life here for 
a little while, and forsake his faith; and committed 
his soul unto God the faithful Creator, and thus 
departed this life, bearing witness to the Gospel, 
and confirming his unfeigned faith with his blood! 
Amen. 


LUCAS DE GROOT HANGED, A. D. 1568 

In the year 1568, a brother named Lucas de 
Groot, a native of Ostend, in Flanders, was appre- 
hended there for the testimony of the truth, and 
after he had boldly confessed his faith, and would 
unwaveringly adhere to it, he was sentenced to be 
strangled and burned ; the judges, however, after- 
wards changing their mind, Lucas was hanged to 
the gallows, in contempt of the believers. 


JAN PORTIER BURNED, A. D. 1568 

In the same year a brother named Jan Portier, a 
native of Komene, in Flanders, and a fuller by 
trade, who had also been Lady van Meessen's por- 
ter, was aprehended at Meessen. When he had 
confessed his faith, he was greatly tortured; the 
first time with screws; the second time, he was 
drawn up high by his thumbs, with heavy iron 
weights attached to his feet, and thus severely 
scourged; but being ruptured, he was not put to 
the rack. And when these tortures and other 
threats could not move him to desist or apostatize 
from the truth he had accepted and apprehended, 
he was finally sentenced to be burnt. And thus he 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


723 


was put to death for the testimony of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, with so small a fire that the smoke 
suffocated him ; which took place without Meessen, 
at the Spring gallows, in November, 1568. 


JAN VAN PARIS, PIETER VAN CLEVES, HENDRICK 

MAELSCHALCK, AND LAUWERENS PIE- 

TERS, A. D. 1568 

Jan van Paris, Pieter van Cleves, Hendrick 
Maelschalck, and Lauwerens Pieters, had not yet 
united with the church, but were novices and ready 
to unite; hence going to hear the Word of God 
preached, they were apprehended, at Ghent, in 
Flanders, in the year 1 568, and taken to the Count's 
Castle. After a bold confession of, and steadfast 
adherence to, the faith, they were sentenced in 
Passion Week, to be strangled and burned. But 
when they had mounted the scaffold, the Spanish 
Provost (there being at that time nineteen com- 
panies of Spanish soldiers in Ghent), seeing that it 
was the intention to strangle them, compelled the 
executioner to fetch other appliances. Hence the 
executioner spoke to the commander-in-chief, who 
ordered, him, contrary to the sentence pronounced, 
to burn them alive. The provost also severely 
kicked and beat the brethren. 

In the meanwhile the executioner fetched a bas- 
ketful of chains. When the brethren heard that 
they were to be burnt alive, they raised their voices 
and sang : "I call upon thee, O heavenly Father." 
Then the Spaniards beat them so dreadfully with 
sticks, that the eye of one fell out on his cheek. 
And thus they were burnt alive, the Spaniards 
loudly vociferating, and throwing sticks into the 
fire at a rapid rate, as desiring to have part in this 
madness, as though they thought to do God service 
thereby. 

THIS HENDRICK MAELSCHALCK, ON THE 26TH OF 

JANUARY 1568, WROTE THE FOLLOWING 

LETTER FROM PRISON AT GHENT 

We wish you abundant grace, joy, peace, and 
mercy, and eternal salvation, from God, our heav- 
enly Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave 
Himself for our sins, that He might deliver us 
from this present evil world, according to the will 
of God our Father, to whom be praise, glory and 
honor, and power and thanks, for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

After wishing you all grace and salvation, we 
would inform you, Goelken our beloved friend* in 
the Lord, and all dear friends that fear the Lord, 
that we four prisoners at Ghent, for the testimony 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, are still well according 
to the flesh, and according to the spirit we thank 
and praise the Lord, that He thus strengthens us 
by His grace; for it is still our mind and purpose, 
by His grace and mercy, always to adhere to the 
Lord, and to depart from Him neither for life nor 


* The word used in the original denotes a female friend. — Trans. 


death. Praise and thanks to the Lord, who thus 
strengthens us by His grace, since we are weak and 
miserable. But through the help of the Lord we 
have been able to endure so far, and we trust 
through the same Helper to persevere unto the end ; 
for in that He Himself was tempted, He is able 
also to succor and deliver them that are tempted. 
For He hath said, I will never leave thee, nor for- 
sake thee; so that we may boldly say with the 
apostle: "The Lord is my helper." Phil. 4:13; 
Heb. 2:18; 13:5,6. 

Now, dearly beloved brethren, if God is with us, 
who can be against us; for all men are but the 
works of His hands, and He has created everything, 
and has power to bring it to nought again at His 
pleasure ; why then should we be afraid of mortal 
men? Rom. 8:31; Isa. 51:12. Surely, we must 
much rather fear this God ; for He alone it is that 
can save and condemn, and though we should es- 
cape the hands of men, we cannot escape Him. 
Hence we will rather say with Susanna : "It is bet- 
ter to fall into the hands of men, than to sin in the 
sight of the Lord." Sus. 23. 

Therefore, dear friends, we trust by no means to 
forsake the Lord, but always to go on to the prom- 
ised land, to possess it, which is full of all good 
things ; to this end, may the Lord strengthen, con- 
firm and fit us by His grace and mercy, and all 
them that fear and accept Him. 

I, Hendricks, have written you all, dear friends, 
a little about the state of our minds. Further, I 
would kindly entreat you, always to continue stead- 
fast in the fear of the Lord ; for they that fear the 
Lord will do good things, and those who love Him 
will strive to do His pleasure, and humble them- 
selves before Him. If ye fear God, says the 
prophet, depart not from Him, but enter into the 
eternal joy and gladness. They that fear God shall 
attain to a good end, and in the day of their death 
they shall be blessed. Therefore, dear friends, let 
us always fear the Lord with all our heart and 
mind; let us obey Him and keep His Word, for 
they are blessed that hear the Word of God, and 
keep it, and they are also those who love Him, and 
keep His Word, and he that loves Him is known 
of Him. But he that saith, I know Him, and keep- 
eth not God's commandments, is a liar, and in him 
the love of God is not perfect. Luke 1 1 :28 ; John 
15:10; I John 2:4; 4:18. Therefore, my dear 
friends, let us love Him, because He first loved us, 
even as Paul testifies that, though He was rich, yet 
He became poor, that we through His poverty 
might be rich ; yea, He who knew no sin was made 
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness 
of God through Him. II Cor. 8:9; 5:21. Hence, 
seeing we well know that the Lord has loved us 
thus, and so abundantly shed His grace upon us, 
let us all take good heed that His grace be not be- 
stowed in vain upon us ; for we are made partakers 
of Him, if we hold the beginning of our confidence 
steadfast unto the end. Hebrews 3 :14. 

Hence, dear friends, as ye have therefore re- 


724 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ceived Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in Him ; 
rooted and built up in Him, and established in the 
faith, as ye have been taught (says the apostle), 
well knowing that it is the true grace of God where- 
in ye stand. Col. 2:6, 7; I Pet. 5:12. Therefore, 
always give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall 
never fall, says Peter; for so an entrance shall be 
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
II Pet. 1:10, 11. Therefore let us hold fast the 
profession of our faith without wavering, and let 
us always watch diligently, and wait for the Lord, 
even as good and faithful servants, that He do not 
come at an inopportune moment for us; but that 
we may always be prepared, as were the five wise 
virgins, who had trimmed their lamps, and went in 
to the marriage. But the five foolish virgins had to 
remain without. Matt. 25 :4. Hence, dear friends, 
let us not be as were the foolish, but as the wise. 
Herewith we commend you to our dear Lord, and 
to the comforting word of His grace; may He 
strengthen and confirm you all, and us all, in all 
truth and righteousness. Amen. 

Further, cordially beloved friend Goelken, and 
all other friends who read this, accept this in good 
part, which I have written in my weakness ; for I 
do not think myself worthy to exhort you, since I 
am fully aware that you are well taught of God. 
But I have done this from love, because I heard 
that you desired to have something from us ; hence 
receive this kindly. 

Further, should you wish to know something 
about our imprisonment, as to whether it will not 
soon be at an end with us, we would inform you 
that we do not hear much about it. We had ex- 
pected to offer up our sacrifice before Christmas, 
for we had heard said, it should be very soon ; how- 
ever, now we hear nothing of it, but by the grace 
of God we are constantly expecting it. Affection- 
ately beloved friends in the Lord, pray for us, that 
we may continue steadfast unto the end, and offer 
up an acceptable sacrifice unto the Lord. We trust 
to do the same for you, according to our weakness. 
Furthermore, we send you three new hymns, as 
a cordial and friendly greeting. Though they are 
simple, receive them in good part, for it has been 
done from love. Farewell, till in eternity. Amen. 
Greet your husband very much, and Grietgen your 
sister, and Bet., and Cor. Versw., and Anna van 
L. ; and Susanna also greets you all very much. 
We further greet all them that fear the Lord. 

Written by me, Hendrick Maelschalck, impris- 
oned at Ghent for the testimony of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; on the 26th of January, 1568. 

Cordially, affectionately and much beloved 
friends, the Lord has truly said that He shall come 
as a thief in the night ; for yesterday I had conclud- 
ed and sealed the foregoing letter, thinking to send 
it to you ; but it happened, that the next morning 
all four of us were examined, of which we knew 
little when we wrote the preceding conclusion. 


Hence I say that the Lord has truly said that He 
shall come as a thief in the night. I Thess. 5 :2. 
Thus, all four of us were examined, one after an- 
other, in the presence of two commissaries. They 
asked us many simple questions, which it would be 
too tedious to relate. But they did not ask us con- 
cerning our faith, except whether we were not bap- 
tized or rebaptized. Jan van Paris said he was bap- 
tized; Lauwerens said that he was not baptized ac- 
cording to the Scriptures ; Pierken said that he was 
not baptized; and I said that we were not Aria- 
baptists, and that I was not baptized. They asked 
Pierken, whether if he should be released, he should 
have himself baptized. He answered- "Yes if I 
were fit for it." They also asked him, whether he 
would renounce his opinion. He replied : "I do not 
consider it an opinion, but the true faith " They 
then asked me whether I would not renounce my 
belief or opinion. I told them that I had renounced 
lies, and followed the truth. Hence, if I were to 
renounce, I should renounce the truth ; but by the 
grace of the Lord I hoped to adhere to it In this 
manner they continued to ask, so that it would be 
too tedious to write it. To Jan van Paris they said 
uiTv. d S00n be dis Patched, and that we 

should be patient for nine or ten days yef thev 
also said that they should send us men who should 
instruct us, and if we desired to hear them we 
might do so. Hence we expect to have priests here • 
but we trust to keep our eyes open, for we weli 
know what they seek. Thus, dear friends, all of 
you, we are of good cheer, the Lord be praised and 
thanked forever; and by the grace of the Lord we 
trust to keep the faith, whether it be life or death 
Thus, dear friends, we think our confinement wili 
not last much longer; for it seems that we have 
been delivered over to the lords of the council and 
that they have orders from the Duke of Alva to 
dispatch us, and that the bailiff and the judges 
have nothing more to do with us. Hence we take 
leave from you all, dear friends, and pray you al- 
ways to be diligent. We hope to go before; may 
the Lord by His grace and mercy strengthen and 
fit us thereto. Amen. Written on the 27th of Jan- 
uary, 1568. By me. Henry Maelschalck. 

"And fear not them which kill the body but 
him which hath power to cast both soul and 'body 
into eternal darkness." Matt. 10:28 


JACOB DIRCKS, WITH HIS TWO SONS, ANDRIES 
JACOBS AND JAN JACOBS, A. D. 1568 

In this bloody and perilous time of persecution 
also pious Jacob Dircks and his two sons, Andries 
Jacobs and Jan Jacobs fell into the hands of the ty- 
rants. This Jacob Dircks, a tailor by trade, resided 
with his family at Utrecht, and as he was spied out 
there as one belonging to the persuasion of the 
Mennists, and as the lords wanted to apprehend 
him he from fear of the tyrants fled to Antwerp 
His wife, who did not hold these views still re- 
maining there for some time, the thief-catchers 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



725 


Jakob Dircks burned along with his sons in Antwerp, AD 1568 


seized their property, and took about half of it, 
While Jacob Dircks resided with his family at 
Antwerp, his wife died there, and he and his afore- 
mentioned two sons, though having escaped the 
hands of the tyrants at Utrecht, subsequently fell 
into the claws of the wolves at Antwerp, where the 
trial of their faith was found much more precious 
than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire (I Pet. 1 :7) ; so that they were together con- 
demned to be burnt, each at a stake, only for the 
divine truth, and living according to it, and not 
on acount of any crime committed. On their way 
to death, Jacob Dirck's youngest son, named Pieter 
Jacobs, met them, who, as he in his great sadness 
and sorrow, put his arms around his father's neck, 
was instantly most cruelly seized by the thief- 
catchers, and thrown under the feet of the people 
following. With what sorrow the father and the 
brothers beheld this is easily imagined. When the 
father and his two sons had each been placed at a 
stake, he said: "How is it my dear sons?" Each 
replied: "Very well, my dear father." Andries 
Jacobs being betrothed at the time, his bride and 
his sister viewed from a distance with sorrowful 
hearts and weeping eyes this offering, how their 


bridegroom and brother, forsaking a temporal 
bride, and temporal relationship, chose the eternal 
Bridegroom Christ Jesus above all visible things. 
Thus these heroes were strangled, each at a stake 
and then burnt, sealing the truth with their death 
and blood on the 17th of March 1568. Therefore 
they shall also, for their severe travail, hear the 
sweet and welcome voice of Christ : "Ye good and 
faithful servants, ye have been faithful over a few 
things, I will make you rulers over many things ; 
enter ye into the joy of your Lord." And, again, 
the king will say: "Come, ye blessed of my Fa- 
ther, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from 
the foundation of the world." Matt. 25 :23, 34. 

This narrative is recorded from the accounts of 
trustworthy persons, who witnessed this offering 
themselves. 


KAREL DE RAET, AND GRIETGEN HIS WIFE, HANS- 
KEN IN'T SCHAECK, WILLEM DE SNIJDER, WITH 
CHRISTIJNTGEN HIS WIFE, A. D. 1568 

On the third of May, 1568, some brethren were 
assembled at Tillegem, near Bruges, in Flanders, 
to hear the Word of God preached, when they were 


726 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


unexpectedly set upon by some who had come out 
to get may-poles, and five of them were appre- 
hended, namely, Karel de Raet, a shepherd, born 
at Wingen ; Hansken in't Schaeck, called Hansken 
Koordedraeger, from the Schaeck at Kortijck; 
Willem de Snijder of Honschote ; and two others 
who, since they did not valiantly adhere to the 
truth, are not worthy to have their names recorded 
here. The wife of Karel de Raet, and that of 
Willem de Snijder, were not apprehended with 
them, nor had Karel's wife as yet united with the 
church, but was ready for it. Thus it happened, 
when these men had been apprehended, that Maer- 
ten Lem, a burgomaster of Bruges, went out, about 
twelve o'clock in the night, with the watchmen, 
and first apprehended Christijntgen, Willem Snijd- 
er's wife, and when a watchman was desirous of 
turning Maerten Lem off from the house where 
Grietgen, Karel de Raet's wife was to be sought 
for, and they were rapidly walking along the fort- 
ress, between the Asses Gate and Jerusalem, Griet- 
gen with two of her children unexpectedly met 
them, which caused Maerten Lem to say: "See, 
God gives this whore into our hands ;" and he 
asked her: "Where are you going?" Greatly 
amazed, she replied: "To church." Thereupon 
he said : "It is no time now to go to church. Where 
is your husband?" She answered: "You know it 
well." He asked whether the two children were 
baptized. She said: "No." "Have they no name 
then?" he asked. "Yes," she replied. "Well how 
is this ?" said he ; "Have they a name before they 
are baptized?" She replied: "Dogs and other 
animals receive names; how much more should 
children, that are created after the image of God? 
I was not aware that my lords of Bruges are so 
blind yet." "If you want to talk this way," said 
Maerten Lem, "You shall be burnt." "I know it," 
she replied; "But then the crown of life is pre- 
pared for me." And thus these two women were 
likewise taken to prison, where much vexation, 
pain and suffering were inflicted upon them, as 
also upon the three men mentioned, to draw them 
from the faith; but all in vain. Hence, first the 
men were sentenced to be burnt on the Hillige, 
near Bruges, where they also boldly offered up 
their sacrifice; and a few days after, also the two 
women, because they steadfastly adhered to God, 
and His truth, were sentenced, and burnt in the 
castle in Bruges. And they now wait together for 
the coming of Him that shall come to avenge all 
their sufferings. 


JAN DE SMIT, DANIEL DE PAEU, DANIEL VAN 
VOOREN, AND PASSCHIER WEYNS, A. D. 1568 

In the year 1 568, at Ghent, in Flanders, also four 
brethren were apprehended, namely, Jan de Smit, 
Daniel de Paeu, Daniel van Vooren and Passchier 
Weyns, who boldly confessed their faith and all the 
articles in regard to which they were examined, and 
were not ashamed of God and His Word, but val- 


iantly and undauntedly contended for the truth ac- 
cepted and apprehended ; against all that withstood 
them, unwaveringly even unto death, which they 
therefore tasted, as valiant soldiers; first, Jan de 
Smit, and shortly after, the other three. But they 
obtained to live forever where the new wine will be 
given them to drink in the Father's kingdom. 


VALERIUS SCHOOLMASTER MARTYRED, A. D. 1568 

A. D. 1568, a God-fearing, pious brother, called 
Valerius Schoolmaster, having in his time exercised 
the functions of schoolteacher at Hoorn, in Hol- 
land, and at Middelburgh in Zealand, was appre- 
hended for the testimony of Jesus, at Brouwersha- 
ven, in Zealand. He was a zealous follower of 
Christ, and would not hide the talent he had re- 
ceived in the earth, but put it with great diligence 
out upon usury; so that in paths and highways 
wherever he saw a fit opportunity, he exhorted the 
people with the word of God, threatening the sin- 
ner with the terrible punishment and vengeance 
which at the speedy appearance of Christ from 
heaven will fall upon all ungodliness ; and, again, 
comforting the penitent with the great and glorious 
promises and rewards which the Lord God at the 
end of the world will give to all believers. In con- 
sequence of this he incurred the displeasure of be- 
nighted men, who can neither hear nor endure the 
light of the Gospel, so that once he was put in 
bonds at Goes, in Zealand, but was released again, 
keeping his faith. Finally, however, he was appre- 
hended at Brouwershaven, in the district of Zier- 
ickzee, where he suffered many assaults and long 
imprisonment, but by the grace of God, overcame 
everything, and attested and sealed the faith of the 
truth with his death and blood, and thus, through 
grace, obtained the crown of eternal life. 

He also was not idle during the time of his im- 
prisonment, but wrote two excellent little books, 
well worth reading, and sent them from prison. 
The first is entitled, -Of the Decrease and Decay of 
the Apostolical Church; and Of the Rise of Anti- 
christ, and how the Light of the Gospel is obscured 
by him. Written in the sixtieth week of his impris- 
onment ; together with an earnest exhortation to 
apostates from the Word of God, that they may 
seek the grace of the Almighty betimes, while He is 
yet to be found. 

The other_ book bears the title, The Proof of 
Faith; in which he teaches with great earnestness, 
to count this world and all visible things nothing 
but mere loss and dung, so only Christ be won. 
Wherefore he exhorts all believers, to become poor 
for Christ's sake, and to expect riches hereafter 
with God in heaven. Hence he greatlv commends 
the povertv and piety still remaining in Menno Si- 
mon's S. G., and says that herein he puts to blush 
many others. We have therefore added here, for 
his remembrance, the first part of said book, that 
by this little the reader may judge of all the remain- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


727 


der, which would be too long to adduce here in full. 
He wrote it the fourteenth week of his imprison- 
ment. Read it with attention. 

"Natural, impartial reader or hearer, who have 
any understanding, you may well know and imag- 
ine that a man that is so depraved and wicked, and 
has done so much evil, as to insure his death, in 
case he were apprehended, ought to be afraid of 
committing any more evil, lest at last he be appre- 
hended and put to death. But if he do not cease 
from evil he may at last be apprehended for his 
crimes. Then, when imprisoned, he may reflect and 
concern himself night and day, how he may escape 
or obtain his liberty, whether by strategy, violence 
or breaking out — and all this, that he might pro- 
long his uncertain life for a little while, which, 
though he should escape, he must ultimately relin- 
quish. And if a poor prisoner cannot help himself, 
he may consider whether some good friend cannot 
assist him. And if his friend fail him, he may medi- 
tate whether the judges might not be merciful to 
him, at whose feet he may fall, and implore them to 
spare him in mercy; moreover, he may promise 
thoroughly to reform, and that he will commit such 
or like misdeeds no more all the days of his life. 
And when the prisoner has done this much, yea, all 
that he knows to do, and all his plans, and every- 
thing else, prove of no avail, he may in desperation 
give up all courage. And when he sees the monk 
coming, he may become greatly alarmed, knowing 
that his confessor (who with lies and vain consola- 
tion may promise him eternal life, thereby seeking 
to assure his soul) is the harbinger of his death; 
and when the doomed man hears the court pro- 
nounce his sentence of death, he may become still 
more afraid and dismayed. And when at last he 
is led to death, and beholds the instrument of his 
death, the gallows, wheel, stake, or water, he may 
most of all fear and quake, so seized with mortal 
dread and horror as though he were dead while still 
living, unless he be assured by the priests or some 
other liars, of his salvation, in which case he might 
be of good cheer — one in this way, another in an- 
other way. And if some one should bring to this 
doomed criminal under the sword or at the stake, 
good news assuring him of his life, and tell him to 
arise and he himself should kneel down in the mal- 
efactor's stead, how joyfully should the latter with 
gratitude accept his transient life! But Christ, 
who gives redemption and eternal life by His death, 
few are willing gratefully to accept aright and 
unto repentance. John 3:16; Col. 1 :14; Isa. 53:4. 

"Now, suppose that the doomed criminal were a 
filthy, unclean harlot, imprisoned for a crime, or 
for having herself alone committed (if it were pos- 
sible) all the wickedness and sins ever perpetrated 
by the whole world, for which she were condemned 
to the most shameful death that could be devised ; 
and the King should send His only, beloved Son 
from His kingdom and glory into great poverty, 
imprisonment, suffering and an innocent death, in 
the stead of the unclean harlot, who by all manner 


of contempt and evil-doing had angered the King, 
and merited death a thousand times, but is now 
nevertheless, out of grace, through the death of the 
King's Son (on condition of her amending) recon- 
ciled to the King, made at peace with Him, liber- 
ated from prison, and delivered from death, and re- 
mains alive, a partaker and heir of all the riches of 
the King; ought she not to accept this great love 
and grace, love the King, amend her ways, and be 
greatly afraid of vexing the King any more all her 
life, who cleansed her, forgave all her evil deeds, 
paid all her debts, espoused her as his beloved 
queen, exalted her into his glory, and protected her 
as himself from all enemies ? But if she should not 
amend (according to her promise), should again 
anger the King, and do worse than before, were 
this not great ingratitude, worthy of sorer punish- 
ment than before ? Hereby we may prove ourselves, 
whether we that are redeemed through the grace of 
God, also keep the promise of amendment. And 
though all this were to happen thus, a thing which 
was never heard of or seen, nor ever occurred; 
yet, since it were but temporal and of short dura- 
tion, it is not an adequate comparison to that which 
is eternal and intransient, namely, the love of God, 
which has come to us through Christ His beloved 
Son. 

"For God so loved the condemned world, His 
enemy, steeped as it was in sin, and lying in wick- 
edness, that He spared not His only Son, but sent 
Him from His glory in heaven, and delivered Him 
up to the ignominious and cursed death of the cross 
that whosoever believeth, should not perish or be 
condemned, but, through the love, mercy and grace 
made manifest through Christ, be acquitted, bless- 
ed, redeemed, cleansed from sin, protected from the 
wrath to come, wooed, wedded and exalted as His 
chosen bride, obedient wife (Hos. 2:20), and glo- 
rious queen, and His eternal and imperishable 
kingdom, and live with joy unspeakable ; whereas 
we were so unclean in our sins, polluted in our 
blood, no one attending to us (Ezek. 16), taken 
captive by the devil at His will, and sentenced by 
God, according, to His justice, to eternal death and 
damnation. 

"Now let us well consider and advise with our- 
selves, according to the simile of the criminal, im- 
prisoned harlot under the sword or at the stake. 
Let us well examine ourselves, whether we have 
risen from our sins, amended, and still daily amend, 
and whether we have rightly accepted, by the faith 
which worketh by love, this love, grace and re- 
demption of God, made manifest through Christ, 
and whether we in return love God, keep His com- 
mandments, and are afraid of offending Him. 

"The world was by nature corrupted by sin, and 
judged or sentenced to condemnation, so that 
Christ did not come to judge or to condemn that 
which was already judged, but to redeem from 
judgment and condemnation all those who rightly, 
by faith, accept His grace (Tit. 2:11), that is, those 


728 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


who die unto and forsake their sinful life, repent 
and amend ; in a word, those who are born again, 
live after the Spirit (John 3 ; Rom. 8) , as the Scrip- 
tures abundantly testify in many places. 

"But the others, who do not rightly accept, by 
faith, unto the amendment of their entire life, ac- 
cording to the holy Word of the Lord, this love, 
grace and redemption, abide notwithstanding, held 
captive by their sins, under the condemnation and 
wrath of God, and will on account of their unbe- 
lief, impenitence and unrighteousness not see the 
kingdom of God, nor inherit eternal life, because 
they still continue in sin, and thus cannot receive 
redemption and forgiveness of sins; and if they 
have once received it, yet, when their new sins ex- 
ceed the old ones, it may go worse with them than 
before, because they are so ungrateful, and do not 
keep their promise of amendment. For Christ bore 
our sins in His own body on the tree of the cross 
(on this condition of our amendment) that we be- 
lievers, being dead to sins, should live unto right- 
eousness: by whose stripes we were healed. For 
we were as sheep going astray; but are now re- 
turned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. 
I Pet. 2:24, 25. From this we may clearly per- 
ceive, that those who do not die unto their sins, nor 
live according to righteousness, are not yet healed 
or redeemed by the stripes and death of Christ ; for 
they are not yet by faith returned unto God, from 
their sins, wherein they still live. Hence they in 
vain assure themselves, of eternal life, and of their 
redemption by the death of Christ, since they are 
still bound by their sins. Either they must turn 
from their sins to God, obediently to serve Him all 
the days of their life, in all holiness and righteous- 
ness of faith which is pleasing in His sight ; or they 
still remain captive, unbelieving and condemned, 
as the Scriptures declare more abundantly than I 
can designate; for I have never had a Bible in 
prison. Let each examine himself. II Cor. 13 :5. 

"Mark now, how poor mankind receive redemp- 
tion and salvation, as they think. One hears and 
sees openly enough that almost the entire popu- 
lation of Europe are called believing Christians, 
though by their wicked works they hardly show 
that they are natural men, since they live more un- 
natural than irrational beasts. Nevertheless, they 
are taught by their teachers, that they are called 
children and heirs of God (Ezek. 13:10), which 
they also claim they are, being so firmly persuaded 
of and settled in it, that there are very few of them 
who can be turned, advised, helped or drawn out of 
the prison, water, or fire of damnation (Jude 23) ; 
for they are already too wise in themselves, already 
helped, and delivered from death as they think and 
say, though in this their sinful life and ungodliness, 
they live enveloped in perdition ; and clothed with a 
beautiful name, being called Christians and children 
of God, though they lead a worse life than do Jews, 
Turks, or Saracens, who do not pretend to be 
Christians, as these, who so openly and shamelessly 
forsake Christ, in idolatry with wood and stone, 


which they call an excellent worship; in avarice 
which they style only industry ; in pride, which 
with them is only neatness; in lasciviousness and 
adultery, which they term only friendship; in 
drunkenness, which they call enjoyment, pleasure, 
glee, good naturedness, or good cheer, even as they 
know how to name and varnish over every form of 
wickedness and sin, as though they were nothing 
but virtue and righteousness. As though they were 
blameless, many of them are not willing to be re- 
proved for the lusts of their flesh, in dicing, gamb- 
ling, singing, jumping, dancing, strutting, boasting, 
in order to be nowhere the least, but everywhere 
the first, if possible ; in vain, false, and renowned 
arts of earthly worldly and carnal wisdom ; in liti- 
gating, suing, swearing; in subtle, fraudulent, 
wicked inventions and traffics; in lying, cheating, 
quarreling, cursing, fighting, and killing, if not in 
deed, then with the heart ; in hatred and envy, de- 
faming, backbiting, foolish talking, jesting, joking, 
unprofitableness, impropriety, in all manner of lust- 
fulness and wantonness. This is nearly everywhere 
as common as daily bread; herein and herewith 
they spend, abuse and fritter away, to the perdition 
of their souls, the precious time of grace, their life, 
and every good creature of God ; which good gifts 
of God we have received from His grace for our 
good, thereby obediently to serve our God and 
Creator blessed forever, to the honor of God, the 
salvation of our souls, and the edification and love 
of our neighbor. For God is not willing that any 
should perish, neither has He pleasure in the death 
of sinners ; but He is longsuffering, and waits for 
all to repent and will have all men to come to the 
knowledge of the truth, and be saved. II Pet. 3 :9 ; 
Ezek. 33:11 ; 18:32; I Timothy 2:4. 

"What more should our Lord God do for man, 
than He has done? Does not then men's condemna- 
tion proceed from their unbelief, disobedience, neg- 
lect, abuse, guilt, sin, obduracy, and ingratitude, 
because they will not by faith unto repentance ac- 
cept this grace and incomprehensible love of God ? 
But they reject this repentance, and would still en- 
joy this grace and salvation in their sinful life, from 
which they do not turn.* For since men have also 
the freedom to abuse themselves or their own life, 
and every creature of God, though this is not the 
will of God, only He permits it, therefore men, by 
their first birth, live contrary to the Word and will 
of God, hence unnaturally, disobediently, ungrate- 
fully, unreasonably, heedlessly, according to the 
will of the devil, are devilishly and carnally minded, 
covetous and ambitious, unmannerly, immodest, 
faithless, perjured, hateful, envious, unmerciful, 
without compassion, impatient, morose, cruel, and 
revengeful ; in short, had men the power of wealth, 
and of their body, and were there no human author- 
ity which they fear and dread more than God, men 
might live in such an inhuman manner that we 
might almost have a hell upon earth ; for though 

* See whether a criminal is pardoned, if he is not willing to 
amend his ways. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


729 


now men are feared more than God, still it is alto- 
gether too bad.* 

"Many that are poor refrain from drunkenness 
because they have no money or pledge, while the 
rich may refrain from it on account of their honor 
or pride, or because they have no company accord- 
ing to their liking, or because they wish to preserve 
their health and mind; and for such reasons also 
lasciviousness is avoided. Men often refrain from 
stealing on account of the gallows, and from mur- 
der because of the wheel; in short, every sin is 
left uncommitted more on account of constraint, 
shame, and fear of men, than from voluntary good- 
ness for the Lord's sake. And though men are so 
devoid of shame and given up to evil that they 
openly keep brothels, and live far more detestably 
than beasts; they are nevertheless called Chris- 
tians, and claim to be children and heirs of God by 
grace. How much more then those who manage it 
a little more decently and secretly, as they think, 
though they frequently are much worse ? Can one 
do worse, than those who without shame live in 
adultery and other secret sins, when God the Lord 
knows every secret of the heart? Rev. 2 :23 ; 16:7. 
Oh, if men's sins were written on their foreheads, 
how constantly would they keep in the house, and 
conceal themselves in corners, holes and dens, so 
as not to be seen by men. 

"But they are not ashamed before God, nor 
afraid of Him, from whom they cannot hide ; and 
who can kill the body, and cast both it and the soul 
into the fire of hell. Intelligent and impartial read- 
er or hearer, prove whether these false Christians 
in this their improper and unchristian life can be 
saved though God's mercy and the death of Christ, 
or not? even as they presumptuously say, that the 
kingdom of heaven is for them, and not for the 
beasts, and besides utter so much nonsense, as 
though they were raving, as they also are, so that 
a true Christian may well be ashamed and afraid to 
see or hear their madness and their unrighteous 
works. II Pet. 2:8. 

"O depraved and wanton men ! Though the Jews, 
because they were called Abraham's seed, claimed 
to be God's children, Christ showed them that a 
thief, liar and murderer from the beginning, even 
the devil, was their father, because their works 
were evil. John 8:44. This may have seemed 
strange to them, even as it may seem strange to 
those who obey not the Gospel of Christ, that ac- 
cording to the testimony of the holy Scriptures they 
are called, and are servants of sin (Rom. 6 :20), an 
evil and perverse generation of serpents, vipers and 
adders (Matt. 3:7), the seed of the devil, children 
and heirs of wrath (Eph. 2:3), accursed and of 
eternal damnation, seed of Cain, Ishmaelites, filthy 
swine, devouring dogs, ravening wolves in sheep's 
clothing (Matt. 7:15), that is, under the cloak of 
sanctity, uncircumcised, gentiles, aliens and strang- 

* Many think they are good Christians, because they do not 
steal or commit murder, and because they do not perpetrate vio- 
lence or highway robbery, or because they refrain from evils which 
they can or dare not do; however, this is no virtue in their case. 


ers from the covenants of the promise of eternal life, 
who have no part in the kingdom of God, though 
they entertain a vain hope of it; without God, 
without Christ, godless and idolatrous in the world. 
These evil works are the nets, snares, fetters, 
blocks, chains, bonds, and imprisonments, with 
which the prince of this world, the devil, who 
works in the children of disobedience holds men 
captive, blinded and bound at his will. Eph. 2 :2 ; 
II Tim. 2 :26. And so long as the false Christians 
go or creep about bound by their sins, and en- 
tangled in their unrighteousness, they boast in vain 
and heap one great lie on top of another, when they 
boast that through Christ they are redeemed and 
freed from their sins, when they still live in their 
toils, and because of their unbelief and disobedience 
are predestinated unto eternal damnation, unless 
they turn from their sins to God, and by faith 
rightly receive His grace unto repentance ; where- 
by they will not perish, but are predestinated to 
eternal life, and become vessels of honor prepared 
unto glory, according to my simple view. Rom. 
9:23. 

"Mark what Christians these are, because they 
say that there is a gracious God, which the devil 
also believes, and trembles ; moreover, they say that 
they are sorry for their sins, and still they go on in 
them, the longer the more, the older the worse, and 
under the cloak of the grace of God commit all 
kinds of sin, the one in this, another in that, so 
that no wickedness is left undone. Let every one 
search the secrecy of his heart, and he will better 
understand and find what I, prisoner, here write. 
One man cannot alone commit all these sins, for his 
life is too short and insufficient. For it is generally 
seen that sins leave men when sickness or old age 
comes, which, however, does not tend to their re- 
pentance, amendment, or salvation, though many 
who are robust and healthy abandon and deceive 
themselves, saying : I shall repent when I am old, 
when I lie upon my death bed, or I care not longer 
to serve the world ; if any one sorrows for his sins 
then, and the end is good, all is well. 

"O vain consolation! for what kind of repent- 
ance can that be, when one is no longer able to com- 
mit sin and wickedness ? it is nothing but mocking 
the Lord, sinning presumptuously, and rejecting 
His grace. Oh that all men captive in sin at the will 
of the devil (II Tim. 2:26), would always con- 
sider this, and thus give the more diligence, so that 
through grace their souls might become disengaged 
and free from the snares of the devil, or sin ; even 
as a prisoner according to the body gives diligence 
to obtain his liberty, so as to escape bodily death 
for a brief and uncertain time yet, though he ulti- 
mately cannot escape it. If men believed that God 
is just, and that He will not suffer any evil to go 
unpunished in impenitent sinners, they would be 
terrified, and through fear of God's righteous 
judgment forsake their sins; but now they are 
comforted in their misfortune by their preachers, 
with flattering words and soothing sermons, with 


730 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


grace, peace, mercy and salvation; whereas they 
ought to be reproved for their sins, and threatened 
with the anger, wrath, fury and displeasure of God 
(Rom. 2:8), and eternal damnation, so that they 
might repent while the door of grace is open for a 
little while yet. II Cor. 6:2. 

"I know of nothing that so securely and firmly 
holds men in the sleep of sin till the Lord comes as 
a thief in the night, as to call good evil (Isa. 5 :20), 
the Gospel a sect (of which all manner of evil and 
falsehoods are spoken), and to change the truth 
into lies. The Christians are called heretics and 
deceivers ; every good work, virtue and righteous- 
ness is so misnamed, perverted, painted in such 
abominable colors, and the worst construction put 
upon them, so that men are afraid of them, as 
though they would be led astray by the truth, and 
of God. The devil, on the other hand does not 
appear half so ugly as he is represented and I have 
here described him, but disguised by a beautiful 
semblance of love, and changed and transformed 
into an angel of light, as though he were sent of 
God, and were himself God. II Thess. 2:4. Then 
are his lies called nothing less than Gospel and 
truth; Babylon is called the church of God; idol- 
aters are styled my lords; lying and cheating are 
termed prudence and cleverness ; fighting is called 
valor, and murder, simply misfortune; and thus, 
many like shameful deeds, upon which an honor- 
able construction is put, so that evil is called good. 
But woe unto such, as Isaiah says. Isa. 5 :20. Thus, 
the ministers and children of the devil know how to 
change, gloss over, name, and construe in the most 
favorable light into good works virtues, and all 
manner of righteousnesses, all their evil works, 
vices, sins, and manifold unrighteousnesses ; as, 
avarice into industry and pride into neatness. 

"Who can reprove them therein? And there- 
with the devil blinds them so artfully and firmly 
to his will, so that they think themselves to be pious 
Christians, and are not willing to be reproved by 
the truth for their sins, but claim to be unblamable 
children of God ; moreover, they say, like Christ's 
disciples : 'Our Father, etc' But let everyone ex- 
amine himself, whether he is born of God, be- 
cause he knows how to palliate his sins; and 
whether he so sanctifies and adorns the name of 
God, and does His will, and whether he carries 
himself before God as an obedient child before his 
father; otherwise he joins lie upon lie in his pray- 
er, which in that case is a curse and an abomination 
before God. In short, he that committeth sin is 
born of the devil, and knoweth not God, John 8 :44 ; 
I John 3 ; and they that are carnally minded can- 
not please God. Hence, mark whom impenitent 
sinners call upon as their father. Blind indeed 
must he be who cannot perceive this, and hardened 
he that is not willing to repent. 

"O dear reader or hearer, if I may pray you, it is 
my heartfelt desire of you, that you would always 
consider (and regulate yourself accordingly), that 
men shall give an account of every idle word they 


have spoken ; how much more then of their deeds. 
And everyone shall receive the things done in his 
body, according to that he hath done, whether it be 
good or bad; namely, before the righteous judg- 
ment of God, where anger, hatred, envy, yea, not 
loving in deed and in truth, speaking scornfully or 
spitefully to one's brother, Raca, thou fool, or of- 
fending him, will be deemed and judged murder, 
worthy of the council, of judgment, and of hell fire. 
Matthew 5:22; I John 3. In like manner, dis- 
obedience will be regarded as witchcraft; to look 
upon a woman to lust after her, as adultery ; and 
any other evil which is desired with the heart, and 
consented to with the will (though the power for, 
and the commission of it be wanting), will be 
judged and punished as an accomplished evil work. 
I Sam. 15:23; Matt. 5 :28; Not to keep His Word, 
will be considered lying and perjury, and a good 
oath, so called, will be as severely recompensed as 
a bad oath ; for Christ has prohibited all swearing ; 
Matt. 5, as also to hate one's enemies, and not to 
love them like one's friends ; and many like things. 
Now mark how adultery was punished under the 
law by the judges ; for those who committed adul- 
tery were stoned to death. Lev. 20:10. And it is 
daily seen, how witchcraft, homicide or murder 
are punished by the secular lords with fire or the 
sword unto death. Mark, how Adam, for one sin, 
likewise Cain, then the whole world, with the flood] 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the adjacent cities, with 
fire and brimstone, Egypt, and afterwards the idol- 
aters in Israel and murmurers against Moses, were 
punished according to the justice of God, for our 
example. Of how much sorer punishment then are 
they worthy who murmur against Christ, change 
His truth into lies, and do not receive His grace 
and redemption by faith, unto the amendment of 
their life, but reject the same, living presumptu- 
ously in their sins. Heb. 10:29; Rom. 1 :25. God 
who did not spare the angels who had sinned, will 
also not spare those who through unbelief are un- 
righteous and false Christians, but punish them 
with a sorer punishment than Sodom and Gomor- 
rah, which were turned into ashes and condemned 
and overthrown for an example unto all them that 
commit ungodliness, and do not repent. II Pet 
2:4, 6; Jude 6; Matt. 11 :24; II Pet. 3. 

"If then we are to be saved through God's mercy, 
we must repent, must be obedient children of God[ 
born again of Him, and must follow Christ in the 
regeneration and the footsteps of faith, through the 
narrow way unto eternal life ; nor are we then saved 
through the merit of good works, but by the grace 
which came through Christ. Eph. 2 :5. For though 
we lived holy, blameless, and perfect in all right- 
eousness (as the Scriptures require), and suffered 
for the truth a death more bitter than that of Christ 
which with us men is impossible, yet we could not 
be saved through our own good works, but only 
by God's mercy, and the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who alone has wrought out our salvation. 
And if we sought or placed our salvation in our 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


731 


good works or our sufferings, we should commit 
idolatry, and we were our own idol, if we trusted 
in ourselves. But now our salvation depends only 
on the mercy of God, and not on our running and 
following after. Rom. 9:16. Though we should 
run and follow after ever so well (which is our 
bounden duty), so that we attained, and already 
had, the perfection (that for which we are appre- 
hended of Christ), and had done all those things 
which are commanded us, and which it is our duty 
to do, we were yet only unprofitable servants. Phil. 
3:12; Luke 17:10. How much more unprofitable 
then are we now, with our many defects, though 
we willingly strive after and should gladly perform 
that which is good, and are sorry that we are not 
perfect.* Hence we have great reason, and are in 
duty bound, to humble ourselves very low under 
the abundant grace of God, and to pray ; for eternal 
life is a gift of God, and not a debt or reward pro- 
ceeding from our labor, merit, or good works ; for 
we are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, 
unto good works, which God hath before prepared 
that we should walk in them (Ephesians 2 :10), as 
is our duty to do, in the least as well as in the great- 
est. But the wages of sin is death ; hence we must 
hate and fear sin, that we do not consent to or 
commit it, if we want to be saved by the grace and 
gift of God. Thus, we are delivered through Christ 
from the bonds of the devil, or sin ; let therefore 
no one say or hope that he is saved by his good 
works, which are far too insufficient. That, also, 
no one say: 'Should we not take thought, should 
we not gain a livelihood, else on what should we 
live ? except to them who say that one is not to sup- 
port himself by the labor of his hands, but to go 
idle.' Matt. 6:25; Luke 12:22; Eph. 4:28. And 
that, also, no one say: 'No man knows the hour 
and the day of the Lord, except to those who have 
set the hour and the day, from doing which may 
the Lord keep me.' Mark 13:32; Matt. 24:42; 
Luke 12:40. Beware of frivolous babblers, for 
scorners will speedily come to an end. I Cor. 15 : 
33. And if, when you speak your mind, or reprove 
with meekness that which does not meet your ap- 
probation, and one resist you in the good, be silent 
instantly, that you may retain your peace and the 
tranquility of your conscience. If it vex you, do 
nevertheless not engage in contention, that you 
may be found in peace when the Lord comes. II 
Pet. 3 :14. We must here at any rate suffer vio- 
lence and wrong ; but it will not last long ; hence, 
let us possess our souls in patience. Luke 21 :19. 
"The fourteenth week of my imprisonment, the 
first day of January, so called, A. D. 1568. I trust 
that the present year will not pass like the former. 
Watch and pray, for you know neither the day nor 
hour; but the God-fearing may consider whether 
this is the year in which the Lord will deliver His 
elect and believers ; let everyone take warning." 


* That no one say : "We cannot be perfect ; except to those who 
say that they are perfect. There is nothing so good as that men 
will not contradict it, even with the Scriptures." 


JAN THIELEMANS AND JOB JANS, BURNT TO DEATH 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, IN THE 

HAGUE, IN HOLLAND, IN THE YEAR 1 568 

Hands were now laid in the Hague, on the be- 
loved friends of the Lord, so that they did not 
hesitate to deprive them of their lives with flaming 
fire. 

This became apparent in the case of two very 
pious and God-fearing men, one of whom was 
named Jan Thielemans, the other Job Jans. To 
both of them, at that place, because they faithfully 
adhered to the Lord their God, and could by no 
torture be moved from the steadfastness of their 
faith, their sentence of death was read in court, 
namely, that, in pursuance with the decrees of the 
Emperor, and the King of Spain (who called him- 
self Count of Holland), they should be put to 
death with fire as heretics ; which was executed on 
the 18th of December, A. D. 1568, on both of 
them, after they had committed their souls into 
the hands of God. 

Further observation, concerning the death sen- 
tences of the aforementioned martyrs 

We have this year, 1659, on this occasion, 
through some of our friends in the Hague, re- 
quested by way of authenticated copy, the use of 
the proceedings of the court, from the criminal 
records of the year 1568, but especially of the 
death sentences of the aforementioned martyrs 
(as recorded by the papists) , which, as appears, are 
still extant in the original; but as A. D. 1648 peace 
was made with Spain, with condition of forgiving 
each other all previous wrongs, and consequently, 
to mention them no more, the actuary was afraid 
to make out a copy of these particulars, as well as 
concerning others of our fellow believers that were 
put to death during the papistical reign, fearing 
it might tend to their reproach, and prove detri- 
mental to the peace concluded. 

This aim of the actuary was not bad, since it 
springs from carefulness in regard to a matter of 
great importance; but in the meantime these holy 
martyrs must suffer abridgement, since their mat- 
ters, which otherwise necessarily (even out of the 
mouth of their adversaries, might be made known 
to every one), must thereby remain hid. This by 
way of notice. 

■The first letter which Jan Thielemans wrote in 
prison 

I wish you, my dear friends, grace and peace 
from God the heavenly Father, through Jesus 
Christ His dear Son our Lord, as a friendly greet- 
ing. Amen. 

Further, after all good and proper greetings that 
are Christian-like, I, in my unworthiness, have felt 
greatly prompted in my spirit, to write you some- 
thing yet, since I cannot orally converse with you 
all ; seeing I had laid the first foundation in some of 
you (I Cor. 3:10), and, according to my humble 


732 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


gift, withheld nothing from you, and though I am 
now removed from you, I have nevertheless, be- 
cause of the great love which we in great fellowship 
and peace have mutually had, remembered you in 
my last adieu with a little draught out of my rivu- 
let, from which I have poured out for you ; yet not 
1, but the grace of God through me. For thus it is 
written, Gen. 17, that God spake to our father 
Abraham, saying : "I am the Almighty God ; walk 
before me, and be thou perfect. And 1 will make 
my covenant between me, and thee, and will multi- 
ply thee accordingly, so that kings shall come out of 
thee. And I will give unto thy seed the land of 
Canaan for an inheritance. And this is my cove- 
nant which I will make with you : Every man-child 
ye shall circumcise." Thus Abraham believed God, 
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: 
and he was called the Friend of God. James 2 :23. 
So God then gave Abraham a son, who was called 
Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob and Jacob begat the 
twelve patriarchs. And the patriarchs envied Jo- 
seph, and sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty 
pieces of silver. The Ishmaelites sold him into 
Egypt ; but God was with him, and he found favor 
in the sight of king Pharaoh, and became governor 
over the land of Egypt. And it happened that 
there came a dearth over Egypt, so that Jacob and 
his sons found no sustenance. And they heard that 
corn was sold in Egypt. Hence Jacob sent out his 
sons the first time ; and the second time Joseph was 
made known to his brethren ; and Joseph's kindred 
was made known unto Pharaoh. And Joseph sent 
for his father Jacob. And Jacob went down into 
Egypt, and with him threescore and fifteen souls ; 
and he dwelt in Egypt, and he and his sons died 
there. Acts 7:4, etc. 

Now when the people began to multiply, there 
arose another king, who oppressed the people of 
Israel, and commanded that the young children 
should be cast away. Mark well, my good friends, 
how did the children of Israel get into this distress, 
great misery and sorrow, on account of which 
they lamented and groaned to God? who had 
brought them into this ? It was their father Jacob 
that had done it ; yet with God Almighty the prom- 
ise remained as firm as ever, which He had made to 
our father Abraham, namely, that his seed should 
inherit the land of Canaan ; but now they were in 
great affliction. Now, what did all those inherit 
that were born there? the good and faithful land 
of promise ? No, but they inherited bondage under 
the cruel King Pharaoh, and still found themselves 
in the land of Egypt; this is certainly the truth. 

Consider now this age of the world, and those 
who are at the present day born unto the world ; if 
they ascertain it from the Scriptures, who brought 
them into the world? Adam their father. So they 
now still find themselves in the spiritual dark 
Egypt, under Pharaoh, the devil. Mark now, my 
good friends, what they inherit, and how they 
boast in vain. They inherit a naked body when 
they are born, without raiment and food; for if 


they inherited raiment and food, there would not 
so many people go naked and suffer hunger. But 
now excellent and thankworthy gifts are proffered 
by the Lord. But if we will not use these excellent 
means according to the rule and truth of Christ, in 
order to get to the spiritual promised land, we must 
remain without; even as there are many who do 
not use the means for obtaining food and clothing, 
and must therefore go without them, suffer cold 
and hunger : thus, my good friends, it will also go 
with all those who here vainly boast of the king- 
dom of God. 

I will now return to my previous theme. Con- 
sider now Israel, who were dwelling in Egypt; 
they began greatly to multiply, and wax mighty, 
and numbered six hundred thousand men. This 
great power was nevertheless beaten and com- 
pelled to labor by King Pharaoh. They groaned 
and complained, and though there was such a great 
multitude of them, yet it was not possible for them 
to get out of the country, and enter into the land of 
which they were to be heirs, as God had promised 
Abraham. Thus, also, my friends, it is impossible 
for man to get out of spiritual Egypt, and to be 
delivered from King Pharaoh, namely, the devil, 
in order to enter into the spiritual country, namely, 
the kingdom of God ; for men universally inherit a 
depraved nature, and in accordance with it they act, 
and live after the flesh, wherefore they die, and do 
not inherit the kingdom of God. Now, my dear 
friends, when they were thus in Egypt, and had 
dwelt there four hundred and thirty years, and 
complained, groaned and sighed, it came before the 
Lord. And the Lord God Almighty remembered 
His covenant which He had firmly made with our 
Father Abraham, and God raised up and chose a 
man named Moses. Behold, my good friends, 
through this man God intended to deliver all the 
people, and He did many wonderful signs and 
mighty works before the king of Egypt, as we may 
read. Finally this Moses brought them out by the 
mighty hand of God ; but before they left the coun- 
try, Moses went many times to Pharaoh and said : 
"Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Let my people 
go, that they may serve me." But Pharaoh said: 
"Who is the Lord, that I should let the people go? 
I will not let the people go." Now, even as the 
people that were in Egypt could not serve the Lord, 
unless they left Egypt and journeyed towards the 
promised land, so can now those likewise not serve 
the Lord, who are in the spiritual Egypt ; for one 
cannot serve two masters at once ; one must leave 
Pharaoh and Egypt; for Pharaoh dwells in Egypt, 
but the Lord God dwells in the spiritual promised 
land. My kind friends can now easily perceive 
that it is the truth what I write, that one must 
leave the spiritual Egypt, even as Moses by the 
mighty hand of God delivered the people out of 
Egypt, from which they went out in one day, and 
came to the sea, whither Pharaoh with his servants 
pursued them, thinking that they could not escape 
out of the country. But little did they know that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


733 


the Lord was with the children of Israel; for 
Pharaoh thought to smite them. But the Lord 
divided the sea, so that the waters stood like walls. 
And thus Moses and the people of God passed 
through, but Pharaoh with all his servants re- 
mained in the sea, so that not one of them escaped 
to go and tell the tale in Egypt. Thus also, my 
dearest, when men want to serve God, then they 
forsake Egypt and Pharaoh, and when Pharaoh 
sees this, he bestirs him with his servants. But the 
spiritual Moses has gone before his people, and 
helps them through the sea, namely, through the 
wilderness of this world, and Pharaoh and his serv- 
ants diligently pursue to the end, which is death. 
Furthermore, my friends, when Moses had now 
succeeded in bringing them across the sea, they 
saw their pursuers drown before their eyes. Then 
they rejoiced greatly, and with songs thanked God, 
who had so mightily helped them. They were, how- 
ever, not yet in the promised land, but on the way 
to the same. And Moses their leader went before 
them, and brought them to Mount Sinai ; and he, 
the faithful servant of the Lord, went up into the 
mount and there received the law of the Lord, 
which was written with the finger of God in two 
tables of stone. When Moses had received these 
two tables of stone from the hand of the Lord, to 
lay them before the people, that they should do ac- 
cording to them, for now the service of the Lord 
commenced ; and as yet they had received no ordi- 
nance from God, save circumcision ; hence, if they 
were now to serve God, they must also have the 
commandments, the Lord said to Moses : "Go, 
get thee down from the mount ; for the people have 
corrupted themselves." Ex. 32 :7. Now when 
Moses went down from the mount, and saw the 
people dancing around the calf, rejoicing in the 
work of their hands, he cast down the two tables 
of stone and brake them beneath the mount, and 
with a grieved heart addressed Aaron, saying: 
"What hast thou done, that thou hast brought this 
people to so great a sin?" Aaron excused himself 
before Moses, and said: "My lord, thou knowest 
that this people is a stiffnecked people. They fell 
upon me and I demanded of them their golden ear- 
rings, and other gold ; and I received it from their 
hands, and fashioned it with a graving tool, and 
hence this calf came." Moses took the calf, and 
ground it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, 
and made the children of Israel drink of it. And 
Moses addressed the Levites, and said to them: 
"Put every man his sword by his side, and go in 
and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, 
and slay every man his brother, and every man his 
companion, and every man his neighbor." And 
there fell three thousand men. Behold now, my 
dear kind friends, these three thousand had left 
Egypt and Pharaoh, and were gone out of it, in 
order that they should possess the goodly land; 
now if they had boasted themselves of the goodly 
land (promised by God to Abraham and his seed), 
would it not have been vain boasting? Certainly. 


And Korah, Dathan and Abiram, with two hun- 
dred and fifty others, who offered incense before 
the Lord, perished from the multitude, together 
with fourteen thousand and seven hundred that 
murmured against Moses, and said: "Ye have 
killed the people of the Lord." Num. 16. 

See, my good friends, they claimed to be the 
people of God, though they were not it ; and again, 
Moses the faithful servant of the Lord was said to 
have done it, though it was not he, but their own 
sins that did it. And if the truth had been told, it 
would also have been so said ; but the truth is also 
now at the present day often perverted, and things 
are asserted to be true when they are not. Again, 
if the twenty-four thousand whoremongers (Num- 
bers 25:1), together with three thousand more 
and many others, who all perished in the wilder- 
ness because of their sins and transgressions, had 
all greatly boasted themselves of the goodly land, 
would this not have been vain boasting ? Certainly. 
Hence, it is vain to boast of one's self ; but to boast 
according to the truth is right. For Moses said to 
them : "Hear, O Israel : Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy might. 
These words which I command thee this day, shall 
be in thine heart : and thou shalt write them upon 
the posts of thy doors; talk of them when thou 
walkest by the way with thy children ; and let them 
be for a memorial in thine hand." Deut. 6 :4, etc. 
Thus Moses strictly exhorted the people, and most 
diligently presented the law of the Lord to them ; 
and the people said: "Yea, but did not do it." 

Hence, my good friends, take heed, lest there 
be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief [in de- 
parting from the living God]. But exhort one an- 
other daily while it is called today ; lest any of you 
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For 
ye are made partakers of Christ, if ye hold the be- 
ginning of your confidence steadfast unto the end. 
Therefore, today if ye will hear His voice, harden 
not your hearts, as in the provocation, when He 
was grieved forty years with that generation, and 
sware in His wrath, that they should not enter into 
His rest. Heb. 3. Therefore, my good friends, let us 
give the more earnest heed to the things which we 
have heard, lest at any time we should let them 
slip. For if the word spoken by angels was stead- 
fast, and every transgression and disobedience re- 
ceived a just recompense of reward ; how shall we 
escape, if we neglect so great salvation? 2:1-3. 
Let us therefore fear the Lord, that we may enter 
into His rest, and that none of us remain without. 
For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as 
unto them: but the word preached did not profit 
them, not being mixed with faith in them. 4:1, 2. 
Thus, my good friends, it does not profit to hear 
the word of God, if it is not mixed with faith ; for 
unto them that believe, as the Scripture says,' the 
kingdom of God is promised by the mouth of Jesus. 
Hence let us not neglect the grace of God, who 
says : "I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in 
the day of salvation have I succored thee : behold, 


734 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


now is the accepted time ; behold, now is the day 
of salvation" — which is neglected by many. He- 
brews 12:15; II Cor. 6:1, 2. 

Therefore let us in all things approve ourselves 
as the ministers of God, serving Him all the days 
of our lives in holiness and righteousness, which 
are acceptable before Him. Hence I say with Paul : 
"Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble 
knees; that ye stumble not, as do the lame; but 
make straight paths for your feet; for I fear that 
there are now many lame, and many hands which 
hang down. Therefore follow peace and holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord. He- 
brews 12 :12, 13. I beseech you therefore, my good 
friends, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service. And be not con- 
formed to this world : but be ye transformed by the 
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is 
that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. 
Rom. 12:1, 2. Hence, remember the words which 
were formerly spoken to you in the name of the 
Lord: "Therefore abide in that which you have 
heard from the beginning. If you abide in that 
which you have heard from the beginning, you 
shall continue in the Father and in the Son. And 
this is his promise, even eternal life." I John 2: 
24, 25. For we have a sure word of prophecy, 
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a 
light that shineth in a dark place, until the daystar 
arise in your hearts. II Pet. 1 :19. 

My dear friends, what a dark place it was for- 
merly with you, when the light was hid from you ; 
and what dark places there are still ; but you have 
obtained mercy. Hence Jesus Christ says in the 
Gospel: "I am come a light into the world, that 
whosover believeth on me should not abide in 
darkness. And if any man hear my words, and 
believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to 
judge the world, but to save the world. He that 
rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one 
that judgeth him : the word that I have spoken, the 
same shall judge him in the last day. For I have 
not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent 
me, he gave me a commandment, what I should 
say, and what I should speak. And I know that 
his commandment is life everlasting." Jno. 12 :46- 
50. 

Hence it is our concern that we through the 
cordial grace of our Lord Jesus Christ may receive 
the same at His hand; for the Lord also is con- 
cerned to have a people that fear and love Him. 
And this is the love of God, that we keep His com- 
mandments ; and His commandments are not griev- 
ous, to them that love Him. I John 5 :3. Therefore, 
the law of commandments is good, and will abide 
forever ; he that receives it, shall obtain life ; but he 
that receives it not shall obtain death. 

Hence, my friends, be mindful of the Lord our 
God all your days, and let not your will be set to 


sin, or to transgress the commandments of the Lord 
our God (Tob. 4:5) ; for He has commanded the 
people to come, charging them, when they came, 
what they should do, that they might live; and 
what they should observe, that they might not be 
tormented. But they have rejected His laws; 
therefore they shall also be in great misery, who 
have abused His ways. Though He gave them an 
appointed time, they understood it not, to show re- 
pentance ; and must therefore know it after death 
in torment. II Esd. 9:9. For, for this cause was 
the gospel preached also to them that are dead, 
that they might be judged according to men in 
the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. 
I Pet. 4 :6. Therefore, the hour is now come, that 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God : 
and they that hear shall live. And there shall an 
hour come, when the dead that are in the grave 
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they 
that have done good shall rise unto life eternal; 
and they that have done evil shall rise also, how- 
ever, not unto life, but unto damnation. John 5 : 
25, etc. Hence, my good friends, look to yourselves, 
that you lose not those things which you have 
wrought, but that you may receive a full reward. 
For whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in 
the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. But he that 
abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the 
Father and the Son. II John 8, 9. "Ye are of God, 
little children, [and have overcome them:] be- 
cause greater is he that is in you, than he that is in 
the world. They are of the world : therefore speak 
they of the world, and the world heareth them. 
We are of God ; he that knoweth God heareth us ; 
he that is not of God heareth not us." I John 4 • 
4-6. 

Thus, my good friends, I have written you a lit- 
tle, and now begin to draw to a close with my let- 
ter ; for we have little time for writing, since there 
are so many people coming and going. Openly I 
dare not write; so that I sometimes can scarcely 
write a line in solitude. Hence excuse me, in case 
there be any blunders. Thus, my dear friends, I 
have written you a little, because I felt prompted 
in my mind to do this, and could find no rest. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
to the Word of His grace, which is able to build 
you up, and to give you an inheritance among all 
them which are sanctified. And remember me, 
your poor unworthy brother, in your prayers, that 
I may finish this to the praise of the Lord, and to 
your confirmation; so that my soul may find rest 
with the Lord ; for I, in my insignificance and un- 
worthiness, do not forget you here, where I also 
entreat the Lord. Furthermore, I greet you all 
especially much with the salutation of our dear 
Lord Jesus Christ when He, having been removed 
by wicked men from His disciples, for a little 
while, returned to them (as they sat with doors 
closed) and said: "Peace be unto you all." John 
20:19. Thus I also say: Have peace with one an- 
other, and the Lord will be with you. II Cor. 13:11. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


735 


ANOTHER LETTER WHICH JAN THIELEMANS WROTE 
FROM PRISON 

I wish you, my much beloved brethren and sis- 
ters in the Lord, and all those who shall see my 
letters, or hear them read, the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ and the communion of the Holy 
Ghost, for a friendly and worthy greeting. Accept 
it in love. Amen. 

After good and proper greetings, I undertake to 
write a little to you, my beloved, dear friends. I be- 
seech you all by the mercies of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, that you would all diligently take heed to 
yourselves* in all love, peace and truth, according 
to the words of the Gospel, while, dear children, 
you still have time from the Lord, through His 
great love shown you ; since the time is so precious, 
for when it is past, and one has not taken good 
heed, it is lamented with sorrow. Hence Paul says : 
"Let us take heed to ourselves, to provoke to love 
in good works."f Therefore let us be the least, 
meanest, and lowliest, to bear all that is consistent 
with love and truth. For thus said Christ Jesus, 
the eternal truth, Himself; when the disciples 
asked who should be the greatest among them, 
He took a child, and set it in the midst of them, 
and said : "Except ye become as little children, ye 
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 
18:3. Hence we may well perceive from the words 
of Christ, that we are to be, and must be, a pre- 
pared people; or we are not what we think our- 
selves to be, or, for what people take us. 

Hence, my much beloved friends, we must ap- 
prove ourselves in all things as the ministers of 
God. Now, no more is required in them, than that 
they be found faithful ; for God is not unrighteous 
to forget your love, and your good and kind works. 
I Cor. 4:1,2; Heb. 6:10. Therefore be steadfast 
and immovable in the work of the Lord, always 
knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord ; 
hoping by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
it will yet be most richly rewarded to you, when 
He will say: "Come, ye blessed, inherit the king- 
dom of my Father." I Cor. 15:58; Matt. 25:34. 
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in 
the kingdom of their Father. Matt. 13:43. Then 
shall it be seen what difference there shall be be- 
tween the righteous and the wicked, and between 
them that have served God, and them that have not 
served Him. Mai. 3 :18. 

Therefore, my greatly beloved in the Lord, take 
diligent heed to yourselves. Rather suffer from an- 
other — even though it should be one friend from 
another — than that another should suffer from you. 
Rather bear from another — even though it should 
be a friend — if it be consistent with the truth, than 
that a friend should suffer from you. Hence it is 


* The reader will observe that this rendering of the passage 
alluded to here (Heb. 10:24), does not fu'ly coincide with the one 
found in the English version of the Bible ; which may be attributed 
either to the author's having used an imperfect translation, or to 
an error on his part, in quoting said passage from memory. — Trans. 

t See preceding foot note. 


written : "If thou come to serve the Lord, prepare 
thy soul for temptation." Sir. 2 :1. For it will come 
very convenient even if one has put himself in the 
lowest place. 

Hence, beloved friends in the Lord, abide in that 
which you have heard from the beginning. If you 
abide in it, you shall continue in the Father, and 
in the Son. And this is His promise, even eternal 
life. I John 2:24, 25. What do we care for the 
world, or for what there is in it ; for the world shall 
pass away, and the lust thereof ; but he that doeth 
the will of God abideth forever. And it is certainly 
our chief concern to be saved ; as Peter says, Acts 
15:11: "We believe that through the grace of the 
Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved." Even as he 
says also in another place : "I have briefly written 
to you, by our brother Silvanus, namely, that this 
is the grace of God wherein ye now stand. There- 
fore hold that fast which you have, that no man 
take your crown." Rev. 3:11. If you overcome, 
you shall inherit all things. Hence add to your 
faith, virtue ; to virtue, knowledge ; to knowledge, 
temperance; to temperance, patience; to patience, 
godliness; to godliness, brotherly kindness; to 
brotherly kindness, charity. For if these things 
be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall 
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these 
things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath 
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. 

Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to 
make your calling and election sure: for if ye do 
these things, ye shall never fall : for so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. II Pet. 1:5-11. Having therefore 
such great and glorious promises, dearly beloved, 
let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the 
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness. II Cor. 7:1. 
As John also testifies, saying : "Let us purify our- 
selves from sin, even as he is pure. For whosoever 
committeth sin doeth wrong; for sin is wrong. 
Therefore came he into the world, that he might 
take away sin; for in him is no sin. Whosoever 
sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him." 
I John 3:3-6. The same John further testifies, 
and says: "Ye are of God, little children, [and 
have overcome them :] because greater is he that is 
in you, than he that is in the world. They are of 
the world : therefore speak they of the world, and 
the world heareth them. We are of God : he that 
knoweth God heareth us ; but he that knoweth not 
God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit 
of truth, and the spirit of error." I John 4:4-6. 
With this Christ agrees, saying : "The world can- 
not hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify 
of it, that the works thereof are evil." John 7 :7. 
As He further says in another place: "Father, 
keep through thine own name those whom thou 
hast given me: thine they were, and thou gavest 
them me. Not, Father, that thou shouldst take 
them out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep 


736 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


them from the evil." John 17:11. In another place 
Christ says : "Every one that doeth evil hateth the 
light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds 
should be reproved." 3:20. 

Thus, my much beloved friends, while we are 
yet in this sad world, and the Lord still grants us 
time, we must take most diligent heed to the word 
of the Lord, and do our very best to follow the 
same ; for thus Paul teaches us, saying : "As many 
as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, 
and mercy." Gal. 6:16. For thus we read in an- 
other place: "This people doth not understand, 
neither lay they to heart, that the grace and mercy 
of God are over his chosen and over his saints;" 
even as Moses says, that His mercy is shown to 
thousands of them that love Him, and keep His 
commandments. Ex. 20 :6. True, there are many 
in the world, who say that they love the Lord ; but 
they do not show it by their works, for their works 
show well enough whom they love ; for Christ says : 
"He that loveth me will keep my word, or obey 
my commandments." These are they who can 
stand before Him; for thus also says Christ: "He 
that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he 
it is that loveth me." John 14 :21. But he that does 
not keep His commandments, does also not love 
Him; for John in his epistle declares: "This is 
the love of God, that we keep his commandments : 
and his commandments are not grievous. For 
whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world : 
and this is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith. Who is he that overcometh . the 
world, but he that believeth that Jesus Christ is the 
Son of God." I John 5 :3-5. Therefore "love not 
the world, neither the things that are in the world. 
If any man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him. For all that is in the world, namely, 
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes and the 
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the 
world. And the world passeth away, and the lust 
thereof : but he that doeth the will of God abideth 
forever." I John 2:15-17. Hence, my much be- 
loved friends, be not conformed to this world : but 
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, 
that ye may prove what is that good and accept- 
able will of God. Rom. 12 :2. Even as Paul says 
also in another place : "Grace be to you, and peace, 
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who gave himself for our sins, that he 
might deliver us from this present evil world." 
Galatians 1 :3, 4. Thus, my dear friends, this grace 
has been given you, namely, that you have tasted 
that the Lord is gracious, to whom you are come as 
unto a living stone, which was disallowed of men, 
but before God was chosen and precious. There- 
fore, be ye built up a spiritual house, and a holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, accept- 
able to God through our Lord Jesus Christ; that 
you may lift up holy hands to the Lord, without 
strife and discord (I Tim. 2:8), and make inter- 
cession and give thanks for all men ; and the Lord 
of peace shall be with you. II Cor. 13 :11. 


But if God be with you, who shall be against 
you, who spared not His own Son, but delivered 
Him up for us all? Who shall lay anything to the 
charge of His elect? It is God that justifieth them. 
Who shall condemn them? It is Christ that died 
and is risen again, who is even at the right hand of 
God, and also maketh intercession for us. Hence 
Paul says : "Who shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God? tribulation, or persecution, or 
death," etc. Rom. 8:31. 

Thus, my much beloved brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, I will shorten my simple letter which I 
have written in bonds, in which we daily look for 
the redemption of our bodies. Hence receive this 
letter kindly, and think of what has in times past 
proceeded forth from my unworthy lips (not I, but 
the grace of God through me, I Cor. 15 :10). 

Herewith I bid you an eternal, Christian adieu, 
and expect you all in the second resurrection, that 
we may meet Him in the air, and ever be with the 
Lord. Comfort one another with these words. I 
Thess. 4:17, 18. Once more I bid you adieu, my 
dear friends. Herewith I commend you to the 
Lord, and to the Word of His grace, which is able 
to budd you up, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them which are sanctified. Amen. Acts 
20:32. 

Written in bonds, by me, Jan Thielemans, 

Your weak brother in Christ. 


HEYNDRICK ARENTS, A. D. 1568 

Among many other true believers baptized ac- 
cording to the command of Christ, who were every- 
where persecuted, expelled and put to death, also 
one Heyndrick Arents of Briel, about the year 
1568, fell into the hands of these persecutors. The 
circumstances that led to his imprisonment were as 
follows : "A vessel having cast anchor in the road- 
stead off Briel on account of a leak which it had 
sprung, and said Heyndrick Arents being a ship- 
carpenter in Briel, those of the vessel requested 
him to calk the craft. While he was thus with them, 
the lords of Rotterdam learned that said vessel 
was a pirate, and sent thither a detachment of sol- 
diers. These captured the vessel and conducted 
said Heyndrick Arents and the pirates to Delft as 
prisoners. And as those of Delft refused to take 
them in, they were forthwith taken to Rotterdam, 
where they, on account of their misdeeds, were 
soon sentenced to be hanged. When Heyndrick 
Arents perceived this, he asked whether he had 
come into a city of justice, or of violence— why 
they wanted to condemn the innocent with the 
guilty ? and said that he had not been apprehended 
on account of any crime. If they would inquire 
concerning him and his faith, they would find it to 
be so. Sus. 53; Ex. 23:7; I Peter 4:15. 

Hearing this, the governor asked : "What does 
he say ? what sort of a heretic is this ? if he is one 
of the Anabaptists he shall not be hanged, but 
burned." Thus, he was examined concerning his 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


737 


faith, and freely confessed that he had been bap- 
tized upon his faith, according to the command of 
Christ; and, on the other hand, rejected usurping 
infant baptism and all papal errors, but confessed 
the ordinances of Christ and His apostles (which 
were observed by him and his fellow believers). 
Thereupon they sentenced him, and, after an im- 
prisonment of two weeks, he was burnt at said 
place, in great constancy, and confirming the faith 
of the truth with his death and blood. 


CLAUDINE LE VETTRE, AND WITH HER A 
BROTHER, A. D. 1568 

Meenen is a beautiful little town in Flanders, 
three leagues from Rijssel, on the road to Bruges, 
built on the edge of the Leye. In this town there 
lived a God-fearing man, Piersom des Muliers, 
with his wife Claudine le Vettre, who through the 
preaching of Leenaert Bouwens, and by reading 
and studying the Word of God, were turned from 
papal idolatry. Learning of this, Titelmannus, 
Dean of Ronse, and inquisitor of the faith, came 
thither with bailiffs, thinking to apprehend the 
aforesaid Piersom in his house. But a pious man 
of the council of Meenen had warned Piersom to 
flee from the inquisitor, which he did, betaking 
himself into a certain piece of woods not far from 
his house. But his wife Claudine being engaged 
with her four little children (one of whom is still 
living), tarried a little too long, and had just left 
the house, with a child on the arm, when the bailiffs 
entered, who tumultuously asked the children and 
the neighbors where the husband was; and when 
they could not learn it they prepared to leave. 
Perceiving this, one of the neighbors, kindled with 
an evil and perverse zeal, said: "Men, there goes 
the wife with a child on her arm." They therefore 
forthwith caught her, and delivered her into the 
hands of the aforesaid inquisitor. This happened 
in the year 1567, a few months before the Duke 
of Alva's arrival in the Netherlands. She was tak- 
en from Meenen to Ypres, where many lay in 
prison for the faith that is because they could 
not understand that there was another Mediator 
and Saviour than Jesus Christ alone, who was of- 
fered up for our sins on the tree of the cross (I 
Tim. 2:5; Rom. 4:25) ; and could not believe that 
God had any pleasure in images of wood and stone, 
or silver and gold, but believed rather that such 
worship was prohibited in the Word of God (Ex. 
20:4; Deuteronomy 4:16). And because they also 
did not believe that dead men can hear our prayers 
and help us; but much rather that we are to call 
upon no one but God alone, who alone is the dis- 
cerner of our hearts and thoughts, and knows what 
we shall pray for, even before we have poured out 
our prayer; who exclaimed with a loud voice: 
"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest," etc. ; "to whom all 
the prophets and apostles point us, and not to one 
of the departed saints." Matt. 4:10; Rev. 2:13; 


Heb. 4:12; Matt. 6:8; Rom. 8:26; Matt. 11:28; 
Acts 10:43; 4:12; Jeremiah 23:5; 33:15. 

All who held such faith were by Titelmannus de- 
clared heretics, and delivered to the secular authori- 
ties, to be dealt with according to the decrees, 
namely, the men to be burnt alive, and the women 
to be buried alive. This severe death greatly terri- 
fied some, so th.at many apostatized, in order to 
save their lives. For at one time a large number 
broke out of prison and escaped, so that Claudine 
also could have made her escape, but she would not 
leave her child; so also a pious brother, who re- 
mained with her in prison unto the end, and would 
not leave her, dying with her for the truth, at said 
place. But Claudine did not apostatize, notwith- 
standing manifold assaults, continuing one year, 
but remained steadfast in the faith, refuting, from 
the word of God, all that the priests and monks 
were able to bring forward against her, as appeared 
from divers letters which she wrote to her husband 
from prison.* Finally, when they could not pre- 
vail upon her, they endeavored to move her by her 
maternal love for her infant, which hitherto had 
been nourished at its mother's breast in prison. The 
child therefore was taken from her and put out to 
a wet nurse, which was the greatest affliction she 
suffered during her imprisonment, and on account 
of which she wept many a tear, constantly praying 
God for power and strength against such tempta- 
tion and assault of the flesh, in order that she might 
not fall, even as many of her fellow believers fell 
in her presence. God Almighty heard her prayer, 
for the Duke of Alva, having in the meantime 
entered the country, and commanded to clear all 
prisons from heretics, she also was crowned with 
the crown of the godly, without Ypres, A. D. 1568; 
and with her a brother, who was also burnt for the 
truth, at said place. 

Her husband, Piersom, often said of his afore- 
said wife that it was astonishing how well she was 
versed in the Scriptures. For whenever he could 
not find a passage, he would ask his wife Claudine, 
who would at once clearly indicate to him what he 
sought.t 

It is understood that the child which was taken 
from her in prison was from that time on seen no 
more, without the father and the friends ever 
knowing what became of it. 

Piersom had formerly lived with his wife Clau- 
dine, in Bruges, where the same thing had hap- 
pened to him, namely, that he with his wife escaped 
from the inquisitor, through the friendly warning 
of a councilor of the city. However he had to leave 
beh'nd everything he had, as was also the case at 
Meenen. But the pious man of Meenen who had 
warned him, concealed Piersom's books and part of 
his household goods, and saw that they were again 
taken to the place where the books belonged. But 

* Respecting said letters it has not been possible for us to obtain 
any of them. 

t Piersom was a teacher [minister] of the church of God called 
Mennists. 


738 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the bad neighbor, who had betrayed Claudine, fell 
into such detestation with the town's people that he 
had to leave the place, after the rabble of the town 
had demolished and ruined his shop, calling after 
him, Judas! Judas, the traitor 1 

Meenen was at that time an open city, without 
walls and gates, and hence Titelmannus did not 
dare trust his prisoners there : it would have gone 
with them as it did in another small town of h lan- 
ders, where on a set day the peasants came in great 
numbers, broke open the prison, and liberated 
about four hundred persons who had been im- 
prisoned for the same cause. 

The friends had Piersom's children baptized by 
the pastor of Meenen, as Margriete, the oldest of 
the children, who subsequently died, at the age of 
sixteen, in Calais, was wont to relate. 

The remainder were three sons, named Pieter, 
Nicolaes and Jan, the last mentioned being the in- 
fant which was nourished at the mother's breasts 
in prison. Pieter died during his mother's imprison- 
ment. 

Piersom subsequently married a woman by the 
name of Peronne Hennebo, who died at Leyden, 
A. D. 1589, leaving two daughters, Maria and 
Martha, both born at Hoorn. This Martha was the 
wife of Doctor Dirk Volkertsz Velius, who wrote 
the Chronicles of Hoorn, and the mother of Pieter 
Velius of Hoorn. 

Piersom's third wife was Habeau de la Motte, 
mother of Margriete des Muliers, who resided at 
Gonda. 

Piersom fell asleep in the Lord in Leyden, in 
the year 1591, leaving a son by his first wife Clau- 
dine, two daughters by his second wife Peronne, 
and a daughter by his last wife, as already said. 

Claudine was beautiful of person, and a good 
singer, so that she moved the bystanders by her 
singing. Especially on the last day of her life, 
people stood before the prison, to hear her sing 
with a joyful heart, when death was announced to 
her. One who related it to me had heard her sing 
with a clear, strong voice the 27th psalm of David : 

Le Seigneur est la clarte qui m'addresse 

And the people firmly believed that if they had 
not gagged her when they brought her to the place 
of execution, she would have departed life singing 
and praising God. 

This account we received from D. N. M., the son 
of Piersom and Claudine, by the help of D. D. V., 
Claudine's brother-in-law. 


FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE AFORESAID CLAUDINE 
LE VETTRE 

The descendants of Piersom, the husband of 
Claudine le Vettre, claimed to have received, by 
way of tradition, that this Piersom at the time of 
the imprisonment of his afore-mentioned wife be- 
took himself to a miller who lived in or near his 
mill, which stood close under the walls of Ypres, 


in order to be able there daily to get tidings from 
his beloved wife, which, gleaned from street ru- 
mors were brought to him by the miller's wife, as 
often as she returned from town, though without 
knowing that it was his wife, or that he was an 
Anabaptist. 

She judged Claudine not to be in her right mind 
because she had allowed herself to be rebaptized, 
and let so many sufferings be inflicted upon her on 
this account, and would rather die, than do what 
the priests said. This every time pierced Piersom's 
heart like a dagger, and ofter compelled him to 
step aside to give vent to the deep feelings of his 
heart. 

The day when Claudine was to be offered up, the 
miller's wife, desirous of seeing her being executed, 
asked Piersom whether he did not wish to go along 
and behold the scene, which he declined, requesting 
her kindly to pay strict attention to everything, in 
order to give him an account of it afterwards. 
When she returned home she related to Piersom 
how valiantly and undauntedly Claudine went to 
death, what she said, and how she conducted her- 
self ; everything, however, with the idea, that Clau- 
dine had not acted rationally. Thereupon Pier- 
som, having warmed up, took heart and discovered 
himself to the miller and his wife, saying that he 
was of the same belief, and that the one put to death 
was his beloved and very rational wife, and upon 
what foundations of truth they founded their doc- 
trine and life. This so deeply affected the miller 
and his wife, that they also resolved to amend their 
life. They were baptized upon their faith, and 
shortly after sealed the truth with their blood. 


PIETER PIETERS BECKJEN, BURNT ALIVE AT AM- 
STERDAM, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 
ON THE 26TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, A. D. 1569 

The dreadful murdering, burning and killing of 
the innocent and upright followers of Jesus Christ 
were not sufficient at this time to deter from the 
true confession and practice of the Christian faith 
a certain pious brother and faithful witness of the 
Lord, named Pieter Pieters Beckjen, by trade a 
boatman on the Amstel, and so zealous, that at 
divers times he gathered the little flock of the op- 
pressed pious who lived about Amsterdam, into his 
boat, in order to edify one another with the Word 
of God, and to strengthen one another in the ac- 
cepted faith. 

And when it came to pass that his dear wife bore 
him a child, he, from Christian carefulness, took 
said infant with him to a place where it might be 
secure from the superstition of the papists, and 
from being baptized. 

In short, he manifested his zeal in every respect, 
notwithstanding the cruelty of the rulers of dark- 
ness, and this with a sincere and good intention, till 
finally he was, on that account, denounced to the 
magistrates of the city of Amsterdam, apprehend- 
ed, dreadfully tortured, and, at last, when he would 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


739 



Pieter Pietersz burned in Amsterdam, AD 1569. As a ferryman he made his boat available for secret services. 


not apostatize, sentenced to death, and burnt alive, 
as appears from the sentence, which, for confirma- 
tion of said matter, was faithfully and correctly 
sent to us from the hands of the secretary there. 
In it can be seen, on the one hand, the steadfast 
confession of this martyr, and on the other hand, 
how awfully the rulers of darkness misinterpreted 
the same, and construed it to an evil, shameful and 
terrible end. 


SENTENCE OF DEATH OF PIETER PIETERS 
BECKJEN 

Whereas Pieter Pieters, alias Beck j en, boatman, 
prisoner, unmindful of his soul and salvation, and 
of the obedience which he owed to the Lord God, 
and to his imperial majesty, forsaking our mother, 
the holy church, and this from the time that he at- 
tained to understanding, even until now, has re- 
fused to go to the holy, worthy sacrament, despis- 
ing and disregarding the same, and has in twenty 
years been to confession only once, contrary to the 
ordinance of our mother, the holy church, and, 
moreover, has attended the reprobate and pro- 
hibited assemblies, or conventicles, of the Men- 
nonists, etc., and has himself, in his own boat, twice 
held conventicles of the aforesaid Mennonists, in 
which abominable and reprobated sect he so ob- 


stinately persists, that still recently before his ap- 
prehension, his wife lying in childbed, he took said 
child and conveyed it away, not willing to tolerate 
or permit that said child should be baptized ac- 
cording to the ceremonies of the ancient Roman 
Catholic and Apostolical church; in which he is 
still captive, persisting therein, and not willing to 
return to our mother, the holy church, notwith- 
standing he has at divers times, by various eccle- 
siastical persons, and also by the aldermen of this 
city, been admonished and urged to return and to 
leave this accursed sect, — all of which are crimes 
against the divine and the secular majesty, as said 
before, which disturb the peace and the common 
weal, and which ought therefore, for an example 
to others, not to go unpunished; therefore, my 
lords of the court, having seen the demand of my 
lord the bailiff, also his information, the confession 
of the prisoner, together with the poor defense of 
said prisoner, and having duly considered all, have 
condemned the aforesaid prisoner, as they by these 
presents do condemn him, to be executed with fire, 
according to the decrees of his majesty ; and declare 
his entire property confiscated for the benefit of 
his majesty aforesaid, without prejudice to the 
privileges and all other interests of this city. 
Done in court this 26th of February, A. D. 1569, 


740 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


in the presence of all the judges, by the advice of 
all the burgomasters. 

How said person was condemned to the rack, and 
when this happened 

He was condemned to the torture, the 17th of 
January, A. D. 1569, and examined and threatened 
with torture on the same day, and in the same place, 
as appears from the records of the confession. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences, preserved in the archives of the city of 
Amsterdam. N. N. 


LAUWERENS VERKAMER, A. D. 1569 

In the year 1569 there was apprehended in 's 
Hertogenbosch, in Brabant, a pious follower of 
Christ, named Lauwerens Verkamer, for the single 
reason that he could not follow the Romish priests 
and monks in their self -invented idolatry, but sepa- 
rated therefrom, and united with the true members 
of our Lord Jesus, seeking to observe and practice 
with them in true obedience, His holy command- 
ments. For this reason he was persecuted in a very 
hostile manner by the papistical and anti-Christ- 
minded, so that he, with many others, in the begin- 
ning of January, left Antwerp, with the intention 
of taking up residence at Nimeguen. But though 
the rest went to Holland, he, while on the journey 
to Nimeguen, was apprehended by the sheriff of 's 
Hertogenbosch, and brought to that place a pris- 
oner on the 5th of January, and suffered very se- 
vere and tyrannical imprisonment, none of his good 
friends being allowed to visit him, nor might he 
indicate by letter his distress and severe imprison- 
ment to any one — thus unmercifully and malig- 
nantly was he kept. For as he was a man of distin- 
guished family and large means, and had with him 
many books of his temporal affairs, these blood- 
thirsty men could ascertain his circumstances, 
which tended to aggravate his situation. But his 
firm unwavering steadfastness in the true saving 
faith was manifested in him; for in the year 1569, 
about the end of June, he was burnt by the enemies 
of the truth, in great constancy, and sealed the 
faith of the eternal truth with his death and blood, 
and put off this mortal clothing of the flesh in true 
obedience, for which, at the last day, he shall be 
clothed by the true Bridegroom Christ Jesus with 
the immortal clothing, and be rewarded with the 
crown of eternal glory. II Esd. 2:45; I Cor. 15: 
58; II Tim. 4:8. 


SIJNTGEN VERCOILGEN, A. D. 1569 

As in the time of Ishmael and Isaac, he that was 
born after the flesh persecuted him that was born 
after the Spirit (Gal. 4 :29), so it still goes in these 
latter days. For the ministers of the Roman anti- 
christ imprisoned at Kortrijck, in Flanders, a God- 
fearing lamb of Christ named Sijntgen Vercoilgen, 
the mother of Jan Vercoilgen, and after many 
temptations, she was put to death at said place, in 


great steadfastness, for the testimony of Jesus, in 
the year 1569, on the 9th of March, having put off 
her womanly weakness, and in place of it, by the 
grace of God, received through the illumination of 
the Holy Spirit in her heart a manly courage ; and 
testified and sealed the belief of the truth with her 
death, and blood, as a memorable example to all 
followers of Christ. 


LIPPIJNTGEN STAYERTS, A. D. 1569 

In the year 1569 there was put to death, at 
Ghent, in Flanders, by the maintainers of the Ro- 
man antichrist, for the genuine truth and the prac- 
tice of it, a woman by the name of Lippijntgen 
Stayerts, the wife of Pieter Stayerts, about St. 
Peter's day, not on account of any crime, but only 
for the sure truth, as she had renounced the world 
and all its false, invented lies, and submitted herself 
to the prince of truth, Christ Jesus, hearkening 
with obedient ears to the blessed voice of truth, 
and shunning all strangers contrary to it, where- 
fore she shall also, with all the obedient sheep that 
have heard and followed this voice, at the revela- 
tion of His glory, hear the words: "Come, ye 
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from the beginning." Matthew 25 :34. 

MAERTEN PIETERS AND GRIETGEN JANS, A. D. 1569 

In the year 1569, the 25th of June, there was put 
to death for the testimony of the truth, in Briel, 
reckoned to Holland, on the Maese, Maerten Pie- 
ters of Maesland, a village situated near Delft in 
Holland and with him Grietgen Jans, wife of Adri- 
aen Heynsen, a weaver of Swartewael. Maerten 
Pieters was beheaded with the sword, and Grietgen 
Jans was burnt at the stake, in the town, whereupon 
their dead bodies were taken down, and conveyed 
out of the town, to the place of execution, called the 
Nieuwe Noordt. Here Maerten Pieters was laid 
upon a wheel, and his head upon a stake. And 
Grietgen Jans was again tied to a stake, and thus 
given for food to the fowls of the heavens. Ps. 79 :2. 
And all this they suffered for the testimony of the 
truth, were in no manner charged with any evil 
works, but accused simply on account of having 
united with those called Mennists, and having, ac- 
cording to the doctrine of Christ, been baptized 
upon their faith, seeking thus to please their Cre- 
ator, according to all their ability. Therefore they 
have a firm and sure promise from God : that all 
who have been put to death by men, for the testi- 
mony of Jesus, shall receive again in great glory at 
the resurrection of the dead these their members, 
which are here sown in dishonor, being made like 
unto the glorious body of Christ, and shall live with 
Him in unspeakable joy forever and ever. II Mac- 
cabees 7:11 ; Phil. 3 :21 ; I Cor. 2:9. 

This account of the sacrifice of these pious wit- 
nesses of God is taken from the book of criminal 
sentences of the town of Briel, commenced on Ba- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



™Md7i"PL%?5W ar ° Wd t0 S0Ve ^ peTSeCUt0r ' S li l e; Was then ca ^red, imprisoned, and burned 


mis,* in the year 1564, and now, the 3rd of June 
1616, extracted from it by the clerk of said town. 

DIRK WILLEMS, A. D. 1569 

In the year 1569 a pious, faithful brother and 
follower of Jesus Christ, named Dirk Willems, 
was apprehended at Asperen, in Holland, and had 
to endure severe tyranny from the papists. But 
as he had founded his faith not upon the drifting 
sand of human commandments, but upon the firm 
foundation stone, Christ Jesus, he, notwithstanding 
all evil winds of human doctrine, and heavy show- 
ers of tyrannical and severe persecution, remained 
immovable and steadfast unto the end ; wherefore, 
when the chief Shepherd shall appear in the clouds 
of heaven and gather together His elect from all 
the ends of the earth, he shall also through grace 
hear the words: "Well done, good and faithful 
servant ; thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many things ; enter thou 
into the joy of thy Lord." I Pet. 5 :4 ; Matt. 24 :31 : 
25:23. 

Concerning his apprehension, it is stated by 

* Perhaps St. Bartholomew's day. — Trans. 


trustworthy persons, that when he fled he was hotly 
pursued by a thief-catcher, and as there had been 
some frost, said Dirk Willems ran before over the 
ice, getting across with considerable peril. The 
thief-catcher following him broke through, when 
Dirk Willems, perceiving that the former was in 
danger of his life, quickly returned and aided him 
in getting out, and thus saved his life. The thief- 
catcher wanted to let him go, but the burgomaster, 
very sternly called to him to consider his oath, and 
thus he was again seized by the thief-catcher, and, 
at said place, after severe imprisonment and great 
trials proceeding from the deceitful papists, put to 
death at a lingering fire by these bloodthirsty, rav- 
ening wolves, enduring it with great steadfastness, 
and confirming the genuine faith of the truth with 
his death and blood, as an instructive example to all 
pious Christians of this time, and to the everlasting 
disgrace of the tyrannous papists. 

Note. — In this connection, it is related as true 
from the trustworthy memoirs of those who were 
present at the death of this pious witness of Jesus 
Christ, that the place where this offering occurred 
was without Asperen, on the side of Leerdam, and 
that, a strong east wind blowing that day, the 


742 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


kindled fire was much driven away from the upper 
part of his body, as he stood at the stake ; in conse- 
quence of which this good man suffered a lingering 
death, insomuch that in the town of Leerdam, 
towards which the wind was blowing, he was heard 
to exclaim over seventy times: "O my Lord; my 
God," etc., for which cause the judge or bailiff, 
who was present on horseback, filled with sorrow 
and regret at the man's sufferings, wheeled about 
his horse, turning his back toward the place of exe- 
cution, and said to the executioner : "Dispatch the 
man with a quick death." But how or in what 
manner the executioner then dealt with this pious 
witness of Jesus, I have not been able to learn, ex- 
cept only, that his life was consumed by the fire, 
and that he passed through the conflict with great 
steadfastness, having commended his soul into the 
hands of God. 

As we have come into possession of the sentence 
which these rulers of darkness passed upon this 
friend of God, we have deemed it well, to add it 
here for the benefit of the readers, in order that 
reading the same, they may be able to perceive the 
truth of this matter. 

Copy. — Whereas, Dirk Willems, born at Asp- 
eren, at present a prisoner, has, without torture 
and iron bonds (or otherwise) before the bailiff 
and us judges, confessed, that at the age of fifteen, 
eighteen or twenty years, he was rebaptized in 
Rotterdam, at the house of one Pieter Willems, and 
that he, further, in Asperen, at his house, at divers 
hours, harbored and admitted secret conventicles 
and prohibited doctrines, and that he also has per- 
mitted several persons to be rebaptized in his afore- 
said house ; all of which is contrary to our holy 
Christian faith, and to the decrees of his royal 
majesty, and ought not to be tolerated, but severely 
punished, for an example to others ; therefore, we 
the aforesaid judges, having, with mature delib- 
eration of council, examined and considered all 
that was to be considered in this matter, have con- 
demned and do condemn by these presents in the 
name, and in the behalf, of his royal majesty, as 
Count of Holland, the aforesaid Dirk Willems, 
prisoner, persisting obstinately in his opinion, that 
he shall be executed with fire, until death ensues ; 
and declare all his property confiscated, for the 
benefit of his royal majesty. So done this 16th of 
May, in presence of the iudges, Cornells Goverts, 
Jan van Stege Jans, Adriaen Gerritts, Adriaen 
Jans, Lucas Rutgers, Jan Jans, and Jan Roefelofs, 
A. D., 1569. 

Extracted from the records of the town of Asp- 
eren, and after collation this copy was found to 
agree [with the original], the 15th of October 
1606. Acknowledged by me, the town clerk of 
Asperen. 

t' sheerenbergh. 


HENDRICK ALEWIJNS, HANS MARIJNS VAN OOSTEN, 
AND GERRIT DUYNHERDER, A. D. 1569 

In the year 1569 there were imprisoned for the 
testimony of Jesus, at Middleburgh, in Zealand, 
the following pious sheep and followers of Christ : 
Hendrick Alewijns, a purse-maker by trade, and 
Hans Marijns van Oosten, with Gerrit Duyn- 
herder. These suffered from the ministers of anti- 
christ manifold assaults, and threats and tortures 
terrible to the flesh, all of which they, through faith 
and the power of God (which was in them) pa- 
tiently and valiantly resisted. And after they had 
suffered all this for Christ's sake, they were to- 
gether burnt alive at said place, on the 9th of Feb- 
ruary 1569, confirming the belief of the everabid- 
ing truth with their death and blood, and now serve 
as a beacon to all true believers, that they may fol- 
low their unfeigned faith. Phil. 3:17. 

The Hendrick Alevijns mentioned here was in 
his time a very zealous follower of Christ, and was 
elected and chosen by the brethren to serve the 
church of God with the Word of the holy Gospel, 
in which he was very diligent, and, though young 
in the service, he exceedingly abounded and in- 
creased in the work of God. II Cor. 8:19; Luke 
1:2; I Tim. 4:15. And though he had neither 
silver nor gold, nor temporal means, yet his hands 
gained him and his wife and children a livelihood, 
and he sought to minister to the flock of Christ not 
for the milk and wool, but this hero followed the 
good, true and faithful Shepherd Jesus, and will- 
ingly, of a ready mind, ministered to the work of 
God, wherefore, at the appearance of the chief 
Shepherd, he shall receive the imperishable crown 
of honor. Acts 3:6; 20:34; Matt. 10:16; Ezek. 
34:3; I Pet. 5:2,4. 

During the time of his imprisonment he also did 
not forget his brethren and sisters, but wrote beau- 
tiful letters, descriptions and hymns, worthy of be- 
ing read, to them, as also to his three little orphans ; 
some of which have previously already appeared 
in print. We pray the reader attentively to read 
those adduced here, the first of which was sent to 
the beloved children of God in Zealand, and reads 
as follows: 

An epistle^ from Hendrick Alewijns, sent to the be- 
loved children of God in Zealand, written in his 
prison at Middleburgh, where he steadfastly 
testified to the truth of God with his death, 
on the 9th of February, A. D. 1569 

A most Christian greeting and salutation in the 
Lord! Hendrick Alewijns, unworthy, a weak 
brother and simple companion in the faith in God, 
a partaker of His sufferings, also of patience, and of 
the hope of eternal life, with all the saints, all 
through the grace of God, unmerited. Grace, peace, 
the mercy of God, salvation, prosperity, and every- 
thing good from above, through Christ Jesus, con- 
stantly to be kept stirred up, and the ardent im- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


743 


pelling of the Holy Spirit, even unto the blessed 
end, these things I wish all my beloved friends, 
brethren, sisters, and companions, from God the 
Father, through Jesus Christ our dear Lord, Re- 
deemer and Saviour. Amen. This I send as a greet- 
ing, in a good intention, from the very depths of 
my love, to you, as my special acquaintances and 
friends, to exhort and stir up one another to good 
devotion, while absent, yet in one hope of the king- 
dom and glory of God, though I am now confined 
at a distance from you. 

My very kind, especially peaceable and ever well- 
meaning friends, seeing before me my departure 
from this life, and having time to write, I gladly 
turn to your love for a little while, to give you in- 
telligence and glad tidings, which, I presume, is 
according to your wish and desire. Behold, be it 
known to you all, that I, your friend, am still pros- 
pering in the Lord, in both respects, that is, in body 
and soul, in the unchanging determination, to en- 
deavor with a good resolution, to keep body and 
soul surrendered to and in God, pleasing to you 
to hear, and to my salvation. May God grant this 
to the blessed end of my faith, O dear Lord. Amen. 

Further, the cause of my writing to you, and to 
your love, is also to ask you to help me pray in my 
behalf, for steadfastness in God's truth, and that 
I may live in His grace, and for God's faithful as- 
sistance towards me. I inform you that I am of 
very good cheer in my imprisonment, tribulation, 
sorrow, reproach, and suffering for righteousness' 
sake; and also I have, with all the saints, in my 
tribulation, a bright prospect, the hope and conso- 
lation of the Spirit, and the rich promises of God 
to succor us in this present time, who also assures 
us of eternal life hereafter, of which so abundantly 
mention is made in the Scriptures. 

In the first place, I know, consider, and firmly 
believe with many saints, according to the abundant 
testimony of the Scriptures, that God is faithful in 
keeping His promises. Read Deut. 32:4; Num- 
bers 23:19; I Cor. 10:13; I Thess. 5:24; II Tim. 
2:13. He will not suffer us to be tempted above 
that we are able to bear, but will with the tempta- 
tion also make a way to escape. He does not leave 
His children comfortless. He will with His Spirit 
defend us before kings and princes, as much as will 
be needful at the time. He will, and knows how, 
to deliver the godly out of temptation. He says: 
"I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." There- 
fore I will trust in the Lord, and not fear what man 
shall do unto me. Heb. 13:5, 6. "What can flesh 
do?" says Paul. 

Again : "If God be with us, who can be against 
us ?" and God is with us, if we are with Him, mark. 
Romans 8:31; II Chron. 15:2. Again: "We are 
troubled on every side, yet not distressed ; we are 
perplexed, but not in despair ; persecuted, but not 
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." 

Again: "Thanks be unto God, which always 
causeth us to triumph in Christ Jesus." II Cor. 
2:14. Again: "Whatsoever is born of God over- 


cometh the world." I John 5 :4. For which cause 
we faint not (because of God's consolation) ; but 
though our outward man perish, yet the inward 
man is renewed day by day. II Cor. 4:16. Again: 
"I can do all things through Christ which strength- 
eneth me." Phil. 4:13. O how blessed is the man 
that endureth temptation : for when he is tried, he 
shall receive the crown of life, which God has 
promised to them (he says, to them) that love 
Him. James 1 :12. 

And since God is so faithful in all His prom- 
ises, as said, we press straight on with righteous- 
ness, as though we beheld God, and saw no ad- 
versaries ; as though we saw no decree, fire, water, 
or sword. For who is he that will harm us, if we 
be followers of that which is good ? as Peter assures 
us. I Peter 3:13. Also Paul says: "Who shall 
separate us from the love of God?" etc. Rom. 8: 
35. Who will pluck our Shepherd's sheep out of 
His hand? No one. John 10:28. But one can and 
may indeed himself stray out of His hand. Again 
it is written: "No evil shall happen to him that 
feareth God ; for when he is tempted, he shall be 
delivered again." Mark, John says: "There is no 
fear in love" (I John 4:18) ; understand, such fear 
as departs from the way of rectitude. Yea, such 
fearless ones run through patience (mark, 
through), not out of, but into, the conflict that is 
set before us, and look not at the dreadful tyranny, 
but unto Jesus, the Captain, the Author and Fin- 
isher of our faith. Heb. 12 :2. 

And these comforting promises of God, here 
partly mentioned and touched upon, behold, speak, 
and treat chiefly only of God's keeping, assisting 
and strengthening us, in this time, and in the suf- 
ferings of this present time. 

But, friends, how much greater and more valu- 
able must be the consolation, reward, and the crown 
of eternal life, of which so much is said in other 
places, of God's eternal life, kingdom and glory, 
which are promised to those that overcome and 
patiently endure, as will here in part follow. 

In the first place, observe in the Book of Wis- 
dom, concerning the day of judgment, and the 
glory of God's elect : "Then shall the righteous man 
stand in great boldness before the face of such as 
have afflicted him, and made no account of his 
labors." Wisd. 5:1. Again: "The righteous live 
for evermore ; their reward also is with the Lord, 
and the care of them is with the Most High. There- 
fore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord's hand." Verses 
15, 16. Mark well, an eternal reward. Again: 
"The souls of the righteous are in the hand of 
God, and the torment of death shall not touch 
them." In the sight of the unwise they seem to die, 
and their departure and going from us are taken 
for destruction ; but they are in peace. For though 
they have much suffering (he says, much suffer- 
ing) in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality, and having been a little chastised, 
they shall be greatly rewarded; for God proves 


744 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


them, and finds them worthy for Himself. Wisd. 
3:1-5. Yea, here they shall suffer strait things, but 
hope for the wide : but they that have lived wicked- 
ly, and yet have suffered the strait things, shall not 
see the wide, alas, no. II Esd. 7:18. Again, II 
Mace. 7:36: "My brethren, who now have suf- 
fered themselves to be martyred for a short time, 
now wait for everlasting life, according to God's 
promise" (he says, everlasting life according to 
God's promise). Again, also the promises of our 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself: "That all who have 
followed him in the regeneration (he says, in the 
regeneration) and have forsaken everything dear 
to them, house, home, wife, children, etc., and their 
own life, shall receive a hundred fold in this time, 
and hereafter everlasting life; and shall also sit 
with Him upon thrones, and help judge the twelve 
tribes of Israel. Matt. 19:28. 

Again : "Blessed are ye that weep now : for ye 
shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate 
you, and when they shall separate you from their 
company, and shall reproach you, and cast out 
your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. 
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for be- 
hold, your reward is great in heaven" (he says, in 
heaven). Luke 6:21. Mark, heavenly consolation. 
Again, Paul says : "Blessed be God, even the Fa- 
ther of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mer- 
cies, and the God of all comfort ; who comforteth 
us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to 
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the 
comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of 
God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, 
so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ." II 
Cor. 1 :3-5. Again : "He that soweth to the Spirit 
shall of the Spirit reap life and peace." O friends, 
let us therefore not be weary in welldoing ; for in 
due season we shall reap without ceasing (he says, 
without ceasing). Gal. 6:8,9. O friends, let this 
claim your joyful consideration and attention. Now 
no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, 
but grievous: nevertheless, afterward (he says, 
afterward) it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of right- 
eousness unto them (he says, them) which are ex- 
ercised thereby. Heb. 12:11. Again, in Paul we 
further find: "It is a faithful saying [he says, a 
faithful saying] : For if we be dead with him, we 
shall also live with him : if we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him ; if we deny him, he also will deny 
us." II Timothy 2:11, 12. 

Again, in Peter, also we read : "Beloved, think 
it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to 
try you, as though some strange thing happened 
unto you [he says as though some strange thing 
happened unto you] : but be partakers of Christ's 
sufferings, that, when he shall be revealed, ye may 
be glad also with exceeding joy." I Pet. 4 :12, 13. 

Behold, such and similar beautiful promises, and 
heavenly consolations for the hereafter, yea, such 
in great abundance, make tribulation sweet, pre- 
cious and light. For our light affliction, which is 
but for a moment, worketh for us a far more ex- 


ceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while we look 
not at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen; which are nevertheless true. 
II Corinthians 4:17. Hence it is impossible for 
these to be plucked out of the hand of our Shep- 
herd. Yea, God is faithful, and not unrighteous 
to forget your work and labor of love, in that ye 
have ministered to the saints, and do minister I 
Cor. 10:13; Hebrews 6:10. 

Now, mark well, the beautiful promises of God 
mentioned here, and many similar ones, point and 
reach farther than God's help in the distress of this 
present time; the promises for the present time 
being essentially different ones, as said above. But 
these are full promises and a reward for the here- 
after, in eternal, imperishable, yea, unspeakable 
or inexpressible glory, even as Peter says of these 
unspeakable things : "Blessed be the God and Fa- 
ther of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to 
his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a 
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from 
the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and unde- 
filed, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven 
for you, who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last 
time [mark, in the last time]. Wherein ye shall 
rejoice with joy unspeakable [mark, unspeakable] 
and full of glory : receiving the end of your faith, 
even the salvation of your souls." [Mark who]. He 
says : "Ye who now for a season, if need be are in 
heaviness through manifold temptations: that the 
trial of your faith, being much more precious than 
of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, 
might be found unto praise and honor and glory 
at the appearing of Jesus Christ : whom having not 
seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him 
not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable," 
as already quoted. I Pet. 1:3. Justly does Esdras 
say of the incomprehensible and unspeakable rec- 
ompense of God: "Thou canst not find out my 
judgment, or in the end the love that I have prom- 
ised unto my people." II Esd. 5:40. 

Happy those venturesome ones who now sow 
liberally to the Spirit in every manner, without be- 
coming weary (Gal. 6:9) ; for it will not be lost, 
will not spoil, rot, rust, or become moth eaten. 

Observe and read Matt. 6:19; Luke 12:33; I 
Tim. 6 :19. O brethren, our faithful God is surely 
faithful. The alms of a man is as a signet with 
Him, and He will keep the good deeds of a man as 
the apple of the eye ; and afterward He will rise up 
and reward them, and render their recompense 
upon their heads. Sir. 17:22, 23. Observe: Thus 
we may well say with Sirach : "We have had labor 
for a little season, and have found great comfort." 
51 :27. 

O friends, let us not be weary in sowing and 
well-doing, for our reward, according to the prom- 
ises of God, is great in the time to come, as has been 
heard, and is unfathomable, incomprehensible and 
unspeakable. Nevertheless, it is now revealed to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


745 


His saints, by His Spirit. I Cor. 2 :10. It is an eter- 
nal and exceeding weight of glory. II Cor. 4:17. 

Now, all attentive [readers] , who firmly believe, 
know and hope this with all their heart and from 
the depths of their soul, and also understand, on 
what conditions, and to whom, and to whom not, 
this glorious kingdom is promised and sure. Such 
an intelligent and far-seeing Christian is so rich in 
hope toward God, so firmly anchored in his soul, 
that he completely and humbly surrenders himself 
soul and body to a faithful Creator, however, in 
well doing without boasting. I Pet. 4:19. 

Yea, we confess and declare with all saints rich 
in hope, that this present time is short, and that the 
sufferings of this time, for righteousness, are small, 
and, hence, not worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed in us (Rom. 8:18), 
as will here follow. 

Believers lightly esteem the sufferings of this 
present time, because of the hope, promise, and 
reward. 

In the first place, the youngest of the seven 
brothers in Maccabees spoke thus out of his joyful 
hope : "My brethren, who now have suffered them- 
selves to be martyred for a little while, now wait 
for eternal life according to God's promise." II 
Mace. 7:36. Again, in Solomon we read: "Having 
been a little chastised [mark, a little], they shall be 
greatly rewarded." Wisd. 3 :5. Again, in Peter, 
also: "Ye who now for a season [he says, for a 
season], if need be, are in heaviness through mani- 
fold temptations," etc. I Pet. 1 :6. Again : "The God 
of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal 
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a 
while [he says, a while] , make you perfect, stablish, 
strengthen, settle you." I Pet. 5 :10. 

These and other like passages esteem the suf- 
ferings of this present time short, small and light, 
and the reproach of Christ greater riches than the 
treasures of this world. Heb. 1 1 :26. The fearful 
woman in travail, of whom Christ speaks, has an- 
guish in her hour of travail, but afterwards she 
rejoices, and forgets the anguish. John 16:21. 
And these, who are thus strong in God, though 
weak and nothing of themselves, who are thus sure- 
ly fixed in faith, hope, and the love of God, these 
(I say these) say with Paul: "Who shall separate 
us from the love of God." "For I am persuaded." 
he says, "that neither death, nor life . . . shall be 
able to separate us from the love of God. which is 
in Christ Jesus our Lord." Rom. 8:35. For if God 
be with them, who can be against them? Verse 31. 

But it were fearful presumption, to boast, or say, 
yea, to think, without God and a good conscience 
toward Him, that we can do am/thins; of ourselves. 
Such arrogancy, boasting and self strength, as 
in the case of inconsiderate Peter, are nothing, 
even as the independent, severed branch, without 
abiding in its vine, can do nothing. John 1 5 :6. 
And as those impotent individuals who took upon 
them to cast out Satan in the name of Jesus, whom 


Paul preached (Acts 19:13), even so can no pow- 
erless man boast without God; he must first cal- 
culate whether he dare with ten thousand go out 
against twenty thousand, according to the counsel 
and words of Christ. Luke 14:31. Therefore, he 
that would glory, let him glory in the Lord : If the 
Lord will, and we live. Jer. 9:23; I Cor. 1:31; 
James 4:15. And if He be with him, no one can be 
against him. Rom. 8:31. And God is with them 
if they are with God. Then they can do all things 
through Christ, which strengthened them. By 
their God they can leap over a wall, run through a 
troop, and overcome the world. The gates of hell 
cannot prevail against them; for love with its pa- 
tient hope and firm faith can do all things through 
the grace of God. Mark well, they who thus close- 
ly, firmly and boldly cleave to God, become strong- 
er in the conflict, as Sirach says. Sir. 2:3. Cleave 
therefore unto God, and depart or waver neither 
to the right nor left, that you may continually wax 
stronger. 

Mark : God said to Joshua, whom He appointed 
in Moses' office and stead : "I will not fail thee, nor 
forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage." 
Josh. 1 :5, 6. Again : "Be strong and of a good 
courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the 
Lord thy God, he it is that doth go with thee ; he 
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee." Deut. 31 :6. 
Mark here the advantage of freely trusting in 
God's promise. Hence such a pious people say 
thus in their hearts : "O Lord God of Israel, there 
is no God like thee in the heaven, nor in the earth ; 
which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy unto 
thy servants, that walk before thee with all their 
hearts." II Chron. 6:14. Observe well who they 
are : he says, [that walk before thee] with all their 
hearts. Whose rock and fortress is the Lord ; who 
is their God, deliverer, consolation, and shield ; the 
horn of their salvation ; their high tower and ref- 
uge; their Saviour who saves them from all vio- 
lence. II Sam. 22 :2, 3. These are also they who 
have set the Lord always before them ; hence He is 
at their right hand, and they shall therefore not be 
moved, says David. Ps. 16:8. Mark here boldness, 
and its power. But the fear of man bringeth a 
snare: (mark) but whoso putteth his trust in the 
Lord shall be safe. Ps. 29:25. Mark: he that is 
with God, and with whom God is. David says: 
"The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord : he 
is their strength in the time of trouble." Ps. 37: 
39. 

But, dear friends, if one is not pious, pure in 
heart, and prepared for temptation as a servant of 
God, when this temptation assails and terrifies him ; 
if he is not found in a pure conscience, genuine 
love of God and his neighbor, in a pious life, firm 
faith, sober vigilance, and armed against every as- 
sault; but is an impotent follower, a niggard, a 
sleeper, or hypocrite, then, O friends, God will for- 
sake him; for David says: "If I regard iniquity 
in my heart, the Lord will not hear me." Ps. 66: 
18. "The Lord is far from the wicked : but he hear- 


746 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


eth the prayer of the righteous." Prov. 15:29. 
Yea, it is true; for God heareth not sinners (mark, 
those who continue in sin) ; but if any man fear 
God, and doeth His will (doeth, it says), him He 
heareth. John 9:31. 

Hence I conclude and counsel with wise Jesus 
Sirach : "My son, if thou come to serve the Lord, 
prepare thy soul for temptation;" he says, prepare 
thy soul for temptation. Sir. 2:1. Again, also with 
Christ : "Strive to enter in at the strait gate. Yea, 
take heed that thy fear of God be not hypocrisy ; 
lest God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down 
thereby in the midst of the congregation, because 
thou earnest not in truth to the Lord, and thy heart 
was full of deceit and falseness." Sir. 1 :28. Behold, 
such cannot overcome ; but only those who are in 
favor with their God, as is mentioned in Judith 5. 

Now, there is further to be noticed the patience 
of which the pious have need in many tribulations. 
Heb. 10:36. Also, what great advantage, profit, 
gain, and acquisition are, and will be, obtained by 
tribulation and patience, follows here in part. 
Meditate on it. 

In the first place, the encouraging words of Ju- 
dith : "Thus Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and all 
whom God loved, remained steadfast and had to 
overcome much affliction [he says: much afflic- 
tion]. But the others, who would not receive af- 
fliction in fear of God, but blasphemed and mur- 
mured with impatience against God, were de- 
stroyed by the destroyer and by serpents. Let us 
therefore not be impatient in this affliction, but con- 
fess that it is a punishment from God, much less 
than our sins deserve, and believe that we are 
chastised as his servants, for correction, and not 
for destruction." Judith 8. O how wise.ly does 
Solomon speak of it: "He that is patient is pru- 
dent, and it is his glory to pass over a transgres- 
sion." Prov. 19:11. Again: "He that is patient 
is wise ; but he that is impatient reveals his folly." 
14 :29. And again : "A patient man is better than 
a strong man; and he that ruleth his spirit than 
he that taketh a city." 16:32. Mark how lovely, 
praiseworthy and advantageous godly patience is, 
as Jeremiah testifies : "It is a precious thing to be 
patient, and to wait for the help of the Lord ; Yea, 
that a man that is forsaken, be patient when some- 
thing befalleth him; and puts his mouth in the 
dust, and wait for the help of the Lord, and give 
his cheek to the smiter, and suffer much reproach, 
for the Lord will not cast off forever." Lam. 3 :26. 

Again, Sirach says : "An humble man will wait 
for the time which will bring him comfort. For 
though his cause be oppressed for a time, yet shall 
the pious praise his wisdom." Sir. 1 :23, 24. Of 
this we have examples in Job and in "the end of 
the Lord." Jas. 5 :11. Also in Tobit, for God per- 
mitted affliction to come upon him — why? That 
posterity might have an example of patience in 
him, as also in holy Job. An angel said to this Tobit 
(when he complained that he could not see the light 
of heaven) ; "Have patience, God shall soon help 


thee, which also came to pass." Tob. 5 :12. Paul 
does truly say that whatsoever things were writ- 
ten aforetime were written for our learning, that 
we through patience and the comfort of the Scrip- 
tures, might have hope. But, friends, mark well, 
where no promise nor godly tribulation is, there is 
certainly no need of patience ; but where the afore- 
faid are, Oh, there is need of patience. Heb. 10: 
36. For we know, says Paul, that tribulation work- 
eth patience, and patience, experience ; and experi- 
ence, hope ;and hope maketh not ashamed. Again, 
also, Christ's own words concerning patience : "Ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name's sake. But 
there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your 
patience possess ye your souls." Luke 21 :17-19. 

Again, Paul advises us to all patience in all our 
distress, and to approve ourselves therein as the 
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, 
in necessities, in stripes, in imprisonments, (yea] 
in imprisonments), in tumults, in labors, in watch- 
mgs, in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge by 
longsuffenng, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by 
love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power 
of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right 
hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by 
evil report, yea, as deceivers and yet true. Mark, 
in how many things a patient minister of God is 
tried, that is, in these and similar things (II Cor. 
6 :4),— mark, a minister of God, and whereby he is 
shown to be such. Again, James would have us 
count it all joy when we fall into divers tempta- 
tions; knowing this (he says), that your faith, if 
it be genuine, worketh patience. But patience must 
be constant unto the end. Jas. 1 :2. 

Behold, thus we must with patience (with pa- 
tience, says Paul), run the race that is set before 
us, looking unto the Captain of our faith, the young 
man who will set the crown of reward upon our 
heads, on Mount Sion. Heb. 12:1 ; II Esd. 2:43 

Behold, all this is obtained as the profit and re- 
ward of patience, as in the case of Christ, and of 
all holy martyrs ; and it must all be seen by faith 
and waited for with patience, as James advises! 
saying: 'Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the 
coming of our Lord, and like the husbandman, let 
us also wait for our harvest and joyful time of 
reaping." Jas. 5:7. O then the liberal sowers 
who have sowed to the Spirit shall reap without 
ceasing. Gal. 6:9. 

Dear friends, let us now, as at the right time, 
also at the right time, sow liberally to the Spirit 
and in hope, with joy and not wearying; for in 
due time it will fill our garner with sheaves as large 
as in I Pet. 1 :16.* For God will not forget our 
work and labor, as has already been said. 

To sum it all up in a few words : "Blessed is the 
man that endureth temptation; for when he is 
tried, he shall receive the crown of life ; which God 
hath promised to them that love him." Jas. 1 :12. 
Now, this promise, inheritance, reward, and crown 

* Evidently a misquotation. — Trans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


747 


meets the wants of everyone ; but only few relish 
the notable conditions upon which these are prom- 
ised, namely, obedience to the Word of God, com- 
plete renunciation of ourselves, and the cheerful, 
voluntary bearing of our cross. For Paul says: 
"Unto us it is given, not only to believe on him, 
but also to suffer for his sake. Phil. 1 :29. 

Mark, friends, that it is certainly his pleasure, 
that the servant be as his lord. Matt. 10:25. Hence 
Christ in His time assured His servants and dis- 
ciples of so much sorrow, tribulation, reproach, 
suffering, and of death, for His name's sake. He 
did not give it to them as His opinion, not as some- 
thing which might eventually, or perhaps come to 
pass, but positively assured them that it should be- 
fall them, as will here follow, and, in part, be 
shown. 

In the first place, Christ's own words : "Behold, 
I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves : be 
ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as 
doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver 
you up [he says, they will deliver you up] to the 
councils, and they will scourge you in their syna- 
gogues ; and ye shall be brought before governors 
and kings for my sake, for a testimony against 
them and the Gentiles." Matt. 10:16-18. 

Again : "The brother shall," he says, shall, "de- 
liver up the brother to death, and the father the 
child; and the children shall rise up against their 
parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye 
shall" he says, shall, "be hated of all men for my 
name's sake." Verses 21,22. 

Again: "Remember the word that I said unto 
you, The servant is not greater than his lord, nor 
the disciple above his master. If they have perse- 
cuted me, they will [he says, they will] also perse- 
cute you; if they have kept my saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do 
unto you for my name's sake." John 15:20,21. 

And again: "These things have I spoken unto 
you that ye should not be offended. They shall [he 
says, they shall] put you out of the synagogues ; 
yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you 
will think that he doeth God service. And these 
things will they do unto you, because they have 
not known the Father, nor me. But these things 
have I told you, that when the time shall come, 
[mark well] ye may remember that I told you of 
them." 16:1-4. Paul, also, says that we must 
through much tribulation (he says, must through 
much tribulation) enter into the kingdom of God. 
Acts 14 :22. And that all (he says, all) that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. 
II Tim. 3 :12. 

Now, dear friends, mark, if it must be so, and al- 
so will be so ; as has been mentioned in part, and 
is certain, then, in the name of God, let it be 
[borne] willingly, and let us not regard the fearful 
tribulation and distress, but look far beyond, as 
said before, and be mindful of the comfort contained 
in the declaration that this temporal tribulation is 
not worthy to be compared with the eternal glory 


(Rom. 8:18) ; and let us also remember that this 
evil and unrighteous world is not fit for, and was 
not worthy of, that blessed crown for suffering 
for righteousness' sake. Heb. 1 1 :38. 

But they are fit who have followed Christ in the 
regeneration, and forsaken all that is dear to them 
here. Matt. 19:28. Remember also, brethren, that 
they who are, or would be, without this chastise- 
ment, are bastards, and not sons. Heb. 12 :8. Thus, 
tribulation is certainly promised us believers, as 
has been heard. 

With regard to this, I counsel with Sirach and 
many others. If we would serve God, let us do it 
with earnestness, lest we tempt Him (Sir. 18:23) ; 
for he that would be God's servant, must prepare 
(mark, prepare) himself for temptation, and al- 
ways labor in the work of the Lord, that, whether 
we be present with Him, or whether we be here, 
absent from Him, we may always please God ; and 
everyone of us must strive to be (not to think, or 
boast [of being], but to be), the chief in good 
works, as also Peter says: "Wherefore, beloved, 
seeing that ye look for his coming, be diligent that 
ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and 
blameless." II Pet. 3:14. Oh, how we must be 
prepared then with a holy conversation, and with 
godliness. Every man that hath this hope in him 
must purify himself, even as He (whom we look 
for) is pure. I John 3:3. He that is holy, must 
become still holier ; and he that is pure, still purer. 
To become holier and holier behooves us, since we 
call upon such an Holy One as our Father, who 
judges without respect of persons, as Peter says, 
and this according to every man's work. Hence, 
pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, and 
it will then be with us as Peter says : "Let all them 
that suffer according to the will of God commit the 
keeping of their souls to him with good works 
[mark, with good works], as unto a faithful Crea- 
tor." I Peter 4:19. Let no one here understand 
salvation by good works, but salvation with good 
works; good works without meriting salvation 
(mark well) for salvation is of grace, thanks to 
our Lord Christ, as in Gal. 2:16, and still clearer 
in Eph. 2 :7* This I say is my advice, that we also 
thus prepare our souls, and commit them to Him 
as unto a faithful [Creator], with good works 
without boasting (without boasting), as His un- 
profitable servants, who would fain be perfect. 
Luke 17:10. Finally, dear friends, let us not seek 
to save our life, which, at all events, we must 
eventually lose ; but let us always entreat our God 
for strength to suffer, that we may finish our course 
as valiant adventurers. Amen, dear Lord, Amen. 
Here now follow instances of exemplary ad- 
venturers of former times — pious persons that 
were persecuted, greatly hated, and put to death; 
mark, how, by whom, and also why these things 
always happened; namely, in order that we need 
not think it strange, when we become partakers of 
the same sufferings and death. 

* 17, the original has it; but this is evidently an error. — Trans. 


748 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


In the first place, pious, good Abel was slain by 
Cain, out of hatred on account of his piety. Lot 
was greatly vexed by the wanton Sodomites, be- 
cause of his virtue and righteousness. David was 
persecuted by Saul, Shimei, and by Absalom his 
son, for his glory and own kingdom. The man of 
God from Judah was threatened by Jeroboam, be- 
cause of his prophesying against Jeroboam's gods 
and his altar. I Kings 13. The holy and mighty 
prophet of God, Elijah, and many others who were 
put to death in his time ; he had to flee from the 
place, and was greatly persecuted by Jezebel, on 
account of his prophetic miracles which he wrought 
through God. I Kings 19. Micaiah was imprisoned 
by the king, who fed him with the water and bread 
of affliction, because he opposed the four hundred 
false prophets of Jezebel with the Spirit and holy 
Word of God. I Kings 22:27. Urijah, a prophet, 
and also a fugitive, was brought back, and slain 
with the sword by King Jehoiakim, on account of 
his message from God, the prophecy against Jeru- 
salem and the land of Judah. Jer. 26:20-23. Jere- 
miah, a prophet of God, was cast by the princes 
into the miry pit to die, because he would not cease 
to preach and prophesy in the name of the Lord. 
Jer. 38:6. Zechariah, a priest's son, and prophet 
of the Lord, was stoned at the commandment of 
the king, because he had prophesied nothing but 
calamity for them, because they had forsaken that 
which was good, and transgressed the Word of 
God. II Chron. 24:21. Mark, for what reason each 
one of these was put to death. 

The three young men, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, were by King Nebuchadnezzar cast into 
a furnace heated seven times more than it was wont 
to be heated — in which God nevertheless preserved 
them on account of their trust in Him — and this be- 
cause they would not honor neither worship the 
king's self-made image, idol and buffoonery. Daniel 
3 :19. Daniel, a most worthy and holy prophet of 
God, was by the worshipers of the dragon, out of 
hatred and envy, cast into the den of lions, against 
the will and power of the king ; God, however, pre- 
served and delivered him. This was done, because 
he, fearing no man, nor the king's plain and strict 
commandment, openly worshiped, honored and 
confessed his God alone, with the windows open 
toward Jerusalem. Hist, of the Destr. of the Drag. 
Dan. 6:10. Mark, are not the pious subtilely 
sought? Yes, sought and found. O Lord, all the 
steadfast pious in Israel were scattered, and most 
atrociously slain by Antiochus. Why? Mark, be- 
cause they circumcised their children, according to 
God's commandment, would eat no swine's flesh, 
according to the prohibition of the law, and refused 
to follow the heathen customs, since they were un- 
clean and contrary to the law. I Mace. 1. Again, on 
another occasion, all the Jews were everywhere 
caught like wild beasts, bound, chased, dragged off, 
conveyed away in ships, and doomed to a general 
massacre, from which latter, however, they were 
miraculously delivered by the hand of God. They 


were thus tormented by King Ptolemy, because 
they would not be compelled by him to depart from 
the law of God, sacrifice to idols, and adopt heathen 
customs. Ill Mace. No fair reason, friends ; and so 
it is still. Again, in the second book of the Macca- 
bees the same thing is enacted. A cruel decree of 
said King Ptolemy, which whoever should not 
obey, was to be put to death instantly. II Mace. 6 :9. 
Some were burnt. Two women had their infants 
tied or hanged to their breasts, and were thus led 
in derision round about the city, and finally cast 
headlong over the walls. Mark why ? Because they 
adhered steadfastly to the law of God, and had cir- 
cumcised their children. Thus also Eleazar, an 
aged man of ninety, was slain by Antiochus. Why? 
Because of his unfeigned steadfastness in refusing 
to eat swine's flesh, or to pretend to eat it. Agaii£ 
also a pious mother and seven steadfast sons were 
by King Antiochus roasted in red-hot pans, with 
the skins of their heads pulled off, and their tongues 
cut out. II Mace. 7. Why? Mark, because they 
would in no wise eat swine's flesh contrary to the 
law, because it was forbidden. And similar in- 
stances in the Old Testament. 

In the New Testament, also, we find instances of 
a like character. 

In the first place, the holy forerunner of Christ 
John the Baptist, was beheaded by Herod That 
good man, why did he kill him? Mark, because 
he reproved Herod for an improper and shameful 
liaison. The good Christ Jesus was also hated by 
the world, because He testified of its evil works. 
Yea, without guilt or cause worthy of death, Pon- 
tius Pilate the judge, through the hatred of the 
Jews, delivered Him up, and put Him to death 
The holy apostles, also, were frequently appre- 
hended, scourged, and forbidden to preach in the 
name of Jesus, by the council of the priests. Why? 
In order that the name, doctrine and church of 
Jesus should not spread and increase. 

Stephen, a deacon, and pious witness of Jesus 
was stoned by the stiffnecked. Why? Because 
they could not resist his spirit, wisdom, and doc- 
trine. The church at Jerusalem, in the beginning 
was dispersed and scattered abroad throughout 
the land of Judea, by the Jews. And Saul, the 
persecutor, went hither and thither with letters and 
authority to apprehend and vex any whom he 
should find of this way or persuasion, in order to 
hinder the doctrine, faith and way of Christ. And, 
yet, to be brief, some were vexed by Herod ; he 
killed James with the sword, and seeing that it 
pleased the people, he apprehended also Peter, and 
guarded him with sixteen servants, and bound him 
with two chains, with doors closed, through the 
hatred of the Jews ; but an angel delivered him. 
Acts 12:1. Let us therefore not wonder at this as 
though it was something strange. 

Now, in conclusion, receive my eternal adieu 
and brotherly greeting. ' 

Behold, I have written this to my dear friends, 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, in humility, with 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


749 


a good intention, and in love, for three special 
reasons. The first reason is, to communicate to 
you welcome news, namely, an account of my pros- 
perity, good health and cheerfulness, in both re- 
spects, that is, in soul and body ; and to stir you 
up to aid me in praising, thanking, and praying 
to God for all His grace and comfort, shown 
towards me unworthy one here, and also towards 
us all. Of this comfort (by which I also am com- 
forted of God) it has been my endeavor to com- 
municate to you a share, according to your wish 
and desire already referred to, and I send it to you 
as a honey-comb, perfume of roses, balm, incense 
and myrrh, from Eden's pleasure garden as it were, 
fruits of the heavenly paradise ; as a fruit, sample, 
perfume and delectation for you, to be inwardly 
contemplated with attention ; yea, as a signal token 
to you of my joy and peace which I feel to have 
with God, in union and in one spirit. Oh, I, un- 
worthy and unprofitable servant of my Lord, that 
I enjoy peace with my Christ, and the fellowship 
of His Spirit. Rom. 8:15; I Cor. 6:17; Gal. 3:26. 
Be it said to His praise, it is all through His merci- 
ful faithfulness, and great, unmerited grace. I 
glory in the Lord, and in His power; we have re- 
ceived from Him this precious treasure in our weak 
earthen vessels; hence, if it is preserved, the ex- 
cellency of the power is of God and not of us ; Oh, 
not of us, but by grace we are what we are. Jer. 
9:24; II Cor. 4:7. 

The second reason is, that, since you are par- 
takers with me of the same hope, reward and com- 
fort, I might awaken in you a refreshing, devotion, 
renewed joy in the promises, and inward gladness, 
by pointing out our comfort mentioned, consisting 
in doctrine- and example of the Scriptures, as no- 
ticed here in part, thereby showing my favor, love 
and affection towards you all, as remembering you 
in the Lord. 

Thirdly and lastly, also for the reason that I 
might make many of you my debtors, to do the 
same in their turn, that is, to send us a letter, in 
token of your steadfast continuance in love, for 
our comfort and joy, and the acknowledgment of 
your remembrance of us, according to the doctrine, 
debt and obligation towards prisoners ; as in Matt. 
25:36; Acts 12:5; II Tim. 1:16; Heb. 13:3. This 
from you would be most acceptable to us three 
prisoners here — Oh, as welcome as the perfume of 
opening roses, incense and myrrh from the bowers 
of Zion, the vineyard and pleasure-garden of our 
God; which has hitherto happened to us so very 
little, far too little, almost as though your love to 
us had ceased. Stop ! lest I wound you or someone 
else by words spoken with no evil intent ; for I do 
not have reference to the necessaries of life. Oh, 
no; we thank God and our careful friends most 
heartily for these. Accept from me in good part 
all that is good, and interpret all my love according 
to love ; this I earnestly pray for the Lord's sake. 
Let no one misapprehend my labor of love, by in- 
terpreting it, or thinking, as though I had done this 


or the like from desire for honor and praise, or 
from any hankering after a gift from any one, or 
after any carnal or earthly communion ; for it was 
love which, out of a pure intention, prompted me 
to it. O Lord, thou knowest it all. 

Yes, my friends, pure love thinketh no evil ; how- 
ever, she sees, finds and reproves evil. Examples 
of this are, Ananias, Simon the sorcerer, the Co- 
rinthian fornicator, etc. Acts 5:1; 8:9; I Cor. 
5:1. 

And now, dear friends, brethren and sisters, I 
again commend you to God, and to the Word of 
His grace (as the salutation of Paul), which is 
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them which are sanctified. Be saluted, 
strengthened, comforted, and of good cheer in the 
Lord. 

Watch and pray. By me, Hendrick Alewijns, 
and my fellow prisoners, all of us of good cheer. 
Farewell. Given in November, A. D. 1568. 

Yes, dear friends, before this letter left my 
hands, two of us were brought before the court; 
dear Gerrit Jans Duynherder, our pious brother 
and myself. And behold, we are kept in durance, 
as sufficiently sentenced, and both of us expect to 
die very soon now. O Lord! O Lord! into Thy 
hands, O faithful Creator! we com'mend our soul 
and spirit. Amen. 

O beloved church of God, take care of my three 
poor, dear little orphans, that are without parents, 
without possession, or inheritance. 

Adieu, my dear children ; adieu, all my friends. 
This is going before you all, and following after 
my Lord Christ, in His footsteps. Lord, assist 
Thy servants unto the last, unworthy and un- 
profitable though they be. 


THIS IS WHAT HENDRICK ALEWIJNS DELIVERED 
TO THE LORDS AT THE RACK 

Most worthy officers, justiciaries, and all my 
lords, who in the name and by the authority of the 
king are to be my judges and examiners, and are 
present here, give audience to me, the condemned, 
Hendrick Alewijns, now ready here for the tor- 
ture, through your sentence. Behold, I find myself 
inwardly constrained, and incessantly urged, not to 
neglect to point out and make known to you all the 
outrages committed by you on me and those like 
me, who are innocent of wicked crimes and have 
not merited legal punishment. 

In the first place, let it be clearly, sacredly and 
Scripturally shown, announced and declared to 
you, that our, or my matters, are not misdeeds or 
crimes, but a law of God, matters of faith, and of 
the spirit ; hence they ought to and must be judged 
spiritually and with the spirit, for a natural man 
cannot comprehend them; they are foolishness to 
him. I Corinthians 2:14. Consider this freely and 
thoroughly. 

In the second place, a Christian must be charged 
with articles of faith, and with the Scriptures, with- 


750 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


out being notorious for rebellious deeds of the flesh, 
as I am not, God be praised for it, that I am not 
under the punishment of justice, but entitled to 
protection and praise from the same. Rom. 13:3. 
Also, that the man of God who seeks in such sim- 
plicity the kingdom, honor and praise of God, is 
not amenable to your justice in matters of doctrine 
and worship. Concerning this you have doctrine 
and examples enough. But one must be subject to 
the authorities in good works. Tit. 3:1. Justiciary 
power is given of God only for the punishment 
of the wicked and the praise of the good, and for 
the protection of those who do well. The innocent 
and righteous slay thou not, says God. Ex. 23 :7. 

In the third place, there is shown to you clearly 
and with the testimony of the holy Scriptures, and 
this from love and in the spirit of meekness, the 
great crime of the tyrants who in this matter of the 
innocent, sin against God Himself, and in His peo- 
ple touch the apple of His eye, yea, fight against 
God, and kick against His goads: likewise your 
certain woe, doom and career, in the time to come, 
when our Lord and righteous Prince shall sit in 
judgment, and take all your power away from you, 
as is written in Judith: "Woe to the nation that 
rises up against my kindred; for God will take 
vengeance on you in the day of judgment; he will 
put fire and worms in their flesh, that they shall be 
burned, and feel it forever." Judith 16:17. They 
shall have no resurrection to eternal life. II Mace. 
7:14. God will not spare them. II Esd. 15:25. 
They shall groan and be terrified and amazed at 
the appearing of the children of God, seeing their 
glory, and shall say: "These are they whom we 
distressed, oppressed, and deprived them, as being 
mad, erring spirits, of honor, possessions and life." 
And further: "The wicked troubleth the right- 
eous ; he draws out his sword, and bends his bow. 
But the Lord laugheth at him; for he seeth that 
his day is coming ; he helpeth the poor and needy. 
He slayeth the righteous ; but his sword shall enter 
his own heart, and his bow be broken in pieces." 
Ps. 37:12. 

Christ Himself reproves, condemns and threat- 
ens all these bloodguilty ones, saying: "How can 
ye escape the damnation of hell?" Matt. 23:33. 

Thus also St. James reproves and laments most 
grievously, that they have condemned and killed 
the just, who did not resist them. Jas. 5 :6. Not in 
vain it is written in Isaiah : "Woe to you spoilers ! 
Think ye that ye shall not also be spoiled ? And ye 
despisers ! Think ye that ye shall not also be de- 
spised ? When ye shall have made an end of spoil- 
ing and despising, ye shall also be spoiled and de- 
spised, saith the Lord." Isa. 33:1. Therefore, my 
lords, let it engage your hearty consideration ; for it 
is not I that have written it. Like Gamaliel (Acts 
5 :35), let me, weak man, who am nevertheless a 
witness of the word, and truth of God, give you a 
friendly warning. This vengeance of God was un- 
derstood and experienced by the cruel king and 
mighty tyrant, and he felt that it is an evil thing to 


touch the people of God, because of the help of 
their God, whose vengeance no one can escape, if 
any wrong is done to His people. II Mace. 1. This 
order he sent in great haste to all his governors: 

Desist from this people." Holofernes would not 
understand nor believe this instruction and warn- 
ing of the wise Achior. Judith 5. 

My lords, accept in good part this my favor to 
you. I have not done it in order to be absolved 
from the sentence pronounced, which is not custom- 
ary, and hardly in your power, and you yet remain 
the friend of the world and the king, which you 
are determined at any rate to remain. James 4:4; 
John 19:12. But I pray you nevertheless, to deal 
mercifully with me, however, as far as is consistent 
with the proper course of the sentence imposed by 
you, and as you can answer for it at court. It is 
better that I suffer, than you ; for I know why I 
suffer. I suffer for a good conscience toward God, 
and this is acceptable with God ; and I am a partak- 
er of Christ's sufferings. I Pet. 2:19; 4:13, I am 
tortured in order to make me speak contrary to the 
great commandment of love (Matt. 22:38) ■ but 
love doeth no evil ; love endureth all things, Dear- 
th all things, and doth not become weary. I Cor. 
13 :7. O my lords, think whether it is not so. The 
wicked can appease you with lies, and say no when 
it is yes, and yes when it is no ; but we can only 
suffer and speak the truth. Have compassion there- 
fore; yea, as you would that it shall be done unto 
you when my Judge will come, when you will be 
greatly afraid, and stand in need of help. May God 
forgive you all wrong against me, as I forgive you, 
and as I would have it done to me in regard to all 
my sins. Amen. 

O wise counsel of Gamaliel! where art thou 
heeded now ? In this the children of God are mani- 
fest, and the children of the devil : whosoever doeth 
not righteousness is not of God. I John 3-10 
"Wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that lead- 
eth to destruction, and many there be which go in 
thereat." Matt. 7:13. 


A FATHERLY FAREWELL, TESTAMENT AND VERY 

CAREFUL SCRIPTURAL INSTRUCTION BY HEN- 

DRICK ALEWIJNS TO HIS CHILDREN 

ARTICLE I 

The paternal jarewell, testament and an earnest 

scriptural instruction from Hendrick Alewijns 

to his children 

Hear me, your father, O my own, well-disposed, 
dear and greatly afflicted orphans, my three moth- 
erless and soon also fatherless children, of ten, 
eight, and six years, deprived of me, and without 
property, alas, O God ! Once more I tell you, O my 
dear children, from one dear mother I received and 
kept you all ; who most solemnly charged me at her 
end, as also the holy Scriptures teach and enjoin 
me concerning you, that I should, as becomes a 
father, bring you up in divine instruction (Eph. 
6:4), to be good and orderly children and men of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


751 


God, which I have hitherto, as became me, done 
with great carefulness and earnestness, but have 
not yet completed it. And behold, now my labor 
is taken away, and I cannot under these circum- 
stances further fulfill towards you my fatherly 
love and debt of discipline. I have therefore now 
faithfully commended you henceforward to the 
God of heaven and to my fellow believers, the 
friends ; and I am fully confident that you will be 
well, very well, taken care of, out of love, for God's 
sake and mine. 

Be subject most obediently, as dear children, to 
the friends, and you will endear yourselves to them 
all. I have charged them with the guardianship 
over you, as though they were your parents ; hence 
be very obedient ; fear words, and you will not need 
stripes. Otherwise you will have to be beaten and 
chastised much, as the holy Scriptures require and 
teach, of which I shall write more explicitly here- 
after. 

My dear little children, it is true, it is true I say, 
you are yet too childish, the oldest as well as the 
youngest, to understand the holy Bible, and also 
that which I shall teach here ; but I hope you will 
delight in reading in it frequently, and to have oth- 
ers read it to you. I also trust that your under- 
standing will increase from day to day and that you 
will yourselves discern good and evil, and will 
wisely learn to know who are the true believers, 
and who the unbelievers ; which are the children of 
God, and which are the children of the devil and 
the world; who bear the name of Christ justly, and 
who unjustly. I therefore write in this hope, and 
to acquit myself of the duty of fatherly instruc- 
tion, which is still to be discharged towards you, 
and to the fulfillment of which much is lacking on 
my part, since I am taken away from you too soon, 
fully to discharge it. Nevertheless, I cannot for- 
bear, through love, to offer and send you this from 
afar, my dear children, if peradventure I must 
shortly go with David the way of all this mortal 
earth. I Kings 2 :2. Hence I instruct, enjoin, and 
counsel you after my departure, as many patriarchs 
and holy fathers did to their children, that you 
will be of good cheer and courage in patience, and 
that you will follow the ways, commandments, 
laws, and ordinances of the Lord, and do His 
whole will. Always do what is right and good ; love 
honesty, modesty, courtesy, shame-facedness, vir- 
tue, praise (Phil. 4:8) ; and whatsoever is Chris- 
tian-like and of good report, that do and think on 
it, and you will be holy and Christians. Then you 
shall have everlasting life and the beautiful heaven, 
that you may be with God and His angelic host, 
with all the elect of God, in eternal rest and joy of 
your souls ; and you shall then not have to fear the 
second death, the fiery lake, eternal fire, the wages 
of sin, disinheritance from Christ's kingdom, or 
exclusion by Christ. Matt. 25 :10. 

My dear children, lay this to heart. As soon as 
your little understanding can comprehend it, think 
of returning from the old rebellious man into the 


new man (Matt. 18:3) ; of the heavenly regenera- 
tion of water and of the Spirit (John 3:35) ; of the 
grace of God and improving the right time (II Co- 
rinthians 6:1,2); of living peaceably with all 
men, if it be justly possible and lying in you (for 
the other half of peace lies with the other party) ; 
and also of holiness, without which no man shall 
see the Lord, or enter into Christ's kingdom. Rom. 
12:18; Hebrews 12:14. 

This, my dear children, is my careful counsel and 
command to you, after my decease. 

ARTICLE II 

The first foundation of virtue, or instruction con- 
cerning the beginning of wisdom in child- 
hood — Government of children 

Behold, my dear children, since you are still chil- 
dren in understanding, young in years, and little 
fitted for the knowledge of God, I now show you 
for the first, how you may attain to the foundation 
of virtue, and the beginning of wisdom, that is: 
Give good audience, and cry earnestly for wisdom, 
and ask for it ; and gladly receive all good instruc- 
tion from those who advise you for the best. For, 
behold, thus Sirach teaches : "Keep only with such 
as fear God, whom thou knowest to keep God's 
commandments, who are minded as thou art, who 
have compassion on thee, if thou stumble; and 
abide by their counsel [he says, abide by their 
counsel] , for thou shalt find no more faithful coun- 
sel, and such an one can often see something bet- 
ter than seven watchmen that sit about in a high 
tower, Sir. 37:12. Again: "The true beginning 
of wisdom is the desire of discipline." Wisd. 6:17. 
And again: "Whoso loveth instruction loveth 
knowledge : but he that hateth reproof is brutish." 
Prov. 12 :1. Again : "The ears that heareth the re- 
proof of life abideth among the wise. And he that 
refuseth correction despiseth his own soul : but he 
that heareth reproof getteth understanding." 15 :31, 
32. Moreover : "He is in the way of life that keep- 
eth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof err- 
eth." 10:17. Again: "A reproof entereth more into 
a wise man than an hundred stripes into a fool." 
17:10. Behold, my dear children, open your ears, 
and receive instruction, and you shall become wise 
and honorable; if not, you must remain unwise, 
ungodly, worldly and in error, as follows here: 
"Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth 
instruction : but he that regardeth reproof shall be 
honored." 13 :18. 

Again: "He that hateth to be reproved is al- 
ready in the way of the ungodly." Sir. 21 :6. Again : 
"An ungodly man will not be reproved, but ex- 
cuseth himself by the example of others in what he 
doeth." 32:17. 

Behold, my dear children, what excellent instruc- 
tions these are. Here you hear good counsel, how 
you can attain to virtue. And this you can do with- 
out many stripes of the rod, if you but attend to 
words, and fear your people in all they command 


752 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you. Be very obedient to the people with whom 
you live, and beware of your innate evil nature, 
your wildness, your foolishness and childishness. 
Abandon that for which you are chastised ; else you 
will have to be severely beaten without ceasing; 
for this belongs to foolish, f roward and disobedient 
children, as follows here: 

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child ; but 
the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. 
Prov. 22:15. The rod and reproof give wisdom: 
but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to 
shame. 29:15. Again: "Train up a child in the 
way he should go : and when he is old, he will not 
depart from it." 22:6. "Withhold not correction 
from the child: for if thou beatest him with the 
rod, he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the 
rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell." 23 :13, 
14. Again: "Hast thou children? instruct them, 
and bow down their neck from their youth. Hast 
thou daughters ? have a care of their body, and do 
not spoil them." Sir. 7:23,24. "He that loveth 
his son causeth him oft to feel the rod, that he 
may have joy of him in the end. He that chastiseth 
his son, shall have joy in him, and shall rejoice in 
him among his acquaintance." 30 :1, 2. 

Behold, my children, this is what is said with re- 
gard to disobedient children. Thus must children 
be brought up by God-fearing parents, the good 
with words, the evil with rods. Thus did Tobit 
with his son; thus was Susannah from her youth 
brought up in the fear of God ; and to Abraham it 
was counted for righteousness that he should ad- 
monish his children to the fear of God after him. 
Sus. 2;Tob. 1:9; Gen. 18:19. 

In short, this is the conclusion: "Children, obey 
your parents in all things : for this is well-pleasing 
unto the Lord. And, ye parents, be not bitter 
against them, lest they become dull, shy, or dis- 
couraged." Col. 3:20, 21 ; Eph. 6:1. 

See, my dear children, learn here what is be- 
coming to you ; see here, with what heavy duty of 
instruction and correction Christian parents are 
charged with regard to their children. 

Those who neglect their children in regard to 
this discipline, and are too indulgent toward them, 
may remember the terrible example of evil recom- 
pense exhibited in Eli, the priest, who for this rea- 
son, by the hand of God, fell from off his seat back- 
ward, and brake his neck. I Sam. 4:18. Hence it 
is a grievous matter badly to bring up f roward chil- 
dren, concerning which Sirach says: "He that is 
too indulgent with his child lamenteth his stripes, 
and is terrified as often as he cries. A wanton child 
becometh willful, like a wild horse. Cocker thy 
child and he shall make thee afraid : play with him, 
and he will bring thee to heaviness. Laugh not 
with him, lest thou have sorrow with him, and lest 
thou gnash thy teeth in the end. Give him no lib- 
erty in his youth, and wink not at his follies. Bow 
down his neck while he is young, and beat him on 
the sides [he says beat him on the sides] while he 
is a child, lest he wax stubborn, and be disobedient 


unto thee. Instruct thy child, and suffer him not to 
go idle, lest thou be brought to shame through 
him." Sirach 30:7-13. Behold, what a solemn 
charge the believer has concerning his children, and 
also those that are committed to him as his own 
children. Hence, dear lambs, endure kind correc- 
tion, and be afraid of words, and you will not have 
to suffer this severe cruelty : otherwise you must 
suffer it, as has been heard. 

Behold, my children, in these holy instructions 
in correction I acquit myself of my duty towards 
you; and in all this I admonish you not only in 
your youth, but also in your riper years, to give 
ear to the advice of the wise and pious, and al- 
ways to love the Christians, God's dear children, 
the holy church, which by all men is considered a 
heresy, because they so firmly hope in the living 
God. Acts 24:14. Learn to know early in the 
Scriptures this living God of them that believe ; for, 
says the apostle Paul, he that cometh to God must 
believe that there is a God, and that He will greatly 
reward those who, through the strait gate, seek 
Him with such hardships, on the narrow way of 
tribulation. I Tim. 4:10; Heb. 11:6. 

ARTICLE III 

Brief instruction concerning God, to learn to know 
Him, by His written name, glory, handiwork, 
wonderful deeds, voice, omnipotence, om- 
niscience, by His enemies, and the 
enemy of His enemies, and the 
faithful succorer of the 
pious, etc. 

Mark, beloved, my simple children, this in the 
God of your father, the God of all the faithful, 
from the beginning of the world until now, the God 
of Abel, the God of Noah, the God of Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob, Israel, the God of Jesus Christ, and 
of all the saints. And this is the God that is not 
made or worshiped by any man or by human hands, 
but the God that was from everlasting and before 
all things, and shall be forever, the God of whom 
and by whom all things are created and made, yea, 
heaven, earth, sea, and all the works that therein 
are, were made by His word, Spirit and omnipo- 
tence. This our God is good to the good, and very 
terrible to His enemies. His power extends over 
all kingdoms and kings, and He is the Lord of 
lords. There is none like unto Him. Thou art 
great, and Thy name is great, and Thou canst show 
it by the deed. Who should not fear Thee, Thou 
King of the heathen? Thou shouldest certainly 
be obeyed. His name is Governor, Lord, Lord 
Sabaoth, the God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Israel, 
and of the fathers ; this is His name. His name is 
Wonderful, Counsellor, Power, Giant, the ever- 
lasting Father, the Prince of Peace, His govern- 
ment abideth upon Him forever. Isa. 9 :6, 7. His 
name is Immanuel, that is, God with us. 7:14. It 
is not possible fully to express His name; hence, 
for the completion of His impossible, unmention- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


753 


able, inexpressible exalted name, He is further 
called Jehova, Shadai, Addonai, and by other 
names. Besides His general appellations, He is 
also called: Righteous, Merciful, Gracious God, 
Truth, Light, Right Hand, Holy consuming Fire. 

See, my dear children, here you have heard of 
your father's God, of His eternity without begin- 
ning and without end, and of His glorious and ex- 
alted names in the Holy Scriptures. There fol- 
lows further now, of His glorious, incomprehen- 
sible, unmeasurable greatness, glory and the invis- 
ibleness of His divine shape, form and image; for 
God is a Spirit. Think, how great He must be: 
heaven is the throne and the earth His footstool. 
Acts 7 :49. He sees, hears, and is, everywhere, and 
in all places : for thus He says through Jeremiah : 
"Am I a God at hand, and not afar off ? Can any 
hide himself in secret places that I shall not see 
him? Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the 
Lord." Jeremiah 23 :23, 24. And in another place 
the Scripture declares : "He spanneth heaven with 
his three fingers." Isa. 40:12. When He walks, 
the mountains tremble, and the foundations of the 
earth quake. When He manifests Himself, or per- 
mits Himself to be heard, He causes fear and ter- 
ror to come upon all men, as we read in Ex. 3, 
that the thorn bush seemed to burn as a flame of 
fire when He called Moses to Him, to make him a 
prince over Israel, to lead them out of Egypt. And 
again, when Moses, while receiving the law of 
God, spoke with God on Mount Sinai, the mount 
smoked, because the Lord descended upon it in 
fire ; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke 
of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. 
And the voice of the trumpet waxed louder and 
louder, with thunders and lightnings, which fright- 
ened the people. And also Moses was terrified, and 
trembled. No one was permitted to touch the 
mount ; no one could endure His voice, save Moses, 
however, with fear. Ex. 19. Thus does God show 
Himself, says Moses, that His fear should be be- 
fore your eyes, and you might not sin. Well may 
Moses say : "The Lord your God is God of gods, 
and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a 
terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh 
reward." Deut. 10:17. 

Behold, my dear children, this great God alone 
is worthy to be feared, who can kill soul and body. 
Sirach says : "The whole heaven everywhere, the 
sea and the earth tremble; mountain and valley 
quake, when he visiteth them ; and shall he not see 
thy heart?" Sir. 16:18. 

Again: "God is witness of all thoughts, and 
knoweth the conscience of every heart, and hear- 
eth every word. For the circuit of the world is full 
of the Spirit of the Lord [he says that the circuit 
of the world is full of the Spirit of the Lord] , and 
he that knoweth the voice is everywhere ; therefore 
he that speaketh unrighteous things cannot be hid." 
Wisd. 1 :6. Yea, my dear children, He knows who 
serves Him in appearance and in the sight of the 
eyes, and who with a sincere heart. For the wisdom 


of God is great, and He is mighty, says Sirach, and 
beholdeth all things ; and His eyes are upon them 
that fear Him, and He knoweth well, what is done 
in righteousness, and what is hypocrisy. Sir. 14: 
18. I say He is worthy that men should fear Him, 
keep His commandments, love Him, be very small 
and humble before Him, and this is what He re- 
quires of His people. Read Mic. 6, the law of 
Moses, and the Gospel of Christ. For He would 
have obedience, and not the pomp and deceitful 
semblance of sacrifices, as is exemplified in Saul, 
I Sam. 15:22. "Will ye not fear me, saith the 
Lord, who have placed the sand for the bound of 
the sea, that it cannot pass it ?" Jeremiah 5 :22. 

Ah, ah, dear children, how good is this fear of 
the Lord, for it is the beginning of wisdom. It is 
the root of wisdom, and its branches flourish for- 
ever. Wisd. 1 :20. 

This fear of the Lord driveth out sin; for he 
that is without fear cannot be justified. Wisd. 1 : 
21. For by the fear of the Lord men depart from 
evil. Proverbs 16:6. The fear of the Lord is a 
fountain of life to depart from the snares of death, 
14:27. For those that fear the Lord, my chil- 
dren, walk in the right way; but he that feareth 
Him not, or despiseth Him, departeth from His 
way. 14:2. 

Hereby, and by the vain boasting or thinking of 
having the fear of God, you may perceive the fear 
of God, and know those who fear Him [and them 
that fear Him not]. 

Read who are the truly God-fearing ; Ps. 1 :2 ; 
119:120; Sir. 2:17; 15:1; 16:2. Therefore, the 
fear of God is the sum and conclusion of all books. 
Read Eccl. 12:13. And as you have now heard of 
the great glory of God, which is well worthy that 
men should fear Him on account of it, so I will 
now briefly show that He is also a most awful, ter- 
rible and inexorably stern avenger and enemy 
towards His enemies; and, on the other hand, a 
faithful succorer of His afflicted friends, as is 
written in Exodus: "I the Lord thy God am a 
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers 
upon the children unto the third and fourth genera- 
tion of them that hate me." And again : "Shewing 
mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and 
keep my commandments." Exodus 20:5,6. 

Notice also the wonderful deeds of God in 
Egypt, on Pharaoh, who afflicted the children of 
Israel ; how God afflicted the Egyptians in return, 
visiting their land with manifold plagues. Ulti- 
mately, how God delivered His people out of it, 
made a dry passage through the Red Sea, separated 
and protected them from Pharaoh by the dark pil- 
lar of cloud, and terrified Pharaoh and his host 
with a heavenly noise in the air, and drowned them 
all in the Red Sea, as a God of great power. Now 
when Israel had passed through the Red Sea, and 
was in the wilderness, King Amalek came to afflict 
them, whom God Himself resisted, however, 
through Joshua, and the enemy and his people were 
discomfited and destroyed. Thus, again, in the 


754 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


days of Joshua, God fought with hailstones, and 
Israel with the sword ; the sun and moon for their 
benefit stood still the whole day, as long as the 
battle lasted. Josh. 10. Yea, God also fought from 
heaven against Sisera, and the stars in their courses 
fought. Judg. 5 :20. Again, at another time, when 
Samaria was besieged by the Syrians, God fought 
for Samaria, and terrified the enemies with a noise 
in the air, as the noise of chariots, horsemen and 
hosts, in the night, so that they fled and left every- 
thing behind them. II Kings 7 :6, 7. Thus read 
also of Zerah the Ethiopian, with his host of a 
thousand thousand, of whom not one escaped. II 
Chron. 14:9. Thus also, the children of Ammon 
and Moab, from Syria, afflicted Israel; and God 
fought for Israel, while Israel stood still and he 
ordered it so that the enemies destroyed one an- 
other. II Chron. 20. 

In like manner we read concerning Gideon, that 
God so ordered it that the enemies, the Midianites, 
fell upon one another with their swords, and de- 
stroyed themselves, through the direction of God. 
Judg. 7:22. 

Behold, my dear children, what an awful, inex- 
orable enemy of His enemies, and faithful and vic- 
torious protector of His friends He is; for when 
His people went to battle with God's consent, 
though they had neither bows, arrows, shields nor 
swords, God fought for them and gained the vic- 
tory. No one could harm this people, save when 
they departed from the commandments of the Lord 
their God ; then God delivered them into the hand 
of the enemy. We have a God that helps, the Lord 
Sabaoth, who delivers from death; thus extol the 
saints the help of God. When the people of God, 
in former times, were encompassed and assailed 
with war, and by wicked nations and kings, and 
then cried with confidence to this their God for 
protection, behold, their God only sent an angel to 
their assistance, who was able to direct all, and 
turned not away from thousands. Read II Kings 
19:35; Isa. 37:36. Read further II Mace. 11:10. 
We further read of five angels of God, armed and 
upon horses with bridles of gold, and what great 
execution they did. II Mace. 10:29. God sent two 
angels to Sodom, for the destruction of the wicked, 
and the preservation of the good. And other such 
examples; read II Mace. 12; Judg. 7:22; I Sam. 
14:20; 17:52; II Chron. 20:23. 

Behold, my dear children, the faithfulness of 
God towards His people, and His terribleness to 
the wicked, as has been heard; and this is only a 
moderate portion, much still remains to be told of 
so many examples contained in the holy Scrip- 
tures, and left for our confirmation, that we might 
hope in this God, suffer for His sake, and obey 
Him. However, it must be understood with a due 
distinction of times and laws, as regards the ancient 
warfares of Israel, the taking of revenge on ene- 
mies, fighting and killing in the time of the law, 
and previous to it, which then was done by the will, 
command, permission, and also, help, of God, under 


the Old Testament, it must not be so, and is now 
plainly prohibited, by the Word and example of 
Christ, Himself God and the Son of God, whose 
word must be heard. Prohibited, I say, plainly and 
clearly enough, not by men's commandments, but 
by God Himself; His people are denied and for- 
bidden all revenge, and commanded to commit all 
vengeance unto God ; not to resist evil ; to give to 
him that taketh away the cloak also the coat, and 
to turn to him that smiteth thee on thy right cheek 
the other also, and the like ; yea, to love one's ene- 
mies, to pray for your persecutors, and to flee from 
them from one city into another. Matt. 5:39; 
Rom. 12:17; I Thess. 5 :15. And they that are thus 
afflicted shall be blessed, and greatly comforted of 
God, with the promise of eternal life. In short 
not to fight at all, and yet to fight, but this no long- 
er with iron, steel, stone, wood, or any carnal weap- 
ons, but with spiritual weapons, mighty before God. 
II Cor. 10:4. Read, my children, what weapons 
and warfare Christians now wield, as is plainly 
and very clearly set forth. Eph. 6. Christians have 
no other warfare at the present time. For, under- 
stand, the prophecy is fulfilled which said with ref- 
erence to this time, that such people have beaten 
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears 
into sickles, rest from their works, and truly ob- 
serve the spiritual Sabbath. Isa. 2:4; Mic. 4:3; 
Ex. 20:10, 11. Hence Christians may now not 
wage war any more. However I refer you to an- 
cient warfare and God's succor, as these are a dem- 
onstration and proof to you of the greatness and 
the terrible deeds of God ; in order that you may 
learn to know, fear and obey Him in whose pres- 
ence the earth shakes, and the mountains trem- 
ble ; for the disobedient toward His Word, will and 
commandment shall find no hiding place from His 
face when He shall appear with His angels, in 
flames of fire, to execute vengeance on all the dis- 
obedient. II Esd. 16:9. 

Therefore, my children, learn to know and shun 
sin; for because of sin souls are damned forever. 

ARTICLE IV 

What sin is, and whereby sin becomes sin; and 
what are and will be the wages of sin, be- 
fore God, or God's punishment of 
sinners hereafter 

What sin is, is clearly shown by the holy Scrip- 
tures. The prophet Samuel said to Saul, when the 
latter had transgressed the commandment of the 
Lord: "Disobedience is as the sin [mark, sin] of 
witchcraft." I Sam. 15:23. John says: "All un- 
righteousness is sin." I John 5:17. James says: 
"To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, 
to him it is sin." Jas. 4:17. (Mark what sin is). 
Paul says: "Whatsoever is not of faith is sin" 
Rom. 14:23. 

From this and the like, my children, learn to 
know sin; as Paul says : "By the law is the knowl- 
edge of sin. I had not known sin but by the law." 


MARTVRS MIRROR 


755 


The law causes sin to become exceeding sinful ; for 
when it says: "Thou shalt not covet," sin takes 
occasion, and works in us all manner of concu- 
piscence. Rom. 3:20; 7:7, 13. From this we also 
perceive, whereby sin became sin, namely, by the 
command and prohibition of God. 

Every one who transgresses the things which 
God has commanded, commits sin, and it is also 
called sin, and punished as sin, fully and abun- 
dantly, in both Testaments. The tree of knowl- 
edge was not unclean for Adam, except through the 
commandment; his transgression was also called 
sin. As regards the punishment for this sin, read 
Gen. 3 :14. The heathen daughters and wives were 
not unclean for the Jews, save through the com- 
mandment of God, who would not have it. Con- 
cerning the punishment, read Judges 3 ; Num. 25. 
The sanctuary, or ark of God, which was certainly 
clean, was not unclean for any tribe, to touch or 
bear it, except through the commandment. Num. 
4:17. The gods of the heathen were not unclean 
for Israel, save through the prohibition and pro- 
scription of God, also the commandment and pun- 
ishment. I Kings 15. 

Behold, thus you can perceive whereby sin be- 
comes sin, namely, through the commandment, and 
the transgressing of the commandment ; for where 
no commandment is, there is no sin, for without 
the law sin was dead. Rom. 4:15; 7:8. For sin, or 
sinful action was in the world ; but sin is not im- 
puted when there is no law. Rom. 5 :13. 

Now, dear children, as soon as you know sin, 
learn to shun it as you shun fire; for if you ap- 
proach sin, it will embrace you ; but the stings and 
wounds thereof cannot be healed. Sir. 21 :2, 3. 

Therefore, learn now to understand further, 
what proceeds from sin, and what are the wages of 
sin, for these are damnation and death. Rom. 6 :23. 
It is enmity against God, because it is not subject 
to the law of God. Rom. 8 :7. Hence hear further 
the terrible, relentless and awful punishment of 
God upon sin and sinners, which has ever taken 
place and will yet take place. Take heed, my dear 
children, I counsel you, as much as you value your 
souls, to this special, eternal punishment of sin and 
sinners. Thus says the Lord: "I have long time 
holden my peace ; I have been still, and refrained 
myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; 
I will destroy and devour at once. Who among 
you, he says, will give ear to this ? Who will heark- 
en and hear for the time to come ? The day of the 
Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce 
anger, to lay the land desolate : and he shall destroy 
the sinners thereof out of it. It is the day of the 
Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompense for 
the controversy of Zion. And the streams thereof 
shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof 
into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become 
burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor 
day." Isa. 42:14, 23; 13:9; 34:8, etc. 

This impending calamity, the punishment and 
righteous judgment of God, was announced and 


promised a very long time; for when Enoch, the 
seventh from Adam, was upon earth, he said : "Be- 
hold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his 
saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to con- 
vince all that are ungodly among them of all their 
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, 
and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sin- 
ners have spoken against him." Jude 14, 15. 

Mark, that God threatens and gives sufficient 
warning before, as He did to Assur. "Woe be unto 
thee, Assur, thou that hidest the unrighteous in 
thee ! O thou wicked people, remember what I did 
unto Sodom and Gomorrah; whose land lieth in 
clods of pitch and heaps of ashes ; even so also will 
I do unto them that hear me not, saith the Almighty 
Lord." II Esd. 2 :8, 9. 

The Son of man shall send forth His angels, and 
they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that 
offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast 
them into a furnace of fire. Matt. 13 :41, 42. Then 
shall the Lord say unto them on His left hand: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, 
prepared for the devil and his angels : for I was a 
hungered, and ye gave me no meat ; I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me no drink." Matt. 25 :41, 42. Behold, 
my dear children, thus shall it then go with those 
who do not now while it is time, regard this, being 
rich, filled and merry. For Christ says : "Woe unto 
you that are rich, for ye have received your consola- 
tion. Woe unto you that are full ! for ye shall hun- 
ger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall 
mourn and weep. Woe unto you, when all men 
shall speak well of you!" Luke 6:24-26. When 
they lived, says Esdras, and received God's benefits 
they did not regard it; they despised his counsel 
while they had yet liberty, and contemned repent- 
ance; therefore they must know it after death by 
torment. II Esd. 9:10-12. While we lived and 
committed iniquity, we considered not that we 
should suffer for it after death. 7:56. For the 
wages of sin is death. Rom. 6:23. But, after thy 
hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up 
unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and 
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who 
will render to every man according to his deeds ; 
to them who by patient continuance in well-doing, 
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal 
life; but unto them that are contentious, and do 
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness ; in- 
dignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon 
every soul of man that doeth evil. Rom. 2 :5-9. 

Understand again, my dear children, into what 
great danger our evil flesh plunges us here, slaying 
the soul. The lust and works of the flesh cause 
eternal sorrow and loss of heaven. As Paul says : 
"Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust 
of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spir- 
it, and the Spirit against the flesh ; and these are 
contrary the one to the other ; so that ye cannot do 
the things that ye would. Now the works of the 
flesh are these ; adultery, fornication, uncleanness, 
lasciviousness, evil lusts" — (read to the end of the 


756 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


seventeen points mentioned). And he says that 
they which do such things shall not inherit or pos- 
sess the kingdom of God. Gal. 5 : 16 ; I Cor. 6 :9. 
Then it shall not be possible for any one to be 
spared from the vengeance of God, whether he 
know God, or whether he know Him not ; if he has 
been disobedient to the Gospel, he must bear the 
severity of God. For Paul says : "When the Lord 
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his 
mighty angels, in naming fire, taking vengeance on 
them that know not God, and that obey not the 
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ ; [mark] who shall 
be punished with everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his 
power; when he shall come to be glorified in his 
saints, and to be admired in all them that believe." 
II Thess. 1:7-10. 

To disobey the Gospel, is worthy of no small 
punishment ; for he that, in the sight of two or three 
witnesses, transgressed the law of Moses (which is 
inferior to the Gospel in its saving power and op- 
eration, Rom. 8 :3), had to die without mercy, says 
Paul, of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, 
shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden un- 
der foot the Son of God, and hath counted the 
blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, 
an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the 
Spirit of grace ? Heb. 10 :29. These must expect a 
terrible judgment, and the cruelty of the fire, which 
shall devour the adversaries. It is a fearful thing 
to fall into the hands of the living God; for God 
is a consuming fire. 10:31; 12:9. We know Him 
that hath said, "Vengeance belongeth unto me, I 
will recompense." 10 :30. See, since the Gospel is 
great of value and rich in saving power, therefore, 
on the other hand, the refusing, abusing, despising 
and transgressing of the same, is as much the 
greater crime and ingratitude, and deserving of 
sorer punishment, as Paul says, concerning Christ : 
"See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if 
they escaped not who refused him that spake on 
earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn 
away from him that speaketh from heaven : whose 
voice then shook the earth." Heb. 12:25,26. 

O my children, therefore this time of the Gospel, 
in which we now are, is a very precious, valuable 
and acceptable time, as also the Lord Himself fre- 
quently declares in the Gospel, as: "Had such 
mighty works been done in Tyre and Sidon. Why 
do ye not discern this acceptable time for you? 
Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye 
see." Luke 10:23. Jesus says: "Jerusalem shall 
be destroyed [on account of her sins] ; because 
they did not know the time of their visitation." 
Luke 19:44. 

O my dear children, learn to discern good from 
evil; learn to know the wicked world, who think 
that they are holy men, Christians and believers in 
God, but are the synagogue of Satan (Rev. 2:9) ; 
which is evident from their whole spirit, life, and 
their wickedness ; who because of their wickedness 
cannot bear, or tolerate among them, the lustre of 


the pious. But the Lord knoweth how to deliver 
the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the evil 
and unjust unto the day of judgment to be punish- 
ed; but chiefly them that walk after the flesh in 
the lust of uncleanness. What God intends to do 
with such, He has typified and shown to us by sin- 
ners of former times [as we read] : "For if God 
spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them 
down to hell, and delivered them into chains of 
darkness, to be reserved unto judgment, and spared 
not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth per- 
son a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the 
flood upon the world of the ungodly; and turning 
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes con- 
demned them with an overthrow, making them an 
example unto those that after should live umjodly " 
II Pet. 2:4-6. 

Understand here, that God spares neither the an- 
gels, nor the whole world, because they were great 
in number or highly esteemed and chosen ; and thus 
it has often gone with great numbers, for the un- 
godly are not the better for being many. As also 
birach well says : "Rely not upon this that the mul- 
titude of those with whom thou doest evil is great 
but remember that punishment is not far from thee' 
Therefore humble thyself from the heart, for the 
vengeance of the ungodly is fire and worms." 
birach 7 :17, 18. For as one that cometh nigh wild 
beasts, and is torn by them, so it also goes with 
him that attacheth himself to the ungodly, and min- 
gleth in their sins. 12:13, 14. One child that fears 
the Lord is more acceptable to Him than a thou- 
sand that are ungodly. Hence let no one depend 
upon this that his companions in wickedness are 
many nor upon boasting of the mercy of God be- 
fore thy repentance; for when the fire of the pun- 
ishment of God is kindled, it consumes all the wick- 
ed, great and small. Behold, the fire burned up the 
whole congregation of the ungodly ; and wrath was 
kindled over the unbelieving. He spared not the 
°l g i ants who P erished wi th their strength Nei- 
ther did He spare those among whom Lot sojourn- 
ed, but condemned them because of their pride and 
destroyed the whole land without mercy, who had 
transgressed all bounds in sinning. Thus He took 
away six hundred thousand, because they were 
disobedient. How then should a single one that is 
disobedient escape unpunished? For though He is 
merciful, yet also wrath is with Him. He can be 
appeased, but He also fearfully punishes. As His 
mercy is great, so is also His correction ; He judg- 
eth a man according to his works. The ungodly 
shall not escape with his spoils, and the patience 
of the godly shall not be frustrated. Behold, be- 
fore God a great multitude is of little avail ' He 
that sinneth must die. For every one that is proud 
in heart is an abomination to the Lord; though 
hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished. 
Prov. 16 :5. The strength of the ungodly is like a 
heap of tow which is consumed with fire. The way 
of sinners is made plain with stones (it is true) 
but at the end thereof is the pit of hell. Sir 21 -9 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


757 


10. Hell also hath opened wide her mouth, to re- 
ceive great and small, prince and multitude. Isa. 
5 :14. Many be called, but few chosen. Wide is the 
gate, and broad the way that leadeth to destruction, 
and many there be which walk in it. I further say : 
"The great majority will be damned and lost. This 
is too clear to be denied." II Esd. 8 :3. 

Dear children, he that does not fear or believe 
God, does not regard these awful assurances and 
sure threats, as also the Scripture says: "Such 
threatening is too far off, and when a wicked man 
heareth it, he yet cleaveth to his folly and error." 
How truly does Solomon say : "Because sentence 
against an evil work is not executed speedily, there- 
fore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in 
them to do evil." Though a sinner do evil an hun- 
dred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I 
know that it shall be well with them that fear God. 
Eccl. 8:11, 12. I have long time holden my peace, 
says the Lord ; I have been still, and refrained my- 
self : now will I cry like a travailing woman ; I will 
destroy and devour at once. Isa. 42:14. When a 
child is about to be brought forth, the pains of 
travail slack not a moment ; even so shall not the 
plagues be slack to come upon the earth ; the world 
shall mourn, and sorrow shall come upon it. II 
Esd. 16:38,39. 

Oh, happy he who always fears ; but he whose 
heart is hardened shall fall into misfortune, as has 
been sufficiently heard. Mark here the longsuf- 
fering of God toward sinners ; but He nevertheless 
eventually punished them. How truly does Paul 
say: "God is not mocked." Thinkest thou that I 
shall always hold my peace, saith the Lord, that 
thou dost not fear me at all ? But I will declare thy 
righteousness, and thy works, that they are un- 
profitable. Then when thou shalt cry, let thy com- 
panies deliver thee ; but the wind shall carry them 
away, and vanity shall take them. Isa. 57 :13. The 
holy Scriptures do justly call our God a consuming 
fire. As to what fire this is, read Isa. 10:16; Joel 
2 :3 ; Nah. 3:15; Zech. 11:1. Manasses truly says : 
"O God, thine angry threatening toward sinners is 
importable." Man. verse 5. Nahum speaks thus 
of the fierceness of the wrath of God: "The 
mountains quake before him, and the hills fear. 
The earth shaketh before him, yea, the whole cir- 
cuit of the earth, and all that dwell therein. Who 
can stand before his indignation? And who can 
abide before his anger ? His fury burneth like fire, 
and the rocks burst in pieces before him." Na- 
hum 1 :5, 6. Micah says : "The Lord cometh forth 
out of his place, and will come down, and tread 
upon the high places of the earth. And the moun- 
tains shall be molten under him, and the valleys 
shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the 
waters that are poured down a steep place. For the 
transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins 
of the house of Israel." Mic. 1 :3-5. 

Oh, who could write enough of such scripture 
admonitions ! Truly, my dear children, behold, he 
that recognizes the holy Scriptures, the Bible, as 


the sure word, testimony, word and sentence of 
God, and considers well worthy of belief what is 
written in the same concerning God, and especially 
regarding His faithful warning against all sin, the 
promised recompense for transgression, exempli- 
fied in His punishment of sin as exhibited in many, 
together with all His strict and solemn oaths in 
which He has denied His kingdom to the im- 
penitent, as has already been mentioned here in 
part, and will yet briefly be pointed out; such a 
man, I say, may well tremble before God, and with 
David the skin and hair of his head may shudder. 
And if there be but one spark of the fear of God, 
and faith in His Word, in his inmost heart, his 
laughter may and must turn into weeping till he 
obtains peace instead of enmity with God. In the 
first place I will speak of God's warning against 
sin. 

But, my dear lambs, I am deprived of time fur- 
ther to complete my purpose and intention. This 
however was almost finished, but I intended to im- 
prove it and to copy it in a far more legible and 
better form. However, it is now done, and I must 
and will now disengage myself, and prepare to die, 
as I think, in four days. And, behold, my dear 
children, I rejoice in this, and am of good cheer in 
the Lord, and trust not to spare my body for the 
truth, but to present it in worship as a living sacri- 
fice, holy and acceptable unto God. And I trust by 
the grace of God, that I have been to you, my dear 
children, a father who have set you a good ex- 
ample, in my life and death. When you attain to 
the years of understanding, think thoroughly on it 
and so follow Christ with me, as He has gone be- 
fore us, in all suffering and holiness ; and we shall 
meet again, and this in eternal joy and in the king- 
dom of heaven, forever. 

My dear children, though you do not live to- 
gether, love one another the more ardently, and 
show your love in whatever way you can, as by 
greetings and instructive letters to one another. 
Make copies of this little book, so that each of you 
three children may have one. 

I first send it to you my dear son Alewijn Hen- 
dricks, because you are the oldest. Remember what 
I have written for your instruction ; communicate 
it also to your little sisters. Farewell now, an 
eternal farewell, my three little orphans. 

Written by me, your dear father, 

Hendrick Alewijns. 


HERE FOLLOWS A LETTER WRITTEN BY HANS MA- 

RIJNS, WHICH HE SENT FROM HIS PRISON TO 

HIS BELOVED BRETHREN AND SISTERS 

Always have God before your eyes. 

Grace, peace and joy from God our heavenly Fa- 
ther, wisdom, righteousness and truth, through 
Christ Jesus His beloved Son our Lord and Sav- 
iour; together with the comfort and illumination 
of the Holy Ghost ; these I wish you, much beloved 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, as a friendly greet- 


758 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ing and eternal adieu in this sad world, where noth- 
ing is to be found but every sorrow of heart. I trust 
to go and rest, with all the elect saints of God, un- 
der the altar, and hope to wait for you there: to 
this end may the Lord grant us His grace, and may 
He keep me, miserable sinner, unto the end, as I 
hope and trust He will do. Amen. 

Know, much beloved brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, that we are all well yet, the Lord be praised ; 
and it is still the purpose of us all, to adhere to the 
holy truth of the Lord all the days of our life, for 
which we can never fully thank the Lord. O dear 
brethren and sisters, how could we fully thank 
Him, that He so loves me unworthy one ! I hope by 
His grace, that I shall suffer for His holy name, 
and 1 trust to hear with all the beloved saints of 
God : "Come, ye blessed of my Father and inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation 
of the world." Matt. 25 :34. O dear brethren and 
sisters, what beautiful promises are given to them 
that overcome : "That they shall shine forth as the 
sun in the kingdom of their Father ; that they shall 
be of the household of God ; that they shall eat of 
the hidden manna, and of the tree of life, which is in 
the midst of the paradise of God." Rev. 3:12; 
Matthew 13:43; Eph. 2:19; Rev. 2:17; 2:7. 

O why should I write you much; I hope and 
trust, that you yourselves are all taught of God. 
Hence, dear brethren and sisters, I know of noth- 
ing special to write you, save that we should always 
take heed well to keep that which is committed to 
our trust, that no man take our crown, for Peter 
says : "The devil walketh about as a roaring lion, 
seeking whom he may devour : whom resist stead- 
fast in the faith." I Tim. 6:20; Rev. 3 :11 ; I Peter 
5 :8. O we shall be well rewarded, if we hold the 
beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. 
Herewith I will commend you all unto the Lord, 
and to the rich Word of His grace, which is able to 
build us all up for His heavenly kingdom. Amen. 
And I kindly pray you, also to see to my child a 
little as much as you can. I have also requested 
this of the sister at Vlissingen, and of Christian. 
You may advise together as is best ; for I must now 
part from it, so that I cannot take care of it. But I 
am heartily satisfied with this, and am ready to 
forsake not only wife and child, but also body and 
life, if the Lord will only keep me, as He has hith- 
erto done, and will yet do. O dear brethren and 
sisters, we are all of such good cheer. I and 
Hendrick and Gerrit greet you all much. Greet 
Hendrick and Maeyken much in my name, and 
Adrian and Gerrit Coelemey, and your companion 
Lieven, and Huybert; further, Yde and her hus- 
band, and Jacob Wit, and the rest of the brethren, 
and to all whom it is convenient to greet. Bid them 
all farewell in my name. Written on the third of 
February, in the year 1569, after I have been ad- 
vised of my sentence. Farewell altogether, and be 
valiant always. I trust that we shall see one an- 
other again. Communicate to Geertgen occasional- 
ly something of the profit, as seems best to you; 


and do with her what is best, this I earnestly ask of 
you. 

By me, Hans Marijns, your unworthy brother in 
the Lord, with what is in my ability for your best, 
for this time. 


ANPLEUNIS VAN DEN BERGE, A. D. 1569 

This Anpleunis van den Berge, because he had 
permitted, in the year 1556, that the Word of God 
was truly and openly preached on his land, and that 
he had lodged some of the brethren, had to leave 
his own house and property, and conceal himself, 
and sojourn with other good friends (so severe was 
then the persecution against the Christians), until, 
finally, while walking on the road, he was appre- 
hended, and this only because one who saw him 
walking, said : "There goes the man who permit- 
ted preaching on his land." And though he of- 
fered to give to the officer that apprehended him 
his purse containing fifty pounds Flemish, if he 
would let him go, he was nevertheless taken along 
into prison at Kortrijk, where he, after a bold con- 
fession of his faith, was very severely tortured, 
by scourging as well as otherwise ; but as he would 
in no wise apostatize from his faith, or implicate 
any of his fellow members, he was finally sen- 
tenced to death, and burned, in the year 1569, thus 
obtaining a house and inheritance which shall never 
be taken from him. II Cor. 5:1. 


JASPER DEN TASCHRINKMAKER, A. D. 1569 

At Antwerp, about the year 1569, there was ap- 
prehended a brother, named Jasper den Taschrink- 
maker, who, when he was examined concerning his 
faith, boldly confessed it, and would allow no en- 
treaties, threats or tortures to swerve him from it, 
so that because of his steadfastness he was sen- 
tenced to death as a heretic, and offered up his sac- 
rifice by fire. Hence the eternal fire shall not de- 
stroy that which he has built upon the foundation 
Jesus Christ. 


DIRK ANOOT AND WILLEM DE ZAGER, IN THE 
YEAR 1569 

When the Duke of Alba tyrannized with great 
violence against the Gospel, as Antiochus against 
the law, II Mace. 7, there were brought prisoners 
into Ypres, in Flanders, in the year 1569, one Dirk 
Anoot, of Westvleteren, and one named Willem, a 
woodsawyer, who, as they could in no wise be 
drawn from the truth by tribulation, fear, or any 
suffering inflicted upon them, were finally con- 
demned and sentenced by the fire, and were then 
brought into the marketplace, before the city hall, 
with a stick fastened in their mouth, that they 
should not speak. There each was placed at a 
stake and burned. Thus they, as those who did not 
love their life, but delivered it up for the Gospel, 
offered up their bodies as a burnt sacrifice unto 
God, their Lord. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


759 


TANNEKEN VAN DER MEULEN, JAECXKEN VAN 

HUSSELE, AND JAECXKEN TEERLINGS, IN 

THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1569 

At Ghent in Flanders also three sisters were ap- 
prehended on account of the faith, namely Tanne- 
ken van der Meulen, Jaecxken van Hussele, and 
Jaecxken Teerlings, who had to leave, for the 
Lord's sake, five little children, whom she com- 
mended to a faithful keeper and Provider, since 
she had to help her two imprisoned fellow sisters 
contend for His name, in which all three of them 
evinced such manful courage unto death, that even 
the tyrants were amazed at it, who shall be still 
more amazed, when they shall hear the sound of the 
trumpet, and see that these with all the children of 
God shall be taken up into everlasting joy and glad- 
ness, while they themselves standing on the left 
hand will have to go into everlasting sorrow, and 
that the time of repentance shall then be utterly tak- 
en away from them. 


JOOST GOETHALS, ROELANDT AND PIETER STAY- 

ERT, JANNEKEN ROELANDS AND JANNEKEN 

DE JONCKHEERE, IN THE YEAR 1569 

In the year 1569, at Ghent, in Flanders, there 
were apprehended for the faith, three brethren and 
two sisters, namely, Joost Goethals, Roelandt and 
Pieter Stayert, Janneken Roelands and Janneken 
de Jonckheere. These had to resist many exami- 
nations, trials and temptations, but remained val- 
iant in everything unto death, so that they were 
tried as gold in the fire ; nor did that fail which they 
had built upon the cornerstone Christ; wherefore 
they shall, for having been faithful here over a few 
things, be made rulers with the good and faithful 
servant over many things, and enter into heaven 
into the joy of their Lord. Matt. 25 :23. 


CHRISTOFFEL BUYZE, LAURENS VAN RENTERGEN, 
JOOST MEERSSENIER, AND GRIETGEN BAETS 

Not long after the above there were also appre- 
hended at Ghent three brethren and one sister, 
namely, Christoffel Buyze, Laurens van Rentergen, 
Joost Meerssenier, and Grietgen Baets. These, in 
order to follow Christ, gladly took up His cross, 
and had to suffer much reproach, temptation, and 
pain in the narrow way ; but in all this they cour- 
ageously persevered, and could in no wise be in- 
duced to apostatize, so that they finally had to lay 
down their lives for the name of Christ, and with 
Him press through the strait gate, in order that 
they might take the kingdom of God by force, 
where they in the new Jerusalem, shall have Him 
for an everlasting light, and shall with all those who 
have valiantly contended for the truth, live in ever- 
lasting and imperishable joy. 


OLD PIETER, JAN WAITIER, JAN VAN RAES, WOU- 

TER DENIJS, FRANCAIS THE CARPENTER, AND 

KALLEKEN, THE WIDOW OF ANPLEUNIS 

VAN DEN BERGE 

As the Jews did to the Shepherd, so their suc- 
cessors do still to His sheep, which was evident in 
the year 1569, when they, having come from Kort- 
rijck to Meenen, apprehended there a brother 
named old Pieter ; but not yet satisfied with this, 
they returned on the Friday before Easter, in the 
night, and apprehended Jan Watier, Jan van Raes, 
Wouter Denijs, Francais the Carpenter, and Kalle- 
ken, the widow of Anpleunis van den Berge (which 
latter had previously been offered up). These were 
so tightly bound that it was pitiful to behold. Jan 
Watier said: "If there is any one here from 
Komen, greet my wife, and tell her to fear God." 
These were then conducted to Kortrijck, where 
they lay for three weeks, so closely guarded that no 
one could come to them, to comfort or speak to 
them. They were also very severely tortured, in 
order that they should mention others; but God 
kept their lips. The old man, Jan van Raes, was 
put on the rack twice, but he nevertheless betrayed 
no one. When Jan Watier was led back to prison, 
it was a lamentable sight to behold how he had 
been tortured, all his limbs appearing to have been 
broken. 

When they were led to the court, they said: 
"Now truth is fallen in the street, and equity can- 
not enter." Isa. 59:14. There they (the five breth- 
ren and one sister) comforted and cheered one 
another with the Word of God. I Thess. 4:1& 
There the innocent were sentenced to be burned, 
and delivered to the hangman or executioner. 
Longing for their Father's land, to be in peace 
with Him forever, they boldly came forth, and 
Pieter sighed and cast up his eyes, saying: "O 
Lord, succor Thy servant, and strengthen him in 
his last extremity ; and do not account this as sin 
to them, but convert them ; for they know not what 
they do." Jan Watier said to the lords: "If we 
have done amiss to you in anything, do forgive us ; 
we gladly forgive you all that you have done amiss 
to us ; but let the innocent blood you have shed sat- 
isfy you, and do not shed any more." Pieter said 
to the people : "If you would enter into life, seek 
first the kingdom of God, and His righteousness, 
and all that you further need shall be added unto 
you." Matt. 6:33. He further said: "This is the 
strait gate by which we enter in ; here we are going 
home, where we shall be this evening." Wouter 
Denijs said: "O Lord, reprove them with the 
hammer of thy divine word, that they may per- 
ceive, whom they have pierced, and be converted." 
John 19:37. Pieter again said: "These members, 
which God has given me, I will gladly surrender 
for his honor ; for hereafter, when I rise, he shall 
give them to me again." II Mace. 7:11. 

When they had all finished their prayer, and 
were standing bound at the stakes, they confidently 


760 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


exclaimed: "O heavenly Father, into thy hands I 
commend my spirit." Thus all these six friends 
passed through the conflict, as faithful regenerated 
children of God, and elect sheep of Christ, who 
remained steadfast unto the end, and with their 
sacrifice took their blessed departure out of this 
world. 

Wouter Denijs also wrote several letters from 
prison, three of which have come into our hands, 
and follow here. 


THE FIRST LETTER OF WOUTER DENIJS, TO 
HIS WIFE 

A cordial greeting to you, my beloved wife and 
children, and to father, and to my brothers, sisters 
and all my friends according to the flesh, and to all 
that are known to me, who fear God from a pure 
heart. This fear, from a pure heart, may the 
Almighty God grant you through His Son Jesus 
Christ. 

My beloved wife, and my children, whom I love 
next to God, lay this to heart, for I have written it 
with great diligence. Behold, I think (and know 
nothing to the contrary) that you will receive noth- 
ing further from me ; hence if you would be saved 
let my words abide in your ears, I therefore pray 
you from the depths of my heart, through Jesus 
Christ, always to instruct and admonish my and 
your children with great diligence in the fear of 
God, as long as the Lord will let you remain to- 
gether. I further request you, always to restrain 
them, lest they rule over you. You have such a 
striking example in some whom I will not mention 
here, not deeming it best ; but I will let it be as it is : 
everyone will give an account of himself. Romans 
14:12. Therefore, my dear and beloved, I pray you 
for Christ's sake, to walk in the fear of the Lord ; 
and use more diligence in seeking your salvation, 
than you have hitherto done ; and be not ashamed 
to ask questions in matters pertaining to salvation, 
but let us be ashamed before the Lord of our 
misery and nakedness; for when the Lord visits 
us, everyone would like to be found glorious and 
spotless, and blameless in weakness. For when one 
gets into bonds, it is such a blessed thing to have 
peace in one's conscience; or even if one should 
be laid upon his death-bed. Hence Peter admon- 
ishes us: "Let them that suffer according to the 
will of God commit the keeping of their souls to 
him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator." I 
Peter 4:19. And the apostle exhorts us that every 
one should seek to excel in good works. Tit. 3 :8. 
And Christ says in His Gospel: "He that for- 
saketh not lands and house, father and mother, 
wife and children, yea, his own life, is not worthy 
to be my disciple." Luke 14 :26. 

Therefore, everyone that would be saved must 
obey his Saviour, as the Word of the Lord every- 
where declares. Hence use diligence to hear and 
follow the Word of God ; for, without the Word of 
God salvation cannot be found, however grandly 


the false prophets boast themselves. For from the 
beginning of the world the righteous had to suffer 
from the unrighteous, and be persecuted, for if the 
Prince of our salvation Himself suffered, being an 
example and pattern unto us, that we should follow 
Him ; we may well see that the servant is not better 
than his Lord. Hence let everyone that would be 
saved make entreaty to the Lord, from the depth 
of his heart and with tears, without ceasing. And 
I pray you, my dear wife, to teach our children to 
read and write, if it be possible for you, in order 
that they may be able to search for themselves. 
John 5 :39. 

Thus, my dear and much beloved wife, whom 
next to God I loved above all men, lay this to heart, 
and let the same be done by all that shall see it or 
hear it read. And I pray you, brother and sister, 
and all who truly know Christ, and love His ap- 
pearing, that, when they attain to years of under- 
standing, you will exercise an oversight and care 
not only over mine, but all that are in like condi- 
tion ; and charge Hansken at Proentken's, occasion- 
ally to admonish Pieter, and to search whereunto 
we are called, and for what testimony his father 
was burned at Wervijke, in Flanders. Acts 23:11. 

And I beseech everyone that would be saved, 
not to neglect the grace of God. Behold, now is 
the accepted time ; behold now is the day of salva- 
tion ; let everyone take heed now. On the twenty- 
first day of April, about eleven o'clock, I received 
a letter here, which was welcome to me. However, 
I will pass this by, and go on. Know that we are 
still of good courage, and had I been able, I would 
have sent you something; but this I send you all 
as a greeting, and for a remembrance to my chil- 
dren, and I request of you who remain there, to 
keep this till they attain to their understanding, 
if it be possible for you, if peradventure the Lord 
should grant grace, and knowledge of the truth, 
as I trust He will do. I entreat everyone from the 
depth of my heart, and with tears, before God, to 
excuse my weakness kindly and in love. I deplore 
it before God and men, that I have not been more 
of a light, and that the talent which I have re- 
ceived has gained so little profit. 

Hence everyone may take good heed, and al- 
ways be watchful; for I testify before God and 
men, that I have not lightly come here. Therefore 
let everyone take heed, I pray you, that you do not 
lightly receive this ; for, know that I have not light- 
ly written it ; with this warning I acquit myself of 
all responsibility. Let everyone take heed. 

Written by me, your husband and dear friend, 

Wouter Denijs. 

the second letter of wouter denijs and his 

fellow prisoners, to his brethren and 

sisters in the lord 

The unfathomable grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ be with all dear brethren and sisters, and all 
dear friends who desire to walk in the true and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


761 


pleasant fear of the Lord ; and with the overseers 
of the true bride of Christ ; this we wish as a heart- 
felt greeting, namely, we brethren and sisters, Jan 
van Raes, Francais the carpenter, Jan Watier, of 
Komen, Old Pieter, Wouter Denijs, and Kalleken 
van den Berge, who are in bonds here at Kortrijck 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

Further, dear friends, we inform you in regard 
to our first examination, that we were sharply and 
severely examined concerning our brethren, lead- 
ers and teachers, as to who they are, where they 
live, and what their names are. 

Hence we pray you, dear friends, that you do 
not lightly inquire concerning one another's names 
or places of abode; for when we get into bonds, 
we have to suffer great distress on account of it; 
but the Lord be praised forever, who has hitherto 
kept our lips ; however, we are greatly threatened 
with the torture. We therefore kindly ask you, 
diligently to entreat the Lord for us, and for all our 
brethren that are in bonds at Ghent, Antwerp, and 
all other places; that the Lord may strengthen 
them. And we heartily ask you, to see to our wives 
and children, and to admonish them in the fear of 
the Lord, as you should like to have done to yours ; 
and to see that you protect their property as well 
as you can. And know that it is still our purpose 
to fight through by the grace of the Lord. Kalla- 
ken, and Stijntgen and Jaentgen, her two daugh- 
ters, are confined together, and greet you much; 
and as regards, their purpose it is also tolerably 
well with them. But we pray you, dear friends in 
the Lord, diligently to search His Word, and to 
admonish one another while you are out of bonds ; 
for I fear that they will yet greatly scatter the 
church, since they are still thirsting much for 
blood, even more than the judge. For as Jannes 
and Jambres vehemently withstood Moses, so do 
these violently resist the truth. They intend to 
scatter the whole flock at Meenen. Hence let every 
one keep as quiet as he can, and if you receive any 
warning, whether verbal or otherwise, heed it ; for 
if I, Wouter Denijs, had heeded it three or four 
nights, I would perhaps not be imprisoned. But I 
thank the Lord for His grace ; I thought it should 
cause me far more sorrow ; but now I find that the 
Lord is wonderful and mighty in His deeds; He 
who does not leave His children comfortless, for 
which I can never fully praise or thank Him. 
Pieter heartily asks the church to forgive him ; for 
what he said was spoken from great consternation, 
and the man is wonderfully sorry on account of it, 
and has wept many a tear because it happened. We 
kindly pray you, to remember us in your prayers, 
as being imprisoned with us, for we now much need 
the prayers of the saints. And do not lightly 
receive our letter, for we have good reason to write 
this, since we are far more ardent in remembering 
our fellow prisoners than we were before we were 
in bonds. For you may know how this letter was 
written, namely, with a little stick cut off of a 
counter, and with ink made of red earth. Further, 


dear friends, I heartily pray you to admonish 
Ariaenken, my wife. Though matters now thus 
stand with her, I trust in the Lord, that she will 
not remain under the subjection of Egypt with 
her carnal friends, since she has been spoken to. 
I hope for the best. 

No more, but farewell; we commend you to God, 
and to the Word of His grace. 

Written by me, Wouter Denijs, commenced on 
the nineteenth, and finished the twentieth, by the 
grace of the Lord, to whom be praise and honor 
forever. Amen. 


A THIRD LETTER OF WOUTER DENIJS AND HIS 
FELLOW PRISONERS 

Let everyone take heed, though I do not write 
much or very learnedly, which is something that 
is not in me. Receive this from me in good part, 
as I trust you will do. These greetings and warn- 
ings I send to those indicated in my preceding let- 
ters, and further to those who are principally of my 
acquaintance, and to all that walk in the fear of 
God, and love His appearing, and desire to follow 
this; and I admonish everyone to be diligent in 
searching the Word of God. Exhort one another 
in love, and copy this for my dear and beloved wife, 
and preserve these three letters ; this I heartily pray 
you. Take further solicitations for your salvation, 
and let it be read to you occasionally. Grieve not 
on my account, but grieve before God because of 
your sins. Think not within yourselves, that you 
are without sin, but always have an humble esti- 
mate of yourselves before the Lord; for James 
says : "If any man think that he serveth God, and 
bridleth not his tongue, this man's religion is vain." 
James 1 :9. Therefore, my beloved, comfort your- 
selves in the Lord, and think that He has called me 
hereunto ; and I trust by His power, through the 
help and strength of Him who counts me worthy 
for this, not to depart therefrom for any torture. 
And I firmly trust that the Lord counts, and shall 
make, me worthy for it ; and I shall firmly trust in 
Him with a pure heart unto the end ; for I may well 
say hitherto, that the Lord is showing me, and five 
or six others with me, such abundant grace, that it 
were impossible for me to describe it with the pen ; 
for we scarcely know of our bonds, but are together 
in fervency of spirit. Hence I admonish you all to 
pray with greater diligence than I have sometimes 
done, for the prisoners, as the apostle exhorts us. 
Let, therefore, everyone be diligent to pray in love ; 
for we find that they that are in bonds pray much 
more fervently for those who are out of bonds. 
Thus I will conclude writing. Let everyone be 
quick to see how the life and doctrine of the 
learned and wise of this world accord with the life 
of our Lord, Christ Jesus, our Saviour. 

Herewith I commend you to the faithful Creator, 
and to the word of His grace. 

Written by me, Wouter Denijs, 

And my fellow prisoners. 


762 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN FROM PRISON, AT 

ANTWERP, BY A YOUNG WOMAN, NAMED NELLE- 

KEN JASPER, OF BLIJENBERG, WHO LAID DOWN 

HER LIFE AT THE FORMER PLACE, FOR THE 

TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHHIST AND HIS 

DIVINE WORD 

Grace and peace be from God the eternal and 
Almighty Father, through Jesus Christ, who gave 
Himself for our sins into the hands of the enemies, 
and received much suffering from sinners, that He 
might deliver us from this evil and perverse world, 
according to the will of His Father. To Him be 
praise, and honor forever and ever. Amen. 

This bleeding and crucified Jesus Christ I wish 
all dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, and all 
those that fear God from the heart, as a cordial 
greeting, and endowing of your mind. Further, 
my heartily beloved friends, and chosen in the 
Lord, please know that my mind is still unchanged, 
and desire to adhere to the eternal truth all the days 
of my life, as long as there is breath in my body. 
I am of good cheer ; praise, glory and thanks be to 
the Lord evermore for the great grace which He 
shows me, for I have from the very beginning been 
of such good cheer. Yea, He gives such joy into my 
heart, that I cannot express it, and I cannot fully 
thank the Lord for the great benefits He shows me. 

Know further, my dear brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, that I was before the lords. There were 
four of them: the margrave, two judges, and the 
clerk of the criminal court. When I entered the 
room, I did reverence to them, and the margrave 
said: "Well, my daughter how are you?" I re- 
plied: "Very well, sir." The margrave asked me 
whether I had not sat myself tired. I answered: 
"Yes, my lords, if it were your pleasure to make 
away with me, it would be very welcome to me." 
The margrave said: "How so, my daughter, you 
must not speak thus ; you must give up your opin- 
ion, and the king will pardon you." I said : "You 
have put my father and mother out of the way, and 
the two boys, but me you have left sitting here, 
which greatly grieves me." The margrave said: 
"How so, my daughter ; if I should have put you 
out of the way with your father and mother, it 
would not seem good to me ; since you are not yet 
baptized, the king will pardon you." The judges 
asked: "Is she not yet baptized?" "No," replied 
the margrave. I said : "No ; it is true, I am not yet 
baptized; but if I were released this evening, I 
should have it done tomorrow, if it were possible." 
Then they sighed over me, and I said : "The two 
boys were likewise not baptized." They replied: 
"It is true ; they would not desist from their opin- 
ion ; efforts enough were made in regard to them." 
I said, "I will likewise not depart from my faith." 
They told me that I should then not fare better. I 
said I was well satisfied with it ; though they should 
roast me on a gridiron, or boil me in oil, yet I 
trust by the grace of the Lord not to depart from 
the truth, as long as there is breath in me, "and for 


this/' I said, "I am of good cheer and would rather 
see it today than tomorrow." I firmly hope and 
trust in the Lord, that He will help me, and have 
fixed my confidence in His Word, where He says : 
"O my chosen, fear thou not ; I shall preserve thee 
in the fire and in the water, and I shall not suffer 
thee to be tempted above that thou art able to 
bear." Then they said: "Daughter, you are de- 
ceived ; your father and your mother deceived you ; 
they compelled you to it ; you were under their sub- 
jection; you did it through fear; but now you are 
free from them, and have your own free will; 
hence, let it go ; the king will pardon you ; you are 
young yet;" and other similar words. I said that I 
wanted to keep what I had. They said that I should 
advise with myself. I told them that I had my ad- 
vice with me, and had sufficiently advised with 
myself. 

They told me to think that they also had a soul, 
and wanted to be saved. I told them that there 
were many who would be willing to rejoice with 
Christ, but few that wanted to suffer with Him. 
They said that it did not depend on suffering. I 
said that Christ Himself had to suffer : how much 
more we? They did not reply to this, but said: 
"Forsake your opinion ; we shall send you learned 
men into a little room alone ;" and asked me what 
learned men and ecclesiastics I wanted. I told them 
that I did not want any, but that I wanted to keep 
what I had. They said that I must be forever 
damned if I should die in this condition, and that 
my father and mother, and brothers, were glad if 
they could be here and repent. I told them that I 
knew better. We had many more words, which it 
would take me too long to write ; besides, I have 
forgotten much of it. Thus, my affectionately be- 
loved brethren and sisters, whom I love from my 
inmost heart, it is my heartfelt prayer and request 
of you, that you would entreat the Lord in my be- 
half, that I may finish it to the praise of the Lord, 
and to my eternal salvation. Amen. 

Dear friends, I must yet pass through a great 
wilderness, for it is desolate and perilous here ; yea, 
I must yet tread through thistles and thorns ; but 
the crown of life is prepared for us ; for it is the 
right truth, and no other shall ever be found. O my 
dear lambs, do not depart from the Lord ; He will 
not permit you to be tempted above that you are 
able to bear; for He is a faithful succorer, a 
strength in weakness, and a comforter in sorrow 
to those that are afflicted in heart. Let us nestle 
close into His arms, and cast all of our care upon 
Him, for He cares for us, and will Himself watch 
over us ; that we may partake of the supper with 
all the saints in heaven, where Christ Himself will 
gird Himself, and serve at the table. Herewith I 
will commend you to the Lord, and to the mighty 
Word of His grace ; may the peace of God rule in 
your hearts. I heartily greet all our dear brethren 
and sisters, and all those that fear God from the 
heart, with the peace of God. 

By me, Nelleken Jasper, a maiden of Blijenberg, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


763 


your unworthy sister in the Lord; the 12th of De- 
cember, A. D. 1569. Send me a letter occasionally; 
for it will be very welcome to me. 


NOTICE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, CONCERNING 
THE FOLLOWING SENTENCES 

It is a fact known to those who have read with 
attention the history of Holland for the years 1533, 
1534, 1535, and some of the following, that the ex- 
ternal condition of the so-called Defenseless Ana- 
baptists {Weerloose Doopsgesinden) was very sad 
and at the same time in a state of confusion ; not 
only through the severe persecutions by which they 
were scattered into every quarter, but especially 
also through the insurrection of such as, without 
being defenseless, also taught the baptism of adults ; 
because these by falling into abominable practices, 
furnished cause that all those who opposed infant 
baptism were looked upon by the authorities, as 
though they also had part or guilt in such improper 
and abominable doings. And since all who taught 
the baptism of adults were indiscriminately called 
Anabaptists, and under this name persecuted alike, 
it was sometimes scarcely possible for those who 
saved their lives by flight, to know when some were 
apprehended or put to death, whether they were of 
the number of their defenseless brethren and sis- 
ters, or not ; as also, how many they were, and what 
were their names. 

For this reason there were in those years, and, as 
may be inferred from history, also in later times, 
and in divers places, many pious witnesses put to 
death, whose number and names have not been as- 
certained so clearly, that they could be placed 
among the number of their fellow combatants in 
this book, to serve as patterns of utmost fidelity in 
the confession of the truth, to succeeding genera- 
tions. 

In this number there have also been embraced 
up to the present time various men and women who 
were put to death at Amsterdam ; whose sentences 
came into our hands, while this Bloody Theatre 
was being reprinted ; they were obtained from the 
book of sentences from said city of Amsterdam, 
preserved in the archives there. From these sen- 
tences it is clearly evident that they were not put 
to death on account of insurrection or any other 
misconduct, but simply because they departed from 
Romish institutions, opposed infant baptism, and 
had adopted the baptism which is administered 
upon confession of sins, and faith in Christ our 
Lord. 

Hence we deem it our duty, to make known here 
also these persons, and to place them with those 
with whom they in their lifetime valiantly fought 
unto the end under one banner of Christ Jesus our 
Lord ; and with whom they also rest from their la- 
bors, till the time that they shall together, in the 
resurrection, be made partakers of the incorrupt- 
ible crown of glory. 

We heartily wish that we had been able to give 


an account also of their valiant deeds, wise dis- 
courses, acts of patience and resignation, and every 
thing that took place in connection with their suf- 
ferings and death. However, none of these things 
have come to our knowledge, having through the 
adverse circumstances of those times, probably 
never been divulged by those who could and would 
have made them known to those unacquainted with 
them, or to posterity; even as those sorrowful 
times caused this with regard to many martyrs, 
since of some it has scarcely been possible to record 
their number and the place of their offering. 

Extract from the book of criminal sentences of the 
city of Amsterdam, Fol. 48, verso, preserved 

in the archives there 
Whereas Grietje Arents, a maiden of Limmen, 
has had herself rebaptized, holding pernicious 
views concerning the sacraments of the holy church, 
contrary to the faith and ordinances of said church, 
and the written laws and decrees of the Emperor, 
our gracious lord; and, moreover, was banished 
by the Court of Holland, for the aforesaid reason, 
from these countries of Holland, Zealand and 
Friesland, on pain of death, without that she, the 
prisoner, has hitherto manifested a willingness to 
repent, but has suffered the time of grace granted 
by his imperial majesty to pass by ; therefore, the 
judges, having heard the demand made against her 
by the bailiff in behalf of his imperial majesty, and 
the answer arid confession of the aforesaid Grietje, 
and having considered the circumstances of this 
case, have condemned said Grietje by sentence to 
be executed by water, as has been done by the ex- 
ecutioner. Done the last day of December, A. D. 
1534, in the presence of the whole court. 

This Grietje Arents, according to the contents 
of the sentence, had first been banished, however, 
as clearly appears, for no other reason than that 
she did not believe like the Roman church, for 
which reason also, since she persisted therein, she 
was put to death ; but why she returned to the place 
from which she had been banished, is not known ; 
however, we may well infer, since nothing else is 
laid to her charge in this sentence, that the cause 
thereof was likewise a matter of faith and con- 
science. 

Extract as above, Fol. 49, verso 
Whereas Jan Pauw, blockmaker, Arent Janssen 
of Gorckum, tradesman, Barent Claessen of Swol, 
fuller, Jan van Gink, Hendrich Biesman of Maes- 
tricht, Cornelis Willemsse of Haerlem, cabinet- 
maker, Arent Jacobssen, Keyser, of Moonicken- 
dam, and Willen Janssen of Zutphen, have had 
themselves rebaptized, and have accepted the cove- 
nant of the Anabaptists, holding pernicious views 
concerning the sacraments of the holy church, con- 
trary to the faith and ordinances of said church, and 
the written laws and decrees of his imperial maj- 
esty our gracious lord ; therefore, the judges, hav- 
ing heard the demand made by my lord the officer 
concerning them, and their defense and confession, 


764 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and having considered the circumstances of the 
case, have condemned the aforesaid persons by 
sentence, to be executed with the sword and put 
to death, on the scaffold erected for this purpose in 
the marketplace of this city ; and, moreover, their 
heads to be placed upon stakes, and their bodies 
upon wheels, for an example unto others, as was 
done immediately afterwards. Done the 6th day of 
March, A. D. 1535; in the presence of the whole 
court. 

Concerning Jan Pauw there is still another, sep- 
arate sentence, that on the 29th of December, 1534, 
he was tortured, by sentence of the judges, in order 
to learn from him who had baptized, and who had 
been baptized at his house; however, since that 
sentence contains nothing but this order to torture 
him, we have not deemed it necessary to add it 
here verbatim. 

Extract as above, Fol. 51 

Whereas Jan Jacobssen, of Normandy ; inhabi- 
tant of this city, Adriaen Cornelissen of Sparren- 
dam, and Gerrit Claessen of Oudenyerop, have en- 
tered into the covenant of the Anabaptists, and been 
rebaptized, holding pernicious views concerning 
the sacraments of the holy church, contrary to the 
holy Christian faith and the ordinances of said 
church, and the written laws and decrees of his 
imperial majesty our gracious lord ; therefore, my 
lords the judges, having heard the demand made by 
my lord the bailiff, in behalf of his imperial maj- 
esty against the aforesaid persons, and their de- 
fense and confession, and having considered the 
circumstances of their crime, have condemned the 
aforesaid persons by sentence, to be executed with 
the sword and put to death, by the executioner, on 
the scaffold erected in front of the city hall, of this 
city, and, moreover, their heads to be placed upon 
stakes, and their bodies upon wheels, for an ex- 
ample to others ; as was done by the executioner ; 
and we furthermore declare their property con- 
fiscated for the benefit of his imperial majesty as 
count of Holland, of those who are not citizens 
of this city, and of the citizens, to the sum of one 
hundred pounds, according to the privileges of this 
city. Done on the 15th of May A. D. 1535, in the 
presence of the bailiff, Ruysch Janssen and Goos- 
sen Janssen Rekalff, burgomasters, and all the 
judges. 

In the public histories of that time mention is 
made only of the beheading of three men on that 
day, without anything evil being laid to their 
charge, except simply that they were counted 
among the Anabaptists. And since this sentence 
charges them with no crime, insurrection, or any 
misconduct, which in that time of violence, when 
that riot at Amsterdam had but recently happened, 
would very probably have been done, had there 
been any grounds for it, it can readily be inferred 
that these men were pious persons, who are worthy 
to be placed with the other faithful soldiers of 
Christ our Lord. 


Extract as above, Fol. 51. verso 

Whereas Baef Claes, a maiden, Grietje Maes, 
Gerrit s widow, Barbara Jacobs, a maiden of 
Haserwoude, Breght Elberts, a maiden, Adriana 
Ysbrant , a maiden, Trijn Jans of Munnickendam, 
and Lysbeth Jans, a maiden from Benskop, have 
been rebaptized, holding pernicious views con- 
cerning the sacraments of the holy church con- 
trary to the holy Christian faith and the ordinances 
of said church, and the written laws and decrees 
of his imperial majesty our gracious lord, without 
that they have hitherto shown any penitence- 
therefore, the judges, having heard the demand 
made by the bailiff in the behalf of his imperial 
majesty against them, and their answer and con- 
fession, and having considered the circumstances 
of this case, have condemned the aforesaid per- 
sons by sentence, to be executed with water and 
put to death by the executioner; as was done by 
the executioner; and furthermore declare their 
property confiscated for the benefit of his imperial 
majesty as count of Holland, of those who are not 
citizens of this city, and of the citizens, to the sum 
of one hundred pounds, according to the privileges 
of this city. Done on the 15th of May, A. D 1535 • 
in the presence of the bailiff, Ruysch Janssen and 
Goossen Janssen Rekalff, Burgomasters, and all 
the judges. 

These seven women, according to the import of 
this sentence, were put to death on the same day 
with the following nine, and yet public histories 
mention nothing about them ; which is a matter of 
little surprise for the reason that the drowning of 
those who were condemned to death on account of 
religion took place at night, when they, with stones 
tied to their necks, were cast down into the water 
from the Herring-packers' Tower (then called the 
Holy Cross Tower), as appears from the descrip- 
tion of Amsterdam, by Dr. Dapper, Fol. 403. 

Extract as above, Fol. 52. verso 

Whereas Leentgen, Jan van Rheenen's wife, 
Adriana Jans, a maiden from Benskop, Goechgen 
Jans, of Lubik, born at Goude, Leentgen Hendrix 
a maiden of Hertogenbosch, Griet Pieters Mollen' 
a maiden, Marritge, Nadminx, a maiden of Alk- 
maar, Aeltje Gillis, a maiden from Benskop, Jan- 
netje Jans, a maiden of Utrecht, Aeltjen Wouters, 
born at Asperen, have been rebaptized, and betaken 
themselves to the sect and heresy of the Anabap- 
tists, holding pernicious views concerning the 
sacraments of the holy church, contrary to the 
holy Christian faith and the ordinances of said 
church'; and to the written laws and decrees of his 
imperial majesty our gracious lord, without being 
willing to repent of it; therefore, my lords the 
judges, having heard the demand made by the 
bailiff against them in behalf of his imperial maj- 
esty, together with their answer and confession 
and having considered the circumstances of this 
case, have condemned the aforesaid persons by 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


765 


sentence, to be executed with water and put to 
death by the executioner, as was done by the ex- 
ecutioner; and furthermore declare their prop- 
erty confiscated for the benefit of the emperor as 
count of Holland, of those who are not citizens of 
this city, and of the citizens, to the sum of one hun- 
dred pounds, according to the privileges of this city. 
Done on the 15th of May, A. D. 1535, in the pres- 
ence of the bailiff, Goossen Janssen Rekalff, Bur- 
gomaster, and all the judges. 

The public writers of those times also make men- 
tion of these women, but without stating anything 
more than their number, and that they were 
drowned. This sentence, however, not only makes 
known their names, but from it also their innocence 
is evident. 

Extract as above, Fol. 59. verso 

Whereas Pietersen, alias Borrekiek, born at Ley- 
den, has entered the covenant of the Anabaptists, 
and been rebaptized, holding pernicious views con- 
cerning the sacraments of the holy church contrary 
to the holy Christian faith and the ordinances of 
said church, and the written laws and decrees of his 
imperial majesty, our gracious lord, and, more- 
over, had previous knowledge of a meeting held a 
certain time ago, at Leyden, by adherents of the 
afore-mentioned sect, without giving information 
thereof to the authorities of said city ; therefore, my 
lords the judges, having heard the demand of my 
lord the bailiff, and having considered the circum- 
stances of his misconduct, have condemned said de- 
linquent by sentence, to be executed with the 
sword, and put to death on the scaffold, by the exe- 
cutioner, his head to be put upon a stake, and his 
body to be quartered and hanged to a wheel, for an 
example to others ; as was done by the executioner ; 
and, furthermore, declare his property confiscated 
for the benefit of the emperor as Count of Holland. 
Done, etc., in presence as above in the preceding 
sentence. 

Extract as above, Fol. 70. verso 

Whereas Hendrick van Maestricht, at the time 
when the boat, loaded with Anabaptists, was about 
to sail to Geelmuyden, has joined the sect of the 
Anabaptists, by the imposition of the hand, per- 
formed on him by one Claes Enkhuysen, and has 
since allied himself and kept fellowship with said 
people, conversed with them at different places, 
and advised and induced several others to join 
the aforesaid sect, contrary to the decrees ordained 
and caused to be published by his imperial majesty 
our gracious lord against the aforesaid sect and its 
adherents, without that the aforesaid Hendrik has, 
improved the time of grace, but rejected it ; there- 
fore, my lords the judges, having heard the de- 
mand made by the bailiff in behalf of his imperial 
majesty, against the aforesaid Hendrik, together 
with his answer and confession, and having ma- 
turely considered the circumstances of this case, 
have condemned the aforesaid Hendrik van Maes- 


tricht by sentence, to be executed with the sword 
and put to death by the executioner, and his body 
to be placed upon a wheel, and his head upon a 
stake, unless it be that the lords, out of grace, be 
pleased to grant him the church yard ; which sen- 
tence was afterwards executed by the executioner. 
Done on the 10th of June, A. D. 1536, in the pres- 
ence of the bailiff, all the burgomasters excepted, 
Cornelis Buyk, Syverts, Claes Gerritsse, Mattheus 
Claes Doeden, Jan Ryser Janssen, Pieter Wil- 
lemsse Kantert, and Symon Marttensse Dircx, 
judges. 

Extract as above, Fol. 77. verso 

Whereas Albert Reyers, alias Oldeknecht, born 
at Bolswaert, in Friesland, has for several years re- 
sorted to the society, intercourse and fellowship of 
persons tainted with heresy and evil doctrines, and 
has been found with them in divers conventicles, 
and has also held such in his own dwelling, where 
the writings and sacraments of the holy church, 
and the articles of the holy Christian faith were 
subjected to improper disputation, teaching and 
treatment, so that the afore-mentioned Albert, hav- 
ing become infected thereby, spoke and believed 
evilly of the holy sacrament of the altar and other 
sacraments; also of the ordinances and customs 
of the holy church, to the scandal of good Chris- 
tians, contrary to the holy Christian faith, and the 
decrees and edicts of his imperial majesty our gra- 
cious lord ; therefore, the judges, having heard the 
demand made by my lord the bailiff against the 
afore-mentioned Albert Reyers, together with his 
answer and confession, and having duly considered 
the circumstances of this case, have condemned 
said Albert, according to the aforesaid decrees, by 
sentence, to be executed with the sword and put 
to death by the executioner, and his body after- 
wards to be placed on a wheel, and his head upon a 
stake ; and, furthermore, declare his property con- 
fiscated to the sum of one hundred pounds, ac- 
cording to the privileges of this city. So done on 
the 12th day of April, in the year 1537, in presence 
of the bailiff, Claes Gerritsse Deymans and Gerrit 
Meeuwess, Burgomasters, and Gerrit Meeuwess 
and all the judges. 

Extract as above, Fol. 77. verso 

Whereas Andries Harmans of Gelre, has under- 
taken at different times and place to dispute con- 
cerning the Scriptures, and to hold conventicles, 
where the Scriptures, and the sacraments and or- 
dinances of the holy church were subjected to im- 
proper teaching and treatment, whereby the afore- 
said Andries, having fallen into error and heresy, 
also taught these views to others, and tainted them 
therewith, and has also for a certain time spoken 
and believed evilly and heretically, and does still 
believe so, concerning the holy sacrament of the al- 
tar, and other sacraments of the holy church, con- 
trary to the holy Christian faith, and against the 
decrees of his imperial majesty our gracious lord ; 


766 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


therefore, the judges, having heard the demand 
made by my lord the bailiff against the aforesaid 
Andries, together with his answer and confession, 
and having maturely considered the circumstances 
of his misdemeanors, condemn said Andries, ac- 
cording to the afore-mentioned decrees, to be exe- 
cuted with the sword and put to death by the exe- 
cutioner, and afterwards his body to be placed upon 
a wheel, and his head upon a stake, for an example 
to others; and furthermore, declare his property 
confiscated for the benefit of the lord, to the sum 
of one hundred pounds, according to the privileges 
of this city. So done on the 12th of April 1537, in 
presence of the bailiff, Claes Gerrit Deymans and 
Gerrit Andries, burgomasters, and all the judges. 
This execution was performed by the execution- 
er immediately after the sentence was pronounced. 

Extract as above, Fol. 78. verso 

Whereas Thymon Hendricx of Campen, three 
years ago or thereabouts, was rebaptized, and en- 
tered into the covenant and heresy of the Anabap- 
tists, holding pernicious views concerning the holy 
Christian faith, and the sacraments and ordinances 
of the holy church contrary to the truth of the holy 
faith and against the decrees published in regard to 
this, by his imperial majesty our gracious lord, 
therefore, the judges having heard the demand 
made by the bailiff of this city, in behalf of his im- 
perial majesty against the afore-mentioned Thy- 
mon Hendricx, together with his answer and 
confession, and having duly considered the circum- 
stances of the aforesaid case, condemn said Thy- 
mon, according to the afore-mentioned decrees, 
by sentence, to be executed with the sword and 
put to death by the executioner, and his body after- 
wards to be put upon a wheel, and his head upon a 
stake, for an example to others ; and, furthermore, 
declare his property confiscated for the benefit of 
the lord. So done on the 12th of April 1537, in the 
presence of the bailiff, Claes Gerrit Deymans and 
Gerritt Andries, burgomasters, and all the judges. 

This execution was performed by the execution- 
er immediately after the sentence was pronounced. 

Extract as above, Fol. 93 

Whereas Jan Janssen van dem Berg in the coun- 
try of Cleves, a year ago or thereabouts, was re- 
baptized in the city of Delft, by one Claes with the 
lame hand and has entered into the covenant and 
heresy of the Anabaptists, holding pernicious views 
concerning the holy Christian faith, and the sacra- 
ments and ordinances of the holy church, contrary 
to the truth of the holy faith, and against the de- 
crees emitted in regard to this by his imperial maj- 
esty our gracious lord ; therefore, the judges, hav- 
ing heard the demand made by the bailiff of this 
city in behalf of his imperial majesty, against the 
aforementioned Janssen, together with his answer 
and confession, and having duly considered the cir- 
cumstances of the aforesaid case, condemn said Jan 


Janssen, according to the aforesaid decrees, by 
sentence, to be executed and put to death by the ex- 
ecutioner, and his body then to be put upon a wheel, 
and his head upon a stake, for an example to oth- 
ers; and furthermore, declare his property con- 
fiscated for the benefit of the lord. Done on the 7th 
of July, A. D. 1539, in the presence of all the 
burgomasters, Joost Buyk Sybrant, Jan Willemss, 
Albert Dirksen, Willem Stitchel, and Floris 
Floriss. 


ELEVEN BRETHREN AND A SISTER, AT ANTWERP; 

HARMAN TIMMERMAN, JAN VAN HASEBROECK, 

PIETER VERLONGE, GERRIT VAN MANDEL, JAN 

VAN MANDEL, JAN DE SCHAPER, JAN WIL- 

JOOT, JAN VAN DOORNICK, WILLEM VAN 

POPERINGE, MAEYKEN HIS WIFE, JAN 

KOOPMAN, HANS HIS SERVANT; 

A. D. 1569 

In the year 1569, at Antwerp, there was appre- 
hended, examined, tortured and finally sentenced 
to death, for living according to the word of God. 
and the testimony of the truth, twelve pious Chris- 
tians, namely, Harman Timmerman, Jan van Hase- 
broeck, Pieter Verlonge, Gerrit van Mandel, Jan 
van Mandel, Jan de Schaper, Jan Wiljoot, Jan van 
Doormck, Willem van Poperinge, Maeyken, his 
wife, Jan Koopman, and Hans his servant. One of 
them, however, died in prison, from the effects of 
the torture. Seven were burned alive before Easter, 
their mouths having been screwed together with 
screws ; and the last mentioned four, in like man- 
ner, on the 20th of May of said year. 

Here follows a brief yet thorough and Christian 
confession of faith, of the one Being, God the Fa- 
ther, Son and Holy Ghost, and of the eternal God- 
head of Christ the Son of God; also of the incar- 
nation, visibleness, suffering and death of the 
eternal and only begotten Son of the living God, 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ ; which, by this 
here mentioned hero and witness of Jesus, Her- 
man Timmerman, was written as an answer and 
refutation to a letter that had been sent him; and 
to which he so effectually testified and confirmed 
with, his blood and death. We have added the 
same here, for the benefit of the reader. We ask 
you to read it with Christian regard and attention; 
we hope that you will be instructed and bettered by 
it. It reads as follows : 

In the first place, my friend, you desire us to 
write to you, whether we confess that the Father 
and the man Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost are 
one Being. Our answer is, that we confess, that 
there is one Father, and one Son, and one Holy 
Ghost, and that with these words, namely, Father, 
Son and Holy Ghost, the only and Almighty God 
was expressed by Christ Himself, Matt. 28:19. 
This then is our belief, namely, that we confess, 
that when the Father was, there was also the Son ; 
for the Father never was without the Son. For as 
the Scriptures testify of the Father, that He is 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


767 


eternal, and that all things are through Him; so 
they also testify of the Son, that His goings forth 
are from the beginning, from the days of eternity ; 
and all things were created by Him. Mic. 5:1; 
Col. 1 :16; Jno. 1 :3 ; Eph. 3 :9; Heb. 1 :2. Likewise, 
also through the Holy Spirit ; for all things were 
made by Him, who has one will and work with the 
Father and the Son, as may well be understood 
from these words where the Scriptures testify that 
the Holy Ghost says : "Separate me Barnabas and 
Saul for the work whereunto I have called them." 
II Esd. 16:62; Psalm 33:6; Acts 13:2. See, my 
friends, here the Holy Ghost says that He calls 
them to this work; now Paul says, that Jesus 
Christ has called and sent him. Acts 26 :16. And 
in the epistle to the Galatians we read, that God 
called him, and separated him from his mother's 
womb, to reveal His Son by him. Galatians 1 :15, 
16. From these words the unity can clearly be un- 
derstood. And there are still other passages which 
testify concerning the Holy Ghost, that He ap- 
points the ministers or bishops in the church of 
God, which He has purchased with His own blood, 
and that He also dispenses the gifts. Acts 20 :28 ; I 
Cor. 12:11. 

From these words it is easy to understand the 
unity and operation of the Holy Ghost, which He 
has with the Father and the Son, so that He cannot 
be excluded from the unity. Nor can the Son ; for 
He says : "I and the Father are one," John 10 :30 ; 
which unity and Son of God He is according to the 
person as well as according to the Spirit ; for He is 
frequently, according to His humanity called the 
Son of God, as you may read where the centurion 
said: "Truly this is the Son of God." Matt. 27:54. 
And Paul says, that we are reconciled to God by 
the death of His Son. Rom. 5 :10. Again, that God 
did not spare His Son, 8 :32. And John says, that 
the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from 
all sin. I John 1 :7; 4:10. And Luke says: "That 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son 
of God." Luke 1 :35. And to the Galatians : "That 
God sent forth his Son, who was born of a woman." 
Gal. 4:4. Now He who is the Son of God, and 
whom He has given for our propitiation (I Jno. 
4:10), was certainly born of Mary in the form of 
a human person. And Isaiah says: "Unto us a 
child is born, unto us a Son is given : and his name 
shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty 
God, The everlasting Father" (Isa. 9:6), and oth- 
er things, which God says of Himself, and which 
John the Baptist and Christ declare concerning 
Himself. Read Isaiah where it is written: "Be- 
hold, your God. For, behold, the Lord Sabaoth 
cometh; he shall feed his flock like a shepherd." 
Isa. 40:9. 

Also in Ezekiel God says : "I will myself attend 
to my sheep." Ezek. 34:11. Now Christ says, that 
He is the Shepherd of the sheep, and that the sheep 
are His own. Zechariah says: "Smite the Shep- 
herd, and the sheep shall be scattered," and in John 


we read, that Christ is the Bridegroom, who has 
the bride ; and in the epistle to the Ephesians [we 
are taught], that He gave Himself for her, that 
He might prepare Himself a glorious church. Eph. 
5 :25. Christ also is the Lamb of God, and in Rev- 
elation we read that the marriage of the Lamb is 
come, and that His wife has made herself ready. 
Rev. 19:7. Hence we can clearly understand from 
these words, that Jesus Christ is the Bridegroom 
and husband of His church, which husband by the 
prophet Isaiah is called God: "For thy Maker is 
thine husband," he says : "the Lord of hosts is his 
name: and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of 
Israel; the God of the whole earth shall he be 
called." Isa. 54:5. 

See, my friends, from all these words it can 
clearly be understood, that Christ cannot be ex- 
cluded from the unity or from God; since God in 
the Scriptures is frequently expressed by the word 
Christ, as you may read in Timothy, where Paul 
calls Christ our Saviour, and also calls God our 
Saviour, and in other places, where God is called 
our Saviour. Read I Tim. 1:1. And God says 
through Isaiah: "I am the Lord; and beside me 
there is no Saviour." Isa. 43:11 ; 45:5. Now the 
Scriptures testify, that man's salvation lies in the 
sacrifice of the body of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, 
as we above quoted to you some passages ; as, that 
we are reconciled to God by the death of His Son : 
the body died, and, as Peter says : "By- his stripes 
we were healed." His body suffered the stripes. 
I Pet. 2 :24. And Isaiah : "With his stripes we are 
healed:" the stripes were inflicted upon the body. 
Isa. 53:5. 

See, my friend, it is therefore clear from these 
words, that Christ cannot be excluded from God 
with body and spirit, since God ascribes to Himself 
that which Christ has done, as we explained above 
concerning the Shepherd of the sheep. And Christ 
ascribes to Himself that which God does, as may 
frequently be understood from the Scriptures ; so 
that the inference is clear, that they have one will 
and work : for what things soever the Father doeth, 
these also doeth the Son likewise. And as the 
Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them ; 
even so the Son quickeneth whom He will. John 
5 :19, 21. Hence the works of the Son of God can 
be ascribed to none other than to God, so that the 
Son cannot be excluded from God. When there- 
fore the word God is named, Father, Son and Holy 
Ghost are thereby expressed. Thus confess we the 
only God. 

You further desire an answer in regard to the 
passages which speak of the one God, whether 
thereby any other than the Father is named. I un- 
derstand your question thus: "Whether Christ, 
who died, is also comprised in the expression one 
God?" Rom. 1:8; 5:8; John 5:18; I John 5:9. 

Answer. In the first place you quote Deut. 6 :4, 
where Moses said : "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our 
God is one God ;" and says still further in the same 


768 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


chapter : "Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, 
as ye tempted him in Massah." v. 16; Matt. 4:7. 
See, my friend, they tempted this one God, who by 
Paul is called Christ, where he says : "And let us 
not tempt Christ, as some tempted him." I Corin- 
thians 10:9, Now I understand from your letter, 
that you would exclude Christ from God ; I under- 
stand it by the passage you quote (John 17), by 
which you would prove that Christ is not God. Our 
answer concerning this passage is : "They that con- 
fess Jesus Christ in truth also confess Him God, 
since God is expressed by the word Christ, as we 
have proved above from the words of Paul." You 
further quote the language of Hezekiah, where he 
said : "O Lord God of Israel, thou art alone God ; 
thou hast made heaven and earth." II Kings 19:15. 
By these words you would prove that Christ is ex- 
cluded from the one God. And you write in your 
letter that the one God of whom Hezekiah spoke 
made heaven and earth; and you exclude Christ 
from the one God; hence you must also exclude 
Him from the creation of heaven and earth, and 
must first refute all these witnesses that testify 
concerning Jesus Christ, that all that is made was 
made by Him. Read John 1 :3 ; Col. 1 :9; Eph. 3:9; 
Heb. 1 :2 ; Ps. 33 :6. When you shall have refuted 
all these witnesses, and excluded Christ from all 
the works of God, then I shall admit your view, 
that Christ is not comprised in the expression, one 
God. 

You further say that God is invisible and lives 
forever, but that Christ was seen, and that He died, 
and that the child was without knowledge, and that 
it grew up in wisdom ; concerning which you shall 
hear our views afterwards from the confession of 
our faith, which we prove from the Scriptures, 
which later we must believe. Furthermore, you 
say that God knows the times, and that the Son 
does not know them. Matt. 24:36; Mark 13:32. 
Our answer is, that Christ speaks this according 
to His humiliation; for there are other passages 
which testify concerning Him, that He knows all 
things ; as where Peter said : "Lord, thou knowest 
all things ;" and Christ did not contradict him, say- 
ing: '"No, Peter, I do not know the last day." He 
did not even reply to it. Again, when the disciples 
said to Him : "Now are we sure that thou knowest 
all things." John 16:30. You further say that 
God knows the hearts of all the children of men. 
Ps. 7:9; Jeremiah 11:20; 17:10; 12:3. We say 
that Christ also knows them; for He knew what 
was in man, and needed not that any should testify 
of man. II Tim. 4:8; Revelation 2:23; John 2: 
25. And Christ said : "I know you, that ye have 
not the love of God in you." John 9:42. And in 

John 6 :61, we read that Jesus knew in Himself that 
lis disciples murmured at it. But that you write 
concerning the revelation of John, that God gave 
Him the same, this does not imply that He [Christ] 
does not know anything. You further say that 
God is Almighty, and does all things without the 


assistance of any one. Answer: Above we have 
proved that Christ Jesus and the Holy Ghost are 
comprehended in the word God, or you must prove 
that the Father does some things without the Son 
or the Holy Ghost, contrary to the words of Christ 
where He says : "What things soever the Father 
doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." And: 
"My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." And: 
"As the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth 
them, even so the Son quickeneth whom he will." 
John 5 :19; 17:21. And if we are to honor the Son 
as we honor the Father, as the Father requires, 
we must certainly confess Him God, for the Father 
is honored as God, and if we now deny the Son, 
we have neither the Father, nor the Son, and we 
are also the spirit of antichrist. I John 2:22. And 
as God did the miracles by Him, so He, again, did 
them by the Father. And He said to two blind men : 
"Believe ye that I am able to do this to you?" And 
they believed it and were helped. Matthew 9:28. 
This I state, that you may know that He frequently 
ascribes to Himself the works which He does, and 
sometimes to His Father; in order that you may 
know that they are one God, who worketh all 
things. You say that God requires the Holy Spirit, 
which is true. Now you must observe that a certain 
thing is sometimes ascribed to God the Father, 
and sometimes to the Son; for we read, John 3 :16\ 
that God so loved the world, that he gave his only 
Son. Rom. 5:8; I John 4:9. And John 10:17, we 
read that Christ says, that He lays down His life; 
no man takes it from Him ; but He lays it down of 
Himself. Again, that He gives His flesh for the 
life of the world. John 6:51. And that He also 
imparts the Holy Ghost, and also sent Him to His 
disciples. John 20:22; 16:7, 13; 15:26; Luke 

You further quote I Cor. 15 :28. Our answer is, 
as above : That sometimes a work is ascribed to the 
Father and sometimes to the Son; that all men 
might know that they are one. For we read that 
God the Father set Jesus Christ at His own right 
hand in the heavenly places. Eph. 1 :20. And we 
also read, that the Lord sat down on the right hand 
of the Majesty on high. Heb. 1 :3. Therefore my 
friend, you may well take heed before you proceed 
in such a weighty matter, and first well prove with 
the word of Christ and His apostles, that you do 
not run away with a word, without first proving 
whether it agrees with all the words of God. Fare- 
well, and read with the understanding. 

Our belief and ground concerning the incarna- 
tion of Jesus Christ is, that we confess and believe, 
that the only begotten Son of God, who was with 
the Father before the foundation of the world 
(John 17:24), and was in the form of God (Phil. 
2:6), was foreordained before the foundation of 
the world; whose goings forth are from the be- 
ginning ; by whom the world was made, John 1 :3 ; 
Col. 1:16; Heb. 1:2; and who, though He was 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


769 


rich, became poor for our sakes, and came forth 
from the Father, came into the world ; came down 
from heaven; and through the power of the Most 
High was conceived in Mary, and became man in 
her. For the Word became flesh (John 1 :14), so 
that it was seen with the eyes, and handled with the 
hands; of the word of life. I John 1:1. Born of 
Mary (Luke 2:7) ; given unto us as a son (Isa. 
9:6), and crucified, died, and buried for us; raised 
from the dead, for God raised up His child Jesus 
(Acts 3:15; 10:40; I Thess. 1:10); and He as- 
cended up where He was before (John 6:62), for 
He that descended is the same also that ascended, 
Eph. 4:10. We also believe, that the Son of God, 
when the time was fulfilled, became Abraham's 
son, David's son, Abraham's seed, the Son of man ; 
and the son and fruit of Mary, when He became 
man ; not that the Son of God took His origin or 
beginning from Abraham, or David, or Mary ; for 
we have above shown by the Scriptures, that He 
was with the Father before the foundation of the 
world; and was before Abraham was. John 8:58. 
We therefore believe, that Jesus Christ, without 
any division, visible or invisible, mortal or im- 
mortal, wholly and entirely, is the first begotten, 
own, true, Son of God, as all believers have con- 
fessed Him, as we can read in the holy Scriptures. 
Peter confessed Him as the Son of the living God. 
Likewise also John the Baptist confessed Him; 
for he said : I saw, and bare record that this is the 
Son of God. John 1 :34. Nathanael said : "Rabbi, 
thou art the Son of God." Martha in like manner 
confessed that He was the Christ, the Son of the 
living God, who had come into the world. John 
11 :27. 

This is our confession concerning the incarnation 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now if some one should 
ask us whether we do not believe that the Son of 
God assumed flesh and blood, in which He dwelt ; 
and that the Son of God remained the same as He 
was, invisible, immortal, unchangeable, as is the 
Father ; we answer thus. "If it were true that the 
Son of God remained invisible, immortal and un- 
changeable, as the Father, and assumed flesh and 
blood from Mary, in which He dwelt, it could not 
be said with truth, that the Son of God became 
man, but according to truth it would have to be 
said, that the Son of God assumed a man, in whom 
He dwelt ; for to assume is to assume, and to be- 
come is to become, and assuming cannot be called 
becoming. There further follows from it, that if 
the Son of God remained invisible, as the Father, 
He could not be crucified, and in this case He that 
hung on the cross, is not the Son of God ; for He 
was seen, and God has but one Son. It further fol- 
lows from it, that if the Son remained invisible, 
God did spare His Son, contrary to the words of 
Paul, where he says, that God spared not His Son, 
but delivered Him up for us all. Rom. 8 :32. And 
God would in this case also not have given us His 
Son, contrary to the teaching of John, where he 


says: "God so loved the world, that he gave his 
only Son." John 3 :16. 

Furthermore, if He remained immortal, it can 
not be said, that we are reconciled to God by the 
death of His Son, contrary to Paul, where he says, 
that we are reconciled to God by the death of His 
Son. Rom. 5 :10. Nor can it be said that the blood 
of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin. 
It can only be said that the flesh and blood of Mary 
cleanses us from all sin, contrary to the teaching of 
John, where he says, that the blood of Jesus Christ 
his Son cleanseth us from all sin. Nor can it be 
said, that God raised up His child Jesus; for if 
He did not die, He did not raise Him up, contrary 
to the teaching of Paul, I Thessalonians 1:10; 
Acts 2:24; 10:40. Now if someone should ask us, 
whether we believe, that the Son of God was 
changed ; we answer, that we believe, that the Son 
of God for our sakes was changed so much that He 
became what He was not, namely, He, who before 
was rich, for our sakes became poor. And He, 
who was in the form of God, became man ; for the 
Word became flesh, so that it was seen with the 
eyes and handled with the hands. And He, who be- 
fore was invisible, became visible ; and arose from 
the dead; and ascended up where He was before. 
For He that descended is the same also that as- 
cended; and He sits on the right hand of the Maj- 
esty on high, and is our Advocate, our Mediator, 
and ever lives to reconcile us. See, my friend, thus 
confess we the love which God has shown toward 
us. So that Jesus Christ humbled Himself for our 
sakes, became lower than the angels, and was found 
in fashion as a man. Phil. 2 :8 ; Heb. 2 :7. Behold, 
my friend, this is the answer to the remark that the 
child grew up in wisdom. For when He became 
like unto man, as Paul teaches, He became in all 
things like unto His brethren. Heb. 2:17. Now, 
another man grows up in wisdom; therefore the 
Son of God humbled Himself, put Himself in our 
stead before God His Father, and took upon Him 
our sins, and paid for them in our stead, so that in 
our place He cried to God with strong crying and 
tears, and offered up [prayers and supplications] 
unto Him that was able to save Him from death. 
Heb. 5:7; Matt. 27:46. Not, my friend, that He 
needed to be saved on the part of His own person. 
Now if someone should ask us, whether by such 
an incarnation as you have confessed here He did 
not lose His Sonship, and unity with God, we an- 
swer: We have proved above by the Scriptures, 
that Jesus Christ was the Son of God before every 
creature (Col. 1 :15), and was with the Father be- 
fore the foundation of the world; whose goings 
forth are from the beginning and from eternity. 
And He did not lose His Sonship by His incarna- 
tion ; for, while He was man, the Father confessed 
Him as His Son. Matt. 3:17; 17:5; Mark 1:11; 
9 :7 ; Luke 3 :22. And Christ said, that He was the 
Son of God. John 10:36. Likewise did Peter. 
Matt. 16:16. John the Baptist, Nathanael, Mar- 


770 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tha, and Thomas confessed Him as their Lord and 
God. And Christ said : "I and the Father are one." 
From these words it is easy to understand, that by 
His incarnation He did not lose His first identity 
and unity ; for the Son of God could become man, 
so that He died; but nevertheless remain God and 
the Son of God. For we read concerning the first 
man Adam, who was a figure of Christ, that God 
made him of the earth, so that Adam became a 
living soul, flesh and blood, capable of suffering 
and dying, and yet remained earth ; for God said : 
"Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." 
Rom. 5:14; Gen. 1:19; Sir. 17:1. Abraham also 
confessed, that he was dust (earth). Gen. 18:27. 
Now, when the word earth is named, everything is 
comprised in it, that is earth and takes its origin 
from the earth. Now Adam and Abraham, who 
were earth died, and all men who are of the earth, 
will be able to die ; but the earth on which we walk 
can not die. Nevertheless, both are earth, and both 
are comprehended in the term earth. Now, when 
the word God is named, everything is comprised in 
it, that is God, and all that has its origin from and 
with God ; namely, with the word God, we express 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now the Scriptures 
testify, as we have abundantly stated above, that 
the Son of God became man, so that He was seen, 
and that He died; but the Father and the Holy 
Ghost did not die. Nevertheless, God reconciled 
the world, and purchased His church by His blood ; 
for God was made manifest in the flesh. Read Bar- 
uch 4 :22. For God is man's Saviour. Read Isaiah 
43 .11 ; I Tim. 1 :15 ; Tit. 1 :4. Now if Christ's body 
were of the earth, in which body our propitiation 
lies, as Peter teaches, that we were healed by His 
stripes, and Isaiah, that we are healed by His 
stripes; and Paul, that we are reconciled by His 
death ; then the earth must be our savior, and not 
God ; and John must have spoken falsely, when he 
said, that the Word, which is called God, became 
flesh. And before we will believe that Christ's body 
is of Mary's blood, we want to see this assertion 
pointed out to us in the Scriptures, word for word, 
and we will say nothing against it ; for we must be- 
lieve as the Scriptures teach us. John 7 :38. And if 
any one wishes to accept our faith, we will show 
him word for word where this is written, namely, 
that the Word became flesh. Farewell. Read with 
the understanding. Harman Timmerman. 

From Jan van Hasebroeck three letters have 
fallen into our hands, which we have likewise add- 
ed here for the benefit of the reader. 


THE FIRST LETTER OF JAN VAN HASEBROECK TO 
HIS WIFE 

The abundant grace, peace and mercy from God 
the heavenly Father, and the love of our dear Lord 
Jesus Christ, shows us by the shedding of His holy 
and precious blood on the tree of the cross ; may He 
strengthen and stablish you in the inner man/with 


His Word and the power of His Holy Spirit ; the 
same give you much wisdom and understanding, 
that you may be able to stand, to the praise of the 
Lord, and the salvation of your soul ; this I wish 
you, my dear and much beloved wife and sister in 
Christ Jesus, and all that fear the Lord from the 
heart, as a cordial greeting. Amen. 

After all affectionate greetings, I inform you, my 
dear and much beloved wife, that I am still reason- 
ably well, inwardly and outwardly — the Lord be 
praised forever for His great grace and mercy— as 
I trust by the grace of the Lord that it is also with 
you, in the inner man and in the outward, as it 
pleases the Lord. For, my most beloved, if it 
pleased the Lord, He would soon have ordered it 
otherwise; hence be content with what the Lord 
has ordered in regard to you ; for He knows what 
tends to your salvation, O my most beloved love, 
be pleased to know, that you were a medicine to 
my heart the last time I saw you at the lattice ; for, 
as a hart panteth after the water brooks, so did my 
heart long to see your face again. Ps. 42 :1. O my 
dear wife, that I might see and speak to you once 
more, and bid you adieu. But, my dearest, the 
Lord has not commanded me to take leave from 
my friends, but to follow Him in the obedience of 
the truth. Luke 9:61. O my most beloved wife, 
whom I have wedded before Christ and His 
church, for a helpmeet in my pilgrimage, over 
which helpmeet the Lord has placed me as head and 
protector, to feed and nourish you as my own body. 
Eph. 5 :28. Now, my most beloved, if I have not 
well attended to my calling, during the time that we 
have been together ; if I have grieved you in any- 
thing, I kindly ask you from the bottom of my 
heart, to forgive me ; I have asked the Lord with 
tears, to forgive me. O my dear wife, I forgive you 
from the heart everything you may have done 
amiss to me. O my dear wife, you have done noth- 
ing amiss to me ; but I have grieved myself ; hence 
I have prayed the Lord, to forgive me the same. 
And do you also, my dear wife, pray the Lord in 
my behalf, that I may be an acceptable offering to 
Him; for I trust by His grace to go before you, 
with our fellow brethren, and to await you under 
the altar. O my most beloved, my heart's prayer 
for you is, that you would always walk worthily 
before God and His church (Phil. 1 :27), as you 
have also hitherto done ; so that at the last day we 
may stand and hear His voice : "Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for 
you from the foundation of the world." 

Christ also says : "Fear not, little flock ; for it is 
my Father's good pleasure to give you his king- 
dom." Luke 12:32. He also says: "Fear not, for 
the very hairs o ( your head are all numbered." 
Verse 7. My most beloved, comfort yourself with 
the Word of the Lord, and with the beautiful 
promises of God; that you may not faint in the 
way of the Lord, because of the great persecution 
and torments which are inflicted on His people for 
His name's sake; for He says Himself: "Be not 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


771 


afraid of them that kill the body, and after that 
have no more that they can do; but fear him, 
which after he hath killed, hath power also to cast 
the soul into hell." Luke 12:4, 5. And as the 
prophet Isaiah has said: "Fear not men, or the 
children of men, that perish like grass." Isaiah 
51 :12. Therefore, my most beloved, be not afraid 
of this pain; for Paul says that the sufferings of 
this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Rom. 
8:18. In another place Paul also says: "Though 
our outward man perish, yet the inward man is re- 
newed day by day. For our light affliction, which 
is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more ex- 
ceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while we look 
not at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen: for the things which are seen 
are temporal ; but the things which are not seen are 
eternal." II Cor. 4:16-18. 

O my most beloved wife, my heart's prayer and 
desire is, that you would always associate with 
them that fear the Lord, as I likewise trust to do ; 
that hereafter we may meet where men shall not 
part us, but where we shall abide forever with the 
Father and His Son. If we only remain steadfast, 
we shall be saved. Matt. 10:22. 

O my dear wife, as the prophet Malachi says, 
that the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven, 
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, 
shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall 
burn them up, that it shall leave them neither root 
nor branch. But unto you (he says) that fear my 
name shall the Son of righteousness arise with 
healing in his wings ; and you shall go in and out, 
and find pasture. Mai. 4:1, 2. 

Behold, my dear wife, what a difference there is 
between them that fear God, and those that fear 
Him not. For as the apostle Paul says to the 
Thessalonians, in his second epistle, in the first 
chapter : "When the Lord Jesus Christ shall be re- 
vealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flam- 
ing fire, taking vengeance on them that know not 
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with ever- 
lasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 
and from the glory of his power, where the fire 
shall not be quenched, and their worm shall not die ; 
but the smoke of their torment shall ascend forever 
and ever." Mark 9:44; Rev. 14:11. 

Behold, this shall be their reward. Rom. 6:23. 
But they that fear God, love Him, and keep His 
commandments, according to their weakness ; their 
reward shall be life and peace, as the Scriptures 
sufficiently testify. And Paul, also, says that eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man, the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love him. I Cor. 2 :9. 

Herewith I will draw to a close with my dis- 
course, and commend you to the Almighty Lord, 
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the 
God of Jacob, who has given you to me, and, as 


said before, placed me as a head, to feed and nour- 
ish you as my own flesh, which 1 have done accord- 
ing to my weakness, during the time that I have 
been with you. And now that I am taken from you, 
I commend you, my dearest wife and sister in the 
Lord, to the God of peace, who has given you to 
me; humbly praying Him, through Jesus Christ, 
His dear and much beloved Son, that He would 
keep you, and my two little lambs, always in His 
truth, unto the end. And also you, my dear wife, 
I pray you in all sincerity, to do the best for my 
two little children, as I trust you will do. Oh, that 
it pleased the Lord, I would so gladly do my best 
for you yet. My most beloved, 1 have heard that 
you sent me a letter ; but I did not receive it ; hence 
if you want to send me word in regard to anything, 
speak to N., and ask her whether she knows of any 
one that would come to the common prison, and 
ask for the brother-in-law, in the fuller's house. 
For we trust that if you can prudently give it into 
his hand there, we shall get it; hence act circum- 
spectly in this matter, and do not send it without 
speaking to the rest; that it may go through at 
once and attract the less notice. For we have been 
greatly distressed on account of a letter that came 
in from without ; in which stood that they had re- 
ceived two of our letters. This letter fell into the 
hands of the jailer, who seemed beside himself that 
we had written. Therefore, my dearest love, when 
you want to write me something, write not that you 
received a letter from me ; but if you have received 
this letter from me, and send me another, place 
under your letter the sign that will stand under 
this, thereby I shall know that you received my 
letter. And if you speak to my brother, greet him 
much from me, and tell him to enter with Noah 
into the ark, lest the flood come upon him, which is 
the wrath of God ; and to go with Lot out of Sod- 
om, and not to look back, like Lot's wife, who be- 
came an example to those who in future times 
should commit ungodliness; for Christ says: "No 
man, having put his hand to the plough, and look- 
ing back, is fit for the kingdom of God." Luke 9 : 
62. Hereby greet him much in my name, and greet 
all those who inquire after me, especially him who 
was my master, and my country-man and his wife, 
and the woman who the day before was at our 
house, and, also, my most beloved, whom I know 
upon earth, yea, who is as dear to me as my own 
life ; for my natural life was not near so dear to me ; 
this the Lord knows, who is rich in mercy. 

O my beloved, I commend you, and all them that 
fear God, to the Lord, and to the Word of His 
grace. Amen. 

Written by me, Jan van Hasebroeck, 
Your husband and weak brother in Christ. 


THE SECOND LETTER OF JAN VAN HASEBROECK 

Abundant grace and peace be with you from God 
the heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, His 


772 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


dear and much beloved Son, our Lord, through 
whom we expect our salvation; may He by His 
Spirit confirm, strengthen, and comtort you in all 
your tribulation and temptation, outward and in- 
ward, that you may be able to stand firm and im- 
movable in His truth, to the end of your life, to His 
praise, and to the salvation of your soul; this I 
wish you, my dear and much beloved wife and 
sister in the Lord, as a friendly greeting and adieu 
in Christ Jesus. Amen. 

After all heartfelt greetings, my dear and much 
beloved wife, be pleased to know, that I am still 
reasonably well according to the flesh, the Lord be 
praised forever for His grace ; and my mind is al- 
ways ready yet to go on in what 1 declared and con- 
fessed before the rulers of the darkness of this 
world ; and I trust by the grace of the Lord to seal 
the same with my blood and death, so that I un- 
worthy one may obtain the promise, where He 
says: "Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake 
and the gospel's the same shall save it ; and whoso- 
ever shall confess me before men, him will I confess 
also before my Father which is in heaven." Mark 
8 :35 ; Matthew 10 :32. Therefore, my most beloved 
love, be of good cheer, and always comfort yourself, 
and be comforted with the words of the Lord ; and 
do not grieve too much on account of the work and 
will of the Lord, for He worketh all things after 
the counsel of His own will (Eph. 1 :11), and no 
one has ever been the Lord's counselor. Hence, 
my dear and much beloved wife and sister in the 
Lord, though we have had little joy with each other 
during the time that the Lord has joined us to- 
gether, and must now part with sorrow, we know 
that the Lord has promised us nothing here but 
tribulation and sorrow, as Christ said to His dis- 
ciples: "Ye shall weep and lament, but the world 
shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into joy." John 16:20. 
Christ also says : "In the world ye shall have tribu- 
lation : but be of good cheer ; I have overcome the 
world" v. 33. He further says : "Blessed are they 
that weep now : for they shall laugh ; but woe unto 
them that laugh now : for they shall weep." Luke 
6 :21, 25. Again, in another place he says : "Blessed 
are they that mourn : for they shall be comforted." 

Thus, my dear and much beloved wife and sister 
in the Lord, comfort yourself with these beautiful 
words and promises of Christ, which partly also be- 
long to you ; for in that you are sorry, you are sorry 
after a godly manner. And Paul says, that godly 
sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be 
repented of : but the sorrow of this world worketh 
death. II Cor. 7:9, 10. 

O my dear wife, Paul, in another place, further 
says, that our light affliction, which is but for a mo- 
ment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory ; while we look not at the 
things which are seen, but at the things which are 
not seen: for the things which are seen are tem- 
poral ; but the things which are not seen are eter- 


nal. II Cor. 4:17, 18. And the sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall be revealed in us. Kom. 8:18. 
For the apostle says, that eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love Him. I Cor. 2 :9. Therefore, my dear and 
much beloved wife and sister in the Lord, since we 
have such beautiful promises for this little and tem- 
poral suffering, be of good cheer, and always pa- 
tient in your tribulation and temporal sufferings, 
continuing instant in prayer, patient in hope 
(Rom. 12:12), and wait for the time of your re- 
demption with long suffering. I trust by the grace 
of the Lord to be an example and pattern to you, 
and to leap by my God over a wall (Ps. 18:29), 
to go to meet Christ, my Bridegroom, as He has 
commanded me (Matthew 25:1) ; and also to go 
and await you under the altar of the Lord, where 
all God's elect shall rest, until the number of their 
fellow brethren that must yet be killed for the testi- 
mony of Jesus, like we, is fulfilled. Rev. 6:9, 11. 

Therefore, my dear and much beloved wife and 
sister in the Lord, always wait with patience for the 
Lord your God, as did the wise virgins, who had 
oil in their vessels, and were ready to go in with 
their bridegroom, whereunto we all that believe in 
Christ are called, to sup with Him. Rev. 3 :20. For, 
as Christ Himself says, Luke 12 :37 : "Blessed are 
those servants, whom the Lord when he cometh 
shall find watching : verily I say unto you, that he 
shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to 
meat, and will come forth and serve them." Mat- 
thew 24:46. 

Hence, my dear wife and sister in the Lord, al- 
ways be of good cheer, comfort yourself with the 
words of the Lord, and be patient and resigned in 
that which the Lord has ordered concerning you. 
Though He now comes to visit you with tribula- 
tion, suffering or poverty, think that Christ, when 
He was rich, for our sakes became poor, that 
through His poverty He might make rich us who 
were poor. II Cor. 8:9. And James, also, says, 
that God has chosen the poor of this world rich in 
faith, and heirs of the kingdom which He hath 
promised to them that love Him. James 2 :5. 

O my dear wife, think of old Tobit ; when all his 
goods had been taken from him, and he had to flee 
with his wife and his son, he said : "And fear not, 
my son ; true, we are poor, but we shall have much 
wealth, if we fear the Lord, keep his command- 
ments, shun sin, and do good." Tobit 1 :20; 4:21. 

Hence, my much beloved wife and sister in the 
Lord, Christ also says in the Gospel: "Be not 
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that 
have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn 
you whom ye shall fear : Fear him, which after he 
hath killed hath power to cast body and soul into 
hell." Luke 12:4, 5. And in another place: "Fear 
not, little flock ; for it is your father's good pleasure 
to give you the kingdom." Verse 32. And the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


773 


prophet Isaiah also says: "Fear not men, nor the 
children of men, who must perish like grass; for 
all flesh is as grass ; and all the goodliness thereof 
is as the flower of the field: the grass withereth, 
the flower fadeth, but the word of the Lord abideth 
forever." Isa. 51:12; 40:6,8. 

Further, my dear and greatly beloved wife and 
sister in the Lord, be pleased to know, that it was a 
great joy for me to hear that you were of such good 
cheer in your tribulation, and that you have com- 
mitted us four to the Lord; wherefore I rejoice, 
and pray the Lord from the heart, that He would 
strengthen and stablish you, and give you His di- 
vine Spirit for a Comforter and Guide, since now 
is the time of which Christ said (Matt. 24:24), 
that many false prophets and false Christs should 
arise, yea, that even the very elect, if it were pos- 
sible, should be led into error. 

Therefore, my dear and much beloved wife, take 
good heed, that no robber deceive you by philoso- 
phy and vain deceit, after the rudiments of the 
world ; and that you may not have labored in vain, 
but may receive your reward, so that no man may 
take your crown. Hence have your conversation 
always in heaven, from whence we look for our 
Saviour, Christ Jesus our Lord ; who shall change 
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto 
His glorious body. Phil. 3:20, 21. Herewith I will 
commend you, my dear and much beloved wife, 
and both my children, to the Lord, and bid you 
farewell, until we shall meet hereafter, where men 
shall part us no more ; for the apostle says, that the 
Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a 
shout, and with the voice of the archangel ; and the 
dead in Christ shall rise first : then we which are! 
alive and remain shall be caught up together with 
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air : and 
so shall we ever be with the Lord (I Thess. 4:16, 
17) : then men shall not part us. O my most be- 
loved wife and sister in the Lord, I herewith bid 
you adieu, and commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace ; and may the peace of God, 
which passeth all understanding, rule in your heart. 
Adieu, my dear wife, and greet much them that 
inquire after me, especially my brother, and bid him 
adieu, adieu. O adieu, my dear and much beloved 
wife. Jan Koopman and Hansken greet you most 
heartily, and aiso bid you adieu. Amen. 

THE THIRD LETTER OF JAN VAN HASEBROECK 

The abundant grace, peace and mercy from God 
the heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ His dear 
and much beloved Son our Lord, be multiplied unto 
you, with the power and communion of the Holy 
Ghost; may He strengthen, comfort and stablish 
you in the inner man, so that you may be able to 
stand firm and immovable in His truth to the end 
of your life, to His praise and to the salvation of 
your soul ; this I wish you my dear and much be- 
loved wife and sister in the Lord, as a cordial and 
friendly greeting. Amen. 


After all heartfelt greetings, my dear and much 
beloved wife, be pleased to know that I am reason- 
ably well yet according to the flesh, the Lord be 
praised forever for His grace ; and my mind is still 
unchanged to go on in that which I unworthy one 
declared and confessed in His name. I also hope to 
seal the same with my blood, and I trust that the 
Lord will help me in my last extremity ; for Paul 
says (Heb. 2:18) in that He Himself hath suffered 
[being tempted] , He is able to succor them that are 
tempted. O my dear and much beloved wife, 
be pleased to know that I was partly rejoiced, and 
partly grieved, when I heard how it is with you. 
For on account of your sickness I was sorrowful ; 
but when I heard again, that you were of such good 
cheer in your tribulation and suffering, I greatly 
rejoiced, and thanked the Lord for His great grace 
and compassion. And I humbly beseech Him from 
the depth of my heart, through Jesus Christ His 
dear Son, that He would comfort, strengthen and 
stablish you, and always guide you into His truth, 
to the end of your life. O my dear and much be- 
loved wife, always be of good cheer, and think that 
we must through much tribulation and suffering 
enter into the kingdom of God, like all the pious 
and God-fearing men that lived before our time, 
as Paul tells us (Heb. 11), that they suffered mock- 
ings, scourgings, and stoning, yea, bonds and im- 
prisonment, and died by the sword, yea, suffered 
distress and want: they went in sheepskins and 
goatskins, wandering about in deserts ; and had to 
hide in caves of the earth. Therefore, my dear 
lamb, rejoice with all the pious, of whom Paul 
says, that they took joyfully the spoiling of their 
goods, and that all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution. II Tim. 3 :12. For 
Christ Himself says : "If they have persecuted me, 
they will also persecute you ; if they have kept my 
sayings, they will keep yours also. Yea, if they have 
called the master of the House Beelzebub, -how 
much more shall they call them of his household?" 
John 15:20; Matthew 10:25. 

O my dear and much beloved wife and sister in 
the Lord, though the Lord come to visit us with 
tribulation and suffering, Paul says, that it is given 
unto us, not only to believe on His name, but also to 
suffer for it ; and as the sufferings of Christ abound 
in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 
Phil. 1 :29; II Cor. 1 :5. O my dear and much be- 
loved wife, receive willingly the chastening: of the 
Lord ; for He chasteneth everyone whom He lov- 
eth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. 
Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be 
joyous, but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it 
yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto 
them which are exercised thereby. Heb. 12:6, 11. 

O my dear and much beloved wife, herewith I 
will commend you to the Lord, and kindly ask you 
from the depth of my heart, that you would always 
do the best with my two little lambs, as I also trust 
that you will do, as you sent me word. Neverthe- 


774 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


less, I kindly ask you, that if the Lord should spare 
you until they attain to their understanding, that 
you would instruct them in the obedience of the 
truth; and always associate with them that fear 
God, so that at the last day we and they may stand 
together on the Lord's right hand, and hear His 
voice: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation 
of the world." 

O my dear and much beloved wife and sister in 
the Lord! Herewith I commend you to the Lord 
Almighty, and to the Word of His grace, and bid 
you adieu, my dear wife, adieu, and the peace of 
the Lord be with you and all them that fear Him. 
Jan Koopman and Hansken greet you much ; and 
Jan Koopman greets his wife much ; he and Hans- 
ken are also of good cheer. Amen. 

Written by me Jan van Hasebroeck, your hus- 
band and weak brother in the Lord. 


DIRK ANDRIESS, A. D. 1569 

Dirk Andriess, a pious and God-fearing brother, 
was apprehended at Zierickzee, A.D . 1569; and as 
he, in all temptations and sufferings, firmly adhered 
to the love of Christ, he was finally sentenced to 
death as a heretic, and thus, in order to follow 
Christ, who had died a bitter death for him, he also 
gladly for the Lord's sake delivered up his tempo- 
ral life to death, to enter with Him into life eternal. 
Matt. 25:46. 


JACOB DE ROORE, OR THE CHANDLER AND HER- 
MAN VAN VLECKWIJCK, BOTH BURNED ALIVE 
AT THE STAKE, AT BRUGES, IN FLANDERS, 
FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 
THE 10TH OF JUNE, A. D. 1569 

The very pleasant and favored country of Flan- 
ders, in and about the year 1569, was as a dreadful 
den of murderers, in which they did not hestitate to 
put to death the chosen friends and followers of 
Jesus Christ, yea, to deprive them little by little of 
life in the most awful and horrible manner, namely, 
by fire, to the sorrow and grief of many, who living 
at that time beheld it with weeping eyes. This ap- 
peared, among many others, in two valiant heroes, 
and champions of Jesus Christ. One of them was 
named Jacob de Roore, or the Chandler ; he was a 
teacher in the church, and a very God-fearing, 
intelligent, kind, and eloquent man, who was not 
afraid at the peril of his life to lead and feed, the 
flock of Jesus in the green meadows of the true 
evangelical doctrine, though it was in forests and 
wildernesses. The name of the other was Herman 
van Vleckwijck; he was a common member, but 
possessed nevertheless no small gifts. 

These were both brought prisoners into Bruges, 
one of the Flemish cities, where they had to en- 
dure many hard and severe temptations from the 
papists, who sought to make them apostatize from 
the faith ; but as they were founded upon the im- 


movable corner stone, Christ Jesus, the edifice of 
their faith also remained firm, and they could by 
no means be moved or swerved therefrom. Hence 
the rulers at said place, through the instigation of 
the Romish so called spirituality (clergy) con- 
cluded their process, and delivered them both from 
life to death, to be burned to ashes at the stake, 
which was done on the 10th day of the month of 
June, A.D. 1569. Concerning this the following 
verses have been composed: 

"In fifteen hundred and sixty-nine, 

On the tenth of June, in the city of Bruges, 

Encircled wholly by fiery flames, 

With intrepid spirit, both Jacob and Herman. 

Did testify before all the world 

To the word of God, which they sealed with their heart's 

blood, 
And thus their sacrifice they did bring 
To the mighty God that inhabiteth heaven." 

Of these two offered up children of God, two dis- 
putations are extant, which a certain monk, called 
Friar Cornelis held with them at said place, and 
which, because of the wise, intelligent and prudent 
answers of said two friends, are well worthy to be 
added here. 


disputation between jacob de keersgieter and 
mr. friar cornelis, a franciscan monk ; in 
the presence of mr. jan van damme, re- 
corder, and mr. michiel houwaert, 
clerk of the criminal court, on the 
9th of may, a. d. 1569* 

Friar Cornelis. Well, I've come here to see 
whether I can convert you (Jacob, I believe, is 
your name) from your false and evil belief, in 
which you are erring, and whether I cannot bring 
you back to the Catholic faith of our mother, the 
holy Roman church, from which you have aposta- 
tized to this damnable Anabaptism. What do you 
say to this, eh? 

Jacob. With your permission, as regards that I 
have an evil, false belief, this I deny; but that 
through the grace of God I have apostatized from 
your Babylonian mother, the Roman church, to the 
members, or the true church, of Christ this I con- 
fess ; and thank God for it, who has said : "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of 
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plaeues." 
Rev. 18:4; Isa. 52:11. 

Fr. Corn. Is it true? And do you call our mother 
the holy Roman church, the whore of Babylon? 
And do you call your hellish, devilish sect of Ana- 

* The following two disputations, the first between Jacob de 
Roore, or Jacob Keersgieter, and Friar Cornelis, the second be- 
tween Herman Vlekwijck and the same Fr. Cornelis, were not 
given in Van Braght's first edition of 1660, which we made the 
standard in our translation, but was added in the subsequent 
editions. Van Braght refers to these disputations and says that 
he omitted them on account of the indelicate and harsh language 
which frequently occurs in the remarks of the impolite friar We 
have omitted the worst of these expressions and have indicated 
the omissions thus * 

There are also a number of accounts of martyrs, not give in 
the edition of 1660, but inserted in the subsequent editions, which 
are also given in this translation. — Publishers 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


775 



Jacob the Candlemaker disputes with brother Cornelis and is afterward burned, AD 1569. 


baptists the members, or the true church of Christ ? 
Eh ! hear this fine fellow once. Who the devil has 
taught you this ! your accursed Menno Simons, I 
suppose, * * * 

Jac. With your permission, you talk very wick- 
edly. It was not necessary that Menno Simons 
should have taught us as something new, that the 
Babylonian whore signifies your mother, the Ro- 
man church, since John teaches us enough concern- 
ing this in his Apocalypse, or Revelation, in the 
14th, 16th, 17th, and 18th chapters. 

Fr. Corn. Ah bah! what do you understand 
about St. John's Apocalypse? at what university 
did you study ? At the loom, I suppose ; for I un- 
derstand that you were nothing but a poor weaver 
and chandler, before you went around preaching 
and rebaptizing out here in the Gruthuysbosch. I 
have attended the university at Louvain, and stud- 
ied divinity so long, and yet I do not understand 
anything at all about St. John's Apocalypse; this 
is a fact. 

Jac. Therefore Christ thanked His heavenly 
Father, that He had revealed and made it known 
to babes, and hid it from the wise of this world, as 
is written, Matt. 11 :25. 


Fr. Corn. Exactly; God has revealed it to the 
weavers at the loom, to the cobblers on their bench, 
and to bellows-menders, lantern-tinkers, scissors- 
grinders, broom makers, thatchers, and all sorts of 
riff-raff, and poor, filthy, and lousy beggars. And 
to us ecclesiastics who have studied from our youth, 
night and day, He has concealed it. Just see how 
we are tormented. You Anabaptists are certainly 
fine fellows to understand the holy Scriptures ; for 
before you are rebaptized, you can't tell A from B, 
but as soon as you are baptized, you can read and 
write. If the devil and his mother have not a hand 
in this, I do not understand any thing about you 
people. 

Jac. I can well hear that you do not understand 
our way of doing; for you ascribe to Satan the 
grace which God grants our simple converts, when 
we with all diligence teach them to read. 

Fr. Corn. See here once ; these heretics presume 
to have the grace of God, and regard our mother, 
the holy Catholic Roman church as the whore of 
Babylon — is this not a fine grace of God ? Ah, bah ! 
you have the grace of the very devil of hell. What 
shall I say in regard to this? If you regard our 
mother, the holy Catholic Roman church as the 


776 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


whore of Babylon, I can well imagine what you 
consider our holy father the pope, the vicar of God. 
Let us hear once. 

Jac. I consider the pope the vicar of God ; for he 
occupies the place of God, as Paul writes concern- 
ing him, in the second chapter of his second epistle 
to the Thessalonians : "Let no man deceive you by 
any means: for that day shall not come, except 
there come a falling away first, and that man of sin 
be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth and 
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that 
is worshiped ; so that he as God sitteth in the tem- 
ple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Re- 
member ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I 
told you these things ?" 

Fr. Corn. Hush, hush, you have preached 
enough; here you are not in the Gruthuysbosch, 
nor do I sit down to hear you preach. Bah ! you ac- 
cursed Anabaptist, would you apply the prophecy 
of St. Paul to our holy father the pope ? * * **Hear 
this accursed heretic once; how he understands 
St. Paul. Bah! St. Paul thereby means the anti- 
christ ; that he does. 

Jac. I too believe that Paul thereby means anti- 
christ. But does not the pope of Rome do the very 
works of antichrist? Does he not command you, 
that you are not to marry? Does he not command 
you to abstain from meats which God hath created 
to be received with thanksgiving of them which be- 
lieve? as Paul writes in the fourth chapter of his 
first epistle to Timothy. 

Fr. Corn. The devil sits in your cheeks ; the devil 
and his mother play with your ugly mouth, that you 
know how to twist all the holy Scriptures according 
to your heretical notions, and to turn them on your 
thumb. But just wait, I shall show you very well; 
that our holy father the pope is the vicar of God : 
for did not Christ say to St. Peter; "Feed my 
sheep;" and that upon him he would build his 
church? And did he not also give St. Peter the 
keys of heaven, and all priestly authority, to loose 
from sin, and to bind, or to remit and to retain? 
And do not the holy popes sit upon the same seat, 
as successors of St. Peter, and have the same com- 
mand and the priestly authority of the keys of 
heaven, to forgive sins and to retain them, through 
absolution after confession? What do you say to 
this now ? let us hear. 

Jac. Christ said, that upon this rock (that is, 
upon such a faith as Peter confessed, Matt. 17:16) 
He would build His church ; He said nothing about 
a seat, or of vicars, or of successors, or popes, or of 
priestly authority. 

Fr. Corn. He certainly spoke of the keys of 
heaven, and of loosing and binding. And if there 
were no pope, or high priest, nor subpriests who 
then should have the authority, to hear confession, 
to absolve, and to forgive sins? scavengers, etc., I 
suppose. 

Jac. Christ is our only true high priest, as Paul 
writes to the Hebrews, in the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 
7th, 8th, and 9th chapters. 


Fr. Corn. That is just where I wanted to have 
you; for if St. Paul thereby means that besides 
Christ no other high priests or common priests are 
necessary, why then does he say in the fourth chap- 
ter of the first epistle to the Corinthians : "I will 
that every one so account of us, as of Christ's 
priests over the sacraments of God?" that is, ad- 
minister the sacraments of the altar, of baptism, of 
confirmation, of extreme unction, of marriage, of 
confession and absolution, of penitence, and of 
consecrating and anointing priests. What do you 
hold concerning priestly estate, or the sacrament 
of the priesthood ? Let us hear. 

Jac. Next to Christ, we believers in Christ are 
all priests alike, according to the words of Peter in 
the second chapter (9th verse) of his first epistle, 
where he says to the believers in Christ : "But ye 
are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy 
nation." Again, Rev. 1:5, 6: "Christ who loved 
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, 
and hath made us kings and priests unto God and 
his Father." Again, Rev. 5:9, 10: "For thou wast 
slain, and hast redeemed us [to God] by thy blood 
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation ; and hast made us unto our God kings and 
priests." 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush ! now you begin to preach 
again, do you ? keep silence, or reply to me in re- 
gard to what St. Paul writes in the fourth chapter 
of his first epistle to the Corinthians : "I will that 
every one so account of us, as of Christ's priests 
over the sacraments of God." Answer to this.*** 

Jac. With your permission, Paul does not write 
as you say, and hence there is nothing to an- 
swer to it. 

Fr. Corn. O you cursed Anabaptist that you 
are; I could swear by the saints, that St. Paul 
writes as I say : what do you say of this accursed, 
hellish, devilish heretic? 

Jac. The Lord God forgive you this judging and 
cursing, and do not account it to your own con- 
demnation. Christ also says (Matt. 5), do not 
swear an oath; but let your communication be, 
Yea, yea, Nay, nay. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, this means that one is not to 
swear a false oath ; but what I would swear is true. 
But you Anabaptists also have the fancy, that you 
are not to swear any manner of oaths. Bah, what 
a lousy fane/ this is! I should like to hear why one 
may not swear a good oath. 

Jac. Because Christ, in Matt. 5, says : "Ye have 
heard that it hath been said to them of old time, 
Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform 
unto the Lord thine oaths; but I say unto you, 
Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is 
God's throne : nor by the earth ; for it is his foot- 
stool. But let your communication be, Yea, yea; 
Nay, nay : for whatsoever is more than these com- 
eth of evil." In like manner, also James savs, in the 
fifth chapter (v. 12) : "But above all things, my 
brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by 
the earth, neither by any other oath : but let your 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


777 


yea be yea ; and your nay, nay : lest you fall into 
condemnation." 

Fr. Corn. Is it true? in this you would follow 
St. James ; but when he in the same chapter speaks 
of the sacrament of extreme unction, saying: "Is 
any sick, call for the priests of the church, and 
cause him to be anointed ;" and also, where, in the 
same chapter, he speaks of the sacrament of con- 
fession ; herein you heretics are not willing to fol- 
low him. I have asked you once or twice, what you 
think of confession, and of the power of absolu- 
tion, or remission and retention of sins ; but you 
do not reply to me in regard to this. 

Jac. You answer yourself, saying: "Who then 
should have the authority of hearing confession, 
absolving, and forgiving sins? scavengers, etc., I 
suppose." For since you supposed the same I left 
it to you to answer. 

Fr. Corn. Well, answer me then now, what you 
think of the sacrament of confession and abso- 
lution. 

Jac. My answer is: If you would take and un- 
derstand confession (which you papists now use) 
from the fifth chapter of James, you must also con- 
fess your sins to him that confesses his sins to 
you ; for James says : "Confess your faults one to 
another." Now if I confess to you all my sins, will 
you also confess your sins to me? I think not, and 
that you yourself would much rather acknowledge 
and say, that James did not mean such a confession 
as you papists now employ. 

Fr. Corn. * * * You accursed Anabaptist that 
you are. You seek nothing but to tangle up every- 
thing that is advanced against you — the devil wags 
your tongue. But let us hear what you can say 
against this, where Christ says: "Go and shew 
yourselves to the priests." Matt. 8 :4. 

Jac. This Christ said to those whom He had 
healed and cleansed from leprosy, that they should 
go and show their bodies to the priests and let them 
see, that they were clean again, in order that they 
might go among the people again, from whom they 
had been separated on account of their leprosy. 
Matthew 8 :4 ; Luke 17:14. 

Fr. Corn. * * * Bah, it was plainly said: Go 
and confess to the priest: for so our mother the 
holy Catholic Roman church understands it. This 
was the reason why Christ gave His vicar, St. 
Peter, the keys, that he might also have the power 
to bind and loose from sin, or to forgive and to re- 
tain, after confession as I told you. Hence, answer 
me once, but in a few words, without much preach- 
ing, see ! 

Jac. From this power of the keys, which Christ 
gave Peter, it is not to be understood, that you 
priests in popery have power to forgive or to re- 
tain sin. 

Fr. Corn. Is it true? would accursed heretic say 
that the power which Christ gave His successor or 
vicar, St. Peter, does not pertain to us priests? 
What! no! do not the popes, as the successors 


of St. Peter, who sit in his seat, and we priests, 
still have the power as well as did the scribes and 
Pharisees, as the successors of Moses, who at the 
time of Christ still sat in Moses' seat? of whom 
Christ says, in the twenty-third chapter (vs. 1, 2) 
of Matthew's gospel : "The scribes and the Phari- 
ses sit in Moses' seat: all therefore whatsoever 
they bid you observe, that observe and do." What 
do you say to this, eh? Let us hear it. 

Jac. With your permission, but do not get an- 
gry; for I should have been afraid of incurring 
your abuse, if I had compared you to the scribes 
and Pharisees; but since you compare yourselves 
to them, I will reply to you. What Christ means is 
this: Whatsoever they command you to do from 
the law of Moses, that do. But He also commands 
His disciples, in Matt. 16:6, that they should be- 
ware of the leaven of the Pharisees. And though 
the Pharisees and scribes should have boasted 
themselves of the power which Moses had, as you 
priests boast of having the power which Peter re- 
ceived from Christ, of forgiving sin, who would 
have believed the Pharisees? since Christ pro- 
nounces woe over them so many times, Matt. 23 : 
"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! 
for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men : 
for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye 
them that are entering to go in. Woe unto you, 
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour 
widows' houses, and for a pretence make long 
prayers. Woe unto you," etc. 

Fr. Corn. Fie, tush, tush; hear all this preach- 
ing. Bah, I know myself quite well, that Christ 
cries woe, woe, but do you think, that I have come 
here to hear preaching? I can preach myself, that 
I can. 

Jac. Still, you desired that I should reply to your 
comparison between the authority of the Pharisees 
and that of you priests. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah! do you think you can sat- 
isfy me with such a meagre answer ? By no means 
* * * we priests do not care for this ; though the 
schibes and Pharisees were not of much account, 
their authority was none the less, on that account ; 
and just so it is also with our priestly authority, 
after confession to absolve from and forgive, or to 
retain, sin, see! 

Jac. What authority has a man that is already 
himself excluded from heaven, to help another 
into it ; for Christ says, Matt. 5 :20 : "Except your 
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the 
scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into 
the kingdom of heaven." How shall an unrighteous 
man forgive the sins of one whose righteousness is 
greater than his own? 

Fr. Corn. My lord the inquisitor wrote truly 
enough from Kortrijk, where you were born, that 
your tongue was well hung, and that it was labor 
lost to dispute against you. In troth, if you are so 
exceedingly opposed to all priestly authority, and 
say, that all men that believe, yea, even your wives 


778 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and children, are all priests, why do you have more 
episcopal authority than the other Anabaptists? 
For you are their bishop, teacher and preacher. 
You rebaptize them, lay your hands upon their 
heads, and endow them all alike with the Holy 
Ghost, as they think. Hence, let us hear what you 
yourself think of your episcopal authority ; for no 
one can lawfully administer the sacrament of con- 
firmation, unless he be a bishop, or at least a suf- 
fragan. Hence, let us hear once, how you admin- 
ister the sacrament of confirmation, and what you 
think of it. 

Jac. I know nothing to say of episcopal au- 
thority, or of confirmation. How then should I 
administer it, or what should I think of it ; for con- 
firmation is a bugbear about which I know nothing. 

Fr. Corn. Is it possible, do you Anabaptists 
call the sacrament of confirmation a bugbear ? Ah, 
accursed heretic, the devil take you into the fire 
of hell, to burn you forever ; see ! 

Jac. Do not get so angry and excited, for I call 
it a strange bugbear, because it is so unknown to 
me. But tell me what it is, and what you hold con- 
cerning it ; then I can tell you better what I think 
of it. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, this blockhead presumes to be 
a bishop of the Anabaptists, and does not yet know 
what the sacrament of confirmation is. If you are 
a bishop, you ought to confirm yourself. My lords, 
see once, what a fine bishop the Anabaptists have 
had out there in the Gruthuysbosch, who preached 
so many sermons there; is it not a fine bishop, 
teacher and preacher ? Bah, see once, with what we 
have been vexed and tormented * * * 

Jac. I am no bishop, nor do I consider myself 
a teacher; but I have sometimes led the brethren 
and sisters and converts of our church, with ex- 
hortation from the Word of God or the holy Scrip- 
tures, according to my small ability. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you are a fine leader, that you 
do not yet know the sacrament of confirmation. 
Confirmation is, that the bishop or the suffragan 
anoints the grown children, and sometimes also 
adult persons (that are not yet confirmed) with the 
holy chrism on their forehead, and gives them a 
blow on the cheek, in token that they should re- 
member that they have been confirmed ; which con- 
firmation signifies the confirmation of baptism. 
Now you will understand or know it, I think. 

Jac. Just as little as before, since I also do not 
know what chrism and the confirmation of baptism 
are. 

Fr. Corn. It seems that you know nothing con- 
cerning the Christian religion; so does the devil 
hold you by the throat. And you presume never- 
theless to be a teacher and preacher of the Ana- 
baptists. Bah, is it not a shame, that you have to 
be taught yourself yet, how children are confirmed, 
and that chrism is a substance mixed together of 
holy, consecrated things, which must not be told 
you? and that one has to teach you yet, that con- 


firmation signifies the imposition of the priest's 
hands, as the apostles laid their hands upon them 
that were baptized. Do you not yet understand it, 
blockhead that you are ? 

Jac. In the nineteenth chapter of Acts we read, 
that, after Paul had caused some Christian be- 
lievers to be baptized at Ephesus, and had then laid 
his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came down 
upon them, and they spake with tongues, and 
prophesied. Hence I do not believe that your con- 
firmation or chrism, and your blow on the cheek, 
have anything in common with the imposition of 
the hands of the apostles. 

Fr. Corn. Is it possible, so outspoken? you ac- 
cursed Anabaptist, though you do not believe it, 
the sacrament of confirmation is therefore not one 
whit worse, for we Catholics believe it so much the 
more. My lords, what do you say of this accursed 
Anabaptist? for he does not believe in anvthine 
that he don't. ' s ' 

Recorder. Suffer yourself to be instructed, 
Jacob, and believe that which a Christian ought tc 
believe, and don't argue so much. 

Jac. My lords, with your permission, I only an- 
swer to all his questions, and I believe only that 
which is written in the holy Scriptures. 

Fr. Corn. Do you? * * * for you do not be- 
lieve, that St. Paul, in the beginning of the fourth 
chapter of his first epistle to the Corinthians, 
writes : "I will that every one so account of us, as 
of priests of Christ over the sacraments of God." 
And as I said, St. James writes the same in his fifth 
chapter: "Is any sick, call for the priests of the 
church; and let them pray over him, and anoint 
him with oil in the name of the Lord." Are we 
priests then not dispensers or administrators of 
God's sacraments? and you say now, that you be- 
lieve in all that is written in the holy Scriptures. 
It remains now to be seen or heard, what you be- 
lieve concerning the sacrament of holy unction, of 
which St. James writes, as I tell you. Let us hear 
once. 

Jac. I do not believe that the anointing with oil 
of which James writes has anything in common 
with the oil with which you anoint the sick among 
you ; for the oil of which James writes healed the 
sick, as did also the oil concerning which Mark 
writes in the sixth chapter, that the apostle anoint- 
ed with oil many that were sick, and healed 
them. But however much you priests adjure and 
conjure your oil, it can nevertheless not heal the 
sick; hence, that was another oil, than your oil 
which you call a sacrament. 

Fr. Corn. A thousand devils (God bless us) 
what ails this hellish heretic now, that he makes 
sorcery of our reading, consecrating, blessing, and 
sanctifying over the sacrament of extreme unction. 
You bewitched, bedeviled, possessed Anabaptist, 
have reproved me once, because I cursed and con- 
demned you ; but I should go at you quite different- 
ly yet, in cursing, condemning and anathematizing 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


779 


you ; but you are not worthy that I should so in- 
cense and excite myself about you. Therefore I 
tell you, yes, we Catholics call holy unction a sacra- 
ment, and regard it as a sacrament, and it is a sacra- 
ment, in spite of your mouth. Do you understand 
this, you bewitched, accursed Anabaptist, that you 
are? 

Jac. If you want to imitate all the things which 
the apostles did, and regard them all as sacraments, 
why do you not also regard your aprons or hand- 
kerchiefs as sacraments, and lay them upon the 
sick, as Paul did ? For what greater sacredness was 
there in the oil of which James writes, than in 
Paul's aprons, by which he also healed the sick, 
as is written in the nineteenth chapter of the Acts 
of the apostles ? 

Fr. Corn. If the devil does not wag your tongue, 
I do not understand the matter. You accursed 
Anabaptists may yourselves make a sacrament of 
your filthy handkerchiefs or aprons ; for you peo- 
ple have no sacrament, but we Catholics have seven 
sacraments ; is it not enough, eh? 

Jac. Yea, in troth ; for since the term sacrament 
is not once mentioned in the holy Scriptures, you 
have only seven too many. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, does not St. Paul call marriage 
a sacrament? And he does not bestow too much 
honor upon marriage, when he says, in the fifth 
chapter to the Ephesians : This sacrament is great. 
Would you reject this honor, put it from you, and 
trample upon it with your feet, I suppose ? 

Jac. Paul says : "Two shall be one flesh ; this is 
a great mystery." Eph. 5:31, 32. If you want to 
make sacraments of all the mysteries, I am sur- 
prised that you have only seven sacraments. 

Fr. Corn. It is easy to hear, that you Anabap- 
tists do not esteem marriage very highly; for, if 
we priests should say, that priesthood only is a sac- 
rament, and marriage not, I think you would reply : 
Show us where priesthood is called a sacrament, 
as is marriage. But when I consider the matter 
well, you Anabaptists do not observe marriage, 
since you have the women and maidens in com- 
mon, and run together promiscuously, like dogs, 
the father with his daughter, the mother with her 
son, the brother with his sister, just like the beasts 
— is this not a fine thing ? 

Jac. With your permission, don't get incensed, 
we are slandered in regard to this. 

Fr. Corn. Ah bah ! would you deny it, what ails 
you? 

Jac. If it were true, I would not deny it; but 
this can never be said with truth of us. 

Fr. Corn. Bah! bah! this is the most aggravat- 
ing monstrosity yet. I thought you would go and 
show or prove to me from the Holy Scriptures, that 
the women may be had in common; and do you 
now want to deny it, eh! 

Jac. But should I not deny those things that are 
lies? 


Fr. Corn. This miserable Anabaptist would give 
me the lie. But do you think you can swindle me 
out of a matter which I so certainly know to be 
true? Bah, why will you deny it, seeing you have 
already so flatly denied the five sacraments, which 
is a hundred thousand times worse and more dam- 
nable, than to make common all the women and 
maidens of the whole world, that it is. 

Jac. You are very wrong in accusing us with it ; 
for it is something of which we are innocent. 

Fr. Corn. Ah bah, now it is getting to be down- 
right idiocy with this denying. I am mad and in- 
dignant enough to jump right out of my skin, that 
this accursed Anabaptist here would deny a matter 
so public, and known to all the world. Ah bah, 
I will stake my neck, that I have preached more 
than a hundred times, that you Anabaptists have 
the women and maidens in common, and that you 
also sever the marriage tie, giving to one man, 
when he is tired of his wife, another man's wife ; 
and, in like manner, to one woman, when she is 
tired of her husband, another woman's husband. 
Don't I know these things, eh? 

Jac. I have heard it said sometimes, that a cer- 
tain Friar Cornelis here, often preaches such 
things concerning us: is it you, permit me to ask? 

Fr. Corn. Yes, I am Friar Cornelis, who 
preaches such things concerning you. Just take a 
good look at me. I ought to know that I am the 
man; and I will also clearly show to you, that I 
preach it with truth ; for were they not Anabaptists 
who at Amsterdam, and elsewhere in Holland, ran 
stark naked through the streets, men and women, 
young maidens and boys, and said to one another : 
My spirit desires your flesh ; eh ? 

Jac. Those were not of our brethren; for for- 
merly there were such false brethren, as David 
Joris and Hendrick Nicolaus, who taught these 
things in secret, and said that no one might have 
anything as his own, and that therefore, no one 
might marry a wife for himself, but that women 
ought to be had in common. Others also wanted to 
prove from the Scriptures, that women that are 
unmannered or disorderly might be abandoned. 

Fr. Corn. * * * Ah; bah, why would you 
deny, that you Anabaptists have the women in 
common. They certainly were Anabaptists, who, 
at Amsterdam, forcibly took possession of the city 
hall, and who overpowered and took the city of 
Munster, and afterwards were besieged, bombard- 
ed, stormed, defeated, captured, and put to death, 
with their king, Jan Beukelss, a tailor of Leyden. 
They certainly had the women in common, yea, not 
only the women, but also the property ; yea, they 
robbed churches and convents, in Holland, Fries- 
land, and Gelderland. Why would you then say, 
that these also were not of your brethren? You 
must be an idiot, I think. 

Jac. These all belonged to the same (strange) 
false brethren; for as they taught, that women 
might not be held as own, so they also taught that 


780 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


property might not be owned individually, but was 
to be held in common, and that the property of the 
papists belonged to the Christians, and that they 
might seize it wherever they could, in order thereby 
to exterminate the ungodly with the external 
sword, and to abolish all government, in order thus 
to set up a new kingdom of Christ in this world. 
And through these this unchristian report has un- 
justly come upon us. 

Fr. Corn. Is it possible? It remains to be seen 
yet, whether this evil report has unjustly come 
upon you. If you Anabaptists also had a head, like 
the Calvinists, you would persecute, trouble, tor- 
ment, and martyrize us Catholics just as they do ; 
this I swear to you. Well, enough of this ; but that 
you would deny, that you Anabaptists have the 
women in common, this I cannot take in, or swal- 
low. You may deny, twist, sneak, dive, and cover 
up as much as you will, but you shall not swindle 
me out of it, that you shall not. 

Jac. We are not the only ones that have to bear 
this from you ; for you also often preach, I under- 
stand, that the Calvinists have the women in com- 
mon. 

Fr. Corn. And so they do ; for in the point of 
having the women in common they agree with the 
Anabaptists. Ah, bah, don't I know what the Cal- 
vinists and Calvinistresses do when they blow out 
the candles after they have held their accursed, dev- 
ilish supper. Bah, you want to teach me how to 
preach, I suppose; see. 

Jac. If this were true, it would certainly now be 
known to all the world ; for the Calvinists have had 
public churches, in which they have preached, and 
held the supper ; and if they had undertaken to put 
forth such things in them, in regard to having the 
women in common, as you say, what strange 
things would be noised abroad through everv coun- 
try. 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Anabaptist, and will 
you now also begin to upbraid me with slandering 
the accursed Calves-tails,* eh? Don't I say that 
thev do this together, after they have held their 
devil's supper when the candles have been extin- 
guished ? bah, what strange things can be said of a 
matter which no one can see ? But you Anabaptists, 
tell us something about your supper ; or don't you 
have any, I suppose, since you don't know anything 
to say about sacraments? Hence, speak, and let us 
hear: What do vou hold concerning the sacra- 
ment of the altar? 

Jac. I have never seen nor read this name in the 

holy Scriptures ; hence I can say nothing about it. 

Fr. Corn. Fie, the devil and his mother are here 

again already. How would you have it called the 

supper, as the Beggarsf call it, I suppose, eh ? 

Jac. I have read much in the holy Scriptures 
concerning the breaking of bread in remembrance 

* A term of derision chosen because of its assonance, in the 
original ("Calversteerten" and "Calversteerinnen"), to the name 
Calvinists. — Transl. 

f An opprobrious appellation for the Protestants. — Tr. 


of the broken body of Christ, Matt. 26; Mark 14; 
Luke 22; Acts 2; I Cor. 11 ; but of the sacrament 
of the altar I have never read. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you certainly have the Scrip- 
tures at your finger ends ; and because you Anabap- 
tists will read nothing but simply the holy Scrip- 
tures, therefore it is, that you never read of a sac- 
rament of the altar. For as I am informed by my 
lord, the provincial of the Augustinians, you flatly 
refuse to hear, by way of instruction, anything that 
the old fathers, or teachers of the holy Catholic 
church, write; as St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. 
Augustine, St. Gregory, St. Chrysostom, St. 
Bernard, St. Anselm, St. Bede, Doctor Sanctus, 
and many others, yea, such as are more ancient vet, 
as : Irenaeus, Cyprian, Basil, Cyril, and Tertullian. 
If you would read these, you would find the sacra- 
ment of the altar mentioned frequently by many 
different names, sometimes the eucharist, now a 
holocaust, then a sacrifice, oblation, etc. But you 
Anabaptists would far rather delve and root in the 
accursed, damnable books of your arch-heretic 
Menno Simons. And therefore you do not know 
anything of the sacrament of the altar — is this not 
a fine thing? 

Jac. We are satisfied with the simple holy Scrip- 
tures ; for all that is necessary for us to know for 
our salvation, we find abundantly contained in 
them, and we need not to search the doctrines of 
men. 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, speak and let us hear, 
whether you also believe, that Christ is truly pres- 
ent in the consecrated host with His natural flesh 
and blood? Now, do you understand it better so? 

Jac. Now I understand it much less yet, since 
nothing is taught in the holy Scriptures of a conse- 
crated host ; and therefore we also do not trouble 
ourselves with such things, but use in our church 
the memorials of the Lord's body, as I told you. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, what monsters are these memo- 
rials? This begins to sound quite Zwinglian and 
Calvinistic; and are you Anabaptists also Sacra- 
mentarians — I suppose so. Bah, what is it about 
these memorials ? Let us hear once. 

Jac. The memorials are bread and wine, which 
we use in remembrance of the body and blood of 
Christ, because Christ in His last supper commands 
us, that we are to break and eat the bread in re- 
membrance of His body, which was broken on the 
cross ; and that we are to distribute the cup with 
wine, and all drink out of it, in remembrance of His 
blood, which was shed for many, for the remission 
of sins. 

Fr. Corn. Is it possible 1 vou are fine fellows 
with your memorials. My lords, what do you think 
of this accursed, hellish devil's crew? for thev are 
Anabaptists and Sacramentarians. Bah! Jesus, 
Jesus, worthy mother of God, protect us; what 
abominableness this is ! My, my, my, oh, oh, oh, oh ! 
My lords, now you can well hear, what a Beelze- 
bub brood and hellish generation you have here in 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


781 


Flanders, in the city of Bruges, and you sometimes 
ridicule my sermons yet, when I preach against 
these accursed heretics, and say : "That lousy lit- 
tle fool, the crazy friar Cornells is always engaged 
with the heretics in his pulpit." Hear now for your- 
selves whether I have not just reason for it. And 
now listen, you Sacramentarian : Why then did 
not Christ say, "Take and eat ; this bread is a me- 
morial of my body, and this wine is a memorial of 
my blood?" But He said expressly: "Take and 
eat ; this is my body." Further : "Drink ye all out 
of this cup ; this is my blood." Answer me once in 
regard to this, * * * 

Jac. I am heartily sorry that you always get so 
incensed and excited at my answers, and that you 
do not consider, that Paul says to Titus, in the first 
chapter that a teacher must not be angry, snappish 
or contentious. 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, hold your tongue, and 
answer me without much talk or crackling. 

Jac. Christ did not mean that the apostles should 
eat His body, which the day after was crucified; 
nor drink His blood, which the next day was shed ; 
but His meaning was, that His body was food for 
the soul, and His blood drink for the soul, even as 
bread and wine are food and drink for the body ; 
hence He said : "Take and eat ; my body is this, or, 
my body is such as this bread is," namely, food. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, what madness this is ; now I 
could jump out of my skin for anger, yea, should I 
not ? For Christ did not say : "My body is this, or 
my body is such." How you heretics pervert and 
twist the naked, plain words, This is my body. 

Jac. It means the same to say : "This is my body, 
or, my body is this," when regard is had to Christ's 
true meaning ; for since His body was food, there- 
fore He took bread and said: "My body is this, or 
this is my body," namely, food. 

Fr. Corn. Is this not enough to make one crazy ? 
— God bless us again, and the worthy mother of 
God. Bah, did not Christ say : "Take and eat ; this 
is my body, which is given for you." Now, was it 
the same body, which was given them ? then it was 
not bread which He gave His apostles to eat. Let 
us hear what you will answer to this. 

Jac. Even as I answered, that Christ says, that 
the same body which was given for us is food for 
the soul, as bread is for the body of man. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, what mischief is this, and shall I 
not be able to advance something against you, by 
which I can once stop your accursed mouth? Did 
not St. Paul say, in the eleventh chapter of his first 
epistle to the Corinthians: "Whosoever shall eat 
this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, un- 
worthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of 
the Lord?" And should it be only a bit of com- 
mon, simple bread, and a draught of stale wine? 
What does St. Paul make such an exceeding great 
matter of it, and say, that a man should examine 
himself, and eat worthily of that bread, and drink 
worthily of that cup ; for he that eateth and drink- 


eth unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to 
himself, not discerning the Lord's body. Bah, you 
accursed Sacramentarian, is it still only a bit of 
common bread, or a memorial, eh? 

Jac. The unworthy eating of the bread and the 
unworthy drinking of the cup of which Paul 
writes, lies in our conscience ; for if I want to unite 
with the body of Christ, and with many brethren 
become one bread, and am at variance or in con- 
tention with any brother, I eat unworthily of that 
bread, and drink unworthily of the cup of the Lord ; 
I shall thereby be guilty of the body and blood of 
the Lord. Therefore let a man examine himself, 
how he stands with his brother ; for he that comes 
hypocritically, with a gnawing, troubled conscience, 
and eats and drinks unworthily, the same eats and 
drinks judgment to himself, not discerning that the 
body of the Lord in the breaking of the bread 
(which we break) becomes one with, or is par- 
ticipated in by us; and that the cup of blessing 
(which we bless) becomes one with, or is par- 
ticipated in by us in the blood of Christ, as Paul 
writes in the tenth chapter of the first epistle to 
the Corinthians. 

Fr. Corn. There you are caught; for if it is a 
communion or participation in the body and blood 
of Christ, it is certainly no longer bread and wine, 
I think. 

Jac. Can you not understand, that by the partici- 
pation in the broken bread we only signify and re- 
member, that through the breaking of the body of 
Christ on the cross, and through the participation 
in the cup, we are become partakers of His blood, 
and have thereby obtained communion with His 
body. As we all become partakers of, and have 
communion in, a bread which we break and eat, so 
we being many are one body with the body of 
Christ, because we all are partakers of, and have 
communion in, His body, which we signify and re- 
member, when we make ourselves partakers and 
communicants of one bread. This is the meaning of 
Paul in the tenth chapter of the first epistle to the 
Corinthians. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, now I understand clearly, 
out and out, that you Anabaptists are so wicked, 
false, vile and crafty sacramentarians, as the * * * 
calves-tails can be ; for the sacrament with you is 
nothing but a representation, signification and re- 
membrance of the body and blood of Christ, and 
only a bit of bread and a cup of wine. I * * * upon 
your bit of bread, and your cup, by which you 
would represent, signify and remember the body of 
Christ, see. 

Jac. I beg pardon, this is strange language con- 
cerning the ordinance of Christ ; for He has never- 
theless instituted the breaking of the bread and the 
drinking of the cup for our remembrance. But if 
the bread is Christ Himself, as you say, how shall 
it be to us a remembrance of Christ, who, according 
to your saying, is present there Himself? And if 
you get so angry at me, because I called the com- 


782 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


munion only bread and the cup, you must also be 
very angry at Paul, because, I Cor. 11:26, he 
writes : "As often as ye eat this bread, and drink 
this cup," etc. 

Fr. Corn. Silence! not so much talk; hold your 
tongue. For though St. Paul calls the sacrament of 
the altar so, it was nevertheless Christ Himself, as 
He was born of His blessed mother, and died on the 
cross, see. 

Jac. This is a strange notion of yours ; for if it 
is Christ Himself as He died on the cross, then it 
must also be Christ Himself as He rose from the 
dead, and ascended up to heaven. 

Fr. Corn. Yea, in troth, and as He sits at the 
right hand of His Father, see. 

Jac. Why then did Paul say to the Corinthians : 
"As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, 
shew ye the Lord's death till he come?" For if the 
bread had been Christ Himself, then the Corin- 
thians might well have said: "It is no longer nec- 
essary to show the Lord's death; for He is now 
come ; He is here ; this bread which we break and 
eat is Christ Himself." 

Fr. Corn. Bah, talk and chatter as much as you 
will; I flatly say, that the Corinthians ate Christ 
with skin and hair, as we Catholics also do, bah, 
see. 

Jac. Yet Christ says, John 16:28: "I leave the 
world, and go to the Father." Again, verse 5 : "But 
now I go my way to him that sent me." Again, 
verse 7: "Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is 
expedient for you that I go away : for if I go not 
away, the Comforter will not come unto you ; but 
if I depart, I will send him unto you." Again, verse 
10: "Because I go to the Father, and ye see me no 
more." Again, John 12 :8: Me ye have not always. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you begin to preach again, do 
you ? And do you think that you can spirit away 
and wrest from me everything? but wait, wait, I 
shall come at you in another way. It is John here, 
John there; but why do you not tell me of what 
John writes in the sixth chapter, where Christ 
says : "The bread that I will give is my flesh," eh ? 

Jac. Christ says in the same chapter, that He is 
the bread which came down from heaven. Here 
He does not speak of a bread that grows out of the 
earth. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, is this not a wicked, vile, crafty 
and cunning heretic ; for hear how the devil wags 
his accursed tongue, my, my, my 1 

Jac. Yet I do not say anything but what Christ 
Himself says and means; for these are His own 
words, throughout the whole chapter: "Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that 
bread from heaven ; but my Father giveth you the 
true bread from heaven. For the bread of God is 
He which cometh down from heaven, and giveth 
life unto the world." Again: "I am the bread of 
life." Again: "Your fathers did eat manna in the 
wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which 
cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat 
thereof and not die. I am the living bread which 


came down from heaven: if any man eat of this 
bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that I 
will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life 
of the world." Again, "Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, 
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. He 
that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwell- 
eth in me, and I in him." Again: "When Jesus 
knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, 
he said unto them, Doth this offend you ? what and 
if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he 
was before? It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the 
flesh proriteth nothing : the words that I speak unto 
you, they are spirit, and they are life. John 6." 

From all these words of Christ we are to under- 
stand, that by eating His flesh He means nothing 
else but His Word, or His doctrine, by which we 
attain to the faith, without which faith in Him we 
cannot be saved, and live forever. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, are you done preaching now, eh? 
Did it not seem to you that you were standing in 
the Gruthuysbusch and preached, eh ? But, Oh, you 
audacious heretic, show it more fully, that Christ 
means nothing else by this eating of His flesh, than 
His Word or doctrine. Bah, would you array your- 
self against the holy council of Trent? For there 
all the cardinals, bishops and fathers understood 
these words of Christ with reference to the worthy 
sacrament of the altar. Hence, let us hear, how you 
will prove the contrary, you accursed Anabaptist 
and Sacramentarian that you are. 

Jac. You have heard, that Christ in His sermon 
said to the Jews: "The bread of God is he which 
cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the 
world. I am that bread of life : if any man eat of 
this bread, he shall live forever. He that eateth my 
flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and 
I in him." Now you must understand, that if Christ 
by this bread, or by this flesh, meant His natural 
body, as you say, all men to whom you, according 
to your saying, give it to eat, would live forever, 
and none of them would be damned ; for if they had 
once eaten it, they would dwell in Christ and Christ 
would dwell in them. 

Fr Corn. Bah, hear once, my lords, is it not as- 
tonishing, how this lousy weaver, this chandler 
comes by this great wisdom. Bah I this filthy * * * 
bishop, Jacob, would be wiser than all our holy 
cardinals, bishops, and theologians, or doctors of 
divinity, who, in the holy council of Trent, by the 
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, unanimously con- 
cluded, that all the words of Christ, in the sixth 
chapter of St. John are to be understood with ref- 
erence to the holy, worthy sacrament of the altar 
And now this * * * bishop Jacob the weaver would 
like to make us believe, that Christ by His blood 
meant nothing else than His Word and preaching • 
is this not a fine thing? 

Clerk of the criminal court. Suffer yourself to 
be instructed, Jacob, and do not argue so much. 

Recorder. I also desire this of you, Jacob, and 
do not rely so much upon your own wisdom. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


783 


Jac. I beg your pardon, my lords, I do not rely 
upon my own wisdom, but I rely upon the words 
of Christ. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, do you ? bah, you do what I will 
not mention. Bah, you cunning, vile, crafty heretic 
in quoting the words of Christ, you have very slyly 
left out, and omitted to say, that in the same chap- 
ter He also says : "My flesh is meat indeed, and my 
blood is drink indeed." Bah, do you think you can 
deceive us by such rascality, eh? 

Jac. I have not omitted these words of Christ 
from craftiness or rascality, but they did not enter 
my mind; and it is not necessary for me to omit 
these words, since they tend to confirm the answer 
I gave you. Namely, if Christ by the eating and 
drinking means His own natural flesh and blood, 
as you say, they will all live forever, and not die, 
or be damned, who have once eaten and drunk in 
your church, no matter what evil-doers they may 
be ; for you deny the sacrament of the altar to no 
one ; every one that comes partakes of it, and there 
also come drunkards, gluttons, misers, cheats, 
swearers, blasphemers, contentious, envious, and 
unrighteous persons, whores, rogues, adulterers, 
murderers, and many other wicked people, con- 
cerning whom Paul says, I Cor. 6:10; Gal. 5:21, 
that they shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, but those who first confess them- 
selves, and are absolved by the priest, and then 
worthily receive the holy sacrament, they will live 
forever, see. 

Jac. Christ does not speak here of eating and 
drinking worthily or unworthily ; but He says, that 
all who eat this flesh, and drink this blood shall live 
forever. 

Fr. Corn. But St. Paul speaks about eating and 
drinking the body and blood of Christ unworthily, 
to the Corinthians, in the eleventh chapter of his 
first epistle, see there once. 

Jac. Hence the breaking of bread of which Paul 
writes, in another ordinance of Christ, different 
from this. 

Fr. Corn. But you blockheaded bishop, Christ 
with these words, in John 6, did not yet institute 
the sacrament of the altar, but promised to institute 
it; saying: "The bread that I will give [that is, 
which He will give when He institutes the mass at 
His last supper] is my flesh, and the cup of wine 
which I will give is my blood," not wine nor any 
substance of wine; so the bread also is no sub- 
stance of bread ; but my flesh, which I will give for 
the life of the world. Bah, now where are you? 
what can you reply to this ? now you are caught. 

Jac. In regard to this, I reply again, that if 
Christ means such flesh as you according to your 
saying, give men to eat, not one of these will die or 
be damned, according to the words of Christ, but 
they will all live forever. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, for this reason I again ask you, 
for whom confession and absolution are instituted ? 
for the pigs, I suppose, eh? 


Jac. You may very likely suppose this. The 
blood of Christ was shed for men for the remission 
of sins, as He says in His last supper, which you 
now begin to call the institution of the mass. Mat- 
thew 26:28. 

Fr. Corn. Yes, the supper was the institution of 
the mass in spite of your teeth. Let us hear once, 
what you think of the mass. 

Jac. Is your mass as something different yet, 
than your sacrament of the altar ? 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, you are a preacher, a teach- 
er, yea, a bishop (though you deny it) of the Ana- 
baptists, and do not know yet, that the mass is 
something different than the sacrament of the altar. 
Bah! shame upon you. * * * 

Jac. Alas ! because these are all things which are 
neither mentioned nor known in the holy Scrip- 
tures therefore I do not understand them. 

Fr. Corn. * * * Though they are things which 
are not so named in the holy Scriptures, they are 
nevertheless known in the Scriptures ; for the mass 
is a sacrifice or offering, in which the priest sacri- 
fices and offers up the real flesh and blood of Christ 
for the living, and for the dead, or for the souls 
that are in purgatory. Bah, do you understand now 
what the mass is, eh! 

Jac. I do not believe that you can sacrifice and 
offer up Christ again. But I believe, that Christ 
Himself was an offering on the cross for the liv- 
ing and the dead : for Paul writes to the Hebrews, 
in the ninth chapter, that Christ by His own blood 
entered in once into the holy place, having obtained 
eternal redemption for us. "For if the blood of 
bulls and of goats, [and the ashes of a heifer] 
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying 
of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of 
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered him- 
self without spot to God, purge our conscience 
from dead works, to serve the living God?" 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you have preached enough now ; 
for my head begins to ache severely from it. Hence 
let us now dispute about Anabaptism and infant 
baptism, and be done with it. Speak, and let us 
hear why the sacrament of baptism is not necessary 
to children for their salvation, as you Anabaptists 
preach and teach; though ill betide you. 

Jac. Christ says, Mark 16:16: "He that be- 
lieveth and is baptized shall be saved : but he that 
believeth not shall be damned." Now if one of the 
two were necessary to children for their salvation, 
faith is more necessary to them for salvation than 
baptism. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? and would you thus exclude 
from heaven all the poor, innocent children that die 
unbaptized in original sin ? and would you relegate 
them with so many hundred thousand millions to 
hell into eternal perdition, eh? 

Jac. No, we do not want to do this ; for we be- 
lieve that infants are nevertheless saved, though 
they die unbaptized; for they are baptized and 
cleansed in the blood of Jesus Christ, as John says, 
in the first chapter (v. 7) of his first epistle : "The 


784 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanseth us from all 
sin." Christ, also (Matt. 19:14) says: "For of 
such is the kingdom of heaven." 

Fr. Corn. Yes, if they are first washed and 
cleansed by baptism from original sin which they 
have inherited from Adam ; otherwise they go to 
the devil, into perdition, see. 

Jac. Paul writes to the Corinthians, in his first 
epistle, in the fifteenth chapter (v. 22) : "As in 
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made 
alive." Again, to the Romans, in the fifth chapter 
(verses 12, 15) ; "As by one man sin entered into 
the world, and death by sin ; so grace hath abound- 
ed by Jesus Christ." 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, tush, much talk and little 
information, these are all things that do not con- 
cern unbaptized and uncircumcised children. 
Hence I tell you plainly, that all the children that 
in the Old Testament died without circumcision, 
and now in the New Testament without baptism, 
and will yet die, are damned; and he that says 
otherwise is a heretic. But now, since you Ana- 
baptists so little esteem baptism, that you allow 
children to die unbaptized, thinking that they will 
be saved nevertheless, why then do you who have 
been baptized once have yourselves rebaptized, and 
teach others, that they must also suffer themselves 
to be rebaptized, if they would be saved. Ah, bah, 
is this not a hellish, devilish madness ; frenzy, de- 
monianism, and fascination ? * * * 

Jac. We, according to the command of Christ, 
baptize the believing, but you, contrary to His 
commands, baptize the unbelieving. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed, Anabaptist? Bah, though the 
children are not believing, they must nevertheless 
be baptized, if they are to be saved ; for in the third 
chapter of St. John's Gospel we read that Christ 
said to Nicodemus: "Verily, verily, except every 
man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God." Bah, is 
this not saying plainly enough, that children must 
be baptized, though they are yet unbelieving ? why 
then would you Anabaptists upbraid us by saying 
that we baptize the unbelieving, and that you bap- 
tize the believing? Ha! accursed Anabaptist that 

you are! Bah, answer me now in regard to this. 
* * * ° 

Jac. Water baptism signifies the washing of re- 
generation in which Christ baptizes with the Spirit, 
as John the Baptist said, Mark 1 : "I have baptized 
you with water; but one that cometh after me shall 
baptize you with the Holy Ghost." Also in Mat- 
thew 3, and Luke 3, we read : "He shall baptize you 
with the Holy 'Ghost and with fire." Again, John 
1 :33. "But he that sent me to baptize with water, 
the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see 
the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the 
same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." 
From this we can hear and understand, that water 
baptism does not give an entrance into the kingdom 
of God, but only the baptism by the Holy Ghost 
with which Christ baptizes. 


Fr. Corn. Bah, in this you lie, you Anabaptist, 
with your accursed mouth, for Christ says : "Of 
water and of the Spirit;" hence the baptism of the 
Holy Ghost does not alone make the entrance into 
the kingdom of God, but the water and of the 
Spirit, see, 

Jac. Then I must ask you, whether none were 
ever baptized by God and by Christ in the Holy 
Ghost, without water? 

Fr. Corn. What a devilish question this is ; bah, 
who is there that could answer to such an accursed 
question ? Bah, see once, with what this * * * bish- 
op, Jacob the weaver, does now come to vex and 
torment us. Bah, answer yourself. 

Jac. Well then, when Christ saw and heard, that 
Nicodemus was so greatly astonished at the words 
which He spake to him, and that Nicodemus could 
not understand His words, and asked, how these 
things^ were possible, Christ answered him and 
said : "Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not 
these things ?" From these words of Christ we can 
understand, that Christ did not speak of baptism, 
but that He spoke to him of things that were com- 
prehended in the law of the Israelites, namely, the 
regeneration by the Holy Ghost, in which all the 
holy fathers and elect of God, before the coming of 
Christ, were regenerated or baptized. For if Christ 
had spoken of water baptism, as you papists think, 
Nicodemus might have said to Christ: "I have 
never read of a water baptism in the whole law." 
But now Christ spoke to him of things that were 
written in the law, or in the holy Scriptures of the 
Old Testament, though He called them by another 
name, namely, a regeneration of the water and of 
the Spirit, though the Holy Ghost is therein called 
a water. But Christ thereby wanted to prove to 
Nicodemus, in order to astonish him in regard to a 
matter which he ought to have known and under- 
stood very well, since he was a master of Israel. 
Behold for this reason the regeneration in which 
Lhnst baptized with the Holy Ghost is only sig- 
nified by the outward baptism of water. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, Jesus, Jesus, how well you can 
talk, how well your tongue is hung! Bah, never in 
all my life did I hear the Scriptures expounded so 
strangely, contrary to the views of our mother, 
the holy Catholic Roman church, and the ancient 
teachers and fathers. Bah, now I am not sur- 
prised, that the Anabaptists have made you their 
teacher, preacher and bishop ; for to hear such ser- 
mons, the people of Bruges ran at so tremendous 
a rate to the Gruthuysbosch. But I must ask you 
one more question: When you Anabaptists have 
children that remain simple or idiots, and they 
grow to be twenty, thirty, forty, yea, eighty, or 
ninety years old, do you allow them to die unbap- 
tized, because they cannot comprehend your belief 
and doctrine? for one that remains all his life sim- 
ple, or an idiot, can certainly not be taught What 
do you do with them at any rate? let us hear once 
but briefly; for your long talk begins to be very 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


785 


irksome to these good sirs, as well as to me, and 
it is getting late, and I am tired, that I am. 

Jac. To such innocent, simple and childish per- 
sons belongs the kingdom of heaven, as Christ says, 
Matt. 19:14. 

Fr. Corn. Bah ! tush, tush, tush ! I say that it is 
not necessary to teach men first their confession of 
faith, before they are baptized, as you Anabaptists 
teach and do, when you baptize, or rebaptize ; for 
though the infants are unlearned in the Christian 
faith, we Catholics baptize them upon the faith of 
the holy church, and because they have believing 
parents; therefore they need not be taught first, 
that they need not. 

Jac. Yet Christ says, in the sixteenth chapter of 
Mark ; "Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved." Here certainly preaching 
and believing are mentioned before baptizing. 
Again, Matt. 28, Christ says: "Go ye therefore, 
and teach all nations, baptizing them," etc. Here 
certainly teaching is mentioned before baptizing. 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush! you are beginning to 
preach again, are you ? Hence one more question, 
and then enough. In good faith, if an unbaptized 
person of your Anabaptistic church were instructed 
far enough in your devil's faith, to receive baptism, 
and he should come to be baptized, and should be- 
come so sick and faint as to lose all self-conscious- 
ness, and could therefore not confess his faith be- 
fore or in baptism, would you also suffer him to die 
unbaptized, I suppose you would ? hence your non- 
sense and twiddle-twaddle deserve no respect or 
regard. 

Jac. Though he should die in that faintness, un- 
baptized, he would be saved through his faith ; for 
Christ (Mark 16:16) says: "But he that believeth 
not shall be damned." 

Fr. Corn. Well, I have no desire to dispute any 
longer with you. I shall go my way, and let the 
executioner dispute with you, with a burning fag- 
ot * * * and afterwards the devil in hell, with burn- 
ing pitch, brimstone and tar, see. 

Jac. No; for Paul writes (II Cor. 5:1): "If 
our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, 
we have a building of God, a house not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens." 

Fr. Corn. Bah ! in hell, in hell. Expect nothing 
else than to go through this temporal fire into the 
eternal; hell yawns and gasps for your soul, you 
accursed, damned Anabaptist that you are, see. 


DISPUTATION BETWEEN HERMAN VLECKWIJK, IM- 
PRISONED BY THE LORDS OF THE COUNTRY VAN 
DEN VRYE IN BRUGES, AND FRIAR CORNELIS, 
IN THE PRESENCE OF MR. JAN VAN DAM, ON 
THE 10th OF MAY, A. D. 1569 

Fr. Corn. I would say, Good-day, Herman; but 
I am quite wrought up and angry yet from yester- 
day, at your accursed hedge-preacher, or teacher, 
who has so wickedly seduced, deceived, crazed, be- 


deviled and bewitched you and your fellow Ana- 
baptists by his damnable, hellish, Anabaptistic her- 
esies, out there in the miserable Gruthuysbosch. 
Hence I must now come here and try whether I 
can draw you away again from this Anabaptism, 
and convert you to our Catholic Christian faith; 
have you a mind for it, or not ? Let us hear now. 

Herm. To judge from your speaking, I should 
think that you are angry, and if you had not told 
me yourself, I would have thought, that you wanted 
to frighten me. But why are you so angry at that 
friendly, pleasant man, who I think did not give 
you one hard word? 

Fr. Corn. He nevertheless called me a papist 
once or twice ; but I do not care * * * for that ; but 
I am very angry that he would in no wise suffer 
himself to be converted from his accursed Anabap- 
tism and all other accursed heresies, in regard to 
which I have spent so much labor in vain ; and the 
most vexatious of all is, that though I so well 
showed, and convinced him of, his bad, evil, wick- 
ed, false, heretical faith, as these good lords have 
well heard, it was all of no avail ; ill betide him. 

Herm. I think, that he nevertheless clearly 
showed you with the holy Scriptures, that his faith 
is in Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; 
whereby then could you show him, that his faith is 
bad, evil, wicked, false, and heretical, as you say? 

Fr. Corn. Fie, alas ! I already hear by this an- 
swer, that I shall win no laurels in the way of con- 
verting you. But in good faith, do you people think 
it enough, only to believe in Jesus Christ? Ah, 
bah, all the devils of hell believe in Jesus Christ; 
bah, see here now, what we are tormented with. 
Bah, you ought to, and must also, on pain of the 
damnation of your soul, believe in all the other arti- 
cles of the Christian faith, and the excellent, holy 
institutions of our mother the holy Roman Church, 
which by our holy fathers, the popes, have in all 
general holy councils, been ordained and decreed to 
be believed and observed. But you Anabaptists 
neither believe nor observe anything of them, ex- 
cept it be very plainly stated in the holy Scriptures ; 
for if there are any matters contained in the Scrip- 
tures, that seem somewhat obscure to you, you will 
by no means believe them ; as, for instance, all that 
is contained in the holy Scriptures concerning 
prayer for the refreshing and deliverance of the 
souls in purgatory ; nor all that is said in them re- 
specting the seven sacraments; nor all that they 
say concerning priestly authority; nor all that is 
found in them regarding the transubstantiation, or 
change, of the bread and wine into the real flesh 
and blood of Jesus Christ, in the Sacrament of the 
altar ; nor all that they contain concerning the per- 
petual virginity and purity of Mary, the blessed 
mother of God. No, these and very many other 
holy articles you will not believe ; yea, what is still 
more abominable, the worthy blessed mother of 
God, whom you ought and are in duty bound to 
honor, serve, invoke, and entreat, that she would 
intercede for you with her dear Son, her you Ana- 


786 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


baptists do not esteem better than your filthy, * * * 
sinful wives. And in like manner you despise and 
reject all the holy saints and saintesses whom you 
ought to honor, fast to them, celebrate, invoke, and 
entreat, that they would stand as advocates or me- 
diators between God and you, and intercede for 
you ; bah ! is this not a fine thing ? Bah, you are si- 
lent : answer me, why you heretics bear such enmity 
and hatred to the worthy, blessed mother of God, 
and to all God's saints ; let us hear now. 

Herm. That we should hate Mary the mother of 
Jesus Christ, and the saints of God, this be far 
from us; but that we do not invoke and entreat 
them that they should stand as advocates or me- 
diators between God and us, this is because John, 
in the second chapter of his first epistle says : "If 
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous : and he is the propitia- 
tion for our sins : and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world." In like manner, Paul 
writes to Timothy, in the second chapter of his first 
epistle: "There is one God, and one mediator be- 
tween God and man, the man Christ Jesus : who 
gave himself a ransom for all." In the same man- 
ner he also writes to the Hebrews, in the ninth 
chapter. But we do not hate our enemies ; how then 
should we hate God's saints, our fellow brethren 
and sisters in the Lord ? 

Fr. Corn. Indeed ? if they are your fellow breth- 
ren and sisters in the Lord, why then do you bear 
such enmity and hatred to them, that you help burn 
or destroy their relics or bones, and break their 
images to pieces, wherever you have been able to 
get at them ? is this not a fine brotherhood and sis- 
terhood? accursed Anabaptists that you are. 

Herm. We do not meddle with your affairs ; if 
you would leave us alone in our faith and in our 
walk and conversation, as we leave you alone in 
your religion, and with your images, relics or dead 
men's bones, your hands would remain unstained 
with and innocent of our blood. But you genera- 
tion of Cain first killed the saints of God, and then 
take them to exalt and honor them with fasting and 
celebrating, and erect to them idolatrous images, 
which they themselves despised and rejected, and 
you honor their bones, as Christ says, Luke 1 1 :47 : 
"Woe unto you ! for ye build the sepulchres of the 
prophets : and your fathers killed them." Truly ye 
bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fa- 
thers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build 
their sepulchres. Therefore also saith the wisdom 
of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, and 
some of them they shall slay and persecute: that 
the blood of all the prophets [which was shed from 
the foundation of the world], may be required of 
this generation ; from the blood of Abel. Matt. 23. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah! would you * * * accursed 
Anabaptists compare yourself to the prophets. 
apostles, and to God's holy martyrs, popes and 
priests, whose blood was shed for the Catholic, 
Christian faith, of which you Anabaptists are now 
such enemies, that you through the rejection of the 


sacrament of the priesthood reject, not only the 
six other sacraments, and all our Christian cere- 
monies and acts of worship, but also all the articles 
of the Christian, Catholic faith, as I have said; 
therefore you are put to death ; do you understand 
this, you uncouth, blockheaded Anabaptist that you 
are? 

Herm. However uncouth and blockheaded I am, 
I understand very well that you put us to death be- 
cause we do not believe or observe these popish, or 
Romish, church articles, part of which you have 
mentioned. And you think that you do God service 
by killing us for it, as Christ says (John 16:2, 3) : 
"They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, 
the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will 
think that he doeth God service. And these things 
will they do unto you, because they have not known 
the Father, nor me." 

Fr. Com. Bah! you bewitched and devil-pos- 
sessed Anabaptists, would you also fain claim this 
for your side, would you? Bah, and would you 
charge and upbraid us priests and Catholics with 
such things, would you? Bah, and would you also 
say that we priests know neither God nor His Son 
Jesus Christ, would you? Ah, bah! who knows 
God and Jesus Christ better than we Catholic 
priests? Hence this is all spoken concerning the 
Jewish priests, and concerning the Anabaptists, 
Calvimsts, Lutherans, and other heretics, who in 
France and Spain in these lands and elsewhere, so 
tyrannically persecute, trouble, torment, and mar- 
tyrize us priests, because we have the true knowl- 
edge of God and Christ, see. 

Herm. It is to be feared that Christ will not 
know you, though you think that you know Him 
so very well ; for you are of so many different or- 
ders and rules. You are a Franciscan, the other an 
Augustmian, the other a Carmelite, the other a 
Jacobine or Dominican, the other a Benedictine; 
yea, innumerable are the orders and sects into 
which you are divided, and each has its special cer- 
emonies and rules, according to which he must live, 
of which not a word is found in the teaching of 
Christ ; how then shall He know you ! 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? you hellish, devilish Anabap- 
tist, though we are so diverse in regard to orders, 
rules and ceremonies, are we ecclesiastics not all 
comprehended in one sacrament of priesthood, eh? 

Herm. Your sacrament of priesthood is never- 
theless an article like all the other articles of your 
faith, of which nothing is found written in the 
holy Scriptures, hence I have no knowledge of 
nor faith in it. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, you accursed Anabaptist, answer 
me then, why God the Father should not be willing 
to know us, who are His priests, for do we not 
daily, in the mass, offer up His Son Jesus Christ, 
in flesh and blood? Bah, whom should they both 
know better than us, their priests ? What will you 
say now, eh ? 

Herm. How shall I here tell you the secret of the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


787 


mass? I do not myself know it; but you know it 
very well. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed ? if you do not know the secret 
of the mass, how comes it then that you heretics 
undertake to describe such an accursed "Death-bed 
of the mass ?" in which it says, that the mass, as it 
were, is lying sick of a putrid ulcer, which she has 
in her canon, and of which she will have to die. 
Bah ! and do you accursed heretics then not know 
the secret of the mass, as you call it ? Bah ! may the 
devil skin you with the "Death-bed of the mass," 
accursed Anabaptists that you are. 

Herm. We have not composed or written the 
book of the "Death-bed of the mass," and do you 
take it so ill that I speak of the secret of the mass ? 
is it not a common saying, also among the papists 
when they are asked in regard to something which 
they do not wish to tell, they generally answer : "I 
do not want to tell the secret of the mass." 

Fr. Corn. Bah! the devil and his mother have 
introduced this saying among the laity. I would 
that all who use it would sink together through the 
earth into the abyss of hell, that I would. 

Recorder. O father Cornelis, the people say it 
without thinking any evil by it ; I have frequently 
heard priests say it, and to confess the truth, I have 
often said it myself, without any evil thought or re- 
flection. 

Fr. Corn. Well, it is enough of it ; but, you Ana- 
baptist, answer me whether you believe, that the 
real flesh and blood of Christ Jesus are offered up 
by us priests in the mass, let us hear. 

Herm. You must ask me concerning things that 
are contained in the holy Scriptures ; for I have not 
studied your faith or religion. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? You crazy, bedeviled Ana- 
baptist, and would you only be asked concerning 
things that are expressly contained in the holy 
Scriptures ? Come on then, now I will soundly ask 
you in regard to things that are most clearly con- 
tained in the holy Scriptures. Bah! I have heard 
it said, that you have grown-up children running 
about at home, that are still unbaptized, neverthe- 
less Christ, in the third chapter of John, says to 
Nicodemus: "Verily, verily, except every man be 
born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot en- 
ter into the kingdom of God." Bah, is this not 
something that is contained in the holy Scriptures, 
eh? 

Herm. When the apostles, according to the com- 
mand of Christ (Matt. 28), went and taught all 
nations to believe in Jesus Christ before they bap- 
tize them, did the converts to the faith, in the mean- 
time, while they were being instructed, also go 
about unbaptized at home? 

Fr. Corn. Bah, and if your children should die in 
the meantime, would they not go to the devil in 
hell, I suppose ? 

Herm. No, no more than the children or con- 
verts to the faith in the time of the apostles. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, Bah! that was another thing; 
those children were circumcised, and thereby they 


were saved, though they died unbaptized ; bah, here 
you are in a corner, happen what will, yes, yes, 
yes! 

Herm. Those children were not all circumcised ; 
for the faith in Jesus Christ was preached and 
taught also among the uncircumcised Gentiles; 
now I am out of the corner again. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed ? I shall put you in the corner 
again. Bah ! as the children of the uncircumcised 
Gentiles, that died without baptism, went to the 
devil, so your children that die without baptism also 
go into eternal perdition ; do you understand this ? 

Herm. Our children that die before baptism cer- 
tainly do not go into eternal perdition, any more 
than did the children of the Old Testament, that 
died uncircumcised before the eighth day. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah! do you think that the chil- 
dren of the Old Testament, that died uncircum- 
cised before the eighth day, are saved? bah, this 
were a fine thing. 

Herm. Yes, this we think, without once doubt- 
ing it, and I am surprised to hear you doubt it. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, what do you make of the orig- 
inal sin then, which the children inherit from Adam 
and Eve, eh ? 

Herm. What do you make of the death of 
Christ? for John the Baptist said: "Behold, the 
Lamb of God, which beareth away the sin of the 
world." John 1 :29. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, Christ bears away all the sin of 
the world, as you Anabaptists understand, think 
and believe. Bah, who then shall be damned? no 
one, I suppose. 

Herm. Christ says in the sixteenth chapter of 
Mark: "He that believeth not shall be damned;" 
but He nowhere says: "He that is not baptized 
(understand, in infancy) shall be damned." 

Fr. Corn. Bah, here you lie with your vile, false, 
lying mouth ; for did I not tell you, that in the third 
chapter of St. John it is written, that Christ said to 
Nicodemus: "Verily, verily, except every man be 
born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot en- 
ter into the kingdom of God?" bah! here I have 
certainly cornered you, have I not, eh ? 

Herm. No; for Christ there speaks of no ex- 
ternal baptism, nor does He mention baptism ; but 
He speaks of the regeneration which is performed 
by the Spirit of God, who is sometimes also called 
a water in the holy Scriptures. For thus says the 
Lord by the prophet Isaiah in the forty-fourth 
chapter (v. 3) : "I will pour water upon him that 
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will 
pour my Spirit upon thy seed." Again, by the 
prophet Ezekiel, in the thirty-sixth chapter (verses 
25, 26) : "I will sprinkle clean water upon you, 
and ye shall be clean : from all your filthiness, and 
from -dl your idols, will I cleanse you. A new 
heart aiso will I give you, and a new Spirit will I 
put within you." Again, in the thirty-ninth chapter 
(v. 29), the Lord says by Ezekiel: "I have poured 
out my Spirit upon the house of Israel." Again, by 
the prophet Joel, in the second chapter (v. 28) : 


788 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


"Then will I pour out my Spirit upon all flesh," 
etc. 

Fr. Corn. Well, all this is done through the sac- 
rament of baptism, when the children are baptized ; 
for then the devil is exercised by the priest, and 
they are cleansed from the original sin, inherited 
from Adam and Eve, and they obtain a new heart 
and a new spirit ; bah, thus does God pour or shed 
His Spirit upon all flesh; you will not cheat me 
out of this — you are cornered and remain cornered, 
see! 

Herm. I tell you again, that Christ, when He 
talked with Nicodemus, meant such a regeneration 
as does not concern external baptism, nor does it 
children; but it concerns the true believers in 
Christ, who are begotten according to the will of 
God, by the word of truth, as James says in the 
first chapter. Again, Peter, in the first chapter of 
his first epistle, says : "See that you love one an- 
other with a pure heart fervently: being born 
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 
by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for- 
ever." Of similar Scriptures which do not con- 
cern little children or external baptism, there are 
more yet. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, but if the regeneration of water 
and of the Spirit does not concern children, they 
must certainly and unmistakably go to the devil; 
for you acknowledge yourself, that he who does 
not believe will be damned. Bah, children do cer- 
tainly not believe as you also say. And when they 
besides remain unbaptized, and die thus, they must 
surely be damned; for by what other way could 
they be saved, eh ? 

Herm. By the death of Christ, as I have told 
you. And Christ also says (Matt. 5:18, 19), that 
to such belongs the kingdom of heaven. 

Fr. Corn. Yes, these are the same arguments 
with which your hedge-preacher yesterday made 
my spleen run over. Bah, what does all this dis- 
puting and arguing amount to ; if you would suffer 
yourself to be converted, you must be willing to be 
taught, and brought to the Catholic, Christian faith 
of our mother, the holy Roman church, and to her 
baptism and religion. Bah, why will you trust so 
much in the heresies of that damned arch-heretic, 
Menno Simons, and so firmly rely upon this be- 
witched hedge-preacher? Bah, why do you not 
believe me as well as that Menno Simons ? for I am 
as learned, and have read as much, and certainly 
much more, as this * * * bishop, Jacob the weaver, 
and as a Dietrick Phillips, and an Ubbo Frisius, 
and such devil's brood, I suppose, eh? 

Herm. I trust (or build) not upon Menno Si- 
mons, nor upon any man; for the prophet Jer- 
emiah says in his seventeenth chapter (v. 5) : 
"Thus saith the Lord: Cursed be the man that 
trusteth in man." 

Fr. Corn. This is very true ; in this you say very 
well, see ; if you begin to talk like this, I feel quite 
hopeful, that I will convert you with the help of 
God, from this miserable Anabaptism. So I will 


first prevail upon you, to renounce the same, and 
to have your unbaptized children baptized in the 
Catholic church, by a priest, as a good Christian 
is in duty bound to do, see. Well, Herman, what 
think you of this, eh ? 

Herm. I do not think that you are the man that 
will convert me to your mother, the Roman church, 
or who will bring me to it, that I shall have my un- 
baptized children baptized in the papistic church. 

Fr. Corn. Ah bah, how do you talk in this strain 
again; a thousand devils (God bless us), what has 
come over you ? It seems, as though he would trust 
no longer in Menno Simons, nor in any other man ; 
but as soon as I begin with kindness and friendli- 
ness to admonish him to renounce Anabaptism, 
and to have his unbaptized children baptized in our 
Catholic church, he instantly pipes another tune. 
Is this not a fine thing? If you will not be con- 
verted, and have your unbaptized children baptized 
in our church, after the Catholic rite, you can be 
burned alive at the stake, see. 

Herm. This you papists could also do just as 
well, even if I turned from my faith, and had my 
unbaptized children baptized in your church. 

Fr. Corn. Be sure, we could ; but we would give 
you the sword. If you will suffer yourself to be 
converted with kindness. I insure you the sword, 
that I do. 

Herm. For what purpose should you give me 
a sword? it would be of no use to me, for we use 
no swords. 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, tush! you well under- 
stand what I mean by it : you would only be be- 
headed with the sword, see. 

Herm. After I should have truly and un- 
feignedly confessed, that I had erred in the faith, 
and after I should have my unbaptized 'children 
baptized in your church, would I then, according to 
your saying or meaning, not be a good, upright 
Christian ? 

Fr. Corn. Jesus, yes, Herman, and should you 
not in every manner, yes, you, faithful Herman, 
be as good a Christian as any one can be? This is 
what I like to hear, see. 

Herm. And would you papists make no sin of it, 
to shed the blood of such a good, upright Chris- 
tian? 

Fr. Corn. Fie, tush, tush, tush, bah, is it noth- 
ing else ? You would have to die nevertheless, be- 
cause of your having apostatized from the Catholic 
Christian faith, and having yourself rebaptized, see. 

Herm. The shepherd of the hundred sheep, of 
whom Christ speaks in the fifteenth chapter of 
Luke, did nevertheless not cut the throat of the lost 
or strayed sheep, when He had found it ; but He 
laid it upon His shoulders, and carried it home re- 
joicing. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah! what is the use of all this 
raving and prating? if you want to be converted, 
be converted, and recant; what shall I say of this? 
Bah, I should sooner convert the devil in hell and 
his mother, than I could convert one of these ob- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


789 


durate, petrified Anabaptists ; this I swear to you, 
that I do. 

Herm. Therefore I said, that you are not the 
man who shall be able to prove to me from the holy 
Scriptures, that my faith, and my baptism, which 
I received upon confession of my faith in Jesus 
Christ, is evil; how then should you be able to 
convert me from it? 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? but what devil in hell makes 
you people so presumptuous as that you have your- 
selves rebaptized, who have once been baptized? 
Show me once from the holy Scriptures, that a 
Christian that has once been baptized is to have 
himself rebaptized. Bah, I stake my neck, that you 
will not be able to show this to me with the holy 
Scriptures, see. 

Herm. Alas! poor Friar Cornelis, you have al- 
ready lost your neck ; for in the nineteenth chapter 
of the Acts of the Apostles it is written : "And it 
came to pass, that, while Apollos was at Corinth, 
Paul having passed through the upper coasts came 
to Ephesus; and finding certain disciples, he said 
unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since 
ye believed? And they said unto him, We have 
not so much as heard whether there be any Holy 
Ghost. And he said unto them, Unto what then 
were ye baptized ? And they said, Unto John's bap- 
tism. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with 
the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, 
that they should believe on him which should come 
after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they 
heard this, they were baptized in the name of the 
Lord Jesus." Now, poor Friar Cornelis, here you 
lose your neck. 

Fr. Corn. Enough, ah, bah, if they had been 
rightly baptized. Paul would not have caused them 
to be rebaptized. No, I have not yet lost my neck, 
that I have not. 

Herm. Well then, I answer the same; if I had 
been rightly baptized, I would also not have had 
myself rebaptized. But now you can well hear, that 
you have unjustly so often called me an accursed 
Anabaptist. 

Fr. Corn. But you were certainly very well bap- 
tized ; for the priest had baptized you in the name 
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And 
afterwards, only six or seven years ago, you had 
yourself baptized again; are you therefore not an 
accursed, damned Anabaptist, eh ? 

Herm. I was not baptized upon my faith in Jesus 
Christ, but in my unbelief ; and when I heard and 
understood this, I had myself baptized upon my 
faith, as Christ Himself has said in the sixteenth 
chapter of Mark: "He that believeth and is bap- 
tized shall be saved." Am I therefore an accursed, 
damned Anabaptist ? 

Fr. Corn. Yes, you are and remain a damned, 
accursed Anabaptist, if you do not become con- 
verted. For St. Paul says, that there is but one 
God, one faith, and one baptism ; is it not Anabap- 
tism then, to have one's self rebaptized ? 


Herm. For this reason you papists are justly 
(according to your saying) called Anabaptists by 
the Calvinists, because you have rebaptized in your 
churches their children, that had been baptized 
once out here in their preaching. 

Fr. Corn. O you awkward, block-headed Ana- 
baptist, those children were not rightly baptized, 
and you know yourself well enough how to prove 
from the nineteenth chapter of the Acts of the 
Apostles, that St. Paul caused those who had not 
been rightly baptized under John's baptism to be 
rebaptized. Bah, are we Catholics Anabaptists? I 
suppose so, * * * What shall I say now, does it 
now become fool's work altogether with the sacra- 
ment of baptism — see wherewith we are now tor- 
mented and vexed ; would you accursed Anabaptist 

now begin to call us Catholics Anabaptists ? Bah ! 
* * * 

Herm. I do not call you Anabaptists ; for I only 
say, that the Calvinists call you Anabaptists, be- 
cause you rebaptize their children, which they had 
once baptized. 

Fr. Corn. * * * 

(He spoke here only vile words of abuse.) 

Herm. Our baptism is nevertheless administered 
according to the institution of Christ; for in our 
church the believing are baptized, but you baptize 
the unbelieving. 

Fr. Com. Bah, the sponsors believe in behalf of 
the children, until they are old enough to believe 
themselves, do you understand this? 

Herm. No ; I find nothing said in the Scriptures, 
about sponsors, nor about one man believing in be- 
half of another. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, now you are clearly cornered; 
for does not St. Luke say in the fifth chapter, that 
Christ saw the faith of the bearers who let down 
the man afflicted with the palsy, through the roof 
with his couch, and that He therefore healed him 
and forgave his sins, eh ? Bah, here for once I have 
clearly cornered you ; get out if you can. Now you 
have spectacles on your nose, have you not, eh? 

Herm. No ; for from this it is not to be under- 
stood, that the man afflicted with the palsy did not 
himself believe, or was without faith, as are the 
children which you baptize. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, the old fathers or teachers of our 
mother, the holy Roman Catholic church do never- 
theless understand, that the bearers of the man 
afflicted with the palsy signify the sponsors, who 
hold the children when they are being baptized, and 
believe in behalf of the children, till these are old 
enough to believe for themselves; for to this end 
the sacrament of confirmation is instituted, to put 
the children, when they are old enough to believe 
themselves, in remembrance that they were bap- 
tized. Bah, I could very well show you this from 
the ancient fathers, but you Anabaptists will rely 
most firmly on the holy Scriptures alone, so that 
you will not once hearken to the ancient fathers or 
teachers of the holy church. Bah, it seems, as the 
provincial of the Augustinians tells me, that, when 


790 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


one begins to mention something to you from 
St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Greg- 
ory, or some other ancient fathers, that you people 
carry on in just such a crazy and ugly manner, as 
though one began to speak to you of the very devil 
— is this not a fine thing ? 

Herm. Because we wish to be only Christians, 
therefore we do not want to hearken to the teach- 
ings of the ancient fathers ; for they describe pop- 
ery, as of sponsors, of the sacrament of confirma- 
tion, and the whole popery which you follow and 
observe. 

Fr. Corn. O you damned, accursed Anabaptist, 
do you call the sacrament of confirmation popery ? 

Herm. What else is it then? for I have never 
read in the holy Scriptures of the sacrament of 
confirmation. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, and are so dull, awkward and 
block-headed, that you do not understand it, though 
you read of it ; for confirmation means the imposi- 
tion of hands, see. 

Herm. Ah, does it mean this? pardon me, that 
through my awkwardness and dullness I do not 
understand such very high and fine Latin. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, did I say it is Latin, see 
here. 

Herm. What language is it then? I certainly 
would like to know. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, that I do not know myself; but 
we Catholics understand it by the word confirma- 
tion, the sacrament of confirmation, or the laying 
on of the hands of the bishop, when our bishops 
and suffragans confirm grown-up children or ad- 
ults, as also the apostles did ; hence it is that I say, 
that you sectarians read of many holy sacramental 
things in the Scriptures, which you do not under- 
stand, and therefore you do not know our sacra- 
ment of confirmation, that you do not. 

Herm. If your bishops or suffragans by such 
confirmation and laying on of hands could give to 
the grown-up children and adults the Holy Ghost, 
and that they spake with tongues, and prophesied 
as did the apostles, and also those upon whom they 
laid their hands, then I should very well understand 
and know your confirmation. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, there had to be miracles then, 
when the people did not believe yet, in order that 
they might believe the apostles ; do you understand 
this, you stupid Anabaptist? 

Herm. If Christ had commanded you to imitate 
such laying on of hands, He would also do those 
miracles through you. Hence, when your bishops 
do such miracles with their confirmation and impo- 
sition of hands, then I shall believe you too. 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, tush, these are the same 
arguments and chatterings which also your accurs- 
ed hedge-preacher advanced yesterday against the 
sacrament of confirmation, and the sacrament of 
extreme unction. Bah, though Christ Himself did 
not command us to imitate it, the apostles com- 
manded us to do it ; for does not St. James, in the 
fifth chapter, command that when any one is sick, 


the priests of the church are to be sent for, to pray 
over him, and to anoint him with oil, eh ? 

Herm. The oil of which James writes must have 
been another oil than your oil ; for with that the 
sick were anointed, that they should recover from 
their sickness, and they did recover from it. But 
you priests do the very opposite ; for if you knew 
beforehand, that the sick should recover, and not 
die, you would not anoint them with oil; for you 
anoint no sick persons with oil except those who 
you think will die. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, my lords, did I not well know, 
that it would be the same thing which it was yester- 
day with their hedge-preacher? Bah, I lay you a 
wager, that if I begin to prove to him, from the 
same fifth chapter of St. James, the sacrament of 
confession, he will also say, as his hedge-preacher 
said yesterday, that I also ought to confess my sins 
to him ; just see, with what we are tormented and 
vexed. 

Herm. Did this seem to you so strange an an- 
swer from him? for it is nevertheless written: 
"Confess your sins one to another." But when you 
priests learn from people all that you wish to know, 
then you let them go, and do not yourselves con- 
fess to them who have confessed (as you call it) 
their sins to you. 

Fr. Corn. Yes, we call it confession, and it is 
confession, and shall remain confession, in spite 
of your teeth. Ah, bah, would it not be a fine 
thing, if we priests also had to kneel down and 
confess ourselves to the laity; and would they 
have the power to absolve us from sin? I sup- 
pose so. Bah, what a fine absolution that would 
be! Bah, and if I here confess mvself to you, 
would you be so presumptuous as "to think that 
you have power to loose or forgive my sins, eh? 

Herm. Such power as you or all priests have 
to forgive sin, all men have ; for Christ says, Mark 
11 :25 : "Forgive, if ye have aught against any : 
that your Father also which is in heaven may for- 
give you your trespasses." Again, Luke 6:37- 
' Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven." 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Anabaptist, have you 
laymen priestly authority to forgive sin in confes- 
sion? Bah, the forgiveness of sin of which Christ 
speaks, Mark 11 ; Luke 6, does not concern confes- 
sion or absolution. * * * Bah, we priests have in 
the sacrament of confession and absolution a spe- 
cial priestly authority to forgive and to retain sin, 
that we do. 

Herm. Whence do you priests get a special au- 
thority to forgive sin, more than we, whom you call 
laymen ? 

Fr. Corn. Bah, this special authority which 
Christ delivered to His vicar, St. Peter, and St. 
Peter left it to his vicars the popes, and the popes 
impart to us of that power, because they cannot 
themselves in person everywhere hear confession, 
and absolve, see. 

H erm. That the popes and you priests have the 
special power to forgive and to retain sin, which 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


791 


Christ gave to Peter, this you will not be able to 
show to me with the holy Scriptures. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? O you accursed Anabaptist, 
the executioner will be able very well to show it to 
you, by kindling a good fire * * * and the very 
devils in hell will also show it to you with burn- 
ing pitch, brimstone, and tar in the fire of hell ; this 
I swear to you, that I do. 

Herm. You papists can demonstrate your faith, 
doctrine and religion with nothing better than with 
the executioner, and with sword, fire, rope and gal- 
lows; for these are the best demonstrations or 
proofs which you have, and thus your forefathers 
demonstrated their faith and doctrine to God's 
prophets, to Christ, to His apostles, and to the 
saints of God, from the blood of Abel until now. 

Fr. Corn. Ha, you hellish, devilish, damned, ac- 
cursed Anabaptists, for what do you take our holy 
fathers the popes and us priests ? may thunder and 
lightning kill, burn and pulverize you. Bah, that I 
should thus excite, exasperate and disquiet myself 
for such an accursed Anabaptist. 

Clerk of the criminal court. Tush, tush, Father 
Cornelis, and Herman, speak gently with each 
other. 

Fr. Corn. Yes indeed, be gentle towards such 
bedeviled, bewitched, heretics, who do not believe 
anything. In good faith, do you Anabaptists then 
go thus unconfessed and unabsolved to your sup- 
per ? I suppose so ; for you regard it but as a bit of 
simple common bread, and a little draught of com- 
mon, flat wine. The transubstantiation in the sacra- 
ment of the altar with you is only popery, yea, 
sorcery, and we priests are regarded as sorcerers by 
you, because we adjure and conjure the true flesh 
and blood of Christ in the host and in the cup, as 
you Sacramentarians say, ill betide you. 

Herm. Such confession, or absolution, or sacra- 
ment of the altar we do not use in our church, but 
we observe such forgiveness of sins, as Christ com- 
mands us, Mark 1 1 ; and Luke 6, and such break- 
ing of bread, and distribution of the cup, as He in 
His last supper commands us to do for His remem- 
brance. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, but with that forgiveness of sins 
Christ means this when your neighbor has done 
aught amiss to you ; but I ask concerning the sins 
which you people have sinned against God whether 
you go with these unconfessed and unabsolved to 
your devil's supper, eh? 

Herm. We pray as Christ has taught us, Mat- 
thew 6:12. "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive 
our debtors." And we use no devil's supper. 

Fr. Corn. Your breaking of bread, and distribu- 
tion of the cup is the devil's supper of which Paul 
writes in the tenth chapter of his first epistle to 
the Corinthians : "Ye cannot drink the cup of the 
Lord, and the cup of devils ; ye cannot be partakers 
of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils. But 
the cup of blessing which we bless," that is, we 
Catholics, "is it not the communion of the blood 
of Christ ? The bread which we break, is it not the 


communion of the body of Christ?" Bah, and is 
your bit of bread, and your cup with a little draught 
of flat wine not a devil's supper? for you sacra- 
mentarians do not bless your cup, nor do you con- 
secrate your bit of bread, but it is wine and bread, 
and remains wine and bread ; bah, let us hear what 
you can answer against this, that will be con- 
clusive. 

Herm. In regard to this, I must ask you, whether 
you yourself believe, that Christ in His last supper 
meant no other body or flesh, and no other blood, 
than that which was to be broken and shed on the 
cross for the remission of sins. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, and should I not believe this? 
this is quite Catholic, that it is. 

Herm. Well you will certainly also confess, I 
think, that the bread which the apostles ate at the 
supper was not crucified. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, what hellish, devilish, heretical 
question is this ; never in all the days of my life did 
I hear such a deep question. Bah, I believe and 
know very well, that the apostles ate the same body 
or flesh of Jesus Christ, which the day after the 
supper was to be crucified, see. 

Herm. Therefore, poor man, you do not under- 
stand the sense or meaning of Christ, though Paul 
in the tenth chapter of the first epistle to the Co- 
rinthians very clearly explains the same, saying: 
"Behold Israel after the flesh; are not they which 
eat of the sacrifice partakers of the altar?" Thus 
also are we in the eating of the bread, and in the 
drinking of the wine, partakers of the body and 
blood of Christ. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you accursed Sacramentarian, 
would you compare the flesh of God to the rotten 
flesh of oxen, and the lousy flesh of sheep, and to 
the rotten, putrid flesh of goats and other beasts 
and carrions ? * * * Bah, fie, what abominable and 
horrible heresy is this ? 

Herm. You understand neither Paul nor me ; for 
what I say is this, that Paul by this comparison of 
the sacrifices of the altar (which the Jews ate, and 
thereby became partakers of the sacrifice in the re- 
mission of sins) explains and expounds the com- 
munion or participation of the broken bread and of 
the cup of wine (which we eat and drink in re- 
membrance of the body and blood of Christ), that 
we thus also become partakers in the washing from 
sins through the body and blood of Christ, which 
He offered up for the sins of the world. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, see, now I plainly under- 
stand your heretical, Sacramentarian meaning, 
that you only make comparisons and memorials of 
the flesh and blood of Christ. Eh, accursed Ana- 
baptist, why then does St. Paul say, in the eleventh 
chapter of his first epistle to the Corinthians: 
"Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and 
drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be 
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let 
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that 
bread and drink of that cup. For he that eateth and 
drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment 


792 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


to himself, not discerning the Lord's body." Bah, 
answer me once to this, you accursed Sacramen- 
tarian, that you are. 

Herm. In the tenth chapter of the first epistle to 
the Corinthians Paul writes : "We being many are 
one bread, and one body : for we are all partakers 
of that one bread." Again in the twelfth chapter : 
"We are all members of one body." If we then are 
members of one body, unto which Christ has united 
us together by His baptism and by His Spirit, no 
external sign can be fitter, to show or signify the 
union of one body, than that in the breaking of 
bread we all become partakers of one bread, in 
token that we being many are one bread and body. 
Likewise it is also with the wine; for as many 
grains are ground together, and made into one 
bread, so of many grapes one drink is made. There- 
fore let every one examine himself, whether he 
be worthy of the communion of the bread and of 
the cup of the Lord, and whether he love his fel- 
low brother with a pure heart : for if he hates his 
brother, and does not love him, and would besides 
make himself a partaker yet of the bread and of 
the cup of the Lord as though he were a member 
of Christ, he shall be guilty of the body and blood 
of the Lord, and shall eat judgment to himself, not 
discerning, that the body of the Lord is signified 
by this communion or participation, that we are 
members of one body, into which Christ has united 
us. 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, tush! it seems that you 
also could preach a little sermon in the Gruthuys- 
bosch. Bah, this people know nothing else to do 
but to preach ; but you would have to preach a long 
time to me, before I would believe that a man will 
eat and drink judgment to himself on a bit of com- 
mon bread, and a little draught of wine, by which 
you Sacramentarians would only signify the body 
and blood of Christ. Bah, I would rather believe 
that God's name is Henry, that I would. 

Herm. What greater importance was there in 
the sacrifices of the Jews, of sheep and doves, than 
in the bread and wine, which are all types of the 
true sacrifice which Christ made on the cross in His 
own flesh and blood ? And if the Jews had never- 
theless, according to the command of Christ, to lay 
down their offering before the altar, and first go 
and become reconciled to their brother, before they 
were to offer, then a Christian also ought first to 
examine himself, before he partakes of the bread 
and the cup of the Lord. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, a thousand devils, God bless us, 
if the bread and the wine are only types of the true 
sacrifice of the flesh and blood of Christ on the 
cross why then does He say in the sixth chapter of 
John: "The bread that I will give is my flesh;" 
again : "My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is 
drink indeed ; therefore he that eateth my flesh, and 
drinketh my blood, shall live forever," eh? 

Herm. This argument is against yourself, for 
you would say that the bread is therefore the body 
of Christ, and the wine His blood, because Paul 


says, that whosoever eats and drinks it unworthily 
eats and drinks judgment to himself. And here 
Christ says : "He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh 
my blood, shall live forever." If therefore that 
bread and wine of which Paul writes, were the 
flesh and blood of Christ, no one could therein eat 
judgment to himself. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, this accursed Sacramentarian 
would torment and pester us here, I suppose, with 
all these abominable blasphemies against God's true 
body and blood. Bah, the very devil of hell sits in 
his accursed mouth. 

Herm. I have not mentioned one word about the 
body and blood of God ; how then can I have blas- 
phemed there against ? 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Anabaptist and Sac- 
ramentarian, are the body and blood of Christ not 
also the body and blood of God ? are God the Fa- 
ther and the Son of God not one God, or would 
you make two Gods of them. Bah, are you also a 
Trinitarian, I suppose, eh ? 

Herm. Yet you said, when you wanted to dis- 
pute about the mass, that you priests daily in the 
mass, offer up to God His Son Jesus Christ ; hence 
you make a distinction between God and the body 
of His Son, which you now begin to call the flesh 
and body of God. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, the devil and his mother wag 
your tongue. You would now like to bite into my 
trap, would you? Ah, you wicked, vile, false, 
crafty Anabaptist and Sacramentarian, yea, also 
Trinitarian, because you speak so abominably of 
the holy Trinity, do you then not believe, that 
Christ is the second person in the Godhead of the 
holy Trinity ? Bah, it seems not from your speak- 
ing. 

Herm. We only know to speak of things that 
are mentioned in the holy Scriptures. 

Fr. Corn. O you Trinitarian, do we not read in 
the holy Scriptures of God the Father, and of God 
the Son, and of God the Holy Ghost, eh? 

Herm. Yet the holy Scriptures speak of only 
one God, and of the Son of the living God, and of 
the Holy Ghost. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed ? you accursed Trinitarian • if 
you would read the symbol* of Athanasius, you 
would read of God the Father, and of God the Son, 
and of God the Holy Ghost, which three persons 
are therein called one true God, of whom the Fa- 
ther is the first person in the Godhead ; the Son is 
the second person in the Godhead, and the Holy 
Ghost is the third person in the Godhead ; and these 
three persons constitute the holy Trinity, that they 
do. Do you understand now, you Trinitarian, eh? 

Herm. I have not studied the symbol of Athana- 
sius ; for it is enough for me, that I believe in the 
living God, and that Christ is the Son of the living 
God, as Peter believed (Matt. 16), and in the Holy 
Ghost, which is shed on us abundantly through 

* Creed. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


793 


Jesus Christ our Saviour, as Paul writes in the 
third chapter of his epistle to Titus. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? you are certainly fine fel- 
lows, that God should shed His Holy Spirit upon 
you who will not believe that the Holy Ghost is 
also God Himself. But this heresy you pick up 
and study in the devilish books of that accursed 
Erasmus of Rotterdam, who in his preface to the 
books of St. Hilary writes, that St. Hilary, at the 
end of his twelfth book, says, that the Holy Ghost 
is nowhere in the holy Scriptures called God, but 
that we have become so presumptuous as to dare 
call the Holy Ghost God, which the ancient teach- 
ers of the church did not dare do. In like manner 
this wicked Erasmus is also a great enemy of the 
divinity of Christ. Ah, bah ! would you follow this 
damned Trinitarian, eh? 

Herm. We follow neither Erasmus nor Hilary, 
but we follow the holy Scriptures, as Hilary and 
Erasmus herein do. 

Fr. Corn. Though the holy Scriptures nowhere 
call the Holy Spirit God, what matters it? The 
Holy Ghost Himself has inspired our mother the 
holy Roman Catholic church, to call Him God, as 
appears from the symbol of Athanasius, see. But 
in good faith, if you believe the holy Scriptures, 
why then will you not believe in the divinity of 
Christ, eh ? 

Herm. That be far from us, that we should not 
believe in the divinity of Christ, that He is divine 
and heavenly, and not earthly, as you people be- 
lieve ; therefore we are put to death by you. 

Fr. Corn. * * * Bah, we put you to death, be- 
cause you people will not believe, that Christ as- 
sumed the seed of Mary His blessed mother, see. 

Herm. We believe that the Word became flesh, 
as John writes in the first chapter of his Gospel. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, now I have got you well cor- 
nered ; for God was the Word. And if God became 
flesh, why then would you bite into my trap, be- 
cause I say, God's flesh, God's body, and God's 
blood, eh? 

Herm. We too believe that God was the Word ; 
but would you then therefrom understand, that the 
living God (of whom Christ is the Son) became 
Himself flesh? this were certainly contrary to the 
entire holy Scriptures. 

Fr. Corn. Yet Christ says, John 10:30: "I and 
my Father are one." Again, John 14:9: "He that 
hath seen me hath seen the Father." Bah, where 
are you now, eh? 

Herm. Christ also says (John 17:21-23) : "That 
they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, 
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us : that 
the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And 
the glory which thou gavest me I have given them ; 
that they may be one, even as we are one: I in 
them, and thou in me, that they may be made per- 
fect in one." Again (Acts 4:32) : "The multitude 
of them that believed were of one heart and of one 
soul." Again, Paul to the Galatians (3:8) says: 
"For ye are all one in Christ Jesus." Again (Ephe- 


sians 5 :31, 32) : "For this cause shall a man leave 
his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his 
wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a 
great mystery." 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, you have preached 
enough; for all this you have drawn from the 
venomous breasts of Erasmus. But answer me, why 
Christ says : "He that hath seen me hath seen the 
Father," see. 

Herm. Christ also says, John 6:46: "Not that 
any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of 
the Father, he hath seen the Father." Again, John 
1:18: "No man hath seen God at any time." 
Again, John 14:28: "For my Father is greater 
than I." Again, Mark 13:32: "But of that day 
and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels 
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Fa- 
ther." From this it is sufficiently shown that the 
Father Himself did not become flesh. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, this you need not teach me ; for 
I say myself that Christ, the second person in the 
Godhead, or of the holy Trinity, became man, 
whom you will not call God; do you understand 
this, you accursed Trinitarian that you are? 

Herm. I call Him the Son of the living God, as 
Peter called Him (Matt. 16:16), and Lord, as the 
apostles call Him. 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Trinitarian, I could 
jump out of my skin for anger, that I could. 

Herm. Then you must jump out of your skin, 
when in the second chapter of the Acts of the apos- 
tles (verse 22), you read that Peter calls Him but 
a man of God, saying : "Jesus of Nazareth, a man* 
approved of God among you by miracles and won- 
ders and signs, which God did by him." Again, in 
the same chapter (verse 32) : "This Jesus hath God 
raised up." Again, in the third chapter (verse 15) : 
"Whom God hath raised from the dead." Again, 
in Acts 4:10: "Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye 
crucified, whom God raised from the dead." Again, 
Paul (Acts 17:31) says: "Because he hath ap- 
pointed a day, in the which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath 
ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto 
all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead." 

Fr. Corn. Yes, yes, tush, tush, tush, bah ! these 
are the same arguments which this damned Eras- 
mus prefers, in his book, de modo orandi, and in 
Apologia ad Episcopum Hispalensem, Alphonsum 
Mauricum. But you Trinitarian, if you will call 
Christ only the Son of God, you do not esteem Him 
better than Adam ; for Luke says in his third chap- 
ter, that Adam also was the son of God. Bah ! see 
once, with what we are tormented. 

Herm. That be far from us, that we should not 
esteem Christ better than Adam ; for because we 
believe, that the body of Christ is not earthy of the 
earth, as was Adam the first man, but that He is a 
heavenly man, as Paul writes in the fifteenth chap- 
ter of his first epistle to the Corinthians ; therefore 

* See German version. 


794 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


we are put to death by you ; hence you yourselves 
do not esteem Him better than Adam. 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Trinitarian, how the 
devil does wag your tongue. Bah, if you will not 
believe, that Christ is truly man, and if you will also 
not believe that He is the true God, what * * * is 
He then? 

Herm. Do not talk so unbecomingly ; for Christ 
is no devil ; but He is the true Son of God, as John 
writes in the fifth chapter of his first epistle; and 
He is also a true man, as Paul writes in the fifth 
chapter of his epistle to the Romans. 

Fr. Com. Bah, but does not St. John in the same 
chapter say of the Son: "This is the true God;" 
eh? 

Herm. No, for John says : "We know that the 
Son of God is come, and hath given us an under- 
standing, that we may know the true God, and 
that we should be in his true Son. This is the true 
God, and eternal life." Hereby John means this 
true God whom the Son taught us to know. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you Trinitarian ; now it occurs to 
me that St. John says in the same chapter : "There 
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, 
the Word, and the Holy Ghost ; and these three are 
one." Bah, here you are soundly cornered, poor 
Trinitarian that you are. 

Herm. I have often heard it said, that Erasmus 
in his Annotations charges you papists with having 
interpolated these words, and that they are not con- 
tained in the Greek text, even as you people have 
taken out and added many other things in the holy 
Scriptures. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, may the fire of hell forever burn 
and torment you with your devilish, damned, ac- 
cursed heretic Erasmus. Bah, I could tear my cap 
for anger, that I could. 

Herm. Why then do you not tear your cap, 
when you read that Greek text yourself, and see 
that this is not contained in it? 

Fr. Corn. Bah, my lords, what do you think 
of this — am I wrong in so sharply attacking in my 
sermons this damned heretic, this wicked Trini- 
tarian Erasmus ? For it is true, this he writes ; yea, 
what is still worse, in his Annotations to the fourth 
chapter of St. Luke he has written, that a very 
great and strange corruption has been wrought in 
the holy Scriptures in the Greek and Latin copies, 
that sometimes something is added and interpolated 
and sometimes something taken away, omitted, and 
erased, on account of the heretics; yea, that the 
marginal notes which were now and then written 
by one or the other have all been foisted into the 
text, my lords, is it not a fine thing? 

Recorder. Ah, Father Cornells, we are no theolo- 
gians ; we do not understand these things. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? Bah, I believe it; but this 
Trinitarian would certainly understand it very 
well, as you hear, that he charges us with it. Bah, 
he would dare charge us Catholics with his arch- 
heretic, this wicked Erasmus, that in the ninth 
chapter of Romans, where Paul says : "Whose are 


the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh 
Christ came;" we have interpolated: "Who is 
over all, God blessed forever. Amen." For this 
accursed Erasmus writes, that he has great doubts 
with regard to this clause : "Oui est benedictus in 
saecula. Amen." Or these words are to be inter- 
preted and understood as a thanksgiving to God 
the Father, thus, "Christ, etc., who is over all. 
God be blessed for ever. Amen." "Otherwise," he 
writes, "I have great doubts, whether this clause 
has not been interpolated, as I find also in some 
other texts, that they have added similar clauses, 
for the conclusion of discourses, as, Tu autem 
Domine, etc., Gloria Patri et Filio, etc., as their les- 
sons and prayers are all concluded with such claus- 
es." But as regards the words of St. Thomas, in 
the twentieth chapter of St. John's gospel, you have 
no way of escape; for there St. Thomas said to 
Christ : "My Lord and my God." Bah, to this he 
does not reply, yea, with this he is soundly cor- 
nered; nevertheless, he spitefully writes with re- 
gard to this : "This is the first and last passage in 
the Scriptures, where Christ is called God." Bah, 
but you Trinitarian, let us hear what you can say to 
this. 

Herm. I reply to this, that Thomas said very 
well here; for David says in the eighty-second 
Psalm : "I have said, Ye are gods ; and all of you 
are children of the Most High." Christ Himself 
also quotes these words in the tenth chapter of 
John. When the Jews took up stones to stone Him, 
because He had said, "I and the Father are one,"' 
Jesus answered them: "Many good works have' I 
shewed you from my Father; for which of those 
works do you stone me? The Jews answered him, 
saying : For a good work we stone thee not ; but 
for blasphemy ; and because that thou, being a man 
makest thyself God. Jesus answered them, Is it not 
written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he 
called them gods, unto whom the word of God 
came, and the Scripture cannot be broken ; say ye 
of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent 
into the world, thou blasphemest ; because I said I 
am the son of God?" Again, Ex. 22:8, 9: "If the 
thief be not found, then the master of the house 
shall be brought unto the gods, etc. The cause of 
both parties shall come before the gods ; and whom 
the gods shall condemn, he shall pay double unto 
his neighbor." 

Fr.Corn. Bah, but tell me without many words, 
why Christ did not say to St. Thomas : "Stay • I 
am not your God ?" let us hear. 

Herm. In regard to this my previous answer, 
John 10; David m Ps. 82 will serve; but answer 
me, why Christ did not reply to these words of 
Thomas : "Upon this rock I will build my church " 
as He said, Matt. 16:18, when Peter answered 
Him : "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living 
God?" He also did not say to Thomas : "Flesh and 
blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father 
which is in heaven." Why also does Christ, John 
20 :17 ; say to His disciples : "I ascend unto my Fa- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


795 


ther and your Father; and to my God, and your 
God ? Again, Matt. 27 :46 : "My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me?" 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush, you Trinitarian. Bah, 
from this would probably follow diabolical argu- 
ments which would transcend all human compre- 
hension. Ah, bah, is Christ not truly God? why 
then do we call His blessed mother the mother of 
God, eh? 

Herm. Because you will nowhere follow the 
holy Scriptures, but would call everything by a con- 
trary and different name ; for the holy Scriptures 
call her the mother of Jesus, as in the first chapter 
of the Acts of the Apostles, in the nineteenth chap- 
ter of John, and in many other places of holy Scrip- 
ture, where she is not once called the mother of 
God. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? Bah, do you think that we 
Catholics pay so much regard to the naked, bare, 
meagre Scriptures? Ah, bah, the worthy, holy 
council of Nice has ordained and decreed that 
she should be called the mother of God. What do 
you say to this? 

Herm. Do you not hold the last council of Trent 
to be of as great authenticity, dignity, and holiness 
as the council of Nice? 

Fr. Corn. Yea, in troth, and should we not? 
Ah, bah, the Holy Ghost taught and spoke just as 
well through the fathers in the worthy council of 
Trent, as though the fathers in the council of 
Nice. Bah, what need is there of asking this 
question? have you nothing else to ask me? Bah, I 
well perceive that you would fain drop the subject 
concerning the mother of God. 

Herm. I had to ask this in order to hear your 
confession in regard to it ; for now I know by the 
council of Trent all the other councils, because I 
have in my time heard and seen how things went at 
the former council, which mocks and puts to shame 
all previous councils. 

Fr. Corn. O you hellish, devilish, accursed Trin- 
itarian, you blaspheme the Holy Ghost. It is a 
wonder that we do not all together with you sink 
into the earth. My lords, I am absolutely afraid to 
speak any longer with this Beelzebubian Anabap- 
tist, Sacramentarian and Trinitarian, and enemy of 
the mother of God, that I am. 

Recorder. Can you not keep still in regard to 
these things, Herman, as we requested of you ? 

Herm. I do not blaspheme the Holy Ghost, nor 
am I an enemy of the mother of Christ. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, do you not blaspheme the Holy 
Ghost, when you ridicule, villify and deride the 
worthy council of Trent, and all the previous holy 
councils ? and will not call the worthy, hoiy, blessed 
virgin Mary the mother of God, as the holy coun- 
cil of Nice teaches and commands us to do? Bah, 
are you not then a blasphemer of the Holy Ghost, 
and an enemy of the mother of God eh? 

Herm. You papists were so presumptuous in 
your council of Nice, that you dared call the 
mother of Jesus Christ the mother of God, whom 


neither the apostles nor the evangelists dared call 
the mother of the Son of God. 

Fr. Corn. O you damned, devilish Anabaptist, 
you hellish Trinitarian, Sacramentarian and deadly 
enemy of the blessed mother of God, we will call 
her the mother of God in spite of your teeth, and 
she is too the mother of God. Yea, she is the 
mother of God, that she is ? 

Herm. You said yourself that there are three 
persons in the holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and 
the Holy Ghost, and that these three persons are 
but one true God. If Mary then is the mother of 
this true God, then she is just as well the mother of 
the Father and of the Holy Ghost, and of the Son. 

Fr. Corn. O you devilish heretic, I have proved 
to you from the symbol of Athanasius, that the 
Father is God, and that the Son is God, and that 
the Holy Ghost is God, and that there are neverthe- 
less not three gods, but that these three are one 
true, inseparable God, see. 

Herm. If these three are not each a distinct, sep- 
arate God, but if the three are but one true insepar- 
able God, and if Mary is the mother of God, then 
she must be the mother of all three, or the three 
must each be a separate God. Where are you now 
with your council of Nice ? 

Fr. Corn. Bah, may the fire of hell burn you, 
you wicked, evil, vile, false, crafty Trinitarian ; the 
devil wags your accursed tongue. Bah, you would 
drive an hundred thousand doctors of divinity mad 
and crazy. Jesus, Jesus, worthy mother of God, 
how you are reviled, despised and rejected by this 
hellish devil's brood. But in good faith, how would 
you have her called — Maeyken Timmermans,* as 
you call her in your hellish, devilish sermons in the 
Gruthuysbosch, eh? 

Herm. We call her the mother of Jesus, as she is 
called in the Scriptures, And how can you say that 
we revile, despise and reject her? 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Anabaptist, I will 
drop this, that you will not call her the mother of 
God ; but is this not odious reviling, despising and 
rejecting, that your arch-heretic, Menno Simons 
writes, that Christ did not assume the sinful earthly 
seed of Mary, but that He came with flesh and 
blood, with skin and hair, from heaven, into Mary, 
and thus became man, and that He merely passed 
through her body, as water through a sieve, or 
through a spout; — bah, is this not reviling, blas- 
pheming, despising and rejecting? 

Herm. You do not understand what Menno Si- 
mons writes; for what you here say, cannot be 
found in his writings; but he shows with many 
Scriptures, that the Word became flesh (as John 
writes in his first chapter), and not the seed of 
Mary. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah,, was Christ then not born 
of the seed of David according to the promise; 
which seed He assumed in the blessed virgin Mary, 


* Probably an allusion to the fact that Mary's husband Joseph 
was a carpenter. 


796 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of her most pure blood, and of that became flesh 
and man, eh? 

Herm. That Christ was born of the seed of 
David (as regards the generation of which He was 
born) we well believe ; but the angel said to Joseph : 
"That which is begotten in her is of the Holy 
Ghost," Matt. 1:20. Again, John 16:28, Christ 
Himself says: "I came forth from the Father, 
and am come into the world." 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah, Christ says this of His di- 
vinity, that the same proceeded, and came into the 
world from the Father, and not from His humanity, 
you stupid Anabaptist. 

Herm. Why then did Christ say, John 6:62: 
"What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up 
where he was before?" Again, John 3:13: "No 
man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came 
down from heaven, even the Son of man." Again, 
Paul says, Eph. 4:9, 10: "That he ascended ; what 
is it but that he also descended first into the lower 
parts of the earth ? He that descended is the same 
also that ascended up far above all heavens." 

Fr. Corn. Bah, you stupid Anabaptist, did Christ 
then come from heaven into Mary with flesh and 
blood, with skin and hair, entrails and all, as He as- 
cended up to heaven? Bah, what do you say of this, 
you great, stupid, awkward ass? 

Herm. I do not say this; but I say that the 
Word came from heaven, and became flesh in 
Mary, as John writes in his first chapter. 

Fr. Corn. And we Catholics say that the most 
pure blood of Mary became flesh, in spite of your 
miserable teeth, see. 

Herm. This defiance to my teeth is a small mat- 
ter; but this defiance to the holy Scriptures is a 
great blasphemy. 

Fr. Corn. Ha, you damned Anabaptist, I do not 
blaspheme the holy Scriptures ; but you revile the 
holy, blessed, pure virgin Mary. Bah, I am sur- 
prised that you do not say, that she conceived her 
son Christ of her husband Joseph, as your hedge- 
preachers preach in the Gruthuysbosch ; is it not 
a fine thing? 

Herm. You wrong us greatly, that you say this 
of us ; for we believe as Matthew writes in his first 
chapter : "Joseph took his wife, and knew her not 
till she had brought forth her first born son." 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah ! did Joseph know her after- 
wards, eh? 

Herm. It matters not to me whether he knew 
her afterwards, or not. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed? and do you then not believe 
in the perpetual virginity of the blessed virgin 
Mary ? let us hear now. 

Herm. We find nothing said in the Scriptures, 
concerning her perpetual virginity. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, this accursed Anabaptist would 
pester me with the Scriptures. Will you then pos- 
itively believe nothing else but what is contained in 
the holy Scriptures ? Bah, hence it comes that you 


thus despise, reject and revile the worthy mother 
of God and imagine, yea, teach and believe that she 
did the carnal works of the married state with Jo- 
seph her husband, just as well as your filthy, sinful 
wives do with you, and that she had many children 
by Joseph her husband; bah, is this not a fine 
thing ? 

Herm. And if she had done the work of the mar- 
ried state with her husband Joseph, and brought 
forth more children (which is ordained and com- 
manded of God, Gen. 1, and is a blessing) would 
she thereby have sinned? 

Fr. Corn. Bah, God blessed Adam and Eve, and 
said : "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the 
earth," before they transgressed the command- 
ment ; but they did not continue in the blessing but 
transgressed the commandment of God, and there- 
by the work of marriage became sin to them ; bah, 
now you are cornered. 

Herm. You are cornered yourself ; for, Gen. 9 : 
1, it is written: "God blessed Noah and his sons, 
and said unto them : Be fruitful, and multiply, and 
replenish the earth." Again, the prophet Jeremiah, 
in the twenty-ninth chapter, says : "Thus saith the 
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel : Take ye wives, 
and beget sons and daughters ; and take wives for 
your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, 
that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye 
may be increased." 

Fr. Corn. Bah, tush, tush, you have talked 
enough ; bah, hear how much talk there is in this 
miserable Anabaptist. Bah, now that I hear you 
talk, I will believe, that you Anabaptists undis- 
guisedly and presumptuously preach out there in 
the Gruthuysbosch, that Maeyken Timmermans, 
as regards the work of marriage, was not a hair 
better than your filthy, unchaste, carnal wives are. 
Yea, in order utterly to loose the marriage bond, 
and to show, that women may have divers hus- 
bands, you wicked Anabaptists dare preach and 
teach that Mary had children of many different 
husbands, like your wives, whom you have in 
common— is this not a fine thing? 

Herm. Of such things as you here say I never 
heard our teachers speak once, when they preached 
the Word ; but it may sometimes have been asked 
among us, whether the brethren and sisters of 
Christ, of whom the holy Scriptures make mention, 
Matthew 13; Mark 6, etc., were natural children 
by Joseph or Mary. 

Fr. Corn. O you accursed Anabaptist, the holy 
Scriptures call some apostles, as St. James, St. 
Simon, St. Judas, the Lord's brethren, who were 
merely His cousins, you stupid Anabaptists that 
you are. 

Herm. Yet, in the first chapter of Acts it is 
written (after the eleven apostles are enumerated) : 
"These all continued with one accord in prayer 
[and supplication], with the women, and Mary the 
mother of Jesus, and with his brethren." Never- 
theless, I will not insist upon, or maintain that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


797 


Mary the mother of Jesus gave birth yet to other 
children. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, but when you Anabaptists are 
assembled in the Gruthuysbosch, you will main- 
tain it, and other things yet concerning her, which 
are still much more wicked and abominable ; for I 
know it well, that I do. 

Herm. We are greatly slandered, even as also 
you often stand in your pulpit and preach about us 
all that you please. 

Fr. Corn. Indeed, do then any Anabaptists 
sometimes come to hear me preach, eh? 

Herm. Though we do not hear you preach our- 
selves, yet we are told, that you stand in your pul- 
pit and preach, that the Calvinists and Anabaptists 
teach and preach, that Mary the mother of Christ 
was a filthy whore, for which you are censured by 
learned men (in letters which they write to you), 
how you slander us thereby. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, * * * you miserable Anabaptist 
* * * for such * * * letters I do not care * * * 
do you understand this ? And do you know nothing 
else to say ? Bah, you do not answer me in regard 
to having the women in common: bah, you Ana- 
baptists have certainly gone about it very cunning- 
ly, that you have the women and maidens in com- 
mon ; for thereby you gain such a great number of 
adherents for your Anabaptism. Bah, but show 
me once from the Scriptures, that the women and 
maidens are to be had in common, as you Anabap- 
tists do in your devil's supper; — bah, see; let us 
hear, whether you will be able to show me this. 

Herm. No; for this I could show to you just 
as little, as you can show to me from the holy 
Scriptures, that the women and maidens must be 
scourged, as you do in your secret disciplining. 
But you have certainly well practiced the secret 
disciplining or scourging of the maidens and wom- 
en, for thereby you gain such a great retinue of 
devotaries. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, I would rather * * * than reply 
to all your talk ; but answer my question. * * * 

Herm. All such barefaced lies, as that we have 
the women and maidens in common, I do not deem 
worthy of an answer. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, bah! Is it a barefaced lie, that 
you Anabaptists have the women in common ? Why 
then does all the world speak of it, and why then is 
it printed in so many books, which by us Catholics 
are written against you, and which I daily read. 
Fie, you adulterers! fie, you dishonorers of mar- 
riage ! 

Herm. All that are of the world are liars ; hence 
you and your Catholics cannot be believed. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, am I of the world, * * * you 
accursed, bewitched, damned Anabaptist that you 
are. Bah, you stupid beast, and do you not see, 
that I am spiritual ? But you evince worldly works 
by having all the women in common; but I have 
vowed chastity; do you understand this, you dis- 
honorer of marriage that you are? 


Herm. We do not dishonor marriage ; but if you 
are spiritual, and have vowed chastity, then it is 
surprising that you have your delight in this carnal, 
unclean, secret disciplining, or scourging of the 
women. 

Fr. Corn. O you devilish Anabaptist and dishon- 
orer of marriage, I could almost fly into your eyes 
or into your mouth ; bah, what do you understand 
about my secret disciplining which I employ with 
my devotaries? Bah, you are filthy, carnal, un- 
chaste, voluptuous rogues, that you thus use the 
women in common, like dogs. Yes, you damned 
dishonorers of marriage are nothing more than rot- 
ten, stinking dogs, carrions ; for you go about it in 
this respect like dogs, though you would deny it 
before us ; bah, fie, fie ! shame upon you * * * Bah, 
if I cannot prevail upon you with kindness, I must 
try whether I can do it with severity ; see now. 

Clerk of the criminal court. Ah, father Cornells, 
do be modest and keep your temper. 

Recorder. Yes, converse together with kind, 
calm words ; for it seems that you will continue to 
quarrel and bicker here like harlots. 

Fr. Corn. Bah, my lords and may I not accuse 
him of what is true? I suppose so. Did you not 
hear yourselves yesterday, that that * * * bishop 
of the Anabaptists at first also wanted to deny 
everything; but when he perceived that I was so 
well acquainted with the matter, he acknowledged 
that there were some among them, who taught and 
practiced these things in secret, and when I sound- 
ly berated and convicted him with plain and con- 
clusive arguments, he denied it no longer. Bah, 
why then should I not also have liberty to accuse 
and convict this one of it ? Am I not come here to 
instruct and convert him ? I think I am. See with 
what we are tormented. Why does he deny a mat- 
ter which is true? * * * One may certainly talk 
here, I suppose? 

Herm. Then I may also reply to you, that this 
matter is not true, because these things are lies; 
and I presume that Jacob, my fellow brother did 
well reply against it. 

Fr. Corn. Yes, until I told him that the Anabap- 
tists at Amsterdam and elsewhere, in Holland, ran 
stark-naked through the streets, men, women, boys 
and maidens, and said to one another : "My spirit 
desires your flesh." Bah ! was this not a fine thing, 
eh? 

Herm. No, this was not a fine thing ; and hence 
we never regarded such as our brethren. 

Fr. Corn. Bah! why would you deny it so 
strongly; for it is well enough known, that you 
Anabaptists do not regard the sacrament of mar- 
riage at all, because for a very little matter you 
loose and sever the marriage bond. 

Herm. Since you bring so many untrue charges 
against us in regard to our marriage, I must ask 
you something respecting marriage that concerns 
you, and which is certainly no lie, for Paul writes 
thus to Timothy, in the fourth chapter (first 


798 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


epistle) : "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that 
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, 
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of 
devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their 
conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to 
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, 
which God hath created to be received with thanks- 
giving." 

Fr. Corn. Tush, tush hold your tongue ; for we 
do not want any more preaching here; bah, be- 
gone, get you hence. * * * 

Herm. If I could be gone from here I would no 
longer listen to your blasphemies and lies. 

Fr. Corn. Ah, you accursed, hardened, petrified 
Anabaptist, how the devils in hell (whither you will 
shortly go) will sit in your accursed mouth, with 
burning pitch, brimstone, tar, and Greek fire; just 
wait. 

Herm. No ; but I shall go under the altar which 
John saw in his Apocalypse, as is written in the 
sixth chapter, to the souls of them that were slain 
for the Word of God, and for the testimony which 
they held; who cried with a loud voice, saying, 
"How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not 
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on 
the earth ?" 

Fr. Corn. Yes, the devil's martyr you will be. 
* * * But this preaching would probably last all 
night ; hence I go to my convent, and let you preach 
as long as you will, you damned, accursed Anabap- 
tist, Sacramentarian, Trinitarian, and marriage 
dishonorer that you are ; see. 

In the meantime one of the aforesaid two mar- 
tyrs, namely, Jacob de Roore, or the chandler, 
while imprisoned, wrote several letters replete 
with holy and divine things, which we deem it 
profitable to communicate to the reader ; they are 
the following : 


THE FIRST LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER, 
WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE 

The eternal, imperishable wisdom of God our 
heavenly Father, the great love of His Son our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the power of His Holy 
Spirit, for the comforting of your mind, these I 
wish you my very dear and beloved wife, as a cor- 
dial greeting from God, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord and Saviour. Amen. 

My affectionately beloved and chosen wife, be 
pleased to know that my mind is tolerably well, the 
Lord be praised forever for His grace, except that 
I am very sorrowful for your and for the children's 
sake, since I love you and them from the heart, so 
that I know of nothing under heaven for which I 
would be willing to leave you ; but for the Lord and 
His invisible riches we must forsake everything, 
through the love of God, which is shed abroad in 
our hearts by the Holy Ghost. 

Hence Christ says: "He that loveth father or 
mother more than me is not worthy of me : and he 


that loveth son or daughter more than me is not 
worthy of me. And he that taketh not his cross, 
and followeth after me, is not worthy of me," Mat- 
thew 10:37, 38. And he also says: "If any man 
come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, 
... he cannot be my disciple." Luke 14 :26. Yes, 
brother and sisters, wife and children, and our 
own life also, with all that we possess, or we can- 
not be Christ's disciples ; although this hatred ex- 
tends only as far as these things cleave to us, to 
draw us away from Christ. Hence we must over- 
come and forsake them through the love of God, 
for thereby we prove that we love God above all, 
with all our strength, and with all our ability, which 
is the greatest commandment in the law, of which 
Paul says : "The end of the commandment is char- 
ity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, 
and of faith unfeigned." I Tim. 1 :5. By this love 
and faith one must confess Christ unfeignedly, 
and not forsake Him for father or mother, for wife 
or children, or for his own life. Hence Solomon 
writes : "Love is strong as death ; jealousy is cruel 
as the grave: the coals thereof are coals of fire, 
and a flame of the Lord. Many waters cannot 
quench love, neither can the floods drown it : if a 
man would give all the substance of his house for 
love, it would utterly be contemned." (Sol. Song 
8:6, 7) ; for it cannot be bought with riches, but 
it is given for nought by God, through the Holy 
Ghost, to those that seek Him in truth. 

Therefore, I pray you, my dear wife, that you 
seek to possess your soul in patience, and do not 
grieve too much on account of this my trial, 
which happens through God's permission. For 
I had thought to come and take leave, and to 
send you away with H., or with someone else; 
but the Lord did not permit me — He knows why 
it is. Still I am grieving much on your account, for 
I leave you in great distress. But I hope that the 
Lord, who has taken me from you, will help you 
and provide for you, according to His promise, 
since Hz feeds the ravens and little animals, be- 
cause they are His creatures ; how much more then 
shall He provide for His elect, who cry day and 
night unto Him? Therefore did Peter say: "Cast 
all your care upon the Lord ; for he careth for you." 
I Peter 5 :7. As also David says : "The eyes of all 
wait upon thee ; and thou givest them their meat in 
due season." Ps. 145 :15. 

Thus, my dear wife, trust in the Lord, this I pray, 
you ; for He that ministereth seed to the sower, will 
also minister bread for your food. II Cor. 9:10. 
And move to the country of C, where there is 
much tranquility. And the brethren said, that they 
would assist us in whatever they could. I had made 
such good arrangements, that I hoped that it would 
please you well, which I intend to let you know 
yet. 

Furthermore, I pray you, my dear and much be- 
loved wife, that you do the best with my children, 
to bring them up in the fear of God, with good in- 
struction and chastening, while they are still young 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


799 


for with the rod their back is bowed, and they are 
brought into obedience to their parents. Hence it 
is written: "He that loveth his son causeth him oft 
to feel the rod ; and he that spareth his rod, hateth 
his son : but he that loveth him instructeth him be- 
times." Sir. 30:1; Prov. 13:24. For instruction 
must accompany chastisement: for chastisement 
demands obedience, and if one is to obey, he must 
first be instructed. This instruction does not con- 
sist in hard words, or loud yelling; for this the 
children learn to imitate ; but if one conducts him- 
self properly towards them, they have a good ex- 
ample, and learn propriety ; for by the children the 
parents are known. And parents must not provoke 
their children to anger, lest they be discouraged; 
but must bring them up with admonition and good 
instruction. Eph. 6:4; Col. 3:21. 

Thus, my dear and much beloved wife, do the 
best with them, this I pray you ; and take heed to 
yourself, that you may receive the end of your 
faith, even the salvation of your soul. I Peter 1 :9. 
And do not faint because of the tribulation which 
we must suffer, but remember how the innocent 
lamb, Christ Jesus, had to suffer from the begin- 
ning in the faithful. Hence the Lord says : "He that 
toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye." 
Zech. 2 :8. To Paul He said : "Saul, Saul, why per- 
secutest thou me?" And Paul said : "Who art thou, 
lord?" He said: "I am Jesus of Nazareth whom 
thou persecutest." Acts 9:4, 5. Not that he perse- 
cuted Christ according to the flesh; for the latter 
had died, before he persecuted : but he persecuted 
the Christians, in whom Christ lived according to 
the spirit ; for they do not live to themselves, but 
Christ lives in them. Rom. 14 :7. Hence, when they 
suffer, they do not suffer for their own name, but 
for the name of Christ ; for if they lived to them- 
selves, they would not be in trouble, for the world 
would love them ; but because they are not of the 
world, and because Christ has chosen them from 
the world, therefore the world hates them. John 
15:19. Hence Peter says: "If ye suffer for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of 
glory and of God resteth upon you : on their part 
he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glori- 
fied." I Peter 4:14. For they are comforted by the 
same Spirit, so that we know : As the sufferings of 
Christ abound in them, so their consolation also 
aboundeth by Christ, namely, if they suffer with 
Him, they shall also rejoice with Him ; for their 
light affliction, which is but for a moment, work- 
eth for them a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; because they look not at the 
things which are seen, but at the things which are 
not seen: for the things which are seen are tem- 
poral ; but the things which are not seen are eternal. 
II Corinthians 1 :5 ; II Tim. 2:12; II Cor. 4:17, 18. 
Hence Paul says : "I reckon that the sufferings of 
this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us ; for we 
know that, if our earthly house of this tabernacle 
were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house 


not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, where 
mortality will be swallowed up of life; for there 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither any 
heat, for God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes." Rom. 8:18; II Cor. 5:1; Heb. 11:10; II 
Cor. 5:4 ; Rev. 21:4; Isa. 25:8. 

Then they shall leap as the calves of the stall; 
then they shall triumph upon Mount Sion, have 
palms in their hands, and receive the crown of 
honor, which God has prepared for all them that 
love Him and His appearing. Mai. 4:2; II Esd. 
2:42; Wisd. 5:16. 

Thus, my dear wife, comfort yourself with these 
words, and be patient in your tribulation, this I 
pray you; for though I am thus taken from you, 
think that we are not assured of each other ; for we 
must all die, and the Lord has long permitted us to 
be together, considering the perils in which we 
walked. 

There have been so many within our time, who 
had to leave each other, some through imprison- 
ment, some dying of sickness. But there is no more 
glorious death, than that for the name of Christ; 
for not all are made worthy of God to suffer for His 
name, for this is acceptable with God, says Peter. 
I Peter 2 :20. Hence he and John went their way 
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer 
shame for His name. Acts 5:41. 

O my dear and beloved wife, it would greatly 
rejoice me if I could hear that you were of good 
cheer ; for every time that I have written your or 
the children's names, I could not refrain from 
weeping. Nevertheless, as regards my own self, 
I am of reasonably good cheer, the Lord be praised 
for His grace ; so that I would not have thought it 
before my apprehension — so weak did I find my- 
self. Hence Christ did truly say : "I will not leave 
you comfortless; but I will come to you." John 14: 
18. Herewith I will commend you, my dear and 
much beloved wife, to the Lord, who is able to keep 
your treasure, and to give you an inheritance with 
all them who through faith in Jesus Christ shall be 
sanctified. May the Lord Almighty strengthen you 
by His Spirit. Amen. 

Written on the 24th of April, by me, Jacob, your 
husband. Have this copied, and keep it in remem- 
brance of me; for I do not know whether I can 
write you any more. Greet all the brethren and 
sisters much in my name, and all them that fear 
God ; my children B. and his wife ; your brother T. 
and his wife; J. and F. T. and F. his brother; 
J. de L. and his wife; and my friends at Kortrijck. 

Alle die lijden na den Wille Godts, wilt hierop 

mercken, 
Die bevelen haer Zielen den getrouwen Schepper 

met goede wercken. (I Pet. 4:19.) 

Jacob, your husband. 


800 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


THE SECOND LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER, 
TO THE CHURCH 

Affectionately beloved brethren, much grace and 
mercy be unto you from God our heavenly Father, 
through Christ Jesus His only begotten Son, our 
Lord and Saviour, through whom the Holy Ghost 
is given us, that we should be led by Him, and 
guided into all truth, in order thus to be a light 
in this world, so that we might with a good con- 
science, praise our Father who is in heaven ; to this 
end may the Lord give His grace, that it may so 
remain with me, and with all my beloved brethren 
and sisters, to the end of their life, this I wish them 
as a friendly greeting and cordial adieu. 

Futhermore, my dear brethren, know that, 
while in the country of C., I was greatly prompted, 
to appear among you once more, that we might 
once more enjoy ourselves together ; but the Lord 
prevented it by my imprisonment. Yet, I could not 
forbear to write you a little, in order to exhort and 
refresh your minds, so that, as you received the 
Lord Jesus Christ, you might go on in Him, and 
be rooted and built up in Him, and abound therein 
with thanksgiving. Col. 2 :6, 7. For, my dear 
brethren and sisters, if we do not abide in Him, it 
is all labor lost, and we cannot be partakers of His 
abundant riches, which He has prepared for us in 
heaven ; for we are made partakers of Christ, if we 
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto 
the end. Heb. 3:14. And if we draw back, His 
soul will have no pleasure in us. Heb. 10 :38. Yes, 
dear friends, if we abide not in Him. We are like 
a branch that does not abide in the vine, and forth- 
with withers. It is therefore cut off from the vine, 
and cast into the fire ; for it is of no other use to 
men, for the prophet says: "One cannot make a 
wooden pin of it." Ezek. 15:5. Hence, according 
to the words of Christ, such Christians who do not 
abide in Christ, will be cut off, and cast into the fire 
of hell ; for they are of no use to Christ in heaven ; 
hence there shall in no wise enter into it anything 
that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomina- 
tion, [or maketh a lie :] but they which are written 
in the Lamb's book of life. Rev. 21 :26. Therefore 
I exhort you, my dear brethren, with the apostle 
John : "Abide in him, that, when he shall appear, 
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed be- 
fore him at his coming" (I John 2:28) ; that we 
may then not be like the foolish virgins who had to 
remain without with shame, because they had taken 
their lamps and no oil in them. For what can it 
avail us, that we have simply been baptized, and 
separated from popery, as though we would be 
virgins who did not want to remain in such spirit- 
ual whoredom ; and yet do not have the love of God 
in us, by which to lead a pure and chaste conver- 
sation, to the honor of our Bridegroom ; in this case 
we are foolish to think that by such conduct we 
can please Christ. For David says: "The King's 
daughters shall be brought unto the King in glori- 
ous adornment." Ps. 45 :14. Therefore love is the 
bond of perfectness; for he that abides in love 


abides in God; for God is love. Through this love 
we keep His commandments, and His command- 
ments are not grievous. Col. 3:14; I John 4:8; 

Thus, my dear brethren and sisters, let your 
loins be girded about, and your lights burning ; and 
ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord 
Lwhen he will return from the wedding] ; that, 
when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto 
him immediately. Blessed are those servants, 
whom the Lord lwhen He cometh] shall find 
watching. Luke 12 :35-37. For these are wise vir- 
gins, who have learned to know the Bridegroom; 
who know that He takes pleasure in their beauty ; 
whose beauty lies not outwardly in braided hair, 
or in putting on of apparel ; but inwardly in a chaste 
conversation, in a modest behavior, which is mani- 
fested before all men. I Tim. 2:9; I Peter 3:3. 
These virgins are baptized not only with water, 
but with the Holy Ghost and with fire ; for they do 
not only guard against outward idolatry, but will 
not consent to sin in anywise ; nor do they love the 
world, or the things that are in it ; for therein lies 
not the love of the Father. For all that is in the 
world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, 
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of 
the world, by which so many a Christian is se- 
duced; even as it is the cause of ruin to many a 
young girl, when she begins to get proud. Then she 
becomes desirous after fine clothing; then the 
young fellows make their addresses to her, who at 
first do not speak of carnal indulgence, for this 
would be too blunt for an honorable maiden ; but 
they seek first to incite her heart to love, after 
which carnal sin will the more readily be consented 
to. 

Thus also, my dear brethren, Satan goes to work 
with many a Christian ; he does not at first tempt 
them to idolatry, for they would rather suffer 
themselves to be burnt, when they are pure in their 
conscience, than resort to idolatry. But he shoots 
such arrows at them, that they become earthly- 
minded, seek their own more than that which is 
Christ's or their neighbor's, and dissipate their 
minds in their occupation and in traffic, and thus 
the love of the world is apprehended, and temporal 
riches are cherished more than the eternal. Think, 
my brethren and sisters, when Satan has gained 
this point, how easily then one consents to serve 
idols, and to wed the world ; and thus the door is 
opened wide to Satan, for the light has become 
darkness, and the day is changed to night, in con- 
sequence of which one's shame or nakedness is not 
seen; for they are alienated from the life of God 
through the blindness of their heart. Eph. 4:18. 
Therefore, dear brethren, take heed, lest there be 
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief [in depart- 
ing from the living God]. But exhort one another 
daily, while it is called today: lest any of you be 
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 
3:12, 13. And take heed that no one neglect the 
grace of God, lest any root of bitterness spring up, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


801 


and thereby many be defiled. II Cor. 6:1; Heb. 12 : 
15. Therefore endeavor to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace (Eph. 4:3), having the 
same love among yourselves, that you may not be a 
stumbling-block or offense to one another. But if 
you see any brother or sister err from the way of 
truth, run after him, and instruct and admonish 
him in a meek spirit, until he becomes a Christian, 
or until he strays into some carnal works ; that you 
may be natured and minded as Christ, and not 
abuse His ordinance ; for one can be too severe as 
well as too indulgent in reproving. Thus, my dear 
brethren, have good care for one another, and let 
each take heed to himself; for this is a perilous 
time, and love is seen to wax cold in many. There- 
fore let each lift up the hands which hang down, 
and the feeble knees ; and make straight paths for 
your feet, lest you stumble like a lame man, and 
be not slothful in your business, but be fervent in 
spirit, and redeem the time; for your time here 
may perhaps be short, for Satan is stirred up to 
wrath, knowing perhaps that he has but little time. 
Heb. 12:12,13; Rom. 12:11. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, be vigilant every- 
where, and faint not on account of the tribulation 
which is now seen ; but trust only in the Lord, for 
He has said : "I will never leave thee, nor forsake 
thee." So that we may boldly say, "The Lord is my 
helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto 
me." Heb. 13 :5, 6. For the sufferings which men 
inflict upon us are transient; hence Christ says: 
"Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after 
that have no more that they can do ; but fear him, 
which after he hath killed hath power also to cast 
soul and body into hell." Luke -12 :4, 5. But if we 
suffer with Him, we shall also rejoice with Him. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, be faithful unto 
death, and you shall receive the crown of life. Rev- 
elation 2 :10. Think, dear brethren, if the children 
of this world were promised the crown of Spain on 
some condition, how diligently they would work, 
how joyfully they would run to obtain it. How 
much more ought we to be joyful in our tribulation, 
and with patience run the race that is set before us, 
since the crown of life is promised us, with which 
the crown of Spain cannot be compared ; for this is 
a perishable crown, and its glory is not to be com- 
pared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. 
Therefore Moses chose rather to live in affliction 
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures 
of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of 
Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt : 
for he had respect unto the recompense of the re- 
ward. Heb. 11:25,26. 

My dear brethren and sisters, may the Lord 
through faith give you such a heart and vision, that 
you may with Moses and all the saints of God know 
what God has prepared for them that love Him ; for 
the righteous shall live forever, for the Lord is 
their reward, and the care of them is with the Most 
High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious 
kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord's 


hand, and they shall shine forth as the sun in the 
throne of heaven. Wisd. 5:15,16; Matt. 13:43. 

Hence the apostle writes : "If our earthly house 
of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a build- 
ing of God, a house not made with hands, eternal 
in the heavens." II Cor. 5 :1. By this the apostle in- 
dicates, that though our earthly body be put to 
death here, it shall rise again, and be shed about 
with heavenly glory. Therefore he writes: "Our 
citizenship is in heaven ; from whence also we look 
for the Saviour Jesus, who shall change our vile 
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious 
body." Phil. 3 :20, 21 ; Tit. 2 :13. By this he again 
indicates, how gloriously the body will be changed 
after the resurrection ; now it is weak, then it shall 
become strong; now natural, then spiritual; now 
mortal, but then immortal; for this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal, immor- 
tality; then shall the terrible death be swallowed 
up in victory; then shall the last enemy, which is 
death, be destroyed; then shall be no more death; 
neither sorrow, nor any heat ; then shall the tears 
be wiped away from the eyes ; then shall they in- 
herit all things with Christ, because they have 
overcome; then shall He lead them to the foun- 
tain of living water and feed them with the hid- 
den heavenly bread, that they shall neither hunger 
nor thirst any more ; there shall the spiritual Sol- 
omon dwell in perfect peace with the spiritual Is- 
rael, for all his enemies shall be made His foot- 
stool. 

Therefore, my dear brethren and sisters, be 
steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the 
work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your 
labor is not in vain in the Lord. I Cor. 15 :58. 

Herewith I commend my dear brethren and sis- 
ters to the Lord, who is able to keep your treasure, 
and to give you an inheritance among all them that 
are sanctified. Pray the Lord for me, that I may 
contend steadfastly, and continue in the hope in 
which I (the Lord be praised forever) still stand 
at the present time. And I pray you, dear brethren, 
do the best with my wife and children. 

Written by me, Jacob the Chandler, your weak 
brother and minister, on the 18th of April. 

A lie die lijden na den Wille Godts, wilt hierop 

merchen, 
Die bevelen haer Zielen den getrouwen Scheppers 
met goede Wercken. (I Peter 4:19.) 


THE THIRD LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER, TO 
HIS CHILDREN 

May the same God that blessed Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, also bless you my children, with all man- 
ner of spiritual blessings in heavenly places, that 
you may from your youth learn to know the Lord, 
and fear and obey Him all the days of your life. 
This is the most special request that I make to God, 
that you may be eternally saved, and that the name 
of the Lord may be praised through you; unto 


802 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


which name be praise and glory now and forever. 
Amen. 

My children, hear the instruction of your father, 
and forsake not the law of your mother (Prov. 1 :8; 
4:1) ; be always ready to do what you are com- 
manded of God, that is, that you shall from your 
youth learn to know, fear and obey Him ; for obedi- 
ence springs from the fear of God, and the fear of 
God comes through the knowledge of God. 

Hence Solomon writes : "The fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of knowledge." Prov. 1 :7. For a 
child that knows his father, that he is so honorable 
and just, that he will not have his children run in 
the streets with other children, fight, quarrel, use 
bad language, bring home stolen things: children 
who know their father to be thus, are afraid to do 
this, knowing, that if they do this they shall be 
beaten. Thus also, my dear children, the Lord is 
a just God, who will not tolerate sin, but will pun- 
ish them that commit it. Therefore we must fear 
Him, and not commit sin; for the fear of God 
driveth out sin, and he that feareth God will do 
good. Prov. 16:6; Sir. 15:1. As Solomon says: 
"The fear of the Lord is a fountain of wisdom, to 
depart from the snares of death." Prov. 14:27. 
For, my dear children, the wages of sin is death. 
Romans 6 :23. Hence, since the fear of God drives 
out sin, through the fear of God, the cause which 
brings us into death, that is, sin, is avoided. There- 
fore, my children, begin from your youth to walk 
in the fear of the Lord, that you may not at any 
time consent to sin, and may not forsake the com- 
mandments of your Lord and God; but fear the 
Lord, while He may be feared. For they that fear 
the Lord walk in the right way ; for the fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom and to depart 
from evil is understanding. Prov. 14:2; Job 28: 
28. 

Hence, my children, fear the Lord, and depart 
from evil. For the prophet Jeremiah says : "How 
good it is for a man, from his youth to take upon 
him the yoke of the Lord, and for one that is for- 
saken, to be patient, when he meeteth with ad- 
versity." Lam. 3:27, 28. And Sirach says: "My 
child, from thy youth receive instruction, till thine 
old age, and thou shalt find wisdom" (Sir. 6:18) ; 
for the wisdom of God teaches, that we are to re- 
ceive God's instruction, in order to be taught there- 
by, how we are to depart from evil. "For wisdom 
crieth without ; she uttereth her voice in the streets, 
saying: How long, ye little children, will ye love 
childishness? and how long shall fools desire the 
things that are hurtful to them? and the unwise 
hate knowledge ?" Prov. 1 :20. For this is the 
nature of children; they love to run and play in 
the streets, where they learn all kinds of wicked- 
ness, and do not like to be chastised for it, and kept 
in the house. By this they are known as children ; 
for they know not how injurious this is to them ; 
for thereby they become alienated from the knowl- 
edge of God, and so grow up in wickedness, that 
sometimes they can only with great difficulty come 


to the truth. Therefore wisdom calls the children 
of Israel little children, because they are sometimes 
so wicked, that they want to live to themselves, and 
hate the chastening of the Lord, which is neverthe- 
less administered to them out of love, that they 
should not be condemned with the world. I Cor- 
inthians 11:32. Therefore, my dear children, be- 
ware of all bad company, that might seduce you to 
cherish the world ; for the world lieth in wicked- 
ness, and will perish with its lusts. I John 5:19; 
2:17. Therefore, my children, love not the world, 
neither the things that are in it; for all that is in 
the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the 
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but 
is of the world. 2:15,16. Hence, abstain from 
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. I Pet. 
2:11. And Paul says: Flee youthful lusts (II 
Tim. 2 :22) ; for youthful lusts have plunged many 
into ruin, into lasciviousness, whoredom and many 
improper things. Therefore, my children, beware 
of whoredom, and all unedifying conduct, in which 
whoredom has often originated; as dancing and 
leaping, and the practice of young men and maidens 
sitting together at the beer table, drinking to intoxi- 
cation, and speaking improper words, and besides 
what is done in secret would be too shameful to 
mention. Tobit 4:12; I Thess. 4:3. O my children, 
beware of such things; for the apostle says: All 
they that do such things have no part in the king- 
dom of God. I Corinthians 6:10. But when you 
are grown up, and cannot contain, marry in the fear 
of God. Pray God to provide you a faithful help- 
meet, to walk in the fear of God, with a broken, 
lowly and humble heart. 

My children, do not in any wise let pride rule 
over you in your words or thoughts, as Tobit ad- 
monishes his son (Tob. 4:13) ; for the Lord rejects 
such as are proud in their hearts, but He has exalt- 
ed the humble. Hence David says : "I thank thee, 

Lord, that thou hast humbled me; for before 

1 was humbled I went astray." Ps. 119:67. There- 
fore, my children, never exalt yourselves in your 
hearts, but condescend to men of low estate; for 
pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit 
before a fall ; for they become so proud, that they 
reject the word of the Lord, and live according to 
the desires of their hearts ; therefore the Lord shall 
also not regard them. Rom. 12:16; Prov. 16-18- 
Hos. 4:6. 

My children, heed the instruction of your father, 
and forget it not. Refrain your tongue from back- 
biting, and beware of lying;' for the mouth that 
lieth slayeth the soul. Wisd. 1:11. For liars have 
no part in the new Jerusalem ; but their part is in 
the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: 
which is the second death. Rev. 21 :8. And the 
backbiter causes much contention and discord, and 
also stirs up strife and envy, and separates friends. 
Prov. 16:28. Hence Solomon says: "Where no 
wood is there the fire goeth out : so where there is 
no tale-bearer, the strife ceaseth." 26:20. Hence he 
further writes: "Put away from thee a froward 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


803 


mouth and perverse lips put far from thee;" as 
also Moses writes: "Let there be no backbiter or 
slanderer among you." 4:24; Lev. 19:16. There- 
fore, my children, beware of backbiting, and wher- 
ever you are at home, keep your lips sealed, and tell 
not out of the house what is done in it; keep still 
about all in regard to which silence is expedient, 
then men will love you. Always be faithful to peo- 
ple, and beware of stealing, for it is a great sin; 
and thieves have no part in the kingdom of God (I 
Cor. 6:10), nor is a thief trusted or loved by any 
one ; but wherever he goes, his hands are watched. 
Thus, my children, always content yourselves hon- 
orably in the fear of God, and beware of all sin and 
transgression; and do not envy one another, for 
through envy Cain slew his brother, and the pa- 
triarchs sold their brother Joseph ; for envy breaks 
all friendship, causes a man to forget all benefits, 
and is bent only upon doing harm. The envious 
man rejoices not when he sees his brother or sis- 
ter, but turns his face the other way; nor is he 
grieved at his brother's misfortune, but is pleased 
when the latter meets with adversity. Hence James 
truly says: "If ye have bitter envy and strife in 
your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. 
. . . For where envying and strife is, there is con- 
fusion and every evil work." Jas. 3 :14, 16. There- 
fore, my children, do not envy one another, nor 
any one else; but love one another out of a pure 
heart, as brothers and sisters ought to ; not as Cain, 
who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother 
(I John 3:12); but as Christ left an example, who 
gave His life for us. 

Hence you must also so love one another, not 
in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth 
(I John 3:18) ; that you may be brothers and sis- 
ters, not only according to the flesh, but also ac- 
cording to the faith of the Son of God ; for He says : 
"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples 
if ye have love one to another." John 13 :35. Hence 
John writes: "Beloved, let us love one another: 
for love is of God: and every one that loveth is 
born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth 
not, knoweth not God; for God is love." I John 
4 :7, 8. Hence He would have, that children should 
love one another with true, unfeigned brotherly 
love, with a pure heart, as being born not of natural 
seed, which is corruptible, but of incorruptible 
seed, namely, by the Word of God, which abideth 
forever. I Pet. 1 :22, 23. 

Thus, my dear children, I pray and admonish 
you, love, and bear with, one another, and let one 
be subject to the other ; the younger shall obey the 
older, that there may be no contention or discord 
among you. And you, Katelijntgen and Kopken, 
are the oldest ; when you are grown up, take care 
of the other children, and help them with the labor 
of your hands, thus showing mercy to them, that 
you may be children of your Father which is in 
heaven ; for you will perhaps not have your mother 
very long, and then you are in duty bound to do 
the best for one another. 


Thus, my children, heed the instruction of your 
father, and forget it not. Obey your mother ; for 
it is proper that children should obey their parents, 
as is written in Ecclesiasticus : "The Lord will 
that the parents should be honored by the children" 
3 :2. For this was the first commandment in the 
law, which had a promise: "Honor thy father and 
mother that thou mayest live long on the earth." 
Ex. 20:12. And the greatest honor that children 
can show their parents, is, to obey them. To obey 
them in everything that is not contrary to the honor 
of God, but when the honor of God is concerned, 
parents have no power to rule over them, but are 
themselves in duty bound to admonish their chil- 
dren, to obey the Lord. For they had to teach the 
law to their children, when they went to sleep, and 
when they rose up; in which law it was written, 
that God must be loved above all. Deut. 6r.7. There- 
fore children are not bound to love their parents 
more than God, and God-fearing parents are not 
to require this, but are to exhort their children to 
the same, that they should exercise themselves in 
the love of God, that is ; keep His commandments, 
and be humble before their God (Mic. 6:8), as I 
hope, my children, that also your mother will do. 
Hence obey her in love, and be not disobedient to 
her; for it is written in the law, that he that 
cursed, smote or disobeyed his father or mother, 
had to die, so great a sin it is before the Lord. Ex 
21:15,17. 

Therefore, my dear children, though you lose 
me, do not be froward to your mother, but obey 
her the more, for the whole care of you will now 
be committed to her. Hence, my children, never 
grieve her in your life; for in Ecclesiasticus it is 
written: "He that forsaketh his father is a blas- 
phemer ; and he that angereth his mother is cursed 
of God." 3 :16. Therefore, love her, and remember 
how many pains she suffered on your account, and 
how she bore you under her heart nine months, 
and how she will have to undergo much yet, to earn 
bread for you. Tob. 4:3,4; II Mace. 7:27. Hence, 
dear children, when you are grown up, apply your- 
selves diligently to labor, that you may help your 
mother to gain a livelihood. And be not idle; for 
from slothfulness springs much evil, for it makes 
thieves of children, and harlots of girls, and thus 
they finally come to a bad end. Therefore, my 
dear children, do not desire this, but willingly work 
and labor with your hands that which is honorable, 
that you may have to give to him that needeth. 
Ephesians 4 :28. And if your mother take another 
husband, obey him as your father, and honor him ; 
for he will have to care for you, and instruct and 
teach you as though you were his own children. 
Therefore, you, as obedient children, are to re- 
ceive, and not to despise, his instruction. O my 
dear children, I, Jacob, your father, have left you 
this as a testament, that you may remember me the 
better, and know wherein I stood and why I died, 
of which you need not be ashamed, since it was for 
the name of Christ. For it is for the Lord's sake 


804 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


that I leave you ; there is nothing under heaven so 
dear to me that for it I should De willing to leave 
you; but for the Lord's sake everything must be 
forsaken, father and mother, wife and children, 
yea, one's own life, or we cannot be His disciples. 
Deut. 33 :9. But he that for His sake forsakes all 
this, shall receive a hundredfold, and hereafter 
everlasting life. Matthew 19:29. Thus, my dear 
children, with this confidence I leave you. The 
Lord grant you His grace, that I may find you in 
life eternal. I now go before you the way which 
Christ Jesus and all the saints of God went before 
us : and I know that all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus must suffer persecution. II Tim. 6 :12. And 
Paul says: "Unto you it is given in the behalf of 
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suf- 
fer for his sake." Phil. 1 :29. For what we suffer ; 
we suffer not for our own sakes, but for the Lord's 
sake, because we believe in Him, and by faith fol- 
low and obey Him, which the world will not tol- 
erate, for the prophet says: "Truth is fallen in 
the street ; truth languisheth in prison ; equity can- 
not enter ; he that would depart from evil, and do 
good, maketh himself a prey." Isa. 59:14, 15. As 
Christ says: "If ye were of the world, the world 
would love his own ; but because ye are not of the 
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, 
therefore the world hateth you." John 15 :19. 
Hence James says: "The friendship of this world 
is enmity with God ; if you would be the friend of 
the world, you will be the enemy of God." Jas. 
4:4. For my dear children, if you would be the 
friend of the world, you will have to follow the 
world in her improprieties and false worship ; hence 
Paul writes : "If I yet pleased men, I should not 
be the servant of Christ?" Gal. 1:10. For such 
love the Father hath bestowed upon us that we 
should be called His children ; therefore the world 
knoweth us not, neither knoweth it Him. I John 
3:1. Therefore, if they have called the master of 
the house Beelzebub, it is no wonder that they also 
call them of his household so ; for the servant can- 
not be above his lord, nor the disciple above his 
master. Matt. 10:25,24. 

Herewith I will commend you, my dear children, 
and your mother, to the Lord, for whose sake I 
hope to leave you ; who is able to care for you, and 
to keep you from all evil. The Lord grant you His 
grace, that you may grow up in the knowledge of 
God through the Holy Ghost, so that, according to 
the right judgment of God, you may be found 
righteous for His kingdom, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord and Saviour, to whom be praise and glory 
forever and ever. Amen. 

Written on the second and third days of May, 
A. D. 1569, in prison at Bruges, where I was con- 
fined for the testimony of Jesus, under the house 
of the Vrye ; by me Jacob the Chandler. 

This I send my dear children, as a brief testa- 
ment; I also hope to write them my faith, which 
may serve to show them upon what faith their fa- 
ther died. 


Alle die lijden na den wille Godts, wilt hierop 

mercken, 
Die bevelen haer Zielen den getrouwen Shepper 

met goede Wercken. I Pet. 4:19. 


THE FOURTH LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER, 
WRITTEN TO HIS CHILDREN; BEING PROPER- 
LY A CONFESSION OF HIS FAITH 

My chosen dear children, I hope briefly to write 
you my faith, that you may know, that I did not 
die as a deceiver or heretic, but for the true faith, 
which avails before God. 

1. I believe and confess, that there is one true 
God, who created and made heaven and earth, and 
the sea, and all that therein is, by His eternal, Al- 
mighty and incomprehensible Word, which was 
with God in the beginning, and was God with the 
Father. Gen. 1 :1 ; John 1 :1, 2. 

2. And God on the sixth day made man after 
His image or likeness, that is, according to His 
nature. But man did not remain as created, through 
the subtilty of the serpent, in whom the devil 
worked, so that he brought Adam with his whole 
seed into death, as is written. Gen. 3. 

God created man immortal, and made him ac- 
cording to the image of His own likeness; but 
through the envy of the devil death came into the 
world, and all that are of his side follow him. Wis- 
dom 23:24. As also Esdras writes: "The first 
Adam having an evil heart transgressed and was 
overcome and also all them that are born of him." 
And he further says : "O thou Adam, what hast 
thou done! for though it was thou that sinned, 
thou art not fallen alone, but also all we that come 
of thee." II Esd. 7:48. 

3. Now when the man Adam with his whole seed 
had fallen into death, the merciful Father through 
grace many times promised His Son, who as a spot- 
less lamb, that had been foreordained before the 
foundation of the world, delivered us from death 
by His death and blood. Gen. 3:15 ; I Peter 1 :19, 
20. And when the fullness of the time was come, 
He became man, and was born of the virgin Mary, 
as had been prophesied concerning Him, in these 
words : "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is 
given." Isa. 9:6. And again: "A virgin shall con- 
ceive, and bear a son." 7:14. Thus, through the 
power of the Most High He was conceived in 
Mary of the Holy Ghost, even as the angel said to 
her: "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and 
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee." 
Luke 1 :35. To Joseph he said : "That which is 
conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost: therefore 
also that holy thing which shall be born of her 
shall be called the Son of God." Matt. 1 :20. For 
the Word which was with God in the beginning be- 
came flesh, and dwelt among men, visibly and tan- 
gibly, so that also His glory was seen, a glory as 
of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and 
truth. He humbled Himself, and took upon Him- 
self the form of a servant, became as another man, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


805 


and was found in fashion as a man. Phil. 2 :7, 8. 
And all that He saw and heard of His Father He 
taught and made known to us, and was obedient to 
His Father unto death ; for He was innocently sen- 
tenced by Pilate, was crucified, died, and was bur- 
ied, and the third day rose from the dead. And 
after His resurrection He commanded His disciples 
to preach the Gospel to every creature, and to bap- 
tize believers in the name of the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost. And He ascended up to heav- 
en, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father, from 
whence He shall come again, in the glory of His 
Father, and in the clouds of heaven, to judge the 
quick and the dead. Matt. 28:19; Luke 24:51; 
Rev. 1:7. 

4. I further believe and confess, that there is a 
Holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father, and 
is poured out, through Christ Jesus, upon the be- 
lieving and regenerated children, as is written in 
Tit. 3 and Eph. 1 , as an earnest of the Spirit, and 
as an assurance of the mind ; by which Spirit they 
cry, "Abba, Father." Rom. 8:15. By this Spirit 
they are guided into all truth, since He is also their 
teacher. John 16 :1 3. By the same Spirit the proph- 
ets prophesied, since God through Him distributes 
the spiritual gifts to believers, for the profiting 
of all. Hence the apostle writes: "There are 
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And 
there are differences of administrations, but the 
same Lord. And there are diversities of opera- 
tions, but it is the same God which worketh all in 
all." I Corinthians 12:4-6. These three names are 
one true God. The Father is the Creator, who cre- 
ated everything by the Son, or His Word ; and by 
His Spirit He has also renewed all things, and has 
purified believers by the Son, and by the Holy 
Ghost; in which three names the apostles were 
commanded to baptize believers. For there are 
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are 
one. I John 5 :7. 

5. I further believe and confess, that there is a 
holy Christian church, which is the communion of 
the saints, and the assembly of the believing and 
righteous, which is the temple of the living God, 
the pillar and solid ground of the truth, and the 
city of God in the Spirit. I Cor. 12:13 ; I Timothy 
3:i5. And in this temple the Holy Ghost is the 
teacher, and the apostles the laborers, who first 
built this temple. I Cor. 3 :9. As Solomon, when he 
wanted to build his temple, sent out his servants, to 
hew out the stones from a mountain ; and the stones 
having been hewed, when they were brought to the 
work, they joined them together, so that there was 
neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard 
in the house, while it was in building; so Christ 
sent out His apostles, to teach men, and to preach 
repentance in His name, before they were to be 
baptized ; for they had to be regenerated with the 
hammer of the divine Word, and by the incorrupti- 
ble seed of God the Father, who is a mountain and 
rock forever, if they were to be a living stone in the 


temple of God. I Kings 5:17; 6:7; Dan. 2:45. 
Thus the apostles, as wise builders, first built the 
temple, and laid the foundation. Hence Paul says, 
that God has set in the church first apostles, sec- 
ondarily prophets, thirdly teachers. I Cor. 12 :28. 
In another place he says : "He set some, apostles ; 
and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and 
some pastors and teachers ; for the perfecting of the 
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edify- 
ing of the body of Christ ; till we all come in the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son 
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the 
stature of the fullness of Christ." For as a body 
which has many members, and yet is but one body, 
so also, though there are many believers, there is 
nevertheless but one body, of which Christ is the 
head. For Paul writes : "By one Spirit are we all 
baptized into one body . . . and have been made 
to drink into one Spirit." I Corinthians 12:13. 
And all that are in this temple or city have Christ 
for their Lord and King; Him they must obey; 
they must suffer Him to rule over them, and to 
bear dominion with the sceptre of His kingdom, 
namely, with His Spirit and Word; for to Him 
all power is given in heaven and in earth. Matthew 
28:18. The Father judgeth no man, but hath com- 
mitted all judgment unto the Son: that all men 
should honor the Son, even as though they honor 
the Father. He that honoreth not the Son honoreth 
not the Father which hath sent Him. And as the 
Father hath life in Himself; so hath He given to 
the Son to have life in Himself. John 5 :22, 23, 26. 
He that hath the Son of God hath eternal life ; and 
he that hath not the Son of God hath not life. But 
this church has forgiveness of sins through Him ; 
for they believe in Him, and seek their salvation in 
Him alone, for there is none other name given them 
under heaven, whereby they can be saved, than by 
the name of Christ ; for He is made unto them, of 
God, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, 
and redemption. Acts 4:12; I Cor. 1 :30. And He 
gave Himself for them, that He might redeem them 
from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a pe- 
culiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2:14. 
These have one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one 
God for their Father, and one Holy Spirit, upon 
whom and through whom the temple is built and 
founded. Eph. 4 :5, 6. 

6. I further believe and confess a Christian bap- 
tism, according to the import of the Word of 
God, as Christ commanded His apostles, saying: 
"Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded you." Matt. 28 :19, 
20. And Mark 16:15,16: "Go ye into all the 
world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He 
that believeth and is baotized shall be saved ; but he 
that believeth not shall be damned." Thus the 
apostles did according to the command of their 
Lord; for on the day of Pentecost Peter opened 
his mouth, and taught the people of Jerusalem, and 


806 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


reproved them of their sins, so that they said: 
"Men and brethren, what shall we do ? Then Peter 
said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one 
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remis- 
sion of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to 
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as 
many as the Lord our God shall call." Acts 2 :37- 
39. 

Hereby the apostle proves, that the gift of the 
Holy Ghost should be given not only to the Jews 
and their children, but also to the Gentiles, who 
were far from the kingdom of God, but whom God 
should also call to it, as the prophet Joel had fore- 
told, that God in the latter days should pour out 
His Spirit upon all flesh. Joel 2:28. Hence God 
poured out the Holy Spirit upon the Gentile Cor- 
nelius and his household (Acts 10:44), in order to 
convince Peter and his [other] apostles, that He 
had given power to all men by faith, to become chil- 
dren of God ; for with such He would establish His 
covenant. Hence Peter commanded; that they 
should be baptized in the name of the Lord; for 
they had been baptized by Christ with the Holy 
Ghost and with fire; by which Holy Ghost He 
purged their hearts from dead works, to serve the 
living God. Hence Peter said to those of Jerusa- 
lem: "Repent and be baptized every one of you 
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of 
sins." Not as though sin could be forgiven through 
baptism, as may be seen in the case of Simon the 
sorcerer, who had also been baptized by Philip, but 
Peter said that he should have neither part nor lot 
in this matter. Acts 8:21. But they are cleansed 
from sin through faith in Christ Jesus, in whose 
name they receive baptism ; hence baptism is a sign 
by which something better is signified ; therefore it 
must be received upon or through faith, for Peter 
says: "The like figure whereunto even baptism 
doth also now save us, (not the putting away of the 
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good con- 
science toward God), by the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ : who is gone into heaven, and is on the right 
hand of God." I Peter 3:21, 22. Therefore Philip, 
according to the command of Christ, first taught 
those of Samaria, before they received baptism. 
Also many Corinthians that heard it, believed and 
were baptized. Thus baptism must be received 
upon faith, for the burying of sin (Rom. 6 :4), for 
a washing of regeneration (Tit. 3:5), for a cov- 
enant of the Christian life, for a putting on of the 
body of Christ, for an ingrafting into the true olive 
tree and vine Christ, for an entrance into the spir- 
itual ark of Noah (I Peter 3 :20), of which Christ 
is the true householder, as is written concerning 
Him : "Behold I and the children which God hath 
given me." Heb. 2:13. And Isaiah calls him, The 
mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince 
of Peace. Isa. 9:6. Thus they are baptized by 
Christ inwardly with the Holy Ghost and with fire, 
outwardly with water, as the eunuch said : "Here 
is water ; what doth hinder me to be baptized ? And 
Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, 


thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe 
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God." Acts 8:36 

37. 

Thus the true Christian baptism must be receiv- 
ed according to the command of Christ, and the 
practice of the apostles, in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, for the 
burying of sin, to walk with Christ in newness of 
life, and that we henceforth should serve sin no 
more. 

7. I further confess a true Supper, a breaking of 
bread, which Christ Himself instituted, and ob- 
served with His apostles, with bread and wine. The 
same night in which He was betrayed, He took 
bread, gave thanks, brake it, and said, "Take, eat ; 
this is my body, which is broken for you : this do 
in remembrance of me. After the same manner also 
he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This 
cup is the new testament in my blood : This do ye, 
as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me." I 
Corinthians 1 1 :23-25. From this no one is to un- 
derstand, that the bread was the body itself of 
Christ, because He calls it His body ; else we must 
also understand, that the cup is His testament, since 
He calls the cup His testament. But now they are 
only memorials, by which His death and the testa- 
ment (which is sprinkled with His blood) are to be 
remembered ; for where a testament is, there must 
also of necessity be the death of the testator . . . 
otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testa- 
tor liveth. Hebrews 9:16, 17. Hence Christ con- 
firmed with His death His testament which He 
made with the house of Israel ; and suffered His 
blood to be shed for many for the remission of 
sins. Matt. 26 :28. And for such a remembrance 
the bread is broken, and the wine drunk, in the 
church, as Christ said : "This do in remembrance 
of me." For as the bread is broken in the church, 
so also was the body of Christ broken on the tree 
of the cross ; and as no one is fed by this bread, but 
those who eat of it, so also no one is fed, according 
to the soul, by Christ, who is the bread of life, ex- 
cept those that believe in Him. Therefore Judas 
could not receive Christ, though he ate of the 
bread ; for no one has a right to the breaking of 
bread, except those who by faith have become par- 
takers of Christ, and one bread with Him ; and no 
one has a right to drink out of the cup, save he that 
is become a child of the new testament (which is 
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, I Peter 1:2), 
and he must have the law of the Lord written in his 
heart, and the Lord must have become his God, so 
that He will remember his sins no more. Jeremiah 
31 :33, 34. For if we are to use a memorial, we 
must have that which is to be remembered by it. 
Hence the apostle says: "Let every one examine 
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and 
drink of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh 
unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to him- 
self, not discerning the Lord's body" (I Cor. 11 :28, 
29) ; for we must discern for whom the Lord gave 
His body. Hence, Christians, or those that would 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


807 


be called so, must examine themselves, whether 
they also have a right to the bread, for it repre- 
sents much to them, since it becomes to them as a 
mirror. For it is one bread baked of many grains, 
which must be alike among one another, because 
they are ground, made into a dough with water, 
and baked with fire into one bread, so that it can- 
not be distinguished which was the smallest or the 
largest grain. Thus must we also be broken in 
heart, by the hammer of the divine Word (Jer. 
23:29), being united together through the com- 
munion of the Holy Ghost; and through fervent 
love be in union and peace with one another, and 
do nothing through strife or vain glory, but each 
esteem other better than themselves. Phil. 2:3. 
They that have thus become one bread with Christ 
have a right to the breaking of bread, and may re- 
ceive it in remembrance of Him, for, for such a 
people He gave His body ; they may drink out of 
the cup, for they are cleansed by His blood, and 
have by faith obtained that which is signified by the 
wine. I Peter 1 :19. Hence Paul writes : "The 
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the com- 
munion of the blood of Christ? The bread which 
we break, is it not the communion of the body of 
Christ ? For we being many are one bread, and one 
body ; for we are all partakers of that one bread. 
Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which 
eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?" I 
Cor. 10:16-18. For as Aaron and his children ate 
the sacrifice, and no strangers might eat thereof, 
so no one has a right to the breaking of bread and 
the drinking of the cup, save only the true, regen- 
erated children of God, who are inwardly baptized 
by Christ with the Holy Ghost and with fire, and 
outwardly with water, upon their faith, and are 
thus become one bread and body with Christ. And 
as the children of Israel had to eat the paschal 
lamb with unleavened bread, so also the Supper of 
the Lord must be observed by an unleavened peo- 
ple, who have purged out the old leaven, and are 
become a new lump, or they observe it to their 
condemnation. I Cor. 5 :7. 

Thus the bread is not His body, though Christ 
so calls it ; but it is a memorial of His body, which 
He has given for us. For Christ said to His dis- 
ciples: "He that receiveth you receiveth me." 
Matt. 10:40. And He also says: "Whosoever shall 
receive such a child in my name receiveth me." 
Luke 9:48. These words must not be so under- 
stood, that they receive Christ bodily ; but they that 
received such a child or His disciples, did virtually 
as much as though they had received Christ; for 
they were His messengers, and they received them 
in His name. Paul also says that the Israelites 
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, 
which Rock was Christ (I Cor. 10:4); though 
Moses with his rod did not smite Christ, but a 
stone, which signified Christ (Ex. 17:6). For as 
through the smiting with Moses' rod water ran out 
of the stone, so that the Israelites drank ; so God 
the Father by His power caused the water of eter- 


nal life to flow, to give drink to the spiritual Is- 
raelites ; hence he says : "Which Rock was Christ." 
They also, he says, did eat the same spiritual meat ; 
though they yet ate only the figurative heavenly 
bread in the wilderness ; but God gave us the true 
bread from heaven (John 6:50), which is Christ, 
of which the bread which the Israelites ate was a 
figure. Therefore Paul writes: "They did all eat 
the same spiritual meat." I Cor. 10:3. Christ and 
His apostles were wont to call the signs and figures 
as though they were the substance, as in the 
case of the two wives (Gal. 4:24) : Which things 
are an allegory ; for these are the two covenants ; 
though the wives were not the covenants, but they 
signify the covenants. 

So one is also not to understand, that the bread 
is the body of Christ ; else the cup must also be the 
testament, and the wine His blood, which is not so, 
but they are only symbols by which His body, and 
His blood, which was shed on the tree of the cross, 
are to be remembered. Hence Christ says : "This 
do in remembrance of me." 

8. I further also confess a Christian excommuni- 
cation, or exclusion from the church, which Christ 
and His apostles themselves ordained and insti- 
tuted, and this in a twofold manner. In the first 
place, Christ said to Peter and His other apostles : 
"Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven ; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven." Matt. 18:18. For He 
previously says : "I will give unto thee the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven." 16:19. And He also says 
to His disciples : "Peace be unto you : as my Father 
hath sent me, even so send I you. [And when he 
had said this], he breathed on them, and said unto 
them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost : whosesoever sins 
ye remit, they are remitted unto them ; and whose- 
soever sins ye retain, they are retained." John 20 : 
21-23. From this no one is to understand, that 
Christ gave the apostles such power that they might 
govern the kingdom according to their will. God 
forbid ; but He appointed unto them the kingdom, 
as it had been appointed to Him by His Father; 
that they should govern it according to His will. 
Hence He made them vicegerents, because He 
could not remain with them. As the King of Spain, 
when he wished to travel out of his dominion, he 
appointed vicegerents in his place, that they should 
govern the people according to his will ; however, 
he does not make them lords over it, but he com- 
mits to them his laws, decrees and mandates. 
Hence, whatever they have bound or loosed here in 
this country, that is, what they have judged, must 
stand before the king, as far as they have judged 
according to his laws and customs ; or he would not 
be a true king. Thus Christ also gave His apostles 
a rule, after which they were to govern themselves ; 
and He, moreover, gave them His Spirit, in order 
that thev might fully expound it to the church. 
Hence Christ said to them : "And if thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off : it is better for thee to enter 
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 


808 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched." 
The same He also says with regard to the feet and 
the eyes. Mark 9 :43. Now as among them of Cor- 
inth there was such an offensive member, who 
had his father's wife, Paul determined with his 
spirit and with the power of Christ, when they were 
gathered together, to deliver him to Satan, for the 
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be 
saved. I Cor. 5 :1. Hence, that which Paul bound on 
earth was bound in heaven, for he did it with the 
power of Christ ; for this was the power which they 
had received, to cut off such offensive members, 
and to purge out that old leaven, that they might be 
a new lump. Hence he writes to the Thessalonians : 
"Now we command you, brethren, in the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves 
from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not 
after the tradition which he received of us." II 
Thess. 3 :6. For the dead may not remain among 
the living, lest their offensive smell be imparted to 
them, and they also become unclean ; hence one is 
to withdraw himself from all unclean brethren 
and sisters. The apostle also writes : "A man that 
is a heretic, after the first and second admonition, 
reject ; knowing that he that is such is subverted, 
and sinneth, being condemned of himself." Tit. 
3:10, 11 ; Rom. 16:17. Such are to be avoided — 
for they cause contention and offenses — that the 
church may not be corrupted by their false doc- 
trine. Hence we are to have nothing to do with 
those who are excommunicated from the church 
(I Cor. 5:11), that we may not defile ourselves 
with them ; in the second place, that they may be 
ashamed and repent (II Thess. 3:14), for it is a 
punishment for amendment, and not for destruc- 
tion. Not as Israel's excommunication which was 
done by death (Deut. 13:5) ; but we are to with- 
draw ourselves from all [such] brethren or sis- 
ters without regard of person; for as Moses with 
his severe, deadly excommunication did not make 
a distinction of persons, so Christ makes no dis- 
tinction with His excommunication, which tends to 
amendment. Hence the apostle writes: "I have 
written unto you not to keep company, if any man 
that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, 
or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an ex- 
tortioner; with such a one no not to eat." I Cor 
5:11. 

In the second place it is written, Matt. 18, where 
He [Christ] gives them the keys. If thy brother 
shall trespass against thee (here He does not speak 
of offensive members, whom He would have cut 
off, as is written in the same chapter ; for He says) : 
go and tell him his fault between thee and him 
alone ; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother (that is, if he confesses his guilt, you are 
to forgive him, for it is not a deadly matter for 
which God has excommunicated him; hence you 
are to forgive him, even as God daily forgives you 
through Christ. (Eph. 4:32). But if he will not 
hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that 
in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word 


may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear 
them, tell it unto the church : but if he neglect to 
hear the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen 
man and a publican (which heathen and publicans 
were excluded from the covenant of the Lord). 
Lev. 19:17; Deut. 17:6. From this we may per- 
ceive, that this is spoken of sins that may be ad- 
justed between brother and brother, and concern- 
ing which the apostles had received no binding 
keys, except after the third admonition, and then 
he is not punished for the sin, though the sin is the 
cause, but for his disobedience. Then said Peter: 
"Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, 
and I forgive him? till seven times?" Christ said: 
"I say not unto thee, Until seven times : but, Until 
seventy times seven;" that is, as often as brethren 
sin against one another, they are to forgive one an- 
other, whether the sin consist in words or in works 
upon which excommunication is not pronounced 
by the Scriptures. For this is the key with which 
everything must be locked and unlocked, bound 
and loosed, or it will not stand in heaven. O my 
dear brethren, take good heed, that it be always 
used rightly, and it shall redound much to your 
peace. 

9. Lastly I believe in and confess a resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. For 
as by one man death came upon all men, so also by 
one man the resurrection of the dead comes upon 
all men. Rom. 5:12. As in Adam we all die, even 
so in Christ we all are made alive (I Cor. 15 :21) ; 
everyone in his order, for many that sleep in the 
dust of the earth shall wake, some to everlasting 
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. 
Dan. 12:2. For the dead that are in the grave shall 
hear the voice of Christ, and shall come forth; 
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of 
life ; and they that have done evil, unto the resur- 
rection of damnation. John 5 :28, 29. For their 
faces shall be blacker than darkness, and they shall 
be greatly terrified and sigh for anguish of spirit; 
for they shall all be placed before the judgment 
seat of Christ, and shall there receive according to 
that they have done. II Cor. 5:10; Jer. 17:10. 
Then they shall say to the mountains : "Come and 
cover us, that we see not the face of him that sit- 
teth on the throne." Hosea 10:8; Rev. 6:16. Then 
they shall begin to creep into the holes of bats, and 
to hide themselves in the clefts of the rocks from 
the terrible majesty of the Lord. Isa. 2:20, 21. 
But it will not be possible ; for he shall come in the 
clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they shall 
then know whom they have pierced. Matt 24-30- 
Zech. 12:10; Rev. 1:7. And they shall see the 
righteous stand in great boldness, and shall say: 
"These are they whom we sometimes had in de- 
rision ; we fools accounted their life madness : How 
are they now numbered among the children of God 
and their lot is among the saints!" Wisd. 5:3. 
Then shall they fear that terrible sentence; then 
Christ shall say : "Depart ye cursed, into everlast- 
ing fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


809 


Matt. 25:41. But the righteous shall shine above 
the stars, yea, as the sun, in the throne of their 
Father, and shall be clothed in white raiment, and 
fed with the hidden heavenly bread, and eat of the 
tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise 
of God. Then they shall hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more; for the Lamb shall lead them 
unto the fountain of living water; and then they 
shall inherit all things, for they have overcome. 
Dan. 12:3; Matt. 13:43; Rev. 2:7; Isa. 49:10; 
Rev. 7:17. 

Behold, how glorious they shall be that are ac- 
counted worthy for the resurrection of the just ; for 
this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this 
mortal immortality. Now it is sown in corruption, 
it is raised in incorruption : it is sown in dishonor, 
it is raised in glory : it is sown in weakness, it is 
raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is 
raised a spiritual body. I Cor. 15:53, 42-44. And 
Isaiah says: "But, Lord, thy dead shall live, and 
arise with their bodies." Isa. 26:19,* Job says: "I 
know, that my Redeemer liveth, who shall here- 
after raise me up from the earth. This my skin 
shall encompass me, and in my flesh shall I see 
God ; mine eyes shall behold him and not another."! 
Job 19 :25. Then shall the mortal clothing be put 
off, and the immortal put on ; then shall they have 
palms in their hands, and a crown on their heads, 
and shall live forever; then shall they sit with 
Christ on twelve thrones, and judge the twelve 
tribes of Israel; then shall they stand in great 
boldness before the face of them that afflicted 
them; then shall the bride have her Bridegroom, 
Jesus Christ; then shall she hear His beloved 
voice : "Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom of 
my Father, prepared for you from the foundation 
of the world." II Esd. 2:45; Matt. 19:28; Wisd. 
5 :1 ; Matthew 25 :34. Thus I confess a resurrection 
of the flesh, a righteous judgment, and an eternal 
life. Amen. 

See, my dear children, here I have briefly set 
forth to you in writing my faith, that you may 
know, in what faith your father died ; and I hope 
that it may serve for your instruction, and that you 
may be induced the more to follow the same ; the 
Lord grant you His grace, that this may be accom- 
plished. 

Herewith I will commend my dear wife and chil- 
dren to the Lord ; may He help and bless you by 
His Spirit, that you may all grow up in wisdom, 
holiness and righteousness : this I wish you with 
all my heart. When we are to die, I do not know. 

Finished in the year 1569, in May, in my prison, 
at Bruges, by me, Jacob de Roose, or the chan- 
dler. 
Alle die lijden na den wille Godts, wilt hierop 

mercken, 
Die bevelen haer Zielen den getrouwen Shepper 
met goede Wercken. 

I Pet. 4:19. 


* See German version, 
t See preceding note. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER 
WRITTEN IN PRISON AND SENT TO POUWEL 
VAN MEENEN, ONE OF HIS FELLOW MIN- 
ISTERS IN THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST, IN 
ANSWER TO A LETTER WHICH HE 
HAD RECEIVED FROM HIM 

The eternal, incomprehensible God, who is alone 
wise, grant you His grace, mercy, and peace, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and fill you with 
all wisdom, knowledge and understanding, through 
the Holy Ghost, that you may walk worthily be- 
fore God, to do His will, to the praise of His holy 
name, to the edification of His church, and to the 
salvation of your soul; this I wish, my much be- 
loved and very dear brother Pouwel, as a friendly 
greeting and for a parting farewell. 

After all proper greetings, I inform you, my 
dear brother, that I understood from your letter, 
that you request of me, that I should write to you, 
for a remembrance, concerning all the articles of 
faith; which I would willingly do for your sake, 
but I do not think that I shall have the time. In the 
second place, I understood, that after the writing 
of the first letter you saw the articles of faith which 
I briefly wrote to my children. 

In the third place, I understand from the little 
note which you wrote subsequently, that you par- 
ticularly desire to know my views as to what is to 
be done with persons who will not avoid those 
whom the church has excommunicated according 
to the Scriptures, and are not willing to confess to 
guilt in the matter. I am greatly astonished that 
this spirit also manifests itself ; but I fear that he is 
different in his nature from what he pretends to be ; 
for the avoidance is very much in the way of Satan, 
yet the apostle teaches that it is a good means to 
make the excommunicated ashamed, that is, to 
bring him to humility or repentance. II Thess. 3 : 
14. But now I hear that the defect in regard to this 
avoiding lies chiefly, not with those that are avoid- 
ed, but with those that should avoid. From this it 
is quite evident, that the reason why they will not 
avoid, lies with them, and not with those that are 
avoided, which also appears so to me, since I have 
noticed and feared that there was a covetous, self- 
seeking spirit with many, so that the mind was far 
more exercised in temporal business, traffic, and the 
like, than in godliness ; yea, that they sought more 
to lay up treasures on earth, than in heaven. And 
this avoidance is often greatly in the way of this 
spirit, for it inconveniences him sometimes in his 
business; hence one begins to consider, whether 
this cannot be set aside, and this with Scripture; 
for this spirit is of such a nature, that he does not 
like to make himself known ; but he seeks to cover 
himself with the cloak of righteousness. He is also 
not reproved much in the church, or if he is to be 
reproved, he must be called by another name ; for 
he is sometimes reproved as a heretic, sometimes 
as a juggler, sometimes as an idolater. And this is 


810 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the reason, that he can conceal himself so well, but 
yet manifests his nature in this wise ; for wherever 
he goes he does not go to be idle. Hence the apostle 
writes : "The love of money is the root of all evil." 
I Tim. 6:10. 

The apostle further writes : "Now we command 
you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every 
brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the 
tradition which he received from us." II Thess. 
3 :6. And he further writes : "If any man obey not 
our word, signify that man by an epistle, and have 
no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 
Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him 
as a brother." II Thess. 3:14, 15. With this the 
apostle indicates, that the church is as much bound, 
to have nothing to do with the disobedient, as she 
is bound to withdraw herself from such as walk 
disorderly, even though the word withdraw might 
be understood only with reference to excommuni- 
cation; for as the church must withdraw herself, 
lest she should be leavened or denied by such per- 
sons, so she must have nothing to do with them, 
that they may be ashamed. Again the church de- 
files herself, when she does not avoid, since this is 
commanded and taught her by the apostle, for he 
taught this, that it should be done, as may be per- 
ceived in his epistle to the Corinthians; for he 
writes : "I wrote unto you in an epistle not to com- 
pany with fornicators." I Cor. 5 :9. From this it 
seems that he had written them before that time ; 
but as they did not observe it, he explained it to 
them more fully, for he says : "Yet not altogether 
with the fornicators of this world, or with the cov- 
etous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then 
must ye needs go out of the world. But I have 
written unto you, not to keep company with these." 
See, he says again : "I have written unto you." 

From this it can well be seen, that he repeats it, 
in order that they should observe it better, than 
they had done before ; for they did also not observe 
excommunication, because they could not avoid; 
for where no excommunication is, there is also no 
avoidance, for avoidance springs from excommuni- 
cation. Hence he reproved them as being puffed 
up, and that they did not mourn that such heinous 
deeds were committed among them; and deter- 
mined concerning him that had done this deed, 
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when they 
were gathered together, with His spirit, and with 
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver him 
unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the 
spirit might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. 
Hence it is evident from this, that for whatever ex- 
communication is good, avoidance is also good, 
and that they serve the same purpose. For the 
apostle says, that he delivered him to Satan for the 
destruction of the flesh, that is, for the mortifica- 
tion of the flesh ; and concerning avoidance he says : 
"And have no company with him, that he may be 
ashamed." Mark, for what this shame serves ; for 
it serves a woman to wash herself when she is told 


that she is begrimed; a man, also, that is disrobed, 
does not want to be seen in his nakedness, for he 
is ashamed; hence, when someone comes that 
would see him, he immediately puts on his clothes, 
that he should not be seen in his nakedness. As 
Adam, when he knew that he was naked, he forth- 
with sought to cover himself, for he was ashamed; 
and he made an apron of fig leaves, to cover his 
shame. Now we must, according to the words of 
the apostle, avoid the excommunicated, that they 
may become ashamed ; for if we withdraw ourselves 
from them, and avoid them, they have cause to 
consider why this is done, and through this con- 
sidering to know their nakedness; and become 
ashamed before the Lord their God, against whom 
they have sinned, and are thus smitten in their con- 
science, so that in this condition they dare not ap- 
pear before the Lord, and hence seek a means to 
cover their nakedness, but not with fig leaves, as 
did Adam, but with the skin of the Lamb Christ 
Jesus, who must be received through faith with a 
broken and contrite heart. As Adam, when he 
humbled himself, God put a coat of skins on him, 
to cover his nakedness. Thus, dear brother, ex- 
communication and avoidance have the same pur- 
pose, and they are not contrary to each other; 
hence the apostle says : "Yet count him not as an 
enemy, but admonish him as a brother." Admo- 
nition is not contrary to avoidance, for admonition 
serves to amendment, even as avoidance and ex- 
communication serve to it. Hence the apostle does 
not prohibit it, but teaches that they are to be ad- 
monished as brethren ; for all that is not contrary 
to them, namely, excommunication and avoidance 
they do not prohibit; but where excommunication 
is, there must also be avoidance, for it proceeds 
from excommunication. Hence, when he wrote to 
the Corinthians, how they should deliver the forni- 
cator to Satan, and purge out the old leaven he 
also wrote to them : "But now I have written unto 
you not to keep company, if any man that it called 
a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idola- 
ter or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner • 
with such a one no not to eat. For what have I 
to do to judge them also that are without?" Mark 
he says, judge; yet he had not written anything 
from which they might have understood, that the 
world should be excommunicated ; but he had writ- 
ten that they should have no company with forni- 
cators, and in order that they should not under- 
stand it with reference to the fornicators of the 
world, that one should have no company with them 
he says : "Yet not altogether with the fornicators of 
this world, or with the covetous ; for then must ye 
needs go out of the world. For what have I to do 
to judge them also that are without?" See, he calls 
it judging, that, as he said, one should have no 
company with them ; although avoidance is not ex- 
communication or the judgment itself, but it con- 
firms the judgment; for when I say: You must 
have nothing to do with that man, I thereby declare 
that he is excommunicated, and all that avoid him 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


811 


show that he is judged. Hence he says: "Do not 
ye judge them that are within ? But them that are 
without God judgeth. Therefore put away from 
among yourselves that wicked person." 

From this we can well perceive, that avoidance 
is as well founded in the Scriptures as excommuni- 
cation ; hence those who now reject avoidance, re- 
ject the Scriptures, since it is founded in the Scrip- 
tures. Therefore, they that will not avoid, sin, not 
against men, but against the Lord; hence the 
church may not tolerate such, who so sin against 
the Lord, and will not confess to guilt ; for they are 
servants of the Lord, to punish all disobedience. 

Now we perceive, in the first place from the 
words of Christ (Matt. 18:15), that if any one sins 
against his neighbor, by any transgression, he must 
be reconciled to his neighbor, or he cannot, after 
sufficient admonition, remain a brother, but he 
must be regarded as a heathen man or publican, 
who was excluded from the covenant of the Lord, 
and with whom the Jews would have no fellowship. 
John 4 :9. And since they must be regarded as per- 
sons that are excluded from the covenant of the 
Lord, because they have only through weakness 
sinned against their neighbor, and will not confess 
to guilt ; how much more shall they be regarded so 
who sin against the Lord, and transgress His doc- 
trine — which is frequently done through heedless- 
ness, or self-interest, or for the sake of friends or 
relatives — and yet will not become reconciled to 
the Lord? 

In the second place Moses writes, that if any one 
touched a dead body, and would not wash himself 
the third and the seventh day, he was to be cut off. 
Yet the dead had to be touched, for they must be 
buried ; and yet, if they would not wash themselves, 
they had to be cut off; and the priest might not 
defile himself with any dead person ; he was not 
allowed to go to any dead, for he had the anointing 
oil on his head. Num. 19:11; Lev. 21:1; 8:12; 
Ex. 19:10. Hence, if they in Israel had to be so 
punished who would not wash themselves with 
water from a pollution which was caused by neces- 
sity how shall they now be tolerated in the church, 
who without necessity, yea, often for the sake of 
gain, or through the prompting of flesh and blood, 
defile themselves with these dead, after they have 
been separated from the church, and yet will not 
wash themselves, or bear or confess their guilt? 
These people may not thus be tolerated, according 
to the view which I have from the Scriptures : and 
if they are allowed to go unreproved, it must be 
declared as a liberty, and then perhaps tomorrow 
already another will arise and demand the abolish- 
ment of excommunication, and will prove to you, 
that you have just as much power to maintain 
avoidance, as you have to maintain excommuni- 
cation ; and then you will be beaten with your own 
staff, and thus the hedge will be completely broken 
down, and the wild boars will run into the vineyard 
of the Lord, and root it up. Ps. 80:13; Isa. 5:5. 
O dear brother, take heed; blow the trumpet on 


Mount Zion ; let Israel hear the word of the Lord ; 
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering. 
Joel 2:1; II Tim. 4:2. 

With the simple that are led astray in under- 
standing, deal in a fatherly, longsuffering manner, 
if God may haply yet enlighten them by His Spirit. 
Bind up the wounded ; seek the erring ; break not 
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. 
Isa. 61:1; Luke 10:34; 15:4; Isa. 42:3. Always 
take heed unto yourselves, and to the flock, over 
which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to 
feed the church of God, which He hath purchased 
with His own blood. Acts 20 :28. Hence feed the 
flock of Christ not by constraint, but willingly (I 
Pet. 5 :2) , and remember that the apostle says : 
"Woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel! 
For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward ; 
but if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel 
is committed unto me." I Cor. 9:16, 17. Hence he 
also says : "Though we might have used authority, 
as the apostles of Christ, we were gentle among 
you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children; so 
being affectionately desirous of you, we were will- 
ing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of 
God only, but also our own souls, because ye were 
dear unto us. I Thessalonians 2 :6-8. And he said, 
that as a father admonishes his children, so he had 
exhorted, comforted, and charged them, that they 
should walk worthy of God. w. 11, 12; Phil. 1 : 
27; Col. 1:10. 

Thus, my dear brother, take heed to your sheep, 
and tend to your flock with a ready mind, and, 
when the chief Shepherd shall appear ye shall re- 
ceive a crown of glory that fadeth not away. I 
Peter 5:4; Jas. 1:12. Thus, my dear brother, be 
watchful, and do the work of a true preacher; 
make full proof of thy ministry (II Tim. 4:5) and 
say like the prophet : "For Zion's sake will I n.ot 
hold my peace and for Jerusalem's sake I will not 
rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as 
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that 
burneth." Isa. 62 :1. Be on your guard, and watch 
over their souls, as one that must give an account 
thereof. Heb. 13:17. If you see the sword coming, 
blow the trumpet, and warn the people in the 
name of the Lord, that the drowsy may awake, and 
the feeble knees make straight paths, and the hands 
which hang down be lifted up, and you be free of 
their blood. Hebrews 13:17; Ezek. 3:19, 21; 
33:3; Heb. 12:12, 13. To this end may the Lord 
grant you His grace, and strengthen you by His 
Spirit, that you may receive the end of your faith, 
even the salvation of your soul. Amen. 

I pray you, dear brother, receive my brief ex- 
hortation in good part, for it has been written out 
of love ; and here you have my simple views with 
regard to avoidance, and briefly what is to be done 
with those who do not avoid, and will not confess 
to guilt. I should have written more fully concern- 
ing it, but there was no good opportunity. Here- 
with I will commend my dear and much beloved 
brother, whom I love with all my heart, and his 


812 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


dear wife, to the Lord and to the Word of His 
grace. Pray the Lord for us. I thank you heartily 
for what you sent me ; thank Peter very much in 
my name, this I ask of you. Written on the 17th 
and 18th of May by me, Jacob de Roore. 

I wish that you would send a copy of this letter 
to one of the ministers at Armentiers, or to my 
wife for this is my desire. Dear brother Pouwel, 
if you desire anything further, and I have the time, 
I am at your service, though there is little to be ob- 
tained from me. Greet your ministers very much 
in my name, and all them that fear and love God, 
where it is convenient. 

Alle die lijden na den wille Godts, wilt hierop 

mercken, 
Die bevelen haer Zielen den getrouwen Schepper 

met goede Wercken. 

I Pet. 4:19. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER, 
WRITTEN IN PRISON 

I, Jacob, imprisoned for the Lord's sake, wish 
my dear brother much grace, mercy and peace, 
from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and that He would strengthen and enlighten you 
by His Spirit, according to His pleasure, to the 
revelation of His knowledge, that you may do His 
will, so that you, according to the true judgment 
of God, may be found worthy for His kingdom, 
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise forever 
and ever. Amen. Eph. 3:1; II Tim. 1:8: Eph. 
3:16; Rom. 16:27. 

Very dear and in God beloved brother, as I have 
remembered by writing many of the God-fearing, 
I can finally not forget to write a little to you in 
token of trie good fellowship which we had to- 
gether for a time, in Christ Jesus, through faith, 
but which must now for the Lord's sake be broken 
and severed. For, as a wife must, for the hus- 
band's sake, leave all good acquaintance and fel- 
lowship which she has besides her husband, and go 
with him where he pleases, so we must also for the 
Lord's sake, forsake all good acquaintance and fel- 
lowship which we aside from the Lord have with 
any person and this through faith in and love to 
Christ Jesus ; for we have not seen Him with our 
bodily eyes (I Pet. 1 :8) ; hence it is evident that it 
must be done by faith. For if we love a thing be- 
cause we see it, it is not done by faith, for this love 
results from sight, but if we love a thing for what 
we hear of it, love arises through faith in what we 
hear of it. As Rebecca, though she did not know 
Isaac, and, as may be perceived from the Scrip- 
tures, had never seen him, yet she, through the 
words of Abraham's servant, so loved him that for 
his sake she left all that she had in Syria and went 
to meet Isaac. So we must also for the Lord's 
sake, through faith, and not through sight, for- 
sake everything that we have in this world, not 


only in spirit, as may have been done by us for a 
time, and which is the smallest part ; but now every- 
thing must be forsaken indeed by me, unworthy 
one, in the hope of meeting Him in the air, and be- 
ing ever with the Lord. I Thess. 4:17. 

Hence Peter writes : "At the appearing of Jesus 
Christ ; whom having not seen, ye love ; in whom, 
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory ; receiving 
the end of your faith, even the salvation of your 
souls." I Pet. 1 :7-9. Behold, dear brethren, then 
we shall walk no more by faith, being absent from 
the Lord, but by sight ; then shall the pilgrimage 
be over, then hope shall cease, then shall we re- 
ceive what we now hope for, namely, we shall in- 
herit all things, for the marriage shall then be at 
an end, for the bridegroom shall come for His 
bride, which is His church. Then shall the vision 
which John writes be complete : "And I saw a new 
heaven and a new earth ; for the first heaven and 
the first earth were passed away ; and there was no 
more sea." Revelation 21 :1. Mark, dear brethren, 
he says : "There was no more sea ;" for it is much 
understood to relate to this present time. But we 
still have a sea, whether this be meant in a natural 
or a spiritual sense, however one may understand 
it. For in the fourth chapter (v. 6) we read of a 
sea of glass, but as I understand it, John speaks of 
the natural sea, and of the natural heaven and 
earth. And at the last day, when heaven and earth, 
according to the words of Peter, shall be dissolved 
by fire, and be renewed, we find nothing about a 
natural sea, but it says: "Nevertheless, we, ac- 
cording to his promise, look for a new heaven and 
a new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness :" for 
God faithfully keeps His promises. II Pet. 3:12, 
13; Isa. 65:17. Then shall His righteousness be 
revealed ; for when God shall give to everyone in 
his body according to that he hath done, whether it 
be good or bad, then shall God's righteousness be 
manifest in righteousness as well as in unright- 
eousness, since He will faithfully keep His promise 
to everyone. Jer. 17:10; II Corinthians 5:10- 
Rev. 2:23. 

And John further writes : "And I John saw the 
holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God 
out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her 
husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, 
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men[ 
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his 
people, and God himself shall be with them, and be 
their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes ;" which, dear brethren, has not yet been 
done, for the tears are still flowing here from the 
eyes of those who are renewed by Christ Reve- 
lation 21 :2-4; II Cor. 6:16; Jer. 24:7; Zech 8-8- 
Isa. 25:8; Rev. 7:17; John 16:20. But when the 
righteous shall stand in great boldness before the 
face of such as have afflicted them (Wisd. 5:1), 
then shall the tears be wiped from the eyes; for 
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,' nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more pain : for the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


813 


former things are passed away. And He that sat 
upon the throne said, "Behold, I make all things 
new." Revelation 21:4,5; II Cor. 5:17. Hence 
Peter writes: "Seeing then that all these things 
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought 
ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 
looking for and hasting unto the coming of the 
Lord." II Peter 3 :11, 12. For if we are to inherit 
the new things, we must here be renewed in spirit ; 
for otherwise we cannot arise to eternal life, for 
they that have done evil shall come forth unto the 
resurrection of damnation. John 5 :29. Therefore 
Peter writes: "Wherefore, beloved, seeing, that 
ye look for such things (namely, since you expect 
to inherit the new heavens and the new earth, ac- 
cording to God's promise), be diligent that ye may 
be found of him in peace, without spot, and blame- 
less. And account that the longsuffering of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is your salvation; for God is 
longsuffering, and not willing, that any should per- 
ish, but that they should come to repentance." II 
Peter 3 :9, 14, 15 ; Ezek. 18:32; I Tim. 2 :4. For if 
the Lord had come eighteen or twenty years ago, 
we would, it is to be feared, not have been prepared 
yet ; therefore His having been longsuffering to us- 
ward will be for our salvation, if we are now found 
without spot and blameless in the peace of God. 

Hence, my dear brethren, take heed to your- 
selves, and prepare yourselves for the Lord; for 
our dear Lord stands perhaps also before your 
door, with the ring in His hand ready to knock. 
Therefore, dear brethren, prepare your hearts for 
the Lord, so that, when He comes and knocks, you 
may stand ready to open to Him ; for He comes at 
a time when we least expect Him. Hence be sober 
and watch, and gird up the loins of your mind, and 
always act manfully in truth, as a valiant hero, to 
oversee our poor little flock; and lead them into 
the true pasture of the divine Word that they may 
be fed ; for man doth not live by bread alone, but 
by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of 
God. Deut. 8:3; Matt. 4:4. Hence David says: 
"The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want; he 
feedeth me in rich pastures, and leadeth me to the 
refreshing waters." 

But though Christ is the true Shepherd, He has 
ordained divers ministers in the church (I Corin- 
thians 12:5) to oversee the sheep, and to lead them 
to the pasture ; for though the children have bread, 
someone must cut it for them. Hence, dear broth- 
er, do the best in this time of need, and stay with 
them, and, when the chief Shepherd shall appear, 
you shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not 
away. And always see diligently to it, that the 
church be not left uncared for, but that she may 
always be served with all the ordinances. Abandon 
excessive subtilty and human opinion, and tell the 
people to act according to God's truth ; even as I 
briefly wrote to our church, and would have writ- 
ten more yet, if I had had more paper. Thus, my 
dear brother, always act wisely, and keep yourself 
pure ; beware of meddling with the strife of others ; 


examine a matter well, before you meddle with it, 
for he that meddleth with the strife of others is 
like one that taketh a dog by the ears. Prov. 26 :17. 
But whatever you can speak to promote peace, that 
do ; but speak not what tends to division, for then 
is not the time. But if a false doctrine arise against 
the established and well-tried articles of the truth, 
act as a man, yet with kindness and longsuffering ; 
defend the truth, and turn the foxes out of the vine- 
yard of the Lord, that the tender branches may not 
be bitten off or torn from the vine, Christ Jesus, 
but that it may remain sound and fruitful in the 
Lord. 

Therefore, dear brother, exercise yourself in the 
Scriptures, and give up a part of your temporal 
business, that through habit your mind may be 
practiced in discerning good and evil ; for temporal 
business is a great hindrance to spiritual gifts, for 
thereby the thoughts are filled with anxiety, and 
become widely scattered. Hence, dear brother, re- 
member that the apostle says, that bodily exercise 
profiteth little ; for it profits the body, but not the 
spirit. The Lord has blessed you much according 
to the flesh, so that you are not urged by necessity. 
But godly exercise is profitable unto all things, for 
it profits the spirit and the body, since it cares for 
both, remembers the inner man, and does every 
thing that tends to his salvation. Such is the nature 
of godliness ; and it does not neglect the body, but 
knows how to use the temporal things with moder- 
ation. And it casts its care upon the Lord, know- 
ing that He cares for it. Hence the apostle says, 
that it has the promise of the life that now is, and 
of that which is to come. Therefore, dear broth- 
er, if you be risen with Christ, seek those things 
which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right 
hand of God. Set your affection on things above, 
not on things on the earth ; and be not like a mole, 
whose mouth is always digging and rooting in the 
earth, and which, moreover, is so blind, that he 
hardly sees the heavens. Not, dear brother, that I 
say, that you are so ; by no means, for I have a bet- 
ter confidence concerning you. But when we thor- 
oughly examine ourselves, we find ourselves to be 
of such a nature, that we are earthly-minded, and 
blind in divine things ; and though we are enlight- 
ened through Christ Jesus, that we have obtained 
sight in divine things, and been renewed through 
Him, we nevertheless sometimes follow too much 
our innate nature, by which nature faith must 
sometimes bow and show its back, for it is crushed 
down by the innate nature, which through unbelief 
and want of confidence toward God still bears its 
fruits, whence it comes that men make shipwreck 
in the faith ; for when two vessels that are enemies 
to each other meet on the sea, one is seen to van- 
quish the other. Thus also, faith and unbelief 
coupled with man's nature, are enemies to each 
other, so that they conquer each other. Hence, if 
we do not by faith firmly resist with the inner man, 
we shall in the course of time be overcome ; for un- 
belief has much support, in the first place, from 


814 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Satan, who works in the children of unbelief (Eph. 
2:2), in the second place, from our own flesh. 
Therefore consider, dear brother, if a city is be- 
trayed from within, how great resistance must be 
made, before the enemy can be put down, and the 
city possessed in peace. Thus also must we show 
great diligence, before we overcome all these ene- 
mies. In the first place, our own flesh, which is 
prone to all evil, for it lusts against the Spirit. Gal. 
5:17. Hence we must observe how prudent the 
kings of this world are. When they feel that their 
enemies begin to bestir themselves, they make pro- 
vision and strengthen themselves, to resist those 
enemies. But we, who like kings and men, ought 
to be prudent in that which is good, and simple as 
children in that which is evil, when we feel that 
our enemies begin to bestir themselves, go to meet 
them ; but it is not done through faith, but through 
unbelief, namely, when we feel that our own na- 
ture, which is earthly minded, is not content with a 
fair profit, but would rather have still more — for 
it loves money, and hence will not soon be sated 
therewith — we meet it — we set up two or three ad- 
ditional looms and do not rightly consider how 
hurtful it is to our faith, and how widely our 
thoughts are thereby scattered ; so that we become 
much more concerned with temporal, than with the 
spiritual things; and thus the spiritual gifts de- 
crease, while they ought to increase, and we have 
no desire to offer our hand to the flock of Christ, 
and to feed it with what we have received from the 
Lord. Truly does the apostle say: "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain. For we brought 
nothing into this world, and it is certain we can car- 
ry nothing out." I Timothy 6:6, 7; Heb. 13:5. 

And now, dear brother, though we think, I do 
not seek to lay up treasures, I do not want to keep 
the gain for myself alone, consider also, that we are 
not for ourselves, for we are servants of a great 
king. Now, if you were a king, and had servants, 
and appointed one to be your chamberlain, and an- 
other to be your halberdier ; suppose the chamber- 
lain should forsake the office in which you wished 
him to serve you, and should want to be a halber- 
dier ; consider whether you would be well satisfied 
with that servant. Thus also, dear brother, the 
Lord has appointed you His servant, that you 
should serve Him with the spiritual gift which you 
have received from Him ; and if you want to for- 
sake that, and exercise yourself with that which is 
temporal, to serve Him with it, consider whether 
you will thereby please the Lord. And if you will 
assign as a reason, that it is not your office, know 
that they must not all be teachers who exhort the 
church ; this is no rule laid down in the Scriptures. 
Therefore; my dear and much beloved brother, 
take heed to yourself, and surrender yourself to 
the Lord, and stay with the church ; this I pray you 
with all my heart, that the little flock may remain 
together. I hope the Lord will help and keep you 
until the proper time, if you seek Him with all 
your heart; lay it to heart, this I pray you. I 


should have written you more concerning it, but 
there is no opportunity. I hope to write you an- 
other letter, if the Lord grants time; you may also 
lay that to heart. Herewith I commend my dear 
brother to the Lord, and bid you a cordial adieu. 
Receive my letter in good part, for it has not been 
written only for your sake; I wish that it might be 
read by M., or at M's., and by all our ministers. 
Written in my prison to my dear brother, D. B., 
b y me > Jacob the Chandler, ' 

On the 29 and 30th of May, A. D. 1569. 
Alle die lijden na den Wille Godts, wilt hierop 

mercken, 
Die bevelen haer Zielen den getrouwen Schepper 

metgoede Wercken. (I Peter 4:19). 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JACOB THE CHANDLER, WRIT- 
TEN IN PRISON; IN WHICH HE ADMONISHES HIS 
FELLOW MINISTERS, NOT TO FLEE AS HIRE- 
LINGS, AND TO LET CHRIST'S SHEEP GO 
ASTRAY THROUGH LACK OF INSTRUC- 
TION; BUT FAITHFULLY TO DISCHARGE 
THE OFFICE IMPOSED UPON THEM 

As he had himself been in Friesland, and had 
heard from the lips of both parties the difficulty 
that had arisen among the people oj God, and 
understood that they had on both sides sinned 
against God and their neighbor, and made them- 
selves blamable, he therefore made much mention 
concerning this matter in this letter, as you, kind 
reader, may see. 

I, Jacob the Chandler, imprisoned for the Lord's 
sake (Eph. 3:1; II Tim. 1 :8) ; wish all the elders 
and ministers of the churches in Flanders, who 
oversee the flock of Christ, and L. V. or A. D , 
wisdom, knowledge and true love from God the 
heavenly Father, grace, mercy and peace, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and true comfort, strength 
and power, through the Holy Ghost, to serve and 
oversee the church aright, to be with her as a 
father, and faithfully to assist her in every need 
to the upbuilding of the church, to the praise of 
the Lord, and to the salvation of your souls. This 
I wish you, my dear and beloved brethren, as a 
friendly greeting, and a cordial adieu. 

After all proper and Christian greetings, I pray 
all my dear brethren, to consider my letter in love 
even as I testified before the Lord and all the God- 
fearing, that it has been done by me out of love. 
For having heard that many who oversee and care 
for the church seek to be released, in order to 
journey out of the country, love for the people has 
prompted me to write you, in order to admonish 
you that you should rightly think of the poor chil- 
dren whom you would leave behind in great mis- 
ery ; whom you have begotten again through the in- 
corruptible seed, and brought into the true way 
yea, some of whom have not yet been fully regener- 
ated, and can not rightly discern between good and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


815 


evil ; and if you thus go away and leave the poor 
children, they are in great peril of perishing, and 
straying back into the world. Hence, dear breth- 
ren, consider how little joy it will be for you when 
you will hear this of them ; for we would not like 
to leave our natural children in any need if we 
could with a good conscience help the matter. 
Now, you may think within yourselves: "I have 
served the church a long time; another may now 
serve." But I say, dear brethren, with David : "Be 
not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no 
understanding : whose mouth must be held in with 
bit and bridle, if they will not come unto thee." Ps. 
32 :9. For we must not render the service of serv- 
ants, which is often reluctantly rendered, and who 
look to one another, for they serve for wages, and 
do not seek the advantage of the house. But we 
must render the service of children, which is given 
from love, for they live unto their father, and not 
to themselves, as Christ did not live to Himself, 
but to Him that sent Him to be a minister of the 
kingdom, and conducted Himself among them as 
one that serves (Matt. 20:28; Luke 22 :27) ; which 
service was given from love, not a year or two, but 
all the days of His life, for He was obedient unto 
death. Phil. 2:8. And He appointed unto His 
apostles the kingdom, as His father had appointed 
it unto Him, so that they who according to the gift 
were the greatest in the kingdom, had to be their 
ministers and servants. And the apostles took 
help, and ordained in the church pastors, teachers, 
ministers, helps, governments, and the like (II 
Tim. 2:2; Tit. 1:5; I Cor. 12:28), and appointed 
unto them the kingdom, as Christ had appointed it 
unto the disciples, namely, to serve the kingdom 
from love, and to live therein to the Lord and their 
neighbor, and not to themselves. Hence the apostle 
complains of some, saying: "All seek their own, 
and not the things which are Jesus Christ's." Phil- 
ippians 2:21. Thus let all that serve in the king- 
dom, who are chosen according to the rule and 
ordinance of the Scriptures to serve the church, 
give themselves to the church from love, yet, my 
dear brethren, with this understanding : if for the 
church's sake you suffer loss in temporal matters, 
it is her duty to assist you. Deut. 12:19; Sirach 
7:31; Luke 10:7. 

Hence, my dear brethren, let everyone of you 
take heed to himself ; for we certainly believe that 
the choosing of the church is from God. Let us 
therefore consider; if the Lord has chosen us to 
serve Him in this way, we must give ourselves 
to the Lord, whenever we have good reasons for it, 
in this that we can satisfy the church, though we 
may say : "There are others to whom this belongs 
more properly than to me." This is no reason that 
avails before the Lord. If one might thereby ex- 
cuse himself, Jonah could easily have found such 
a reason; but because he refused to go and pro- 
claim to the Ninevites the will of the Lord, he had 
to go into the belly of the whale; even as I un- 
worthy one have seen some in my time, who re- 


fused too much, but it did not turn out to their 
good. Likewise, Moses and others sought excuses 
(Ex. 4:10; Jer. 1 :6) ; but it did not avail them, 
the Lord said : Do not I know whom I will send ? 
For He needs no counselors; He well knows for 
what He wants to use us. Nevertheless the ex- 
ample of Moses is much followed in the churches, 
and it is regarded as an honorable thing for a man 
to refuse ; yet it does not please the Lord, for He 
was angry at Moses. But the prophet Isaiah did not 
do thus, but said: "Send me, Lord; and with this 
the Lord was not displeased." Isa. 6:8. Elisha, 
also, asked for a double portion of Elijah's spirit. 
Elijah said : "Thou hast asked a hard thing ; nev- 
ertheless, it shall be so unto thee." II Kings 2 :9, 
10. And on this wise Paul says : "If a man desire 
the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work." 
I Tim. 3:1. 

See, dear brethren, thus we must follow what is 
honorable and praiseworthy before the Lord, and 
think, they that minister well purchase to them- 
selves a good degree, and great boldness in the 
faith, v. 14; Matt. 25:21. As the children of this 
world, when they can get into the service of any 
lord, they endeavor to serve faithfully, that they 
may obtain a higher office; so must we also en- 
deavor to serve the Lord in that wherein we are 
called, that we may obtain power to rule the hea- 
then with a rod of iron. Ps. 2:9; Rev. 2:27. There- 
fore, my dear brethren, remain together, as long 
as it is possible for you, and you can encourage one 
another; but when you begin to separate, you 
make one another weak; hence remain faithfully 
together, and take heed to your ministry. You that 
care for the poor, exercise diligent care over them, 
visit them frequently, and see how they do; ad- 
monish them with a fatherly heart to labor (Eph. 
4:28; II Thess. 3:12), and comfort them in their 
tribulation, for a consoling word helps the afflicted 
more than the gift. And cleave firmly with your 
heart in love to your ministers of the Word; for 
you must be one heart with them, and you will be 
the better able to keep the people in peace ; for if 
the rulers of a country are not at peace among 
themselves, there cannot well be peace in the land. 
So also in the churches, if the ministers are at vari- 
ance with one another, there cannot well be peace 
among the common brethren. Hence, dear breth- 
ren, remain at peace with one another; and you 
deacons, be a support to the ministers of the Word, 
and take their part ; for they must blow the trum- 

?et, that the drowsy may awake (Isa. 62:6; Joel 
:1) ; and some drowsy people are of such a na- 
ture, that they do not like to be waked up : so also 
some that have become drowsy in sin do not like 
to be waked up. Hence there is sometimes much 
talk behind the back of such ; therefore you and all 
pious brethren must defend your man, and talk to 
the backbiters, and admonish them, and you will 
encourage your man. And you, dear brethren, who 
oversee the church with the Word of the Lord, re- 
main with the church as long as is possible for you ; 


816 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


for if you want to go away, you discourage the 
other ministers, and weigh them down completely, 
and scatter the flock. Hence I pray you, for the 
people's sake, as one that loves them with a pure 
heart, do not forsake them, but remain with them, 
and look at those unto whom Christ appointed the 
kingdom, as it had been appointed unto Him by 
His Father, how diligently they exhorted the king- 
dom, and fed the flock. For they deemed it profit- 
able to admonish and to strengthen them, and to 
stir up their pure minds, as long as they were in 
the body, that after their decease they might re- 
member the same. II Peter 1:13. For the apostle 
had exhorted them for three years day and night 
with tears. Acts 20:31. And he taught the bishops 
of Ephesus, that they should take heed unto them- 
selves, and to the flock, v. 28. Now you will per- 
haps say: "We are no bishops." Then I say that 
they must not all be bishops who exhort the church, 
or proclaim the Word of the Lord ; but everyone 
must be faithful in his ministry." For there are 
manifold ministries (I Cor. 12:5) ; if any have a 
ministry, let him wait on his ministering; if any 
teach, let him wait on his teaching ; if any exhort, 
let him wait on his exhortation (Romans 12 :7, 8), 
and thus feed the flock of Christ, not by constraint, 
but willingly, for the Lord would be served from 
love, even as He served from love. I Pet. 5 :2. 
Hence the apostle writes : "If I do this thing will- 
ingly, I have a reward: but if against my will, a 
dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me." 
I Cor. 9:17. 

Therefore, dear brethren, accept them gladly, 
and bring them up with the rational, sincere milk 
(I Pet. 2:2), like a good nurse, who so loves her 
child which she nurses, though she has not given 
birth to it, that she cannot give it up without tears, 
when the father comes and takes it home, notwith- 
standing it is a stranger to her according to the 
flesh. How much more then shall you love your 
children, and not forsake them as long as you can 
remain with them, since you not only nursed them, 
but may have given birth to a great part of them ; 
and they are your brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
whereby you are the more bound to them in love, 
to serve and protect them. As a hen protects her 
chickens under her wings from the birds of prey ; 
so do you also protect them from evil, wild beasts 
that cause discord and offenses contrary to the doc- 
trine of Christ; for their word will eat as doth a 
canker, and will destroy like the pestilence. Ro- 
mans 16:17; II Tim. 2:17. Hence, protect them 
herein, and separate from such persons ; keep the 
flock in peace as far as is possible for you, and 
avoid all strife, and do not meddle with it as far 
as you can keep out of it ; for he that meddleth with 
strife not belonging to him is like one that taketh a 
dog by the ears, and by strife many a heart is pol- 
luted. Always speak, as much as you can, what 
tends to peace, and not to division, for that is not 
the time then; for a division is very soon made, 
which can only with great difficulty be healed, and 


so many a simple soul perishes thereby. And in my 
judgment it is no usage of the Scriptures, in times 
of decay to settle differences by excommunica- 
tion, though this is sometimes done through zeal ; 
but it is good to be always zealously affected in a 
good thing. Gal. 4:18. For he that transgressed 
the law of Moses died without mercy under two or 
three witnesses (Deut. 17:6; Heb. 10:28) ; for this 
example we have first in the Old Testament, where 
they also had an excommunication, to punish the 
wicked with death. Nevertheless, the Lord was not 
willing to use the excommunication, nor did He 
give the prophets any charge, that the excommuni- 
cation should be used, but He called to them, that 
they should repent and be converted, and He would 
be merciful to them, and purge them most purely 
from their dross ; for He can do this, dear brethren, 
without injuring the gold or silver. Isa. 1 :16; Ter' 
4:14; Joel 2:12; Isa. 1:25. J ' 

In the second place we have this example in the 
Testament, first in the case of John and the church- 
es in Asia, how lamentably they had decayed ; yet 
John did not make use of excommunication with 
respect to them, nor do we find that the Lord once 
asked him why he had not done this ; but He called 
them to repentance through John, which if they 
would not do, He would remove their candlestick 
out of his place. Rev. 2 and 3. And whether the 
apostle insisted as strongly on excommunication, 
in regard to that one fornicator, in the second 
epistle to the Corinthians, as he did in the first, this 
every one may consider; for the apostles always 
had a godly care for the simple, and sought to 
prevent division, as far as was possible for them ; 
hence they tried every means to allay strife, as can 
clearly be seen in the Acts of the Apostles. For 
when the Jewish brethren came to trouble the be- 
lievers among the Gentiles, saying : "Except ye be 
circumcised according to the law of Moses, ye can- 
not be saved:" so that there was a great uproar 
among the people, there rose up also at Jerusalem 
certain of the sect of the Pharisees which be- 
lieved, saying that it was needful to circumcise 
them, and to command them to keep the law of 
Moses; which was certainly great injudiciousness. 
Yet the elders and the apostles did not persist in 
charging them with their unwise course, for fear 
of division, but met the Jewish brethren, to avoid 
division, and adopted certain articles from the law, 
which were not contrary to the evangelical truth, 
and determined that those who had been converted 
from among the Gentiles should not be troubled, 
and that no burden should be laid upon them, than 
that they should abstain from meats offered to 
idols, and from blood, and from things strangled 
and from fornication. Acts 15; I Cor. 10-28- I 
Thess. 4:3; Gen. 9:4; Lev. 7:26. By this the Jews 
were pacified, for they might easily think that they 
were right in a measure at least, because some ar- 
ticles from the law were imposed upon the Gentiles 
As also in the twenty-first chapter, how they al- 
layed the strife or offense that was between the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


817 


Jews and Paul. They had heard that Paul taught 
to forsake Moses; hence the elders advised that 
Paul should take four men unto him, and go into 
the temple, and purify themselves and shave their 
heads. This they were not bound by conscience 
to do, but they did it for the sake of the Jewish 
brethren, for they [the elders] said: "They will 
know that those things whereof they were in- 
formed concerning thee are nothing." Then he 
went to signify to them the accomplishment of the 
days of purification. Acts 21. For when they were 
pacified it was easier to persuade them that the 
law had an end in Christ. Rom. 10 :4. But they did 
not determine, that Paul should stand still in his 
ministry till he had pacified them; for this would 
frequently have had to be done, since there was 
often talk about him, as can well be seen in the 
epistle to the Corinthians but with him it was a 
very small matter that he should be judged of 
them, or of man's judgment, for he says : "I judge 
not mine own self." I Cor. 4 :3. Nor does this tend 
to peace, but to more strife; for a church cannot 
be kept in quietude when she has to lose her pas- 
tor, because there are persons that talk about him, 
and do not know what the matter is, nor whether 
they say it justly or unjustly of him. Hence the 
accuser must come before his church, and accuse 
him there ; if they are matters of which they can- 
not agree together, the church may hear the mat- 
ter, and if the accused is guilty, she may help pun- 
ish him ; thus she will be delivered from his hand, 
so that he can make no trouble. And thus the mat- 
ter must first be proven, before the church can be 
helped, and also before punishment can take place. 
Hence Paul writes to Timothy : "Against an elder 
receive not an accusation, but before two or three 
witnesses." I Tim. 5 :19. For he well knew that 
there is often much said about them. Therefore, 
dear brethren, continue steadfast, this I pray you 
for the sake of God's truth, and do not forsake 
them, namely, your men, before they are forsaken 
by the Lord; but always seek to build up one an- 
other, that the churches may be supplied, and the 
flock fed; that Jerusalem may have watchmen 
upon her walls who do not sleep or hold their peace 
day and night, but remember the Lord and their 
flock, and say: "For Zion's sake will I not hold 
my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, 
until the righteousness thereof go forth as bright- 
ness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burn- 
etii." Isa. 62 :6, 2. 

Thus, my dear brethren, do the best with the 
poor sheep, stand by them faithfully, and do not 
forsake them in this great need, but exhort and 
comfort them with these words: how our fathers 
were tried in many ways, and became the friends 
of God, since they had to overcome through much 
affiction. Judith 8 :25 ; Deut. 8. Likewise, Isaac, 
Jacob, the prophets, and all that loved God, re- 
mained steadfast, as the angel said to Tobit : "Be- 
cause thou didst please God, it was not possible 
that thou shouldst remain without temptation." 


Tobit 12*; Prov. 3:12. And if you fall into afflic- 
tion for their sakes, think of what the apostle 
writes: Therefore, I endure all things for the 
elect's sake, that they may also obtain salvation — 
even as has now fallen to me unworthy as I am. 
For if it had not been for the church, I think I 
would have remained in the country of Cleves ; but 
I can with David say to the Lord : "My times are 
in thy hand." Ps. 31:15. And it was his will to 
bring my time to an end, as the facts show. But 
the apostle says: "Now I rejoice in my sufferings 
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the af- 
flictions of Christ in my flesh for His body's sake, 
which is the church." Col. 1:24; Rom. 12:5; Eph. 
1 :23. And if you suffer for the church, you have 
acted according to the love of Christ, given your 
life for the brethren and for the sheep. John 
10:11; I John 3:16. Thus, my dear brethren, 
watch, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, 
and let all your things be done with charity. 

Finally, I will address myself briefly to my dear 
sisters, namely, to your wives, to exhort and en- 
treat them to be patient with their husbands, and 
not to importune them, in order to get them out 
of the country. But consider the great distress, and 
have pity and compassion with the people, and 
think, that we must help bear that with which the 
Lord tries our husbands, and by faith possess our 
souls in patience. Luke 21:19; Heb. 10:36. As 
when God tried Abraham, that he should offer up 
his son, Sarah had to help bear it, for she would 
have had to miss her only son, if the Lord had not 
given him back to Abraham. Yet we can not see 
that Sarah resisted Abraham; she obeyed Abra- 
ham as her lord, and suffered him to live by his 
faith in all in which the Lord tried him, and ad- 
monished him herself, that he should cast out the 
bondwoman and her son. Gen. 21 :10. Thus also 
you, my dear sisters, obey your husbands, and let 
them live by their faith in all in which they are 
tried by the Lord. Genesis 3:16; Eph. 5 :22 ; Col. 
3 :18. And do not discourage them, but rather re- 
fresh their mind when you see that they are bur- 
dened through the trouble which they have with 
the people, and remember that you are Sarah's 
daughters, as long as ye do well, and are not "afraid 
with any amazement." I Pet. 3:6. Hence, dear 
sisters, be of good cheer, and trust your God ; He 
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you 
are able, but will with the temptation also make a 
way to escape, that you may be able to bear it. I 
Cor. 10:13, II Pet. 2:9. For God knows our 
strength, that it is nothing, hence He cares for us, 
for He hath said, "I will never leave thee, nor for- 
sake thee." So that we may boldly say, the Lord 
is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall 
do unto me. Ps. 37:25 ; Josh. 1 :5 ; Hebrews 13 :5, 
6 ; Ps. 1 18 :6. But we must slay and overcome them 
in the name of the Lord, for they are but dust and 
ashes, and shall perish as grass, yea, the moth shall 


* See German version, v. 13. 


818 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


eat them like wool as Isaiah says ; and he further 
says : "I am he that comforteth you ; who art thou, 
that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall 
die, and of the son of man which shall be made as 
grass?" Isa. 40:6; I Pet. 1 :24; Isa. 51 :8, 12. For 
with them there is only an arm of flesh, but with 
us is the Lord Himself, who will help us, and fight 
our battles. II Chron. 32:8; Jer. 17:5; Wisdom 
4 :28. Although they are now like mad men, who 
spare none, but spoil and destroy those that fear 
the Lord, and exalt themselves very greatly, so 
that almost every one is afraid of and trembles be- 
fore them, yet the Lord shall humble and destroy 
them when their spoiling and destroying shall have 
an end. II Esd. 16:71; Isa. 14:14. But now, dear 
sisters, we must be tried as gold in the fire, that our 
trial may work patience, and that patience may 
have her perfect work. Zech. 13 :9; Wisd. 3 :6. For 
when we are patient in our tribulation, we over- 
come and do not get weary or faint ; yea, though 
our outward man perish, yet the inward man is re- 
newed day by day. II Cor. 4:16. And we choose 
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, 
than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and 
esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than 
the treasures in Egypt, having respect unto the 
recompense of the reward. Heb. 11:25, 26. 

See, dear sisters, take courage, and go forth with 
the widow Judith against the proud Holofernes, 
who had been sent forth by King Nabuchodonosor, 
to bring every country under his power. And he 
pretended that he was God ; yet his servant, Holo- 
fernes, was slain by Judith. Judith 2:5; 13 :8. Thus 
also has now the son of perdition, who is called God 
upon earth, sent forth a proud messenger, and 
thinks thereby to bring everything under his pow- 
er. But, as I hear, he has been vanquished at Kort- 
rijck, by a poor, simple widow, even as Christ van- 
quished the scribes and Pilate. Thus you must also 
go forth dear sisters, to overcome him by faith. 
And take an example also from the woman Jael, 
who slew Sisera, the adversary and enemy of the 
house of Israel. She took a hammer, and drove a 
nail through his head, so that he lay there dead. 
Judges 4:21. Thus must you also, my dear sisters, 
go forth by faith against the enemy and adversary 
of the house of Israel, who through his children 
and servants makes so much clamor and ado, 
namely, the devil or Satan, and must with the 
hammer of the divine Word drive the nail, Christ 
Jesus, through his head, and say with the apostle : 
"Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." I Cor. 15:57. 
And he also says: "Thanks be unto God, which 
always causeth us to triumph in Christ." II Cor. 
2:14. 

Thus, my dear sisters, be always valiant, and 
patient withal, and exhort your husbands to stay 
with the flock; and know that whatsoever good 
thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of 
the Lord, Eph. 6 :8. 

Therefore, be steadfast, immovable, always 


abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as 
ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 
I Cor. 15:58. 

Herewith I will commend you, my dear and 
much beloved brethren and sisters, to the great 
Almighty God, who alone is wise, and pray Him 
to put into your heart to do that which is acceptable 
before Him. And I pray you to receive my letter 
which has been written out of love, in good part ; 
and if there are any views in it that are not like 
your own suffer them in love, for we stand, I hope, 
in one faith. For I am not conscious of any change 
in me; what I unworthy one, have taught the 
church and the people, in that I still stand un- 
changed, the Lord be praised for His grace, who 
has for about eighteen years kept me therein. Greet 
all the brethren and sisters that live among you be- 
loved very much in my name. Herewith I will bid 
you adieu; adieu, my dear brethren with your 
wives, till we see one another in eternal joy ; the 
Lord grant you His grace, that we may find one 
another there. Written the 31st of May and the 1st 
of June, by me, Jacob de Roore, in my imprison- 
ment. 

Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the 
will of God commit the keeping of their souls to 
him in well-doing, as to a faithful Creator. I Pet 
4:19. 


ADRIAEN OL, A. D. 1569 

About the year 1569 there was imprisoned at Ar- 
mentiers, in Flanders for the Word of God and the 
testimony of Jesus, a brother by the name of 
Adriaen Ol, who, as he could by no temptation or 
threat, inflicted upon him by the papists, be caused 
to apostatize, but remained faithful to his God, 
was condemned by those bloodthirsty men.. And 
thus he was not put to death at said place, for the 
testimony of Jesus, having offered up his corrupt- 
ible body in great steadfastness for a sweet smell- 
ing savor unto God. 

To this Adriaen 01, Jacob the Chandler wrote 
his nineteenth letter, for consolation in his impris- 
onment. 


ABRAHAM PICOLET, HENDERICK VAN ETTEN, AND 
MAEYKEN VAN DER GOES, A. D. 1569 

At Antwerp there was one Abraham Picolet, 
who was very intimately acquainted with Hender- 
ick van Etten, born at Breda, and a certain Her- 
man N. Now it happened that as said Henderick 
intended to go home, he requested his companion, 
that they would yet once before his departure en- 
joy and rejoice themselves together (walking) by 
singing and speaking of the word of the Lord, as 
a leave-taking from the good fellowship which they 
had had together in the Lord. But as there was a 
great persecution at that time under the govern- 
ment of the Duke of Alva, these two young men, 
while walking in a forest in the vicinity of Wil- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


819 


rijck, near Antwerp, were apprehended by the 
bailiff of Borgerhout, who searched them, and 
finding in their possession several books, as, a 
New Testament and others, he strictly examined 
them, and asked them where they had last been to 
confession and to the sacrament. Thereupon Abra- 
ham answered, that it had been in Italy. He further 
asked, how long ago it had been, whereupon he re- 
plied: "Four years." Learning these and other 
things from them, he on the second day of Whit- 
suntide brought them prisoners to Antwerp. But 
as the aforesaid Herman was not firmly built upon 
the cornerstone Christ, his building did not stand, 
for his sandy foundation could not endure these 
storms. When examined, he confessed that he had 
been to confession and to the sacrament last East- 
er, though this was not true. And in order to con- 
firm this, the parish priest or pastor of St. George's 
church testified to it, and by this means he was re- 
leased from prison. But the other two, adhering 
to their faith, had many conflicts and disputations 
during their long imprisonment, with the blind 
sophists, who went to great pains and labor to 
draw them from the truth. But as they fled for 
refuge to the Captain of the faith they were not for- 
saken, but their assurance waxed stronger and 
stronger, so that they constantly wished for the day 
of their deliverance. Rom. 7:24. They were also 
very diligent, constantly to edify their neighbors by 
writing an exhortation, so that by their letters and 
steadfastness in the faith they gained some yet in 
their bonds. Philem. 10. After they had lain in 
confinement for a while, the tyrants, seeing that 
there was no hope of moving them from the truth, 
proceeded further to deprive them of their lives, 
and as the bailiff held his court near the Kroonen- 
burgh gate, he had them brought there twice before 
his judges, but this leading to no result, they were 
put the third time into a wagon and thus again 
placed before the judges. But as they were of good 
cheer and strong in the faith, Abraham, as he 
stepped to the wagon said: "Let no one among 
you," says Peter, "suffer as a thief or robber or as 
one that seeks other men's property ; but if any man 
suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed, 
but let him glorify God on this behalf." I Pet. 
4:15, 16. 

Henderick spoke very little, yet nothing but 
boldness could be seen in him. As they stood be- 
fore the judges, their sentence was read to them, 
namely, that they should be burned alive. When 
the reading of the sentence was finished, Abraham 
said that he thanked the lords for having been 
troubled with him, and that he prayed God to en- 
lighten them. They were then put back into the 
wagon, and brought to the prison, where some 
more God-fearing persons were confined, of whom 
the margrave caused a woman to be sentenced to 
the same death, namely, Maeyken van der Goes, 
who valiantly followed her husband, Jasper the 
Taschrinckmaecker, who had been offered up be- 
fore. Thus the tyrants satisfied their desire on 


these three lambs for the slaughter, and had them 
burned alive the following day, after they had 
fastened their tongues out of their mouths with 
screwplates to prevent them from speaking. But 
in all this they valiantly overcame through Christ, 
who was their strength; and went boldly onward 
with Joshua and Caleb, to possess the land of prom- 
ise, to the comfort and strength of many witnesses 
who beheld it. After they were burned, the bodies 
of the two men were given as food to the birds 
(Ps. 79:2) on the way from Wilrijck because they 
had been apprehended under that seignioralty. 

These two valiant heroes and champions, though 
they had not yet received water baptism upon con- 
fession of their faith, showed that they had never- 
theless been baptized by Christ with the Holy 
Ghost and with fire. 

They wrote many letters full of comfort and 
earnest exhortations, especially Henderick, who, 
having formerly been a soldier, exhorted the 
brethren much to fight manfully in the spiritual 
war, to keep good watch, and to persevere unto the 
end, in order to receive from the spiritual captain 
Jesus Christ, as wages and reward, the crown of 
eternal life. But all these letters have remained 
undiscovered, on account of the severe persecution ; 
only one by Abraham Picolet has fallen into our 
hands, which we have added here for the satisfac- 
tion of the sincere reader. 


A LETTER BY ABRAHAM PICOLET, WRITTEN TO 
HIS SISTERS 

Love God above all, attend to the Word of the 
Lord, and have your delight therein. Matt. 22 :37 : 
Ps. 1 :2. 

The abundant great grace and eternal peace of 
God our heavenly Father, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who is the Father of mercies, and the God 
of all comfort may He grant you Christian wis- 
dom, unchanging faith, a steadfast mind, and a 
true understanding of the divine word in truth; 
this I wish you, my beloved sisters, with all my 
heart. Amen. Rom. 1 :7; II Cor. 1 :3; Matt. 24:13. 

Know, my sisters, that I, Abraham your brother, 
imprisoned for the Word of God, let your love 
know, that I receive such strength and courage 
from the Lord, that I hope not to depart from 
Him ; and since He does not forsake me, I trust by 
the help of the Lord, to confess His divine Word 
before the blind men as long as there is breath in 
me, for He helps us remarkably, so that I see and 
feel it, thanks to Him for the grace which He 
shows me, poor sinner, for which I can never suf- 
ficiently praise Him. Acts 12:3; Rev. 1:9; Heb 
10:38; 13:5; Matthew 10:31; II Cor. 2:14; Ps. 
37:39. After all proper and friendly greetings, 
know, my sisters, that it rejoiced me very often, to 
have heard from you, that you also trusted to fol- 
low the Lord, to adhere to the eternal truth all the 
days of your life, and to serve and fear Christ ; for 
He is the way, the truth and the life. John 14:6. 


820 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


He that obeys Him shall inherit eternal joy, since 
He promises eternal joy to them that love Him and 
keep His commandments ; and His commandments 
are not grievous, and His promises are true. I 
John 5 :3. Hence, my beloved sisters, since you 
know His will, and the great grace which He has 
given your love, take heed that you may keep His 
commandments according to your weak ability ; for 
He does not require more than that you do what 
you can. O dear lambs, believe the Gospel, and 
walk the narrow way, which is but a foot wide, 
and which leads to eternal life; for many shall 
seek for it, and shall not be able to get there. Luke 
13 :24. For not all that cry, Lord, Lord shall enter 
in; but they that do the will of the Father which 
is in heaven. Matt. 7 :21. My beloved sisters, strive 
for the strait gate, namely, eternal life. Since you 
hear the voice of the Lord (John 10:27), see that 
you obey His words, and put off all concerning the 
former conversation, namely, the old Adam (Eph. 
4:22), that is, the works of the curse, all unclean- 
ness, evil desires, pride, presumptuous conceited- 
ness, lying, cheating, strutting and boasting, evil 
speaking, guile, hatred, envy, and the like. For, 
dear lambs, this is idolatry, and upon such come the 
wrath and anger of God, and they shall not enter 
into the kingdom of heaven, nor inherit the same, 
but everlasting destruction and eternal damnation 
are their part (if they do not become converted), 
in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, 
which is the second death; where there will be 
only weeping and gnashing of teeth, and where 
their worm shall not die, but they shall be torment- 
ed forever and ever, Eph. 5 :6 ; II Thess. 1 :8, 9 ; 
Rev. 21:8; Mark 9:46. 

O my dear lambs and sisters, depart therefore 
from evil, for God shall hold judgment without 
mercy upon all unbelieving and disobedient men 
who have not obeyed the Word of the Lord, but 
rejected and condemned it, yea, have persecuted 
and killed them that would fear the Lord. For, 
my beloved, God spared not the angels that sinned, 
but cast them down to hell, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judg- 
ment; and spared not the old world, nor Sodom 
and Gomorrah, but turning them into ashes, con- 
demned them with an overthrow, making them an 
ensample unto those that commit ungodliness. 
II Peter 2 :4-6. 

Therefore, my beloved sisters, let us not be 
weary in well doing, though we must suffer a little 
for the name of the Lord. Blessed are ye, and re- 
joice, says Christ, if you suffer for righteousness' 
sake: for great is your reward in heaven. Matt. 
5 :10, 12. For, my beloved sisters, thus did they 
to the prophets that were before us. Suffering and 
affliction in the flesh are promised to all the God- 
fearing, as the apostle Paul says: "All that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 
II Timothy 3 :12. 

Mark, my beloved, how Christ was treated, who 
never had sinned, neither was guile found in His 


mouth ; how He suffered, and all this for our sakes, 
who was the Lord of lords, and the King of kings. 
I Peter 2:22; Rev. 19:16. O dear sisters, consider 
Him that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against Himself, who, when He was smitten, did 
not threaten, but committed vengeance to God, who 
judgeth righteously. Heb. 12:3; John 18:22; I 
Peter 2 :23. And He that was rich, for our sakes 
became poor; yea, He left His divine habitation, 
took upon Him the form of a servant, and became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, 
and was more like a worm, than like a man. II 
Corinthians 8 :9 ; Phil. 2 :7, 8 ; Ps. 22 :6. Therefore, 
God hath given Him a name which is above every 
name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow, of them that are in heaven and on earth. 
Phil. 2 :9, 10. The apostle Peter says : "Beloved 
brethren, forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered 
for us, arm yourselves with the same mind; for 
hereunto we are called, that we should follow his 
steps." I Peter 4:1; 2:21. As also Christ says: 
"If they have called the master of the house Beelze- 
bub, how much more shall they call them of his 
household? If they have persecuted me, they will 
also persecute you." Matt. 10:25; John 15:20. 
Mark, my dear sisters, whether more comes upon 
us, than has been promised us. But all these things 
will they do unto you for my name's sake, says 
Christ. Matt. 10:22; John 15:21. And further: 
"The time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will 
think that he doeth God service. And these things 
will they do unto you, because they have not known 
the Father, nor me." John 16 :2, 3. The Lord also 
says : "But these things have I told you, that when 
the time shall come, ye may remember that I told 
you of them." v. 4. See, my dear sisters, thus noth- 
ing comes upon us, than what has been promised 
us, and what Christ Himself had. Hence we must 
put off all that is a hindrance to the salvation of 
our souls, namely, all the lusts of the flesh, all the 
works of darkness (I John 2 :16 ; Rom. 13:12; Col. 
3:8), and follow the crucified Jesus Christ, our 
Saviour, and obey Him ; for he that saith that he 
knoweth God, and keepeth not His commandments, 
is a har, and the truth is not in him ; and he that 
saith he abideth in Him ought himself also so to 
walk, even as Christ walked. I John 2 :4, 6. Mark, 
my sisters, fear the Lord, take courage in the Word 
of the Lord, search diligently the Scriptures, and 
entreat God the Lord, yea, importune Him day and 
night with prayer and supplication, and He will 
grant you to understand and to do what is neces- 
sary for your salvation. As Christ said, that His 
Spirit shall teach us, and we shall be taught of the 
Lord; for of ourselves we have nothing but all 
manner of weakness. 

tt Thus, my sisters, pray the Lord, who says: 
"Ask, and ye shall receive ; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you ; seek, and ye shall find ; seek the 
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all that 
you need shall be added unto you." Matt. 7:7; 6: 
33. Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, call 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


821 


ye upon Him while He is near; the Lord is so 
merciful toward them who seek to fear Him (Isa. 
55 :6 ; Jonah 4 :2) , my sisters, as He says Himself : 
"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon 
you, and learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart ; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
my yoke is easy, and my burden is light" (Matt. 
1 1 :28-30) ; "and his commandments are not griev- 
ous." 

See, my beloved, how the Lord calls us to repent- 
ance, hence follow Him; for if one does what he 
can, the Lord is satisfied. He can well preserve 
him that trusts in Him. Repent therefore of your 
sins which you committed in your ignorance, be- 
fore you knew the Lord (I Tim. 1:13; I Peter 1 : 
14) ; mourn and weep to the Lord, and He will 
have compassion on you. For the time past of 
your life may suffice you to have wrought the will 
of the Gentiles, when you knew not God, and were 
very far from Him, when you walked in your 
lusts, in lasciviousness, in revelings, banquetings, 
in strutting and boasting. I Peter 4:3. Therefore, 
my sisters, since the Lord has revealed His truth 
to you, see now that you serve Him faithfully, and 
fear not men, who kill the body ; for after that they 
have no more power, and all the evil which they 
can do us is that they can help us into rest through 
the great grace of the Lord. Matthew 10:28; 
Luke 12:4. Confess Christ before men, and He 
will confess you before His Father in heaven, and 
say : "Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom pre- 
pared for you from the foundation of the world." 
Matt. 10 :32 ; 25 :34. Hence be renewed in the spirit 
of your mind, and put on the new man, which is 
created after God. Put away lies, and speak the 
truth. Be followers of God, as His chosen chil- 
dren, and walk in love, in quietness, in kindliness, 
in gentleness. Eph. 5:1, 2. Flee youthful lusts, 
and follow righteousness, love and peace, with all 
them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart ; for 
the servants of the Lord must not be contentious 
or quarrelsome but gentle unto all men. II Tim. 
2:22, 24. 

Adorn yourselves then, my sisters, with a chaste 
conversation. I Peter 3 :2, 3. Be gentle unto all 
men. Be subject to your Lord, for He shall most 
gloriously reward you. Choose rather to suffer a 
little affliction with God's children, than to enjoy a 
little of the pleasures of this world for a season; 
for the end of these is eternal perdition. Heb. 1 1 : 
25. Let us then help bear the reproach of the Lord ; 
it will through His great grace be most gloriously 
rewarded to us, when He will say: "Well done, 
thou good and faithful servant; thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler 
over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord." Heb. 13:13; Matt. 25:21. 

Mark, my dear sisters, how gloriously it shall 
then be rewarded to us. Hence make great haste to 
fear the Lord ; for we live today, but do not know 
whether we shall live tomorrow. Be therefore 


watchful to fear the Lord ; take courage ; life up the 
hands that hang down, and the feeble knees ; and 
take diligent heed, for we know not when the Lord 
will come. Heb. 12:12; Matt. 24:42. The day of 
the Lord draws nigh; it comes as a thief in the 
night, when it is not expected. I Thess. 5 :2. Look 
therefore not to men, for there are few that fear 
the Lord. Think how many there were when the 
whole world perished, and yet there were but eight 
who feared the Lord. Also, how many were saved 
when Sodom and Gomorrah perished. O think 
how few entered into the promised land, only 
Joshua and Caleb ; the rest all perished because of 
their wickedness (even as it still goes with many 
on account of their wickedness), and because they 
would not believe God's words, but resisted, vexed 
and persecuted the righteous ; and if these, will also 
not repent, they shall all likewise perisfi, for all 
those are for an example to us. Luke 13 :3. 

Therefore, my dear sisters, take heed that it 
come not also thus upon us ; for men are punished 
for sin, as the prophet says : "Your iniquities have 
separated between you and your God." Isa. 59:2. 
Behold, thus men are condemned for their wicked- 
ness and unbelief. Mark 16:16. 

O my dear sisters, it is true there does some suf- 
fering come upon us for the name of the Lord; 
but as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our 
consolation also aboundeth by Jesus Christ, and 
this little suffering is not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us. II 
Cor. 1:5; Rom. 8:18. O dear friends, how de- 
lightful it will be there where the mountains drop 
with sweet wine, and are covered with lilies and 
roses ; with all this joy the Lord will fill His chil- 
dren. II Esd. 2 :19. Hence let us fear and love the 
Lord without wearying ; for he that loves God will 
do good and hate evil. Ps. 34:14. 

O dear lambs, eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared for them that love 
Him and keep His commandments. I Cor. 2:9; 

I John 5 :3. Oh, consider what great joy there will 
then be for them that have loved God and confessed 
Him in the world. II Esd. 2:47. Oh, that this joy 
were rightly considered; I think we would use 
more diligence to fear the Lord, and not be afraid 
of men, that kill the body. Oh, how many there 
would be who would follow the Lord's steps ; for 
He is not willing that any should perish, but that 
they should repent, and that He might save them. 

II Peter 3 :9. But it is, my dear sisters, as the 
prophet says : "With seeing eyes they see not, with 
hearing ears they hear not, nor do they understand, 
for their hearts are hardened, their ears they stop, 
and their eyes they cover ; lest they should see, or 
hear, or understand with their heart." Isa. 6:9, 10; 
Matt. 13:14, 15; Acts 7:57. 

Oh, mark, my dear lambs, whether it is not so 
also now ; they love and prefer much rather fight- 
ing, strutting, boasting, banqueting, drinking, and 
to commit all kinds of abominations, than to re- 


822 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


pent and that the Lord might save them. These 
are cursed children, says the apostle ; they forsake 
the right way, and what they know naturally, as 
brute beasts, in those things they corrupt them- 
selves; they deceive and are deceived. II Peter 
2:14, 15; Jude 10; II Tim. 3:13. 

O dear lambs, turn from all the lusts of the 
world, for their damnation slumbereth not. II 
Peter 2 :3. Take heed, now that the Lord has made 
known His truth to you that you obey Him and 
walk as obedient children of light in love and peace. 
Eph. 1 :13 ; 5 :8. Love one another, and always ad- 
monish one another with the word of the Lord. 
What is there that surpasses love? (I Cor. 13) 
what greater joy can men have, than to love one an- 
other. Always forbear one another, and accept 
everything in good part, and the Lord will also love 
you. Eph. 4 :2. Be kind to one another. Give dili- 
gence to fear the Lord, and to search His divine 
Word. Importune Him with supplication and pray- 
er, and fear not men, who today are lords, and to- 
morrow are eaten by worms. The Lord will not 
forsake you, as you can well see in my case, and 
also in the case of all those that have feared Him 
with all their heart. The Lord preserves His own, 
even as He says: "Can a woman forget her child? 
though she forget it, yet will he not forget us." Isa. 
49:15. Nay, who can pluck these out of His hand 
whom His Father has given Him. John 10:28, 29. 

O dear sisters, adorn yourselves, and put on the 
armor. Eph. 6:11. Gird to your side the sword of 
the Spirit, which is the Word of God ; be well shod, 
and have on the armor of righteousness ; and put 
on your head the helmet of salvation, that you may 
be able to resist the subtle assaults of the devil, 
since he walketh about day and night, as a roaring 
lion, seeking whom he may devour. I Peter 5 :8. 
Hence be followers of God ; the Lord will preserve 
you. 

And know, my sisters, that the sixth day of this 
month, in the afternoon, I was brought before N. 
N. (who I heard, certainly came in the name of the 
procurator general, or of his subordinates), and 
before the jailer and another man, where they were 
drinking wine at the table. As I came before them 
the jailer in the presence of them all, said to me : 
"Abraham, you must go before the court on Tues- 
day." His wife, who was also present with them 
that served at the table, said: "They have three 
weeks respite." The jailer said : "Because the Duke 
of Alva is coming here, they must go through." He 
did most of the speaking. I said that I was very 
well satisfied with it. He asked me whether I was 
well satisfied. I replied: "Yes, if it is the Lord's 
will, I am quite well satisfied." They asked me, 
whether I made so little of that at which Christ so 
greatly trembled, and said: "Father, if it be pos- 
sible, take away this cup from me." Mark 14:33, 
36. They further asked me, whether I did not 
wish that I were released, and if the doors were 
open, whether I would not go out. I said, "Yes," 
if they opened the doors I would go out ; but as this 


was not the case now, that I thanked the Lord for 
all that He sends upon me. I also said that he, or 
they, had no power to release me without the con- 
sent of the Duke of Alva, or the like. They asked 
me whether I did not wish to break out. I replied 
that if I knew I should bring him into trouble I 
would have no desire to be out, or to break out. 
They said that it would cost him his neck. I said 
that if this was the case I did not wish to be out. In 
the further progress of our conversation they asked 
whether they should not be saved, or something 
similar. I said : "The apostle John says : 'He that 
saith, I know God, and keepeth not his command- 
ments, is a liar.' " I John 2 :4. I could not properly 
finish what I wanted to say, for they so interrupted 
me, that I do not know myself what answer they 
gave me. I also said that the apostle says that 
whoremongers, drunkards, murderers, liars, proud, 
revilers, gluttons, and the like men, shall not in- 
herit the kingdom of God, and that they have no 
God. I Cor. 6:9, 10. They again interrupted me, 
for the Lord gave me a mouth to say so much, that 
they could not well bear it. They said that what I 
said was true enough, if men died therein ; but if 
they had time yet to call upon the Lord for for- 
giveness, then, they thought they should yet be 
saved. I replied that it was too dangerous a thing 
to depend upon such a calling ; for frequently such 
entreaters for forgiveness, when they recover, go 
into their old ways ; and I opined that they were 
probably such too. Then they again interrupted 
me, and I admonished them, that they should re- 
pent and feel sorry for their sins before they felt 
the day of their death approaching. They asked 
whether we were all saved. I replied, that the Lord 
promises salvation to them that do His will, and do 
not deny Him, though they have to suffer much 
here for His name. Matt. 7:21. Of such the apos- 
tle says: "By grace are ye saved." Eph. 2:8. For 
though we do all that we can, we are still unprofit- 
able servants, and must rely upon the grace of 
God. Luke 17:10; Acts 15:11. 

Here I should have liked to quote some more 
scriptures, but they interrupted me too much. I 
said that their hope was vain, or something similar, 
and this because of their sins, as the prophet says : 
"Your iniquities have separated between you and 
your God." Then they became angry, especially 
the jailer, and I thought they ought not to get 
angry. I further said that it now is as the prophet 
says : "He that departeth from evil maketh himself 
a prey," and, as Christ says, is hated by all men 
Isa. 59:15; Matt. 10:22. They all interrupted me 
again, and finally said that I should be led away. 
And there sat a man there, who said to the jailer, 
that he would first give me a drink. Then we had 
many words again, but I could never quite properly 
finish what I wanted to say, though I would have 
liked so much to finish it, on account of an honest 
man that was there, who reproved the jailer him- 
self, because he became so angry. Then the jailer 
brought me a glass of wine, and I thanked him, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


823 


saying: "To your health!" He asked me why I 
did not say: "God bless you." I replied: "We 
ought not to take the name of the Lord in vain, as 
the drunkards and fornicators do." This made 
them so angry that they had me led away without 
giving me the drink. God be thanked and praised 
for His great grace that He gives His own all that 
is necessary to their salvation. I am told, my sis- 
ters, that they only did this to see whether I would 
not depart from the Lord; yet I know that they 
did not once urge me to forsake my faith. 

Excuse this simple letter. I greatly long for the 
day of our deliverance ; I was so rejoiced the night 
that I heard that we were so near our deliverance, 
that for joy, the tears streamed from my eyes. The 
Lord be praised for His great grace. We trust to 
await our time with patience. They perhaps 
thought to frighten me by it; but I rejoice in it, 
God be praised, who gives me such strength. O 
my sisters, should one not rejoice at the prospect 
of so soon being delivered from all sorrow through 
the grace of the Lord? O that we were fit for it, 
what a great joy this would be for me ! Yet I ex- 
pect it through the Lord's great grace, though I am 
not worthy of it. Oh, that matters were so far, 
that the fiery furnace were prepared. Oh, that it 
were so far, that I were standing in the strait gate, 
where flesh and blood must be left behind ; then it 
should soon be over. 

O my dear sisters, I am of such good cheer, and 
I receive such strength from the Lord, that I can 
not express it, praise be to Him forever for His 
great grace which He shows me. I find it to be 
true : he that trusts in the Lord alone has in his suf- 
ferings such joy of heart, that no one can know it, 
save he that experiences it. 

Farewell ; I commend you to God in grace. Pray 
God, the Lord for me ; I will do the same for you. 

Written by me your weak brother, 

Abraham Picolet. 


TIJS JEURIAENSS AND JAN CLAESS, A. D. 1569 

In this dark bloody reign of antichrist two other 
pious brethren fell into the hands of the tyrants, 
one of whom was a minister of the Word, named 
Tijs Jeuriaenss, residing in North Holland, at 
Karop in Waterland. The name of the other was 
Jan Claess, born near Wesop, and residing in the 
same town ; he was still a single man, about twenty- 
five years of age. And as said Tijs Jeuriaenss had 
gone to Muyen near Amsterdam, to serve the 
church of God in the Word, while said Jan Claess 
in company with some others went to Muyen to 
hear the exhortation. Thus he was apprehended 
with Tijs Jeuriaenss, and brought to the castle of 
Muyen, where they remained in imprisonment for 
about half a year, and were then sent to the Hague, 
where they were also kept confined for about half 
a year, and were then sent back to Muyen, at 
which place after about three months both were 
sentenced to be strangled and burnt at the stake. 


This was so done, and they were burnt black in 
their faces with reed, and were each put at a stake 
outside of the dyke, in the reed, at Muyen, for 
food to the birds. And as these pious witnesses of 
God suffered all this, not on account of having 
committed any crime (upon which alone the sec- 
ular power has a right to visit punishment), but 
only for the truth of the Word of God, and a good 
conscience, they are under the blessed promise of 
God, who has said: "Blessed are they which are 
persecuted for righteousness' sake : for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven." Matt. 5:10. And as they 
have here for Christ's sake delivered up their bod- 
ies unto death, for a living sacrifice holy and ac- 
ceptable unto God, in confirmation of the truth, 
so they shall receive these their mortal and cor- 
ruptible bodies again in the resurrection of the 
just, in eternal, glorious immortality, and shall live 
forever with Christ, whom they confessed here. 

The particulars of this offering we have received 
from the lips of Symon Fijts, teacher of the church 
of God in Tessel, who was present in a chamber at 
their apprehension, and visited them in prison, and 
with his own eyes witnessed their steadfast de- 
parture from this world. 

This Tijs Jeuriaenss was a very zealous follower 
of Christ, who in his long imprisonment also wrote 
many excellent letters for the consolation of the 
God-fearing, some of which have long before this 
been published in a separate book ; treating, among 
other things : of the bringing in and incarnation of 
Jesus Christ, and, again, of His departure ; and also 
of the free will of man. Of these letters we, in 
order to avoid prolixity, present two to the reader ; 
they are as follows : 

The manifold grace of our God, and the abound- 
ing, deep love of His Son Jesus Christ, with the 
unsearchable, rich mercy of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, who hath translated us into the kingdom 'of 
His dear Son and delivered us from this present 
evil world, according to the will of God and our 
Father, and the communion, love, joy, comfort and 
mighty power of His Holy Spirit, we wish to all 
dear brethren and sisters, and all our fellow believ- 
ers; also much wisdom, patience, a valiant faith, 
immovable hope, the breastplate, helmet and armor 
of our God, certain victory, the triumphant, two- 
edged sword of the Spirit, and the power of God 
through the blood of the Lamb. To this high God 
and Lord, and His blessed Son be power, strength, 
might, praise, honor, and glory, forever and ever. 
Amen. 

I desire out of a pure heart with the prophet 
Daniel, imprisoned in Babylon, from pure love, to 
open the windows of my heart toward the pleasant 
city of my God, Jerusalem, now to look lovingly 
upon her with a glad heart, and to show her a joy- 
ful face out of pure love ; and thus to turn the eyes 
of pleasant desire to her, and to show her out of 
pure love a pleasant, glad and joyful countenance, 
with the sound of rejoicing; for Jerusalem signi- 
fies, vision of peace, This adorned and pleasant 


824 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


city of Jerusalem was shown by the angel of God 
to the apostle John. Rev. 21 :10. He saw it in the 
Spirit and in a vision, with a joyful heart, and con- 
fessed that Jerusalem is a vision of peace, and 
therefore it cannot be beheld but through the vision 
of peace. John saw her in a vision, and discerned 
her by the Spirit of truth ; hence no one can now 
see her but by the vision of the Spirit, and through 
the Spirit of truth. This city has the glory of God ; 
her streets are like unto gold, yea, of pure gold. 
Verse 21. Here is the river of life, clear as crystal. 
22:1. In short, here is the pleasant tree, which 
yields her fruit every month; the leaves of it are 
for healing, for they are fruits of life. This city 
has high walls, twelve foundations, and twelve 
gates. 21 :12, 19. She has also twelve watchmen, 
with twelve trumpets, the pleasant sound and glo- 
rious voice of which rejoice my soul. This is that 
joyful, pleasant and sweet voice which delighted 
John ; for it is like the voice of harpers playing on 
their harps. 14:2. The sound and voice of all 
kinds of music in Babylon caused the Babylonians 
to kneel down and worship the high image (Dan. 
3:7) ; but this sound causes my soul to rejoice with 
the joy of the Holy Ghost. This city is far more 
glorious than all other cities, for her builder and 
maker is God. Heb. 11 :10. This city comes down 
from heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her 
husband. And I heard a voice out of heaven say- 
ing, Behold, the tabernacle of God; for God will 
dwell with them, and He shall wipe away all tears 
from their eyes. Rev. 21 :2, 3, 4. Behold, here is 
the spiritual Solomon of the spiritual tabernacle 
or temple. Here is the spiritual sea which is car- 
ried by twelve oxen. I Kings 7 :23. In short, here 
everything is spiritual ; according to the request of 
Peter, lively stones in this living or spiritual tem- 
ple or house. I Peter 2:5. Here the golden vessels 
filled with incense are brought to the altar of the 
Lord. These golden vessels filled with incense are 
poured out before the Lord, for they are the pray- 
ers of the saints. Rev. 5:8. Thus everything is 
renewed in spirit and in truth. For here is the spir- 
itual paradise planted or founded by God Him- 
self. Here men eat of the tree of life. Here is 
the spiritual Adam, of which the literal was a fig- 
ure, after whose image all Christians strive, till 
they are like unto Him in weakness, for they must 
be conformed to the image of His Son. Romans 
5 :14 ; 8 :29. Here has also the spiritual Eve and 
bride of this spiritual husband come forth, through 
the spiritual sleep, and is thus flesh of His flesh, 
and bone of His bones. Gen. 2:23;. Eph. 5:30. 
There is also here, in spirit and in truth, the spirit- 
ual ark seen by John. Rev. 11 :19. Here we enter 
in a spiritual manner into the ark of God, through 
the baptism of Jesus Christ, inwardly prompted to 
it by fire and the Holy Ghost, and outwardly all 
the evil carnal lusts washed with water ; yea, bap- 
tized into his death. Rom, 6:3. For as by the flood 
all flesh perished, so must now also perish, through 
baptism, all lust of the flesh, and die without the 


ark, which is represented by the former. I Peter 
3 :20, 21. Here is the spiritual dove, which brought 
the spiritual olive branch into the ark of the Lord; 
for as the dove brought an olive branch in her 
mouth into Noah's ark, to show that the flood was 
abating, so the Holy Ghost came down in the form 
of a dove upon Christ, to show that He was the 
Son of God, as had been said to John the Baptist : 
"Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending! 
he it is." John 1 :33. In the second place, to show 
that the flood or punishment had departed, and joy 
and glad tidings were come. 

Behold, this is the spiritual dove, as Esdras says : 
"Of all the fowls thou hast chosen thee one dove." 
II Esd. 5 :26. And Christ Jesus says to His dis- 
ciples: "Be harmless as doves." Matt. 10:16. 
These doves bear the pleasant olive branch, which 
is Christ, to all those that with Noah desire and 
apprehend it by faith. I desire once more, with 
the eyes of love, and with the vision of peace, to 
turn my heart and mind with John to the glorious 
woman (Rev. 12:1) since the Lord has shown her 
to me through faith and the vision of His Word ; 
for her beauty has drawn me, her loveliness in- 
flames me, I am inclined to her, she has with her 
sweet singing conquered my heart, she has cap- 
tivated me with her lovely eyes, she has bound me 
with heavenly bonds, for her bond is the girdle of 
truth, the bond of peace and love. Ephesians 6- 
14; 4:3; Col. 3:14. 

I have on account of her forgotten my father's 
house. How charming and lovely is this woman 
how glorious is her raiment! This woman has a 
crown of twelve stars upon her head; she is also 
clothed with the sun, and the moon is under her 
feet, and two wings also are given her to escape 
from the dragon. This woman is spiritual, and 
hence she must be viewed with spiritual eyes ; all 
the proud and vain-glorious cannot behold 'her 
beauty ; she is clothed with the sun, with the clear 
sun of understanding and of truth, says the Scrip- 
ture. r 

I rejoice with John, for he says : "Let us be glad 
and rejoice, [and give honor to him :] for the mar- 
riage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made 
herself ready. And to her was granted that she 
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white : for 
the fine linen is the righteousness of saints." Rev- 
elation 19:7,8. 

Whosoever now hears this woman falls in love 
with her, and he who lovingly turns his eyes and 
face to her, and beholds her beauty, is captivated 
by her loveliness, for she is the Queen of the Son 
of the Most High God. This woman pours out the 
unadulterated sweet wine which comes from the 
true vine. Over this woman or city of Jerusalem I 
will rejoice with David and say : "I had rather be 
a door keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell 
in the tents of wickedness." Ps. 84:10. O Jeru- 
salem, thou city of God, glorious things are spoken 
of thee ; for the Lord loveth the gates of Zion more 
than all the dwellings of Jacob. Ps. 87:3, 2 O Je- 


MARTY5S MIRROR 


825 


rusalem, thou most beautiful, most pleasant, and 
most glorious city, above all royal cities ! O Jeru- 
salem, thou pleasant city and vision of peace, over 
thee is the King of Peace, the Mighty God, and 
Lord is His name. Isa. 9:6. Behold these are the 
pleasant looks which mine eyes cast upon thee; 
these are the windows of joy through which I be- 
hold thee. Once more I must through the window 
of the divine truth view thy glory ; mine eyes and 
face are thus fixed upon thee, that the tears run 
down my cheeks. I cannot turn mine eyes and face 
from thee; though the winds blow into my face, 
that the tears flow from mine eyes, I will dry them 
with the beautiful, lovely, pure, and white hand- 
kerchief with which my most beloved has given me 
to dry them, that I may behold her so much the 
more clearly. Behold, thus I will now with the be- 
loved prophet David turn my heart's delight to 
thee, and thus give thee the desire of my heart, and 
say : "Jerusalem is builded as a city that is com- 
pact together : whither the tribes go up, the tribes of 
the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give 
thanks unto the name of the Lord. For there are 
set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house 
of David. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem ; they 
shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy 
walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my 
brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, 
Peace be within thee." Ps. 122:3-8. Peace be with 
you all. Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house 
of God. Concerning this house read Isaiah 2 ; 
Micah 4. 

We poor prisoners in the Lord, and bound of 
Jesus Christ, for the testimony of our God, and for 
the incontrovertible truth of our dear Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ; also severed and banished 
for still holding fast to the truth and to this testi- 
mony; wish salvation, joy, gladness, love, comfort, 
strength, and the fellowship, operation and power 
of the Holy Ghost to all our dear brethren and 
sisters, that are rejected and oppressed by the 
proud, for the true knowledge of Jesus Christ and 
the fear of God, for a proof of their severe blind- 
ness and pride, and for a proof of patience and 
pure fear of God in all of you; in short, for a 
proof, that through the power of our God you are 
kept in the faith, and also for a confirmation of His 
Word, that the gates and fiends of hell cannot cast 
you down. May the strong God with His mighty 
power and word henceforth keep us all through the 
abundant riches of His grace; to Him be for it 
praise, honor, glory, power, might, and strength in 
glory, forever and ever. Amen. 

Out of pure, brotherly, unfeigned love, and from 
the inmost of our soul and the depth of our heart, 
with a pure conscience toward all banished, op- 
pressed, burdened, and distressed souls, I write 
this simple and plain letter to you, out of a pure 
heart, as a drop of morning dew, dropping down 
for the refreshing, cooling and comforting of your 
hearts ; hence I beseech you with all my strength, 
yea, from the inmost depth of my heart, and by 


the cross and sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and also by His bitter death and His precious blood 
shed for us all, discern and comprehend it with 
pure, clear eyes, ears and hearts. O brethren and 
sisters, behold and consider diligently from what 
the mighty power, Spirit and Word of the Lord 
have delivered you. The hand of the Lord has 
powerfully delivered you, that you might not be 
punished with the severe darkness and blindness 
into which many are fallen. God has also well 
preserved you from all the plagues and sorceries 
of Egypt, while so many now lose their birthright. 

brethren and sisters, take heed to it. Because 
you firmly and confidently hope in the living God ; 
therefore the consuming, and devouring, severe fire 
(which devours all around it) has not been able to 
devour or consume you, though all heat, cunning, 
and craftiness were used in Babylon's fiery fur- 
nace ; yea, my friends, though the lions of Babylon 
gnashed their teeth, you have, like Daniel, not been 
harmed by them, God be forever praised for it. 
Hence, my most beloved brethren and sisters, 
whom I love with all my heart, from this, and much 
more, the power of the Lord has preserved you, 
for through His victory you have triumphed, and 
shall triumph, till you receive the end of your 
faith, even the salvation of your souls. Amen. I 
Peter 1 :9. 

1 beseech you all with an unfeigned faith, open 
your heart once, and consider and lay to heart in 
spirit and in truth these words of the prophet: 
"Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out 
for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glori- 
fied ; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall 
be ashamed, saith the Lord." Ps. 66 :5. 

In another place he says : "I sat not in the as- 
sembly of mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone be- 
cause of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with 
indignation." Jer. 15:17. 

In the third place, mark with an attentive heart 
the words of the prophet : "I will also leave in the 
midst of thee (saith the Lord) an afflicted and poor 
people, and they shall trust in the name of the 
Lord. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, 
nor speak lies ; neither shall a deceitful tongue be 
found in their mouth : for they shall feed and lie 
down, and none shall make them afraid. Sing, O 
daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and 
rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusa- 
lem. The Lord hath taken away the judgments, 
he hath cast out thine enemy : the King of Israel, 
even the Lord, is in the midst of thee : thou shalt 
not see evil any more. In that day it shall be said 
to Jerusalem, Fear thou not : and to Zion, Let not 
thy hands be slack. The Lord thy God in the midst 
of thee is mighty ; he will save, he will rejoice over 
thee with joy ; he will rest in his love, he will joy 
over thee with singing. I will gather them that are 
sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who are of 
thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden. Be- 
hold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee." 
Zephaniah 3:12-19; Isa. 43; 41 :14. 


826 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


The prophet Ezekiel also says: "Because with 
lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, 
whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the 
hands of the wicked, that he should not return 
from his wicked way, that I should save his life." 
Ezekiel 13:22; Jer. 23:14. 

See, my worthy, chosen brethren and sisters, 
here you have comfort and joy in these and other, 
similar passages, in which you can with the afflicted 
in Israel find joy and gladness ; hence these pas- 
sages belong to you. For it has been done out of 
the true fear of God, and because we feared in our 
conscience, we renounced them (God be praised), 
according to the word of the prophet (Jer. 15:17) 
and the teaching of the apostle; for I declare be- 
fore the Lord, and before His angels and hosts, yea, 
that I am ready with all my heart, and desirous, by 
the help and grace of the Lord, to testify to this 
with my flesh, blood and death. This is the solid 
ground of truth, firm and incontrovertible. I doubt 
not that they are wrong, and we, through the grace 
of God, right. Thus I longingly expect to testify 
with a joyful mind to their wrong, even unto death, 
and also to confirm my faith and little gift. May 
the Lord strengthen me and my fellow prisoner. 
But we must first drink the bitter cup with fear 
and trembling. Oh, that we might taste it! for I 
have already given myself to Him who was first 
given for me. 

Hence, I further pray for the sake of the fellow- 
ship and unity of the Spirit, that everyone love the 
brotherhood. I Pet. 2:17: O brethren and sisters, 
take heed thereto with a pure heart and faithful 
love ; for we have all been made to drink into one 
Spirit, and are baptized into one body. I Cor. 12: 
13. Therefore serve one another diligently in love : 
cleave to Christ's body, abide with your members, 
and neither separate nor divide. Let each esteem 
other better than themselves, and you will remain 
together with peace and joy; (Phil. 2:3); the 
merciful God grant this to you and us all. Amen. 

In the third place, I further pray by the power 
of the Spirit, and by the conqueror Jesus Christ, 
yea, I beseech you by the love of the Father toward 
us, — the words are full of joy, spirit and gladness : 
"As my heavenly Father hath loved me, so have I 
loved you : continue ye in my love." John 15 :9. O 
brethren and friends, take heed to it ; love must be 
according to the example of Christ firm and sure, 
for therein love is revealed, known and shown to 
us, yea, herein love stands fast; declared by the 
death, blood and confession of His Son. O friends, 
my most beloved, this is the true measuring reed, 
according to John's writing. Rev. 11:1. Consider 
this in the depth of your heart. 

In the fourth place, I further beseech your love, 
consider with an attentive heart, and inwardly and 
outwardly, with a live, sober mind, prove, measure 
and correct yourselves with the Word of God, and 
follow and hold fast the same. Oh, hold fast to 
the Word of God, and you will never be deceived. 

In the fifth place, I beseech all my brethren and 


sisters, as one that loves you with all his heart, if 
you would have your souls saved, receive the warn- 
ing of the Holy Ghost, that in the latter times many 
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits. I Tim. 4:1. 

O brethren and chosen sisters, consider, and 
learn to know the lying spirits. Oh, diligently try 
the spirits by faith, and the knowledge of the Word 
of God. I John 4:1. Distinguish the good and the 
evil consciences of men. Oh, discern and learn to 
know with diligence them whose minds are cor- 
rupt, also who have the form of godliness, but deny 
the power of the Spirit. These and other points 
despise not ; let them never depart from your heart, 
but hold them fast according to the Word of God ; 
try all spirits, and measure them therewith, and 
you will know what form or appearance they have. 
O brethren, beware with a pure fear, of God, be- 
ware every way, that no one set up his reason or 
conscience as a head, and relapse into his old natu- 
ral state. But much rather let the heart and con- 
science grow and increase according to the Word of 
God. Let your understanding be of the unadulter- 
ated milk, and of the wine from the pure vine 
Christ. Refresh your heart with the living waters. 
Hold fast to the fountain and rock unto death. 

Lastly, I beseech your love yet, by the crying of 
Jesus Christ, by the weeping of the apostle Paul 
(Phil. 3 :18), and by the many tears of the prophet 
Jeremiah, diligently to attend to and consider, and, 
with a living and working faith to hold fast to and 
not depart from the solid ground, and immovable 
foundation in Sion. I Pet. 2:6. My brethren, we 
longingly expect to have to go hence; help us, 
therefore, to contend for the faith ( Jude 3) and to 
defend it unto death. We hope by His power and 
strong grace, help and consolation to go before 
you, if it is His divine will. We have already given 
our bodies to Him who bought our souls with His 
precious blood. I Cor. 6:20; I Peter 1 :19. 

Thus, my dear brethren and sisters, we will here- 
with bid you adieu, and take leave for this time ; if 
it were the will of the Lord, I would from the heart 
that it might, be our final farewell and adieu till in 
life eternal — His divine will be done with us. 

We greet all brethren and sisters that love us in 
the faith, especially those that are banished, out of 
a pure, brotherly, unfeigned, sound love, with the 
mighty power, the word and peace of our dear 
Lord Jesus Christ, till in His eternal glory. Amen. 

Further, do not forget us poor, miserable, weak 
fellow members, and receive our letter in good 
part, it is written out of love. We would have 
written more, but it is now not necessary ; besides, 
we may soon be debarred from it, for we are 
chained together like horses. We expect, as the 
bailiff says, a letter from the stadtholder as to what 
he shall then do with us. 

The Spirit of peace, love, joy, peace; comfort 
and grace be upon all the God-fearing, especially do 
we wish much good to the banished, who, for the 
testimony of the truth, through their faith, have 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


827 


overcome the wicked and still overcome in Christ. 
The Spirit of peace be with your spirit. Amen. 

Written on the 15th day of our imprisonment. I 
hope that through the grace of God we are bound 
with a strong chain of love; love abides steadfast 
unto death. By me, Tijs Jeuriaenss. 

I beseech all my brethren and sisters, and you, 
as a prisoner in the Lord, by the mercies of God, 
and by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
by our gathering together unto Him, that ye be not 
soon shaken in mindj or be troubled neither by 
spirit nor by word, nor by letter as from us. II 
Thessalonians 2:1, 2. This is the faithful warning 
of Paul to his friends. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF TIJS JEURIAENSS, WRITTEN 
IN PRISON TO THE FRIENDS IN EDAM, A. D. 1569 

My dear brethren and sisters, one with us in our 
most holy Christian faith, I wish you the weapons 
of light, to fight against the works of darkness; 
yea, from the depth of my heart and my inmost 
soul I wish you new tidings, glad news, an evan- 
gelical greeting, grace, mercy, peace, longsuffer- 
ing, love, comfort, wisdom and steadfastness ; yea, 
from God our heavenly Father all His heavenly 
treasures and riches, through Jesus Christ, our 
Giver and Distributor, our Prophet ; great Apostle, 
and High Priest, our Ground, Foundation and 
Cornerstone in Sion, our Trumpet, and Horn of 
salvation in the house of David and camp of Israel, 
our Way, Door, Truth and Life, our Reconciler, 
Mediator and Advocate, our Peace, Atonement 
and Righteousness, our paschal Dove and paschal 
Lamb, our Sun, Light, Morning Star, our delight- 
ful Emmanuel, Peace, Comfort, and Captain of 
the faith, our Shepherd, David and Solomon ac- 
cording to the spirit, our Comforter and Rejoicer, 
our Joy, Gladness, Might and Strength, our Fort- 
ress, Castle, Wall and Strength, our Hero, War- 
rior and Conqueror, who led captivity captive, de- 
prived death of its might, power, and strength, 
that is, Him that had the power of death, brought 
life and immortality to light, spoiled principalities 
and powers, triumphed over them in Himself, 
broke down the middle wall of partition, blotted 
out the handwriting and nailed it to the cross, ful- 
filled the promises, satisfied the law, confirmed the 
testament with His death, and sealed it with His 
blood, and renewed all things, and put them under 
His feet, at the mercy seat upon the ark of God, 
above the cherubim, in the most holy place, that is, 
the head of His church forever. Amen. Eph. 4: 
8; Heb. 2:14; Col. 2:15; Eph. 2:14; Matt. 5:17; 
Heb. 9:17; Rom. 3:25; Ex. 25:17; Eph. 1:22. 

Since you are often in our hearts, dear and in 
God beloved, sanctified brethren and sisters, we 
cannot well forbear to visit your love, in spirit, 
through love, with our unworthy letters. For 
though according to the flesh, we are not present 
together, we are nevertheless together in spirit, and 
we rejoice in our bonds, afflicted in the flesh, but 


joyful and delighted in spirit, when we consider 
your love, piety, brotherly love and godliness, the 
steadfastness of your faith, the assurance, con- 
stancy and confidence of your mind, your stead- 
fastness and the obedience of the Gospel, your 
boldness of Jesus Christ, and the strengthening of 
our God through the power of His Holy Spirit. 
Hence the Word of God abides in you, and you 
have overcome the wicked one, which no one can 
do except he remain grounded, rooted and fixed 
in God through Jesus Christ, and God, again must 
dwell, walk and rest in Him through Christ, that 
is: there must be the Word and the wholesome 
knowledge of God, and an unconquerable love, 
hope and faith ; and this is the power of the Spirit, 
irrefutable and unconquerable, in the firm founda- 
tion stone in Sion, which is to the unbelieving, a 
hard touchstone of stumbling and offence. Hence, 
whosoever shall fall on it shall be broken and 
crushed; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will 
grind him to powder, that is, destroy him. I John 
2:14; Eph. 3:17; II Cor. 6:16; I Cor. 13:13; I 
Pet. 2:6; Matt. 21:44. 

Hence our unworthy letter is not especially writ- 
ten to your love, nor to teach or admonish your 
love. Oh, no, you have the anointing of Him that 
is holy, and hence you are already taught and en- 
lightened in God, through Jesus Christ, by the 
Holy Ghost. I John 2:27; John 6:45. Besides, 
you have and know the holy Scriptures which can 
instruct and exhort you unto godliness. But we 
unworthy ones pray and wish day and night for the 
holy God and King of eternity, the Father of light 
and mercy, to strengthen and confirm through His 
unfathomable grace, and by His Holy Spirit, us 
and you in the spirit of our minds, according to the 
heart, and that Jesus Christ according to the inner 
man may dwell in our hearts by faith, that we, 
being rooted and grounded, steadfast and immov- 
able from the hope of the Gospel, may be able to 
know and comprehend with all the saints of God, 
and with all Christian believers and chosen chil- 
dren of God, what is the abundance of His power 
and might, the riches of His glory, and His unfath- 
omable grace, yea, the height, depth, breadth and 
length, and to know the love of God and Christ, 
which passes all knowledge, wisdom and under- 
standing, that He would herein and hereby fill you 
with all the fullness of God. Eph. 4 :23 ; 2 :16. 

See, my affectionately beloved, sanctified breth- 
ren and sisters, who are partakers of the kind and 
nature of our common, most holy, Christian faith, 
I say, of the kind and nature of God, through the 
regeneration of God, the heavenly Father, by His 
incorruptible seed and Word, through the resur- 
rection of Jesus Christ, in heavenly places, in the 
illumination and brightness of the heavenly glory, 
in newness of spirit, in the mind of Jesus' Christ, 
by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ unto 
obedience in the sanctification of the spirit. II 
Peter 1 :4 ; I Peter 1 :2. Hence we have all been 
made to drink into one spirit, and are baptized into 


828 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


one body, and sealed by one Spirit unto the day of 
our redemption. II Cor. 12:13; Eph. 4:30. Where 
this thus exists, there is certainly the nature of the 
Christian faith and the nature of God, without 
which faith and regeneration cannot be, exist, or 
be named ; but where this is found and thus exists 
in full power of the spirit, as said, there are with- 
out doubt the blessing of God, the dew of the Holy 
Ghost and of the heavenly benediction, and the 
rain of righteousness, in all manner of fruitful- 
ness, growth and incense in the knowledge of God 
and the mind of Jesus Christ. Ah, there is Abra- 
ham's holy seed of peace, the children of the prom- 
ise, not of the flesh, nor of the law, but of the Spir- 
it, in Isaac sanctified, justified, and blessed with 
all spiritual blessings in new and heavenly places in 
Jesus Christ. Rom. 9:8; Eph. 1 :3. And therefore 
they have, and there pertain to them the adoption, 
the law, the service of God, the glory, the testa- 
ments, and the promises that were made to the 
fathers, which belonged to Israel according to their 
birthright, that is, according to the flesh, but who 
on account of their unbelief were rejected, and 
failed in them. Rom. 9 :4. But the spiritual Israel 
of God, namely, the seed of Abraham, the children 
of the promise, have obtained it by their faith, and 
have attained to, and been called and elected there- 
unto through grace ; they have contrary to nature 
been grafted into the good olive tree, and have 
through grace become partakers of trie root and 
sap. Rom. 9:8; 11:20-24. And this is now the 
great mystery of God, and the unsearchable grace 
of Jesus Christ, the mystery of the Holy Ghost, 
above the wisdom of the Jews, and the understand- 
ing of the Greeks, as Paul.says, and signifies to us. 
Eph. 3:3-5. 

Yes, my chosen friends, and sanctified of God, 
what a great benefit, love and mercy of God our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is this, namely, that 
we who were not a people, are now the people of 
God; we who had no hope in the covenants of 
promise are now by faith in Jesus Christ ingrafted 
and partakers and fellow heirs of His promises. 
I Pet. 2:10; Eph. 2:12. Behold, thus acts and 
works the only wise and eternal God, who in, with 
and by His wisdom measured and fathomed all 
things, and in the twinkling of an eye looked over 
and knew them from eternity to eternity; I say, 
who through the eyes of His wisdom, in the twink- 
ling of an eye, looked over and knew all things in 
eternity from everlasting to everlasting. Oh, how 
unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways 
past finding out ! For who hath known the mind of 
the Lord? or who hath been His counselor? for 
who hath first given to Him, and it shall be recom- 
pensed unto Him again?] For of Him, and 
through Him, and to Him, are all things : to whom 
be glory forever. Amen. Rom. 1 1 :33-36. 

This holy, unsearchable and only wise God 
wrought all things according to His wisdom, pur- 
pose, and predetermined counsel, first in figures, 
promises, types and shadows, unto the bringing in 


of a better hope, by the which we draw nigh unto 
God. Heb. 7:19. For the figures, shadows and 
heavenly types point us to the true substance and 
perfect truth itself in Christ Jesus, which espe- 
cially the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, which 
also so gloriously speaks of the advent or bringing 
in of Jesus Christ, and of His departure and per- 
fection, as may most satisfactorily be seen in great 
power and glory, which is very pleasant and de- 
lightful to read, consider and lay to heart, Heb. 1 : 
6 ; 5 :9. Happy he who therein has his joy and de- 
light, who considers it in the depth of his heart, 
and sincerely treasures it up. 

For since God in His wisdom and foresight has 
wrought and ordered all things to man's profit and 
salvation, and in order to signify and show some- 
thing else, mark well, the priests in the law were 
made priests without an oath, and this because of 
weakness and imperfection, and because death did 
not suffer them to continue, that is, the law made 
nothing perfect, nor could it ; with all its services 
and sacrifices, bring or give us perfection, salvation, 
or righteousness ; for they could not make or be- 
come perfect in conscience, who worshiped ; for if 
there had been a law given which could make per- 
fect, righteousness would be by the law, and thus 
no better means would have been sought or used ; 
and therefore the law has an end because of imper- 
fection, and terminates in Christ. Heb. 7 ; Romans 
10:4. For the word of the oath which was since 
the law, makes the Son our high priest perfected 
for evermore. Heb. 7 :28. And He ever liveth to 
make intercession for our sins. v. 25. For He has 
neither beginning of days, nor end of life. v. 3. He 
dieth no more ; death hath no more dominion over 
Him ; for in that He died, He died unto sin once 
(Rom. 6:9), that is, He became a propitiation and 
sacrifice for sins, which is perfect, constant and 
perpetual. I John 2 :2. For as the priests had to 
have compassion on them that sinned and erred 
through ignorance, because they themselves were 
also compassed with infirmity ; therefore our high 
priest became a poor, passive and mortal man, 
that He might have compassion on our sins and in- 
firmity, because He became Himself like unto us 
in all things, and was tempted like as we are, yet 
without sin, as may be seen everywhere in the 
New Testament. Hebrews 5:2; 4:15. 

For since Adam was unclean in his nature, and 
with his seed and generation lay in sin and death, 
because of transgression, and the law of God re- 
quired a pure, undefiled, holy, and blameless sac- 
rifice for sin and transgression, that is, satisfac- 
tion for transgression and propitiation for sin, in 
order to help and save men ; therefore the pure, 
undefiled and immaculate Word of the heavenly 
Father, out of great love and compassion had to 
come down here from hieh heaven, and, according 
to the promises of the prophets and the word of 
the angel, be conceived of the Holy Ghost in Mary, 
and, through the power of the Most High, be born 
of the holy virgin, and be holy, innocent, undefiled, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


829 


and separate from sinners, if He according to the 
law was to be a pure, holy, undefiled, ana blame- 
less sacrifice for sin, if the law was to be fulfilled, 
the sins propitiated, the sacrifice made, and our 
high priest made perfect as such for evermore by 
the oath. And He ever lives to make intercession 
tor our sins; for such a high priest became us. 
Rom. 8:34. 

Hence this was the greatest joy on earth that 
has ever been heard, seen and received : that God 
came and was seen and manifested in the flesh. I 
Timothy 3:16. The Lamb of God, which beareth 
and taketh away the sins of the world (John 1 : 
29), came upon earth, in human form and in the 
likeness of sinful flesh (Rom. 8:3), taught the 
kingdom of God (Mark 1 :15), preached the Gos- 
pel of His peace and the word of His reconciliation 
(Luke 4:18; Ephesians 2:16), and declared life 
and His grace, the good Gospel news, the trumpet 
sound, to gather Israel to Jerusalem out of every 
land, to keep the feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and 
of Tabernacles, one new moon and Sabbath after 
another (Ex. 12:16; Isa. 66:23), as the prophet 
says: "Hearken, thou chosen daughter of Zion, 
and ye holy inhabitants of Jerusalem, what joy- 
ful sound and shouting is in thy streets ! O what 
joyful and good news and glad tidings are in the 
camp of Israel, to gather the heavenly manna, 
which lies there, giving delight and sweetness." 
Ex. 16:16; Wisd. 16:21. But there had to be a 
golden pot in which the holy manna of God was 
preserved (Ex. 16:33), so there must be a clean 
flask and cruse in which the spiritual waters of 
eternal life must be gathered. And he that eats of 
this heavenly bread, and drinks of this water of 
life, shall live forever, and shall neither hunger 
nor thirst any more ; for it shall be in him a well 
of living water springing up into everlasting life, 
John 6:51; 4:14. 

See now, my dear and in God beloved, sanctified 
brethren and sisters, partakers of His promise, 
[fellow] citizens [with the saints], and of the 
household of God, built upon the foundation of the 
prophets and apostles, yea, a habitation of God 
through the Spirit, a spiritual house and holy tem- 
ple, and lively stones, a royal generation, and an 
holy priesthood. Heb. 2:12; Eph. 2:19-22; I Pet. 
2:5, 9. I say, holy inhabitants of Jerusalem, who 
have a free and open fountain for sin and unclean- 
ness (Zech. 13:1) ; who completely and entirely 
place their hope in the grace of God, which is 
Drought to you through the Gospel sent from heav- 
en, which things the angels of God desire to look 
into. I Peter 1 :13, 12. Who ascended up far above 
all thrones and heavens, and who is set above all 
power, might and dominion, in this and in the 
world to come. Eph. 4 :10 ; 1 :21. But many neither 
understand nor regard this life, nor do they heed 
this great love and grace of God, and therefore 
they are offended in their heart because of their 
unbelief, and hardened through the deceitfulness 
of sin, and thus a root of bitterness springs up, by 


which many are defiled (Heb. 12:15), as has now 
been seen and found in the case of so many ; and 
they are thus greatly embittered and defiled, that 
all medicines, yea, the flowing waters that issue 
from God's sanctuary, which can sweeten and heal 
everything, cannot heal or sweeten these pools 
and marshes, but they are given to salt, as the 
prophet says. Ezek. 47:1, 11. How unwholesome 
and barren is this water, which cannot be healed 
or made fruitful by the strength of the salt from 
the new cruse, through the power of the word of 
the holy prophet. II Kings 2 :20-22. 

Ah, these bitter waters cannot be made sweet by 
the pleasant tree (Ex. 15 :25) ; for he that drinks 
thereof must die, as John says in his Revelation : 
"There fell a great star from heaven, burning as it 
were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the 
rivers, and upon the fountains of waters ; and the 
name of the star is called Wormwood: and the 
third part of the waters became wormwood; and 
many men died of the waters because they were 
made bitter. And the fourth angel sounded, and 
the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third 
part of the moon, and the third part of the stars ; 
so as the third part of them was darkened, and the 
day shone not for a third of it, and the night like- 
wise." Rev. 8:10-12. And he further says that 
the smoke arose out of the pit, as the smoke of a 
great furnace ; and the sun and the air were dark- 
ened by reason of the smoke of the pit. 9 :2. 

Hence, my very dear and in God beloved holy 
brethren and sisters, let us put on the armor of 
light, to fight against the works of darkness, that 
is, to walk in the Spirit, and we shall not fulfill the 
works of the flesh. Rom. 13:12; Gal. 5:16. With 
the same meaning also Peter says: "Dearly be- 
loved, we beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, 
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the 
soul." I Pet. 2:11. Hence we must arm ourselves 
in weakness with the mind of Jesus Christ, with 
the Holy Ghost, with the word of truth, with the 
armor of light, and with the power of God, on the 
right hand and on the left (II Cor. 6:6, 7), that is, 
we must yield ourselves unto God, and live in God, 
as those that are become alive from the dead, and 
our members as instruments of righteousness unto 
God ; then the wicked will not have dominion over 
us, as Paul teaches. Rom. 6:13, 14. And where 
this thus triumphs, works and prevails in the pow- 
er of the Spirit, there are not only conflicts, dying 
unto the sins of the flesh, and unto the old Adam 
with his lusts and desires, but there is also, through 
the divine knowledge and the mind of Jesus Christ, 
together with an invincible, firm faith, a sure and 
certain mind in the word and truth of the Lord : a 
conflict against principalities, powers, the rulers of 
the darkness of this world, and wicked spirits ; and 
we also bring all reason, and every high thing and 
what exalts itself against the truth into captivity 
to the obedience of Christ. Eph. 6:12; II Cor. 10 : 
5. And this, as has been said, through a pure, 
wholesome, sure, and steadfast knowledge of God. 


830 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and a constant and certain mind, with the invin- 
cible shield of faith, with which all the fiery darts 
of the wicked are quenched. Eph. 6:16. And 
where this thus takes place and exists, as said 
above, there is the armor of light, but not of the 
flesh; there the power and armor of God have 
been put on; there is the mind of Christ, of the 
Spirit, but not of the flesh : there they war in, by 
and with faith, by which everything is conquered 
and put down in mighty power and in the strength 
of the Spirit, as has been said, etc. 

O my dear friends, regenerated, children of the 
resurrection and of life, of light and of the day 
(Luke 20:36; I Thess. 5 :5), children of God, and 
brethren and sisters of Jesus Christ, His com- 
panions and anointed members of His body, lively 
stones (I Pet. 2:5), temples of the Holy Ghost 
(I Cor. 6:19), kings and priests of God, I say, in- 
habitants of Jerusalem, and fellow heirs of His 
promise, yea, my sanctified brethren and sisters of 
our common, most holy Christian faith, also guests, 
strangers and pilgrims with Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, in this world (I Pet. 2:11 ; Heb. 11:9), Oh, 
what power, operation, nature and evidence have 
and pertain to these and like names, yea, what com- 
fort, joy and gladness lie in them, belong in them, 
and would follow from them, that is, an evidence of 
obedience (Heb. 11 :8), yea, an evidence, that one 
seeks the future promised land, firmly believes 
God's promises, despises the earthly, and loves the 
heavenly; yea, these names attest and confirm 
God's promises, that is, that no one has a right to, 
can have, bear, keep, and, in the power of the 
Spirit, maintain and live up these names, except he 
have with the patriarchs a firm assurance of faith, 
and judge him faithful who has promised it, and 
who is also able to keep it. Heb. 11:11. And there- 
fore they all willingly journeyed as pilgrims, and 
through steadfast faith saw the future things, and 
held fast to them, and thus evinced their names in 
power and indeed, for our instruction, comfort, ex- 
ample and imitation. 

Herein rejoice now with us, O you holy brethren 
and sisters in the Holy Spirit of truth, in the invin- 
cible, strong knowledge of God, and of the faith 
which leads to the hope of everlasting life ; my most 
beloved, in the mind of Jesus Christ and nature of 
God. Yea, my immovable holy brethren and sis- 
ters, as I hope forever, brethren according to the 
Spirit, and not the flesh, according to the Gospel, 
and not the letter. Yea, I repeat it, my holy breth- 
ren and sisters, regenerated from the dead by the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ into heavenly places, 
here in the Holy Ghost, and hereafter in perfection. 
Then you shall rejoice with joy unspeakable ; then 
you shall live eternally and be forever happy ; then 
the fiery lake and the second death shall not be able 
to terrify you; then shall your body, soul and 
spirit together be saved and forever blessed ; then 
you shall eternally be filled and anointed with the 
Holy Ghost; then you shall be clothed in white 
raiment, and crowned and rewarded with the 


crown of life, of joy, and of everlasting gladness 
and pleasure ; then you shall enter into eternal joy 
and rest, and be taken and caught up in the air, to 
meet the Lord, and ever be with Him (I Thess. 
4:17) ; then you shall be changed in the twinkling 
of an eye (1 Cor. 15:51, 52) and your body and 
face be glorified with heavenly glory; there you 
shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of your 
Father (Matt. 13:43), then you shall laugh and 
rejoice (Luke 6:21) ; then you shall forever be- 
hold yourselves as in a mirror, in His face, bright- 
ness and glory, and behold Him who thus loved 
you that He gave His only begotten Son, who 
loves you even as His dear heavenly Father loved 
and blessed Him in eternity. I John 3:1; John 
3 :16. 

Yes, then you shall in perfection, with soul, body, 
and spirit, inwardly and outwardly ; burn in the fire 
of His love, and be forever inflamed in His abound- 
ing grace, sit at His table (Luke 12:37), and eat 
the bread of angels, of life and salvation and drink 
to the full of the waters of wisdom, life, of eternal 
salvation, and of everlasting joy ; then shall He re- 
joice in Himself with His angels and holy hosts, 
and be joyful over you with the shouting of His 
multitude ; then shall you receive, inherit and pos- 
sess the imperishable riches that shall endure for- 
ever ; then shall you be rich in body, soul and spirit ; 
then shall you sing, leap, and cry: "Holy, holy' 
holy is the Lord God, hallelujah" (Isa. 6:3) ; then 
shall a thousand years be to you as one day 
(II Pet. 3 :8) ; then shall eternity be to you as the 
twinkling of an eye ; then shall your years and days 
not grow old or be fulfilled ; then shall you be with- 
out beginning of days and end of life : then you 
shall pass eternity as a moment of time; then you 
shall forever be without change, which now heart 
cannot comprehend, nor tongue or mouth express 
and fathom. Behold, this is now to be hung as a 
bright mirror before the eyes of our hearts ; they 
are fruits of the promised land, the sweet Word 
of God, and immortal fruits, the powers of the 
world to come. 

See hereby, my very dear and most beloved holy 
brethren and sisters in the regeneration and resur- 
rection of Jesus Christ from the dead into heaven- 
ly places, that is, through the renewing of the spir- 
it of the mind (Eph. 4:23), through the mind of 
Jesus Christ, as firm walls and pillars in the truth 
of God, my dear friends, the apple of my eyes, my 
right hand and foot, hold fast to, and continue to 
stand upon, the firm ground of truth, upon which 
you are built and placed, whereunto we are from 
eternity foreordained, called and created of God, 
that is, accordmg to the likeness of God, and to 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ. I commend 
you all to the holy, invincible God, the Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost, and to His holy Word and ever- 
lasting peace, in your holy assemblies, to the praise 
of His holy name, and to our salvation. We give 
and commend you and all of us again, for an 
eternal adieu, into the invincible arms of His pow- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Willem Hans van Durgerdam burned in Amsterdam, AD 1569 


er, and into the invincible hands of His strength ; 
the powers of heaven and the firmament of faith- 
fulness be our foundation and strength, to enter 
through death into life eternal. We unworthy ones 
greet your love out of pure unfeigned, heartfelt, 
brotherly love, yea we greet all our brethren and 
sisters, the regenerated in the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ into heavenly places, the mind of 
Christ, the new likeness and brightness of His 
glory, the undefiled, pure knowledge of God, that 
leads to the hope of eternal life, through firm faith 
and power, and the communion of the Holy Ghost 
forever. Amen. 

This we unworthy ones have written you in 
haste in our bonds, if haply it should please God, 
that we might be worthy of being remembered by 
you in your holy prayers, harping and hallelujahs, 
and that we with you, and you with us, might for- 
ever rejoice. Greet therefore, in our name, all the 
saints of God, and you among yourselves, with 
pure hearts, holy and bent knees, uncovered heads, 
in the holy name of our God, with the pleasant kiss 
of peace, embrace and bless one another cordially 
in fervent love. Once more I commend you to the 
faith of God's elect, the health of Jesus Christ, the 
knowledge of God that leads to godliness, and to 


the hope of eternal life ; and remain invincible for- 
ever. The Lord be praised forever. Amen. 

Written by me Tijs Jeuriaenss, your weak, 
poor and miserable brother, from our bonds, A. D. 
1569, the 5th day of February, imprisoned in the 
Hague for the testimony of the truth. 

willem janss from waterland, after terrible 

tortures burned alive at amsterdam, for 

the testimony of jesus christ on the 

12th of march, 1569 

About two weeks after the death of the afore- 
mentioned hero of God, Pieter Pieterss Beckjen, 
there was also (entirely for his sake) put to death, 
in the same place at Amsterdam, another valiant 
champion and soldier of Christ, who loved the 
truth more than his own life, named Willem Janss, 
born in Waterland, and residing at Doornicken- 
dam, the circumstances which led to his death being 
as follows: 

This Willem Janss having heard that his dear 
fellow brother Pieter Pieterss Beckjen was about 
to offer up his sacrifice, and to deliver his body to 
the fire, for the truth, at Amsterdam, he made great 
haste also to appear at this time at the place of exe- 


832 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


cution, at Amsterdam, in order that he might wit- 
ness the death of his brother, and, if possible, 
strengthen him in the faith in his extremity. 

However, when he arrived at the city, he was a 
little too late, the bar having already been let down 
on account of the execution. But his zeal was so 
great, that he had no rest till he might see his be- 
loved friend either alive or dead; hence he, for a 
certain sum of money, had the bar unlocked and 
made haste to be present at said offering. 

When Pieter Pieterss Beck j en was brought forth 
to die, this valiant hero and friend of God, stand- 
ing over against the place of execution, on the 
steps of the weighing office, called to him with a 
loud voice, saying: "Contend valiantly, dear 
brother." 

He was immediately also seized by the persecu- 
tors, thrown into prison, twice severely and horri- 
bly tortured, and, when he would in no wise apos- 
tatize, he was two weeks after the death of his dear 
brother, sentenced to the fire, to be burned alive, at 
the same place where his brother had died ; which 
was also done to him after he had commended his 
soul into the hands of God. 

The foregoing was recorded long ago, from cred- 
ible witnesses, though the date, or time when it oc- 
curred was not correctly stated,* which we have 
corrected according to the import of the following 
sentence, which was pronounced upon him on the 
day of his death, in the court at Amsterdam, in 
which also all the circumstances upon which the 
rulers of darkness at that time founded his death 
are expressed. It reads as follows : 

Sentence of death of Willem Janss from Waterland 
Whereas Willem Janss, from Waterland, resid- 
ing at Doornickendam, present here as a prisoner, 
unmindful of his soul's salvation, and the obedi- 
ence which he owed to our mother the holy church, 
and to His Royal Majesty, as his natural lord and 
prince despising the ordinances of the holy church, 
has never been to confession ; and only once in his 
life, about eight years ago, to the holy, worthy sac- 
rament ; has further undertaken several times to go 
to the assembly of the reprobated and accursed sect 
of Mennonists or Anabaptists ; also, about six or 
seven years ago, rejecting and renouncing the bap- 
tism received by him in his infancy of the holy 
church, been rebaptized, and afterwards received 
the breaking of bread three or four different times, 
after the manner of the afore-mentioned sect, has 
also exhorted said sect as a teacher ; and on the 26th 
of February ultimo, when one Pieter Pieterss 
Beckjen, bargeman, was to be executed in this city, 
on account of said sect, he, the prisoner, standing 
among the people, undertook yet to strengthen said 
Pieter Pieterss in his obstinacy, calling with a loud 
voice these or similar words : "Contend valiantly, 
dear brother," and though he, the prisoner, by my 
lords of the court as well as by divers clerical per- 

• The time of the death of Willem Janss, as also of Pieter Pie- 
terss Beckjen, had from of old been fixed in the year 1567- but 
thi» was two years too early, as appears from the adjoined sentence 


sons, has been urged and repeatedly admonished to 
leave the afore-mentioned reprobated sect, and to 
return to our mother the holy church, he neverthe- 
less refuses to do the same, continuing in his stub- 
bornness, and obstinacy, so that he, the prisoner, 
according to what has been mentioned, has com- 
mitted crime against divine and human majesty, 
as by disturbing through said sect the common 
peace and welfare of the land, according to the im- 
port of the decrees of his majesty existing in re- 
gard to this, which crimes, for an example unto 
others, ought not to remain unpunished ; therefore, 
my lords of the court, having heard the demand of 
the lord bailiff, and having seen the confession of 
the prisoner, and having had regard to his stub- 
bornness and obstinacy, have condemned said pris- 
oner, and, by these presents do condemn him to be 
executed with fire according to the decrees of his 
majesty; and declare all his property confiscated 
for the benefit of his majesty aforesaid. Done in 
court, the 12th of March, A. D. 1569, in presence 
of all the judges, by advice of all the burgomasters. 
Of the twofold torturings of the aforesaid martyr 
according to the record of said secretary 

This delinquent was tortured twice, according to 
the sentence of the judges, namely, the 26th of Feb- 
ruary, and the last of the same month, A. D. 1569, 
as appears from the records of the confession. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, preserved in the 
archives of said city. N. N. 

JAN QUIRIJNSS, OF UTRECHT, A SKIPPER, AFTER 
BEING TWICE TORTURED, EXECUTED WITH 
FIRE, OR BURNT ALIVE, FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT AMSTER- 
DAM, ON THE 12TH OF MARCH, 
A. D. 1569 

On the same day that the afore-mentioned friend 
of God, Willem Janss, from Waterland, was put to 
death by fire, there was also, in the same city 
of Amsterdam, by the same judges, in the same 
court, and for the same reason, sentenced to death 
and the fire, a certain pious brother, named Jan 
Quirijnss, a native of Utrecht, and by trade a skip- 
per; who, though he was a citizen of the city 
of Amsterdam, had nevertheless his citizenship in 
the new and heavenly Jerusalem, to obtain which, 
he pressed through the strait gate, so that he left 
his flesh on the posts, all of which appears from the 
following sentence, which was pronounced about 
an hour before his death ; and which, though drawn 
up very odiously by the papistic rulers who then 
reigned at Amsterdam, nevertheless, when con- 
sidered impartially, sufficiently shows the truth of 
what we have just said. The contents of it, except 
the title, are word for word as follows : 
Sentence of death of Jan Quirijnss, of Utrecht, 

a skipper 

_ Whereas Jan Quirijnss, skipper, born at Utrecht, 

citizen of this city, at present a prisoner, unmindful 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


833 


of his soul's salvation, and the obedience which he 
owed to our mother, the holy church, and to his 
royal majesty, as his natural lord and prince, un- 
dertook, contrary to the ordinances of the holy 
church, and to the great contempt of the holy bap- 
tism received by him in his infancy, to have him- 
self baptized by the teachers of the reprobated and 
accursed sect of the Mennonists, about seven years 
ago; also, afterwards, at two different times, ac- 
cording to the manner of said sect, to receive the 
breaking of the bread ; and several times attended 
the assembly of said sect, and this even within a 
year: and, moreover, has always so despised the 
ordinances of the holy church, and does still despise 
them, that he has been neither to confession nor to 
the holy, worthy sacrament, except once about 
twelve years ago; to which reprobated and ac- 
cursed sect he, the prisoner, still persistently clings, 
refusing to return to our mother, the holy church, 
notwithstanding he has repeatedly, by divers cler- 
ical persons, and also by the court of this city, been 
urged thereto and thus instructed ; so that he, the 
prisoner, according to what has been mentioned, 
has committed crime against divine and human 
majesty, as disturbing by his sect the common 
peace and welfare of the land, according to the de- 
crees of his majesty; therefore, my lords of the 
court, having heard the demand of my lord the 
bailiff, and seen the confession of the prisoner, and 
having had regard to his great stubbornness and 
obstinacy, have condemned him, and by these pres- 
ents do condemn him, to be executed with fire, 
according to the decrees of his majesty; and de- 
clare all his property confiscated for the benefit 
of his majesty aforesaid, without prejudice to the 
privileges of this city in all other matters. Done in 
court, in presence, etc. 

How said martyr was twice tortured, according 
to the record of the secretary of said place 

The aforesaid person was twice tortured, namely 
on the fourth and fifth of March, A. D. 1569, and 
this according to the sentence of the judges, as 
appears from the records of the confession. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, preserved in the 
archives of said city. N. N. 


CORNELIS JANSS OF HAERLEM, A SAILOR, BURNT 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, 

AT AMSTERDAM, ON THE 12TH OF 

MARCH, A. D. 1569 

At the same time, and in the same court, there 
also received his sentence of death, Cornelis Janss, 
a sailor, a native of Haerlem according to the body, 
but born again of God from heaven according to 
the soul. However, he had not yet received baptism 
upon his true faith, which (though he had not been 
able to find an opportunity for it) he greatly de- 
plored even at his very last, since the Lord has 
said: "Thus it becometh us to fulfill all right- 
eousness." Matt. 3:15. 


In short, sentence was pronounced upon him, 
that he should like the preceding martyrs (Willem 
Janss and Jan Quirijnss) be put to death with fire; 
concerning which we have obtained, from the book 
of criminal sentences, of the city of Amsterdam, a 
true copy of his sentence of death, as also, how he 
was twice examined by torture, or on the rack, 
and when all this took place ; which copy we will 
faithfully annex here, for the greater confirmation 
of this matter; it reads as follows: 

Sentence of death of Cornelis Janss of Haerlem, 
sailor 

Whereas Cornelis Janss, sailor, born at Haer- 
lem, citizen of this city, at present a prisoner here, 
unmindful of his soul's salvation,* and the obedi- 
ence which he owed to our mother, the holy church, 
and to his imperial majesty, as his natural lord and 
prince, has apostatized from the holy church, so 
that he, despising her ordinances, has never in his 
life been to confession, nor to the holy worthy 
sacrament ; and has also several times attended the 
assembly of the reprobated and accursed sect of the 
Mennonists, in this city, as well as lately, before 
the last frost, in the town of Middleburgh, in Zea- 
land, being then so hardened in said sect, that he 
still, as prisoner, declares that he regrets that he is 
not rebaptized, and has not received the breaking 
of bread, adding that he would have done this if he 
had had a convenient time for it ; to which repro- 
bated and accursed sect, he, the prisoner, still per- 
sistently clings, refusing to return to our mother, 
the holy church, notwithstanding he has repeatedly, 
by divers clerical persons, and also by the court 
of this city, been urged thereto, and instructed ; so 
that he, the prisoner, according to what has been 
mentioned, has committed crime against divine and 
human majesty, as disturbing the common peace 
and welfare ; therefore, my lords of the court, hav- 
ing heard the demand of my lord the bailiff, and 
seen the confession of the prisoner, and having had 
regard to his great stubbornness and obstinacy, 
have condemned said prisoner, and by these pres- 
ents do condemn him to be executed with fire, ac- 
cording to the decree of his majesty ; and declare 
his property confiscated without prejudice to the 
privileges of this city in all other matters. Done in 
court, in presence, etc. 

Touching the two torturings of the aforesaid mar- 
tyr, according to the record in the book of 
criminal sentences of the city of Amsterdam 

The aforesaid person was twice tortured, accord- 
ing to the sentence of the judges, namely, on the 
fourth and the sixth of March, A. D. 1569, as ap- 
pears from the records of the confession. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, preserved in the 
archives of said place. 


* A great calumny which the writer of this sentence cast upon 
this good man, as though he had been forgetful of his soul's 
salvation. 


834 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


CLEMENT HENDRICKSS, A SAIL MAKER, BURNT FOR 
THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT AMSTER- 
DAM, ON THE TWELFTH OF MARCH, IN 
THE YEAR 1569 

The awful fury and bloodthirstiness of the pa- 
pistic rulers in the city of Amsterdam continued, 
and on the same day pronounced sentence of death 
upon a fourth person of said Anabaptistic religion, 
named Clement Hendrickss, a sail maker by trade. 

He, though possessing a living, effectual and holy 
faith, yet through want of opportunity or some 
other reason had also, like the preceding martyr, 
Cornelis Janss, not yet received baptism upon his 
faith, which grieved him not a little when he was 
in bonds ; but he did not on this account cast away 
his hope in the grace of God, since this had not 
been omitted through contempt of this holy ordi- 
nance of Christ, but from want of opportunity, on 
account of the pressure of persecution. 

The authorities of the above-mentioned city also 
viewed it in this light, and sentenced him to the 
fire, according to the imperial decree, as though 
he had already been baptized upon faith, because 
he confessed being desirous of it. This severe pun- 
ishment of death he valiantly and steadfastly en- 
dured, and was thus numbered by the pious, with 
the number of the faithful martyrs of Jesus Christ, 
though according to the judgment of the papists 
he died as a heretic, as appears from the following 
sentence which was publicly read to him in court, 
just before his death, by the rulers of darkness, in 
these words : 

Sentence of death of Clement Hendrickss, sail 
maker 

Whereas Clement Hendrickss, sail maker, citizen 
of this city, at present a prisoner here, unmindful 
of his soul's salvation,* and the obedience which 
he owed to our mother, the holy church, and to 
his imperial majesty, as his natural lord and prince, 
has so apostatized from the holy church, that he, 
despising her ordinances, has for five years and 
longer been neither to confession nor to the holy 
sacrament, and has at three different times attended 
the assembly of the reprobated and accursed sect 
of the Mennonists, the last time about a year ago ; 
and is so hardened in said sect, that even while a 
prisoner he has declared that he is sorry that he is 
not rebaptized, and has not received the breaking 
of bread ; and has also repeatedly attended the meet- 
ings ; to which above-mentioned reprobated sect of 
Mennonists, he, the prisoner, still persistently 
clings, refusing to return to our mother, the holy 
church, notwithstanding he has repeatedly, by di- 
vers clerical persons as well as by the court of this 
city, been urged thereto and instructed ; so that the 
prisoner, according to what has been mentioned, 
has committed crime against divine and human 
majesty, as disturbing by his sect the common peace 

* How often shall it be said in these Amsterdam sentences, of 
the true believers, that they were unmindful of their soul's salva- 
tion, whereas this was their sole object? 


and welfare ; therefore, my lords of the court, hav- 
ing heard the demand of my lord the bailiff, and 
seen the confession of the prisoner, and having had 
regard to his great stubbornness and obstinacy, 
and duly considered everything, have condemned 
said prisoner, and by these presents do condemn 
him to be executed with fire, according to the de- 
crees of his majesty ; and declare all his property 
confiscated for the benefit of his majesty aforesaid, 
without prejudice to the privilege of this city in all 
other matters. Done in court, in presence, etc. 

Of the torturing of the above-mentioned Clement 
Hendrickss, and when this took place 

The aforesaid person was tortured, according to 
the previous sentence of the judges, on the fourth 
of March, A. D. 1569, as appears from the records 
of the confession. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences, preserved in the archives of the city of 
Amsterdam. N. N. 


Here follow several letters from the afore-men- 
tioned martyrs, the first from Jan Quirijnss, and 
the other from Clement Hendrickss. 

A LETTER OF JAN QUIRIJNSS, IMPRISONED WITH 

CORNELIS JANSS AND CLEMENT HENDRICKSS, 

AT AMSTERDAM, WHERE ALL THREE WERE 

BURNED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 

JESUS CHRIST 

The eternal, almighty and merciful Father, who 
by His mighty arm led His chosen out of the house 
of the bondage of Pharaoh, keep and confirm you, 
my beloved sister in the Lord, with the power of 
His Holy Spirit, to so do His will that you may be 
found spotless and blameless in all peace, and in all 
righteousness, truth, zeal, and love, unto the end ; 
this grant you the almighty and strong Lord, who 
is alone wise and just ; to Him be praise, honor, 
glory, and gratitude, now and forever. Amen. 

Very dear and much beloved sister in the Lord, 
whom I greatly love according to the spirit, I have 
undertaken, by the saving grace of God, to write 
you a little, as you requested of me poor servant; 
for I deem myself unworthy of writing to another 
— it were more necessary that some one should 
write to me. For, dear sister, I find so much lack- 
ing in me, that, when I call upon the Father, I fear 
that I am not His child, for I do not half His will. 
But, dear sister, though we are compassed by vile 
flesh, we will not give up courage, but firmly keep 
on, and always pray without ceasing, and give 
Him the praise, and constantly thank Him for His 
unspeakable kindness which He has shown us 
simple children. Eph. 2:7. Oh, what great grace 
has appeared to us ! Oh, what love has been shown 
us ! Oh, what light has arisen to us ! Oh, what ex- 
cellent, precious, hidden treasure has been given 
into our earthen vessels ! That which is hid from 
the wise and prudent, He has now revealed unto 
us poor, simple children. Matt. 11 :25. The clear 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


835 


truth is now made known to us; the beautiful, 
shining light has shined into a dark place ; the clear 
radiance has been given into our hearts, whereby 
we are illumined with the uncovered, clear light, 
through Christ Jesus, this gracious Lord of lords. 
II Pet. 1:19; II Cor. 4:6. 

He took away the great darkness out of our 
dark hearts and yielded Himself, this merciful 
Jesus Christ, to be a shining light unto us, as J ohn 
says: "This then is the message which we have 
heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is 
light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say 
that we have fellowship with him, and walk in 
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth." I John 1 :5, 
6. Therefore, dear sister, take heed to the light, 
and let it be a lamp unto your feet, and a light unto 
your path, as David says (Ps. 119:105), that you 
may not stumble by day, but may always see be- 
fore you wherever you go; for the darkness is 
passed, and the true light now shines. I John 2 :8. 
He has delivered us from the power of darkness 
[and called us] into His marvelous light, who, as 
Peter says, in time past were not a people, but are 
now the people of God. Col. 1 :13; I Pet. 2:9, 10. 
For this reason we may well be glad in our hearts, 
and rejoice, and say with David (Ps. 124 :7) : "The 
snare is broken, and we are escaped; we are de- 
livered out of the jaws of the lion, in which we 
were imprisoned," that is, in this dismal, abomi- 
nable, subtle, wicked world, which lieth in wicked- 
ness. I Pet. 5 :19. 

The God of this world, that rules in the children 
of unbelief, has so blinded the minds of them that 
they believe not, and so stopped their hearts, that 
they cannot see or perceive in the least, nor taste 
that the Lord is gracious. II Cor. 4 :4. With them 
we all had our fellowship, and had our conversa- 
tion in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires 
of the flesh and of the mind ; and were by nature 
the children of wrath, even as others. Eph. 2:3. 
But the rich, merciful and kind God looked with 
His gracious eyes upon us poor sinners, and 
stretched forth His blessed hand, and has now ex- 
tended it to us, and has delivered and brought 
us out of the pit of death and tied up and healed 
our wounds ; our hungering and thirsting souls He 
has satisfied with the bread of life, and refreshed 
with the water of the Holy Ghost ; He did not let 
us lie in our blood, He did not desire to pass by us, 
He did not let us perish with hunger; when we 
asked for bread He did not give us a stone ; neither 
did He let us go thirsty, but refreshed our famish- 
ing souls from the clear fountain of living water. 
Oh, that we had never spent money for that which 
is not food ! but we have largely spent our money 
for bitter gall and vinegar, and for false, corrupt 
leaven. Oh, that we had thought of this gracious 
host, who gives it for nought to all that ask Him 
(Rev. 21 :6) ; and none that come to Him will be 
cast out. Hence, my dear sister, let us desire the ra- 
tional, unadulterated milk, as new born babes, that 
are born again from above of God, through Jesus 


Christ. I Peter 2 :3 ; John 3 :3. Let us take good 
heed to and firmly keep our new birth; for John 
says: "Whosoever is born of God, doth not com- 
mit sin ; for his seed remaineth in him : and he can- 
not sin, because he is born of God." John 3 :9. 

Oh, that we might take an example from Esau, 
who sold his birthright for a mess of pottage. Oh, 
how little did he esteem his salvation; but after- 
wards, when he sought it with tears, he was re- 
jected; for he found no place of repentance. Gen. 
25 :33 ; 27 :38 ; Heb. 12 :17. But, dear sister, let us 
diligently take heed, that we hold fast that which 
we have, which has been given us from above of 
Him who is the giver of all good. Rev. 2 :25 ; 
James 1 :5, 17. And if we ask anything according 
to His will, lie heareth us : and if we know that He 
hears us, in whatsoever we ask, we know that we 
have the petition that we desire of Him. I John 
5:14, 15. Is this not a gracious Lord? Yes, as- 
suredly, and He is a Lord rich over all them that 
call upon Him ; only place your trust firmly upon 
Him, and put your will into God's will, and all will 
be well. 

Therefore, my dear sister in the Lord, be stead- 
fast, immoveable, always abounding in the work of 
the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor 
is not in vain in the Lord. I Cor. 15 :58. For you 
shall receive reward by it. Matt. 20 :9. If you sow 
to the Spirit, you shall of the Spirit reap life ever- 
lasting. Gal. 6:8. If we sow in tears, we shall 
reap with joy; for our shame we shall receive 
honor, and for confusion we shall rejoice, says 
the prophet. Isa. 61 :7. Oh, let us be content then 
— we shall be such a glorious people; and with 
patience wait for it, and think of the glorious 
promise that He has promised us. I John 2:25. 
He also will do it, He will not delay His promise 
(II Peter 3 :9) ; only let us continue valiantly, re- 
joicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing 
instant in prayer, not slothful in our business, but 
fervent in spirit, a burning love in our hearts (Ro- 
mans 12:10, etc.), and the Lord through love 
grounded and rooted in us (Eph. 3 :17), so that no 
one may be able to separate us from the love of 
God, nothing of all that may come upon us for the 
name of Jesus Christ, and for His testimony. Ro- 
mans 8 :35. Let therefore no one beguile us of our 
reward, but let us evince from our faith virtue, and 
let our moderation be known unto all men. Colos- 
sians 2 :18 ; II Peter 1 :5 ; Phil. 4 :5. The Lord is at 
hand, be careful for nothing ; for it is soon over ; 
our time, dear sister, is so short, if we well con- 
sider it. I Cor. 7 :29. Hence let us pass our short 
time in the fear of God, and be sober and vigilant ; 
for our adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, 
walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: 
whom resist steadfast in the faith. I Peter 5 :8, 9. 
As James says : "Resist the devil, and he will flee 
from you." James 4 :7. Yes, dear sister, he walks 
about us very craftily; now with this, now with 
that, whether outwardly or inwardly with our evil 
flesh, which is our greatest enemy, with whom we 


836 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


have most to contend ; the Spirit against the flesh, 
the flesh against the Spirit : these are contrary the 
one to the other, so that we do not the things that 
we would. Gal. 5:17. But Paul gives us comfort, 
when he says: "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall 
not fulfill the lust of the flesh." v. 16. Oh, that we 
were as fervent in spirit, as diligent in good works, 
in seeking eternal life, as we are in seeking earthly 
treasures, worldly things, which must nevertheless 
perish and remain here; and that we might love 
God's commandments above gold or precious 
stones; we should be such blessed children, we 
should continually have less and less conflict. But 
alas I it is sometimes the case, that greater endeav- 
ors are made for these temporal things, than for 
the abiding riches that are in heaven, which shall 
nevertheless endure forever. In writing this I do 
not mean that this is the case with you ; for I well 
perceive that you seek the Lord with all your heart. 
Hence, my dear sister, let us lay to heart the words 
of the apostle, who warns us against the tempter ; 
lest we also be deceived by Satan, for we are not 
ignorant of his devices (II Cor. 2:11), that is, 
that he aims to capture God's children in his net 
by lies and envy, since he has been the father of 
lies from the beginning (John 8:44), as he has 
shown in the case of the first man, as is written in 
Wisdom: "God created man for eternal life; but 
through the envy of the devil death came into the 
world ; and they that are of his part do follow him." 
2 :23, 24. Thus he also comes to us with his emis- 
saries, with whom we have a hard conflict, yea, 
those who went out from us being the most trouble- 
some to us, so that we find that the Scripture is 
fulfilled, namely, that in the latter days it should 
be as John says: "Little children it is the last 
time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall 
come, even now are there many antichrists ; where- 
by we know that it is the last time. They went out 
from us, but they were not of us ; for if they had 
been of us, they would no doubt have continued 
with us : but they went out that they might be made 
manifest that they were not all of us." I John 2 :18, 
19. See, dear sister, thus the apostle warns us ; for 
they are not all Abraham's children that are of 
Abraham's seed. Rom. 9 :7. 

Therefore, dear sister, look to the pious, and not 
to the weak ; look unto Jesus Christ the Author and 
finisher of the faith, as Paul says, and suffer not 
yourself to be led astray by certain vain talkers who 
undertake to turn you aside. Heb. 12 :2 ; Tit. 1 :10. 
Christ says that in the latter days many false 
prophets shall arise in His name (Oh, mark, in 
His name) ; insomuch that, if it were possible, 
even the very elect should be deceived. Matt. 24 : 
24. But he that endureth to the end shall be saved ; 
the elect shall not be deceived. Be valiant in your 
mind, and always pray without ceasing, with pray- 
er and supplication in the Spirit. Meditate day 
and night in the law of the Lord, that you may be 
a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth 
forth his rich good fruit in his season ; whose leaf 


shall not wither (Ps. 1 :2, 3) ; and that you may 
be a fruitful branch in the vine Christ Jesus. For 
David says: "The righteous shall never fall, but 
shall stand forever like mount Zion ; yea, the right- 
eous shall never be removed," says Solomon. 
Psalm 125:1; Prov. 10:30. 

Let us therefore finish our course with joy, and 
strive lawfully (II Tim. 2:5); for no one is 
crowned, except he strive lawfully, as did the pious 
forefathers, who placed their hope in God, whom 
they faithfully served. He did not forsake them, 
nor did they forsake Him ; they bowed their necks 
under the scepter of Christ Jesus, as the pious 
Esther also bowed her neck. II Esther 14 :2. Oh, 
take heed to this ; though the righteous must suffer 
much here, and be deprived of all human help and 
comfort, let us turn our eyes to the succorer Jesus 
Christ, who will not forsake us. Can aj mother for- 
sake her child? Yea, though she forsake it, yet 
will I not forsake thee, says the Lord. Isa. 49:16. 
He that touches us, touches the apple of His eye. 
Zech. 2 :8. Who should not fear such a God, who 
always preserves and protects His poor people? 
For the joy which He has promised us, sweetens 
everything. He that overcometh shall inherit all 
things. Rev. 21 :7. They shall sit with Christ Jesus 
in His throne, even as He sat down with His Fa- 
ther in His throne. Revelation 3 :21. Yea, He shall 
gird Himself, and go before us, and serve us at 
table. Luke 12 -.37. How the righteous shall shine 
forth then in the kingdom of his Father! How 
they shall leap up then as calves of the stall ! How 
the righteous shall then shine, as sparks that run 
among the stubble ! how they that did not love their 
lives unto death shall then triumph and sing the 
song, and, with palms in their hands and crowns 
upon their heads, thank, praise, and magnify the 
name of the Lord ! In short, eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love Him. Matt. 13:43; Malachi 4:2; Wisd. 
3 :7 ; John 12 :25 ; Rev. 14 :3 ; II Esd. 2 :46 ; I Cor. 
2:9. 

Hence, let everyone that has this hope in him 
purify himself, even as He is pure. I John 3:3. 
But the God of all grace, who has called us by His 
glory and power, strengthen and confirm you, my 
beloved, dear sister in the Lord, with the power 
of the Holy Ghost, unto the end. Amen. I Peter 
5:10. 

Herewith I will commend you, my beloved sister 
in Christ, to the Lord, and to the Word of His great 
grace. Receive this my short, simple letter in good 
part, for I have written it out of true, unfeigned 
brotherly love, this the Almighty Lord knows. 
Hence I pray you, receive this from me in good 
part ; for he that fears God receives everything for 
the best. Always hold fast your first love unto the 
end, and the fervent love to God and the brethren 
(Rev. 2:4; I Peter 4:8) ; may the Almighty, eter- 
nal and strong God grant you this. Amen. 

Greet all my friends in my name, especially M. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


837 


S's daughter, G. R. W., and further all that know 
me. Several that were with me when I wrote this 
greet you; also Cornelis Janss greet you. The 
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 


Blessed are they which are persecuted for right- 
eousness' sake : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 

FIVE LETTERS OF CLEMENT HENDRICKSS, SENT 
FROM HIS PRISON IN AMSTERDAM, WHERE HE 
LAID DOWN HIS LIFE FOR THE KNOWL- 
EDGE OF THE TRUTH; TOGETHER WITH 
JAN KRIJNSS AND CORNELIS 
JANSS MENTIONED ABOVE 

First letter, sent to one of his acquaintances, named 
Grietgen Dircks 

Know, dear Grietgen Dircks, that I am still of 
good courage in the flesh, and that my mind is still 
unchanged and fixed to fear the Lord, the Lord be 
thanked ; I can never thank the Lord enough for it. 

I sometimes am much grieved that I unworthy 
one have at times grieved you so much. I can 
easily imagine that many are grieved on my ac- 
count, as I have heard, that it is said that I have 
apostatized from my faith, which is not true, the 
Lord be praised. So far they have asked me only 
simple questions ; if they would only not ask more 
closely, this I sincerely desire; but I fear that I 
already am where I must stay. The Lord grant 
unto me what is for my salvation. I trust in Him, 
that He will give me strength, that I may continue 
to His praise, and to the salvation of my soul. Our 
other three brethren have already fought the fight ; 
if it is the Lord's will, He may also take me home. 
On Friday I yet knew nothing to the contrary, but 
that I should also offer up my sacrifice ; and my 
mind was quite ready for it, the Lord be thanked ; 
I can never thank Him enough, that He so faith- 
fully succors me. I trust only in Him, and he that 
trusts in Him shall not be ashamed ; for He does 
not forsake His own who trust in Him alone. Be 
so kind and greet all the brethren very much in my 
name, and tell them to pray for me, that the Lord 
would strengthen me unto my last extremity ; for 
the prayer of the faithful and righteous avails 
much ; this is my sincere request. Acts 12 :5, 12 ; 
James 5 :16. Herewith I will commend you to the 
Lord, if we should see each other no more with the 
eyes of the flesh ; take this in good part, and tell 
my sister what I have written you ; for she is as 
yet under the impression that I have apostatized 
from my faith — the Lord is the discerner of all 
hearts. Acts 1 :24. 

By me Clement Hendrickss, unworthy prisoner 
in the Lord. 

The second letter of Clement Hendrickss 

Grace, peace and mercy from God our heavenly 
Father, through Jesus Christ His only beloved Son, 
who gave Himself for us, out of great love, to de- 
liver us from the bond of death ; this fervent love, 


with the power and strength of the Holy Ghost, I 
wish you my very dear and beloved N., as a token 
of gratitude, and for consolation and strength, now 
and forever. Amen. 

Further, my very dear and beloved, beloved by 
God, the heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ, out of true Christian, brotherly love I can- 
not well forbear to write your love briefly as to 
how it still is with me in my bonds. I cannot thank 
and praise the Lord sufficiently, that He so com- 
forts me in my tribulation, and that my mind is still 
fixed to fear the Lord with all my heart all the days 
of my life, according to my weak ability. Further- 
more, very dear and beloved, I poor and unworthy 
one have undertaken to write you a little, though I 
am unfit to do so ; but it is done out of true Chris- 
tian, brotherly love; hence accept it from me in 
good part. 

O my very dear and beloved, what a beautiful 
consolation it is to us, that Christ says : "Blessed 
are they which are persecuted for righteousness' 
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 
5:10. Christ also says : "Whosoever doth not take 
up his cross, and follow me, is not worthy of me ; 
and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." 
Luke 9 :23, 24. Paul, further, says all that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. II 
Tim. 3 :12. Many are the afflictions of the right- 
eous ; but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. 
Ps. 34:19. Therefore, my very dear and beloved, 
the prophets suffered, yea, Christ Himself, and 
also all the pious witnesses of Jesus Christ even 
unto the present day. Hence, let your loins be gird- 
ed about, and your lights burning; and ye your- 
selves like unto men that wait for their lord, when 
he will return from the wedding, that, when he 
cometh and knocketh they may open unto him 
immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom 
the lord when he cometh shall find watching : verily 
I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make 
them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and 
serve them. Luke 12:35-37. Hence, my dear and 
much beloved," what a beautiful comfort this is to 
us ! For it is written : "Eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, 
the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him." I Cor. 2 :9. He that shall endure unto 
the end. the same shall be saved. Matt. 24 :13. And 
Esdras saw upon the Mount Sion a great people, 
whom he could not number, and they all praised 
the Lord with songs. And in the midst of them 
there was a young man of a high stature, taller 
than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads 
he set crowns, and was more exalted ; at which he 
[Esdrasl marveled greatly. So he asked the angel, 
and said: "Sir, what are these?" He answered 
and said: "These be they that have put off the 
mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and have 
confessed the name of God : now are they crowned, 
and receive palms." Then he asked the angel: 
"What young person is it that crowneth them, and 
giveth them palms in their hands?" And he an- 


838 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


swered and said: "It is the Son of God, whom 
they have confessed in the world." II Esd. 2: 
42-47. 

Behold, my dear and much beloved in the Lord, 
what is our life? It is even a vapor, or as a smoke 
that is driven by the wind, not knowing whence it 
cometh, that appeareth for a little time, and then 
yanisheth away. Jas. 4 :14. But our dying is noth- 
ing less than an introduction into eternal life, to 
reign with God and Christ. Christ says : "He that 
believeth in me is passed from death unto life." 
John 5 :24. If we die through Him, we live in 
Him, for God is not the God of the dead, but of the 
living ; and Abraham believed in Him, and all be- 
lievers live in God. Matt. 22 :33 ; Jas. 2 :23. Though 
they suffered death, they were the friends of God, 
so that He says : "He that toucheth you, toucheth 
the apple of my eye." Zech. 2:8. Behold, what 
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, 
that we should be called the sons of God : therefore 
the world knoweth you not, because it knew Him 
not. Therefore, my dear and much beloved, now 
are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear 
what we shall be ; but we know that, when He shall 
appear we shall be like Him ; for we shall see Him 
as He is. And every man that hath this hope in 
him purifieth himself, even as He is pure. I John 
3 :l-3. We know that, if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of 
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens, that we mav be clothed upon with it. II 
Con 5:1, 2. Yea, saith Paul, as the sufferings of 
Christ abound in us, so our consolation also 
aboundeth by Christ; whether it be comfort or 
tribulation, it is all for our salvation, if we suffer 
as the saints suffered, that is, for the testimony of 
the Word of God. 1 :S. 6; Rev. 6:9. Paul further 
says : "If we suffer with him, if we die with Christ, 
we shall live with him." II Tim. 2:11, 12. He 
further says ; that our earnest expectation is noth- 
ing less than the manifestation of the sons of God, 
that is, we desire and long so greatly for the ap- 
pearing of our Lord in the clouds, that we may be 
caught up to Him in the clouds, and become like 
Him. Rom. 8:19; Matt. 24:30; I Thess. 4:17. 
While we are in these tabernacles, we are burden- 
ed ; for we would rather be clothed upon with the 
immortal and heavenly glory with which Christ 
shall glorify us. He that hath wrought us for this 
selfsame thing is God, who hath given unto us the 
earnest of the faith, through faith and trust in His 
Son. II Cor. 5 :4, 5. 

Hence, my dear and much beloved, even as it is 
also written ; Though our outward man perish, yet 
the inward man is renewed day by day. For our 
light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory ; while we look not at the things which are 
temporal, but at the things which are eternal. 
II Cor. 4:16-18. Herewith I commend you to the 
Lord ; may He bless and keep you, the Lord make 
His face to shine upon you and upon us all, and be 


gracious unto us. Num. 6 :24, 25. Greet the breth- 
ren much in my name, where it is convenient. I 
will commend you all to the Lord until the appear- 
ing of our Lord. The peace of the Lord be with 
you now and forever. Amen. 

Written in bonds, on Christmas Monday, by me, 
Clement Hendrickss, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 

Third Letter of Clement Hendrickss, to his father 
and mother 

I wish you, my dear and beloved father, and my 
dear and much beloved mother, the Spirit of truth, 
and the knowledge of the faith, according to the 
mind of Christ Jesus, a clear vision and an open 
heart in all divine matters and in the Word of God, 
thereby rightly to discriminate which is light or 
darkness, lies or truth, yea, flesh or spirit ; in order 
that you may not be deceived, but firmly adhere to 
the word of God, so that you may receive a full re- 
ward, and lose none of those things which you have 
hitherto wrought through your faith. II John 8. 

Further, my dear and much beloved father and 
mother, whom I well remember in my bonds, and 
still pray for you every morning and evening, that 
the Lord would comfort you in your sorrow, which 
you have for me, poor, unworthy man, who am not 
worthy that you should sorrow for me. Further- 
more, my dear and much beloved father and mother 
I inform your love, that I have undertaken to write 
yourlove a little, as to how it still is with me, and 
that it is still my purpose to fear the Lord with all 
my heart, with all my strength, and with all my 
soul, as long as I remain in the flesh, for which I 
can never sufficiently thank and praise the al- 
mighty, great and only wise God for His unspeak- 
able, yea, incomprehensible grace, which He has 
hitherto shown me and still daily shows me through 
Jesus Christ and the supply of His Spirit. Phil. 
1 :19 For this I thank the almighty God, and bow 
the knee of my heart (Prayer of Manasses) be- 
fore the Father full of grace, who is a true and 
righteous God of mercy, and a God that comforts 
us all with His holy Word. Therefore, my dear 
and much beloved father and mother, sorrow not 
for me poor, unworthy man, but much rather re- 
joice herein, and praise the Lord for it, that He 
has called and made worthy your son, to suffer for 
His holy Word and His Gospel. And we find, 
that the apostles and the prophets, yea, Christ Him- 
self, had to suffer according to the flesh, from evil 
and perverse men. Hence my dear father and much 
beloved mother, do not grieve too much, and be 
content herein, as much as is possible for you, this 
I most kindly ask you for the name of the Lord. 
And always comfort yourselves with the words of 
Christ where He says: "He that loveth aught 
more than me is not worthy of me ; and everyone 
that forsaketh house, home, lands, and father and 
mother, shall receive a hundred fold." Matt 10- 
37 ; Luke 14 :26 ; Matt. 19 :29. Therefore, my dear 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


839 


and much beloved father and mother what else 
can we meet with in this life, than with great pov- 
erty? And what is man's life? nothing but as the 
flower of the field: the grass withereth and the 
flower f adeth ; and as a vapor, that appeareth for a 
little time and then vanisheth away. Isaiah 40:6, 
7; Jas. 4:14. Further, my dear and much beloved 
father, I am of good courage to offer up my sacri- 
fice, and to suffer for the name of the Lord ; for 
Christ says: "Whosoever therefore shall confess 
me before men, him will I confess also before my 
Father which is in heaven." Matt. 10:32. Christ 
also says : "Let your light shine before men." 5 : 
16. And 1 fain would, when I am to offer up my 
sacrifice, that they would place me on a wagon and 
carry me around town, and scourge me four times, 
that I might let the light shine before this evil, 
blind and perverse generation; for I am not 
ashamed to suffer for the Gospel. Rom. 1 :16. For 
I shall not suffer as a thief, or a rogue, or robber, 
or evildoer, but I shall suffer as a Christian. I 
Peter 4:15, 16. For if we suffer for evil doing, 
what profit is it to us? but if we suffer for well 
doing, this is acceptable with the heavenly Father. 
2 :20. Furthermore my dear and much beloved fa- 
ther and mother, I inform your love that they have 
let me know that I should commit myself into the 
hands of the clergy ; then they thought I should get 
out of here. Thereupon I sent back word to them, 
that I had no intention of doing this, and that they 
should go to no trouble about it. 

Hence, my dear and much beloved father and 
mother, be not dismayed on account of this, I 
humbly pray you for the name of the Lord, for of 
such things a Christian ought not to be ashamed. 
For there was Joseph, who was tempted by the 
Egyptian woman ; and she had caught him by his 
coat or mantle, and wished to commit whoredom 
with him; and she would not let him go; but he 
fled from her, and left the mantle or coat in her 
hand, rather than commit this great sin with her. 
Therefore, my dear and much beloved father and 
mother, if the whore of Babylon takes hold of our 
coat or mantle, that we should commit whoredom 
with her, rather let go, through the grace of the 
Lord, your coat or mantle, namely, your temporal 
life, than that you should commit whoredom with 
her. Rev. 17:1, 2. 

Furthermore, my dear and much beloved father 
and mother, I ask you very humbly, with weeping 
eyes, for forgiveness for all that I have done amiss 
against you by word or deed, or by any thoughts, 
that you will forgive me. It seems that my time 
will soon be here now, when I shall offer up my 
sacrifice. Hence my dear and much beloved father 
and mother, I will commend you to the Lord, and 
bid you adieu till the appearing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. The peace of the Lord be with you forever 
and ever. Amen. 

Written by me, your beloved son, in my bonds. 
Clement Hendrickss, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 


Fourth letter of Clement Hendrickss, to his father 
and mother 

A most friendly greeting to you my beloved fa- 
ther and mother. I inform you, that I am still of 
good courage and well, as I hope that also you are. 

Further, my dear and much beloved father and 
mother, I inform your love how it is with me, ac- 
cording to the body, in my bonds. I cannot thank 
and praise the Lord enough for it, that He so com- 
forts me in my tribulation, and that it is still my 
fixed purpose to fear the Lord as long as I am here, 
though flesh and blood should suffer on this ac- 
count. 

Furthermore, my dear and much beloved father 
and mother, I inform your love, how they dealt 
with me when I was first apprehended. I had been 
invited out in the evening, which was on a Wednes- 
day, and we were speaking of going home. Then 
the watch met us, and we had no light with us, 
whereupon we were taken up above by the watch, 
where sat Floris den Bral, who asked us, whence 
we came, whether we had not been at a meeting of 
the new religion. We said: "No." He asked 
whether we would substantiate this with our oath. 
I said to him : "Will you not believe my word ; I 
mean to tell you the truth." But he insisted on the 
oath, and we would not swear, then he said : "Take 
them back below." And we were forthwith taken 
in the rear, into the dungeon, as though we had been 
thieves or rogues. The next morning we were taken 
above, and they brought me first before the lords, 
having bound my hands behind my back, as though 
I had been a thief. Then the bailiff asked me and 
said: "Clement." And I said: "Sir bailiff." He 
asked : "How many times have you attended the 
meetings of the Mennists ?" I kept silence and gave 
him no answer. And he insisted hard upon know- 
ing it, whereupon I was led away into a room by 
myself. Then the others were brought before the 
lords, and asked concerning their faith. They con- 
fessed their faith, and then I was again brought be- 
fore the lords, and he again asked me, how often I 
had attended the meetings. He wanted to know 
whether I had been there ten times. I said : "No." 
Eight times? "No." Seven times? "No." Three 
times? "Yes." Then he asked me, who had been 
the preacher. I said : "I am not minded to tell it." 
He also wanted me to tell in what house I had been, 
and what people had been there. I told him that I 
was not minded to tell him. He said that he should 
make me tell it. I was then taken back into the 
dungeon. The day following I was again taken up 
before the lords, and the bailiff asked me, whether 
I would not yet tell him, who had been the preacher, 
where it had been, and what people had been pres- 
ent. I told him that I was not yet minded to tell it, 
and said : "I am in trouble, and I do not wish to 
bring any one else into trouble ; you have me here, 
deal with me accordinsr to your pleasure." Jeremiah 
26:14. Then the bailiff said to the judges: "I de- 
mand him to be put on the rack, in order to learn 


840 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


all the particulars." And he said : "Take him to 
the rear ;" and I was taken to the rack, where I was 
stripped, and my shirt tied before my body. Thus 
I was placed in a sitting posture on the rack, and 
my eyes blindfolded. Then the bailiff came to me, 
and asked me whether I would not yet tell it. I told 
him that I was not yet minded to tell it. Thereupon 
I was laid upon the rack, and tied to it with seven 
ropes. On my head there were two knots, which 
lay on my forehead; and a cord on each of my 
great toes, and the others around my body. The 
ropes were twisted together with billets of wood, 
and I expected nothing else but that he would twist 
in pieces the ribs in my body. Urine was also 
poured into my mouth, and as I lay there in pain, 
I was also scourged on my breast. The Lord knows 
how they dealt with me. Through the severe pain 
I named four persons ; but I hoped that they were 
not in town. This lasted about half an hour. I said 
to them, that they should put a rope around my 
throat, and dispatch me at once. When they loosed 
the ropes, I was not able to get up by my own ef- 
forts ; the servants had to help me up. I was then 
taken back into a dungeon. The next day I was 
again brought above before the lords, and if it had 
not been for Joost Buyck, I would have been tor- 
tured again, though I was scarcely able to walk. 
Then the bailiff asked me, whether I would not 
have a monk to come and see me. I said, that he 
might stay away. He said : "You have to hear a 
dog bark; can you not hear a man talk?" I was 
then taken back into the dungeon, and a priest and 
a monk came to dispute with me. They began to 
prate much of this and that, and to tell many fables ; 
but I kept silence, and let them prate on ; and they 
got angry because I did not reply to them more, 
and one of them said that I had the devil in me. 
Four days after I was taken above again, when 
they told me that I should prepare myself against 
Saturday. I said : "Whenever it pleases the Lord 
I am ready." I was then taken back into the dun- 
geon, and expected nothing else than that I should 
offer up my sacrifice on Saturday, and even on Sat- 
urday I had no other expectation but of offering up 
my sacrifice. There came a priest to me, and would 
have me confess to him. I said that I did not want 
to confess to him, since he could not forgive my 
sins ; I said : "The best confession is to confess to 
the Lord my God." Then the bailiff with two 
judges came to me, and said, that they would wait 
with me two weeks yet ; but I was of such good 
courage to offer up my sacrifice, as though I had 
known nothing of death. Phil. 2:17. And so I am 
still of such good courage, as though I knew noth- 
ing of imprisonment. It began to vex me that it is 
deferred so long. I long to be out of the flesh, and 
am quite cheerfully resigned to offer up my sac- 
rifice; the Lord does not forsake His own who 
trust in Him. Furthermore, my dear and much be- 
loved father, I inform you, that I received your 
letter, and I was rejoiced to learn that you are so 
well content herein. 


Further, my dear father and mother, I will bid 
you adieu, if it be the Lord's pleasure, till the ap- 
pearing of our Lord. The peace of the Lord be 
with you forever. Amen. By me, 

Clement Hendrickss, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 

Fifth letter of Clement Hendrickss 

I wish you, my dear and beloved in the Spirit 
and according to the truth, as I trust, in the knowl- 
edge of the faith, and in the mind of Christ Jesus, 
a clear vision, and an open heart, in all divine mat- 
ters, and in the Word of God, thereby rightly to dis- 
criminate which is light or darkness, lies or truth, 
yea, flesh or spirit ; in order that you may not be 
deceived, but adhere firmly to the Word of God, so 
that you may receive a full reward. 

Further, my dear and much beloved, I cannot 
well forbear to write you a little, how it still is with 
me in my bonds, and that my mind is still fixed to 
fear the Lord with all my heart, with all my 
strength, and with all my soul, for which I can nev- 
er fully thank and praise the almighty, great and 
all-wise God, for His unspeakable, yea, incompre- 
hensible grace which He has hitherto shown me 
and still daily shows me, through Jesus Christ, and 
the supply of the Spirit. For this I thank the al- 
mighty God, and bow the knee of my heart before 
the Father full of grace and truth, who is the true 
Father full of grace, and the God of all comfort, 
who can comfort us when we are in tribulation and 
distress. II Cor. 1 :3, 4. Hence, my dear and faith- 
ful, keep well this good treasure, which is com- 
mitted to you, given you of God through grace ; for 
faith is the gift of God. Rom. 12:3. By it the 
elders obtained a good report, and assurance in 
their hearts, through the ancient word of the Spirit 
of Christ, who had testified before with their spirit, 
that they were the children of God, and heirs of all 
the glorious promises. Heb. 11:2; I Pet. 1:11. 
Hence they willingly forsook everything, and es- 
teemed it nevertheless much more and greater rich- 
es, to suffer affliction with the children of God, than 
to enjoy all the temporal pleasures of this world ; 
for they had respect unto the recompense of the 
reward, and to that which was eternal and not tem- 
poral. Heb. 11:25, 26; II Cor. 4:18. For faith 
looks to that which does not appear here now, nor 
is seen with carnal eyes, but which is beheld by the 
inner, hidden man, and by the eyes of the heart ; 
and hence they hold it fast, as though they saw it 
before their eyes, and could touch it with their 
hands ; for they judge Him faithful that promised, 
that He also will do it, for He cannot deny Him- 
self. Heb. 11:1, 11; 10:23; II Timothy 2:13. 
Therefore, my dear and faithful, look not at the 
things which are seen; for the things which are 
seen are temporal; but the things which are not 
seen are eternal. II Cor. 4:18. And Christ says: 
"He that loveth augfht more than me, is not worthy 
of me." Matt. 10:37. And in another place He 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


841 


says: "Every one that forsaketh house, home, 
lands, and father and mother, yea, also his own 
life, shall receive a hundred fold." Matt. 19 :29. 
Hence we must forsake everything here, and love 
nothing more than the living God, and show it with 
works and by the deed, that we are the children of 
God, and not bastards. The righteous must through 
much affliction enter into the kingdom of heaven ; 
but the Lord helps them in all their afflictions ; He 
does not suffer His own to be tempted above that 
they are able, but has with the temptation also made 
a way to escape. Ps. 34:19; I Cor. 10:13. But the 
ungodly He reserves unto the day of judgment to 
be punished. II Pet. 2 :9. 

Hence, my dear and much beloved, remember 
Joseph, who was tempted by the Egyptian woman 
to commit whoredom with her ; and she had taken 
hold of his coat or mantle, and would not let him go ; 
but he fled from her, and left the coat or mantle, in 
her hand, rather than commit this great sin with 
her. Therefore, my dear and much beloved, if the 
harlot of Babylon takes hold of our coat or man- 
tle rather let go, by the grace of God, your earthly 
coat, namely, your temporal life, than that you 
should be compelled to commit whoredom with her ; 
well knowing that our mortal clothing must first be 
put off before the immortal can be put on. II Esd. 
2 :45. And if our earthly house of this tabernacle 
be dissolved, we have a building in heaven, a house 
not made with hands, but which is eternal. II Co- 
rinthians 5:1. 

Furthermore, my dear and much beloved, I have 
undertaken to write you a little yet, of the words of 
Christ, where He says : "If ye love me, keep my 
commandments. And I will pray the Father, and 
he shall give you another Comforter [that he may 
abide with you forever] ; even the Spirit of truth, 
whom the world cannot receive. . . . Yet a little 
while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye 
shall see me, and ye know me, says the Lord." 
John 14:15-17, 19, 20. In another place Christ also 
warns us, saying: "Beware of false prophets, 
which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inward- 
ly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them 
by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, 
or figs of thistles ? Even so every good tree bring- 
eth forth good fruit ; but a corrupt tree bringeth 
forth evil fruit. . . . Every tree that bringeth not 
forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the 
fire." Matt. 7:15-17, 19. 

Herewith I bid you adieu with the sure Word of 
His grace, until His coming. The peace of the 
Lord be with you forever and ever. Amen. Re- 
ceive this my brief letter in good part. 
Written in my bonds out of love, by me, 

Clement Hendrickss, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 


VEIT GREYENBURGER, A. D. 1570 

In the year 1570, Veit Greyenburger, a brother, 
was apprehended at Wald in Vintschgau as he was 


traveling through there. He had been spied out, 
and a prize set upon his capture. When he ar- 
rived at the inn, and the peasants noticed him, 
but did not well know him, they came into the 
inn by night, and when they saw him pray before 
eating, they put their heads together and said : "He 
is the man, or he looks like him;" and acted as 
though it were wrong to pray — so plainly could 
the devil be seen in them. Hence they watched him 
in the inn, and sent word to the judge in the castle 
at Niedersol, who came with many footmen and 
servants, bound his hands behind his back, and took 
him to the prison in the castle of Niedersol. Very 
soon after he was examined, and led back into 
prison. Five weeks afterwards the grand bailiff 
came from Saltzburg, who took him with two serv- 
ants and two footmen to the castle at Saltzburg, 
and there put him in prison in chains-. A long 
time, namely, two years and a half, afterwards, 
priests came, namely, the preacher of the Cathedral 
at Saltzburg, also the ecclesiastical judge and other 
fellows. Each had before him ink and paper, and 
they addressed Brother Veit, and urged him to 
make his defense. The brother said : "What shall 
I say : You are accusers and judges, and what you 
are not able to carry out yourselves, the judge, the 
beadles, and the executioner must do in your stead. 
You tell it to the Prince, the Prince tells it to the 
judge, the judge to the beadles, the beadles to the 
executioner, who must finish it ; this is your high 
priest who helps you to gain the victory." Among 
other things the brother also said to them : "The 
Spirit says plainly what you are ; for Paul writes : 
'That in the latter times some shall depart from 
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doc- 
trines of devils ; speaking lies in hypocrisy ; having 
their conscience seared with a hot iron ; forbidding 
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, 
which God hath created to be received with thanks- 
giving.'" I Tim. 4:1-3. Then one of the priests 
said to him : "We do not forbid marriage ; more- 
over, I have eaten meat today." But the brother 
said : "Ah ! it is well known that you forbid mar- 
riage and permit whoredom." But when the priest 
had well bethought himself he said : "Do you know 
what Christ says : 'The Scribes and the Pharisees 
sit in Moses' seat : all therefore whatsoever they bid 
you observe, that observe and do' " ? Matt. 23 :2, 3. 
Then Brother Veit asked them : "Do you think that 
you are the same?" They replied: "Yes, we are 
they by the will of God." The brother said : "You 
are they indeed, since you confess it; but Christ 
pronounces many woes upon them, and calls them 
serpents and a generation of vipers, hypocrites, 
fools and blind guides, and such are you, as your 
own mouth testifies." Matt. 23. Then he was 
called an Anabaptist and the like. 

Thereupon Brother Veit asked them, whether 
they also considered Paul an Anabaptist. They 
said : "No." Then he was asked : "Why then did 
he baptize again those who had already been bap- 
tized with John's baptism, which was certainly 


842 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


from heaven, but was nevertheless not sufficient to 
salvation ? How much less then can infant baptism, 
which is from men, be sufficient ?" Then they were 
silent and Brother Veit said: "You allow mid- 
wives to baptize ; where is this written ?" But they 
did not know, and sat there as dumb as dogs. 
Thereupon they asked him, whether he belonged to 
the Huterite society. He replied: "Huter was a 
teacher." They asked : "Is he then your Messiah ?" 
He answered : "Huter was a pious man, who was 
burnt at Innsbruck for his faith and the divine 
truth ; but our Messiah is Christ. (John 1:21; 4 : 
25.) But what kind of Messiah and father have 
you at Rome, and also here in this town?" Then 
they said that the pope had nothing to do with 
them. Then the brother said: "Then you have a 
superior here in town?" The priests said that he 
was not their father. The brother rejoined : "You 
certainly said yourselves before, that your father 
had sent you forth." Then they did not know what 
to say. In this manner he was examined several 
times ; hence, Christ did not in vain say to His 
own : "When they shall bring you into their syna- 
gogues, council houses, before magistrates, pow- 
ers and the learned, take no thought how or what 
ye shall say : for I will give you a mouth and wis- 
dom, which they shall not be able to gainsay or re- 
sist." Luke 21 :12, etc. 

Having been imprisoned upward of six years at 
Saltzburg, suffering much misery and tribulation, 
Brother Veit, in the year 1576, through the help of 
God, escaped through a window of his prison. The 
people in the castle said that it was beyond the 
power of man to get out ; but with God all things 
are possible. Matt. 19 :26. Thus he returned to his 
brethren and the church, on the 9th of August of 
said year. 


FOUR FRIENDS OFFERED UP IN MAESTRICHT; 

ARENT VAN ESSEN ; URSEL HIS WIFE ; NEELT- 

GEN, AN OLD WOMAN; AND TRIJNTGEN, 

HER DAUGHTER, IN THE YEAR 1570 

During the time of freedom following the de- 
struction of the images, the church at Maestricht 
grew and flourished, increasing in number. But 
when the Duke of Alva came into the country, 
many fled out of the city whithersoever they best 
could; some, however, remained, among whom 
there was also a brother who was an elder and also 
a school teacher. His name was Arent van Essen, 
and he had a wife whose name was Ursel. In the 
same house with them there lived another couple, 
of whom the wife's name was Trijntgen ; and the 
name of her mother, an old woman of about sev- 
enty-five years, was Neeltgen. These persons hav- 
ing been betrayed and reported to the authorities, 
one of the burgomasters of the city, a man of furi- 
ous disposition, came violently, about twelve 
o'clock in the night, with his servants, called bea- 
dles, to the house of the schoolmaster, and with 
great noise apprehended this man Arent, and the 


latter was led in the night to the council house, 
called the Landskroon. About an hour after, the 
burgomaster with his beadles again went to the 
house of the aforesaid schoolmaster, to apprehend 
two women yet, whom he had not seized before. 
Arriving there he also found Neeltgen the old 
woman, who had come to see how it was with her 
daughters Trijntgen and the others; for she had 
heard that Arent had been taken away and im- 
prisoned. He also apprehended these three, and 
took them likewise to the Landskroon, to the man, 
so that in the morning all four were together, re- 
joicing together in God, and comforting one an- 
other. 

When they were brought before the lords, they 
each separately freely confessed their faith (I Pet. 
3:15), and that they had received baptism upon 
their faith, and what else belongs to godly doc- 
trines ; in which, it seems, Ursel, though weak, ac- 
cording to the flesh, was not the most timid ; for 
they separated her from the rest and delivered her 
to the lords (that is, to the bailiff and the judges), 
who judge in cases of capital punishment. And 
thus she was taken to the Dinghuys, a place thus 
called ; where she was greatly harassed with many 
threats, all of which she meekly bore and suffered. 
Thus it went also with her husband, Arent, whom 
they likewise delivered to the lords, and brought 
him to the prisoners' gate, which is the highest 
prison, where also manifold wiles were employed to 
cause him to apostatize. 

When this old woman Neeltgen and her daugh- 
ter Trijntgen, were also delivered to the lords, and 
conducted to the Dinghuys, and came into the 
street on their way thither, both of them being 
joyful and of good courage, Trijntgen for joy be- 
gan to sing, thus she was kindled in the Lord. 

During their imprisonment in the Dinghuys they 
were frequently assailed by the lords, and also by 
monks and priests, who sought to move them to re- 
nounce their faith ; but God preserved His sheep 
from the terrible rage of the wolves. After this 
they began first to torture Arent. Yea, it was said, 
that he was seven times severely tortured, so that he 
fell into despondency in consequence of all these 
tortures : but the Lord extended to him His hand, 
strengthened him, and gave him new courage, so 
that he manfully fought through, as we shall hear. 
Ursel his wife was likewise brought from the Ding- 
huys to the prisoners' gate, where she exhorted her 
husband not a little, to the strengthening of his 
heart. There Ursel was also twice tortured on the 
rack ; but she faithfully adhered to the truth. But 
it did not stop with this torturing in her case ; for 
the executioner tied her hands together, and drew 
her up, and as she was hanging there he cut open 
her chemise with a knife baring her back, and se- 
verely scourged her with rods ; this was done twice 
in one day. (It was said that a Jesuit advised this 
scourging.) But all this was patiently borne by 
Ursel, who, as said above, was also tender of body, 
so that before her imprisonment, she had to turn 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


843 



The teacher Ursula painfully tortured, whipped, beaten, and finally burned in Maastricht, AD 1570 


her stockings inside out, and put them on and wear 
them thus, because she could not bear the seams of 
the stockings inside on her limbs ; but now, through 
the help of God, she was able to endure torturing 
and scourging. Neeltgen the old woman was also 
led to the torture, and when she came to the rack or 
ladder, she went and lay down upon it of her own 
accord ; but the lords considering her age and 
feebleness, she was not tortured. They said to her : 
"It is not your first time, namely, that she lay on 
the rack ; for they knew that she had also once in 
her youth been imprisoned and tortured for the 
truth, from which imprisonment she had been de- 
livered in a remarkable manner. But her daughter 
Trijntgen was treated far less gently, for she was 
tortured very severely; and when she was taken 
from the rack almost in a fainting condition, she 
was laid upon a bed for a little while ; but as soon 
as she was recovered a little she had to go on the 
rack again. And when she was tortured severely 
she cried aloud : "O Lord, succor me, and keep my 
lips." For she was severely tortured, that she 
should name others; for they were thirsting for 
more blood. And God heard her prayer, and kept 
her lips, so that they could obtain nothing from her 


which implicated her neighbor. When Trijntgen 
was tortured the last time, she said : "I praise and 
thank the Lord." Mother Neeltgen, who was not 
far off, hearing her daughter speak, asked: "Is 
that my child ?" Hearing this, Trijntgen replied : 
"Yes, my mother ;" and fell on her neck and kissed 
her. 

On the 9th of January, in the year 1570, Arent 
and Ursel his wife were notified in the name of the 
lords, that each was to be put to a stake and burned, 
in which message they greatly rejoiced, because 
they were to be counted worthy to die for the name 
of Christ ; and were full of joy that day and night, 
thanking and praising God, and thus waited for the 
day of their redemption. 

In the morning a town beadle came to Ursel, and 
enjoined her in the name of his lords, that she 
should not speak in the street on her way to exe- 
cution ; this the beadle said in the presence of the 
lords. Ursel said to the lords : "And may I not sing 
a little, and say something now and then ?" But this 
they would not permit her, and said among them- 
selves : "We hear now what her intentions are." 
They further said to the executioner : "Do as you 
are commanded, and stop her mouth." The execu- 


844 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tioner had a piece of wood, which he put in Ursel's 
mouth, and tied up her mouth with a cloth. And 
as they had been taken back from the prisoners' 
gate, where they were tortured, to the Dinghuys, 
whence they were to go to execution, and where 
also Neeltgen and Trijntgen were still imprisoned, 
Trijntgen, when Ursel was led away from the 
Dinghuys, had come to a window above, and when 
she saw Ursel being led forth to death, she cried 
aloud over all the people, saying to Ursel : "Dear 
sister, contend manfully, for the crown of life is 
prepared for you." Thus Ursel, with her mouth 
gagged, went to the Vrijthof (the place where she 
was to be offered up), the people complaining 
greatly, because her mouth had been gagged so 
that she could not speak one word. 

When Ursel arrived at the scaffold which had 
been erected, she ascended it quietly as a lamb, and 
went directly into the hut, and the executioner im- 
mediately set fire to the same; and thus she was 
burned to ashes, and became a burnt offering unto 
the Lord. 

Very shortly after, Arent, Ursel's husband, was 
also notified to prepare himself for death, which 
he willingly received, and prepared himself ac- 
cordingly. Before he was led forth to death, they 
also stopped and tied up his mouth, which pre- 
sented a pitiful sight. They had erected a scaffold 
in another place than where Ursel had been put to 
death, namely, in the Friday or cattle market, near 
the Poel. What the lords sought by putting them to 
death separately was not really known ; but com- 
mon report had it, that the lords did it in order that 
Arent and Ursel might not derive any comfort 
from each other. When Arent was thus led, with 
his mouth gagged, to this place, a joyful and undis- 
mayed mind could be perceived. Having ascended 
the scaffold, he fell upon his knees, and fervently 
offered up his prayer. 

He then arose and went into the hut, where he 
divested himself of part of his clothing ; but as this 
took up some time, the bailiff, who was present on 
horseback, called out to the executioner : "Go on 
with your work ;" which the latter immediately did, 
and lighted the fire, and thus this martyr was like- 
wise burned to ashes, as a witness of Jesus Christ. 

Above we said, that the old woman Neeltgen, 
and Trijntgen her daughter, remained still impris- 
oned in the Dinghuys. On the 23d of January of 
the same year, these two also received notice from 
the lords, that they should have to die as the others ; 
which notice they so joyfully received, that time 
seemed very long to them before that day arrived. 
For they sought rest above in heaven with their 
dear heavenly Father, who, though He suffers His 
own to be tempted here, yet does never depart with 
His mercy from them, but delivers them out of all 
their distress. Hence, they were rejoiced in the 
Lord above measure, thanked and praised Him the 
whole night, and thus waited longingly for the day 
of their redemption. In the morning, when they 
were to be led to execution, the executioner put 


a piece of wood into the mouth of each, and tied 
it up with a cloth ; and thus they joyfully went (es- 
corted) to the Vrijthof. On the way Trijntgen 
put her hands up to the cloth with which her mouth 
was tied, and began to draw it away and to say 
something, and to call out why they died. But this 
they would in no wise tolerate ; hence the execu- 
tioner went up to her and laid his hand upon her 
mouth, and ordered her to go into the hut; for 
most of this was done on the scaffold. And thus 
Trijntgen and her dear mother were led into the 
hut, and both burned to ashes, having commended 
their souls into the hands of God ; which took place 
on the 24th of January, A. D. 1569. 


ANNEKEN OGIERS, DAUGHTER OF JAN OGIERS, AND 

WIFE OF ADRIAEN BOOGAERT, DROWNED FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT 

HAARLEM, A. D. 1570 

The misery of persecution continued, so that al- 
most nowhere liberty could be found for an up- 
right Christian soul. Herein also those of Haarlem, 
in Holland, incurred guilt ; which appeared in the 
year of our Lord 1570, for then they laid their 
hands (which they had previously several times 
imbrued in the blood of the saints) on a God-fear- 
ing woman named Anneken, the daughter of Jan 
Ogiers, and wife of Adriaen Boogaert, who thir- 
teen years previously had betaken herself from the 
darkness of popery to the true light of the Gospel, 
and, in proof that she desired to be a disciple of 
Jesus, had been baptized upon her faith, leaving 
and renouncing the pope and the Romish church, 
and, on the other hand, accepting and confessing 
Jesus Christ as the Son of God, and His church 
(namely, the cross-bearing church of the Ana- 
baptists) as His beloved bride, wife and own body, 
by which she was then recognized as a member and 
fellow sister. 

When she in her imprisonment could by no 
means be turned from her faith, the rulers of the 
city of Haarlem, concluded her trial, and, on the 
17th of June, A. D. 1570, publicly in court, pro- 
nounced sentence of death upon her, namely, that 
she should be drowned and buried under the gal- 
lows. The sentence (excepting the title) reads 
word for word as follows : 

SENTENCE OF DEATH OF ANNEKEN, JAN OGIERS' 
DAUGHTER 

Whereas Anneken, Jan Ogiers' daughter, and 
wife of Adriaen Boogaert, porcelain-maker, pris- 
oner, has confessed without torture and iron bonds, 
that_ about thirteen years ago, she, rejecting the 
Christian baptism received by her in her infancy, 
was rebaptized at Amsterdam, contrary to our 
Catholic faith, and the unity of the holy Roman 
church, and also in contempt of the decrees of his 
royal majesty, our most gracious lord ; and what 
is still worse, though she has been instructed for 
the best concerning her error and heresy, she still 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


845 


obstinately persists therein ; therefore, the judges, 
having heard the demand made in conclusion by 
Jacob Foppens, bailiff, of this city of Haarlem, in 
the name of his majesty, as Count of Holland, 
against said prisoner, that she should be condemned 
by their sentence, to be conducted to the scaffold 
here, and executed with fire, until death should en- 
sue ; and all her property confiscated for the ben- 
efit of his royal majesty, according to the decrees 
of his majesty aforesaid ; have, by reason of what 
has been mentioned, condemned said Anneken, 
Jan Ogiers' daughter, prisoner, and by these pres- 
ents do condemn her to be executed with water 
and drowned here in the city hall, until death en- 
sues, and the body to be buried under the gallows ; 
and declare all her property forfeited for the ben- 
efit of his majesty. Thus read from the city hall, 
by the sound of the bell, on the 17th of June, A. D. 
1570, in presence of Jacob Foppens, bailiff, Mr. 
Gerrit van Ravensberge, Mr. Lambrecht van 
Roosvelt, Mr. Huge Bol van Zanen, Aelbrecht 
van Schagen, Mr. Gijsbrecht van Nesse, Wouter 
van Rollandt, and Frans Janss Teyng, judges. 

Extracted from the first book of penal sentences 
of the city of Haarlem (beginning A. D. 1539, 
and concluding the 27th of October, A. D. 1582; 
preserved in the archives of the city of Haarlem) 
and, after collation, found to accord with it ; by me, 
the undersigned, secretary of the aforesaid city, 
*e 14th of July, A. D. 1659. 

The above-mentioned sentence, we obtained, af- 
ter much trouble, from the hands of the secretary 
of civil and criminal matters, or clerk of the crim- 
inal court of the city of Haarlem, through the in- 
strumentality of one of our good friends, H. V., 
just as the same was read in court at the hour of 
the death of the aforesaid woman, and is still at the 
present day found in the city records of that place ; 
from the particulars of which we have written the 
account that precedes the sentence. 


BARBER JANS, A. D. 1570 

At Haarlem in Holland, in the year 1570, a 
woman, named Barber Jans, was apprehended, be- 
cause she had apostatized from the Romish church, 
and endeavored to be a follower of Christ ; who, 
having boldly confessed her faith, and firmly ad- 
hering to it, was sentenced to death on the 13th 
of February, and secretly drowned for the Gospel's 
sake, and then burned to ashes. 


ALLERT JANSS, A. D. 1570 

In the same year 1570, on the 13th of April, also 
a pious brother, named Allert Janss, was brought 
prisoner to Haarlem ; who, after many temptations 
and assaults, because of his steadfastness in the 
divine truth, on the 6th of May, after the sentence 
had been pronounced, boldly went to the stake, 
to be burnt alive to ashes, and thus offered up a 
sacrifice, well-pleasing to God, and serving as an 
example to all the God-fearing. 


ANDRIES N., WITH HIS FATHER AND BROTHER, 
A. D. 1570 

In this same year also a brother named An- 
dries N., because he, having died unto the world, 
had entered the service of God, was apprehended 
at Antwerp, and about the same time also his fa- 
ther and brother, who, being imprisoned together, 
rejoiced in the Lord, that they were counted worthy 
to suffer for His name, which they also boldly con- 
fessed before the secular rulers, and professed a 
good profession of their faith, to which they firmly 
adhered, notwithstanding the sufferings or vexa- 
tions which, by subtilty, promises and threats, were 
inflicted upon them on this account ; so that they 
persevered unto the end in the truth, in the true 
faith, and in the love to God. All three were then 
sentenced and burnt, and thus, offering up their 
sacrifice, as a sweet smelling savor unto God, helped 
to fulfill the number of their brethren that had 
gone before. 


ANDRIES N., A. D. 1570 

In this same year 1570, there was also appre- 
hended in Haarlem, for his faith and the truth, a 
brother named Andries N., who was tortured very 
cruelly for the space of three hours, but neverthe- 
less, then as well as in other temptations and suf- 
ferings, always steadfastly adhered to his faith. 
Finally he was sentenced to death and burned, and 
thus, as a valiant soldier of the Lord, fought a good 
fight ; hence, he is worthy not only to be remem- 
bered here for an example and perpetual memorial, 
but also to inherit the kingdom of his heavenly 
Father, which is prepared for all the pious. 


JORIS VAN MEESCH AND JACOB LOWIJS 
ABOUT 1570 

Christ says to His disciples : "The brother shall 
deliver up the brother to death, and the father the 
child : and the children shall rise up against their 
parents, and cause them to be put to death. And 
ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake : 
but he that endureth to the end shall be saved." 
Matt. 10 :21, 22. This also appeared about the year 
1570 (for we do not know the exact time), when 
two pious followers of Christ, named Joris van 
Meesch and Jacob Lowijs, were apprehended at 
Ghent, in Flanders, where, after many temptations 
and severe threats (from the papists) they were 
put to death, testifying to and confirming the faith 
of the eternal truth with their blood. Hence, they 
shall at the last day be graciously accepted of God, 
and receive the crown of eternal glory at the hand 
of the Lord. 


I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them 
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, 
and pray for them which despitef ully use you, and 
persecute you. 


846 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


JAN THE RIBBON WEAVER, JOOST THE WHEEL- 
WRIGHT WITH HIS WIFE, MAERTEN VAN 
WYJCKE WITH LIJSKEN HIS WIFE, 
AND JELIS THE MASON, IN THE 
YEAR 1570 

In the year 1570 there were apprehended at Ant- 
werp, and put to death at the same place for the 
testimony of Jesus, the following God-fearing per- 
sons : Jan the ribbon weaver, Joost the wheelwright 
with his wife, Maerten van Wijcke with Lijsken 
his wife, and Jelis the mason's tender. Lijsken, 
however, the wife of Maerten van Wijcke, was 
kept imprisoned for one year, and then, on the 2d 
of May, 1571, burnt alive at said place. 

Thus these six pious, godly persons were mar- 
tyred by the tyrants and bloodthirsty, not on ac- 
count of any crime, much less for any heresy, but 
only for following the genuine faith of the truth. 
Herein the latter followed the footsteps of their 
forefathers, the false prophets, who thus perse- 
cuted and killed the upright followers of the truth 
from the beginning. Hence, it is to be feared, that 
they will repent when it is too late, and will also 
receive the same recompense with those whose 
works they herein followed. But those who fol- 
lowed the true prophet Christ Jesus in true obedi- 
ence and upright faith, shall, on the other hand, 
upon Mount Zion, be clothed in white raiment, by 
their Bridegroom Christ Jesus for whose sake they 
suffered this, receive palms in their hands, and be 
crowned with crowns of eternal glory, which no 
one shall ever be able to take from them. 


FAES DIRCKS, AND TWO OTHERS, A. D. 1570 

In the year 1570, on the 7th of April, there was 
apprehended for the Word of God and the testi- 
mony of Jesus, at Gouda, in Holland, a pious fol- 
lower of Christ, named Faes Dircks, a chairmaker 
by trade. Afterwards, the 27th of May, he was very 
unmercifully and tyrannically tortured by the 
bloodthirsty servants of antichrist, and led forth 
under the blue sky, and on the 30th of May of the 
same year, put to death, and burned for the genuine 
faith of the truth, following the footsteps of his 
Lord and Master Christ Jesus. Some time prior to 
this two other pious followers of Christ were put to. 
death at Gouda, for the testimony of Jesus, one of 
whom according to the counsel of God, was not yet 
baptized upon his faith ; but the God of all grace, 
who knows the heart, mind and thoughts of all men, 
accepted in him the will for the deed. Thus they 
suffered with Christ, and shall be received with 
Him into eternal glory, at that time when all the 
earthly, carnal generation of men shall weep and 
lament over themselves eternally. 

Subsequently, when Gouda was taken by the 
troops of the prince of Orange, it was deliberated 
upon to exhume the priest who had been the cause 
of the imprisonment and death ot said Faes Dircks, 
and of the dispersion and persecution of many of 
those who feared God. They afterwards changed 


their mind, but hired a man for about four guild- 
ers, who took down the bones of Faes Dircks from 
the scaffold, and opened the grave of the aforesaid 
priest, who had previously died, and been interred 
in the church of the Franciscans, near the high 
altar, and then laid the bones of Faes Dircks upon 
the body of the priest ; thus deriding this traitor, 
because he had deemed the God-fearing unworthy 
to live with him in the same town, and, after their 
death, their bodies unworthy of burial, but they 
had to be given as food to the birds of heaven. But 
at the speedy coming of Christ from heaven, this 
idolatrous priest shall find, when it will be too late 
for repentance, who of them both will be acknowl- 
edged and accepted by the chief Shepherd as an 
acceptable sheep, or as a rejected goat. 

Concerning this martyr Faes Dirckt we have ob- 
tained three examinations, namely, two without 
torture and one on the rack, just as the same have 
been extracted by the secretary there from the 
town records of Gouda, which we therefore will 
communicate to our fellow believers for the greater 
confirmation of the foregoing account; they read 
as follows. 

COPY OF THE CONFESSION MADE BY FAES DIRCKS 
IMPRISONED HERE IN THIENDEWEGS GATE 

First Examination 

The 11th of May, 1570, the bailiff of Gouda 
brought to examination the hereinafter mentioned 
person : there being present, Gijsbert Jan Maert- 
enss, and Gerraert Huygen, burgomasters, Dirck 
Andries, Mr. Heyndrick Jacobs, Mr. Cornelis 
Heyndricks, judges. 

Faes Dircks, chairmaker, about thirty-one years 
of age, says that he is a native citizen of Gouda, 
and that on last Easter Day he heard the pastor of 
Gouda preach; that those who go to the Lord's 
table do not receive roasted, sodden or raw meat, 
but that they receive the roasted flesh of our Lord, 
roasted on Good Friday, on the tree of the cross. 
Hence, hearing this, he went out of the church, 
since he did not feel well at this, nor deem himself 
worthy to receive it, and did not go to the Lord's 
table. 

He says and confesses, that he does not consider 
the sacrament of the altar real flesh and blood, and 
this for the reason that there is but one God. 

He also confesses, that about a year ago he was 
baptized at Rotterdam, and that he did not know 
the one that baptized him, but that the latter deliv- 
ered an exhortation, saying that the Lord had said : 
"That all that believe and are baptized shall be 
saved." 

He further says, that the one who baptized him 
baptized him in the name of the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, and that water was poured 
over his head out of a basin, and that there were 
present ten or twelve persons, one of whom was 
named Wiert Claess, of Gouda. 

When asked, whether Euwout the barber, and 
Dirck Jacobs, the shoemaker, or others from Gouda 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


847 


were not also present with him at Rotterdam, he 
says, "No," but that Wiert Claess was present 
there, and that to his knowledge Wiert was not 
baptized at that time. 

Note. — Here follow some more questions and 
answers, which are treated of in the following ex- 
amination; hence we have omitted to place them 
here. In conclusion the secretary wrote : Thus done 
on the days and in the presence aforesaid, in the 
Thiendewegs Gate ; I being present as secretary of 
Gouda. Joris Jacobs. 

Second Examination 

The 19th of May, 1570, the bailiff brought Faes 
Dircks, the second time to examination, in the pres- 
ence of the pastor of Gouda, Mr. Joost Boorgoos, 
Gijsbert Jan Maertenss, Jan Gerritts Pels, and Ger- 
rit Huygen, burgomasters, Gerrit Gerrit Bouw- 
enss, Dirck Andriess, Mr. Heyndrick Jacobs, Floris 
Gijsberts, and Mr. Cornelis Heyndricks, judges. 

The afore-mentioned Faes Dircks, when he was 
asked whether he still persisted in and adhered to 
what he said and confessed on the 11th of this 
month, replied that he still adhered to it. 

He says, that he believes in Almighty God, and 
in Jesus Christ, who was born of the virgin Mary. 
He also says, that infants cannot be regenerated, 
since they have no understanding to believe, and 
that water cannot save them. 

When he was asked whether he did not believe 
that Christ Jesus is in the holy sacrament he says, 
"No," since there is not more than one God, and 
He is in heaven, and not here in the sacrament. 
He says that he considers himself a sheep of Christ, 
and that he regards Christ as his Shepherd, and 
that he knows no other shepherd. 

When he was asked who baptized him, he says 
that he does not know, and that he never saw the 
one that baptized him, either before or since, and 
that no one was present there from Gouda, except 
Wiert Claess, who brought him there, and that he 
[Faes Dircks] arrived in the place on an evening, 
and stayed there the whole night and the following 
day, until the evening when he was baptized ; this 
took place at Rotterdam, in a house, in a large gar- 
ret.* 

Note. — Here follow again some questions and 
answers, which are more fully explained in the 
third and last examination, and which we have 
omitted in order to avoid repetition. The secretary 
then, after stating the time when, the place where, 
and the persons in whose presence this took place, 
again subscribes himself, by the name of Joris 
Jacobs, secretary of Gouda. 

Third examination on the rack 

On the 27th of May, 1579, Johan Pieterss, mayor 
of Gouda, in the name of Sir Cornelis Mylo, castel- 
lan and bailiff of the city of Gouda, brought Faes 
Dircks to the torture, in the presence of Gijsbert 

* Behold here the strait of the believers in those times, who 
to hear the Word of God, occasionally had to spend whole days and 
nights in order to attend the meeting. 


Jan Maertens, Gerritt Huyge Hapkooper, burgo- 
masters ; Gerrit Gerrit Bouwenss, Dirck Andriess, 
Dirck Janss Lonck, and Mr. Cornelis Heyndricks, 
judges. 

Faes Dircks being asked whether he still adheres 
to the confession which he made on the 19th of this 
month, says that he still adheres to it. 

When brought to the torture, and asked, in whose 
house he was baptized, he said he did not know, but 
subsequently understood that it took place at the 
house of a shoemaker named Michael, residing near 
the East Gate, at Rotterdam. 

He says that when he was baptized, about eight 
or nine others were baptized with him, among 
whom were Dirck Jacobs, a shoemaker, and Jan 
Adrienss, a tanner, and that the wife of Michael, 
the shoemaker, and Wiert Claess, were present 
when the baptism took place, but that Wiert was 
not baptized. 

When asked whether Euwout the barber, Jan 
Aertss, the weaver, and Jan de Bagijn were also 
present when he was baptized, he says "No," and 
he says further that Dirck Jacobss and the tanner 
came early in the morning before daylight into the 
house where they were baptized. 

He says that the one who baptized him had a 
strange language, and talked somewhat loud. 

He says, that a woman named Maertjen Philips, 
residing in the Cingel, is of his faith, and also Wil- 
lem Janss, cutler, Wiert Claess, and- Jan Aertss, 
weaver. 

When asked whether Euwout the barber was of 
the same persuasion and faith with him, he says 
that he does not know, and that he has not had any 
conversation with him in regard to matters of faith, 
but that he has been at his house. He says that he 
does not know whether Jan de Bagijn is also of 
the same faith as he that speaks or not. 

Again : The above confession was then read to 
the aforesaid Faes Dircks, under the blue sky, 
without torture and iron bonds, and being asked 
whether he adhered to it, he replied that he did, 
and that he desired mercy, and not justice. Done 
in the presence of the full court. 

Joris Jacobs. 

Note. — Since not only the three afore-mentioned 
examinations, but also the sentence of death of 
said friend of God, were sent us by the present 
secretary of the town of Gouda, we will add the 
latter here, as it reads in the original, that no one 
may in any wise doubt what has been related. 


EXTRACT FROM THE BOOK OF CRIMINAL SENTENCES 
OF THE TOWN OF GOUDA 

Faes Dircks executed with fire 
Whereas Faes Dircks, native citizen of this town 
of Gouda, at present a prisoner, has confessed, 
without torture and iron bonds, under the blue sky, 
before my lords of the court, that about a little over 
a year ago he was rebaptized at Rotterdam, by a 
man whom he does not know ; that he also for two 


848 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


years back has rejected communion with the holy 
church, our mother, and does not believe in the 
holy, worshipful sacrament of the altar, in which 
lies the salvation of man : without that said Faes 
Dircks has been willing to repent of this, to be in- 
structed otherwise, but has added, that he would 
not listen to him that desired to instruct him, and 
to turn him from his error and heresy, all this be- 
ing contrary to the written laws and decrees of his 
royal majesty published at different times in these 
countries ; therefore the judges with the mature de- 
liberation of the council, having examined and 
weighed all that is of importance in this case on the 
behalf and in the name of the King of Spain, as 
Count of Holland, Zealand and Friesland, our 
common lord and prince, have condemned the 
aforesaid Faes Dircks, at present a prisoner, and 
condemn him by these presents, to be brought to 
the scaffold without this town, and there to be ex- 
ecuted with fire ; and declare all his property con- 
fiscated for the benefit of his royal majesty; unless 
the aforesaid Faes Dircks depart publicly before 
the church, from his aforesaid heresy, and declare 
and confess that he has been led astray and de- 
ceived; in such case the judges reserve to them- 
selves the punishment to be inflicted upon him for 
his crime, the same to be according as they shall 
find proper pursuant to the decrees of his majesty 
aforesaid.* 

Done by Jan Claess Diert, and Simon Pieters, 
burgomasters, summoned, Gijsbert Jan Maertenss 
and Gerritt Huyges, burgomasters, Dirck Ottes 
van Slingerlandt, judge, summoned, Gerrit Gerrit 
Bouwenss, Dirck Andriess, Mr. Heyndrick Ja- 
cobs, Dirck Janss Lonck, Mr. Cornelis Heyndricks, 
judges, and announced to Dirck van Necq, judge, 
summoned. Published on the 30th of May, in the 
year 1570. Subscribed. 

Joris Jacobs, 
Secretary of Gouda, A. D. 1570. 


ADRIAEN PIETERS AND BARBER JOOSTEN, IN THE 
YEAR 1570 

In the year 1570, there were imprisoned at Haar- 
lem in Holland, a brother named Adriaen Pieters, 
and a sister named Barber Joosten, not on account 
of any crime or heresy, but only because they 
sought to follow Christ in the regeneration, for 
which they were envied by the servants of anti- 
christ, who sought with many tyrannical means to 
draw them from Christ, and to make them follow 
their self-invented idolatry which militates against 
God. But these, as giants in the faith, valiantly 
resisted, through the grace of God, the snares of 
Satan. Hence, they were condemned and sentenced 
to death by the rulers of darkness. Adriaen Pieters 
was burnt, and Barber Joosten was drowned in 
great steadfastness, and thus they both remained 
faithful to the Lord their God unto death and hence 
out of grace, obtained the crown of eternal life. 

* That is, in this case, he would have been executed with the 
sword, but as he remained steadfast, it did not come to this. 


MAERTEN KARETTIER, A. D. 1570 

Maerten Karettier of Busbeke, who also would 
rather suffer affliction with the children of God, 
than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and 
live in joy with the world, was apprehended for his 
faith at Rijssel and there made a good confession 
of it and evinced great steadfastness, for which 
reason he finally, as a valiant witness of God, had 
to taste death. 


LIJNTGEN KEMELS, A. D. 1570 

In like manner, there was also apprehended, at 
Luyck, a sister named Lijntgen Kernels, who, after 
having made a good and steadfast confession of 
her faith, was burnt there, and thus went boldly, 
with her lamp burning, to meet her bridegroom, 
who also joyfully took her as a wise virgin in to his 
[marriage] feast. 


JOOST VERKINDERT AND LAUWERENS ANDRIESS, 

BOTH PUT TO DEATH FOR THE TESTIMONY 

OF JESUS CHRIST, AT ANTWERP, THE 13TH 

OF SEPTEMBER, A. D. 1570 

A letter of Joost Verkindert to his wife, mother, 

brother, and sister; written on the 7th of June, 

being the ninth day of his imprisonment 

Grace and mercy from God the heavenly Father, 
and the merits of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, who 
redeemed us on the tree of the cross by the shed- 
ding of His precious blood, when we were yet His 
enemies, together with the consolation of the Holy 
Ghost, who comforts all afflicted hearts ; all this I 
wish you together as a friendly and heartfelt greet- 
ing. I wholly commend myself to you, and also 
thank you all for the love shown me, and the ex- 
hortation and consolation in my present great trib- 
ulation, which I must now receive as permitted and 
foreordained by the Lord. For Christ says : "The 
very hairs of your head are all numbered. Mat- 
thew 10 :30. Nevertheless, in going out I was ap- 
prehensive of meeting the officer, which also hap- 
pened, since the plan of meeting together at that 
time was not well-timed ; however all things must 
have a cause. I must relate to you something about 
our apprehension, how the bailiff with some of his 
servants met me and Lauwerens and asked: 
"Whence do you come? and whither are you go- 
ing?" Hearing this we were both greatly conster- 
nated, so that they instantly perceived what kind 
of people we were. They immediately bound us, 
and conducted us above ; and while they were lead- 
ing us they greatly cursed us and called us rogues. 
Haying arrived at the prison, they forthwith ex- 
amined Lauwerens alone. Afterwards I was also 
brought before them, and was asked, whether I had 
received another baptism besides the one received 
in my infancy. I asked him in return, what he had 
to say against me. He said: "You are rebaptized ; 
your servant has told me." I answered : "Let me 
alone; I shall tomorrow confess my faith before 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


849 


the margrave." But he was not satisfied with that, 
for he had a notebook to write in; and when he 
could obtain no other information from me, he be- 
came angry and said : "I shall make you say yes 
or no." I said: "My lord, be satisfied for this 
time." And when he saw that he could not obtain 
anything further from me, he made me sit in the 
emperor's chair, and thus they left me, I thinking 
that they were going for the executioner. While 
lying there alone I was troubled by various 
thoughts; moreover Satan greatly tormented me 
with wife and children, sustenance, and many 
other temptations, on account of which I heartily 
wept, calling to God for succor, and began to meas- 
ure my life and conversation with the Word of 
God, from the beginning of my Christian life up 
to this present day, and found no cause just enough 
to cease from all the severe labor which I had done. 
Though I have often transgressed the command- 
ment of God, yet it was not done wantonly and I 
found grace with God. 

The next day we were both brought into the 
tower where Lauwerens was tortured. They fur- 
ther asked me concerning my age and faith, all of 
which I freely confessed to them, and was not 
ashamed. They asked whether I had a wife. And 
when I had said, "Yes," they asked whether I had 
children. I said : "Two." They asked what their 
names were, and whether they were baptized. 1 
answered: "They are not baptized, for I recog- 
nize no infant baptism ; we also find in the Scrip- 
tures but one baptism upon faith, as Christ left it 
to us, and His apostles practiced." When I pro- 
nounced the names of the children, they laughed, 
because the children had names without being 
christened. We further had many other words, 
which it would take too long to relate; hence I 
write this to you very briefly for I am so closely 
guarded, that no one can speak with me ; nor have 
I ever conversed with Lauwerens alone. Hence, 
keep quiet about everything, for I am apprehensive 
of being tormented still much more, of which I am 
greatly afraid according to the flesh ; for they have 
here so many tortures, chains for suspending, pul- 
ley, cords, and rack, on which I was tortured, as 
you know. 

O friends, let all of you heartily entreat the Lord 
for me, and cause prayer to be made for me. Acts 
12 :5. O I pray the Lord with tears ; yea, I water 
my couch with my tears before the Lord ( Ps. 6 :6) , 
that He should make me worthy of Him through 
His grace. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord and bid 
you all adieu. 

Written in bonds by me, 

Joost Verkindert, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 

Note. — He was apprehended on the 30th of 
May, and put to death on the 13th of September 
of the same year. 


ANOTHER EDIFYING LETTER AND EXHORTATION 
OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRITTEN IN HIS IM- 
PRISONMENT, THE 20TH OF JUNE, TO 
THE CHURCH OF GOD AT A. 

Grace, mercy and peace from God the heavenly 
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own blood ; to- 
gether with the consolation of the Holy Ghost, who 
proceeds from the Father and the Son, to comfort 
all them that are in any tribulation and affliction for 
His holy name's sake. To Him be praise, honor, 
glory, dominion, power and majesty, forever and 
ever. Amen. This we wish you all as a friendly 
greeting, my beloved brethren and sisters in the 
Lord. We prisoners for the testimony of our dear 
Lord Jesus Christ inform you, that it is still toler- 
ably well with us according to the flesh; but as 
regards the spirit, we would that it were better, for 
we are compassed about with such a vile, evil flesh, 
which always lusts against the will of God, and 
shrinks much from suffering; however we must 
suffer and fight, if we are to overcome. For, dear 
brethren and sisters, the crown lies not at the 
beginning nor in the middle, but at the end ; there 
the conflict lies ; then the gold is tried by the fire 
of affliction, which no one knows better, than those 
who have been tried therein. 

It is indeed true what the apostle says: "No 
chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, 
but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth 
the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them 
which are exercised thereby." Heb. 12:11. 

Further, my dear friends, brethren and sisters, 
we pray you by the great love of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that you be all of the same mind, and let 
there be no discord among you nor any strife about 
any matter ; but let each seek to be wise and pru- 
dent in that which is good, and simple in what is 
evil, remembering the words of the apostle where 
he says : "If there be therefore any consolation in 
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship 
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye 
my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same 
love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let noth- 
ing be done through strife or vainglory; but in 
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than 
themselves. Look not every man on his own 
things, but every man also on the things of others. 
Yea, let this mmd be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus, who, though he was rich, became 
poor for our sakes, that through his poverty he 
might make us rich, and purify unto himself a holy 
church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such 
thing ; which he hath purchased with his own blood, 
that they should be holy and without blame, and 
walk in love." Phil. 2:1-5; I Cor. 10:24; II Co- 
rinthians 8:9; Eph. 5:26, 27; Acts 20:28; Eph. 

This church has now for a time suffered much 
sorrow ; may the complaint ascend to the merciful 
Father in heaven, concerning the misery and sad- 


850 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ness that have come upon Zion. But the God of all 
grace be praised for His great mercy which He has 
yet shown the church at Antwerp, which continues 
still in good peace and unity (as I think) ; where- 
fore there is great joy and gladness there according 
to the spirit, but great distress according to the 
flesh. For the Lord tries His people with tribula- 
tion and distress, as Christ says : "They shall put 
you out of the synagogues : yea, the time cometh, 
that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth 
God service. And these things will they do unto 
you, because they have not known my Father, nor 
me." John 16:2, 3. For if they had known Him, 
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 
I Corinthians 2 :8. And though the persecution is 
not so severe in some places, the Lord can never- 
theless try men by other means, by strife, discord, 
strutting and boasting, reveling and banqueting, 
in short by carnal works, all of which are not ac- 
cording to our vocation. Not, dear friends, that I 
would here accuse any one; but out of brotherly 
love we exhort every one ; for before God nothing 
can be hid, for He will bring to light all that is 
done in secret. I Cor. 4:5. 

Therefore, my dear friends, let us not deceive 
the Lord ; for His eyes are as a flame of fire, and 
He is a mighty, powerful and strong God, and sees 
everywhere in secret and openly; hence He may 
well be feared, for He has not spoken a single 
word in vain, as He says by the prophet, that the 
Word which goeth forth out of His mouth does 
not return unto Him void, but does accomplish all 
that He pleases. Rev. 1 :14; Isa. 55:11. 

My affectionately beloved brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, receive this letter from your poor, weak 
brother in good part ; for it has been written at the 
request of some brethren, if peradventure you 
might be comforted and refreshed a little by our 
simple epistle, for we have written these few lines 
out of cordial affection, and because we should ex- 
hort one another while it is called today; for we 
hope soon, by the grace of the Lord, here to put 
off our flesh. Heb. 3 :13 ; II Pet. 1 :14. 

O friends, the way that leads into life is so strait 
and narrow ; but the way that leads into hell is so 
broad and easy for the flesh. Truly indeed does 
the prophet Isaiah say, that hell has opened wide 
her mouth, and both princes and the common peo- 
ple descend into it, yea, they go to hell like sheep 
to the slaughter. Isa. 5 :14. 

Hence, my dear friends, let us take diligent 
heed, that we may not have received the grace 
of God in vain ; but let us constantly remember the 
days of our illumination, and how little we then 
were in our own eyes, when we humbled ourselves 
under the mighty hand of God, yielding up our- 
selves entirely, to serve the Lord in holiness and 
righteousness acceptable before Him. Heb. 10 :32 ; 
I Pet. 5 :6 ; Luke 1 :75. For we were then all like 
Saul when he was anointed king, who was of the 
least of the tribes of Israel and little in his own 
eyes. But when he became proud, the Lord rejected 


him. For the Lord said to Samuel : "Go and tell 
Saul to destroy Amalek from the earth, both man 
and beast." But Saul followed his own judgment 
and spared the king, and the best of the oxen, and 
of the sheep, to sacrifice them to the Lord ; whereby 
he transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and 
was disobedient to His voice, notwithstanding the 
Lord desired obedience and not sacrifice. I Sam. 
15. 

Behold, dear friends, for what a small matter 
Saul was rejected; hence let us take good heed, 
for He is still the same God. This is also the case 
with part of us, that we take too great liberty in our 
faith, in consequence of which we are rejected, 
and then do not know ourselves where the fault 
lies. Now a spirit of contention comes upon us, 
causing the pious to sigh and mourn : so that there- 
by division and schism are wrought in the church 
of God, which mostly occurs where Christians have 
great liberty. How much it is now like it was in 
the days of Israel ; when they were in peace [from 
without], they waged war against one another, so 
that many thousands fell, when they fought against 
the Benjamites. Judg. 20. Hence, my dear breth- 
ren and sisters, let Christ Jesus be an example unto 
you, who has called us in peace. I Cor. 7:15. For 
the fruit of the Spirit is all manner of goodness, 
righteousness, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Eph. 
5 :9. And let us take good heed that we do not be- 
come like the church of Laodicea, which was nei- 
ther cold nor hot, and thought she was rich and in- 
creased with goods, and had need of nothing. But 
the Spirit answered her, saying : "I commend thee 
to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may- 
est be rich ; and white raiment, that thou mayest be 
clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do 
not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, 
that thou mayest see." Rev. 3:18. Hence, it is 
daily necessary to exhort one another with the word 
of the Lord, which is the true mirror and plumb- 
line by which to measure our life and conversation 
according to our weakness. I say according to our 
weak ability; for if God should enter into judg- 
ment with us, no one could stand before Him. Ps. 
143 :2. Hence, no man may or can justify himself 
before God. But we must always remain debtors, 
remembering that we come short in many things. 
Matthew 6:12. 

Let us therefore take diligent heed, and have our 
predecessors constantly before our eyes, namely, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and all the proph- 
ets, who were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, 
and sought a country, a city that had foundations, 
whose builder and maker was God; and experi- 
enced tribulation and affliction, stripes and im- 
prisonments ; of whom the world was not worthy. 
Heb. 11. And Christ Jesus Himself had not so 
much in the world as upon which to lay His blessed 
head, for He says : "The foxes have holes, and the 
birds of the air have nests ; but the Son of man 
hath not where to lay his head." Matt. 8 :20. But 
He had to flee away everywhere (Matt. 2 :13), even 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


851 


as His members must still do at the present day. 
For he who confesses Christ Jesus in power is a 
prey to everyone, and is cursed and banished as a 
rebel and heretic, yea, condemned to and exter- 
minated with the severest death that they can de- 
vise. May the complaint ascend to God in high 
heaven, of the great and miserable blindness. They 
perpetually cry: "The decree must be observed; 
not once considering whether it is right or wrong ; 
though some nevertheless say that no one ought 
to be put to death for the faith's sake." 

Thus, my dear brethren and sisters, we must 
with Jeremiah commit our cause to the Lord, and 
pray for the blindness of our enemies, that the Lord 
would enlighten them, so that they may see whom 
they pierce, and how they fight against the Lamb, 
which shall yet overcome them. Jer. 1 1 :20 ; John 
19:37; Rev. 17:14. 

Further, dear brethren and sisters, we pray you 
in general, that you remember them that are in 
bonds, as bound with them ; and them which suffer 
adversity, as being yourselves also in the body 
(Heb. 13:3) ; also, that we may joyfully put off 
our flesh here upon earth, to the praise of the Most 
High, and to the edification of our neighbor, that 
the name of the Lord may not be blasphemed 
through us. I, Joost Verkindert, Lauwerens An- 
driess, and Nelleken Jaspers greet you (who are 
in like faith with us) with the peace of the Lord, 
commending you to the crucified Jesus Christ, who 
may rule in your hearts. To Him be praise, glory, 
dominion, power, and majesty forever and ever. 
Amen. 

Receive our simple letter and exhortation in good 
part, for it has been written out of true brotherly 
love ; though you are yourselves abundantly taught 
of God, and we ought rather to be taught and ex- 
horted of you, for we find that we have too many 
defects and imperfections to exhort others. But, 
dear friends, we also admonish ourselves hereby, 
and pray the Lord without ceasing, that we might 
be found worthy of Him, to meet Him in the resur- 
rection of the dead. I Thess. 4 :17. 

O friends, watch and pray ; for ye know neither 
the day nor the hour. Matt. 25:13. Farewell. 

Written in my bonds, by me, 

Joost Verkindert, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN THE 26TH OF JUNE, FROM PRISON, TO HIS 
AFORE-MENTIONED BROTHER, W. 

Grace, joy and peace from God the heavenly 
Father, and our dear Lord Jesus Christ, who loved 
us, and washed us from our sins in His own blood, 
and the consolation of the Holy Ghost, who is the 
comforter of them that are in any tribulation and 
sorrow. To Him be praise, honor, glory, dominion, 
power, and majesty forever and ever. Amen. This 
I wish you for a friendly and cordial greeting, my 


very dear and beloved brother W., with your dear 
wife J. 

Know further, that I am still tolerably well, ac- 
cording to the flesh, and as regards the spirit, I 
hope through God's great and unspeakable grace 
to finish this great and severe conflict with the help 
of the Most High — from whom we must expect 
help and comfort — to the praise of His holy name, 
to the edification of our neighbor, and to the salva- 
tion of our souls ; which salvation cannot be bought 
or obtained with gold or silver, nor with anything 
that is in the world, but only by a living and active 
faith in Jesus Christ. Gal. 5 :6. I also received a 
salutation from you, together with the things that 
were sent to us, which much exhorted us, and was 
a great consolation in our tribulation, so that we 
rejoiced, and praised and thanked God, that there 
are still such good-hearted brethren, who remem- 
ber us poor, weak prisoners. 

O dear brethren and sisters, always remember 
us in your prayers, that the Lord may strengthen 
us, so that we may put off our flesh with joy here 
upon earth ; for it is sometimes much afraid of the 
gag and of being burnt alive, which is nevertheless 
very soon over. But when I think of the fire that 
shall burn and last forever, I thank the Lord, that 
He has made me worthy to confess His holy name 
among this evil and perverse generation, the eyes 
of whose hearts the god of this world has blinded. 
II Cor. 4:4. 

Oh, they shall yet greatly lament at the last day, 
that they have thus shed innocent blood, which has 
been so until now, even from the beginning, and 
shall continue, I presume, unto the end; for the 
holy Scriptures abundantly testify of the sufferings 
of the holy fathers, how they all were strangers and 
pilgrims here upon earth, and after much tribula- 
tion and affliction fell asleep in the Lord ; for they 
firmly trusted that God's promises should not fail 
them, as Christ also says : "Heaven and earth shall 
pass away, but my word shall not pass away." Mat- 
thew 24 :35. 

O dear brother, whom I love from the depth of 
my heart, cease not (because of my tribulation, 
which is great) to serve the Lord ; for we have the 
truth, as the Holy Ghost bears me witness in my 
conscience. But great care has to be exercised ; for 
Satan brings forth everything that can be im- 
agined, and he makes it so great and grievous, that 
I often pray and call upon the Lord with tears, to 
help and deliver me. I also call to remembrance the 
days of my illumination (Heb. 10:32), how little I 
was then in my own eyes, and that neither flesh nor 
blood, nor any one under heaven, advised me to do 
this ; but great terror and fear of eternal death and 
of the cruel fire of hell, which (as I read) should 
come upon all the world ; for I found myself then 
like others in all manner of worldly lusts, yea, al- 
together earthly and carnally minded, upon whom 
the wrath of God comes. Also that there was no 
other means than this, by which to be saved ; hence, 
I entirely committed myself to the Lord, and have 


852 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


also, with much sighing and mourning, traveled 
through the wilderness of this world, compassed 
about with an evil flesh, which has never yet ad- 
vised me to anything good : yea, if I had not fled 
for refuge to the word of the Lord, I would have 
been utterly overthrown in the wilderness of this 
world, for flesh and blood greatly desired to be 
one with the world, since they always shrank from 
suffering. But when I with David went into the 
sanctuary of God, and there beheld the recompense 
of the world, and how soon they are cut off, and 
that they were blots, and not children; and also 
remembered that it is written : "Cursed be the man 
that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm ; yea, 
cursed be their going out and coming in." Ps. 73 : 
17 ; Deut. 32 :5 ; Jer. 17:5; Deut. 28 :19. However 
fine a captain one may choose, to prosper in the 
world, flesh and blood are nevertheless the ulti- 
mate object herein; for experience has taught me 
this ; nor am I surprised at it, since men are now 
of no other material, than were the children of 
Israel. How often did the Lord sigh over them, 
and what great trouble did He have with them? 
Hence we may daily take good heed, and be up 
and doing, that no one may take our crown. 

Therefore, my dear brethren and sisters, be not 
troubled, that Fra. Ha. Jo. Ta. have gone back to 
Egypt, which does not surprise me. But let it be 
an example unto you, that they were overthrown 
in the wilderness of this world (I Cor. 10:5) ; and 
do you take better courage (as I trust you will), 
and constantly keep before your eyes the pious that 
were before us ; for he that flees out of the conflict, 
does not get the crown, for there is but one victory 
comprised in the Scriptures by which we are to be 
crowned. I Cor. 9:25; II Tim. 2:5; Rev. 2:10. 

O dear brethren and sisters, we now look through 
quite different eyes as to what salvation depends on 
than when we were out of bonds ; for out of bonds 
I never could pray to God as I now sometimes do. 

Further, my dear brother, I commend to you 
my wife, whom I love from the heart ; desiring and 
requesting of you, that you will exercise Christian 
care over her, the more so, since she desires to 
remain a widow ; for the holy Scripture commands 
us to visit the widows and orphans in their afflic- 
tion. James 1 :27. Hence, be the more diligent to 
aid her in everything wherein she may need your 
counsel, in order to gain a livelihood for herself and 
my children ; so that she may not become despon- 
dent. 

O my dear brethren, this I exhort you with tears, 
for if the Lord had not taken me from them, I could 
have provided for them myself according to my 
weakness ; but now the Lord has ordered it other- 
wise with me, since He knows best what we need, 
and what is for our best. Hence, I will also leave 
them for the Lord's sake ; for, dear brother R., my 
wife has been with me, and we ate together a part- 
ing meal, and thus took final adieu from each other. 
Think for yourself, how bitter a parting it was, for 
I know that she also loves me from the heart. 


Hence, if the Almighty Lord did not give 
strength and power, it would not be possible to 
endure and overcome it ; but through Him we can 
do all things. Phil. 4:13. Hence, I commit my 
cause now as before to the Lord, declaring that it 
is not on account of any crime, heaven and earth 
bear me witness herein, and God, who searches 
heart and reins, also knows very well my object in 
this matter. 

Furthermore, dear W., if it were possible, and 
you should be in the city, I should from the heart 
like to converse orally with you, which (as it seems 
to me) could very easily be done, by giving a piece 
of money. But as you live so far away, I fear it 
cannot well be done since it is so inconvenient for 
you ; and in such case I hope to be patient herein ; 
for we neither know nor hear when we are to die, 
nor have any priests assailed as yet ; but a secular 
man came to see us once and assailed us. Neither 
have we been spoken to by the authorities, since we 
were tortured the first time; for as we hear, the 
margrave has had a sore leg. Thus we do not 
know if we shall be tortured any more or not. They 
would indeed like to find out much from us, but I 
hope that the Most High will keep our lips; for 
though one were to tell them something, they are 
not satisfied with that, but want to know more and 
more. 

Hence, my dear brother and sister in the Lord, 
we pray you, and all them that inquire after us, to 
remember them that are in bonds, as bound with 
them ; and them which suffer adversity, as being 
yourselves also in the body. Heb. 13 :3. And pray 
the Lord heartily for us ; we will also pray for you. 
Lauwerens, my fellow prisoner, and I, greet you 
all with the peace of the Lord, together with all our 
acquaintances in the Lord that are over there from 
here. Let all of you remain like minded, and the 
God of peace will be with you ; and let there be no 
strife among you. Rom. 12:16, 15:5. Remember 
me, my dear brother and sister ; I hope to wait you 
under the altar, where all tears shall be wiped away 
from our eyes. Herewith I will commend you to 
the crucified Christ Jesus ; may He strengthen our 
hearts and minds, and direct them into all that is 
acceptable before Him. Herewith I bid you adieu. 
Adieu, my beloved brother and sister. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN ON THE 2ND OF JULY, FROM 
PRISON, TO HIS WIFE 

Grace, joy and peace from God the Father, and 
our Lord Jesus Christ ; together with the Comfort- 
er, the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from both the 
Father, and the Son, to comfort all them that are 
in any tribulation and affliction; may He be multi- 
plied in you, to whom be praise, honor, glory, do- 
minion, power, and majesty, forever and ever. 
Amen. This I wish you as a cordial and friendly 
greeting, my dear, beloved wife and sister in the 
Lord, whom, with my children, I love from the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


853 


depth of my heart, whose absence is to me such a 
great affliction in my bonds, that I many and many 
a time call upon the Lord with weeping eyes, to 
take from me that which is too heavy for me. But 
I remember the words of the apostle, where he 
says : "Let my grace be sufficient for thee ; I shall 
not leave thee, nor suffer thee to be tempted above 
that thou art able." II Cor. 12:9; I Cor. 10:13. 
For I know, that as long as man is in this life, he 
cannot be without conflict. Job 7:1. 

Further, my beloved, I have heard that we may 
probably soon offer up our sacrifice ; but we know 
not the time. Hence, I very often pray the Lord 
with tears, to take from me the snare of death, in 
order that I may offer up my soul with joy to the 
Lord. And I hope through the great and unspeak- 
able grace of God, that my soul shall be received in 
safe hands, not through my merits, but out of grace 
and because of the hope, that Christ with His faith- 
ful mouth says : "Whosoever shall lose his life for 
my sake or the gospel's the same shall find it here- 
after." Mark 8:35; Matt. 10:39. And: "Whoso- 
ever shall confess me before men, him will I con- 
fess also before my heavenly Father, and before his 
holy angels ; but whosoever shall deny me before 
men, him will I also deny in the glory of my heav- 
enly Father." Matt. 10:32, 33. Thus, my most be- 
loved, there is no better advice for us than to cleave 
to the truth, so that we may hereafter receive the 
eternal crown from the hand of the Lord. Know, 
furthermore, that I am much surprised that my 
brother W. does not write a letter: for if he, or 
any one else should desire to write us something, 
you could easily send it to us, as you also do ; for it 
can be done quietly. I also hear that mother is in 
H., with whom we would so gladly have spoken 
once more, since it is very easy to come to us here, 
if one will not begrudge the money. For though the 
lord does not come into the prison, he does not 
trouble himself with anything but simply that for 
which he comes. Furthermore, my beloved, J. de 
B. told me that he had been with you, and that 
you wept much on my account ; wherefore, when I 
heard this, I was also filled with much sorrow. But, 
my chosen, comfort yourself in the Lord, and let 
us commit the matter to Him, and pray for those 
who afflict us with this; for, "Vengeance is mine, 
I will repay, saith the Lord." Rom. 12 :19. O my 
beloved, I feel indeed, that as long as I live I 
must bear you in my heart, but nevertheless, God 
above all; for God is a jealous God (Ex. 20:2), 
and I also give Him the praise for the kindness 
which He has shown me poor, weak servant, and 
still daily shows me. 

Herewith I will commend you to the crucified 
Christ Jesus, and to the Word of His grace. Lau- 
werens, my fellow prisoner, and I, greet you and 
all our acquaintances in the Lord very much with 
the peace of the Lord. Write to me occasionally, 
for a letter from you is more pleasing to me than 
gold and silver. If time should overtake us, I bid 


you adieu. Adieu, my beloved, and always per- 
severe steadfastly. Written in my bonds, by me, 
Joost Verkindert, 

Your dear husband. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN FROM PRISON, ON THE 12TH OF 
JULY, TO HIS MOTHER 

Grace, joy and peace from God the heavenly 
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own blood, 
together with the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who 
proceeds from both the Father and the Son, to com- 
fort all them that are in any tribulation and afflic- 
tion for His holy name's sake ; may He be multi- 
plied in you ; unto whom be praise, honor, glory, 
dominion, power, and majesty, forever and ever. 
Amen. This and all divine virtues, I wish you as a 
cordial and friendly greeting, my dear and be- 
loved mother and sister in the Lord. I inform you 
by this that I am still tolerably well according to 
the time, and I trust that you are well, too. My 
mind also is still fixed to adhere to the eternal 
truth, and not to forsake the same, whether it 
mean life or death; for Peter says that there is 
none other name under heaven, given to men, 
whereby to be saved, than only through the name 
of Jesus Christ. Acts 4:12; 10:43. Therefore, 
my dear mother, it is necessary that we constantly, 
according to our weak ability, seek to follow the 
footsteps of Jesus Christ; for John says: "Who- 
soever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doc- 
trine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in 
the doctrine of Christ, hath both the Father and 
the Son." II John 9. 

Hence, my beloved, let us take heed that we may 
always be found to be of the little flock (Luke 
12 :32) , that our sheaf may be gathered with all the 
elect saints of God into one barn for there is a 
great storm at hand. Oh, that we were all worthy 
of the Lord ; then we should indeed have been born 
at a blessed hour ! Oh, I pray the Lord most heart- 
ily for you, to keep you in His holy truth ; so that 
we may hereafter be crowned with praise and hon- 
or. O my beloved, the bringing forth is so grievous 
to me ; truly indeed does Christ say : "In the world 
ye shall have tribulation : but be of good cheer ; I 
have overcome the world." John 16:33. And also, 
further : "Ye shall weep and lament, but the world 
shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your 
sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when 
she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is 
come : but as soon as she is delivered of the child, 
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that 
a man is born into the world." vs. 20, 21. We have 
now also much sorrow', and the world is glad and 
joyful, and they do not once think how lamentably 
they are under the wrath of God, as long as they do 
not become converted, and show true repentance 
before the Lord. How applicable are the words of 
Isaiah; "Hell hath opened wide her mouth, that 


854 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


there may go in both their princes and the common 
people : yea, they go to hell like sheep to the slaugh- 
ter." Isa. 5 :14. May the complaint ascend to the 
Lord of heaven, that the false prophets so lament- 
ably seduce the poor blind people (Ezek. 13:10), 
and, what is still more, so miserably oppress, per- 
secute, rob, and make a prey for every one, those 
who seek to amend their lives. Truly indeed does 
Isaiah say : "Holy and pious men are taken away, 
but no man layeth it to heart." Isa. 57:1. Hence, 
my beloved, let us not fear men, who must perish 
like grass; for the moth shall eat them up like a 
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool. 
51 :2, 8. O dear mother, they forbid the reading of 
the holy Scriptures, while Christ says and exhorts 
us: "Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think 
ye have eternal life : and they are they that testify 
of me." John 5:39. For Paul also says : "What- 
soever things were written beforetime were writ- 
ten for our learning." Rom. 15:4. Oh, how hard 
will it go with those who so little esteem the Scrip- 
tures ; they are those that call good evil, and evil 
good. Isa. 5:20. Oh, that they might once con- 
sider, how grievously they have incurred the wrath 
of God. I pray the Lord most heartily, to open the 
eyes of their understanding, that they may see 
against whom they are fighting, that it is against 
God and the Lamb ; but the Lamb shall overcome 
them. Rev. 17:14. For Isaiah says: "Though a 
mother should forget her child, and forsake the 
son of her womb, whom she brought forth herself, 
yet will I not forsake thee." Isa. 49:15. Yea, the 
Lord further says through Zechariah: "He that 
toucheth you toucheth the apple of mine eye." 
Zech. 2 :8. And again, Isaiah says : "Fear not, O 
Jacob ; when thou walkest through the fire, I will 
preserve thee ; and when thou art in the water, it 
shall not harm thee : for I the Lord will keep thee." 
Isa. 43 :1, 2. My beloved, His hand is not yet short- 
ened ; He is still the same God that delivered Israel 
out of the land of Egypt, and out of the hand of 
Pharaoh : who made the Red Sea a way so that 
the ransomed of the Lord passed over. He is also 
still the same God that fed them for forty years 
with bread from heaven, as is written: "He fed 
them with bread from heaven, and with angel's 
food." Psalm 78:25. He is also the same God 
that preserved Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego 
in the fiery furnace, and delivered Daniel out of 
the den of lions, and many other holy fathers, con- 
cerning which an abundance is written in the Scrip- 
tures. 

Therefore, my affectionately beloved sister in the 
Lord, my heart felt prompted once more to exhort 
you a little with the Word of the Lord, though you 
are yourself abundantly taught of Him ; for Paul 
says: "Exhort one another [daily,] while it is 
called today" (Heb. 3:13), for the Lord cometh 
as a thief in the night, as you may well perceive in 
our case. 

Further, dear mother, I thank you for the affec- 
tionate love which you have shown me at all times ; 


yea, even before I obtained your dear daughter to 
wife you were always kind to me. I also thank 
you for the good intercourse which we have always 
had together in peace (the Lord be praised) ; for I 
have often rejoiced my soul with you. And now, 
my beloved, I commend to you my dear wife and 
her two little orphans, desiring that you will help 
exercise a Christian care over them, and do not 
spare the rod on the children. Associate with R. 
as much as is possible for you, lest she becomes 
despondent ; for I know that I am dear to her heart, 
and that she will therefore sorrow for a long time. 
But exhort her to be patient in her tribulation ; for 
every dispensation of God toward us I hope will 
turn to the salvation of us all ; for the Lord knows 
what we need. My beloved, receive this brief ex- 
hortation in good part as a testament, since it is 
written with a humble heart and mind. Herewith I 
will commend you to the crucified, bleeding Christ 
Jesus, and to the Word of His rich grace. Amen. 
Adieu, my dear mother, until another time, if we 
should here see each other no more. Lauwerens, 
my fellow prisoner, and I, greet you and our ac- 
quaintances in the Lord most cordially with the 
peace of the Lord. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN FROM PRISON, TO HIS WIFE, ON 
THE 23D OF JULY 

Grace, joy and peace from God the heavenly 
Father, and our dear Lord Jesus Christ, who loved 
us and washed us from our sins in His own blood; 
together with the consolation and communion of 
the Holy Ghost ; this I wish to be constantly mul- 
tiplied in you, as a friendly greeting, my beloved 
wife and sister in the Lord, informing you that I 
am still tolerably well according to the flesh ; and as 
regards the spirit, my mind is still fixed to adhere 
to the eternal truth by the help of the Most High, 
from whom we must expect comfort; for of our- 
selves we have not one good thought, but much 
rather an aversion ; for the flesh loves life, since it 
is of the earth, and seeks nothing but what is earth- 

i rl I h ° pe in the g° odness an d longsuffering 
of God, that He will not forsake me, but will keep 
me, according to His promise, as the apple of His 
eye. My beloved, we are now put to a very severe 
test ; for at no previous time was there before us 
such an opportunity of being released as there is 
now. For there are some that got out, who would 
have been put to death three weeks ago; but as one 
of them was confined to his bed by sickness, their 
day of execution was postponed, and in the mean- 
time the pardon helped them out. This pardon is 
also held out to us as seductively as possible ; they 
promise to restore to us that of which we have been 
despoiled, and, to set us free, provided we should 
renounce our second baptism, which we have re- 
fused, preferring rather with old Eleazar, to die 
honorably, than to live with ignominy (II Mace 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


855 


6 :19) : praying the almighty Father through Jesus 
Christ, to keep us in this purpose, and to preserve 
us from evil. I also cannot keep from you what 
happened to me. On Friday last, about evening, I 
was taken down alone, to speak with one of the 
bishop's underlings, whom I saluted, and bade him 
good evening. He did the same to me, saying: 
"Good evening, Joos." I remained standing with 
my head uncovered, and he also took off his cap, 
and made a long speech, and began greatly to praise 
the name of God, since He left His saints the prom- 
ise to abide with His church unto the end. There- 
upon I asked him, whether the apostles had put the 
church in the form and ordinances in which it now 
stood. 

He replied : "Yes, that is as regards the faith ; 
and as touching the ordinances, these the holy 
teachers instituted through counsels and decrees, 
on account of certain causes that arose, even as it 
also happened during the times of the apostles : that 
all the elders came together, because contention 
arose in the church." Acts 1 5 :6. Then I said to 
him, that the Lord had commanded the children of 
Israel very strictly neither to take from nor add 
to the law ; and how severely Saul was punished by 
the Lord, because he, following his own mind, had 
spared the king of the Amalekites, and the best 
oxen and sheep, contrary to the command of God. 
Deut. 4 :2 ; 12 :32 ; I Sam. 15. Thereupon he said : 
"The Lord had commanded him, to kill them all, 
and not to spare them, and for this reason he was 
punished ; but we neither take from nor add to the 
faith." I returned that they were nothing but hu- 
man plants. And Christ says : "Every plant which 
my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted 
up. Let them alone : they be blind leaders of the 
blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall 
fall into the ditch." Matt. 15 :13. Then he said, that 
plants were not doctrines ; but they are trees, said 
he, which are called men. I rejoined, that Christ, 
Matt. 15, did not speak of trees. He said : "Yes." 
I said: "No;" so that he finally said: "I will let 
you have it. He then asked me, where I had 
learned the Scriptures, or by whom I had been in- 
structed. I replied that I had taken my foundation 
from the Scriptures, as Christ teaches us, saying : 
"Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye 
have eternal life : and they are they which testify of 
me" (John 5:39). Hence, I searched, and asked 
the Lord for a right understanding and wisdom. 
Then he said: "Oh, we must be instructed." I 
said : "We had also teachers." He asked of whom 
our teachers had received understanding. I asked 
him in return where the prophets and apostles had 
received understanding. He answered, saying: 
"We are the ancient church, from the time of 
Christ to the apostles, who first instituted the holy 
church, and established it with many signs and 
miracles; and from the apostles to Timothy and 
Titus, and to all the holy teachers, and thence to 
all the holy popes and doctors even to the present 
day." And we had many other words, concerning 


baptism, which it would take too long to relate; 
but we could not agree. 

Finally, in parting, he showed me great friendli- 
ness, saying: "Dear Joos, you err, and do not 
understand the Scriptures." I said: "My lord, 
even as you think that I err, so I think that you 
err." He said: "Ask the Lord for understand- 
ing." I replied, that I did so. Guilliame, the thief- 
catcher, was present throughout the whole conver- 
sation, and they were both very deeply moved on 
my account, as I well perceived; and he spoke 
much of the great pardon which had come from 
King Philip and the pope together. In parting, I 
asked him, whether any one might be put to death 
on account of the faith. He answered, saying: 
"What else is the magistracy for ?" I said : "For 
the protection of the good, and the punishment of 
the evil" (Rom. 13 :3). He rejoined : "Peter killed 
Ananias and Sapphira" (Acts. 5:5, 9), and with 
this some persons came in, so that this remark re- 
ceived no reply. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. Greet W. B. and all his ac- 
quaintances in the Lord, in my name, with the 
peace of the Lord. Lauwerens, my fellow prisoner, 
also greets you with the peace of the Lord. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN FROM PRISON, ON THE 10TH OF AUGUST, 
TO HIS BROTHER W. AND I. HIS WIFE 

Grace, joy and peace from God the heavenly Fa- 
ther, and our dear Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own blood ; to- 
gether with the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who 
proceeds from both the Father and the Son, to com- 
fort all them that are in tribulation and sorrow for 
His holy name's sake. To Him be praise, honor, 
glory, dominion, power, and majesty, forever and 
ever. Amen. 

This, and other divine virtues I wish you as a 
friendly greeting, my dear beloved brother W., 
and your dear wife I. ; informing you, that I am 
still tolerably well according to the time, for which 
reason I thank and praise the Lord for His great 
grace which He shows me, poor, weak and fee- 
ble servant ; trusting that also you are well. Know 
further, that I learned in my bonds, that Fra. 
sent word to Jo. Ca., that he should look to his 
advantage, and that they would do likewise. Hav- 
ing received this message, Jo. immediately fell sick, 
insomuch that he was paralyzed in one side, and 
also lost his mind, so that he took in and received 
the idol, and, consequently, received the extreme 
unction, as a good son of the Romish church, and 
died the 9th of August, for a perpetual warning 
to us and all the God-fearing:. Oh! my soul was 
very sad when I heard it. It is just as Christ savs : 
"Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it." 
Luke 17 :33. Hence, dear brother and sister, let us 
take diligent heed, that we have not received the 
grace of God in vain ; for now is the accepted time, 


856 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


now is the day of salvation. Let us therefore not 
give offense to any one, but in all things approve 
ourselves as the ministers of God. II Cor. 6:1. Let 
everyone strive to excel in good works ; for what- 
soever good a man has done, the same shall he re- 
ceive twofold from the Lord. Hence let us always 
take heed to and follow the words of Christ, where 
He says : "Fear not them that kill the body ; but 
rather fear him, which after he hath killed hath 
power also to cast soul and body into hell." Luke 
12 :4, 5. Let us stand in awe of and fear Him, I 
say; for before Him ungodliness cannot stand. 
But few there are that lay it to heart, even as it 
has also been from the beginning, as in the time of 
Noah, when there were but eight righteous per- 
sons. Again, in the time of Sodom, when there 
were only three who could stand before the Lord. 
Likewise the children of Israel, who were God's 
peculiar people ; the Lord did not spare them, but 
destroyed them in the wilderness, so that of six 
hundred thousand only two entered into the prom- 
ised land, namely Joshua and Caleb. O my dear 
brother and sister, how many there are falling also 
in the wilderness of this world, though they were 
also delivered by the Red Sea, namely, by the blood 
of Christ. And this need not surprise us, since the 
Scriptures testify, that the present world was cre- 
ated for many men, but the future for few. For it 
is indeed just as the angel showed Esdras, namely, 
a city builded upon a broad field, full of all good 
things ; the entrance thereof was narrow and steep, 
as if there were a fire on the right hand, and on the 
left a deep water, so that there was only one nar- 
row path between them both, so small that but one 
man could go there at once; which city no man 
could or might receive for an inheritance, except 
he first pass that strait. II Esd. 7:6-9. O my 
brother, now we are on the narrow way, which is 
strait indeed, which no one knows better than he 
that is tried therein; for we are now under the 
test ; the almighty God grant us His grace, that we 
may not be found to be hay, straw and stubble, but 
gold, silver and precious stones. I Cor. 3 :12. O 
my dear friends, the flesh is indeed afraid; but 
whenwe consider and meditate on the beautiful 
promises which are promised to them that over- 
come and remain steadfast, they sweeten every 
pain ; for now no chastening for the present, says 
Paul, seemeth to be joyous, but grievous : never- 
theless, afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit 
of righteousness unto them which are exercised 
thereby. Heb. 12:11. 

Thus we must also rapidly bring our days of sor- 
row to an end ; for we are sometimes as one that is 
in the throes of travail, and there are so many griev- 
ous woes come upon us, that we would almost seem 
to perish. Isa. 26:17. Hence pray the Lord for us 
poor, weak prisoners ; we do the same also for you 
and all the God-fearing. Herewith I will commend 
you to the crucified Christ Jesus, and to the Word 
of His grace, bidding herewith adieu to my dear 
brethren and sisters. Greet in my name, with the 


peace of the Lord, all my acquaintances, and also 
those not known by sight, but known before the 
Lord; and always remember them that are in 
bonds, as bound with them. And always persevere 
steadfastly, so that we may find one another under 
the altar. Amen. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN TO HIS DEAR WIFE, AND, GENERALLY, TO 
ALL BRETHREN AND SISTERS IN THE LORD; 
IN WHICH AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF SEV-' 
ERAL DISPUTATIONS HELD WITH THE 
BISHOP'S COMMISSARY CONCERNING 
THE FAITH 

Grace, joy and peace from God the heavenly Fa- 
ther, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us, and 
washed us from our sins in His own blood, and 
hath shined in our hearts, and translated us into the 
kingdom of His dear Son ; together with the Com- 
forter, the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from both 
the Father and the Son, to comfort all them that 
are in tribulation and sorrow. To Him be praise, 
honor, glory, dominion, power, and majesty, for- 
ever and ever. Amen. 

This I wish you as a friendly greeting, my dear 
and beloved wife and sister in the Lord, together 
with all fellow believers of our most holy faith ; in- 
forming you, that our mind is still fixed, to adhere 
to the eternal truth, and to the faith once delivered 
to the saints, trusting thereby to obtain eternal life, 
not through our own merits, but through pure 
grace, and also because of the hope, that Christ with 
His faithful mouth says : "Whosoever loseth his 
life for my sake and the Gospel's the same shall 
find it hereafter in life eternal." Matt 10-39- 
Luke 17:33; John 12:25. ' ' 

O my dear brethren and sisters, let everyone fol- 
low the advice of Christ, and search the Holy 
Scriptures ; for they are they which testify of Him. 
John 5 :39. And Paul says : "Whatsoever things 
were written aforetime were written for our learn- 
ing." Rom. 15:4. And let us not fear men, which 
must perish like grass ; but let us fear Him which, 
after He hath killed, hath power also to cast soul 
and body into hell; fear Him. Isa. 51 :12; Luke 
12:5. For heaven and earth shall pass away, but 
His Word shall abide forever. Matt. 5 :18. 

Know further, that on the 17th of August we 
were both called down to speak with the bishop's 
commissary ; and having come down we courteous- 
ly greeted him, and bade him good evening. He did 
likewise, asking: "Joos, to what conclusion have 
you come?" I replied: "I pray the Lord night and 
day for my greatest salvation, and the more I pray 
the greater my assurance becomes that I have the 
truth.'' He said that it was true I was seeking my 
salvation, but ignorantly, like the Jews, who want- 
ed to be justified through the law. And, with folded 
hands, he made a long speech and highly extolled 
and thanked the name of God, and of Jesus Christ 
that He had done all things so well, and had given 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


857 


the holy church so many good ordinances, and 
promised to abide with it even unto the end of the 
world. Then Lauwerens asked, where his church 
suffered persecution. He answered: "That was 
seen three years ago, when some of our people were 
killed by the Protestants." I said : "My lord, if the 
authorities did not protect your church with the 
sword, it would soon come to nought, for it has no 
strength." He said, that it was of God, and had 
continued from the time of the apostles to Timothy 
and Titus, and thence to all the holy teachers even 
to the present day. I asked, whether the apostles 
had so observed or instituted them [the ordinances] 
as they were now used by them. "Yes," said he, 
"as regards the faith." I said, that they were far 
from the right way; for I had previously shown 
him, that their ordinances were but command- 
ments of men; and Christ says: "Every plant 
which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall 
be rooted up. [Let them alone :] they be blind lead- 
ers of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, 
both shall fall into the ditch." Matt. 15:13, 14. I 
showed him, that Israel was forbidden to follow 
their own opinions, but were to observe only what 
the Lord had commanded; and I told him how 
severely Saul was punished by the Lord, because 
he, following his own mind, had spared the king 
of the Amalekites, and the best of the oxen and 
sheep. He answered, that Saul did this contrary 
to the command of the Lord, but they did not ; for 
it was all instituted on account of certain causes 
that had arisen in the church : even as in the time 
of the apostles; when there were some that con- 
tended, a council was held. Also, that Paul com- 
manded Titus, to set in order the things which he 
had left uncompleted (Tit. 1 :5) ; and other words. 
Thereupon I told him of the pious king Josiah: 
that he did not regard the ancient customs and cer- 
emonies of his forefathers, but that he destroyed 
all that had been instituted contrary to the law, 
and commanded the law to be observed aright. II 
Kings 23. To this he had but little to say. I also 
asked him, saying: "My lord, I am much sur- 
prised, that you do not banish us, as they do in 
Germany the Eastern country,* and England." 
He said : "Whither would you go ? for whitherso- 
ever you go there you corrupt and seduce the peo- 
ple." I told him, that faith was the gift of God, and 
also, that not all men had it. Eph. 2 :8. He said : 
"You did have the faith, but now you have adopt- 
ed another ; and he added a simile : that we were 
like soldiers that had run away from their lord 
without a passport, who were nowhere free. I asked 
him, whether infant baptism was a taking in into 
his church. He said : "Yes." I asked again, why 
they did not go to Turkey to take in children. He 
answered : "Nay, this does not belong to them, for 
they are a rejected people. I further asked him, by 
what scriptures they might put us to death ; which 
he assayed to show with the law ; but I said, that 
we were under the law of grace, namely, under the 

* Probably Austria, or the country bordering on the Baltic. — Tr. 


Gospel; and Christ says of the tares, that they 
should be suffered to grow up with the wheat until 
the harvest. Matt. 13:30. "He said we have 
other scriptures, that the magistracy has not re- 
ceived the sword in vain" (Rom. 13 :4). I showed 
him, that the sword was given to the magistracy for 
the punishment of the evil, and the protection of the 
good ; moreover [I said] I have not been disobedi- 
ent to the magistracy, but have obeyed it in all ac- 
cording to the power which it has received from 
God. And when I had asked him, whether he had 
no other scriptures, he said : "Peter slew Ananias 
and Sapphira." I said: "With what, and why?" 
He replied : "Because they lied." "That is true," 
I said ; "for they lied to the Holy Ghost, and had 
kept back and said nothing about part of the price 
of the land which they had sold." He said : "Nev- 
ertheless, he slew them with the sword of his 
mouth." And though I told him it was done for 
evil doing, and without the sword, it was of no 
avail, he would therewith prove his point that we 
might be put to death, and also added the words of 
Paul: "I would they were even cut off which 
trouble you." Gal. 5 :12. I replied, that Paul did 
not mean such cutting off as they were now doing. 
He said: "Paul then did not yet have the mag- 
istracy on his side." 

We then also spoke of infant baptism, which he 
would prove to be a command of Christ, namely, 
because Christ says: "Except a man be born of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God." John 3 :5. In this passage he 
would also include the children, namely, in the 
expression, a man* I then made him read that 
chapter, in a Bible which was there, namely: 
"There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nico- 
demus, a ruler of the Jews: the same came to 
Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know 
that thou art a teacher come from God : for no man 
can do these miracles that thou doest, except God 
be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him, 
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be 
born from above, he cannot see the kingdom of 
God." I then asked him, whether he knew and un- 
derstood what it was to be born from above ; and 
also said, that a child could not be born from 
above ; but that Christ thereby meant persons that 
had ; understanding. "Yes," said he, "and infants 
too," and fell back on his old proposition, and held 
fast to it, namely : "Except a man be born of water 
and of the Spirit," etc. And he also quoted Paul 
and Titus, that Christ cleansed His church with the 
washing of water by the Word. Eph. 5 :26. There- 
upon I answered that Paul thereby did not mean 
children. He would also establish it with John's 
epistle, namely, that there are three witnesses in 
heaven : the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost : 
and these three are one; and three witnesses on 
earth : the spirit, the water, and the blood : and these 
three are one (I John 5 :7, 8) ; to which he added, 
that infants must be cleansed from original sin 

* Any one. Dutch version. 


858 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


through baptism. I told him, that infants are 
cleansed from their original sin through the blood 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. For Paul says : "Even 
as by the unrighteousness of one man death entered 
into the world, so grace much more abounded by 
Christ Jesus ; and as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ are all made alive again." Rom. 5 :\7 ; I Co- 
rinthians 15:22. Also, that the prophet says, that 
the child shall not bear the iniquity of its father. 
Ezek. 18:20. He said: "It is true, this grace has 
come upon all men : but that children must never- 
theless be baptized, if they were to be saved ;" and 
he made a great many words which had a fair 
semblance. Then I asked him, whether infants 
were saved by the water. He replied: "When 
they are baptized with water, they receive the Holy 
Ghost, and are then redeemed by the blood of 
Christ; which he established with the three wit- 
nesses on earth, namely, the spirit, the water, and 
the blood" ; and upon this he strenuously insisted. 
I told him, that he rejected and disesteemed with 
his infant baptism the blood of Christ, with which 
he was not well satisfied. I then asked him, whether 
baptism was not a burial of sin. He replied : "Yes." 
I said, again, that infants had not committed sin, 
and that they were simple and innocent. But it was 
all of no avail ; children must be baptized, for this 
had been practiced from the time of the apostles. 
I asked him again, whether the apostles had bap- 
tized children. He answered, that they had baptized 
entire households, among which there might prob- 
ably also have been infants. I said, that the house- 
holds had addicted themselves to the ministry (I 
Cor. 16:15), which children could not do, but 
it is necessary to minister to them ; nevertheless he 
adhered to what he had said. I asked him, if there 
were a woman that had two infants, and one of 
them were baptized, and the other died without 
baptism, what he held in regard to this. He an- 
swered : "The baptized infant would be saved, and 
the unbaptized one not." I said, that the blood of 
Christ had more efficacy than their baptism, and 
that they also Baptized those to whom it did not be- 
long; for Christ has commanded to baptize be- 
lievers, and not infants, and has also commanded 
the baptized to keep His commandments. I also said 
that they were dear with baptism, but that it had 
no efficacy. He therefore made many words, for 
he wanted to establish infant baptism also with 
circumcision. But I proved to him, that the figure 
was not applicable thereto : also, that only the male 
children, and not the female, were circumcised. 
But it was all of no avail, it had to be a figure of 
baptism, and as the uncircumcised soul had to be 
cut off from the people of Israel, he said, so should 
also the unbaptized be damned; which I contra- 
dicted him with divers Scriptures. He said : "Joos, 
it seems to me, that you understand it better than 
you pretend; for I have certainly proved to you 
plainly enough that infants must be baptized." I 
answered him and said : "My lord, think not that 
I would contradict you against my mind and un- 


derstanding, when I am in such severe confine- 
ment." And thus we had to be poor and miserable 
men ; and we had many other words together re- 
garding ^baptism ; but we could not agree on this 
point. When he had waited a little with speaking, 
he said: "Joos, you have suffered yourself to be 
lamentably deceived." I told him, that I had the 
truth, nor had I suffered myself to be deceived; 
asking him, whether it was not his opinion, that we 
should from this fire go into the eternal. "Oh," said 
he, "that is beyond a doubt." "I have a better 
hope," said I, "and should fain see also you come 
to a better knowledge." When he heard this, he 
ceased a little, as though he were startled and ter- 
rified, and he pitied us greatly, and I saw that he 
meant it from the heart. 

We further had some words concerning the in- 
carnation of Christ, who he said had assumed flesh 
and blood from Mary. I told him, that he should 
prove it to me. He quoted Rom. 1 :3, that He was 
David's son according to the flesh. I said : "I con- 
fess this too." He then quoted Paul to the He- 
brews, where he says : "He taketh not on angels, 
but he taketh on the seed of Abraham." Hebrews 
2:16. He also quoted Matt. 1, of the generation. 
Thereupon I asked him, whether he did not be- 
lieve that the Word became flesh. He replied, 
"Yes, for Christ assumed flesh and blood from 
Mary." I quoted to him Luke 1, that the angel 
came to Mary, saluted her and said, that she should 
conceive in her womb, and bring forth a son, who 
should be called Jesus, and the Son of the High- 
est. Mary answered and said to the angel : "How 
shall this be, seeing I know not a man ?" The an- 
gel answered and said to her : "The Holy Ghost 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the High- 
est shall overshadow thee : therefore also that holy 
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the 
Son of God." I added also Matt. 1, that the angel 
appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying : "Joseph, 
thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary 
thy wife : for that which is conceived in her is of the 
Holy Ghost." I also quoted Paul, where he says : 
"The first man is of the earth, earthy ; the second 
man is the Lord from heaven." And that flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. I Co- 
rinthians 15 A7, 50. But no matter what I proved 
to him, he persisted that Christ must be of the na- 
ture of Mary, so that after many other words which 
we had together, concerning the incarnation of 
Christ, we could not agree. He then took up the 
Supper, saying that it was true flesh and blood, 
which he would establish with the words of Christ, 
where He says : "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. 
Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, 
hath eternal life." John 6 :53, 54. I replied to him, 
that Christ did not speak these words with ref- 
erence to the Supper. He rejoined : "Is it not writ- 
ten: Take, eat; this is my body?" (Matt. 26:26). 
I replied, that it signified His body : for it is also 
written: I am the true vine (John 15:1) though 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


859 


He was not a natural vine. Moreover, Paul states 
it clearly, where he says : "I have received of the 
Lord that which also I delivered unto you, That 
the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was be- 
trayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, 
he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body, 
which is broken for you ; this do in remembrance 
of me. After the same manner also he took the 
cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the 
new testament in my blood : this do ye, as oft as 
you drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often 
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew 
the Lord's death till he come," (Mark, till He 
come). I Corinthians 11 :23-26. Hence, I said, He 
is not present there bodily, as you say, my lord. 
I also told him of the paschal lamb, proving to 
him, that it was a true figure of the Supper ; but 
we could agree in no point. The subject of monas- 
teries was also brought up all of which I called 
sects, and asked him, whether God's children must 
not all be spiritual. He answered : "Yes." I asked 
again, why they were not all of one kind since 
there were many and various monasteries mani- 
festly differing from one another in caps and cer- 
emonies. He answered and said that the Holy 
Ghost wrought manifold gifts, with which He 
wanted to establish the monasteries. I also asked 
him whether he had not read the prophet Baruch. 
"Very likely," he said. Then I told him, how the 
prophet there warns Israel that when they should 
be in Babylon, and should there see them bear idols 
upon their shoulders, and much people running be- 
fore and behind, they should think in their hearts : 
"O Lord, thou alone art to be worshiped." Ba- 
ruch 6:3. And I asked him, whether the same 
ought not to be done on Sunday. He answered and 
said : "That is to be only an image." I said, that 
the image makers are cursed. Ex. 20:4; Deut. 
27:15. He said: "They are the books of the sim- 
ple," and maintained, that the images were like 
letters, and would also prove that images might be 
made, and this with the cherubim that were on the 
ark. We also had many words together concerning 
the worshiping of the saints; but we could not 
agree. I have been before him three different 
times. O dear brethren and sisters, let each per- 
severe steadfastly: and heartily entreat the Lord 
for us ; that we may be able to stand against all the 
gates of hell ; for our conflict is not little, for we 
are in the midst of our enemies. Farewell all of 
you, and adieu till a better time. 
Written in my bonds, by me, 

Joost Verkindert. 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 


Blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see 
God. Matt. 5:8. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT WRIT- 
TEN IN BONDS TO HIS WIFE ON THE 
20TH OF AUGUST 

The unspeakable grace of God the Father, the 
love of His beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to- 
gether with the comfort, joy and gladness of the 
Holy Ghost; this I wish you for a cordial and 
friendly greeting, my very dear and beloved wife 
and sister in the Lord. I inform you that I am still 
tolerably well according to the time, for which 
reason I thank and praise the Lord for His great 
grace, trusting to hear the same from you. 

Know further, that in the letters mentioning the 
disputations with the priest not all the words are 
contained which we had together, for he also 
quoted : "He which converteth the sinner from the 
error of his way shall save a soul from death" 
( Jas. 5 :20) ; telling us, that if we would be con- 
verted, we should be set free, and suffered to go 
where we pleased. He spoke with an angelic mien 
frequently with folded hands, adding virtually, that 
he would stand in our stead at the judgment of God 
and that we had not the truth ; so that it seems to 
me, that if a man were not firmly built upon Christ, 
he would have to perish. But the almighty God be 
praised and thanked, that all his sharp arrows 
which he shot did not harm or injure me, for God 
was with me. He also said, that not many rich fol- 
lowed Christ, but many poor and plain people ; but 
by the apostles many signs and miracles were 
wrought, whereby, he said, the rich, and also kings 
and princes came to the faith, and since he is very 
profuse in words, he quoted many other fragmen- 
tary passages of Scripture, and gives himself very 
plain. In short, he made a fair display, but did not 
sell anything. If we however, had sought the tem- 
poral life, he indeed represented it to us in very fair 
colors; but the almighty God be praised and 
thanked for His great grace, for my mind is still 
determined at this day, rather to die honorably 
than to live ignominiously. For there is none other 
name under heaven given to men whereby we must 
be saved except only the name of Jesus Christ 
(Acts 4 :12) ; for He alone is the way and entrance 
to life eternal. O my beloved, this way has no by- 
paths, but those that depart from it go to death. 
Flesh and blood would indeed live still longer, but 
the spirit would rather be unfettered and present 
with Christ (II Cor. 5 :8) ; for as long as we live 
we are in many dangers ; for in a short time we may 
lose that for which we have long labored. 

Therefore, we may indeed constantly cry to God, 
to preserve us poor pilgrims in this dismal wilder- 
ness, where serpents spew fire, yea, where wolves 
run swiftly until evening to shed innocent blood ; 
but, my beloved, He that is with us is much might- 
ier than he that is with the world ; for God is with 
us, but with the world, an arm of flesh. Oh, that we 
might be found one of those of whom John writes, 
saying: "These are they which came out of great 
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made 


860 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore 
are they before the throne of God, and serve him 
day and night in his temple : and he that sitteth on 
the throne shall dwell among them. They shall 
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither 
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the 
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed 
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of 
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes." Rev. 7:14-17. And also: "These are 
they which were not defiled with women ; for they 
are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb 
whithersoever he goeth." And again : "These were 
redeemed from among men, being the first fruits 
unto God and to the Lamb." 14 :4. Also : "Because 
thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will 
keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall 
come upon all the world, to try them that dwell 
upon the earth." 3 :10. 

O my beloved, if we were there, the journey 
would have been safely accomplished. Neverthe- 
less, I have a living hope ; for God does not desire 
our death. Hence, let us always be bold, and com- 
fort ourselves with the words of Christ, where He 
says : "They shall put you out of the synagogues : 
yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you 
will think that he doeth God service. And these 
things will they do unto you, because they have 
not known the Father, nor me." John 16:2, 3. 
"For if they had known him, they would not have 
crucified the Lord of glory." I Cor. 2:8. Let us 
take for an example all the holy fathers, who met 
with all sorts of tribulation and affliction, and 
proved themselves a sweet savor of Christ in them 
that are saved, and in them that perish a savor unto 
death. II Cor. 2:15, 16. For the Lord has ap- 
pointed a day in which He will render to every 
man according to his works (Ps. 62:12) ; and it 
seems to me, that the day of the Lord is at hand ; 
hence let us possess our souls in patience, so that 
we may be able to stand before Him in that day. 
Luke 21 :19. 

Herewith I will commend you, my beloved, to 
the crucified, bleeding Christ Jesus, and to the rich 
Word of His grace. Lauwerens, my fellow pris- 
oner, and I, greet you and all our acquaintances 
very cordially with the peace of the Lord. Do the 
best with my little orphans. By me, 

Joost Verkindeet. 

Your dear husband, and unworthy prisoner in 
the Lord. Written in my bonds, on the 20th of 
August. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN IN HIS BONDS, TO HIS WIFE, ON THE 2d 
OF SEPTEMBER 

The grace and peace of God the heavenly Father, 
the love of His beloved Son, together with the com- 
fort, joy, and gladness of the Holy Ghost, this I 
wish you as a friendly greeting, my very dear and 
beloved wife and sister in the Lord. Be pleased to 


know, that I am still tolerably well according to the 
time, for which I thank and praise the Lord for His 
great goodness and grace, trusting to hear the 
same from you. Know further, that I received 
your letter, and thank you for your good exhor- 
tation and Christian solicitude for me in these my 
bonds. O my beloved, this indeed may truly be 
called the narrow way, for we are assailed from 
every side, namely, from flesh and blood ; and Satan 
rests not day or night, by some means to bring us 
into error or unbelief ; for the enemies of the cross 
of Christ approach us very subtilly. Now they 
have compassion for us, saying: "I will be inno- 
cent of your blood." Then they say : "If you die 
in your belief, you must from this fire go into the 
eternal. Thereupon I replied to him, that we had a 
better hope, and were not as those that beat the 
air." I Cor. 9 :26. He said that we were possessed 
of the devil, and were so firmly bound or held of 
him, that we would not let ourselves be moved. We 
replied that the Jews also said to Christ, that He 
had a devil. John 7:20; 10:20. I wonder, said he, 
if it would do some good to exorcise you ; and oth- 
er blasphemous words. We told him to go and seek 
souls, and to reprove harlots and rogues, drunk- 
ards, and the ungodliness of the people, since to 
such the kingdom of heaven is denied. He an- 
swered, that he exhorted them to repentance. Lau- 
werens told him, that all their things and cere- 
monies were nothing but hypocrisy and abomina- 
tion, and that they sold masses to the people by the 
dozen. He replied to Lauwerens, saying : "If you 
were a wise man, I should take this ill of you." I 
asked him, where there was anything written [in 
the Bible] concerning his mass. He said it was a 
sacrifice, and made many words with regard to this 
matter, so that it was astonishing where he got it 
all ; much of it had a fair semblance. Among other 
things he said, that he would shed his blood for us, 
to gain our souls. I told him, that he would never- 
theless be loth to die for us, and set us free. He said 
that we were too pernicious to live. I said : "My 
lord, I am much surprised (since you say, that if 
we die in this belief we are damned) that you will 
not rather suffer us to live ; for as long as a man 
lives, he has time for amendment and repentance." 
But to this he had little inclination, saying, that we 
were of the worst persuasion on the earth; for the 
Calvinists and Martinists, he said, were more easily 
moved than we ; so that we could not agree, but he 
said, that he daily prayed for us. Oh, said he, I re- 
membered you this very day in my mass. We said, 
that we also prayed the Lord day and night for our 
greatest salvation. He said, that we sought salva- 
tion, but ignorantly. He would also have the flesh 
and blood of Christ really present in the bread or 
Supper. In regard to this we made but few words, 
but I said to him : "Even as Israel made a golden 
calf, which served as an idol, to whom they said, 
that these were their gods which had delivered 
them out of Egypt ; so it is also with your people ; 
for they say : 'This is our god which has redeemed 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


861 


us on the tree of the cross.' " He said, that if He 
were not present in the bread, it would be idolatry ; 
but when the priest has pronounced the words over 
it He conies sacramentally into it, and hence it is 
also not idolatry. And when he could not move us 
with Scriptures, he held out to us release and par- 
don, to lure us, so that my conflict thereby becomes 
tihe more grievous to me ; yet I hope that the Lord 
will help us to triumph, for without the help of 
God it were impossible to stand. 

Hence, my beloved, help me heartily to entreat 
the Lord, that He will preserve me through His 
great goodness and longsuffering as the apple of 
His eye, that I may not be seduced through philoso- 
phy or carnal liberty, nor depart from my God, of 
which I have a great terror ; but that He will com- 
fort and strengthen me in my good purpose, to the 
praise of His holy name, and to the salvation of 
my soul. 

Herewith I will commend you to the crucified, 
bleeding Christ Jesus, and to the rich Word of His 
grace; who is faithful in what He has promised. 
I greet you, my beloved, with the kiss of peace; 
and Lauwerens and I also greet all our acquaint- 
ances very cordially with the peace of the Lord. 
Amen. 

Written in my bonds, by me, 

Joost Verkindert, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN TO HIS BROTHERS, MICHIEL AND PLEUN, 
ON THE 7TH OF SEPTEMBER, THE 100TH 
DAY OF HIS IMPRISONMENT 

May God the Father, and our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, give you a heart and mind, to walk in His 
holy truth all the days of your life, to the salvation 
of your poor, naked souls, that they may be saved, 
when the Lord shall visit them at the last day, when 
we shall all be placed before the judgment seat of 
Christ, where everyone shall receive reward ac- 
cording to his deeds, whether they be good or bad. 
II Cor. 5 :10. To God the Father be praise and 
honor through Jesus Christ ; may He give us His 
Holy Spirit for a Comforter in all our tribulation, 
in which we now are, for Christ and the Gospel's 
sake. To the Lord be praise, honor and thanks 
forever and ever. Amen. 

This I wish you, my dear and beloved brothers, 
Michiel and Pleun, as a heartfelt and friendly 
greeting, from the inmost of my soul. Be pleased to 
know, that I am still tolerably well according to the 
flesh; and as regards the spirit, my mind is still 
fixed, to adhere to the eternal truth with the help of 
the Most High, to whom I must look for comfort 
and help ; for of myself I have not one good thought 
but only aversion ; for the flesh always shrinks from 
suffering. Nevertheless, my dear brothers, there 
must be suffering, either here or hereafter, for 
Christ says that the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence, and the violent must take it by force. 


Matt. 11 :12. O dear brothers, I pray you from the 
heart, that you will take heed to yourselves, to obey 
the voice of the Lord, so that you may not be 
found to be of those who had buried their talent in 
the earth, and of those who want to put a new piece 
upon an old garment, and of those who put new 
wine into old bottles. Matt. 25 :18 ; Luke 5 :36, 37. 
O my dear brothers, if you do not take heed to 
yourselves, God will require a strict account of you, 
for Christ says : "All those who will not have me to 
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before 
mine eyes, and cast them into outer darkness ; there 
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." Luke 
19:27; 13:25. And further, Luke 12:47, Christ 
says: "That servant which knew his Lord's will, 
and prepared not himself, neither did according to 
his will, shall be beaten with many stripes." O my 
dear brothers, accept this my warning in good part, 
for it is done out of pure brotherly love, and this 
because I so well know, that without Christ and 
without His Word there is no salvation. For I also, 
for a number of years knew better than I did, the 
Lord forgive me ; and if I could have served the 
world and the Lord, I would not be in bonds. O 
dear brothers, flesh and blood did not bring me to 
this, but the Word of the Lord, which is sharper 
than any two-edged sword. For no man can serve 
two masters at the same time ; he must despise the 
one, and hold to the other. Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon together. Matt. 6:24. And Oh, it 
(the Word) also calls to the children of Israel and 
says : "How long halt ye between two opinions ? 
if the Lord be God, follow him ; if Baal, then fol- 
low him." I Kings 18:21. O dear brothers, these 
and other Scriptures compelled me to renounce my 
own will, in order to escape the great deluge and 
punishment that shall come upon those who have 
not obeyed the Gospel of our dear Lord Jesus 
Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting de- 
struction from the presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of His power. II Thess. 1 :8, 9. 

O dear brothers, be afraid of that day which shall 
burn as an oven, and when all the proud despisers, 
and all the wicked shall be as stubble ; but they that 
have kept the laws of their God shall then grow up 
as calves of the stall, and they shall go in and out, 
and tread down the wicked like ashes under their 
feet. Mai. 4:1. O dear brothers, that we might all 
be found worthy to hear the pleasant voice of 
Christ saying : "Come, ye blessed, inherit the king- 
dom of my Father, prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." Oh, then we should have 
indeed been born at a blessed hour ! For there are 
so few that seek to follow the Lord with a whole 
and true heart, for everyone would excuse himself ; 
the one says : I have bought five yoke of oxen ; the 
second : I have married a wife ; the third : I have 
bought a piece of ground ; I pray thee, have me ex- 
cused. Luke 14:18. O dear brothers, before the 
Lord no excuse shall be able to stand ; hence let us 
take heed, if we have heard His voice, that our 
hearts do not become hardened or stony; for we 


862 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


have many examples in the holy Scriptures, that 
the ungodly cannot stand before the Lord. For we 
read, how God punished the world with the deluge, 
because of their sins; but He saved Noah, the 
eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, and 
brought in the flood upon the world, of the un- 
godly; and overthrew and condemned the cities 
of Sodom and Gomorrah for their sins ; but pre- 
served just Lot with his two daughters, who were 
vexed with their improper and unchaste conversa- 
tion. II Pet. 2 :5. Thus, dear brothers, though the 
Lord does not outwardly comfort* you, as, He then 
did, yet He shall not let sin go unpunished, for the 
Lord is a righteous judge, who will judge the heart 
and thoughts. Oh, yes, man shall have to give 
account of every idle word that he has spoken. 
Matt. 12 :36. O dear beloved brothers, go out from 
this spiritual Egypt, from the power of the hellish 
Pharaoh, and from this spiritual Sodom, where 
they crucified our Lord, and from this spiritual 
Babylon ; so that you may live in Zion, and there be- 
hold the beautiful worship of God ; for I warn you 
in the name of the Lord, and my conscience, that 
you will find it at the last day, as I have here writ- 
ten you. 

O dear brothers, Michiel and Pleun, I also ad- 
monish myself hereby, for if I persevere not in this 
conflict, all that I have suffered is in vain, for the 
unsaved shall be written in the earth. Jer. 17:13. 

so many times I feel a terror of apostatizing, for 

1 am so certain and assured that I am on the right 
way. For, dear brothers, you well know, that no 
one can come into this world except he be born ; so 
no one can enter into the future world, except he 
be born again, even as Peter clearly testifies, not of 
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word 
of God, which liveth and abideth, forever. I Peter 
1 :23. brothers, dear brothers, happy is he that is 
thus born: for such regenerated persons use the 
true baptism and the true Supper ; they also keep 
aloof from all false doctrines, and also use the true 
excommunication and separation, for the main- 
tenance of the purity of the church, or it would 
soon become a Babylon. 

Dear brothers, I have been before a priest four 
different times, and we can agree in nothing. Oh, 
he uses such diligence to bring us to his church ; 
and because we will not buy, or cannot accept with 
a good conscience, his merchandise, therefore he 
says that we have the devil in us, and that we are 
damned if we thus die in our belief. However, I 
am not terrified by his judgment, but I pray the 
Lord, to open the eyes of their understanding, that 
they may see against whom they are contending, 
that it is not against men, but against God and the 
Lamb ; for Christ says : "If ye were of the world, 
the world would love his own ; but because ye are 
not of the world, [but I have chosen you out of the 
world] , therefore the world hateth you." John 15 : 
19. And Christ further says : "If they have called 

* Perhaps a typographical error, and should read, punish. — Tr. 


the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more 
shall they call them of his household." Matt. 10: 
25. Oh, how truly it may be said at this time, that 
our life is accounted madness, our going out de- 
struction and our honor shame. Wisd. 5:4; 3-3 
Oh, how are the words of Christ fulfilled where He 
says : "They shall put you out of the synagogues : 
yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you 
will think that he doeth God service. And these 
things will they do unto you, because they have not 
known the Father, nor me." John 16:2, 3. And 
also Paul says: "If they had known him, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory." I Cor. 
2 :8. O my dear brothers, remove your feet from 
the paths of the ungodly, for they go to hell, like 
sheep to the slaughter. Proverbs 4:14. And look 
not to the multitude, for Esdras writes : "Even as 
there is found much earth of which to make earth- 
en vessels, but little to make golden ones, so are 
the ungodly to the righteous." II Esd. 8:2. And 
again "Like as a flood is to a drop, so are the un- 
godly to the righteous." 9 :16. And he further says : 
"What profit is it to man that there is promised a 
city full of all good things, if he cannot enter into 
it? or that there is promised an immortal life, 
whereas we do the works that bring death ?" Hence 
we may well say with Esdras : "O Adam, Adam! 
what hast thou done ! for when thou didst fall, thou 
didst not fall alone, but also we all that come of 
thee.' 7:48. O my dear brothers, strive to become 
true sheep of Christ's flock, and true branches of 
the vine Christ, and seek those things which are 
above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of 
God; set your affections on things above not on 
things on the earth; and mortify your members 
which are upon the earth ; fornication, uncleanness, 
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covet- 
ousness, which is idolatry ; for which things' sake 
the wrath of God cometh on the children of dis- 
obedience. Col. 3 :1, 2, 5, 6. Thus, my dear broth- 
ers, if you desire the truth, and to escape the pun- 
ishment to come, seek to order your life according 
to the Gospel, and deny yourselves ; for Christ says 
in the Gospel : "If any man will come after me, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and fol- 
low me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose 
it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake 
and the Gospel's shall save it, For what is a man 
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose 
his own soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange 
for his soul ? But whosoever shall be ashamed of 
me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful 
generation, of him also shall the Son of man be 
ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Fa- 
ther with the holy angels." Matt. 16:24-26; Mark 
8 :38. 

O my dear brothers, consider well these Scrip- 
tures, and meditate on them, for Christ Jesus has 
brought them down here from high heaven, and 
lived and taught them, and sealed them with His 
blood, and became poor for our sakes, that through 
His poverty He might make us rich. O consider 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


863 


once, how despised Christ was for our sakes. So 
that the prophet Isaiah laments and says, that there 
was no beauty in Him, which might have pleased us. 
Isa. 53:2. Yea, he [the Psalmist] laments, that he 
was a worm, and no man. Ps. 22 :6. O dear broth- 
ers, let us take an example from Him, how admira- 
bly He went before us ; for all those who do not ac- 
cept Christ are not redeemed by Him ; for Christ 
also says in the Gospel : "Why call ye me, Lord, 
Lord, and do not the things which I say ? for who- 
soever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth 
them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built 
his house upon a rock : and the rain descended, and 
the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon 
that house ; and it fell not : for it was founded upon 
a rock.* And every one that heareth these sayings 
of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto 
a foolish man which built his house upon the sand : 
and the rain descended, and the floods came, and 
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it 
fell : and great was the fall of it." Luke 6 :46 ; Mat- 
thew 7:24-27. And Christ further says, of the 
sower, Matt. 13, that some seed fell by the wayside, 
some upon stony places, some among thorns, and 
some into good ground, and this brought forth 
fruit. Oh, ponder well this Scripture, in how many 
a one the deceitful riches suppress the Word of 
God, so that it does not bring forth fruit. Thus, 
my dear beloved brothers, this is written in my 
bonds for a perpetual warning to you. Oh, that 
God would grant grace, that His Word might lie 
in your heart, as it does in mine ; then you should 
soon bid the world farewell, Yet, my flesh some- 
times wonderfully shrinks back from suffering, so 
that at times I am as fearful as one that is in the 
throes of travail. Nevertheless, Christ Jesus also 
shrank from suffering. Luke 22. 

Herewith I will commend you to the crucified 
Christ Jesus, and to the abundant Word of His 
grace, as a perpetual adieu upon earth if we should 
here see one another no more ; for my mind is still 
fixed this day, to seal this letter with my blood, 
and, with old Eleazar, rather to die honorably than 
to live stained with ignominy. And, Michiel, I also 
greet your wife, sister Tanneken, very cordially 
with a perpetual adieu. My brothers always do 
good, and praise and thank the Lord, that you have 
a brother who is worthy to lay down his life for 
Christ and the Gospel's sake. Written to you in 
tears, for nature's sake. Assist Christian with the 
children, wherever it is possible for you ; and keep 
this letter as a testament. By me, your dear broth- 


er, 


Joost Verkindert. 


THE LAST LETTER OF JOOST VERKINDERT, WRIT- 
TEN TO HIS WIFE AFTER HE HAD RECEIVED 
HIS SENTENCE, AND WAS BROUGHT TO THE 
COMMON PRISON, IT BEING ON THE 
12TH OF SEPTEMBER 

God, who is the God of all comfort ; who com- 
f orteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able 
to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the 
comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of 
God through Christ Jesus, to Him be praise, honor, 
glory, dominion, power, and majesty, forever and 
ever. Amen. 

This I wish you as a cordial and friendly greet- 
ing, my dear and beloved wife and sister in the 
Lord, as a perpetual adieu upon earth; informing 
you, that I am still tolerably well according to the 
time, for which I thank and praise the almighty 
Father, my and your God, that He has chosen me 
hereto. 

Hence, my most beloved, do not sorrow too much 
on my account, but praise and thank the Lord, that 
you have had a husband that is counted worthy to 
lay down his life for the truth. 

O my beloved, I pray and exhort you once more, 
that you will keep yourself in quietness and in the 
fear of God, that we may together receive the beau- 
tiful promises, where neither cold, nor heat, nor 
hunger, nor thirst shall be any more, but such joy, 
which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man, the great joy and 
gladness which God hath prepared for them that 
love Him. I Cor. 2 :9. 

O my beloved, this befell me, when we least ex- 
pected it; but the almighty God be praised and 
thanked through Christ Jesus, that He still thus 
aids and succors me in my distress. 

Herewith I commend you and my two little chil- 
dren to Christ Jesus, whom I commend to you for 
a husband. 

O my beloved, never forsake this husband and 
bridegroom, for he is the Father of the widows and 
orphans. Ps. 68 :6. Adieu, my most beloved, with 
mother and all our friends, whom I commend upon 
earth to the crucified, bleeding Christ Jesus. Adieu, 
adieu all together. Subscribed by me, 

Joost Verkindert. 
Your dear husband, written in my bonds. 


* "Corner-stone," the original has it. 


A LETTER FROM LAUWERENS ANDRIESS, THE FEL- 
LOW PRISONER OF JOOST VERKINDERT; SENT 
THE 9TH OF SEPTEMBER, TO R., THE WIFE 
OF SAID JOOST 

The eternal, abundant and rich grace and mercy 
of God the heavenly Father, and the pure love, joy 
and peace of the Son, together with the comfort of 
the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from both the Fa- 
ther and the Son, to comfort those that are in any 
tribulation ; this I wish you, my dear and God-be- 
loved sister in the Lord, as a friendly greeting, to 
strengthen you in your great tribulation, in which 


864 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you now also are for the Lord's holy name and the 
Gospel's sake, which Gospel He left us, and sealed 
it with His precious blood, that He might thereby 
cleanse and wash us from all our uncleanness, and 
present us unto Himself holy and blameless, with- 
out spot or wrinkle, yea, that He might thereby pre- 
pare unto Himself a holy people zealous of good 
works. Eph. 5:26, 27; Tit. 2:14. To Him be 
praise, thanks, glory, honor, power, and majesty, 
forever and ever. Amen. 

After all proper greetings, my dear and beloved 
sister in the Lord, whom I love from the depth of 
my heart, because of our regeneration, I inform 
you, that I and your dear husband are still tolerably 
well according to the flesh ; and as regards the spir- 
it, it is still the purpose of us both, to adhere to the 
eternal truth by the great help of the Lord, without 
whom we can do nothing, and from whom we must 
also constantly look for help and comfort. And He, 
according to His promise, does not suffer us to be 
tempted above that we are able, but does with the 
temptation also make a way to escape. I Cor. 10:13. 
Yea, He is a faithful helper in distress, who never 
yet forsook His own that continued in His fear, and 
firmly trusted in His Word; for He gives unto 
every one that asks Him, and will not that any 
should perish, but that all should come to repent- 
ance, that we should be to the praise of His glory. 
Matt. 7:7; II Pet. 3:9; Eph. 1 :12. Hence, "If ye 
then be risen with Christ, seek those things which 
are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of 
God. Set your affection on things above, not on 
things on the earth ; for ye are dead, and your life 
is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our 
life, shall appear, then shall ye* also appear with 
him in glory. Mortify therefore your members 
which -are upon the earth; fornication, unclean- 
ness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and 
covetousness, which is idolatry : for which things' 
sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of 
disobedience." Col. 3:1-6. Therefore, let all bit- 
terness, conceitedness, and wrath, and anger, and 
clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, 
with all malice: and be ye kind one to another, 
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God 
for Christ's sake hath forgiven you. Be ye there- 
fore followers of God, as dear children ; and walk 
in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given 
himself for us. Eph. 4:31, 32; 5:1, 2. And Christ 
says : "A new commandment I give unto you, That 
ye love one another ; as I have loved you, that ye 
also love one another. By this shall all men know 
that ye are my disciples." John 13 :34, 35. And 
Peter says: "Have fervent charity among your- 
selves; for charity shall cover the multitude of 
sins" (I Pet. 4:8) ; and love is the fulfilling of the 
law. Rom. 13 :8. But we must love God above all, 
as is written : "If any man come to me, and hate 
not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, 
and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, 
he cannot be my disciple." Luke 14 :26. And f ur- 

* "We," in the original. 


ther : "He that loveth father or mother more than 
me is not worthy of me : and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than me is not worthy of me. Mat- 
thew 19:37. Thus, we must love Him above all, 
and for His name forsake everything, and entirely 
deny ourselves. 16:24. Hence, my dear sister, be 
content, and do not grieve immoderately on this 
account ; for it is the will of the Lord, and His will 
must be done. We must part here once. Thus, 
hasten, that we may all meet together when men 
shall not be able to part us any more. May the 
good and almighty Lord full of grace and truth 
make us fit hereto. Amen. 

Farewell, and accept this in good part. 

HANS VAN DEN WEGE, JANNEKEN VAN HULLE, 
AND JANNEKEN VAN RENTEGEM, A. D. 1570 

Jan van den Wege, having risen early one morn- 
ing, and then, about seven o'clock, gone with his 
cousin to market, was apprehended at the fish 
market at Ghent in Flanders, by master Klaes (who 
was wont to ride out with the Dean of Ronse, in 
order to assist in the apprehension of those called 
heretics) and two other officers, and taken to the 
Sausselet (the city prison), where master Klaes 
asked him concerning his place of residence, which 
he refused to tell. He was then searched ; but they 
found nothing on his person except a hymn ; hence 
they took their departure from him, leaving him se- 
curely locked in prison. Having, after many exami- 
nations and vexations, boldly confessed his faith, 
and refusing to apostatize from it in any wise, he 
was, on the 7th of November 1570, together with 
two young maidens, named Janneken van Hulle, 
and Janneken van Rentegem, sentenced to death 
for the living word of God. When they were 
brought forth, almost entirely stripped, the exe- 
cutioner put a gag into each one's mouth to pre- 
vent them from speaking. Thus they went along in 
silence like sheep to the slaughter, and saluted the 
brethren by nodding to them. A brother was heard 
to say to them : "Be valiant." And a sister said : 
"Contend valiantly for the truth." In their sen- 
tence it was stated that they had been rebaptized, 
contrary to the royal decree, also, that they had 
erred from the true faith, and united with heretics, 
and that they were therefore sentenced to be burned 
with fire. The executioner then placed each at a 
stake, and strangled and burned them. Thus they 
finished their course, and are now lying under the 
altar, awaiting the reward of their sufferings. 

THE FIRST LETTER OF HANSKEN VAN DEN WEGE 

I wish you, my cordially beloved and chosen 
sister, whom I love from the very depth of my 
heart, the unfathomable, abundant, great grace and 
mercy of the eternal and almighty God, the heav- 
enly Father ; and also the great humility and meek- 
ness, and the great peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
the only and true Son of the living God ; and the 
great power, consolation and full joy of the Holy 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


865 



Hans van den Wegen, captured on the Fish Market in Ghent and executed in 1570 


Ghost; this is my eternal and blessed wish and 
holy salutation and perpetual memorial to you, my 
dear, chosen sister ; and also to all men that fear 
and love the Lord, and call on Him out of a pure 
heart. This is ever my blessed wish and holy salu- 
tation, to the eternal salvation of your souls, and to 
the praise of the eternal, supreme, almighty God 
of heaven and earth; to whose name be praise, 
thanks, glory and honor, forever and ever. Amen. 
O see, my dear and much beloved chosen sister, 
what more shall I wish you ? or what more shall I 
write you than I have written? But I repeat, and 
this from abundant, pure and fervent love to God, 
with the holy, chosen apostle Peter, where he 
writes to you, and also to us, and to all men: 
"Purify your souls in obeying the truth through 
the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, 
and see that ye love one another with a pure heart 
fervently: being born again, not of corruptible 
seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, 
which liveth and abideth forever. For all flesh is 
as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of 
grass. The sun is risen, and hath withered the 
grass, and the beauty of it is perished: but the 
word of the Lord endureth forever. I Pet. 1 :22-25. 


O dear sister, what a good ointment and blessed 
doctrine this is which Peter has here taught us by 
the Holy Ghost. O yes, what a precious medicine 
this is which the Lord has left us by His apostles, 
by which the soul can be purified and healed. Hence 
let us open our ears, and unlock our hearts, that 
we may hear with our ears and understand with 
our hearts, what the obedience of the truth teaches 
us. For it is Jesus Christ, the genuine truth, with 
all the precious medicines of grace and mercy, and 
the sweet-smelling oil of love, whereby we purify 
our souls, and by no other. 

Hence, O dear sister, let us hear this truth, and 
obey it ; for He proceeded from the Father, yea, 
came from and was sent by Him, a teacher from 
heaven, to teach us the way of truth, and the life, 
which He was Himself ; and all that He has heard 
and seen from His Father, He has taught us, in 
order to purify our souls, and save them for ever; 
for He teaches us, saying: "Verily, verily, I say 
unto thee, Except a man be born of water and 
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of 
God." John 8:42; 1:4; 14:6; 8:38; 3:5. 

O dear sister, earnestly pray the Lord for a right 
understanding of this regeneration, which must be 


866 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


effected from above, of water and of the Spirit, 
since otherwise we cannot enter into the kingdom 
of heaven. Hence, let us pray with a firm confi- 
dence and a strong faith, yea, pray with an unwa- 
vering mind to God the Most High, in spirit and in 
truth ; and it shall be given us, as He Himself says : 
"For every one that asketh receiveth," says the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Matt. 7 :8. Let us therefore so 
ask Him that we may receive it, that is, understand 
the regeneration, and live in accordance therewith, 
and then remain forever and constantly regenerated 
unto the end. O yes, so born from above, that 
whereas there was nothing before, there is some- 
thing now ; and whereas formerly we knew nothing 
but lying and cheating, together with presump- 
tuous pride, proud cursing, fighting, swearing, evil 
speaking, and lived in much pleasure of the flesh, 
we now speak the truth from the heart, and walk in 
the truth, as children that are born of the truth; 
and live in the fear of our God, with an humbled 
heart, in lowliness, gentleness, and in great joy 
of the Spirit, and no longer go to dumb idols, to 
worship or honor them, nor do we go into their 
Baal's dens, where nothing but the commandments 
of men are taught, which doctrines destroy men's 
souls, and with which the devil has destroyed the 
whole world, for His name is destroyer. Rev. 9:11. 
O yes, dear sister, whenever we went there, we saw 
them perform their mass and abominable idolatry, 
which are but fables and commandments of men, 
and instituted by the same destroyer, the devil. 
And when they elevate their abominable idol, every 
one must fall down before it, and worship and 
honor it. O what abominable idolatry this is ! Sen- 
tence has long ago been pronounced upon them; 
for idolaters, says Paul, have no part in .the king- 
dom of God; but their part, says John, is in the 
lake which burneth with fire and brimstone : which 
is the second death. I Cor. 6 :9 ; Rev. 21 :8. Hence, 
O dear sister, keep away from idols, and touch not 
the unclean thing, and let us be turned from idol- 
atry to the service of the living God, to serve Him 
for He alone is to be heard, praised, honored, wor- 
shiped, served, and loved, forever. Yes, dear sister, 
let us thus apprehend the meaning of Christ, that 
we be truly turned from the power of this world, 
where there is nothing but darkness, namely, the 
night of sin (I Thess. 5 :7 ; Rom. 13 :12) ; to the day 
of grace, where shines in the beautiful Sun of 
righteousness, Jesus Christ, with all His promises 
and grace (Mai. 4 :2 ; Rom. 6 :14) ; and from lies to 
the truth, and from unrighteousness and wicked- 
ness to righteousness and good works; and thus 
demonstrate in power, that we are regenerated in 
humility of heart and spirit, love one another with 
brotherly love out of a pure heart, and have peace 
with all men, if it be possible; yea, as ye would 
that men should do to you, so do you also to 
them: for this is the law and the prophets, says 
Christ, who is the infallible truth. I Pet. 1 :22 ; 
Rom. 12:18; Matt. 7:12. 

Let us therefore well consider this, that we may 


not err ; for we would indeed be willing that men 
should show us much favor and mercy, and always 
live peaceably with us; hence let us also always 
show much favor and mercy to all men, and do 
them many kindnesses, thus showing love to them, 
and seek to live in peace and love with one another, 
and with all men. Yes, dear sister, let us so purify 
our souls as Peter says: "Purify your souls in 
obeying the truth through the Spirit unto un- 
feigned love of the brethren, and love one another 
with a pure heart fervently : being born again, not 
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the 
word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." 
I Pet. 1 :22, 23. Oh, yes, dear sister, let us so fol- 
low the advice of Peter, that we obey the truth of 
Christ, and through obedience purify our souls, and 
be truly born from above, of water and of the Spir- 
it, which must be effected from high heaven, where- 
by we must be born again, namely, of the water, as 
Christ says: "He that believeth on me, as the 
Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow riv- 
ers of living water." (But this spake He of the 
Spirit, which they that believe on Him should re- 
ceive.) John 7 :38, 39. And by the words of truth, 
as Christ Himself says : "The words that I speak 
unto you, they are spirit, and they are lite." John 
6:63. Oh, yes, dear sister, this is the true water 
and the true Spirit, whereby we must be born again 
from above, if we are to see the kingdom of heav- 
en ; for Christ gives and sends the Holy Spirit from 
above down upon everyone whom He sees pre- 
pared ; and His Word He also brought from above, 
and hence this regeneration is effected from above 
John 15:26; 8:26; 3:3, 7. 

Therefore, dear sister, let us take good heed, that 
we well keep this regeneration, and constantly, 
all the days of our life, walk before the eyes of the 
Lord in holiness, as the truly regenerated children 
of God, who are not born of corruptible seed, but 
of incorruptible, namely, by the word of God, 
which liveth and abideth forever. Hence, my dear 
and much beloved sister, if you are truly in this 
regeneration, which has been effected in you from 
above, show forth the nature of that of which you 
are born, so that you have all your conversation in 
heaven, and are no longer minded toward flesh and 
blood, nor anything that is visible, as Paul says, but 
towards that which is invisible. Phil. 3:19, 20. 
For Paul says, that our light affliction, which is but 
for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding, 
and eternal weight of glory ; while we look not at 
the things which are seen, but at the things which 
are not seen: for the things which are seen are 
temporal; but the things which are not seen are 
eternal. II Cor. 4:17, 18. Hence let us remain 
steadfast, and look at and believe only that which 
is invisible. For Peter says : "At the appearing of 
the Lord Jesus Christ : whom having not seen, ye 
love ; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet be- 
lieving, ye rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full 
of glory: receiving the end of your faith, even the 
salvation of your souls." I Pet. 1 :7-9. Oh, yes 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


867 


dear sister, let us do according to the doctrine 
brought us from above through the Holy Ghost, 
that we purify our souls, and be born again from 
above of water and of the Spirit, so that we may 
see the kingdom of heaven, and forever possess it 
through the grace of the Lord; and let us always 
firmly trust and believe in the invisible God, and 
in the Lord Jesus Christ our Redeemer, and the 
Saviour of the world, so that our souls may be 
forever saved. Oh, yes, that we may be with all 
the elect and regenerated children of God, and with 
all the saints of the supreme God of heaven and 
earth, and with the heavenly, great, and beautiful 
host of the holy angels of God, in unspeakably 
great glory and joy, and glorious and imperishable 
brightness; and may forever reign with the Lord 
of lords and King of kings, in great glory, and in 
exceedingly great joy, and then, with all the great 
heavenly, holy hosts, from great joy of heart, for- 
ever praise, glorify, honor, and sanctify with great 
honor, the exalted name of the Lord; for, glory 
belongs to God in the highest, and on earth peace 
and good will toward men. Luke 2 :14. Herewith, 
my dear sister, I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the words of His eternal grace. Amen. 

Written out of great, fervent, brotherly love, to 
you Cijntgen, my dearly beloved chosen sister, as 
a perpetual and blessed memorial in the Lord, by 
Hansken, your poor, miserable and weak brother, 
who is imprisoned at Ghent, in the Sausselet, for 
the true Word of the Lord. Remember me in your 
prayers to God, so that through me poor, miser- 
able man, who am weak, the exalted, holy name 
of the Lord may be honored and praised forever ; 
for it is good to sing praises unto our God. Amen. 
Ps. 147:1. 


THE SECOND LETTER FROM HANSKEN VAN DEN 
WEGE 

The eternal, abundant, unfathomable, great grace 
and mercy of God the heavenly Father, which came 
by Jesus Christ, the only and true Son of God ; and 
the great humility and meekness, holiness and peace 
of our Lord Jesus Christ the Saviour of the world, 
together with the great power, consolation and full 
joy of the Holy Ghost; this I wish you from the 
depth of my heart, and from the inmost of my soul, 
my dear and much beloved friend Jacob Kesij, and 
mother Martijntgen ; this is my perpetual and bless- 
ed wish and holy salutation to you, and to all men 
that fear and love the Lord, and call on Him out of 
a pure heart ; yea, may the Lord of eternal grace 
grant you this my blessed wish and holy saluta- 
tion, and make you wise in that which is good, and 
simple in that which is evil, so that you may with 
Job be found perfect and upright, fearing God, 
and eschewing evil. Amen. Rom. 16:19; Job 1 :1. 

Further, my dear and beloved friends Jacob and 
Martijntgen, I pray you from the depth of my 
heart, and by the great and fervent love and mercy 
of God, and by Jesus Christ the Son of God, and 
this by His merits, bitter death, bleeding wounds, 


and His precious blood, which He suffered to be 
shed on the cross to purchase us, and to redeem us 
from the bonds of death; yea, I beseech you and 
say with the apostle Paul: "Flee also youthful 
lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, 
peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure 
heart." II Timothy 2 :22. Oh, take heed to it, and 
follow faith, for without faith it is impossible to 
please God, and he that believeth not shall be 
damned, says Jesus Christ our Lord. Heb. 1 1 :6 ; 
Mark 16 :16. Hence, O dear Jacob and Martijnt- 
gen, turn, turn, and follow the true faith, which 
worketh by love (Galatians 5:6), yea, by the fer- 
vent love of God, without which [faith] no one can 
now or ever please God, as Paul says. Hence take 
good heed, that you confirm the faith with love, 
and follow love with all the strength of your heart, 
the nature of which love consists in meekness and 
gentleness. Yea, charity envieth not ; charity vaunt- 
eth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave it- 
self unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily 
provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in in- 
iquity, but rejoiceth in the truth ; beareth all things, 
believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all 
things. Charity never faileth. I Corinthians 13:4. 
Hence I repeat it, see well to it, that you follow this 
beautiful fruit of love, and that it may be found 
with you forever so that you may adorn your faith 
with true love, and thus please God and be saved. 
Therefore, O my dear friends, follow faith, love, 
and also peace with all men. For it is a wisdom that 
is from above, and is first pure, then peaceable, gen- 
tle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good 
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. 
And the fruit of righteousness* is sown in peace of 
them that make peace. James 3:17, 18. Hence, 
make peace, and continue therein, that the peace of 
the Lord may rule in your hearts (Col. 3:15), and 
bring forth the fruit of righteousness to the praise 
of the Lord, and to the salvation of your souls. 
Oh, yes, dear Jacob and Martijntgen, do thus ac- 
cording to my request, and the admonition of Paul, 
and you will not be deceived. Follow all this right- 
eousness which is by faith (Rom. 3:22), with all 
your heart, and with all your strength and ability ; 
pray, lament, call, and weep in spirit and in truth, 
to God the heavenly Father, for grace and mercy ; 
yea, trust and hope in Him with all your heart, and 
with steadfastness, and the Lord, who is full of all 
goodness (Psalm 118:1), will be gracious unto 
you according to His great goodness, and unfath- 
omable mercy ; for the Lord is gracious and merci- 
ful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and re- 
penteth Him of the evil ; for the Lord is not will- 
ing that any should perish, but that all should come 
to repentance. Joel 2 :13 ; II Pet. 3 :9. Yea, this is 
His will ; for Christ says : "Repent ye, and believe 
the gospel." Mark 1 :15. Hence receive this good 
doctrine,_ so that you repent and bring forth gen- 
uine fruits of repentance, and thus flee youthful 
lusts. And love not the world — which liveth in 

* "Of the Spirit," in the original. 


868 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


pleasure, as John says — neither the things that are 
in the world ; for if any man love the world, the 
love of the Fiather is not in him. For all that is in 
the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the 
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but 
is of the world. And the world passeth away, and 
the lust thereof : but he that doeth the will of God 
abideth forever. I John 2 :1S-17. Hence I tell you 
once more: flee carnal and youthful lusts in this 
world, that you be not condemned with the world. 
Gal. 5:16; I Cor. 11 :32. Oh, yes, turn from this 
wicked generation, who live in pleasure, for they 
are dead while they live, as Paul says. I Tim. 5 :6. 
Therefore, O Jacob and Marti jntgen, turn away, 
turn away from this wicked way of the ungodly, 
so that you may not with them be punished with- 
out mercy by the Lord; for God will rain light- 
nings, fire and brimstone upon the ungodly, and re- 
ward them with a tempest. Rev. 18 :4 ; Gen. 19 :24 ; 
Exodus 9 :24 ; Ps. 7 :12. For the Lord is righteous, 
and loves righteousness, so that according to His 
righteousness He cannot let sinners go unpunished ; 
hence flee youthful lusts, but follow righteousness, 
faith, charity, peace, with them that call on God 
out of a pure heart. Ps. 11 :7; II Tim. 2:22. Yes, 
dear Jacob and Martijntgen, follow this high gift 
of the Lord, namely, the wisdom that is from 
above ; yea, I say, follow after it, and bring forth 
genuine fruits of repentance, and it shall be well 
with you. And always humble yourselves under the 
mighty hand of God, and be no longer high-minded, 
but fear with great humility of heart and of the 
spirit, before God the heavenly Father; for God 
resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the hum- 
ble. I Pet. 5 :6; Rom. 11 :20; I Pet. 5 :5. Hence I 
repeat it: humble yourselves under the mighty 
hand of God, that He may exalt you in due time ; 
for whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; 
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted, says 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Luke 14:11. Therefore, 
O dear Jacob and Martijntgen, follow righteous- 
ness, and strive for it with all your power and all 
the diligence of your heart ; and sin no more, lest a 
worse thing come unto you. John 5 :14. And learn 
henceforth truly to fear the Lord with all your 
heart ; and learn to love Him with all your strength, 
so that your names may be written in the book of 
life, and you may thus through God's great grace 
be forever saved, and may, with all the holy an- 
gels in heaven, and with the great heavenly host, 
with the Lord of lords, in unspeakably great joy, 
glory and brightness, reign forever in heaven, 
where the great and holy name of the Lord will be 
forever praised, glorified and honored ; for glory to 
God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will 
toward men. Luke 2:14. 

Herewith, I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the Word of His grace. Amen. Written by me, 
Hansken van den Wege. 

Imprisoned for the testimony of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


THE THIRD LETTER OF HANSKEN VAN DEN WEGE 

My blessed wish, holy salutation and perpetual 
memorial to you, Claerken, my dear sister, is, that 
you may live holy, and die happy, and that you 
may arise with a holy body, acceptable to the Lord, 
to the salvation of your soul, and also to the praise 
and honor of the eternal and almighty God of 
heaven and earth, to whose name be eternal praise, 
glory and honor, now and forever. Amen. 

O dear and much beloved chosen sister, I wish 
you from the depth of my heart, and the inmost of 
my soul, much grace and mercy from God our 
heavenly Father, who is true and almighty, of 
whom are all things, and this through Jesus Christ 
our Lord, the Son of the true and living God, by 
whom are all things, who is the Saviour of the 
world, and especially of those that believe ; for He 
is our High Priest, Prince, Reconciler, and Saviour, 
by His death and precious blood, which He once' 
shed for us; and this with great humility and 
meekness, in holiness and peace ; together with the 
great power, consolation and full joy of the Holy 
Ghost. O yes, dear sister, may the Holy Ghost 
who is the supreme comfort of our afflicted con- 
science, impel and guide you into all truth. O 
Claerken, dear sister, strive for this, and purify 
yourself thereto, that you may be a member in the 
body of the Lord, and a stone in His temple; and 
so humble yourself now, that it may be seen and 
perceived in you, that you now humble your flesh 
and spirit, so that the Holy Ghost may dwell in 
you ; and that you also show forth the nature of 
Him that dwells in you, by great gentleness, mercy, 
love and peace toward all men, not being quarrel- 
some, not clamorous, not cursing, not puffed up, 
nor proud, not minded to worship idols, nor to 
hearken after the commandments of men, and also 
not greedy of filthy lucre, which has to be left be- 
hind. Oh, yes, Claerken, dear sister, flee all these 
abominations and evil things, and moreover, all 
that are like them. Oh, yes, shun them, as you 
would shun snakes and serpents; for if you come 
too near you will be bitten by them so that no man 
can heal you. Sir. 21 :2. Hence, dear sister, sep- 
arate from all these abominations, and touch not 
the unclean thing; but strive to be found excelling 
in good works, so that you may be fit for the Spir- 
it of God to dwell in you ; and may at all times 
bring forth the fruit of the Spirit; for the fruit of 
the Spirit is in all goodness, righteousness and 
truth. Eph. 5 :9. Yea, strive for the kingdom of 
heaven, which is righteousness and peace, and joy 
in the Holy Ghost, (Rom. 14:17). Amen. 

And I greet my dear and much beloved chosen 
mother, who is also my dearest sister in the Lord, 
very cordially and affectionately ; yea, I greet you| 
O dear mother, with all the strength of my heart' 
and I wish you always and forever Jesus Christ, the 
Son of the most high God, that He may, with His 
great power, by which all things are made, uphold 
you in the true way, that leads to life eternal, yea, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


869 


to the new Jerusalem, where the streets are of pure 
gold, so that you may enter in there, through His 
great grace, and thus be forever saved, and live in 
eternal, great joy and rest, and triumph and reign 
forever with the Lord of lords, and forever praise, 
glorify, and honor His great, high and holy name; 
for glory be to God in the highest, and on earth, 
peace, good will toward men. Herewith I com- 
mend you forever to the only and almighty Lord, 
and to the eternal words of His grace. Amen. 

Adieu, adieu, dear mother, dear mother, fare- 
well, farewell; O yes, blessed, blessed. Amen, 
amen. 


THE FOURTH LETTER OF HANSKEN VAN DEN WEGE 

The unfathomable and abundant great grace and 
mercy of God our heavenly Father, given and be- 
stowed upon us through Jesus Christ the Son of the 
true and living God, and Jesus Christ, with all His 
humility, meekness, and great holiness, yea, the 
great power, consolation and full joy of the Holy 
Ghost, this we wish you from the depth of our soul, 
and with all the strength of our heart, our dear and 
much beloved chosen sister in the Lord, together 
with all that fear and love the Lord, and call on 
Him out of a pure heart. This is our perpetual, 
blessed wish, yea, holy salutation; may the Lord 
grant you this our blessed wish and holy salutation, 
and make you wise in that which is good, and sim- 
ple in that which is evil ; so that you may be found 
upright and perfect, fearing God, and eschewing 
evil. Amen. 

Further, dear and much beloved chosen sister in 
the Lord, we wish you and also us, and all men, 
the eternal, great and blessed treasure to which 
Christ compares the kingdom of heaven ; which a 
man found and hid, and for joy over it went and 
sold all that he had, and bought that field. Yes dear 
sister in the Lord, let us also be minded as he was 
that had found the treasure, since the treasure is 
now also revealed to us, through Jesus Christ the 
Son of God, let us also hide it, and this with great 
diligence, with prayer, supplication and fasting in 
the Spirit to God, for where there is a treasure, the 
thieves and murderers seek to get it ; hence let us 
take good heed that it be not taken from us, and 
let us go in righteousness and peace, and with great 
joy and gladness, in the Holy Ghost; for the king- 
dom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in 
the Holy Ghost. Rom. 14:17. Hence let us thus 
go on, since to us is revealed the treasure that lies 
hidden in the field before so many. Let us there- 
fore be diligent, yes, dear sister ; let us go on, and 
with great steadfastness in meekness follow the in- 
fallible truth Jesus Christ ; for He is the way, the 
truth, and the life. Hence let us always follow 
Him, and let us thus go on until the time that we 
have forsaken and sold everything, and let us then 
buy the field in which the treasure is hid ; for he 
that does not forsake everything, says Christ, is not 
worthy of me. For if it were hid in a great, broad 


field many would come and seek for it, but only one 
would find the treasure ; so also the good and bless- 
ed treasure, Jesus Christ the Son of God, lies hid in 
the field of the holy Scriptures, and many indeed 
come and seek for it, but only one finds the same ; 
namely, all the members that are in the body of 
which Jesus Christ is the head, have found the 
treasure Jesus Christ, with all His graces and mer- 
its, and also eternal life. They now may well great- 
ly rejoice in the Holy Ghost, that they have found 
the great, beautiful, and holy treasure (Jesus 
Christ), and say with the prophet: "The lines are 
fallen unto me in pleasant places ; the Lord is the 
portion of my inheritance: therefore I will not 
fear ; though my flesh and my heart fail, thou, O 
Lord, art the strength of my heart, and my portion 
forever ; yea, the Lord is my portion, saith my soul, 
therefore will I hope in him." Ps. 16 :6 ; 5 ; 73 :26 ; 
Lam. 3:24. 

Therefore my dear and much beloved chosen sis- 
ter in the Lord, let us go on with a valiant, firm and 
strong confidence, and with great humility and 
meekness of heart, and with a great desire after our 
holy and blessed treasure (Jesus Christ) ; and the 
Lord shall desire our beauty, and when the Lord 
shall come with His mighty angels, and with the 
sound of the trumpet, in the clouds, to reward every 
man according to his works, then shall the elect be 
gathered together from the four winds of heaven, 
and they shall, as sheep, be set on His right hand, 
and the ungodly, as goats, on the left; then shall 
we hear the sweet and blessed words: Come, ye 
blessed, inherit the kingdom of my Father, pre- 
pared for you from the foundation of the world. 
II Thess 1 :7; Matt. 16:27; 24:30, 31 ; 25:33, 34. 
Then we shall enter into the great, beautiful and 
imperishable glory of the Lord, where we shall be 
in great glory and unspeakable, great and eternal 
joy, and thus forever be with the Lord of lords, 
King of kings, God of gods, and Father of fathers, 
and praise, thank, glorify, honor and sanctify Him, 
for Holy, holy, is the holy Lord God Almighty, 
which was, and is, and is to come. Rev. 4 :8. But 
to them on the left hand He shall say : Depart, ye 
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for you and 
the devil ; there shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. Hence, O dear and much beloved in the 
Lord, let us take good heed, that we do not sleep 
in sin, lest our treasure be taken ; for when people 
sleep, thieves go and rob them. But let us watch 
and pray and adorn ourselves as the five wise vir- 
gins, who had oil in their lamps ; so that when the 
Bridegroom comes, we may enter in to His glori- 
ous and imperishable marriage, where the Lord will 
be praised forever, for it is a good thing to sing 
praises to our God. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the rich Word of His grace. Amen. Always re- 
member us in your holy prayers to God, as Paul 
says : "Remember them that are in bonds as bound 
with them." Heb. 13:2. For we also remember 
you for the best in our prayers, according to our 


870 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


weak ability, for it is written : All things whatso- 
ever ye would that men should do to you, do ye 
even so to them : for this is the law and the proph- 
ets. Matt. 7:12. 

Written out of great brotherly love, and sent by 
us three prisoners for the word and the holy name 
of the Lord, to you our dear and much beloved sis- 
ter in the Lord. Amen. 


BARBELKEN GOETHALS, AND SAERKEN VAN DUER- 
HOVE, A. D. 1570 

At Ghent, in Flanders, there were imprisoned for 
their faith, two pious sisters, named Barbelken 
Goethals and Saerken van Duerhove. While con- 
fined in the convent of St. Peter, they had to resist 
many temptations, sufferings and vexations; but 
adhering nevertheless steadfastly to the divine 
truth, they were finally sentenced to death as here- 
tics, and, on the 21st of November, 1570, burnt 
without Ghent, in consequence of which they are 
delivered, and shall remain so forever, from the 
eternal and unquenchable fire of hell. 


HERE FOLLOWS A LETTER WHICH BARBELKEN 

GOETHALS WROTE IN PRISON, AND SENT TO 

JASPER N v ONE OF HER FELLOW BELIEVERS 

The abundant and unfathomable great grace, 
peace and mercy of God our heavenly Father, and 
Jesus Christ, His only and eternal dear and beloved 
Son, by whom we are redeemed and loosed from 
the chains of hell and the shadows of death, and 
reconciled through His precious blood alone : Him 
I wish you, my dearest brother in the Lord ; as the 
preserver of your soul ; and that He would comfort 
you with the great consolation, joy, and gladness of 
the Holy Ghost, in all that may befall you yet for 
the true testimony of our dear Lord Jesus Christ. 
To this God who only is wise, be praise, glory, 
honor, power, strength and might, forever and ever. 
Amen. 

After all proper, cordial and friendly salutations 
to you, Jasper,- my dearest brother in the Lord, 
whom I love with godly love in the truth (II John 
1 ) , and this for the truth's sake, Oh, this the Lord 
knows, to whom all hearts are known, O my dear 
and much beloved brother in the Lord, know that 
it is still my purpose to fear our dear Lord from 
the depth of my heart, according to my weakness, 
all the days of my life, and hope by the help of the 
Lord never to separate from the truth ; not for any- 
thing that is in the world, neither for riches, silver 
or gold, do I hope by His grace, to apostatize from 
our dear Lord, to which end may the almighty 
God strengthen me, this I pray Him. O my dear- 
est brother in the Lord, I would far rather with 
Susanna fall into the hands of men, than to sin in 
the sight of the Lord ; for the pure and undefiled 
Susanna said : "If I do this thing, it is death unto 
me : and if I do it not, I cannot escape your hands. 
It is better for me to fall into the hands of men, 
and not to do it, than to sin in the sight of the 
Lord." Susanna 22, 23. I likewise well know, 


that if I forsake the truth death is unto me; but, 
oh no ! this I hope by the grace of the Lord never 
to do ; but it is much better for me also to fall into 
the hands of men, than that I should forsake the 
Lord my God. Oh no, my dearest brother in the 
Lord ! Oh, let us never depart from the truth of 
the Lord, for so many beautiful promises are prom- 
ised us, and if we continue steadfast unto death we 
shall be saved. O my much beloved, dear brother in 
the Lord, Oh, if we may only be saved, that is 
enough; which I hope by His great grace, if we 
continue in His Word, we shall ; for He is faithful 
that promised, who also will do it ; for He says by 
His pious prophet Isaiah, comforting His own: 
"Though a mother forget her own child, which she 
herself has brought forth, yet will I not forget 
thee." Isa. 49:15. Therefore, my affectionately be- 
loved brother in the Lord, behold, how faithfully 
our dear Lord comforts us ; hence, dear and be- 
loved in the Lord, let us be of good courage, and 
willingly labor, for it (our labor) will not be in 
vain in the Lord. I Cor. 15 :58. Hence I am valiant 
and bold, to the Lord be praise and glory, now and 
forever, who so faithfully succors me according to 
His promise, Oh, who should not fear such a God, 
who so preserves His tender branches ; and I also 
trust valiantly in my Lord and God, that He will 
preserve me where I am, and, if it be His will, de- 
liver me out of this murderer's den. 

Hence, O my dearest and much beloved brother 
in Christ Jesus, let us have good courage, though 
we meet with more adversity than the world. O let 
us look unto Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher 
of our faith, how He went before us in much suf- 
fering and reproach. And all the holy prophets, Oh, 
let us look to them, how they went before us,' 
through so much tribulation, yea, in destitution and 
affliction ; of whom the world was not worthy. For 
if they had been mindful of that country from 
whence they came out, they might have had oppor- 
tunity to have returned ; but now they desired a bet- 
ter country, that is, a heavenly : wherefore God is 
not ashamed to be called their God. Heb. 11. Thus, 
O Jasper, my most affectionately beloved brother 
in the Lord, God will also not be ashamed to be 
called our God, if we continue faithfully in His 
truth, and do not again lay the foundation of re- 
pentance from dead works, and of faith toward 
God. Hebrews 6:1. Oh, no, oh, no, my dearest 
brother in the Lord, let us not again lay the founda- 
tion of repentance from dead works, and of faith 
towards God ; but let us hold fast the faith which 
we have in Christ our dear Lord. Oh, I hope by the 
help of God to hold fast the faith which I have in 
Christ Jesus ; nor shall, the Lord helping me, any 
man separate me from the love of God, as also Paul 
says: "Who shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, 
or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword ? As it 
is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day 
long ; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. 
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquer- 
ors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


871 


that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor princi- 
palities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things 
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other crea- 
ture, shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." Rom. 
8 :3S-39. Therefore, my dearest, beloved brother in 
the Lord, let us be of good courage in the Lord ; 
for they can not hurt a hair of our head without 
the will of our Father. Luke 12 :7. 

O Jasper, my dear and beloved brother in the 
Lord, I am of such good cheer, the Lord be praised, 
that I should never be able to describe the joy which 
I feel in my heart. Oh, what courage I have to fight 
against the princes and rulers of darkness ; I think 
that I could say with David : "I will not be afraid 
of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves 
against me round about." Ps. 3 :6. Oh, what joy I 
have; praise, glory and honor be to God forever 
for the great joy that He gives me. O my dearest 
brother, rejoice with me, and let it strengthen you, 
as I hope that it will. Thus I have briefly written 
to my dearest brother in Christ Jesus, with the 
small gift that I have received through the grace 
of the Lord. Herewith I will commend you to our 
dear Lord, and to the rich Word of His grace. 
I take leave, and say : "Adieu, adieu, adieu, fare- 
well, farewell, farewell, my dearest brother in the 
Lord, till we meet again. Though we must part 
here, and be separated by men, I hope that we shall 
meet again where men can part us no more." 

O Jasper, my dearest brother in the Lord, acquit 
yourself valiantly unto the end in the word of 
God ; I hope to do the same. Again I say : "Adieu, 
adieu 1 farewell, farewell ! we must now part." Oh, 
I beseech you most affectionately, to receive my 
simple letter in good part, as I hope you will, since 
I have done it out of pure love. Written in bonds 
by me, your weak sister in the Lord, who lies in 
bonds in St. Peter's, for the true testimony of Jesus 
Christ. Keep this letter in remembrance of me ; I 
hope to seal it with my blood. Always fear God, 
but not men. Barbelken Goethals. 


TEN PERSONS, MEN AS WELL AS WOMEN, BURNED 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT 

DORDRECHT, ABOUT THE YEAR 1570 

Ancient and credible memoirs tell us as indubi- 
table facts, that about the year of our Lord 1570, 
two very devout persons, a man and a woman, 
whose names we have not been able to ascertain, 
were sought for by the bailiff of the city of Dor- 
drecht, because they were called Anabaptists, and 
finally found in the Marienbon Street of said city, 
in a house from which was suspended the sign of 
a boot. As they steadfastly adhered to their faith, 
both were shortly after burnt in the market field, 
beyond the scales, where then was the place of exe- 
cution. 

Also, that seven others, men as well as women, 


of the same religion, who had come from Breda,* 
when they could by no means be moved therefrom, 
suffered like punishment, namely, by fire, until 
death ensued; which took place in the plain, not 
far from the Menne bridge, beyond the powder 
magazine being the other place of execution. 

About the end of the year, namely, in the month 
of November, when that great and terrible flood, 
that came on All-Saints-Day (of which almost 
everyone knows something) had come to an end, it 
is stated, that a certain Anabaptist widow in the 
Armetij Street was taken from a room at the side 
of a stairway by the bailiff and the stadtholder; 
which widow some time afterwards, as she would 
not apostatize from her faith, also had to die in the 
flames. 

We made search for the examinations and death 
sentences of the afore-mentioned persons, in the 
ordinary's criminal city records of that time, but 
did not find them, nor of J. W. van Kuyck and 
Adriaentgen Jans van Molenaersgraef, who were 
put to death two years afterwards; though there 
were several living witnesses of it in our time, who 
saw the death of said persons, together with all the 
circumstances. This being the case it appears that 
the papists were ashamed to put the court proceed- 
ings and death sentences of said persons into the 
city records, since it seemed that the country and 
at the same time also this city should before long 
change government and religion, which about two 
years afterwards was accomplished through the 
coming of William I, prince of Orange ; and thus 
the constraint over the faith and conscience ceased 
at the same time, at said place. 

Further Observation. — As regards the persons 
who then (in the year 1570) sat in court, and ad- 
ministered justice, they were, according to the rec- 
ord of Johan van Beverwijck, in his register of the 
magistracy of Dordrecht, as follows : 

Adriaen van Bleyenbergh Adriaenss, bailiff of 
said city, who had entered on his office in the year 
1549, and completed his time in the year 1571. 

Arent van der Mijle Sir Corneliss, burgomaster 
of the community. 

Together with nine judges : Gijsbrecht van Haer- 
lem Jans; Cornelis van Diemen Jacobss; Huy- 
brecht Jonge Adriaenss; Jan van Slingelandt Sir 
Ottenss; Wourick van Drenkwaert Sir Wilmss; 
Jan Janss Elandtss; Bondewijn Heerman Gijs- 
brechtss; Dierick van Beverwijck Sir Philips; 
Cornelis van Mosyenbroeck Sir Corneliss. 

However, whether they all concurred in this sen- 
tence, or only some of them, is not known to us. 


JELIS CLAVERSS, LIJSABET, WIFE OF CLAES DE VRIES, 
NELLEKEN JASPERS, AND WITH THEM THIRTY- 
THREE OTHER PERSONS, A. D. 1571 

In the year 1571, thirty six persons were appre- 
hended at Antwerp, in Brabant, for the truth of the 


* Of these martyrs from Breda mention seems to be made also 
in one of the letters of Jan Wouterss van Kuyck, 


872 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Gospel of Christ and following the same. Among 
them were Jelis Claverss, Lijsabet, wife of Claes de 
Vries, and Nelleken Jaspers, whom we think to 
have also been among this number, which com- 
prised six men and thirty women, some of whom 
were burnt, and some suffered drowning with great 
constancy. But said Lijsabet died with a screw in 
her mouth, by which she was prevented from 
speaking, that she should not tell the spectators 
how innocently she died ; in which deed the monks 
and priests more than filled up the measure of their 
forefathers, the bloodthirsty Pharisees; for they 
stopped only their own ears, that the truth should 
not be told them by Stephen, the worthy man of 
God ; these new Pharisees, the monks, on the other 
hand, caused screws to be put on the tongues of 
these pious and faithful witnesses of God, and the 
tip of the tongue touched with a red hot iron, that 
the swelling should prevent it from slipping out. 
Thus these pious persons [were put to death] not 
on account of any crime or uproar or fraud, nor 
for any heresy, but only because they had gone 
out of Babylon, and united with Christ, herein fol- 
lowing the teaching of the Holy Ghost. II Cor. 
6:17. Hence tfiey valiantly contended for the be- 
lief of the truth, and shall, from the Prince of 
truth, through grace, for this short, little labor, re- 
ceive the crown of eternal glory, and enjoy it for- 
ever. 

The above-mentioned Nelleken Jaspers was a 
girl of seventeen years, whose memory has been 
much sung on the street, in these countries. She 
was confined in prison for about a year, so that she 
was about eighteen years old when she died. Dur- 
ing her imprisonment she suffered severe tempta- 
tions, by way of threats of a terrible death as well 
as by fair promise of an advantageous marriage, 
and the like. But even as Christ, her captain, had 
repelled and vanquished all temptations of the 
enemy, so also this young heroine faithfully fol- 
lowed unto death the footsteps of her Bridegroom 
Christ Jesus, and continued steadfast unto death, 
and, through the grace of God, received the end 
of the faith, which is the salvation of the soul. I 
Pet. 1 :9. Though some would claim Nelleken 
Jaspers for the Protestant religion (as they also 
unjustly do concerning Anneken van den Howe, 
who was buried alive without Brussels), this is 
nevertheless utterly in vain, seeing, that when this 
was recorded, credible persons were still living who 
knew better, testifying that she died in one and the 
same faith with these pious confessors (called 
Mennists). This appears also from Joost Verkin- 
dert's letter on the 20th of June, where she is de- 
scribed as of like faith with Joost and Lauwerens 
Andries, who greet the brethren with the peace of 
the Lord. 


hended at Vlissingen in Zealand, also a pious broth- 
er named Dirck Mieuwess, and after long imprison- 
ment the bailiff and jailer permitted him to render 
them certain services for the benefits of their 
households, in consequence of which he, together 
with some of his fellow prisoners, was frequently 
allowed to leave the prison. Hence, when a favor- 
able opportunity presented itself, some of the pris- 
oners escaped and advised said Dirck Mieuwess to 
flee with them, which this friend of Christ refused 
to do, fearing that thereby the jailer, who had per- 
mitted him to go out, should get into trouble. Thus 
remaining in imprisonment, he, on the 6th of 
March, 1570, before Easter, was sentenced to be 
tortured on the rack, and the following year, name- 
ly, A. D. 1571, on the 8th of May, he was burned 
at said place, evincing great steadfastness, and of- 
fered up his temporal and corruptible body as a 
sweet-smelling savor unto the Lord of heaven and 
earth; not suffering as a thief or murderer, nor 
as one that seeks other people's property, but only 
for the truth of Christ, and a good conscience. I 
Peter 2:19. Hence there are sure to him the prom- 
ises of Christ, who has said : "Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness' sake : for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 5 :10. 


DIRCK MIEUWESS, A. D. 1571 

After much persecution, murdering and burning 
of the true followers of Christ, there was appre- 


ANNEKEN HEYNDRICKS, A. D. 1571 

In the year 1571, there was burnt alive, at Am- 
sterdam in Holland, for the testimony of Jesus, a 
woman named Anneken Heyndricks, aged about 
fifty-three years. Having come from Friesland to 
Amsterdam, she was betrayed by her neighbor, the 
underbailiff, who entered her house, in order to 
apprehend her. She said to him with a meek spir- 
it: 'Neighbor Evert, what is your wish? if you 
seek me, you can easily find me ; here I am at your 
service." This Tudas the traitor said : "Surrender 
in the name of the king." And he bound Anneken 
with a rope, arid led her along with him, as Judas 
and the scribes had done with our predecessor, Je- 
sus. When they had arrivrd on the Dam, Anneken 
said, that they should not hesitate to look at her, 
since she was neither a harlot nor a thief, but a 
prisoner for the name of Jesus. After arriving in 
prison, she thanked and praised her Lord and Cre- 
ator with an humble heart, for counting her worthy 
to suffer for His name's sake. And she boldly con- 
fessed her faith before Pieter the bailiff and the 
other lords. They greatly tormented her with 
Baal's priests, in order to cause her to apostatize ; 
but through the grace of God she valiantly resisted 
it. This greatly astonished the bailiff, that she did 
not pay more regard to his spiritual lords, and he 
said to Anneken : "Sir Albert, our chaplain, is such 
a holy fellow, that he ought to be mounted in fine 
gold ; and you will not hear him, but make sport 
of him ; hence you must die in your sins, so far are 
you strayed from God." 

Thus they suspended this God-fearing aged 
woman (who could neither read nor write) by her 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


873 



Anneken Hendriks, burned at Amsterdam, AD 1571 


hands, even as Christ had been, and by severe tor- 
turing sought to extort from her the names of her 
fellow believers, for they thirsted for more inno- 
cent blood. But they obtained nothing from Anne- 
ken, so faithfully did God keep her lips. Hence 
the bailiff preferred against her the charge of being 
infected with heresy, having forsaken the mother, 
the holy church, now about six years ago and hav- 
ing adopted the cursed doctrine of the Mennonists, 
by whom she had been baptized on her faith, and 
married a husband among them. Thereupon she 
was sentenced to be burnt alive. She thanked the 
lords, and said with humility, that if she had done 
amiss to any one, she asked them to forgive her. 
But the lords arose and made no reply. She was 
then tied on a ladder. Then she said to Evert the 
underbailiff, her neighbor: "Thou Judas, I have 
not deserved it, that I should be thus murdered." 
And she asked him not to do this any more, or God 
should avenge it on him. Thereupon Evert angrily 
said, that he would bring all those that were of her 
mind into the same trouble. Then the other bailiff 
came once more with a priest, tormenting her, and 
saying that if she did not renounce, she should go 


from this fire into the eternal. Thereupon Anneken 
steadfastly said: "Though I am sentenced and 
condemned by you, yet what you say does not come 
from God; for I firmly trust in God, who shall 
help me out of my distress, and deliver me out of 
all my trouble." They did not let her speak any 
more but filled her mouth with gunpowder, and 
carried her thus from the city hall to the fire into 
which they cast her alive. This done, the traitor 
Evert, the underbailiff, was seen to laugh, as 
though he thought he had done God an acceptable 
service. But the merciful God, who is the comfort 
of the pious, shall give this faithful witness, for 
this brief and temporal tribulation, an everlasting 
reward, when her stopped mouth shall be opened 
in fullness of joy, and these sad tears (for the 
truth's sake) shall be wiped away, and she be 
crowned with eternal joy with God in heaven. 

Concerning this, see a hymn in some old hymn 
books. 

Note.— We have obtained the sentence of death 
of this pious and valiant heroine of Jesus Christ, as 
the same was read to her in court ; as also, the rec- 
ord of her torture, which, as it appears, took place 


874 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


two weeks before her death ; which we shall place 
here one after the other, as they were copied by the 
secretary from the criminal records of the city. 


SENTENCE OF DEATH OF ANNEKEN HEYNDRICKS, 
SURNAMED DE VLASTER 

Whereas, Anna Heyndricks daughter, alias, 
Anna de Vlaster, formerly citizeness of this city, 
at present a prisoner here, unmindful of her soul's 
salvation, and the obedience which she owed to our 
mother, the holy church, and to his royal majesty, 
as her natural lord and prince, rejecting the ordi- 
nances of the holy church, has neither been to con- 
fession, nor to the holy, worthy sacrament, for six 
or seven years since [but has dared], to go into the 
assembly of the reprobated sect of the Mennonists, 
or Anabaptists, and has also held conventicles or 
meetings at her house ; and has further, about three 
years ago, forsaking and renouncing the baptism 
received in her infancy from the holy church, been 
rebaptized, and then received the breaking of bread 
according to the manner of the Mennonist sect, and 
was also married to her present husband in Men- 
nonist manner, by night, in a country house ; and 
though she, the prisoner, has, by my lords of the 
court, as well as by divers ecclesiastical persons, 
been urged and repeatedly admonished, to leave the 
afore-mentioned reprobated sect, she nevertheless 
refuses to do it, persisting in her obstinacy and 
stubbornness, so that she, the prisoner, according 
to what has been mentioned, has committed crime 
against divine and human majesty, as by said sect 
disturbing the common peace and welfare of the 
land, according to the import of the decrees of his 
majesty, existing in regard to this ; which misde- 
meanors, for an example unto others, ought not to 
go unpunished; therefore, my lord of the court, 
having heard the demand of my lord the bailiff, 
seen the confession of the prisoner, and having had 
regard to her obstinacy and stubbornness, have con- 
demned her, and condemn her by these presents, to 
be, according to the decrees of his royal majesty, 
executed with fire, and declare all her property 
confiscated for the benefit of his majesty aforesaid. 
Done in court, on the 10th of November, in the 
year 1571, in presence of the judges, by the advice 
of all the burgomasters, in my knowledge, as sec- 
retary, and as was subscribed : 

W. Pieterss. 

Concerning the torturing of the afore-mentioned 
Anna Heyndricks, and when this occurred 

She was tortured on the 27th of October, in the 
year 1571, according to the previous sentence of the 
judges, as appears from the record of the confes- 
sion. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam. Preserved in the 
archives there. N. N. 


WOLFGANG PINDER, A. D. 1571 

In this year 1571, Brother Wolfgang Pinder was 
apprehended through treachery, at Scharding, in 
Bavaria. The chancellor of Burkhausen was at 
Scharding at that time; he came himself, appre- 
hended and bound him, and took him thence to 
Burkhausen, where he had to resist many assaults 
and temptations from the host of false prophets, 
such as priests and others, who vehemently assailed 
him, in order that he should renounce his faith, and 
suffer himself to be instructed by them. To this end 
they used great diligence, and employed all manner 
of subtilty, to see whether they could not lead him 
astray, by fair, smooth words, by false doctrine, or 
by arrogance and threats ; but he allowed himself 
in no wise to be moved from the known way of the 
truth, into which God had helped him. When the 
priests therefore could accomplish nothing, the exe- 
cutioner was on hand the following night, who had 
to lay hold of him, and he was vehemently tortured, 
racked and stretched most lamentably, so that his 
hands swelled greatly and he could not stand on his 
feet, so cruelly and unmercifully had the children 
of Satan treated him, according to the manner of 
their father, who is full of wrath against the hu- 
man family, and works through his children all the 
works of wickedness, wherever he can. 

Once two priests came to said brother ; one of 
them talked with him, and admonished him to for- 
sake his error and be converted ; but brother Wolf- 
gang, though still suffering great pain from the 
torturing and racking, said to him with a manful 
hearty "O you priest, do repent, and turn from 
your sinful life, and false doctrine ; for you are a 
false prophet, and one of the rogues that go about 
in sheep's clothing, and cover their deceitfulness 
and rascality with long robes ; but inwardly you are 
ravening wolves, upon whom the Lord has pro- 
nounced many woes." At this the priest got angry 
and blushed, as did also the other ; and they could 
not accomplish their purpose with him. Finally 
they sent him back from Burkhausen to Scharding, 
where he had originally been apprehended. In 
both places they tried him hard, but could not ac- 
complish their purpose with him. When he could 
not be moved, and would not follow their false 
doctrine, he had to lay down his life. They unex- 
pectedly set a day, and he was taken out early in 
the morning to be executed, without any judicial 
sentence, which brother Wolfgang demanded. But 
such course of action on their part need not surprise 
one at all, for they have nothing to prefer against 
the pious, and cannot find any cause of death in 
them. 

Thus the executioner came, and removed the 
collar from his neck, but he seized him with fear 
and trembling. Brother Wolfgang knelt down, and 
commended his spirit into the hands of his Lord 
and God. The executioner handled him very badly ; 
he could not strike him properly, nor execute him 
with dispatch ; he finally, while he was lying on the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


875 



The decapitation of Wolfgang Binder of Scharding in Bavaria, AD 1571 


earth, had to hack or cut off his head as best he 
could ; so that he himself was in great fear, and in 
great peril of his life from the people present, so 
that he vowed, never again in his life to execute 
any brethren. There were many people present 
who saw how valiant and brave he was. This oc- 
curred shortly after Candlemas, in the year 1571. 
After he had been imprisoned almost half a year, 
he had thus to shed his blood for the faith in Jesus 
Christ, and passed over to the Lord's host, who 
must in faith, by patient suffering, take possession 
of the kingdom of joy. The traitor who had in- 
formed against him, subsequently fared very badly, 
as did also the chancellor, who had apprehended 
him; their good days soon came to an end, as it 
generally goes with such Judases, who sin against 
the pious, innocent sheep of the Lord, and thirst 
for their blood : misfortune overtakes them through 
the wrath of God, and does not suffer them to 
remain long at ease. 


JOOST VAN DER STRATEN, A. D. 1571 

Joost van der Straten, born at Teems in the dis- 
trict of Waes, in Flanders, a chairmaker by trade, 


was, when he was about seventy years old, taken 
from his work, and apprehended with his whole 
household, outside of Antwerp, on the Kiel (where 
now the fort stands), and they were, by the Span- 
iards, who apprehended them, brought to Antwerp. 
His wife and daughter, however, belonging to no 
religion, were released in course of time ; but upon 
Joost many tortures were inflicted, in order to 
make him apostatize. But as he remained stead- 
fast, after an imprisonment of three days, on 
Shrove Tuesday, A. D. 1571, his mouth was 
screwed open, and he was thus burnt alive in the 
marketplace, before the city hall, and then sus- 
pended from a stake in the gallows-field. The 
Duke of Alva was in Antwerp at that time. 


HANS VAN DER STRATEN A. D. 1571 

Shortly after Shrove Tuesday, in the year 1571, 
the Duke of Alva removed from Antwerp to Brus- 
sels, taking with him all the prisoners, those of the 
reformed as well as those of the Anabaptistic reli- 
gion, among which prisoners there were also this 
Hans van der Straten, aged about thirty-one years, 
born at Kortrijck, and his wife Tanneken, aged 


876 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


past seventeen years, born at Mechlin. As Hans 
firmly adhered to his faith and the divine truth, he 
was sentenced to death, and conducted outside of 
Brussels with his mouth screwed open, and there 
burnt alive to ashes, about the middle of Lent, in 
the year 1571. But his wife, to whom he had been 
married only six weeks, and who was still very 
young, finally, through many vexations and tor- 
tures, apostatized from her faith, and was put into 
a convent at Breda, from whence, at a favorable 
opportunity, she escaped, and went to Danswijck, 
where she, after having fully repented of her apos- 
tasy, again united with the church, and thereafter 
always led a pious life until her godly death. 


GERRIT CORNELISS, A. D. 1571 

In the year 1571, there was apprehended at Am- 
sterdam in Holland, for the truth's sake, as he was 
standing and working in a lighter-boat, a young 
brother, named Gerrit Corneliss. The bailiff bound 
him, and led him to the city hall, where, the next 
day, he was examined and interrogated concerning 
his faith, which he freely confessed ; but when they 
wanted him to name some of his fellow believers, 
he would not do it, and hence had to suffer the 
torture. When he had been tortured once, and was 
dressed again, his eyes were blindfolded with a 
cloth, and his hands having been tied together, he 
was drawn up by them, and left thus suspended, 
whereupon he was again stripped, and severely 
scourged with rods ; but no matter how he was tor- 
tured, he did not name any one. He was then laid 
upon the rack again, and while lying upon it, they 
caused him to be scourged with rods, urine poured 
into his mouth, and burning candles held under his 
arms; whereupon, having been stripped naked 
again, and his shirt bound before his nakedness, 
he was as before drawn up by his hands, with a 
weight attached to his feet, and leaving him thus 
suspended they went out, and returning after some 
time, they spitefully said to him, that if he would 
name no one, they should thus deal with him in 
this manner all day : but God (whom he thanked 
for it) kept his lips, that no one was brought into 
trouble by his speaking. In short, he was so tor- 
tured, that he could not walk, but had to be carried 
in a chair. 

Some days after, having been brought into court, 
he was mockingly crowned with a hat of flowers, 
and sentenced to be strangled and burned. While 
listening to this sentence he evinced joyf ulness and 
patience, until he arrived at the stake, where he 
very fervently prayed after this manner : "O Fa- 
ther and Lord, be gracious unto me ; let me be one 
of Your least lambs, or the least member of Your 
body. O Lord, who lookest down here from on 
high, and art a discerner of the hearts and of every 
hidden thing, before whom all things are to be 
accounted as nothing, Thou knowest my simple love 
towards Thee ; accept me, and forgive them that in- 
flict this suffering upon me." Having risen, he 


cried to the people : "O men, eternity is so long, 
Oh, yes, eternity is so long; but these sufferings 
here are over very soon. But the conflict here is so 
fierce and severe ; Oh, how fearful I am yet ; O 
flesh, bear and resist a little longer, for this is the 
last conflict." When the rope had been placed 
around his neck, he cried: "O heavenly Father, 
into thy hands I commend my spirit;" and with 
this he sweetly died and was then burnt. Thus he 
offered up his sacrifice, boldly standing up for the 
name of Christ, not fearing pain, suffering, shame, 
nor these worldly lords, but constantly striving 
valiantly unto death ; hence there shall also, at the 
last day, when the Lamb that was slain shall open 
the books of life, his name be found therein ; but 
the apostate shall be written in the earth, and the 
earth, with the works that are therein, shall be 
burned. Rev. 2:10; 5:6; 20:12; 3:5^ Jer. 17:13- 
II Peter 3:10. ' 

Note. — As we have obtained a true copy, from 
the book of criminal sentences of the city of Am- 
sterdam, of the death sentence as well as of the two 
tortunngs which this friend of God endured before 
his death, together with clear information when all 
this occurred, we deem it well to add the same 
here, so that no one may in anywise doubt the 
truth of what has been related, but may be fully as- 
sured of it. 


SENTENCE OF DEATH OF GERRIT CORNELISS, SUR- 
NAMED BOON 

Whereas Gerrit Corneliss, alias Gerrit Boon, 
boatman, citizen of this city, at present a prisoner 
here, unmindful of his soul's salvation, and the 
obedience which he owed to our mother the holy 
church, and to his imperial majesty, as his natural 
lord and prince, rejecting the ordinances of the 
holy church, has been neither to confession nor to 
the holy sacrament for ten years past, and has 
further dared repeatedly to go into the assembly 
of the reprobated sect of the Mennonists or Ana- 
baptists, and has also, about eight years ago, re- 
nouncing and forsaking the baptism received by 
him in his infancy from the holy church, been re- 
baptized, and afterwards repeatedly received the 
breaking of bread according to the manner of the 
aforesaid sect, and also attended the assembly of 
the aforesaid sect, without speaking to them 
when they met together ; and though he, the pris- 
oner, has, by my lords of the court as well as by 
divers ecclesiastical persons, been urged, and re- 
peatedly admonished, to forsake the afore-men- 
tioned reprobated sect, and to return to our moth- 
er, the holy church, he nevertheless refuses to do 
it, persisting in his obstinacy and stubbornness, so 
that he, the prisoner, according to what has been 
mentioned, has committed crime against divine and 
human majesty, as by said sect perturbing the 
common peace and welfare of the country ac- 
cording to the import of the decrees of his majesty 
existing in regard to this ; which misdemeanors 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


877 


for an example unto others, ought not to go un- 
punished ; therefore, my lords of the court, having 
heard the demand of my lord the bailiff, and seen 
the confession of the prisoner, and having had 
regard to his obstinacy and stubbornness, have con- 
demned said prisoner, and by these presents, do 
condemn him to be executed with fire, according to 
the decrees of his royal majesty, and declare all 
his property confiscated for the benefit of his maj- 
esty aforesaid. Done in court, on the 26th of June, 
A. D. 1571, in the presence of all the judges, by 
the advice of Cornelis Jacobss Brouwer, and Hen- 
drick Cornelis, burgomasters; I being present as 
secretary. Subscribed. 

W. Pieterss. 


THE TWO TORTURINGS OF GERRIT CORNELISS, AC- 
CORDING TO THE RECORD IN THE BOOK OF 
CRIMINAL SENTENCES AT AMSTERDAM 

He was tortured twice, namely, on the 27th of 
April, and on the 3rd of May, A. D. 1571, accord- 
ing to the sentence of the judges, as appears from 
the record of the confession. 

Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, preserved in the 
archives there. N. N. 


A LETTER FROM HENDRICK VERSTRALEN TO HIS 

WIFE, WRITTEN IN THE YEAR 1571, IN PRISON 

AT RIJPERMONDE, WHERE HE LAID DOWN 

HIS LIFE FOR THE NAME OF THE 

LORD 

The abundant great grace of God, that comes to 
us from the Father, through Christ His only Son ; 
and the immeasurable riches of the Holy Ghost, 
whereby we are now kept unto eternal life, among 
this wicked and perverse generation, this only and 
eternal God of all grace keep you, my dearest wife 
and sister in the Lord, my flesh, my bone, the dear- 
est among all creatures on earth. For this I have 
confessed more than once before the lords, if the 
whole world were mine, I would give it, if I could 
keep my wife and children with a good conscience ; 
but for the Lord's sake I must now contrary to 
nature forsake everything — the spirit must over- 
come the flesh. O my Janneken, my lamb, how 
hard it is for me to part from you and the children ; 
Oh, how deep you are buried in my heart ; which is 
now a great conflict for me ; may the Lord help me 
to gain the victory, so that the crown of life may be 
prepared for me, with all the elect saints of God ; 
who have forsaken everything for the Lord's sake. 
O my dear wife, my lamb, my love, I thank you 
from the depths of my soul, for your consoling let- 
ter, which you sent me ; and may the Lord grant 
His eternal life to all those that by counsel or deed 
lent their aid in the matter. The letter removed a 
greater weight from my heart, than all the riches 
on the face of the earth are worth. Oh, what a 
good thing it is, to remember the prisoners; how 
welcome came this Habakkuk to me, who fed me 


poor prisoner in my soul, here in the lion's den ; for 
a little morsel that comes from without strengthens 
me ten times more than what I have with me. 
Hist, of the Drag. 33, etc. 

my dear wife and sister in the Lord, I pray 
you for the Lord's sake, who am now bound for 
His sake, adhere to the truth, as the church at Ant- 
werp and Ghent stands. Keep with them that truly 
fear God, and the God of all comfort will be with 
you, yea, God and His holy church shall feed you, 
and my young lambs, of this I have no doubt. If 
you continue in the fear of the Lord, and cast all 
your care upon Him, though you are now poor; 
my sister and beloved wife, you will have much 
wealth, if you fear God and eschew sin, as I trust 
you will. Tob. 4:21. 

1 further pray you ; my dearest wife, take care as 
long as you live, of my young lambs, my Susanne- 
ken, my Abrahamken, and my Isaaken, that they 
may be brought up in the fear of God. Oh, with 
what scalding tears do I pray to my God, to let 
them grow up in His fear, or to take them to Him 
in their youth. 

O my dearest love on earth, Janneken Verstra- 
len, kiss all my children once for me, and tell my 
Susanken, that it is her father's wish, that she be 
obedient to her mother in the fear of God; and 
learn to be diligent to help her dear mother, to earn 
bread for her little brothers, and you my Janneken, 
my love, remember me your imprisoned husband, 
and bound for the eternal truth, and for the sake of 
the testimony of Jesus, in your prayers. This I 
pray you and all God-fearing brethren and sisters, 
to help us pray to God, that we may gain the victory 
of a good fight, that God will now teach my fingers 
to war and my arm to bend the bow of steel, so that 
by faith I may break through a troop, and leap by 
my God over a wall (Ps. 18:34, 29) ; so that we 
may say with Paul : The fight is fought, the course 
is finished, the crown of life is laid up for us. 
II Tim. 4 :8. Maeyken and I are determined to use 
such force in order to take the kingdom of God, 
that flesh and blood shall remain on the posts and 
stakes. We are not permitted to stay together ; how- 
ever we have been together three times, yet through 
strategy; the first time, when the disputer came 
from Ghent. Then all the lords came too, and I be- 
gan to say to them with what calamity they should 
be punished who now imbrued their hands in the 
blood of the innocent. Then they cast down their 
eyes ; but a flatterer began to speak, saying, that I 
had most gravely accused all the lords. In short, I 
felt that he was the one who was to dispute with 
me ; hence I finally feigned as though I could not 
defend myself, and spoke pleasantly to the lords, 
and requested that they should let Maeyken hear 
it; "for I see, said I, that you are anxious to help 
me, and in this wise you will have the trouble only 
once ; if you help one you help them both." They 
therefore consented to it ; then we began to defend 
ourselves, and it lasted until long in the afternoon. 
After dinner we met again, but Maeyken was not 


878 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


allowed to come to me. We then began to have 
some very, sharp words ; hence they changed their 
tactics, and began to speak pleasantly saying, 
whether I dared not do like Paul, and, contrary to 
my views, circumcise Timothy, and shave my head ; 
yea, secretly he said, whether I dared not with 
Judith cut off Holofernes' head, though it were 
not the truth, that I should do all that I should 
promise; whether it were not the same God, and 
whether one might now not lie as well as then, for 
the sake of some good end ; for it is written, he said : 
"If it be possible, live peaceably with all men." 
Rom. 12:18. I requested time for consideration, 
whether I could do it with truth and a good con- 
science. We then parted, and they said they de- 
sired nothing else. They returned another time, 
and asked to what conclusion I had come ; and I 
constantly sought to be with Maeyken ; but it could 
not well be. I then said : "Let us come together ; I 
hope always to do what is possible." Then Maey- 
ken came to me, and I presented the matter to her 
as they had done to me, whereupon she said : "How 
should this be? should the dog return to his own 
vomit?" II Peter 2:22. I then told them, that 
they should let me speak with Maeyken alone, and 
they permitted it. I then told Maeyken, that no 
man living should persuade me of this, that the 
priests' matters are right, "they know it well," said 
I, "but they seek to be rid of us ; but we will live 
and die together." Thus we said that we should 
consider the matter, with which they were sat- 
isfied. 

At another time they took Maeyken alone, but 
had me come too. When I came, and was there, 
I perceived that they showed us great friendship 
and promised much to set us into the street as free 
as we had ever been, for which they would pledge 
their souls; so that I finally became frightened, 
fearing that I might be led astray by their fair 
speeches. They also had more hope of winning me, 
than Maeyken ; hence I fell upon my knees, and en- 
treated them, not to trouble themselves any more 
with us ; for I have besought my God with many 
tears day and night, that He would keep me in His 
truth ; and hence I would live or die with the Lord. 
Then Maeyken leaped up for joy, for she had 
thought that I had given it up, since I had come in 
with a sad countenance. "Now I am glad," she 
said, "for I thought, that I should have to die 
alone." But when I perceived that Maeyken had 
such thoughts concerning me, I fell upon my knees, 
and said : "I am very sorry for this." Thus we shook 
hands, and kissed each other, and rejoiced greatly 
together, but our adversaries were greatly grieved. 
I would have written these things more neatly, but 
I cannot make these writing materials do good 
service. 

Furthermore, my dearest wife, my lamb, my 
love, I inform you, that I am little burdened in my 
conscience, the Lord be forever praised for it ; but 
all my sadness is caused by the bitterness of our 
parting. But, my dear lamb, this I would like to ask 


of you, because you have such a good nature that 
you could well live without a husband, that you 
henceforth stay only with my children; for often 
great sorrow arises from marrying again. And 
wherein I ever grieved you through my weakness, I 
ask your forgiveness, for the sake of the Lord's 
deep wounds and innocent death. Greet much all 
the God-fearing, and the babes that are nourished 
at the breasts of Zion in my name with the peace of 
the Lord. Serres, you broken bonehead, and J. van 
G. help to care for my poor widow and little or- 
phans, knowing, that therein you will not serve 
man, but God. I much greet H. C. M. and A. and 
L. and C. O how gladly I would write neatly, had 
I good materials. Adieu, by flesh and blood ; kiss 
Susanneken for me. O adieu for me, adieu, adieu, 
my dear wife. Pray our dear Lord for me for a 
blessed end. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM HENDRICK VERSTRALEN 
TO HIS WIFE 

O my dearest wife, my flesh, my bone, my dear 
friend, my lamb, not on my heart, but in my heart, 
and henceforth my poor widow, whom I must leave 
according to the pleasure, goodness, will and coun- 
sel of God, who has deemed it well that I should 
according to His pleasure lie in bonds here for His 
eternal truth's sake, which, my dear wife and sister 
in the Lord, I hope by the grace of God to seal with 
my death, to pay now the obedience which we owe 
to God, that is, the denying of ourselves, that we 
may love nothing above Him, neither father, nor 
mother, nor wife, nor child, nor our own life; or 
God threatens us with His eternal judgment. He 
that loveth aught more than me can not be my dis- 
ciple, much less my son ; and they that are not sons 
are bastards, who shall have neither part nor in- 
heritance with God. Eph. 5 :5. And this is the rea- 
son, my dear wife, that, though you and my little 
children lie so deeply in my heart, you must, against 
my nature, be cast out from it ; for you may not be 
an idol to me, nor I to you, as much as we love our 
dear-bought souls. I Cor. 6:20. Hence know by 
this, my dearest wife, that I will commend you and 
my little children to the great, almighty, and eternal 
God, who is rich in mercy over all them that fear 
and love Him, that through His goodness and great 
power He will bring you to the eternal, glorious 
and undefiled inheritance among all them that are 
sanctified. The God of all comfort, and Father of 
all grace, who is called the true Father in heaven or 
upon earth, the same grant you, my dear wife, jan- 
neken Verstralen, that through His unfathomable 
mercy, and immeasurable goodness, and the riches 
of His grace, may be strengthened by His Holy 
Spirit in the inner man, and that Christ, His bless- 
ed Son, may dwell in your heart by faith (Eph. 
3:16, 17), that you, my love, may be clothed with 
the cloak of righteousness and have the loins of 
your mind girt about with the girdle of truth, and 
the bond of love (6 :14; Col. 3 :14) ; yea, that the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


879 


basket of grapes and the bundle of myrrh may hang 
between both your breasts, in your heart, namely, 
Christ Jesus, whereby you may be preserved from 
the pestilence that walketh in darkness (Ps. 91 :6), 
and thus shine with an eternal crown, as a daughter 
born of royal seed, the living Word of God, and 
may gain the victory of a good fight : may this be 
done to the praise and glory of the almighty God, 
and to the salvation of your soul. Amen. 

This I, Hendrick Verstralen, your husband, pris- 
oner in the Lord for the eternal truth's sake and 
the testimony of Christ, send to you, my beloved 
wife and sister in the Lord, as a salutation and 
good wish of my heart, and as my last adieu. Adieu 
my dearest on earth ; adieu, sister in the Lord. Oh, 
strong is the truth; it conquers all things. I Esd. 
4:35. O my own rib, who are taken out of the 
middle of my body, how should I not love you, you 
my wife, who loves my soul more than my body, 
as I understand from your letter, which is a great 
joy to me, and a perpetual comfort; I have read it 
with many tears. I thank you much, my lamb, for 
your earnest solicitude for me. I further pray you, 
my dear wife, whom I have wedded honorably be- 
fore God and His church, now that our parting is 
at hand help us and all the God-fearing to pray 
and supplicate to God for a little while yet, until 
Maeyken, our dear sister, and I your husband, who 
now are still in our greatest conflict, under the 
bloody banner which Christ, the author of faith, 
and chief Captain, has borne Himself in the midst 
of His saints, that with Him, we may through our 
death, overcome our enemies, with God nail our 
flag to the mast, and with peace and rest enter into 
our chambers (Isaiah 26:20), and wait for the 
coming of our Lord, who shall through His grace 
raise us up from the earth unto life eternal. And, 
my dear lamb, my flesh, my blood, be patient in 
your tribulation; continue now with Judith and 
Anna the prophetess instant in prayer, serving your 
God day and night, in the house of the Lord, which 
is His church. See, my dear wife, I hope that you 
will do according to Paul's advice (I Cor. 7:32), 
now that you are unmarried ; that you will serve 
the Lord unhindered, and seek to please Him, and 
to be holy in soul and body. Hearken, my wife, 
my dearest love on earth, follow my advice for the 
Lord's sake; go and sell all that you can spare, 
which is little, and live as plainly as possible, for a 
widow can get along with very little ; and seek an 
honorable, quiet girl that does not keep company 
with youthful companions; and flee youthful lusts, 
and do the best with my little children. The Lord 
shall care for you ; He who gives the wild ass his 
food in the wilderness, when he cries for thirst, 
and who feeds the young ravens that cry unto God, 
as David says (Psalm 147:9), will also feed you, 
my dear lamb, when you, my widow, my chosen 
lamb, shall with my young orphans cry to God. 
Though your tears fall here upon earth, they shall 
not cease until they penetrate the clouds and appear 
before God. Then shall you find consolation, as 


David says: "The righteous cry, and the Lord 
heareth, and delivereth them out of all their trou- 
bles ; yea, the angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that fear him from the heart." Ps. 
34:17,7. 

O my dear wife, think of the words of Paul : The 
time is short ; I would fain spare you ; they that are 
married must be as though they were not. I Cor. 
7 :29. Thus, my dear sister in the Lord, Janneken 
Verstralen, the end of all things is now at hand, 
says Peter; the heavens shall be rolled together, 
and pass away as smoke, and the elements shall 
melt with fervent heat. I Pet. 4:7; Rev. 6:14; 
II Pet. 3:10. O what manner of person ought you 
then to be in all holy and chaste conversation. II 
Pet. 3:11. O my dear wife these words have some- 
times terrified me on account of my wicked, evil- 
desiring flesh, with which I am compassed about ; 
but I consoled myself with this, that God by chas- 
tisement should refine me in the fire of affliction, 
and thus be gracious unto me ; for I have loved His 
truth, though weakness cleaved to me. Hence I 
will now say with the prophet Micah: "I will bear 
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned 
against him." Micah 7:9. And with Sirach: "I 
will rather fall into the hands of the Lord, than 
into the hands of men; for his mercy is as great 
as he himself is." Sir. 2:18. He forgives sin, and 
helps in distress. Ps. 32 :5. Hence, my dear wife, 
be patient in the tribulation that is upon us both ; 
confess with Judith, that our punishment is less 
than our sins. Judith 8 :27. And He helps in dis- 
tress ; for he that humbles himself before the Lord, 
and confesses and forsakes his sins, shall obtain 
mercy ; but he that covers them shall not prosper. 
Prov. 28 :13. But if we confess our sins to the Lord, 
it is God that forgives them ; for we have a free and 
open fountain for sin and uncleanness, as Zech- 
ariah says, that is, Christ Jesus, who has bought us 
with His precious blood ; for the blood of our dear 
Lord Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins. 
See, my dearest wife, though now the sufferings of 
Christ abound in us, so our consolation much more 
abounds by Christ, that through His innocent death 
we shall have eternal life, if we continue steadfast 
in the fear of God unto the end, as I hope through 
the grace of God to do. And I also pray you, my 
Janneken Verstralen, my lamb, my love, that you 
will do so, and will remain an honorable widow, in 
prayer and supplication to God (I Tim. 5 :5), and 
in holiness, without which no one shall see the Lord 
(Heb. 12 :14) ; till you also are taken away by the 
Lord. O my dearest love on earth, [in] my fatherly 
heart, yours and my little children's, I wish you 
much good according to the soul. There are three 
of my little lambs with the Lord, and I hope 
through God's grace soon to be the fourth. O my 
dear wife, that I might, through the grace and 
power of God, be burnt alive twice in a pitch bar- 
rel, for you four that must remain behind, and you 
should now go with me to the Lord into rest ! What 
joy would it be to my fatherly heart, if I were sure 


880 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of the salvation of you all. Written with many 
scalding tears. This I pray you, my dearest wife, 
that you will remain an honorable and quiet wid- 
ow. Do not take this amiss from me ; true, it is my 
advice, but therefore no command ; but I seek it for 
the greater assurance of your salvation. 

Oh, how often has this happened, that widows 
whose husbands went before so valiantly, and so 
courageously gave their lives for the truth, by mar- 
rying again, have subjected themselves to many 
sorrows, some of them fallen into perdition, and 
some of them gone through life in great sorrow, 
sighing over those whom they now have. Hence, 
my dear lamb, I repeat it, think of the words of the 
apostle: "The time is short; I would fain spare 
you. For he would fain have wished, that all men 
had been even as he himself, seeing that through 
marriage much trouble comes into the flesh." I 
Cor. 7 :28, 29, 7. However, everyone has his par- 
ticular gift, the one this, the other that ; but do what 
you will, only that it be done in the Lord. v. 39. 
But I hope and trust in my God, that He will firmly 
keep you together with my three lambs, and pre- 
serve you, that you may not be taken ; and not suf- 
fer you, my dearest wife, to be tempted above 
that you are able ; for God knoweth how to deliver 
the godly out of temptation, but to reserve the 
wicked and ungodly unto the day of judgment to 
be punished. I Cor. 10:13; II Pet. 2:9. 

Hence, my dear lamb, I will commend you to 
the Lord, our God and helper in distress, and fur- 
ther to His holy church; may they together open 
their fatherly heart over you, my poor widow and 
young orphans. I further desire, my dear wife, 
that wherever it is convenient you greet the God- 
fearing brethren and sisters much in my name with 
the peace of the Lord ; and tell them, that I greatly 
desire of them all, that they remember us poor 
prisoners as their fellow brethren, and will help 
pray and supplicate to God, that we may wage the 
Lord's war, and [that He may] also help us to gain 
the victory, so that we may finish it to His praise 
and to our salvation ; and bid them all adieu in our 
name, if perhaps I can write no more. And to you, 
my dear wife, my flesh and my blood, I will also 
say adieu ; adieu, my helper in distress ; adieu, my 
faithful friend on earth. The Lord be praised, that 
gave you to me; you, my lamb, who have always 
comforted me in my tribulation. Adieu, my Susan- 
neken, my Abrahamken, my Isaaken ; adieu, Janne- 
ken, my dearest love upon earth, who have borne 
me six children, with three of whom I hope soon 
to be at rest. 

The almighty God, to whom nothing is impos- 
sible, but whose power is equal to everything, keep 
you, my chosen wife, with the other three innocent 
lambs, unto His eternal life. O my lamb, my Jan- 
neken Verstralen, may the almighty God grant us, 
my love, that we may with our children come to 
the Lord, to rejoice together before the throne of 
the Lamb and the Majesty of our God. Amen. 

May God keep you, my dear wife, in the sim- 


plicity of doves, the innocence of children, and the 
prudence of serpents, and bring you to His eternal 
inheritance. I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the rich Word of His grace. By me, your husband, 
Hendrick Verstralen, bound for the eternal truth, 
at Rijpermonde, with fetters on my legs 

Maeyken greets you and all the God-fearing 
much with the peace of the Lord. Oh, greet the 
household at D. much in our name ; I very affec- 
tionately desire to ask the old mother and her 
daughters, that they immediately gird up their loins 
with the girdle of truth, and put on the shoes of 
the Gospel, to enter into the camp of God, to the 
church, where now the Lord's war is waged. Come 
immediately, my dear old mother, with your young 
daughters, to bear the baggage of the Captain of 
our faith, namely, the knapsack of love, in which 
is the helmet of salvation, with a beautiful plume 
called faith and firm trust. Cover them with the 
mantle of righteousness, so that the beautiful hel- 
met of salvation may not rust, and the plume not 
become soiled, that is, that your faith and trust 
towards God may not fail, and you remain behind 
with the fainthearted and fearful. Though you see 
that all the tempests, storms and heavy rains fall 
upon the righteous, remember, my dear lamb, that 
all the God-fearing must have themselves enlisted 
and become soldiers under the bloody banner which 
Christ Jesus our chief Captain has borne in the 
midst of His saints, and under whose banner I 
now stand by the grace of God, and hope to fight 
valiantly together with Him, and to strive lawfully, 
as long as I can stand on my feet, and there is 
breath in me. 

Herewith I will bid you adieu, my dear friends 
D. and P., and the daughters, and commend you 
to God, and to the Word of His grace, hoping that 
you will follow. Adieu, my dear friends, at whose 
table I ate bread with joy for the last time, and we 
sang a hymn to the honour of God. Adieu, my dear 
friends, in hope that we shall eat bread together in 
the kingdom of God, and drink the oil of joy and 
the new wine. 

By me Hendrick Verstralen, in bonds for the tes- 
timony of the truth, on Palm Sunday, A. D. 1571. 
Hendrick Verstralen. 


A LETTER FROM HENDRICK VERSTRALEN, WRITTEN 
TO HIS BRETHREN AND SISTERS 

We prisoners and bound in the Lord for the eter- 
nal truth's sake, Hendrick Verstralen and Maeyken 
Deynoots, your very weak brother and sister in the 
Lord, wish our very dear and affectionately be- 
loved brethren and sisters, who in the Lord stand 
in like faith with us, and are gone out from Bab- 
ylon, no more to touch the unclean thing, nor to be 
yoked together any more with unbelievers, but are 
come unto Jerusalem, into the church of the living 
God, there to serve the Lord your God, around the 
slaughter house, where some of you are still spared 
as the prophet Jeremiah says (Jer. 11 :19), to be 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


881 


baptized; much consolation, gladness and joy in 
all your hearts, from God our heavenly Father, and 
this through Jesus Christ His only, eternal begot- 
ten Son, full of grace and truth, through this our 
High Priest and mercy seat, who offered Himself 
to God His Father for us, on the tree of the cross, 
that through His death He might prepare us the 
entrance to eternal life. Through this innocent 
and spotless Lamb, that took away our sins, we 
bow the knee of our heart day and night before God 
our heavenly Father, that He would spread His 
peace among you as a river, and confirm you, my 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, with His 
Holy Spirit, that you may be strengthened in the 
inner man, and keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace and love (Eph. 4:3), so that we, my 
dear brethren and sisters, who are bought and re- 
deemed with the precious blood of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, may together serve the Lord in holiness and 
righteousness acceptably before Him, as long as we 
are in this tabernacle. Amen. 

O thou camp of the Lord, thou city of the living 
God, may the Lord set watchmen everywhere on 
thy walls, that never hold their peace day nor night 
dsa. 62:6) ; but that thy teachers may, as David 
says, be filled with much blessing, and gain one vic- 
tory after another, so that the vineyard of the Lord 
may be planted, and thou Jerusalem be built, thou 
temple of the Lord, though in a sorrowful time. 
Let every one gird his sword to his side, and let 
him build with the one hand, and with the other let 
him hold the spear, so that the enemies who would 
prevent our working may be repelled, so that Zion 
alone may be shown prepared. O my dear brethren 
and sisters, we wish you from God, that you may be 
built together a spiritual house and habitation of 
God; that God's law may be written in all your 
hearts, and His commandment be in your mind, 
and you thus remain sons and daughters of God in 
whom He may dwell and walk : that He would keep 
you, that you will never touch the unclean thing, 
but may approve yourselves in all things as minis- 
ters of God, so that the name of the Lord may be 
praised from the rising of the sun to the going 
down of the same. O brethren and sisters, that 
your light may arise as the morning star, and you 
remain a royal priesthood, a holy nation, and a 
peculiar people, so that you, dear brethren and 
sisters, may everywhere lift up holy hands to God, 
and offer up to Him t .ie fruit of your lips, spirit- 
ual sacrifices, so that the vial of the Lord may be 
filled with incense from the prayers of the saints. 
I Tim. 2:8; Heb. 13:15; Rev. 5:8. O thou bride 
of the Lamb, who from love of your Bridegroom 
Christ must be zealous unto death, and bring forth 
the fruits of righteousness with many sorrows and 
pains, and be sick of love to Him ; may the Lord 
our God lay His left hand under your head, and 
embrace you with His right hand (Cant. 2 :6) , thou 
Eve regenerated by Christ your husband through 
the incorruptible seed of the living Word of God 
proceeding from the fatherly heart. O thou beau- 


tiful daughter of the almighty Father, who are now 
presented to His Son Jesus, the Lord from heaven, 
and through faith in Him shalt have eternal life; 
may the eternal, almighty Father richly pour out 
upon you His blessing and the power of the 
Holy Ghost, and make you fruitful and fit for 
every good work, so that you may win His Son 
Jesus many sons and daughters, that His winepress 
may soon be filled through the number of His 
saints (Rev. 6:11), and you may thus the sooner 
see the destruction of our enemies,. who are in- 
numerably many, and have bent our back, and walk 
over us as over a street, and reward us evil for 
good, because they cannot build with us on the 
spiritual house of the Lord, because they are un- 
circumcised of heart and carnally minded. Against 
these our enemies, may God arm us and you, my 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, with the 
armor of righteousness, [and grant] that we may 
be shod with the Gospel of peace, and our loins be 
girt about with truth, always having the two edged 
sword of the Spirit at our side, thus preserving 
our helmet of salvation with the shield of faith, 
guarding the knapsack of love, and thus following 
the Captain of our faith, as Christian soldiers, 
boldly waging the war of the Lord, under the 
bloody banner of Christ; so that we, our dear 
brethren and sisters, may through the grace of God 
gain the victory of a good fight in godly conflict, 
and obtain the crown of eternal life. Amen. 

We prisoners in the Lord, and bound for the 
eternal truth's sake and the testimony of Jesus, 
Maeyken Deynoots, and Hendrick Verstralen, 
herewith greet all our brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, and send you this brief letter from the depth 
of our heart, as our last adieu ; hereby taking affec- 
tionate leave from all dear brethren and sisters, 
especially those of you who are known to us, and 
have shown us much good by your consoling ex- 
hortations, in our tribulation, where we are im- 
prisoned for the eternal truth's sake. Hence we 
again entreat all you beloved who shall see our let- 
ter, or hear it read, before we are out of the flesh, 
that you will help us heartily to beseech the Lord, 
that we may overcome even unto death, to the 
praise and glory of the almighty God, and to our 
salvation, and to your boast in the day of Christ. 
Phil. 2:16. Adieu, all my dear brethren and sis- 
ters. Adieu, all that love the Lord and His appear- 
ing. Adieu, H. P. H. de R. and D. P. and Adam 
and his wife, and B. P. and S. and J. van H., our 
faithful helpers in distress. Adieu, K. and L. B. 
and M. S. and G. and her sister Janneken. Dear 
friends, lay it to heart to pray to God for us, for 
we ask it of you with tears. H. de R., I pray you 
greet much in my name with the peace of the Lord, 
for an adieu, L. de C, and your servant maid and 
your friend C, and all my dear brethren. Oh, that 
God would grant that the two Abrahams might 
each make a Sarah out of their rib; this is my 
heart's wish. Bid them adieu too, Grietjen and 
Judith. Adieu T. de S. and your wife, our L. S. G. 


882 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


as I may boldly call you ; my dear brother, my dear 
friend, adieu; however, I hope to remember you 
yet, if it is possible. Acquit yourself valiantly. 
Written on St. Georges day, A. D. 1571. 

A LETTER WHICH MAEYKEN DEYNOOTS WROTE TO 
HER BRETHREN AND SISTERS, WHILE IMPRIS- 
ONED, IN THE YEAR 1571, AT RIJPERMONDE, 
WHERE SHE ALSO HAD TO LAY DOWN HER 
LIFE FOR THE TRUTH'S SAKE 

The abundant grace and mercy of God our heav- 
enly Father, through His only, eternally begotten 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered up Him- 
self for us to God His heavenly Father, as a pro- 
pitiation for our sins, that He might deliver us 
from the future wrath that shall come upon all 
them that have not obeyed the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlast- 
ing destruction (II Thess. 1 :8) ; but may wisdom, 
power, and the consolation of the Holy Ghost, 
which proceeds from both the Father and the Son, 
this only eternal and almighty God, by whom every 
good and perfect gift is given, always abide with 
us and you, my dear brethren and sisters, so that 
He may through grace make us all together fit 
through Himself, that we may be found worthy in 
the day of His coming. Amen. Luke 21 :36. 

My affectionately beloved brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, I wish you from the depth of my heart, 
for an adieu, that you may always prosper in soul 
and body. I Maeyken, your weak sister in the 
Lord, thank you from the very depth of my heart 
for the great love that you are showing us ; I wish 
before God, that the same may also be done to you 
in distress, my dear brethren and sisters in the 
Lord. Excuse me, that I do not write more with 
my own hand; for I am very unskilled therein. 
However, I did not deem it to be necessary; for 
Hendrick, our dear brother, my fellow prisoner in 
the Lord, has done it so well for us both ; I wish 
you the same before God, my dear brethren and 
sisters in the Lord. Let it seem to you as though I 
had written it ; my heart's wish is, that we may seal 
it with our blood, to the praise and glory of the holy 
name of the Lord, and to the salvation of our souls. 
With my own hand I bid adieu to all my dear breth" 
ren and sisters in the Lord. Adieu ; always adhere 
valiantly to the eternal truth. Adieu. Pray the 
Lord for us ; I pray day and night for you in my 
weakness. Adieu, G. C. N. T. and your wives. 
Adieu, B. J. B. P., my dear sisters. Adieu, Andries 
M. Adieu, adieu ; receive this in good part. 

ANOTHER LETTER FROM MAEYKEN DEYNOOTS, TO 
HER BROTHER AND SISTER 

I prisoner of the Lord salute you from the in- 
most of my heart, my very dear and affectionately 
beloved brother and sister J. and Andries who are 
now in great tribulation and sorrow on account of 
the sad parting. Oh, be patient in all your tribu- 
lation, continuing instant in prayer, and rejoicing 


in hope, which maketh not ashamed, my dear 
brother and sister in the Lord. Uh, it is a good 
thing to be patient, and wait for the help ot the 
Lord; for he that fears God is comforted after 
temptation, and after chastisement he finds favor. 
The Lord does hide His face for a moment, but 
with everlasting kindness will He have mercy on 
us. Isa. 54:8. Hence, my dear sister Janneken, 
console yourself with the Lord's holy Word; 
though you are now as it were a forsaken and 
heartstricken wife, it is but a little while, and 
your sorrow shall be turned into everlasting joy ; 
for thy maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts 
is His name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of 
Israel; the God of the whole earth shall He be 
called, verse 5. O you warrioress of God, contend 
valiantly against your flesh and blood, and continue 
steadfast unto death, and there shall be given you 
the crown of eternal life, with full joy, which no 
man shall take from you. Andries, my dear brother, 
that you parted from us with great sorrow, and that 
you desire to be with us, this you must commit to 
the Lord, for everything must have its due time. 
They did not lack the power, when they said to me : 
"Woman, you must come with us." I said : "In the 
name of the Lord." They greatly desired you. I 
said : "If it were the Lord's will, you would get 
him." I went again very willingly; then I saluted 
our dear brethren with the kiss of peace, since love 
impelled me to it. I believe my brother and fellow 
prisoner has informed you how it further went, 
and of the proceedings with us, as far as known to 
him; I cannot write anything concerning it, for 
want of paper. My dear brother and sister, I thank 
you heartily for your good exhortation, faithful 
warning, and sweet consolation, and wish before 
God, that the same may be done to you in your dis- 
tress. I read it with many tears, and time and again 
thanked the Lord, who through His great grace re- 
members His poor, weak, imprisoned and bound 
children, and does not forget them. Comfort and 
admonish one another with the same words, my 
dear brother and sister in the Lord, and kiss one 
another once for me; I hope to do as you said. 
Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and to 
the comforting Word of His grace, and herewith 
bid adieu to all dear brethren and sisters in the 
Lord; I know of no one that is known co me, 
whether he be far or near, of whom I do not think! 
Adieu with an inward holy kiss of love and peace. 
Adieu, and pray the Lord for us ; I pray day and 
night for you. Adieu, my dear brethren and sisters. 
Adieu, adieu, adieu, with tears : adieu, keep firmly 
on, till you are taken hence. This adieu I write to 
you all. Excuse this simple letter. 

Written by me your weak sister in the Lord, in 
the castle of Rijpermonde where I am imprisoned 
and bound with iron chains or fetters, for the eter- 
nal truth's sake. I long for the day when I shall 
offer up my sacrifice ; however, I hope to wait for 
it with patience. A. D. 1571. 

Maeyken Deynoots. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


883 


ADRIAEN JANSS HOEDEMAECKER, AND JELIS DE 

BACKER, BOTH BURNT ALIVE AT THE SAME STAKE, 

FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS, IN RIJSSEL, 

A. D. 1570. THREE LETTERS OF ADRIAEN 

JANSS HOEDEMAECKER, WRITTEN IN 
PRISON AT RIJSSEL 

The first letter from Adriaen Janss Hoedemaecker, 
to his wife 

The love of God the Father, the grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion of the Holy 
Ghost, be with you my dear wife and sister in the 
Lord, now and forever ; this I wish you from the 
depth of my heart as an affectionate salutation. 
Amen. After this good wish of my heart and Chris- 
tian salutation, let me inform you, my dear and 
in God beloved wife how it still stands with me, 
that I am still well content and of good cheer, the 
Lord be praised for His grace which He shows me, 
and I hope by His grace, that He will help and keep 
me unto the end, since with Jeremiah, I have com- 
mitted to Him my cause against my adversaries, 
who are set against me and against the Lord, since 
I am imprisoned for the name of the Lord, because 
with the prodigal son, I have arisen to confess my 
guilt before my God, against whom I have sinned 
and transgressed, who graciously received me, 
when I sought and entreated Him with tears. And 
for this reason they persecute and gainsay us, be- 
cause we have received mercy from God, as the 
Lord has spoken and declared, saying: "If ye 
were of the world, the world would love you, but 
because I have chosen you out of the world, there- 
fore the world hateth you." John 15:19. Mark, 
my dear wife, the words of our Lord, what is the 
reason that we are hated; so that in the time of 
hatred and persecution we may comfort ourselves 
with the grace of the Lord, as also the apostle 
Peter testifies, saying : "Because we no longer run 
with them to that excess of riot, as are lascivious- 
ness, lusts, excess of wine, revelings, banquetings, 
and abominable idolatries." I Peter 4 :3, 4. There- 
fore does the world speak evil of you: therefore 
say they as is written in the Book of Wisdom : "Let 
us lie in wait for the righteous ; for his life is not 
like other men's, his ways are of an other fashion ; 
he declares our ways to be sin, and avoids us like 
filth ; therefore he is grievous unto us ; we will tor- 
ment and examine him with despitefulness, that 
we may know his meekness, and prove his patience, 
and let us condemn him with the most shameful 
death." Wisd. 2:12. This has ever been the rea- 
son, why the righteous have been evil spoken of, 
envied, persecuted, despoiled of their goods, cast 
into prisons and bonds, drowned, beheaded, and 
burned, as we may first read concerning Abel, as 
John testifies with these words: "Let us love one 
another, not as Cain, who was of that wicked one. 
and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him ? 
Because his own works were evil, and his brother's 
righteous." I John 3:12. Hence the apostle says : 
"Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you." 


v. 13. Christ declared to the Jews: "Many good 
works have I shewed you from my Father; for 
which of these do ye stone me?" John 10:32. 
Hence, my dear, beloved wife, it will not fail, as the 
apostle says, that all who will live godly in Christ 
Jesus will have to suffer persecution ; for evil men 
and seducers always wax worse and worse, deceiv- 
ing, and being deceived. II Tim. 3:12, 13. Hence, 
the righteous may always prepare themselves for 
suffering and tribulation; for they are led forth 
unto death as sheep for the slaughter ; we that live 
are constantly delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, 
and are always in peril to die every day for our 
glorying which we have in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
We may therefore well prepare ourselves for suf- 
fering, even as the Lord told His apostles : "In the 
world ye shall have tribulation ; yea, the wjorld shall 
rejoice, but ye shall weep and be sorrowful ; for a 
woman that is in travail hath sorrow, because her 
hour is come." John 16:33. Thus we must also 
bring forth Christ with sorrow in this world. 
Therefore the apostles strengthened and en- 
couraged the churches, that they must with tribu- 
lation and suffering enter into the kingdom of God, 
even as our head Christ went before, as is written 
concerning Him in the prophets. For the kingdom 
of God suffereth violence, and the violent take it 
by force (Matt. 11 :12), as I now experience my- 
self ; for we did indeed formerly have some temp- 
tations such as are common to man, but now we 
must strive unto blood. I Cor. 10:13; Heb. 12:4. 
For I may now well say with the apostle, that I 
bear in my body the marks of the Lord. Gal. 6:17. 
For they have scourged me three times, until the 
blood flowed, and this that I should betray my fel- 
low brethren ; but the Lord by His grace kept my 
lips. I was suspended by my hands so that I did 
not touch the ground. Yea, my dear beloved wife, 
I was seized with great fear so that I could hardly 
stand it, when they scourged me the third time; 
hence I thought of the words of the apostle who 
says : "The Lord will not suffer you to be tempted 
above that ye are able." I Cor. 10:13. Then they 
desisted though they threatened to torture me ; and 
they said that they would rend my limbs asunder, 
or I should tell them who had associated with me, 
and who were my fellow brethren ; but the Lord did 
not let them have their will this time; what they 
will do yet, the Lord knows, for to Him every 
thing is known. 

My dear and in God beloved wife, faint not at 
my tribulation, which ought to be a comfort to you, 
that the Lord has called me hereunto, that He 
wants to magnify His name by me, and that I am 
counted worthy to suffer shame for His name, and 
to seal His Word with my blood before this wicked 
and adulterous generation. I hope to go before you 
in truth, and before all my dear brethren and sis- 
ters who still walk in like peril ; that they may take 
an example from me, not in anywise to forsake the 
Lord in tribulation, but firmly to cleave to Him, 
who (though He is great), will not forsake His 


884 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


own in distress who trust in Him, and serve Him in 
truth ; for His eyes are upon the righteous, and His 
ears are open unto their cry, yea, the Lord is the 
strength of the righteous in the time of trouble. 
Psalm 34:15; 37:49. 

Herewith I will commend my dear and in God 
beloved wife to the Lord, who is able to keep your 
treasure, and to give you an inheritance among all 
them which are sanctified. Acts 20:32. Adieu, my 
dear wife, whom I love in truth, adieu. For I sus- 
pect that the parting is close at hand; for I wait 
from day to day for the redemption of my body, 
and to enter into godly rest to my fellow brethren 
that were also slain for the truth. Rev. 6:11. 

Greet the brethren and sisters in my name with 
the peace of the Lord. 

Written in my bonds, by me, 

Adriaen Janss, 
Unworthy prisoner in the Lord. 

The second letter from Adriaen Janss Hoede- 
maecker to his wife 

I, Adriaen Janns, imprisoned at Rijssel for the 
name of our Lord, and the testimony of my con- 
science, wish my dear and in God beloved wife, 
much grace, mercy and peace, from God the heav- 
enly Father, who is the true Father in heaven and 
earth ; that He would grant you to be strengthened 
with might by His Spirit, and Christ to dwell in 
your hearts, and to be rooted in through love. Eph. 
3 :14. This I wish you, together with the consola- 
tion of the Holy Spirit, as a Christian salutation 
and affectionate adieu. 

Furthermore, after all proper and Christian salu- 
tation, I hereby inform you my dear wife in the 
Lord, that J am well content, and have a good con- 
science, the Lord be praised forever for His grace, 
who has kept me in His grace until this hour, and I 
hope that through His grace He will keep me unto 
the end, according to His promise, for He says: 
"Though a mother forsake her child, yet will I not 
forsake thee." Isa. 49:15. Yea, the Lord says: "I 
will not leave you comfortless." Herewith, my 
dear wife, I comfort myself when I am tempted. I 
further cannot conceal from my dear wife the 
many tears which I shed when I think of your sor- 
row, which I presume you have on my account, be- 
cause we must now give up our Christian fellow- 
ship which we have had together by faith. Yes, my 
dear and beloved wife in the Lord, to every thing, 
says Solomon, there is a time: "A time to meet, 
and a time to part." Eccl. 3:1. Hence my dear wife 
in the Lord, what more godly parting can there be 
than for the name of the Lord ; and though we now 
must part, I hope that I shall go before you, and 
that you will also follow to that place where there 
will be no more parting, for there we shall ever be 
with the Lord. I Thess. 4:17. Herewith you may 
comfort yourself, even as the apostle Paul com- 
forted the church at Thessalonica. I further be- 
seech and exhort you by the mercies of God, that 
you take heed unto the vocation in which the Lord 


has called you, and that you walk as you have re- 
ceived the Lord, with all humility and meekness, 
and walk in the love of God, and of your neighbor, 
Eph. 4:1; Col. 2 :6. Always remember the poor 
saints where you live ; give according to what the 
Lord has bestowed upon you; continue also in 
prayer day and night : adhere firmly to the doctrine 
of Christ, and whatsoever you have heard and re- 
ceived let it abide in you ; and the God of love and 
peace shall be with you. II Corinthians 12:11. And 
remember me as long as I am here ; I hope not to 
forget you as long as I am in this tabernacle, with 
my prayers to God. Though with my body I am ab- 
sent from you I am nevertheless present with the 
spirit and remember you with tears. 

Herewith adieu, my dear wife in the Lord, adieu, 
till we get in the kingdom of God to our heavenly 
Father. Written with tears by me, 

Adriaen Janss. 

Greet the friends much in my name, especially 
my S. J. I would write more, but there is no good 
opportunity here for writing. Written to my dear 
wife. 

The third letter from Adriaen Janss Hoedemaecker 
written to the brethren and sisters 

I, Adriaen Janss, imprisoned at Rijssel for the 
name of the Lord and the testimony of my con- 
science, wish my cordially beloved brethren and 
sisters, my companions of the faith in the kingdom 
of God, and in the patience of our. Lord Jesus 
Christ, much grace, mercy and peace from God the 
heavenly Father, who is the true Father of all mer- 
cies, and the God of all comfort, who comforts us 
in all our tribulation; and from Jesus Christ our 
Lord, Redeemer and Saviour, who delivered us 
from this present, proud world, according to the 
will of God His Father ; together with the power 
and consolation of the Holy Ghost, and a steadfast 
mind unto the end of your life. This I wish you as 
a Christian salutation in the Lord, and as an affec- 
tionate adieu. 

Furthermore, after all proper and Christian sal- 
utation, my dear and in God beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, I cannot forbear, because of the 
fellowship which we through the Gospel had to- 
gether in the Lord, to write you briefly, for the 
comfort and joy of your heart, concerning the 
grace which I have received from God, so that I 
am of good cheer and well content (the Lord be 
praised for the grace He shows me), so that I hope 
by His grace, that He will make my cause termi- 
nate to His praise, for which I daily pray Him. 
For I desire nothing else than that His name might 
be magnified by my weak members, and ask my 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, with me to 
beseech God, so to strengthen me, that I may tri- 
umph in Christ Jesus our Lord; I hope that He 
will hear your prayer and mine. For the prophet 
David says: "The Lord will fulfill the desire of 
them that fear him ; he will also hear their cry and 
will save them." Ps. 145 :19. Since I desire noth- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


885 


ing but what tends to His praise, I hope that He 
will hear us. I trust I shall not forget you in my 
prayers to God, but to remember you, even as be- 
hooves the members of the body in Christ ; and as 
I, when I was still with you, served you with the 
little gift which I received from God, so I must also 
exhort you yet in my imprisonment, and say with 
the apostle: "I the prisoner of the Lord beseech 
you that ye walk worthy of the vocation where- 
with ye are called of God, with all lowliness and 
meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one an- 
other in love ; endeavoring to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace." Ephesians 4:1-3. 
Yea, as ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so 
walk ye in Him, rooted and built up in Him (Col. 
2 :6, 7) ; and always remember the former days, in 
which ye were illuminated (Heb. 10:32), and what 
promises you made to the Lord, when you entered 
into covenant with Him, so that you should serve 
the Lord in holiness and righteousness all the days 
of your life. Hence, my dear brethren and sisters, 
walk faithfully before your God, who called you 
in His grace out of darkness into His marvelous 
light, who has received you as sons and daughters, 
enlightened you with His Holy Spirit, and prom- 
ised you His kingdom. 

Hence I repeat it, walk worthy of your voca- 
tion, in the love of God and your neighbor; love 
one another, as behooves brethren and sisters, and 
let not your hearts be overcharged with the cares 
of this life (Luke 21 :34), that your hearts do not 
become alienated ; for through many cares the heart 
becomes estranged from God. Therefore my dear 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, I say with Christ : 
"Watch, and pray day and night to God, and be 
like unto men that wait for their lord ; that, when 
he knocks, they may open unto him immediately. 
Oh, how blessed are those servants whom the Lord 
shall find thus watching: they shall enter in with 
him into the kingdom of God, and possess all 
things." Luke 12:36, 37. Herewith I will commend 
my dear brethren and sisters to the Lord, who is 
able to keep your treasure, and to give you an in- 
heritance among all them which are sanctified. 
Adieu my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
adieu, till we get into the kingdom of God. It is 
very inconvenient here for writing. 

Written by me, imprisoned for the true testi- 
mony of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Adriaen Janss Hoedemaecker. 


TWELVE CHRISTIANS AT DEVENTER : YDSE GAUKES, 
DIRCK VAN WESEL, WITH ANNEKEN AND JAN- 
NEKEN, THEIR WIVES; HARMEN THE DYER, 
BRUYN, ANTHONIS THE WEAVER, CLAES OP- 
REYDER, LIJSBET AND CATHARINA SOM 
ERHUYS, LIJNTGEN JORIS, AND TRI J NT- 
GEN HER DAUGHTER, A. D. 1571 

In the year 1571, on the 11th of March, in the 
night, the Spaniards at Deventer (having held a 
tournament during the day) went out with swords, 


halberds, guns, and many other implements, to ap- 
prehend the sheep of Christ. They went through 
many houses, searching in some streets from house 
to house ; and all whom they could find they appre- 
hended, and fettered and ironed them, saying : "O 
you heretical dogs, because you deny the Roman 
Catholic faith you will have to die." For a few 
days the gates were closed, and there was read by 
the sound of the town bell, the proclamation, that 
no one should conceal any, and if any one should 
know of any that were concealed, that he should re- 
port them. But this order was not obeyed; for 
many were concealed, who secretly fled, and left 
their goods for a spoil. In all there were appre- 
hended twelve, namely, Ydse Gaukes, Dirck van 
Wesel, with Anneken and Janneken, their wives ; 
Harmen the dyer, Bruyn, and Anthonis the weav- 
er, Claes Opreyder, Lijsbet and Catharina Somer- 
huys, Lijntgen Joris, and Trijntgen her daughter ; 
all of whom at first when they were apprehended, 
were valiant, and confessed their faith ; but some 
were greatly afraid according to the flesh, and 
abandoned the faith even before they were tor- 
tured. (In the torture they were drawn up, their 
hands tied behind their back and heavy weights of 
iron, or cannon balls, suspended to their feet). 
Several others did indeed remain valiant in the 
torture, but subsequently also apostatized from the 
faith; and four remained valiant throughout. 

Thus it happened that they were frequently vis- 
ited, and that they (who had denied the faith with 
the mouth) were very sorrowful, and promised and 
said, that if the Lord should grant them grace so 
that they should get out, they would return to the 
truth. And when on the 20th of May (when they 
offered up their sacrifice on the 25th) a friend came 
to them, they asked very closely what news he 
brought. The friend replied, that the news was 
bad ; he feared that they all should have to die ; in 
short, much was said, and the friend remarked : "I 
love you, so much that I would you were all out of 
all this, and that I could be imprisoned in your 
place ;" so that the prisoners became very sorrow- 
ful, and wept most bitterly, and said to the friend : 
"It is best that you go, on account of the Span- 
iards." V 

Thus it came to pass on the 24th of May, in the 
evening, that monks came to them, to speak with 
them, that they should prepare themselves, since 
they were to die the next day. The monks went 
away at twelve o'clock in the night, but returned 
at four o'clock in the morning. There were two 
men, Dirck van Wesel and Harmen the dyer ; and 
four women, Dirck van Wesel's wife, Ydse Gau- 
kes' wife, and Somerhuys' two daughters, Lijsbet 
and Catharina ; who did not hearken to the monks, 
but, according to all that could be seen and heard, 
cleaved to the eternal truth. First, when they came 
out of the prison, with a very joyful countenance 
and smiling, they, bowing their heads, said adieu to 
a friend whom they knew well, and who had visited 
them in prison ; and he smiled to them in return. 


886 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Twelve persons beheaded or burned at Deventer in 1571 


Thus did at first the four women; but the two 
brethren, Bruyn and Anthonis the weaver, who 
were brought out with them, were very sorrowful, 
and did not speak; the women, however, spoke 
much and greatly reproved the monks that were 
with them ; yea, they were heard to say, that Christ 
their Bridegroom and Shepherd had thus gone be- 
fore, and they would follow Him as His own sheep, 
and they kissed one another very affectionately, the 
two sisters having hold of each other's hand, and 
began to sing: "My God, whither shall I go?" 
Then they had to separate, and six of them were 
put into the wagon. When they arrived at the 
scaffold, they brought Catharina, the younger sis- 
ter, upon the scaffold first. She was very bold in 
speaking, and said : "Know, ye citizens, that it is 
not for any evil, but for the truth." When she had 
ascended the scaffold, her sentence was read, which 
was as follows : "If she would abide in the Cath- 
olic church, she should be executed with the sword ; 
but if not, should be burnt alive." She was then 
asked, whether she would abide in the Catholic 
church. She answered: "No; I want to abide in 
the truth." They said- "Then you will be burnt 


alive." "I do not care for that," she said; "you 
deal in lies ;" and she spoke very boldly. She was 
then taken from the scaffold again, and put into the 
wagon; and her mouth was closed, so that she 
could not speak any more. Then the two brethren 
(namely, Bruyn and Anthonis) were one after the 
other brought upon the scaffold, and were both be- 
headed, without speaking anything, except that the 
one was heard to say: "O Lord, be merciful to 
me." They then returned to the tower, and fetched 
Dirck and Harmen. These both had their mouth 
gagged, so that they could not speak; but they 
made many signs on the way by nodding, and 
smiling and were very bold, so that the people were 
astonished. 

Thus these two were brought upon the scaffold, 
and they frequently smiled and nodded to those 
whom they knew, and who stood before them. Har- 
men then fell upon his knees and prayed to the 
Lord ; but as he made it too long for them, the ex- 
ecutioner pulled him up, and he boldly placed him- 
self at the stake. While the executioner was fasten- 
ing Harmen, Dirck kneeled, and called upon the 
Lord from the heart; for they could not speak. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


887 


Then Dirck arose and affectionately embraced 
Harmen as he stood at the stake, kissed him, and 
pointed with his hand up to heaven. Thereupon 
Dirck went with a joyful and smiling countenance, 
and stationed himself with his back to the stake, 
and cast up his eyes to heaven. When they had 
been thus fastened to the stakes, the four women 
were brought from the wagon to the scaffold, and 
saw the two standing at the stakes. They were very 
glad and smiled, folded their hands, cast up their 
eyes to heaven, kissed one another, and all of them 
fell upon their knees, and each placed herself very 
boldly with her back to the stake. While they thus 
kissed one another, there came a noise almost as if 
it had been thunder or a wagon without horses, 
and it seemed to come from the Brink, and roared 
before the wagon, so that the people fell over one 
another, and no one knew what it was, so that a 
great fear arose. The Spaniards said that it thun- 
dered. Previously, when the two were beheaded, 
the monks made a speech, that everyone should 
keep his children away from this people, and that 
no one should become offended, though they should 
now be burnt, which was the pleasure of the royal 
majesty; and that no one should make any dis- 
turbance. They had no sooner concluded this 
speech, than there came such a noise, even as 
though it came from the main street beyond, so 
that the people did not know what to do with them- 
selves for fear. Hence the Spaniards began to cry 
alarm, and the drums also began to sound the 
alarm ; but it all passed off without any harm be- 
ing done. Some said that they saw a light over the 
scaffold, like a dark sun ; this, however, I did not 
see, but I saw and heard the noise. Moreover, 
when they were standing at the stakes, straw and 
wood were laid around them, so that only their 
heads were visible. While thus standing at the 
stakes, they made many a friendly sign to those 
whom they knew, by smiling, by nodding, and by 
casting up their eyes to heaven ; so that the Span- 
iards said : "To whom mav they nod thus ?" And 
the one to whom they nodded stood by the Span- 
iards in front of the scaffold, and heard the Span- 
iards say it. This brother also nodded and smiled, 
and pointed with his hand on high, that they should 
take God for their helper. Thereupon thev cast 
their eyes up to heaven, except Dircks van Wesel 
who was unconscious already when the wood and 
straw were laid around him; for the chains that 
were around his neck choked him, for he had been 
greatly tortured, so that his arms had been much 
injured; and when the executioner fastened his 
arms behind around the stake, a faintness seized 
him, so that he became unconscious, and was not 
seen to manifest any further signs of life. The ex- 
ecutioner then lighted the fire, and all six were 
burnt alive (together with two baskets full of 
books), some almost to ashes. The bones and 
bodies were buried near the gallows. 

This was thus done at Deventer, on the Brink, 
the 25th of May, A.D.I 571. 


Subsequently, on the 16th of July of the same 
year, the other valiant heroes, namely, Claes Op- 
reyder, Ydse Gaukes, Lijntgen Joris, and her 
daughter, named Catharina, were brought from 
the tower, with their mouths gagged, so that they 
could not speak, and passed along the streets very 
boldly, smiling and nodding to many. Thus Claes 
was brought upon the scaffold first, and he fell 
upon his knees, to prayer ; but the executioner lift- 
ed him up, for the Spaniards would not tolerate it, 
and cried: "Villains, villains!" But the six pre- 
ceding ones, who had been offered up first, had 
performed their prayers, and had not been pre- 
vented from it ; for they had been allowed to come 
together, and also to kiss one another; but since 
the people said so much about it, how they had 
prayed, and so lovingly kissed one another, they 
had resolved to bring only one at a time on the 
scaffold. Now when Claes stood at the stake, they 
also brought Ydse upon the scaffold, and he forced 
his way to Claes and kissed him. Hence the Soan- 
iards clamored again, and were enraged. While 
thev were fastening Ydse, a Spaniard, one of the 
chiefest, together with a monk, stood by Catharina ; 
but her mother stood at some distance from them, 
so that she could not hear what thev said to her 
daughter. Then the monk said: "Your mother 
has recanted, for she has confessed that she was 
seduced; and will be executed with the sword; 
and if you will recant too, you shall not die, be- 
cause you are young yet ; but vou shall be married 
and receive a large dowry, and be helped on." But 
in reply to all this she shook her head. And then 
the Spaniards also said much to her. that she should 
recant, and she should save her life. But others 
said : "Do not tell her this ; but say, that if she will 
renounce her heresy, she shall die as a pious Chris- 
tian and be executed with the sword." And others 
said : "She must onlv be made to believe, that she 
will save her life ; when she has recanted she shall 
die nevertheless." But she shook her head to all 
this, so that they became discouraged. Then the 
monk said: "Dear sister, recant, or you will go 
from this fire into the eternal, upon this I will 
pledge my soul." In the meantime the mother also 
was brought upon the scaffold, and placed at the 
stake. Then Catharina was seen to rejoice greatly, 
for she found that it was nothing but lies, what they 
had told her concerning her mother. Then Cath- 
arina was also brought upon the scaffold, and she 
ascended the steps very rapidly, since she, as also 
the others, had greatly longed for the hour of her 
redemption; and thus all four were placed to 
stakes, back to back, so that they could neither see 
nor nod to one another. While thus standing at the 
stakes, they smiled and nodded to several yet. Then 
the Spaniards said : "There are some more of this 
people; if we only had them too." 

There were also on the scaffold the provost and 
the quartermaster to assist the executioner ; and the 
provost wanted to lay the wood about three or four 
feet from them, in order to roast them from a dis- 


888 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


tance ; but the quartermaster said, that the sentence 
was to burn them like the first; hence they had 
hard words. The Spaniards also cried, that they 
should be put to death slowly. However, the wood 
at least was laid around them like around the form- 
er; but little straw, with which they ignited the 
wood ; in order that they should die the more slow- 
ly ; however it was soon over. Thus these four of- 
fered up their sacrifice, and were burned to ashes, 
on the 16th of June, A. D. 1571 ; from whom many 
took a good example, who recognized them as the 
true people, and endeavored to follow them, by the 
grace of God, in a righteous and God-fearing life, 
which these four evinced unto death, and thus con- 
firmed that which they had said and written in 
prison. 


A LETTER FROM YDSE GAUKES, SKIPPER, WHICH 
HE WROTE IN PRISON, AT DEVENTER, TO HIS 
BROTHER, AND TO THE FRIENDS, AC- 
CORDING TO THE SPIRIT 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
this I wish to all my dear brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, and especially to you, my brother ac- 
cording to the flesh, and your beloved wife, and my 
sister according to the Spirit. I wish you the true, 
penitent faith, that works by love. 

Furthermore, dear friends, there were twelve of 
us brethren and sisters apprehended; there was 
also a new convert. We men were confined together 
eight days; then the women were examined, and 
they renounced the faith, especially your mother 
and her daughter. After that I was brought before 
the lords, when they asked me my name, and how 
long ago I had been baptized. I said : "About four 
years." And I said: "How do you know that it 
was done ?" Then they said : "We cannot be satis- 
fied, but you must swear us an oath." "No," said 
I, "I must not swear." They said: "We may." 
I said: "We may not." They said: "Where is it 
written?" I said: "Matt. 5." They said that I had 
read it erroneously. Then one of them said to me : 
"What a lamb you are." After that he said : "What 
a devil you are." Then they asked, how many 
children my wife had. I said : "One of about nine 
weeks." Then they asked: "How many did you 
have?" I said: "Six." "And there is none of them 
baptized?" said they. "That is true, my lords," 
I replied. Then they asked me concerning the man 
that had baptized me. I told them, that he was 
dead. And who had thus led me astray? I said: 
"My former life ;" and that God had revealed it to 
me. They then wrote, that we had despised God's 
Spirit. And they read it all out of a letter, as it 
seemed to me. I said to them: "It seems to me, 
that you know it well." "We do," said they. It 
seemed to me, that they wrote more than I had 
confessed. Then I said, that they should not write 
more than I had confessed. "We do not," said 
they. And they had it read to me again. And I 
was satisfied with it. Then they asked me concern- 


ing my father and mother and sister, and how many 
brothers I had. I said: "Two." And they asked 
me closely concerning their names. I said: "Pieter 
is the younger, and Symon." "Where does he 
hve?" said they. Then I told them: "He is of 
your belief." "He is not," said they. I said it was 
true. And I much excused them both, and said, 
that they were not so bad. I then entreated them, 
that they should not touch the innocent. Now they 
said: "Then the woman lied; we must have her 
brought up." I said: "My lords, I did not say that 
I do not have more." They said : "Have you more 
then?" I said: "One." Then they interrogated 
me closely whether I did not have more. I replied : 
"No." Then they wanted to know his name. I 
told it to them. Then they asked me, whether he 
was baptized. I told them, that they should ask 
him himself. Then they said : "You do not know 
how to speak before the court ; how will you speak 
before God? We shall make you tell it." I said: 
"The body is at your disposal." 

Then they let me go down, and brought up the 
men, one after the other, and they all freely con- 
fessed the faith. And we were put together again ; 
then we rejoiced, that we were allowed to be to- 
gether again; this continued several days. Then 
Anthonis was tortured, but remained valiant. After 
that they fetched me, and asked, whether I would 
name those whom I knew. I said: "No." Then 
they said : "We shall make you tell it ; but if you 
ask grace, we shall grant it you, as we did to the 
girl in the Norenburger street. That was Mariken 
Backers, who said like Peter, that she did not know 
the man ; this I did not want to do. Master Pou- 
wels was standing there, and they said : "Do you 
know this man?" "I saw him yesterday," said I. 
Then the commissary said: "Take him, Master 
Pouwels." Then I went to the rope. The execu- 
tioner entreated me much; "You are still a young 
man," he said. I then divested myself of my upper 
garments, and the shirt was pulled off by the 
sleeves, and tied around the middle of my body, 
and I had to stand there naked, until the captain 
and the inspector came; and my hands were tied 
behind my back. 

They then drew me up, about a foot from the 
ground, and in this manner left me suspended. 
I suffered great pain ; I had intended not to open 
my mouth, but I cried out thrice, and then kept 
silence. This is only child's play, they said, and 
letting me down again they placed me in a chair, 
and neither asked nor said anything to me. I had 
an iron bolt with two rings on my feet, and they 
tied three cannon balls to the rings. When they 
drew me up again, a Spaniard with a gold chain 
wanted to strike me in the face, but he could not. 
While thus suspended, I worked hard and drew 
one foot through the ring; then the whole weight 
was on one leg. They would have tied it again 
but I forced it through. Then they all laughed, and 
I had great pain. 

Then they placed me in a chair, and I named 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


889 


several persons whom I thought they knew, for 
they could name others to me. Concerning Claes 
Opreyder I have no certainty; for one says this, 
and another that. I hope by the grace of the Lord 
to give my life for it; I say, by the grace of the 
Lord. My mind is still unchanged ; I pray the Lord 
night and day, to give me strength. Do you also 
heartily pray the Lord for me; for the effectual 
fervent prayer of the righteous man availeth much. 
James 5 :16. 

Afterwards I had great conflict from my wife, 
because she frequently sent monks to me ; but God 
helped me. After that I was brought above before 
the bishop and the pastor, and they talked much 
with me, that I must believe more than was written 
in the Gospel. "For," said they, "how do you 
know that I am a man?" I said: "How should I 
not know that?" "Where is it written," said they, 
"and in what chapter?" And they also asked how 
I knew that she was my wife ; and other such soph- 
istries, but little from the Scriptures. 

Then I went back to my castle, in which I had 
to be confined. My mother also visited me once ; 
I greatly pitied the woman. I said that God would 
comfort her. Then they said, it was the last day 
of grace. On the same day the bishop made an 
exhortation to the apostates. Then came the su- 
perior of the Franciscans and said : "I run down 
here for your sake, it was the last day of grace, but 
God's grace is always open." After the exhortation 
was over, they took me above, where stood my 
wife, crying bitterly; but I said: "We must not 
forsake God." "You are not to forsake God," said 
the bishop, and she wept much. But turning my 
heart to God, I thought, the suffering after this life 
would be too long. Katelijntgen was also greatly 
tortured, and drawn out and suspended with two 
irons to her legs. Then came the executioner, and 
said that though the woman had been drawn limb 
from limb, she would not have said one word ; this 
was a joy for me to hear. Trijntgen, too, was sub- 
jected to many assaults, by comfort and promises, 
and by threats that she should be severely tortured. 
They compared her to a dog, who, they said, was 
better than she. The Lord helped her. But (as a 
warning) she was not prudent in speaking ; for, the 
pastor speaking of the Old Testament, she would 
not listen to it, which was speaking foolishly on her 
part ; but she wanted to adhere to the New Testa- 
ment. This Gijsbert told me, and he says that he 
is innocent with regard to us, for there were read 
to him at least a hundred [names] from different 
places ; and through him I obtained these [writing] 
materials. And, dear brother, see to my poor little 
orphans. I wish all the God-fearing the fear of the 
Lord. Written in great fear and distress. I com- 
mend you to the Lord ; take good heed to yourself. 

Written by me, your dear brother, from prison, 
the twentieth day of our imprisonment. 

Ydse Gaukes. 


THE SECOND LETTER OF YDSE GAUKES 

We prisoners in the Lord for the testimony of 
our dear Lord Jesus Christ, of which we are not 
worthy to boast ourselves; grace and peace from 
our dear Lord Jesus Christ be with our very dear 
and chosen, beloved brethren and sisters, through 
the obedience of the Gospel. We wish you, our 
much beloved, the true penitent faith which works 
by love. To this end may the power of the Holy 
Ghost strengthen you. Amen. 

After all proper salutation, be pleased to know, 
our much beloved, that we are still in good health 
according to the flesh, and also according to the 
spirit, and unchanged in mind and faith, and, more- 
over, have a peaceful conscience, and are sure that 
it is the truth, and that no other shall ever be found, 
though there are many subtle spirits, who seek an- 
other way than taught by Christ, and in which He 
went before them. Hence, rejoice with us, our 
much beloved, that our Father has helped us to 
triumph. Truly indeed did He say: "Though a 
mother forsake her child, yet will he not forsake 
us." You must confess with us, that He has done 
this ; for which we cannot thank Him enough, since 
we well know, that of ourselves we have nothing at 
all but wickedness : as the apostle says : "I know 
that in my flesh dwelleth no good thing." Rom. 
7:18. Further, my much beloved chosen brethren 
and sisters, know that the Lord can still order it 
well ; though we are here in the tyrants' hands, yet 
we fare better here than you people think ; for the 
Lord still sends us every day a Habakkuk (H. 
Drag. 34), which is my sister, who can still come 
to us every day, and she does not tire of it either ; 
besides, every third day we have a kind guard, so 
that many people can speak with us. Furthermore, 
dear friends, I cannot conceal from you the joy 
which we have, that they have confined us together 
in the tower, each in a small cell about eight feet 
square and made of two thick planks. In this place 
we are confined ; but we see and often speak with 
one another, which is a great joy to us, and for 
which we are also envied by him who used to be 
my best friend on earth, who said that we were 
confined too close to one another, and that we 
strengthened one another still more. Hence the 
Lord may well say, when an unclean spirit has 
been cast out, he comes and looks at the house ; if 
he finds it empty and swept, he takes with himself 
seven other spirits more wicked than himself. 
Matt. 12:43. 

Furthermore, my dear friends, be not proud, and 
trust not in yourselves, but commit your cause to 
the Lord. He who was the strongest and of the 
best courage when we were first apprehended, and 
with whom to be together was a joy to us, more- 
over, who remained very valiant in the torture, lies 
now also in the mire ; hence trust not in yourselves. 
Further, dear friends, they let us lie here, so that in 
six weeks no one looked after us, save that the com- 
missary had our sister Trijntgen brought above, 


890 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


to ask her concerning one from Ghent whom they 
did not know ; they also inquired after other friends 
from Ghent, but did not obtain their wish. Then we 
expected our sentence since we knew nothing else 
but that we should offer up our sacrifice. At the 
last two Franciscans came to me; however they 
had not been sent. They unlocked the doors, and 
asked how it was with me. "As God will," said I. 
"Yes," said they, "and as you will too." We talked 
of the Gospel ; they asked : "How do you know that 
it is the Gospel?" I said: "I know this well, for 
Christ has sealed it with His blood." One of them 
became angry. I said: "Be still, or wait a little; 
you treat us worse than Jews ; for the Jews are tol- 
erated for tribute, but us you put to death." Then 
he became angry again and said : "Your rascality 
puts you to death." "We have done nothing 
amiss," said I. He wanted to go away, and cried 
aloud. "Be meek," I said. "Yes," said they, "this 
is your word: O Father, forgive them; for they 
know not what they do." Then he went off. Once 
there came also two Beguines,* who wanted to say 
much to my fellow prisoners. I said: "May one 
also baptize something else than men?" "No," 
said they, "no beasts." I said : "Why then do you 
baptize bells ?" That was customary they said ; "it 
is an old custom that when there is a bad storm we 
ring the bells ; then it passes away." I said : "Yes, 
when the worst is over, you begin to ring, and 
thus you think that it helps." Then they said : "It 
is not good for the people to come to him." 

I can also not hide from you, how unmercifully 
they dealt with our sister : they tied her clothes to 
gether in the middle, but completely bared the up- 
per part of her body. Then said our sister (who is 
still a young girl) : "Never yet was such shame in- 
flicted upon me." "You inflict it upon you your- 
self," they said. Further, my dear brethren and 
sisters, who shall see or hear read this our brief let- 
ter, we inform you all thereby, that our mind is still 
valiant and unchanged ; that we do not exhort you 
more, is attributable to our little knowledge; for 
which I hope you will excuse us. Know, my be- 
loved friends, that we greatly rejoice with exceed- 
ing joy, because we received letters from you ; for 
it refreshes our inward man. 

Now, my very chosen dear brethren and sisters, 
we prisoners, beseech you most earnestly, that you 
will now take heed to yourselves, and to your walk ; 
for my much beloved brother and sister, when one 
comes to be thus confined, then only he finds, that 
the way is narrow and the gate strait, that leads 
unto life ; yea, many shall strive for it, but not enter 
in, because they are not of the right number. There- 
fore, my dear and in God beloved brother and sis- 
ter, examine daily the inmost of your heart when 
the daily fear comes upon you, and do not hide 
your sins, lest you sink under them ; for you can- 
not conceal them from the Lord— He has eyes like 


* Nuns of the order of St. Bega. 


flames of fire. O my chosen, you can deceive no 
one but yourselves. We have an example in David, 
when he sent fhe man into the battle, and wrote that 
he should be put in the forefront of the hottest 
battle, and where there were valiant men opposed 
to Israel ; in order that he might obtain the wife. 
What did Nathan say to the king? There was a 
man who had many sheep, and there was a man 
that had one only sheep; and he that had many 
sheep took from the man that one sheep, and slew 
it. Then David himself judged that he [David] 
was worthy of death ; but he went and watered his 
couch with his tears. II Sam. 11 :14; Ps. 6:6. See. 
my dear brother and sister, let us ever watch and 
take heed, and if we are overtaken by any evil, let 
us not be too good to repent, but with David and 
Manasseh (II Chronicles 33:12) confess our sins, 
and we shall find grace before God. O my dear 
and chosen brother and sister, had this been done 
in Friesland, and everyone looked into his own 
heart, it would never have turned out so badly. But 
when everyone is proud and says : "Show me my 
guilt ;" thinking, I will not yield, what should the 
people say? yea, I will resign my honor and min- 
istry. O friends, had they taken heed, and every- 
one examined his own heart, and willingly repent- 
ed, no one would have fallen into such great trou- 
ble. 

Hence, my beloved, always keep in the obedience 
of the Gospel, and do not suffer yourselves to be 
moved by every wind of doctrine, but abide in that 
before which you have bowed your knees ; remem- 
ber that Paul says : "Though an angel from heaven 
should come and preach any other gospel, let him 
be accursed." Gal. 1 :8. And beware of the abomi- 
nable marrying out of the church, which some of 
you would introduce : and behold Israel, how they 
had to forsake the heathen wives. Therefore, my 
dear friends, take diligent heed, as long as it is 
called today ; and let us always diligently build on 
the temple, with the sword of the Spirit at our side, 
that we may resist the enemies, lest they take our 
glory. For we have received a talent, which the 
Lord shall require again at our hands ; and if He 
finds us faithful, He will make us rulers over many 
things. Hence, my chosen, let us ever take earnest 
heed, always diligently to keep the pearl of great 
price which we have found, lest robbers take it 
from us ; for if it is taken from us we are ruined. 
Hence keep good watch, and think, dear brethren 
and sisters, that if a piece of gold were given you 
not larger than a penny, and it were said to you : 
"Keep this but three or four years, and there shall 
come a dearth, which shall last a year ; and keep 
this piece so long, and you shall buy for it enough 
to keep you from want; but if you lose it, you 
must die of hunger ;" how closely would you guard 
it — would you not every day, when the time drew 
near that you would be in need of it, see whether 
you had not lost it? I think, every hour. See, my 
chosen, you that have received the faith, to you 
this money is given, to keep it as long as you live ; 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


891 


and if you keep it unto the end, you shall receive 
eternal life for it. 

Thus, my much beloved, now that you know that 
the day is approaching when you must have it, take 
earnest heed lest you lose it ; for if you should lose 
it the last day, it could avail you nothing ; though 
one had kept it a hundred years, it could not avail 
him anything ; as the prophet says : "If a man hath 
done good all his life, and walked uprightly, and 
turned himself to unrighteousness, all the good that 
he hath done before shall avail him nothing.'' See, 
how the Lord requires obedience of us, as the 
prophet Samuel said to Saul : "The Lord deliglii- 
eth more in obedience, than in sacrifices." I Sam- 
uel 15 :22. And consider also the man of God, how 
he was punished by the Lord because he had heark- 
ened to the false prophet, and not done what the 
Lord had commanded him. I Kings 13:24. Be- 
hold Israel, when they had sinned, they had to turn 
their backs before their enemies : Josh. 7 :12. And 
Christ Himself says : "Ye are my friends, if ye do 
whatsoever I command you." John 15 :14. Yea, he 
that endureth to the end shall be saved (Matthew 
10:22) ; for it lies neither in the beginning nor in 
the middle. Hence, look diligently before you, lest 
ye be deceived ; for Christ has truly said, that many 
false prophets shall rise and cry : "Here is Christ, 
there is Christ." Matt. 24:11, 5. Therefore, my 
chosen, beware, lest you be deceived. They went 
out from us, says the apostle ; but if they had been 
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. 
I John 2:19. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
to the rich Word of His grace. Know, that our 
brother Claes still suffers great pain in his limbs, 
on account of his age ; and our sister Lijntgen has 
also great pain in her shoulders ; but Trijntgeh and 
I do not ail. Now we prisoners greet you very 
cordially; also all the churches and lovers of the 
truth in the neighborhood ; by name, P. J. and your 
wife ; and I thank you most heartily for your letter. 
Greet W. in my name, and send it to L. J. in Mol- 
queeren, in Friesland, and also to Jan de P. and to 
those of Amsterdam; I have also written some- 
thing for him, which put with it, and see that this 
a' jo gets to Embden, to my beloved brother and 
his wife. My dear brother, and dear sister, grieve 
not for us, for your mother and sister are of very 
good cheer ; and tell Machtelken, rather to beware 
of Harmen ; he seeks to bring her into the mire ; 
if he can get out, I have heard him say, he will 
make a good Christian of her. We also salute our 
scattered fellow believers. Now, my affectionately 
beloved brethren and sisters, remember us pris- 
oners in your prayers and assemblies, for the 
earnest prayer of the faithful avails much. We ex- 
pect from day to day to offer up our sacrifice. And, 
dear friends, do write us. 

Written in great fear and distress, in the prison 
at Deventer, after having been imprisoned nine 
weeks. 


THE THIRD LETTER OF YDSE GAUKES, WRITTEN IN 
PRISON IN DEVENTER 

The grace of God our heavenly Father, who cre- 
ated and made heaven and earth ; and the love of 
His beloved Son, our Lord, Redeemer and Sav- 
iour, which is Jesus Christ, by whom He has de- 
lievered us from eternal enmity and the torment of 
hell ; and the power of the Holy Ghost, who works 
in all His elect ; this we wish all our known, and 
also our unknown, brethren and sisters, and all 
lovers of the truth, as a most cordial and affection- 
ate salutation. Amen. 

Further, my very elect brethren and sisters, fel- 
low believers of our most holy faith, by the grace 
and mercy of God, branches on the vine of the 
Lord ; we prisoners, confined for the testimony of 
the truth, intend to write you yet a littlej by which 
you may remember us ; if the Lord permits it that 
you may get this little out of the lions' den ; for we 
think and trust that our Lord will soon deliver us, 
and that we shall have no time any more to write to 
you. If we did not have my sister, we would fare 
very meagerly and suffer hunger ; but now we have 
a sufficiency ; may the Lord reward it, and recom- 
pense it a hundredfold to them that show us mercy. 

Now, my dear and much beloved brethren and 
sisters by the obedience of the Gospel, know that 
according to the flesh we are still tolerably well, and 
in the faith unchanged, and are sure that it is the 
right truth, and that no other will ever be found 
neither now nor in eternity, for we are sure, and 
find the Lord faithful in all His promises ; as He 
says, that He will not forsake His own, but keep 
them as the apple of His eye ; and that He will not 
suffer them to be tempted above that they are able, 
but will with the temptation also make a way to 
escape ; wherein we also firmly trust. Hence, my 
dear chosen brethren and sisters, beseech the Lord 
heartily for us, that He will give us power and 
strength when the hour of suffering is at hand ; for 
our persecutors greatly threaten us, that they will 
torture us in this and that manner, and roast us 
alive with a large fire placed at a distance from us. 

Therefore, my dear brethren, and sisters in the 
Lord, help to pray the Lord for us, since of our- 
selves we have nothing but all weakness, and are 
compassed about with frail flesh. But we find 
abundant comfort when we consider the Word of 
the Lord, and His promises to those who strive val- 
iantly unto death, and cleave to them ; for he that 
remains steadfast shall receive the promises, since 
He never yet has forsaken any that trusted in Him, 
and who think of the fight which our captain Christ 
Jesus fought for us, so that they willingly follow 
Him. Hence, we joyfully wait for our redemption, 
though they threaten us much, they can do us no 
more than what the Lord permits them ; and what- 
soever the Lord permits them, to that we will re- 
sign ourselves, for our flesh, with which we have 
offended the Lord so often, has merited it more 
than a thousand times. Furthermore, my dear 


892 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


brethren and sisters, we expect from day to day to 
be offered up, for we thought we should offer up 
our sacrifice when our fellow prisoners offered up 
theirs. Now, my much beloved brethren and sis- 
ters, you that have submitted to the obedience of 
the Gospel, and have with Noah entered into the 
ark, and are with Lot gone out of Sodom, and with 
Moses out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, and 
choose rather to suffer affliction with the children 
of God, than to enjoy, with Pharaoh, the pleasures 
of sin for a season ; therefore now, my dear friends, 
be valiant with righteous Noah, who firmly trusted 
in the Lord's promises, and with patience waited 
for the day promised him by the Lord, namely, an 
hundred and twenty years. See, my dear brethren 
and sisters, who are still in this tabernacle, and 
have with Noah received a promise, that there shall 
come a day that will be upon all flesh; if you are 
then found upright before the Lord, you shall with 
Noah be forever saved. And obey the Lord with 
Lot, and firmly believe what God commands you, 
for He wants His commandments kept, as we have 
an example in Lot's wife, that she was turned into 
a pillar of salt ; and further in Israel ; when they 
observed His laws and commandments, no one was 
able to harm or hinder them; as we have an ex- 
ample in the children of Israel, to whom the prom- 
ised land was promised ; but they did not obtain it, 
because they did not trust in the Lord ; for of six 
hundred thousand not more than two entered into 
the promised land ; but their descendants were led 
through Jordan by Joshua, and the Lord mightily 
helped them, so that they according to the Lord's 
command went around Jericho with the ark of 
the covenant, and the walls fell. 

See, my dear, beloved brethren and sisters, if we 
trust in the Word of the Lord, and keep His com- 
mandments, and always walk according to the 
Lord's rule, and call upon the Lord day and night, 
He will fight for us. Yea, our enemies shall not be 
able to harm us, but they shall be confounded. But 
if the righteous forsake the Lord, they must turn 
their backs before their enemies, as we read in 
Joshua, concerning Achan and others, also of Saul, 
who was the first king of Israel ; when the Lord had 
commanded him, to go forth to fight against the 
Amalekites, and to spare no one, he went, but did 
not keep the Lord's command ; hence the Spirit of 
the Lord departed from him, and the Lord set 
David in his stead ; on which account he persecuted 
David. And thus the righteous have ever had to 
suffer from the unrighteous. Jacob, from Esau; 
Abel, from Cain, because his offering was accept- 
able before the Lord, and his brother's not ; hence 
he was killed by Cain ; and this generation is still 
in the world. 

See, my much beloved and chosen brethren and 
sisters, to whom the truth, which is hid from so 
many thousands is revealed, and who have received 
grace from God ; let us show obedience to the Lord, 
as did our father Abraham, who is the father of the 


faithful ; and Jephthah, who did not spare his only 
daughter, but willingly offered her up to the Lord. 
Judges 1 1 :39. Hence, my dear brethren and sisters, 
let us diligently fear the Lord, and observe His 
commandments, and He will be gracious unto us. 
Therefore, my very dear and beloved brethren 
and sisters, only be faithful unto the end, and nei- 
ther be terrified, nor fear; though this generation 
has now great power to crush and kill the people of 
God, they can do no more than the Lord permits 
them. Hence let us keep good watch for our souls, 
and always be vigilant ; for the Lord says Himself : 
"Watch and pray; for the Lord shall come as a 
thief in the night." O, my dear brethren and sisters, 
that we might then not be found idle or drowsy, 
but with the five wise virgins always have oil in 
our lamps, and ever be ready and watch for the 
coming of our Bridegroom, so that with Gideon 
we may be found worthy; for they were not all 
accepted ; only three hundred were found worthy. 
Judges 6:12. Even as also Christ Himself says, 
that many are called, but few chosen. Matt 20-16 ■ 
22:14. 

Hence, my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
let us diligently pray to God with a fervent heart, 
that we may be known and reckoned with the little 
flock, and that we may be stones in the Lord's tem- 
ple, and branches on the Lord's vine, and valiantly 
follow our Lord and Bishop even unto the end ; and 
it shall be well with us ; and walk in all righteous- 
ness and holiness, and always be mindful of the 
day of the Lord, and not depart from the Lord's 
way ; and He will have compassion upon us and be 
gracious unto us. For He shall separate the sheep 
from the goats, and say to them on His right hand : 
"Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom prepared 
for you." And to them on His left hand : "Depart 
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." Matt. 
25:32. Oh, how lamentable will it then be with 
those who here have feared men more than the 
Lord; yea, who now say: "The Lord is gracious 
and merciful," which is true ; but He is also right- 
eous, and wants His commandments kept. Hence, 
O dear people, think of the day of which Peter 
says : "That one day is with the Lord as a thou- 
sand years." II Peter 3:8. How lamentably it 
will then be deplored ! See, my dear brethren and 
sisters, my materials are about to give out ; hence I 
must conclude. We prisoners will therefore here- 
with bid you adieu, namely we four; our names 
you well know ; let this reach Jan de P., our sister 
Lijntgen's brother. We prisoners cordially salute 
you with the Word of the Lord, and are still of 
good cheer, and trust to offer up a willing sacrifice 
to the Lord ; the Lord God strengthen us with His 
Holv Spirit. And, dear brothers Bauke, Symon, 
and Pieter, who are my brothers according to the 
flesh, take care for your souls; though you are 
young yet, do not depend on that ; you know nei- 
ther the day nor the hour, and enough is revealed 
to you, that vou well know that it is the truth. 
Herewith I will send you my last adieu, as I do not 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


893 


think I will see you anymore ; but see that we may 
meet one another again with joy. 

Now, my dear brother Bauke and your wife, 
your mother and sister, and I your brother, salute 
you and all acquaintances most cordially; I send 
you our last salutation here, and may the Lord 
make us worthy, that hereafter we may meet one 
another again with joy. Claes greets you very 
cordially, and we also greet much all those that 
have remembered us by writing, and we are much 
rejoiced in this, that you still have such delight in 
the truth. Herewith we bid our dear brethren and 
fellow believers of our faith our last adieu ; may the 
Lord keep you all in righteousness and holiness. 

Written in our dark prison, with bad materials ; 
hence receive it in good part. Given the ninety-fifth 
day of our imprisonment, the 14th of June, in the 
year 1571, in Deventer. 


DOUWE EEUWOUTS, A. D. 1571 

They who seek truly to follow the words and 
commandments of God often have to suffer great 
contempt and persecution from the learned of this 
world, as was well seen at Leeuwaerden, in Fries- 
land in the case of a brother named Douwe Eeu- 
wouts, who on the 3d of January of the year 1571, 
for the name of Christ, had to leave five little chil- 
dren alone in the house, and suffer himself to be 
imprisoned in a dark dungeon, where he had to re- 
main confined with criminals for a long time, which 
he, though longing to be offered up, patiently suf- 
fered. Afterwards he was examined by the bishop 
and others, who greatly tormented him, in order to 
cause him to recant, but all in vain. They asked 
him concerning his faith, which he freely confessed. 
They also greatly praised up to him the pope's 
trumpery ; but he said, he would keep to the com- 
mandments of God, and let go the commandments 
of men. He also proved, that their hours, mass, 
confirmation, anointing, exorcising, and other 
things were not in accordance with the Word of 
God ; and he further besought them, that now that 
he had confessed his faith, they should not torment 
him any more, but cut short his sufferings and 
troubles ; for he was ready to give up his life for 
the truth, knowing that he might then expect the 
crown of life. Finally the bishop condemned him 
as a heretic, and delivered him to the secular 
judges, that they should deal with him according 
to the king's decree, for these so-called Christians, 
like the Pharisees, can put no one to death. But in 
consequence of the bishop's delivering him, Dou- 
we Eeuwouts, after long imprisonment, was sen- 
tenced to death on the 12th of October, A. D. 1571, 
to be drowned the following night. When he heard 
this sentence, he showed himself valiant as a giant 
in the faith, not terrified by impending death, but 
greatly longing for the new Jerusalem ; and sat in 
the room with his head uncovered, thanking, prais- 
ing, and praying to his heavenly Father, till the 
hour of his departure had come. They then took 


him, and tied him in a bag, when he began to sing : 
"I poor lamb on the heath." Many that were there 
praised his boldness, that he went to death so vol- 
untarily and joyfully. 

Thus he most joyfully departed this temporal 
sorrow, and ended his life in the water, and now 
rests under the altar, and there waits for the eter- 
nal joy which is promised to all of God's dear chil- 
dren. 


HANS MISEL, A. D. 1571 

In the year 1571, Hans Misel, a weaver, who was 
yet a young man, at Langensmeer in Swabia, was 
asked by some persons to read and speak from the 
Word of the Lord ; and as he declared to them the 
way of the truth, he was betrayed, and reported at 
Warthausen. The lady who then resided there, sent 
her clerk thither, who came with servants, sur- 
prised the brother, drew his sword, and with the 
hilt of the same several times struck the brother on 
the heart or breast, berating him fearfully, and say- 
ing, he had power to do this and more. He also 
struck him with the blade of the sword, and said he 
had authority to thrust him through with it, and 
kill him. But the brother did not allow himself to 
be intimidated, but with gentle words said to the 
clerk, that he should calm himself, and not carry on 
so. The clerk bound him himself, and they took 
him with them to Barthausen, and kept him that 
night in a house, where they reveled and caroused, 
and made sport of and ignominiously treated the 
brother, the whole night. When day came, they 
conducted him into the castle, and confined him in 
a tower, where many priests came to him, who 
greatly labored with and tempted him ; but all that 
came to him had to retire from him with shame. 
The executioner also had to do his part to try him ; 
they greatly racked and tortured him, but could not 
move him to renounce his belief or to do anything 
that was contrary to the faith. When they had fin- 
ished all their temptations, and he remained stead- 
fast, and would not depart a single step from the 
way of faith and of the divine truth, the lady of the 
castle sent for the priests, and said to them, that 
she was a woman, and knew little how he ought to 
be dealt with; they should advise her as to what 
ought to be done with him. Here the lady had hit 
upon the right counselors, even as though one were 
to ask the wolf what ought to be done with the 
sheep; for they immediately presented to her the 
imperial law and mandate, and thus adjudged him 
worthy of death, according to the way of their fa- 
thers, who also gave counsel concerning Christ and 
cried : "Away with him, he is worthy of death ; we 
have a law, and by the same he ought to die." John 
19:15, 7. Thus it happened that he was sentenced 
to death ; several in the council however would not 
give their voice ; but this was of no avail, the devil, 
who works in the children of unbelief, was master 
of the game. 

Now when he was to be executed in the morning, 


894 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


his friends came in the night, and wanted to help 
him out of the tower. They dug until they came 
almost to him, so that he heard them. He warned 
them, that they should not dare do this, since he 
should not come out to them through the hole; 
hence they had to let it go. And as the sentence 
had come, that he was to be executed, they wanted 
to give him something to eat first ; but he would not 
eat, and when he heard that his last hour had now 
come, he requested to be left alone in peace, in a 
corner for a little while, which they granted him, 
without knowing why he requested this ; however, 
they had him watched, to see what he should do, 
and what he intended. He raised his hands to 
heaven, and offered up an earnest and sincere pray- 
er to God, and also praised God, that He had per- 
mitted him to see this hour, and had counted him 
worthy thereto; and prayed that He would give 
him power and courage for it, that he might die 
the death of an upright and manifest witness of 
God. He then also faithfully thanked God for all 
the benfits which He had ever shown him, and also 
prayed that God would assist him now in his last 
hour, which was at hand, and thus commended 
himself into the hands of the Lord his God. 

The executioner said : "This man is bolder than 
we all." 

When he had finished praying, he came forward 
again to the people with smiling lips, and was will- 
ing to die. The confessor of Warthausen went with 
him when he was taken out, and wanted that he 
should renounce, and have mercy on himself. But 
he said, that they should renounce and turn from 
their whoredom, villainy, and the idolatrous, un- 
godly life, into which they were sunken. 

When the executioner brought him to the place 
where he was to be executed, he said to him, that if 
he would recant, he still had authority to let him 
go. But he refused, and would there seal his faith 
with his blood, and so far as he was concerned, he 
said, he might proceed. Thus he was beheaded and 
then burnt, and as they could not burn him quickly 
enough, they cut him into pieces and burned the 
pieces. When the executioner had struck off his 
head, so that the same lay on the ground, his body 
still remained erect, with the hands uplifted, as 
though he were praying, till the executioner pushed 
him over with his foot. It was also said that his 
head and hair could not be burned, but that it was 
found entire and undisfigured in the ashes, and was 
thus buried. This took place on the 13th of De- 
cember of said year 1571. 

When he was about to be executed, he said, his 
blood should be seen in the sun. And it came to 
pass on the third day after, at noon that the sun 
presented a blood-red appearance, and where it 
shone through the windows, upon tables and other 
things, they seemed as though they were standing 
in the fire, so that the people came together in the 
streets from amazement, as those who saw it and 
are still living can testify. 


JAN BLOCK BURNT FOR THE FAITH, AT NIMEGUEN, 
A. D. 1572 

About the year 1572, there was burnt at Nime- 
guen, a young man named Jan Block, who had 
wealth, and lived of the same, so that he had not 
learned any profession or trade. He associated with 
a brother named Symon van Maren, a furrier, bom 
at Hertogenbosch, with whom he formerly was 
wont to go to the tavern to tipple, but who, after he 
was converted, admonished him to read the New 
Testament, which advice he also followed ; and the 
good Lord so opened his heart, that he understood 
from it what was right, and joined the church of 
God. This done, he could not remain hid, since he 
led a better life than before; so that all his prop- 
erty was confiscated, and a price set upon his ap- 
prehension, that whoever would betray him, should 
receive for it seventy gold reals. Then he fled out 
of the city, and in a village asked a mason for work 
as a tender, in order that he might earn a living, 
since he knew nothing else to do. The mason re- 
fused him this, saying: "They would come here 
to apprehend you, and this would bring me into 
trouble." Sometime after he came into town, 
where he was espied by a traitor, who went and re- 
ported it to the officer and his beadles, who came 
to seek him. The woman of the house had com- 
passion on Jan Block, and he went and stood upon 
the bed behind the curtains. The bailiff looked into 
the chamber, but did not search very closely, since 
he was not a bloodthirsty man, and then turned 
back again, saying: "He is not there." The traitor 
said : "He is there ; I saw him go in." One of the 
beadles went back, and raising the curtains, saw 
him standing there. He was then taken along, as a 
malefactor. While in prison he was often visited, 
and cared for by the God-fearing. 

Finally sentence of death was pronounced upon 
him, and he was condemned to be burned at the 
stake as a heretic. 

While this took place, one of the lords in the 
court, who, since Jan Block was of high descent, 
had formerly associated much with him, sought, as 
he pretended, to convert him to the Romish faith 
before his end; to whom this valiant witness of 
Jesus Christ, turning around, answered: "You 
should have converted me when we were formerly 
together in such and such places (which he named 
to him) and each of us had a harlot in his lap." 

Coming upon the scaffold, to be put to death, he 
showed such a joyful countenance, as though he 
had come to a wedding feast or a festival ; for he 
went to the stake at which he was to offer up his 
sacrifice, with as much alacrity as though he had 
made a leap. 

Having arrived at the stake, he pointed out to 
the executioner his carelessness, consisting in this, 
that the holes where he was to be fastened were 
not bored at the proper place. 

Shortly after this, after having commended his 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


895 


soul into the hands of God, and suffering many 
tortures, he was burned, and an end put to his life. 
All this was so affecting, that several of the 
lords who had sat in judgment over him shed tears 
of compassion for this innocent, but nevertheless 
well-established and steadfast young man; which 
we have deemed necessary to record from the testi- 
mony of those who according to their statement 
were present on that occasion and witnessed it. 


A LETTER WRITTEN BY JAN BLOCK 

It is good that a man should both hope and 
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. Lamen- 
tations 3 :26. 

The grace and peace of God our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Blessed be God, the 
heavenly Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort ; who 
comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may 
be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, 
by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are com- 
forted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth 
by Christ. And whether we be afflicted or com- 
forted, it is all for our good and our salvation. This 
salvation, except my bonds, I wish you from the 
depth of my soul, for comfort and salvation in your 
greatest need, when you, dear brother in the Lord, 
will have need of help and comfort, as you, moved 
and impelled through the operation of the Holy 
Spirit, have now at the right time written and sent 
to me, poor prisoner at Nimeguen, for the Word of 
our dear Lord; by which you have done me such 
a great and acceptable service, that I shall never 
in my life be able sufficiently to thank God my 
heavenly Father, who appointed you, like Habak- 
kuk, to bring food, by which the pious Daniel was 
fed outwardly according to the flesh, through the 
confidence which he had toward our God. O how 
great is this spiritual food, dear brother, with which 
you have fed and comforted my poor, hungry soul, 
which you, according to the opportunity of the 
past, abundantly wrote to me in your letter from 
the holy word of the Lord, for my consolation, and 
to incite me to take undaunted courage ; for which 
I, as said above, cannot sufficiently thank you. By 
the help of our dear Lord I hope to do the same ; 
through the almighty Lord I still have the will to 
do well from the heart. I hope and trust in God 
our heavenly Father, who shall strengthen me, 
poor, unworthy prisoner for His holy Word, to fin- 
ish it to His holy praise, when I shall offer up my 
sacrifice, as you write to me of many prophets and 
apostles, yea, of Christ Himself, who, for the sins 
of us all, out of love for us was led to the slaugh- 
ter as a dumb lamb ; how much more ought I, poor 
miserable sinner, to deliver up my life for His holy 
name's sake, of which I sincerely deem myself un- 
worthy. Yet I trust, as above, and as you wrote to 
me, as the prophet Ezekiel speaks by the mouth of 
the Most High, that He will remember sins no 


more, as we, the Lord be thanked, well know on 
what condition the Lord has spoken to us. All that 
desire this, and are converted from the heart, God 
will hear. 

And such as lament and moan night and day 
over their great transgression, as I poor, miser- 
able sinner have done, He will hear, and be gra- 
cious unto them, for He loves to forgive, so that I, 
as said above, gladly surrender myself for the name 
of my Lord, and suffer by His grace very patiently 
for my sins, and deliver up my body, as did the 
seven children in Maccabees. And the pious Elea- 
zar would much rather die honorably, than dis- 
simulate and set a bad example to the young 
brethren. Thus, by the grace of God, is also my 
mind, dear brother in the Lord. But, much beloved 
brother, I have such great conflict on account of 
my former life, that I did not gain a living as an 
honest man. But, the Lord be thanked, a little be- 
fore my imprisonment, I had resolved by the grace 
of the Lord, to support myself in all humility and 
holiness by the labor of my hands; however, I 
have not time to carry it out. Hence my mind is 
often troubled, and this by the passage of Paul 
where he says that, "Though I had faith, so that 
I could remove mountains, and gave all my goods 
to the poor, and gave my body to be burned, and 
had not charity, it were all of no avail." And that 
we are to live so holy and unblamable, this causes 
my heart to shrink, and my eyes daily to flow like 
a river, because I have so sinfully spent my pre- 
cious time ; this the Lord knows, for whose Word 
and testimony I, miserable sinner am imprisoned ; 
yet I wouk! not give my hope and faith for a thou- 
sand worlds. O dear brethren, how little have I 
known, much less had, the true regeneration and 
new creature, as I now feel it through the grace 
of God, and should gladly confess it, if I had the 
time. Friends, have earnest love to one another, 
and edify one another in all humility and earnest- 
ness in the exercise of godliness, and daily exhort 
one another to all holiness ; also that each be the 
least in his own eyes, and that you do not walk so 
haughtily and with such display, lest the poor, blind 
world, according to her doing, surpass* us in many 
things. This view I have now, by the grace of God, 
had for some little time, and if I had indeed in the 
beginning felt it thus, and accepted it, as I ought to 
have done, and as I now, alas ! in my last time had 
resolved, by the grace of the Lord, to do, I should 
certainly not have come to such great sorrow, 
which originated in superciliousness or secret pride 
and an easy life. Hence, dear brother, and dear 
ministers of the church of God, wherever you are, 
take diligent care, as faithful laborers in the vine- 
yard [and direct into the right way] the branches, 
which shoot up very lightly, and grow in the full- 
ness and vanity of their mind, who are also alie- 
nated from the life of God. I only now begin to 
experience with the understanding, what the new 
creature is. 


* Walk, move more circumspectly. — Trans. 


896 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


O dear brethren and watchmen over the house 
of the Lord, do not regard the person; for those 
that are young in the understanding of the Chris- 
tian life can be ruined in no way more effectively, 
than by not diligently exhorting them with the 
Word of the Lord, to become new creatures, and 
to humility, and to lead a godly life. Oh, how I 
have experienced this within my own self, that so 
few are found at this time who are truly converted 
and renewed, and rightly follow the life and the 
footsteps in which Christ went before us. Oh, if 
they felt it, as I now in my last time feel it, they 
would be afraid of speaking or thinking of any- 
thing, except chiefly of the law of the Lord. O dear 
friends, now only I understand it, and very often 
think of one of our three sisters, who wrote her 
son Tobias a testament, in which she speaks, I 
think, of improving our time, and that we shall de- 
plore nothing more, than that we have so little im- 
proved our time, but often spent it in frivolity. O 
dear friends, I would from the heart, that those 
that are guilty in this matter, or are found slothful, 
could feel their present time as I now feel in my 
heart my past time, and am accused [in my con- 
science] concerning it; you would certainly be 
found, in godly exercise, to be renewed in the pow- 
er of the Spirit, into a new, spiritual life, which is 
like the image of Him, who poured out His holy 
blood for us poor sinners ; then we should indeed 
show forth the mind and nature of Christ in words 
and in works. We should then, according to Matt. 
5, so let our light shine, and be such a salt of the 
earth, that we should indeed have the greater 
praise before this adulterous generation; yea, we 
should shine forth with a clear light in the church 
of God. Even as the light of the candle is im- 
proved by trimming it, so if we would in our short 
time, trim our body in word and deed from our 
carnal body, in words and in works, yea, in dress 
and worldliness, then our lights would certainly be 
found to give forth a clearer light. Hence since 
every one sees, how many there are found to be 
darkness, to the reproach of the Gospel, we see 
here, that so many in this last time, without afflic- 
tion, become alienated from God, and wax cold; 
that, as the Lord says, when the Son of man shall 
come, whether He shall then find faith on the earth. 
O dear friends, though one may guard himself so 
as not to be punished with excommunication, do 
you think that one is then also a new creature be- 
fore God, truly according to His Father's image, 
truly dead unto all sin ? Oh, no ; I think differently ; 
and this through the grace of the Lord. But this 
is my last time, to all appearance, and I also make 
no other calculation, than to surrender my body 
from day to day for the testimony of the Word of 
our dear Lord, to suffer a little through His grace, 
and to strive manfully, even unto death, yea, unto 
the death by fire, or whatever my enemies will, as 
the Lord permits them. I have commended myself 
to the Lord of my salvation and strength, and my 
helper in time of need. 


O dear brother and sister in the Lord, I have 
written this letter, my little gift, to you most be- 
loved, with abundant tears, out of love. In short, I 
beseech you, dear brother, and my cordially beloved 
sisters in the Lord, from the depth of my soul, that 
you will everywhere with one accord, bow your 
knees before God, and lift up holy hands to the 
Lord, and entreat the almighty Father for me poor 
weak servant, that He will give me strength, that I 
may finish it joyfully, to His holy praise, and to 
my salvation, undismayed unto death, as I hope 
and trust, without my knowledge. And it behooves 
you to write, according to ancient, holy custom, 
that the strong pray for the weak, especially in 
peril of death. I pray the almighty Lord according 
to my weak ability for you dear brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, that He will keep you that are 
still in a good state; and those who have erred or 
sinned in anything, that they may truly confess 
their sins before God, with weeping, and be con- 
verted in time. My cordially beloved fellow believ- 
ers and dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, I 
your poor unworthy brother— yet through the 
grace of the Lord I hope to be worthy— would have 
written you concerning what happened to me be- 
fore the lords ; but I cannot put it all here, nor have 
I much to write concerning it ; for, after I had been 
confined for a week, they had me brought above ; 
then I confessed my faith ; since that time I have 
had very great conflict, and shall have as long as I 
am in this tabernacle. I hope to write you more. 
Dear brethren, if you should find any words that 
may lack a letter or two, or if the spelling or 
writing be bad, excuse me, for my reason and 
memory have lately left me much, and this through 
great sorrow, to state the reason is not necessary ; 
but my mind is firm and of good cheer in the Lord, 
and I am as courageous as a young lion. I cannot 
thank the Lord enough for His great goodness 
which He daily sends me, sometimes by great sor- 
row, and sometimes by great joy, yea, that I at 
times think that I am in heaven; however, for the 
most part I have tribulation, the Lord be thanked 
for it. Dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
heartily pray the Lord for me ; by the grace of God 
I shall do likewise, according to my small ability. 

Written by me at the Nimeguen in prison, where 
I unworthy one was confined for the Word of our 
dear Lord, which is tried and pure. The almighty 
Lord mightily strengthen my mind by His grace, 
when I shall have to render up my life, who have 
not the strength to finish it to the praise of my 
Lord before wicked men. Adieu, my dear breth- 
ren and sisters in the Lord. I bid you most beloved 
good night, to wait for you all where I hope to 
get by the grace of the Lord, in the eternal joy. 

Jan Block. 

HEYNDRICK VAN ECKELO, A. D. 1572 

In the year 1572 there was also imprisoned at 
Ghent in Flanders, for the testimony of Jesus, a 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


897 


young man by the name Heyndrick the Shoemaker, 
because he had turned his ear to the voice which 
calls, saying: "Come out of her, my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues." Rev. 18:4. Hence he sep- 
arated from Babylon, and united with Christ, in 
consequence of which he was tried with very many 
odious and severe threats by the ministers of Bab- 
ylon or antichrist. But the trial of his faith, being 
thus purified, was found much more precious than 
of gold which perisheth, though it be tried with fire 
(I Pet. 1:7) ; so that he patiently bore all for the 
name of Jesus. And as no tortures could move him 
to apostatize, for he was founded upon the rock, he 
was therefore put to death with the sword at said 
place, in the Friday market, and thus died stead- 
fastly, and, through grace, obtained the crown of 
eternal glory, and now rests under the altar, Christ 
Jesus. 

This hero and warrior of Jesus Christ composed 
in his bonds the beautiful hymn which is found in 
the Tafereel hymnbook, and commences thus: 

"Since nature this doth teach me." 


A YOUNG MAN FROM NIMEGUEN BURNT AT 
HERTOGENBOSCH, A. D. 1572 

After the offering up of the afore-mentioned 
friend of God, Jan Block, a young man who main- 
tained the truth of the slain martyr, and made the 
same confession, traveled from Nimeguen to Her- 
togenbosch, but being spied out, was apprehended 
by the bailiff there, and taken to the place where it 
was customary to imprison those that had forfeited 
their heads, and securely confined there. 

Not long after, the mint master of the city of 
Nimeguen, having heard of it, came to Herto- 
genbosch, in order, if possible, to rescue and ran- 
som him from death, who was one of his faithful 
servants. 

To this end he paid down to the bailiff there a 
thousand florins, thinking thereby to have made 
satisfaction and achieved his purpose: but when 
the bailiff had received this sum, he would not 
grant it, declaring that the prisoner had to die 
nevertheless, according to the imperial decree. 

The result was, that shortly after his trial was 
concluded, his death sentence was announced to 
him, namely, that he was to be executed with fire, 
or burned in the market place ; which was carried 
into execution in said city, to the heartfelt sorrow 
of many spectators. 


JAN WOUTERSS VAN KUYCK AND ADRIAENKEN 

JANS OF MOLENAERSGRAEF, BOTH BURNT FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT 

DORTRECHT, A. D. 1572 

In the year of our Lord 1572, the lords of justice 
at Dortrecht in Holland, laid their hands on two 
very meek and dear friends of God, who followed 
their Saviour, the slain Lamb of the cross, Jesus 
Christ, and were not of the least of the members 


of the church of the Lord scattered abroad in all 
countries, in showing forth, as lights in this world, 
their eminent virtues among this evil and perverse 
generation. They were both taken out of the fold 
like lambs for the slaughter, the circumstances be- 
ing as follows : 

First, Adriaenken Jans' daughter was suddenly 
apprehended. She resided at Molenaersgraef, in 
the Papendrecht district; which was under the 
jurisdiction of the city of Dortrecht, and because 
she was said to be a heretic, she was seized and im- 
prisoned in the Vuylpoort. 

After that the plan was formed to capture Jan 
Wouterss van Kuyck, who resided in the city, but 
frequently changed his abode, so as not to be so 
easily recognized. To this end, the bailiff, having 
learned where he resided (namely, in the street 
leading to the Rietdijck, near the New Gate, in a 
room which was reached from the street by a flight 
of stairs), came with his beadles and unexpectedly, 
and without asking anything, ascended the stairs, 
where Jan Wouterss met him just as he opened the 
door. The bailiff said, since he did not know him : 
"Does Jan van Kuyck reside here ?" to which this 
good, upright and very sincere man, not willing to 
speak contrary to the truth, answered yes, adding 
that it was he himself. 

These words he spoke very loudly, in order that 
his dear wife, who was back in the room, should 
hear it and flee, which she did : his only daughter, 
however, a child of only about seven years, re- 
mained in the room and saw her father appre- 
hended, to which no attention was paid. The min- 
isters of justice immediately laid their hands upon 
this friend of God, and forcibly bound him, where- 
upon he said: "O my lords, how you bind me, as 
though I were a wicked man; however, you bind 
not me, but yourselves." Then a great lamentation 
arose among them ; however, they proceeded, and 
led him, as a defenseless lamb that is overcome by 
wolves, from the Rietdijck to the Vuylpoort, about 
half an hour's walk through the city, where they 
put him into another cell than the one in which 
Adriaenken Jans was confined, though within the 
same walls and under the same roof of said prison. 

In the meantime both had to suffer much tempta- 
tion, according to the body as well as in regard to 
the soul ; several times they were severely tortured, 
stripped, and scourged, so that almost the entire 
city spoke about their sufferings and misery, as Jan 
Wouterss subsequently also indicated in one of 
his letters. 

The papist clergy also assailed them much ac- 
cording to the soul, in order to deprive them, by 
many wiles and snares, of the treasure of a true 
faith; but they were not able to accomplish any- 
thing with either of them; hence they [the two 
martyrs], were finally sentenced to death in open 
court, to be executed with fire, on the water front 
of the city, near a certain lime kiln, where now the 
new fortification is, between the mill that stands 
upon the bastion, and the rampart ; however, with 


898 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Jan Woutersz van Kuyk and Adriaentje Jans of Molenaarsgraaf are executed at Dordrecht, AD 1572 


the condition, that Adriaenken Jans should not 
really die by fire, but should prior to her burning 
be strangled at the stake, which lesser penalty of 
death we do not find to have been executed on Jan 
Wouterss. 

In the meantime both prepared themselves for 
death with great desire and inward joy, unable 
sufficiently to praise God that they had been count- 
ed worthy to deliver up their bodies as a sacrifice 
for His holy name's sake. 

When the hour of their departure had come, 
both were tied together; however, they fell upon 
their knees, and quietly offered up, before they 
were led forth, an earnest prayer to God the Lord, 
that He would strengthen them in their impending 
suffering, to persevere unto the end. 

Thereupon their mouths (for fear that they 
should speak something to the people), were 
gagged with a piece of wood, or some other instru- 
ment made for this purpose, and they were thus led 
from the prison which presented a pitiful sight. 
Jan Wouterss, however, pulled out the piece of 
wood, or instrument, with one hand, which it ap- 
pears was not bound, and cried with a loud voice : 


"O Lord, strengthen Thy feeble servant : and Thy 
poor handmaiden. It is for Thy name's sake that 
we have come to this for which we have willingly 
prepared ourselves." 

When he had said this, one of his fellow believ- 
ers, whose heart, as it seems, had been set aflame 
hereby mightily pressed his way through the peo- 
ple, and coming before him, said : "Strive valiant- 
ly, dear brother, you will suffer no more hereafter." 

Thereupon Jan Wouterss instantly pulled open 
his jacket and showed him his breast bloody from 
the scourging inflicted upon him in prison and said : 
"I already bear in my body the marks of the Lord 
Jesus ;" and he lifted up his eyes to heaven, looking 
longingly as it were to the heavenly resting place. 

In the meanwhile, before all this was properly 
noticed, because of the surging crowd, said person 
went out of sight and disappeared among the peo- 
ple; whereupon some of the servants of justice 
murmured and sternly asked, where this man was. 
This occurred near the swine market, close by the 
New Haven. 

They went on and soon arrived at the place of 
execution, where two stakes stood erected near, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


899 


and around which an innumerable multitude was 
gathered. 

Having arrived there, they ascended the height, 
or erected scaffold, where they on their knees again 
quietly prayed to God, though Jan Wouterss only 
was able to speak, since the mouth of Adriaenken 
Jans was well gagged with the previously men- 
tioned piece of wood, or instrument. 

When they had risen, preparations were first 
made to strangle Adriaenken Jans, whereupon she 
placed herself at the stake. 

Then Jan Wouterss said: "This is the day of 
salvation." But the underbailiff, hearing this, stern- 
ly cried: "Be silent." Thereupon Jan Wouterss 
said: "Why should I keep silent; I certainly 
speak nothing that is evil." 

In the meantime Adriaenken Jans was strangled, 
who, according to the testimony of those who wit- 
nessed it, previous to her burning, remained stand- 
ing at the stake a little while, dressed in a red petti- 
coat. 

The servants of justice then turned to Jan Wou- 
terss, who cheerfully, yea, with a smiling counte- 
nance, placed himself at the other stake, which 
stood close by, where he while being fastened to it, 
noticed that some of his fellow believers stood 
among the people, to see his end ; to whom, with- 
out naming any one, he cried aloud: "Adieu and 
farewell, my dear brethren and sisters, I will here- 
with commend you to the Lord, to the Lord who 
shed His blood for us." With this he made haste 
and prepared himself for death, commending his 
soul to God in these words : "O God, who art my 
strength, I commend my spirit into Thy hands." 

Then fire was set to the wood piled around him, 
and this friend of God was burned alive, as it ap- 
pears, with his dead sister, to the great sorrow of 
many that stood around and were rilled with com- 
miseration at the sight of it. 

This was the end of these two dear favorites of 
the Lord, of whom no one spake any evil (touching 
their life) , but whom every one praised on account 
of their virtuous walk. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION CONCERNING THE DEATH 
OF JAN WOUTERSS VAN KUYCK AND ADRIAEN- 
KEN JANS OF MOLENAERSGRAEF 

When said two persons were led forth to death, 
the hall bell was rung (as was generally done at ex- 
ecutions that took place in the name of the city) , in 
consequence of which a great concourse of the com- 
mon people gathered to the place of execution. 

The gates of the city were closed, or at least 
guarded, that no one could get out or in, except 
with the consent of those who kept watch there, and 
their names were written down after they had stat- 
ed whence they came, and whither they were 
bound. 

When they had arrived at the place of execution, 
which was on the northwest side of the city, close 
by the water's edge, and had ascended the height, 


or scaffold, some among the bystanders called to 
these two valiant persons with a good intention, 
and comforted them, because of their courage, in 
their impending death. Jan Wouterss turned to 
them and exhorted them to amend their life, and to 
accept the true faith, declaring that they both were 
of good cheer and longed for this holy sacrifice. 

Thereupon he was harshly reproved by the un- 
derbailiff, which displeased many, notwithstanding 
they had not attained to the true enlightenment. 

Both of them were then stripped of their upper 
garments and also of their shoes, which were 
thrown among the common people, but picked up 
and taken away by a certain brother named Dirck 
Wouterss. 

Forthwith Adriaenken Jans was first placed at 
the stake, and strangled without delay, seeing 
which and recognizing her, a certain sister of the 
church, whose name is well known, and who had 
come in the market boat from Rotterdam, fainted 
away, and was therefore not able to witness the 
subsequent death of Jan Wouterss. 

This took place as already stated. In the mean- 
time the hall bell was still rung, until about the 
time that the (so-called) justice was finished. 

Note. — We went to no little trouble to obtain at 
the archives of this city of Dortrecht, the old rec- 
ords of their examinations and death sentences, but 
were not able to procure them, as they are no 
longer extant ; they were also, as it appears, never 
put on record in the ordinary's book of criminal 
sentences, which we searched for this purpose. It 
is our opinion that these sentences were simply 
put on loose sheets of paper and thus read in court 
and then destroyed, so that no remembrance of it 
should remain, as it seemed that the city should 
soon change her government and religion, as 
actually took place about three months afterwards, 
through the arrival of William I, Prince of Orange. 

Nevertheless, we are not without other legal 
testimony in regard to this matter. 

Johan van Beverwijck, first physician and judge 
of the city of Dortrecht, writes concerning it, in 
the history attached to his description of Dortrecht, 
in the Dort edition, p. 348, for the year 1572, as 
follows : 

"In the city proper there was imprisoned, ac- 
cused as a heretic, a man of blameless life and con- 
versation, as I learned from those with whom he 
resided, by the name of Jan van Kuyck Wouterss, 
a skillful writer upon glass and painter. 

"The authorities, seeing the disposition of the 
people, were not in haste with his trial; yea, the 
bailiff, Jan van Drenckwaert Boudewijnss, who 
was still young and beardless, had himself painted 
by him, in the attitude of Solomon, where he pro- 
nounces his first sentence. 

"But the monks did nothing but vehemently 
preach against this slackness, and hesitated not to 
proclaim from the pulpit, that the bailiff had appre- 
hended him merely to have himself painted by him. 


900 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


"Hence, this poor man, after many tortures, 
inflicted upon him in order to extort from him the 
names of his master and comrades ; was burned on 
the 28th of March, A. D. 1572, on the New Fortifi- 
cation, together with Adriaenken Jans, a woman 
from Molenaersgraef." Thus far, Johan van Bev- 
erwijck. 

Hence the account of the death of these persons 
is certain and reliable, nor is it doubted by any one 
that we have ever heard here in this city ; the well- 
disposed will therefore be satisfied therewith. 


For our light affliction, which is but for a mo- 
ment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. II Cor. 4:17. 


TOUCHING THE PERSONS THAT WERE THEN IN THE 
COURT OF JUSTICE, AND CONSEQUENTLY, SAT 
IN JUDGMENT IN REGARD TO THIS SEN- 
TENCE; THEY WERE THE FOLLOWING : 

Jan van Drenckwaert Boudewijnss, aged be- 
tween twenty-nine and thirty years, being then 
bailiff of Dortrecht. 

Arent van der Mijle Sir Corneliss, burgomaster 
of the community, who had gone out of office 
about the close of the year 1570, but had now, the 
6th of March, been re-elected. 

Together with (according to the law of said city) 
nine judges : Cornelis Sir Hendricks; Adriaen van 
Mosyenbroeck Sir Govertss; Adriaen Koninck 
Dirckss ; Arent Hendricks ; Gijsbrecht Janss, treas- 
urer ; Michiel van Beveren Sir Pieterss ; Mr. Jan 
van Muylwijck Sir Franss ; Pieter Kool Sir Huy- 
genss; Damas Sir Wouterss, surrogated by Jan 
Adriaenss. 

There we have extracted from the register of the 
lords of justice of the city of Dortrecht, who 
reigned in the year 1572, according to the account 
of the aforesaid Johan van Beverwijck, in the 
book referred to, where he treats of the govern- 
ment of the city, for the year 1572. 

But whether they all together concurred in this 
sentence, or only some of them, by a majority of 
votes among them, is not expressed, nor do we con- 
sider it of much importance to know, since it is 
sufficient for our improvement and edification to 
have learned the unwavering faith and steadfast 
death of the aforesaid martyrs, who died under 
their reign. 

Concerning the death of these friends two hymns 
were composed at that time, in the first of which 
the following words among others were sung, 
touching the cause and time of their imprison- 
ment: 

Terstond daer m zijn Brieven gekomen, 
Te Dordrecht aen den nienwen Schout, 
Die seer jonk is van jaren, etc. 
Right after, letters came: 
To the new Bailiff at Dortrecht, 
Who is very young of years, etc. 


In the other this is sung concerning, their death: 
Adriaenken Jans is eerst omgebrocht, 
't Welck Schout Jan Drenkwaert heeft versocht. 
First Adriaenken Jans was put to death 
Who requested the bailiff Drenkwaert. 

And afterwards : 
Jan Wouterss sprak, met goed bescheyd, 
Dit is den dag der saligheyd. 

Swygt, sprak den Onderschout. 
Waerom sonde ik (seyde hyj 'tspreeken laten, 

Myn woorden zijn niet quaed, noch stout. 
Adriaenken look haer oogen voorwaer, 
Om haren Bruydegom te behagen klaer; 

Die rust nu in den Heer, 
En is de pyn van den brand ontgaen, 

A lie en door sijn genade meer. 
Jan Woutersz heeft hem aen den pael garecht, 
Doen lachre hy [van vreugd'] als een vr'oom 
knecht, 

En beval soo God 

Synen geest in Syne handen* 
Die was sijn Toevlucht, Borgt, en Slot. 
Oorlof heeft hy geroepen aldaer, 
Aen Broeders en Susters in't openbaer, 

Met woorden soet, 
U wil ik den Heer bevelen, 

Die voor ons heeft gestort sijn bloed. 
Dees twee schaepkens zijn door, voort tempeest, 
Wat heeft al [haer] lijden nu geweest? 

Sy hebben de Kroon 
Der Martelaren verworven, 

Die hebben sy nu voor haer loon. 

Jan Wouterss clearly spake : 

This is the day of salvation. 

Be silent, said the underbailiff. 

Why should I, he said, forbear to speak? 

My words are neither bad nor bold. 

Adriaenken too looked forward, 

To please her Bridegroom. 

She rests now in the Lord, 

And has passed the fire's pain, 

Through His bountiful grace alone. 

Jan Wouterss placed himself at the stake, 

Then laughed for joy, as a pious servant, 

And thus commended his spirit 

Into the hands of the Lord, 

Who was his Refuge, Fortress and Castle. 

Farewell, he sweetly called 

To the brethren and sisters openly : 

I will commend you to the Lord, 

Who shed for us His blood. 

These two lambs have now passed through, 

Away tempest! 

What were now all their sufferings? 

They obtained the martyr's crown, 

Which now they hold as their reward. 

In the same hymn is also mentioned, how their 
mouths were gagged, how they prayed to God, 
how they prepared themselves for death at the 

* "In's hi-eren Handen, seyt den Schrijber." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


901 


place of execution, etc.; but we deem the fore- 
going sufficient for a memorial of their sacrifice. 

Note. — As there have come into our hands all 
the letters, testaments and confessions, twelve in 
number, of Jan Wouterss van Kuyck, as also a let- 
ter of Adriaenken Jans of Molenaersgraef, with 
the answer of her husband, J. A. of Dort, all of 
which we have, upon perusing them, found to be 
full of sound and edifying teachings we have 
deemed it well to add the same here for edification 
and perpetual remembrance, so that every one may 
see the active and living faith upon which the 
afore-mentioned friends laid down their lives. 


THE FIRST LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO HIS 

BROTHER-IN-LAW AND HIS SISTER, WHICH 

TREATS OF HIS EXAMINATION AND 

TORTURE 

The abundant grace of God, the love of Christ, 
and the co-operation of the Holy Ghost, be con- 
stantly multiplied with you beloved, my dear broth- 
er-in-law and brother in the Lord, and your much 
beloved wife our dear sister, with all pious saints, 
who are zealous for righteousness, so that through 
this zeal and desire the name of God may be mag- 
nified; for they that are such are a light in the 
world, and a joy and pattern to their neighbor, for 
they constantly seek to please their neighbor in that 
which is good unto edification, that they may with 
all the God-fearing be found diligent followers of 
Christ. If we do thus, I have hope in the Lord, 
that we shall all get where Christ our Lord is, who 
strengthens us, and helps us to triumph, as may be 
read hereafter. Amen. 

After this cordial salutation out of a pure heart, 
I unworthy one, and least member in Christ, can 
not forbear to write you briefly, for a remembrance 
to you all, and for your comfort and encourage- 
ment; for I cannot keep this unspeakable joy of 
the Holy Ghost to myself alone, but must impart 
something to your love. But how can joy be a re- 
markable thing, if one has not experienced anxiety ; 
but I unworthy one have tasted this, the Lord be 
glorified therein. Amen. 

First, when I was apprehended for the obedience 
of Christ, I was interrogated concerning my faith, 
which I plainly confessed; but afterwards they 
asked for certain names, namely, for my wife, my 
mother, my master, and who baptized, and married 
me, and for other things. Thereupon I replied, that 
I had resolved in my heart not to name any one, 
for I intended to answer for myself, and would 
not be a traitor. The bailiff threatened that he 
should make me tell, etc. 

Having been confined there all the time during 
the cold winter, I was brought, the Saturday after 
St. Peter's day, up to the torture loft, where the in- 
struments stood in readiness. The bailiff asked me 
first of all concerning my master, and then regard- 
ing others, and said, that I should also have to tell 
him what he should ask me. They entreated me ; 


they threatened me ; and said : "Though we know 
nearly all, and your master is possibly gone al- 
ready, we will nevertheless hear it from your lips ; 
hence do not suffer your limbs to be broken, but tell 
it voluntarily ; else we shall deliver you to the exe- 
cutioner, and then you will have to do it." When 
they could obtain nothing from me, the upper part 
of my body was stripped, in the bitter cold, my 
hands were tied behind my back and made fast to 
the loft, and also my feet were bound, and I was 
thus, with my eyes blindfolded, drawn up by my 
hands, after I had been entreated to have a regard 
to my fine trade. And he said, that I should spare 
my members, my members which God had given 
me, for I had no power over one hair of my head. 

As I kept silent, I was scourged with rods, and 
the stripes fell mostly on my abdomen. Having 
been thus treated, I was let down and again asked ; 
but the Lord be praised, they obtained nothing 
from me, though I had drank that bitter cup. I 
was then drawn up again, and scourged as before. 
O flesh, you must suffer now, I thought. While I 
was thus suspended in agony, a halberdier ran 
from the loft and said: "I would rather be dead 
than that man;" because he only stood there and 
beheld it. 

When I did not reply in regard to anything, the 
executioner said : "What, will you not answer my 
lords? Reply to my lords; or have you a dumb 
devil in you ?" 

They asked me whether I would advise with my- 
self until Monday, and then tell them the truth (as 
they call it), in regard to all. I kept silent and 
thought, why should I advise with myself ; I do not 
want to tell you anyway. I prayed within myself, 
that the Lord should not suffer me to be tempted 
above that I was able. I also openly called upon 
the Lord, and prayed that He would forgive them. 
The jailer once thought that I was beside myself ; 
but I know nothing about that. The executioner 
imagined he would make me tell ; he had had [he 
said] so many of our people under his hands, who 
eventually had to tell everything ; but the faithful 
Helper in distress kept my lips. They then released 
me, and themselves gave me a respite that I should 
advise with myself until Monday ; but if I should 
then not do it, I should be dealt with in an extraor- 
dinary manner ; and they threatened me much, so 
that it was dreadful to hear. They said this was yet 
of the least, that it was only child's play compared 
to other, future tortures. But when I looked at my- 
self, and beheld my body which was bloody from 
the scourging; for that was certainly one of the 
severest pains, I thought to myself: Is this only 
child's play? The jailer went away, and said to 
his wife : "They will torture the man to death." In 
short, I was so tortured that they had to dress and 
undress me. All this the vile flesh had to bear, 
which has so often grieved me, and would con- 
stantly walk in the crooked path, to gratify its lusts ; 
it had deserved yet more. This having taken place 
in the afternoon, I was not well able to sleep in the 


902 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


night, but counted the striking of the clock all 
night, and during the night I moaned most lament- 
ably. But afterwards I received a great, peaceful 
joy and gladness of the Holy Ghost, so great that 
I cannot adequately describe it ; because the Lord 
had so faithfully kept my lips, and not suffered me 
to be confounded in my confidence, which I poor, 
simple servant had already before I was appre- 
hended ; but herein the Lord proved me unworthy 
servant, praised be His name for evermore. 

Now when my sufferings became noised through 
the city, there were worldly people who rejoiced 
that I had kept my lips sealed : and if such people 
can rejoice, how much more shall the God-fearing 
rejoice, and praise God. 

Further, the appointed day drawing nigh, I ear- 
nestly prepared myself for it, and made supplica- 
tion to my God, that He would not chasten me un- 
worthy servant according to my sins, according to 
His justice, but according to His fatherly mercy, 
that He would keep my lips, and alleviate the pain, 
as He had done the first time. 

When the hour approached, my flesh feared, and 
my soul was afraid, for it had tried it ; but I com- 
forted myself as much as I could, thinking : "You 
will not suffer hereafter, where it will last forever ; 
and this is but a little time." When I came upon 
the torture loft, on Tuesday (it was delayed a 
day), I was asked, to what conclusion I had come. 
I said, that my conscience would not allow it; I 
could not do what they requested. 

They said: "You can; we take that upon our- 
selves." I said: "Everyone must stand for him- 
self." They said: "How can your master or your 
wife get into trouble; for they are gone already; 
what harm can it do the place where you were bap- 
tized?" "I think," said the bailiff, "that it took 
place at your master's ; but I do not know it for cer- 
tain ; and he that baptized, and he that married you, 
has left the king's country, for it was so long ago." 
The secretarv's servant also said to me : "Why will 
you conceal it ? the pains are too great, and in the 
end vou will do it after all. as those of Breda." 

Thev concluded, that they would send me a 
learned man. who should prove to, or instruct, me 
with the Scriptures, that I could do it. 

When thev were assembled together in another 
place, the bailiff asked, in what I was troubled. 
Thereupon the prior said : "You can well do it, and 
name your neighbor, for if you are the true people, 
thev will then with you receive the crown of mar- 
tyrdom ; but since vou are not, then also hate the 
wicked, even as God hates them.". 

O abominable expositor ! whose exposition tends 
only to destruction. O Lord God. convert their 
hearts, who thirst so greatly after innocent blood. 
As we could not agree, we separated. 

The following day (which was Wednesday) I 
was brought forth again, and asked as before. I 
said, that I could not do it ; my conscience did not 
allow it ; if I did it, I think my heart would never 
be at rest ; hence I would rather die with a peaceful 


heart, than live with a troubled conscience. The 
Scriptures teach us: "Do to men as you would 
have them do unto you ; love your wife ; love your 
neighbor as yourself." Matt. 7:12; 22:39. 

The bailiff said : "You love your neighbor more 
than yourself." I rejoined that one ought to lay 
down his life for his brother. I John 3 :16. When 
with many words, entreaties and threats they could 
get nothing out of me, the executioner again seized 
me, and I again humbly entreated my God, as be- 
fore in the first conflict. 

I was then stripped, and my hands tied behind 
my back ; and I was much entreated, that I should 
do it. Thus I was drawn up, but not fastened be- 
low ; I expected to be laid upon the rack. 

When I had been drawn up, and could not an- 
swer according to their will (for the seed of God 
remained in me), he scourged me upon my lacer- 
ated skin, which caused me great pain. And he 
said: "How does this suit you? thus I will tear 
open your old wounds ;" and he threatened me in 
an extraordinary manner. He then let me down 
again, and placed me before the lords, upon the 
rack, sitting with my eyes blindfolded, as an Ecce 
Homo.* And he asked, whether I would not yet 
tell it to my lords. I replied, that I could not do it ; 
hence he drew me up again, which caused me great 
pain ; and when he shook me, and jerked the rope, 
the pain was increased. When they could obtain 
nothing from me, they let me down, and gave 
me time for consideration till the next day. But 
while I was suspended, the bailiff said : "Your face 
is as sweet as that of an angel, but vour heart is 
harder than Pharaoh's heart." I said: "This is 
not so : and the Lord will make it manifest here- 
after ; I have in my simplicity sought my salvation." 

And when the executioner began to dress me, 
I said to him: "O friend, how you have treated 
me ; you have not for a long time thus treated a 
rogue, who felt it so loner afterwards as I." Then 
he answered, saving : "They confess, but vou will 
not confess : and the weather is cold, and it cannot 
come so quickly." 

When the bailiff heard this, he said to me : "You 
are worse than a roeue ; for these have sinned, but 
you have apostatized from God. and denied Him ; 
hence He forsakes you in your distress." I said : 
"If this is true. I am a poor man; but I have a 
better hope." "Yea." said he, "you are a strayed 
sheep: the wolves have taken vou away, and de- 
voured you," etc. He also told me, that we people 
did not get baptized until we were first tried be- 
tween two naked women. I said, that no such thing 
obtained with us. Thev also talked to me about 
David Toriss. I disavowed him and all his adher- 
ents. _ The executioner said that we held the belief, 
that infants that died in their mother's womb can- 
not be saved. I denied it. Another said, we had to 
give a pound Flemish when we were bantized. 
whether we had it or not. I think the bailiff said 


Behold the man I John 19:5. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


903 


this, for besides he said that in the church only 
three stivers or thereabouts are given, when one 
has a child baptized. I denied that too. O offense, 
offense ! what have you done already, whereby the 
innocent have had to suffer? for the wicked soon 
take cause, though they should hear false testi- 
mony, even as was the case with regard to our Lord 
Himself, and Stephen. In short, the number of the 
infamous things said was exceedingly great, and, 
I suppose that to some the infamous speeches and 
their threats, are almost as grievous as the tortures. 
Hence patience is especially needful, in order to 
overcome in this conflict. Christ may therefore 
well say : "Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly 
in heart ; and ye shall find rest unto your souls." 
Matt. 1 1 :29. That this is a true doctrine, I indeed 
now experience. He, the Lord Himself from heav- 
en, who was mightier than all men, suffered shame, 
reproach and contempt, and thus took possession 
of His own kingdom (Luke 24:26); how then 
should we not bear it, who are but for a litle time 
subjugated by our enemies. 

Hence I unworthy servant beseech all the God- 
fearing, that you forget not, constantly to learn of 
Christ, for He is meek and lowly in heart ; and also 
possess your souls in patience, and you shall find 
rest, for patience is our strength. To be patient, 
and thus wait for the help of the Lord, is a good 
thing ; for in Proverbs it is written, that a patient 
man is better or greater than a strong man. Lamen- 
tations 3:26; Prov. 16:32. Take for an example, 
Abraham, Jacob, Moses, the three youths, Daniel, 
the seven brothers and their mother, Job, the 
prophets, and the end of our Lord. 

Thus, my most beloved, trust God, and believe 
in Him, He will help you since He has promised it. 
But if you do not trust Him, consider whether you 
also believe, that God is almighty and true, even 
as you believe, that by His Word He created heav- 
en and earth, and the sea and all that in them is. 
David testifies, and rejoices in it that He is a God 
who is ready to help. He further savs, that He is 
a buckler to all those who trust in Him. Yea, His 
angels encamp round about us, to keen us. But if 
we do not trust Him, how then shall He help us ? 

When I again expected the hour of my tempta- 
tion, I, unworthy servant, besought the Lord my 
refuge, that He would also keeo me the third time, 
as He, through His grace, had done twice ; so that 
I should not be confounded, and that they should 
not deprive me of my boast (that is, the good pur- 
pose of my heart in the beginning), so that I might 
keep the faith in a pure conscience. Then I hope 
to praise, glorify and magnify Thy holy name, to 
the joy of the pious saints, and to the babes, as a 
comfort and a sweet savor of life, that, smelling it, 
thev may thereby be refreshed and strengthened, 
to become the bolder in the truth, which is the 
strongest of all, and will always conquer (I Esd. 
4 :38) ; and not regard what men, who must perish 
like grass, may do to us, since it is manifestly 
found, that the Lord's hands are not shortened, but 


that He also assists the pious, as David testifies. 
For, dear Lord, if I did not continue valiant, what 
a great sorrow would it be for the young babes, and 
to what great blasphemy it would give rise. I be- 
seech Thee, O heavenly Father, have compassion 
on me, poor sinful man, and remove from me the 
rest of the cup, if it is possible; and if it is not 
possible, Thy will alone be done. Lord, help me to 
triumph, for Thou knowest how the stripes of men 
taste. I commit myself into Thy hands ; though they 
exceedingly threaten me, they have not power to 
harm one hair of our head, Thou must first permit 
them ; but Thy holy will be done to my salvation. 
O Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. Acts 7 :60. 

Now when I had thus prepared myself, I heard 
that they were torturing our beloved sister, my fel- 
low prisoner. It seemed to me, that she was also 
drawn up, and let down again. When she would 
not confess, she was drawn up again, and was then 
also made fast below by her feet. When she had 
suffered the anguish for a while, she was let down 
again, and carried away. Then thought I: Now 
comes my turn ; now they will come and take me 
poor lamb out of the pen, to the slaughter. While 
thus waiting, I much consoled myself, thinking, 
how soon a man is unmade ; for it seems to me that 
she scarcely suffered the torture half an hour. 

When I had thus with Abraham delivered up 
my only son, that is, my flesh, the Lord suddenly 
interposed and turned my tribulation into great 
joy. In the first place by this, that the Lord had 
also kept the lips of that weak lamb; and in the 
second place, that it seems that they are satisfied 
with the sufferings which I have undergone before 
my sacrifice. 

I have written this, not to cast you down, but for 
the reason that you saints of God should rejoice 
with me in the Holy Ghost, and help me thank the 
Lord, that He has so faithfully helped me ; and that 
you may know how wonderfully God works in His 
elect ; as also a pious witness of Christ, Karstiaen 
L., has testified in his letter, and Joris the dyer, 
who was a witness of the truth with me here ; and 
would not name those that were dead, for he said 
in himself : "If the devil comes upon the first step, 
he also comes higher." Oh, I think one loses his 
strength, in a measure, thereby; for I thought, 
though they do not know my master, and though I 
also know that he is gone, together with my dear, 
beloved wife, and others, yet they would not be 
satisfied, they are determined to torture me, and 
I want to be silent in regard to the one as well as 
to the other ; it will now be made manifest, how the 
Lord helps those that trust in Him. Oh, what a joy 
is the victory through Christ; now my faith in 
Christ is tried, my fear of God, and my confidence 
which I had already before I came into bonds, my 
love to God and to His holy church, as the gold in 
the furnace and upon the touchstone; for other 
trials can be borne tolerably well, when one has 
enough and can go where he pleases; but when 
one, with Job, is touched in his skin (Job 2:4, 5). 


904 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


when the skin is lacerated, so that the blood flows, 
and this is repeated after four days, that touches 
the quick. O thou daughter of Zion, thou bride of 
the Lamb, be not dismayed, the Lamb shall gain 
the victory ; be of good courage in the short conflict 
that is set before you, for all things are promised to 
him that overcometh; he that continueth faithful 
unto death shall receive the crown of life, and shall 
not taste eternal death, or the everlasting torment. 
I do not know that my torture lasted over two 
hours in all ; but the threatening, the contempt, and 
the tormenting lasted somewhat longer. My most 
beloved, is this not a small torment? should one 
therefore forsake the truth? should one therefore 
deny the Lord, and burden his conscience by men- 
tioning names ? nay, when one is nevertheless fre- 
quently subjected to suffering. Oh, no; the Lord 
Himself fights the battle for us ; to Him alone be 
praise forever. Amen. 

Thus, you beloved and saints of God, who have 
become partakers of the heavenly calling through 
Jesus Christ, despond not, nor be afraid of them 
that kill the body, for they have no power over the 
soul. I unworthy one, have espied for you the help 
of the Lord ; hence I bear witness of Him, that He 
is a faithful helper in distress, as is written of Him ; 
yea (He says by the prophet), though a mother 
forget the son of her womb, whom she brought 
forth, yet will I not forsake nor forget thee. Isa. 
49:15; Heb. 13:5. 

Hence, all you that believe the Lord's promise, 
continue steadfastly. Oh, that no one from despond- 
ency may keep back for any calling or ministry of 
the saints, according to ability ; for no one may live 
to himself, or withhold himself ; so that the work of 
the Lord may always be carried on with readiness ; 
and help bear one another's burden ; if it goes thus, 
it is a joy, and the work can be carried on without 
murmuring ; and know, whatsoever good thing any 
one does, the same shall follow him. Eph. 6:8. 

Excuse me for writing in general; I hope that 
the fainthearted will hereby gain a little courage 
and confidence through my bonds ; yea, I hope, that 
the afflicted will become more cheerful because 
such great help is found with the Lord, who is 
nevertheless not seen, for I testify to you with the 
apostle : "Though our outward man perish, yet the 
inward man is renewed day by day. For our light 
affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory ; while we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen." II Cor. 
4:16-18. Now I can write and testify to the same 
with regard to this, that the suffering is light, be- 
cause it is short; for when all my tortures were 
over, I do not know that I felt as much pain after- 
wards as I once suffered for a time from a little 
ulcer, of which my dear wife well knows, and that 
I had to bear and found no promise for bearing it. 
But if we bear this suffering for the Lord's sake, 
all the principal promises are ours ; yea, there are 
no more glorious or greater promises than these, 


namely : that they who submit to the sufferings of 
Christ, and through Christ overcome, to them the 
crown of life is promised; and there is also this 
testimony in our hearts, that we are not bastards ; 
yea, we shall be honored and crowned by Christ 
Himself. For this holy estate I know that I am 
not worthy ; but the merciful, good God does nev- 
ertheless count me worthy to bear this reproach 
for His name's sake; praise to Him forever. 
Amen. 

Herewith I will conclude this, asking you to ex- 
cuse my simple letter ; and I will commend you all, 
and particularly my most beloved brother-in-law, 
and my dearest sister, to the Lord, who is able to 
finish the good work which He has begun in you, 
that you may receive a full reward with Jesus' 
Christ our Lord, whither I will go before, and 
await you there, that we may then live together 
in eternal joy. 

To this end may the good God grant His grace, 
so that no one, because of this little torment, may 
forsake the way of eternal life, and thus become 
like the fearful and fainthearted servants (Judg. 
7:3), who cannot go into battle with Gideon, who 
do not believe in God, nor can set their seal to it, 
that God is faithful, almighty, and true. What there 
is promised to such in the Scriptures is manifest, 
namely, eternal torment, as to sorcerers and idol- 
aters. Rev. 21 :8. What will it avail them to have 
borne the name of a Christian, if one does not 
continue steadfast? then we must ignominiously 
perish, like the ten unbelieving spies. Num. 14:37. 
What does it avail to have been delivered out of 
Egypt, if one does not believe ; for the unbelieving 
will all be destroyed? What did it avail Lot's wife 
to have gone out of Sodom: for she looked back? 
Hence, all you beloved saints of God, strive val- 
iantly for the truth unto death. And always have 
such a mind in you ; and the Lord shall fight your 
battle, and you shall then, if you wait with pa- 
tience for it, rejoice in the end, even as I do now. 
For a confirmation of the truth, read the holy 
Scriptures; there you will find how the Lord 
fought for Israel, for Daniel, Gideon and Jehosh- 
aphat, and for others; though they had but little 
people, yet such great numbers were slain, that 
they could not take away the spoil in three days 
II Chron. 20:25. 

Furthermore, it is necessary and very profitable, 
to write comforting letters and send them to the 
miserable, forsaken ones, for they are greatly com- 
forted thereby. Let everyone do his diligence in 
this resoect, as much as possible, and put forth your 
best endeavors herein, and pray the Lord for suit- 
able means, without detriment to any one ; likewise 
also, to visit them ; but above all, constantly to prav 
for them, and to lift up holy hands with Moses, till 
they have finished the fieht, and overcome against 
their flesh, against the stinsr of sin, and against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world, wherein Satan 
works. Hence let everyone lay to heart what the 
apostle says : "Remember them that are in bonds, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


905 


as though ye were in bonds." Heb. 13 :3. "When 
one member suffers, the other members suffer with 
it." I Cor. 12:26. 

Herewith adieu on this earth to all the God-fear- 
ing; be of good courage; for courage lost, battle 
lost, I cordially greet you all in the Lord, but par- 
ticularly my dearest brother-in-law and his be- 
loved wife I thank you heartily for all your great 
friendship. 

Commenced the last Thursday in February, and 
finished the first of March. I unworthy servant 
bear the marks of the Lord above both my hands 
and on my body ; the name of the Lord be praised 
forever. 

By me confined as a prisoner in the Vuylpoort, 
for the obedience of the gospel, I said to the jailer : 
"Though I could knock the jail into pieces with 
my fist, I should not want to do it, lest he should 
get into trouble on my account. 

Jan van Kuvck. 


THE SECOND LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, WRIT- 
TEN TO HIS BROTHER AND HIS SISTERS 

The eternal and merciful God grant you, my only 
brother and my beloved sisters, His grace through 
Jesus Christ, that you may together get a desire, 
taste and longing for your salvation, unto the end 
of your life. Oh, that this would happen, dear 
Lord, what a joy would it be to us hereafter ; which 
I hope will be so, that our old, venerable beloved 
father, and our venerable mother and their chil- 
dren, will find one another in life eternal. Amen. 

In the first place, T hope in the Lord, that you 
with me have received a desire, taste and longing 
for salvation. Hence, I now exhort you a little, that 
you will increase therein, since the Lord has 
granted you His grace, and opened your eyes, so 
that you can discern good from evil. 

Thus, my dearest, beloved brother, since you 
have received this grace, that you know and believe 
(as I trust you do) that God hates evil and loves 
righteousness, thank the good and omnipotent God 
for it, and particularly, that He has delivered us 
from the hands of Satan through Christ Jesus, and 
has according to His mercy begotten us again by 
the word of life, and has helped us in this accept- 
able time ; in which time He has caused His saving 
grace to shine upon all men; and you, my dear 
brother, have taken heed to this saving grace, you 
have received, as I trust, this light, which is Christ 
Jesus. The Scriptures testify that to them that 
have received Christ (that is, who believe in Him), 
power is given to become the children of God. 
John 1:12. Hence suffer yourself constantly to be 
governed, directed and guided by Him, through 
His Spirit ; for these are the true children of God, 
that are led by His Spirit ; they are Christ's. 

Now, my dearest brother, be careful all your 
life, to guard well this good and most precious 
treasure: that you may live of it, and ever follow 


what the saving grace of God (namely, Christ 
Jesus who is our light), teaches us. 

In the first place, the saving grace of God 
teaches us to deny the ungodliness of this world, 
and its lusts and desires; as Paul says: "And be 
not conformed to this world ; but be ye transformed 
by the renewing of your mind, that is, after the 
mind of Christ." Tit. 2:11, 12; Rom. 12:2. If you 
do this, you will walk in the light, and not in dark- 
ness, wherein the world walks. Beware, my be- 
loved brothers, of the works of darkness, and have 
no fellowship therewith, but always separate from 
them, and touch not the unclean thing, namely, all 
evil ; and you shall be a child of God and remain 
one if you abide in Christ unto the end. Eph. 
5:11; II Corinthians 6:17. 

I unworthy one imprisoned for His name's sake, 
affectionately beseech you, always adhere to the 
Word of the Lord, and you shall never fall, and 
whatsoever you shall ask the Father in His name, 
that will He give you ; though one thereby incurs 
suffering, we must not faint on that account, for it 
is made manifest thereby, that the way is narrow, 
and the gate strait, which leads unto life eternal. 
But this suffering is transient, and if we suffer 
with Christ, we shall also be glorified together ; for 
the sufferings which men can inflict upon us, are 
short and light, and work for us a far more exceed- 
ing and eternal weight of glory ; while we look not 
at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen ; for though our outward man 
perish, which at all events must perish, yet the in- 
ward man is renewed day by day. II Cor. 4:17, 18, 
16, and when the faith has been kept, and we have 
overcome, all is sweetened by Him who strengthens 
us, which is Christ ; He helps us to triumph ; this I 
experience best now that I am in the trial ; to Him 
be praise forever and ever. Amen. 

But, my dear brother, think not that something 
new has happened to me, just as though it had not 
always been thus. 

Read of righteous Abel, and you will understand 
the Word of Christ, that the servant is not better 
than his lord. Matt. 10:24; John 13:16. Dear 
brother, the head, which is Christ, suffered Him- 
self ; the members must follow ; and it is a special 
sign of love, that He sends me this chastening, to 
prove me, whether I indeed fear, love, and trust 
Him from the heart. In short, I deem it to be for 
my salvation ; His holy will be done to my salva- 
tion. Amen. 

Hence I now declare to you, my dearest brother, 
that this is and shall ever remain the only right 
truth, for which I now suffer for a little while. 
Thus, my dearest brother, diligently read the Word 
of the Lord with devotion, and meditate well upon 
it, and always pray the Lord in every concern, with 
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, with perse- 
verance ; for if you live according to the Word of 
the Lord, you shall prosper, and never fall (II 
Pet. 1:10), for in the Word of the Lord is our 
light, which is Christ Jesus. Let us follow Him, 


906 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


and we shall get to Him where He is ; by our High 
Priest Christ Jesus, there I will await you, my dear 
wife, my daughter, our father, and mother, and 
sisters, if you all die in the Lord, namely, if you 
adhere to the truth unto the end and follow the 
Lord, as I hope that you with all the saints of God 
will do, I will go before, and herewith write to 
all of you in this short time. Adieu ; the Almighty 
God grant you all His grace, that you may always 
have good courage to obtain your salvation through 
Christ Jesus ; and be diligent in love, and be a pat- 
tern to one another in every good work unto life 
eternal. 

Thus, my only, dear brother, I have now written 
you a little, for your remembrance, and to stir up 
your minds (II Pet. 3:1), and for your consola- 
tion, that you fear not men, but only the Almighty 
God, who is eternal. As for man, his days are as 
grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. 
For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone. Ps. 
103:15, 16; Isa. 40:6. Men are perishable; they 
cannot harm a hair of our head, unless the Lord 
permit them. And He will not permit them more 
than we are able to bear and keep the faith. 

Oh, it affords such peace, when one by the help 
of the Lord has kept his lips. Praise ye, all my 
friends, our strong and faithful God, who kept my 
lips in the first torturing. I hope and trust that 
He who helped me first is able to help me again, 
for He has promised it to us unworthy creatures 
(His words are yea in Him ; He is a faithful help- 
er in distress, as David says : "With the Lord help 
is found, he is our shield, our fortress, and the 
strength of the poor"). But we must also trust 
Him ; who was ever confounded, that trusted in the 
Lord ? Hence cease not to seek your salvation, and 
be not slothful in your business, but be fervent in 
spirit, patient in tribulation, and continuing in- 
stant in prayer. Rom. 12:11, 12. But if you feel 
no fervor in you, pray the Lord for it, and He will 
give it you, if you only sincerely seek the kingdom 
of God and His righteousness, as I trust you do. 
But beware of trusting in the world ; possess your 
souls in patience ; the Lord can easily in due time 
give you a God-fearing person for a companion; 
but first diligently pray the Lord, to so order it 
that you will first unite with the God-fearing. 
Write my brother-in-law a letter some time, and he 
may be prompted to write you also, and to advise 
you wherein you may need advice. I thank you for 
the friendship which you have hitherto shown me. 

Written the second day after Matthew, in Lent, 
on which day I was again suspended twice and 
once scourged; but, my only brother, the strong 
God again kept my lips. Hence I pray you, rejoice 
with me, and praise the Lord, since I have great 
joy now ; and be not dismayed in your mind be- 
cause my flesh has suffered a little while ; for now 
the good heavenly Father has tried my faith, as 
gold in the fire, whether I would also trust and fear 
and love Him in the severest conflict. And now 
that He has found me faithful, from one tribulation 


to the other, so that through the grace of God I 
have overcome the rulers of this world (wherein 
I have greatly rejoiced from the heart), and this by 
the prayer of the faithful, and the co-operation of 
the Holy Spirit, henceforth there is laid up for me 
the crown of eternal life, to receive the same from 
Christ through grace. Thither I will now go be- 
fore (and first put off this mortal clothing of the 
flesh), with the prepared burning lamp ; for I have 
kept, and not denied, the faith, nor love, nor 
Christ. The faith is the oil, a pure heart and con- 
science the wick, and fervent love the light. 

Do you also daily adorn yourself therewith, to 
meet Christ our Bridegroom ; and take possession 
of the promised land, that is, the everlasting king- 
dom of God. But be not afraid on theiway because 
there are many enemies, robbers and wolves in the 
wilderness, namely, in the world ; and be not dis- 
mayed on this account, for I have passed through 
it all by the help of the Lord, and have spied out the 
country in advance for you and many of the God- 
fearing, so that I can now write you that you need 
not stay back on account of the peril, and this 
because the Lord Himself conducts our conflict; 
He fights for us, and He is certainly the strongest ; 
for He said to Abraham : "Fear not ; for I am thy 
shield, and thy exceeding great reward." Gen. 
15:1. Was this said to Abraham alone ? Paul says, 
it is written for our learning, that we through pa- 
tience and comfort of the Scriptures might have 
hope. Rom. 15:4. 

Consider former examples, how God fought for 
Gideon, David, Jehoshaphat, and others ; the peo- 
ple [the hostile army] were slain without their hav- 
ing to lift up a hand. Oh, my only dear brother, 
put your whole trust in the Almighty, for with 
Him help is found, He is a true helper in distress, 
He does not forsake His own in all their tribula- 
tions; so that we may say with the apostle: "If 
God be for us, who can be against us? He that 
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for 
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give 
us all things? Romans 8:31, 32. If He has mani- 
fested such great love towards us, how should He 
not preserve us in every extremity. 

Believe this, that the good God is our debtor ; if 
we unwaveringly continue to walk in His way, and 
cleave to Him, and not forsake Him, He will also 
not forsake us. This is certainly a sure promise; 
but if we deny Him, He also will deny us. II Tim! 
2 :12 ; Luke 12 :9. O how thoughtless, how unwise, 
yea, how unmerciful toward their poor souls, are 
they, who, because of this little, short suffering, 
through fear, forsake the way of life and choose 
another way according to their own mind, to es- 
cape the cross of Christ, and comfort themselves 
with a vain consolation in the way which they have 
found according to their own views ; whose end is 
destruction. But, my only dear brother, do not fol- 
low these, for they that are such do not believe that 
God is almighty and true. Hence the Scripture 
says: "Woe unto the faint-hearted! for they be- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


907 


lieve not; therefore shall they not be defended. 
Woe unto them that persevere not ! how will it go 
with them when the Lord shall visit them? (Sir. 
2:13, 14), yea, their part will be with sorcerers in 
the lake that shall burn forever." Thus, take cour- 
age with Joshua and Caleb; but you must firmly 
believe in God's promises, even as you believe that 
God has created heaven and earth by His Word ; 
and you shall then devour all your enemies like 
bread, and through patience finish your conflict 
with the help of God, and take the promised land 
by force, for the violent take it by force. Num. 
14:9; Matt. 11:12. 

But, dear brother, the apostle testifies, and I un- ' 
worthy one also, that we wrestle not only against 
the rulers of the world, but also against the spirits 
that are under heaven (Eph. 6:12), and as Christ 
says, that in the latter days many false Christs shall 
arise. Matt. 24:5, 11. This I have also espied for 
you ; for in the time of my faith many false proph- 
ets or false Christians have assailed me ; now they 
came with this fair appearance, now with another. 
But the Lord, who would have all men saved, de- 
livered me from all this and I cleaved to the Word 
of God, as I heard and accepted it in the beginning ; 
and my faith weakened not, though many aposta- 
tized who had seemed to be the most valiant. See, 
thus our faith is tried in many ways, and besides 
by the daily conflict that never ceases ; for it is a 
lasting conflict; the Spirit wars against the flesh, 
and the flesh against the Spirit. Gal. 5 :17. Herein 
I find myself troubled the most; my own sinful 
flesh was my most inveterate enemy, which has cost 
me many a bitter tear. Satan thereby sought to 
sift me as wheat ; but now falling, now stumbling, 
I have come thus far through the grace of God; 
for I always struggled up hard by the grace of the 
Lord. But what was it, I would so fain have been 
perfect, but this weak flesh was always in the way ; 
which must now suffer, and I hope to offer it up as 
a burnt sacrifice. 

Thus, my dearest brother, I have explained to 
you a little what conflict a Christian must wage, 
namely, against flesh and blood, against false spir- 
its, who have laid their subtle arrows upon the 
bow, to shoot in secret at the pious. Hence take 
unto you the armor of God ; that you may be able 
to stand against the subtle assaults of the devil; 
and be girded with the girdle of truth : above all, 
take the shield of faith, wherewith you shall be 
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; 
and have your feet shod so that you may always 
be well prepared for the Gospel of peace ; and take 
the helmet of salvation, the living hope, and the 
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God ; and 
pray always with all prayer and supplication. 
Ephesians 6:13-18. Behold, with these weapons 
of the Spirit we can overcome, and then the crown 
is promised us. But forget not that Jesus Sirach 
says : "My son hast thou sinned ? do so no more, 
but ask God for pardon for thy former sins. Flee 
from sin as from the face of a serpent ; for if thou 


comest too near it, it will bite thee : the teeth thereof 
are as the teeth of a lion, slaying the souls of men. 
All iniquity is as a two-edged sword, the wounds 
whereof cannot be healed." Sir. 21 :l-3. Paul, too 
says : "Mortify your members which are upon the 
earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affec- 
tion, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which 
is idolatry. In short, live according to the Spirit, 
and you shall not fulfill the works of the flesh." 
Col. 3 :5 ; Galatians 5 :16. To this end the good God 
grant His grace, that you may grow up in faith, in 
love, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, so that you may become a perfect man, unto 
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, 
and thus wait for the coming of Christ. Eph. 4:13. 

O my dear brother, take care for your salvation ; 
the time here is so short, and eternity is at hand. O 
heavenly Father, I humbly beseech Thee, that 
Thou wilt keep my only brother from all evil, and 
sanctify him in Thy name through Christ Jesus, 
and ever guide him by the Holy Spirit, that we 
may rejoice together hereafter. Amen. 

Adieu, my only brother on this earth; with 
Christ I will await you. I wrote the first page just 
after I had been tortured; hence it is somewhat 
badly written. Now my hand is a little better, but 
I still have the marks of the sufferings of Christ ; 
His name be praised forever. 

This I have written you in my bonds, the second 
day of March, A. D. 1572. By me your only 
brother, unchanged in mind, imprisoned for the 
testimony of Christ: hence be of good cheer; the 
faith is kept, I have striven unto blood, in the Vuyl- 
poort at Dortrecht. 


THE THIRD LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO THE 
CHURCH OF GOD AT DORTRECHT, WHO WERE 
SCATTERED EVERYWHERE FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF CHRIST 

To the scattered saints and the others at Dor- 
trecht, grace and peace from God our heavenly Fa- 
ther, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, and the co- 
operation of the Holy Spirit, ever be multiplied to 
you all, for consolation on your pilgrimage, so that 
you may be patient in your tribulation, that pa- 
tience may have her perfect work in you, so that 
you may neither weary nor faint in that which you 
have accepted for the salvation of your souls, which 
has come and been brought to us by Christ ; there- 
in we are glad, so that we can rejoice in our tem- 
poral affliction. Remember Christ's prophecy, 
where He says: "Ye shall weep and lament, but 
the world shall reioice ; and ye shall be sorrowful, 
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, which no 
man shall be able to take from you." John 16:20, 
22. O dearest, if we could enter the kingdom of 
God with ease, how could we speak of the narrow 
way and the strait gate ; but because of the tribula- 
tion we can say this, that one must walk in the 
same, and press through the strait gate, and take 
the kingdom by force, through much affliction and 


908 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


adversity ; which confirms the word that the serv- 
ant is not better than his lord. If our Head had to 
take His own kingdom through much suffering 
and contempt, if they called the master of the 
house Beelzebub, should they not call them of His 
household likewise? Luke 24:26; Matt. 10:24, 25. 

In order to pass through all this, and to continue 
steadfast unto the end, trust in God, and believe 
His Word, even as you believe that He has created 
heaven, earth, the sea, and what therein is ; and He 
will help you, and fight the battle for you, so that 
you will not be confounded. For if God be for us, 
says the apostle, who can be against us? He that 
spared not His own Son, how shall He not with 
Him also freely give us all things? The almighty, 
good God grant His grace to this end, that you may 
neither waver in nor doubt God's promises; and 
fear shall depart from you, and you will not care 
what men can do to you, and will possess your 
souls in patience till the day that shall comfort you. 
Amen. 

After this cordial wish to all you beloved, I un- 
worthy servant could not forbear, though my gift 
is small, to write your love a little, to strengthen 
the older, and to give courage to the younger, so 
that every one may persevere steadfastly in the 
conflict that is set before us, always to make sure, 
by the fruits of your faith, your calling and elec- 
tion; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto 
you abundantly in the everlasting kingdom of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. II Pet. 1:10, 11. 
What more would you have? 

Therefore, thou beautiful daughter of Zion, fear 
not, since your entrance is prepared so abundantly. 

O thou fairest among women, therefore the filthy 
wrinkles that disfigure thee must be put from thee. 
Cant. 1 :8. O thou fair bride of Christ, constantly 
adorn thyself more and more with the wedding gar- 
ment of righteousness, and also trim your lamps 
with glorious faith and imperishable love, that you 
may not lack these, as did the foolish virgins, but 
that you may ever possess them abundantly, that 
thereby the light of Christ may shine in you, and be 
manifested by you, to the praise of God, the edifi- 
cation of your neighbor, the salvation of your souls, 
and as a light to the world, and for a testimony 
unto them. Although they then hate you, because 
the bright, morning star, Christ Jesus, has arisen 
in your hearts, bear it, and be not surprised at it, 
for Christ, who is the light Himself, was hated 
and cast out by the darkness before you. II Pet. 
1:19; John 1:5. 

It does not care for your person, but because the 
truth is in you, which the darkness, that is the 
world, tramples under foot, wherefore you become 
a prey to every one. But fear not therefore ; O thou 
warnoress, go on to your promised reward; the 
truth that is in you shall overcome, for it is the 
strongest. O thou fair queen, remember at all 
times, how loathful and unwashed thou didst lie in 
thy blood as an outcast, and that the most mighty, 
richest and eternal King, the fairest above all men, 


chose thee, washed thee, purchased thee with His 
own blood, and accepted thee as His queen. And if 
we always think of our redemption, it is, or ought 
to be, an admonition, to cleave to the royal Bride- 
groom alone, and not to forsake Him through wan- 
tonness or presumption, and run to others; for he 
that forsakes Him, him He will also forsake. His 
jealous love cannot bear or tolerate it, that one 
loves another more than Him ; such a one is not 
worthy of Him. Oh, not so; not for anything; 
though you be surrounded as a lily among thorns, 
and though the bramble has usurped the govern- 
ment of the world (Cant. 2 :2 ; Judges 9 :14), cease 
not therefore to give forth your sweetness, the fair 
fragrance of the lily, your beautiful grapes, and 
your fatness as olive branches; so that everyone 
may be found a sweet savor of Christ in His call- 
ing; the poor, that they be diligent in their labor, 
if they can earn a stiver or a half, so that they may 
have a clear conscience before the Lord. 

Again, that those who have abundance give 
abundantly ; but those who do not have it in abun- 
dance, that they communicate the same with a 
faithful heart. If this is done, and every one prof- 
fers his assistance, the ministers can serve with 
a joyful heart, especially if there are few ministers. 

Further I write unto you, you threescore valiant 
men (Cant. 3:7), always have strong courage, al- 
ways be well prepared with the sword of the Spirit 
at your side, to protect this lovely bride from all 
harm or nightly terror, bringing into captivity 
every thought that exalteth itself against the obedi- 
ence of Christ. II Cor. 10:5. 

Guard well, with a faithful heart, this pleasure 
garden of the Lord, that the cunning foxes that 
creep in may not nestle therein, that the rooting 
swine do not come and dig it up, whereby the young 
|P ro " ts often lose their strength and wither. Psalm 
80:13 Though you then may sometimes have to 
meet false brethren, turn not back on that account, 
nor faint; for if you turn back, what should the 
others do? 

Hence be of strong courage in the Lord; since 
the Spirit of the church h»s chosen you for the 
work of the Lord, offer your heads, and take your 
life into your hands, and go forth in the name of 
the Lord. If they threaten you, think: "We are 
m the hand of the Lord; you are but dust and 
ashes ; the Lord will preserve us." Think : "We are 
not better than our brethren." Though it then 
comes to pass, that one's time is fulfilled, that his 
course is finished, that he must be tried as gold 
before kings, lords, and the rulers of the darkness 
of this world, to praise the name of the Lord; go 
forward nevertheless, and take for your example 
those valiant heroes, as Abraham, Moses, Joshua, 
Caleb, Samson, Gideon, David, the prophets and 
the apostles and consider the former times, how 
mightily the Lord trampled upon the necks of their 
enemies, as Joshua said to his valiant men, that 
the Lord should do to all that did set themselves 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


909 


against them; hence He said: "Fear not." Josh. 
lu:25. 

Most beloved, excuse my simple letter ; though it 
is very simple, yet, whatever its defects, think that 
I hereby manifest in a measure my boldness and my 
affection towards you, which, I unworthy one, have 
had and still have towards you ; yea I have this con- 
fidence by the grace of the Lord, that no one shall 
be able to separate me from the great love which I 
have towards you and the Lord. 

Hence I am of good cheer in all that comes upon 
me, for I find our Lord very faithful ; that He is a 
true helper in time of need, who does not forsake 
His own ; for I have now by the help of the Lord 
striven unto blood, kept the faith, and received 
great consolation in my heart, so that I can rejoice 
in my suffering, and this through the aid of your 
prayers, and by the co-operation of the Holy Spir- 
it. Yea, I cannot tell you the great joy which I 
now have because the Lord has kept my lips. 

Hence I beseech you all most affectionately, re- 
joice, and praise the Lord with me, that He has so 
faithfully succored His poor servant, and has allevi- 
ated my pain, and made a way to escape, so that I 
was able to bear it. 

O most beloved, is this not a great consolation, 
that the holy and good God has made Himself our 
debtor, and has promised us (mark, by promising 
an obligation is incurred), saying: "Though a 
mother forget the son of her womb, yet will I not 
forget thee ?" says the Almighty Lord, if we do not 
forsake Him, and do not sell our birthright as 
lightly as did Esau, for a little life; concerning 
which Christ says : "Whosoever shall seek to save 
his life shall lose it." Luke 17:33. Alas! he loses 
it badly thatwill not find it again ; but well does he 
lose it who will again find an imperishable one. 

This is certainly the promise of Christ, this He 
has merited for us by His righteousness and suf- 
fering; but we must also faithfully strive unto 
death for the truth, and purify our souls by obedi- 
ence to the truth, to persevere in this short con- 
flict: "Therefore take unto you the armor of 
God, wherewith you shall be able to quench all the 
fiery and subtle darts of the wicked. Gird your 
loins with the girdle of truth; put on the breast- 
plate of righteousness; have your feet shod with 
the gospel of peace, so that you may be ready in all 
things ; above all, take the shield of faith, and the 
helmet of salvation [that is, the living hope] and 
the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God ; 
and always pray with all prayer and supplication 
in the Spirit." Eph. 6:13-18; Luke 12 :35 ; I Thess. 
5 :8. With these weapons you can overcome all 
your enemies, in patience and meekness. 

To this end you have many testimonies in the 
Scriptures, and also I unworthy one, your known 
weak brother, bear witness, that these are the true 
weapons ; for I can now write of this because of the 
victory that I have gained through Christ Jesus, 


who always helps me to triumph. To Him alone be 
praise, honor and might forever and ever. Amen. 

Herewith I will commend you my dearest fel- 
low helpers, brethren and sisters to the Almighty 
God and the rich Word of His grace, who is able to 
strengthen you all, and to finish the good work that 
He has begun in you, and to bring you into His 
everlasting kingdom. Amen. 

Herewith I bid you all adieu in this evil world 
full of all wickedness, with Christ Jesus our bride- 
groom I will await you, and there meet you again 
in fullness of joy; the Lord grant His grace here- 
unto. Amen. 

Finally I humbly make this request, that if I have 
grieved any one by word, conduct, or deed, you 
will heartily forgive me ; I likewise do so from the 
heart, but I wish that it had been better with me in 
this respect. Farewell, be of good courage. 

Written by me, your weak brother and humblest 
member, imprisoned for the testimony of the Gos- 
pel of Christ, at Dortrecht, on the 3d of March, in 
the year 1572. Jan Wouterss. 

I was tortured a week ago Saturday, and again 
the following Wednesday. Thus I now bear in my 
body the marks of the sufferings of Christ ; which I 
might have easily escaped, had I been willing to tell 
what was demanded of me. I should in that case 
have acted contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to 
love and my conscience, and should die with a 
troubled heart; many hearts should have been 
grieved; but now I trust that many will rejoice 
with me, and be glad and bold, and praise God. 

Thus, let all of you firmly resolve in your hearts 
to do those things that are of good report, honest, 
and pleasing to God (Phil. 4:8) ; call upon the 
Lord for strength, and be assured in your hearts, 
that He hears your prayer. Ps. 145 :19' Present to 
Him in your prayer His own promises, and you 
shall not be confounded, for He hears the prayer 
of the poor, says David. Also rejoice together, 
that our enemies obtained nothing by the torture 
from our dear sister, my fellow prisoner. There- 
fore praise the Lord, ye saints. Ps. 147. I un- 
worthy one cordially greet you all in the Lord, in 
His name, with the love and peace of Christ. I 
thank you all for your Christian fellowship. O 
most beloved, let that which you have heard and ac- 
cepted from the beginning abide in you, and be- 
ware of those that would take it from you ; for I 
unworthy one testify that you stand in the un- 
adulterated truth; fulfill the same in the fear of 
God, and you shall have peace. 

Writen by me, in bonds, 

Jan Wouterss Kuyck. 


THE FOURTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO 
HIS WIFE 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour, and 
the co-operation of the Holy Ghost constantly be 


910 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


multiplied in you my most beloved wife, for conso- 
lation in your pilgrimage, for the strengthening of 
your faith, for comfort in your tribulation, to the 
praise of God, and the salvation of your soul. 
Amen. 

After this my cordial salutation to you my chosen 
sister and most beloved wife my love towards you 
is great, but my love for the eternal truth is greater 
yet ; the same helps me to overcome all my enemies. 
In this great victory I greatly rejoice, since I have 
now been in the conflict twice. For the sake of this 
victory : in which Christ alone, who is the genuine 
truth, helps us so valiantly to triumph, heartily re- 
joice with me, and magnify and thank the name of 
the Lord. I now know how the cup of suffering 
tastes, but I did not know that the good God works 
in us with such wonderful power; for I received 
such peaceful joy in my heart that I was amazed. 
This was shortly after I had been tortured; yet I 
was greatly threatened that I should be tortured 
again the following Monday, but I thought that the 
faithful God could keep my lips also a second time ; 
and I prayed and entreated Him greatly to mani- 
fest it on me (as it is a small matter for Him), 
that I should not be confounded in my first boast- 
ing, or purpose of my heart, so that my neighbor 
should not be grieved, nor any one open the mouth 
of slander on my account. 

And the eternal good God kept my lips in the 
second torturing; and I was threatened again, but 
my determination never weakened, such grace did 
the Lord give me ; but when I earnestly prepared 
myself for it, and with Abraham offered up my 
only son, that is, my flesh, that he should do His 
holy will to my salvation, the Lord turned my anx- 
iety into joy; yea, that my eyes overflowed for 
gladness, because the Lord had kept the lips of our 
sister, my fellow prisoner, and, in the second place, 
that they were satisfied with my suffering. I also, 
a few days before I was tortured, had received the 
glad news that you were able to say with your 
mouth, though you could pull me out with your 
arm, you should not do it if I were valiant or re- 
signed; which rejoiced my heart, that the good 
Lord thus strengthens and comforts you by His 
Holy Spirit. The eternal, good God be praised 
forever, that He shows to us unworthy ones such 
great tokens of mercy and love. O my dearest 
lamb, how shall we be able sufficiently to thank the 
Lord for it ? Yes, I have joy in my heart, that the 
Lord has counted me, poor man, worthy to suffer 
so much reproach, and contempt, and so many 
threats and stripes. Herewith the Lord proves me, 
even as He proved His dearest chosen ones, as to 
whether I fear Him, sincerely, trust Him in the 
greatest distress, and love Him from the heart. My 
heart leaped up in my body, as it seems to me, for 
joy, because we have such a good dear God. I 
thought that I loved Him, but now that my skin is 
touched, He proves this best Himself. Job 2:4, 5. 

But, my chosen, be not dismayed on this account ; 
this vile flesh has merited yet much more, but the 


Lord chastens us according to His mercy. Thus 
my faith is tried as gold in the furnace ; now all the 
glorious promises of the Lord belong to me ; hence- 
forth there is laid up for me the crown of eternal 
Me; yea, our King, Christ Jesus, will honor me 
Himself. Luke 12:37. Oh, alas! of this I know 
myself that I am unworthy ; but our Lord has ob- 
tained it from His heavenly Father, that He may 
d ° ^is to us, our joy may be full, and that we 
should console ourselves with His promises in our 
tribulation. 

how inconsiderate are all those who lightly es- 
teem, yea, reject all these glorious promises because 
of this brief suffering. Yea, what is this suffering 
when it is over, it is not to be compared with the 
glory that shall be revealed in us. Rom. 8:18. I 
wrote the foregoing letter yesterday, and now I 
have just been before the bailiff and two judges 
and the secretary. The bailiff asked me whether I 
would not yet tell the truth. I said that I had done 
so. "Yes," said he, "as much as you wanted to." 
Then the demand of the bailiff was read to me, set- 
ting forth that I had apostatized from the Christian 
Catholic faith or Roman Church, and had been re- 
baptized by the Anabaptists, and married my wife. 
That having been admonished by divers learned 
men in regard to this error, I persisted in the same ; 
and he further added, that the royal decree pre- 
scribed that I should be punished by being burnt 
alive at the stake ; but if I recanted, the sword, pos- 
sibly also the churchyard should be my portion. 

Then I replied that I had not (or never) aposta- 
tized from the Christian faith ; nor do I know [said 
I] any Anabaptists; I have been baptized but once 
upon my faith; infant baptism I do not regard as 
baptism, and when I was a child I did as a child, 
even as my parents led me. 

Further, I desire grace from the Most High, for 
if I apostatized from my faith, I think that I should 
be eternally lost; but if I adhere to it I hope to be 
saved by the grace of the Lord. 

All this was written. I told them, that they 
should do as they expected to answer for it before 
the Supreme Judge. I demanded that they should 
tell me whether I had wronged any one; that I 
might defend myself. Then he said that I had 
seduced my wife, and my child, and had helped to 
seduce still others, and had held meetings in nooks 
and corners by night, and at unseasonable times, 
contrary to the royal decree. I said: "Who was 
injured thereby?" And I was led away again, 
for they could not bear my words My fellow 
prisoner was also brought forward then, but she 
too remained valiant. 

1 now hope that we shall soon be released from 
all our labor and vexation. Thus, my dearest upon 
this earth, I hope that you shall soon be rejoiced 
still more, when you will hear of my deliverance. 
What more can they do? they connot harm the 
soul ; what more have they then, than that which 
must remain here? It is certainly very profitable 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


911 


to me to be present with the Lord. Though this 
earthly house or habitation perish, we expect a bet- 
ter in heaven, which is eternal, yea, which is like 
unto Christ's glory. What greater eternal joy shall 
we then have, when we shall shine like sparks 
among stubble, yea, like the sun; then shall we 
leap like calves of the stall for joy. Wisd. 3:7; 
Matthew 13:43; Mai. 4:2. 

Hence comfort yourself with these and other 
promises, and hold fast that which you have heard 
from the beginning, as I trust with all my heart that 
my most beloved lamb will do. 

And when I have fallen asleep, then, my most be- 
loved wife and dearest sister, you are released; 
conduct yourself in your widowhood to the praise 
of the Lord, to the edification of your neighbor, as 
a pattern to our most beloved, only daughter, and 
as a light to the world, and to your soul's salvation. 
Endure and persevere in the unadulterated truth 
wherein you stand ; though you be tried so that one 
conflict succeeds another, count it all for your sal- 
vation ; always prepare your heart for patience, and 
the day shall come that will comfort you. 

The promises are thus : "Here tribulation, here- 
after joy." Further, consider how joyfully you 
would have taken my hand, had my parents loved 
the truth; but now that you and I have seen the 
day that they love the truth, it is a special joy. 

Hence I pray you, show them as much honor and 
friendship as lies in you, for my, for our little 
daughter's, and for the truth's sake, as I trust you 
will do ; and if you engage in any traffic, see that 
you keep yourself unspotted from the world. Jas. 
1 :27. If they assail you with words, so that you 
are constrained to tell how much the goods cost 
you; tell it simply, without adding any further 
words, by yes, or by no for that would not become 
us. But if you do not find yourself strong enough 
herein, abandon that traffic, for you can get along 
with a little ; if it is not fat it is lean ; the godly are 
soon satisfied. But if you continue in any business, 
take care that it does not get too large, lest your 
heart become surcharged, so that you can ill per- 
form your prayers. Luke 21 :34. 

Thus, remember what the Holy Scriptures coun- 
sel you for the best, and you will prosper according 
to the soul, as I trust you will. And continue instant 
in prayer, as becomes holy widows ; pray for faith- 
ful laborers, for all the saints, for prisoners, for 
apostates, for kings, princes, the rulers of this 
world ; especially when you see sects or contention 
arising in the church, which must be, in order that 
they that are tried may be made manifest. Al- 
though the elders should lose courage (which God 
forbid), continue in earnest prayer to God, as you 
have an example in the holy widow Judith (Jud. 
8) : and always adorn yourself with a meek and 
quiet spirit, which will adorn you more than all 
jewels, as Peter and the Scriptures teach you (I 
Pet. 3:4), and as you are taught of God Himself; 
and possess your soul in patience, and you shall 
find peace in the Lord, and in your heart. Be also 


of good courage your chief Captain and best Bride- 
groom still lives, and He will keep and feed you 
and our only daughter ; for though i should have to 
wander about with you for a while yet, it must all 
come from Him nevertheless. My most beloved, I 
have shown you a little faithfulness in my bonds, 
by having applied my hands to labor, so that I 
might not be an expense to you, and that you might 
have a little left to meet you in your labor ; which 
is a great joy. 

For I hope and trust concerning you, my dear, 
chosen, most beloved wife, that you will not change 
your state; for the good God has given you a 
special gift for which praise be to Him forever. 

But not, my most beloved, that I would cast a 
rope around your neck, as though I would forbid 
you it. Oh, no; the apostle counsels you what is 
best. I Cor. 7:40. I married you for {life, and 
thank you as affectionately as I can for your dear, 
good companionship, faithfulness and love, of 
which I deem myself in a great measure unworthy. 
Now the only good, merciful God has called me, 
unworthy one, to a higher state, and you can offer 
me, your most beloved on earth, for no higher 
state to the Lord. Thus console yourself with the 
others, for your tribulation shall last for a short 
time only. 

Thus I will write you, my dearest, adieu in this 
evil world, and will commend you to the faithful 
Almighty God, for He alone is able to keep you 
from the evil, and to bring you into His eternal 
kingdom. 

holy Father, I, Thy weak servant, humbly be- 
seech Thee in my bonds, that Thou wilt keep my 
most beloved wife, and my only daughter, and all 
the God-fearing, from the evil, and sanctify them in 
Thy name. O heavenly Father, hear me, unworthy 
one, through Jesus Christ; that we may all enter 
into Thy eternal joy, and no one remain without. 
To this end, may the good God grant His grace. 
Amen. 

Adieu, my only daughter; your beloved father 
shall be crowned a king by our dear Lord. Hence 
be resigned and be an obedient daughter, and dili- 
gently read the holy Scriptures. Live according to 
them, and we shall meet again and rejoice forever, 
without end. Amen. 

Finished on the fourth day of March, A. D. 
1572, by me, your dear husband, imprisoned for 
the testimony of the Gospel of Christ, to the praise 
of God. Amen. Jan van Kuyck. 

1 salute you cordially in the Lord with the love 
and peace that shall endure forever. 


THE FIFTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO HIS 
WIFE AND DAUGHTER 

The unfathomable grace and mercy of our heav- 
enly Father, the abundant love of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the co-operation of His Holy Spirit, 
always be multiplied to you beloved, my chosen on 
earth, for consolation on your pilgrimage, for the 


912 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


steadfastness and confirmation of your faith, to the 
praise of God, and to the salvation of your soul; 
that you may always be a light in this world, and 
also edify your dear, only daughter, and your 
neighbor, in that which is good; so that you may 
always be like unto fruitbearing branches, for to 
this are all believers appointed. If another decreas- 
es and becomes weary, do you constantly increase, 
and let your increasing become manifest before 
God and men, knowing that the good works will 
follow you; and it will be an ornament to your 
wedding garment when you shall appear before 
the supreme Bridegroom; when the slothful, the 
sleepers — who are sufficiently awake to seek that 
which is perishable only too much — shall stand 
naked, then you shall be gloriously appareled. 

Therefore, my dearest sister above all men 
weary not, though you must still walk in this pil- 
grimage; always trim and fill your lamp in sim- 
plicity with oil, and keep it constantly burning, 
and thus with patience wait for your Comforter 
and Bridegroom. Then He shall for a little season 
of faithfulness bid you a glorious and joyful wel- 
come ; for He has opened the way, for you and all 
believers, who use diligence, and add to their faith, 
virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, tem- 
perance ; to temperance, patience ; to patience, god- 
liness ; to godliness, brotherly kindness ; to brother- 
ly kindness, charity. If these things be in you, and 
abound, they make you that ye shall neither be bar- 
ren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these 
things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath 
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. 
Hence Peter further admonishes: Wherefore the 
rather give diligence to make your calling and elec- 
tion sure ; for if ye do these things (mark), ye shall 
never fall (mark still more) : for so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. II Pet. 1 :5-ll. 

Oh, it is very evident from this, how one falls, 
and how one gets into the way of life ; hence, dili- 
gence is a good thing. For David says : "Thou hast 
commanded us to keep the precepts diligently!" 
Psalm 119:4. And Paul says: "Be not slothful in 
business, but fervent in spirit." Rom. 12:11. He 
further writes : "These things I will that thou af- 
firm constantly, that they which have believed in 
God may excel in good works." Tit. 3 :8. 

Oh, how well it goes when one heeds this ! He 
further also says : "O that it were the will of God, 
that those whom I have instructed might minister 
to the furtherance of the truth of the Gospel, and 
become diligent in the works of eternal life." O 
they who lay to heart these divine Scriptures of 
admonition and warning, will not easily grow 
weary ; when others will halt, they will go on with 
a faithful heart, as long as they can draw breath, 
and constantly make no account of what they do, 
because of the divine nature that is in them, which 
love is without measure. Namely, when one con- 


siders in his heart, that Christ, by His great agony 
of death made us dead men alive, and delivered us 
from the power of the devil, and translated us into 
the kingdom of Christ; that He has taken and 
chosen us poor sinners from so many thousands, 
and enlightened us. When they shall go into eternal 
fire, we shall go into everlasting joy, and our vile 
body shall be like unto Christ's glory. Oh, who can 
tell that great joy which shall endure forever? 
Everyone who truiy tastes said love and goodness 
of God does not easily weary in well doing; the 
same, Paul also says, shall reap without ceasing. 
Gal. 6:9. And Christ says: "A good tree bringeth 
forth good fruit." Matt. 7:17. He also says: 
"They that have done good shall arise unto the 
resurrection of eternal life." John 5:29; Dan. 
12:2. O my very dear and beloved wife, though I 
must now leave you, and see you no more, yet by 
the grace of the Lord I hope to see you in the res- 
urrection, but with a glorious and incorruptible 
body. Therefore, my dearest lamb, always go on 
in virtue, according to your ability, as I trust with 
all my heart, my dearest, you will do. Hold fast the 
truth wherein you stand through the grace of God ; 
for it is the rignt truth, and there shall no other be 
found; of this I am sure in my heart. Hence be 
firmly rooted therein, that you may be able to stand 
against all tempests, and not fall through persecu- 
tion, or through being robbed of your goods, or 
your beloved, nor through false Christs, of whom, 
alas ! there are many abroad, who disturb and de- 
ceive many hearts and minds, under the semblance 
of truth, which is adulterated by them; so that 
much bitterness has sprung up, and love has waxed 
cold in a very great measure. 

Yea. I fear, that it will go yet as Christ says : 
When the Son of man shall come, will he find 
believers on the earth?" Luke 18:8. O my most 
beloved wife, I can no longer watch over you by 
the help of the Lord, nor strive for you ; strive now 
for yourself, with earnest prayer to God. He will 
not forsake you, though I must leave you. Trust 
firmly in Him, and always adhere unwaveringly to 
the doctrine of Christ. Fulfill that which you have 
heard and accepted, in the fear of God, and you 
shall have eternal life ; for God is able to perform 
and to accomplish the same good work which He 
has begun in you, without delay. 

Finally, be strong in the Lord, through the 
power of His might, and be well armed against all 
adversity, and you shall triumph by the help of 
the Lord. Set your affection on divine things, and 
overcome that which is human. Col. 3 :2. And I 
beseech you as affectionately as I can, be resigned 
in the Lord, and constantly be mindful of your re- 
demption, and of the treasure that surpasses all 
treasures, which has been given you out of grace ; 
and have in constant remembrance the glorious 
promises; and I hope by the grace of the Lord, 
that the bitter cup and the bitter water Mara, which 
you must now also drink for the Gospel's sake, 
will be, in a measure, sweetened. For, my dearest) 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


913 


you are certainly well aware that these are our meat 
and promises, and that ever since we accepted the 
truth we expected to become a spoil to everyone; 
for the servant is not better than his lord, and we 
must through much tribulation enter into the king- 
dom of God. And consider, from Abel to the pres- 
ent time, how the righteous had to suffer. The 
Scriptures must certainly be fulfilled ; for if I were 
not apprehended, nor another, how should the 
number of the martyrs under the altar be fulfilled ? 
for they wait for the fulfillment. Hence console 
yourself, my dearest, and comfort one another ; for 
I suppose when one weeps the other weeps, too. 
For I can comfort you with the holy Word of the 
Lord; and I am still more assured that I am not 
a bastard, because the merciful Father has been 
pleased to chasten me poor sinful man, and to 
receive me unworthy one as His dear son ; His will 
be done. Therefore pray, and cause prayer to be 
made for me, that I may with my death praise the 
name of the Lord, to the edification, emboldening 
and joy of my neighbor, for a light to the world, 
for the awakening of those who are still in the sleep 
of sin, and to the salvation of my soul. Amen. 

I must also inform you, my dearest on earth, 
that it is a great alleviation to me in my bonds, 
that you are not in custody. Oh, I also cannot 
fully thank my God on account of our poor little 
daughter, who saw her father bound, as though he 
were a murderer ; however, the strong and faithful 
God gave me such grace, that I was hardly fright- 
ened at all, only I said : "O my lords, why do you 
bind me thus, as though I were a wicked man?" 
"Oh," said they, "you inflict this upon you your- 
self;" hence there was much lamenting among 
them. When he asked me concerning you, I spoke 
in a very loud tone to the bailiff, in order that you 
should flee, so greatly was I concerned for you. 
The Lord be praised, that He so graciously chas- 
tens me. 

O dearest lamb, you were certainly very near, as 
may be imagined, if one leaves the cloak behind and 
flees without it. Now, dearest, be of good cheer; 
true, you leave more yet ; but if you leave much you 
shall receive much. And always possess yourself 
in patience, and you shall by the grace of the Lord 
overcome everything that comes upon you ; for pa- 
tience is a special gift of God. Patience is the 
Christian's strength ; this I, unworthy one, have 
discovered indeed, and I also experience it best in 
my bonds which I suffer for Christ's sake. I can- 
not fully thank His grace for His consolation. I 
experience how a man feels that is not imprisoned 
for any evil doing. I experience the Lord's faith- 
fulness, which He has promised His own. I trusted 
in His Word, that He would keep it, before I was 
apprehended; for the Lord says: "Though a 
mother forget the son of her womb, yet will I not 
forget thee." Isa. 49:15. He is certainly the 
strength of the poor, and a true helper in time of 
need. 


Oh, I was in hopes that I should alone seal it 
with my blood; but another weak lamb has fallen 
into the hands of the wolves, and this very strange- 
ly. One would have thought that she was certainly 
not in much danger. She came into my master's 
house, and was held. When my time was fulfilled, 
I also fell into their hands ; I believe that the good 
God has ordered it so for my salvation; for He 
knows better than I, what is necessary for me; 
hence His will be done. O my dearest, be also re- 
signed thus, and offer me up, your most beloved, 
into the will of the Lord, as is our daily prayer; 
for I had many times before prayed the Lord, that 
He should give me, and let come upon us, what is 
for my salvation. I therefore see that the Lord 
wants to take me away from the evil to come, and 
to bring me into rest; for he that loves the Lord 
and the church from the heart is seldom without 
sorrow of heart, but frequently in travail. But now, 
I am also ofttimes, it seems to me, like a woman in 
travail, when I think of your and my daughter's 
grief, and of the sorrow of my old father and my 
old mother ; then I indeed could cry, but the Lord 
gives me consolation again by His Holy Spirit; 
praise to Him forever. Amen. 

I further cannot forbear, but must greatly thank 
you, my dearest, only wife, for having been such 
a dear, faithful wife to me, for more than nine 
years ; the time has passed away so rapidly, that I 
am surprised. I have had such joy in my heart be- 
cause of your love, that I could never fully thank 
the Lord for His grace ; yea, I thought, that though 
the hairs of my head and the grass of the earth 
were tongues, I could not fully thank His good- 
ness; I should remain His debtor. But however 
much I loved you, I had to limit it, in order that if 
it should come to what it has now come, I might 
overcome the parting. 

Again, I loved my daughter rather more than I 
showed; I dared not set my affection too much 
upon her, in order that when I should have to part 
from her, as the Lord has ordered in regard to me, 
unworthy one, the bitter parting should not over- 
come me. But now that the Lord has called me to 
this state, I will commit you both, my dearest 
lambs, to the Lord of lords, and beseech His grace 
to keep you both from the evil, and to bring you 
into His everlasting kingdom. Amen. 

But, alas ! I have often regretted, and do still re- 
gret, that I, miserable man have not walked more 
holy and perfectly with you. Do as I would, I al- 
ways fell far short; so that I did not struggle 
through all the years of my faith without stumbling 
or falling. But the rich God, seeing my good in- 
tention, according to His mercy lifted me up again, 
for He is willing to forgive, as I also gladly forgive 
and His promise is sure : "If we forgive men their 
trespasses, he will also forgive us our trespasses." 
Matt. 6 :14. When I thus felt my own deficiency, 
it caused me to keep myself in humility, and to 
bow myself under the mighty hand of God, and it 


914 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


was an admonition to me to be zealous in my call- 
ing. While I was in a good determination, the 
Lord of lords came, for which eternal praise be to 
Him ; and I often pray Him to forgive those who 
named, delivered, and apprehended me ; I forgive 
them all. O my beloved wife, this I must also 
heartily pray you yet, that you will likewise thus 
forgive them that have sinned against me, and 
caused your grief ; for if you forgave not, I think 
you should prevent the Lord your and my God 
from forgiving your debt ; hence I beseech you to 
forgive it from the heart. And pray for them that 
afflict you, and you will be a good sister in Christ. 
Make God your debtor, and He will also forgive 
your debt; for we need daily forgiveness, because 
we are frail. 

But I am also daily afflicted in this, that our dear 
church — many poor souls — are scattered so, and 
must wander about in foreign countries, yea, some 
of them having nothing to lay hold of, and yet the 
poor children must be fed. Oh, there is a lack of 
cheerful givers in this distressing time. 

Nothing special further for this time ; but I com- 
mend you now and forever to the Lord, and to the 
rich Word of His grace, who is so able to keep you 
from the evil, and to bring you into His everlasting 
kingdom. Amen. I greet you most affectionately 
in the Lord with the kiss of love and peace, and this 
in the heart, as present with you in spirit. Bid our 
beloved daughter much good night in my name, 
and tell her to comfort her mother, and if she is an 
obedient daughter, learns diligently to read, and 
then also to write, and then helps her dear mother 
to gain a livelihood, I shall love her. Greet much 
in my name, in the Lord, all the God-fearing that 
ask you concerning me; tell them to be of good 
cheer all of them, and to hope and trust in the Lord, 
for His hand is not shortened, this I now realize. 
Let therefore no one fear mortal man, but much 
rather the immortal God. I have confessed the 
faith, not sought my life, freely and openly con- 
fessed Christ before this sinful people, for a testi- 
mony unto them, that they may have no excuse to 
make in the day of Christ. 

The bailiff asked me, whether I would not re- 
nounce my faith; that they would then give me 
back my liberty, so that I could gain a livelihood 
for my wife and child as before: "you are yet a 
young man," said he, "you can raise children yet, 
and increase the world." I answered, that I did not 
wish to renounce. The bailiff said : "Do you not 
want to live then ?" "Yes, my lord, but I will not 
renounce my faith for anything in the world." In 
going he said that I erred ; he would prove to me 
from history, that the doctrine which I said in the 
time of the apostles was called the sect of the Naz- 
arenes, is openly contradicted; you must see that 
our faith has existed for so many centuries, and 
been handed down from generation to generation. 
I said, "I do not look at the years, but at the truth." 
Thus we parted. 

Go not around much with my letter, lest I lose 


my liberty [of writing] ; the Lord be praised for it. 
If any one feel constrained by love to write a little, 
send it; put into it, a little color, and soil it a little, 
and it will be noticed the less. Write me how you 
and my daughter are; send it with color, or some 
spice, if it be only fennel seed, or a piece of cake ; 
it shall be acceptable to me. Salute cordially your 
brother and his wife. 


THE SIXTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO HIS 
ONLY DAUGHTER IN PARTICULAR 

The eternal, almighty, good God, who by His 
word created heaven and earth, and the sea, and all 
that therein is, be with you. Because I sought Him 
in my simplicity, for the salvation of my soul, I am 
imprisoned by His enemies, which I will forgive 
them. But though I am imprisoned, and have also 
suffered for it, i have never yet regretted that I 
sought, in my simplicity, my salvation; for unto 
salvation I am created through Jesus Christ, unto 
good works, that I should walk in them, and here- 
after arise to everlasting life, Eph. 2:10; John 
5 :29. Therefore, my only daughter, attend to the 
instruction of your beloved father. Thus, what I 
tell you according to the Scriptures is this: "Con- 
sider the wickedness of the world, the learned with 
the magistrates, and their adherents, how they 
shed the innocent blood ; they are called spirituals 
and Christians." Hence I beseech you, my dearest 
daughter, do not follow them, for they walk not in 
the right way, to this I bear witness. And read the 
holy Scriptures, and when you have attained your 
years, consider and ponder it well; and pray the 
Lord for understanding then, and you shall be 
able to discern good from evil, lies from truth, the 
way of perdition, and the narrow way that leads 
unto eternal life. And when you then see pomp, 
boasting, dancing, lying, cheating, cursing, swear- 
ing, quarreling, fighting and other wickedness, 
such as drinking to intoxication, kneeling down be- 
fore wood, stone, gold, silver, or bread, think then : 
"This is not the right way, these are not the works 
of Christians, as the holy Scriptures teach. Such 
works proceed not from the Spirit of God, but from 
the spirit of Satan." The Scriptures testify that 
they are Christ's who have the Spirit of Christ or 
are led by the same. Rom. 8 :9, 14. And in order 
that you may be found a true Christian, do not fol- 
low those people ; follow them not, though they al- 
lure you in an inviting manner, and promise you 
fine things ; do not regard that, but depart from the 
broad way on which they are, that you do not be- 
come a partaker of their eternal plagues. Consider 
the examples of the Scriptures in regard to this, 
which happened in the first world; for all who had 
departed from God, and did not believe Noah's 
preaching, and did not regard his words, were 
drowned. Likewise, Sodom and Gomorrah, who 
daily vexed righteous Lot ; they who would not go 
out with him, were burned. Thus it shall also go 
with those who do not believe the true Noah, that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


915 


is, Christ Jesus ; for He preached it in this world, 
saying first: "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven 
is at hand." Mark 1 :15. Even as Moah had warned 
and preached, before the flood came, so Christ 
preached, and caused His apostles to preach, re- 
pentance, and still causes it to be done daily, by 
me, unworthy one, your beloved father, and by 
other servants of Christ. But what does it avail 
them? not many repent; they remain with the 
great multitude; we are lightly esteemed, for we 
are a plain, small and unlearned people. But Christ 
could well foresee the hardness of the people; 
hence He says in the Gospel: "As it was in the 
days, or times, of Noah; they were eating and 
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until 
Noe entered into the ark ; so shall it also be in the 
coming of the Son of man," that is, Jesus Christ. 
Matt. 24:37. Then shall the day of the Lord be as 
a burning oven. Mai. 4:1. Crying and lamenting 
will then avail wicked, unbelieving men nothing, 
for then there shall be no time to obtain grace. But 
now is the acceptable time, the day of salvation, 
now is the time of grace, the jubilee of the Lord, 
until the terrible day of the Lord comes. Isa. 49 : 
8; Deuteronomy 15:1. Then He shall say to those 
who would not believe the Gospel, but followed 
the multitude : Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting 
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. But to 
those who followed Him in this life unto the end, 
He shall say: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, in- 
herit the kingdom prepared for you from the foun- 
dation of the world." Matt. 25 :41, 34. 

Thus, my dearest daughter, lay it to heart, de- 
spise it not, for it is of great importance to you ; 
and diligently search (when you have received 
understanding from the Lord) the holy Scriptures, 
and you will find, that we must follow Christ Jesus, 
and obey Him unto the end ; and you will also truly 
find the little flock who follow Christ. And this is 
the sign : they lead a penitent life ; they avoid that 
which is evil, and delight in doing what is good; 
they hunger and thirst after righteousness : they are 
not conformed to the world ; they crucify their sin- 
ful flesh more and more every day, to die unto sin, 
which wars in their members ; they strive and seek 
after that which is honest and of good report ; they 
do evil to no one ; they pray for their enemies ; they 
do not resist their enemies; their words are yea 
that is yea, and nay that is nay ; their word is their 
seal ; they are sorry that they do not constantly live 
more holily, for which reason they often sigh and 
weep. Let not this, however, be the only sign by 
which you may know who follows Christ; but 
[they are] also these, namely, who bear the cross 
of Christ, for He says: "If any man will come 
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his 
cross daily, and follow me." Luke 9:23. For He 
has said: "If they have persecuted me, they will 
also persecute you." John 15:20. But now some- 
one might say, and persuade people, that He said 
this to His apostles. But the apostle Paul declares 


to them and says that all that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. II Tim. 
3:12. The prophet, also, says that he that takes 
up the truth becomes everyone's prey; for that 
which is pure and clear cannot come forth. Isa. 
59:15. Hereby you may understand, my dear 
daughter, who follow Christ, to be saved through 
Him. Beware of sin, that you do not commit it; 
and join these cross-bearers, that you may come to 
Christ, who bore the cross for us; for we must 
follow His footsteps, and be like our Lord, the dis- 
ciple like his master ; and as we suffer with Him, 
so shall we forever rejoice with Him. But, my only 
daughter, whom I love from the heart, I beseech 
you, fear not this present suffering, so that you do 
not, on this account, forbear to seek your salvation ; 
this would be too great a folly ; for now that I have 
suffered the same, I say with the apostle, that the 
suffering which comes upon us for Christ's sake is 
light and temporal, and works for us an exceeding 
weight of glory. For as the sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by 
Christ, and He always helps us to triumph, so that 
we keep the faith in a pure conscience; for it is 
blessed, says the apostle, if we endure stripes for 
well doing. Hence rejoice, that your dear father 
has suffered and endured threats, contempt and 
stripes for well doing ; I say for well doing, because 
I would not with the world walk the broad way to 
everlasting torment, which all shall receive who do 
not turn and follow Christ in the narrow way. The 
Word of Christ is always the Judge ; hence let no 
one think hard of me. John 12:48. 

In the second place I also suffered because I 
loved my neighbor as myself, and would not name 
him. Be therefore resigned, and always think that 
your beloved father did not suffer as a thief or 
murderer, but as a Christian, of which I need not 
be ashamed, nor need you ; but let them be ashamed 
themselves who do evil ; one needs not be ashamed 
of that which is good. Though we are despised 
of men, who perish like grass, and vanish as a 
vapor, what care we for mortal man: if we only 
please the immortal God, all is well, for He will 
praise us. The praise of men is perishable. Hence 
we do not regard it, and look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which are not 
seen ; after these we follow and strive, and choose 
with Moses rather to suffer affliction with the chil- 
dren of God, than to live in the lusts of the world, 
for we have respect to the reward of Christ. 
Thither I will now go before, and wait for you and 
your dear mother a little while. Hence I pray you 
very affectionately, my dearest, only daughter, take 
the words of my letter to heart, so that you seek 
your salvation with all your heart, in following 
Christ. He will help you as well as He helps me, 
and has helped others who lived in my time and be- 
fore. Christ is the way to eternal life ; hence keep 
His commandment, which is life everlasting. John 
12:50. 


916 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


I further pray you, my dearest daughter, that 
you first of all love and obey your dear, beloved 
mother. If your beloved mother gets to be an aged 
woman, always show her great honor ; and always 
do your best with her ; it is a commandment of the 
Lord which has a promise. For if you do not love 
your dearest, beloved mother, how can you love 
our dear Lord, whom you do not see. But I hope 
and trust, my only, dear daughter, that you will do 
the best ; and I was very glad to hear in my bonds, 
that you conduct yourself so well, and are so re- 
signed. Thank the Lord, that He has spared your 
beloved mother, so that you should get along bet- 
ter. But, as the time of the saints, of the prophets, 
of Christ, the apostles, and other saints, is fulfilled, 
so my time is also now being fulfilled, according to 
the providence of God, that I should henceforth 
rest in Christ. Thus I go the way of the prophets 
and apostles, believing what the holy Scriptures 
say, that Christ Jesus alone is our Saviour, and 
seeking to be saved by His blood, His merits, and 
His sufferings alone. Many evil things are said of 
us, of not one of which are we guilty ; but we must 
suffer all for Christ's sake, and take His kingdom 
by force, for the violent take it by force. Matt. 11 : 
12. Our enduring all things is our power and force, 
and by patience., meekness and longsuffering we 
can get through everything by the help of the Lord. 
May He grant you, my beloved daughter, and your 
dearest mother, the same patient, good spirit, to 
overcome in all tribulation which you have to- 
gether, or may yet have, for the name of the Lord, 
to His praise and your soul's salvation. Amen. 

Herewith, adieu in this wicked world, and be 
of good cheer together. Written and completed 
this 4th of March, A. D. 1572. By me your beloved 
father, imprisoned at Dortrecht for the obedience 
of Christ, and this to the praise of God. Amen. 

O merciful heavenly Father, who hast so spe- 
cially chosen and loved me unworthy one, I, who 
am but dust and ashes, commend to you my dearest 
wife and my dearest, only daughter. 

Written by me in bonds, at Dortrecht. 

Jan Wouterss Kuyck. 


THE SEVENTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO 
HIS FATHER AND MOTHER 

The eternal merciful God, full of all comfort, 
grant you, my dearest, beloved father, and my 
dearest, venerable mother, His grace through 
Christ, and confirm the love of you both through 
His Holy Spirit ; so that you may pass this short 
time to the praise of God, as a light to the world, 
a pattern to your children, and to the salvation of 
your souls. Amen. 

After this my cordial wish. I beseech and exhort 
your love, that you henceforth yield your members 
as weapons of righteousness, and not as formerly 
in the old man ; but mortify the old Adam ; that is, 
put off the old man with his evil deeds, and put on 
the new man, in true righteousness and holiness, as 


the holy Scriptures teach, which serve us to eternal 
life. Rom. 6:13; Col. 3:9, 10. 

For His commandment is life everlasting. And 
remember, how diligently you walked in the com- 
mandments of men, by which they have made the 
commandment of God of none effect for them- 
selves; they also worship God in vain, teaching and 
observing the commandments of men, which have 
no promise in the Scriptures, but shall be rooted 
up, because our heavenly Father has not planted 
them. Yea, the same is accursed by Paul. Gal. 1 :8. 
Oh, that you may now also be found very diligent, 
yea, much more diligent yet, in the unadulterated 
truth of God, which is revealed to you both through 
the grace of God, through Christ, in your old age. 

Oh, this is such a great joy to me, that the Lord 
has spared you both so long, and that I have seen 
the day that my beloved father, and my beloved 
mother, and my only brother (I hope the best in re- 
gard to my dear sisters) have had their blind eyes 
enlightened, so that they are now able to dis- 
tinguish light from darkness, that is, evil from 
good, and are determined to forsake that which is 
evil, and do what is good. 

If you go on together in this, and persevere unto 
the end, 1 hope that we shall rejoice with one an- 
other in the resurrection of life. 

When the righteous shall be raised up, Oh, con- 
sider what great gladness and joy we shall then 
have, when the dear father, mother, and their 
children, shall hear the voice of our Bridegroom, 
saying: "Come, ye beloved, and possess the king- 
dom of my Father." But, dearest father and moth- 
er, brother and sisters, you must first think that 
Christ before that said: "Narrow is the way and 
strait is the gate which leadeth unto eternal life." 
As the prophet Esdras testifies, who speaks of a 
city full of all good things, to which leads a way 
which is but the width of a man's footstep ; on one 
side is water, and on the other fire; how is one to 
receive this city for an inheritance, except he first 
pass through the strait? II Esd. 7 :6. 

Hence Christ, the supreme Prophet (who could 
well foresee the wickedness of the world) said: 
"Ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake, 
and this because they have known neither me nor 
the Father." Matt. 10:22; John 16:3. He further 
says : "Because I have chosen you out of the world 
therefore the world hateth you, for the world lov- 
eth his own." 15:19. Further: "If they have kept 
my saying, they will keep yours also ; if they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you ; if they 
have called the master of the house Beelzebub how 
much more shall they call you?" 15:20; Matt. 10- 
25. For the servant is not better than his lord; 
hence, he that would follow Christ in order to get 
where He is must deny himself, daily take up his 
cross, and follow Him in affliction, for He further 
says : "In the world ye shall have tribulation : but 
be of good cheer ; I have overcome the world " 
John 16:33. Ye shall (He also says in the same 
chapter) weep and lament, but the world shall re- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


917 


joice ; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy, which no man shall be able 
to take away. 

From this it is sufficiently obvious, that the way 
is very narrow for the flesh, which must remain 
here; this must be ventured, or one cannot be 
worthy of being a disciple of Christ. 

But I trust that with Jacob we shall all desire the 
beautiful Rachel, namely, the kingdom of heaven, 
but this cannot be, we must first have Leah with 
her running eyes. For our trying, also the head was 
tried, who had done no sin; how then should not 
the members be tried ? for then only He thoroughly 
sees whether a man fears, loves and trusts Him 
from the heart; whether he does not love his life 
more than his salvation. Concerning this neces- 
sary trial to which many saints of God were sub- 
jected, we have many examples in the holy Scrip- 
tures ; as Abel, Jacob, Moses, David, Job, the three 
young men in the furnace, Daniel, Susannah, the 
seven brothers with their mother, many prophets, 
apostles, and many saints after them, and also in 
my time. 

Now it is my time, the Lord be praised, for I 
know that I am unworthy that I should place my- 
self among this number, but the good, merciful 
God counts me worthy, to fulfill the number of the 
martyrs who rest in Christ, and are waiting for 
their number to be fulfilled by those who should 
also be slain as they, for the testimony of Christ 
which was in them, and is in me, through Christ ; 
which Christ has always, from the beginning of the 
world, been despised, evil spoken of, and cast out. 
Therefore I suffer for a little while; otherwise 
there is nothing for them to take exception to in 
me; they know nothing evil to allege against me, 
the Lord be praised. Hence I suffer now with 
Christ, as a Christian, for well doing, that my faith 
may be found much more precious than gold which 
perisheth. Thus does God try His chosen ; but in 
time of need He faithfully helps us; this (how 
wonderfully God works in His chosen) I have ex- 
perienced in my distress. Yea, I have very great 
joy, that He has kept my lips from beginning to 
end, this alleviated my sufferings, when my filthy, 
stinking carcass (evil in its nature) was suffering, 
being suspended and scourged two different times ; 
but now that it is over, I have joy in my heart. The 
first time that I was tortured, was the last Satur- 
day in February; and the other the Wednesday 
after. But, dearest father and mother, be not dis- 
mayed on this account, but rejoice with me, that 
we have such a strong God, who so faithfully helps 
us ; for He fights our battle, He will not let us be 
confounded. For, consider the ancient times, 
whether any one was ever confounded that trusted 
in Him ; for He hears, says David, the cry of the 
poor, and their heart is sure that His ears attend 
unto their prayer. Thus, firmly believe God's 
Word, and trust in Him, and He will keep His 
promise ; for this vou must know, that though the 
outward man perish, yet the inward man is re- 


newed day by day. Moreover, our temporal afflic- 
tion is brief and light; of this I can now write; 
and it works for us a far more exceeding weight of 
glory, while we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen. 

We endure the visible, and wait with joy for the 
invisible, eternal joy, in firm confidence and a living 
hope, which shall not make us ashamed. 

Then shall they who were faithful unto death in 
the truth, confessed the name of Christ before the 
world, and put off the mortal clothing be crowned ; 
these shall be honored by the young man, Christ 
Jesus, as Esdras testifies. II Esd. 2:43. Hence, I 
am of good cheer in the Lord, be also of good 
cheer. For when the suffering was over, I was as 
though I had had a fall ; so that I can say, "What is 
suffering when it is over ? it is not to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Ro- 
mans 8:18. Oh, how joyful we shall be when we 
shall see that the children of God are such glorious 
kings, shining forth as the sun. Then shall the rul- 
ers of this world see whom they have pierced, 
whom they have mocked, despised and tortured; 
then they shall bewail it, but it shall then be too 
late. Hence I beseech you, be resigned, and thank 
the Lord, that you have raised such a son who is 
called to such a holy state. 

It is no wonder, that this happens to me; con- 
sider John, than whom a holier has not been born 
of women, and who lived so austere a life, but yet 
was imprisoned and put to death ; yea, Christ Him- 
self, Stephen, Peter, James, who did so many 
miracles, and so many good works, and were never- 
theless put to death. Hence Christ says : "The serv- 
ant is not better than his lord." Thus there must be 
striving, and the kingdom of God must be taken 
by force, for the violent take it by force ; for we are 
called, not only to believe in Christ, but also to 
suffer for Him, and to help bear the sufferings and 
reproach of Christ. Though our earthly tabernacle 
perish, we doubtless expect a better in heaven. We 
are as sheep for the slaughter ; who are not worthy 
of the world, we are to them filth, offscouring, and 
fools, for Christ's sake ; but we are God's elect out 
of grace, through the blood of Jesus Christ, which 
alone cleanses us from all our sins, who alone by 
His sufferings and merits makes us worthy of His 
eternal kingdom; to Him be praise, glory, honor 
and power for ever and ever. Amen. By me your 
beloved son, after I had striven unto blood against 
my enemies, this first day of March, A. D. 1572. 

My suffering sounds fearful, but I do not think 
that it lasted more than two hours in all. I do not 
know that I was in torture two hours ; should one 
therefore deny the Lord ? God forbid ! 

Finally, I pray your love, that you mourn not for 
me, but rejoice from the heart, and praise God, 
that He separated your firstborn son from the 
womb, to bear His great and glorious name before 
the rulers of the world, and that the faithful God 
has so faithfully helped me, for I was scourged 
thrice, and suspended four times. But Christ had 


918 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


suffered still more. And after the suffering I re- 
ceived great joy of the Holy Ghost, yea, that I 
wept for joy, because He has kept our lips, and 
does not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able to bear. I have deemed it necessary to write 
of those wonderful deeds of God, and to spread 
them, in order that you should also become bold in 
the truth ; and I leave you this as a testament in re- 
membrance of me, that the Spirit of God, which 
makes me strong and bold, may also thus confirm 
and lead you according to His will, who created 
you, and that you may love each other : for if you 
loved each other, and lived peaceably, when you 
were in blindness, how much more ought you to 
love each other, and to live peaceably, now that 
your eyes are enlightened through the grace of 
God. And always pray the Lord, to give you still 
more grace, which He will also do ; if you are found 
faithful in the little which you have already re- 
ceived, He will trust you with still more. Yea, He 
will give the Holy Ghost to all who ask Him for it ; 
but one must first depart from evil, deny himself, 
and say with Paul : "Lord, what wilt thou have me 
do ?" When the heart is thus entirely surrendered, 
the Lord will further work and fulfill in you, be- 
cause there is a good will in you. And always hum- 
ble yourself under the mighty hand of God, and 
He shall exalt you in due time, as He has promised 
in many places; so that we may together be ex- 
alted by Christ our eternal Saviour, whither I will 
now go before, and will much rather first give the 
mortal mantle of flesh, than that I should consent 
to the whore of Babylon. I will rather be slain by 
Cain, than on his account leave undone that which 
is pleasing to God. I will rather be stoned with 
Naboth, than sell my heavenly Father's inheritance, 
as Esau sold his birthright. Rather be stoned with 
Susannah, than do the will of the false rulers. 
Rather go with Daniel in the lion's den, than that I 
should kneel down before wood, stone, gold, silver, 
bread, wine or oil. Rather go with the young men 
in the fiery furnace, than worship the image, which 
was set up, since it is written, that the Lord God 
alone is to be worshiped. Deut. 6. May the same 
purify you, my much beloved father and my much 
beloved mother, and through Christ His beloved 
Son, and the co-operation of the Holy Ghost, make 
you meet for His eternal kingdom, so that we may 
hereafter in the future world see one another with 
eternal joy. O heavenly Father, I who am but 
dust and ashes, beseech Thee here in my bonds 
through Jesus Christ, grant hereunto Thy un- 
fathomable grace. Amen. 

Adieu in this transient world. Oh, that you 
knew what joy I have ; you would, I hope, be still 
more resigned. Finished this second day of March. 
My hand is somewhat better again; I bear in my 
body the marks of our Lord. The faith is kept. I 
have striven unto blood ; in this the holy name of 
the Lord be glorified forever. Amen. 

Jan Wouterss van Kuyck. 
Imprisoned in the Vuylpoort, at Dortrecht. 


THE EIGHTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO 

HIS SISTER-IN-LAW, WHO WAS STILL AMONG 

THE PAPISTS, AND IN THE ROMISH FAITH 

Affectionately written to you, my much beloved 
sister Neelken, Jacob's daughter, mother in the 
convent : I Jan Wouterss van Kuyck, your beloved 
brother-in-law, imprisoned at Dortrecht, not for 
any evil, but for the obedience of the Gospel of 
Christ; which is no shame before my supreme 
Lord, who created us, but a great honor to Him, 
that one for His name's sake, yea, for well doing, 
endures contempt and bloody stripes ; such are ac- 
counted blessed by the holy Scriptures, which 
blessedness T salvation] Christ has merited by His 
great sufferings. 

And since I sought my salvation in Christ, I have 
fallen into affliction, but I do therefore not regret 
it, for salvation is dearer to me than this transitory 
life, and I will give my life for it, knowing and be- 
lieving that I shall, according to God's promises, 
which will not fail, receive an eternal one, which is 
better. 

Hence, I beseech you most affectionately, grieve 
not on my account ; I thank you very kindly for all 
the great friendship you have shown me and my 
dearest wife, and also my only daughter, and which 
you may have further shown while I have been in 
bonds. 

Henceforth I know of no greater friendship to 
show you, my beloved sister ; than that I must at 
my end invite you yet to the marriage of the Lamb, 
which is Christ ; yea, heartily entreat you, to pre- 
pare yourself for it during this short time. Hence 
put off the old man with his evil deeds, and put on 
the new man, which is renewed in the knowledge 
of God, of Him that created him. Put off the old 
Adam, and put on the new, and walk therein, and 
you shall henceforth not be conformed to the 
world, but be transformed by the renewing of 
your mind. Col. 3:9,10; Rom. 12:2. 

See, beloved sister, I declare to you with the holy 
Scriptures, that you cannot come to Christ, the 
Bridegroom, unless you sincerely follow Him in 
His footsteps, in the narrow way which He walked ; 
and I pray you, lay it to heart, for it is of great im- 
portance to you. I say and declare unto you, that 
neither you nor any one (I do not mean infants) 
can follow Christ, except you first deny yourself 
and deliver^ up to Him your own understanding, 
reasons, opinions, and your own life, even as He 
delivered up His life for us, that all who believe in 
Him, and do not live to themselves, should not per- 
ish, but have everlasting life through Him. Suffer 
to be told and have mercy on yourself, and trust 
not in the learned or that you bear the name of a 
Christian ; to the learned, God's wisdom is hid. and 
the name does not make a Christian. But if you 
would nevertheless trust in the learned, perceive 
bv their fruits what kind of trees they are, as 
Christ taught, that every tree shall be known by 
his fruit. Consider how Christ condemns them in 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


919 


the Gospel, and how they were enraged against 
Christ and His apostles, and how they laid hands 
on them ; and though the heathen judges found no 
cause of death, yet they had to put to death the in- 
nocent, if they wished to remain the friends of the 
scribes and of Caesar. Thus it is still ; think not that 
it is better now; they fill up the measure of their 
fathers, that the righteous blood may be found on 
them. I have worked or labored for my necessities, 
for my widow, and for my orphan child ; they will 
not work themselves, and rather live off that which 
is other people's and cannot bear that another 
works; hence the bailiff forbids me to work, on 
their account. Again, when I was to be tortured 
the second time, in order that I should betray my 
neighbor, which I could not do, on account of my 
conscience, they brought to me the superior, who 
was to prove to me the Scriptures that I might 
do it. The superior said that I might do it, for, said 
he, "If you are the true people, your fellow breth- 
ren will with you receive the martyr's crown. How 
can one attain to greater honor: hence you may 
name them. But since you are not the true people, 
you ought to name them, for God hates the 
wicked." This the superior said to me. O dear, 
consider in your heart what spirit actuates these 
learned men, how they expound — the ultimate ob- 
ject is nothing but murder. O dear Lord, forgive 
them. Thou teachest us better, namely, to love our 
neighbor as ourselves, yea, to lay down our lives 
for the brethren. Hence separate from them, you 
have long been one with them ; lest you partake of 
their sins and abominable plagues. 

It is now, out of great love, declared to you be- 
forehand, by your very familiar brother-in-law, 
before that day comes upon you as a thief in the 
night ; as the warning came in the first world, so it 
does still. Hence, if you would with Noah and his 
house be saved and protected, betake yourself un- 
der the protection of the true Noah, and observe 
His commandment, which is life everlasting; He 
calls you and all men ; He knocks ; He stretches out 
His hand to you ; refuse Him no longer, and do not 
rely on this, that you are called a Christian, and 
that God is merciful. Remember with it, that 
neither the name, nor the water, nor the sponsors 
make a Christian, but he that doeth righteousness 
is righteous; they that are led by the Spirit of 
Christ are His. And remember also that God is 
just, as David declares, saying: "God is a right- 
eous God, or a righteous judge, and God is angry 
with the wicked every day. If he turn not, he will 
whet his sword, he hath bent his bow, and made it 
ready. He hath also prepared for him the instru- 
ments of death; he ordaineth his arrows against 
the persecutors." Psalm 7 :1 1-13. Attend well unto 
every word, for he is a strong archer when he lets 
fly his arrow, none can evade him. Hence consider 
his arrows which he let fly at the first world, at 
Sodom, Gomorrah and others. These accounts 
have been left us in writing that we should fear the 
Word of the Lord more than the aforesaid learned 


men ; and if we, through fear and love, observe His 
commandments, then the Word, that God is merci- 
ful, will avail for us. For His divine nature is 
such, that His wrath and His mercy proceed to- 
gether from Him, and this on this wise, that if the 
righteous forsake the way of the Lord, his right- 
eousness shall not be mentioned, but he shall die 
for the sake of the blasphemy. Ezekiel 18:24. 

Again, if the sinner turns away from his evil 
ways, does that which is good and right, and walks 
in the way of the Lord, his sins shall be remem- 
bered no more, for the Lord has no pleasure in the 
death of the sinner, but that he turn from his way 
and live. Ezek. 18:21; 34:11. Hence I beseech 
you, that you will free yourself from all the ways 
of the world, of the carefulness, and of the old 
things, of which your heart may be full; so that 
the Word of God may be planted in you with meek- 
ness and you may be found good earth bringing 
forth fruit abiding unto life eternal. God's judg- 
ment is now declared that every tree which bring- 
eth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and 
cast into the fire. Matthew 7 :19. Let therefore the 
hammer of the divine Word break your heart into 
pieces ; remember the words of the prophet : "Rend 
your hearts, and not your garments: for God is 
longsuffering and merciful and of great kindness, 
who forgiveth sin." Joel 2:13; Ps. 103:3. Hence, 
dear sister, remember that the longsuffering and 
daily kindness invite you to salvation ; refuse it no 
longer, for thereby you would wrong your own 
self. Therefore amend your life and ways, and 
believe and obey the Gospel and you shall be saved 
through Christ for this is the promise, even eternal 
life. I John 2 :25. But if you want to continue in 
the ordinances of men, and to be led thereby as the 
ox to the slaughter, you will find yourself deceived 
in the end; for in vain do you observe the com- 
mandments of men, which have no promise from 
the Lord, as I also said to the superior. He said that 
what God has not forbidden he permits. Oh. is 
this not a feeble reed in which to trust ; but Christ 
teaches differently, saying: "Every plant which 
my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be root- 
ed up." Matt. 15 :13. And the apostle savs that no 
other foundation can be laid, than Christ alone. 
I Cor. 3:11 : In the second place the aoostle has 
declared all the counsel of God and withheld noth- 
ing from us. Acts 20:27. 

In the third place, he says : "If any preach any 
other gospel than I have preached, let him be ac- 
cursed." Gal. 1 :8. Yea, though it were an angel 
from heaven (mark well) yet his doctrine must 
not be received, if it is anything different. How 
should we receive for the purpose of honoring God 
with it, that which has proceeded from men, who 
are prone to wickedness from the cradle, and drink 
iniquity like water ? Hence, what man institutes is 
like the labor of the spider ; it can be used neither 
for covering, nor for clothing; but everyone that 
hears and keeps the Word of God for his salvation 
need add nothing to it. 


920 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Finally, I declare unto you once more in the 
name of my Lord : "Amend your life and ways, be- 
lieve the (jospel, and flee idolatry." But if you yet 
think that you do not worship them, it is at least 
evident, that you serve them, kneel before them, 
and honor them, which God has forbidden, who 
requires His true statutes to be kept, and says by 
the prophet Jeremiah : "Obey my voice, and I will 
be your God and ye shall be my people." Jere- 
miah 7 :23. And another prophet : "A son honor- 
eth his father, and a servant his master : if I then 
be a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a 
master, where is my fear ?" Mai. 1 :6. Hence, if 
God is our Father, we must obey Him more than 
men ; if He is our Lord, we must honor Him with 
that which He commands us. Then if we be re- 
proached we will think : "The servant is not better 
than his lord ; if they have called the master of the 
house Beelzebub, why should they not call them of 
his household so ?" In short, he that would follow 
Christ to His marriage feast, must deny himself, 
take up the cross, and prepare his heart to suffer 
with Christ, in order afterwards to rejoice with 
Him. And this suffering is short, hence it is light : 
do not on this account remain behind. The Lord 
will help me and all the God-fearing through, and 
He will not suffer you to be tempted above that 
you are able to bear, but will help you to triumph, 
though your enemies be never so many ; God is our 
shield, who can overcome Him ? Dear beloved sis- 
ter, it is nothing strange that I suffer ; it is a sign 
that the Lord loves me, and I count it for my salva- 
tion. He tries me as gold is tried in the fire ; thus 
He tried many chosen saints of God before my 
time, as Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Caleb, Joshua, 
Daniel, John the Baptist who was the holiest of 
those born of women; Christ Himself and His 
apostles and others, were tried, as Job ; but if we 
adhere to the Lord in temptation, the crown of 
eternal life is ready for us. 

Herewith I will conclude this letter, kindly ask- 
ing you not to reject my humble labor to you, 
which I have done out of great friendship. Search 
the Scriptures in regard to these things, and see 
whether they are not so. If you cannot understand 
or comprehend it, I kindly ask you, love your dear 
sister nevertheness, for she has been to me a very 
affectionate and faithful wife, so that I cannot 
thank her enough for her friendship and good 
company. Likewise love our only daughter, for I 
think that she has prolonged her beloved mother's 
life, the Lord be praised. But do not lead our 
child to dumb idols ; by so doing you would sin still 
more against God. Take my letter in good part ; 
for it has been done out of a faithful heart. O 
Lord, grant our beloved sister Thy holy knowl- 
edge, as Thou didst to Saul, who also had a zeal 
without knowledge. 

Herewith I bid you, my beloved sister, adieu. 
Farewell. 

Written in my bonds, on the fifth day of March, 


A. D. 1572. By me, your beloved brother-in-law 
(in the Vuylpoort at Dortrecht). 

Jan Wouterss Kuyck. 

THE NINTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO HIS 
YOUNGEST THREE SISTERS 

Affectionately written to you, my three beloved 
sisters, by me your beloved imprisoned brother, 
imprisoned for well-doing, and for the obedience 
of the Gospel, which is no shame to me before the 
Almighty, who has created us, but is a great hon- 
or to Him, for His power is made manifest, 
through us poor men, who suffer and endure 
stripes and contempt for His name's sake, and ad- 
here nevertheless to the truth. Hence we do not 
regard these wicked men, who are nothing but dust 
and ashes, and shall vanish awav as a vapor ; but 
they that do the will of God shall abide forever. 
Though our earthly tabernacle perish, which must 
perish once, we look with patience for a better one 
in heaven, which is imperishable. And since we are 
assured of this in our hearts, we faint not, willing 
to be freed from this vile flesh, which is prone to 
sin from infancy and to be at home, resting with 
Christ our Lord. But before we attain to this rest 
we must first labor a little and fight against our 
enemies, who have been, and are still, very many. 
Understand this well, we get through this, and 
this through Him who strengthens us, which is 
Christ our Lord, who fights for us, so that we keep 
the faith, and see our desire upon our enemies ; and 
we can rejoice in our sufferings, because of the 
victory which we obtain through Christ. And 
striving thus, we enter into rest. Yes, our dear 
Lord so strengthened me, that I was not disturbed 
by all the torturing. It seemed to me that I could 
embrace the bailiff, so friendly was my heart to- 
wards him, when I was not yet dressed after the 
torture. 

_ See, my dear, beloved sisters, I have discovered 
it for you in advance ; that the Lord of lords is a 
faithful helper in time of need. Hence I beseech 
you together, fear not men, but this almighty Lord ; 
for they cannot harm one hair of the people of God' 
except they first receive the power from our Lord 
on high, and He will not permit them more than 
we are able to bear, and will always with the temp- 
tation make a way to escape so that we shall be 
able to bear it. I Cor. 10:13. The souls of the right- 
eous are ever in the hand of God, and the torment 
of death shall not touch them. Wisd. 3:1. He is 
able to alleviate the pain, as He did to me. Praise 
to Him forever for His great faithfulness. Amen. 
Mark thereby the wonderful deeds of God, that 
He so faithfully helps them that believe and firmly 
trust in Him, whom they yet do not see. 

Hence I know of no greater friendship to show 
you for this time, than to reveal to you the wonder- 
ful deeds of God, that you may rejoice therein with 
me, and that you may also be awakened to your 
salvation, to seek it alone in Christ Jesus, through 
His holy Word, which teaches us, in the first place 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


921 


repentance, and to believe in the Gospel, in which 
Christ has said : "If any man thirst, let him come 
unto me and drink for nought. He that believeth 
on me, as the Scriptures hath said, out of his belly 
shall flow rivers of living water. This spake he of 
the Holy Spirit which they that believe on Christ 
should receive." John 7:37. Hence I entreat you 
most affectionately, to betake yourselves to the 
clear wine Christ Jesus ; you shall receive it without 
price. Hence, constantly lead a penitent life, and 
pray with a longing heart for saving faith; so 
hunger and long to receive it from Christ, as you 
would long to receive bread, when you are hungry ; 
and you shall receive it, and shall bring forth the 
fruits of the Holy Spirit, namely, love, peace, 
gentleness, patience, longsuffering, goodness, faith, 
meekness, temperance and thus in all the virtues 
you are to approve yourselves in obedience and in 
a meek and quiet spirit, as dear children of God, 
and always prepare and adorn yourselves thereto, 
and not with gold, silver, or costly apparel, for 
thereby one conforms to the world, to please her. 
But I counsel you for the best, that you do not do 
these things, lest you be punished with the world 
by the future judge, Jesus Christ, whom they de- 
spised and cast out, together with the prophets, 
apostles, and many saints, and also your brethren. 
Hence do not seek to please the wicked world, but 
Him who created you, that you may be saved 
through Jesus Christ. 

Hence exercise yourselves and read the Word of 
the Lord, which will profit you in all things, how 
you may walk circumspectly in order to please the 
living God, and to be saved. And then the Spirit 
of Christ will guide you into all things, and you 
shall yourselves be taught of God. And He shall 
with the finger of His Holy Spirit write inwardly 
upon the tables of your heart. 

Therefore always hearken to Him, and you shall 
be His friends, yea, He shall be your brother ; and 
if you follow Him to the end, you shall possess 
what Christ possesses. Thither I will now go be- 
fore, and wait for you there a short time, hoping 
that you will follow for your salvation's sake. 
When then our beloved father, and our beloved 
mother, my dearest and beloved wife, and my dear, 
only child, my only brother, my dear, beloved sis- 
ters, and other familiar friends, when we shall meet 
together (as I hope) in God's kingdom, what great- 
er joy could we have? Hence take heed that this 
do not fail us, and that none of us be found to re- 
main without. Love one another ; set one another 
a good example; let each seek to be the first in 
good works and in the fruits of faith. Be diligent 
in reading, and warn one another against sin, for 
the other, crooked serpent* is very subtle in draw- 
ing off, and in exhibiting the lusts of the world, 
thereby to allure you, in order to keep you from 
God. He will lay his ambushes and manifold nets 
and snares ; but continue always steadfastly in the 


* Evidently an allusion to Isaiah 27:1, where (see German ver- 
sion) two serpents seem to be indicated. 


fear of God, and do not listen to him, and he will 
flee from you; and think how he deceived Eve 
and Adam, and the whole first world, with the ex- 
ception of eight persons. And it is still the same 
spirit: hence keep diligent watch, often resort to 
fasting and prayer, and always live soberly, that 
your flesh do not overcome you; for this is the 
worst enemy, for wherever we be, he is always 
with us, and is constantly advising us to evil. He 
ever strives against the Spirit ; for it is very pain- 
ful to the flesh, that it cannot fulfill its lust, and 
that it is subjugated by the Spirit. But, dearest sis- 
ters, if it should happen that Satan should take 
you unawares (since he never rests, but is always 
seeking whom he may devour) always rise again, 
and do not yield yourselves to become servants or 
handmaids of sin, but take better heed; it is for 
your warning. Hence humble yourselves under 
the mighty hand of God, and seek henceforth to 
purify your souls in obeying the truth through the 
Spirit, and run henceforth in the conflict that is 
set before you and all the God-fearing; that you 
may not be found as those who become weary and 
dissatisfied in the way of the Lord, as I have known 
many to do. For by conflict all the God-fearing are 
tried ; for how should they overcome, if there were 
no conflict? but to them that overcome the king- 
dom and an eternal crown are promised as a re- 
ward. And the holy Scriptures also teach you to 
honor father and mother ; hence do not forget this, 
but help them in everything wherein they may 
need you, and always proffer your willing service ; 
for this will be pleasing to the Lord, and our dear, 
beloved, venerable father, and our dear, beloved, 
venerable mother, can then rejoice, because their 
children have found delight in keeping God's com- 
mandments, whereby one can escape the future 
wrath of God. And when their days are fulfilled, 
they can depart in peace and tranquility, and com- 
mit the keeping of their souls in well doing unto a 
faithful Creator, and this because this good Lord 
has also called their dear children to the faith, and 
they have lived to see that they have found delight 
in the truth, to take it up, which has so long been 
trampled under foot, even as the whole world still 
does in its ignorance. Again, because they leave 
behind them believing children, for a child that 
fears God is better than a thousand that are un- 
godly ; for children that do not fear God are to be- 
lieving parents an affliction from the Lord, which 
cannot well be healed. 

Thus, my dearest, beloved three sisters, I will 
commend and trust to you and my only brother, 
that you will fear and love God all your life which 
will last but a short time when compared to the 
ages of eternity. The fear of God teaches to beware 
of evil ; and to love God is to keep His command- 
ments, as Christ says: "If ye love me, keep my 
commandments. " 

The Scripture also says : "The fear of the Lord 
driveth out sin ; it is also the beginning of wisdom." 


922 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Sir. 1 :21, 27. Hence I entreat you all, love the wis- 
dom of God above gold, and it shall come and 
meet you ; and when you have received much un- 
derstanding and wisdom, do not exalt yourselves 
therein, as though you were somebody ; but thank 
the Lord for it, that He gives it into your keeping, 
and always apply it for the purpose for which He 
has given it you, for He appoints you only stewards 
over it. And when the Lord then sees that you are 
faithful over His property, that you do not suffer 
it to lie idle, nor squander it, but that you are lights 
in the world, as pleasant olive twigs of Christ, 
pleasant branches, beautiful stones in the temple 
of the Lord, He can entrust to you much more still, 
so that you may bring forth fruit more abundantly, 
bride of Christ, as a people of God, as members, 
as sisters and brethren of Christ, yea, as a royal 
priesthood. But when the other, crooked serpent 
sees this, he will envy you most, and work against 
you through the children of unbelief, in whom he 
now works, and in whom he has always worked. 
But, my dear sisters, always be of good courage, 
and take faith for a shield, with which always to 
protect yourselves and you shall quench and resist 
his fiery darts; and be armed also with the other 
spiritual weapons of God, as the apostle teaches, 
Eph. 6, and you shall remain steadfast, and be 
saved. May the good, eternal, almighty God, who 
lives in eternity, who rejoices with His holy angels 
over one sinner that repents with all his heart, 
make you all, my beloved sisters and brother, meet 
and perfect for His heavenly kingdom, through 
Jesus Christ His only Son, and by the co-operation 
of His Holy Spirit, that you may always have your 
delight in the right way of the Lord as David says ; 
for they [His judgments] are true and righteous, 
and more precious than fine gold, and sweeter than 
the honeycomb (Psalm 19:9, 10) ; use all diligence 
to perform this, and this to the salvation of your 
souls. Amen. 

Herewith I will bid you my much beloved three 
sisters, adieu in this sorrowful, transient world, 
and I thank your love for all your friendship. 

Written in my bonds, and finished on the sixth 
day of March, by your beloved brother, for a re- 
membrance to you all. A. D. 1572. 

J. V. K. 

THE TENTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO HIS 
OLDEST BROTHER-IN-LAW AND SISTER 

Grace and peace from God the heavenly Father, 
through Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord and 
Saviour, and the co-operation of His Holy Spirit, 
always be multiplied to you both, for the confir- 
mation of your faith, and for consolation on your 
pilgrimage, that you may not weary in the only 
way of life, but may unwaveringly go on to your 
rest, so that vou may together receive the end of 
your sure faith, namely, the salvation of your 
souls. Amen. 


After this my cordial brotherly salutation and 
good wish, be pleased to know, my most cordially 
beloved oldest brother-in-law, and my most hearti- 
ly beloved sister, that in this conflict I have con- 
stantly remained unchanged in the faith of the 
truth, once delivered to the saints ; for which I now 
suffer vexation from mortal men, enduring it with 
a patient heart. 

I cannot fully thank the Lord for this great grace 
that He has thus preserved us as the apple of His 
eye. Hence I beseech you both, be not dismayed 
on account of my transient tribulation, but be the 
bolder in the living faith, which worketh by love, 
knowing that your labor will not be in vain, but 
that it will follow you, clothing and adorning you 
in the day of Christ. Hereunto look constantly, 
and always follow His footsteps, in humility and 
meekness of heart ; and be ever resolved the longer 
the more to live still more holy, remembering that 
we always fall short in many things, as I also ex- 
perience in my own case ; but my hope and refuge 
is Christ Jesus, who is our salvation, righteousness, 
perfection, eternal priest, propitiation, and inter- 
cessor. I would further inform you my specially 
beloved brother and sister in the Lord, that I your 
beloved brother-in-law and weak, unworthy broth- 
er, could not well refrain from writing your love 
a little, though I am conscious that my gift is sim- 
ple and small, and you have an abundance of 
Scripture, and also the anointing, which always 
teaches you what is right, so that I deem it unneces- 
sary to write you much ; but I feel nevertheless con- 
strained thereto, in order that I may, in some meas- 
ure, show you my unchanging love before I put off 
this tabernacle ; it serves for your consolation and 
for the strengthening of your faith, and I am con- 
fident in my heart, that it will be acceptable to you, 
though it be little. Thus, my dearest, I present to 
you nothing new, but beseech and exhort you both, 
that you take diligent heed to keep the pearl of 
great price, and to preserve the precious treasure 
in your earthen vessels. For you know how much 
it cost you, before you found and obtained it ; and 
in confirmation of it that it still is and remains in 
you, let your light shine before your enemies, who 
are terrified thereby, and vanquished before your 
eyes by the Lord, without your help, as we have an 
example in Gideon, and others, wherein it is fully 
shown to us, that the Lord fights His people's bat- 
tles. And since it is certain that the almighty Lord 
is with us, who can be against us ? He that spared 
not His only Son, how should He not with Him 
give us all things? Thus He is a shield to them 
that seek and trust Him with all their hearts, and 
believe His Word to be sure, that He will not for- 
sake us, but [thatl the Lord Almighty will be with 
us unto the end of the world. 

But if we do not trust Him, and forsake Him, 
and are afraid of the manifold enemies of the truth, 
and flee on this account, as did the ten soies, He 
will also forsake us. But if we have a manful spirit, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


923 


with Joshua, Caleb and David, and remember in 
our hearts, that God is true, that His hand is not 
shortened, that He is a faithful succorer of the 
miserable, who has delivered us from the hand of 
Pharaoh, from the specious deceptive and insinu- 
ating sedition of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, from 
the strange fire, and from other enemies and perils, 
and who, according to His promise, for His name's 
sake, and for our salvation, will help us further ; 
not only in the beginning, or in the middle, but unto 
the end will He bruise the head of our enemies, so 
that through the help of the Lord we shall over- 
come our enemies. Hence have good courage, and 
be of good cheer ; He who through His great grace 
began the good work in you, the same is also able 
(this is certain) to perform it in you, and in all 
that believe in Him and are of good purpose. And 
consider, do we not see our desire upon our ene- 
mies, that, however they stir, labor, strive, despise, 
beat, threaten, and slander, we through the grace 
of our Lord nevertheless remain unchanged and 
undisturbed ? I certainly believe that steadfastness 
is the desire of Christians for it has the promise 
of salvation. Thus I unworthy one, in a small de- 
gree hereby minister to you, that I may spread and 
magnify the name of the Lord, and His faithful 
daily help and power. I also counsel all Christians, 
when they go walking in their pleasure garden, 
namely, in the holy Scriptures, that they forget not 
the Psalms of David, which are left us by the Spir- 
it of God, they serve us especially to righteousness, 
boldness, a firm confidence, a living hope, and for 
consolation in our pilgrimage. In short, all Scrip- 
ture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for in- 
struction in righteousness: that the man of God 
may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good 
works. II Tim. 3:16, 17. Again: "Whatsoever 
things were written aforetime were written for our 
learning, that we, through patience and comfort 
of the Scriptures might have hope." Rom. 15:4. 
Hence adhere thereto; you will therein find all 
that will be necessary to your salvation, as I trust 
from the heart that there will abide in you that 
which you have heard and accepted from the begin- 
ning, nothing strange, but as declared in the holy 
Scriptures. For you know what it has wrought in 
you, how through this heavenly trial you are deliv- 
ered from your vain conversation, in which the 
whole world is still sunk; how you have turned 
from dumb idols to the living God, yea, are passed 
from death unto life, so that you are enlightened, 
and your hope made alive, and all this through 
Tesus Christ. And loving His appearing, we pa- 
tiently wait for Him in good works, which live in 
us, so that we love our neighbor as ourselves, seek 
his advantage more than our own, vea, when nec- 
essary lay down our lives for the brethren. This 
is a seal and sign that we love Him whom we do 
not see, and that we yet believe in Him, as though 
we saw Him. Again, if we did not love the breth- 
ren, whom we see, how could we in truth love God, 


whom we do not see ? But that we from the heart 
and fearlessly love the brethren and sisters, by 
this it is known that we are Christ's disciples ; and 
they that are Christ's disciples are sometimes tried, 
as gold in the fire; yet not to destruction, but to 
purification and greater perfection, for He chas- 
tens every son whom He wants to receive and 
loves. Heb. 12:6. And it is nothing strange to us, 
that this now in these latter days happens to us un- 
worthy ones; for it has always been so from the 
time of Abel — darkness has always hated the light, 
for they will not be reproved in their darkness, but 
resent it, and in order to defend themselves, and 
to continue in their own way, they say, "Judge not, 
that ye be not judged ;" but what the apostle says : 
"And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather reprove them" (Eph. 5 : 
11); this they passed by. 

Thus drunkards, idolaters, and the like, know 
how to help themselves with the Scriptures; but 
alas ! with such fig leaves they wrong themselves, 
and suffer themselves to be led by the learned like 
the ox to the slaughter. O dear Lord, I heartily 
pray Thee, enlighten the eyes of our enemies, as 
Thou didst to Paul, who also persecuted the church 
of God. Take this brief letter in good part, for I 
trust that you are yourselves taught and strength- 
ened. Be manful therein, watch, stand fast in the 
faith, be strong in the faith, and let all your things 
be done in love, and as I sincerely trust concerning 
you both. Herewith I will commend you, my 
much beloved brother-in-law and brother in the 
Lord, and my greatly beloved sister in the Lord 
(and by marriage), to the Lord of lords, and to the 
rich Word of His grace, which is able to keep you 
from all evil, and to make you zealous in that 
which is good, and meet for His eternal kingdom, 
to give it to you, the incorruptible inheritance 
among them that are sanctified. I also thank' you 
both as much as I can, for your great friendship 
and affection to me unworthy one. 

Herewith I bid you adieu ; there in the presence 
of Christ Jesus I will await you, and my very dear 
wife, and all the God-fearing left behind. Amen. 

Written shortly before Easter, when I hourly ex- 
pected to be notified that I was to offer up my 
sacrifice, to the praise of God, and to my salvation. 
Amen. 

Herewith I bid my nephews and nieces adieu on 
this earth. Oh, that they would also follow Christ, 
when they have attained to understanding; then 
they would also come where He, namely, Christ, 
is ; and they that repent and keep His command- 
ments, these are His friends and disciples who fol- 
low Him. 

Hence I beseech you, my dear, beloved niece, to 
shun evil, diligently to seek the kingdom of God 
and His righteousness, and to work to satisfy her 
hunger with bread, and quench her thirst with 
drink. If you do this, my dear niece, you will be 
one who with Mary has chosen the good part ; and 
I will then await you there with Christ Jesus, 


924 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


whither I will go a little beforehand ; and all that 
love the truth will follow. To this end may the 
good Lord grant His grace, that this my heartfelt 
wish may be realized, to the salvation of my nieces 
and nephews. Amen. 

Written in my bonds, by me, 

Jan Wouterss van Kuyck. 


THE ELEVENTH LETTER FROM JAN WOUTERSS, TO 
P. J., HIS YOUNGEST BROTHER-IN-LAW 

Grace and peace from God the Father through 
Jesus Christ, and the co-operation of the Holy 
Spirit, be multiplied to you, my much beloved 
brother, and to all that seek their salvation with 
all their heart, in the name of Jesus Christ; that 
we may be able to stand, by the help of the Lord, 
in this last conflict that is set before us, and may 
patiently finish it, for an example to our neighbor, 
for a light to the world, to the salvation of the soul, 
and to the praise of God. Amen. 

After this my heartfelt wish, I cannot forbear to 
write you a little, if peradventure I and you may 
be refreshed somewhat thereby. In the first place, 
know that I cannot fully thank our God for His 
grace, that He has called me, unworthy, poor vile 
man to this state, whereby I perceive the great love 
which He has to me, unworthy one; He chastens 
me according to His mercy, thereby confirming 
that I am not a bastard. O what great grace is this, 
that the good God seeks my salvation, which sal- 
vation has been, and still is, the sole object of my 
seeking and praying, as I wrote to you before my 
imprisonment, to help me to pray, that the Lord 
would give and let come upon me what is for my 
salvation, which I trust His grace that He, out of 
great mercy, does, and will do according to His 
promise and goodness, and not according to my 
righteousness, for His grace knows better than I 
what I need. Hence His will be done for my sal- 
vation, to take me away from the evil, which fre- 
quently arises through the work of Satan, which he 
works in the children of unbelief ; for I have found 
from my youth, that one trouble and difficulty fol- 
lows upon the heels of another. And he that from 
the heart seeks his salvation and the welfare of the 
church, often has to suffer the pains of travail. 
Moreover, one has much to die unto and mortify 
in himself, and constantly to fight, so that one is 
seldom without conflict, even as Paul and also 
many pious witnesses of God ; but all who do not 
become weary, and who overcome, shall inherit all 
things, and to them that overcome the crown is 
promised. Let therefore no one become faint or 
weary, knowing and believing that we have such a 
strong champion, who cannot be conquered, but 
from whom the wicked must flee. Paul says : "If 
God be for us, who can be against us?" Rom. 8 :31. 
The Lord said to Abraham : "Fear not ; I am thy 
shield, and thy exceeding great reward." Gen. 
15:1. The Lord said, yea, commanded him, that he 
should be of good courage, and not be afraid or 


dismayed; He promised always to be with him, 
wherever he should go (thus He was also with His 
faithful servant Moses), and [told him] that he 
should meditate day and night on the law of God. 
(Oh! herein I fall far too short, which I heartily 
regret), that he should not depart therefrom either 
to the right or to the left, and his way should be 
prosperous and full of blessings, and he should 
trample his enemies under foot and devour them as 
bread. Yea, God sent His angel, as He had prom- 
ised, as a champion, so that the Lord Himself 
fought the battle. Oh, is this not a faithful God ! 
who should not trust in His powerful Word ? And 
though we do not see Him externally, yet we daily 
behold His creation, which through the power of 
His Word still stands in its strength, though it be 
but a little flower out of the earth. 

Hence, though a storm come upon us occasion- 
ally, let us firmly rely upon the word and promise 
of the Lord ; that we do not sink with Peter, but 
pass over this raging sea to the Lord, always pray- 
ing Him, in faith, and with firm confidence in His 
Word, for strength, as those that are never sated. 
I, unworthy servant, now in this state well experi- 
ence His faithfulness, praise to Him forever. He 
has promised to assist us, and not to forsake us, as 
He says by the prophet : "Can a mother forget the 
son of her womb, that she should not have com- 
passion on him ? though she do this, yet will I not 
forsake thee." Isa. 49:15. He is also the strength 
of the poor, a sure refuge, and a true helper in time 
of need. Yea, He preserves His own as the apple 
of His eye, in water, in bonds, and in the fire; 
hence, he that afflicts His chosen afflicts Him, as 
the Lord said to Saul: "Why persecutest thou 
me?" and he that does good to His chosen in His 
name, does good to Him. Hence let everyone per- 
severe steadfastly, and do good cheerfully without 
wearying, for in due time we shall also reap with- 
out ceasing; and the good shall arise unto ever- 
lasting life. We are created unto good works 
through Christ. Hence let everyone bring forth 
good fruit, unto which he is appointed ; and God 
our heavenly Father will be honored, and purify us 
still more, that we may bring forth fruit still more 
abundantly, and grow up unto the [measure of the] 
stature of the fullness of Christ ; and so doing we 
shall wait for the coming of our Lord and Bride- 
groom, and this with patience, for patience is the 
strength of the God-fearing. Nothing special fur- 
ther for this time, but hold fast what you have, and 
be faithful unto death, for your and my faith is the 
unadulterated truth, which perform in the fear of 
God, by the help of the Lord, and you shall have 
peace with the Lord, according to His promise. Be 
of good cheer this short time of your pilgrimage • 
sorrow not for me ; and though I am now baptized 
with the baptism of suffering, and drink the cup of 
affliction, it is for my salvation. Henceforth I ex- 
pect through the grace of the Lord the crown of 
life. What does it signify? once we must part; if I 
had died of the pest, or of something else, all to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


925 


whom my person is dear would certainly have to 
miss me ; and it is manifest that I do not suffer as 
an evil doer, but because I have accepted Christ 
Jesus, and this I do not at all regret. I salute you, 
my dear wife, and yours, and all the God-fearing, 
cordially in the Lord. Pray for me, and cause 
prayer to be made for me. Amen. 


A CONFESSION OF FAITH, TO THE BAILIFF AND 

THE COUNCIL THEN RESIDING IN DORTRECHT, 

BY JAN WOUTERSS; TOGETHER WITH A 

BRIEF EXPLANATION EXHORTING 

THEM TO REPENTANCE 

To my honorable lord the bailiff, and my honor- 
able lords the burgomasters, aldermen and the 
council of the city of Dortrecht. I, Jan Wouterss, 
your prisoner, not for any crime, but for the sake 
of my faith, which is nevertheless right before my 
God, wish you, you ministers of God, that He 
would grant you all a prosperous, peaceful, 
healthy, long life, and understanding rightly to use 
your office, in punishing the evil (that is, evil- 
doers), and protecting the good. Rom. 13 :3. 

Further, the reason of my writing is, that I 
briefly confessed my faith, but did not add the ex- 
planation. Hence I put this in writing, in order 
not to summon my honorable lords again, and cause 
them trouble. I confess that I was a zealous papist 
in my youth, which I heartily regret, for then no 
good fruits proceeded from me. Afterwards God 
opened my blind eyes, to serve no longer dumb 
idols, but the living God alone, who created me. 
And He revealed to and gave me, poor, sinful man, 
the faith of the truth, by which we are saved. This 
faith is, as the Scripture says : "This faith and the 
inward baptism constrained me to the obedience 
of his word, to fulfill his righteousness." Hence I 
confess, that I was baptized upon my faith, and 
this with desire, according to the command of 
Christ, renouncing the devil, the world, the pope, 
and his adherents. 

I confess Christ Jesus alone as the way of the 
truth, and the life. And there is none other name 
given to men, whereby we can be saved, except 
through Christ alone. I further confess that it is 
certain that the customs of the priests and of all the 
"shaved" are the broad way to damnation. They 
are human institutions, an abomination to God, and 
plants which our heavenly Father has not planted ; 
hence they are also cursed, for there can no other 
foundation be laid, than that is laid, which is Christ 
alone. Those of the pope's adherents who under- 
take to be leaders are blind leaders, and if the 
blind lead the blind, says Christ, both shall fall into 
the ditch. Everyone that will not believe it, or can- 
not, because of his sins, the same must know it after 
death by pain (II Esd. 9:12) ; hence repent truly 
now. Further, my honorable lord bailiff thinks that 
I am in error, or that my faith is of no account. 
To this I reply : "If this were true, then my fruits 
would be evil, which always prove more than mere 


confession; but now I have by the help of God 
walked therein for so many years, from my youth, 
even until now, according to my weakness, avoided 
all bad company, diligently and quietly earned my 
living, and eaten my own bread, from which I am 
now taken away, as though I were a murderer." 

Lord, forgive them, for they know not what 
they do ; I forgive them, O my dear lords, repent, 
for he who touches us touches the apple of the 
eye of my God. 

I also confess that I have attended the assembly 
of the believers, so often that I cannot count it. For 
the supreme King has given us a promise therein, 
saying: "Where two or three are gathered to- 
gether in my name, there am I in the midst of 
them." Matt. 18:20. The apostle commands us in 
His name, not to forsake the assembling of our- 
selves together, but to exhort one another, and to 
provoke unto love and to good works. Heb. 10:25, 
24. I confess that I have never been in an assembly 
to harm any one (think on this). I confess that I 
have not for many years been to the priests' con- 
fession and their sacrament, and this because I do 
not think anything of it ; moreover, I confess, that 

1 am a sinful man, and need every day to confess 
my sins before my God, and daily to die unto sin, 
more and more, which I regard as the best confes- 
sion. But the sacrament I recognize as a little 
baked cake, and wine, till it is consumed by the 
afore-mentioned of my [other] men, and nothing 
else, but not as the flesh and blood of Christ ; He 
comes no more into the hands of sinners. He dwell- 
eth not in temples made with hands (Acts 7:48), 
but in heaven, whence He shall come to judge the 
quick and the dead, that is, believers and unbeliev- 
ers. But I confess that I am well satisfied with 
Christ's breaking of bread, the practice of the 
apostles among the believers, in remembrance of 
the body and blood of Christ, and this not with 
drunkards, proud, strikers, adulterers, murderers, 
idolaters, harlots, rogues, etc. 

I also confess that I did not marry my wife se- 
cretly, that no one should see it, but before the 
church of God; for marriage is honorable, but 
whoremongers and adulterers God will punish. 
Heb. 13:4. O my God, count it not sin to him who 
took me away ; for it is a bitter cup to me to part 
from wife and child, because we love one another 
so much. I also confess that my child has not been 
baptized by the priest, neither by any one else, for 
thereby I would despise the holy blood of Christ.* 
But this is my firm belief that Christ has made 
atonement for infants, and that Christ's baptism 
belongs to none but those who believe with all their 
heart, as Cornelius with his family, Paul, and 
others; of this afore-mentioned faith I am sure 
through the grace of God, and know certainly, that 
there is no other, nor ever will be. I have not 
founded myself upon the wind, but solely upon the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets. Jesus 

* Then I should sacrifice my child to the devil, the author had 
written, but this reads a little too harsh. 


926 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone, to the 
wicked an offense, and to the good a defense and 
salvation. If I must innocently suffer for this un- 
adulterated faith, I can think, that my Lord Jesus 
Christ, whose servant, I poor, sinful man am, 
fared no better at the hands of the authorities of 
that day and this through the instigation of the 
learned. O my honorable lords, repent, amend 
your ways and your doings. Jer. 7 :3. And I also 
proclaim repentance to all my lords still living, 
who are guilty of the innocent blood of Joris de 
Ve.,* who shall soon come forth, shining in God's 
glory, with great joy. For the day of the Supreme 
Judge is at the door: this is apparent from the 
pestilence, dearth, rumors of wars, and many other 
signs. O my honorable lords, be cordially warned 
of the evil which is to come upon you, for it is 
done out of love and friendship, and not through 
bitterness, for beyond doubt, we must all appear 
before the Supreme Judge; there every one shall 
give account of himself, and receive according to 
that he hath done ; there excuses or regrets will not 
avail. Rom. 14:12; II Cor. 5:10. Oh, reflect; it 
will soon come to pass, and none can escape it. 

Further, I did not reply to all the questions of 
my honorable lord the bailiff, who demanded of me 
that I should tell the truth, which I have done in 
the confession of my faith, of this I am certain; 
but the other questions I dare not answer, for 
Christ has taught me: "Do to men as you would 
have them do to you ; love your neighbor as your- 
self; love your wife, honor your parents," etc. 
For this reason I have foreborne, and I am sure 
that in this my Supreme Judge will justify me, 
when we shall together appear before His judg- 
ment seat; for I have not done it out of any dis- 
regard for my honorable lord the bailiff. I also 
have refused your learned men the presentation, 
for I am so sure of my faith, that [I am convinced 
that] all those who speak against it are in error. 
Hence do not regard it as proceeding from ob- 
stinacy on my part, but from the assurance of my 
faith. 

Finally, deal mercifully with me innocent one, 
and think that I too am a man; for hereafter he 
"shall have judgment without mercy, that hath 
shewed no mercy." Jas. 2:13. I confess one Lord, 
one faith, one God, one Father of all, who is above 
all, and in all believers. I believe only what the 
holy Scriptures say ; and not what men say. Fare- 
well. Written in my bonds. 


* Hereby is meant Joris Wippe, who was put to death at Dor- 
trecht, A.D. 1558. 


A LETTER FROM ADRIAENKEN, JAN'S DAUGHTER, OF 

MOLENAERSGRAEF, WRITTEN TO HER HUSBAND 

WHILE SHE WAS IN PRISON, IN THE VUYL- 

POORT AT DORTRECHT, WHERE SHE WAS 

BURNT WITH JOHN W0UTERSS VAN 

KUYCK, THE 28th OF MARCH, AS 

PREVIOUSLY SHOWN 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Fa- 
ther, through Jesus Christ His only Son, our Lord 
and Saviour, and the co-operation of the Holy 
Ghost, be multiplied to your love, and to all the 
God-fearing, for consolation in your pilgrimage, 
to the praise of the Lord, and to the salvation of 
all your souls. Amen. 

After this my cordial salutation and good wish, 
please know, my dearest and cordially beloved 
husband and brother in the Lord, that jl your dearly 
beloved wife and sister in the Lord, called Adriaen- 
ken Jan's daughter, am still of good cheer in the 
Lord, and I can never thank the Lord of lords 
enough for His daily greatness in showing His 
grace, is to me unworthy one. Eternal praise and 
glory be to Him, for ever and ever. Amen. 

Please know further, J. A., my cordially be- 
loved husband, that I your dearest, beloved wife 
and sister in the Lord, could not well forbear, but 
must leave your love, a few lines in remembrance 
of me, on account of the great love which we have 
had to each other, and which I hope will abide for- 
ever, and that no one shall separate us from it, 
and though we are separated from each other ac- 
cording to the eternal body, yet love remains. And, 
in the second place, to comfort you a little, that you 
would moderate your grief, as one that well knows, 
that these are the costs of our house which we have 
founded upon the rock Christ, which house will 
now certainly continue to stand, through the grace 
and power of the Lord, though many a storm beat 
upon it, wherein we rejoice that we have such a 
faithful Helper in distress. But it is not expedient, 
that we keep this joy to ourselves alone, but that 
we spread the same, so that you, my dearest on this 
earth, and all the God-fearing, if it were possible, 
might also rejoice, in order that you, my especially 
beloved husband, and all the God-fearing, may 
steadfastly persevere, and not be afraid. Though 
our enemies are so many, we say with the prophet 
Elisha : "There are more with us than against us," 
II Kings 6:16. As also Paul says: "If God be for 
us, who can be against us ? He that spared not his 
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall 
he not with him also freely give us all things?" 
Rom. 8 :31, 32. And the prophet David says : "The 
Lord is an invinc'ble shield to all that trust in him ; 
and a faithful helper in distress, for he hears the 
cry of the afflicted." Hence, my dearest, go on in 
the confidence in the promises of the Lord, for He 
is a. faithful, true God: there is none like Him; all 
His promises are yea in Him, and not nay, as well 
to help us in distress in this present time, as to give 
eternal life hereafter to them that believe in Christ. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


927 


We two unworthy lambs of Jesus Christ go now 
quite near the city full of all good things, which 
has become our inheritance through the merits of 
Christ ; yea, we are going out from tribulation, out 
from all difficulty and peril, and leave you and all 
the other dearest brethren, sisters and friends, in 
this dismal wilderness, even in this wicked world 
full of all unrighteousness where on every hand of 
evil examples, to the detriment and sorrow of our 
soul, for one cannot well touch pitch and remain 
undefiled therewith. Hence it is our conviction 
that it is the Lord's pleasure to take us two weak 
lambs away speedily, that we may not be deceived, 
like Eve, but saved in and through faith in Jesus 
Christ. And that the only-wise, good and merci- 
ful God first tries us somewhat in this one chastise- 
ment; this is a token of grace and of special love, 
for He now deals with us unworthy ones, as a dear 
father deals with and bears affection to His chil- 
dren, whereby He confirms, according to His great 
mercy, that He does not know us as bastards, but 
as true heirs. Heb. 12 :8. 

Hence we are of good cheer ; whatever the Lord 
suffers to come upon us, is all for our good, for in 
tribulation He forgives sin ; therefore His holy will 
be done for our profit, that is, for our salvation, 
which is our greatest desire, wherefore we endure 
everything, and are patient, according to the ex- 
ample of Job, prophets, the apostles, and the 
end of our Lord, and other martyrs after them. 
We now go steadfastly forward, to finish our con- 
flict by the help of the Lord with a faithful heart, 
even unto death, for we know and believe that the 
crown of eternal life is prepared for us. Amen. 
Thus, my cordially beloved husband and dearest 
brother in the Lord, I your specially, cordially be- 
loved wife, Adriaenken Jans, your dearest sister 
in the Lord, who have married each other before 
the Lord and His church, I will herewith bid your 
love adieu, and await you there with your and our 
dearest Bridegroom, Christ Jesus. Therefore hold 
fast that which you have, for it is the only and un- 
adulterated truth, that no one take your crown, 
for Satan works wonderfully in his own. 

The superior of the Franciscan convent said to 
me : "Give me Jan Wouterss, he at least said that 
he is sorry for it." O villain, thought I; I well 
know your trickery, Thus the Lord kept me, that 
we may always triumph in Christ : He will still, ac- 
cording to His promise, help us on further in the 
way to the promised land of our rest. 

Herewith I will commend you my dearest hus- 
band and beloved brother in the Lord, to the Al- 
mighty God, and to the rich Word of His grace, 
which is able to build you up, to keep you from evil 
and to bring you to the eternal inheritance ; there I 
hope to see you with eternal joy, to which end the 
good God grant His grace. Amen. Take this, my 
brief letter, in good part. To write much I do not 
deem necessary, for the God-fearing have left us, 
through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, an 


abundance of writings, for correction, for doc- 
trine, for consolation and strengthening. 

I Adriaenken Jan's daughter, your cordial and 
dearest wife and sister in the Lord, greet you my 
most beloved husband and dearest brother in the 
Lord, affectionately with the kiss of eternal love 
and peace of Christ, with the mouth of my heart, 
present with you in spirit. 

Finally, I herewith bid you adieu once more, and 
thank you as much as lies in me, for your good 
company and faithfulness. 

Written by me your beloved wife Adriaenken 
Jans, imprisoned for the testimony of the gospel of 
Christ, to the praise of the Lord, to the comfort and 
joy of our neighbor, for a light to them that are yet 
in darkness, to the confusion of those who have 
condemned us as apostates, and to the salvation of 
our souls. Amen. 

I and my fellow prisoner greet you and all the 
God-fearing much. 

We had hoped to offer up our sacrifice on Mon- 
day before Mary, and thus to enter into rest ; but 
we were not so fortunate. Hence we hope that it 
will soon come to pass, if the Lord has so ordered 
it ; but if our tribulation is to last a little longer yet, 
the will of the Lord be done for our salvation. 
Amen. 

Written in my bonds, the day after Mary in 
Lent A. D. 1572, by me, 

Adriaenken Jans. 


A LETTER TO SAID ADRIAENKEN JANS IN HER 
BONDS. SENT BY HER HUSBAND 

To the dear wife of my heart, Adriaenken Jan's 
daughter, out of love, to strengthen your heart. 
Amen. 

We ought to obey God rather than men. Acts 
5:29. 

Grace and peace, wisdom and comfort, be with 
you, my much beloved dear wife and sister in the 
Lord, from God our heavenly Father ; through the 
great love of His Son Jesus Christ, our Lord and 
Saviour, and through the power of the Holy 
Ghost, and patience in your bonds ; this I wish you, 
my beloved wife and sister in the Lord, as an af- 
fectionate salutation, to the praise of the Lord, and 
to your soul's salvation. Amen. Possess your soul 
in patience. 

After all cordial salutation, my much beloved 
wife and sister in the Lord, I affectionately pray 
you, that you will prove valiant in your tribulation 
and distress, and ever look unto Jesus Christ the 
author and finisher of our faith, who, when the joy 
was set before Him, endured the cross, despising 
the shame. Heb. 12 :2. Mark, he says, despising the 
shame. Hence go forth without the camp, and help 
bear His reproach. 13:13. For when Christ suf- 
fered, He had to suffer without Jerusalem, and 
there took upon Him our sins, and became as a 
worm, greatly despised, says the prophet Isaiah. 
53:3. And Paul says: "Who, being in the form 


928 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with 
God, but delivered himself unto death, even the 
death of the cross." Phil. 2 :6, 8. And Peter says : 
"Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in 
the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same 
mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath 
ceased from sin : that he no longer should live the 
rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but 
to the will of God." I Pet. 4:1, 2. Paul also says: 
"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution" (II Tim. 3:12) ; as he also tells the 
Hebrews (chap. 11) of so many pious witnesses, 
who through their faith suffered so much, having 
respect unto the recompense of the reward; they 
were stoned, cut asunder, tempted, slain with the 
sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and 
goatskins: being destitute, afflicted, tormented; 
of whom the world was not worthy ; and thus they 
took the kingdom of God by force, hoping only 
from afar for the promise, which they did not yet 
possess, as Christ says: "Blessed are the eyes 
which see what ye now see; and the ears which 
hear what ye now hear: for many prophets and 
righteous men have desired to see those things 
which ye now see, and it could not be." Luke 10: 
23, 24; Matt. 13 :16, 17. Paul also says : "God, who 
at sundry times and in divers manners spake in 
time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in 
these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom 
he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also 
he made the worlds ; who being the brightness of 
his glory, and the express image of his person, and 
upholding all things by the word of his power." 
Heb. 1 :l-3. See now, my dear lamb, how many 
pious witnesses we have; hence let us not become 
weary, but see that we may with Caleb and Joshua 
enter the promised land. For you have already 
passed through the wilderness, and stand now be- 
fore the Jordan, which though it is terrible to be- 
hold, you will pass over; only waver not, all you 
need do is to pass over. Be valiant, my lamb ; the 
Lord will help you ; put your trust in Him, for He 
is our captain, our strong fortress and castle. My 
dear lamb, be of good cheer in the Lord; such a 
glorious crown is awaiting you, for the Lord says : 
"Blessed are they who are persecuted for the truth ; 
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 5:10. 
See, my fair one, you will be one of that number 
whom John saw under the altar, who were clothed 
in white robes ; and will help fulfill their number, 
and the great multitude of whom the angel told 
Esdras, II Esd. 2:45. For when the number, or 
the company of the righteous is fulfilled, the re- 
warding will soon take place. Then shall all your 
tears be wiped away ; the heat of the sun will hurt 
you no more, for you shall with all the chosen chil- 
dren of God rest under His shadow. My dear 
lamb, if you now only strive manfully for the truth, 
it is but for this life; after this time there is no 
more time. No man is crowned, except he strive 
lawfully. II Tim. 2:5. And James says: "Dear 
brethren, we count them happy that have endured." 


Jas. 5:11. And Solomon says, that His [God's] 
people are tried as gold in the furnace, and when 
He finds them acceptable, he receives them as a 
burnt offering. Wisd. 3 :6. Confess now the word 
of the Lord before this evil generation; for if we 
confess Him, He also will confess us before His 
heavenly Father, and before His angels ; if we deny 
Him, He also will deny us ; if we believe not, yet 
He abideth faithful; He cannot deny Himself. 
Matt. 10:32. II Tim. 2:12, 13. Nevertheless, the 
foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let 
every one that nameth the name of Christ depart 
from iniquity." v. 19. 

Behold, my dear lamb, here the sentence is al- 
ready pronounced. Take heed now, that in your 
bonds, as you have begun, you remain faithful for 
the word of the Lord ; that you may receive a full 
reward, and lose not that for which you have so 
long labored by faith ; for whosoever transgresseth, 
and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not 
God ; he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he 
hath both the Father and the Son. II John 8, 9. 

Dear Jan's daughter, we expect such a glorious 
crown, if we abide in the truth ; how we will rejoice 
when we get into the new heavenly Jerusalem, 
where the streets are of pure gold ; and her gates 
are not closed against the penitent, but they are not 
open unto the ungodly, for without are dogs and 
sorcerers. Rev. 21:21; 22:15. See, my dearest 
lamb, for none but the God-fearing ; for them His 
grace is always ready, and He will give them to 
drink of the beautiful river, which flows through 
the fair city ; these are the living waters of which 
the Lord told the Samaritan woman, that if she 
should drink of them, she should never thirst. John 
4:14. Behold, my dear rib, of these waters did all 
the righteous drink. They drank of that spiritual 
Rock that followed them: and that Rock was 
Christ. But with many of them God was not well 
pleased : for they were overthrown in the wilder- 
ness. I Cor. 10:4, 5. 

Behold, dear Adriaenken Jans, what virtues the 
Lord has shown us, and how richly He has be- 
stowed gifts upon His children, and how He shall 
endow them when He shall come to judge all the 
nations of the earth. Then shall we tread down all 
our enemies, and shall sit with all the elect of God 
upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes 
of Israel ; and shall stand in great boldness before 
the face of those that have afflicted us; and we 
shall shine as sparks among the stubble, and leap as 
calves of the stall, in that day which the Lord has 
appointed. Matt. 19:28; Wisd. 5:1; 3:7; Mai. 
4 :2, 3. We also read that Esdras saw in the spirit, 
upon mount Sion, how the Lord went and gave 
palms into the hands, and set crowns upon the 
heads, of those who had confessed Him in the 
world. II Esd. 2 :42. Peter also says that we shall 
be made kings and priests, that we should shew 
forth the virtues of Him who hath called us out of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


929 


darkness into His marvelous light. Rev. 1 :6 ; I Pet. 
2:9. 

Ah! Jan's daughter, my dear wife and sister in 
the Lord, if we were to recount all the glorious 
promises which the Lord has promised them that 
continue faithful in their temptation, it would take 
too much time to write it all. 

Herewith I commend you my dear wife and 
sister in the Lord, to God, and to the rich Word 
of His grace, which is able to keep us from all the 
subtle wiles with which our adversary the devil 
walks about us as a roaring lion, as Peter says. I 
Pet. 5 :8. He could assail the Lord ; should he then 
not assault his people ? for we are not ignorant of 
his devices (II Cor. 2:11), for he works also 
through his emissaries, that is, the children of un- 
belief, who will possibly come to assail you ; but we 
can well overcome them, we can do all things 
through the grace of the Lord, which grace may 
God grant you and me, and us all. Amen. 

Farewell, and pray the Lord for me, that He may 
keep me in this evil time, that I may always walk in 
the way of the Lord. I also pray for you, that the 
Lord will grant you strength, that you may be an 
acceptable offering unto Him, and that through 
your bonds and through the voluntary surrender 
of your body into the tyrants' hands, many may 
come to the truth. Though it is somewhat hard for 
the flesh, the Lord can give strength to them that 
trust in Him. Yes, dear Jan's daughter, my dear- 
est, beloved sister in the Lord, let us take heed and 
pray the Lord, that we may well guard ourselves, 
that we do not dishonor the temple of God; for 
thus says Paul (mark well) : "Know ye not that ye 
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of 
God, him shall God destroy ; for the temple of God 
is holy, which temple ye are." I Cor. 3:16, 17. If 
we guard ourselves well, it will be well with us, for 
we have a precious treasure in earthen vessels, the 
Spirit of the Lord, the Comforter, which will not 
be taken from us, if we fear God, depart from all 
sin, and do good. 

O my dearest, dismiss from your mind that you 
went there to get the bed, for possibly the Lord 
wants thus to prove you ; and let us not tempt the 
Lord ; He does all for the best ; I would not give 
you for all the treasures of the world; this the 
Lord knows, for He knows every heart. Now that 
it is so, let it be so in the name of the Lord. You 
may readily suppose that Abraham was sorrowful 
that he had to offer up his beloved son ; for he was 
dear to him, and the Lord had told him that his 
seed should be as numerous as the dust of the 
earth and the stars of heaven. But, my dear lamb, 
he feared the Lord, and dared not disobey His 
command. Thus we, too, have courage, my dear 
wife ; think, it is only for one evil hour, or half an 
hour, and all is over, for much may be done in half 
an hour. See, my dear, he that overcometh shall 
inherit all things ; he that overcometh shall not be 
hurt of the second death. Rev. 21 :7, 2 :11. Where- 


fore, let them that suffer according to the will of 
God commit the keeping of their souls to Him in 
well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. I Pet. 4:19. 
Let us pray for them that afflict us (that is, the 
pope and his adherents), that they may see how 
blind they are; and also for the magistrates, that 
they may no longer seek innocent blood, but be 
satisfied, and see wherein they are sinning before 
God. 

Adieu, be resigned in the Lord, my dear wife 
and sister in the Lord; take my simple letter in 
good part, for it has been written from a good 
intention. 

Written with much sorrow and labor. Nothing 
more for this time, only the Lord keep you in a 
godly life, and preserve you from the second death. 
Amen. 

By me, your dear husband and weak brother in 
the Lord, who am not worthy of the name ; but by 
the grace of the Lord we can do all things. 

J. van Dort. 

Written on the 18th and 19th of January, in the 
year 1572. Whatever I can do for you is at your 
service; do not spare me. Adieu, farewell; put 
your trust in the Lord alone, and you will find rest 
for your soul. Amen. 


Yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you 
will think that he doeth God service. And these 
things will they do unto you, because they have 
not known the Father, nor me. John 16:2, 3. 


SEVEN BRETHREN AT BREDA, JAN PIETERSS, GE- 

LEYN CORNELISS, PIETER DE GULICKER WITH 

HIS SERVANT, ARENT BLOCK, CORNELIS 

GIJSELAER, AND ONE MICHIEL, IN 

THE YEAR 1572 

In the year 1572, when many exiles were resid- 
ing in Nieuwvaert, near Breda, where they enjoyed 
a little more liberty than elsewhere, among whom 
there were also some who for the testimony and 
following of Jesus Christ, had fled thither from 
other places ; it happened in the beginning of the 
month of August of said year, that, many brethren 
and sisters having come there from without, from 
Brabant, from Breda, Sevenbergen, and several 
adjacent villages, also from Holland, from Leyden, 
Haerlem and elsewhere, which being discovered, 
it was reported to the bailiff, while he was sitting 
at Gerrit Vorster's and drank with the steward, 
who hearing this, was filled with anger and said: 
"We will disturb that nest, and exterminate that 
band at once." Thereupon they gathered an armed 
force, in the evening of the fifth of August, about 
nine or ten o'clock, when these assembled to hear 
the preaching, and to marry a couple, in a house 
standing on the Voorstraet, in the front part of 
which resided Pieter de Gulicker, a tailor, and in 
the back part, Jan Pieterss, a weaver, where about 
one hundred men and women were assembled to- 
gether. The steward and the bailiff with their men 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Geleijn Cornelus cruelly tortured and finally burned, in Breda, 1572 


came twice to the house to listen, without accom- 
plishing anything further; but the third time 
the steward sent a servant, who found them as- 
sembled, by the light of many candles, engaged 
in their preaching. Thereupon came the steward, 
stadtholder, and bailiff, with all their servants and 
people well armed with pistols, halberds, swords, 
and other weapons, and thrusting open the doors 
of the house, they apprehended some whom they 
could get; but most of them broke through the 
walls, passages, and the roof of the house, and es- 
caped. In all there were apprehended, Jan Pieterss 
of Vlaerdinge, who lived in the rear part of the 
house, and ministered to the assembly with the 
Word of truth ; Pieter de Gulicker, a tailor, who 
resided in the front part of the house, with one of 
his apprentices, who was but sixteen or seventeen 
years old ; Geleyn Corneliss, a shoemaker of Mid- 
dleharnisse, near Somerdijck; Arent Block of 
Sevenberger ; and Cornells, the son of Koppen de 
Gijselaer, of Dortrecht ; and two or three women. 
These having been apprehended they were brought 
to Gerrit Vorster's house, and the men put in 
irons ; but the women were placed unfettered in a 
chamber by themselves, whence they made good 


their escape. The next day in the morning there 
came to these six prisoners Michiel, the uncle of 
Cornelis de Gijselaer (married to the widow of 
Valerius the schoolmaster, who in the year 1568, 
about three years prior to this, had been offered up 
at Brouwershaven), who having come to visit 
his friends, to comfort them from the Word of God 
in their tribulation, the bailiff happened upon them 
and apprehended him likewise, saying : "You also 
belong to this people ; you must also stay here with 
them." 

All the property of these prisoners was immedi- 
ately written down and confiscated, so that the 
women and children had to flee deprived and 
stripped of everything, which was lamented by 
many. In consequence of these things the people 
in Nieuwvaert were so terrified, that many dared 
not stay there any longer, the more so, as the 
steward had written to the duke of Alva, and hav- 
ing received a letter in return, had gone thither in 
person. In all, there fled about thirty, brethren as 
well as sisters, of those who resided in Nieuwvaert, 
besides all the others who had come there from 
other places. 

The schoolmaster of Nieuwvaert, called Master 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


931 


Pieter Claess van der Linden, who had disputed 
five hours with Jan Pieterss (besides that the pas- 
tor had also disputed with him two or three times), 
and was greatly embittered against this people, 
gives nevertheless this testimony concerning them, 
that their chief and principal errors are : "That they 
do not baptize infants ; that they cannot believe that 
Christ had His flesh and blood from Mary; and 
that they regard themselves as the little flock and 
the elect of God. But that, with this exception, their 
life and conversation is better than that of many 
others, and that they also seek to bring up their 
children in better discipline and fear of God, than 
many other people. That he also had of their chil- 
dren in his school, who were apter and learned 
more readily than any others. That he and many 
others deeply deplored the great persecution and 
vexation inflicted upon these people, and especially 
that on account of the men the poor women and 
children were so lamentably stripped of all their 
possessions, and driven away into misery." 

These prisoners were confined in irons, in the 
house of said Gerrit Vorster, from the fifth of Au- 
gust, when they were apprehended in the night, 
until noon of the seventh, when they were together 
taken to Breda, where they were most severely as- 
sailed with examinations, promises, threats, and 
tortures, to cause them to apostatize from their 
faith, and to name their fellow believers, so that 
Pieter de Gulicker, unable to resist the same, aban- 
doned the faith and his God, whereby he neverthe- 
less did not obtain a release, but was executed with 
the sword. But the rest remained steadfast unto 
the end, however unmercifully they were treated 
in the torture. For one was very cruelly tortured 
and wounded upon the rack, and while thus lying, 
urine was poured into his mouth, and his body 
trampled upon ; another was fastened below by his 
feet, his hands tied behind his back, and he was 
thus hauled up from behind, and scourged. But 
Geleyn, the shoemaker, was tortured most cruelly 
of all. They stripped him naked, and suspended 
him by his right thumb, with a weight attached 
to his left foot, and while thus suspended he was 
burned under his arms with candles and fire, and 
scourged until the two commissaries of the Duke 
of Alva, who were present, themselves became 
tired, and went away and sat down to play cards, 
the executioner looking on, for about an hour, or 
an hour and a half. Meanwhile Geleyn was left 
suspended, who, during all the time that they 
played, experienced no pain, but was as though he 
had been in a sweet slumber, or in a swoon ; yea, 
he subsequently himself testified that he never in 
his life rested on his bed with less pain, than while 
he was suspended there. When they had finished 
playing, they said to the executioner: "Seize him 
again ; he must tell us something ; a drowned calf is 
a small risk." Coming to him, the executioner ex- 
claimed : "The man is dead" (so deep was his sleep 
or swoon"). Then one of the commissaries darted 
up, and shook him so roughly by one arm as to 


sprain it, which was not yet healed from the burn- 
ing. When he began to revive again, he was let 
down; but he implicated no one, nor did he deny 
his faith, so that he was finally sentenced to the fire 
with Jan Pieterss and the young apprentice to be 
burnt alive. When they were standing at the stakes, 
and were being burned, the flames were wafted 
away so much from Geleyn, that the executioner 
had to hold him into the fire with a fork on the 
other side of the stake. Thus these, valiantly ad- 
hering to the truth, laid down their lives for it. 

Shortly after, when Cornelis de Gijselaer and 
Arent Block were also led to death to be burnt, 
Arent dropped a Ltter which he had written, think- 
ing that some one of the friends would pick it up 
and get it, but unfortunately, it fell into the hands 
of the tyrants, who immediately had the two taken 
back to prison, whereupon they were yet most 
dreadfully tortured; but when they nevertheless 
constantly remained valiant, named no one, and 
in no torture apostatized from their God, they were 
finally, like the three preceding ones, also sentenced 
and burned; and very soon after also Michiel, the 
uncle of Cornelis de Gijselaer followed the others 
with a like sacrifice. 

Thus these now lie together under the altar, and 
wait for the number of their brethren to be fulfilled, 
that they may then live with them forever in ever- 
lasting joy with the Lamb that was slain, and all 
the friends of God, and sing the new song. 

TOUCHING THE COURT PROCEEDINGS AND DEATH 
SENTENCES OF THE AFORE"MENTIONED MARTYRS 

We did not spare the pains, to have looked up, 
through the mediation of certain of our good 
friends at Breda, in the present archives of the 
year 1659, by the clerk of the recorder there, every 
thing that might be noted, and could be found as 
recorded by the papistic rulers, of the year 1572, 
concerning the imprisonment, sufferings and death 
of the afore-mentioned pious witnesses of Jesus 
Christ. But soon after search for it had begun to he 
made, information was received that the archives 
where these and similar documents had been pre- 
served was destroyed and laid in ruins by a terrible 
conflagration a few years ago; for which reason 
nothing could be brought to light in regard to the 
matter, except the particular reminiscences of old 
writers, from which the above is recorded. This by 
way of notice. 


MAERTENS JANSS, A CORN PORTER, AND JAN HEN- 

DRICKSS OF SWARTEWAEL, A STEERSMAN, BOTH 

PUT TO DEATH AT THE STAKE, AT DELFT, 

IN HOLLAND, A. D. 1572 

The city of Delft, in Holland was at this time 
only a burying place, yea, a dreadful murderers' 
den, for the extirpation of God's saints. This ap- 
peared in the case of two very pious, God-fearing, 
and most virtuous lambs of Christ, who had be- 
taken themselves among the flock of the great 


932 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Shepherd of the sheep, Christ Jesus, to be led and 
fed by Him in the green meadows of the true evan- 
gelical doctrine. Une was named Maerten Janss, 
by trade a corn porter ; the other, Jan Hendnckss, 
born at Swartewael, a steersman, who followed the 
sea for a livelihood. 

They were both imprisoned at Delft, where they, 
for almost two years, suffered much affliction, 
anxiety and distress, from secular as well as spirit- 
ual [ ecclesiastical J persons, to make them apos- 
tatize from their faith. But as they were founded 
upon the immovable cornerstone Christ Jesus, they 
could in no wise weaken their faith, much less 
cause them to apostatize entirely from it. Hence 
the rulers at said place, inflamed, through the in- 
stigation of the papistic clergy, with a bitter hatred 
against them, pronounced, in court, a very cruel 
sentence upon both of them, namely: That they 
should be tied to a stake, upon a scaffold to be 
erected in the market place, and burned until death 
should ensue. 

Thereupon, on the fifth of February, A. D. 1572, 
both were brought upon the scaffold at said place, 
to die; whereupon the town clerk read to all the 
people : That no one was allowed to speak to them, 
on pain of forfeiting life and property. 

Then Maerten Janss' tongue was seared ; yet he 
nevertheless boldly said : "Thus I must now testify 
to the truth ; for if I had not cared for my salvation, 
I would have escaped much sore conflict and ob- 
tained pardon ; but now I have fought a good fight, 
finished my course, and kept the faith, and hence- 
forth there is laid up for me the crown of right- 
eousness." 

Then he cried : "O Lord, be merciful to me poor 
sinner. Who am not worthy to suffer for Thy name, 
but Thou hast made me worthy thereto." 

Finally he exclaimed: "O Lord, receive my 
spirit into Thy hands." And with this his life was 
ended he thus departing this world through fire. 

Jan Hendrickss was likewise gagged, to prevent 
him from speaking; but when he nevertheless 
spoke, namely : "Now is the time, now the truth 
must be fully sealed," etc., a great clamoring, con- 
fusion and running arose among the people, so that 
the lords, filled with fear, caused Jan Hendrickss 
to be brought inside, until the commotion and tur- 
bulence of the people had subsided. 

After that he was brought forth completely gag- 
ged, and having hurriedly been fastened to the 
stake, he was deprived of this temporal life by 
fire, even as his slain fellow brother. 

Their dead and half-consumed bodies were 
brought outside of the city, to the common place 
of execution, called Gallows Hill, where each was 
separately fastened to a stake, for food to the 
fowls of the air. 

This was the end of the afore-mentioned two 
lambs of Jesus, who, though a spectacle and re- 
proach before the world, before God became a holy 
and acceptable sacrifice. 


Note.— -Having been furnished from the book 
of criminal sentences of the city of Delft, by the 
secretary there, with an authentic copy of the sen- 
tence of death of the afore-mentioned friends, just 
as the same was publicly read in court on the day of 
their death, we deem it well to add it here, that the 
reader may be fully assured of the truth of the 
foregoing account. The contents thereof are word 
for word as follows : 

EXTRACT OF THE SENTENCE OF MAERTEN JANSS, 

CORN PORTER, CITIZEN OF THIS CITY, AND JAN 

HENDRICKSS OF SWARTEWAEL, STEERSMAN, 

PUT TO DEATH WITH FIRE 

Whereas Maerten Janss, corn porter, citizen of 
the city of Delft, and Jan Hendrickss of Swarte- 
wael, steersman, prisoners, have confessed, with- 
out torture and iron bonds, to belong to the evil and 
reprobated sect of the Anabaptists, and conse- 
quently to have attended various forbidden and 
improper meetings ; and also confess to be rebap- 
tized, and to have withheld the holy sacrament of 
baptism from some of their infants : that they also 
hold very evil views concerning the mass, despis- 
ing and utterly rejecting the holy sacrament of the 
altar, as also all other sacraments, services and cer- 
emonies of the holy Roman Catholic Church, and, 
what is worse still persist and obstinately adhere, 
to their aforesaid damned reprobated heresy, with- 
out in any wise repenting, or being willing to aban- 
don it, notwithstanding all the good admonitions 
frequently and at divers times addressed to them 
by various good spiritual Catholic persons ; all of 
which are most enormous, wicked and scandalous 
matters, which for an example unto others ought 
not to go unpunished; therefore, the judges of the 
city of Delft, according to the import of the decrees 
issued by his royal majesty, have ordered, and do 
order by these present, the aforesaid Maerten Janss 
and Jan Hendrickss, prisoners, to be led upon the 
scaffold erected in the marketplace of this city, 
and there to be tied to a stake and burned till death 
ensues, and their dead bodies then to be brought to 
the Gallows Hill and there placed at stakes. We 
furthermore declare all their property confiscated 
and forfeited for the benefit of his royal majesty. 
We further condemn the aforesaid prisoners to 
the costs of their imprisonment and the expenses 
of the execution. Done the fifth of February. A D 
1572, Delft Style. 

Note. — The original date seems to be in the 
year 1570, being two years earlier; but it is an 
error, as appears from various circumstances that 
follow, as also from the date of the letters which 
Jan Hendrickss wrote in prison. 

Extracted from the first book of criminal sen- 
tences, fol. 195, preserved in the archives of the 
city of Delft, 23d of August, A. D. 1659. 

Secretary of Delft. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


933 


A LETTER FROM JAN HENDRICKSS, WRITTEN IN 
PRISON AT DELFT, TO HIS WIFE 

The God of all grace, who has called us from the 
power of darkness into His eternal kingdom, 
through Jesus Christ, and married us with an ever- 
lasting love, as the prophet says, the same grant 
you, my dear wife, according to the riches of His 
grace and glory, to be strengthened with might by 
His Holy Spirit in the inner man, that you may 
stand steadfast and immovable in faith and love, 
and the peace of God, to the salvation of your soul 
and the praise of God, that you may receive the 
undented, incorruptible and unfading inheritance, 
together with the crown of eternal life, Amen, 
which God has promised to all them that love and 
serve Him with all their heart. This, I Jan Hen- 
drickss wish Lijsbeth Jans my dear wife, from my 
bonds and in my last time, as a very cordial salu- 
tation in the Lord. 

Further, after all proper salutation to you mv be- 
loved wife Lijsbeth Jans, I inform you that I am 
still valiant and of good cheer in the Lord, and trust 
to adhere to His Word and truth by His help, with- 
out whose aid it cannot be done ; and I trust that 
He will keeo mv treasure unto the end and deliver 
me out of the lions' iaws. that thev mav not devour 
me with their teeth. Thus T trust it is also with 
you. and T sincerelv have this confidence concern- 
ing you that you are still minded and determined 
with me to serve Him all the davs of your life in 
righteousness and holiness; and T trust that God 
will strengthen and keen vou therein, even as He 
has hitherto done, for which praise be to Him for- 
ever. 

Furthermore, mv dear wife, since the time of my 
departure, according to human purpose, is very 
near at hand. I cannot forget you, but must out of 
love write vou a little yet. because of the great love 
which I have to you, and because you have shown 
me so much love in mv bonds, in various ways by 
visiting and writing, for which I thank you very 
much : mav God in high heaven reward vou for it. 
And I thank vou most heartily for your last letter, 
which was verv precious, for when we read it we 
were so much reioiced by the great consolation that 
we both went. And because you love me so, and I 
you. Therefore I must still care for vou a little, 
and admonish vou as my most beloved. Not. my 
dear Jan's daughter, that T have not the confidence 
that vou will walk in the fear of God ; oh, no ! I am 
confident that you will do nothing but what is good. 
But that I exercise this care for vou, is done only 
from pure, clear love, because I love your soul so 
very much ; hence I very often wish that you might 
be taken before me, since I well see how difficult 
it is to reach heaven, and how easily man is \\ed 
astray], even as Paul warns us I Cor. 10:12, say- 
ing: "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall." 

Hence; dear Jan's daughter, take this in good 
part, this I pray you, as I trust that you do. And I 


further admonish and beseech you, that you always 
walk in true and unfeigned fear of God, since the 
fear of God is the true foundation to please the 
Lord, for without the fear of God it is impossible 
to please Him. For by the fear of God we guard 
against evil and shun that which is wrong; for 
when we begin to consider that God will punish 
sinners so fearfully, we fear Him on that account ; 
for if this were not so, there would be no need of 
fearing Him. But when we begin to consider it, 
we consequently shun and avoid that which is 
wrong; but those that do not fear Him commit 
much ungodliness. In the second place, my dear 
Jan's daughter that you firmly cleave to the vine 
Christ, and abide in Him and He in you, and you 
shall be as a fruitful branch, full of good and 
beautiful fruit ; and thus the Father will purge you, 
that you may bring forth fruit more abundantly. 
For he that does not abide in Him, but departs 
from Him, the same is cut off from Him as a with- 
ered branch. For your sins, says the prophet, 
"have separated between vou and your God." Isa- 
iah 59:2. Behold, dear Jan's daughter, here we 
have the clear express scripture, by what a man is 
cut off from Christ, the vine, and what the separa- 
tion is whereby we are separated from God, name- 
ly, sin; for when we sin, we are by the sin sep- 
arated from God. Therefore, my dear wife, I be- 
seech you once more, that you firmly cleave to the 
Lord and shun sin as you would a serpent, that 
you do not come too near it, and be devoured by it ; 
for the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, slav- 
ing the souls of men. Sir. 21 :2. We must beware 
of sin ; for God does indeed warn man against sin, 
but He does not prevent him from it, when he is de- 
termined to commit it. as we have many examples 
in the Scriptures, as in Adam and others. 

In the third place, I beseech you to be patient in 
the afflictions that come upon you for Christ's sake, 
for patience is a very good thing for Christians, for 
Christ says: "In your patience possess ye vour 
souls." Luke 21 :19. and Paul likewise says : "For 
ye have need of patience, that, after ve have done 
the will of God, ye might receive the promise." 
Heb. 10:36. Truly indeed mav Paul say that we 
have need of patience, which I have proven in my 
bonds. Paul further says: "Let us run with pa- 
tience the race that is set before us, looking unto 
Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith ; who for 
the joy that was set before him endured the cross, 
despising the shame, Tand is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God.] For consider him that 
endured such contradiction of sinners against him- 
self, lest ve be wearied and faint in your minds." 
Heb. 12:1-3. 

Behold, dear Jan's daughter, thus ate we ex- 
horted to patience, for with patience and resigna- 
tion we can overcome much tribulation and afflic- 
tion ; but he that is impatient cannot stand in the 
sufferings of Christ. Hence Sirach may trulv say : 
"Woe unto those that have lost patience, and have 
turned aside into perverse ways! how will it go 


934 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


with them when the Lord shall visit them ?" Sir. 2 : 
14. Dear Jan's daughter, take heed to the holy 
Scriptures, and in "all things approve yourself as 
the minister of God, in much patience, in afflictions, 
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprison- 
ments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fast- 
ings ; by pureness, by knowledge, by thanksgiving, 
by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, 
by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the 
armor of righteousness on the right hand and on 
the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and 
good report : as deceivers and yet true, as unknown 
and yet well known ; as dying, and, behold we live ; 
as chastened, and not killed ; as sorrowful, yet al- 
ways rejoicing ; as poor, yet making many rich ; as 
having nothing, and yet possessing all things." II 
Corinthians 6:4-10. See, my most beloved, mark 
these words, and watch for the coming of the Lord ; 
for He shall come as a thief in the night ; and al- 
ways have oil in your lamp and do not suffer it to 
go out but always be ready with the wise and good 
virgins to let the Lord your Bridegroom in; and 
constantly have a burning light in your hand, and 
stand with your loins girded to wait that you may 
not be surprised ; constantly and at every moment 
walk as you hope to appear before Him, and do not 
lie down to sleep with a troubled or gnawing con- 
science, but purify your heart before God and your 
neighbor, and always act and walk according to the 
right rule of the Scriptures, for the Scriptures al- 
ways point to Christ, and you cannot be confound- 
ed, nor deceived, nor err. And if you do this, the 
God of peace shall be with you and abundantly 
minister unto you an entrance into eternal life. 
Rom. 15:33; II Pet. 1:10, 21. 

Hence my dear Jan's child, be patient in all trib- 
ulation and distress and take for an example the af- 
flictions and longsuffering of Christ, and the proph- 
ets, who have spoken to you in the name of the 
Lord. "Behold," says James, "we count them 
happy which endure. Ye have heard of the pa- 
tience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. 
Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for 
when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, 
which the Lord hath promised to them that love 
him." James 5:11; 1:12. 

Behold, dear Jan's child, he that overcometh 
shall inherit all things and he shall not be hurt of 
the second death. He that overcometh, and keep- 
eth my works unto the end, to him will I give 
power over the nations; and he shall rule them 
with a rod of iron ; as the vessels of a potter shall 
they be broken to shivers, as Christ has testified of 
His Father. And to him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with Me in My throne, even as I also 
overcame, and am set down with My Father in His 
throne; to him that overcometh will I give to eat 
of the hidden manna, and will give him a white 
stone, and in the stone a new name written, which 
no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it; he 
that overcometh shall inherit all things. Rev 21 -7 • 
2:11, 26, 27; 3:21 ; 2:17. In short, dear Jan's child, 


the Scriptures are full of the great reward of the 
righteous; hence set your affections on things 
above, and not on things on the earth, for they who 
mind earthly things, their end is destruction. Col. 
3:2; Phil. 3:19. Strive therefore after imperish- 
able treasures, which thieves cannot steal, namely, 
after heavenly riches, which cannot perish, and will 
endure forever with the Father. 

Let your meditation be in the word of the Lord, 
day and night concern yourself in His command- 
ments and statues, and watch for His coming, and 
long for it, and avoid all appearance of evil, and act 
not as though you might live many years yet, but 
walk before the Lord just as if you were to die im- 
mediately. And let the voice or sound of the an- 
gels' trumpets constantly be in your ears, when 
the dead shall have to rise and appear before the 
judgment seat of Christ, that everyone may receive 
according to that he hath done, whether it be good 
or bad. II Cor. 5:10. For the Lord Himself, says 
Paul, shall descend from heaven with a shout, with 
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of 
God : and the dead in Christ shall rise first ; then we 
which are alive and remain shall be caught up to- 
gether with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in 
the air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord I 
Thess. 4:16, 17. 

Wherefore comfort one another with these 
words, my most beloved ; for the day of the Lord 
will come as a thief in the night ; in the which the 
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the 
elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth 
also and the works that are therein shall be burned 
up. Seeing then that all these things shall.be dis- 
solved, what manner of persons ought we to be in 
all holy conversation and godliness? II Peter 3:10 
11. Mark well, my dear Jan's child, what manner 
of persons we ought to be, says Peter; let it there- 
fore not grieve us though we must now suffer 
much affliction for the name of Christ. If any man 
suffer as a Christian, says Peter, let him not be 
ashamed, but let him commit his cause to God. For 
the time is come that judgment must begin at the 
house of God : and if it first begin at us, what shall 

a j ■ be ° f them that obey not the Gos P el o f God ? 
And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall 
the ungodly and the sinner appear? I Pet. 4 :17, 18 
The Proverb also says : "If the righteous be rec- 
ompensed here, how will it go with the sinner?" 
Prov. 11:31. "And if they do these things in a 
green tree," says Christ, "what shall be done in 
the dry?" Luke 23:31. Behold, my most beloved, 
if Christ the eternal truth had to suffer before He 
entered into the kingdom of His Father, how much 
more His members ? For He Himself says : "The 
servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you ; if they 
have kept my sayings they will keep yours also. But 
all these things will they do unto you for my name's 
sake, because they know not him that sent me." 
John 15 :20, 21. And if the righteous must suffer 
here, where shall the sinner appear? "Wherefore 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


935 


let them that suffer according to the will of God 
commit the keeping of their souls in well-doing, as 
unto a faithful Creator," says Peter. I Pet. 4:19. 
Thus, my dear Jan's child, be resigned as much as 
you can; though men separate us here, hereafter 
they shall have no power. Then shall we stand in 
great boldness before the face of such as have af- 
flicted us and they shall say : "These are they whom 
we so often had in derision, and a proverb of re- 
proach. We fools have missed the right way, and 
the way of truth hath not appeared unto us." Wisd. 
5:1. 

Charles with his bloody decrees, and all that help 
to confirm them, shall then have no more power. 
The blood-thirsty priests shall then no more hate 
the people of God ; but we shall live with the Lord 
forever and ever, and go in and out as calves of the 
stall. Mai. 4 :2. Then the great sorrow shall all be 
forgotten, since it shall be turned into great joy, 
which shall never end, for a thousand years shall 
seem to be but as one day because of the great 
joy. II Pet. 3 :8. 

Therefore, my most beloved, comfort yourself 
with these promises for He is faithful that prom- 
ised; and wait for them with patience and long- 
suffering: and I hope to wait for you under the 
altar. Hebrews 10:23; Rev. 6:9, 11. 

Herewith I will commend you to God, who 
brought Israel through the Red Sea, and through 
the wilderness, till they were in the promised land ; 
may He bring you into His eternal kingdom. I 
would from the heart that I might take you with 
me, but you must bide the time with patience. 

Herewith I write you adieu for this brief span of 
time, since I do not intend to write you any more 
after this ; but I hope to speak orally with you in 
the throne of heaven. 

Adieu, dear wife, a thousand times adieu ; acquit 
yourself valiantly in the truth, and walk truly in the 
narrow way, until the Lord comes. I thank you 
very much from the heart for the exceedingly great 
love you have shown me ; in time of need love is ap- 
preciated best. 

Furthermore, I bid all the friends an earnest 
farewell, to name them individually according to 
the flesh, their number is too great. And bid my 
son, Heyndricks Janss, farewell ; and tell him to be- 
come a good child ; and to fear our dear Lord, for 
bold and ungodly children shall not enter into 
heaven, but go to hell, and that he learn and go to 
school, and not run and play with naughty children, 
but obey his mother and his grandfather and grand- 
mother, and not learn to speak evil or lie, for the 
mouth that lieth slayeth the soul. Wisd. 1:11. 
Further, Lijsbeth Jans, the letters at Delft you may 
let her keep, and thus you will have no trouble with 
them, since she intends to let the readers read them 
first, as they write me. I send you with this letter, 
three pieces of money, of which each of you shall 
have one for a medal of remembrance, you one, my 
son one, and my daughter one; to my daughter, 
however, you may give the smallest one, if you 


please to do so. You may excuse the woman from 
paying for the bed and the cloak, and I thank him 
much. Now, my dear Jan's child, acquit yourself 
valiantly. I herewith write you adieu, adieu, dear 
Jan's child ; be as resigned as you can ; you would 
have had to resign yourself to it, if I had been lost 
at sea ; once we must part. You may return home. 
Pray the Lord for me; I hope not to forget you. 
Greet the friends, wherever it is convenient. Adieu, 
my dear Jan's child ; you know why I suffer. 

Written on the 4th of February, A. D. 1571, by 
me, Jan Hendeickss. 


SOME EXAMINATIONS OF JAN HENDRICKSS 

Since some brethren have requested me to write 
them something concerning what the lords have 
asked me touching my faith, when I was before 
them, I can therefore not refuse to write them a 
little in regard to the answer which I gave them ac- 
cording to the simple fisherman's understanding 
which the Lord has given me ; the bailiff also did 
not ask me very much or very thoroughly, as you 
will yet hear. Further, when I had been in confine- 
ment forty weeks, on the fifth of June, A. D. 1 570, 
if I remember rightly, I was taken down the first 
time to appear before the lords, and when I entered 
the sheriff's hall, the judges with the bailiff and also 
the burgomasters were assembled there. I un- 
covered my head and bade them good day, and they 
did the same to me. The bailiff then told me to sit 
down upon a bench, which I did, whereupon he 
asked me how old I was. I said that I did not know 
it accurately ; "but," said I "you may write twenty- 
eight years ;" and so it was written. "Where were 
you born?" "At Swartawael." "How long have 
you resided in the Haven?" I said: "Five years, 
counting the time I have been confined here." 
"Yes, that is all the same," said the bailiff. 

He then asked me why I had not my children 
baptized. I said : "Because I have never read that 
the apostles baptized infants, nor is it found in the 
Scriptures." And so it was written: "Jan Hen- 
drickss has confessed to us that he has not had his 
children baptized, and this because he has never 
read in the Scriptures that children were baptized." 
The bailiff then asked me how many children I 
had, whether I did not have more than the two 
whom he had caused to be baptized. I said: 
"None." "How old are the children?" Ans. "The 
older is three years, and the other about one year." 

Then the bailiff asked me whether I had been 
aware that children were baptized. I said : "Yes, I 
have seen it myself." Ques. "Why then did you 
not have your children baptized ? Or are you better 
or wiser than your forefathers?" Ans. "That 
I have not had my children baptized, is because I 
have never read that infants are baptized." Then 
they said that whole households were baptized. 
Ans. "While households are indeed spoken of, but 
it is written that they all rejoiced that they had 
come to believe in the Lord, which infants can not 


936 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


do." This some of the lords admitted. The clerk 
then asked me where it was forbidden to baptize 
infants. I asked him where it was forbidden to 
throw dice. He said that it was forbidden enough, 
but he could not prove it to me. Then I said : "It is 
nowhere forbidden ; yet every one knows that it is 
an evil practice," and they also admitted that it 
was not good. I further said that the Scriptures 
do not forbid everything that is evil, and that no 
one should institute the practice of baptizing in- 
fants, unless he is able to prove it from the Scrip- 
tures. The bailiff then asked me whether I had had 
myself baptized. Ans. "I had myself baptized 
once, and I know of but one baptism." Then the 
bailiff asked me whether I had received more than 
the baptism administered to me in my infancy. 
Ans. "I had myself baptized once according to the 
Scriptures, the last day of March, '63." Then the 
bailiff said : "It was in '64 ; you confessed so to me 
yourself, when I apprehended you." "It was in 
'63, said I ; but I shall not deny it, whether it is a 
year more or less." Then the bailiff said: "We 
may have misunderstood each other" ; and he had 
it written thus : "Jan Hendrickss had himself bap- 
tized the last day of March, '63, and this according 
to the Scriptures." "Then you were not very old 
yet," said the bailiff. "This is true, I said." 

He then asked whether I did not know that I was 
baptized in my infancy. "I have heard it said," 
said I, "but I do not remember it." "This indeed 
I believe" said the bailiff. "What man was it that 
baptized you, and where was he from, and what 
was his name ?" Ans. "I did not ask him what his 
name was, I had never seen him, nor have I ever 
seen him since that time, as far as I know." This 
was written exactly as I confessed it to them. Ques. 
"Where does he reside?" Ans. "I do not know." 
Ques. "Do you not know where he was from?" 
Ans. "I do not want to tell you this ; I do not wish 
to name any one." Ques. "Why?" Ans. "Be- 
cause I do not wish to bring any one into trouble ; 
there are enough in trouble now, and you have 
trouble enough with us." Ques. "Was no one 
present when you were baptized?" Ans. "Yes." 
Ques. "Who were they and what were their 
names?" Ans. "I do not wish to tell." Ques. 
"Where did it occur and in what place?" Ans. 
"In Holland." Then the bailiff said: "Holland is 
large; in what place?" Then I said: "Why would 
you ask me much for the place; if I were to tell 
you the place, you would demand to know still 
more; but I do not wish to implicate any one." 

Finally I told them the place, and said that it had 
taken place in Delfshaven. Ques. "In what house?" 
Ans. "I do not wish to tell." Ques. "What was 
the name of the people that were in that house?" 
Ans. "I do not wish to name any one." Ques. 
"Why are the people in that house so sacred that 
they may not be named?" Ans. "If you knew 
them, you would not leave them in peace ; and I do 
not wish to implicate any one; you have trouble 
enough with us." Then the bailiff began to ask 


how long I had had my wife, and where I had 
married her. Ans. "About five years," and I told 
them that I had married her before the Christian 
church. Ques. "Before what church? you cer- 
tainly did not marry her before the church that 
stands in Delfshaven?" Ans. "No." And so it 
was written that I had married her before the 
Christian church. Ques. "Who was present?" Ans. 
"I do not wish to tell you." 

Then the bailiff said that I should name the per- 
sons, or he would torture me. Ans. "Sir Bailiff, 
who taught you this?" Then the bailiff said that 
he had power to do thus with me, and threatened 
me greatly, and when he heard that I would name 
no one, he told the clerk to write : "Jan Hendrickss 
has confessed to us such and such things (such as I 
told them), but he has named no one, and this be- 
cause he did not wish to implicate any one ;" and 
so it was written. When the bailiff had thus in- 
terrogated me, and wished me many miles away, 
I said to them, "I would fain be in Hitland." 
Then the bailiff said: "Where is that, where trie 
busses catch the herring?" "Yes." "I indeed 
would that you were there," said the bailiff, "with 
all those that are of your persuasion." Then one of 
the lords, who, I was told was a burgomaster, 
wanted to speak to me concerning bantism, and 
asked me that if a man should lead a Christian life, 
but did not have himself baptized, whether he could 
not be saved : whether it would be an obstacle in 
theway of his salvation? I replied: "No; else sal- 
vation would be by the water; but baptism is a 
command of Christ, hence it must be practiced." 
Then I think he said, that it was our view that in- 
fants ought not to be baotized. and asked me when 
they were to be baptized, and how old thev had to 
be. Thereupon I replied to him that the Scriptures 
specify no vear, whether they were twenty, or 
thirtv. or fifty, or a hundred : whenever thev re- 
pented, and requested it. it mieht be done : and so 
we use it. but not sooner, said I and so did Christ 
teach, and the apostles practice it. Then they said 
that at that time it had to be so, that adults were 
baptized, but now the infants must be baptized, 
for then was the beginninsr or commencement; 
this was their pretense. I then asked the burgo- 
master whether Christ, Matt. 28 and Mark 16 
had not commanded to go and teach all nations' 
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; and whether the 
apostles had not observed the same, and had first 
taught the people and then baptized them? This he 
admitted ; for we find, he said, that about five thou- 
sand were baptized at one time. Thereupon I think 
I asked him whether he confessed that adult per- 
sons were baptized at that time. "Yes," he said. 
"Well then, we certainly find clearly enough, that 
the apostles lived more than ten or twenty years in 
the world, and they first baptized adult persons as 
you confess yourself; and this had therefore to be 
done so at that time, because it was in the begin- 
ning: now, since we find that they lived in the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


937 


world so long, infants enough must have come into 
the world in this long period of years ;" this he also 
acknowledged. Then I said: "Now show me once 
where the apostles in this long time baptized in- 
fants; and transferred baptism upon infants; for 
you say that then adult persons had to be baptized, 
but now infants. If the apostles had wanted to 
change baptism, or wanted that it should be 
changed, they had time enough themselves, for they 
were long enough in the world, for Paul says: 'I 
have not shunned to declare unto you all the coun- 
sel of God'" (Acts 20:27); but they could not 
prove it to me. Then the oldest judge said that they 
would prove it to me, but it was not done ; and the 
same judge said that God created man once, and no 
more; and He commanded circumcision to Abra- 
ham once and no more ; and He commanded bap- 
tism once, and no more. Ans. "This is true. Now, if 
God created the man Adam once, and no more, and 
commanded them circumcision once, and no more, 
and commanded them baptism once, and no more, 
and they observed the same, and did not change it, 
why then have they changed baptism from adult 
persons to infants?" Then they said: "Who has 
changed it?" Ans. "The Pedobaptists." Then they 
told and begged me to consider the matter well, 
that it was not a convenient thing to be burnt. I 
replied : "I know that well ; I have no desire to be 
burnt — it is not convenient to be burnt ; if I did not 
know that I am right, I would rather ignominiously 
yield; than honorably lose my life; for it is no 
small matter to suffer one's self to be burnt at the 
stake ; I am not so desirous of death. I would rather 
keep my life, if it were God's will." "Yes." said 
they, "consider it well." Then the bailiff said: 
"Jan Hendrickss, you have confessed this to us 
(and he had my confession read before mv eyes, 
all that I had confessed) ; now if you will yield, mv 
lords will do their utmost to procure your release." 
Ans. "My lords, I am quite open to conviction ; if 
you can prove to me that I am wrong, and when T 
can feel, that, I will desist from that which is evil." 
That was well, they said, and they told me to ask 
the Lord for grace, that He would grant me a pood 
understanding. "That I will gladly do." said I. This 
lasted about an hour and a half, whereupon they 
had me conducted uo above again. These are the 
principal questions which they asked me. and which 
I have remembered, and these are mv simple fisher- 
man's answers which I made, as far as I can re- 
member, for it was written six weeks after I was 
before the lords ; for there was a man confined with 
us, and for this reason we dared not write, but to 
write the words exactly as they were spoken, 
would be impossible for me, for my memory is 
weak. 

A few days after I was taken below again before 
mv lord the bailiff and a young priest, the chaplain 
of the Old Church, and thus three of us were in the 
sheriff's hall. The priest then began to relate how 
he had had a conversation with a man, and that 
thev had had many words together concerninsr the 
holy Scriptures, and about this burning and killing, 


for there had recently four priests been put to death 
in the Hague, and the priests had said to one an- 
other that there were many different views in the 
world concerning the holy Scriptures, and each 
died for his belief, and yet there was but one true. 
This the priest told me, and said to me that they 
had many words ;■ and the man had requested the 
priest that he should talk with me; so the priest 
said. I then asked: "What kind of man was it?" 
"He was of your persuasion," he said, "a sailor, 
and a man like you are." Then it occurred to me 
who it was, but he is not of our persuasion, for I 
had already heard of him ; and thus we fell into an 
animated conversation, and the priest asked me, 
whom I acknowledge as true, for there are so 
many persuasions. I said : "What have I to do with 
another, I have enough to do with myself." He 
asked whether there was more than one faith that 
was true. "No," said I. And there fell very many 
words, and the bailiff listened, and greatly 
strengthened the priest in what he said ; and when- 
ever I quoted Scripture against them, the priest 
was immediately on hand to obscure what I said, so 
that I could not finish my remarks, and he fre- 
quently said to me: "You are forever coming 
with the holy Scriptures." "Yes," said I, "with 
what should I come ? I have nothing else." "Yes," 
said he, "I well know that you always come with 
the Scriptures, and much with the passage, II 
Thess. 2:15, where Paul says: 'Mark therefore, 
dear brethren, and hold the traditions which ye 
have been taught, whether by word or epistle.' " 
Mark well the term word; by that he frequently 
wanted to prove that there was more Scripture 
than was written, which we were also bound to ob- 
serve, as far as I could comprehend his assertion, 
for he frequently made it before I could under- 
stand it. But it is only a stumbling block — how 
can we observe more than what is written? Their 
sole aim is to obscure the understanding of the 
Scriptures, since they are well aware that with the 
Scriptures they will fall short ; and they also can- 
not well bear it that we quote the Scriptures of the 
New Testament, for whenever we do this, their 
first question is why we quote more from the 
Testament, than from other writers, and whereby 
we know that the Testament is true; and they 
then come with many sophistical questions, which 
are not edifying, and skip from one thing to an- 
other. But when they can find any Scriptures in 
the Testament that are on their side, these must 
stand, yea, then the Word of God must stand for- 
ever. For we came to speak of the breaking of 
bread, where Paul savs: "Take, eat; this is my 
body." I Cor. 1 1 :24. This language had to stand 
just as it was. I asked him more than once, whether 
the bread which they gave men was the body of 
Christ. He said : "Yes ; when we have pronounced 
the words over it, it is His flesh and blood, yea, 
soul and body :" it is the truth what I write. There- 
upon I said: "I have eaten the bread with you 
people, but I could not feel in my mouth, that it 
became flesh, but it remained bread even as it was." 


938 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


And we had many words with regard to it. I said 
that Christ Himself says : "Flesh and blood profit 
nothing ; but the words that I speak are spirit and 
life." John 6:63. He then came with a sophism, 
asking whether the flesh of Christ was not good 
for anything. 

Thus we had many words. I said that it was 
written that the Most High dwelleth not in temples 
made with hands, neither is worshiped with men's 
hands. Acts 17:24,25. "Yes," said the priest, 
"as though He needed any one ; for He does not 
need us, but we need Him." Then he asked me 
what I held concerning the matter, or the like. I 
replied that Paul says, I Cor. 10:15-18: "I speak 
as to wise men; judge ye what I say. The cup 
of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
of the blood of Christ ? The bread which we break, 
is it not the communion of the body of Christ ? For 
we being many are one bread, and one body ; for 
we are all partakers of that one bread. Behold 
Israel after the flesh : are not they which eat of the 
sacrifices partakers of the altar?" Thus I confess 
that there is but one communion of Christ, for Paul 
explains it with a simile, saying: "Behold Israel 
after the flesh : are not they which eat of the sacri- 
fices partakers of the altar ?" "Now, I ask," I said 
to them, "what was it that Israel ate, the altar or 
the sacrifices?" They said: "The sacrifices;" but 
they said it reluctantly. "That is right," said I; 
"yet they were partakers of the altar : so it is also 
with those who help to break or eat the bread ; they 
eat only bread, and are yet partakers of the body 
of Christ." I asked whereby he would maintain 
his mass. He brought forward the passage, I Co- 
rinthians 11:24: "This do in remembrance of 
me." By this he maintained his mass. "Well, there 
is nothing said about a mass," said I. This was his 
defense of the mass. I asked him whether a man 
might be apprehended for his faith. He affirmed 
it. I said: "Paul certainly says: 'A man that is a 
heretic, after the first and second admonition, re- 
ject;' but he says nothing about apprehending." 
Titus 3 :10. "It is written," said the priest, "that the 
magistracy does not bear the sword in vain." 
"Yes," said I, "for the punishment of the evil, and 
for the protection of the good ; but what evil have 
I done?" They said: "You have adhered to false 
doctrine, and attended assemblies that are opposed 
to the Roman religion, which the king will not tol- 
erate, for he wants to protect his country ; for it was 
seen what those of Munster did ; their object was to 
capture cities, and to deprive the king of his coun- 
try." Ans. "The Munsterites did wrong; have you 
heard such things of me? I have never in my life 
known the Munsterites." "No ; but the Munsterites 
sprang from you." "Well then, it would have been 
time enough for you to apprehend me, when you 
had heard such things of me; for no one can be 
burned justly, except he first have done evil him- 
self, and not on account of another." But the priest 
strenuously defended the authorities in this; that 
a man might be apprehended for his faith. I said : 


Christ certainly said to His servants, when they 
wanted to root up the tares, that they should not 
do it, but that they should let both grow together 
till the day of harvest." Matt. 13:30. The priest 
said : "But one can go and root up the tares along 
the edge, without injuring the good." Ans. "Christ 
commands not to do it, but to let it grow." But the 
priest constantly charged it upon the magistracy, 
that the apprehending was their work, just as 
though the ministers of the Romish church had 
been without guilt in the matter. I then asked them 
whether my lord the bailiff of Delft, who was with 
us, was a brother and minister in their church. 
This I asked him many times ; but the priest would 
not give me a clear answer with regard to it, but 
jumped from one thing to another. However, I did 
not desist, until he made a definite answer, which 
he did, but with great reluctance. When the bailiff 
saw that we disputed so warmly, he came and stood 
before us, and listened with close attention; then 
I pressed the matter only the harder. Finally he 
said: "Yes." "Then you acknowledge him as a 
brother and minister in your church?" "Yes," said 
the priest. "Well then, now I desire you to show 
me where the apostles had magistrates in their 
church, who protected the faith with fire, water and 
the sword, as you do." This he could not prove to 
me, but came with the passage in Acts 23, where 
Paul was imprisoned, and more than forty men had 
vowed neither to eat nor to drink till they should 
have killed Paul. Paul's sister's son hearing this, 
made it known to Paul, and Paul sent him to the 
chief captain, that he should tell it to him. And 
when the chief captain heard it, he said to two other 
captains, that they should make ready the beasts, 
and set Paul thereon, and bring him safe unto Felix 
the Governor; with two hundred soldiers, three- 
score and ten horsemen, and two hundred spear- 
men. 

Thereupon I replied : "Paul was then a prisoner, 
and that magistrate was an unbeliever; but show 
me once where they had magistrates in their 
church." "Yes," said the priest, "if unbelievers 
did this, how much more believers." I asked where 
the apostles had baptized bells. He said: "We 
do not baptize bells." "What do you teach them 
then?" said I. He said that they blessed or exor- 
cised them, if I have remembered his words cor- 
rectly; "For," said he, "Satan is much in such 
things;" and he related how he had reigned in 
the New Church, and therefore this was done, as 
he said ; and there was a great deal said. 

I said to him that I had never read that the apos- 
tles had magistrates in the church, who protected 
their faith with the sword ; but that I had read that 
Paul says : "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, 
but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world." Then the 
priest started up, and asked where this was written. 
"In Eph. 6:12," said I. Then he took up his 
Testament and looked for it, and having read it 
he said: "This Paul says of the devil; he is the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


939 


prince of this world." I said : "It is the magistracy 
of this world, who rule the world, for it speaks of 
principalities and lords of this world." And there 
fell many words, the bailiff listening with attention. 
The priest said that our faith had not existed long, 
but that their faith had endured fifteen hundred 
years, and though whole countries were aposta- 
tizing from it, said he, whole countries were being 
converted in India, and that many great signs and 
miracles occurred there, even as occurred in the 
time of Christ, so that the Christians were increas- 
ing. Then I said: "Does that occur there, and 
not here ? the church is certainly also here in these 
lands, and there are pastors in Delft, and in other 
cities hereabout, as well as there." He said, it was 
certainly true. "Yes," said I, "Pharaoh's magi- 
cians also imitated what Moses did." "Yes," said 
the priest, "that was so, but they did not do such 
things as occurred there." Then I said : "Well then, 
I will adduce to you still more : we read that there 
was a sorceress, who caused Samuel to come forth 
from the grave, and Samuel talked with her or with 
Saul." I Sam. 28. "That is true," said the bailiff ; 
"I have read that." Then said I, "Christ Himself 
also says that they shall say: 'Lord, have we not 
in thy name cast out devils ? But he shall answer 
them : Depart from me ; I know you not.' " Matt. 
7:22, 23. Then the bailiff said: "Jan Hendrickss 
does not believe it; do you, Jan Hendrickss?" 
"No ; Sir Bailiff," said I, "there is so much villainy 
perpetrated." "Yes," said the priest, "there has 
much indeed been done that was not good;" and 
he related that there had been popes who had not 
done what was good, but what was wrong. This 
the priest himself acknowledged; but "there was 
now," said he, "an old, able man pope, of whom 
much good was said, and he confessed that there 
were bad abuses among them." "Paul says," said I, 
"that the old leaven ought to be purged out, and 
that if any man that is called a brother be a drunk- 
ard, or a railer, or a fornicator, with such a one we 
ought to have nothing to do;" but of this, as it 
seemed, he had little understanding. "Indeed," 
said the bailiff, "if there were a man who would 
have to do with another man's wife, I should not 
want to have anything to do with him." 

The priest then I think asked me why I had left 
them? I said that I had indeed heard the priests 
preach a great deal, very severely censuring pop- 
ery, but that they did not practice what they 
preach; that they drank to such an excess as to 
fight, strike and rave as though they had been mad- 
men, and for this reason I left. This I confessed 
to him because the bailiff was present ; when there 
were no lords present, I did not wish to bring up 
their things. I said : "They always want to instruct 
us in prison ; they ought to set us at liberty, and 
then instruct us;" but of this nothing was said. 
And having thus many words together, I asked the 
bailiff, saying: "Sir Bailiff, I must ask you some- 
thing- if I should renounce my faith: however I 
do not say that I shall do that." "Well," said the 


bailiff, "I do not say it either, that you do." "But 
if I did, would you assure me of my life, and re- 
lease me." "This I will not say, but I still say as 
my lords said, that we will do our best in that 
respect." "Yes, Sir Bailiff," said I, "what would 
that signify ; it has happened that persons have re- 
nounced their faith, and were put to death notwith- 
standing, as has been seen in Delft." "Yes," said 
the bailiff, "some were also released." This I had 
to ask him once, to hear what he would say ; for we 
had talked about it together. Not that we intended 
to renounce our faith, but to hear what they would 
say. For it has never been my mind, nor have I 
ever had any inclination for it ; but it afforded me 
a good reason, when they tormented us to re- 
nounce, to give them this for an answer. Why 
should we renounce our faith? our life is not as- 
sured us. We had many words together, but these 
are the principal things that were said which I have 
remembered, for my memory is not strong. If I 
were to write everything, I should require much 
paper, for it lasted full four hours. In consequence 
of its lasting so long, my fellow brethren were very 
sorrowful, for they thought and believed that I 
had been confined elsewhere away from them. 

The bailiff then rang the bell, and the beadles 
came. I then said to the priest : "If my lord had 
not been present, I would not have made so many 
words with you." "That I believe," said the priest. 
I took off my cap and bade them good evening, 
and they me. And I said to the pastor and begged 
him, that if I had spoken any word too hastily, he 
should excuse me for it. "Yes," said the bailiff, 
"and so do you to him, do you not ?" "Yes," said I : 
and thus we parted. 

It further happened that they confined us all 
three in separate places, apart from one another, 
and took away the Bible from us, one which they 
themselves had let us have, and which the bailiff 
had previously consented that we might have ; but 
we remained of very good cheer, the Lord be 
praised. 

On Sunday, the 16th of July, 1570, I was taken 
down again, and they tied my arms, which they 
had never done before, for I had gone down with 
the jailer, fettered together with another. This sur- 
prised me much, whereupon the beadles told me, 
that the priests had required it of the bailiff. Thus 
they brought me before two priests, namely, Mr. 
Maerten, and the pastor of the New Church, who 
had once before been to see me. When I came to 
them, I bade them good day, and they returned 
the salutation. Then they said : "We have visited 
you once, and now we come again, to see whether 
you are not more willing to yield, than you were the 
other time." I said : "I say as I have already said : 
If it can be proved to me clearly and expressly, that 
infants were baptized, I will gladly suffer myself to 
be instructed." With this answer they were not 
well pleased, since they have no Scripture for it. 
But they asserted that I must suffer myself to be 
instructed, and that infants had of a long time been 


940 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


baptized in the Christian church ; and that it had al- 
ways been an ordinance; but I held to the proof 
furnished by the practice of the apostles. They 
said that we ought to walk in the old paths. "Yes, 
in the right ones," said I; "thus it is written." 
Jer. 6:16. They had come to instruct me. "Yes," 
said I, "I cannot understand it so." This they did 
not like to hear, that I could not understand it ; and 
they said: "You want to understand it before 
you accept it." "It is written," said he, "in the 
prophet Isaiah, that we must first accept it, before 
we believe it." "Where is it written?" said I. 
"I do not know," said the priest. "Rom. 10:10," 
said I, "we read: 'With the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness ; and with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation.' I must certainly believe 
your things with the heart, if I am to accept them : 
but now I cannot understand it as you do." This 
they would not hear ; but if I had soundly assented 
with the mouth to what they said, whether I had 
believed it or not, it would have been all right. 
They begged me much, that I should suffer my- 
self to be instructed, there was not a day that they 
did not pray for us. They also frequently said that 
I had strange views, and that I was damned ; if I 
were not damned, God would not be God, he said ; 
and the Scriptures would not be true ; this he often 
said. To be damned, and to lie in prison, these are 
not good things, said I ; for I said as little to them 
as I could. But the damning did not hurt me ; I let 
them say on. I said : "If you can prove to me, that 
infants were baptized, I would like to hear it." 
They said that whole households were baotized, 
and declared that there must have been children 
there. Ans. "That you do not know, for there are 
households in which are no children ; I also do not 
seek salvation from the water." When they heard 
this they were greatly astonished. "Yes," said I, 
"vou say that all unbaptized children are damned." 
"Yes," said the priest, "they are damned." "Then 
the women who give birth to such children are 
badly off." "Yes," said the priest. "Indeed," 
said I, "then the water must wash away sin?" 
"Yes," said they. Ans. "I shall prove to you, 
that it does not." I then told them, that in Peter 
3 :21 it is written : " 'The like figure whereunto 
even baptism doth also save us, not the putting 
awav of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a 
good conscience.' And the aoostle baptized Simon 
the sorcerer but the water did not remove his sins, 
for it is written that he was in the gall of bitterness, 
and in the bond of iniquity, though he had been 
baptized by the apostles." "You say of Peter," said 
the priest, "that he writes this ; how do you know if 
it is true? Did Peter tell you himself? And Simon 
the sorcerer was a worthless fellow for if the anos- 
tles had known that his heart was in this condition, 
they would rather have bitten their fingers, than 
pronounced the name of God over him." Ans. 
"This I admit ; but the water did nevertheless not 
wash away his sins." And they asserted that I must 
suffer myself to be instructed, and said that I acted 
contrary to the Scriptures, for it is written, Mat- 


thew 18 : "If thy brother shall trespass against thee, 
rebuke him ; and if he will not hear thee, tell it to 
the college." "See," said they, "you will not hear 
us now that we rebuke you ; in this you certainly 
act contrary to the Scriptures." Ans. "What would 
you teach me then ? Would you let me go then, and 
shun me as a heathen and a publican?" "No, no," 
said the priest, "this is your favorite theme, which 
you always bring up." (For I had had many words 
with him in regard to it the last time ;) but to let 
me go was not in their power, he said. Ans. "Christ 
certainly says, when they are reproved, and will 
not hear, they are to be shunned, and not appre- 
hended. And Paul also says: 'A man that is a 
heretic, after the first and second admonition, re- 
ject?' Tit. 3:10. And now I will not hear you, 
hence you ought to let me go." But they did not 
listen to this, that was the magistracy's business, 
they said. Ans. "You certainly have a faith ; show 
me once where the apostles had magistrates in 
their church." 

Then the priest said that Peter had killed two 
persons. Ans. "You cannot prove that to me, nei- 
ther by word nor deed." Then he read from a Ger- 
man Testament, that Ananias and his wife sold 
their possessions ; and did not bring all and lay it 
at the apostles' feet, but kept back a part of it. 
Then Peter said : Ananias, why hath Satan filled 
thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? thou hast 
not lied unto men, but unto God. When Ananias 
heard these words, he fell down and gave up the 
ghost. Three hours after his wife came, and Peter 
asked her too, whether they had sold the land for 
so much. She said : Yea. Peter said to her : How 
is it that you have agreed together to tempt the 
spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet of them which 
have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall 
carry thee out. Then fell she down straightway at 
his feet and yielded up the ghost. Acts 5. When he 
had read, I said: "Who can say that Peter did it, 
for it reads that when they heard these words they 
gave up the ghost." We had many words which I 
have partly forgotten; thev begged me to suffer 
myself to be instructed. "Well," said I, "I can not 
understand it so." To this they would not listen, 
that I would first understand it, before I accepted 
it ; and they said that their faith had always existed 
for fifteen hundred years ; they would show to me 
from year to year, how their church had been built 
up, and they named to me many of their teachers 
or bishops, Augustine and others ; how it first came 
from Spain into France, whence St. Willeboort 
brought it into these countries; and many other 
things did they tell me. And though whole coun- 
tries apostatized from them, there were large 
countries again that adopted their faith, as for in- 
stance in India, where the Lord did great signs, 
so that there were persons who in one month 
learned another language, and accepted the faith, 
and even preached within one month; and many 
other things they told me. I asked whether that 
country was large. They said: "As large as Spain, 
France, Germany and this country taken together." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


941 


Thus their faith had always existed, and could not 
perish, for Christ had said: "I will be with you 
unto the end of the world ;" but our faith had not 
existed so long; for [said they] you can not prove 
to us, that your church has always existed. "I 
know," said the priest, "that you will name to me 
five or six persons." Then I said: It would have 
been much better, if he had heard Micaiah, than 
the four hundred false prophets. (The king of 
Judah, I Kings 22). They tried hard to draw me 
out, as to whether I was baptized, but the Lord 
kept my lips, and I did not tell them. They had 
heard it said, they told me. I asked whether they 
had heard me to say it. They said: "No." I re- 
plied: "I do not want to tell you either." They 
said : "We do not wish to know it." 

And when they found that I would not listen to 
them, they told me time and again that I was 
damned, and that I was a murderer of souls, that I 
had murdered many souls, and they had heard it 
said that I had caused many to apostatize from the 
Roman church. I said : "I have murdered no one's 
soul." He said: "You say that we are murderers 
ourselves." I said: "You have not heard me say 
that." They told me to consider the matter, and if 
I desired it, they would come again. Thus we part- 
ed amicably. 

These are the principal points of our conversa- 
tion, for it lasted about two hours. I should not be 
able to write the whole of it, for I can not remem- 
ber it, and it would be impossible for me to give 
the exact conversation, without leaving out or 
adding to it. 

Written by me, Jan Hendrickss. 


ANOTHER LETTER BY JAN HENDRICKSS, TO MAER- 
TEN JANSS, HIS FELLOW PRISONER 

The eternal God of all grace, who has called us 
with a heavenly calling, from the power of Satan 
into His eternal, marvelous kingdom, strengthen 
and confirm you, my brother Maerten Janss, with 
His holy Word, and give you the power of the 
Spirit, that you may be able to resist all the wicked 
wiles of the Evil One, whether through himself, 
or through his emissaries, so that you may be able 
to stand in this grace; and grant you and me a 
valiant faith, firmly rooted and grounded, that you 
may neither be moved nor cast down by the great 
tempest of false doctrine. This, I Jan Hendrickss, 
your weak fellow brother in imprisonment, tribu- 
lation and affliction, wish Maerten Janss, my dear 
brother, in his bonds and imprisonment, as a 
friendly salutation in the Lord, for the refreshing 
of your mind. Amen. 

Further, my dear brother, I inform you, that I 
am still of good cheer in the Lord, and my heart 
and mind have still no other purpose than to fear 
Him, and to adhere to His holy Word, according to 
my great weakness, with the help of God. Without 
whose assistance I am utterly powerless to perform 
the same. Thus I hope and am confident in my 


heart, that it is also with you. I furthermore thank 
you much for the comforting letters you have sent 
me to refresh and console me in my tribulation, and 
that you still remember me in your prayers, which 
I also do for you, that we may help each other fight 
in this great conflict, which we now have with the 
great red dragon, which draws the third part of 
the stars from heaven with his tail. Revelation 
12 :3, 4. When I read your letters, it was no sor- 
row for me to hear that you were of such good 
cheer and courage in the Lord, but it rejoiced my 
spirit. Hence, my dear brother, let us take good 
heed to, and well consider, the teaching and ad- 
monition of Paul, where he says: "As ye have 
therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk 
ye in him, rooted and built up in him." Col. 2 :6, 7. 
Mark, dear brother, it is needful that we attend to 
these words and admonition of Paul. For since 
we have put on Christ by baptism, and have become 
members of His body, let us walk in Him, rooted 
and built up in Him, and firmly abide in Him, even 
as He says : "Abide in me, and I in you. As the 
branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide 
in the vine ; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. 
I am the vine, ye are the branches. He that abideth 
in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much 
fruit ; for without me ye can do nothing. If a man 
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and 
is withered; and men gather them, and cast them 
into the fire, and they are burned." John 15:4-6. 
Mark, dear brother, how well it is with him that is 
in Christ, and Christ in him: but he who has no 
consciousness of Christ, is like a branch that is 
cut off and withered, which receives no sap or 
strength, nor the nature of the stem of the vine. 

Dear brother, let us now earnestly consider the 
matter, whether this is not the case with men. Let 
us therefore abound in him with thanksgiving, and 
by him offer the sacrifice of praise to God contin- 
ually, that is, the fruit of our lips, that we be not 
spoiled through philosophy and vain deceit, after 
the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the 
world, and not after Christ. Heb. 13:15; Col. 2:8. 
"For it is now an evil time, a time that searches 
and tries Christians, whether they are firmly rooted 
and built in the faith. For when a woman has con- 
ceived, and the time of her delivery is drawing 
nigh, before she is delivered, great pain comes 
upon her, which is the forerunner and sign of her 
impending delivery ; but when she is delivered, she 
soon forgets the great pain, because she has gotten 
a child. 

Behold, my dear brother, thus it is also with us 
now; the great temptation and vexation, conflicts 
without, and fears within, which happen to us 
daily, these are our pains which precede delivery, 
whereby we may perceive, that the time of de- 
livery is fast approaching; but as soon as we are 
delivered, then we shall remember it no more; 
namely, when we shall have put off this tabernacle, 
the mortal clothing, that shall be the last of our 
pain; then we may say: "O death, where is thy 


942 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting 
of death is sin ; and the strength of sin is the law. 
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." I Cor. 15:55-57. 
Then shall the last enemy, death, be conquered. 
Then shall we no more weep, mourn, or lament ; all 
torment, pain and affliction shall then have passed, 
like a vapor, that endures for a little time. Then 
we shall no more be tormented or tempted, appre- 
hended or hunted ; but we shall rest from our heavy 
labor, and help keep the eternal day of rest, with 
many thousand saints under the altar, who are 
chosen out of every kindred and nation, who have 
also sealed the Word of God with their blood, and 
have passed through the world through many great 
tribulations, and not loved their lives above their 
Creator unto the death. Rev. 14:13; 7:14; 12:11. 
Behold my dear brother Maerten Janss, what 
will it matter then, whether we have lived in great 
luxury and pleasure, or whether we have been 
persecuted, imprisoned, tormented, tortured, burnt 
or beheaded, yes, what will it matter when it is all 
over ? For then we shall all follow the Lamb slain 
from the foundation of the world, with a great mul- 
titude of saints, arrayed in fine linen clean and 
white, palms in our hands, and crowns upon our 
heads. Oh, what a glorious work will that be for 
him that will be able to endure here unto the end ! 
Hence, my dear brother, I say with tears, though I 
write it to you, let us keep good courage ; for in the 
world, says Christ, ye shall have tribulation : "But 
be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." 
John 16 :33. So doing let us hold fast the promise, 
without wavering ; for he is faithful that promised 
(Hebrews 10:23) ; though they say that we have 
the devil of pride in us, and that he is too firmly 
seated in us. But it will be found otherwise, when 
that comes what shall come ; there is no doubt about 
it. Though we are here deprived of our right, 
when the Judge of judges shall judge, we shall get 
it back, I have no doubt at all. Herewith I will 
commend you to the Lord, and to the rich Word of 
His grace, who is able to keep you unto the end. 
Amen. 

Know, Maerten Janss, that the tormentors have 
been with me all the week, except one day, and I 
daily expect their return. Adrian Corneliss was 
also here this week, with the chaplain. And on 
Saturday the chaplain was here, with a steersman 
from Egmont, named Jacob Meulenaer, who want- 
ed to prove to me, that however bad a man was, he 
might teach the Word of God aright, and save men ; 
yea, though it were the devil, he might teach men 
the Word of God aright. He took off his cap, and 
sat there as though he was about to deliver an ex- 
hortation, and made a speech almost a quarter of 
an hour long, commencing at the very beginning. 
I could not refrain from laughing, whenever I 
looked at him, for I thought that his head was out 
of order. When he had finished, all three of us 
fell in a dispute ; yet I did not intend to make many 
words, but it is difficult for a man to keep silence. 


Hence when they perceived that I would not listen 
to them they assailed me very hard. The steers- 
man said : "Had I been officer, you would not have 
lain here so long ; he would have made short work 
with me." He said to the priest : "The lords must 
put this man to death secretly; he [the devil] was 
so firmly seated in me," he said, "that he could not 
come out ;" and many other ugly words he said. I 
said : "The plainer you make it the better I under- 
stand it." And the chaplain and I had many hard 
words, and he was greatly incensed. I said that I 
did not desire him so any more. He said that he 
marveled with Paul, that I had so soon suffered 
myself to be led to another gospel, when yet there 
was no other. I said : "What other gospel have I 
accepted?" He said: "That I had not been willing 
to have my children baptized." "Indeed," said I, 
"you have not a single letter of Scripture that they 
must be baptized." Observe, dear brother, his 
view : "If Paul had ordained it as a command and 
custom to baptize infants, and we rejected the 
same, we had accepted another gospel." I also had 
some words with the steersman ; what he said was 
neither rhyme nor reason, and he was very abusive 
to me. I said: "Calling names breaks no bones; 
one can do it seated as well, and I offered him a 
chair." He said that he knew more in one finger, 
than I in my whole body ; and many other things he 
said. Farewell, and acquit yourself valiantly; I 
hope to do the same. And let us remember each 
other in our prayers. Take this my simple letter in 
good part, for it has been written out of love ; and 
excuse me for having waited so long before writ- 
ing, since I have many visitors, not friends, how- 
ever, since no one is allowed to come to me except 
my father. Write me again, how it is with you, for 
I hear nothing but good of you, God be praised. 
Written, A. D. 1572, in my bonds, by me, 

Jan Hendrickss. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JAN HENDRICKSS TO 

POUWELS AND AECHTGEN, HIS BROTHER AND 

SISTER, FOR AN ADMONITION TO THEM, 

AND FINALLY FOR A FAREWELL 

The God of all grace, who has called us from the 
power of darkness into His eternal kingdom, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord, grant you accord- 
ing to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened 
with power by His Spirit in the inner man ; that 
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith ; that ye, 
being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to 
comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and 
length, and depth, and height ; and to know the love 
of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might 
be filled with all the fullness of God. Col. 1:13; 
Eph. 3 : 16-19. This, I Jan Hendrickss, a poor pris- 
oner for the word of the Lord, at Delft, wish 
Pouwels H. and Aechtgen H., for an affectionate 
salutation in the Lord. Amen. 

Further, after all proper salutation to you, my 
beloved brother Pouwels Hendrickss, and Aacht- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


943 


gen Hendrickss, daughter, whom I love much ac- 
cording to the flesh, and also after the spirit, I 
inform you, that I am still valiant and of good cheer 
in the Lord, as I hope that this is also the case 
with you. And as, according to human calculation, 
my departure, or time is near at hand, to put off 
my tabernacle, I cannot forbear, but must exhort 
you briefly, out of pure, faithful, brotherly love, to 
strive firmly, steadfastly and constantly in the faith 
once delivered to the saints, that you may through 
this faith receive God's promises, so that we may 
meet together under the altar, with the great 
number robed in white, who are chosen and re- 
deemed by the blood of the Lamb out of every 
kindred and nation under heaven, and have passed 
through the world through great tribulation, being 
burnt, pursued, beheaded, and the like ; therefore 
are they before the throne of God, and serve Him 
day and night in His presence. Rev. 7 :14, 15. 

See, dear brother, all these had to drink of this 
bitter cup, before they attained their present state ; 
and they all had to walk this narrow, strait, slip- 
pery, and perilous way, and did not love their 
lives unto the death, and had to leave everything 
behind for the name of the Lord, whether it be 
lands, sand, house, home, wife, and children, before 
they reached this exceedingly glorious state. Yea, 
the Son of God Himself entered into His Fa- 
ther's kingdom through great affliction being ap- 
prehended, mocked, scourged, crucified, and put to 
death, so that he said : "I am a worm, and no man." 
Psalm 22 :6. Hence let us take these for an example 
and pattern, lest we become slothful, drowsy, or 
faint on the way, and thus be taken captive by the 
wiles and snares of Satan, for a man that is asleep 
is easily caught. But be fervent in spirit, and seek 
to be the first in every good work, and not the least ; 
and beware of the arrows of the devil, which he 
shoots in darkness ; and pray to God day and night, 
for it is needful to pray always, lest we fall into 
temptation, for he that seeks to murder our soul 
neither sleeps nor slumbers, and is constantly walk- 
ing about us as a roaring lion. And beware of 
pride, of spiritual as well as other pride, for it is 
the nature of man to be rather high minded. Let 
all envy and hatred, railing and slandering, and all 
craftiness and malice be far from you, together 
with all murmuring of the heart. Covetousness or 
rapacity, ambition and selfishness, let these not be 
found with you, but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and follow His example in everything, as well as 
you can. Have brotherly love, and endeavor to keep 
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Be pa- 
tient in all tribulation and affliction that come upon 
you, and the God of peace will be with you ; for we 
have great need of patience, as I have proved. For 
Sirach says : "Woe to him that has lost patience," 
and well may he say so. 

In short, conduct yourselves so according to your 
weakness, that no one may justly have much to 
complain of you. And serve the Lord with all 
your heart and purpose ; incline your thoughts to 


God, and let your eyes ever be upon Him, even 
as the eyes of the servant are upon his master, and 
the eyes of a maiden upon her mistress. And work 
out your salvation with fear and trembling ; more- 
over, think not that you always fall too short, not 
doing enough. And do not walk carelessly in the 
ways of the Lord, but pass the time of your so- 
journing here in fear, for the heedless and careless 
will soon have squandered all their substance ; but 
exercise great care for the poor soul which has been 
redeemed with a great price, and will live forever, 
either in heaven or in hell. Fight valiantly against 
Satan with his manifold lusts and desires and false 
insinuations, and trample his head in pieces under 
your feet, with earnest supplication and prayer to 
God, with diligence and earnestness, for Satan 
comes down with great wrath, knowing that his 
time is brief. Rev. 12:17. Likewise always re- 
member God's severe judgment, and great day that 
shall come upon all the ungodly. For when we bear 
it well in mind, we can the better guard against it, 
because it will be most terrible; even as Sirach 
says : "My son, remember your end, and you will 
never sin," for according to the Scriptures marvel- 
ous things indeed will take place when the great 
day of the Lord shall come ; for the Lord Himself 
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God : 
and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we 
which are alive and remain shall be caught up to- 
gether with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord 
in the air : and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 
I Thess. 4:16, 17. And the sea shall give up her 
dead; no one shall then remain hid that shall not 
rise again : but everyone shall receive in his body 
according to that he hath done, whether it be good 
or bad. Rev. 20:13; II Cor. 5:10. Although our 
body is now placed to the stake, for food for the 
birds and beasts (Psalm 79:2), it shall therefore 
not remain lost, but the Lord shall raise it up 
again in due time, and make it like unto the image 
of His Son, and then shall we, through His grace, 
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Fa- 
ther, whereas the part and lot of all the ungodly 
shall be in the lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone. Phil, 3:21; Matt. 13:43; Rev. 21:8. 

Therefore, my dear brethren and sisters, faint 
not at my tribulation which I now suffer, but let it 
be your glory. Eph. 3:13. For, who art thou, says 
the Lord by the prophet, that thou shouldst be 
afraid of man that shall die, and of the son of man 
which shall be made as grass? Isa. 51 :12. Christ 
likewise says : "I say unto you my friends, Be not 
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that 
have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn 
you whom ye shall fear : Fear him, which after he 
hath killed hath power to cast into hell ; yea, I say 
unto you, Fear him." Luke 12:4, 5. For, my dear 
brethren and sisters, it is too wonderful how the 
Lord can work with His own, which I well experi- 
enced when I was tortured ; for they first drew me 
up by the pulley, and when I was suspended, they 


944 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


scourged me; and when I would betray no one, 
they hung a weight to my feet; but as soon as I 
came upstairs again, I had but little pain, yea, the 
next day my limbs were no worse than if I had 
helped catch six or seven loads of herring. Hence 
keep good courage, and follow me ; I hope now to 
go beiore you, and to wait for you under the altar 
of the Lord, with the marked dead of the Lord, 
who are already slain for the name of their God, 
and lie and wait for their fellow brethren, that shall 
be killed yet for the testimony of the Lord, until 
the time that the number is fulfilled. Oh, that we 
might meet one another there! what great joy it 
would be for me, as I hope and have this confidence 
concerning you, that we shall yet go in and out 
there as calves of the stall, and help keep the eter- 
nal Sabbath ; then we shall rest from all our great 
trouble, misery and torment that have been inflicted 
upon us, and from the heavy labor which we have 
done. To this end make you meet the great Shep- 
herd of the sheep, who brought us from the dead 
through the blood of the everlasting testament. 
Amen. Hebrews 13 :20. For I love your souls with 
all my heart, and would fain, that 1 might take you 
all before me. Herewith I will commend you to 
God, and to the rich Word of His grace ; may He 
keep you unto the end. Amen. 

Dear brother and sister, my heart's great desire 
of you is, that you have an eye upon our brothers 
Cornelis H. and Jacob H., and our sister Leentgen 
H., and direct them in the fear of God as much as 
you can. But above all, have your eye upon my 
children, and show them and my wife as much love 
as you can; for my glass is almost run out, my 
watch is nearly over; day will soon break, for I 
have already seen the morning star in the sky. 
Herewith farewell ; I greet Adrian H. and his wife 
and all dear friends much; bid my friends many 
adieus. Dear brother and sister, take my letter in 
good part; though I am somewhat solemn in my 
letters, it is because I love your souls so much. 
Written on the 23d of January 1572. Adieu for 
a little while, my dear brethren and sisters, till we 
meet again; acquit yourselves valiantly, this I 
pray you. By me, Jan Hendrickss. 


SANDER WOUTERSS, OF B0MMEL AND EVERT HEN- 
DRICKS, OF WARENDORP, BOTH BURNT ALIVE 
FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST AT 
AMSTERDAM, ON THE 3d OF SEPTEM- 
BER, A. D. 1575 

The misery of the beloved children of God had 
not come to an end yet at this time, since the words 
spoken by the Lord: "They shall put you out of 
the synagogues ; yea, the time cometh, that whoso- 
ever killeth you will think that he doeth God serv- 
ice," were still being fulfilled, which among many 
other instances, also appeared in the year 1572, on 
the third day of September, at Amsterdam, in the 
case of two pious and valiant champions of Jesus 
Christ, named Sander Wouterss, of Bommel and 


Evert Hendricks of Warendorp, both of whom at 
that time, voluntarily exchanged their life for death, 
and surrendered it to the Lord as a burnt sacrifice, 
the Romanistic rulers effecting this through their 
malice, with fiery flames in the place of execution 
in front of the city hall at Amsterdam. 

But between those who did this, and the others 
who suffered it, there shall hereafter be a great dif- 
ference, when there shall be said to those who 
suffered it: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, in- 
herit the kingdom prepared for you from the foun- 
dation of the world," but to those who did it (if 
they have not sincerely been converted from this 
wickedness) ; "Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting 
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." Matt. 
25. Oh, what an exceeding great difference 1 our 
reason is utterly powerless to grasp this, our 
mortal and frail tongue cannot express it. 

Note. — The sentence of death of the afore-men- 
tioned two persons was sent us from the original 
book of criminal sentences of said city, through 
the instrumentality of the clerk of the court there : 
hence we will add the same here, just as it reads ; in 
it may be seen how perfidiously the papistic rulers 
of that time misinterpreted the good confession of 
the pious witnesses of Jesus Christ, and how dread- 
fully and horribly they proceeded against and dealt 
with them. 


SENTENCE OF DEATH OF SANDER WOUTERSS OF 

BOMMEL AND EVERT HENDRICKS OF 

WARENDORP 

Whereas it has appeared to my lords of the court 
that Sander Wouterss of Bommel and Evert Hen- 
drick of Warendorp, both tailors and inhabitants 
of this city, prisoners at present, unmindful of the 
obedience which they owed to our mother, the holy 
church, and to his royal majesty, as their natural 
lord and prince, and rejecting the ordinances of 
the holy church, have for many years past not been 
to confession, nor to the holy, worthy sacrament, 
and have further dared repeatedly to attend the 
assembly of the reprobated sect of the Mennonists, 
or Anabaptists, and also to permit preaching after 
the manner of the aforesaid sect to be done in their 
houses ; and the afore-mentioned Sander Wouterss, 
twelve years ago, and the aforesaid Evert Hen- 
dricks, seven years ago, renouncing and forsaking 
the baptism received by them in their infancy from 
the holy church, have also suffered themselves to 
be rebaptized, and afterwards repeatedly received, 
the breaking of the bread, according to the man- 
ner of the afore-mentioned sect ; and though they 
have been repeatedly urged and admonished, by 
divers spiritual persons, to forsake the afore- 
mentioned sect, and to return to our mother, the 
holy church, they nevertheless refuse to do' the 
same, persisting in their stubbornness and obsti- 
nacy, disturbing by said sect the common peace and 
welfare of the land,* according to the import of the 

* Thus spake also the enemies of the prophet Amos, saying- 
Amos hath conspired [against thee in the midst of the house of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


945 


decrees of his majesty existing in regard to this, 
which crimes, for an example unto others, ought 
not to go unpunished; therefore, my lords of the 
court having heard the demand of my lord the bail- 
iff, and having seen the voluntary confession of the 
prisoners, and having had regard to their stubborn- 
ness and obstinacy, have condemned, and do con- 
demn by these presents, said prisoners, and each of 
them severally, to be executed with fire, according 
to the decrees of his majesty, and declare all their 
property confiscated for the benefit of his majesty 
aforesaid. Done in court, this 3d of September 
1572, by all the judges, and with the advice of all 
the burgomasters, in presence of me the secretary. 

Signed, W. Pieterss. 
Thus extracted from the book of criminal sen- 
tences of the city of Amsterdam, preserved in the 
archives of that city. N. N. 

HANS KNEVEL, A. D. 1572 

As is known to many, the world has become so 
corrupted through the false teachings of antichrist, 
and iniquity has, according to the prediction of 
Christ (Matt. 24:12), so gained the ascendancy, 
that the princes and kings of the earth have become 
utterly perverted, through her seductive wine of 
fornication (Rev. 17:2; 18:3), from their native 
reasonable nature, who usually are wont to show 
some love and mercy to their own friends and kin- 
dred, and also to those who love and do good to 
them. This reasonableness seems to have almost 
ceased in many princes and rulers of this world, so 
that in place of their native reasonableness they are 
now like irrational beasts, who by nature are born 
for taking and slaying. II Pet. 2:12; Jude 1:10. 
This, among many other instances, appeared also, 
about the year 1572, in the city of Antwerp, where 
they apprehended a pious follower of Christ, by the 
name of Hans Knevel. He was a young single man 
and a clothshearer by trade. The circumstances 
that led to his imprisonment were as follows: It 
happened that one of his chief friends became 
known to the margrave and to some one of his 
servants, whereupon they laid plans to apprehend 
him. This plot was made known to Hans Knevel, 
in his shop where he worked. He therefore very 
earnestly warned his friend with regard to it, and 
advised him to go away from there, saying that he 
would go with him. Thus they went together and 
took up residence at Hamburg, where, after re- 
siding for a time, Hans Knevel went back to Ant- 
werp again, there seeking to make a living by sell- 
ing wool. Hence, about ten o'clock, the margrave 
with his servants came into the inn where he 
lodged and asked him: "Is not your name Hans 
Knevel?" He answered: "Yes," They said: "You 
are an Anabaptist ; you must go with us." And he 
was also able to tell him, that he had gone from 
there to Hamburg with his special friend Steven 


Israel the land is not able to bear all his words. Amos 7:10. And 
thus it was also said of Christ: "He perverts the nation." Luke 
23:2. 


Janss Dilburgh. And thus he was confined in a 
dark dungeon, and on the following Monday 
brought before the lords, the margrave, bailiff, two 
judges, and the clerk of the criminal court. Now 
when this friend of God, Hans Knevel, out of mod- 
esty hesitated to sit down immediately, the bailiff 
said: "Sit down and do what you are told; you 
obey your people, you must also obey us." When 
he asked him what he held concerning their infant 
baptism, Hans answered that he had read nothing 
of infant baptism in the New Testament, hence he 
could hold nothing concerning it. Ques. "Were 
you baptized upon your faith?" Am. "Yes." 
Ques. "How long ago ?" He told them, and that it 
took place between Chronenburgh and the Oever. 
This they wrote down as he understood. Ques. 
"Where have you attended preaching, and whom 
have you seen there ?" He named to them several 
persons, and some who had already been offered 
up. Thereupon they said: "You name to us per- 
sons that are out of the country, and such as have 
been burned; we want to know those who live in 
this place, and who are your teachers, ministers, 
and informants." And they said such people as he, 
the prisoner, was, had no liberty anywhere, and 
had to roam about everywhere. Hans replied that 
also Christ Himself had no liberty anywhere. This 
they took ill, that he the prisoner sought to com- 
pare himself to Christ. The margrave said: "At 
Hamburg you people have no liberty either." Hans 
replied: "There, however, they deprive no one of 
property and life, as is done here. Margrave. 
"What do they do there then." Hans. "They are 
sent out of the city." Margrave. "Then they have 
to go into' another again." Hans. "Yes, but they 
shall not have gone over all the cities of Israel, till 
their redemption shall be at the door." Matt. 10 :23. 
At this they laughed. Margrave. "We will send 
you learned men, and if you will suffer yourself 
to be instructed, mercy shall be shown you." Hans. 
"Yes, you will show me such mercy that I shall 
have my head cut off." Margrave. "No, but we 
should release you." Hans. "Though it were as 
you say, you would love my body, but hate my 
soul." Margrave. "No, but I love your body, and 
still much more your soul, since you are young 
yet, and have been brought to it innocently ; but if 
you will not hear; you shall fare like the rest." 
Hans said that he was well satisfied, and thus 
they parted. Afterwards these prisoners of the 
Lord were for three consecutive days brought be- 
fore a priest, who endeavored with all his might to 
make them believe his false doctrine, telling them 
many things concerning their old custom, which 
this friend of God did not deem worthy to write to 
his friends. The priest especially made many words 
over Rom. 13, by which he wanted to justify the 
murdering and slaying perpetrated by the Romish 
church, saying that the magistracy did not bear the 
sword in vain, and that it must therefore be obeyed. 
Hans replied that he was willing to obey the mag- 
istracy in custom, taxes and the like ; but that the 


946 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Hans Knevel burned at Antwerp, AD 1572 


priest ought to be ashamed, that he sought to 
justify their wicked murdering and burning even 
by the Scriptures; asking him where Christ and 
His apostles had ever done this. He further asked 
the priest why he had come to him. The priest an- 
swered: "To win your soul." Hans Knevel told 
him, if he sought to win souls, to go around in the 
city, in the brothels, the tippling houses, tennis 
courts, and to those who shed so much innocent 
blood, and to seek to win their souls. His own soul 
Christ had already won. Thus this prisoner dis- 
puted five different times with the priest. After- 
wards he was put upon the rack several times; 
but the Lord his God ; in whose grace he trusted, 
faithfully succored him according to His promise. 
When he again appeared before the lords, he was 
severely upbraided, why he refused to hear the 
learned men whom they had sent. Hans replied : 
"Your learned men wanted to make me believe in 
infant baptism, of which the Scriptures no where 
speak" ; and he offered to show the lords the Scrip- 
tures relating to the true Christian baptism; but 
the lords did not wish to hear it, claiming not to 
understand the matter. Hans asked how they then 
dared judge such an important matter, involving 


body and soul, and which they, according to their 
own saying, did not understand. 

Having been severely confined for about nine 
days in the Emperor's Chair, he was again sum- 
moned before the margrave, and the clerk of the 
criminal court. The margrave told him that he 
had received a letter from the Duke, with the im- 
port that the prisoner must be examined still fur- 
ther or more rigorously. Hans replied that he 
could not give them any further information. Hence 
he had to go upon the rack again. When they could 
obtain nothing else from him, they released him 
from the rack. Hans said: "How can you tor- 
ment us thus, when no one complains of us, that 
we have injured any one?" The margrave said: 
"You will not obey the authorities." Hans replied: 
"We will gladly obey the authorities in all taxes, 
customs and excises; yea, we should be sorry, if 
we should withhold from the authorities one stiver 
of what is their due." They then compared him to 
the Munsterites. Hans said that his faith was as 
different from the Munsterite sect, as heaven is 
from the earth. And after they had finished tor- 
menting, tempting and otherwise maltreating him 
according to their pleasure, and he the prisoner, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


947 


was in no wise to be moved, since he was firmly 
built upon the cournerstone Christ Jesus, he was 
burned at the stake, in the marketplace at Ant- 
werp, about the year 1572, confirming the faith of 
the truth with his death and blood, for an instruc- 
tive and perpetual example to all true Christians ; 
for he has fought the fight, finished his course, ob- 
tained the crown of eternal glory through the grace 
of God, and now rests with all his fellow combat- 
ants that have lawfully striven (II Tim. 2:5), un- 
der the altar of Christ Jesus. 

This account we have chiefly taken from Hans 
Knevel's own letter, which he wrote at Antwerp, 
from prison, to his dear brother Steven Janss Dil- 
burgh! and his wife Leentjen at Hamburg; in 
which he communicates at length the firm founda- 
tion of his faith and living hope in God's grace and 
blessed promises, which we, to avoid prolixity, have 
omitted, even as we have also done with a large 
number of similar writings. 


Persecuted, but not forsaken. II Cor. 4:9. 


MATTHEUS BERNAERTS, CALLED MATTHEUS VAN 

LINCKEN, ADRIAEN ROGIERS, MAERTEN VAN 

DER STRATEN, AND DINGENTGEN OF 

HONSCHOTEN, A. D. 1572 

In the year 1572, the 4th of December, there 
were burned at Ghent in Flanders, in the Friday 
Market, for the testimony of Jesus, with balls in 
their mouths, a God-fearing, pious brother, named 
Mattheus Bernaerts, called Mattheus van Lincken, 
born at Meenen in Flanders, forty years old, in his 
time a minister of the church of God, in the Word 
of the holy Gospel, and also in the deaconship, 
to provide for poor needy members of Christ in 
temporal necessities ; and a young maiden, named 
Dingentgen of Honschoten. These two, together 
with Maerten van der Straten, born at Kortrijck 
in Flanders, and Adriaen Rogiers, born at Bommel 
in Guelder land (who are separately mentioned in 
this book), four in all, were together burned in the 
same fire, with balls in their mouths, for the true, 
indubitable truth, and testified to and confirmed 
the true faith with their death and blood in great 
constancy. They thus fought a good fight against 
the princes and rulers of darkness, the devil and 
his adherents, finished their course, kept the faith, 
and are expecting now to receive, through grace, 
the crown of eternal glory from the hand of the 
Lord. 


A TESTAMENT WRITTEN BY MATTHEUS BERNAERTS, 

CALLED VAN LINCKEN, IMPRISONED IN GHENT, 

TO HIS CHILDREN, JANNEKEN, JOOSKEN 

AND MIJNTKEN 

The salutation. 

God the heavenly Father, Creator of heaven and 
earth, and the waters, and all that therein is ; who 
dwells in the light which no man can approach 
unto ; whom no man hath seen, nor can see (I Tim. 


6:1); the same eternal, only, Almighty God, 
grant you, my dear children, through Christ Jesus 
His only Son, and the power of the Holy Ghost, 
till your full age, grace and mercy, wisdom and 
understanding, that your senses may become ex- 
ercised to discern both good and evil (Heb. 5 :14), 
so that you may from your youth, through the fear 
of God, learn to shun sin, and to avoid all evil and 
wickedness, and thus grow up in the knowledge of 
God that you may inherit salvation and eternal 
glory, so that I may find you in life eternal. This I, 
Mattheus Bernaerts, your father, wish you, my 
dear children, Janneken, Joosken, and Mijntken, 
from the depth of my heart, that this may be done. 
Amen. 

I, Mattheus Bernaerts, or Mattheus van Linc- 
ken, your father, am now, for the Word of God, 
confined in prison at Ghent. Hence, my dear chil- 
dren, my first wish is, that, when you are come to 
years of understanding, you diligently inquire why 
it came that your father had to suffer ; and search 
also ardently in the holy Scriptures, and you will 
by the grace of God readily perceive that it is not 
for any evil doing or heresy that I have to suffer, 
as I and my fellow brethren that have obtained like 
faith with me, have been accused by the false 
prophets ; but we are reproached, because we firm- 
ly hope in the living God, who is the -Saviour of all 
men, specially of those that believe. I Tim. 4:10. 
In the living God, I say, who so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in Him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life. John 3:16. We confess that the 
same only Son of the Father has existed from ever- 
lasting to everlasting. For He is Alpha and Omega, 
the beginning and the end, the first and the last, by 
whom all things were created, and by whom we 
also have reconciliation, even the forgiveness of 
sins. Revelation 1 :8, 17; Col. 1:16, 14. For when 
we were yet ungodly, Christ died for us, and we 
were reconciled by the death of the Son of God 
when we were yet enemies through the knowledge 
of evil works, and now are we reconciled by the 
body of His flesh through death, for the blood of 
Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all our 
sins. Romans 5 :8 ; I John 1 :7. He is also the in- 
nocent, spotless Lamb, that took Adam's sin upon 
Himself, who did no sin, neither was guile found in 
His mouth, and who of God is made unto us 
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and 
redemption. I Pet. 2 :22 ; I Cor. 1 :30. 

In short, I believe and confess with many saints 
of God, that Christ is the Son of the living God, 
even as Peter confessed Him, with many apostles, 
Nathanael, Martha, the thief, the angel Gabriel, 
the Father from high heaven, and many Christian 
witnesses. This only Son of God revealed and made 
known to us the will of the Father after He arose 
from the dead. He gave His apostles a command, 
saying : "All power is given unto me in heaven and 
in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, 
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of 


948 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the Son, and of the Holy Ghost : teaching them to 
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you." Matt. 28:18-20. Mark writes: "Go ye into 
all the world, and preach the Gospel to every crea- 
ture. He that believeth and is baptized shall be 
saved ; but he that believeth not shall be damned." 
Mark 16:15, 16. But man must then first become 
converted and repent, for Christ caused repentance 
to be preached in His name, for the remission of 
sins, and to Christ give all the prophets witness, 
that through His name, whosoever believeth in 
Him shall receive remission of sins. Acts 2:38; 
10:43. And the apostles as faithful servants fol- 
lowed the command of Christ, as we read in Acts, 
where Peter taught the people of Jerusalem, say- 
ing: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you 
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of 
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, 
and they that gladly received his word were bap- 
tized." Acts 2:38, 41. Likewise we also find con- 
cerning the eunuch from Ethiopia, that he was bap- 
tized by Philip upon the confession of his faith. 
V. 37, 38. Philip also baptized both men and wom- 
en, when he had preached to them the things con- 
cerning the kingdom of God. V. 12. Peter also 
commanded to baptize Cornelius and his household, 
when he and all his household, by faith, had re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost. 10:47, 48. The jailer and 
his household also were baptized, when they had 
come to believe in the Lord Jesus. 16:33. Thus 
the apostles baptized only believers, after they had 
first taught them to repent, to die unto sin, and 
to be buried by baptism, to rise again in newness of 
life. Rom. 6 :4. Thus baptism is a burial of sin, a 
washing of regeneration, the like figure whereunto 
even baptism, says Peter, doth also now save us, 
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but 
the answer of a good conscience toward God. I 
Pet. 3:21. For by baptism it is indicated to be- 
lievers, that they, through Christ, are inwardly 
baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, con- 
cerning which we have many testimonies in the 
Scriptures, and thus enter into a covenant with the 
Most High, who assures them by His Holy Spirit, 
of the grace and merits of our Lord Jesus Christ 
that He is their God, and that they are His chil- 
dren. 

This in brief is our belief respecting baptism, and 
we, moreover, renounce everything that has been 
instituted by men, contrary to it. 

We further have from the Word of God the 
Supper, or breaking of bread, which the Lord Him- 
self instituted, and commanded His apostles, for 
a remembrance of His sufferings and death, as 
Paul writes : "The Lord Jesus, the same night in 
which he was betrayed, took bread : and when he 
had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat ; 
this is my body, which is broken for you : this do in 
remembrance of me. After the same manner also 
he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This 
cup is the New Testament in my blood : this do ye, 
as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as 


often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do 
shew the Lord's death till he come. Wherefore 
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup 
of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body 
and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine 
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink 
of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh un- 
worthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to him- 
self, not discerning the Lord's body." I Cor. 11 : 
23-29. Thus did Christ Jesus institute the Supper 
with bread and wine, to be used in the Christian 
assembly, in the name of the Lord, for a token of 
brotherly love and unity, for a sign that we, 
through His merits, by faith in His holy name, have 
become partakers of Christ, the true bread from 
heaven, as Paul declares: "The cup of blessing 
which we bless, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ ? The bread which we break, is it 
not the communion of the body of Christ? For we 
being many are one bread, and one body : for we 
are all partakers of that one bread." I Cor. 10:16, 
17. But they that are meet for this bread must 
have died unto sin, and have buried it [sin] by 
baptism, and have risen again with Christ in a 
godly Christian life ; they must have become new 
creatures in Christ, and been cleansed in His blood ; 
they must be saved by the washing of water by the 
Word, be flesh of Christ's flesh, and bone of His 
bones; they must be partakers of the divine na- 
ture, and further flee all the perishing lusts of this 
world; they must also by one Spirit be baptized 
into one body, and have been made to drink into 
one Spirit. II Cor. 5:17; Ephesians 5:26; I Cor. 
12:13. This Supper is wholly perverted by the 
world, for they hold their supper with harlots and 
rogues, with drunkards, adulterers, idolaters, liars, 
thieves, murderers, railers, and sorcerers, of whom 
it is written, that such shall not inherit the kingdom 
of God, for their part shall be in the fiery lake 
which shall burn with fire and brimstone, which is 
the second death. Gal. 5 :21 ; Rev. 21 :8. They also 
believe that in eating the bread and drinking the 
cup they eat the real body of Christ, and drink His 
real blood, whereas Christ says to the Jews, when 
they also understood it carnally, even as these do 
still understand it, that flesh and blood did profit 
nothing; it is the Spirit that quickeneth : the words 
that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are 
life. John 6 :63. We also find in many places, that 
Christ sat down on the right hand of His Father in 
heaven, and that He shall possess heaven, until the 
time that there will be fulfilled what God has spok- 
en by the mouth of His prophets. Acts 3:21. And 
because I, my dear children, have from the heart 
accepted and believed these three articles, from the 
Word of God, as from the mouth of the Lord by 
the Holy Ghost, and have, according to my weak 
ability, avoided and shunned evil, and all that is 
contrary thereunto, as many different abomina- 
tions, idolatry, infant baptism, the idolatrous, per- 
verted supper, auricular confession, and divers oth- 
er abominations ; therefore I must suffer and die. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


949 


But it has been so from the beginning of the world, 
that the righteous have had to suffer much, as 
Christ says : "They shall put you out of the syna- 
gogues : yea, the time cometh, that whosoever kill- 
eth you will think that he doeth God service. And 
these things will they do unto you, because they 
have not known the Father, nor me" (John 16: 
2, 3) ; for "had they known him, they would not 
have crucified the Lord of glory." I Corinthians 
2 :8. And Christ says : "If ye were of the world, 
the world would love his own ; but because ye are 
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you." John 
15:19. 

Thus the children of God are called and chosen 
from this dark, wicked world to the light Jesus 
Christ, that their works, which are done in God, 
may reprove the world and bring to light its wick- 
edness; therefore they are enraged against them, 
after the manner of Cain. Because Abel's sacrifice 
was acceptable before the Lord, therefore he was 
slain by Cain; for that which is pure and clear 
cannot come forth; he that departeth from evil, 
and doeth good, is every one's prey. Isa. 59:14, 15. 
And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must 
suffer persecution. II Tim. 3:12. The angel said 
to Tobit: "Because thou wast pleasing to God, it 
had to be thus ; thou couldest not remain without 
temptation, that thou mightest be tried." Tobit 
12:13. "The disciple is not above his master, nor 
the servant above his lord. It is enough for the 
disciple that he be as his master, and the servant 
as his lord. If they have called the master of the 
house Beelzebub; how much more shall they call 
them of his" household? If they have persecuted 
me, they will also persecute you ; if they have kept 
my saying, thev will keep yours also." Matt. 10:24, 
25; John 15:20. My dear little children, what I, 
your father, must now suffer for, will not be to 
your disgrace, for it is for the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Hence be not ashamed of it, for we 
cannot die a more glorious death for the Lord, 
than for the Word of God. Peter and John de- 
parted joyfully from the presence of the council, 
when they had been scourged, because they were 
counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of 
Jesus. Acts 5:41. And the same apostle says: "If 
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are 
ye ; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon 
you : on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your 
part he is glorified." I Pet. 4:14. 

It is further my wish, my dear children, that you 
keep yourselves from the evil works of this world, 
the number of which is very great, that you be not 
condemned with it ; for the world and all the lust 
thereof shall pass away, but he that doeth the will 
of God abideth forever, yea, the Lord will keep 
him as the apple of His eye, and his good works as 
a signet. I Cor. 11 :32; Sir. 17:22. Therefore strive 
from your youth for that which is best, submit your 
shoulders to the truth, flee all youthful lusts, and 
endeavor to take up the yoke of the Lord, namely, 


the doctrine of Jesus Christ, now in your youthful 
days, even until old age, yea, unto the end of your 
life, then a wise and perfect man will be beheld in 
you. Diligently search the holy Scriptures, that 
you may thereby go on perfect in the divine life, 
from which the world is alienated; and let the 
Word of Christ be planted in you, that it may dwell 
in you richly in all wisdom. Col. 3 :16. Remember 
always God's commandment, and continually His 
Word, which shall make your heart perfect, and 
give you wisdom, as you desire; for the Word of 
the Most High is the fountain of wisdom, and 
her entrance are the everlasting commandments. 
Sirach 1 :S. Through the Word of God you receive 
godly senses that are exercised to discern both good 
and evil, for the holy Scriptures testify of God's 
goodness, and makes the ignorant (that desire it) 
wise to fear God, and to flee all wickedness, and do 
good. For he that fears God will do good. The 
fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and to de- 
part from evil is understanding. Job 28:28. The 
fear of the Lord is a fountain of wisdom, to de- 
part from the snares of eternal death. Prov. 14:27. 
And the wages of sin is death. Rom. 6 :23. Hence, 
my dear children, shun the cause which leads to 
death, that is sin, which is seen very much in those 
that art carnal, for the world lieth in wickedness, 
for sin is very lightly esteemed by them, yet the 
teeth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, slaying the 
souls of men, for all sin and iniquity is as a two- 
edged sword, the wounds whereof can not be 
healed. I John 5:19; Sir. 21 :2, 3. O my dear chil- 
dren, keep your souls with the greatest diligence, so 
that you also speak no iniquity with your mouth ; 
and beware of lying, for man, says Christ, shall 
have to give account of every idle word which he 
shall have idly spoken. Matt. 12:36. Hence Paul 
says : "Put away lying, and speak truth with one 
another." Eph. 4:25. For idle words shall not go 
free, and the mouth that lieth slayeth the soul ; and 
liars have no part in the kingdom of God, but their 
part shall be in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone. Wisd. 1 :11 ; Rev. 21 :8. 

Dear children, be faithful wherever you live, or 
wherever you are be good and faithful to all men ; 
and beware of stealing, for thieves have no place in 
the kingdom of God, for it is an abominable, great 
sin ; hence let neither your eye nor your heart covet 
ought of that which is not yours, for a thief is no- 
where liked, for wherever he goes he and his hands 
are watched. 

Thus, my dear children, conduct yourselves hon- 
estly toward everyone, and whatever you hear in 
the house that should be kept secret, do not pro- 
claim in the streets, or to everyone from house to 
house, but observe secrecy and attend to your 
work, and be not negligent through idleness, for 
idleness makes thieves of boys, and harlots of girls, 
which is frequently seen to happen, that daughters 
reach the brothel, and sons the gallows ; this often 
comes from the fact that they are lickerish, and will 
not work. Hence conduct yourselves well with 


950 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


those with whom you are, and obey them, even as 
you ought to obey your father, and be not stubborn 
and obstinate, but obey them willingly from the 
heart, and treat them and all men courteously and 
kindly ; and beware of backbiting, for this too is a 
great sin, a thief is a shameful thing, but a back- 
biter is more shameful still, for the backbiter re- 
veals what he secretly knows. Sir. 5 :14. Hence 
keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from 
speaking guile. Eschew evil, and do good: seek 
peace, and ensue it; for the eyes of the Lord are 
over the righteous, and His ears are open unto 
their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against 
them that do evil. Ps. 34 :13 ; I Pet. 3 :10-12. There- 
fore put off now all envy and backbiting (I Pet. 
2:1), and do not envy one another, nor any one, 
for envy destroys all friendship, and separates good 
friends, and through envy Cain slew his brother 
Abel. Out of envy the sons of Jacob cast their 
brother Joseph into the pit, and sold him. 

O my dear children, keep constantly in the 
house, and do not go in the street much, when you 
have nothing to do there; for there one learns 
nothing but roguery, as fighting, playing, gam- 
bling, cursing, swearing, and to speak many un- 
profitable words. O children, it is very injurious 
for you, according to soul and body, to run in the 
street : but, when you do not have to work, take a 
Testament in your hand, and read in it ; that will 
be very appropriate for you. And you Janneken 
and Joosken, you are older than your sister Mijnt- 
ken; show mercy according to your ability in as- 
sisting to provide for her board, and work dili- 
gently with your hands, that you may have to give 
to him that needeth (Eph. 4:28), for you are under 
great obligation, after my departure to do the best 
for one another, that you may properly help one 
another according to your ability. Let the younger 
obey the older, that there may be no contention. In 
this and all other things show your humility; for 
God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the 
humble. I Pet. 5 :5. And those that are proud of 
heart He has cast down from their seats, and set 
them of low degree thereupon. Luke 1 :52. Hence, 
my dear children, let not pride rule in you, in word 
or in deed ; for David says : "A f roward heart shall 
depart from me : I will not know a wicked person. 
Whoso privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I 
cut off ; him that hath a high look and a proud heart 
will not I suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the faith- 
ful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he 
that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me." 
Ps. 101 :4-6. O my dear children, be good and kind 
to one another, and let no spiteful words be heard 
from you, either to one another or to any one else. 
Be also obedient to my wife, your mother ; for the 
Lord's sake, and for my sake, for she was very 
dear and precious to me ; but now I must leave her 
and you for the name of the Lord, according to the 
command of Christ, which I would not do for all 
the world, but for the Lord and the Gospel's sake 
we must forsake everything, father, mother, wife, 


child, brothers, sisters, lands, house, home, yea, 
moreover even our own life else we are not worthy 
to be His disciples. Matt. 10:37; Mark 8:35. 

Herewith I will now bid adieu to my dear chil- 
dren and take my leave from them ; the Lord grant 
them His abundant rich blessing, that they may 
grow up in a becoming godly life, and increase in 
the knowledge of Christ. 

my dear children, neglect not to thank your 
Lord and God before eating and drinking (Deuter- 
onomy 8:10) ; and when you lie down to sleep and 
when you arise, upon your knees, with folded 
hands, entreat Him for His grace. 

1 now commend you and your mother, my dear 
in God beloved wife, to the Lord, who is able to 
provide for you above that we are able to ask in 
our prayer, in soul and body. And it is also my 
wish, that this testament be copied for you, and 
that it be preserved for Heyne and the children, in 
remembrance of me, and when it begins to wear 
out, have it copied again, that it do not perish ; this 
I kindly request. Adieu, Heyne. Farewell, adieu, 
Janneken, my oldest daughter, and farewell, adieu, 
Joosken ; farewell, adieu, Mijntken, and adieu, my 
dear in God beloved wife and sister in the Lord. 
Adieu, we must now part. The Almighty God, who 
blessed Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, also bless you 
in heavenly places, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 

The crucified Christ, blessed be He, be your 
comfort and abundant, rich treasure of grace. The 
peace of God and the communion of the Holy 
Ghost be with you. Once more adieu. 

Farewell and adieu, dear Neelken. I thank the 
Lord and you for the kind fellowship and the love 
you have shown me. I go before ; the Lord direct 
your hearts in the love of God and the patience of 
Christ, that I may find you with the Lord. II Thes- 
salonians 3:5. 

By me, from prison at Ghent, written on the 
second day of Dec. 1572. 

Mattheus Bernaerts. 


A THANKSGIVING BEFORE AND AFTER EATING, 

WHICH MATTHEUS BERNAERTS, CALLED VAN 

LINCKEN, COMPOSED IN HIS PRISON AND 

SENT TO HIS CHILDREN 

Before eating 

O taste and see that the Lord is good, who has 
created these creatures, and given them to those 
that believe, to be used by them with thanksgiving, 
to the praise and glory of His holy name. (Ps. 34 : 
8; I Tim. 4:3). O dearest, most gracious, merciful, 
eternal Father do not forget Thy poor, miserable 
children, that are persecuted for Thy holy name's 
sake. 

After eating 

Let us now praise and thank the Lord, who has 
so graciously fed us in our bodies. Let us entreat 
the Father, to feed us now with the bread of eternal 
life, that we may with our spirits, souls and bodies 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


951 


that have been fed do His holy will. O dearest, 
most gracious, merciful, eternal Father do not for- 
get Thy poor, miserable children, that are perse- 
cuted for Thy holy name's sake. Amen. 
Written by me in my prison. 

Mattheus Bernaerts, 

called van Lincken. 


ADRIAN ROGIERS, BURNED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 

JESUS CHRIST, AT GHENT IN FLANDERS, THE 

4TH OF DECEMBER, A. D. 1572 

Here follow three letters which Adrian Rogiers 
wrote from his prison. 

First letter to his wije 

Out of tender love, an affectionate greeting to 
you my most dearly beloved wife, whom I love 
from the heart, this the Lord knows who knows 
all things, and, according to the words of Jeremiah, 
tries men's hearts and reins. Jer. 17:10. Further, 
my love, after this my proper and Christian saluta- 
tion, let me, please, inform you, that I, the Lord be 
praised forever, am in tolerably good health ac- 
cording to the flesh, and according to the spirit, 
God be praised, my mind is disposed to leap by our 
God over a wall. Ps. 18:29. However, my dearest, 
I trust through the goodness of God, that you are 
also well in soul and body, and prepared, by the 
help of God rather to die honorably with Eleazar, 
than to live with ignominy. II Mac. 6 :19. The al- 
mighty Lord, who in time of need provides bread, 
and according to the words of the prophet, gives 
both wine and milk without price (Isa. 55 :1), may 
so strengthen and confirm you and us all, by His 
Holy Spirit, that we may in our present tribulation 
be able to bear all that comes upon us for the Lord's 
sake, and may fear His name, for thereunto has 
God delivered us from him that was too strong for 
us, that we should serve and fear Him in true right- 
eousness all our lives, for Sirach says: "There is 
nothing better than the fear of the Lord." Sir. 
23 :27. Therefore, O my dear wife, let us fear the 
Lord with all our heart, and in every distress let us 
flee to the Lord, and He will help us, for David 
says: "The Lord lays upon us a burden, but he 
also helps us bear it ; for we have a God that helps, 
and the Lord of lords that delivers from death." 
Ps. 68 :20. For He is, says the prophet, a strength 
to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, 
a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the 
heat. Isa. 25 :4. For He stands at the right hand 
of the poor, to save him from those that condemn 
his soul. Ps. 109:31. But God shall wound the 
head of His enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a 
one as goeth on still in his trespasses. Ps. 68:21. 
For Judith also says: "Woe to the heathen that 
persecute my people ! for the Lord Almighty shall 
judge them, and visit them in the day of vengeance ; 
he shall torment their body with fire and worms, 
and they shall burn and weep forever." Judith 16 : 
17. But that with which the Lord chastiseth us, O 
my chosen, endures but for a moment, for David 


says: "Weeping may endure for a night, but joy 
cometh in the morning." Psalm 30 :5. "For God," 
says Judith, "chastens us, his servants, for cor- 
rection; but the ungodly he punishes to their de- 
struction." Judith 8 :27. 

Therefore, my dear wife, let us bear our cross 
patiently for a little while yet ; and let us consider 
how much our dear Lord suffered for us, even as 
the prophet says : "He is despised and rejected of 
men ; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief : 
and we hid as it were our faces from him ; he was 
despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath 
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows : yet we 
did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and af- 
flicted. But he was wounded for our transgres- 
sions, he was bruised for our iniquities : the chas- 
tisement of our peace was upon him ; and with his 
stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone 
astray ; we have turned every one to his own way ; 
and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. 
He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he 
opened not his mouth : he is brought as a lamb to 
the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is 
dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." Isa. 53 :3-7. 
Hence, O my dear wife, since we know, as Peter 
teaches, that Christ suffered in the flesh, let us arm 
ourselves with the same mind ; for he that hath suf- 
fered in the flesh hath ceased from sin ; that he no 
longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to 
the lusts of the flesh, but to the will of God. I Peter 
4:1,2. 

Thus, my dearest, be of good cheer when the 
Lord tries you, for it is written : "The souls of the 
righteous are chastised a little, but much good shall 
come to them ; for God proves them, and finds them 
worthy for himself. He tries them as gold in the 
furnace, and receives them as a fat sacrifice. And 
in the time of their visitation, they shall shine, and 
run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the heathen, and have dominion over all 
nations, and the Lord shall reign over them for- 
ever. For they that put their trust in him shall find 
that he faithfully keepeth what he hath promised ; 
and such as be faithful in love shall abide with him ; 
for his saints are in his mercy, and he hath care for 
his elect." Wisd. 3:5-9. 

Therefore, O my love, let us commit our cause 
and the distress that comes upon us to the Lord, 
and cast our care upon Him ; for He, says Peter, 
careth for us; and if God be for us, says Paul, 
who will be against us? I Pet. 5 :7; Rom. 8:31. 

Hence, O my love, let us be of good courage, 
and watch diligently, that, when our Bridegroom 
comes, we may triumph with Him forever and 
ever. Amen. 

Further, my very dear wife, I commit you to our 
dear Lord; may He in every way be your guide, 
for I take leave now, and bid you adieu. Do the 
best for the children, as I am confident you will. 
Know further, my love, that I have received 
your letter, for which I thank you much; greet 
much in my name the one that wrote it. However, 


952 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


you must also know that I am very much grieved 
that I have not heard from you so long ; I beg you 
to let me know how it goes with you and the chil- 
dren. 

I further bid you adieu once more ; pray the Lord 
for me, as I do for you, and greet the acquaint- 
ances. We prisoners all greet you ; pray the Lord 
for us. 

Written in my bonds, for your best, by me your 
dear husband. Adrian Rogiers. 


ANOTHER LETTER BY SAID ADRIAN ROGIERS, WRIT- 
TEN IN PRISON TO HIS WIFE 

An affectionate loving salutation to you my most 
dearly beloved wife, whom I wedded before God 
and His glorious church. 

Further, after all proper and Christian saluta- 
tion, let me please inform your love, that I, the 
Lord be forever praised, am in tolerably good 
health according to the flesh, and according to the 
spirit, God be praised, my mind is still disposed, to 
leap by my God over a wall. However, I hope and 
trust that you are also well in soul and body, God 
be thanked, and unharmed in the faith. The Al- 
mighty Lord, who only, according to what David 
writes, doeth wondrous things, may keep and 

lengthen you and us all, together with His Holy 
Spirit, that we may live and die to His glory, and 
be patient in this present tribulation ; and when we 
are tried, let us remember that we are not the only 
ones, but that God, according to Paul's writing, 
scourgeth every son whom he loveth. Heb. 12:6. 
As it also appeared, that God before our time tried 
our fathers, as Judith tells, when the city of 
Bethulia was besieged, and they, because of water 
famine, wanted to surrender the city after five days 
(Judith 8:11); whereupon Judith admonished 
them to patience, saying : "Who are ye that ye set 
the Lord the time and days when to help ? for this 
tendeth not to obtain mercy, but much rather wrath 
and disfavor. Let us therefore be sorry for it, and 
with tears seek the face of the Lord. And ye men 
and brethren, ye that are the rulers of the people, 
go to the people and tell them, how God in former 
times tried our fathers, whether they served him 
from the heart or not. Even as our father Abraham 
was tried by many temptations, whereby he re- 
mained the friend of God ; even as also Isaac, Jacob 
and Moses, and all who were of the number of 
God's beloved, who had to overcome through much 
affliction, as Sirach teaches us, saying : My child, 
if thou wilt be God's servant, prepare thyself for 
temptation. Endure and be constant, and depart 
not away, when the ungodly lure you. For as gold 
is tried in the fire, so righteousness is tried in the 
fire of affliction. But ye that fear the Lord, hope 
the best of him, and your comfort shall not fail. 
For consider the examples of the ancients, and lay 
them to heart ; for never was any confounded that 
trusted in the Lord: or who was ever forsaken, 
that did abide in the fear of God?" Sir. 2:1. 


Thus, my very dear wife, despair not, when you 
are tried by the Lord ; for after He has wounded, 
says Job, He can heal again; for He kills, and 
makes alive again, He leads into hell, and out 
again. Job 5:18; Deut 32:39. 

Thus, my very dear wife, cleave firmly to the 
Lord, and diligently exercise yourself in godliness, 
and you shall find that godliness is mightier than 
all things ; for wisdom did not forsake the righteous 
when he was sold, but delivered him from sin ; she 
went down with him into the pit, and left him not 
in bonds, till she brought him the sceptre of the 
kingdom, and power against those that oppressed 
him. Wisd. 10:13, 14. 

Thus, my dear wife, though we are now for a lit- 
tle while in tribulation, let us possess our souls with 
patience, for God shall exalt us over all those that 
now do violence to and oppress us, for Christ says 
in the Gospel : "Woe unto you that laugh now ! for 
ye shall mourn and weep ; but rejoice ye that weep 
now ; for ye shall laugh." Luke 6 :25, 21. 

Therefore, O my very dear wife, let us bear the 
heat of the sun, yet a little longer, and give our 
back to the smiters ; for yet a little while, and he 
that shall come will come. Isa. 50:6; Heb. 10:37. 
Therefore, O my love, let us willingly help bear 
His reproach without the camp, and remember that 
the servant is not better than his Lord ; for if they 
have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how 
much more shall they call them of His household? 
Hebrews 13 :13 ; Matt. 10:24, 25. Ah, if they have 
done these things in a green tree, what shall they 
do to us dry trees ? Luke 23:31. Let us therefore lift 
up the idle hands which hang down, and, according 
to Isaiah's writing, confirm the feeble knees, to 
make straight paths for our feet, and run, accord- 
ing to Paul's teaching, with patience the race, that 
is set before us, and let us with Moses have respect 
unto the recompense of the reward ; for it is cer- 
tainly true what Paul writes : "If we suffer with 
Christ, we shall also rejoice and reign with him " 
Isa. 35:3; Heb. 12:12, 13; 11:26; II Tim. 2:12. 
Hence let us not be weary in well doing, for in due 
time we shall very abundantly and with joy reap 
the precious seed which we now sow with weeping 
Gal. 6:9; Ps. 126:5,6. For our light affliction^ 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while 
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are not seen : for the things which are 
seen are temporal; but the things which are not 
seen are eternal. II Cor. 4:17, 18. Thus, my very 
dear wife, I pray you have the Lord always before 
your eyes, that you may hereafter reign and tri- 
umph with the Lord forever and ever. Amen. 

Further, my very dear wife, I commend you to 
the Lord, and to His Word full of all comfort and 
consolation, asking you to take my letter in good 
part, and kindly requesting that you will also re- 
member me by writing, for I am often exceedingly 
desirous to hear from you. 

I heard that you tried hard to come to me, but it 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


953 


could not be; however, be of good cheer. I hope 
that though we cannot meet here, we shall here- 
after meet together with the Lord, where parting 
will be no more. 

Thus, I bid you adieu. Do the best for the chil- 
dren, and pray the Lord for me ; I will do the same 
for you according to my ability. 

Nothing more, but greet the acquaintances very 
cordially in my name; Maerten van der Straten, 
and Beliken van der Straten, his very dear wife, 
and Hansken, Margriet and Dingentgen also greet 
you and the acquaintances much; pray the Lord 
earnestly for us. 

Written in my bonds, by me your dear husband 
and brother in the Lord. Adrian Rogiers. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM ADRIAN ROGIERS TO HIS 
WIFE, WRITTEN IN PRISON AT GHENT 

Out of a loving heart an affectionate greeting to 
you my dearly beloved wife, whom I wedded be- 
fore God and His glorious church, and whom I also 
love from the heart, this the Lord knows, who with 
His eyes that are as a flame of fire penetrates every- 
hing. Rev. 1 :14. Further, after all proper and 
Christian salutation, let me, please, inform your 
love, that I am in tolerably good health according 
to the flesh, and my mind is still fixed, by the help 
of the Lord, to hold fast to the faith even to the 
very end. Furthermore, my dear wife, I trust that 
you are also well in soul and body, God be praised, 
and ready to pass the time of your sojourning here, 
with joy, to the praise of the Lord and the salvation 
of your soul. The good, eternal and Almighty God, 
who through His gracious goodness gives both 
wine and milk without price, strengthen and con- 
firm you and us all together by His Holy Spirit, 
that we may serve the Lord in His fear, for there 
is nothing better than the fear of the Lord, for Sir- 
ach says : "Money and riches lift up the heart, but 
much more the fear of the Lord ; for he that fear- 
eth the Lord, with him it shall be well at the last." 
Sir. 40:26. Therefore, O my dear lamb, cleave 
firmly to the Lord, and arm yourself; put on the 
armor of God, that you may be able to withstand all 
the subtle assaults of the devil, for our adversary, 
the devil, says Peter, rests not, but walks about us, 
as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. 
Eph. 6:13; I Pet. 5:8. Hence, O my dear sister, 
stand fast in the faith, pray, and be on the watch ; 
put on the bond of love, and beware of false proph- 
ets, for in the last days, as Christ says, many false 
prophets shall arise, saying: "Lo, here is Christ, 
and, lo, there is Christ," but do not go forth. And 
they shall say : "Behold, he is in the desert, and in 
the chamber ; but believe them not. For as the 
lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even 
unto the west ; so shall also the coming of the Son 
of man be." Matt. 24:23. Therefore, O my love, 
persevere steadfastly, till you are taken hence ; for 
yet a little while, and He that shall come will come, 
Hence possess your soul with patience, and en- 


dure the heat of the sun for a little while, for Christ 
has promised us tribulation in the world, and God 
also speaks through the prophet, saying: "Be in 
pain, and labor to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, 
like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou go 
forth out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the 
field." John 16:33; Mic. 4:10. In short, the king- 
dom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent 
take it by force. Matt. 11 :12. And Paul also says 
that we must through much tribulation enter into 
the kingdom of God. Acts 14 :22. For Christ, who 
is our head, went before us, and had to suffer much 
reproach for our sake, as the prophet says: "He 
took upon him all our sins, and bore our reproach, 
and he is dumb as a sheep before her shearers: 
and when he was reviled, he reviled not again, and 
when he was threatened, he threatened not again, 
but committed vengeance to him that judgeth 
righteously." Isa. 53:6, 7; I Pet. 2:23. Thus we 
must also, my dear wife, according to the words 
of Peter, follow the Lord's footsteps. For Paul 
says: "Being reviled we bless." I Cor. 4:12. And 
Christ also taught us to pray for those that afflict 
us. Matt. 5 :44. 

Hence, O my dear lamb, let us in all things show 
ourselves true members of Christ, and think as 
Paul says : "If we suffer with Christ, we shall also 
reign with him." II Tim. 2:12. Let us therefore 
lay aside all malice, and shun the sin which doth 
beset us, and follow after holiness, without which 
no man shall see the Lord. I Pet. 2:1 ; Heb. 12:1, 
14. Oh, let us adorn ourselves with a holy con- 
versation, and let us not be conformed to the world, 
which shall pass away with its lusts. 

Therefore, O my dear lamb, let us watch dili- 
gently, as servants that constantly wait for their 
Lord, that we may through the grace of God be 
partakers of the glorious reward, with all the elect 
children of God, forever and ever. Amen. 

Further, my dear wife, I do not know much more 
to write you, but pray you to excuse my little gift, 
for if Habakkuk had brought something better, you 
would have fared better. Hist, of Dest. of Drag. 
33, etc. 

Furthermore, my dear wife, know that I received 
what you sent me, for which I thank you sincerely, 
for it was to me a great consolation. Further, my 
dear wife, Maerten van der Straten and his dear 
wife, Beliken van der Straten, greet you much. 
Margriet van der Sluys, and Dingentgen of Hons- 
choten, and that honorable youth Hansken of 
Oudenaerde greet you much, and finally we all 
jointly ask you, earnestly to pray to the Lord for 
us, that He will make us meet rather to die honor- 
ably with Eleazar, than to live with ignominy. 
Nothing more, but I commend you to the Lord, 
and to the rich, comforting Word of His grace. 
And do the best for the children in every way; 
teach them to fear the Lord ; though I am confident 
that you will do this ; I can not forbear to write it ; 
but whatever I do is done out of pure love and from 
a good heart. 


954 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Farewell; do the best in the beginning and in 
the end. 

Written for your service, by me your dear hus- 
band and brother in the Lord. 

Adrian Rogiers. 


MAERTEN VAN DER STRATEN, WITH BELIKEN HIS 
WIFE, A. D. 1572 

At this time yet another pious brother, named 
Maerten van der Straten born at Kortrijck in Flan- 
ders, with his wife, named Beliken van der Straten, 
fell into the hands of the enemies of the truth, so 
that after manifold temptations their faith was 
found much more precious, than perishable gold, 
which is tried by fire. Hence Maerten van der 
Straten, and two other brethren and a sister (who 
are separately mentioned in this book), on the 4th 
of December, A. D. 1572, in the city of Ghent, 
steadfastly delivered up their bodies as a sacrifice 
acceptable unto God, and were together burned in 
the Friday Market, with balls in their mouths ; and 
Beliken van der Straten was subsequently, in 1573, 
in Lent, offered up in the same place for the truth ; 
having thus fought a good fight, finished the course, 
kept the faith, and, notwithstanding the opposition 
of the tyrants taken the kingdom of God by force. 

Concerning these two pious witnesses a separate 
book has been printed, containing many excellent 
letters by Maerten van der Straten, and several 
hymns, which these persons composed and ad- 
dressed to each other, and to others in prison. Of 
these letters we communicate to you several, as 
follows. 


THE FIRST LETTER FROM MAERTEN VAN DER 
STRATEN TO HIS WIFE 

I Maerten van der Straten, your dear husband 
and brother in the Lord (both unworthily, how- 
ever) wish you, my affectionately beloved wife, 
Beliken van der Straten, who are with me, accord- 
ing to Paul's writing, in the mouth of the lion (II 
Timothy 4 :17), and wounded by Babylon's watch- 
men (Canticles 5 :7), much grace and mercy from 
God our heavenly Father; and may the love of 
His Son be multiplied to you, and may the power 
of the Holy Ghost richly dwell in you, that you may 
to the praise of the Lord bring forth good and meet 
fruits, and let your light shine before men, even as 
a city that is set on a high hill, that you may leave 
behind you a good name among the heathen, and 
a good memory in Israel ; and the God of our fa- 
thers grant you grace, and prosper what you un- 
dertake, that Israel may rejoice over you, and that 
your name may be reckoned among all the saints, 
and that you may hereafter play the new song be- 
fore the throne of the Lord, forever and ever. Rev. 
14 :2, 3. This I wish you, my chosen love, with all 
the strength of my soul, and from a heart full of 
love. 

Out of a fond heart permeated with love, an 
affectionate greeting to you, O my dearest love, 
whom I love with all my heart, in accordance with 


the Word of God, that a man shall leave father and 
mother, and cleave to his wife. For you, O my dear 
lamb, are flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bones ; 
and no man, says Paul, ever yet hated his own 
flesh ; but nourisheth and cherisheth it. Eph. 5 :29. 
Hence I have good reason to love you, as I also 
do, this the Almighty Lord knows, who, according 
to the words of Jeremiah, tries men's hearts and 
reins. Jer. 17:10. 

Further, after this my proper and Christian sal- 
utation, know, my affectionately beloved wife, that 
I, according to the words of Sirach, add day to day 
through much tribulation, as one that lodges in the 
field, and receives many a storm, hail and rain on 
his body. But God, who kills and makes alive, 
will, I hope, preserve me, that I shall with Eleazar 
prefer an honorable death to an ignominious life. 

Furthermore, my dearly beloved, whom I took 
by the hand with tears of joy, I hope and trust that 
you are also well in soul and body, ready with Su- 
sanna rather to fall into the hands of men, than to 
sin in the sight of the living God, who, with His 
eyes, which are like a flame of fire, penetrates all 
things. Sus. 23; Rev. 1:14. The Almighty Lord 
of lords, who, according to Paul's writing, is rich 
in goodness, and abounds with grace and mercy, 
look upon you and us all with His gracious eyesi 
and deliver us from this misery ; for I, like vou, am 
at this time in great distress, besieged as those of 
Bethulia (Judith 7) ; my enemies have turned 
away the water with which I was formerly wont to 
refresh my heart, and they have compassed about 
the fountains where I was accustomed to quench 
my thirst. But the Almighty King is the true foun- 
tain, who, as Jeremiah says, with His learned 
tongue comforts the weary soul, and, according to 
the words of the prophet, in time of need gives 
bread, and in thirst water ; Him, I hope, they shall 
not intrench or compass about ; for He regards nei- 
ther grated windows nor bolts, neither locks nor 
doors ; and He, I hope, will visit us before long, for 
He knows that we are most sorely smitten and 
wounded by Babylon's watchmen, in a dry and 
dark land, far and deep in Babylonia, where nei- 
ther His word nor His beautiful songs of praise are 
heard. Jer. 31:25; Isa. 30:20; Cant. 5:7; Ps. 
137:1. 

Hence I hope that He will exercise mercy above 
justice over us, since He sees our tribulation, and 
knows that I, for my part, am not able to bear it, 
because my weakness is so great; for among all 
that fear God there is no one so imperfect as I am. 
For my miserable weakness is so manifold, that I 
often bewail it with tears, and I am so desoondent 
that it seems to me that my heart is convulsed, be- 
cause the Lord does not take away my reproach. 
Hence I may well say with David : "O Lord God 
of my salvation, I have cried day and night before 
thee : let my prayer come before thee : incline thine 
ear unto my cry ; for my soul is full of troubles : 
and my life draweth nigh unto the grave. I am 
counted with them that go down into the pit ; I am 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


955 


as a man that hath no strength: free among the 
dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou 
rememberest no more: and they are cut off from 
thy hand. Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in 
darkness, in the deeps. Thy wrath lieth hard upon 
me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves" 
(Ps. 88:1-7) ; for all my persecutors hold counsel 
against me, utterly to starve my hungry soul, and 
to deprive my thirsty soul of drink. Hence I may 
well say with the prophet: "My enemies wait for 
my soul, and they render me evil for good, to bring 
me into sorrow." Ps. 56:6. 

Hence, O my love, my dearest love, I cannot 
forbear to utter my complaint before you, to ease 
my sorrowful heart, which is often so disconsolate, 
yea, so disconsolate, that I might well say with 
David, in my despondency : O Lord, I am cut off 
from before Thine eyes (Ps. 31 :22) ; yet I trust 
that He will before long hear the voice of my sup- 
plication. Hence I pray you, my dear lamb, let not 
your ears become weary of hearing my sorrowful 
complaint, nor let your eyes tire of beholding my 
afflicted countenance. I hope that the Lord will so 
order it, that it will not last much longer; hence 
bear patiently with me for a little while yet, even as 
you have always done towards me. For when it 
did not go well with us according to the flesh, you 
always showed more patience than I, for which I 
heartily thank you. For your hands were more 
diligent than mine to maintain the household ; and 
you walked more piously by your faith before God, 
than I ; and your patience is greater even until this 
present day, than mine. Hence I have good reason 
to love you more than Paul loved the church at 
Ephesus, which he yet for three years warned night 
and day, with anxiety, with watching, and with 
tears. Acts 20:19,31. O my lamb, my love, my 
dearest love, I have now, God be praised, also had 
you for about three years, and have in these our 
bonds of tribulation had great anxiety day and 
night for you, and have sighed so many a sigh, and 
wept so many a tear, which I would not have wept, 
had I been able to speak to you. But now, my affec- 
tionately beloved wife, since God has so ordered it, 
that I must leave you, and, as it seems, go before, I 
say thus : Though I am not worthy to exhort you, 
I yet exhort you in this letter with tears, and be- 
seech you, always to have the Lord before your 
eyes, and to cleave to Him with prayer and fasting. 
For I know that if God takes me out of the flesh 
before you, that you will after my departure be 
severely assailed; and therefore I beseech you, O 
my only lamb, for the Lord's sake, that you will 
watch circumspectly, as did the good and wise vir- 
gins, who expected their bridegroom every hour. 
And I pray you, O my love, my dearest love, if I 
have found grace before your eyes, remember me, 
even as the pious, God-fearing Judith remembered 
her husband. Jud. 16 :22. O Beliken, Beliken, my 
dearly beloved, the three years which we have lived 
together do not seem to me to be three days ; hence 
when I think of the parting, my heart is troubled. 


Yet I would, if it must be, that the Lord would 
come speedily. For I have, the Lord knows, so 
many sore vexations, so that I may well utter my 
complaint with David, and say: "O Lord, my 
chastisement is ready every morning" (Ps. 73 :14) ; 
for he that seeks my soul, as a bird without cause, 
neither sleeps nor slumbers day nor night, evening 
nor morning; but I expect with Paul, that God, 
before long, will deliver me and us all out of the 
mouth of the lion. II Tim. 4:17. Further, my af- 
fectionately beloved wife, Beliken van der Straten, 
whom I love from the heart, let me, please tell your 
love, that I do not know much more to write at this 
time, but I commend you to Almighty God, and to 
His comforting Word. Moreover, I take leave 
from you, even as bound Israel, who gave their 
children the last milk ; however, God who made the 
heavenly host, is well able to turn the elephants 
back again. Ill Mace. 180. His will be done, and 
not ours. Nothing more. The Lord be with you. 
Greet them that are with you, from me. Adrian 
also greets you much. 

Written by me, your dear husband and brother 
in the Lord. Maerten van der Straten. 


THE SECOND LETTER FROM MAERTEN VAN DER 
STRATEN TO HIS WIFE 

I Maerten van der Straten, your dearly beloved 
husband and brother in the Lord, wish you my 
affectionately beloved wife and sister in the Lord, 
Beliken van der Straten, much grace and mercy 
from God our heavenly Father ; and may the love 
of His Son always be multiplied to you, and the 
power of the Holy Ghost dwell in you richly, that 
you may thereby lead a chaste conversation among 
the heathen, and be a light for them that sit in dark- 
ness, so that you, according to Isaiah's writing, 
may see the King in His beauty (Isa. 33 :17) and 
be numbered among the royal host that have 
washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who bore our reproach, healed 
our wounds, and restored for us that which He had 
not taken away, that He might deliver us from this 
present evil world, according to the will of God 
His Father ; to whom be honor, power, glory, and 
praise, for ever and ever. Amen. Ps. 69:4; Gal 
1:4. 

Cordially written to you, my chosen, dearest love 
Beliken van der Straten, whom I love from the 
heart, yea, more than my own life, for you are flesh 
of my flesh. In short, you are mine and I am yours. 
Hence I thank the Lord without ceasing, that He 
has given me you; for I would not have thought 
that God would have given me such a faithful help- 
mate, with whom I have found so much love and 
patience ; but God has in every way shown me 
more mercy than I am worthy, and I hope He will 
do so yet, when I shall need it most, for He is a 
gracious God, who according to Paul's writing, is 
rich in goodness, and abounds in mercy. Eph. 2 :4. 


956 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Further, my dearly beloved, after this my broth- 
erly salutation, let me, please, inform your love, 
that my mind, God be praised, is fixed by His help, 
to live and die in the truth. However, my love, I 
trust that through the grace of the Lord you are 
also thus minded, by His help to fear His name all 
the days of your life. The Lord of lords, and God 
of gods, grant you and us all His grace to this end. 

Furthermore, Beliken, my love, I understand it 
to be your request, that I shall write to you once 
more, which it is impossible for me to refuse you ; 
yet I am unworthy to write to you, because of the 
thorn which I have in my flesh, for my weakness is 
so great, that I might well say : "Oh, that my head 
were waters, that I might day and night bewail my 
miserable weakness" ; for my weakness is exceed- 
ing great, and my sorrow moreover is not small, for 
when I think, Beliken, my only lamb, that I 
must part from you, and leave you among this 
adulterous generation, oh, then my heart is bur- 
dened unto death, and when I think ; if God should 
take you out of the flesh before me, oh, then my 
heart is troubled still more, for I feel that after 
your departure, I should not see a single happy day. 
Thus my thoughts distress me from every side, so 
that I may well say with Susanna, "Oh, in what a 
great strait am I now!" Sus. 22. Yea, this miser- 
able state has so laid hold on me, that I may 
well cry to God, and say with Hezekiah : "O Lord, 
ease me: for I suffer distress" (Isa. 38:14), yea, 
such distress as is suffered by the hinds, when they 
writhe to bring forth. Moreover, I am ofttimes 
more despondent than Jonah, when he was smit- 
ten down by the sun, Jonah 4 :8. Hence I may also 
well say: "O tribulation and vexation, how long 
will ye live in me?" Yea, moreover, I may well 
say with David : "My enemies ploughed upon my 
back, and made long their furrows." Ps. 129 :3. But 
then I console myself again, O my love, when I re- 
member, that God, as Paul says, chasteneth whom 
He loveth, and scourgeth every son whom He re- 
ceiveth ; and with the temptation also makes a way 
to escape, that one may be able to bear it, which I 
have often experienced. Heb. 12:6; I Cor. 10:13. 
Hence I also thank the Lord, who has everywhere 
delivered me from the snare of the fowler. Ps. 91 :3. 
Therefore I will also with David praise the Lord 
and glorify Him among many, for He stands at 
the right hand of His poor, to save him from those 
that condemn his soul. Ps. 92:1; 109:31. Hence, 
O my chosen, dearest love, let us firmly cleave to 
the Lord, and not stumble, though the wicked per- 
secutes him that is more righteous than himself. 
For Job says : "The ungodly pluck the child from 
the breast and make it an orphan in the city ; they 
cause men to sigh, and the souls of the slain to cry 
out; and God troubleth them not." Job 24:9, 12. 
But it is nevertheless certain, that God will not al- 
ways say amen to their course. For He says by the 
prophet : "I hold my peace for a time, and am still, 
but at the last I will avenge myself on mine ene- 
mies." Isaiah 42:15. For I lift up my hand to 


heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I whet my glit- 
tering sword, and mine hand take hold on judg- 
ment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, 
and will reward them that hate me. I will make 
mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall 
devour flesh over the blood of the slain, and over 
the captives, and over the uncovered head of the 
enemy. Hence, Moses says : "Rejoice, all ye that 
are his people ; for he will avenge the blood of his 
servants, and render vengeance to his adversaries ; 
but he will be merciful unto the land of his people." 
Deuteronomy 32 :40-43. Thus, O my love, my only 
lamb, let us be of good courage : though we must 
now sow in tears, we shall in due time, I hope, reap 
an abundant harvest. For God says through the 
prophet : "Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad 
with her, all ye that love her : rejoice for joy with 
her, all ye that mourn for her ; that ye may suck, 
and be satisfied with the breasts of her consola- 
tions ; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with 
the abundance of her glory." Isa. 66:10, 11. 

Thus, O my chosen, dearest love, let us for a lit- 
tle while help the Lord bear His reproach : for it is 
a faithful saying, says Paul: "If we suffer with 
Christ, we shall also reign with him, and if we die 
with him we shall also live with him ; and then all 
tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and all 
our tribulation shall be changed into eternal joy. 
Hence, O my love, let us diligently pray the Lord, 
that this promise may be fulfilled in us, and that 
we may be found citizens in the beautiful city 
where the walls are of sapphire and the streets pure 
gold." Rev. 21 :18. 

Further my love, I will commend you to our 
dear Lord; may He keep and govern you as His 
daughter, for I take leave now and bid you adieu. 

Oh, adieu, my affectionately beloved, for we 
must part in tears. Oh, adieu, Beliken van der 
Straten, my very dear wife, whose hand I took 
with tears of joy. Oh, bitter parting, how hard it is 
for me! Once more I say adieu. O Beliken, my 
chosen, dearest love, I thank you most affection- 
ately for all your pure love. May the Lord recom- 
pense you. Greet from me those that are with you. 
Adrian also greets you much. The Lord be with 
you. 

Written in my bonds, by me, your weak brother 
and servant, as much as I am able. 

Maerten van der Straten. 


THIRD LETTER FROM MAERTEN VAN DER STRATEN, 
TO HIS WIFE 

I Maerten van der Straten your affectionately 
beloved husband and brother in the Lord, yet both 
unworthily, wish you my very dear, beloved wife 
and sister in the Lord, Beliken van der Straten, 
much grace and mercy from God our heavenly 
Father, and may the love of His Son be multiplied 
to you, and may God, moreover, fill you, like Jere- 
miah, with His Holy Spirit, that you may thereby 
withstand all the subtle assaults of the devil, and 
after the victory, with all God's children, receive 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


957 


the crown of glory upon the pleasant mountain 
where, according to the writing of Esdras roses 
and lilies grow. II Esd. 2:19. And, my dearly be- 
loved, I pray the Lord, to make you meet and 
worthy to play the new song before the throne of 
His glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 

Cordially written out of tender love, to you 
Beliken van der Straten. O my love, my chosen, 
dearest love, which through God's providence was 
given to me before His church by my father, and 
whose hand I took with tears of joy, for which I 
also thank the Lord, that He gave me you, for I 
would not have thought myself worthy of you. 
Hence this is also a reason for me, to love you the 
more. Yet, I call God to witness, that I love you 
as my soul, yea, more than the heart in my body, 
which I am bound also to do according to the de- 
mand of the Scriptures, for, since I, according to 
John's writing, am bound to love my brother, how 
much more then must I love you since you, ac- 
cording to the Word of God and Paul's declara- 
tion, are flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bones. 
And the apostle also says: "No man ever yet 
hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cher- 
isheth it." Eph. 5 :29. In short, he that loves his 
wife also loves himself. 

Further, Beliken, my beloved, after this my 
proper and Christian salutation, let me, please, 
inform your love that I, the Lord be praised, am 
in tolerably good health according to the flesh, and 
according to the spirit, God be praised, my mind 
is still fixed to fear the Lord, all the days of my 
life, according to my weak ability. Furthermore, 
my dearest, I have the same confidence concern- 
ing you, that you are well both in soul and body, 
prepared to live and die to the glory of the Lord. 
This worshipful, good God, who has broken the 
bow of the mighty, and according to the word of 
the prophet, through the gracious goodness gives 
both wine and milk without price (Isa. 55:1), 
may strengthen and confirm you and us all in this 
lion's den, where we, on every hand, are so se- 
verely assailed and so greatly distressed, like 
Israel, when they were compassed about by Holo- 
fernes. Jud. 7. Yea, the false elders do so dis- 
tress us, that we can with Susanna find nowhere 
a place of escape, but behold death before our 
eyes on every hand; for our persecutors are eve- 
ning wolves, that leave nothing over till the morn- 
ing. Hab. 1 :8. Hence we may well say with 
David : "They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, 
and afflict thine heritage. They slay the widow 
and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. They 
gather themselves together against the soul of the 
righteous, and condemn the innocent blood." Ps. 
94:5, 6, 21. 

But, my dearly beloved, let us not therefore de- 
spond, though we are now tried in the furnace of 
affliction, for the prophet says: "Blessed is the 
man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest 
him out of thy law, that he may have patience in 
the day of adversity, until the pit be digged for the 


wicked. For the Lord will not cast off his people, 
neither will forsake his inheritance. For he re- 
gardeth the prayer of the destitute, and doth not 
despise their petitions ; for he looketh down from 
the height of his sanctuary, and from heaven doth 
the Lord behold the earth, to hear the groaning of 
the prisoner." Ps. 94:12-14; 102:17, 19, 20. For 
Sara said: "This I truly know, if a man serve 
God, he is comforted after temptation, and de- 
livered from affliction, and after chastisement 
he findeth grace. For thou, O Lord, delightest 
not in our destruction; for after the storm thou 
causest the sun to shine again, and after weeping 
and mourning thou dost give us joy abundantly. 
Eternal praise to thy name O God of Israel, for 
with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light 
we see light." Tobit 3 :1 1 ; Ps. 36 :9. 

Hence, my love, O my dearest love, let us pa- 
tiently drink the cup of the Lord, for we know, 
according to the words of Isaiah, that truth is fall- 
en in the street, and that he that turneth from his 
evil ways is the spoil of every one. Isa. 59:14, 15. 
For Esdras says: "For there shall be in every 
place, and in the next cities, a great insurrection 
upon those that fear the Lord. They (the ungod- 
ly), shall be like mad men, sparing none, but still 
spoiling and destroying those that fear the Lord. 
For they shall waste and take away' their goods, 
and cast them out of their houses. Then shall they 
be known (says the Lord) ; who are my chosen; 
and they shall be tried as the gold in the fire." II 
Esd. 16:70-73. 

Therefore, O my chosen love, my lamb, let us 
give our back to the smiters for a little while yet, 
and look to the author of our faith, the King of 
kings and Lord of lords, who for our sakes was so 
maltreated and disfigured, that He Himself says : 
"If they have done these things in a green tree, 
what shall be done in the dry." Luke 23:31. 
Hence, O my love, my dearest love, let us think 
as Paul, that our light affliction, which is but for 
a moment, will hereafter work for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. II Cor. 
4:17. For Solomon says: "But the righteous live 
for evermore ; their reward also is with the Lord, 
and the care of them is with the Most High. 
Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, 
and a beautiful crown from the Lord's hand : for 
with his right hand shall he sever them, and with 
his arm shall he protect them." Wisd. 5:15, 16. 
Therefore, O my dear lamb, let us diligently pray 
the Lord, that we may be worthy at His coming, 
to live with Him for ever and ever. 

Further, my chosen, dearly beloved, know that 
I do not know much more to write you, but I com- 
mend you into the hands of the Lord, and bid you 
adieu if I should write you no more ; for our ene- 
mies are now so greatly incensed at us, that they 
gnash on us with their teeth, even as they did on 
Stephen in the judgment hall. I therefore yet give 
you this letter, even as Israel, when they were 
bound, gave their children the last milk. And fur- 


958 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


thermore, I thank you, O my love, for all your 
pure love and sincere friendship, and I also thank 
you much for the sleeves you made me ; they stand 
me in better stead than the coat which was sent 
me. Rightly did Sirach say, that one friend helps 
the other in time of need, but much more yet 
husband and wife. 

Once more I take leave, and bid you adieu; 
O adieu, Beliken, my dearest. Greet from me them 
that are with you. Adrian also greets you much. 

Written by me, your dear husband and brother 
in the Lord. Maerten van der Straten. 

Pray for me. 


THE FOURTH LETTER FROM MAERTEN VAN DER 
STRATEN, TO ANNA SERVAES 

I, Maerten van der Straten, your unworthy 
friend and brother, wish you, my beloved, dear 
sister in the Lord, Anna Servaes, much grace and 
mercy from God our heavenly Father; and may 
the love of His Son be in you as a burning fire, that 
you may become perfect unto the measure of the 
stature of the fullness of Christ, having your con- 
versation honest among the Gentiles, and bearing 
good fruits, as a tree planted by the rivers of water, 
so that you may be numbered among the royal 
priesthood, the peculiar people, which God, ac- 
cording to the writings of Moses, bore on eagle's 
wings ; so that you, when the land shall again be 
divided to Israel, may possess an inheritance full 
of joy, for ever and ever. Amen. Eph. 4:13; I 
Pet. 2:12; Ps. 1 :3; I Pet. 2:9; Deut. 32:11. 

A cordial, fond and affectionate greeting to you, 
my dear and much beloved sister in the Lord, Anna 
Servaes, whom I love with a pure love out of a pure 
heart, of which God be my judge, who, according 
to the word of Jeremiah, tries men's hearts and 
reins. Further, after all proper and Christian salu- 
tation, let me, please, inform your love, that I and 
my dear wife are in tolerably good health according 
to the flesh, and according to the spirit we hope 
by God's assistance to keep the covenant which we 
once made with the Lord our God, when we bowed 
our knees before Him and His glorious majesty. 
Yes, we moreover trust that also you are well in 
soul and body, ready to perform your journey to 
Bethel, and to prophesy against Jeroboam and his 
altar. I Kings 13:1. To this end, may you and we 
all be strengthened by the only and eternal, al- 
mighty God, whose tabernacle is on high, and who 
lives far above all heavens, in a light which, ac- 
cording to the words of Paul (I Tim. 6:16), no 
man can approach unto ; that we may fear and love 
Him above all. For He is a jealous God, who would 
dwell alone in man's heart ; for thereunto we have 
been delivered out of the hand of our enemies, 
and from them that hate us, that we should fear and 
serve Him without fear, in true righteousness and 
holiness, all the days of our lives, as good and faith- 
ful servants, seeking the praise of God, and, with 
Paul, counting our gain loss for Christ's sake, lead- 


ing a chaste, honorable life, and setting up an en- 
sign for the nations, that we may not make the 
blind to wander out of the way, but that we, ac- 
cording to the words of Peter, through a modest 
and good conversation, may win the unbelieving 
without the Word; which Christ also teaches us in 
the Gospel, saying: "Let your light shine before 
men, that they may behold your good conversation, 
and glorify God our Father in the day of visita- 
tion." Ex. 20:5; II Cor. 6:16; Luke 1:74, 75; 
Phil. 3:7; Isa. 11:12; Deut. 27:18; I Pet. 3:1,2; 
Matt. 5:16; I Pet. 2:12. Hence, O my dear and 
much beloved sister in the Lord, let us with all hu- 
mility follow the Lord's footsteps, that in every re- 
spect we may adorn the doctrine of the Gospel, 
shining as a bright morning star among this evil 
and perverse generation; then shall the King, as 
David writes, greatly desire our beauty. Ps. 45 :11. 

Hence, O love, let us each seek to be the chiefest 
in virtue, and patiently wait for the Lord, our 
Comfort, who alone can help us, as David says : "I 
waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined unto 
me, and heard my cry. He brought me up also out 
of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my 
feet upon a rock, and established my goings. And 
he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise 
unto our God." Ps. 40:1-3. Therefore, O dear 
lamb, let us thank the Lord, and pray that we 
may not be caught through our tongue, saying 
with Jesus Sirach : "O Lord God, Father and Lord 
of my life, let me not fall among the slanderers, 
and perish among them. Oh, that I could bridle my 
thoughts, and discipline my heart with the word of 
God, and that I might not spare myself, if I erred, 
lest I should cause sin, and create great error, and 
commit much evil, and perish before my enemies, 
and become their sport." Sir. 23:1-3. Hence, O 
dear sister, let us seek God's face day and night 
with tears, that we may not perish with the wicked 
under the wrath of God, but that we may continue 
obedient in Christ unto the end of our lives, so that 
we may be saved in the day of the Lord, which, 
according to the words of Christ, shall come as a 
thief in the night ; in the which according to Peter's 
writing, the heavens shall be dissolved with fire, 
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. And 
if all these things are to come to pass, O how ought 
we to be meet and adorned with a good, chaste 
and holy conversation ! For the time is come that 
judgment must begin at the house of God : and if it 
now begin at us, and if the righteous shall scarcely 
be written in the book of life, what shall the end of 
the ungodly be? Matt. 24:42, 43; II Pet. 3:10-12; 
I Pet. 4:17, IS. Oh, well may I sigh and say with 
Solomon : "O Lord, wink at the multitude of my 
sins." Wisd. 1 1 :23. Hence we may also with David 
say: "O Lord, enter not into judgment with us, 
or, thou, O Lord, shalt be justified. And render 
us not according to our deeds, neither reward us 
according to our works, nor chasten us, O Lord, 
in thine anger, but be merciful unto us, O Lord! 
according to thy goodness, which is great." Ps! 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


959 


143:2; 6:1, 2. Therefore, O dear lamb, let us 
cleave to the Lord with prayer and supplication, 
with a broken heart and contrite spirit, that we may 
be saved, not through our merits, but through the 
grace of God, and thus live with the Lord in His 
eternal kingdom. 

Further, my dear sister, I do not, because of my 
small gift, know much more to write you, but com- 
mend you to the Lord, and to the rich, comforting 
Word of His grace. I moreover pray you to excuse 
the plain, simple letter which I, your unworthy 
servant, have written, who am the weakest in 
Israel, yea, not worthy to unloose your shoe's 
latchet; however, I yet trust in the grace of God. 

Furthermore, my dear sister, greet your dear 
husband, and also the acquaintances, in my name. 
My dear wife also greets you both, and the ac- 
quaintances much. There also greet you much, 
Adriaen, Grietgen, Hansken, and Dingentgen; 
and all of us prisoners jointly request of you, that 
you will diligently pray the Lord for us. Nothing 
more. Farewell, and do the best in the beginning 
and in the end. 

Written in my bonds, by me, your weak brother 
and servant, as much as I am able. 

Maerten van der Straten. 


THE FIFTH LETTER OF MAERTEN VAN DER STRATEN. 
TO SERVAES JANSS 

I, Maerten van der Straten, imprisoned for the 
Word of the Lord, wish you my dear and much 
beloved brother in the Lord, Servaes Janss, much 
grace and mercy from God our heavenly Father, 
and also to all that have been redeemed from the 
earth, and cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to the word of 
the prophet, bore our reproach, took upon Him our 
sins, and restored to us that which He had not 
taken away, that He might deliver us from this 
present evil world; according to the will of God 
His Father ; to whom be glory, power and honor 
forever and ever. Amen. 

Out of a fond heart a loving greeting to you, my 
beloved, dear friend and brother in the Lord, whom 
I love according to the peculiar privilege of Israel, 
this the Lord knows, who according to the words 
of Jeremiah, tries men's hearts and reins, and ac- 
cording to David, knows men's thoughts when they 
are yet afar off. Jer. 17:10; Ps. 139:2. 

Further, after all proper and Christian saluta- 
tion, let me, please, inform your love, that I, the 
Lord be praised forever, am in tolerably good 
health according to the flesh, and according to the 
spirit my mind is still fixed to serve God all the 
days of my life. I have moreover the undoubted 
confidence concerning you, that you are also well in 
soul and body, ready to keep the covenant which 
you once made with the Lord our God, when you 
bowed your knees before God and His glorious 
majesty ; may this only, eternal, and only wise God, 
endow you, according to the word of the prophet 


(Joel 2:28), with His Holy Spirit, that you, led 
by Him, may lead a good and chaste conversation 
among the Gentiles, as Christ teaches us in the Gos- 
pel, saying: "Let your light so shine before men, 
that they beholding your good conversation, may 
glorify God your Father." 

Hence, O my dear brother, let us, according to 
the writing of the apostle, diligently strive to be the 
chiefest in virtue ; as Paul also says, that we should 
approve ourselves as the ministers of God, in much 
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, 
in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, 
in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by knowl- 
edge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy 
Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the Word of truth, by 
the power of God, by the armour of righteousness 
on the right hand and on the left, by honor and dis- 
honor, by evil report and good report : as deceivers, 
and yet true ; as unknown, and yet well known ; as 
dying, and, behold, we live ; as chastened, and not 
killed: For God can wound, and heal again, as is 
written in the Book of Kings : "The Lord killeth, 
and maketh alive : he bringeth down to the grave, 
and bringeth up." Tit. 3:8; II Cor. 6:4-9; Deut. 
32:39; I Sam. 2:6. 

Hence, O my dear brother, if you be visited at 
any time, out of bonds as well as in, be not grieved, 
nor become weary in the way of the Lord, though 
it is narrow and straight ; for it is better to suffer 
affliction for a little time with God's children, than 
to possess all the treasures of Egypt; for though 
man, as Christ says, should gain the world, and 
lose his own soul, O what would he have then,, that 
he could give in exchange for it? Heb. 11 :25, 26; 
Matt. 16:26. 

Therefore, O my dear brother, let us seek the 
kingdom of God above all things, and let us not 
follow after that which is earthly, as is written in 
the epistle to the Colossians, by the holy apostle 
Paul, where he says: "If ye then be risen with 
Christ, seek those things which are above, where 
Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your 
affection on things above, not on things on the 
earth, For ye are dead, and your life is hid with 
Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall 
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in 
glory." Col. 3 :l-4. For it is a faithful saying: "If 
we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with 
him." II Tim. 2:12. Hence let us not be weary in 
well doing, for according to Paul's writing, in due 
season we shall reap a most abundant harvest. 
Galatians 6:9. For our light affliction, which is 
but for a moment, worketh for us a far more ex- 
ceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while we look 
not at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen : for the things which are seen 
are temporal ; but the things which are not seen are 
eternal. II Cor. 4:17,18. 

Hence, O my dear brother, let us help the au- 
thor of our faith, the Lord Jesus Christ, bear all 
His reproach, and let us, as Paul says, follow after 
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. 


960 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Heb. 12:14. And let us seek the Lord with tears, 
while He may be found, and let us bring forth gen- 
uine fruits of repentance, that the tower of Siloam 
may not fall upon us, for we have done evil long 
enough before the Lord. Isa. 55:6; Luke 13:4. 
Hence let us now, as Paul says, use our members, 
which we have heretofore used from iniquity, unto 
iniquity, still more abundantly from righteousness 
unto righteousness. And let us, moreover, praise 
the Lord, because He has revealed to us the pearl 
of great price that lies in the field, and is yet still 
hid from so many. Matt. 13:46. Therefore, O my 
dear brother, let us now, as good and faithful serv- 
ants, put our talent out upon usury, that, when our 
dear Lord comes, we may have gained something, 
and may hear the words: "Well done, good and 
faithful servant: thou hast been faithful in a few 
things, I will make thee ruler over many things: 
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." Matt. 25 :23. 
Thus, my dear, let us diligently look before us, and 
watch circumspectly, that we do not defile our wed- 
ding garment, but may much rather be adorned 
with the five wise virgins, with the oil of love in our 
lamps, so that we, when our Bridegroom comes, 
may enter in with Him into His eternal kingdom, 
where, according to the word of Isaiah, and of the 
apostle, incomprehensible joy and gladness shall 
endure forever. Amen. 

Further, my dear brother, I do not know, be- 
cause of my small gift, much more to write you, 
but commend you to the only, eternal, almighty 
God, who according to the word of Isaiah, hath 
measured the waters in the hollow of His hand, and 
meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended 
the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the 
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance ; that 
he may keep you, so that you may receive a crown 
of glory. Isa. 40:12; I Pet. 5:4. 

Furthermore, my dear brother, I pray you, that 
you will excuse this simple letter which I, un- 
worthy one, have written, for it were better that 
you would write to me ; but in order to fulfill your 
request I could not forbear to do it. 

Greet your dear wife, and also the acquaintances 
in my name. Beliken van der Straten, my dear 
wife, also greets you and Tanneken much, and also 
the acquaintances. Further, all of us prisoners 
greet you from the heart. Pray the Lord diligently 
for us. Nothing more. Farewell, and do the best. 

To your benefit as much as lieth in me, by me 
your weak brother and servant. 

Maerten van der Straten. 


THE SIXTH LETTER FROM MAERTEN VAN 
STRATEN, AND BELIKEN HIS WIFE, TO 
ADAM V. L. AND HIS WIFE 


DER 


I, Maerten van der Straten, and Beliken van der 
Straten, my most dearly beloved wife,, both of us 
prisoners for the word of the Lord, wish our very 
dear brother and sister much grace and mercy from 
God our heavenly Father, who dwells on high, in a 


light unto which, as Paul writes, no man can ap- 
proach. We moreover wish, that you may have the 
love of His Son, that you may be a light for them 
that sit in darkness, and that you may shine as a 
bright morning star among the blind that err in the 
way, so that you may hereafter, as Isaiah writes, 
behold the King in His beauty, and meet with that 
perfect and unspeakable joy and gladness that shall 
endure forever and ever. This we wish our dear 
friends in the Lord, with all the strength of our 
souls, out of an affectionate heart. 

A cordial, loving greeting to you our very dear 
brother Adam V. L., and to Mariken, your very 
dear wife. We two prisoners, as said above, love 
you, as Paul says, with a godly love, and out of a 
pure heart as Peter writes ; this the Almighty Lord 
knows, who penetrates every thing with eyes which 
are as a flame of fire. 

Further, after all proper and Christian saluta- 
tion, let me, please, inform your love, that I and my 
dearly beloved lamb, whose hand I took with tears 
of joy are still, the Lord be praised forever, in tol- 
erably good health according to the flesh, and ac- 
cording to the spirit, God be praised, our mind is 
still fixed, by the help of the Lord to prefer with 
Eleazar, an honorable death to an ignominious life. 
But, dear brother and sister in the Lord, we are 
also confident beyond a doubt, that you both are 
well in soul and body, ready to keep the covenant 
you made with Almighty God, concerning which 
we are exhorted by Moses, that we should always 
be mindful of the covenant which we once made 
with the Lord of lords. Deut. 4 :9. And Paul in- 
structs us still more fully, that we are to call to re- 
membrance the day in which we were illuminated. 
Heb. 10:32. The merciful King, and God of gods, 
who according to the word of the prophet, in time 
of need gives bread, and in thirst water, and in the 
day of tribulation forgives sin, may strengthen and 
confirm you and us all with His Holy Spirit, that 
we, as Luke writes, may serve Him in true right- 
eousness and holiness all the days of our lives. And 
let us, O dear friends, always have the Lord before 
our eyes, even as David, who says : "I have set the 
Lord always before me." Ps. 16:8. And again he 
says : "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that 
will I seek after ; that I may dwell in the house of 
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the 
beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple. 
For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his 
pavilion : in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide 
me; he shall set me up upon a rock." 27:4, 5. 
Hence, dear friends, let us always seek the face of 
the Lord with humility, and take good heed to our 
vocation, redeeming the time, because the days are 
evil, as Paul says (Eph. 4:1; 5:16); for the 
tongues of the builders of the tower of Babel have 
come to disagree. For David says : "Violence and 
strife are in the city. Day and night they go about 
it upon the walls thereof : mischief also and sorrow 
are in the midst of it. Wickedness is in the midst 
thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


961 


streets." Ps. 55:9-11. And, as the prophet says: 
"They fear not God; for they lay their hands on 
his peaceable ones, and break his covenant," verses 
19, 20. "Their mouth," as David says, "is smooth- 
er than butter, but they have war in their hearts : 
their words were softer than oil, yet are they 
drawn swords," verse 21. Hence, O dearly be- 
loved friends, let us always watch circumspectly 
in the spirit, and fear our God from the heart, and 
cleave to Him with prayer and supplication, even 
as the royal prophet David says: "As for me, I 
will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me. 
Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, 
and cry aloud : and he shall hear my voice," verses 
16, 17. 

Thus, dear friends when you are distressed, call 
upon the Lord, and do not let the waters of Marah 
(Ex. 15 :23) become too bitter for you, but remem- 
ber, that according to Paul's words we must 
through much tribulation enter into the kingdom 
of God. Even as also Christ teaches us in the Gos- 
pel, saying : "The kingdom of heaven suffereth vio- 
lence, and the violent take it by force." Matt. 11 :12. 
Hence, dear brother and sister, let us willingly bear 
our cross, and give our back to the smiters, and not 
regard it however great the heat of the sun, for 
the servant is not above his master or lord; for if 
they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, 
how much more shall they call them of His house- 
hold? Matt. 10:25. For Peter teaches us saying: 
"Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in 
the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same 
mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath 
ceased from sin ; that he no longer should live the 
rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, 
but to the will of God. For the time past of our life 
may suffice us to have wrought the will of the 
Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, 
excess of wine, revelings, banquetings, and abom- 
inable idolatries," I Pet. 4:1-3. 

Hence, O dear friends, let us no longer live 
according to the wisdom of the flesh, to indulge 
its lusts, but let us walk, as Paul writes, only as 
becomes the Gospel, and do not let us be une- 
qually yoked together with unbelievers : for what 
similarity or fellowship hath righteousness with 
unrighteousness? and what communion hath light 
with darkness ? and what concord hath Christ with 
Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with 
an infidel? and what agreement hath the temple 
of God with idols ? for ye are, says Paul, the temple 
of the living God ; as God hath said, I will dwell in 
them, and walk in them ; and I will be their God, 
and they shall be My people. Wherefore come out 
from among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing ; and I will 
receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye 
shall be My sons and daughters, saith the Lord Al- 
mighty. Phil. 1 :27; II Cor. 6:14-18. 

Therefore, O my dear brother and sister, let us 
serve the Lord with a faithful heart, and refrain our 
foot from every evil way, and let us lead a chaste 


and pure conversation among the Gentiles, that we, 
as Paul writes, may not give the slanderer an occa- 
sion to speak evil; but let us in all things seek 
the glory of the Lord with a simple heart, so that 
we, according to the word of Paul, may adorn the 
Gospel by good works. Tit. 2 :8, 10. Hence, O 
dear friends, be not weary in well doing ; for what 
you now sow in tears, that shall you in due season, 
as Paul writes, reap with joy in great abundance. 
Hence let us with fasting and weeping entreat the 
Lord, that we may be able to withstand in the evil 
day, so that we may live with Him forever and 
ever. Amen. John 3:8; Eph. 6:13. 

Further, my beloved friends, we do not know 
much more to write you for this time, because of 
the simplicity of our understanding ; but we com- 
mend you to the Lord, and to the word full of con- 
solation, and bid you adieu. 

I Maerten van der Straten, and Beliken van der 
Straten, my love, have written this little out of af- 
fection and according to your request, and we beg 
you to accept it in good part. We also request the 
aid of your prayers. 

Farewell ; greet the acquaintances in our name, 
we thank you for all the good you have shown us. 
Adriaen also greets you much ; and also Hansken, 
Margriet and Lou greet you much; Dingentgen 
and we all jointly request you to pray for us. 
Nothing more, but do the best first and last. 

From us your dear friends, 

Maerten and Beliken van dee Straten. 


WILLEM DE RIJCKER, AND CHRISTOFFEL FIERENS, 
A. D. 1572 

At Meenen, in Flanders, on the 5th of Decem- 
ber, A. D. 1572, there were sentenced to death as 
heretics, two pious witnesses of God, named Wil- 
lem de Rijcker and Christoffel Fierens. When they 
were brought out to die, they came fearlessly, like 
two sheep for the slaughter. A brother said to Wil- 
lem : "Dear brother, strive valiantly for the truth." 
And a sister also cried: "O yes, dear brethren, 
strive valiantly." Christoffel said: "O men, think 
of your salvation ; for this is the way of truth unto 
life." They were quickly conducted to the hut, 
without being able to speak much ; but they cried to 
God for help and assistance, and said : "What we 
suffer is for the right truth." Christoffel also said : 
"Sell your clothes, and buy Testaments; attend 
therein to the words of God : for therein you will 
find life ; and fear not them that kill the body, but 
fear him that hath power to cast soul and body into 
hell." He also thanked God, that He had permitted 
him to see this day, for which he had so greatly 
longed, and said further : "These members, which 
Thou, O Lord hast given me, I will gladly deliver 
up again for Thy doctrine." Willem said : "I have 
been in many perils by sea and by land, and God 
has always helped me; hence I trust that He will 
also not leave me in this extremity, but succor me 
unto death." They then offered up their prayer to 


962 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


God, in which they said with Stephen : "O Lord, 
forgive them what they do unto us, and do not lay 
this sin to their charge." Willem then said: "I 
have now with Paul fought a good fight, kept the 
faith, finished my course," etc. Finally they cried : 
"O heavenly Father, into Thy hands we commend 
our spirits." Many other words were spoken, which 
have partly been forgotten, and it would also take 
too long to write them all. The executioner then 
asked, whether they were ready ; whereupon Chris- 
toffel replied : "Yes, my dear friend." While Chris- 
toft'el was being strangled, Willem cried: "O dear 
friends, my brother is now forbidden to speak." 
After that he cried once more to the Lord, and then 
also inherited the crown of life. Thus did these two 
die for the name of the Lord, being first strangled, 
and then burnt, after Willem had been confined in 
prison for more than twenty-two months ; and thus 
they became heirs of the promised land, in which 
all those that here lay down their lives for the 
word of God shall find it again. 

During the time that Willem was imprisoned, 
one Cornells van Eeckhoute was burgomaster at 
Meenen, who would very gladly have seen him re- 
leased ; he therefore sought to persuade the priest 
and others, that he [Willem] was half-witted, 
whereupon Willem was examined once, and his 
views asked respecting purgatory. Willem an- 
swered that he had once lived in a convent, where 
on Saturday always meat and other things were 
cooked for Sunday, and that the monks, sweeping 
together the fire by which they had cooked, called 
it purgatory.* Then the burgomaster said: "Do 
you see my lords, by this you may perceive that 
the man is only half-witted, for these are not the 
words of a reasonable man." But Willem said that 
he did not want to be released from prison as half- 
witted, but that they should ask him concerning his 
faith, and that he should confess it to them reason- 
ably enough. Thereupon he had to remain in con- 
finement, and was finally, as already stated, sen- 
tenced to death, this burgomaster pronouncing the 
sentence. This man, some time after, driven away 
through war, fled to Bruges, where he, however 
rich he was, had to live very frugally, and nearly 
all the time borrow money to defray his household 
expenses, which when it became too great a vex- 
ation for him, he resolved to go home to Meenen, 
but he died very suddenly on the way. 


JAN SMIT, a. d. 1572 

About the year 1572 there was also another 
pious, God-fearing brother, named Jan Smit, a 
native of the country of Marck, but at that time re- 
siding in North Holland, near Munnekendam ; he 
was afterwards brought a prisoner to Munneken- 
dam, for the testimony of Jesus. But when after a 
certain time Munnekendam was taken by the 

* In Dutch. "Vagevuur" from "vagen" or "vegen," to scour 
[and also to "sweep"] and "vuur fire ;" hence a play on words, 
which cannot be rendered into the English withont the loss of the 
humorous effect which it has in the original tongue. — Trans. 


Protestants, he was released by one of their cap- 
tains. When subsequently engaged in a boat, on 
the Zuyder Zee, he was again apprehended by a 
Spanish captain, and brought to Amsterdam. There 
he remained in confinement, until it was deter- 
mined, that these prisoners should be used as oars- 
men on the Haarlem Lake, against those of Haar- 
lem. But when this pious Jan Smit came to the 
place where he was to row, he declared that he did 
not feel free in his conscience, thus to row, seeing 
he had no enemies; they might deal with him 
according to their pleasure. Thereupon he was 
brought into the camp before Haarlem, where he 
was sharply examined in the faith, and found to be 
of the Mennonistic religion. And as examinations 
and severe threats could not move him to apos- 
tatize, since he was founded upon the firm Rock, 
and therefore overcame all by faith, Don Frederic!:, 
son of the Duke of Alva, sentenced him, there to 
be suspended by one leg to the gallows, which was 
done, till death ensued. And thus this hero and 
soldier of Jesus Christ, by saving faith overcome 
the world, sin, flesh and blood, and all tyrants, and, 
through God's grace, obtained the crown of eternal 
glory. 

This account we received from old Simon Fijt- 
soon, teacher [minister?] and elder of the church 
of Tessel. He declares that this Jan Smit was his 
special friend. 


PIERIJNTGEN LOOSVELDT, OR NECKERS, 
A. D. 1572 

At the close of the year 1572, there was appre- 
hended at Meenen, in Flanders, for the truth and 
the Word of God, a spinster, about forty-three 
years old, named Pierijntgen Loosveldt, or Neck- 
ers. While kindly ministering to a sick person, she 
was walking out at a certain time, when she met 
the chief bailiff, Joncker Jan de Carmago, who ap- 
prehended her, and asked where she resided. She 
pleasantly replied that she did not live very far 
off, and gave him the fairest words, in order to be 
released. But it was all of no avail ; she had to go 
to prison, and on the second day, when she had not 
had much time for consideration, she was sum- 
moned before the lords, and examined concerning 
her faith, which she freely confessed. 

In the first place she was accused that she had 
attended imroper assemblies, contrary to the em- 
peror's decree. But Pierijntgen held that she had 
used diligence to follow Christ, and to shun the 
evil, and go out from them, and join the good, 
knowing that Christ says: "Where two or three 
are gathered together in my name, there am I in 
the midst of them." Matt. 18:20. And these assem- 
blies she could not forsake, though it should cost 
her her life. 

In the second place she was asked whether she 
had not had herself rebaptized. She confessed that 
she had suffered herself to be baptized according to 
the command of Christ, which they considered An- 
abaptism, not at all regarding the instance of the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


963 



Jan Smit suspended from the gallows outside Haarlem, AD 1572 


disciples who, though they had received John's 
baptism, did nevertheless, after they had heard the 
preaching of Paul, suffer themselves also to be 
baptized in the name of Jesus. And that one must 
first believe on Jesus Christ, and be baptized upon 
such faith, according to the teaching of the Scrip- 
tures, which also say, that baptism is a burial of sin 
and the answer of a good conscience. 

When they asked her, who was present when she 
was baptized, she did not confess it, however hard 
she was threatened. 

In the third place they asked her, whether she 
did not regard the priests as the vicars of Christ, 
who had power to forgive sin ; and that whatever 
they bound or loosed had to remain bound or 
loosed. But she could not confess that they are 
such vicars of Christ who are not minded as He is ; 
for He is the true Shepherd, who laid down His 
life for His sheep, while the priests do the very op- 
posite. He is the true Mediator between God and 
men (I Tim. 2:5), and His Father's vicar. He is 
the open, clear Fountain (Zech. 13 :1 ), who calls to 
Him all those who are burdened and laden with sin. 
He is the true pool with five entrances, of which 


John tells (John 5:2), and all who truly repent 
shall receive the forgiveness of their sins. Luke 
24 :47. No one was found worthy to open the book 
with seven seals, but the Lamb Jesus Christ. Rev. 
5:1. He is the right door ; it is of no avail whether 
any one will open or shut, the ungodly must re- 
main without. John 10:9; Rev. 22:15. 

In the fourth place she was asked, whether she 
did not confess that the body of Christ was in the 
sacrament or wafer, when the priest had pro- 
nounced the words over it, and consecrated it in 
the mass. But she could regard the mass, with all 
that pertained to it, for nothing more than a plant, 
planted by men, which God should root up. Matt. 
15:13. But she confessed that Christ had left us 
the Supper to be observed in remembrance of Him, 
according to Paul's doctrine, and thereby to shew 
the Lord's death. I Cor. 11 :25, 26. 

In the fifth place she was also asked whether she 
did not confess that infant baptism was necessary 
for salvation, and for the washing away of the 
original sin which has adhered to us from Adam. 
But her confession was, that one could receive but 
one baptism, and that only they are worthy of it 


964 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


who forsake sin, or repent, and believe in the name 
of Jesus Christ ; and that it was also not a washing 
away of sin, but the answer of a good conscience, 
and that the blood of Christ cleanseth us from all 
sin. Ephesians 4 :5 ; Acts 2 :38 ; I Pet. 3 :21 ; I John 
1:7. 

In the sixth place she was asked whether she did 
not believe that Christ had assumed His flesh from 
Mary. But she confessed that He was from above, 
and had come down from the Father; that the 
Word had become flesh, even as John says : "That 
which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which 
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, 
of the Word of life." And as He Himself says, 
that He is the bread which came down from heav- 
en. That He was also the only reconciler, redeem- 
er and advocate. To investigate further, was not 
necessary to her salvation. John 8:23; 1:14; I 
John 1 :1 ; John 6:31 ; Rom. 5:10; I John 2 :1. 

In the seventh place she was also asked whether 
she did not confess that three persons constituted 
one true God. Thereupon she confessed that there 
were three names in one Divine Being, namely, Fa- 
ther, Son and Holy Ghost. But the Father who 
sent the Son she could not regard as a person ; for 
the heaven is His throne, and the earth is His foot- 
stool ; Christ also calls Him a Spirit, and a spirit, 
He says, has neither flesh nor bones. The Holy 
Ghost, who manifested Himself upon Christ in the 
form of a dove, and upon the apostles in the form of 
tongues of fire, and sat upon each of them, Him she 
could also not understand to be a person. But the 
Son, who became man for us, was visible, palpable 
and passive, walked much among the Jews, did 
many signs, suffered hunger and thirst, wept, etc., 
Him she could indeed confess to be a person. I 
John 4:9; Isa. 66:1; John 4:24; Luke 24:39; 
Matt. 3:16; Acts 2:3; Matt. 17:12; 11:5; 21:19; 
John 19:28; Luke 19:41. 

In the eighth place they asked her, whether one 
might not swear, or take an oath, before the author- 
ities, to defend justice and establish the truth, but 
she esteemed Christ's commandment more than 
that of men; for He teaches: "I say unto you, 
Swear not at all ; neither by heaven ; for it is God's 
throne: nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: 
neither by Jerusalem ; for it is the city of the great 
King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, be- 
cause thou canst not make one hair white or black. 
But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, 
nay : for whatsoever is more than these cometh of 
evil." Matt. 5 :34-37. 

In the ninth place it was told her that good works 
did avail, also for them that had died. But she as- 
serted that neither soul-masses, obsequies, pilgrim- 
ages, the burning of tapers, nor anything else 
could help or benefit the dead; for the Scripture 
says : "If the tree fall toward the south, or toward 
the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there 
it shall be." Eccl. 11:3. Christ also tells of ten 
virgins, of whom the five who had wisely kept their 


lamps burning, and provided their vessels with oil, 
went in with Him ; but the others, who had neg- 
lected their time, had to remain without. Even as 
the angel said, that hereafter time shall be no long- 
er. Rev. 10:6. 

In the tenth place she was asked whether the 
saints had not ascended up to heaven. But she con- 
fessed that no one has ascended up to heaven, but 
Christ our Protector and Saviour, not even Mary 
His mother ; but that they all rest in the hand of 
God, waiting for the judgment of the last day. 
John 3:13; Acts 1:10; Wisd. 3:1. As the Scrip- 
ture says, that the hour is coming, in the which all 
that are in the graves shall hear the voice of God, 
and they that have done good shall enter in unto 
life eternal, but the ungodly into eternal damnation. 
John 5 :28, 29. The resurrection is for both the 
just and the unjust, as Paul says: We must all 
appear before the judgment seat of the Lord, to be 
rewarded according to our works. Acts 24:15; II 
Cor. 5 :10. We also read of the souls of the right- 
eous that are under the altar, and wait till the num- 
ber of their brethren shall be fulfilled. Rev. 6:9 
11. 

After she had thus been most rigidly examined, 
they sought through the learned of this world to 
instruct her for the purpose of causing her to re- 
cant ; but when neither entreaties or threats could 
move her, but she declared herself willing rather 
to die, than to apostatize, she had to go upon the 
rack stripped of everything but an apron. There 
she was severely racked, with a stick in her mouth, 
so that her teeth broke in pieces ; but she would not 
recant, nor betray any of her fellow members. And 
when she requested that the torture be discon- 
tinued, the burgomaster said, that she should re- 
cant and confess. But God kept her lips, and helped 
her so that she was released from the torture ; for 
she would rather with old Eleazar die this tem- 
poral death, than by denying Christ forfeit His 
eternal kingdom. Divers times they threatened her 
with death, but this could not intimidate her. Some- 
times she feared that, because she was very sad, she 
might not be able to refrain from weeping when 
she should be led to death ; hence she turned to God 
in prayer, who did not leave her prayer unheard, 
for when she received the intelligence, that she 
should have to die, her heart was especially filled 
with joy and good cheer. On the morning when 
she was to die, the bailiff asked her, whether she 
had not yet considered the matter. But she said : 
"He that would obtain the precious prize that is 
set before us, must run without ceasing." I Cor. 
9:24. She was then brought into court, and sen- 
tenced to death. In her sentence the foregoing ten 
articles were read to her charge, and that she there- 
fore, and because of her obstinacy, should be 
burned as a heretic. This did not make her de- 
spondent, but she thanked the Lord, and wished 
them grace from God, that they might turn from 
idolatry to the true worship of God. I Thess. 1 :9. 

When she came out and went forth to death, she 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


965 


said to the people : "Go, buy Testaments, and read 
therein, that you may find why I am sentenced to 
death, and have to die." Thereupon the execu- 
tioner, greatly incensed, and threatening to strike 
her, told her to be silent, and without saying much 
more she went into the hut, where the executioner 
hastened his work, and commending her spirit into 
the hands of God, she was burned, on the eve of 
Epiphany 1573, and prepared herself to go forth 
with the wise virgins, to meet the Bridegroom. 

The burgomaster, or president of the court, at 
Meenen, named Jan de Drijver, who had pro- 
nounced the sentence on Pierijntgen, was after- 
wards severely punished of God ; his flesh decayed, 
so that in consequence of it one ear dropped from 
his head, and he died a most miserable death. 


MICHIEL VAN BRUYSSEL, AND BARBERKEN HIS 
WIFE, A. D. 1573 

About the year 1573, there were imprisoned for 
the testimony of Jesus, at Ghent, in Flanders, Mi- 
chiel van Bruyssel and Barberken his wife. Be- 
cause they were not of the world, but had by God 
been chosen out of the world, therefore the world, 
which only loves its own, hated, persecuted and op- 
pressed them. But they, as wise builders, had built 
their foundation upon the cornerstone Christ Jesus, 
who was able to keep their treasure until the day 
of their redemption. Thus they, after manifold 
temptations and trials of their faith, were, by the 
blinded, God-opposing papists, put to death, not 
on account of any evil deed, but only for the obedi- 
ence of the truth of Jesus Christ. Michiel van 
Bruyssel was burned in the Friday Market, and 
Barberken his wife was beheaded with the sword, 
in the count's castle. And thus they remained faith- 
ful unto death to their Redeemer and Saviour; 
hence they shall receive an eternal and glorious 
kingdom, and a beautiful crown, from the hand of 
the Lord, which no one shall be able to take away 
from them. 


JAN VAN ACKEREN, A. D. 1573 

After manifold persecution, murdering and burn- 
ing of the Christians, there also fell into the hands 
of the tyrants, in the city of Antwerp a valiant hero 
and soldier of Jesus Christ, named Jan van Acker- 
en born near Ypres. The sole cause of his appre- 
hension was, that he in accordance with the counsel 
of God, had separated from the wicked world and 
all her false worship militating against the Word of 
God and had yielded his body and spirit under the 
banner and obedience of Christ. And as the light 
does not unite and mingle with darkness; but is 
hated and persecuted by the latter, therefore the 
rulers of darkness examined and tried said sheep 
of Christ, with severe imprisonment and many sore 
tortures. And as he could by no means be brought 
to apostatize, since he was founded upon the Rock 
he was put to death by fire at said place, suffering 
it with great steadfastness. And thus he testified 


and confirmed the belief of the truth with his death 
and blood, and trod the wine press of suffering with 
Christ. Hence he was not rejected as a bastard, 
but much rather, through grace, acknowledged and 
received as an acceptable son by Christ, into his 
eternal inheritance, where he with all God's chosen, 
shall live and reign forever and ever. 

This friend of Christ sent several letters from 
his prison, but they did not come to our hands. 


G. KLEERMAECKER, WITH SIJNTGEN VAN ROUS- 

SELARE AND MAEYKEN GOSENS, PUT TO 

DEATH FOR THE TRUTH, AT ANTWERP, 

A. D. 1573 

A letter from G. Kleermaecker, imprisoned at 
Antwerp with Sijntgen van Rousselare, wife 
of Jeronymus, where they laid down their 
lives for the truth 

The abundant grace of God, the great love and 
mercy of His Son, and the power, operation and 
illumination of the Holy Ghost, this, my very dear 
and beloved sister in the Lord, I wish you as a cor- 
dial and affectionate greeting, whereby we, un- 
worthy ones, are born anew of God, to serve the 
Lord in righteousness and holiness, to the praise 
of the Lord and to the salvation of our souls. 
Hereunto fit, strengthen and confirm us, the Lord, 
the Father of all mercy, to whom alone be praise, 
glory, and honor, forever and ever. Amen. 

After this salutation, my very dear and beloved 
sister in the Lord, I inform you, that I am, the 
Lord be praised forever, still tolerably well accord- 
ing to the flesh, and also as regards the mind ; and 
I trust by the grace of God to go with our true 
Captain, Joshua to the promised land (which has 
been promised us unworthy ones out of grace, and 
shown us through faith) hoping and trusting by the 
grace of God to pass unharmed over Jordan ; yet I 
would from the depth of my heart, that my mind 
were more valiant for it. 

Further, my very dear and beloved sister, I in- 
form you, that at the visit my heart was greatly re- 
joiced by you, because I saw your great joy and 
gladness in the Lord, your complete self-renunci- 
ation, and the resignation of your heart and mind, 
in the Lord, for which we cannot thank and praise 
the Lord enough, that He has given you such a 
treasure in earthen vessels, that you do not want to 
forsake the Lord, for neither life nor death, nor 
for any torment which the tyrants might inflict 
upon you my very dear and beloved sister in the 
Lord. The Lord, the God of all grace, strengthen 
and confirm you unto the end, and fulfill all the 
good pleasure of His goodness in you, and the work 
of faith with power, that the name of our dear 
Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and 
that you may fight the good fight of faith ; and lay 
hold on eternal life, whereunto we are called, if we 
hold the beginning of the Christian life steadfast 
unto the end. II Thess. 1 :11, 12; I Tim. 6 :12; Heb. 
3:14. For, dear sister in the Lord, if we properly 


966 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


consider the life of Christ, we find nothing but trib- 
ulation, suffering and distress. He who was the 
Lord of lords, for our sakes left His Father's king- 
dom ; He came into the world, to call our guilt upon 
Him, and paid the debt with His bitter suffering 
and death on the tree of the cross, leaving us in all 
things an example, as the apostle says, that we 
should follow His steps, who did no sin, neither 
was guile found in His mouth ; who when He was 
reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered He 
threatened not; but committed Himself to Him 
that judgeth righteously: who His own self bare 
our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, be- 
ing dead to sins, should live unto righteousness ; by 
whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep 
going astray ; but are now returned unto the Shep- 
herd and Bishop of your souls. And in another 
place the apostle says : "Consider him that endured 
such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest 
ye be wearied and faint in your minds." Heb. 12 :3. 
And thus also the prophet utters his complaint for 
him saying: "I am a worm, and no man; a re- 
proach of men, and despised of the people. All 
they that see me laugh me to scorn : they shoot out 
the lip, they shake the head." Ps. 22:6, 7. In still 
another place Isaiah says : "He hath no form nor 
comeliness; and when we see him, there is no 
beauty that we should desire him. He is despised 
and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and ac- 
quainted with grief: and we hid, as it were, our 
faces from him .... He was oppressed and he 
was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is 
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his 
mouth." Isa. 53 :2, 3, 7. Besides this, my much be- 
loved sister in the Lord, consider Christ's entire 
life how He begun, lived, and ended it; you will 
find nothing but suffering, humiliation, misery and 
contempt, which He suffered for our sakes in hu- 
mility, so that the apostle says of the Lord, that in 
the days of His flesh He offered up prayers and 
supplications with strong crying and tears unto 
God who was able to save Him from death, and 
was heard because He honored God. Heb. 5 :7. 
Hence, my dear sister in the Lord, this beginning 
of the Christian life must abide with us unto the 
end, as said before, and we shall then also be par- 
takers of Him, and with all God's children inherit 
His kingdom through grace, for which reason He 
went hence to prepare us a place there, even as He 
says : "I go to your and my Father, to prepare a 
place for you ; and if I go, I will come again, and 
receive you unto myself ; that where I am, there ye 
may be also," John 20:17; 14:3. Therefore, my 
dear sister in the Lord, though our God does now 
hide His face from us for a little while, yet will 
He gather us again with everlasting kindness, as 
the prophet says : "I will lead you into mine house, 
and give you a place within my walls, and a name 
better than of sons and of daughters; yea, I will 
give you an everlasting name, that shall not be 
cut off. Yea, he will lay our stones with fair col- 


ors, and lay our foundations with sapphires, and 
will make our windows of crystal and our gates of 
carbuncles." Isa. 54:7, 8; 56:5; 54:11,12. "Yea, 
there is a city built," says John, "of pure gold, 
where, my very dear sister in the Lord, you shall 
see the King in his beauty, whose head is as the 
finest gold, and his locks are curled and black as a 
raven ; his eyes are as the eyes of doves ; his cheeks 
are as growing beds of spices of the apothecary ; 
his hands are as gold rings set with turquoises, his 
body is as pure ivory. His legs are as pillars of 
marble set upon sockets of gold; his mouth is 
sweet, and his word is lovely." Rev. 21 :18; Cant. 
5 :1 1-16. In short, we shall find more there, than it 
is possible to tell us or to describe. 

See, my dear sister in the Lord, such as our 
Friend and Bridegroom; hence rejoice, you be- 
trothed of the Lord, for He that has chosen you 
from among many thousands is fairer than all the 
children of men. 

Therefore, my dear sister in the Lord, adorn 
yourself with the fine linen of righteousness (Rev- 
elation 19:8) in honor of your Bridegroom until 
the days of tribulation shall be at an end, and the 
Lord shall turn again the captivity of Zion, and 
wipe away all tears from your eyes, and make per- 
fect our joy, so that for our mourning and sighing 
we shall sing as in the night of a glorious feast, and 
shall, with the hundred and fortv-four thousand 
virgins, that were redeemed from 'the earth, stand 
before the throne of God, having the name of our 
God written in our foreheads, having harps in our 
hands, and singing a new song. Rev. 7:4; 14:1-4. 

Behold, dear sister, this our enemies shall see 
and be confounded, who now say to us : "Where is 
your God?" Our eyes shall then behold them 
trodden down as mire in the streets, and be ashes 
under the feet of the righteous. Mai. 4 :3. Hence, 
dear sister in the Lord, let us be sincere in love, and 
obtain the victory in the Christian's conflict ; to him 
that overcometh He will give to eat of the tree of 
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. 
Rev. 2:7. This grant us the only wise God, the 
Father of grace and mercy, who alone has power 
inheaven and on earth, that we, justified through 
His grace, may become heirs of eternal life. Unto 
Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above 
all that we can ask or think, to Him alone be praise, 
glory and honor, forever and ever. Amen. Ephe- 
sians 3:20,21. 

Faithful is He, who also will do it, according to 
His promise ; for I am God, He says by the prophet 
Malachi, and change not, namely, in His promises. 
IThess. 5:24; Mai. 3:6. 

Herewith, my very dear and beloved sister in the 
Lord, I will commend you to the Lord, and to the 
rich Word of His grace. Adieu, adieu, if we should 
see each other's face no more in this world, yet I 
hope that we shall see each other in eternity with 
our God, where parting will be no more. Once 
more, adieu, and take my simple letter in good 
part, this I humbly pray : and if I have in anything 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


967 


written too little or too much, I beg you to excuse 
me for it. Herewith I cordially salute you and also 
my wife cordially greets you with the peace of the 
Lord; and Sander ijntgen, and another maiden 
from Zealand, named Magdaleentgen, also greet 
you most cordially. I ask you very kindly, my dear 
sister, let me have a letter from you, for this will 
be very welcome to me and more agreeable than I 
can write you. Farewell. 

By me your weak brother and servant, to the ut- 
most of my ability. 

G. Kleermaecker, v. s. b. 


A LETTER FROM SIJNTGEN VAN ROUSSELARE 

Grace and peace. Written at Antwerp, in prison, 
I, Sijntgen, who am unworthy, am imprisoned for 
the testimony of the Lord, and daily expecting my 
sentence ; the Lord grant us, that we may offer up 
our sacrifice to His praise and glory ; and to the sal- 
vation of our souls. Amen. 

The great grace and mercy of God the Father, 
and the great love of the Son, and the power of the 
Holy Ghost, confirm you, my very dear sister in 
the Lord, and us, unto the end, that we may be 
found worthy in the day of the Lord, through grace 
to receive the beautiful promises, when the Lord 
shall say : "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the founda- 
tion of the world." Oh, what great joy will then 
be prepared for us, if we only hold the beginning of 
the Christian life steadfast unto the end ; hereunto 
confirm us the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob, whose power is great, even 
as the prophet declares, that with His three fingers 
He encircles the whole earth ; and unto His name 
every knee must bow in heaven and earth, and 
every tongue must praise Him ; the Lord of hosts 
is His name, the Lord Sabaoth, the Mighty One in 
Israel, for whose name we are imprisoned here ; to 
Him alone be praise and glory, forever and ever. 
Amen. Isa. 40:12; 45:23; 54:5. 

For He has created and made heaven and earth 
out of nothing. This same bleeding, naked, cruci- 
fied Christ I wish you, my very dear sister in the 
Lord, as an affectionate and Christian greeting; 
may He keep and comfort you in all affliction that 
may come upon you and us for His name. After 
all loving and Christian salutation, I inform you, 
my dear lamb and sister in the Lord, that my 
mind is still determined (eternal praise and glory 
to the Lord for His grace) as it was when I un- 
worthily bowed my knees before the Lord, there- 
by showing that I desired to obey Him in every 
thing, in affliction as well as in joy, even as the 
apostle also admonishes us, that it is given unto us 
not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for 
Him. O my dear sister in the Lord, the servant is 
not above his Lord, nor the disciple above his mas- 
ter, and Christ has also told us : "The world shall 
rejoice, and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy." And further : "Ye shall 


weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice, but be 
of good cheer ; I have overcome the world." John 
16 :20, 33. And our faith is the victory that over- 
cometh the world, by which we must overcome 
princes and magistrates, through the grace of the 
Lord. I John 5 :4. O my dear sister in the Lord, 
it is true, we are here as sheep for the slaughter; 
but in all these things we are more than conquerors 
through Him that loved us, as the apostle says: 
"Who shall separate us from the love which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord? Shall tribulation, or dis- 
tress, or persecution, or peril, or sword? As is 
written." Rom. 8:35. 

O my dear lamb, He is such a faithful King 
whom we serve ; He will not forsake us but assist 
us in water, sword and fire: for He says by the 
prophet Isaiah: "Though a mother should for- 
sake her own child, yet will I not forsake thee, but 
keep thee as the apple of mine eye." Isa. 49:15; 
Zech. 2 :8. O my dear sister, this is for us a glori- 
ous comfort in our present tribulation, and dis- 
tress, which is temporal and light, says the apostle, 
and worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the 
things which are temporal, but at the things which 
are eternal ; for eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath it entered into the heart of man, the 
things that God hath prepared for them that love 
Him. II Cor. 4:17, 18; I Cor. 2:9. O my dear sis- 
er in the Lord, let us choose much rather to suf- 
fer affliction with the children of God, than to en- 
joy the pleasures of sin for a season, and let us es- 
teem the reproach of Christ great riches, and with 
the prophet David, much rather go into the holy 
sanctuary of the Lord, than in the path of the un- 
godly, for though he flourishes here, he must per- 
ish, for the wise man says that the hope of the un- 
godly is like dried thistledown. Wisd. 5:14. But 
we, dear sister in the Lord, have a sure hope; 
though here in the sight of the unwise we seem to 
die, we know that we shall live forever, for it is 
written: They that here sow in tears shall reap 
with everlasting joy and gladness, and bring their 
sheaves into God's garner. Wisd. 3:2; Ps. 126:5, 
6. O my dear sister in the Lord, when this mortal 
shall put on immortality, how gloriously we shall 
then be crowned with glorious joy, for then our joy 
shall not be taken from us. I Cor. 15 :53; II Esd. 
2 :45. O my dear lamb and sister in the Lord, let 
us freely trust in our King, for His promises will 
not fail, for He will not put us off, as do these car- 
nal lords, all of which passes away, but He will out 
of grace give us life eternal. 

O my sister in the Lord, my desire is, to go and 
rest under the altar, with all my dear brethren and 
sisters who freely delivered up their lives unto the 
death, and are resting under the altar ; I hope that 
we shall soon come to them, for we are of good 
courage here, by the grace of the Lord, to take, 
with Caleb and Joshua, the promised land. Though 
our enemies are many, we hope to devour them 
like bread, for we have overcome nearly all our en- 


968 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


emies, but now we have before us the greatest or 
last enemy, which is death, but we have a strong 
comfort, which is the God of Jacob, who gives us 
strength when the need is greatest ; though the bil- 
lows then come against us, we hope as David says, 
by our God to leap over a wall, and with Paul to 
say: "I can do all things through Christ, which 
strengtheneth me;" and we hope thus to press 
through, even as Christ says: Strive to enter in 
at straight gate, for narrow is the way which lead- 
eth unto eternal life. And Christ further says that 
the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the 
violent take it by force. Num. 14:9; I Cor. 15 :26; 
Ps. 18 :29 ; Phil. 4:13; Luke 13 :24 ; Matthew 7 :14 ; 
11:12. 

O my dear sister in the Lord, when flesh and 
blood must remain on the posts and stakes, then is 
the time of the severest conflict, for Satan also well 
knew to say this, when he tempted God-fearing 
Job. Job 2 :4, 5. When flesh and blood are touched, 
then the true faith is tried as gold in the furnace 
and then we must strive lawfully, to obtain through 
grace, the crown of eternal life, for it is written: 
Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I 
also will keep thee from the hour of temptation. 
And I will not blot out his name out of the book of 
life. He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed 
in white raiment, and I will make him a pillar in the 
temple of my God, and I will lead him to the foun- 
tain of living water. I Pet. 1:7; II Tim. 2 :5 ; I 
Cor. 9:25; Rev. 3:10, 5, 12. O my dear sister in 
the Lord, what glorious promises are given us, if 
we only endure steadfast unto the end. To this end, 
may the Lord grant us and you His grace, that we 
may help sing the new song in Zion, with the hun- 
dred and forty-four thousand, which were not de- 
filed with women: for they are virgins, because 
they did not commit whoredom with the daughters 
of Babylon. Rev. 14 :3, 4. Herewith I will commend 
you, my dear sister, to the Lord and to the Word 
of His grace, which is able to keep you and us unto 
eternal life. And I herewith take leave from you, 
and bid you adieu on this earth, till we meet where 
parting will be no more, where the streets are of 
pure gold, and the gates of pearls and precious 
stones. Rev. 21. Adieu, adieu, my dear sister in 
the Lord. Written by me, Sijntgen van Rousselare 
wife of Jeronymus, your weak sister in the Lord ; 
take my simple letter in good part, since it has been 
written out of true love; for my gift is not very 
great. And greet with the peace of the Lord, in my 
name your people where you live and all dear 
friends, known and unknown, especially your 
brother and sister Passchier my familiar acquaint- 
ances. My fellow prisoners greet your love cor- 
dially with the peace of the Lord. Pray the Lord 
heartily for us ; we will most gladly do the same for 
you according to our weak ability. And let us al- 
ways persevere steadfastly, that no one may take 
our crown, but that we may with the wise virgins 
enter into joyful rest. Amen. 

Sijntgen van Rousselare. 


FRANCOYS VAN LEUVEN, HANSKEN VAN OUDEN- 

AERDEN AND GRIETGEN VAN SLUYS, IN THE 

YEAR 1573 

In the year 1573, there were put to death at 
Ghent in Flanders, for the genuine faith of the 
truth, and for following Christ, Francoys van 
Leuven (the son of Willem van Leuven, separately 
mentioned in this book), the uncle of Jan Doom; 
Hansken van Oudenaerden, born at Geertsberge; 
and Grietgen van Sluys, born at Tielt, in Guelder- 
land. These were at said place, by the envious and 
bloodthirsty generation of Cain, and not of Judah, 
put to death most ignominiously, as not worthy to 
be tolerated upon the earth, not on account of any 
misdeed, but only because they, according to the 
command of the eternal God, had separated from 
this corrupt world, which lies in inhuman wicked- 
ness, and sought, according to their weak ability, 
to follow Christ in the regeneration; and as the 
light can have no fellowship with darkness, this 
tyranny was inflicted upon them by the rulers of 
darkness, because they held the genuine faith of 
the truth, and thus they became partakers of the 
sufferings of Christ, wherefore they shall also with 
Christ, when His glory shall be revealed, receive 
great joy and gladness, and enjoy the same for- 
ever. I Peter. 4:13. 


LIPPIJNTGEN STAYAERTS, SIJNTGEN BARNINGE, OR 
LAME SIJNTGEN, A. D. 1573 

In the same year there were imprisoned at 
Ghent, in Flanders, for the truth of the holy Gospel, 
Lippijntgen Stayaerts, a native of Ghent, and 
Sijntgen Barninge, called Lame Sijntgen, born at 
Kortrijck in Flanders. As these had also betaken 
themselves into the way of righteousness, under the 
banner of their only and eternal Shepherd Christ 
Jesus, the ministers of antichrist inflicted upon 
them the same treatment which their Captain Him- 
self had met with, and which He had also foretold 
and promised His followers : not to be loved and 
highly esteemed by the world but the very opposite, 
namely, hatred, tribulation, crosses, persecution 
and death. Thus it happened, after manifold trials 
and temptations which they suffered for Christ's 
sake, that they were sentenced to death by the 
rulers of darkness, and beheaded with the sword in 
the court's castle. And as Sijntgen was lame, she 
was carried upon the scaffold in a chair, and as she 
held up her folded hands rather high, a brother 
(named Natanael de Tollenaer, a brother of Joost 
de ToHenaer) cried: "Lamb, look out for your 
hands ;" and so they also cut off her two thumbs. 
Thus they did not love their lives unto death, but 
willingly delivered up their earthly house for the 
heavenly ; hence there is prepared for them a build- 
ing of God, a house which, in unspeakable glory, 
shall endure forever in heaven. II Corinthians 5 :1 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


969 


JACOB VAN DEN WEGE, A. D. 1573 

This Jacob van den Wege, born at Ronse, in 
Flanders, was a nephew of Mr. Claes, who was a 
colleague of the Dean of Ronse, in his time, prob- 
ably, the most prominent and zealous inquisitor and 
persecutor of the Christians in that country. As 
Jacob had come to the knowledge of the truth, 
and followed it with ardent love, he was on this 
account banished from all the dominions of the 
king of Spain, and had thus, as a fugitive, for more 
than seven years to subsist very meagerly, gaining 
a livelihood, and providing bread for his wife and 
children, by making chests or trunks. Much of the 
time he abode secretly with good friends, here and 
there in Flanders, as at Meenen, Halewijn and 
Wervick, whence, on account of the severe perse- 
cution under the Duke of Alva, and because he was 
also an exile, he went to work in a shop at Rijssel, 
which was three leagues from the former place. 

Having afterwards secretly taken up his resi- 
dence, with wife and children, at Ghent, it hap- 
pened at a certain time, that he went to the house 
of one Christoffel van Leuven, a minister of the 
Word of God, at the very time that the authorities 
of Ghent had sent to apprehend this Christoffel, 
and not finding him, they laid hands upon Jacob, 
taking him along and putting him into severe con- 
finement, in a tower, guarded, and secured with 
seven doors. There, lying in great fear and dis- 
tress, he earnestly called upon the Lord his God, 
in prayer, in spirit and in truth, that He would 
strengthen him therein, and graciously grant him 
help, of which he was then in great need, seeing 
many strong enemies assailed him ; for Satan, the 
envier of all that is good, exerted great power to 
make him apostatize from the Lord his God, not 
resting day or night, but very subtly going about 
him to lead his soul astray. The emissaries of Satan 
also approached him very craftily, with plausible 
speeches, as though they sought to comfort and en- 
lighten him ; but if he had listened to them, they 
would have murdered his soul, from which God 
preserved him. His wife and children also were 
to him a source of great temptation, for it was very 
hard for him to leave them, but for the Lord's 
sake it had to be done. 

After he had been imprisoned for a time and 
valiantly withstood many entreaties and torments, 
he was finally publicly burned, at Ghent, for living 
in accordance with the genuine truth, about three 
years after his brother Hans had been burned there 
for following Christ, as related before. 

We have added here the letters of this Jacob van 
den Wege, which have come into our hands, that 
the reader from them may see in what faith he 
stood and died. 


A LETTER FROM JACOB VAN DEN WEGE, WRITTEN 
TO HIS WIFE, IN THE BEGINNING OF HIS IM- 
PRISONMENT, AT GHENT, IN THE HUYS 
TER LUCHT, AT THE END OF THE 
MEULENAERS STREET 

O my most beloved under the sun, and my three 
children, who make my heart so faint that I scarce- 
ly know what I have in myself, for when I think of 
you, I am so sorely crushed with anguish in the 
press of affliction, that my eyes run over with tears, 
so that I only with difficulty can quiet myself. 

O my dear wife, and my three lambs, whom I 
love, how strong is love? how shall I be able to 
write you a parting letter ? for the waters of afflic- 
tion fill my eyes, and this through my infirmity, 
misery and great weakness. 

O my wife, I confess here before you and before 
all that read this, that I have written you here, far 
too feebly and miserably; neverthelees, the great 
anxiety and deep affliction, which rises from my 
strong love for you four, impelled me to it. But 
I hope that you will accept it from me for the sake 
of the truth; and, my dear wife, please hear my 
answer in regard to what you had asked me, as to 
what advice I would give you concerning the 
traveling. I say, I give you no advice with regard 
to it, since I do not know an opportunity at pres- 
ent; but I would most urgently entreat you, that, 
if it be possible for you to gain some sort of a live- 
lihood here, that you remain until the matter is 
decided with me one way or the other, and this for 
no other reason, but that I might still hear from 
you now and then, for a greeting from you is more 
precious to me than much silver or gold. And, my 
wife, please know, that Kalleken Meere, who is 
imprisoned with me, has made a bequest, namely, 
a shift, a necklace, a night neckerchief, and a hair- 
lace ; and Hijntgen also gives you a night necker- 
chief, a neck-cloth, and her best apron. This they 
give to you for their remembrance and testament ; 
after their death it is yours, and they cordially greet 
you with the peace of the Lord. Amen. 

Written in my bonds, by me, your dear husband 
and brother in the Lord. 

Jacob van den Wege. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JACOB VAN DEN WEGE, 
TO HIS WIFE, AND HIS BRETHREN AND SISTERS 

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, 
good will toward men. Luke 2:14. 

I, Jacob van den Wege, imprisoned for the in- 
vincible truth, wish my dear in God beloved wife 
and sister in the Lord, and my three innocent little 
children ; and further all brethren and sisters, and 
all my dear friends in the Lord, grace, peace, 
mercy, much true Christian wisdom and prudence, 
an understanding heart, a steadfast mind in the 
truth, a strong faith, a living hope, a good, peaceful 
conscience toward God and man, and an unblama- 
ble, holy conversation in all humility, meekness, 
kindness and unity, and all this in the true fear of 


970 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


God bound with the bond of love. This I wish you 
all from God the heavenly Father, through Jesus 
Christ His eternal, only, true Son, our Lord, to- 
gether with the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, 
as a cordial and affectionate greeting. Amen. 

After my simple, cordial salutation, my beloved 
wife, and all brethren and sisters, and further all 
my friends in the Lord, let me please inform you, 
that it is still well with me, and I am unchanged in 
the faith and knowledge of God, even as I was 
when I bowed my knees before the Most High, so 
I am minded ; and still stand through the grace of 
God, and the power of Christ, which strengthens 
me, to live or die with Christ in this same faith 
and truth. The Almighty Lord, who is able so to 
strengthen and confirm him that is miserable, weak, 
and without strength here in this conflict, to Him 
be praise, thanks, glory, and honor forever and 
ever, and this for all His great benefits which He 
has so abundantly shown me. So I trust that it is 
also very well with you, on which account I re- 
joiced, and thank God the Most High, for all His 
great goodness that He has shown you, and all this 
through His great mercy and love ; and I pray the 
same Almighty Lord and God of grace, to bless you 
all, and to fill you with all knowledge and spiritual 
wisdom and understanding, that you may walk 
worthily and fruitfully all the days of your life in 
holiness and righteousness, and receive the end of 
your faith, even the salvation of your souls. 

Let me further, please, tell my dear friends the 
reason why I have been so backward in writing, 
when you have so many times requested of me, 
that I should write to you. Hence I tell you, that 
I hardly dare write anything, and this because 
it is such a perilous time, so that people sometimes 
understand and construe a letter as they will, and 
not as the writer has meant it. Even as I have only 
too much known this to be the case, and it has even 
happened to me, in my simple writing. Not that 
I mean that I am above criticism ; God forbid ! but 
I say that some people find fault not only with the 
letters of simple prisoners, but sometimes also with 
the holy Scripture; and since I also know myself 
far too simple and ignorant, to write anything prof- 
itable for your exhortation, therefore I have always 
refused them that requested it of me, and have thus 
far put it off. And were it not for my innocent little 
children, who today understand neither good nor 
evil, I should not have written much yet ; but they 
constrain me to write now, in order that when they 
come to the years of understanding through the 
grace of God, and I shall then have been taken from 
them, the same might then teach them of my faith, 
and instruct them in righteousness and the knowl- 
edge of God, in the fear of the Lord, and in all 
obedience. And since I must walk the way, and 
obey the vocation in which I am called, and I can 
then not admonish them with my lips, I write and 
leave them this much for a treasure and testament ; 
for gold or silver I cannot give them, but such as 
God has given me, which is little, but yet more than 


I am worthy of; this I leave them for an exhorta- 
tion, that they may also know most assuredly and 
certainly by my own writing, in what doctrine and 
faith I died, and that I did not suffer for any mis- 
deed or wickedness, or heresy, as one that follows 
his own mind and purpose (though I am called a 
heretic by this evil generation, who imagine that 
they are pure, and are yet not washed from their 
filth; but their railing is no proof, and their cal- 
umny is untruth) ; for I well know and am sure 
that all who follow their own mind and purpose do 
not keep God's commandments : for the Scriptures 
teach us, that we must be spiritually minded, as 
Jesus Christ was, that we must be obedient and 
deny ourselves, yea, utterly and completely re- 
nounce our own will, and bow ourselves under the 
Word and the mighty hand of God, which Word is 
like a fire, and like a hammer that breaketh the 
rock in pieces, yea, as a two-edged sword, which 
shall judge men in the last day. Rom. 8 :6 ; Philip- 
pians 2:5; Matt. 16:24; 6:10; I Pet. 5:6; Jere- 
miah 23:29; Rev. 1 :16; John 12:48. Hence I saj 
that I have submitted myself, to obey the same with 
all my power and ability, to suffer myself to be in- 
structed by it, to believe what the Scriptures say ; 
for I believe all that is written in the law and the 
prophets, both in the Old and the New Testaments ; 
and have hope toward God, for which the prophets 
themselves waited, namely, that there shall be a 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and un- 
just; and herein do I exercise myself, always to 
have a conscience void of offense toward God and 
toward men (Acts 24:14-16) ; thus my faith which 
God has given me, is as the Word of God, and like 
the Scriptures, as here briefly follows : 

In the first place, I believe and confess one only, 
eternal, Almighty God the Father, of whom are all 
things. Him I confess to be a living God, who cre- 
ated and made heaven, earth, the sea, and all that 
in them is, even as both the Old and New Testa- 
ments highly extol and worship Him in His wor- 
thiness ; as an invisible and immortal God, a God of 
gods, a Lord above all lords, a great God, mighty 
and most terrible, who sits upon His throne, a Lord 
unto whom there is none like, for He is higher 
than the heavens, deeper than hell, longer than the 
earth, and wider than the sea, as He Himself by 
the prophet says : "The heaven is my throne, and 
the earth is my footstool." Rightly has Jeremiah 
said : "Thou great and mighty God, the Lord of 
hosts, is thy name ; great in counsel, and mighty in 
work. For behold, the heaven and heaven of heav- 
ens can not contain him." Hence I also say, that a 
creature cannot comprehend the Creator, but I con- 
fess Him to be a holy, true, gracious, merciful, 
but also a severe, righteous and just God, before 
whom alone we must tremble and fear, fall down 
and worship, and love and obey Him; who shall 
render unto every one according to His works, 
whether they be good or bad, either salvation or 
damnation. Mark 12:29; Isa. 40:28; Gen. 17:1 - 
I Cor. 8:6; Gen. 1 ; John 1 :18; I Tim. 6:16; De'ut! 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


971 


10:17; Ps. 139:8; Isa. 66:1; Jer. 32:19; I Kings 
8:27; Lev. 19:2; Ps. 7:11; Matt. 4:10; II Cor. 
5:10. 

In the second place, I confess and believe in 
Jesus Christ, God's only, own, true Son, our Lord, 
who was with the Father from the beginning and 
from everlasting, whom the Father has imbued 
with His real presence, and expressly set forth the 
same in Him, as is everywhere fundamentally con- 
tained and declared in the Scriptures ; so that He is 
the image of the eternal light, the immaculate re- 
flection of the divine glory, and the likeness or im- 
age of His being. So that when He was in the 
form of God, He was glorified as God, yea, the 
wisdom and Word of God Himself, in whom alone 
was life, the firstborn of every creature, invisible, 
impassable, and immortal, through whom all things 
were created and made ; He is before all, and all is 
in Him, so that He is Alpha and Omega, the be- 
ginning and the ending, the first and the last, who 
is, and who was, and who is to come ; even thus do 
I confess the Son of God in His divinity as the 
eternal true Son of God, true God with the Father, 
equal with Him in glory, brightness, power, will, 
and providence. John 3:16; Rom. 8 :32 ; Mic. 5 :2 ; 
Col. 1 :1S; II Cor. 4:4; Phil 2:6; John 1 :4; Col. 
1:15; Rev. 1:8, 17; John 17:21. 

But when the man Adam, by transgressing the 
commandment, had sinned, and through sin, be- 
cause of God's strict justice, was, with all his pos- 
terity, under the sentence of eternal death, God, 
kindled with compassion and fervent love, com- 
forted the miserable, sorrowful Adam and prom- 
ised to man His only Son, or eternal Word, by 
which all things were made, yea, Adam himself 
having first been created after His own likeness ; 
He promised him, that he should be redeemed and 
saved by that same Word. This promise God also 
made for consolation, to many ancient fathers, as 
patriarchs, prophets and servants of God, by beau- 
tiful figures and shadows, for a Redeemer and 
Saviour of the world, especially of those that be- 
lieve. When the time and all promises were ful- 
filled, God sent His Son, born of a woman named 
Mary, who was espoused to a man named Joseph, 
of the house of David. This virgin conceived of 
the Holy Ghost, even as God had foreordained, and 
spoke by Isaiah saying "Behold, a virgin shall 
conceive, and bear a son." Yes, she conceived of 
the Holy Ghost, and through the power of the 
Most High it became flesh in her, that is man, like 
unto us in all things, sin excepted. Namely, He 
that was previously invisible, became visible; He 
that was immortal, became mortal; and He that 
enjoyed great riches of glory, was glorified as God, 
yea, was Himself true God, the same forsook His 
riches, glory and brightness for a little while, and 
became like unto other men, and was found in 
fashion as a man: so that He was both true God 
and man, and was put under the law to redeem 
them that were under the law. Gen. 3; Romans 
5:18; Jer. 33:14; Deut. 18:15; I Tim. 4:10; Gal. 


4:4; Matt. 1:25, 20; Isa. 7:14; John 1:14; Heb. 
2:17; 5:2; John 17:5; Phil. 2:7, 8; Gal. 4:5. 

Thus I confess with the apostle, that the eternal 
Word of the Father, in whom alone was the light 
and the life of men, became flesh, and dwelt upon 
the earth, and they beheld His glory, the glory as 
of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace 
and truth. Even as John testifies and says : "That 
which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which 
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, 
of the Word of life ; (for the life was manifested, 
and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew 
unto you that eternal life, which was with the Fa- 
ther, and was manifested unto us;) that which we 
have seen and heard declare we unto you. And 
their testimony is true. Hence I confess from these 
words, and other Scriptures, that Jesus Christ is 
come in the flesh, who is over all, God blessed for- 
ever. Yea, God was manifest in the flesh, justified 
in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the 
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into 
glory." John 1:4, 14; I John 1:1-3; John 17:3; 
I John 4:2; Rom. 9:5; I Tim. 3:16. 

Thus I believe that the true Messias did come, 
whom God had promised to the believing fathers ; 
for Abraham received the true promised seed of 
Christ, in whom he and all the nations upon earth 
are blessed. And this beautiful Morning Star rose 
out of Jacob, and hath shined in our hearts, to give 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in 
the face of Jesus Christ. Judah received his Shiloh 
or Deliverer, and Moses his Prophet. He was born 
in the city and of the lineage of David, and called 
the Son of the Highest, yea, Israel and Judah be- 
held themselves their Lord, King, Saviour, and 
God, and the arm of the Lord reigned with power 
and He taught men, not only as a true messenger, 
but also as a lover of life, and a faithful steward, 
the Word of His Father, which He Himself had 
first heard and seen from His Father, and which 
He proved and confirmed with very many mighty 
signs, and ultimately sealed with His precious 
blood, when He took upon Him our sin and trans- 
gression, and had to restore that which He had not 
taken away; who did no sin, neither was guile 
found in His mouth. Of Him Isaiah says : "He hath 
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, and he 
was wounded for our transgressions, he was 
bruised for our iniquities : the chastisement of our 
peace was upon him ; and with his stripes we are 
healed." And He died for us an ignominious death 
on the tree of the cross, when we were yet enemies. 
He was buried, and raised again the third day ac- 
cording to the Scriptures, for our justification, and 
after His resurrection, as an almighty, victorious 
prince and potentate in heaven and earth, He again 
taught His apostles, to observe all things whatso- 
ever He had commanded them. He then ascended 
up on high, and sat down at the right hand of His 
Father in heaven, far above all principality, and 
power, and might, and dominion, and every name 


972 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


that is named, not only in this world, but: also in 
that which is to come. And He is our Mediator, 
Intercessor, Advocate, Mercy-seat, Reconciler and 
High Priest, to make reconciliation for the sins of 
the people; for in that He Himself hath suffered 
being tempted, He is able to succor them that are 
tempted, and can have compassion on our weak- 
ness, wherefore He is able also to save them ever- 
more that come unto God by Him. John 4:25; 
Gen. 22:18; Gal. 3:16; Num. 24:17; II Cor. 4:6; 
Gen. 49:10; Deut. 18:15; Luke 2:4; John 12:49; 
Heb. 9; I Pet. 2:24; Ps. 69:4; I Pet. 2:22; Isa. 
53:4, 5 ; Rom. 5 :10; I Cor. 15 :4; Rom. 4:25 ; Matt. 
28:18,20; Eph. 1:20,21; Rom. 8:34; Heb. 2:17, 
18; 5:2; 7:25. 

In short, I believe and confess that Jesus Christ 
was sent by God, and that God testified of Him, 
that He is His Son. Now, he that believeth on the 
Son of God hath the witness in himself : he that be- 
lieveth not God hath made Him a liar ; because he 
believeth not the record that God gave of His Son. 
And this is the record, that God hath given to us 
eternal life, and this life is in His Son. He that hath 
the Son hath life ; and he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not the life, but the wrath of God abideth 
on him. But I confess with John, that the Son of 
God is come, and hath given us an understanding, 
that we may know Him that is true, and we are in 
Him that is true, even in His Son Jesus Christ. 
This is the true God, and eternal life. This is the 
first and the last, which was dead, and is alive, and 
liveth now for evermore. Little children, keep 
yourselves from idols, especially Adamitic crea- 
tures that are highly esteemed by the world. Amen. 
Matt. 3:17; I John 5:10-12; John 3:36; I John 
5:20,21; Rev. 1:11,18. 

In the third place, I believe in the Holy Ghost, 
who is an eternal Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, 
which Spirit I confess to belong to both the Father 
and the Son, proceeding from the Father through 
the Son. This Spirit God by the prophets promised 
to pour out upon all flesh, which promise He ef- 
fectually fulfilled in the apostles, and in their time, 
and the same is still poured out, and will be poured 
out, upon all believing, regenerate children of 
God, for the consolation of their consciences sor- 
rowing after a godly manner and to seal them unto 
the day of reconciliation, to distribute unto every 
one spiritual gifts, according to His good pleasure. 
By the same we cry, Abba Father ; for the same 
Spirit beareth witness with our spirit that we are 
the children of God, even as Paul says, which is the 
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of 
the purchased possession, unto the praise of His 
glory; by which Spirit also the prophets spake 
from the beginning of the world, and prophesied 
in a mystery the treasures of wisdom and the 
knowledge of God, but now made manifest by the 
appearing of our Saviour, Jesus Christ, who hath 
abolished death, and hath brought life and immor- 
tality to light through the Gospel, whereunto Paul 
was appointed a preacher, and apostle, and teacher 
of the Gentiles, and all this according to the com- 


mandment of the everlasting God, made known to 
all nations for the obedience of faith. All these 
things Paul and all holy men did and spake as 
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. I therefore 
believe and confess the Father as the Creator of all 
things, through His Son or Word; and Jesus 
Christ as the Son of God, who redeemed us, and 
bought us with His precious blood ; and the Holy 
Ghost as a mighty operation of the Most High, 
in all truly regenerated and believing children of 
God. These three I confess to be one only, eternal, 
almighty, living God, who have one purpose, one 
counsel, one will, one work together in all eternity. 
As John writes, that there are three that bear rec- 
ord in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy 
Ghost: and these three are one. To this only, 
eternal, almighty, living God, who is incompre- 
hensible, unsearchable, and indescribable, alone be 
praise, honor, wisdom, thanks, glory, power, and 
strength, forever and ever. Amen. John 14-17- 
Isa. 44:3; Joel 2:28; Acts 2:3; Eph. 1:13; Tit 
3:5; Gal. 3:26; II Cor. 7:9; Eph. 4:30; Rom. 
8:15, 16; II Cor. 1 :22; Eph. 1 :14; II Pet. 1 :21 ; 
II Tim. 1 :10, 11 ; I Tim. 2:7; Rom. 16:25; Gen. 
1 :1 ; John 1 :3, 12; Mark 12 :29; I John 5 :7 ; Rom. 
11:33. 

In the fourth place, I also believe all that this 
only God spake by His holy prophets and apostles, 
and He Himself declared and taught with His own 
mouth ; and confess from this same teaching of the 
Gospel, a holy Christian church, which is the com- 
munion of the saints, and congregation of the be- 
"evers, new creatures, and children of God, which 
children are bound together in unity and peace with 
the bond of love, and baptized into one Spirit and 
body, as Paul says ; for they confess one Lord, one 
faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who 
is above all, and through all, and in us all. They 
have the mind which was in Jesus Christ, and look 
not at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen, for their conversation is in 
heaven ; hence they are also the temple of the living 
God, in which God dwells with His Holy Spirit, 
which Spirit assures them, that they are the chil- 
dren of God, and are justified by faith, and wait for 
all the promises of God. These have the forgive- 
ness of sins, and redemption through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Amen. Acts 24:14; I Cor 12-13- 
II Cor. 5:17; Eph. 4:5,6; Phil. 2:5; II Cor. 4:18 1 
Phil. 3:20; II Cor. 6:16; Rom. 8:16; Eph. 1 :7. 

In the fifth place, I further confess from the holy 
Scriptures, or Word of God, a baptism, both in- 
ward and outward. Inwardly, as Christ says, with 
the Holy Ghost and with fire ; and outwardly, with 
water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son 
and of the Holy Ghost, in token of all that has 
taken place within, as Paul says, that it is a burial 
of sin, and also a washing of regeneration. If it 
then be a burial of sin, and a washing of regenera- 
tion, as it also is, it is a vain baptism which is used 
on infants, for infants, though they are born of sin- 
ful seed, have never practiced sin, and do not know 
it, since they understand neither good nor evil ; and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


973 


if they have never committed nor known sin, bap- 
tism, which is a burial of sin, can not rightly be 
used on them. And so they can also not be regen- 
erated, since they are pure through Christ and still 
in their first birth; hence, too, baptism does not 
belong to them, since it is a washing of regenera- 
tion : but I say that they are cleansed and redeemed 
through Christ, as Christ Himself says: "Suffer 
little children, and forbid them not, to come unto 
me; for of such is the kingdom of heaven." Acts 
1 :5 ; Matt. 3:11 ; 28:19; Rom. 6:4; Ps. 51 :5 ; Deut. 
1 :39 ; Rev. 1 :5 ; I John 1 :7 ; Col. 1:14; Matt. 19 : 
14. 

But when men grow up, and have attained their 
years, the heart, as Jeremiah says, is deceitful above 
all things, and desperately wicked. Hence there 
dwells no good thing in the flesh, but it departs 
from the Lord in every respect, since through evil 
lusts and desires the flesh is impelled to all wicked- 
ness and sin, whereby they often go astray and sin, 
because they have little or no right instruction; 
hence they lose Christ's death and merits, under 
which grace they were when they were first born. 
Men must therefore, according to the Scriptures, 
through the power of the divine Word, be taught 
to know sin; that sin and all unrighteousness are 
sin ; and they must be exhorted to repentance and 
amendment, that denying ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, they should live soberly, righteously, and 
godly, in this present world; and to become new 
creatures, and regenerated children of God by 
faith, for we cannot see, nor enter into, the king- 
dom of God, except we be renewed and born again 
of water and of the Spirit. Which Spirit in the 
Scriptures is called water as well eis Spirit, even as 
God spake by the prophet Joel, saying: "I will 
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh," that is, upon all 
generations or nations, namely that have become 
lowly in spirit and contrite in heart, and believe in 
God. Which faith, as Paul says, cometh by hearing 
the word of God. Hence I confess, that men must 
first be taught, that they bring forth genuine fruits 
of repentance, believe in Christ, and then be bap- 
tized upon their faith, as Christ Himself ordained 
this, and commanded His apostles, saying : "Go ye 
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded you." And in the 
sixteenth chapter of Mark, he says: "Go and 
preach the Gospel to every creature." He that be- 
lieveth and is baptized shall be saved ; but he that 
believeth not shall be damned. And the apostles 
did as they were commanded, as we may read in 
the Acts of the Apostles, and in their epistles : they 
first taught, and then baptized all the God-fearing 
with water, in the name of the Lord, they that 
hearkened to their words and believed in the Son 
of God received baptism, and this for a burial of sin 
and washing of regeneration, for a fulfillment of 
all righteousness and the answer of a good con- 
science toward God, for a covenant to live in holi- 


ness and righteousness, and for an entrance into 
and uniting with the body of Christ, which is 
the church of God ; for by one Spirit we are all bap- 
tized into one body, as Paul says : "Ye are all the 
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as 
many of you as have been baptized into Christ have 
put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, 
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male 
nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." 
Jer. 17:9; Rom. 7:18; Gal. 5:17; II Tim. 3:16; 
I John 3:4; Tit. 2:12; II Cor. 5:17; I Pet. 1:23; 
Gal. 3:26; John 3:3, 5; Isa. 44:3; Joel 2:28; Isa. 
57:15; Acts 16:34; Rom. 10:17; Acts 2:38; 16:31; 
Matt. 28:19,20; Mark 16:15, 16; Acts 2; 16:14; 
2 :41 ; 8 :12 ; Matt. 3:15; I Pet. 3 :21 ; Luke 1 :75 ; 
I Cor. 12:13; Gal. 3:26-28. 

In the sixth place, I further confess from the 
Word of God, a true Supper, with bread and wine, 
by which we are to show Christ's sufferings, and 
His death, and also to remember the new cove- 
nant, or testament, which He made with His peo- 
ple, and sealed and confirmed with His blood. Even 
as Christ Himself instituted the same, and observed 
it with His apostles, as is written: "That Christ 
the same night in which he was betrayed, took 
bread : and when he had given thanks, he brake it, 
and said, Take, eat ; this is my body, which is bro- 
ken for you : this do in remembrance of me. After 
the same manner also he took the cup, when he 
had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament 
in my blood, which is shed for many : this do in re- 
membrance of me." But all that are to eat this ex- 
ternal bread, and to drink the wine, truly in remem- 
brance of Him, must first be renewed and changed 
by the Word of God, so that they must be lowly of 
spirit and contrite in heart, and truly confess Christ 
Jesus by faith, that He alone is their Redeemer and 
Saviour ; and they must have love, unity and peace 
with one another, and must be sanctified through 
the Holy Spirit, and assured in their conscience by 
faith, that they are the children of God, and heirs, 
who through grace shall be partakers of Christ's 
great benefits, as, His merits, death and blood, for 
His suffering is our rejoicing, and His death is our 
life, as Paul says : "That he has reconciled us in the 
body of his flesh through death, to present us holy 
and unblamable and unreprovable ; and made peace 
through the blood of his cross, by himself." And 
hence they are to examine themselves, as Paul says, 
and so eat of the bread, and drink of the cup ; for 
he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and 
drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the 
Lord's body. Hence Paul says : "The cup of bless- 
ing which we bless, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it 
not the communion of the body of Christ ? For we 
being many are one bread, and one body : for we 
are all partakers of that one bread. Behold Israel 
after the flesh : are not they which eat of the sacri- 
fices partakers of the altar?" Thus the communion 
of the body and the blood of Christ must be in us, 
and he that so examines himself, and through the 


974 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Holy Spirit finds in his conscience, that he is an 
heir of the great benefits of Christ, and a member 
of His body, he may indeed use the memorials of 
bread and wir * with regard to it, as Christ says : 
"This do in : membrance of me," and Paul says : 
"As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, 
ye do shew the Lord's death till he come." Mat- 
thew 26:26; I Cor. 11 :23; Heb. 9:12; Luke 22:19; 
Matt. 11:29; Col. 1:14; Matt. 1:21; Rom. 8:16, 
17; Col. 1 :20-22; Eph. 2:13; I Cor. 11 :28,29; 10: 
16-18; Rom. 12:5; I Cor. 11:26. 

In the seventh place, I further confess a true 
Christian excommunication, which is an excluding 
or binding of the disobedient sinner, and a releasing 
or loosing of the obedient penitent, even as Christ 
wisely instituted and effectually taught the same, 
and His apostles thoroughly expounded, used and 
also taught it, as Christ spake to the apostle, say- 
ing : "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom 
of heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 
And he also says: "If thy hand offend thee, cut it 
off, and cast it from thee : it is better to have only 
one hand, and enter into life eternal, than having 
two hands to be cast into everlasting fire." And 
the same he also says in regard to the foot and the 
eye. Matt. 18:18; 16:19; 5:30; 18:8. 

But though Christ taught His apostles all this, 
we do not find it written, that the ordinance was 
used in Christ's time by any disciple, with regard 
to those who having transgressed or apostatized, 
caused offenses ; and this because of the law, which 
came to an end in the death of Christ, and because 
the body was not yet perfect, and the temple of the 
Lord not yet complete, since they were yet very ig- 
norant, and in many matters not fully instructed, as 
Christ says to them : "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit 
when he, the Spirit of truth is come he will guide 
you into all truth." Which spirit they must receive, 
before they could bind or release any one with the 
key (which is the Word and Spirit of God), as 
Christ also indicates with these words, when He 
breathed on them, and said : "Receive ye the Holy 
Ghost : whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitt- 
ed unto them ; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they 
are retained." Not that Christ gave the apostles au- 
thority, to forgive or to retain any one's sins con- 
trary to His Word, and thus to govern the church 
according to their will. No ; God forbid ! They had 
to act without respect to persons, even though it 
had been their right hand — retain the sins of those 
who according to the Word of God were under the 
wrath of God, and proclaim grace and peace to the 
penitent, who according to the same word were un- 
der the grace of God ; and thus Christ appointed 
unto them the kingdom as His Father had ap- 
pointed it unto Him. Rom. 10:4; John 16:12, 13; 
20:22,23; Luke 22:29. 

But I repeat it, though Christ had so appointed 
and taught it to them, yet, according to my view, 


they had then neither a command nor authority to 
use the same, as already said, before Christ had 
ascended up to heaven, having sent them forth, to 
preach the Gospel in all the world, to every crea- 
ture, teaching to observe whatsoever He had com- 
manded them. They also had to tarry in Jeru- 
salem, until they were endued with power from on 
high, and had received the promise of the Father, 
which was the Holy Ghost, who was their teacher 
and power, whereby they proceeded in this prac- 
tice. And when the body was perfect, and the tem- 
ple of the living God complete, in which God dwelt 
with His Spirit, the apostle effectually taught 
Christ's institution and ordinance of excommuni- 
cation, and also used it, as we may read, how the 
apostle delivered Hymeneus and Alexander unto 
Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. 
And so he also punished the Corinthian fornicator, 
concerning whom he had determined, when they 
were gathered together, and his spirit, with the 
power of Christ, to deliver him unto Satan, for the 
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be 
saved. Since the Corinthian church was very slack 
in regard to using this excommunication in the case 
of him that had done that deed, therefore he re- 
proved them with severe words, as we may read in 
the second epistle to the Corinthians, chapters 12 
and 13. As he also wrote to them, that a little 
leaven leaveneth the whole lump, therefore he 
says : "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a 
new lump." And thus Paul used excommunica- 
tion, and also would have it used, even as he writes 
to the Thessalonians, saying : "We command you, 
brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother 
that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition 
which he received of us." For in this epistle he had 
written to the Corinthians, not to company with 
fornicators, and since they did not observe it, or 
perhaps not well understand it, he explained it to 
them more fully, and said: "Yet not altogether 
with the fornicators of this world, or with the 
covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for 
then must we needs go out of the world. But now 
I have written unto you not to keep company, if 
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or 
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, 
or an extortioner; with such a one no not to eat." 
And thus I confess that such carnal men, who thus 
sin against God, are, according to the ordinance of 
Christ, with the Word of God, as Paul has ex- 
plained this thus, to be excommunicated and ex- 
cluded from the church, and that we are also not to 
company with them, as the apostle says: "If any 
man obey not our word, signify that man by an 
epistle, and have no company with him, that he 
may be ashamed" or think with himself, that for 
his presumptuousness and transgression he is de- 
livered unto Satan (whom he obediently served ac- 
cording to his will, and also hearkened to for the 
sake of sin,) for the destruction of the flesh, which 
before the fall lived and desired to live in sin ; that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


975 


he may be ashamed, may humble himself, repent 
truly, and thus die unto sin, and the spirit be saved 
in the day of our Lord. For as the Word of God 
has power to excommunicate the presumptuous 
transgressor, so it has also power to teach and to 
avoid the excommunicated person, since excommu- 
nication is ineffectual without avoidance. And as 
excommunication and avoidance are thoroughly 
taught in the Scriptures, I confess both, since also 
Paul excommunicated, and also taught, to put away 
him that doeth evil, and says: "Keep not com- 
pany with them; with such [as he there specifies] 
ye shall not eat." Even as he also says concerning 
a man that is a heretic: "When ye have once or 
twice admonished him, reject him, knowing that he 
that is such, is subverted, and sinneth, being con- 
demned of himself. For such cause contention and 
offenses, and their words eat as doth a canker;" 
hence the church is to avoid them, lest she be leav- 
ened or corrupted by them. Matt. 28:20; Luke 
24:49; Acts 1:8; I Tim. 1 :20; I Cor. 5 ; Gal. 5 :9 ; 
II Thess. 3:6,14; Tit. 3:10, 11; Rom. 16:17; I 
Tim. 2:17. 

Let the reader be informed that Jacob van den 
Wege, the writer of the preceding letter, owing to 
want of opportunity did not further carry out or 
write down the articles of faith, though he was suf- 
ficiently informed in all, and continued therein 
steadfastly unto death. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JACOB VAN DEN WEGE, 
WRITTEN IN HIS BONDS, TO OTHER PRISONERS 

The unfathomable abundant grace and mercy of 
God the heavenly Father, the peace, holiness and 
merits of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, 
and the joy, comfort and power of the Holy Ghost. 
This only, eternal and Almighty God, who alone is 
holy and good, grant you, my dear and most affec- 
tionate beloved sisters in the Lord, who are now 
imprisoned for the testimony of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, this my salutation, yea, the Lord grant it to 
you through His great goodness and benevolence ; 
this I wish you from the depth of my heart, as an 
affectionate and cordial greeting. Amen. 

Further, after all unfeigned Christian salutation, 
let my dear sisters in the Lord, please, be informed, 
that we three prisoners, who now are also in bonds, 
in Ghent, in the count's castle, for the testimony 
and doctrine of our Saviour Jesus Christ, are still 
of good cheer, and not changed in the least in our 
purpose to suffer with Christ, and to strive for the 
truth. And we are also ready not only to endure 
poverty, reproach, imprisonment, and bonds, but 
also to die for the name of the Lord, if it be His 
pleasure; and all this by His great and mighty 
power, with which He strengthens us through His 
great grace; to Him be praise, thanks and glory 
forever. 

From your letter I also understood that it is still 
well with you four, on account of which I and my 
fellow prisoners were much rejoiced, and I pray 


God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has 
chosen us hereunto from our birth, and through 
His great mercy and love has given us His abun- 
dant grace, that He would keep and strengthen us 
unto the end with His Holy Spirit, that His name 
may be praised and honored forever through us 
all, for the edification of our neighbor, and the sal- 
vation of our souls. O my dearly beloved sisters 
in the Lord, let us continue steadfastly, and take 
good heed, that we do not neglect the grace of God 
which He has so faithfully shown us, but well im- 
prove it, for through neglect one may soon lose that 
for which he has labored so long, and then it is 
sometimes very difficult to find it again. Hence I 
say, let us take good heed, and hold fast that which 
we have, that no one take our crown. For if we 
continue steadfast in that which we have, we shall 
without any doubt be saved through the grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 12:15; Rev. 3:11; 
Matt. 10:22; Acts 15 :11. And to this end (name- 
ly, to be saved) we have already begun; may God 
grant us strength, that we may be able to carry it 
out to His praise and to the salvation of our souls. 
For God knows, that on earth we seek no other 
riches or honor, than the honor of His name and 
the salvation of our souls, for which salvation we 
now with great patience endure here so much af- 
fliction amidst sorrowing and sighing (all of which 
rises from reproach and imprisonment), together 
with manifold conflicts and temptations. 

But, my most beloved, let us not become de- 
spondent in tribulation and affliction, nor let us 
think it strange as though some strange thing hap- 
pened unto us, for from the beginning of the world 
the righteous had to suffer ; but let us rejoice here- 
in that we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, well 
knowing that if we suffer with Him, we shall also 
reign with Him. I Pet. 4:12, 13; II Tim. 2:12. 
For Paul says, that it is given unto us, not only to 
believe on Christ, but also to suffer for His sake ; 
for we must through much tribulation and afflic- 
tion enter into the kingdom of heaven. Phil. 1 :29 ; 
Acts 14:22. But the sufferings of this world are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed in us, who look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which are not 
seen, for eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man, the things 
which God hath prepared for them who love Him 
and keep His commandments; but He hath re- 
vealed them unto us by His Spirit. Rom. 8:18; II 
Cor. 4:18; I Cor. 2:9, 10. Hence, my dear sisters, 
we ought to be comforted by these promises, and 
work with a joyful heart in the vineyard of the 
Lord, patiently endure the heat of the sun, and 
not fear what man shall do unto us, for we know, 
and are sure through our faith, that if they kill our 
body, our Redeemer liveth, and that He shall here- 
after raise us up from the earth, and then we shall 
in our flesh see God; our eyes shall behold Him 
and not another. Job 19:25. And Paul says, that 
we look for the Saviour, Jesus Christ, who shall 


976 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


change our vile body, that He may fashion it like 
unto His glorious body. Phil. 3:20,21. Then 
shall we be caught up in the air to meet Him, to in- 
herit eternal life, and then shall He fill our hearts 
with joy, and comfort us, and make us glad after 
our tribulation, shall wipe our tears from our eyes, 
and shall reward our labor, for sorrow and mourn- 
ing shall flee away from us, and everlasting joy 
shall be upon our heads. I Thess. 4:17; Rev. 7:17; 
Isaiah 51:11. Yea, all this shall happen to us 
through His great grace and if we firmly persevere 
and take good heed, and abide steadfast unto the 
end in that which we have, we shall be saved. 
Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, that He 
will keep you my dear sisters in the Lord, with the 
strong power of His Holy Spirit. And take my 
brief unfeigned letter in good part, for I had al- 
most not written you at all, because of my ignor- 
ance and simplicity; but through your request I 
dared not forbear. 

Written with my own hand, on the last day of 
April. Farewell. Amen. My fellow prisoners also 
greet you most cordially with the peace of the Lord. 
By me. 

Jacob van den Wege. 


ANOTHER LETTER BY JACOB VAN DEN WEGE 

I Jacob, imprisoned for the name of the Lord our 
God, grace, peace, mercy and love from God our 
heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, His only 
Son our Lord, who delivered Himself up for our 
sins, when we were yet enemies, that He might re- 
deem us from this present evil world, and purify 
unto Himself a people zealous of all good works. 
Rom. 5:10; Gal. 1 :4; Tit. 2:14. This I wish my 
dear sister in the Lord as an affectionate greeting. 
Amen. 

After salutation, my dearly beloved sister in the 
Lord, even as we are both born of one mother ac- 
cording to the flesh, so I hope that according to the 
spirit we are also born of one God, for we confess, 
and believe in one eternal God, Creator of all things 
and by faith He has regenerated us with the Word 
of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of 
His creatures, as the apostle says: "Whosoever 
believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: 
and every one that loveth him that begat, loveth 
also him that is begotten of him." Therefore, he 
that loveth God, and is begotten of Him, must love 
the brethren, for he that loveth not his brother 
abideth in death, and whosoever hateth his brother 
is a murderer ; and ye know that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in him. James 1:18; I John 
5:1; 3:14, 15. Hence Peter says: "Purify your 
souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto 
unfeigned love of the brethren, being born again, 
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by 
the word of God, which liveth and abideth for- 
ever." I Peter 1 :22, 23. As also Paul says : "Be 
ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; 
and walk in love as Christ also hath loved us, and 


hath given himself for us, an offering and a sac- 
rifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor." Eph. 
5:1, 2. My dear sister, put on therefore, as the 
elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, 
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuf- 
fering ; forbearing one another, and forgiving one 
another, if any man have a quarrel against any: 
even as Christ forgave you so also do ye. And 
above all these things put on charity, which is the 
bond of perfectness. And let the peace of God rule 
in your hearts, and be ye thankful. Let the word 
of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom ; teach- 
ing and admonishing one another in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in 
your hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever ye do 
in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord 
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by 
Him. Col. 3:12-17. 

Hence, my dear sister, constantly walk devoutly 
in all things, and be faithful to Him who hath called 
you out of darkness into His light, from lies into 
the truth, and from hatred into love ; and therefore 
are you called, that you should walk in the light, in 
the truth, and in love; and by this, says Christ, 
shall all men know that ye are My disciples, if ye 
have love one to another. Yea, my dear sister, the 
end of the commandment is charity out of a pure 
heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith un- 
feigned. I Peter 2 :9; John 12 :35 ; Eph. 5 :8 ; John 
13:35; I Tim. 1 :5. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to 
the comforting Word of His grace. The God of 
peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord 
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through 
the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you 
perfect in every good work to do His will, working 
in you that which is well pleasing in His sight, 
through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory forever 
and ever. Amen. Heb. 13:20, 21. 

Written on the 4th of July, A. D. 1573. Keep 
this in remembrance of me your weak brother in 
the Lord, and do not forget me and my fellow pris- 
oners in your prayers ; we will do likewise accord- 
ing to our weak ability. 

Jacob van den Wege. 


THE LAST WORDS WRITTEN BY JACOB VAN DEN 

WEGE, AFTER HE HAD RECEIVED WORD 

THAT HE WAS TO DIE 

I, a prisoner for the name of the Lord, wish all 
my dear brethren and sisters much spiritual wis- 
dom and consolation through the Holy Ghost, es- 
pecially to my dear wife and children, whom I 
greatly love ; but the Almighty Lord must be the 
nearest, as you are yourselves taught from the 
Word of God. Hence, my dear wife, whom I love, 
I write you this little for a parting letter in this 
world. Adieu my love, the Lord lighten your trib- 
ulation; and my most beloved sister in the Lord, 
namely, my mother : O mother, be of good cheer 
in the Lord; the God of all comfort deliver you 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


977 


from your tribulation. And Sijntgen, Grietgen, 
and Claerken, my dear sisters in the Lord, always 
be at peace with one another, and comfort one an- 
other in love. Adieu, all of you. I now go to deliv- 
er up my life for the name of the Lord. Written 
the day that I received word that I must die. Adieu 
Tanneken, my oldest daughter, and Grietgen (O 
that the Lord might take you), and Betgen my 
youngest daughter, adieu. 

Written in my bonds, by me, your dear husband 
and brother in the Lord. 

Jacob van den Wege. 

maeyken van deventer, put to death for the 

testimony of jesus christ, at rotterdam 

in holland, a. d. 1573 

Not only those of the city of Ghent, in Flanders, 
of whom we have just spoken, but also those of 
Rotterdam, in Holland, again imbrued their hands 
at this time in the blood of the saints. This appeared 
in the case of a very pious and God-fearing heroine 
of Jesus Christ, who, a native of Deventer accord- 
ing to the flesh, was nevertheless from the heavenly 
Jerusalem, born again of God; whose name here 
upon earth was Maeyken van Deventer, while her 
inward and spiritual name was known only to God, 
and recorded in the secret book of God's perpetual 
remembrance. 

She was apprehended for her saving faith, in 
the city of Rotterdam, in Holland, without any fear 
from the neighboring cities, as the city of Dor- 
trecht had already a year before, under the reign 
of the Prince of Orange, William I, capitulated, 
no longer to shed innocent blood on • :count of the 
faith; which had taken place in July, A. D. 1572, 
while this occurred about the middle of the year 
1573. 

They did not stop at imprisonment, but pro- 
ceeded further with her, so that when she could not 
be turned from her steadfast and true faith, sen- 
tence of death was speedily pronounced upon her, 
that she should be put to death, as an immovable 
and obstinate heretic. O God, how couldst Thou 
tolerate it! 

This sentence was speedily executed on her by 
the executioner, so that, having commended her 
soul into the hands of God, she left her body upon 
earth as a prey. 

Observations concerning the death sentence of 
Maeyken van Deventer 

We have taken much trouble, to obtain, if pos- 
sible, the death sentence of this pious woman Maey- 
ken van Deventer, as well as of others of our dear 
fellow believers that were put to death at Rotter- 
dam ; but we have been informed by the secretary 
there, who searched for it, that in the year 1600, 
just fifty-nine years ago, there was a great fire in 
the city hall, whereby the examinations and death 
sentences of said martyrs were all burned, together 
with all that had been recorded with regard to this, 
previous to the year 1600, as we also, for the year 


1572, showed to have occurred at Breda; certainly 
a lamentable matter, which might cause to pass into 
oblivion that which we ought constantly to remem- 
ber, namely, the steadfast death of the saints. To 
prevent such oblivion, we have deemed it necessary 
to notice this matter more fully than has ever be- 
fore been done. This by way of notice. 


A TESTAMENT MADE BY MAEYKEN VAN DEVENTER 
FOR HER CHILDREN 

My children according to the flesh, but, alas! 
not according to the spirit, here is a testament, 
which I, your mother, leave you, namely, Albert, 
Johan, Egbert, Truyken, my dear children. The 
Lord bless you, as Isaac blessed his son Jacob, 
that he should be a ruler over his brethren. My 
children in the flesh, I must leave you young; 
may the Most High permit us to meet in the world 
to come, which shall be done before long by the 
Father, who will paternally b'ess us with His most 
holy name. This I expect from day to day, that, 
when it pleases the Lord, I may offer up my life 
and body for His holy name's sake, and I trust that 
this will not be deferred, and that the good Lord 
will not forget me any longer. When you hear this, 
sorrow not, as the world does, which has no hope, 
or knows not where they shall be; but thank the 
Most High, that you had a mother who was found 
worthy to shed her blood for the name of the Lord, 
and who, through His great grace and mercy, may 
be counted as a witness or martyr. Hence, my chil- 
dren, respect this testament which I leave you. 

I cannot leave you gold or silver, nor can I give 
you treasures of this world, as the world gives to 
her children ; for this I did not take with me, but 
left it to your carnal father ; and this I also did not 
seek, but I sought the eternal riches, which are im- 
perishable. Do you also seek this way, and you 
shall live forever ; and follow this testament and the 
instruction which I here write you. Even as Christ 
Jesus our forerunner left such to us for an everlast- 
ing testament, and sealed it with His blood ; such 
a testament I also leave you, and will likewise seal 
the same with my blood, even as the blessed Jesus 
did. My children, do not set at naught or lightly 
esteem this ; be not heedless : it is better than gold, 
for it will save your souls. If you do what I write 
you, you shall see me again in great glory, and you 
shall be as kings and queens; but you must keep 
yourselves from this corruptible world, for it shall 
pass away with all its lusts. 

Hear, my children, the instruction of your moth- 
er, and incline your hearts to understanding, and 
open your ears to hear the words of my mouth, for 
I seek the salvation of your souls ; believe me, and 
no one else, that you may come to me and live for- 
ever. Behold, my children, I hold before you the 
way of my Bridegroom, and our forerunner, Christ 
Jesus, who went before me, which leads to the 
truth, as the Lord has commanded me ; and behold, 
I take up my cross, and follow the Saviour of the 


978 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


whole world. Do so, too, my children; I .shall go 
before you, without looking back, for this is the 
way of the prophets and martyrs, and behold, I 
shall now drink the cup which they drank. I now 
go the way which Christ Jesus, the Lord full of all 
grace and truth, who laid down His life for His 
sheep, went ; this cup I must drink, as Christ says : 
"I have a cup to drink of, and a baptism to be bap- 
tized with; and how am I straitened till it be ac- 
complished!" Matthew 20:22; Luke 12:50. And 
having thus passed through, He calls His sheep, 
and His sheep hear His voice, and follow Him 
whithersoever He goes, for this is the way to the 
living fountain; this way went the priestly kings 
coming from the rising of the sun, as is written in 
.Revelation (Rev. 16:12), and entered into eter- 
nity. And behold, they had to drink of this cup, 
and to go this way, who are now under the altar, 
crying and saying: "Lord almighty Father, how 
long dost thou not avenge our blood on them that 
dweil on the earth? And white robes were given 
them, and it was answered unto them : Bear yet 
for a little season, till the number of your brethren 
that shall also be killed yet for the testimony of 
Jesus Christ be fulfilled." Rev. 6:9-11. These also 
drank of the cup, and ascended up to enjoy the 
eternal Sabbath of the Lord. And of this cup also 
those had to drink who are crowned, have palms 
in their hands, and are clothed in white. 11 Esd. 
2:42. Yea, this is also the way trod by the four 
and twenty elders that stand before the throne of 
God, and cast their crowns from their heads, and 
their harps before the throne of the Lamb, and 
falling down upon their faces, say: "O God, to 
thee alone be praise, honor and glory, power and 
strength, forever and ever. Lord almighty God, 
who wilt speedily avenge the blood of thy servants 
and ministers, thine be the victory; magnified by 
thy name, which is, and which was, and which is 
to come." Rev. 4:10, 11. This way also walked 
the marked of the Lord, who had the mark in their 
foreheads, who were chosen out of all the kin- 
dreds of men, who were not defiled with women, 
but follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth. 7 :3 ; 
14 :3, 4. Behold, these had to drink the bitter cup, 
and also all those that are still lacking of the num- 
ber and fulfillment of Zion, which is the bride of 
the Lamb, and the new Jerusalem, which shall de- 
scend out of heaven, in which city and throne the 
glory of the great King shall be revealed and seen, 
when the marriage feast shall be kept and cele- 
brated in the day of the high and holy Sabaoth, the 
Lord their God, which is the day of their rest and 
joy, 6:11; 21:10. Behold, all these first suffered 
the judgment in their flesh, and had to bear the 
punishment of this world, for Jesus Christ was 
the first one, as is written "The Lamb slain from 
the foundation of the world ;" and Paul says, that 
whom Fie did foreknow He also did predestinate 
to be conformed to the image of His Son. Rev. 
13:8; Rom. 8:29. Christ our Saviour also says, 
that the servant is not better than his lord, nor the 
disciple above his master ; but it is enough for the 


disciple, that he be as his master. Matthew 10:24, 
25. This also Peter declares to us, who says that 
the time is come that judgment must begin at the 
house of God ; and if it first begin at God's elect 
what shall the end be of them that have not believed 
the Gospel of God ? and if the righteous scarcely be 
saved, where shall the unrighteous appear ? I Pet 
4:17, 18. 

Hence, my dear children, press through the strait 
gate, for strait and narrow is the way that leadeth 
unto life, and few there be that find it, and still less 
that walk it ; but wide and broad is the way that 
leadeth to destruction, and many there be that 
walk therein. Matt. 7:13, 14. 

Therefore, my children,' heed the chastening and 
instruction of the Lord, and bow your shoulders 
under His yoke and easy burden, and bear it pa- 
tiently from your youth, thanking Him with great 
honor, for He receives no sons whom He does not 
chasten, for if you forsake chastisement after this 
manner, whereof we all are become partakers you 
are not children, but bastards, and you shall be cast 
out of your Father's inheritance. Heb. 12 :6. 

Hence, my dear children, gird your loins, and 
follow Christ, and neither fear nor rest till you have 
found this way. And search the Scriptures : they 
shall show you the way of life, for the angel says 
to Esdras : "Behold, a city is builded, and set upon 
a broad field, and is full of all good things : th:: 
entrance thereof is narrow, and set in a dangerous 
place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right 
hand, and on the left a deep water : and one only 
path between them both, even between the fire and 
the water, so small that there could but one man 
go there at once. If this city now were given unto 
a man for an inheritance, if he never shall pass the 
danger set before it, how shall he receive this in- 
heritance?" II Esd. 7:6-9. Behold, my children, 
this way has no retreats ; there are also no byways^ 
that he on the right hand or on the left ; this is the 
way which is found by so few, and trod by still 
fewer ; yea, there are indeed some that see it who 
well know that this is the way unto life, but it is 
too hard for them ; it hurts them far too much. 

Therefore, my children, regard not the great 
multitude, neither walk in their ways ; refrain your 
feet from their path, for they go to hell, even as 
sheep to the slaughter, as the prophet Isaiah tells 
us, saying: "Hell hath opened wide her mouth, 
that there may enter in the princes of the earth! 
and the common people." For it is a people of no 
understanding; therefore he that made them will 
not have mercy on them. Prov. 1 -15- Isa 59 y- 
5:14; 27:11. ' ' 

But, my children, remember what I write, and 
wherever you hear that there is a plain, rejected 
little flock, that is despised and cast out by this 
world; join them; and wherever you hear of the 
cross of Christ, depart not away. But flee the 
shadow of this world, go to God ; fear Him alone ; 
keep His commandments; remember all His words 
to do after them; write them upon the tables of 
your heart, and bind them on your forehead, and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


979 


speak of His statutes night and day, and you shall 
be a pleasant branch in the garden of the Lord, 
yea, a beloved plant growing up in Zion. 

My children, call the fear of the Lord your 
Father, and wisdom and understanding shall be 
your mother. If you do this, my children, the 
Lord shall bless you, and sanctify your body for 
His service that His name, may be sanctified 
through you, and magnified to His glory. Confess 
Him before men, that He may also confess you be- 
fore His heavenly Father. Yea, forsake your life, 
my children, rather than that you should depart 
from the truth. And follow me ; I go before you 
as a valiant soldieress, who is prepared for the 
war or conflict of the Lord, that I may deliver up 
my life for the name of the Lord. My children, I, 
your mother, the instrument whereby you have 
been brought into this sorrowful world, desire your 
salvation. Believe me what I write you and have 
left you, and no one else, except what they say 
agrees with the holy Scriptures. If you do this, 
you shall come to me, and I to you. If you lose your 
body, which is of the earth, the Lord has prepared 
you a better in heaven. Hence, my children, strive 
valiantly unto death for the truth and for right- 
eousness, and arm yourselves with the armor of 
God, that you may be found valiant Israelites; 
trample down the world and all unrighteousness 
that is therein; love or seek only that which is 
above, and remember that you are not of the world, 
even as your Lord and Master was also not of the 
world. John 15:19; 17:16. And be diligent, that 
you too may be found disciples; whatsoever you 
shall ask then, shall be done unto you ; for no man 
can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy 
Ghost, for the true worshipers shall worship God 
in Spirit and in truth ; for these Christ prayed, and 
not for the world, for when the world prays, it 
calls upon the devil, and they desire that his will 
be done in them. John 15 :7 ; I Cor. 12:3; John 4 : 
23 ; 17 :9. Hence, my dear children, do not become 
conformed to it ; flee from it, and have no fellow- 
ship with it. Rom. 12:2; Eph. 5:11. Regard not 
what is fair to the eyes, for it is all vanity ; seek 
only those things which are above, and set your 
affection on things above, and not on things on the 
earth Col. 3:1, 2. Let your eyes ever look to the 
Lord and always labor with prayer and supplica- 
tion, that you may ever be with Him in heart. Heb. 
12 :2. Let your laughter be turned to weeping, for 
we are pilgrims here upon earth ; and let there be 
nothing in this world, which can rejoice you, for 
it is all vanity, and passes away. Jas. 4 :9 ; I Peter 
2:11 ; II Cor. 4:18. Beware of covetousness with 
regard to earthly riches, for this is the true foun- 
dation of perdition. Luke 12:15; I Tim. 6:9. Re- 
member me. The Lord cause you to walk in His 
fear, and fill you with His Holy Spirit and sanctify 
your understanding and mind. My children, be 
circumspect in all your conversation, and whatso- 
ever you do, therein let the name of the Lord be 
praised and blessed. Col. 3 :17. And guard your 


lips, that you may not take the name of God into 
your mouth in vain, for this is a great unrecog- 
nized sin ; and do not use the name of God, except 
you do it with great reverence, with bended knees, 
and with uncovered head, or it will be accounted ill 
to you. Ex. 20:7. Pray God that you may learn 
to know Him, and be not ashamed to confess and 
honor Him, who can save your souls ; for the Lord 
will not tolerate that His people deny Him, for it is 
enough that the world dishonors and denies Him ; 
hence let us honor, praise and glorify His holy 
name with the whole heart, for it is written, that 
whosoever takes the name of the Lord in vain is 
worthy of death. 

Therefore, my children, love your neighbor 
heartily, and this with a liberal heart. Let the light 
of the Gospel shine in you. II Cor. 4 :4. Deal your 
bread to the hungry, clothe the naked, and do not 
suffer anything to remain with you double, since 
there are enough that lack. Isa. 58 :7. And whatso- 
ever the Lord grants you, that possess with thank- 
fulness, not only for yourselves, but also for your 
neighbor, and seek not your own profit, but that of 
your neighbor. In short, my children, let your life 
be conformed to the Gospel of Christ. And the God 
of peace, that brought again from the dead our 
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, 
make you perfect in every good work to do His 
will, working in you that which is well pleasing in 
His sight, that your whole spirit, soul and body 
may be found blameless unto the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, power and 
majesty forever and ever. Amen. Heb. 13 :20, 21 ; 
I Thessalonians 5 :23. 


A PRAYER BY SAID MAEYKEN VAN DEVENTER 

O holy Father, sanctify the children of Thy 
handmaiden in Thy truth, and keep them from all 
evil, and from all unrighteousness, for Thy holy 
name's sake. O Almighty Father, I commend them 
unto You, since they are Thy creatures ; care for 
them, for they are Thy handiwork; so that they 
may walk in Thy paths. Amen. 


MAEYKEN WENS, AND SOME OF HER FELLOW-BE- 
LIEVERS, BURNT FOR THE TESTIMONY OF 
JESUS CHRIST, AT ANTWERP, A. D. 1573 

The north wind of persecution blew now the 
longer the more through the garden of the Lord, 
so that the herbs and trees of the same (that is the 
true believers) were rooted out of the earth 
through the violence that came against them. This 
appeared, among other instances, in the case of a 
very God-fearing and pious woman, named Maey- 
ken Wens, who was the wife of a faithful minister 
of the church of God in the city of Antwerp, by the 
name of Mattheus Wens, by trade a mason. About 
the month of April, A. D. 1573, she, together with 
others of her fellow believers, was apprehended at 


980 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Maeyken Wens was burned at Antwerp with a tongue screw in her mouth, 
the screw to keep in memory of their mother's Christian witness, AD 1573 


Here her sons search and find 


Antwerp, bound, and confined in the severest 
prison there. In the meantime she was subjected to 
much conflict and temptation by so-called spirit- 
uals (ecclesiastics), as well as by secular persons, 
to cause her to apostatize from her faith. But when 
she could by no manner of means, not even by se- 
vere tortures, be turned from the steadfastness of 
her faith, they, on the fifth day of October, 1573, 
passed sentence upon her, and pronounced it pub- 
licly in court at the afore-mentioned place, namely, 
that she should, with her mouth screwed shut, or 
with her tongue screwed up, be burnt to ashes as a 
heretic, together with several others, who were 
also imprisoned and stood in like faith with her. 

Thereupon, the following day, the sixth of Oc- 
tober, this pious and God-fearing heroine of Jesus 
Christ, as also her fellow believers that had been 
condemned with a like sentence, were brought 
forth, with their tongues screwed fast, as innocent 
sheep for the slaughter, and each having been fas- 
tened to a stake in the marketplace, deprived, by 
fierce and terrible flames, of their lives and bodies, 
so that in a short time they were consumed to 
ashes; which severe punishment of death they 
steadfastly endured ; hence the Lord shall hereafter 


change their vile bodies, and fashion them like unto 
His glorious body. Phil. 3:21. 

Further Observation 

The oldest son of the afore-mentioned martyr- 
ess, named Adriaen Wens, aged about fifteen years, 
could not stay away from the place of execution on 
the day on which his dear mother was offered up ; 
hence he took his youngest little brother, named 
Hans (or Jan) Mattheus Wens, who was about 
three years old, upon his arm and went and stood 
with him somewhere upon a bench, not far from the 
stakes erected, to behold his mother's death. 

But when she was brought forth and placed at 
the stake, he lost consciousness, fell to the ground, 
and remained in this condition until his mother and 
the rest were burnt. Afterwards, when the people 
had gone away, having regained consciousness, he 
went to the place where his mother had been burnt, 
and hunted in the ashes, in which he found the 
screw with which her tongue had been screwed 
fast, which he kept in remembrance of her. 

There are at present, 1659, several grandchil- 
dren (well known to us) still living of this pious 
martyress, who are named after her. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


981 


Touching the others, her fellow believers, who 
were put to death with her, we are not able, be- 
cause it is so long ago, to give their names, but it 
appears to us, that they are those who are men- 
tioned in the next following account (that is, the 
women*) since it is stated of them, that they were, 
on the same day, namely the sixth of October, 
1573, also put to death, at Antwerp, by fire. This 
by way of notice. 


THE LETTERS AND TESTIMONIES OF MAEYKEN 

WENS, WIFE OF MATTHEUS WENS, MASON, IN 

HIS LIFETIME A MINISTER OF THE CHURCH 

OF GOD AT ANTWERP; OFFERED UP THE 

6TH OF OCTOBER, 1573 

Bemint Gott boven al: op den Steen, 
Daer de vreugde is seer kleen; 
Maer ik hope 't sal hier haest zijn gedaen 
Als 't God belieft my in genade 't ontfaen. 

Grace and peace from God the Father, through 
Jesus Christ His only begotten Son, who grant you 
wisdom and understanding, that you may wisely 
govern yourself and your children, and bring them 
up in the fear of God, to which end may the good 
Father strengthen you, and the Holy Ghost com- 
fort you in your tribulation. This is the greeting 
and wish of my heart to you my dear and much be- 
loved husband in the Lord. After all salutation, I 
inform you that I am still tolerably well according 
to the flesh, and also according to the spirit I trust I 
am doing the best ; but my best is nothing special, 
and I regret, that I am not more thankful for all 
that comes upon me, for it is all the work of the 
Lord. We ought to thank the Lord in adversity as 
well as in that which is agreeable to the flesh ; for if 
the Lord takes all from us, He takes from us no 
more than what He has lent us, for it belongs to us 
no longer than it pleases the Lord. Oh, that I could 
always thank the Lord as well when the flesh suf- 
fers adversity, as when it prospers — then we can 
thank the Lord indeed. 

O my dear friend, I should never have thought 
that parting should come so hard to me as it does. 
True the imprisonment seemed hard to me; but 
that was because they were so tyrannical ; but now 
the parting is the hardest of all. 

O my very dear and beloved husband, pray the 
Lord heartily in my behalf, to remove the conflict 
from me ; for it is in His power, if it is His pleas- 
ure. Truly the Lord has said : "He that does not 
forsake everything is not worthy of me;" for the 
Lord well knew that it would come hard to the 
flesh. But I hope that the Lord will also help me 
through even as He has helped many, and for 
which I can simply trust Him. Oh, how easy it is 
to be a Christian, so long as the flesh is not put to 
the trial, or nothing has to be relinquished ; then it 
is an easy thing to be a Christian. 

Herewith I will conclude my letter, and com- 
mend you and your children to the Lord, that you 

* These are called: Jannricen Mwmstdorp, Mariken, Lijsken. 


may walk in wisdom, to the edification of your 
neighbor, and the salvation of your soul. I com- 
mend you to the Lord, and to the rich Word of 
His grace : this is the good greeting and wish of my 
heart. As regards further the visiting, you may do 
in the matter according to your pleasure; for I 
should indeed often desire your visit, were it not 
for the expense. But if you want to make your 
heart glad, you may come ; I dare say nothing else, 
except that it costs so much, else I should desire to 
have you come soon. If you come, go to no ex- 
pense in the way of bringing anything with you, 
as it costs far too much. No more for this time, 
except that you may prosper in soul and body ; this 
is my desire. Greet the acquaintances in the Lord 
much in my name, and also the friends according 
to the flesh. My companions also greet you much. 
My children also come in for a share. 
Written in my bonds by me, 

Maeyken Wens. 


THE SECOND LETTER FROM MAEYKEN WENS, 
WRITTEN TO HER HUSBAND 

The grace and peace of God the Father, and the 
great mercy and love of the Son our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who through grace was sent by the Father 
to the salvation of all those that have died unto 
their sins, and are thus risen with Christ unto 
newness of life ; and the eternal, unfathomable joy, 
comfort, and fellowship of the Holy Ghost, 
strengthen and keep your hearts and minds in 
Christ Jesus, to whom be glory forever and ever. 
Amen. 

After all cordial salutation to you my very dear 
and beloved husband and brother in the Lord, I in- 
form you that my heart is still fixed to offer up a 
sacrifice to the Lord, the Lord be praised for the 
great grace which He shows to me poor, miserable 
creature. And I am also tolerably well according 
to the flesh, as I trust through the grace of the 
Lord that it is also with you, my most beloved in 
the Lord. Nothing more for this time, but I com- 
mend you to the Lord and to the words of His 
grace; this is the good wish and greeting of my 
heart. Farewell. Pray for me. 

By me, your dear wife and sister in the Lord. 

Maeyken Wens. 


THE THIRD LETTER FROM MAEYKEN WENS, WRIT- 
TEN IN PRISON AT ANTWERP, THE 21ST OF 
APRIL, A. D. 1573, TO HER SON 

Always fear God and love Him above all 

My dear child Adriaen, my son, I leave you this 
for a testament, because you are the oldest, to ex- 
hort you that you should begin to fear our dear 
Lord, for you are getting old enough to perceive 
what is good or evil ; think of Betteken, who is 
about as old as you are. My son, from your youth 
follow that which is good and depart from evil : do 
good while you have time, and look at your father, 
how lovingly he went before me with kindness and 


982 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


courteousness, always instructing me with the 
Word of the Lord. Oh, if I had so followed after 
him, how light would be my bonds ! Hence, my 
dear son, beware of that which is evil, that you 
will not have to lament afterwards: "Had I done 
this or that ; for then, when it is as far as it now is 
with me, it will be too late." Hear the instruction 
of your mother : hate every thing that is loved by 
the world and your sensuality, and love God's 
commandment, and let the same instruct you, for 
it teaches : "If any man will come after me, let 
him deny himself," that is, forsake his own wisdom, 
and pray: "Lord, thy will be done. If you do 
this, the anointing of the Holy Ghost will teach 
you all that you are to believe. I John 2 :27. Be- 
lieve not what men say, but obey that which the 
New Testament commands you, and ask God to 
teach you His will. Trust not in your understand- 
ing, but in the Lord, and let your counsel abide in 
Him, and ask Him to direct you into His ways. My 
child, learn how you are to love God the Lord, how 
you are to honor your father, and all other com- 
mandments which the Lord requires of you. What- 
soever is not contained therein, believe not, but 
whatever is contained therein, obey. Join yourself 
to those that fear the Lord, and depart from evil, 
and through love do all that is good. 

Oh, regard not the great multitude, or the an- 
cient custom, but look at the little flock, which is 
persecuted for the word of the Lord, for the good 
persecute none, but are persecuted. When you have 
joined them, beware of all false doctrine, for John 
says: "Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not 
in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that 
abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the 
Father and the Son." II John 9. The doctrine of 
Christ is mercy, peace, purity, faith, meekness, 
humbleness, and full obedience to God. 

My dear son, yield yourself to that which is 
good ; the Lord will give you understanding. I give 
you this as my last adieu to you. My dear child, 
heed the Lord's chastening; for whenever you do 
evil, He will chasten you in your mind; desist, 
then, and call to the Lord for help, and hate that 
which is evil, and the Lord will deliver you, and 
good will come to you. God the Father, through 
His beloved Son Jesus Christ, grant you His Holy 
Spirit, that He may guide you into all truth. Amen. 

This, I, Maeyken Wens, your mother, have writ- 
ten, while I was in prison for the Word of the 
Lord; the good Father grant you His grace, my 
son Adriaen. Write me a letter as to what your 
heart says, whether you desire to fear the Lord; 
this I should like to know. But you must write it 
better than the last two letters were written ; the 
one which Maeyken Wils brought, however, was 
good. 

Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the 
will of God commit the keeping of their souls to 
Him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. I 
Peter 4:19. 


THE FOURTH LETTER FROM MAEYKEN WENS 
WRITTEN TO HER SON 

O my dear son, though I am taken from you 
here, strive from your youth to fear God, and you 
shall have your mother again up yonder in the 
New Jerusalem, where parting will be no more. 
My dear son, I hope now to go before you ; follow 
me thus as much as you value your soul, for besides 
this there shall be found no other way to salvation. 
Thus, I will now commend you to the Lord ; may 
He keep you. I trust the Lord that He will do it, if 
you seek Him. Love one another all the days of 
your life ; take Hansken on your arm now' and 
then for me. And if your father should be taken 
from you, care for one another. The Lord keep 
you one and all. My dear children, kiss one another 
once for me, for remembrance. Adieu, my dear 
children, all of you. My dear son, be not afraid of 
this suffering; it is nothing compared to that which 
shall endure forever. The Lord takes away all 
fear; I did not know what to do for joy, when I 
was sentenced. Hence cease not, to fear God, be- 
cause of this temporal death ; I cannot fully thank 
my God for the great grace which He has shown 
me. Adieu once more, my dear son Adriaen ; ever 
be kind, I pray you, to your afflicted father all the 
days of your life, and do not grieve him; this I 
pray all of you, for what I write to the oldest, I also 
mean to say to the youngest. Herewith I will com- 
mend you to the Lord once more. I have written 
this, after I was sentenced, to die for the testimony 
of Jesus Christ, on the fifth day of October, in the 
year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1573. 

By me, your mother, who gave you birth in 
much pain, as a memorial to you. Preserve well 
this the adieu which your father wrote your moth- 
er when she had been sentenced, and the adieu of 
your mother. Maeyken Wens. 


Fear not them which kill the body. 

THE FIFTH LETTER FROM MAEYKEN WENS, WRIT- 
TEN TO JAN DE METSER, MINISTER 

Love God above all; He it is who is, and shall be 

The rich grace and peace of God the Father, and 
the love of Jesus Christ; may He be your com- 
forter. Though we must now die, we are better off 
than you who remain in this vale of tears ; however, 
one must bide the time with patience till the Lord 
comes. O my brother in the Lord, I would so glad- 
ly have written you a short letter, but my time has 
slipped away, although I have been confined long 
enough. But I am such a poor writer ; hence you 
must excuse me, and think, if you were invited to 
a table somewhere, would you not certainly be sat- 
isfied with that which was prepared? So you must 
also be satisfied with my writing, for I do not have 
much, and hence I cannot give much. And now I 
can also not write much, because I have been sen- 
tenced; nevertheless I was so full of joy, that I 
should not be able to express it with the mouth, the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


983 


Lord be forever praised for the great grace He 
has shown me, who has feared so much. Oh, what 
a strong God we have, compared with what we see 
the wicked have. Oh, let us have good courage ; 
we shall devour our enemies like bread. I go before 
you tomorrow ; the Lord grant you strength, that 
you may come to me, as I trust you will. But, my 
dear brother in the Lord, always watch, for the 
Lord will come as a thief in the night, when we 
least expect it, for this was my experience; it is 
good then, that a man be not sleeping. But, dear 
Jan, I should have written you more, but my time 
of delivery came on speedily, hence my flesh be- 
gins to tremble somewhat ; however this is the na- 
ture of the flesh. I will herewith commend you to 
the Lord, and to the Word of His grace. Farewell, 
my dear friend Jan. I have written you this the 
night I was sentenced, that you might have some- 
thing from my hand, for old acquaintance's sake. 
Take my simple letter in good part, for I would not 
have thought that I could write you so much yet 
after I was sentenced. I will now bid you adieu 
here in this world; but I hope that we shall see 
each other up yonder in the New Jerusalem, where 
parting shall be no more. However, I hope that 
before this letter shall have been read, I shall have 
entered into rest by the help of the Lord ; and I 
also hope to be an epistle which shall be read of 
all men. II Cor. 3:2. Adieu, adieu, dear friend. 
Greet your dear wife much in my name, and tell 
her that if she has seen aught in me which did 
not edify her, not to follow me therein ; but if she 
has seen anything that was edifying, to follow that 
which is best. This is the good wish of my heart, 
written to you on the fifth day of October, 1573. 
My fellow prisoners also greet you much. 

Written in my bonds, by me your weak sister, as 
much as I am able, which is but little. 

Maeyken Wens. 


So persecuted they the prophets. 


FIVE PIOUS CHRISTIANS, HANS VAN MUNSTDORP 
AND JANNEKEN MUNSTDORP HIS WIFE, TO- 
GETHER WITH MARIKEN, LIJSKEN, AND 
MAEYKEN, ALL BURNED TOGETHER 
AT STAKES, AT ANTWERP, IN 
THE YEAR 1573 

The awful murderer's den of the city of Ant- 
werp, though full of stakes, slain bodies, and the 
ashes of the saints, was at this time not yet sated 
with the many massacres that were perpetrated for 
the sake of the true faith on the innocent sheep of 
Christ. This appeared also in the case of five pious 
Christians, namely, Hans van Munstdorp and 
Janneken Munstdorp his wife, together with Mar- 
iken, Lijsken and Maeyken. These were, about 
the year 1573 while they were gathered to hear 
the Word of God, apprehended together and con- 
fined in the prison at Antwerp. 


But when they could in no manner be turned 
from the steadfastness of their faith, notwithstand- 
ing many terrible threats, disputations with world- 
ly, learned men, and other means were used against 
them, it was determined to put them all to death, 
and this not in an easy or short manner, but by fire, 
till life in them, should be extinct. 

This was first put into execution on Hans van 
Munstdorp, who, about the month of September of 
the aforesaid year, was taken out of the fold, away 
from the other four, as a sheep for the slaughter, 
and, according to the sentence passed, put to death 
with a huge fire, which severe and grievous death 
he steadfastly endured, with a heart full of good 
cheer. 

The reason why the other four persons were not 
put to death with him, was chiefly because his wife 
Janneken Munstdorp was very far advanced in 
pregnancy, and was soon to be delivered, which 
took place shortly after her dear husband was 
burnt. She was delivered of a little daughter, 
whom she, since she was now also soon to die, 
named, after her own name, Janneken, and made 
great haste to get the child (before the priests 
should lay hands on it) to the friends, to whom she 
heartily commended it, and also wrote a testament 
full of excellent instructions to this little daugh- 
ter, when she was about a month old, which testa- 
ment the friends preserved for her. 

When the time of her offering up was at hand, 
so that she was sentenced on the 6th of October, to 
follow her husband by a like death ; which message 
also the other three women, namely, Mariken, 
Lijsken, and Maeyken, received, for which they 
joyfully and willingly prepared themselves, long- 
ing for the hour of their redemption. 

This sentence was executed on them at the time 
and hour appointed, when they offered up to the 
Lord a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable, for 
which they shall hereafter be exempt from eternal 
fire, and permitted to enter into the blessed enjoy- 
ment in the paradise of God. They shall hunger no 
more, neither thirst any more ; neither shall the sun 
light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which 
is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and 
shall lead them unto living fountains of waters : and 
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Rev- 
elation 7:16,17. 

With regard to these sacrificed friends, see a 
hymn in the Rotterdam Hymnal, beginning : 

Och vrienden al te samen, hoort, 

Hoe wy op Bamis-dagh waren verstoort, etc. 

Note — It appears to us from all the circum- 
stances, that one of these women, who is called 
Maeyken, bore the surname Wens, and that she is 
the same martyress that has been previously no- 
ticed, as we have also stated in that place. 


984 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


A LETTER WHICH HANS VAN MUNSTDORP WROTE 

TO HIS WIFE, WHEN THEY WERE BOTH IN 

BONDS IN THE PRISON AT ANTWERP, FOR 

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST 

An affectionate greeting to you my beloved wife 
whom I love from the heart, and greatly cherish 
above every other creature, and must now forsake 
for the truth, for the sake of which we must count 
all things loss, and love Him above all. I hope, 
though men separate us here, that the Lord will 
again join us together in His eternal kingdom, 
where no one will be able to part us, and we shall 
reign forever in the heavenly abode. Hence I in- 
form you, my beloved wife, that my mind is still 
unwaveringly fixed to adhere to the eternal truth. 
[I hope] by the grace of the Lord, that this is also 
the purpose of your mind, which I would be re- 
joiced to hear. I herewith exhort you my beloved 
lamb, with the apostle : As you have received Christ 
Jesus the Lord, so walk in Him, rooted and built 
up in Him, and established in the faith, and suffer 
yourself not to be moved from your purpose 
through philosophy or vain deceit of men, whereby 
they seek to seduce the hearts of the simple, show- 
ing them in fair colors the apple of pleasure, where- 
by they are deceived, even as there are some here, 
as you know. Pierijntgen has also tasted of the ap- 
ple, as I understand ; hence, my faithful lamb, take 
heed and lust not after evil things. I Cor. 10:6. 
And look not back with Lot's wife, lest you be- 
come like her. Gen. 19:26. Remember the word 
of the Lord: "No man, having put his hand to 
the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom 
of God." Luke 9:62. Hence, my beloved lamb, 
always remember, as the prophet says, the crown, 
which shall come in the end, and of the vengeance 
that shall come upon the ungodly. The prophet 
says : "Woe to the rebellious children that forsake 
the Lord, the fountain of life ; woe unto them for 
they that depart from him shall be written in the 
earth." Isa. 30:1 ; Jer. 17:13. Hence, my beloved, 
hearken not to them, for their work shall be found 
wood, straw, and stubble in the day of vengeance, 
and it shall be burned with fire, as is written. I 
Cor. 3:12, 13. Therefore, my beloved lamb, whom 
I so affectionately love and cherish as my own 
soul, persevere steadfastly, this I pray you, till 
you are taken away, as I trust you will do. And do 
not regard flesh or blood, for it must all pass away. 
Though we have here a rejected and vile body, the 
Lord shall fashion it like unto His own glorious 
body, on condition that we adhere to the truth unto 
death. Phil. 3:21; Rev. 2:10. Take this in good 
part. Always remember the eternal riches. I here- 
with greet you in the Lord, out of cordial love, and 
also your companions ; rejoice one another in the 
Lord, be glad in the lions' den, and trust in the 
God of Daniel. 

Herewith adieu and farewell. Bide the time with 
patience; be patient in the conflict, and rejoice in 
hope. Let me know, if you can, whether you have 


received it. Always remember me kindly in your 
fervent prayers. I hope also not to forget you, 
whom I would carry in my heart, if it were pos- 
sible. This butter, it seems to me came from Griet- 
gen Wevels. I greet you most cordially therewith. 
Adieu and farewell, my lamb, my love ; adieu and 
farewell, to all that fear God; adieu and farewell, 
until the marriage of the Lamb in the New Jerusa- 
lem. Be valiant and of good cheer ; cast the trou- 
bles that assail you upon the Lord, and He will not 
forsake you ; cleave to Him, and you will not fall. 
Love God above all ; have love and truth ; love your 
salvation, and keep your promises to the Lord. 
Note.— Through a certain good friend a very 
affectionate and consolatory testament of Janne- 
ken Munstdorp, the wife of Hans van Munstdorp, 
has been put into our hands, which she wrote in 
prison at Antwerp, after the offering up of her 
husband, when she was in daily expectation of 
death, to her dear little daughter— to whom she 
had given birth in prison, and who was now only 
about a month old— for a perpetual remembrance, 
farewell, and adieu from this evil world. It reads 
as follows: 

[TESTAMENT] WRITTEN TO JANNEKEN MY OWN 
DEAREST DAUGHTER, WHILE I WAS (UNWOR- 
THILY) CONFINED FOR THE LORD'S SAKE, 
IN PRISON, AT ANTWERP, A. D. 1573 

The true love of God and wisdom of the Father 
strengthen you in virtue, my dearest child; the 
Lord of heaven and earth, the God of Abraham, the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the Lord in 
Israel, keep you in His virtue, and strengthen and 
confirm your understanding in His truth. My dear 
little child, I commend you to the Almighty, great 
and terrible God, who only is wise, that He will 
keep you, and let you grow up in His fear, or that 
He will take you home in your youth, this is my 
heart's request of the Lord : you who are yet so 
young, and whom I must leave here in this wicked, 
evil, perverse world. 

Since, then, the Lord has so ordered and foreor- 
dained it, that I must leave you here, and you are 
here deprived of father and mother, I wi'll com- 
mend you to the Lord ; let Him do with you ac- 
cording to His holy will. He will govern you. and 
be a Father to you, so that you shall have no lack- 
here, if you only fear God ; for He will be the Fa- 
ther of the orphans and the Protector of the wid- 
ows. 

Hence, my dear lamb, I who am imprisoned and 
bound here for the Lord's sake, can help you in no 
other way ; I had to leave your father for the Lord's 
sake, and could keep him only a short time. We 
were permitted to live together only half a year, 
after which we were apprehended, because we 
sought the salvation of our souls. They took him 
from me, not knowing my condition, and I had to 
remain in imprisonment, and see him go before 
me ; and it was a great grief to him, that I had to 
remain here in prison. And now that I have abided 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


985 


the time, and borne you under my heart with great 
sorrow for nine months, and given birth to you 
here in prison, in great pain, they have taken you 
from me. Here I lie, expecting death every morn- 
ing, and shall now soon follow your dear father. 
And I, your dear mother, write you, my dearest 
child, something for a remembrance, that you will 
thereby remember your dear father and your dear 
mother. 

Since I am now delivered up to death, and must 
leave you here alone, I must through these lines 
cause you to remember, that when you have at- 
tained your understanding, you endeavor to fear 
God, and see and examine why and for whose 
name we both died ; and be not ashamed to confess 
us before the world, for you must know that it is 
not for the sake of any evil. Hence be not ashamed 
of us; it is the way which the prophets and the 
apostles went, and the narrow way which leads into 
eternal life, for there shall no other way be found 
by which to be saved. 

Hence, my young lamb, for whose sake I still 
have, and have had, great sorrow, seek, when you 
have attained your understanding, this narrow 
way, though there is sometimes much danger in it 
according to the flesh, as we may see and read, if 
we diligently examine and read the Scriptures, that 
much is said concerning the cross of Christ. And 
there are many in this world who are enemies of 
the cross, who seek to be free from it among the 
world, and to escape it. But, my dear child, if we 
would with Christ seek and inherit salvation, we 
must also help bear His cross ; and this is the cross 
which He would have us bear : to follow His foot- 
steps, and to help bear His reproach; for Christ 
Himself says : "Ye shall be persecuted, killed, and 
dispersed for my name's sake." Yea, He Himself 
went before us in this way of reproach, and left us 
an example, that we should follow His steps ; for, 
for His sake all must be forsaken, father, mother, 
sister, brother, husband, child, yea, one's own life. 

I must now also forsake all this for the Lord's 
sake, which the world is not worthy to suffer ; for 
if we had continued in the world, we would have 
had no trouble. For when we were one with the 
world and practiced idolatry, and loved all manner 
of unrighteousness, we could live at peace with the 
world; but when we desired to fear God, and to 
shun such improper ways, well knowing that this 
could not please God, wherefore we sought to shun 
all this, and turned from idolatry to the worship of 
the living God, and sought here in quietness and 
gentleness to practice our *uith, then they did not 
leave us in peace ; then our blood was sought ; then 
we had to be a prey to everyone, and become a 
spectacle to all the world. They seek here to mur- 
der and to burn us; we are placed at posts and 
stakes, and our flesh is given as food to the worms. 

Thus, my dear child, it is now fulfilled in your 
dear father and mother. It was indeed prophesied 
to us beforehand, that this was awaiting us; but 
not everyone is chosen hereunto, nor expects it ; the 


Lord has chosen us hereunto. Hence, when you 
have attained your understanding, follow this ex- 
ample of your father and mother. And, my dear 
child, this is my request of you, since you are still 
very little and young ; I wrote this when you were 
but one month old. As I am soon now to offer up 
my sacrifice, by the help of the Lord, I leave you 
this : "That you fulfill my request, always uniting 
with them that fear God; and do not regard the 
pomp and boasting of the world, nor the great 
multitude, whose way leads to the abyss of hell, 
but look at the little flock of Israelites, who have 
no freedom anywhere, and must always flee from 
one land to the other, as Abraham did; that you 
may hereafter obtain your fatherland; for if you 
seek your salvation, it is easy to perceive which is 
the way that leads to life, or the way that leads into 
hell. Above all things, seek the kingdom of heaven 
and His righteousness ; and whatever you need be- 
sides shall be added unto you. Matt. 6 :33." 

Further, my dear child, I pray ycu, that wher- 
ever you live when you are grown up, and begin to 
have understanding, you conduct yourself well and 
honestly, so that no one need have cause to com- 
plain of you. And always be faithful, taking good 
heed not to wrong any one. Learn to carry your 
hands always uprightly, and see that you like to 
work, for Paul says : "If any will not work, neither 
shall he eat." II Thess. 3:10. And Peter says: 
"He that will love life, and see good days, let him 
refrain his tongue from evil." I Pet. 3 :10. 

Hence, my dear Janneken, do not accustom your 
mouth to filthy talk, nor to ugly words that are not 
proper, nor to lies; for a liar has no part in the 
kingdom of heaven ; for it is written : "The mouth 
that lieth slayeth the soul." Hence beware of this, 
and run not in the street as other bad children do ; 
rather take up a book, and learn to seek there that 
which concerns your salvation. 

And where you have your home, obey those 
whose bread you eat. If they speak evil, do you 
speak well. And learn always to love to be doing 
something ; and do not think yourself too good for 
any thing, nor exalt yourself, but condescend to the 
lowly, and always honor the aged wherever you 
are. 

I leave you here; Oh, that it had pleased the 
Lord, that I might have brought you up ; I should 
so gladly have done my best with respect to it ; but 
it seems that it is not the Lord's will. And though 
it had not come thus, and I had remained with you 
for a time, the Lord could still take me from you. 
and then, too, you should have to be without me, 
even as it has now gone with your father and my- 
self, that we could live together but so short a time, 
when we were so well joined since the Lord had 
so well mated us, that we would not have forsaken 
each other for the whole world, and yet we had to 
leave each other for the Lord's sake. So I must 
also leave you here, my dearest lamb; the Lord 
that created and made you now takes me from you, 
it- is His holy will. I must now pass through this 
narrow way which the prophets and martyrs of 


986 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ passed through, and many thousands who 
put off the mortal clothing, who died here for 
Christ, and now they wait under the altar till their 
number shall be fulfilled, of which number your 
dear father is one. And I am now on the point of 
following him, for I am delivered up to death, as 
it appears in the eyes of man ; but if it were not the 
will of the Lord (though it seems that I am deliv- 
ered up to death), He could yet easily deliver me 
out of their hands and give me back to you, my 
child. Even as the Lord returned to Abraham his 
son Isaac, so He could still easily do it ; He is still 
the same God that delivered Daniel out of the lion's 
den, and the three young men out of the fiery fur- 
nace; He could still easily deliver me out of the 
hands of man. 

Now, my child, if this be not so, I know 
that He is faithful and faithfully keeps His prom- 
ise. Thus, my poor orphan child, always be re- 
signed; though I and your father are now taken 
from you ; know that you have a Father in heaven, 
who will doubtless well provide for you. And when 
you are old enough, give diligence to learn to read 
and write, since it is very convenient, and most 
profitable in this distress, for him that fears God, 
that you may sometimes read this letter ; as also the 
other letters, which your father left you ; do read 
them, and remember us both thereby. Dear Janne- 
ken, we have not left you much of this world's 
goods, and I have now not much to give you, but 
what I have I give you. However, we leave you a 
good example to fear God, which is better than 
much of the temporal goods of this world. Only 
follow us, and you shall have wealth enough ; true, 
you are poor here, but you shall possess much 
wealth, if you only fear God and shun sin. As the 
apostle says to the Hebrews: "My son despise not 
thou the chastening of the Lord; for they that 
would be without chastisement are bastards, and 
not sons or heirs." Heb. 12 :5. Hence, my dear 
lamb, cease not, because of the cross, to fear God, 
for a Christian is not made meet except by much 
tribulation and persecution upon this world, and 
we must through much tribulation enter into the 
kingdom of God ; for Paul says : "All that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." II 
Tim. 3:12. And Christ says: "He that taketh not 
his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of 
me ; for the servant is not better than his lord, 
nor the disciple above his master. If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much 
more shall they call them of his household." Matt. 
10:38,24,25. If they have persecuted the Lord, 
they will also persecute us ; if they have hated Him, 
they will also hate us ; and this they do because 
they have not known my Father, nor me, says the 
Almighty Lord. For His kingdom was not of this 
world; had His kingdom been of this world, the 
world would have loved Him; but because His 
kingdom was not of this world ; therefore the 
world hated Him. So it also is now : since our 
kingdom is not of this world, the world will hate 


us; but it is better for us to be despised here by 
the world, than that we should hereafter have to 
mourn forever. But they that will not taste the bit- 
ter here, can hereafter not expect eternal life ; for 
we know that Paul says, that all that will live godly 
in Christ Jesus shall be persecuted and be a prey to 
everyone. 

Thus, my dear child, this way the prophets and 
apostles and many thousands of other God-fearing 
persons went before us, for an example unto us ; 
and Christ Himself did not spare Himself for us, 
but delivered up Himself unto death for our sakes 
— how then should He not give us all things? 
Hence, my dearest lamb, seek to follow this way, 
this I pray you, as much as you v.*due your salva- 
tion ; for this is the only way which leads to eternal 
life, yea, there is no other way by which we can be 
saved than only through Jesus Christ, as Paul says : 
"Other foundation can no man lay than that is 
laid, which is Jesus Christ" (I Cor. 3:11); by 
whose stripes we are healed, and through whose 
blood we have been dearly purchased ; for we have 
not been bought with gold or silver, but through 
His bitter death, and His precious blood which He 
shed for us. And we were as erring sheep in this 
world, but now are we redeemed through His pre- 
cious and dear blood, and He has now called us to 
be heirs and first-fruits of Christ. All those that 
have died unto sin, and amended their lives, and are 
thus risen with Christ into newness of life, these 
no longer desire to live to themselves, but their 
life belongs to the Lord ; if they live, they live to 
the Lord ; if they die, they die unto the Lord ; they 
are so resigned that whether they live or die, they 
belong to the Lord. For, my dear lamb, what shall 
it avail them that Christ died, who still continue in 
their sins, and do not turn from this improper life 
in which they are still sunk, as, drunkards, mur- 
derers, adulterers, idolaters, liars, backbiters, or 
railers, who cannot please God, whose works pro- 
ceed only from the devil, all of which the Lord pro- 
hibits and says that except they amend their lives, 
they shall not inherit the kingdom of God ? and it 
shall avail them nothing that He died, if they will 
not repent. They would sin upon the grace of God, 
but they say not that He is just ; He is indeed mer- 
ciful, but He is also just; we may not sin upon His 
grace. Though we do our best to fear the Lord, 
and to renounce ourselves according to our ability, 
yea, though we did all that He commands us, which 
we are far from doing, we should only do that 
which is commanded us ; we must yet confess that 
we are unprofitable servants and have not merited 
anything, but are guilty of eternal death. If He 
were not merciful, we could not be saved; hence 
we may not sin upon His grace, but always strive 
according to our ability to follow that which he 
commands us. 

My dear lamb, we can merit nothing, but must 
through grace inherit salvation ; hence always en- 
deavor to fear God, for the fear of the Lord is the 
beginning of wisdom, and he that fears the Lord 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


987 


will do good, and it will be well with him in this 
world and in that which is to come. And always 
join those that seek to fear the Lord from the heart, 
and be not conformed to the world, to do as she 
does, nor walk in any improper course of life ; for 
the world shall pass away, and all the nations that 
serve her shall perish with her. Nor have fellow- 
ship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 
rather reprove them ; and be transformed by the re- 
newing of your life, that you may show forth the 
virtues in which God has called you. 

my dearest lamb, that you might know the 
truth when you have attained your understanding, 
and that you might follow your dear father and 
mother, who went before you ; for your dear father 
demonstrated with his blood that it is the genuine 
truth, and I also hope to attest the same with my 
blood, though flesh and blood must remain on the 
posts and on the stake, well knowing that we shall 
meet hereafter. Do you also follow us my dear 
lamb, that you too may come where we shall be, 
and that we may find one another there, where the 
Lord shall say: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the be- 
ginning." 

Then our joy shall not be taken from us. Though 
they have separated us here, so that we are taken 
from you, and must go before you, know that it 
was the Lord's will ; if it had been His pleasure, He 
could easily have ordered it otherwise. 

Hence, my dear child, be content; He knows 
what He has determined concerning you, that I 
must leave you here. Always be honorable and 
courteous toward all men, and let your modesty 
be manifest to all men when you have attained to 
your understanding. 

1 leave you here among my friends ; I hope that 
my father, and my step-mother, and my brothers, 
and my sisters will do the best with you as long as 
they live. Be subject and obedient to them in every 
thing, so far as it is not contrary to God. I leave 
you what comes from my mother's death, namely, 
thirty guilders and over ; I do not know how much 
it is, since I have been long imprisoned here, and 
do not know what it has all cost. But I hope that 
Grietge, my dear sister, who has shown me so 
much friendship, will do her best to give you what 
belongs to you. And as to what may come to you 
from your father, I do not know, since I can learn 
nothing about his parents, because it is so far from 
here; if they should inquire after you, my friends 
may do the best in the matter. 

And now, Janneken, my dear lamb, who are yet 
very little and young, I leave you this letter, to- 
gether with a gold real, which I had with me in 
prison, and this I leave you for a perpetual adieu, 
and for a testament ; that you may remember me by 
it, as also by this letter. Read it, when you have 
understanding, and keep it as long as you live in 
remembrance of me and of your father, if perad- 
venture you might be edified by it. And I here- 
with bid you adieu, my dear Janneken Munstdorp, 


and kiss you heartily, my dear lamb, with a perpet- 
ual kiss of peace. Follow me and your father, and 
be not ashamed to confess us before the world, 
for we were not ashamed to confess our faith be- 
fore the world, and this adulterous generation; 
hence I pray you, that you be not ashamed to con- 
fess our faith, since it is the true evangelical faith, 
an other than which shall never be found. 

Let it be your glory, that we did not die for any 
evil doing, and strive to do likewise, though they 
should also seek to kill you. And on no account 
cease to love God above all, for no one can prevent 
you from fearing God. If you follow that which is 
good, and seek peace, and ensue it, you shall re- 
ceive the crown of eternal life ; this crown I wish 
you and the crucified, bleeding, naked, despised, re- 
jected and slain Jesus Christ for your bridegroom. 

This I wish you for a perpetual testament, and 
for a perpetual adieu and farewell my dearest 
lamb. 

Remember thereby your dear father, and me, 
your dear mother, who have written this with my 
own hand, for your edification; and always keep 
this gold real with you, with this letter, for a per- 
petual testament: I herewith bid you adieu and 
farewell ; I hope to seal this letter with my blood at 
the stake. 

I herewith commend you to the Lord, and to 
the comforting Word of His grace, and bid you 
adieu once more. I hope to wait for you; follow 
me, my dearest child. 

Once more, adieu, my dearest upon earth ; adieu, 
and nothing more; adieu, follow me; adieu and 
farewell. 

Written on the 10th of August, A. D. 1573, at 
Antwerp. 

This is the testament which I wrote in prison for 
my daughter Janneken, whom I bore and gave 
birth to here in my bonds. 

By me your dearest mother, imprisoned for the 
Lord's sake. Janneken Munstdorp. 

Note. — With this testament we also received a 
letter which the same Janneken van Munstdorp 
wrote to her dear father and mother, who, as it 
seems, had not yet come to the true faith ; who are 
by her exhorted to the best, and to whom she in 
the meantime commends her little child. 


COPY OF A LETTER BY JANNEKEN MUNSTDORP's 

OWN HAND, WRITTEN AT ANTWERP IN PRISON 

TO HER FATHER AND MOTHER, ON THE 19TH 

OF SEPTEMBER, A. D. 1573 

My dear father and my dear mother, I wish you 
a true understanding, and a contrite spirit in your 
hearts, to fear God, for an affectionate greeting. 

After all cordial and proper salutation, I now 
leave you my dear and most affectionately beloved 
father and dear, beloved mother, without forget- 
ting all my dear brothers and sisters, whom I must 
now leave for the Lord's sake, and I expect not to 
see your faces any more in this world, because I 


988 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


am imprisoned and bound here, and this for the 
Lord's sake, and am daily expecting to be sentenced 
to death. 

Hence, my dear father, since the Lord through 
His great grace has still given me time to write you 
a little, I am prompted to inform you concerning 
my bodily health ; hence I write to you, that I am 
still tolerably well according to the flesh, and after 
the spirit I am still determined to adhere to the liv- 
ing, almighty, eternal God, and not to depart from 
Him for any tortures which they may inflict upon 
me, for it is written: "Whosoever shall confess 
me before men, him will I confess also before my 
Father which is in heaven." Hence I know that 
this God will deliver me out of all this sorrow, if I 
only remain faithful to Him, and seek no other 
God beside Him; I therefore hope that He will 
help me finish the good work begun by Him in me, 
that His name through me may be praised. 

Hence, my dear father and mother, I would from 
the heart that it were also with you according to 
the spirit, as it is still with me at this present time : 
it would be a great joy to me, if you should yet 
come to fear the Lord. Oh, that you might yet at 
the last hour work in the Lord's vineyard ; though 
you seem to be free, and are not imprisoned, you 
are not certain of a single hour as to how long 
you will live. 

Therefore, my love, you also are commanded to 
watch, for in the last day you will have no excuse 
that you can make, that you did not know which is 
the narrow way that leads to eternal life, of which 
Esdras speaks, on the one side of which there is 
water, and on the other side fire; and there are 
many that know this way, but few that walk it. 

Thus, dear father and mother, water and fire are 
set before us, and we may choose which we will, 
life or death. Hence, dear father, we have here in 
this life sought the salvation of our souls, that we 
may exchange this death for eternal life, this cor- 
ruptible for the incorruptible ; for the sufferings of 
this world are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory that shall be revealed to us. Though we are 
here robbed of all men, and accounted as a sport 
and spectacle to all the world, they shall yet have 
to confess in the last day that they shed the inno- 
cent blood; they shall then see whom they have 
pierced. Though we are here accounted poor, we 
shall yet have much wealth, if we fear God and 
shun sin. 

Hence, my dear father and mother, though you 
must now sometimes hear that I am imprisoned for 
a base sect, or heretical doctrine, which I presume 
is said and has been said, — many things are said 
about us, which are not true, — you well know that 
it is not for any evil, but that it is only for the sake 
of our salvation. Though we are despised here, it 
is nevertheless the genuine truth, and there shall 
never any other be found; I have sought nothing 
else herein. 

If I did not want to be saved, I should seek an 
easy life as gladly as others ; for he that would fear 


God must expect all these, tribulation, suffering, 
bonds, and imprisonment, and we can nowhere 
have a free place ; for it is given unto us not only to 
believe in God, but also to suffer for His name. 
Hence, my dear father and mother, though I must 
here die for Christ's sake, and men say all manner 
of evil about me, let it not cause you sorrow ; for if 
they have called the Lord Beelzebub, how much 
more them that believe in Him ? Hence be not sur- 
prised, and only deal kindly with my little child, 
which I bore and gave birth to in great sorrow here 
in my bonds, which I love as my own soul, so that I 
can not write of it without tears, when I think of 
my dear husband, of whom I bore it, and that I 
must now leave it here. But the Lord knows why 
He has so ordered it that I had to leave here a little 
orphan child. I commend it to you, and to Him who 
created and made it ; I trust that He will not suffer 
it to be wronged, though it is here deprived of fa- 
ther and mother. The Lord well knows how I bore 
it, and for whose sake it was ; hence, exercise a pa- 
rental care for it, my dear father and you dear 
mother ; as long as you live show the love which 
you bear to me to my dear child ; he that loves the 
tree, will also love the branches. 

Oh, oh ! that the Lord would take it, what a great 
joy it would be to me, since I must die. O that it 
had been the will of the Lord, that I could yet have 
brought it up, in what great regard I should have 
held it for my dear husband's sake ; though I should 
have suffered want with it, I should not have parted 
with it ; but the will of the Lord be done. I am 
possibly not fit to offer up a sacrifice to the Lord ; 
He has perhaps some purpose with me, that He still 
suffers me to be confined here. I did not think 
that I would remain in confinement here so long. 
Hence, dear father, I was much afraid of long im- 
prisonment, and it has now come upon me, which 
greatly grieves me, as I well know that the expense 
here is very great, and that I am a great burden to 
my sister; for she has great trouble and expense 
here, though I know that she does it gladly from 
the heart. But, my dear father, I know that her 
ability is not great, and yet I do not know how to 
thank her fully for it, nor have I ever merited from 
her, what she has shown and given me ; for she has 
shown her love in time of need — one sometimes has 
friends indeed, till he needs them. In time of need 
one will know his friends. Oh, that I had been 
taken away at the first, that you would not have 
needed to have any expense on my account. But, 
my dear father and mother, I hope that you will not 
leave me in need; I hope that you will help my 
sister in paying for the board, though I wrote you 
in the letter, that it should remain, that you should 
keep it for my child. 

My father, you might well think that we did not 
have much to live on, since we did not have much 
when we were married, and our married life did 
not last long. Therefore I thought that you should 
keep that which was, though it is not much, for my 
child; and since you wrote that my sister would 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


989 


care for me, I thought that you were helping me 
therein, though my sister has done her best to help 
me, and I know that it is a great burden for her. 
And they have given me much, that I should not 
go into the dungeon, which I was willing to do, 
because it lasts so long, and the expense here is so 
great, though one is also not confined without ex- 
pense in the dungeon, in which one also can not 
see ; hence they do not wish to leave me in want, 
nor to let me go into the dungeon because of the 
money. 

Further, dear father, I inform you that I sent let- 
ters with Hans van der Dam, but I have not yet re- 
ceived an answer. If I am taken hence, make in- 
quiries whether there is still anything left ; it would 
come my child in good stead. I also wrote my 
child a testament, to remember me and its father by 
it. When it attains to the years of understanding, 
and you are still alive, cause it to read the same 
sometimes, that it may know why its father and 
mother died. Further, dear father, I know nothing 
special to write you ; but if I should write you no 
more, and I should soon enter on my journey, 
write me a letter speedily, how it is with you and 
my child ; and if you should hear from Hans, have 
my brother Passchier write a letter to send to his 
father. 

Nothing special for this time, but I herewith take 
leave and farewell from you my dear father and 
mother, and from all my dear brothers and sisters ; 
and for my sake do not forget my dear child; 
always remember me by it. Once more adieu ; greet 
my lady very heartily, and tell her I thank her 
much for all the favor she has shown me ; the Lord 
will leave no good deed unrewarded. Herewith 
farewell ; kiss my child for me, and often visit it. 
And greet Pleuntjen and Lieven most cordially in 
my name, and tell them that I request them to do 
the best with the child, for I have the confidence 
concerning them that they love it for my sake, for 
it is a pledge of love, which I love more than all else 
that is upon the earth. I hope now soon to follow 
my husband, if it is the Lord's will. Oh, that I 
might have died with him, to obtain the kingdom 
of God together with him. Herewith farewell, my 
dear father and mother; I commend you to God. 

By me, your dear daughter, imprisoned at Ant- 
werp for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

Janneken Munstdorp. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JANNEKEN MUNSTDORP, 

WIFE OF HANS VAN MUNSTDORP, TO HER SISTER ; 

WRITTEN WHEN SHE WAS CONFINED IN PRISON 

AT ANTWERP, FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS 

CHRIST, AND SENTENCED WITH THREE 

OTHERS TO BE BURNT; WRITTEN AT ONE 

O'CLOCK IN THE NIGHT, THE 5TH OF 

OCTOBER, IN THE YEAR OF OUR 

LORD 1573 

The abundant and unspeakable great grace of the 
Father, and the mercy of God, and the loving kind- 
ness and love of the Son ; with the communion of 


the Holy Ghost, who through grace has been sent 
us by the Father, through the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, to the comfort and joy of all faithful, 
true children of God, by whom we are all guided, 
taught and instructed ; the same keep your under- 
standing, heart and mind in Christ Jesus, to the 
praise and glory of the Father, to the salvation of 
your soul, and to the edification of all dear brethren 
and sisters that fear the Lord and love the truth. 
The same God, who only is wise, make you fit 
hereunto, to whom be glory, honor and power, 
might and strength, forever and ever, Amen, and 
for a perpetual adieu. After this, my heart's wish 
from God, for an adieu, and a perpetual farewell 
to you, my dear brethren in God, and to you, my 
very dear and chosen, affectionately beloved sis- 
ters [I would say that] the time has now come 
that we must part from one another ; I shall now be 
freed from all sorrow ; sorrowing and sighing shall 
befall me no more. My dear friends, adieu, adieu, 
we must now part here. Though the Lord has so 
ordered it with me, I am yet constrained to write 
you once more for the last time. True, I have 
written you adieu, but now it goes to my heart ; 
sentence has been passed upon me that I must die. 
I said to them, that they should take good heed — 
that our blood should be severely required at their 
hands. They said they did not do it, that it was the 
decree of the king. I said that this would not save 
them, but the Lord forgive you if you do it igno- 
rantly; but I think that you, in part, know well 
enough what kind of people we are. They washed 
their hands from it. I said: "Pilate did so too." 
They said that Pilate was a just judge, and that we 
acted contrary to the king's command. I said that 
we had greater reason to obey God, than the king ; 
it is a little matter that you inflict this temporal 
death upon us, for we know not how long we shall 
live, but we know that we must certainly die some- 
time ; and I said that they should take good heed 
with regard to shedding innocent blood. Thus we 
four were sentenced, and it will now soon be over 
with us. My dear brothers and sisters, the Lord 
has heard me, that I am permitted to offer up a 
sacrifice for His name. I did not think that the Lord 
did so love me; I have certainly never merited it 
of Him ; but He will make me fit hereunto through 
His grace. Oh, what a strong helper in distress we 
have, who does not let us be confounded. How 
short has seemed to me the time that I have been 
here, whereas I was previously so afraid of it ; and 
that He has so faithfully succored me in all my dis- 
tress, and now makes me so happy that I know 
nothing to say of sadness. Oh, oh ! how strong is 
our God; who should not want to fear Him? of 
whom will we be afraid ? God is with us ; who can 
be against us? At all events we must here leave 
everything behind. I may well say that there was 
never more joy in my heart, than I had when I was 
sentenced. My dear sister, fear not men who must 
pass away like grass ; for they can do no more than 
the Lord permits them. My dear brethren and sis- 


990 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ters, be not afraid ; if the Lord had permitted them, 
they would not have waited with me so long ; but 
now the Lord permits them. I am well pleased with 
it, that they shall remove me out of this evil, wicked 
world, from the evil that I might yet have had in it, 
so that I shall not be moved; for I expect no joy 
in this world, because of my dear husband, who 
went this way before me, and whom, by the grace 
of the Lord, I am now to follow, having long wait- 
ed for this time. I also go before you now ; follow 
me. This is the narrow way which the prophets 
and apostles went, who also had to drink the cup 
which we must now drink. We shall now soon have 
passed through this wilderness, as soon as we have 
drunk the bitter waters. Ex. 15:23. The time of 
travail is now at hand; weeping and mourning 
shall then be over. Oh, what a joy this is in my 
heart, so that I cannot describe it to you. Oh, how 
mightily the Lord works in us poor, weak vessels ; 
for I know that I have never merited it from the 
Lord, but am worthy of nothing but eternal death. 
If the Lord would enter into judgment with me, I 
should in no wise be saved ; but now I must expect 
salvation out of pure grace, and I doubt not that 
He will remember my past sins no more, as the 
prophet says : "When a sinner turns away from 
his wicked life, and does righteousness, he will re- 
member his unrighteousness no more." Ezek. 18: 
21, 27. 

O my dear and much beloved, chosen sister, 
whom I greatly love from the heart and this out 
of a godly love, you have shown me so much 
friendship, and assisted me in need, that I cannot 
fully requite you, since I am now but a poor, weak 
creature, and about to pay all that I owe, whether 
according to the flesh or according to the spirit. 
Hence, my dear sister, I cannot reward you, but 
I thank you very heartily (writing you still some 
more) for all that you have ever shown me. O dear 
sister, you write me that I should forgive you what 
you may have done amiss to me ; O my dear sister, 
you have done nothing amiss to me, but know that 
I fall short to you in many things ; but I trust that 
you will bury it with me, and remember it no more. 
I know that I fall short in everything; but: Christ 
died, to pay for that in which we fall short. Did He 
not die a bitter death for us, whereas He was with- 
out spot or wrinkle, and no guile was found in His 
mouth; how should we then not gladly die for a 
righteous man? hence let us not spare ourselves, 
but willingly go into death for the name of Christ, 
and not fear what men can do to us. Rom. 5 :7 ; 
Heb. 13 :6. 

And, my dear brother and sister, be of good 
cheer; though men put us to death, it is the will 
of the Lord. Pray, do not sorrow for me any more ; 
for I know that you have great sorrow on my ac- 
count. It is now all over; I shall soon have con- 
quered my last enemy, and be able to say with 
Paul : "I have fought a good fight, I have finished 
my course, I have kept the faith : henceforth there 


is laid up for me a crown of righteousness." I Co- 
rinthians 15:26; II Tim. 4:7,8. 

I shall soon be an epistle to you, which may be 
read of all men. II Cor. 3 :2. And, my dear sister, 
though we must part here, know that it is for some- 
thing better ; we have neither hour nor time. It is 
so glorious to die for His name, and Peter says : 
"Rejoice if you suffer and endure for well-doing ; 
this is acceptable with God." I Pet 4 -14 • 3 -17 • 2 • 
20. ' ' ' 

But, my dear sister, it is now my turn; it may 
very soon, perhaps tomorrow, be your turn ; be of 
good courage, and patiently abide your time, my 
dearest sister. You write me in regard to my child ; 
I have confidence in you that you will do your best 
with it. I have committed it to the Lord, to do His 
good pleasure with it, and to move your heart to it. 
For, dear sister, I trust that you love me from the 
heart, and they that love the tree will also love the 
branches. I read your letter again with tears, when 
I heard that you were so sad on my account, and 
that I was so joyful. 

O my dear sister, how glad I was that I had 
kissed you once more. Grieve not, that you have 
not visited me more ; I did not take it amiss, for 
I well know that you did not lack the will : my dear 
sister, you have done so much for me. O my dear 
brother and sister, I would write you more yet, 
of the hope that is now in me, but I cannot write 
you so much; it is much greater still [than I have 
described to you]. I hope that you will take this 
in good part, and will herewith bid you a perpetual 
adieu ; and do the best with each other. And you, 
my dear brother, pray, comfort my dear sister in 
her tribulation which she has on my account, for 
I love her from the bottom of my heart. Parting 
is grievous according to the flesh, but according to 
the spirit I thank and praise the Lord, that I am 
permitted to offer up such a sacrifice, which can be 
acceptable to him ; yea, that I can offer up my flesh 
and blood at the stake. Gladly I give it to Him 
that gave it me; though I had seven bodies, I 
should gladly deliver them up for the Lord's sake. 
Pray the Lord heartily for me, that I may now 
make strait paths for my feet, to the edification of 
all dear brethren and sisters. Herewith adieu. I 
have sent knit-needles for my daughter ; keep them, 
and do the best with her. I also leave you here a 
poor little orphan without father or mother: the 
Lord be your dear Father, and I commend you to 
Him that created and made you. My sister, I wish 
you would keep my lamb in remembrance of me, 
and I sent some sugar for you and your daughter, 
of which I ate when I was sentenced ; and thank 
Engel much in my name for the pot of wine, and 
tell him adieu. I know nothing special now to com- 
mit to you, but do the best with my young lamb ; 
the Lord will not leave unrewarded what you do 
for His name. Bid my father and mother, my dear 
brethren and sisters, adieu and farewell; adieu 
and farewell to all; farewell to my dear brethren 
and chosen sisters, whom I love from the depth of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


991 


my heart ; I greet you once more with the holy kiss 
of peace, as though I were present with you ; kiss 
one another. My fellow sisters who are with me 
also greet you, and have kissed me once for you, 
and I have done the same for you. My dear, chosen 
brethren and dear sisters, weary not of Jesus 
Christ. I hope to go before you yet to the heavenly 
city, to wait for you under the altar with all the 
chosen saints; follow me. My dear chosen sister, 
I must now go before you, where I shall enjoy bliss. 
Adieu, sister dear ; remember me still ; the time of 
travail is at hand, to offer up my sacrifice at the 
stake, much beloved. Herewith I commend you to 
the Lord. 

I shall seal this with my blood. Adieu, adieu, 
my dearest brethren and sisters, with your little 
lamb, and also mine, which I bore under my heart. 
I have written this for you yet after I was sen- 
tenced, after one o'clock in the night; however, it 
was not irksome to me. I take leave and bid you 
adieu once more, till we meet hereafter, where 
men shall separate us no more. Adieu, till we to- 
gether drink the new wine which Christ shall give 
us at His table. Matt. 26 :29. This other letter is 
from Augustijn, who sent it to me. Adieu, adieu, 
all of you adieu. I shall follow Hans, my dear 
husband. The lady with her midwife, and her 
nurse are going now, and shall receive a like re- 
ward. Nothing more from me, but adieu for the 
last time. Follow me. 

Fear God; this is the conclusion. 


shall knock and not be heard, and, with too late 
repentance and sorrow of heart, shall have to re- 
main excluded. 


SUSANNEKEN AND KALLEKEN CLAES, A. D. 1573 

In the year 1573, at Ghent, in Flanders, there 
were also apprehended, for following Christ, two 
sisters, young maidens, named Susanneken and 
Kalleken Claes, or Draeyaerts, the former aged 
about twenty-six, and the other about twenty-four 
years. While imprisoned in the Saucelet, the city 
prison, they had to suffer many entreaties and 
afflictions from the enemies of the truth, in all of 
which they steadfastly adhered to their only Shep- 
herd, Lord, and the Author of their faith, to help 
them bear His bloody banner, His cross, and re- 
proach, and, as courageous heroines, to strive val- 
iantly unto death, which they had to taste for His 
name; for as they remained steadfast, and would 
in no wise depart from the divine truth, nor from 
the true faith, upon which they, according to 
Christ's ordinance, had received baptism, they 
were finally sentenced to death as heretics, and, on 
the 4th of December of the aforesaid year, and 
with balls tied into their mouths, to prevent them 
from speaking or confessing with their mouths the 
cause of their innocent, fearless, voluntary, and 
God-pleasing death and sacrifice, they were 
brought into the Friday market, and there publicly 
burned at the stake, going thus with burning lamps, 
and the oil of love in their vessels, to meet their 
Forerunner and Bridegroom, who will let them in, 
as wise virgins, to His marriage, when the foolish 


ANTHONIS YSBAERTS, A. D. 1573 

While the Duke of Alva so dreadfully perse- 
cuted, and tyrannized over, the believers, there was 
also apprehended and put to death, for his faith and 
the practice of the truth, at Tielt, in Flanders, one 
Anthonis Ysbaerts, who had been a servant of the 
High Bailiff of Ghent, and consequently often at- 
tended the executions of the saints, where he did 
not always with a sin-desiring, unconcerned, vain 
mind, nor with blinded eyes, behold the invincible 
steadfastness in the faith, and the joyful peace of 
mind, of the Christians, who in the midst of their 
innocent sufferings undauntedly confessed, pro- 
claimed and magnified the name of God; but he 
was finally so stirred and troubled by it in his 
heart, that he forsook not only the service of his 
temporal lord, but also the worship of idols, and 
betook himself henceforth to become a servant of 
God, notwithstanding he had many times witnessed 
what had befallen others on this account, [and 
knew] that he had to expect the same, as it also 
occurred with him. 

As soon as he had betaken himself to hear the 
word of God, and to follow Christ, and so advanced 
therein, that he was considered worthy to receive 
baptism upon his faith, and to be received as a fel- 
low member of the church of Christ, he had to flee 
the country, and thus went to Vriesland, where he, 
not being conversant with any trade, could earn 
only a very precarious living. In the meantime it 
happened that a brother who had also fled from 
Tielt (mentioned above) on account of his faith, 
and come to live in Vriesland, and who had left be- 
hind much property, hired this Anthonis, and sent 
him to Tielt, to arrange his unsettled affairs, and 
save his effects and convey them to him, as much as 
he conveniently could. When he had attended to all 
the things with which he had been charged, and was 
just on the point of returning to Vriesland, the 
bailiff of Tielt came to him, and asked him, whether 
he did not belong to the same people as those that 
had sent him out, which when he did not dare deny, 
the bailiff sent for his beadles, and had him con- 
ducted to prison, where he had to resist not a little 
vexation and torment ; but when he, in all things, 
steadfastly adhered to the accepted truth, he was 
finally, pursuant to the king's decree, sentenced to 
death, to be burnt alive as a heretic. 

This sentence having been read to him, he re- 
quested permission to speak a word, and this being 
granted, he asked the lords whether they did not 
think that such a sentence was too cruel for him, 
who had not done anything amiss to any one. This 
produced such a commotion among the judges, that 
they held a consultation and concluded that he 
should first be strangled, and then burnt. He 
thanked them that they had shown him so much 
mercy. 


992 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


There was also with him one Friar Pieter de 
Backer, who sought to converse much with him. 
in order to cause him to apostatize, but he mostly 
refused all he said, finally saying : "Let me alone ; 
my heart is of good cheer, my departure is very 
near at hand, for the bell which is striking now 
shall not strike another time before I hope to have 
offered up my sacrifice, and to be at home with 
my Redeemer, in whom all my hope and confidence 
rests." 

He was therefore brought forth to die, in very 
mean attire, for which he had exchanged his own 
clothes, which were better, giving the latter to one 
who was imprisoned for his crime, and was short- 
ly to be released. 

When he came to the stake where he was to offer 
up his sacrifice, he kneeled down and offered up an 
earnest prayer to God, and then voluntarily pre- 
pared himself for death. But when the executioner 
was to strangle him, he could not find his twist- 
ingstick ; hence the bailiff with his sword cut off a 
piece from the torch which they had to light the 
fire, that it might be used for a twistingstick. 
Thereupon he, commending his spirit into the 
hands of God, sweetly fell asleep in the Lord, and 
when he had been strangled, the fire was lighted to 
burn him. And just as this was taking place, there 
arose such a terrible storm, that many people were 
frightened, and were of the opinion that God there- 
by meant to show His displeasure upon the tyranny 
inflicted upon His elect. 


FIFTY-FOUR PERSONS, BRETHREN AS WELL AS SIS- 
TERS, NAMELY, THIRTY-SEVEN AT ANTWERP 
AND SEVENTEEN AT BRUSSELS, VERY UN- 
MERCIFULLY BURNT FOR THE TESTI- 
MONY OF JESUS CHRIST, IN THE 
YEAR 1574 

After manifold and long tyranny, torturing, mur- 
dering and killing of the children of God, it: further 
occurred, in the year 1 574, through the order of the 
most dreadful, bloodthirsty tyrant, the Duke of 
Alva, that there were apprehended, in a meeting, at 
Antwerp, in Brabant, thirty-seven persons, and at 
Brussels, in Brabant, at one time, seventeen per- 
sons, men, women, widows, and young maidens, 
who, in the places stated here, were very severely 
confined, and tortured and examined with dreadful 
tyranny, to cause them to apostatize from the truth 
of the holy Gospel, and from following Christ, 
and to obey again the papistic superstitions, to- 
gether with all their trumpery of human ordi- 
nances and commandments militating against God. 
Especially were they dreadfully tyrannized and tor- 
tured, that they should inform against their fellow 
believers, and deliver them up into the hands of the 
executioners and torturers, since they were by no 
means sated yet, but greatly thirsted after more in- 
nocent blood. But these valiant heroes and men 
of God courageously resisted and overcame, 
through faith and the invincible power of God 


(which was in them), the subtle and tyrannical 
wiles of the devil. Hence the blind scribes de- 
clared them heretics, and delivered them into the 
hands of the secular authorities. These, made 
drunk with the wine of the Babylonian whore, al- 
lowed themselves, this and many other times, to 
be used as the executioners and obedient servants 
of these idolatrous priests and monks, and caused 
all these fifty-four persons to be unmercifully 
burnt, at different times, so that they all died 
steadfastly, and scattered and confirmed the faith 
of the eternal truth with their death and blood. 
And though open thieves and murderers were per- 
mitted to open their mouths and confess to the by- 
standing people their distress, as also to call upon 
the God of heaven for forgiveness of their sins, 
yet the awful tyranny and envy against the true 
children of God were so great, that this was fre- 
quently denied them, and to this end they filled the 
mouths of the pious witnesses of God with gags 
and balls, so that they were not able to proclaim 
to the by-standing people their innocence and the 
true reason why they suffered this. But the priests 
and monks having noticed that these pious men of 
God, when they came to the place of execution, 
freed themselves from these gags and balls, and 
spoke to the people from the word of God; the 
monks, in order to prevent this, had instruments 
made resembling vises, between which they made 
the prisoners stick their tongues, which they then 
had screwed fast, and the tips thereof touched with 
a red-hot iron, that they should swell up and thus 
not slip back. And this new and abominable inven- 
tion of the monks, these tyrants, to their own per- 
petual shame, used on the persons mentioned here. 

All this these true witnesses of Jesus suffered, 
and were, as humble sheep and lambs of Christ, led 
to the slaughter, who did not resist, but were thus 
unjustly put to death by them. But this deed, it is 
to be feared, will at the coming of Christ, when it 
will be too late to repent, exceedingly smart their 
eyes ; while these brave heroes and heroines who so 
valiantly strove for the name of the Lord, will by 
their Bridegroom Christ Jesus upon mount Zion, 
be rewarded with the crown of eternal glory ; for 
the fight is now fought, and they are now resting 
under the altar. 

Whoever will, let him read Emanuel van Meter- 
en, the laudable historian of the High Lords States ; 
printed A. D. 1614. On page 99 this matter will be 
found verified. 


ADRIAEN HOEDEMAECKER AND MATTHEUS REUSE 
A. D. 1574 

At Bruges, in Flanders, in the year 1574, there 
were also apprehended for following and practic- 
ing the doctrine of Christ and His apostles, one 
Adriaen Hoedemaecker, called Kort Adriaentgen 
[Short Adrian] of Ghent, and one Mattheus 
Keuse, and after they had been in confinement for a 
time, they were, for the steadfast confession of their 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


993 



Anton Ijsbaerts burned at Tielt in Flanders, AD 1573 


faith, sentenced to be burned. When they came 
upon the scaffold, to offer up their sacrifice, the 
priest addressed several remarks to them, where- 
upon the executioner said to him : "Attend to your 
preaching." The executioner then kissed these 
brethren, and comforted them with the Word of 
God, hearing which the priest or confessor said to 
him: "Attend to your office, for preaching is my 
business." After this and other things, these two 
brethren boldly offered up their burnt sacrifice to 
the Lord, and commended their souls into His 
hands, thus taking their departure out of this vale 
of tears ; to enter into the eternal joy with God and 
all His saints. 


HANS PELTNER, A. D. 1574 

In the year 1574, Hans Peltner, a tailor, at Rot- 
tenhosen in Imtal, was apprehended for his faith, 
and the divine truth, who had to endure many dis- 
putations and temptations, from the priests as well 
as others, all of which he very valiantly resisted, 
and with the Word of God testified to the truth, to 
which he by the help of God would adhere unto 
death. On this account he was finally sentenced to 


death, and conducted forth to the place of execu- 
tion, where he exhorted the people to desist from 
sin and repent. He then kneeled down, turning his 
face to the East, or the rising of the sun, lifted up 
his hands to heaven, and poured out an earnest 
prayer to God his heavenly Father, thanking 
and praising Him for all the grace and benefits 
shown him and that He had made him worthy to 
suffer for His name. He also prayed for all men 
who were worthy, that God would put repentance 
and amendment into their hearts. Finally he com- 
mended his spirit into the hands of God, for whose 
name he was willing to offer up again his life and 
body (which he had received from Him), and to 
testify to His truth even to his last drop of blood, as 
he had promised Him in baptism, and would thus 
expect to be received of Him into His gracious 
arms. 

This prayer was too long for the executioner's 
patience, for he wanted him to shorten it ; but the 
judges said that he should let him pray to his 
heart's content, since it was his last time. 

When he had finished praying, he rose and went 
boldly toward the executioner, so that neither his 
face nor his color changed, but he knelt down again 


994 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


so intrepidly, that the executioner was conster- 
nated by his valiant praying and undaunted mind, 
and became afraid to execute him. 

When the executioner removed the collar from 
his neck, previous to seizing his sword, he asked 
him once more, whether he would renounce ; but he 
would not. Thereupon the executioner proceeded, 
beheaded him, and then burned his dead body. 
Thus this Christian hero freely testified to the truth 
with his blood, and in no wise suffered himself to be 
separated from the way of eternal life in Christ. 
Hence the Lord, the Judge of the living and the 
dead, who holds in His hand the judgment and the 
souls of them that have died for the faith, shall 
raise him up at the last day, and cause him to ap- 
pear before Him, where he shall inherit a martyr's 
crown and all that God has promised His own. 


EEYTSE AYSESS OF OLDENBORN PUT TO DEATH 
FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, AT 
LEEUWAERDEN, ON THE 23l) OF APRIL, IN 
THE YEAR 1574, TOGETHER WITH VARIOUS 
LETTERS WRITTEN BY HIM WHILE IM- 
PRISONED AT THAT PLACE 

The first letter of Reytse Aysess, written in his 

prison, how he zvas betrayed, apprehended and 

put into bonds by the bailiff, called An- 

dries Grief, and boldly and fearlessly 

acknowledged and confessed his 

faith 

It happened in the year 1573, the 18th of Sep- 
tember, that I came to Oldenborn, where I met the 
bailiff, who requested me to go with him, saying 
that he had something to tell me. When we had 
entered his house, he asked me where I lived. I 
replied: "In Bechsterswaegh." He then asked me 
how old I was ; I said that I did not know it accu- 
rately. He further asked me where I had stayed 
over night. I said: "In my father's house." He 
asked me whether H. had not been there ; to which 
I made no reply. Then he urged me so hard in re- 
gard to it, that I finally said, "Yes." He then 
asked me concerning many others. I kept silence 
for a long time. Finally, after many temptations, I 
said that W. had also been there, and that formerly 
we had been very intimate friends ; and after some 
other conversation which we had together I was 
silent. He then put fetters on me, and wanted to 
instruct me from the ancient fathers of fifteen hun- 
dred years ago, and from other writings not con- 
tained in the New Testament. I said that I would 
accept no other writings than the New Testament. 

The next day, in the morning, the substitute of 
Leeuwaerden came, who tempted me very much, to 
tell who all had been at my father's house ; but the 
almighty God kept my lips. Hence they took me 
to Leeuwaerden, and cast me into a dungeon, in 
which there were eight who cared nothing for God. 
There I at first became very sorrowful, and day 
and night called upon the Almighty God, that He 


would keep me; and He enlightened my heart, for 
which I praise and thank the eternal Father for His 
great benefits shown me. After I had been confined 
there five days, they brought me into another 
prison, to a lord, for which 1 praised and thanked 
God. 


DIVERS EXAMINATIONS OF REYTSE AYSESS BEFORE 

THE COMMISSARY, PASTORS, PRIESTS, 

BISHOPS, AND OTHERS 

On the sixth day they brought me before the 
commissary, and in going thither there met me an 
old man, who bade me "good evening." 1 re- 
turned the compliment, however was frightened 
when I saw him. But he said to me : "You have 
a bad commissary" ; and he conversed much more 
with me, and instructed me how I should answer 
the commissary; and so I went in. 

The commissary bade me "Good day," and I 
wished him the same. He then asked me: "What 
is your business here?" I replied: "I have been 
brought here against my will." He further asked 
what I believed. Ans. "I believe in God almighty; 
and that there is but one Lord, one faith, and one 
baptism, by which we can be saved." He said that 
he also believed that, but that I was seduced. I said : 
"Is God then a seducer?" Commissary. "No; 
but you have been seduced by Menno and other 
seducers." I said that I did not rely on men, but 
on the word of the Lord. He said that I should 
suffer myself to be instructed by the holy Catholic 
Church, since God Himself had ordained apostles, 
doctors [teachers] and pastors. I said that I be- 
lieved nothing but the Word of God and the New 
Testament. He then asked me, whether I was bap- 
tized. I said : "Yes, upon my faith, as Christ has 
commanded." He then made a long speech, that 
Christ had received flesh and blood from Mary, 
and that I must believe this ; and many other words 
we had together. He then asked me, when I had 
been to confession and the sacrament the last time. 
I replied: "Never in my life;" and many other re- 
marks we had together. Thus he admonished me, 
that I should suffer myself to be instructed by the 
holy church, and then he went away. This oc- 
curred on Friday. 

After I had been in confinement six weeks and 
a half, they took me to the Poorte, where was the 
pastor of Nyehoof (who was pastor of Enchuysen) 
with an advocate. These asked me on what I had 
determined. I said that I would adhere to the 
word of the Lord. They then produced a letter, in 
which was written all that I had confessed. There- 
upon they asked me, whether I considered the 
church of the Mcnnists a true church. I said : "You 
call it so, but I regard it as the true church of 
God." This they wrote down. Then they asked 
me, whether I was baptized upon my faith. I said : 
"Yes." They also asked me whether I had not 
been baptized in my infancy. I said: "Yes; but 
that was no baptism as Christ commanded, for 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


995 


Christ taught to repent, amend, and then to be bap- 
tized for the remission of sins. See, so I was bap- 
tized." Then they said that infants were born in 
original sin ; hence they had to be cleansed by bap- 
tism. I replied : "Christ has redeemed us from the 
fall and transgression of Adam; hence He says 
Himself, that to the children belongs the kingdom 
of heaven." They said: "Yes, those were circum- 
cised children." Then they asked whether I had 
been in the church of the Mennists. I replied that 
I had been in the church of God. This they wrote 
down. Ques. "What do you hold concerning the 
Roman church?" Ans. "Nothing." Ques. "What 
do you hold touching the sacrament?" Ans. "I 
have never in all my life read of a sacrament, but 
of the Lord's Supper; and this I indeed want to 
observe, as Christ has commanded it ; but of yours 
I think nothing." Ques. "Do you believe that God 
is almighty?" I said: "Yes." "And whether God 
therefore should not come into the bread which 
they break?" Ans. "This I never believed." They 
also asked whether I did not believe that Christ had 
received flesh and blood from Mary. I briefly said 
that I did not believe it. These are principally the 
articles which they asked me, and they noted down 
every thing. I then asked the priest: "If I should 
fulfill your will, would you be willing to be respon- 
sible for my soul ?" He said : "Yes, for you and 
the whole world." I said that this was as the apos- 
tle says: While they promise them liberty, they 
themselves are the servants of corruption (II Peter 
2:19). He said that this was not spoken to them. 
And after some more conversation which we had, 
they told me to go, and we bade one another adieu 
for this time. 

After I had been in prison seven weeks, I was 
again taken to the Poorte, into a large hall, where 
were three priests, one of whom was the one of 
Nyehoof , with whom I have often been ; the other 
was a Friesian. These asked me what I had de- 
termined on. I replied that by the help of God I 
would adhere to the word of the Lord. He said 
that it was not the Word of God, and that I was 
seduced ; he was sorry, because we were both Frie- 
sians ; "for," said he, "when one has temporal mat- 
ters on hand that he does not understand, he seeks 
advice from those that are wise and knowing in 
such matters, and suffers himself to be instructed ; 
hence it is necessary that one also suffer himself 
to be instructed by wise men of the holy Church, 
in matters from which depends eternal salvation." 
Ans. "Whoever rightly instructs me with the word 
of the Lord, him I will gladly hear; but by your 
instruction I should be seduced." They said that I 
was already seduced; but if I would suffer myself 
to be instructed by the holy church, they would 
pledge their souls for me at the last day. I replied 
that they should have enough to do with their own 
souls. But with them it was a settled thing, that I 
was seduced. So we finally came to infant baptism. 

They said that infants were born in original sin. 
I said: "Christ made us free, and called the chil- 


dren to Him, declaring that to such belongs the 
kingdom of God." Priest. "Flesh or blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of God; hence we must be 
born of water and of the Spirit; therefore it fol- 
lows that infants must be baptized, if they are to 
be regenerated and inherit the kingdom of God." 
Reytse. "Children are in the grace of God as long 
as they are in their ignorance, and they are washed 
through the blood of Christ ; hence baptism in their 
case is vain and to no purpose." Priest. "How do 
you understand regeneration?" Reytse. "A man 
must truly repent and amend his life, with a con- 
trite heart confess his sins before God, that he is 
sincerely sorry for them, and with confidence call 
to God for forgiveness, and thus believe in God's 
Word and submit to it in all obedience ; upon such 
confession he is to receive baptism for the remis- 
sion of sins; this certainly cannot be done by in- 
fants." Priest. "Nevertheless, infants must be 
baptized; for the apostles baptized entire house- 
holds, and there doubtless, were also children." 
Reytse. "The house of Stephanas addicted them- 
selves to the ministry of the saints, which no chil- 
dren can do." (I Cor. 16:15). They then asserted 
that first the apostles, and after them the holy fath- 
ers, had instituted it, fifteen hundred years ago. I 
said that the pope had instituted it, who wanted to 
improve on Christ. 

Then they were mad, and said that I was se- 
duced, and should plunge my soul and body into 
perdition. I said they might take my life, but my 
soul I should save unto life eternal. Priest. "What 
do you think of the holy Roman Church ?" Reytse. 
"I do not believe in it." Priest. "Do you not be- 
lieve that the priests can forgive sin?" Reytse. 
"No; for it is God alone that can forgive sin." 
This they wrote down. Priest. "Do you not be- 
lieve that God's flesh and blood are in the bread 
which we break?" Reytse. "No." Priest. "This 
is clear enough; for Christ says: 'Take, eat; this 
is my body;' this you cannot contradict." Reytse. 
"Christ gave His disciples bread to eat and wine to 
drink, as the evangelists testify, and not His body, 
for He still sat there bodily at the table with them. 
And to His disciples who understood His words 
carnally, as you do, and murmured at it, He said : 
'The flesh profiteth nothing : the words that I speak 
unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.' John 
6 :63. His flesh and blood He gave as a redemption 
for many, and not that His flesh is to be eaten. He 
is sitting at the right hand of God His almighty 
Father, and shall not come thence, before He shall 
judge the quick and the dead; hence He shall not 
come under your teeth." Priest. "Nevertheless 
Paul says: 'The bread which we break, is it not 
the body of Christ ? and the cup which we bless, is 
it not the blood of Christ ?' hence we must believe 
that God's flesh and blood are in the holy sacra- 
ment." Reytse. "I have not read of a sacrament, 
but of the Lord's Supper ; this I indeed want to ob- 
serve with the church of God, but yours I do not 
desire." 


996 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


They said much more with regard to it, which is 
too lengthy for me to relate. They esteemed the 
sacrament so highly, that whenever they name it, 
they raise their caps, and they looked sharply at 
me, because I would not show it reverence too. 
They also asked me whether I did not believe that 
Christ had received flesh and blood from Mary. 
I said that Christ came by His divine power out of 
heaven, was conceived in Mary through the Holy 
Ghost, and born of her, and took upon Him the 
form of a servant, and became like unto us in all 
things, except sin, so that He was not born of the 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, and did not re- 
ceive flesh or blood from Mary, which came to pass 
in such a manner, that Mary at first could not un- 
derstand it herself, for she asked the angel : "How 
shall this be, seeing I know not a man ?" The angel 
answered her : "The Holy Ghost shall come upon 
thee, and the power of the Highest shall over- 
shadow thee : therefore also that holy thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." 
Luke 1 :34, 35. Against this they did not say much. 
Priest. "Do you not believe that the saints in 
heaven are to be honored and worshiped ?" Reytse. 
"I indeed desire to honor the saints, for men are 
honored ; but not to worship them. But I want to 
worship God alone, for it is written : 'Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt 
thou serve.' " Matt. 4:10. Priest. "What do you 
believe of purgatory?" Reytse. "I have not read 
that there is a purgatory; where is it written?" 
Priest. "In the books of the Maccabees." 

He further admonished me, that I should suffer 
myself to be instructed by the holy church, which 
had stood for fifteen hundred years, while our sect 
had existed only fifty years, for Menno Symons had 
first introduced it. Reytse. "There were from the 
beginning of the world two classes of people, a peo- 
ple of God and a people of the devil. But the chil- 
dren of God have always been persecuted and dis- 
persed, so that they have always been in a minority, 
and sometimes very few in number, so that they had 
to hide themselves in caves and dens, and as they 
are not of the world, the world does also not know 
them ; but the ungodly have always been powerful, 
and have prevailed, and therefore you do not know 
the children of God, neither did your fathers know 
them, and you think that they have only now 
arisen." 

They said that I was seduced ; their church had 
always existed from the beginning. I said : "When 
we shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 
it will be found otherwise ; then you will say : These 
are they whom we had in derision : O how they are 
now numbered among the children of God." Wis- 
dom 5 :3, 5. They also told me that I should not 
concern myself with the Scriptures, but simply go 
to church, and suffer myself to be instructed there, 
and not be obstinate, since the Scripture says that 
every word is established in the mouth of two or 
three witnesses, and hence I was bound to believe 
them. Reytse. "I believe the word of the Lord far 


more than your testimony ; I do not want to depart 
from it, and hope by the help of God to live and 
die for it, because Christ says: 'Whosoever shall 
confess me before men, him will I confess also be- 
fore my Father which is in heaven.' " Matthew 
10:32. 

We had many other words, which it would take 
too long to relate. They approached me so with 
sophistry, that if the Lord had not been on my side, 
I would have had to succumb ; so that I may well 
say : "The Lord is my helper, of whom shall I be 
afraid?" Ps. 56:11. 

After I had been in prison nine weeks, I was 
again conducted to the Poorte, where were two 
priests and the bishop's commissary; one was the 
priest of Nyehoof, the other was from the country. 
When I came to them, I uncovered my head, and 
greeted them. They first asked me on what I had 
determined, whether I would not amend. I said: 
"Yes, as much as is in my ability." They then 
produced a letter, which contained the article 
which I had previously confessed ; this they read to 
me and asked whether I would adhere to it. I said ; 
"Yes." They said, then I was damned, and should 
plunge soul and body into eternal perdition. Reytse. 
"How dare you condemn me so dreadfully, where- 
as judgment belongs to the Lord?" Priest. "You 
have offended against the Scriptures, and apos- 
tatized from the holy church, which has stood for 
fifteen hundred years, while your sect has not ex- 
isted more than forty years ; and you have suffered 
yourself to be rebaptized, whereas you had been 
baptized before." 

Then we had many words again concerning bap- 
tism; his conclusion was, that children which die 
without baptism are damned forever. Reytse. "And 
are you not afraid, so dreadfully to condemn the 
innocent children, when Christ has promised them 
the kingdom of heaven, so long as they remain in 
their innocence?" Priest. "No one can enter into 
the kingdom of heaven, he must first be born of 
water and of the Spirit; hence children must be 
baptized, if they are to be saved; the apostle also 
baptized many households, where certainly there 
were also children." Reytse. "So far as the house- 
holds are concerned, it is written that the house of 
Stephanas addicted themselves to the ministry of 
the saints, which is certainly not a work of children. 
I Cor. 16:15. And of the house of Cornelius it is 
written: 'That when Cornelius, the centurion of 
Caesarea, had called together his friends and kins- 
men into his house, he said among other things to 
Peter: Thou hast well done that thou art come. 
Now therefore are we all here present before God, 
to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. 
And while Peter yet spake these words, the Holy 
Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. And 
they of the circumcision which believed were aston- 
ished, as many as came with Peter, because that on 
the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the 
Holy Ghost. For they heard them speak with 
tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


997 


can any man forbid water, that these should not be 
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as 
well as we?' Acts 10:33, 44-47. From this you can 
easily perceive, if you are not entirely struck with 
blindness, that this is not spoken of children. Again, 
Paul preached the word of God to the jailer and to 
all that were in his house, and after they were bap- 
tized he rejoiced with all those that were in his 
house, that he had come to believe in God (Acts 
16:34), which is above the understanding of chil- 
dren, for to understand the preaching of the Word 
of God, to believe in it, and to rejoice on account 
of the faith, this is far from children." Then they 
said that there were many other writings that tes- 
tified with regard to it ; but I did not want to re- 
ceive any writings except the New Testament, 
which Christ sealed with His precious blood. Then 
they asked me, whether the children of the heathen 
and the Turks should also be saved. I said : "Yes, 
as well as your baptized children." Then they were 
greatly astonished, and spoke scornfully to me and 
damned me. One of the priests sat by me, and 
asked me how I dared speak such words ; he knew 
that I was damned, as well as he knew that I was 
sitting by him. I laughingly said: "How could 
you know it better ?" And after many words which 
we had about infant baptism, I finally said that I 
believed nothing but what I had confessed. They 
again asked me, whether I did not believe that our 
Lord is present in the form of bread. I said : "This 
I do not believe ; for He will not come under your 
teeth." I asked the priest whether he believed it. 
Then he held out his finger and said he believed 
more certainly that God was in the bread, than he 
believed that that was his finger. And after other 
words which we had together, they got some clean 
paper and asked all the articles of me anew: 
whether I acknowledged the church of the Men- 
nists as a true church, and how long it was since 
I had been baptized. I said: About four years. 
And so on, they asked all the articles of me again. 
I answered them in the same manner as before, and 
they noted down everything exactly, to deliver it to 
the lords. Finally, when all the remarks had been 
concluded, they produced a letter, which was the 
sentence which the bishop had concluded over me, 
in which they damned me as an unbelieving, diso- 
bedient and obstinate heretic, and delivered me into 
the hands of the secular judges. Since he had suffi- 
ciently admonished me, and I would not let myself 
be instructed, he, like Pilate, took water and 
washed his hands, and also thought that he was 
clear of my blood ; hence I had to expect the sen- 
tence, and many other words. Then they told me 
to go. 

After I had been in prison twelve weeks, they led 
me into the castellan's house, where were the bish- 
op with a councillor, the pastor of Oudenhoof, the 
pastor of Nyehoof, the pastor of Jorwert, and the 
bishop's commissary. After they had taken their 
seats, they called me, and when I came in I took 
off my hat and sat as a sheep in the midst of a 


troop of wolves. They looked at me sharply and 
earnestly ; but the Lord my God, in whom I trust, 
strengthened me and gave me a bold heart, so that 
I was fearless before them all. The bishop com- 
menced, and asked me whether I would still con- 
tinue in the faith. I was silent for awhile, for it 
seemed unnecessary to me to answer that question ; 
but he had so much to say, that I was finally com- 
pelled to defend myself; for I had resolved not to 
dispute any more. Thus I occasionally reproved and 
contradicted their foolish ignorance, for I was 
grieved that the truth should be so blasphemed ; 
and that they should not think that I would listen 
to them. The sum and substance of what they said 
was, that I was seduced, and that those who had 
taught me had been seducers, as Menno, who was 
a vagabond. I said that I did not rely upon Menno, 
or human doctrine, but only upon the Word of 
God ; in this I desire by the help of the Lord to live 
and to die. We also had many other words, as, of 
infant baptism. I said : "It is not contained in the 
Scriptures, that the children are to be baptized ; if 
this had been the will of the Lord, He would doubt- 
less have commanded it : but since there is nothing 
written concerning it, and neither our Lord Jesus 
Christ nor His apostles have made mention of it, 
it is a great presumption, that we poor, vain human 
creatures want to improve it, whereas it is written, 
that we are not to add to, or take away from the 
Lord's commandments : he that does this, upon him 
eternal woe is pronounced" (Deut. 4:2; Prov. 
30:6; Revelation 22:18). 

Finally the bishop said that none of all the 
articles so surprised him, than this : That I did not 
believe that the Lord Jesus Christ is now per- 
sonally man in heaven, just as He was upon earth, 
with wounds and stripes which He received from 
the Jews. This I would not accept because I had 
not read of it, but I said : "I believe that He is now 
in the Divinity, sitting at the right hand of the Al- 
mighty Father, in His glory, and shall come again 
with power and majesty, as the Scripture testifies 
with regard to it." Then the bishop took the Bible, 
and read the vision which John had seen in the 
Island of Patmos, of one who was like unto the 
Son of man; and when he had read it, he closed 
the book, for it contradicted him. A man can cer- 
tainly not be of such a nature in his members, as 
John declares of that vision. 

They then rehearsed the articles of my faith 
anew, and I confessed as I had always confessed 
before; and after they had noted it down, they 
went away. The councillor said that I had forfeit- 
ed my life, according to the decree. They then took 
me back into prison. 

I would have related all these matters at length, 
but my gift is small, and my hand heavy for writ- 
ing; hence I must run over them very briefly. 

After I had been imprisoned about thirteen 
weeks, they conducted me once more into the cas- 
tellan's house, where was the pastor of Nyehoof, 
who again began to say that Christ is now person- 


998 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


ally in heaven, as He was upon earth, in like form 
as we are. I defended myself, and proved it to him 
from John's Revelation. He said that no one could 
understand John's Revelation, which surprised me. 
And in all his remarks he called me brother. I 
said: "Why do you call me brother? I do not 
want to be your brother." He answered that he 
hoped that we should yet become one fold. And 
after some more conversation he left me. 


ANOTHER CONFESSION WHICH REYTSE AYSESS 

MADE BEFORE THE BISHOP, ON THE StH 

OF JANUARY, A. D. 1574 

The love of God, the communion of the Holy 
Ghost, and the love of the Father, who gave His 
only Son for us all, keep, strengthen and confirm 
you and us all unto the end, that we may hereafter 
come to the Shepherd Jesus Christ. My affectionate 
request of you, my cordially beloved friends, is, 
that you make haste to enter into his rest. Heb 
4:11. 

After all proper salutation, let me inform your 
love, that on the fifth day of this year, 1574, I was 
before the bishop, who said: "Good-day, and a 
Blessed New Year. Will you not yet give yourself 
to the holy Catholic faith, in which all your fore- 
fathers believed, and in which we still believe?" 
Ans. "A blessed New Year I indeed desire from 
the heart ; but in your faith I do not wish to believe, 
but I want to believe in the holy Scriptures." The 
bishop said, I had built upon men, and upon the 
doctrines of men. Reytse. "I have not built upon 
men ; I have built upon the foundation of the apos- 
tles and prophets, yea, upon the rock ; therefore my 
house shall stand. Behold, these are now the tem- 
pests that assail my house; had it such a founda- 
tion, it would fall ; but now it is founded upon the 
rock." Bishop. "What is the reason that you went 
out from us, for you have confessed that you have 
never heard our doctrine?" Reytse. "Hear me; I 
shall tell you : When I was a child, I went there as 
others ; but my parents kept me from the sinners' 
path, for which I am very thankful to them. But 
when I attained to my understanding, I read in the 
holy Scriptures that the way to the kingdom of God 
is narrow and strait, and that flesh and blood 
must remain on [the posts] ; that we must be well 
fitted ; that there must be a pure church ; that the 
stones must be hewn and squared, before they 
may be put into the house of God, of which Christ 
Jesus is the cornerstone; and that there are to be 
no whores, rogues, drunkards, covetous, or idola- 
ters in the church of God. But I found that your 
church of which you are the head or ruler is such 
a church; and I am concerned for you, because 
you are a meek man; hence I pray you, that for 
once you will search the holy Scriptures; for it 
seems to me that you know better than you speak ; 
you have a soul to lose as well as I." He said that 
as regards drunkenness, fornication and other sins 
that were in their church, they had ordained that 
one should pray for it, and the priests would for- 


give the sins. I said: "The priests cannot forgive 
sin, but to pray God to forgive sin, is very good : 
but a man must pray from the heart, that he may 
never during all the days of his life sin any more. 
But I must ask you once, whether you think, that 
if a man sins today or tomorrow, and asks the 
Lord for forgiveness, and does so every day, the 
Lord will forgive him?" He said this could be. I 
said it could not. 

Finally the bishop made a long speech, that I 
would not obey my superior, and had thus aposta- 
tized from their holy faith, and joined the Mennists 
and Tibbites. I said I had never been disobedient, 
and had never opposed the king, and did not want 
to bear the sword against any one, as Christ 
teaches. Then the bishop said he would take the 
clearest of that which I could say nothing against, 
and that I should suppose myself to be ignorant, 
and he would suppose that he was ignorant, and so 
the Scriptures should judge between us. I told him 
to say on ; if it would agree with the Scriptures, I 
would hear him. He said the Lord spoke very 
clearly in the Gospel, where He says : "Take, eat ; 
this is my body, which is broken for you ; likewise 
the cup ;" hence we must eat His flesh, and drink 
His blood, as He said ; this you cannot contradict. 
I said I well knew that it is written that the Lord 
said : "Take, eat ; this is my body" ; but I know that 
the Lord is in high heaven and does not come 
under men's teeth for your own people do not be- 
lieve that you give them flesh and blood. He said 
they had to believe it. I said that the Lord spoke 
thus : "Take, eat ; this is my body which shall be 
broken for you." This is what the Lord said, but 
the disciples asked : "How can this man give us his 
flesh to eat?" But the Lord said that flesh and 
blood profit nothing, but the words are spirit and 
life (John 6). Hence it is clear enough, that we are 
not to eat and drink Christ's flesh and blood, as 
He said, but that we are thereby to remember His 
death and sufferings ; for the Lord gave His body 
for the whole world, and for the original sin in 
which we were born. If the Lord had not re- 
deemed us from the sin imposed upon us by Adam, 
we could not have been saved ; but now the Lord 
has redeemed us with His flesh and blood, and 
made us free from all sin, and shed His blood for 
many ; hence we cannot eat His flesh, because He 
made us free with it. Gal. 5 :1. 

The bishop said that Christ did not say of His 
own flesh that it profiteth nothing, but "of other 
flesh ; hence, since the Lord so clearly says it, we 
must eat His flesh, and drink His blood, if we are 
to be saved ; for he said that Paul says : "Is this 
not the cup of blessing?" Hence you cannot con- 
tradict what Christ and Paul have so clearly ex- 
pressed. Reytse. "My lord, I well know what 
Christ and Paul said, for the apostles brake bread 
from house to house, as we clearly read, in proof 
of it, and as Christ has left us." But he kept in- 
sisting that we had to eat the Lord's flesh, if we 
are to be saved. 

The bishop further made a long speech concern- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


999 


ing the resurrection of the dead, how we shall die, 
and rise again with this flesh, and many other re- 
marks which he made about the resurrection. I 
finally said that I indeed believe that there is a 
resurrection of the dead, for if there were no resur- 
rection of the dead, Christ would profit us nothing 
and I would in that case not suffer thus ; but that 
this was a useless disputation. Then he dropped 
the matter, and made a long speech, how it was 
written of one Lord, one faith and baptism, hence 
I had transgressed this, having suffered myself to 
be rebaptized, when I had been baptized once, and 
that I had transgressed the holy Scriptures, and 
been baptized in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is contrary to 
the ordinance of the holy Church. Reytse. "I have 
not been rebaptized, having been baptized once; 
for I well know that there is written of one Lord 
and one faith ; hence I betook myself to one bap- 
tism as the Lord teaches in many places, that the 
believing are to be baptized: I therefore betook 
myself to the baptism of repentance, as is proper 
according to the Scriptures, and according to my 
human weakness. But what you say, that I have 
been rebaptized, this I deny ; for I do not recognize 
the baptism of infants as a baptism, but as a human 
institution, as is obvious enough, since there is no 
Scripture that children ought to be baptized." 

The bishop said that we must be born of water 
and of the Spirit, if we are to be saved ; hence chil- 
dren must be baptized, if they are to be saved. 
Reytse. "No; this is no Scripture, that children 
ought to be baptized ; for the Lord called the chil- 
dren to Him, that they should not be turned away, 
for theirs is the kingdom of God ; hence they are 
already saved." He said that they were believing 
[believers?! children, that were circumcised, and 
he made a long speech about the circumcision of 
Abraham, that the children had to be circumcised, 
or they were damned ; and as then was circum- 
cision, so now baptism has been ordained by the 
holy fathers, as is now the case. Reytse. "To this 
I say no ; it is not so, that the children that were 
not circumcised were damned ; for it was a com- 
mand of God, that they should be circumcised. 
They were to be circumcised because they were 
Abraham's seed; the Lord had so commanded it, 
because they should be His people, and not for the 
reason that they that were not circumcised should 
be damned. For they were circumcised on the 
eighth day, and many must have died before they 
reached the age at which they received the sign of 
circumcision ; hence great injustice would certainly 
have been done the poor children, and in such a 
case all the female children would certainly have 
been damned, who are heirs of the kingdom of God 
as well as we." To this he said the children had 
nevertheless to be baptized, if they were to be 
saved. Reytse. "No; I further say, that the chil- 
dren are in the hands of God, so long as they are 
ignorant, and baptism does not belong to them; 
but to those that have repented ; for John preached 


repentance and amendment, and only those [the 
penitent] to be baptized, for the remission of sins, 
as he also says : O generation of vipers, who hath 
warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Re- 
pent, therefore, and save yourselves from this un- 
toward generation." Luke 3:7, 8; Acts 2:40. 

The bishop said that I could not prove it with 
John's baptism. I said that Christ Himself came to 
John, and requested it of John. John refused it to 
the Lord. The Lord said : "Suffer it to be so now, 
for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness ;" 
and John suffered him. Why do you say that I can 
not prove it with John's baptism ? for Christ Him- 
self requested it. The bishop made but little reply 
to it. I said: "I will show you still more Scrip- 
tures, that it belongs to believers, as the eunuch to 
whom Philip came. Philip said: "Understandest 
thou what thou readest?" He said: "How should 
I understand it, except some one instruct me?" 
Philip preached unto him from the beginning, and 
he believed it. He said : "Here is water ; what doth 
hinder me to be baptized?" Philip said: "If thou 
believest with all thine heart, thou mayest." The 
eunuch replied : "I believe that Jesus Christ is the 
Son of the living God." Then he baptized him. 
(Acts 8). Here we see that faith was before bap- 
tism nor was he a child. Further, in like manner 
also Paul was baptized, when he had become a 
believer. Pray, read the Acts of the Apostles 
through. The bishop said, they also did want to 
baptize such adults that had not been baptized in 
their infancy, as the heathen or Tibbites, who were 
not baptized in their infancy; hence they would 
also baptize adults, for he said that it was written : 
"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." 
Though faith is mentioned before baptism, it is all 
the same; hence children must be baptized: for 
there are many that do not become so old that they 
attain their reason; hence they certainly die with- 
out baptism and are as certainly damned. Chil- 
dren must therefore be baptized, that they may all 
be saved. I said, that the children are in the hands 
of God, and baptism does not pertain to them, for 
there is no Scripture which declares that it does. 
Had it been the will of the Lord, He would have 
commanded it; but now He has commanded that 
the believers are to be baptized, as He taught, and 
as His apostles practiced. Hence prove to me with 
the Scriptures, that it is commanded to baptize 
poor innocent infants, which have done no sin; 
for though I had never so many children, I would 
not have them receive your baptism. He said, 
though it was not commanded to baptize children, 
neither was it forbidden to baptize them ; hence 
there is no Scripture prohibiting it. I said: "All 
that the Lord has not commanded He has forbid- 
den. Hence, if He has commanded to baptize the 
believing, men ought not to do differently from 
what the Lord Himself has commanded, for we 
everywhere read of a baptism of repentarce, and 
not of a baptism of infants, as you teach and do. 
Why do you do that which ought not to be ? For it 


1000 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


seems to me that you know better ; tell the truth." 
But he made me no reply to it; except that I was 
seduced; if I adhered to this faith I would be 
damned ; hence I should betake myself to the holy 
Catholic faith. And we had many other words, but 
it grew late, and he went out, and said to the cas- 
tellan, that there was no hope for me, and that I 
would not suffer myself to be instructed ; and told 
me to consider the matter further. I said that I 
wanted to do that; but in this respect I have al- 
ready considered; but do you consider it, I pray 
you. 


ANOTHER CONFESSION OF REYTSE AYSESS, MADE 

BEFORE AN ARROGANT PRIEST; TOGETHER 

WITH AN EPISTLE OR EXHORTATION 

TO THE FRIENDS 

Shortly after there came a priest, who was very 
arrogant ; he asked me what I had determined with 
regard to the letter which the bishop had sent me. 
Reytse. "I have determined even as I said to you 
the last time. For by what he writes I have not 
been made weaker, but stronger, he foolishly writes 
that no sin hinders or prevents a man, and that we 
may observe the Supper with whores and rogues, 
and that also no sin is so great that it can prevent a 
man ; all of which he wants to prove with the eighth 
chapter of Mark, where the Lord fed the great mul- 
titude." Reytse. "What do you want to prove 
thereby? O how blind you are!" He became an- 
gry, and would not understand Scripture, but blas- 
phemed and spoke very ugly, and said that I con- 
demned and rejected the Lord's death with my sec- 
ond baptism. But I said that I did not condemn the 
Lord's death, but deemed it good ; "for, if I should 
confess this as you say, woe would be to me ; for I 
do not recognize your baptism as a baptism, since 
there is no Scripture for it. But with your infant 
baptism, you reject Christ's sufferings and death, 
for Christ has redeemed us; but you say that the 
children are damned, which you cannot prove with 
Scripture. But those who live in sin, who, the Lord 
says shall not enter the kingdom of God, these 
you say are saved ; drunkards, covetous, and forni- 
cators, and whatever sins they may do, who the 
Lord says shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 
these you say are saved. But the poor children, 
who are already saved, as the Lord has said, these 
you say are damned. Is it not a lamentable matter 
that you are so blinded? Hence wake up once, I 
pray you, for it will ruin you." He said that I had 
a faith like a Turk. I said: "What is the Turk's 
faith?" He said: "The Turk believes in a piece 
of wood, or in whatever suits him." I said that 
they [the papists] believed in a piece of bread, 
which they held up as God, worshiping it, and fall- 
ing upon their knees before it, and regarding it as 
God. Likewise, the idolatrous infant baptism, is 
that any better than the Turk's faith ?" He became 
angry, and reviled us much, and did not think that 
we were the right people, I said : "If I should tell 
you what I consider you to be, you would not like 


it." He said tell it. Reytse. "Well then I shall tell 
you ; I consider you the vile world, the congrega- 
tion of the dead, and heathen and Turks according 
to the spirit, and that you are alienated from the 
life of God (Prov. 21 :16; Eph. 4:18) ; and as is 
written concerning you in Daniel 12, and in Reve- 
lation, so it shall be found in the day of the Lord. 
Repent therefore, and come out from her, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins" (Rev. 18:4). 

Then he arose and hastened away, but I overtook 
him in another room, where we conversed for a 
little while about infant baptism and other things. 
Finally he said that he could not remain any long- 
er, since he was to stand godfather to a child, I 
begged him not to do it ; "for" said I, "The child is 
as good as you can make it." He said that he 
would do it, nevertheless. He also spoke much 
about the war, and about the Gueux* that their 
cause was a bad one, and that we aided them with 
money and property. I told him what he said was 
not true ; for we did not want in anywise to defend 
them with money or blood, "for I think nothing of 
the Gueux, neither of you, for you cannot stand 
before God, miserably as you are betraying and 
slaying one another. However, the Gueux are not 
as bloodthirsty as you are, for if they had appre- 
hended me, they would let me go, but you want to 
shed my blood." He became angry and said : "You 
desperate miscreant, should we not kill you? we 
should not be able to answer before God [if we 
should allow to live] such a heretic as you are ; for 
we do so much running on your account that no 
money could hire us to do it ; hence you shall here 
receive the temporal fire, and hereafter the eternal, 
because you will not suffer yourself to be instruct- 
ed, as much as we have done for you." 

I talked to him very gently, but he said that I 
had the devil in me, and that he transformed him- 
self into an angel of light, and had seduced me, 
that I could not remain in the true way. Reytse. 
"I have no devil, but I speak with a free and glad 
heart." He reviled much; adducing no Scriptures 
but only saying that they had done much for me, 
and were always on the run to win my soul and 
save my life, and now there was no prospect that I 
would renounce my heresy ; hence the bishop had to 
cut me off, as was right. Reytse. "I never desired 
that you should come to me, and you may stay at 
home for I do not wish to hear you, nor to believe 
you, and you might have saved all your running, 
for the reward which you earned by me will not 
be great." 

Finally he spoke about praying, and boasted 
much of his praying ; he said that he prayed more 
in one week, than I in three months, and he had 
much to say about praying, and that Christ prayed 
in the temple. I said that he was like the Pharisees, 
who boasted themselves so much of their praying, 
and stood in the temple, and on the street corners, 
to be seen of men. And in all your words you are 
like them ; hence take good heed how you boast, for 
a tree shall be known by its fruit ; for I do not like 

* Beggars, a sobriquet of the Reformed. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1001 


your fruit. He said that I had the heart of a Phari- 
see, and he their clothes; which is the better. 
Reytse. "No; it seems to me you have both, the 
heart and the clothes, for the Lord did not act thus, 
neither did His apostles lead such a life, nor have 
such clothing in their time, as you have, which is 
contrary to the Scriptures, hence take heed what 
you put on, for I beseech you to repent, for you 
cannot stand before the Lord with your faith, nor 
with your walk, nor with your church, for which 
you want to be responsible in the day of the Lord." 
Finally he went away. I told him to tell the bishop 
that he did not need to come again on my account, 
since I would in no wise hear him. He bade me 
good day, and they brought me back into prison. 
About three days after, a messenger came from the 
bishop, and said that I should hear my sentence in 
three days from that time. On the appointed day 
they came and transacted their business, as they 
understood it, and passed judgment upon me, being 
very pompous and verbose in their sentence. 
When they had finished their business, they went 
away; but there remained a priest, who reviled 
much and talked improperly and unfitly. I would 
not talk with him, because they had delivered me 
over, and also because he spoke so ill and unseemly. 
Then he went away. A considerable time elapsed 
before I wrote this down, for I could not well recol- 
lect it because of my fellow prisoners. And my 
memory also is rather short ; some remarks I have 
forgotten; and if I were to write all, it would be 
far too much, for I have been before the bishop 
and his colleagues eleven times at least, and I 
talked much with them concerning all the articles 
of the faith. 

Written by me, your beloved brother in the 
Lord. 

Reytse Aysess. 


AN EPISTLE OR EXHORTATION OF REYTSE AYSESS, 
WRITTEN TO THE FRIENDS 

O dear friends, fear not, neither be surprised, 
when you are tried by manifold temptations which 
may come upon a Christian, and also do come upon 
him in bonds and imprisonment, as I now find, it is 
grievous according to the flesh, but very light ac- 
cording to the spirit, for it is the power of God. 
This I have experienced in these bonds, that the 
Lord is with those that seek and fear Him from the 
heart. Hence, my dear friends, who have received 
like faith with me, fear the Lord from the heart, 
that if it should be the Lord's will to have you here 
in such bonds or imprisonment, you may be able 
to withstand, for they employ much craftiness and 
subtlety, to draw us away from the truth, and they 
know how to exalt lies, and abolish truth, with 
feigned words of their own devising; sometimes 
with very gentle words, and sometimes with harsh 
ones, by which they think to weaken and discour- 
age one, as they have done with me. And also 
Satan, as Peter says, walketh about us as a roaring 


lion, seeking where he can devour us ; so he has 
also assailed me, but the Lord has hitherto kept me, 
for which I thank Him. But Satan once assailed me 
with a temptation which I must write to you, to 
show you how crafty the evil One is. I once spake 
with a priest, who reviled us and said that they 
sang the psalms of David, while we sang hymns 
which men had made. And when I came back into 
prison, the tempter very craftily assailed me, that 
it was true, that we did sing hymns which men had 
made. And I was grieved that I should suffer, and 
it might be wrong, and I was still young in years, 
and it grieved me much. Finally I thought : I know 
better ; I know that the hymns are made from the 
holy Scriptures, and that it is right ; if I could do 
according to them, I should be saved. Then I re- 
flected on the priest's walk, and on their faith, and 
on the things which they had spoken against the 
holy Scriptures, which are lies, and I entreated the 
Lord, and it entered my mind no more. Hence, 
dear friends, Satan is very crafty ; but we must al- 
ways pray the Lord in every assault which he 
makes upon us, in manifold temptations, for the 
almighty, eternal, merciful God will not suffer us 
to be tempted above that we are able, but will with 
the temptation also make a way to escape, as he has 
spoken (I Cor. 10:13) ; for He is our Captain, our 
Champion in all our distress. And do not fear 
though they place me at the stake, and burn me; 
but be strengthened thereby, that the Lord is still 
so powerful in His works; and always fear Him, 
and praise Him, and thank Him, now and forever. 
Amen. 

I further thank those who sent me that book, for 
it delighted and rejoiced me much in the Lord ; and 
I commend all of you who fear Him to the Lord. 


ANOTHER CONFESSION OF REYTSE AYSESS, MADE 
BEFORE THE COMMISSARY 

After I had been imprisoned nineteen weeks, I 
was brought before the commissary of the royal 
court, who first demanded an oath of me, that I 
should tell the truth. I said : "The Lord has for- 
bidden us to swear in anywise ; hence I do not want 
to take an oath." Then he said that I should an- 
swer to his questions with yes and no. I said: "I 
do not want to do this, for you might ask me some- 
thing which it would not be proper for me to tell ; 
hence I must first hear what you want to ask me." 
He then first asked me my age. I answered: 
"Twenty-four or five years." He wrote it down. 
He further asked where I was born, where I had 
last resided, and how many children I had. I said : 
"One." Com. "How old is it?" Reytse. "Half a 
year." Com. "Is it baptized?" Reytse. "No, not 
that I know." Com. "What is the reason that it 
has not been done?" Reytse. "Because it is not 
commanded in the holy Scriptures." Com. "Are 
you baptized?" Reytse. "Yes, upon my faith, as 
Christ has commanded." Com. "Were you not 


1002 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


baptized in your infancy ?" Reytse. "Yes, but I do 
not recognize that as a scriptural baptism." 

He wrote it all down. He asked me who the one 
was that had baptized me, where it had taken place, 
and who and how many had been at my father's 
house. I said: "I do not want to tell you this; 
I hope you will not ask me concerning it. If you 
thirst so much for the blood and life of men, you 
have me in your hands ; do with me according to 
your pleasure, I shall by the help of the Lord freely 
offer my neck for it ; but I hope of your grace, that 
you will not question me so severely in regard to 
it." He said they should indeed question me more 
severely yet ; hence you better tell me voluntarily, 
than involuntarily. I said: "The Lord my God 
will keep me, for this I trust His grace." And after 
he had written down everything, he told me to go. 

A LETTER FROM REYTSE AYSESS, WRITTEN TO HIS 
FATHER 

Dear father, some time when it suits you, write 
me something concerning your intentions or pur- 
pose, as to where you intend to live, and how your 
temporal affairs stand, also in regard to my sister, 
and also some consolation, for this rejoices me 
much. 

I further inform you that there are now two 
other prisoners with me ; they are old men, and we 
agree tolerably well; for they have been confined 
with me for about a month, and we have spoken 
somewhat of the way of the Lord. They are willing 
to exchange that which they have for something 
better, and they think that they need salvation as 
much as I do. They have indeed formed the good 
resolve, to live no more unto sin, but to be trans- 
formed into newness of life, which I am glad to 
hear ; but God knows the heart. T further let you 
know that one evening the colonel's wife came be- 
fore the prison, just as we were about to be fed. 
She therefore first asked how manv prisoners 
there were here. They told her. Then she asked 
what their crimes were. Then one excused himself, 
as best he could. She then asked me, what my 
crime was. I said that my crime for which they 
held me was not very great. She had heard of me, 
and said I should suffer myself to be instructed by 
those who were wiser than 1. 1 said, I would suffer 
myself to be instructed with that which was right. 
She further said that people said that I did not be- 
lieve in the Father, nor in the Son, and also not in 
the Holy Ghost; which I earnestly contradicted, 
and said that I thought much thereof, and that my 
faith was resting thereon, and that if I did not be- 
lieve in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 
I should not be worthy to live. Then she inquired 
what it really was. The castellan's son said that I 
did not believe in the mass. Then she became an- 
gry, and I said that I did not believe in the ordi- 
nances of men, as, namely, infant baptism, and 
their sacrament— that the blessed Lord was not 
present in it. but I believed that He was in the 


throne of eternal life. She became angry and said 
that if there were no executioner, she would rather 
put me to death herself, than that I should live. 
And she gave the two prisoners that are with me 
seven stivers, and forbade them to give me any- 
thing of it, and warned them, that they should not 
allow themselves to be seduced by me, and went 
away. Furthermore, dear father, deliver to my wife, 
at the first opportunity, the letter which I have 
written her, and exhort her to that which is good, 
this I affectionately pray you, and all my dear 
friends ; my dear old mother above all, and my two 
sisters, and my young brother, that he conduct him- 
self well, when he gets a little more understanding ; 
and also my poor child, for whose poor soul I am 
so greatly concerned, that it may please the Lord. 
But I hope the Lord will take it into His kingdom, 
before it commits sin. Walk in love. Eph. 5:2. 
Further, dear father, I would desire a Testament! 
if you could send me one; for I have had our 
brother's Testament for a very long time, and he 
needs it himself, and has it now again. 

Written in my bonds, by me, your dear son. 

Reytse Aysess. 


A letter from reytse aysess, written to his 

MOTHER 

My dear mother, I wish you the gracious eter- 
nal, merciful Father, and the love of God, and the 
comfort of the Holy Ghost, as a greeting ; and the 
Father of peace rule in your heart. Amen. 

My very dear and affectionately beloved mother, 
who bore me in your own body, and brought me 
into the world with great pain, yea, whose breasts 
have nourished me and who nourished and instruct- 
ed me in all truth, you have kept me from all sinful 
companions ; yea, you have kept me from all false 
doctrine, yea, you have kept me from the whore 
of Babylon, yea, you have brought me into the 
church of the living God. You have kept me from 
all sin, according to your best ability. You have 
brought me thus far with the help of the Lord. Be- 
hold, my very affectionately beloved mother ; it is 
therefore my entreaty and request of you, that you 
will not fret and grieve on my account, for I hope 
that you have not brought me up to the reproach 
but to the praise, of God and His church. After all 
proper salutation, it is my request and entreaty of 
you, that you will forgive and excuse me, if I have 
m anywise grieved you, whether it may have been 
done in my youth or ignorantly, this I request of 
you. Further, my dearly beloved mother, I must 
write you a little from the bottom of my heart and 
the inmost of my soul, though you know it, and 
are taught of God, and are my dear mother, yet 

I write to you that in none of us there may be found 
an evil heart of unbelief, and that none may be en- 
tangled bv the deceitfulness of sin, and depart 
from the living God on account of any tribulation 

II Peter 1 :12; John 6:45; Heb. 4:12, 13. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1003 


Behold, my dear, beloved mother, let us not be 
troubled, or become despondent ; though they have 
touched you in property and blood [kindred], fear 
not, but be of good courage, for the Lord is our 
Redeemer. Behold the afflictions of Job, how the 
Lord helped him. And behold the end of the Lord ; 
for the Lord will not forsake you and me, if we 
trust in Him, for the Lord has helped me to fight, 
for I have now been before them twelve times. The 
Lord is my Captain, He will not forsake me. Nor 
do I want to forsake Him, neither for life nor death. 
Hence, my dear and much beloved mother, let us 
go to and sincerely prostrate ourselves before the 
Lord, for all our lives end in death, and when we 
shall all be presented before the judgment seat of 
Christ, what manner of persons must we then be. 
Therefore, my beloved mother, who have obtained 
like faith with me, let us prepare ourselves, and 
gird up the loins of our mind. And let us lay 
aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily 
beset us, and let us run with patience the race 
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author 
and finisher of our faith ; and we shall receive a re- 
ward. Heb. 12:1, 2; I Cor. 3:14. Dearly beloved 
mother, though they have touched you in your 
property, and me in my life, what does it matter. 
The Lord our God will help us ; but we must trust 
in Him. The world shall rejoice, and we shall be 
sorrowful ; but our sorrow shall be turned into joy. 
John 16:20. But, dear mother, we must patiently 
wait for it. Though they speak evil of us, dear 
mother, they treated the Lord our God in the same 
manner before us. 

Hence I am not surprised ; they have condemned 
me so often; yea, [have said] that I shall here re- 
ceive the temporal fire, and hereafter the eternal ; 
yea, that the devil is in me. Yea, they say that if 
they did not put such as Douwe Eeuwoutss and I 
out of this world, they should not be able to answer 
for it before God. Hence, dear and beloved mother, 
fear not, for they know no better. But let us 
heed our lesson, for the Lord demands and re- 
quires more of us, than of them ; hence let us take 
heed to the correction and chastisement, and re- 
ceive it patiently and joyfully ; and we shall receive 
a reward, for whom the Lord chastens, him He 
will receive. But if we are without chastisement, 
whereof all are partakers, then are we bastards, 
and not children. Hence, my beloved mother, I re- 
joice from the depth of my heart, that the Lord our 
God has so loved me, as to have called me hereunto, 
that I may be found Christ's sheep for the slaugh- 
ter. And I hope by His great grace and mercy, that 
He will make me fit, and shall receive me into His 
kingdom, as He promised those who seek Him 
from the heart. See, my very dear and beloved 
mother, let us not despise the correction of the 
Lord, but patiently receive it ; and we shall receive 
a reward. Yea, hereafter all sorrow and tears shall 
be wiped away from our eyes Yea, we shall stand 
upon mount Zion, with all the saints of God. Be- 
hold what great joy is prepared for them that have 


obeyed God. Therefore, dear and much beloved 
mother, let us take up our cross, and follow Him 
from the heart, as dear children, that we may not 
be blotted out of the book of life. My love, we 
must be holy and unblamable before Him in all our 
conversation. Our words must be seasoned with 
salt, as Paul says ; that we may be able to stand be- 
fore the almighty eternal God. Further, dearly be- 
loved mother, as you have shown all love to me, it 
is my request of you, that you will love my dear, 
beloved child as you have loved me, as I trust you 
will do, and have a mother's heart for it. 

O dear mother, take in good part what I have 
written here, for it has been done out of love. 

Know, dear and much beloved parents, that in 
the eighteenth week of my imprisonment I was be- 
fore the bishop, where were assembled at least 
eight or nine persons. The bishop spoke first, that 
I should betake myself to the holy Catholic faith, 
and he should set me at liberty ; and other words 
that he said. If I would not do this, they would 
cut me off as a heretic and an obstinate and disobe- 
dient person, who is opposed to the ordinances of 
the Roman Church. Finally I opened my mouth, 
very joyfully, and said: "Do what you will and 
can answer for before God, for I do not want to 
forsake my faith, for either death or life." They 
said that I should advise with myself, or amend, 
since eternity was so long. Reytse. "Because eter- 
nity is so long, therefore I want to take heed; if 
eternity were not so long, I would not sit in these 
bonds." 

Finally they asked me all the articles anew, and 
I confessed them. Then they read the sentence to 
me, but I did not understand it well, as it was 
written in Latin. It was that they delivered me 
over as a heretic, who would not suffer himself to 
be instructed with the ordinances of the holy 
Church ; and they gave me over into the hands of 
the judges; together with certain documents per- 
taining to this matter. Finally I sat there with un- 
covered head, and defended myself with many re- 
marks, speaking joyfully, that they should take 
heed not to bring harm to themselves by laying vio- 
lent hands on me. The bishop said that he would 
rather fast two weeks with water and bread, than 
pass sentence upon me. 

Finally, when they had finished their business, 
they went away. After they had gone, a priest 
remained, who reviled much, and had much to 
say, and wanted to dispute with me a whole night ; 
but I would not, because they had delivered me 
over already ; for he had come of his own account. 
Then he went away, and I had to go back to prison ; 
nevertheless, I am not dismayed. The Lord God 
has brought me thus far ; I hope through His great 
grace, that He will help me further, for I know 
that He is the One that helps me ; without Him I 
can do nothing. Hence praise the Lord always, 
and glorify Him forever and ever. I commend 
you to the Lord, for He is our Redeemer and 
Helper in all our tribulation and distress. 


1004 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Written by me in the twentieth week of my im- 
prisonment. Reytse Aysess. 


A letter from reytse aysess, written to his 

WIFE 

Grace, peace, mercy, love, and unity from God 
our heavenly Father, be with you my dear and be- 
loved wife; may the almighty God keep you and 
me, and bring us into eternal life. Amen. 

See, my dear and much beloved wife, whom I 
took before God and His church, I am greatly 
troubled and grieved on your account, and pray the 
Almighty God day and night for you, that He will 
keep you in your steadfast faith; for when you 
were with me, you comforted me with the word of 
the Lord, wherein I greatly rejoice, with joy un- 
speakable, and praise the almighty, eternal God for 
your faith. 

Behold, my dear and much beloved wife, be not 
troubled on my account, but console yourself in the 
Lord, for the Lord is my helper, and He comforts 
me. I sometimes scarcely know that I am in prison, 
when I think of the promises which God has given 
us, and thank God that He has chosen me thereto. 
If we continue steadfast unto the end, the crown of 
life is laid up for us, and we shall be clothed in 
white raiment, and shall stand upon Mount Zion, 
with all God's chosen saints, and sing the good new 
song. O my dear, beloved wife, I could not for- 
sake you for any riches of this world, but Christ 
says: "He that forsaketh not father and mother, 
sister and brother, house and home, wife and child, 
and his own life, is not worthy of me." Luke 14: 
26. Behold, my dear, beloved wife, we have had 
each other two years, and have loved each other 
greatly; if I could die for you, I think it: would 
not be too hard for me. My dear wife, though I am 
imprisoned here, it will not be to your disgrace, but 
to the praise of God. I am greatly troubled for you 
and my dear child. O that our dear Lord would 
take it into His kingdom ; it would be such a great 
joy to me ; but if not, may it grow up in the fear of 
God. My dear wife, be not troubled on my account, 
but console yourself in the Lord. May the Al- 
mighty God keep you and me, that we may here- 
after appear in eternal life. The Lord keep you 
and me, and confirm us unto eternal life. Amen. 

By me, your dear husband. 

Reytse Aysess. 


another letter from reytse aysess, written 
to his wife 

Grace, peace, mercy, unity, and love be with 
you, my dear wife and sister in the Lord ; may the 
almighty God comfort you in your misery and trib- 
ulation which you have on my account. 

Behold, my very dear and beloved wife and sister 
in the Lord, whom I took before God and His 
church, the eternal Almighty God, console you in 


your tribulation and distress which you endure on 
my account. 

Behold, my beloved, though we are to suffer 
here (for in the world we shall have tribulation, but 
our tribulation shall be turned into joy), let us 
firmly cleave to the word of the Lord, and depart 
neither to the right nor to the left. O dear and much 
beloved wife, I am so greatly troubled and con- 
cerned for you, and pray the Almighty God for you 
day and night, that He will keep you, and that you 
may continue steadfast unto the end ; for he that 
continues steadfast shall be saved. 

My dear, beloved wife and sister, when you were 
with me you comforted me with the word of the 
Lord, so that the castellan's wife said : "I could not 
do this ;" and you said I should cleave to the word 
of the Lord ; wherein I greatly rejoice, and thank 
the eternal God for your strong faith. Pray the 
Lord who has begun this good work in you, that He 
will keep it in you unto the end, that you may ob- 
tain the salvation of your soul. My beloved, be of 
good courage, and be valiant in the Lord ; and we 
may well say with the prophet: "O Israel, how 
happy are we, that God has made known His word 
unto us." Bar. 4 :4. What thanks shall we render 
to the Lord for the good that He has shown us ? for 
our sakes He became poor, that we through His 
poverty might be rich. I Thess. 3:9; II Cor. 8 :9. 
Hence, my dear and beloved wife, if we suffer with 
Him, we shall also rejoice with Him ; if we die with 
Him, we shall also reign with Him. II Tim. 2:11, 
12. O beloved, be of good courage, and cleave to 
the word of the Lord, and be firmly rooted in Him. 
Even as Jacob took hold of the angel, and wrestled 
with Him all night, until the breaking of the day. 
The angel said : "Let me go." Jacob said : "I will 
not let thee go, till thou have blessed me." Genesis 
32:24. 

Let us therefore be followers of God, as dear 
children in love. Eph. 5:1. O my beloved wife, I 
have such a great care for you, and am so much 
troubled for you. O love, I beseech you from the 
inmost of my soul, that you will not forsake the 
Lord your God all the days of your life. O love, I 
am so greatly troubled and grieved for my dear 
child, that I do not know whither to turn, and I 
pray the eternal, almighty God day and night in re- 
gard to it. O my dear and beloved, be of good 
courage, and console yourself in the Lord, and be 
not troubled on my account — the Lord is my help- 
er. My beloved, if it should please our deaf Lord, 
that we should meet no more, may we meet here- 
after in eternal life. May the Lord help you and 
me to this end, and keep us, that we may be saved. 

Written by me, your beloved husband and broth- 
er in the Lord. Reytse Aysess. 


SENTENCE AND DEATH OF REYTSE AYSESS 

After Reytse Aysess had confessed his faith with 
all boldness before the lords and princes, and had 
taken leave from his good friends, he was finally 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1005 


brought before the lords and sentenced to death. 
His sentence reads as follows : 

Whereas it has appeared to the Court of Fries- 
land, that Reytse Aysess, at present a prisoner, 
has, by the sentence of the high, worshipful Lord 
Bishop of Leeuwaerden, been condemned as an ob- 
stinate heretic in his opinions and errors concerning 
the holy church, and as such been committed into 
the will and hand of the secular justice, to be dealt 
with according to law, according to the full power 
of the sentence existing with respect to this ; there- 
fore, the aforesaid court, having duly regarded and 
considered all that ought to be considered in this 
matter, in the name and in behalf of the King of 
Spain, etc., Archduke of Austria, Duke of Bur- 
gundy Brabant, etc. Court of Holland, Zealand, 
and Lord of Friesland, have condemned, and by 
these presents do condemn the aforesaid prisoner, 
to be executed with water, and brought from life to 
death; declaring, furthermore, all his property to 
be forfeited and confiscated for the benefit of his 
majesty. Done the 23d of April, A. D. 1574. 

Upon this, Reytse was very bold and joyful, 
praising and thanking the Lord, that he had become 
worthy to suffer for His name ; and in the evening, 
at nine o'clock, he was brought into the castellan's 
house by the beadles. 

There were some monks there, who tormented 
and tempted him much, but they were not able to 
resist the spirit that was in him ; he remained bold 
and fearless, and spoke with a person which bears 
this testimony concerning it, and sent greetings to 
all his good friends, especially to his parents, wife, 
and nearest kindred, informing them that he was of 
good cheer and in greater joy than he had ever been 
in his life. Thereupon, about twelve o'clock in the 
night, the castellan, the beadles, the executioner, 
the monks, and others, assembled and conducted 
him to the torture tower, whither he gladly went, 
singing : 

"I call upon Thee O heavenly Father, 
Be pleased to strengthen my faith." etc. 

When he came into the torture tower, he fell 
down upon his face, and called upon the Lord in 
fervent prayer, after which he rose, and offered up 
his sacrifice with all boldness, and was drowned 
there. He rests now under the altar, waiting for the 
number of his fellow brethren to be fulfilled. 

How signally the faithful God is filled with com- 
passion over His people, how He comforts and 
strengthens them by His Spirit, how He goes with 
them into water and fire, yea, He remains with 
them in the bitterness of death, never forsaking 
them ; and how He also regards every injury in- 
flicted upon His own, as though the apple of His 
own eye were touched ; this can be seen and per- 
ceived, in both the Old and New Testaments, in the 
avenging hand of God, with which He many times 
smote bloodthirsty persecutors. Ex. 14 :8; II Mace. 
9:28; Acts 12:23. 

The same can also be seen in many tyrants and 
persecutors of these latter days, as, among other 


instances, may be seen in the case of a certain no- 
bleman, named Andries Grijpen, who, searching 
for some thieves, laid his hands on this aforesaid, 
God-fearing Reytse Aysess. And though their con- 
sciences (that is, his own as well as his wife's con- 
science), greatly troubled and accused them with 
regard to this deed, so that they said they much 
deplored that these people were so exceedingly op- 
pressed; these people who, he said, harmed no 
one, nor desired any one's property, but were well 
satisfied with what they had. That these were thus 
harassed, was a grievous cross to his heart; and 
though he felt thus in his conscience, he neverthe- 
less, through the instigation of his secretary, and 
because he, like Pilate, would remain the emperor's 
friend, and not lose his office, set at naught this 
conviction of his heart, and bound and ironed the 
aforesaid Reytse Aysess, and sent him thus to 
Leeuwaerden to prison. But the righteous God, 
who is not mocked, very soon after this deed, 
sorely smote the said lord with His avenging hand, 
so that the freebooters, coming from Holland, fell 
upon his house and completely demolished it, and 
subjected him to much affliction and ignominy, tak- 
ing him with them to Holland, and setting a ran- 
som of six thousand guilders upon him, in ad- 
dition to which he had to give a hundred guilders 
each week as personal expenses, until the ransom 
had been fully paid. In consequence of this he and 
his family fell into extreme poverty, so that other 
people, filled with compassion, aided and fed him 
in this his great need. Besides this he was afflicted 
with gravel and consumption, of which he ulti- 
mately miserably died. Some others of his kindred 
also were taken out of this world in a miserable 
manner". Moreover, in these afflictions his con- 
science greatly accused him of this deed, so that he 
penitently prayed to God, desiring that through his 
temporal afflictions and suffering, he might, by the 
grace of God, escape and turn away the eternal tor- 
ment of hell, which he seemed to experience in 
himself. Hence this ought to serve as an example 
to all tyrants and persecutors, carefully to beware 
of such deeds. 


HENDRICK PRUYT, A. D. 1574 

About the year 1574 there was another pious 
brother, named Hendrick Pruyt, born at Harder- 
wijck, in Guelderland, and a seaman by occupation, 
who came and sailed in the Zuyder Zee, on the 
coast of Friesland. And as a Spanish colonel was 
stationed at Wurckom, who was a zealous servant 
of the King of Spain, and a great war was carried 
on at that time between Holland and the King of 
Spain, the soldiers of the latter came in a yacht, on 
board of said Hendrick Pruyt's vessel. And as he 
saw no way of escape, he said to his wife : "Trijnt- 
jen Jans, lamb, there comes the wolf;" exhorting 
her to boldness and to answer without dissimula- 
tion to whatever she might be asked. When these 
robbers came on board they asked: "Where does 


1006 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Hendrik Pruijt tarred and tied to his ship and set afire outside Workum, AD 1574 


this craft hail from ?" They answered : "From Har- 
derwijck." Though that place was at that time at 
peace with the king, they nevertheless had to go 
on shore with them, and Hendrick Pruyt was put 
in prison at Wurckom. His wife, who came to him, 
was greatly concerned how to obtain his release, 
for they were young people who greatly loved each 
other : and as Hendrick Pruyt had little hope of be- 
ing released, he asked his wife not to go to much 
trouble on his account, but that she should travel 
to her brother and friends, who were principally 
interested in the vessel, that they might see how to 
get the vessel released, which was also done. While 
she went home, they in the meantime examined 
Hendrick Pruyt and found that he was a brother 
of the Mennistic persuasion. 

On account of this they dealt with him so cruelly 
and tyrannically, that they could not wait until the 
return of his wife, whom they might then also have 
made to tread this way of suffering. But they took 
this pious man and cast him into a boat which they 
had well smeared with tar. They also tarred the 
prisoner's body, and bound his outstretched hands 
to the ends of the mast-thwart, and took him thus 


without the harbor, set fire to the boat, and started 
him burning seaward. But as his hands through 
the fire had become loosed or disengaged from their 
bonds, it seemed probable that he might yet deliver 
himself from the fire ; but these murderers, seeing 
this, hastened to him, and thrust him through, and 
ended his life. Thus this friend of God passed val- 
iantly through the conflict, and the seed of God, 
which he had received in his heart through the 
preaching of the divine Word, remained in him un- 
to the end, whereby he through patience overcame 
his enemies, kept the faith, and through God's 
grace obtained the crown of eternal glory. 

When this colonel perceived that Trijn Jans, his 
wife, hearing this report, would not readily be will- 
ing to run into the hands of these wolves, he was 
very much dissatisfied with it; saying: "If I had 
her here, she would have to go the same route;" 
and that if he could at any time get hold of this 
woman, though she were buried somewhere in a 
city, he would nevertheless dig up her dead body 
and burn it. 

Consider, beloved reader, how such awful blood- 
thirstiness and tyranny accord with the Word, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1007 


spirit and example of Christ and His apostles, 
whose followers they, without shame, still dare 
call themselves. 


OLIVIER WILLEMSS, OF NIMEGUEN, BURNT ALIVE 

FOR THE PRACTICE OF THE EVANGELICAL 

TRUTH, TOGETHER WITH TWO YOUNG 

MAIDENS, AT ANTWERP, A. D. 1574 

Olivier Willemss, born at Nimeguen, educated 
in the schools, and having become pastor of Leeu- 
wen, a village between Nimeguen and Tiel, began 
at times to evince scruples in reading the mass, and 
about other Romish institutions. This exciting sus- 
picion, he, by the advice of well meaning friends, 
fled to the country of Cleves, and having entered 
into the communion of the Anabaptists there, mar- 
ried a certain widow from Antwerp (likewise a 
fugitive on account of persecution), and in the 
hope of greater freedom through mitigation of the 
bloody decrees, returned with her to Antwerp and 
settled down in the Steenhouwdersvest. 

His wife in the meantime giving birth to two 
sons, the report of it, together with the circum- 
stance that the children were not brought to bap- 
tism, brought them into rumor and suspicion of 
heresy, so that they, after accusation, in the be- 
ginning of the year 1574 (the children being then a 
year and three months old), were put into prison. 

A few days afterwards, on Friday, the 22d of 
January, this good and upright man, Olivier Will- 
emss, was, because of his faith, because of having 
received baptism in adult years, and because of 
having sold certain good and edifying books, pro- 
scribed by the papists, condemned to death and the 
fire, to be burnt alive, which he steadfastly suffered 
the following day, having commended his soul into 
the hands of God. 

His wife, through a certain occasion, not neces- 
sary to be related here, escaped out of prison, and 
ultimately fell asleep in the Lord, a God-fearing 
and godly woman, in the eighty-fifth year of her 
age. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION TOUCHING THE PERSON OF 

OLIVIER WILLEMSS, AS ALSO CONCERNING 

HIS SUFFERING AND DEATH 

It is stated of him, that besides his upright faith 
and virtuous conversation, he had a very sagacious 
and penetrating understanding, as also, that he 
was so well versed in the three chief languages, 
namely, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that he daily 
read them at home, and explained them to his 
household. 

In prison great threats of the torture were made 
against him, which he bore steadfastly, immovably 
and unchangingly before God and men. He had 
been in prison only three days, when his trial was 
concluded; whereupon sentence followed, and the 
next day, death. 

He was burnt alive between two young maidens, 
who to all appearance had confessed the same truth, 


according to the testimony of those who said that 
they witnessed it with their own eyes. 

Note. — As there have come into our hand, not 
only the foregoing copy and this last notice touch- 
ing Olivier Willemss, but also the criminal demand 
of the bailiff of Antwerp, made concerning said 
person, and what the judges advised thereupon, ac- 
cording to the original record of the secretary there, 
we shall properly add the same here, so that every 
one may be fully assured of it. 


EXTRACTS FROM THE COURT RECORDS OF CRIMINAL 
AND CIVIL MATTERS OF THE CITY OF ANTWERP 

The bailiff vs. Olivier Wilhemssen, of Nime- 
guen, since he has dared attend divers forbidden 
conventicles, to sell books that are proscribed, and 
to have himself, in said forbidden conventicles, 
rebaptized, though he received baptism in his in- 
fancy, all of which is contrary to the prohibitions 
and decrees of his majesty; concludit capitaliter, 
that the defendant be punished according to the 
aforesaid decrees, the defendant having openly 
confessed that with which he was charged by the 
bailiff. Judicatum, that the plaintiff have his full 
demand granted. 

This copy having been compared, by us the un- 
dersigned, secretary of the city of Antwerp, with 
the aforesaid court records, is found to accord 
with it. Ph. Valckenissen. 

The words, concludit capitaliter, translated into 
Dutch [English], mean substantially, that the bail- 
iff demands [the prisoner's] life and property for- 
feited in his behalf. The word judicatum means, 
that the lords pass sentence. This certifies the 
same. 

Ph. Valckenissen. 

Note. — I have another authentic copy of this de- 
mand made by the bailiff of the judges, against 
Olivier Willemss, on which is inscribed in the mar- 
gin, Executio : as though it were said : Execute, or 
punish, him according to your demand, that is, 
burn him alive, for this was the punishment of 
steadfast Anabaptists, according to the imperial 
decree ; upon which the bailiff had founded his de- 
mand. 


JACOB THE COBBLER AND HIS WIFE, GRIETJEN VAN 

BRUYSSEL, ANNEKEN VAN BRUYSSEL, TANNE- 

KEN WALRAVEN, A. D. 1575 

In the year 1575, on the eve of Whitsuntide, 
there were also burnt alive, with their tongues 
screwed fast, atAntwerp, in Brabant, the following 
witnesses of Jesus : Jacob the Cobbler and his wife ; 
Grietjen van Bruyssel, a widow; Anneken van 
Bruyssel, a young maiden; and Tanneken Wal- 
raven, the mother of Jacques Walraven, of Amster- 
dam. These died together, except the wife of Jacob 
the Cobbler, who, being enciente, had to wait until 
her delivery, and thus following the footsteps of 


1008 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


her husband, she willingly delivered up her life for 
the testimony of Jesus. 

Every reader ought further to notice, how di- 
rectly these papists followed the footsteps of the 
envious and truth-hating scribes and Pharisees, 
who stopped their ears, that they should not hear 
the words of truth which were declared to them by 
that faithful witness of God, Stephen. So did also 
these scribes, with still greater tyranny deal with 
these friends of God, taking instruments invented 
for this purpose by the monks, in which they 
screwed fast the tongues of these prisoners, to de- 
prive them of the power of speech, that they, on 
their way to death, should not be able to proclaim 
to the bystanding people the truth from the Word 
of God, and the innocence of their death. How will 
these persecutors answer for their course before 
the judgment seat of Christ, who knowing that 
Christ pronounced so many woes upon the scribes 
and Pharisees, who killed and stoned the prophets 
sent to them, nevertheless followed their works; 
hence they may expect the same reward from the 
righteous Judge, who shall reward every one ac- 
cording to his works. 

On the other hand, these witnesses can in truth 
console themselves, that to them, whose tongues 
were bound here, and who had to suffer for the 
truth a little while, it will yield the peaceable fruit 
of righteousness, when in the revelation of Christ 
their mouths shall be filled with laughter, and their 
tongues with praise, and they shall stand in great 
boldness before the face of such as have afflicted 
them, and made no account of their labors, being 
thus under the blessed promise of Christ, who said : 
"Blessed are they which are persecuted for right- 
eousness' sake ; for theirs is the kingdom of heav- 
en." And Peter: "If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye." I Pet. 1 :6 ; Heb. 
12:11; Ps. 126:2; Matt. 5:10; I Pet. 4:14. 

These witnesses wrote many letters from their 
prison, but they were lost through the Spanish in- 
surrection, which occurred at Antwerp on the 4th 
of November, A. D. 1576. 


CLAES VAN ARMENTIERSS, AND LIJNTGEN, A YOUNG 
MAIDEN, A. D. 1575 

In the year 1575 there was burnt alive at Ant- 
werp, for the faith of the truth and the testimony 
of Jesus, a God-fearing, pious brother, named 
Claes van Armentiers, a lace-maker ; and with him, 
a young maiden, named Lijntgen, a servant maid. 
Claes van Armentiers, having been imprisoned 
first, said Lijntgen called to him into prison: 
"Strive valiantly, my dear brother, for you have 
the genuine truth." Being apprehended upon this, 
she was offered up four or five days afterwards, 
both being burnt alive together. And as they, for 
the truth of Christ (as behooves obedient sheep of 
their only, eternal Shepherd), patiently and in true 
obedience suffered temporal burning in their tem- 
poral and corruptible bodies, they are hereby saved 


and delivered from the eternal and unquenchable 
fire of hell prepared for the devil and all his fol- 
lowers. These shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord, where 
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
II Thess. 1:9; Mark 9:44. On the other hand, 
these faithful followers of the truth may expect to 
hear from the mouth of Jesus : "Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness' sake ; for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven." At that time they 
shall again in great glory, receive these members, 
which they here for the testimony of Jesus de- 
livered to the burning, being like, in immortality 
unto the glorious body of our Lord Jesus, and shall 
live with Him in unspeakable joy and glory, forever 
and ever. Phil. 5:21; I Cor. 2:9; Wis. 5:16. 

TWENTY PERSONS AT LONDON, IN ENGLAND, 

NAMELY, FOURTEEN WOMEN DRIVEN FROM THE 

CITY: A YOUTH SCOURGED BEHIND A CART; 

ONE DIED IN PRISON; TWO, NAMED HEN- 

DRICK TERWOORT AND JAN PIETERSS, 

BURNT ALIVE AND TWO OTHERS, AFTER 

ENDURING MUCH MISERY, ESCAPED 

FROM PRISON; ALL OF WHICH TOOK 

PLACE UNDER THE REIGN OF 

QUEEN ELIZABETH, IN THE 

YEAR 1575 

The persecution, killing and murdering of the 
Christians not yet ceasing in many places, certain 
friends, on account of the severe tribulation and 
small opportunity for making a living, went from 
Flanders to England; among which number were 
also one Hendrick Terwoort and Jan Pieterss. 
While living in their simplicity, in London, to earn 
bread for wife and children, it occurred in the year 
1575, on Easter Day, that the assembly met in a 
suburb, to hear the Word of God. Having thus en- 
gaged together in prayer to God, the constable (for 
they had been spied out) came in, fiercely and inso- 
lently, and called them devils, asking them who was 
their preacher. He wrote down their names, and 
made the women promise, to remain there together 
until further orders. Thus these friends remained 
there till the constable returned. He called off their 
names, and drove them before him as sheep are led 
to the slaughter, and conducted them to prison, 
there being twenty-five persons, of which number 
two escaped without any violence. They were con- 
fined two days in the South Fort in the Mersey, 
and were then released on bail, but soon after sum- 
moned to appear in St. Paul's Church, where the 
bishop and other eminent teachers and persons 
were assembled. There four questions were put to 
them, which were as follows : 

1. Whether Christ, our Saviour, had not assum- 
ed His flesh from the body of Mary ? 

2. Whether it is lawful for a Christian to swear 
an oath ? 

3. Whether Christians ought to have their chil- 
dren baptized? 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1009 


4. Whether it is lawful for a Christian to admin- 
ister the (criminal) office of the magistracy? 

These questions these friends could not answer 
in the affirmative, but they denied one and all of 
them because they had not read them in the holy 
Scriptures with which our belief must agree. But 
they confessed that they had read of a magistracy 
which God has appointed in every country, for the 
protection of the good, and the punishment of the 
evil. When these friends, through the fear of God, 
could not follow the learned in these their ques- 
tions, the bishop, and also the others, inveighed 
against them in a very brutal and furious manner, 
saying that the law should be applied to these peo- 
ple; if not, they would themselves lay hands on 
them. And because one of the prisoners spoke a 
little more than the rest, they said : "This is their 
captain ; you shall no longer scatter your evil seed 
in our country," and they shut him up by himself. 
And the bishop showed them a large letter, saying 
very sternly : That the court has given orders, that 
all strangers should have to subscribe the above 
mentioned four questions, and he who would do 
this might remain in the country free and without 
molestation, but all that were found obstinate here- 
in should be put to a terrible death. Let everyone 
consider this, subscribe and deliver himself from 
danger. 

These cruel and unchristian threats terrified 
some, so that through the weakness of the flesh 
five of them apostatized from the truth, and re- 
fused to lose their bodies for the name of Christ. 
Having caught these in their net, they did not re- 
joicingly lay these found sheep (as they were re- 
garded by them) upon their shoulders, according 
to Christ's teaching ; but, on the contrary, they ex- 
posed these five, for a disgrace, in St. Paul's 
churchyard, with a fagot tied on their shoulders, 
as a token that they were worthy of burning, with 
which they stood there till the bishop had concluded 
his sermon, and gave a letter into their hands, say- 
ing : That these people were seduced, but that this 
was the truth, which was taught there; and that 
they should give bail, that they would unite with 
the Dutch (Duytsche) church, and thus become 
their brethren. The other friends who steadfastly 
adhered to the truth were brought before the bish- 
op twice afterwards, and it was sought, by severe 
threats with the decree, to constrain them to sub- 
scribe, or they would have to die a terrible death. 
When the bishop could by no manner of means 
cause these friends to apostatize, he delivered 
them over to the mayor, and they were put into 
severe imprisonment with malefactors, where these 
fourteen women and a lad were confined for some 
time with great tribulation and sorrow, by fre- 
quently being threatened with a cruel death. But 
the matter ultimately took a different turn, so that 
they released these women, and drove them, as 
innocent lambs (whom it was easy to compel) , with 
halberds and armed men, (as though they had to 
guard a city) to the ship. But the young lad they 


tied to a cart, and scourged him out [of the city] 
with a whip, which caused him to say : "This is for 
the name of Christ." When they were on board 
the ship, to embark for Gravesend, a letter was 
given to the skipper, which stated, that these peo- 
ple were not worthy to come among Christians. 
The other five brethren were brought forth again, 
and with great severity urged to subscribe, or in de- 
fault of which to be burnt in Smithfield. There- 
upon Jan Pieterss replied with a valiant heart, 
that this was a small matter. The bishop sternly 
asked : "What does he say ?" When he had under- 
stood Jan Pieterss correctly, he presumptuously 
said that such heretics must be shunned ; and that 
he did now expel them from his church, as bad 
members. Thereupon Hendrick Terwoort said: 
"How can you expel us from your church, when 
we have never yet been one with you?" The 
bishop answered : "That this was all the same, and 
that in England there was no one that was not a 
member of God's church." Thus they put these 
friends of Christ into Newgate, confining them 
very securely, and tormented them with manifold 
temptations, with disputations, and [threats of] a 
cruel death. 

But when these friends, as men in the faith, 
steadfastly endured all this, they, very unmerci- 
fully, cast them into a deep dungeon, infested with 
filthy and noxious vermin, which was a dreadful 
and unhealthy place to be confined, so that one of 
the friends, named Christiaen, died there in a 
short time. Once an English teacher [minister] 
came to them, and laying his hands upon them, 
and falling down upon his knees, cried aloud: 
"Lord, convert their heart ;" and naming the devil, 
said: "Depart from them, thou wicked one." But 
as these men, through the grace of God, and for 
the love to Him, bore all this, finally a letter was 
shown them, containing eight articles: That all 
strangers must subscribe to, and whether it were 
not right to put to death such vagabond heretics ; 
together with the above-mentioned articles. There- 
upon sentence was sent from the court upon Jan 
Pieterss and Hendrick Terwoort, that they should 
both be publicly burnt. This sentence was also as- 
sented to by the common people, by subscribing, 
that such heretics should be put to death. 

On the Sunday following intelligence was 
brought to them, that they should be burnt in three 
days ; and they were at the same time also asked, 
whether they desired any postponement. Hendrick 
Terwoort answered : "If it has to be according to 
your intention, make haste in the matter, for we 
would rather die than live, that we may be deliv- 
ered from this dreadful vermin." But it was de- 
layed until Friday, when they were brought forth 
early in the morning, to be put to death in Smith- 
field. 

On their way to death Jan Pieterss said: "We 
need not be ashamed of this way, since many 
prophets went the same before us." And thus they, 
as defenseless sheep of Christ, following the foot- 


1010 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


steps of their Master, went boldly to death for the 
name of Christ. An English teacher who was pres- 
ent derisively said before all the people: "These 
people do not believe in God." Thereupon Jan 
Pieterss replied: "We believe in one God, our 
heavenly Father almighty, and in Jesus Christ His 
Son." When they stood at the stakes, they were 
once more tormented [with the demand] to sub- 
scribe to the articles referred to, and on condition 
that they should subscribe to them, they were 
promised pardon. Thereupon Jan Pieterss spoke 
thus: "You have labored with all your might to 
bring us over to you ; but now that you cannot ac- 
complish your purpose, we are placed at the stake." 
Thereupon one of their preachers excused them, 
saying : "That this came through the council alone, 
and that it was also the will of the queen, that they 
should be put to death." Jan Pieterss replied that 
they who were the teachers of the queen ought to 
instruct her differently; and that therefore our 
blood shall be required at your hands. Thus, on the 
22d of July of said year, 1575, both were burnt 
alive and confessed the word of truth with their 
death. But the other two prisoners, Gerrit van By- 
ler and Hans van Straten, after much misery and 
distress, were set free, unharmed in their faith. 

It is also deserving of the consideration of every 
intelligent person, how utterly incompatible with 
the Christian faith such unchristian and cruel pro- 
ceedings and sentence as seen here, are, since the 
Christians are described as sheep and lambs sent 
out among cruel, ravening wolves. Matt. 10:16; 
Luke 10:3. Who then can believe with a good 
conscience, that these English preachers are the 
true sheep of Christ, seeing they so signally 
brought forth in this the fruit of wolves, since ac- 
cording to the teaching of Christ, the tree shall be 
known by its fruit. And these preachers are to be 
censured so much the more yet, since they regard 
as a principal article of their faith, that God Al- 
mighty before the foundation of the world elected 
a certain small number of men, which can in no 
wise be decreased or increased, but who shall in- 
fallibly all be saved. And that God Almighty, on 
the other hand, rejected the great majority of men, 
who shall likewise infallibly be lost. And that the 
will or ability which God has given man, can do no 
more in the way of inducing acceptation of God's 
gracious conversion, than dead men are able to 
resurrect from temporal death. If it stands thus 
with man's conversion, how utterly unfounded is 
then the course of these English preachers, who 
by such tyrannical means sought to force the faith 
and conversion (according to their idea) upon 
these poor defenseless prisoners, by threatening 
them with a terrible death. It appears from this, 
that they do not believe their principal article 
themselves. 

This occurred under the reign of Queen Eliza- 
beth, in the eighteenth year of said reign. 

He that will, may read this account also in an 


old printed hymn, which was then composed con- 
cerning the offering up of these friends. 

EXTRACT FROM A WRITING BY GERRIT VAN BYLER's 

OWN HAND, HANDED TO US BY HIS SON JAN 

VAN BYLER; WRITTEN IN PRISON, AT 

LONDON, AND CONFIRMATORY OF 

THE FOREGOING 

First of all he states that they, more than twenty- 
five of them being assembled in prayer to God, on 
Easter Day, were surprised, apprehended, and put 
into the Queen's prison, where they were confined 
till the third day, that they had to give bail for a 
large amount of money, etc., someone going se- 
curity for it; and we, writes G. van Byler, kept 
our word. 

(From here on we shall follow G. van Byler's 
own words. ) 

We were then brought before her majesty's 
bishop, to confess our faith, which we did. 

When we came before the bishop, there were 
assembled there : Mr. George, James King, John 
Wheelwright, two aldermen, and a French preach- 
er. Again: we came before the lords and their 
servants ; they presented to us four questions, and 
thereupon said: "Say yes or no." 

1. Ques. Whether Christ had not assumed His 
flesh and blood from the virgin Mary? 

We replied : "That He is the Son of the livine 
God." s 

2. Ques. Whether infants must not be baptized? 
We replied : "That we could not understand it 

so, since we had not found it in the holy Scrip- 
tures." 

3. Ques. Whether a Christian may administer 
the [criminal] office of the magistracy? 

We replied : "That our conscience did not allow 
it, but that we recognized it as the servant of God, 
as we read." 

4. Ques. Whether a Christian, in case of neces- 
sity, may not swear ? 

We replied: "That our conscience did likewise 
not allow it, because Christ, in Matthew, had said: 
'Let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, 
nay.' " 

Then we kept silence. The bishop said that our 
crimes therein were very great, so that we should 
not inherit the kingdom of God. O Lord, do not 
avenge it! 

The bishop then said to us all, that they should 
conduct us back into the Mersey, whence we had 
come out, and keep us confined there. 

A young brother, who being questioned first, 
boldly declared the truth, was severely accused 
for it, and taken from us to Westminster, where he 
was confined by himself, which grieved us greatly. 

While we were thus imprisoned, Mr. George 
came, and said that if we would adhere to the 
church, he would release us, and free us from our 
bonds, to which end, he said, he had orders from 
the bishop. But we adhered valiantly to the truth 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1011 


of Jesus Christ ; He is our Captain, and no other ; 
yea, in Him is all our trust. 

My dear brethren and beloved sisters, let us 
courageously persevere, till we are taken hence. 
The Lord shall give us to drink of the new wine. 
O Lord, strengthen our faith 1 As we have received 
the Lord Jesus Christ, so let us go on, valiantly 
trusting in Him. 

When we thought that the conflict was almost 
over, it was only the beginning of it. We were put 
in irons, and each separately confined, with fetters 
on our legs. This lasted a little more than three 
weeks. 

In the meantime we had to appear before the 
lords again, when we were told that we should be 
burnt, which was grievous for the flesh; but we 
called to God in our distress, that He would 
strengthen us, as He had strengthened Israel. 

On the morning of the day before Whitsuntide 
we were two and two coupled together, and 
brought before the lords (which was the fourth 
time) , and we remembered the word of the Lord : 
"When ye are brought before lords and princes, 
fear not what ye shall speak, for it shall be given 
you in that hour." Hence we trusted in the Lord. 

When we had been brought there, the lords 
again presented to us the afore-mentioned four 
questions, and urged us to sign them. But we said, 
we would adhere to the word of the Lord. 

We were then taken away and each separately 
confined, and fettered as previously. The women 
and one young brother were taken to Newgate, 
whence they were conducted on board a vessel, and 
carried away; and the brother was tied to a cart 
and whipped out of the city. 

We were then released from our fetters for 
about five days, which, however, were put on us 
again, and then we looked for the end. 

After this, two Dutch preachers, sent by the 
bishop, came and gave a letter to the jailer. 

Thereupon, on the 2d of June, we were bound 
again, led forth, and brought before the lords, who 
again presented to us the afore-mentioned four 
questions, and after this had been done, they sent 
us into Newgate prison, where the other friends 
had been confined. 

Then we expected our end in a day or two, for 
which we greatly longed, for the imprisonment was 
severe; however, it was not yet the Lord's will. 

When we had been confined there about eight 
days, one of our brethren was delivered from the 
flesh, and died a godly death, at which all of us 
were called to be present, to witness it. 

In the meantime we were confined among many 
thieves and criminals, to whom the bishop, as also 
a preacher, said that they should take care not to 
be seduced by us. 

After many storms Mr. Godfrey and two others 
came, and we were confined in cages, so that we 
could not converse with our neighbors. 

And as a thunder clap, death was, from day to 
day, announced to us, by hanging, burning, and 


otherwise; however, the Lord strengthened us, 
praise be to His holy name. They also told me 
before, that when I should be in the heat of the 
flames, I could not bow or beckon for pardon; 
hence I should do it before, said they, for the less 
pain the better ; so that I should not have to suffer 
much in death. 

Thus we waited for death from day to day ; we 
thought little of our lives, though it was grievous 
for the flesh, and consoled ourselves with the 
thought that once, at all events, we had to die. 

My severest conflict was, that I had to leave my 
dear wife and all my little innocent children. Af- 
ter twelve days two of us were informed, that they 
should have to die by fire on the third day ; where- 
upon on Tuesday, a stake was erected in Smith- 
field; but the execution did not take place. 

On Wednesday much people were gathered, to 
behold the death of our two friends ; however, they 
dispersed again. But this was done for the sake 
of intimidation, to draw our friends and us from 
the faith. But on Friday, two of our friends, 
namely, Hendrick Terwoort and Jan Pieterss, 
were taken from prison and led forth to be offered 
up. 

Jan Pieterss said as he was going out: "This 
way went all the pious prophets, as also Christ our 
Saviour, which has been thus from the beginning 
of days, from the time of Abel." 

These two were put at a stake in Smithfield, and 
strove through by force, in the midst of the fire, 
thus becoming a sacrifice before the Lord, which 
they offered up to Him alive. 

Notice. — Here follows in this writing a hymn, 
with the remark, that Jan Pieterss Wagemaker, 
who was burned at this time, composed the same 
before his death, in prison. It treats of the suffer- 
ings of all the righteous, until Jesus Christ and His 
apostles, and many martyrs, and begins thus : 

Hoort Vriendekens al te somen, 
Een lied heb ik gestelt, etc. 

And concludes with this stanza: 
Die dit lied heeft begonnen, 
Hy was seer teer en krank: 
Had hy den strijd gewonnen 
Het ware wel sijnen dank. 
Den strijd was in saysoene. 
Als hy dit eerstmael sank; 
Te Londen was 't te doene 
Daer hy was in bedwank. 

Then follows another hymn, which concludes 
thus: 

Die dit lied heeft begonnen, 
Verblijd was hy al in den geest, 
Uyt liefden was hy daer toe gedrongen, 
Als hy lag in benouwen meest. 
Tot God was alleen sijn verlangen, 
Die hem kan sterken totten end, 
Te Londen daer hy lag gevangen, 
In Nieuwgeet seer wel bekent. 


1012 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Again another stanza. 

Wy zijn, Heer! mi in den strijd, 

Och! wilt ons dock bewaren, 

Van ons vyanden, nu ter tijd, 

Die ons benouwen aen alien zijd', 

Ol Heer, ons dock bevrijd! 

Op dat wy wel volherden. 

O God gy zijt een Heere groot, 
Sterkt ons altijd in onsen nood. 

After that, the following words were written by 
Gerrit van Byler : 

Hope of Believers: Though they condemn me 
here upon this earth, I nevertheless certainly be- 
lieve with the prophet David (Ps. 27:13) that I 
shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of 
the living ; hence I rejoice in the Lord, and am of 
good cheer and undismayed, assured that my Re- 
deemer liveth. Spes mea in Deo.* 

In Newgate, at London, in September, in the 
year 1575. Written by me. 

Gerrit van Byler. 


EXTRACT FROM THE APPENDED MATTERS IN THE 

OLD MARTYRS MIRROR, EDITION OF 1631, 

PAGE 964, COL. 2 

We received, too late, a certain chronicle of Eng- 
land, by Egmont Howes, a nobleman in London, 
printed A. D. 1615, by Thomas Dauwson, in which 
on page 678, the following is related, as having oc- 
curred under Queen Elizabeth, A. D. 1575 : 

On Easter Day, being the 3d of April, about nine 
o'clock in the forenoon, there was discovered a 
gathering of Dutch Anabaptists, Hollanders, in a 
house beyond the Aldgate; seventeen of whom 
were apprehended, and four cast into prison. 

On the 21st of May, on Whitsuntide eve, one 
man and ten women, Dutch Anabaptists, were con- 
demned, in the Consistory of St. Paul's church, to 
be burnt in a place called Smithfield; however, 
after much labor and pains with them, only one 
woman turned, and the rest were banished from 
the country. 

On the 22d of July two Dutch Anabaptists were 
burned in the place called Smithfield, who died in 
great terror, weeping and crying. So far the afore- 
mentioned author. 

We have deemed it well to add this here, since it 
serves to confirm the foregoing ; as also, to testify 
that they did not suffer for any reviling against her 
majesty (as circulated by some), but only for their 
faith. And this is the more authentic, because it 
was recorded by the hand of their adversaries. 


TWO LETTERS WRITTEN BY THESE IMPRISONED 

FRIENDS, AS WE HAVE FOUND THEM IN A 

SMALL, OLD, PRINTED BOOK 

We poor and despised strangers, who are in per- 
secution for the testimony of Jesus Christ, wish all 
men, of whatever race or office, from God, that the 

* My hope is in God. 


Lord would grant them a long peace, so that we 
may live in peace among one another, in all godli- 
ness, to the praise and glory of the Lord, and the 
salvation of the soul. 

Since we are by so many persons, both with 
word and pen, very unjustly accused and slan- 
dered, we are for this important reason con- 
strained briefly, in writing, to present the ground 
of our faith, and thus make it known as follows : 

We are not addressed, and interrogated concern- 
ing our faith, with a meek spirit, as the holy Scrip- 
tures teach ; but reproach is heaped upon reproach, 
and lie upon lie, to increase and augment our af- 
flictions and sorrows ; and because they also have 
no pity for our poor weak women and children. 
Our country and kindred, and our property, we 
had to leave (partly, because of the great tyranny), 
and fled as lambs before wolves, only for the true 
evangelical truth of Jesus Christ, and not for any 
sedition or heresy, as the Munsterite errors or 
abominations were, and as (God forbid!) is re- 
ported of us. We fain would that our whole faith 
and life were written on our forehead, so that 
everyone might know and see what we believe, 
and what we seek and desire here upon earth. 
There should nothing be found but a true faith in 
full accordance with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 
and an unblamable life, seeking to provide bread 
for our wives and children, even as God has com- 
manded and as the Scriptures teach. I Thess. 2 :9 ; 
II Thess. 3:8; Eph. 4:28; I Thess. 4:11. Oh, 
that our persecutors knew that this is the desire of 
our hearts, they certainly could not but have great 
pity and compassion upon us poor, despised stran- 
gers, if there be any human pity and compassion 
in them at all, and they would, according to the 
words of the Lord, have compassion upon us, as 
the prophet says : "Bring the poor that are afflicted 
to thy house." Isa. 58:7. Moses says: "If a stran- 
ger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not 
vex him ; but the stranger that dwelleth with you 
shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou 
shalt love him as thyself." Lev. 19 :33, 34. 

Mark well that God commands to love the stran- 
ger as one's own self. Who is in misery and dwell- 
ing in a strange country, that likes to be despised, 
and driven out of it with his fellow believers, and 
suffer great loss besides? Hence Christ says: "All 
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to 
you, do ye even so to them : for this is the law and 
the prophets." Matt. 7 :12. Oh, that they would 
deal so with us, according to natural equity, and 
the evangelical truth (of which our persecutors 
so greatly boast), how soon should the persecutors 
cease, and the lying and slandering mouths be 
stopped. For Christ and His own persecuted no 
one, but in His true Gospel taught the contrary, as 
He says: "Love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them which despitefully use you, and perse- 
cute you ; that ye may be the children of your Fa- 
ther which is in heaven : for he maketh his sun to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1013 


rise on the evil and on the good." Matt. 5 :44, 45. 
This is the doctrine left by Christ and His apostles, 
as they themselves declare, even as Paul says: 
"Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no 
certain dwelling place ; and labor, working with our 
own hands : being reviled, we bless ; being perse- 
cuted, we suffer it : being defamed, we entreat : we 
are made as the filth of the world, and are the off- 
scouring of all things unto this day." I Cor. 4:11- 
13. Paul further says: "All that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." II Tim. 
3:12. 

From all this it is demonstrable, that those who 
have the true evangelical doctrine and faith will 
persecute no one, but will themselves be persecuted. 
If it be said to us, that we are persecuted for our 
heretical faith, according to Paul's teaching, and 
because God has commanded to kill the false 
prophets (Deut. 13 :9), we reply thus: "Paul says, 
that we are to reject (avoid) a man that is a here- 
tic, after the first and second admonition." Tit. 
3 :10. He does not say : "Drive them out of the 
country and city without hearing or admonishing 
them." Besides, one must also know who are here- 
tics : namely, those who advance a doctrine that is 
beside and contrary to the word of the Lord. But 
no man can convince us of this; that is, that our 
doctrine and faith are contrary .to the doctrine of 
Jesus Christ and His holy apostles, as the sequel 
will show. 

In regard to their allegation, that God has com- 
manded, in His law, to kill false prophets, we reply 
that if we, in this time of the New Testament, were 
to kill all which God had commanded to kill in the 
Old Testament, we should have to kill not only the 
false prophets, but also the adulterers, whoremon- 
gers, and those who take the name of the Lord in 
vain and curse, and other like transgressors. Levit- 
icus 20:10; Deut. 22:21 ; Lev. 24:14. And if they 
would wink at these, and allege against us only 
the commandment concerning the false prophets, in 
order to be rid of us, do at least rightly consider the 
word of the Lord, by what sign false prophets shall 
be known. For thus does God speak by Moses: 
"If a prophet or dreamer say to you: Let us go 
after strange gods, which you know not, that 
prophet shall die." Deut. 13. But we do not teach 
to go after strange gods, neither have we a heretical 
faith which is contrary to the word of Christ. But 
we believe in one God, Father Almighty, Creator of 
heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ His only be- 
gotten Son, our Lord, who was conceived of the 
Holy Ghost, born of the pure virgin Mary, suffered 
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was 
buried ; on the third day He rose from the dead, as- 
cended up to heaven, and is now sitting at the right 
hand of God the Almighty Father, whence He must 
come again, to judge the quick and the dead. We 
believe in the Holy Ghost. We believe that Christ 
Jesus is true God and man. 

Neither do we seek salvation in our works, as is 


reported of us; but we believe that we shall be 
saved only through the merits of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Nor do we boast of being without sin, but con- 
fess ourselves every moment as sinners before our 
God. But from presumptuous sins we must re- 
frain, if we would be saved : as namely, from adul- 
tery, fornication, sorcery, sedition, shedding of 
blood, cursing and swearing, lying and cheating, 
pride and drunkenness, anger and strife, hatred 
and envy. These are the sins of which the Scrip- 
ture says: "They which do such things shall not 
inherit the kingdom of God." Gal. 5:21. 

That they also say that we will not hear the 
Word of God, because we do not hear the preach- 
ers in church, to that we reply that we do not hear 
the preachers, to this the Word of our God con- 
strains us, as they are not fit persons to administer 
such an office. For Paul teaches Timothy and says : 
"The things that thou hast heard of me by many 
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, 
who shall be able to teach others also." II Tim. 
2 :2. For he that would reprove and teach another 
must be unblamable himself. But if the preachers 
were according to the apostolic doctrine, we would 
gladly hear them from the depths of our hearts, 
and would also be the first and the last in church. 

But if it be said to us, that Jesus Christ says: 
"The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat : 
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that 
observe and do ; but do not ye after their works" 
(Matt. 23 :2, 3) ; we answer : "If the preachers are 
the scribes and Pharisees, then they are the ones 
who have crucified Jesus Christ, and then also will 
come upon them all the woes that follow hereafter. 
But if they are not the scribes, then are also the 
preceding words, that we are to do according to 
their words, and not after their works, not spoken 
of them." Again, they that sat in Moses' seat, were 
from the tribe of Levi, like Moses, teaching the 
people of Israel : "All that the priests and Levites 
teach you, and as they command you, that shall ye 
observe, and do according to it." Deut. 17:10. The 
prophet says: "The priest's lips should keep 
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his 
mouth." Mai. 2:7. Since Christ did not come to 
destroy the law or the prophets, but to fulfill them ; 
therefore He taught His apostles thus. But that 
this should be an argument from the word of 
Christ (Matt. 23), to hear the preachers, cannot 
be; since the preachers are not of the tribe of 
Levi, whom Israel had to hear, but from the Gen- 
tiles. Besides, it must be considered, that when 
Christ Jesus had fulfilled the law in every respect, 
by His bitter death and the shedding of His sacred 
blood, He ordained another priesthood that should 
teach His holy law, namely, His Gospel, when He 
said to His disciples: "As my Father hath sent 
me, even so send I you." John 20:21. 

These holy messengers of Christ directed us to 
hear, not blamable teachers, but such as are un- 
blamable; who are not given to wine, not self- 


1014 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


willed, not soon angry, no brawler, not covetous, 
not given to filthy lucre; but given to hospitality, 
kind, sober, just, holy, temperate ; holding fast the 
faithful word. And let the deacons also first be 
proved; then let them use the office of a deacon, 
being found blameless. II Pet. 3:2; I John 4:1; 
I Tim. 3; Tit. 1 ; Rom. 2:21 ; 16:17. 

Hence we dare not regard the preachers as the 
persons that are to wait on the office of the min- 
istry; nor dare we hear them, because they, ac- 
cording to Paul's teaching, are blamable and unfit 
thereto. When it is therefore said of us, that we 
will not hear the Word of God, great injustice is 
done us ; for to hear the Word of God is the great- 
est joy that can come to us upon earth, for it is the 
comfort of our hearts. 

That they would also accuse us of being disobe- 
dient to the magistracy, because we do not have 
our children baptized, to this we reply that we de- 
sire to obey the magistracy in all things not con- 
trary to the Word of God. That we do not have 
our children baptized by the priest, this we omit 
not from stubbornness or presumption, but 
through the fear of God, because Christ com- 
manded to baptize believers, and the messengers 
of Christ did not baptize infants, who were unable 
to speak, but reasonable persons, upon confession 
of their sins, and of their faith, as may be read, 
Matt. 3:16; Mark 1:9; Luke 3:21; John 3:22; 
Acts 2:28; 9:37; 8:18; 10:48; 16:33; 18:8; 19:5; 
22:16. Thus did Christ and the apostles teach 
concerning baptism as we may read, Matt. 28:19; 
Mark 16:16; John 3:23; Rom. 6:3; Gal. 3:27; 
Eph. 4 :S ; Col. 2:12; Tit. 3 :5 ; I Peter 3 :21 ; Heb. 
6:2. These are the Scriptures that testify of the 
baptism of believers. But of baptizing infants de- 
void of reason or speech, upon the faith of the 
fathers, and exorcising the devil from them, of this 
the Scriptures do not say one word. Hence we 
dare not consent to such a baptism, because God 
has commanded, that one shall neither add to nor 
take away from His words. Nor dare we do what 
seems right to any one, but only that which He 
commands. It is further written: "Add thou not 
unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be 
found a liar." Prov. 30 :6. 

The Scriptures declare in many places, that they 
will be most grievously punished by God who for- 
sake His Word and follow their own opinion, even 
as Saul the first King of Israel; Uzzah, who 
touched the ark of the Lord ; the two sons of Aaron, 
Nadab and Abihu, who did that which was not 
commanded them, wherefore they were also pun- 
ished. I Samuel 15:24; II Sam. 6:6; Lev. 10:2. 
These are to us remarkable examples, that we dare 
use no religious rites or ceremonies without a 
command from God. For Christ says: "Every 
plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted, 
shall be rooted up." Matthew 15 :13. And Martin 
Luther, commenting on the third chapter of Dan- 
iel, writes : "Divine worship without the word 
is always idolatry." 


That they say that the children believe them- 
selves and that God is almighty, so that He can 
easily give the children faith, since faith is the gift 
of God, to this we reply that God is almighty, and 
can easily give the children faith, and not only 
faith, but also speech, and works, whereby faith is 
also confessed (for faith is not without confession 
or good works), but now does God give the chil- 
dren neither speech nor works, to say nothing of 
faith.* Paul says : "How shall they believe in him 
of whom they have not heard?" Rom. 10:14. It is 
certainly evident to everyone, that infants can 
neither hear nor understand, as also the Scripture 
openly declares. And even though the Scriptures 
did not teach us this, yet experience teaches us, 
that they must be guarded and kept from all sharp 
and dangerous instruments, from water and fire, 
whereby they prove that there is neither faith nor 
understanding in them. And as they are not willing 
to permit that infants should receive the sacrament, 
they thereby prove themselves, that they do not 
regard their speechless children as believers. 

That they also claim that their children are filled 
with the Holy Ghost in their mother's womb, as 
was John the Baptist ; if this be true, how comes it 
then that they exorcise the unclean spirits from 
their children, when they baptize them; if they 
have previously had the Holy Spirit? 

That they also adduce the words of Christ : "Suf- 
fer the children to come unto me, for of such is the 
kingdom of God," as a proof for baptizing the chil- 
dren, we answer that the kingdom of God is theirs 
we heartily admit ; but that they are therefore to be 
baptized, we do not admit, for the reason that 
Christ did not baptize the children that were 
brought to Him, nor did He command that they 
should be baptized; but they are saved through 
grace, without any ceremonies, through the blood 
of Christy even as the children which died without 
circumcision in Israel. 

That they also assert that we must be born again 
of the water and the Spirit, or we cannot enter into 
the kingdom of God, and would conclude that 
children must be baptized, because water precedes 
the spirit ; or they will not be saved ; to this we re- 
ply, in the first place, that Christ here does not 
speak of children, but to an adult person, that came 
to Him by night, to whom Jesus said: "Verily, 
verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh 
is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is 
spirit." John 3:5,6. In the second place, Christ 
speaks of a regeneration before the water (v. 3), 
which regeneration cannot be effected, except 
through faith in Jesus Christ, as the Scriptures 
teach. This also Martin Luther writes,"!- that faith 
is a divine work in us, which changes and renews 
us by the power of God, mortifies the old Adam, 

* Thus writes Martin Luther in his preface to the Epistle to the 
Romans. 

t In the preface to the Epistle to the Romans. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1015 


makes of us entirely different beings in heart, mind 
and every power, and brings the Holy Ghost with 
it. 

These words do in no respect concern innocent 
children, for they do not have the old birth, from 
the original sin which condemns them, as some 
would prove, because David says: "I was begot- 
ten of sinful seed ; and in sin did my mother con- 
ceive me." This psalm David made, when he had 
committed adultery with Bathsheba, and was re- 
proved by the prophet Nathan. Then he lamented 
on account of the inborn sin from Adam, but it 
was not accounted unto his condemnation, because 
of the promised seed which had been promised to 
Adam and Eve, namely, Christ Jesus, who recon- 
ciled Adam's transgression and took the original 
sin upon Himself, as Paul says: "As by the of- 
fense of one judgment came upon all men to con- 
demnation ; even so by the righteousness of one the 
free gift came upon all men, unto justification of 
life." Rom. 5:18. Thus also Martin Luther de- 
clares, writing on the fifteenth chapter of John: 
"That original sin was taken away through Christ, 
and that since Christ's advent it does no more con- 
demn any one. Since, then, original sin was taken 
away through Christ, and no longer condemns 
any one, there is also no sin can condemn infants 
if they die without baptism ; for the children shall 
not die for the iniquity of the father, saith the 
Lord." Deuteronomy 24:16; II Kings 14:6; II 
Chronicles 25 :4 ; Ezekiel 18 :20. Hence it is a great 
sin before God, to demand that the children be 
baptized for the sake of original sin, or that they 
shall not be saved. Those who demand this, esteem 
Adam's sin greater than the merits of Christ : they 
also seek salvation more in the water than in the 
blood of Christ, which is openly contradicting the 
Scriptures, since it is so clearly declared "that the 
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ cleanseth us from 
all sin." I John 1 :7; Col. 1:14; I Pet. 1 :19; Rev. 
1:5; Heb. 9:12. 

That they also want to argue, that circumcision 
is a proof for the validity of infant baptism ; this 
can not be. Reason, if children were to be bap- 
tized as they were circumcised, only the male chil- 
dren would have to be baptized, and not the female, 
for the female children were not circumcised, but 
only the male children. Paul does not apply cir- 
cumcision to baptism, but to the circumcision of 
the heart, which is a circumcision of the spirit. 
Rom. 2 :29; Col. 2:11 ; Phil. 3 :3. God commanded 
Abraham to use circumcision on the eighth day; 
this commandment Israel kept until Christ came, 
and they did not change it, whether in little or in 
much, but adhered to the eighth day, and did not 
want to follow their reason and say: that when 
children die before the eighth day without circum- 
cision they are damned ; but they would obey God 
and His commandments and would not follow 
their own wisdom. In this manner we in the New 
Testament are also to use baptism : Namely, at the 
time Christ commanded it; that is, on believers, 


and we are not to follow our own opinion in the 
matter of baptism, that we should use it before the 
proper time on speechless and unreasonable chil- 
dren; because God has not commanded it, and it 
has not been His will. Had it been the will of God, 
that infants should be baptized, as they were cir- 
cumcised when they were eight days old, God 
would doubtless have commanded it with an ex- 
press command, that children should be baptized, 
even as well as He commanded to circumcise the 
children. Christ would also have received baptism 
in His infancy, as well as that He was circumcised 
when He was eight days old. But now this was 
not the will of God ; hence He did also teach other- 
wise, and received it Himself in a different man- 
ner. For Christ came to John, and desired that he 
should baptize Him, as he also did. By this He 
teaches us, and has shown us by examples, that 
they who are to be baptized must have a desire for 
baptism. 

That the preachers assert that Origenes received 
infant baptism from the apostles, this cannot be; 
for Origenes lived a hundred years after the time 
of the apostles, as history testifies. But it is very 
surprising, that the learned are trying to prove any 
thing by Origenes, since Martin Luther so stren- 
uously rejects him. They write and say what some 
Romish bishops or popes instituted, and proved 
the same from the historian Platina. They write 
thus: "That Pope Innocent commanded to bap- 
tize children as soon as they were born." The same 
is contained in a book printed at Magdeburg, en- 
titled a "Prayer Book, new from the holy Scrip- 
tures." Again, Sebastian Franck's Chronika, and 
Adriaen van Bergen write that Ignius the tenth 
pope instituted the sponsors in baptism. This is 
the reason why we cannot see the propriety of in- 
fant baptism: because it is instituted and com- 
manded by men, and the holy Scripture does not 
know such a baptism, but knows only the baptism 
that is taught upon faith, as said before. 

We are also branded as profaners of the sacra- 
ment and forgetters of God. To this we reply: 
"We neither profane nor forget the sacrament of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, but hold it in great grati- 
tude, and remember, whenever we observe it, the 
great love which Christ showed us on the cross, 
when He suffered His body to be broken, and shed 
His sacred blood for our sakes ; and thus we show 
forth the death of the Lord, as Paul says : "As of- 
ten as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do 
shew the Lord's death till he come." I Cor. 1 1 : 
26. This is our faith concerning the sacrament. 
That we do not receive it from the preachers, and 
observe it with their church, is for three reasons. 

The first reason is that the minister or dis- 
penser must be blameless according to the teaching 
of Paul ; he must rule well his own house, and have 
his children in subjection, and his wife must be 
faithful in all things. I Tim. 3 :2 ; Tit. 1 :6. In the 
second place, the church that is to eat of the bread 
must be a blameless church (Eph. 5 :27) , as Paul 


1016 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


says : "For even Christ our passover is sacrificed 
for us : therefore let us keep the feast, not with old 
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wick- 
edness ; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity 
and truth." Paul further says : "I wrote unto you 
in an epistle not to company with fornicators : yet 
not altogether with the fornicators of this world, 
or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with idol- 
aters ; for then must ye needs go out of the world. 
But now I have written unto you not to keep com- 
pany, if any man that is called a brother be a for- 
nicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a 
drunkard, or an extortioner; with such a one no 
not to eat." I Cor. 5:7-11. Since we openly find 
such works in their church, the Word of God for- 
bids us to observe the Lord's sacrament with them. 

The third reason is that they do not observe 
their sacrament according to the practice of Christ 
and His apostles, for they took bread, and break it, 
and gave it to the people. Matt. 26:26; I Corin- 
thians 10:16; 11:23; Acts 2:42; 20:11. But the 
priest break no bread, but give unbroken wafers. 
The wafers were instituted by Pope Alexander. 
Christ commanded it to be done in remembrance of 
Him (I Cor. 11 :24) ; the priests say that it is to be 
done, partly, for the forgiveness of sins. These are 
the reasons why we dare not observe it with them, 
through the fear of God, for we dare do nothing 
but what the Word of God teaches us. And we ob- 
serve it with a blameless dispenser, in a blameless 
church who fear God, with bread and wine, accord- 
ing to the practice of the Lord and His apostles, in 
the houses, as Christ and the apostles did. 

This is our faith and confession concerning holy 
baptism: that it may be given to none other but 
adults that believe, and know themselves what they 
are receiving, even as they who eat of the bread of 
the Lord must have understanding and faith, and 
must examine themselves. Because we thus rightly 
observe these two sacraments according to the com- 
mand of Christ, hence it partly comes, that the 
preachers are so exceedingly hostile to us. It 
grieves them, that they should lose their profit. 
They know not what evil things they can falsely tell 
the authorities and the common people, in order 
that they should not tolerate us in any city or coun- 
try. They pretend that there are so many thousands 
of us in the country, who want to take possession 
of countries and cities ; whereas no such thoughts 
have entered into our hearts, for it is impossible to 
take possession of countries and cities without vio- 
lence and bloodshed. And if we had such a liberty 
as would permit us to commit murder, and to de- 
prive an other of his property, we would also have 
liberty to let our children be baptized by the 
priests ; then we would not need to allow ourselves 
to be driven from our possessions and paternal 
inheritances, from our ease into great misery, as a 
reproach to all. If we had such a heart as is re- 
ported of us, we would suffer all this in vain, for 
they who do such things shall not inherit the king- 
dom of God, as Paul says : Gal. 5 :21. "A lie," says 


Sirach, "is a foul blot in a man, yet, it is continually 
in the mouth of the untaught. A thief is better than 
a man that is accustomed to lie." Sir. 20:24, 25. 
For they had also invented this lie against Paul, 
that he had made an uproar, and had brought from 
the wilderness four thousand secret murderers. 
Acts 21 :38. But with regard to us they have still 
magnified the lie, and speak of many thousands as 
being of our faith. We have not so easy a faith, 
that they flock to us in crowds ; only here and there 
may be a household, which are very solitary and 
few as a sparrow alone upon the housetop, like 
the pelican of the wilderness, and owl of the desert, 
a hly among thorns, and the apple tree among the 
trees of the wood, which brings forth good fruit 
(Ps. 102:7,6; Cant. 2:2,3j Ps. 1:3), as a peni- 
tent life, to deny one's self, and to hate his own 
life, otherwise he cannot be Christ's disciple. Luke 
14:26. They that are Christ's, crucify the flesh 
with the affection and lusts. Gal. 5 :24. He that 
says he abides in Christ ought himself also to walk, 
even as Christ walked. I John 2:6. Christ says 
that there are few that walk in His way, in the 
way which leads unto life, and that find it. It is hid 
from the scribes and wise of this world. Base 
things, and things which are most despised, hath 
God chosen, and things which are not, to them it is 
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of 
God. Thus Christ and His apostles declare that 
there are few who have the true faith, and know 
the way. As also the prophet laments : "The faith- 
ful fail from among the children of men." Psalm 
12:1. For iniquity abounds, so that, if it were 
possible, the very elect should fall into error, as 
Christ Himself says : "When the Son of man com- 
eth, shall he find faith on the earth?" Luke 18:8. 
Hence there will be few believers at Christ's com- 
ing, and have also been few from the beginning of 
the world. As namely, in the time of Noah, only 
eight believing souls. In Lot's time, there were 
only three believers. In the time of Israel, there 
were eight hundred false prophets against one. 
Also, four hundred false prophets, to one ftruel 
prophet. I Kings 18. 

Thus the perverse have always outnumbered the 
righteous. This is our open confession before God 
and all men : that the faith and heart of every one 
of us is of such a nature, that we do not desire in 
any wise to injure our enemies that persecute us, 
or to wish them evil ; but we desire from the depths 
of our hearts, to pray for them, and if they should 
need us, we would most heartily serve them ac- 
cording to our ability, for they know not but that 
they are right, and are therein doing God great 
service. John 16:2. Even as they will hereafter 
have to confess, as it is written in the fifth chapter 
of Wisdom ; Lut it shall then be too late for them. 
For this reason the promise of eternal salvation is 
ours; as Christ Himself said: "Blessed are ye, 
when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and 
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for 
my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad : for great 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1017 


is your reward in heaven." Matt. 5:11, 12. This 
promise have they that are persecuted here. But to 
those that persecute here, woe is prophesied, as 
Christ says : "Woe unto you, scribes, who kill the 
prophets; fill up the measure of your fathers." 
The apostle says : "Go to now, ye rich men, weep 
and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon 
you. Your riches are corrupted, and your gar- 
ments are moth eaten. Your gold and silver is 
cankered ; and the rust of them shall be a witness 
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were 
fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last 
days. Ye have condemned and killed the just; 
and he doth not resist you." James 5 :l-3, 6. If it 
be replied, that they do not want to shed our blood, 
but only order us out of their cities and countries, 
we answer that though there is nowhere a place for 
us, still we must certainly live somewhere ; hence 
we must for this reason go to bloody countries, 
whence we fled, partly because of the great tyran- 
ny, where the blood of the saints is poured out like 
water. But when that great day of the Lord will 
come, when men shall say: "Ye mountains and 
hills, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him 
that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of 
the Lamb ;" then it shall be found how guilty they 
have been of our blood. For they shall have judg- 
ment without mercy, that have shewed no mercy. 
For with what measure a man has meted, it shall 
be measured to him again. 

Hence we request and pray, for the sake of Jesus 
Christ, that what we have written be received in 
good part, since it has been done out of pure love, 
for a warning against the punishment of the Lord, 
lest you sin against us ; since we are the true stran- 
gers and people of God, who are persecuted for the 
true doctrine of Jesus Christ and His holy apostles. 
May the eternal and merciful God look with gra- 
cious eyes upon all His afflicted children, who are 
hated by so many, and not give to the beasts the 
souls of thy turtle doves, for His great and holy 
name's sake. Ps. 74:19. 

O Lord, shorten the days, and look upon the re- 
proach of Thy people, which they must suffer 
every day for the sake of the holy testimony of the 
Gospel, through Thy dear Son, our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Amen. 

(End of the first letter) 

As then he that zvas born after the flesh perse- 
cuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it 
is now. Gal. 4:29. 


Let us hold fast the profession of our faith with- 
out wavering; for he is faithful that promised. 
Heb. 10:23. 


ANOTHER LETTER OF THE PRISONERS: IN WHICH 

WE VINDICATE OURSELVES OF THAT WHICH IS 

REPORTED OF US, AND BRIEFLY NOTICE THE 

PRINCIPAL POINTS OF OUR FAITH, AS IS 

STATED MORE FULLY BELOW 

We poor prisoners, named Hendrick Terwoort 
and Jan Pieterss, lying in bonds in the Mersey, for 
the testimony of Jesus Christ, and from there sen- 
tenced to death, to be burnt to ashes at the stake, 
whereunto we have willingly prepared ourselves 
here, this 10th of April, A. D. 1575, in London. 

Further, we poor prisoners kindly ask, that you 
will accept in good part our simple writing to your 
honor ; for the reason that we do this, is because 
we are very sorry that your honor is not well satis- 
fied with the simple answer made by us ; which has 
caused us briefly to write your honor, in order that 
you may better understand and know what views 
we have in regard to it. Hence we have also briefly 
written our confession concerning it. 

This is the confession of our faith of God our 
heavenly Father. 

1. We believe in one only God the Father Al- 
mighty, Creator of heaven and of the earth, as is 
written, Gen. 1 :1 ; in whom Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Moses, and all the prophets believed. Heb. 11. 

2. We further believe in Jesus Christ the only 
Son of the Father, who was in the beginning with 
God. Mic. 5 :2 ; John 1 :1 ; I John 1 :1. And when 
the fullness of the time was come, which God had 
promised, this Word became flesh, and was born 
of the house of David, Rom. 1 :3, of the pure virgin 
Mary, espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, 
of the house of David, who is blessed above all 
other women. We believe that this true Son of 
God, by many signs and miracles which He did, 
proclaimed to us the word of His Father. And 
after that He was delivered up to the Jews, He was 
crucified under Pontius Pilate, died and was 
buried. Matt. 27 :1 ; Mark 15:1; Luke 23:1 : John 
18. J 

3. We also believe that this same Jesus Christ is 
true God and man, and suffered for our sins. Isaiah 
53 :5. And when we were His enemies, He suffered 
a bitter death for us, that those who believe in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life. John 
3:16. 

4. We also believe that this our Saviour was 
raised up from the dead, Matt. 28:6; Mark 16:6; 
Luke 24:6; John 20:9, even as He had foretold! 
Matthew 17:9; Mark 9:9; Luke 9:22. And is sit- 
ting at the right hand of His Father. Mark 16:19- 
Acts 7:55. 

5. We furthermore believe in the Holy Ghost, 
even as is written, I John 5 :7, saying that there are 
three that bear record in heaven : The Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are 
one. 

6. We also believe in the communion of the 
saints, whose prayers avail much for us, I John 


1018 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1:3;* James 5:16. We also believe in a holy 
church, in which are those who believe in Jesus 
Christ, who by one Spirit are baptized into one 
body, even as Paul says, I Cor. 12:13. And Jesus 
Christ is the Head thereof, namely of the holy 
church, even as it is written, Eph. 5 :23 ; Col. 1 :18. 
We believe and confess, that this holy church 
has power to close and to open, to bind and to 
loose, and whatever is bound upon earth is also 
bound in heaven, and whatever is loosed upon 
earth is also loosed in heaven. Matt. 16:18, 19. We 
also believe that God has ordained in this holy 
church, apostles, prophets and teachers, I Cor. 12 : 
28, bishops and deacons. I Tim. 3. 

7. We believe in and confess also a baptism in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost, even as the Lord Jesus Christ com- 
manded us and ordained (Matt. 28:19), and as the 
apostles practiced (Acts 2:38), and as they wrote 
with regard to it (Rom. 6:3; I Cor. 12:13; Gala- 
tians 3 :27 ; Eph. 4 :S ; I Pet. 3:21). And we believe 
that all those that have received this baptism are 
members of the body of Jesus Christ, in the holy 
church. I Cor. 12:13. 

8. As further regards the holy Supper of Jesus 
Christ, we believe and confess even as Christ said 
with reference to it, as is written, Matt. 26:26: 
As they were eating the supper, Jesus took bread, 
and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it to His 
disciples, and said : "Take, eat ; this is my body." 
And He also took the cup, and gave thanks, and 
gave it to them, saying: "Drink, and divide it 
among yourselves ; for this is my blood of the New 
Testament, which is shed for many for the remis- 
sion of sins : this do in remembrance of me." Matt. 
26:26; Mark 14:24; Luke 22:17, 19. We believe 
as Paul declares, saying: "The cup of blessing 
which we bless, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ ? The bread which we break, is it 
not the communion of the body of Christ ?" I Cor. 
10:16. "Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my 
blood, hath eternal life ; and I will raise him up at 
the last day." John 6:54. 

9. We also confess and believe in a marriage 
state, as being an ordinance of God, as we read, 
Gen. 2 :24. A man and a woman joined together in 
the name of the Lord, in the holy church. I Corin- 
thians 7:2. For this cause shall a man leave his 
father and mother, and shall be joined unto his 
wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Eph. 5 :31. 
Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. 
What therefore God hath joined together, let not 
man put asunder. Matt. 19:6. For marriage is hon- 
orable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whore- 
mongers and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13 :4. 

10. We further believe and confess that magis- 
trates are appointed and ordained of God. Wisd. 
6:3; Sir. 17:17; Rom. 13:1, for the punishment 
of the evil, and the protection of the good; to 
which magistrates we desire from the heart to be 


In the margin. 


obedient, even as is written (I Pet. 2:13) : "Sub- 
mit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the 
Lord's sake." "For they bear not the sword in 
vain." Rom. 13:4. And Paul further teaches us, 
that, first of all, we are to make supplications, 
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, for 
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we 
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness 
and honesty ; for this is good and acceptable in the 
sight of God our Saviour, who will have all men to 
be saved. I Tim. 2:1. He further teaches us, that 
one should be subject to principalities and powers, 
obey magistrates, and be ready to every good work. 
Tit. 3:1. Hence we would kindly beg your majesty, 
that you would rightly understand our meaning: 
that is, that we do not despise the august, noble, 
and gracious queen, and her wise council, but es- 
teem her majesty worthy of all honor, and we 
also desire to be subject to her in all that we can ; 
for we confess with Paul as stated above ; for she 
is the minister of God ; and that whosoever resists 
this power resists the ordinance of God ; for rulers 
are not a terror to them that do good, but to those 
that do evil. Hence we confess that we owe, and 
are ready to give, to the secular power, custom, 
tribute, honor and fear, even as Christ Himself 
taught us, saying: "Render unto Caesar the things 
which are Caesar's ; and unto God the things that 
are God's." Matt. 22:21. Hence, since she is a 
minister of God, we would kindly entreat her 
majesty, that she would be pleased to show mercy 
to us poor prisoners, even as the heavenly Father 
is also merciful to us. 

We hereby do not consent at all to those who 
would resist the higher powers, but confess with 
all our heart, that one must be obedient and sub- 
ject to them, as we have stated above. 

11. Furthermore, to the question put to us, 
whether we would not be willing to swear any oath, 
we reply that we do not find ourselves free in our 
conscience, that we may do this, because, as is 
written, Christ says (Matt. 5 :33) : "Ye have heard 
that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou 
shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto 
the Lord thine oaths : but I say unto you, Swear 
not at all ; neither by heaven ; for it is God's throne : 
nor by the earth ; for it is his footstool : neither by 
Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King. 
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou 
canst not make one hair white or black. But let 
your communication be, Yea, yea ; Nay, nay ; for 
whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil." 
Further, also James teaches us (Jas. 5:12), say- 
ing: "But above all things, my brethren, swear 
not; neither by heaven, neither by the earth, 
neither by any other oath : but let your yea be yea ; 
and your nay, nay." For these reasons we dare in 
no wise swear. 

12. We further believe in the resurrection of the 
dead, as is written Isa. 26:19; Job 19:25; Daniel 
12:2; John 5; I Cor. 15:12; I Thess. 4:16. That 
men shall rise from the dead in their own body, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1019 


Job 19:26; Isa. 26:19; I Cor. 15, when the Lord 
shall come in the clouds, with His angels, when He 
shall judge every man according to his deeds, Mat- 
thew 25:31; Rom. 2:6. 

13. We furthermore believe all that is contained 
in the holy Scriptures, both in the Old and New 
Testament. And we poor prisoners make humble 
entreaty, if we have in any wise done amiss to her 
majesty, or her subjects, praying them, to forgive 
us for it, and be merciful unto us, even as the 
heavenly Father is merciful; for we are a poor, 
simple people, of humble knowledge and under- 
standing, and we are sorry that we cannot write 
more courteously. Hence we beg your highness, 
that your majesty would accept our simple writing 
in good part. 

Herewith we will commend your royal majesty 
to the Lord for this time; the Lord be with you 
and us all. Amen. 

Written in our imprisonment, in London, on the 
21st of July, in the year of our Lord 1575, by 

Hendrick Terwoort, 
Jan Pieterss. 


A clear account of the foregoing matters is con- 
tained in the following letter, written by one Jaques 
de Somere (a member of the Calvinistic church, 
resident at that time in London), and sent to his 
mother, Tanneken van der Varent, residing at 
Ghent, in Flanders; in which city he subsequently 
became a pensionary, while the Reformed ruled at 
Ghent, before the city was delivered up to the 
[Duke of] Parma, in the year 1584. 

A LETTER FROM JAQUES DE SOMERE, SENT TO HIS 
MOTHER, AT GHENT 

Venerable and beloved mother, after most hum- 
bly commending myself to you, please let me in- 
form you, that we are well, God be praised, even 
as we, not without great joy, learned from father's 
letter, that this is also the case with you. I dare say 
that I never read a letter from my father without 
anxiety and fear, until the end of the same assures 
me of your health, since I, aware of the weakness 
and infirmity of your nature, and in constant dread, 
lest you might have fallen into some severe sick- 
ness, which would cause me greater grief, than if 
I myself were in the greatest distress and pain. 

But God be praised for His goodness, that He 
does not visit you more grievously, nor lay upon 
you a greater burden, than you, by His help and 
the consolation of His Word, and the hope of the 
life to come, are able to bear ; and permits me to 
enjoy the greatest joy which a good child might 
wish in this world, namely, to see my father and 
mother attain to a good old age, and bear me such 
solicitude, love and favor as I could possibly ex- 
pect from the most solicitous and benevolent par- 
ents, for which I owe you eternal gratitude. 

Further, my beloved mother, as regards the par- 
ticulars of the execution of the Anabaptists, though 


I doubt not but you have already heard much con- 
cerning it from the accounts of others, and I do not 
like to write of this matter, of which I can never 
think without great sadness ; yet, since you desire 
it of me, and I perhaps know more about it than 
the common people, as I was often with them, and 
took a memorandum of everything, I would not 
forbear to write you such information as I have 
with regard to it; and I will also send you some 
copies of their confession, upon which they died 
(though some of them are still imprisoned), to- 
gether with a supplication, which they presented to 
her majesty, but which was not accepted. 

The matter was as follows : On Easter Day, the 
3rd of April, A. D. 1575, there were gathered in 
a house beyond Aldgate (on the way leading to 
Mirror Court), thirty Anabaptists, men as well as 
women, for the purpose of exhortation and prayer. 
But being discovered of the neighbors, nearly all 
of them were led from there to prison, with so few 
beadles, that part of them could easily have es- 
caped, had they felt free in their conscience to run. 
After they had fallen into the hands of the mag- 
istrates, they were brought to the house of the bish- 
op of London, in order to be examined by him 
(through the mouth, however, of the Dutch and 
French preachers, since the bishop did not under- 
stand their language) concerning their faith, which 
they delivered in writing, and which was of such 
a character, that it contained nothing but what I 
myself would have dared subscribe to, excepting 
only the article touching the oath, in which they 
openly confessed that they believed that one might 
not swear in any wise. 

Not satisfied with this confession, the bishop 
laid before them four articles, which they were to 
sign, or, if they remained obstinate, be burnt alive ; 
declaring that he had received this commission 
from the court. 

The articles were: 1. That they should desist 
from,_ renounce and forsake all errors, sects and 
heresies of the accursed sect of the Anabaptists, 
and confess that they had been seduced thereto by 
the devil; and further believe and confess with 
heart and mouth, that Christ had assumed His 
flesh and blood from the substance of the flesh and 
blood of Mary. 2. That infants ought to be bap- 
tized. 3. That a Christian might administer the 
office of magistracy. 4. That a Christian might 
swear an oath. 

Thereupon they replied that they could not be- 
lieve this in their consciences, and that they would 
hold to their first confession. Hence they were 
from these conducted back to prison; but on the 
way ten or twelve of them (seeing in what danger 
they were, and that they had a good opportunity 
to escape, since only one or two beadles went with 
them), escaped, all of whom, however, in a day or 
two, of their own accord, returned to the prison, 
partly to release their bail who were bound in the 
sum of a hundred pounds ; and partly, because the 
bishop, as a man of honor, promised them with an 


1020 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


oath, that he should release all of them together in 
four or five days, if they returned ; if not, he should 
keep the others in confinement till Christmas. 

Shortly after, five of the men (through the much 
disputing of our Netherlanders, who belonged to 
the [Calvinistic] church), before they were con- 
demned as heretics became converted. And yet 
they were made to stand, in St. Paul's churchyard, 
in a full assembly of many thousand Englishmen, 
in front of the pulpit (mark), each with a fagot on 
his shoulder, as a token that they had merited the 
fire; and much other loss and ignominy was in- 
flicted upon them, though the bishop had promised 
them, that he should forthwith acquit them of 
everything, and release them without any trou- 
ble, if they would only sign the four articles ; but 
the contrary was evident. 

This occurred on the twenty-fifth day of Mav, 
A. D. 1575. y 

A few days afterwards, when the bishop saw 
that the rest would not depart their faith, he 
condemned them all to death, in the ecclesiastical 
court in St. Paul's church (where the papistic 
bishop in Queen Mary's time was wont to sentence 
the Christians), and delivered them over to the 
secular judge, by whom the women, tied hand to 
hand, were conducted to Newgate (which is the 
prison of those confined for capital crimes) ; to- 
gether with one of the men, whom they considered 
to be the youngest and most innocent. But the 
rest of the men were taken back to their old place 
of confinement of the bishop's prison, so that it 
was thought that the women were to be executed 
first, even as they also daily came and threatened 
them, holding up death before their eyes, if they 
should not renounce; so that for five or six days 
they suffered great distress and temptation, ex- 
pecting from day to day to be burnt, and this was 
done even on the very day when their sentence of 
banishment had arrived from the court ; for at ten 
o'clock in the evening the bailiff and his beadles 
came into prison, to make an inventory of all their 
property, and to apprise them, that they should 
prepare themselves to die the next day, which he 
did, in order to see whether none of them would 
renounce through fear. But when he saw that they 
all remained steadfast, he announced to them, that 
the queen would show them mercy, and only banish 
them from the country, and cause the youth to be 
scourged behind a cart. 

Thus, within five or six days afterwards, four- 
teen women or thereabouts, were conducted, by the 
officers of justice, from the prison which stands 
near St. Martin's Church, to St. Catharine's on 
shipboard, and the youth was scourged behind a 
cart which went immediately in front ; and thus all 
were banished from the country, on pain of death, 
and they are now residing in Holland and Zealand. 

A few days afterwards, the five men who were 
still confined in the bishop's prison were likewise 
sentenced by the bishop, and brought to Newgate, 
where one of them, through the poverty and hard- 


ship of the severe confinement, died in prison. The 
others, fearing that the extreme penalty should be 
inflicted upon them, since they had so rigorously 
dealt even with the women ; and hearing that the 
queen and the entire council were so incensed 
against them, that hardly any one dared intercede 
for them, because of an evil report that they denied 
God and Christ, and rejected all government and 
authority of magistrates and higher powers as un- 
godly and unchristian ; ventured to present a sup- 
plication, together with their confession concerning 
the four articles that had been laid before them 
(copies of which I send here), to her majesty, who 
was so incensed against them that she would not 
even receive it, but severely reprimanded the maids 
of honor who presented it to her, as they them- 
selves reported to those that had delivered it to 
them. 

When they saw this they changed said articles 
and supplication to some extent and delivered it to 
My Lord of Bodley, who, having conferred with 
the bishop about the matter, returned them the fol- 
lowing day with the answer that he was sorry for 
their sakes, but that there was no hope at all of 
mercy, except they were willing to sign the articles, 
and renounce their heresy. In the meantime, the 
bishop, in behalf of her majesty, issued several 
articles, one of which was that a Christian mag- 
istrate might punish obstinate heretics with the 
sword; commanding all strangers to subscribe to 
the same, or if not, to give sufficient bail that 
whenever it shall please the bishop they will ap- 
pear before him and the queen's commissioners, to 
be more fully examined and punished according 
to the finding. Hence, nearly all the strangers, 
more through fear than otherwise, signed the same, 
except some who would rather be in danger, than, 
against their conscience, sanction, by their hand- 
writing, the killing of the poor people ; how it will 
end with them, is not yet known. 

Shortly after, an order from the court came to 
the sheriff or bailiff of London, that he should exe- 
cute the oldest two, according to their sentence. 
One of them named Jan Pieterss, was a poor man, 
more than fifty years of age, with nine children. 
His first wife had previously likewise been burnt 
for her religion, here in Ghent in Flanders. And he 
was now married to a woman whose husband had 
also previously been burnt at Ghent for his re- 
ligion. Hence both, on account of persecution, had 
fled to England, thinking that they should be able 
to live there without peril in the liberty of their 
conscience. All this he stated to the bishop, and 
asked for mercy to leave the country with his wife 
and children ; but it was not granted him. 

The other, named Hendrick Terwoort, was a 
handsome, wealthy man of thirty-five or six years, 
a goldsmith by trade, and had only been married 
eight or ten weeks previous to his apprehension. 

These two, as no disputing of the Dutch and 
French preachers could move them to subscribe the 
articles, but were much rather confirmed in their 
views through the cruelty and unchristian proceed- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1021 


ing of those who boast themselves of the Gospel 
and the true faith, notwithstanding that many 
Englishmen as well as Dutchmen solicited pardon 
for them, were, nevertheless, the 22d of July, at 
six o'clock in the morning; in Smithfield (where 
they formerly used to burn persons belonging to 
our religion) most miserably burnt alive at a stake, 
till consumed to ashes, without any strangling or 
gun powder, according to the custom of the coun- 
try, on the Friday after that on the preceding 
Tuesday the stake had been erected. I doubt not 
but that the queen consented to it with reluctance, 
but was persuaded thereto by some papists or other 
perverse persons and enemies of the truth, of 
whom there are many here ; who made her believe 
that the Anabaptists (which religion is unknown 
to this nation), not only deny God and Christ; and 
thus overthrow the salvation of souls, but that they 
also reject all secular politics, laws and author- 
ities, and instigate the people to sedition and re- 
bellion, teaching that the office of the magistracy is 
ungodly and unchristian, whereby mostly, I doubt 
not, she became incensed against them, so that she 
would not even receive their supplication. 

May the Lord forgive those who were the cause 
and authors of this, and so greatly slandered these 
poor people before her majesty, as you may judge 
from this their confession, which they subscribed 
in my presence, with their own hands: which 
though it does not satisfy me in every respect, and I 
greatly fear that they labor under a misapprehen- 
sion as regards the point of Christ's first concep- 
tion and the origin of His flesh ; yet, since they with 
expressed words confess in a Christian manner, 
and have often orally confessed in my presence, 
that Christ is true God and true man, like unto us 
in flesh and blood and all other things, except sin 
alone; I am so far from deeming them worthy of 
any capital punishment, that I would not hesitate 
to recognize them as brethren and do not doubt 
their salvation, provided they have feared the Lord, 
and walked before Him in a good conscience ; for 
our God is a merciful and gracious God, who does 
not condemn men for this or that misapprehension 
and error, but much rather graciously forgives their 
weakness and infirmity, for His Son Christ Jesus' 
sake, if it does not arise from stubbornness, but 
from pure ignorance, even as Paul says of himself, 
that he obtained mercy with God, because he had 
sinned ignorantly (I Timothy 1:13); and the error 
does not concern the fundamental doctrines of the 
faith, but the accessories of it, as is the case with 
these Anabaptists. 

As regards the two young men that are still left, 
they continue as firm and steadfast as ever, and 
daily expect to have the same punishment inflicted 
upon them. 

Lucas and I sought, if it were possible, to help 
them out of prison (four days after the others had 
been executed) , and had with much talking brought 
the matter so far that they subscribed the confes- 
sion (a copy of which I herewith send you), hop- 


ing that the bishop should be satisfied with it ; who, 
when he had read it, found it good enough, but 
would nevertheless not accept it graciously, except 
they would subscribe the first four articles without 
any contradiction, and unite with the Dutch church, 
which they had resolved not to do, even though 
they were entirely and in every respect of our be- 
lief because they would thereby have to condemn 
the two executed, and all others of their fellow be- 
lievers (who died or still live in the same faith), 
and confess that they had been led into damnable 
heresy by the devil, the spirit of lies and error, in 
which they say that they, in their consciences, in no 
wise believe, but that they are much more assured 
of their salvation in Christ, who is true God and 
true man, and because they would greatly offend 
God, as they say by saying all these things against 
their conscience. 

Hence there is nothing known but that they will 
have to suffer the same punishment which their 
associates suffered ; and this the more, because they 
attempted to break out of prison, by filing off an 
iron bar from a window, for which reason they are 
now also fettered much more heavily than ever be- 
fore, and should consider themselves fortunate, 
if they, the sooner the better, could be released 
through death from the great poverty and misery 
of the imprisonment, since they are both confined 
apart, so that they cannot comfort each other, and 
no one may come there and speak to them, on pain 
of being held himself. 

Here you have, beloved mother, from beginning 
to end, a written account of the sad history of the 
imprisoned, converted, banished and executed Ana- 
baptists, which as I well know, has seemed very in- 
credible and strange to you, and that you have been 
greatly grieved: because they who formerly suf- 
fered persecution themselves here now persecute' 
others for their religion ; and force the conscience 
of others with fire and sword, whereas they for- 
merly taught (which is the truth) ; that no man has 
a right to rule over the conscience of another; and 
that faith is a special gift of God and cannot be im- 
planted in man by any physical force, but through 
the Word of God and the illumination of the Holy 
Ghost; also, that heresy is not a carnal, but a spir- 
itual crime, which God alone must punish ; that lies 
must be overcome not by force, but with the truth ; 
that the disposition of the children of God is, not 
to put others to death for their faith, but to be put 
to death themselves for the testimony of the truth; 
finally, that the shedding of blood for the sake of 
religion is a sure sign of antichrist, who thereby 
sets himself in the place and judgment seat of God, 
and ascribes to himself dominion over the con- 
science (which belongs to God alone). I am well 
aware, I say, that this matter has greatly grieved 
you and every sympathizing heart ; yet I hope that 
you will hereby not become offended or take 
occasion to doubt the true faith ; but will think (as 
is also the truth) that it has not been sanctioned 
or approved of by some of the God-fearing and 


1022 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


learned, of the English, as well as of the foreigners 
that are here. 

Moreover, though this church should approve of 
it, you nevertheless well know that the truth does 
not depend on men, who are but frail, weak, sinful, 
and changeable, so that those who are good and 
godly today, may tomorrow fall into great sins, 
especially if their affairs prosper in this world ; but 
that our comfort and hope, religion, faith and sal- 
vation consist in God, who is unchangeable, and 
whose truth ever remains uniform. By Him we 
have also been taught and warned beforehand, that 
we should not be offended at the scandals of this 
world, which are many and of various kinds, and 
are also often caused by those who shelter in the 
church of Christ. Even as Paul declares concern- 
ing what befell him, the persecution which he suf- 
fered from false brethren was not the least. 

I would write you more about this matter, if time 
did permit me. Hence I will conclude here, and 
pray the Lord, that He will strengthen you and all 
the God-fearing and lovers of the truth, in virtue 
and godliness, to the salvation of the soul. Amen. 

Your obedient son, 

Jaques de Somere. 


Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the 
will of God commit the keeping of their souls to 
him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 
I Peter 4:19. 


the following writings also appear to have 
been drawn up partly by the assistance 
of said Jaques de Somere, as a fa- 
vor TO THE PRISONERS, WITH THEIR 
CONSENT 

A Supplication, Presented to the Queen, in Behalf 

of the Prisoners in England, but not Received 

by Her Majesty 

In consideration of your majesty's laudable 
goodness and grace, famous far and wide among 
all nations, because you have always used discre- 
tion in all matters, and especially in the matter of 
religion and conscience, and have recently shown 
this in our fellow believers; we entirely trust to 
your majesty, that you will be pleased to show us 
poor prisoners and strangers the same mercy, since 
we are in the same state and condition, and in the 
same faith, which we humbly present to your maj- 
esty in Christ, for Christ's sake, that your high- 
ness be pleased to peruse the same, and, according 
to your wisdom and grace, considering the unim- 
portant difference, graciously judge of it. We tes- 
tify before God and your majesty, that if we could 
feel or understand otherwise in our conscience, we 
should with all our heart accept and confess the 
contrary, seeing it would be a great error on our 
part, not to prefer living in a true faith, to willfully 
dying in a false faith. Likewise, will her majesty 
be pleased to consider according to her innate good- 


ness and wisdom, that it does not behoove us to 
speak dissimulatingly, otherwise than we believe 
with the heart, in order thus to escape the danger 
of temporal death, and that it is impossible to be- 
lieve differently from what we feel in our con- 
science ; as also, that it is not in our power to be- 
lieve this or that, even as an evil doer can volun- 
tarily do well or cease to do evil ; but that the true 
faith must be poured into men's hearts by God, 
whom we daily pray, that He would give us His 
Spirit, that we may understand His truth and 
Gospel. 

Moreover, it is well-known to her majesty, that 
we are not a turbulent people, neither seek to insti- 
gate any rebellion against her majesty, but much 
rather daily pray the Lord for her prosperous reign 
and welfare according to soul and body ( Jer. 29 : 
7) ; finally, that we have not sought to spread our 
faith in this country, nor are we able to do it, since 
we are simple and unlearned trades-people, and in- 
experienced in divinity. These and other reasons 
we humbly entreat her majesty to consider for our 
benefit, and in particular to be mindful of her laud- 
able and princely grace, which is a marvel to all na- 
tions, and which has ever appeared in all matters, 
but especially in the matter of religion and con- 
science. 

It was subscribed : Hendrick Terwoort, 
Jan Pieterss, 
Christiaen Kemels, 
Gerrit van Byler, 
Hans van Straten. 


a confession of faith of the prisoners in 
england, in connection with the pre- 
ceding supplication 

Touching our faith of Jesus Christ our Saviour : 
We not only believe in His incarnation, but also re- 
gard him, who denies that Christ is come in the 
flesh, to be the antichrist. I John 4 :3. Hence we 
believe with the heart and confess with the mouth, 
that the eternal Word of God was from the begin- 
ing with God ; that the Son of God became man 
when the fullness of the time was come, for the 
salvation and redemption of men ; that He was con- 
ceived of the Holy Ghost, and through the power 
of God the Most High, born of the blessed virgin 
Mary, and manifested of the seed of David; that 
He is the fruit of the body of Mary ; and that inas- 
much then as the children are partakers of flesh 
and blood, He also Himself likewise took part of 
the same. Hebrews 2:14. 

Finally, we believe that He is the promised seed 
of the woman that has bruised the serpent's head ; 
we also believe, all that is further written concern- 
ing Him in the holy Scriptures ; and we place the 
hope of our salvation solely in His death and resur- 
rection. But herein alone is the difference, that we 
can as yet not find it in our conscience to say that 
He took His flesh from the substance of the flesh of 
the virgin Mary; since we do not find this ex- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1023 


pressed in the Scriptures ; hence we forbear to in- 
quire into the mystery of God. 

As regards the baptism of children, we believe 
that infants are in a saved state and belong to the 
kingdom of God; but as we do not find a com- 
mandment or an example in the holy Scriptures, to 
baptize them, we deem, according to the ordinance 
of Christ, that one ought to wait with baptizing 
them, till they are able to confess their faith in the 
church of God. In the meantime we do not con- 
demn the churches that hold other views. 

Regarding the magistracy, so far as the office in 
itself is concerned, we confess that it is not only 
good and profitable for the maintenance of the 
common welfare, but also ordained of God, for the 
protection of the good and the punishment of the 
evil ; that he has not received the sword in vain, to 
whom we also are bound, through God's command- 
ment, and ready, to show all subjection and service. 
We believe that it does not behoove us further to 
inquire into or judge of this matter. 

But being constrained in our conscience by ques- 
tions as to whether the magistrate can be a Chris- 
tian, we say that to human eyes it will, for mani- 
fold obstacles, be hard and difficult; nevertheless 
we do not despair of it, since that which seems im- 
possible to men is possible before God, according 
to what Christ says in the Gospel concerning the 
rich. Matt. 19:26. 

Finally, as to swearing : In this article we agree 
with the Dutch preachers, that we may, with a 
good conscience, call God to witness in a matter of 
which we know and are certain. 

These articles, as contained here, we simply be- 
lieve, notwithstanding the conclusions which some, 
out of their own understanding, draw from them to 
the contrary. 

Hence we beseech her majesty, for Christ's sake, 
to bear our weakness, and to consider that if we 
could feel somewhat different in our conscience, we 
would most gladly accept the same from the heart, 
and confess it with the mouth. 

Thus we humbly pray God for her majesty's 
long life, prosperous reign, and eternal salvation. 
We doubt not but that she will be pleased to show 
us poor prisoners and strangers such grace as has 
already been shown to our companions, for which 
thanks be to God and to her majesty. 

Subscribed by: Hendrick Terwoort, 

Jan Pieterss, 
Christiaen Kemels, 
Gerrit van Byler, 
Hans van Straten. 


ANSWER TO THE LETTER OF JOHN FOX ; WRITTEN 
BY THE PRISONERS AT LONDON, A. D. 1575 

Reverend and well beloved Sir Doctor Fox : We 
have read your letter, from which we learn the en- 
deavors you have put forth in our behalf, with her 
royal majesty as well as with her wise council, for 
which we greatly thank you, even as we also do for 


your good admonition, which notwithstanding it 
seems to us to be written somewhat severely, we 
are nevertheless assured proceeds from love and 
from a good zeal which you have for the truth and 
the welfare of your neighbor ; hence we cannot but 
give it a good interpretation. However, we are 
very sorry that you, not better understanding our 
point, have an opinion of us different from what 
we would like; since you think that through our 
singularity and obstinacy we not only give offense 
to the church of God, but also greatly offend God, 
and overthrow our salvation. 

What cause you have thus to think of us, we do 
not know ; however, we can assure you of this, that 
we seek with all our heart to serve the only God 
and Christ in a good conscience, and to edify our 
neighbor as far as is possible to us. 

Hence we willingly accept whatever the holy 
Scriptures declare to us, and wish that we would be 
left to adhere to the simplicity of the Word of God, 
and not with subtle questions to be driven further, 
than we with our feeble understanding can com- 
prehend or answer with the Scriptures. We con- 
fess (even as you say) that Jesus Christ the Son 
of the living God, when the time was fulfilled, was 
born of woman and became truly man. 

We confess that the flesh of Christ is not a fan- 
tasm or ethereal, but true, human flesh, like unto us 
in all things, except sin ; that He is the promised 
seed of the woman, David's son, and the fruit of 
Mary's body. Finally, we believe all that the holy 
Scriptures further testify of Him ; and whether we 
live or die, we do not place our salvation in our 
works or holiness, but solely in His death and res- 
urrection. Hence we cannot wonder enough, what 
more could be required of a Christian, since you 
yourself quote from the apostle : "Though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth 
know we him no more. Therefore if any man be in 
Christ, he is a new creature." II Cor. 5 :16, 17. 

By this the apostle sufficiently indicates to us that 
we ought rather to observe and appropriate to our- 
selves the fruits of the incarnation and the suffer- 
ings of Christ, than arrogantly to dispute about the 
origin of His flesh ; which we yet confess as far as 
the Scriptures tell us concerning it ; contenting our- 
selves with what you request of us, that He is come 
in the flesh. If people only were satisfied therewith, 
and would not compel us to confess that Christ has 
His origin from the substance of Mary's flesh; 
which because we cannot comprehend or believe, 
for the reason that the word substance is not men- 
tioned in the holy Scriptures, and, therefore it is 
concluded against us, that we believe that Christ is 
not true man, and in short, that we deny our salva- 
tion; whereas, on the contrary, according to the 
dictates of love, it ought to be concluded that, when 
we say that Christ had just as true, human flesh as 
our first father Adam had before the fall, we at 
once confess Him to be true man and our Saviour, 
especially when we confess this with express 
words. If you reply to this, that you find little or no 


1024 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


difference between your faith and ours, except in 
the expression, substance of the woman, and that 
we ought not therefore obstinately to reject the 
same, we rejoin, on the other hand, that we ought 
not to be constrained thereto by force, but that our 
weakness in this respect ought to be borne with, 
since we cannot believe otherwise in our con- 
science, and should greatly sin against God, if we 
were to speak contrary to the testimony of our 
conscience. 


PAUL CLOCK, A. D. 1576 


Hence, if we are put to death (which we do not 
hope of her royal grace) we testify before God, 
that we do not die for this or that article (which if 
we could, with arguments, be made to believe, we 
would accept with all our heart), but for our con- 
science' sake, to which if we act contrary, though 
we did well, we nevertheless do ill, and witness 
against ourselves, as you with your learning can 
understand far better than we simple and un- 
learned people. 

Finally, we are men, and what is more, un- 
learned men, who are liable to err ; and hence we 
will always show ourselves teachable to all those 
who can show us something better with the Scrip- 
tures ; but that they want to constrain us thereto 
with fire or sword, this appears to us a vain under- 
taking, and to militate against reason ; for it is in- 
deed possible, that through fear of death we could 
be made to speak differently from what we under- 
stand; but that we should understand otherwise 
than we believe, you know to be impossible. 

Therefore those who should deal with us on this 
wise, offer us this alternative, either temporal or 
eternal death ; temporal, if we adhere to what our 
conscience declares to be right, or the truth ; eter- 
nal, if we act and speak contrary to our conscience. 
But we have a better hope of her royal grace, 
which has hitherto not deemed it well to put [any 
one] to death for the matter of religion ; well know- 
ing that the true faith is a special gift of God, im- 
planted in man, not by fire and sword, but through 
the Holy Ghost and the preaching of the eternal 
word of God. And we ought to consider well, that 
formerly we were all heretics here, who if we had 
been made to die in such a condition, would all 
have had to suffer the death of both body and soul. 
But we will here conclude this matter, thanking 
you for the trouble to which you have been pleased 
to go for us, and requesting you that you will do 
the best in our cause, with the council, and es- 
pecially before her royal majesty, who, if our point 
were well known to her, we doubt not, would, ac- 
cording to her excellent wisdom and usual grace, 
deal mercifully with us, since we willingly show 
her majesty all reverence and subjection, praying 
for her long life and prosperous reign. Amen. 


Subscribed to by : 


Gerrit van Byler, 
Hendrick Terwoort, 
Hans van Straten, 
Jan Pieterss, 
Christiaen Kemels. 


In the year 1576, Paul Glock, who had been 
imprisoned without intermission for nearly nine- 
teen years, in the country of Wurtemberg, came to 
his deliverance, after he had suffered much during 
his imprisonment, and at first been greatly tor- 
mented and tortured, and at such times been 
tempted in many and various ways, by the authori- 
ties as well as by noblemen and Lutheran preach- 
ers ; they tried him with hard imprisonment and al- 
so with light imprisonment. In the year 1566 they 
did not try him for a whole half year, and also per- 
mitted him to go out several times, on his promis- 
ing them with his word, that he would not go away 
without their knowledge. Subsequently, when the 
court chaplain of the prince and others examined 
him, and he still firmly adhered to his faith, and 
would not regard their magistracy, sword, and war, 
as in harmony with Christianity ; they said that he 
was not worthy of going among the people ; that he 
must remain in confinement all the days of his life, 
even until his death, or until he should say that 
they were good Christians. In the year 1567 he was 
sick, from Epiphany until St. John's day, being 
very feeble and miserable, lame in his hands, and 
.also in his knees, so that he was not able to stand 
up. He also had great pain in his mouth, so that 
for some time he could eat no bread, and there was 
no hope that he would ever get well again. When 
his enemies learned of this, they thought, "Now 
is our time," and sent two priests to him, who were 
to dispute with him, and to persuade him, in regard 
to infant baptism and the sacrament, and that they 
should convert him to themselves, since God so vis- 
ited him with sickness. But brother Paul said: 
"Show me a Christian flock that has grown up by 
your preaching, doctrine and faith, and I will unite 
with it ; and if there be anything in me that is con- 
trary to God, I will lay it aside and forsake it, and 
adopt that which is better." Then the two priests 
said : "The Christian church cannot be pointed out 
with the finger." Brother Paul said: "It is evident 
what false prophets you are; Christ showed His 
church and disciples, when He stretched out His 
hand over His disciples, and said: 'Whosoever 
shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, 
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.' 
Matt. 12 :50. Also : 'A city that is set on a hill can- 
not be hid.' 5 :14. Further : 'Ye are the light of the 
world.' The apostle Peter also speaks of it, where 
he says : 'Ye are a chosen generation, a holy na- 
tion.' I Pet. 2 :9. Paul also shows her [the Chris- 
tian church] where he says : 'Ye are the temple of 
the living God, the seal of mine apostleship.' II 
Cor. 6:16; I Cor. 9:2. But since you do not know 
her, you are the children of the night and of dark- 
ness, and not members of the body of Christ ; and 
since you cannot show me Christ's body, how 
should I trust and commit myself to you, that you 
should make a Christian of me, when you have not 
yet shown me one Christian in your church. You 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1025 


are even as Ahab's four hundred false prophets; 
into whose deceitful mouth a false spirit has been 
put, to deceive the whole world; yea, you are the 
thieves and murderers that now come to kill and 
steal." I Kings 18; John 10:8. 

When he gave them such an answer, they were 
astonished that he could so answer them in his 
sickness, and did not come to him any more for 
a long time, to dispute with him. They also said : 
"Though your cause be right and good, it can yet 
not be tolerated, for it has never been tolerated." 
Brother Paul said: "Yes, the ungodly and the 
world could not tolerate Christ, His apostles, or 
any of the righteous ; so also you, for you are un- 
godly, unrighteous, and wicked men, whose belly 
is their god. Phil. 3 :19." 

In the year 1572 the preachers of the prince 
came to him the third time, to the castle of Hohen- 
withing, talked much with him, and examined him 
concerning many things. In the year 1 573 they had 
him brought into the city of Aurach, where then 
were the preachers and the steward of the country 
(who is the next after the prince), and they dis- 
puted with him about infant baptism. They said : 
"Children have faith, and hence they are justly 
brought to baptism ; for the apostle says : 'Without 
faith it is impossible to please God.'" Heb. 11:6. 
But Paul said: "The apostle does not say this of 
children, nor does he speak to children, but with 
adults ; and he further says in the same place : 'He 
that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that 
he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.' 
Now place before me a child, and if it shows so 
much confession and faith, then baptize it freely." 
They said : "A child needs no confession." "Then 
it also needs no baptism," said he. Then they were 
silent about that, and began to speak of the magis- 
trates, saying that they were Christians, since the 
apostles calls them God's ministers. The brother 
replied: "The apostle calls them ministers (Ro- 
mans 13:4) because of the council, and the council 
does not belong in the house of God or Christ." 
They said: "The council does certainly belong in 
the house of God." The brother said : "Then show 
me a lawful magistracy in the house or church 
of Christ ; for the apostle ordained all offices in the 
house of God : hence show me where he ordained 
the princes or worldly kings with their offices in 
the church." Then the preachers began and said : 
"Cornelius was a centurion over soldiers, and be- 
came a Christian." Acts 10:1. They also men- 
tioned Sergius Paulus, and said that he had been 
the deputy of the country. Acts 13:7. Then the 
brother asked them, whether they also believed that 
the apostle had preached the Gospel to them, by 
which they had to become believers, and whether, 
also, the apostle had been a true follower and teach- 
er of Christ. They answered: "Yes." He asked 
further : "Did he also judge in a worldly manner — 
bear a sword?" They said: "No; but he wielded 
a spiritual sword and judgment." "As you then 
also confess," said the brother, "you also well 


know that the apostles preached the Gospel to Cor- 
nelius and Sergius Paulus; also that the people 
wanted to make Christ a king, and that He fled 
(John 6:15) ; again: 'The princes of the Gentiles 
exercise dominion over them; but it shall not be 
so among you; ye shall not resist evil' (Matt. 20: 
25 ; 5 :39) : from all this they could easily learn 
that in following Christ they could not administer 
any worldly magistracy or governorship ; or if they 
wanted to be like Paul, who says : 'Be ye followers 
of me, even as I also am of Christ.' " I Corinthians 

Thereupon they were silent, and then began and 
said: "God forgives all men or sinners, however 
great their sins may be." The brother answered 
and said : "I believe this, too, if they truly repent 
and are sorry for their sinful works." But he asked 
them, whether they also likewise forgave their fel- 
low members and brethren, when they had sinned. 
They said: "Yes." He said: "Why then do you 
hang your criminals, and help them to the gallows 
and the wheel ; seeing you have forgiven them their 
sins, and they are your brethren?" Then they 
laughed over their own folly, and finally said : "For 
this reason the magistracy is ordained, that they 
should punish that which is evil." The brother 
said: "Is repentance then a crime too?" The 
preachers said: "No; but it is a benefit." The 
brother said : "Has the magistracy then power or 
a command from the Old or the New Testament, 
that they may put to death the righteous or peni- 
tent (as you say that they have eaten your sacra- 
ment, and are also become Christians) ?" They 
said : "They must nevertheless be punished, as a 
warning to others." The brother further asked, 
whether they also believed that, when by their 
preaching of infant baptism and the sacrament, 
they made such a criminal in prison pious, and he 
would accept the two articles, he was then a Chris- 
tian, and could be regarded as a Christian? The 
preachers said: "Yes." The brother said: "If he 
is then become a believer, as you say, he has also 
been sealed with the Spirit of God, according to the 
words of Paul; is this not your belief too?" They 
said: "Yes." The brother said: "Then his body 
must also be a temple of God, because the Holy 
Ghost dwells in him." II Cor. 6:16. They said: 
"Yes." "See once then," the brother said, "how 
you act, how you dishonor the temple of God, 
hanging it to the gallows ; do you not know what 
the apostle says : 'If any man dishonor the temple 
of God, him shall God also dishonor and destroy ?' 
I Cor. 3:17. Behold your magistrates, what fine 
Christians they are, if they thus slay the penitent 
and dishonor the temple of God, if it is as you 
say and confess." 

When he said such things to them, they looked 
at each other, as though they wanted to say : "We 
do ill with such a confession of Christianity." They 
then began to speak of the Supper, and asked him 
what he thought of it. He answered: "I think 
much of it, when it is observed as Christ ordained 


1026 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


it ; but as you observe it, I do not think anything 
of it, and it is also vain to speak much with you 
about it." Then they were silent. 

Finally the steward of the country began to 
speak in Latin with the court preacher, and when 
they had finished speaking, the preacher asked the 
brother, if he would leave the country, and not 
return into it any more, then they would release 
him from prison. The brother replied: "If you 
will give me a letter, that where I go, they shall 
freely receive me, I will leave your country." They 
said they could not do this. Thereupon he an- 
swered : "Then I can also not leave your country ; 
but I will remove out of it, and if I return into it, 
and do that by which I merit the sword, then use 
it." This pleased them well. Then the steward of 
the country again spoke much in Latin to the 
preacher, and then said to the brother: "If you 
will be pious for yourself, or abide in your belief, 
and no more seduce any one, we will release you 
yet." The brother answered : "If I am wrong, use 
the sword, for this is your office ; but if I am right, 
then it is also right for him that hears and learns 
something good from me, and according to this 
I will govern myself." Then the preacher said: 
"We will not force you to the faith, but we will al- 
ways keep you imprisoned, so that you will not 
seduce any other." They then had him brought 
back to prison ; thus he had to suffer and endure 
imprisonment quite innocently, only for his faith 
and for the sake of the divine truth ; and this for 
about nineteen years. 


MATTHIJS BINDER, A. D. 1576 

Matthijs Binder, a minister of the Word of 
God, was apprehended for his faith and the testi- 
mony of Jesus Christ, at Neffen, in the country of 
Wurtemberg, and taken to Stuttgart, and thence 
imprisoned in chains at Maulbronn, where he was 
much examined and disputed with, by the first 
physician of the prince, by the chief of the clergy, 
and the abbott of Maulbronn, as well as by nobles, 
the prince's courtiers, and others of various sta- 
tions; but when they could not accomplish their 
will with him, he was finally taken to Hohen- 
withing into the castle, where brother Paul Glock 
had long been confined. There they were confined 
together for about two years, but in the year 1576 
God sent them deliverance. Through the careless- 
ness of the people in the castle, there arose a fire, 
so that the latter burned to the ground ; and these 
two imprisoned brethren helped to extinguish the 
flames as much as any one else, and did not run 
away, but requested afterward, that they should 
be released, since they could well prove that they 
had harmed no one, and promised never to avenge 
their imprisonment. Thereupon an account was 
speedily (before the envious priests could pre- 
vent it) sent to the prince, who acquitted them and 
gave orders that they should be released, and some 
money be given them for their journey. 


Thus both Paul and Matthijs returned with a 
good conscience, in peace and joy, to their brethren 
and church. 


RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE AND JERONYMUS SCHEP- 
ENS, AND OTHER PERSONS, A. D. 1576 

In the year 1576 there were apprehended at 
Ghent, in Flanders, for the firm foundation of the 
truth, a God-fearing pious brother, named Raphel 
van den Velde, and with him a brother named Je- 
ronymus Schepens, and other persons. At said 
place they were confined in a strong tower with 
seven doors, and very strongly guarded. There 
they remained imprisoned seven weeks, and were 
dreadfully tormented by the bloodthirsty ministers 
of antichrist, with manifold temptations and 
threats, which they, through the grace of God, re- 
sisted. Thereupon the servants of Baal sentenced 
them to be executed with fire. But as they suffered 
all this for the testimony of Jesus, and not for any 
crime, there is prepared for them the crown of 
eternal glory in heaven. And thus they were burnt 
alive at said place, confirming the faith of the 
eternal truth with their death and blood, as a per- 
petual and instructive example to all true believers, 
to follow them in the footsteps of the faith. 

Here follow the letters which Raphel van den 
Velde wrote from his prison, and sent to his wife 
and friends. Let the reader please read them with 
attention. 


THE FIRST LETTER FROM RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE, 
WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
and our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you, my dear 
and in God beloved wife ; and the supreme Com- 
forter, the Holy Ghost, be with you and console 
you, and lighten your heart in all your tribulation 
and affliction, which I well know, are exceedingly 
great. Hence I hope to write your love a little, 
for your consolation ; for I hope that it will be a 
great comfort to you, when you will read it, even 
as also my heart was exceedingly comforted and 
rejoiced, when I received your letter, on Wednes- 
day, about five or six o'clock [P. M.], when in the 
morning I had been tortured from about eight until 
ten o'clock. I thank the Lord, that He kept my 
mouth, so that no one need be troubled by it ; for 
when I had been laid upon the bench, I did not 
open my mouth to criminate any one, but cried, 
sighed, and prayed to God. The lords said: 
"Hearken to us, and we will shorten the pain-; 
yea, we are sorry that we must inflict it upon you."' 
But when I would not listen to them, lying there 
bound and ropes tightly twisted around my shins 
and thighs, and over my heart, and my arms tied 
together behind my back, so that they lay under 
my loins, and a cord with knots having been put 
around my head, which lay on a pebble-stone, they 
began winding it with an iron chain, so that I 
thought nothing else but that they were winding 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1027 


and crushing my head all to pieces; and on my 
thighs and shins, so that it seemed to me, that all 
my bones, flesh, veins, and sinews were going to 
pieces. Then thought I : O Lord, what torture this 
is ! O Lord, I shall not be able to endure it. O Lord, 
succor me now, for the distress is great. Then I 
composed myself, and committed the matter to 
God; and instantly all my members became as 
dead, and the lords kept calling: "Tell, tell; and 
we shall shorten your pain." And when I would 
still not tell, they spoke in Latin to Master Hans, 
and then the latter went and made two cords fast 
to my great toes, in the form of a double knot, and 
stretched me out thereby, which caused me ex- 
ceeding pain. When I would yet not tell, they caus- 
ed the cords on my thighs and shins to be twisted 
still more tightly, and the knots pained me so, that 
I thought that I must die. And still they kept call- 
ing: "Speak, speak; and we shall shorten your 
pain." Then thought I : "O Lord, how shall I be 
able to endure this; must it (ast long yet?" Then 
the thought came into my mind, that the eternal 
pain should be still greater, and should last forever. 
Then I took courage again, and cried to God: 
"Help me in this distress, that I must not bring my 
neighbor into the same affliction." And the Lord 
gave me such courage, that I resolved rather to die 
on the bench, and kept silence. And as they did still 
not obtain anything from me, to the implication of 
my neighbor, Master Hans took water (during the 
entire time a cloth had lain on my face) , and hold- 
ing my nose shut with one hand, began to pour 
water on my abdomen and thence all over my 
breast, and into my mouth, even as one should 
drink when he is very thirsty. I think that the can 
from which he poured out the water held about 
three pints. And when I was at the end of my 
breath, and wanted to fetch such, I drew the water 
all into my body, whereupon I suffered such dis- 
tress, that it would be impossible for me to relate 
or describe it ; but the Lord be forever praised : He 
kept my lips. And when they could still not obtain 
anything from me, they caused the cord which was 
on my thigh to be loosed and applied to a fresh 
place, and wound it much tighter than before, so 
that I thought he would kill me, and began to shake 
and tremble greatly. He then proceeded to pour 
water into me again, so that I think he emptied 
four such cans, and my body became so full of it, 
that twice it came out again at the throat. And thus 
I became so weak that I fainted; for when I re- 
covered from my swoon, I found myself alone with 
Master Hans and Daniel de Keyser. And Master 
Hans was so busily engaged in loosing all my cords, 
that it seemed to me that they were concerned over 
me. But the Lord in a large degree took away my 
pain every time ; whenever it became so severe 
that I thought it was impossible to bear it, my 
members became as dead. Eternal praise, thanks, 
honor, and glory be to the Lord ; for when it was 
over I thought that, by the help of the Lord, I had 
fought a good fight. 

I would write you much more about it, but I 


leave it till another time. Hence, my dear wife, 
let us thank God for His grace. On Monday I did 
not think that I was approaching such a happy 
week, and as regards the bruises from my torture, 
I hope that it will be well ; but it must have its time. 
Be not grieved on account of my sufferings ; but 
praise God in this matter, for my mind, I hope, is 
unchanged and immovable ; for though they should 
torture me twice yet, I hope to endure all they in- 
flict upon me. But it may indeed be called torture, 
for it is a great pain. I also am ready not only to 
suffer myself to be tortured, but also always to let 
my flesh to be burnt alive at the stake for the truth. 

I must also write you something about the joy and 
gladness which I now have in the Lord ; how the 
Lord strengthens, comforts and rejoices my heart, 
when I consider the Scriptures, that I, who am 
such an unworthy man, may be a partaker of 
Christ's sufferings ; I can now say with the apostle, 
that I bear the marks of Christ in my members 
Gal. 6:17. 

Further, my dearest, I inform your love, that I 
received your letter, whereby my heart was greatly 
comforted and rejoiced, so that for joy I could not 
refrain from weeping; which was a sure sign of 
godly sorrow, and the same worketh to salvation. 

II Cor. 7:10. Thus I understood from it your great 
grief, much greater than you can say or write. 
But, my dearest, I pray you by the mercies of God, 
that you will to some extent lay aside your grief 
concerning me, and remember how, or in what 
manner we received each other from the hand of 
the Most High ; was it not under the condition, that 
the Lord should always be the dearest, and that we 
must leave each other, if it be His holy will? And 
now your love well knows, that this is certainly the 
will of the Lord, and nothing else ; for if it had not 
been the will of the Lord, I would have escaped as 
well as you. Hence, my beloved, let us be moder- 
ate, and be content with such things as we have 
(Heb. 13:5), as I hope from your love that you 
will do ; and, if you think it well, rather let the girl 
go, and keep your child with you. And in the 
meantime, teach him something yourself, and dili- 
gently keep him busy at something with you. But 
above all, I pray you, take good heed to yourself, 
for the proctor general questioned me much in re- 
gard to you, and at divers times they asked me 
concerning my brother, but I did not answer them 
thereupon ; but they knew it well already, as they 
said. And Daniel de Keyser came into my cage, 
and also asked me much in regard to my brother. 
They also questioned me concerning my child, and 
whether he was not baptized, which I told them ; 
hence take good heed, or peradventure they might 
take him, and greater trouble might result from it. 
We shall probably have time to write more about 
this matter; but now I write only a little of this 
and a little of that, for my head is not in a con- 
dition to write much, but I hope that it will im- 
prove. Today I have been greatly tired with speak- 
ing against two Jesuits concerning our faith ; in the 


1028 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


presence of the clerk of the criminal court, and 
Master Jacob Hesseling, the proctor general, and 
a councilor; but the Lord be forever praised and 
thanked, they had to give up with ignominy. 

I hope by and by to write more fully about every 
thing. Tell my dear brother, also to write some- 
thing, and greet him much for me, as also his wife, 
and my dear sister, with the peace of the Lord, and 
that they write me something, since I am exceed- 
ingly much burdened and concerned for them. And 
take good heed, for no one knows what bonds are, 
except he that tries them, this I may well say, for 
which I thank and praise the Lord with a joyful 
heart. I hope that I am over the worst and my 
heart is much resigned in suffering or affliction, 
and in death, but when I begin to think of parting 
from my love, and my dear son, then I cannot com- 
pose my heart so easily. But this comforts me 
much, that my child can keep his mother. And be 
not over-careful, my love ; the Most High cares for 
you and also for your child ; and our dear Lord has 
shown us much grace, that He has permitted us to 
live together so long. Yea, be not too careful, this 
I pray you, my love; but cast your care entirely 
and gladly upon the Lord ; He will provide for you, 
and give you another husband in my place, if it be 
for your good. Ps. 55:22; I Pet. 5:7; Phil. 4:6. 

Herewith I will commend you, my dearest wife 
and sister in the Lord, to the Almighty God and to 
the rich word of His grace; adieu, my love. 

Oh, you have been such a good and excellent 
housekeeper to me ; O my love, I thank you from 
the depths of my heart for your great faithfulness 
and willing service, which you have so faithfully 
shown me in all obedience. And I pray you all, 
dear friends, that you would diligently help me 
pray to the Lord, for it is now time, the conflict is 
nearing its height, this I well experience, and I ap- 
prehend that Jeronymus, our brother, will also ex- 
perience it ; the Lord be gracious unto him ; I com- 
fort him now and then, as best I can. 

Greet Vintgen from me with the peace of the 
Lord, and let me know, how it went with them all. 
Greet Jan and Klaerken from me ; and K., and tell 
him to write me something. And also greet in my 
name all those that fear God, and always associate 
with the righteous, and you will become more 
righteous still. Adieu, adieu. 

Written in the dark, on the 24th of May, A. D. 
1576. Adieu, my wife, adieu, my child. 

On Thursday the 24th of May I was brought be- 
fore the lords once more, and there sat two Jesuits. 
I was very feeble from the torturing. They began 
and asked me, why I had suffered myself to be so 
long seduced, and questioned me concerning my 
faith. Then I said: "Have I come here to teach 
you? by no means. Do you confess your faith to 
me? I am come to be instructed." Then he began 
to confess his faith, just like children that are learn- 
ing. "Well, this is my faith," he said. Then I 
said : "Prove it with the Word of God, and I will 
also believe it." Then he began from John 3, that 


the children must be baptized; also from Mark 16 
and Matt. 28, where he so entangled himself, that 
he did not see how he could get out of it ; and went 
from there [he went on] to circumcision, where he 
likewise knew not what to do. Finally they had to 
confess that it did not apply to baptism which 
greatly surprised me. And when they saw that all 
that they did went backwards, they all began to 
talk Latin at the same time, and I sat there and 
looked on. Eamus (let us go), they said, and 
wanted to go, for it struck eleven and we had come 
together a little after eight. And when they were 
determined to go, I said : "I pray you, my lords, 
write your faith down for me, so that I can con- 
sider it." But they would not do it. "If you do not 
believe our words," said they, "you would not be- 
lieve our writing." 

Oh, thought I, if I could get that, I should have 
you ; I should soon show to you, that your faith is 
not contained in the Scriptures. 

Further, on the 25th of May there came the peni- 
tentiary from the bishop, and another, and Friar 
Pieter de Backer, and they approached me very 
subtly. They led me upon a very high mountain, 
and [said that] if I would yield just a little, all 
should be well. Master Jacob Heyselinck said, 
"Yes," he should help me, and the matter was in 
his power; that I should only seemingly recant a 
little: '"Dear Raphel, how sorry I am; it pierces 
me to my very heart." Then I said: "O my lords, 
you say that I should recant a little. This I will 
gladly do ; yea I will recant altogether, if you can 
show me something better than the Word of God ; 
but not otherwise, or my faith should not rest upon 
the Word of God, but upon the words of men, and 
I well know what the prophet says : 'Cursed be the 
man that trusteth in man.' Jer. 17:5. O my lords, 
that would not be converting; you would have to 
prove it to me with the holy Scriptures, or we shall 
not do it." And after many words we parted once 
more, and I thanked them for their trouble. Some- 
time afterwards the clerk of the criminal court, 
the proctor, and Friar Pieter de Backer came and 
entreated me again. I said I was sorry that they 
entreated me. They said : "But we shall show it to 
you very clearly;" and commenced another mys- 
tery concerning the incarnation of Christ. And 
when I began to answer, he put his Testament 
away. And many other things they said. Then I 
said : "If it is your pleasure, I shall reply to you 
upon every thing, one after the other ;" and when 
they heard how I began to answer them, they 
slipped away and said adieu, and I did the same. 
And Friar Pieter said: "I shall come again in a 
day or two." "If you please," said I. "Oh," said he, 
"how sorry your mother must be." But I said 
nothing. And in the afternoon they sent me a book, 
entitled "The Shield against the Anabaptists," 
which I should read ; and in two or three days the 
penitentiary should come to see me again. 

Here, dear brethren and sisters altogether, you 
may have heard whether I suffer temptation or not, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1029 


but I write it only very briefly, else it would take 
much too long to write it. But the Lord be thanked 
for His great grace, who so faithfully strengthens 
me and governs my mouth to His praise. Though 
the outward man perish, this is small loss ; the in- 
ward man is renewed from day to day, for which 
eternal praise and thanks be to the Lord, for I may 
now well say with Pieter van Werwicke : 

"Noyt meerder vreught in my en was, 
Als nu tot desen tijden, 
Mijn treuren vergaet my alsoo ras, 
Godts woordt doet my verblijden: 
Als ick dencke op 't eeuwigh Goedt: 
Och dan Krijgh ick sulck eenen moedt." 

I cannot tell it (express the joy) ; yea, I think 
that if every one of the hairs of my head were a 
tongue, I could not express it. And that they tor- 
ment me with examinations, this I deem a recre- 
ation, for I get out of my stinking hole every time, 
into the pure air, and this rejoices my heart. 

Herewith I will commend you to the Lord, and 
to the rich word of His grace. Always endeavor to 
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, 
and purify your souls before the Lord, if perad- 
venture God be pleased to let you fall into the same 
trouble ; if one is not a good Christian previously, 
one can hardly become one here, this I well experi- 
ence, O dear brethren and sisters, I pray you by 
the love of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
you will show love to my dearly beloved wife and 
my dear child, in all love, in unity, in kindness, 
and in patience. Bear one another in love, this I 
pray you from the bottom of my heart, and con- 
sider in what trouble she now is. Also, you are 
sorry on my account, for which I thank you, for it 
is godly sorrow ; but she has the greatest reason to 
be sorrowful. Oh, she has lost so much, and my son 
too; but I must resign myself herein, for it is the 
will of the Lord ; who will hinder it ? Oh, when I 
think of her and her grief, and of my child, I can- 
not restrain myself ; but I hope that the Lord will 
help me also in this. I beseech you by the love of 
God. O brethren, my dear brother, write me once 
how she is situated, how it is with her tribulation, 
and with my dear son. 

O my dear son, I am taken from you too soon. 
O dear brethren, do this much for my sake ; and for 
the Lord's sake ; you will thereby afford such great 
comfort to my heart. Oh, it seems to me that I have 
not heard anything for such a long time, and of my 
son I do not know that I have had any intelligence ; 
and of our Tanneken. O poor lamb! Adieu my 
dear brother; adieu my dear sister; adieu to all 
your little ones. 

Adieu, adieu ; may God grant grace, that we may 
rejoice hereafter. Written by me, Raphel, your 
weak brother in the Lord, with many tears and 
sighs ; not on my own account, as though my mind 
were ill at rest — God forbid, it was in eleven years 
never better, the Lord be thanked; but it is my 
weak nature. If I have written too little or too 


much in any thing, excuse me, since my mind is 
much engaged, and my mind is getting confused 
from all the troubles. Written the 25th of May, in 
the year 1576. 

Raphel van den Velde. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE 
WRITTEN TO HIS BRETHREN AND SISTERS 

I Raphel, wish you my dear B. and C. and K. 
my dear sister in the Lord, a steadfast mind, con- 
stant, immovable in the fear and love of God, that 
you, by such a constant, strong, firm, and immov- 
able faith, hope, and love to God and your neigh- 
bor, may continue in the love of God, and in the 
patience of Christ, so that you may possess your 
souls with patience, meekness and longsuffering, 
in order that you may willingly bear whatsoever is 
imposed upon you by the Lord ; and be not grieved 
nor faint because of the tribulation, which is very 
great now. And I thank your love, that you so 
faithfully exhort and comfort me by your consola- 
tory letter ; and I would do the same for you, ac- 
cording to my little ability, which is very little, but 
to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. 
Prov. 27 :7. Hence it is my hope and trust of your 
love, though it is not so consolatory, sweet or affec- 
tionate, that it will nevertheless taste quite sweet to 
your hungry soul. It is therefore my cordial and 
affectionate salutation and greeting to you all, my 
much beloved brethren and sisters, that my mind is 
still well composed and that I am also well content 
with whatever is at hand (Heb. 13:5), whether it 
be suffering or dying for the Lord's holy truth ; and 
I fear not what man shall do unto me, for I am 
willing rather to be present with the Lord in the 
eternal rest, than to live longer. II Cor. 5 :8. For 
though I were free, as one would desire and wish, 
I find in myself, that I should many times also be 
sorrowful, when I well consider how perilous it 
now is to live in the world, which often heartily 
grieves me, when I think of you, and of my dear 
wife, and my child. Oh, it costs me so many a tear, 
since you are still in much the greatest distress and 
peril ; may the Lord help, comfort, and strengthen 
you, so that you may overcome in everything, as I 
hope that you shall; for when the conflict is the 
severest, then the Lord helps the most, which I 
may well say, for I have surely proved it, for which 
I cannot now ever fully thank the Most High. 

Hence, my heartily beloved friends, faint not 
because of the tribulation, nor for any affliction, for 
we must know this, and certainly trust in it, that 
He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we 
are able, but will with the temptation also make a 
way to escape ; and also that not a hair of our head 
shall be harmed, unless it be His will. I Cor. 10 :13 ; 
Matthew 10:30. Understand well the expression, 
unless it be His will. Hence, my dear friends, do 
not despond nor grieve, nor grow weary in the way 
of the Lord, but endure willingly; for the Lord 
beholds all your steps, and all your distress, and 


1030 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


your labor which you do with all diligence, to 
magnify His holy name. Hence receive the chas- 
tening of the Lord with a willing heart, for they 
that are partakers of the Lord's chastisement, are 
His children, sons and daughters ; but those who 
will not endure it, are bastards, and a bastard has 
no part in his father's possessions. Heb. 12 :5. 

Therefore, my dearest, let us willingly suffer all 
that comes upon us for His holy name; rather 
than that we should have to forego His eternal 
riches. Oh, think how great and glorious He will 
make us; if we continue steadfast unto the end. 
For once at all events we must die, and we cannot 
die more blessedly or honorably, than for the name 
of our God, who suffered so much for us. I should 
have written you more, but I hope of your love, 
that you are all taught of God, much more than I 
can write you, and I also have not always conveni- 
ent time to write you. I also trust to God and your 
love, that you have not begun this good work so 
far, to let it rest here ; but that you will be diligent 
unto the end, so that you may receive a full re- 
ward. II John 8. 

Further, dear B. and S. and K. S., I pray your 
love, that you will take good heed to yourselves, 
for this new president proceeds very severely — the 
Lord change his heart and open his eyes. Rather 
leave the city, for they will watch their time even if 
it should be a year after this. They have very many 
on paper, but who they all are I do not know. They 
read them all in an undertone, and questioned me 
in regard to some, but I did not know them by their 
names. And when Jeronymus my friend was ex- 
amined, they read aloud: Boudewijn Tijncke, 
Pouwels Ketel, Gijselbrecht, and others, whom he 
did not know by name, and at last also they again 
read inaudibly. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE, 
WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE 

I Raphel, imprisoned for the truth, wish my dear 
and in God beloved wife (who next to God is the 
dearest of all that I know, yea, if I could help you, 
though it were by dying the death, I should so 
gladly do it ; and my dear son, I wish you, my love, 
as you wish me in your letter) a steadfast mind in 
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, an ardent love 
of God, and invincible strength from God our heav- 
enly Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord and 
Saviour, so that you may overcome all your ene- 
mies, and preserve moderation in your tribulation, 
so that you will not grieve more or further than 
godly sorrow goes, as I hope that you will also do, 
and willingly be resigned in all wherein God tries 
you, that you may thus receive the crown of life at 
the hand of the Lord. This is my cordial prayer 
and great petition to God for you my dearest love 
on earth ; the Almighty God grant His great mercy 
thereto. Amen. 

After all affectionate salutation and respects to 
you my dear and in God beloved wife, let me please 


inform you, that my mind is unchanged and re- 
signed in God, to serve the Lord, to testify to the 
truth, and to suffer for His holy and high name all 
that come upon me in His account ; and I do not 
fear in the least, the Lord be praised and glorified 
for His grace. 

On Monday afternoon, from soon after three till 
about six o'clock, as I think, I was with three 
priests, who wanted to tell me so much ; but I first 
made them confess their faith, since they had come 
to instruct me. Then they began to confess some 
things of infant baptism, of the incarnation of 
Christ, and of their host or wafer, that Christ 
(after the words were pronounced), was present 
there in flesh and blood, even as He was when they 
ate the supper. When they were to prove it with 
the Scriptures, they were in a strait, for I insisted 
so firmly, and would not leave a single point be- 
fore they had proved it to me with all that they 
could ; and when they had proved it all, I went and 
confounded them with their own words, so that at 
times they blushed and did not know what they had 
better say, so that it seemed to me, that they finally 
became afraid to speak any more with me. And 
now and then they all three talked, and then I 
sometimes forgot what had been said before. Then 
I said : "I am not good at disputing ; my memory is 
too poor." Then one of them said : "Yet I think 
that it is tolerably good;" and he looked at me 
sharply. Well, my love, we will let it rest here 
for this time ; for if I were to write to you all that 
has befallen me, I think I should cover six sheets 
of paper; the Lord be thanked, who always helps 
His followers. This new president is so blood- 
thirsty, and severe with us ; he has all of us con- 
fined separately, one here, and the other there, and 
we can scarcely leave our cage long enough to at- 
tend to the calls of nature; and no one is allowed 
to come to us. And I have understood that we 
shall not be confined long, which I would gladly see 
verified, for the long confinement is too vexatious, 
always alone; but the Lord be thanked, the time 
has not been very irksome yet to either myself or 
Jeronymus, my brother and fellow prisoner, for 
it surprises us when we think that we have been 
confined eight days already. And I hope that the 
Lord will further comfort us, and not forsake us. 
Adieu, adieu, till another time. Farewell. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE, 
WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE 

I Raphel, your husband, imprisoned for the 
Lord's sake, wish you my dear wife and sister in 
the Lord, much grace, mercy and peace, from God 
the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the 
true Father over all kindreds that are in heaven 
and upon earth ; that He would grant you, accord- 
ing to the riches of His goodness, to be strength- 
ened with might by His holy Spirit in the inner 
man; and that Christ Jesus may dwell in your 
heart by faith, and be rooted in through love ; and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1031 


that He may abide with you unto the end of your 
life, to the salvation of your soul. Eph. 3 :14. This 
I send you, my dear sister in the Lord, as a testa- 
ment and affectionate adieu. 

My dear and in God beloved wife, for a sure to- 
ken of the love which I have had to you, I could 
not forbear to send you a letter, for I think that the 
parting is very near at hand. But, my very dear 
and beloved wife, it is not a writing of divorce- 
ment,* as Israel wrote a writing of divorcement, 
for the hardness of their hearts ; that I should thus 
leave you, my love. Oh, no! for this leaving is 
done for the love of God, for the parting must take 
place for His name's sake. For, my dearest (al- 
ways next to God), it is He that joined us together, 
and it is He that parts us again, which I willingly 
accept from His hand, for my mind has never been 
in a better condition in this respect, than it is now, 
the Lord be thanked. And I now commit you, my 
dearest, and your child, to the Lord, as to a faithful 
Father; cleave faithfully to Him, this I pray you 
my dear wife; and He shall, without any doubt, 
provide for you in soul and body. For Peter says : 
"According as his divine power hath given unto us 
all things that pertain unto life and godliness, 
through the knowledge of him that hath called us 
by his glory and virtue ; whereby are given unto us 
exceeding great and precious promises; that by 
these we might be partakers of the divine nature, 
having escaped the corruption that is in the world 
through lust." II Pet. 1 :3, 4. For if we remain en- 
tirely faithful to Him, so that we keep ourselves 
unspotted from the world, He will be a faithful 
Father unto us, who will provide for us, for it is 
He that giveth food to all flesh, and the eyes of all 
wait upon Him, says David, and He gives them 
their meat in due season. James 1 :27 ; Ps. 136 :25 ; 
124:27. 

Thus, my dear and beloved wife, I now commit 
you and your child to the Lord, by faith, to confirm 
the covenant which we made with the Lord, even 
as Abraham by faith delivered up his son Isaac to 
the Lord, and Jephtha his daughter, to prove and 
confirm his promise thereby. Thus I also, out of 
love, deliver you and my child over to the Lord, 
hoping and trusting that He will well provide for 
you, if you remain obedient and faithful to Him. 

Herewith I bid you, my dear and in God beloved 
wife, a final adieu, till we see each other in eternal 
joy; the Lord grant His grace, that this may come 
to pass. And I greatly and heartily thank you for 
your faithful, willing, and obedient service and love 
shown me in all subjection and kindness towards 
me; and, my love. I thank you (God shall recom- 
pense you for it) for your pious and good conver- 
sation and walk with me, whereby my heart was 
often relieved, comforted and rejoiced, which truly 
causes me yet the more to trust in God, and which 
is also a sure seal in my heart that we have walked 


* A play upon words, which obtains only in the original, in 
which the literal expression used, parting letter, has the twofold 
meaning of farewell letter and bill of divorcement. — Tr. 


unworthily in the love and fear of God before the 
Lord according to our weak ability; and once 
more I thank you, my dear wife, for all the kind- 
ness and friendship shown me, and heartily entreat 
you by the great love of God, if I have grieved 
you in anything, or done amiss to you in any wise 
by word or deed, that you will readily forgive me ; 
this I pray you in this letter, with many tears. I 
know nothing against you, my love, but what I 
gladly forgive you; may the Lord forgive us all 
our sins. 

Further, my dear wife, I cannot forbear to write 
your love briefly also, though it is done with many 
tears, to comfort and rejoice your heart, and this 
by the Word of God, for this must now be all our 
comfort, even as the prophet David says : "O Lord, 
unless thy law had been my delight, I should then 
have perished in mine affliction." Ps. 119:92. And 
as also the prophet Jeremiah says : "Thou knowest, 
O Lord, that we suffer reproach for thy sake ; but 
thy word sustains us, since we have received it; 
and thy word is the joy and comfort of our hearts." 
Jer. 15 :15, 16. Hence, my dear wife, we must have 
our delight in the word of the Lord, and meditate 
upon it day and night (Ps. 1:2), even as a rich 
man has his delight in his treasure, meditates upon 
it, and often counts it to rejoice his heart. Hence, 
David also says, we must meditate upon the law 
of the Lord with delight, and we shall be like a tree 
planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth 
his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not 
wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper, 
v. 3. Hence I pray you, my dearest, be patient in 
all wherein you are tried by God, and do not grieve 
too much, but think that it has been so ordered by 
the Lord, that we must part now; and console 
yourself thereby, though it is grievous for you, and 
goes contrary to our flesh, will and desire, we must 
nevertheless be patient : and if we suffer willingly, 
we shall be richly rewarded ; but woe to us, if we 
do not suffer willingly, nor are willing to be pa- 
tient, though it is hard for the flesh. O my love, it 
is a little matter to be patient, so long as it goes 
well with a man — that cannot be called patience ; 
but to be patient when it goes ill with one, and then 
to be able to preserve moderation, this is certainly 
a great power of faith. Hence, my dearest, I pray 
you once more, that you would be patient, and 
thank God with resignation of heart, saying: 
"Lord, thy will be done ;" but, O Lord, strengthen 
my faith and confidence, that I may never become 
fainthearted, disconsolate, despairing or doubtful 
concerning Thy promises, but may trust God, for 
His promises shall never fail; He is much too 
faithful that has promised it, and there will never 
be any failure on His part, for He will not suffer 
you to be tempted above that you are able, but 
will always with the temptation make a way to 
escape, that you may be able to bear it Heb 
10:23; I Thess. 5 :2S ; I Corinthians 10:13. 

Hence, my love, be patient and endure it will- 
ingly, and pray the Almighty God. with whom all 


1032 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


things are possible, that He will cause the sorrow 
and trouble that have come upon you on account 
of my bonds, and because we must part, to melt, 
diminish and vanish away; and that you may 
henceforth only be concerned as to how you can in 
all things please the Lord best, and spend the time 
of your life in the fear of God, and also care for 
your child ; the Lord grant you grace, that this may 
come so. Cast your entire care upon the Lord, and 
always hope the best of Him ; for we must know 
that if we forsake much for the name of the Lord, 
we shall receive much again ; and that if we suffer 
much for His holy name, we shall also rejoice in 
much, when the Lord shall come in His glory ; for 
we must all appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ ; that everyone may receive the things done 
in his body, according to that he hath done, wheth- 
er it be good or bad. Matt. 19:29; II Cor. 5:10. 
Therefore, dearest, let us always seek to excel in 
all good works, and let us not be weary in well 
doing, for in due season we shall reap without 
ceasing. And let not your heart be afraid, or 
moved, nor become weary in the way of the Lord. 
Though the waters become bitter, murmur not; 
and never turn back to Egypt with your heart, as 
Israel did. When they began to think of the flesh- 
pots which they had left behind, and because the 
waters were bitter, they wanted to choose them- 
selves captains, and return to Egypt. They said to 
Moses : "Hast thou therefore brought us into the 
wilderness, to destroy us here, except thou have 
rule over us? How finely hast thou brought us 
into a country that floweth with milk and honey !" 
Hence the wrath of the Lord arose over them, and 
He destroyed many of them. Ex. 15:23; 16:3; 
Num. 11:4; 14:4; 16:13. 

Therefore Solomon says : "Beware of murmur- 
ing, which avails nothing, for though we had spent 
all that we have in the world, and the Lord would 
prove us with poverty, as he did Israel, our anxiety 
could avail us nothing." Hence we must cast our 
care on the Lord, who cares for us ; for He permit- 
ted Israel to suffer hunger, to prove them whether 
they loved Him or not, and to try whether they 
should be patient. Hence my dear wife and sister 
in the Lord, always possess your soul with patience, 
and you shall overcome with all the pious witnesses 
of God, and inherit salvation, and say with the 
prophet Baruch : "O Israel, happy are we ; for God 
has revealed to us his will." Bar. 4:4. Even as 
Moses says: "O people saved by the Lord, the 
shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy 
excellency!" Deut. 33:29. Therefore, my much 
beloved sister in the Lord, though we must suffer 
for His sake, we must nevertheless possess our soul 
with patience, and remember that the apostle says : 
"That it is acceptable with God, to suffer for well 
doing." I Pet. 2:20. Notwithstanding that the 
world does not deem it acceptable, as Paul says: 
"The preaching of the cross is to them that perish, 
foolishness : but unto us which are saved, it is the 
power of God;" which power God works in them 


by His Spirit, to the comforting and strengthening 
of their minds, so that they, by their God, leap 
over a wall ; and, with Caleb and Joshua, devour 
their enemies as bread ; and, with Jael, drive a nail 
(that is, the enemy of the house of Israel), through 
Sisera's head, with the hammer of the divine word 
( Judg. 4 :21 ) ; and, with David, overcome, with the 
stone, Christ Jesus, the giant Goliath, that is, the 
devil and Satan who fights against Israel (I Sam. 
17:50) ; and say with the apostle Paul: "Thanks 
be unto God who giveth us the victory through our 
Lord Jesus Christ." I Cor. 15:57. And he further 
says : "Thanks be unto God, which always causeth 
us to triumph in Christ." II Cor. 2 :14. They also 
say with David: "The Lord is my life and 
strength." Ps. 27 :1. As the prophet writes : "They 
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength ; 
they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they 
shall run, and not be weary ; and they shall walk, 
and not faint." Isa. 40:31. 

Hence, my much beloved wife and sister in the 
Lord, the world cannot partake of this comfort, 
because they do not believe in the Lord and thus 
deem the word of the cross foolishness, as is writ- 
ten: "We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews 
a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolish- 
ness." I Cor. 1 :23. But they that believe and will 
be saved regard it as the power and wisdom of God, 
that they are worthy to suffer shame for the name 
of the Lord, as did Peter and John, when they had 
been scourged by the Pharisees. Acts 5 :41. Hence 
Peter writes: "What glory is it, if, when ye be 
buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? 
but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it 
patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even 
hereunto were ye called." I Pet. 2:20, 21. Paul 
also writes : "Those of old time had trial of cruel 
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds 
and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the 
sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and 
goatskins ; being destitute, affilicted, tormented ; of 
whom the world was not worthy." Heb. 11 :36-38. 

See, my dear and in God beloved wife, how the 
world cannot become a partaker of this grace, since 
it does not esteem the Lord worthy to suffer for 
His name ; for no one can suffer for the name of 
the Lord, except he have through faith obtained 
power to become a child of God. John 1:12. 
Hence, my cordially beloved sister T. H., let us 
never be grieved by what we must suffer for the 
name of God, but willingly and lovingly endure it, 
and look to the reward; for such as seek to live 
unto the Lord, and to promote His glory, and do 
not seek their own, but much rather what is to the 
praise of the Lord and to the edification of their 
neighbor. Oh, what glorious promises of salvation 
are theirs, and what great riches are promised 
them! Romans 24:8; I Cor. 10:24; Matt. 10:22. 
But we must know that if we would come to honor, 
we must first suffer, for thus it has been from the 
beginning with all the righteous children of God 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1033 


Hence John writes that the Lamb was slain from 
the beginning. Rev. 13:8. Not that Christ Him- 
self was slain according to His flesh from the be- 
ginning ; for Paul says that Christ appeared in the 
end of the world, to put away the sins of many by 
the sacrifice of Himself. Heb. 9:26. But He was 
slain from the beginning in righteous Abel; and 
thus He still daily suffers in all believers ; hence it 
is evident that they suffer for His name, whereto 
the world is unworthy yet, for they do not have 
Christ, and hence they cannot suffer for His name ; 
hence their suffering is nothing but vexation, for 
the sorrow of this world worketh death. II Cor. 
7:10. But godly sorrow worketh to salvation, 
whether it be outward or inward; if inward, that 
one is sorry for sin, it is to amendment; if out- 
ward, because one suffers for the name of Christ, 
it is to consolation, for Paul says : "As the suf- 
ferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation 
also aboundeth by Christ." II Cor. 1 :5. Therefore 
Peter says : "If ye suffer for righteousness' sake, 
happy are ye." I Pet. 3:14. He further says: "If 
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy 
are ye ; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth 
upon you : on their part he is evil spoken of, but on 
your part he is glorified." I Pet. 4:14. O my dear- 
est, consider what precious words these are, for us 
to whom these promises, without any doubt belong. 
For though Christ by the Spirit of God cast out 
devils, yet, according to their saying, He had to do 
it by Beelzebub, the prince of devils. Matt. 12:24. 

Therefore Christ rightly spake: "If they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you ; if they 
have kept my saying, they will keep yours also; 
for the servant is not greater than his lord, nor the 
disciple above his master." John 1 5 :20 ; Matthew 
10:24. For the angel said to Tobit: "Since thou 
didst please God, thou couldst not remain without 
temptation." Tob. 12 :13. For it is written : "Temp- 
tation alone teaches to observe the word." Isa. 
28:19. Therefore, my dear wife, take these words 
to heart, and mark them well, namely, how the 
Lord has visited His own in many ways, and how 
well He is pleased, when His children show obedi- 
ence in all things, and willingly receive chastise- 
ment, and do not seek to escape from the cross of 
Christ, but gladly and willingly take His yoke upon 
them; and who are so minded, that through the 
great love and firm confidence which they have to 
Christ Jesus, they will far rather forsake all that 
they have in the world, father, mother, sister, 
brother, husband, wife, children, yea, even their 
own life, with all that they possess, and, moreover, 
endure and suffer all that comes upon them, tribu- 
lation, distress, persecution, sorrow, and affliction. 
Oh, how gloriously will God receive those who 
have become so poor for Christ's sake. Oh, how 
rich shall He make them ; for as they are humbled 
with Him, and for His sake, so shall they be exalt- 
ed and made glorious with Him. As they have con- 
fessed Him in the world, so shall He also confess 
them before His Father which is in heaven ; and 
they shall shine forth with Him as the sun in the 


Father's throne (Matt. 13 :43), and shall be clothed 
in white raiment, because they have overcome 
through their faith (I John 5:4), even as John 
writes : "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multi- 
tude, which no man could number, of all nations, 
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood be- 
fore the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with 
white robes, and palms in their hands ; and cried 
with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God 
which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. 
And all the angels stood round about the throne, 
and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell 
before the throne on their faces, and worshipped 
God, saying, Amen : Blessing, and glory, and wis- 
dom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, 
and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. 
Amen. And one of the elders answered, saying 
unto me, What are these which are arrayed in 
white robes ? and whence came they ? And I said 
unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, 
these are they which came out of great tribulation, 
and have washed their robes, and made them white 
in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they be- 
fore the throne of God, and serve him day and 
night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the 
throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger 
no more, neither thirst any more ; neither shall the 
sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb 
which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, 
and shall lead them unto living fountains of wa- 
ters : and God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes. Revelation 7:9-17. 

O my dear sister, this is a sure sign that we must 
here weep first, if the Lord is to wipe away the 
tears ; as Esdras also saw upon the Mount Sion a 
great people, whom he could not number ; and they 
all praised the Lord with songs. And in the midst 
of them there was a young man of a high stature, 
taller than all the rest, and upon every one of their 
heads He set crowns, and was more exalted; at 
which he marveled greatly. Then he asked the 
angel and said: "Lord, what are these?" He said: 
"These be they that have put off the mortal cloth- 
ing, and put on the immortal, and have confessed 
the name of God: now are they crowned, and re- 
ceive palms. Then said I unto the angel, What 
young person is it that crowneth them, and giveth 
them palms in their hands ? Then the angel spake : 
It is the Son of God, whom they have confessed in 
the world. Then began I greatly to commend them 
that stood so stiffly for the name of the Lord." II 
Esd. 2 :42-47. Behold, my dear and in God beloved 
wife and sister in the Lord, here you hear the beau- 
tiful promises of the Lord, which He has promised 
all them that suffer for His holy name, and endure 
it with patience. Hence Paul has truly written: 
"If we suffer, we shall also reign with him." if 
Tim. 2:12. 

Therefore, my dear sister, be steadfast, immov- 
able, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 
forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in 
vain in the Lord. I Cor. 15 :58. 


1034 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Herewith I commend you, my love, to the Lord, 
and to the rich word of His grace, who is able to 
keep your treasure, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them that are sanctified. Acts 20:32. 
Adieu, my dear and in God beloved wife and sister 
in the Lord; adieu, adieu. Finally, rejoice, be per- 
fect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in 
peace ; and the God of love and peace shall be with 
you. Amen. II Cor. 13:11; Phil. 4:4. Greet my 
son and Tanneken, in my name, and tell him that 
I command him, always to be obedient and subject 
to his mother, in all things, always with reverence ; 
adieu, adieu, farewell. 

Written with my blood, for a seal and testament ; 
an affectionate adieu to you, my love. 

By me, your dear husband, 

Raphel van den Velde. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE, 
WRITTEN TO HIS SON 

The same God that blessed Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, bless also you, my dear son, with all spiritual 
blessings in heavenly places, that you may from 
your youth learn to know, fear and obey the Lord 
all the days of your life. This is my most special 
prayer, will and desire from the depths of my 
heart, which I ask of God, that you may be eternal- 
ly saved, and the name of the Lord be glorified 
through you ; unto which great and glorious name 
be praise and glory now and forever. Amen. 

See, my dear son Raphelken, since the Lord has 
so ordered it, that I must be taken from you, 
though I would most gladly have remained with 
you, to help you on, and to bring you up in the 
fear of God, but it was not the Lord's pleasure, 
for if it were not for the Lord's sake, it were im- 
possible for me, thus to leave your mother and my 
dear son, for I know of no person, nor any treas- 
uses so great in the whole world, that for it I 
should be willing to leave you, but for the sake of 
Christ Jesus all must be forsaken ; for Christ says : 
"If any man forsake not all, father and mother, 
sister, brother, husband, wife, child, yea and his 
own life also, with all that he possesses, he is not 
worthy of me ; and if any man love aught more, he 
cannot be his disciple" ; since it is the will of God, 
that we must part, and I cannot speak with you 
orally, I would write a little for instruction in the 
fear of God, as the wise man says : "My son, hear 
the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the 
law of thy mother." Prov. 1 :8. Be ever ready 
to do what is commanded you of God, that is, that 
you are to learn from your youth to know, fear and 
obey Him ; for obedience proceeds from the fear of 
God, and the fear of God proceeds from the knowl- 
edge of God. Hence Solomon writes: "The fear 
of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge." Prov- 
erbs 1 :7. For a child that knows his father, that 
he is so honest and righteous, that he will not have 
his children to run with other children in the street, 
fight, quarrel, and speak bad words, or bring home 


stolen things ; children that know their father thus, 
are afraid to do such things, thinking : "If I do this, 
I shall be beaten." Prov. 13 :24. Thus also, my dear 
son, the Lord is a righteous God, who will not tol- 
erate sin ; but He will punish them that commit it ; 
hence we must fear Him, and not commit sin. For 
the fear of God drives out sin, and he that fears 
God will do good. Prov. 16:6; Sir. 15. As Solo- 
mon says : "The fear of the Lord is a fountain of 
wisdom, to depart from the snares of death." 
Proverbs 14:27. For, my dear son, the wages of 
sin is death. Rom. 6 :23. 

Hence, since the fear of God drives out sin, we 
avoid by it the cause through which we incur death, 
that is, sin. 

Therefore, my dear son, endeavor from your 
youth to walk in the fear of the Lord, so that you 
will at no time consent to sin, and not forget the 
commandments of the Lord your God. But fear 
the Lord, while He may be feared ; for they that 
fear the Lord walk in the right way. Prov. 14 :2. 
"For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wis- 
dom ; and to depart from evil is understanding " 
Job 28:28. S 

Hence, my child, fear the Lord and depart from 
evil; for the prophet Jeremiah says: "How good 
it is for a man, to take upon him the yoke of the 
Lord from his youth ; and for one that is forsaken, 
to be patient, when he meeteth with adversity." 
Lam. 3 :27, 28. And Ecclesiasticus says : "My son, 
gather instruction from thy youth up ; so shalt thou 
find wisdom till thine old age." Sir. 6:18. And 
beware of all evil companions, that might seduce 
you to affiliate with the world ; for the world lieth 
in wickedness, and shall perish with all its lusts 

I John 5:19; 2:17. 

Therefore, my dear child, love not the world, 
neither the things that are therein ; for all that is in 
the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the 
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but 
of the world, vs. 15, 16. Hence abstain from flesh- 
ly lusts, which war against the soul. I Pet. 2:11 ; 
Gal. 5:16. Paul also says: "Flee youthful lusts." 

II Tim. 2:22. For youthful lusts have plunged 
many into perdition. 

My child, heed the instruction of your father, 
and forget it not. Prov. 4:1. Refrain your tongue 
from backbiting, and beware of lying. Ps. 15:3. 
For the mouth that lieth slayeth the soul. Wisd. 
1 :11. For liars have no part in the New Jerusalem, 
but their part is in the fiery lake that shall burn 
with fire and brimstone : which is the second death. 
And the backbiter causes much contention and 
strife; he also raises discord and envy, and sep- 
arates good friends. Moses writes : "Let there be 
no backbiter or slanderer among you." Lev. 19 :16. 
Hence, my son, beware of backbiting; and wher- 
ever you live or go in and out in a house, be re- 
served, and tell not out of the house what happens 
within ; and keep silent about all that ought to be 
kept secret, and you will make yourself beloved. 
And always be faithful to people, and beware of 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1035 


stealing, for it is a great sin, for thieves have no 
part in the kingdom of God : nor is a thief trusted 
or loved by any one, but wherever he comes his 
hands are watched. 

Thus, my dear son, always acquit yourself hon- 
estly in the fear of God, and beware of all sin and 
transgression ; and it shall be well with you at the 
last day, when the Lord shall reward every one ac- 
cording to his works, such as he has done, whether 
it be good or bad. My son, remember that it is 
written: "Honor thy father and mother; that 
thou mayest live long on the earth." Ex. 20:12; 
Ephesians 6:2, 3. For this is the first command- 
ment with promise in the law. But the greatest 
honor which children show their parents, is that 
they are obedient to them, in all that is not con- 
trary to the Lord and His commandment. Hence, 
my dear son, though you lose me, be not impudent 
to your mother, but obey her the more ; for the sole 
care will now be upon her. Therefore, my child, 
grieve her not in your life, for in Ecclesiasticus it 
is written: "He that forsaketh his father is as a 
blasphemer; and he that angereth his mother is 
cursed of God." Sir. 3 :16. Hence love her, and 
remember how much pain she suffered for your 
sake, and how she bore you, under her heart, and 
shall have much to suffer yet, to bring you up, and 
to earn a livelihood. Tob. 4:4; II Mace. 7:27. 

Hence, my dear child, apply yourself from your 
youth to labor and industry, and when you are 
grown up and can earn something, let your mother 
profit by it ; and always labor diligently and will- 
ingly, and do not think it irksome to do your best, 
to help your mother gain a livelihood, for before 
she has done it for you. And beware of being idle 
or slothful, for from idleness proceeds much evil ; 
and slothfulness makes thieves of children, and 
thus they finally come to a bad end. Hence, my 
son, never desire it, but labor, working with your 
hands that which is honest, that you may have to 
give to him that needeth. Eph. 4 :28. 

Herewith I will commend you, my dear son, and 
your mother, to the Lord — O bitter parting; yet 
for His sake who is able to provide for you, and to 
keep you from all evil I hope to leave you. The 
Lord grant you His grace, that you may grow up 
in the knowledge of God, through the Holy Ghost ; 
so that you, according to the sentence of the right- 
eous judgment of God (Rom. 2 :5), may be found 
righteous for His kingdom, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord and Saviour, to whom be praise and 
glory forever and ever. Amen. 

Written by me, your father. Adieu, my dear 
son, whom I love more than any silver or gold or 
precious stones ; but God must be the dearest. 
Adieu; love conquers all things; once more adieu, 
my dear son; read over often this which your fa- 
ther has written you out of love ; and comfort your 
mother, and always be kind to her in all subjection 
in the fear of God ; the Lord grant grace, that this 
be so. Amen. 

Raphel van den Velde. 


THE LAST LETTER FROM RAPHEL VAN DEN VELDE, 
WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE AFTER HE HAD RE- 
CEIVED THE MESSAGE THAT HE WAS 
TO DIE 

Grace and peace, love, patience, longsuffering, 
kindness, power and strength in your faith, this I, 
Raphel wish you my dear and in God beloved wife 
and sister in the Lord, as an affectionate adieu ; the 
Lord grant you and us all grace, that we may here- 
after see one another in the eternal joy. My love, I 
thank you for your letter, which you sent me for a 
comfort in my last extremity. And I also thank 
Kestijntgen heartily; and her dear husband also 
thanks her, and now bids an affectionate adieu ; the 
Lord grant you grace, that you may follow Him at 
the proper time ; and he also thanks you, that you 
the last time so cheered and rejoiced his heart; 
adieu, adieu. I wrote this after I had received the 
message that I must die, which was to me a joyful 
message, according to the spirit. But it seems that 
the flesh now and then is inclined to shrink back, 
which is not surprising, for it is touched by it! 

Herewith, my love, I will commit and commend 
you and my dear son to the Lord ; He will provide 
for you in soul and body, this is my confidence to 
God. My love, be resigned to my sufferings and 
death, for all men must once die, and many a man 
loses his life in an ignominious, dreadful and un- 
happy manner; but this is for the most glorious 
cause that one can find, and the most blessed work 
that one can do, and though it is attended with dis- 
tress, yet the reward will make ample amends. O 
my love, be resigned and of good cheer, and Kes- 
tijntgen our sister too ; and thank God, that you 
had such husbands, who confessed the truth, with 
all might and great power, and with much labor. 
Thanks be unto God, who has helped us to tri- 
umph. II Cor. 2:14. We may now say with the 
apostle Paul : "The fight is fought, the course is 
finished, the faith is kept ; the crown of life is now 
ready for us." II Tim. 4:7,8. O Lord, what a glo- 
rious comfort. O my love, remember frequently 
what I have written you for the edification and 
consolation of your mind ; and forget me, for it is 
a sealed fact, that the dead will not return. 

Herewith I bid you adieu, adieu, adieu, flesh and 
blood, adieu, adieu, farewell. 

Written in my extremity, by me, your dear hus- 
band and brother in the Lord. 

Raphel van den Velde. 


to claes schepens 

The eternal grace and peace from God our heav- 
enly Father, and the kindness and love of His Son, 
and the fellowship and consolation of the Holy 
Ghost, be with you my dear brother and sister in 
the Lord, as an affectionate greeting and perpetual 
adieu in this time. The Lord grant His grace, that 
we may hereafter see one another in eternity. 
Amen. 


1036 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


After much affectionate greeting and loving rev- 
erence to you, let me please inform your love, that 
my mind is still unchangeably fixed, to confess and 
serve the Lord, according to my weak ability, all 
the days of my life ; and I also have the same good 
confidence concerning you ; which I also partly un- 
derstand from what you write in your letter, by 
which I was comforted, when I heard it read. May 
the Lord always grant you to grow up, and to be 
strengthened and increased in the same, to His 
praise, and to the salvation of your souls. Amen. 

Further, dear brother and sister in the Lord, I 
inform you how it goes with me in my bonds, 
namely, that I am very much resigned, the Lord be 
thanked for His great grace; the Lord comforts 
and strengthens me so and makes my bonds so 
light, that I sometimes scarcely know that I am im- 
prisoned ; and He takes away my fear, and rejoices 
my heart, and gives me new strength. II Cor. 1 :5 ; 
Isa. 40:31. And though the false prophets shoot 
their deadly arrows at me, the Lord so faithfully 
preserves me, that it does not harm, but rather 
rejoices me, though they have assailed me very 
subtly, with many fair words, and I had to resist 
very many, and to hear from my father, and Lieven 
de Kroock, and Maeye Moeye, and our cousin 
Pieter, and Daniel de Keyser. Those who appre- 
hended me were with me on Ash Wednesday, and 
they led me upon such a high mountain, and of- 
fered me so many fair promises without power, if 
I had wanted to listen to them ; but thanks be to 
God, who always helps us to triumph. Yea, they 
said so much to me, that I think it could not be 
written on four sheets. Lieven de Kroock said at 
first, that I had devils in me by the score, and that 
he saw them sitting on my shoulders. Then said 
I : "Will you not take down one?" And it seemed 
to me, they sought to make me drunk, but I would 
not drink, though they tormented me greatly to do 
it; but the Lord gave me strength to resist it. I 
further inform your love, that my father was with 
me again today alone, and tormented me greatly ; 
but I told him, that he should be satisfied, since I 
did in no wise wish to forsake the Lord. And he 
told me, that you were also spoiled of and driven 
from your possessions, which greatly grieved me 
when I heard it. But, my dear brother and sister 
in the Lord, be of good cheer, and patient in your 
tribulation and affliction ; for we must know, that it 
is given unto us, not only to believe in Christ, but 
also to suffer for His name. Phil. 1 :29. And Christ 
Himself says: "If any man forsake not all for 
my name's sake, he cannot be my disciple ; and if 
any man love aught more than me, he is not worthy 
of me." Luke 14 :26, 27. 

Hence, my much beloved friends, think of the 
words of Tobit, when he had also become so poor, 
for the Lord's sake: "My child," he says, "true, 
we are poor; but be of good cheer, we shall have 
much wealth, if we fear God, do good, and shun 
sin." Tob. 4:21. For, dear and in God beloved 
friends, we are children of the saints, and hope for 


a life which God shall give to those who stand up 
for Him and continue steadfast in the faith. There- 
fore do not become weary in the way of the Lord, 
and do not faint because of the tribulation, but 
persevere firmly, until you are taken hence. I fur- 
ther understand from your letter, that it is your in- 
tention to remove ; which I pray you myself to do, 
since they greatly seek your life, and ask you much 
concerning me. And Maeyken Moeye said, that it 
was your fault, that I was here ; but I said : "No." 
Furthermore, dear brother and sister, I entreat 
your love, that you would remember me with a 
fervent heart in your prayer to God, that I may 
fight a good fight, and finish my course, to the sal- 
vation of my soul ; I hope to do the same also for 
you, and that the Lord will prosper you on your 
journey, in soul and body. I now bid your love, my 
dear and in God beloved brother and sister in the 
Lord, an affectionate and perpetual adieu. The 
same great, omnipotent, Almighty God, who led 
Jacob, when he had to flee, guide also you, and 
bring you into everlasting rest. Amen. Adieu, 
farewell, farewell, adieu, adieu. 

I Raphel van den Velde (the writer of this) also 
greet your love most heartily with the peace of the 
Lord. 

Love overcomes all things. 

Your beloved weak brother. 

Jeronymus Schepens. 


LOUWERENS THE SHOEMAKER, A. D. 1576 

In the year 1576, at the time of the Spanish Fury 
(on the 4th of November), there was in confine- 
ment at Antwerp a God-fearing, pious brother, 
named Louwerens the Shoemaker, for no other 
reason, than that he would not follow the world 
and all its false inventions and wickedness (in 
which she lies), but forsook it, and sought with the 
people of God to lead a godly life, and to follow 
Christ in the regeneration. He was therefore ap- 
prehended and tormented with great and dreadful 
tortures, by the enemies of the truth, the blood- 
thirsty papists. They tortured him in such an un- 
christian-like and tyrannical manner, that his body 
was completely crippled, for in the Spanish Fury 
the prisons were opened, and the prisoners ran out, 
so that the jailer said : "Louwerens, run out too." 
He answered : "Whither shall I run ? for I am so 
crippled, that I cannot earn my bread." And re- 
maining thus in confinement, he was, after the 
Spanish Fury was over, brought forth, and con- 
firmed the faith of the truth with his death and 
blood, at said place. Therefore, at the glorious ap- 
pearing of Christ from heaven, he shall receive the 
glorious crown, which no man shall ever take from 
him ; and having been thus planted with Christ in 
the likenessof His death, he shall also forever be a 
partaker with Him of the glorious resurrection 
Rev. 20:4; Acts 1:11; II Thess. 1:10; II Tim 
4:8; John 16:22; Rom. 6:5. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1037 


HANS BRET, A. D. 1576 

Hans Bret, who was about twenty-one years old, 
and the son of one Thomas Bret, an Englishman, 
was (besides his daily labor which he performed in 
the service of his master) very diligently con- 
cerned and engaged with the study of the word 
of the Lord, in which he constantly exercised him- 
self in the morning and evening also, generally, 
exhorting with edifying, profitable and instructive 
passages from the holy Scriptures, those with 
whom he had intercourse, to a virtuous and godly 
life. He would also not spend Sunday idly, but 
truly sanctifying and observing it, generally sought 
together a number of new converts, to whom he 
diligently went in all kindness, giving out to them 
in the fear of God some edifying questions from 
the Scriptures, whereby he exhorted them to re- 
pent and desist from their sinful life, showing them 
the indignation which God shall pour out upon the 
children of unbelief and unrighteousness, and the 
gracious promises of salvation which are promised 
in eternal life to the penitent children of faith. 
This his exhorting he did with such becoming 
earnestness and edifying doctrine, that many 
sought to be with him, perceiving in him the pow- 
erful work of God and his advancement in the 
knowledge of Christ, with which he, though so 
young in years, was very richly filled, and which 
he also did not keep to himself alone, but allowed 
it to break forth and flow from him without fear 
to the profit and advantage of his neighbor. II Cor. 
3:5; Phil. 3:8; I Tim. 4:12; I Cor. 10:33. 

But the devil, the enemy of righteousness, and 
envier of the increase of virtue and- of the church 
of Christ, could not long tolerate or endure this ; 
for, perceiving in this servant the godly zeal in the 
truth, and assiduity to convert the erring, he, by 
his instruments (bloodthirsty men, who always 
have dishonored the temple of God, murdered His 
sheep, slain His saints, shed their blood, and given 
their flesh as meat to the beasts of the field), sought 
to trouble this servant of God with affliction, and to 
hinder the brightness of his light, which he also 
partly effected and accomplished; for about two 
months after he had been baptized upon the con- 
fession of his faith, according to the command of 
Christ, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost, there came, on the sixth day of May, 
in the year 1576, about nine o'clock in the evening, 
the bailiff of Antwerp, with many servants, to the 
house of Hans Bret's master, who had been be- 
trayed with all his household. They closely guarded 
this house from behind, where it had two exits, as 
well as in front, with armed men and beadles, and 
then knocked at the front door, which Hans Bret 
came to open (not knowing that those who thirsted 
for the blood of his master and his household, and 
for his own, stood before it), and asked who was 
there. They said: "Open," and pretended that 
they wanted to buy something. In the meantime, 
hearing that they had inserted an instrument in the 


door, to open it from the outside, he began to think 
that they were the wolves and tyrants, who came to 
devour the innocent and harmless sheep of Christ, 
and did not open the door to them ; but they man- 
aged to open it from without, which perceiving, 
Hans Bret ran into the house, where his master 
with his wife and several other women sat eating, 
and warned them of it, who all quickly rose up and 
ran to the rear, thinking (as also Hans Bret) to es- 
cape by the back door ; but when they opened this, 
the bailiff's beadles showed themselves with great 
cruelty, speedily apprehending and capturing all 
whom God permitted them, among whom there was 
also this servant of God ; but his master and several 
others with him were wonderfully and remarkably 
delivered and preserved through the hand and as- 
sistance of God. Jer. 1:8; Acts 26:17. Behold, 
thus did this innocent sheep of Christ fall into the 
hands of the wolves, and was confined in prison, 
only for the faith in the doctrine of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the practice of the same. 

Now, how he conducted himself in his bonds; 
how they, through wiles and snares, fair promises 
and severe threats, sought to move him from, and 
despoil him of, the salvation of his soul ; and how 
they, because he had written some letters to his 
brethren and friends, cast him into a loathsome 
dungeon; together with the various disputations 
which he had with the priests and soul-seducers, 
and also how he answered them, and what boldness 
he manifested through the help of God; all this 
you will find fully treated and revealed in the fol- 
lowing letters written by him. 

When he had been confined about eight months, 
the tyrants finally went to the utmost of their pow- 
er in the case of this servant of God and faithful 
follower of Christ, and, on Friday before Derthien- 
Avondt, in the year 1577, had him brought into 
court, whither he went very boldly, since his bonds 
were not for any crime, evil, or unrighteousness, 
but for the doctrine of his Lord and Master, Jesus 
Christ, for righteousness and truth, for which the 
children of God have always had abundantly to suf- 
fer, who have helped Christ to bear His cross, as a 
true ensign that they are Christ's servants, dis- 
ciples and followers. 

Being brought before the lords and judges, he 
was asked, whether he had been baptized upon his 
faith, which he finally confessed and acknowl- 
edged, not ashamed of what he had done by the 
command of his Lord and Master Christ Jesus, 
though he certainly knew that they did not ask him 
to be taught of him, but only to get a word from his 
mouth by which they might sentence him to death. 
When the lords and criminal judges had heard this 
Christian confession, they rose up and went to sen- 
tence him to death ; and having returned from their 
evil consultation, they pronounced and declared 
their sentence over this servant of God: that he 
should publicly be burnt alive at the stake till death 
should ensue. 

When he had received his sentence, he was con- 


1038 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



John Bret, an Englishman, receives the tongue screw and is burned afterward in Antwerp, 1576 


ducted back to prison, undismayed and of good 
courage, where he doubtless addressed some Scrip- 
tural remarks to the common people, as setting 
forth the cause of his imprisonment and suffering 
not to be any evil or crime, but the faith of the pure 
and saving truth, which the world cannot endure. 
Romans 10:9. 

Thus he (Hans Bret) was brought back from 
the court into prison, and confined and held there 
till the following day, which was Saturday ; then, 
in the morning, the executioner came to him into 
prison, in order to screw fast his tongue, close his 
mouth, and prevent his speaking. O miserable 
work ! 

Murderers, and the very worst criminals have 
the privilege and permission of freely using their 
tongue; but, behold here a follower of Christ, a 
child of God, a servant of faith, one separated from 
the world, in whom dwells righteousness and no 
cause of death is found — behold, how he is pre- 
pared for death by closing his mouth and screwing 
fast his tongue, that the truth may not be pro- 
claimed, righteousness not heard, nor any testi- 
mony be given of the name of Christ. O Christ, 
look down, and succor Thy saints. 


When the executioner had come to him, he 
commanded him to put out his tongue, which he 
(faithful and pious servant of God), willingly did, 
since he had not a member on his body, which he 
was not willing to deliver up to suffering for the 
name of Christ, being well assured that all the suf- 
ferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the joy and glory which God has 
promised them that overcome. Matt. 10:22: Ro- 
mans 8:18; Rev. 2:7. 

And when he put out his tongue, the executioner 
fastened it with a piece of iron, and screwed it very 
tight with a vise or screw, and then touched the 
end of the tongue with a hot iron, that swelling, the 
screw might not slip off or become loose. O bitter 
cruelty and great tyranny. 

When they had thus closed his mouth, and 
screwed fast his tongue, the fire with which he was 
to be offered up being already prepared in the mar- 
ket place, they led him forth, with his hands tied 
together, from prison, and placed him into a 
wagon, to convey him to the marketplace, to the 
spot where his sacrifice for the Word of truth was 
to take place. 

It is said that they took this wagon for the reason 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1039 


that the way that leads from the prison to the mar- 
ket place, could not well be walked, because of the 
burnt houses which had been set on fire by the 
Spaniards, at the taking of Antwerp. 

When he stepped into the wagon, he saw several 
persons of his acquaintance, whom he boldly and 
joyfully beheld, showing by his actions the desire 
which he had to come to the place where his sacri- 
fice was to take place. He affectionately bowed his 
head, and greeted divers persons with the head, ex- 
pressing and manifesting his steadfastness by his 
countenance and actions, all to the praise of God, 
who bestows such strength and power upon His 
saints, as being their protector, refuge, help, pow- 
er, strength, and strong bulwark in all distress, 
tribulation, sorrow, and suffering inflicted upon 
them by the world for the true saving faith in 
Jesus Christ. Matt. 28:20; Ps. 18:2; Matt. 16:16. 

When he had been brought into the marketplace, 
near the stake and the fire, he lifted himself up, and 
being clothed with Christian glory, descended from 
the wagon, being of good courage in God, strong 
in faith, and persevering in the conflict. With 
folded hands, he bowed his knees to the earth, 
humbly casting his eyes up to heaven, thus pre- 
paring himself to worship his Lord and God, and 
to commend himself to Him, even as behooves 
every Christian believer. Luke 23:46. But when 
those bloodthirsty men saw this, they could not tol- 
erate or endure it (which they nevertheless per- 
mit criminals to do, who are put to death for their 
evil deeds) ; but very hurriedly and quickly pulling 
him up from the ground, they prevented him from 
calling to God upon his knees, and with great cruel- 
ty conducted him to the stake. To suffer all this, he 
went into the hut (constructed of straw and wood), 
humbly and meekly stepping to where they placed 
him at the stake, and made him fast by putting 
chains around his body, all of which he endured 
with great steadfastness for the Word and truth 
of Christ. And as he thus stood in the hut, at the 
stake, they finally kindled the fire, thus burning 
alive and devouring this lamb, whose body, indeed, 
was burnt, but whose soul was received into para- 
dise, into joy and blessed rest, because he con- 
fessed Christ, who has promised salvation to them 
that endure. 

Thus did this young and pious Christian, aged 
about twenty-one years, end his life, and offer and 
deliver up his body for the Word of God, in the 
year 1577, on Derthien-Avondt, and thus he be- 
came a witness among the witnesses of Jesus, a 
confessor among the confessors of Christ, a Chris- 
tian conqueror among the soldiers of the Lord, a 
soul among the souls of Christ at rest under the 
altar, a faithful servant among the servants of 
Christ, whose reward is the crown of eternal, im- 
perishable life. 

Here follow some letters which Hans Bret wrote 
during his imprisonment. 


THE FIRST LETTER OF HANS BRET, WRITTEN ON 

MONDAY AFTER WHITSUNTIDE, A. D. 1576, 

AT ANTWERP, IN PRISON, TO HIS DEAR 

AND BELOVED MOTHER 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
through His only Son Christ Jesus, and the com- 
fort of the Holy Ghost, for the increase of your 
faith, and to the salvation of your soul, this I wish 
you, my heartily beloved mother, from the very 
depth of my soul. Amen. 

Most dearly beloved mother, let me please in- 
form you, that I am well according to the flesh, 
thanks to the good God ; but according to the spirit, 
I thank the Lord, and praise Him for His unspeak- 
able grace, that He gives me strength by His Holy 
Spirit, so that my mind is unchanged, the Lord be 
thanked. And I trust in the Lord that He will 
give me strength by His Holy Spirit, even as He 
through grace has hitherto done to this hour, to me 
poor man, for which the Lord be praised forever. 
For from Him alone we expect our strength, to 
withstand these cruel wolves, so that they can have 
no power over our souls, for they are more cruel 
than wolves — they are not satisfied with our body, 
that they tear that ; but they seek to devour and kill 
our souls, as I told three priests. Isa. 40:29; Zeph. 
3 :3. However, according to the words of Christ, 
they cannot harm our souls; for when they have 
done all that they can (however, not without the 
Lord's permission), they can but kill our body, 
which I gladly suffer for the name of Christ, and 
have a desire to be delivered from this flesh, and 
to be in joy with Christ, who has prepared for us 
a dwelling not made with hands, but which is 
eternal in the heavens. Rom. 7 :24; II Peter 1 :14; 
Phil. 1 :23; II Cor. 5 :1. We now look not at the 
things which are seen, but hope in the things which 
are not seen — in the imperishable, to be crowned 
with the crown of eternal life, yea, to be clothed in 
fine, white linen, and to rest with the souls that are 
under the altar, that were slain lor the word of 
God, until the number of our brethren is fulfilled, 
who shall also be killed, according to the testimony 
of John in his Revelation. II Esdras 2:43; Rev. 
19:8; 6:9, 11. 

Therefore I long, dear mother, from one Satur- 
day to another, to offer up my sacrifice. I had so 
fondly hoped, that I should this day offer up my 
sacrifice, but it has not pleased the Lord ; hence I 
hope to offer up my sacrifice next Saturday, if it 
please the Lord, and to have with the Lord that joy 
and gladness which ear has never heard, and of 
which the heart of man cannot conceive, yea, which 
is prepared for the righteous, who were not 
ashamed to confess the name of the Lord before 
this adulterous generation, as long as they had 
breath to speak, in their bodies, yea, until they were 
deprived of speech. I Pet. 1 :8 ; I Cor. 2 :9 ; Mark 
8:38. Therefore, my dearest mother, rejoice, and 
thank the Lord, that He counts me, your son, an 
unworthy man, worthy to suffer for His name, and 


1040 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


to offer up my body to Him, to the praise of His 
holy name. Acts 5:41; Rom. 12:1. 

For, my dear mother, there happens to me noth- 
ing but what has happened to all God's righteous 
ones, from the beginning of the world until this 
present day. If they killed Christ, the Author of 
faith, in whom was no sin, what shall they do to 
the servants? for the disciple is not above his mas- 
ter, says Christ. Hence console yourself, my dear 
mother, and rejoice therein; for they can do no 
more to me, than the Lord permits them. For the 
Lord says that the very hairs of our head are all 
numbered. Not a sparrow falls to the ground with- 
out His will; but of how much greater value are 
we than the sparrows. Matt. 10:29-31. Yea, He 
says that we are not to fear them that kill the body, 
for they have no power over the soul. Hence be 
resigned, and pray the Lord for me and my fellow 
prisoners. 

My mother, I would write you more for your 
consolation, but I hope that you are better com- 
forted of the Lord, than I should be able to com- 
fort you with my writing; and I also forbear so 
that you may learn something about how it goes 
with our imprisonment, for otherwise my paper 
would not suffice. For I presume that you greatly 
desire to hear it, even as I desire to hear from you, 
as to how you are. I hope that you, as also all of 
you, are well, both according to body and soul, for 
which I pray the Lord, and remember all of you in 
my prayer to the Lord. Remember also, in your 
prayers, us poor prisoners according to the flesh, 
but rich according to the spirit, as I also hope to re- 
member you, for James says that the prayer of the 
righteous avails much (James 5 :16) ; that we may 
finish our conflict with joy, for we have to strive 
not only against flesh and blood, or the priests of 
Jezebel, but against invisible spirits, namely the 
enemy, who always seeks to hinder and quench 
that which is good, with deception and lies ; yea, I 
fear that you will hear, or have already heard, 
through the great falsehoods which the enemy of 
the truth is spreading, that I wanted to listen to the 
priests. Yes, they do not hesitate to tell great false- 
hoods here in this prison, for they went twice in 
one day to N., and told her that I wanted to listen 
to the priests ; yea, the great priest, the Dean, was 
not ashamed to speak abominable falsehoods to N., 
in order to rob her, by deception and lies, of her 
salvation.with these words: "Your servant wants 
to hearken to us, and to repent;" and other like 
words which Satan (who was a liar from the be- 
ginning) knows how to use ; so that she has to en- 
dure no small conflict, from the priests, as well as 
from her brother, who causes her great conflict. As 
regards N., her friends exert themselves very 
greatly to procure her release ; but in what manner, 
I do not know. I have exhorted her that she should 
take heed, which to rehearse here would be too 
long. She has told me, that her mind is unchanged, 
and that she does not want to be ashamed of the 
truth. 

Touching N., I know so far nothing but good, 


and that her mind is all right, the Lord be thanked ; 
for she longs with me only for the day of our deliv- 
erance from this flesh, and to offer up our sacrifice. 
For yesterday evening, which was Whitsuntide- 
evening, about eleven o'clock I spoke with N. ; 
then she was somewhat grieved, because she had 
said to the priests, that she would listen to them in 
whatever agreed with the Word of God ; because 
she thought that the priests had thereby gotten 
some occasion to say of her that she wanted to 
hearken to them. Hence I comforted her about 
this, and told her that I myself should say it, and 
that there was nothing evil in it, since their abomi- 
nable idolatry is contrary to the Word of God, and 
can never agree with it, for there is a great differ- 
ence between darkness and light. Isa. 5 :20 ; II Co- 
rinthians 6:14. And as regards myself, I thank the 
good God, who beholds me, unworthy man, with 
His eyes of mercy, and gives me strength by His 
Holy Spirit, to confess His Word and truth before 
this adulterous generation; yea, who counts me, 
poor miserable man, worthy that I am to offer up 
my body to Him, to the praise of His holy name. 
Phil. 2:17. O my mother, thank and praise, with 
me, the good God, who looks upon me, unworthy 
man, with His eyes of mercy, through His Son 
Christ Jesus; who shows me so many benefits. 
How shall I be able sufficiently to praise and glo- 
rify Him for the unspeakable grace and mercy that 
He is showing to meward, here in this lions' den. 
Thank now the Lord with me for His goodness 
which He shows us through His Son Christ Jesus, 
for which praise be to Him now and forever. 
Amen. 

I hope now to write you a little, relating very 
briefly how my examination by the priests passed 
off. 

The first time that I spoke with the priests, 
which according to my recollection, was about 
eight days before Whitsuntide, there came the 
Dean, that great, large priest, with another priest, 
whom we are wont to call the inquisitor (my mas- 
ter knows him well), and who cries and storms the 
most. We talked for a long time, and I reproved 
their idolatry, as much as the Lord by His Holy 
Spirit gave me utterance. Hence this priest began 
to speak of the Supper, and asked me, whether that 
was not the real body which Christ gave to His dis- 
ciples, and His blood. I said : "No." Then the priest 
began to clamor and to rave, and talked very abu- 
sively, saying that it were better if I had concerned 
myself with making my confectionery, or selling 
groceries, than with the Scriptures. I said : "I may 
concern myself with reading the Scriptures, for 
Christ says : 'Search the Scriptures ; for they are 
they which testify of me.' " John 5 :39. Then the 
dean said: "Hear those who have studied the 
Scriptures all their life." "Yes," said I, "they 
study amiss." "I ask you," I said, "where did Paul 
study or go to college? show me this with the 
Scriptures." "Did he not?" "No." "Did he not 
go to Ananias ?" said the dean. "Yes ; but he did 
not study there." Then he began again to talk 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1041 


abusively, and they said that the devil had me by 
the throat. Matt. 12:24. 

While we were thus talking, there came another 
priest, a Jesuit, so that there were three of them 
sitting there. Then the priest again commenced to 
speak of the Supper. Therefore I asked them: 
"When Christ gave the bread to His disciples, and 
said: 'Take, eat; this is my body: this do in re- 
membrance of me;' whether Christ Himself re- 
mained sitting there?" He said: "Yes." I said: 
"Hence it is not to be understood so" (as you say) ; 
and I told him that he did not understand the 
Scriptures. I said that a carnal man cannot under- 
stand that which is spiritual, for, says Paul, it is 
foolishness unto him. I Cor. 2 :14. Then he cried : 
"What can you say about me, am I a drunkard?" 
Ans. "Your idolatries bear witness what you are, 
and also the Scriptures reveal your horrible idol- 
atry, which is an abomination in the sight of God ; 
yes, I am sorry that you are so in error." They 
cried: "You err." The Jesuit cried every time, 
that the devil had me by the throat, and that I was 
a proud fool ; and other like words. I said : "I re- 
joice that I am thus despised for Christ's sake." 
They clamored so loudly, that one could scarcely 
utter a sentence. The dean cried to the others: 
"Domine, Domine;* let him go, we shall gain no 
laurels with him." But the priest commenced again 
to talk of the Supper. I told him that he had to 
understand it spiritually, and proved it to him with 
several Scriptures, as, John 1 :29 : "Behold the 
Lamb of God." Again, 15:1: "I am the true 
vine." 

If I were to relate all, though I had much more 
paper, I should cover it with writing. We then 
spoke of baptism ; he asked me why children might 
not be baptized. [I replied] : "Because Christ did 
not command it, nor the apostles teach it. 

Then he adduced several Scriptures that were 
quite to the contrary, John 3, and others. I showed 
him, that Christ there did not teach water baptism, 
but that He had taught it in Matt. 28 and Mark 16 ; 
and I stated what baptism signified; to whom it 
pertains, and that it is horrible to hear that they 
want to save children by baptism, whereby they 
deprive Christ of the honor. Rom. 6 :3 ; John 3 :16 ; 
Acts 4:12. When we had talked thus for a long 
time, the dean cried to the priest: "Hear, hear, 
Lord ; Audi, audi, Domine ; let him go ; we waste 
our time with him, and he remained as obstinate as 
ever." I said : "I am sorry that you will not listen 
to the truth; it is all in vain, it is only casting 
pearls before swine." Matt. 7 :6. 

Then the dean became very angry, so that I soon 
parted from them, for it was getting late. I must 
be brief, for my paper is giving out. Afterwards I 
talked yet with a priest alone, on Whitsuntide eve- 
ning ; so that the priest went away from me, when 
I told that he should show to me, that Christ and 
His apostles, in this manner, went about the street 

* Lord, Lord. 


with an idol, with torches, lanterns and bells. Ps. 
1 12 :4 ; Bar. 6 :4. He would not talk with me long ; 
we talked a little about the Supper and baptism, 
but not long, for the priest went away, and I be- 
gan to admonish him a little. But I must be brief. 
Though you hear much said that I wanted to 
hearken to the priests, believe it not ; but be fervent 
in prayer, for in the end it shall be made manifest. 

Mother, I pray you, that you will send the letter 
herewith enclosed, which I have written to my 
brother D. in England, to him; and if there be 
anything written in it that is not suitable, erase it. 
And I pray you, write him my faith. I would write 
it myself, but through want of paper I cannot. 
Write him that he may know for what I deliver up 
my body to the burning ; for I presume that many 
will write that which is not the truth. Thus, dear 
mother, it is time to stop, for want of paper. I greet 
you, my mother, and also all my dear sisters, 
with a holy kiss of peace ; and greet also from me 
those whom you well know, also my master, yea, 
and all the friends. G. and my sister K., the Lord 
be with you and us all, and keep you. Thus, my 
dearest mother, farewell, and the Lord be with 
you ; for I think that you will see my face no more 
in this life, nor do I know whether I shall have 
another opportunity to write. Thus, the God of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob be with you all. Amen. 

By me your son, imprisoned for the testimony 
of Jesus Christ. Hans Bret. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM HANS BRET, WRITTEN AND 

SENT TO HIS BROTHER DAVID, WHO LIVED 

ABROAD, AND HAD NOT YET COME TO THE 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father, 
through His only Son Jesus Christ, our Saviour ; 
the comfort and power of the Holy Ghost, further- 
ing to a true faith ; the true heavenly wisdom, the 
true regeneration, the fear of God, this I wish my 
dear and affectionately beloved brother, to the sal- 
vation of your soul. Amen. 

My dear brother, the reason of my writing is 
to inform you of my imprisonment, so that you 
may not think that it is for any evil or any infi- 
delity or heresy, as many evil tongues may prob- 
ably pretend and report, thereby to grieve you and 
harden your heart, that you should not believe the 
genuine truth, but remain in your belief ; for Satan 
constantly walks about men, as Peter says (I Peter 
2 :8) , as a roaring lion, seeking whose soul he may 
devour and draw away from that which is good, 
for he is the enemy of all good, who always hates 
and seeks to resist that which is good. 

But, dear brother, do not listen to such, for it is 
the suggestion of Satan ; but give ear to the Word 
of God, the genuine truth, as James says, and let it 
be ingrafted in your soul, that it may save your 
soul, whereby you may live forever. Jas. 1 :21. 

Hence, my beloved, awake once from the sleep 
of sin, and Christ shall give you light (Eph. 5 :14) ; 


1042 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


for you have walked in sin and unrighteousness 
long enough; it is about time to flee sin and shun 
unrighteousness, that you be not punished with all 
the ungodly, who have not lived according to the 
will of God, nor hearkened to the truth, but have 
walked according to their own lusts. They follow 
the lusts of their flesh, and live, as Paul says to the 
Galatians (5:19-21), in pride, covetousness, 
drunkenness, adultery, strife, hatred, contention, 
and other like works. 

O dear brother, let such works not be found with 
you ; for such, says Paul, cannot inherit the king- 
dom of God, for such carnal life is an abomination 
in the eyes of God, for Paul says to the Romans, 
that such carnal-mindedness is enmity against God, 
and cannot please God. For the wages of sin is 
eternal death, but the gift of God is eternal life. I 
Cor. 6:10; Ps. 5:5; Rom. 8:7; 6:23. 

My dear, flee such works, and turn to the Lord 
and you shall live. Isa. 55 :3. Remember the in- 
struction which Tobit gave his son, when he says : 
"My son, let not pride dwell or rule in your heart." 
Tob. 4:13. For Ecclesiasticus says: "That pride is 
hateful before God, and that it is the beginning of 
all sin, and he that has to do with it shall be de- 
stroyed with many curses." Sir. 10:13. Thus shun 
now all pride and all sin, and set yourself to serve 
the Lord, renouncing all the lusts of the flesh. 
"Seek ye the Lord," says the prophet, "while he 
may be found, and call ye upon him while he is 
near: let the wicked forsake his way, and the un- 
righteous man his thoughts: and let him return 
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him." 
Isa. 55:7. 

My dear brother, turn to the Lord while you 
have time; wait not until death with the amend- 
ment of your life, like many who say, that if they 
have an hour in which to repent, it is enough for 
them. Oh, do not thus defer it, nor follow such 
counsel, but follow the counsel of Ecclesiasticus, 
who says : "Repent while thou art still able to sin." 
And again: "Make no tarrying to return to the 
Lord, and do not put it off from day to day ; for the 
wrath of the Lord shall come forth suddenly." 
Sir. 5 :7. Hence there is no time to be set, for we 
are not assured of one hour, nor any one how 
long he will live. Job 14:1. 

Hence remember the words of Christ, who says 
that He shall come as a thief in the night ; if the 
good man of the house knew at what hour the thief 
would come, he would watch, and not suffer his 
house to be broken through. Luke 12:39. Seeing 
then, that we have neither hour nor time, watch 
constantly with the wise virgins, who were not 
found sleeping, when the bridegroom came. Matt. 
25. If you would therefore enter in with the Bride- 
groom to the marriage, as did the wise virgins, put 
away from you (as the prophet says, Isa. 1 :16) all 
that is evil, and the Lord shall be your God, and 
you shall be His son. 

My dearest brother, love that which is good, 
and it shall be well with you ; fear the Lord with 


all your heart, and your soul shall lodge in good- 
ness, and your seed shall inherit the earth ; for the 
prophet David says : "That the eyes of the Lord 
are upon them that fear him, and that hope in his 
mercy ; and he shall deliver their soul from death ; 
for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wis- 
dom." Psa. 25:13; 33:18, 19; 111:10. 

Hence have God always before your eyes in what 
you do, and you shall prosper in it; always love 
that which is good, and hate that which is evil, that 
the Lord may be with you, as you have spoken, 
says the prophet Amos, 5:14. Follow the advice 
of Paul, Romans 12:21, where he says: "Over- 
come evil with good." Oh, then it shall be well 
with you, and you shall find rest in your soul. Mat- 
thew 1 1 :29. Let there be found in you once the 
true faith which worketh by love, and which has so 
far not brought forth much fruit in you. Gal. 5 :6. 
Hence it is time now to awake once and seek 
Christ, whereby you may live and enter by the 
right door into the sheepfold. John 11 :25 ; 10:7. 

Hence give ear now to the voice of Christ, who 
says: "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the com- 
mandments." Consider well that the Lord would 
have us practice His Word and truth, and not do 
like many who indeed have the Word of God in 
their mouth, and hear it, but do not live according 
to it, but suffer it to enter in at one ear, and out 
at the other; yea, what is more yet, though they 
well know that sin and unrighteousness must be 
shunned and avoided, as soon as they have heard 
the word, they go on again in sin, in drunkenness, 
in adultery, in gambling, etc. But to take the 
Testament or Bible into their hands, to read, and 
to spend their time in godliness, that were far too 
much; but they follow their own lusts, namely, 
the lust of their father, the devil, for he delights in 
all such works : for he that committeth sin is of the 
devil, says John; for the devil sinneth from the 
beginning. John 8:44; I John 3:8. Hence, dear 
brother, have no fellowship with such persons, but 
seek such as fear the Lord and live according to 
His Word, and keep it, for Christ says : "Blessed 
are they that hear the word of God and keep it." 
Luke 1 1 :28. Now you may perceive that they are 
blessed (saved) who keep the Word of God, and 
govern themselves in accordance with it. For in 
Matthew 7:23, Christ declares that He shall say 
to all those who shall not have kept His word, nor 
practiced it : "Depart from me, ye workers of in- 
iquity; I know you not." O brother, take good 
heed, that you do not hear this voice, but that you 
may hear that glad voice, with all God's righteous 
ones that have lived according to the word of the 
Lord : "Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom of 
my Father, prepared for you from the foundation 
of the world." Matt. 25 :34. What a joy it will be 
to hear this, for the good that have walked in the 
fear of the Lord. 

My brother, give ear now to the word of the 
Lord, that we may meet there, and hear the glad 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1043 


voice, which I pray the Lord that He will grant us 
through His only Son, Christ Jesus. Amen. 

Brother, I must stop, for my paper is giving out ; 
hence take this simple letter in good part, for I 
have written it out of love ; and ponder it well, for 
it is not my word, but the word of the Lord, for 
His mouth has spoken it. Amen. 

I hope to explain to you, dear brother, the cause 
of my imprisonment, so that you may not grieve, 
but rejoice, and thank the Lord for it. I thank the 
Lord, that He has opened my dark eyes, and looked 
upon me with the eyes of His mercy, when I was 
sunk in sin, yea, expected nothing but eternal death 
and damnation; yea, I was without God in the 
world, and I lived in sins innumerable, which were 
an abomination before the eyes of God, so that if 
God centered into judgment with me, I could not 
stand in His sight, but should pass away like dust 
before the wind, because of my innumerable sins. 
Psa. 143 :2 ; 1 :5. But the Lord who through His 
unspeakable love, out of grace, caused to be pro- 
claimed to me, by His servants, His word, concern- 
ing His Son Christ Jesus, that whosoever believeth 
in Him, should have eternal life. John 3:15. Hence 
I heard that there was no means to obtain salvation, 
but through His Son Christ Jesus, who died the 
death for our sins, and shed His blood for us, for 
the washing away of our unrighteousness, even as 
John says : "That the blood of Christ cleanseth us 
from all our sins." Acts 13:38; I Cor. 15:3; Eph. 
1 :7 ; I John 1 :7. And when I heard the words of 
Christ: Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest; I, poor man, 
laden with sins and innumerable wickednesses, 
made my complaint to Christ, bewailed my sins, 
and He forgave and remitted them to me through 
His shed blood, when I confessed them before 
Him. Matthew 11:28; Ps. 32:5. Thus, dear 
brother, I forsook my sins, from day to day, ac- 
cording to my ability, and sought to walk the nar- 
row way, and separated myself from the wicked, 
perverse world, and sought to please Christ, yet 
not as I would, for I constantly felt the Spirit 
striving against the flesh, as Paul says, Gal. 5:17. 
And Job says that man's life upon earth is nothing 
but a constant warfare. Job 7:1. Thus, dear 
brother, I sought to please the Lord, and not the 
world, which the enemy could not endure any long- 
er, who hates all that is good, and cannot endure 
it, but seeks to quench it. He has shown, and still 
shows, his power also on me, but has not been 
able to do any more, than the Lord permits him; 
yea, when he has done all, he can but kill the body, 
but over the soul he has no power, for the Lord 
gives us strength through His Holy Spirit, to resist 
it. Matt. 10:28; Eph. 3:16; I Pet. 5:9. Hence, 
dear brother, my imprisonment is not for any evil, 
but for the truth, and for the confession of the holy 
word of the Lord. Hence rejoice therein, that the 
Lord counts me worthy to suffer for His name, and 
to offer up my body to the praise of His holy name. 
Acts 5:41. Think that it has been thus with all 


God's righteous ones, from the beginning of 
the world till the present day. Hence, my brother, 
be resigned to the work of the Lord, for thus it 
went with Christ our Captain. If they have done 
this to the Lord, how will it be with His followers ? 
for Christ says : "The servant is not greater than 
his lord, neither he that is sent greater than he that 
sent him." John 13:16. Hence I hope by the 
grace of the Lord, that He shall give me strength 
through His Holy Spirit, to confess His Word and 
truth as long as there is breath in my mouth, even 
as I have hitherto done unto this hour; hence I 
expect now nothing else than my sentence, to be 
placed at the stake in the market place, to be burnt 
there. Comfort yourself herein, and thank the Lord 
for it, that He counts me worthy to suffer for His 
name. Thus I have now briefly written the cause 
of my imprisonment, that you might the better con- 
sole yourself herein, and not give ear or belief to 
every evil tongue, as I hope mother will write you. 
If in any wise possible I hope to write you my faith, 
if I get paper; and if I should not, I hope that 
mother will write it to you, so that you will not 
grieve, as though I died in unbelief, as Satan may 
pretend, and as may possibly also have been writ- 
ten to you ; but I pray you give no ear or belief to 
it, for that for which I suffer is the genuine truth 
and the true faith in Christ Jesus,' since Christ and 
His apostles taught it, of which Paul says: 
"Though an angel from heaven should come, and 
teach you otherwise, than I have taught you, let 
him be accursed." Gal. 1 :8. Thus, dear brother, I 
would write you more, but I have no more paper 
now. Farewell, the Lord be with you ; and I greet 
you, dear brother, with a holy kiss, for I think that 
you will see my face no more. 

By me, your brother, who is imprisoned for the 
testimony of God, and for the holy word and truth 
of the Lord. Hans Bret. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM HANS BRET, WRITTEN 

TO HIS BELOVED MOTHER, THE 19TH OF 

JULY, 1576 

The unspeakable grace, peace and mercy of God 
our heavenly Father, who is a Father full of grace 
and truth, through the bitter suffering and death 
of our only Saviour Christ Jesus, who washed and 
cleansed us from all our sins and unrighteousness- 
es ; the power of the Holy Ghost, for the increase 
of your faith, to resist all the enemies of truth; 
this I wish you, my affectionately beloved mother, 
for the salvation of your soul. Amen. 

My dearest mother, whom I love from the heart ; 
my chosen mother, who gave birth to me in pain 
and anguish, from whose body I came forth; I, 
your son, who am now confined at Antwerp, in 
prison, for the word of truth, commend myself to 
you from the bottom of my heart, and thank you, 
my dear mother, for the great benefits you have 
shown me from the beginning of my existence until 
the present day, that you have cared for my neces- 


1044 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


sities, and are still caring for me. But especially do 
I thank you, my dearest mother, that through the 
comforting letter you wrote me, you exercise a care 
for the salvation of my soul. 

Oh, when I began to read the letter, and under- 
stood that it was from you, my mother, then my 
tears began to flow, so that I could hardly finish 
reading the letter, because of the many tears that 
flowed from my eyes; for I had thought that I 
should hear from you no more. I was so rejoiced 
by your consoling instruction, and that you fol- 
lowed the example of Tobit, who also gave instruc- 
tion to his son. 

Oh, I thank, yes, I thank you, my dear mother, 
that you thus exhort me to steadfastness and bold- 
ness, to confess the name of Christ, which I hope 
to do by the help of the Lord, who alone is my 
helper and my strength, to resist the principalities 
and powers of this world, the spirits of the air, as 
Paul says (Eph. 6:12), yea, these priests of Jeze- 
bel, who thirst for the blood of the righteous that 
walk in the ways of the Lord, who, according to the 
word of Christ, seek to walk the narrow way, and 
to forsake their own life, as also, sin, unrighteous- 
nesses and carnal lusts, and seek to please the Lord 
in righteousness, according to the will of God, in 
holiness. I Thess. 4:3. These are rejected, de- 
spised, and persecuted, yea, imprisoned ; their end 
is to be killed, because they seek to walk the way 
in such a manner, that they may please the Lord. 
Hence Esdras says : "The way is narrow, and can- 
not be walked without danger." II Esd. 7 :8. This 
we may well consider. 

Behold, there were two brothers in the world, 
namely, Cain and Abel. Abel sought to walk the 
narrow way and to please the Lord with his offer- 
ing, with which the Lord was pleased and had re- 
spect to it, because he and his offering were good. 
Cain sacrificed to the Lord, but his offering did not 
please the Lord, because he was evil; hence the 
Lord had not respect to his offering. Then Cain 
was angry at his brother Abel, and slew him. I 
John 3:12. 

Consider Lot in Sodom, how they assailed his 
house through their wickedness, and wanted to 
commit fornication with the angels that had entered 
into his house. Again, Abraham had to forsake his 
country, and went to sojourn in a strange country, 
where he was a stranger, and had to live in tents. 
Again, behold Isaac, who walked in the ways of his 
father Abraham, and served the Lord; he was 
hated by the Philistines ; for they went and stopped 
the well which his father Abraham had digged; 
yea that was not enough yet, but King Abimelech 
commanded him to leave his dwelling place. Gen- 
esis 26:14. 

Jacob was hated and persecuted by his brother 
Esau, who also sought to kill him. 

Joseph was by his brethren cast into a pit, and 
sold to the Ishmaelites; and chose rather to flee 
from the wife of the captain of the guard, leaving 
his mantle behind than to comply with her desire. 


So, dear mother, I will also rather lose my life, 
than do what they command. The children of 
Israel were also afflicted. If I were to tell further 
all that happened to all God's prophets, I fear my 
paper should not suffice; such and similar ex- 
amples, namely, concerning Christ, the author of 
faith, how He was persecuted in this life ; yea, He 
had hardly been born, when His mother Mary had 
to flee with Him. She nourished Him up in pov- 
erty, yea, He was in poverty, for He Himself says : 
"The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have 
nests ; but the Son of man hath not where to lay 
his head." Matthew 8:20. Behold, how it further 
went with Him : they crucified Him ; His feet and 
hands were pierced; they gave Him vinegar and 
gall to drink; and His side was pierced with a 
spear, from which flowed blood and water. 

Observe, thus it went with our Captain Christ 
Jesus ; thus He concluded His days in poverty and 
with reproach, was scourged, beaten, mocked, and 
crowned on His head with a crown of thorns. Oh, 
I cannot sufficiently tell all that He suffered for us 
poor men, to save us and yet these Pharisees are 
not ashamed to rob His honor, saying that we are 
saved by baptism ; whereas the Lord Christ sanc- 
tifies and cleanseth from sin. Oh, how sad it makes 
me when I hear this ; the Lord forgive them. Yea, 
if Christ were here now, they would kill Him yet! 
Thus we have an example in our Captain Christ! 
yea, in His dear apostles. Paul, too, suffered much 
for the name of Christ. Consider how many others 
yet have suffered since the time of Christ and the 
apostles, unto the present day. 

Since, then, my beloved mother, so many have 
suffered, and we are compassed about, as Paul says, 
with so great a cloud of witnesses ; I say with Paul : 
"I rejoice in my sufferings which I endure for 
Christ's sake." Heb. 12:1; Col. 1:24. Hence re- 
joice also that Christ wants me, your son, to whom 
you have given birth, a poor, unworthy man, 
worthy to suffer for His holy name, so that I long 
to be delivered from this flesh, and to be with 
Christ, in whom I now believe, yet not see; but 
then I shall behold Him ; and partake of the joy 
which the heart of man has never conceived of, 
neither can tongue express the great joy that is 
prepared for the good. They shall be clothed in 
fine, white linen ; they shall be crowned with the 
crown of eternal life ; they shall sit upon Mount 
Sion, and sing the new song, so that I may say as 
David says : "A day with the Lord is better than 
a thousand in joy and gladness here." Rom 7 -24 • 
Luke 23:42; I Pet. 1:8; I John 3:2; Rev. 19-8 : 
2:10; I Esd. 2:42; Psalms 84:10. ' ' 

O dear mother, who would now want to remain 
here, when such joy is prepared for the good, 
which shall last forever. There we shall neither 
hunger nor thirst any more, there we shall feel 
neither heat nor cold, so that I may say with Paul : 
"I reckon the sufferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed in us." Rom. 8:18. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1045 


Hence, then, dear mother, in consideration of 
this, I need not think it strange, though I suffer for 
the name of Christ, for His Word and truth ; since 
all God's righteous ones, from the beginning of the 
world have suffered. Hence Peter says : "Think it 
not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to 
try you, which means tribulation, affliction and 
persecution." I Pet. 4:12. For the prophet David 
says: "Many are the afflictions of the righteous: 
but the Lord delivereth him out of them all." Ps. 
34:20. Paul well says: "That we must through 
much tribulation and affliction enter into the king- 
dom of heaven." Acts 14 :22. 

Behold, my dear mother, what consolation we 
have, so that when it pleases the Lord to try our 
faith, that we should not be grieved in the trial ; for 
he says : "Unto us it is given not only to believe in 
Christ, but also to suffer for his sake." Phil. 1 :29. 
Paul, who cared well for the flock of Christ, did 
not forbear to reveal to those who wanted to walk 
according to Christ's ways, and tread the narrow 
way trod by few, that they must suffer persecution, 
in order that when affiliction, tribulation, persecu- 
tion or reproach comes, we should not think it 
strange. II Tim. 3 :12. 

Hence Christ also says : "In the world ye shall 
have tribulation"; and comforts His disciples, in 
order that they should not be grieved in the tribu- 
lation, and says : "Be of good cheer : I have over- 
come the world." John 16 :33. He also teaches His 
disciples, that they should not fear tribulation or 
reproach : for when they, namely, the rulers of this 
world, have done all, they can but kill the body, but 
the soul they cannot harm. But He teaches us 
whom we shall fear, namely, Him that hath power 
to cast soul and body into the eternal fire, which 
shall burn forever, where shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. Luke 12:4, 5; Matt. 22:13. 

Oh, how sorrowful shall they then be, that have 
feared the kings and princes of this world more 
than the Lord, who is the Lord of lords, the God of 
gods, the King of kings, who, as David says, can 
make and crush the heart of the kings and princes 
of this world like potsherds. I Tim. 6:15. Why 
then should we fear? for the Lord says by the 
prophet Zechariah : "He that toucheth you touch- 
eth the apple of mine eye." 2 :8. 

Consider what Christ says: "He that rejecteth 
or despiseth you, despiseth me ; and he that despis- 
eth me, despiseth him that sent me." Luke 10:17. 
Again Christ says : "Blessed is he that is despised 
for my sake: for great is his reward in heaven." 
Matt. 5:11, 12. 

Hence, my dearest mother, comfort yourself 
with these and similar words of Christ, and rejoice 
with me, and thank and praise the Lord, that you 
are counted worthy to be persecuted for His name. 
Follow now the advice of Paul: "Be patient in 
tribulation, and continue instant in prayer." Phil. 
4:4; Romans 12:12; I Thess. 5:17. 

Remember the consolation of Moses, with which 
he comforted the children of Israel, saying: "Be 


strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be 
afraid of them : for the Lord thy God, he it is that 
doth go with thee ; he will not fail thee, nor forsake 
thee." Deut. 31 :6. Hence, my mother, though our 
enemies are many, and I am here in the midst of 
the hand of the enemy, yet I will say with the 
prophet David : "Lord, now thou art with me, and 
art my helper, I will not fear, though I were com- 
passed by many thousands." Again with the proph- 
et David: "The Lord is my light and my salva- 
tion ; whom shall I fear ? the Lord is the strength 
of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though 
death should come upon me, I will not fear; for 
the Lord is ever with me to strengthen me." And 
again : "He is my fortress ; I will not fear, though 
the earth be removed, and the mountains be car- 
ried into the midst of the sea." Ps. 27:1; 23:4; 
18:3; 46:2. 

Thus, my dear mother ; press with me, by force, 
through the straight gate; that is, through afflic- 
tion and persecution, for Christ says : "The king- 
dom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent 
take it by force." Matt. 11 :12. I also hope to take it 
by force, through the strength which the Lord 
gives me to resist the cruelty of these fell lions, that 
are not satisfied with the blood of the righteous, 
but seek, through their subtle words and fair 
speeches, yea, with invented lies, (according to the 
advice of their father the devil, as Christ says ; for 
he was a murderer and deceiver from the beginning 
of the world), to devour and slay their souls, and 
to deprive them of their inheritance, namely, of 
eternal life, which they obtained through the shed 
blood of Christ our only Saviour. John 20:31. But 
the Lord be forever praised and thanked, that He 
keeps and delivers us, so that they cannot harm our 
souls; for when they have done all that they can 
do, they have no more power than to take this tem- 
poral life, which I gladly resign for Christ's sake, 
for I know and doubt not that the Lord shall give 
me a better, which He promises to all the good that 
have not been ashamed to confess His word and 
truth before this adulterous generation. Hence 
Christ says : "He that loseth his life for my sake 
shall find it again." Matt. 10:39. Not a life that 
shall perish, but that will endure forever, an in- 
corruptible life, a life that shall endure forever in 
joy. Therefore my dear mother, my soul longs for 
this life ; though flesh and blood should remain at 
the stake, yet I regard it not; rather than that I 
should suffer myself to be spoiled of my inheri- 
tance, namely, eternal life, for a little of temporal 
life. Oh, no! God forbid; for I now regard not 
this visible, but the invisible, the eternal and im- 
perishable. 

O my chosen mother, think not that there is 
aught that might rob me of my salvation, for Paul 
says: "Who can separate us from the love of 
God ? Neither hell, the devil, nor death. Christ has 
conquered all, so that I may say : O hell, where is 
thy pain ? O death, where is thy power ? Christ has 
vanquished death ; Christ has bruised Satan's head, 


1046 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


so that he can but bite the heel, which he indeed 
does, but that is of no account. Who therefore, 
says Paul, can lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect? It is Christ that justifieth. Who is he that 
condemneth? It is Christ that died." Rom. 8:35; 
Heb. 2:14; Rom. 8:33,34. 

Hence, my dear mother, be armed with me, and 
all God's righteous ones, as Paul says, with the ar- 
mor of God on your body, the helmet of salvation 
upon your head, and the sword of the Spirit in 
your hand ; and above all, take the shield of faith, 
wherewith you shall be able to quench all the fiery 
darts of the wicked one, for the prophet says : "Be 
of good courage ; you shall at last climb upon the 
devil's shoulders." Eph. 6:13; Bar. 4:25. 

Therefore my mother, if you should hear any 
thing of me that is not true — for the devil is 
crafty, and deals much in lies, to grieve the right- 
eous — do not hearken to it ; as I also trust that you 
will not: for my mind is unchanged, for which I 
thank the living God, the God of Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, and to His name be praise for ever and 
ever, through His only Son Jesus Christ our Sav- 
iour, who strengthens me, poor, unworthy, de- 
spised man with His Holy Spirit to resist all the 
enemies of the truth who seek to spoil me of my 
salvation (Col. 2 :8) for which they have no power, 
for the Lord is my strength, as the prophet says : 
"He is my song ; I shall with joy draw water out 
of the well of the Saviour." Isa. 12:2, 3. Again the 
Lord says by the prophet Isaiah : "I the Lord thy 
God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, 
Fear not: I will help thee. Fear not, thou worm 
Jacob, and ye few men of Israel ! I will help thee, 
saith the Lord, and thy Redeemer." Isa. 41 :13, 14. 
Of whom should we be afraid, for the Lord hath 
said it. Therefore, my mother, take courage with 
me, to overcome, like Joshua and Caleb, the great 
and strong giants, the princes of this world, and not 
to fear them, and thus to take the promised land, 
the kingdom of heaven. Of whom should I be 
afraid, when we have this glorious consolation, 
that they that trust in the Lord, shall not be 
ashamed, for the prophet says that the Lord will 
not forsake the righteous even unto death; yea, 
the Lord says by the prophet Isaiah : "Can a moth- 
er forget her child, that she should not have com- 
passion on the fruit of her womb ? and though she 
forget, yet will I not forget thee ; for I have graven 
thee upon the palm of my hands, saith the Lord." 
Ps. 25:3; Isa. 49:15, 16. Remember, again, how 
the Lord speaks by the prophet Malachi, saying: 
"The Lord has a book of remembrance before him, 
in which he has written all them that fear him, and 
he shall deliver their souls from death." Mai. 3 :16. 
Happy are those then, that have feared the Lord, 
for David says : "Blessed is the man that feareth 
the Lord." They who then have not been ashamed 
to walk in the ways of the Lord, their names are 
recorded in heaven in the book of life. Luke 
10:20. Hence rejoice with me, my mother; I 
should like to write you still more, that you would 


always walk in the ways of the Lord, and never 
depart therefrom, and bring many to the knowledge 
of the truth, but my paper is failing me. I pray 
you, my dear and beloved mother, take this little 
knowledge and simple writing from me in good 
part, for I write you out of love, and impart to 
you of this little gift which the Lord, through His 
unspeakable grace, has given me, unworthy man. 

You further write me in your consoling letter, 
whether I have any lack of the necessaries of life! 
Oh, no, I have enough, the Lord be thanked. You 
also write in your letter, that if I desired you, I 
should write so, and you should come, though you 
had to pay for it with your blood. O my dear 
mother, why should I desire this ; I shall never de- 
sire it, for you could not help me. For my refuge 
is the Lord alone ; He is my helper ; He it is that 
gives me strength to overcome and to go to battle 
valiantly. Hence, my mother, walk prudently, for 
they are cruel to shed the innocent blood. How- 
ever, they can do no more than the Lord permits 
them. If I were to write more concerning it, my 
paper should not suffice, for I intend to relate to 
you yet, that I have been twice more with the 
priests since I wrote the letter to you, so that in all 
I have been before the priests four times; but 
twice I wrote you a little; hence I also hope to 
write you a little now. The third time I spoke with 
the dean, but mostly against the inquisitor, for he 
wants to be master ; his name is Pardo. We talked 
much of the Supper, and there was present a bail- 
iff, the new one, and a man that could speak Eng- 
lish. I heard Pardo talk much of the Supper, which 
was contrary to the word of the Lord; and he 
asked me, whether it was not true that Christ gave 
His apostles His own body, and that His disciples 
ate it. I said that He gave His disciples bread, and 
what they ate was bread ; and that He gave His 
disciples wine, and what they drank was wine, 
and not changed, as you say. 

I showed them how it was to be understood, both 
the bread and the wine ; I would repeat it here, but 
my paper would give out. We then spoke of the 
baptism of infants ; I said that he should show to 
me with the Scriptures, that Christ taught to bap- 
tize infants, and that the apostles followed or prac- 
ticed it. They said : Christ said and taught, John 
3 :5 : "Except a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." 
I said : "Christ there did not speak of water bap- 
tism, but Christ teaches of baptism in Matthew 28 
and Mark 16," and I told them the text. 

Then the man said: "A fool cannot believe; 
hence he cannot be baptized; he is therefore 
damned." I said : "Christ says not : Go teach fools. 
I ask you," said I, "whether a fool can be taught ?" 
He answered : "No." He then asked me, whether 
the fool was damned. I said: "I may judge no 
one; I leave the fool in the hands of the Lord." 
Thus, to be brief, the man asked me whether I had 
been in England. I said: "Yes." "What sort of 
people," said he, "were those that were put to 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1047 


death ?" I said : "I believe that they were Menno's 
people." He said: "No," and that they were Puri- 
tans. I said: "No." He said that I was of that peo- 
ple, that I was also a Puritan. I said that I did 
not know them ; that it was the first that I heard of 
it. I said that he should tell me, what sort of a 
people it was, and what kind of a faith they have. 
But he would not tell me that. They said more, 
but it would take too long to relate it. 

The last time was the 13th of June, when I spoke 
with four priests at once, but not so much as at 
other times ; I was asked whether I would not re- 
pent. I said : "Yes, I want to desist from sin from 
day to day." No, whether I would not hearken to 
the ecclesiastics and the Roman Catholic church ? I 
said: "I thank the Lord, who has instructed me, 
and opened my eyes, and brought me into the right 
way ; and I desire to be instructed by the Lord still 
more." 

Thus they wrote a letter, that they would de- 
liver me over to the lords ; that I was an obstinate 
heretic, and would not hearken to them ; and they 
wrote that they had done their best, so that they 
would not talk with me any more. Thus I was re- 
leased from the priests, and delivered to the au- 
thorities, so that I expect to hear my sentence on 
the 22nd of June, and to offer up my sacrifice on 
the 23d. The Lord grant me strength unto the end, 
to the praise of the Lord and the salvation of my 
soul. The Lord grant me the spirit of boldness, 
that I may finish my conflict with joy. 

Thus, my dear mother, cleave to the Lord. The 
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob be with you, and 
keep you. The Lord preserve your going out and 
coming in, now and forever. Num. 6 :25. 

My dear mother, I greet you with a holy kiss of 
love (I Pet. 5 :14), for I think that you will see me 
no more in this flesh, nor I you, my mother. Fare- 
well, the Lord be with you, my mother ; I go be- 
fore, and shall wait for you in the kingdom of 
heaven, there we shall see each other in joy and 
gladness. 

I bid you adieu ; once more, farewell. The Lord 
be with you forever, for I know not whether I shall 
write you any more ; I think that it is the last time. 
I greet you once more, my dear mother, who have 
given birth to me in pain and anguish. Greet cor- 
dially my dear brother D., and admonish him to 
walk in the ways of the Lord, to the salvation of 
his soul; this I pray you, my mother, even as I 
also trust, and doubt not that you will also do. 
Greet my beloved sister K. A., with T. and W. 
Greet also those whom you well know, also my be- 
loved master, whom I love from the heart ; and G. 
The Lord be with you all, now and forever. Amen. 

My affectionately beloved mother, whom I love 
from the depth of my soul. I leave you here, and 
enter into joy, and shall behold Christ, in whom I 
now believe, not seeing Him ; and you remain here 
in this distressful world, where nothing else can be 
expected than tribulation, affliction and persecu- 
tion, so long as it pleases the Lord. The Lord com- 


fort you in all tribulation, and be with you now 
and forever. Amen. 

Written by me your son, whom you well know, 
at present confined in prison at Antwerp, for the 
word of the truth, and for the confession of God's 
holy Word ; I expect my sentence, to be burnt alive 
at a stake, if it pleases the Lord, to the praise of 
His holy name. Jan Bret. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM HANS BRET, WRITTEN TO 

HIS BELOVED MOTHER, THE STH OF 

JULY, 1 576 

The unspeakable love, grace and peace of God 
our dear heavenly Father, who is a Father full of 
grace and truth, rich and abundant in mercy and 
loving kindness, through the bitter suffering and 
death of His only Son our Saviour, who loved us, 
and washed us from all our sins in His blood, and 
from all the unrighteousness that we have done. 
The power of the Holy Ghost strengthen you, and 
comfort you in all your tribulation, affliction and 
sorrow which you have for Christ's word and truth, 
in your persecution and suffering, in your grief 
which you may have, as I understand, for my sake 
according to the flesh. May He strengthen you in 
the faith of the truth, wherein you now stand, 
which God has revealed to you out of grace, that 
you may overcome all sorrowfulness of the flesh, 
which you may have. This, I your son, wish you 
my chosen mother, with all my heart, to the salva- 
tion of your soul, that we may meet together, and 
may, with all those that have endured unto the end 
in the belief of the truth, hear that glad and joyful 
voice of the only Son of God : "Come, ye blessed, 
inherit the kingdom of my Father, prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world." Amen. 

My affectionately beloved mother, whom I love 
from the heart, I commend myself to you with all 
my heart, and inform you my chosen mother, that 
I did not think that I should write you this letter 
yet ; but since it has pleased the good God, to keep 
me in life until this present hour, I cannot forbear, 
my dearest mother, to write you this parting letter, 
perhaps the last in my life, and bid you, my dear 
mother, adieu. For according to what I hear, the 
time of my deliverance is near at hand ; yet I know 
not to this hour when, except that I hear that it is 
to be tomorrow, that I am to hear my sentence. 
Not that I hear concerning myself alone, but of 
several, of whom I think that I am one, if it pleases 
the Lord. We have indeed heard this often, but 
whether they do it to frighten us, I do not know. 
I have never heard it from the people here in the 
house, but from a girl of M.'s people that is im- 
prisoned here ; she has told it me. If it is the will 
of the Lord, let it be done. I am well resigned 
thereto. The Lord be thanked, who strengthens me 
poor, weak man here in these my bonds, by His 
Holy Spirit, to resist all that should be a hindrance 
or harm to my soul ; for it is the day for which I 
have longed ; the Lord grant me strength unto the 


1048 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


end that I may finish my conflict with joy, and 
gain the victory, to the praise, glory, and honor of 
the Lord's holy name. Amen. Eph. 3:16; I Timo- 
thy 6:12; I Cor. 15:57. 

Since, then, my dear mother, it has pleased the 
good God, to count me, your son, worthy to suffer 
for His name to help fulfill the number of the 
righteous that are under the altar, and rest till the 
number of their brethren is fulfilled, who must 
also be killed as they ; console yourself herein, my 
dear mother, and be not grieved on my account, 
this I pray you; for, dear mother, the Lord has 
called me to a better place than to remain in this 
wicked, evil world. Though it is grievous to the 
flesh, I will not regard it for the joy of which I 
shall partake with all God's righteous ones ; for I 
say with Paul: "I reckon that the sufferings of 
this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us." Rom. 
8:18. 

O my dearest mother, who should not long for 
this glory; who should not strive for it, and say 
with Paul: "I groan and desire to be out of this 
flesh; for I look for another dwelling, that is not 
made with hands, but which is eternal in the heav- 
ens." II Cor. 5. Then shall we, as John says, see 
Him in whom we now believe, not seeing Him; 
then shall we behold Him with our own eyes, 
whose brightness is greater than that of the sun. 
I John 3:2; I Pet. 1:8; Job 19:27. Who should 
now regard this suffering or pain that can be in- 
flicted upon the flesh, and yet not without the 
Lord's permission, for when they have done all that 
they can, according to the words of Christ, they 
can but kill the body, but over the soul they have 
no power ; for we read in the book of Wisdom, that 
the souls of the righteous are in the hands of the 
Lord. Matthew 10:28; Wisd. 3:1. 

Who should regard this temporal pain that men 
may inflict upon this body, when such joy is prom- 
ised for a little pain, and great, unspeakable bliss, 
yea, an eternal life, for a little of temporal life ; for 
Christ says : "He that loseth his life for my sake, 
shall find it again hereafter." Rev. 22 :5 ; Matthew 
10:39; Mark 8:35. 

Behold once, my dear mother, how many laid 
down their lives for the word of Christ and the 
truth ; and consider what man's life is, which passes 
away so quickly ; it is, as James says, to be com- 
pared to only a vapor that arises ; for when the va- 
por disappears and vanishes away, it is seen no 
more, and is over very quickly; yea, it may be 
compared to a bubble upon the water, which so 
quickly perishes. Ps. 90: 5; James 4:14. Why 
then should we much regard this temporal life? 
it cannot be compared with the eternal life. 

Should you then, dear mother, be grieved on ac- 
count of our pain, that may be inflicted upon my 
body, but which is for the faith and confession of 
God's holy Word and truth ? O no, my mother, let 
not such grief come upon you ; but I pray you, my 
affectionately beloved mother, be of good cheer ; I 


hope by the help of the Lord, that your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy. John 16:20. 

O my beloved mother, let it go with you as it 
went with Abraham, who had but one only son, 
whom God had given him in his old age. Behold 
how God tried this good man, when He command- 
ed him, that he should go and offer up to Him his 
only son Isaac. We do not read that he was grieved 
on account of the command, nor was he grieved 
when his son asked him : "My father, here is the 
wood : but where is the sacrifice ?" Abraham said 
to his son with a fatherly voice, trusting in the al- 
mighty God: "The Lord will provide it." Thus 
Abraham followed God's command, and made his 
only, beloved son Isaac kneel down upon the wood, 
drew the sword from its sheath and raised it to cut 
off his son's head, and to sacrifice him. But the 
angel said to him, that he should put the sword into 
the sheath, and not harm the child. In all this time, 
even to the last hour, we cannot read that this good 
man was grieved, or afraid to obey God's com- 
mand. My dear mother, why would you now be 
grieved ; the Lord does not try you in such a man- 
ner, that you should kill your son, but He permits 
it to be done by the generation of Cain, who always 
thirst for the blood of the righteous Abelites that 
please the Lord. My mother, do also trust the 
Lord like the good man Abraham, and say : "The 
Lord will provide it ; though your oldest son whom 
you now have, be offered up. The Lord can raise 
upanother, if it pleases Him ; hence be resigned to 
it." It does not go otherwise with me, than it went 
with all the righteous that have ever pleased God, 
from the beginning of the world until the present 
time. 

Consider how it went with the prophet Jeremiah, 
who endured much grief, because he according to 
the command of the Lord reproved the cities of 
their sin. He was apprehended and cast into a miry 
dungeon, yea, much grief came upon him, as the 
Scriptures sufficiently testify concerning it ; yea, so 
that he resolved no more to preach in the name of 
God. Behold, to such grief this man of God was 
subject, who yet had been closen by God, in his 
mother's womb, to proclaim His holy will. Ter 
38:6. 

Again, behold John, who was sanctified in his 
mother's womb. He who was known to all the peo- 
ple to be a prophet, did not Herod, for the sake of 
a harlot, cause his head to be struck off in prison ? 
who nevertheless, according to the words of Christ, 
was the greatest prophet born of woman. Luke 
1:15; Matt. 14:5,10; 11:11. 

See, my dear mother, if it went thus with those 
who walked so worthily before the Lord — if they 
killed those, what shall they do to us? 

Consider, thai they did not hesitate to kill Christ 
Jesus, who is the only Son of God, and the Son of 
man, who, according to the testimony of the Scrip- 
tures, is truly God and man, the Son of God, and 
the Son of men, for He calls Himself in many 
places the Son of man ; and He is confessed and is 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1049 


the true living Son of God, who delivered us from 
the power of Satan, from eternal death and damna- 
tion, and opened our eyes when we were dead in 
our sins and unrighteousness, and brought us into 
this marvelous light; He has revealed to us His 
Word and truth, the Gospel, which, as Paul says, is 
the power of God unto salvation to everyone that 
believeth. Rom. 1 :16. 

Since, then, the good God, through His unspeak- 
able grace and goodness, has revealed to us His 
Word and truth, whereby our dark eyes have been 
opened, and has given us to believe in Him by 
whom we might live forever, which is Christ Jesus, 
upon whom the generation of vipers inflicted much 
pain and torment, as the four evangelists abundant- 
ly testify concerning it ; how they scourged, mock- 
ed, beat, and very miserably maltreated Him, and 
placed a crown of thorns upon His head ; He had 
Himself to bear His cross to which they nailed 
Him; they gave Him vinegar and gall to drink; 
they pierced His side with a spear, and water and 
blood issued from the same. Alas, so dreadfully 
did they deal with Him; all that went by opened 
their mouth and mocked Him, so that He was the 
most despised upon earth ; He was like the prophet 
David says and prophesies : "I am a worm and no 
man ; I am the most despised among all men ; they 
open their mouths against me, and cast lots upon 
my vesture." Psalm 22 :6, 7, 14, 18. 

O dear mother, how bitter it is to describe the 
sufferings of the immaculate Lamb of God, that 
was subjected to so much suffering and sorrow; 
who should be able to describe His sufferings 
which He endured for our sakes ? Should we then 
not suffer a little for His sake, when He shall so 
gloriously recompense all that suffer for His sake ? 
for He says: "Blessed are they which are perse- 
cuted for righteousness' sake ;" and again : "Bless- 
ed are they that suffer reproach for my name's 
sake; for great is their reward in heaven." Matt. 
5:10-12; Luke 6:22, 23. Now you may perceive 
that the Lord will not leave unrewarded all those 
that suffer for His Word and the truth; who in 
suffering adhere steadfastly to His Gospel; who 
depart not from His Word and truth which He 
has spoken with His mouth ; who depart not from 
the narrow way that leads to eternal life; who 
were not ashamed to confess the truth before this 
adulterous generation, who did not fear those that 
kill the body, but much rather feared Him that 
can cast soul and body into hell, into eternal dark- 
ness and torment, where there will ever be weep- 
ing and gnashing of teeth, where the flames shall 
never be extinguished, where the smoke shall as- 
cend forever and ever, where the worm shall never 
die ; who resemble not, as Peter says, the dog that 
swallows again that which he has vomited (II Pet- 
er 2 :22) ; that are not like the sow which, when she 
has once been washed and cleansed, goes and wal- 
lows again in the mire ; who do not call light dark- 
ness, and darkness light (Isa. 5:20) ; who do not 
call truth lies, and lies truth ; who intend with Elea- 


zar to persevere, and not to dissemble (II Macca- 
bees 6:18) ; who do not reject the truth, when they 
well know that it is the truth ; who do not hearken 
to the devilish doctrine of the papists (I Tim. 4: 
1-3) ; who follow not the priests of Jezebel, who 
thirst for the blood of the righteous, who love and 
serve God, and love Him with all the heart and 
with all the soul ; who seek to follow Christ's foot- 
steps, to live and walk according to His will ; who 
seek to please Him and not men (Gal. 1 :10), for 
James says : "Whosoever will be a friend of God, 
must be the enemy of the world" (James 4:4) ; 
who seeks to walk the narrow way ; who desires to 
forsake unrighteousness ; who forsakes the counsel 
of the flesh and follows the counsel of the Spirit ; 
who forsakes this earthly good, and seeks after the 
heavenly; who regards the temporal as nothing, 
and seeks after the eternal and imperishable ; who 
looks not at this visible, but hopes for the invisible 
(II Cor. 4 :18) ; who regards not this life, but seeks 
to obtain eternal life, who now delights not in this 
temporal joy and pleasure, but in the eternal joy 
and bliss ; to those who are thus, there is promised 
that they shall inherit forever and ever that prom- 
ised land, the eternal life, where they shall be 
crowned with great glory; they shall, as Malachi 
says, leap as calves of the stall (Mai. 4:2) ; palm 
branches shall be given into their hands (II Esdras 
2:46) ; they shall, as John says, sing the new song 
before the throne of God (Rev. 14:3), they shall 
be arrayed in fine, white linen (19:8) ; they shall 
shine forth as the sun (Matt. 13:43) ; they shall 
forever be in joy, such joy (Paul says) as ear has 
never heard, eye never seen, nor has man's heart 
been able to conceive of the joy of which the 
righteous that endure steadfast unto the end shall 
partake. Who should now depart for any reproach 
or contempt ? who should now depart for any per- 
secution or tribulation or any temporal life? 

Oh, it is better to leave flesh and blood at the 
stake, than to suffer one's self to be despoiled of 
the eternal salvation of one's soul, of one's Fa- 
ther's inheritance which is obtained through Christ. 
Hence Paul says : "Who can separate us from the 
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus ? tribulation, 
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or naked- 
ness? We may say with the apostle, that we are 
persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, 
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the 
love of God." Rom. 8:17, 35. Let us then not fear, 
since, my dearest, there is nothing that can sepa- 
rate us from God, if we love Him from the heart, 
for John says : "Where love is there is no fear ; for 
love casteth out fear." I John 4:18. This you may 
also perceive by the words of Paul, where he says : 
"Though I had faith, so that I could remove moun- 
tains ; yea, though I gave all my goods to the poor, 
and suffered my body to be burned, and had not 
love, it would profit me nothing." I Cor. 1 3 :2, 3. 
Hence there must be a burning love to Christ, we 


1050 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


must with the wise virgins have our lamps burning, 
and so wait for our Bridegroom, that is we must 
be kindled with a fervent love, and thus wait for 
Christ Jesus our Bridegroom, till He comes. 

Behold, hereby we are to know who loves Christ, 
for He says : "He that loveth me keepeth my com- 
mandments, and the Father will come to him, and 
we will make our abode with him." John 14:23. 
But without loving Christ, and keeping His com- 
mandments, we cannot enter into life. For He says 
Himself : "If thou wilt enter into life, keep my com- 
mandments." Matt. 19:17. And what is His com- 
mandment, but to love Him ; and he that loves Him 
will not depart from Him because of any pain that 
may be inflicted upon the flesh, as I stated before 
with the words of Paul which he wrote to the Ro- 
mans. But if a man do not love Christ, there is vain 
faith, which cannot please God, for Paul says: 
This is true faith, which worketh by love, that is, 
by the love which one has to God to keep His com- 
mandments ; hence James says, that faith without 
works is dead. James 2 :26. And this can easily be 
perceived ; where there is true faith, there will also 
good fruits appear, for a good tree will bring forth 
good fruits, but of a corrupt tree evil fruit will 
spring forth; for a good tree cannot bring forth 
evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth 
good fruit ; so it is also with man ; he that has a true 
faith will bring forth good fruits that are pleasing 
to the Lord. Matt. 7:17,18. 

But where there is a faith that is vain and not 
true, there you will not perceive good fruits, but all 
evil, for James says that the devils also believe and 
tremble. James 2:19. 

Now it may be considered how many there are 
that have also a vain faith, and yet boast that they 
believe truly, yea, even these papists, they can say : 
"I believe in Christ Jesus, that He died, was cruci- 
fied," etc., but they deprive Him of His honor; to 
be brief, they do not obey Him in that which He 
commands, they do after the lusts of their father, 
the devil. Christ says : "For he was a liar and de- 
ceiver from the beginning." John 8 :44. 

Oh, how dreadful it is, that some hearken to such 
liars and deceivers, and confess the devilish doc- 
trine to be the doctrine, Word and truth of Christ, 
whereas God says by the prophet: "Cursed is he 
that maketh and honoreth idols." Oh, what are 
they also doing, who say that the true body of 
Christ is in the little house with which they walk 
along the streets, with their bells, torches, and lan- 
terns. Oh, what abomination it is to call this the 
truth, while it is but bread and wine. While I am 
here, my mother, I sometimes sing a spiritual song ; 
but though they forbid it me, I will therefore not 
cease, as long as they do not fetter my tongue ; yea, 
if I or some of Menno's people sing, then the serv- 
ants sing a profane song, so that the good may not 
be heard. 

Oh, I am so glad that my dearest brother whom 
I have upon earth in the Lord, has so remembered 
me, poor prisoner, with a hymn and a letter by his 


own hand. It rejoiced me so much inwardly in my 
soul that I cannot describe it to you. I pray you to 
thank him heartily, and ask him to write again, and 
you also, for I think that I shall be here yet eight 
days longer ; but when I began to write this letter 
to you, I did not think that I should write so much, 
for I thought that by this time I should have heard 
my sentence. But since it has pleased the Lord, 
that I am still to remain here in this prison, I hope, 
according to the advice of Paul, to abide the time 
with patience, till it shall please the Lord ; and thus, 
according to the words of Christ, to possess my 
soul in patience, for I commit myself into the hands 
of the Lord, that it may be done with me according 
to His divine will, to the praise, glory and honor of 
His holy name, and to the salvation of my soul, 
now and forever. 

Hence, then, my dear mother, I bid you adieu 
once more; adieu, my chosen mother, adieu, my 
worthy mother, who gave birth to me in pain and 
anguish. I pray you, my dear mother, be resigned 
to the work of the Lord, be not grieved on my ac- 
count, be of good cheer; since our God has so 
ordered it that I am to be separated from you, so 
that you shall see me no more in this flesh, be re- 
signed thereto, for there can nothing happen to 
me without the Lord's permission, for the Lord is 
my keeper, my protector, and my defender, for the 
prophet David says, that the angel of the Lord en- 
campeth round about them that fear Him. Psalm 
34:7. Think not that there is any one that can 
harm me, for Christ tells us that the very hairs of 
our head are all numbered, and not a sparrow falls 
to the ground without His will ; of how much more 
value are we than the little sparrows ! Matt. 10 :30. 
Hence, though it is so with me that I am cast into 
prison for the Word and truth of Christ, to confess 
His name before these cruel men, and suffer con- 
tempt and reproach, full of vexation, yea, finally to 
be put to death by them, rejoice therein according 
to the words of Christ, when He says : "Rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad when men shall revile you 
and say all manner of evil against you falsely for 
my name's sake." Matt. 5:11. 

Remember what Peter says: "Think it not 
strange as though some strange thing happened 
unto you." I Pet. 4:12. Why? Because it has gone 
thus with all God's children that have ever pleased 
Him, for Christ says : "In the world ye shall have 
tribulation but be of good cheer ; I have overcome 
the world." John 16:33. Hence we need not, ac- 
cording to the words of Peter, think it strange, for 
the Scriptures sufficiently declare all this, where- 
fore also Paul says : "It is given unto us, not only 
to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his name." 
Philippians 1 :29. Consider what the prophet Da- 
vid says: "Many are the afflictions of the right- 
eous." Psalms 34:19. 

Behold, Christ Himself, the author of faith, had 
to suffer, and thus to enter into His glory. If they 
have called the master of the house Beelzebub, what 
shall they then do to his servants? If they have 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1051 


cast out and killed the heir, what shall they do to 
those that are sent ? Hence the Lord laments over 
Jerusalem, and says: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them 
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have 
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gath- 
ereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would 
not !" Matt. 23 :37. Behold, how they have always 
killed those that were sent by God, and shall yet 
do so. For Christ says to His disciples : "Ye shall 
be put out of the synagogues, and whosoever killeth 
you will think that he doeth God service thereby." 
John 16:2. 

Now he that will be a good and faithful disciple 
of Christ and serve his Lord in faithfulness, must 
willingly bear all that is laid upon him for the 
Lord's sake, for Paul says : " All that will live god- 
ly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." And 
again: "We must through much tribulation enter 
into the kingdom of heaven." Luke 14:27 ; II Tim. 
3:12; Acts 14:22. 

Since, then, the kingdom of heaven must be 
taken through much affliction and vexation, let us 
with Paul rejoice in the afflictions which we suffer 
for the name of Christ, for we see how Peter and 
John, when they came from the council, rejoiced 
that they had suffered reproach and been scourged 
for Christ's sake. Acts 5 :41. Thus, my dear 
mother, do also rejoice with me, and thank the 
good God, that He counts a poor, weak, unworthy 
man fit to suffer for His Word and truth. 

Praise and glorify the Lord for His grace ; sing 
praise to Him for His benefits; say with me: 
"Thanks be to the God of Abraham, the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, for his unspeakable 
mercy and goodness which he has shown us poor 
men." Say with David : "Where is a god like unto 
our God? to him be praise and glory forever and 
ever. Amen." 

I bid you adieu, my dearest mother, adieu ; if I 
should write you no more, and if this should be 
the last letter, I bid you adieu, my beloved mother, 
and take leave from you, if it should be the last 
time; my mother whom I love, adieu, for I leave 
you for the Lord's sake, and also hope to lay down 
my life for His sake, for the Lord has promised 
me another life, which shall endure for ever, and 
never pass away; not like this life, which must 
perish, for this life, or the temporal pleasure of this 
world, is not to be compared to the joy and glad- 
ness that is promised to the righteous that endure 
steadfast unto the end ; where one day, as David 
says, is better than a thousand here in joy and 
pleasure. Ps. 84:10. 

I hope by the help of the Lord soon to partake 
of the eternal joy. Then I shall be freed from all 
sighing, weeping and sorrow ; then I shall neither 
thirst nor hunger any more ; then I shall no more 
feel heat or cold ; then I shall be released from all, 
and for ever triumph with the Lamb. Hence, grieve 
not, neither weep nor sigh ; though I go before, we 
shall meet again; be of good cheer, my chosen 


mother ; the Lord comfort you with His Holy Spir- 
it, in all your tribulation and sorrow. John 14:16. 

I might be grieved more than you, for your sake, 
for I leave you here in this evil world, where you 
are subject to all sorrow, tribulation and affliction, 
while I depart from tribulation into joy, from this 
life into the eternal life; but we need not be sor- 
rowful, but resigned to the work of the Lord, for 
Paul says : "All things work together for good to 
them that believe"; hence, remember what we 
pray : "Lord, thy will be done in earth, as it is in 
heaven." Rom. 8:28; Matt. 6:10. 

Therefore, let us take heed, that we do not will 
anything contrary to the will of fhe Lord, but that 
we be patient and longsuffering in all things, so 
that there may be fulfilled in us the passage con- 
tained in John's Revelation : "Here is the patience 
of the saints." Rev. 14 :12. Therefore, dear mother, 
be patient in all that has now come upon you, and 
that may yet come upon you. 

Farewell, my affectionately beloved mother, and 
I pray you, when you begin your prayer to God, 
remember me poor, weak man, your son, impris- 
oned here for the testimony of the only Son of God, 
as I hope and doubt not that you do; for James 
says that the effectual fervent prayer of the right- 
eous avails much, and he adduces an example, and 
says, that Elias was a man like us, and he prayed 
that it should not rain, and it came to pass so ; and 
he prayed again, that it should rain, and it rained. 
This, James tells us, to show how effectual the 
prayer of the faithful is. James 5:16; I Kin^s 
17:1; 18:45. 

Christ also says : "What things soever ye desire, 
when ye pray, if ye believe and doubt not, it shall 
be done unto you." Mark 1 1 :24. The Scriptures 
abundantly testify, that the prayer of the righteous 
penetrates through the clouds, so that they are 
heard by the Lord. Herewith I take leave from 
you, dear mother, if it should be the last time, and 
I commend you to the God of Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob; the God of all comfort console you; the 
strong God strengthen your faith, to resist all the 
fiery darts of the wicked one ; the Lord keep your 
going out and your coming in. now and for ever. 
Amen. 

Adieu, my dearest mother, adieu in this life, till 
we see each other in life eternal, with Christ our 
only Head and Bridegroom. Amen. 

Greet my dearest brother in the Lord Christ Te- 
stis, the dearest brother I have on earth ; greet him 
very cordially, and also my chosen dear master, if 
he is with you. Greet mv beloved brother D. B.. 
when you write to him. My mother, take this mv 
simple letter in good part, since T have written it 
out of love, according to my little knowledge, 
which the Lord, through grace, has given me un- 
worthy man. The Lord be with us all. Amen. 

By me your son, whom you well know, at pres- 
ent confined in prison, at Antwerp, on the 7th of 
July, A. D. 1576, for the Gospel, and for the con- 


1052 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


fession of the only Son of God, Christ Jesus our 
Saviour, whom the world does not confess, but de- 
nies. 

Hans Bret. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM HANS BRET, WRITTEN 

FROM A DARK PIT INTO WHICH HE HAD BEEN 

CAST, AND SENT TO ONE OF THE SISTERS 

IN THE FAITH, ON A SUNDAY IN 

AUGUST, 1576 

Grace and peace from God our dear heavenly 
Father, full of grace and truth, rich in mercy and 
loving kindness, through the bitter suffering and 
death of His only Son Christ Jesus, who loved us, 
and washed us in His blood, from all our sins and 
iniquities that we have done ; the power of the Holy 
Ghost, to strengthen you in the belief of the truth, 
which the Lord through His unspeakable grace and 
mercy has revealed to you: this I, your weak 
brother, wish you from all the heart, to the salva- 
tion of your soul. Amen. 

Affectionately beloved sister in Christ Jesus, 
whom I love from the heart, I cannot refrain from 
writing you this brief letter, here in this pit into 
which I have been cast, without any light except 
the light of the candle. 

Hence, I herewith bid you adieu, if I should 
write you no more, which is known to our dear 
heavenly Father. 

I further inform you, my beloved friend, that by 
His divine help, I want to keep the covenant that I 
have made with my God, and wait for the coming 
of our Bridegroom Christ Jesus, that when He 
comes, I may enter in with Him to the marriage, 
and be forever in joy. O dear sister, I cannot suffi- 
ciently praise or thank our God for His unspeak- 
able mercy, that He succors and strengthens me 
here in this pit into which I have been cast for the 
word of truth. 

Dear sister, remember me poor prisoner in your 
prayers to God, as I hope that you also do ; that it 
may please Him to deliver me soon out of this flesh, 
so that I may offer up my sacrifice to the praise 
of His holy name and to the salvation of my soul, 
so that these enemies may be confounded in their 
purpose, who think to rob me of my inheritance, 
through this pit into which they have now cast me ; 
but thanks be to the Lord that succors me in my 
distress, and is my only helper, to whom I fly for 
refuge, for Paul says that He is faithful and true, 
and will not lay upon us more than we are able to 
bear. Col. 1 :12; Ps. 46:1 ; I Cor. 10:13. 

Hence, dear sister, always remember your poor, 
weak brother to the Lord, for the prayer of the 
righteous avails much. 

O dear sister, these cruel wolves have taken 
from me all my letters which you have sent me, 
pens, ink, and paper, altogether, and also a few 
things that I had written myself. Also two letters, 
one which I had written to my dear brother H, and 
another, almost finished, to my brother Willem, 
and besides one thing and another ; but I hope not 


that any trouble will arise from it. 

The fact of our writing was disclosed by one 
that was confined with me ; if I were to write you 
all of it, my paper would give out. This paper I 
have received since, from the man that was con- 
fined with me in this pit. 

Thus, I have been confined here ten days ; how 
much longer I am to remain here, is known to our 
dear Lord. I was confined here, according to my 
recollection, on a Friday night, the 27th or 28th 
of July. 

But, my dear sister, always adhere to the truth, 
which is Christ ; be not afraid of these wolves, for 
our God always succors us, according to His prom- 
ise, in all distress. Heb. 13 :5. 

I bid you a cordial adieu, my dear sister, greet 
my mother most heartily in my name, and all my 
sisters, our brother Hans, and my dear master, and 
also all the friends. I pray you, do not let my 
mother know that they have cast me into this Laz- 
arus' pit. The Lord be with you, and keep you in 
His ways always and for ever. Amen. 

Written by me your weak brother, by the light 
of a candle, in a pit which is called Lazarus' pit, 
where I am confined for the Word of truth. The 
Lord knows my redemption. Hans Bret. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM HANS BRET, WRITTEN TO 

HANS C, ONE OF THE BRETHREN 

IN THE CHURCH 

The great unspeakable grace and peace from 
God our heavenly Father, who is a Father full of 
grace and truth, a God of comfort and of peace, 
rich and abundant is His mercy, and inexpressible 
is His grace and goodness, which He has shown 
us through His only begotten Son Christ Jesus 
our Redeemer and Saviour, who has redeemed us 
from the power of Satan, whose slaves and serv- 
ants we were through our sins and iniquities. But 
He loved us, says St. John, and washed and 
cleansed us in His blood from all our sins and in- 
iquities, with which we were burdened and laden ; 
and made us kings and priests before God His Fa- 
ther. The invincible power of the Holy Ghost 
strengthen your inner man, so that you may grow 
up and increase in the faith of the truth which the 
good God through His unspeakable grace and 
mercy has revealed to you; that you may with 
Joshua and Caleb and all God's righteous ones take 
the promised land, namely, eternal life. This is the 
whole wish of my heart to you my brother in Christ 
Jesus, to the salvation of your soul. Amen. 

My beloved brother in Christ Jesus, sanctified 
and cleansed, and elected of God, I greet you with 
this my letter, which I write to you here in these 
my bonds, out of Christian love, that you may 
know how it is with me, for which I cannot suffi- 
ciently praise or thank the good God, who has as- 
sisted me, unworthy one, in all my temptations, so 
that I can say with the prophet David : "Where is a 
God like unto our God, who never forsakes him 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1053 


that trusteth in him; for he that trusteth in the 
Lord shall not be ashamed. For the prophet says : 
He that trusteth in the Lord shall not fall, but 
stand forever as mount Zion." Ps. 125:1. Hence, 
dear brother, my trust is in the Lord alone, in 
whom all the righteous have trusted from the be- 
ginning of the world; nor were they confounded, 
but in all tribulation and distress the Lord was 
their helper, and, according to His promise, suc- 
cored and preserved them in the water and the fire 
(Isa. 43 :2), as we have many examples concerning 
it in the Scriptures, for our instruction. When we 
consider how God led the children of Israel dry- 
shod through the Red Sea, and thus delivered 
them from the hand of cruel Pharaoh, who perse- 
cuted them and attempted also to cross the sea, but 
they all perished; hereby you may perceive how 
the Lord delivers him that trusts in Him. Again, 
consider holy and righteous Daniel, who was in the 
lions' den, without any food ; behold, the Lord did 
not forsake him, but fed him through the prophet 
Habakkuk. History of the Dragon 34. 

Thus, dear brother, the Lord also feeds those 
that firmly trust in Him with spiritual food, name- 
ly, with His Holy Word, which He has given us as 
food for our souls. For Christ clearly says that 
man does not live by bread alone, but by every 
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord. 
Matthew 4 :4. For as man is fed and nourished by 
bread, so the inward man is fed and nourished by 
the word of the Lord. For as a man, when that 
which is necessary for his sustenance is withheld 
from him, perishes; so also, my dear, when from 
the inner man, the soul, there is withheld her food, 
namely, the Word of God, by which she is fed and 
nourished, she perishes ; hence, it is so necessary 
that we exhort one another, as the apostle Paul 
says, while it is called Today, to the keeping of 
God's commandments, that the inner man may 
daily be fed and nourished, and thereby grow up 
and become strong. Heb. 3 :13 ; I Pet. 2:2. For the 
apostle Peter says : "I deem it expedient and profit- 
able, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to exhort 
you, though you are established in the present 
truth" ; lest, as Paul says, any of you be seduced or 
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. II 
Peter 1 :12, 13 ; Heb. 3 :13. Hence, my dear broth- 
er, have in remembrance the words of the holy 
apostle Paul, who says : "Warn them that are dis- 
orderly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the 
weak, be patient toward all men." I Thess. 5 :14. 

O my dearest brother, weary not in the ways of 
the Lord, neither become slack in keeping God's 
commandments ; have your delight therein day and 
night, with all God's righteous ones, and say with 
the prophet David : "Lord, Thy Word is a greater 
comfort and joy to me, than all the treasures and 
riches of this world" and again: "Thy word, O 
Lord, is dearer to me than much gold or silver." 
Psalm 1:2; 119. 

Consider how all God's righteous ones comforted 
themselves with the word of the Lord. So, do also 


you console yourself with it; have it in remem- 
brance all your life ; let it be planted in your soul, 
that it may save you. James 1:21. 

Thus, my beloved brother Hans, I bid you adieu ; 
adieu, if it should be the last time that I write you. 
I pray you, my dear, persevere steadfastly in ex- 
horting, instructing and teaching, according to the 
gift which God through His unspeakable grace has 
given you. If you have received much, dispense 
liberally; if you have little, communicate also of 
that little. Be ready always to give an answer to 
every man that asketh you a reason of the hope 
that is in you. I Pet. 3:15. Get much gain with 
that which you have received, so that the Lord may 
say to you: "Come, thou faithful servant: thou 
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make 
thee ruler over many things." Matt. 25 :21. Behold, 
dear brother, if a man is faithful to the Lord, He 
will not leave him unrewarded for it. Hence, God 
says in His Revelation to John : "He that remains 
faithful shall receive the crown of eternal life." 
Rev. 2:10; Matt. 19 :29 ; James 1:12. Do also you, 
my dearest brother, remain faithful, so that you 
may with all God's righteous ones be crowned with 
the crown of eternal life ; to this end may the good 
God strengthen you, that you may enjoy this for- 
ever. Amen. 

My dear brother H, my heart and mind writes 
you indeed more, according to the little gift which 
I have unworthily received from the Lord; but 
I lack paper, and I am afraid that you will hardly 
be able to read this, since the paper blots so. Oh, I 
thank you so heartily for what you have so faith- 
fully sent me. I am so glad, that I should not be 
able to describe my joy to you ; for I had not heard 
from you for a long time. I pray you, thank our 
brother H. very heartily in my name, for his letter, 
which I could not read without tears, because of his 
comforting exhortation. He writes me that I should 
write a letter to A. H. and one to B. O brethren, 
I would most gladly do so, rather than eat; but 
the enemies of the truth have prevented me from it, 
so that I do not know how I could send you the 
letters. I know not how I shall send this letter ; but 
I have written it in the hope that our dear Lord 
would provide a means ; and though I would like 
to write more, I have no more paper. I have writ- 
ten this with a little bilberry juice ; I hope that if it 
pleases the Lord you will send me some writing 
materials, to employ myself while I must pass my 
time here. Hence, dear brother, no more for this 
time, through want of paper. 

Herewith I bid you adieu; adieu, my brother 
adieu. The God of comfort and of peace, the God 
of Jacob and of Israel, keep you in the faith of the 
truth; may He be with you forever. Amen. 

I greet you, dear brother, with a holy kiss of 
peace. Greet my mother very heartily in my name, 
and all my sisters, and our brother H., my master. 
Say that I sent her a letter not long ago; but 
whether she received it, I do not know. Greet all 


1054 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the saints in my name. Grace and peace be with 
you all. Amen. 

Written by me, your weak brother, whom you 
well know, at present in bonds for the testimony 
of the Gospel, which is the power of God unto 
salvation to every one that believeth. Rom. 1:16. 

Hans Bret. 

Note. — When this great heat of persecution 
which the papists had kindled everywhere as far 
as their jurisdiction extended, began to abate in 
several cities of Holland and Zealand, and espe- 
cially in the town of Middelborgh, where the 
Prince of Orange, William I, of worshipful mem- 
ory, had granted liberty of conscience, for the Ana- 
baptists as well as for others, so that many of the 
innocent and defenseless lambs of Christ settled 
down there, and in quietness served God with a 
thankful heart; some of the citizens of said city, 
though they had previously themselves been under 
the galling yoke of popery, envied them for this, 
and obtained so much from the magistrates there, 
that there was announced to all Anabaptists that 
sojourned there : That they should have to swear 
allegiance to said city, in the form of an oath, and, 
moreover, arm themselves, together with other cit- 
izens, with external weapons, to resist the enemy ; 
and that if they did not do this, they should be 
obliged to cease from their trades and occupations 
tending to the sustenance of the body, to close their 
houses, etc. 

This announcement having been made, the Ana- 
baptists, since they did not think it right to swear 
any oaths, nor to arm themselves with external 
weapons, had recourse to the afore-mentioned 
Prince of Orange, humbly requesting of him, that 
they might enjoy the liberty of their conscience, in 
practicing their faith ; and to be permitted faithful- 
ly to pay all civil imposts, taxes, and the like, to- 
gether with others, to be believed on their yea, and 
nay (according to the doctrine of Christ), in place 
of the oath, and to keep this truly, without evasion, 
guile, or subtlety. 

Thereupon, the Prince, not long after, consented 
to it, commanding the magistrates there, not to 
ensnare these people with the afore-mentioned an- 
nouncement, nor to oppress their consciences with 
such burdens. These things, as we have obtained 
full information in regard to them, we deem profit- 
able and expedient to add here, to the praise of the 
princely house of Nassau, in the hope that it might 
prove an example for other magistrates which 
have not yet attained to this gentleness of dispo- 
sition to follow. 


LETTER OF PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY WILLIAM I, TO 
THE ANABAPTISTS AT MIDDELBORGH 

Whereas, in behalf of certain citizens of this 
town of Middelborgh, a supplication has been pre- 
sented to His Excellency, in which they complain 
that the magistrate of said city recently caused 
their shops to be closed, and consequently pro- 


hibited their occupation, which is nevertheless their 
only means of supporting their families; they pro- 
ceeding to this prohibition, for the reason that they 
should render the customary oath, as others have 
done; the aforesaid citizens remonstrating the 
more, because they now for certain long years, 
without ever having rendered the aforesaid oath, 
have willingly borne, together with other citizens 
and inhabitants of said city, all civil imposts, con- 
tributions and taxes, without ever having been 
found in any default, and wherefore also they 
ought still to be left unmolested, seeing they there- 
by request nothing but to live in the liberty of their 
conscience, in respect to which this present war has 
been undertaken against the King of Spain, by his 
subjects, and all ceremonies that militate against it 
are resisted; wherein, by the help of God, it has 
now come so far, that the aforesaid liberty of con- 
science has been conserved, and it would therefore 
be unjust to take it away from the petitioners, who 
helped to gain the same, not without great peril of 
body and life, by taxes, contributions, and bearing 
other burdens ; which, after they had presented it 
in the form of a request to the aforesaid magis- 
trate, it was answered them, that they had to regu- 
late themselves after the institutions and ordinances 
of the aforesaid town ; whereby the aforesaid mag- 
istrate seems to endeavor, by the oath, to drive out 
of the country, to their total destruction, not only 
their petitioners residing in Middelborgh, but, con- 
sequently, innumerable others in Holland and 
Zealand, who, pursuant to his decrees, have be- 
taken themselves under His Excellency's protec- 
tion, whereby no one can derive any profit, but 
there should only great and signal damage result 
to these countries, and trade everywhere become 
greatly diminished; wherefore they humbly peti- 
tion His Excellency, to consider the matter with 
compassion, and to take the necessary steps, par- 
ticularly, seeing the aforesaid petitioners offer to 
tender their Yea in place of oath, and that the 
transgressors thereof are to be punished as per- 
jurers: therefore, His Excellency having consid- 
ered the foregoing and caused it to be duly deliber- 
ated upon, has, by the previous advice of the 
Governor and the Councilors of Zealand, ordained 
and decreed, and ordains and decrees by these pres- 
ents, that the aforesaid petitioners shall be allowed 
to use, with the magistrate of the aforesaid town, 
their Yea offered by them, in place of the oath ; 
provided, that the transgressors thereof are to be 
punished as perjurers ; His Excellency command- 
ing and charging the magistrate of Middelborgh, 
and all others whom this may concern, not further 
to oppress the petitioners, contrary to their con- 
science, with regard to the oath and otherwise, but 
to allow them to open their shops, and to pursue 
their ocupations, as they have previously done. 

All with this provision and understanding, that 
when greater tranquility of affairs exists, and the 
matter has been considered with mature delibera- 
tion, proper measures shall be enacted. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1055 



Laurens Hans van Nooddruft of Delft burned at Antwerp, 1577 


Thus done, under his Excellency's name and 
seal, in the town of Middelborgh, the 26th of Janu- 
ary, A. D., 1577. Sealed with a red wax seal pend- 
ing from it. Signed: 

William of Nassau. 

What ensued thereupon, shall be shown for the 
following year, 1 578. In the meantime, the papists 
proceeded, as ravening wolves, with all cruelty and 
tyranny, wherever they bore rule, against the 
lambs of the flock of Christ ; so that many among 
them had to lay down their lives, as can be seen 
from the following accounts. 


LOUWERENS JANSS NOODTDRUFT, OF DELFT, 
A. D. 1577 

After manifold persecution, slaying, and burn- 
ing of the true followers of Christ, there was also 
a pious brother, by the name of Louwerens Janss, 
a shoemaker by trade, who chose rather to suffer 
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the 
pleasures of sin for a season with the unbelieving ; 
hoping hereafter to enjoy liberty in heaven, with 
all the true children of God ; yea, rather to die here 
for a little while unto his flesh and the pleasures of 


this world than hereafter to have to pay for it with 
an eternal lamentation in the torment of hell. He 
was therefore apprehended by the persecutors and 
enemies of the truth, in the month of August, in 
the year 1576, at Antwerp, where he endured se- 
vere imprisonment, and, through the grace of God, 
resisted much temptation. And as he could by no 
means be brought to apostatize, but was firmly 
built upon Christ, the lords and rulers of this 
world, through the instigation of priests and 
monks, condemned him to death. And thus, in the 
month of January, A. D. 1577, he was burnt alive 
at said place, and testified and confirmed the genu- 
ine faith of the truth with his death and blood; 
wherefore he has obtained, through grace, for this 
his broken, earthly house, a building of God, a 
house not made with hands, but which shall en- 
dure forever in heaven. II Cor. 5 :1. 

And since this friend of Christ could obtain no 
writing materials, he wrote and made known to his 
beloved friends, his affectionate mind, upon two 
tin spoons, with a pin. 

Upon the one spoon was the following: I wish 
all my brethren and sisters much grace from God 
our Father; and the peace of our Lord Jesus 


1056 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ, which passeth all understanding, rule in all 
your hearts ; and the love of God, which passeth all 
knowledge, increase with you all, that you may 
abound and be steadfast, and continue in the work 
of the Lord. O my dear friends, take good heed to 
yourselves, this I pray you, I unworthy prisoner 
in the Lord. II Cor. 1 :2; Phil. 4:7; I Cor. 15 :58; 
Heb. 10:24. 

Upon the other spoon was written: Grace and 
peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you my very dear and in God be- 
loved sister in the Lord, Weyndelken and her 
daughter M. ; this I wish you from the depths of 
my heart before God, who searcheth the hearts and 
reins, that you may walk before Him unharmed 
and unhindered, in His truth, to which He has 
called you; and always look to Christ and to all 
the righteous. Adieu, in this time, adieu. 

Louwerens Janss Noodtdruft, of Delft. 


HANS DE RUYTER, WITH HIS WIFE AND DAUGHTER, 
A. D. 1577 

At Antwerp there was imprisoned for the sake of 
his faith, with his wife and daughter, in the year 
1577, the brother Hans de Ruyter, a minister of 
the church of God, and a very experienced man in 
the Scriptures. But when he was assailed with 
many severe trials, and many fair promises of re- 
lease and other things were held out to him, he 
suffered himself to be moved to renounce his faith ; 
yea, so that he even exhorted his wife thereto ; but 
hearing afterwards, that he should have to die nev- 
ertheless, it produced such terror and dismay in 
him (seeing how he had suffered himself to be se- 
duced with lies by the blind leaders, he who ought 
to have been a leader of others), that with a dis- 
tressed heart and anxious mind (perceiving where- 
unto he had suffered himself to be brought, and 
what was approaching him), he turned himself to 
the Fountain of grace, and prayed with scalding 
tears, from the bitterness of his soul, that this apos- 
tasy from, and denial of his Lord, might be for- 
given him, and he be received back into favor, with 
the prodigal son ; and he would steadfastly adhere 
thereto all the days of his life, and suffer nothing 
again to turn him away therefrom. This he not 
only promised with words, but also proved it in- 
deed, for whatever temptation, pain, or torture was 
afterward inflicted upon him, he steadfastly ad- 
hered to his reaccepted faith, so that he was finally 
burnt for it, with his wife and daughter ; and they 
are now waiting under the altar, till the number 
of their brethren is fulfilled. 

Note. — In the beginning of the preceding year, 
1577, we showed the perverse zeal of certain fol- 
lowers of the Calvinistic doctrine, who, at Mid- 
delborgh in Zealand, had obtained so much, that 
the Anabaptists, who having fled out of the Romish 
Babylon, and settled there, were prohibited from 
exercising their temporal occupation or trade by 
which they had to sustain their life : and this, be- 


cause they refused the swearing of the civil oath, 
and the use of external weapons of war. 

Thereupon, as shown in that place, the Prince 
of Orange commanded the magistrate of said city, 
to allow the afore-mentioned people to live in quiet- 
ness, and not to oppress their consciences. 

But the magistrates there, instead of heeding 
this, as coming from high authority, acted entirely 
contrary ; insomuch that the Anabaptists that lived 
there, and especially those in the country, were 
compelled again to betake themselves with an hum- 
ble supplication to the Prince, to obtain their reli- 
gious liberty; who thereupon, the second time, 
wrote and sent the following charge to said mag- 
istracy : 


CHARGE OF WILLIAM I, TO THE MAGISTRATE AT 
MIDDLEBORGH 

The Prince of Orange, Count of Nassau, Lord 
and Baron of Breda, Diest, etc., to the noble, 
pious, honorable, wise, particular, etc. 

Whereas, certain residents, living there, said to 
be Anabaptists, have at divers times indicated to us 
by way of complaint, that you daily molest them, 
and deprive them of the means, in peace and quiet- 
ness to gain a living for themselves and their fami- 
lies, prohibiting them from opening their shops, 
under the pretext that they refuse to render the 
oath in such form as other citizens ; which we have 
duly considered ; and since the aforesaid people of- 
fer to bear in equity all burdens, together with 
other citizens (however, in the matter of arms, 
which chiefly moves them to take this course, levy 
upon them such a contribution as you, or those who 
may have charge of it, may find to be proper in all 
justice and equity) ; hence we think that you are 
doing very unjustly, in not letting them live in 
peace and quietness, according to the dictates of 
their conscience, pursuant to the act which we, with 
the advice of the governor and the councilors, have 
previously granted them, which they say they have 
exhibited to you; and yet, as we learn that you 
have hitherto not been willing to regard it, nor our 
previous letters, we have been compelled to write 
you this final act, by the which we openly declare 
to you, that it does not behoove you, in particular, 
to concern yourself with any one's conscience, as 
far as there is nothing done that might tend to any 
one's offense, in which case we wish to regard or 
tolerate no one : and therefore, we expressly com- 
mand and ordain you, in future to desist from mo- 
lesting the aforesaid people, that are Anabaptists, 
or from preventing them to exercise their traffic 
and trade, to gain a living for wife and children ; 
allowing them to open their shops, and to work as 
they have previously done, at least until the time 
that the generality, whose province it is to do this, 
shall have decreed otherwise. Hence beware of at- 
tainting anything contrary to this and the act 
granted them, and to take from them any fines for 
the above cause ; because there is nothing attainted 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1057 


with them, except what might tend to the offense 
of any one; and because they shall also, together 
with others, bear all civil and reasonable burdens. 
Herewith, noble, pious, honorable, wise, discreet, 
dear, particular, I commend you to God. Written 
at Antwerp, on the sixteenth day of July, 1578. 

Subscribed : 

Par Copie de Baudemont. 

The aforegoing copy was certified to as follows : 

Written by the secretary Baudemont, and found 
to agree with it. By me Jacob Masureel, notary 
public of the town van der Vere, the 15th of No- 
vember, 1579. 

Signed: J. Masureel, Notary 

Remark. — Notwithstanding the Prince of 
Worshipful Memory, had now the second time so 
strictly commanded this liberty of conscience in the 
practice of the worship of God, the true fruit did 
still not follow, notwithstanding it was obeyed for 
a few years immediately afterwards ; for after the 
decease of that good prince they began again ; how- 
ever, to the salvation of the defenseless church of 
God, it was terminated by a third prohibition, by 
his son, as shall be stated in the proper place. 


HENDRICK SUMER AND JACOB MANDEL, A. D. 1582 

In the year 1582, in the first week of September, 
the dear and faithful brother Hendrick Sumer, a 
minister of the Word of God, still under trial, and 
with him Jacob Mandel, were apprehended for 
their faith and the testimony of Jesus Christ, at 
Torzag, in Switzerland, and were then conducted 
into the town of Baden, where they,' by the high 
bailiff of the country, and the judges, were publicly 
examined in the presence of the people, in the 
council house, and interrogated concerning their 
faith, which they freely confessed. At this exami- 
nation were present twenty-four priests, who tried 
whether they could not cause them to apostatize 
and err in their faith: but they could accomplish 
nothing, nor were they able to convict them of any 
wrong or error, much less perceive in them a just 
cause of death. 

Now when these brethren and Christian heroes 
were quite steadfast in the faith, and boldly testi- 
fied and proved by the Word of God, that they 
were on the true, narrow way of the truth unto the 
eternal life in Christ Jesus, from which they would 
in no wise depart, though it should cost them their 
lives ; then the priests were at their wits end, and 
said to the councilors, that they could not do any- 
thing further; since they remained obstinate, they 
must now deal with them as they deemed proper. 

They were then to be sentenced to death ; but the 
councilors could not agree, for some among them 
would not take the responsibility of their death 
upon themselves, nor be guilty of it, because it was 
on account of matters of faith, and they knew them 
to be good men. But as the majority of the voices 
were for putting them to death, they determined 


that their sentence should be proceeded with, which 
when the brethren learned that their time had come 
that they should depart out of the world, they re- 
joiced from the heart, and were glad and of good 
cheer ; they also said that it was a greater joy for 
them than if they were to go to a marriage ; yea, 
they were of very good cheer, that God had count- 
ed them worthy, that they should glorify His name 
through such a righteous death — which many 
righteous ones and friends of God had done before 
them, and thus obtained the heavenly crown. 

When they were led forth, they spoke boldly to 
the people, and exhorted the great multitude that 
had gathered, that they should repent and turn 
from their sinful life to God, and then both joined 
their voices in raising a joyful, sweet, and heartfelt 
song of praise to the Lord. 

There was present a great number of people, and 
many among them shed tears, when they heard 
them sing and saw that they were of such good 
cheer in the hour of death. But the eternal joy was 
before their eyes, and they rejoiced in the inner 
man, that they should go to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
to all the patriarchs and the whole number of the 
saints, to all the prophets and the apostles of the 
Lord, and to their pious fellowbrethren and sisters 
that had recently died, yea, to Jesus Christ Him- 
self, their Saviour. Thus they sang till close to the 
water's edge, where they were to be drowned. 

When they came outside, Hendrick said : "Now, 
my brother Jacob, since we have traveled together 
so long, let us now also journey together further, 
through this temporal death into eternal life." 
Brother Jacob Mandel was the first one. The exe- 
cutioner took him and drowned him in the water. 
When he was dead, he drew him out and laid him 
before Hendrick's eyes, and said : "My dear Hen- 
drick, behold thy brother who lost his life, and re- 
nounce yet, or you will have to die too, there is no 
other choice." But he said: "You need not think 
that I shall renounce, and forsake the divine truth ; 
I will adhere to it though it cost body and life." A 
priest also begged him very earnestly and said : "O 
my dear Hendrick, desist from this new infidelity, 
and from this evil sect." But brother Hendrick 
turned to him and said : "What sect ? I believe in 
God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ our 
Lord and Saviour, and in His holy Word and di- 
vine commandment ; in this I stand — do you con- 
sider this a sect ? Dare you call the true Christian 
faith a sect? what kind of faith have you then? If 
you have another faith, you are in a sect and in a 
new faith yourself; desist from it, and forsake 
your sinful, vicious and ungodly life." Thus the 
priest was put to shame and ridicule, and had to 
keep silence. When they saw that he continued 
steadfast, the executioner took him and drowned 
him too, like the other. This took place on the 9th 
of October of the aforesaid year 1582, at Baden, 
in Switzerland, after they had been imprisoned 
four weeks and a half. 


1058 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Heinrich Summer and Jakob Mandel drowned in Baden, AD 1582 


MELCHOIR PLATSER, A. D. 1583 

In the year 1583, on the Friday after Whitsun- 
tide, Melchoir Platser, who had been an apothe- 
cary, was apprehended for the faith's sake, in the 
village of Rankweil, in the Feldkirch, bailiwick. 
There he was put in irons and taken to Feldkirch 
into the castle, and imprisoned in a deep tower, 
whence he was several times taken before the au- 
thorities and the priests. He was always prepared 
to give an answer concerning his faith and to re- 
sist their false doctrine. 

There was then brought to him from the town of 
Bregenz a special priest, whom they regarded as 
very wise and learned. He undertook to dispute 
publicly with brother Melchoir, hoping to get hon- 
or and glory by it; but he was very soon put to 
shame, so that he himself said: "Did the devil 
bring me here for this purpose, that I should be 
convinced by an Anabaptist?" Now when they 
could accomplish nothing with him, they sent 
(since that region is completely papistic) for Lu- 
theran parsons, and brought them to him, [to see] 
whether they could instruct him. But they were no 
better in his eyes; he convinced them, that they 


were both in unrighteousness and unjustly upheld 
and maintained their doctrine. This is the cause 
why at the present day all sin, vice, and idolatry 
are so prevalent, because the priests themselves are 
the greatest rogues and knaves. 

Now when they could in no wise seduce or de- 
ceive him, they delivered him over to the authori- 
ties and accused him as a traitor that had merited 
death. However, they offered him that, if he de- 
sired mercy, and would swear an oath that he 
would leave their land and dominion, they would 
suffer him to live and go away. But he answered 
that before he would swear such an oath to them, 
and consent to renounce, he would rather await 
what God should permit them to do with him, 
though it should cost his body and life. He also 
told them that their threats did not terrify him, 
and that he did not care for it, for at all events he 
had once to die. 

Then the lord at Feldkirch was touched, and re- 
quested that they should conduct him back to 
Rankweil, into the same village where they had ap- 
prehended him, as though he thereby wanted to 
wash his hands in innocence from his blood. 

When they came to Rankweil, they held a court 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1059 


over him, pursuant to the order of the great Hanni- 
bal, to whom he had been delivered by the prince 
of Innsbruck, to deal with him according to his 
pleasure. There they passed sentence, that he 
should be put to death. 

When the brother heard that he was to depart 
out of this world, he faithfully thanked God the 
heavenly Father, and rejoiced that God was willing 
to make him worthy, that he should testify to the 
truth with his blood, which he regarded as a great 
benefit from God. 

Shortly afterward he was delivered into the 
hands of the executioner, who conducted him to 
the usual place of execution. The people were very 
sorrowful and compassionate; but Brother Mel- 
choir began to speak to the people with great zeal, 
and exhorted them to think of their ungodly life in 
which they were sunk, and that they should no 
longer thus perversely boast themselves Christians. 
"O what woe" said he, "and eternal suffering will 
come upon such men that kill an innocent man be- 
cause he has separated and turned from the un- 
godly, shameful life of the world. But I will com- 
mit this to God in heaven who will give such 
mouth-Christians their reward." The priests also 
came, as he was being led out, and wanted to com- 
fort him. But he said : "You priests are the ser- 
pents and scorpions, against whom Christ has 
warned us; that are full of abomination and de- 
struction." Thereupon, they commanded him to 
keep silence, if he wanted to speak so scornfully to 
them. Then he began to sing with a loud voice, till 
he arrived at the place where he was to be exe- 
cuted. He then again warned the people that they 
should beware of the false prophets who thus up- 
hold, comfort and strengthen them in unrighteous- 
ness, and promise them liberty and life, in order 
that they should the less desist from wickedness. 
He spoke so earnestly and much to the people, that 
the sweat rolled from his face. The executioner 
dried off his face and said: "Speak freely, I shall 
not hurry you." A little after the executioner said 
to him : "If you will consent to do according to the 
mind of the lords, and acknowledge their doings 
as right, power has been given me to release 
you." Melchoir replied: "I will not do this; hence 
go on, and do what you are commanded." There- 
upon, the executioner forthwith executed him with 
the sword and speedily cut off his head. Not far 
from there was a pile of wood, upon which he laid 
his body and burned it, after he had been im- 
prisoned about twenty-six weeks. Thus he kept 
the confessed truth, as long as he was in life and 
had breath in him. 


ANDRIES PIRCHNER, A. D. 1584 

On the 26th of May, in the year 1584, Andries 
Pirchner was apprehended at Laitsch, in Vintsch- 
gau, his fatherland, and thence taken to Soltrain, 
where he was thrice put upon the rack and severely 
tortured. For they wanted to know of him, where 


and with whom he had lived and had intercourse, 
and that he should mention them. But he answered 
that he would not be a Judas, to betray those that 
had done good to him, so that any harm would 
come to them he would rather lose his life and 
body, yea, one member after another; nor were 
these matters that concerned the faith or any article 
of the same; but in regard to his faith, that he 
would willingly and gladly declare and not keep 
silence about what he had done or not done ; he had 
made God in heaven a promise in Christian bap- 
tism, to which he would adhere, and not be found 
a liar before God. Moreover, he would (if it could 
not be otherwise) patiently suffer death, and also 
request nothing else, than that by his blood and 
suffering he might induce some poor souls to re- 
pentance and to the confession of the truth. There- 
upon priests were sent to him, that they should dis- 
pute with him ; but these, no matter what they com- 
menced with him, accomplished nothing at all, for 
he forthwith upbraided them with their sinful and 
lascivious life, showing them, that they could not 
lead or point others to a virtuous life, because they 
were blind themselves. And he further said that 
they should consider their own ways and desist 
from their sinful life; he also presented to them 
several passages from the Old and New Testa- 
ments, so that they could accomplish nothing with 
him according to their will, but he constantly per- 
severed firmly in his faith. He was also greatly 
admonished and entreated by many, privately in 
the house, and also in public, that he should desist 
from his faith, since he must see that there was 
nothing else left for him, or he should have to die. 
Thereupon he answered : "All that will live godly 
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, as the 
Scripture says. And to the same I will adhere, and 
I daily pray to God, my heavenly Father, that His 
will be done. Now if it be God's will, He can order 
it that I shall be released ; but if it is not His will, 
I will die patiently." They entreated him, that he 
should only once renounce and recant, and they 
should let him go ; he might then adopt it again. 
But he replied: "No, that cannot be; may God 
keep me from breaking my promise and being 
found a liar before Him ; for that were acting like 
the dog that swallows again that which he has once 
vomited. So it would also go with me; I would 
have to recant and stamp as a lie that which I have 
long known and confessed as the truth and the will 
of God ; of which I should not be able for a long 
time truly to repent, and who knows whether I 
should be able to repent and obtain grace? Hence 
I neither will nor can do it, and I will rather die, 
and hope by the help of God to be a living martyr 
for His truth." After that he was brought from 
Soltrain to Schlanders, and there, according to the 
princely and old imperial command and decree 
sentenced to death and delivered to the officer, who 
conducted him to the place of execution. 

When he was led forth he spoke with a joyful 
heart : "God be praised, that it has come so near 


1060 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


to the end with me, and since it is thus His will, I 
will also patiently die." And thus he honored his 
end with many thankgivings, Christian teachings 
and remarks to the people, after which he knelt 
down ; and though it had on that day been cloudy 
weather until that hour, the sun commenced to 
shine brightly, right into his face, at which he re- 
joiced, and said : "God be praised, that He shows 
me His bright sun yet before my end." 

When the executioner had drawn out the sword, 
and was about to make a stroke, they called to him 
to hold still, and the brother was very earnestly en- 
treated, that he should renounce, and they should 
let him live. But he would not ; he valiantly lifted 
up his head, and thus the executioner beheaded 
him ; joyfully offering up his spirit unto God. Af- 
terwards his body was singed with a little fire of 
straw. 

This occurred on the 19th of October of the 
aforesaid year, after he had been imprisoned for 
about twenty-two weeks. 


LEONHART SUMERAVER, A. D. 1584 

In the year 1584, about eight days before Saint 
Martin's day, brother Leonhart Sumeraver, from 
the country of Saltzburg, was apprehended, as he 
was about to leave the country and had embarked 
at Titmaing. The boatman learned of it, and land- 
ed at Berckhausen, at the bridge, in order that they 
should not come to grief. There a rope was thrown 
them, and the matter became known, for the boat- 
men cried that they had an Anabaptist on board. 
The clerk, who stood there, went to the chancellor 
and told him that an Anabaptist had arrived. The 
chancellor had him apprehended, and he was forth- 
with brought to the rack and five times dreadfully 
tortured, also twice suspended by a rope ; but they 
could obtain nothing from him, nor accomplish 
anything with him. Hence, he had to suffer much 
pain and sorrow during the time of his imprison- 
ment, and also much temptation and conflict on ac- 
count of his faith, and because he would not ac- 
cept their doctrine. 

After he had been in prison almost half a year, 
he was led to the place of execution. There went 
with him four priests, who tenaciously urged him 
to renounce: but he said that he had already re- 
nounced his unrighteous life, more than twenty 
years ago. When he was led through the town, 
they admonished him the second time to renounce. 
But he replied: "Should I depart from God? Christ 
does not teach me this when He says : 'Whosoever 
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny be- 
fore my Father which is in heaven.' " 

When he was led forth before the stone court, 
they said to him: "Behold, there is the image of 
our Lord; bow down before it." But he replied 
that he dared not do it ; that they should proceed 
with him. The priests asked him, why he had gone 
out from the Christian church, and betaken himself 
to this heresy (as they call it). But he said : "Not 


so ; but I went out from ungodly idolaters, fornica- 
tors, blasphemers, and all the unclean, and have be- 
taken myself to the good, to God and His church." 
But they said : "He is possessed of the devil, who 
causes him to speak thus" ; even as also the Jews 
accused Christ. Afterwards they entreated him 
thrice for God's sake, that he should renounce ; but 
he would not. The executioner also begged him 
the very best he could. But Brother Leonhart said : 
"O dear, be silent, and do not beg me, but pro- 
ceed, for I want to die as a good Christian ; I stand 
in the true faith and upon the firm foundation, 
which is Christ my Lord, from which I shall never 
depart." When they saw that all their efforts were 
in vain, the executioner took his collar from his 
neck and said to him : "If you would renounce but 
the two articles, they would release you." But he 
said : "Let me alone and proceed as you please, for 
I want to die valiantly upon my faith." Thereupon, 
the executioner said: "I do not like to execute 
you, but if I do not do it, another will." And he 
drew out the sword before him, in order to frighten 
him; but he was not terrified in the least by it. 
Thus he was beheaded, and buried in the place of 
execution. 

This happened at Berckhausen, on the 5th of 
July 1585, that this lamb of the Lord was torn by 
the ravening wolves. 

ANNEKEN BOTSON, JANNEKEN HER DAUGHTER, 
AND MAEYKEN PIETERS, A. D. 1585 

About the year 1585, there were imprisoned, at 
Sint Vyt, in the country of Lutzenborg, three 
women, having been brought from a village called 
Nieuwstadt. Among them were a mother and 
daughter ; the mother's name was Anneken Botson, 
and that of her daughter Janneken Botson ; the oth- 
er woman was named Maeyken Pieters. All three 
of them were simple, God-fearing persons, who 
had forsaken popery, and through the grace of 
God, betaken themselves to the obedience of the 
holy Gospel. This the priests could not endure, but 
they manifested their envy and reported these 
persons to the authorities ; and thus they were ap- 
prehended and put in prison at Sint Vyt, as al- 
ready mentioned. There they were not confined 
long, but were forthwith examined concerning 
their faith, which they cheerfully and in simplicity 
confessed, and to which they also constantly ad- 
hered, though they tried in many ways to make 
them recant the truth; but when they could not 
prevail upon them they were sentenced that they 
should be burnt to ashes. As innocent sheep for the 
slaughter they went to the place where they were 
to be offered up, and died thus a valiant death, of- 
fering up their bodies as a sacrifice to the Lord. 

WOLFGANG RAUFER, GEORGE PRUCKMAIR, AND 
HANS AICHER, A. D. 1585 

In the year 1585, three brethren, namely, Wolf- 
gang Raufer, George Pruckmair, and Hans Aicher, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1061 


were apprehended for the faith, while on a journey, 
half a league from Riet, they having taken some 
refreshments in an inn, and after eating returned 
thanks. Hence, immediately beadles were sent for, 
and it was told that there were people there like 
Anabaptists. While they were then counting out 
the money for what they had received, and the inn- 
keeper took it, the wicked men came, apprehended 
all three of them, and took them to Riet. A few 
days after, they were taken from Riet to Berck- 
hausen, where the council and the judges sent emi- 
nent doctors to them, who were to speak with them, 
and if possible to overcome them and turn them 
from their faith; but they could accomplish noth- 
ing, nor were they (neither the doctors nor the 
priests) able, by disputing, in any wise to turn 
these brethren. In the meantime they executed the 
aforementioned Brother Leonhart Sumeraver, with 
the sword, on a Friday, about eight o'clock in the 
morning. Afterwards the judge and other lords 
went into the castle, and announced it to these 
brethren, and told them that if they would not re- 
nounce, that they should share the same fate with 
him; whereupon they replied: "We are ready to 
die; whatever be God's will with us, we will pa- 
tiently suffer." Now when they had been impris- 
oned for a considerable time, about fourteen weeks, 
at Berchhausen, and they could not prevail upon 
them, nor intimidate them, they were separately 
placed in carts, on the next following day of exe- 
cution, namely, the 3rd of August, led forth from 
prison, and about four o'clock brought before the 
council house, where the royal decree was read to 
them, according to which they were to be dealt 
with. In the meantime the judge called the execu- 
tioner, and commanded him, that he should bind 
these three persons and convey them out to the 
usual place of execution, and then (since they had 
been sentenced from life to death) to execute 
them with the sword, and afterwards lay them up- 
on a pile of wood and burn them with fire. There- 
upon, Brother Wolfgang replied: "Not from life 
to death, but through death into eternal life." Then 
George and Wolfgang said : "Now since we must 
die, we die solely for the sake of the divine truth, 
for we have done no evil or wrong to any one, and 
here is not a single person to whom we have done 
any injury, or who can complain of us ; since we 
then must lose our lives for the faith and for the 
Word of God, we shall find it again in eternity, as 
the holy Gospel testifies." They then said to the 
authorities that they should henceforth take better 
heed, for the innocent blood should cry for venge- 
ance upon those that were guilty of it ; but since 
it was the will of God concerning them, they would 
willingly die, since our Lord Jesus Christ had to 
suffer the same death in this world. Then Wolf- 
gang said to George and Hans: "Now my dear 
brethren, we will take leave from one another ; and 
let us be joyful, for the Lord is with us." There- 
upon, Brother George, requested the executioner, 
that he would loose their hands a little, so that they 


could give each other the hand, and thus take leave ; 
to which the executioner consented, doing it will- 
ingly. Thus they took joyful leave from one an- 
other. In the meantime a priest came to Brother 
Wolfgang, and admonished him to renounce. But 
Brother Wolfgang briefly answered him, that he 
should himself renounce his ungodly life and forni- 
cation ; and would not tolerate the priest with him. 
He then went on, and when he came into the mar- 
ketplace, he commenced to sing joyfully, and then 
gave praise and thanks to God, that they had come 
to this, that they might be truly refined. And he 
further said: "Would to God, that among this 
multitude of people there might be some one from 
our country that could inform our brethren of this ; 
then we would greatly thank God for it. However, 
we trust that God will send some one that will noti- 
fy them of this, whether it be orally or by writing ; 
and this causes our heart to rejoice." This wish was 
also fulfilled, as the facts show. Then Wolfgang 
said to the executioner : "Now, Master Christoffel, 
I shall henceforth be more quiet, and contain my- 
self a little ; but my heart experiences no anxiety at 
all, but there is only laughter within; and if my 
brethren, my wife and child, knew this, they would 
rejoice for our sakes, though they might otherwise, 
according to the flesh, weep and mourn. And I 
pray, and also hope, that God will send some one 
to our country, to our church, who will for us take 
leave from all brethren and sisters, our wives and 
children, and all our acquaintances according to 
the flesh." 

While Wolfgang was thus speaking, they were 
led out and came to the place of execution. The 
other two brethren, George and Hans, had mostly 
been silent ; but when they arrived at the place of 
execution, all three of them were joyful, again took 
leave from one another, and offered up their prayer 
together in quietness. 

They were then beheaded, and their bodies laid 
upon piles of wood and burnt. 

When the executioner had performed this, he 
said to the people : "These persons would not de- 
sist from their faith, nor would they tolerate 
priests ; they also have a much stronger faith than 
I and all that are here. I would rather execute 
thirty robbers than these." 

Thus these dear brethren testified to the faith in 
Jesus Christ and the divine truth with their blood, 
to which end God gave them power and strength, 
for which praise be to Him forever. Amen. 


OF THE MANDATE PUBLISHED AGAINST THE AN- 
ABAPTISTS IN THE DUCHY OF PRUSSIA (BUT 
NOT UNTO DEATH), ON THE 12TH OF 
NOVEMBER, A. D. 1586 

When on account of the terrible burning and 
scorching of the pious witnesses of Jesus that were 
called by the name of Anabaptists, many of them 
went from papistic regions, where the distress was 
greatest, to the Prussian countries, in the hope that 


1062 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the rulers there, who boasted of greater discretion 
and mercy than those of general popery, should 
grant them liberty to live according to their con- 
science, it came to pass, that when they came there 
they found themselves deceived in their opinion, in- 
asmuch as the prince of that country, who then 
reigned at Brandenburg, ordered them, by a public 
mandate, to leave. 

Concerning this, P. J. Twisck has given this ac- 
count : 

George Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg, 
commanded in a public mandate, on the 12th of 
November, A. D. 1586, that the Anabaptists must 
leave this whole Duchy of Prussia. Chron. van den 
Ondergang, edition 1620, 2d part, 16th book, for 
the year 1586, p. 1401, col. 1. 


CHRISTIAN GASTEYGER, A. D. 1586 

In the year 1586, on the Friday after Whitsun- 
tide, which was the 3rd of June, Christian Gastey- 
ger, a blacksmith, was imprisoned, at Ingolstadt 
in Bavaria. On the following Sunday two Jesuits, 
with their town judge came to him, and talked with 
him concerning his faith; but they soon left him 
again, for they could not agree with him. Nine 
days after, the two Jesuits came again to talk with 
him, and began with many words to revile the 
church; but the brother contradicted them, and 
thus they spent almost an hour and a half together, 
and then left him with dissatisfaction. Three 
weeks afterwards, again two Jesuits came to him, 
who wanted to instruct him; but when he would 
not dance as they piped, they left him again; and 
after two days the judge came to him, with a doctor 
in the Scriptures, to speak with him concerning in- 
fant baptism. They said : "Children were damned, 
if they were not brought to baptism." Thereupon, 
brother Christian replied : "They are not damned 
therefore;" and he proved it to them with many 
Scriptures which he adduced. On this account 
they called him a heretic and said further : "Chil- 
dren have the devil in them ; hence they must be 
baptized." Then he asked how the devil got into 
the children. They said : "He comes into the child 
from the mother." But he contradicted them also 
in this. 

Nine days afterwards the judge and his council 
came to him, and they said : "You are well aware 
why you are imprisoned here ; you have been con- 
fined here for some time already, and priests have 
come to you ; but you would not hearken to them, 
for I have been told by them, that there is no hope 
of you any more ; and the order has come, that I 
am to speak with you once more, and that if you 
will not be converted to that which your parents 
believed, you shall be placed upon a stack of wood 
and burnt; and let us see then how God will be 
with you." But he replied : "I am ready every day 
to die, and I hope to God in heaven, that He will 
keep me valiant and faithful unto the end, so that I 


shall not depart from the truth ; and may His will 
be done concerning me." 

The next day again two Jesuits came to dispute 
with hm, and asserted that he had no faith. They 
also began of infant baptism, saying that the child 
had to be baptized, else it were damned. But he 
contradicted them. And when they had spent three 
hours with him, and he had sufficiently replied to 
them and valiantly resisted their false doctrine, 
they left him. He also let us know that, as he was 
now imprisoned for the truth's sake, he would also 
firmly adhere to the truth; though it should cost 
him his life, he should not depart from it; they 
should have all good confidence concerning him, 
for he would valiantly fight for the eternal crown, 
and he well perceived that God faithfully succored 
him in his bonds, for which he also praised and 
thanked Him, and prayed that He would keep him 
even unto his temporal death. He moreover sent 
us and all believers a Christian greeting. After- 
wards, when he had been confined for over twelve 
weeks at Ingolstadt, and all the priests and Jesuits 
there had become tired of him, and yet could ac- 
complish nothing with him, he was, on the 25th of 
August, placed upon a cart and conducted from 
Ingolstadt to Munich. 

Finally, on the 13th of December, sentence was 
requested concerning him. The prince was not at 
home, and the supreme judge had died ; the under 
judge would have had to pronounce the sentence ; 
but he would not, and said that it was not his office. 
The burgomaster and several others in the council 
would also not consent to it, but the Jesuits stren- 
uously insisted upon it, so that the sentence 
proceeded nevertheless. 

He was led forth from prison before the countil 
house, and sentenced to the sword. He was then 
led to death, and since he was very joyful and of 
good cheer, and spoke very much to the people, 
the Jesuits became very angry and spat into his 
face, so that the executioner himself wiped it off. 
The Jesuits also held before him an idolatrous 
crucifix and spat again into his face, which vexed 
the people greatly. 

When he arrived in the place of execution, he 
was very joyful, because he saw that he had so 
nearly gained the crown. 

The executioner stood there with the drawn 
sword, afraid and begging him to renounce. But 
he said to the executioner that he should execute 
his sentence on him ; and to the Jesuits he said : 
"Though there were a thousand of you here, and 
multiplied thousands, you should not be able to 
seduce me." Then the executioner executed him 
with the sword, and thus he persevered steadfast 
and joyful in the faith. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1063 


CONCERNING THE DECREE EMITTED AGAINST THE 

ANABAPTISTS IN THE JURISDICTION OF KOENIGS- 

BERG AND ITS CITIES AND SUBURBS, ON 

PAIN OF CORPORAL PUNISHMENT AND 

LOSS OF THEIR PROPERTY, A. D. 1587 

Even as it had gone the year before in Prussia, 
with the Anabaptists, so it went now also in the do- 
minion of Koenigsberg, which was carried out by 
the same prince, who was also the lord of this ter- 
ritory. 

The afore-mentioned author, having related 
their departure from Prussia, immediately adds 
that on the 1st of March, A. D. 1587, they were 
ordered to leave not only the liberties of Koenigs- 
berg and the cities and suburbs of that country, but 
also all the territories and dominions belonging 
under the reign of George Frederick, Margrave of 
Brandenburg, and this on pain of corporal punish- 
ment and loss of their property. 

This was done because they spoke most offen- 
sively* (as it was said) of infant baptism (which 
the learned of that country considered the door and 
entrance into the kingdom of God). Compare the 
sixteenth book of Chron. van den Ondergang, 2d 
part, edition 1620, page 1501, col. 2, with Johan. 
Behin, jol. 72, 73. 


MICHAEL VISCHER, A. D. 1587 

In the year 1587, about Whitsuntide, Michael 
Vischer was imprisoned for the faith, at Ingolstadt, 
in Bavaria, and when he had been confined about 
twelve weeks, and much had been tried with him 
by monks, Jesuits and otherwise, and he would also 
not follow their false doctrine and idolatry, but 
firmly persevered in the faith which he had ac- 
cepted, acknowledged and confessed, he was finally 
sentenced to death, that he should be executed on 
Friday the 6th of August, if he would not re- 
nounce ; but since he looked for a better and eternal 
life, he continued immovable and steadfast in the 
faith. Thus he was on the afore-mentioned day, 
about eight o'clock in the morning, brought from 
the prison before the council house, and sentence 
was there read to him, that since this anabaptist had 
for about twenty years adhered to Anabaptism (so 
they call it), and also seduced several others there- 
to, and would in no wise allow himself to be moved 
from it, he must die for it. For the imperial man- 
date and decree is, that such shall not be suffered 
or tolerated, but punished with fire and sword. 
Thereupon he was led out to the place of execution, 
to which he was willing and ready, going there with 
alacrity. A Jesuit and a monk went with him, and 
wanted to instruct him ; however, he did not heark- 
en to them, but told them to go away from him. 
Thus they went in advance to the place of execu- 
tion, and there said to him, that since he had to die, 
he should prepare himself for it, and they held a 
crucifix before his face, saying, that he should be- 

* Derisively, the authors say. 


hold Him that had died for us. But he shook his 
head and said : "Christ my Redeemer is in heaven ; 
therefore I deny all human handiwork." He also 
said to the executioner: "Come hither; there is 
nothing else left to do, I will valiantly adhere to 
the faith and die upon it." And with this he knelt 
down, boldly and undismayed. God granted him 
such power and strength, that he persevered stead- 
fastly unto the end, in the way of truth unto eternal 
life in Jesus Christ. The executioner became ter- 
rified by his undauntedness, so that he could not 
properly execute him, but had to cut off his head 
as it were,* in consequence of which he was in no 
small peril of his life. 


CHRISTIAEN RIJCEN, A. D. 1588 

This Christiaen Rijcen lived still in these latter 
days as a faithful witness, at Hontschoten, in Flan- 
ders, where he, as a true Christian, was imprisoned 
for the Word of God and the testimony of Jesus 
Christ, in December of the year 1587. And after 
suffering much trial and temptation there, he was 
very cruelly tortured, and burned to ashes there, 
the seventh day of April, 1588, under the bloody 
tyranny and reign of the Prince of Parma. And 
thus he steadfastly delivered over unto death his 
corruptible body, for the truth of Christ, and ex- 
pects now a new house in heaven, which God shall 
prepare for him, that it shall endure forever. II 
Cor. 5:1. 

Of this friend of God a book has been published, 
containing fifteen letters, with some hymns, which 
this true witness wrote from prison to his wife and 
his friends, for comfort and encouragement; of 
which the following few are here communicated to 
the reader. 


A STATEMENT HOW HE WAS EXAMINED BY THE 

MAGISTRATES, AND HOW THE PASTOR WANTED 

TO PROVE INFANT BAPTISM TO HIM, AND 

HOW SEVERELY THEY ASSAILED HIM 

Grace, peace and love be unto you, from God 
our heavenly Father, through His Son Jesus 
Christ. Amen. This I wish you my dear and be- 
loved wife, for an affectionate greeting. 

And after all salutation, I inform you, my very 
dear wife, that it is still tolerably well with me, ac- 
cording to the flesh ; and according to the spirit it 
is my mind and purpose, by the help of God, to 
adhere to the Lord unto the end of my life. 

The reason of my writing is further to inform 
you, that I have been before the lords once, and 
they questioned me concerning my faith, which I 
confessed to them. And they asked me whether 
I had had myself baptized. I said: "Yes." They 
asked me how long ago it was. I said: "About 
eight years." They then asked me concerning my 
children, whether they were not baptized. I said : 
"No." They asked whether my wife was like me. 

* As distinguished from severing it with one stroke. — Tr. 


1064 


M A.RTYRS MIRROR 


I said: "Yes." Then they asked in what house 
I had been baptized. I told them that it stood in 
the South East corner. They asked me what the 
name of the man was that lived in it. I said: 
"Pieter." "And his surname?" said they. I said: 
"We do not inquire much after surnames." Thus 
they wrote down all that I told them. And they 
sent for the pastor, and read to him what I had 
confessed before them. And the pastor spoke much 
to me about baptism, and said that the children 
must be baptized, in order to be cleansed from 
original sin. I said that Paul, Romans 5, says that 
as death passed upon all men through Adam, so 
righteousness came upon all men through Christ 
Jesus. Yea, even as we all die through Adam, so 
we are all made alive by Christ. This he would not 
accept, but said that John says: "Except a man 
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter 
into the kingdom of heaven." Hence the children 
must be baptized, if they are to be delivered from 
original sin. I said to him: "The Scripture does 
not say in John 3 : 'Except a man be baptized of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God;' but the Scripture says: 'Except 
a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God,' and this the chil- 
dren cannot, and need not do, since they have not 
committed sin, that they must be born again." 
Thus, my dear and beloved wife, we had many 
other words also, which I have forgotten, and 
which do not deserve to be written. Thus, I know 
not what they will do with me, whether they will 
pursue their old course, or not. But, my dear wife, 
though they deal with me as they have been accus- 
tomed to do in old times, let us therefore not be 
surprised, even as Peter writes: "Think it not 
strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try 
you, as though some strange thing happened unto 
you : but rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings. For if ye [he says] be re- 
proached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; 
for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon 
you : on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your 
part he is glorified." I Pet. 4:12-14. Not, my dear 
wife, that I have heard as yet, that they shall kill 
me ; but though they should do it, it were nothing 
new, for Christ Himself has foretold: "The time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that 
he doeth God service. And these things will they 
do unto you, because they have not known the 
Father, nor me." John 16:2, 3. Thus, my dear 
wife, be of good cheer in the Lord, and let us com- 
mit our cause to Him, and from Him expect a day 
that shall comfort us. For this is what is first 
promised here upon earth, namely, weeping and 
lamenting; but the world shall rejoice; we must 
now be sorrowful, but our sorrow shall be turned 
into joy. And Paul says: "I know that the suf- 
ferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in 


us." Rom. 8:18. Thus, my dear wife, be of good 
cheer in the Lord ; I hope that He will help us ; and 
do the best with the children, to nourish them up in 
the fear of God. And since your burden is great, 
it oppresses me so much, when I think of you and 
the children; the tears often flow from my eyes, 
because I have had to leave you under so great a 
burden and with little temporal substance. But, my 
love, when I think that we must leave each other 
for the Lord's sake, or we cannot be worthy of 
Him, I hope that the Lord will care for you, be- 
cause it is written : "Seek ye first the kingdom of 
God, and his righteousness ; and all that ye need 
shall be added unto you." Matthew 6:33. And 
Peter says : "Cast all your care upon the Lord; for 
he careth for you." I Pet. 5 :7. Thus, my dear wife, 
since the Scriptures comfort me, that we have such 
a good Provider, I hope that He will provide you 
and me and our children with all that we need. 
Hence, my dear wife, faint not. Write me how it 
is with you and with the children, according to the 
flesh and according to the spirit. But, my dear wife, 
I must also inform you, that the pastors have often 
talked with me here in prison ; but we cannot agree. 
Sometimes they use harsh words, and sometimes 
fair words, and they always want to prove their 
infant baptism from John 3, adducing yet many 
other Scriptures, as Romans 6; Col. 2; Eph. 5; 
Tit. 3, and others, which do not serve their pur- 
pose, but treat of regeneration, of the burial of sin 
by baptism, or that God has cleansed His church by 
the washing of water in the Word. These Scrip- 
tures, which do not serve their purpose, they quote 
to prove their infant baptism. Hence, I have a 
great conflict here ; it seems to me that I am in the 
wilderness at Marah, where the children of Israel 
were, at the water of Meribah,* where the waters 
were bitter; but the Lord showed them a tree, 
which they were to cast into the waters, to make 
them sweet. Ex. IS :23-25. So the Lord has also 
shown me a green tree which sweetens all this 
water ; which is Christ Jesus, the true green tree. 
When I think of Him, how He was delivered over 
by the chief priests and the scribes, to be cruci- 
fied and put to death, it makes it very sweet for me ; 
for I think that the servant is not better than his 
master, but that it ought to be enough for the 
servant, that he be as his master. 

Herewith I will commend you, my dear wife, 
for this time, to the Lord, and to the rich Word 
of His grace ; who is able to keep your treasure, 
and to give you His eternal kingdom. 

Written on the 2d of January, A. D. 1588, by 
me, your husband. Christiaen Rijcen. 


Strife. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1065 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM CHRISTIAEN RIJCEN WRIT- 
TEN TO A BROTHER, THAT HE WOULD AID HIS 
WIFE (IF HE SHOULD BE PUT TO DEATH) 
IN GETTING TO HOLLAND ; TOGETHER 
WITH OTHER COMFORTING RE- 
MARKS 

The eternal, imperishable wisdom of the Father, 
and the love of the Son, and the illumination of the 
Holy Ghost, this I wish my very dear and beloved 
brother N., as an affectionate greeting in the Lord. 
Amen. 

And after all salutation, I inform my dear and 
beloved brother, that I am still in tolerably good 
health according to the flesh ; and according to the 
spirit, it is my purpose, by the help of God's good- 
ness, to adhere to the Lord as long as I live. 

Further, my beloved brother, I have learned that 
my children are at your house, that you are to keep 
them till my wife comes home, whereby you show 
me great friendship, that you have done this ; and 
I also pray you, my dear brother, that if you should 
have a small chamber that you could spare, that my 
wife might also live with you until the Lord bring 
about a change with me ; and if they should deprive 
me of my life, I should like it very much, if you 
would aid her in getting to Bruges, there to make 
her living, or back to Holland, wherever it should 
please her to go. For, my beloved brother, women 
that are thus situated, have need of help and com- 
fort ; hence I pray you, do your best in this matter ; 
remember that James says, that true religion is to 
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, 
and to keep himself unspotted from the world. 
James 1 :27. And, my dear brother, though I must 
now suffer a little for the Lord's sake, let this not 
deter you from following the Lord, but let it make 
you the more zealous to build the house firmly upon 
the rock, so that when such storms come, it may 
stand. And neglect not to exhort one another with 
the gifts that the Lord has given you, so that no 
one may be hardened through the deceitfulness of 
sin; also to provoke one another to love and good 
works, so that should it be tomorrow. or the day 
after, that any of you should come into bonds, you 
may then be strong through the Lord, and through 
the power of His might, to resist all those that ex- 
alt themselves against the knowledge of Jesus 
Christ. For Paul makes known how we are to arm 
ourselves with the armor of God, saying that the 
loins must be girt about with truth, and the breast 
protected with righteousness, and the feet shod 
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace ; and 
take the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of 
God ; and above all, take the shield of faith, where- 
with you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts 
of the wicked. Eph. 6. Thus, my beloved brother, 
such weapons are of good service to him that is 
tried as I am now tried. 

Hence, my dear brother, I beg you pray the 
Lord for me, that I may overcome all; and do 
also in my place assist my wife and children, this I 


pray you; and greet N. N., and above all, greet 
your wife much in my name. 

Written on the 17th of January, by me, 

Christiaen Rijcen. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM CHRISTIAEN RIJCEN, WRIT- 
TEN TO HIS WIFE, IN WHICH HE WRITES THAT 
HE HAS LEARNED THAT NO COMFORT HAD 
COME FOR HIM FROM THE COURT, THOUGH 
THE RECORDER HAD COME HOME J WHERE- 
FORE HE CONSOLED HIMSELF IN THE 
LORD 

Grace, peace and love be unto you from God 
our heavenly Father, through His Son Jesus 
Christ, Amen. This, I Christiaen Rijcen, wish you 
my dear wife, as an affectionate greeting in the 
Lord. 

And after all salutation, I inform you, my very 
dear wife, that I am still in tolerably good health 
(praise and glory to the Lord for His grace), as I 
trust is also the case with you and the children. 

I further inform you, that I received your letter, 
and I thank you for the treasure you sent me. I 
further also learn that you live in N's house, and 
that he has provided you with wood, of which I am 
very glad, that you find some comfort there yet. 
If it should please the Lord, to deliver me out of 
this again, I hope that we shall repay it to him; 
but so far I think there is little prospect for me to 
get out. For I have learned that no advice has 
come from the court as yet. Though the recorder 
has come, there has no comfort come for me with 
him, except that I thank the Lord, who comforts 
me in this tribulation. And I hope to approve my- 
self as a minister of God, in much patience, in af- 
flictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in 
imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, 
in fastings ; by pureness, by knowledge, by long- 
suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love 
unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of 
God, by the armour of righteousness on the right 
hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil 
report and good report : as deceivers, and yet true ; 
as unknown, and yet known before God ; as dying, 
and behold, we live. II Cor. 6 Thus, my dear wife, 
I hope to approve myself in all things as the min- 
ister of God; for I often hear evil reports, and 
sometimes good reports, and so the time passes 
away ; and I think that it may probably be so also 
with you. Hence, my beloved wife, let us be pa- 
tient in tribulation, fervent in hope, and continuing 
instant in prayer ; and remember me in your pray- 
ers, for I do the same for you. For there passes 
not much time that I do not think of you and the 
children. I pray you, do the best with them, and if 
you have some work, make them labour diligently. 
Tell them that I command them to this ; and when 
you have some leisure, teach them in the book ; this 
I pray you ; so that hereafter, when they shell have 
lost you and me, they may search, as to what tends 
to their salvation. 


1066 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


I furthermore also learn from your letter, that 
you desire me to write your landlord a short letter ; 
which I have done. However, I wrote at the top 
of the letter, to N. N. ; but it does not matter to me 
who has it; may the fruit of righteousness spring 
from it. But I hope to write another yet, if the 
Lord permits me. Nothing more for this time, but 
be commended to the Lord, and greet all acquaint- 
ances in my name. 

Written the 27th of February, by me, 

Christiaen Rijcen. 


ANOTHER COMFORTING LETTER FROM CHRISTIAEN 

RIJCEN, WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE, IN WHICH HE 

EXHORTS HER TO PERSEVERANCE IN THE 

FEAR OF GOD, AND INFORMED HER, HOW 

THE PASTOR OF HOUTEN HAD TEMPTED 

HIM, PROMISING HIM TO HELP HIM 

OUT, IF HE WOULD HEARKEN TO HIM 

I, Christiaen Rijcen, imprisoned for the Lord's 
sake, wish my very dear and beloved wife, the 
eternal wisdom of the Father, and the love of the 
Son, and the consolation of the Holy Ghost, as an 
affectionate greeting. 

And after all salutation, I inform my very dear 
and beloved wife, that I am not very well at pres- 
ent, for I have pain in the head, and am in great 
tribulation for your and the children's sake, that I 
can not assist you in helping to gain a living. Yet I 
hope that the Lord, who has taken me from you, 
will assist you and provide you with what you 
shall need, for faithful are the promises which He 
has made, saying : "Seek first the kingdom of God, 
and his righteousness; and all these things shall 
be added unto you." And Peter says: "Cast all 
your care upon the Lord ; for he careth for you." 
Hence, my dearest love, flee for refuge solely and 
entirely to the Lord ; for he that gives seed to the 
sower will also give you bread for food. 

Know further, that I received your letter, and I 
thank you from the heart for the comforting treas- 
ures you sent me. Knowing that they greatly re- 
joiced me, when I heard your mind, and that you 
still confirm me in the truth, to continue valiant in 
the Lord unto death. I hope so to do by the grace 
of God, and to obtain the glorious promises. And 
I also pray you, my dear wife, always take heed to 
yourself, so that we may hereafter, by the grace 
of the Lord, rejoice together where joy shall en- 
dure forever. If it can be no more here in this 
world, that it may certainly be hereafter, that we 
may then rejoice eternally; though we must now 
sow in tears, that we may then reap with joy. 
Hence, my dearest love, be of good courage, and 
thank God, that we are worthy to suffer for His 
name ; for thus the saints went before, and we must 
also through much tribulation enter into the king- 
dom of God. It is now my turn; it may perhaps 
soon be your turn. Hence, my dear wife, endeavor 
diligently to please the Lord and to serve Him 
faithfully, that when He comes to you, you may be 


watching ; for blessed are those servants whom the 
Lord when He cometh shall find so doing : He shall 
gird Himself, and make them to sit down to meat, 
and will come forth and serve them. Luke 12:37! 
Hence, my dear wife, always continue steadfast in 
the word of the Lord, and faint not at my tribula- 
tion which is now present ; but be the more diligent 
to serve the Lord, and always keep yourself pure, 
my dear wife, this I pray you, as I hope that you 
will do. And take great pains to set the children to 
work, the best you can ; and always conduct your- 
self discreetly toward them, so that they may learn 
discretion ; and thus do in all things the best, this I 
pray you. I do not know yet what they will do 
with me. I now hear reports sometimes, that they 
will leave me in confinement till I turn and adopt 
the Romish religion. But the Lord, to whom I have 
committed the matter, can soon bring about a 
change, if it is His will ; hence I commit my cause 
to Him. Last Tuesday I had the pastor of Houten 
here with me, and we had many words together, 
but he did not know much to say from the Scrip- 
tures. However, it would be too long to write all 
that we said ; but in parting, as he was leaving, he 
said that if I would hearken, he would soon help 
me out. I said that I would do the best ; so we part- 
ed from each other. 

Thus, my very dear and beloved wife, my hope 
and confidence are fixed upon the Lord, to serve 
and obey Him all the days of my life, by His divine 
help and power. 

Herewith, I commend you and my children to 
the Lord and to the rich Word of His grace. Amen. 
Greet much in my name all the acquaintances that 
live near you, and give this letter to N., your land- 
lord, and greet him much from me. Nothing more 
for this time, but farewell. In haste, on the Sth 
of March. By me, Christiaen Rijcen. 

Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery 
trial which is to try you, as though some strange 
thing happened unto you : but rejoice, inasmuch as 
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings ; that, when 
his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye. I Pet. 4:12-14. 

ANOTHER LETTER FROM CHRISTIAEN RIJCEN; HE 
THANKS HIS WIFE FOR THE COMFORTING PAS- 
SAGES OF SCRIPTURE WHICH SHE HAD SENT 
HIM, AND INFORMS HER THAT THE BAILIFF 
CAME, AND THAT HE CLEARLY UNDER- 
STANDS FROM THE PRIESTS THAT THERE 
IS NO HOPE OF FREEDOM, FOR IN 
THE COUNCIL OF TRENT ALL COUN- 
TRIES WERE DENIED US, AS BE- 
ING THE WORST SECT UNDER 
HEAVEN 

Grace, peace and love from God the heavenly 
Father, through His Son Jesus Christ. Amen. 
This I wish you, my dear and beloved wife, as an 
affectionate greeting in the Lord. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1067 


And after all salutation, I, Christaen Rijcen, in- 
form you, my dear wife, that I am in tolerably 
good health (praise and glory to the Lord for His 
grace), as I trust that is the case also with you. 
Only that I have a little pain in my throat so that 
by reason of it my appetite is not very good, but 
otherwise it still goes very well with me ; it is still 
my purpose (the Lord be praised) to obey the 
Lord and to continue in His commandments all the 
days of my life, by the help of the Lord. Know 
further, that I received your letter and I rejoice 
that you always comfort me by the treasures which 
you send me; and I thank you greatly from the 
heart, that you write these treasures for my con- 
solation, for they come very convenient to me, since 
I am thinking a great deal daily, because of the 
long time that I must remain here : sometimes sor- 
rowful, sometimes of good cheer, and thus time 
passes away with great desire. O my dearest love, 
I think that this is also the case with you. But my 
dear wife, let us firmly persevere till we are taken 
hence, for now is the time of which it has been told 
us, that we must through much tribulation enter 
into the kingdom of God, and that we must weep 
and lament, but the world rejoices ; we must now 
be sorrowful, but our sorrow shall be turned into 
joy. And Paul also tells us : "As the sufferings of 
Christ abound in us, so our consolation also 
aboundeth by Christ." II Cor. 1:5. And Paul 
further says: "Though our outward man perish, 
yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For 
our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; while we look not at the things 
that are seen, but at the things which are not seen : 
for the things which are seen are temporal ; but the 
things which are not seen are eternal." II Cor. 
4:16-18. Hence, my dear wife, we must now have 
respect unto what Moses had respect, and esteem 
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treas- 
ures in Egypt, and always have respect unto the re- 
ward, and by faith forsake the Egyptian nation, and 
not fear the cruelty of the king, but always cleave 
to the invisible God, as though we saw Him. Thus, 
my dear wife, I commend you and my children to 
this same God, that He will keep you, and provide 
for you in all your needs, for I do not know whether 
I shall be able to write you any more ; I now expect 
a change soon, for the bailiff is come, so that it 
seems to me, that there may probably be a change 
in my situation. You wrote me about that man at 
Cassel : but I do not think that he was of our faith, 
for the priest considers us the worst sect under 
heaven. Hence, it may turn out differently with 
me, than with the man at Cassel, for we are the 
filth or offscouring of this world. For the priests 
said to me that in the last council of Trent we were 
denied all countries, and had no liberty. Hence, 
my dear wife, if I must also be one to fulfill the 
number, be patient, this I pray you, and do the best 
with the children, and commit your matters to the 
Lord, and hope in Him ; He will bring it to pass for 


Sirach says: "The Lord never forsook any that 
abode in the fear of God, nor that put their hope in 
him." Eccl. 2. 

Herewith, I commend my dear wife to the Lord, 
and to the rich Word of His grace. Amen. 

Greet the acquaintances that are with you much 
in my name, and always keep yourself pure in the 
fear of God. 

Written on the 12th of March, 1588, by me, your 
husband. Christiaen Rijcen. 


ANOTHER CONSOLATORY LETTER FROM CHRIS- 
TIAEN RIJCEN, WRITTEN TO HIS WIFE, WHEN 
HE SUPPOSED THAT HIS CASE SHOULD BE 
DISPOSED OF; AND HOW SOME CONSOLE 
HIM WITH THE [CONCLUSION OF] PEACE 
THAT HE SHOULD THEN BE RELEASED 

Grace, mercy, peace and love be unto you from 
God our heavenly Father, through His Son Jesus 
Christ. Amen. This I wish you, my dear and be- 
loved wife, as an affectionate greeting. 

And after all salutation, I, Christiaen Rijcen, in- 
form you, my dear wife, that I am in tolerably good 
health (praise and glory to the Lord for His 
grace), as I trust is also the case with you and the 
children. 

Know further, that I received your letter, and I 
am much rejoiced that you are of such good cheer, 
and that you still comfort me, for which I heartily 
thank you. And I would also like to write some- 
thing for your consolation, that you may be of good 
cheer ; but, my dear wife, the greatest consolation 
is the Lord, who has taken me from you ; who, as I 
hope, will assist you in all your need, and provided 
for you, if you do not forsake Him. For Paul says : 
"We are perplexed, but not in despair ; persecuted, 
but not forsaken." II Cor. 4:8,9. Paul further 
says that He will not leave us nor forsake us, so 
that we may boldly say : "The Lord is my helper, 
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me." 
Hebrews 13 :5, 6. Sirach also says : "Did ever any 
trust in the Lord, and was confounded ? or did any 
abide in his fear and was forsaken? or whom did 
he ever despise, that called upon him?" Eccl. 2 :16. 
Hence, my dear wife put your entire hope in God, 
and say with Jeremiah: "Lord, thou art my ref- 
uge, my strength, and my comfort in distress." 
Jer. 16:19. And also with David, saying: "If I 
only have thee Lord, I care not for heaven or earth ; 
yea, though my body and soul should fail, thou art 
the comfort and portion of my heart." Ps. 73 :25, 
26. And remember also, that Sara, when she was 
in great tribulation, said, that she well knew that 
all those that will serve God, after temptation, are 
delivered, and comforted in sorrow, and after all 
correction, they find grace; and after the great 
storm He makes the sun to shine again, and after 
weeping and lamenting, He gives joy abundantly, 
Tob. 3. Thus, my dear wife, console yourself with 
these words; though we must now mourn and 
weep, let us have good courage ; for the Lord shall 


1068 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


see us again, and our hearts shall rejoice, and no 
man shall take away our joy. And Christ says: 
"Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and 
when they shall separate you from their company, 
and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that 
day, and leap for joy ; for, behold, your reward is 
great in heaven, for in like manner did their fathers 
unto the prophets." Luke 6 :22, 23. Christ further 
says : "Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall 
laugh," v. 21. With these words comfort yourself. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and as re- 
gards my case, I know nothing special to write 
you. I expected this week, that they would dispose 
of the matter ; but it seems to me, that God has not 
given them the power yet. There are some, as I 
think, that would have it; but it seems that the 
Lord does not permit them. Some console me with 
the [conclusion of] peace, that they shall then re- 
lease me. Thus, my dear wife, I have committed it 
to the Lord. Do you so also, and greet all acquaint- 
ances much in my name, and always keep yourself 
pure in the fear of God, and always do your best 
with the children. Nothing more for this time, but 
farewell. In haste, this 19th of March, 1588. 

By me, your beloved husband. 

Christiaen Rijcen. 

christiaen rijcen exhorts his wife firmly 

to trust in the lord, and informs her, 

that he was assailed once more this 

week by the pastor and a franciscan 

friar, who tempted him by threats 

and fair words to apostatize; 

and of the terror that came 

upon him the following night 

Grace, peace and love be unto you from God our 
heavenly Father, through His Son Jesus Christ. 
Amen. This, I wish you, my very dear and be- 
loved wife, as an affectionate greeting in the Lord. 

And after all salutation, I inform you, my very 
dear and beloved wife, that I am still well accord- 
ing to soul and body, praise, glory and thanks be 
forever to the Lord, for His great goodness, who 
has called me to this time, and kept me, that I am 
worthy to suffer a little for His name ; and I also 
trust by the grace of the Lord, that you and the 
children are also well, though I understand from 
your letter, that you have had the ague. I hope in 
our dear Lord, that He will succor you; and not 
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able ; 
but that with this temptation He will also make a 
way to escape, so that you will be able to bear it. 
O my dearest love, trust with all your heart in the 
Lord, and do not forsake your friend, that loves 
your soul, since you have found Him, as the bride 
in Cant. (3:4) ; but cleave faithfully to Him, and 
take Him for your Husband, and for a Father for 
my children, and diligently instruct my children, 
that they obey this Father all the days of their life ; 
and you too, my dear wife, be also faithful to your 


Husband Christ, and do not forsake Him in any 
distress, for His promises are, that He will also not 
forsake you. I must now leave you with sorrow ; 
but, my dear wife, I hope that we shall find each 
other in life eternal, where we shall part no more. 

my dear wife, I would like it so much, if the fight 
here were fought, so that I might say with Paul : 
"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is 
laid up for us the crown of life." II Tim. 4:7. Oh, 
then my heart would rejoice ; but there is conflict 
here yet sometimes. This week I have had with me 
the pastor and a Franciscan friar once more, who 
came to see whether I would not hearken. The 
pastor said that the recorder had told him, that let- 
ters had come from the court [to the effect that] if 

1 would not hearken, and repent, they knew what 
they were to do with me. I told the pastor, that I 
wanted to wrong no one ; but as regards my faith, 
I said, I have received it from the Lord, and! I can- 
not forsake it. Then they used fair words and 
said : "If you will hearken, you may live here with 
us, and be a man of honor." I said : "I want to do 
well, like a man of honor, and to wrong no one; 
and that if I should do wrong to any one, that they 
should punish me twice as much as another that 
had done the same thing as I." Against this they 
did not say very much. We had many words, 
which it would take too long to write. I therefore 
do not know what they will do with me. 

My dear and beloved wife, you must know yet, 
that the night after the pastor had been with me, a 
great terror came upon me, inasmuch as I thought 
that they should put me in irons, or place me upon 
the rack, which so terrified me, that the perspira- 
tion issued from my body, so that I was wet from 
it ; which made me very sorrowful, but I remem- 
bered Christ, when His sufferings came upon Him 
so that His sweat rolled from Him as drops of 
blood, down to the ground; wherein I consoled 
myself a little, and it also seems to me, that the 
Lord sent it to me, that I should not boast of my- 
self, but that I should rely only upon the Lord and 
not upon my own strength, as I also hope to 
do. And I pray my dear wife, that she will help 
me pray to the Lord, that the Lord will strengthen 
and confirm me with His Spirit, that I need not 
fear men, nor the children of men, since they shall 
perish as grass. 

Herewith I commend you to the Lord, and to the 
rich Word of His grace. Amen. 

And greet your landlord in my name, and give 
him for this time this hymn ; and greet from me 
also all the others that live near you. Nothing more 
for this time, except that I heartily thank you for 
your comforting treasures, which you send me to 
my great consolation, for they come very conveni- 
ent to me. Farewell and console yourself in the 
Lord, for these, my bonds shall be no disgrace to 
you, for I have done nothing amiss to any one (the 
Lord be praised) that can say anything evil of me 
wherein I greatly rejoice. ' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1069 


Thus, my dear wife, be faithful to the Lord, for 
He that shall continue faithful unto death, shall 
have the crown of eternal life. 

Written on the 27th of March, A. D. 1588, by 
me, your beloved husband. Christiaen Rijcen. 


CHRISTIAEN RIJCEN INFORMS HIS WIFE, THAT HE 
HAD EXPECTED TO RECEIVE HIS SENTENCE, AND 
THAT HE HAD AN IRON ON HIS LEG FOR EIGHT- 
EEN OR NINETEEN DAYS, WITH A LOG, UPON 
THE STRAW, BUT THAT NOW AGAIN HE 
HAD A LITTLE MORE COMFORT 

I must inform you of something yet, my dear 
wife, namely, that I constantly hoped last week, 
that I should receive my sentence: but it did not 
come ; hence I longed much the more for it, so that 
I daily waited for comfort, which did not come, as 
I think, my dear wife, that you have also done. 
But I have now committed it to the Lord, and hope 
to wait with patience for the day that shall comfort 
us ; and I pray you, my dear wife, that you do like- 
wise. I further inform you, my dear wife, that 
about eighteen or nineteen days I was confined 
with an iron on my leg, with a log, upon the straw, 
which was quite uncomfortable, and always in my 
clothes. But the Lord be praised, it did not grieve 
me, but I thought that we must follow the Lord 
through want and adversity, even as the saints went 
before ; but now I have good comfort and am very 
well according to the body, and Joost shows me 
great friendship, more than I shall be able to repay 
him. And, my wife, I pray you, make as few words 
with those of Hontschote as you can, lest perad- 
venture the authorities should hear that you were 
there, and send word of it to those of Bergen. But 
if you can speak to N. [do so;] he often comes to 
Bergen. But, my dear wife, if you have any word 
to send me, tell it to N. or N., who will deliver the 
message to me ; and neglect by no means to write 
to me how it is with you and the children, and how 
you get along. Nothing more for this time, but be 
commended to the Lord, and to the rich Word of 
His grace. Amen. By me, your husband. 

Christiaen Rijcen. 


PIETER SAYMER, A. D. 1588 

In the year 1588, Pieter Saymer was apprehend- 
ed at Freiburg in Bavaria ; having staid there over 
night, in an inn, with a landlord, and about to 
proceed on his way in the morning, a beadle seized 
and apprehended him. He was then conducted to 
Berckhausen, and very briefly examined, and con- 
tinuing steadfast, was taken back to Freiburg. The 
third day after, the judge himself had him brought 
out of prison, and advised him to renounce. But he 
answered: "I cannot renounce the true faith in 
Jesus Christ, nor the keeping of God's command- 
ments, though it should cost me body and life." 
Then his end was announced to him, and the staff 
broken over him, which caused his heart to leap for 


joy, and he greatly thanked and praised God, say- 
ing then : "I have one head, and if I had two, or still 
more, I would rather suffer them all to be cut off, 
than to renounce my faith." 

There was much people present, and some wept 
over him when he was led out ; but he said : "You 
need not weep over me, for I am of good cheer in 
God;" and he sang for joy, which the priests 
would not tolerate, neither the actuary. There 
came a simple man, a fisherman, to him and said : 
"Dear Pieter, renounce, and spare yourself." But 
he said : "Be silent, you neither know nor are able 
to comprehend what there is at stake for me." He 
then knelt down and offered up his prayer to God 
in heaven, and while he thus kneeling performed 
his prayer, the executioner struck off his head, 
which when it fell down to the ground, rolled about 
wonderfully, and finally lay still with the face 
turned toward the executioner, at which the people 
greatly marveled. 

Thus, he testified with his blood to the faith and 
the divine truth, and obtained the crown of eternal 
life, which occurred on the 8th of July, 1588. 


JOOST DE TOLLENAER, MICHIEL BUYSE, AND 
SIJNTGEN WENS, A. D. 1589 

On the 13th of January, A. D. 1589, at ten 
o'clock in the night, there were apprehended at 
Ghent, in Flanders, for the practice of the truth 
and following Christ, two brethren and one sister, 
namely, Joost de Tollenaer, Michiel Buyse, and 
Sijntgen Wens; who, after much temptation and 
torment (in which they constantly remained stead- 
fast), were finally publicly sentenced to death as 
heretics, but secretly, with locked doors, in the 
count's castle, strangled at the stake, after which 
the two brethren were suspended from the gallows 
without, and the woman buried under it, which 
happened on the 13th of April of the aforesaid vear 
1589. 

And as several letters of Joost de Tollenaer have 
come to our hands, we have added them here, for 
the benefit of the reader. 


THE FIRST LETTER OF JOOST DE TOLLENAER 

Grace and peace from God our heavenly Father 
through Jesus Christ His beloved Son, our Lord 
and Saviour ; may He, Lowijs, my dear brother in 
the Lord, and also Janneken, Jacomijntgen, and 
Sijntgen, my dear sisters in the Lord, together 
with all beloved brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
strengthen and confirm you with His Holy Spirit 
in the inner man, so that you may obtain the end of 
your faith, to the salvation of your souls, and to the 
praise, glory, honor of, and gratitude to, Him that 
lives forever and ever. Amen. 

After all affectionate and Christian salutation to 
you my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, I in- 
form you, that I am in good health according to the 
flesh, the Lord be thanked; and according to the 


1070 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


spirit, my mind is fixed, by the grace of the Lord, 
to adhere to the holy Christian truth, since there is 
no other salvation to be obtained, neither in heaven 
nor upon earth, than through Jesus Christ, who is 
the truth and the life. Hence, know, my dear 
brethren and sisters, that I am of very good cheer 
in the Lord, with my fellow prisoners, though all 
three of us are confined separately ; and the jailer 
has strict orders, not to allow us to come together, 
nor to speak. It is a little close now, but there are 
Habakkuks who sometimes assist us, and though it 
is a little distressing, we have a very great consola- 
tion, namely, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, the 
same helper and succorer that comforted the holy 
apostles in their tribulation. Hence, I pray and 
supplicate day and night to the Lord my God, that 
He would graciously assist me, and help me to tri- 
umph, so that His holy name may be eternally 
praised through me poor one ; and that He would 
take from me that which might hinder me; and 
thus I have committed myself to the eternal, al- 
mighty, strong God, through Jesus Christ our eter- 
nal Saviour. 

Thus, my dearest friends, the Lord has heard my 
voice, and looked upon me miserable, imperfect 
man, who am but dust and ashes, and too unwor- 
thy for all this mercy, that He has called me to have 
tribulation, bonds, affliction, and temptation for 
His name ; so that I have such courage and joy, that 
I could not express to you with the mouth the joy 
and gladness which the Lord is giving me by His 
Spirit, so that I often think in my heart : "O Lord, 
is this sorrow and tribulation, affliction and bonds, 
or grief?" For in all the time that I unworthily 
walked in the truth, I never had such joy and glad- 
ness. But when I think of the eternal joy, of the 
great and comforting promises of happiness, which 
the Lord has prepared for His chosen, and for all 
those that continue steadfast unto the end — that 
they shall follow the immaculate Lamb Christ Je- 
sus, with shining white raiment, and branches of 
palm in their hands, and shall moreover be crowned 
with the crown of eternal life; that He shall lead 
them to the fountain of eternal life, and thus wipe 
away all tears from our eyes ; then it seems that my 
heart would burst with joy, when I behold all this 
in the spirit ; so mighty is the Lord, and so can He 
comfort those that surrender themselves with all 
their hearts. For, friends, it has now come so far, 
that I count all that is temporal and perishable loss 
for Christ's sake, and the Lord has given me grace, 
so that I am not hindered by temporal affairs, 
which I accept as a great gift from the Lord. 

Hence, my dear and beloved, rejoice with me in 
the spirit, thanking the Lord, that He so graciously 
assists your weak brother with His Spirit and 
Word. All those that shall read or hear read this 
my letter, I pray out of brotherly love, that you 
will bow the knees of your heart before the Most 
High, that He may strengthen us by His Spirit, so 
that we may finish to His holy praise the work 
which He has begun in us. For, friends, we expect 


nothing else, but that we shall be offered up, es- 
pecially I and Michiel ; and this on account of sev- 
eral things that we confessed in our examinations. 
They first asked me my age. I said : "About fifty 
years." They asked whether I was rebaptized. I 
said : "No;" but told them that I had suffered my- 
self to be baptized in the name of the Father, the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost, upon the confession of 
my sins, for which I was heartily sorry, and upon 
the confession of my faith in Christ Jesus, that He 
is the Son of the living God. This was written 
down. They asked how long ago that was. I said : 
"Twenty-six years last Christmas." They won- 
dered that I had ruled so long. Question: "Are 
you in the ministry of the deaconship, or have you 
been in it?" I freely confessed that I was in the 
ministry, though I said I am not worthy of it. 
They further asked me whether I exhorted, or had 
exhorted. I said: "No." They asked me whether 
not lately a man had been here, that had preached 
in the place. I was silent. After much questioning, 
however, I told them, that we were not allowed of 
God to implicate or accuse any one. Finally they 
told me all the circumstances, namely, that Jan de 
Wever had been in the city, and that on a certain 
night a receiving of members had taken place se- 
cretly, three or four having been taken in ; and they 
briefly said that our sister who was confined with 
us had confessed it, for they had tortured her. And 
they asked me, whether Hans had lodged at my 
house; they knew all about it, I could not contra- 
dict it, but had to admit it. They said that this had 
been prohibited. I answered that I did not regret 
having lodged him, and if it were to do again, I 
should gladly do it. This that I did not regret it, 
was ill received. 

They also asked me, whether I had advised, or 
consented, to send for Jan de Wever. I said : "Yes, 
with all my heart." This also was ill received ; but 
I care little if they did receive it ill, for they receive 
everything in the very worst way. Thus they went 
with it to the lords of the council, according to what 
I have since learned ; and besides, they must have 
fuller advice from the court. 

I have written this briefly, for to write all would 
have been too long, because I have not enough ma- 
terials to write everything. I should like it, if this 
letter or a copy of it would be sent to those of Har- 
lem. There was once without my knowledge a let- 
ter sent by those of Harlem, and found in the house 
of Michiel Buyse, which brought severe charges 
against me, in regard to one hundred pounds which 
had been sent to the poor, and which I was said to 
have received; and also concerning a legacy of 
twenty-four pounds, of Joost Daems. I replied 
thereupon, that I had never seen the letter, which is 
the case ; but these letters cause great grief. I have 
received as many letters as any man in Flanders or 
Brabant ; but I cleared myself from every impor- 
tant imputation. However, tribulation and bonds 
must come from somewhere; and, moreover, the 
Lord be thanked, I do not trouble myself about it. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1071 


I am satisfied with everything that the Lord has 
sent me. God the Lord suffers it to happen, that 
He may thereby prove, whether there is any thing 
in my heart that is displeasing to Him, or whether 
I love aught more than Him ; for the Lord is jeal- 
ous, and He will be alone the dearest, of which He 
is also well worthy, for He has dearly purchased 
us, namely, with the precious blood of His Son, 
our Lord Jesus Christ ; hence we must also prove 
in the power of our faith, that we love Him above 
husband, wife or child, house, field, gold, silver, 
and the last and dearest pledge, that is our own life. 

When one is thus brought to the touchstone, 
then it is made manifest upon what one has built, 
whether it be gold, silver, precious stones, or wood, 
hay, or stubble ; for everyone's work shall then be 
made manifest, as by fire. Hence, I counsel my 
dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, that are now 
at liberty, that you will wake up manfully, for it 
may easily come to pass, that persecution will also 
arise among you, as now in Flanders ; for this lib- 
erty we also had about seven years. Hence, all 
true soldiers in Christ Jesus are always to equip 
themselves with the armor of righteousness, hav- 
ing on the helmet of salvation and the breastplate 
of righteousness, girded with the girdle of truth, 
having the sword of the Spirit, and the shield of 
faith, wherewith one is able to quench all the fiery 
darts of the wicked. But, friends, the slothful 
would sometimes allow their weapons to stand in 
a corner, and thus they would easily rust; and 
when there would be a necessity for conflict, that 
the enemy (who walketh about as a fierce lion) 
should come upon us, then alas ! they would have 
to be sought in the corner, completely rusted over, 
and thus the enemy should surprise us by strategy. 
Therefore Paul gives good advice, saying : "Watch 
ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be 
strong. Let all your things be done with charity." 
I Cor. 16:13, 14. 

Friends, I should write more, but you are your- 
selves taught of God ; and as the anointing teacheth 
you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and 
even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in it. 
I John 2 :27. I will herewith commend you to the 
Lord, and to the Word of His grace. Take my pre- 
sumptuous letter in good part. 

Know, brother, that I have written my daughter 
a testament letter, in case our life here should soon 
close. 

By me, your weak brother in the Lord, on the 
13th of January, 1589, imprisoned for the truth. 
Amen. Joost de Tollenaer. 


THE SECOND LETTER FROM JOOST DE TOLLENAER 

I wish you, my heartily beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord (who as scattered strangers are 
dispersed in every country, driven and persecuted 
from their lands, cities, houses, and goods, and this 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ), grace, peace and 
mercy from God our heavenly Father, through 


Jesus Christ His only begotten Son our Lord and 
Saviour, through whom we have become partakers 
of the divine promises in His holy name, for He has 
cleansed us by the washing of regeneration in His 
holy blood, and chosen us from all kindreds of the 
earth, for a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual 
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Christ. May He 
strengthen and confirm my dear and in God be- 
loved brethren and sisters, with His Holy Spirit, in 
the inner man, to the praise and glory of the great, 
invincible God of heaven and earth, that you may 
shine as bright lights among the heathen nations 
among whom you dwell as scattered) strangers, so 
that many thousands may take hold of your skirts, 
and say: "My dear, we will go up with you; for 
we see that the Lord is with you." Zech. 8 :23. To 
this end may the Lord give you His blessing, to the 
praise, glory and honor of His holy, great and 
adorable name. 

After wishing all Christian salutation to you, 
my dear and in God beloved brethren and sisters in 
the Lord, and hearing by our last examinations, 
of the 23d and 28th of March, that the time of our 
pilgrimage may very soon be at an end, I felt con- 
strained by brotherly and simple love, to write you, 
my dear friends a little, thereby making known to 
you joyful tidings, namely, that, by the grace of 
the Lord, I and my fellowprisoners are of good 
courage in soul and body, to adhere to the holy 
truth as long as we have the breath of life in us, 
having committed body and soul into God's pow- 
erful keeping — for you welcome news, and for us 
a happy portion. May God through grace grant 
this to us, as servants unworthy of being partakers 
of His sufferings. But I rejoice in the spirit with 
all my heart, that God has called me to such grace, 
of which the world is not worthy, because of the 
unbelief of their hearts. 

Further, my dear and affectionately beloved 
brethren and sisters in the Lord, it is our cordial 
request to all the elect, that fear God from the heart, 
truly and fervently, in a holy faith which worketh 
by love, that you will bow the knees of your heart 
before the Almighty God, the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, to pray for us prisoners, as impris- 
oned with them, and for us that suffer adversity, 
as being yourselves also in the body; so that we 
may gloriously accomplish the end of our faith 
(which through the grace of God we confessed 
before this evil and wicked generation, who are 
enemies of the cross of Christ), and yield our 
bodies a sacrifice acceptable unto God through 
Jesus Christ, to the praise of His great name, the 
edification of our neighbor, and for a light unto the 
world ; this is the prayer of us all. 

Furthermore, dear friends, I find in this my trib- 
ulation, afflictions and bonds and reproach, that 
happened to me, unworthy one, for the righteous- 
ness of God, that God is faithful in all His prom- 
ises ; who does not suffer us to be tempted above 
that we are able, but makes with the temptation also 
a way to escape. He does not leave His people com- 


1072 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


fortless ; He will with His Spirit answer for us be- 
fore kings and princes, as much as we shall need in 
that time. He has said: "I will never leave thee, 
nor forsake thee." Hence, I will rely on the Lord, 
and not fear what man shall do unto me. Though 
they now break the earthly house of this taber- 
nacle, we know assuredly, that for the righteous 
there is a dwelling prepared in heaven, which is 
not made with hands, but is eternal; for which 
house my soul has a heart-felt desire. For, friends, 
there is always a very great conflict, outwardly 
and inwardly ; for within flesh and blood manifest 
their nature, which must be resisted by faith ; out- 
wardly, against the pride of the world and the false 
prophets, and lying spirits, against which we must 
fight valiantly with the sword of the Spirit, which 
is the Word of God. O friends, I have already 
well proved it: for I have been assailed by them 
twelve different times, six times by the secular 
authorities, and six times by the false prophets. 
The authorities said to me, that I had a spirit of 
pride in me and such evil opinions; and that I 
therefore would not suffer myself to be moved. I 
asked them, whether that was great pride, that I 
suffered myself to be spoiled of all my property, of 
wife and child, and finally to be a spectacle to all 
men ; that I shall be burnt at the stake, and thus 
my flesh be given for food to the beasts and to the 
birds of heaven. They said again : "Yes, you pride 
yourself therein." I said : "No, but we rejoice be- 
cause we have become partakers of Christ's suf- 
ferings." 

I warned them, that they should take heed, be- 
fore they laid their hands upon those that seek to 
practice their faith in peace, that have done in- 
jury to neither you nor yours. They said that we 
were rebels and seditious, and seduced many 
simple hearts, and drew them to our faith, and that 
we were worthy of greater punishment than thieves 
and robbers. I said: "We seduce no souls; but 
your false prophets seduce many thousands of 
souls by their doctrine and false religion, which 
they practice under a semblance of holiness." 

They looked at me sternly. Many other things 
were said, which I do not deem necessary to write. 
And as further regards their asking for my age, 
and how long I had been in the faith, and concern- 
ing my deaconship, I have written it in my other 
letter, which some of you may have read, as I un- 
derstand from a letter which I received yesterday. 
The same came very welcome to me ; for, friends, 
it does so much good, when letters of comfort and 
warning arrive, yea, they are more acceptable than 
many pieces of gold. For, friends, a line written 
by the labor of another, tastes much better than 
if one had ten times more with himself. 

Further, friends, ten or twelve days afterwards 
the authorities sent two learned men, the parish 
priest of St. John, and a canon, who also had much 
to say and made a very long speech, finally asking 
me, why I had departed from the mother, the 
Catholic Roman Church. I very briefly said that 


I did not regard it as the true, holy church. They 
asked: "Why?" I said: "Because there is nothing 
else practiced than a false, invented religion." This 
they took very ill, and very many things were said 
upon it, very much as it was with our friends in 
former times. 

And in about ten or twelve days after that, they 
came again and brought with them the priest Mi- 
chielken, who is an apostate, and has by this time 
become a priest. Then the parish priest, whose 
name is Sir Jan van Dale, said to me: "Do you 
know Sir Michielken?" I said: "Yes." He said: 
"Why do you not also turn from your heresy, as 
Sir Michielken has done? If your belief were 
good, he would not have departed from it, and re- 
turned to the mother, the holy church." I said that 
he had departed from the holy church of God, to 
the worship of idols and to the doctrine of devils. 
They asked: "What is idolatry in our church?" 
I said : "In the first place, all the images that stand 
in it, before which you burn candles, offer sacrifice 
and bow your knees." They said that the images 
were the books for the simple, and the mass and 
sacrifice which they performed, were all holy pray- 
ers. I said: "If all were good, as you say, you 
should put it into Flemish or into Dutch, so that 
the simple might be taught. For this purpose you 
have the Gospel book, from which you might teach. 
But you are afraid, that the people might learn too 
much from it." In short, we also had very many 
words in regard to the sending of preachers, and 
of infant baptism; but I deem it unnecessary to 
write much about it, for it all goes the same way as 
is written in the Offerboeck; for if I were to write 
all, I should not be able to put it on seven or eight 
sheets of paper ; and much of it I have also forgot- 
ten, for it occurred at so many different times. 

Finally there came the pensionary Schoockman 
with his son, who is clerk of the criminal court. 
He ordered that I and Michiel Buyse should come 
together, to speak with him. Hence I prayed the 
Lord, that He would keep me according to His 
promise. Then I went downstairs, and when I and 
Michiel got there, we respectfully saluted him, and 
he also bade us a good evening. He asked us to- 
gether, whether we did not tire of being in prison 
so long. Answer: "We must be patient therein." 
"Yes," said he, "it is your fault, and you inflict it 
upon yourselves ; if you would suffer yourselves to 
be moved, and would depart from your opinion, 
all should be well, for it is only vainglory and a 
spirit of pride, that impels you to it." I told him as 
I said before, that this which demands the sacrifice 
of body and property was not pride. He strenu- 
ously defended the Roman Empire, and greatly ex- 
alted the church of the priests, that it had been 
from the time of the apostles until now. He also 
adduced many unscriptural arguments, which are 
not worthy of being written. And again, he said : 
"Though there are some abuses, it is therefore none 
the less the faith. I am well aware, that there are 
priests who might live more virtuously; but we 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1073 


must not look to their works, but hearken after 
their words." Michiel said: "A good tree bears 
good fruit, which a bad tree does not." 

In the second place, I said : "My lords, we have 
the truth, and I hope by the grace of God, that we 
shall adhere to it unto the end." He also made 
many words, saying that he had come out of com- 
passion which he had for us; "and inasmuch," 
said he, "as you will not hearken to the clergy, 
I come of my own accord, finding myself con- 
strained thereto, hoping that you would hearken 
to me more." For (said he, and smote his breast) 
if it had not been for him, it would already have 
been over with us, but he had prevented it. We 
also know, that he has very great influence, with 
the court as well as with the lords of the city, for 
in many things in the government of the city, his 
wishes, to a great extent, are consulted. Thus he 
finally said (smiting his breast once more), that we 
should have to die; "for," said he, "it has been 
determined by the lords of the council of Flanders, 
by the high council, by the court, and by His High- 
ness the Prince of Parma." Thereupon I joyfully 
replied, saying : "The will of the Lord be done with 
us; to this end (once to die), are we born." 

"Yes," said he, "the dying is a small matter, 
but that you shall hereafter go into perdition !" for 
he had previously damned us many times. Hence, 
Michiel answered, that judgment belonged to God. 
Then he said: "Perhaps you say that we are 
damned." Thereupon, I said, "We do not con- 
demn those that are without us; God will judge 
them." But, friends, they are a presumptuous 
proud tribe, and they blaspheme God and His holy 
temple without any fear. He further also said : "If 
we would renounce, he should do his best with His 
Highness, though he should have to travel to the 
court himself, which should cost a good deal." 
Thus, friends, it seems, according to what we hear, 
that though we should forsake the faith, we should 
still be in peril of death. And thus he finally left 
us, begging us to think of his words. "I hope," 
said he, "that the Holy Spirit will work in them." 
But we had another hope, namely, that God the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ shall strengthen 
us by His Spirit, that we may abide in the truth 
unto the end of our life. 

Friends, we were with him over two hours. 
And we used few words, except now and then, 
when we could not pass something by, which re- 
quired a reply ; for much speaking is of little avail, 
and they say that they come to teach us ; but we do 
not want to be taught by them. This the priests 
said to me alone, for we were examined separately, 
except this last time. 

And about five or six days after, he sent his son 
to us once more, asking us, whether we had at- 
tended to and considered this matter. Thereupon 
we said that we wanted to adhere to the faith in 
Jesus Christ, as we confessed from the first. 
Hence, he left us, which was on the 28th of March. 


Thus, my affectionately beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, we daily expect the day of our 
redemption, that we might offer up our sacrifice. 
I had almost forgotten to state that the pensionary 
had told us : "You may perhaps be taken una- 
wares some night, when you will least expect it." 
Hence, God knows what they have in mind. They 
have no power over us, except the Lord permit 
them. God is our strength and power, and the 
sword of our conquest. And though we must suffer 
for His sake, we must possess our souls with pa- 
tience, remembering, that the apostle says (I Pet. 
2 :20) , that it is acceptable with God, to suffer for 
well-doing ; though, dear brethren and sisters in the 
Lord, the world does not regard it as acceptable, 
for (I Corinthians 1 :18) it is written: "That the 
preaching of the cross is to them that perish, fool- 
ishness ; but unto us which are saved, it is the pow- 
er of God, which power God works by His Spirit, 
to the comfort and strengthening of their mind." 
Hence, my dear brethren and sisters, watch ye, 
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong, 
and let all your things be done with charity, so that 
you may grow up and increase, and not depart in 
love, in hope, in faith, which is a precious treasure, 
that we have received in our earthen vessels 
through the Holy Spirit. Keep it diligently with 
great carefulness, for part of us have long labored 
for it, and through light minded carelessness one 
is so soon spoiled of it, and then all labor that has 
been done is lost. For if the righteous man shall 
turn away, says the Lord, my soul shall have no 
pleasure in him. He forsakes the fountain of living 
waters, and they that depart from him shall be 
written in the earth, neither shall their names be 
found in the book of life. Heb. 10:38; Jer. 2:13; 
17:13; Philippians 4:3. 

Hence, watch in the faith, and let us exercise as 
great care for our spiritual treasure which we have 
through grace received by faith in Christ Jesus, as 
many a man exercises for his perishable treasures, 
which thieves and robbers covet, as sometimes ap- 
pears ; as for instance in my own case, and that of 
Michiel my fellowprisoner ; for they have robbed 
us of nearly everything. And many are of such 
a disposition, that they like to acquire temporal 
wealth, not properly considering the words of 
Paul, that such fall into temptation and great 
snares. I Tim. 6 :9. And covetousness, which Paul 
calls idolatry (Eph. 5 :S), has a long cloak, so that 
one cannot easily get at it. And they gather great 
treasures for their children, which is opening a 
wide door by which to introduce them into the 
world. But the best treasure which can be left to 
children, is this: To instruct them from their 
youth to fear God ; to present to them the Word of 
the Lord, as far as their understanding can com- 
prehend it, and as the forefathers taught their 
children, to fear God, shun sin, and do good, as we 
have examples in Abraham, who commanded his 
children after him; likewise in Susanna; also in 
old Tobit, who taught his son from his youth to 


1074 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


fear God; and also in Sara, the daughter of Ra- 
guel. 

Friends, diligently search the Scriptures, which 
will sufficiently instruct you. Let us always follow 
that which is good, and exhort and provoke one 
another to good works, to excel therein. Hence, I 
write once more as before ; for the axe is now al- 
ready laid at the root of the trees, and every tree 
which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down 
and cast in the fire. Matt. 3:10. And that we be 
not like the five foolish virgins; that when the 
Bridegroom comes we be not sleeping, so that we 
may then not have to go and buy the oil to burn in 
our lamps. Hence, the faith which worketh by 
love shall shine gloriously before the Lord. For 
not everyone that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall 
enter into the kingdom of God; but he that doeth 
the will of my Father which is in heaven. Matthew 
7:21. 

Hence, Christ says : "Blessed are they that hear 
the word of God, and keep it." Luke 1 1 :28. 
"Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the 
words of this prophecy, and keep those things 
which are written therein : for the time is at hand." 
Rev. 1:3. Let us continue in Christ's word, and 
we shall also be His disciples, and remain such 
forever. John 8:31. 

Further, my affectionately beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, we find in all the Scriptures, 
that all the holy patriarchs, prophets, and apostles 
were moved to teach and exhort us to peace, love 
and unity; for the apostle says: "The peace of 
God, which passeth all understanding, keep your 
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus." Phil. 4 :7. Pe- 
ter says : "Unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see 
that ye love one another with a pure heart fer- 
vently : being born again, not of corruptible seed, 
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which 
liveth and abideth forever." I Pet. 1 :22, 23. O 
friends, where love, peace and unity exist in the 
church, there is exceeding wealth. The Psalmist 
truly says: "How pleasant it is for brethren to 
dwell together in unity! it is like precious oint- 
ment." Ps. 133 :1, 2. But where there is discord, 
there the hearts must grievously sigh over one an- 
other, and eat their bread with mourning; and 
thus the feast days (when the bread of the Lord 
should be broken in the Lord's church, in remem- 
brance of the abundant benefits of the Lord) are 
turned into days of mourning, which to behold 
causes great sorrow to the simple ; as, alas ! is to be 
lamented with weeping eyes at Harlem and con- 
cerning several other churches that are infected 
with such diseases, which is a sorry thing for me 
and others with me in our countries to hear. May 
the complaint thereof ascend to the Lord in high 
heaven. 

Oh, that God would grant grace, that they could 
bear one another in love, and that the principal ones 
would bow themselves under the mighty hand of 
God, and deny themselves, for the holy will of the 
Lord and for the sake of His church. I should hope 


that it would not give them an evil conscience, if 
they submitted to it for the sake of peace, and if 
everyone were little in his own eyes ; how well it 
should go, and how soon everything should be 
peacefully settled ! O friends, let us bow the knees 
of our hearts before the Lord, that Christian unity 
among one another may come upon the spiritual 
Israel, so that a triumphant thanksgiving with joy 
and gladness in the spirit may be observed in all 
the churches. Hence seek peace, and pursue after 
it. Heb. 12:14. Consider the word, pursue; for 
when a man pursues something, he goes after it 
with haste. O friends, it is more than time for you 
to make peace and unity, lest haply the Lord pun- 
ish in wrath. For no one is assured, that there will 
always remain liberty in the country; there will 
perhaps be a change in the country there, as there 
is in Flanders and Brabant. 

Hence, my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
I and my fellowprisoners pray you, and this with 
bended knees and a sad heart, in the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ (before whom every knee must 
bow, and who shall also without respect to persons 
recompense every one, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad), that you will 
make peace and unity with the Lord ; for blessed 
are the peacemakers, says Christ; for they shall in- 
herit the kingdom of heaven ; so that the pleasant 
mountain of the Lord, and the holy city of Jerusa- 
lem, may be found in glorious appearance, with all 
her pleasant fountains, from which the waters of 
the Holy Spirit spring forth abundantly, into the 
hearts of the elect and holy citizens and of the 
household of God, who are firmly founded upon 
the foundation of the prophets and apostles, of 
which Christ Jesus is the true cornerstone. 

Herewith, I will bid my dear brethren and sisters 
in the Lord, a final farewell and Christian adieu, 
till we meet where parting shall be no more, which 
is m the new, heavenly Jerusalem, where the King 
of kings shall reign forever with the sceptre of His 
eternal, imperishable kingdom. I herewith com- 
mend you to the Lord, and to the comforting, rich 
Word of His grace, by which Word we are called 
in peace, to keep the unity of the Spirit through 
the bond of peace. Adhere valiantly to the truth, 
and pray the Lord for us, as already written ; we 
hope to do the same for you, according to our weak 
ability. I hope that the Lord will keep us unto the 
end of our life. O friends, I have such a heartfelt 
desire for the day of my redemption, to rest under 
the altar, Christ Jesus, with all our dear brethren 
and sisters that have been put to death before us 
for the testimony of Jesus Christ, who did not 
spare their lives, but willingly surrendered them 
for His holy name's sake. 

Thus, my dear brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
hasten, too, and betake your hearts under the 
bloody banner of Jesus Christ, to help bear His re- 
proach without the camp of the Lord, and this from 
pure love without fear. For he that feareth hath 
torment ; but perfect love casteth out fear. I John 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1075 


4 :18. O friends, where such love is, there love is 
stronger than death, and jealousy hard as hell ; the 
coals thereof are coals of fire, and a flame of the 
Lord, so that many waters cannot quench love. 
Cant. 8 :6, 7. Hence, let all your things be done in 
love, and be steadfast and immovable, and abound- 
ing in the work of the Lord, knowing that your 
labor is not in vain in the Lord. I hereby humbly 
pray you, to take my simple writing in good part, 
though it has not been well arranged. For, friends, 
far be it, that I should think myself fit to exhort, 
but I need to be exhorted myself ; but I include my- 
self in everything that I have written here, for it 
has been done out of simple, brotherly love, this the 
Lord knows; and I hope by the grace of God to 
confirm it with my death, as seems probable ac- 
cording to what we hear. The Lord strengthen us 
in our last extremity with His Spirit, who is a 
helper in distress. 

Finally, my dear brethren, rejoice, be perfect, be 
of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace ; and 
the God of love and peace shall be with you. II Co- 
rinthians 13:11. Watch in the faith! 

By me, a weak brother, a feeble member of the 
body of Christ, too undeserving for all the mercy 
of God, and unworthy of His grace, to suffer. O 
Lord, make me, unworthy one, worthy. Michiel 
Buysen and Sijntgen Wens greet you much with 
the peace of the Lord. Joost de Tollenaer. 


ANOTHER LETTER FROM JOOST DE TOLLENAER, TO 
HIS MOTHER 

Grace, peace and mercy from God our heavenly 
Father, through Jesus Christ His only begotten 
Son and the Saviour of the whole world ; for as by 
one man death came into the world, so by one man 
came life into the world, that all that believe in His 
name should obtain eternal life. May He strengthen 
and confirm you with His Holy Spirit in all your 
tribulation and grief which you bear on my ac- 
count ; but be patient, my dear, beloved, old moth- 
er, for your tribulation shall be turned into eternal 

joy- 
To the same only wise and strong, invincible 

God be praise, glory, honor, power and" blessing 
forever and ever. 

After all affectionate and Christian greeting to 
you my dear and in God beloved mother and sister 
in the Lord, whom I love from the very depth of 
my whole heart, I inform you, that my mind is still 
unchanged, hoping by the grace of the Lord to ad- 
here to His holy truth, which I also have not been 
ashamed to confess before men, and this upon the 
consolation that Christ will also not be ashamed to 
confess me before His heavenly Father and His 
holy angels, which will be an everlasting consola- 
tion of reward for those who shall continue in the 
faith steadfast unto the end. To this end may He 
strengthen and confirm me and all those that are 
with me in distress, with His Holy Spirit, so that 
He may ever rule in our hearts to the praise and 
honor of His holy and most worthy and adorable 


name. For this I pray day and night in my weak- 
ness; asking also your love, my beloved mother, 
that you will help pray the Almighty God for us 
poor prisoners, that we may keep the faith in fer- 
vent love unto the end, to the salvation of our souls, 
to the edification of our neighbor, and for a light 
unto the world. 

O my dear, beloved mother, you who have given 
birth to me in such pain and anguish, and have 
moreover brought me up with great carefulness, 
with what should I be able to recompense your 
motherly love? I have nothing with which I can 
fully requite it. But since you fear God, standing 
in the same faith with me, I have a living hope to 
the eternal, Almighty God, that He shall give me 
strength in my faith, to finish it to His name's hon- 
or, and this I know will be greater joy to your 
heart, than if I should bring you many pieces of 
gold. 

Thereto I have good courage, for the Lord is 
faithful in all His promises; for He forsakes no 
one that flees to Him for refuge ; but He keeps His 
chosen as the apple of His eye. Oh, how pleasant 
it is to fear the Lord, for him that with a resigned 
heart puts himself under obedience to the Lord. 
Hence let us always, as long as we have the breath 
of life in us, walk in the pure love of the truth, as 
children that are born of God, for God is love, and 
he that abides in love abides in God, and God in 
him. I John 4:7, 8. Hence Paul says : "Who shall 
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribu- 
lation, or distress, or famine, or nakedness or peril, 
or sword? As it is written, For thy sake we are 
killed all the day long ; we are accounted as sheep 
for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are 
more than conquerors through him that loved us. 
For I am persuaded, neither death, nor life, nor 
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, 
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us 
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our 
Lord." 

Hence Paul calls love the bond of perfectness.* 
Herewith I will bid my dear and in God beloved 
mother, a Christian farewell and final adieu. Adieu 
my chosen, beloved mother and sister in the Lord, 
and be of good cheer in the Lord and grieve not too 
much on my account, for parting must come once ; 
but we expect, in the hope of faith, a heavenly 
meeting, where parting shall be no more; there I 
hope to wait for you under the altar of Christ. I 
pray you always to have good intercourse with my 
dear wife after my departure; for I shall leave an 
afflicted widow. Hence do the best as long as you 
are together; for, as far as I understand, it may 
take an end with us this or the following week. 
The Lord grant me strength in my last extremity. 
Adieu, my dear mother ; with an inward kiss of love 
and peace. Greet in my name my dear and in God 
beloved wife, with the kiss of love and peace; and 


* The original has it, Hence Paul calls the bond of love a per- 
fectness. — Tr. 


1076 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


also J. F. E. and V. T. with their company, and 
Stoffel and Margriete S., when it is convenient. 
Farewell and a final adieu to all that fear God. I 
would like to have it remain secret, that we write 
letters from here, for they have troubled and vexed 
us on account of it. May the Lord open the eyes of 
all our enemies, that they may see whom they 
pierce and distress. 

By me, your beloved son, in all subjection, ac- 
cording to my weak ability. 

JOOST DE TOLLENAER. 


A TESTAMENT FROM JOOST DE TOLLENAER, TO 
HIS DAUGHTER 

If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy 
voice for understanding ; if thou seekest her as sil- 
ver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures ; then 
shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find 
the knowledge of God. Prov. 2:3-5. 

If thou wilt serve God, be in earnest with it, lest 
thou tempt Him. Eccl. 18:23. 

Be not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, 
rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation ; continuing 
instant in prayer. Rom. 12:11, 12. 

Search the Scriptures ; for in them ye think ye 
have eternal life; and they are they which testify 
of me. Jno. 5 :39. 

Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord 
negligently. Jer. 48:10. 

I, Joost de Tollenaer, your father, was appre- 
hended in Ghent, and brought into the Saucelet 
(the city prison), in the corn market, after ten 
o'clock in the night, of the 13th of January, 1589, 
and this for the Word of God and the testimony of 
Jesus Christ. The Lord strengthen me by His 
Holy Spirit unto the end of my life, and all those 
that are in distress, without as well as in bonds. 

Betgen, this is your age, and is for your remem- 
brance 

Betgen de Tollenaer was born on the 14th of Au- 
gust, A. D. 1574. God strengthen you in virtue 
according to His will. And if I die for the name of 
the Lord, the following letter is written to you for 
a testament, and for a remembrance all your life. 
But if I do not die, it is for the delight and instruc- 
tion of your heart, that you should conduct your- 
self, to fear the Lord your God. 

Fear God, and keep His commandments ; for this 
behooves all men. 

By holy faith and love effectual 
Man is saved through Jesus Christ. 

May the only and merciful, almighty God, who is 
full of all mercy and a Father of the afflicted wid- 
ows and orphans ; and a Ruler of all those that trust 
in Him, cause you, my daughter and child, to grow 
up in wisdom and in the knowledge of the truth, so 
that you may know and learn to fear the most high 
God, who created and made heaven and earth, the 
sea and all the fountains of water. May the eternal 
Almighty Father, grant you this through Jesus 


Christ His only begotten Son, our Lord and Sav- 
iour. Amen. 

Hear, my dear child Betgen, and understand my 
word, written to you in the name of the Lord, and 
let my speech enter into your heart, and receive it 
as a precious treasure of gold, that is, that you are 
from your very youth to learn to fear the Lord your 
God with all your heart, with all your soul, and 
with all your ability ; and walk in all His ways, and 
serve the Lord with the whole heart and soul, and 
keep the commandments of the Lord your God, so 
that it may go well with you in the land ; and the 
Lord will give you His rich grace, and all manner 
of spiritual blessings. For the fear of God is an 
overflowing fountain of eternal life, which quick- 
ens heart and spirit, and creates a longing and de- 
sire to hear the words of God ; for they strengthen 
the inner man in soul, spirit, and body. 

Hence, my dear child, endeavor from your youth 
to shun and avoid evil ; for it will now be time to 
perceive and learn to discern what is good and evil. 
For he that knoweth to do good and doeth it not, 
to him it shall be accounted sin. James 4:17. And 
the wise man says : "That the Spirit of God does 
not dwell in a careless soul, nor in a body that is 
subject to sin." Wisd. 1 :4. Therefore learn hence- 
forth to shun sin like the face of a serpent. Hence 
be sober, of good conduct and modest, and avoid 
all light company, which is carnal and worldly 
minded; for the world and all the lust thereof 
shall perish, but he that doeth the will of God abid- 
eth forever. I John 2:17. Hence have your inter- 
course with those that fear the Lord, and walk in 
God's ways ; and you shall grow up as a daughter 
of Sarah, which will be acceptable before the Lord. 
Hence, my child, if you lack wisdom, you must ask 
it of God : who giveth it to all men liberally, and 
upbraideth not. But he must ask in faith, nothing 
doubting, and it shall be given him. James 1 :5, 6. 
Hence, ask the Lord your God humbly with bended 
knees, and this often and constantly. Going, stand- 
ing, working, always have the Lord before your 
eyes, calling upon Him with prayer and supplica- 
tion, saying: "O Lord, my Lord, direct me in Thy 
ways ; give me wisdom that comes from the throne 
of Thy glory, and cleanse me from all my sins, that 
I may be worthy to become a holy temple. Give me 
grace that I may be meek and humble of heart, and 
little in my own eyes, so that Thy Holy Spirit may 
dwell in me, and that I may grow up in Thy holy 
divine fear; to the eternal salvation of my soul, 
and to the praise, glory and honor of Thy holy, 
most worthy, adorable name. O Lord, strengthen 
me, miserable one, since I am but dust and ashes. 
O Lord, be merciful unto me, and help me forever. 
Amen." 

And if you, my child, thus betake your heart 
with all humility to the Lord, and unceasingly 
cleave to Him with prayer and supplication, He 
will delight in you, and abundantly give you the 
fear of God, and the knowledge of wisdom. For 
the fear of God is a tree of life, and his branches 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1077 


flourish forever, and his fruits are righteousness, 
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and his leaves 
serve for the healing of the nations ; but none eat 
of the fruits save those that are born again of water 
and of the Spirit ; who, through baptism in Christ 
Jesus, have buried the old Adam with all his carnal 
lusts ; who renounce the devil, hell, death, the world 
and all its false appearance, and henceforth walk 
according to the holy will of God the Lord, with all 
the elect children of God, whose names are written 
in the book of eternal life. Hence fear God from 
the heart ; not as the world does, who profess that 
they know God but in works they deny Him, being 
abominable unto God, and disobedient, and unto 
every good work reprobate. Tit. 1:15. But God 
has chosen him a peculiar and holy people, zealous 
of good works, to do His will. I Pet. 2 :9; Tit. 2 :14. 
Hence we must above all, as I have written before, 
diligently fear the Lord with an humble heart. 
Perfect and upright was Job, fearing God, and es- 
chewing evil; for to depart from evil is under- 
standing. Job. 1 :1 ; 28:28. Hence serve the Lord 
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Ps. 2:11. 
For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wis- 
dom ; it is a good understanding ; and he that doeth 
according to it, his praise endureth forever : And 
then the wise man also says : "The fear of the Lord 
is to hate evil, pride, and arrogancy, and the evil 
way." Prov. 8:13. He that walketh in his upright- 
ness feareth the Lord, but he that is perverse in 
his ways, despiseth Him, and falleth in the snares 
of death. 14 :2. For where one suffers, in the fear 
of God, for the name of the Lord, there are wealth 
and honor ; and the fear of the Lord is the begin- 
ning of wisdom, and is in the depth of the heart 
only with the faithful, and dwells only with the 
chosen women, and is found only with the right- 
eous and the faithful. The fear of the Lord is true 
religion; it keeps and makes the heart good, and 
gives joy and gladness ; for he that fears the Lord 
shall prosper, and when he needs comfort, he shall 
be blessed of the Lord. The fear of the Lord pre- 
vents sin ; for he that is without fear cannot please 
God. Eccl. 1. 

Hence, my child, when it goes well with you, 
watch, and continue steadfast in the fear of the 
Lord, and be not proud, for a haughty spirit goes 
before a fall. Prov. 16:18. Therefore have God 
always before your eyes in all your ways, and seek 
to please Him with an upright heart ; and God shall 
be with you, and have compassion upon your weak- 
ness, and wink at sin when it comes upon you 
unawares through ignorance or misapprehension. 
But presumptuous sinning and obstinacy are an 
abomination before the Lord, and He will not leave 
unpunished such as thus lightly esteem His words. 
Therefore take heed to yourself, that you be not 
a slave to sin. And give not your mouth to lying ; 
for the mouth that lieth slayeth the soul. Wisd. 
1:11. There is more hope of a thief, than of a man 
accusomed to lie ; for they are every man's enemy. 
A lying child is always hated, and whatever they 


speak, their words are not hearkened to, and men 
hold them in derision. The devil is a liar from the 
beginning, and abode not in the truth. Hence all 
the ungodly are called children of the devil. When 
they speak lies, they do according to the nature 
of their father the devil, who has always continued 
a liar, wherefore he was also cast out of heaven. 
Hence, my child, always speak the truth, for the 
same maketh not ashamed, whether it be for or 
against you. Always say just as it is ; for though 
you have erred in something, yet if you speak the 
truth, it will be overlooked more readily, than if 
you sought to cover it by lying ; for lies ultimately 
are made manifest and come to light, and then the 
liar must with shame hear words of reproach, 
which is an abomination before God and men. 
Hence Paul says: "Lie not one to another, but 
let every one speak the truth from the heart with 
his neighbor; for liars shall have no part in the 
kingdom of God." 

Behold, my dear child Betgen, I have set before 
you many excellent and precious treasures, and all 
for your admonition. I pray you, take them to 
heart, and often read them over ; so that you may 
thereby be instructed in the fear of God. And do 
not let this my letter (which I have written with 
much pains in my prison, with trepidation, fearing 
lest some one should suddenly surprise me), to lie 
there idle as a dead fable ; but lay it to heart, for a 
child that loves her father will also love that which 
comes from her father, and often read it over with 
delight, thereby remembering her father's affec- 
tionate favor. For as a man, that has his delight in 
a treasure of money, which he has locked in his 
strong chest, often goes to contemplate the treas- 
ure, to count it over, and to make calculations 
with it ; so do also you often look over and peruse 
this my letter; for it is of more value than many 
pieces of gold, for it points you to the fountain of 
life, whereby your soul may live for ever, if you 
will be subject to the truth. However, my child, 
you are young yet, and your mind cannot yet 
comprehend it all; but I hope the understanding 
will come yet. Hence give good attention from 
your youth, to hear the words of God, and the 
Lord will give you wisdom ; buy it of the Lord, 
for He will give it to you for nothing. Hence lay 
my words to heart, for they are not my words, but 
the holy word of the Lord, which Christ Himself 
has taught us. Therefore, if you would be saved, 
keep the Lord's commandments. For he that loves 
Christ, and will be His disciple, the same will con- 
tinue in His word; with Him he shall keep His 
supper in the kingdom of God, His heavenly Fa- 
ther, and He will go before them and serve them, 
and dwell with them for ever. But he that will be 
God's servant here, must submit to much tempta- 
tion; he must also take his cross upon him, and 
thus daily follow him ; for Christ says : "Ye shall 
weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice ; but 
be of good cheer: I have overcome the world." 
Even as appears now, my child; because I fear 


1078 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


God, and according to my weak ability separate 
from the world, therefore the world hates me. And 
through their wicked hatred and envy they have 
imprisoned me, and it may very soon come to pass, 
that they shall kill me for the name of Jesus Christ, 
and for the testimony of His holy word, wherein I 
also stand steadfast through the grace of the Lord, 
to risk for it all that I have. For I have nothing 
which I have not received from the Lord; hence 
we must willingly surrender it again for His holy 
name, for what we possess here in this world is but 
lent us ; hence they are foolish who set their heart 
upon temporal things. For he that fears God must 
possess all things as though he had them not, for 
our goods are a prey to every one. All they that 
fear God are thrust out of their houses, and they 
will spoil and scatter them. By this it is known 
who are God's chosen children: they are tried as 
gold in the fire. 

Therefore, my child, search the holy Scriptures ; 
they shall show you, that the God-fearing must 
enter into the kingdom of God through much tribu- 
lation and suffering. But the ungodly world is not 
worthy to suffer for the name of the Lord, for they 
do not know the name of Christ in the spirit. For 
if they had known Him, they would in former 
times not have crucified the Lord of glory. Hence, 
if they hated, persecuted and envied Christ the 
Son of God, and said that He had a devil, how 
much the more His disciples! But the Lord be 
thanked, all their upbraiding, reviling and envying 
is of no avail, but the Word of God; and Christ 
says : "Blessed are ye, when men speak evil of you 
falsely; rejoice and be glad, for your reward shall 
be great in heaven." Matt. 5:11, 12. Peter says: 
"The Holy Spirit of God resteth upon him." I 
Pet. 4:14. For as the sufferings of Christ abound 
in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 
II Cor. 1 :S. 

Therefore, my child, though the world upbraid 
you with it today or tomorrow, you need not be 
ashamed, for I do not suffer for any crime, as a 
thief, or murderer, or as one that seeks other peo- 
ple's property; but it is for the confession of my 
faith in Christ Jesus, namely, that He is the true 
Son of God. Hence Peter says, that if one suffers 
for well doing, it is acceptable with God. I Peter 
2:20. 

Further, my dear child Betgen, it is my fatherly 
request of you, if I am taken away from you, that 
you may go to your uncle Lowijs, or to your aunt 
Tanneken or Jacomijntgen, to live with them ; or 
if they think it best, they may put you with some 
good friends, to service. Hence I pray you, that 
you will be subject to your elders, not with eye- 
service, to please men, but with all courtesy and 
modesty, in their absence, as well as in their pres- 
ence, remembering that you serve not only men, 
but God. Eph. 6:6, 7. And always be diligent to 
do what they command you, and be courteous and 
friendly; and you will be loved by them. And 
always make yourself the least, and they will exalt 


and praise you, and do not in anything think too 
well of yourself, and take good heed not to argue 
against your elders, or with those with whom you 
are living ; for it becomes young people very ill to 
contradict or talk back. And, my child, be also just 
in all your dealings, and steal nothing from people, 
for this would be a very shameful thing, if young 
girls or boys were discovered in any unrighteous- 
ness. Hence take good heed to keep clean hands, 
this I pray you, as I hope you will do. And what- 
ever food or drink you see, take nothing therefrom, 
for it would bring you into disfavor. Hence re- 
member all that I your father have requested of 
you, and keep it in your heart for a perpetual re- 
membrance; for with careful love I have written 
this for a perpetual memorial, that you might at all 
times have or keep a good name. 

Further, my beloved child, I must tell you yet, 
always to conduct yourself honorably with all with 
whom you live ; and be well behaved, and show that 
you do not run into any fornication, which is an 
abominable, deadly sin before God, and besides ex- 
poses a person to the scorn of all men, and you 
could not attain to an honorable state. Hence 
always take good heed not to talk, joke or play 
with any young men, or to have much idle talk 
with them, lest through the lust of error you fall 
into sin. Besides I advise you out of fatherly love, 
to lay to heart all that I request of you, which 
will be an honor to you before God and all men. 

Behold, my child, if I be offered up now, and go 
the way of all the earth (for all men are born once 
to die), be of good cheer and console yourself in 
the Lord, and be strong, and attend unto the admo- 
nition of the Lord our God, and lav it to heart, 
that you walk in His ways and keep His judgments, 
testimonies, statutes and commandments, as is 
written in the law and prophets. Hence, my child, 
when you live with any, if they fear God, thev wili 
be bound to admonish and correct you with the 
word of the Lord. This shall be a proof to you that 
they love you and seek vour soul's salvation, for 
which you are also to be thankful ; but since you are 
young yet, you will understand it better when you 
have more understanding. Therefore pray the Lord 
diligently, to endow you with wisdom and under- 
standing, so that you mav grow up as a green 
plant in Zion, and as the pleasant rose in Jericho, 
and as the precious balsam that grows upon mount 
Hermon. Eccl. 24:14; Ps. 133:2. 

Behold, my dear child Betgen, if vou fear the 
Lord with all your heart, and with all your soul, 
and with all your strength and ability, your name 
shall be written in the book of life, and you shall be 
marked in vour forehead with the name of the liv- 
ing God. You shall also receive a white, shining 
stone, and upon it a new name written, which no 
man knows, save he that receives it. You shall also 
be arrayed in garments of pure, white silk, which is 
the righteousness of the saints. Moreover, you shall 
with all the angels of God follow the glorious Lamb 
of God in great glory, and live forever and ever. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1079 


Behold, such glorious rewards shall they have ; he 
that overcometh shall inherit all things that God 
has prepared for His chosen. He shall lead them to 
the fountain of living waters, and shall wipe away 
all tears from their eyes. Rev. 7:17. Therefore 
fear God, and always seek to be instructed by the 
God-fearing, and lay the words of the Lord well to 
heart, and keep them as did Mary the mother of the 
Lord. And always walk with meekness and humil- 
ity, for God is pleased with those that are humble 
and lowly of heart; for God has cast down the 
proud from their seats, but has exalted the humble 
thereupon ; for God resisteth the proud, but giveth 
grace to the humble. Luke 1 :52; I Pet. 5 :5. 

Therefore humble yourself under the mighty 
hand of God, and He shall exalt you in due time ; 
for the proud cannot please God. In Proverbs it is 
written: "These things doth the Lord hate: 
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed 
innocent blood." Prov. 6:17. "When pride Com- 
eth, then cometh shame : but with the lowly is wis- 
dom." 11 :2. A proud heart is an abomination unto 
the Lord, and it shall not remain unpunished. 
Hence Tobit said to his son : "Let not pride rule in 
your heart, nor in your words ; for it is the begin- 
ning of all destruction." Out of it proceeds all 
pride, when man apostatizes from God, and departs 
with his heart from his Creator ; and pride impels 
to all sin, and he that is infected with it causes 
many abominations. Hence the Lord always re- 
jected pride, and ultimately cast it down. God cast 
the proud princes from the throne, and set the 
humble thereupon ; God rooted out the root of the 
proud nations, and set and planted the humble in 
their stead. 

Hence do not think yourself wise, and do not re- 
ward evil for evil to any one, but recompense with 
good, as Christ teaches, where He says : "Ye have 
heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and 
a tooth for a tooth: but I say unto you, That ye 
resist not evil ; but whosoever shall smite thee on 
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if 
any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy 
cloak, let him have thy coat also. And whosoever 
shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." 
Matt. 5 :38-41 . Not, dear child, that we like to be 
smitten, or like to lose our cloak when it is taken 
away from us, that we should also give the coat, or 
to go with any one three or four miles against our 
will ; but this is what the Scriptures teach us ; and 
Christ also would herewith teach us, in order that 
we should rightly understand Him, that believers 
are in no wise permitted to avenge themselves on 
any man, however great reason they may have, but 
must commit the matter to God, who judges aright. 
For when some one smites us, we must rather suf- 
fer ourselves to be smitten again, than that we 
should defend ourselves, or smite back ; and when 
our cloak is taken away, rather also let the coat be 
taken, than that we should take or get the cloak 
back by force or by smiting. In short, we must al- 
ways suffer, but never inflict suffering upon any 


one, as the law of nature teaches us. Do unto thy 
neighbor as unto thyself. 

Hence we are to wish evil to no one, though in 
the law of Moses the contrary is written: "Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy." 
But Christ takes this away ; for that was in the law 
of revenge, but now we are under grace. Hence we 
must also show grace, and not punish, as Christ 
says : "Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But 
I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them which despitefully use you, and persecute 
you ; that ye may be the children of your Father 
which is in heaven : for he maketh his sun to rise on 
the evil and on the good." Matt. 5 :43-45. Hence, 
dear child, one may not wish evil to his enemy, 
much less do him any evil. And do not hate him, 
neither avenge yourself, but give place to wrath; 
and be slow to wrath, for the wrath of man worketh 
not the righteousness of God; but as you would 
that men should do unto you, so do to them, and 
you will fulfill the law of Christ. Rom. 12:19; 
James 1:19,20; Matt. 7:12. 

Further, my dear child, you are in duty bound 
to hold your mother, whom you still have, in love 
and esteem all the days of your life; for she has 
had much trouble and care with you, from the time 
that I have been married to her ; hence you are also 
bound to love her, as your own mother. If you 
part from her today or tomorrow, you must heart- 
ily thank her for the motherly love which she has 
shown you ; you ought not to part from her without 
many tears, for she has been a good mother to you. 
Therefore, though you should live far away from 
her, write her a very respectful letter sometime, 
and if you prosper, you may send her a friendly 
gift, by which to remember that you hold her in 
love and esteem ; this shall be an honor to you. 
Hence do the best in all that I command you. And 
copy or read over frequently my letter, for a per- 
petual remembrance of your father ; and follow it, 
and all that is good and acceptable before God. 

Furthermore, my child, yield your heart under 
the obedience of the truth. And always be desirous 
to hear the word of God, and seek, when you attain 
to your understanding, to betake yourself among 
the church of the living God, and that in this way 
you may enter into the ark of the covenant ; so that 
you may be a partaker of all the heavenly promises 
with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and all the 
prophets and holy apostles of God, our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Then you shall at the last day (that shall 
burn as a fiery oven) be delivered. For the un- 
godly shall be dreadfully tormented; they shall 
weep and lament forever, for they shall with the 
dragon, the devil, and all false prophets, be 
cast into the fiery lake that shall burn with fire and 
brimstone. Watch therefore in the fear of God, 
that you be not a partaker of their plagues. For if 
you today or tomorrow attain to your full age, and 
your hand is able, remember the poor members of 


1080 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Christ, in communicating to the poor with such as 
the Lord grants you. And whatever you give, give 
with a willing heart, and not by constraint, but of 
a ready mind, for God loveth a cheerful giver, says 
the apostle Paul. II Cor. 9:7. In Hebrews we 
read: "To do good and to communicate forget 
not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." 
Heb. 13:16. And alms cover a multitude of sins. 
Through fasting, prayer and alms the Gentile, Cor- 
nelius, was acceptable to God, and he received the 
promise of salvation; for as water quenches fire, 
so alms extinguish sin; and the Lord who holds 
it will requite it in the time to come, and when he 
falls he shall find help. "My child," says Sirach, 
"let not the poor suffer want, and be not hard to- 
ward the needy. Despise not the hungry, and do 
not grieve the needy in his poverty. Add not more 
trouble to a sorrowful heart ; and defer not to give 
to him that is in need. Reject not the supplication 
of the afflicted; neither turn away thy face from 
a poor man." Eccl. 3 :30, 31 ; 4 :l-4. 

Therefore assist the poor, so that the Lord may 
richly bless you. If you lay this to heart, and do 
according to it, your light shall arise as the bright 
morning star at the beautiful dawn ; hence always 
do well, and if you love God, keep His command- 
ments. Herewith I will conclude my letter. I have 
presented to you that which is best from the word 
of the Lord. Water and fire are set before man, 
namely, life or death. Eccl. 15 :16, 17; Deut. 30:19. 
Hence choose life, that you may forever possess the 
kingdom of God, with all His chosen saints. 

Herewith, my dear child Betgen, I, for this time 
take a perpetual adieu of you ; commending you to 
God the heavenly Father, who is the Father of all 
orphans, and of all those that fear and love Him. 
And never neglect or forget diligently to ask God 
Almighty, and you shall receive of Him, more than 
you ask, if it is according to His will. 

Adieu, my child, if we should see each other no 
more. I pray the Almighty God and King of kings, 
that He will govern you by His Holy Spirit, so that 
I may meet you in the clouds of heaven, where 
parting shall be no more, this I pray God by His 
unfathomable grace and love, with bended knees 
and a weeping heart and uplifted hands. 

O Lord, hear my prayer, and let it be done, that 
through the fruit of my loins Thy holy, most 
worthy and adorable name may be praised now 
and forever. Amen. 

My child Betgen, if I die, I would like to have 
your mother give you, for a perpetual memorial, a 
Testament, a Dirrick Philips Book of Fundamen- 
tals, a hymn book, and a copy of the book by Jacob 
de Keersgieter, which read diligently, for there are 
many excellent admonitions contained in them. 

By me, your father, who wishes you every thing 
good. A. D. 1589. 

JOOST DE TOLLENAER. 


MAEYKEN PICKELEN, A. D. 1590 

That the way which leads to eternal life is strait 
and narrow, is shown by the holy Scriptures, and 
moreover, also many devout children of God have 
actually found this to be so ; among whom was also 
a simple, God-fearing woman, by the name of 
Maeyken Pickelen, who would no longer live ac- 
cording to the commandments and ordinances of 
men, but much rather sought to obey God, and to 
follow her Leader, Lord, and Bridegroom, with 
the oil of love in her vessel, and a burning lamp in 
her hand. Hence she could also not remain without 
temptation, but experienced that the kingdom of 
God must be taken by force; for in the year 1590 
she was imprisoned for her faith and the practice 
of the evangelical truth, and on this account, after 
much vexation, torment, and suffering, she finally 
had to lose her life, and thus obtained the martyr's 
crown, which the young man (of whom Esdras 
speaks, II Esdras 2:43) shall set upon her head, 
whereby she shall be permitted to enter into the 
eternal, everlasting joy, with all God's chosen chil- 
dren. 


LEONHARD BOLTZINGER, A. D. 1591 

In the year 1591, on a Friday, the 8th of March, 
Leonhard Boltzinger a brother, was executed for 
the Christian faith, not far from Plunaven, in 
Bavaria, after he had been imprisoned twenty-three 
weeks ; for he had been apprehended there the day 
before St. Michael's, in the year 1590, and from 
there been taken into the town of Brauna, and put 
into a dark dungeon. They also tortured him 
greatly, in order to make him apostatize from his 
faith. Once he was drawn up by ropes, and the 
other time very miserably stretched on the rack; 
but he would not depart from the truth. Ultimately 
he was taken back from Brauna to Ulba, the place 
of his apprehension, where they on the aforesaid 
Friday led him out to the place of execution. He 
greatly rejoiced when he saw that he was so near 
his end, though they strenuously urged him to re- 
cant; but he replied: "I stand in the right faith 
and therefore, though I had ten heads for one, I 
should rather have them cut off one after another, 
before I should renounce my faith. 

The executioner then beheaded him with the 
sword and burned his body. 

Thus he persevered steadfastly in the love of 
God, and refused to separate therefrom, to which 
end God gave him power, comfort, and strength, 
that though his sufferings were severe, he es- 
teemed them so lightly, as though they had not 
been sufferings at all ; so firm was his hope of en- 
tering into the glory of God, into everlasting joy 
that he did not regard this short and transient 
tribulation. 


GEORGE WANGER, A. D. 1591 

In this same year 1591, on the fifth day of the 
month of August, George Wanger, a tailor was 
executed for the faith, at Lorenzi, in the Puster- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1081 



Georg Wanger beheaded at Brixen, AD 1592 


thai, in the earldom of Tyrol, after he had been 
confined for more than a year ; for he was appre- 
hended the evening before St. James' day, in the 
year 1590. At Lorenzi he was brought into the 
bailiff's house, and put into a common prison. 
The next day he was brought before the bailiff, 
judge, clerk, and a priest, where they wanted to 
know of him, who had gone out with him, and 
where he had staid or lodged. But he answered: 
"God keep me from this evil; we do not betray 
our enemies ; should I then betray my friends and 
dear brethren? by the help of God I shall not do 
this, for it is contrary to the love for our neigh- 
bor." The judge strenuously assailed him with 
smooth and with hard words ; but the brother said : 
"I received my sound members from God; to 
Him I will offer them up again, and this with a 
good conscience." 

Having been confined long at Lorenzi, and ex- 
amined three times by the authorities, he was in 
the castle of Michelsberg placed upon the rack, 
and when he would not, according to their wicked 
demand, tell what was contrary to God, his con- 
science, or neighborly love, he was twice so tor- 


tured, that the marks of it could be seen on him for 
thirteen weeks. 

Having been confined in the castle of Michels- 
berg about two weeks, he was, on the sixteenth day 
of the month of September, taken to Brixen, and 
there put in chains in the tower, in which there was 
much vermin; scorpions also crawled about his 
head, on his bed and on the walls; he could not 
well turn over, and always had to keep his head 
covered, on account of the vermin. During the 
nineteen weeks that he was imprisoned at Brixen, 
his death was announced to him twice, and he was 
at the same time earnestly admonished to recant. 
But he said : "I have no desire to go to this people 
to whom you want to drive me ; but to amend my 
life, if I err, and to exhort others that have not yet 
amended their life, to repentance ; this I consider a 
work of God, and will gladly do it, and keep to 
God what I promised Him in baptism, to my soul's 
salvation." The priests at Brixen often pestered 
him in prison with their visits, and also had him 
summoned before the vicar or provost of the cathe- 
dral, twice before the commander, ten times also 
before monks and priests, nobles and others, and 


1082 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


wanted to lead him back to the true church. But 
he said: "I have not forsaken the true doctrine, 
faith, or church of Christ, but through the grace of 
God have obtained it, and want to adhere to it." 

Having been imprisoned at Brixen seven weeks, 
he was taken back to Lorenzi, and it was intended 
to execute him after two nights ; but this was frus- 
trated by the death of the Bishop of Brixen. He 
was taken back to Michelsberg, and imprisoned in 
the castle, until the fifth day of August, when he 
was again brought to Lorenzi into the judgment 
hall, where the priests held judgment over him, 
first trying whether they could not make him apos- 
tatize; but when they could not accomplish that, 
he was sentenced to death upon the imperial man- 
date, and it was read to him, that he had apos- 
tatized from the Catholic, Roman Church, and been 
baptized again, and had afterwards also sought to 
bring others to it, and to seduce them to his heret- 
ical sect, as they called it. But Brother George 
said: "It is no heretical sect, but it is the divine 
truth and the true way to the kingdom of God." 
He was then led out to the place of execution, 
where the commander of Lorenzi again earnestly 
admonished him, with smooth words, to recant ; he 
would give him so much that he should have 
enough all the days of his life ; and would moreover 
be surety for him at the last day, if he did wrong 
in it. But the brother said : "If I did this, and were 
to accept you as my surety, and the devil should 
first make off with the surety, where should I 
then have to go and seek my surety and pledge." 
Thus the commander was made ashamed, and de- 
sisted from him. 

There were also many people present, some of 
whom wept. He also requested that his hands be 
released a little, that he might lift them up to God, 
to thank and praise Him, and to ask Him, that He 
would give him strength to resist the false prophets 
and evil spirits. Finally he commended his spirit 
into the hands of God, and was thus beheaded for 
the Word of God, and His truth. 


JACOB PLATSER, A. D. 1591 

In this year 1591, on the nineteenth day of Au- 
gust, the brother Tacob Platser, a locksmith, was 
apprehended at Silgen, in the Pusterthal, in the 
earldom of Tyrol, and remained in bonds and im- 
prisonment about eight weeks, until the fifteenth 
day of October. When they could not accomplish 
their purposes with him, and he would in no wise 
renounce that which God had made known to him, 
nor depart from the truth, he was, in pursuance 
with the imperial mandate, sentenced to the sword. 
He was then led out to the place of execution, 
where he offered up his prayer to God, in which he 
was of good cheer, to die for the sake of His truth 
and the faith. The executioner then beheaded him, 
and afterwards buried him. Thus he testified val- 
iantly unto death, to the Word of God and the true 
faith, to which God gave him His grace and power. 


BARTHOLOMEUS, PANTEN, MICHIEL THE WIDOWER, 
AND KALLEKEN N., A. D. 1592 

In the year 1592, in the month of July, there 
were apprehended at Ghent in Flanders, for the 
practice of the Word of God, two brethren and a 
sister, named Bartholomeus Panten, Michiel the 
widower, and Kalleken N., who suffered much 
temptation, and were severely examined, by the 
priests, the Jesuits, and also by the pensionary, be- 
fore whom they freely and fearlessly confessed 
their faith, to which they adhered steadfastly with- 
out departing from it. Thereupon it happened, 
that the sister was released from her bonds and set 
at liberty. But the brethren were severely tortured, 
in order that they should apostatize from their 
God, and indicate their fellow brethren. But God, 
who does not forsake His own, but keeps them as 
the apple of His eye, so succored them, that they 
were enabled to adhere steadfastly to Him and 
His word, and to keep their lips from bringing 
their neighbor into trouble. Hence they were final- 
ly sentenced to death as heretics, for the testimony 
of Jesus Christ, and having first been hanged to 
the gallows, and strangled, in the Count's castle, 
they were then buried without in the gallows' field. 
And as they helped the Lord Jesus Christ bear His 
reproach, so shall they also be received up with 
Him into His glory full of honor and light, to live 
with Him forever in joy and gladness. 

We have also added here, for the benefit of the 
reader, the letters which Bartholomeus Panten 
wrote in his bonds. 


THE FIRST LETTER FROM BARTHOLOMEUS PANTEN, 

WRITTEN TO HIS BROTHER KAREL, RESIDING 

AT HARLEM 

After an affectionate greeting to you, my beloved 
brother, without forgetting your wife and house- 
hold, I inform you, that through the grace of the 
Lord I am well in body ; and as regards the spirit, 
it is my purpose, by the help of the Lord to adhere 
to the truth unto the end, which I also wish you. 
Further, my beloved brother, I inform you of the 
condition in which I now am, that is, that I am now 
imprisoned at Ghent together with another man 
and a woman, for the testimony of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the truth of the Gospel, for which the 
other man and I have been tortured, and I have 
unworthily suffered : and they threatened to inflict 
still further sufferings on us. But Peter says: 
"And be not afraid of their terror, neither be trou- 
bled ; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts ;" 
since they cannot do to you more than is permitted 
them of God. I Pet. 3 :14, 15. And Paul says to the 
Corinthians: "For we know that, if our earthly 
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have 
a building of God, a house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens. For in this we groan, earn- 
estly desiring to be clothed upon with our house 
which is from heaven : if so be that being clothed 
we shall not be found naked. For we that are in 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1083 


this tabernacle do groan, being burdened." II Co- 
rinthians 5:1-4. 

Thus, my dear brother, I see no other way to 
attain to eternal life than to bear the cross which 
God has laid upon us, as Christ says : "If any man 
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will 
save his life shall lose it : and whosoever will lose 
his life for my sake shall find it. For what is a man 
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose 
his own soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange 
for his soul?" Matt. 16:24-26. But the sufferings 
of this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us, for 
which cause, says Paul, we faint not ; but though 
our outward man perish, yet the inward man is re- 
newed day by day. For our light affliction, which 
is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory ; while we 
look not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are not seen : for the things which are 
seen are temporal; but the things which are not 
seen are eternal. Rom. 8:18. II Cor. 4:16-18. 
Know, that I had temptation from the Jesuits and 
priests, and from the pensionary, but by the help 
of God I have hitherto resisted all these storms, 
and hope that He will further help me by His Spirit 
and power, without which we are not able to do 
anything; for of myself I have nothing but all 
weakness, misery and imperfection, which I have 
lamented with tears before God, praying Him, 
that He would not enter into judgment with me, 
without His grace, for there shall no living soul 
stand innocent before Him. 

Herewith I commend you to God, and remember 
the words of Paul, where he says: "I therefore, 
the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, 
with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffer- 
ing, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring 
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 
There is one body, and one Spirit." Eph. 4:1-4. 
And to the Colossians : "Forbearing one another, 
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quar- 
rel against any ; even as Christ forgave you, so also 
do ye. And above all these things put on charity, 
which is the bond of perfectness. And let the peace 
of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are 
called in one body ; and be ye thankful." Colossians 
3:13-15. And to the Galatians: "If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be 
desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, 
envying one another. Brethren, if a man be over- 
taken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such 
a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thy- 
self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one an- 
other's burdens. . . . For if a man think himself 
to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth 
himself. But let every man prove his own work, 
and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, 
and not in another. For every man shall bear his 
own burden." Gal. 5:25,26; 6:1-5. Again, in 


James 5 :19, 20 we read: "Brethren, if any of you 
do err from the truth, and one convert him ; let him 
know, that he which converteth the sinner from the 
error of his way shall save a soul from death, and 
shall hide a multitude of sins." And Peter says: 
"Above all things have fervent charity among 
yourselves: for charity shall cover the multitude 
of sins." I Pet. 4:8. For John says: "Whosoever 
doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he 
that loveth not his brother. For this is the message 
that ye heard from the beginning, that ye should 
love one another. Not as Cain, who was of that 
wicked one, and slew his brother." I John 3 :10-12. 

Hence, my dear brother, be kind and affection- 
ate with one another, and forgive one another, even 
as God has forgiven you through Christ. Paul also 
says: "Warn them that are unruly, comfort the 
feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward 
all men. See that none render evil for evil unto 
any man ; but ever follow that which is good, both 
among yourselves, and to all men." 

Herewith, my dear brother, I bid you adieu, if 
we should see each other no more. 

Written in my bonds, to Karel Panten, my 
brother, by me, Bartholomeus Panten. 


THE SECOND LETTER FROM BARTHOLOMEUS PAN- 
TEN, BEING AN INSTRUCTION FROM THE WORD 
OF THE LORD, TO ALL LOVERS OF THE 
TRUTH; TOGETHER WITH A BRIEF AC- 
COUNT OF HIS EXAMINATION 

As the lily among thorns, so is my love, etc. Canti- 
cles 2 :2 

Christ Jesus teaches us, Matt. 5 :10-12: "Blessed 
are they which are persecuted for righteousness' 
sake : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed 
are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute 
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you 
falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding 
glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so 
persecuted they the prophets which were before 
you." Hence let us be patient, and rejoice in it, 
and bless them that curse us, and pray for them 
that despitefully use and persecute us ; that we may 
be the children of our Father which is in heaven, 
who maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the 
good, on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love 
them which love you, what reward have ye ? do not 
even the publicans the same ? Be ye therefore per- 
fect, even as your Father which is in heaven is per- 
fect. Vv. 44-48. 

Thus, my dear friends, let us show common love 
(charity), and also brotherly love, according to 
Peter's teaching. II Pet. 1 :7. And also according 
to the teaching of Paul : "Let us do good unto all 
men, especially unto them who are of the household 
of faith." Gal. 6:10. And: "See that none render 
evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow that 
which is good, both among yourselves, and to all 
men." I Thess. 5:15. Again, Peter also teaches 
us : "Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for rail- 


1084 


M ARTYRS MIRROR 


ing: but contrariwise, blessing; knowing that ye 
are therefore called, that ye should inherit a bless- 
ing. For he that will love life, and see good days, let 
him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that 
they speak no guile: let him eschew evil and do 
good: let him seek peace, and ensue it. For the 
eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his 
ears are open unto their prayers: but the face of 
the Lord is against them that do evil. And who is 
he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that 
which is good ? But and if ye suffer for righteous- 
ness' sake, happy are ye ; and be not afraid of their 
terror, neither be troubled; but sanctify the Lord 
God in your hearts. But let none of you suffer as a 
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a 
busybody in other men's matters. Yet if any man 
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed ; but 
let him glorify God on this behalf. For the time is 
come that judgment must begin at the house of 
God : and if it first begin at us, what shall the end 
be of them that obey not the gospel of God? And 
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the 
ungodly and the sinner appear?" I Pet. 3:9-15; 
4:15-18. 

"Wherefore, let them that suffer according to 
the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls 
to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator." 
V. 19. "And let us look unto Jesus the author and 
finisher of our faith ; who, for the joy that was set 
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, 
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of 
God. For consider him that endured such contra- 
diction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied 
and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisted 
unto blood, striving against sin." Heb. 12 :2-4. And 
Peter also says: "Christ suffered for us in the 
flesh, and left us an example, that we should follow 
his steps ; who did no sin, neither was guile found 
in his mouth; who, when he was reviled, reviled 
not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; 
but committed himself to him that judgeth right- 
eously." I Pet. 2:21-23. 

Hence, dear friends, if we want to be of His 
servants, we must serve the Lord according to His 
divine will and demands. That is, we must suffer 
and bear here, and not resist; else we should live 
to ourselves, and not to the Lord, and so doing we 
should not follow the footsteps of Christ, for we 
must bless, and not curse, them that persecute us. 
As Paul teaches us : "Provide things honest in the 
sight of all men. If it be possible, as much as lieth 
in you, live peaceably with all men. Dearly be- 
loved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place 
unto wrath : for it is written, Vengeance is mine ; 
I will repay, saith the Lord. Therefore, if thine 
enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him 
drink : for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire 
on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good." Rom. 12:17-21. 

Hence, my dear friends, and all those that seek 
their salvation, learn from this to know the sheep 
from wolves, the doves from hawks. For Christ 


sent out His own like sheep in the midst of wolves, 
and admonished them, to be wise as serpents and 
simple as doves. Matt. 10:16. For all that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. But 
evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 
deceiving and being deceived. II Tim. 3:12, 13. 

But when I told it to our persecutors, they said 
that they also had been persecuted; whereupon I 
told them, that they only suffered persecution when 
they were too weak and feeble ; but when they had 
the ascendancy again, they were persecutors them- 
selves, and took our goods, and tormented and 
threatened us, so that there is fulfilled the prophecy 
of Esdras : "They shall be like mad-men, sparing 
none, but still spoiling and destroying those that 
fear the Lord. For they shall waste and take away 
their goods, and cast them out of their houses. 
Then shall they be known who are my chosen ; and 
they shall be tried as gold in the fire." II Esdras 
16:71-73. Also Christ says: "These things have 
I spoken unto you, that you should not be offended. 
They shall put you out of the synagogues : yea, the 
time cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think 
that he doeth God service. And these things will 
they do unto you, because they have not known the 
Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, 
that when the time shall come, ye may remember 
that I told you of them." John 16:1-4. 

But, my dear friends, the sufferings of this pres- 
ent time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed in us ; for ear hath 
not heard, nor eye seen, what God has prepared for 
them that love Him ; for the righteous shall live for- 
ever; the Lord is their reward, and the care of 
them is with the Most High ; therefore they shall 
receive a glorious kingdom and a beautiful crown 
from the Lord's hand. Wisd. 5:15, 16. Hence let 
us with the eyes of the spirit look at the beautiful 
promises, and with Moses rather choose to suffer 
affliction with the children of God, than to enjoy 
the pleasures of sin for a season; for he had re- 
spect unto the recompense of the reward, and es- 
teemed the reproach of Christ greater than all 
the treasures of Egypt. Hebrews 11 :25, 26. 

Herewith, my dear friends, I will commend you 
to the Lord, and to the rich Word of His grace ; 
that thereby you may in this time grow up, blos- 
som, be fruitful and flourishing. By me, 

Bartholomeus Panten. 

The following are some controversies which we 
prisoners had with the Jesuits. I have written them 
briefly, according to the best of my recollection; 
for to write them word for word would be impos- 
sible. If we could have been together, I could have 
written a little more fully, for quite a number of 
days have passed, since it took place. Again, for 
proof they quote much from Augustine, and other 
of their teachers, and also assert that they have ex- 
isted so long. They know not or will not know, 
that they have possessed the earth for a long time 
with deceit, violence and tyranny, kept down the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1085 


untarnished truth, and instead of the truth be- 
lieved lies, as Paul declares how that God sends 
strong delusions, because they received not the 
love of the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteous- 
ness : Read II Thess. 2. There it is written of the 
man of sin and the son of perdition, who opposeth 
and exalteth himself above all that is called God, 
or that is worshiped. 

I further inform you, that they have assailed me, 
and would have liked to bring me back to their doc- 
trine. I would have liked to show them by the para- 
ble of the tares of the field (Matt. 13 :24) that it is 
unbecoming and contrary to the doctrine of Christ, 
and also contrary to common love and propriety 
that any one should be apprehended for his faith 
(of misapprehension of the holy Scriptures), 
spoiled of their goods, tortured or put to death; 
and I partly presented to them the declaration of 
Christ, that the Father of the household command- 
ed His servants, that they should permit the tares 
and the wheat to grow up together until the har- 
vest, which is the end of the world, according to 
Christ's own declaration. But they said: Jam 
marces est, that is: "It is now harvest." I said: 
"The harvest is the end of the world ; and the reap- 
ers are the angels;" adding: "You assume the 
service of angels." 

They wanted to excuse themselves with the au- 
thorities ; but I warned them, seeing that they were 
the teachers and preachers of the authorities ; that 
our blood should be required at their hands, if they 
teach the authorities this, and encourage, constrain 
or counsel them thereto, as they do according to 
my understanding, for it is contrary to the doctrine 
of Christ, and the command of God. When His 
servants asked Him, whether they should root it 
out, He told them: "Nay, lest while ye gather up 
the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them." 
But they want to be wiser, and to rule over Christ ; 
whereby they show that they are antichrist, that is, 
contrary to Christ and His doctrine. For if they 
were true Christians, and disciples of Christ, the 
bride, yea sheep, doves and members of Christ, or 
branches on the vine, they would not persecute or 
inflict suffering upon any one, but would rather 
suffer and bear persecution. But evil men and se- 
ducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and 
being deceived. II Tim. 3:12, 13. 

Again, we also had a controversy concerning 
baptism with the same Jesuits, and also with the 
Dean of St. John's and their pastor, who defended 
infant baptism and considered it necessary for sal- 
vation. But I quoted to them divers Scriptures, that 
baptism pertains to believers, and that it is not 
enough, that the faith is confessed with the mouth, 
but that it must also be apprehended with the heart, 
as Philip said to the eunuch. Acts 8 :37. "If thou be- 
lievest with all thine heart, thou mayest." I also 
told them that Philip preached the Word of God 
to those of Samaria, and when they believed Philip 
(who preached to them of the kingdom of God and 
the name of Jesus Christ), they were baptized both 


men and women. And Michiel quoted the Scrip- 
ture from the Acts of the Apostles, in the second 
chapter: "Therefore let all the house of Israel 
know assuredly, that God hath made that same Je- 
sus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. 
Now when they heard this, they were pricked in 
their heart ; and said unto Peter and to the rest of 
the apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do ? 
Then Peter said unto them, Repent." Thereupon 
one of them said : "What is it, to repent ?" That is : 
"Be sorry for your sins, and be baptized every one 
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remis- 
sion of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost." In the same chapter it is also writ- 
ten: "And with many other words did he testify 
and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this un- 
toward generation. Then they that gladly received 
his word were baptized: and the same day there 
were added to them about three thousand souls." 
And the Dean of St. John's, and the pastor of 
the same church, when we talked with them, made 
a long speech from John 3, where Christ declares : 
"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God." I said that He had spoken that to 
the adult ; but he would claim, that it was spoken 
of every one, of children as well as adults; and 
wanted to conclude from it, that infants that died 
without baptism were lost, which is untrue, for 
the kingdom of God belongs to infants, according 
to Christ's own promise; and the words which 
Christ speaks to Nicodemus do not concern in- 
fants, but only those that have ears to hear, and 
hearts to understand. But they insisted : "Except 
a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can- 
not enter into the kingdom of God." And they 
thought that water baptism constitutes the new 
birth, and that infants are thus regenerated ; which 
is a great misapprehension; for, according to 
Peter's words, it is as he says in his first epistle : 
"Purifying your souls in obeying the truth through 
the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see 
that ye love one another with a pure heart fer- 
vently ; being born again, not of corruptible seed, 
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which 
liveth and abideth forever." I Pet. 1 :22, 23. And 
James says: "Of his own will begat he us with 
the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first 
fruits of his creatures." James 1 :18. And John 
says: "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the 
Christ is born of God." I John 5:1. Christ also 
says: "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; 
and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. Mar- 
vel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. 
The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hear- 
est the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it 
cometh, and whither it goeth ; so is every one that 
is born of the Spirit." John 3 :6-8. Behold, thus, 
the new birth is effected by receiving the word of 
God ; for the old man and his works must be put 
off, and the new man put on, and this is no child's 
work. This I have added here as an explanation 
to you of the new birth. 


1086 


iMARTYRS mirror 


We also spake with the Jesuits, and with others, 
about the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, in 
which we did not agree, for they said that He had 
flesh and blood from Mary. And I said that He is 
the Son of God, who was born of the virgin Mary, 
since she had known no man : and I also said, that 
Paul says: "For if, when we were enemies, we 
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, 
much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by 
his life." Rom. 5 :10. And in the Acts of the Apos- 
tles it is written: "Unto you first God, having 
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in 
turning away every one of you from his iniquities." 
Acts 3 :26. And John says in his first epistle : "The 
blood of Jesus Christ his Son," and not the blood 
of Mary. I John 1 :7. The apostle Paul also says 
to the Corinthians : "The first man is of the earth, 
earthly ; the second man is the Lord from heaven." 
I Corinthians 15 :47. And in the Gospel we read: 
"He that cometh from above is above all; he that 
is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth ; 
he that cometh from heaven is above all. And what 
he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no 
man receiveth his testimony. He that hath received 
his testimony, hath set his seal that God is true." 
John 3:31-33. And unto the Hebrews it is writ- 
ten : "Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, 
he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, 
but a body hast thou prepared me." Heb. 10:5. 
And Matt. 1 :20 it is written : "Joseph, thou son of 
David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; 
for that which is received (conceived) in her is of 
the Holy Ghost." That which she received (mark 
well) did not come from her ; else it would be of the 
earth, as was Mary, and as are all the children of 
Adam. Not that we had all these words with them, 
but that you might the better understand the foun- 
dation of our faith. The others used many more 
words than are put here, but I have not remem- 
bered them all. They asserted that He was of the 
natural seed of David. Thereupon we confess that 
He came forth from the seed of David, and that 
He is of the house of David, and born of the virgin 
Mary, through the power and operation of the 
Holy Ghost, for Mary herself was astonished at 
this work, when she received the message from the 
angel, and said to the angel: "How shall this be 
seeing I know not a man ?" And the angel answered 
and said unto her, "The Holy Ghost shall come up- 
on thee, and the power of the Highest shall over- 
shadow thee : therefore also that holy thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of 
God." Luke 1 :34, 35. In John it is written : "T 
am the living bread which came down from heav- 
en ; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for- 
ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world." John 
6:51. Mark well here, whence this bread, which 
He calls His flesh, came, whether it came from 
Mary, who was of the earth, or whether it came 
from heaven? We say with Christ: "From heav- 
en, and not from the earth, of which Mary was." 


Again, I also inform you, that we spoke some 
concerning the Lord's Supper and the breaking of 
the bread, with the Dean of St. John's and their 
pastor, and their view was, that Christ's flesh and 
blood were in their sacrament. Thereupon Michiel 
said: "If this was so, then they would be eating 
flesh on Fridays" ; which they took amiss, and said 
that it was not eaten like other flesh. And Kalleken 
said from John 6: "The flesh profiteth nothing: 
the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, 
and they are life." And I quoted to them the dec- 
laration of Paul, I Cor. 1 1 :26 : "As often as ye eat 
this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew forth the 
Lord's death till he come." "Hence He is certainly 
not there," said I. They said that He was every- 
where ; and there stood ink on the table at which 
we sat, and they, or one of them, said that He was 
in the ink. And one among them had a pen in his 
hand and said : "He is in the pen." One of them 
also said that He was in hell. It did certainly seem, 
according to their saying, that God was every- 
where ; and I said : "Into a malicious soul wisdom 
shall not enter ; nor dwell in the body that is sub- 
ject unto sin; for the Holy Spirit flees from the 
froward." Wisdom 1 :4, 5. And there were many 
other words said, concerning their images and idols 
and their view was that they might be made and set 
up, but that they might not be worshiped, and that 
if there were any one that did this, he should be 
reproved, as they said ; and after this manner they 
spoke. I said to the Jesuits : "If candles are lighted 
or placed before them, and they are carried upon 
the shoulders, is that not honoring and serving 
them ?" And I said : "The gods of the heathen are 
of silver and gold, and the work of men's hands ; 
they have ears, but hear not ; they have eyes, but 
they see not." Ps. 115 :4-6. One of them, when he 
heard this, wanted to say, that they did not have 
any; but upon maturely considering the matter, 
they had some of silver and gold. And there was 
still more said about it between Michiel and them ; 
but what I said I have remembered best. 

Herewith adieu for this time; farewell; read 
with understanding, and keep it secret for the pres- 
ent, that the lords may not get to hear of it. By me, 
Bartholomeus Panten. 


A TESTAMENT FROM BARTHOLOMEUS PANTEN TO 
HIS LITTLE DAUGHTER, WHO AFTER HER FA- 
THER'S DEATH WAS PUT INTO A CONVENT 
BY THE PRIESTS; THE LORD GRANT 
THAT SHE MAY YET BE BROUGHT 
INTO THE RIGHT WAY 

My dear child, hear the instruction of your fa- 
ther, and forget it not, if God permits you to grow 
up, and you attain to your understanding ; and re- 
member how I went before you, according to my 
limited ability, in all imperfection (which I lament 
before God), to enter in through the strait gate, 
for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that 
leadeth to destruction, and many there be which 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1087 


go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and nar- 
row is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it. Beware of false prophets, 
which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inward- 
ly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them 
by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, 
or figs of thistles ? My dear child, I say that it is 
impossible ; hence take heed to their fruits ; for it 
agrees in no wise with the holy Scriptures, that 
any one should be apprehended, spoiled of his 
property, and put to death, for his faith; for nei- 
ther Christ nor His disciples did this, but they had 
to suffer themselves from unbelievers, and were 
put to death by them, as it clearly appears, that 
Christ Himself was numbered among the trans- 
gressors, and was led to death like a lamb, and as a 
sheep dumb before her shearers. 

Hence, my dear child, endeavor to follow this 
Shepherd, if you would be one of His sheep ; for 
Peter declares of Him: "Christ also suffered for 
us, leaving us an example, that we should follow 
his steps ; who did no sin, neither was guile found 
in his mouth : who, when he was reviled, reviled not 
again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but 
committed himself to him that judgeth righteous- 
ly." I Pet. 2:21-23. Hence, my dear child, the au- 
thor of our faith went before, as Paul declares to 
us: "Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed 
about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay 
aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily 
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that 
is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and 
finisher of our faith: who for the joy that was set 
before him endured the cross, despising the shame, 
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of 
God. For consider him that endured such contra- 
diction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wear- 
ied and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet re- 
sisted unto blood, striving against sin." Heb. 
12:1-4. 

Thus, my dear child, lay this to heart, and when 
you attain to your understanding, it is my fatherly 
request of you, that you will join yourself to those 
that fear God, who are by far the least among all 
people, but are yet the true congregation and 
church of God, who regulate themselves according 
to the ordinances of the Lord, and according to the 
practice of the holy apostles, namely, a baptism 
which is founded upon faith, and must be received 
as Christ has commanded, and is written in Mat- 
thew : "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, bap- 
tizing them in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost : teaching them to ob- 
serve all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you." Matt. 28:19, 20. Also in Mark: "Go ye into 
all the world, and preach the gospel to every crea- 
ture. He that believeth and is baptized shall be 
saved." Mark 16:15, 16. Also in the Acts of the 
Apostles, where Peter practiced it on many. This 
confession of faith must not only be made with the 
mouth, but it must also be apprehended with the 
heart, and shown by the works, even as John de- 


clared to the Pharisees and Sadducees, whom he 
saw coming to his baptism, and said : "O genera- 
tion of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the 
wrath to come ? Bring forth therefore fruits meet 
for repentance." Matthew 3 :7, 8. 

It must withal be understood, that confession is 
not enough, but that sorrow of heart must also be 
evinced by good works ; that the old man with his 
evil works, must first be put off, and that it must be 
done out of pure faith, as Philip said to the eu- 
nuch : "If thou believest with all thine heart, thou 
mayest." Acts 8 :37. For all outward action, with- 
out renewing of the spirit, cannot please God. And 
the Supper we keep in remembrance of the Lord's 
bitter death and sufferings, as is declared [a letter] 
to the Corinthians : "I have received of the Lord 
that which also I delivered unto you, That the 
Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was be- 
trayed, took bread : and when he had given thanks, 
he brake it, and said, Take, eat ; this is my body, 
which is broken for you : this do in remembrance of 
me. After the same manner also he took the cup, 
when he had supped, saying, this cup is the new 
testament in my blood : this do ye, as oft as ye 
drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as 
ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew 
the Lord's death till he come." I Cor. 11:23-26. 
Now if we are to show His death till He come, He 
is not daily in their mass, nor in all their idolatry, 
nor in their idol, with which they visit the sick in 
their distress, where they say He is; this is far 
from the truth. 

And as regards the incarnation of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, we believe what the holy Scriptures declare 
concerning it, and are satisfied with the confession 
of Peter, when Christ asked His disciples, who men 
said that He was : "Some said Jeremiah, Elias, or 
one of the prophets. Hence Christ asked his disci- 
ples : But whom say ye that I am ? Peter answered : 
Lord, thou art the Son of the living God." Matthew 
16:13. And as also Nathaniel testifies: "Thou art 
the King of Israel." John 1 :49. Paul says : "For if, 
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son ; much more, being recon- 
ciled, we shall be saved by his life." Rom. 5 :10. 
And John says: "The blood of Jesus Christ his 
Son cleanseth us from all sin." I John 1 :7. And 
in the Acts of the Apostles it is written: "God 
raised up his child Jesus." Acts 3 :26. Now if He 
raised up His child, it must certainly have been 
dead. And in Isaiah it is written : "A virgin shall 
receive [conceive], and bear a son." Isa. 7:14. If 
she received [conceived] him, it is my belief that 
she did not receive more than she brought forth ; 
and I am satisfied with the work of God, however, 
it may have been effected. That I should believe, 
that He is of her flesh and blood, of this I have no 
testimony in the holy Scriptures, and am content 
with the aforesaid confession. 

We further practice, according to the doctrine of 
Christ and of the apostles, an excommunication, 
whereby the disorderly, who pervert their faith in 


1088 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


improper works must be punished, as Christ and 
Paul declare. It must be used with those that have 
entered into the communion of the saints and been 
baptized into one body with them, but relapse into 
any carnal works, as in adultery, whoredom, mur- 
der, drunkenness, idolatry, and the like. Matthew 
16:19; I Cor. 5:11; I Tim. 5:20. 

Hence, my child, when you attain to your under- 
standing, defer not to take up the cross, as much as 
you value your soul, for it is written: "If any 
man come to me, and hate not his father, and moth- 
er, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sis- 
ters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot: be my 
disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, 
and come after me, cannot be my disciple." Luke 
14 :26, 27. Hence everything must be forsaken for 
the Lord's sake, for Christ also says in the same 
chapter: "Whosoever forsaketh not all that he hath 
cannot be my disciple." Verse 33. 

Therefore, my dear child, look not at the great 
multitude, but remember the time of Noah, how 
few there were saved when the world perished by 
the flood. And that from the five cities of Sodom 
and Gomorrah there were left but three persons. 

Hence, my dear child, separate also from the 
spiritual Sodom, that you be not a partaker of her 
sins, and receive not of her plagues. Rev. 18:4. 
It is also written, II Cor. 6:17, 18; 7 :1 : "Come out 
from among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing ; and I will 
receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye 
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Al- 
mighty." Having therefore these promises, dearly 
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness 
of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the 
fear of God. For the time will come when they 
shall lament it, who have spent their life here in 
that which was not proper; for when they shall 
say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction 
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with 
child ; and they shall not escape. I Thess. 5 :3. 

Hence, my dear child, Paul says : "But ye are 
not in darkness, that that day should overtake you 
as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the 
children of the day : we are not of the night, nor of 
darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as do others ; 
but let us watch and be sober. For they that sleep, 
sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are 
drunken in the night. But let us, who are of the 
day, watch and be sober." Verse 4. As also Peter 
says : "Be sober, be vigilant ; because your adver- 
sary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour : whom resist stead- 
fast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions 
are accomplished in your brethren that are in the 
world." I Pet. 5:8, 9. 

We also believe in a resurrection of the flesh at 
the last day, of the good and of the evil, of the just 
and the unjust, so that all that are in the grave, 
shall hear the voice of the Son of God ; and they 
that have done good shall come forth unto the res- 


urrection of eternal life; and they that have done 
evil shall come forth unto eternal damnation. John 
5:28, 29. 

Hence, my dear child, order your paths accord- 
ing to the holy Scriptures, which will show you the 
right truth ; for he that seeketh findeth, and to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened. Hence, pray the 
Lord for help and assistance, for He is the Giver 
of every good thing; that after this life you may 
hear the welcome voice : "Come, ye blessed of my 
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from 
the foundation of the world : for I was a hungered, 
and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave 
me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: 
naked, and ye clothed me : I was sick, and ye vis- 
ited me : I was in prison, and ye came unto me." 
Matt. 25 : 34. 

Hence, my dear child, exercise yourself herein, 
and have your delight in it : do according to Tobit's 
advice : "If thou hast much, give much ; if thou hast 
little, give little, and that with a faithful heart." 
Tobit4:8. 

O my dear child, be mindful of what I have 
written you, and be always faithful and obedient to 
people, in all that is not contrary to the truth ; and 
be diligent in your labor, courteous, gentle and 
meek ; for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness 
and righteousness and truth. Eph. 5 :9. 

Herewith I commend my dear child to the Lord, 
and to those that fear God. 

This was written by me your father, Bartholo- 
meus Panten, on the same day that I was tortured 
for the name of the Lord; some of it before the 
torturing, and some after it. Let all of you that 
read this, or hear it read, bear in mind, and not be 
surprised, though this has taken place, for the apos- 
tle Peter says: "Beloved, think it not strange, as 
though some strange thing happened unto you; 
but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings; that in the time of revelation 
ye may be glad with exceeding joy, if ye are now 
reproached here for the name of Christ." Amen. 
By me, 

Bartholomeus Panten. 


MICHIEL HAZEL, A. D. 1592 

In this year, 1592, also one Michiel Hazel, after 
he had been imprisoned over four years, for the 
Christian faith, was beheaded in prison, at Witling, 
in the country of Wurtemberg, on the seventh day 
of the month of July, continuing firm, steadfast 
and of good cheer in the Lord, though he had to 
suffer much misery and tribulation in the time of 
his imprisonment. For a long time he was con- 
fined, not knowing but that he should have to re- 
main in confinement all the days of his life ; yet 
he would not forsake the faith and the divine truth, 
no matter what might come upon him, even though 
it were death. Hence even the unbelieving had to 
give a good testimony of him; for the castellan 
himself said that this was a good man; and that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1089 


if such a man did not get into heaven, he would not 
venture to knock; yea, that if he should come to 
such an end, he should rejoice over it from the 
heart. 


THOMAS HAN, A. D. 1592 

In the year 1592, on the twelfth day of May, 
also Thomas Han, of Nicktsburg, was imprisoned 
for the faith, at Freiburg, in Bavaria; he was also 
very severely tortured and racked, and in order 
that he should tell what they wanted, and renounce 
his faith, they had him suspended by ropes from 
eight until eleven o'clock. But he answered them : 
"You have my body ; do with it what you will ; you 
shall not deprive me of my soul, and I shall also 
not tell you what you want, nor betray any one; 
though you extract the veins out of my body, one 
after another, and cut away a strip from my skin 
every day, yet I will not renounce, nor depart from 
the truth." They applied to him many words of re- 
proach, as that he was a deceiver, and had se- 
duced many to the sect of the Anabaptists. But he 
said to them: "It is the true, Christian baptism, 
and not anabaptism; and if I could convert the 
whole world, I would gladly die three times if it 
were possible." 

When he had been in confinement about seven 
weeks, he was (since he could not be brought to 
recant) on the 8th of July brought into the council 
house to be sentenced. As this took place, he 
turned to the people and exclaimed thrice with a 
loud voice : "Honor and thanks be to God, that it 
has come to this, and that this is His will." The 
executioner then bound him, and wanted to place 
him into a wagon, but he said: "I will walk to 
death, even as also Christ our Lord walked to 
death"; and he thereupon commenced to sing. 
The beadle enjoined him silence, but the execu- 
tioner said: "Let him alone." In going out, a 
priest joined himself to him, and also other persons 
went with him. The priest asked (when he refused 
to be instructed) whether he thought that he and 
his like alone were righteous, and that the rest 
were all damned. But Brother Thomas answered : 
"We endeavor to live piously, and shun sin; but 
those who will live in sin, we put away from us, 
and do not tolerate them ; yet we condemn no one ; 
but every one that commits sin is condemned by his 
evil works, and this we tell them." Thereupon the 
priest said: "We also reprove sin." The brother 
said: "How should you reprove, for where the 
shepherd is not good, how then should the sheep 
be good ? You are false prophets, how then should 
you reprove falseness ?" And he further said to the 
priest : "Go away, you false prophet ; I cannot be- 
hold you any longer." Thereupon the priest began 
to exalt his sacrament, that it was the true body 
and blood of Christ, and that whosoever partakes 
of it has no sin. The brother said: "You go 
around with your sacrament, and sell it for money, 
even as Judas sold and betrayed the Lord ; but we 


observe the Lord's Supper in remembrance of Him, 
according to His command." 

He then asked the priest, where there was any- 
thing written of the sacrament. The priest became 
silent, and did not know what to answer, except 
that he said : "It is written in the Bible." Thomas 
asked: "Where?" The priest said: "Paul writes 
of it in the fifteenth chapter." The brother said: 
"That is not so;" and then went on to say: "Do 
go away from me, you false prophet." When they 
arrived at the place of execution, the executioner 
asked whether he wanted to pray. This he did, and 
then said: "I have finished my prayer; proceed 
now, for I wish to get out of this world." He then 
knelt down, and the executioner quickly drew forth 
the sword, to frighten him, and then begged him 
three times for God's sake, to renounce, and he 
would let him go. But the brother said : "Renounce 
I will not ; but proceed with your work, for it must 
be." Thus the executioner beheaded him, he peace- 
fully commending his spirit to God. The execu- 
tioner then placed the body upon the wood, and 
singed it a little, and then buried the severed head 
with the body. And though there was a strong 
wind that day, yet the smoke of the fire ascended 
straight up to heaven, as can also be testified by all 
who saw it. This happened at Freiburg, in Bava- 
ria, on the 8th of July, A. D. 1592. 


MATTHEUS MAIR, A. D. 1592 

The same year 1592, on Mary Magdalene's day, 
Mattheus Mair was apprehended at Wier, in the 
district of Baden. This was brought about by a 
priest, who upon coming out of the church, and 
noticing the brother, sent his servant maid after 
him, to see whether he should leave the village. He 
further commanded her, that she should so speak 
to him, as though she also wanted to become of his 
persuasion, and would like to go with him to his 
people ; in the meantime he should come, and send 
other persons there, who should speak with him. 
With such words the maid delayed the brother, till 
the priest sent out some peasants, who apprehended 
him, and conducted him into the town of Baden. 
Six days after, namely, the 28th of July, as he 
would not follow them, nor renounce his faith, the 
ungodly pack of priests proceeded with him ; how- 
ever, what they talked with him, or what he an- 
swered them, this they did not allow to come to 
the light. When he was led forth to death, there 
were present his brother-in-law and several of his 
friends, who interceded for him, and also offered 
to give money for him ; but they could obtain noth- 
ing, yea, not even to speak with him. 

Now as he was going forth to death, he asked 
among the people, where his brother-in-law and 
friends were, and how they might come to him; 
saying that he had to charge them, that they should 
tell his brethren and sisters, to take care of his 
wife and child, for they were with a pious people. 
This he spoke aloud among the people. Then one of 


1090 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Matthias Mayr drowned at Wier, AD 1592 


his friends among the people consoled him and 
said, that he should not yield, but be valiant; he 
should soon have overcome. Thereupon one smote 
the friend, who had said this, for it, and said that 
he was also a heretic, and ought to be treated like 
the rest. Now when the executioner had thrust 
brother Mattheus into the water, he drew him out 
again three or four times, and each time asked 
him whether he would recant. But he always said, 
"No," as long as he was able to speak; hence he 
was drowned, on the twenty-ninth day of the 
month of July, through the power of God stead- 
fastly persevering in the faith. There was much 
said about his death, by high and low, as that they 
murdered him, and the traitorous Judas and priest 
were cursed ; for this Mattheus was a well-known, 
good and pious man; hence God also gave him 
power to continue steadfast in the faith unto his 
end. 

Note. — The envy of some of the Calvinists in 
the town of Middelborgh was at this time so great 
against the defenseless sheep of Christ, who had 
come to them from various papistic towns, to es- 
cape the distress and persecution, and expected to 
rest under their protection, that they paid no at- 
tention, and had no regard, neither to humble sup- 


plications nor the repeated commands of the Prince 
of Orange, who in the years 1 577 and 1 578 had giv- 
en orders to the magistrates there, to let these peo- 
ple dwell in peace ; but disturbed the peace of said 
people, and the practice of their religion. Hence 
Maurice, the oldest son of the aforesaid prince, of 
honorable memory, following the footsteps of his 
father, issued, for the third time, a prohibition con- 
cerning the oppressing of the aforesaid people, to 
the end that they might now certainly obtain liberty 
of conscience, as appears from the following act: 

Transcript 

Maurice, born Prince of Orange, Count of Nas- 
sau, Marquis van der Vere, to the honorable most 
learned, wise, discreet, dear, particular, etc. 

That which has been brought to our knowledge, 
on behalf of Hciijaert de Poorter, and Joost Leon- 
isse, sawyers and wood sellers, residing in the town 
of Middelborgh, you will learn at length from the 
accompanying request; and though we do not 
doubt at all, but that you will conduct yourselves, 
with the supplicants, in the points of their requests 
and complaint, entirely according to the import of 
the resolution previously taken with regard to this, 
by the Lords States of Holland and Zealand ; and 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1091 


will conform to such acts and letters as have been 
granted to the supplicants and their fellow breth- 
ren in the same profession, in the time of our lord 
and father the Prince of Orange, of worshipful 
memory; yet we would nevertheless hereby earn- 
estly request you, seeing this matter concerns not 
only the town of Middelborgh in particular, but 
these United Provinces in general, that you will 
regulate your self according to the import of the 
aforesaid resolutions, in all quietness and friend- 
ship, allowing the aforesaid supplicants and their 
fellow brethren to enjoy such liberties as have been 
granted them by said resolutions and acts respec- 
tively, until the aforesaid Lords General States of 
these United Provinces shall have further consid- 
ered and disposed of the aforesaid matter. And 
besides that, we deem it reasonable and just, it is 
our pleasure. 

And hereby, honorable, most learned, wise, dis- 
creet, dear, particular, we commend you to God. 

Gravenhage, on the 4th of March, 1593. 

Signed: Your very good friend, 

Maurice de Nassau. 

The superscription was : To the honorable, wise 
■and discreet, our dear, particular burgomasters, 
judges and rulers of Middelborgh, and was sealed 
with his excellency's seal. 

Below was written : Compared with the original, 
and found to agree with it. 

J. MlLANDER. 

Further Observation. — Upon this followed, it 
appears, some rest, so that the scattered flock of 
Christ began to increase some at that place, and to 
extend its membership. In the meantime, however, 
[in the dominion] of popery they were still perse- 
cuted to death; of whom, among others that lost 
their lives there, the following have come to our 
notice ; from which the distress of that time, though 
there was rest in some places, can be inferred and 
judged. 

AELTGEN BATEN, AND MAEYKEN WOUTERS, 
A. D. 1595 

Aeltgen Baten was an aged woman, and Maey- 
ken Wouters a young woman of about twenty-four 
years. Both were born at Sonhoven, in the seign- 
ioralty of Vogelsnack, belonging under the terri- 
tory of Luyck, and resided there. Through the 
grace of God they obtained the true knowledge of 
the holy Gospel, believed the same, amended their 
lives, according to its requirements, and had them- 
selves baptized upon the faith in Jesus Christ, ac- 
cording to His divine commandment and the prac- 
tice of His dear apostles. As this, however, could 
not be tolerated, complaints were entered against 
them at Luyck, where the Court is held, and where 
orders were given to bring them thither as prison- 
ers, which was done in the following manner : The 
lords of Luyck have certain beadles, called trappers, 


whom they send through the country whenever 
they want to have any one apprehended. They sent 
fourteen of these trappers from Luyck to Sonho- 
ven, to apprehend these two women, or any others, 
and to bring them to Luyck. They first captured 
Aeltgen, and afterwards Maeyken and her brother 
(who was still very young), who had made them- 
selves ready and it was the intention of both of 
them, if their father should have been taken, to 
go with him and not to forsake him ; but as they 
did not catch the father, her brother also escaped 
the trappers. 

Thus they began to conduct these two lambs to 
Luyck ; but as they, on their jway to Luyck, had to 
pass through Hasselt, a town about a league dis- 
tant from Sonhoven, these two lambs were spoken 
to by many of their acquaintances at Hasselt, and 
it was greatly lamented, that they had to go to 
Luyck, into prison, and much sympathy and solici- 
tude was expressed for them. Maeyken said to 
them: "If the Lord has so ordered it, I would 
rather go to Luyck [namely, for the testimony of 
Christ], than home." And thus they proceed 
through the city, and went to Luyck, in all a dis- 
tance of about eight leagues. When they got there, 
they were imprisoned ten weeks in the official's 
tower. During this time, they showed each other 
great love, tending as it appears, much to edifica- 
tion and encouragement; for the young sister 
would gladly have borne in her own body, if it had 
been possible to do so, all the hardships which her 
dear, old sister suffered. They endured much vex- 
ation, being threatened, frightened, and also en- 
treated, in order to turn them from the faith. 

Once the bishop's chaplain came to the young 
sister, with bland words, and brought a can of wine 
with him, in the hope that he should overcome her. 
With words of greatest suavity he presented to her 
the matter ; yea, he got down upon his knees, and 
with folded hands begged her to recant and to 
believe the Romish church. But Maeyken proved 
herself faithful, and repelled the devil's deceit, so 
that the tempter went away. On another occasion, 
a man from her village, who was acquainted with 
her, came to Luyck. He had heard that it was 
reported that she should have to die, and his soul 
was set on fire, and the matter excited his carnal 
sympathy, thinking: "And must that young girl 
die?" Hence he thought with himself, that he 
would talk with her, in order to see whether he 
might not move her. He therefore went to her in 
prison, and called Maeyken out alone, and said: 
"My dear Maeyken, Oh that you would obey, and 
yield a point, to be released from these bonds. 
When you get out, you can live as before." There- 
upon she replied : "My dear friend (calling him by 
name), would you advise me this, that I should 
forsake God and become a child of the devil?" 
The man said : "Then you will have to die." There- 
upon Maeyken said: "I should rather have this 
come to pass with us, than enjoy the light of day." 
When the man heard this, he became silent, so that 


1092 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


he turned around with weeping eyes, and said 
nothing more to her. They were both tortured and 
suspended on Thursday night; but they remained 
silent and fainted away. Then they poured water 
over Maeyken, upon which she cried aloud; but 
more than that they did not obtain from either. 
During the night they lay together quietly. On 
Friday night they sang with great joy. Having 
been thus imprisoned for a long time, they were 
finally brought into the official's court, and con- 
demned according to their spiritual law. When 
they heard their sentence, they thanked the Lord 
with a joyful heart, yea, with a laughing mouth. 
They then delivered these two persons over to the 
secular judge, who received them, and placed them 
again in his prison, in which they suffered great 
distress for a few days, on account of the uncom- 
fortable condition of the prison. However the Lord 
ordered it, so that they took consolation and cour- 
age in the Lord, and Aeltgen's husband sent her 
money and blankets for her needs, for which she 
thought she had no further use, and hence re- 
fused it altogether. She asked her dear sister 
Maeyken, whether she would have it. Maeyken 
said: "I have as little need of it as you, my dear 
sister" ; for they trusted soon to live in all fullness 
and joy with the Lord. "Yes," said Aeltgen, "if the 
door stood open, I should not wish to go away." 
And since in all their sufferings they were so joy- 
ful in God, they thanked God in heaven in their 
hearts, and sang praises to Him in prison. 

Afterwards they wanted to sentence them by the 
secular law, which it was said, was done by four 
judicial persons, or judges, namely, that these two 
persons should be drowned (for the Word of 
God), by being cast alive, bound, from the Meuse 
bridge. On that same Saturday there came to them 
to Luyck two men from their locality, to ask both 
of them, whether they had some word to send yet. 
Coming thus unbeknown, they found them in a 
chamber, where sat the lords to sentence them, and 
they were standing in their midst, and when Aelt- 
gen saw her acquaintance she said to him : "Neph- 
ew, have you come to visit us once more? We 
trust to offer up our sacrifice within one hour ; we 
thank you heartily for it, and I request you to 
please tell my husband, to bring up my children in 
the fear of God." Maeyken also said : "Do bid my 
father and mother many adieus." This they spoke 
while standing among the lords, expecting their 
sentence. The men tarrying a little, one of the 
lords bowed himself before Maeyken, begging her 
to recant and to believe in the Romish church ; and 
her life should be spared. Thereupon Aeltgen 
said: "We want to die, as Christ's apostle did." 
Now when their last hour was approaching, both 
were brought forth from prison. Hence, both of 
them being rejoiced, they began to sing and to 
thank and praise God; but alas! the poor lambs 
could not long enjoy this; for what is granted to 
thieves and murderers, namely, to speak, of this 
they were deprived, and they were conducted back 


to prison, where their mouths were gagged, and 
they were thus, as dumb lambs, led to the slaughter 
and death. When they arrived on the Meuse 
Bridge, many and various reports of this matter 
were circulating among the common people. When 
they arrived at the place appointed, the executioner 
began to bind them, but they had to keep silent, 
until the executioner loosed the cloth that was be- 
fore their mouths, and tied it over their eyes. Then 
Aeltgen first said : "O Lord, this is a beautiful city 
indeed ; would that it repented with Nineveh" ; and 
commending herself to God, the executioner forth- 
with cast her from the bridge down into the water, 
and she was instantly drowned. 

The executioner then also released Maeyken's 
mouth, so that she was heard to speak, saying to 
the executioner: "Grant me, that in my greatest 
extremity I may pray to God and call upon Him." 
The executioner said : "Pray to our lords the mag- 
istrates, and believe with us in the Romish church ; 
and you shall save your life." Maeyken said: "I 
have never done amiss to the magistrates; hence 
I also need not to worship them" ; but the execu- 
tioner gave her a short answer, and giving her no 
time, cast her down from the bridge immediately ; 
she did not sink instantly as Aeltgen, but with 
blooming cheeks she drifted upon the water for a 
long time, until, it is said, she had reached the 
lower side of the city. 

Thus these two Christians ended their lives to 
the honor of God, on the 24th of July, 1595. 


HERE FOLLOWS A LETTER WHICH MAEYKEN WOU- 
TERS WROTE FROM PRISON TO HER PAR- 
ENTS, AND TO OTHERS OF HER FEL- 
LOW BELIEVERS 

The abundant mercy of God our heavenly Fa- 
ther, through Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord, 
this I wish you, my dear father and mother, broth- 
ers and sisters, whom I love much from the heart, 
but our heavenly Father above all, for He has called 
me, that I should help Him bear His sufferings, 
for which I have asked Him many times, if I 
might be worthy of it. Hence I followed Him with 
great joy. 

My dear father and mother, think not (though I 
am bodily separated from you and the flock of 
Christ) that my Bridegroom will forsake me; 
think what He has said : "Though a mother should 
forsake her child, yet will I never forsake mine 
elect, whom my heavenly Father has given me." 
Isa. 49:15. Hence if it is His pleasure, I shall soon 
be delivered. But if you now deliver me with 
temporal wealth, you deprive our Bridegroom of 
His honor, and believe not that He will deliver me. 

Hence, my dear father and mother, grieve me no 
more about paying the costs; for you have bur- 
dened me greatly, day and night, because I sent 
word to you so many times, that you should not 
ransom me, and you did not write me an answer. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1093 


Hence, my dear father and mother, speak with 
our friends, so that I may receive a comforting 
letter from you or from the others, which would be 
to me a great joy; for otherwise I desire no com- 
fort from men, only from our heavenly Father 
alone, who is able to provide for us. 

O dear friends, if I continue steadfast in that 
which my heavenly Father lays upon me, what 
great treasure I hope to gather thereby, which will 
fall to me hereafter, which is a great joy to me. 
O my dear father and mother, is this not a greater 
joy to you, than if I had not done according to your 
will, and had gone off with a young man, as you 
have doubtless heard of other girls? Hence rejoice 
and make melody to the Lord in your hearts, be- 
cause the Lord has made me, unworthy one, worthy 
thereto and you have brought me up to God's 
praise. Remember that there is still more written, 
where the Lord says : "Blessed are ye, when men 
persecute and revile you for my name's sake ; re- 
joice and be exceeding glad then, for great shall be 
your reward in heaven." Matt. 5:11, 12. 

Know, dear father and mother, that I have been 
before so many lords and authorities, also priests 
and Jesuits, who sought nothing but to murder my 
soul. But the Lord our God gave me wisdom and 
understanding, and a mouth to speak which, I be- 
lieve, was pleasing to our dear Lord. Very many 
times they predicted my eternal damnation, and 
said to me : "If you do not forsake your sect, and 
live according to the holy Roman Church, as the 
whole world does, you will, as truly as God is in 
eternal life, never attain to repentance." Then I 
said to them : "I doubt not, but trust that if we 
finish it by the help of the Lord, we shall through 
grace obtain the eternal joy." Then they said to 
me: "God has nothing to do with you; you are 
a child of the devil ; the devil has you by the throat, 
who will confirm you even unto the fire. God cre- 
ated you beautiful, and made you after His own 
image ; and is it not a pity now, that you will have 
to die an ignominious death, and hereafter inherit 
eternal fire?" I said to them: "I will rather die, 
than apostatize from my faith, if it is God's pleas- 
ure. Thus I am ready, much rather today than to- 
morrow ; I will not fear men, who must die ; but I 
will much rather fear my heavenly Father, who has 
given me my life ; though I now, for His sake, lose 
it, He can give it to me again." 

Then they left me. The omnipotent, strong and 
mighty God, our heavenly Father, who always 
helps us to triumph, and does not forsake them that 
have put their hope in Him, and never turn their 
faith from Him, the Lord our God, who sits in the 
highest throne of glory, come to our aid ; He alone 
is worthy to receive praise and thanks, honor and 
glory, and blessing forever and ever. Amen. 

Hereby I most heartily greet my dear father and 
mother, brother and sister, with the peace of the 
Lord. Dear friends, when you offer up your pray- 
ers before the Lord, do not forget me, since I shall 
not forget you ; may the Lord be our helper. Amen. 


Once more, in particular I greet father and 
mother, brother and sister, and further all believers 
and lovers of the truth ; let all pray heartily for me. 
I hope to be diligent, as far as the Lord has given 
me grace. God be with us all. Amen. 

I had this letter written, when I was in prison for 
the testimony of the truth, in the town of Luyck, 
A. D. 1595. I, a feeble member of the Christian 
church, bearing now in my body the marks of my 
Lord. Adieu, now, all of you. 

Maeyken Wouters. 


ANNEKEN VAN DEN HOVE, 1597 

At Brussels, under the reign of the archduke 
Albert, there was apprehended for her faith and 
following Christ, a young maiden named Anneken 
van den Hove (being the servant maid of Nicolaes 
Rampaert's sister), having been betrayed, as it was 
said, by the pastor of the Savel church at Brussels. 

This Anneken was imprisoned two years and 
seven months, in which time she suffered much 
temptation, from priests, monks, Jesuits and others, 
who thereby sought to make her apostatize from 
the faith she had accepted ; but however great pains 
they took with her, in the way of examining, tor- 
menting, fair promises, threats, long imprison- 
ment, and otherwise, she nevertheless constantly 
remained steadfast in the faith in her Lord and 
Bridegroom, so that finally, on the ninth of July, 
1597, certain Jesuits came and asked her whether 
she would suffer herself to be converted, for in that 
case she should be released and set at liberty. 
Thereupon she replied: "No." They then offered 
to give her six months more time for consideration ; 
but she desired neither day nor time, but said that 
they might do what seemed good to them, for she 
longed to get to the place where she might offer up 
unto the Lord a sacrifice acceptable unto Him. 
This answer having been conveyed to the judges, 
information was brought her about two hours 
afterwards, that if she wanted to die, prepare her- 
self, unless she wished to turn. 

Hence the justice of the court, and also a few 
Jesuits, went out with her about eight o'clock, half 
a mile without the city of Brussels, where a pit or 
grave was made, while in the meantime she fear- 
lessly undressed herself, and was thus put alive into 
the pit, and the lower limbs having first been cov- 
ered with earth, the Jesuits who were present asked 
her whether she would not yet turn and recant? 
She said: "No;" but that she was glad that the 
time of her departure was so near fulfilled. When 
the Jesuits then laid before her, that she had to 
expect not only this burying alive of the body into 
the earth, but also the eternal pain of the fire in her 
soul, in hell. She answered that she had peace in 
her conscience, being well assured that she died 
saved, and had to expect the eternal, imperishable 
life, full of joy and gladness in heaven, with God 
and all His saints. 


1094 


MARTYRS MIRROR 



Anneke van den Hove buried alive in Bruxelles, AD 1597 


In the meantime they continued to throw earth 
and (as has been stated to us) thick sods of heath 
ground upon her body, up to her throat ; but not- 
withstanding all their asking, threatening, or 
promising to release her and take her out of the 
pit, if she would recant, it was all in vain, and she 
would not hearken to it. 

Hence they at last threw much additional earth 
and sods upon her face and whole body, and 
stamped with their feet upon it, in order that she 
should die the sooner. 

This was the end of this pious heroine of Jesus 
Christ, who gave her body to the earth, that her 
soul might obtain heaven ; thus she fought a good 
fight, finished her course, kept the faith, and val- 
iantly confirmed the truth unto death. 

Since she then so loved her dear leader, Christ 
Jesus, that she followed Him not only to the mar- 
riage at Cana, but also, so to speak, even to the 
gallows-hill, there cannot be withheld from her the 
honor and name of a faithful martyress, who suf- 
fered all this for His name's sake. 

Hence she will also afterwards, when going 
forth as a wise virgin, yea, as a dear friend of the 


Lord, to meet her heavenly Bridegroom, be joy- 
fully welcomed and received in the heavenly halls 
of immortal glory, together with all steadfast ser- 
vants of God. 

O God, be merciful also unto us that are still liv- 
ing, that continuing faithful unto the end, we may 
with her, and all the saints receive Thy blessed in- 
heritance. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION TOUCHING THE CAUSE OF 
DEATH OF ANNEKEN VAN DEN HOVE 

It was for a long time believed (which origi- 
nated in the assertions of some adherents of the 
Reformed Church), that the afore-mentioned 
Annekan van den Hove died for the sake of the 
Calvinistic or so-called Reformed faith; but this 
was long ago justly contradicted, by written as 
well as by oral testimonies ; among others, through 
a certain letter, which was written in the month of 
July (when she was offered up) by some one from 
Antwerp, to one of his friends; in which it is 
stated, in papistic style, that she was buried alive 
outside of the city of Brussels, because she be- 
longed to the Anabaptists. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1095 


One year subsequently, namely, 1598, there was 
published a printed work called the Apologia 
Catholica, by Franciscus Kosterus, in which, on 
page 160, these words are found : "Moreover, there 
was no injustice done at Brussels, to Anneken van 
den Hove, inasmuch as they proceeded against her 
in accordance with the old laws of the emperor's ; 
nor need the Calvinists complain of the lords ; for 
she was found a Mennonist and Anabaptist, who 
Calvin himself confesses, ought to be punished." 
See the afore-mentioned book, printed at Antwerp, 
by Joachin Trognesius, edition 1598, at the place 
referred to. 

Subsequently, in the year 1601, another tract 
was printed and published at Antwerp, by Hier- 
onymus Verdussen, entitled: Brief and true ac- 
count of the sufferings of some pious and glorious 
martyrs, etc.; wherein she, near the close, is pro- 
nounced an Anabaptist. 

Moreover, a certain school teacher and sexton of 
the papistic church at Aelst, who then resided in 
Brussels, near the Stone Gate, where she was im- 
prisoned, and who often brought her food, made 
the verbal statement, according to creditable testi- 
mony, that she had such a faith and religion as the 
Mennonites, etc. 

It was also then, and shortly after that time a 
common saying at Brussels, of those that had any 
knowledge concerning her views, that she agreed 
therein with the Anabaptists, etc. 


OF THE DESTRUCTION OF SOME TYRANTS OF THIS 
LAST PERSECUTION 

We will abridge this century with which for- 
merly also our old Offerboeck was concluded; 
showing the destruction of some tyrants, who were 
no small cause of this last and severest persecution 
of all. 

Even as the old man whom King Antiochus had 
sent out to Jerusalem, notwithstanding he set up 
many abominations, and tyrannized against the 
law of God, could nevertheless not suppress the 
people of God and His law, but had to behold their 
increase [even] under the persecution, and be- 
sides see that the country was full of wars and 
commotions and resisted the king ; even so it also 
came to pass with the aged Ferdinand Alvares de 
Toledo (also called Duke of Alva), whom King 
Philip II had sent from Spain into these Nether- 
lands ; however much he endeavored to make 
everyone accept the abomination of idolatry, above 
God and His Word, and however dreadfully he 
raged, utterly to exterminate the true lovers of the 
divine truth, and ardent followers of the holy Gos- 
pel, yet he could not, to the satisfaction of his 
furious and bloodthirsty disposition, accomplish 
his presumptuous undertaking. 

For under his severe and bloody persecution, the 
church of the God-fearing, the pure bride of Christ, 
still constantly bloomed as a beautiful rose among 


pricking thorns, and was fruitful, to the praise of 
the Most High. 

But he himself, who sought to rule over all 
Netherland lords, and to oppress others, met with 
resistance from some of those whom he sought to 
exterminate, who, however, were not of the de- 
fenseless sheep of Christ, so that, after he had for 
about seven years indulged his desire for blood- 
shed, slaying and murdering for the faith (when 
the country was full of war on his account), he had 
to depart in disgrace, and with him one John 
Vergas, who was a member of his council of blood ; 
which many regarded as a punishment of God for 
his wickedness. But a still severer fate awaited 
Jacob Hessel, one of the chief members of his dead- 
ly court, and Jan de Vis, bailiff of Ingelmunster ; 
who, some time afterwards, were taken out of 
prison, without previous announcement, or sen- 
tence having been pronounced, conducted without 
the city of Ghent, and hanged to a tree. And even 
as they had sentenced many others to death unex- 
pectedly, so they also had to yield up their lives 
unexpectedly, and thus there was meted to them 
with the same measure with which they had meas- 
ured to others. From this we can easily perceive 
God's just punishment upon those who persecute 
and kill Christ and His members. Likewise in the 
case of the high bailiff of Halewijn, named George 
de la Rave, who also participated in the tyranny 
over the children of God, by persecuting, dispersing 
and apprehending them, and otherwise. In the year 
1571 he assisted in apprehending, among others, 
one Adriaen Jans Hoedmaecker (who was burnt 
at Rijssel on account of his faith), and in the year 
following, on the same spot where Adriaen had 
been apprehended, he met together with some in- 
toxicated persons, with whom he and his servants 
fell into an altercation and fight in which he was 
wounded to such an extent, that he had to lie in 
bed with the wound for a long time and finally 
died a painful death in great distress of mind. 
Hence he had several confessors come to him, who 
could nevertheless not rid him of the gnawing 
worm of a torturing conscience ; but he had to end 
his life as a tyrant in misery. 

But especially can it be seen, how hard it is to 
kick against the goads, in the case of one Pieter 
Titelman, the Dean of Ronse, who was probably 
the chiefest inquisitor in Flanders. He was about 
this time in Kortrijck, smitten with a severe dis- 
ease by God, lice growing out of his wicked body 
so abundantly, that he could not be kept clean 
therefrom, notwithstanding he was supplied with 
clean linen, and otherwise cleansed two or three 
times a day. No remedy could be procured and he 
died a most distressing and miserable death. 

Concerning this Dean of Ronse it is also written, 
that having gone forth on a certain occasion with a 
small number of men, to apprehend these witnesses 
of God, and thus to deliver them into the hands of 
the torturers and slayers, he came, at evening, into 
an inn, where he met a bailiff, who had gone out 


1096 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


with a great number of beadles, to apprehend va- 
grants and wicked men. The bailiff asked Ronse 
with surprise, how he dared trust his body with so 
few servants, to apprehend other people; for if I 
were to do so, said he, I would soon lose my life. 
Thereupon Ronse replied, that he had no fear in 
this respect, since he had gone out to catch only 
good men, from whom he had no danger to appre- 
hend. Upon this the bailiff, particularly reflecting 
upon Ronse's words, answered : "If you arrest the 
good people, and I the bad, who then shall remain 
free?" Hereby this Dean of Ronse certainly bore 
testimony of himself, that he had laid his hands 
on the just, who had not resisted him. So it 
can also be perceived from this bailiff's remark, 
that he himself well knew that the magistracy's 
power ought to be used only for the punishment of 
the evil, and the protection of the good ; and that 
therefore this Ronse and his adherents shamefully 
abused their authority on these people. 

It also happened at Dixmuyden, in Flanders, in 
the year 1553, when the pious Wouter Capelle, who 
is mentioned in this book, was burnt for the truth, 
that there was a simple, harmless fellow, who was 
arrested by the lords of Dixmuyden. He begged 
in the streets, and was thus fed by good-hearted 
people. And since the afore-mentioned Wouter Ca- 
pelle, (by trade a say-weaver) was very liberal in 
supplying the poor with food, communicating to 
them from the labor of his hands, it occurred, two 
or three days before Wouter was apprehended, that 
this simple fellow, late in the evening, came to 
Wouter's house. Wouter asked him whether he 
wanted something to eat. He said : "Yes." Hence 
Wouter brought him a piece twice until he did 
not wish any more. Now when it came to pass, 
that Wouter Capelle was sentenced to be burnt, 
this simple fellow cried: "You thieves and mur- 
derers, you shed innocent blood ; this man has done 
no evil but has very kindly fed me." And this he 
cried constantly, and as Wouter was brought forth 
to be burned, he also stepped near and wanted to 
run into the fire with the condemned man, so that 
they had to carry him away by force. And when 
he was dead, the burnt body having been brought 
outside of the city to the gallows-field, this simple 
fellow daily resorted thither, heeding neither snow 
nor rain, and stroked with his hands the burnt 
body, and said: "O poor fellow, you have surely 
done no evil, and yet they have shed your blood ; 
and you have fed me so kindly." Finally, when the 
body had been almost devoured by the birds, this 
man on a certain occasion took off the whole skele- 
ton, laid it upon his shoulders, and ran in to the 
gate with it. Hence many people followed him, to 
see whither he should take it, but he went with it to 
the lord burgomaster of the city, and when the lat- 
ter had opened his door, he threw the whole skele- 
ton down into the hall, and said (also other lords 
being gathered there) : "You thieves and mur- 
derers, if you have eaten the flesh of this man, eat 
the bones, too." And as the lords of Dixmuyden 


had erected an iron stake in the place where the 
aforesaid Wouter Capelle had been executed, for a 
token and lasting memorial, that such a heretic (as 
they regarded him) had been burned there ; it came 
to pass that the burgomaster of said city, into whose 
house the skeleton had been thrown, became sick 
unto death, and his sickness so affected him, that 
in his delirium he cried out that he had seen the an- 
gel of God fly over the stake with the soul of the 
burnt Wouter Capelle. And this he constantly 
cried, till the lords caused the iron stake to be re- 
moved ; then he ceased his cry ; but died most mis- 
erably shortly afterwards. In consequence of this, 
it seems, those of Dixmuyden were so frightened 
that afterwards they shed no more innocent blood. 

Concerning this avenging hand of God, which 
He very signally exercised upon bloodthirsty ty- 
rants and persecutors of His people, you may also 
read in an epistle of Menno Simons, S. G. folio 
133,* which the latter wrote in his time to Martin 
Mikron, and which partly related to the afore- 
mentioned Menno himself. It reads as follows: 

"It is now about eighteen or nineteen years since 
that a very eminent and distinguished man, who 
was highly esteemed by the world, but whose name 
and country I will not mention, wickedly advised, 
how they should extirpate me and the pious. He 
had scarcely finished his words and wicked 
thought, when the avenging hand of the Most 
High touched him. He dropped at the table, and 
thus in a moment ended his impenitent, blood- 
thirsty, wicked, ungodly life in a most dreadful 
manner, O terrible judgment?" This happened 
about the year 1539. 

"About the same time it happened to another 
man, who thought that he would so set his trap for 
me, that I could not escape, that he, in like man- 
ner, at the same meal he was eating, while speaking 
the words, was suddenly pierced by an arrow from 
the Lord's quiver, being smitten with a severe dis- 
ease, and thus had to give an account before the 
almighty, avenging God, and was buried within 
eight days from the time he had spoken these 
words. 

"Still another, who was to become an officer to 
the emperor in a certain place, fancied that he 
should exterminate this people, if there was any 
virtue in the imperial authority. He came to the 
place where he was to be located and serve in his 
capacity ; and four or five days thereafter, the bell 
was tolled and the requiem sung over him. 

"Behold, thus God the Lord annihilates the de- 
signs of the ungodly who assail His holy moun- 
tain, and brings to naught all those that hate His 
truth and are inimical thereto. 

"In the year 1554, it also occurred that three of 
our brethren were at Wisbuy in Gotland, for the 
purpose of earning a livelihood there. A preacher 
of that city, whose name was Laurentius, who was 
led by the spirit of his father [the devil], cried af- 
ter them on the street, and reviled them as much 

* English Edition 2nd part page 419. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1097 


as he could; saying that they should not practice 
their religion there, though it should cost him all 
that was inside of his coat, namely, body and soul. 
A few days afterwards he came to converse with 
one of these brethren, another preacher also being 
present, who was somewhat more reasonable in 
disposition. He reviled and carried on dreadfully ; 
but the great Lord smote him in the presence of 
them both, so that he was suddenly deprived of his 
speech, and within twenty-one hours (alas!) was 
numbered with the dead. O terrible punishment 
and judgment of God! 

"A case almost similar occurred the same year at 
Wismar, where they had accepted a crier, named 
Doctor Smeedesteed, who said that he would rather 
have a hat full of our blood, than a hat full of our 
gold. He persuaded the magistrates (who gladly 
have and want to hear such pillow makers) to pro- 
claim just before cold winter, to the poor children, 
to clear the place before St. Martin's Day ; or they 
should be put where they should not like to be. 
Smeedesteed was very joyous that he had accom- 
plished the fulfillment of his heart's desire ; but to 
his sore judgment; for that very day the almighty, 
great Lord laid the hand of His wrath upon him, 
and within six or seven days took him away by an 
awful and severe sickness. Yet the hardened, blind 
and stupid world did not perceive it. 

"A. D. 1555, it occurred again in that city, that 
there was a preacher, named Vincentius (who still 
lives there), who never grew tired of his ungodly 
reviling and severe reproaching. On the day they 
call the Lord's Ascension Day, he read from the 
Scriptures (Mark 16:16) : 'He that believeth and 
is baptized shall be saved,' and said he should re- 
proach and revile us, as long as his mouth was 
open. Instantly the strong power of God closed it, 
and bound his tongue, and he fell down in the 
pulpit, and was carried out by some of those pres- 
ent, as one punished of God, and taken into his 
house a dumb man. Behold, thus He can punish 
those who would touch and injure the apple of His 
eye. 

"If I were to relate all the incidents which in my 
time befell the enemies of the saints, it would re- 
quire a separate volume." Thus far from Menno 
Simons. 

It is appropriate to add here, what happened to 
the said Godfearing Menno Simons himself. A 
traitor sold him for a certain amount of money, 
binding himself to deliver him into the hands of the 
tyrants, or he would lose his own head instead ; in 
which, however, to his own injury he did not suc- 
ceed, though he put forth his utmost diligence to 
accomplish it. He repaired to their meeting, and 
diligently spied out a place where they assembled ; 
but Menno in a miraculous manner escaped his 
hands. 

It occurred also, that the traitor and the officer, 
who had gone out to seek and apprehend Menno, 
unexpectedly met him in a small boat on a canal. 
The traitor kept silence, till Menno had passed on 


a piece, and then jumped on shore, to escape with 
less peril. Then the traitor said: "See there, the 
bird has escaped us." The officer called him a vil- 
lain, and upbraided him for not speaking in time. 
The traitor replied: "I could not speak, for my 
tongue was held." This was taken so amiss by the 
lords, that they severely punished the traitor, for a 
rigorous and instructive example to all blood- 
thirsty traitors. 

Thus there can, by these and similar examples 
mentioned in divers places in this book, as also in 
both Testaments, in murderous Cain, Pharaoh, 
Jezebel, Antiochus, Herod, and many similar ones, 
be manifestly seen and perceived the avenging hand 
of the Almighty God, and how grievously they of- 
fend against the God of heaven and earth, who here 
afflict, persecute and kill His people ; and what in- 
tolerable punishment they have to expect at the 
coming of Christ from heaven ; of which this tem- 
poral punishment is but a beginning and foretaste, 
seeing the Son of God, in the day when He will 
arise to avenge Zion, will regard all that has been 
inflicted upon His own, as though the apple of His 
own eye had been touched. Then shall all perse- 
cutors be sorry with too late repentance, and groan 
for anguish of spirit, who here condemned and 
killed the just, who did not resist them. Wisd. 5 :3 ; 
James 5 :6. 

Hence the wise woman Judith says in her song 
of praise : "Woe to the nations that rise up against 
my kindred! for the Lord Almighty shall judge 
them, and visit them in the day of judgment ; for 
he shall put fire and worms in their flesh, that they 
shall burn, and feel it for ever." Judith 16:17. 

Oh, how good were it for all tyrannical men, if 
they would consider and lay to heart these and 
similar passages of holy Scripture, and would fight 
no more against the high God, for it will be re- 
quired of them at that day, before the judgment 
seat of Christ. Since faith is a pure gift, which 
comes from God alone, and hence can neither be 
given nor taken away by any man, however highly 
esteemed he may be. All princes and rulers ought 
also to commit the matter of faith to the Creator of 
all things, who alone is the discerner of the hearts 
and reins of all men, and who knows and beholds 
the hidden thoughts and intents of the heart, clear 
and uncovered before His eyes ; before whose high 
majesty both the judge and the condemned must 
finally appear together. He will judge the world 
in righteousness, and offer faith to everyone. Acts 
17:31. He shall then judge according to truth, as 
to who believed and walked righteously or falsely. 
Hereunto we would from the inmost of our soul, 
counsel and entreat all lords and princes, as for 
their own welfare. Oh, that God Almighty would 
be pleased to grant all princes and lords who have 
received the sword of justice, the grace, that they 
would use their sword and authority no further 
than only upon the bodies and goods of men in civil 
matters, for the punishment of evildoers, and the 
protection of the good ; to which end the same has 


1098 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


been given them of God; and would let God Al- 
mighty be the Lord and Judge over the faith, souls, 
and consciences of men, which unquestionably be- 
longs to Him (blessed be He) alone. And that 
they would moreover consider, how very short 
and uncertain man's life is, and how soon these 
earthly kingdoms can pass from one nation to an- 
other. And if the incoming lords hold different 
views than the former ones, city and country are 
instantly in great danger of revolt, uproar and de- 
struction, if they want to force all their subjects 
to the religion which they have accepted; or the 
common people must resort to dissimulation and 
hypocrisy, to escape the punishment threatened; 
for such lords seldom lack preachers who for the 
sake of great prebends are willing to preach ac- 
cording to the pleasure of the lords. 

And, Oh, that men would once consider, how 
many thousands of persons have for many centu- 
ries been deprived of life and property, on account 
of religious differences, because the magistrates 
(through the instigation of their preachers) would 
force them to their religion; which nevertheless 
wrought no improvement, but the conflict remained 
uninterrupted. But how utterly blind and unrea- 
sonable they proceed in this matter, it is easy to 
perceive ; since we certainly, most clearly and abun- 
dantly find, that even the Lord's apostles, which He 
had sent and highly enlightened, could bring but 
a very small proportion of men to one religion, and 
that in their time, besides the innumerable multi- 
tude of unbelievers and persecutors of the truth, 
were also many false apostles and deceitful work- 
ers, who preached Christ out of envy and strife, 
and not sincerely ; so that Christ was preached in 
many ways, in season and out of season. II Cor. 
11:13; Philippians 1:15, 16. Who then shall be- 
lieve that in this last and evil time, in which in- 
iquity prevails, whole countries and kingdoms can 
be brought into the obedience of the apostolical 
doctrine, through the sword and constraint of the 
magistracy? The more so, since Christ Himself 
says, that at His coming it shall be as it was in 
the days of Noah and Lot. Luke 17 :26. Hence the 
Lord Jesus also seems to ask doubtfully : "Wheth- 
er, when the Son of man cometh, he shall find faith 
on the earth ?" 

For the number of believers has from the begin- 
ning of the world been very small among the chil- 
dren of men ; and not all men have faith, as Paul 
says ; and the whole world, according to the teach- 
ing of the apostle, lieth in wickedness ; and all that 
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the 
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but 
of the world, and the world and the lust thereof 
shall pass away ; and Solomon seems to compare 
this world and all her ungodliness to a magnificent- 
ly adorned woman, in the attire of a harlot, subtle, 
wild and stubborn, so that her feet could not abide 
in her house; whereby she seduced and deceived 
the foolish youth, so that he followed her in wick- 
edness. 


Compare with it now this present evil world; 
how one can see every city and country pol- 
luted with pride, boasting, cursing and swearing, 
tippling houses, tennis courts, dancing halls, and 
shameful brothels, or houses of ill-fame, where one 
can perceive, with open eyes, what a countless mul- 
titude of people, especially of the young, gorgeously 
arrayed and adorned in honor of the world and the 
devil, allow themselves to be lured and seduced 
thither; whereas it is certainly known, and also 
unanimously acknowledged, by all the one another 
opposing sects, according to the express words of 
God, that the end of such a life and walk, without 
true fruits of repentance, is eternal death. Never- 
theless, we do not find that the preachers, to pre- 
vent this wickedness, work with the authorities to 
punish and root out in every respect, by rigorous 
decrees and corporal penalties, this indubitable evil 
and soul deception ; but in the point of religion (in 
which through the craftiness and subtlety of men, 
there are so very many articles of contention and 
doubtful and conflicting views) we see them labor 
with all their might, to punish, exterminate, and 
use constraint upon the faith and consciences of 
others, though the latter cannot be accused of any 
of the evils mentioned. Yet experience teaches, that 
many of these preachers are themselves so un- 
certain and wavering in their faith, that they would 
rather change their faith many times, according to 
the desjre of the authorities, as the chameleon its 
color, before they would on this account forsake 
their large salary. Hence it is our hearts' wish and 
earnest prayer to all rulers, that they would be 
pleased not to hearken to such treacherous preach- 
ers, who seek the loss and destruction of other peo- 
ple ; but that they would use their authority for the 
punishment of evildoers and the protection of the 
good; so that we may lead a quiet and peaceable 
life under them, in all godliness and honesty ; and 
at the last day may, together find comfort and grace 
before the judgment seat of Christ, when we all 
shall stand so greatly in need of grace and com- 
fort. To this end may the Lord strengthen and 
keep us by His Spirit. Amen. 


CONCLUSION OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY 

We will take leave of this sixteenth century with 
a certain conclusion appended to the Martyrs' Mir- 
ror of the year 1631 ; wherein we will say nothing, 
as far as respects the sense of the same, but what 
our dear fellow believers have said in that work. 

We have here presented to you, kind reader, 
many beautiful examples (as we have found them 
in printed works of former times, as well as in those 
of more recent date, from different regions, from 
the criminal records of city and country), of men, 
women, youths and maidens, who faithfully fol- 
lowed their Saviour, Christ Jesus, in the true faith, 
feared God from the inmost of their soul, and with 
a pure heart sought eternal life ; who flourished and 
shone as bright lights, before all the world, in the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1099 


love and power of God, their mouths flowing in 
wisdom with the holy Word and doctrine of the 
Lord ; which appeared more in the manifestation of 
the Spirit, than in elegant language or human wis- 
dom ; for their thoughts, words and actions were all 
to please their leader and only Shepherd, for 
whose name's sake they gladly delivered up their 
lives into temporal death, as not seeking to possess 
a worldly and peaceful kingdom here upon this 
earth, but, as true strangers, to journey to the eter- 
nal and heavenly fatherland, well knowing and hav- 
ing experienced, that they that will live godly must 
suffer persecution. There must also be noticed the 
difference between the children of God and the 
children of unrighteousness, between the perse- 
cuted and the persecutors, because we know, and 
it can clearly be shown from the holy Scriptures, 
that from the beginning of the world the unright- 
eous, whose works were evil, always envied, re- 
viled, persecuted and oppressed those that were 
righteous and practiced virtue, for an unreasonable 
zeal impelled them to it. And it has been observed, 
that many times the teachers or leaders, who ought 
to have taught and led the people to the true re- 
ligion, and into the way of life, misled them to 
idolatry and into the way of error and death. The 
shepherds, who ought to have carefully fed the 
sheep of the Lord with the Word of God, and pro- 
tected them against the ravening wolves, have fat- 
tened themselves, and paid no attention to the flock, 
but presented to them mostly human doctrine and 
the reasonings of their own mind ; clothed them- 
selves with the wool of the sheep, and thus, in the 
appearance of sheep but the nature of wolves, 
themselves been disturbers and devourers of the 
flock, or have delivered them into the talons of the 
eagle, and the teeth of the lion. So also, the min- 
isters of God, who were endowed with great honor 
and dominion by the Lord, and who had received 
the sword to punish the wicked and to protect the 
good, did not content themselves with these high 
offices and honor, but abusing their power, through 
instigation or ignorant zeal, laid their hands in the 
Lord's husbandry, and inconsiderately plucked off 
the wheat for the tares ; and though it tended to 
the salvation of the oppressed, it was nevertheless a 
presumptuous procedure, thus to root out, destroy 
and thoughtlessly condemn with an unjust judg- 
ment, the green plants in the Lord's field, before 
the harvest ; for no one but the Lord Himself can 
truly know who is worthy of the fire or of the 
garner. 

Hence there are no servants upon earth wise 
enough to step into any office of the only wise God, 
and to execute the judgment which He has reserved 
for Himself ; for who can fathom man's heart, save 
He that sees all things, and knows all mysteries, 
who penetrates the hearts and reins, and knows the 
thoughts of all men. Such things indeed are not 
man's province, for men are often, though they 
think they are standing, cumbered with sin, unbe- 
lief and perverted views, much more than they are 


aware of ; and all that men know and believe here 
is but in part. Besides, the examiners of the faith 
can easily be blinded or deceived by lies and a 
hypocritical life. 

Hence those who would defend persecuting and 
killing for matters of faith, and represent and urge 
it as right, accomplish no good by their fury, but 
instead of good wheat they gather much impure 
chaff, and fill the sheepfold with dissembling, hyp- 
ocritical goats. And if any one thinks, that it does 
not behoove a king or prince to tolerate all sorts of 
doctrines, persuasions or heretics in his country, 
but that he may practice such a religion in it, as he 
understands to be needful for the salvation of his 
subjects, and to prohibit all others; such a one 
must also consider this, that if in any country sev- 
eral princes, differing in religion, should come to 
rule one after another, and each one, seeking to en- 
force his faith, pollute the land with the blood of 
its inhabitants, such a country would be nothing 
else than a hell, or a pool full of disquietude and op- 
pression, where the minds of men would be in such 
lamentable misery, as ships, which on the dreary 
and turbulent ocean are rocked hither and thither 
in the storm by all sorts of winds, till they at last 
suddenly perish. But how can they so greatly hate 
and cast out any one for the faith, even though he 
should err ? this is not the nature of the children of 
God, who do not oppress even the unrighteous, 
even as it is not the nature of the sheep to devour 
the wolves, but to flee from them, and suffer de- 
vouring. 

And why will they force any one to the faith, 
which only God can give to man? He that errs, 
errs for himself ; if he falls, he falls unto his Lord, 
who can and will lift him up again, for He calls and 
invites every one to it, offering to him water and 
fire, life and death ; each may choose what he will. 
And this choosing, seeking or finding of a faith to 
his salvation, is certainly as free to every citizen or 
inhabitant, as it is to the king or prince ; for does 
not Christ call to Him all that are burdened and 
heavy laden? Hence no one may think, that such 
calling concerns only the rulers, and that it is 
enough for the subjects, to look to and follow them. 
Oh, no ! each shall have to give an account for him- 
self; for at the last judgment everyone's heart, 
whatever his rank or title, shall be equally closely 
searched; each shall receive reward according to 
his own works ; and it shall not concern only the 
princes or the shepherds. No one shall there be re- 
sponsible for another, but every one shall find his 
own burden heavy enough to carry. However, one 
need not be surprised, as though some new or 
strange thing happened, if God thus tries and puri- 
fies His elect. For if even the Prince of life and of 
salvation had to enter into His glory through much 
suffering ; if the way to get into the joyful kingdom 
was so narrow for Him, how shall His followers 
get there, except by the same way? What guilt was 
there in Him ? What wickedness, uproar, or crimes 
did He commit ? Why was this harmless, innocent, 


1100 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


spotless Lamb (which sought the harm of no one, 
but the welfare of all) persecuted so malignantly? 
What made the blind scribes so incensed at Him ? 
and why were they so exceedingly eager to follow 
the advice of inconsiderate Caiaphas ? And was not 
the cause of all this the fact that mad ignorance 
urged them on? which so ofttimes inflamed the 
heads of the people, so that they (as though it had 
been a great service to God) wanted to exercise do- 
minion over the minds as well as over the bodies of 
men, and use the sword to constrain the faith as 
well as to civil unity. However, not all rulers were 
infected with this madness, for it was seen that the 
Gentiles, who were called strangers to the knowl- 
edge of God (as Felix, Festus, Agrippa, Gallius, 
and the like), were more considerate in well admin- 
istering the office they had received, in careful 
maintenance of the common peace, and, according 
to Gamaliel's wise counsel, committing to God the 
dominion over the faith, than the envious Jews, 
who according to the promise ought to have been 
children of God and true branches in the true olive 
tree. And thus we see, that God, who does all 
things according to His good pleasure, at some 
times and places, still grants such authorities who 
do not compel their subjects in matters of faith, but 
only seek their peace and welfare; even as we in 
our time lived to see a Polish and also a French 
king, who did not so strictly examine their subjects 
concerning their faith, nor investigate whether the 
same agreed with the common belief; but solely, 
whether their course of action tended to hinder or 
advance the welfare of the country, which they 
considered with sincere love and sought to pro- 
mote. 

Herein also not too much praise can be bestowed 
upon the Lords States of the United Netherlands, 
who, however vehemently they have sometimes 
been incited to it, do also not consent to such blind 
zeal in the way of constraint of conscience and in- 
vestigation of faith. And since we are commanded 
to pray God for the magistrates, that we may lead a 
quiet, peaceable and godly life under them, how 
much more are we bound to thank God for His lov- 
ing kindness, who also grants us the grace, that we 
may dwell under the protection of such authorities 
who oppose the wicked zeal of these blood thirsty 
tyrants of conscience (as we have now enjoyed it 
in this country for about fifty years), and who 
according to their ability execute their offices, 
leaving the dominion and investigation of man's 
heart and conscience to God. 

We are also most solemnly bound to pray the 
Most High for them, that He will constantly keep 
them in this purpose, and moreover give them wis- 
dom and understanding, so to rule their country 
and people, that all may tend and conduce to the 
peace of the subjects and the honor of God ; that 
He may also give them such believing hearts, that 
they may truly know whereto they are set here by 
God, and, finally, walk before Him in such a God- 
fearing manner, that at the last day (when the cru- 


cified Jesus Christ shall appear with His mighty 
angels, in the clouds of heaven, as an almighty 
Potentate, Victor and glorious King, to execute 
vengeance upon all those that have not known 
God, and not obeyed the Gospel) they may also 
be glorified with all God's saints, and appear with 
the elect believers in the resurrection and the reve- 
lation of the heavenly glory, to be clothed with the 
same, by the power of Christ, and with Him to in- 
herit the imperishable glory in perfection, and pos- 
sess it forever and ever, without end. Amen. 


AN ACCOUNT OF THOSE WHO SUF- 
FERED IN THE SEVENTEENTH 
CENTURY, 

from 1600 to 1660 


SUMMARY OF THE MARTYRS IN THE SEVENTEETH 
CENTURY 

[After the preceding, sixteenth century closed 
with the burying alive of Anneken van den Hove, 
in the year 1597, the following, seventeenth century 
commenced, not without threats, and the shedding 
of the blood of the pious witnesses of the Lord. 

The first year of this century begins with a de- 
cree (though not unto death), published by those 
of Groeningen and Sneeck against the Anabaptists. 

Huybert op der Straten, Trynken his wife, 
Pieter ten Hove, and Lysken te Linschoten, near 
Witgensteyn, for the afore-mentioned faith, led 
around the gallows, scourged and banished from 
the country, in 1601. 

Hemes Nimrich, a teacher of the afore-men- 
tioned people, and others, four years subsequently, 
namely, 1605, near Steyn, scourged out of the city, 
Hemes having first been led through under the 
gallows. 

Marcus Eder and Hans Poltzinger apprehended 
on the 24th of April, of the same year, at Nim- 
bach, in Bavaria, and on the 26th of the same 
month taken to Riet ; and, for the steadfastness of 
their faith finally put to death with the sword, and 
burnt with fire, on the 26th of August, A.D. 1605. 

Hans Landis beheaded in the city of Zurich; 
further observations touching the circumstances of 
his death; for the year 1614. 

An account respecting a certain prohibition pub- 
lished by those of Aerdenborgh against the Ana- 
baptists, and what was done by the Lords States 
General of the United Netherlands for the abolish- 
ment of the same. 

An extract from certain letters of said Lords 
States to the Lords of Haultain, Governor of Sluys, 
as also to the bailiff and magistrates of Aerden- 
borgh, for the cessation of the oppression beean 
A. D. 1619. 5 

A decree of those of Deventer against the Men- 
nists or Anabaptists, A. D. 1620. 

A note touching severe slanders against the Ana- 
baptists in Holland, and how they, by a certain con- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1101 


fession of faith, defended themselves before the 
States of said country, A. D. 1626. 

The inauguration of the last Swiss persecution, 
as also the cause of the same, A. D. 1635. 

The progress of the inauguration of said perse- 
cution in the castles Wadischwyl, Knonow and 
Groeningen, as also in the consistory, at Zurich, 
A. D. 1636. 

Concerning said persecution, and the manner in 
which twelve brethren were apprehended, and im- 
prisoned in the place Othenbach, at Zurich, as also 
how it terminated, A. D. 1637. 

Hans Meyli, Sr., and his son's wife conducted to 
Zurich and imprisoned A. D. 1638. 

This year (1639), fruitful of martyrs and mar- 
tyresses, many having suffered in prison, at Zurich, 
in body as well as in life; an account of whom is 
given in order, namely, Catharina Mulerin; the 
four sisters, Barbara Meylin, Ottila Mulerin, Bar- 
bara Kolbin, and Elizabeth Meylin ; as also, Eliza- 
beth Hilzin; the brethren, Hans von Uticken, 
Burckhardt Aman, Jacob Egly, Ully Schedme, sur- 
named Schneider, Jacob Rustenhel of Horgerberg, 
Stephen Zehender of Byrmensdorf, Ulrich Schnei- 
der, with his two sons, Henry Gutwol of Lehnmer, 
Hans Jacobs Hess, as also his wife. 

A certain manifesto published by those of Zurich 
in excuse of the persecution commenced, answered 
and refuted by the persecuted; in the aforesaid 
year 1639. 

Werner Phister, and his son's wife, as also Gal- 
lus Schneider, Rudolph Bachman, and Ulrich Mul- 
ler, put to death in the year 1640, at Zurich, in the 
prison Othenbach. 

A supplication of those of Amsterdam to the 
council of Zurich, for mitigation of the persecu- 
tion; as also the answer, A. D. 1642. 

Felix Landis (the son of Hans Landis) dies of 
hunger and want in prison Othenbach, A. D. 1642 ; 
his wife delivered out of her bonds. 

Rudolph Suhner, a young lad, follows in the 
footsteps of the aforesaid Felix, and also dies of 
want, A. D. 1643. 

A number of women suffer much for the truth, 
namely, Elizabeth Bachmanni, Elsa Bethezei, 
Sarah Wanry, Verena Landis, Barbara Neff, and 
Barbly Ruff, about A. D. 1643. 

Henry Boiler dies bound in prison, A. D. 1644. 

A certain letter from Switzerland, touching the 
threats made by those of Berne against the Ana- 
baptists in those parts, A. D. 1645. 

Mention is made, A. D. 1650, of a decree pub- 
lished by those of Schaffhausen against those called 
Anabaptists. 

A certain mandate proclaimed against the Ana- 
baptists, three years later, namely, 1653. 

Ully Wagman and another brother, both im- 
prisoned; Ully dies A. D. 1654, while the other 
brother remained in prison long afterwards. 

A certain letter from Mackhenheym, in defense 
of the brethren persecuted in Switzerland, sent to 
Amsterdam, A. D. 1658. 


Seven teachers apprehended at Berne, namely, 
Ully Bogart, Anthony Hinnelberg, Jegly Schle- 
bach, Hans Zaug, Ully Baumgartner, Christian 
Christians, and Rudi Peters. See year 1659. 

A decree published by those of Berne, against 
those called Anabaptists, on the 9th of August, 
A. D. 1659. 

A record of what the Lords States of the United 
Netherlands did with those of Berne, for the miti- 
gation of the aforesaid decree, by letters of recom- 
mendation, as also of letters of recommendation of 
some Dutch cities in particular, for the same pur- 
pose; A. D. 1660. 

Herewith this whole work, and consequently the 
whole Book of Martyrs, is abridged and con- 
cluded.] 

This century will be brief, and extend not over 
much more than half a century. Neither will the 
martyrizations that occurred in it be so severe as 
those in any of the preceding centuries. Beheading 
people, or suffering them to die of want in prison, 
will be the severest punishments that were inflicted 
according to the body upon the following witnesses 
of the Lord. In the meantime, when the north 
wind of persecution began to blow its fiercest, ac- 
cording to the course of the times, the pleasant 
south wind of rest and liberty from persecution in- 
tervened. The most, however, mischief in this brief 
century, in the parts of Zurich and Berne, was 
caused by such as called themselves Reformed; 
others, who bore the same name, and especially the 
rulers of the United Netherlands (as being friends 
of peace, and enemies of constraint of conscience), 
opposed it, and kindly and in a fatherly manner 
protected the innocently persecuted ones, accord- 
ing to all their ability. 

This work begins with Groningen and Sneeck 
in Vriesland, and ends with Zurich and Berne, in 
the confines of Switzerland. This is the order 
which we shall follow. 


OF A DECREE PUBLISHED BY THOSE OF GRONINGEN 

AND SNEECK AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS, 

A. D. 1601 

With the beginning of this century, when the 
constraint exercised by the papists upon the faith 
and conscience of the pious, began to cease some- 
what, some who had separated from popery, and 
yet nevertheless retained the disposition of the pa- 
pists, in the matter of oppressing others for their 
religion, poured out their bitterness not only upon 
those who had formerly oppressed them, but princi- 
pally upon such as had never done them evil, but 
always good ; however, not unto death, nor severe 
punishment of the body, but lighter and lesser pen- 
alties, of which those of Groningen and Sneeck 
were the inventors, and inaugurators. Which de- 
cree, as far as it is directed against the Anabaptists, 
we shall copy literally. 


1102 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


THE DECREE* 

The burgomasters and the council make known : 
Whereas it has come to our certain knowledge that 
not only many in the city and in the jurisdiction 
of the same presume to exercise and practice, con- 
trary to the treaty sworn to and made with the city, 
A. D. '94, another religion than the Reformed, to 
the adulteration of the Word of God, to the misuse 
of His holy sacraments, and to the offense and se- 
duction of many persons; but that also nearly all 
disorders and abuses in and without the marriage 
state, and also others contrary to the Christian 
church regulations established and customary here, 
creep in and are practiced ; and we by virtue of our 
office recognize it our duty to meet and check all 
this with proper penalties : therefore, we have or- 
dained, and do ordain and decree by these pres- 
ents, as follows: 

Firstly, that the exercise of all other religions 
than the Reformed is herewith again strictly pro- 
hibited. 

And if any one be found to allow his house or 
place to the Anabaptists, contrary to the church 
regulations of this city, for the purpose of preach- 
ing or holding meetings therein, he shall each time 
be fined ten dollars. 

The preachers, as aforesaid, if found to be 
preaching, shall for each offense be fined ten dol- 
lars, or be imprisoned two weeks on water and 
bread; and when detected in thus preaching the 
third time, shall be expelled from the city or the 
jurisdiction of the same. 

And all that shall be found attending such 
preachings or gatherings, shall each time be fined 
two dollars. 

Whoever shall be found to have rebaptized any 
one, shall be fined twenty dollars; and when de- 
tected the second time, shall be imprisoned on 
water and bread, and expelled as aforesaid. 

Again, unbaptized children shall not receive in- 
heritance, according to the city statutes. 

No one also shall be admitted to any administra- 
tion or office, public or private, nor be accepted as 
a witness, except he render the solemn oath re- 
quired for it. 

And all that refuse such oath shall be punished as 
a witness, except he render the solemn oath re- 
quired for it. 

And all that refuse such oath shall be punished 
as is proper according to law. 

(Note. — Here follow two other articles, which 
do not properly belong to this matter; hence we 
have omitted to place them here; but proceeding 
we read thus:) 

As regards the disposing of the aforesaid fines, 
one half shall go to the informer, and the other 
half, like other fines, fall to the city and its juris- 
diction. 


Thus resolved on the 5th of September, to be 
published by the bell on the ensuing Monday. 

The aforewritten, touching the exercise of reli- 
gion, was published by the bell, the 7th of Septem- 
ber, 1601, old style. 

See Chronijck van den Ondergang, edition 1620, 
page 1 539, col. 2, compared with the apology of the 
decree, letter A., jol. 4; also, Tegenberacht, let- 
ter A., 3, 4. 


* Let no one take offence at the words of this decree ; for we 
desired to give them unchanged. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION 

Whether this decree by these of Groningen and 
Sneeck caused any serious oppression, then or 
about that time, by way of banishment or the like, 
to those baptized according to Christ's ordinance, 
we have not been able to learn ; but that they after- 
wards in those places proceeded much more se- 
verely than the decree justified, by hard imprison- 
ment, etc., against those people, we have found 
only too much to have been the case ; however to 
the great good and happiness of those who suffered 
this for the testimony of the Lord and His holy 
truth. 

Moreover, said year did not end without the 
shedding of blood of the saints, and the spoiling of 
their goods, in the parts of Witgensteyn, as will ap- 
pear from the following account. 

FOUR PERSONS, NAMELY, HUYBERT OP DER STRA- 

TEN, TIJNKEN HIS WIFE, PIETER TEN HOVE, 

AND LIJSKEN TE LINSCHOTEN, NEAR WIT-' 

GENSTEYN LED AROUND THE GALLOWS, 

SCOURGED, AND BANISHED FROM THE 

COUNTRY, A. D. 1601 

In the year of our Lord sixteen hundred and one 
it occurred that Johann von Steyn, Count of Wit- 
gensteyn, Lord of Hamburg, being a member of 
the Calvinistic Church, purposed to abolish the 
Romish and Lutheran doctrine, and at the same 
time laid his hands on the defenseless sheep of 
Christ, which were contemptuously called Ana- 
baptists, and put them in prison. 

Among these are mentioned by name, Huybert 
op der Straten, Trijnken his wife, Pieter ten Hove, 
and Lijsken te Linschoten, which latter, as we have 
learned, was an aged woman of over seventy years. 

The first three mentioned were imprisoned 
twelve weeks, the latter seventeen days, she having 
been apprehended much later. 

They suffered much temptation, by way of bitter 
threats as well as by entreaties, in order to cause 
them to apostatize; but when they (the persecu- 
tors) could not destroy their souls, or cause them 
to apostatize or depart from the truth all four were 
finally condemned upon a false accusation (name- 
ly, that they had been convicted with the holy 
Scriptures, which was altogether untrue, and that 
they would nevertheless continue in their deceptive 
heresy of Anabaptism, etc.) in this manner: 

That all their property should be forfeited, and 
that each should be scourged with rods, to the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1103 


number of about forty stripes, and moreover be for- 
ever banished from the country; which was ac- 
cordingly done. 

Thus, say the authors, they stripped these inno- 
cent, pious persons, led them around the gallows, 
and scourged them, spoiled them of their property, 
and shamefully drove them forth with empty hands, 
and sent them out of the country. See preface to 
the old Offerboeck, of the year 1615, letter iij, col. 
1. 


HEMES NIMRICH, A TEACHER OF THE ANABAP- 
TISTS, TOGETHER WITH SEVERAL OTHERS, 
SCOURGED OUT OF THE CITY, FOR THE TES- 
TIMONY OF JESUS CHRIST, HEMES HAV- 
ING PREVIOUSLY BEEN LED THROUGH 
UNDER THE GALLOWS, A. D. 1605 

Under the afore-mentioned Count of Steyn (or 
Witgensteyn) in Germany, though he was called 
Reformed, the Anabaptists also at this time, had 
to suffer much persecution for their faith. 

A teacher of said faith, named Hemes Nimrich, 
was apprehended together with several others. "He 
was led to the gallows," writes P. J. Twisck, "not 
knowing but he was to be beheaded; but when 
he arrived there, he was (as had been done to the 
preceding persons) led through under the gallows, 
and severely scourged; the other prisoners were 
scourged out of the city." Chron. van den Onder- 
gang, page 1590, col. 2. 


MARCUS EDER AND HANS POLTZINGER, A. D. 1605 

On the 24th of April, A. D. 1605, two brethren, 
named Marcus Eder, a cartwright, and Hans 
Poltzinger, a tailor, were apprehended for their 
faith and for the sake of the divine truth, at Nim- 
bach in Bavaria, where they were traveling through 
and were betrayed. Early in the morning on the 
26th of April both were taken prisoners to Riet, 
where they remained in confinement until in the 
fifteenth week. In the meantime they dealt with 
them in many and various ways, seeking to make 
them apostatize from the faith. Two Jesuits were 
also brought to them from the town of Oting, who 
were to instruct them, and teach them their faith. 
But they continued firmly and steadfastly in the 
true faith, and would not hearken to the voice of 
strangers. The priests at Riet often came to them, 
and wanted to persuade them to their faith ; but the 
brethren said: "It is a faith of idolatry and for- 
nication, a faith of sin and blasphemy, as the fruits 
testify." And thus they did in no wise suffer them- 
selves to be moved, but always defended themselves 
well according to the truth and the simplicity of 
Christ, concerning what God had made known to 
them ; and thereto they would adhere unto the end ; 
and though they, by God's permission, should de- 
prive them of their lives, they could not harm their 
souls. 

Now when all the false doctrine of the priests 
could accomplish nothing with them, they gave 


them over to the executioner that he should try his 
skill on them, and had them twice very cruelly tor- 
tured, wanting to know of them, who had lodged 
them, and who they were to whom they wanted to 
go ; the brethren however would not tell them, but 
said that it was not necessary for them to know. 

Now when they could in no wise accomplish 
their purpose with them, there came, after much 
proceeding, an order from the government at 
Berckhausen, that they should be executed with 
the sword, and then burnt with fire. 

When they arrived at the place of execution, 
Brother Marcus requested the executioner, that he 
should first execute Hans, which he also did ; and 
when this had been done, Marcus said to the peo- 
ple, of whom there were many present: "God be 
praised, my brother has overcome; and I will do 
likewise." After these words Brother Marcus was 
also beheaded, whereupon both were burnt to- 
gether. This occurred on the twenty-sixth day of 
the month of August of the aforesaid year. The ex- 
ecutioner had received orders, that if he should per- 
ceive that one of them wanted to recant, though he 
should already have drawn forth the sword, he 
should yet forbear and not proceed with it ; but in 
this hope they were disappointed. Thus these two 
brethren testified to the faith and the divine truth 
valiantly and steadfastly unto death, with their 
blood; God, who gave them power and strength 
thereto, be praised and thanked forever. 

The following brief account, which is found in 
the Chronijck van den Ondergang, page 1590, col. 
2, will serve as a confirmation of the foregoing. 

In the year 1605 (says the writer), on the 24th 
day of April, Marcus Eder and Hans Polzinger, 
Anabaptists, were apprehended for the faith, at 
Nimback, in Bavaria, and taken prisoner to Riet, 
where they remained in confinement until the fif- 
teenth week. 

When they could neither by the Jesuits, nor by 
the priests, move them from the faith, they gave 
them over to the executioner to try his skill on 
them, and had them tortured twice very cruelly, 
wanting to know of them, who had lodged them, 
and who they were to whom they wanted to go ; 
but the brethren would not tell them. Thereupon 
both of them were executed with the sword, and 
their bodies burnt together, on the 26th of August, 
of the same year. Compare the afore-mentioned 
chronicle with Jac. Th. Oal., and W. Att. letters. 


HANS LANDIS, A. D. 1614 

That the bloody constraint or dominion over the 
consciences of men still obtains, is a sad thing, and 
especially is it to be deplored, that those who boast 
of being, more than others, followers of the de- 
fenseless Lamb, have not more the nature of the 
lamb, but much rather that of wolves in them. It 
certainly cannot stand as an excuse, that such a 
course is conducive to the maintenance of purity of 
the church ; but it appears to be a hot zeal to weed 
out the tares (or what they judge to be tares) ; 


1104 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


whereas the servants of the lord, when their zeal 
urged them to root out the tares, did not venture to 
do it; but asked permission, and when they were 
forbidden to do it, they forbore. If these would also 
ask, or examine the law book of their Lord, they 
would find there, that the Shepherd does not teach 
His flock to devour, but sends them as sheep among 
wolves ; that it is also not His will, that the erring 
should be destroyed, but that they should be guided 
into the true way ; and that He also does not desire 
the death of the sinner, but that he should repent 
and live. And many other similar doctrines, all of 
which tend to the salvation and not the destruction 
of men. But it is very evident that there is still a 
veil before their hearts, so that they cannot under- 
stand this ; or that a frantic zeal has inflamed their 
hearts to such bloodthirst, that they cannot tolerate 
it, that any one should walk the way to heaven in 
any other manner than just as they have chosen it, 
and in which they want to compel every one to 
walk, as was seen in the year 1614, at Zurich, in 
Switzerland, in the case of a pious witness of the 
divine truth, named Hans Landis, a teacher and 
minister of the Gospel of Christ, who had gone up 
the river Rhine, where he had his place of resi- 
dence, to feed and refresh with the Word of the 
Lord some souls that were hungering and thirsting 
for righteousness. 

When the council at Zurich learned of this, they, 
instigated by the disposition of the envious scribes 
and Pharisees, could not tolerate this, but instantly 
caused it to be forbidden him, as though they had 
thought thereby to hinder the true progress of the 
word of the Gospel. But he, who knew with Peter, 
that we must obey God's commands more than the 
commandments of men, had such love to the truth, 
and to the young sucklings on Zion's breasts, that 
no human threats could induce him to forbear feed- 
ing them with the true food of the soul. Hence the 
enviers of the same apprehended him, and sent him 
ironed from Zurich to Solothurm, to the papists, 
expecting that he should forthwith be sent to sea or 
upon the galleys; but through the help of good- 
hearted people he was there released; but subse- 
quently apprehended again and taken to Zurich, 
where he was rigorously examined concerning his 
doctrine, and when he would in no wise desist from 
his godly purpose or from his faith, they showed 
in him, that their decree of eighty-four years pre- 
vious was not yet forgotten, neither had the spirit 
of it died of old age ; for, according to the import 
of the same, they sentenced him from life to death, 
and hence, in the month of September of the afore- 
said year, 1614, for the sake of the truth he was be- 
headed as a true follower of Christ. Which they 
nevertheless would not acknowledge, but pre- 
tended, and persuaded the common people, to de- 
ceive them, that he was not punished and put to 
death for his religion, but for his obstinacy and 
disobedience to the authorities. 

In this they evinced their old nature of Phari- 
sees ; who, when they condemned to death the inno- 


cent Lamb, the Saviour of us all, did not say that it 
was for His virtuous doctrine by which He con- 
verted man to God, but that He had to die for His 
blasphemy. And this is the nature of all tyrants, to 
heap upon the innocent, besides sufferings and 
death, also false accusations. But when the last 
day of judgment shall come, when they must also 
expect and shall receive a sentence for their in- 
considerate sentences, and shall lament in amaze- 
ment: "Behold these whom we once had in de- 
rision, and a proverb of reproach, how are they 
now exalted"; then they shall too late repent of 
their wicked course, and lament it forever with 
gnashing of teeth. 

But on the other hand, this pious martyr and 
witness of God, and all the righteous that are still 
under the altar and wait for the fulfillment of the 
number of their brethren who shall also make their 
robes white in the blood of the Lamb, shall receive 
a glorious reward, and shall then together, in shin- 
ing raiment, with great boldness, as valiant heroes 
and confessors of Christ, with the wise virgins, be 
admitted by the Bridegroom to His marriage, 
where they shall enjoy eternal happiness, and pos- 
sess the kingdom of the Father, prepared for them 
from the beginning. Amen. 


FURTHER OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING THE PERSON 
AND DEATH OF HANS LANDIS 

Having through our good friends B. Louwr and 
H. Vlaming come into possession of a certain ex- 
tract from a letter dated, A. D. 1659, July 19-29, 
from one of the preachers at Zurich, who witnessed 
the death of the afore-mentioned martyr, we have 
deemed it well to add it here, that is, as much of it 
as is necessary to be given here for fuller informa- 
tion. 

"Further you remember," he writes, "that Hat- 
tavier Salr. witnessed the beheading of Hans Lan- 
dis, which I also still remember well, having seen it 
myself in the Wolfsstadt, the whole transaction be- 
ing as fresh in my recollection, as though it had 
happened but a few weeks ago." 

Continuing, he speaks of his personal appear- 
ance and the manner of his death, saying. 

"Hans Landis was a tall, stately person, with a 
long black and gray beard, and a manful voice. 

"When he, cheerful and of good courage, was 
led out, by a rope, to the Wolfsstadt (being the 
place made ready for his execution), the execu- 
tioner, Mr. Paull Volmar dropped the rope, and 
lifting up both of his hands to heaven, spoke these 
words : 

" 'O that God, to whom I make my complaint, 
might have compassion ; that you, Hans, have come 
into my hands in this manner; forgive me, for 
God's sake, that which I must do to you.' 

"Hans Landis comforted the executioner, saying 
that he had already forgiven him : God would for- 
give him, too ; he well knew that he had to execute 
the order of the authorities; he should not be 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1105 


afraid, and see that there was no hindrance in his 
way. 

"Thereupon he was beheaded. After his head 
had been struck off, the executioner asked : 'Lord 
bailiff of the Empire, have I executed this man 
rightly according to imperial law and sentence?' 
Otherwise it was customary to say : 'This poor fel- 
low,' etc. As though he believed that he died saved 
and rich. 

"The people were of the opinion, that the exe- 
cutioner by dropping the rope meant to indicate to 
Hans that he should run away, it was also generally 
said : that if he had run away, no one would have 
followed him, to stop him." So far the afore- 
mentioned extract. 

Further Statement. — It is also appropriate to 
give here what has been stated to us through cred- 
ible testimony, namely, that when the afore-men- 
tioned Hans Landis was standing in the place of 
execution, to be put to death, his dear wife and 
children came to him with mournful crying and 
lamentation, to take a last and final adieu and leave 
from him. But when he saw them, he requested 
them to go away from him, in order that his good 
resolution and tranquillity of heart for the death 
awaiting him might not be disturbed or taken away 
by their weeping and grief; which having been 
done, and he having commended his soul into the 
hands of God, the quickly descending stroke of the 
sword put an end to his life. 


OF A CERTAIN PROHIBITION PUBLISHED BY THOSE 

OF AERDENBORGH AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS, 

AND WHAT WAS DONE BY THE LORDS STATES 

GENERAL OF THE UNITED NETHERLANDS 

FOR THE ABOLISHMENT OF THE SAME, 

A. D. 1615 

Also at Aerdenborgh in Flanders they began to 
put into execution various means for the oppres- 
sion of the Anabaptists who resided there and had 
escaped the claws of the Romish wolf, the cause of 
which was a certain prohibition emitted by the bail- 
iff and the council of said city ; in which said people 
in the first place, were refused liberty in the practice 
of their religion, insomuch that they were not al- 
lowed to assemble for this purpose, neither in the 
city, nor within the limits of its jurisdiction. 

Thereupon there began they to afflict these inno- 
cent and defenseless people, not only with heavy 
fines, but also with arrest and imprisonment. 

This sad beginning would, to all appearance, 
have culminated in greater mischief to the afore- 
said people, had not their High Mightinesses, the 
Lords States General of the United Netherlands, 
who had received information of this, opposed it 
with a certain mandate, whereby those who were 
the cause of said oppression were prevented from 
proceeding with the execution of their afore- 
mentioned prohibition, and on the other hand, lib- 
erty of religion was granted to those that were 


oppressed. The contents of the afore-mentioned 
mandate are as follows: 

The States General, etc., to the Bailiff, Burgo- 
masters and Judges of Aerdenborgh. 

Honorable, etc. : We have learned with surprise, 
that contrary to our resolution announced to Your 
Honor by our order by the clerk, Jan Bogaerd, 
you still hinder the members of the community 
called Anabaptists or Mennonists, residing in Aer- 
denborgh and the parts under its jurisdiction, in 
the freedom of their assembling and the exercise of 
their religion in Aerdenborgh, and trouble and op- 
press them, by prohibiting their assembling, by ar- 
rests, and fines. 

Whereas we desire that the aforesaid members of 
the community belonging to the Anabaptist persua- 
sion be allowed to enjoy just as much freedom, with 
all quietness and modesty, in their mind, con- 
science, assembling, and exercise of their religion, 
in Aerdenborgh as is the case every where else in 
the provinces, cities, and places of the United Neth- 
erlands, without any contradiction or resistance, 
except that you may exercise an oversight over 
their gatherings, as far as they deem it well, and 
that they, to this end, may inform you every time 
that they desire to assemble. Hence we command 
you, to govern yourselves precisely in accordance 
with this, to the better maintenance of tranquillity, 
peace and unity in the aforesaid city ; without caus- 
ing the apprehension or execution of the aforesaid 
members for any fine or contravention, because of 
previous gatherings. Upon this we shall rely, and, 
etc. Given this 1st of May, 1615. 

This agrees with the minutes preserved in the 
rolls of their High Mightinesses. Signed, 

N. Ruysch. 


FURTHER OBSERVATION, A. D. 1619 

When the aforesaid mandate had been drawn 
up, and properly delivered by order of their High 
Mightinesses, the hope was indulged in that it 
would be obeyed, and thereby the peace desired 
accomplished, but through the intervention of en- 
vious and malevolent persons this hope was frus- 
trated; for it was sought, notwithstanding said 
mandate to find cause whereby the liberty of the 
afore-mentioned people might be annulled justly 
as it were, and their peace disturbed. 

To this end served, or at least was used, a cer- 
tain ordinance decreed in July of the year 1619, by 
order of the Excellencies lords in power against 
certain individuals. Though this ordinance had no 
reference whatever to the Anabaptists, yet their as- 
sembling and religious worship was prohibited; 
hence they again addressed themselves with humble 
supplications to the High Mightinesses of the Unit- 
ed Netherlands, to the end that they might be de- 
livered from this disturbance of their peace, and 
freely permitted (as had been ordained before) to 
practice their religion; whereupon followed an- 
other mandate to the governor of Sluys, and the 


1106 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


bailiff and magistrates of Aerdenborgh, it read as 
follows : 

The States, etc., to the Lord 0} Haultain, Gov- 
ernor of Sluys and the adjacent parts; as also to the 
Bailiff and Magistrates of the city of Aerdenborgh. 

Noble, august, honorable, dear, particular: We 
here send you the adjoined request presented to us 
in the behalf of the members of the community 
called Mennonites or Anabaptists, residing in Aer- 
denborgh who complain that they are disturbed in 
the free exercise of their religion which we have 
granted them in the aforesaid city ; you doing this 
under the pretext of the decree emitted by us on 
the 3d of July last ; whereupon we have deemed it 
necessary to advertise and explain to you, that it is 
not our intention that the supplicants be compre- 
hended in the aforesaid decree of the 3rd of July, 
but that the supplicants shall retain, enjoy, and 
continue in, said freedom in the exercise of their 
religion, in Aerdenborgh, even as they have pre- 
viously had and enjoyed. Hence we charge you, 
to govern yourselves in accordance with this, with- 
out further troubling the supplicants, as that they 
have to follow our previous concession and resolu- 
tion. Hereupon we shall rely and commend you 
into the high protection of the Almighty. From the 
Hague, the 16th of November, 1619. 

This agrees with the minutes preserved in the 
rolls of their High Mightinesses. Signed, 

N. Ruysch. 


REMARKS AS TO WHAT FOLLOWED HEREUPON 

After this second mandate there followed in the 
aforesaid city and its jurisdiction the hoped for 
peace, at least so that we have learned of no note- 
worthy disturbance or obstruction of religion. 

Meantime the mischief broke out again in other 
places, especially at Deventer, though also from 
those professing the Calvinistic doctrine ; insomuch 
that the authorities of said city, instigated by cer- 
tain bitter and malignant persons, endeavored, 
through a certain edict containing divers punish- 
ments against the Anabaptists, to abolish the gath- 
erings of those professing that belief; an account 
of which we shall forthwith give. 


OF AN EDICT OF THOSE OF DEVENTER AGAINST 

(AMONG OTHERS) THE SO CALLED MENNONISTS 

OR ANABAPTISTS, A. D. 1620 

When the year sixteen hundred and twenty, 
after the birth of Christ had come, the aforesaid 
magistrates emitted an edict, not only against the 
Romanists (from whom they had formerly suf- 
fered persecution themselves), but also against the 
Mennonites or Anabaptists, who had always shown 
themselves peaceable and friendly toward and 
among them, whereby they prohibited, among 
others, also the assemblies of the Anabaptists, yet 
not on pain of death. 

That this may be well understood, we shall cor- 
rectly copy the edict ; as far as it is directed against 


the Anabaptists, and present it to the impartial 
reader. 


EDICT 

The magistrates of the city of Deventer prohibit 
all citizens and residents of their city ; that no Men- 
nists, etc., shall hold any secret or open assembly 
or meeting where any preaching . . . .* marri- 
age, or any other exercise of religion is practiced ; 
under whatever pretext the same may be done ; on 
pain that those who shall be found to practice it 
shall forthwith be banished from the country for- 
ever; and every person that shall be found at such 
a place or in the assembly; shall forfeit the upper 
garment and twenty-five guilders in money; the 
second time, the upper garment and fifty guilders ; 
the third time, to be punished arbitrarily. And he 
that lends his house, for the purpose of holding 
such gatherings, forfeits a hundred guilders; the 
second time, two hundred guilders ; the third time, 
he shall be banished forever. See Chron. van den 
Ondergang, Book 17, for the year 1620, etc., page 
1825, col. 1. 


For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience 
toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully 
For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for 
your faults, ye shall take it patiently ? but if, when 
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto 
were ye called : because Christ also suffered for us, 
leaving us an example, that ye should follow His 
steps. I Pet. 2:19-21. 


OF SEVERE SLANDERS AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS 
IN THE PROVINCE OF HOLLAND, ETC. (TO IN- 
STIGATE TO PERSECUTION) , AND HOW 
THEY DEFENDED THEMSELVES TO 
THE STATES OF SAID COUNTRY, 
ON THE 8TH OF OCTOBER, 
A. D. 1626 

In the meantime men did not cease to slander 
and speak evil of the doctrines of the Anabaptists • 
especially about the article which they confessed 
concerning God, as also touching the incarnation 
of the Son of God, etc., even as though they ad- 
vanced the most absurd, yea, ungodly opinions in 
regard to it; which was done, in order, if possible, 
to cause a persecution of these people, even in the 
midst of the Netherlands. 

For this occurred in such a way, that also the 
high magistrates and States of the country were ex- 
ercised with regard to it; who, to get full infor- 
mation about this matter, gave orders to divers 
churches of the Anabaptists, to make a uniform 
confession touching the afore-mentioned articles, 
and to deliver the same to their noble High Mighti- 
nesses. 

To this the afore-mentioned Anabaptists were 


■ \ T1 l at wllich , is left out here concerns the religion of the Da- 
pists ; hence we have omitted it. p 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1107 


not averse; inasmuch as they composed these 
articles in writing, and delivered them, on the 8th 
of October, A. D. 1626, to the deputies of the 
Court of Holland. The contents thereof were as 
follows : 

Of the only God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost 

We believe from the heart, and confess herewith 
according to the testimony of the Word of God, 
that there is one, only, eternal, almighty, merciful 
and just God (Deut. 6:4; Matt. 19:17; Ps. 90:2; 
Isaiah 40:28; Rom. 16:26; Gen. 17:1; Ps. 103:8; 
Philippians 2 :4; Dan. 9:7), and none other (I Co- 
rinthians 8:4, 5), to whom there is none like (Ex. 
8:10; Isa. 46:9), whose greatness is immeasurable, 
and His form indescribable, II Chron. 6:18; Job 
1 1 :8, 9. Before whom, above whom, and beside 
whom, there is no other, Isa. 43 :11 ; Deut. 10:17 ; 
32:39. Who is of Himself that He is, Ex. 3:14. 
To whom all things that are owe their existence, 
Gen. 1 ; Ps. 146:6; Acts 14:15. Who is the Alpha 
and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning 
and the end, Rev. 21 :6; Isa. 41 :4. Who knows, 
sees, and hears all things, Ps. 94:11 ; I John 3:20; 
Ps. 33 :13 ; 94 :9. Who alone is good, and the foun- 
tain and source of all good, Matt. 19:17; James 
1:17. Wherefore to Him, blessed be He, belongs 
and must be given all divine honor, fear, love and 
obedience (Ps. 29:1 ; Luke 2:14; Deut. 10:12, 20; 
6:5 ; Matt. 22 :37; Jeremiah 11 :7), which may not 
be shown to any other, neither to angels, nor to 
men, nor to any other, whether they be heavenly or 
earthly creatures, Rev. 19:10; Acts 10:26. For 
He will not give His glory unto another, neither 
His praise to idols, Isa. 48 :1 1, 42 :8. But although 
God in the aforesaid manner manifests and makes 
Himself known in general by His Word: yet by 
the same word He also shows Himself distinctively 
and separately, as, namely: That there are three 
that bear record in heaven, I John 5 :7. Not three 
gods, but one Father, one Word or Son, and one 
Holy Ghost, even as this was shown, when the 
Lord Christ was baptized (Matt. 3:16); and is 
also taught in the words of Christ, where He com- 
mands His disciples to baptize in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
Matt. 28:19. So that therefore, according to the 
Word of God, the Father is the true Father of the 
Son (Matt. 7:21; 10:32, 33; 16:17; Mark 14:36; 
John 17), from whom the Son proceeded in an in- 
comprehensible manner from eternity, and was 
born before every creature. Micah 5 :2 ; Col. 1 :15. 
Hence the Son is also the true Son of the Father 
(Ps. 2:7, 12; Matt. 3:17; 17:5), so that also the 
Father, as far as He is the Father, is not the Son, 
John 3:16, 17; Rom. 8:3; Gal. 4:4. That likewise 
the Son, as far as He is the Son, is not the Father, 
John 16:28; Rom. 5:10. But that herein the Fa- 
ther is another than the Son, and the Son another 
than the Father, John 5:32, 37; 10:25, 29; 15:24. 
That also the Father and the Son, as far as they 
are Father and Son, are not the Holy Ghost. That 


also the Holy Ghost, as far as He proceeds or is 
sent out by the Father, in the name of the Son, is 
another than the Father or the Son. But as far as 
the Father is God, eternal, uncreated, but the Cre- 
ator of all things, with many other divine attri- 
butes, herein we believe that the Son and the Holy 
Ghost are one with the Father, to whom one and 
the same title of God, in the highest significance, 
honor, service, and obedience, belongs. 

However, the manner, how and wherein Father, 
Son and holy Ghost are three and also one, we do 
not think that God has so fully revealed to us in 
His Word ; that also all the knowledge of it is not 
necessary to salvation, since it is a high or deep 
mystery, which here in this life can be known 
but in part, as if seen through a glass darkly, 
I Cor. 13 :12. The perfect knowledge and true con- 
templation of which, is hoped for by faith, in this 
life, but will only hereafter, in the life eternal, be 
fully known. I John 3 :2. Wherefore deep investi- 
gation of this matter, beyond or above the Word 
of God, is more subtilty than Christian simplicity. 
The terms, of one essence, trinity, three persons, 
invented in former times by the ancients, we avoid, 
because they are unknown to the Scriptures, and 
because it is dangerous, in naming God, to use 
other words than those of the holy Scriptures. By 
the words, three beings, or three in one being, 
previously used by Jaques Outerman, as also by 
some of our teachers, we understand nothing else 
than what is comprehended in this our preceding 
confession. 

Of the incarnation of the Son of God 

We believe and confess, that God, willing to 
show His very great love to the human race (who 
through sin had fallen into death and into much 
corruption), and to perform by the deed His gra- 
cious promises made to the fathers (Gen. 3:15; 
12:3; 22:18; Deut. 18:18), sent to this purpose 
His only (John 3 :16), dear (Luke 9:35), and be- 
loved Son (Matthew 3 :17), who was from eternity 
(Heb. 1 :2), by whom all things were created and 
made (Col. 1 :16; Heb. 1), into this world (John 
3:17; I John 4:9), who gladly obeyed the will of 
His Father (Ps. 40:8: Heb. 10:7), and came from 
above (John 3:31 ; 8:23), from heaven (3:13; 6: 
62), came forth from His Father (16:28), leaving 
His divine glory (17:5), form (Phil. 2:6), and 
riches (II Cor. 8:9), descended (Eph. 4:9), came 
into this world (John 16:28), so that the virgin 
Mary, by the power of the Most High (Luke 1 : 
35), conceived Him (Isa. 7:14; Matt. 1:23; 
Luke 2:7), so that also the same, and no other, 
was born of her (Isa. 7; Matthew 1 :25; Luke 1 ; 
Gal. 4:4). For although Mary bore the Son of 
God in another form, than in which He was with 
the Father before the foundation of the world; 
yet it is nevertheless the same, whose goings forth 
have been from of old, from everlasting, Micah 
5 :2 ; Isa. 9 :6. For the Word or Son became flesh. 
John 1 :14. Yea, He that was like unto God, be- 


1108 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


came like another man. Phil. 2:7. The Son of 
God appeared in the form of sinful flesh (Romans 
8:3), and God was manifested in the flesh (I Tim- 
othy 3:16), so that the second man Christ is the 
Lord Himself from heaven. I Cor. 15 :47. Hence 
that which the apostles saw in Christ, with their 
eyes, heard with their ears, and handled with their 
hands, was of the Word of life ; so that they saw 
that eternal life which was with the Father. I John 
1. For God brought His first begotten Son into the 
world, whom all angels and men must worship. 
Heb. 1 :6; Phil. 2:10. And when we thus believe, 
we have in our favor the testimony of God and 
of all the righteous, who with one accord unani- 
mously exclaim : that this visible man Christ is the 
Son of God (Matt. 3:17; John 1:2; 9:37; 11:27; 
Matt. 16:16; I John 4:10; 5 :5), who dwelt among 
men (John 1:14; Zech. 2:10; Bar. 3:37), and 
whom the high priests, because He confessed Him- 
self to be the Son of God, also condemned to death. 
Mark 14:64; John 18:35. For, not knowing Him, 
they nailed the Lord of glory, that is the Lord from 
heaven, to the cross. I Cor. 2:8; 15:47. There 
the Son of the living God suffered (Heb. 5:8), 
whom God did not spare (Rom. 8:32), but deliv- 
ered Him up for the life of the world (John 
3 :16; I John 4:14), to the most ignominious death 
of the cross. Phil. 2 :8. There the Son of God shed 
His precious blood for the forgiveness of our sins 
(Acts 20:28; Col. 1:14; I John 1 :7; Rev. 1 :5) ; 
He by whom God made the worlds, by Himself 
purged our sins. Heb. 1 :2, 3. He was buried, and 
the third day was raised from the dead by the glory 
of the Father. I Cor. 15 :12; Acts 3 :26; Rom. 6:4; 
I Thess. 1 :10. He ascended up to where He was 
before. John 3:13; 6 :62 ; 16 :28; Eph. 4:8; I Tim. 
3 :16. He is sitting there at the right hand of the 
Majesty of His Father (Eph. 1:20; Heb. 1:3), 
whence He shall come in the clouds of heaven, to 
judge the quick and the dead. Matt. 24:30; Acts 
10:42; Rev. 1:7. 

The final cause of the sending, advent, incarna- 
tion, and suffering and death of the only begotten 
Son of God in this world, was to save sinners 
(I Tim. 1:15; Matt. 18:11), or to reconcile the 
sinful world to God the Father, John 3 :17 ; I John 
2:2; 11 Cor. 5 :19. Hence He is also the only foun- 
dation (I Cor. 3:11), the only door to the Father 
(John 10), the only way to eternal life (John 14: 
6), and the only meritorious cause of justification 
(Acts 13 :38; Rom. 3 :24), and of eternal salvation; 
for there is salvation in no other, as the apostle 
Peter says, neither is there any other name under 
heaven given among men, whereby they must be 
saved, than in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Acts 4:12. To Him be praise, honor and glory for- 
ever and ever. Amen. 

This was subscribed by twenty ministers of the 
Anabaptists (who are all well known), in the name 
of their churches; as of Amsterdam, Haerlem, 
Leyden, Delft, Rotterdam, Dergoude, Schiedam, 
Bommel, Blockzijl, etc. 


This confession of faith, concerning the articles 
about God and the incarnation of the Son of God, 
etc., having been delivered to the deputies of the 
Court of Holland, produced satisfaction with their 
high excellencies, and hence the establishment of 
greater peace and liberty for the Anabaptists in 
said country, although to the dissatisfaction of 
those who, through bitterness, had first endeavored 
to disturb their peace, and, if they could have suc- 
ceeded to cause an oppression or persecution of 
them. 

Note. — Just in time two manuscript tracts, in 
the Swiss language, were sent to us, both of them 
having been sent before this date, from the Swiss 
parts, to divers churches of our fellow believers, 
but principally to those of Amsterdam, at the re- 
quest and in the name of some of the oppressed 
brethren ; also in general, of the ministers and eld- 
ers of the church in the Palatinate and Alsace. 

The first was written and completed on the 15th 
of September, 1645, and bears the signature of 
Jeremiah Mangold. 

The second, in the month of February, 1658, by 
M. Meyli. 

These two tracts, both of them written with one 
design and purpose, and sent to us, shall aid us in 
the carrying out of the work we have undertaken ; 
namely, to extend the history of the holy martyrs 
who suffered for our common Christian faith, to 
this our present time, and bring it to a completion. 

In order to do this in the best manner, and to 
bring these matters (which in one tract are de- 
scribed very diffusely, and in the other, very briefly, 
and sometimes abruptly), into a convenient form or 
shape, we shall not grudge the labor of treating 
them from their first rise, and to follow up the mat- 
ters chronologically (though they are described in- 
discriminately), and to indicate each time, in order 
that no error be made, as to which tract from which 
we have taken it. 


OF THE INAUGURATION OF THE LAST SWISS PERSE- 
CUTION; TOGETHER WITH THE CAUSES OF 
THE SAME, 1635 

The blooming rose of the church of God, in the 
Swiss countries, had now for about twenty-one 
years enjoyed tolerable peace ; for it appears, that 
the thorns which before and about the year 1614 
had grown up over it for its oppression, were satis- 
fied with the blood of the last named Hans Landis ; 
until, in the year of our Lord 1635, the old hatred 
of the misnamed Reformed broke out again in 
those parts, and principally in the city of Zurich, 
which, already one hundred and ten years pre- 
viously, namely, A. D. 1525, in the time of Zwingli, 
when their church was but five years old (as was 
shown jol. 80. col. 2), had commenced with public 
decrees against the Anabaptists. 

This originated principally in the conversion of a 
certain influential, rich, and respected man in the 
city of Zurich, named Henry F., who being chosen 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1109 


ensign by the authorities there, found his soul 
troubled with anguish and distress, and became un- 
willing to be used in the war, in which he was now 
to serve ; hence seeking advice with the church of 
the defenseless Christians or Anabaptists, he en- 
tered into the convent, and forsaking war, was 
there accepted through baptism, and recognized as 
a dear brother of said church. This through the 
instigation of the learned there, was very illy re- 
ceived by the authorities in the afore-mentioned 
city ; the more so, since he continued to live undis- 
turbed on the borders of their territory, and this 
right opposite their adversaries, namely, the Ro- 
man Catholics. 

Thereupon it followed that the magistrates is- 
sued a command, that all the Baptists (who con- 
temptuously were called Anabaptists) should have 
to go to church with them and attend their wor- 
ship, if they wished to retain their liberty. 

But when they could not do this with a good con- 
science, and hence refused to comply with it, the 
magistrates, incensed at this, towards the close 
of the year 1635, caused many of them to be ar- 
rested, all of whom, with the exception of three, 
escaped (since the prison was not strong) and fled 
from the hands of the persecutors. The other three, 
however, namely, Rudolf Egli, Uhbi Schmied and 
Hans Muller, remained, and were each separately 
imprisoned, in the council house, where they perse- 
vered about twenty weeks, amidst much conflict, 
adversity and temptation, inflicted upon them in 
order to make them apostatize from their faith. 

But when they in no wise wished to apostatize, 
and their adversaries could accomplish nothing 
with them ; inasmuch as they indeed promised, if 
they should be released, to render their authorities, 
as they had previously done, all proper honor, 
subjection, and taxes, but that they would in no 
wise go to their church, nor attend their worship 
(which was the principal point) ; they were en- 
joined, that they, in order to come to a resolution, 
should deliberate and advise with their brethren ; 
wherefore they, provisorily, were released from 
their imprisonment and bonds for a month's time. 

Afterwards, when they, according to the charge 
given them, and their promise, returned, and 
could still not consent to or follow with a good 
conscience that which the authorities demanded of 
them touching their religion, they were again con- 
fined in prison. 

But when, as before, their good resolution and 
firm faith could not be changed, they were finally 
again released upon the afore-mentioned condition, 
but afterwards, having proved what they had to 
expect, they did not again appear before them with- 
out safe-conduct. But all these things were but the 
beginning of sorrows. Compare Tract, Jer. Mang. 
after the preface, fol. 1, A., with Tract, M. Meyli, 
fol. 2, A. 


PROGRESS OF THE INAUGURATION OF THE AFORE- 
SAID LAST SWISS PERSECUTION, IN THE CASTLES 
WADISCHWYL, KNONOW, AND GROENINGEN, AS 
ALSO IN THE CONSISTORY AT ZURICH, IN 
THE YEARS 1636 AND 1637 

In the following year, namely 1636, on the 17th 
of March, also on the 17th of August of the same 
year, and also on the 8th of September, and to- 
wards the close of the year, but finally, in May 
of the following year, 1637, nearly all Anabaptists, 
brethren as well as sisters, in the parts of Switz- 
erland, but principally, in the territory of Zurich, 
were summoned before certain persons, political 
as well as ecclesiastical, whom the authorities had 
delegated thereto. 

First in the castles Wadischwyl, Knonow, and 
Groeningen, where they all had to make known 
their names and surnames, which were written 
down. 

The second time, again in the same castles, 
where they were informed : That they should con- 
form to the common mode of worship in the 
churches ; which they refused. 

The third time, at Zurich, in the consistory 
(however not all, but only some), where they dis- 
puted with them about three articles of religion, 
namely, about baptism, the Supper, and church 
discipline, or evangelical excommunication ; so that 
when they had declared their views touching these 
points, as also concerning the whole foundation of 
their faith, and asked the committee, whether one 
could not be saved with such a faith ; they received 
for an answer : "Yes, one could be saved with it." 
However, in the evening, this having occurred dur- 
ing the day, they were again greatly reviled, re- 
proached, and threatened with regard to their 
faith; for, as the proverb says: "When the fox's 
skin does not reach, they use the lion's pelt." 

The fourth time, again in the same consistory, 
where it was told them that they should indicate 
all their movable and immovable property; with 
the promise that not one stiver should be taken 
therefrom ; which they candidly did and declared ; 
hence all their property was written down and 
registered, and they were then put in arrest. 

The fifth time, again in the afore-mentioned cas- 
tles, to which end a letter of safe-conduct was giv- 
en them. Here they were asked, what they had re- 
solved as regards conforming to the common wor- 
ship, etc., which they had been enjoined to con- 
sider ; whereupon a letter from the high bailiff, by 
the order of the high authorities, was read to them, 
which contained that if they would not go to 
church, and therein obey the authorities, they 
should be imprisoned in certain places, and have 
to expect no mercy. 

In the meantime the aforesaid brethren and sis- 
ters frequently requested permission to leave the 
country (namely, with their property), but consent 
was never granted, only two things were offered 
them, of which they might choose one, namely, 


1110 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


(1) that they should have to go to church with 
them; or, (2) that they should have to die in the 
prisons in which they were to be confined. 

The first they would not promise or consent to, 
and hence had to expect the second. 

This is the manner of the proceedings that pre- 
ceded the last persecution of the believers in Switz- 
erland. Jer. Mang., Tract, jol. 2, A. B.; also, M. 
Meyli, jol. 3, A. B. 


of the afore-mentioned persecution itself, 

how it occurred, and in what manner 

twelve brethren were apprehended, 

and imprisoned at zurich, in the 

place othenbach (with some 

criminals) ; and how it 

terminated with 

THEM, A. D. 1637 

After the afore-mentioned proceedings of the 
Swiss authorities against the true believers in 
those parts, had taken place, and said believers 
could not answer according to the former's pleas- 
ure, since their consciences did not feel free to do 
so, the afore-mentioned authorities, especially those 
of the city of Zurich, in the month of May, 1637, 
sent out their beadles in great numbers, who with 
raging and storming, cursing and swearing, cutting 
and chopping, even as ravening wolves among a 
flock of sheep, violently entered the houses of the 
believers, and took with them nearly all that they 
could get, sparing none ; young and old, men and 
women, those enceinte, and mothers with infants, 
well and sick; among whom twelve brethren are 
especially mentioned by name, in the writings of 
the friends from Zurich; all of whom were im- 
prisoned in the city of Zurich, in a very damp 
prison, called Othenbach, with some criminals ; 
where much grief, vexation and misery befell 
them, solely for the steadfastness of their true 
faith. Some of them, who could not endure the 
severity of the imprisonment, the lack of food, and 
other hardships, died in bonds ; some, however, es- 
caped, by the help of God, unknown to the author- 
ities, through the prison being opened, without do- 
ing violence to their faith ; which matters will be 
treated more clearly and circumstantially in their 
proper place. Compare this with Jer. Mang., jol. 
3, B. 

Note. — In the year 1637, in the month of May 
three brethren, the names of two of whom are Jac- 
ob Rusterholtz and Peter Brubach, were sum- 
moned to a certain place and kept prisoners, by the 
high bailiff of Wadischwyl. There was also im- 
prisoned at this time, Hans Landis the second, a 
confirmed minister of the church in Horgerberg ; 
as also his daughter, Margaret Landis, who re- 
mained imprisoned about sixty weeks in Othen- 
bach. In the meantime the authorities sold their 
property, realizing seven thousand guilders from it, 
which they kept for themselves. 

Again, one Rudolf Egly, who two years previ- 


ously, namely, 1635, had been imprisoned with two 
other brethren, in the council house at Zurich, but 
had escaped, was now, A. D. 1637, again impris- 
oned, his house destroyed, the children driven out 
of it, and everything sold; from which there was 
realized about five hundred guilders, which the 
authorities also took into their possession. 

Afterwards his wife, Martha Lindingerin, was 
apprehended and confined at Othenbach, in a very 
damp prison. For a time she was very harshly 
treated, and also severely tempted in regard to the 
common money belonging to the poor of the 
church, of which her husband had charge ; for she 
was conducted into the torture chamber, and the 
executioner sent for and placed beside her, and she 
was threatened with severe pain and torture, if she 
would not indicate it. 

In consequence of this she weakened, and gave 
the desired information, whereupon she was re- 
leased, and the property of the poor saints seized, 
amounting in money and notes to about two thou- 
sand rix-dollars. 

But when her spirit, as it seems, could not rest, 
and she bewailed this with great sorrow, she was, 
a considerable time afterwards, again apprehended, 
and imprisoned in Othenbach; but was, with a 
good conscience (by breaking out), on the Friday 
before Easter, with others of her brethren and 
sisters, delivered from bonds. 

Compare both tracts, viz. : Mangold and Meyli. 

Note. — In continuation, we shall now show 
from the first mentioned tract of the Swiss elders 
and ministers, what persons, as far as we have 
learned of them, were apprehended during this 
persecution, as also how it terminated with them. 

HANS MEYLI, SR., AND HIS SON'S WIFE, ABOUT 
THE YEAR 1638* 

In the Knonow Bailiwick, the persecution, at 
this time, broke out with great violence, so that at 
one time about thirty thief catchers! entered, as by 
storm, the houses of the Anabaptists and defense- 
less Christians, made many watch-fires, raged and 
stormed, broke open doors and windows, ran with 
bare swords through the houses, and afterwards 
drank and rioted worse than soldiers. 

Among others there was also vehemently as- 
sailedthe house of an old man, named Hans Meyli, 
a minister of the church, who himself had been im- 
prisoned in the year 1637 ; but now they also took 
along his son Martin's wife, notwithstanding she 
had an infant at the breast. 

She was bound hard, and confined in the convent 
prison called Othenbach, fed for a long time on 
bread and water, and very severely treated, in or- 
der to cause her to apostatize ; but she continued 
steadfast in all her temptations, and was ultimately, 

* The exact time, when this occurred, is not mentioned by the 
writers ; but we find, from the circumstances, that it was about the 
year 1638. 

t There were with them two preachers (says the Swiss author) 
who went along with the thief catchers and helped them. ' 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1111 



The persecution continues in Switzerland: 1637 


through the grace of God, wonderfully delivered 
from bonds. Subsequently, being enceinte, she 
was again apprehended, and taken to the council 
house at Zurich, thence to Othenbach, and finally 
into the hospital, and there made fast to a chain, 
until the pains of travail came upon her, when she 
was loosed from her bonds, and seeing an oppor- 
tunity for deliverance, once more escaped the per- 
secutors' hands. See Tract of the year 1645, by 
Jer. M., fol. 4, B. and fol. 5, A. 

Note. — The authorities laid their hands also on 
the property, movable as well as immovable, of the 
old man, and realized from the sale of it fourteen 
thousand guilders, all of which they kept for them- 
selves, without making any restitution. 

Note.— On the 3d of May, A. D. 1639, the two 
sons of the afore-mentioned Hans Meyli, namely, 
Hans Meyli, Jr., and Martin Meyli, together with 
the wife of this Hans Meyli, were apprehended and 
imprisoned at Zurich, where there was inflicted up- 
on them, especially upon the men, much misery, 
vexation and harm, with fetters and handcuffs, as 
well as iron shackles, which were put upon them 
twice, in order to make them apostatize from their 
faith. 


Their children, as poor, forsaken orphans, were 
put out among strangers, which, as may easily be 
supposed, must have caused no small sorrow and 
anxiety to the hearts of these imprisoned parents ; 
nevertheless they remained unchanged in their 
faith, refusing to apostatize therefrom, notwith- 
standing their love to their afflicted children, to 
whom they could not come, until they, on the Fri- 
day before Easter, A. D. 1641, after three years 
imprisonment, together with others of their fel- 
low brethren, were delivered, in an unexpected 
manner, from their bonds, keeping a good con- 
science. See Tract of the year 1645, by Jer. Mang., 
fol. 5.A.B. 


CATHARINA MULERIN, A. D. 1639 

The north wind of persecution rose now more 
and more in the Knonow district, which also ap- 
peared in the case of an old sister, named Catha- 
rina Mulerin; who having also been apprehended 
and taken to Zurich, had to suffer much there in 
prison, for the faith and testimony of Jesus Christ ; 
but was afterwards (as the preceding ones), be- 
yond all hope and expectation, released from 
bonds. Tract, Jer. Mang., fol. 8, B. 


1112 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


FOUR SISTERS, NAMELY, BARBARA MEYLIN, OT- 

TILA MULERIN, BARBARA KOLBIN, AND 

ELIZABETH MEYLIN, A. D. 1639 

The persecution did not cease with the fore- 
going ; but they continued and laid their hands also 
upon four pious sisters, Barbara Meylin, Ottila 
Mulerin, Barbara Kolbin, and Elizabeth Meylin, 
who also had to drink out of the bitter cup of the 
dreadful Zurich prison; however, the Lord pre- 
served them, so that they, unharmed in their faith, 
unknown to the authorities, unexpectedly also es- 
caped from imprisonment and bonds. See the last- 
mentioned tract, fol. 10, A. 

Note. — We made mention, for the year 1635, of 
one Hans Muller, who, being imprisoned in the 
council house at Zurich, with two of his fellow 
brethren, was released for a month upon condition 
and then again imprisoned, and released the second 
time upon the same condition. 

He was subsequently (about the year 1639, as 
the circumstances show) again cruelly persecuted; 
insomuch that even his neighbors and their houses 
were not spared, through which the thief catchers 
ran like ravening wolves on the track of a sheep ; 
but when they came into his house, from which he 
had already escaped, they, with pincers and other 
instruments, broke open chests and drawers, in the 
hope that they might there find the property of the 
church or the poor. 

These thief catchers, that night, threatened his 
little children, with bare swords, that they would 
kill them, if they did not show them where their 
father was. 

When they could not get him, they took along 
his wife, whom they bound and imprisoned in 
Othenbach. Thereupon, it was proclaimed in 
church, that no one was allowed to lodge, or give 
food or drink to Hans Muller from the Groeningen 
bailiwick, on pain of severe penalty and the dis- 
favor of the authorities. 

Now when his life was made exceedingly hard to 
him, the bailiff in the convent of Ruti, in the name 
of the burgomasters and councilors of Zurich, sent 
to him a letter of this import, namely, that he 
should have a safe conduct for three weeks, to go 
and remain wherever he would ; also that he might 
freely come to him in the convent, and, after they 
should have finished their conference, leave free 
and unmolested. 

Thereupon he voluntarily, with sure confidence 
in the aforesaid promise, went into the convent; 
but when he could not consent to the bailiff's de- 
mand about his having to go to church, he was 
confined there, guarded day and night, and then 
taken to Zurich, imprisoned for a time in the coun- 
cil house, and then in Othenbach (that being the 
place where also his wife was imprisoned) , where 
he was stripped, and kept a prisoner about sixty 
weeks; in which time he was in irons sixteen 
weeks, till he with the other prisoners finally, one 


Friday before Easter, unexpectedly made his es- 
cape. 

Afterwards he was again hunted with mad fury, 
even as before, and driven from one place to an- 
other, so that he did not dare to live in his house 
with his wife. 

In the meantime it happened, that his wife, hav- 
ing been delivered of twins, and lain in but eleven 
days, was surprised by ten thief catchers, who, 
having surrounded the house by night, entered it 
with this threat : that if she would not indicate her 
husband's hiding place, she should not leave the 
house for six weeks, or else she would have to go 
to church herself. But when she would not comply 
with this, two of the ten remained, and guarded 
her day and night. 

This filled the woman with such terror that, see- 
ing their design, she, on a certain very cold night, 
broke away with her two infants, and went a long 
unbeaten way, over hill and dale, and thus escaped 
the enemies' hands, forsaking all that she had, 
which the authorities rented to strangers, realizing 
thereby a thousand guilders annually. See Jer 
Mang. Tract, fol. 13, A. 


ELIZABETH HILZIN, A. D. 1639 

In the meantime they treated some far more se- 
verely and cruelly than the preceding ones; for 
they ceased not with mere imprisonment, but the 
people were suffered to die by sheer want, poverty 
and misery. 

Among those that suffered death, there is num- 
bered Elizabeth Hilzin, a God-fearing woman and 
sister of the church, who having been appre- 
hended, bound, and imprisoned in Othenbach, was 
there treated so harshly, that she, from that time 
on, had but few well moments. 

Nevertheless no mercy or compassion was shown 
her, until she, in consequence of all the hardships 
suffered, wasted in body, and having surrendered 
her spirit, which she had received from God, back 
to Him, died. However, the second death shall not 
hurt her, according to the promise of the Lord: 
"He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the sec- 
ond death." Rev. 2:11. See above. 

Note. — The authorities extorted a fine of five 
hundred guilders from the surviving husband of 
Elizabeth Hilzin. 

Further observations. — About this time, 1639, 
there was also apprehended a young man from 
Horgerberg, named Hans Aster. He was also taken 
to Zurich into Othenbach, fed on bread and water 
for a time, stripped in his bonds, etc., but subse- 
quently helped out through the assistance of some 
of his fellow believers. 

When this occurred, he was so miserably crip- 
pled through the severe imprisonment, that he had 
to be carried a long distance in the night. 

In the meantime, also his wife with her infant 
child was apprehended, and confined in Othenbach 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1113 


for a time, but subsequently, through divine prov- 
idence, escaped the enemies' hands. 

The authorities expelled the children into pov- 
erty, and sold their house and homestead (realizing 
from it about four thousand guilders), without re- 
storing anything. 

The parents had therefore to work hard for a liv- 
ing, having lost everything ; but in this they trusted 
in God's promises. Tract, Jer. and Meyli. 


HANS VAN UTICKEN, A. D. 1639 

Like a sweeping tempest which strikes every- 
thing, and carries away whatever is loose, so it also 
went at this time in the matter of persecution. All 
that were called Anabaptists were taken along, 
wherever they could get hold of them. The district 
of Uticken-wage had to suffer much in consequence 
of this. Among those that lived here, they also 
apprehended a pious brother, named Hans van 
Uticken,* surnamed Muller, who, in the year 1639, 
was incarcerated in the convent prison at Zurich. 

There they fed him on water and bread, stripped 
him in his bonds, and treated him most unmerci- 
fully, until he, having continued therein two years, 
became very sick, and as sick as he was, was helped 
out of prison, through the assistance of some of his 
fellow believers, who, as it seems, feared his un- 
timely death. 

But when he was brought to his wife and chil- 
dren, and attained to rest, he died ; however, with a 
joyful hope and glad soul, because the course of 
his pilgrimage (since he was not weakened in his 
faith and conscience) was now finished. 

Thereupon his wife, because she had lodged her 
husband, and the children, because they had shown 
mercy to their father, had to pay to the authorities, 
a fine of forty pounds. Tracts, Jer. Mang., fol. 6, 
A., and M. Meyli, fol. 7, B., num. 13. 

Note. — In the year 1639, the thief catchers of 
the city of Zurich, led by one of the ministers of the 
church there, who went before them with a light (a 
lantern, torch or candle) like maniacs and mad- 
men, violently entered into the house of a pious 
brother, named Rudolf Hagi, whom they forthwith 
took prisoner and conducted to Othenbach, a damp 
and unwholesome prison of the city of Zurich. 

Here he was stripped in his bonds, and kept con- 
fined for about eighty-three weeks ; during which 
time he, with other of his fellow believers, was fet- 
tered and chained for sixteen weeks. 

In the meantime they searched hard for his wife, 
but for the first captured only her oldest child, 
which they threatened with iron bonds and hand- 
cuffs, if it would not show where its mother was. 
Afterwards they also found the mother, whom 
they imprisoned in Othenbach. They, however, 

* The Swiss author rails this Hans van Uticken by the name of 
Hans Muller, but we have allowed him to retain the name Hans 
van Uticken, because he was by descent from Uticken-wage ; to dis- 
tinguish him from Hans Muller who was descended from the 
Groeningen Bailiwick, and of whom we made previous mention, 
in the note added to 'he account concerning Barbara Meylin and 
three of her fellow sisters. 


when there was no deliverance at hand, subsequent- 
ly, by a certain means, made their escape, together 
with their brethren and sisters that were also im- 
prisoned, without apostatizing from the faith. 
Tract Jeremiah Mang., fol. 6, A., compared with 
M. Meyli, on the name Rudolf. 

BURCKHARDT AM AN, A. D. 1639 

Burckhardt Aman was a God-fearing brother, 
who lived on the lake of Zurich. He was from there 
taken to Zurich, and imprisoned in Othenbach. 
But when his imprisonment had lasted about a 
year and a half, he, through a certain accident, 
unexpectedly was released, unknown to the au- 
thorities, keeping the faith in a good conscience. 

But as in his bonds he had been maltreated very 
unmercifully and miserably, through many hard- 
ships and afflictions that he had suffered, not the 
least true Christian love or assistance having been 
shown him, it was impossible for him to live long ; 
and he fell into a lingering sickness, and ulti- 
mately died, and was thus numbered among the 
dead in Christ, who have suffered and fought for 
His name's sake. Jer. Mang. Tract for the year 
1645, fol. 20, A. 

Note. — About this time also two sisters, honor- 
able women, were apprehended on the Lake of 
Zurich; who, after they had endured the trial of 
the faith, were released and delivered from their 
bonds. See Tract, Script., A. D. 1645. 


JACOB EGLI, A. D. 1639 

The misery of the beloved friends and children 
of God continued ; insomuch that in the year 1639 
they laid their hands also on a pious hero and sol- 
dier of Christ, named Jacob Egli, from the Groen- 
ingen Bailiwick. He was also taken to Zurich, and 
there imprisoned in the convent dungeon Othen- 
bach. 

Herein he persevered upwards of seventy 
weeks,* but was finally no longer able to endure, 
according to the flesh, the severity of the place and 
the bad treatment, so that he at last, when his 
strength failed more and more, and his infirmities 
increased, with a cheerful heart, commended his 
soul into the hands of God, and through death de- 
parted this life. 

Thus he finished the course of his pilgrimage, 
and entered into the saints' rest, to triumph here- 
after, where there shall be no more death, neither 
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain; where all things 
shall be made new and turned into joy, according 
to the Lord's promise, Rev. 21 :4. See Tract Jer. 
Mang., fol. 18, B.; also M. Meyli. Tract, fol. 7, A., 
num. 10. 

Note — A. D. 1639 there was also apprehended 
the Brother George Weber, an old man, from the 
county of Kiberg. The same was also taken to 
Zurich, into the convent Othenbach, and there fed 
on bread and water. 

* A year and a half, one of the Zurich writers say. 


1114 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Finally, through the hardships and long duration 
of his imprisonment, be became greatly impaired 
in his body, and fell into a severe sickness, after he 
had been confined there seventy weeks. 

Afterwards, through some of his fellow prison- 
ers, who opened the prison, he was released, but 
never again recovered his property. 

As regards the homestead of this George Weber, 
as also that of Jacob Egly, the owners of the same 
must each annually pay therefor to the authorities 
five hundred guilders. Jer. Mang. Tract, fol. 19, 
A. 


ULLI SCHEDME, SURNAMED SCHNEIDER, IN THE 
YEAR 1639 

The fire which the persecutors had kindled con- 
tinued to burn, and their mad fury did not cease, 
until they had also apprehended a zealous and God- 
fearing minister of the church, named Ulli 
Schedme, surnamed Schneider, by descent from 
Hirtzenstal, in the seignioralty Wadischwyl. 

In his imprisonment all manner of vexation and 
sorrow was inflicted upon him, in order to induce 
him to conform to the common mode of worship in 
the churches, and to turn him from his own with 
whom he had hitherto associated. But as he could 
not consent to this, and time passed on, he, because 
of the bad fare and other hardships suffered, con- 
tinually grew weaker and weaker, till his soul left 
his body ; and he thus, because of his faithfulness, 
became, through natural death, an heir of the 
eternal and blissful life; the full possession of 
which the Lord, at the last day, shall grant to, and 
make partakers, of, all those that have here faith- 
fully and steadfastly served Him. Tract, M. Meyli, 
fol. 6, B., num. 4. 

"Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of 
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, 
shall give me at that day : and not to me only, but 
unto all them also that love his appearing." II 
Timothy 4:8. 


JACOB RUSTERHEL FROM HORGERBERG, IN THE 
YEAR 1639 

In the year 1639, there was also brought prisoner 
to Zurich, Jacob Rusterhel, an old brother of the 
church at Horgerberg. 

He was imprisoned in Othenbach, and they dealt 
very unmercifully, rigorously and cruelly with 
him ; insomuch that he weakened, and consented to 
those that kept him in prison, to go to church; 
wherefore he was released. 

But when he came to himself and considered 
what he had done, and what great offense should 
arise from it, he repented and very bitterly be- 
wailed his fall, and again prepared himself very 
valiantly for the coming conflict. 

Thereupon he suddenly became weak and sick 
according to the body, though full of divine power 
according to the soul, and kept quietly hid in his 
house. 


However this could not remain concealed any 
longer; hence, being known, he was betrayed, 
again apprehended, and, as sick as he was, taken to 
Zurich, and, having been shackled with a chain, 
confined in the hospital there. 

But as he could not endure this, and bodily in- 
firmities came upon him more and more, he there 
departed this life, in misery, though with a joyful 
hope, waiting in blessed rest for the day of resur- 
rection from the dead, which shall crown and com- 
fort him and all true lovers of God, for all reproach 
and affliction suffered, with eternal honor and joy. 
Jer. Mang., Tract of the year 1645, fol. 13; also, 
M. Meyli, Tract, fol. 6, B., num. 14. 

Note. — We have extracted this from the writing 
of the Swiss friends, of A. D. 1658, and it must be 
distinguished from that which is contained in the 
writing of A. D. 1645, concerning Brother Jacob 
Rusterholtz, who was imprisoned almost two years, 
and then with wife and child expelled from the 
country, leaving behind his property, from the sale 
of which the authorities realized 1700 guilders, 
without restoring anything of it. See Tract, Jer. 
Mangold concerning the name Jacob Rusterhel. 

But if it is to be understood, that both accounts 
refer to one and the same person, so that the sur- 
names Rusterhel and Rusterholtz are only to be 
distinguished in the sound or spelling, and not in 
signification, it must follow, that said person was 
imprisoned only a few years ago, and then, when 
they could accomplish nothing with him, expelled 
from the country, and his goods seized and sold; 
but that he was finally again apprehended, and, 
when he, as before, remained steadfast, fastened to 
a chain in the hospital, until he died, having com- 
mended his soul to God. Compare both tracts, in 
the places which we have indicated. 

STEPHEN ZEHENDER OF BYRMENSDORF, IN THE 
YEAR 1639 

On the 23d of September of the same year, 1639, 
there was brought bound to Zurich a God-fearing 
brother, aged in years, named Stephen Zehender, a 
member of the church at Knonow, but by descent 
from Byrmensdorf. He was there imprisoned for 
sixteen weeks, in iron bonds, in the convent prison, 
a very damp and unwholesome place, called Othen- 
bach, stripped in his bonds, fed on bread and water, 
and kept very hard in every respect, until he could 
stand it no longer, and, impaired in body, was be- 
fallen with severe misery according to the flesh, and 
ultimately with death, after he had with a patient 
and steadfast mind, commended his soul unto God. 
See Jer Mang., Tract, fol. 7, B., compared with 
the account of M. Meyli, fol. 6, B., num. 6. 

Note. — About this time an old sister named 
Catharina Grobin, lived concealed (on account of 
the persecution) with her daughter, in the Knonow 
Bailiwick ; but the preacher of the church at Rister- 
schwyl, knowing this, came and wanted to appre- 
hend her, notwithstanding he was alone; the 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1115 


daughter, however, out of filial love, wanted to save 
her, but he (Oh, what cruelty from a preacher!) 
gave her such a thrust, that the pains of travail 
came upon her, and she was delivered of a dead 
child. In the meantime the mother escaped the 
hands of this ungodly man. Tract, M. Meyli, com- 
pared with that of Mangold, about the year 1639. 


ULRICH SCHNEIDER, WITH HIS TWO SONS, IN THE 
YEAR 1639 

On the same day that Stephen Zehender was ap- 
prehended at Knonow, namely, the 23d of Sep- 
tember, of the year 1635, they also seized, in the 
Seignoralty Wadischwyl, Ulrich Schneider, who 
was likewise (for his true faith, and because he 
would not go to the common church with his ad- 
versaries) bound and brought into the dungeon 
Othenbach.* 

But when he had persevered here for a long time, 
lain in irons, and suffered exceeding much tempta- 
tion, adversity and conflict (inflicted upon him, to 
make him apostatize), and, moreover, been 
stripped in his bonds, his bodily strength left him, 
and having committed his spirit unto God ; he died 
in prison, thereby triumphing valiantly and cou- 
rageously in the conflict set before him, without 
having weakened in his faith. 

After the death of their father, his two sons were 
also apprehended, and imprisoned in the same place 
where their father had died ; but the Lord granted 
them deliverance, so that they, when it was least 
expected, with a good conscience, through a certain 
means, unknown to the authorities, obtained their 
freedom. 

In the meantime the authorities broke up this 
whole family, drove the remaining children among 
strangers, and sold the house and homestead, real- 
izing therefrom 7,000 guilders, which they kept for 
themselves, but the cast out and forsaken ones joy- 
fully bore the spoiling of their goods.f Tract, 
Jer. Mang., jol. 11. 

HENRY GUTWOL OF LEHNMER, A. D. 1639 

Two days and one month after the apprehension 
of the last-mentioned witness of Jesus Christ, 
namely, on the 25th of October, 1639, there also 
died in the dungeon Othenbach, very miserably, 
however with a steadfast and joyful mind, Henry 
Gutwol, of Lehnmer, from the Knonow Bailiwick, 
after he had suffered much want, poverty and mis- 
ery there ; which painful and prolonged misery, up- 
on which death ensued, shall hereafter, because of 
his steadfastness in the accepted truth, be returned 
to him in an eternal, joyful and triumphant life, 
according to the Lord's promise : "Be thou faithful 
unto death and I will give thee a crown of life." 

* Some say, into the convent Othenbach ; others, into the dun- 
geon; others, into the prison, etc., but it was evidently at Othenbach 
a famous prison in Zurich. 

t They sold everything without restoring the proceeds to the 
poor, expelled orphans. How will they be able to answer for this 
in the great day of judgment, when the Lord shall come and in- 
quire what mercy they have shown? Matt. 25. 


Revelation 2:10. Compare both tracts, that of 
Mangold as well as that of Meyli ; the one of A. D. 
1645, the other of A. D. 1658, in the Swiss lan- 
guage, on the name Henry Gutwol. 

HANS JACOB HESS, WITH HIS WIFE, A. D. 1639 

Among those who suffered in the Swiss persecu- 
tion, there was none of the least Hans Jacob Hess, 
a chosen and confirmed minister of the Christian 
church. 

He was apprehended for the third time in the 
year 1639; for from the two preceding imprison- 
ments, the first of which had occurred already, in 
the year 1637, the Lord, beyond all expectation, 
had remarkably delivered him, through the aid of 
those that were imprisoned with him ; as also out of 
this third imprisonment. The first lasted nineteen 
days; the second, eight weeks; the third, eighty- 
three weeks, or more than a year and a half. 

But in the meantime his life was made very bitter 
and vexatious ; for he was stripped, and, together 
with some of his fellow believers, put in iron bonds 
sixteen weeks, which he nevertheless patiently bore 
with a steadfast mind, until the time of his deliver- 
ance. 

While this was taking place, namely in the same 
year, also his wife was apprehended, who was first 
imprisoned in the council house, and then in Othen- 
bach, where, through bad treatment and unfit food 
and drink, for sixty-three weeks, she was so im- 
paired in her constitution, and weakened, that she 
was seized with consumption, and after suffering 
much misery, died in prison. 

This then was the end of this pious heroine of Je- 
sus, who, to receive the eternal, blessed life, be- 
cause of the uprightness of her faith, chose to die 
a lingering death rather than enjoy the temporal 
rest and pleasure of this life; wherefore the gra- 
cious God shall hereafter crown and reward her, 
with all those that have valiantly suffered and 
fought for His name's sake, with the unfading 
crown of honor. (I Peter 1 :4) Tract, Jer. Mang., 
jol. 16, A. B., and jol. 17, A., etc. 

Note. — The property of Jacob Hess was seized 
by the authorities, who realized from the sale of it 
4,000 guilders, without restoring anything of it to 
those who remained. O great injustice ! How will 
they be able to account for this before the righteous 
judgment seat of Jesus Christ? 


OF A CERTAIN MANIFESTO, EMITTED BY THOSE OF 
ZURICH, A. D. 1639, IN EXCUSE OF THE PERSE- 
CUTION RAISED; AND OF THE ANSWER WHICH 
FOLLOWED FROM THE PERSECUTED AS A 
REFUTATION 

Now when it happened that in consequence of 
the foregoing evil treatment instituted against the 
Swiss Anabaptists, those who had commenced this, 
drew down upon themselves, even from the com- 
mon world, much opposition, criticism, and re- 
proach, the rulers of the country, and especially of 


1116 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


the city of Zurich, as having been the principal 
ones in said ungodly work of persecution, caused, 
A. D. 1639, a manifesto, apology, or defense (so 
called) to be published, in excuse and vindication 
as it were, of what they had already done and 
brought about against said Anabaptists. 

But as this in many respects, was not according 
to the truth, but, from partisanship, contrary to the 
truth, many of the Swiss brethren who were still 
out of bonds, yet in the same persecution, defended 
themselves with regard to it, with all proper cour- 
tesy in a Christian and discreet manner. We could 
produce here their answer entire and with all the 
circumstances, since we have received it correct; 
but as this would take up too much room, and un- 
duly increase this work, we shall note only some of 
the most important portions from it. 

In regard to the first accusation laid to their 
charge in the aforesaid manifesto, by the lords of 
Zurich, namely, that they had separated themselves 
from the obedience which they owed to the Chris- 
tian church ; they make this reply : 

"Herein, right in the beginning; great wrong 
and injustice is done us ; for we desire in no wise to 
separate ourselves from the Christian church, but 
seek to adhere to the same and the pure Word of 
God, yea, to sacrifice our bodies, property and 
blood therefor ; but the reason that we cannot unite 
with their (namely, the so called Reformed) 
church, is, that her doctrine in many respects is not 
like the ancient, pure, apostolical doctrine, nor does 
it agree with the words and commandments of 
Christ ; and that we, through God's gracious illumi- 
nation, have before us a better way, namely, the 
true apostolical foundation, to which, by the help of 
God, we will also adhere. 

"But that nevertheless not we, but the principal 
learned men, and some of their own number, are 
those who, having in the beginning of the change 
held the right views with us, touching baptism, the 
Supper, excommunication, and resistance or re- 
venge, afterwards again turned away from it shall 
clearly appear, when we shall rightly examine their 
first teachings and writings of a hundred years or 
more ago." 

Hereupon it is stated in the same answer, what 
teachers in the beginning of the Reformation taught 
the afore-mentioned articles aright, from which 
they subsequently, and especially their descendants, 
again departed; which appears from these words: 

Firstly, as regards baptism, this is declared by 
the conference of Zwingli and Balthazar Hubmaier, 
held A. D. 1523, at Zurich, in the Graef; where 
Zwingli publicly confessed : "That infants are not 
to be baptized before they grow up and attain 
to a reasonable age. He also promised that he 
should make mention of it in his Book of Articles ; 
as he also did, in the eighteenth article respecting 
Confirmation, where he says: 

"That in former times it was not common to 
baptize children; but that they were publicly in- 
structed together with the rest; who afterwards, 


when they had attained to their understanding, 
were called catechumeni, that is, instructed ones in 
the word,* whereupon, when the faith was thus 
firmly implanted in the heart, and they had con- 
fessed it with the mouth, they were 'baptized.' " 

This practice of the doctrine, he said, he wished 
to see readopted in this our time. 

Thus also confessed his colleague, Oecolampa- 
dius in a letter to the afore-mentioned Hubmaier, 
saying : "We have up to the present day not met 
with any passages in the holy Scriptures, that cause 
us to confess the baptism of infants, as far as we in 
our littleness can see." 

In like manner, on the sixth chapter of the 
Epistle to the Romans, treating on the word, Anig- 
noratis, he writes : "That every Christian shall first 
confess Christ, and then be baptized with the ex- 
ternal baptism (of water)." 

So also writes Sebastian Holmeyster, preacher at 
Schaffhausen, to said Hubmaier : "We have publi- 
ly confessed before the council at Schaffhausen that 
if our brother Zwingli in any wise insists (contrary 
to his previous opinion), that children are to be 
baptized, he herein greatly misses the mark, and 
does not according to the truth of the holy Gospel." 

Continuing, he writes: "Truly, I did not allow 
myself to be compelled that I should baptize my 
child, who is named Zacharias, hence you also act 
in a Christian manner, that you bring to light again 
the true baptism of Christ; which has long been 
neglected or kept down. We will also undertake to 
do this." 

Christopher Hogendorf, on the third chapter of 
the first Epistle of Peter, writes : "You have heard, 
that faith is put before baptism ; hence it is not 
mere baptism, but also the faith of baptism, which 
saves us." 

In like manner, Cellarius writes to the afore- 
mentioned Hubmaier, as follows: "Since you de- 
sire that I shall declare to you my iudgment con- 
cerning baptism and the Lord's Supper, I will 
heartily and briefly comply with your request : 

"In the first place it is an abomination in the eyes 
of God, that little children are baptized; which 
baptism is declared neither in the holy Scriptures, 
nor in the examples of the holy apostles ; and there 
testify against it also God's judgments, which 
manifest themselves in the division of the created 
things ; for in the beginning the earth was without 
form and void." 

The preachers at Strasburg: Wolfgang Capitb, 
Cestor Hedio, Matthew Zell, Symphonas Polio, 
Theobald Niger, John Latonius, Anthony Firn, 
Martin Hatk, and Martin Bucer, in their book, en- 
titled, Ground and Reasons, fol. 1, write: "That 
in the beginning of the church no one was baptized 
nor received into the holy Christian church, except 
those who had entirely submitted to the word of 
Christ." 


* In the word of salvation, etc., it says: In the tract the order 
of the words is a little different, according 1 to the Swiss style ; how- 
ever, the sense of the same is clearly expressed here. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1117 


Their ground and reason for such belief, they 
show from the holy Scriptures, namely, that they 
confess, that the beginning (before) of our Chris- 
tian life is sin, and that therefore John the Baptist, 
Christ, and the apostles always began by saying: 
"Repent, etc." Again: "In the congregation of 
God confession of sins has ever and always been 
first, which, with the ancients, preceded baptism, 
for usually adults, and not children, were bap- 
tized." 

Fol. 2 and 3, as also further on, they write: 
"That without the baptism of the Holy Spirit the 
water and (its) baptism are but a hocus pocus." 

Concerning the article of War or Retaliation. In 
like manner, some of the foremost Lutherans (who 
in the beginning were one with the Calvinistic Re- 
formed), and of the Zwinglians, believed with us 
that it does not behoove a Christian to war, or offer 
resistance. Among them we will first adduce An- 
drew Carlstadt, who, in a little book treating on 
whether men should forgive sufferings and of- 
fenses, printed at Zurich, A. D. 1524, writes as 
follows concerning resistance: 

"We shall not be misled by the objection made: 
War is a punishment of God ; hence there must cer- 
tainly always be one who wages war against an- 
other." Again: "They warred in the Old Testa- 
ment." 

In reply to the first he writes: "Hear on the 
other hand, what Christ says (Matt. 18:7): 'It 
must needs be that offenses come ; but woe to that 
man by whom the offense cometh!' Hence some 
merit the disfavor of God, so that He punishes and 
torments them with war, but woe to him that wages 
war against them; for He (namely, God) punishes 
the evil with the evil." 

Reply to the second: "The children of Israel 
waged war, either against sinful nations that would 
not allow them to go into the promised land, or 
against those, who, when they were in it, did not 
leave them in peace, and all this was a figure of the 
spiritual war, which we must now wage in Christ, 
as regenerated and new men, against all vice and 
unbelief." 

Immediately after that he proceeds and writes: 
"They also bring against us this objection: That 
we must compel by force of arms those that will not 
allow that which is right." 

Answer: "If we are to speak in a right and 
Christian manner of the matter, war in no wise be- 
comes us ; we ought, according to the teachings of 
Christ, to pray for those who say all manner of evil 
against us, and count us fools ; yea, if they smite us 
on one cheek, to offer them the other also; then 
shall we be children of the Most High." Thus far, 
Carlstadt. 

From Carlstadt the writer goes on to Luther, 
saying : "In a little book, printed at Wittenberg, in 
the year, 1520, Luther states why he burnt the 
pope's books. The twenty-second article thereof 
reads thus : 'Because he teaches, that it is right for 
a Christian to defend himself with violence against 


violence; contrary to the words of Christ (Mat- 
thew 5 :40) : "If any man take away thy coat, let 
him have thy cloak also." ' " 

In another book, also printed at Wittenberg, in 
the year 1522, there are found among other articles 
(which one Sorbona had extracted as heretical 
from Luther's books) also these: "That he (name- 
ly, Luther) had taught concerning the words of 
Christ (Matt. 5:39) : 'Whosoever shall smite thee 
on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also ;' and 
again, (Rom. 12:19) : 'Dearly beloved, avenge not 
yourselves,' that these words are not advices" that 
is, which one may, or may not do "as many theolo- 
gians erroneously teach, but that they are com- 
mandments" that is, things which must be ob- 
served. 

Again: "Christians are forbidden to sue for 
their rights at the law." Again : "Since a Christian 
may not place his affection upon temporal things, 
he may also not swear an oath because of them." 

In short : "We find that Luther for a consider- 
able time was with mouth and hand opposed to re- 
sistance, till he was finally seduced to another 
belief, by the Jesuits even as Sleydanus, lib. 8, fol. 
561, testifies." See the oldest edition. 

A few pages further on the writer comes to speak 
of Pomeranus, Brentius, and divers others, who, 
about the years 1520, 1530, 1540, and subsequently, 
undertook the work of the Reformation from Pop- 
ery, and also became effectual instruments in that 
direction ; who nevertheless at that time taught not 
only against retaliation upon enemies, but also, 
besides infant baptism, the swearing of oaths, and 
other articles which are not founded in the holy 
Gospel of Jesus Christ; and, on the other hand, 
taught and defended such things as are founded 
therein, and are still at the present day taught by 
the Anabaptists; though some of the afore-men- 
tioned reformers themselves, and especially their 
descendants, for the most part, again departed 
therefrom. 

These and similar matters were, in said reply of 
the persecuted Anabaptists in Switzerland, given 
for examination to the lords of Zurich, and to those 
who had drawn up the afore-mentioned manifesto 
in excuse of the persecution raised; as clearly 
showing that not the Anabaptists, but they them- 
selves, had departed from the principles of the 
Reformation; that consequently not the Anabap- 
tists, who had adhered to their principles, but the 
apostate reformed themselves, were to blame in 
this matter. Hence, that the authors of said mani- 
festo had done wrong in charging the aforesaid 
Anabaptists with having separated themselves 
from the obedience which they owed to the true 
Christian church, only because they would not go 
to church with them, who are called Reformed, 
nor receive their religion contrary to their souls 
and consciences. 

Besides this point of disobedience toward the 
church, the Swiss brethren were also charged in the 
aforesaid manifesto, that they were also disobedi- 
ent to the political authorities, etc. But hereupon 


1118 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


they, in said answer, roundly declared that this was 
unjustly said of them, yea, that they were willing 
and entirely ready to obey their authorities in all 
just matters, to pray for them, to pay them due 
tribute, honor and fear, and, though they should 
suffer wrong from them, in no wise to avenge it ; 
but willingly and patiently to bear it for the Lord's 
sake. 

These were about the principal points that were 
mentioned in the manifesto, and refuted by the 
persecuted brethren ; the other matters are of small 
importance, and hence not necessary to be adduced 
here. 

But they nevertheless proceeded with the perse- 
cution, and granted no mitigation, as will be seen 
from the following accounts : 


in Othenbach, where they miserably wasted, etc. 
Tract, Jer. Mang.; edit. 1645. 


WERNER PHISTER AND HIS SON'S WIFE, IN THE 
YEAR 1640 

The progress of the years brought no cessation 
of the persecution, nor could aught of what was 
adduced by way of excuse avail anything. This 
was clearly evident, for the year 1640 had scarcely 
come when the Wadischwyl district began again to 
resound with persecution, insomuch that the serv- 
ants of the authorities there assailed, with dreadful 
raging and storming, like howling wolves and 
bears, the house of an old and pious minister of the 
church named Werner Phister, beat doors and win- 
dows and all that was attached to it in pieces, and 
apprehended him and his wife, as also his son's 
wife, and brought them to Zurich, where they were 
imprisoned in the place Othenbach. 

In the meantime the old man's wife by a certain 
accident escaped; but the pious old minister him- 
self, as also his son's wife, when they would in no 
wise apostatize from their faith, nor go to the com- 
mon church, had to forfeit their lives, insomuch 
that they were suffered miserably to die through 
want, poverty and hardships. But hereafter they 
shall no more hunger or thirst, nor be assailed by 
suffering or death; when the Lord, according to 
His promise shall reward and crown them with the 
eternal and blessed life. Tract, Jer. Mang., jol. 14, 
B, compared with Tract, M. Meyli., dated 1651, 
jol. 6, number 2. 

Note. — We previously, for the year 1637, made 
mention, in the margin, of a brother named Peter 
Brubach, who being then imprisoned with two 
other of our fellow believers, finally was released. 
The same was now, A. D. 1640, cruelly perse- 
cuted ; insomuch that on the 6th of May his house 
was demolished, his male and female servants sent 
away, the children driven out of the house, his 
house, homestead, woodland and fields, movables 
and immovables, yea, everything taken; a part of 
which was put into Othenbach, and the other part 
sold, from which 9,000 rix-dollars was realized, 
which the authorities seized. Not long afterwards 
the three little sons of this man were imprisoned 


GALLUS SCHNEIDER, A. D. 1640 

A very old man named Gallus Schneider, from 
the Seignioralty Wadischwyl, was also apprehend- 
ed in the year 1640, brought to Zurich, and there 
imprisoned in the convent dungeon (Othenbach). 

He was kept in irons sixteen weeks, and very 
harshly treated, until he finally, when his faith had 
been sufficiently tried, and been found immovable, 
died in his bonds, having committed his soul unto 
God, from whom he had received it. Compare 
Jer. Mang. Tract, jol. 15, B. with Tract, M. Meyli, 
jol. 7, A., num. 7. 

Note. — About this time, an old sister from Hor- 
gerberg, named Verena Albi, was also imprisoned, 
but subsequently, through a certain means, deliv- 
ered out of bonds, but must still keep herself con- 
cealed. Tract, Mang., and Meyli. 

RUDOLPH BACHMAN, A. D. 1640 

Even as youth on account of the bloom of their 
life was not spared, so also not the least compassion 
was had upon old age and declining years ; yea, not 
even upon such as were very feeble and infirm ac- 
cording to the body. 

Among these was Rudolph Bachman, from the 
Wadischwyl district, who was apprehended in the 
year 1640, and as he on account of his great age, 
weakness and infirmity, according to the flesh, was 
not able to walk, he was put on a sled, and thus 
conveyed from his house to the prison, which was a 
great distance off. 

Afterwards he was placed in chains for a time, in 
the nearest hospital, and, because of the steadfast- 
ness of his faith, not loosed therefrom till he died. 

But for this he shall hereafter, being freed from 
the eternal bonds of darkness, be admitted into the 
liberty of God's saved children ; on the other hand : 
"He that leadeth into captivity shall go into cap- 
tivity." Rev. 13 :10. 

Then it shall be seen, what difference there will 
be between God's true servants, and those that have 
afflicted them ; for everyone shall receive the things 
done in his body, according to that he hath done, 
whether it be good or bad. II Cor. 5:10. Com- 
pared with Tract, M. Meyli, dated 1658, jol. 6, B., 
num. 3, etc. 

Note.— Now, in the year 1640, there was also 
apprehended Henry Schnebbi, from the Seignior- 
alty Knonow, a God-fearing brother, who was 
cast into prison with a number of criminals at Zu- 
rich, at whose hands he met with much ill-treat- 
ment ; however, he was finally released. Tract, Jer. 
M., etc. 

In the year 1641, Hans Rudolf Bauman, a very 
God-fearing man, and a minister of the Church of 
Jesus Christ at the Horgerberg, was also taken to 
Zurich, and there confined in the convent prison, 
where he was very closely kept for over sixty 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1119 


weeks, and for a considerable time fed on bread 
and water, and put into iron bonds ; in consequence 
of which he fell into a severe sickness. 

In the meantime, on a certain Good Friday, 
through the aid of some of his imprisoned fellow 
brethren he escaped, but as he on account of his 
sickness, was not able either to walk or to stand, he 
was taken up and carried for a considerable dis- 
tance, so that he escaped the persecutors' hands. 

Thereupon his house and homestead were sold, 
and wife and children driven therefrom. From the 
sale was realized 3,000 guilders, which the authori- 
ties seized and kept for themselves. But the Lord 
shall render unto every man according to his right- 
eousness, and according to his faithfulness. I Sam- 
uel 26:23. Compared with Tract, Jer. Mang., 
fol. 12, A., etc. 


ULRICH MULLER, A. D. 1640 

On the 31st of August of the year 1640, there 
was apprehended Ulrich Muller, a minister of the 
Word of God, in the country of Kiberg. 

He was taken from there to Zurich, where he 
was confined in the council house, and a few days 
afterwards imprisoned in the convent dungeon at 
Othenbach. 

Here they treated him most unmercifully for 
thirty-five weeks, so that he completely wasted 
away, and, adhering to his faith, fell asleep in his 
bonds in great steadfastness. 

After his death his children had to pay a fine of 
100 guilders to the authorities on account of their 
father, who had, as it was thought, died as a here- 
tic. 

Compare both tracts, that of Mangold as well as 
that of Meyli, on the name Ulrich. 

Note. — At this time, A.D. 1640, there was also 
apprehended Oswald Landis, with his wife and two 
of his daughters-in-law, all of whom were im- 
prisoned in the convent Othenbach ; Jacob Landis, 
the son of Oswald, as also his entire family, were 
exiled into misery. 

In the meantime the two imprisoned daughters- 
in-law, who had nursing infants, escaped out of 
prison by night ; in which subsequently also the old 
man and his wife succeeded, but they had lost all 
their property, in consequence of which they had to 
roam about in poverty. Tract, Jer. M. 

In the following year, 1641, they again appre- 
hended divers pious Christians residing in the 
Seignioralty of Knonow; among whom are men- 
tioned by name, Henry Fricken, and also Hans 
Ring and his wife. 

Henry Fricken was confined in the council house 
of the city of Zurich, and so unmercifully treated, 
that he weakened in his purpose, and consented 
also to go to the common church, which was what 
they desired; whereupon he was released. But 
when he considered what he had done, and how he 
had done violence to his conscience, wronged his 
soul, and given offense to the Church of God, he 


fell into great distress, confessed his fall, and, with 
Peter, bitterly wept over his sin, and in order that 
his persecutors should no more rejoice over his 
apostasy, he went back to Zurich, into the council 
house, to be confined in the place whence he had 
been released, which was done. 

In the meantime, by the order of the authorities, 
his two large farms were rented for 420 guilders 
and notes they took from him over 13,000 guilders ; 
after which he was released, but again apprehend- 
ed, out of which bonds he again escaped, but was 
afterwards, as before, sorely persecuted, while 
wandering about in misery and poverty. 

Hans Ring also had to go to Zurich into the 
council house, and was then imprisoned in Othen- 
bach, and closely guarded. He was conducted into 
the torture chamber, and twice stripped, near the 
rack, but yet finally, unweakened in his faith, es- 
caped the tyrants' hands. 

The wife of this Hans Ring, four days after hav- 
ing been confined, and being yet very sick, was un- 
expectedly so assailed and distressed by the magis- 
trates' beadles, with furious raging and cursing, 
that she, in the attempt to save herself as it seems, 
unexpectedly fell into a gutter, where she could not 
be found or helped out for the time being ; but af- 
terwards, having been found, she was there fasten- 
ed to a chain, and the people in the house com- 
manded with severe threats, not to let her leave the 
house. 

Finally, however, through the aid of some of her 
friends, she escaped by night, and, being very weak 
yet, was carried into another region. Compare 
Tract, Mang. with Tract, Meyli, on the names 
above referred to. 


OF A CERTAIN SUPPLICATION ADDRESSED AND DE- 
LIVERED BY THOSE OF AMSTERDAM, IN FEBRU- 
ARY, 1642, TO THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF 
ZURICH, FOR MITIGATION OF THE PERSE- 
CUTION RAISED; AND OF THE ANSWER 
WHICH, IN JUNE OF THE SAME 
YEAR, FOLLOWED THEREUPON, BY 
THOSE OF ZURICH 

The laudable magistrates of the city of Amster- 
dam, in Holland, having an aversion to the pro- 
ceedings of their fellow associates at Zurich, on the 
20th of February, 1642, through the urgent re- 
quest of the Anabaptists, at Amsterdam, with re- 
gard to the distress of the Swiss brethren, sent an 
humble supplication to the burgomasters and the 
council of the city of Zurich, in order, if possible, 
to obtain some mitigation of the persecution com- 
menced against the Anabaptists there. 

This supplication having safely and properly ar- 
rived and been delivered there, could nevertheless 
obtain nothing in this direction, save only an un- 
friendly and irritating reply ; which was drawn up 
by them on the 18th of June, of the same year, and 
sent to the good magistrates of Amsterdam, and 
consequently also to the Anabaptists there, accom- 


1120 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


panied by three of their previously emitted mani- 
festoes of the year 1639, wherein, as we have no- 
ticed for said year, nothing but reproach and 
contumely (though without cause) was heaped 
upon said persecuted people. 

We could here adduce this letter of the Zurich 
lords, as we have a correct copy of it ; but as it con- 
tains nothing but unkindness and acrimony, with- 
out the least justice or information, and the fol- 
lowing work sufficiently declares from what spirit 
it proceeded, we deem it unnecessary and un- 
worthy, to accord it a place here ; without, however, 
despising said lords, since we are commanded to 
love even our enemies, and to pray for them that 
persecute us. Matt. 5 :44. 


FELIX LANDIS, WITH HIS WIFE ADELHEID EGLI, 
ABOUT A. D. 1642 

Felix Landis (the son of Hans Landis, who, 
A. D. 1614, was beheaded at Zurich) was a pious 
and God-fearing brother of the church in Horger- 
berg. He was apprehended, and imprisoned in 
Othenbach, in which place he was treated most un- 
mercifully; for he was not given anything to eat 
for many days, so that even some criminals that 
were confined near him in another place, took pity 
on him, and with difficulty, managed to get some 
food to him, through an opening between them. 
But when the doorkeeper perceived this, he was 
put into another prison. Finally, however, they 
gave him some food ; but he was so impaired in his 
body (through shrinking of his bowels, as it seems, 
on account of having suffered hunger so long) , that 
he could not bear food any more, but prepared 
himself for death. 

Yet in his greatest distress he was carried to 
church, during the sermon, where he, O dreadful 
inhumanity! was thrown under a bench; but he 
soon after gave up the ghost, which he had com- 
mended into the hands of God. 

His wife Adelheid Egli, who was also imprisoned 
in Othenbach, was kept there almost four years. 

In that time she was treated not only unmerci- 
fully, but also shamefully; they threw her into 
many a stinking corner, stripped her twice in her 
bonds, and for a time took away her clothes from 
her every night; however, she afterwards, with a 
good conscience, escaped from her bonds. 

But in the meantime the authorities had broken 
up their family, put out the children among stran- 
gers, and then sold house and furniture, realizing 
from it 5,000 guilders, all of which they kept for 
themselves. 

However the cast out and forsaken ones com- 
forted themselves herein according to the words of 
the apostle : "Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your 
goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in 
heaven a better and enduring substance." Hebrews 
10:34. Compare Jer. Mang., Tract of the year 
1645, fol. 13, A. B., with M. Meyli, Tract, dated 
1658, fol. 7, num. 8. 


Note. — The time of the imprisonment and death 
of this martyr, and of the following ones, which we 
have fixed about the year 1642 and 1643, is not 
really expressed in the Swiss manuscript, but is in- 
ferred from the circumstances. 


RUDOLF SUHNER, ABOUT A. D. 1643 

They also apprehended a young lad, named Ru- 
dolf Suhner, who, though young in years, was old 
in the faith and knowledge of Jesus Christ. 

He was kept confined nearly two years in Othen- 
bach, during which time he was forced to hard 
labor. 

In the meantime they made his life so bitter to 
him, by severe threats and terrible representations, 
that he, through fear of the impending distress, 
consented to go to church with those that had im- 
prisoned him, whereupon he was released. But 
soon after, reflecting on his fall, he experienced 
great sorrow, sincerely wept over his sins, and 
again prepared himself for the conflict set before 
him. 

Thereupon he was again apprehended, and con- 
fined in the afore-mentioned place, but kept much 
harder than before. For, for a time all food was de- 
nied him (even as had been done to Felix Landis), 
so that some criminals, who were confined close to 
him, filled with compassion on his account, poured 
to him some warm liquid food, through a crevice 
in the wall. 

Finally, when in consequence of having suffered 
hunger so long, he was so weakened, that he could 
not live any longer, he requested once more, that 
they would, in his great distress, allow him a little 
warm food, which the jailer made known to the 
lords. This, however, they jointly refused to grant 
in order to cause him, if possible, to apostatize. 
But finally one of the lords, beholding his misery, 
gave permission that they should give him some 
thing to eat again. Which when it was done, he 
could eat or bear it no more, and thus died famish- 
ing in his bonds; for which the Lord shall here- 
after, at His heavenly table, reward him with 
eternal satiation. "Blessed are ye that hunger now : 
for ye shall be filled." Luke 6:21. Compare Jer. 
Mang., Tract, fol. 14, A., with Tract, M. Meyli, 
fol. 7, num. 8. 

THREE SISTERS, NAMELY, ELIZABETH BACHMANNI, 

ELSSA BETHEZEI, AND SARAH WANRIJ, ABOUT 

A. D. 1643 

The army of God, which at this time prepared 
itself for the conflict and the sufferings of Jesus 
Christ, consisted not only of men, who are some- 
times judged to be strongest, but also in women, 
for God's power is made strong in weakness, which 
appeared in the case of three pious heroines of 
God, namely, Elizabeth Bachmanni, from the 
Groeningen Bailiwick, the wife of Hans Jaggli, of 
Bartschwyl; Elssa Bethezei, from the Knonow 
Bailiwick, the wife of Jacob Isselme ; Sarah Wan- 
rij, from the Horgerberg, the wife of Hans Phister, 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1121 


all of whom, imprisoned and bound in the dungeon 
Othenbach and in the hospital, for the testimony 
of Jesus Christ, lost their lives through want, 
hardships, and misery. 

All this they endured in the fear of God as well 
as patiently. They counted their departure from 
this life as the beginning of the future. And so, 
their unrest was truly the entrance to the rest of the 
saints, who shall hereafter, for this brief suffering, 
which they endured for the name of the Lord, re- 
joice forever. "For our light affliction, which is 
but for a moment, worketh for us a far more ex- 
ceeding and eternal weight of glory." II Cor. 4:17. 
Compare the above with Tract, Meyli, dated 1658, 
fol. 8, A., num. 1, 2, 3. 

VERENA LANDIS, A. D. 1643 

An old sister, named Verena Landis, was sur- 
prised in the night in her own house, with dreadful 
raging and storming ; in consequence of which she 
was so frightened that she fainted, yea, became 
sick, and hence could not go with the thief-catch- 
ers. 

When they could not get her away, she had to 
promise to remain a prisoner in her house, which 
promise she kept. 

But as they treated her very harshly, and pro- 
vided her with very bad food, certain death ensued 
a short time afterwards, and she thus departed this 
life with a joyful hope and cheerful heart; for 
which the Lord hereafter, because it was done for 
His name's sake, shall crown her with the life of 
bliss, and deliver her from eternal death. "There 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain : for the former 
things are passed away." Rev. 21 :4. Jer. Mang., 
Tract, fol. 15, B., compared with Tract, M. Meyli, 
fol. 8, A. 

BARBARA NEEFT, ABOUT A. D. 1643 

This woman was very near her confinement, 
when she was driven hither and thither through 
the persecution. 

After she was delivered and had lain in three 
days, she was betrayed and apprehended. 

She was forthwith, in the bitter cold of winter, 
taken to prison, a distance of four hours' walk ; in 
which, on account of the intolerable cold, her 
health became irrevocably ruined, so that she, 
though she was released from prison previous to 
her death, died soon after, and is now resting 
with her soul under the altar of God. Compare 
Jer. Mang., Tract of the year 1645, fol. 16, A., 
with M . Meyli, Tract, fol. 8, after the three women 
first mentioned, num. 1. 


Ruff, who was likewise enceinte; in consequence 
of which this good woman was so exceedingly 
frightened, it happened so unexpectedly, that the 
pains of travail came upon her, and she was there- 
fore not able to accompany her captors. 

Therefore she was fastened to a chain in the 
house of her brother-in-law, and the family or 
servants there enjoined to guard her well. 

But when she had been delivered of her child, 
and had gained a little strength, although not yet 
quite recovered from all the hardships she had suf- 
fered, she, when it was not expected, escaped into 
another district, but since her life had been greatly 
weakened through the persecution she had suffered 
she died soon after ; which she bore willingly and 
patiently, with a valiant and steadfast mind, to the 
praise of the Lord, entering into the saints' rest, 
and waiting for the day that shall hereafter comfort 
her and all the pious. M. Meyli Tract, dated 1658, 
fol. 8, B., compared with Jer. Mang., Tract of the 
year 1645, on the name Barbly, etc. 

Note. — About this time, 1643, there were also 
apprehended for their faith, two sisters, namely, 
Martha Lindne and Annill Blau, very well known 
and noted women. Martha was imprisoned in 
Othenbach, and threatened with the executioner, 
who stood beside her, if she should not reveal the 
poor fund, which was intrusted to her husband; 
which when she had pointed out, they took the 
whole of it and kept it, it amounting to about 1,000 
dollars. Annill being enceinte, was fastened to a 
chain in the hospital till she was delivered. But, as 
many interceded for her, and especially through the 
intercession of the chief curate, Printiger, she was 
released, and went to the Lower Palatinate, where 
she and her husband, named Moneth Meylich, who, 
on account of the steadfastness of his faith, had 
also endured much persecution, tribulation and im- 
prisonment, settled down, and (nothing to the con- 
trary being known) they still live, enjoying pros- 
perity through the blessing of God. Compare tracts 
of M. Meyli and Jer. Mang., on the names above 
referred to. 


BARBLY RUFF, ABOUT A. D. 1643 

The persecutors did not rest, but continued, so 
that having hastily entered into the Knonow Baili- 
wick, they fell upon another sister, namely Barbly 


HENRY BOLLER, ABOUT A. D. 1644 

It continued to be a common custom to let peo- 
ple die in prison. This appeared also in the case of 
a God-fearing brother, named Henry Boiler,* 
from the Seignioralty Wadischwyl, a man of very 
great age, and very infirm according to the body. 

He was apprehended, and taken to the afore- 
mentioned prison Othenbach at Zurich, and there 
put in bonds. 

But as they treated him most unmercifully and 
without the least compassion, his many years and 
natural infirmity were not able to bear up under it ; 
hence, having commended his spirit into the hands 

* In the last tract he is called Hans Boiler, but in the first, 
Henry, which we have followed in our account. It must also be 
noticed, that in the Swiss manuscript the time of this occurrence is 
not expressly noted for the year 1644 ; but from the circumstances 
we have inferred, that it took place about said year, as we have 
also noted. 


1122 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


of God, he died there in prison: but he shall be 
rewarded for this in the day of resurrection, when 
there will be fulfilled what the prophet says : "Thy 
dead men (O God!) shall live, together with my 
dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye 
that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of 
herbs." Isa. 26:19. Compare Tract, Jer. Mang., 
fol. 16, A., with the account o] M. Meyli, foL 6, B., 
though, through a mistake in copying, instead of 
Henry, it reads Hans. 

Note. — On the 11th of June of the year 1644 
there was apprehended an old brother from the 
Horgerberg, named Conrad Stricke, who, though 
he had been apprehended outside of the Zurich ju- 
risdiction, was nevertheless imprisoned at Zurich, 
in the place Othenbach, and put in chains every 
night. 

So was also his wife apprehended, and impris- 
oned in the same place; however, she, through a 
certain means, keeping her faith, escaped again; 
but the afore-mentioned Conrad, her husband, was 
not so successful, so that he remained in severe im- 
prisonment until the close of the year 1645, after 
which time we have learned nothing of him or 
of his deliverance. See Jer. Mang. Tract, edit. 
1645, on the name Conrad. 


OF A CERTAIN WRITING FROM SWITZERLAND, 

TOUCHING THE THREATS MADE BY THOSE OF 

BERNE AGAINST THE ANABAPTISTS IN 

THOSE PARTS, A. D. 1645 

Now when some brethren and sisters in the 
Swiss dominions had died in prison, of misery, 
want, hunger, and grief, but five still lived in con- 
finement, the remaining ones who were yet out of 
bonds, when they were threatened, especially by 
those of Berne, that they should expel them all 
from the country, and seize their goods, and sell 
them, had recourse, next to God, with an humble 
and friendly letter, to their fellow believers in Hol- 
land and elsewhere in the Netherlands, requesting 
that they should everywhere fervently call upon 
God the Lord in their behalf, for comfort and 
grace, to the end that they might patiently endure 
that which might come upon them according to the 
flesh, for His holy name's sake. 

This letter was written the 22d of July, old style, 
in the year of our Lord 1645, and was signed by 

Hans Duster, at Baltzen, 
an elder in the word of the From the 

Lord. _ Berne 

Ruth Kunstel, at Muchem, f jurisdiction. 
a minister in the word of the 
Lord. 
Ruth Hagen, an elder. -> From the 
Hans Mully, a minister. I Zurich 

Hans Stuss, a minister. J jurisdiction. 
What followed therefrom, and how it subse- 
quently went with those who were imprisoned, can 


be seen in a subsequent account, in a marginal note, 
in connection with Ully Wagman. 

But as to how the poor wanderers that were not 
imprisoned managed in their misery and poverty, 
we have received no clear information, but it can 
be sufficiently inferred from the sad condition of 
affairs. 


AN EDICT PUBLISHED BY THOSE OF SCHAFFHAU- 
SEN AGAINST THOSE CALLED ANABAP- 
TISTS, ABOUT THE YEAR 1650 

The persecution of the sheep of Christ remained 
at this time not confined in the limits of Zurich and 
Berne ; but as a fire of gunpowder, or a flash of 
lightning, rapidly passes from one place to another, 
so it went also here ; for also those of Schaffhausen, 
being one of the Swiss cities designated by the 
name of Cantons, following the footsteps of their 
fellow believers, took, even as the former, to ban- 
ishing the defenseless people who, having hitherto 
peaceably lived under their protection, were called 
Anabaptists. 

There was, however, some time set them, in 
which they might leave with their families ; hence 
the distress of those whom this befell was not so 
great as that of those of whom we made previous 
mention, and of whom we shall hereafter speak. 

All this was caused by a certain edict published 
for this purpose, which, if it were necessary, could 
be adduced here; but for certain reasons we are 
compelled to be brief, and to abridge our account 
as much as is possible. 

OF A CERTAIN MANDATE PUBLISHED BY THE PRINCE 
OF NEUBURG, AGAINST THE ANABAP- 
TISTS (SO CALLED), ABOUT THE 
YEAR 1653 

Even as an innocent lamb that has escaped the 
wolf, at last falls into the claws of the bear, so it 
went also at this time ; inasmuch as some of the de- 
fenseless followers of the meek Jesus, daring no 
longer to trust themselves to the Swiss confines, 
under the dominion of the Zwinglian Reformed, 
fled hither and thither, and thus also, as it appears, 
into Bergsland, the dominions of Guliche, and else- 
where, where the Roman Catholic Prince of Neu- 
burg, William Wolfgang ruled, and where the Ana- 
baptists had lived in peace for many years, under 
toleration. 

But now it came to pass, about the year 1653; 
that the same prince, instigated, as it is supposed, 
by certain envious and malignant Jesuits, also op- 
posed all those that were called Anabaptists within 
the limits of his dominion ; insomuch that he, by a 
certain public mandate, banished these people, in 
whatever part of his dominion they were resident, 
however with these conditions : 

1. That all Anabaptists who had become such by 
apostatizing from the Romish religion, should have 
to leave without delay. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1123 


2. That all other Anabaptists, who had not 
apostatized from the Romanists, but had proceed- 
ed out of themselves, if they owned no real estate, 
should have to leave within half a year. 

3. That all like conditioned Anabaptists, who 
owned real estate, and were engaged in an estab- 
lished mercantile business, should be granted for 
their removing, in order first to save their prop- 
erty, two years, etc. All this was accompanied with 
certain threats. 

This was executed by his order, and published 
without any delay in every place of his dominion 
where it is customary to make proclamation ; how- 
ever, at Glabbeeck, in the country of Guliche (from 
where we have received information concerning 
this matter), it was done on the last of January of 
the year 1653. 

In the meantime divers supplications for miti- 
gation of the afore-mentioned edict were delivered 
to the prince ; to which, as it appears, he would in 
a measure have been inclined : but before this was 
done, he departed this world ; hence that which had 
already been published remained in force with his 
successor. 

Hence the afore-mentioned people had to leave 
those parts, and everyone had to look out where he 
might best go; in which the Lord God showed 
many of them the grace that they were peaceably 
and joyfully received in the places whither they 
went, especially in the country of Cleves, under the 
Elector of Bradenburg, and in the Netherlands. 

"When they persecute you in this city," says the 
Lord, "flee ye into another : for verily I say unto 
you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Is- 
rael, till the Son of man be come." Matt. 10:23. 


ULLY WAGMAN, AND ANOTHER BROTHER, IN THE 
YEAR 1654 

There was some respite or abatement, as it ap- 
pears, between the years 1644 and 1654, in the Zu- 
rich dominions, inasmuch as we have not learned of 
any one having died in prison, from bad food or 
maltreatment (though some, of those whom we 
previously, and also in the margin, made mention 
of, had been apprehended a considerable time pre- 
viously) ; but when the year 1654 was come, we 
again learn of the death of a pious Christian there. 

They aimed at the leaders of the church, espe- 
cially at those who ministered in the Word of God. 
Among these they had apprehended, and impris- 
oned at Zurich, in the convent Othenbach, a very 
dear and worthy man, who, from a faithful heart, 
with the gift he had received from God, took heed 
to the church of Jesus Christ, and cared for it spir- 
itually; his name was Ully Wagman. 

But as in his imprisonment he was treated very 
harshly and rigorously, he felt that his death was 
near, and having commended his soul unto God, he 
departed this life. Compare both of the afore-men- 
tioned tracts. 

With him there was imprisoned another brother, 


who after Ully's death (since he did not want to 
apostatize, nor to go to church with his opponents) 
remained in confinement about two years longer, 
namely, until the 2d of October, A. D. 1656. But 
as to how it subsequently ended with him, we have 
not learned. M. Meyli, Tract edition 1658. 

Meanwhile, the former lost his life, while the lat- 
ter remained in bonds. The Lord will hereafter 
pronounce a righteous judgment upon those who 
have done and those who have suffered this; the 
dead that die in the Lord are blessed; those im- 
prisoned for the testimony of Jesus Christ shall be 
brought into the liberty of the children of God ; and 
on the other hand, those who imprisoned shall be 
imprisoned and bound with the woeful bonds of 
darkness; those who put to death the pious, or 
were the cause of their death, and have not re- 
pented of it, will, it is to be feared, not escape the 
second and eternal death. Oh, that those who may 
be guilty in this matter, and are still living, might 
repent before their death! Oh, that from persecu- 
tors they would become true followers of Christ 
and of His saints ! Oh, that they might be saved ! 
This we also wish them out of pure love and from 
the heart. 

Note. — Already prior to the year 1645 they had 
at divers times brought this and that one of the 
scattered flock of Christ prisoner to Zurich, and 
confined them in Othenbach. Among these there 
were particularly five brethren, namely, Jacob Aus- 
silly, Jacob Gachnauer, Jacob Baumgarter, Hans 
Huber, and another, named Henry. With these it 
went, consecutively, as follows: 

Jacob Aussilly, from the county Kiberg, was im- 
prisoned in Othenbach already in the year 1644, 
stripped of his clothes, dressed in a long grey coat, 
and fastened to a chain. 

Jacob Gachnauer, from the Groeningen Baili- 
wick, was first with his wife driven out of the 
country, his family broke up, the children expelled 
and thrust into poverty, house and furniture sold, 
and the proceeds thereof delivered into the hands 
of the authorities. But when he subsequently un- 
dertook to come back into the country, to seek his 
scattered children, he met the persecutors on the 
way, who also imprisoned him in Othenbach, de- 
prived him of his clothes, dressed him in a gray 
coat, fastened him to a chain, and dealt with him 
as with the preceding brother. 

Jacob Baumgarter, an old man of seventy years, 
had prior to this time been imprisoned five times on 
account of his faith, but had escaped every time; 
but when he was now apprehended, and also 
brought to Othenbach, there was no hope of deliv- 
erance, for they also fastened him to a chain, like- 
wise deprived him of his clothes, and, as had been 
done to the former, also dressed him in a gray coat. 
Moreover, he was for a time fed on bread and wa- 
ter, stripped twice, and put in irons twice, and also 
in fetters and handcuffs, etc. ; his house and home- 
stead were sold for 500 guilders, and the money de- 
livered to the authorities. 


1124 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Hans Huber, from the Horgerberg, was first im- 
prisoned with eleven other brethren, for the faith's 
sake, from which bonds he was delivered with his 
companions ; but he was subsequently again appre- 
hended, and imprisoned in a strong place at Othen- 
bach ; and as he was fettered and chained, there was 
no prospect for him to be released without the mi- 
raculous help of God. 

In the meantime, his wife and her sister, two 
aged women, were driven into exile, also because 
of the faith. 

The last, named Henry, had divers times also 
been severely persecuted for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ, and had also been imprisoned; but he was 
now confined with the others, in a way which made 
deliverance almost an impossibility. 

They were all chained, and stripped of their 
usual garments, and dressed, in the afore-men- 
tioned manner, for a mockery and reproach, in long 
gray coats. 

Thus they persevered until the last of August of 
the year 1645, being the time when we heard of 
them for the last time; how it further went with 
them, we have not been able to ascertain. 

In the meantime there cannot be withheld from 
them the name of pious witnesses of Jesus Christ ; 
since they professed a good profession, and, more- 
over, suffered all this for His name's sake. See 
Tract, Mang., of the year 1645, completed the ISth 
of September. 


OF A CERTAIN WRITING FROM MACKENHEYM, BE- 
ING A DEFENSE OF THE PERSECUTED SWISS 
BRETHREN, OR REFUTATION OF A LETTER 
ACCUSING THEM, SENT FROM ZURICH 
TO AMSTERDAM, A. D. 1658 

When all the afore-mentioned outrages perpe- 
trated on the Swiss brethren gave rise to much cen- 
sure on the part of some people, against the authors 
of said outrages, a certain letter was sent from the 
city of Zurich to one of the merchants at Amster- 
dam, in which the cause of the persecuted brethren 
was represented in the blackest hues, but the cause 
of their persecutors, in the fairest colors ; consisting 
principally in the assertion, that those who were 
persecuted there were quite a different class of peo- 
ple, and of another faith and practice, than their 
fellow believers in the Netherlands, namely, that 
they were disobedient, stubborn, etc. 

This letter having arrived at Amsterdam, it was 
found good to send the same (either the original or 
a copy of it) to the Swiss brethren ; to the end that 
they might obtain from them a correct and true 
explanation with regard to this matter. 

Thereupon they wrote an answer upon the 20th 
of March, old style, or the 30th of the same month, 
new style, A. D. 1658, and sent the same, together 
with the confession of their faith to the ministers 
of the church of God at Amsterdam. 

Therein it is stated, among other things, concern- 
ing the slander of disobedience, that even the Zu- 


rich lords of both estates had often confessed to 
them (the prisoners), that they had been to them 
very dear and obedient subjects, that is in common 
or civil matters, yea, that in the matter of doing 
right they serve as lights and examples unto others. 
Again, that they had nothing to complain of them, 
save only that they would not go to church with 
them, etc. 

It is then stated in said letter, that they had nev- 
ertheless been reduced to extreme desolation and 
misery, in regard to which these words are found : 

"They apprehended the old and sick, women en- 
ceinte and in childbed, together with their innocent 
babes, and treated said persons in various ways, 
with great harshness and cruelty ; yea, they seized 
all whom they could get into their power, so that at 
one time there were, in confinement, thirty-seven 
persons, of whom many men and women, in conse- 
quence of the dampness and long confinement, were 
very grievously injured in their health, and sixteen 
persons had to die in these prisons," etc. 

This letter was written at Mackenheym, and 
signed by six elders and ministers from Alsace 
(whose names on account of the present peril, we 
will not mention), in the year 1658, in the month 
and on the day given above. 


SEVEN TEACHERS AND ELDERS OF THE CHURCH 
OF JESUS CHRIST IMPRISONED AT BERNE, 
NAMELY, ULY BOGART, ANTHONY HINNEL- 
BERG, JEGLY SCHLEBACH, HANS ZAUG, 
ULY BAUMGARTER, CHRISTIAN CHRIS- 
TIANS, AND RHODE PETERS, IN THE 
YEAR 1659 

The little flock of Christ having fled from the 
confines of Zurich to the regions of Berne, could at 
this time also there obtain no freedom, inasmuch as 
those of Berne, following the footsteps of those of 
Zurich, also undertook to lay hands on them, but 
especially on the shepherds and leaders of the 
church, in order that they might by this means, as 
it seems, cause the more terror among the innocent 
sheep and lambs of the scattered flock of Christ. 

Seven of the teachers and principal elders of the 
church were apprehended, for whom special pris- 
ons were prepared, namely, Uly Bogart, Anthony 
Hinnelberg, Jegly Schlebach, Hans Zaug, Uly 
Baumgarter, Christian Christians, and Rhode 
Peters. 

These were for awhile kept very hard at work, 
and very poorly fed with heavy food, spelt and rye, 
to make good the expenses they caused; besides 
that much reproach, contumely and vituperation 
was heaped upon them. 

They were first told, that they should be kept 
confined in this manner until the end of their life ; 
in which they patiently comforted and surrendered 
themselves to the grace of the Lord. However, 
when they saw that there was no hope of dissuad- 
ing these people from their faith and religion, they 
determined upon another plan (according to what 
we have been informed from Alsace), namely that 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1125 


they should have to choose one of these three 
things : ( 1 ) To go with them to church ; or, (2) Be 
perpetually banished to the galleys; or, (3) To 
have to die by the hands of the executioner. 

Certainly a hard and difficult choice ; for the first 
proposition concerns the soul, and the last two the 
body: by choosing one of these things doubtless 
either the soul or the body, or even both together, 
should be imperiled. 

If one denies his faith, he does violence to his 
conscience; or if he adopts another religion, con- 
trary to his heart and mind, he exposes his soul to 
extreme danger, yea, to the peril of damnation. 

If one on the other hand will keep his faith, not 
bend or violate his conscience, and maintain and 
defend the religion which he has accepted and 
thinks necessary to salvation; he brings, in such 
case, his body in distress, so that he must wander 
about in misery, or meet with an untimely and vio- 
lent death. 

However, in such a case, it is necessary to con- 
sider, that the soul is of infinitely greater impor- 
tance than the body, which latter at all events must 
once, when the soul shall continue, be put off. 
Hence heed ought to be taken to the instruction of 
Christ, where He says : "And fear not them which 
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul : but 
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul 
and body in hell." Matt. 10:28. 

As to what was done in this matter, either on the 
part of the prisoners, or by those who kept them 
imprisoned, we have not been able to learn; it is 
certain, however, that they remained in confine- 
ment as late as A. D. 1659, which sufficiently indi- 
cates the immovableness of their faith, wherein the 
Lord, who is gracious, be pleased to strengthen 
them by His good Spirit, so that they, striving 
steadfastly, may hereafter, with all the saints, of 
whom we have mentioned many in this book, re- 
ceive the blessed crown of unfading glory from the 
Lord. 


SEVEN HUNDRED PERSONS OPPRESSED AND PERSE- 
CUTED AT BERNE 

In the year 1671 there arose again a severe per- 
secution against the Anabaptists, in said dominion 
of Berne; which persecution was so rigorous and 
long-continued, that it seemed that the authorities 
would not desist, until they should have utterly 
driven that people out of their dominion, or exter- 
minate them. In consequence of this it also hap- 
pened, that about seven hundred persons, small 
and great, found themselves compelled to leave 
their abode, forsake their property, and, many of 
them, also their kindred, together with their earthly 
fatherland, and betake themselves with the others 
to the Palatinate, in hope that the Lord should so 
order it, that they might find a place of abode 
there. We were eyewitnesses, as to how it went 
when they arrived there, and we inspected place 
after place whither they had come to find abodes. 


However, as we, just before we went thither, had 
received, from the persecuted people themselves, 
as well as from others who wrote in their name, 
and as they told them, several letters, which plain- 
ly state the circumstances and condition of this 
persecution, just as we had heard it from their 
own lips, we deemed it advisable, to insert the same 
here, in order that the Christian reader, reading 
them, may fancy to himself, that he hears the ac- 
count, not of ear or eye witnesses, but even of the 
very people that suffered said persecution. The 
letters read as follows: 


EXTRACT FROM THE FIRST LETTER, DATED THE 7tH 
OF APRIL, 1671, FROM OBERSULTZEM 

As to the request of the friends, concerning the 
situation of our Swiss brethren in the Berne do- 
minion, the facts are, that they are in a very sad 
condition, as we have learned from the lips of the 
fugitives that have arrived here, some of whom are 
still in my house. They say that they are daily 
hunted with constables, and, as many as they can 
get, taken prisoners to the city of Berne, so that 
about four weeks ago about forty, men and women, 
were in confinement there. They have also scourged 
some, and banished them from the country, one of 
whom has arrived here. They also scourged a min- 
ister in the word, and then conducted him out of 
the country, into Burgundy, where, when they ar- 
rived there, they first branded him, and let him go 
among the Walloons. However, as he could talk 
with no one, he had to go about three days with his 
burnt body, before his wounds were dressed and he 
obtained some refreshments ; being in such a condi- 
tion, that when they undressed him for the purpose 
of binding up his wounds, the matter ran down his 
back, as a brother who helped dress the wound told 
me himself. This friend arrived in Alsace together 
with two women and a man, who had also been 
scourged and banished. Hence they proceed very 
severely, and, as it seems, will not desist from 
their purpose, until they shall have utterly ban- 
ished from their country and exterminated this 
harmless people. 

It also appears that nothing further can be done 
in favor of these persecuted brethren ; for besides 
that the friends at Amsterdam and elsewhere 
labored for several years in the matter, so that 
several favorable letters of recommendation from 
the Lords States of Holland, as also in particular 
from the city of Amsterdam, and also of other per- 
sons of quality, were sent thither to the magis- 
trates; also, in the year 1660, an Express named 
Adolf de Vreede, was sent to them; however, he 
did not effect much for the benefit of our friends 
there. Hence, I cannot see that the friends at 
present will be able to effect anything that would 
tend to the relief of our persecuted brethren there. 
We will have to await with patience the deliverance 
which the Lord our God may be pleased to grant 
them. 


1126 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


EXTRACT FROM THE SECOND LETTER FROM OBER- 
SULTZEM, THE 23d DAY OF MAY, 1671 

The persecution of our friends continues as rig- 
orous as before, so that we are surprised, that they 
do not make more speed in leaving the country. 
Now and then one or two come straggling down ; 
but the most of them still stay above Strasburg, in 
Alsace. Some go into the woods and chop wood ; 
others go to the mountains and work in the vine- 
yards, in the hope, as it appears to me, that by-and- 
by tranquility will be restored, and that they 
might then be able with the greater convenience to 
return to their forsaken abodes ; but I fear, that it 
will not pass over so soon, and that they will find 
themselves greatly deceived in their hope. 

The magistrates at Berne caused six of the pris- 
oners, among whom was a man with nine children, 
to be fastened to a chain, and to be sold for the 
sea, to be used as galley slaves between Milan and 
Malta ; but as to what they propose to do with the 
other prisoners, cannot really be learned. One of 
the prisoners, an old man of about eighty years, 
died in prison. May the Lord comfort them in their 
sorrow, and strengthen them in their weakness, so 
that they may patiently bear the cross, and strive 
faithfully unto the end, for the truth of the Gospel, 
and thus be enabled ultimately to obtain the prom- 
ised salvation and crown of life. Amen. 


EXTRACT FROM THE THIRD LETTER FROM OBER- 
SULTZEM, THE 13TH OF OCTOBER, 1671 

Hendrick de Backer, most esteemed friend and 
beloved brother in Christ. I wish you and yours 
much grace and peace from God our Heavenly 
Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, as a friend- 
ly greeting. Amen. 

This is in reply to your request touching the con- 
dition of our persecuted Swiss brethren. The facts 
are, that on the 11th ult, it was resolved in the full 
council at Berne, to send the male prisoners that 
are young and strong also upon the galleys, even as 
they have before this done to six of them ; but the 
old and feeble they would either send elsewhere, or 
keep them in perpetual confinement. Learning of 
this resolution, and being moved to compassion, a 
certain gentleman in Berne went to the magistrates, 
and requested that they would be pleased to post- 
pone sending away the prisoners until he could go 
to their fellow believers, residing in Alsace, and see 
whether they would be responsible for the prison- 
ers, by promising that the latter, after leaving the 
country, should return no more without consent. 
This he obtained, and coming into Alsace to our 
friends, he presented the matter to them, who, as 
soon as they had heard it, forthwith accepted the 
conditions, and promised in case the authorities 
at Berne should be pleased to send the prisoners to 
them, that they would be responsible for them, and 
aid them in obtaining other abodes. This our 
friends, as I understand, promised this gentleman 
(his name was Beatus), not only orally, but also 


gave it to him in writing. Thereupon he promised 
them again to do his best with the authorities of 
Berne, and hoped to obtain so much from them, 
that they should bring the prisoners as far as Basle, 
from where the friends might take them away with 
them. Hence, we long to meet them, daily expect- 
ing to hear that they have arrived in Alsace, or 
that they shall come over here to us. 

At this moment there have arrived at my house, 
four Swiss brethren with their wives and children, 
who say, that also many others are on the way, 
since the persecution and search are daily increas- 
ing. Concluding herewith, I commend you, after 
a Christian and brotherly greeting, to the Most 
High, for your eternal salvation. 

Your affectionate friend and brother in Christ, 

Jacob Everling. 

extract from the fourth letter, dated 

NOVEMBER 2d, 1671 

Concerning our Swiss friends, they are now 
coming this way in large parties, so that there have 
already arrived over two hundred persons, and 
among them are many old, gray-headed people, 
both men and women, that have reached seventy, 
eighty, yea, ninety years ; also a number that are 
crippled and lame ; carrying their bundles on their 
backs, with children on their arms, some of good 
cheer, some also with tearful eyes, particularly the 
old and feeble persons, who now in their great age 
are compelled to wander about in misery, and go to 
strange countries, and many of them having noth- 
ing on which to sleep by night, so that I and others 
with me, have now for about two weeks had to 
make it our regular work, to provide shelter and 
other necessaries for them. 

We are also in daily expectation of still more, so 
that we hope, that when the people have mostly 
left the country, the prisoners also will be released. 
Farewell. 


The sequel was, that continually more and more 
of the expelled fugitives came down from Switzer- 
land into the Palatinate, in all nearly seven hun- 
dred persons, old and young, among whom were 
families of eight, ten, and as many as twelve chil- 
dren, who had scarcely been able to bring with 
them enough for their traveling expenses, as ap- 
pears from the following extract: 

FIFTH EXTRACT FROM THE SAME, OBERSULTZEM, 
ON THE 5TH OF JANUARY, 1672 

There has arrived in the region above Heidel- 
berg, a man, being a minister in the North, having 
twelve, mostly very young children, but having, as 
I understand, brought with him only four rix- 
dollars in money, and a very poor horse. Some 
others have brought with them some money, but 
many nothing at all, so that after close examination 
there was found among two hundred and eighty- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1127 


two persons, one thousand and forty-six rix-dol- 
lars. And in the Alzey Bailiwick, among two hun- 
dred and fifteen persons, six hundred and eight 
rix-dollars. In the Darmstein Bailiwick, there 
were found one hundred and forty-four persons; 
but as to what their means are, I have not learned ; 
but from appearances I judge them to be the 
most indigent. In short, we find that their number 
consists of about eighty full families, then further, 
widows, single persons, and husbands and wives 
that had to forsake their companions, because the 
latter, being attached to the Reformed Religion, 
could not make up their minds to leave ; in all, six 
hundred and forty-one persons, whose funds 
amount to no more than the little sum already 
stated; so that you can easily calculate, that con- 
siderable assistance will be necessary. Besides 
these, we understand, there are about one hundred 
persons more sojourning in Alsace, whom we also 
expect by the forepart of the year. Farewell. Thus 
far the extracts from the letters. 

Subsequently the brotherhoods residing in the 
provinces of the United Netherlands, in March of 
the same year, 1672, sent some from their midst to 
the Palatinate, who traveling everywhere to the 
persecuted brethren, and hearing and seeing them, 
not only found the above related, to be true, but 
also, that already some of the last-mentioned had 
come over from Alsace, who, bringing also, like the 
others, no funds with them, were, together with 
these, aided and comforted by the common assist- 
ance of the wealthy churches or brotherhoods of 
the United Provinces. 

Moreover, they learned from some of the forty 
prisoners themselves that they had all been re- 
leased, and, according to the request of the above- 
mentioned gentleman, been brought to Basle, and 
there turned over to their brethren, with whom 
they then together removed. But when the chiefest 
of them were asked why they had not left sooner 
and sought such places, where they might have 
lived with more freedom according to their con- 
science, seeing the authorities had not prevented 
their leaving, they gave different reasons for it, of 
which the following ones were not the least : 

1. They said that they say that the churches 
greatly waxed and increased, so that, though under 
the cross, they nevertheless flourished as a rose 
among thorns, and that further increase could daily 
be expected, because many persons manifested 
themselves, who saw the light shine out of dark- 
ness, and began to love the same and seek after it ; 
that the ministers considering this in their heart, 
found themselves loath to leave the country, fear- 
ing that thereby this promising harvest might be 
lost, and thus many fall back from their good pur- 
pose ; and hence, they chose rather to suffer a little 
than to leave, in order that they might yet rescue 
some souls from perdition, and bring them to 
Christ. 

2. A second reason was that they could not so 


easily take their departure to other countries, be- 
cause there are among them many divided families, 
of whom the husband or the wife is in the church, 
while the companion still attended the public 
church, in which case, if the latter would not fol- 
low their persecuted companions, also to forsake 
everything and leave the country, it caused great 
inconvenience and sorrow; that there were even 
divers ministers not exempt from this difficulty, 
and there were also two ministers there in the 
Palatinate, who had wives that were not in the 
church, and whom they (having secretly been 
warned by a good friend), also had had to 
leave by night, and take to flight, without knowing 
as yet whether their wives should follow them, or 
whether they, loving their property more than 
their husbands, should remain there in the land, 
and forsake their husbands. That such cases creat- 
ed the more sorrow and difficulty, because the 
authorities granted liberty to such remaining per- 
sons, whether women or men, to marry again and 
seek other companions. These and other reasons 
had prevented them from departing uncompelled 
out of their earthly fatherland ; but induced them, 
rather (as they had now done), to wait until they 
should see that they could no longer remain there 
and preserve a good consience. 

Truly, it is to be lamented that at this time, when 
the light of the Gospel has shone so long to the 
protestants, there are nevertheless still found 
among them those who think it good to persecute 
such who in every respect are good and pious sub- 
jects, and differ from them only in certain points 
concerning the Christian religion. Oh, how little 
there is regarded by such conduct, the teaching of 
our Saviour, to do unto others as we would have 
them do unto us. And yet such complain of the 
persecution that is inflicted in France, Hungary, 
and elsewhere upon their brotherhoods. But what 
do you think, might they not with justice be replied 
to in the same manner in which the Apostle Paul 
replied to the Jews, Rom. 11 :21,* etc.? Certainly, 
very justly. 

We conclude this recital with this earnest prayer, 
namely, that God the Lord would be pleased so to 
direct the hearts of those that are in authority, that 
we may under their reign and dominion lead a 
peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and hon- 
esty. And if it should be, that the great God might 
deem it good, to permit the persecution of His be- 
lievers here or there, that He might then be pleased 
to abide with them with His fatherly care and com- 
fort, and through grace grant that their afflictions 
may be accompanied with patience, their faith with 
steadfastness, and their virtues with faithfulness ; 
all to the honor of His name, that can never be 
praised enough, and to the salvation of their souls, 
through Christ our Lord and Saviour. Amen. 


* This is evidently an error, and Rom. 2 :21 seems to be the 
passage had in view by the author. — Trans. 


1128 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


HANS HASLIBACHER, A. D. 1571 

In connection with the above account of the per- 
secutions that came upon the Swiss brethren, we do 
not deem it out of place to add the following, 
namely, that a certain old and pious brother (com- 
monly called Haslibacher, because he was born 
at Haslibach) ; was apprehended for his faith, 
and brought to Berne, where in prison he was 
handled very severely, and cruelly tortured; but 
when he, notwithstanding this, steadfastly ad- 
hered to his faith, there came to him in the prison, 
soon after, one Friday, several preachers, who dis- 
puted with him, against whom he so bravely con- 
ducted himself, in defending his simple confession 
of faith, that they could accomplish nothing with 
him. Thereupon the preachers came to him again 
the following day, being Saturday, speaking more 
harshly to him, and severely, threatening him, 
that if he did not renounce his faith, his head 
should be laid before his feet. Upon this, the good 
old man courageously replied, that he should in no 
wise renounce his faith, but would steadfastly ad- 
here to the same, since he felt perfectly assured 
that his faith was so acceptable to God, that He 
should by no means forsake him in distress and 
death. 

Thereupon it happened, as is credibly related, 
that in the following night from Saturday until 
Sunday he was comforted and strengthened by a 
divine vision, and exhorted to adhere steadfastly 
to his accepted faith ; and that, though they should 
severely threaten him, even so that they should 
put him to death with the sword, he should never- 
theless not be terrified, for the Lord should be at 
his side, and not suffer that he should feel any 
pain from it. 

Now when on Monday the preachers again came 
to him and disputed with him as before, endeavor- 
ing to move him from his faith, adding, that if he 
did not renounce, he should be punished with death 
the next day. Haslibacher boldly answered : "I am 
ready to suffer my head to be struck off, much 
rather than apostatize from my faith." 

Thereupon, when the preachers left him, and he 
in the evening fell into a deep sleep which lasted 
until midnight ; it is said that he had a dream in 
which it was shown him that they would behead 
him (through which he was suddenly awakened), 
and it was made known to him in a special manner, 
that he should be punished with the sword, but that 
there should be given three special signs, whereby 
his innocence would appear before men. 

Note. — As reference has been made to three 
signs, which however, are not mentioned, but are 
given in the hymn (the last one of the Gesangbuch 
der Taujgesinnten), we will in order to complete 
the account, here insert this hymn in full. We will, 
however, add that neither this hymn nor the list of 
Swiss martyrs, copied by Hans Loersch, following 
it, were contained in the Holland editions of the 
Martyrs' Mirror, but were afterwards added in the 


German editions. The hymn which also appears 
only in part in the German, is here given entire. — 

Publishers. 

Give ear, kind friends, and help who can, 
To sing about an aged man, 

Who hailed from Haslibach ; 
Hence, Haslibacher was he called, 
And lived in parish Summiswald. 

Since our dear Lord permission gave, 
To men t' accuse him as a knave, 

Because of his true faith ; 
Hence bound they him with rigor stern, 
And led him to the town of Berne. 

And though he was imprisoned here, 
And tortured with torments severe, 

For holding to his faith; 
Yet did he steadfast still remain, 
In torture, anguish, and in pain. 

One Friday moning, mark my words, 
There came some educated lords, 

Into his prison hold ; 
And in dispute did him enlist, 
That he should from his faith desist. 

Our Haslibacher then and there, 
Gave all their babblings to the air, 
For thus he straightway said: 
"My faith I never will forsake, 
Though life and body you should take." 

On Saturday these learned men 
Came to his prison-hold again, 

And thus with threats they spake: 
"Thou must renounce thy heresy, 
Or else thou shalt beheaded be." 

Instant he answered with bold heart: 
"From this my faith I'll ne'er depart, 

But firmly cleave thereto; 
For God accepts my faith as right 
And He'll protect me by His might." 

And when night's sable garb was spread, 
God's angel came with might and said, 

In Haslibacher's ear : 
" 'Tis God who me to thee doth send, 
To comfort theee before thy end. 

"Moreover I will counsel thee, 
Not wavering in thy faith to be, 

But strong therein remain; 
For God accepted thy belief — 
He'll keep thy soul and bring relief. 

"And though they threaten with the sword 
To execute thee, let their word 
In thee cause no dismay: 
For at thy side I will remain 
To succor thee from every pain." 

And thus again, when Monday came, 
Those tutored men of priestly fame 

To Haslibacher went, 
And sorely him with words they ply, 
That his belief he should deny. 

"If not," they said, and meant it too, 
"Tomorrow's morn brings death to you." 

But Haslibacher said: 
"This body you may put to death — 
I'll give my head, but not my faith." 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1129 


When night again her mantle spread, 
Deep sleep fell on his weary head, 
Until the clock struck twelve. 
He dreamed he was in daylight fair, 
Led forth to be beheaded there. 

This wakes him up, as well it might, 
And lo, about him all is light. 

A book before him lies, 
And angel's holy voice explains: 
"Read what this little book contains." 

And when he reads the book he finds 
That his tormentors set their minds, 
That they would him behead. 
But God would let three signs appear 
To show th' injustice he should bear. 

When he had read it to the end, 
Night's darkness did again descend, 

And sleep his eyelids closed, 
'Til daylight brought these murderous men, 
Into his prison cell again. 

"Good morning, friend," he from them hears, 
With thanks, like greeting meets their ears. 

Then unto him they said: 
That he the Word divine should hear, 
Or feast on executioner's fare. 

"From this my faith I'll ne'er let go, 
The Word of God full well I know; 

My cause to God I give; 
Yet deep regret doth fill my heart, 
That innocent I must depart." 

They led him to an inn in haste, 

And meat and drink before him placed, 

The hangman by his side: 
That deep disgust and fear of death, 
Might make him yet renounce his faith. 

Quoth Haslibacher to the man: 

"Eat, drink; make merry while you can, 

For though upon this day 
You offer up my guiltless blood, 
My soul more quickly soars to God." 

He further said: "The Lord will show 
Three signs, to let you plainly know 

That innocent I die; 
For when my head's struck off, 'twill fall 
Into my hat, and laugh withal. 

"The second sign upon the sun 
You'll plainly see when it is done; 

And of the third take heed: 
The sun will, like my blood, be red, 
The town-well likewise blood will shed. 

"The judge unto the lords decreed: 
Of these three signs take godly heed. 

Remember also this: 
That if this all shall happen so, 
'Twill work your soul's eternal woe." 

When he had finished his repast, 
They took his hands to tie them fast ; 

When Haslibacher said: 
"Pray, Lorenz, listen to my plea, 
And leave my hands from fetters free. 

"I'm ready now and do rejoice, 
That you have let me have my choice 

To die and pass from hence. 
But Lord, show mercy unto them, 
Who me this day to death condemn." 


When he at last the block had faced, 
He doffed his hat and had it placed 

The multitude before : 
"Friend Lorenz, to my prayer give ear, 
I beg to leave my hat lie here." 

With this he bowed his knees in prayer, 
And when the Paternoster there, 

He earnestly had prayed, 
He said: "To God I've given my cause, 
Act now, according to your laws." 

Down comes the sword, when lo, the head 
Springs in his hat, as he had said; 

And all the signs were seen — 
The sun was red and looked like blood, 
The town-well shed a crimson flood. 

Amazed, an aged sire said: 

"The Anabaptist laughs, though dead." 

Then said another sire: 
"If you had let this Baptist live, 
Eternally you would not grieve." 

With one accord the people said. 
"Henceforth no Baptist's blood we'll shed." 

Then said an aged sire: 
"Had you not acted 'gainst my will, 
This Baptist would be living still." 

The hangman too was heard to say: 
" 'Tis guiltless blood I've shed today." 

Then said a yeoman old: 
"The Anabaptist's mouth did laugh, 
Which surely indicates God's wrath." 

He who composed this little hymn, 
Received his death in prison dim, 

A sinful mob to please. 
They brought him pen and ink to write, 
And thus he bade us all "Good night." 

Note. — At the close of the German edition of 
the Martyrs' Mirror an extract was received and 
inserted which Hans Lcersch had copied out of the 
Tower Book at Berne, and which has been pre- 
served by Christian Kxopff; the same reads as 
follows : 

At Berne the following persons were executed 
for the faith: In the year 1528: Hans Seckler, a 
joiner, and hatter, at Aarau. In the year 1529: 
Conrad Eicher of Straffisburg ; two believers from 
the Seignioralty Bix; a tinker from the Emmen- 
thal; Ulrich Schneider, of Luetzgenpfluehe ; a 
young lad from Wallis ; Hagerly, from the Seign- 
ioralty Alburg. In the year 1536: the 2nd of May, 
Moritz Losenegger. In the year 1537: Bernhard 
Waelty of Ruederswil, on the 7th of July; Hans 
Schweitzer of Ruegsau, Juerg Hoffser of Ober- 
gallbach, from the Seignioralty Siegnau on the 
28th of August, Ulrich Bichsel ; Barbeli Willher of 
Hassli ; Barbeli zur Studen of Summiswald ; Cath- 
arina Friedli Imhoff; Verena Issoli of Schuelbah 
from the Seignioralty Seignau ; Ulrich of Ruegsau. 
In the year 1538: Cunas Seidenkohen of Con- 
stance, on the 28th of March; Peter Stucki, at 
Wimmis on the 16th of April; Ulrich Huben of 
Rietenbach from the Seignioralty Seignau; Hans 
Wilier, in August; Elsbeth Kuepfer of Summis- 
wald ; two women, on the 28th of May, the one of 
Summiswald, the other of Hoestetten ; Peter Wes- 


1130 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


senmiller of Wimmis, on the 7th of September; 
Stephen Ruegsegger, on the 8th of December, who 
was executed at Einygen ; one from the Seignior- 
alty Seignau; one of Summiswald; Rudolph 
Isolly from the Tannenthal. In the year 1539: 
Lorenz Aeberly of Gruenau, on the 3d of June; 
Hans Schumacher from the Aargau, of Wuemist- 
ern. In the year 1532: one of Oberbip, on the 1st 
of May; Peter Ancken from the Siebenthal. In 
the year 1543: Christian Oberlen, on the 17th of 
September ; Hans Ancken of Ausseldingen ; Wael- 
ty Gaerber on the Striethalter, from the Seignior- 
alty Seignau. In the year 1571, on the 20th of De- 
cember : Hans Haslibacher, from the Seignioralty 
Summiswald, who was executed at Haslibach. 


AN EDICT PUBLISHED BY THOSE OF BERNE AGAINST 
THOSE CALLED ANABAPTISTS, THE 9TH OF 
AUGUST, IN THE YEAR 1659 

The persecution did not cease with the imprison- 
ment of the above-mentioned seven friends at 
Berne but they proceeded still further with their 
constraint of conscience, and consequently with the 
exercise of their fury; insomuch that they also 
aimed at those that were dispersed and wandered 
about as sheep having no shepherd. 

Against them, on the 9th of August of the year 
1659, in the meeting of the Council of the city of 
Berne, a certain edict was drawn up, confirmed 
and also proclaimed, touching the bodies and goods 
of the afore-mentioned, poor, wandering, and 
afflicted people, teachers as well as those taught; 
reading as follows : 

Extract of an edict, published by those of Berne 
against the Anabaptists 

The teachers, of whom, by close search ; one or 
more can be apprehended, shall forthwith, by the 
bailiff, be conducted here into our orphan house, 
for safekeeping ; in order that the necessary steps 
for their conversion may be taken there, or, if they 
persist in obstinacy, proper punishment be exer- 
cised. In the meantime the officers shall seize their 
property and deliver an inventory thereof to us, or 
to the directors appointed by us for this purpose. 

Now between those that are not teachers, but 
simply their adherents and followers, as also be- 
tween the stubborn and obstinate, and the simple 
or weak and inexperienced, this difference shall be 
made, that with the former more severity is to be 
used, but with these more gentleness. 

Those, however, as well as these, our officers and 
preachers shall together, kindly, diligently and 
punctually examine and investigate, concerning 
their and their fellow believers' life, conversation 
and faith; remind and convince them from the 
word of God of their error, and thereupon, for the 
same reason, show them, with proper discretion 
and prudence, their bounden duty towards God, 
His Word, the preaching of the same, holy bap- 
tism, the holy Supper and catechization, and also 
toward their God-appointed Christian authorities, 


fidelity and allegiance towards their country, to- 
gether with other things required, and remind 
them well, so that they may at all times execute 
these things. 

If then by such kind words, instruction and ad- 
monition, some shall have been brought back into 
the true way, so that there is hope of their reforma- 
tion and conversion, the same shall and may with- 
out any other abjuration, or without rendering any 
oath, be set at liberty, with a good admonition, and 
paying the expenses, and as converted members, 
graciously be received back into the bosom of the 
church; without this causing them any further 
rebuke, hatred, contempt or the like, but much 
rather praise for their obedient return. 

Then, as soon as these people shall have returned 
the preachers of said place shall so order their ser- 
mons, as to strengthen the same after their conver- 
sion, and earnestly admonish all the others in gen- 
eral, much rather to honor, praise and love these 
people on account of their conversion, than that 
they should therefore in any wise hate, despise and 
revile them. Further, they shall set them a good 
example, by a blameless life and conversation, by 
piety and honesty, in the hope, that by this means 
the rest may be won the more easily, and, without 
fear, be brought back into the true way. 

But to those who accept no reminding, instruc- 
tion or admonition, but continue disobedient and 
stubborn, neither will renounce or depart from 
their error, the penalty of banishment imposed 
upon them shall be announced, and their immov- 
able obstinacy and reprobacy be made known to 
the directors appointed by us over the affairs of 
the Anabaptists, that our further orders with 
regard to it may be expected. 

And when such obstinate, erring persons, upon 
the above-mentioned report, have been sentenced 
by the court, it is our meaning, intention and com- 
mand : that they, under a safe escort, be conducted 
to the boundary, and by a promise, in place of an 
oath (since they do not swear an oath), be utterly 
banished from our country and dominion, until 
their apparent conversion; and if they, notwith- 
standing the banishment, return unconverted, and 
are apprehended, and still do not recant, but ob- 
stinately persevere in their error as before, they 
shall, as often as this occurs, be publicly scourged 
with rods, branded, and again, as before, expelled 
and banished from the country, which well de- 
served punishment is founded upon the following 
reasons and arguments : 

1. All subjects are, without contradiction, bound 
to show their natural, God-given authorities, fidel- 
ity and allegiance, and to attest such fealty or fidel- 
ity with an oath; but those who will not render 
such oath of allegiance are not recognized as sub- 
jects, nor tolerated in the country, hence the Ana- 
baptists, who flatly refuse the same, neither can or 
shall in any wise be permitted to remain in the 
country. 


tARTYRS MIRROR 


1131 


2. Just as little can they be recognized and toler- 
ated as subjects, who will not acknowledge (as 
subjects are bound to acknowledge), that their au- 
thorities are from God, and with God, without 
which acknowledgement there can be no obedi- 
ence; but as the Anabaptists will not admit, that 
the office of magistracy is compatible with Chris- 
tianity (or can exist in the Christian church), 
hence they can also not be tolerated in the country. 

3. All subjects are bound to defend and protect 
their country, as being our common mother, yea, 
to sacrifice their property and blood for it; hence 
those, who, contrary to the command refuse to do 
this, cannot be permitted in the country and as the 
Anabaptists utterly refuse this, they cannot be tol- 
erated in the country. 

4. All subjects are bound, according to the teach- 
ing of the holy apostle Paul, to render, for the com- 
mon support of their country, tithes, customs and 
taxes ; and those who refuse to do this cannot be 
tolerated in the country. Since, then, the Anabap- 
tists, though they do not refuse to do these things, 
which is done through fear, yet teach, that to take 
this, is not compatible with Christianity; which 
doctrine, if it should gain the ascendancy, might 
easily produce evil fruit; therefore such people 
can not be put (or tolerated) under a government. 

5. Since the magistracy, as the same apostle 
teaches, is given of God as an avenger, upon those 
that do evil, especially upon murderers, traitors, 
and the like, the subjects are bound to make the 
same known to their authorities; but those who 
will not obligate themselves to do this, cannot be 
reckoned among the faithful and obedient subjects ; 
now therefore as the Anabaptists are such as re- 
fuse to make known one of them to the authorities, 
they cannot be tolerated. 

6. Those who refuse to submit to the wholesome 
ordinances and statutes of the authorities of the 
country, yea, act directly contrarily to them, can be 
tolerated still less. Now the Anabaptists are such 
people ; for they act and offend against the so nec- 
essary and not less beneficial ordinances of the au- 
thorities, in the following ways: 

1. They preach without the calling and con- 
firmation of the authorities. 

2. They baptize in their churches without the 
calling and command of the authorities. 

3. They pervert the church discipline (or have 
other church regulations) contrary to the public or- 
dinances of the authorities. 

4. They attend no meetings (of the church) held 
on Sundays or days of prayer. 

Hence, as they will not submit, as behooves 
faithful subjects, to such institutions and ordi- 
nances, that agree with the Word of God, and con- 
temptuously act contrarily to them, they are not 
worthy to live in the country. 

For these manifold and vitally important reasons 
we are entirely resolved, and would earnestly have 
it laid to heart by all, that they constantly and with- 
out delay proceed with such banishment and the 


penalties pertaining thereto, against all the adher- 
ents and followers of this erring and (on account 
of much evil) very dangerous, wicked sect ; that the 
same may make no progress, much less, receive 
additions, but that it may, with every possible 
means, be utterly abolished, and the country be 
rid of it; whereupon we graciously rely. 

Touching, then, the property of such disobedient 
banished people, as also of those that have run 
away, the same shall, after computation of the ex- 
penses accrued, be divided with the obedient wives 
and children, and said portion, whether real or 
personal property, after our officers have seized it, 
an inventory thereof shall be sent to the hands of 
our aforesaid directors, in order that such property 
may be managed at their discretion, the annual 
income be drawn from it and, if the banished or 
fugitive persons do not again return, but die un- 
converted in their errors, the same be adjudged to 
us with perfect equity ; likewise shall it be done re- 
garding the property belonging to the wives and 
children of Anabaptists, who went away with them, 
though they were not regarded as adherents of the 
sect. 

We herewith also declare and prohibit with 
equal strictness, that no one, whoever he be, shall 
lodge or give shelter to native or foreign Anabap- 
tists, whether they be related to him or not ; or to 
help encourage their meetings, preaching, etc., 
whether by granting them the use of houses or 
barns, or by aiding them with means ; or, in the fu- 
ture, to have any intercourse whatever with them, 
whether written or oral; or in any wise to lend 
them any aid in the way of money, provisions, or 
the like, neither secretly nor publicly ; but, on the 
contrary, we earnestly admonish every one of our 
subjects, whatever they can learn concerning them, 
by writing, by messengers, or orally, forthwith to 
report the same to the high bailiff, that he may 
regulate himself according to these our ordinances, 
and proceed against offenders, for every offense 
of which they are found guilty, with the irremis- 
sible fine of one hundred guilders ; or, in case they 
are not able to pay it, with arbitrary punishment, 
concerning which last mentioned point, every one 
shall, until further information, be warned by a 
special proclamation read from the pulpit. 

Given in our council meeting, on the 9th of Au- 
gust, A. D. 1659. 


CONCERNING WHAT WAS DONE FOR THE DELIVER- 
ANCE OF THE LAST-MENTIONED PRISONERS, AS 
ALSO FOR THE MITIGATION OF THE EDICT OF 
THOSE OF BERNE, BY THEIR HIGH MIGHTI- 
NESSES THE LORDS STATES GENERAL, AND 
SOME RULERS OF DUTCH CITIES, IN THE 
YEAR 1660 

This edict having been drawn up and proclaimed 
everywhere, especially in the confines of Berne, 
caused very great sorrow, for those that were al- 
ready imprisoned, as well as for the rest that 


1132 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


were still out of bonds ; since, as it seemed, it was 
now imminent, that the whole remaining light of 
truth, which had most gloriously arisen in these 
parts, should be extinguished, and even the very 
foundation and root of the lovely flower of the true 
Christian church utterly eradicated and destroyed. 

But in the meantime it happened, that the afore- 
mentioned edict came to our notice, in the original 
Swiss language, and also translated into the Dutch ; 
whereby there was caused in us, and in many 
other of our fellow believers in the province of 
Holland, who had received reliable information re- 
garding the same, an inward affection, love and 
compassion for the distressed Swiss friends, who 
were severely threatened thereby. 

Hence it was resolved and determined, in Febru- 
ary of the year 1660, to dispatch certain persons, 
fellow believers of our faith, from the cities Dor- 
trecht, Harlem, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, and 
Rotterdam, to Gravenhage, or the Court of Hol- 
land, where their High Mightinesses, the Lords 
States General, were then holding their special 
assembly ; to the end that the distress of the Swiss 
Anabaptists might be made known to them, and 
favorable letters of recommendation be obtained, 
to the cities of Berne and Zurich, for the release, 
or at least alleviation of the condition, of said peo- 
ple that were persecuted there. 

Thereupon those dispatched from the afore- 
mentioned cities appeared together in Gravenhage, 
about the 18th of February, of the same year, 
and very speedily brought into the proper form 
an humble supplication (which had already been 
drafted, but was not vet signed by all) — signed it, 
and, to the end of aforesaid, delivered it to their 
High Mightinesses. 

These, as kind fathers and friendly fosterers of 
the afflicted, poor and oppressed, took such great 
interest in the matter, that they without delay, 
immediately resolved to comply with what was re- 
quested in the afore-mentioned supplication. 

Hence three documents were drawn up by the 
order of their High Mightinesses ; the first to the 
rulers of the city of Berne, for the releasing of the 
prisoners, etc. The second to those of Zurich, for 
restitution of the property of the imprisoned, de- 
ceased and expelled Anabaptists (of whom we have 
also made mention in this book), which they had 
kept in their possession already from the year 1635. 
The third, as a passport for Adolph de Vrede, 
who was now to travel to Berne and Zurich in 
Switzerland, in behalf of the Dutch Anabaptists, or 
at least in the name of those who had drawn up the 
afore-mentioned supplication, and thereupon ob- 
tained the letter of recommendation from their 
High Mightinesses ; to deliver the first mentioned 
two documents to the lords there, to the end afore- 
said. 

These three documents, since we have received 
true copies thereof, we shall, as much as concerns 
this matter in particular, present to the well-dis- 
posed reader, and accord them a place in this book, 


for a laudable memorial of what the States General 
of these blessed United Netherlands have herein 
done. 


THE STATES, ETC. 


To the city of Berne in Switzerland: 

Noble, very respectable, wise, prudent lords, es- 
pecial good friends and neighbors. From the com- 
plaints of divers persons, delegated by their re- 
spective churches, who here in this land are called 
Mennonists, citizens and inhabitants of the cities of 
Dortrecht, Harlem, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, 
and Rotterdam, all situated in the province of Hol- 
land, we have learned, that their fellow believers, 
under the name of Anabaptists, are suffering great 
persecution at Berne and thereabouts, by virtue of 
very rigorous edicts enacted against them, where- 
by they are not only prohibited from continuing to 
reside in the country, but are not even permitted to 
depart elsewhere with their families and goods, 
though they cannot be charged with any crimes. 
_ That also some of the above-mentioned persua- 
sion are kept in close confinement there. 

All of which has moved us to Christian compas- 
sion, and we could therefore not forbear, but, on 
the contrary, have deemed it well, hereby to request 
you very kindly and neighborly, also most earn- 
estly, that you will not only not meet, neither suffer 
to be met, — the fellow believers of the supplicants, 
who under the name of Anabaptists are found in, 
or belong to your dominion and are obedient, with 
improper proceedings, and release and set at lib- 
erty the aforesaid prisoners, — but also much rather, 
according to the good example of the lords of the 
government of Schaffhausen, grant them sufficient 
time, to remove with their goods and effects, 
whithersoever they shall resolve to go. 

Taking into favorable and proper consideration, 
that in the year 1655, when the Vaudois, our and 
your fellow believers, were so miserably dispersed 
and persecuted by the Romanists, solely for the 
profession of their Reformed religion, that the dis- 
tress of the poor, dispersed people, could not be 
relieved in any other way, than by the giving and 
gathering of great contributions in England, in this 
country, and elsewhere, where the Reformed* re- 
ligion was practiced, the Anabaptistic church, now 
the aforesaid supplicants, upon this simple recom- 
mendation of their respective magistrates, from due 
obedience to the same, and at the same time, also 
out of Christian love and compassion for the afore- 
said dispersed and persecuted Christians, gave so 
liberally in their meetings, that it swelled to a not- 
able sum, which the deacons of the aforesaid 
church, by the order of their afore-mentioned re- 
spective magistrates, turned over to where it be- 
longed. 

We will rest confident, that you will defer to our 
well-meant friendly and neighborly intercession, 
as much as the justice of the matter demands, and 

* "True Reformed," a certain copy has it. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1133 


as we expect from your usual wisdom and dis- 
cretion; assuring you, that we shall never fail to 
return and acknowledge respectively this favor to 
you collectively and individually, also to your in- 
habitants, whenever an opportunity for it shall 
present itself to us, and you shall be pleased to try 
us in this respect. In the meanwhile we pray God 
Almighty : Noble, etc. In the Hague, the 19th of 
February, 1660. 

This accords with the minutes preserved in the 
records of their High Mightinesses. 

J. Spronssen. 

Besides this writing of their High Mightinesses 
to the lords of Berne, there was drawn up also the 
following, to those of Zurich, which (excepting a 
few words expressed in the foregoing, and hence 
not necessary to be repeated), we will present here, 


THE STATES, ETC. 

To the city of Zurich in Switzerland : 

Noble, very respectable, wise, prudent lords, es- 
pecial good friends and neighbors. From the com- 
plaints of divers persons, delegated by their respec- 
tive churches, who here in this land are called 
Mennonists, citizens and inhabitants of the cities of 
Dortrecht, Harlem, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, 
and Rotterdam, all situated in the province of Hol- 
land, we have learned, that their fellow-believers, 
under the name of Anabaptists, have suffered great 
persecution at Zurich and everywhere in your do- 
minion, by virtue of very rigorous edicts enacted 
against them, and that they have thereby been com- 
pelled to leave everything and to remove to other 
countries, to their great inconvenience and total 
ruin. 

All this has moved us to Christian compassion, 
and we could therefore not forbear, but on the con- 
trary, deemed it good, hereby to request you very 
kindly and neighborly, also most earnestly, that 
you, according to the good example of the magis- 
trates of the city of Schaff hausen, release the prop- 
erty of the fellow believers of the supplicants, 
which you have now for several years had managed 
by directors appointed over them, and drawn the 
fruits thereof, and deliver them to the aforesaid 
persons interested, or those authorized by them, to 
be sold within a certain sufficient time, and turned 
into money for their benefit. 

(The rest is identical word for word with the 
preceding letter.) 

Besides the afore-mentioned two letters of the 
States General to the lords of Berne and Zurich, 
which are dated the same day, namely, the 19th of 
February, 1660, there followed yet a third letter, on 
the 9th of March of the same year, serving partly 
as a passport to the ambassador and bearer of said 
two letters to the cities of Berne and Zurich, and 
partly to request the neighboring potentates near 
and around those parts, to promote said matter 
for the protection of the Anabaptists. The con- 
tents thereof are as follows : 


COPY 

The States General of the United Netherlands, 
to all who see this or hear it read, greeting. 

Be it known : Whereas divers merchants and in- 
habitants of the chiefest provinces of Holland and 
West Friesland, have informed us, that they, for 
the performance and promotion of matters of con- 
sideration and importance, most deeply concerning 
them and their own (for which purpose we also, 
several weeks ago, granted our favorable letters of 
recommendation had deemed it necessary, to dis- 
patch to Switzerland and the adjacent countries, 
the honorable Adolph de Vrede, we have, accord- 
ing to the manner customary here, in such cases, 
deemed it well, hereby to request his Roman imper- 
ial majesty, all kingdoms, republics, princes, po- 
tentates, states and estates, also the rulers of cities 
and places, friends and allies of this state, or main- 
taining neutrality with the same, and especially the 
kings, republics, princes, potentates, and lords in 
the aforesaid parts, together with all others that 
shall see this or to whom it shall be shown; that 
they will render and show, and also suffer to be 
rendered and shown, the afore-mentioned Adolph 
de Vrede, during this his coming journey, in go- 
ing, stopping, as well as returning, all aid, favor 
and assistance, whereto an opportunity may pre- 
sent itself, which we are ready to return and ac- 
knowledge, at all occurrences and opportunities, to 
his most high aforesaid imperial majesty, said high 
kings, said high republics, princes, potentates, said 
noble states, estates, and rulers of cities and places, 
as also to their subjects and inhabitants respective- 
ly, to each according to the opportunity and pro- 
priety of the State and Country). 

Given in our assembly, under our hand and seal, 
and the signature of our recorder. In the Hague, 
on the 9th of March, 1660. 

johan baron van reede, at Renswoude 

By the order of said High Lords States General 
in the absence of the Recorder. 

J. Spronssen. 

Besides that which was done by their high 
mightinesses, for the release ; or at least for the al- 
leviation of the condition of the persecuted Swiss 
friends in the confines of Berne and Zurich also 
some separate cities of the United Netherlands, 
particularly in the province of Holland, who were 
sincerely opposed to the constraint exercised over 
the faith and the practice of the dictates of con- 
science, reproved their coreligionists in Switzer- 
land, especially the rulers of the city of Berne, and 
admonished them to gentleness; yet all this, in a 
courteous, friendly and discreet manner. 

Of this, in order not to adduce too much of a 
matter, we shall not quote the whole, but only that 
which, by the burgomasters and rulers of the city of 
Rotterdam, was written to this end, in Latin, and 
sent to the rulers of Berne, which, translated into 
the Dutch, as sufficiently expressing the sense of 
the whole, we will present to the well-disposed. 


1134 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


COPY 

(Translated from the Latin) 

To the Rulers and Councilors of the City and 
Republic of Berne, the Burgomasters and Rulers 
of the City of Rotterdam wish all happiness and 
prosperity. 

Noble, honorable, highly respected lords, es- 
teemed friends : It is but a few days ago, that there 
was presented to us, from the elders of the church, 
which, from their predecessor,* Menno, is called 
the church of the Mennonites, a request, in the 
name of said church, containing long complaints; 
that their fellow believers, under the odious name 
of Anabaptists, are proceeded against with such 
fury in your E. E. city, that, in consequence of the 
edicts, they are not allowed (though they are harm- 
less and not accused of any crimes), to remove with 
their possessions and temporal effects out of your 
E. E. city and jurisdiction, and go elsewhere, yea, 
that some, solely out of hatred against their faith, 
are deprived of their goods, and confined in prison. 

They the supplicants, request, that we, through 
our intercession, should endeavor, to avert, if pos- 
sible, the punishments decreed against their breth- 
ren ; which their request, being founded upon just 
arguments, if they at all are founded on truth, we, 
by virtue of our duty and office, could not ignore. 

Hence we request your E. E. highly-esteemed 
lords, yea, we beg your E. E., for the sake of re- 
ligion and the faith in Christ; which we have in 
common with your E. E., that your E. E, would 
be pleased, either utterly to abolish the aforesaid 
exceedingly severe decrees enacted against the in- 
nocent, erring or wandering ones, or, if your E. E. 
should not deem this compatible with the situation 
of your state, of which the judgment belongs to 
your E. E., would at least permit, that the afflicted 
people, after selling their real estate, and arrang- 
ing their matters, may remove with their means to 
where they may expect more tranquillity and safe- 
ty- 

As far as we are concerned, honorable lords, we 
have ever since the foundation of this city held, that 
this class of people can quite safely be tolerated in 
the state, without injury to the republicf 

And for this our judgment we have to thank 
Prince William of Orange, of blessed memory, who 
through his valor established for us freedom of 
conscience, whom the entreaties and perverse zeal 
of a class of evil disposed men never could move, 
to refuse the Mennonites any civil privileges. And, 
truly, we have not yet regretted it, having never 
found, that the Mennonites, under the cloak of re- 
ligion (which alone is pernicious for all republics), 
have ever sought to brew any thing in the state ; 
but, on the contrary, that they have always with 
a cheerful and willing mind rendered custom and 
taxes, and all that a subject owes to his prince, yea, 

* First one, etc., another translation has it. 

+ Here follows a brief parenthesis, which can be omitted with- 
out changing or diminishing the sense; namely: "If they are only 
separate from the mad way of the Old," etc. 


that they relieved, with their very liberal contribu- 
tions, the Reformed that were elsewhere suffering 
trouble for their faith, and again recently, the 
Vaudois, our fellow believers, when they, upon the 
instigation of the pope's ministers, were miserably 
maltreated by the duke of Savoy. 

It is not hid from us, highly esteemed lords, that 
certain madmen, through a wrong and perverse 
zeal, endeavor to persuade your E. E. by argu- 
ments that the tolerating of the Mennonites is in- 
jurious for the republic; but they do this with 
such arguments, the weight of which was never 
sufficient to induce us, to oppress the Mennonites 
with any severe edicts. 

For, that they do not consider the office of mag- 
istracy lawful for a Christian, and religiously ab- 
stain from the swearing of oaths (with which two 
points they are principally charged), this cannot 
be detrimental to the republic ; seeing they do not 
refuse obedience to the magistrates, to whom, 
though they command something onerous, they, 
constrained by their conscience, consider them- 
selves in duty bound to obey ; and will be so bound 
to their naked declaration, that, when convicted 
of broken faith and of falsehood, they are willing 
to submit to the punishment of perjurers. 

Which things, as long as they continue un- 
changed we cannot see, what harm the Republic 
has to expect therefrom. 

That some, through pious, or even superstitious, 
fear, abstain from the magisterial office, and from 
the swearing of oaths, what will those say against 
it, who under the truly glorious name of Reformed, 
follow the tyranny of the pope, and under the 
favor of the excellent titles of reformation and 
purity of faith introduce popery, with regard to 
the cruelty of which, as it was practiced in former 
times, in this city, especially against the Mennon- 
ites, as often as the remembrance of it, preserved 
in our records, burdens our thoughts, our souls are 
seized with horror and we rejoice that through the 
blood shed in former times our necks have been 
freed from the yoke of the furious harlot. 

All of which, highly esteemed lords, if it is prop- 
erly considered by your excellencies, we indulge 
the hope, that your E. E. will either abolish the se- 
vere decrees against the Mennonites, or, at least, 
after the example of those of Schaffhausen, one of 
the Swiss cantons, and the example of the Roman 
Catholic prince of Neuburg, grant the afflicted, err- 
ing (or wandering) ones sufficient time to arrange 
their affairs, and to settle down elsewhere. 

Which, highly esteemed lords, when it shall 
have been done, your E. E. shall have performed 
an act that shall be acceptable unto God, glorious 
for the name Reformed, salutary for the erring 
(or wandering) ones, and pleasing to us, who are 
united with your E. E. by the close bond of re- 
ligion, and able to serve as an example to all those 
that boast of the glorious name of the meek Sav- 
iour. 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1135 


We pray God Almighty, to enlighten your E. E. 
persons and republic with the radiance of His 
truth, and to preserve you in lasting prosperity. In 
Rotterdam, the 14th of February, 1660, 

Your E. E. Excellencies' affectionate friends, 
burgomasters and rulers of the city of Rotterdam, 
and in the name of the same. 

W. va der A. A. 

This then was the laudable and good work of 
our high authorities in this land of the states gen- 
eral, as well as of the authorities in particular 
cities; far different from the disposition of those 
who instituted the afore-mentioned oppressions 
and persecutions; wherefore we sincerely wish 
and pray that God the Almighty Lord, would there- 
fore be pleased to be their shield and exceeding 
great reward. 

Verily everyone shall receive reward according 
to his works. The martyrs who suffered for the 
truth of God, for their faithfulness and stead- 
fastness unto the end ; the persecutors who afflict- 
ed the pious, for their cruelty and tyranny, if they 
died unconverted and without repentance; the 
saviors and deliverers (that is the good authorities) 
who sought to defend the oppressed and persecut- 
ed, to help them, and to rescue them from the 
claws and teeth of rapacious, blood-thirsty, unrea- 
sonable men, falsely so called, for the salvation and 
deliverance which they with regard to this effected 
for the harmless and innocent. 

In the meantime we wish everyone the best, even 
our enemies ; for by the means of their cruelty the 
pious are tried, made martyrs, and brought to that 
state which makes truly and infinitely happy, 
namely, to the eternal and blessed life. For this is 
thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God 
endure grief, suffering wrongfully. I Pet. 2 : 19. 

PRAYER FOR THE SECULAR POWER 

Oh, thou God and Lord of hosts, who hast ap- 
pointed governments in all countries, forgive those 
authorities who have laid their hands on Thy 
saints, and touched the apple of Thine eye ; let the 
blood of those whom they have killed not cry ven- 
geance upon them, lest Thy wrath be kindled 
against them ; let it not be laid to their charge in 
Thy great day of judgment, which shall be here- 
after. 

Let those who do not yet cease to rage against 
Thy sheep, and to scatter Thy dearly purchased 
church, be brought to the right, so that they may 
be converted before their death, and from persecu- 
tors, become true followers of Thy church. 

On the other hand, the authorities whom thou 
hast set in our fatherland, the blessed Netherlands, 
that are at present free from the constraint of con- 
science, free from domineering over the most holy 
faith, and above all, free from the blood of Thy 
servants and saints, be pleased to bless them, out 
of Thy heavenly habitation, with the abundance of 
Thy wisdom and grace, a foretaste of which Thou 


hast permitted them to have already, many years 
ago. 

Let Thy church, which is without external ar- 
mor, shield, sword, or arms, rest under their pro- 
tection, as under a shady vine or fig tree, in honesty 
and godliness; so that Thy people may be multi- 
plied, and many that are still in error, be guided 
into the true, right, and only way that leads to life. 

Guide us so into Thy ways, that we may not in 
any wise be a stumbling-block or offense for them ; 
so that the liberty which they grant us in the prac- 
tice of our religion, which we owe to Thee, may not 
be taken from us because of an improper walk on 
our part. 

Be pleased to let our children and descendants 
(if it be best for their salvation), enjoy this pleas- 
ant peace which we receive under their protection. 

O Lord God, grant that none of these authori- 
ties, or of those that are ruled by them, perish ; but 
that they may all be kept and eternally saved, 
through Jesus Christ Thy beloved Son, to whom be 
praise, now and forever. Amen. 

Remember me, O my God, for good. Neh. 13: 
31. 

Into thine hand I commit my spirit; thou hast 
redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Ps. 31 :5. 

ADVERTISEMENT 

When this book had been printed and fully con- 
cluded, we unexpectedly received several things 
pertaining to the last Swiss persecution in the con- 
fines of Zurich and Berne ; principally concerning, 
however, the Berne edict of the 9th of August, in 
the year 1659, and what was graciously effected 
and accomplished by the E. E. honorable lords 
burgomasters of the city of Amsterdam, for miti- 
gation of the same, as also for the release of our 
already imprisoned friends, and of their goods. 

Concerning the edict, it must be stated, that 
what we shall place here is not the whole, but only 
the first part of the same, being really a prepara- 
tion for the extract of the edict shown page 1130, 
col. 1 ; for this, when added to that which is placed 
there, constitutes the whole edict. 

The people of this century are very inquisitive, 
not so much, however, from a true hunger of souls 
as from a spiritual lickerishness. This work could 
have consisted just as well, if the following had not 
been added, since in the afore-mentioned extract ; 
printed in the place above referred to, the execu- 
tion and punishment of the imprisoned Anabaptists 
who adhered to their faith is set forth, which is the 
principal point to be noticed. On the other hand 
in what follows here, only an address is made to the 
so-called spiritual and secular persons of rank, of 
the church, in the jurisdiction of Berne, with re- 
gard to their offices : in connection with which some 
preparation is made for the searching out and ap- 
prehension of the afore-mentioned people. 

But in order, also, if possible to satisfy the in- 
quisitive in this respect, and withal to show that 


1136 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


we have in no wise omitted anything that might be 
necessary, we have deemed it advisable to add 
this here. 

They shall put you out of the synagogues : yea, 
the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will 
think that he doeth God service. John 16:2. 

Note. — Though this properly has reference to 
banishing, ejecting or expelling from the Jewish 
synagogues, it can be applied to all banishment 
for the sake of religion. 


FIRST PART 


Of the Edict of those of Berne, in Switzerland, 

against the (by them called) Anabaptists, dated 

the 9th of August, A. D. 1659 

We the bailiff and councilors, of the city of 
Berne, send to everyone of our officers, preachers, 
and those who administer any office, both spiritual 
and secular, in all towns, counties, seignioralties 
and tribunals of our German dominions,* and here- 
by make known, that since the reformation of the 
Christian religion, there have been emitted, from 
time to time, by our laudable and pious forefathers, 
and by us, pursuant to our Christian reminding and 
command, admonitions and ordinances, how and 
by what means, and with what zeal and earnest, the 
errors of the hypocritical and seductive sect of the 
Anabaptists, that has crept in, which is rejected by 
all Christian authorities from the infallible foun- 
dation of the Word of God, as being an evil, dan- 
gerous, pernicious leaven, because they reject the 
lawful protection of the magistracy,! through 
which much baneful harm can be caused to coun- 
try, people and ranks, are to be opposed and avert- 
ed, yet, by constant experience we must see and 
learn that such orders do not meet with real atten- 
tion and execution, in consequence of which negli- 
gence this evil has rather increased than de- 
creased until this time. 

But in order that the same may not be permitted 
further to pursue its pernicious and seductive 
course, but may earnestly be checked, and as far 
as possible utterly abolished, we have caused dili- 
gent inquiries to be made, in regard to the default 
in not executing and obeying of the commands and 
ordinances we have emitted, and held a careful 
deliberation as to what might be the most expedient 
to do in this matter, as also, to whom it pertains, 
by virtue of office and duty, to take care, that these 
errors and all that is contrary to the confession of 
the Swiss evangelical faith, be not tolerated in 
our dominions, and among our God-committed and 
entrusted, dear subjects, but, on the contrary that 


"Our 


* A certain copy of this edict adds here these words : 
gracious good will and greeting, etc." 

t This is utterly false, since the so-called Anabaptists have 
never rejected, but much rather honored and highly esteemed the 
lawful protection of the magistracy as they also still do at the 
present day. But quite differently did the most laudable rulers of 
the common Dutch cities, judge of this and especially those of the 
city of Amsterdam, who gave the Anabaptists, who had lived among 
them from of old, and do still live among them, the name of good 
citizens and subjects, who were found wanting on no occasion, etc., 
as sufficiently appears from their letters of A.D. 1660. 


our own may be led to the true knowledge of God, 
and kept therein. 

As to the means which we have deemed well to 
be employed in, and for this our intention and pur- 
pose, they consist in two chief points. 

First, namely, in the removing of the principal 
causes of offense to which the so-called Anabaptists 
object, in order to separate themselves from the 
common Christian assemblies. 

Second, in the course of proceeding that shall be 
observed against those that are attached to said 
sect. 

Concerning the first point, it comprises and re- 
quires a godly and virtuous life and conversation ; 
also proper punishment of open slanders, and at- 
tention is therefore to be given that the officers, 
both spiritual and secular, for the better heeding 
and evincing of their duty, be, in the following, 
earnestly admonished. The virtuous life of the of- 
ficers, with which everyone shall seek to be a light 
to his subjects, can particularly serve as a good ex- 
ample herein, and prevent further offense; con- 
sisting chiefly in this, that they diligently attend 
preaching and practice other Christian works, so 
that such apostate persons may at no time take oc- 
casion to say, as has already happened, that the 
things of which they are accused in this respect are 
neglected also by our own people, and even by the 
officers. 

But the preachers shall be edifying, both by be- 
ing zealous in their church ministry, and by con- 
ducting themselves honestly, godly, and inoffen- 
sively in their life, so that especially, of the preach- 
ers, no evil reports be heard. The duty of their 
calling also consists principally in this, that they 
rightly divide the doctrine of truth, and apply the 
same to the profit of everyone ; also, that they, as 
often as an opportunity presents itself, show forth 
the errors of the Anabaptists, and effectually, but 
yet in the spirit of meekness, refute them from the 
foundation of the holy Scriptures, well answer all 
objections, and fully convince them, as also that 
they better instruct their churches and hearers. 

But the officers in general, spiritual as well as 
secular, especially of the places where such people 
live, shall, every one in his calling, so perform and 
do their duty, as before the eyes of the omniscient 
God ; they shall also together, in general as well as 
in the consistory, sincerely labor with zeal and dili- 
gence, that the open vices of whoredom, lascivious- 
ness, cursing and swearing, immoderate eating and 
drinking, and like wickedness, be strictly and with- 
out connivance, punished according to the edicts 
and ordinances emitted by us, virtue and honesty 
thereby planted, and thus they who would excuse 
their departing from the church by such offensive 
life, be deprived of all occasion. 

But to this, our chief point, belongs especially 
the invocation of God, that He will grant His 
blessing and increase, to the public proclaiming of 
the pure doctrine, and keep Satan in check, so that 
not under the dissemblance of simplicity, the nox- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1137 


ious and pernicious weed of hypocrisy, of disobe- 
dience to God, of base contempt of the public wor- 
ship, the holy sacraments, and other holy institu- 
tions, as also of the duty and propriety due to us, 
the Christian magistracy, be propagated. 

The second chief point, as to how such people 
are to be dealt with, consists of two points : 

1. How the same are to be detected and brought 
to light. 

2. How those that are detected are to be pro- 
ceeded with. 

Concerning the first: As these people are hard 
to be taken, since some are concealed by others, 
even by those to whom they are related by mar- 
riage or other ties, particularly by those with 
whom there is little knowledge of God, and zeal 
for religion to be found, and they hold their gath- 
erings mostly by night, in hid or otherwise un- 
known places ; therefore our officers shall with all 
diligence, according to their oath and official duty, 
also on pain of punishment for connivance, be ad- 
monished and bound themselves, and through their 
subofficers and servants, to search for them, es- 
pecially the teachers, as much as possible, and to 
have them followed whether in the mountains or in 
valleys, forests and wildernesses, with all possible 
means, in order to apprehend or capture as many 
of them as possible. 

In order now the better to know and discover 
them and their adherents, our church ministers, as 
appointed shepherds, shall with like diligence, and 
in accordance with their literal, sworn oath, be ad- 
monished, obligated and bound, every one of them, 
particularly in places where this sect is found, with 
two or three of the church council in his pastorate, 
to go round from house to house at least twice a 
year, and properly to write down all those that be- 
long in the church, that is, men and women, old and 
young, and to keep a stricter eye on them, so that 
they may all attend the preaching, catechization, 
common prayers, and particularly also use the holy 
sacraments ; those who stay away and do not bring 
their children to holy baptism at the proper time or 
not at all, and thereby are guilty of apostasy from 
the church, not only at all times to make known 
these by name to the chief bailiff appointed, but 
also to indicate to him the persons and their places 
of abode, as far as known ; also to neglect nothing 
of all that is required for the managing of such per- 
sons. 

However, in order that not again something be 
lacking in the execution of this so necessary work, 
even as has hitherto been the case, or that it other- 
wise be slackened and omitted, through want of the 
necessary zeal, our officers together with the 
preachers are strictly charged to carry out this 
order with the proper effect, in sincere earnestness, 
without regard of persons. And that herein no 
negligence or connivance be exercised by them, 
much less that they allow themselves to be turned 
therefrom by any scruples, as being forbidden, im- 


proper means, or on account of any advantage, lest 
they incur our disfavor. 

The second article of the second chief point con- 
cerns the manner of proceeding against those that 
are detected and captured by the aforesaid means : 
whether the same be teachers and seducers, or 
their adherents, and that are seduced. 

Thus far the first part of the edict, which as yet 
mentions no corporal punishment, but only the ap- 
prehending and capturing of the (by them so- 
called) Anabaptists. The other part then follows, 
page 1130, col. 1, beginning with these words: 

"The teachers of whom one or more, by close 
search," etc. 

Thereupon it follows, in what manner they are 
to be punished, either by depriving them of their 
goods, utterly banishing them from the country, 
conducting them under safe escort to the bounda- 
ries of the country, and if they, contrary to the 
banishment, etc. 

Note. — This edict having been proclaimed in 
the Berne dominion, soon after arrived in Holland, 
and caused no small sorrow in many well-meaning 
hearts among the Anabaptists there, who were 
moved with heartfelt sympathy for their dear fel- 
low believers, the more so since already some of 
them were in severe imprisonment, and others in 
the confines of Zurich, had now for many years 
been deprived of the use of their property. 

Hence, in various Dutch cities, yet especially in 
the city of Amsterdam, there was presented, by 
certain men delegated thereto, in the name and by 
the order of their churches, to the noble, honorable 
lords burgomasters of said place, the distress of the 
afore-mentioned oppressed friends, and a formal 
request made for favorable letters of recommenda- 
tion to the magistrates of the cities of Berne and 
Zurich respectively, for the release of the afore- 
mentioned prisoners, and the restitution of their 
goods, etc. This was subscribed with the names of 
H. Vlaming, W. J. V. Coppenol, and G. Grates. 

This request having been delivered, the noble, 
honorable lords burgomasters and rulers of the 
afore-mentioned city, very fatherly and kindly 
consented to the matters presented, giving there- 
upon this appointment: 

The burgomasters and rulers of the city of Am- 
sterdam have consented to grant the above re- 
quested letters of recommendation. 

Done this 29th of January, 1660, and sub- 
scribed, N. Nicolai. 

Thereupon followed the promised letters of rec- 
ommendation to the rulers of Berne as well as to 
those of Zurich, reading as follows : 


1138 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


THE SUPERSCRIPTION OF THE LETTER TO THE 
GOVERNMENT OF BERNE 

To the very honorable and highly esteemed 
lords, our good friends, the lords burgomasters 
and pensionaries of the city of Berne, Very hon- 
orable and highly esteemed lords: A very con- 
siderable number of our citizens, who with regard 
to their religion are called Mennonites or Ana- 
baptists, have shown us, that their fellow believ- 
ers, dwelling in the cantons of Zurich and Berne, 
because of their religion have to suffer a very se- 
vere persecution, insomuch that many of them 
have been cast into prison, without that it was 
granted them, to leave the country with their 
families and goods. 

It is for this reason then, that the above-men- 
tioned citizens, sympathizing in their hearts for 
their fellow brethren, on account of their distress, 
have, through Christian, as well as human zeal, re- 
quested letters of recommendation from us, in 
order that by means of the same they may have a 
favorable access to your noble lordships, to pros- 
trate themselves before your excellencies, with re- 
spect and proper humility, to excite compassion 
and pity in you for those who are persecuted, that 
you will give and grant them the liberty and rea- 
sonable permission, to leave the dominions of your 
lordships, with all that belongs to them. 

They are a class of people who, under our gov- 
ernment, and that of our predecessors, have lived 
for many successive years, and do still live, in this 
city, with all quietness and peaceableness, as has 
also been the case in divers other cities of this state ; 
willingly contributing for the support of the Re- 
public, as much as is imposed upon them; dis- 
charging further the duties of good citizens and 
subjects, who have on no occasion been found de- 
ficient, in manifesting an unusual love towards 
the confessors of the Reformed church. 

They still recently, while our brethren the Vau- 
dois, were so cruelly dispersed, contributed in this 
city, simply upon our recommendation, even to the 
sum of about seven thousand pounds Dutch mon- 
ey, to be used in the support of said Vaudois. 

It is therefore for this reason, very honorable 
and highly esteemed lords, that we, considering 
these reasons, could not refuse to grant the effect 
of our Christian love to these our worthy citizens, 
interceding for them with your lordships, in favor 
of their fellow brethren; praying your lordships, 
if you cannot be moved to let these poor people live 
under your government here, even as we do, that 
you would at least be pleased, to deal gently with 
them ; granting them, according to the pattern and 
example of those of Schaffhausen, as also of the 
Duke of Neuburg, a Roman Catholic prince, the 
liberty, and proper time, to remove with their fam- 
ilies and goods; in which we doubt not your lord- 
ships will do a true, and genuine work of mercy. 
We on the other hand assure you, that we shall 


not neglect, when opportunity offers, to reciprocate 
such obligation in all that in which your lordships 
shall deem our intercession to be proper ; as being 
truly, very honorable and highly esteemed lords, 
very ready to serve your lordships, the lords burgo- 
masters and rulers of the City of Amsterdam. 
The llth of February, 1660. 
By order of said my lords. 

Subscribed: N. Nicolai. 

Note.— It would be sufficient for the intelligent, 
if only the first mentioned letter were given, since 
the following contains almost the same words and 
circumstances ; but as it was thought by some, that 
this work would not be complete, if anything 
lacked of that which was also written to Zurich, we 
shall place said letter here in full. 


THE SUPERSCRIPTION OF THE LETTER TO THE 
GOVERNMENT OF ZURICH 

To the very honorable and highly esteemed 
lords, our good friends, the lords burgomasters 
and syndics of the city of Zurich. 

Very honorable and highly esteemed lords: A 
very notable number of our citizens, who with re- 
gard to their religion are called Anabaptists, have 
shown us, that those of their persuasion have now 
for several years been compelled, because of edicts 
published against them, to leave their abodes and 
goods in the canton of Zurich, without that it was 
granted them, to take their afore-mentioned goods 
with them, nor to enjoy the profit and income from 
the same, even to this day. 

It is for this reason then, that our said citizens, 
sympathizing in their hearts for their fellow breth- 
ren, on account of their distress, have, through 
Christian as well as human zeal, requested letters 
of recommendation from us, in order that by means 
of the same they may have a favorable access to 
your noble lordships, to prostrate themselves be- 
fore you, and to entreat you with respect and prop- 
er submission, to have compassion and pity for 
those of their church; giving them, or to those 
whom they have authorized, the liberty and reason- 
able time, to dispose of their aforesaid goods, 
which are situated under your lordships' juris- 
diction, in order that they may convey them away 
to where they may deem it convenient or necessary. 

They are a class of people, who, under our gov- 
ernment, and that of our predecessors, have lived 
very peaceably for many years, and still live, in this 
city, as also in divers other cities of this state; con- 
tributing with all diligence, to the support of the 
Republic, all that is imposed upon them, and dis- 
charging the duty of good citizens and subjects ; 
who have on no occasion that presented itself been 
found deficient, to manifest their Christian zeal in 
an uncommon manner against those of the Re- 
formed religion; even as they also still recently 
when our brethren the Vaudois were so cruelly dis- 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1139 


persed, contributed in this city alone, upon our 
recommendation, even to the sum of about 7,000 
pounds Dutch money, to be used for the support 
and comfort of said Vaudois. 

It is therefore for this reason, very honorable 
and highly esteemed lords, that we, in considera- 
tion of the same, could not refuse this present ef- 
fect of our Christian love, to these our worthy cit- 
izens, interceding for them with you, praying your 
lordships in favor of their fellow brethren : if your 
lordships cannot allow this poor people to live un- 
der your government as we do here, that you would 
at least be pleased to deal a little more gently with 
them, granting them, according to the example of 
those of Schaffhausen, and also of the Duke of 
Neuburg, a Roman Catholic prince, the liberty and 
proper time, to dispose of their goods and effects, 
in order that they may in pursuance therewith con- 
vey or transport the same to where they shall deem 
proper ; in which we in no wise doubt, your lord- 
ships will do a true work of equity and mercy. We 
also assure you, that we on our part shall in no wise 
fail to evince our reciprocal and mutual duties, in 
all that in which your lordships shall deem it well 
to commit it to our intercession, as being truly and 
sincerely, very honorable and highly esteemed 
lords, very affectionately yours, and ready to serve 
your lordships. The burgomasters and rulers of 
the city of Amsterdam. 

The 2d of March, 1660. 
By order of said my lords. 

Subscribed: N. Nicolai. 

Thus did the noble and most laudable rulers of 
the city of Amsterdam, as fathers over their dear 
children, full of compassion and mercy, act in the 
matter of the afflicted and oppressed Swiss friends. 
God be their shield and very great reward. May He 
bless their wise reign. May He grant, that their 
days may endure as the days of heaven and earth. 

The very good example of the afore-mentioned 
rulers took such great effect in the hearts of some 
of the leaders in the French church of said city of 
Amsterdam, that they were also moved, and kin- 
dled with a holy zeal of compassion, to labor in like 
manner, by friendly petitions, to the magistrates 
as well as to the members of the consistory of the 
cities of Berne and Zurich, for the deliverance and 
liberation of the oppressed. 

With regard to this, we could, if it were neces- 
sary, show their own writings. Truly, a miracle of 
the Lord! Who should ever have thought, that 
Zion's deliverance should come through this way? 
But it is here, as the apostle has said for the con- 
solation of the pious: We know that all things 
work together for good to them that love God. Ro- 
mans 8:28. We are persecuted, but not forsaken. 
II Corinthians 4:9. 


TO THE BLOODY THEATER OF THE ANABAPTISTS, 
OR NONRESISTANT CHRISTIANS* 

To my Brother T. J. Van Braght : 

A zeal and heavenly desire pervades th' inspired 

strings 
Of David's harp, whose tuneful chords a mournful 

feeling brings; 
When fear of death was strong within, those 

strains from Zion would roll, 
In psalms to demonstrate his grief and gloominess 

of soul. 

Such zeal, O brother, did I see from thee, like 
flashes burst, 

As thou the Christian martyrs' deaths and stead- 
fast faith rehearsed : 

E'en at the very time when sore afflicted, thou 
didst lie, 

And thou didst seem to realize that thou must 
shortly die. 

Wilt thou not save that care and zeal which thou 

dost now exhaust, 
And cease awhile that sacrifice, which all thy 

strength has cost? 
And with the sick and weak awhile from active 

service hold, 
In which, as I have said, thou hast engaged with 

zeal untold. 

Yet, well I know that thou, like Christ, must ever 
onward go, 

And teach the world the word of God, while trav- 
eling here below. 

To show the world what we should bear, and what 
the martyrs bore: 

Thou wast, by studying God's blest word, impelled 
to work the more. 

P. Van Braght. 


TERTULLIAN S CONSOLATION AND ENCOURAGE- 
MENT TO THE MARTYRS IN PRISON IN THE 
TIME OF THE HEATHEN EMPERORS, 
IN THE YEAR 200 

Ye blessed and chosen martyrs of Jesus Christ, 
receive from me also, somewhat that may tend to 
your spiritual refreshment, in addition to the tem- 
poral comfort and maintenance with which the 
lady, the church, has supplied you from her own 
breasts, and the brethren from their individual 
labor. For, it is not profitable to nourish and cher- 
ish the body, while the spirit is permitted to suffer 
hunger; and when assistance is rendered to that 
which is weak, we should not neglect that which 


* This poem, by P. Van Braght. written to his brother, the 
author, on the occasion of a severe illness, from which he was not 
expected to recover, during the progress of the work, appears in the 
original, on page 61. During the progress of the work on the 
present edition it was translated by A. B. Kolb, and hence we 
give it a place here,— Publishers. 


1140 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


is still weaker. However, I am not the person to 
address you. Nevertheless, the most consummate 
soldiers are addressed, not only by masters and 
their superiors, but also by plain persons and those 
of inferior rank, receiving occasionally abundant 
and circumstantial exhortations from them. Hence, 
it has frequently happened, that the representations 
and admonitions of such persons, have afforded 
them signal advantage. 

Therefore, ye blessed, above all things, grieve 
not the Holy Spirit who has accompanied you into 
prison ; had He not entered with you, you would 
not now be in bonds. Strive, therefore, to retain 
the Holy Spirit with you there, that He may lead 
you from prison and conduct you to the Lord. The 
prison is indeed the house of the devil, in which he 
keeps his household ; but you have gone into prison 
for the purpose of trampling upon him in his own 
house ; for when you contended with him without, 
you totally vanquished him. Wherefore, he shall 
not say: "They are in my power, I will tempt 
them with disgraceful hunger, with apostasy, or 
with dissension among themselves." He will flee 
from your sight, and hide himself in his abyss, like 
a frightened, halting, torpid, accursed and van- 
quished serpent. 

Moreover, he shall not be so successful in his 
kingdom, as to excite dissension among you, and 
incite you against one another ; but he shall find you 
equipped and armed with concord, since your peace 
is to him a war. Even though some of you have 
not enjoyed this peace in your churches, yet they 
have usually obtained it through prayer, from their 
fellow martyrs in prison. You ought, therefore, to 
have and preserve this peace among you, that you 
may impart the same to others. Other hindrances, 
such as parents, etc., have accompanied you to the 
prison door. Thenceforth, you are separated from 
the world, and much more from the perishable 
things of the world. It should not be a source of 
fear and distress to you, that you are separated 
from the world; for when we consider that the 
world is rather a prison, we can perceive that you 
have rather escaped from than been committed to 
prison. For the world is filled with greater dark- 
ness, obscuring the minds of men. The world binds 
sinners with more ponderous chains, in order to 
keep their souls in bondage and security. The 
world exposes adulterous mankind to more deso- 
lating impurities. In fine, the world contains more 
prisoners ; namely, the whole human family ; and, 
moreover, is awaiting a sentence, not this sentence 
of aldermen or judges, but the judgment of God. 
So, ye blessed, ye are now in a place of refuge or 
safety from the prison of the world; true, there is 
darkness in that refuge, but you are a light in that 
darkness. There are indeed prisoners there, but 
you are God's freedmen; there is a loathsome 
smell there, but you are a sweet savor. These 
judges have to look for a judge, but you it is who 
shall judge these judges. II Cor. 6:2; Rev. 3:21. 
Those may indeed be distressed who sigh after the 


wealth of this world, but a true Christian had al- 
ready renounced the whole world when he was out 
of prison : and now that he is in prison he also re- 
nounces the prison. To you who have renounced 
the world, it matters not in what part of the world 
you are. And if you have but some of the joy of 
this life, it is profitable dealing to lose or relin- 
quish a trifling bargain, in order, thereby, to gain a 
greater one. I forbear mentioning the magnitude 
of the reward and glorification to which the mar- 
tyrs are called of God. Rev. 3 :21. 

Still, we would hereby compare the life of the 
world and the prison life ; the spirit gains more in 
prison than the body loses. Nay, the body loses 
not the necessaries of life, in consequence of the 
providence of the church and love of the brethren, 
but the Spirit, moreover, makes such acquisitions 
as are every way advantageous to faith; for there 
(in prison) you see no strange gods ; there you are 
not offended with their images ; there you are not 
molested by the great throng of men, which takes 
place at the festivals of the heathen ; you are not 
enveloped with foul stench ; you are not terrified 
with the shrieks of the horrid exhibitions, and with 
the fury and insolence of tumult, when the heathen 
tragedians make such vain representations. You 
are not disgusted with the sight of public brothels ; 
you are free from offense, from temptation, from 
evil thoughts, nay, from persecution. The prison 
affords to Christians all the advantages derived by 
the prophets from their solitary wilds. The Lord 
was wont to withdraw from the people, that He 
might enjoy the more freedom in prayer, and in re- 
tirement from the world. Nay, in the wilderness, 
He manifested His glory to His disciples. We will] 
therefore, discard the name prison, and substitute 
that of separation, for, though the bodv is therein 
secluded and confined, yet all things are' open to the 
spirit. Let the spirit then issue forth and wander 
abroad, not in shady orchards or spacious pleasure 
houses, but let it travel in the way that leads to 
God. Phil. 3:20; Col. 3:2; Heb. 13:14. So often 
as you expatiate in the spirit, so often will you be 
beyond the confines of the prison. The feet are 
free from the shackles, when the hands are up- 
lifted to heaven ; the mind carries the whole man 
with it, taking him wherever it goes; hence,, our 
hearts should be wherever we should have our 
treasures. Matt. 6:21. 

But be it so, ye blessed, that the prison is irk- 
some to the Christians: yet we must remember, 
that we are called to the warfare of the living God! 
Eph. 6; and the more especially as we have taken 
the sacramental (baptismal) vow. Nay, no soldier 
marches to war with joy and delight. He marches 
forth to the battle, not from his bed, but from his 
tent, equipped and girded about, when the whole 
work is a series of trouble, sorrow and turmoil ; 
nay, in peace they are free from labor. They teach 
with trouble to endure the fatigues of war ; they 
march under arms, they exercise in the field, sink 
ditches and saw wood for the various kinds of ar 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1141 


maments and fortifications. All is one continued 
labor and toil, lest the body or the mind should be 
influenced by fear; from the evening twilight till 
the dawn of day, from the heat of summer to the 
cold of winter, from the taking off of the coat till 
the putting on of the armor, from silence till clam- 
or, from tranquillity till alarm. 

Therefore, ye blessed, inure yourselves to all the 
hardships of the soldier, for the exercise and 
strengthening of the mind and body. You are now 
marching in a good contest, in which the living 
God is the dispenser of the prizes, and the Holy 
Ghost the keeper; the coronation is an everlasting 
jewel, the citizenship angelic existence in heaven, a 
glory that shall endure forever: therefore, it is 
Jesus Christ who dispenses the prizes to you, who 
has given you the unction of the Holy Spirit, and 
advanced you to this grade of honor ; may he with- 
draw you from lighter work before the day of bat- 
tle, that you may be assailed with greater violence, 
and your strength be confirmed ; for the combatants 
have to undergo severe discipline and exercise, 
in order that, by exertion, their physical powers 
may be improved. For, for this end they are kept 
from venery, rich victuals, and strong drink ; they 
are subjected to constraint, tortured and exercised ; 
and the greater preparatory exercise they take, the 
greater is their hopes of victory. Now they do it, 
says the apostle (I Cor. 9:25), to obtain a cor- 
ruptible crown ; but we shall obtain an eternal one. 
We should, therefore, make the prison a place of 
trial and exercise, that we may be inured to every 
misfortune and inconvenience, and so appear with 
the greater confidence, before the judgment seat of 
Christ. 

We are not unacquainted with the declaration of 
the Lord Jesus : "The spirit is willing, but the flesh 
is weak." We ought, therefore, not to fear or be 
dismayed, since the Lord declares that the flesh is 
weak; but He has told us beforehand, that the 
spirit is willing and ready, in order that He might 
know which should be subject to the other, namely, 
that the flesh should serve the spirit, the weaker 
submit to the stronger — that the former might 
also acquire strength of the latter. The spirit 
should converse about the general eternal salva- 
tion, and not about the inconvenience of the prison, 
but meditate upon the contest, and what greater 
hardships may still be in reserve. Perhaps the flesh 
will be terrified at the huge sharp sword, the lofty 
gallows, the ravenous beast, or the exquisite pain 
of the flames, and the numerous instruments of 


torment ; then will the spirit and flesh stand in op- 
position. What though this be great cruelty, num- 
bers have suffered it with great joy ; nay, persons 
have voluntarily desired and longed for it, in order 
to acquire honor and a name; and not only men 
but women. Hence, ye blessed, you may know 
how to deport yourselves according to the measure 
of your race. 

It would consume too much time to mention all 
who have been executed with the sword, under the 
influence of a strong desire for such a death. 
Among females, there is Lucretia, who, being rav- 
ished, pierced her bosom with a dagger in the pres- 
ence of her friends, that she might leave behind 
her the fame of her chastity. Mutius burst off his 
right hand, in order, thereby, to acquire a name. 
How, also, that many other extraordinary incon- 
veniences and tortures have been suffered for the 
acquisition of worldly honor and fame, we omit 
for brevity's sake ; and add that if temporal honor 
is worth so much torture and pain, endured 
through strength of mind, so that fire, sword, gal- 
lows, wild beasts, and torture were contemned for 
the reward of human fame, I may well say, that 
this, our affliction, is extremely light in comparison 
of the heavenly glory and the divine reward. If 
glass is so valuable, how much more precious are 
jewels? Who, then, would not much rather suffer 
so much for a real, substantial good, when so many 
endure so much for an unsubstantial one. I now 
dismiss the consideration for temporal fame; still 
the strife of indignation and that of martyrdom 
are analogous, etc. 

This outward exercise, ye blessed, the Lord has 
not permitted to enter the world to no purpose; 
but for our sakes, to warn us, thereby, that we 
shall be put to shame and confusion at the last day, 
if we are afraid of suffering for the sake of truth 
unto salvation, that which others have endured for 
the sake of vanity, unto perdition, etc. And in con- 
clusion, let us consider the end or design of the 
creation of man, at which we must arrive, that such 
reflection may stimulate us to prepare ourselves 
resolutely to endure those calamities which equally 
befall the willing and the unwilling, (namely, the 
punishment of death, etc.), There is no person 
who would not still suffer for man's sake ; why then 
should we hesitate or fear to suffer in the cause of 
God, who will recompense us with the purest love, 
and with joy and everlasting glory ? Meditate upon 
this, ye blessed. 


INDEXES 


Editorial Notes on Indexes 

The Index of Anabaptist Martyrs (1525-1660) and the List of Popes and Emperors have 
been prepared and compiled by Ira D. Landis, member of the Mennonite Historical 
Committee. He has also compiled an entirely new General Index, making a total of three 
indexes which we believe will be much appreciated and utilized by the readers. An Index of 
Sources Quoted is not available. 


On the Use of Indexes 

The Index of Anabaptist Martyrs lists the names of all Anabaptists known to have been 
persecuted or martyred from the time of the first Anabaptist martyrs in 1525 to the year 
1 660. The names of the martyrs other than Anabaptists are listed in the General Index. In the 
List of Popes and Roman Emperors, the page numbers appear with those names found in the 
book. In parentheses are the dates during which the pope or emperor served. We trust the 
reader will find these indexes of considerable value in the use of the book. 


1144 


Index of Anabaptists Who Were Persecuted 
or Martyred 1525—1660 

Compiled by Ira D. Landis 


Abraham of Colchester, 346, 347 

Ackeren, Jan van, 965 

Adams, Hendrick, 588 

Adrian of Gravenhage, 447 

Adrienss, Jan, 847 

Aeberly, Lorenz, 1130 

Aechtken of Zierckzee, 623 

Aelmeers, Martijtgen, 663 

Aelmeers, Nikasen van, 663 

Aernem, Hendrick van, 500 

Aernem, Hendrick van, 500 

Aerts, Elsgen, 640 

Aerts, Hendrick, and wife, Janneken 

Cabiltaus, 665 
Aerts, Willem, 715 
Aertss, Jan, 847 
Aicher, Hans, 1060, 1061 
Albi, Verona, 1118 
Alda, 439 

Alewijns, Hendrick, 742-757 
Alewyns, Gerrit, 758 
Algerius, 570-573 
Allaerts, Lauwerens, 656 
Aman, Burckhardt, 1113 
Amare, Marijn, 655 
Amare, Martilne, 663 
Amare, Nikasen, 655 
Andries, 624 
Andries, M. 882 

Andries, N., father and brother, 845 
Andries, N. 845 
Andriess, Dirk, 774 

Andriess, Lauwerens, 851, 852, 861, 8/2 
Andriess, Lauwerens, 848, 863 
Anna, 702 

Anna of Freiburg, 434 
Anna of Rotterdam, 453 
Anneken, 494, 495, 526 
Anneken, 575 

Antheunis, Annetgen, 574-577 
Anthonis, the weaver, 885-888 
Anoot, Dirk, 758 
Arents, Grietje, 763 
Arents, Heyndrick, 736, 737 
Armentiens, Class van, 1008 
Asselroye, Anthony van, 498 
Assuerus, 525 

Aster, Hans, and wife, 1112 
Aucken, Hans, 1130 
Aucken, Peter, 1130 
Augustine the baker, 553 
Aussilly, Jacob, 1123 
Aysess, Reytse, 994-1005 


Bachman, Rudolph, 1118 

Bachmani, Elizabeth, 1120 

Backer, Hans de, 640 

Backer, Hendrick de, 1126 

Backer, Jacob de, widow of, 670 

Backer, Peter de, 555 

Backer, Pieter de, 568 

Backer, Victor de, 568 

Backers, Mariken, 888 

Backster, Margaret, 346, 348 

Baets, Grietgen, 759 

Bagijn, Jan de, 847 

Bair, John, of Lichtenfels, 503, 504 

Balthasar, 428 

Barbara of Thiers, 435, 436 

Barbel, 526 

Barninge, Sijntgen, 968 

Bartel, 500 

Bartel, Hans, 447 

Bartholomew, the potter, 550 

Bastiaen, 655 

Baten, Aeltgen, 1091, 1092 

Bauman, George, 438 

Bauman, Hans Rudolf, 1118 

Baumgarter, Jacob, 1123 

Baumgarter, Uly, 1124 

Beck, Hans, 440 


Beck, Hans, 444 

Beck, Hans, 588 

Beck, Michael, 449 

Beckjen, Pieter Pieters, 738, 739 

Beckjen, Pieter Pieterss, 831, 832 

Beckuam, Mary van, 500, 501 

Beckum, John van, 467 

Backum, Maria van, 467 

Beckum, Ursula, 467 

Beerentge, 539, 540 

Benedict, 436 

Benedictus, Steven, 443 

Berg, Jan Janssen van dem, 766 

Berge, Anpleunis van den, and wife, 
Kalleken, 758, 759 

Berge, Perceval van den, 664, 665 

Bernaert, Jelis, 624-630 

Bernaerts, Mattheus, 947-951 

Bernard, 632 

Bernkop, Leonard, 465 

Betgen, 650 

Betgen, Deat, 640 

Betgen of Ghent, 640 

Bethezel, Elssa, 1120 

Biesman, Hendrich, 763 

Binder, Matthijs, 1026 

Blau, Annill, 1121 

Blaurock, George, 430-432, 435, 436 

Blietel, Hans, 473 

Block, Arent, 930, 931 

Block, Jan, 894-896 

Block, John, 447 

Boens, Truyken, 483, 484 

Bogart, Uly, 1124 

Boiler, Henry, 1121 

Boltzinger, Leonhard, 1080 

Bonaventuers, Grietgen, 623, 639 

Boogaert, Adriaen, -wife of, 844 

Boon, Gerrit, 876 

Boosers, Maeyken, 667-669 

Borduerwercker, Hans, 550 

Bosch, Jan, of Bergh, 630, 631 

Bossier, Maerten, 582 

Bostijn, Jacques, 656 

Botson, Anneken, and daughter, Janne- 
ken, 1060 

Bouwens Leenaert, 737 

Brael, Adriaen, 655, 656 

Brael, Hems, 560-563 

Brandhulier, Wolfgang, 433 

Brent, Jan Jans, 617 

Bret, Hans, 1037-1054 

Bret, Willem, 1052 

Broecke, Hanscken van den, 583 

Brother at Vuren, 547 

Brubach, Peter, 1110-1118 

Bruck, Steyermark, 429 

Brussels, Grietjen van, 1007 

Bruyn, 885-888, 

Bruynen, Peter, 498 

Bruyssel, Michiel van, and wife, Bar- 

berken, 965 
Buchner, John, 498 
Buefkijn, Jannijn, 493 
Burry, Adriaen den, 686 
Busch, J. D. G. van den, 465 
Buyck, Joost, 840 
Buyse, Michiel, 1069, 1070 
Buyze, Christoffel, 759 
Byler, Gerrit van, 1010-1012, 1022-1024 


Cantiana Anna, 498 
Capelle, Wouter van, 539, 1096 
Cassel, Anthosis van, 620, 622 
Catharine, 503 
Christian, 526 
Christian, 550 
Christian and wife, 575 
Christoffel, 526 
Claes, Anthonis, 640 
Claes, Baef, 764 
Claes, Cornelias, 470 
Claes, Kalleken, 991 


Claes, Susanneken, 991 

Claesken and husband, 611-616 

Claess, Adriaentgen, 470 

Claess, Claes, 465 

Claess, Cornells, 704, 706, 711, 713-715 

Claess, Gerritt, 470 

Claess, Jacob, and wife, 485 

Claess, Jan, 823 

Claess, John, 468-471 

Claess, Wiert, 846, 847 

Claessen, Gerrit, 764 

Claessen of Drourijp, 444 

Claverss, Jelis, 872 

Cleves, Pieter van, 723 

Coelomey, Adrian and Gerrit, 758 

Coerten, Pieter of Meenen, 620, 622 

Corneliss, Adrian, 526-535 

Corneliss, Geleyn, 930, 931 

Corneliss, Gerrit, 876 

Corneliss, Willeboort, 669 

Cornelissen, Adriaen, 764 

Cornelissen, Joost, 553 


Daems, Joost, 1070 
Dale, Guljame van, 656 
Dam, Hans van aer, 989 
Damian of Algau, 466 
Damme, Kestine van, 641 
Dasie, Jacques, 498 
D'Auchy, Jacques, 591-611 
Denijs, Wouter, 759 
Deniis, Wouter, 759-761 
Deventer, Maeyken van, 977-979 
Deynoots, Maeyken, 880-882 
Dilburgh, Steven Janss, and wife, 

Leentjen, 947 
Dingentgen of Honschoten, 947, 953-959, 

961 
Dirk, Little, 583 
Dircks, Faes, 846-848 
Dircks, Grietgen, 837 
Dircks, Jacob, 724, 725 
Dircks, Lijsken, 504-506, 511-522 
Dircks, Reyer, 502 
Dirks, Claes, 465 
Dirks, Clement, 563, 567 
Dirks, Hendrick, 526 
Dirks, Michael, 473 
Dirks, Waeckling, 583 
Doom, Jan, 44, 968 
Doornaerts, Maeyken, 553 
Doomick, Jan van, 766 
Doornick, Lambert van, 584 
Draeyaerts, Kalleken and Susanneken, 

991 
Drooghscheerder, Jan, 550 
Droogscheerder, Willem, 568, 569 
Duerhove, Saerken van, 870 
Durps, Jan, 630 
Duster, Hans, 1122 
Dutysch, Hans den, 583 
Duyck, Willem de, 686 
Duynherder, Gerrit, 742, 758 


Eckelo, Heyndrich van, 896 

Eder, Marcus, 1103 

Eelken, 484, 485 

Eemkens, Heyndrick, 660, 661 

Eeuwouts, Douwe, 893, 1003 

Egbert, Reyer, 536 

Egle, Jacob, 1113, 1114 

Egli, Rudolf, 1109 

Egly, Rudolf, 1110 

Egiwerckin, Jan, 465 

Eicher, Conrad, 1129 

Eight others, 448 

Eight men, two women, one child, 296 

Eighteen burned at Salzburg, 427 

Elberts, Breght, 764 

Eleven others, 1124 


1145 


1146 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Elizabeth, 481, 482 

Elizabeth, 503 

Elizabeth, 546, 547 

Elstlandt, Franchoys van, 654 

Engel, 990 

Enkhuysen, Claes, 765, 766 

Ennathas, 183 

Ensisheim, 600 slain at, 429 

Eslinger, Wolfgang, 439, 440 

Essen, Arent van, and wife, Ursel, 842- 

844 
Etten, Henderich van, 818 
Euwout, the barber, 846, 847 
Everling, Jacob, 1126 
Eynoven, Pieter van, 575, 576 


Feichter, Conrad, 441 

Feierer, Hans, 428 

Felbinger, Nicholas, 643, 644 

Femmetgen of Egbert, 443 

Fest, Ludwig, 441 

Fierens, Christoffel, 961 

Fifty-four burned, 992, 993 

Fije, 484, 485 

Fijts, Symon, 823 

Fijtsoon, Simon, 962 

Five brethren and sisters burned, 428 

Floris, Maeyken, 620-622 

Forty-five martyrs, 703 

Francijntgen, 553 

Francis, 472 

Franss, Betgen, 618 

Franss, Mariken, 618 

Franss, Neelken, 618 

Frick, Leonhard, 425 

Frick, George, 435 

Fricken, Henry, 1119 

Friesen, George, 661-663 

Frisius, Ubbo, 788 

Freerks, Sicke, 441, 442 


Gachnauer, Jacob, 1123 

Gaerber, Waelty, 1130 

Gasteyger, Christian, 1062 

Gaukes, Ydse, and wife, Anneken, 885- 

893 
Gaupner, Andrew, 428 
Geertgen, 758 
Gelder, Sijntgen van, 656 
Geldersman, Jacob de, 475-477 
George, John, 703 
George of Chur, 436 
Gerbrant, Claes, 536 
Geyer, Nicholas, 703 
Gerrit, Home of, 575 
Gerrits, Peter, 445 
Gerritt, 500 
Gerritts, Jan, 680 
Gesel, Balthasar, 444 
Gijselaer, Koppen de, Cornells, Michiel, 

930, 931 
Gijsbrechts, Hendrick, van Campen, 

443 
Gijselbrecht, 1030 ■ 
Gillis, 494, 495 
Gillis, 502 
Gillis, Aeltje, 764 

Gillis, Aix la Chapelle, 536, 568, 575 
Gink, Jan van, 763 
Glasmacker, Sebastian, 446 
Glock, Paul, 1024-1026 
Goes, Maeyken van der, and husband, 

Jasper the Taschrinckmaecker, 818, 

819, 758 
Goes, Peluntgen van der, 618 
Goethals, Barbelken, 870 
Goethals, Joost, 759 
Gomer the mason, 640 
Gotthard of Nonenberg, 590, 591 
Goudeken, 656 
Govert, 494, 495 
Graet, Steven de, and mother, Sijntgen, 

666 
Greitzinger, Offrus, 448, 449 
Grendel, Jan, 663 
Greunfelder, Henry, 345 
Greyenburger, Veit, 841, 842 
Grietge, 987 
Grietgen, 583 
Grietgen, 503 
Grietgen, 553 
Grietjen, 881 
Grobin, Catharina, 1114 
Groot, Jelis de, 616, 617 


Groot, Lucas de, 722 
Gruber, Lambrecht, 440 
Gruenfelder, Hans, 446 
Gruenwald, George, 438 
Guelders, Laurens van, 569 
Gulicker, Pieter de, 929, 930 
Gutwol, Henry, 1115 
Gurtzham, Hans, 474 


H 

Hadewijk, 546, 547 

Hagen, Ruth, 1122 

Hagerly, 1129 

Hage, Rudolf, 1113 

Halewijn, Mahieu van, 616, 617 

Hailing, Karel, 704 

Hans, Thomas, 1089 

Hans, 1053 

Hans, 655 

Hans, 624 

Hans, Little, of Stotzingen, 427, 428 

Hans of Wels, 450 

Hansken, 774 

Hansken of Oudenaerde, 953, 959, 961, 

968 
Haring, Christina, 441 
Harmons, Andries, 765 
Harmen the Dyer, 885-888 
Hasebroeck, Jan van, 766, 770-774 
Hasepoot Gerrit, 560 
Hansken's wife 624 
Haslibacher Hans, 1128-1130 
Haustelraed, Tennis van, 495, 496 
Haverbeke, Willem van, 582 
Hazel, Michiel, 1088 
Hee, Adricien van, 584 
Hellrigling, Ursula, 467 
Hendrick, 758 
Hendrick, 642 
Hendrick of De venter, 514 
Hendrick N., 653 
Hendricks, Aechtgen, 942-944 
Hendricks, Alewijn, 757 
Heyndricks, Anneken, 872, 873 
Hendricks, Cornells, Jacob, Leentgen, 

944 
Hendricks, Evert, 944 
Hendricks, Jan, 574-576 
Hendricks, Lucas, 655-656 
Hendrickss, Jan, 932-944 
Hendricks, Sander, 639 
Hendrickss, Clement, 834, 837-841 
Hendrickss, Pouwels, 942-944 
Hendrix, Leentgen, 764 
Hendrix, Thymon, 766 
Henry, 1124 
Henry, Big, 504, 519 
Herman, 691 
Herman, 697, 700 
Herman, 665 
Hermans, Meynert, 535 
Herman, Thomas, 422 
Hess, Hani; Jacob, and wife, 1115 
Hilzin, Elizabeth, and husband, 1112 
Hinnelberg, Anthony, 1124 
Hoedemaecker, Adriaen Janss, 883-885 
Hoedemaecker, Adriaen (Kort), 992, 

993, 1095 
Hoedemaecker, Goossen, 584 
Hoedemaecker, Willem den, 584 
Hoestetten, woman of, 1129 
Honschoten, Woute van, 583 
Houte, Soetgen van den, and husband, 

646-657 
Hove, Anneken van den, 1093-1095 
Hove, Pieter ten, 1102 
Huber, Hans, 465 
Huber, Hans, and wife and her sister, 

1123, 1124 
Huber, Uliich, 1129 
Hubmaier, Bathasar, 424, 465, 1116 
Hueber, Wolfgang, 617 
Huereblock, Martin, 488 
Hulle, Jan, 656 
Hulle, Janneken van, 864 
Hussele, Jaecxken van, 759 
Hut, John, 433 
Hut, Philip, 433 
Huter, Jacob, 430, 431, 440 
Huybert, 758 
Huyge, 677 
Huyvernaeeker, Lauwerens de, and 

wife, Catelijntgen, 639 


Ick, Stijntj«, van, 574 

Imbroeck, Thomas van, 367, 578-582 


Imbroeck, Barbertgen, Hansken, Joos. 

Pierken, 587 
Imhoff, Catharina, 1129 
Imwald, Thomas, 435 
Isolly, Rudolph, 1130 
Isselme, Jacob, 1120 
Issoli, Verena, 1129 


Jacob the Cobbler, and wife, 1007 

Jacob the goldsmith, 640 

Jacob the weaver, 774, 784, 788 

Jacobs, Andries, 724 

Jacob, Old, 500 

Jacob and Seli, 464 

Jacobs, Arent, and family, 455 

Jacobs, Barbara, 764 

Jacobs, Dirk, 847 

Jacobs, Jan, 724 

Jacob, Pieter, 725 

Jacobssen, Arent, 763 

Jacobssfen, Jan, 764 

Jacques, 616 

Jaggli, Hans, 1120 

Jan, 524, 525 

Jan, 654 

Jan, 655 

Jan, 1028 

Jan and companions, 497 

Jan N., 655 

Jan, ribbon weaver, 846 

Jancheelen, Maritgen, 574 

Jankheer, janneken de, 656 

Janneken, 569 

Janneken, 583 

Janneken, 641 

Janneken, 881 

Jans, Adriaenken, 897-900 

Jans, Adriana, 764 

Jans, Albert, 845 

Jans, Avicenna, 577 

Jans, barber, 845 

Jans, Claes, 469 

Jans, Dieuwertgen, 495 

Jans, Dirk, 526 

Jans, Grietgen, 740 

Jans, Ellert, 483, 484 

Jans, Felistis, 539 

Jans, Gertrude, 469 

Jans of Ghent, 535 

Jans, Gijsbert, 483, 484 

Jans, Goechgen, 764 

Jans, Herman, 538 

Jans, Jan, 483, 484 

Jans, Jannetje, 764 

Jans, Job, 731 

Jans, Joos, 666 

Jans, Lijsbeth, and husband, Jan Hen- 
drickss, 933 

Jans, Lysbeth, 764 

Jans, Trijn, 764 

Jans, Maerten, 932, 941, 942 

Jans, Trijntjen, 1005 

Jans, Maritgen, 495 

Jans, Pieter Claes, 464 

Jans, Pieter, 483, 484 

Jans, Stijntgen, 575, 576 

Jans, Sybrant, 443 

Jans, Willem, 495 

Janss, Cornelies, 44 

Janss, Cornelis, 833, 834 

Janss, Hendricks, 935 

Janss, Servaes, 959, 9C0 

Janss, Willem, cutler, 847 

Janss, Willem, teacher, 831, 832 

Janssen, Arent, 763 

Janssen, Willem, 763 

Jasper, N., 870 

Jasper, Nelleken, and father and 
mother, 762 

Jasper, Shoemaker, 663 

Jaspers, Govert, 582 

Jaspers, Nelleken, 872 

Jelis, mason's tender, 846 

Jelis of Aix-la-Chapelle, 532, 557, 592, 

611, 612 
Jeronymus, and wife, Margriete, 569. 
965, 967, 968 

Jeronymus, Cecilia, 485, 486 

Jeuriaenss, Tijs, 823-831 

Joachim, 644 

Jonckheere, Janneken, 759 

Joosken, 697 

Joost, the wheelwright, and wife, 846 

Joosten, 585 

Joosten, barber, 848 

Joosten, Joost, 651 

Joosten, Pieter, 44 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1147 


Joris, 503 

Joris, 644 

Joris, the dyer, 903 

Joris, Lijntgen and Trijntgen, 885-889, 

891 
Joris, Mary, 563 
Joris, Peter, 445 

K 

Kalleken, 709 

Kalvaert, Daniel, 666 

Kampner, Agatha, 435, 436 

Kampner, Elizabeth, 435, 436 

Karel, 715 

Karel N., 653 

Karettier, Maerten, 848 

Ken-niter, George Kunen, 436 

Karstiaen L., 903 

Kasteef, Joos, 715 

Katelijntgen, 889 

Kats, Maeyken, 623 

Keersgieter, Jacob de, 774-785, 798-818 

Keeskooper, Hansken, 487-491, 493, 494 

Kels, Jerome, 445 

Kernels, Christiaen, 1009, 1022-1024 

Kernels, Lijntgen, 848 

Kempen, Gerrit van, 497 

Keppel, William van, 661, 662 

Kesij, Jacob, and mother, Martijntgen, 

867, 868 
Kestijntgen, 1035 
Ketel Pouwels, 1030 
Ketels Fierijntgen, and mother, 

Leentgen, 666 
Keurs, Philip de, 447 
Keuse, Mattheers, 992, 993 
Keute, Anthonis, 655, 656 
Keuts Trijnken, 618 
Keyser, Daniel de, 1027, 1036 
Keyser, Leonhard, 420-422 
Keyser, Liefken, 535 
Kindt, Joos, 540-546 
Klaerken, 569 
Klampherer, Julius, 652 
Kleermaecker, G., 965, 966 
Kleermaecker, Willem de, 645 
Knel, John, 498 
Knevel, Hans, 945-947 
Koch, Conrad, 686-688 
Koch, Hans at Augsburg, 339, 413, 414 
Kocx, Maeyken, 652-654 
Kofler, Andrew, 473 
Kolbin, Barbara, 1112 
Koolaert, the cooper, 651 
Koopman, Jan, and servant, Hans, 

766, 774 
Koordedraeger, Hansken, 725, 726 
Kopf, Daniel, 435 
Kopfler, Philip, 435 
Korbmacher, Johns, 645 
Korte, Maeyken de, 623, 624, 639 
Koster, Peter, 443 
Kraen, Hugo Jacob, 441 
Kraen, Mary, 441 
Kramer, Michael, 473 
Kramer, Peter, 590, 591 
Kranewitter, Peter, 444 
Krood, Dirk Pieters, 464 
Kudse, Jan de, 554 
Kulenburgh, Cornelius van, 538 
Kunstel, Ruth, 1122 
Kuter, Eustace, 645, 646 
Kuyck, J. W. van, 871, 897-927 
Kuyck, John Wouterss van, 372 
Kuyper, Frans de, 592 


Lad of 15, 501 

L. Adam V., and wife, Mariken, 960 

Lamberts, Lucas, 471 

Lamberts, Dirk, 666 

Landis, Felix, and wife, Adelheid Egli, 

and family, 112 
Landis, Hans, 1103-1105 
Landis, Hans II, 1110 
Landis, Margaret, 1110 
Landis, Verena, 1121 
Langeduhl, broommaker, 624 
Langedul, Andries, and daughter, 

Maeyken, 633, 634, 639 
Langedul, Christian, and son-in-law, 

J. T., 704-709, 711 
Langmantel, Hans, and servants, 429 
Lantz, Peter, 431 
Laurentius, 1096 
Lauwerens, and wife, 624 
Lauwerens, broommaker, 624 
Leeks, Claes, 481 


Ledersnijder, Marcus de, 583 

Leenaert, 592-595 

Leendert, 575 

Leentgen, wife of Jan van Rheenen, 

764 
Leerverkooper, Henderick, 583 
Leerverkoopster, Naentgen, 618 
Leonidas, 118, 180 
Leonides, 201, 127 
Lettersetter, Tannekin, 640 
Leuven, Francoys van, 968 
Leuvens, Christoffel van, 969 
Levina, 549 
Leydecker, Peter, 445 
Leyden, Lauwerens van der, 633-640 
Leyden, Tonijntgen van der, and hus- 
band, Lieven, 633 
Leyen, Lieven van der, 639 
Leyen, Nathanael van der, 639 
Leyen, Tanneken van der, 550 
Leytner, John, 644 
Libich, George, 466 
Lieven, 758 
Lijntgen, 583 
Lijntgen, 655 
Lijntgen, 1008 
Lijsken, 981, 983 
Lincken, Mattheus van, and children, 

947-951 
Lindingerin, Martha, 1110 
Lindne, Martha, 1121 
Lindt, Tijs van, 496 
Linschoten, Lijsken te, 1102 
Lisz, Hansken, 655, 656 
Lochmaier, Leonhard, 448 
London and others, 1008, 1012, 1019- 

1024 
Loosveldt, Pierijntgen, 962-965 
Losenegger, Moritz, 1 129 
Lou, 961 

Louvain, William van, 549 
Louven, Willem van, 968 
Louwerens, shoemaker, 1036 
Lowijs, Jacob, 845 
Luyckener, Hans de, 639, 640 
Luyts, Cornelius, 465 


M 

Maeb, Jaapje, 568 
Maebouts, Prijntgen, 670 
Maelbouts, Martijntgen, 670 
Maelschalck, 723, 724 
Maes, Grietje, 764 
Maes, Hans van, 631-633 
Maes, Jan, 664, 665 
Maestricht, Hendrik van, 765 
Maeyken, 641 
Maeyken, 655 
Maeyken, 979, 983 
Maeyken, Old, 623, 639 
Magdaleentgen of Zealand, 967 
Magdaleentken, 623 
Mair, Mattheus, 1089-1091 
Mair, Walter, 440 ., 

Mair, Wolfgang, 617 -\ 
Maldegem, Betgen^van, 656 
Maldegem, Pieter van, 656 
Male, Pieter van, 656 
Maler, Anna and Ursula, 437 

Mandel, Gerrit van, 766 

Mandel, Jacob, 1057 

Mange, John, 703 

Mankager of Fusessen, 435, 436 

Manz, Felix, 415 

Marenj, Symon van, 894 

Margriet, 961 

Margriete, 569 

Maria of Monjou, 525 

Marijntgen, 666 

Mariken, 494, 495, 526 

Mariken, 566 

Mariken, 981, 983 

Marritge, 764 

Martens, Victor, 586 

Martha, 650 

Martin, the painter, 439 

Martin of Vilgraten, 449 

Matschilder, Michael, 474 

Mattheus, 624 

Matthijs, Jelis, 671-680 

Maurer, Hans, 444 

Maurick, Stijntje van, 574 

Meenen brethren, 586 

Meenen, Mariken van, 655 

Meenen, Pauwels van, sister of, 670 

Meenene, France van, 659 

Meenwens, Joos, 589 

Meerssenier, Joost, 759 


Meesch, Joris van, 845 
Mein, Hans, 562 
Melchior, 439, 440 
Meliss, Aecht, 465 
Meliss, Claes, 465 
Mels, Johanna, 445 
Melselaer, Jacob de, 583 
Mesdagh, Jacques, and sister, Susan- 
nah, 715-721 

Meselaer, Claes, 525 

Metzer, Jan de, 982 

Meulen, Pieter van der, 666 

Meulen, Tanneken van der, 759 

Meulenaer, Andries, 655, 656 

Meulenaers, Francijntgen, 655 

Meyli, Hans, 1110 

Meyli, Hans Jr., and wife, 1111 

Meyli, Martin, and wife, 1110, 1111 

Meylich, Moneth, 1121 

Meylin, Barbara, 1112, 1113 

Meylin, Elizabeth, 1112 

Michael the shoemaker, wife of, 847 

Michiel, 1082, 1085, 1086 

Michiels, Lucas, 483, 484 

MieuwesSj Dirck, 872 

Misel, Hans, 893, 894 

Moeyken, 758 

Molenaersgraef, Adriaentgen Jans van, 
871 

Mollen, Griet P., 764 

Monster, Hans van die, 500 

Motte, Gerard de la, 315 

Moykaert, Claes, and wife, 586 

Moykaert, Janneken, 586 

Mulerin, Catharina, 1111 

Muliers, Piersom de, and family, 737, 
738 

Muller, Hans, 1109 

Mullerin, Ottila, 1112 

Muller, Ulrich, 1119 

Mully, Hans, 1122 

Munstdorp, Hans van, 983, 984, 989, 991 

Munstdorp, Janneken, 981, 983, 984-991 

Munstdorp, Passchier, 968, 989 


N 

N. Kalleken, 1082, 1086 

Nadminx, 764 

Naentgen, 503 

Namesius, 254 

Neckers, Pierijntgen, 962-965, 984 

Neeft, Barbara, 1121 

Neele, Starke, 574 

Neelken, 918 

Neeltgen and Trijntgen, 892-894 

Niedermair> Peter, 433 

Nimrick, Helnies, 1103 

Nine: Brethren and three sisters, 429 

Nine brethren arid several sisters, 437 

Noele, 584 

Noodtdruft, Lauwerens Janss, 1055 

Nose, Joost, 641 , 

Nouts, Evert, 574, 576-578 


Oberacker, Hans, 445, 446 

Oberlen, Christian, 1130 

Ogiers, Anneken, 844 

Ogiers, Jan, Anneken, daughter of, 844, 

845 
Ol, Adriaen, 818 
Oldeknecht, Albert, 765 
Olman, Pieter van, 536-538 
Oosthove, Pieter van, 666 
Oosten, Hans Marijns, 742, 757, 758 
Opreyder, Claes, 885-889, 891-893 
Orval, 654 

Oswald of Jamnits, 472, 475 
Oudkleerkooper, Joris, 568 
Outerman, Jelis, 655 
Overdam, Hans van, 486-493 


Pacimontanus, Balthasar, 416 

Paeu, Daniel de, 726 

Palmen, Palmken, 496 

Pan, Adriaen and wife, 618, 619 

Panten, Bartholomeus, 1082-1088 

Paris, Jan van, 723, 724 

Parmentier, Hansken and Jelis, 655 

Passchier, 968, 989 

Pastor, Adam, 542 

Pauw, Jan, 763 

Pelgnius, Veit, 440 


1148 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Peltner, Hans, 993 

Pennewaerts, Jan, 483-484 

Pesemaecher, Kalleken de, 639 

Peter the servant, 440 

Peter of Spain, 640 

Peters, Rhode, 1124 

Petz, Hans, 447 

Philip of Langenlonsheim, 438 

Philips, Maertjen, 847 

Phister, Hans, 1120 

Phister, Werner, and son's wife, 1118 

Pichner, Hans of Sal, 550 

Picolet, Abraham, 818-823 

Pickelen, Maeyken, 1080 

Pierijntgen, 666 

Pierken, 724 

Piersom, Margriete, 738 

Pieter, 550 

Pieter, the miller, 569 

Pieter, Old, 759 

Pieter, shoemaker, and wife, Jacomijnt- 

gen, 665 
Pieters, Adriaen, 583 
Pieters, Adriaen, 848 
Pieters, Digna, 550, 551 
Pieters, Lauwerens, 723, 724 
Pieters, Maerten, 740 
Pieters, Maeyken, 1060 
Pieters, Quirinus, 474 
Pietersen, alias Borrekiek, 765 
Pieters, Jan, 929-931 
Pieters, Jan, 1008-1011, 1017-1024 
Pinder, Wolfgang, 874, 875 
Plaitner, Virgil, 432, 433 
Platser, Jacob, 1082 
Platser, Melchior, 1058 
Plaver, Peter, 440 
Pleun, 524 
Pleunis, 654 

Plover, Lenaert, 641-643 
Poperinge, Willem van, and wife, 

Maeyken, 766 
Portier, Jan, 722 
Pottebacker, Mattheus, 633 
Pottebacker, Mattheus de, 639 
Potvliet, Jelis, 656 
Potvliet, Pieter, 656, 659 
Potvliets, Stijntgen, 653 
Pouwel, 812 
Prader, Cariusetal, 433 
Praet, Claes de, 554-560 
Pretle, Hans, 427 
Pruchmair, George, 1060, 1061 
Pruyt, Hendrick, 1005, 1006 


Questinex, 483, 484 
Quirijnss, Jan, 832-836 


Raeck, George, 646 
Raedts, Maeyken, 704, 708 
Raes, Jan van, 759 
Raet, Karel de, and wife, Grietgen, 725 
Ramaecker, Remken, 497 
Raufer, Wolfgang, 1060, 1061 
Reve, Hans van der, 431 
Rayer, William, 574 
Reyers, Albert, 765 
Reynerts, Djaert, 454 
Rhais, 203, 128 
Ries, Fluchtthal, 429 
Rieu, Adrian du, 704 
Rijcen, Christiaen, 1063-1069 
Rijcker, Willem de, 961 
Ring, Hans, 1119 
Roders, Claes, 464 
Roelands, Janneken, 759 
Rogiers, Adriaen, 947, 951-954, 959 
Rommeken, 550 

Roore, Jacob de, 371, 803, 774-818 
Rousselare, Sijntgen van, 967, 968 
Ruegsegger, Stephen, 1 130 
Ruff, Barbly, 1121 
Rusterhel, Jacob, 1114 
Rusterholtz, Jacob, 1110, 1114 
Rutsaert and wife, 655 
Ruyter, Hans de, and wife and daugh- 
ter, 1056 

s 

S. Margriete, 1076 
S. Tanneken de, 620-622 
Sach, FranciB van der, 664 
Sanderijntgen, 967 
Sattler, Michael, 416-420 
Schaeck, Hansken, 725 


Schepens, Jeronymus, 1026, 1028, 1035, 
1036 

Schilder, Dirk de, 583 

Schlaeffer, Hans, 425, 426 

Schlaper, [an de, 766 

Schlebach, Jegly, 1124 

Schlosser, Nicholas, 643, 644 

Schmede, Ulli, 1114 

Schmied, Uhbi, 1109 

Schnebbi, Henry, 1118 

Schneider, Gallus, 1118 

Schneider, Leopold, 426 

Schneider, Ulli, 1114 

Schneider, Ulrich, and two sons, 1115, 
1129 

Schneider, Wolfert, 444 

Schoener, Leonhard, 424, 425 

Schoenmaecker, Maerten, 583 

Schoolmaster, Valius, 726 

Schoonvelt, Anthonis, 652-654 

Schub, John, 654, 655 

Schumacher, Caspar, 449 

Schumacher, Hans, 465 

Schumacher, Hans, 1130 

Schumacher, Konrad, 574 

Schumacher, Laurence, 440 

Schweitzer, Hans, 1129 

Seckler, Hans, 1129 

Segers, Jerome, and wife, 504-522 

Seidenkohen, Cumas, 1129 

Seifensieder, Michael, 445 

Sengius, Paulus, 102-105 

Servaes, Aelken, 697 

Servaes, Aeltgen, 700 

Servaes, Anna, 958 

Servaes, Barbara, 698 

Servaes, F'rances, 698 

Servaes, John, 698 

Servaes, Matthias, 688-703 

Seven brethren, 433 

Seventeen, 496 

Seventy, 433 

Seventy, 424, 425 

Seyel, Hans, 450 

Seyle, Apollonia, 450 

Sijntgen, Lame, 968 

Sijntgen, 1069 

Simeraver, Hans, 455 

Simon, 540 

Simons, Joviaen, 563-568 

Simons, Menno, 454, 455, 466, 474, 481, 
498, 592, 603, 607, 609, 686, 726, 775, 
780, 788, 795, 994, 996, 997, 1050, 
1096, 1097, 1134 

Six banished, 429 

Sixty eight, 422 

Sluys, Grietgen van, 959, 968 

Sluys, Margriet van der, 953 

Smit, Hans, 588, 620-622 

Smit, Jan, 962 

Smit, Jan de, 726 

Smit, Marcus de, 620-622 

Smit, Matthijs, 590 

Smith, a, 502 

Smits, Lijsken, 640 

Smuel, Dirk Pieters, 475-481 

Snijder, Dileman, 588 

Snijder, Willem de, and wife, Chris- 
tijntgen, 725, 726 

Somere, Jaques de, 1019-1022 

Somerhuys, Lijsbet and Catharina, 
885-888 

Spillebout, Jacob, 620-622 

Stautdach, Hans, and three others, 474, 
475 

Stayaerts, Lippijntgen, 740, 968 

Stayert, Pieter, 759 

Stayert, Roselandt, 759 

Steens, Kalleken, 665 

Steinmetz, George, 439 

Stevens, Michael, 447 

Stijntgen, 583 

Stoffel, 1076 

Straten, Beliken van der, 953-958, 960 

Straten, Hans van der, and wife, Tan- 
neken, 875, 876 

Straten, Hans van, 1010, 1022-1024 

Straten, Maerten van der, 947, 953-961 

Stricke, Conrad, 1122 

Strings, Jelis, 656-660 

Strings, Kalleken, 652-655 

Stucki, Peter, 1129 

Studen, Barbell zur, 1129 

Stuss, Hans, 1122 

Styaerts, John, 449 

Suhner, Rudolf, 1120 

Sumer, Hendrick, 1057 

Sumeraver, Leonhart, 1060, 1061 

Summis, Wald, 1129 


Swarte, Franchoys de, and wife, Klaes- 

ken, 663 
Swarte, Jacob de, 583 
Swarte, Jan de, and wife, Klaesken, 

and four sons, Christian, Hans, 

Klaes, Mahieu, 664, 665 
Sweendtreger, Frans, 550 
Symons, Hans, 704-706, 709-713 
Symons, Kaerle, Vincent, and Willem, 


Taller, Hans, 440 

Tanckreet, Kaerle, 620-622 

Tanckreet, Proentken, 620-622 

Tanneken, 583, 639 

Tanneken, wife of Vincent Symons 

709-711 
Tanneken, 1029 
Taschrinkmaker, Jasper den, and wife, 

Maeyken van der Goes, 758, 819 
Tauber, Casper, 414 
Teerlings, Jaecxken, 759 
Ten burned, 871 
Terwoort, Handrick, 1008, 1009, 1011 

1017-1019, 1021-1024 
Thennis, Jacob, 577 
Thielemans, Barbara, 483, 484 
Thielemans, Jan, 721-736 
Thirty seven imprisoned, 1124 
Thomas, 428 

Thomas, the printer, 693, 696, 697 
Three burned, 987 

Three brethren and two sisters, 428 
Three hundred fifty executed, 437 
Thymans, Pieter, 536 
Tiban, Frans, 583 
Tiegem, Karel van, 617 
Tieleman, Joris, 640 
Tielleman, 526 
Tijncke, Boudewijn, 1030 
Tijs, 539, 540 

Timmerman, Herman, 766-770 
Timmermans, Maeyken, 795, 796 
Tinker, a, from Emmenthal, 1129 
Tollenaer, Jacomijntgen, 1069, 1078 
Tollenaer, Janneken de, 1069, 1078 
Tollenaer, Joost de, Natanael, and Bet- 

gen de, 968, 1069-1080 
Tollenaer, Lowijs de, 1069, 1078 
Tollinger, Christian, 435, 436 
Tomme, Absalom van, 582 
Topigh, 436 
Tower, Puttox, 551 
Trams, Maeykens, 655 
Trijnes, Pieter, 464 
Twelve Christians burned, 885-888 
Two believers of Bix executed, 1129 
Two brethren drowned, 441 
Two brethren and four sisters, 435 
Two beheaded, 440 
Two thousand slain, 429 

u 

Ulman, Wolfgang, 427 
Ulrich of Ruegsau, 1129 
Uticken, Hans van, and wife, 1113 


Valerius, the schoolmaster, 930 

Vandruynen, Paul, 447 

Vaser, George, 446 

Velde, Karel van den, and wife, Proent- 
gen, 663 

Velde, Raphel van den, and Tanneken, 
and son, Raphelken, 1026-1035 

Vehus, Dr. Dirk Volkertsz, 738 

Verbeeck, Joos, 652 

Vercoilgen, Sijntgen, 740 

Verdussen, Hieronymus, 1095 

Vergas, John, 1095 

Verkamer, Lauwerens, 740 

Verkampt, Daniel, 582 

Verkindert, Joost, and brothers, Michiel 
and Pleun, 844-663 

Verlonge, Pieter, 766 

Vermeerch, Hans, 631-633 

Verstralen, Hendrick, and wife, Jan- 
neken, 877-882, 887, 888 

Verstralen, Janneken, 877-880 

Vet, Melchior, 416 

Vette, Hans de, 620-622 

Vette, Maritgen de, 620-622 

Vettre, Claudine le and husband, Pier- 
som des Muliers, and a brother. 
737 738 

Vick, Mattheus de, 704-707, 711 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1149 


Vijntgen, 656 

Vincentius, 1097 

Vischer, Michael, 1063 

Vlaster, Anna de, 874 

Vleckwijck, Herman van, 774, 785-798 

Vreden, Hendrick van, 592 

Vrees, Claes de, Lijsabet, wife of, 872 

Vooren, Daniel van, 726 

Vroevrouwe, Fransken, 618 


w 

Wael, Charlo de, 663 
Waelty, Bernhard, 1129 
Wagemaker, Ian Pieterss, 1011 
Wagman, Ully, 1122, 1123 
Wagner, George, 416 
Wale, Antonijn de, 666 
Walen, John and two others, 424 
Walle, Lauwerens van de, 652-654 
Walraven, Jacques, 563, 1007 
Walraven, Janneken, 563 
Walraven, Tanneken, 1007 
Walter of Stoelwijk, 455-464 
Wanger, George, 1080-1082 
Wanrij, Sarah, 1120 
Watier, Jan, 759 
Weber, George, 1113, 1114 
Weert, Pieter Bruynen van, 523 
Wege, Jacob van, and Tanneken, Griet- 
gen, and Betgen, 969-977 


Wege, Hansken van den, and wife, 

Cijntgen, 864-870 
Weger, Tanneken van den, 960, 977 
Welmut of Jans, 443 
Welsch, Anthony, 664 
Wens, Adriaen, and brother, Hans 

Mattheus, 980-982 
Wens, Hansken, 982 
Wens, Maeyken, 979, 980 
Wens, Mattheus, and family, 979-983 
Wens, Sijntgen, 1069 
Werwijck, Pieter van, 536-538 
Wesel, Dirck van, and wife, Janneken, 

885 
Wessenmiller, Peter, 1130 
Wetteren, Christian van, 666 
Wevel, Grietgen, 984 
Wever, Jan de, 1070 
Wever, Louwijs de, 583 
Weyndelken, 1056 
Weynken, 422-424 
Weyns, Passchier, 726 
Wideman, Michael, 449 
Wiggers, William, 442 
WilJoost, Jan, 766 
Willeboort, 677 
Willem, 525 
Willem of Bierck, 526 
Willems, Adrian, 721, 722 
Willems, Arendt, 574 
Willems, Dirk, 741, 742 
Willemss, Olivier, 1007 


Willenesse, Cornells, 763 
Wilier, Hans, 1129 
Willher, Barbell, 1129 
William, 465 

Wippe, Joris, 551, 584, 585, 926 
Wit, Jacob, 758 
Witses, Pieter, 548, 549 
Wolfgang, 435 

Women, two or three arrested, 930 
Wouter, 503 
Wouters, Aeltjen, 764 
Wouters, Maeyken, 1091-1093 
Wouterss, Dirck, 899 
Wouterss, Sander, 944 
Wubbers, Remmeltje, 547 
Wucherer, Hans, 447 
WyJcke, Maerten van, and wife, Liis- 
ken, 846 

Y 

Yde, and husband, 758 
Yperes, Jacob van, 569 
Ysbaerts, Anthonis, 991 
Ysbrant, Adriana, 764 


Zaeyweuer, Maerten, 568 
Zager, Willem de, 758 
Zaug, Hans, 1124 
Zaunringerad, George, 440 
Zehender, Stephen, 1114, 1115 


List of Popes and Roman Emperors 

Compiled by Ira D. Landis 


Popes 

Leo I, "The Great" (440-61), 196 

Hilarus (461-68) 

Simplicius (468-83) 

Felix III (483-92), 195 

Gelasius I (492-96) 

Anastasius II (496-98) 

Symmachus (498-514), 55n, 203, 204 

Hormisdas (514-23), 55n 

(Laurentius) (514-18), 55n 

John I (523-26) 

Felix IV (526-30) 

Boniface II (530-32) 

John II (533-35) 

Agapetus I (535-36) 

Silverius (536-38), 54 

Vigilius (538-55), 54 

Pelagius I (556-61), 54 

John III (561-74) 

Benedict I (575-79) 

Pelagius II (579-90) 

Gregory I (the Great) (590-604), 214, 218 

202, 7 
Sabinianus (604-06) 
Boniface III (607) "Papa," 213 
Boniface IV (608-15) 
Duesdedit (615-18) 
Boniface V (619-25) 
Honorius I (625-38) 
Severinus (640) 
John IV (640-42) 
Theodore I (642-49) 
Martin I (649-55) 
Eugenius I (654-57) 
Vitalian (657-72) 
Adeodatus II (672-76) 
Donus (676-78) 
Agatho (678-81) 
Leo II (682-83) 
Benedict II (684-85) 
John V (685-86) 
Conon (686-87) 
Sergius I (687-701) 
John VI (701-05) 
John VII (705-07) 
Sisinnius (708) 
Constantine I (708-15) 
Gregory II (715-31), 58 
Gregory III (731-41), 231 
Zacharias (741-52), 231, 229 
Stephen II (752) 
Stephen III (752-57), 56 
Paul I (757-67) 
(Constantine II) (767-68), 56 
Stephen IV (768-72) 
Hadrian I (772-95), 227n 
Leo III (795-816) 
Stephen V (816-17) 
Paschal I (817-24) 
Eugenius II (824-27) 
Valentine (827) 
Gregory IV (827-44) 
Sergius II (844-47) 
Leo IV (847-55) 
Benedict III (855-58) 
Nicholas I (858-67), 247, 238n 
Adrian II (867-72) 
John VIII (872-82) 
Marinus I (882-84) 
Hadrian III (884-85), 59 
Stephen VI (885-91) 
Formosus (891-96), 53 
Boniface VI (896), 53 
Stephen VII (896-97), 53, 55 
Romanus (897) 
Theodore II (897) 
John IX (898-900), 53 
Benedict IV (900-03), 53 
Leo V (903), 53 
Christopher (903-04), 53, 56 
Sergius III (904-11), 55, 53 
Anastasius III (911-13) 
Lando (913-14) 
John X (914-28), 55 
Leo VI (928-29) 
Stephen VIII (929-31) 
John XI (931-36), 55 
Leo VII (936-39) 
Stephen IX (939-42), 55 
Marinus II (942-46) 


Agapetus II (946-55) 

John XII (955-64), 55 

Leo VII (963-65) 

Benedict V (964-65) 

John XIII (965-72) 

Benedict VI (973-74) 

Benedict VII (974-83) 

John XIV (983-84), 248 

Boniface VII (984-85) 

John XV (985-96) 

Gregory V (996-99) 

Sylvester II (999-1003) 

John XVII (1003) 

John XVIII (1003-09) 

Sergius IV (1009-12) 

Benedict VIII (1012-24) 

John XIX (1024-32) 

Benedict IX (1032-45), 56, 58, 59 

Sylvester III (1045), 56 

Gregory VI (1045-46), 55 

Clement II (1046-47), 55 

Damasus II (1048), 55 

Leo IX (1049-54), 55 

Victor II (1055-57) 

Stephen X (1057-58) 

Benedict X (1058-59) 

Nicholas II (1059-61), 262 

Alexander II (1061-73) 

Gregory VII (1073-85) 

Victor III (1086-87) 

Urban II (1088-99) 

Paschal II (1099-1118) 

Gelasius I] (1118-19) 

Galixtus I] (1119-24) 

Honorius II (1124-30) 

Innocent II (1130-43), 292 

Celestine II (1143-44) 

Lucius II (1144-45), 59 

Eugenius III (1145-53), 292 

Anastasius IV (1153-54) 

Hadrian IV (1154-59), 59, 292 

Hadrian IV (1154-59), 59, 292 

Alexander III (1159-81), 56 

•Victor IV (1159-64), 56 

•Paschal III (1164-68), 56 

•Calixtus III (1168-78), 56 

Lucius III (1181-85), 291, 297 

Urban III (1185-87) 

Gregory VIII (1187) 

Clement III (1187-91) 

Celestine III (1191-98) 

Innocent III (1198-1216), 299, 310, 313 

Honorius III (1216-27) 

Gregory IX (1227-41), 58, 316, 302 

Celestine IV (1241) 

Innocent IV (1243-54), 58, 59 

Alexander IV (1254-61), 320 

Urban IV (1261-64), 304, 320 

Clement IV (1265-68), 58 

Gregory X (1271-76) 

Innocent V (1276) 

Hadrian V (1276) 

John XXI (1276-77) 

Nicholas III (1277-80), 59 

Martin IV (1281-85) 

Honorius IV (1285-87) 

Nicholas IV (1288-92) 

Celestine V (1294) 

Boniface VIII (1294-1303), 321 

Benedict XI (1303-04) 

Clement V (1305-14), 329, 330 

John XXII (1316-34), 52, 54, 58, 59, 323, 

331 327 
Benedict XII (1334-42) 
Clement VI (1342-52) 
Innocent VI (1352-62) 
Urban V (1362-70), 323, 332, 327 
Gregory XI (1370-78) 
Urban VI (1378-89), 327 
Boniface IX (1389-1404), 56 
Sylvester III (1404), 59 
Innocent VII (1404-06), 55 
•Benedict XIII (1394-1423), 55, 56n 
Gregory XII (1406-15), 55, 56n 
Alexander V (1409-10), 56n 
John XXIII (1410-15), 55, 56, 57 
Martin V (1417-31), 56 
Eugenius IV (1431-47), 56 
Nicholas V (1447-55) 
Calixtus III (1455-58), 56 
Pius II (1458-64) 

1150 


Paul II (1464-71), 59 

Sixtus IV (1471-84) 

Innocent VIII (1484-92) 

Alexander VI (1492-1503), 58 

Pius III (1503) 

Julius II (1503-13) 

Leo X (1513-21), 58, 59 

Hadrian VI (1522-23) 

Clement VII (1523-34), 56 

Paul III (1534-49), 58 

Julius III (1550-55) 

Marcellus II (1555) 

Paul IV (1555-59) 

Pius IV (1559-65) 

Pius V (1566-72) 

Gregory XIII (1572-85) 

Sixtus V (1585-90) 

Urban VII (1590) 

Gregory XIV (1590-91) 

Innocent IX (1591) 

Clement VIII (1592-1605), 56, 58, 59 

Leo XI (1605) 

Paul V (1605-21) 

Gregory XV (1621-23) 

Urban VIII (1623-44) 

Emperors 

Aemilianus (253), 138, 140 
Alexander Severus (222-35), 125, 130 
Alphonso I (1112-85), 298 
Amalaric (526-31) 210 
Antonius Pius (138-61), 100 
Augustus (27BC-14AD), 67 
Aurelian (270-75), 125, 141, 142 
Caracalla (Antonius) (211-17), 125, 129 
Charles I (Charles V in Germany) (1516- 

56), 551 
Claudius (41-54), 73, 75 
Claudius II (268-70), 123, 125 
Constantius (305-306), 179, 182 
Decius (249-51), 125 
Diocletian (284-305), 125, 143, 144, 145, 

146, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 181, 182 
Domitian (81-96), 96, 97, 130 
Frederick I (1152-90), 58 
Frederick II (1215-50), 296, 302, 304, 316 

317 
Galba (68-69), 85 
Galerius (305-11), 179, 182 
Gallienus (260-68), 123, 125, 138 
Gallus (251-53), 125, 131, 135, 138 
Geta (Septimus) (211-12), 125, 129 
Hadrian (117-38), 100 
Henry I (1031-60), 267 
Henry III (1039-56), 267 
Heraclius (610-41), 218, 219 
Honorius (395-423), 198, 199 
Jovian (363-64), 186 
Julian, the Apostate (361-63), 180 
Justin I (518-27), 206, 210 
Justinian I (527-65), 206, 210 
Justinian II (685-95), 219 
Leo III (717-41), 221, 228 
Lothair II (1125-37), 292 
Louis I, the Pious (814-40), 233n, 247 
Louis of Bavaria (1314-47), 302 
Lucius Aurelius Verus (161-69), 114, 115 
Marcus Aurelius (161-80), llln, 114, 115, 

117 
Maurice (582-602), 212 
Maximian (286-305), 146, 152, 172, 173, 

179, 182, 184 
Maximinus (235-38), 125 
Nero (54-68), 51, 75, 76, 78, 79, 85, 87, 

130, 269 
Otto I (Great) (936-73), 251 
Otto III (983-1002), 258 
Philip II, Augustus (France), (1180-1223), 

296 
Philip II (Spain) (1556-98), 551 
Phocas (602-10), 52, 213, 214 
Probus (276-82), 142 
Robert II (996-1031), 265 
Septimus Severus (193-211), 125, 126, 128 
Theodosius (sole Emperor) (394-95), 198, 

199 
Tiberius (14-37), 63, 79 
Titus (79-81), 100 

Trajan (98-117), 78, 104, 105, 108, 130 
Valentinian I (West) (364-75), 186 
Valerian (253-60), 125, 138, 141, 142 


Abel, 315, 565, 568, 752, 786, 883, 892, 
905, 913, 923, 950, 979, 1011, 1033, 
1044, 1048, 
Abelard, Peter, 276, 292, 293 
Abimelech, 1044 

Abraham, 12, 22, 580, 752, 770, 812, 
817, 828, 830, 836, 850, 892, 903, 907, 
908, 910, 920, 952, 971, 986, 999, 
1017, 1031, 1044, 1048, 1074, 1079 
Abraham, martyred, 554 
Absalom, 695, 748 
Achan, 892 

Adam, 720, 755, 770, 784, 787, 788, 793, 
794, 796, 804, 810, 820, 824, 828, 
829, 916, 918, 921, 963, 971, 998, 
1011, 1015, 1024, 1076 
Adam and Eve, 377, 378 
Adamites, 296 
Addtess to worldly-minded, and to 

young and old, 14 
Adeodatus, 204 
Adelphius, received, 125 
Advice to youth, 646-650 
Aedesius, drowned, 181 
Aeneas, 302 
African Council, 238 
Agamemnon, 353 

Agapitus, drowned, (A.D. 223), 130 
Agathonica, (A.D.168), 104, 114 
Agathopus, drowned, 181 
Agrippa, 1 100 
Ahab, 609 

Aix la Chapelle, 269, 288, 305, 320, 588 
Albericus, 300 
Albert of Gaul, 229, 230 
Albigenses, began, 271, 282, 283 

Bumed, 305, 307, 308 

Called Albi, 288, 304; Albigeols, 265 

Confession of, 285 

Countless perish, 313 

Decrees against, 316, 317 

Died, 309, 310 

Distinction of, 300-306 

Examination given, 312 

Lived in England, 309 

Same as Waldenses, 306, 309 

Wholesale martyrdom, 304 
Albinus, teacher, 224 
Albion, baptized, 224 
Alcibiades, (A.D. 179), 104, 117 
Alcimus on baptism, 202, 209, 210 
Alexander, burned (A.D. 253), 133 
Alexander, torn (A.D. 263), 141 
Alexander of Jerusalem (A.D. 247), 131 
Alexander of Phrygia (A.D. 172), 104 
Alexander, the Greek, (A.D. 179), 104, 

118 
Alexandrinus, writer, 100 
Alexandrinus, Theophilus, 208 
Alfuard, 268 
Algerus, 261 
Alipius, 204 
Almaricus, 314 
Aloida, 244 
Alsace, 44, 703, 1126 
Altisidorensis, 265, 307, 308 
Altzey Mandate, 437 
Alva, Duke of, 758, 1095 
Alzeiter, Christian, 444 
Amalek, 850, 855, 857, 892 
Amaziah, 361 
Ambrose, 204, 597, 632, 660, 708, 790 

On baptism, 159 
Amkers, Frijn, 465 
Amman, martyred, 186 
Ammonaris (two), beheaded (A.D. 253), 

134 
Ammonius, died, 185 
Amphilochius, wrote, 162 
Amos, 12, 357 
Amsterdam, 27, 44, 498, 474, 477, 483, 

501, 504, 535, 538, 568, 593, 619, 
738, 763, 764, 779, 797, 823, 831, 832, 
833, 841, 844, 872, 876, 945, 1108, 
1119, 1124, 1125, 1132, 1133, 1136n, 
1139 

Anabaptist, 16, 17, 18, 278, 296, 324, 
326, 330, 365, 428, 438, 442, 500, 

502, 519, 536, 539, 546, 547, 552, 568, 
569, 596, 610, 616, 630, 660, 736, 
738, 763, 764, 774, 775, 776, 778, 
779, 780, 781, 782, 783, 785, 786, 


General Index 

Compiled by Ira D. Landis 

787, 789, 791, 792, 795, 796, 797, 
798, 871, 875, 910, 945, 962, 1007, 
1012, 1019, 1021, 1054, 1056, 1058, 
1060, 1061, 1062, 1063, 1089, 1094, 
1095, 1100, 1101, 1103, 1106, 1110, 
1113, 1115, 1117, 1119, 1122, 1123, 
1125, 1130, 1131, 1132 

Condemned, 195, 1105 

Churches in Holland, 1108 

Church older than Catholic, 632 

Name, 63 

Practice and conditions, 1130, 1131 

Name odious, 1134 

Not "Ana," 1089 

Pernicious leaven, 1136 
Anabaptists, Edict against 

Berne, 1130 

Charles V, 442, 1122, 1123 

Constantius, 191 

Honorius and Theodosius, 191, 198 

Theodoric, 204 

Theodosius, 190 

Zurich, 414 
Ananias and Sapphira, 605, 749, 855, 

857, 940 
Ananias (Paul), 1040 
Anasasius, 246 
Anastasius, baptized, 216 
Andrew, crucified (A.D. 70), 111., 87 
Andrew, read first Mass, 516 
Andrew and Guillemetti, 321 
Andronicus, slain (A.D. 70), 86, 146-152 
Angelonius, 232 
Anobert, charged, 229 
Ansbert, 250, 251 
Anselm's writings, 259-261 
Anthimus, beheaded, 175 
Anthonis, beheaded, 583 
Anthoniss, Hendrick, sentenced, 536 
Anthony the Hermit, 339 
Anti-Catholic sacrament, 216, 536, 597- 
610, 631, 667, 668, 774-798, 937, 938, 
1024-1026, 1072 
Antichrist, Pope was, 345, 346, 445 
Antichrist, rise of, 726 

Throne of, 313 

Works of, 271 

Many, 672 
Antioch, died, 611 
Antiochus, king, 748, 1097 
Antopas, burned (A.D. 93), 111., 94, 95 
Antwerp, 500, 523, 554, 563, 568, 569, 
583, 594, 618, 622, 624, 633, 640- 
644, 652, 655, 704, 706-708, 711, 
725, 762, 818, 819, 845, 848, 850, 
871, 875, 877, 945, 947, 965, 979- 
981, 983, 984, 987, 989, 992, 1036, 
1037, 1039, 1043, 1047, 1051 
Anysia, slain, 185 
Apeldoren, Hendrick Dircksz, 44 
Apocrypha, Jerome on, 284 

Disowned, 274 
Apollinaries, martyred (A.D. 70), 94 
Apollonia, burned (A.D. 252), 133 
Apostate, 1072 
Apostolic, 393 

Apostolic succession, 228, 320, 365, 366 
Apostolics, 275, 276, 278, 293, 294 
Apphian, drowned, 180 
Apselamus, Peter, burned, 183 
Aquila, slain (A.D. 70), 86 
Aquila of Alexandria, 126 
Aquilina, martyred, 12, 184 
Aquimas, 300 

Arabian, persecutors at, 232 
Arabians, 255 
Ardens, Radulph, 267 
Ares, martyred, 183 
Arethas, martyred, 212 
Argimirus, 245 
Arian persecution, 211 
Ariares, 294 

Aristarchus, slain (A.D. 70), 85 
Aries, 273, 320 

Arnobius on baptism, 125, 153, 154 
Arnold, burned, 292, 293, 296 
Arnold, burned, 354 

Martyred, 211, 212 

Taught, 274 
Arnoldists, 277, 297, 298 
Arnulph, baptizes, 215 
Ascholius, Bishop, 162 
Asterius, crucified, 144 
Aston, John, 332 

1151 


Astyages, 88 
Ater, burned, 253 
Athanasius, 153, 155, 156, 792 
Attalus, roasted (A.D. 172), 104, 115 
Augurius, burned (A.D. 261), 140 
Augustine, 103, 204, 597, 632, 660, 708, 

790, 940, 1085 
Augustine's sons baptized, 170 
Augustyn, 665, 991 
Aurea, executed, 245 
Aurelian Emperor, 142 
Ausibius, early convert, 52, 66 
Austria, 328, 330, 331, 341, 349, 350, 

446-472 
Auxentius, martyred, 185 
Avignon, 320, 321, 332 
Avoidance, 32, 33, 37, 43, 690, 809, 975 


Babel, 960 

Babylas, executed (A.D. 254), 134 

Babylon, 336, 862, 872, 954, 992, 1002, 

1056 
Babylonian whore, 330, 336, 775 
Backter, Wm., 348 
Baden, 1089 
Baleus, 309, 342 

Baltic Sea countries, 440 die in. 333 
Baptism, 153-171 
Baptism, on, 1st century, 63-67 

2nd century, 100-104 

3rd century, 118-125 

4th century, 153-171 

5th century, 187-197 

6th century, 201-209 

7th century, 213-217 

8th century, 220-227 

9th century, 232-240 

10th century, 247-254 

11th century, 259-264 

12th century, 270-290 

13th century, 300-303 

14th century, 321-327 

15th century, 334-340 

16th century, 363-373, 396-398 

17th century, 30, 36, 40 

Abelard, Peter, 274 

Ado Travirensis, 263 

Albinus, 224 

Alcimus, 202 

Alexander, 303 

Alexandrius, Theophilus, 208 

Algenis, 261 

Amalarius Fortunatus, 222 

Ambrose, 159 

Angelomus, 232, 296 

Ansbert, 250 

Anselm, 259, 260 

Apostles, 62-65 

Arnold of Brescia, 274 

Arnobius, 125 

Arnulph, Bishop of Lyons, 274 

Athanasius, 156 

Augustine, 365 

Anthymius, 194 

Aysess, Reytse, 995, 999 

Baronius, 306 

Basilius, 162, 163 

Bassila, 119 

Bede, 221, 222 

Berengarus, 247, 262 

Beroldus, 263 

Bohemius, 273 

Boosers, 667 

Brandanus, Detrius, 209 

Bruis, Peter de, 301 

Brunechildis, 207 

Bruno, Bishop of Algiers, 262 

Brute, Waltz, 325 

Buchard of Worms, 262 

Canons on, 158 

Carnotensis, Juo, 263 

Cassiodoris, 202, 203 

Celestius, 191 

Cellanius, 1116 

Charles, Bishop of Milan, 326 

Chrysostom, 164, 165 

Clement, 67, 103 

Clement Alexandrinus, 100, 102, 103 

Clodovius, 197 

Corneliss, 535 

Council of Paris, 237 


1152 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Cyril of Alexandria, 192 

Cyril of Jerusalem, 120 

D'Auchy, Jacques, 595-596 

Dionysius, 100 

Donatus, 154, 155, 208 

English, 1014, 1015 

Ephrem, Syres, 160 

Epiphanius, 171 

Eubulus, 162 

Euchenius, 193 

Evagrius, 193, 1213 

Fathers, 64 

Faustus, Regiensus, 193 

Fortunatus, Arnalarius, 222, 223 

Franck, Sebastian, 302 

Fulbertus of Carnotanses, 254 

Fulgentius, 196 

Gasteiger, 372 

Gelasius, 194 

Gerhard, John, 209 

Germanus, 221 

Gerrits, Jan, 683 

Giselbert, 248, 255 

Glock, 1025 

Gratianus, 102, 235 

Gregory of Nazienzas, 156, 162 

Gregory of Nyssa, 160 

Haimo, 233, 234, 241 

Hendrickss, Jan, 935-937 

Henry of Toulouse, 274, 301 

Heymon, 232 

Hilarius, 189 

Hildebert, 274 

Hincmar, 238 

Hogendorf, Christopher, 1116 

Holmeyster, Sebastian, 1116 

Honorius, 193 

Hubmair, Balthasar, 465 

Huldricus, 238 

Imbroeck, Thomas, 367-371 

Isidoris, 216 

Jacob the Chandler, 783-785 

Jan, 524 

Jerome, 168, 169 

Jesus, 64, 260 

John the Baptist, 63, 64 

Justin, 119 

Justinus, 101 

Justus, Ongelitanus, 206 

Kuyck, John Wouterss van, 372 

Lactantius, Birmianus, 156, 157 

Leo II, 216 

Leonilla, 121 

Luther and Lutheran divines, 1117 

Lydius, D. B., 338 

Marcellinus, 719 

Martin, St., 153 

Maximus, 191 

Mehrning, 154, 157 

Mell, 204, 226, 259, 300, 322, 338 

Monica, 151 

Montanus, 204 

Nazarus, 194 

Neocesarea, 153, 158 

Nicea, 151 

Nicephoris, Calistus, 326, 366 

Nolanus, 195 

Olman, van, 537 

Olympiodoris, 106 

Optatus, Milevitanus, 161 

Origen, Adamantius, 121 

Pamelius, Jacob, 215 

Pancratius, 179 

Panten, Bartholomew, 372 

Paschasius, 239 

Perkins, Gull., 209 

Peter, 206 

Peter, Bishop of Apamea, 40 

Peiters, Jan, 1015, 1016 

Pomorius, J., 216 

Pontus, 119 

Primasius, 196 

Probus of Tullo, 303 

Prosperus, 190 

Rabanus, Maurus, 232 

Reformed preachers, 1116, 1117 

Reinenies, 279 

Remlquis, 240 

Roore, Jacob de, 371, 787-789 

Rupert, Tuiciensis, 272, 273 

Sagarellas, Gerard, 302 

Salvlan of Massilla, 194 

Schut, 654 

Scotus, Johannes, 246, 247 

Sedulius, 189 

Severus, Alexandrius, 207 

Simons, Joriaen, 564 

Smaragdus, 251 

Smuel, 476, 477 


Strasburg, reformed, 1116, 1117 
Swinderby, William, 325 
Synesius, Syrenus, 188 
Tertullian, 118-120 
Theodocrat, 190 
Theophilact, 251-254 
Theophilus, Alexandrinus, 208 
Thessalonian Church, 366 
Twisck, P. J., 226, 240 
Verbeeck, 651 
Verkindert, Joost, 857, 858 
Victor, Vincent, 187 
Victorinus, 181 
Victorius, 157 
Vivecomes, D. G., 273 
Vives, Lndovicus, 273, 365 
Vleckwicfc, Herman, 187-189 
Walafrid, 232 
Waldensos, 271, 280, 281 
Wege, Jacob van, 973 
Wyckliffe, John, 324 
Zoroaras, 206 
Baptism, adult, 153-171 
Augustine enjoyed, 169 
Benefits of, 165 
Called circumcision, 171 
Carthage, 193 

Christian, from Pentecost, 63-66 
Commanded and practiced, 64 
Extracts from history, 339 
Frequency, 683 
Heretical views of, 223, 322 
Importance, 65 
Infant, forced, 448 
Infant has no instruction or faith, 303 
Infant, introduced, 118, 119, 170 
Infant, obligatory, 214 
Infant, opposed by Victor, 187 
Infant, refused, 224 
Infant, unknown early, 104 
Instruction prior, 237 
Instruction six years, 153 
Invisible elements in, 134 
Kinds of, four, 234, 241 
Kinds of, water, 153 
Reasons for infant, 397, 1116, 1117 
Roman practice favorable to, 223 
Of faith, 251 
Of Jews, 192, 207, 215 
Of tears, 250 
Persons and things associated with, 

224, 225 
Place of, 611 
Principal points of, 301 
Required of catechumens, 224 
Scripturally practiced, 340 
Slaves, 237 
Time of, 171, 216, 224, 263, 264, 326, 

366 
Vow, 993 

Baptism of Ambrose, 159 

Anastasius, 214 

Anthymius, 194 

Athanasius, 155 

Augustine, 169 

Basilla, 1.23 

Brunechildis, 207 

Caesarecc, 214 

Clodovus and people, 197 

Constanttae, 171 

Ephiphanius, 171 

Fusca, 154 

Heringild, 221 

Hilarius, 157 

Jerome, 167 

Jesus, 64 

John, 63, 64 

Martin, St., 159 

Monica, 158 

Namesius, 254 

Mozarius, 194 

Nectarias, 162 

Nemesis, 123 

Olympius, 254 

Pancratius, 123 

Placidus and family, 254 

Pontus, 123 

Sissinius, 194 

Synesius, Syrenus, 188 

Taborites, 337 

Theodosius, 171 

Victorinus, 188 

Virion, Marcellinus and Justin, 123 

Wittikind, 224 

Zeno of Verona, 215 
Barcma, 1069, 1089, 1103 
Barbelius and sister Barbara, slain, 

104, 10B, 112 
Barnabas, burned (A.D. 64), 111., 75, 76 


Barnabas, St., 326 
Baronius, 247, 269, 306 
Barriers, Waldenses burned, 315 
Barsaemeus of Edessa (A.D. 108), 104. 

112 
Bartholomew, beheaded (A.D. 70), 88 
Basil, 204 

Basileus, martyred, 186 
Basilides, beheaded, 128, 204 
Basilius, on baptism, 163 

Sells out, 162 
Basle, 429, 1127 
Bastewart, 428 
Bathsheba, 1015 
Bavaria, 432, 473 
Bedenborgh, on antichrist, 325 
Beghards, 323, 332 
Beguines, 323, 332 
Bellarmine, 269 

Benjamin of Persia, martyred, 99 
Berengarius, 246, 269, 270, 278, 294 

Followers burned, 292 
Bernhard of Clairvaux, 293, 294 
Berne, 703, 1122, 1128-1131, 1134, 1139 

Decree (1671), 1125 

Edicts against Anabaptists, 1130, 1136 

Persecuted, 700, 1125 

Prison conditions, 1126 
Bertherius, charged, 229 
Bertram, 232, 237 
Bertrand, Nicholas, 308 
Beukelss, Jan, Munster leader, 779 
Biblis, martyred, 184 
Birinus, catechizes, 215 
Blandina, tortured (A.D. 172), 116 
Blesensus, Peter, 276 
Blessing of God of Patriarchs, 950, 967, 
984, 1034, 1041, 1046, 1047, 1051, 
1053 
Blood of Martyrs, 360, 535, 591 
Bohemia, 323, 324, 326, 328, 332 
Bohemian Brethren, 349, 350 
Bohemius, John, 273, 326 
Bom, Comelis, 44 
Borsel, Peter van, 44 
Boxhom, 310, 311 
Brabant (Netherlands), 1070, 1074 
Braght, P. Van, 1139 
Breda, 929 
Brixen, 448 

Broekhuysen, William, 44 
Bruges, 655 
Bruenn, Moravia, 428 
Brugh, Beetken van, 655 
Bruis, 301 
Bruis, Peter de, burned, 273n, 274, 279, 

290, 293, 294, 309 
Brulifer, Stephen, 350 
Brunechildis, baptized, 207 
Bruno, 269 
Bruschius, 333 
Brussels, 582, 992, 1093, 1094 
Brute, Walter, 325, 326 
Brute, William, 341 
Bucer, Martin, 1116 
Bulgarian tyrant, 241, 242, 265 
Bullinger, H., on baptism, 208 
Burgundy, 1125 
Business forbidden, 911 
Bzovius, 216, 319 


Caesarea, baptized, 214 

Caesarius of Hiesterbach, 296 

Cahors, 288 

Cain, 12, 21, 357, 729, 730, 748, 786, 

803, 883, 892, 918, 949, 950, 1044, 

1048, 1097 
Caleb and Joshua, 569, 658, 707, 821, 

856, 907, 908, 920, 923, 928, 967, 

1032, 1046, 1052 
Calignon, 290 
Callistus, 325 
Calvin, 364, 1095 
Calvinism, 324, 780, 786, 789, 860, 1010, 

1020, 1056, 1094, 1102, 1106 
Cambray, 319 
Candle light service, 930 
Capitaneis, Albert de, 276 
Capito, Wolfgang, 1116 
Carloman, baptized, 224 
Carlstadt, Andrew, 1117 
Carmelites, 335 

Carnotanses, Fulbertus, baptized, 254 
Carnotensis, Juo, 263 
Carpus, executed (A.D. 70), 94 
Carpus, died (A.D. 168) 104, 114 
Casamus, Nicholas, 338 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1153 


Cassian, tortured, 176 

Cassiodoris, on baptism, 202, 203 

Catharina, beheaded, 183 

Catharists, 277 

Catharites, 296, 297 

Catholic orders, 335, 341 

Catholicism, corrupt, 939 

Cavia, 1094 

Cellarius, 1116 

Charles' bloody decrees, 935 

Cecilia, 130 

Cecilius, Capella, 126 

Celestius, 191 

Cesenas, Michael, 325 

Chaignards, 277 

Charles of Milan, 326 

Charles V, edict oi, 442 

Persecutor, 551 
Chartetius, Alanus, 348 
Chassanion, 305, 308 
Childbirth in prison, 985 
Childlessness better, 710 
Child named — Jewish, heathen? 273 
Children, unbelieving, 921 
Children to abjure, 316 
Chorus, German persecutor, 142 
Chosen of God, 648 
Christ or Barabbas, 584 
Christian in prison, 1124 
Christianity in Europe, 727-730 
Christians, non-militaristic, 156 

Martyred— 200,000, 58 
Christminded, 16 
Chrysostom, John, baptized, 159 
Chrysostom, on baptism, 104, 153 

Persecution, 164, 166 

On swearing, 166 

On nonresistance, 166 

On antichrist, 167 

Death, 167 
Church, apostate, 44-46 

Called Christminded, 16 

Commanded to search house to 
house, 1137 

(of) Christ, 392-394 

Established, 21-24 

(of) God, 21, 60 

Holy, 285 

New Testament founded, 393 

Obscured, 24-26 

Service of, 100, 929 

Time: at night, 1137 

Universal, 21 
Claess, Jan, 15 
Claessen, Claes, 44 
Claessz, Isaac, 44 
Claudius, crucified, 144 
Claudius, Emperor, persecutor, 73 
Claudius, Herminianus, 126 
Clemens, Alexandrinus, 67, 73, 100, 

102, 103 
Clement, 67 

Clement of Scotland, 111., 229, 230, 231 
Clemongis, Nicholas, 325 
Cleves, 525 

Clodovius and two sons baptized, 197 
Cluniacensis, Peter, 274, 303 
Coals of fire, 1096 
Cobrijsz, Hans, 44 
Cointha, stoned, 133 
Cologne, 296, 578, 582, 654, 688, 696, 
702 

Burnings, 6 

Lords of, 367 
Coming of Christ — Judgment, 24n, 33, 

37, 38, 43, 44 
Communion, true, 806, 807 
Confessions, Albigenses and Wal- 
denses, 285-287 

Alewijns, Hendrick, 750-757 

Ancient faith, 313 

At baptism, 233 

Of 1600, by Peter Jan Twisck, 373-490 

Of 1626, 1107, 1108 

Of 1627, 26-33 

Of 1630, by Jan Centsen of Amster- 
dam, 33-38 

Of 1632, Adrian Cornelius of 
Dordrecht, 38-44 

Of 1658, 1124 

Of Claes de Praet, 554-560 

Of Claesken, 611-616 

Of Executioner, 101, 106 

Of Jacob de Roore, 804-809 

Of Jacob van den Wege, 969-975 

Of Terwoort Pieterss, 1017-1019 
Corrupted writings and councils, 301 
Councils of, Agathe, 201 

Aries, 224 

Christian, at Paris, 232 


Constantinople II, 202, 205 

Ilerda, 201 

Laodicea, 237 

Laodicea and Elibertum, 153 

Neocesarea, 158 

Nicea, 155, 156 

Paris, 235, 237 

Home, 269 

Trent, 1066 

Toulouse, 316 

Tours, 269 

Vercellis, 246 

Versailles, 269 
Communion cup, 399 
Comists, 277 
Congregations burned, 111., (A.D. 237) 

131, 132 
Conrad of Gmund, 289 
Consolati, the comforted, 298 
Constance, 433 

Constance, Council of (A.D. 1414), 56 
Constantiensis, Bertokeus, Roman, 270 
Constantine, baptized, 154, 171 
Consubstantiation, 187, 190 
Contractus, Herman, 267 
Converted from Catholicism, 925, 939 
Cornelissz, Adriaen, 44 
Cornelissz, Anthonis, 44 
Cornelius, 222, 806, 925, 948, 1025 
Corruption of 10th century, 249 
Cottarellt, 7000 slain, 297 
Cotterellos, 277 

Covenant, baptismal greater than mar- 
riage, 710 
Craus, Paul, burned, 338, 348 
Creation, fall and redemption, 38, 39 

Guido on, 59 
Credentes, 298 
Creeds, Apostolic, 27 

First, 27-33 

Second, 33-38 

Third, 38-44 
Cf. confessions, 804 
Cresconius, charged on baptism, 191 
Croock, Jan de, Friar, 490 
Crown, 507 

Crusades against Albigenses, 304 
Cyprian, 602 
Cyrenia, martyred, 182 
Cyril of Alexandria, on baptism, 192 
Bread and wine, 192 
Faith, 192 

On Nestorianism, 199 
Cyril of Jerusalem, 123, 124 
Cyrilla, martyred, 185 


Decrees of, Anabaptist, 414, 1063, 1101 

English, 341, 450 

Frederick II contra Waldenses and 
Albigenses, 316, 317 

Ilphonsus, £ing of Aragon, contra 
Waldenses, 298 

Menno Simons, contra, 466 

Pope Leo II, 286 

Renewed, 551-553 

Roman Catholic, 412 

To introduce the rules of the inquisi- 
tion, 328, 329, 501 
Dadoes received, 125 
Dagoberts' son, catechumen, 213 
Daniel, 13, 223, 357, 569, 606, 647, 652, 
698, 748, 854, 873, 875, 895, 903, 918, 
920, 984, 986, 1053 
David, 12, 22, 751, 794, 825, 892, 903, 
906, 908, 923, 1015, 1017, 1022, 1023 

David's tears, 712 

And Goliath, 569, 1032 

Flees Saul, 357 

Not innocent, 361 

Neck broken, 549 
Deacons in Mennonite Church, 590 
Dean of Kestenne, 542 
Dean of Polet, 542, 582 
Deans of Ronse, 537, 541-543, 582, 1096 

Miserable end, 1095 
Decrease and Decay of Apostolical 

Church, 726 
Delft, 531 
Demas, 361, 609 
Demetrius, died, 185 
Denmark, kings, 241, 256 
Departure from faith, reasons for, 672, 

678 
Derthuin, charged, 229 
Didius, died, 185 
Dionysia, beheaded (A.D. 253), 134 


Dionysius, 364 

Dionysius the Areopagite (A.D. 70), 104, 

246, 247 
Dionysius, banished (A.D. 260), 139 
Dionysius, wrote, 122 
Dioscorus, burned (A.D. 253), 134 
Dircksz, Abraham, 44 
Dircksz, Claes, 44 
Discipline, Church, 404 
Dispensations, five, 21 
D. J. V., wrote, 273 
Doctrines, 19 
Doctrines, stable, 22 
Dominic, preaches, 314 
Dominicus, condemned, 428 
Donatus, baptized, 153 
Donatus of Carthage, 154 
Donotian, beheaded, 186 
Donuina, beaten, 144, 145 
Dortrecht, 27, 44, 345, 550, 575, 586, 587, 

871, 897, 899, 907, 916, 918, 925, 

926, 930, 1132, 1133 
D.P.'s in Palatinate, 1126, 1127 
Dulcinus of Novaria, 321 
And wife, 329 


Ecbert's account, 296 
Educated ministry, 395 
Egystus, martyred (A.D. 70), 94 
Eight persons burnt, 300 
Eighty sentenced to fire, 313 
Eleazar (Maccabaean), 13, 357, 567, 

855, 895, 953, 954, 960, 964, 1049 
Elentherus et al (A.D. 120), 109 
Elias, martyred, 183 
Elijah, 12, 36, 358, 569, 748 
Elijah and 7000, 233 
Elisha, 12 
Eli's sons, 695 
Emden, 555 
Emilas, slain, 245 
Emilius, 306 

Encouragement, 564, 567 
Encouragement to steadfastness, 520, 

521 
End of world, 726 
England, 1046 
England relief, 1132 
Enjoyment in tribulation, 570-572 
Ennathas, burned, 183 
Enoch, 22 

Enthymius as Bishop, 207 
Epaphras, slain (A.D. 70), 86 
Ephrem, wrote, 160 
Epimachus, burned, 133, 253 
Epiphanius, baptized, 170 
Epipodius, beheaded, 104, 117, 179 
Epolonius, executed, 134, 254 
Erasmus, 793, 794 
Erigena, Johannes, 246, 247 
Erimgard, 267 
Ermoigus, 256, 257 

Esau, 647, 648, 695, 708, 835, 909, 918 
Esdras, 648 
Esperonists, 277 
Esther, 649 
Eternal security, 384 
Ethiopia, 90 

Ethiopian Church (A.D. 110), 105 
Ethiopian and Philip, 65, 100, 235, 272, 

948 
Eubulus, 162 
Eucratis, 178 

Eugenia, beheaded, 256, 257 
Eugenus, died, 185 
Eulalia, burned, 111., 176-178 
Eulogius, burned, 140, 261 
Eunomians, 205, 294 
Euns, bumed (A.D. 253), 133 
Euphratesia, 184 
Euplius, beheaded, 178 
Eusebius, Pamphilius, 128, 130, 131, 135, 

183, 233, 602 
Eutichius, martyred, 228 
Euxperia, baptized, 254 
Evagrinus, 213 

Excommunication, 807, 808, 974 
Exodus to Palatinate, 1127 
Exselt, William Jansz van, 46 


Fall, real cause, 696 
Fasting, Jerome, 169 
Fathers' writings not on par, 274 
Faustina and Jacobita (A.D. 120), 104, 
109 


1154 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Faustus, died, 185 

Fear God Always, 504, 507 

Feet Washing, 31, 36, 42, 399 

Felician torn by animals, 180 

Felicitas and seven sons (A.D. 1G4), 
104, 109-111 

Felicitas, martyred (A.D. 201), 127 

Felix, 1100 

Felix, beheaded, 179 

Females, uncircumcised, 370 

Festus, 1100 

Flanders, 447, 502, 539, 547, 553, 582- 
585, 616, 620, 631, 651, 652, 655, 
656, 663, 665, 666, 686, 722, 723, 
736, 740, 774, 781, 818, 845, 870, 
875, 896, 947, 961, 962, 965, 968, 969, 
977, 991, 992, 1026, 1063, 1070, 1096 

Flemish, 344 
Put to death, 297 

Florentin, martyred, (A.D. 270), 141 

Fortunata, martyred, 184 

Fortunatus, Amalarius, 222, 223 

Forty women, martyred, 186 

Forty youths, burned, 182 

Four banished for orthodoxy, 291 

Four priests, martyred, 937 

Fourteen burned at Orleans, 111., 265- 
267 

Foxe, John, 342, 348, 498, 1023, 1024 

Franoais the carpenter, 759 

France, Waldenses scattered over, 289, 
290, 301 

Francis, 232, 328, 341, 786, 940 

Franck, Sebastian, 131, 226, 254, 429, 
336 

Franks, 242 

Fratricelli, 277, 321 

French, 24 burned at Paris, 304 

Friesland, 454, 481, 641, 765, 779, 814 

Friesland judges, 447 

Friesland, West, 443 

Fructuosus, burned (A.D. 261), 140 

Frueder, George, betrayer, 431 

Fuhrman, Hous, 366 

Fulgentius, on baptism, 196 
On oppression, 201 

Furnace, burning, 931 

Fusca and Maura, baptized, 153, 154 


Gabriel, 947 

Gaius of Alexandria, banished (A.D. 

260), 139 
Gallio, 84 
Gallius, 1100 
Garret for worship, 847 
Gasteiger, Christian, 372 
George, John, drowned, 703 
Gerard, leader, 294, 295 
Gerardus, 6n 
Germanicus, devoured (A.D. 170), 104, 

114 
Germany, 341, 349 
Getulicus, martyred (A.D. 136), 109 
Ghent, 449, 488, 493, 494, 502, 549, 555 
Gideon, 754, 842, 904, 906, 922 
Gijsbertsz, Mels, 44 
Giselbert, 249, 255 
God, justices of, 9 

Godfathers, at time of Augustine, 104 
Golanduch, died, 212 
Goslar, 267 

Gospel, world wide, 162 
Govertsz, Tobias, 44 
Graff, Harmen op den, 44 
Gratianus, a nonresistor, 100, 102 
Gravenhage, 441 
Great Britain, 91 
Greece, 95 

Gregory of Nazianzus, baptized, 162 
Gregory of Turin, baptized, 215 
Gregory of Nyssa, 160, 790 
Greizinger, Offrus, 448, 449 
Grljspert, Piter, 44 
Groningensis, 350 
Grubenheimers, 277 
Guenfelder, Henry, 340 
Guido, 59, 299 
Guitode, I., 339 
Gysius, quoted, 131 

H 

Habakkuk, 877, 889, 895, 953, 1053, 1070 

Habdarrhaghman IV, 255 

Haer, David ter, 44 

Hager, Conrad, 332 

Hague, 577, 937 

Haimo, 232, 233, 238, 241 


Haimus, on swearing, 166 

Halmael, Israel van, 44 

Hamburg, 945, 947, 1102 

Hannibal, 1059 

Hansz, Anthony, 44 

Harlem, 27, 44, 563, 565, 657, 844, 929, 

962, 1(170, 1074, 1082, 1132, 1133 
Hebrews, Ihree children, 569, 647, 691, 

698, 748, 854, 903, 918, 986 
Hector, 353 
Heidelberg, 1126 
Helias, 245 

Hendricks, Wigger, forsakes office, 442 
Henricians, 277, 278 
Henricus of Lyons, (A.D. 223), 130 
Henry in Sweden, 268 
Henry of Sens, 293 
Henry of Toulouse, 274, 278, 292, 293, 

301, 309 
Heracles, Alexandria, 122 
Heraclides, beheaded (A.D. 203), 128 
Heribert, burned, 265, 267 
Heritage, the best, 646 
Hermagoras, pastor, 77 
Hermagoras, martyred (A.D. 70), 94 
Herman, N., apostatized, 818, 819 
Herman of Mistelgen, 289 
Hermans, bones burned 20 years after, 

321 
Hernias, received, 125 
Hero, beheaded (A.D. 203), 128 
Herod, 81, 1097 
Herod, ignominious death, 611 
Heron, burned (A.D. 253), 134 
Heyde, Jacob van der, 44 
Heymon, contended, 237 
Heynes, Richst, maltreated, 481 
Hieremias, slain, 245 
Hilarius, wrote, 153, 157, 793 
Hildebert, 270, 274 
Hincmar, 238, 239, 245, 246 
Hoffser, Juerg, executed, 1129 
Hogendorf, Christopher, 1116 
Holiness, 260, 286 

Holiness to follow baptism, 235n, 237 
Holiness in Waldenses, 288, 289 
Holland, 726, 731, 740, 741, 764, 765, 

779, 797 
Conditions in, 763, 846, 929, 931, 936, 

977, 1005, 1020, 1065, 1108, 1132, 

1133 
Holmeyster, Sebastian, 1116 
Holofernes, 818, 878 
Holy kiss, 120 
Holy martyrs of the New Covenant 

(Dutch poem), 61 
Holy Spirit the Teacher, 805 
Homer, 353 
Honoricus, 111., 200 
Honorius, 16 

Hooghvelt, Jan Hendricksen, 44 
Horens, Daniel, 44 
Horgerberg, 1118, 1120, 1124 
Huldricus, 238 
Humiliati, 297 

Hundred martyred at Strasburg, 310 
Huss, John, 278, 364 

13-point tn-eed, 336, 337 

Disciple of Wickliffe, 324, 325, 364, 

365 
Hutterites, faith, 366 

Called Moravians, 366 
Hymeneus, and Alexander, 974 
Hytacus, 9 L 

I 

Idiota, 238 

Ignatius, devoured (A.D. Ill), 111., 105- 

107 
Iliad, Homer's, 353 
Illyricus, M. Flacius, 320, 325, 330, 331 

332 
Image of God, 384 
Imbroeck, Thomas van, 367 
Imprisonment conditions described, 350 
Incarnation, 1086 
India, 901, 939, 940 
Induti, 308 
Infants to answer, 231 
Ingolstadt, 1062, 1063 
Inn, The, 455 
Innsbruck, 563, 645, 1059 
Inquisition, Articles for Recantation, 334 

Of believers, 319 

Contra Albigenses and Waldenses, 
299 

Cruel, 310 

Delivered to judges, 351 

Mode of, 328 

Netherlandish, 311 


Places of imprisonment, 350 

Rules for, 328, 329 

Spanish, 350, 351 
Insabbathi, 277 
Invocation (Van Braugh), 5 
Irene and two sisters, burned, 184 
Ireneus, beheaded (A.D. 210), 129 
Isaac, 812, 817, 828, 830, 850, 952, 977 
, 986, 1017, 1031, 1044, 1048, 1079, 
Isaiah, 357 
Ishmaelites, 729 
Isidore, burned (A.D. 253), 134 

On Matt. 16:18, 222 
Isidore of Seville, 245 
Isidorius, on swearing, 166 
Israel in Egypt, 8n 
Israel's deliverance, 569 
Italy, 98 


Jacob, 817, 830, 850, 903, 920 
Sons of, 950, 952, 977, 1004, 1017 
1036, 1044, 1079 

Jacobita, 104 

Jacobs, Jan, 44 

Jael and Sisera, 818, 1032 

James the Greater, beheaded. 111 T> 
73 ' 

James the Just, stoned, (A.D. 54), 111 , 74 
75, 917 

Jan van Leyden, 17 

Janss, Cornelis, 44 

Jansz, Jan, 44 

Januarius, beheaded, 182 

Jehoiakim, 748 

Jehoshaphat, 906 

Jephtha, 1031 

Jeremiah, 12, 359, 883, 1048 

Jericho, 892 

Jeroboam I, 748, 958 

Jerome, 153, 167, 337, 632, 708, 204, 790 
On Apocrypha, 284 

Jesus, martyred, 111., 67-69 

Jesus' brethren, 796 

Jesus Christ, names of, 827 

Jews by hundreds baptized, 214 

Jezebel, 1049, 1097 

Job, an example, 580, 709 

Job, 903, 920, 927, 1003 

Johannes of Floriax, 265 

John, Apostle, 949, 1032, 1077 

John, life and death, 111., (A.D. 97), 96, 

John Baptist, 32, 63, 64, 69, 70, 250, 

260, 272, 329, 357, 367, 748, 769, 

917, 920, 963, 999, 1014 
John Mark, 357 

John of Cordova, tormented, 111., 243 
John of Ferrara, 336 
John of Lyons, 281 
John of Poland, 289 
Jonah, 815 
Joosten, Pieter, 44 
Joris, David, 542, 902 

False brother, 779 
Joseph, 803, 841, 950 
Joseph, husband of Mary, 796, 958, 1017 
Josephists, 297, 298 
Joshua, 753, 754 
Josiah, 598 

Joy in death, 591, 823, 893, 990, 1057 
Joy in suffering, 1036, 1061, 1074 
Judas, a, 487, 503, 531 
Judas, 609, 611, 688, 738, 806, 872, 875 

1059, 1089, 1090 
Judge of quick and dead, 995 
Judgment, last, 407, 408 
Judgment, reversed, 996 
Judith, 818, 878, 881, 952 
Julia, 130 

Julian, burned, 133 
Juliana, martyred, 182 
Julianas, slain (A.D. 100), 99 
Julitta and Quiricus, 181 
Julius, 130 

Junla, slain (A.D. 70), 86 
Juo, Bishop of Canuto, 263, 264 
Justinus, (A.D. 140), 100-102, 104, 111, 

112 
Justus, slain, 104, 108 
Justus, beheaded, 179 

K 

Keyser, Leonhard, 111., 339, 421 

Keyser, Pieter, 1136 

Knar, Leonard, 366 

Koenigsberg and Anabaptists, 1063 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1155 


Kollenkamp, Dirck Wonteresz, 44 

Koning, Isaac de, 44 

Korah, Dathan and Abiram, 733, 923 

Korink, C. de, 44 

Krantz, Albert, 331 

Krentzheim, L., 330 

Kreynen, Weylm, 44 

Kropff, Christian, archivist, 1129 


Labor, honorable, 803 

Lactantius, Firmianus, 156, 130 

Lad of 13 years drowned, 256 

Landuno, John de, 332 

Laodicea, Church of, 850 

Last time, 1047 

Laurence, 296 

Laurentii, wrote, 308 

Lazarus, pit, 1052 

Leam to work, 950 

Leeuwarden, 442, 444, 472, 498, 501, 

546, 591, 610, 611, 616, 892, 1005 
Leonilla and 3 grandsons baptized 

(A.D. 224), 121 
Leoxides, 104 
Lethus of Alexandria, 126 
Leyden, 526, 765, 779, 929, 1132, 1133 
Libuga, 217 

Life formerly, now, 565, 566 
Light, covered, 245 

Lisoius, burned, and 13 others, 265-267 
Livius, Titus, 12 
Lollards, 277, 330, 334 

Articles of faith, 334, 335 
Lombardy, 318, 328 
Londoner, burned, 304 
Longobards, 211, 212, 218 
Lorraine, France, 343 
Lot, 233, 756, 771, 748, 862, 892, 914, 

984, 1016, 1044, 1098 
Louis of Clifford, 335 
Louis, a Waldensian, executed, 433 
Louis, Sir, strangled, 428 
Lucken, Andriesz Juo, 44 
Lucian, martyred, 185 
Lucius, executed (A.D. 144), 104, 109 
Lucianus, Bishop of Bellovaco, slain 

(A.D. 100), 99 
Luke, hanged, 111., (A.D. 93), 94, 95 
Luna, Peter de, 349 

Lutgerus, 217 

Lutherans, 566, 786, 1024, 1058, 1102, 

1117 
Luther, Martin, 339, 364, 598, 599, 600, 

1014, 1015, 1117 
Lydius, wrote, 217, 280, 338, 354n 
Lyonists, 277, 283 
Lyonnois, 277, 280, 281, 282, 284 
Lyons, 117 

M 

Macar, burned, 133 

Macarius, Felix and Verus, 152 

Maccabean mother, 710 

Maccabees, 567, 895 

Machtelken, 891 „„ 

Maerten the Walloon, beheaded, 569 

Magdeburg, centuries, 303 

Malchus, torn, 141 

Mamas, thrust, 142 

Mange, John, imprisoned, 703 

Manicheans, 267, 268 

Manicheans and Manes, 294 

Many Christians, burned, 296, 330 

Many Christians, imprisoned, 218 

Many Christians, killed, 297 

Maodatius, burned, 185 

Marah sweetened, 912, 961, 1064 

Marcella, burned, 128 

Marianus, martyred (A.D. 70), 94 

Marijnesz, Lieven, 44 

Marilus, torn, 126 

Marinus, beheaded, 140 

Mariolatry, 558, 559 

Marius, Victorius, on baptism, 157 

Mark, martyred, 111., (A.D. 64), 77, 78 

Maro, Virgilus, 12 

Marriage in church, 713, 890 

Marriage in own faith only, 37, 401 

Marsilius, 296 

Marsilius, Glabrio (A.D. 100), 99 

Martha, 646, 769, 947 

Martin, St., 357 

Martina, 130 

Martinlsts, 860 

Martlonilla, 184 

Martyrdom, modes of, 197, 200 


Martyred, hundreds daily in every city, 

173 
Martyrs, among Jews, Mohammedans, 

Catholics and Anabaptists, 180 
Martyr's glory, 1139-1141 
Martyrs, political, 1095 
Martyrs, 140 at Novaria, 330 
Mary, 793, 797, 858, 1022, 1023, 1044, 

1077, 1079 
Mass, unscriptural, 603, 938 
Massaeus, Christian, 309 
Maternus, martyred (A.D. 70), 94 
Matrimony, 120 

Matrimony, holy, 31, 32, 42, 36, 37 
Matthew, beheaded, 111., (A.D. 70), 92, 

357 
Maturus (A.D. 172), 116 
Maurice of Orange, granted religious 

liberty, 1090 
Mavimenus, Peter, 228 
Maximianus, slain (A.D, 100), 99 
Maximus, stoned, 136 
Mehrning, guoted, 123, 131, 204, 207, 

208, 213, 278, 302, 326, 338, 364 
Meister, Leonhard, 339, 413, 414 
Melchizedec, 315 
Mellinus, Abraham, 213, 303, 305, 316, 

320, 322, 323, 330, 332, 333, 336, 

342, 364 
Mennist, minister, 737n, 742, 774 
Mennists, 278, 322, 326, 724, 739, 740, 

832, 833, 834, 839 
Mennonists, 873, 874, 876, 962, 994, 995, 

997, 998, 1006, 1095, 1106, 1132, 

1134 
Mennonite minister, 969, 979, 982, 1056, 

1057, 1065, 1070," 1104, 1110, 1115, 

1118, 1119, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1125, 

1126 
Mentz, 350 

Mercurra, beheaded (A.D. 253), 134 
Meribah, 1064 
Merila, 324 
Merindol and Gabriere on Waldensian 

Faith, 285 
Metaphrastes catechizes, 215 
Metros, stoned, 132 
Micah, 357 

Micaiah, 609, 748, 941 
Michielsz, M., 44 
Middleborg, 1054, 1056, 1090, 1091 
Mikron, Martin, 1096 
Milan, 326 

Milevitanus, -wrote, 161 
Millen, bailiwick of, 496 
Ministerial aid, 815 
Ministry, 395 

Minorities, 5 point creed of, 323, 335 
Miraculous, 568, 894, 1069, 1089, 1093, 

1129 
Missions, (Jerome), 169 
Mohammedan, 232, 242, 244, 255 
Moir, Cornells de, 44' 
Monica, Augustine's mother, baptized, 

153 
Monks, 349 
Moranus, Peter, 306 
Montanists, 205 

Montanus, H., 273, 290, 324, 365 
Moon, blood, 320 
Morality of day, 620, 622 
Moravia, 365, 366, 431, 440, 453 
Moravian Brethren, 339 
Morgenstem, George, 349 
Moses, 121, 569, 649, 732, 733, 753, 850, 

904, 908, 915, 920, 939, 952, 1017, 

1032, 1079, 1084 
Moses, 212, 815, 892 
Mosselman, Jacob, 577 
Moyer, Pieter Jansz, 44 
Munich, Bavaria, 428, 1062 
Munster, 498, 593, 619, 779 
Munsterites, 17, 938, 946, 1012 
Mutius, H., wrote, 310 
Muntziger, John, 325 
Mythius, P., burned, 184 

N 

Naboth, 918 
Nadab and Abihu, 1014 
Narbonne, 273, 288, 309 
Narcissus, 130 
Nathan, 1015 
Nathanael, 769, 947 
Nazarius, baptized, 194 
Nebriss G., wrote, 290 
Nebuchadnezzar, 691, 748 
Neck, Martin von, 435 
Nectarius, baptized, 162 


Nemesius, burned, 134 

Neon, crucified, 144 

Nero, tyrant (A.D. 64-69), 78-94 

Nestorians, 294 

Netherlanders, 1020, 1095, 1100, 1104, 

1106, 1127 
Netherlands, 292 

New Testament, authoritative, 306, 997 
Nicanor, executed (A.D. 70), 93 
Nicasius, slain (A.D. 100), 99 
Nicea, Council of, 795 
Nicholas of Poland, 289 
Nicodemus, 222, 251, 371, 784, 788, 1085 
Nicolaus, Hendrick, false brother, 779 
Nilus, burned, 184 

Nimeguen, 740, 894, 895, 896, 897, 1007 
Noah, 233, 673, 683, 752, 771, 796, 806, 
824, 856, 862, 892, 914, 915, 919, 
1016, 1088, 1098 
Nobles, Christian martyrs, 703 
Nonconformity, 720, 953 
Non Litigation, Luther, 1117 
Nonresistance 

Alewijns, Hendrick, 754 

Ambrose, 153 

Arguments for, 305, 306, 321, 323 

Banished by Reformed, 1131 

Brentius, 1117 

Capelle, Wouter, 1096 

Carlstadt, 1117 

Creedal, 32, 35, 36, 37, 42 

Dosie, Jacques, 498 

Dutch Poem on, 61 

Euvodius, 170 

Grasp at all costs, 5, 6-13 

Gratian, 232, 235 

Hendrick, Alewijn, 754 

Jerome, 169 

John and Paul, 186 

Lactantius, Firmianus, 156 

Laurentius, 1096 

Lost, 174 

Luther, 1117 

Martin, St., 153 

Pomeranus, 1117 

Schut, John, 655 

Simons, Menno, works, 1096 

Smeedestead, Dr., 1097 

Taborites, 338 

Tertullian) 120 

Tharacus, 146 

Tollenaer, Joost de, 1079 

Vicentius, 1097 

Waldenses, 275, 281, 282, 287, 288 
Nonswearing 

Anabaptist, 1054, 1134 

Banished for, 1130 

Catholics lost, 200, 202, 1054 

Creedal, 32, 37, 42, 402 

Hendrick, Terwoorts, 1018 

Jan Pieterss, 1018 

John Huss, 336, 337 

Looseveldt, Pierifntgen, 965 

Luther and Lutheran divines, 1117 

Somere, Jacques de, 1019 

Turilupins, 325 

Waldenses, 275, 282, 283, 287, 311 
312, 321, 323 

William Thorpe, 335, 336 

Wycliffe, 324, 325, 342 
Nons of Mennonite Church, 52, 36, 42 
Normans, 259 

Northampton, William, 345 
Norwich, 341, 345 
Nunilo, slain, 244 

o 

Obadiah, 12 
Obedience, the test, 21 
Obersultzen im Wald, 1125, 1126 
Obeyed Gospel from heart, 671 
Olivarius of Ansona, 265 
Olympius, baptized, 254 
Olympus, imprisoned (A.D. 70), 94 
Onesimus, martyred (A.D. 70), 94 
Onesimus (Philem. 10), stoned, (A.D. 

Ill), 104, 107 
Onesiphorus, torn to death (A.D. 70), 86 
Onias, 13 

Ordinances, 30, 31, 36, 42 
Origen (A.D. 254), 123, 124, 127, 128, 

137, 
Wrote, 121, 125, 127, 128, 130, 137, 

1015 
Original sin purged, 1015 
Orleans, 265 
Ornithemlus, wrote, 296 
Othenbach in Zurich, 1110-1115, 1118- 

1123 
Outerman, Jacques, 1107 


1156 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


Padua, Marsilius de, 331 

Paeldink, Lainbiecht, 44 

Pain, executed, 439, 440 

Palatinate, 44, 1126, 1127 

Palsgrave, 437, 438 

Pamphilius, martyred, 175, 183 

Panten, Bartholomew, 372 

Papal darkness, 247, 248, 260, 264, 265, 

344, 350 
Popylus, died, 104, 114 
Parisiensis, Matthaeus 

On Antichrist, 325 
Parmenas, executed (A.D. 70), 94 
Paschasius, 239 
Pascientia, slain (A.D. 100), 99 
Passagenes, 277, 296, 297, 298 
Pastor slain (A.D. 116), 104, 108 
Patarini, 227, 296, 297, 298, 316, 317, 318 
Paucratius, 14, 179 

Paul (A.D. 69), 111., 49, 81, 82, 139, 259, 
357, 368, 369, 925, 963, 997, 998, 
1014, 1015 
Paulianist, 156 
Paulicians baptize, 215 
Paulus, 245 
Peacemakers, 690 
Peck, John, 366 
Pegna, Franciscus, 316 
Pelagius on baptism, 191 
Pelagius, martyred, 256, 257 
Pelagia, suffocated, 182 
Pennen, Jacob, 44 
Perfecti, the perfect, 298 
Peronne of Aubeton, 332 
Perpetus, martyred, 127 
Perpigna, wrote, 295 
Perrin, J. Paul, 322, 365 
Persecutions 

1st (A.D. 66), 78 

2nd (A.D. 93), 94 

3rd (A.D. 102), 104 

4th (A.D. 166), 111 

5th (A.D. 201), 126 

6th (A.D. 237), 130 

7th (A.D. 251), 131 

8th (A.D. 259), 138 

9th (A.D. 273), 141 
Persecution 

Catholic, Jews, Mohammedans, Sara- 
cens, et al, 350 

Cause of, 131 

Types of, 132 

France, in, 212 

Furious, 304 

Rewards for, eternal, 304 

Inquisition, infernal, 310 

Modes, 175, 176, 182, 184, 242, 310, 
313 

Modes of Nero, 79 

Severe, 320 

Thousand deaths, 328 

Threefold reasons for, 359 

World-wide, 174, 211 
Persecutor canonized, 319 
Persia, 92 
Peter, 449 

Peter, Apostle, 111. (A.D. 69), 46-52, 79, 
80, 81, 269, 357, 516, 545, 768, 806, 
855, 857, 917, 940, 949, 951, 977, 
1032, 1085 
Peter, burned, 184 
Peter, banished, 139 
Peter, died, 185 
Peter, Johannes, 329 
Peter, the Weaver, 339 
Petrarcha, Franciscus, 334 
Petrobrusians, 270, 273, 278, 294 
Phileas, beheaded, 175 
Philemon, martyred, 185 
Philidian, executed, 134 
Philip, (A.D. 45), 111., 73, 74, 104, 357, 

606, 806, 948, 999, 1085 
Philip of Alexandria, 141 
Philip II of Spain 

Decrees, 666 

Persecutor, 551, 1095 
Phillips, Dietrich, 686, 788 
Philipps, Dirk, 1080 
Phocas of Pontus, 111., 108 
Photimian, 156 

Photinus, maltreated, 104, 117 
Picards, 277 
Pieters, Pieter, 44 
Pilate, 63, 69, 79. 100, 101, 805 
Pillage, 258 
Pionius, burned, 135 
Pious teacher, martyred, 199 
Pious, 40 martyred, 212 


Pirschner, Andries, beheaded, 1059 

Pistoria, John de, 332 

Placidus, wife and two sons, baptized, 

254 
Plutarch, 12 

Plutarch, martyred, 104, 128 
Plutarchus, martyred, 118 
Poland, 328, 332 

Poltzinger, Hans, beheaded, 1103 
Polycarp, burned, (A.D. 168), 112, 113 
Polycarp's twelve, 114 
Pontius, martyred, 141 
Pontus, youth from, 116 
Pontus, baptized, 123 
Poor men, 281 

Of Lyons, 294, 295 
Pope, his doctrine, 668 

First called (A.D. 606), 213 

Works of antichrist, 776 
Popery, 52, 53, 606 

Corrupt, 52-58, 224 
Popery, not Petrine, 46 
Popes, multiple and none, 55, 56 

Punished, 58, 59 

Usurpers, 53, 55 
Porphyrius, torn to death (A.D. 70), 87 
Porphyry, jew, Christian, apostate, 174 
Posthumanius, 153, 163 
Prateolus, G., 282 

Praying for dead — unscriptural, 603 
Predestination affirmed, 190 
Preface — Sohm, 4 
Preface — Van Braght, 6-15 
Pride to be reproved, 698 
Priest crait, Jerome's views on, 168 
Prijntgen, greeted, 639 
Primasius, on baptism, 196 
Prince of kings of earth, 353 
Prinus, torn by animals, 180 
Priscilian, 357 

Priscilla, slain (A.D. 70), 86 
Priscus, torn, 141 
Privatus, beaten, 142 
Probus, martyred, 146-152 
Probus, enlightened, 303 
Prochonis, suffered (A.D. 70), 93 
Proculus, beheaded, 182 
Promus, martyred, 183 
Proof of faith, 726-731 
Property, confiscated, 1131, 1132 
Prophets, 22 
Prosperity, 8n 
Prosperus, 190 

Prussia and Anabaptists, 1061, 1062 
Ptolemy, martyred, 109, 478 
Publicans, 277, 295, 296, 297 
Publius, 104 

Publius of Athens, slain, 108 
Purgatory, unscriptural, 603 

In Maccabees, 996 
Puritans, 1047 


Quintus, Curtius, 12 
Quirinus, slain (A.D. 100), 99 
Quiritius, 130 


Rabanus, 232, 235, 236, 237 

Rack torture, 705 

Radulphus, Glaber, 265, 268 

Rathgeber, Henry, 345 

Rauens, Wmdel, died, 525 

Raymond of Toulouse, excommuni- 
cated, 305 

Rebaptism, 235, 259 

Rebekah, 812 

Recant, 541, 788 

Red hot iron, 310-313 

Red Sea, 856, 935, 1052 

Reformation principles lost, 1117 

Reformed Church, 438, lOOOn, 1094, 
1101, 1103, 1108, 1116, 1117, 1122, 
1127, 1130, 1131, 1132, 1138 

Regeneration essential, 864, 867 

Reginaldus, G., 282 

Regnerus, Xing of Denmark (A.D. 818- 
832), reaped what sown, 241, 242 

Reinerius, 279, 281, 282, 284, 288, 299 

Religious liberty, 928, 930, 1054, 1056, 
1090, 1091, 1105, 1106, 1119, 1125, 
1132-1134, 1138 

Remigius, wrote, 242 

Rentergen, Laurens van, died, 759 

Repentance and reformation, 40 

Resurrection, 33, 43, 406, 407, 808, 809, 
736 


Retribution, divine, 58, 59, 428, 431, 437 
438, 440, 448, 496, 497, 551, 553', 
573, 611, 618, 655, 665, 730, 962, 
965, 1095 

Return of Christ, 33, 37-39, 43, 406, 1108 

Reuderson, Dirck, 44 

Reutegem, Janneken van, burned, 864 

Revocatus, torn, 127 

Rhedonensis, 348 

Rhine, 662 

Rhodes, 288 

Riberia, Jacob de, 288 

Richard alias, Eckhard, 332 

Rickel, Rionysius, 338 

Rigordus, 297 

Rioting, 577 

Robert of Auxerre, 305 

Rockenzabus, 337, 338 

Rogation, beheaded, 186 

Roger of Hovedon, 296 

Roma, Augustine de, 348 

Roman jurists, 126, 130 

Romanism, not Scriptural, 46 

Romanist, 223, 315, 323 

Rome and Antichrist, 166, 167, 240 

Rome, Algerius martyred in, 573 

Rome in prophecy, 487, 491 

Rome, Paul in, 95 

Rome, whore of Babylon, 301 

Romulus, martyred (A.D. 100), 99 

Rosellus, A., 339 

Rostan, John, 290 

Rotterdam, 472, 577, 736, 793, 814-817 
846, 847, 977, 1132, 1133 

Rubis, Claude de, 276 

Rufus, beheaded (A.D. 109), 104, 105 

Runcari, 277 

Rupert, Tuiciensis, 272, 273 

Ruptuarii, resistant, 305n 

Rutilius, martyred, 126 


s 

Sabas, received, 125 

Sabelliaus and Sabellicus, 294 

Sacrament, 30, 31, 36, 41, 42, 236 

Sagarellus of Parma, 321 

Sagaris, martyred, 104, 118 

Sailer, Leonhard, freed, 446 

Saint Call, 436 

Saint Martins, 159 

Salaried preachers, 1098 

Saltwoden, 341, 342 

Salvation's day today, 915 

Salzburg, 433 

Samson of Rheims, 230, 231, 293 908 

Samuel, 850, 939 

Sanctus, 116 

Santraus, William, 327, 334 

Sapphira and Sabina, 109 

Saracen persecutions, 227n, 228 241 

242, 244, 245, 258 
Saturninus of Carthage, torn, 126, 127 
Satyris, torn, 127, 204 
Saube, Catharine, 243, 244 
Saul, 748, 850, 853, 857, 892, 939, 1014 
Saul (Paul), 920, 924 
Savonarola of Ferrara, burned, 340 

345, 351 
Saymer, Pieter, beheaded, 1069 
Scapula of Carthage, blinded, 126, 127 
Schaffhausen, 1116, 1132-1134 1139 

Edict, 1122 
Scheldt, River, 569 
Schism, 814-819, 850 
Schoenmaker, Balten Centen, 44 
Schoonhoven, 531 
Schwitzer, Hans, 366 
Schwitzers, called German, 366 
Scissa, John de Rupe, burned, 332 
Scotland, 338 
Scotus, Johannes, 246, 247 
Screws, described, 992, 1038 
Scriptoris, Paul, 351 
Scubiculus, slain (A.D. 100), 99 
Sebrechts, Jacob van der Heyde, 44 
Secular power renounced, 442 
Segers, Herman, 44 

Separation of church and sta'e 1134 
Serapion, torn, 133 
Serenus, beheaded, 128 
Serenus, burned, 128 
Serpent's head bruised, 1022, 1045 
Serundulus, tortured, 127 
Seven brethren, 13 
Seven brothers martyred, 184 
Shadrack, Meshach, and Abedneao 

13, 233 
Shimei, 748 


MARTYRS MIRROR 


1157 


Shunning, 405 

Siccars, 277 

Sicily, 318 

Siculus, N., 338 

Silas, martyred (A.D. 70), 86 

Siloam, Tower of, 960 

Simeones, 125 

Simon, Cleophas, crucified (A.D. 109), 

104 
Simons, Menno, 120, 442, 455 
Simon of Salig, 289 
Simon, the sorcerer, 749, 806, 940 
Simon, Zealotes, crucified (A.D. 70), 

111., 81, 357 
Simons, Simon, letter to, 564-566 
Simotensus, 338 
Sincken, persecutor, 429 
Singel, Pieter Jansz van, 44 
Sixtus and a letter, 100 
Sixty burned at Casser, 308 
Smaragdus, 251 

Smeedesteed, Dr., stricken, 1097 
Smithfield, Lond, 341, 342, 351 
Sodom and Gomorrah, 730, 755, 771, 

821, 856, 862, 914, 919, 1044, 1088 
Soldier could never be ordained, 170 
Solomon, 361, 801, 805 
Sonnet (Dutch poem), 61 
Sosius, beheaded, 182 
Spain, 227n, 244, 245, 786, 801, 807, 

940, 969, 1095 
Spaniards, 885, 888 
Spanish Fury, 1036 
Spiering, Gijsbert, 44 
Spronk, Abraham, 44 
Stability in witness, 449 
Steadfast, 590, 658, 673, 704, 721, 762 
Stephen, stoned (A.D. 34), 111., 70-72, 

244n, 748, 903, 917, 1008 
Stephen, burned, 350 
Stephen and thirteen others, 265 
Stifelius, Michael, 330 
Strabonus, wrote, 103 
Strasburg, 1126 

100 martyred at, 310 
Suidas, Bishop, 127 
Swabia, 433, 439 

Swinderby, William, 325, 326, 341, 342 
Switzerland, 1057 
Sydonius, 230 
Sylvanus, devoured, 182 
Sylvan us of Gaza, 175 
Sylvester's time, 283 
Sylvius, 302 

Symphorianus, beheaded, 143 
SymphoTosa, 109 
Synesius, Syrenus, baptized, 188 
Syria, 105-107 

T 

Taborites, 337 

Creed of, 338 
Tacitus, 79 
Talamus, 343, 344 
Tauler, John, 327 
Tertullian, 118-121, 126, 129, 130, 226, 

602, 1139-1141 
Terwen, Jacuis, 44 
Texerants, 277 

Thaddeus, beaten to death (A.D. 70), 91 
Tharacus, martyred, 111., 146-152 
Theodoric, 296 
Theodoras, baptized, 214 
Theodoras, martyred, 185 
Theodosia, drowned, 182 
Theodosius, persecutor, 16, 604 
Theodosius, baptized, 162, 171 
Theodulus, baptized, 254 
Theodulus, drowned, 181, 
Theonas, martyred, 182 
Theonilla, tortured, 145 
Theotecnes, bishop, 140 
Theridate, baptized, 254 
Thessalonians, 365, 366 
Theunis, Annetgen, 575 
Tholossanus, H. P. (Henry of Toulouse), 

274, 278 
Thomas, cast into furnace, 111., 89, 90, 

345, 357, 770, 794 
Thomas, bishop, baptizes, 224 
Thorpe, William (5-point creed), 335, 

336 342 
Thousands burned (AJ). 237), 131 
Thraseas, martyred, 104. 118 
Three Hebrews, 357 
Three hundred burned in lime kiln 

(A.D. 270), 141 
Thuan, 268 
Tibbites, 998, 999 
Tiburtius, martyred (A.D. 233), 130 


Times, dangerous, 8 

Timmerman, Pieter Jansz, 44 

Timothy, stoned (A.D. 98). 22, 98, 857, 

878 
Titus, 857 

Torea, Peter, executed, 340, 345, 347 
Torture, 111 

Toulouse, 304, 305, 313, 314, 319 
Toulouse in Gascony, 273. 275, 290 
Tradesman, burned, 342 
Trading not good for Christians, 696 
Transmontani, 277 
Transubstantiation, 269, 271, 291, 292, 

314, 316, 342, 346, 351 
Treatment after arrest, 677-680 
Tribulation, Great, 78, 79, 107, 132, 

201, 233, 535, 571, 591, 708, 738, 

851, 883, 954, 992, 1027, 1125, 1132 
Trieste, 453 
Trinity, 374-376 
Trithemius, 296, 316, 330, 332 
Trojana, baptized, 254 
Trophimus, beheaded (A.D. 70), 94 
Truthfulness, 695, 696 
Truth is consistent, 683 
Tryphon, a disputation, 100-102 
Turilupins, 324, 325 
Twisck, 349 

Twisck, on baptism, 125, 130, 131 
Two sisters drowned, 184 
Tylius, John and Turilupins, 324 
Types, 21 

Tyrannion of Tyre, 175 
Tyrol, 430, 431, 432, 434, 440, 1080, 1082 


u 

Udo, reaped what sown, 258 

Ulpian, drowned, 181 

Ulrio of Hutten, 327 

Unconquerable, 174 

Unity in Trinity, 27-30, 767-770, 805, 970- 

973, 1107 
Universities of Prague, Oxford, Paris, 

327 
Urban, executed, 134 
Urijah, 13, 748 

Utrecht, 312, 441, 575, 660, 724, 725 
Urticinus, beheaded (A.D. 99), 98 
Uzzah, 1014 


Valentinian, murdered, 170 

Valerianus, martyred, 130 

Valla, Laurence, 349 

Vandals, 211, 258 

Vaudois, 311, 364, 1132, 1138, 1139 

Veileti, Jan, 289 

Venice, 652, 664, 703 

Vennander, C, 353 

Vestiti, 308 

Vetius, martyred, 104, 115 

Vicecomes, wrote, 104, 160, 205, 326 

Vienna, 115n, 117, 475, 573, 574 

Vignier, Nicholas, J295, 324, 332 

Virgin worship, 171 

Vitalus, buried alive, (A.D. 99) 111., 

wife beaten to death, 98, 99 
Vives, Ludovicus, 363, 365 
Volentius, Romanus, heretic, 102 
Voluntary service, 1037 
Vrede, Adolph de and Envoy, 1132, 

1133 

w 

Waddon, John (22-point creed), 246, 247 
Wafer (Instituted by Pope Alexander), 

1016 
Walafrid, 237 
Waldenses, 364 
Accusation of, 289 
Anabaptists, 277, 278, 303 
Anti-Catholic, 283-284 
Apostolic, 154, 275 
Austria-Bohemia, 330, 349 
Burned, at Bingen, 333, 309 

Marseilles, 331 

Mentz, 309 

Pomerania, 333 

Strasburg, 307, 310, 313 

Toulouse, 318, 319 

Zuidenitz, 331 
Burned, books, 300 
Called many names, 276, 277, 297 

Vaudois, 311, 1132 

Waldois, 320, 321 
Children unbaptized, 280 
Church and state, 281 


Confessions of, 285-287 
Article XIV, 284, 285 

Cross examined, 288, 289 

Decrees contra, 298, 315, 316, 320 

Dispersion of, 276 

Doctrines of, 283, 284 

Followers of, 266 

Founder, Peter Waldo, 275, 278, 281 

Holiness of, 288 

Immutable, 298 

Inquisition of Innocent III, 299 

Kinds, three, 278 

Martyrs of, 330, 349 

Number of, 290 

Nonresistance of, 281 

Nonswearing of, 282 

On Rack, 325 

Persecution of, 276, 316, 320, 331-333, 
350, 364, 1132 

Precepts of, 287 

Property confiscated, 316 

Reject infant baptism, 279 

Slain (7,000), 297 

Slandered, 325 

Tortured, 333 

Wholesale martyrdom, 304 

With Albigenses, 285 

With Taborites, 337 
Walings, Heyne, 465 
Walloons, 1125 
Walrich of Hardeck, 289 
Walsingham, Thomas, 335 
War renounced: Euvodius, 170 
War sanctioned: Munsterites, 17 
Waterlander schism, 568 
Waterlandt, 464 
Wenschelberg, 342 
Wesalia, John de, 349 
Westminster, 1010 
Westphalia, 539, 654 
Weyens, Jan, 44 
White, Johanna, 346 
White, William, 345 

22-point creed, 346 

Burned, 111., 346, 347 
Wicelius, wrote, 229 
Wickliffe, John, 334, 337 

Articles of, 351 

Bones burned, 324 
Widefort, William, 324 
Willemsen, Bastiaen, 44 
William of Armorica, 296 
William of Orange, 666, 640, 871, 977, 
1134 
Mentions Anabaptist Decree, 552 
Religious liberty, 1054, 1056 
Willeborts, Oillaert, 44 
Winkelmans, Jan, 44 
Witnesses, great cloud of, 571 
Wittikind, baptized, 224 
Word, not water, 224 
World conditions, 1098 
World divided by apostles, 91 
Worm, Danish king, 257 
Worms, 550 

Worst sect under heaven, 1066 
Writing fluid, bilberry juice, 1053 
Wrote on spoons, 1055, 1056 
Wuestefeld, 455 
Wurtemberg, 438, 1024, 1026, 1C38 


Youth, tested, 112, 176, 178, 179, 181, 
256, 257, 483, 493, 498-501, 538-548 
553, 564, 572, 651, 657-660, 670, 762, 
872, 876, 890, 893, 897, 930, 936, 
953, 1001, 1006, 1008, 1011, 1020, 
1037, 1088 
Counsel to, 1076-1080, 1091-1093, 1112 


Zacchaeus, 449 

Zacharia, teacher, 115 

Zealand, 1056 

Zechariah, 12, 748 

Zeno of Verona, catechizes, 215 

Zenobius of Sidon, 175 

Zenobius and sister, beheaded, 145 

Zerah, 754 

Zosimus, beheaded, 104-109 

Zurich, 274, 1104, 1108, 1109, 1111- 

1115, 1117-1120, 1122-1124, 1132, 

1133, 1135, 1137, 1138 
Edicts adverse to Anabaptists, 438 
Zwingli, 364, 598, 599, 600, 603, 1116 
Zwinglians, 566, 780 


/ 


e 


FOR FURTHER READING 

(By Herald Press unless otherwise identified) 

Ausbund. Hymns in German, by Anabaptist martyrs from 1535 and later. Available from Aylmer, Ont., and LaGrange, 
Ind.: Pathway Publishers. 

Bauman, Elizabeth Hershberger. Coals of Fire. 1954, 1982. 

Dyck, C. J. An Introduction to Mennonite History: A Popular History of the Anabaptists and the Mennonites. 3d ed. 1993. 

Foxe, John. The New Foxe's Book of Martyrs. North Brunswick, N.J.: Bridge-Logos, 1997. 

Hostetler, Marian. They Loved Their Enemies. 1988. 

Hutterian Brethren, trans, and ed. The Chronicle of the Hutterian Brethren. Vol. 1 . Rifton, New York: Ste. Agathe, Man. ; 

and Robertsbridge, England: Plough Publishing House; 1987. 
Jackson, Dave and Neta. On Fire for Christ: Stories of Anabaptist Martyrs. 1989. 

Klaassen, Walter, ed. Anabaptism in Outline: Selected Primary Sources. Classics of the Radical Reformation, 3. 1981. 
Krahn, Cornelius. "A Martyrs Mirror Digest." Mennonite Life 22/2 (Apr. 1967). North Newton, Kan.: Bethel College. 

Rev. and repr. in: The Witness of the Martyrs Mirror for Our Day. 

Loewen, Harry. No Permanent City: Stories from Mennonite History and Life. 1993. S 

Loewen, Harry, Steven Nolt, Carol Duerksen, and Elwood Yoder. Through Fire and Water: An Overview of Mennonite 
History. 1996. 

Lowry, James W. The Martyrs Mirror Made Plain: A Study Guide and Further Studies. Aylmer, Ont.: and LaGrange, 

Ind.: Pathway Publishers, 1997. 
Luyken, Jan. The Drama of the Martyrs: From the Death of Jesus Christ up to the Recent Times, Drawn and Engraved on 

Copper by the Renowned Engraver Jan Luyken (1649-1712). Lancaster, Pa.: Mennonite Historical Associates, 1975. 
Mennonite Encyclopedia, The. Cooperative publication, with distribution by Herald Press. Vols. 1-4, 1955-59; vol. 5 

1990. Esp. articles on martyrs and martyr books, 3:517-531. 
Mennonite Quarterly Review. Goshen, Ind.: Goshen College. Esp. articles on martyrs in July 1945, July 1948, Jan. and 

Apr. 1954, Jan. 1984, Jan. 1985. 
Miller, Lynn A. On the Trail of the Martyrs. Nappanee, Ind.: Evangel Press; and Elkhart, Ind.: Schwaermer Press; 1984. 
Oyer, John S., and Robert S. Kreider. Mirror of the Martyrs. Intercourse, Pa.: Good Books, 1990. 
Snyder, C. Arnold. Anabaptist History and Theology: An Introduction. 2d ed. Herald Press; and Kitchener, Ont.: Pandora 

Press; 1997. 

Weaver, J. Denny. Becoming Anabaptist: The Origin and Significance of Sixteenth-Century Anabaptism. 1987. 


1158 


