Title: The Journal of the Rev. John Wesley, A.M., Sometime Fellow of
  Lincoln College, Oxford: Enlarged from Original MSS., with Notes
  from Unpublished Diaries, Annotations, Maps, and Illustrations
  (Vol. I of 8)
Creator: John Wesley (Nehemiah Curnock, Editor)
Publisher: R. Culley, London
Publication Date: [1909?]-1916 (this volume's own preface is dated
  Rayleigh, October 1909; the standard scholarly "Curnock edition"
  of Wesley's Journal, 8 vols.)
Rights: Public Domain
Source: Internet Archive, identifier a613690401wesluoft
  ("Permission Granted to Digitize Item"; hosted via the Saint
  Mary's College of California collection). Fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text derivative,
  2026-09-25.
Provenance note: OCR full-text derivative, machine-transcribed by
  Internet Archive from the scanned original; no long-s or thorn/eth
  encoding artifacts were found in this file (this edition already
  sets in modern round-s type). Nothing else altered. Rights basis:
  publication complete by 1916, well over 95 years before this
  session (2026) -- public domain by date.
Content note: Volume I only, covering the Journal from Wesley's
  birth/early life through 1738 (the Aldersgate "heart strangely
  warmed" entry, 24 May 1738, falls in this volume). Volumes II-VIII
  (1738 onward) are NOT vendored in this pass -- flagged as an open
  acquisition item.
______________________________________________________________________

mt   m 


I     b 


THE   JOURNAL   OF 
THE   REV.   JOHN    WESLEY,   A.M. 


"THE  JOURNAL  *.( 


OF    THE    REV. 


JOHN   WESLEY,   A.M. 

SOMETIME  FELLOW  OF  LINCOLN  COLLEGE,  OXFORD 

ENLARGED   FROM   ORIGINAL   MSS.}   WITH   NOTES 
FROM   UNPUBLISHED   DIARIES,  ANNOTA- 
TIONS, MAPS,  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 


EDITED  BY 

NEHEMIAH    CURNOCK 


ASSISTED   BY   EXPERTS 


LIBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGi 


STANDARD   EDITION 
VOL.  I 


111162 


ROBERT    CULLEY 

25~35    CITY    ROAD,     AND    26    PATERNOSTER    ROW,     B.C. 


Copyright 
Entered  at  Stationers'  Hah 


PREFACE 

WESLEY'S  JOURNAL  was  originally  published  in  a  series  of 
'  Extracts,'  each  filling  a  small  duodecimo  volume  of  a  hundred 
pages  or  more.  The  first  was  printed  in  Bristol  by  *  S.  and  F. 
Farley,  and  sold  at  the  New  School-house  in  the  Horsefair.' 
It  is  not  dated  ;  but  as  the  last  entry  was  made  on  Wednes- 
day, February  I,  1738,  and  the  Second  Extract  is  dated  1740, 
it  is  safe  to  infer  that  in  or  about  1739  the  Journal  was 
issued  to  the  public.  In  some  version  or  other  it  had,  however, 
long  been  known  to  the  Holy  Club  and  to  members  of 
the  Wesley  family ;  for  the  Journal  originally,  as  Wesley 
himself  intimates  in  the  Preface,  was  written  for  private  use, 
and  it  was  not  the  '  design  or  desire  '  of  the  writer  '  to  trouble 
the  world  with  any '  of  what  he  modestly  calls  his  '  little 
affairs.'  At  one  time  there  must  have  been  in  existence  many 
copies  and  several  versions  of  the  Georgia  Journal,  possibly 
also  of  the  Second  Extract.  The  Diary,  to  which  Wesley  refers 
in  the  first  paragraph  of  his  Preface,  shows  conclusively  that 
he  transcribed  his  Journal  and  'Accounts';  whilst  allusions  in 
letters  and  other  circumstances  prove  that  these  transcriptions 
were  intended  to  serve  the  purpose  of  private  letters  to  his 
mother  and  brother  and  sisters,  and  to  such  friends  as  James 
Hutton,  John  Clayton,  and  Richard  Morgan.  The  versions, 
differing  from  the  printed  Extract  and  from  one  another,  were 
prepared  each  for  a  special  purpose.  One,  for  instance,  seems 
to  have  been  the  first  rough  draft  of  a  business-like  document 
intended  for  presentation  to  the  Georgia  Trustees  in  London. 
Precisely  such  a  document  was  presented  in  the  spring  of 
1738,  but  has  not  yet  been  discovered  in  the  archives  of  the 
Colonial  Office.  Another  ( version,'  limited  to  the  voyage 
of  the  Simmonds,  was  drafted  for  the  special  information  of 


vi  Preface 

Samuel  Wesley,  at  that  time  head  master  of  Blundell's  School 
in  Tiverton.  It  is  now  in  the  possession  of  an  old  Devonshire 
family.  A  third  copy,  or  version,  was  published  in  1741,  and 
was  entitled 

An  Extract  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley's  Journal  with  regard 
to  the  Affidavit  made  by  Captain  Robert  Williams  (John  vii.  51). 
London:  printed  in  the  year  1741.  i2mo,  pp.  12. 

The  Rev.  Richard  Green's  notes  on  this  scarce  publication  are 
of  special  interest : 

The  affidavit  is  mentioned  in  the  Preface  to  the  Journal  (Works, 
vol.  i.  p.  3).  See  also  Tyerman's  Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  pp.  429-30. 

This  very  rare  tract  consists  of  such  portions  of  Wesley's  Journal 
printed  in  1739  as  relate  to  the  accusation  and  trial  of  Wesley  for 
refusing  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  a  communicant  in 
Savannah.  The  first  date  given  (p.  2)  is  June  25,  1736:  it  should 
be  1737.  Not  a  little  scurrilous  writing  appeared  in  reference  to  this 
event.  Whitefield,  in  The  Weekly  History,  very  stoutly  defends  his 
friend,  after  having  made  careful  inquiries  into  the  circumstances  on 
the  spot. 

A  fourth  sectional  version  was  transcribed  by  Wesley  himself 
in  Oxford  for  the  special  benefit,  it  may  be  reasonably  con- 
jectured, of  Mrs.  Susanna  Wesley  and  her  son  Samuel. 

These  and  other  versions  have  been  freely  used  in  the  produc- 
tion of  a  new  text,  which  represents  as  fully  as  circumstances 
permit  all  that  Wesley  wrote  in  journalistic  form  respecting  his 
voyage  to  and  life  in  Georgia.  Readers  who  so  wish  may  dis- 
tinguish at  a  glance  between  the  old  and  the  new  material,  the 
latter  being  printed  within  square  brackets.  The  utmost  care 
has  been  taken  to  preserve  unaltered  Wesley's  own  phraseology, 
even  to  the  grammatical  peculiarities  which  he  shared  with 
other  writers  of  the  day.  The  whole  of  the  printed  Journal  will 
be  found  intact,  except  that  here  and  there — very  occasionally — 
a  more  vigorous  or  picturesque  phrase,  borrowed  from  another 
copy  in  Wesley's  handwriting,  has  been  substituted  for  the 
printed  version  of  the  same  sentence.  It  will  be  found  that 
no  new  textual  matter  has  been  printed  in  the  Second  Extract, 
a  portion  only  of  which  appears  in  the  present  volume.  No 


Preface  vii 

manuscript  copy  of  No.  II  has  hitherto  been  discovered.  This 
is  the  more  remarkable,  because  in  all  probability  Wesley  sent 
copies  of  his  German  Journal  home  for  the  information  of 
friends,  and  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  he  com- 
municated a  journal-account  of  his  conversion  to  his  mother, 
to  his  brother  Samuel,  and  to  Mr.  Clayton.  These  copies, 
however,  if  they  ever  existed,  have  been  either  destroyed  or 
buried  in  forgotten  family  archives. 

For  reasons  which  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  state- 
ment of  facts  we  have  ventured  to  entitle  this  *  The  Standard 
Edition  of  Wesley's  Journal.' 

The  late  Rev.  Richard  Green  devoted  a  lifetime  to  the  study 
of  the  Journal  and  to  the  collection  of  Wesley  publications. 
His  library,  represented  by  his  Wesley  Bibliography,  is  the 
most  complete  of  its  kind  in  the  world.  His  knowledge  of 
the  Journal  text  and  of  all  the  literature  necessary  for  its 
exposition  was  unrivalled.  It  was  exhaustive  and  singularly 
accurate.  Before  his  death  Mr.  Green  strongly  urged  that  in 
the  preparation  of  a  Standard  Edition  the  first  edition  should 
be  practically  discarded.  It  was  full  of  inaccuracies,  as  indeed 
were  all  the  editions  published  during  Wesley's  lifetime.  The 
successive  publications  were  not,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term,  new  editions  at  all,  but  reprints,  even  to  the  reproduc- 
tion of  errata.  In  1771  Wesley  began  the  republication  of 
all  his  prose  writings,  with  certain  specified  exceptions.  The 
Works  were  issued  in  weekly  numbers  of  seventy-two  pages 
each,  price  sixpence  ;  also  in  thirty-two  volumes  in  this  and 
the  three  following  years.  The  Journal  Extracts,  which  begin 
in  volume  xxvi,  are  reprints  of  the  first  edition.  (Green's  Biblio- 
graphy, p.  179.) 

In  1808  the  Conference  directed  its  Editor,  the  Rev.  Joseph 
Benson,  to  prepare  a  new  edition  of  Wesley's  Works.  This  he  did 
in  seventeen  octavo  volumes.  Benson's  edition  of  the  Journal 
is  prejudiced  from  its  first  page  by  an  unexplained  and  un- 
warranted curtailment  of  the  Preface  and  by  the  entire  omission 
of  Wesley's  Introduction.  It  gains,  however,  by  the  insertion, 


viii  Preface 

as  footnotes,  of  two  letters,  one  to  Mrs.  Wesley  and  the  other 
to  Charles,  by  explanatory  notes  on  Machiavel  and  Dr.  Bray, 
and  by  a  brief  extract  from  Whitehead's  Life  of  Wesley.  But 
no  serious  attempt  seems  to  have  been  made  by  Benson  to 
produce  a  strictly  accurate  text.  He  was  too  much  occupied 
with  Presidential  duties  to  give  the  minute  and  critical  attention 
which  so  vast  an  undertaking  as  the  republication  of  John 
Wesley's  prose  writings  demanded.  The  printer  who  handled 
the  seventeen  volumes  overlooked  Wesley's  tables  of  errata, 
an  injury  particularly  disastrous  to  the  Journal 

In  1828  the  Rev.  Thomas  Jackson  was  entrusted  with  the 
task  of  editing  yet  another  edition  of  Wesley's  Works.  This 
he  did  in  fourteen  octavo  volumes.  Having  access  to  Wesley's 
manuscript  corrections  and  to  many  other  sources  of  information, 
he  devoted  himself  to  the  production  of  a  pure  text.  It  was, 
perhaps,  inevitable  that  he  should  fall  short  of  his  own  lofty 
ideal.  When  Mr.  Green  made  a  careful  examination  of 
Jackson's  so-called  '  Third  Edition,'  he  discovered  in  the  Journal 
no  less  than  two  hundred  mistakes  in  dates  alone  ;  nor  does  the 
Fifth,  which  forms  the  basis  of  the  present  edition,  succeed  in 
entirely  eliminating  such  errors.  During  recent  years,  however, 
thanks  largely  to  the  work  of  the  Wesley  Historical  Society 
and  to  the  zeal  of  collectors  and  students,  the  text  of  the 
Journal  has  been  purged  from  error,  and  materials  of  great 
value  have  been  accumulated  for  its  elucidation. 

Foremost  in  importance,  so  far  as  the  early  Journal  Extracts 
are  concerned,  are  the  Diaries,  which  for  various  reasons  have 
hitherto  been  inaccessible.  These  are  the  sources  whence 
Wesley  constructed  his  Journal.  An  account  of  them  will  be 
found  in  the  following  pages.  They  often  assist  us  to  fill 
wide  gaps  in  the  Journal  ;  they  supply  names  of  persons  and 
places,  together  with  much  additional  information  ;  above  all, 
they  enable  students  to  picture  more  vividly  the  daily  life  of 
the  man  who  even  before  his  conversion  was  an  enthusiastic 
evangelist.  Mr.  George  Stampe  has  entrusted  the  most  priceless 
treasure  in  his  large  collection  to  the  editor  of  this  edition,  so 


Preface  ix 

that  he  might  patiently  decipher  the  records  of  Wesley's  daily 
life  at  Oxford,  Wroot,  and  Stanton  from  1725  to  1727.  Mr. 
Russell  J.  Colman  gave  free  access  to  the  collection  of 
Diaries  and  other  Wesley  MSS.  which  his  father,  the  late 
J.  J.  Colman,  of  Norwich,  acquired  from  Mr.  Gandy,  who 
was  executor  to  Henry  Moore.  During  many  months  the 
editor  photographed  these  Diaries  and  letters.  How  large  is 
the  collection,  and  how  great  the  importance  attached  by  the 
Conference  Office  to  an  accurate  copy,  may  be  inferred  from 
the  fact  that  the  photographic  copying  involved  the  use  of 
more  than  three  thousand  dry  plates.  One  of  the  Georgia 
Diaries  was  missing  from  the  collection.  It  had  been  given 
by  Henry  Moore  to  a  friend.  Fortunately  we  were  able  to 
trace  the  missing  volume  to  the  possession  of  Bishop  Hendrix, 
of  Kansas,  U.S.A.,  who  very  generously  lent  it  for  the  service 
of  this  edition.  Mr.  Andrews,  of  Exeter,  with  equal  generosity 
lent  the  MS.  of  the  First  Extract— Benjamin  Ingham's  copy  of 
Wesley's  Voyage  Journal — the  copy  that  was  undoubtedly  sent 
to  Samuel  Wesley. 

Many  have  cried  out,  with  pardonable  impatience,  for  the 
publication  of  a  volume  which  has  long  been  promised.  But  a 
work  of  this  character  could  not  have  been  produced  hurriedly 
or  in  a  much  briefer  space  of  time.  An  unused  shorthand 
had  to  be  learned,  a  cipher  without  a  key  deciphered.  To 
edit  Wesley's  Journal  under  the  jealous  eye  of  a  Conference 
Committee  might  seem  to  be  an  impossible  undertaking ;  and 
it  would  indeed  have  proved  itself  impracticable  except  for  the 
graciousness  of  individuals.  To  the  Rev.  Charles  H.  Kelly 
the  editor  owes  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude.  He  made  the 
photography  of  the  Colman  Collection  possible,  and  boldly 
took  the  responsibility  of  purchasing,  on  behalf  of  the  Conference, 
the  valuable  Weise  MSS.  The  Rev.  W.  L.  Watkinson,  who 
began  the  task  of  gathering  materials  for  this  edition,  handed 
over  to  the  editor  all  his  accumulations.  Since  the  work  was 
commenced  some  of  the  most  capable  expert  advisers  have 
passed  to  their  reward — Thomas  M'Cullagh,  Richard  Green, 


x  Preface 

Richard  Thursfield  Smith,  and  Dr.  James  Harrison  Rigg.  Of 
surviving  friends  grateful  mention  must  be  made  of  the  Rev. 
Henry  J.  Foster,  the  editor  of  the  Wesley  Historical  Society's 
Proceedings ;  the  Rev.  Richard  Butterworth  ;  the  Rev.  John  Tel- 
ford,  B.A.,  who  has  read  all  the  proofs ;  and  the  Rev.  Thomas 
E.  Brigden,  who  has  supplied  eighteenth-century  prints. 

To  the  librarian  of  the  Colonial  Office  we  are  indebted  for 
assistance  in  discovering,  and  for  permission  to  photograph, 
three  very  early  unpublished  maps  of  Georgia ;  and  to  the 
Secretary  and  officials  of  the  Record  Office  for  facilities  to 
study  the  Minutes  and  Journals  of  the  Georgia  Trustees  and 
a  remarkable  collection  of  letters  from  Georgia  from  1735 
to  1738. 

It  is  impossible  to  name  all  who  by  advice  and  encourage- 
ment have  assisted  in  the  work.  This  volume,  however 
interesting  in  itself,  is  but  the  forerunner  of  other  and  far 
more  important  volumes.  May  it  be  for  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  kindling  of  new  zeal,  in  the  creation  of  a  surer  trust 
in  the  good  Providence  that  shapes  human  means  to  divine 
ends,  and  in  the  diffusion  of  that  grace  which  brings  salvation 
to  churches  and  nations ! 

NEHEMIAH    CURNOCK. 
RAYLEIGH, 
October  1909. 


CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTORY-  PAGE 
JOHN   WESLEY'S   EARLY  LIFE  IN   THE   LIGHT  OF 

UNPUBLISHED  DIARIES 3 

THE  FIRST  OXFORD  DIARY 36 

WESLEY'S  CIPHER 71 

PART   THE   FIRST— 

THE  PREFACE 83 

NOTES  ON   THE  PREFACE 8$ 

THE  RISE  AND  DESIGN   OF  OXFORD  METHODISM      .  87 
ON     THE    DEATH     OF     MR.    WILLIAM     MORGAN     OF 

CHRIST  CHURCH 103 

THE  VOYAGE  JOURNAL IO6 

FIRST   SAVANNAH  JOURNAL l66 

FIRST   FREDERICA  JOURNAL 191 

SECOND   SAVANNAH   JOURNAL 197 

SECOND   FREDERICA  JOURNAL 219 

THIRD  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 236 

THIRD   FREDERICA  JOURNAL 258 

FOURTH   SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 270 

FOURTH   FREDERICA  JOURNAL 282 

FIFTH  SAVANNAH   JOURNAL 289 

FIFTH   FREDERICA  JOURNAL 307 

SIXTH   SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 313 

PART   THE   SECOND- 

THE   PREFACE 429 

THE  JOURNAL  (FROM  FEBRUARY  I  TO  JUNE  13,  1738)  432 


XI 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 

JOHN  WESLEY Frontispiece 

MAP   OF   GEORGIA             .......       To  face  p.  79 

PAGE 

OXFORD    FROM   THE   HENLEY    ROAD        ......  9 

LINCOLN   COLLEGE,    OXFORD,    IN   WESLEY'S   TIME  .            .            .  IO 

CHRIST   CHURCH    COLLEGE,    OXFORD IO 

VARANESE    FACSIMILE 14 

EPWORTH   RECTORY       .            .            .            .            .            .            .  IJ 

SAMUEL    WESLEY 17 

SUSANNA   WESLEY 17 

EPWORTH   CHURCHYARD    FROM    WEST   DOOR  .  .  .  .  .17 

THE    RECTORY,   STANTON        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .25 

THE   CHURCH,    STANTON 25 

THE    RECTORY,    WROOT 26 

THE   GARDEN,    WROOT 26 

THE    GARDEN,    WROOT,    LOOKING    FROM   ARBOUR    ....  26 

FACSIMILE   OF   THE    FIRST   PAGE   OF   THE   FIRST   OXFORD   DIARY      .  37 

REDUCED    FACSIMILE   PAGES    FROM   THE    FOURTH   OXFORD    DIARY  .  38 

FACSIMILE   COVER-PAGE   OF    THE    FIRST   OXFORD   DIARY             .            .  43 

REDUCED    FACSIMILE   PAGES    OF    WESLEY'S    EARLY   HANDWRITING    .  44 

FACSIMILE   OF    RULES   OF    HOLY   LIVING    IN   CIPHER          ...  49 

„            PAGE   CONFESSIONS   IN   CIPHER 50 

REDUCED    FACSIMILE   RESOLUTIONS   IN   CIPHER       .  .  .  -57 

„                      „              MONTHLY  REVIEW,  '  PYRATES  '  AND  IDLENESS  57 

„                      „              RECORDING    HIS   ORDINATION         ...  58 

„                      „              OF  FIRST  PAGE  OF  WESLEY'S  FIRST  SERMON    .  58 

INTERIOR    OF   CHRIST   CHURCH,    OXFORD 63 

SOUTH   LEIGH   CHURCH 63 

BROADWAY   CHURCH 63 

BUCKLAND   CHURCH   AND   RECTORY 64 

THE   HOME   OF   THE   GRANVILLES 64 

FACSIMILE   OF   MONTHLY   SUMMARY 67 

„             OF    DIARY   WRITTEN    AT   WROOT     .....  68 

,,            CIPHER   PAGE   OF   CONSONANTS   AND    VOWELS           .            .  73 

„            LIST   OF    PERSONAL   FRIENDS    IN    OXFORD   COLLEGES        .  74 

xiii 


xiv  List  of  Illustrations 

PAGE 

FACSIMILE    OF   THE   TITLE-PAGE   OF   THE    FIRST    EDITION                        .  8 1 
„             OF   THE    FIRST    PAGE    OF    THE    PREFACE   TO    THE    FIRST 

EDITION •  •  -83 

„  OF   THE    SECOND    PAGE   OF  THE   PREFACE  TO   THE  FIRST 

EDITION          .....  .84 

ACCOUNT   OF    THE    FIRST    SUBSCRIPTION   LIST    MADE    BY 

THE    HOLY   CLUB 91 

„  OF  THE   FIRST  PAGE  OF  THE  INGHAM  COPY  OF  WESLEY'S 

VOYAGE   JOURNAL             .                         .            .            .            .  loy 

„             OF   THE   FIRST    PAGE   OF   THE    VOYAGE    DIARY           .            .  IO8 

„            PAGE   OF   DIARY,   NOVEMBER    17,    1735                                      •  I!9 

,,             OF   THE   SECOND   PAGE   OF    THE    VOYAGE   DIARY     .             .  I2O 

„             OF   DIARY,    DECEMBER    IO,    1735 1 29 

JANUARY    25,    1736      .                                                   .  I30 

REDUCED    FACSIMILE   OF    MAP   OF   GEORGIA 147 

TOMO-CHACHI 157 

AUGUST    GOTTLIEB   SPANGENBERG 157 

BENJAMIN    INGHAM         .            .            .            .            .            .            .             .  157 

GENERAL   OGLETHORPE            157 

SKETCH-MAP   OF   GEORGIA      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .163 

SAVANNAH    IN    WESLEY'S    DAY          .  .  .  .  .  .  -177 

FACSIMILE  PAGES  OF  FLEURY's  'MANNERS  OF  THE  CHRISTIANS'.  199 

MAP  OF  WESLEY'S  PARISH  IN  GEORGIA 203 

FACSIMILE  PAGE  OF  THE  HENDRIX  GEORGIA  DIARY     .        .        .  207 

„      EASTER  DAY  DIARY,  1736 2o8 

„         PAGE:  HYMNS  TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN         .  215 

„         HYMN,  *TO  THEE  WITH  HEART  AND  MOUTH  I  SING'.  2l6 

,,        PAGE  OF  DIARY,  FINISHING  'THE  HOUSE*  .        .        .  227 

„         FIRST  MEETING  IN  '  THE  HOUSE7       ....  228 

WESLEY'S  FIRST  SHORTHAND 305 

REDUCED  FACSIMILES  OF  WESLEY'S  SHORTHAND,  MARCH  9  AND  IO, 

1737      •                         •                                      •                                                                -  331 
REDUCED    FACSIMILES    OF   WESLEY'S    HYMN-WRITING         .            .            -341 

PETER    BOHLER     ..........  433 

JOHN    GAMBOLD     ..........  453 

COUNT   ZINZENDORF       .........  433 

JAMES    HUTTON     ..........  433 

REDUCED  FACSIMILE  OF  WESLEY'S  NEW  FORM  OF  SHORTHAND 

DIARY 451 

MAP  OF  THE  ALDERSGATE  LOCALITY 473 


INTRODUCTORY 

JOHN    WESLEY'S    EARLY    LIFE    IN    THE 
LIGHT  OF  UNPUBLISHED   DIARIES. 
THE   FIRST   OXFORD  DIARY. 
WESLEY'S   CIPHER. 


VOL.  I. 


JOHN  WESLEY'S  EARLY  LIFE  IN  THE 
LIGHT  OF  UNPUBLISHED  DIARIES 

THE  Diaries  available  for  annotating  a  new  edition  of  Wesley's 
Journal  have  been  preserved  in  a  series  of  small  neatly  written 
volumes.1  Unfortunately  the  series  is  far  from  complete.  We 
have  the  beginning  and  the  end  ;  but  at  several  points  volumes 
are  missing.  Between  the  years  1741  and  1790  we  lament  a 
gap  which  possibly  may  never  be  filled.  To  many  readers  the 
Diaries,  though  not  wholly  unintelligible,  would,  if  published, 
prove  disappointing.  Intended  for  private  use,  their  information 
concerning  Wesley  and  his  friends  and  their  times  is  frag- 
mentary. Enough  is  told  to  serve  the  purpose  the  diarist  had 
in  view,  but  not  enough  to  appease  the  curiosity  of  readers  a 
hundred  and  sixty  years  later.  The  writing,  moreover,  is  severely 
abbreviated.  A  cipher  is  used  to  which  no  key  is  provided,  or 
only  one  more  perplexing  than  the  writing  itself.  In  the  later 

1  The  following  table  gives  the  broad  facts  with  reference  to  Wesley's  private 
Diaries : 

Oxford  I.         April  5,  1725  to  Feb.  19,  1727,  Mr.  G.  Stampe,  Great  Grimsby. 

Lost  vols.        Feb.  20,  1727  to  April  29,  1729. 

Oxford  II.       April  30,  1729  to  June  17,  1732,  Colman  Collection. 

Oxford  III.     June  18,  1732  to  Sept.  30,  1733,         „  „ 

Oxford  IV.     Oct.  I,  1733  to  APril  22,  !734>  »»  », 

Lost  vols.        April  23,  1734  to  Sept.  6,  1734. 

Sept.  7,  1734  to  Feb.  8,  1735  (once  in  Colman  Collection). 
Feb.  9,  1735  to  Oct.  16,  1735. 

Georgia  I.       Oct.  17,  1735  to  April  30,  1736,  in  the  Colman  Collection. 
Georgia  II.     May  I,  1736  to  Feb.  n,  1737,  Bishop  Hendrix. 
Georgia  III.    Feb.  12,  1737  to  Aug.  31,  1737,  Colman  Collection. 
Lost  vol.         Sept.  i,  1737  to  March  31,  1738. 

London  and  Bristol,  fragments  from  April  I,  1738,  Colman  Collection. 
Lost  vol.         April  1739  to  Oct.  14,  1739. 

London,  &c.    Oct.  15,  1739  to  Aug.  8,  1741,  Colman  Collection. 
Lost  vols.        Aug.  9,  1741  to  Feb.  24.  1790. 

Last  Diary.     Feb.  25,  1790  to  Feb.  24,  1791,  in  Headingley  College  Library. 
The  Oxford  Monthly  Review  at  one  point  extends  beyond  the  Diary,  Oxford  IV. 

3 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


volumes  a  system  of  shorthand,  long  disused,  is  employed,  and 
is  more  or  less  interwoven  with  the  partially  discarded  cipher. 
For  those,  however,  who  patiently  interpret  them,  the  Diaries 
have  messages  of  great  importance.  They  belong  to  periods  in 
Wesley's  career  during  which  he  himself  and  his  life-work  were 
in  course  of  development,  and  they  reveal  the  Providence  which 
prepared,  prevented,  and  led  him  through  ways  unknown.  From 
this  point  of  view  even  the  most  monotonous  pages  assume  a 
new  meaning  and  value. 

This  first  volume  of  the  Standard  Edition  includes  the  Georgia 
episode,  from  the  embarkation  at  Gravesend  in  the  autumn  of 
1735  to  early  in  1738,  a  period  of  two  years  and  three  months. 
This  portion  of  the  Journal,  as  we  hitherto  have  possessed 
it,  is  an  extract  from  a  larger  journal,  itself  constructed  from 
memory,1  aided  by  brief  notes  entered  day  by  day,  and  often 
hour  by  hour,  in  Diaries  some  of  which  have  recently  come  to 
light  again.2  Though  these  Georgia  Diaries  were  known  to  be 
in  existence,  the  material  they  contained  was  hidden,  and  for 
half  a  century  or  more  the  little  volumes  themselves  were  not 
visible  save  to  the  families  which  possessed  and  securely  guarded 
them. 

We  now  know  that  material  not  less  valuable  exists  for  the 
elucidation  of  Wesley's  life  at  Oxford  prior  to  the  Georgia 
period.  As  early  as  the  spring  of  1725,  some  months  before 
his  ordination,  Wesley  began  to  keep  a  diary.  These  Diaries 
are  accessible,  but  their  interpretation  is  far  from  easy.  Wesley 
was  an  economist  of  space  and  words.  Signs  and  abbreviations, 
plain  to  him  and  sufficient  for  his  purpose,  are  enigmas  to  us. 
Had  he  adopted  one  simple  system,  either  of  shorthand  or  of 
abbreviated  longhand,  the  task  of  deciphering  would  have  been 
comparatively  easy.  But  before  learning  Byrom's3  system,  he 


1  Certain  of  the  more  graphic  descrip-  use  it  himself.     Charles  Wesley  was  an 
tions  were  written  immediately  after,  and  expert  writer  of  Byrom's  shorthand.     In 
in  part  during,  the  events  pictured.  Georgia    he    insisted    on    his    brother's 

2  As  the  result  of  recent  discoveries,  adoption  of  the  system   as  a  protection 
the  text  of  the  Georgia  Journal  now  more  against  unscrupulous  tamperers  with  their 
nearly  approximates  to  Wesley's  original  correspondence.     A  portion  of  the  third 
draft.  volume    of   the   Georgia    Diary    is    in 

3  The  Oxford    Diaries  show  that  he  Byrom's    shorthand,   and  all   the    later 
taught  Weston's  shorthand,  but  did  not  Diaries. 


Introductory 


wove  into  his  own  scheme  of  abbreviation  a  shorthand  unknown 
to  modern  experts.  The  greatest  difficulty  of  all,  however,  arises 
from  the  cryptic  writing  which  Wesley  curiously  interwove  with 
his  other  forms  of  abbreviation.  Here  again,  not  content  with 
a  single  and  simple  cipher,  he  introduces  as  the  months  go  by 
new  elements,  making  it  more  and  more  complex.1  Why  he 
thus  disguised  his  pen  will  appear  later. 

The  first  Oxford  Diary2  was  acquired  a  few  years  ago  by 
Mr.  George  Stampe,  of  Great  Grimsby.  It  differs  from  other 
manuscript  books  of  the  series  in  appearance,  being  much  older, 
and  also  in  the  general  character  of  its  contents.  It  is  not  only 
a  diary,  but  contains  time-tables  of  study,  lists  of  pupils  and 
of  subscribers  to  his  father's  Dissertations  on  Job>  accounts,  lists 
of  books  read  or  to  be  read,  texts  on  which  sermons  are  to  be 
written,  and  miscellaneous  notes  and  extracts.  As  a  diary  it  is 
of  priceless  interest,  if  only  because  it  opens  the  series.  But, 
more  important  still,  it  reveals  the  man  himself  at  the  outset  of 
his  quest  after  saving  faith  and  the  ne\v  creation.  The  Diary 
becomes  a  drama,  the  scenes  of  which  are  laid  in  Oxford,  Wroot, 
and  Epvvorth,  in  Gloucestershire  and  Worcestershire,  and  again 
in  Oxford.  Many  persons  are  introduced  whose  names  have 
hitherto  been  unknown  to  us.  Others  whom  we  have  slightly 
known  appear  in  a  new  and  striking  light.  The  record,  extend- 
ing from  April  5,  1725,  to  February  19,  1727,  forms  a  preliminary 
study  enabling  us  more  perfectly  to  understand  the  genesis  and 
work  of  the  Holy  Club,  the  causes  leading  to  the  Georgia 
expedition  and  its  apparent  failure,  and,  finally,  the  early  evolu- 
tion of  that  remarkable  condition  of  spiritual  helplessness  which 
proved  to  be  a  discipline  preparatory  to  an  evangelical  conversion. 
The  publication  of  this  Diary  as  it  stands  would  be  of  little  if 
any  interest  except  to  a  small  number  of  expert  students.  It 
has  been  thought,  therefore,  that  an  analysis  of  its  contents, 
with  translated  extracts  and  a  few  passages  in  facsimile,  would 
be  sufficient  as  an  introduction  to  the  well-known  letter 3  to 
Mr.  Morgan,  senior,  in  which  Wesley  describes  the  founding  of 
the  Holy  Club. 


1  For  the  Wesley  cipher-writing  and       and  translations,  is  given  on  pp.  36-70. 
its  interpretation,  see  pp.  71-7.  J   Works ,  vol.  i.  pp.  5-14. 

2  An  analysis,  with  facsimile  examples 


6  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

Returning  from  Epworth  in  1729  to  fulfil  those  college 
duties  which  Lincoln  expected  from  its  younger  Fellows,1  he 
found  that  Mr.  Robert  Kirkham,  of  Merton  College,  whom 
he  had  hitherto  known  only  as  a  youthful  member  of  the 
Stanton  family,2  and  his  brother  Charles  and  William  Morgan, 
both  of  Christ  Church,  had  formed  a  small  society  for  the  study 
of  the  classics  and  the  New  Testament  and  for  the  cultivation 
of  religion.  Wesley  at  once  joined  this  society.  Under  his 
influence  it  became,  in  study  and  the  observance  of  church 
rites,  more  and  more  devotional,  spiritual,  and  methodical. 
Nicknames,  intended  to  load  it  with  reproach,  were  rained  upon 
it.  The  fittest  of  these  has  survived,  and  '  Methodist '  has  won 
imperishable  fame. 

The  popular  impression  is  that  Wesley  himself  founded 
and  organized  the  society  of  Oxford  Methodists.3  Fertile  in 
resource,  it  is  assumed  that  he  was  a  great  organizer.  It  is 
more  in  accordance  with  facts  to  say  that,  however  great  he  may 
have  been  in  organization,  he  was  not  an  originator.  He  utilized 
the  experience  of  the  past,  borrowed  freely  from  his  contem- 
poraries, knew  how  to  follow  a  friend's  initiative,  and  had  a  rare 
gift  of  assimilation.  He  was  quick  to  see  the  usefulness  of  new 
ideas,  and  did  not  despise  them  because  they  came  from  other 
Churches  or  from  friends  and  allies  in  his  own  circle.  The 
class-meeting,  lay  preaching,  and  the  love-feast  are  illustrations 
in  point.  Wesley,  however,  did  not  himself  conceive  the  idea  of 
the  Holy  Club.  He  swiftly  recognized  the  value  of  a  simple 
institution  into  the  founding  of  which  men  some  years  younger 
than  himself  had  been  led. 

The  influence  of  the  Holy  Club  on  the  religious  and  irre- 
ligious life  of  the  University  increased,  not  rapidly,  though  with 
marked  effect,  deepening  the  one  and  exasperating  the  other. 
But  its  most  important  result  was  seen  in  the  development  of 


1  Wesley  was  induced  by  the  rector  of  2  See  p.  23. 

his  college  to  resign  the  curacy   which  3  'An    Oxford    Methodist'    was    the 

he  held  under  his  father,  and  return  to  designation    used    by    Wesley    in   later 

Oxford,  that  he  might  undertake  the  edu-  life.      '  Our  Company  '  is  the  title  used 

cation  of  some  young  gentlemen  in  whose  in     the     Oxford     Diaries,     1729-1733. 

welfare  Dr.  Morley  was  deeply  interested.  *  Holy  Club,'  like    'Methodist,'  'Bible 

He  arrived  in  November  1729.  (Jackson's  Moths,'  &c.,   was  a  nickname  given  in 

Life  of  Charles   Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  21.)  scorn. 


Introductory 


John  Wesley  himself.  His  Diary,  notwithstanding  the  extreme 
brevity  of  its  entries,  reveals  a  man  who,  from  his  birth  a 
chosen  vessel,  is  passing  through  psychological  changes  that  are 
prophecies  of  the  future.  To  a  considerable  extent  he  has 
laid  aside  weights  and  besetments  which  unfitted  him  to  run 
the  race  set  before  him,  and  is  unconsciously  being  prepared 
for  a  task  the  nature  of  which  is  as  yet  hidden.  The  story  he 
tells  to  Mr.  Morgan,  the  father  of  William,  reflects  a  light  into 
which  he  himself  is  slowly — very  slowly — passing.  It  is  the 
light  of  a  coming  day,  and  it  makes  apparent  the  kind  of 
spiritual  life  that  became  his  ideal,  eventually  fulfilling  the 
original  purpose  of  the  Holy  Club.  Whatever  might  become 
of  the  '  body  '  of  Oxford  Methodism,  its  soul  would  pass  to 
an  appointed  goal.  The  corn  of  wheat  falls  into  the  ground 
and  dies  ;  but  in  due  time  it  comes  again  in  the  triumph  of 
a  new  and  richer  life. 

If  it  is  asked  why  the  new  society  did  not  drift  into  mys- 
ticism, as  so  many  of  its  predecessors  had  done,  or  degenerate 
into  a  mere  social  club  with  some  charitable  or  other  beneficiary 
object  as  its  excuse  or  occasion,  the  answer  may  be  found  in 
the  account  given  by  Wesley  to  the  father  of  his  young 
friend.  That  story  he  had  already  told  with  all  humility  to 
his  parents  and  to  the  chaplain  of  the  bishop  of  his  diocese. 
They  rejoiced  in  the  character  stamped  upon  this  new  outbreak 
of  university  devotionalism.  Most  of  all  were  they  thankful  for 
that  which  rapidly  became  its  salient  feature.  Attendance  at  Holy 
Communion,  strict  observance  of  church  order,  the  devout  study 
of  Holy  Scripture,  hours  stolen  from  sleep  and  worldly  amuse- 
ments l  and  devoted  to  religious  exercises — these  things,  though 
not  without  value,  were  in  themselves  of  little  moment  compared 
with  that  practical  religion  which  every  day  cared  for  the  poor, 
the  sinful,  and  the  dying.  Oxford  Methodism  was  intensely 
practical.  It  reflected  the  life  of  Him  who,  in  the  synagogue  of 
His  own  boyhood,  stood  up  and  read  those  words  which,  since 
our  Lord  endorsed  them,  have  always  been  the  sign  and  charter 
of  true  religion  :  '  TJie  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me,  because  He 

1  Wesley  renounced  all  his  recrea-  Diaries  show  how  great  was  the  renuncia- 
tions, and  during  the  Georgia  period  all  tion.  Cf.  letter  to  Samuel  Wesley  (see 
classical  studies,  plays,  and  fiction.  The  Appendix  I.  vol.  vi. ). 


UBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 


8  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

hath  anointed  Me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor  ;  He  liath  sent 
Me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives, 
and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that 
are  bruised' 

William  Morgan  began  the  religious  work  that  resulted 
in  the  Christian  philanthropy  of  Methodism.  From  Wesley 
and  his  friends  the  future  was  hidden.  But  those  of  a  later 
time,  to  whom  the  shrouded  past  becomes  an  open  vision, 
can  see  the  mind  of  Christ  hovering  over  the  little  company 
and  the  hand  of  God  directing  all  their  enterprises.  The  first 
Oxford  Diary,  as  we  shall  presently  more  fully  learn,  has  this 
among  other  peculiarities,  that  it  contains  no  reference  whatever 
to  the  philanthropies  which  became  the  most  striking  feature 
in  the  daily  life  of  the  first  Oxford  Methodists.  In  the  whole 
history  of  Methodism  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  more 
remarkable  contrast  than  that  which  may  now  be  drawn 
between  the  Rules  and  Resolutions  of  Holy  Living  so  pro- 
minent in  Wesley's  Cipher  Diary  and  the  *  Questions  '  in  Wesley's 
letter  to  Mr.  Morgan  *  which  so  admirably  describes  the  life  of 
the  Holy  Club,  and,  we  may  add,  of  Methodism  in  its  noblest 
periods. 

How  came  it  to  pass  that  Joseph  Benson,  in  his  edition  of 
Wesley's  Journal,  omitted  the  letter  to  Mr.  Morgan  ?  Did  he 
fail  to  see  its  essential  value  as  an  introduction  to  the  Georgia 
episode?  Thomas  Jackson  restored  it,  and  it  is  never  likely 
that  a  single  line  of  a  document  so  prophetic  will  again  be 
omitted. 

Wesley  believed  that  the  purpose  of  the  Holy  Club,  fulfilled 
to  some  extent  in  Oxford,  might  be  carried  out  with  even 
greater  effect  among  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  Far  West.  The 
root  of  his  mistake  may  be  discovered  in  the  text  printed  on 
the  title-page  of  the  first  Extract  of  his  Journal :  '  What  shall 
we  say  then  ?  That  .  .  .  Israel,  which  followed  after  the  law  of 
righteousness,  hath  not  attained  to  the  law  of  righteousness. 
Wherefore  ?  Because  they  sought  it  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were 
by  the  works  of  the  law} 

The  fact  remains  that  in  Wesley's  judgement — a  judgement 


1  Wesley's  Introduction  to  the  Georgia  Extract  (see  pp.  87-102). 


1.  LINCOLN    COLLEGE,    OXFORD,    lit  WESLEY  S    TIMB. 

2.  CHRIST    CHURCH    COLLEGE,    OXFORD. 

Photographs  by  H.  W.  Taunt  &•  Co.,  Oxford. 
10 


Introductory  1 1 


formed,  be  it  remembered,  after  his  evangelical  conversion — the 
story  of  the  Holy  Club  was  the  true  interpretation  of  the  moral 
and  religious  significance  of  Georgia.  The  Mission  to  Oxford 
University,  like  the  Mission  to  Georgia,  was  comparatively  a 
failure ;  and  for  the  same  reason — because  '  they  sought  right- 
eousness not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law.' 
Yet  both  episodes  served  a  purpose  in  the  training  of  Wesley 
that  was  not  only  providential  but  pre-eminently  spiritual. 

The  voyage  to  America,  the  work  in  Savannah  and  Frederica, 
the  collapse  of  cherished  hopes,  were  part  of  the  discipline  that 
brought  Wesley  to  a  just  understanding  of  his  own  limitations. 
The  Holy  Club,  immediately  preceding  his  Georgia  experience, 
helped  him  in  his  progress  towards  the  light,  but  it  fell  short 
of  perfect  enlightenment.  It  left  him  without  the  law  of 
the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus.  Of  this  deeper  and  richer 
experience  he  had  as  yet  no  knowledge.  It  required  the 
discipline  of  Georgia  to  bring  him  to  himself.  He  could  not 
hope  to  be  a  teacher  sent  from  God  until  he  had  himself  come 
to  God  through  the  only  living  way,  a  way  that  as  yet  was 
hidden  from  his  eyes.  The  more  closely  the  whole  subject  is 
studied,  the  more  clearly  will  it  be  seen  that  some  account  of 
his  religious  experience  was  necessary  as  an  introduction  to 
those  religious  aspirations  and  sorrows  which  marked  the 
Georgia  life.  No  more  fitting  exposition  of  his  faith  and 
practice  at  this  time  could  have  been  furnished  than  that 
contained  in  his  own  graphic  description  of  the  Holy  Club. 

Why,  it  may  further  be  asked,  did  not  Wesley  begin  his 
Journal  at  an  earlier  period,  say,  from  the  year  of  his  ordination  ? 
He  had  at  his  disposal  ample  material.  His  first  Diary  is  dated 
April  5,  1725.  He  was  then  twenty-two  years  of  age.  In 
addition  to  the  Diary  he  had  free  access  to  a  considerable  store 
of  letters ;  and  if  we  may  judge  from  those  that  have  survived, 
all  were  more  or  less  autobiographical.  His  student  life  was 
not  lacking  in  variety.  Few  men  in  Oxford  were  more  popular. 
He  had  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  men  of  social  and  intel- 
lectual distinction.  The  later  Oxford  Diaries  show  that  during 
his  residential  university  life  he  was  a  great  traveller  in  English 
counties,  and  often  on  foot.  We  may  imagine  an  Oxford  and 
Epworth  journal,  set  in  a  framework  of  scholarly  and  social 


X 


1 2  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

interest,  its  main  feature  a  description  of  that  earnest  seeking 
after  true  religion  which  was  the  dominant  impulse  of  Wesley's 
early  adult  life.  Such  a  journal  would  have  fulfilled  the 
evangelist's  ideal  of  religious  usefulness  in  everything  he  printed 
as  well  as  in  everything  he  spoke.  If  his  purpose  in  the 
Georgia  Journal  were  to  portray  a  soul  contending  with  itself 
and  with  adverse  and  diverse  external  influences,  a  soul  in 
course  of  gradual  preparation  for  the  as  yet  unguessed  work 
of  the  future,  how  instructive  such  a  self-revelation  would 
have  been !  We  should  have  seen  the  slow  process  of 
spiritual  enlightenment,  and  have  learned  much  concerning  the 
way  in  which  God  made  all  things  work  together,  now  by 
providential  discipline,  and  now  by  spiritual  striving.  But  it 
was  not  possible  for  Wesley  in  the  year  1739  to  begin  an 
autobiographical  record  with  the  day  of  his  ordination.  Had 
he  attempted  such  a  course,  he  must  have  brought  into  the 
personnel  of  the  story  friends  who  had  admitted  him  into 
the  intimacies  of  family  life.  He  had  no  right  to  betray  the 
confidence  of  private  intercourse.  Other  reasons  operated 
coincidently,  as  will  appear  in  the  annotations.  For  our  present 
purpose  it  may  suffice  to  remember  that  Wesley  was  not  at 
liberty  to  publish  the  contents  of  his  private  Oxford  Diaries 
without  the  consent  of  persons  from  whom  by  this  time  he 
was  far  removed. 

That  Wesley's  awakening  began  long  before  he  thought  of 
going  to  Georgia,  and  before  the  founding  of  the  Holy  Club, 
no  one  who  has  read  his  Diaries  can  for  a  moment  doubt. 
When  did  the  first  awakening  take  place  ?  Who  aroused  this 
prince  in  Israel,  and,  under  God,  made  him  henceforth  a  restless, 
unsatisfied  seeker  after  his  Lord  ?  The  answers  to  these  ques- 
tions form  a  chapter  in  Wesley's  religious  experience  hitherto 
almost  unknown.  A  few  of  the  facts  have  been  familiar  to 
readers  of  his  biography,  but  quite  recently  a  much  fuller  light 
has  dawned. 

When  in  his  printed  Journal  for  1738  Wesley  came  to 
1  Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday,'  May  22,  23,  and  24,  he 
quoted  *  a  letter  to  a  friend,'  and  then  proceeded  to  review  his 
religious  experience  from  childhood  onwards.  Such  a  review 
was  necessary  if  readers  were  to  understand  the  significance 


Introductory 


of  '  what  occurred '  on  Wednesday  the  24th.  This  remarkable 
document  should  be  carefully  studied  by  those  who  would  form 
just  views  of  Wesley's  opinions  and  experience  at  the  most 
critical  moment  of  his  career.  Here  a  few  sentences  will  suffice. 
Having  described  the  religion  of  his  childhood  at  home,  of  his 
boyhood  at  the  Charterhouse,  and  of  his  student  life  for  five 
years  at  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  he  writes : 

When  I  was  about  twenty-two,  my  father  pressed  me  to  enter  into 
holy  orders.  At  the  same  time,  the  providence  of  God  directing  me 
to  Kempis's  Christian  Pattern,  I  began  to  see  that  true  religion  was 
seated  in  the  heart,  and  that  God's  law  extended  to  all  our  thoughts 
as  well  as  words  and  actions.  I  was,  however,  very  angry  at  Kempis 
for  being  too  strict;  though  I  read  him  only  in  Dean  Stanhope's 
translation.  Yet  I  had  frequently  much  sensible  comfort  in  reading 
him,  such  as  I  was  an  utter  stranger  to  before ;  and  meeting  likewise 
with  a  religious  friend,  which  I  never  had  till  now,  I  began  to  alter  the 
whole  form  of  my  conversation  and  to  set  in  earnest  upon  a  new  life.1 
I  set  apart  an  hour  or  two  a  day  for  religious  retirement.  I  communi- 
cated every  week,  I  watched  against  all  sin,  whether  in  word  or  deed. 
I  began  to  aim  at,  and  pray  for,  inward  holiness.  So  that  now,  '  doing 
so  much,  and  living  so  good  a  life,'  I  doubted  not  but  I  was  a  good 
Christian. 

No  biographer  or  commentator,  so  far  as  we  are  aware, 
has  succeeded  in  ascertaining  the  identity  of  this  religious 
friend.  And  in  truth  the  mystery  could  not  now  have  been 
penetrated,  except  for  the  incidental  light  thrown  upon  it  by  the 
Diaries.  That  Wesley  himself  regarded  the  friendship  referred 
to  in  the  italicized  sentence  as  of  supreme  importance  is  proved 
by  the  fact  that  the  conviction  formed  in  April  1725  remained 
his  unwavering  conviction  in  April  1732,  and,  at  the  most  critical 
moment  in  his  life,  in  May  1738 — a  period  of  thirteen  years.  A 
book  and  a  friend  were  used  by  the  providence  of  God  to  check 
and  to  change  the  career  of  John  Wesley.  The  book  we  know  ; 
but  who  was  the  '  religious  friend '  ?  Was  he  an  Oxford  tutor, 
or  a  fellow  student  ?  The  phraseology  seems  to  exclude 
relatives,  nor  is  the  sex  defined.  The  friend  might  have  been 
a  man  or  a  woman  ;  could  it  have  been  father  or  mother, 
'  my  brother  Samuel,'  one  of  his  sisters,  or,  as  we  at  one 

1  The  italics  are  our  own.— ED. 


14  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

time  guessed,  John  Griffiths,  his  '  first  convert '  ?  These  and 
other  surmises  naturally  fill  the  mind  of  the  close  student  as 
he  lingers  on  this  critical  passage.  The  words  that  immedi- 
ately follow  succinctly  summarize  the  religious  life  described 
in  the  first  Oxford  Diary.  Of  that  life  we  have  hitherto  known 
nothing  except  the  general  features  inferred  from  the  above 
passage  and  from  the  few  family  letters  that  have  survived. 
The  details  are  preserved  in  the  cipher  record  of  the  first  Diary. 
An  examination  of  the  first  page  in  the  Diary J  at  once  fastens 
attention  upon  a  sentence  obviously  inserted  at  a  somewhat 
later  date  in  a  space  that  may  have  been  left  vacant  for  it. 
The  process-plate  only  imperfectly  preserves  differences  in  ink  ; 
but  it  sufficiently  emphasizes  the  special  importance  Wesley 
attached  to  the  entry  in  question.  The  page,  it  will  be  noted, 
is  filled  with  studies  of  the  morning  and  afternoon  up  to  the 
Friday  of  the  second  week  in  April.  At  this  point  Wesley 
went  out  of  town  ;  he  does  not,  however,  explain  where  he 
went,  nor  could  we  have  guessed  his  destination  but  for  what 
follows.  He  no  doubt  spent  the  interval  between  Monday, 
April  10,  and  Friday,  May  28,2  on  the  borders  of  Gloucester- 
shire. On  May  28  he  resumes  his  Diary.  The  sentence  at  this 
point  inserted  is  plainly  written,  with  the  exception  of  one  word 
and  two  capital  letters ;  these  are  in  the  peculiar  cipher-writing 
fully  described  in  another  place.3  The  cryptic  word  is  certainly 
the  name  of  a  person  ;  the  words  accompanying  it  mark  the 
very  great  importance  attached  to  the  incident  in  the  diarist's 
life.  The  following  is  the  inserted  passage  : 

to. 


2.0 


1  See  p.  37.  with  Old  and  New  Style.     Two  of  the 

2  Wesley's  dates,  like  the  pages  of  his  dates. in  the  above  passage,  as  originally 
Diaries,  and  his  use  of  numbers  gener-  written,  were  wrong.     Wesley,  discover- 
ally,  are  not  to  be  relied  upon  without  ing  the  error,  attempted   to  rectify  it  ; 
careful  verification.    In  striving  to  rectify  in  so  doing  he  rather  adds  to  the  con- 
errors,  the  student  has  to  remember  the  fusion. 

complications  which  arise  in  connexion          3  See  p.  71. 


Introductory  1 5 


The  erasures  strengthen  the  impression  of  extreme  care  in 
making  the  entry,  but  they  do  not  succeed  in  clearing  up  the 
date-figures.  The  name  written  in  cipher  is  Varanese,  the 
pseudonym  of  Miss  Betty  Kirkham,  a  younger  daughter  of 
the  Rev.  Lionel  Kirkham,  rector  of  Stanton,  and  a  member 
of  the  correspondence  and  reading  circle  which  included  John 
and  Charles  Wesley  and  Mrs.  Granville's  two  daughters. 

For  his  definite  reawakening  in  Oxford  Wesley  was  indebted 
largely  to  the  teaching  of  certain  devotional  books :  Thomas 
a  Kempis's  Imitation  of  Christ,  or  Christian  Pattern',  Bishop 
Jeremy  Taylor's  Holy  Living  and  Dying-,  William  Law's 
Christian  Perfection.  Reading  his  own  carefully  drawn  account, 
we  can  scarcely  avoid  wondering  under  what  circumstances,  or 
by  what  friendly  voice  or  pen,  Wesley's  attention  was  first 
directed  to  these  devotional  writers.  The  providence  of  God 
directed  Wesley  to  Thomas  &  Kempis's  Imitation  of  Christ, 
and  Varanese  was  intimately  associated  with  the  seemingly 
trifling  incident.  The  details  we  may  never  know,  but  the  facts 
are  beyond  question.  At  or  about  the  same  time  the  Holy  Living 
fell  into  his  hands,  probably  through  the  same  or  a  similar 
agency.  And  if  we  may  anticipate,  about  a  year  later,  and  again 
following  immediately  on  a  visit  to  the  rectory  at  Stanton,  he 
began  an  almost  furious  study  of  William  Law,  whose  Christian 
Perfection  had  then  been  published  about  two  years. 

It  will  probably  be  urged,  in  reply,  that  the  communications 
between  Oxford  and  Epworth  in  1725  indicate  Susanna  Wesley 
as  the  person  who  kindled  her  son's  enthusiasm  for  devotional 
literature.  But  a  study  of  the  original  letters  proves  conclu- 
sively that  this  could  not  have  been  the  case.  Kempis  and 
Taylor  were  almost  as  great  a  revelation  to  Mrs.  Wesley  as  to 
her  son.  In  the  review  of  his  experience  already  quoted  he 
writes  :  '  When  I  was  about  twenty-two,  my  father  pressed  me 
to  enter  into  holy  orders.'  He  was  born  in  1703  :  in  April  1725, 
the  date  of  the  Varanese  entry,  he  was  therefore  '  about  twenty- 
two.'  He  went  out  of  town  on  '  Monday,  April  10.'  Easter  in 
that  year  fell  on  March  28.  He  returned  to  Oxford  on  Friday, 
May  28.  On  the  day  following,  May  29,  he  wrote  a  letter  to 
his  parents  from  Oxford  :  '  I  was  lately  advised  [he  defines  the 
mode  of  providential  direction]  to  read  Thomas  a  Kempis  over, 


1 6  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

which  I  had  frequently  seen,  but  never  much  looked  into  before. 
I  think  he  must  have  been  a  person  of  great  piety  and  devotion  ; 
but  it  is  my  misfortune  to  differ  from  him  in  some  of  his  main 
points.'  On  June  8  in  the  same  year  his  mother  sent  him  a  long 
letter  in  which,  replying  to  his  inquiry,  she  wrote :  '  I  have 
Kempis  by  me  ;  but  have  not  read  him  lately.  I  cannot  recollect 
the  passages  you  mention  ;  but,  believing  you  do  him  justice, 
I  do  positively  aver  that  he  is  extremely  in  the  wrong  in  that 
impious,  I  was  about  to  say  blasphemous,  suggestion,  that 
God,  by  an  irrevocable  decree,  has  determined  any  man  to  be 
miserable  even  in  this  world.'  She  goes  on  to  say  that  Kempis 
had  '  more  zeal  than  knowledge.'  From  this  it  is  quite  clear 
that  Mrs.  Wesley  was  not  responsible  for  advising  her  son  to 
read  The  Christian  Pattern. 

On  June  18,  1725,  he  again  writes  to  his  mother,  asking 
questions  about  Jeremy  Taylor's  Holy  Living  and  Dying.  In  a 
passage,  omitted  by  Tyerman,  he  remarks :  *  I  have  heard  one  I 
take  to  be  a  person  of  good  judgement  say,  that  she  [in  this  case 
the  person  advising  him  was  a  woman  other  than  his  mother] 
would  advise  no  one  very  young  to  read  Dr.  Taylor  of  Living 
and  Dying :  she  added,  that  he  almost  put  her  out  of  her  senses, 
when  she  was  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  old,  because  he  seemed  to 
exclude  all  from  being  in  a  way  of  salvation  who  did  not  come 
up  to  his  rules,  some  of  which  are  altogether  impracticable.'  On 
July  21,  1725,  his  mother  replies:  'I  know  little  or  nothing  of 
Dr.  Taylor's  Holy  Living  and  Dying,  having  not  seen  it  for  above 
twenty  years  ;  but  I  think  it  is  generally  well  esteemed.' 

This  evidence  falls  short  of  an  actual  statement  that  the 
*  religious  friend'  was  Varanese,  and  that  it  was  she  who 
directed  his  attention  to  Kempis,  and  about  the  same  time  to 
Bishop  Taylor  also.  But,  though  circumstantial,  the  evidence 
is  clear,  ample,  and,  as  Paley  would  say,  'undesigned.'1 

1  From   April   1725,   V.,   or  Var.    or  written:     '  To   b  S    (brother    Samuel), 

Varan6,    is  in   frequent    correspondence  S  P.  (Sis.  Patty),  my  father,  Mr.  Barnard, 

with   Wesley.     In   April   1732   the  fol-  Sel(ima),    V(aranese).'      Tyerman    says 

lowing  appears  in  his  regular   monthly  that    Miss    Betty    Kirkham    married    a 

review:    'N.B.    April    20,     1725,    saw  Mr.  Wilson,  and  died  in  1731  ;  but  John 

V[aranese].      April   20,   1732,    saw  Mr.  Wesley  is  writing  to  her  in  1732,  she  is 

Clayton  !  V  F  [one  of  his  cipher  ejacula-  on  his  list  of  correspondents  in  1735-7, 

tions  of  devout  gratitude].'     On  the  same  and  Charles  sees  her  in  1737.    See  Charles 

page,  for  May  1732,  he  enters  as  letters  Wesley's  Journal,  new  ed.  p.  116. 


I.    THE    RECTORY,    EPWORTH. 

2.    SAMUEL    WESLEY.  3.    SWSAHK A, *&&**>&> 

4.    EPWORTH    CHURCHYARD    FROM    WEST    DOOR. 

17 


Introductory  1 9 


The  question  of  Wesley's  indebtedness  to  personal  friends 
is  a  comparatively  unworked  quarry.  The  private  Diaries  show 
that  in  Oxford,  in  Epworth  and  its  neighbouring  parishes,  and 
in  the  Broadway  district,  he  had  a  large  number  of  intimate 
friends.  Lists  of  these  will  be  given  in  due  course.  A  few  of 
them  were  women ;  but  the  majority  were  men,  often  older 
than  himself  and  heads  of  families.  He  loved  a  family  circle, 
loved  to  sit  at  the  fireside  with  congenial  company,  reading 
aloud  or  discussing  events  of  the  day,  books,  points  in  moral 
philosophy,  history,  science,  plays  and  poetry,  and  natural 
phenomena.  Parlour  games,  such  as  at  that  time  beguiled  the 
long  winter  evenings  in  country  rectories  and  college  rooms,  he 
did  not  despise.  In  Worcestershire  he  occasionally  danced 
with  friends,  and  with  his  sisters  almost  on  every  available 
evening  during  his  visits  to  Wroot  and  Epworth.  All  this 
illustrates  the  fact  that  he  had  not  in  him  the  making  of  a 
recluse,  or  even  of  a  hard,  sour-visaged  Puritan.  He  was 
essentially  a  friendly  man.  In  Oxford,  whether  as  commoner 
at  Christ  Church  or  a  Fellow  at  Lincoln,  he  rarely  breakfasted, 
drank  tea,  or  even  worked  alone.  Companionship  seemed 
essential.  From  the  days  of  the  earliest  written  record  it  is 
a  story  of  fellowship.  His  own  title  for  the  Holy  Club  in  his 
manuscript  Diaries  is  *  Our  Company.' 

Like  many  of  the  greatest  and  best  men  of  our  own  times,  he 
owed  much  to  the  friendship  of  women.  All  his  lady  friends,  be- 
ginning with  his  mother  and  sisters,  were  women  of  culture  and 
religious  disposition.  Some,  like  the  ladies  of  Stanton  Rectory  and 
the  Granvilles,  were  highly  educated,  readers  of  the  best  literature, 
and  brilliant  in  conversation.  All  were  devout  and,  according 
to  the  early  eighteenth-century  standard,  earnest  Christians. 
Remembering  what  Oxford  and  most  of  the  villages  were  at 
this  time — immoral,  irreligious,  tainted  with  infidelity ;  re- 
membering also  the  evil  influence  wielded  by  not  a  few  clever 
and  reckless  women,  we  cannot  but  rejoice  that  Wesley,  at 
twenty-two  years  of  age,  fell  under  the  influence  of  some  of 
the  best  and  most  intellectual  women  of  his  day.  How 
disastrous  might  have  been  the  fate  of  this  young  student- 
susceptible,  highly  strung,  and  most  attractive — except  for  the 
spells  cast  upon  him  by  English  gentlewomen  at  a  time  when 


2O  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

he  most  needed  their  restraining  and  inspiring  influence ! 
Among  these,  Varanese  ranks  as  his  '  first  religious  friend.' 

It  was  in  this  time  of  religious  conviction  that  Wesley's 
habit  of  diary-writing  took  root.  Let  us  stand  at  a  little 
distance  from  the  picture  etched  in  Oxford  Diary  No.  I,  and 
try  to  realize  what  Wesley  was  at  this  period.  The  Diary 
contains  a  triptych.  There  are  three  sharply  defined  and 
correlated  pictures. 

I.  We  see  an  Oxford  student  in  transition.  He  is  passing 
from  the  status  of  a  layman  into  that  of  a  clergyman.  He  is 
leaving  Christ  Church,  and  is  entering  on  the  career  of  a 
Fellow  of  Lincoln,  For  five  years,  from  seventeen  to  twenty- 
two,  he  had  been  winning  the  reputation  of  an  industrious, 
a  keen-witted  and  successful  student ;  a  thoughtful,  versatile, 
and  lively  comrade.  Too  frail  in  health  to  be  an  athlete,  he  had 
nevertheless  been  able  to  hold  his  own  in  the  tennis-court,  to 
pull  an  oar  on  the  river,  to  swim,  ride,  hunt,  and  to  walk  long 
distances.  There  is  no  evidence — and  had  there  been  any,  his 
own  self-upbraiding  pen  would  certainly  have  supplied  it — that 
these  years  had  witnessed  any  scattering  of  '  wild  oats.'  The 
worst  that  he  can  say  against  himself  is  that  he  had  *  gone  on 
contentedly  in  some  or  other  known  sin.' 

At  Oxford  he  was  not  only  a  great  reader,  but  his  manner 
of  handling  books  gave  him  the  mastery  of  them.  He 
analysed,  extracted,  sometimes  condensed  for  the  benefit  of 
friends,  and  always  'collected,'1  to  use  his  own  phrase.  It  is 
open  to  conjecture  whether  Wesley  could  ever  have  become  a 
great  scholar.  True  he  had  intellectual  capacity  of  a  very 
high  order.  But  withal  there  were  two  disqualifications :  frail 
health  compelled  him  to  indulge  in  a  disproportionate  amount 
of  rest  and  recreation,  and  he  was  essentially  discursive. 
Reviewing  the  work  of  a  week,  month,  or  year,  as  his  custom 
was,  he  often  upbraids  himself  for  '  idleness.'  The  context  of 
his  confessions  raises  the  suspicion  that  such  idleness  consisted 
more  frequently  than  not  in  excursions  into  by-paths  of 


•The    word    is    used,     in    Wesley's  paring  for  examination.     «"  Collection" 

sense,  in  Mrs.  Delany's  Life  and  Letters.  is  (5)  A  private  examination  at  the  end  of 

It  means  making  a  synopsis  of  a  book  each  term  at  the  colleges  of  the  English 

read,  with  notes  and  extracts,  to  use  in  pre-  Universities '  ( Century  Dictionary], 


Introductory  2 1 


literature  and  knowledge  and  in  visits  to  '  the  Coffee  House ' 
to  read  the  news.  He  spends,  for  instance,  precious  hours  in 
reading  Ben  Jonson's  play  The  Alchemist \  and  Py rates}  In 
self-examination  he  gives,  in  cipher,  judgement  against  himself 
thus:  'Idleness  slays.'  But  the  severe  concentration  on  selected 
subjects  and  the  rigid  self-denial  in  the  matter  of  current 
literature  necessary  to  expert  scholarship  never  characterized 
Wesley  at  either  Christ  Church  or  Lincoln.  He  knew  more 
in  the  wider  field  than  most  of  his  contemporaries,  and  his 
knowledge  was  exact  and  fairly  comprehensive  ;  yet,  like  many 
other  English  men  of  letters,  the  width  of  his  learning  impeded 
his  flight  upwards  to  the  heights  of  professorial  distinction.  It 
is  important  to  remember  all  this,  because  this  very  limitation, 
coupled  with  habits  of  economy  in  the  rescue  of  spare  moments 
for  reading,  made  him  in  after  life  a  leader  of  popular  education 
— the  best  gatherer  and  scatterer  of  useful  knowledge  that 
Georgian  England  knew. 

2.  Twice  after  his  election  to  the  Lincoln  Fellowship  he 
acted  as  his  father's  curate  in  the  twin  parishes  of  Wroot  and 
Epworth.  Of  the  first  visit,  which  extended  from  April  to 
September  1726,  we  have  a  record  in  some  detail  within  the 
covers  of  the  quaint  little  No.  I  Diary.2  Allowing  for  differences 
of  locality,  companionship,  and  recurring  duties,  he  lived  in  his 
father's  parishes  much  as  he  lived  and  conducted  himself 
in  Oxford.  He  worked  in  the  old  garden  at  Wroot,  made 
arbours  (one  of  the  seats  in  which  probably  remains  in  part  to 
this  day),  gathered  roses  and  elder  flowers  for  his  sisters,  cut 
stakes,  shot  plovers  in  the  fenland  that  then  lay  between  the 
two  parishes,  wrote  sermons  for  himself  and  his  father,  drank 
tea  here  and  there,  swam  on  summer  mornings  in  the  fen  river, 
and  went  to  every  village  fair  within  reach ;  transcribed  letters 
to  or  from  Varanese,  '  Na.,'  Aspasia,  and  his  brothers  ;  explored 
a  hermit's  grave,  covered  by  a  great  stone ; 3  as  one  to 

1  The  first  edition  of  Robinson  Crusoe,  *  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  of  1747 
published  in  1719,  had  on  the  title-page  gives  a  full  account  of  this  antiquarian 
the  following  :  '  His  strange  Adventures  jaunt,    taken    by    Mr.    George    Stovin, 
among  Py rates.'  of  Crowle,   in    company   with    Samuel 

2  The    longer    period,    which    closed  Wesley,    to   Lindholme,   near   Hatfield, 
late    in    1729,   is   also    recorded   in   an  in   Yorkshire.    John  was  of  the  party. 
'  Oxford  Diary' ;  but  part  (probably  one  (  W.H.S.  vol.  v.  p.  7.) 

volume)  of  the  record  is  lost. 

VOL.  I.  2 


22  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

whom  hard  reading  had  become  easy,  he  pursued  his  classical 
and  theological  studies,  read  and  collected  Spenser's  Faerie 
Queene,  indulged  in  The  Spectator,  in  plays  and  other  light 
literature ;  discussed  points  of  doctrine  or  moral  philosophy 
with  his  learned  mother,  carefully  noting  her  opinions  in  his 
Diary ;  laboriously  copied  out  Dissertations  on  Job  for  his  father ; 
read  to  his  sisters  as  they  sat  working  in  the  arbour,  stood 
godfather  to  sister  Nancy's  baby,  discoursed  to  Miss  Kitty 
Hargreaves,  read  Spenser  to  her,  and  was  not  unappreciative  of 
her  gentle  friendship  as  was  his  father  (not  his  mother)  ;  paid 
frequent  visits  to  his  mother's  great  friend,  Mr.  Hoole,  at  Haxey 
Rectory  ;  preached  severely  to  the  people  of  Epworth,  not  sparing 
their  sins,  especially  their  gossip  and  scandal,  visited  their  sick, 
and  buried  their  dead.  Mindful  of  the  voice  that  called  him 
to  the  devout  life,  he  '  writ '  his  Diary,  and  gave  himself  to 
prayer  and  self-examination.  He  lived  as  one  who  was  only, 
as  yet,  within  sight  of  the  frontier  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

What  a  contrast  between  the  daily  life  of  1726  and  that 
of  1739!  At  Wroot  we  see  a  better  sort  of  country  parson 
in  times  degenerate.  He  is  far  removed  from  George  Herbert 
in  The  Church  Porch,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  from  William 
Grimshaw,  the  Methodist  rector  of  Haworth ;  but  on  the  whole 
he  is  making  progress  towards,  and  is  being  prepared  for,  the 
great  ministry  of  the  future.  He  is  gentlemanly,  refined, 
familiar  with  the  best  literature  of  the  day,  a  congenial  com- 
panion ;  to  some  extent  worldly,  yet  standing  absolutely  clear 
of  grossness,  though  not  of  what  he  so  frequently  calls  *  levity ' ; 
not  exempt  from  temptation,  but  '  buffeting '  his  body,  and 
bringing  himself  under  the  iron  rule  of  law  and  resolution. 
All  the  while  he  honestly  strives  to  be  a  Christian  disciple—- 
an Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile. 

Could  such  a  man  ever  have  aroused  a  whole  country  to  reli- 
gious enthusiasm  ?  Could  such  a  scheme  of  morality  and  religion 
ever  have  forged  Methodism,  with  the  world  as  its  parish  and 
baptisms  of  fire  as  its  normal  experience?  We  follow  this 
little,  handsome,  clean-living  parson  as  he  rides  about  the 
fen  lands  in  immaculate  attire — cheery,  conversational,  adored 
by  his  sisters,  the  ever-welcome  companion  of  his  scholarly 
mother ;  and,  apart  from  miracle,  we  have  difficulty  in  realizing 


Introductory  23 


that  this  man,  a  few  years  hence,  will  be  one  of  the  Church's 
greatest  evangelists. 

3.  The  third  picture  of  Wesley  is  in  some  respects  the 
most  attractive.  Between  1725  and  1729  he  frequently  visited 
the  parishes  of  Broadway,  Buckland,  and  Stanton.  They 
are  still  amongst  the  most  beautiful  of  our  English  villages, 
and  in  Wesley's  early  days  were  enriched  by  family  life  of 
a  specially  interesting  and  intellectual  character.  Wesley  had 
personal  friends  in  all  three,  and  elsewhere  in  the  same  neigh- 
bourhood. He  lived  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship  with  their 
families.  Many  of  them  were  represented  in  the  University, 
which  was  only  one  day's  ride  distant.  They  seem  to  have 
been  closely  connected  with  the  Church  of  England,  as  well 
as  with  the  political  and  aristocratic  life  of  the  times,  and  to 
have  formed  a  little  coterie — intelligent  and  religious. 

The  village  of  Stanton,  with  its  cottages  of  stone,  its  ancient 
cross,   and   quaint   old    church,   since    the    early    part    of    the 
eighteenth    century    has    remained    almost    unchanged.      The 
broad    highway   leads   to   the  hill   on    which    Wesley  and    his 
friends,    Miss    Betty    Kirkham    and    her    sister    Damaris,    one 
memorable    day   in   the   autumn   of   1726,  conversed  seriously 
for  an  hour.      The   rectory  in    which  W7esley   spent  so  many 
happy  hours   has   been    demolished  ;    but  the  garden  remains, 
and   we  may  still  stand  at  the  open  gate  where  he  so  often 
reined    in   his   horse.      By  the  courtesy  of  the  rector  we  are 
permitted  to  reproduce  a  drawing  of  the  house  as  it  was  in  the 
eighteenth  century  (see  p.  25).     The  present  dwelling,  erected  by 
a  Roman  Catholic  family,  may  be  more  convenient,  though  it  can 
scarcely  be  more  beautiful.     During  his  visits  to  the  neighbour- 
hood, Wesley  lodged  sometimes  at  the  Broadway  vicarage  with 
Mr.  Griffiths,  or  with  the  Aliens,  and  sometimes  in  the  village  of 
Buckland  with  the  Tookers.1    Buckland,  within  walking  distance 
of  Mr.  Kirkham's  rectory,  lay  midway  between  Broadway  and 
Stanton.     Mrs.  Granville  and  her  daughters  lived  in  Gloucester. 
A  little  earlier,  when  Wesley  was  first  introduced  to  the  family, 
their  home  was  in  Buckland.     At  the  death  of  Queen  Anne, 
Colonel  Granville,  like  many  other  members  of  the  disaffected 

1  '  Parson     Tooker  '    was     rector    of      in  vol.  i.  of  The  Life  and  Correspond- 
Buckland.      Mrs.  Delany  describes  him       ence.     (See  Appendix  XXVII.  vol.  vi.) 


24  John    Wesley  s  Journal 

party,  suffered  a  reverse  of  fortune.  His  elder  brother,  Lord 
Lansdowne,  was  sent  to  the  Tower.  Colonel  Granville  also 
was  arrested.  On  his  release  he  removed  his  family  to  Buck- 
land,  where  they  lived  for  some  time  in  a  house  provided  by 
Lord  Lansdowne.  It  is  now  a  farmhouse  in  the  occupancy  of 
a  family  well  known  in  Methodist  circles.  After  his  ordination 
Wesley  frequently  preached  in  the  churches  of  these  villages, 
and  spent  his  shorter  holidays  in  one  or  more  of  the  homes 
which  welcomed  him  as  a  guest. 

It  was  through  the  Kirkhams  that  Wesley  added  Mrs.  Gran- 
ville and  her  daughters,  Mary  and  Anne,  to  his  circle  of  friends. 
Charles  Wesley,  who  matriculated  at  Christ  Church  in  1726,  was 
also  a  member  of  the  same  pleasant  fellowship ;  but,  unlike  his 
brother   John,  he  did   not  preserve  copies  of  the  letters  that 
passed  between  himself  and  the  Gloucestershire  ladies.      The 
Granvilles,  the  Wesleys,  and  the  Annesleys  were  of  the  same 
social  rank.      Mary,  the  elder  daughter,  was  at  this  time  the 
youthful  widow  of  Mr.  Charles  Pendarves,  of  Roscrow,  Cornwall. 
In  1743  she  married  Dr.  Delany,  who  was  afterwards  appointed 
Dean  of  Down.     Throughout  life  she  was  on  terms  of  intimacy 
with   families   of  the   highest   distinction,   to    many  of  which, 
indeed,  she  was  nearly  related.     In  her  old  age   Mrs.  Delany 
was   received   into  a  peculiarly  close  and  beautiful    friendship 
with    George    III    and   Queen    Charlotte.      She   was   a   lineal 
descendant  of  Sir  Bevil  Granville  (or  Grenville,  as  the  name 
was  sometimes  spelt),  who  fell  in  battle  fighting  for  Charles  I, 
and  of  Sir  Richard  Grenville,  the  hero  of  the  Revenge.     In  an 
age    when    few    great   names   were   untainted,   no   shadow   of 
reproach  ever  fell  upon  the  fair  fame  of  Mary  Granville.     She 
ranks  amongst  the  ablest  and  most  interesting  women  of  the 
eighteenth  century.     By  a  singular  coincidence  she  counted  the 
Irish  Wesleys  also  amongst  her  chief  friends.     She  was  god- 
mother to  the  father  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.    In  the  Stan  ton 
rectory  Wesley  made  the  acquaintance  of  another  lady  whose 
name    figures   frequently   in    The   Life  and   Correspondence   of 
Mrs.  Delany — Sarah,  elder  sister  of  Miss  Betty  Kirkham  and 
wife   of  the    Rev.    John    Chapone.     All    the    members   of  this 
correspondence  circle,  following  a  fashion  of  the  day,  adopted 
names  which  lightly  veiled  their  identity  and  added  a  touch 


t 


I.    THE    RECTORY    AT    WROOT.       BAY    WINDOWS    MODERN  ;     FRONT    ROOMS    FACING    THE 

GARDEN    OCCUPIED    BY    WESLEY. 

2.    THE    GARDEN,    WROOT.  3.    THE    GARDEN,    WROOT,    LOOKING   FROM    ARBOUR. 

26 


Introductory  27 


of  romantic  colour  to  their  friendship.  Betty  Kirkham  was 
Varanese ;  Mrs.  Pendarves,  Aspasia ;  John  Wesley,  Cyrus. 
Later,  Miss  Anne  Granville  joined  the  group  as  Selima,  and 
Charles  Wesley  as  Araspes.  The  correspondence  between 
John  Wesley  and  the  Granville  ladies  survives  in  part,  tran- 
scribed by  Wesley.  Much  of  it  has  been  published  in  The 
Methodist  Magazine,  also  by  Tyerman,  by  Dr.  Rigg  in  his 
Living  Wesley ',  and  in  Tel  ford's  Life  of  John  Wesley.  There  is 
no  reason  why  the  whole  should  not  be  published.  Those  who 
desire  a  more  detailed  account  of  this  friendship  will  find  it  in 
Dr.  Rigg's  remarkable  study  of  Wesley.  Written  at  a  time  when 
complete  information  was  not  available,  The  Living  Wesley 
anticipates  recent  disclosures,  and  is  a  vivid  and  discriminating 
sketch  of  a  noteworthy  episode  in  Wesley's  life. 

It  would  not  be  necessary  to  bestow  so  much  space  upon 
these  friendships  but  for  their  influence  upon  Wesley.  They 
fostered  refinement,  thoughtfulness,  and  religious  aspiration  ; 
they  were  an  incentive  to  literary  activity,  slight  in  itself,  yet 
important  in  its  results.  We  are  indebted  to  these  women, 
and  in  a  less  degree  to  the  Wesley  sisters,  for  selections  of 
poetry,  and  other  extracts  and  collections  which  subsequently 
led  to  those  larger  literary  efforts  that  made  Methodism  an 
educational  force,  and  every  itinerant  preacher's  saddlebags  a 
book-store.  Several  of  the  dainty  little  volumes  in  the  Colman 
Collection  are  examples  of  these  literary  beginnings.  It  was 
for  a  lady  student  that  Wesley  wrote  his  earliest  known 
transcription  and  annotation. 

A  study  of  Wesley's  religious  experience  at  this  time  is 
involved  in  the  causes  that  took  him  to  Georgia. 

The  Georgia  Trustees  were  an  influential  body  of  merchants, 
politicians,  and  philanthropists,  who  held  under  charter  from  the 
Crown  the  considerable  tract  of  country  which  has  since  become 
the  State  of  Georgia,  U.S.A.  The  unreliable  character  of  the 
English  colonists  and  the  neighbourhood  of  Indian  tribes  were 
difficulties  weighing  at  this  time  on  the  minds  of  the  Trustees. 
Some  safeguard  against  internal  dissensions  and  disloyalty  to 
established  government  was  provided  by  the  arrival  of  Moravian 
immigrants,  who  had  suffered  much  for  conscience'  sake,  and 


28  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

who  were  a  highly  disciplined  community.  If  the  Indian 
tribes  could  be  brought  under  Christian  influence,  instead  of 
being  a  source  of  danger  to  their  neighbours  they  would  become 
an  element  of  strength  to  the  colony.  For  their  conversion  the 
Trustees  required  missionaries  and  teachers  who,  forsaking  all, 
would  be  content  to  live  and  die  alone  in  the  wilderness. 

Dr.  J.  Burton,  of  Corpus  Christi,  Oxford,  one  of  Wesley's 
intimate  friends  and  a  godly  High  Churchman,  was  a  member 
of  the  Georgia  Trust  and  a  generous  supporter  of  the  Society 
for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel.  In  relation  to  Georgia  the 
Trust  and  the  Society  worked  as  allies.  It  is  interesting  at 
this  point  to  remember  that  Lincoln  College  was  founded  '  for 
the  propagation  of  the  Christian  faith  and  the  extirpation  of 
heretics.'  On  September  8,  1735,  Dr.  Burton  wrote  to  John 
Wesley.1  The  letter  came  at  a  moment  when  many  circum- 
stances induced  Wesley  to  regard  it  as  a  call  of  God.  His 
friendship  with  Miss  Betty  Kirkham  (Varanese)  continued, 
though  it  now  appeared  unlikely  to  become  more  intimate. 
Aspasia,  after  a  silence  of  three  years,  had  written  suggesting 
a  renewal  of  her  correspondence  with  Cyrus  and  Araspes,  but 
her  plea  fell  upon  deaf  ears.  By  this  time  she  belonged  rather 
to  that  literary  and  artistic  world  in  which  Dean  Swift,  Dr. 
Delany,  Garrett  Wesley,  Handel,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  and  the 
Duchess  of  Portland  were  shining  lights,  and  among  her  most 
intimate  friends.  A  pathetic  reply,  in  the  style  of  high  courtesy 
that  had  prevailed  throughout,  closed  the  Wesley-Granville 
episode.  Many  of  the  University  friends  of  former  years  had 
passed  on  their  several  ways,  and  the  Holy  Club  seemed  to  be 
breaking  up.  Robert  Kirkham  had  accepted  a  curacy  under 
his  uncle.  William  Morgan  was  dead.  Clayton  had  become 
a  High  Church  parish  priest  in  Salford.  Gambold  had  retired 
to  the  rectory  of  Stanton  Harcourt,  in  Oxfordshire,  where  he 
was  already  verging  toward  the  Moravianism  which  eventually 
claimed  him.  Charles  was  willing  to  go  to  Georgia  as  General 
Oglethorpe's  secretary,  and  was  shortly  to  be  ordained.  Ingham 
for  the  present  was  in  Yorkshire. 

Coincidently  with  this  slow  shaping  of  affairs  in  Oxford,  the 

1  This   letter,   *  the   oldest    Methodist       now   in  the  possession  of   Mr.    George 
missionary    document   in    existence,'    is       Stampe.     {Wesley  Studies,  p.  69.) 


Introductory  29 


question  of  John's  future  had  been  under  discussion.  The 
family  earnestly  desired  that  he  should  seek  the  next  pre- 
sentation to  Epworth,  succeed  his  father,  and  so  preserve  the 
Epworth  home  for  his  mother.  Samuel  Wesley,  junior,  who 
himself  had  declined  the  Epworth  candidature,  urged  John  to 
apply  for  the  next  presentation.  The  correspondence  will  be 
found  in  Dr.  Priestley's  volume  and  in  the  Colman  Collection. 
Ostensibly  it  was  jealousy  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  brother's 
ordination  vows  that  moved  Samuel  Wesley  ;  but  he  was  not 
great  at  finesse,  and  the  plea  really  at  the  back  of  the  good 
man's  mind  was  the  provision  of  a  home  for  the  dear  old 
mother  when  the  rector,  who  was  known  to  be  dying,  should 
pass  away.  John,  taking  his  brother  Samuel  on  his  own  pro- 
fessed ground,  wrote  at  once  to  Dr.  Potter,  who  had  ordained 
him,  and  put  a  plain  question.  The  letter  to  Samuel  in  which 
this  question  is  effectually  settled  is  supremely  important1 

'OxON,  March  4,  1735. 

DEAR  BROTHER, — I  had  rather  dispute,  if  I  must  dispute,  with  you 
than  with  any  man  living,  because  it  may  be  done  with  so  little  expense 
of  time  and  words. 

The  question  is  now  brought  to  one  point,  and  the  whole  of  the 
argument  will  be  in  a  single  syllogism : 

Neither  hope  of  doing  greater  good  nor  fear  of  any  evil  ought  to 
deter  you  from  what  you  have  engaged  yourself  to.  But  you  have 
engaged  yourself  to  undertake  the  cure  of  a  parish,  therefore  neither 
that  hope  nor  that  fear  ought  to  deter  you  from  it. 

The  only  doubt  is  whether  I  have  engaged  myself  or  not.  You 
think  I  did  at  my  ordination,  'before  God  and  His  high-priest.'  I 
think  I  did  not. 

However,  I  own  I  am  not  the  proper  judge  of  the  oath  I  then  took. 
It  being  certain  and  allowed  by  all —  Verbis  in  quibus  quis  jurejurando 
adigitur,  sensum  genuinum,.  ut  et  obligationem  sacramenti  et  modum 
et  mensuram  praestari  a  mente  non  praestantis>  sed  exigentis  juramentum? 

1  The  original  is  in  the  possession  of  words  in  which   any  one  is  caused   to 

a  collateral  branch  of  the  Wesley  family,  take  an  oath,  the  true  meaning,  and  also 

and  has  not  often  been  seen.     The  late  the  manner  and  extent  of  the  obligation  of 

Mr.    Thursfield    Smith    took    a    careful  the  oath,  is  supplied  from  the  mind,  not 

copy,  which  is  here  reproduced.  of  the  taker  of  the  oath,  but  of  him  who 

2  Tyerman,  quoting  the  letter,  prob-  demands  it."     The  words,  which  are  not 

ably  at  second  hand,  omits  this  sentence.  clear,  are  evidently  a  quotation  from  a 

An     expert    has    given    a    translation.  law  book,  probably  from  some  English 

He  says  :    '  The   general  sense  is  clear.  Canonist,  who  is  reproducing  an  estab- 

I  make  it  somewhat  as  follows:   "To  lished  principle  of  Roman  law.' 


LIBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 


30  John   Wesley's  Journal 

Therefore  it  is  not  I,  but  the  high-priest  of  God  before  whom  I 
contracted  that  engagement,  who  is  to  judge  of  the  nature  and  extent 
of  it.  Accordingly  the  post  after  I  received  yours  I  referred  it  entirely 
to  him,  proposing  this  single  question  to  him,  Whether  I  had  at  my 
ordination  engaged  myself  to  undertake  the  cure  of  any  parish  or  no  ? 
His  answer  runs  in  these  words : 

REVD.  SIR, — It  doth  not  seem  to  me  that  at  your  ordination  you  engaged 
yourself  to  undertake  the  cure  of  any  parish,  provided  you  can,  as  a  clergyman, 
better  serve  God  and  His  Church  in  your  present  or  some  other  station. 

Now,  that  I  can  as  a  clergyman  better  serve  God  and  His  Church  in 
my  present  station  I  have  all  reasonable  evidence. 

Dr.  Burton  keenly  appreciated  the  piety,  zeal,  and  High 
Church  proclivities  of  the  Holy  Club.  He  acted  in  the  matter 
as  a  Trustee  of  the  colony,  and  in  friendly  alliance  with  General 
Oglethorpe  and  the  S.P.G.  It  appears  that  at  one  time  he 
seriously  hoped  to  capture  the  whole  Club  for  the  service  of  this 
mission.  But  it  was  not  homogeneous,  and  a  successful  transfer 
of  its  membership  to  Savannah,  Frederica,  and  the  Indian 
camps  could  only  have  led  to  confusion.  A  few  letters,  little 
known,  from  the  Thursfield  Smith,  Stampe,  Priestley,  and 
Colman  Collections  explain  how  Wesley  came  to  share  in  the 
Georgia  expedition.  They  will  be  found  chronologically  arranged 
in  Appendix  XII.  vol.  vi. 

It  is  a  singular  fact  that  the  old  rector  at  Epworth,  by  this 
time  at  rest,  had  unwittingly  prepared  the  way  for  the  appoint- 
ment of  his  two  younger  sons  to  Georgia.  He  was  one  of  the 
first  and  most  enthusiastic  supporters  of  Oglethorpe's  scheme, 
and  was  in  correspondence  with  him  and  the  Trustees  as  early 
as  I732.1  When  John  Wesley,  fulfilling  his  father's  dying 
request,  was  in  London  negotiating  the  publication  of  Job  and 
its  dedication  to  Queen  Caroline,  he  met  Oglethorpe,  and  agreed 
to  his  proposal.  The  final  arrangement  was  that  Wesley  and 
Ingham  should  go  to  Savannah  as  missionaries  to  the  Indians, 
Charles  becoming  secretary  for  Indian  affairs. 

Three  distinct  sets  of  persons  shared  the  responsibilities  of 
an  extremely  difficult  situation  :  Wesley  and  his  friends,  the 
Oglethorpe  party,  and  the  Moravians — missioners,  Government 
agents,  and  German  refugees. 

1  See  Journal  of  Georgia  Trustees  in  the  Record  Office,  and  letters  in  Clarke's 
Wesley  Family,  vol.  ii.  p.  252,  and  vol.  i.  pp.  334-7. 


Introductory  3 1 


1.  Wesley   did    not   take   the   voyage   to   Georgia   that   he 
might  become  a   parish  priest,  but  to  be  a  missionary  to  the 
Indians.       Unfortunately  one   of  the   conditions   agreed   upon 
between  himself  and  the  Trustees  was  that,  until  access  to  the 
Indians   could    be   obtained,   he   was    to    act    as    minister    to 
the   church    in    Savannah,  in    succession   to    the  Rev.   Samuel 
Quincy,  the  late  incumbent.     This  confounding  of  things  that 
differed,    and    the    absence    of  clear    definitions    and    lines    of 
duty,   led   to   trouble.      Moreover,   we   must   never   lose   sight 
of  the  fact  that  Wesley  by  this  time  was  an  extreme   High 
Churchman.     His  ritualism,  his  severe  literalism,  and  his  per- 
fectly conscientious  yet  overstrained  adhesion  to  rubrics   and 
canons  brought  him  into  conflict  with  the  people,  few  of  whom 
were    members   of  the   Church    of  England   or   of  any   other 
Church. 

2.  But  if  Wesley  went  out  for  the  sake  of  the  Indians,  and 
for  them  alone,  Oglethorpe  as  Governor  of  the  Colony,  Causton 
as  Chief  Magistrate  of  Savannah,  and  others  of  the  governing 
class,  were  most  of  all  concerned  for  the  colonists.    The  problem, 
every   day    becoming   more   and    more   serious,   in    Savannah, 
Frederica,  and  the  outlying  plantations,  was  largely  disciplinary, 
educational,  moral,  and  religious.     From   the  Governor's  point 
of  view,  Wesley  and  his  friends  were  needed  far  more  by  the 
colonists  than  by  the   Indians.      The  pastor  in  charge  of  the 
church  was  about  to  return  to  England.    His  flock  were  as  sheep 
in  the  wilderness  without  a  shepherd.    Rough,  lawless,  licentious, 
they  presented  a  serious   moral  problem.      Causton    may  not 
have  been  lifted  many  points  above  his  neighbours ;  nor,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  was  Oglethorpe  immaculate.     But,  at  all  events, 
they   both   must    have    felt   the    advantage   of  having   in   the 
church  a  man  of  Wesley's  calibre — a  scholar,  a  gentleman,  a 
man  serious,  intensely  in  earnest,  with  a  will  of  his  own,  and 
animated   by  a  keen  sense   of  duty.      Tyerman  ridicules  the 
'  molehill  empire '— '  a  pompous,  minikin  miniature  of  the  great 
system  of  government  at  home.'     A  careful  study,  however,  of 
published   and    unpublished   documents    shows   that   the   evils 
and  perils   and  necessities   of  Georgia,  if  on  a  minute   scale, 
did  not  otherwise  differ  from  those  recorded  in  the  history  of 
empires.     Oglethorpe  might  also  have  prayed : 


32  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

Ah  God,  for  a  man  with  heart,  head,  hand, 
Like  some  of  the  simple  great  ones  gone 
For  ever  and  for  ever  by  ! 
One  still,  strong  man,  in  a  blatant  land, 

one 
Who  can  rule  and  dare  not  lie. 

He  himself,  if  Henry  Moore's  version  is  to  be  relied  upon, 
had  personal  need  for  the  presence,  friendship,  and  fearless 
loyalty  of  Wesley.  In  Frederica,  his  head  quarters,  he  and  his 
secretary,  Charles  Wesley,  lived  in  a  nest  of  hornets.  Henry 
Moore's  story  has  been  discounted.  Tyerman  dismisses  it 
with  little  less  than  contempt.  But  Moore  held  the  Colman 
collection  of  Diaries  and  Letters  at  a  time  when  it  was  more 
complete  than  now.  Wesley's  own  hand  had  lifted  the  veil 
concealing  many  of  the  Georgia  facts,  the  Oglethorpe  part  in 
a  threatened  tragedy  among  the  rest.  Moore  knew  what  he 
was  writing  about. 

3.  The  Moravians  in  Georgia  differed  essentially  from  the 
English  colonists.  They  were  refugees  for  conscience'  sake. 
They  had  their  own  minister  and  organized  worship.  Bishop 
David  Nitschmann  had  come  with  a  party  of  immigrants  for 
the  express  purpose  of  ordering  the  Congregation  of  Brethren 
in  Savannah,  and  ordaining  an  elected  elder,  or  bishop,  who 
should  be  duly  invested  with  authority  to  secure  sound  doctrine, 
wholesome  discipline,  and  all  that  made  for  holiness. 

Of  Wesley's  life  in  Georgia  he  himself  is  the  best  biographer. 
What  estimate  he  put  upon  his  strange  experiences  may  be 
inferred  from  the  care  with  which  he  wrote  and  rewrote  the 
story.  Judged  truly,  as  indeed  he  himself  judged  it,  Georgia 
was  the  final  outcome  of  the  long  struggle  that  began  with 
the  finding  of  his  first  religious  friend,  and  the  reading  of 
The  Christian  Pattern  and  the  Holy  Living  and  Dying.  In 
the  spring  of  1725  he  set  out  on  a  new  life.  In  the  last 
days  of  1737  he  left  Georgia,  landing  at  Deal  on  Wednesday, 
February  I,  1738.  For  nearly  four  months  he  wandered  hither 
and  thither  seeking  rest.  On  Wednesday,  May  24,  he  found  the 
peace  for  which,  during  thirteen  weary  years,  he  had  striven, 
toiled,  suffered,  prayed. 


Introductory  33 


Many  writers  have  referred  to  Wesley's  *  so-called  conversion.' 
Now,  no  one  who  believes  in  the  necessity  of  a  supernatural 
change,  or  in  its  possibility,  would  dream  of  so  characterizing 
St.  Paul's  conversion,  or  St.  Augustine's,  Martin  Luther's,  or 
John  Bunyan's.  Could  Wesley  have  fulfilled  his  mission, 
the  prophetic  vision  of  his  dying  father — the  revival  of  God's 
work  within  the  Church  of  England  and  ultimately  throughout 
the  worldwide  parish — if  he  had  not  passed  through  the 
experience  which  Dr.  Rigg  so  justly  calls  his  '  evangelical 
conversion  '  ?  No  matter  what  view  is  held  with  reference  to 
the  nature  and  process  of  the  spiritual  crisis  that  comes  in 
every  good  man's  life,  the  facts  of  Wesley's  life-story,  more 
clearly  revealed  now  than  ever  before,  confirm  all  Methodist 
students  in  their  old  conclusion  that,  until  his  heart  was 
1  strangely  warmed  '  in  Aldersgate  Street,  he  neither  knew,  as 
a  normal  experience,  the  meaning  of  saving  faith,  nor  had  he 
the  power  to  fulfil  his  Lord's  mission. 

Yet  we  must  not  belittle  the  partial  attainments  of  Oxford 
and  Georgia.  Wesley  himself  was  much  too  sensible  and 
practical  to  undervalue  the  worth  of  rules  and  *  works,'  or  the 
conscientious  labouring  after  a  perfect  character  and  blameless 
life  which  had  distinguished  his  career  during  the  thirteen 
years  of  his  novitiate.  One  of  the  ablest  students 1  of  Wesley's 
Journal  says :  '  A  man's  religious  life  begins  when  he  becomes 
an  earnest  seeker  after  truth,  however  unenlightened  his  search. 
Wesley  always  looked  back  to  his  days  at  Oxford  with  emotion. 
In  a  letter  to  his  brother  Charles,2  December  15,  1772,  he  writes  : 
"  I  often  cry  out,  Vitae  me  redde  priori !  Let  me  be  again  an 
Oxford  Methodist !  I  am  often  in  doubt  whether  it  would  not 
be  best  for  me  to  resume  all  my  Oxford  rules,  great  and  small. 
I  did  then  walk  closely  with  God,  and  redeem  the  time.  But 
what  have  I  been  doing  these  thirty  years  ?  "  Upon  which  this 
writer  remarks  :  *  This  may  seem  rather  inconsistent,  but  Wesley 
was  no  martyr  to  the  bugbear  of  consistency.'  It  may  here  be 
noted  as  a  significant  fact,  that  when  Wesley  was  compiling  his 
Twelve  Rules  of  a  Helper,  he  modelled  them  upon  the  earliest 
rules  and  resolutions  recorded  in  his  first  Oxford  Diary,  1725. 

1  The  Rev.  Richard  Butterworth.  tion  from  Horace  is  thus  translated  by  Bos- 

2  Works>  vol.  xii.  p.  131.     This  quota-       cawen,  *  My  former  happy  life  restore.' 


34  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

There  are  two  excellent  commentaries  on  Wesley's  religion 
from  1725  to  1738.  One  is  the  remarkable  analysis  of  personal 
experience  inserted  in  the  Journal,  May  24,  1738;  the  other  is 
the  7th  chapter  of  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  These 
two  records  should  be  borne  in  mind  as  we  study  the  Diaries. 
In  those  narratives  and  confessions,  as  they  might  not  inaptly 
be  called,  we  see  him  at  twenty-two  years  of  age  raising  a 
certain  standard  of  religious  life.  He  sets  about  this  work  with 
extreme  care  ;  and  all  through  these  thirteen  years,  however 
careless  and  almost  undecipherable  his  handwriting  may  some- 
times be  when  recording  other  things,  whenever  he  resumes 
the  task  of  resolution-making  or  confession  he  writes  with  a 
clearness  and  firmness  of  hand  quite  pathetic.  If  any  one 
desires  to  see  John  Wesley's  penmanship  and  his  gift  of 
idiomatic  expression  at  their  best,  let  him  examine  his  apparatus 
for  self-examination. 

His  standard  takes  the  form  of  rule  and  resolution.  Some- 
times, both  at  Oxford  and  Wroot,  he  holds  a  Saturday  night 
'  private  band '  with  his  own  soul ;  he  reads  his  resolutions, 
f  makes  rigid  inquest  upon  his  own  thoughts,  upon  his  conversa- 
tion, studies,  and  amusements  during  the  week  ;  he  brings  all 
his  most  secret  motives  and  emotions  to  the  test,  making 
confession  to  himself  at  the  bar  of  his  own  conscience.  Ques- 
tions and  confessions  are  written  in  the  remorseful  Diary.  He 
binds  his  tortured  soul  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and  the  flames 
play  around  it.  He  has  no  mercy  upon  himself.  Not  once 
does  he  excuse  himself  or  enter  a  single  plea  in  extenuation. 
When  the  record  is  more  humiliating  than  Usual,  his  only 
remedy  is  a  pathetic  strengthening  of  the  outward  standard  or 
a  new  emphasis  added  to  an  old  rule,  and  always  with  a  cry 
to  God  in  the  sacred  tongue  Kvpie  porjOei,.  More  law,  more 
methods  ;  a  new  cord  to  the  flagellant's  whip,  or  a  new  knot  in 
the  old  cord.  As  we  read  from  page  to  page  we  expect  to  find 
this  self-upbraiding  candidate  for  saintliness  in  the  grip  of  despair. 
Nothing,  however,  daunts  him.  Saturday  night  finds  him  in  the 
depths,  but  on  Sunday  morning  he  is  bravely  beginning  again. 
Defeat  and  failure  always  seem  to  stimulate  Wesley  to  new  effort. 

When  he  reviews  the  whole  period,  he  refers  to  brief  moments 
of  sensible  comfort  and  passing  gleams  of  joy.  These  he 


Introductory  3  5 


regards  as  anticipations  of  the  future.  Though  naturally  a 
cheerful  man,  there  is  little  joy  in  his  religion.  His  sacred 
song  is  set  in  a  minor  key.  It  is  a  wail  of  distress  and 
disappointment.  In  the  first  Diary  there  is  no  rejoicing.  How 
extraordinary  the  contrast  between  these  yellow,  dreary  pages 
and  St.  Paul's  letters  to  the  Thessalonians  or  to  the  Philippians  ; 
or  between  the  Wesley  religion  of  1725-9  and  the  manuscript 
hymn-book  which  for  fifteen  years  was  his  constant  companion 
in  evangelistic  travel !  We  may  even  now  see  the  thumb-marks 
on  his  favourite  page — deeper,  more  stained  with  use  than  any 
other  : 

Oh  for  a  thousand  tongues  to  sing 

My  great  Redeemer's  praise ! 
and 

Now  I  have  found  the  ground  wherein 

Sure  my  soul's  anchor  may  remain. 

Hymns  For  Believers  Rejoicing  found  no  place  in  Wesley's 
Saturday-night  exercises  in  the  year  1725. 

Another  mark  of  true  religion  absent  from  the  first  Diary 
has  already  been  noted.  Service  for  others  did  not  form  part 
of  Wesley's  original  standard  of  holy  living.  It  was  Oxford 
Methodism  that  saved  him  from  religious  selfishness.  The 
voyage  to  Georgia,  with  its  ministries  for  others,  carried  him 
still  farther  in  the  same  direction.  Nor  was  Savannah,  its 
many  disappointments  notwithstanding,  wanting  in  a  certain 
useful  training  for  service. 

This  strange  story  of  pilgrimage  had  its  stages,  its  discipline, 
its  instruction  in  faith  and  righteousness,  its  prophecies  of  the 
future.  Nothing  in  the  long  journey  from  the  town  of  Legality 
to  the  Cross  was  lost.  Not  only  Methodism,  but  the  whole 
Christian  Church,  is  the  richer  to-day  because  of  all  the  way 
in  which  John  Wesley,  during  these  years,  was  led  and  humbled 
and  proved. 


THE  FIRST  OXFORD  DIARY 

WESLEY  wrote  both  Diaries  and  Journals.  The  distinction 
may  be  arbitrary  and  illogical,  yet  it  is  convenient. 

His  Journals  were  fully  written,  but  not  necessarily  for  publi- 
cation. Not  always  content  with  one  version,  he  laboriously 
'  transcribed  '  in  various  forms.  The  Georgia  Journal,  or  its 
most  important  section,  survives  in  at  least  five  distinct  ver- 
sions. They  are  in  Wesley's  handwriting.  One  may  surmise 
that  he  thus  wrote  and  rewrote  for  the  clearing  of  his  own 
mind,  that  he  might  see  his  life  in  black  and  white,  and  so 
be  in  a  position  to  judge  accurately  as  to  his  own  motives, 
attainments,  doings,  failures.  He  wrote  also  for  his  mother,  his 
brothers,  and  possibly  for  his  sister  Emilia  (with  whom  for 
many  years  he  corresponded  intimately) ;  for  the  Huttons,  for 
members  of  the  Holy  Club  in  Oxford  and  London ;  also 
for  Clayton,  Rivington,  and  others  ;  and  later  for  the  society 
at  Fetter  Lane,  and  his  own  societies  in  London,  Bristol,  and 
Newcastle.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  number  of 
autograph  journals  lost  is  greater  than  those  now  accessible. 

In  addition  to  the  Journals,  Wesley  wrote  Diaries — not  one 
continuous,  day-by-day  Diary,  but  a  series,  preserving  in  their 
form  the  dividing-lines  of  the  writer's  life.  For  instance,  the 
Diary  written  during  his  Oxford  career  differs  in  form  from 
the  Diary  kept  on  board  the  Simmonds,  whilst  the  former  is 
itself  broken  into  sections  more  or  less  distinct.  Wesley's  script 
also  varied.  The  varieties  mark  changes  in  the  writer's  life. 
His  first  Diary,  kept  in  a  note-book  used  for  several  purposes, 
begins  in  a  slightly  abbreviated  longhand.  On  the  first  page 
a  few  words  in  cipher  appear.  Whenever  in  this  volume 
(Oxford  Diary  No.  I)  religious  experience  or  intercourse  with 
intimate  friends  is  introduced,  the  record  is  in  cipher  wholly 
or  in  part.  Oxford  Diary  No.  II  is  written  in  a  much  more 

36 


(1  . 


10    *f*M, 


a. 

to-  ?  A*  i*a 


r//-  tktffAu  to#>9*j  &fy+.if.*T&f-**4-<fiks*. 

#-  J        Jg.?  f-|^%  ^^/-i,  /^af  5TvA^  ^Lwn?>  ££ 
*n.   Sn*»6>*J  y  fi.  ?fK?.£    &l$*ct&  >*^  { 


m.  **ml*lt4  yp.  fW.l.f.     ^ 
ft. 


crr*j    (V  ft   c./'-_ 


£0  >2    £j  -^ 

ft.    VtnlctJfr  fo  faj  *(%<££  \ 
Ci  ,   Jfw9v^  ®^r  /A  ^  ^lv*/  f  4 


S' 


FACSIMILE    OF    THE    FIRST    PAGE    OF    THE    FIRST    OXFORD    DIARY. 


37 


•S  ?» 


3} 

mt.iV>  J> 


« -S     i  >v"        »v 

- 


*  ftlM-S?  ^^jq^  N  S  s  ^ 

^C   Iv,  1^  i^^ly    «i   'w   I*  VfcN  ><  Vi^  «§  W-'Q  Hli^W  4  «J  r«  ^>  <J 

«^ViVi         *i   «    ^  ^          5$?J>v«cri^vi^K^ 


Introductory  39 


severely  abbreviated  longhand,  with  a  few  reminiscences  only 
of  the  cipher  which  so  largely  prevails  in  the  earlier  volume. 
The  monthly  reviews,  which  in  No.  II  take  definite  shape,  and 
until  the  voyage  to  America  continue  with  regularity  as  a 
valuable  autobiographical  feature,  are  easily  read.  The  veils 
of  cipher  and  abbreviation  are  lifted,  or  they  lose  their  opaque- 
ness. No.  II  as  a  whole  is  remarkable  for  its  untidiness. 
The  handwriting  is  hurried,  confused,  and  for  this  reason  alone 
is  often  undecipherable.  The  same  characteristic  marks  con- 
siderable portions  of  the  first  volume,  reappearing  in  Georgia 
No.  III.  Everywhere,  however,  bad  writing  disappears  when 
the  diarist  enters  into  his  closet,  shuts  to  the  door,  and  com- 
munes in  secret  with  his  own  soul  and  with  his  Father  in 
heaven.  All  the  monthly  reviews,  the  resolutions,  general 
and  particular  questions,  confessions  and  ejaculatory  prayers, 
are  written  with  minute  care.  They  are  pictures  of  neatness, 
order,  succinctness,  and,  except  for  a  few  eccentricities  of  letter 
and  figure  formation,  might  be  set  as  copies  for  schoolboy 
imitation.  In  all  the  Oxford  Diaries  an  ever-increasing  number 
of  pages  are  devoted  to  the  registration  of  the  daily  work  of 
a  college  tutor.  His  scheme  of  marking  class  attendance  may 
have  been  borrowed  ;  but  if  so,  he  improves  on  the  original  until 
it  perfectly  answers  his  purpose.  In  one  of  the  Rules  for  'our 
Company,'  he  regards  scholarship  as  a  Christian  virtue,  empha- 
sizing '  the  necessity  of  method  and  industry,  in  order  to  either 
learning  or  virtue.'  The  Oxford  class-registers  embody  this 
sentiment  in  details  which,  however  small,  bear  silent  testimony 
to  the  manner  in  which  the  Fellow  of  Lincoln  discharged  his 
trust  as  a  college  tutor.  In  neatness  and  orderliness  the  tutorial 
record,  being  a  part  of  his  religion,  ranks  with  experience  and 
friendship.  Business,  represented  by  accounts  of  income  and 
expenditure— kept  as  a  religious  duty — is  honoured  by  scrupulous 
exactness.  At  first  the  accounts  are  included  in  the  Diary 
volume.  Later  they  monopolize  one  of  the  series. 

The  Oxford  Diary  No.  Ill  is  written  in  abbreviated  long- 
hand. The  writing  is  good,  and  there  are  many  signs  of  an 
increasing  orderliness  and  steadfastness  in  daily  life.  The  diarist 
has  become  a  '  Methodist,'  and  that  not  only  in  relation  to  the 
great  affairs  of  life,  but  also  and  equally  in  such  details  as 


4O  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

caligraphy,  margins,  paging,  and  dates.      In  form  and  style  it 
is  the  diary  of  a  man  living  according  to  rule. 

The  last  Diary  written  at  Oxford  (No.  IV)  carries  self- 
examination  to  its  high-water  mark.  Nothing  more  elaborate 
for  the  torture  of  a  tender  conscience  or  for  the  training  of 
a  good  conscience  has  ever  been  devised.  The  earlier  part 
of  the  volume  is  arranged  on  the  plan  adopted  in  No.  III. 
But  in  January  1734  a  new  scheme  is  introduced,  with  fine 
pencil  rulings  that  answer  to  the  departments  of  a  Holy  Life, 
secular,  religious,  intellectual,  and  physical.  Numbers  down  the 
left-hand  margin  represent  the  hours  of  the  day,  from  four  o'clock 
in  the  morning  until  nine  at  night.  A  second  column  is 
introduced,  with  the  letter  f  e '  for  '  ejaculatory  prayer  ' ;  and  a 
third  with  figures  down  the  middle  of  the  page  for  minutes 
spent  at  the  close  of  each  hour  in  devotion.  The  same  general 
plan,  with  fewer  pencil  rulings,  is  preserved  in  the  Voyage 
and  later  Georgia  Diaries,  until,  with  the  advent  of  Byrom's 
shorthand,  untidiness  reappears,  and  the  diarist,  distracted  by 
the  apparent  fruitlessness  of  his  scheme  of  personal  religion, 
and  by  the  failure  of  the  mission  for  which  he  has  sacrificed 
so  much,  bids  fair  to  lose  himself  in  a  pathless  wilderness. 
One  of  the  volumes,  containing  a  section  of  the  Georgia  daily 
record,  disappeared  many  years  ago  from  the  collection  now  in  the 
possession  of  the  Colman  family.  Through  the  channels  of  gift 
and  purchase  it  has  passed  ultimately  into  the  hands  of  Bishop 
Hendrix,  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  South,  by  whom  it 
has  been  lent  for  the  service  of  this  edition  of  Wesley's  Journal. 

With  the  new  life  that  began  in  London  and  Bristol  the 
Diary  revives,  but  in  a  new  form.  The  wearying  apparatus 
for  introspection  and  self-diagnosis  wholly  disappears.  Byrom's 
shorthand,  in  strong  lines  and  curves,  tells  the  story  of  travel, 
preaching,  and  society-meeting.  Names  and  numbers  are  *  writ 
plain.'  A  short  space  only  is  given  to  the  daily  record,  and 
on  the  face  of  it  the  Diary  has  become  a  mirror  in  which, 
even  at  this  distance  of  time,  we  may  see  the  stir  and  labour 
and  strife  of  a  great  church  movement.  To  place  the  first 
page  of  No.  I  Diary  (April  1725)  side  by  side  with  the  last  page 
of  the  Evangelistic  Diary  still  in  our  possession  is  to  produce 
a  contrast  as  significant  as  dramatic. 


Introductory  41 


All  the  Diaries  have  this  in  common  :  they  are  private 
records.  Those  who  would  ransack  the  archives  of  the  dead, 
and  refuse  sanctuary  to  their  most  confidential  self-communings, 
would  print  the  Diaries  as  they  stand.  Fortunately  they  are 
in  unknown  tongues,  and  few  would  care  to  devote  months  to 
the  task  of  decipherment.  On  the  other  hand,  how  few  reputa- 
tions, even  of  the  saintliest  dead,  would  survive  the  preservation 
of  diaries  containing  in  brief  sentences  their  innermost  thoughts  ! 
Yet  the  student  of  Wesley's  life  returns  from  behind  the  scenes 
with  a  profounder  regard  than  ever  for  the  man  who  so  frankly 
unveils  himself. 

One  peculiarity  relaxes  to  some  extent  the  stern  law  of 
silence  which  otherwise  might  restrain  investigation.  Wesley 
did  not  shroud  his  Diaries  in  wellnigh  impenetrable  veils  for 
his  own  sake,  but  for  others  who  now,  with  their  families  for  the 
most  part,  are  gone.  Further,  he  did  not  destroy  his  Diaries ; 
he  left  them,  knowing  that  they  would  fall  into  the  hands  of 
surviving  friends  who  would  treat  them  with  respect. 

For  our  present  purpose  a  description  and  an  analysis  of  the 
first  Oxford  Diary  will  suffice  as  a  study  preparatory  to  Wesley's 
own  account  of  the  Holy  Club.  Just  as  the  account  he  gave 
to  Mr.  Richard  Morgan  of  Dublin  was  a  fitting  introduction  to 
the  story  of  the  Oxford  Mission  to  Georgia,  so  the  substance 
of  this  Diary  will  prove  helpful  to  a  more  perfect  conception 
of  that  Oxford  Methodism  which  Wesley  strove  to  plant  in 
Georgia  and  would  fain  have  given  to  Red  Indians  and  to  the 
whole  world. 

The  book  is  a  small  duodecimo  volume,  stoutly  bound  in  half 
vellum  and  much-worn  marble  boards,  antique  in  appearance, 
the  paper  poor  in  quality  and  yellow  with  age ;  the  ink  varies 
greatly ;  the  writer's  pens  are  hand-made  quills.  Compared 
with  the  beautiful  calf-bound  volumes  of  the  Colman  Collection, 
the  book  is  poverty-stricken,  probably  a  century  older,  and  much 
the  worse  for  wear. 

How  came  the  note-book  into  Wesley's  possession  ?  Do  the 
covers  yield  the  secret  of  its  origin  and  earliest  use?  The 
inner  side  of  the  cover  is  filled  with  writing,  the  meaning  of 
which  is  fairly  obvious.  It  is  a  plan  of  study  for  the  new  year, 
thought  out  as  the  year  1721  drew  to  a  close — a  time-table  of 

VOL.  I.  3 


42  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

work  and  correspondence  drawn  up  by  John  Wesley  at  Christ 
Church  in  his  eighteenth  year,  four  years  before  his  ordination— 
with  the  exception  of  a  well-known  Charterhouse  letter  the 
oldest  writing  of  his  in  existence.  But  there  is  other  and  older 
writing  on  the  page,  partly  covered  by  the  time-table,  though 
without  any  attempt  at  obliteration. 
Three  Wesley  names  appear  thus  : 

Jo:  Wesley 
John  Westley 
Sam:  Westley 
and  interwoven  with  them  the  words  : 

'  Job,  afternoon  and  pupils.' 

Conjecture — and,  however  reasonable,  it  can  only  be  conjecture- 
suggests  that  originally  the  book  was  purchased  by  John  West- 
ley  of  Winter  bourne- Whitchurch,  grandfather  of  the  John  who 
was  destined  to  fill  its  pages.  This  earlier  John  Westley,  a 
brave,  witty,  scholarly,  simple-minded  itinerant  evangelist,  may 
be  claimed  as  one  of  the  fathers  of  Methodism.  Of  him  it  was 
said  that,  when  a  schoolboy,  he  had  a  very  humbling  sense  of 
sin,  and  a  serious  concern  for  his  salvation,  and  soon  after  began 
to  keep  a  diary,  in  which  he  recorded  remarkable  instances  of 
providential  care  over  him,  the  method  of  God's  dealings  with 
his  soul,  and  how  he  found  his  heart  affected  under  the  means 
of  grace  and  the  occurrences  of  Providence.  This  method  he 
continued,  with  little  intermission,  to  the  end  of  his  life.  Adam 
Clarke  adds  :  '  It  was  probably  his  example,  which  he  must  have 
known,  that  led  his  grandson,  the  founder  of  the  Methodists,  to 
follow  the  same  practice.' 1 

It  may  be  objected  that  Wesley,  in  his  Preface  to  the  first 
'  Extract/  attributed  his  habit  of  keeping  a  journal  to  '  an  advice 
given  by  Bishop  Taylor  in  his  Rules  for  Holy  Living  and  Dying! 
But  the  two  statements — Dr.  Clarke's  and  Wesley's — are  not 
inconsistent.  What  the  latter  says  is,  '  I  began  to  take  a  more 
exact  account  than  I  had  done  before  of  the  manner  wherein  I 
spent  my  time,  writing  down  how  I  had  employed  every  hour.' 
The  Oxford  Diaries  illustrate  and  reconcile  the  two  statements. 
He  began  to  keep  the  Diary  before  reading  Jeremy  Taylor  ;  and  it 


1  Wesley  Family^  vol.  i.  p.  32.     See  also  Whitehead's  Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  2. 


•Jr.  xA/^ 


,&~  q     oo^jyp  ^»/» 

^  W 

**BF 

*=•/*  o* 


FACSIMILE    COVER-PAGE    OF    THE    FIRST    OXFORD    DIARY. 


43 


J  * 

<3  ^ 

i  -5(T? 

?  ^ 


^  *i 

•~j  ^ 


iw 


a  fi  s .  i  ^ 


^  a 

to      ?i 


44 


Introductory  45 


was,  as  he  says,  only  after  the  advice  he  received  that  he  enlarged 
its  scope,  making  it  a  more  exact  record  of  what  he  did  not  only 
from  day  to  day,  but  often  from  hour  to  hour. 

This  note-book  belonged,  apparently,  to  John  Westlcy,  of 
Whitchurch.  Had  the  good  man  lived,  the  little  volume  would 
have  been  filled,  as  others  like  it  had  been,  with  events  and 
thoughts  of  his  life  ;  and  it  would  then  have  passed,  with  the 
rest  of  his  diaries,  into  the  possession  of  Dr.  Calamy,  whose 
quotation  from  one  of  them  seems  to  have  been  the  original 
from  which  both  Whitehead  and  Clarke  quote.  But,  its  owner 
dying,  it  was  inherited,  with  other  personal  effects,  by  his  son 
Samuel.  Who  wrote  '  John  Westley's  '  name  in  the  book  we  do 
not  know.  There  is  often  a  family  likeness  in  the  handwriting, 
as  in  the  faces  and  figures,  of  the  Wesleys.  It  may  be  that  all 
three  names  were  written  by  one  hand,  or  by  two  or  three. 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  we  have  the  succession 
— the  grandfather  John  Westley,  his  son  Samuel  Wesley,  his 
grandson  John  Wesley.  The  book  would  probably  come  into 
the  hands  of  the  rector  of  Epworth  unused,  or  with  only  two  or 
three  pages  written  upon,  pages  which  have  been  neatly  cut  out. 
We  may  imagine  that  when  John,  having  finished  his  school  life 
at  the  Charterhouse,  removed  to  Oxford,1  his  father  gave  him 
this  note-book,  advising  that  he  should  imitate  the  example  of 
his  grandfather  whose  name  he  bore,  reminding  him  that  he 
also,  his  father,  had  kept  a  diary  with  accounts  of  his  expendi- 
ture. Probably  the  earliest  use  John  made  of  his  grandfather's 
old-fashioned  little  book  was  to  transcribe  extracts  and  notes 
from  the  first  Ode  of  Horace.  These  he  wrote  in  the  schoolboy 
handwriting  of  which  other  examples  survive  in  the  earliest 
known  letters  to  his  mother  and  in  a  letter  to  the  Treasurer 
of  Charterhouse  concerning  a  mistake  in  the  payment  of  his 
exhibition.  The  last  figure  of  the  date  in  the  latter  is  in- 
distinct, 'but  there  are  indications  of  its  having  been  the 
figure  I,  making  the  date  1721. '2 

At  the  close  of  this  same  year,  1721,  when  John  was  not  yet 
nineteen  years  of  age,  something  occurred  to  compel  a  more 

1  In  1720.  pp.  151-4.     See  note  on  p.  46,  also  fee- 

2  Homes    and    Haunts     of     Wesley.       simile  opposite,  for  an  example  of  Wesley's 
Facsimile     letter    from    the    Greyfriar,      earliest  handwriting. 


46  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

serious  outlook.  What  it  may  have  been  we  do  not  know ; 
perhaps  a  letter  from  his  father,  or  mother,  or  his  brother 
Samuel.1  But,  whatever  it  was,  it  led  him  to  write,  in  a  small 
neat  hand,  upon  the  inner  cover  of  his  grandfather's  note-book, 
a  plan  which  in  later  years  was  carried  out  still  more  elaborately. 
He  laid  down  a  scheme  of  studies  for  1722 — a  time-table  for 
each  day  of  the  week,  a  list  of  subjects  which  he  hoped  to  study, 
and  an  order  of  correspondence  with  his  father,  mother,  sisters,  and 
brother.  We  give  a  facsimile  of  the  first  cover-page  on  p.  43. 

The  volume,  among  other  peculiarities,  has  not  been  paged  ; 
it  has  been  used  for  various  purposes  ;  it  begins  from  both  ends, 
and  seems  to  have  been  taken  in  hand  more  than  once  as  though 
for  regular  service  in  a  busy  life,  and  then  to  have  been  laid  on 
one  side.  Whole  pages  are  left  blank,  and,  years  having  passed, 
are  filled,  or  partially  filled.  The  date  of  three  early  pages, 
containing  lists  of  pupils  provided  by  Dr.  Morley,  rector  of 
Lincoln,  is  as  late  as  1730,  when  the  volume  had  already,  nearly 
three  years  earlier,  finished  its  course  as  a  diary.  For  the  date 
of  two  pages  that  immediately  follow,  the  handwriting — a  fairly 
reliable  witness2— carries  us  back  eight  or  ten  years.  If  we 
could  identify  *  Mrs.  Seaco,' 3  for  whose  instruction  the  pages 
were  written,  we  might  approximately  date  them.  They  are 
so  beautiful  in  penmanship,  and  so  interesting  as  an  example 
of  what  the  scholarly  young  student  calls  '  collection,'  that  we 
here  reproduce  them.4 

Questions  arise : 

Did  Wesley  lend  his  grandfather's  little  note-book  to  a 
lady  pupil  ?  Or  is  this,  like  some  other  instances  that  might 
be  named,  a  transcription  for  the  student's  own  use  of  a 
separately  written  paper  given  to  Mrs.  Seaco?  If  the  latter, 


1  Or  the  conversation  with  the  college  in  Oxford  ;   it  persisted,  with  modifica- 
porter  reported  by  Reynolds.     See  Tyer-  tions,  to  the  end. 

man's  Life  of  Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  24.  8  The  name  may  be  a  contraction  for 

2  In  early  life  Wesley  seems  to  have  'Seacombe'  or  'Seacole.'      In  the  ac- 
had  two  distinct  yet  closely  allied  hand-  counts  he  twice  pays  '  Mrs.  Seacole '  ten 
writings.     The  first  he  probably  inherited  shillings.     He  had  several  lady  pupils  at 
from  the  Charterhouse.     The  Greyfriars  Oxford — Mrs.  Aldrich  and  Mrs.  Bagster 
letter,  the  Diary  pages  on  Horace,  two  of  Christ  Church,  Mrs.  Bosom  of  Mag- 
letters  to  his  mother  in  1723  and  1724,  dalen  or  Merton,  Mrs.  Green  and  Mrs. 
and   the   General    Rules  in   cipher,   are  Shelon  of  Wadham. 

examples.    The  second  style  was  formed  4  See  facsimile,  p.  44. 


Introductory  47 


have  we  here  one  of  Wesley's  unfulfilled  purposes,  an  unrealized 
ambition  ?  Probably.  We  know  that  he  left  the  Charterhouse 
with  a  reputation  as  a  writer  of  Latin  verse.  This  Diary 
bears  testimony  to  his  love  for  Horace.  He  translated  and 
1  collected '  all  the  Odes,  Epodes,  Satires,  and  Epistles.  The 
Odes  he  could  at  this  time  have  recited  in  early  eighteenth- 
century  Oxford  Latin  pronunciation,  and  with  the  rhetorical 
finish  that  made  his  readings  so  welcome  in  private  circles. 
Some  of  them  he  had  already  translated  into  English  verse. 
With  this  little  volume  in  our  hand,  we  may  surmise  that 
when,  in  or  about  1721,  he  transcribed  and  annotated  the  first 
Ode,  Wesley  cherished  the  idea  of  a  new  edition  of  Horace. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  many  congenial  pursuits  in  this 
spring-time  of  a  virile  life  shone  temptingly  before  Wesley's 
eyes.  We  can  easily  imagine  him  at  Christ  Church,  or  in  the 
familiar  rooms  at  Lincoln,  before  the  Holy  Club  had  fired  him 
with  the  '  enthusiasm  of  humanity,'  planning  his  life,  and  filling 
it  with  scholarly  achievements,  some  of  which  he  tentatively 
began.  Horace,  Juvenal,  Homer,  Shakespeare,  Spenser,  and 
Milton  were  annotated  by  his  facile  pen  at  Oxford  and  Wroot. 
At  one  period  his  mind  inclined  towards  the  drama.  His  sister 
Martha,  in  a  well-known  letter,  thanks  him  for  good  plays,  and 
craves  more.  On  the  first  page  of  his  Diary  a  mediaeval  writer 
of  plays  is  named  twice  as  a  subject  of  study,  and  three  times  on 
the.  same  page  he  says  that  he  '  acted  an  hour.' 

But  the  first  and  most  striking  feature  of  this  Diary  is 
the  dominating  influence  of  'Rules  and  Resolutions.'  If  the 
Diary  in  its  earliest  and  simplest  form  was  an  inheritance 
from  his  father  and  grandfather,  in  its  more  advanced  develop- 
ment it  was  a  fulfilment  of  Jeremy  Taylor's  advice.  The 
genesis  of  its  apparatus  is  distinctly  traceable  to  those  '  Rules 
of  Holy  Living '  which  have  ever  ranked  so  high  in  the 
devotional  literature  of  Christian  homes. 

Three  sets  of  Rules  and  Resolutions,  written  with  exquisite 
care,  immediately  precede  the  first  page  of  the  Diary.  On  the 
same  pages,  disfiguring  their  original  caligraphic  beauty,  are 
examples  of  an  early  form  of  class-register  and  a  list  of  texts 
and  topics  for  pulpit  preparation,  written  roughly,  at  various 
times,  and  here  and  there  rudely  erased.  The  cipher  in  which 


48  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

the  Rules  are  written  is  quite  simple  when  once  a  clue  to  the 
principle  of  decipherment  is  supplied.  Reserving  to  a  later 
section1  an  account  of  how  the  cryptic  lines  were  translated, 
we  here  give  facsimile  reproductions,  with  a  transliteration. 

A  GENERAL  RULE  IN  ALL  ACTIONS  OF  LIFE 
Whenever   you   are   to  do  an   action,  consider  how   God   did   or 
would  do  the  like,  and  do  you  imitate  His  example. 

GENERAL  RULES  OF  EMPLOYING  TIME 

1.  Begin  and  end  every  day  with  God;  and  sleep  not  immoderately. 

2.  Be  diligent  in  your  calling. 

3.  Employ  all  spare  hours  in  religion ;  as  able : 

4.  All  holidays  [holy-days]. 

5.  Avoid  drunkards  and  busybodies. 

6.  Avoid  curiosity,  and  all  useless  employments  and  knowledge. 

7.  Examine  yourself  every  night. 

8.  Never  on  any  account  pass  a  day  without  setting  aside  at  least 
an  hour  for  devotion. 

9.  Avoid  all  manner  of  passion. 

FRIDAY,  March  26.     I  found  a  great  many  unclean  thoughts  arise 
in  prayer  [or  devotions],  and  discovered  these  temptations  to  it  : 

a.  Too  much  addicting  myself  to  a  light  behaviour  at  all  times. 

b.  Listening  too  much  to  idle  talk,  or  reading  vain  plays  or  books. 

c.  Idleness,  and  lastly— 

Want  of  devotion — consideration  in  whose  presence  I  am. 
From  which  I  perceive  it  is  necessary 

a.  To  labour  for  a  grave  and  modest  carriage ; 

b.  To  avoid  vain  and  light  company  ;  and 

c.  To  entertain  awful  apprehensions  of  the  presence  of  God. 

d.  To  avoid  idleness,  freedom  with  women,  and  high-seasoned 

meats ; 

e.  To  resist  the  very  beginnings  of  lust,  not  by  arguing  with,  but 

by  thinking  no  more  of  it  or  by  immediately  going  into 
company;  lastly 
To  use  frequent  and  fervent  Prayer. 

GENERAL  RULES  AS  TO  INTENTION 

1.  In  every  action  reflect  on  your  end; 

2.  Begin  every  action  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
^  Holy  Ghost; 

t..--         3.  Begin  every  important  work  with  prayer ; 

4.  Do  not  leave  off  a  duty  because  you  are  tempted  in  it. 
1  See  p.  71  et  seq. 


t 


*    -       M  « 


-   , 
^ 


*' 


S    «* 


.f 


?>.*•£    a. 

I5;1h-^ 

L    '    SJ      f   ' »      „ 


I      ^ 
-       ^ 


t      Ni     «^ 

i'c§   TO 


R         u        M 

.B     ^      « 

H     «     5 


'<? 


•v/fj-rnf  -ft  /Lpff*  «  tf/Jc/'sfy 
Irft  fir.m  *l9fi.*A'.*/L- 


FACSIMILE    PAGE    CONFESSIONS    IN    CIPHER. 


Introductory  5 1 


These  Rules  are  a  '  collection  '  of  some  of  Jeremy  Taylor's 
noblest  paragraphs.  Wesley's  indebtedness  to  the  Holy  Living 
in  framing  all  his  Oxford  Rules,  his  Twelve  Rules  of  a  Helper, 
and  the  Rules  of  the  United  Societies,  will  be  obvious  to  any  one 
who,  having  read  the  book,  turns  to  these  productions  of  a 
man,  trained  in  the  school  of  method,  who  excelled  his  saintly 
master  at  least  in  his  power  to  say  much  in  few  words. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1725,  after  a  confession  of  sin 
and  a  cry  for  mercy,  he  makes  a  notable  addition  to  his  store  of 
Resolutions.  The  page  so  fairly  represents  the  general  charac- 
teristics of  the  Diary,  and  its  entries  for  the  most  part  are 
so  clearly  written  and  so  slightly  abbreviated,  that  it  may  be 
given  as  it  stands  without  transliteration  (see  opposite),  save  as 
regards  the  remarkable  cipher  passage  dated  December  I,  1725, 
the  decipherment  of  which  reads  thus  : 

Breach  of  vows  :  hence  careless  of  fixing  days  of  mortification,  &c. 

Pride  of  my  parts  or  holiness  :  greedy  of  praise  :  peevishness  : 
idleness. 

Intemperance  in  sleep  :  sins  of  thought  :  hence  useless  or  sinful  anger. 

Breach  of  promise  :  dissimulation  :  lying  :  rash  censures  :  contemning 
others  :  disrespect  of  governors  :  desire  to  seem  better  than  I  am. 


RESOLUTION  : 

To  fast,  &c.,  every  Wednesday  in  a  month.    Kvpie  /?or/0ei. 

During  the  first  year  of  his  new  career  as  an  ordained  clergy- 
man Wesley  adopted  a  plan  destined,  in  a  slightly  changed  form, 
to  play  a  momentous  part  in  the  early  Methodist  societies.  Every 
Saturday  night  he  held  an  inquisition  with  regard  to  his  own 
religious  experience.  It  was  a  private  Saturday-night  'band- 
meeting,'  his  Lord  and  his  own  soul  being,  as  yet,  the  only 
members  of  the  '  band.'  Month  by  month  Diary  No.  I  records, 
usually  in  the  form  of  confession,  the  results  of  this  inquisition. 
The  words,  as  a  rule,  are  few,  and  invariably  in  cipher.  They 
end  with  the  familiar  prayer  for  mercy  (K.  e.)  ;  or,  when  a  new 
Resolution  is  added  to  the  *  Rules  and  Exercises  of  Holy  Living,' 
the  prayer  is  for  <  help  '  (K.  #.)•  Returning  from  Buckland  and 
Stanton,  where  the  Christmas  holidays  of  1725-6  were  spent, 
he  resumes  his  work,  reading  the  Latin  classics  and  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans  in  Greek.  On  Saturday  he  writes  thus  : 


52  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

5.  Read  Juvenal  again  :  breakfast  with  Mr.  Lehman,  talk  of  Lincoln 
[this  last,  with  characteristic  caution,  is  in  cipher,  for  he  was  not  yet 
elected  a  Fellow  of  Lincoln]. 

Aft.  Drank  tea  with  Gwynn  :  read  the  Corpus  verses  and  Vertot. 

And  then,  it  being  Saturday  night,  he  draws  a  line,  enters  his 
secret  place  of  meditation,  reopens  his  Diary,  and  with  minute 
care  writes  the  following  spiritual  exercise  (see  p.  57)  : 

ENQUIRE  : 
Have  I  loved  women  or  company  more  than  God  ? 

RESOLVE  :  Never  to  let  sleep  or  company  hinder  me  from  going 

to  prayers. 
Have  I  taken  God's  name  in  vain  ? 

RESOLVE  :  Never  to  mention  it  but  in  religion. 
Irreverent  behaviour  at  Church  ? 

RESOLVE  :  Never  to  laugh  or  talk  idly  there. 
Indevotion  ? 

Prayer  and  humility. 
Pride  ? 

Consider  death,  the  Scriptures. 
Idleness  ? 

Six  hours  every  day. 
Intemperate  sleep? 

At  five. 
Unclean  thoughts  ? 

God's  omnipresence. 

Jan.  29,  1726. 
Lying. 

Sept.  20.  RESOLVED  to  reflect  twice  a  day. 
Oct.    24.  Once  a  day  to  read  over  the  last  week's  resolutions. 
Dec.     i.  To  fast  once  a  month. 

Reviewed  Jan.  31,  1726. 

These  sacred  and  hitherto  unknown  meditations  of  a  young 
scholar  (he  was  still  in  his  twenty-second  year)  are  published 
with  diffidence,  and  not  without  misgiving  lest  readers,  more 
familiar  with  modern  phraseology  than  with  the  words  and 
meanings  of  the  older  devotional  writers,  should  read  into  them 
a  significance  not  warranted  by  the  known  facts  of  the  writer's 
inward  and  outward  life.  For  instance,  in  his  severe  self- 
communings  he  recalls  the  pleasant  Christmas  holiday  spent  in 
the  villages  of  Broadway,  Stanton,  and  Buckland.  Women  like 


Introductory  53 


Mrs.  Kirkham  and  her  three  daughters,  Mrs.  Chapone,  Betty 
and  Damaris,  with  their  intimate  friends  in  the  vicarages  of 
Broadway  and  Buckland,  and  their  neighbours,  Mrs.  Granville, 
Mrs.  Pendarves  (afterwards  Mrs.  Delany),  and  Miss  Anne  Gran- 
ville, had  been  his  daily  comrades  during  the  Christmas  and 
New  Year  festivities.  They  were  all  women  of  the  highest  dis- 
tinction, both  intellectually  and  in  point  of  morals  and  manners. 
In  the  young  student's  regard  they  ranked  with  his  own  mother 
and  sisters.  But  there  had  been  much  company.  A  wedding 
in  the  Kirkham  family,  at  which  Wesley  was  an  invited  guest, 
had  increased  the  gaiety  of  the  old-fashioned  *  merry  Christmas.' 
Returning  to  Oxford,  Wesley  closes  the  first  month  of  the  new 
year  with  a  series  of  searching  questions  addressed  with  unsparing 
'openness'  to  a  painfully  tender  conscience.  The  foremost  inquiry 
in  this  Saturday-night  self-examination  echoes  the  phraseology 
of  the  *  Holy  Living  '  and  the  intimacies  of  the  Christmas  friend- 
ships :  *  Have  I  loved  women  or  company  more  than  God  ? ' 

Another  cipher  word  may  here  be  noted.  1— -o  seems  to 
reappear  in  a  later  Diary  (1734,  for  example)  as  li  and  1,  where, 
undoubtedly,  the  interpretation  is  'lively.'  According  to  his 
own  diagnosis,  Wesley  was  greatly  tempted  by  the  opposite 
dispositions  of  c  liveliness '  and  *  moroseness.'  It  might  be 
thought  possible  to  translate  1 — o  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner. 
One  would  gladly  accept  such  relief  from  an  acknowledged  diffi- 
culty but  for  the  inexorable  pressure  of  facts.1  The  word  is 
used  frequently  in  the  confessions  of  this  period.  It  is  clearly 
and  carefully  written,  nothing  in  any  context  contravenes  the 
interpretation,  and  in  one  place  no  other  is  possible.  But  by 
'  lying '  Wesley  (always  the  most  unrelenting  witness  against 
himself)  does  not  mean  the  deliberately  spoken  lie,  but  exag- 
geration, misrepresentation,  the  equivocal  use  of  words  out  of 
their  ordinary  and  strictly  accurate  and  literal  meaning,  or  a 
suppressio  veri>  all  of  which  will  be  recognized  as  being  the 
temptation  of  a  lively,  highly  imaginative  conversationalist. 
Betrayed  into  hasty  speech,  when  the  Saturday-night  dry  light 
shines  on  the  sayings  and  doings  of  the  week,  he  labels  his 
sins  of  idle  words  '  lying.' 

Even  in  his  exuberant  youth  a  hard  reader  and  a  busy 
y :  the  fullpoint  in  the  centre  =  i  :  o  =  ng. 


54  John   Wesley  s  Journal 


man,  Wesley  nevertheless  was  constantly  tempted  to  waste 
precious  hours  in  idleness.  In  early  youth  and  far  on  into 
old  age  an  early  riser,  '  immoderate  sleep '  was  another  frequent 
'  sin.'  Constitutionally,  and  through  force  of  life-long  physical 
infirmity,  a  lazy  man,  he  resolutely  trained  himself  into  the 
habit  of  ceaseless  diligence.  But  the  process  was  slow  and 
painful.  In  this  Diary  we  see  the  habit  in  the  early  stages 
of  its  growth  and  in  its  struggles.  No  early  Methodist 
preacher  knew  better  than  John  Wesley  how  hard  it  was  for 
young  men  to  'be  diligent.'  Light  literature,  plays,  books 
like  Gulliver  and  Hudibras,  music,  the  customary  outdoor  and 
indoor  recreations  of  the  day,  tea-drinking  with  friends,  long 
walks  and  various  forms  of  horse  exercise,  brightened  a 
laborious  life,  and  at  the  same  time  allured  into  that  which 
he  regarded,  in  his  more  serious  moments,  as  a  sinful  waste 
of  time.  One  of  the  pathetic  complaints  against  himself  fre- 
quently met  with  is  *  intemperate  sleep '  or  '  immoderate  sleep.' 
Another  constantly  recurring  word  in  cipher  is  -€'m'^\  (idle- 
ness). Oneofhis  Saturday-night  reviews  (October  I,  1726,  p.  57) 
is  recorded  in  two  words  -ef'm'n\  rK  .  The  history  of  the  brief 

idleness        slas 

cryptic  sentence  is  interesting.  During  the  previous  days  he 
has  made  a  new  sermon  and  has  preached  it  at  St.  Michael's,  has 
written  verses,  enjoyed  recreation  in  the  Common  Room  of  his 
own  College  of  Lincoln  and  among  his  former  comrades  at 
Christ  Church,  indulged,  as  he  frequently  did,  in  light  reading 
(in  this  case  the  History  of  Py rates)  and  ended  the  working- 
week  on  Friday  night  with  '  writ  to  my  mother.'  His  Saturday- 
night  verdict  on  the  week's  doings  is,  '  Idleness  slays.'  The 
word  translated  '  idleness  '  is  beyond  question.  The  next  word 
may,  as  shorthand  experts  think,  be  a  '  phraseogram.'  It  seems 
to  stand  for  words  in  which  s-s  occurs.  Here  it  is  combined 
with  'I*  and  'a.'  The  following  passage  from  Jeremy  Taylor's 
Holy  Living  (p.  5,  ed.  1858)  solves  the  difficulty.  It  certainly 
affords  an  illuminating  commentary  on  Wesley's  life-long  battle 
against  idleness,  whether  in  sleep  or  trifling  employment 

Idleness  is  called  '  the  sin  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters,' r   and 
indeed  is  '  the  burial  of  a  living  man ' 2  •   an  idle  person  being  so 

1  Ezek.  xvi.  49.  2  Seneca. 


Introductory  55 


useless  to  any  purposes  of  God  and  man,  and  he  is  like  one  that 
is  dead,  unconcerned  in  the  changes  and  necessities  of  the  world  ; 
and  he  only  lives  to  spend  his  time  and  eat  the  fruits  of  the  earth  : 
like  a  vermin  or  a  wolf,  when  their  time  comes  they  die  and  perish, 
and  in  the  meantime  do  no  good ;  they  neither  plough  nor  carry 
burdens  ;  all  that  they  do  either  is  unprofitable  or  mischievous. 

All  this  John  Wesley  '  collected '  into  a  cryptic  phrase, 
writing  it  in  his  grandfather's  little  diary-book  that  it  might 
whisper  warning  amidst  the  distractions  of  a  pleasant  life — 
'  Idleness  slays.'  Sunday  morning  followed,  and  we  may  picture 
him  riding  through  the  autumn-tinted  lanes  to  Combe  parish 
church,  where  he  read  prayers  once,  and,  returning  to  Oxford, 
preached  at  Christ  Church.  On  Monday,  October  3,  he  went 
to  the  Coffee  House,  where  he  read  the  news,  and  again  '  writ 
my  mother.'  In  the  after  part  of  the  day  he  wrote  to  his 
hard-working  brother  at  Westminster,  read  Lilly's  Life,1  and 
two  days  later  rode  to  Broadway — a  memorable  journey. 

These  exercises  of  religion  recorded  in  this  first  Diary  are 
repeated  in  a  more  and  more  elaborate  form  in  later  Diaries. 
They  prepared  the  way  for  the  Holy  Club ;  they  found  their  fullest 
development  in  the  class-meeting,  private  bands,  and  *  Helpers ' 
of  the  United  Societies,  with  their  Rules  and  fellowship. 

At  a  later  period,  when  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Club  the  keeping  of  a  diary  had  become  one  of  his  most  serious 
'  actions,'  Wesley  divided  his  life  into  compartments,  giving  to 
each  a  name  in  his  Monthly  Reviews  One  of  these  review  pages 
is  given  on  p.  67. 

The  compartments  are  indicated  by  marginal  letters. 
Under  R.  he  notes  religious  exercises,  e.g.  preaching,  studies, 
reading,  &c.  ;  L.  represents  studies  in  Latin,  G.  Greek,  H. 
Hebrew,  Fr.  French  ;  Lr.  the  principal  correspondence  of  the 
month ;  T.  his  travelling  ;  Pu.  matters  specially  relating  to  his 
pupils  ;  Ac.  the  '  actions,'  or,  more  probably,  what  Jeremy  Taylor 
calls  the  'accidents' — i.e.  the  happenings  of  his  life.2  In  a 
later  volume  we  purpose  giving  the  complete  series  of  these 
pages.  They  form  a  succinct,  intelligible,  and  most  interesting 

1  Which   he   read   again   later  (Jour-  2  Compare  the  Bible  use  of  the  phrase 

nal,  Oct.  1 8,  1763).     Lilly  was  a  famous       '  It  fell  on  a  day  '  or  '  It  came  to  pass, 
astrologer  of  the  seventeenth  century. 


56  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

autobiographical  record  of  the  years  1732-4.  One  of  the  pages 
is  here  introduced  for  two  reasons  :  (i)  it  shows  how  the  scheme 
of  life  drafted  on  the  cover-page  of  the  first  Oxford  Diary 
was  carried  out  in  subsequent  years ;  and  (2)  it  affords  further 
proof  that  the  identification  of  Varanese  (Miss  Betty  Kirkham) 
as  '  my  first  religious  friend '  is  correct.  She  here  ranks  with 
Clayton,1  afterwards  vicar  of  Salford,  as  a  gift  of  Providence. 
She  continues  to  rank  with  Wesley's  special  correspondents  until 
1736,  or,  in  other  words,  almost  to  the  eve  of  his  departure  from 
Georgia.  If  the  lost  Diaries  filling  the  gap  between  September 
1734  and  October  1735  should  be  discovered,  '  V,'  like  Clayton 
and  Hutton,  will  be  found  holding  a  place  of  high  regard  among 
the  religious  friends  of  the  leader  of  the  Holy  Club.2 

Following  Wesley's  example  in  his  Monthly  Reviews,  we 
will  now  attempt  an  analysis  of  the  first  Diary. 

Under  the  head  of  Religion  we  naturally  turn  to  his 
ordination  to  the  office  and  work  of  the  Christian  ministry. 
The  record  reflects  his  condition  of  mind  at  this  time  and  the 
habits  of  his  daily  life. 

Sept.  17,  1725. 
Friday.  Breakfast  with  Mr  Sherman  [his  tutor]  (of  passive  obedience) 

vindicated  St1 :  p.  i.  K.  e.  p:  c.  T.  F.3 
Aft.  Read    The    Gentleman's   Library,    subscribed    the   Articles,    read 

Dr  Bennet.     p.  i.  K.  e.     Sat  at  the  Coffee  House.     Idle  talk. 
Sat.  Read  Mr  Russill's  sermon,  Dr  Bennet:  p.  i.  K.  e.     R  said  [PRead] 

Bishop  Bull's  Companion,     p.  c.  T.  F. 
Aft.  Saturday,     inde :  Boasting,   greedy  of  praise,   intemperate  sleep, 

detraction,  lying:  K.  c.  p.  i.  K.  e.  p.  c:  T.  F:   heat  in  arguing: 

p.  c.  T.  F. 


1  Clayton's    advent   marked  the  more  Ktfpie  e\^aov   and  '  K.  /3.'  Ktfpie  fioriOei; 
perfect   organization   and   inspiration   of  '  p.  i.'  may  mean  '  prayer,' 'intention '; 
the  Holy  Club.  'c.  T.  F.'    (cursive   capitals)    may  be   a 

2  A  letter  was  written  to  her  from  the  cryptic  formula  of  thanksgiving.     If  this 
Simmonds,  Oct.   18,  1735,  also  to  Clay-  interpretation  is   approximately  correct, 
ton,    S[ister]    Emilia,    and  other   choice  the  constant  use  of  the  letters   in  con- 
friends.     Her  name  appears  in  the  corre-  nexion  with  daily  work,    letter-writing, 
spondence   list   at    the   end   of   Georgia  intercourse    with    friends,    means    that 
Diary  No.  II.  Wesley  strove  at  this  time   after  literal 

3  These    letters,    partly    English    and  obedience   to   the    apostle's    injunction, 
partly   Greek,    constantly   recur   at   this  '  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplica- 
time.      They    are    probably    devotional  tion  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests 
and  ejaculatory.     '  K.  e.'  no  doubt  means  be  made  known  unto  God.' 


CSi 


IL-  * 

Mi  2 


^t      141.^5 


Introductory  59 


Morn.  Was  ordained  Deacon  by  the  Bishop  of  Oxford.     K.  e.  ft. :  p.  c. 

T.  F. 
Aft.  Walked  in  Trinity  Gardens :  collected  Dr  Bennet :  heard  Mr  Bear 

on  the  Holy  Ghost  teaching  the  Apostles  all  truth :  collected 

Bennet :  p.  c.  T.  F.     Sat  at  Burman's  :   read  Bishop  Burnet 

of  his  oivn  times  :  disputed  warmly  on  a  trifle.     K.  e.  p.  c.  T.  F. 

Sept.  19. 
Morn.  Was  treated  by  Ditcher  at  the  Coffee  House  and  Tennis  Court : 

p.  c.  T.  F.     Collected  Bennet.     Writ  out  the  Duke's  Funeral 

for  Mr  Burcomb ;  talked  of  marriage  with  Griffiths  :  walked 

round  the  meadow.     Resolved  to  Review  always  twice  a  day. 
Aft.  Walked  an  hour :  writ  to  my  father,     p.  i.  K.  c.  :  walked  from  five 

to  six :   went  to  Tatham's  :   sat  at  the  Coffee  House :   p.  c. 

T.  F. 
Tues.  Breakfast  with  Burman  :  p.  c.  T.  F.     collected  Bennet :  walked 

an  hour. 

Aft.  Collected  Bennet :  played  two  hours  at  tennis. 
Wed.  Breakfast  with  Burman  :  read  Jane  Shore  :  p.  i.  K.  «.  p.  c.  T.  F. 
Aft.  Writ  to  my  Brother  and  to  N.  :  sat  at  Lincoln,     p.  c.  T.  F. 
Th.  Breakfast  with  Burman  :  writ  to  Varanese :   p.  i.  K.  €. 
Aft.  Writ  to  Varanese  :   sat  at  home  with  company. 
jFri.  Read  Clark  and  Ward  :  p.  i.  K.  e. 
Aft.  Collected  Bennet :  compared  Clark  and  Ward  :  walked  out :  drank 

tea  with  Mr  Rigby,  talk  of  predestination  p.  c.  T.  F.     Sat  at 

the  King's  Head. 

Mr.  Sherman  was  Wesley's  tutor  ;  Griffiths  the  son  of  his 
friend  the  vicar  of  Broadway,  whose  '  fancy '  Christian  name, 
probably,  was  '  Robin.' 

At  the  Coffee  House  he  read  the  news,  The  Spectator,  and 
other  periodicals  of  the  day,  paying  $d.  a  sitting,  or  a  guinea 
a  year.  At  the  King's  Head  friends  would  lodge. 

From  a  reference  in  his  printed  Journal  we  know  that 
Wesley's  first  sermon  after  his  ordination  was  preached  at 
South  Lye  (or  Leigh)  near  Witney.  Among  the  miscellaneous 
papers  in  the  Colman  Collection  the  MS.  is  preserved.  Strange 
to  say,  no  record  of  the  sermon  or  of  its  preaching  appears 
in  the  Diary.  Sunday,  September  26,  1725,  is  left  blank.  The 
Saturday  previous  he  spent  collecting  Bennet,  breakfasting 
with  Ditcher,  walking  with  Burton  of  Corpus  Christi  (who  ten 
years  later  induced  him  to  undertake  the  Georgia  Mission), 
reading  Watts  on  Predestination,  and  writing,  as  usual,  bitter 


60  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

things  against  himself,  among  them  being  this :  '  heat  in 
arguing.'  This  ever-memorable  week  closed  with  the  old  cry, 
'Kvpie  ekerjaovV  On  Sunday  morning  he  rides  alone  through 
Oxfordshire  lanes  towards  Witney,  and,  halting  at  the  quaint 
old  church  at  South  Lye  with  frescoed  walls,  he  presents  his 
authority  signed  by  Bishop  Potter,  and  preaches,  from  an 
exquisitely  neat  little  MS.,  on  '  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  His  righteousness.'  Nearly  seventy  years  later,  'in 
age  and  feebleness  extreme,'  Wesley  preached  in  the  house  at 
Leatherhead — it  still  survives — from  the  companion  text,  '  Seek 
ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found  ;  call  ye  upon  Him  while 
He  is  near.'  These  were  his  first  and  his  last  sermons. 

The  first  diary-recorded  preaching-Sunday  is  October  3 : 
*  Preached  and  read  prayers  at  Fleet  Marston  and  Winchenden.' 
Apparently  the  sermon  delivered  at  South  Lye  did  not  satisfy 
his  fastidious  taste  or,  we  may  hope,  his  hungry  spirit ;  for  he 
spent  the  preceding  week  in  reading  Watts,  the  Greek  Testa- 
ment, and  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  in  communion  with 
the  best  of  his  friends,  in  prayer  and  severe  self-examination, 
and  in  writing  and  revising  a  new  sermon.  'Hide  nothing'  is 
the  principal  Saturday-night  record.  And,  rising  early,  he  rode 
forth  to  preach  his  laboriously  written  sermon  or  sermons  in 
two  parishes. 

The  following  are  typical  preaching-Sundays  in  1725-6, 
the  record  being  exact,  though  for  convenience  in  reading  a 
little  freely  transliterated. 

c  Oct.  10.'  Having  an  appointment  to  preach  at  Shipton,  some 
miles  from  Oxford,  he  hired  a  horse,  for  which  he  would  pay,  as  we 
learn  from  the  accounts,  about  3^.  6d.  The  appointment  evidently 
included  an  invitation  to  spend  the  week-end  with  friends,  probably 
at  the  rectory.  Therefore  on  the  Saturday  afternoon  he  'rid  to 
Shipton,'  and  on  the  Sunday  'preached  twice,  read  prayers  three 
times,  buried  a  corpse,  talked  of  good  examples,  of  publishing  injuries 
done  to  ourselves,  and  of  the  natural  constitution  of  the  body,  &c.' 

'  Oct.  17.  Rode  to  Tarm  [Thame],  read  prayers,  and  preached 
twice.'  Returning  the  same  evening,  he  'sat  with  Harrison.' 

'  Oct.  24.'  He  again  rode  to  Shipton  on  the  Saturday  afternoon, 
'  preached,  read  prayers,  baptized  a  child,  and  married  a  couple '  on  the 
Sunday  morning ;  in  the  afternoon  preached  again  and  *  read  prayers 
twice.' 


Introductory  6 1 


Riding  home  on  the  Monday  morning,  he  spent  the  afternoon  with 
Burman  and  in  walking  to  the  Castle.  The  next  day  he  went  to 
Broadway,  halting  at  Evesham,  Stanton,  and  Buckland.  He  returned 
home  on  the  Saturday,  and  spent  the  Sunday  in  reading  Norris,  talking 
with  Mr.  Pindar  (son  of  his  father's  near  neighbour)  about  church 
discipline,  walking,  talking  of  Moving  creatures/  and  ended  the  day 
'at  JessonV  rooms. 

' Nov.  21.'  He  'writ  a  sermon,  read  prayers,  preached  at  Binsey, 
and  sat  at  New  College.' 

''Jan.  9'  (1726).  He  'read  prayers  and  preached  at  Buckland'  in 
the  morning  and  'at  Stanton'  in  the  afternoon. 

'Jan.  1 6.     Read  prayers  and  preached  at  Stanton.' 

He  wrote,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  from  fifteen  to  twenty 
sermons  during  the  year.  The  services  in  which  he  took  part 
numbered  fifty-five.  In  thirty-four  of  these  he  preached.  In 
contrast  with  records  of  later  years,  how  scanty  the  information, 
how  cold  the  memories  !  He  writes  not  a  word  concerning 
the  congregation  or  his  own  conscious  experience  during  or 
after  the  preaching.  He  neither  rejoices  over  fruit  gathered 
nor  mourns  the  absence  of  result.  The  sermon  is  '  writ/ 
preached,  and  that  is  all.  Once,  preaching  at  Stanton,  he 
preserves  a  note  of  the  conversation  which  followed.  Mrs.  Pen- 
darves  and  the  rectory  ladies  heard  the  sermon.  It  seems  to 
have  been  preparatory  to  a  celebration  of  Holy  Communion. 
This  is  the  Diary  entry  : 

Talked  of  the  nature  of  a  Sacrament.  Much  harm  is  done  by 
exaggerating  the  venerableness  of  it.  Proposing  it  as  an  object  of 
fear  rather  than  love  deters  multitudes  from  receiving  it.  [Talked] 
of  the  fulfilling  of  the  prophecies  touching  the  Messiah,  particularly 
that  given  to  Ahab  [PAhaz] — 'He  shall  be  called  a  Nazarene.'1 

On  Sunday,  January  i,  1727,  he  preached  once  more  at 
Stanton,  and  again  conversed  with  his  friends  on  the  Sacrament. 


1  That  Wesley   in   1726,    or    at  any  ing  one  consonant  back— would  be  *b/ 

time,  should  mistake  Ahab  for  Ahaz  is  and    so    he    instinctively,    and    not    of 

extraordinary.     But  in  small  details  he  is  set  purpose,  wrote  '  Ahab '  for  « Ahaz.' 

frequently  betrayed  into  error,  apparently  There    are    several   illustrations  in  the 

by  absent-mindedness  and  the   'law  of  Diaries  of   error    arising    from    similar 

association.'     This    probably    happened  causes, 
here.     The  cipher  sign  for  '  z  ' — count- 


62  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

The  Sunday  following,  after  reading  prayers,  he  records  a  con- 
versation on  *  Election  and  Reprobation  '  with  '  Aspasia  '  (Mrs. 
Pendarves),  who  was  visiting  at  the  rectory.  Two  days  later  came 
a  tragedy  that  invests  a  sermon  printed  in  Wesley's  Works  with 
new  and  hitherto  unexpected  interest.  '  Robin  '  Griffiths,  son  of 
the  vicar  of  Broadway,  died  suddenly.  A  messenger  was  sent  to 
Wesley,  who  was  staying  with  the  Tookers  at  Buckland.  '  Rode 
to  Broadway,'  he  writes.  '  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Griffiths  bear  it  nobly, 
with  regular,  solemn  sadness.  Talked  of  him  and  his  death. 
Proffered  to  preach  for  him.  Returned,  and  in  the  afternoon 
began  a  sermon  —  2  Sam.  xii.  23.'  Thursday,,  February^  12,  he 
was  again  at  Broadway,  transcribing  the  sermon  for  his  friends, 


and  was  present  at  'Robin's'  burying.  On  Sunday  eiioany  15, 
he  read  prayers  and  preached  the  '  funeral  sermon  '  in  the  old 
parish  church  at  Broadway.  Later  in  the  day  he  rode  home  to 
Buckland,  where  also  he  preached  —  possibly  the  same  sermon  ; 
for  if  our  surmises  respecting  '  Robin  '  and  Miss  Nancy  Tooker 
are  correct,  there  was  a  house  of  mourning  at  Buckland  as  well 
as  at  Broadway,  and  Mr.  John  Wesley,  and  Miss  Betty  Kirkham, 
with  her  sister,  Mrs.  Chapone,  and  Mrs.  Pendarves,  loved  'Robin' 
and  Nancy,  and  in  this  day  of  sorrow  forgot  the  faults  of  both 
in  the  tearful  memory  of  their  virtues.  The  preacher  returned 
to  Broadway,  slept  that  night  with  the  Aliens,  and  next 
morning  rode  back  to  Oxford,  apparently  escorting  Mrs. 
Chapone  to  her  husband's  house  or  lodging. 

During  John's  absence  his  brother  Charles  had  come  to 
Oxford.  John  and  Mr.  Sherman  went  to  see  his  rooms  at 
Christ  Church.  Three  days  later  a  parcel  came  from  the 
Broadway  vicarage,  with  a  letter  written  by  the  bereaved  and 
grateful  father.  '  Robin's  '  gown  and  other  personal  belongings 
were  in  the  parcel.  The  copy  of  the  sermon  transcribed  in 
the  old  vicarage  at  Broadway  remained  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Griffiths.  The  original  from  which  Wesley  preached  is  now 
in  the  Colman  Collection,  endorsed  with  the  date  as  in  the 
Diary.  Many  years  ago  it  was  recopied  and  included  among 
Wesley's  published  sermons,  with  a  footnote  to  the  effect  that 
it  was  '  preached  at  Epworth  '  ! 

With  this  pathetic  story  we  exhaust  the  human  interest 
of  Wesley's  preaching  in  the  first  two  years  of  his  ministerial 


I.    INTERIOR    OF    CHRIST    CHURCH,    OXFORD.  2.    SOUTH    LEIGH    CHURCH. 

3.   BROADWAY  CHURCH,    IN   WHICH  WESLEY   PREACHED   FREQUENTLY.       (See  SER.  CXXXV 
PREACHED    HERE,    AND    NOT    AT    EPWORTH.) 

63 


1.  BUCKLAND    CHURCH    AND    RECTORY. 

2.  THE    HOME    OF    THE    GRANVILLES    (MRS.    DELANY),    BUCKLAND. 

64 


Introductory  65 


life.  He  was  learning  the  art  of  sermon-making.  But  as  yet 
he  knew  not  how  to  preach  the  sermons  he  wrote.  He  was 
learning  also  how  to  report  and  '  collect '  sermons  and  lectures, 
as  the  following  interesting  examples  culled  from  the  first  Diary 
will  show : 

N.B.— Heard  Mr.  Colley :  Think  of  God  with  reverence  and 
modesty;  avoid  a  sanctified  forwardness;  let  your  thoughts  of  Him 
be  mixed,  compounded  of  all  His  attributes,  and  not  unfruitful ;  but 
imitate  Him  in  truth,  love,  and  holiness,  and  consider  Him  under  the 
characters  He  assumes  Himself,  as  a  Good  Shepherd,  a  Friend  (what 
an  honour,  comfort,  and  support  is  that  relation  to  Him,  entailed,  unless 
we  disinherit  ourselves,  on  all  the  spiritual  sons  of  Abraham,  as  on  him  and 
his  active  faith),  a  Father  who  not  only  gave  a  beginning  to  our  existence, 
but  has  taken  care  of  us  ever  since — who,  when  even  our  parents  forsake 
us,  takes  us  up,  and  has  provided  for  us  all  things  necessary  both  to  life 
and  godliness,  both  to  our  temporal  and  eternal  happiness ! 

N.B. — Heard  Mr.  Coningsby  on  Passive  Obedience  :  No  exception 
to  be  made  from  a  general  rule,  unless  either  by  the  lawgiver  or  from 
the  reason  of  the  thing.  St.  Paul's  reasons  are  against  it ;  as  it  is  the 
very  idea  of  government :  for  supremacy,  limited  or  unlimited,  implies 
a  last  resort,  and  from  the  last  resort  there  lies  no  appeal.  So  that  to 
assert  both  supremacy  and  resistance,  that  is,  a  further  appeal,  is  a 
palpable  contradiction. 

If  God  be  the  origin  of  all  power,  then  is  the  supreme  governor 
His  Vicegerent ;  if  His  Vicegerent,  then  he  has  no  superior,  but  him 
from  whom  his  authority  is  derived ;  and  if  he  has  no  superior  but  God, 
then  there  can  lie  no  appeal  from  him  to  any  but  God  Himself. 

Want  we  authority  ?  all  the  good  men  in  the  world,  all  the  New 
Testament,  our  Lord  Himself,  His  disciples,  the  blessed  martyrs, 
who  wanted  neither  strength  nor  numbers;  our  own  Church  both  in 
her  practice,  Homilies,  and  Liturgy,  and  this  Loyal  Seat  .  .  .  which 
made  no  less  than  three  decrees  to  the  purpose,  in  the  compass  of  the 
last  century. 

In  the  Monthly  Reviews,  first  after  Religion,  rank  serious 
studies.  In  these,  Latin  and  Greek  classics,  or  Hebrew,  take 
precedence.  French  or  English  literature  follows.  Theology, 
church  history,  and  works  of  devotion  are  included  under 
the  head  of  Religion.  In  the  six  months  following  his 
ordination  he  read  Drake  and  Le  Clerc's  Physics,  Burnet  of 
the  Reformation,  Dennis  against  Pope,  Salmon's  Review, 
Welstead's  Poems,  Lee  against  Locke,  Hickes  of  Schism,  The 

VOL.  I.  4 


66  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

Great  Atlas,  Dr.  Halley  of  Magnetism  and  Gravity,  Ditton 
of  Matter's  Thinking,  the  Souls  of  Brutes,  Watts,  Keil's 
Principia,  Cowley,  Locke,  Norris,  Heautontimorumenos,  Cheyne 
of  Fevers,  Ezra  in  Hebrew,  Horace's  Odes,  Horace's  Epodes 
and  Satires,  Life  of  Whiteways,  Horace  de  Arte  Poetica  and 
Epistles,  St.  Matthew,  part  of  the  i$th  chapter  of  Proverbs 
(which  he  translated  into  Latin  verse),  Virgil's  Eclogues,  Logic, 
Virgil's  Georgics,  St.  Mark,  St.  Luke,  the  Aeneid,  Life  of 
Plutarch,  Epictetus,  the  Acts,  the  Iliad,  Romans,  Xenophon, 
Colossians  and  Thessalonians,  Proverbs  and  Ecclesiastes, 
Cornelius  Nepos,  Jackson,  Cowley  and  Watts,  On  the  Case 
of  Subscribing,  Prior  and  Berkeley,  Satires  of  Juvenal,  Vertot's 
Revolutions  of  Rome,  Synge  on  Toleration,  Clarendon,  Milton, 
Rapin  on  Eloquence,  Ephesians,  and  twelve  Odes  of  Anacreon. 
All  these  books,1  with  a  remarkable  admixture  of  Plays,  &c., 
were  read,  and  many  of  them  re-read  and  collected,  in  the 
interval  between  his  ordination  (September  1725)  and  his 
election  to  the  Fellowship  of  Lincoln  (March  17,  1726) — a 
fair  list  in  the  course  of  six  months  by  a  young  student 
of  delicate  physique  who  suffers  a  martyrdom  from  chronic 
bilious  catarrh,  and  is  only  able  to  preserve  a  tolerable  measure 
of  health  by  strict  abstemiousness  and  daily  exercise  in 
walking,  riding,  rowing,  or  tennis. 

Next  to  Religion  and  Learning,  the  letters  of  friendship 
filled  a  large  place  in  Wesley's  life  at  Oxford.  As  the  years 
passed,  letters  to  be  written  increased  in  number,  and,  we 
may  well  believe,  in  importance.  Each  letter  as  received  was 
endorsed,  dated,  and,  in  many  instances,  entered  in  the  Diary. 
Replies — not  always  brief  and  terse,  as  in  later  years — were 
transcribed.  Most  of  the  Granville  correspondence  was  preserved 
in  Wesley's  handwriting.  The  Varanese  letters  have  perished. 
Not  a  single  example  is  known  to  exist.  Perhaps  Mrs.  John 
Wesley  destroyed  the  epistolary  fruit  of  a  friendship  which, 
during  ten  years  at  least,  so  powerfully,  and  on  the  whole  so 
graciously,  influenced  Wesley's  life.  His  letters  to  Varanese— 
probably  much  freer  and  more  natural  than  those  written  to 
Aspasia — would,  if  discovered,  be  a  complete  spiritual  auto- 

1  Wesley's  descriptions  or  titles,  with  the  order  in  which  the  books  are  named,  are 
preserved. 


FACSIMILE    OF    MONTHLY    SUMMARY    (S£0    PAGES    1  6,    55,    56). 


67 


t. 


, 


J> 


J. 


hL 


CO, 


2.  •    fff. 


t 


/ 


ff*  <y.  &£ 


L/r.  *£:  r. 


P 

ij. 

f!L 


FACSIMILE    OF    DIARY    WRITTEN    AT    WROOT. 


68 


Introductory  69 


biography  for  the  years  1725  to  1735.  Hundreds  of  letters 
that  certainly  were  written  from  Oxford,  Broadway,  Wroot, 
and  Savannah  may  still  be  concealed  in  family  archives.  A 
careful  examination  of  the  Diaries  will  show  whether,  in  the 
several  known  collections,  all  the  letters  written  to  '  my  father,' 
*  my  mother,' '  my  brother  Samuel,'  '  Sister  Emilia,'  '  S.  Martha,' 
'S.  Nancy,'  '  S.  Hetty,'  '  S.  Kezia,'  '  S.  Mary,'  and  'Brother 
Charles '  are  preserved.  Many  of  these  probably  have  perished. 
The  entire  family  correspondence,  covering  so  many  eventful 
years— years  not  wanting  in  romance,  tragedy,  and  comedy — 
would  form  a  work  of  surpassing  interest.  The  Wesleys, 
whatever  their  faults  or  sorrows,  clave  to  one  another.  The 
story  of  one  member  of  the  family  cannot  be  written  without 
remembering  the  fortunes  and  misfortunes  of  all. 

This  account  of  Wesley's  first  Diary  may  fitly  close  with  a 
picture  of  his  life  at  Wroot  during  the  summer  of  1726.  The 
facsimile,  given  opposite,  of  the  first  complete  page  of  the  Diary 
written  at  Wroot  may  be  rendered  thus : 

Sat.  Writ  sermon  for  my  father. 

Aft.  Writ  sermon :  read  Cheyne's  Philosophical  Principles. 

Levity  slays :    Intemperate  sleep. 

Sunday ',  May  i  (1726). 

Preached  and  read  prayers  and  at  Lolin  (or  Robin)  Jaques' : 
1726. 

Man.  Writ  to  Na:  to  Mr  Burton :  sat  at  my  sister  [Nancy] 
Lambert's. 

Tues.  At  Epvvorth  :  at  my  brother's  :  drank  tea  with  Mr  Pennington  : 
Called  at  Mr  Barnard's,  Mr  Harper's,  Sarah  Clark1  and 
H.  Halt  rk  =  Satis. 

Wed.  4.  Writ  sermon.  Afternoon,  heard  [sic]  Richard  3.  Read  Half- 
pay  Officers.  Walked  or  talked. 

Thur.  5.  Writ  sermon  :  afternoon,  writ  sermon ;  ended  it :  bathed. 

Fri.  6.  Three  acts  of  the  Royal  Convert-,  afternoon,  ended  it:  with 
Mr  Thompson  in  the  river.  Satis  sufficit  [and  elsewhere]. 

Sat.  Miss  Kitty  Hargrave  came. 

Mon.         Preached  at  Epworth  :  read  prayers. 


1  See  two  tombstones  in  front  of  the  on  the  shoulders  of  a  neighbour  and 
west  door  of  Epworth  Church.  It  was  a  lifted  the  child  out  of  the  burning 
member  of  the  Clark  family  who  stood  rectory.  (Wesley  Studies,  pp.  47,  48-) 


7o  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

Tues.  10.  At  Haxey  :  read  Rowe's  second  volume. 

Wed.  ii.  At  Bawtry. 

Sun.    15.  Rode  to  Haxey  :  preached  :  at  Mr  Hoole's  :  with  Mrs  Barnard 

and  her  daughters  :    drank  tea :   supped :  came  home  at 

eight  with  my  mother. 
Mon.  16.  Cut  stakes:  made  two  benches  in  the  arbour1:  my  sister 

Nancy's  birthday. 
RESQLUTION  : 

Despise  nobody's  advice. 
Walked. 
Tues.  17.  Writ  to   F.    Hammond:    read   four   acts   of   The   Orphan-. 

walked. 

Wed.  1 8.  Walked:    writ  sermon:    ended  The  Orphan',   and  walked. 
Thur.        Writ  sermon  :   read  prayers  :   went  possessioning :   walked. 
Fri.    20.  Writ  sermon :   writ  for  my  father :   at  my  sister  Nancy's. 
Sat.    2 1 .  Writ  sermon  :  learnt  Alexis :  read  Spectator. 
Sun.    22.  Preached:  writ  for  my  father. 
Mon.          Wrote  sermon  :   learnt  a  tune :   read  Spectator. 

His  purpose  in  going  to  Wroot  was  to  assist  his  father, 
who  was  now  in  failing  health.  His  work  was  threefold : 
(i)  he  preached,  read  prayers,  and  attended  as  best  he  could 
to  the  duties  of  two  scattered  parishes — for  this  he  needed 
new  sermons ;  (2)  he  wrote  new  sermons  for  his  father ; 
(3)  he  acted  as  his  father's  amanuensis  in  preparing  Job  for 
the  press. 

1  The  remains  (very  old)  of  a  bench  in  the  rectory  garden  at  Wroot  probably  mark 
the  site  of  this  arbour. 


WESLEY'S   CIPHER 

ALL  Wesley's  Diaries  are  disguised,  and  therefore  difficult  to 
read.  Abbreviation,  shorthand,  and  a  cipher  were  his  devices, 
securing,  he  hoped,  concealment  as  well  as  economy  of  space 
and  time.  In  the  later  Diaries  the  three  methods  are  found 
in  combination.  It  is,  however,  only  in  the  first  Oxford  Diary 
that  we  find  the  cipher  in  its  fullest  development  There 
concealment  is  its  only  purpose.  In  no  sense  is  it  a  short- 
hand. It  may  have  been  borrowed,  like  Wesley's  shorthand, 
and  like  those  '  Rules '  and  '  Resolutions '  which  best  illus- 
trate the  cipher.  Some  of  its  peculiarities — for  example,  the 
abbreviations  and  vowel-points — certainly  were  borrowed  ;  they 
will  not  be  strange  to  stenographers.  But  as  a  system  it 
has  not  yet  been  traced  beyond  the  little  book  which  contains 
the  first  Oxford  Diary. 

Across  the  middle  of  an  early  page  in  this  remarkable 
volume  are  written  two  lines  of  curious  signs.  The  upper 
line  is  partially  obliterated  by  ink  markings  which  seem  to 
be  of  about  the  same  date  as  the  underlying  cryptic  signs. 
They  represent  a  small  sheaf  of  hand-made  quill  pens.  It 
has  been  suggested  that  they  were  made  by  rapid  back- 
strokes of  the  pen.  The  appearance,  however,  is  as  though 
the  page,  after  the  writing  of  the  signs,  had  been  sensitized, 
and  had  then  received,  through  a  lens,  the  imprint  of  a 
scattered  sheaf  of  quill  pens,  some  being  in  and  some  out  of 
focus.  By  a  happy  coincidence  the  signs  not  obliterated  are 
those  most  frequently  used  in  the  Diary.1 

It  will  be  convenient  at  once  to  state  that  the  upper  line 
of  signs  consists  of  consonants,  single  or  in  combination, 


1  A  line  at  the  top  of  the  page,  without  possibly  an  unused  cipher.  The  schedule 
apparent  meaning,  containing  six-and-  of  numbers  at  the  foot  is  part  of  a  class- 
twenty  letters  partially  obliterated,  is  register,  or  time-table  for  pupils  (p.  73). 

71 


72  John   Wesley's  Journal 

that  the  second  line  stands  for  the  numerals  i  to  10,  with 
II  and  12  in  a  separate  small  compartment;  and  that  these 
disguised  numerals  represent  the  vowels.  But  why  ten  signs 
for  five  vowels,  or  twelve  for  seven  ?  And,  returning  to  the 
upper  line  of  consonants,  where  does  the  list  begin  ?  And 
why  are  two,  or,  in  some  cases,  three  signs  given  for  one 
letter?  Further,  is  the  cipher  simple  or  compound?  is  it  in 
Latin,  Greek,  or  English  ?  And  are  the  words  in  a  sentence 
properly  or  unnaturally  divided  ?  The  keys  on  this  blotted 
page,  if  keys  they  are,  seem  only  to  confuse  the  problem. 
For  the  present,  therefore,  we  abandon  them,  and  turn  to  the 
Diary  itself. 

It  would  be  tedious  to  detail  all  the  slow  steps  and  re- 
tracings  by  which  eventually,  after  many  months  and  indeed 
years  of  reasoned  inference  and  testing,  all  the  cryptographic 
words  and  sentences  have  been  deciphered.  It  may  be  of 
interest  to  note  that  the  first  effective  clue  was  given  to  the 
writer  in  a  dream.1 

1.  If  we  examine  a  series  of  cryptic  sentences  in  various 
parts  of  the  book,  it  is  at  once  seen  that  letters — English,  Greek, 
and  at  least  in  one   notable  instance    Hebrew — are   used,   to- 
gether with  signs,  numerals,  points,  and  dashes  ;    and  that  it 
is   not  safe  to  assume   that   all  signs  invariably  have  a  fixed 
signification. 

2.  Letters  are  frequently  used  in  their  natural  and  proper 
sense.      In    the   first   cryptic   sentence,   overleaf,   for   instance, 
2  f  n-r'O  r.l-  -n  20    'q-.n  .f  L-f; — out  of  twenty-seven  signs  or 
letters  nine  are  used  naturally.      Transliterated  the  line  reads, 
1  A  General  Rule  in  all  Actions  of  Life.'     This  is  one  of  the 
simplest  forms  of  the  cipher. 

An  ordinary  word,  with  one  consonant  changed  and  all 
the  vowels  either  omitted  or  replaced  by  fullpoints,  may  look 
hopelessly  perplexing.  What,  for  instance,  is  this  word — sdnr? 
All  the  vowels  have  been  eliminated,  and  one  consonant  has 
been  changed  under  the  operation  of  Wesley's  numerical 


1  He  had  discovered  a  place,  far  on  in  useless,  until  in  a  dream  he  saw  that 
the  Diary,  where  '  : '  meant,  and  could  '  2 '  stood  for  '  a.'  This  was  the  first 
only  mean,  '  12.'  This,  as  a  clue,  proved  ray  of  light. 


FACSIMILE    PAGE    OF    CONSONANTS    AND    VOWELS,    OUT    OF    WHICH    WESLEY 
CONSTRUCTED    HIS    CIPHER. 

73 


In. 


J> 


FACSIMILE    LIST    OF    PERSONAL    FRIENDS    IN    OXFORD    COLLEGES 


PAGE    77). 


74 


Introductory  75 


law.  Restore  the  vowels  on  a  simple  dot-and-dash  system, 
thus:  ,sd-n'r_,  and  it  does  not  become  difficult  to  guess  the 
word,  especially  when  you  are  informed  that  it  is  used  in 
the  first  line  of  this  paragraph. 

3.  If  a  scheme  of  cipher-writing,  after  its  adoption,  is 
changed  from  time  to  time  by  the  introduction  of  new  and 
distracting  elements,  how  dire  the  apparent  confusion,  and 
how  effectual  fthe  protection  against  decipherment !  Such 
was  Wesley's  device,  and  such  his  purpose.  The  true  key 
to  the  cipher  is  woven  into  the  structure  of  those  Rules  and 
Resolutions  which,  in  Oxford,  Wesley  was  continually  making 
more  stringent  and  elaborate.  With  each  new  set  the  cipher, 
in  which  from  1725  to  1730  they  were  all  written,  advanced 
in  complexity. 

Let  us  now  attack  the  problem  before  us.  We  will  begin 
with  the  vowels.  These  Wesley  expresses  in  not  fewer  than 
six  different  ways  : 

1.  Occasionally   they    are    used    in    their    ordinary   form. 
This  intensifies  the  mystery. 

2.  From  the  stenographers  a  system  of  dots  and  dashes  is 
borrowed.      It   must  not  be  assumed,  however,  that  dots  and 
dashes  stand  for  vowels  and  nothing  else.     A  dot  at  the  end 
of  a  word  may  be  simply  a  sign  of  abbreviation  : '  y '  means  '  ye,' 
the  old-fashioned  '  the.'     The  dash  over  a  word  or  letter  may 
be  a  sign  of  contraction.     For  instance,  '  6 '  is  '  not.' 

As  used  for  vowels,  Wesley's  dot  is  identical  with  Byrom's. 
Its  value  is  determined  by  its  relation  to  the  consonant  with 
which  it  happens  to  be  allied.  As  dots  all  the  five  vowels 
are  present  in  the  cryptic  sentence  quoted  above.  Or  they 


may  be  brought  together  thus  :  '• 


If  '  w '  and  '  y '  are  used 


as  vowels,  they  may  be  expressed  by  a  dash  | 

—  y 

3.  The  odd  numerals — I.  3.  5.  7.  9. — represent  a.  e.  i.  o.  u. 

4.  So  also  the  even  numbers — 2. 4,  6.  8.  10.  mean  a.  e.  i.  o.  u.  ; 
whilst  1 1  and  12  may  serve  for  '  w '  and  *  y.' 

5  and  6.  The  signs  which  represent  the  numerals  are 
similarly  treated.  The  following  table  may  make  this  com- 
plicated system  clear  : 


76  John   Wesley  s  Journal 


a 

a 

e 

e 

i 

. 

0 

o 

u 

u 

w  or  y 

/ 

•> 

II 

3 

4 

1 

e' 

1 

r 

•  i        ) 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

II           12 

a 

e 

i 

0 

u 

w  or  y 

a 

e 

i 

0 

u 

If  in 

the 

cryptic 

word  —  . 

sd 

n'r_- 

—we 

substitute    for 

the 

dots  and  the  one  dash  the  proper  vowels,  the  word  reads 
'  osdinary.'  Substitute  for  dots  the  odd  signs  'from  the  above 
table,  and  the  word  reads  thus  :  e'sd^n/r:  ;  or  the  even  signs, 
•)  s  d  ;  n  )  r :  ;  or  the  odd  numerals,  7  s  d  5  n  i  r  i  2  ;  or  the  even 
signs,  and  it  becomes  8  s  d  6  n  2  r. ;  or  we  might  mix  dots,  signs, 
and  numerals  indefinitely,  and  then  not  exhaust  the  possible 
complexities  of  the  Wesley  cipher. 

So  far  we  have  only  changed  one  consonant,  substituting 
for  '  r '  its  next-door  neighbour,  '  s.'  We  might  follow  up 
Wesley's  method  of  treating  consonants  still  further  by  changing 
other  letters  ;  but,  in  order  to  obtain  a  more  complete  illustration 
of  the  system,  we  will  turn  the  word  '  ordinary '  into  a  plural 
noun.  Slightly  varying  the  cryptic  expression,  we  may  write 
the  well-known  heraldic  *  ordinaries  '  thus,  e<  q  c-  m  2  s  5  3  q.  In 
transforming  the  word  into  Wesley's  cipher  we  have  sampled  his 
various  methods  of  vowel  expression,  and  for  the  consonants 
have  counted  one  back  and  one  forward  alternately.  Unfortun- 
ately for  the  decipherer,  Wesley  revels  in  new  and  ever  newer 
complications,  as  though  he  had  laid  himself  out  to  baffle 
human  ingenuity.  But  the  above  is  the  governing  principle 
throughout. 

We  may  now  examine  the  line  of  consonants  on  the  blotted 
page.  The  letters  it  contains  are  Greek  and  English,  with  a 
suggestion  of  Hebrew.  As  they  stand  they  are  useless  ;  treated 
with  the  key  number  one,  counted  backward  they  become  letters 
of  the  alphabet  actually  in  use  throughout  the  volume.  But 
the  alphabet  begins  in  the  middle,  and  often  two  or  three 
alternative  signs  are  given.  The  list,  for  some  reason,  is  not 
complete ;  but  the  following  will  give  a  fair  idea  of  this  strange 
fragment  of  an  alphabet:  0-5,  rtj,  Lv,  \  cz,  oy,  -ZD,  /ZD,| 
n-,  u,  L,  3,  C  (!»:£  o,  0,  m  r1 — s=r,  t  =  s  t  v  (these  are  partly 
blotted).  From  the  dividing-line  the  signs  appear  to  be  in 


Introductory  77 


another  and  rarely  used  category.  They  stand  for  words  like 
'  and,'  '  for/  &c.,  or  for  double  and  compound  consonants  like 
ct,  cl,  ch,  ng,  mm,  mt,  &c.  In  actual  use  the  earlier  letters  of 
the  alphabet — b,  c,  d,  f,  g,  &c. — are  either  used  naturally  or 
altered  by  the  numerical  key,  counting  backward  or  forward. 
The  letter  b,  for  instance,  may  mean  c ;  the  capital  letter  D 
may  be,  and  indeed  in  the  Georgia  Diaries  constantly  is,  C  or 
E.  It  stands,  in  fact,  for  '  Communion  '  or  '  Eucharist.'  G  is 
frequently  represented  by  F,  T  by  V,  N  by  M,  and  vice  versa.1 
Each  case  has  to  be  judged  on  its  merits,  and  interpretation 
often  depends  upon  the  context.  A  horizontal  line  drawn 
through  a  letter  doubles  it.  The  spelling  is  frequently 
phonetic. 

Apart  from  the  Rules  of  Holy  Living,  one  of  the  most 
interesting  cryptograms  is  the  following  list  of  personal  friends, 
with  the  names  of  their  respective  colleges  (see  p.  74). 

Tues.  Breakfast  at  Payne's,  and  heard  Mr.  Spry  on  Lawsuits^  and 
waited  on  Dr.  Morley  and  writ  Epistles. 

Christ  Church — Mr.  Sherman.  Merton  .  .  Mr.  Frank. 

„  Bateman.  Magdalen  .  „  Woodeson. 

„  Vere.  Wadham  .  „  Watkins. 

„  Hammond.  Exeter  .  „  Pitt. 

„  Burman.  New  College  .  „  Griffiths. 

„  Shuckburgh.  Lincoln  .  .  „  Baylif. 

„  Llangford.  „  Persehouse. 

Corpus  .         .      ,,  Burton.  Bulman. 

„  Pawlin. 

March  10,  1725. 

W.  Terence.  Writ  a  theme  at  Dr  Morley's.  Carried  Epistles. 
Read  The  Silent  Woman — Anacreon.  Sat  at  home :  Clarendon : 
Scripture  phrase.  S.  Xenophon :  with  Mr.  Brereton,  Hutchins,  and 
Persehouse.  Idleness. 


1  The  rule  seems  to  be  that  these  letters,   when  used  for  sacred  purposes,  are 
written  as  cursive  capitals. 


I 


/ 


i 


ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 

.  •     • 


• 


• 


: 


PART  THE    FIRST 

THE    JOURNAL 
FROM   OCTOBER   14,    1735,  TO   FEBRUARY   i,   1738 

(FROM  THE  EMBARKING  FOR  GEORGIA  TO  THE  RETURN  TO  LONDON) 

What  shall  we  say  then  ?  That  .  .  .  Israel,  which  followed  after  the  law  of  righteous- 
ness, hath  not  attained  to  the  law  of  righteousness.  Wherefore?  Because  they 
sought  it  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law.— ROM.  ix.  30-32. 


79 


This  version  of  the  First  Part  of  Wesley's  Journal  has 
been  considerably  enlarged  from  unpublished  MSS.  Five 
journals,  or  statements  chronologically  arranged,  have, 
wherever  possible,  been  woven  into  the  printed  text.  The 
new  material  is  indicated  by  square  brackets.  The  non- 
bracketed  portions  of  the  text  represent  the  edition  of  1831 
revised  and  corrected. 

In  the  following  Notes  new  information,  including  the 
events  of  days  unrecorded  in  the  Journals,  is  supplied  from 
Wesley's  Diaries,  now  for  the  first  time  deciphered. 


A   N 

E  X  T  R  AC  T 

O  F    T  H  E 

Rev.  Mr.  JOHN  WESLEY'S 

JOURNAL 

From  his  Embarking  for  GEORGIA 
To  his  Return  to  LONDON. 


What  foall  we  fay  then? T^at  Ifrael  which  follow?  d 

after  the  Law  of  Righleovjheff,  halb  not  attained  fj 

the  Law  of  Rigbteonfnefs. Wherefore?     Becaufe 

they  fought  it  not  by  Faith  t  but  as  it  were  by  the.  Works 
of  the  Law.  Rom.  ix.   30,  31. 


5  R  I  S  r  O  L: 
Printed  by  S.  and  F.  FARLEY, 

And  fold  at  the  New  School-Houfe  in  the  Horfe-Fair: 
and  by  the  Bookfellers  in  Town  and  Country. 

[Facsimile  of  the  Title-Page  of  the  First  Edition. 


81 


The  PREFACE. 

I.  T  T  was  in  Porfuance  of  an  Advice 
J[  given  by  Bp.  T*aylor^  in  hi$  Rules 
for  Holy  Living  and  Dying,  that  about 
fifteen  Years  ago,  I  began  to  take  a  more 
exaft  Account  than  I  had  done  before,  of 
the  manner  wherein  I  fpent  my  Time, 
writing  down  how  I  had  employed  every 
Hour.  This  I  continued  to  de,  wher- 
ever I  was,  till  the  Time  of  my  leaving 
England.  The  Variety  of  Scenes  which 
I  then  pad  thro',  induced  me  to  tranfcribe 
from  time  to  time,  the  more  material  Parts 
of  my  Diary,  adding  here  and  there  fuch 
little  Reflections  as  occurred  to  my  Mind. 
Of  this  Journal  thus  occafionally  compil- 
ed, the  following  is  a  fhort  Extrad:  It 
not  being  my  Defign  to  relate  all  thofe 
Particulars,  which  I  wrote  for  my  own 
Ufeonly;  and  whi^h  would  anfwer  no 
valuable  End  to  others,  however  impor- 
tant they  were  to  me. 

2.  Indeed  I  had  no  Deiign  or  Defire  to 
trouble  the  World  with  any  of  my  little 
Affairs :  As  can't  but  appear  to  every  im- 
partial Mind,  from  my  having  been  fo 
long  as  one  that  beareth  not^  notwithftand- 
ing  the  loud  and  frequent  Calls  I  have  had, 
to  anfwer  for  myfelf.  Neither  fhou'd  I 

have 

[Facsimile  of  first  page  of  Preface  !o  First  Edition. 


The  P  RE  FACE. 
have  done  it  now,  had  not  Captain  #77- 
liatns's  Affidavit,  publifh'd  a s  foon  as  he 
had  left  England^  laid  an  Obligation  upon 
me,  to  do  what  in  me  lies,  in  Obedience 
to  that  Command  of  GOD,  Let  not  the 
Good  which  is  in  you  be  evil-fpokcn  of. 
With  this  View  I  do  at  length  give  an 
Anfwer  to  every  Man  that  ajketh  me  a 
Reafon  of  the  Hope  which  is  in  mey  that  in 
all  thefe  Things  /  have  a  Con/'cience  void 
of  'Offence ,  towards  GOD  and  towards  Man. 

3.  I  have  prefixt  hereto  a  Letter  wrote 
feveral  Years  fince,  containing  a  plain  Ac- 
count, of  the  Rife  of  that  little  Society  in 
Oxford,  which  has  been  fo  varioufly  re- 
prefented.     Part  of  this  was  publifh'd  in 
*733  >  but  without  my  Confent  or  Know- 
ledge.    It  now  flands  as  it  was  wrote ; 
-without  any  Addition,   Diminution,    or 
Amendment :  It  being  my  only  Concern 
herein,  nakedly  to  declare  the  thing  as  it  is. 

4.  Perhaps  my  Employments  of  ano- 
ther kind  may  not  allow  me,  to  give  any 
farther  Anfwer,  to  them  who  fay  all  man- 
ner ofEvilofmefalfely?  and  feem  to  think 
that  they  do  GOD  Service.    Suffice  it,  that 
both  they  and  I  fhall  fhortly  give  an  Ac- 
count^ to  him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the 
Quick  and  the  Dead. 

[Facsimile  of  second  page  of  Preface  to  First  Edition. 


84 


NOTES  ON  THE  PREFACE  TO  THE 
FIRST   EDITION 

1  IN  pursuance  of  an  advice  given  by  Bishop  Taylor.' 

The  Rules  for  Holy  Living  and  Dying  do  not  in  so  many  words  advise 
the  keeping  of  a  diary,  but  the  taking  *  an  exact  account  of  the  manner  in 
which  time  is  spent.'  Jeremy  Taylor  urges  a  yearly  *  dressing '  of  the  soul 
by  '  confessions,  meditations,  and  attendances  upon  God  ;  that  he  may  make 
up  his  accounts,  renew  his  vows,  make  amends  for  his  carelessness,  &c.' 
This,  and  much  else  in  a  similar  strain,  precisely  describes  Wesley's  Oxford 
Diaries.  Each  volume  commences  with  'General3  and  ' Particular  Questions ' 
and  an  elaborate  apparatus  of  Confession  and  Resolution.  In  the  Holy 
Dying  Jeremy  Taylor  says,  *  In  this  we  shall  be  much  assisted  ...  if,  before 
we  sleep  each  night,  we  examine  the  actions  of  the  past  day  with  a  particular 
scrutiny'  (Holy  Living,  chap.  i.  pars.  21,  22;  Holy  Dying,  chap.  ii.  sect.  2). 

'  Fifteen  years  ago.' 
See  p.  4. 

'A  short  extract.' 

Wesley  sent  his  Voyage  Journal  to  Mr.  James  Hutton,  son  of  the  Rev. 
John  Hutton,  the  neighbour  and  friend  of  his  brother,  Samuel  Wesley,  at 
Westminster,  and  in  1738-9  the  host  of  himself  and  his  brother  Charles. 
This,  with  letters,  was  read  by  the  Huttons  to  friends.  These  readings  led 
to  the  formation  of  a  society  which  met  at  Mr.  Hutton's  house,  Great  College 
Street,  Westminster,  next  door  to  the  house  in  which  Samuel  Wesley,  junior, 
lived  when  he  was  a  tutor  in  Westminster  School.  After  this  *  a  Poor-Box 
Society '  was  formed,  '  whose  members  met  every  Wednesday,  each  sub- 
scribing one  penny  a  week  towards  a  charitable  fund  for  all  descriptions  of 
poor  people.'  An  account  of  this  society,  and  of  the  part  played  in  its 
formation  by  John  Wesley's  Journal  and  correspondence,  was  published  in 
the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Magazine,  1857,  p.  158.  For  a  fuller  account  see 
Memoirs  of  James  Hutton,  by  D.  Benham,  pp.  10-13. 

*  Captain  Williams's  affidavit'  was  sworn  before  the  Mayor  of  Bristol, 
the  I4th  day  of  March/, '1^40,  the  Mayor  signing  himself  'Stephen 
Clutterbuck.'  Williams  arrived  in  England  in  the  previous  November. 
The  affidavit  was  not  published  until  after  his  return  to  Georgia.  In  1743 
The  Progress  of  Methodism  in  Bristol  was  published.  A  copy  of  this 

85 


86  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

extremely  rare  pamphlet,  probably  the  only  copy  now  in  existence,  is  in  the 
*  Richard  Green '  collection  of  Wesley  books  and  pamphlets.  It  contains 
a  doggerel  of  850  lines,  Captain  Williams's  affidavit,  and  a  few  of  the  letters 
that  followed  its  publication.  In  the  Richmond  College  Interleaved  Journal 
the  Rev.  S.  Romily  (Hall,)  himself  a  member  of  an  old  Bristol  Methodist 
family,  has  written  a  full  account  of  this  transaction,  with  copies  of  the 
Williams  affidavit,  Wesley's  reply,  letters  from  George  Whitefield  (who  at 
Wesley's  request  investigated  the  case  in  Georgia  itself),  and  other  documents. 
A  few  extracts  from  these  voluminous  records  will  be  found  in  Appendix  II. 
vol.  vi.  See  also  Wesley's  Works,  vol.  viii.  pp.  121-2;  Tyerman's  Life  of 
Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  429.  Robert  Williams's  slanders  are  only  of  interest 
because  their  publication  in  England  and  America  was  the  occasion  of 
hastening  the  issue  of  Wesley's  first  extract  from  his  Journal. 

Why  this  Georgia  planter  should  have  taken  the  trouble  to  appear  in  the 
Bristol  court  against  Wesley,  and  what  could  have  induced  him  to  weave 
a  tissue  of  palpable  falsehoods,  deliberately  delaying  their  publication  until 
he  himself  was  safe  beyond  the  wrath  of  his  victim  and  beyond  any  possible 
action  at  law,  is  not  now  hard  to  understand.  He  was  influenced  by  personal 
animosity.  Wesley  opposed  the  introduction  of  negro  slavery,  and  de- 
nounced the  traffic  in  white  slaves.  Of  the  latter,  David  Jones,  whose  story 
is  told  in  the  Journal  (see  p.  344),  was  only  one  of  many  victims.  Little 
wonder  that  this  fraudulent  '  Bristol  merchant '  and  Georgia  land-holder 
sought  his  revenge  in  Mr.  Clutterbuck's  court. 

'Part  of  this  was  published  in  1733.' 

In  a  tract  entitled,  *  The  Oxford  Methodists,  being  an  account  of  Some 
Young  Gentlemen  in  that  City,  in  derision  so-called  ;  setting  forth  their 
Rise  and  Designs.  With  some  occasional  remarks  on  a  letter  inserted  in 
Fogg's  Journal  of  December  9,  1732,  relating  to  them.  In  a  letter  from 
a  Gentleman  near  Oxford,  to  his  friend  at  London.  The  Second  Edition, 
with  very  great  alterations  and  improvements.  To  which  is  prefix'd,  a 
Short  Epistle  to  the  Reverend  Mr.  Whitefield,  A.B.,  of  Pembroke  College, 
Oxon.  London:  Printed  for  J.  Roberts,  at  the  Oxford  Arms  in  Warwick 
Lane,  and  A.  Dodd,  without  Temple  Bar.  1737.  Price  sixpence.' 

r*rvC-  <f}r  i  ~i\ji' 

Wesley  submitted  the  MS.  of^this^irst- extract  to  his  friend  the  Countess 
of  Huntingdon.  Her  reply,  which  was  an  emphatic  endorsement,  will  be 
found  in  Appendix  III.  vol.  vi. 


THE  RISE  AND  DESIGN  OF  OXFORD 
METHODISM 

FROM  THE  REV.  JOHN  WESLEV,  A.M., 
TO  MR.  RICHARD  MORGAN,  OF  DUBLIN.1 


OXON,  October  18,  1732.* 


SIR, 


The  occasion  of  my  giving  you  this  trouble  is  of  a  very 
extraordinary  nature.  On  Sunday  last 3  I  was  informed  (as  no 
doubt  you  will  be  ere  long)  that  my  brother  and  I  had  killed 
your  son :  that  the  rigorous  fasting  which  he  had  imposed  upon 
himself,  by  our  advice,  had  increased  his  illness  and  hastened  his 


1  Mr.  Richard  Morgan,  to  whom  this 
letter  was  written,  was  Second  Remem- 
brancer   to    the    Court    of    Exchequer, 
Dublin.      His    wife,    Elizabeth,    was   a 
daughter  of  Anthony  Raymond,  collector, 
Drogheda.     They  had  two  sons,  William 
and  Richard,  and  one  daughter,  Mary, 
who  married  the  Rev.  William  Godley, 
rector  of  Mullaghbrack,  Armagh,  whose 
lineal    descendants   still   survive  in   Co. 
Leitrim.    (W.H.S.  vol.  iii.  p.  47,  Rev. 
C.  H.  Crookshank,  M.A.,  to  whom  we 
are  mainly  indebted   for  notes  relating 
to   Ireland  in   this  edition   of  Wesley's 
Journal.) 

2  The  words  '  Introductory  Letter '  did 
not  appear  in   the   first   edition,   which 
was  printed  without   date,    probably  in 
1739,  for  Williams's  affidavit  was  dated 
y*JR.  14,  1739,  and  the  Journal  was  '  sold 
at  the  New  School  House,  Horsefair,'  the 
foundation  of  which  was  laid  May  12, 
J739-   No.  2  of  the  Journal  was  published 
towards  the  close  of  1740.     The  date  (in 
error)  was  printed  'Oxon,  Oct.  18,  1730.* 
Oxf.  D.  iii.,  under  date  Wed.,  Oct.  18, 
1732,   has  several    references  to  letters 


written  ;  but  not  until  the  I9th  is  a  letter 
*  writ  to  Mr.  Morgan'  named.  It  occupies 
some  hours  on  Thursday  and  Friday. 
Sat.,  2 1st,  between  six  and  seven  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  the  letter  is  ended 
(Whitehead,  vol.  i.  p.  450  ;  Moore,  vol.  i. 
pp.  192  n.,  195).  The  following  is 
Benson's  note  on  the  date  of  Wesley's 
letter  to  Mr.  Morgan,  in  full : 

'  In  all  the  printed  copies  of  this  letter 
which  we  have  seen  the  date  is  1730  ; 
but  in  the  manuscript,  in  Mr.  Charles 
Wesley's  handwriting,  the  date  is  1732, 
which  is  the  true  date  of  it,  as  appears 
from  Mr.  Morgan's  account  of  his  son's 
death.  The  true  date  may  be  collected 
from  the  letter  itself,  compared  with 
Mr.  John  Wesley's  Short  History  of 
Methodism,  which  fixes  the  time  when 
they  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Clayton.' 
Wesley's  Works,  2nd  [Benson's]  edit., 
1809. 

8  Sun.,  Oct.  15,  he  rose  at  four;  read 
the  Apocrypha  (Ecclus.);  at  7.15  went 
to  Christ  Church  ;  a  Mr.  Faw[throp]  is 
named ;  heard  two  sermons ;  spent  nearly 
an  hour  with  pupils ;  prayed  many  times ; 


88  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

death.  Now  though,  considering  it  in  itself,  '  it  is  a  very  small 
thing  with  me  to  be  judged  by  man's  judgement ' ;  yet  as  the 
being  thought  guilty  of  so  mischievous  an  imprudence  might 
make  me  the  less  able  to  do  the  work  I  came  into  the  world  for, 
I  am  obliged  to  clear  myself  of  it,  by  observing  to  you,  as  I  have 
done  to  others,  that  your  son  left  off  fasting  about  a  year  and  a 
half  since ;  and  that  it  is  not  yet  half  a  year  since  I  began  to 
practise  it.1 

I  must  not  let  this  opportunity  slip  of  doing  my  part  towards 
giving  you  a  juster  notion  of  some  other  particulars,  relating 
both  to  him  and  myself,  which  have  been  industriously  mis- 
represented to  you. 

In  March  last  he  received  a  letter  from  you,  which,  not  being 
able  to  read,2  he  desired  me  to  read  to  him  ;  several  of  the 
expressions  whereof  I  perfectly  remember,  and  shall  do,  till  I 
too  am  called  hence.  I  then  determined  that,  if  God  was  pleased 
to  take  away  your  son  before  me,  I  would  justify  him  and 
myself,  which  I  now  do  with  all  plainness  and  simplicity,  as 
both  my  character  and  cause  required. 

In  one  practice  for  which  you  blamed  your  son,  I  am  only 
concerned  as  a  friend,  not  as  a  partner.  That,  therefore,  I  shall 
consider  first.  Your  own  account  of  it  was  in  effect  this  :  *  He 
frequently  went  into  poor  people's  houses  in  the  villages  about 
Holt,  called  their  children  together,  and  instructed  them  in  their 
duty  to  God,  their  neighbour,  and  themselves.  He  likewise 
explained  to  them  the  necessity  of  private  as  well  as  public 
prayer,  and  provided  them  with  such  forms  as  were  best  suited 
to  their  several  capacities.  And  being  well  apprised  how  much 
the  success  of  his  endeavours  depended  on  their  good-will 


at   the    rector's    house  ;     evening    with  Wesley  reports  William  Morgan  '  sick  at 

Holy  Club,  apparently  singing  a  hymn,  Holt.'     In  1732  he  was  'affected  in  his 

Charles  talking  on  Spurstowe's  Medita-  mind,  as  well  as  worse  in  body.'      He 

tions.     No  reference  is  made  to  the  in-  left  Oxford  on  June  5,  returning  to  his 

formation  that   he  and  his  brother  had  father's  house  in  Dublin.     After  resting 

killed  Mr.  Morgan's  son.  for  six  weeks  he  set  out,  accompanied  by 

1  At  this    time  Wesley's   rule  was  to  a  man  servant,  hoping  once  more  to  visit 
observe  one    day  a  month  as  a   Fast.  Oxford.     Developing  serious  symptoms, 
Oct.  1 1  in  this  month  is  named  as  '  The  the  servant  took  him  back  to  his  father's 
Wednesday  Fast.'  house,    where  he  died,  Aug.  26,  I732- 

2  June  n,  1731,  writing  to  his  father  (App.  IV.  vol.  vi.) 


Rise  and  Design  of  Oxford  Methodism  89 


towards  him,  to  win  upon  their  affections  he  sometimes  dis- 
tributed among  them  a  little  of  that  money1  which  he  had 
saved  from  gaming  and  the  other  fashionable  expenses  of  the 
place.'  This  is  the  first  charge  against  him  ;  upon  which  all 
that  I  shall  observe  is,  that  I  will  refer  it  to  your  own  judgement 
whether  it  be  fitter  to  have  a  place  in  the  catalogue  of  his  faults 
or  of  those  virtues  for  which  he  is  now  '  numbered  among  the 
sons  of  God.' 

If  all  the  persons  concerned  in  *  that  ridiculous  society,2  whose 
follies  you  have  so  often  heard  repeated,'  could  but  give  such 
a  proof  of  their  deserving  the  glorious  title5  which  was  once 
bestowed  upon  them,  they  would  be  contented  that  their  '  lives ' 
too  should  be  '  counted  madness,  and  their  end  '  thought  to  be 
*  without  honour.'  But  the  truth  is,  their  title  to  holiness  stands 
upon  much  less  stable  foundations ;  as  you  will  easily  perceive 
when  you  know  the  ground  of  this  wonderful  outcry,  which 
it  seems  England  is  not  wide  enough  to  contain. 

In  November  1729,  at  which  time  I  came  to  reside  at  Oxford,4 


1  In  Oxford  Diary  No.  I  the  earliest 
known    Methodist    subscription    list    is 
preserved,  and  its  expenditure  in  charity. 
The  Diary  shows   that   the   Holy  Club 
saved  Wesley  himself  also  from  '  gaming  * 
and  'other  fashionable   expenses'   (See 
facsimile,  p.  91.) 

2  Wesley    himself    used    at    first    no 
other  title  than   'Our  Little   Society,' 
or  '  Our  Company. '    Later  he  writes  of 
'The  Oxford  Methodists,'  and  declares 
this  to  be  the  first  rise  of  Methodism. 
(Benson's  Apology,    p.    77 ;    Gambold's 
Letter,  App.  V.  vol.  vi.) 

8  «  The  Holy  Club.'— This  is  Wesley's 
footnote  in  the  first  edition. 

4  His  Diary  for  Oct.  and  Nov.  1729 
marks  the  transition  from  the  life  of  a 
country  curate  to  that  of  an  Oxford 
tutor,  lecturer,  moderator,  leader.  He 
preached  at  Epworth,  Wentworth,  and 
thrice  at  Wroot;  translated  a  sermon, 
and  read  one  in  Norris  on  Faith  and 
Practice  ;  collected  ten  pages  of  Wake ; 
made  notes  on  a  few  Psalms,  and  read, 
in  Hebrew,  over  again,  eight  chapters  in 
Genesis  ;  corrected  his  father's  Disserta- 
VOL.  I. 


tion  De  Filiis  Keturae,  &c.,  wrote  out 
the  lists  of  subscribers  to  his  father's 
great  work  on  Job;  consumed  an  un- 
usually large  portion  of  light  literature, 
reading  plays  and  other  entertaining 
pieces  to  his  sisters  and  their  friends. 
On  Nov.  9  he  left  home,  travelling 
through  rain  and  floods  to  Gainsborough, 
Lincoln  (where  he  halted  to  visit  his 
sister  Emilia),  Stamford,  St.  Neots, 
Biggleswade,  Stevenage,  and  London. 
He  arrived  at  the  Red  Lion  in  Alders- 
gate  Street  at  4.30,  drank  tea  with 
his  brother  Samuel  and  his  sister-in- 
law  Ursula  at  their  house  in  Great 
College  Street,  Westminster,  and  spent 
the  next  few  days  in  visiting  friends  and 
entertaining  himself.  At  the  Old  Play- 
house he  saw  The  Scornful  Lady.  His 
Aunt  Nancy  [Annesley,  '  My  love  to 
Sister  Molly,  and  tell  her  she  may  direct 
to  Aunt  Ann  Annesley,  at  Shore  House, 
in  Hackney,'  Stevenson,  Wes.  Family, 
291],  at  Hackney,  gave  him  tea  and 
promised  him  her  picture.  His  sister 
Hetty  he  saw  more  than  once,  also  Dr. 
Wigan  [probably  Dr.  George  Wigan, 

5 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


your  son,  my  brother,  myself,  and  one  more1  agreed  to  spend 
three  or  four  evenings  in  a  week  together.  Our  design  was  to 
read  over  the  classics,  which  we  had  before  read  in  private,  on 
common  nights,  and  on  Sunday  some  book  in  divinity.  In 
the  summer  following,  Mr.  Mforgan]  told  me  he  had  called  at 
the  jail,  to  see  a  man  who  was  condemned  for  killing  his  wife ; 
and  that,  from  the  talk  he  had  with  one  of  the  debtors,  he  verily 
believed  it  would  do  much  good  if  any  one  would  be  at  the 
pains  of  now  and  then  speaking  with  them.  This  he  so  fre- 
quently repeated,  that  on  the  24th  of  August,  1730,2  my  brother 
and  I  walked  with  him  to  the  Castle.  We  were  so  well  satisfied 
with  our  conversation  there,  that  we  agreed  to  go  thither  once  or 
twice  a  week  ;  which  we  had  not  done  long,  before  he  desired 
me  to  go  with  him  to  see  a  poor  woman  in  the  town  who  was 
sick.  In  this  employment  too,  when  we  came  to  reflect  upon  it, 
we  believed  it  would  be  worth  while  to  spend  an  hour  or  two  in 
a  week  ;  provided  the  minister  of  the  parish  in  which  any  such 
person  was  were  not  against  it.  But  that  we  might  not  depend 
wholly  on  our  own  judgements,  I  wrote  an  account  to  my  father 
of  our  whole  design ;  withal  begging  that  he,  who  had  lived 


Principal  of  New  Inn  Hall,  1726],  Mr. 
Prior,  and  others.  Then  he  went  by 
Wycombe  and  Tetsworth,  arriving  at 
Oxford  at  four  o'clock  on  Saturday  after- 
noon. Saturday  evening  and  Sunday  he 
spent  chiefly  with  his  old  friends  Mr. 
Hutcheson  and  Mr.  Tottenham,  and  with 
a  new  friend,  Mr.  Morgan.  The  book 
companionships  of  the  next  few  days  are 
chiefly  Horace  and  the  Greek  Testament. 
And  thus,  'without  observation,'  the 
kingdom  of  God  came  to  him  again,  and 
all  things,  slowly  and  silently,  as  the 
Diary  testifies,  became  new. 

1  The  'one  more'  was  Mr.  Robert 
Kirkham,  of  Merton  College,  whom 
John  Wesley  had,  so  far,  only  known 
as  a  schoolboy — pert,  jovial,  affectionate, 
greatly  admiring  his  sisters'  friend,  and 
desiring  that  he  might  become  his  brother- 
in-law.  From  one  account  it  would  seem 
that  the  idea  of  a  meeting  of  friends  to 
study  the  Greek  Testament  and  the  classics 
originated  with  Mr.  Robert  Kirkham. 


(See  Wesley  to  his  mother,  Feb.  28,  1730. 
Tyerman's  Oxford  Methodists,  p.  3.) 

2  On  Monday,  Aug.  24,  1730,  he 
rose  as  usual  at  four,  spent  more  than 
an  hour  in  prayer,  at  six  o'clock  began 
a  letter  to  his  friend  Varanese,  break- 
fasted with  Mr.  Rhodes,  W.  Morgan 
also  being  there  ;  read  Justinian  (pos- 
sibly the  book  from  which  he  quoted 
in  a  decisive  letter  to  his  brother  Samuel 
four  years  later — see  p.  29) ;  again  wrote 
to  V.,  ending  the  letter  (as  he  then 
thought);  at  2.30  he  walked  with  his 
brother  Charles  and  William  Morgan  to 
the  Castle,  and,  though  he  knew  it  not, 
began  the  philanthropic  and  evangelistic 
work  of  Methodism.  He  spent  much 
time  afterwards  in  thought,  conversa- 
tion, and  prayer  ;  reopened  his  letter  to 
his  '  first  religious  friend, '  and  ended 
the  long  day  at  9.45  with  one  of  those 
solemn  acts  of  thanksgiving  that  usually 
mark  the  great  events  of  his  early 
Methodist  life. 


FACSIMILE    ACCOUNT    OF    THE    FIRST    SUBSCRIPTION    LIST    MADE 
BY    THE    HOLY    CLUB. 


Rise  and  Design  of  Oxford  Methodism          93 

seventy  years  in  the  world,1  and  seen  as  much  of  it  as  most 
private  men  have  ever  done,  would  advise  us  whether  we  had 
yet  gone  too  far,  and  whether  we  should  now  stand  still  or 
go  forward. 

Part  of  his  answer,  dated  September  21,  1730,  was  this: 

And  now,  as  to  your  own  designs  and  employments,  what  can  I  say 
less  of  them  than  Valde probo* ;  and  that  I  have  the  highest  reason  to 
bless  God  that  He  has  given  me  two  sons  together  at  Oxford  to  whom 
He  has  given  grace  and  courage  to  turn  the  war  against  the  world  and 
the  devil,  which  is  the  best  way  to  conquer  them.  They  have  but  one 
more  enemy  to  combat  with,  the  flesh ;  which  if  they  take  care  to  subdue 
by  fasting  and  prayer,  there  will  be  no  more  for  them  to  do,  but  to 
proceed  steadily  in  the  same  course,  and  expect  '  the  crown  which 
fadeth  not  away.'  You  have  reason  to  bless  God,  as  I  do,  that  you 
have  so  fast  a  friend  as  Mr.  Morgan,  who,  I  see,  in  the  most  difficult 
service,  is  ready  to  break  the  ice  for  you.  You  do  not  know  of  how 
much  good  that  poor  wretch  who  killed  his  wife  has  been  the  pro- 
vidential occasion.  I  think  I  must  adopt  Mr.  Morgan  to  be  my  son, 
together  with  you  and  your  brother  Charles;  and  when  I  have  such 
a  ternion  to  prosecute  that  war,  wherein  I  am  now  miles  emeritus* 
I  shall  not  be  ashamed  when  they  speak  with  their  enemies  in  the 
gate. 

I  am  afraid  lest  the  main  objection  you  make  against  your  going  on 
in  the  business  with  the  prisoners  may  secretly  proceed  from  flesh  and 
blood.  For  '  who  can  harm  you  if  you  are  followers  of  that  which  is  so 
good,'  and  which  will  be  one  of  the  marks  by  which  the  Shepherd  of 
Israel  will  know  His  sheep  at  the  last  day  ? — though  if  it  were  possible 
for  you  to  suffer  a  little  in  the  cause,  you  would  have  a  confessor's 
reward.  You  own,  none  but  such  as  are  out  of  their  senses  would  be 
prejudiced  against  your  acting  in  this  manner;  but  say,  'These  are 
they  that  need  a  physician.'  But  what  if  they  will  not  accept  of  one 
who  will  be  welcome  to  the  poor  prisoners  ?  Go  on  then,  in  God's 
name,  in  the  path  to  which  your  Saviour  has  directed  you,  and  that 
track  wherein  your  father  has  gone  before  you  !  For  when  I  was  an 
undergraduate  at  Oxford,  I  visited  those  in  the  Castle  there,  and  reflect 
on  it  with  great  satisfaction  to  this  day.  Walk  as  prudently  as  you  can, 
though  not  fearfully,  and  my  heart  and  prayers  are  with  you. 

Your  first  regular  step  is  to  consult  with  him  (if  any  such  there  be) 


1  Samuel  Wesley,  son   of   Rev.  John  He  died  April  25,  1735,  aged  seventy- 

Westley,   of  Winterbourne-Whitchurch,  three, 

born  Dec.   17,  1662,  rector  of  Epworth  *  I  greatly  approve. 

(1694-1735),  also  of  Wroot  (1726-34).  8  A  soldier  past  service. 


94  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

who  has  a  jurisdiction  over  the  prisoners ;  and  the  next  is  to  obtain  the 
direction  and  approbation  of  your  Bishop.  This  is  Monday  morning, 
at  which  time  I  shall  never  forget  you.  If  it  be  possible,  I  should  be 
glad  to  see  you  all  three  here  in  the  fine  end  of  the  summer.1  But  if 
I  cannot  have  that  satisfaction,  I  am  sure  I  can  reach  you  every  day, 
though  you  were  beyond  the  Indies.  Accordingly,  to  Him  who  is 
everywhere  I  now  heartily  commit  you,  as  being 

Your  most  affectionate  and  joyful  father. 

In  pursuance  of  these  directions,  I  immediately  went  to 
Mr.  Gerard,2  the  Bishop  of  Oxford's  chaplain,  who  was  likewise 
the  person  that  took  care  of  the  prisoners  when  any  were  con- 
demned to  die  (at  other  times  they  were  left  to  their  own  care) : 
I  proposed  to  him  our  design  of  serving  them  as  far  as  we  could, 
and  my  own  intention  to  preach  there  once  a  month,  if  the 
Bishop  approved  of  it.  He  much  commended  our  design,  and 
said  he  would  answer  for  the  Bishop's  approbation,  to  whom 
he  would  take  the  first  opportunity  of  mentioning  it.  It  was 
not  long  before  he  informed  me  he  had  done  so,  and  that 
his  lordship  not  only  gave  his  permission,  but  was  greatly 
pleased  with  the  undertaking,  and  hoped  it  would  have  the 
desired  success. 

Soon  after,  a  gentleman  of  Merton  College,  who  was  one 
of  our  little  company,  which  now  consisted  of  five  persons, 
acquainted  us  that  he  had  been  much  rallied  the  day  before 
for  being  a  member  of  T/ie  Holy  Club  ; 3  and  that  it  was  become 
a  common  topic  of  mirth  at  his  college,  where  they  had  found 
out  several  of  our  customs,  to  which  we  were  ourselves  utter 
strangers.  Upon  this  I  consulted  my  father  again,  in  whose 
answer  were  these  words  : 


1  The    rector's    desire    was    partially  against   the   Holy  Club.     (W.M.   Mag. 
fulfilled.     In  the  spring  of  1731  John  1832,  p.  793.) 

and    Charles    walked    from   Oxford    to  8  The  'five  persons'  were  John  and 

Epworth.     Some  time  after  their  return  Charles  Wesley,  William  Morgan,  Robert 

they  both  wrote  (June  11,  1731)  to  their  Kirkham  (the  'gentleman  of  Merton'), 

father  and  mother.      (App.  VI.  vol.  vi.)  and  either  Boyce  or  Gambold — probably 

2  Gerard     prophesied     that    Wesley  Boyce,  for  Gambold,  according  to  his 
would  '  one  day  be  a  standard-bearer  of  own  account,  did  not  join  until  later.   On 
the  Cross,  either  in  his  own  country  or  R.  Kirkham's  membership  see  Wesley's 
beyond  the  seas.'     This  he  said  in  reply  letter   to    his    mother,    Feb.    28,    1730. 
to  George  Lascelles,  who  was  speaking  (App.  VII.  vol.  vi.) 


Rise  and  Design  of  Oxford  Methodism          95 

December  i. 

This  day  I  received  both  yours,1  and  this  evening,  in  the  course 
of  our  reading,  I  thought  I  found  an  answer  that  would  be  more 
proper  than  any  I  myself  could  dictate ;  though  since  it  will  not  be 
easily  translated,  I  send  it  in  the  original.  IIcXA?}  /xot  KCM^O-IS  vrrip  fyuoi/- 
TTf7r\rjp<j)fJLai  ry  TrapaKA/^o-ei,  v7re/37repuro-€vo/Aai  TQ  ^apy.*  (2  Cor.  vii.  4). 
What  would  you  be  ?  Would  you  be  angels  ?  I  question  whether 
a  mortal  can  arrive  to  a  greater  degree  of  perfection  than  steadily 
to  do  good,  and  for  that  very  reason  patiently  and  meekly  to  suffer 
evil.  For  my  part,  on  the  present  view  of  your  actions  and  designs, 
my  daily  prayers  are  that  God  would  keep  you  humble ;  and  then  I  am 
sure  that  if  you  continue  '  to  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake/  though 
it  be  but  in  a  lower  degree,  '  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God '  shall, 
in  some  good  measure,  '  rest  upon  you.'  Be  never  weary  of  well-doing : 
never  look  back ;  for  you  know  the  prize  and  the  crown  are  before 
you  :  though  I  can  scarce  think  so  meanly  of  you  as  that  you  would 
be  discouraged  with  '  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot.'  Be  not 
high-minded,  but  fear.  Preserve  an  equal  temper  of  mind  under 
whatever  treatment  you  meet  with  from  a  not  very  just  or  well-natured 
world.  Bear  no  more  sail  than  is  necessary,  but  steer  steady.  The 
less  you  value  yourselves  for  these  unfashionable  duties  (as  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  works  of  supererogation),  the  more  all  good  and 
wise  men  will  value  you,  if  they  see  your  actions  are  of  a  piece ;  or, 
which  is  infinitely  more,  He  by  whom  actions  and  intentions  are 
weighed  will  both  accept,  esteem,  and  reward  you.3 

Upon  this  encouragement  we  still  continued  to  meet  together 
as  usual ;  and  to  confirm  one  another,  as  well  as  we  could,  in 
our  resolutions,  to  communicate  as  often  as  we  had  opportunity 
(which  is  here  once  a  week) ;  and  do  what  service  we  could 


1  Wesley's  reply  to  his  father's  letter  thought  it  fitting  to  print  :   *  I  hear  my 
of  Sept.    21,   quoted   in   the  text,    and  son  John  has  the  honour  of  being  styled 
the    second    letter   in   which  he  asked  the  "  Father  of  the  Holy  Club ";  if  it  be 
further    advice,    are    here    referred    to.  so,  I  am  sure  I  must  be  the  Grandfather 
On  Dec.    II  John   again  wrote   to  his  of  it,  and  I  need  not  say  that   I   had 
father,  thanking  him,  on  behalf  of  the  rather  any  of    my  sons    should   be   so 
little    company,    for   his   sympathy   and  dignified  and  distinguished  than  to  have 
further  advice.     (App.  VIII.  vol.  vi.)  the  title  of  His  Holiness.'     In  the  same 

2  *  Great  is  my  glorying  of  you :  I  am  letter  he  advises  them  to  use  great  mild- 
filled  with  comfort,  I  am  exceeding  joy-  ness  towards  their  persecutors,  but  at  the 
ful'   (R.V.    'Great  is  iriy  glorying    on  same  time  to  avoid  a  mean  or  sneaking 
your  behalf :  I  am  filled  with  comfort,  behaviour,  and  rather  to  show  an  open, 
I  overflow  with  joy ').  manly  firmness,  which  is  highly  becoming 

8  Moore,    with    the     original     letter  in   a    mind    conscious    of   acting   well, 

before  him,  quotes  more  than  Wesley  (Moore's  Life  of  Wesley t  vol.  i.  p.  171.) 


96  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

to  our  acquaintance,  the  prisoners,  and  two  or  three  poor 
families  in  the  town.  But  the  outcry  daily  increasing,  that 
we  might  show  what  ground  there  was  for  it,  we  proposed  to 
our  friends,  or  opponents,  as  we  had  opportunity,  these  or 
the  like  questions  1  : 

I.  Whether  it  does  not  concern  all  men  of  all  conditions  to  imitate 
Him,  as  much  as  they  can,  '  who  went  about  doing  good '  ? 

Whether  all  Christians  are  not  concerned  in  that  command,  '  While 
we  have  time,  let  us  do  good  to  all  men  '  ? 

Whether  we  shall  not  be  more  happy  hereafter,  the  more  good  we 
do  now  ? 

Whether  we  can  be  happy  at  all  hereafter,  unless  we  have,  according 
to  our  power,  '  fed  the  hungry,  clothed  the  naked,  visited  those  that  are 
sick,  and  in  prison ' ;  and  made  all  these  actions  subservient  to  a  higher 
purpose,  even  the  saving  of  souls  from  death  ? 

Whether  it  be  not  our  bounden  duty  always  to  remember  that  He 
did  more  for  us  than  we  can  do  for  Him,  who  assures  us,  '  Inasmuch  as 
ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  My  brethren,  ye  have 
done  it  unto  Me  '  ? 

II.  Whether,  upon  these  considerations,  we  may  not  try  to  do  good 
to  our  acquaintance  ?    Particularly,  whether  we  may  not  try  to  convince 
them  of  the  necessity  of  being  Christians  ? 

Whether  of  the  consequent  necessity  of  being  scholars  ? 

Whether  of  the  necessity  of  method  and  industry,  in  order  to  either 
learning  or  virtue  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  try  to  persuade  them  to  confirm  and  increase 
their  industry,  by  communicating  as  often  as  they  can  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  mention  to  them  the  authors  whom  we 
conceive  to  have  wrote  the  best  on  those  subjects? 

Whether  we  may  not  assist  them,  as  we  are  able,  from  time  to  time, 
to  form  resolutions  upon  what  they  read  in  those  authors,  and  to 
execute  them  with  steadiness  and  perseverance? 

1  With  these  compare  the  Resolutions  upon  himself  and  faithfully  kept.      For 

known  as  The  Liverpool  Minutes,  which,  instance,  he  advised  them  to  rise  at  five  ; 

with  the  Twelve  Rules  of  a  Helper,  the  he  himself  rose  at  four  o'clock.      He 

Conference  directed   should  be  read   in  advised  gifts  to  the  poor  ;  he  gave  all  he 

every  Ministers'  Meeting  and  every  May  possessed,  except  so  much  as  he  required 

Synod  once  a  year.   Compare  also  Jeremy  for  the  necessary  expenses  of  a  tutor's 

Taylor's    Rules    of  Holy    Living,    and  life. 

Wesley's  practice  at  Oxford,  in  Georgia,  Compare    also    the    Scheme  of  Self- 

and  to  the  end  of  life.     An  examination  Examination  used  by  the  first  Methodists 

of   his  private  Diaries  shows  that  the  in  Oxford.     (Wesley's    Works,  vol.   xi. 

Rules  he    imposed  upon  his   followers  pp.  514-16;  and  fully  quoted  in  Richard 

were  less  severe  than  those  he  imposed  Green's  John  Wesley ',  Evangelist.) 


Rise  and  Design  of  Oxford  Methodism  97 

III.  Whether,  upon  the  considerations  above-mentioned,  we  may 
not  try  to  do  good  to  those  that  are  hungry,  naked,  or  sick?      In 
particular,  whether,  if  we  know  any  necessitous  family,  we  may  not  give 
them  a  little  food,  clothes,  or  physic,  as  they  want  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  give  them,  if  they  can  read,  a  Bible,  Common- 
Prayer  Book,  or  Whole  Duty  of  Man  ? 

Whether  we  may  not,  now  and  then,  inquire  how  they  have  used 
them ;  explain  what  they  do  not  understand,  and  enforce  what  they  do  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  enforce  upon  them,  more  especially,  the 
necessity  of  private  prayer,  and  of  frequenting  the  church  and 
Sacrament  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  contribute  what  little  we  are  able  toward 
having  their  children  clothed  and  taught  to  read? 

Whether  we  may  not  take  care  that  they  be  taught  their  catechism 
and  short  prayers  for  morning  and  evening  ? 

IV.  Lastly  :    Whether,  upon  the  considerations  above-mentioned, 
we  may  not  try  to  do  good  to  those  that  are  in  prison  ?     In  particular, 
Whether  we  may  not  release  such  well-disposed  persons  as  remain  in 
prison  for  small  sums  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  lend  smaller  sums  to  those  that  are  of  any 
trade,  that  they  may  procure  themselves  tools  and  materials  to 
work  with  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  give  to  them  who  appear  to  want  it  most  a 
little  money,  or  clothes,  or  physic? 

Whether  we  may  not  supply  as  many  as  are  serious  enough  to  read, 
with  a  Bible  and  Whole  Duty  of  Man  ? 

Whether  we  may  not,  as  we  have  opportunity,  explain  and  enforce 
these  upon  them,  especially  with  respect  to  public  and  private  prayer 
and  the  blessed  Sacrament? 

I  do  not  remember  that  we  met  with  any  person  who 
answered  any  of  these  questions  in  the  negative,  or  who  even 
doubted  whether  it  were  not  lawful  to  apply  to  this  use  that 
time  and  money  which  we  should  else  have  spent  in  other 
diversions.  But  several  we  met  with  who  increased  our  little 
stock  of  money  for  the  prisoners  and  the  poor  by  subscribing 
something  quarterly  to  it ;  so  that  the  more  persons  we  proposed 
our  designs  to,  the  more  we  were  confirmed  in  the  belief  of  their 
innocency,  and  the  more  determined  to  pursue  them,  in  spite 
of  the  ridicule  which  increased  fast  upon  us  during  the  winter- 
However,  in  spring  I  thought  it  could  not  be  improper  to  desire 
further  instructions  from  those  who  were  wiser  and  better  than 


98 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


ourselves;  and  accordingly  (on  May  18,  1731)  I  wrote  a 
particular  account  of  all  our  proceedings  to  a  clergyman  of 
known  wisdom  and  integrity.1  After  having  informed  him  of 
all  the  branches  of  our  design  as  clearly  and  simply  as  I  could, 
I  next  acquainted  him  with  the  success  it  had  met  with,  in  the 
following  words  :  '  Almost  as  soon  as  we  had  made  our  first 
attempts  this  way,  some  of  the  men  of  wit  in  Christ  Church 
entered  the  lists  against  us  ;  and,  between  mirth  and  anger, 
made  a  pretty  many  reflections  upon  the  Sacramentarians,  as 
they  were  pleased  to  call  us.  Soon  after,  their  allies  at  Merton 
changed  our  title,  and  did  us  the  honour  of  styling  us  The  Holy 
Club.  But  most  of  them  being  persons  of  well-known  characters, 
they  had  not  the  good  fortune  to  gain  any  proselytes  from 
the  Sacrament,  till  a  gentleman,2  eminent  for  learning,  and  well 
esteemed  for  piety,  joining  them,  told  his  nephew  that  if  he 
dared  to  go  to  the  weekly  communion  any  longer  he  would 
immediately  turn  him  out  of  doors.  That  argument,  indeed, 
had  no  success  :  the  young  gentleman  communicated  next  week  ; 
upon  which  his  uncle,  having  again  tried  to  convince  him  that 


1  Mr.  Hoole,  rector  of  Haxey.     Com- 
pare   notes    on    Wesley's    Conversion, 
p.    468.      It   is  to   a   letter   written   by 
Mrs.  Wesley  to  Mr.  Hoole  in  1709  (now 
in  the   Colman  Collection)  that  we  are 
indebted   for    the   best   account  of   the 
Epworth  fire  (printed  in  an  incomplete 
form  in  Moore's  Life,  vol.  i.  pp.  112-14  > 
fully  in  Wesley  Studies,  pp.  43-6). 

2  Dr.    Whitehead     and    others    have 
endeavoured  to  identify  this  learned  and 
pious  persecutor,  but  no  one  has  advanced 
beyond   conjecture.      The    rule    among 
the  Oxford  Methodists  was  to  take  the 
sacrament  of  Holy  Communion  once  a 
week  :    hence    their   title   *  Sacramenta- 
rians.'     Their    devotion    to    works    of 
charity  and  piety,  supposed   to  belong 
only  to  the  parochial   clergy,  won  for 
them  the  title  of  *  Supererogation  Men.' 
Other  titles  by  which  they  were  known 
were   *  Methodists,'  'The  Godly  Club,' 
'Enthusiasts,'    'The   Reforming    Club.' 
The  Wesleys  left  all  titles  severely  alone. 
'Society'  at  that  time  had  associations 


more  political  than  religious,  and  'Club,' 
as  Samuel  Wesley,  junior,  saw,  was  ob- 
jectionable on  other  grounds.  '  Metho- 
dist' was  a  strictly  accurate  description 
of  their  manner  of  life — they  lived  by 
method  ;  but  it  was  mediaeval,  sectarian, 
and  medical.  The  two  words  adopted 
in  later  years,  gradually,  instinctively, 
and  without  formal  resolution,  were 
'  Methodist '  and  '  Society.'  At  Oxford 
Wesley,  however,  was  content  with  'our 
little  Company.'  A  new  touch  of  pa- 
thetic memory  is  thus  given  to  some  of 
the  lines  in  the  Wesley  hymns,  e.g.  : 
My  company  before  is  gone, 

and 

Come,  let    us    ascend,  my   companion    and 
friend. 

That  Wesley,  from  very  early  days, 
thought  seriously  on  the  ecclesiastical 
significance  of  the  word  '  Society '  is 
evident  from  a  note  in  his  first  Oxford 
Diary  :  '  Heard  Dr  Holdsworth  on  the 
authority  of  the  Church  as  a  Society.' 


Rise  and  Design  of  Oxford  Methodism          99 

he  was  in  the  wrong  way,  by  shaking  him  by  the  throat  to  no 
purpose,  changed  his  method,  and  by  mildness  prevailed  upon 
him  to  absent  from  it  the  Sunday  following ;  as  he  has  done 
five  Sundays  in  six  ever  since.  This  much  delighted  our  gay 
opponents,  who  increased  their  number  apace ;  especially  when, 
shortly  after,  one  of  the  seniors  of  the  college  having  been  with 
the  Doctor,  upon  his  return  from  him  sent  for  two  young 
gentlemen  severally,  who  had  communicated  weekly  for  some 
time,  and  was  so  successful  in  his  exhortations,  that  for  the 
future  they  promised  to  do  it  only  three  times  a  year.  About 
this  time  there  was  a  meeting  (as  one  who  was  present  at 
it  informed  your  son)  of  several  of  the  officers  and  seniors 
of  the  college,  wherein  it  was  consulted  what  would  be  the 
speediest  way  to  stop  the  progress  of  enthusiasm  in  it.  The 
result  we  know  not,  only  it  was  soon  publicly  reported  that 

Dr.  and  the  censors  were  going  to  blow  up  The  Godly 

Club.  This  was  now  our  common  title ;  though  we  were 
sometimes  dignified  with  that  of  The  Enthusiasts,  or  The 
Reforming  Club.' 

Part  of  the  answer  I  received  was  as  follows : 

GOOD  SIR, 

A  pretty  while  after  the  date,  yours  came  to  my  hand.  I  waived 
my  answer  till  I  had  an  opportunity  of  consulting  your  father,  who, 
upon  all  accounts,  is  a  more  proper  judge  of  the  affair  than  I  am.  But 
I  could  never  find  a  fit  occasion  for  it.  As  to  my  own  sense  of  the 
matter,  I  confess  I  cannot  but  heartily  approve  of  that  serious  and 
religious  turn  of  mind  that  prompts  you  and  your  associates  to  those 
pious  and  charitable  offices ;  and  can  have  no  notion  of  that  man's 
religion,  or  concern  for  the  honour  of  the  University,  that  opposes  you, 
as  far  as  your  design  respects  the  colleges.  I  should  be  loth  to  send  a 
son  of  mine  to  any  seminary  where  his  conversing  with  virtuous  young 
men,  whose  professed  design  of  meeting  together  at  proper  times  was  to 
assist  each  other  in  forming  good  resolutions  and  encouraging  one 
another  to  execute  them  with  constancy  and  steadiness,  was  inconsistent 
with  any  received  maxims  or  rules  of  life  among  the  members.  As  to 
the  other  branch  of  your  design,  as  the  town  is  divided  into  parishes, 
each  of  which  has  its  proper  incumbent,  and  as  there  is  probably  an 
ecclesiastic  who  has  the  spiritual  charge  of  the  prisoners,  prudence  may 
direct  you  to  consult  them.  For  though  I  dare  not  say  you  would  be 
too  officious,  should  you  of  your  own  mere  motion  seek  out  the  persons 
that  want  your  instructions  and  charitable  contributions;  yet  should 


100 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


you  have  the  concurrence  of  their  proper  pastor,  your  good  offices  would 
be  more  regular  and  less  liable  to  censure. 

Your  son  was  now  at  Holt.1  However,  we  continued  to 
meet  at  our  usual  times,  though  our  little  affairs  went  on  but 
heavily  without  him.  But  at  our  return  from  Lincolnshire,  in 
September  last,  we  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him  again  ;  when, 
though  he  could  not  be  so  active  with  us  as  formerly,  yet  we 
were  exceeding  glad  to  spend  what  time  we  could  in  talking 
and  reading  with  him.  It  was  a  little  before  this  time  my 
brother  and  I  were  at  London,  when  going  into  a  bookseller's 
shop  (Mr.  Rivington's,  in  St.  Paul's  Churchyard),2  after  some 
other  conversation,  he  asked  us  whether  we  lived  in  town  ;  and 
upon  our  answering,  '  No  ;  at  Oxford,' — '  Then,  gentlemen,'  said 
he,  '  let  me  earnestly  recommend  to  your  acquaintance  a  friend 
I  have  there,  Mr.  Clayton,  of  Brazenose.'  Of  this,  having  small 
leisure  for  contracting  new  acquaintance,  we  took  no  notice  for 
the  present.  But  in  the  spring  following  (April  20),  Mr.  Clayton 
meeting  me  in  the  street,  and  giving  Mr.  Rivington's  service,  I 
desired  his  company  to  my  room,  and  then  commenced  our 
acquaintance.  At  the  first  opportunity  I  acquainted  him  with 
our  whole  design,  which  he  immediately  and  heartily  closed 
with ;  and  not  long  after,  Mr.  Morgan  having  then  left  Oxford, 
we  fixed  two  evenings  in  a  week  to  meet  on,  partly  to  talk 


1  See  letters  in  App.  IV.  vol.  vi. 

3  Mr.  Rivington,  of  St.  Paul's  Church- 
yard, bookseller  and  publisher,  was  the 
intimate  friend  of  the  two  brothers.  He 
published  John  Wesley's  edition  of 
Thomas  a  Kempis.  In  the  Diaries  of 
this  period  and  in  correspondence  his 
name  frequently  occurs.  Mr.  Clayton, 
whom  he  introduced  to  Wesley,  was  the 
son  of  a  Manchester  bookseller,  born 
1 709,  educated  at  the  Grammar  School  of 
his  native  town,  and  entered  Brazenose  in 
1726.  He  became  incumbent  of  Salford 
(Manchester)  in  1733,  where  WTesley 
visited  him,  and  Clayton  wrote  to  his 
friend  at  Savannah.  Like  the  Wesleys, 
father  and  three  sons,  like  Dr.  Burton 
and  many  other  intimate  friends  of  this 
period,  he  was  a  High  Churchman.  His 
friendship  was  an  all -important  factor  in 


Wesley's  early  life,  and  his  membership 
in  the  Company  of  University  Methodists 
marked  a  distinct  advance  in  organization 
and  in  approximation  to  the  rigid  rule 
and  authority  of  a  religious  Order. 
The  value  Wesley  attached  to  Clayton's 
friendship  is  indicated  in  a  facsimile  from 
Oxford  Diary  No.  II,  Monthly  Summary, 
where  he  notes  the  coincidence  of  dates  : 
'April  20,  1725,  saw  V.!  April  20, 
1732,  saw  Mr.  Clayton!  V.  F.'  And 
this  estimate  is  abundantly  confirmed  by 
subsequent  Diary  notes  and  by  the  cor- 
respondence. (See  App.  IX.  vol  vi.)  To 
this  note  the  late  Richard  Green  added  : 
'It  has  been  discovered  that  Clayton 
helped  Wesley  in  the  compilation  of  his 
first  publication — A  Collection  of  Forms 
oj  Prayer  >  1733.'  See  above,  p.  67, 
where  the  Monthly  Summary  is  printed. 


Rise  and  Design  of  Oxford  Methodism         101 

upon  that  subject,  and  partly  to  read  something  in  practical 
divinity. 

The  two  points  whereunto,  by  the  blessing  of  God  and  your 
son's  help,  we  had  before  attained,  we  endeavoured  to  hold  fast : 
I  mean,  the  doing  what  good  we  can  ;  and,  in  order  thereto, 
communicating  as  often  as  we  have  opportunity.  To  these,  by 
the  advice  of  Mr.  Clayton,  we  have  added  a  third, — the  observing 
the  fasts  of  the  Church ;  the  general  neglect  of  which  we  can 
by  no  means  apprehend  to  be  a  lawful  excuse  for  neglecting 
them.  And  in  the  resolution  to  adhere  to  these  and  all  things 
else  which  we  are  convinced  God  requires  at  our  hands,  we 
trust  we  shall  persevere  till  He  calls  us  to  give  an  account  of 
our  stewardship.  As  for  the  names  of  Methodists,  Superero- 
gation Men,  and  so  on,  with  which  some  of  our  neighbours  are 
pleased  to  compliment  us,  we  do  not  conceive  ourselves  to  be 
under  any  obligation  to  regard  them,  much  less  to  take  them  for 
arguments.  *  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony '  we  appeal, 
whereby  we  ought  to  be  judged.  If  by  these  it  can  be  proved 
we  are  in  an  error,  we  will  immediately  and  gladly  retract  it ;  if 
not,  we  '  have  not  so  learned  Christ '  as  to  renounce  any  part  of 
His  service,  though  men  should  '  say  all  manner  of  evil  against 
us/  with  more  judgement  and  as  little  truth  as  hitherto.  We 
do,  indeed,  use  all  the  lawful  means  we  know,  to  prevent  '  the 
good  which  is  in  us  from  being  evil  spoken  of.'  But  if  the 
neglect  of  known  duties  be  the  one  condition  of  securing  our 
reputation,  why,  fare  it  well ;  we  know  whom  we  have  believed, 
and  what  we  thus  lay  out  He  will  pay  us  again.  Your  son 
already  stands  before  the  judgement-seat  of  Him  who  judges 
righteous  judgement ;  at  the  brightness  of  whose  presence  the 
clouds  remove :  his  eyes  are  open,  and  he  sees  clearly  whether 
it  was  '  blind  zeal,  and  a  thorough  mistake  of  true  religion,  that 
hurried  him  on  in  the  error  of  his  way '  * ;  or  whether  he  acted 
like  a  faithful  and  wise  servant,  who,  from  a  just  sense  that  his 
time  was  short,  made  haste  to  finish  his  work  before  his  Lord's 
coming,  that '  when  laid  in  the  balance  '  he  might  not '  be  found 
wanting.' 

I  have   now   largely  and  plainly  laid  before  you   the   real 

1  Wesley's  quotations  are  from  Mr.  Morgan's  letter,  March  1732,  to  his  son 
William  (App.lV#  vol.  vi,). 


IO2  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

ground  of  all  the  strange  outcry  you  have  heard  ;  and  am  not 
without  hope  that  by  this  fairer  representation  of  it  than  you 
probably  ever  received  before,  both  you  and  the  clergyman  you 
formerly  mentioned  may  have  a  more  favourable  opinion  of  a 
good  cause,  though  under  an  ill  name.  Whether  you  have  or 
no,  I  shall  ever  acknowledge  my  best  services  to  be  due  to  your- 
self and  your  family,  both  for  the  generous  assistance  you  have 
given  my  father,  1  and  for  the  invaluable  advantages  your  son 
has  (under  God)  bestowed  on, 
Sir, 

Your  ever  obliged, 

and  most  obedient  servant 


[For  Richard  Morgan,  the  younger  brother,  see  W.H.S.vtA.  iii.  p.  50; 
Crookshank,  vol.  i.  p.  12  ;  and  especially  Moore,  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  197.  Wesley 
paid  him  a  visit  in  Ireland,  July  15,  1769.] 


1  Both  father  and  son  subscribed  to  the  following  entry:  'June  21,  1734. 
Samuel  Wesley's  Dissertations  on  the  Sent  Mr.  Morgan  five,  from  241  to 
Book  of  Job.  In  Oxford  Diary  No.  I  is  245.' 


ON  THE   DEATH   OF   MR.   WILLIAM 
MORGAN  OF  CHRIST  CHURCH 

Who  died  August  26,  1732 

BY  THE  REV.  SAMUEL  WESLEY,  A.M.1 

We  fools  counted  his  life  madness? 

IF  aught  beneath  them  happy  souls  attend, 
Let  Morgan  hear  the  triumph  of  a  friend, 
And  hear  well-pleased.     Let  libertines  so  gay 
With  careless  indolence  despise  the  lay  ; 
Let  critic  wits,  and  fools  for  laughter  born, 
Their  verdict  pass  with  supercilious  scorn  ; 
Let  jovial  crowds,  by  wine  their  senses  drowned, 
Stammer  out  censure  in  their  frantic  round  ; 
Let  yawning  sluggards  faint  dislike  display, 
Who,  while  they  trust  to-morrow,  lose  to-day, — 
Let  such  as  these  the  sacred  strains  condemn  ; 
For  'tis  true  glory  to  be  hissed  by  them. 

Wise  in  his  prime,  he  waited  not  for  noon  ; 
Convinced  that  mortal  never  lived  too  soon. 
As  if  foreboding  then  his  little  stay, 
He  made  his  morning  bear  the  heat  of  day. 
Fixed,  while  unfading  glory  he  pursues, 
No  ill  to  hazard,  and  no  good  to  lose : 


1  Eldest  son  of  the  rector  of  Epworth.  Samuel  Wesley's  published  volume,  but 

He  inserted  this  elegy  in  a  quarto  volume  evidently  from  his  brother's    corrected 

of  412  pages  of  his  own  poetry,  dedicated  proof-sheets,  hence  the  various  readings, 
to  his  kind  friend  and  patron,  Edward,  2  The  motto  is  from  the  Apocrypha, 

second   Earl  of   Oxford,   and    entitled,  The  whole  passage  is  remarkable,  when 

'  Poems  on  Several  Occasions.    By  Samuel  read  in  the  light  of  William  Morgan's 

Wesley,    A.M.,    Master    of    BlundelPs  life  at   Oxford,   and  of   the    esteem   in 

School  at  Tiverton,   Devon,    sometime  which  he  is  now  held  : 

Student  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and 

TT  ,         .      ,,7          .  We  fools  accounted  his  hie  madness, 

near  twenty  years  Usher  in  Westmm-  And  his  end  to  be  without  honour . 

ster   School.'     Published   by  Rivmgton,  How  is  he  numbered  among  the  children  oi 
1736.      John    Wesley  read    the   proof-  God! 

sheets  in  Georgia,  noting  the  fact  in  his  And  his  lotis  among  the  saints. 
Diary.    The   poem  is  not  quoted  from  Wisdom  v'  «  '  cf'  "•  '  to  * 

103 


104  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

No  fair  occasion  glides  unheeded  by  ; 
Snatching  the  golden  moments  as  they  fly, 
He  by  few  fleeting  hours  ensures  eternity. 

Friendship's  warm  beams  his  artless  breast  inspire, 
And  tend'rest  rev'rence  for  a  much-loved  sire. 
He  dared  for  heaven  this  flattering  world  forgo, 
Ardent  to  teach,  as  diligent  to  know  ; 
Unwarped  by  sensual  views  or  vulgar  aims, 
By  idle  riches,  or  by  idler  names ; 
Fearful  of  sin  in  every  close  disguise  ; 
Unmoved  by  threat'ning,  or  by  glozing  lies. 
Seldom  indeed  the  wicked  came  so  far, 
Forced  by  his  piety  to  defensive  war ; 
Whose  zeal  for  other  men's  salvation  shown, 
Beyond  the  reach  of  hell  secured  his  own. 
Gladd'ning  the  poor,  where'er  his  steps  he  turned  ; 
Where  pined  the  orphan,  or  the  widow  mourned ; 
Where  prisoners  sighed  beneath  guilt's  horrid  stain, 
The  worst  confinement  and  the  heaviest  chain  ; 
Where  Death's  sad  shade  the  uninstructed  sight 
Veiled  with  thick  darkness  in  the  land  of  light. 
Our  Saviour  thus  fulfilled  His  great  design 
(If  human  we  may  liken  to  divine),1 
Healed  each  disease  that  bodies  frail  endure, 
And  preached  th'  unhoped-for  gospel  to  the  poor.2 

To  means  of  grace  the  last  respect  he  showed, 
Nor  sought  new  paths,  as  wiser  than  his  God  : 
Their  sacred  strength  preserved  him  from  extremes 
Of  empty  outside  or  enthusiast  dreams ; 
Whims  of  Molinos,3  lost  in  rapture's  mist, 
Or  Quaker,  late-reforming  Quietist. 


1  In  the  original  the  reading  is  :  Th*11  only  a"gry  when  a  wretch  conveys 

The  Deist  poison  in  the  gospel  phrase. 
For  human  may  be  likened  to  divine.  ,  John    Wesley>     nowever,     SO    much 

2  Six  lines  omitted  here  may  be  found       admired   the   Spanish   mystic  as  to  in- 
inthe  volume  of  1736:  troduce   some   of  his  writings  into  the 

Christian    Library    (vol.    xxiii.    p.    67, 

Nor  yet  the  priestly  function  he  invades  :  The  spiritual   Guide).     Whitefield   was 

'Tisnothissermon  but  his  life  persuades.  Quietism. 

Humble  and  teachable,  to  church  he  flies,  v«- 

Prepared  to  practise,  not  to  criticize;  (Jackson,  C.   W.  vol.  i.  p.  20.) 


Death  of  Mr.    William  Morgan  105 

He  knew  that  works  our  faith  must  here  employ, 
And  that  'tis  heaven's  great  business  to  enjoy. 
Fixed  on  that  heaven  he  Death's  approaches  saw, 
Nor  vainly  murmured  at  our  nature's  law  ; 
Repined  not  that  his  youth  so  soon  should  go, 
Nor  grieved  for  fleeting  pleasures  here  below. 
Of  sharpest  anguish  scorning  to  complain, 
He  fills  with  mirth  the  intervals  of  pain.1 
Not  only  unappalled,  but  joyful,  sees 
The  dark,  cold  passage  that  must  lead  to  peace ; 
Strong  with  immortal  bloom,  secure  to  rise, 
The  tears  for  ever  banished  from  his  eyes. 

Who  now  regrets  his  early  youth  would  spend 
The  life  so  nobly  that  so  soon  should  end? 
Who  blames  the  stripling  for  performing  more 
Than  Doctors  grave,  and  Prelates  of  threescore  ? 
Who  now  esteems  his  fervour  indiscreet, 
His  prayers  too  frequent,  or  his  alms  too  great? 
Who  thinks,  where  blest  he  reigns  beyond  the  sky, 
His  crown  too  radiant,  or  his  throne  too  high? 
Who  but  the  Fiend,  who  once  his  course  withstood, 
And  whispered, — '  Stay  till  fifty  to  be  good '  ? 
Sure,  if  believed,  t'  obtain  his  hellish  aim, 
Adjourning  to  the  time  that  never  came. 


1  Samuel  Wesley  knew  William  Morgan  Probably  he  lodged  with  S.  Wesley 
not  only  through  his  brothers  John  and  when  visiting  London.  See  Morgan 
Charles,  but  personally  in  London.  Correspondence  in  App.  IV.  .vol.  vi. 


THE   JOURNAL 

From  October  14,  1735,  to  February  i,  1738 

THE  VOYAGE 

1735.  OCTOBER  14,  Tues. — [About  nine  in  the  morning,] 
Mr.  Benjamin  Ingham,1  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford  ;  Mr.  Charles 
Delamotte,2  son  of  a  [sugar]  merchant,  in  London,  [aged  twenty- 
one,]  who  had  offered  himself  some  days  before,  [and  showed  an 
earnest  desire  to  bear  us  company  ;]  my  brother  Charles  Wesley, 

The  new  version  of  the  Journal  enables  us  to  picture  the  boat,  with 
its  passengers,  sailing  down  the  Thames,  from  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning 
until  four  in  the  afternoon  ;  also  the  partitioned  section  of  the  forecastle, 
with  its  two  cabins,  which  for  more  than  three  months  was  to  be  the  home 
of  the  four  friends.  It  was  a  section  of  Oxford  Methodism,  and,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  the  Oxford  Rules,  by  mutual  agreement,  were  strictly 
enforced.  The  smaller  of  the  two  cabins  was  allotted  to  Ingham  and 
Delamotte  ;  the  larger  to  the  Wesleys.  In  the  latter  the  four  friends  met 
for  reading  and  prayer. 


1  Born    at    Ossett,    near    Wakefield,  Charles  Delamotte's  early  life,  or  of  the 
June    II,     1712;     educated    at    Batley  circumstances  under  which  Wesley  made 
Grammar     School ;     entered     Queen's  his  acquaintance.     His  brother  William, 
College,     Oxford,     1730;    joined     the  who  was  converted  through  the  influence 
Oxford  Methodists  in    1732  ;    ordained  of  Ingham  and  Charles  Wesley,  as  were 
at   Oxford  by  Bishop   Potter;    in  1736  his  mother  and  two  of  his  sisters,  appears 
took  possession  of  a  house  built  for  him  to   have    been    the  first    Methodist— or 
near  an   Indian  town  in  Georgia.      In  Methodist  Moravian — in  Cambridge  Uni- 
1737  he  returned  to  England,   commis-  versity.     Whitefield  had  serious  thoughts 
sioned  to  find  recruits  for  Georgia,  but  of  proposing  marriage  to  Miss  Elizabeth 
was  led  into  other  work  at  home.     In  Delamotte.     Both  William  and  Charles 
1741  he  married  Lady  Margaret  Hastings,  became  Moravians.     The  former  died  in 
who  already  had  been  instrumental  in  1743  ;   the  latter  Wesley  met  in  1782. 
the  conversion  of  her  sister-in-law,  Selina,  See  frequent  references  to  the  Delamotte 
Countess  of  Huntingdon  (App.  X.vol.  vi.).  family  in  Charles  Wesley's  Journal.     Cf. 

2  Son  of  a  Middlesex  magistrate  (Tyer-  Whitefield's    Life,    by    Tyerman  ;    also 
man's  Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  118).     Beyond  W.H.S.  vol.  ii.  p.  88,  and  W.  M.  Mag. 
the  facts  here  stated  we  know  nothing  of  Feb.  1902,  p.  135. 

106 


FACSIMILE    OF    THE    FIRST    PAGE    OF    THE    INGHAM    COPY    OF    WESLEY'S    VOYAGE    JOURNAL 


107 


/4.' 


>f  *6yZs£v/*£t*r^.& 


S2  f 


FACSIMILE    OF   THE    FIRST    PAGE    OF   THE    VOYAGE    DIARY    (S£0    PAGE    I  IO). 


1 08 


6ct.  1738.] 


The   Voyage 


109 


and  myself,  took  boat 1  for  Gravesend,  in  order  to  embark  for 
Georgia.2  Our  end  in  leaving  our  native  country  was  not  to 
avoid  want,  God  having  given  us  plenty  of  temporal  blessings, 
nor  to  gain  riches  or  honour,  [which  we  trust  He  will  ever 
enable  us  to  look  on  as  no  other  than  dung  and  dross;]  but 
singly  this — to  save  our  souls,  to  live  wholly  to  the  glory  of 
God.3  [To  take  their  last  leaves  at  Gravesend,  Mr.  Burton,4 
one  of  the  Trustees  ;  Mr.  Morgan,6  of  Lincoln  College ;  and 
Mr.  Hutton,  junior,6  of  Westminster,  set  out  with  us.  About  four] 
in  the  afternoon  we  found  the  Simmonds  off  Gravesend,  and 
immediately  went  on  board.  [My  brother  and  I  had  a  cabin 
allotted  us  in  the  forecastle,  which  had  been  designed  for  Mr. Hall  ;7 
but  he  had  married  a  wife,  and  could  not  come.  Mr.  Ingham  and 
Delamotte  had  the  next ;  we  chose  to  be  here  for  privacy,  there 
being  a  partition  between  the  forecastle  and  the  rest  of  the  ship.8] 

In  the  Georgia  Diary,  No.  I,  the  first  date  is  October  17.  The  three 
days  missing,  from  the  I4th  to  the  I7th,  should  be  in  the  lost  Diary 
commencing  October  15,  1734,  and  ending  at  October  16,  1735. 

For  seven  days  the  Voyage  Diary  is  almost  a  journal,  and  may  be  read 
with  comparative  ease  (see  opposite).  It  afterwards  becomes  more  frag- 


1  Probably  at  Westminster  Stairs,  the 
place    of   embarkation    nearest    to    the 
Huttons'  house  in  Great  College  Street. 

2  Moore  (Life,  vol.  i.  p.  259)  and  Jack- 
son  (C.   Wesley,  vol.  i.  pp.  39-47)  give 
summary    accounts    of    the    history    of 
the  colony  of  Georgia  up  to  this  date. 
Dr.  Stoughton  {Religion  in  England,  vol. 
vi.  p.  60)  gives  a  good  resum6  of  what 
was  done  under  Queen  Anne  and  the  first 
Georges  by  English  Episcopalians  with 
a  view  to  the  diffusion  of  Christianity 
abroad.    The  missions  of  the  S.P.G.  were 
specially  directed  to  America.  See  Pratt's 
Propaganda,   Hawkins's  Missions  of  the 
Church  of  England,  Anderson's  Colonial 
Church,  and  especially  Bishop  Berkeley's 
Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  213-30.    For  Wesley's 
appointment    see    Journal    of    Georgia 
Trustees,  Record  Office,  C.O.  5,  Oct.  10, 
1735,  and  App.  XI.  vol.  vi. 

8  See  Wesley's  letter  to  Dr.  Burton  in  the 
Colman  Collection  (App.  XII.  vol.  vi.). 

*  Dr.  Burton,  of  Corpus  Christi,  was 
an  old  Oxford  friend  of  John  Wesley, 

VOL.   I. 


but  never  a  member  of  the  Holy  Club. 
One  of  the  most  influential  of  the 
Georgia  Trustees,  he  introduced  Wesley 
to  Oglethorpe,  and  did  more,  perhaps, 
than  any  one  else  to  support  Oglethorpe 
in  his  Georgia  enterprise. 

5  Richard  Morgan,  junior,  of  Lincoln 
College,  was  the  younger  brother  of 
William  Morgan. 

a  James  Hutton,  son  of  Rev.  John 
Hutton,  M.A.,  who  lived  next  door  to 
the  house  formerly  occupied  by  Samuel 
Wesley  in  Great  College  Street,  West- 
minster, and,  like  his  neighbour,  took 
boarders  from  Westminster  School. 
James  was  converted  in  his  father's 
house  under  a  sermon  preached  by  [ohn 
Wesley.  Both  he  and  Richard  Morgan 
desired  to  join  the  Mission. 

7  The   Rev.    Wes]ey   Hall,    curate  in 
the  parish  of  Wootton,  Wilts,  was  one 
of   John    Wesley's    pupils    at     Lincoln 
College,    Oxford.      In    the  summer  of 
1735  he  married  Martha  (Patty)  Wesley. 

8  The    Trustees    had    chartered    two 


i  tb  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Oct.  1736. 

Wednesday  and  Thursday  we  spent  chiefly  with  Mr.  Morgan 
and  Mr.  Hutton,  partly  on  board  and  partly  on  shore,  in 
exhorting  one  another  to  '  shake  off  every  weight,  and  to  run 
with  patience  the  race  set  before  us.' 

Fri.  17. — I  began  to  learn  German,1  in  order  to  converse 
[a  little]  with  the  Moravians,2  slx-and-twenty  of  whom  we  have 
on  board,  [men  who  have  left  all  for  their  Master,  and  who 
have  indeed  learned  of  Him,  being  meek  and  lowly,  dead  to 
the  world,  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


mentary  and  cryptic.     The  following  transliteration  of  the  first  three  days 
will  assist  the  decipherment  of  the  page  printed  in  facsimile  : 

OCT.  17,  1735.     Friday. 
On  board  the  Simmonds,  off  Gravesend. 
5^  Dressed ;    prayed    with    Charles    and    Ingham.      6.    talked    of   disposing    our 

7  business  and  studies.      7.   writ  to  the  Rector,   Mr.    Hutchins,  Sister  Emilia. 

8  8£  told  each  ;  in  talk  9.  on  business  \  read  prayers. 
io£  Writ  diary  \.  began  German  Grammar.     12. 

12    Prayed :  German  2| ;    prayed ;    talked ;  conversed  till  4 ;    began  Deacon  with 

5  Delamotte  &c.     5.  conversed  with  Ambrosius  Tackner; 

6  he  resolved  to  be  baptized. 

7^  Sung,   conversed    7|  devotion ;    read    prayers    between  decks ;   visited   a    sick 
8    Moravian,  in  talk  8£  ;  conversed  [or  reflected],  prayed,  undressed  9^. 


ships  for  the  expedition,  the  Simmonds  names  three  captains,  and  a  few  days  later 

(Captain     Joseph     Cornish)     and     the  others  are  added.     (See  Record  Office, 

London    Merchant    (Captain    Thomas).  C.O.   5,  Georgia  Letters,  and  Gascoigne 

'  James  Oglethorpe,  Esq.,'  had  general  Correspondence,  App.  XIII.  vol.  vi.) 
charge  of  the  expedition.      H.M.  sloop  '  The   paragraphs    inserted  from   the 

Hawk,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Ingham  copy   of  the  Journal,   we  may 

James  Gascoigne,   was   directed   by  the  assume,  were  specially  intended  for  the 

Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  eyes  of  his  brother  Samuel  and  his  friend 

to  convoy  the  emigrant-ships  from  Spit-  Clayton.      They    give   a   High   Church 

head.     On  arriving  at  Georgia  Captain  tincture  to  the  Journal,  in  this    respect 

Gascoigne    was     to    survey    the    coasts  harmonizing   with   the   Diary  and   with 

and   harbours  near  the  settlements,  for  the  phase  of  ecclesiasticism  through  which 

which   purpose   Mr.   Oglethorpe  was  to  the  writer  was  passing.     From  this  point 

provide    two    scout-boats    belonging    to  of  view   even    the   phrase    'a   little'    is 

the  province  of  South  Carolina,  the  boats  suggestive.     He  would  not  have  Samuel 

being  manned  from  the  sloop.     Accord-  imagine   that  he   had  gone  over  to  the 

ing  to  another  statement  '  six  very  large  Moravians. 

ships '  formed  the  expedition.     Of  these          2  In  the  first  edition  the  name  given 

the  Hawk  was  one.     See  Georgia  papers  to    the    emigrants    from     Herrnhut    is 

in  Record  Office,  C.O.  5,  1735-7.  Charles  'Moravians,'   changed  in  later   editions 

Wesley  refers  to  the  'London  Galley,'  by  to  *  Germans.'     The  Diary  names  them 

which  he  may  have  meant  the  London  indifferently  '  Germans '  and  '  Moravians.' 

Merchant.    John  Wesley,  in  the  Diary  For  Herrnhut  see  Bovet's  Life  of  Zinzen- 

notes  on  the  landing  at  Peeper  Island,  dorf,  trans,  by  T.  A.  Seed. 


6ct. 


The   Voyage  ill 


\_Sat.  1 8. — I  baptized  at  his  desire  Ambrosius  Tackner,  aged 
thirty  ;  he  had  received  only  lay  baptism  before.  We  dined 
on  shore  with  Mr.  Delamotte's  father,  who  was  come  down  on 
purpose  to  see  him,  and  was  now  fully  reconciled  (which  is  of 
the  power  of  God)  to  what  he  at  first  vigorously  opposed.] 

Sun.  19. — The  weather  being  fair  and  calm,  we  had  the  morn- 
ing service  on  quarter-deck.1  I  now  first  preached  extempore 
[to  a  numerous  and  as  it  then  seemed  serious  congregation.]  We 
then  celebrated  the  Holy  Eucharist,  [Ambrosius  Tackner]  and 
two  more  communicating  with  us — a  little  flock,  which  we  did 
not  doubt  God  would  increase  in  due  time. 

Mon.2O. — Believing  the  denying  ourselves,  even  in  the  smallest 
instances,  might,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  be  helpful  to  us,  we  [my 
brother  and  1]  wholly  left  off  the  use  of  flesh  and  wine,  and 
confined  ourselves  to  vegetable  food,  chiefly  rice  and  biscuit, 
[a  diet  which  has  agreed  with  us  hitherto  perfectly  well.]  In 
the  afternoon  Mr.  David  Nitschmann,  Bishop  of  the  Moravians,2 

Saturday  18. 

4JI  Dressed  ;  prayed  ;  began  Genesis  6  ;  Deacon  f  ;  writ  to  Varanese, 

7  Miss  Sally  Andrews,  Sister  Emilia  8  ;  talked  ;  writ  to  Salmon  and 

9  Clayton  ;  10.  Falcon  with  Tackner  ;  baptized  him  1 

ii  Delamotte  Senior  ;  read  Whiston's  Catechism. 

I  £  dinner,  <2\  on  board.     Conversed  3^.     German.     4.     Cabin. 

4  Writ  to  Sister  Kezia,  Mr.  Vernon,  Mr.  Hutcheson,  my  mother, 

5  Rivington.     5^  talked.     6£  devotion  \  sung  7.     German  with  Tackner. 

7  Conversed,  prayer,  9^. 

Sunday  19. 
4    Dressed ;  prayed,  Scripture.    6.  Deacon,  7.  Kempis. 

8  Xavier  ;  talked  10.     Read  prayers,  preached  extempore,  Eucharist  three 

ii    communicants.    12.  Xavier.     i.  dined,  devotion,  prayer.     2.  Read  with  Tackner. 
3    Read  prayers,  expounded.    4.  Sat  in  with  Hermsdorf.     5.  talked  ;  conversed  with 

6  Mrs.  Tackner.     \  prayed,  conversed.     6^  sung.     7^  conversed  with  Oglethorpe. 

8    Sung  with  Germans,  f ,  with  Oglethorpe  [lit.  '  sat  in,'  i.e.  conversed  with  him  in 
private  ;  not  talked  casually,  but  seriously  and  with  a  purpose] ;  prayer  9.40. 

On  this  page  are  two  indications  that  Wesley  had  not  entirely  discarded 
the  cipher  of  his  earliest  Diary.  The  capital  letter  *  D,'  at  the  end  of  line 
two,  Sunday  19,  stands  for  'Eucharist.'  Later,  the  same  letter,  with  a 

1  He  recalls  this  first  Sunday  morning       bishop  of  the   Moravian   Church,    con- 
service  in  his   reply  to  Rowland   Hill's       secrated  in  Berlin,  March  1735. 

tract,  Imposture  Detected  :    '  I  preached  Earlier  in  the  year  Spangenberg  had 

in   the  open  air  in  Oct.   1735'  (Works^  escorted    a  detachment,   and   was  now 

vol.  x.  p.  447)'  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  bishop  who 

2  David  Nitschmann,  in  charge  of  the  had  been  entrusted  with  the  organization 
Moravian  emigrants,  was  sixty  years  of  of  the    Moravian    Church,    the    Unitas 
age ;  a  sufferer  for  conscience*  sake ;    a  Fratrum  in  Georgia. 


1 1 1  John   Wesley  s  Journal  toot  1735. 

[Mr.  Van  Hermsdorf,1  and  Andrew  Dober 2]  began  to  learn  Eng- 
lish. Oh  may  we  be  not  only  of  one  tongue,  but  of  one  mind 
and  of  one  heart ! 

Tues.  21. — [God  sending  us  a  fair  wind,]  we  sailed  from 
Gravesend.  When  we  were  past  about  half  the  Goodwin  Sands, 
the  wind  suddenly  failed.  Had  the  calm  continued  till  ebb,  the 
ship  had  probably  been  lost.  But  the  gale  sprang  up  again  in 
an  hour,  and  carried  us  into  the  Downs. 

We  now  began  to  be  a  little  regular.  Our  common  way  of 
living  was  this :  From  four  in  the  morning  till  five  each  of  us 
used  private  prayer.  From  five  to  seven  we  read  the  Bible 
together,  carefully  comparing  it  (that  we  might  not  lean  to  our 
own  understandings)  with  the  writings  of  the  earliest  ages.  At 
seven  we  breakfasted.  At  eight  were  the  public  prayers,  at  which 
were  present  usually  between  thirty  or  forty  of  our  eighty  passen- 
gers. From  nine  to  twelve  I  commonly  learned  German,  and  Mr. 
Delamotte  Greek.  My  brother  writ  sermons,3  and  Mr.  Ingham 


difference,  stands  for  'Delamotte.'  A  mark  above  the  letter  shows  that  it 
is  taken  from  the  cipher  alphabet,  and  means  *  Eucharist '  or  *  Communion.' 
The  letters  '  rt '  represent  the  word  '  sat,'  one  of  Wesley's  favourite  words. 
It  always  indicates  deliberate  intention,  serious  purpose.  If  he  sits  alone,  it 
is  that  he  may  reflect ;  if  with  another  person,  that  he  may  converse,  and  not 
merely  talk.  Often  he  adds  the  word  '  close,'  or,  as  in  the  last  line  of 
this  page,  the  letter  *  n,'  which  seems  to  mean  that,  for  instance  on  this 
Sunday  evening,  he  and  his  chief  were  '  within,'  in  the  privacy  of  his  own 
cabin,  very  seriously  conversing.  Other  reminiscences  of  the  old  cipher 
are  occasionally  found. 

In  line  three,  October  17,  the  letters  'tea'  do  not  mean  either  tea  or 
teaching.  The  mark  over  the  first  letter  shows  that  *  t '  stands  for  a  com- 
plete word  :  '  told  each '  meets  all  the  requirements,  and  gives  sense  :  at  the 
earliest  moment  he  wrote,  telling  his  friends,  his  kinsfolk,  his  publisher,  and 
the  rector  of  his  college,  where  he  was  and  how  he  fared. 

His  first  tutor  in  German  was  Tackner,  who  also  was  his  first  Simmonds 
convert.  Tackner  and  his  wife,  and  her  daughter,  Betty  Hazle,  are 
frequently  named  in  the  Frederica  sections  of  the  Diary. 


1  Hermsdorf  was  an  officer  permitted  first  bishop  of  the  Savannah  Congrega- 
by  the  Prussian  Government  to  serve  the  tion  of  United  Brethren. 

new  colony  under  Oglethorpe.     Later  he  3  Charles  Wesley  was  ordained  deacon 

organized  the  defence  of  Frederica  against  (Sunday,   Oct.  5,    1735)  bv  Dr-  Potter, 

the  Spaniards.  Bishop   of  Oxford,    who    also    had    or- 

2  Andrew,    brother   of  Leonhard   and  dained  his  brother  John  and  Ingham.    On 
Martin  Dober  (Bcribam's  James  Hutton^  the  Sunday  following  (Oct.   12)  he  was 
p.  23).     Anton  Seifart   was  chosen  the  ordained  priest  by  Dr.  Gibson,  Bishop 

Cc 


Oct.  1735.1 


The   Voyage  113 


read  some  treatise  of  divinity  or  instructed  the  children.  At 
twelve  we  met  to  give  an  account  to  one  another  what  we  had 
done  since  our  last  meeting,  and  what  we  designed  to  do  before 
our  next.1  About  one  we  dined.  The  time  from  dinner  to  four 
we  spent  with  the  people  partly  in  public  reading,  partly  in 
reading  to  those  whom  each  of  us  had  taken  in  charge,  or  in 
speaking  to  them  severally,  as  need  required.  At  four  were  the 
evening  prayers,  when  either  the  Second  Lesson  was  explained — 
as  it  always  was  in  the  morning — or  the  children  were  catechized 
and  instructed  before  the  congregation.  From  five  to  six  we 
again  used  private  prayer.  From  six  to  seven  I  read  in  our 
cabin  to  two  or  three  of  the  passengers,  of  whom  there  were 
about  eighty  English  on  board,  and  each  of  my  brethren  to  a 
few  more  in  theirs.  At  seven  I  joined  with  the  Germans  in 
their  public  service,  while  Mr.  Ingham  was  reading  between  the 
decks  to  as  many  as  desired  to  hear.  At  eight  we  met  again,  to 
exhort  and  instruct  one  another.  Between  nine  and  ten  we  went 
to  bed,  where  neither  the  roaring  of  the  sea  nor  the  motion  of  the 
ship  could  take  away  the  refreshing  sleep  which  God  gave  us. 

Fri.  24. — Having  a  rolling  sea,  most  of  the  passengers  found 
the  effects  of  it.     Mr.  Delamotte  was  exceeding  sick  for  several 


During  these  days  he  read  Deacon  and  Xavier  ;  pursued  his  German 
studies  so  diligently  that  on  Thursday,  23rd,  he  ended  the  German  Grammar  ; 
began  to  teach  English  to  Nitschmann  and  Hermsdorf ;  sang  every  day 
f  with  all '  and  *  with  the  Germans,'  and  began  his  friendship  with  von  Reck 
and  Mr.  Hird. 


of   London.      He    took    orders    reluct-  and  that  his  ordination  as  deacon  took 

antly,  Dr.  Burton  urging  him  to  do  so,  place  on  a  Sunday,  we  have  provisionally 

and  his  brother  John  overcoming    his  adopted  Sunday,  Oct.  5,  as  the  day. 
scruples.     It  does  not  appear  that  he  l  The  fact  that  the  four  friends  were 

had  either  preached  or  written  a  sermon  living  under  Oxford  Rules  accounts  for 

before    embarking    for    Georgia.      The  certain     peculiarities     in     the     Diary, 

sermons    he    preached    in   the    Isle   of  Neither  on  board  ship,  nor  subsequently 

Wight  while    the    ship    lay  in    Cowes  in  Georgia,  would  Wesley  take  any  step 

Harbour  were  those  he  wrote  on  board  without   consulting    his    brethren  ;   and 

the  Simmonds— Charles    Wesley's   first  when  they  were  not  at  hand,  he  fulfilled 

sermons.      The  exact   date    of   Charles  the   spirit  of  the  rule  of  his  order  by 

Wesley's   ordination   seems   to    be    no-  consulting  the  Moravian  elders.      This 

where  recorded.     His  own  Journal  does  rule  he    afterwards    imposed    upon  his 

not  begin  until  later.      John   Wesley's  preachers.      It  is  still  in  force,   being 

Diary  for  the  early  autumn  of  1735  is  embodied   in   the     7welve    Rules  of  a 

lost.     Assuming  that  Charles  spent  no  Helper  (see  Minutes,  vol.  i.  p.  678,  and 

long  time  in  London  before  embarking,  Sum.  Meth.  Law  and  Discipline*  p.  245). 


1 1 4  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Oct.  1735. 

days  ;  Mr.  Ingham  for  about  half  an  hour.  My  brother's  head 
ached  much.  Hitherto,  it  hath  pleased  God,  the  sea  has  not 
disordered  me  at  all ;  nor  have  I  been  hindered  one  quarter  of 
an  hour  from  reading,  writing,  composing,  or  doing  any  business 
I  could  have  done  on  shore. 

During  our  stay  in  the  Downs,  some  or  other  of  us  went, 
as  often  as  we  had  opportunity,  on  board  the  ship  that  sailed 
in  company  with  us,  where  also  many  were  glad  to  join  in  [the 
prayers  of  the  Church  and  to  hear  the  Word  of  God  explained. 

[Sun.  26. — We  had  a  new  communicant. 

[Mon.  27. — Mr.  Johnson  J  complained  to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  that 
having  the  public  prayer  in  the  great  cabin  was  a  great  incon- 
venience to  him.  He  said  he  could  not  bear  to  stay  in  the 
room  when  so  many  people  were  in  it,  and  that  he  could  not 
stay  out  of  it  while  they  were  there,  for  fear  of  catching  cold. 

In  the  Journal  as  hitherto  published  the  days  between  October  24  and 
31  are  unrecorded  ;  also  the  days  between  November  i  and  16.  This  new 
version  and  the  Diary  account  for  each  missing  day. 

OCT.  25,  Sat.— His  reading  this  morning,  at  five  o'clock,  is  the  *  Bible, 
and  at  six  and  seven  *  Deacon*  and  Common  Prayer.'  He  again  preaches 
on  board  the  other  ship  and  visits  the  sick  passenger,  a  Mrs.  Walker,  with 
whom  he  *  disputes.'  He  notes  in  the  evening  that  Charles  is  '  perverse.' 
Every  available  moment  is  given  to  the  study  of  German. 

Sun.  26. — For  early  morning  reading,  Nelson  took  the  place  of  Deacon. 
He  had  a  *  good  time '  on  board  the  other  ship,  where  he  read  prayers  and 
preached.  For  Hermsdorf,  von  Reck,  and  the  Saltzburghers  he  always  en- 
tertained the  highest  regard.  The  Moravians  and  the  Hirds  were  almost 
the  only  people  on  board  the  Simmonds  who  did  not,  sooner  or  later,  cause 
him  pain  and  anxiety.  Returning  to  the  Simmonds,  he  again  preached, 
administered  the  Eucharist,  and  conversed  ;  the  result,  noted  at  the  foot 
of  the  page,  being  '  Strengthened  one  another.' 

Mon.  27. — This  was  a  memorable  day.  It  began  with  an  hour  of  private 
prayer,  from  four  to  five.  His  Bible  he  reads  to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
rolling  sea  which  leaves  him  'well.'  At  six  he  prays  with  Delamotte  and 
Charles.  At  seven  he  converses  with  Oglethorpe,  who  is  *  right.'  At  eight 
he  reads  prayers  and  attends  to  business.  At  half-past  nine  he  'began 
Gesang-Buch.^  It  may  not  be  impossible  to  ascertain,  by  a  comparison  of 
numbers,  which  Gesang-Buch  was  used  by  Wesley  in  Georgia,  and  from 
which  some  of  the  greatest  hymns  were  drawn.  Meantime,  the  choice 
seems  to  lie  between  two  books:  (i)  The  first  German  Moravian  hymn- 
book — Das  Gesang-Buch  der  Gemeine  in  Herrnhut — was  published  in  1735. 

1  Son  of  the  late  governor  of  South  2  Dr.  Deacon  was  Clayton's  friend.    See 

Carolina  (see  Correspondence  in  Record       Tyerman's  Oxford  Methodists,  p.  44,  for 
Office,  CO.  5).  account  of  this  once-famous  Nonjuror. 


NOV.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  115 


After  some  dispute  the  matter  was  compromised,  that  the 
prayers  in  the  morning  (during  which  Mr.  Johnson  was  in  bed) 
should  be  read  in  the  cabin,  and  the  afternoon  prayers  between 
decks  (the  quarter-deck  being  too  cold) ;  the  fore  hatchway  was 
the  best  place  we  could  find  there,  though  indeed  it  was  very 
dirty  and  very  noisy,  and  so  small  it  would  not  hold  above  a 
quarter  of  our  congregation,  and  so  low  none  of  them  could 
stand  upright.  But  these  and  far  greater  inconveniences  vanish 
away  before  a  desire  to  please  God.] 

Prim  31. — [It  pleased  God  that  the  wind  came  fair,  and]  we 
sailed  out  of  the  Downs.  At  eleven  at  night  I  was  waked  by  a 
great  noise.  I  soon  found  there  was  no  danger.  But  the  bare 
apprehension  of  it  gave  rne  a  lively  conviction  what  manner  of  men 
ought  those  to  be  who  are  every  moment  on  the  brink  of  eternity. 

Nov.  i,  Sat.— We  came  to  St.  Helen's  Harbour,  [off  the  Isle 
of  Wight. 

Copies  therefore  may  have  been  in  the  possession  of  Nitschmann  and  his 
friends  when  they  joined  the  Simmonds.  (2)  Freylinghausen's  Gesang-Buch. 
This  was  published  in  two  parts  :  Geist-reiches  Gesang-Buch,  den  Kern  alter 
undneuer  Lieder  .  .  .  in  sich  haltend,  &c.  (Halle).  Gedruckt  und  verlegt  im 
Waysen-Hause,  1704  (Hamburg),  with  683  hymns  and  173  melodies.  The 
second  part,  Neues  Geist-reiches  Gesang-Buch,  was  published  in  1714.  It 
contained  815  hymns  and  154  melodies  (Julian's  Diet.  Hym.  pp.  768  and 
396).  Possibly  all  these  books  were  on  board  the  Simmonds  ;  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  Wesley  had  access  to  them  in  1736,  when  he  began  to  translate 
German  hymns  for  the  use  of  his  English  Societies.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted 
that  some  of  the  earliest  Methodist  tunes  were  drawn  from  these  sources. 

The  beginning,  however,  of  a  revolution  in  Christian  song  is  not  em- 
phasized at  the  foot  of  the  Diary  page  ;  only  the  'rolling  sea,'  Oglethorpe's 
mood,  and  '  Mr.  Johnson's  anger  at  our  having  prayers.' 

Tues.  28. — He  reads  Deacon  On  Common  Prayer,  spends  four  hours  in 
studying  German,  converses  seriously  with  the  men,  who  are  'affected,' 
buries  James  Proctor,  and  reads  the  Life  of  Gregory  Lopez  (which  he  after- 
wards included  in  the  Christian  Library,  vol.  xxvii.). 

Wed.  29. — His  studies  are  Wall  on  Baptism,  German,  and  the  Life  of 
Lopex  \  the  sea  is  rough,  but  '  Mr.  Johnson  is  kind  ! ' 

Thur.  30. — After  dinner  he  spends  a  quarter  of  an  hour  under  the  deck 
reading  Law  to  many,  who  seem  to  be  affected,  as  are  the  sailors  and  the 
cook,  to  whom  he  speaks  in  the  afternoon. 

Fri.  31. — He  begins  to  read  Law's  Christian  Perfection  to  the  people 
under  the  deck,  and  to  Charles  and  Delamotte  in  their  cabin.  Alarmed 
by  the  great  noise  in  the  night,  he  renews  his  resolutions. 

Nov.  i,  Sat. — He  writes  to  his  mother  and  Mr.  Vernon.  Arriving  safely 
at  St.  Helen's  Harbour,  he  resolves  to  amend,  and  reads  the  resolution  to 
his  brother  and  friends. 


1 1 6  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Nov.  1735. 

{Sun.  2. — We  passed  the  Fleet  at  Spithead,  and  fell  down 
into  Cowes  Road. 


Sun.  2. — He  prays  for  Johnson,  reproves  the  captain,  who  is  convinced, 
preaches,  visits  Captain  Thomas,  and  converses  with  Mrs.  Mackay.1 

In  Cowes  Roads  the  ships  remained  until  December  10,  waiting  for  the 
Hawk)  which  was  being  refitted  for  the  Georgia  survey. 

Mon.  3. — In  the  Diary  the  sign  for  the  four  members  of  the  Holy  Club 
is  '  C — c,'  i.e.  Charles  and  company.  It  recalls  the  phrase  which  so 
frequently  occurs  in  the  Oxford  Diary — *  Our  Company.'  With  C — c  he 
takes  *  a  very  pleasant  walk '  in  the  island.  They  dine  at  Newport,  com- 
mune by  the  way,  write  and  sign  a  solemn  Agreement  (Tyerman's  Oxford 
Methodists^  p.  70)  ;  at  two  they  meet  Oglethorpe,  with  whom  they  converse 
and  sing.  On  the  way  home  they  converse  with  Captain  Thomas,  Wesley 
reading  prayers  and  preaching  on  board  his  ship.  This  was  the  first 
Methodist  society-meeting  held  in  the  Isle  of  Wight. 

Tues.  4. — He  spends  some  time  in  transcribing  names — probably  of 
communicants  and  of  those  needing  pastoral  care.  A  similar  duty  he 
fulfilled  the  day  before  on  board  the  other  ship.  Throughout  life  he 
attached  great  importance  to  the  'number  of  the  names.'  Long  lists 
survive,  neatly  written  with  his  own  hand.  It  was  on  this  day  that  he 
formally  began  'visits.'  The  first  names  on  his  visiting-list  were  '  Hird 
and  family' — staunch  friends  of  the  Wesleys  afterwards  in  Frederica,  and 
also  (in  1736)  friends  of  Miss  Hopkey,  who  lodged  with  them  some  weeks. 
They  deserve  to  stand  first  on  the  roll  of  Colonial  or  American  Methodism. 
Wed.  5. — Oglethorpe,  whose  kindness  to  the  passengers,  and  especially 
to  the  sick,  Ingham  describes  in  his  own  Journal,  talks  with  the  women.  At 
one  Wesley  converses  with  Davison  and  company,  and  at  three  with 
the  Hird  family.  In  Frederica  Davison  and  Hird  were  constables. 
He  read  prayers  and  preached  ;  afterwards,  for  half  an  hour,  he  '  explained 
with  Oglethorpe,'  who,  through  impulsive  kindness,  was  already  being 
drawn  into  difficulty. 

Thur.  6. — A  sermon,  which  has  occupied  an  hour  a  day,  is  transcribed ; 
a  new  book  (Pietas  Hallensis^  by  A.  H.  Francke)  is  begun  with  Charles 
and  company  ;  a  storm  breaks. 

Fri.  7. — He  is  still  working  on  a  sermon,  studying  German,  visiting,  and 
either  reading  or  expounding  to  the  people.  He  has  an  explanation  with 
the  captain,  and  both  Captain  Cornish  and  Mr.  Johnson  come  to  prayers. 

He  had  long  been  in  the  habit  of  writing  sermons,  not  that  he  absolutely 
needed  to  do  so,  for  every  day,  morning  and  afternoon,  he  expounded  ;  but 
in  this  as  in  so  much  else  he  was  led  on,  partly  by  his  own  trained  habits 
of  accuracy  and  method,  and  partly  by  the  unseen  Hand  which  was  pre- 
paring for  the  future.  Peculiar  interest  attaches  to  the  sermons  written 
during  the  voyage,  because  some,  if  not  the  whole  of  them,  were  after- 
wards included  in  the  standard  volumes.  Ingham,  in  his  own  Journal, 

1  In  the  Minutes  of  Council,  C.O.  5,  Mackay,  late  Lieut,  of  H.M.  Service,  in 
690  (April  I,  1737),  is  a  letter  in  which  command  of  the  Hundred  of  Darien 
Oglethorpe  tells  a  fine  story  of  Hugh  (App.  XIV.  vol.  vi.). 


NOV.  1735.1 


The   Voyage  117 


[Sun.  9. — A  gay  young  woman,  who  casually  heard  me 
speaking  to  another  on  the  nature  of  Christianity,  appeared  to  be 
much  surprised  and  affected  ;  but  good  company  soon  restored 
her  to  her  former  gaiety.]  The  wind  was  fair  ;  but  the  man-of- 
war,  which  was  to  convoy  us,  not  being  ready,  obliged  us  to  wait 
for  her.  This  was  a  happy  opportunity  of  building  up  our 
fellow  travellers  [in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  wherein  they 
needed  to  be  instructed  little  less  than  the  savages  of  America.] 
May  He  whose  seed  we  sow  give  it  the  increase  [in  His  good 
time  !] 

Sun.  1 6. — Thomas  Hird,  and  Grace  his  wife,  with  their 
children,  Mark,  aged  twenty-one,  and  Phoebe,  about  seventeen, 
[who  had  been  educated  among  the]  Quakers,  were,  at  their  own 
often-repeated  desire,  and  after  [frequent  and]  careful  instruction, 
[received  into  the  Church  by  Baptism,  whereby  we  gained  four 
more  serious  and  constant  communicants.  Our  custom  had 
hitherto  been,  besides  the  Second  Lesson,  to  explain  part  of  the 


says  that  *  during  the  voyage  Wesley  went  over  our  Saviour's  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,'  thus  laying  the  foundation  for  a  series  of  sermons  which,  at 
a  later  period,  were  published  in  the  'four  volumes.'1 

Sat.  8. — The  day  was  devoted  chiefly  to  sermon  transcription,  exposition, 
and  German. 

Sun.  9.— A  cold,  which  grows  worse,  does  not  greatly  hinder  devotions  ; 
at  eleven  Charles  reads  prayers  and  expounds  ;  at  twelve  Delamotte,  who 
seems  to  have  shared  his  chief's  distemper,  prays  and  sings  for  half  an 
hour,  and  is  *  cured  in  a  moment !  ! '  On  this  day  '  M  H  '  (Mrs.  Hawkins, 
wife  of  a  surgeon  on  board)  speaks  to  him.  She  is  the  '  gay  young  woman  ' 
referred  to  in  the  text,  and  the  mainspring  of  most  of  the  trouble  that  befell 
both  the  Wesleys  and  Oglethorpe  in  Frederica. 

Mon.  io.— He  converses  with  Charles  von  Reck,  who  sailed  with  the 
Saltzburghers  on  board  the  London  Merchant. 

The  instruction  of  the  Hird  family  continues  from  day  to  day,  interrupted, 
however,  by  a  dispute,  which  after  much  talk  Wesley  settles.  Mrs.  Tackner, 
wife  of  his  first  German  tutor,  is  added  to  the  list  of  catechumens.  Fresh 
books  of  theology  or  devotion  are  commenced  by  the  four  friends  in  the 
cabin.  The  Hird  family  are  more  and  more  affected,  and  at  last,  on 

Sun.  1 6,  at  eight  in  the  morning,  Thomas,  Grace,  Mark,  and  Phoebe 
Hird  are  baptized,  Benjamin  Ingham  being  witness. 

1   In  the  edition  of  Wesley's   Works  on  the   Subject  of  Dress';   'Duties  of 

published  in  1771,  the  standard  sermons,  Husbands  and  Wives,'  in  seven  chap- 

fifty-three  in  number,  were   printed  in  ters ;  and  an  '  Extract  from  Mr.  Law's 

four  volumes.     Vol.  iv.    also   contained  Treatise  on  Christian  Perfection,'  in  five 

'  Advice  to  the  people  called  Methodists  chapters. 


1 1 8  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Nov.  1735. 

Common  Prayer  after  service.  But  being  informed  that  some 
of  the  people  were  tired  with  so  much  expounding,  we  proposed 
to  them  fairly  to  leave  it  off.  This  they  utterly  protested 
against,  and  desired  us  to  go  on  as  we  began,  which  I  did  till 
we  came  out  to  sea. 


Mon.  17.— The  Diary  page  is  still  divided  into  columns  according 
to  the  plan  adopted  in  1733-4.  The  need  for  remark  occasionally  over- 
leaps the  column  limitation  ;  otherwise  he  adheres  to  his  system.  Each 
page  ends  with  a  summary,  or  with  notes  of  specially  important  events. 
The  following  list  of  columns  and  their  uses  will  be  of  interest : 

(1)  The  hours  of  the  day. 

(2)  The  ejaculatory  prayer. 

(3)  The  occupation  of  the  hour. 

(4)  Devotional  minutes  ending  each  hour. 

(5)  Matters  personal,  e.g.  health,  mood,  &c. 

(6)  Matters  relating  to  *  our  Company '  or  other  people. 

(7)  General  remarks,  as  for  example,   '  v '  is   'All  well,'  or  a  note  of 
admiration  (!)   is   inserted;    a    cross   (  +  )  indicates   something  sacred   or 
causing  suffering. 

The  attempt  to  interpret  columns  (i),  (2),  (3),  (4)  is  given  without 
hesitation  ;  the  interpretation  of  columns  (5),  (6),  (7)  can  only  be  con- 
jectural ;  it  depends  on  Wesley's  cipher,  and  the  materials  here  for  a 
reliable  induction  are  much  scantier  than  in  Oxford  Diary  No.  I.  The 
following  is  the  interpretation  of  four  lines  under  this  date  (Nov.  17,  see 
opposite) : 

4.  Ej.  Brest,  prayer,  private  prayer  6  min.  sang  ^.  read  with  2 :  at  one :  well 

5.  Ej.  prayer;  Bible  7  ,,       ,,     2       ,, 

6.  Ej.  Wall  on  Baptism  6  no  taste  ,,       ,,     2       ,, 

7.  Ej.  talk  :  £  past,  Wall  5  sang  i 

If  this  interpretation  is  correct,  it  means  that  the  rules  of 'our  Company' 
were  observed  ;  that  at  the  morning  exercises  two  members,  besides  himself, 
were  present ;  that  they  were  in  agreement,  and  '  well ' ;  but  that  he^ 
probably  as  the  result  of  a  severe  influenza,  had  *  no  taste.'  '  6  s  £ '  may 
mean  that  half  the  devotional  6  minutes  he  spent  singing. 

At  ten  he  wrote  to  Clayton  and  Salmon,  and  notes  the  fact  that  he  was 
'  at  one '  with  them.  They  were  indeed,  at  this  time,  of  one  mind.  After 
dinner  he  finished  Collier's  Reasons,  the  book  he  had  been  reading  for  some 
days.  Phoebe  Hird  and  Frank  Brooks  were  the  young  people  for  whose 
spiritual  welfare  he  was  specially  caring.  His  evening  hour  with  the 
Germans  he  marks  with  a  cross.  His  summary  is  interesting.  The  people 
were  well.  The  noteworthy  event  of  the  day  was  that  '  All  the  people  were 
angry  at  my  expounding  so  often.  All  convinced  and  affected.'  The  letters 
'  Lz '  recall  his  first  Diary,  with  its  wellnigh  endless  varieties  of  devout 
ejaculation,  often  in  cipher  or  Greek,  or  both.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  in  this  Diary  '  Lz '  is  cipher  for  Kvpit  ftorjQfi. 

Tues.  18.— In  the  afternoon   'Hird,  Mr.  Williams,  and  his  wife'  are 


2  •? 
4. 

S 


3  e)  r£i 

4  - 


&..  ¥ 

FACSIMILE    PAGE    OF    DIARY,    NOVEMBER    1  7,    1735. 


119 


V 


.*> 


FACSIMILE    OF    THE    SECOND    PAGE    OF    THE    VOYAGE    DIARY    ($<?£    PAGE    III). 


120 


NOV.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  121 


\Wed.  19. — The  man-of-war1  came,  and  the  wind  turned 
against  us.  Between  twelve  and  one  at  night  a  gentleman2  who 
was  disgusted  at  our  occasioning  (as  he  supposed)  his  maid  to 
be  set  on  shore,  who  was  a  known  drunkard,  and  suspected  of 
theft  and  unchastity,  waked  us  by  dancing  over  our  heads ;  but 
he  begged  our  pardon  the  next  day,  and  seemed  convinced  we 
had  done  him  no  wrong.] 

Thur.  20. — We  [left  Cowes,]  fell  down  into  Yarmouth  Road, 
[and  at  four  in  the  afternoon  anchored  ;]  but  the  next  day  were 
forced  back  to  Cowes.  During  our  stay  here  there  were  several 
storms,  in  one  of  which  two  ships  in  Yarmouth  Road  were 
stranded  on  the  island.  The  continuance  of  the  contrary  winds 
gave  my  brother  an  opportunity  of  complying  with  the  desire  of 


named ;  he  conversed  seriously  with  the  three.  Probably  we  have  here 
the  first  mention  of  the  *  Captain  Williams '  who,  some  years  later,  swore 
an  affidavit  in  the  magistrates'  court  at  Bristol.  Its  publication  in  America 
precipitated  the  publication  of  the  *  First  Extract '  of  Wesley's  Journal  (see 
Notes  on  Preface,  p.  85). 

He  again  wrote  to  Mr.  Vernon.  For  evening  reading  he  began  a 
new  book,  Nicodemus ;  ory  a  Treatise  on  the  Fear  of  Man,  written  in 
German  by  August  Herman  Francke  (see  pp.  300-1). 

Thur.  20. — At  six  in  the  morning  Horton  was  *  very  angry,'  the  result 
being  a  talk,  intimately,  with  Oglethorpe.  At  ten  Mr.  Vernon  came.  He 
remained  for  the  day,  and  attended  the  afternoon  exposition.  He  and 
Wesley  sang  and  conversed  seriously  together.  A  letter  dated  '  London, 
1 8  Nov.  1735,'  shows  that  Mr.  Vernon  was  sending  his  son  to  Georgia 
on  board  the  Hawk  (App.  XIII.  vol.  vi.,  Mr.  Vernon's  letter).  From  the 
same  letter  we  learn  that  Mr.  Vernon  was  interesting  himself  in  the 
affairs  of  Wesley's  mother.  He  says,  '  I  shall  continue  my  care  of  what 
relates  to  your  mother's  interest  in  her  husband's  books.'  Wesley  notes 
the  kindness  of  Oglethorpe,  his  openness,  and  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Lawley, 
the  sick  woman  befriended  by  Oglethorpe,  was  'seriously  affected.' 


1  The    man-of-war    was    H.M.   sloop  land     in    Trust     to    William     Horton, 
Hawk,  with  a  crew  of  seventy  men.  Thomas  Hawkins,  William  Weston,  and 

2  The    Diary  enables   us  to    identify  Thomas  Hird  at  Frederica,  to  be  culti- 
this  as  Mr.  Horton,  who  afterwards  was  vated  in  order   to  raise  a  maintenance 
appointed  Magistrate  in  Frederica.     Mr.  for    a    minister    at    Frederica,    and  for 
Horton's  name  frequently  appears  in  the  other   religious  uses.'     All  these  names 
Diary,  and  in  the  official  documents  of  figure  in  Wesley's  Journal — Horton  as  a 
the   Georgia  Trustees.      The  following  soldier,  magistrate,  and  candid  critic  of 
extract   from    the  Minutes  of  Council,  Wesley's  preaching,  Hawkins  as  doctor, 
C.O.   5,   690,  is  of  interest :   '  June  6,  Weston  and  Hird  as  intimate  friends. 
1737.     Read  a  grant   of   300  acres  of 


122  John   We s leys  Journal  [Nov.  1735. 

the  minister  of  Cowes,1  and  preaching  there  three  or  four  times. 
The  poor  people  flocked  together  in  great  numbers,  and  appeared 
extremely  affected.  We  distributed  a  few  little  books  among 
the  more  serious  of  them,  which  they  received  with  all  possible 
expressions  of  thankfulness. 

Fri.  21. — [I  visited  Mrs.  Lawley]  recovering  from  a 
dangerous  illness.  She  [had  a  long  time]  desired  to  receive  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  to  be  instructed  in  the  nature  of  it.  I 
thought  it  concerned  her  to  be  first  instructed  in  the  nature  of 
Christianity,  and  accordingly  fixed  an  hour  a  day  to  read  with 
her  in  Mr.  Law's  treatise  on  Christian  Perfection.  [She  received 
it  with  gladness,  and  seemed  every  day  more  earnest  to  pursue 
the  one  thing  needful.] 

\_Sat.  22. — Many  persons  having  endeavoured  to  sow  dis- 
sension between  us  and  Mr.  Horton  (whose  maid  was  mentioned 
before)  by  representing  us  as  dissemblers,  backbiters,  incendiaries, 
and  what  not,  I  came  to  an  understanding  with  him,  wherewith 
he  was  at  the  present,  blessed  be  God,  fully  satisfied.] 

Sun.  23. — [We  had  twelve  communicants.]     At  night  I  was 

Fri.  21.— He  wrote  to  Mr.  T.  Delamotte,  the  father  of  Charles. 

Sat.  22. — His  cold  is  '  almost  gone.'  He  spends  a  morning  with  Charles 
and  Delamotte  in  Cowes,  taking  the  Life  of  Lopez  to  read  as  they  walk. 
They  go  to  Carisbrooke  Castle.  At  Farmer's,  where  he  prays,  converses, 
and  reads  Lopez,  *  they  are  affected.'  At  Cowes,  where  also  he  reads  Lopez, 
many  hear  and  are  affected.  He  dines  at  Cowes,  and  immediately  on  his 
return  begins  a  course  of  readings  in  Law  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lawley. 
His  notes  on  the  day  are  cheerful :  '  The  women  at  Carisbrooke  ;  at  Cowes  ; 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lawley  ;  Hird  and  Phoebe  affected  ;  Horton  open,  friendly.' 

Sun.  23. — His  cold  is  better.  He  begins  a  devotional  book  which,  during 
many  months,  influenced  him  and  others  powerfully.  It  has  left  its  mark 
on  the  hymns  of  the  Wesleys.  For  a  time  Hickes's  Reformed  Devotions 
almost  took  the  place  of  Kempis  and  the  Psalter.2  Some  of  its  hymns  were 
sung  in  the  societies  (the  earliest  Methodist  societies)  of  Frederica  and 

1  Cowes  was  in  the  parish  of  Caris-  •  minister  of  Cowes '  was  the  rector,  who 

brooke,  where  the  rector  lived.     In  1735  at  the  time  was  in  sole  charge — Rev.  Dr. 

the  'minister  of  Cowes'  was  the  Rev.  Thomas  Tronghear   (1722-61),  vicar    of 

Cadwallader  Williams,    who,    however,  Carisbrooke  and  rector  of  Northwood. 

is    said    to    have   died  in   February  of  This  would  account  for  the   two  visits 

that  year.     A  successor  does  not  seem  paid  by  the  Wesleys  to  Carisbrooke. 
to  have  been  appointed  before  the  time          *  In  1755  Wesley  included  a  revised 

of  Charles  Wesley's  visit,  or  if  appointed  and  shortened  form  of  this  book  in  his 

his  name  does  not  appear  in  the  parish  Christian  Library.     See  Green's  Biblio- 

records.      It  is  quite  possible  that  the  graphy,  p.  93  ;  W.M.  Mag.,  1908,  p.  791. 


Nov.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  123 


awaked  by  the  tossing  of  the  ship  and  roaring  of  the  wind, 
and  plainly  showed  I  was  unfit,  for  I  was  unwilling,  to  die. 

Savannah.  Immediately  following  the  Hickes  note  he  writes,  *  Drest  (i.e. 
robed  for  public  prayers),  talked  with  Delamotte  ;  at  seven-forty  sung.' 
What  did  they  sing  ?  Was  it  one  of  Austin's  hymns  ?  or  one  of  Watts's 
(he  undoubtedly  had  Watts's  Psalms  and  Hymns  with  him  in  Georgia, 
for  he  selected  ten  of  them  to  take  the  first  place  in  the  hymn-book  he 
printed  in  Charlestown)  ?  or  one  from  the  Gesang-Buch  he  was  now 
beginning  to  use  in  his  evening  visits  to  the  Germans?  The  next  line 
in  the  Diary  may  throw  a  ray  of  light  on  this  interesting  question:  *8 
recappshsci234ptb  x';  the  marks  above  the  letters  assist  the  interpreta- 
tion, which  probably  is  as  follows  :  *  Read  chapter  appointed,  prayer,  sang 
hymn,  said  Creed,  Collects  I,  2,  3,  4,  Tate  and  Brady,  expounded.'  In  other 
words  :  at  eight  o'clock  on  the  25th  Sunday  after  Trinity,  Wesley,  robed  in 
his  surplice,1  stood  between  decks,  the  ship  lying  in  Cowes  Harbour,  and 
read  the  chapters  appointed — Prov.  xiii.  and  John  xv.  He  prayed,  sang 
the  hymn  he  and  Delamotte  had  sung  together  an  hour  before,  said  the 
Creed  and  four  Collects, — Lord's  Prayer,  Collect  for  the  day,  for  Peace, 
for  Grace, — sang  from  the  New  Version,  and  expounded  the  Second 
Lesson — '  I  am  the  true  Vine.1  How  often  in  later  years,  when  he  expounded 
the  same  verses  in  the  New  Room  at  Bristol,  in  the  Foundery,  or  in  the 
Orphan  House,  did  he  recall  that  Sunday  morning  in  Cowes  Harbour  ! 
The  Gospel  and  Epistles  of  St.  John  were  favourite  subjects  for  exposition 
at  Wesley's  early  morning  society  worship.  He  may  not  have  realized  it 
at  the  time,  but  in  that  little  shipboard  parish  there  had  sprung  up  a  branch 
of  the  true  Vine — the  firstfruits  of  the  Methodist  harvest.  After  prayers 
he  had  serious  conversation  with  some  of  the  young  people  whom  he  was 
gently  leading — Mark  and  Phoebe  Hird  and  Betty  Hazle.  At  eleven  he  read 
prayers,  and,  as  a  help  to  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion,  *  intoned.'  If  we 
would  read  the  story  of  this  memorable  Sunday  morning  aright,  we  should 
read  the  Psalms  for  the  morning,  the  Lessons,  the  Collect,  the  Gospel,  and 
Epistle.  At  the  Eucharist  there  were  twelve  communicants.  He  gives  the 
names  in  his  Diary — *  Thomas,  Grace,  Mark,  Phoebe  Hird,  Mr.  Tackner  and 
Betty  (his  wife),  Burk  and  West.'  If  we  add  to  these  Charles  Wesley, 
Delamotte,  Benjamin  Ingham,  and  himself,  the  number  is  complete.  It 
was  a  morning  of  triumph,  for  they  were  all  the  converts  of  his  ministry — 
a  triumph  followed,  however,  by  trouble  and  humiliation.  At  one  he  *  fell ' 
on  his  '  head ' ;  Oglethorpe  was  *  very  ill ' ;  and  a  storm  filled  him  with  a 
terror  of  death  of  which  he  was  ashamed. 

Mon.  24. — He  has  a  long  and  serious  conversation  with  Mr.  Horton, 
who  in  the  colony  will  have  great  influence,  and  must,  if  possible,  be  won  ; 
writes  again  to  T.  Delamotte,  not  a  hasty  note,  but  an  hour-and-a-half  letter  ; 
he  was  responsible  for  Charles  Delamotte  ;  William  was  at  Cambridge,  and 
the  mother  and  her  daughters  were  at  home  in  Kent  waiting  to  be  drawn 
into  '  our  Company.'  Wesley  even  now  wasted  no  opportunity. 


1  In  City  Road   Chapel   he  wore   his  surplice  when   reading  prayers.    (Homes, 
Haunts  t  and  Friends  of  John   Wesley  >  p.   149.) 


John   Wesley  s  Journal  [free.  17*6. 


\Fri.  28.  —  Mrs.  Hawkins,  the  gay  young  woman  mentioned 
before,  was  at  Mrs.  Lawley's  cabin  when  I  read  Mr.  Law,  as  she 
afterwards  was  several  times.  She  was  always  attentive  and 
often  much  amazed. 

[Sun.  30.  —  It  pleased  God  to  visit  her  with  sickness.  I  then 
began  to  hope  He  would  perfect  His  work  in  her.  During  this 
whole  time  Mr.  Johnson  was  more  and  more  impatient  of  the 
contrary  winds  ;  and  at  last,  on  Monday  ',  DECEMBER  I,  despairing, 

He  studies  German,  talks  with  Mrs.  Tackner,  who,  after  conversation  with 
Inghajn,  &c.  'resolves  to  stand'  ;  after  dinner  he  reads  Law  to  Mr.  Lawley, 
and  prays  with  Oglethorpe,  who,  still  sick,  sends  for  him.  The  books  read 
privately  or  publicly  during  these  days  are  Wall  On  Baptism,  Nicodemus, 
Law's  Christian  Perfection,  Johnson's  Unbloody  Sacrifice,  and  the  Life  of 
Gregory  Lopez. 

Tues.  25.  —  Hitherto  Charles  Wesley  dined  alone  with  Oglethorpe,  whose 
secretary  he  was.  On  this  day  John  Wesley  resolves  in  future  to  dine  with 
Charles  at  Oglethorpe's  table.  Much  of  the  inner  anxiety  of  the  prolonged 
voyage  arose  from  Oglethorpe's  friendliness  to  Wesley,  and  also  his  excep- 
tional kindness  to  sick  and  hysterical  women.  Wesley  strove,  faithfully  and 
without  partiality,  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  friend  an,d  pastor  towards  his  chief  and 
all  others.  He  rejoices  that  Oglethorpe  is  '  open.'  The  women,  under  heavy 
and  repeated  courses  of  Law,  Lopez,  and  serious  conversation,  are'  affected.' 

Wed.  26.  —  One  of  Wesley's  peculiarities  was  the  importance  he  attached 
to  small  and  apparently  trifling  incidents.  He  treated  as  signs  things  which 
others  would  have  passed  by  without  notice.  To-day  he  was  reading  Law, 
when  a  child  cried.  The  voice  that,  long  afterwards,  stilled  tempestuous 
mobs,  soothed  the  little  one  into  silence.  Twice  on  the  page  he  notes  the 
curious  fact. 

Thur.  27.  —  A  day  without  event.  Johnson,  Law,  Nicodemus,  and  Lopez 
almost  monopolize  the  page,  though  prayer,  Bible-reading,  and  exposition 
fill  their  accustomed  places. 

Fri.  28.  —  From  this  day  forward  Mrs.  Hawkins,  the  surgeon's  wife, 
figures  in  the  story  more  and  more  prominently.  Nor  is  it  possible  to 
form  a  just  estimate  of  all  that  happened,  unless,  however  reluctantly,  we 
follow  closely  the  course  of  those  events  in  which  she,  Mrs.  Welch,  Mrs. 
Lawley,  and  Mr.  Oglethorpe  played  a  part. 

Already,  in  some  unexplained  way,  his  chief  had  incurred  Wesley's 
displeasure.  A  line  in  the  day's  summary  reads,  *  Reproved  Oglethorpe  ; 
he  open.' 

Sat.  29.  —  He  was  reading  Nicodemus  with  his  three  friends  when  Ogle- 
thorpe came.  On  the  interview  with  him  the  note,  repeated  at  the  foot 
of  the  page,  is,  *  Got  no  good.'  He  also  remarks,  *  Ingham  zealous,'  a 
characteristic  that  Benjamin  Ingham  never  lost. 

Sun.  30.—  For  this  day  Hickes,  Bishop  Patrick,  and  Kempis  were  the 
devotional  books  in  use.  At  five  in  the  evening  'Oglethorpe  talked  with 
the  women,'  and  Wesley  'prayed.' 


Dec.  1735.]  The   Voyage 


as  he  said,  of  their  ever  being  fair  while  he  stayed  in  the  ship,  he 
left  it  and  took  boat  for  Portsmouth  in  order  to  return  to  London. 
In  the  afternoon  we  held  public  prayer  in  the  great  cabin,  one 
of  the  many  blessings  consequent  on  his  leaving  us.] 

Tues.  2. — I  had  much  satisfaction  in  conversing  with 
[Mrs.  Moore,  one  of  Mr.  Oglethorpe's  servants,]  that  was  very 
ill  and  very  serious.  [She  desired  me  to  read  some  treatise  I 
judged  proper  with  her,  which  I  gladly  promised  to  do  every  day. 
I  began  with  Mr.  Norris  on  Christian  Prudence  ;  but  we  never 
came  to  the  end  of  it,  for]  in  a  few  days  she  recovered  from  her 
sickness  and  her  seriousness  together. 

[By  our  stay  at  Cowes  we  gained  two  new  passengers,  both 
serious,  conscientious  men. 

[  Wed.  3. — I  read  the  Second  Spira l  to  one  of  them  (Mr.  Reed), 
Mrs.  Hawkins,  and  her  husband.  They  were  all  affected  for 
the  present.  God  grant  it  may  sink  into  their  hearts  ! 

DEC.  i,  Mon. — The  only  event  recorded  is  the  acquisition  of  the  great 
cabin  for  evening  prayers. 

Tues.  2. — Several  additions  are  made  to  the  list  of  persons  willing  to  hear 
readings  and  exhortations.  One  of  these  the  Journal  helps  us  to  identify 
as  Mr.  Reed  ;  the  other  the  Diary,  for  December  3,  seems  to  indicate  as 
James  Billinghurst,  with  whom  he  *  began '  after  prayers  on  Wednesday 
morning.  Arthur,  named  both  on  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  as  '  open,'  may 
have  been  *  Daniel  Arthur,  17,'  who  in  Wesley's  list  of  passengers  (Clarke's 
Wesley  Family,  vol.  ii.  pp.  175-7),  is  berthed  with  'John  Brownfield,  21 '  ;  or 
'  Arthur  Johnson,'  whose  name  occurs  in  the  Georgia  Letters  in  connexion 
with  'An  Account  of  the  Death  of  our  Good  Governor,  Mr.  Johnson'  (see 
Record  Office  Correspondence,  C.O.  5.)  But  whoever  he  may  have  been, 
Wesley  fastened  upon  him,  as  he  invariably  did  upon  every  person,  high  or 
low,  to  whom  he  could  speak  a  word  in  season,  and  to  the  end  of  the  voyage 
he  cared  for  him  sedulously. 

Concerning  Mr.  Reed  there  is  no  uncertainty.  His  name  must  be 
remembered,  for  he  will  reappear  in  the  tragic  story  of  Frederica — a 
courageous  friend  during  days  of  rebuke  and  peril,  and,  as  far  as  we  can  now 
ascertain,  the  first  lay  pastor  in  American  Methodism. 

Mrs.  Patterson,  with  whom  also  he  now  *  began,'  is  frequently  named  in 
the  Frederica  story.  Also  *  Robert  Patterson,  31,'  her  husband.  She  seems 
to  have  been  a  Roman  Catholic,  or  to  have  had  leanings  that  way.  At  all 
events,  Wesley  thought  it  desirable,  after  Law  and  serious  conversation,  to 
read  to  her  a  'tract  against  Popery,'  under  which  she  was  'seriously 
convinced.' 

Thur.  4.— After  prayers  he  'began  with  Jemmy  Welch.'    The  list  gives 
'  John  Welch,  30  ;  Ann,  his  wife,  26 ;  James,  his  son,  5  ;  John,  his  son,  3 
1  See  Wesley's  Veterans  (John  Haime),  vol.  i.  p.  47. 


126  John   Wes leys  Journal  [Deo.  1736. 

\_Sat.  6. — Alexander  Craig,1  the  second  mate,  an  oppressive, 
insolent,  turbulent  man,  who  had  before  insulted  and  abused 
many  of  the  passengers,  affronted  Mr.  Oglethorpe  himself  to 
his  face.  The  next  day  he  was  removed  before  the  mast  to  the 
man-of-war.  Praised  be  God  for  the  deliverance  of  the  poor 
people  from  an  unrighteous  and  wicked  man  !] 

Sun.  7. — [We  had  fourteen  communicants.]  Finding  nature 
did  not  require  so  frequent  supplies  as  we  had  been  accustomed 
to,  we  agreed  to  leave  off  suppers 2 ;  from  doing  which  we  have 
hitherto  found  no  inconvenience.  [John  Spurrell,  a  sailor 
belonging  to  the  ship,  began  now  to  recover  from  an  illness  in 
which  his  life  was  despaired  of.  My  brother  attended  him 
every  day.  His  resolutions  were  a  little  shaken  at  first  by  the 
raillery  of  his  companions,  till  it  pleased  God  to  touch  the  heart 
of  one  of  them  too,  who  has  ever  since  gone  on  with  him  hand 
in  hand.] 

It  will  be  of  some  interest  to  remember  that  another  'Jemmy,'  whom  we 
may  identify  as  James  Billinghurst,  and  who  is  often  named  in  connexion 
with  boat  voyages  subsequently,  became  one  of  Wesley's  favourite  pupils. 
Was  he  in  charge  of  the  boat  that  took  the  brothers  ashore  ?  They  must 
again  have  walked  towards  Carisbrooke,  for  they  dined  at  Farmer's,  afterwards 
conversing  at  Mr.  Wendover's.  During  this  journey  he  read  the  Answer 
to  the  Plausibility  Arguments. 

Fri.  5. — To  interpret  two  notes  on  this  day's  page  it  would  be  necessary 
to  study  Johnson's  Unbloody  Sacrifice,  one  portion  of  which,  relating  to  the 
*  Father,'  two  of  the  friends  heard  Wesley  read  thrice  before  they  were  clear 
as  to  the  teaching.  Both  as  learner  and  teacher  Wesley  was  thorough. 

With  James  Billinghurst  and  Jemmy  Welch  he  began  ''Conversations] 
the  day  following  writing  them  out. 

Mon.  8. —  His  preparation  for  the  morning  exposition  is  the  reading  of 
the  Greek  Testament ;  he  is  still  writing  the  Conversations  with  J.  B.  and 
J.  W.  According  to  the  Diary  it  was  on  this  day  he  began  to  read  Norris's 
Christian  Prudence  to  Mrs.  Moore.  Little  wonder  that  an  hour  and  three- 
quarters  of  such  reading  proved  distasteful  to  an  uneducated  servant  woman. 

Oglethorpe  sent  for  him ;  he  had  an  interview,  first,  with  Vernon, 
afterwards  with  Oglethorpe  and  Lawley. 

Tues.  9.— Their  last  day  in  Cowes  Harbour.  After  prayers  and  exposi- 
tion he  spent  three-quarters  of  an  hour  with  Oglethorpe  '  within,'  in  which 

1  The  note  in  the  Diary  is  '  Craig  beat  Wesley  Family  neither    of  these  names 

by  Oglethorpe.'     See  the  Gascoigne  Cor-  appears.        But    we    find    Samuel    and 

respondence,  App.  XIII.  vol.  vi.     New  Catherine  Parkins. 

names     are     added     to    his     list— Mrs.  2  In   Georgia   Ingham   continued   the 

Perkins  and  Mrs.  Lambert.     In  the  list  habit  :   the   Wesleys,    he   says,  resumed 

of  passengers   given   by   Clarke   in    his  suppers. 


Dec.  1735.] 


The   Voyage  127 


Wed.  10.— [About  eight  in  the  morning]  we  sailed  from 
Cowes,  and  [at  three]  in  the  afternoon  passed  the  Needles.  Here 
the  ragged  rocks,  with  the  waves  dashing  and  foaming  at  the 
foot  of  them,  and  the  white  side  of  the  island  rising  to  such  a 

connexion  'Weston'  is  named  for  the  first  time.  In  Frederica  Wesley 
married  Weston  to  Miss  Fosset,  Sophy  Hopkey's  chief  friend. 

A  comparison  of  notes  on  several  days  in  this  month  shows  that  the 
written  Conversations  with  James  Billinghurst  and  Jemmy  Welch  grew  into 
a  *  catechism.3  This  throws  light  on  Wesley's  methods  of  instruction  at  this 
time,  which,  always  systematic  and  thorough,  were  often  catechetical. 

At  the  foot  of  this  Diary  page  he  writes  : 

'N.B.— No  Hourly  Prayer  like  Ejaculations  ! ' 

The  note  explains  two  signs  in  this  and  an  earlier  diary.  Each  hour 
opens  with  the  letter  *  e,'  and  closes  with  a  numeral,  6,  5,  or  7.  The  letter 

*  e  '   stands   for  Ejaculation  ;   the  numeral  for  minutes  spent  in  devotion. 
4  Our   Company,'  acting  as   a  religious   society,   or  club,  with  rules,   had 
instituted  a  scheme  of  devotions.     On  the  evidence  of  the  Diaries  it  came 
into  force  January  27,  1734,  when  the  sign  'e'  and  the  numeral  '6'   first 
appear  on  the  page  in  ruled  columns.     On  December  9,  1735,  f°r  one  day 
and  a  half,   the   '  e '   is  omitted,    and   the   numeral   alone   survives.     On 
December  lothe  ejaculation  is  resumed,  and  continues  until  January  27,  1736, 
when   it  finally  disappears  ;   but   to   the  end  of  the   Georgia  Diary   the 
6,  5,  or  7  minutes  spent  in  prayer  at  the  close  of  each  hour  continues.     All 
such  matters  were  considered  by  the  Society  in  council  ;  the  vote  of  the 
majority  was  binding  on  all.     The  '  Agreement '  signed  at  Cowes  provided — 

*  First :  That  none  of  us  will  undertake  anything  of  importance  without  first 
proposing  it  to  the  other  three.     Second :  That  whenever  our  judgements 
or  inclinations  differ,  any  one  shall  give  up  his  single  judgement  or  inclination 
to  the  others.      Third :  That  in  case  of  an  equality,  after  begging  God's 
direction,  the  matter  shall  be  decided  by  lot.'     In  this  case  the  majority  pre- 
vailed against  Wesley  for  one  day  and  a  half.     Then  for  nearly  two  months 
he  prevailed.     Eventually,  however,  he  acquiesced,  and  the  hourly  ejacula- 
tion ceased.     In  the  eighteenth  century  the  habit  of  devout  ejaculations  was 
common  among  English  mystics.    Books  of  pious  ejaculations  were  published. 
It  is  said  that  the  late  General  Gordon  thus  worshipped.     The  first  Oxford 
Diary  proves  that  Wesley  adopted  the  habit  long  before  the  formation  of  the 
Holy  Club.     In  all  his  examination  work,  whether  for  ordination  or  degree  or 
fellowship,  he  used  it  freely,  sometimes  profusely.     Afterwards  it  faded  away. 
But  as  the  Holy  Club  became  more  and  more  highly  organized,  it  revived  in 
greater  force  than  ever.     This  note  proves  that  he  was  reluctant  to  abandon 
it,  esteeming  it  as  of  more  value  than  the  hourly  prayer. 

Wed.  10. — The  sailing  was  delayed  by  alterations  on  board  the  Hawk, 
fitting  her  for  the  survey  of  the  coast  of  Georgia.  After  the  man-of-war's 
arrival  contrary  winds  compelled  further  delay.  Ingham,  in  his  own  journal, 
says  that  at  the  last  moment  a  still  further  delay  occurred.  Two  gentlemen, 
passengers  on  the  London  Merchant,  were  left  behind  in  Portsmouth,  where 
they  had  gone  the  night  before.  The  ships  waited  for  them  two  hours  ; 

VOL.  I.  7 


128  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Dec.  1735. 

height,  perpendicular  from  the  beach,  gave  a  strong  idea  of  Him 
that  spanneth  the  heavens,  and  holdeth  the  waters  in  the  hollow 
of  His  hand ! 

To-day  I  spoke  closely  on  the  head  of  religion  to  one, 
[Mrs.  Hawkins,]  I  had  talked  with  once  or  twice  before.  [She 
listened  with  great  attention,  and  answered  readily  to  all  the 
questions  I  proposed,  and  afterwards  said,  with  many  tears, 
'  My  mother  died  when  I  was  but  ten  years  old.  Some  of  her 
last  words  were,  "  Child,  fear  God  ;  and  though  you  lose  me,  you 


'  but  they  not  coming,  we  made  the  best  of  our  way,  running  about  seven 
and  eight  miles  an  hour.' 

Wesley  himself  evidently  regarded  this,  for  several  reasons,  as  a 
momentous  day  in  his  life.  The  page  in  his  Diary  is  so  full,  clearly  written, 
characteristic,  and  easy  of  interpretation  that  it  is  here  reproduced,  with 
the  following  transliteration. 

December  10,  Wednesday,  1735. 

4  Ej  drest,  prayer  4.50  :  prayer,  sung  6  Serm  on  Mt  at  Ch.  5.  read  2  pres  at  one. 

5  Ej  prayer,  Bible  7  2  chs  with  2 

6  Ej  prayer,  Johnson's  Unbloody  Sacrifice  6  at  6  ch  v  i  2,  at  one,  with  2 

7  Ej  talk,  Lopez,  Greek  Test.  6  sang  \  at  6-1  equal  2,  at  one 

8  Ej  read  prayers,  sat  with  W.  Wn.  55^,  at  one  sailed  ! 

9  Ej  with  Jemmy  Welch,  Catechism,  6  at  one  with  2 

10  Ej  Catechism  6  at  one 

1 1  Ej  Mrs  Hawkins  and  Mrs  Lambert,  6  they  much  affected  ;      with  2     ! 

12  Ej  Law  ;  sat  [reflecting]  6 

1  Ej  Norris  to  Mrs  Moor  6 

2  Ej  Sitting  with  Ingham,  Oglethorpe  5  sang  ^and  company     prayer 

3  Ej  Dinner  ;  sat  with  Oglethorpe  equal    at  one 

4  Read  prayers ;  expounded  6  et  cetera 

5  Ej  Oglethorpe  opened  himself  pray  7  prayer  2    —       ! 

6  Ej  with  Mrs  Lambert  and  Hawkins  sat,  Law.    6  She  in  tears 

7  With  Germans  6 

8  With  Oglethorpe ;  he  open  !  O  God  !  6 

9  Sat  with  Oglethorpe,  20  past  9  undrest ;  10,  asleep  :  not  sick  ! 


Personal  [or  Public.]    Sailed  from  Cowes      G[od] 

Not  sick  Kvpte  /3or?0ei. 

Mrs  Lambert  much  affected. 
Mrs  Hawkins  twice  in  tears. 
Oglethorpe  opened  his  heart.  O  God  ! 

Thus  from  four  in  the  morning  till  ten  at  night  he  spends  the  first  day 
of  his  voyage  to  America.  For  nearly  two  months  he  had  been  delayed  on 
board  this  emigrant-ship.  But  the  time  had  been  well  spent.  He  had  won 
several  converts,  some  of  whom  were  afterwards  of  service  to  himself  and 
the  colony  ;  he  had  learned  German  enough  to  sing  and  pray  with  the 
Moravians,  using  both  hymns  and  tunes  from  their  Gesang-Buch  in  his  own 


£  fi/J-  <£-. 
£*jia 


jo  e 


/$.  e-*/%st>  rf— 


c/2».x 


FACSIMILE    OF    DIARY,    DECEMBER    IO,    1735. 


129 


re 
fr 


>/ 


f  /^      J  *-** 


-    A 


FACSIMILE    OF    DIARY,    JANUARY    25,    1736    (S00    PAGE    141). 


I30 


Dec.  1735.]  The   Voyage  131 

shall  never  want  a  friend."  I  have  now  found  a  friend  when  I 
most  wanted  and  least  expected  one.' 

From  this  day  to  the  fourteenth,  being  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay, 
the  sea  was  very  rough.  Mr.  Delamotte  and  many  others  were 
more  sick  than  ever  ;  Mr.  Ingham,  a  little  ;  I,  not  at  all.  But 
the  fourteenth  being  a  calm  day,  most  of  the  sick  were  cured 
at  once. 

English  worship  ;  he  had  obtained  an  extraordinary  influence  over  Oglethorpe 
— an  influence  which  at  a  later  period  saved  a  great  philanthropist  soldier 
from  disaster,  if  not  from  disgrace,  and  prevented  the  ruin  of  the  colony. 

The  days  between  the  tenth  and  fourteenth,  as  recorded  in  the  Diary, 
are  filled,  as  far  as  the  weather  and  the  health  of  the  '  parish  '  will  permit, 
with  the  usual  occupations.  He  cannot  always  read  prayers,  but  he  visits 
all  the  more  diligently.  He  can  no  longer  study  German,  but  he  ends  the 
Life  of  Lopez,  and  at  their  proper  times  reads  the  Bible,  Law,  and  Johnson. 
Pastoral  anxieties  relate  chiefly  to  Oglethorpe,  who  is  'quite  open  and 
nearly  ready  to  communicate,3  to  Mrs.  Moore,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins, 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reed,  and  Mrs.  Welch,  who  apparently  was  dying.  By  eight 
on  Thursday  the  nth,  they  are  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  where  the  sea  is  *  rough,' 
and  on  the  twelfth  *  very  rough ' ;  but  even  off  Cape  Finisterre  he  is  *  quite 
well '  and  able  to  fulfil  his  tale  of  prayers,  readings,  and  pastoral  duties. 

Sun.  14. — It  was  a  dead  calm  ;  Wesley  preached  and  administered  the 
Eucharist.  Between  five  and  six  he  read  a  sermon  to  Mrs.  Hawkins  and 
her  friends,  who  were  '  affected.'  On  the  quarter-deck  he  prayed,  and  sang 
and  conversed  with  Oglethorpe,  ending  a  pleasant  day  with  the  Germans, 
and,  last  of  all,  with  Charles  and  Ingham.  His  most  important  note  on 
the  day  is,  '  Oglethorpe  quite  open,  but  deferred  Communion.' 

Mon.  15. — Again  the  weather  was  rough.  The  midday  notes  hint  at 
something  amiss,  in  which  Delamotte  is  concerned.  John  Wesley  talks 
seriously  with  Charles  and  company  ;  *  Delamotte  is  open.'  Nothing  more 
is  revealed  until  eight  in  the  evening,  when  this  note  appears  :  *  Sat  with 
Ingham  and  Charles  ;  Law  ;  all  angry  at  f .'  We  do  not  know  the  meaning  -t 
but  the  spiritual  atmosphere  was  charged  with  the  possibility  of  dispute  and 
confusion.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  These  Diary  pages,  apart  alto- 
gether from  the  interpretation  of  their  mysterious  signs  and  symbols,  indicate 
tension.  And  no  relief  is  permitted.  There  is  no  trace  of  recreation,  or 
even  of  changed  occupation,  breaking  the  monotony  of  this  exalted  and 
unhuman  rule  of  holy  living.  The  marvel  is  that  the  four  friends  and 
Oglethorpe  and  the  new  communicants  were  to  so  great  an  extent  *  at  one.' 
The  fractional  sign  ?  probably  means  Member,  No.  6,  of  No.  i  group — that 
is  to  say,  of  the  Holy  Club.  But  who  was  No.  6  ?  No.  5  may  have  been 
Oglethorpe.  If  so,  was  No.  6  Arthur  ? 

His  last  note  for  the  day  is — 'Storm.     Quite  well.     Slept  sound!' 

Tues.  1 6. — The  storm  continued,  preventing  public  worship,  but  not 
preventing  Wesley  from  writing  for  three  hours,  from  nine  till  twelve,  on 
the  Eucharist. 


1 3  2  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Dec.  1735. 

Thur.  1 8. — One  [Mrs.  Welch,  who  was  believed  to  be  at  the 
point  of  death],  being  big  with  child,  in  a  high  fever,  and  almost 
wasted  away  with  a  violent  cough,  [was  by  Mr.  Oglethorpe 
removed  into  his  own  cabin,  he  ordering  a  hammock  to  be 
hung  up  for  himself.  She  earnestly]  desired  to  receive  the 
Holy  Communion  before  she  died.  At  the  hour  of  her  receiving 
she  began  to  recover,  and  in  a  few  days  was  entirely  out  of 
danger,  [and  is  now  in  good  hope  of  a  safe  delivery]. 

Sun.  21. — We  had  fifteen  communicants,  which  was  our 
usual  number  on  Sundays.  On  Christmas  Day  we  had 
nineteen. 


Thur.  1 8. — Most  of  the  day  he  spends  with  Oglethorpe,  for  whom  he 
cared  with  ceaseless  vigilance,  and  for  whom  he  afterwards  worked  as 
though  he  had  been  his  private  secretary.  In  Oglethorpe's  cabin  lay 
Mrs.  Welch  '  at  the  point  of  death.'  Wesley  administered  Holy  Communion, 
and  afterwards  read  Psalms  to  Oglethorpe  and  left  him  to  read  them 
himself. 

Fri.  19. — In  his  early  morning  devotions  he  is  sleepy  and  'very  hungry.' 
It  was  the  fast-day  of  '  our  Company '  !  So  at  five  o'clock  he  braced 
himself — reading  the  Resolutions,  and  praying.  At  eight  he  began  a 
visitation  of  the  people,  which  he  finished  at  ten.  Then  he  '  prepared  '  for 
the  sick,  and  whilst  the  gruel  was  boiling  read,  in  the  intervals  of  his  work, 
Johnson's  Unbloody  Sacrifice.  Next  he  '  prepared '  for  the  Germans,  and, 
whilst  others  cared  for  the  English,  distributed  to  his  sick  Moravian  friends 
the  hot  soothing  gruel  he  himself  had  made.  His  note  on  the  day  is, 
'  In  four  hours  got  gruel  for  the  people.  Resolution  on  more  serious 
devotion.' 

Sat.  20.— A  calm  followed  the  storm,  and  *  all  were  better.'  He  himself 
in  the  early  morning  was  '  tired  and  hungry.'  He  overslept  himself  half  an 
hour.  But  he  went  through  the  allotted  prayers  and  readings.  After  the 
eight  o'clock  service  he  dressed  and  went  with  Oglethorpe  on  board  Captain 
Thomas's  ship  (he  invariably  calls  it  by  the  name  of  its  captain).  At  ten- 
thirty  he  returned,  reading  Johnson  in  the  boat  and  afterwards  to  his  friends 
the  Hirds. 

Sun.  2i.— It  was  Oglethorpe's  birthday.  At  Holy  Communion  the  chief 
was  present.  In  the  Diary  Wesley  gives  no  hint  of  birthday  festivities.  In 
the  Journal  he  only  refers  to  the  number  of  communicants.  It  is  Ingham 
who  informs  us  that  Oglethorpe  gave  a  sheep  and  wine  to  the  people, 
'  which,  with  the  smoothness  of  the  sea  and  the  serenity  of  the  weather,  so 
enlivened  them  that  they  perfectly  recovered  from  their  sea-sickness.' 

Mon.  22. — One  of  the  persons  who  benefited  from  the  serene  weather, 
and,  as  Wesley  believed,  from  the  Sacrament  he  had  administered  when 
she  was  believed  to  be  in  extremis,  was  Mrs.  Welch.  He  visited  her  every 
day.  Sometimes  when  he  prayed  with  the  sick  woman  Mrs.  Hawkins 
was  present :  to-day  Oglethorpe  and  company  were  in  the  cabin  during 


Dec.  1735.] 


The   Voyage  133 


[Sat.  27. — I  endeavoured  to  reconcile  Mrs.  Moore  and  Mrs. 
Lavvley  with  Mrs.  Hawkins,  with  whom  they  had  had  a  sharp 
quarrel.  I  thought  it  was  effected  ;  but  the  next  day  showed 
the  contrary,  both  Mrs.  Moore,  Mrs.  Lawley,  and  their  husbands 
being  so  angry  at  me,  that  they  resolved  (and  prevailed  on  some 
others  to  do  the  same)  never  to  be  at  prayers  more. 

devotions,  and  they  all  were  '  much  affected.'  The  association  of  these 
persons  on  shipboard  must  be  remembered  ;  also  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Lawley 
and  Mrs.  Moore  were  never  far  away.  The  mysterious  'Arthur '  reappears. 
Wesley  had  serious  conversation  with  him  and  his  friends. 

Tues.  23. — At  noon  he  began  to  read  *  Brevint  to  Reed  and  Mrs. 
Lawley.'  What  he  read,  probably,  was  the  Preface,  concerning  the  Christian 
Sacrament  and  Sacrifice,  which,  ten  years  later,  he  and  his  brother  Charles 
published  separately  as  a  tract  and  as  an  introduction  to  their  Hymns  on 
the  Lord's  Supper,  on  the  title-page  of  that  work  entitling  themselves 
*  Presbyters  of  the  Church  of  England.'  Dr.  Brevint,  it  is  sometimes 
assumed,  was  a  Roman  Catholic.  His  book,  Missale  Romanum ;  or,  the 
Depth  and  Mystery  of  the  Roman  Mass  Explained,  is  included  in  a  recent 
catalogue  of  'Roman  Catholic  Works.'  It  really  is  'an  admirable  argu- 
mentative treatise,'  which,  like  another  volume  by  the  same  author  published 
two  years  later,  was  devoted  to  the  'reproof  of  Romish  superstition.'  The 
book  from  which  Wesley  read  to  Mr.  Reed  and  Mrs.  Lawley  on  board  the 
Simmonds  was  a  practical  and  devotional  treatise  on  the  Holy  Communion, 
written  at  the  request  of  the  Princesses  of  Turenne  and  Bouillon — written 
4  by  way  of  discourse,  meditation,  and  prayer ;  but  taking  no  notice  of 
contending  parties  any  more  than  if  they  had  never  appeared.' 

Wed.  24. — Prayer  and  Bible-reading  filled  all  the  hours  from  four  till 
eight,  when  he  once  more  took  Johnson  in  hand  and  ended  it.  Nelson 
was  now  the  book  he  read  to  the  people. 

Thur.  25. — Christmas  Day.  Oglethorpe  gave  a  hog  and  wine  to  the 
people.  Wesley  spent  four  hours  with  Quesnel  and  Kempis.  He  read 
prayers,  preached,  and  administered  the  Eucharist  to  nineteen  communi- 
cants. The  rest  of  the  day  he  spent  as  usual.  At  eight  he  conversed  with 
Oglethorpe,  who  was  feverish.  At  nine  he  undressed,  but  could  not  sleep 
till  twelve. 

Fri.  26. — At  nine  he  began  a  Treatise  on  the  Rucharist,  and  worked  at 
it  till  half-past  twelve.  The  gains  and  losses  of  his  pastoral  work  he  thus 
summarizes :  '  Heddon  serious  ;  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Mrs.  Welch  affected  ; 
Mrs.  Lawley  and  Mrs.  Moore  unaffected,'  for  which  he  blames  himself.  In 
his  personal  column  he  writes:  'Lukewarm  !' 

During  the  last  days  of  the  year  he  resumed  his  German  studies. 
Quarrelsome  women  he  endeavoured  to  reconcile,  but  their  anger  was 
turned  against  him.  His  ceaseless  prayers,  readings,  exhortations  irritated 
the  people.  Either  the  long  confinement  on  board  a  crowded  emigrant- 
ship,  or  the  exceptional  Christmas  fare,  or  both,  induced  feverish  ailments, 
the  only  remedy  for  which,  in  those  days,  was  '  blooding.' 


134  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [jan.i736. 

\_Tues.  30. — Being  informed  Mrs.  Lawley  was  ill,  I  hoped 
she  might  be  in  a  milder  temper,  and  therefore  spent  some 
time  with  her,  and  told  her  of  the  alteration  of  her  behaviour 
since  her  being  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Moore.  As  soon  as  I 
was  gone,  she  told  all  and  more  than  all  I  said,  who  from 
that  hour  counteracted  us  publicly  and  privately  to  the  utmost 
of  their  power. 

[1736.  JANUARY  I,  Thur. — We  celebrated  the  Holy 
Eucharist,  and  had  fifteen  communicants.  Oh  may  the  New 
Year  bring  a  new  heart  and  a  new  life  to  all  those  who  seek 
the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers ! 


Tues.  30. — An  hour  with  his  German  work,  and  then  he  *  saw  five 
blooded  ' ;  half  a  psalm,  and  he  saw  two  more.  He  turned  again  to  German 
and  the  woes  of  Mrs.  Lawley  and  Mrs.  Hawkins,  from  whom  he  'got  no 
good.5  More  German,  with  dinner,  prayer,  and  meditation  ;  he  strives  over 
and  over  again  with  these  unhappy  women,  with  the  result  described  in  the 
Journal.  The  Diary  summary  is  pathetic  :  *  Got  no  good  with  Mrs.  Lawley  ; 
Mrs.  Hawkins  affected  ;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Moore  very  angry  at  me.'  And  so  he 
closes  this  year,  so  memorable  in  his  experience. 

The  Diary  from  JANUARY  i,  1736,  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour,  is  not 
less  minute  and  characteristic  than  any  of  the  pages  so  far  interpreted  in 
these  notes.  To  avoid  monotony,  however,  we  will  read  more  rapidly, 
except  when  events  of  importance  occur. 

Sat.  3. — He  begins  to  catechize  six  children,  and  afterwards  con- 
verses seriously  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  with  Phoebe  Hird  and  Betty  Hazle, 
and,  later,  with  Frank  Brooks.  On  Monday  night  a  squall  awoke  and 
terrified  him.  For  two  days  Mrs.  Hawkins  is  'angry,'  with  her  husband 
first,  and  afterwards  with  others ;  the  day  following  she  is  '  serious  and 
open.'  This  woman,  with  her  ever-varying  moods,  which  Wesley  vainly 
strove  to  control  by  daily  doses  of  Law's  Christian  Perfection  and  Serious 
Call)  figures  twice  or  thrice  on  every  page.  At  this  time,  as  on  subsequent 
occasions,  Wesley  thought  to  win  her  husband,  and,  through  him,  to  save 
the  wife.  The  only  result  was  that  'at  him'  (her  husband)  she  was  '  very 
angry.'  With  others,  whose  names  are  now  familiar,  he  also  strove,  and 
from  time  to  time  new  names  appear.  The  expositions,  twice  a  day,  and 
the  sermons  on  Sundays  and  saints'  days  continue,  also  the  catechizing  of 
children  and  the  preparation  of  converts  for  Holy  Communion.  He  is  in 
training  as  preacher,  teacher,  evangelist,  and  pastor. 

Every  day  he  devotes  two  or  three  hours  to  German.  On  Thursday,  the 
8th,  he  resumes  readings  in  Law  with  the  people  below,  i.e.  between  decks, 
and  '  resolves  to  be  more  zealous  and  active,  especially  from  five  to  ten.' 

Fri.  9. — Ingham,  whose  call  also  was  to  the  Indians,  joins  him,  and 
together  they  begin  an  Indian  Dictionary  ;  the  work  continues  for  two  or 


Jan  1736.] 


The   Voyage  135 


\_Sun.  n. — We  had  twenty-one  communicants.  In  the 
afternoon  Mr.  R.  M.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins,  between  whom  some  of 
their  neighbours  had  endeavoured  to  sow  dissension,  explained 
themselves  to  each  other,  and  came  to  a  thorough  reconciliation. 

\_Mon.  12. — Mrs.  Hawkins  expressed  a  desire  of  receiving 
the  Holy  Communion.  Several  being  apprised  of  it,  warned 
me  of  her  insincerity,  and  laid  many  crimes  to  her  charge, 
of  which  I  informed  her.  In  the  evening  she  replied  clearly  and 
calmly  to  every  article  of  the  charge,  and  with  such  an  appear- 
ance of  innocence  as  to  most  particulars,  and  of  an  entire  change 


three  hours,  when  he  turns  to  German,  and  at  eleven  is  with  the  Germans. 
On  the  new  study  Ingham  writes :  *  Monday,  January  12,  I  began  to  write 
out  the  English  Dictionary,  in  order  to  learn  the  Indian  tongue.  Oh  !  who  is 
sufficient  for  these  things  ?  When  the  ship  rolled  so  that  we  could  not  well  go 
about  to  visit  the  people,  we  generally  spent  the  evening  in  conversing  with 
Mr.  Oglethorpe, from  whom  we  learntmany  particulars  concerningthe  Indians.' 

Traces  of  increasing  irritability  appear.  The  voyage  was  again  delayed 
by  contrary  winds.  Ingham  says,  *  They  kept  us  above  a  fortnight  longer 
at  sea  than  we  otherwise  should  have  been.'  On  the  evening  of  the  loth 
Charles  and  Ingham  are  angry  at  John,  apparently  because  he  persists  in 
believing  that  his  penitents  are  sincere  and  worthy  to  be  admitted  to  the 
Holy  Communion.  Mrs.  Mack  (or  Mackay),  Phoebe  Hird,  Betty  Hazle, 
Arthur,  Frank  Brooks,  and  Mr.  Delamotte  he  pronounces  seriously  affected. 
He  had  bestowed  much  thought  and  prayer  and  catechetical  instruction 
upon  these  young  people,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt,  in  their  case,  the 
accuracy  of  his  judgement ;  but  Mrs.  Welch  and  Mrs.  Hawkins,  as  we  now 
know,  and  as  Charles  Wesley  and  Ingham  at  the  time  firmly  believed,  were 
consummate  hypocrites.  Even  now — certainly  a  few  months  later — they 
were  joint  conspirators  in  a  plot  diabolical  beyond  belief.  John  Wesley 
never  saw  it,  until  his  amazing  credulity  nearly  cost  him  his  life  and  drove 
him  from  Frederica  back  to  the  still  graver  perils  of  Savannah.  Underneath 
the  brief  entries  in  the  Diary  are  hidden  the  beginnings  of  a  tragedy  which, 
however  small  and  sordid  in  itself,  was  fraught  with  stupendous  consequences 
to  Wesley,  his  brother,  and  many  others. 

Sun.  ii. — From  the  Diary  we  learn  that  the  quarrel  lay  between  Mr.  Reed 
and  Mr.  Hawkins,  and  that  Wesley  conversed  with  each  person  involved. 
After  the  reconciliation,  for  half  an  hour,  he  prayed,  sang,  and  had  *  close 
conversation  '  with  Mrs.  Hawkins,  under  which  discipline  she  was  'affected.' 

Mon.  12. — Bishop  Nitschmann,  Brownfield,  Horton,  and  Delamotte  were 
among  the  *  several '  who  protested  against  his  determination  to  admit  Mrs. 
Hawkins  to  the  Holy  Communion.  With  the  openness  to  which  he  attached 
so  much  importance,  and  which  so  often  brought  him  trouble,  he  informed 
Mrs.  Hawkins  of  the  charges  against  her,  with  the  result  that  she  wept  and 
was  *  desperately  affected  and  open.'  Unfortunately  his  theories  betrayed 
him  into  tactical  errors.  He  discussed  Mrs.  Hawkins  with  various  people, 


136  John   Wesley's  Journal 

of  the  rest,  that  I  could  no  longer  doubt  of  her  sincere  desire 
to  be  not  only  almost  but  altogether  a  Christian.  She  accord- 
ingly received  the  Holy  Communion  the  Sunday  following 
and  at  every  opportunity  since.  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord 
still  hath  the  pre-eminence,  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  bringeth 
mighty  things  to  pass. 

\Wed.  14. — Mr.  Oglethorpe  taking  up  Gother's  Sinner's 
Complaint  to  God,  alighted  upon  a  part  of  it  which  relates 

and  unwittingly  added  fuel  to  the  fires  he  would  fain  have  quenched. 
Horton  long  afterwards  remembered  the  fact,  and  mercilessly  upbraided 
Wesley  with  his  folly.  He  was  learning  by  bitter  experience. 

His  special  work  during  these  days  was  the  preparation  of  a  Catechism 
for  the  Children. 

Tues.  13. — From  4.45  till  7  o'clock  he  conversed  with  Charles.  The 
entries  in  the  Diary  are  of  interest  because  they  incidentally  confirm  the 
suggested  interpretation  of  the  cryptic  letters,  figures,  &c.,  in  the  sixth 
column — the  column  that  belongs  to  the  Holy  Club  and  other  groups  on 
board  the  Simmonds.  On  this  page  the  letters  '  si '  (at  one)  appear  only 
once.  On  the  previous  page  they  are  found  only  in  connexion  with  the 
Germans  and  the  Children's  Catechism.  '  Our  Company '  are  not  '  at 
one,'  or  only  on  some  special  point  in  this  grave  discussion  concerning 
Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Holy  Communion.  If  it  is  a  question  of  a  catechism 
for  children,  ministering  to  the  sick,  or  expounding  Holy  Scripture,  they 
are  agreed  ;  but  this  other  matter  fires  them  with  anger, — they  because 
John  Wesley  is  blindly  and  daringly  charitable  enough  to  believe  in  the 
professions  of  a  woman  whom  they  conceive  to  be  equal  to  any  lie  or 
any  villany ;  he  because  Charles  and  all  the  rest  want  to  drive  from  Holy 
Communion  a  woman  who,  as  he  believes,  repents  of  her  sins,  and  is  in 
love  and  charity  with  all  her  neighbours,  and  intends  to  lead  a  new  life.  In 
him  it  is  the  quality  that  helped  to  make  him  the  greatest  evangelist  of 
his  times  ;  in  them  the  underlying  quality  that  drove  Ingham  and  Delamotte 
away  from  him  and  often  set  up  partial  estrangements  between  himself  and 
Charles. 

After  prayers  he  again  discussed  the  burning  question  with  Charles, 
making  no  headway.  Then  he  turned,  still  on  the  same  subject,  to 
Oglethorpe.  They  conversed  seriously  by  the  space  of  one  hour,  and 
then  addressed  themselves  to  the  equally  burning  and  still  more  difficult 
problems  of  *  Georgia  and  the  negroes.'  Repeatedly  during  the  rest  of 
the  day  he  had  interviews  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins  ;  but  they  were 
'  very  angry,'  and  he  '  got  no  good.'  The  precise  point  of  view  we  can  only 
surmise.  But  the  broad  facts  are  quite  clear,  and  they  shed  light  upon 
Wesley  and  upon  the  times  through  which  he  was  passing. 

Wed.  14.— After  the  morning  exposition  he  has  an  interview  with  Reed. 
Germans  come  ;  they  talk  of  their  plans  ;  letters  are  read  ;  he  talks  German 
with  them. 

Escaping  from  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Mrs.  Welch,  it  must  have  been  a 


Jan.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  137 


to  forgiveness.  We  then  put  him  in  mind  of  one  of  his  servants, 
who  had  injured  him  some  time  before.  He  forgave  him  from 
that  hour.] 

Thur.  15. — Complaint  being  made  to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  of 
the  unequal  distribution  of  the  water  among  the  passengers, 
he  appointed  new  officers  to  take  charge  of  it.  At  this  the 
old  ones  and  their  friends  were  highly  exasperated  against 
us,  to  whom  they  imputed  the  change.  But  '  the  fierceness 
of  man  shall  turn  to  Thy  praise.' 

relief  to  discuss  with  Charles  and  company  the  new  catechism,  on  which, 
however  great  their  differences  on  other  questions,  they  were  'at  one.' 
But  again  after  dinner,  and  after  prayers,  his  pastoral  conscience  compelled 
conversation  with  the  same  two  women.  An  hour's  reading  with  Arthur 
and  with  Frank  Brooks,  and  his  usual  evening  hour  with  the  Moravians,  were 
some  compensation  for  the  day's  crosses.  Three  notes  at  the  foot  of  the 
page  do  not  need  interpretation.  Under  the  personal  and  company  ex- 
perience column  he  writes,  '  Lz  (Kv/ne  porjOci)  to  be  a  Christian.'  And 
under  the  event  or  occupation  column  : 

MH  quite  cool. 

!  Oglethorpe  forgave  Al.  Grim.  [Alexander  Grimaldi]. 

Thur.  15. — Two  slight  personal  details  are  noted  :  He  had  fallen  asleep 
later  than  usual  the  night  before  (10.15);  tnis  morning  he  does  not  rise 
before  5.30.  But  at  6.45  he  reads  the  chapters  appointed,  prays,  sings  a 
hymn,  says  the  Creed,  prays,  sings  from  the  tune-book  (or  Tate  and  Brady), 
and  expounds.  The  prayer  for  himself  is  *  Lz '  (Kvpi€  /3o»?&i)  ;  the  note  on  the 
company  'con.,'  which  seems  usually  to  signify  'convinced.'  His  indulgence 
in  luxury,  however  simple,  is  one  of  the  rarities  of  this  Voyage  Diary.  An 
example  occurs  here.  At  eight  he  had  '  raisins.'  His  accounts  show  that  at 
Oxford  he  often  bought  raisins. 

The  Diary  shows  that  it  was  Wesley  who  '  inquired '  in  the  matter  of 
water  supply  and  who  informed  Oglethorpe.  Hence  the  new  orders  and 
the  appointments  that  angered  the  old  and  unfaithful  officers. 

Gother's  Sinner's  Complaint  to  God,  which  the  day  before  had  pro- 
duced so  gracious  an  effect  on  Oglethorpe,  was  now  read  to  Mrs.  Hawkins 
and  her  sick  friend  and  co-conspirator  Mrs.  Welch.  The  famous  Theolo- 
gica  Germanica,  which  Luther  made  so  popular,  is  named  to-day,  and  on 
many  other  days.  For  his  final  judgement  on  this  book  see  Journal,  Novem- 
ber n,  1741.  He  seems  to  have  read  it  to  the  people  in  place  of  the  usual 
afternoon  exposition,  and  afterwards  to  *  Arthur '  and  to  Frank  Brooks,  still 
later  again  to  them  but  in  company  with  Germans,  and  at  nine  to  Oglethorpe. 

Fri.  1 6. — He  must  have  had  on  board  quite  a  library  of  books.  Large 
'  benefactions '  of  books  were  made  for  Georgia  direct  to  the  Trustees  or 
through  '  Dr.  Bray's  Associates.'  (See  Journal  of  Trustees,  Record  Office, 
C.O.  5.)  He  spent  four  hours  this  morning  in  'sorting  books.'  Another 
preparation  for  the  colonial  life  now  imminent  was  Oglethorpe's  reading  of 


138  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Jan.  me. 

Sat.  17. — Many  people  were  very  impatient  at  the  contrary 
wind.  At  seven  in  the  evening  they  were  quieted  by  a  storm. 
It  rose  higher  and  higher  till  nine.  About  nine  the  sea  broke 
over  us  from  stem  to  stern  ;  burst  through  the  windows  of  the 
state  cabin,  [Mr.  Oglethorpe's  cabin,  where  three  or  four  of 
us  were  sitting  with  a  sick  woman,  and  covered  her  all  over.] 
A  bureau  sheltered  me  from  the  main  shock.  [Mr.  Oglethorpe 
removed  Mrs.  Welch  once  more  into  his  own  bed.]  About 
eleven  I  lay  down  in  the  great  cabin,  and  in  a  short  time 
fell  asleep,  though  very  uncertain  whether  I  should  awake 
alive,  and  much  ashamed  of  my  unwillingness  to  die.  Oh  how 
pure  in  heart  must  he  be  who  would  rejoice  to  appear  before 
God  at  a  moment's  warning !  Toward  morning  '  He  rebuked 
the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.' 

Sun.  1 8. — We  returned  God  thanks  for  our  deliverance,  of 
which  a  few  appeared  duly  sensible.  But  the  rest  [like  true 
cowards]  (among  whom  were  most  of  the  sailors)  denied  we 


the  Charter.  '  Theol.  Germ?  he  finishes,  and  notes  '  Mrs.  Hawkins  in  good 
temper,  and  Mrs.  Perkins  pacified.'  Feminine  quarrels  and  outbursts  of 
temper  had  become  the  usual  thing,  so  much  so  that  a  single  day  of  peace 
in  the  great  cabin  or  on  deck  was  worth  noting. 

Sat,  17.— This  day's  Diary  record  is  unique.  It  begins  at  four  in  the 
morning  and  ends  at  one  the  next  morning — twenty-one  hours  of  continuous 
strain,  in  which  appear  all  the  usual  features  :  private  devotions,  prayer  and 
reading  with  the  inner  circle — they  being  for  several  hours  once  more  'at 
one ' — public  prayers  and  singing,  German  study,  pastoral  conversation, 
catechizing,  readings,  and  afternoon  prayers  and  exposition.  At  six  in  the 
evening,  when  the  '  Company '  were  all  together,  it  became  stormy.  And 
now  the  handwriting  betrays  the  shaking  of  the  ship.  At  nine  he  writes  : 

A  storm.     Sea  broke  in  to  us          ! 
10  Prayer,  conversed  ;  Afraid  to  die  ;  Storm  still         ! 
n  Prayer,  conversed  ^;  lay  on  the  boards.     Slept         ! 
12  Stormy  still  and  afraid  ! 

i  Lay  on  Mrs.  Welch's  bed.  She  in  Mr.  Oglethorpe's  [cabin].1  Calmer.  Resolved 
not  to  please  myself  in  eating  or  drinking.  Thankfulness  with  our  Resolution. 

The  next  morning  he  did  not  rise  till  seven.  It  was  Sunday  morning. 
After  his  devotions  he  dressed  for  prayers,  but  the  storm  must  have  made 
the  usual  early  service  impossible ;  so  he  read  Kempis  to  them  and 


1  Oglethorpe's   cabin  was   now  given  the  voyage  had  been  assigned  to  himself 

up  entirely  to  Mrs.   Welch,  whose  con-  and  Charles,  to  Oglethorpe,  he  for  the 

dition   was   still  critical.      Wesley   gave  time  sleeping  '  on  the  boards  '  or  in  any 

the   cbain,    which   at   the   beginning  of  bed  that  chanced  to  be  vacant. 


Jan.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  139 


had  been  in  any  danger.  I  could  not  have  believed  that  so 
little  good  would  have  been  clone  by  the  terror  they  were 
in  before.  But,  [for  the  future,  I  will  never  believe  them  to] 
obey  from  fear  who  are  dead  to  the  motives  of  love. 

conversed  with  Betty  Hazle.  But  at  eleven  he  preached  and  administered 
the  Eucharist  to  twenty-three  communicants,  renewing  his  resolution  not  to 
please  himself ! 

Mon.  19. — He  resumed  the  sorting  of  books  and  papers,  and  began  to 
write  his  '  Account  of  the  Voyage.' 

Another  resolution,  referred  to  in  the  text,  he  observed  with  equal 
consistency  throughout  life.  He  was  sparing  in  his  use  of  fear  as  a  motive. 
That  he  regarded  the  future  punishment  of  the  wicked  as  an  article  of  the 
Christian  creed  there  can  be  no  question.  Perhaps  the  strongest  passage  on 
the  subject  in  the  Standard  Sermons,  as  it  is  the  clearest  and  most  concise, 
is  the  one  in  which  he  sums  up  the  final  end  of  all  stewardship  :  *  And  what 
will  remain,  either  to  the  faithful  or  unfaithful  steward  ?  Nothing  but  the 
execution  of  that  sentence  which  has  been  passed  by  the  righteous  Judge, 
fixing  thee  in  a  state  which  admits  of  no  change  through  everlasting  ages  ! 
It  remains  only  that  thou  be  rewarded,  to  all  eternity,  according  to  thy 
works.'  But  even  in  this  great  and  solemn  sermon,  preached  in  1768,  the 
appeal  is  not  really  to  fear,  but  to  much  more  subtle  and  abiding  motives. 
In  the  Four  Volumes  which  form  part  of  the  doctrinal  standard  of  the 
Methodist  Church  there  is  no  sermon  on  Hell,  or  indeed  on  Heaven.  The 
one  sermon  of  Wesley's  on  Hell,  published  in  a  volume  not  included  in  the 
standard,  is  obviously  a  sermon  composed  in  pre-evangelistic  days,  and 
is  full  of  academic  quotations  and  allusions  ;  and  even  in  this  outburst  of 
youthful  learning  and  untempered  zeal,  he  takes  refuge  finally  in  Dr.  Watts, 
whose  writings  charmed  him  at  Oxford,  and  in  '  the  tender  mercy '  of  God. 
Atlantic  storms  and  their  evanescent  effect  on  himself  and  his  godless  fellow 
passengers  cured  him  of  any  faith  he  may  hitherto  have  cherished  in  the 
sovereign,  saving  grace  of  fear. 

On  Tuesday  the  2oth  he  continued  his  '  Account '  of  the  voyage  all  day, 
doing  nothing  else  that  was  not  absolutely  imperative.  On  the  2ist  he 
came  to  a  full  stop,  and  then  began  a  long  letter  to  his  brother  Samuel, 
which  was  not  finished  until  the  next  day. 

This  '  Account '  was  undoubtedly  the  beginning  of  *  Wesley's  Journal.' 
The  original  MS.  is  lost  or  hidden  away  in  family  archives.  Several  copies, 
however,  seem  to  have  been  made  by  Wesley  himself  and  his  friends  on 
board  the  Simmonds.  These,  it  is  believed,  were  sent,  one  to  Samuel 
Wesley  at  Tiverton,  another  to  the  Huttons  at  Westminster,  a  third  to  the 
Holy  Club  at  Oxford,  a  fourth  to  Mrs.  Wesley,  then  at  Salisbury  or  Wootton  ; 
or,  possibly,  to  Clayton  at  Salford  for  the  Holy  Club  ;  to  the  Kirkhams,  and 
others.  As  we  have  elsewhere  explained,  the  one  sent  to  Tiverton  was 
transcribed  by  Ingham.  It  and  the  printed  Extract  are  the  only  surviving 
copies  of  the  Voyage  Journal.  The  fact  that  it  was  written  on  shipboard, 
in  the  midst  of  the  events  it  describes,  sufficiently  accounts  for  the  graphic 
power  of  its  narratives. 


1 40  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [jan.  me. 

Fri.  23. — In  the  evening  another  storm  began.  In  the 
morning  it  increased  so  that  they  were  forced  to  let  the  ship 
drive.  I  could  not  but  say  to  myself,  '  How  is  it  that  thou 
hast  no  faith  ? '  being  still  unwilling  to  die.  About  one  in 
the  afternoon,  almost  as  soon  as  I  had  stepped  out  of  the 
great  cabin  door,  the  sea  did  not  break  as  usual,  but  came 
with  a  full,  smooth  tide  over  the  side  of  the  ship.  I  was  vaulted 
over  with  water  in  a  moment,  and  so  stunned  that  I  scarce 
expected  to  lift  up  my  head  again  till  the  sea  should  give 
up  her  dead.  But,  thanks  be  to  God,  I  received  no  hurt  at 
all.  About  midnight  the  storm  ceased. 


Thur.  22. — '  Intercession '  was  the  subject  on  which  he  conversed  with 
his  friends  in  the  five-o'clock  hour,  suggested  probably  by  the  Second  Lesson 
for  the  morning  (Matt.  xx.  30-34),  and  the  First  Psalm  for  the  morning 
(Ps.  cvii.),  or  by  the  passage  on  prayer  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  John 
Brownfield  appears  on  the  scene  ;  he  is  frequently  named  afterwards.  He 
served  on  the  Grand  Jury  in  the  Savannah  trial,  and  some  years  later  was 
able  to  render  an  essential  service  to  Wesley,  defending  him  against  the 
unscrupulous  attacks  of  Captain  Williams.  (See  the  Green  and  the 
Colman  Collections,  the  Richmond  Interleaved  Journal,  and  App.  II.  vol.  vi.) 
Having  finished  his  letter  to  Samuel,  he  writes  also  to  Mr.  Vernon  and 
Mr.  Hutcheson.  The  footnotes  are  interesting  : 

P.     Fair  wind.     Well. 

John  Brownfield  convinced. 

Mrs.  Welch  and  Mrs.  Hawkins  convinced. 

Katherine  and  Mr.  Arthur  open. 

Katherine  is  mentioned  first  on  the  2oth ;  for  the  first  time  Arthur  is 
named  as  '  Mr.  Arthur.'  In  his  use  of  titles  Wesley  had  hitherto  been 
somewhat  punctilious. 

Fri.  23. — At  5.30  there  was  a  service,  or  meeting  of  some  kind,  in  the 
cabin,  at  which  two  members  of  the  *  Company '  were  present,  but  to  which 
Mrs.  Hawkins  would  not  come.  Probably  the  intended  interview  was  with 
reference  to  her  proposed  admission  to  Holy  Communion.  At  six  he  sang 
a  German  hymn,  three  being  present.  This  seems  to  have  been  in 
preparation  for  the  service  an  hour  later,  which  in  the  fairer  weather  was 
held  in  the  great  cabin.  He  then  wrote  to  Sir  John  Thorold,  whom  he  had 
succeeded  in  the  Fellowship  of  Lincoln  College,  and  who  in  a  letter  refers 
to  the  Voyage  Journal  which  he  has  read  (Colman  Collection  and  App.  XV. 
vol.  vi.).  In  the  German  quarters  he  saw  Von  Reek's  Journal  of  the 
voyage.  He  had  already  read  some  of  the  letters  (afterwards  published) 
in  which  Francis  Moore  gave  his  version  of  the  voyage.  The  day  closed 
with  a  storm,  which  he  did  not  fear  so  much  as  on  former  occasions. 

Sat.  24.— From  4.30  till  6.45  '  in  storm,'  he  prayed,  read,  sang,  studied 
the  Bible,  ending  with  another  hymn  or  psalm,  and  '  bread-and-cheese,'  the 


Jan.  me.]  The   Voyage  141 

Sun.  25. — [While  the  calm  continued  I  endeavoured  to 
prepare  myself  for  another  storm.]  At  noon  our  third  storm 
began.  At  four  it  was  more  violent  than  any  we  had  had 
before.  Now,  indeed,  we  could  say,  '  The  waves  of  the  sea 
were  mighty,  and  raged  horribly.  They  rose  up  to  the  heavens 
above,  and  clave  down  to  hell  beneath.'  The  winds  roared 
round  about  us,  and — what  I  never  heard  before — whistled 
as  distinctly  as  if  it  had  been  a  human  voice.  The  ship  not 
only  rocked  to  and  fro  with  the  utmost  violence,  but  shook 
and  jarred  with  so  unequal,  grating  a  motion,  that  one  could 
not  but  with  great  difficulty  keep  one's  hold  of  anything,  nor 
stand  a  moment  without  it.  Every  ten  minutes  came  a  shock 
against  the  stern  or  side  of  the  ship,  which  one  would  think 


latter  being  a  unique  luxury.     At  seven  he  read  prayers,  with  none  to  hear 
save  two  of  *  our  Company,'  and  ended  the  reading  of  Von  Reek's  Journal. 

The  next  entry  is  important,  because  it  helps  to  substantiate  what  has 
been  said  with  reference  to  the  multiplication  of  copies  of  the  Journal : 

8  e.  Transcribed  Account  of  Voyage. 

9  e.  Account. 

10  e.  Account.  We  drove. 

ix  Prayed.     Storm  greater  :  afraid  ! 

12  Prayed  with  Ingham.     Sat  with  Charles  and  company. 

1  Washed  all  over  and  under,     with  3     ! 

2  Dined  together.     Storm  rather  abated. 

3  Explained  with  Horton  :  he  convinced  :  talked      ! 

Readers  of  Wesley's  Journal  have  never  before  realized  under  what 
circumstances  its  terse  but  graphic  descriptions  were  noted,  and  in  some 
cases  actually  written.  It  was  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  whilst  John 
Wesley  was  in  the  act  of  transcribing  this  Voyage  Journal,  that  Captain 
Cornish  gave  orders  to  let  the  ship  drive.  Yet  how  human  !  As  the  storm 
gathers  fury  he  is  smitten  with  fear,  and  in  this  truthful  Diary  acknowledges 
it — '  Storm  greater  :  afraid  ! '  His  work  is  arrested.  He  cleaves  to  his 
4  Company.'  Together  they  pray,  and  commune  one  with  another.  But 
the  instant  the  terror  passes  he  resumes  his  work,  and  continues  it  to  the 
close  of  this  memorable  day  (App.  XVI.  vol.  vi.). 

Sun.  25. — The  Diary  notes,  and  to  some  extent  the  Account  itself,  were 
written  during  the  storms.  The  handwriting  of  this  page  shakes  with  the 
shaking  of  the  ship.  The  terrors  of  this  Sunday  are  best  illustrated  by  the 
facsimile  of  the  Diary  page,  which  needs  no  interpretation  (see  p.  130). 

The  student  who  traces  the  sequence  of  events  will  see  that  the  storm 
was  one  of  the  crucial  facts  in  the  history  of  early  Methodism.  It  shook 
the  nerve  of  all  on  board,  passengers  and  seamen — of  all  except  the 
Moravians.  It  was  their  great  peacefulness  when  the  sea  split  the  mainsail, 
and  the  joy  of  their  singing,  that  brought  Wesley's  incipient  friendship  to 


142  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [jan.i736. 

should  dash  the  planks  in  a  thousand  pieces.  [In  the  height 
of  the  storm,]  a  child,  privately  baptized  before,  was  brought 
to  be  [publicly]  received  into  the  Church.  It  put  me  in  mind 
of  Jeremiah's  buying  the  field  when  the  Chaldeans  were  on 
the  point  of  destroying  Jerusalem,  and  seemed  a  pledge  of  the 
mercy  God  designed  to  show  us,  even  in  the  land  of  the  living. 

We  spent  two  or  three  hours  after  prayers  [with  Mr. 
Oglethorpe]  in  conversing  suitably  to  the  occasion,  confirming 
one  another  in  a  calm  submission  to  the  wise,  holy,  gracious 
will  of  God.  And  now  a  storm  did  not  appear  so  terrible  as 
before.  Blessed  be  the  God  of  all  consolation,  who  alone  doeth 
wonders,  and  is  able  mightily  to  deliver  His  people  ! 

At  seven  I  went  to  the  Germans.  I  had  long  before 
observed  the  great  seriousness  of  their  behaviour.  Of  their 
humility  they  had  given  a  continual  proof,  by  performing  those 
servile  offices  for  the  other  passengers  which  none  of  the 
English  would  undertake ;  for  which  they  desired  and  would 
receive  no  pay,  saying,  '  it  was  good  for  their  proud  hearts/ 
and  *  their  loving  Saviour  had  done  more  for  them.'  And  every 
day  had  given  them  occasion  of  showing  a  meekness  which  no 
injury  could  move.  If  they  were  pushed,  struck,  or  thrown 
down,  they  rose  again  and  went  away ;  but  no  complaint  was 
found  in  their  mouth.  There  was  now  an  opportunity  of  trying 
whether  they  were  delivered  from  the  spirit  of  fear,  as  well  as 
from  that  of  pride,  anger,  and  revenge.  In  the  midst  of  the 
psalm  wherewith  their  service  began,  [wherein  we  were  mention- 
ing the  power  of  God,]  the  sea  broke  over,  split  the  mainsail 
in  pieces,  covered  the  ship,  and  poured  in  between  the  decks, 
as  if  the  great  deep  had  already  swallowed  us  up.  A  terrible 
screaming  began  among  the  English.  The  Germans  [looked 

maturity.  It  may  be  said  to  have  made  Ingham  a  Moravian  (App.  XVI. 
vol.  vi.),  and  no  doubt  it  influenced  Delamotte  in  the  same  direction.  One 
cannot  resist  the  conviction  that  when,  about  a  year  later,  in  Georgia,  Wesley 
translated  and  reversified  Rothe's  great  hymn,  he  recalled  the  Moravians 
and  the  storm,  and  the  unshaken  trust  that  enabled  the  exiles  to  sing, 
amidst  the  'roaring  of  the  wind'  and  the  terrible  'screaming'  of  the 
English,  their  psalm  on  the  power  of  God  : 

Though  waves  and  storms  go  o'er  my  head. 

What  psalm  did  the  Moravians  sing  at  their  evening  worship  on  that 
memorable  Sunday  ?     It '  mentioned  the  power  of  God.' 


Jan.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  143 


up,  and  without  intermission]  calmly  sang  on.  I  asked  one  of 
them  afterwards, '  Was  you  not  afraid  ?  '  He  answered,  *  I  thank 
God,  no.'  I  asked,  '  But  were  not  your  women  and  children 
afraid  ? '  He  replied  mildly,  '  No  ;  our  women  and  children 
are  not  afraid  to  die.' 

From  them  I  went  to  their  crying,  trembling  neighbours, 
[and  found  myself  enabled  to  speak  with  them  in  boldness  and 
to]  point  out  to  them  the  difference  in  the  hour  of  trial  between 
him  that  feareth  God  and  him  that  feareth  Him  not.  At 
twelve  the  wind  fell.  This  was  the  most  glorious  day  which 
I  have  hitherto  seen. 

Mon.  26. — We  [now]  enjoyed  the  calmer  weather.  I  can 
conceive  no  difference  comparable  to  that  between  a  smooth 
and  a  rough  sea,  except  that  which  is  between  a  mind  calmed 
by  the  love  of  God  and  one  torn  up  by  the  storms  of  earthly 
passions. 

Thur.  29. — About  seven  in  the  evening  we  fell  in  with  the 
skirts  of  a  hurricane.  The  rain  as  well  as  the  wind  was 
extremely  violent,  [the  lightning  almost  without  intermission.] 
The  sky  was  so  dark  in  a  moment,  that  the  sailors  could  not 
so  much  as  see  the  ropes,  or  set  about  furling  the  sails.  The 

Mon.  26. — The  day  begins  at  six.  The  weather  is  calmer.  The  invalid 
and  her  husband  are  in  the  next  cabin.  He  converses  for  a  time  with  them, 
and  at  seven  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte.  After  prayers,  exhortation, 
and  reflection,  he  sits  awhile  with  Mrs.  Hawkins,  who  also  is  ill,  and 
then  'visits  all,'  hoping  to  cheer  them  after  the  storm  and  to  impress 
its  lessons  on  them.  At  ten  he  begins  Nelson,  or  *  Nalson '  as  he  per- 
sistently calls  him,  though  not  invariably.  Probably  the  book  read  was 
Nelson's  Festivals  and  Fasts.  After  further  visiting  and  a  reading  in  Law 
to  them,  he  shaves,  dines,  spends  another  hour  with  Nelson,  resumes  after- 
noon prayers  and  exposition,  visits  special  cases,  and  at  eight  writes  thus  : 

8  Sat  with  Charles  and  Ingham.     Charles  perverse. 

9  In  talk  with  Charles.     Charles  perverse. 

G.    7,    2.      6,   13.      Ku'pie  00)j0«i 

Resolved  to  write  at  once  to  Charles. 

The  next  morning  he  read  the  Battle  oj  the  Sexes  (one  of  Samuel 
Wesley's  poems,  which  he  was  correcting  for  the  press).  On  Wednesday  he 
wrote  an  alphabet,  presumably  of  the  Indian  language,  which  he  and 
Ingham  were  studying.  The  weather  being  calm  and  the  wind  fair,  he 
dined  with  Von  Reck  and  his  friends  on  board  the  London  Merchant, 

Thur.  29. — The  day,  at  four,  opened  with  a  fair  wind  ;  but  in  the 
evening,  as  he  reads  to  Arthur  and  to  Frank  Brooks,  a  storm  breaks,  with 
lightning.  He  convinces  Alexander  of  the  use  of  public  prayers,  and 


144  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Feb.  we. 

ship  must,  in  all  probability,  have  overset,  had  not  the  wind  fell 
as  suddenly  as  it  rose.  Toward  the  end  of  it  we  had  that 
appearance  on  each  of  the  masts  which,  it  is  thought,  the 
ancients  called  Castor  and  Pollux,1  [the  modern  Romanists 
Corpus  Sanctum^]  It  was  a  small  ball  of  white  fire,  like  a  star. 
The  mariners  say  it  seldom  appears  but  either  in  a  storm,  and 
then  commonly  on  the  deck  or  just  at  the  end  of  it ;  and  that 
it  is  usually  on  the  masts  or  sails.  [Being  below  with  the 
Germans,  I  knew  nothing  of  the  danger,  God  being  merciful 
to  me  till  we  were  delivered  out  of  it] 

Fri.  30. — We  had  another  storm,  which  did  us  no  other 
harm  than  splitting  the  foresail.  Our  bed  being  wet,  I  laid  me 
down  on  the  floor  and  slept  sound  till  morning.  And  I  believe 
I  shall  not  find  it  needful  to  go  to  bed,  as  it  is  called,  any  more. 

FEB.  i,  Sun. — [The  Pomeroy  from  Charlestown  came  up 
with  us,  bound  for  London.  We  were  exceeding  glad  of  so 
happy  an  opportunity  of  sending  to  our  friends  in  England 
word  of  our  safety. 

[Mon.  2. — About  ten  at  night  William  Taverner,  a  lad 
fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old,  came  running  to  our  cabin  greatly 
affrighted  with  something  which  he  said  he  had  seen  at  the  foot 
of  his  bed  ;  he  added  that  it  looked  at  him  continually  unless 

commences  a  sermon  on  'A  Single  Eye'  (see  Wesley's  Sermons, 
Vol.  I.  xxviii.,  Sermon  on  Mount,  Discourse  viii.). 

On  Friday  he  resumed  his  account  of  the  voyage,  and  on  Saturday  the 
writing  of  his  sermon. 

FEB.  i,  Sun. — By  the  Pomeroy  he  probably  did  not  send  the  letters 
to  Samuel  and  other  friends  which  were  already  written.  From  the  Diary  it 
seems  clear  that  *  as  the  ship  came  up  to  us '  he  wrote  a  brief  letter  to 
Samuel,  possibly  other  letters  also,  sufficient  to  assure  friends  at  home 
of  the  safety  of  the  party.  Mrs.  Hawkins,  though  affected  by  the  Nelson 
readings,  was  not  among  the  twenty-two  communicants. 

Mon.  2. — For  some  unexplained  reason  he  momentarily  despairs  of 
Oglethorpe,  or  has  trouble  with  him.  At  the  foot  of  the  page  in  the 
columns  devoted  to  personal  and  company  affairs,  he  writes,  'At  noon 
ceased  striving  !  O  Fool  ! '  Nevertheless,  the  next  day,  at  nine,  ten,  twelve, 

1  The  Dioscuri,  or  twin  brothers,  in  fied  their   presence   with   the   pale-blue 

Greek     mythology,    were      Castor     the  flame  or  light  seen  in  thundery  weather 

horse-tamer   and   Pollux   the    prince    of  at   the   masthead.      Paul   sailed   in  the 

boxers,  sons    of    Zeus   and    Leda,    and  Castor    and    Pollux     from     Melita    to 

brothers  of  Helen  ;  but  better  known  as  Puteoli.      (Hastings,  Dictionary  of  the 

the  tutelary  gods  of  sailors,  who  identi-  Bible,  art.  '  Dioscuri. ') 


Feb.  1736.J 


The   Voyage  145 


when  he  was  saying  his  prayers,  and  then  he  saw  nothing  of  it. 
The  rest  of  his  account  was  very  confused.  He  sat  trembling 
and  praying  by  our  bedside  till  one  in  the  morning,  and  has 
been  utterly  distracted  ever  since.] 

Wed.  4. — [We  had  the  welcome  news  that  we  were]  within 
soundings,  [having  not  twenty-fathom  water.]  About  noon  the 
trees  [of  Georgia]  were  visible  from  the  mast,  and  in  the  after- 
noon from  the  main  deck.  In  the  Evening  Lesson  were  these 

six,  and  eight  he  is  again  seriously  conversing  with  him.  He  loved 
Oglethorpe,  and  cared  for  him  as  for  his  own  soul.  On  this  day  (February  3) 
the  lad  Taverner  went  mad. 

Wed.  4. — This  must  have  been,  for  all,  a  day  of  intense  excitement, 
yet  the  orderly  succession  of  duties  continued  unbroken.  He  spent  an 
hour  before  the  usual  morning  exposition  at  his  German  studies.  At 
eight  he  corrected  the  sermon  he  had  so  carefully  written.  At  9.30, 
having  finished  the  sermon,  he  corrected  the  'Account,'  and  steadily 
worked  on,  revising,  writing,  or  transcribing  the  Journal  which,  though 
he  knew  it  not,  was  destined  to  be  read  from  generation  to  generation 
the  world  around.  Then  he  turned  to  his  pastoral  work,  rinding  two  new 
hearers,  who,  after  a  reading  from  Law,  came  and,  with  Oglethorpe,  were 
4  seriously  affected.'  The  two  new  names  were  Hughes  and  Sexton.1 

The  last  note  on  this  day's  page  must  have  been  written  with  a  throbbing 

heart : 

1  Saw  Land.     Read  a  Great  Door  and  effectual,  et  cetera. 

All  the  Lessons  and  Psalms  for  the  day  were  remarkable.  The  following 
table  for  February  4,  1736,  is  taken  from  a  Book  of  Common  Prayer  that 
might  have  been  used  by  the  Wesleys  at  Christ  Church.8 

Wednesday,  February  4,  1736  : 

Morning  Prayer  :   Psalms,  xix.,  xx.,  xxi. ;  Lessons,  Exod.  xiv.  ;  Mark  iv. 

The  Sunday  foregoing  was  the  Fourth  Sunday  after  the  Epiphany.  We 
may  rest  assured  that  the  Collect  was  read  : 

O  God,  who  knowest  us  to  be  set  in  the  midst  of  so  many  and  great  dangers,  that 
by  reason  of  the  frailty  of  our  nature  we  cannot  always  stand  upright ;  Grant  to  us 
such  strength  and  protection  as  may  support  us  in  all  dangers,  and  carry  us  through 
all  temptations,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 

1  '  John    Hughes,    14,   and    Edmund  by  the  man  who  wrote  Alice  in  Wonder- 
Sexton,  21.'  land,  and  probably  also  by  Dean  Liddell, 

2  It  is  bound  in  red  morocco,  with  the  the  father  of  his  child-friend.    The  name 
Bible,  and   the  *  Psalms  Collected   into  now    written    above    the    title-page    is 
English  Metre.'     The  imprint  on  Prayer-  'Charles  Lutwidge  Dodgson,  from  L.L., 
book  and  Bible  is  'Oxford:  Printed  by  1873.'     ^n  other  words,   the  book  once 
John  Baskett,  Printer  to  the  King's  most  belonged  to   '  Lewis  Carroll,'  and  it  is 
Excellent  Majesty,  and  to  the  University,  not  difficult   to  interpret  its  history,  or 
MDCCXV.'    The  book  might  have  been  to  guess  to  whom  the  initials  L.L.  be- 
used  in  Christ  Church  by  John  Wesley,  as  longed  in  1873.     ^n  Christ  Church  both 
undoubtedly  it  was  used  in  the  same  college  John  and  Charles  Wesley  were  ordained. 

VOL.  I.  8 


146  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Feb.  1736. 

words :  '  A  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened.'  Oh  let  no  one 
shut  it !  ['  and  there  are  many  adversaries ;  and  as  touching 
our  brother  Apollos,  I  greatly  desired  him  to  come  unto  you 
with  the  brethren,  but  his  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this 
time :  but  he  will  come  when  he  shall  have  convenient  time.'] 

Thur.  5.1 — Between  two  and  three  in  the  afternoon  God 
brought  us  all  safe  into  the  Savannah  river.  We  cast  anchor 
near  Tybee  Island,  [which  gave  us  a  specimen  of  America.] 
The  pines,  [palms,  and  cedars]  running  [in  rows]  along  the 
shore,  made  [an  exceeding  beautiful]  prospect,  [especially  to  us 
who  did  not  expect  to  see]  the  bloom  of  spring  in  the  depth  of 
winter.  [The  clearness  of  the  sky,  the  setting  sun,  the  smooth- 
ness of  the  water  conspired  to  recommend  this  new  world  and 
prevent  our  regretting  the  loss  of  our  native  country.] 

Fri.   6. — About  eight  in  the   morning   I   first  set  my  foot 

The  Epistle  for  the  week  was  Rom.  xiii.  i  to  8. 

The  Gospel  for  the  week  was  Matt.  viii.  23  to  the  end. 

Evening  Prayer  :  Psalms,  xxii.,  xxiii. ;  Lessons  :  Exod.  xv.  ;  I  Cor.  xvi. 

If  we  read  all  these  Scriptures,  we  shall  surround  ourselves,  to  some 
extent,  with  the  spiritual  atmosphere  of  this  great  day  in  Wesley's  life. 

Thur.  5. — Shortly  after  six  he  was  with  the  Germans,  reading  prayers. 
At  seven  he  read  prayers  with  his  own  people  and  expounded.  At  7.30 
he  began  to  write  his  'Account,'  and  wrote  steadily  until  2.30.  His 
refreshment  for  the  long  morning  was  '  bread,'  for  he  *  could  not  get  tea.' 
At  2.30  he  dined,  and  the  ship  anchored  at  'Tibi.'  He  is  uncertain  as 
to  the  proper  spelling,  for  on  the  same  page  he  gives  it  as  Tibi  and 
Tiby.  In  the  afternoon  he  read  prayers  and  expounded,  resuming  his 
'Account'  until  it  was  the  hour  for  German  worship — an  hour  he  never 
willingly  missed.  At  eight  Mr.  Oglethorpe  talked  to  the  people  ;  and 
Wesley  prayed,  and  slept. 

Under  this  date,  with  a  page  all  to  itself,  is  the  following  resolution  : 

Nos  ires  proponimus,  Deo  juvante,  neq  carnem  neq  vinum  gustare,  ante  Diem 
Dominicum. 

Fri.  6. — The  Diary  entries  are  interesting.  The  early  hours  were  given 
to  business.  At  eight  he  went  on  shore  with  Oglethorpe,  read  prayers, 
and  expounded  Mark  vi.,  which  was  the  Second  Lesson.  The  name  of  the 
island  was  '  Peeper.'  They  then  *  made  a  bridge.'  With  Charles,  John  read 

1  Ingham's  account  of  the  close  of  the  dated  '  Savannah  in  Georgia,  Feb.  14, 
voyage  will  be  found  in  Tyerman's  Oxford  I735~6,'  was  published  in  The  Gentle- 
Methodists,  pp.  74,  75,  where  indeed  the  man's  Magazine,  vol.  i.  1736,  p.  229. 
whole  of  his  Journal  is  reprinted  (see  also  According  to  this  writer,  the  expedition 
App.  XVI.  vol.  vi.).  A  letter  written  by  consisted  of  six  very  large  ships.  This 
one  of  the  colonists  who  sailed  with  the  reckoning  may  include  the  Hawk  and 
Wesleys,  or  possibly  by  Francis  Moore,  ships  sailing  from  other  ports. 


REDUCED    FACSIMILE    OF    MAP    OF    THE    INHABITED    PART    OF    GEORGIA, 
FROM    A    DRAWING    BY    WILLIAM    DE    BRAHM. 

[By  permission  of  the  Colonial  Office. 

M7 


Fen.  1736.]  The   Voyage  149 

on  American  ground.  It  was  a  small  uninhabited  island,  [but 
a  few  miles  in  extent,]  over  against  Tybee,1  [called  by  the 
English  Peeper  Island.]  Mr.  Oglethorpe  led  us  [through  the 
moorish  land  on  the  shore]  to  a  rising  ground,  where  we  all 
kneeled  down  to  give  thanks  [to  God  and  beg  the  continuance 
of  His  fatherly  protection  over  us.]  He  then  took  boat  for 
Savannah.  When  the  rest  of  the  people  were  come  on  shore, 
we  [chose  an  open  place  surrounded  with  myrtles,  bays,  and 
cedars,  which  sheltered  us  both  from  the  sun  and  wind,  and] 
called  our  little  flock  together  to  prayers.  Several  parts  of  the 
Second  Lesson  (Mark  vi.)  were  wonderfully  suited  to  the  occasion  ; 
in  particular,  the  account  of  the  courage  and  sufferings  of  John 
the  Baptist,  our  Lord's  directions  to  the  first  preachers  of  His 
gospel,  and  their  toiling  at  sea  and  deliverance — with  these 
comfortable  words :  'It  is  I,  be  not  afraid ' — [were  all  so 
manifestly  spoken  to  us,  that  we  could  not  but  make  the 
application.  God  grant  that,  through  patience  and  comfort  of 
His  Holy  Word,  we  may  ever  hold  fast  the  blessed  hope  of 
our  calling !  ] 

Sat.  7. — [Mr.  Oglethorpe  having  commissioned. me  and  one 

the  *  Account '  and  sang.  For  an  hour  he  attended  to  business.  At  noon, 
returning  to  the  ship,  he  conversed  with  Arthur,  with  Frazer,  and  after- 
wards with  Heddon  and  Alexander.  He  dined  on  shore  ;  walked  with 
Mrs.  Hawkins,  who,  as  he  conversed,  was  '  seriously  affected.'  On  board  '  all 
were  /ze'^uo-o-t.'  The  crew  and  such  passengers  as  were  left  on  board  were  de- 
moralized, in  fact  drunk.  Later  he  had  an  interview  with  the  captains — Thomas, 
Cornish,  and  Dempsey.  Captain  Dempsey  was  commissioned  by  Oglethorpe 
to  treat  with  the  Spanish  authorities  (Georgia  Papers,  Record  Office,  1735). 

The  First  Lesson  for  the  day  was  Exod.  xviii. — a  lesson  for  Oglethorpe. 
The  Second  Lesson  most  of  all  impressed  Wesley.  He  calls  it  *  a  glorious 
lesson  ! ' 

It  is  said  that,  on  landing,  Charles  Wesley  preached  a  sermon,  which 
was  afterwards  (in  1816)  included  in  the  volume  published  by  his  widow. 
But  of  this  there  is  no  trace  in  the  Diary,  in  the  new  version  of  the  Journal, 
nor  in  Mr.  Ingham's  Journal. 

Sat.  7. — In  the  early  morning  he  *  called  the  people/  with  whom,  for  an  hour 
or  two,  he  was  '  in  talk  and  on  business.'  At  seven,  in  the  personal  column, 
as  though  he  himself  did  the  deed,  are  the  following  words  :  '  Staved  rum.' 

1  The  night-wind  smoothes  with  drifting       history  of  the  Rebellion  (Ann.  Register^ 

*and  1779,  pp.  30  and  208).     Here  Whitefield 

Our  track  on  lone  Tybee.  ,, 

cast  anchor  on  May  7,  1738,  and  preached 
WHITTIER,  '  At  Port  Royal.'  ,  ,,     T      ' 

(Whiteheld  s  Journal,  p.  79). 

The  island  is  often  referred  to  in  the 


1 50  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Feb.  me. 

more  *  to  take  care  of  the  passengers  in  his  absence,  I  found  how 
hard  it  is  to  serve  God  without  distraction  in  the  midst  of 
secular  business.  Happy  are  they  who  are  delivered  from  this 
heavy  cross,  and  so  are  they  who  bear  it  in  the  spirit  of  their 
Master. 

[In  the  afternoon  as  we  were  coming  from  shore  a  shower 
of  rain,  common  in  these  parts,  overtook  us,  and  before  we 
could  get  one  hundred  yards  wetted  us  all  from  head  to  foot. 
I  found  no  ill  effects  of  it  at  all.  What  can  hurt  those  whom 
it  pleases  God  to  save? 

[Before  Mr.  Oglethorpe  left  Savannah,  one  Mrs.  Stanley,  an 
experienced  midwife,  came  to  him,  and  said  she  heard  several 
women  on  board  were  near  their  time.  He  told  her  he  believed 
not,  but  that  he  should  be  glad,  nevertheless,  if  she  would  go 
down  with  him  and  examine  a  pretended  midwife  who  was  on 
board  the  Simmonds.  Accordingly  he  returned  in  the  evening 
with  her  and  Mr.  Spangenberg,2  who  had  conducted  the  first 
company  of  Bohemian  Brethren  to  Georgia.  He  told  me 

Is  this  the  explanation  of  the  ominous  Greek  word  on  the  preceding  page  ? 
Strong  drink  was  the  curse  that  followed  in  the  wake  of  all  the  early  English 
colonists,  blighting  the  colonies  and  destroying  the  native  populations.3 
Wesley's  first  deed,  after  landing  in  America,  was  the  registering  of  a  vow  of 
total  abstinence  from  flesh  and  wine  ;  his  second  the  staving  of  rum-casks. 
Mr.  Spangenberg  came  from  Savannah,  bringing  letters  which  awaited  the 
arrival  of  the  colonists.  With  him  was  Mr.  Vanderplank.  In  spite  of  the 
business  distraction  of  which  he  complains,  Wesley  reads  prayers  and  expounds 
on  shore  ;  prays  and  sings  with  Brownfield  ;  reads  Norris  to  Delamotte, 
Mr.  Hawkins,  and  Mrs.  Hawkins,  converses  seriously  with  the  latter  in  the 
wood,  *  No.  4  of  No.  I '  (i.e.  Delamotte)  being  present,  and,  in  the  company 

1  John  Brownfield  was  the  '  one  more.'  them.'     Yet   he  did  not  discontinue  all 

He    came    from    Bristol,    and    was   one  his  studies,  for  in  1726  he  took  his  M.A. 

of    the    most    capable    of    the    English  degree.     Dr.  Byrom  heard  Spangenberg 

emigrants.     See  letters   and   journals  in  preach  in  Fetter  Lane,  and  admired  the 

the  Record  Office.  sermon.     He    is    said    to    have   sought 

'-'  Wesley  at  first  spells  '  Spa//en '—  Anglican  orders  from  the  Bishop  of 
and  on  the  same  page,  '  Spallewberg.'  London  (Dr.  Gibson),  but  was  refused 
Later  he  discovers  the  correct  spelling.  (see  his  autobiographical  sketch,  p.  152). 
August  Gottlieb  Spangenberg  was  born  Spangenberg,  Toltschig,  and  Seifart 
at  Klettenburg  in  1704,  his  father  went  out  with  the  first  party  of  Mora- 
being  a  Lutheran  clergyman.  At  Jena,  vians,  sixteen  in  all,  landing  at  Charles- 
where  for  a  while  he  was  a  professor,  he  town. 

lodged    with    Dr.    Buddseus.      He   had  3  See    S.    Wesley's     (sen.)    letter    to 

studied  for  the  law.      '  He  forsook  his  Oglethorpe    (Clarke's     Wesley    Family, 

former  associates,  and  was  forsaken  by  vol.  i.   p.  334). 


Feb.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  151 


several  particulars  relating  to  their  faith  and  practice  and  disci- 
pline, all  of  which  were  agreeable  to  the  plan  of  the  first  ages, 
and  seemed  to  show  that  it  was  their  one  care,  without  desire 
of  pleasing  or  fear  of  displeasing  any,  to  retain  inviolate  the 
whole  deposit  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

[Sun.  8. — I  asked  Mr.  Spangenberg's  advice  with  regard  to 
myself] — to  my  own  conduct.  He  told  me  he  could  say  nothing 
till  he  had  asked  me  two  or  three  questions.  '  Do  you  know 
yourself?  Have  you  the  witness  within  yourself  ?  Does  the 
Spirit  of  God  bear  witness  with  your  spirit  that  you  are  a 
child  of  God  ?  '  I  was  surprised,  and  knew  not  what  to  answer. 
He  observed  it,  and  asked,  '  Do  you  know  Jesus  Christ  ?  ' 
I  paused,  and  said,  '  I  know  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.' 
*  True/  replied  he;  'but  do  you  know  He  has  saved  you?' 
I  answered,  '  I  hope  He  has  died  to  save  me.'  He  only  added, 
'  Do  you  know  yourself?  '  I  said, '  I  do.'  But  I  fear  they  were 
vain  words.  [After  my  answering,  he  gave  me  several  directions, 
which  may  the  good  God  who  sent  him  enable  me  to  follow !] 

of  his  friends  the  Germans,  begins  his  all- important  conversation  with 
Spangenberg. 

Sun.  8. — By  eight  o'clock  he  has  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  *  Spal- 
lenberg,'  as  he  still  calls  him,  is  an  *  excellent  man.'  There  seems  to  have 
been  a  private  and  preliminary  service  for  *  our  Company,'  at  which  prayers 
were  read  and  a  sermon  preached,  probably  by  Spangenberg.  Afterwards 
Wesley  read  Bishop  *  Patrick  to  them,'  at  half-past  eleven  reading  prayers 
publicly,  preaching,  and  administering  the  Eucharist.  Oglethorpe  had  not 
yet  returned  from  Savannah,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Charles 
Wesley,  his  secretary,  was  with  him.  It  was  after  Holy  Communion  that 
Wesley  had  his  confidential  conversation  with  Spangenberg.  The  conversa- 
tion lasted  from  one  o'clock  till  half-past  two.  Immediately  after,  Wesley 
spent  half  an  hour  in  '  meditation  and  prayer.'  At  six,  whilst  he  was  singing 
with  Spangenberg,  Oglethorpe  arrived  from  Savannah.  The  hour  is  marked 
by  a  cross,  as  well  as  the  first  hour  of  the  day.  Later  in  the  evening  Oglethorpe 
had  an  interview  with  Spangenberg.  Wesley  also  had  private  conversation 
with  Oglethorpe  and  his  secretary.  The  ships,  the  shore,  and  Savannah 
were  places  of  anxious  business  for  the  chief,  and  his  friend  John  Wesley 
shared  the  burden. 

Wesley's  notes  on  the  day  are  : 

Mr.  Spallenberg  a  wise  man 

!  Advised  me  as  to  myself !    The  cross  once  more. 

The  cross  refers  to  something  that  happened  in  the  earliest  morning, 
when,  alone  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte,  he  could  not  record  in  the  Diary 
that  they  were  *  at  one ' ;  something  similar  occurred  when  Spangenberg  and 


152  John    Wesley s  Journal  [Feb. me. 

Mon.  9. —  [Mrs.  Welch  was  safely  brought  to  bed  by  Mrs. 
Stanley.  On  this  occasion  I  received  a  fresh  proof  how  little 
extraordinary  providences  avail  those  who  are  not  moved  by 
the  ordinary  means  He  hath  ordained  to  devote  their  whole 
souls  to  His  service.  Many  burials  and  some  deaths  I  have 
been  present  at,  but  I  never  yet  knew  a  soul  converted  by 
the  sight  of  either.  This  is  the  second  time  I  have  been 
witness — there  being  only  a  door  between  us — of  one  of  the 
deepest  distresses  which  life  affords.  The  groans  of  the  sick 
person  had  very  short  intermissions.  And  how  were  they  filled 
up  by  the  assistants  ?  With  strong  cries  to  God  ?  With 
counselling  her  that  was  encompassed  with  sorrows  of  death 
to  trust  in  Him  ?  With  exhortations  to  each  other  to  fear  Him 
who  is  able  to  inflict  sharper  pains  than  these  ?  No  ;  but  with 
laughing  and  jesting,  at  no  time  convenient,  but  at  this  least 
of  all.  Verily,  if  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  even 
the  thunder  of  His  power  they  will  not  understand. 

[In  the  afternoon,  the  boat  not  being  yet  come  which  was 
to  carry  Mr.  Spangenberg  and  his  people  to  Savannah,  we  took 
a  walk  on  the  shore.]  I  asked  him  many  questions,  both 
concerning  himself  and  the  church  at  Herrnhut.  The  substance 
of  his  answers  was  this  : 

[I  was  left  without  father  or  mother  when  I  was  ten  years  old. 
From  that  age  to  eighteen  I  lived  without  the  fear  of  God.]  I  was 
sent  to  the  University  of  Jena,  where  I  spent  some  years  in  learning 


Oglethorpe  were  with  him.  One  can  only  surmise  that  the  old  contention 
regarding  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  her  eligibility  for  admission  to  the  Lord's 
Table  had  again  arisen.  The  last  entry  is  : 

Resolved  to  follow  Christ ! 

Mon.  9. — Two  events  occurred  to-day.  Spangenberg  conversed  with  him 
closely,  and  *  Mrs.  Welch  was  brought  to  bed  by  the  midwife  who  came  last 
night  to  Savannah.'  That  Oglethorpe  should  have  had  the  good  sense  to 
bring  Mrs.  Stanley,  Wesley  regarded  as  '  an  extraordinary  providence,'  as 
undoubtedly  it  was.  The  death  of  Mrs.  Welch  would  have  cast  an  ominous 
cloud  upon  the  new  settlements. 

In  this  conversation  between  Wesley  and  Spangenberg  we  have  the 
origin  of  one  of  the  most  frequently  quoted  Rules  of  a  Helper.  Wesley's 
translation  of  this  passage  in  his  edition  of  the  Christian  Pattern  is  free  and 
peculiar  :  '  Be  not  familiar  with  any  woman  ;  but  in  general  commend  all 
good  women  to  God.'  What  Kempis  wrote,  literally  translated  was :  *  All 
good  women  avoid,  and  commend  them  to  God.'  Earlier  in  the  same 


Feb.  1736.1 


The   Voyage  153 


languages,  and  the  vain  philosophy  which  I  have  now  long  been  labour- 
ing to  forget.  Here  it  pleased  God,  by  some  that  preached  His  word 
with  power,  to  overturn  my  heart.  I  immediately  threw  aside  all  my 
learning  but  what  tended  to  save  my  soul.  I  shunned  all  company, 
and  retired  into  a  solitary  place,  resolving  to  spend  my  life  there.  For 
three  days  I  had  much  comfort  here,  but  on  the  fourth  it  was  all  gone. 
I  was  amazed,  and  went  for  advice  to  an  experienced  Christian.  When 
I  came  to  him  I  could  not  speak.  But  he  saw  my  heart,  and  advised 
me  to  go  back  to  my  house  and  follow  the  business  Providence  had 
called  me  to.  I  went  back,  but  was  fit  for  nothing.  I  could  neither 
do  any  business  nor  join  in  any  conversation.  All  I  could  say  to 
any  one  was,  Yes  or  No.  Many  times  I  could  not  say  that,  nor 
understand  the  plainest  thing  that  was  said  to  me.  My  friends  and 
acquaintance  looked  upon  me  as  dead,  came  no  more  to  me,  nor 
spoke  about  me. 

When  I  grew  better,  I  began  teaching  some  poor  children.  Others 
joining  with  me,  we  taught  more  and  more,  till  there  were  about  thirty 
teachers,  and  above  two  hundred  scholars.1  I  was  now  desired  by 
several  universities  to  accept  the  place  of  professor  of  Divinity  or 

chapter  Kempis  says — we  are  still  quoting  Wesley's  translation — '  Converse 
not  much  with  young  women  and  strangers.'  If  John  and  Charles  Wesley, 
and  Oglethorpe,  but  especially  John  Wesley,  had  promptly  and  persistently 
acted  upon  Spangenberg's  advice,  how  much  distress  and  failure  would 
have  been  avoided  !  In  justice,  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that 
Wesley  had  a  certain  standard  ideal  of  pastoral  duty  always  shining  before 
him,  and  that  the  perils  threatening  his  own  safety  as  he  followed  his  ideal 
urged  him  forward  rather  than  held  him  back.  His  resolution  was  'to 
follow  Christ,'  who  never  cast  out  the  vilest  offender.  The  terrible  charges 
laid  against  Mrs.  Hawkins  only  made  him  strive  the  more  daringly  to  save 
her  soul.  He  simply  told  her  what  was  alleged,  and  asked  if  it  were  true, 
and  if  so  did  she  repent  ?  There  is  no  trace  of  any  flirtation  with  Mrs. 
Hawkins  or  with  any  other  passenger.  He  was  an  indefatigable  and 
remorseless  pastor,  willing  to  suffer  the  loss  of  all  things  if  only  he  might 
save  a  soul  alive  and  hide  a  multitude  of  sins.  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Mrs. 
Welch  were  simply  the  most  lost  sinners  on  board.  He  did  for  them  what 
he  judged  Christ  would  have  done.2 


1  He  was  the  mainspring  in  keeping  House,  and  by  royal  patent  was  appointed 
the  free  schools  in  proper  activity,  and  assistant  theological  professor  in  the 
he  made  them  subservient  not  only  to  University.  Breithaupt  was  formerly  a 
the  education  of  poor  children,  but  to  the  powerful  preacher  at  Erfurt,  and  after- 
training  of  schoolmasters.  Wesley  gives  a  wards  a  professor  at  Halle  along  with 
full  account  of  Spangenberg's  work  as  a  Francke. 

teacher  of  children  (cf.  Journal,  Aug.  21,  '*•  See  translated  shorthand  in  Charles 

1738).     At  Halle  Spangenberg  became  Wesley's  Journal,   new    edition    in   the 

special  director  of  the  famous  Orphan  Finsbury  Library  (R.  Culley). 


154  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Feb.  me. 

Philosophy.  But  I  utterly  refused  it,  and  begged  of  God  with  my 
whole  heart  that  I  might  not  be  famous,  but  very  little  and  unknown. 

I  had  spent  some  years  thus,  when  Professor  Breithaupt,  of  Halle, 
died.  Being  then  pressed  to  accept  of  his  professorship,  I  believed 
it  was  the  call  of  God,  and  went.  I  had  not  been  long  there  before 
the  Director  of  the  University  found  many  faults  with  my  behaviour 
and  preaching ;  and  offences  increased  more  and  more,  till,  after 
half  a  year,  a  petition  against  me  was  sent  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  who 
sent  an  order  to  the  commander  at  Halle  ;  in  pursuance  whereof  I  was 
warned  to  leave  the  city  within  forty-eight  hours.1  I  did  so,  and  retired 
to  Herrnhut  to  Count  Zinzendorf,  [whom  I  had  known  for  several 
years.2  I  wrote  to  the  Directors  that  I  desired  to  know  my  crimes  ; 
but  they  never  sent  an  answer.  I  could  easily  have  cleared  myself  by 
a  public  defence  from  all  the  imputations  they  had  cast  upon  me  ; 
but  I  feared  it  might  lessen  the  success  of  their  ministry,  and  therefore 
chose  to  be  silent. 

[Count  Zinzendorf  is  about  thirty-six  years  old.  He  has  been 
full  of  the  love  of  God  from  a  child,  insomuch  that  he  has  sometimes 
owned  he  has  never  felt  the  love  of  the  world  one  quarter  of  an 
hour  in  his  life.] 

The  village  of  Herrnhut  contains  about  a  thousand  souls,  gathered 
out  of  many  nations.  They  hold  fast  the  discipline,  as  well  as  the  faith 
and  practice,  of  the  apostolical  Church.  I  was  desired  by  the  Brother- 
hood last  year  to  conduct  about  fifteen  of  them  to  Georgia,  where  two 
lots  of  ground  were  assigned  them  near  the  town  of  Savannah,  and 
another  in  the  country ;  and  with  them  I  have  stayed  ever  since. 


Tues.  10. — To-day  he  spent  some  time  in  writing  his  'Account.'  He 
dined,  conversed  for  some  time  with  his  brother  Charles,  and  is  once  more 
able  to  write  '  at  one.'  Here  a  line  of  some  importance  occurs  : 

3  On  board  Captain  Thomas,  in  talk.     On  board  Captain  Diamond. 

Was  this  another  emigrant-ship  ?  If  so,  we  now  have  four  ships  in  the 
expedition — or  expeditions,  for  there  may  have  been  more  than  one. 
Named  after  their  captains,  they  are  :  Captain  Gascoigne  (H.M.  sloop 
Hawk],  Cornish,  Thomas,  and  Diamond.  These  were  mercantile  marine 
officers,  or  of  the  Royal  Navy.  A  military  captain,  during  these  days 
and  afterwards,  is  often  named. 

Wesley  seems  to  have  greatly  admired  Captain  Hermsdorf,  who,  he 
says,  was  'very  zealous,'  and  with  whom  many  times  he  sang.  A  mysterious 


1  Yet  Frederick  was  favourable  to  the  Jena  and  Halle,  he  retired  to  the  Mora- 
Moravians,  and  wrote  in  gracious  terms  to  vian  settlement,  and  there  and  in  America, 
Zinzendorf.  for  sixty  years,  served  the  Church  of  the 

2  He    had    already   visited    Herrnhut  Brethren  with  a  zeal  and  devotion  seldom 
and  made  the  acquaintance  of  Zinzendorf.  equalled.     In   September  1792  he  'was 
After  the  short-lived    appointments    at  removed  to  a  higher  life.' 


Feb.  1T36.] 


The   Voyage  155 


I  asked,  Whither  he  was  to  go  next  ?  He  said,  '  I  have 
some  thoughts  to  go  to  Pennsylvania  [where  are  about  one 
hundred  of  my  countrymen  driven  by  persecution  out  of  their 
own  country,  who  have  neither  means  of  subsistence  where  they 
are  nor  money  to  transport  them  to  Georgia.  If  it  pleases 
God  that  I  shall  be  useful  to  them,  I  shall  be  glad  ;  and  if 
not,  I  shall  be  glad.]  But  what  God  will  do  with  me  I  know 
not.  I  am  blind.  I  am  a  child.  My  Father  knows ;  and 
I  am  ready  to  go  wherever  He  calls.' l 

[I  asked  Mr.  Spangenberg  of  Mrs.  Hawkins's  case,  and 
desired  his  advice  how  to  behave  towards  her.  He  answered  : 
1  My  dear  brother,  I  believe  our  friend  Kempis  advises  well, 
Ovines  bonus  mulieres  devita,  casque  Deo  commenda.  Not  that 
I  would  advise  you  to  give  her  up  quite,  but  to  converse  much 
may  be  dangerous  either  to  her  or  you.  It  may  be  best  to 
speak  to  her  seldom,  and  in  few  words,  and  earnestly  pray  God 
to  do  the  rest.'] 


combination  of  signs,  immediately  following  this  statement,  might  be  in- 
terpreted as  the  admission  of  Hermsdorf  to  the  inner  circle  of  '  our 
Company.'  May  we  not  think  of  Colonel  Oglethorpe  and  Captain 
Hermsdorf  as  the  first  Methodist  soldiers?  In  his  footnotes  for  the  day 
he  repeats  his  praise  of  Hermsdorf.  But  for  himself  he  writes  '  Lz  (Kvpte 
porjOti ! '),  and  adds  : 

A  poor,  careless,  lukewarm  day. 

Wed.  ii. — Twice  on  this  day  he  sings  with  Hermsdorf.  The  routine  of 
work  continues,  but,  between  shipboard  and  the  encampment  on  shore,  the 
distractions  are  many.  'Did  nothing'  and  '  got  no  good 'are  symptoms. 
Further,  he  is  beginning  to  realize  the  hopelessness  of  a  self-imposed  task. 
The  judgement  of  his  friends  respecting  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  the  shrewd 
advice  of  Spangenberg  are  both  being  justified.  Oxford  Methodism,  even 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  is  not  in  itself  all-powerful  for 
good.  This  is  the  entry  : 

Myself  and  company  nothing,  but  God  all  1  With  Mrs.  Hawkins  too  long,  therefore 
did  nothing. 

Thur.  12. — A  day  of  much  singing,  chiefly  with  Hermsdorf,  who  seems  to 
have  loved  singing,  and  likely  enough  introduced  Wesley  to  many  hymns 
and  tunes  of  the  Fatherland.  He  also  resumed  the  reading  of  his  Greek 
Testament,  spending  two  or  three  hours  with  it.  He  conversed  with 

1  He  remained  in  Georgia  and  Penn-  year  and  a  half  spent  in  Europe.  (On  Count 

sylvania  till  1739.     After  his  return  to  Zinzendorf  and  the  history  of  Herrnhut, 

America  in  1744,  he  continued  to  labour  see    Life    of    Spangenberg,     from     the 

there  until  1762,  with  the  exception  of  a  German  of  '  Ledderhose.') 


156  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Feb.  me. 

Fri.  13. — [We  received  information  that  Tomo-chachi  and 
his  Beloved  Men  were  coming  to  see  us.  They  sent  us  down 
a  side  of  venison  before  them.]  In  our  course  of  reading  to-day 
were  these  words  :  [*  I  will  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing. 
Fear  not,  but  let  your  hands  be  strong.]  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
of  Hosts,  It  shall  yet  come  to  pass,  that  there  shall  come  people, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities ;  and  the  inhabitants  of 
one  city  shall  go  to  another,  saying,  Let  us  go  speedily  to 
pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to  seek  the  Lord  of  Hosts :  I  will 
go  also.  Yea,  many  people  and  strong  nations  shall  come 
to  seek  the  Lord  of  Hosts  in  Jerusalem,  and  to  pray  before 
the  Lord.  [Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts  :  In  those  days  it 
shall  come  to  pass  that  ten  men  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirts 
of  a  Jew,  saying,  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  heard 
that  God  is  with  you.'] 

Sat.  14. — [In  our  course  of  reading  were  the  words  :  '  By  the 

Captain  Cornish  and  Mr.  Tackner,  they  both  being  convinced  ;  but 
Mrs.  Tackner  'gets  no  good.'  He  has  at  last  discovered  the  right  spelling 
of  Spangenberg's  name. 

Fri.  13. — He  spends  some  time  to-day  in  song,  conversation,  and 
prayer  with  Spangenberg  and  the  Germans.  At  nine  he  has  a  confidential 
talk  with  Oglethorpe,  whom  he  finds  'open  and  friendly.'  The  result  is 
that  from  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  four  in  the  afternoon  he  '  writes 
for  Oglethorpe.'  If  we  may  rely  upon  the  evidence  of  the  Diaries,  and  upon 
the  testimony  of  Charles  himself  in  his  Frederica  Journal,  Charles  Wesley, 
as  secretary,  was  an  utter  failure.  John,  on  the  contrary,  developed  an 
aptitude  for  secretarial  work  that  Oglethorpe  was  quick  to  recognize  and 
utilize.  On  this  day,  for  example,  at  9.30,  he  is  conversing  seriously  with 
Oglethorpe  ;  at  10.15  he  begins  to  write  for  him,  and  continues,  with  the 
usual  hourly  interludes  of  five  or  six  minutes  for  psalm  or  prayer,  until 
four  in  the  afternoon.  And  then,  for  the  first  time  in  the  long  day,  he 
breaks  his  fast.  A  long  spell  of  writing  for  Oglethorpe,  for  which  there 
is  no  trace  of  remuneration,  and  frequent  consultations  on  business  that 
must  have  been  delicate  in  the  extreme — these  are  the  common  facts  of  the 
Georgia  Diaries  whenever  the  two  men  are  together.  Little  wonder  that 
Oglethorpe  earnestly  desired  to  retain  in  the  colony  a  man  so  capable, 
so  absolutely  candid,  so  willing  to  work.  Little  wonder  if,  as  tradition 
alleges,  Oglethorpe,  meeting  Wesley  many  years  after,  fell  on  his  knees 
in  reverent  affection.  Oglethorpe  never  had  a  truer  or  a  more  unselfish 
friend  than  John  Wesley.  'Oglethorpe  open  and  friendly,'  wrote  Wesley 
at  the  close  of  this  day  ;  and  on  every  day  during  their  intimate  intercourse 
Oglethorpe  might  have  returned  the  compliment. 

Sat.  14. — This  morning  at  four  he  was  'sleepy'  and  'sick.'  Little 
wonderj  At  five  he  breakfasted  on  'bread  and  prayer.'  At  six  he  was 


I.    TOMO-CHACHI    (FROM    PART    I.    OF    THE  2.    AUGUST    GOTTLIEB    SPANGENBERG. 

'  AUSFUHRLICHE    NACHRICHTEN*). 


3-    BENJAMIN    INGHAM. 


4.    GENERAL    OGLETHORPE. 


157 


Feb.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  159 


blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of 
the  pit  wherein  is  no  water.  Turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold,  ye 
prisoners  of  hope.  Even  to-day  do  I  declare  I  will  render  double 
unto  thee.'  '  From  the  rising  up  of  the  sun  unto  the  going 
down  of  the  same  My  Name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles  ; 
and  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  My  Name,  and 
a  pure  offering  '  (Zech.  ix.  1 1,  12  ;  Mai.  i.  n). 

[One  of  the  Psalms  for  the  day  was  the  seventy-second,  a 
glorious  prophecy  of  the  propagation  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
The  Second  Lesson  was  Mark  xiii.,  containing  both  our  Lord's 
directions  to  the  first  publishers  of  His  gospel,  and  a  plain 
description  of  the  treatment  which  all  who  published  it  were  to 
expect  from  those  who  received  it  not.] 

About  one  Tomo-chachi,1  his  nephew  Thleeanouhee,  his  wife 
Sinauky,[and  the  Meikoor  King  of  the  Savannah  nation],  with  two 
of  their  chief  women,  and  three  of  their  children,  came  on  board. 
[Tomo-chachi,  Sinauky,  and  Toanoh  were  in  English  dress. 


singing  with  Spangenberg  ;  at  seven  '  within  with  Oglethorpe.'  At  nine 
he  read  prayers  and  expounded  ;  then  gave  an  hour  to  business  and  two 
hours  to  the  writing  of  his  '  Account.'  At  one  he  dressed  in  surplice  and  hood, 
as  did  Charles  and  Ingham,  took  down  his  Greek  Testament,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  and  at  1.15  received  Tomo-chachi.  At  a  quarter-past  two 
he  was  writing  the  account  of  the  interview.  At  four  he  dined  with 
Mr.  Spangenberg  and  Captain  Hermsdorf. 

Compare  his  account  of  this  Indian  visit  with  Ingham's  picturesque 
description  (Tyerman's  Oxford  Methodists^  p.  75,  and  App.  XVI.  vol.  vi.). 

This  was  Wesley's  first  contact  with  the  Indians.  He  had  come  to 
America  as  a  missionary  in  the  service  of  the  Society  for  the  Propagation 
of  the  Gospel.  His  fellow  voyagers  and  the  colonists  of  Savannah  and 
Frederica  were  only  incidentally  and  temporarily  under  his  pastoral  care. 
His  real  parishioners  were  these  dusky  Indians.  It  must  be  remembered, 
however,  that,  as  he  frankly  told  Dr.  Burton  (see  letter  in  the  Colman 
Collection,  App.  XII.,  vol.  vi.),  he  had  not  come  to  America  simply  and 
solely  to  save  either  Indians  or  colonists,  but  'to  save  my  own  soul.' 


1    Tomo-chachi  (the  names  are  vari-  sent  two  swans  to  the  Trustees  (Journal, 

ously  spelt)  was  chief  of  a  small  party  C.O.   5).     The  chief  lived   nearly  one 

of  Creek  Indians  settled  four  miles  from  hundred  years,  saw  Oglethorpe  again  in 

Savannah,  and  four  hundred  miles  from  1738,  was  visited  in  his  last  sickness  by 

the  main  body  of  the  Creek  tribes.     In  Whitefield,  died  near  Savannah  in  1739, 

1734  Oglethorpe  took  Tomo-chachi  and  was  buried  with   military   honours,  and 

his  wife  to  England  and  presented  them  enjoyed   the  greater  honour  of  an   Ode 

to  George  II  (after  whom  the  colony  was  written  by  Samuel  Wesley  (Gents.  Mag. 

named),  and  to  Queen  Caroline.     He  1739,  P-  22)« 


1 60  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Feb.  1736. 

The  other  women  had  on  calico  petticoats  and  coarse  woollen 
mantles.  The  Savannah  king,  whose  face  was  stained  red  in 
several  places,  his  hair  dressed  with  beads,  and  his  ear  with  a 
scarlet  feather,  had  only  a  large  blanket  which  covered  him  from 
his  shoulders  to  his  feet.  Sinauky  brought  us  a  jar  of  milk,  and 
another  of  honey,  and  said  she  hoped  when  we  spoke  to  them 
we  would  feed  them  with  milk,  for  they  were  but  children,  and 
be  as  sweet  as  honey  towards  them.] 

As  soon  as  we  came  in  they  all  rose  and  shook  us  by  the 
hand,  [women  as  well  as  men.  This  was  the  more  remarkable 
because  the  Indians  allow  no  man  to  touch  or  speak  to  a  woman, 
except  her  husband,  not  though  she  be  ill  or  in  danger  of  death. 
When  we  were  all  sat  down,]  Tomo-chachi  spake  by  his  inter- 
preter, one  Mrs.  Musgrovc,1  to  this  effect : 

'  I  am  glad  you  are  come.  When  I  was  in  England,  I  desired 
that  some  would  speak  the  Great  Word  to  me  ;  and  my  nation 
then  desired  to  hear  it.  But  since  that  time  we  have  been  all 
put  into  confusion.  [The  French  have  built  a  fort  with  one 
hundred  men  in  it  in  one  place,  and  a  fort  with  one  hundred  men 
in  it  in  another.  And  the  Spaniards  are  preparing  for  war. 
The  English  traders,  too,  put  us  into  confusion,  and  have  set  our 
people  against  hearing  the  Great  Word.  For  they  speak  with  a 
double  tongue  ;  some  say  one  thing  of  it  and  some  another.] 
Yet  I  am  glad  you  are  come.  I  will  go  up  and  speak  to  the 
wise  men  of  our  nation  ;  and  I  hope  they  will  hear.  But  we 
would  not  be  made  Christians  as  the  Spaniards  make  Christians  : 
we  would  be  taught  before  we  are  baptized.' 

[All  this  he  spake  with  great  earnestness,  and  much  action 
both  of  his  hands  and  head,  and  yet  with  the  utmost  gentleness 
and  softness  both  of  tone  and  manner.] 


Ingham,  like  Wesley,  had  studied  shorthand.  He  gives  a  full  report  of 
the  speeches.  As  we  have  already  seen,  he  also  had  some  knowledge  of 
the  tribal  tongue,  gleaned  from  Oglethorpe  during  the  voyage,  and  had 
commenced  an  Indian  Dictionary.  It  was  afterwards  arranged  that  Mrs. 
Musgrove  should  more  fully  instruct  Ingham,  and  that  he  should  teach 
Wesley.  To  what  extent  this  purpose  was  fulfilled  does  not  appear. 


1  Mrs.  Musgrove,  who  appears  fre-  (Record  Office,  CO.  5,  1734),  as  an 
quently  in  the  subsequent  Diary  records,  Indian  woman  married  to  a  white 
is  described  in  one  of  the  Georgia  Letters  trader. 


Feb.  1736.] 


The   Voyage 


161 


I  answered, '  There  is  but  One,  He  that  sitteth  in  heaven,  who 
is  able  to  teach  man  wisdom.  Though  we  are  come  so  far,  we 
know  not  whether  He  will  please  to  teach  you  by  us  or  no.  If 
He  teaches  you,  you  will  learn  wisdom  ;  but  we  can  do  nothing.1 
We  then  [saluted  them  all  as  before,  and]  withdrew. 

[Having  a  few  moments  to  myself,  before  we  went  to  the 
Indians,  I  took  down  my  Greek  Testament,1  which  opened  on 
these  words : 

'TyLtefc  yap  fjLi/jLrjral  eyevrfOrjre,  dSeXfot,,  TWV  e/cKXrjffiwv  rov 
Seov  T&V  OVGWV  ev  rfj  'lovSaLa  ev  Xpi(TTa)  'Irjcrov,  cm  ravra 
eirdOere  ical  vpels  VTTO  TWV  iSiwv  av/j,<t>v\€T(t)vt  /ca#a><?  ical  avrol 
VTTO  T&V  'lovSaiwv,  .  .  .  ical  Vfjas  €/c8ia)f~dvT(i)v,  ical  Seat  firj 

teal  Traaiv  dv0pct)7roi<;  evavriwv,  K0)\v6vra)v  ^yu-a 
\a\ij<Tai  iva 


The  '  few  moments  to  myself  '  were  between  one  o'clock  and  a  quarter- 
past,  during  which,  having  robed,  he  took  down  his  Greek  Testament. 

A  comparison  of  the  passage  from  I  Thess.  ii.  14-16  as  written  by 
Ingham  in  his  transcription,  with  Mill's  printed  text,  or  indeed  with  any 
Greek  text,  shows  inaccuracies,  chiefly  of  omission,  due  probably  to  Ingham's 


1  R.V. :  'For  ye,  brethren,  became 
imitators  of  the  churches  of  God  which 
are  in  Judaea  in  Christ  Jesus  :  for  ye  also 
suffered  the  same  things  of  your  own 
countrymen,  even  as  they  did  of  the 
Jews ;  .  .  .  and  drave  out  us,  and  please 
not  God,  and  are  contrary  to  all  men  ; 
forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles 
that  they  may  be  saved '  ( I  Thess.  ii. 
14-16). 

What  printed  text  of  the  Greek 
Testament  did  John  Wesley  use?  It 
must  be  remembered  that  he  was  an 
Oxford  man,  a  Greek  scholar,  and  a 
lover  of  best  things.  The  Greek  Testa- 
ment that  bore  the  imprimatur  of  the 
Vice-Chancellor  of  his  own  University, 
and  that  the  greatest  scholars  in  England, 
including  Bentley,  recognized  as  the  best 
edition  of  the  Greek  text  of  the  New 
Testament,  was  John  Mill's,  published  in 
Oxford  in  1707.  The  volume  was  the 
product  of  the  labour  of  thirty  years,  and 
its  author  died  within  a  fortnight  after  its 
publication.  The  royal  folio  edition, 


bound  in  calf,  its  Greek  text  in  fair  large 
type,  with  contractions  that  have  long 
since  gone  out  of  fashion  (but  of  which 
Wesley  preserves  a  list  in  his  Short  Greek 
Grammar,  Works^  vol.  xiv.  p.  82),  with 
Prolegomena  and  annotations  in  Latin, 
and  with  plates  and  initials  of  exceeding 
beauty,  has  come  from  Oxford  bookshelves 
for  the  service  of  this  edition  of  Wesley's 
Journal.  One  of  many  points  of  interest 
in  the  volume  is  the  initial  letter  of  the 
Apocalypse  representing  the  interior  of 
Bodley— the  great  library  which  Wesley 
frequented  and  constantly  refers  to  in  his 
first  Oxford  Diary. 

Whether  it  was  a  royal  folio  that  he 
took  down  on  this  memorable  day  may 
be  open  to  question,  though  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  he  had  with  him  on 
board  the  Simmonds  more  than  one 
ponderous  folio.  But  it  requires  no 
stretch  of  imagination  to  believe  that  in 
Oxford  his  hand  had  often  turned  the  fair 
pages  of  Mill's  superb  folio— possibly  of 
this  very  copy. 


LIBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 


1 62  John    We s leys  Journal  [Feb. me. 

Sun.  15. — Another  party  of  Indians  [of  the  Savannah  nation] 
came  ;  they  were  all  tall,  well-proportioned  men,  and  had  a 
remarkable  softness  in  their  speech  and  gentleness  in  their 
whole  behaviour.  In  the  afternoon  they  all  returned  home  but 
three,  [the  Meiko  and  two  others,]  who  stayed  to  go  with  Mr. 
Oglethorpe,  [and  hunt  with  him  at  the  Alatamahaw  river.] 

Mon.  16. — [About  six  in  the  evening]  Mr.  Oglethorpe  set 
out  for  the  new  settlement  on  the  Alatamahaw  river.  He  took 

haste  in  copying  (when  he  wrote  this  page  he  was  on  the  point  of  leaving 
for  Frederica),  and  not  to  Wesley's  original  draft,  though  that  also  was 
likely  enough  to  be  less  than  perfect,  if,  instead  of  again  taking  down  a 
royal  folio,  he  wrote  from  memory. 

Sim.  15. — At  the  Eucharist  there  were  thirteen  communicants.  After- 
wards he  conversed  with  Spangenberg  and  sang,  at  first  alone  with  him, 
and  then  in  company  with  his  friends. 

At  three  in  the  afternoon  there  was  a  formal  and  solemn  leave-taking 
of  the  Indian  visitors  : 

3  Took  leave  of  Tomo-chachi,  sung,  dined. 

4  Conversed,  all  open  and  friendly. 

5  Patrick  to  them,  read  prayers  and  expounded 

6  in  great  cabin.     Meditated.     In  talk. 

7  Prayed  with  them.     Sung.     Meditated. 

8  Great  cabin,  in  talk. 

9  Conversed  with  Spangenberg,  prayed. 

P  Took  leave  of  Tomo-chachi  and  wife ; 
We  all  open  and  friendly. 

This  was  Wesley's  first  contact  with  the  people  whom  he  had  come  to  save. 

Mon.  16. — Wesley  describes  this  as  a  'Hurry-day.'1  It  began  at  four 
in  the  morning,  and  did  not  close  until  half-past  ten  at  night.  He  read 
prayers  twice,  but  did  not  expound.  An  hour  with  Spangenberg  in  the 
early  morning  and  half  an  hour's  serious  conversation  with  Mrs.  Hawkins 
represented  the  pastoral  side  of  his  work.  The  rest  of  the  day,  except 
such  as  was  taken  up  in  dining  and  business,  was  devoted  to  Oglethorpe, 
whom  he  reports  as  *  open  and  friendly  and  convinced.'  For  seven  hours 
he  wrote  for  Oglethorpe,  snatching  half  an  hour  only  for  his  own  '  Account,' 
which  no  doubt  included  these  last  pages  of  the  Voyage  Journal.  We 
can  scarcely  be  surprised  if,  at  twelve  o'clock,  after  five  hours  of  steady 
writing,  a  Greek  text,  quoted  from  memory,  became  slightly  inaccurate. 

Ingham's  Journal  (Tyerman's  Oxf.  Meth.  p.  76)  may  be  consulted  for  an 
account  of  the  *  new  settlement,'  which  under  the  name  of  Frederica  (after 
Prussia's  great  king)  figures  so  prominently  in  the  Journals  of  John  and 
Charles  Wesley.  As  the  Wesleys  first  saw  it,  it  was  a  town  of  palmetto 
huts,  on  the  island  of  St.  Simon,  close  to  the  mainland,  and  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Alatamahaw  river. 

1  Was   this  a   Wesley   phrase;    have       Wesley's  hymn — 'In  a  Hurry  of  Busi- 
we  a   reminiscence  of  this    in    Charles       ness '  ? 


THIS  IS  PROBABLY  THE  EARLIEST  MAP  OF  THE  PROVINCES  OF  CAROLINA  AND  GEORGIA 
PREPARED    BY    GOVERNMENT    SURVEY. 

[Reproduced  by  permission  of  the  Colonial  Office. 
163 


Feb.  1736.] 


The   Voyage  165 


with  him  about  fifty  men  of  our  two  ships,  besides  Mr.  Ingham, 
Mr.  Hermsdorf,1  and  the  three  Indians.  [These  six  went  with 
Mr.  Oglethorpe  in  the  scout-boat,  the  rest  in  a  sloop  hired  on 
purpose.] 

Oglethorpe  returned  at  once  from  St.  Simon  to  the  mouth  of  the  Savannah 
river,  and,  without  waiting  to  visit  the  town  again,  conducted  a  second 
party  of  emigrants,  in  four  boats,  to  Frederica.  He  arrived  March  8,  and 
the  day  following  Charles  Wesley  arrived. 

With  the  sailing  of  the  boats  at  6.30  on  Monday,  February  16,  the 
version  of  Wesley's  Journal  transcribed  by  Ingham  comes  to  a  natural 
close.  For  some  weeks  we  are  entirely  dependent  on  the  printed  Journal, 
the  Diary,  Charles  Wesley's  Journal  (which,  however,  does  not  begin  before 
March  9,  the  day  of  his  arrival  in  Frederica),  on  the  residue  of  Ingham's 
Journal,  and  on  contemporary  correspondence. 

Tues.  17. — Distractions  notwithstanding,  he  continued  the  orderly  sequence 
of  devotional  exercises — '  private,'  '  company,'  and  public.  The  Company  was 
now  reduced  to  three,  for  Ingham  and  Oglethorpe  had  gone  down  the  coast 
to  Frederica,  taking  English  colonists  to  prepare  huts  for  the  married 
families  and  three  Indians  to  help  with  the  hunting.  Most,  if  not  all,  of  the 
Moravians  had  gone  with  Spangenberg  to  Savannah.  He  visited  the 
married  people  and  the  sailors  of  all  the  ships,  though  not  as  formerly,  for 
it  was  no  longer  possible  to  indulge  in  readings  and  long  conversations. 
Delamotte  was  with  him,  Charles  coming  and  going,  Mr.  Vanderplank, 
Captain  Dempsey,  and  another  captain  not  hitherto  named — Captain 
Deliegec  (the  name,  probably,  is  spelt  phonetically).  Being  left  in  charge  he 
is  often  *  on  business,'  but  finds  time  between  nine  and  twelve  to  write  his 
*  Account.'  His  notes  on  the  day  are  : 

P.  well.     Q.  [the  hourly  minutes  given  to  God]  a  cross. 

J.  Billinghurst  affected,  and  Mr.  Falcon,  f  Never  make  yourself 

Mrs.  Welch  angry  at  me.  \familiar,  cheap. 

Wed.  1 8. — New  people  are  named.  Mr.  Richards  came  ;  he  conversed 
with  Chance  and  company ;  and,  most  interesting  of  all,  J.  Billinghurst, 
F.  Hird,  and  *  Cosi ' 2  are  with  him  more  than  an  hour  ;  he  calls  them 
'  children,'  and  says  that  he  began  the  *  Bible  with  them ' — a  children's 
Bible-class.  He  notes  the  weather  as  'very  cold.'  He  sings  several  times 
during  the  day,  and  at  seven,  the  hour  he  used  to  spend  with  the  Germans, 
he  to-day  spends  with  '  German  Psalms.' 

9.     Lay  on  the  ground.     Slept  pretty  well  I 

1  Captain     Hermsdorf    was     military  was  hoped,  would  be  a  defensive  outpost 

attache  to  Oglethorpe.     Later  he  served  against  the  Spaniards  and   the  French, 

under  Oglethorpe  in  an  expedition  against  Hence,  probably,  the  grant  of  ,£10,000 

the  Spaniards  of  Florida.     It  should  be  voted  by  the  House  of  Commons  and  the 

remembered    that     whilst    the    Georgia  commissioning  of  the   Hawk  both  as  a 

colonization  project  was  mainly,  and  in  convoy  and  a  survey-ship, 

the  first  instance  exclusively,  philanthro-  2  F.  Hird  is  not  named  in  the  Clarke 

pic,    Protestant,   and   missionary,  it  ac-  list,  but   we  find   the  following :  *  John 

quired,    perhaps  as    was  inevitable,   an  Ilird,    12  ;    William    Chance,    10 ;    Jo. 

underlying  political  motive.     Georgia,  it  Cosins,   II.' 


1 66  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Feb.  1735. 


FIRST  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 

Thur.  19. — My  brother  and  I  took  boat,  and,  passing  by 
Savannah,  went  to  pay  our  first  visit  in  America  to  the  poor 
Heathens.  But  neither  Tomo-chachi  nor  Sinauky  was  at 
home.  Coming  back,  we  waited  upon  Mr.  Causton,  the  Chief 
Magistrate  of  Savannah.  From  him  we  went  with  Mr.  Span- 
genberg  to  the  German  brethren.  About  eleven  we  returned 
to  the  boat,  and  came  to  our  ship  about  four  in  the  morning. 

Sun.  22.1 — Mary  Welch,  aged  eleven  days,  was  baptized 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  first  Church,  and  the  rule  of 


Thur.  19. — At  3.30  a.m.  he  rises  from  his  cold  bed,  and  at  5.30  he  sets 
out  in  the  boat.  A  'hard  gale  '  compels  them  to  row.  By  10.30  they  are 
at  Savannah.  His  first  business  is  with  the  Indians  who  are  encamped  near 
the  Cowpen,  four  miles  away  ;  he  waits  in  the  boat,  presumably  for  a  guide, 
and  then  sets  out,  Greek  Testament  in  hand,  for  the  Cowpen,  which  he 
reaches  at  1.30.  He  calls  on  Mrs.  Musgrove,  and  at  two  o'clock  proceeds 
with  her,  as  interpreter,  to  the  Indian  town.  But  the  *  King '  is  not  there. 
His  Greek  Testament  solaces  him  on  his  return  journey  to  Savannah,  where 
he  calls  on  the  Chief  Magistrate  (Mr.  Causton),  and  has  a  *  good  time.'  Whilst 
they  are  conversing  Mr.  Spangenberg  arrives.  They  walk  together  in  the 
garden,  where  Mr.  Quincy,  the  minister  whose  cure  of  souls  Wesley  is 
to  take  over,  joins  them.  At  six  he  has  a  private  conversation  with  John 
Brownfield,  who,  with  himself,  had  been  entrusted  with  the  care  of  the 
immigrants.  Mr.  Quincy  rejoins  them,  and  they  have  a  'good  time 
together.'  By  7.15  he  is  again  singing  with  his  beloved  Germans.  Return- 
ing to  Mr.  Causton's,  he  sleeps  for  three  hours,  and  at  midnight  sets  out 
in  the  boat,  again  sleeping.  His  comment  on  this,  his  first  day  in  America, 
is  curious  : 

Beware  America,  be  not  as  England  I 

Fri.  20. — At  four  o'clock  he  was  again  on  board  the  Simmonds ;  tired, 
he  lay  down  till  6.30.  At  seven  he  'read  prayers,  expounded,  and  got  tea 
for  them ' — not  for  himself,  for  it  was  the  fast-day  of  the  Holy  Club,  and  he 
did  not  break  his  fast  until  three,  when  he  dined.  He  held  his  Bible-class 
with  J.  B[illinghurst]  and  Cosins,  and  in  the  German  hour  he  again  sang 
German  psalms  or  hymns. 

Sat.  21.— To-day  he  began  Greek  Testament  with  Charles  and  Delamotte. 
Otherwise,  it  was  a  day  of  miscellaneous  pastoral  conversation,  upon  which, 
especially  as  it  concerned  Mrs.  Hawkins,  he  did  not  look  back  with  satisfaction. 

Sun.  22. — After  prayers  and  exposition  he  conversed  with  Charles  and 
Delamotte,  sang  and  prayed.  This  morning  the  baby  born  the  day  after 

1  The  Diary  gives,  as  the  date  of  this  baptism,  not  Saturday  21,  but  Sunday, 
Feb.  22. 


Feb.  1736.]  First  Savannah  Journal  167 

the  Church  of  England,  by  immersion.1  The  child  was  ill 
then,  but  recovered  from  that  hour. 

Tues.  24. — Mr.  Oglethorpe  returned.  The  day  following 
I  took  my  leave  of  most  of  the  passengers  of  the  ship,  who 
all  appeared  serious.  It  may  be,  all  the  seed  is  not  fallen  upon 
stony  ground. 

their  arrival  at  Tybee  was  to  be  baptized.  For  half  an  hour  before  the 
solemn  service,  upon  which  he  had  thought  and  read  much,  he  prayed,  and 
at  9.30  'baptized  Mary  Welch  by  Trine  Immersion  1' 

Wesley  ordered  all  his  church  life,  his  administration  of  the  Sacraments, 
his  daily  devotions,  public  and  private,  his  weekly  fasts,  his  observance  of 
Sundays  and  other  holy-days,  according  to  what  he  believed  to  be  the 
custom  of  the  early  Church.  So  far  as  these  Diaries  and  the  Journal  are 
concerned,  there  is  no  evidence  that  his  churchmanship  was  '  high '  in  any 
other  sense.  In  his  strict  observance  of  rites  and  ceremonies,  in  his  loyalty 
to  rubrics  and  canon  law,  in  his  belief  that  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  met 
all  the  religious  needs  of  individual  and  national  life,  John  Wesley  was  a 
High  Churchman  of  the  early  Church  type.  But  to  what  extent  he  sympa- 
thized with  the  doctrinal  interpretation  placed  by  Anglican  and  Roman 
Catholics  upon  the  rites  he  so  scrupulously  observed,  is  quite  another 
question.  The  Georgia  Journal  and  Diary  suggest  a  devout,  somewhat 
antiquated  High-Church  Protestant,  whose  point  of  view  has  little  in 
common  with  the  Oxford  Tractarianism  of  a  later  time. 

In  the  evening  Charles  and  Delamotte  went  to  Savannah. 

Man.  23. — For  an  hour  in  the  early  morning  he  read  Clarendon,  whose 
Constitutions  he  had  studied  at  Oxford.  At  nine  he  translated  German 
psalms  ;  for  an  hour  read  Law  to  the  people,  of  whom  eleven  were  present ; 
in  the  afternoon,  on  shore,  he  began  to  read  Scougal  *  to  Mrs.  Hawkins. 
Two  hours  of  such  discipline  produced  a  serious  effect  ;  but,  as  he  observes  in 
a  footnote,  *  immediately,  in  light  company,  all  vanished.'  Returning  to  the 
ship,  he  read  prayers  and  expounded,  spending  the  rest  of  the  day  mostly 
in  writing  German. 

Tues.  24.— Colonel  Bull  called.  (We  shall  meet  him  again,  during 
Wesley's  first  visit  to  Charlestown.)  After  prayers  he  wrote  German,  read 

1  Trine,  or  Triple,  Immersion  was  the  here  for  the  first  time.     Charles  Wesley 

custom  of  the  very  early  Church  (Smith's  seems  to  have  been  the  first  member  of 

Dictionary  of  Christian  Antiqtdties,  vol.  i.  the   Holy   Club   to   make    acquaintance 

p.  161).    The  Prayer-book  of  Edward  VI,  with  Scougal's  writings.      He   lent  the 

which  Wesley  had  prepared  for  examina-  Life  of  God  to  George  Whitefield  ;  even- 

tion  in  1725,  prescribed  it.     He  regarded  tually  it   led   to  his  conversion.     John 

it  as  the  law  of  the   Church.     Ancient  Wesley  afterwards  published  an  edition 

fonts  in  English  churches  were  designed  of  the  book,  and  included  a  volume  of 

for  immersion.  Scougal's    sermons    in     The     Christian 

*  Scougal,   the   Scotch   mystic,  whose  Library  (Butler's  Wesley  and  Whitefield 

Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of  Man  and  other  in  Scotland,  pp.  7,  67,  68  ;   and  Butler's 

devotional  writings  played  an  important  Henry  Scougal). 
part  in  the  Methodist  Revival,  appears 

VOL  I.  Q 


1 68  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

In  the  evening  I  went  to  Savannah  again,  whence  Mr.  Span- 
genberg,  Bishop  Nitschmann,  and  Andrew  Dober  1  went  up  with 
us  to  Mrs.  Musgrove's,  to  choose  a  spot  for  the  little  house 
which  Mr.  Oglethorpe  had  promised  to  build  us.  Being  after- 
ward disappointed  of  our  boat,  we  were  obliged  to  pass  the 
night  there.  But  wherever  we  are  it  is  the  same  thing,  if  it 
be  the  will  of  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

At  our  return  the  next  day  (Mr.  Quincy2  being  then  in  the 
house  wherein  we  afterwards  were),  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I  took 


the  Account  of  the  Church  in  Herrnhut,  and  at  noon  conversed  and  sang 
with  the  children.  The  event  of  the  day  was  the  safe  return  of 
Mr.  Oglethorpe  from  Frederica. 

Wed.  25. — To-day  he  took  leave  of  his  fellow  passengers  who  still  re- 
mained on  board  the  Simmonds.  The  Moravians  of  the  party  had  already 
settled  in  Savannah.  The  Saltzburghers  from  the  London  Merchant  had 
gone  to  Ebenezer,  where  Wesley,  much  later,  visited  them.  The  English 
immigrants  of  the  London  Merchant  party  appear  to  have  proceeded,  with 
Ingham  and  other  leaders,  to  Frederica,  where  they  served  as  pioneers 
for  the  married  people,  who,  with  Hermsdorf  and  Charles  Wesley,  were  about 
to  join  them.  The  distance  between  the  Savannah  river  and  Frederica 
was  about  one  hundred  miles. 

The  leave-taking  was  not  a  perfunctory  farewell,  but  a  last  attempt, 
by  close  conversation  and  prayer,  to  influence  every  family.  It  is  curious 
to  note  how,  even  on  such  an  occasion,  he  clung  to  his  books.  He  had 
a  volume  of  Law  with  him,  also  Nelson,  and  read  from  them.  At  four 
in  the  afternoon  he  '  shaved.'  The  purpose  of  the  shaving  entry  is  revealed 
in  the  two  letters  that  follow — '  m,  p,J  which,  interpreted,  mean  '  meditation 
and  prayer.'  No  moment  was  lost.  He  strove  to  fulfil  the  injunction  '  in 
everything  by  prayer '  with  a  literalness  more  pathetic  than  amusing.  The 
page  in  the  Diary  can  be  deciphered  without  difficulty.  In  the  first  line 
of  the  summary  the  figure  '40'  is  a  curious  use  of  the  old  cipher,  the 
meaning  being— 'spoke  to  each.  All  affected.'  Then,  so  far  as  his  own 
personal  relation  to  God  is  concerned— Lz,  Kvpte  fiorjdfi. 

He  had  closed  the  day,  ruling  his  Diary,  when,  at  ten  o'clock, 
Mr.  Spangenberg  and  Bishop  Nitschmann  came.  With  them  he  had 
a  private  ('intra')  interview  which  lasted  until  11.45  p.m.,  when  he  '  lay  on 
the  ground.' 

1  Wesley's  Andrew  Dober  was  brother  Oglethorpe,  writing  to  the  Trustees  and 
to  Leonhard  Dober,  of  Herrnhut.  quoting  a  letter  from  Wesley  respecting 

2  Samuel    Quincy,    born    in     Massa-  Quincy's   character,    says   that   his   only 
chusetts,     was     the     first     minister     in  fault  was  '  marrying  a  native  woman  to 
Georgia.     For  his  appointment,  and  its  an    Englishman '    (Fitzwater).       Tomo- 
revoking   *  for  good   and   sufficient  rea-  chachi  gave  the  bride   away,   and  both 
sons,'  see   Journal  of  Georgia  Trustees,  Indians  and  colonists  approved. 
December    1732,    and    October     1735. 


Feb.  1736.]  First  Savannah  Journal  1 69 

up  our  lodging  with  the  Germans.  We  had  now  an  oppor- 
tunity, day  by  day,  of  observing  their  whole  behaviour.  For 
we  were  in  one  room  with  them  from  morning  to  night,  unless 
for  the  little  time  I  spent  in  walking.  They  were  always 
employed,  always  cheerful  themselves,  and  in  good  humour 
with  one  another  ;  they  had  put  away  all  anger,  and  strife,  and 
wrath,  and  bitterness,  and  clamour,  and  evil-speaking  ;  they 
walked  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  they  were  called, 
and  adorned  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  in  all  things.1 

Thur.  26. — At  four  he  and  Spangenberg — who  probably  had  shared  his 
bed  on  the  ground,  Nitschmann  sleeping  elsewhere — prayed  together.  He 
began  an  *  Account '  of  what  had  happened  since  the  'Account  of  the  Voyage,' 
by  this  time  in  multiplied  copies  on  its  way  to  England.  The  *  Account ' 
now  in  course  of  writing  is  lost,  with  the  exception  of  brief  extracts  in  the 
printed  Journal.  In  place  of  the  usual  exposition  he  this  morning  preached 
a  sermon.  It  was  the  last  of  a  series  of  ship-board  sermons.  Later  in  the 
morning  Mrs.  Hawkins  came.  He  'told  her  of  all  her  faults  and  advised 
her  against  light  company.  She  was  seriously  affected,  and  resolved  [to  do 
as  Wesley  advised].' 

At  eleven  he  set  out  with  Spangenberg,  Nitschmann,  and  company, 
conversing  as  they  sat  in  the  boat  and  reading  an  account  of  the  Brethren. 
At  1.45  in  the  afternoon  they  arrived  at  Savannah.  He  dined  with  the 
Germans,  and  at  three  set  out  with  Spangenberg,  Nitschmann,  and  Dober 
for  the  Cowpen,  where  they  saw  the  ground  allotted  for  the  house  in  which 
Ingham  afterwards  lived.  The  house  was  designed  as  an  Indian  mission- 
house.  About  the  ground  they  talked  casually  ;  but  with  Spangenberg  and 
his  company  Wesley  conversed  seriously  till  six,  and  again  till  seven,  and 
again,  still  with  them,  till  nine,  when  they  sang  together  till  ten.  At  the 
unusually  late  hour  of  eleven  the  day,  that  began  at  four  in  the  morning, 
ended — he  *  lay  down.' 

Fri.  27. — At  five  he  prayed,  sang,  and  conversed.  At  six  they  set  out, 
talking  and  reading  together  as  they  walked,  until  eight  o'clock,  when  they 
reached  Savannah  and  'breakfasted  with  the  Germans  on  Indian  corn.' 
Wesley  sorted  books  and  clothes,  being  then,  as  always,  a  neat  and 
orderly  man.  At  1.30  he  and  Spangenberg  discussed  'mystical  divinity,' 
his  friend  acknowledging  himself  a  '  Mystic.'  At  three  they  talk  of  the 
1  ministry.'  Spangenberg  '  denies  the  succession.'  Thus  they  converse 
until  5.30,  when  Wesley  falls  to  meditation  and  singing — his  only  recreation. 


1  The    Moravians   were    regarded   by  educated  people,  did  they  seem  capable 

the  authorities  in  England  as  mission-  of  undertaking   missionary  work.   Ogle- 

aries,  and   not  merely  as  colonists.     At  thorpe,  however,  took  an  opposite  view, 

first  the  Georgia  Trustees  objected  to  the  He    threw    the    whole    weight    of    his 

original   detachment   with   Spangenberg  authority  into  the  scales  in  favour  of  the 

at   their  head,    because   they   were   not  Brethren,  and   acquired  a  grant  of  500 

exiles  from  persecution.     Nor,  being  un-  acres  for  Zinzendorf,  and  one  of  50  acres 


170 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[Feb.  1736. 


Sat.  28. — They  met  to  consult  concerning  the  affairs  of 
their  church ;  Mr.  Spangenberg  being  shortly  to  go  to  Penn- 
sylvania, and  Bishop  Nitschmann  to  return  to  Germany.  After 
several  hours  spent  in  conference  and  prayer,  they  proceeded  to 
the  election  and  ordination  of  a  bishop.1  The  great  simplicity, 
as  well  as  solemnity,  of  the  whole,  almost  made  me  forget  the 
seventeen  hundred  years  between,  and  imagine  myself  in  one 
of  those  assemblies  where  form  and  state  were  not,  but  Paul 


At  6.15  he  is  again  with  Spangenberg.  They  talk  of  Mr.  Gambold,  then 
an  Oxford  Methodist,  a  Mystic,  the  rector  of  Stanton  Harcourt,  the  kindly 
host  of  Kezia  Wesley ;  but  destined,  six  years  later,  to  abandon  his 
comfortable  and  leisurely  living  for  the  poverty  and  uncertainty  of  the 
Moravian  ministry.  They  read  *  Whitfield's  case,'  sang  with  the  Germans  ; 
then,  after  writing  his  Diary,  undressing,  and  praying,  the  tired  man  slept. 

Sat.  28. — He  and  Delamotte  were  now  living  with  the  Germans. 
Spangenberg,  pre-eminently  a  scholar ;  Nitschmann,  originally  a  carpenter 
but  now  a  bishop  ;  Andrew  Dober  and  Anton  Seifart,  were  all  present. 
The  conversation  again  turned  on  the  Mystics.  At  nine  Wesley  began 
the  German  Grammar  with  Spangenberg.  Whilst  sorting  his  'things' 
Mr.  Quincycame. 

At  noon  he  walked  in  the  German  garden,  meditating  and  sing- 
ing. Grammar,  dinner,  and  the  writing  of  his  Diary  followed.  He  walked 
awhile  with  Delamotte  and  began  The  Light  of  the  World.  In  the  evening 
he  returned  from  Mr.  Quincy's  to  the  Germans,  and  saw  the  ordination 
of  Bishop  Anton  Seifart—'  a  far-seeing  and  humble-minded  man.'  In  his 
eightieth  year  Wesley  met  Seifart  again  at  Zeist. 

Probably  it  was  Wesley's  glowing  description  of  a  Moravian  ordination, 
read  to  the  society  in  Hutton's  house  at  Westminster,  that  led  James 
Hutton  (writing  to  Wesley  in  September  1736)  to  say,  'Take  care  to  inquire 


for  Spangenberg — both  plots  being  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Savannah.  Zinzen- 
dorf  appointed  Spangenberg  first  minister 
in  Georgia.  To  ensure  his  position  in 
the  colony  in  relation  to  Anglican 
ministers,  Spangenberg  applied  to  the 
Bishop  of  London  for  ordination, 
Vernon  introducing  him.  The  bishop 
is  said  to  have  consented,  but  for  some 
unknown  reason  the  ordination  did  not 
take  place.  Bishop  Nitschmann,  who 
had  come  from  Herrnhut  with  the 
first  ten  Brethren,  handed  over  his 
pastoral  charge  to  Spangenberg,  who 
accompanied  the  little  flock  to  Georgia. 
They  arrived  in  June  1735.  In  the 
autumn  of  the  same  year  Nitschmann, 


with  a  second  party  of  Moravians, 
amongst  whom  were  the  wives  of  some 
of  the  first  settlers,  sailed  in  the 
Simmonds  with  Oglethorpe  himself  and 
the  four  Oxford  friends. 

1  Potter,  who  as  Bishop  of  Oxford  had 
ordained  Wesley,  Ingham,  Gambold,  and 
other  members  of  the  Holy  Club,  if  he 
did  not  officially  recognize,  did  not  dis- 
allow the  validity  of  the  Moravian 
orders.  In  conversation  with  Zinzendorf 
the  Archbishop  said  '  that  he  considered 
all  the  objections  to  the  Moravian  epis- 
copal succession  trivial.  Only  those  who 
were  ignorant  of  church  history  could 
doubt  its  validity.' 


Feb.  1736.1  First  Savannah  Journal  1 7 1 

the  tent-maker  or  Peter  the  fisherman  presided,  yet  with  the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power. 

Sun.  29. — Hearing  Mr.  Oglethorpe  did  not  come  any  more 
to  Savannah  before  he  went  to  Frederica,  I  was  obliged  to 
go  down  to  the  ship  again  (Mr.  Spangenberg  following  me 
thither)  and  receive  his  orders  and  instructions  on  several 
heads.  From  him  we  went  to  public  prayers  ;  after  which  we 
were  refreshed  by  several  letters  from  England.  Upon  which 
I  could  not  but  observe  how  careful  our  Lord  is  to  repay  what- 
ever we  give  up  on  His  account.  When  I  left  England,  I  was 
chiefly  afraid  of  two  things  :  one,  that  I  should  never  again 
have  so  many  faithful  friends  as  I  left  there  ;  the  other,  that  the 
spark  of  love  which  began  to  kindle  in  their  hearts  would  cool 
and  die  away.  But  who  knoweth  the  mercy  and  power  of  God  ? 
From  ten  friends  I  am  awhile  secluded,  and  He  hath  opened  me 
a  door  into  a  whole  Church.1  And  as  to  the  very  persons  I 
left  behind,  His  Spirit  is  gone  forth  so  much  the  more,  teaching 
them  not  to  trust  in  man,  but  '  in  Him  that  raised  the  dead, 
and  calleth  the  things  that  are  not  as  though  they  were.' 

carefully  and  strictly  concerning  the  mission  of  the  Moravian  bishop.  I  will 
make  what  inquiries  I  can.  A  great  deal  depends  upon  the  validity  of 
ordinations.1 2 

Sun.  29.— He  was  at  Mr.  Quincy's  house  when  Hird  and  Davison  came 
from  the  ship  with  news  of  Oglethorpe.  At  ten  he  took  boat,  and,  reading 
his  Greek  Testament  all  the  way,  came  to  the  ship  at  1.45.  Charles  was 
there.  He  had  a  long  interview  with  Oglethorpe,  read  prayers,  and  ex- 
pounded, *  all  the  sailors  being  affected.'  *  Read  letters  from  Oxon.  They 
zealous.' 


1  The  first  edition  of  the  Journal,  printed  case    reproduces  what  Wesley  actually 

by  S.  and  F.  Farley,  Bristol,  and  sold  at  wrote.     We  must  not  press  the  number 

the  New  School-House  in  the  Horse-Fair,  ten  too  far,  as  though  it  was  intended  to 

has  a  different  reading :  '  From  ten  friends  be  a  numerical  return  of  the  member- 

I  am  awhile  secluded  ;   and    He    hath  ship  of  the  Holy  Club  in  Oxford  when 

opened  me  a  door  into  the  whole  Moravian  Wesley  left. 

Church.'       The    name     '  Moravian '    is          2  Zinzendorf,  who   only  a   few   weeks 

omitted  in  the  edition  of  1771  ( Works >  later  came  to  London  and  took  Lindsey 

vol.    xxvi.    p.    123).      Benson,    in    his  House,    near   the  Georgia    offices,    was 

edition  of  Wesley's  IVorks,  naturally  and  even   now  feeling  his  way  towards  the 

rightly  follows  the    1771    edition ;    and  official     recognition     of      the     English 

Jackson,  in  the  edition  which  has  been  Moravians    as    a    Church     within     the 

regarded  as  most  accurately  representing  English   Church.       From   this   point   of 

the  original,  follows  Benson.     There  can  view  a  great  deal  undoubtedly  did  depend 

be  no  doubt  that  the  first  edition  in  this  on  the  validity  of  ordinations. 


172  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [March me. 

About  four,  having  taken  leave  of  Mr.  Spangenberg,  who  was 
the  next  morning  to  set  out  for  Pennsylvania,  I  returned  to 
Savannah.1 


MARCH  i,  Mon. — He  gave  Oglethorpe  the  whole  morning,  writing  for 
him.  At  3.30  *  Mrs.  Hawkins  came,  conversed  ;  she  deeply  melancholy. 
She  would  not  speak.  In  despair  !  got  no  good.'  The  evening  devotional 
hour  with  Charles  and  Delamotte  was  spent  partly  in  prayer  for  this 
unhappy  woman.  He  saw  her  husband,  and  again  prayed  for  her.  At 
nine  he  spent  one  hour  in  prayer  for  her  and  in  meditation  on  her  case. 
'  O  Jesu  !  /Soiree  !  the  cross/ 

Then  he  conversed  with  Hird,  and  from  him  went  to  talk  the  matter 
over  with  Oglethorpe,  but  'he  cannot  guess.'  It  was  nearly  midnight 
before  his  reflections  on  this  mystery  of  despair  and  hysteria  ceased. 

Tues.  2. — 'Sung;  prayed  for  Mrs.  Hawkins' — this  is  the  first  line  in 
the  Diary  for  the  day.  He  then  gave  an  hour  to  Delamotte  and  the 
Bible,  before  reading  prayers  and  expounding  below.  One  cannot  read 
the  Second  Lesson  for  the  day — Luke  xiii.,  which  he  expounded — without 
some  understanding  of  the  hope  that  this  woman,  whom  Satan  had  bound, 
might  be  loosed.  At  this  point  we  find  an  entry,  abbreviated  and 
partially  cryptic  : 

8.  Wrote  conference  with  Mrs  Hawkins. 

9.  Conversed  with  her.     She  deeply  afflicted. 

All  the  morning  he  is  either  conversing  seriously  with  her,  or,  in 
company  with  devout  friends,  is  praying  for  her.  At  one  he  interests 
Oglethorpe  and  his  company  in  the  case.  After  dinner  he  consults 
Spangenberg,  who  has  come  from  Savannah  to  bid  Wesley  farewell  : 
he  '  hopes  for  her.'  The  last  entry  for  the  day  is  : 

9.     Conversed  with  Mrs    Hawkins  and  Mrs  Welch.        Mrs   Hawkins  in  a   fever, 
mild  but  utterly  inconsolable.     Took  solemn  leave. 

The  whole  day  he  sums  up  in  a  sentence  :  '  Mrs  Hawkins  inconsolable.' 

The  Diary  page  for  the  day  following  completes  the  present  phase 
of  this  extraordinary  unveiling  of  Wesley's  pastoral  conscience. 

Wed.  3. — He  rose  at  3.30  and  dressed  for  the  day — one  of  the 
long  days  of  his  life — a  day  of  nineteen  hours,  without  either  food 
or  sleep  ;  a  day  of  intense  thought  and  emotion.  We  can  picture  him 
with  Delamotte  in  the  cabin — clean  and  neat  and  well-appointed.  He 
prayed  for  Mrs.  Hawkins.  At  four  'wrote  second  conference.'  At  five 
he  talked,  sang,  prayed,  fasted  ;  at  six  conversed  with  Mrs.  Hawkins : 
'She  sad  but  mild.  I  hope  for  her.'  At  seven  conversed.  'They  took 
boat.  Prayed  for  them.  She  softened.'  At  eight  for  half  an  hour  he 
prayed  for  them ;  then  meditated.  But  at  nine  he  was  once  more  a 


1  The  printed  Journal  unintentionally  Diary  shows  that  he  slept  on  board,  and 
conveys  the  impression  that  he  returned  indeed  continued  in  attendance  on  Ogle- 
to  Savannah  on  the  Sunday  night.  The  thorpe  until  4  o'clock  on  Wed.  Mar.  3. 


March  1736.]  First  Savannah  Journal  173 

man  of  action.     He   sat  down  to  write  his  Journal,  and  for  nearly  five 
hours  continued  the  task. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  he  was  frank  to  a  fault.  He  concealed 
nothing,  told  Mrs.  Hawkins  all  the  faults  he  himself  and  others  saw. 
He  consulted  every  person  who,  conceivably,  might  help — her  husband, 
Oglethorpe,  Spangenberg,  Nitschmann,  Charles,  Delamotte,  even  Hird 
and  Brownfield.  The  whole  circle  of  friends  and  acquaintances  knew 
everything  that  was  going  on.  Anxious  not  to  deceive  himself,  and 
always  conscious  of  his  responsibility  to  the  'Company'  in  Oxford  and 
London  who  confided  in  his  leadership,  he  committed  the  case  from  day 
to  day  to  the  cold  dry  light  of  'Account,'  'Statement,'  'Conference,' 
'Journal,'  'Diary.'  And  half  a  century  afterwards  he  deliberately  left  the 
'open'  record  of  this  strange  story,  without  further  comment,  to  the 
judgement  of  posterity. 

What  Charles  thought  and  suffered  during  this  time  may  be  gathered 
from  his  Journal  (see  new  edition  in  Finsbury  Library,  published  by  R. 
Culley).  John  also  suffered,  but  he  was  sustained  by  the  exaltation  of  the 
mystic.  His  semi-cryptic  ejaculations  would  lead  to  the  suspicion  that  he 
believed  himself,  in  some  humble  measure,  to  be  knowing  the  fellowship 
of  his  Lord's  sufferings — in  the  reproaches  of  angry  friends  enduring  the 
cross,  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  despising  the  shame. 

The  Simmonds  had  now  fulfilled  her  commission.  The  married  people, 
in  four  boats,  with  Oglethorpe  in  command  (though  he  did  not  actually 
leave  until  the  day  following)  and  his  secretary,  Charles  Wesley,  in  one 
of  the  boats,  proceeded  by  the  coast  route  to  Frederica,  where  fifty 
unmarried  English  immigrants  were  building  palmetto  huts  under  the 
direction  of  Captain  Hermsdorf,  with  Benjamin  Ingham  as  spiritual 
director.  Spangenberg  was  now  on  his  way  to  Pennsylvania,  leaving 
Nitschmann  in  charge  of  the  Moravian  church  in  Savannah,  with 
instructions  to  preside  over  the  solemn  ceremony  of  choosing  and 
ordaining  a  bishop. 

One  cannot  resist  the  conviction  that,  if  the  Wesleys  and  Ingham 
had  held  appointments  as  sharply  defined  as  was  the  status  of  Nitschmann, 
much  of  the  misunderstanding  that  subsequently  arose  would  have  been 
avoided.  Trouble  came  from  the  mixed  and  provisional  character  of  the 
appointments.  John  Wesley  went  to  Georgia  as  missionary  to  the 
Indians,  and  found  himself  in  charge  of  a  pastorate — English,  Spanish, 
French,  Hebrew,  German.  Charles  Wesley  went  as  '  Secretary  for  Indian 
Affairs,'  and  found  himself  in  charge  of  a  nondescript  parish.  Ingham 
went  as  missionary  to  the  Indians,  and  never  really  found  his  sphere, 
but  was  driven  hither  and  thither  by  the  exigencies  of  Frederica  and 
Savannah,  and  by  the  restlessness  of  his  own  spirit.  The  people  were 
heterogeneous — saintly  Moravians  and  Saltzburghers,and  British  Adullamites 
from  debtor-prisons,  with  a  sprinkling  of  adventurous  English  gentlemen, 
Scotch  Highlanders,  and  worthy  artisans,  who  had  nothing  in  common. 
The  colonies  were  scattered  in  small  groups  over  a  wide  area,  without 
roads  or  other  means  of  intercommunication,  except  by  dangerous 
coasting  or  equally  perilous  river  navigation.  The  chief  men  of  the 
new  colony  were  as  incongruous  as  the  people  they  strove  to  govern  or 


1 74  John   Wesley's  Journal  [March  1736. 

teach.  Oglethorpe,  the  Wesleys,  Ingham,  Hermsdorf,  Horton,  Von  Reck, 
Nitschmann,  Anton  Seifart,  Causton,  Christie,  the  planters ;  and  men 
like  Reed,  Hird,  and  Brownfield,  of  inferior  social  standing  but  of 
considerable  influence, — they  were  all  imperfectly  trained,  and  either 
undisciplined,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Wesleys,  over-disciplined.  They 
lacked  the  drill,  the  common  purpose,  the  esprit  de  corps,  that  bring 
men  into  line,  and  that  make  government  by  semi-democratic  means  both 
efficient  and  just.  Little  wonder  that  difficulties  arose,  and  frequent  mis- 
understandings. 

But  our  chief  concern  here  is  with  the  effect  produced  in  the 
development  of  John  Wesley.  Was  it  not  in  part  as  the  result  of  lessons 
learned  amidst  the  confusions  and  failures  of  Georgia  that  he  became 
one  of  the  most  capable  leaders  and  rulers  the  Church  has  ever  known  ? 
Both  Journal  and  Diary  now  bring  us  to  Wesley's  ministry  in  Georgia. 
It  was  a  ministry  partly  settled  and  parochial,  partly  itinerant  and 
episcopal.  It  was  a  ministry  of  lofty  purposes  and  great  conceptions  of 
duty  ;  a  ministry  that  gathered  its  ideals  from  the  earliest  centuries  of 
church  history  ;  a  ministry  priestly  and  dominant,  yet  severely  controlled 
by  law,  rule,  usage,  and  by  a  remorseless  pursuit  of  duty — always  remorse- 
less save  when,  in  spite  of  himself,  the  priest  became  a  man,  and  the 
pathway  was  traversed  by  affection  and  human  weakness.  Underneath 
the  steel-bound  system  there  throbbed  a  heart  that  craved  to  give  and 
receive  sympathy.  The  gentleness  that  eventually  made  him  great 
became  his  weakness.  Blinded  by  tears,  eyes  that  ordinarily  could  read 
men  through  and  through  failed.  He  could  not  discern  spirits.  He 
misread  the  simplest  facts.  A  shrewd  observer,  for  a  while  he  became  the 
sport  of  fools  and  hypocrites.  But  this  also  was  training,  painful  to  a 
proud  man,  but  salutary,  for  by  the  things  he  suffered  was  he  perfected 
for  the  ministry  of  the  future. 

One  other  fact  has  to  be  remembered  as  we  study  the  Georgia 
Journal.  Wesley  was  still  in  one  of  the  lower  classes  of  the  school  of 
Christian  doctrine.  As  yet  he  knew  only  enough  to  bring  him  into  a 
great  and  holy  bondage.  He  had  still  to  learn  the  truth  that  makes 
men  free.  He  was  in  Damascus,  in  the  street  that  is  called  Straight, 
waiting  for  the  coming  of  Ananias  and  the  word  of  full  release. 

Thur.  4. — He  had  hitherto  been  a  visitor  in  Savannah,  coming  and 
going  between  town  and  ship.  Even  now,  so  long  as  Mr.  Quincy 
remained  in  the  parsonage,  he  was  not  fully  installed  as  minister  of  the 
parish  with  full  control.  He  still  lodged  with  the  Moravians,  and  to 
some  extent  shared  their  life.  There  was  no  church  in  the  town, 
though  the  Trustees  had  set  apart  a  lot  for  the  purpose,  and  held  ever- 
increasing  funds  for  the  erection  of  a  building.  The  intention  was  not 
carried  out  during  Wesley's  time.  The  court-house  served  as  church — 
possibly  also  as  school-house — except  when  the  magistrates'  court  was 
in  session,  or  when  it  was  required  for  Indian  conferences  or  other 
state  functions.  The  fact  that  the  community  was  small — probably  never 
numbering,  in  Wesley's  time,  more  than  a  thousand  souls — and  that 
offices,  titles,  and  pomp  of  authority  were  absurdly  magnified,  must  not 
be  allowed  to  mislead  the  student.  To  the  Chief  Magistrate,  the 


March  1736.1  First  Savannah  Journal  175 

MARCH  6,  Sat.— I  had  a  long  conversation  with  John  Reinier, 
the  son  of  a  gentleman,  who,  being  driven  out  of  France  on 
account  of  his  religion,  settled  at  Vevey,  in  Switzerland,  and 

Recorder,  the  Grand  Jurymen,  and  also  to  Wesley  and  his  friends, 
it  was  all  real.  It  represented  the  majesty  of  British  rule  and  justice 
and  order.  Neither  in  Georgia  nor  in  England  did  John  Wesley  ever 
ridicule  authority.  He  arrayed  himself  in  his  Oxford  robes  when  he 
interviewed  the  'king'  of  a  petty  Indian  tribe,  and  he  never  belittled  the 
dignity  and  legitimate  power  of  Oglethorpe  or  Causton,  Christie  or 
Horton. 

The  first  Thursday  in  March  was  the  beginning  of  his  new  parochial 
life.  It  began  with  a  'sharp  frost.'  He  and  Delamotte  were  with  the 
Germans.  They  had  pleasant  intercourse  with  Bishop  Nitschmann. 
Wesley  had  serious  conversation  with  Frazer,  who  was  '  affected.'  He 
enlisted  the  prayers  of  the  Germans  on  behalf  of  Mrs.  Hawkins,  whom 
most  of  them  knew.  He  read  Tauler's  Life^  and  in  the  afternoon 
another  Life  that  produced  upon  his  mind  an  impression  that  lasted 
far  on  into  old  age — the  Life  of  Boehm,  chaplain  to  Prince  George  of 
Denmark,  and  secretary  to  Queen  Anne  (Works^  vol.  xii.  pp.  -fc8&  and 
431).  It  was  immediately  after  reading  this  biography  that  he  'began 
to  visit  the  parish.'  In  the  evening  he  commenced  a  third  book — Ludolf. 
Outside  the  circle  of  German  friends  he  now  had  no  comrade  in  the 
place,  except  Delamotte.  It  comforts  him  to  know  that  Delamotte  is 
again  'open  and  friendly.' 

Fri.  5. — Early  this  morning  he  began  a  work  which  at  first  startles — 
1  Revised  Prayer-book,  talked,  conversed,  reflected  ;  revised  Common 
Prayer-book.  Prayed,  sarig.  Looked  over  Psalm-book.'  This  filled  the 
morning  till  noon.  The  revision  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
probably  did  not  extend  beyond  the  slight  alterations  incident  to 
changes  in  the  royal  family  and  to  the  circumstances  in  which  he  found 
himself.  They  were  such  revisions  as  may  now  be  read,  in  John 
Wesley's  handwriting,  in  the  great  Prayer-book  at  Wroot.  Also  he  may 
have  marked  the  book  according  to  that  scheme  of  daily  prayers  which 
he  instituted  in  Savannah,  on  the  authority  of  the  early  Church,  and 
which  became  one  of  the  grounds  of  action  against  him  later  in  the 
magistrates'  court.  The  Psalm-book,  we  may  assume,  was  the  '  New 
Version'  by  Tate  and  Brady,  which  had  been  authorized  for  nearly 
forty  years.  This  he  spent  three  hours  in  looking  over.  One  would  like 
to  know  the  result  of  his  reading.  It  could  scarcely  have  been  flattering 
to  the  New  Version  ;  otherwise  when,  nine  months  later,  he  sent  his 
first  collection  of  psalms  and  hymns  to  the  press,  he  would  have  gone 
to  Tate  and  Brady  rather  than  to  Isaac  Watts  for  the  first  ten  metrical 
psalms  in  the  new  book. 

The  rest  of  the  day  he  gave  to  Tauler  and  Ludolf,  except  an  evening 
hour  which  he  spent  at  Causton's  with  Bishop  Nitschmann. 

Sat.  6. — At  5.15  he  began  to  teach  the  Germans  English.  He  finished 
Ludolf,  and  devoted  four  hours  and  a  half  to  the  writing  of  his  Journal. 


176  John   We s leys  Journal  [March  1736. 

practised  physic  there.  His  father  died  while  he  was  a  child. 
Some  years  after,  he  told  his  mother  he  was  desirous  to  leave 
Switzerland,  and  to  retire  into  some  other  country,  where  he 
might  be  free  from  the  temptations  which  he  could  not  avoid 
there.  When  her  consent  was  at  length  obtained,  he  agreed 
with  a  master  of  a  vessel,  with  whom  he  went  to  Holland  by 
land,  thence  to  England,  and  from  England  to  Pennsylvania. 
He  was  provided  with  money,  books,  and  drugs,  intending  to 
follow  his  father's  profession.  But  no  sooner  was  he  come  to 
Philadelphia,  than  the  captain,  who  had  borrowed  his  money 
before,  instead  of  repaying  it,  demanded  the  full  pay  for  his 
passage,  and  under  that  pretence  seized  on  all  his  effects.  He 
then  left  him  in  a  strange  country,  where  he  could  not  speak  to 
be  understood,  without  necessaries,  money,  or  friends.  In  this 
condition  he  thought  it  best  to  sell  himself  for  a  servant,  which 
he  accordingly  did  for  seven  years.  When  about  five  were 
expired,  he  fell  sick  of  a  lingering  illness,  which  made  him 
useless  to  his  master  ;  who,  after  it  had  continued  half  a  year, 
would  not  keep  him  any  longer,  but  turned  him  out  to  shift  for 
himself.  He  first  tried  to  mend  shoes ;  but  soon  after  joined 
himself  to  some  French  Protestants,  and  learned  to  make  buttons. 
He  then  went  and  lived  with  an  Anabaptist ;  but  soon  after, 
hearing  an  account  of  the  Moravians  in  Georgia,  walked  from 
Pennsylvania  thither,  where  he  found  the  rest  which  he  had 
so  long  sought  in  vain. 

Sun.  7. —  I  entered  upon  my  ministry  at  Savannah  by 
preaching  on  the  Epistle  for  the  day,  being  the  I3th  of  the  first 
of  Corinthians.  In  the  Second  Lesson  (Luke  xviii.)  was  our 
Lord's  prediction  of  the  treatment  which  He  Himself  (and 

After  dinner  he  talked  or  read  German  with  Toltschig,  and  began  to 
read  Drake  with  John  (probably  Reinier,  whose  story  he  to-day  wrote), 
sang  with  Delamotte,  sang  at  Mr.  Quincy's,  buried  a  child,  revised 
his  Journal,  and  ended  the  day  with  more  singing  ;  for  few  things  in 
these  Georgia  days  are  more  emphasized  than  the  singing  with  which 
he  cheered  his  loneliness  and  inspired  his  faith. 

Sun.  7. — It  was  Quinquagesima  Sunday.  The  appointed  Lessons  for 
the  morning  were  Gen.  ix.  to  ver.  20,  and  Luke  xviii.  :  the  Epistle,  from 
which  he  preached,  i  Cor.  xiii.  ;  the  Gospel,  Luke  xviii.,  ver.  31  to  the 
end.  The  sermon  Wesley  preached  on  this  first  Sunday  morning  in 
Savannah  is  printed  in  the  Fifth  Series,  No.  139,  and  is  entitled,  *  On 
Love.'  The  date— '  Preached  at  Savannah,  Feb.  20,  1736'— is  incorrect. 


177 


March  1736.]  First  Savannah  Journal  179 

consequently  His  followers)  was  to  meet  with  from  the  world  ; 
and  His  gracious  promise  to  those  who  are  content,  nudi  nudum 
Christum  sequi l :  'Verily  I  say  unto  you,  There  is  no  man 
that  hath  left  houses,  or  friends,  or  brethren,  or  wife,  or  children 
for  the  kingdom  of  God's  sake,  who  shall  not  receive  manifold 
more  in  this  present  time,  and  in  the  world  to  come  life 
everlasting.1 2 

Yet,  notwithstanding  these  plain  declarations  of  our  Lord, 
notwithstanding  my  own  repeated  experience,  notwithstanding 
the  experience  of  all  the  sincere  followers  of  Christ  whom  I 
have  ever  talked  with,  read  or  heard  of ;  nay,  and  the  reason  of 
the  thing  evincing  to  a  demonstration  that  all  who  love  not  the 
light  must  hate  Him  who  is  continually  labouring  to  pour  it  in 
upon  them  ;  I  do  here  bear  witness  against  myself,  that  when 
I  saw  the  number  of  people  crowding  into  the  church,  the  deep 
attention  with  which  they  received  the  word,  and  the  seriousness 
that  afterwards  sat  on  all  their  faces,  I  could  scarce  refrain 
from  giving  the  lie  to  experience  and  reason  and  Scripture 
all  together.  I  could  hardly  believe  that  the  greater,  the  far 
greater  part  of  this  attentive,  serious  people  would  hereafter 
trample  under  foot  that  word,  and  say  all  manner  of  evil  falsely 
of  him  that  spake  it.  Oh,  who  can  believe  what  their  heart 
abhors?  Jesus,  Master,  have  mercy  on  us!  Let  us  love  Thy 
cross ;  then  shall  we  believe,  '  if  we  suffer  with  Thee,  we  shall 
also  reign  with  Thee  ! ' 3 

It  should  be  March  7.  It  is  the  sermon  in  which  he  describes  a 
comfortable  death — *  a  calm  passage  out  of  life,  full  of  even,  rational 
peace  and  joy,'  giving  as  examples  the  death  of  his  father  at  Epworth 
and  the  *  recent  death  of  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  at  Savannah.' 
Mr.  Brownfield  and  Von  Reck  heard  the  sermon,  and  were  '  affected.' 
The  Mr.  Christie  here  named  was  the  Recorder  who  afterwards  figured 
in  the  trial.  The  Second  Lesson — noted  in  the  Diary  as  well  as  the 
Journal — was  all  the  more  impressive  because,  in  part,  it  coincided  with 
the  Gospel  for  the  day. 

1  'Naked  to  follow  a  naked  Christ.'  also    antea,    p.     \2?—W.H.S.    voL    v. 

In  early  editions  no  translation  is  given.  p.  24). 

*  The  reference  is  to  what  may  be  called  2  The  text  is  quoted    from  memory, 

the  motto  of  St.  Francis  of  Assisi :  "He  and  not  quite  correctly.    The    1st  and 

(the  Duke  of  Gandia)  took  for  his  ideal  2nd  (Benson's)  edition  are  as  above, 

that  of  St.  Francesco  d'  Assisi :  '  Nudus  3  This  paragraph  is  obviously  an  in- 

nudum  Christum  sequens'"  (Chronicles  sertion    made    at    a    later    date.     Such 

of  the  House  of  Borgia,  p.   312.     See  insertions  are  not  infrequent. 


1 80  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [March  1735. 

This  evening  one  of  the  Moravians,1  who  had  been  long  ill  of 
a  consumption,  found  himself  much  worse.  On  my  mentioning 
it  to  Bishop  Nitschmann,  he  smiled,  and  said,  '  He  will  soon  be 
well ;  he  is  ready  for  the  Bridegroom.' 

In  the  afternoon  Mr.  Quincy  read  prayers  and  preached.  Mr.  Brown- 
field  and  Mr.  Christie  called.  He  visited  Mr.  Darn,  who  was  sick,  conversed 
with  Mr.  Causton,  and  wrote  his  Journal.  '  All  the  church  serious,'  he  reports. 

Mon.  8. — This  morning,  at  six,  he  read  prayers  'at  the  church' ;  that  is 
to  say,  in  the  building  used  as  a  church,  and  not  in  a  private  house.  Four 
persons  were  present.  For  two  hours  he  wrote  his  Journal.  He  saw 
Mr.  Quincy  repeatedly,  visited  Francke,  who  died  the  same  afternoon, 
'sorted  things,'  read  Drake's  Anatomy  alone  and  with  'John.'  At  seven 
Francke  was  buried.  In  Savannah  a  burial  took  place  on  the  day  of  death. 

Tues.  9. — He  read  prayers  and  expounded  to  a  congregation  of  twenty. 
After  an  hour  with  German  and  the  Greek  Testament,  he  set  out,  in  company 
with  Mr.  Quincy,  Delamotte,  Nitschmann,  and  Anton  [Seifart]  the  new 
bishop,  to  visit  Mrs.  Musgrove  at  the  Cowpen,  and  to  see  the  ground  on 
which  the  promised  house  was  to  be  built.  The  chief  merit  of  the  site 
was  its  nearness  to  Mrs.  Musgrove  and  to  the  Creek  Indians. 

Wed.  10. — The  first  day  of  Lent  was  observed  strictly.  There  is  no 
indication  of  a  meal  from  four  in  the  morning  until  night.  Twice  he  read 
prayers  and  preached,  thirty  being  present  on  each  occasion.  He  conversed 
seriously  with  several,  spent  two  hours  with  Delamotte  and  the  Greek 
Testament,  and  sang  alone  and  with  'John.'2 

Thur.  ii. — Von  Reck  brought  Appee,  a  notorious  young  Dutchman,  to  see 
Wesley  (C.  Wesley's  Journal,  new  edition,  p.  50).  It  is  noted  that  in  serious 
conversation  '  Mr.  Appee  was  struck  ! '  The  man  really  was  a  scoundrel, 
who  imposed  upon  the  Wesleys,  and  even  upon  Oglethorpe.  John  Wesley, 
writing  to  his  mother  (March  18),  quotes  him  as  a  shining  example  for  'my 
brother  Hooper.'  '  May  the  good  God  give  him  the  same  zeal  for  holiness 
which  He  has  given  to  a  young  gentleman  of  Rotterdam,  who  was  with  me 

1  In  the  first  edition  the  name  *  Mora-  surnames.     In  connexion  with  Francke's 
vians '  is  used.     In  this  case  the  earlier  illness  and  death  Wesley  read  Drake's 
reading  is   probably  correct.     It    is   the  Anatomy  with   'John.'     The  suggestion 
Moravian  type  of  religion  that  produces  so  is  that  John  Reinier  is  the  John  here  and 
noteworthy  an  effect ;  at  this  date  Wesley  elsewhere  named,  and  that  Wesley  was 
greatly  admired  Moravianism.     Francke  assisting  his  studies  with  a  view  to  his 
probably  was  the  sick  man  referred  to.  rehabilitation  as  a  doctor — possibly  also 

2  Several  Johns  figure  in  this  section  with  the  hope  that  he  might  establish  a 
of  the  story — John  Brownfield  (who  was  practice  in  the  colony.     This  suggestion 
appointed  to  assist  him  at  the  landing),  accounts  for   the   fact   that   a   man   suf- 
John  Bradley,    John    Desbrough   (with  ficiently  important  to  have  his  story  told 
whom  he  had  an  interview  after  the  ser-  in  the  Journal  is  not  so  much  as  named 
vice  on  Wednesday),  and  John  Reinier,  (apparently)  in  the  Diary.     His  work  for 
the    Huguenot   doctor,    whose    story   he  Reinier   and   his   Oxford   study  of  Dr. 
inserted   in  the  Journal   (p.    175).     All  Cheyne  laid  the  foundation  of  Primitive 
these,  except  the  last,  are  differentiated  by  Physic  (1747). 


March  1736.] 


First  Savannah  Journal 


181 


last  night.'  On  the  occasion  referred  to  Wesley  recognized  Appee  as  *  of  our 
Company.'  At  one  time  it  was  intended  to  propose  him  to  the  Trustees  as 
Charles's  successor  in  the  secretaryship. 

Von  Reck  and  Appee  left.  The  reading  of  Drake's  Anatomy  with 
'John'  and  the  Bible  with  Nitschmann  and  his  friends,  pastoral  visits,  and 
frequent  readings  in  the  Greek  Testament  filled  so  much  of  the  day  as  was 
not  required  for  the  paramount  duty  of '  close '  Lenten  exposition. 

Fri.  12.— The  days  were  lengthening.  Winter  storms  were  past. 
Woods  and  gardens  were  breaking  into  life.  At  sunrise  the  German  garden  ! 
was  a  pleasant  retreat.  There,  for  forty  minutes,  he  prayed  and  meditated 
and  read  his  Greek  Testament,  sometimes  alone  and  sometimes  with  his 
Moravian  friends.  And  through  all  the  early  hours  he  filled  the  garden 
with  song.  It  was  a  fast-day,  and  there  is  no  trace  of  either  dinner  or 
supper;  the  only  meal  was  'bread-and-butter'  at  nine.  At  the  same  time 
it  was  a  day  of  song  and  of  high  religious  festivity.  He  robed,  read  prayers, 
expounded,  and  'baptized  John  Bradley*  by  immersion.'  After  evening 
prayers  he  wrote  to  *  Boltzius 3  and  Gronau.' 

Sat.  13.— On  this  day,  and  not  on  March  12,  as  Whitehead  and  other 
biographers  say,  he  first  saw  Miss  Sophy;  also  Miss  Fosset4  (Wesley's 
spelling,  though  probably  phonetic,  is  here  preserved). 


1  The  letter  *G'  is  frequently  and 
variously  used— for  'God,'  'German,'  and 
'  garden.'  Here,  standing  for  '  garden,' 
it  recalls  Wesley's  life-long  love  of  garden- 
ing— a  love  that  played  its  part  both 
at  Savannah  and  Frederica,  as  it  had 
already  done  at  Wroot  and  Stanton,  and 
as  it  was  destined  in  the  near  future  to 
do  at  Kingswood. 

'*  John  Bradley  was  sufficiently  well- 
to-do  to  keep  men  servants,  i.e.  farm- 
labourers,  &c.  One  of  these,  Peter 
Wright,  was  Wesley's  sick  parishioner. 
At  this  time  there  were  no  negro  slaves 
in  Georgia.  The  Trustees  refused  to 
sanction  their  introduction.  The  Wes- 
leys'  contact  with  coloured  slavery  was 
during  their  visits  to  South  Carolina. 
In  Georgia,  however,  the  Trustees  could 
not  prevent  a  system  of  apprenticeship, 
or  voluntary  self-sale,  or  self-hiring  for 
a  term  of  years ;  and  this  led  to  abuses 
only  less  frightful  than  those  which  pre- 
vailed on  the  plantations  of  Carolina 
and  Florida,  where  negro  slaves  worked. 
Wesley's  protests  against  the  injustice 
and  cruelty  perpetrated  on  hired  ser- 
vants excited  the  animosity  of  men  like 
Captain  Williams.  John  Bradley  was  a 
better  type  of  master. 


s  Boltzius  (Rev.  John  Martin  Bolzius, 
or  Boltzius)  and  Gronau  were  ministers 
of  the  Saltzburghers,  trained  at  Halle 
under  Francke.  Wesley  had  a  profound 
regard  for  their  piety  and  devotion ;  but 
his  present  bondage  to  ecclesiasticism 
compelled  him  to  refuse  the  Sacrament 
of  Holy  Communion  to  Boltzius  (cf. 
Journal,  Sept.  1749). 

4  These  ladies,  young,  intelligent, 
attractive,  and  inclined  towards  a  devout 
life,  influenced  Wesley  not  altogether  for 
good,  nor  yet  altogether  for  evil.  Miss 
Fosset  was  simply  a  friend  and  pupil — 
nothing  more.  He  had  a  great  re- 
gard for  her,  as  he  had  also  for  two 
other  Savannah  ladies  whose  names  will 
presently  appear.  Later  he  married 
Miss  Fosset  to  Mr.  Weston,  a  gentleman 
colonist  in  Frederica. 

Miss  Sophia  Christiana  Hopkey  was 
niece  to  Mrs.  Causton,  of  whom  we  know 
nothing,  except  what  can  be  gleaned  from 
this  Journal.  Her  husband  was  a  man 
of  bad  reputation  both  before  and  after 
his  arrival  in  Georgia.  According  to  A 
True  and  Historical  Narrative  of  the 
Colony  of  Georgia,  published  in  1741, 
by  a  number  of  colonists  living  on  the 
spot,  and  all  of  them  unfriendly  to 


182 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[March  1736. 


Sun.  14. — Having  before  given  notice  of  my  design  to  do 
so,  every  Sunday  and  holiday,  according  to  the  rules  of  our 
Church,  I  administered  the  Holy  Communion  to  eighteen  persons. 
Which  of  these  will  endure  to  the  end  ? 


It  was  at  nine  o'clock  on  Saturday  morning  he  saw  the  ladies  at 
Mr.  Causton's.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  been  nearly  so  much  impressed 
by  them  as  he  was  the  same  morning  by  Von  Reek's  conversation  about 
Ebenezer,  the  home  of  the  heroic  Saltzburghers,  where  Boltzius  and  Gronau 
had  gone  and  Von  Reck  himself  was  going.  His  note  for  the  day  is  : 

P.  Von  Reck  and  Brownfield  open. 

He  spent  much  time  during  the  day  in  visiting,  reading  the  Greek  Testa- 
ment, and  writing  to  Count  Zinzendorf  and  Boltzius. 

Two  years  later,  in  his  rooms  at  Lincoln  College,  when  writing  a  chapter 
of  intense  autobiographical  interest,  he  underscored  March  13,  1736,  as  one 
of  the  momentous  days  of  his  life. 

Sun.  14. — At  four  he  was  conversing  seriously  with  Nitschmann,  at  five 
transcribing  his  letter  to  Zinzendorf.  At  eight  he  wrote  to  Varanese  and 
Mrs.  Skinner.1 

It  was  in  the  garden,  with  Kempis  in  hand,  that  he  meditated  in  prepara- 
tion for  the  Sunday  morning  solemnity.  He  read  prayers,  Mr.  Quincy 
preached,  and  together  they  administered  the  Eucharist  to  eighteen  com- 
municants, among  whom  were  Miss  Sophy  and  Miss  Fosset.  They  were 
'affected' ;  Miss  Fosset,  he  notes,  was  'much  affected.' 


Wesley'  (Tyerman's  Life  and  Times  (of 
Wesley,  i.  pp.  143-6),  Causton  left  Eng- 
land in  disgrace,  having  practised  a  fraud 
upon  the  public  revenue.  In  Oct. 
1738  he  was  turned  out  of  all  his 
offices  in  Savannah,  and  his  certified 
accounts  were  refused  by  the  Trustees 
as  incorrect.  Miss  Sophy  was  not  more 
than  eighteen  years  of  age.  Her  home 
had  no  protective  influence,  except  the 
presence  of  her  aunt.  She  was  harassed 
by  a  masterful  and,  as  the  event  proved, 
unprincipled  lover.  With  few  excep- 
tions, the  people  among  whom  she 
lived,  both  in  Savannah  and  Frederica, 
were  not  helpful  to  a  young  girl.  For 
the  first  time  she  now  fell  under  the 
influence  of  a  very  intense  form  of 
religion.  Her  minister  was  unmarried, 
thirty-three  years  of  age,  an  ascetic, 
a  gentleman,  a  scholar,  a  singularly 
attractive  and  susceptible  personality. 
At  first,  and  for  many  weeks  subse- 
quently, there  was  no  thought  on  either 
side  of  loye.  Wesley,  for  the  time  being, 


until  he  could  become  a  missionary,  was 
pastor  and  tutor.  The  Diary  shows  that 
all  his  friends  were  treated  as  pupils. 
He  uses  for  them  the  letter  which  in  his 
Oxford  Diaries  stands  for  pupils.  His 
conception  of  duty  was  that,  without 
ceasing,  he  must  pray  and  care  for  those 
he  taught.  Obviously  there  was  danger 
in  the  relationship.  And  the  clanger  was 
all  the  greater  because  the  tutor  curate, 
in  spite  of  all  his  striving,  had  not  yet 
succeeded  in  destroying  his  human 
nature. 

1  They  are  both  included  in  the  list  of 
correspondents  on  one  of  the  last  pages 
of  the  second  Georgia  Diary.  The  list 
begins  with  '  M  M '  (my  mother),  and 
includes  all  his  sisters,  his  brother 
Samuel,  Clayton,  Rivington,  *  Aspasia  ' 
(Mrs.  Delany),  '  Selima '  (Anne  Gran- 
ville),  and  many  others.  There  is 
abundant  evidence  that  Wesley,  in  de- 
voting himself  to  missionary  work,  did 
not  cut  himself  adrift  from  the  friend- 
ships of  his  former  life. 


March  1736.]  First  Savannah  Journal  183 

Mon.  15.  —  Mr.  Quincy  going  for  Carolina,  I  removed  into 
the  minister's  house.  It  is  large  enough  for  a  larger  family 
than  ours,  and  has  many  conveniences,  besides  a  good  garden. 
I  could  not  but  reflect  on  the  well-known  epigram  : 

irort'  vi>v  &«  Mm'fnrov.1 


How  short  a  time  will   it  be  before   its  present   possessor  is 
removed,  perhaps  to  be  no  more  seen  !  * 


Mon.  15. — He  parted  with  Mr.  Quincy,  but  not  finally.  By  eight  o'clock, 
when  his  '  companion  [Delamotte]  came,'  he  was  in  possession  of  the  wooden 
parsonage,  with  its  ample  space,  its  many  'conveniences,'  and  its  'good 
garden.'  At  nine  he  (Quincy)  went.  Forthwith  the  new  tenant  began  to 
place  his  'books'  and  to  'clean  things  I'm  the  house.  Everything,  except 
reading  prayers,  expounding,  and  an  hour  for  singing,  gave  place  to  'clean- 
ing, sorting,  and  business  in  the  house.'  Wesley's  habits  of  scrupulous 
neatness  were  already  formed. 

For  twelve  days  we  are  entirely  dependent  upon  the  Diary. 

Tues.  16.— He  had  not  found  it  convenient  to  sleep  at  home.  There- 
fore he  is  still  praying  and  singing  with  the  Germans.  At  seven  he  returned 
'home.'  His  first  business  was  with  'John.'  He  then  gave  an  hour  to  his 
Journal  and  interviewed  James  Bett[an]y  of  the  Uchee  town  ;  they  con- 
versed together,  and  James  was  'seriously  affected.'  In  the  garden  he 
read  tracts.  At  12.45  he  dined,  read  German  with  them,  sorted  seeds, 
and  was  at  work  in  the  garden  when  Von  Reck  and  Mr.  Gronau  called. 
He  then  visited  Mrs.  Darn,  and,  returning  to  the  garden,  read  tracts  for 
another  hour.  Business,  Greek  Testament,  and  a  burial  claimed  him. 
After  evening  prayers  and  exposition  he  sang  with  the  Germans,  and  was 
so  engaged  when  his  friends  Dober  and  Toltschig  came,  with  whom  he  had 
a  quiet  'talk  within.'  The  same  night  he  began  Echard's  Ecclesiastical 
History.  His  first  day  of  work,  after  the  ordering  of  his  house,  began  at  four 
in  the  morning  and  ended  at  ten  in  the  evening.  But  he  and  Delamotte 
seem  still  to  have  slept  with  the  Germans,  whom  they  were  loth  to  leave. 


1  The     quotation    is     from     Lucian,       me,  and  again  this  one  thinks  so;  but 
Epigr.  13.    In  full  the  passage  reads  thus  :       in  fact  I  belong  to  nobody  at  all,  but 

only  to  Fortune.'     Cf.  '  Nunc  mihi,  nunc 

A-ypdj  AYcuuei>{3ou  yevdfjn}v  irori'  vvv  Of         ../  .  ,     TT  .... 

'  — 


..      .  ,     TT  .... 

alii    benigna.'  —  Ilor.    Od.    in.    29,        . 
Nlevlirirov,  ,  ,,.  „.  _,        . 

Kai  rdXir  <?£  trtpov  ftffopM  eh  trepov.          C   ^    '      ,  "'?'   **'\  f  . 

'  .        ,    ,  ,  Wesley's  quotation  might  be  engraved 

Kai   7<xp  e/ceti/os   %XfiV   P*  iror    V67"0*   Ka<-         i  r 

above    the    door    of    every      Itinerant 
ira\iv  OUTOS  ,,  .,     ,.  .   „        ,      ,    ,  .    , 

Methodist  Preachers    circuit-house. 


,«/        ,xx>  m,  -. 

Ofercu,  elai  d  SXws  oiWvos,  dXXa  TI/YWS. 

'  In  the  first  edition  this  sentence  is 

'  I  was  once  the  estate  of  Achaemenides,  printed  in  italics,  the  printer  assuming  it  to 

but  now  am  the  property  of  Menippus  ;  be  a  translation  of  the  Greek  quotation  — 

and  again   from   the  one  I  shall  go  to  one  of  many  indications  that  Wesley  did 

the  other.     For  he  once  thought  he  had  not  read  the  proofs. 


1 84 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[March  1736 


Wed.  17. — The  Diary  shows  that  Delamotte  was  with  him  at  4.30,  and 
that  at  five  he  was  with  the  Germans  during  their  early  morning  prayers.1 

An  hour  later  he  is  '  at  home  on  business.'  He  unpacks  books  and  sorts 
them.  It  is  the  Wednesday  fast.2 

On  this  occasion  he  broke  his  fast  on  'bread-and-butter'  between  eight 
and  nine  o'clock,  and  fasted  absolutely  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  So  also  on 
Friday,  March  12,  where  the  entry  is  even  plainer : 

9.  Greek  Testament ;  bread-and-butter ;  dressed  ; 

followed  by  prayers,  exposition,  and  a  solemn  baptismal  service  ;  but  it  is  a 
dinnerless,  supperless  day. 

He  wrote  to-day  to  Rivington,  who  a  year  before  had  published  the 
Wesley  edition  of  Thomas  a  Kempis's  De  Imitatione  Christi,  and  was  now 
engaged  on  a  volume  of  poems  -by  his  brother  Samuel.  He  then  robed, 
read  the  chapters  appointed  for  the  day,  prayed,  sang  a  hymn,  said  the 
Creed  and  the  Collects  i,  2,  3,  4,  i.e.  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Collect  for  the 
ist  Sunday  in  Lent,  and  the  Collects  for  Peace  and  Grace.3 

He  wrote  letters  to  Mr.  Vernon,  to  '  Sister  Nancy,'  to  Salmon  (who 
hoped  to  have  joined  the  mission),  and  to  *  Ilif.'  In  the  garden  he  read 
tracts,  and  had  a  long,  close,  and,  as  he  hoped,  satisfactory  interview  with 
Mr.  Appee,  partly  indoors  and  partly  in  the  garden.  He  notes  him  as  *  in 
our  Company'  ;  from  which  we  may  infer  that  he  was  admitted  to  the 
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Club.  This  accounts  for  Charles  Wesley's  intimacy 
with  him  up  to  the  date  of  their  sailing  for  England.  It  was  not  until  they  were 
on  shipboard  that  this  unscrupulous  Dutchman  '  laid  aside  the  mask.'  The 
story  may  be  read  in  Charles  Wesley's  Journal,  August  i,  1736. 

Thur.  1 8. — The  day,  which  began  at  five  and  ended  at  ten,  is  a  fair 
specimen  of  his  everyday  life  at  this  time.  He  prayed  with  Delamotte  and 
sang  with  the  Germans  ;  read  prayers  and  expounded  in  the  court-house, 


1  The  letters  '  pp  '  are  variously  used. 
Ordinarily,  as  Richard  Green   surmised 
(W.H.S.  vol.  i.  pp.    78-82),  they  mean 
*  private  prayer '  ;  but  at  times  they  are 
used    for    '  public    prayer,'   or,    as  here 
seems    probable,    for    'prayers'    in    the 
plural.       In    doubtful  cases  the  context 
and  a  variety  of  circumstances  familiar  to 
the  translator,  who  has  worked  through 
volumes  of  notes  in  shorthand  and  cipher, 
determine  the  interpretation. 

2  He  does  not  seem  to  have  had  any 
inflexible  rule  governing  the  manner  in 
which  the  Wednesday  and  Friday  Fasts 
of  the  Holy  Club  were  to  be  observed. 
His  practice  varied.     Once,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  he   sanctioned  a  feast  on 
a  fast-day.      Very  occasionally  he  kept 
an  absolute  fast.     More  frequently  than 
not    he    dined,    but    some    hours    later 


than  usual.      Sometimes  he  breakfasted 
or  dined  on  *  bread.' 

3  If  the  letters  « tb'  mean  'tune-book,' 
the  reference  may  be  either  to  the  English 
Psalm-book  which  he  had  revised  for 
use  in  public  worship,  or  to  the  Ger- 
man Gesang-Buch  ;  if  the  latter,  it  would 
be  introduced  for  the  sake  of  Germans 
in  the  congregation.  Both  books  had 
'  tunes  annexed.'  Other  suggestions  are 
(i)  that  the  letters  'tb'  are  cipher 
for  '  sc '  (second  chapter,  or  lesson, 
always  selected  for  morning  and  evening 
exposition) ;  the  meaning  of  '  tb,  x ' 
would  in  that  case  be  '  expounded  the 
Second  Lesson ' :  or  (2)  that  they  mean 
'Tate  and  Brady,'  the  metrical  version 
then  slowly  making  its  way  in  the 
English  Church  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
Sternhold  and  Hopkins  version. 


March i736.i  First  Savannah  Journal  185 

walked  with  Miss  Sophy  and  Miss  Fosset,  conversing.  He  breakfasted 
with  the  Germans  ;  conversed  ;  *  began  to  drink  sassafras  ' ;  wrote  to  '  my 
mother,1  brother  Samuel,  Sister  Kezia,  and  Sister  Lambert '  ;  to  Mr.  Burton 
and  Brown ;  read  tracts,  prayed,  wrote  Diary,  dined  ;  Bible-reading  with 
Germans.  In  talk  with  John  Brownfield ;  Drake's  Anatomy  with  John 
[Reinier] ;  between  three  and  six  he  read  tracts,  worked  in  his  garden, 
meditated,  and  prayed  with  Delamotte.  He  then  supped,  read  Echard, 
read  prayers  and  expounded  among  his  own  people,  went  to  the  Germans' 
garden,  meditated  whilst  they  sang  ;  again  read  Echard,  prayed,  and 
ended  a  quiet  day. 

Fri.  19. — It  was  a  fast-day.  His  only  meal  was  breakfast  with  the  Ger- 
mans. At  4.45  he  married  John  Brownfield  (to  whom  does  not  appear),  and 
read  Echard.  At  home,  read  tracts,  and  wrote  letters  to  Wogan,  R.  Wood, 
Clayton  ;  read  Psalms  with  the  Germans,  saw  them  dissect  Rusch's  body 
and  bury  it,  and  heard  them  sing  at  the  grave.  Appee,  who  also  was 
present,  became  quite  serious.  The  singing  of  the  Germans  at  the  burial 
he  twice  notes.  Both  their  psalms  and  psalm-tunes  impressed  him. 

Sat.  20. — To-day  he  wrote  to  his  old  friends,  Home,  Broughton,  Morgan, 
and  Sally  Andrews  ;  also  to  Mrs.  Musgrove,  who  later  in  the  day  came  and 
was  '  both  serious  and  open.'  Mr.  Causton  seems  to  have  given  him  letters 
from  Oglethorpe.  He  had  conversation  with  a  Dr.  Tailfer  *  of  episcopacy.' 
When  he  had  gone,  Wesley  took  Echard  down  the  garden  and  meditated. 
He  notes  with  satisfaction  that  Dr.  Tailfer  was  serious,  and  that  the 
boatmen  were  serious  also.2  His  treatment  of  Echard's  Ecclesiastical 
History  during  these  days  is  characteristic.  Whenever  he  obtained 
possession  of  a  book  that  for  any  reason  appealed  to  him,  he  read  it  at 
every  available  moment,  introduced  it  to  his  friends  and  parishioners,  and 
exhausted  it.  In  Georgia  his  reading  was  as  thorough  as  in  Oxford. 

Sun.  2i.— He  and  Delamotte  still  slept  with  the  Germans.  Wesley 
shared  their  early  devotions,  and  talked  with  them,  as  on  this  morning, 
even  when  he  'shaved.'  At  half- past  seven  he  went  home,  and  there,  on 
this  spring  morning,  we  have  a  picture  of  him,  in  surplice  and  master's 
hood,  walking  in  his  garden,  singing,  reading  his  Greek  Testament,  medi- 
tating on  the  sermon  he  is  going  to  preach,  and  praying.  He  preached 
twice,  celebrated  the  Eucharist  with  fifteen  communicants,  catechized  in 
the  afternoon  service,  wrote  to  Oglethorpe  and  Charles,  and  ended  the  day 
with  Echard,  whom  he  read  to  the  Germans,  with  frequent  singing. 

Mon.  22. —  He  wrote  to  Charles,3  Mr.  Sarney,  also  to  the  rector  of 
Lincoln,  and  retreated  to  his  garden  and  the  tracts.  After  dinner  he 


1  This    was    the    well-known    letter  and  letters  to  and  fro  along  the   coast 
from  which  an  extract  is  printed  in  the  and  up  the  rivers. 

Works,  vol.  xii.  No.  XI.  s  The  letter,  given  in  Whitehead's  Life 

2  There  seems   to  have    been  a  more  of  John   Wesley ',  vol.    ii.    pp.    14-16,  is 
or  less  regular  service  of  boats  between  typical  of  the  correspondence  between 
Florida  (or  Fort  Augustine)  and  Charles-  the  brothers  during  this  time  when,   as 
town,  loosely  organized  by  Indian  traders,  they  knew,    every  letter    sent    by    the 
or  on  their  behalf.     These  boats  conveyed  precarious  boat-service  was  liable  to  be 
goods,    passengers    (like    Dr.    Tailfer),  intercepted   and   read  :    hence   the  odd 

VOL.  I.  IO 


i86 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[March  1736. 


read  the  Bible  with  the  Germans,  interviewed  Causton,  and  heard  from 
Captain  Watson  'strange  things  if  true.'  They  no  doubt  referred  to  the 
treatment  this  gentleman  had  received  from  the  magistrates.  Wesley's 
insistence  on  justice  in  this  case  was  one  of  the  initiatory  causes  of  the  ill- 
feeling  against  him  in  high  quarters. 

At  4.30  he  and  Delamotte  set  out,  talking  together.  In  forty  minutes 
they  reached  '  the  plantation.'  They  remained  fifty  minutes,  and,  leaving  at 
six,  made  the  return  journey  in  half  an  hour.1 

At  ten  he  ended  the  first  volume  of  Echard. 

Tues.  23. — Apparently  his  congregation  at  the  six-o'clock  exposition 
consisted  only  of  Miss  Sophy  and  Miss  Fosset.  They  were  'very  serious,' 
and  came  home  with  him  ;  he  conversed,  and  they  were  '  seriously  affected.' 
He  sorted  books  for  two  hours,  and  wrote  to  Sir  John  Phillips  (one  of  the 
Trustees).  At  one  he  read  the  Bible  with  the  Germans  and  talked  with 
Toltschig ;  at  two  began  Waterland  on  The  Importance  of  the  Trinity.  Later 
he  'wrote  a  catalogue  of  the  people  from  John  Milledge.'  '  This  occupied 
nearly  two  hours.  In  the  garden  he  read  Plato's  Phaedo  to  Mr.  Appee, 
conversing  both  casually  and  seriously  with  him,  he  being  '  much  affected.' 

Wed.  24. — Waterland,  Arndt  (begun),  and  Echard  were  the  books  read 
to-day.  On  Waterland  he  was  writing  notes.  One  entry  would  be  specially 
interesting  if  we  could  fully  interpret  its  meaning  : 

7.     Conversed,   read    prayers,   expounded,    prayed,    sung,    began  Third   Part    with 
Germans,  sung. 

Probably  the  'Third  Part'  refers  to  the  Gesang-Buch,  or  'psalms'  or 
'hymns'  which,  as  we  have  seen,  he  was  at  this  time  studying  with  the 
Germans. 

Mr.  Causton  and  Vat  came,  the  result  being  that  he  wrote  to  Von 
Reck,  who  probably  was  with  the  Saltzburghers  at  Ebenezer.  At  one  he 
'  prayed  for  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Oglethorpe/  ended  Waterland,  and  visited 
Mrs.  Mellichamp,  whose  son,  probably  now  in  prison  for  some  misde- 


mixture  of  English,  Latin,  and  Greek. 
Later,  Byrom's  shorthand  was  substi- 
tuted. He  refers  to  the  '  promising ' 
character  of  the  work  in  Savannah, 
names  the  persons  in  Frederica  who, 
he  hopes,  will  be  steadfast ;  in  Latin 
refers  to  his  sermons,  a  quarto  Bible,  a 
box,  a  '  book  of  discipline,'  &c.,  in  English 
and  Greek  advises  Charles  ;  adds,  '  I  con- 
jure you,  spare  no  time,  no  address,  or 
pains  to  learn  the  true  cause  rrjs  TrdXai 
odtivris  rfjs  (pl\r)s  /AOV,  of  the  former  distress 
of  my  friend.  I  much  doubt  you  are  in 
the  right.  Mr;  yfroiro  iva  ourw  TraXiv 
aftapTavr),  &c.,  God  forbid  that  she  should 
again  in  like  manner  miss  the  mark. 

Watch  over  her )  keep  her,  as  much  as  possible. 

Write  to  me  how  to  write  to  her.1     He 


hints  at  the  possibility  of  sending  Ingham 
back  so  that  he  may  visit  Frederica,  add- 
ing in  Greek,  /  stand  in  jeopardy  every 
hour. 

1  The    Trustees  made  grants  of   land 
to  certain  communities  and  persons.    The 
plantation  visited  by  Wesley  and  Dela- 
motte was  doubtless  the  land  (or  '  lot ') 
granted  to  the  English  Church.     There 
is  no  evidence  that  any  grant  was  made 
to  Wesley  personally  (such,  for  instance, 
as  was  made  to  the  Moravian  bishop), 
his  office  as  curate-in-charge  being  only 
temporary. 

2  For  the  population  of  Savannah  and 
other  Georgian  settlements  at  this  date, 
see  Tyerman's  Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  127. 


March  1736.J  First  Savannah  Journal  187 

Sun.  28. — A  servant  of  Mr.  Bradley's  sent  to  desire  to  speak 
with  me.  Going  to  him,  I  found  a  young  man  ill,  but  perfectly 
sensible.  He  desired  the  rest  to  go  out,  and  then  said,  '  On 
Thursday  night,  about  eleven,  being  in  bed,  but  broad  awake, 
I  heard  one  calling  aloud,  "  Peter  !  Peter  Wright !  "  and,  looking 
up,  the  room  was  as  light  as  day,  and  I  saw  a  man  in  very 
bright  clothes  stand,  by  the  bed,  who  said,  "  Prepare  yourself, 
for  your  end  is  nigh " ;  and  then  immediately  all  was  dark  as 
before.'  I  told  him,  '  The  advice  was  good,  whencesoever  it 
came.'  In  a  few  days  he  recovered  from  his  illness ;  his  whole 
temper  was  changed  as  well  as  his  life,  and  so  continued  to  be 
till,  after  three  or  four  weeks,  he  relapsed  and  died  in  peace. 

meanour,  wished  to  marry  Miss  Sophy.  He  also  visited  Mr.  Darn,  his 
sick  parishioner,  and  later  in  the  day  Mrs.  Darn,  who  was  *  very  serious.' 
As  it  was  the  vigil  of  the  *  Annunciation  of  our  Lady,'  he  fasted  until  three 
in  the  afternoon. 

Thur.  25. — This  being  a  holy-day,  he  preached  a  sermon  and  adminis- 
tered Holy  Communion,  but  before  doing  so  read  with  Delamotte  the  '  Office 
of  our  Blessed  Saviour,'  with  the  'Invitatory'  and  'Antiphon'  for  the 
Annunciation,  in  Hickes's  Reformed  Devotions.  At  intervals  he  *  wrote  of 
the  Moravians.'  Visiting  Mr.  Dean,  another  sick  parishioner,  he  prayed 
with  him  before  reading  the  service  for  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick  in  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer. 

Fri.  26. — He  'wrote  for  the  Germans,  sowed  Seaward  beans,'  and 
'transcribed  in  German.' 

Sat.  27. — He  resumed  the  reading  of  Greek  with  Delamotte  and  cate- 
chized the  children.  The  strain  of  incessant  work,  with  frequent  and  severe 
fastings,  and  without  recreation,  told  upon  him.  In  the  evening  he  was 
'  quite  faint.'  Nevertheless  he  read  prayers,  expounded,  and  discussed  lay 
baptism  with  the  Germans. 

Sun.  28. — Twice  with  Delamotte  and  once  alone  he  read  Hickes's 
Devotions.  In  the  'Office  for  Matins'  this  morning  is  a  hymn  of  which 
more  than  one  Wesley  hymn  is  reminiscent. 

Behold,  we  come,  dear  Lord,  to  Thee, 
And  bow  before  Thy  throne. 

The  phrases  '  Whate'er  we  have,  whate'er  we  are,'  '  us  in  mercy  spare,' 
and  'the  mighty  debt  we  owe,'  are  familiar.  It  was  at  the  close  of  the 
afternoon  catechizing  and  sermon  that  he  '  began  to  visit  Peter  Wright.' 
He  seized  the  opportunity  to  converse  also  with  'his  companions.'  'He 
was  affected  :  they  serious.' 1 

Mon.  29. — He  again  visited  Peter  Wright,  saw  Causton,  sealed  letters, 
wrote  to  Mr.  Hawkins,  read  Arndt,  ending  the  book.  After  dinner  he  read 


1  Peter  and  his  companions  were   the  servants  of  John  Bradley,  whom  Wesley 
baptized  by  immersion. 


1 88 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[March  1736. 


Tues.  30. — Mr.  Ingham,  coming  from  Frederica,  brought  me 
letters,  pressing  me  to  go  thither.  The  next  day  Mr.  Delamotte 
and  I  began  to  try  whether  life  might  not  as  well  be  sustained 
by  one  sort  as  by  a  variety  of  food.1  We  chose  to  make  the 
experiment  with  bread  ;  and  were  never  more  vigorous  and 

the  Bible  with  the  Germans,  translating  for  them.  Mr.  Campbell  came  ; 
'  he  open  and  friendly.5  To  Mr.  E.  Philips  he  wrote  on  business.  Singing 
with  the  Germans,  and  at  nine  praying,  he  closed  the  day — perhaps  the  last 
peaceful  day  he  was  destined  to  spend  in  Georgia.  That  night  a  terrific 
storm  swept  through  the  country.  At  three  the  next  morning  he  writes  : 
Uninterrupted  thunder  and  lightning. 

Tues.  30. — At  7.30  Ingham  arrived  from  Frederica.  First  they  talked 
of  Savannah,  and  then  of  Frederica,  where  the  gravest  disasters  threatened 
the  colony,  its  founder  personally,  and  its  pastor.  On  the  news  brought 
by  Ingham,  Wesley  consulted  Causton,  and,  later  in  the  day,  Toltschig  and 
Seifart.  In  the  midst  of  the  tumult  Mr.  Vernon 2  came. 

That  Wesley  fully  appreciated  the  gravity  of  the  situation3  is  apparent. 
The  note  at  the  foot  of  the  page  reads  thus  : 
P  Mr  Ingham  came. 

Talk  of  !  O  God  !  meditation  :  the  cross. 


1  Once    Oglethorpe,    asking    him    to 
dine  with  him,  said :  '  Mr.  Wesley,  there 
are  some  here  who  have  a  wrong  idea  of 
your   abstemiousness.     They   think   you 
hold    the    eating   of    animal    food    and 
drinking   wine    to   be   unlawful.     I   beg 
that    you    will    convince    them    of    the 
contrary.'     Henry  Moore,  who  had  the 
story   from  Wesley  himself,   adds,   *  He 
resolved  to  do  so.     At  table  he  took  a 
little  of  both,  but  a  fever  was  the  con- 
sequence,  which   confined   him  for  five 
days'  (Moore's   Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.   311). 
In  the  first  Oxford  Diary  the  influence 
of  Dr.    Cheyne's  theories  on  abstinence 
is   seen,  and   this   remained   throughout 
life. 

2  This  must  evidently   have  been  Mr. 
Vernon's  son,  who  had  been  commended 
by  his   father   to  Wesley's  special  over- 
sight.     He    seems    to    have    sailed    as 
midshipman  or  junior  officer  on  H.M. 
Hawk,    but    it   is   quite   likely   that    he 
went    as     an    intending    colonist    with 
Ingham,  or  Charles,  or  Oglethorpe  him- 
self   to    Frederica,    and    had    now    re- 
turned   to    Wesley    either    with    letters 
from    Oglethorpe    or    because    he    was 


dissatisfied     with      the      prospects      at 
Frederica. 

3  Charles  Wesley  wrote  in  his  Journal 
(March  27)  :  'A  thought  came  into  my 
mind  of  sending  Mr.  Ingham  for  my 
brother.  He  was  most  reluctant  to  leave 
me  in  my  trials,  but  was  at  last  persuaded 
to  go.'  These  '  trials  '  seriously  affected 
the  course  of  events  and  the  ultimate 
destiny  of  the  two  brothers.  The  story 
was  not  fully  known  until,  in  1862,  Dr. 
Elijah  Hoole  partially  deciphered  the 
shorthand  notes  in  Charles  Wesley's 
Journal.  The  existence  of  these  notes 
was  known  to  Thomas  Jackson  when  he 
published  Charles's  Journal ;  but  to  him, 
and  probably  to  every  one  else  who  then 
had  access  to  them,  they  were  unintelli- 
gible, being  written  in  Byrom's  out-of- 
date  shorthand.  They  revealed  a  con- 
spiracy, accounting  for  a  situation  hitherto 
obscure.  The  veil  was  not  intended  as 
a  protection  for  the  Wesleys  or  for  any 
member  of  the  missionary  party.  They 
had  nothing  to  fear  from  the  fullest  in- 
vestigation, except  pain  for  their  chief 
and  injury  to  a  great  national  project. 
Charles  wrote  a  Voyage  Journal,  as  did 


March  1736.] 


First  Savannah  Journal 


189 


healthy  than  while  we  tasted  nothing  else.  '  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart ' ;  who,  whether  they  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever 
they  do,  have  no  end  therein  but  to  please  God  !  To  them  all 
things  are  pure.  Every  creature  is  good  to  them,  and  nothing 
to  be  rejected.  But  let  them  who  know  and  feel  that  they  are 
not  thus  pure  use  every  help,  and  remove  every  hindrance  ; 
always  remembering,  '  He  that  despiseth  little  things  shall  fall 
by  little  and  little.'1 


Ingham,  and  destroyed  it,  leaving  only  a 
condensed  manuscript  journal  of  what 
occurred  after  his  landing  at  St.  Simon's 
Island,  whilst  so  much  of  the  story  as 
related  to  the  gross  attacks  made  upon 
Oglethorpe  and  the  lies  concerning  him- 
self he  committed  to  the  secrecy  of 
shorthand.  John  Wesley  knew  all  the 
details ;  but  in  his  Journal  he  says  next  to 
nothing,  and  in  his  Diary  surprisingly  little. 
Attacks  made  upon  himself  by  tongue  or 
hand  or  gun  he  describes,  but  the  under- 
lying cause  of  all  the  tumult  and  peril 
he  leaves  unrecorded.  In  Frederica  the 
brothers  discussed  the  matter  in  lonely 
places  beyond  the  overhearing  of  in- 
formers, and  in  Latin  ;  if  they  afterwards 
had  to  write  to  one  another  about  it, 
they  employed  the  veil  of  Greek  or  short- 
hand. Surrounded  as  they  were  by 
1  spies  and  ruffians, '  they  were  compelled 
to  be  cautious.  It  was  only  by  the 
exercise  of  the  greatest  wisdom  and 
courage  that  John  saved  his  brother's 
life  and  cleared  his  reputation.  In  the 
process  his  own  life  was  more  than  once 
attempted. 

The  scandal,  in  brief,  was  this.  Two 
married  women  of  some  relative  position 
in  Frederica — they  are  called  '  ladies '  in 
Hoole's  account— conspired  to  set  Ogle- 
thorpe and  the  Wesleys  at  enmity.  Their 
purpose  was  to  destroy  the  disciplinary 
rule  which  prevented  unbridled  licence. 
The  moral  and  religious  influence  of 
Benjamin  Ingham  and  Charles  Wesley 
(John  was  in  Savannah,  and  had  not 
as  yet  set  foot  in  Frederica)  accounted, 
they  believed,  for  Oglethorpe's  puritanic 
sternness.  Mrs.  Hawkins,  in  particular, 


hated  Charles  Wesley.  On  the  Simmonds 
he  had  seen  through  her  hypocrisy, 
and  had  quarrelled  with  his  brother 
for  so  persistently  believing  in  the 
genuineness  of  her  repentance,  and 
because,  in  the  teeth  of  warning  and 
protest,  he  had  admitted  her  to  Holy 
Communion.  A  clever,  strong-willed 
woman,  she  made  Mrs.  Welch — they 
were  mutually  jealous,  each  being  in  love 
with  Oglethorpe — her  tool.  Together 
they  thought  to  defy  all  authority,  and 
turn  Frederica  into  a  paradise  of  law- 
lessness. The  plot  was  simple.  These 
women  confessed  to  Charles  Wesley 
that  they  had  themselves  committed 
adultery  with  Oglethorpe.  Charles 
was  simple  enough  to  believe  them. 
He  thought  their  tale  accounted  for 
Oglethorpe's  kindness  to  both  during 
the  voyage.  They  then  went  to  Ogle- 
thorpe and  informed  him  that  Charles 
Wesley  was  circulating  this  preposterous 
story  in  Frederica — that  Charles  was 
slandering  him  and  charging  them  with 
adultery.  Strange  to  say,  Oglethorpe 
also  was  simple  enough  to  believe  their 
slander  against  Charles.  The  result 
was  that  Charles,  who  at  the  time  was 
hovering  between  life  and  death,  was 
left  to  live  the  life  or  die  the  death 
of  a  dog,  until  John,  summoned  by 
Ingham,  appeared  upon  the  scene,  and 
in  six  days  cleared  his  brother  from 
blame.  Had  he  remained  longer  he 
must  have  learned  more,  and  cleared 
Oglethorpe  also,  at  all  events  of  the 
vilest  crimes  alleged  against  him.  See 
C.  Wesley's  Journal  (new  edition). 
1  Cf.  Wisdom  xii.  2,  10;  also  xi.  16. 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


Wed.  31.  —  From  this  day  onward  we  are  frequently  reminded  of  the 
bread  diet  upon  which  the  three  companions  had  agreed  to  live.  At  four 
he  prayed  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte,  and  at  five  they  breakfasted  on 
bread.  He  was  conversing  with  Ingham  when  Causton  called,  and  later 
Mrs.  Mellichamp.  The  mother,  no  doubt,  desired  his  good  offices  on 
behalf  of  her  son.  He  wrote  to  John  Martin  Boltzius  and  Von  Reck,  both 
of  whom  by  this  time  were  in  Ebenezer  with  the  Saltzburghers.  In  the 
garden  he  read  the  Greek  Testament  and  prayed  for  Charles.  The  news 
from  Frederica  and  the  preparations  for  departure  dislocated  the  routine  of 
the  day.  Morning  prayer  was  postponed  till  ten  ;  after  the  exposition  he 
had  a  conversation  with  Miss  Sophy  and  Miss  Fosset.  For  more  than  two 
hours  he  wrote  his  Journal.  At  three  he  prayed  with  Ingham  and  dined  on 
bread.1  In  the  garden  he  ended  Arndt,  sang,  prayed,  wrote  Ktfpie  /3o^ei, 
spent  the  five-o'clock  hour  in  singing,  prayer,  and  meditation.  At  six  he 
offered  the  fast-day  prayer  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte,  and  walked  with 
Ingham,  conversing.  A  quiet  time  in  the  garden  with  his  Greek  Testament 
was  his  preparation  for  evening  prayer  and  exposition.  He  ended  the  day 
with  the  Germans. 

P.  Wind  against.     Could  not  go. 

APRIL  I,  Thur.  —  Throughout  the  day  the  wind  continued  '  against  us.' 
At  any  moment  it  might  change.  He  was  extremely  anxious  to  commence 
this  momentous  journey.  His  brother,  sick,  lonely,  and  surrounded  by 
enemies,  was  sleeping  on  the  bare  ground  in  a  corner  of  Reed's  hut,  being 
refused,  by  name,  so  much  as  a  board  to  lie  upon.  He  might  even  now  be 
dying.  But  hour  after  hour  the  wind  remained  in  the  same  quarter.  Yet, 
in  the  midst  of  deep  anxiety,  he  continued  his  work  —  read  Greek  with 
Delamotte,  expounded  twice,  revised  his  brother  Samuel's  Poems,  the  proofs 
of  which  had  been  sent  by  Rivington  the  publisher,  wrote  a  German  Cata- 
logue, in  the  garden  with  Ingham  read  his  Journal,  and  visited  Miss  Bovey. 
In  the  midst  of  his  literary  work  for  Samuel  he  prayed  for  Oglethorpe  and 
Mrs.  Hawkins,  and  an  hour  later  for  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Oglethorpe.  In 
great  trouble  he  walked,  sang,  and  meditated,  and  wrote  Ktipie 


1  This  obviously  was  the  beginning  of  ordinary  fast   commenced.     A  probable 

a  great  fast,  undertaken  not  capriciously  suggestion  is  that  this  fast,  in  its  begin- 

or  by  way  of  mere  experiment,  but  for  ning,  was  connected  with  the  trouble  in 

some  special  purpose.     The  three  mem-  Frederica — a  veritable  case,  Wesley  might 

bers  of   'our  Company'  shared  it.     Its  well  believe,  of  devil  possession.     Only 

special  feature  was  not  abstinence  from  by  prayer  and  fasting  could  they  hope  to 

food   and   drink   for  prolonged  periods,  cast  out  these  devils  that  threatened  to 

but  the  living  exclusively  on  one  kind  of  destroy  Charles,  Oglethorpe,  and  a  num- 

food,  and  that  the  simplest — dry  bread.  ber   of   persons   upon   whom    they   had 

It   began   in,  but   not   with,    Lent,  and  bestowed  so  much  pastoral  care  on  board 

does  not  seem  to  have   had  more   than  the  Sirnmonds.     '  Mrs.  Welch,  that  poor 

an  accidental  connexion  with  the  great  blockhead,   joined   with    Mrs.    Hawkins 

church  fast  which  was  being  religiously  and  the  devil  in  their  slanders '  (Charles 

kept   when  this   inner  and  quite  extra-  Wesley's  Journal,  new  edition). 


Apm  me.]  First  Frederica  Journal  191 


FIRST  FREDERICA  JOURNAL 

APRIL  4,  Sun. — About  four  in  the  afternoon  I  set  out  for 
Frederica  in  a  periagua — a  sort  of  flat-bottomed  barge.  The 
next  evening  we  anchored  near  Skidoway  Island,  where  the 
water,  at  flood,  was  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  deep.  I  wrapped 
myself  up  from  head  to  foot  in  a  large  cloak,  to  keep  off  the 
sand-flies,  and  lay  down  on  the  quarter-deck.  Between  one  and 
two  I  waked  under  water,  being  so  fast  asleep  that  I  did  not 
find  where  I  was  till  my  mouth  was  full  of  it.  Having  left  my 
cloak,  I  know  not  how,  upon  deck,  I  swam  round  to  the  other 
side  of  the  periagua,  where  a  boat  was  tied,  and  climbed  up 

Fri.  2.— The  following  entries  for  this  day  are  of  interest : 

4  Prayed  with  them,  \  prayed  for  Oglethorpe  and  Mrs  Hawkins. 

5  Meditated,  prayed  for  myself,  Mr  Oglethorpe,  and  Mrs  Hawkins. 

6  At  home  :  garden,  began  Solid  Virtue. 

7  Solid  Virtue.  Wind  fair. 

8  Bread,  conversed  \,  Solid  Virtue.     Yet  they  will  not  go. 

The  day  passed  in  similar  exercises.  He  dined  late  on  bread.  At  noon, 
when  the  *  Company '  met  for  prayer,  they  all  *  prayed  for  Oglethorpe  and 
Mrs.  Hawkins.'  Solid  Virtue  and  Echard,  which  he  ended,  filled  the 
unoccupied  hours  of  the  day. 

Sat.  3. — This  also  was  a  day  of  irritating  waiting.  It  was  spent  like  the 
preceding  day,  except  that,  visiting  Mr.  Darn,  he  made  his  will,  and  'at 
that  hour  the  sick  man  began  to  mend.' 

Sun.  4. — He  was  sleeping  still  with  the  Germans. 

5  Meditated,  sung  with  Germans,  meditated. 

6  Garden,  Greek  Testament,  meditated. 

7  Bread,  conversed,  dressed,  on  business. 

8  K  em  pis  10,  read  prayers.     Boat  not  ready. 

ii  Preached,  Eucharist.     12,  bread,  prayed  for  Oglethorpe  and  Mrs  Hawkins, 
i  At  the  Bluff;  boat  not  ready,  resting  in  the  periawga  [periagua]. 

3  Began  Light  of  the  World. 

4  Set  out  with  Delamotte  and  Mr  Mackay.     Thunder  and  lightning,  flies  ! 

5  Conversed,  good  time  6  ;  bread,  conversing,  read  prayers  ;  8  to  bed  :  hard  rain. 

Mon.  5. — At  four  he  was  *  praying  for  Mrs.  Hawkins  and  Oglethorpe, 
and  later,  '  singing  and  reading  The  Light  of  the  World}  until  they  came 
to  Mr.  Lacy's  (at  Thunderbolt),  who  walked  with  them.  Here  they  would 
have  had  a  pleasant  time  but  for  the  flies;  'all  were  civil  to  me.'  He 
bathed,  dined,  had  '  a  good  time '  with  a  Mr.  Delegal,  conversed  with  two 
Swiss ;  at  four  set  out ;  at  five  reached  Skidoway,  where,  in  the  shallows, 
they  anchored.  Wesley  slept  on  deck,  and  in  the  dead  of  the  night  fell 
overboard,  but  '  swum  unhurt  ! ' 

The  daily  record  of  this  prolonged  and  perilous  voyage,  nearly  a  hundred 
miles  down  the  coast,  in  a  clumsy-decked,  flat-bottomed  barge,  is  brief  but 


192  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

by  the  rope  without  any  hurt  more  than  wetting  my  clothes. 
Thou  art  the  God  of  whom  cometh  salvation :  Thou  art  the 
Lord  by  whom  we  escape  death. 

The  winds  were  so  contrary,  that  on  Saturday,  io,  we  could 
but  just  get  over  against  Doboy  Island,  twenty  miles  from 
Frederica,  but  could  not  possibly  make  the  creek,  having  a 
strong  tide  also  against  us.  Here  we  lay  beating  off  till  past 
one,  when  the  lightning  and  rain,  which  we  had  long  seen  at  a 
distance,  drove  down  full  upon  us  ;  till,  after  a  quarter  of  an 
hour,  the  clouds  parted,  some  passing  on  the  right,  and  some 
on  the  left,  leaving  us  a  clear  sky,  and  so  strong  a  wind  right 
after  us  as  in  two  hours  brought  us  to  Frederica. 

A  little  before  we  landed,  I  opened  my  Testament  on  these 
words  :  '  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? '  Coming  on 
shore,  I  found  my  brother  exceeding  weak,  having  been  for 

picturesque.  He  took  with  him  his  Greek  Testament,  Thomas  a  Kempis, 
The  Light  of  the  World,  Psalm-books,  Prayer-books,  and  a  Bible.  The  wind 
was  often  contrary.  Sometimes  he  lay  on  deck,  tormented  by  flies,  and 
sometimes  on  shore,  with  the  ground  for  a  bed  and  sky  or  trees  for  covering. 
Once  he  notes  a  storm.  Anxious  hours  he  whiled  away  by  singing  alternate 
verses  with  Delamotte.  Once  he  read  Parnell  to  Mackay,  who  '  fell  asleep.' 
His  prayers  filled  every  interval.  Their  burden  was  '  for  Oglethorpe  and 
Mrs.  Hawkins,'  whom  with  scrupulous  impartiality  he  names  alternately. 
Once  he  prays  for  Ingham,  left  in  charge  at  Savannah ;  and  once  for 
Savannah  and  Frederica.  Charles  he  does  not  pray  for— probably  because 
he  feared  that  he  might  already  have  escaped  the  sorrow  and  pain  of  life. 

Sat.  io.— On  this  day,  at  half-past  five  in  the  afternoon,  he  arrived  at 
Frederica.  The  day's  events,  though  trifling  and  monotonous,  are  not 
without  significance.  The  mere  handwriting  is  eloquent  of  a  boat  or  of  the 
untoward  conditions  on  land  under  which  the  entries  had  to  be  made.  It  is 
a  rough,  hasty,  and  non-departmental  series  of  Diary  jottings  : 

5.  Private  prayer,  prayer  [i.e.  with  Delamotte  and  others];  bread,  conversed:  5.30. 
Greek  Testament,  sung  :  7.  conversed  with  Nowell  [one  of  the  passengers  or  crew] : 
7.45.  Greek  Testament ;  conversed  with  them ;  Greek  Testament,  sung :  io  o'clock 
shaved:  10.15.  Greek  Testament,  sung;  dined,  conversed:  12.30.  in  talk:  i.  storm; 
conversed  with  Delamotte  and  company :  2.  wind  for  us  ;  dressed  [it  is  characteristic 
that  he  'shaved'  and  dressed  for  the  landing]:  3.15.  diary,  on  business:  4.  meditated 
and  prayed ;  conversed  with  soldier  and  company  [either  going  to  strengthen  the  small 
garrison  at  the  fort  Captain  Hermsdorf  was  about  to  build,  or  as  a  military  escort  without 
which  travel  was  not  safe]  :  5.  opened  Bible  and  Kempis  [for  texts  as  signs]  ;  prayed  for 
Oglethorpe,  Mrs  Hawkins  and  company  :  5.30.  at  Frederica. 

All  this  may  be  compared  with  the  Journal.  It  helps  us  to  realize 
vividly  Wesley's  condition  of  mind  when  he  stepped  on  shore.  What 
follows,  also  compared  with  the  Journal,  brings  us  at  once  face  to  face  with 
the  situation : 


April  1736.]  First  Frederica  Journal  193 

some  time  ill  of  a  flux  ;  but  he  mended  from  the  hour  he  saw 
me.  This  also  hath  God  wrought ! 

Sun.  1 1. — I  preached  at  the  new  store-house  on  the  first  verse 
of  the  Gospel  for  the  day :  '  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ? 
And  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  Me  ?  '  There  was 
a  large  congregation,  whom  I  endeavoured  to  convince  of  un- 
belief, by  simply  proposing  the  conditions  of  salvation  as  they 
are  laid  down  in  Scripture,  and  appealing  to  their  own  hearts 
whether  they  believed  they  could  be  saved  on  no  other  terms. 

In  every  one  of  the  six  following  days  I  had  some  fresh  proofs 
of  the  absolute  necessity  of  following  that  wise  advice  of  the 

5.30.  Mr  Oglethorpe  came  on  board  and  received  us  with  the  utmost  love :  saluted 
Mrs  Hawkins ;  conversed  with  Charles  of  Frederica :  7.  read  prayers  and  expounded  ; 
Mrs  Hawkins  there  :  7.30.  conversed  with  her  ;  she  quite  cold  and  reserved  :  8.30.  with 
Oglethorpe;  he  quite  open  and  friendly  :  u.  Horton  came,  friendly  :  11.30.  store-house, 
prayed.  [At  first  he  wrote  '  guard-house '  but  erased  '  guard '  and  substituted  '  store.'] 

This  was  his  sleeping-place  for  at  least  four  of  the  six  nights  spent  in 
Frederica.1 

Sun,  ii. — By  five  o'clock  he  was  with  Charles,  who  was  waiting  for  him. 
After  prayer  he  began  to  read  Charles's  Diary.  The  people  were  'all  civil.' 
At  eight  he  read  prayers  and  expounded.  Afterwards  he  had  some  talk 
with  Mrs.  Welch,  and  with  Charles  about  her  ;  they  were  of  one  mind  ;  she 
was  open.  He  returned  to  Reed's  hut,  which  was  Charles's  home,  and  wrote 
his  own  Diary.  At  eleven  Charles  read  prayers,  and  John  preached  the 
sermon  on  the  Gospel  for  the  5th  Sunday  in  Lent,  to  which  he  refers  in  the 
Journal.  He  administered  Holy  Communion  and  sang  with  Charles  and 
Delamotte.  *  Wrote  conference  with  Mrs.  Hawkins.'  The  rest  of  the 
day  he  spent  with  Charles  and  the  Diary,  and  'in  talk  with  Horton, 
Mrs.  Hawkins,  and  Oglethorpe.'  With  him  also  he  sang.  Between  ten  and 
eleven  he  retired  with  Delamotte  to  his  sleeping-quarters  in  the  'guard- 
house,' as  he  calls  it.  His  special  notes  for  the  day  are  : 

P.  Heard  Charles'  diary  !  !  !  !  Something  like  faith. 

All  civil.     How  long  ? 
Mrs  Welch  serious,  open. 

Mon.  12. — Omitting  the  usual  devotional  lines,  private  and  public,  those 
which  relate  to  the  scandal  may  be  given  : 

8  Walked  with  Mrs  Welch  and  talked  of  Mrs  Hawkins  ;  she  quite  open. 
10  Mr  Oglethorpe  called  me  into  Mrs  Hawkins'  tent ;  talked  ;  he  read  private  letters. 
I  Wrote  diary ;  wrote  conference  with  Mrs  Welch  ;  Mrs  Hawkins  beat  her  boy. 

3  Whilst  Charles  and  Horton  were  together  talking,   Oglethorpe  came  from  Mrs 

Hawkins  ;  very  angry. 

4  Walked  with  Mrs  Welch,  conversed,  she  quite  open  1  !  !  I 

1  It  was  as  yet  a  small  township  of  ing  Indians,  and  Spanish  spies  prowled 

palmetto  huts  and    tents.      The  store-  around — was  the  church,  and  indeed  the 

house,  guarded   probably  by  constables  only  place  of  meeting  until  Wesley  him- 

or  soldiers— for  loose  characters,  wander-  self,  some  months  later,  built  a  house. 


194  John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[April  me. 


apostle  :  '  Judge  nothing  before  the  time  ;  until  the  Lord  come, 
who  will  both  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and 
will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts.' 


The  summary  for  the  day  illustrates  Wesley's  optimism  : 
P.  Mrs  Welch  open  !  resolved  to  change. 
Oglethorpe  friendly,  soft. 
Horton  soft,  friendly,  serious. 
Oglethorpe  came  out  of  the  house,  very  angry  with  her  1 

Tues.  13. — Charles  is  still  reading  his  Diary,  which  must  have  been  very 
much  longer  than  his  published  Journal  unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  it 
'included  the  Voyage  Diary  now  destroyed.  John  had  some  talk  with 
Mr.  Hawkins,  who  'was  very  angry  at  Charles.'  It  was  midnight  before  he 
lay  down  in  the  store-house.  Except  when  writing  '  Accounts  '  or  praying, 
he  spent  the  long  day  in  vain  attempts  to  unravel  a  tangle  of  lies  and 
animosities,  and  in  striving  to  make  peace.  It  is  evident  that  a  trial  was  in 
prospect,  but  by  whom  threatened  does  not  appear. 

P.  Mrs  Hawkins  civil  ;  Mrs  Hawkins  at  prayers.    She  open  and  mild. 

Mr  Welch  soft,  open  and  affected.  Oglethorpe  soft,  open.     O  God,  in  Thy 

Mrs  Welch  soft,  open  and  affected.  light  let  us  see  light ! 

Oglethorpe  at  prayers. 

Wed.  14. — He  wrote  another  account  of  a  conference  with  Mrs.  Hawkins. 
To  this  Charles  refers  in  his  Journal  :  *  APRIL  14,  Wed. — By  a  relation  my 
brother  gave  me  of  the  late  conference  he  had  with  her,  I  was,  in  spite  of 
all  I.  had   seen  and  heard,  half  persuaded   into  a   good  opinion   of  Mrs. 
Hawkins.     For  the  lasting  honour  of  our  sagacity  be  it  written  ! '    John, 
however,  was  beginning  to  waver  in  his  belief  as  to  Mrs.  Welch's  sincerity. 
The  words  '  dark'  and  '  dissembling '  occur  in  connexion  with  her  name. 
P.  Mrs  Hawkins  came  to  me  at  Mrs  Welch's. 
God  will  reveal  all. 

In  the  midst  of  these  personal  anxieties,  public  affairs  became  more 
and  more  gloomy.  The  Spaniards  were  threatening  the  colony.  On  the 
Monday  night  Charles  had  taken  leave  of  Mr.  Horton,  Mr.  Hermsdorf,  and 
Major  Richards,  who  were  going,  with  thirty  men,  to  build  a  fort  over  against 
the  Spanish  look-out,  twelve  leagues  from  Augustine. 

Thur.  15. — He  wrote  an  account  of  another  conference,  breakfasted  at 
the  lots,  continued  writing  his  account,  paid  a  number  of  pastoral  visits,  had 
further  futile  interviews,  and  found  no  rest  day  or  night  for  the  sand-flies 
which  were  the  plague  of  the  island. 

pri  j6  i — The  alternations  of  personal  and  public  temperature  are  best 
illustrated  by  the  summary  : 

P.  Mrs  Robinson  and  Phoebe  Hird  affected.     News  of  the  Spaniards  coming. 
Mrs  Welch  and  Mrs  Hawkins  came  to  me  in  the  field. 
Oglethorpe  seemed  quite  open,  and  in  an  excitable  temper. 
Mrs  Hawkins  and  Oglethorpe  seem  innocent !  Amen  ! 
She  quite  angry. 
Mrs  Welch  in  a  swoon.     Open  my  eyes  ! 

1  Under    this    date    Charles    Wesley       brought  me  off  a  resolution,  which  honour 
writes    in    his   Journal :     *  My    brother       and  indignation  had  formed,  of  starving 


April  1736.]  First  Frederica  Journal  195 

Sat.  17. — We  set  out  for  Savannah,  and  reached  it  on 
Tuesday  evening.  Oh  blessed  place,  where,  having  but  one  end 
in  view,  dissembling  and  fraud  are  not  ;  but  each  of  us  can  pour 
out  his  heart  without  fear  into  his  brother's  bosom  ! 


Sat.  17. — The  night  before  he  lay  down  in  Reed's  hut,  where  his  brother 
slept.  The  brothers  were  living  a  life  of  daily  peril.  The  next  day  John 
was  to  leave  Frederica.  He  might  never  see  his  brother  again.  After  early 
morning  prayer  with  Charles,  he  writes,  in  the  column  which  records 
moods,  emotions,  &c.,  '  Afraid.'  At  seven  he  was  '  with  Oglethorpe,  writing 
for  him,'  *  Not  afraid.'  Eight,  nine,  ten  o'clock  he  was  still  writing  for  his 
chief.  *  Mrs.  Hawkins  came  ;  Oglethorpe  there  ;  she  very  angry  and 
sad.'  After  prayers  he  conversed  with  Charles,  and  at  twelve  with  Mrs. 
Welch.  He  then  returned  home  and  wrote  an  account  of  his  conference 
with  Oglethorpe.  The  rest  of  the  day  passed  in  interviews,  the  one  topic 
apparently  being  uppermost.  That  night  the  three  friends  slept  together — 
John,  Charles,  and  Delamotte. 

Sun.  1 8. — He  called  on  Oglethorpe  and  found  him  busy.  He  saw 
Mrs.  Perkins,  Mr.  Hawkins,  and  Mrs.  Hawkins;  'she  very  angry.'  At 
eight  he  prayed,  expounded,  administered  the  Eucharist.  After  a  parting 
exhortation  he  again  went  to  Oglethorpe,  but  in  the  presence  of  company 
there  could  be  no  private  conversation.  He  still  lingered,  waiting  for 
Oglethorpe's  letters,  which  he  was  to  take  to  Savannah.  At  10.30,  in 
Mr.  Houstoun's  boat,  which  Charles  says  was  'open,'  he  set  out.  It  rained 
hard.  In  the  afternoon  they  landed  at  Sapalo  Island,  and  tried  to  light  a 
fire.  With  some  difficulty  they  at  last  succeeded,  and  supped.  At  seven 
they  re-embarked.  He  slept,  and  thought,  and  slept  till  twelve,  when  the 
boat  grounded,  and  they  supped  on  bread-and-cheese.  This  was  on 
Monday,  the  igth.  In  fair  weather,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  they  'got  off.3 
Wesley  spent  the  hours  in  writing  an  account  of  his  conferences  with 
Oglethorpe,  Mrs.  Hawkins,  and  Mrs.  Welch.  At  three  they  overtook 
Dorman,  and  found  '  Indian  traders  there.'  By  eight  it  was  so  'very  dark' 
that  they  lost  themselves.  Tormented  by  flies,  they  did  not  reach  Hussebaw 
before  eleven.  There  they  made  a  fire.  Sick  and  weary,  at  midnight  they 
lay  down  on  the  ground. 


rather  than  ask   for   necessaries.      Ac-  figure  has  been  told  in  fragments.    So  far 

cordingly  I  went  to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  in  as  the  Wesleys  are  concerned,  and  pro- 

his  tent,  to  ask  for  some  little  things  I  bably  Oglethorpe  also,  there  is  no  reason 

wanted.     He   sent  for   me   back   again,  why  all  the  facts,  so  far  as  they  have  been 

and  said,  "  Pray,  sir,  sit  down.     I  have  preserved  in  authentic  form,  should  not 

something  to   say  to  you.     I  hear  you  now  be  placed  before  students  of  a  great 

have  spread  several  reports  about."  '     It  biography.     They  are  not  interesting  in 

is  at  this  point  that  the  story  passes  into  themselves,  but  they  played  an  important 

the   shorthand  deciphered  in  part,   and  part  in  the  life-history  of  the  Wesleys. 

as    a    rule    accurately,    by   Dr.    Hoole.  See   new    edition   of   Charles   Wesley's 

The  story,  in  which  Mrs.  Hawkins,  Mrs.  Journal  (Finsbury  Library,  published  by 

Welch,  Mr.  Oglethorpe,  and  the  Wesleys  R.  Culley). 


1 96  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Aprii  1736. 

Tues.  20. — At  half-past  four  they  set  out,  and  at  six  again  overtook 
Dorman.1 

At  10.30  he  notes  a  meal  on  'oysters,'  after  which  they  again  set  out  in 
'  hard  rain.'  In  three  hours  they  reached  Thunderbolt.  Mr.  Lacy  was  not 
at  home,  but  his  pastor  was  hospitably  entertained  on '  eggs.'  In  the  evening 
he  walked  over  to  Savannah  with  Delamotte  and  Mr.  Houstoun.  On  his 
arrival  he  found  Mr.  Quincy,  who  had  returned  from  Carolina,  and  was 
revisiting  Savannah  prior  to  his  return  to  England.  As  though  nothing  had 
happened,  he  took  up  the  interrupted  course  of  his  ordered  life,  and  at  7.45 
read  prayers  and  expounded.  At  8.30  he  was  with  the  Germans,  but  in 
that  peaceful  atmosphere  the  tired  pastor  could  only  sleep.  He  had  come 
through  perils  on  the  deep,  and  perils  by  his  own  countrymen,  and,  worst 
of  all,  perils  by  his  own  countrywomen.  But  out  of  all  the  Lord  had  brought 
him.  The  kindly  Moravians  let  him  sleep;  but  at  9.15  he  went  home  to 
conversation  and  prayer  and  singing  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte.  It  was 
during  this  year,  and  may  not  improbably  have  been  about  this  time,  that 
he  transcribed  and  altered  for  his  first  hymn-book  George  Herbert's 
'  Discipline ' : 

Though  I  fail,  I  weep: 
Though  I  halt  in  pace, 

Yet  I  creep 
To  the  throne  of  grace. 

Then  let  wrath  remove  : 
Love  will  do  the  deed : 

For  with  love 
Stonie  hearts  will  bleed. 

Throw  away  Thy  rod  ; 
Though  man  frailties  hath, 

Thou  art  God  : 
Throw  away  Thy  wrath. 

Cf.  Charlestown  Hymn-book,  1737,  pp.  45,  46. 

At  this  point  in  the  story  it  is  necessary  to  emphasize  two  notes. 

(i)  The  daily  and  hourly  record  of  Wesley's  life  at  this  time  is,  for 
the  most  part,  a  wearisome  reiteration,  as  the  record  of  every  life  subjected 
to  rigid  rule  must  often  be.  But  the  very  monotony,  the  printed  details 
of  which  irritate,  is  of  the  essence  of  the  story.  We  cannot  fully  understand 
what  has  already  happened,  still  less  shall  we  be  in  a  position  to  appraise 
at  its  true  value  all  that  is  going  to  happen,  unless  a  vivid  consciousness 
of  Wesley's  bondage  during  many  years  to  the  monotony  of  life-by-method 
impresses  us.  Nor  can  we  hope  to  realize  what  it  actually  was,  or  the  effect 


1  His    boat  was  engaged    by   Indian  out,  frequently  anchoring  within  hail  of 

traders  who  carried  on  a  lucrative  traffic  Indian  encampments  or  settlers'  planta- 

among  the  islands  and,  creeks  that  studded  tions.     One  such  halt  gave  Wesley  the 

the  coast,  and  up  the  rivers  towards  the  opportunity  he  never  wilfully  missed,  of 

foothills  of  the  Alleghanies.      It  was  a  serious  converse  with  men  who,  in  virtue 

swifter  craft  than  Houstoun's  '  open  boat,'  of  their  wandering  life  and  their  continual 

in  which  Wesley  and  Delamotte  sailed.  intercourse  with  Indians  and  colonists, 

But  in  the  pursuit  of  trade  it  sailed  in  and  were  pioneers  either  for  God  or  the  devil. 


Apm  1736.]  Second  Savannah  Journal  197 

SECOND  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 

NOT  finding,  as  yet,  any  door  open  for  the  pursuing  our 
main  design,1  we  considered  in  what  manner  we  might  be  most 
useful  to  the  little  flock  at  Savannah.  And  we  agreed  (i)  to 

it  had  upon  him  and  upon  his  people,  except  we  read  it  upon  the  printed 
page  in  reiterated  sequences. 

(2)  All  the  Wesleys  were  more  or  less  critical,  independent  in  opinion, 
self-willed.  They  differed  not  only  from  friends  and  foes  outside  their  own 
family  circle,  but  among  themselves.  Samuel  and  Susanna  Wesley  quarrelled 
politically  and  in  ecclesiastical  matters.  The  correspondence  of  the  brothers 
Samuel  and  John  is  a  battle  royal,  in  which  wit  and  logic  fly  to  and  fro  like 
live  shells.  John  and  Charles,  as  we  have  seen,  and  shall  see  again, 
differed  seriously.  At  the  same  time  the  Wesleys  were  clannish.  They 
stood  by  one  another  loyally — in  financial  difficulties  with  scant  regard  to 
consequences  or  personal  risk.  They  were  warmly  attached,  loving  one 
another  with  an  affection  which  '  lovers'  quarrels  '  could  not  quench.  And 
whenever  emergencies  arose  or  practical  service  could  be  asked  or  given, 
differences  vanished.  John  is  absolutely  loyal  to  Samuel,  as  head  of  the 
family,  even  when  he  is  in  the  act  of  quarrelling  with  him ;  and  Samuel, 
desiring  that  a  scholar  should  read  the  proofs  of  his  latest  book  of  poems, 
sends  them  to  John  in  Savannah,  and,  probably  by  the  same  mail,  posts 
a  letter  that  sparkles  with  satire.  Charles  in  trouble — sick,  slandered, 
deserted,  and  left  to  die  in  misery  by  his  chief — turns  to  the  brother  with 
whom  he  is  at  variance.  John  flies  to  his  help,  and  not  only  clears  his 
character  but  does  his  work  both  as  pastor  and  secretary.  It  was  character- 
istic of  the  Wesleys  that  they  should  strongly  differ  and  greatly  love. 

Wed.  21. — His  first  business  was  to  revise  the  papers  he  had  written  in 
Frederica  and  those  he  had  received  from  Charles.  Walking,  and  therefore 
securing  the  privacy  unattainable  in  small  wooden  houses,  he  '  read  to 
Ingham  the  papers  as  to  Frederica.'  At  noon  he  wrote  to  Charles, 
Mr.  Hawkins,  and  Oglethorpe.  The  letter  to  Hawkins  has  not  been 
discovered.  Extracts  from  the  other  two  we  have  in  the  Works  (vol.  xii. 
p.  41,  '  To  Mr.  Oglethorpe,  Savannah,  April  2O,2  1736 '  ;  and  p.  103,  'To  his 
Brother  Charles,'  same  date).  The  first  he  describes  in  the  Diary  as  'a 
letter  on  business.'  The  editor,  in  printing  the  letter,  has  omitted  the 
*  business  '—probably  the  only  part  of  much  historical  interest,  and  has 
preserved  the  pious  sentiment  which  adds  little  to  our  information.  The 
letter  to  Charles  is  a  mere  fragment.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that 
the  original,  in  form  and  substance,  more  nearly  resembled  the  letter  dated 
March  22,  1736,  which  Henry  Moore  gives  fully  (Moore's  Life  of  Wesley, 
vol.  i.  p.  293).  It  may  even  have  been  the  intercepted  letter,  the  Greek  of 

1  The  'main  design'  was  the  mission  otherwise     fully    accounted    for.       On 
to  the  Indians.  Wednesday  21,    the    letter    to    Charles 

2  The  date  in  the  Works — April  20 —  occupied   three-quarters  of  an  hour,  the 
is  an  eiror.      Tuesday  20  is  the  last  day  letter  to  Hawkins  an  hour,  and  the  one 
of  his  journey  from   Frederica,  and  is  '  on  business  '  to  Oglethorpe  an  hour. 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[April  1736. 


advise  the  more  serious  among  them  to  form  themselves  into  a 
sort  of  little  society,1  and  to  meet  once  or  twice  a  week,  in  order 

which  kindled  all  Frederica  into  a  flame  of  angry  passion.     (See  p.  260  and 
Charles  Wesley's  Journal,  new  edition.) 

He  dined,  as  he  had  breakfasted,  on  bread.  In  the  afternoon  he  had  a 
long  talk  '  with  Mrs.  Causton  of  Miss  Sophy,'  and  afterwards  with  Miss  Sophy 
herself.  Later  he  saw  Mr.  Causton.  He  again  slept  with  the  Germans. 
The  following  is  the  summary  for  the  day  : 

P.    Mr  and  Mrs  Causton  open.  I  dead  !     O  Jesus  ! 

Miss  Sophy  open  and  much  affected. 

Thur.  22.— He  transcribed  Charles's  Journal,  and  gave  much  time  in  the 
course  of  the  day  to  his  own  Journal,  and  to  pastoral  work. 

P.    Much  easier.  J.  Brownfield  serious,  open  and  affected. 

Peter  Wright  relapsed.  Miss  Fosset  quite  open  and  affected. 

Mr  Darn  in  good  temper. 

Good  Friday. — He  is  evidently  out  of  health.  Ingham  reads  prayers 
and  preaches  in  the  morning,  and  expounds  in  the  afternoon.  Wesley  spent 
the  day  chiefly  with  Kempis  and  his  Journal,  except  that  he  seems  to  have 
given  the  Sacrament  to  Mr.  Darn. 

Raster  Eve. — He  was  still  busy  with  his  Journal.  Twice  in  the  morning 
public  prayers  were  read,  at  eleven  by  Wesley  with  exposition,  and  again  at 
twelve  by  Ingham.  They  had  two  meals,  one  at  six  in  the  morning  and  the 
other  at  four.  Bread  was  the  only  food  throughout  Passion  Week.  He 
again  began  the  reading  of  Fleury.2 


1  Wesley  distinguishes  the  origin  of 
Methodism  into  three  distinct  periods. 
'  The  first  rise  of  Methodism  was  in 
Nov.  1729,  when  four  of  us  met  together 
at  Oxford  ;  the  second  was  in  Savannah, 
in  April  1736,  when  twenty  or  thirty 
persons  met  at  my  house  ;  the  last  was 
in  London  on  this  day,  May  i,  [1738] 
when  forty  or  fifty  of  us  agreed  to  meet 
together  every  Wednesday  evening,  in 
order  to  free  conversation,  begun  and 
ended  with  singing  and  prayer '  (Wesley's 
Ecclesiastical  History -,  vol.  iv.  p.  175). 
The  description  of  the  society  and  its 
organization  and  meetings  is  remarkable. 
The  society,  as  a  whole,  was  to  meet 
once  or  twice  a  week,  i.e.  on  one  or  both 
of  the  fast-days  of  the  Holy  Club;  an 
inner  circle  was  to  meet  on  Sunday 
afternoon.  We  have  here  the  actual 
institution  of  the  Society-meeting—using 
the  term  in  the  old  class-meeting  sense — 
and  of  the  Select  Bands.  In  the  second 
edition  (1809)  Benson  has  a  footnote  on 


this  :  *  Here  we  see  the  origin  of  classes 
and  bands,  which  have  been  instrumental 
of  so  much  good  in  the  Methodist 
Societies.'  The  extreme  probability  is 
that  this  new  plan  was  propounded 
broadly  on  Easter  Sunday,  April  2=5,  and 
that  the  details  were  worked  out  in  con- 
sultation with  Toltschig  and  Anton  on 
Sunday,  May  2,  when  they  '  talked  of 
the  parish,'  and  when  again,  after  Com- 
munion, Wesley  '  wrote  names.'  The  con- 
versation was  '  close,'  and  it  '  convinced ' 
Wesley.  The  plan  was  a  Moravian  graft 
upon  the  *  Oxford  Methodist '  stock.  The 
Diary  clearly  points  to  a  hitherto  un- 
suspected fact,  namely,  that  the  member- 
ship of  this  little  society  was  largely 
German.  This  explains  Wesley's  almost 
ecstatic  words  concerning  Savannah — 
'  Oh  blessed  place,'  &c. 

2  In  the  Colman  Collection  of  Wesley 
MSS.,  in  one  of  the  calf-bound  note- 
books which  Wesley  used  for  diaries, 
journals,  accounts,  treatises,  extracted 


199 


April  1736.] 


Second  Savannah  Journal 


201 


to  reprove,  instruct,  and  exhort  one  another.     (2)  To  select  out 
of  these  a  smaller  number  for  a  more  intimate  union  with  each 


Easter,  1736.— At  midnight  he  awoke  and  sang,  using  the  Office  for 
Easter  Day  in  Hickes's  Devotions  : 

The  Invitatory,  '  The  Lamb  of  God  that  was  slain,'  &c. 

The  Antiphon,  '  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,'  &c. 

V.  O  Death,  where  is  thy  Sting?    Alleluja. 

R.  O  Grave,  where  is  thy  Victory  ?    Alleluja. 

The  prayer,  '  O  God,  whose  gracious  Providence  restores  to  Thy  Church  the  Face  and 
Voice  of  holy  Exultation,  by  the  triumphant  Festival  of  our  Saviour's  Resurrection  ! 
Grant,  we  humbly  beseech  Thee,  that  the  Joy  that  shines  in  our  Looks  may  flame  in  our 
Hearts,'  &c. 

Can  we  not  picture  him  in  the  first  hour  of  this  Easter  Day,  as  he  reads,  and 
as  he  sings  the  appointed  hymn — 

Behold,  we  come,  dear  Lord,  to  Thee, 
to  an  accompaniment  of  *  thunder  and  lightning '  ? ! 

At  one  he  slept ;  but  at  five  he  was  singing  and  praying,  and  singing 


poems,  transcribed  letters,  and,  at  a  later 
period,  for  lists  of  members  in  the  Metho- 
dist Societies,  there  is  a  carefully  written 
Abridgement  of  Fleury's  Manners  of  the 
Christians.  If  we  may  judge  from  the 
handwriting,  and  from  certain  Diary 
indications,  the  Abridgement  was  made 
not  later  than  the  year  1736.  The  only 
question  is  whether  it  may  not  belong  to 
an  earlier,  i.e.  to  a  late  Oxford,  period. 
A  more  minute  examination  of  the 
voluminous  Oxford  Diaries  may  throw 
further  light  upon  this  and  other  biblio- 
graphical questions.  The  chief  interest, 
however,  of  this  discovery  lies  in  the  fact 
that  the  heading  of  the  manuscript  page 
has  been  altered  by  Wesley  himself.  At 
a  later  date,  when  revising  his  books  and 
papers,  he  saw  that  the  Abridgement  he 
had  carefully  and  laboriously  made  in 
days  of  comparative  leisure  would  find  a 
fitting  place  in  his  series  of  cheap  reprints 
from  great  books.  From  the  facsimile 
(p.  199)  it  will  be  seen  that  he  wrote  a  note 
in  the  top  corner  of  the  first  page  :  '  It  will 
make  about  30  pages.'  Then  he  altered 
the  title.  Originally  it  had  been  : 

An  Abridgement  of 
Fleury's  Manners  of  ye  Xtians. 
For  printing  as  a  tract-pamphlet,  it  reads, 
The  Manners  of  the  Ancient  Xtians 
Extracted  from  a  French  Author.    By 

J.  W.  &c. 


On  the  page  opposite  is  a  Table  of 
'  Lessons,'  which  shows  what  was  the 
scope  of  the  larger  work  from  which 
Wesley's  extract  was  made.  This  he 
or  the  copyist  has  run  his  pen  through, 
as  also  through  some  other  pages  in  the 
book  (Wesley's  Works,  vol.  xiv.  p.  235), 
where  the  second  title  is  exactly  copied, 
with  the  usual  addition :  '  By  John 
Wesley,  A.M.,  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College, 
Oxford.  I2mo.,  pp.  24.  1749.'  The  note 
in  Green's  Bibliography  is  : 

123.  The  Manners,  &c.  [as  above]  Bristol : 
Printed  by  Felix  Farley,  and  sold  at  the 
School-Room  in  the  Horse-Fair;  also  by 
T.  Trye,  near  Grays-Inn-Gate,  Holborn  ;  and 
at  the  Foundry  near  Upper- Moor-Fields, 
London,  1749.  i2mo,  pp.  24.  [Price  Two- 
pence.] 

Six  editions  were  published,  the  last  in 
1798.  It  was  included  in  the  collected 
Works,  1771,  No.  276.  Mr.  Green  goes 
on  to  say  : 

Contains  a  brief  description  of  the  charac- 
ter of  Christ,  the  condition  of  the  Church  at 
Jerusalem,  and  the  state  of  the  heathen  be- 
fore their  conversion  ;  then  of  the  habits  of 
the  Christians,  particularly  their  prayers, 
reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  fasting,  their 
general  demeanour,  their  marriages,  public 
assemblies,  care  for  the  poor  and  sick,  and 
their  hospitality.  A  very  useful  tract. 

1  Cf.  footnote,  p.  198,  for  the  Methodist 
interest  of  this  Easter  Day. 


202  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Apm  1736. 

other,   which   might   be   forwarded,  partly   by   our   conversing 
singly  with  each,  and  partly  by  inviting  them  all  together  to 


again,  with  Delamotte.  He  seems  on  this  Easter  Day  to  have  been  greatly 
cheered.  Ingham  was  'zealous.'  His  friend  John  Brownfield  was  'very 
serious.'  At  the  Eucharist  there  were  thirty-five  communicants.  He  wrote 
down  their  names.  Twice  he  preached ;  read  Hickes  repeatedly,  and 
further  refreshed  his  spirit  with  Fleury,  whose  writings  he  so  greatly  admired. 
Eight  times  he  sang  with  'the  Face  and  Voice  of  holy  Exultation.' 

Mon.  26. — This  was  a  day  of  business.  He  had  occasion  to  visit  Mrs. 
Musgrove  and  her  brother  at  the  Cowpen.  Returning  home,  he  heard  that 
Mr.  Lacy  was  very  ill.  So  he  set  out  again  for  Thunderbolt.  In  the 
morning  Ingham  read  prayers  ;  but  in  the  evening,  having  refreshed  himself 
with  the  unusual  luxury  of  supper,  he  read  prayers  himself,  noting  with 
satisfaction  that  'many  were  not  at  the  ball.'  An  hour  later  he  was  ex- 
pounding with  the  Germans. 

Tues.  27. — After  writing  his  Journal  he  set  out  for  Thunderbolt,  dressed, 
for  he  hoped  to  hold  a  service,  and  was  not  disappointed.  He  took  Fleury 
to  read  as  he  walked.  Mr.  Lacy  he  found  better.  All  the  servants  came 
in,  and  he  read  prayers  and  expounded.  Again  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  one 
of  the  vivid  pictures  which  a  few  Diary  words  sometimes  reveal.  It  is  still 
early  morning,  in  the  beautiful  Georgian  spring.  Wesley,  robed  and  reading 
Fleury,  loses  himself.  Fearing  lest  he  should  be  late  for  prayers  and 
exposition  in  Savannah,  he  runs,  reaching  home  at  eleven.  The  people  are 
not  disappointed  of  their  exposition.  His  Journal,  '  Mr.  Hall's  case,'  Parker 
and  Causton — apparently  in  some  dispute  or  difficulty — claim  his  attention. 

Wed.  28. — An  account  of  Mr.  Hall's  case,  Fleury's  Catechism,  Mr. 
Lacy  (who  was  better)  and  his  servants,  eleven  of  whom  came  to  hear  him 
expound,  and  an  interview  with  Causton  on  Mr.  Hall's  case,  are  the  principal 
features  of  the  day. 

Thur.  29. — He  is  still  working  at  Fleury  and  Mr.  Hall's  case,  and  visiting 
Mr.  Lacy.  For  some  unexplained  reason  he  makes  another  journey  into 
the  country,  this  time  in  company  with  Miss  Fosset  and  Ingham.  They 
meet  Mrs.  Musgrove.  Probably  an  arrangement  was  made  for  an  interview, 
on  the  day  following,  with  Tomo-chachi,  in  which  both  Mrs.  Musgrove  and 
Miss  Fosset  took  part.  By  this  time  the  house  in  which  Ingham  was  to 
live  near  the  Cowpen  and  the  Indian  settlement  was  probably  finished. 
The  account  of  Hall  continues,  and  is  discussed  with  a  Mr.  Butler,  who  is 
'much  afraid.'  He  visits  Joseph  Stringer,  who  is  'seriously  affected.'  Mr. 
Causton  comes  to  the  parsonage  ;  he  and  Butler  and  Brown  sup  together, 
Wesley  after  supper  reading  prayers.  He  ends  a  busy  day  with  prayers 
and  exposition  with  the  Germans. 

Fri.  30. — Beginning  at  five,  it  is  nine  before  he  finishes  the  writing  of 
Hall's  'Account.'  This  is  one  of  the  lost  documents,  and,  judging  from  the 
time  Wesley  bestowed  upon  it  and  the  interest  the  case  seems  to  have 
aroused  in  Savannah,  it  was  of  value.  At  nine  he  read  Ingham's  Journal. 
(This  also  is  apparently  lost,  for  it  can  scarcely  have  been  the  Voyage 
Journal  sent  to  Mrs.  Ingham  some  months  earlier.  Doubtless  it  was 


MAP  OF  WESLEY'S  PARISH  IN  GEORGIA. 

[Reproduced  by  permission  of  the  Colonial  Office. 
203 


May  1736.] 


Second  Savannah  Journal 


205 


our  house  ;   and  this,  accordingly,  we  determined  to  do  every 
Sunday  in  the  afternoon. 


Ingham's  Journal  of  his  visit  to  Frederica  with  the  pioneer  colonists,  and  of 
all  that  happened  up  to  the  time  when  he  left  Charles  Wesley  among  the 
'wild  beasts'  and  came  to  summon  John  to  the  rescue.)  He  then  spent  an 
hour  in  reading  over  his  own  Journal.  After  an  interview  with  Causton,  he 
and  Ingham  set  out  by  boat l  with  '  a  strong  tide  against '  them,  Wesley 
reading  Hall's  case.  Arrived  at  their  destination,  they  learn  that  '  Mrs. 
Musgrove  and  Miss  Fosset  are  in  the  woods ' ;  there  they  found  them. 
With  Mrs.  Musgrove  as  interpreter  and  Miss  Fosset  as  an  interested 
listener,  he  had  a  conversation  with  Tomo-chachi,  and  afterwards  with 
Miss  Fosset,  who,  as  usual,  was  '  seriously  affected.'  Wesley  then  returned 
home.  No  further  mention  is  made  of  Ingham,  who  probably  remained. 
The  immediate  purpose,  it  has  been  suggested,  was  that  Ingham  might 
study  the  Indian  language.  He  was  then  to  teach  Wesley. 
This  ends  Wesley's  first  volume  of  the  Georgia  Diary. 

MAY,  1736,   Sat.    i   (Old  Sfyle}.—Th\s  begins  a  new  volume  of  the 
Georgia  Diary.8    He  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Oglethorpe,  and  after  dinner 


1  The  coast  of  Georgia  and  South  Caro- 
lina is  studded  with  islands  and  pierced 
with  inlets  and  rivers.  Of  the  latter  the 
principal  are  the  Alatamahaw  to  the  south, 
with  St.  Simon's  and  a  number  of  smaller 
islands  guarding  its  estuary ;  the  Ogeechy, 
its  mouth  opposite  Skidoway  and  other 
islands ;  the  Savannah,  with  a  wide 
estuary  of  twenty  or  thirty  miles  guarded 
by  Tybee,  Peeper,  and  other  islands,  and 
running  far  up  the  country.  On  the 
south  bank  of  the  estuary,  a  little  inland, 
lay  Thunderbolt,  consisting  at  this  time 
mainly  of  Mr.  Lacy's  plantation  ;  farther 
inland,  Hampstead  and  Highgate ;  four 
or  five  miles  to  the  north-east,  near  a 
bluff  overlooking  the  estuary,  Savannah 
Town  ;  about  half  a  mile  beyond,  Yamu- 
craw,  the  Indian  village  ;  and  about  four 
miles  farther  north,  still  following  the 
broad  river,  Cowpen,  Mrs.  Musgrove's 
place.  New  Ebenezer,  where  the  Saltz- 
burghers  were  settled,  was  about  fifteen 
miles,  as  the  crow  flies,  north  by  west  of 
Cowpen,  near  the  river.  From  this  it 
will  be  seen  that  when  Wesley  made  a 
morning  journey  to  Thunderbolt,  and  an 
afternoon  journey  to  Cowpen,  he  tra- 
velled, whether  by  land  or  water,  in 
VOL.  I. 


opposite  directions.  There  were  no 
roads,  only  precarious  paths  through  the 
woods.  Therefore  an  unwary  pedestrian 
absorbed  in  a  book  or  in  conversation, 
as  Wesley  usually  was,  might  easily  lose 
himself.  Ordinarily,  both  journeys  were 
made  on  foot.  Even  when  returning  by 
boat  from  Frederica,  Wesley  walked 
overland  from  Thunderbolt.  His  reason 
for  taking  boat  to  the  Cowpen,  we  may 
surmise,  was  connected  with  Ingham's 
approaching  settlement  in  his  new  house. 
It  would  be  the  most  convenient  method 
of  conveying  stores.  Possibly  Mrs. 
Musgrove  and  Miss  Fosset  were  pre- 
paring the  mission-house  for  Ingham's 
occupancy. 

2  The  'Hendrix'  Georgia  Diary  is 
described  by  the  late  Richard  Green 
(  W.  H.  S.  1 898,  vol.  i.  p.  78).  It  belonged 
originally  to  the  series  of  small  121110 
volumes  now  forming  part  of  the  Colman 
Collection.  Its  place  in  the  series  of 
Diaries  is  Georgia,  No.  II.  Mr.  Green's 
description  would  apply  to  others  of  the 
set  :  '  Stoutly  bound  in  leather,  and  con- 
taining 1 86  pages  of  good  note-paper. 
One  hundred  and  seventy-five  of  these 
pages  are  numbered,  and  all  are  filled 
II 


206 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[May  1736. 


a  letter  for  him.  Business  of  the  colony  increasingly  occupied  his  atten- 
tion. Disputes  arose :  questions  relating  to  Indian  traders  and  their 
licences  ;  judicial  cases  in  which  persons  thought  themselves  aggrieved  ;  the 
inevitable  difficulties  of  settlers  who  discovered  that  a  new  country  was  not 
free  from  the  ills  of  the  land  from  which  they  had  fled.  Increasingly 
Wesley's  advice  was  sought,  and  not  infrequently  his  co-operation,  especially 
by  Oglethorpe,  who  must  often  have  regretted  that  the  elder  brother,  instead 
of  the  younger,  had  not  been  appointed  secretary.  Whenever  Oglethorpe 
and  John  Wesley  are  in  the  same  place,  the  latter  is  requisitioned  for 
secretarial  work,  even  though  Charles  is  at  hand  and  at  liberty  for  the 
service.  On  this  first  day  in  May  he  writes  for  his  absent  chief.  It  is  one 
of  the  Church's  holy-days.  Therefore  he  preaches  and  administers  the 
Eucharist * — to  twelve  communicants  ;  also  catechizes  the  children,  in  which 


with  Wesley's  neat  and  clear  writing. 
Each  of  the  numbered  pages  is  devoted 
to  the  doings  of  a  single  day,  and  each 
line  to  the  work  of  a  single  hour.'  The 
dates  are  from  Saturday,  May  I,  1736 
(O.S.),  to  Feb.  11,  1737-  The  fac- 
simile of  a  page — Thursday,  Sept.  9, 
1736 — is  given  opposite,  with  an  explana- 
tion of  *  some  of  the  curious  contractions.' 
Many  of  Mr.  Green's  interpretations  are 
now  known  to  be  correct. 

A  pamphlet  published  by  a  New 
Orleans  newspaper  in  1901,  professing 
to  print  this  Diary,  reprints  part  of  the 
published  Journal  and,  in  facsimile,  two 
pages  of  the  Diary ;  one  being  a  poem 
in  the  handwriting  of  John  Wesley,  and 
the  other  the  entry  for  July  4,  1736,  and 
Dec.  23.  The  pamphlet  also  gives  the 
following  information  : 

'On  the  fly-leaf  of  the  Diary  is  the 
inscription:  "Pray  without  ceasing, "and 
beneath,  "John  Wesley's  Journal,  from 
Oct.  14,  1735.  to  Feb.  i,  1737."' 

We  may  add  that  in  one  or  two  in- 
stances these  small  volumes,  originally 
intended  for  one  purpose,  for  some  un- 
explained reason  have  eventually  been 
used  for  another.  The  Book- Room 
manuscript  Georgia  Journal,  for  instance, 
has  on  its  fly-leaf  'Notes  on  the  New 
Testament.'  Apparently  Wesley  at  first 
intended  this  '  Hendrix '  volume  for  his 
manuscript  Journal.  Later  he  determined 
to  utilize  it  for  his  Diary.  One  fact  is 
clear.  It  is  not,  as  some  suppose,  Wesley's 
pocket  Diary,  complete  from  the  day  when 


he  boarded  the  Simmonds  to  the  day  when 
he  left  America,  but  only  the  Diary  of 
nine  months  and  eleven  days,  from 
May  I,  1736,  to  Feb.  II,  1737.  Wesley, 
as  we  now  know,  wrote  three  (probably 
four)  Diaries  in,  or  on  the  way  to,  Georgia. 
This  is  one  of  the  three.  The  other 
two  are  in  the  Colman  Collection.  The 
reason  why  this  volume  is  not  in  its 
proper  place  with  the  rest  is  explained 
by  a  memorandum  on  the  second  page 
of  the  fly-leaf: 

'  Memorandum  :  Book  of  the  late  John 
Wesley.  From  the  Rev.  Henry  Moore 
to  Elizabeth  Taylor  of  Carnathen  [sic], 
1817.'  'The  Rev.  John  Gould  Avery : 
From  his  much  obliged  and  ever  affec- 
tionate friend,  Elizabeth  Thomas,  late 
Elizabeth  Taylor,  1847.' 

The  New  Orleans  pamphlet  further 
states  that  the  letter  from  Mr.  Moore  to 
Elizabeth  Taylor  in  reference  to  the  Diary 
is  also  in  Bishop  Hendrix's  possession. 
The  subsequent  history  of  the  book  is  well 
known.  From  Mr.  Avery's  daughter  it 
passed  to  Mr.  R.  Thursfield  Smith,  who 
sold  it  to  Bishop  Hendrix,  who,  for  the 
purpose  of  this  edition  of  the  Journal, 
placed  it  for  a  time  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Editor. 

1  The  use  of  the  cursive  capital  D 
illustrates  one  of  the  curious  features  of 
Wesley's  cryptic  writing.  The  letter  is 
used  for  two  purposes,  and  in  two  ways  : 
(i)  as  the  initial  of  Delamotte ;  and  (2) 
as  a  cryptic  sign  for  Holy  Communion. 
In  (i)  it  is  written  plainly  ;  in  (2)  it  has 


FACSIMILE    PAGE    OF    THE    HENDRIX    GEORGIA    DIARY. 


207 


> 

£ 

ff 

j- 


FACSIMILE    EASTER    DAY    DIARY,    1736    (S0e    PAGE    2IO). 


208 


May  1736.]  Second  Savannah  Journal  209 

one  may  trace  the  influence  of  Fleury.  Of  course  he  read  the  appointed 
Lessons— Eccles.  vii.  and  John  i.  43. 

Sun.  2. — He  began  writing  for  Oglethorpe  '  before  five  in  the  morning, 
and  continued  to  do  so  at  intervals  until  six  o'clock,  when  he  read  over  the 
letter. 

His  writing  to  Oglethorpe  was  interrupted  by  a  *  close  conversation  with 
Toltschig  and  Anton  [the  Moravian  bishop],  on  the  Parish,'  which  from 
every  point  of  view,  whether  Moravian  or  English,  was  much  more  extensive 
than  Savannah  Town.  After  Holy  Communion  he  had  an  impressive  con- 
versation with  Miss  Sophy  alone,  her  friend  being  with  Mrs.  Musgrove. 
Ingham,  who  is  not  named,  was  probably  still  at  the  Cowpen. 

Mon.  3. — This  morning  Toltschig,  who  seems  to  have  been  now  the  most 
influential  person  in  the  Moravian  community  (he  is  named  before  the 
bishop),  came  to  the  English  morning  prayers,  and  Wesley  notes  the  fact 
as  important.1 

After  breakfasting  with  Causton,  he  went  to  the  Moravians,  and  began  a 
more '  systematic  and  scholarly  study  of  German,  using  as  text-book  The 
General  Grounds  of  Grammar.  Most  of  the  day  was  spent  with  the 
Germans.  He  also  began  a  course  of  Greek  Testament  study  with  Ingham 
and  Delamotte.  Two  other  notes  mark  this  as  a  day  of  more  than  usual 
importance.  From  four  to  five  in  the  afternoon  he  sang  and  read  Thomas 
a  Kempis  alternately.  He  then  transcribed  the  book  he  had  been  studying, 
i.e.  as  he  would  have  said  in  his  early  Oxford  days,  he  '  collected'  it. 

P.  Telchig  at  Prayers    With  God,  7,  i.     6,  8.     5,  8. 

Made  Resolution,  prayed.     Company. 

This  is  in  cipher.  It  might  read — and  this  is  perhaps  the  more  probable 
reading — *  New  resolution.'  What  happened  seems  to  have  been  that  '  our 
Company '  resolved  on  some  new  exercise  or  method  of  devotion.  It  will 
be  noted  that  in  the  printed  Journal  the  days  following  his  return  from 
Frederica  are  astir  with  signs  of  a  new  beginning,  and  that,  in  point  of  fact, 


over  it  a  small  mark,  ~l .     In  Wesley's  whole  of  it  was  not  only  more  or  less 

cipher  alphabet,   which   for  secret   and  official,  but  historical.      It  may  still  be 

especially    for  sacred   purposes   he  still  in  existence.    The  archives  of  the  Georgia 

used,  the  letter  D  stands  between  C  (for  Trustees,  of  the  Colonial  Office,  of  the 

Communion)    and    E    (for    Eucharist).  Admiralty,  of  the   Board   of  Trade,  of 

Readers   of    the   Journal     and    of   the  the  States  of  Georgia  and  S.   Carolina, 

Wesley  hymns  will  be  familiar  with  the  and  of  the   S.P.G.    may   possess  these 

brothers'  use  of  both  words.     The  Lord's  documents.     The  handwriting  would  be 

Supper    was     at    once    a    Communion  unmistakable. 

(xoti'cdi'la)  and  a  sacramental  Thanks-  2  It  seems  probable  that  at  this  time 
giving  (evxa-ptffTla).  Probably  Wesley  the  plan,  favoured  by  Zinzendorf,  Span- 
had  no  special  preference.  The  terms  genberg,  and  others,  and  not  discounten- 
were  scriptural,  and,  in  signification,  anced  by  Archbishop  Potter,  of  bringing 
Protestant.  By  using  both  he  avoided  about  a  co-operative  agreement  between 
tautology.  Anglicans  and  Moravians,  at  least  on 
1  The  Oglethorpe  correspondence  in  colonial  and  missionary  stations,  com- 
the  handwriting  of  John  Wesley  must  have  mended  itself  to  Wesley,  as  undoubtedly 
been  voluminous  and  important.  The  it  did  to  James  Hutton. 


210 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[May  1736. 


MAY  5,  Wed.— I  was  asked  to  baptize  a  child  of  Mr.  Parker's, 
second  Bailiff  of  Savannah  ;  *  but  Mrs.  Parker  told  me, '  Neither 
Mr.  Parker  nor  I  will  consent  to  its  being  dipped.'  I  answered, 

many  years  after,  he  deliberately  underscored  this  as  one  of  the   three 
Beginnings  of  Methodism.' 

Neither  the  Journal  nor  the  Diary  marks  the  precise  day  in  April  when 
this  '  second  beginning '  took  place,  unless,  indeed,  we  may  infer  that  the 
two  words  *  wrote  names '  in  the  Easter-Day  Diary  page  fix  the  date  : 
12  Communion  [or  Eucharist] ;  \ ;  dined.     35  Communicants. 

1  Wrote  names,  Company  [in  cipher] ;  | ;  Greek  Testament. 

2  Greek  Testament,  sung ;  £ ;  read  prayers. 

3  Read  prayers,  preached, 

4  preached  :  meditated,  conversed. 

If  we  may  further  assume  that  in  the  afternoon  of  this  Easter  Day  he 
followed  his  usual  custom  and  selected  his  subject  of  discourse  from  the 
Second  Lesson,  he  could  scarcely  avoid  saying  something  about  the  great 
word  which  so  exactly  defines  the  Methodist — whether  Oxford,  Georgian, 
or  London — ideal  of  fellowship  :  Acts  ii.  42 — *  And  they  continued  stead- 
fastly in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and 
in  prayers.3 

Tues.  4. — At  five  in  the  morning  twenty-five  came  to  hear  him  expound. 
He  then  began  vigorously  to  write  German.  At  eleven  he  ceased,  and 
went  to  the  *  Trustees'  garden,'  taking  with  him  an  ecclesiastical  history, 
a  Hebrew  psalm,  and  Fleury's  History  of  the  Church.  In  the  afternoon  he 
returned  to  his  German,  saw  Mrs.  Musgrove  and  Miss  Fosset,  and  at  seven 
read  Greek  Testament  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte. 

Wed.  5. — Being  ill  with  one  of  his  old  complaints,  he  sorted  papers. 
Ingham  helped  him  by  reading  prayers.  At  noon  he  '  conversed  with 
Mr.  Parker  of  baptizing  his  child,  and  got  no  good.'  Dinner,  as  he  notes 


1  A  sawyer,  intemperate  and  un- 
educated. He  afterwards  figured  in  the 
trial  of  Wesley  before  the  Savannah 
magistrates.  In  the  First  Edw.  VI 
Prayer-book  the  rubric  directed  '  the 
priest  to  dip  the  child  in  the  water  thrice. 
.  .  .  And  if  the  child  be  weak,  it  shall 
suffice  to  pour  water  upon  it,  saying,' 
&c.  This  was  modified  in  the  Second 
Edw.  VI,  the  thrice  dipping  being 
omitted.  Thus  the  rubric  continued, 
through  successive  revisions,  until  the 
time  of  Charles  II  (1662),  when  it  was 
altered  to  its  present  form  : 

Then  the  priest  shall  take  the  child  into 
his  hands,  .  .  .  &c. 

But  if  they  certify  that  the  child  is  weak,  it 
shall  suffice  to  pour  water  upon  it,  saying,  &c. 

This    is  the   law    of  the  Church    of 


England  now.  John  Wesley  and  his 
brother  Charles  were  governed  by  the 
rubric  of  the  Edw.  VI  Prayer-book, 
because  they  believed  it  to  be  more  in 
harmony  with  the  usage  of  the  early 
Church  than  any  other,  as  undoubtedly 
it  is.  The  question  involved  may  seem 
trifling,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact 
that  the  effusion  of  water,  originally 
supplementary  to  immersion,  became  a 
not  infrequent  substitute  for  it,  and  has 
gradually  come,  in  spite  of  the  old 
custom  and  the  literal  direction  of  the 
rubric,  to  prevail  almost  universally 
(Bishop  Barry  on  The  Book  of  Common 
Prayer).  It  must  be  remembered,  how- 
ever, that  the  controversy  raised  by 
Wesley  throws  light  on  the  very  interest- 
ing question  of  his  position  at  this  time 


nay  1736.]  Second  Savannah  Journal  211 

'If  you  "certify  that"  your  "child  is  weak,  it  will  suffice"  (the 
rubric  says) 1  "  to  pour  water  upon  it." '  She  replied,  *  Nay,  the 
child  is  not  weak ;  but  I  am  resolved  it  shall  not  be  dipped.' 
This  argument  I  could  not  confute.  So  I  went  home,  and  the 
child  was  baptized  by  another  person. 


in  amazement,  cured  him  of  his  colic.  Then  he  began  to  write  German, 
and  at  three  '  transcribed  a  German  psalm.'  The  abbreviated  word  might 
mean  '  translated.'  He  does  not  always  mark  the  distinction  between  the 
two  words.  There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  now  entering 
upon  another  new  departure — the  selection,  translation,  and  reversification 
of  German  psalms  and  hymns.  Nor  did  he  confine  his  attention  to  German 
psalmody.  The  divine  hand,  equipping  and  leading  him  in  so  many  other 
respects,  was  gradually  bringing  him  to  fountains  of  living  water,  the 
streams  whereof  were,  within  a  few  years,  and  for  all  future  time,  to  make 
glad  the  city  of  God.* 

Thur.  6. — Five-o'clock  morning  prayers  and  exposition  now  became  the 
rule.  The  service,  however,  was  very  brief,  Wesley  recognizing  the  im- 
portance of  letting  the  people  go  to  the  woods  and  gardens  with  as  little 
delay  as  possible.  In  his  letter  to  Oglethorpe  (April  20),  expostulating  with 
him  for  his  neglect  of  public  worship,  he  says  :  '  All  the  prayers  usually  read 
morning  and  evening,  at  Frederica  and  here,  put  together,  do  not  last  seven 
minutes.  These  cannot  be  termed  long  prayers:  no  Christian  assembly 
ever  used  shorter  :  neither  have  they  any  repetitions  in  them  at  all.' 

Conversation  with  Mr.  Lacy,  who  now  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  visit 
at  the  parsonage  and  to  attend  morning  prayers  ;  also  with  Delamotte  and 
Von  Reck  junior ;  two  hours  with  Toltschig,  an  hour  with  Fleury,  an  hour 

in  relation  to  ecclesiastical  law  generally.  side  :  Second,  the  left  side  :  The  third 
He  belonged  to  that  school  in  the  time  dipping  the  face  toward  the  font : 
Anglican  Church  which  respected  the  so  it  be  discreetly  and  warily  done,  say- 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  -just  so  far  as  ing,'  &c.  '  And  if  the  child  be  weak,  it 
it  reflected  the  law  and  usage  of  the  early  shall  suffice  to  pour  water  upon  it,'  &c. 
Church.  2  The  important  facts  to  be  now 

1  The  First  Edw.   VI   rubric  directs  noted  are  : 

the    priest   to  make   a  cross  upon  the  (i)  The  providential  overruling  of  un- 

child's  forehead  and  breast,  to  exorcise  toward  events  which  drove  him  nearer 

the  unclean  spirit.  .  .  .  'Therefore,  thou  to  the  Moravians,  who,  for  him,  held  the 

cursed  spirit,    remember   thy  sentence.  key  to  the  best  German  psalmody  (both 

.  .  .  And  presume  not  hereafter  to  exer-  hymns  and  tunes), 

cise  any  tyranny  towards  these  infants,  (2)  The  scholarly  training  that  com- 

whom    Christ    hath    bought    with    His  pelled  him  to  seek  a  more  intimate  and 

precious  blood,  and  by  this  holy  Baptism  accurate  knowledge  of  German, 

calleth  to  be  of  His  flock ' ;  to  lead  the  (3)  The  supremely  significant  fact  (it 

child  by  the  hand  into  the  church  toward  will  reappear  at  later  dates)  is  that  the 

the  font,  saying,   'The  Lord  vouchsafe  impulse    towards    a   nobler    service    of 

to  receive  you  into  His  holy  household ' ;  common   praise  in  the   English   Church 

and,  naming  the  child,  '  shall  dip  it  in  was  coincident  with  a  revival  of  spiritual 

the  water  thrice.    First  dipping  the  right  life  and  of  early  Christian  fellowship. 


212  John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1736. 


Sun.  9. — I  began  dividing  the  public  prayers,  according  to 
the  original  appointment  of  the  Church *  (still  observed  in  a  few 

sorting  letters,  and  four  hours  with  German  translation  or  transcription — 
these  were  the  occupations  of  the  day.  In  the  evening  he  read  prayers  and 
expounded  with  his  own  people,  and  at  eight  with  the  Germans.  His  life, 
it  will  be  noted,  is  double — Anglican  and  English  ;  German  and  Moravian. 

Fri.  7. — This  was  one  of  the  momentous  days  in  Wesley's  life  and  in  the 
history  of  English  hymnology.  At  five  he  set  out,  whether  on  foot  or  by 
boat  does  not  appear,  to  visit  the  Lacys  at  Thunderbolt.  On  the  way  he 
translated  hymns  from  the  German  (see  p.  215). 

6  translated. 

7  Mrs.  Lacy's  :  he  not  present :  verses  :  Conversing  with  her  [Mrs.  Lacy]. 

In  the  service  which  followed  he  expounded  at  unusual  length.  From 
9.20  to  9.40  he  was  reciting  or  singing  the  verses  already  written.  On  his 
return  journey  he  was  translating  all  the  way,  until,  at  11.20,  he  reached 
home  and  forthwith  'wrote  verses,  shaved,  sung,  dined,  conversed,  and 
wrote '  in  his  Diary  the  story  of  one  of  the  most  joyous  mornings  in  his  life— 
the  morning  on  which  a  new  element  was  introduced  into  English  church 
worship. 

His  care  of  Delamotte,  who  was  quite  young,  and  for  whose  well-being 
in  all  respects  he  was  responsible,  is  pathetic.  He  treats  him  as  a  pupil — a 
son  in  the  gospel.  His  first  duty  every  morning  is  to  '  pray  with  Delamotte,' 
and  few  days  pass  without  special  conversation  or  instruction.  On  this  day 
a  Mrs.  Smith  speaks  to  him  '  of  Delamotte.'  No  explanation  is  given,  but 
he  writes  his  solemn  cry,  in  cipher,  Kvpie  /Soi/tfei.  It  is  satisfactory  to  learn 
that  Mrs.  Smith  was  rewarded  by  a  prolonged  course  of  the  usual  pastoral 
remedies  for  sick  souls.  He  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Oglethorpe,  and  visited 
the  sick. 

Sat.  8.— He  had  frequent  visits  from  Von  Reck,  who  to-day  brought  his 
younger  brother.  Von  Reck  wrote  a  journal,  which  from  time  to  time  was 
submitted  to  Wesley.  It  was  afterwards  published.  Mr.  Appee,  who  had 
been  with  Charles  in  Frederica,  reappeared.  The  morning  and  most  of 
the  afternoon  were  devoted  to  Fleury,  whose  writings,  condensed  by  Wesley, 
played  their  part  in  after  years  among  the  children  and  young  people  of 
early  Methodism.  At  1.30  he  baptized  Stephen  Lander. 

Sun.  9. — He  began  to  read  prayers  in  the  court-house  at  8  a.m.,  and 
not  to-day  at  five,  as  stated  in  the  Journal.  At  the  early  service  thirty-three 

1  The  First  Prayer-book  of  Edw.  VI  Introit,  Collects,   Epistles,  and  Gospels 

divided  the  public  prayers  into  (i)  Matins,  to  be  used   at    the  celebration   of    the 

which  included  the  Lord's  Prayer,   the  Lord's   Supper   and   Holy  Communion, 

versicles,    the     Venite,     the    appointed  through  the  year:   with  proper  Psalms 

Psalms  and  Lessons,  with  the  Te  Deum  and  Lessons  for  divers  Feasts  and  Days.' 

(or  in  Lent  the  Benedicite)  and  the  Bene-  Following  this  came  '  The  Supper  of  the 

dictus  ;  the  Kyrie,  Creed,  Lord's  Prayer,  Lord,  and  the  Holy  Communion,  com- 

versicles,   and    the    three    Collects — for  monly  called  the   Mass' — an  office  not 

the  day,    for    peace,    for   grace.     Here  differing  greatly,  except  in  order,  from 

Matins  ended.     Evensong   was   similar.  that  which  now   obtains   in   the  Angli- 

(2)  '  At  the  Communion '  (to  be  adminis-  can  and  Methodist  Churches.     The  Ten 

tered  every  Sunday  and  Feast-day) :  '  The  Commandments  were  inserted  in  1552. 


May  1736.] 


Second  Savannah  Journal 


213 


places  in  England).  The  morning  service  began  at  five ;  the 
Communion  Office  (with  the  sermon),  at  eleven ;  the  evening 
service,  about  three ;  and  this  day  I  began  reading  prayers  in 
the  court-house * — a  large  and  convenient  place. 

Mon.  10. — I  began  visiting  my  parishioners  in  order,  from 

were  present ;  at  eleven  the  congregation  numbered  90 ;  at  two  120.  There 
were  eighteen  communicants. 

Mon.  10. — He  cleaves  toToltschigand  German  studies,  vigorously  visits  his 
people,  especially  the  sick,  and  writes  a  letter  to  Oglethorpe,  which  is  sufficiently 
important  to  be  *  transcribed.'  The  names  of  parishioners  visited  are  given. 
5  Visited  Mrs  Moore  xtend  h  sick  chi. 

The  interpretation  may  be  :  'At  five  visited  Mrs.  Moore  :  extended  [the 
visit  to]  her  sick  child.'  He  notes  a  letter  from  Charles,  the  main  fact  in 
which  he.  records  in  the  Diary — '  Oglethorpe  innocent  ! ' *  The  shorthand 
account  in  Charles  Wesley's  Journal  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  absolute 
innocence  of  Oglethorpe. 


1  Savannah  had  no  consecrated  build- 
ing in  Wesley's  day.  Oglethorpe,  on 
behalf  of  the  Trustees,  gave  a  site,  upon 
which,  at  a  later  date,  Christ  Church 
was  built.  The  paten  and  chalice  used 
in  this  church  were  given  by  or  through 
Samuel  Wesley  (Journal  of  Trustees, 
Record  Office).  The  church  was  after- 
wards destroyed  by  fire.  Wesley  does 
not  seem  to  have  made  any  serious 
attempt  to  build  a  church  in  Georgia 
(Digest  of  S.P.G.  Records}.  The  house 
he  built  in  Frederica  was  a  society-room 
rather  than  a  church.  On  an  old  map  of 
Savannah  (1737)  a  site  for  a  church  is 
shown,  but  not  the  building.  Next  to, 
and  indeed  part  of,  the  court-house  is  a 
building  called  a  '  chappel.'  This  seems 
to  have  been  the  preaching-house  which 
Wesley  first  occupied.  On  Sunday, 
May  9,  he  removed  to  the  court-house 
itself.  Some  weeks  later  we  shall  find 
the  court-house  temporarily  required  for 
other  purposes.  The  minister's  house, 
it  is  said,  stood  by  itself  on  the  east 
side  of  the  town.  Causton's  house  stood 
in  the  Great  Square.  Neither  now  nor 
later  was  Wesley  greatly  stirred  by  church- 
building  ambition.  It  was  the  spiritual 
building  that  most  of  all  interested  him. 
Here  in  Savannah,  a  house,  hut,  store, 
court-house  contented  him  for  preaching 


and  for  all  the  rites  and  sacraments  of 
the  Church.  What  he  most  earnestly 
desired  was  spiritual  awakening,  to  see 
persons  '  open,'  '  seriously  affected,'  '  con- 
vinced,' 'zealous'  concerning  'inward 
and  outward  holiness.'  Beyond  this  he 
desired  the  orderly  observance  of  worship, 
the  continuous  nurture  of  Christian  life, 
and  the  practice  of  religion  according  to 
the  example  of  the  ancient  Church  and  the 
rubrics  of  the  Edw.  VI  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  (1549).  Forty-eight  years  later 
he  wrote :  '  As  soon  as  I  set  foot  in 
Georgia  I  began  preaching  at  five  in 
the  morning ;  and  every  communicant, 
that  is,  every  serious  person  in  the  town, 
constantly  attended  throughout  the  year  : 
I  mean,  came  every  morning,  winter  and 
summer,  unless  in  the  case  of  sickness. 
They  did  so  till  I  left  the  province.'  On 
the  same  page  he  records  his  deliberate 
opinion  as  to  the  relative  value  of  material 
and  spiritual  building.  '  We  are  labouring 
to  secure  the  preaching-houses  to  the  next 
generation.  In  the  name  of  God,  let  us, 
if  possible,  secure  the  present  generation 
from  drawing  back  to  perdition  ! ' 

*  It  is  unfortunate  that  we  do  not  pos- 
sess the  complete  Oglethorpe  and  Wesley 
(John  and  Charles)  correspondence,  par- 
ticularly the  letter  and  its  reply  named  on 
this  Diary  page.  Until  now  John  believed 


LIBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 


214 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[May  1736. 


house  to  house ;  for  which  I  set  apart  the  time  when  they  can- 
not work,  because  of  the  heat,  viz.  from  twelve  till  three  in  the 
afternoon.1 


Tues.  ii. — 'John'  reappears.  He  attends  the  five-o'clock  service.  At 
night  he  comes,  apparently  as  guest,8  to  the  parsonage. 

He  wrote  letters  to  Charles,  and  at  great  length  to  Oglethorpe.  He 
began  a  meeting— devotional  apparently— with  Delamotte  and  Ingham,  and 
spent  three  hours  and  a  half  with  the  Germans,  the  last  being  devoted  to 
translation.  The  usual  pastoral  notes  are  continued. 

Wed.  12. — At  five  in  the  morning  he  set  out  for  Thunderbolt,  as  on  a 
former  occasion  translating  German  as  he  walked,  and  on  and  after  the 
return  journey  writing  verses.  At  Thunderbolt  he  found  Mr.  Lacy  better, 
and  met  John  Chapman,  with  whom  he  had  'convincing'  conversation.  On 
the  return  journey  Chapman  overtook  him.  The  letter  written  to  Oglethorpe 
must  have  been  important,  or  he  would  not  have  given  two  hours  and  a  half 
out  of  a  busy  day  to  its  transcription.  Among  the  day's  visits  was  one  to 
Mrs.  Mellichamp. 

Thur.  13. — There  is  further  evidence  of  the  importance  he  attached  to 
the  letter  written  to  Oglethorpe.  After  morning  prayers  he  spent  half  an 
hour  in  re-reading  it.  This  letter  cannot  now  be  found  in  any  English 
collection  of  MSS.  Mr.  Quincy  called.  With  his  friends  Wesley  began  the 
reading  of  Archbishop  Sharpe's  sermons,  sang  with  Delamotte,  rearranged 


that  his  friend  and  chief  had  been,  to 
some  extent,  compromised  by  Mrs.  Haw- 
kins or  Mrs.  Welch,  or  both.  Charles 
he  had  cleared  of  the  charge  of  slandering 
Oglethorpe.  But  now,  though  less  and 
less  inclined  to  credit  the  testimony  of 
these  wretched  women  against  them- 
selves and  Oglethorpe,  he  had  misgivings. 
We  know  from  the  Voyage  Diary  that  he 
had  heard  his  chief,  in  moments  of  deep 
religious  emotion,  speak  confidentially 
about  himself.  What  passed  on  these 
occasions  was  never  revealed ;  it  was 
never  even  committed  to  the  safe  keep- 
ing of  a  cipher  diary.  Henry  Moore's 
statements  and  hints  must  be  read  with 
the  reserve  proper  to  the  second-hand 
evidence  of  a  man  writing  from  memory. 
The  details  were  given  to  him  by  an 
old  man,  and  were  not  committed  to 
print  until  after  some  years  had  passed. 
Moore's  story  of  Wesley  in  Georgia  is 
confused.  The  broad  facts  seem  to  have 
been  these:  At  first  Charles  believed 
the  women's  story.  Gradually  he  came 
to  see  that  it  was  a  monstrous  lie,  and, 


having  no  other  evidence,  he  declared  to 
John  his  belief  in  Oglethorpe's  innocence. 
John,  on  his  part,  firmly  believed  that 
the  two  women,  however  sinful  in  the 
past,  were  now  sincere  penitents.  When 
Charles  told  him  that  they  had  both 
accused  themselves  of  sin  with  Ogle- 
thorpe, he  remembered  all  he  had  seen 
and  heard  during  the  voyage,  and  he 
feared  the  worst.  Even  after  he  had 
proved  Mrs.  Welch  to  be  a  liar  and  had 
seen  Mrs.  Hawkins's  demoniacal  rages, 
he  still  had  misgivings.  Charles,  how- 
ever, was  convinced  of  their  friend's 
innocence.  Twice  on  the  same  page 
John  thankfully  records  the  fact — '  Letter 
from  Charles.  Oglethorpe  innocent.' 

1  On  the  heat  in  Georgia,  see  Works, 
vol.  xi.  p.  73. 

*  The  parsonage  in  Savannah,  unlike 
any  other  house  in  the  town,  except 
Causton's,  was  built  large  enough  to 
accommodate  a  considerable  family.  In 
Wesley's  time  it  served  as  a  guest-house. 
He  speaks  of  'eight  persons'  living 
there. 


* 


FACSIMILE  PAGE:    HYMNS  TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN  (s<?0  PAGE  212). 


215 


FACSIMILE   OF   HYMN,    'TO    THEE    WITH    HEART    AND    MOUTH    I    SING ' 
(S£0    PAGE    299). 


216 


May  1736.] 


Second  Savannah  Journal 


217 


Sun.  1 6. — We  were  surprised  in  the  evening  by  my  brother, 
just  come  from  Frederica.1  After  some  conversation,  we  con- 
sulted how  the  poor  people  there  might  be  taken  care  of  during 

papers,  and  considered  the  '  scheme  of  our  Savannah  life.'    After  supper  he 
read  The  Art  of  Surgery. 

Fri.  14.— Several  peaceful  hours  he  spent  with  German  and  Archbishop 
Sharpe's  sermons.  Armed  with  Gother's  Sinners  Complaint  to  GW— the  book 
which  during  the  voyage  had  produced  so  good  an  effect  on  Oglethorpe— 
he  set  out  on  his  afternoon  round  of  pastoral  visitation.  His  first  adventure 
was  'a  quarrel  between  Mrs.  Dean  and  her  son.'  In  an  interview  with 
Mr.  Dean  he  'got  a  little  good.'  He  also  conversed  with  Eleanor  Dean, 
and  'got  a  little  good.'  This  curious  expression,  at  this  time  frequently 
recurring  in  the  account  of  his  pastoral  experiences,  may  be  taken  as  typical. 
Just  as  his  projected  mission  to  the  Indians  was  undertaken  in  the  first 
instance  '  to  save  his  own  soul,'  so  his  attempts  to  save  colonist  parishioners 
has  for  its  ultimate  motive  the  good  he  can  get  to  his  own  soul.  At  a  later 
period  his  chief  concern  was  to  do  all  the  good  he  could  :  his  present  concern 
is  to  get  all  the  good  he  can. 

Sat.  15. — Miss  Sophy,  who  is  'open,'  comes  in  the  early  morning.     His 
occupations  are  German,  Sharpe's  sermons,  Gother,  Francke,  and  Greek 
Testament.     His  hour  with  Delamotte,  spent  in  prayer  and  in  reading  the 
Greek  Testament,  causes  some  concern.     Hence  his  prayer— Kupie  jSoq&t. 
P.  St  Anthony's  Fire. 
Smarted  much. 

Sun.  16. — He  is  in  pain.  'John'  comes,  and  he  is  easier.  This 
strengthens  the  theory  that  '  John '  is  '  John  Reinier,3  the  French  surgeon 
whom  he  had  befriended.  At  the  first  service  Ingham  read  prayers.  At 


1  No  hint  is  given  in  the  Journal  of 
the  reason  for  this  unexpected  visit  or  of 
John's  sickness.  In  Charles's  Journal  we 
have  a  full  account  of  his  reconciliation 
to  Oglethorpe,  and  of  the  external  perils 
threatening  the  colony ;  of  Oglethorpe's 
safe  return  from  his  expedition  against 
the  Spaniards ;  of  various  '  alarums  and 
excursions'  incident  to  the  uncertainty 
prevailing  along  the  frontier  between 
the  English  and  Spanish  territory ;  of 
Charles's  recovered  health  and  the  re- 
sumption of  morning  exposition ;  of 
Appee's  request  for  baptism  and  of  his 
intended  marriage  to  Miss  Bovey.  On 
Tuesday,  May  12,  near  midnight,  Ogle- 
thorpe, in  the  scout-boat,  followed  in 
the  wake  of  the  other  boats  under  Cap- 
tain Hermsdorf's  command.  They  were 
going  to  St.  George's  to  treat  with  the 


Spaniards,  and  to  bring  away  Major 
Richards  and  Mr.  Horton,  who  had  been 
arrested  contrary  to  the  law  of  nations, 
and  were,  it  was  feared,  in  some  peril. 
Charles  writes :  '  At  four  the  next  day 
I  set  out  for  Savannah,  whither  the 
Indian  traders  were  coming  down  to 
meet  me  and  take  out  their  licences. 
I  was  overjoyed  at  my  deliverance  out 
of  this  furnace,  and  not  a  little  ashamed 
of  myself  for  being  so.'  '  Sun.  16. — 
We  landed  at  Skidoway,  and  dined  at 
Mrs.  Mouse's.  I  then  went  round,  and 
asked  the  few  people  there  were  upon 
the  island  to  come  to  prayers :  which 
accordingly  I  read,  and  preached  to  about 
ten  in  the  guard-room ;  and  promised  so 
to  contrive,  if  possible,  that  they  should 
be  supplied  once  a  month.  At  four  we 
returned  to  our  boat,  and  by  six  reached 


218  John   Wesley's  Journal  [May  me. 

his  absence :  and  it  was  at  last  agreed  that  Mr.  Ingham  and 
I  should  take  our  turns  in  assisting  them  ;  and  the  first  was 
allotted  me.  Accordingly,  on  Tuesday -,  i8th,  I  walked  to 
Thunderbolt ;  whence  the  next  afternoon  we  set  out  in  a  small 
boat.  In  the  evening  we  touched  at  Skidoway,  and  had  a  small 
but  attentive  congregation  to  join  with  us  in  evening  prayer. 


ten  'John '  came  again.  Wesley  read  Hickes  to  them,  Ingram  reading  the 
Collects,  singing,  and  preaching.  The  communicants  numbered  twenty-one. 
The  Sunday  passed  as  usual,  until  at  nine  in  the  evening  Charles  came  and 
they  talked  together  'of  Frederica.'  At  ten  he  took  'physick.' 

Mon.  17. — At  five  'John  [Reinier]'  came.  Notwithstanding  his  pain 
Wesley  read  prayers  and  expounded.  In  the  garden,  with  Charles  and 
Ingham,  he  conversed  of  Frederica  until  eight ;  he  then  worked  at  German 
and  Sharpe's  sermons  until  noon,  when  he  ended  the  second  volume  of  the 
latter.  He  sang  with  them,  dined,  conversed,  and  visited;  but  'all'  on 
whom  he  called  '  were  out.'  Later  in  the  afternoon  he  was  more  successful. 
Among  others  whom  he  then  saw  was  Miss  Bovey.  Whilst  at  Miss 
Bovey's  house  James  Brownfield  called,  and  close  conversation  became 
impossible.  The  loss  of  such  an  opportunity  must  afterwards  have  been 
deeply  regretted,  for  already  the  younger  of  the  two  sisters — the  one  to 
whom  Appee  was  engaged  to  be  married — was  marked  for  death.  The 
Germans,  with  whom  he  read  prayers  and  expounded  that  evening,  prayed 
for  him.  They  knew  that  he  was  suffering,  and  understood  to  some  extent 
his  anxiety.  Before  the  day  closed  '  John '  came  again,  probably  to  dress 
the  boil,  into  which  the  inflammatory  swelling  (St.  Anthony's  fire)  had 
developed.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  words  '  on  business '  which 
immediately  follow. 

Tues.  18. — 'John  '  came  again  soon  after  four  to  attend  to  the  'business.' 
Ill  as  he  was,  and  in  'pain,'  he  read  prayers.  At  six  Mrs.  Causton  and 
Miss  Sophy  came,  and  at  eight  Percy;  half  an  hour  later  he  set  out, 
Ingham,  Charles,  and  Delamotte  walking  with  him.  By  eleven  they  reached 
Mr.  Lacy's.  They  read  prayers  and  expounded  ;  conversed  with  Chapman 
and  'got  no  good.'  In  the  afternoon  Ingham  and  Charles  left,  John  and 
Delamotte  walking  with  them  part  of  the  way.  He  read  prayers  again  in 
the  evening,  after  a  close  conversation  with  Mr.  Lacy. 

Wed.  19. — At  4.15  he  was  abroad,  walking  and  translating  German.  At 
seven  he  returned  home  and  drank  coffee  with  the  Lacys,  and  transcribed 
verses  and  '  necessary  papers.'  Soon  after  ten  he  walked  with  Mrs.  Lacy. 
In  the  afternoon  Charles  came  over  from  Savannah,  bringing  Delamotte 
with  him.  They  were  evidently  anxious,  and  not  without  cause.  At  three 


Thunderbolt ;  whence  I  walked  the  five  but  it  being  late,  we  each  retired  to  his 

remaining  miles  to  Savannah.     Mr.  Ing-  respective   corner   of  the   room,    where, 

ham,    Mr.    Delamotte,  and  my  brother  without   the  help   of  a  bed,   we   slept 

were  surprised  at  my  unexpected  visit ;  soundly  till  the  morning.' 


May  1736.]  Second  Frederica  Journal  219 


SECOND  FREDERICA  JOURNAL 

MAY  22,  Sat. — About  four  in  the  afternoon  we  entered  upon 
Doboy  Sound.  The  wind,  which  was  right  ahead,  was  so  high 
when  we  were  in  the  middle  of  it,  and  the  sea  so  rough,  being 
driven  in  at  the  inlet,  that  the  boat  was  on  the  point  of  sinking 
every  moment.  But  it  pleased  God  to  bring  us  safe  to  the  other 


he  was  'sick  and  vomited/  and  again  at  four.  But  by  five  he  was  *  better.' 
The  'pettiawga'  came.  At  six  he  set  out  in  the  'open  boat.'  By  seven  he 
was  singing.  With  difficulty  they  made  Skidoway,  where  he  was  hospitably 
entertained,  as  Charles  had  been  only  a  few  days  before,  by  Mrs.  Mouse. 
He  read  prayers  and  expounded  to  a  congregation  of  nine.  At  nightfall 
they  set  out,  the  rain  having  ceased,  and  by  ten  he  slept. 

Thur.  20. — The  Diary  notes  on  this  voyage  are  sufficiently  interesting  to 
warrant  transcription.  The  handwriting  shakes,  at  times,  with  the  motion 
of  the  boat : 

3^  Rowed ;  conversed.     4  Rowed ;  conversed. 

5  Rowed ;  prayer,  conversed,  £,  at  all-hon  [?  the  name  of  an  island] ;  talked. 

6  Great  trouble,  Mr.  Uelamotte  drest  me.     ^  Set  out ;  translated  German. 
8  Translated  German.     9  Began  de  Renty  ;  10  de  Renty. 

ii  Washed  feet.     Verses.     Layby.     12  Dined;  very  hot ;  conversed, 
i  Set  out ;  read  Renty  ;  wind  rose.     2  Renty  ;  very  rough  ! 
3^  On  Millikin's  Island  ;  on  business. 
4^  Greek  Testament.    Supper ;  conversed  with  two  ;  no  water. 

5  Conversed.     Set  out ;  verses  ;  water  ;  rough  !  afraid  ! 

6  Water  ?  [bad  writing]  S.  Katherine's  Sound.     Rough  ! 

7  On  the  sand ;  conversed  ;  exceedingly  afraid  ! 

8  Conversed  ;  9^  on  S.  Katherine  ;  could  not  find  water  ! 
10  Boat  at  10.30  found  water.     Lay  on  shore. 

Fri.  21. 

5  On  Business  ;  talked  ;  my  boil  better. 

6  Walked  with  Delamotte,  ^,  would  rest  [shorthand]  me. 

7  Meditation,  prayer,  8 ;  Greek  Testament. 

9  Greek  Testament.     Read  prayers,  expounded,  meditation. 

10  Set  out,  diary,  transcribed  German. 

11  Translated  German,  12  dined.     53^  at  one,  2 

i  Slept  $,  rowed.     Sea  rough,  wind  high  !    4^  Delamotte' s  Island ;  made  fire. 

5  Talked,  conversed,  conversed  and  prayed,  sung. 

6  Read  prayers,  expounded  20,  conversed.    7^  Set  out ;  rough. 
9  Lay  by  near  the  Sound.     Could  not  go  on ! 

Sat.  22. 

4  Rowed ;  private  prayer  ;  sung. 

5  Private  prayer,  £,  Sapalo;  on  business,  talked,  conversed,  diary,  7$  prayer. 

8  Slept,  9^,  Set  out ;  on  ground.     Transcribed  verses. 

12^  Dined,  i  diary,  read  Renty.     3  Transcribed  German  \,  Wind  rose. 
4  Doboy  Sound,  very  rough,  high  sea,  prayer  !     5  In  the  Creek.     Sung. 

6  Sung,  $,  great  trouble,  anchor  in  St  Simon's  Road ;  supped. 
10  Slept. 


22O  John   We s leys  Journal  [May  1736. 

side  in  half  an  hour,  and  to  Frederica  the  next  morning.  We 
had  public  prayers  at  nine,  at  which  nineteen  persons  were 
present,  and  (I  think)  nine  communicants. 

The  only  certain  evidence  we  have  as  to  the  hymns  Wesley  at  this 
time  translated  from  the  German  and  sang  is  found  in  this  second 
volume  of  the  Georgia  Diary,  where,  on  the  last  pages,  he  has  transcribed 
(or  more  probably  written  for  the  first  time)  four  hymns  from  the 
German  which  he  published  a  few  months  later  in  the  Charlestown 
Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns.  But  it  is  clear,  from  the  many  records 
in  the  Diary,  that  these  four  hymns  represent  but  slightly  his  industry 
in  this  special  department  of  literature. 

Now  that  we  can  picture  Wesley's  daily  life,  we  can  enter  understand- 
ingly  into  the  allusions  of  familiar  hymns,  the  innermost  meaning  of  which 
has  hitherto  been  hidden.  No  sympathetic  reader,  remembering  the 
circumstances  of  this  time  as  now  revealed — the  traveller's  sickness,  the 
severing  of  friendships,  the  anxieties  and  moral  perils  through  which  all 
the  '  Company '  were  passing — can  follow  the  story  of  this  voyage  without 
recalling  some  of  the  finest  verses  John  Wesley  ever  translated — verses 
which  may  have  been  composed,  some  or  all  of  them,  then,  and  which 
certainly,  whenever  written,  breathed  reminiscences  of  this  stormy  voyage, 
of  a  safe  anchorage,  and  of  spiritual  experiences  in  which  the  '  everlasting 
love '  was  the  one  sure  hope  : 

Now  I  have  found  the  ground  wherein 
Sure  my  soul's  anchor  may  remain.1 

And  again  : 

Though  waves  and  storms  go  o'er  my  head, 

Though  strength,  and  health,  and  friends  be  gone, 
Though  joys  be  withered  all  and  dead, 

Though  every  comfort  be  withdrawn, 
On  this  my  steadfast  soul  relies, — 
Father,  Thy  mercy  never  dies  ! 

All  this  was  exactly  true  of  Wesley  at  this  time.  Nor  may  we  forget 
that  the  *  sinners'  in  Frederica  he  was  still  hoping  to  save  may  have 
been  present  in  his  thoughts  when  he  wrote  : 

Father,  Thine  everlasting  grace 

Our  scanty  thought  surpasses  far  ; 
Thy  heart  still  melts  with  tenderness, 

Thy  arms  of  love  still  open  are, 
Returning  sinners  to  receive, 
That  mercy  they  may  taste,  and  live. 

1  A  free  translation  of  Johann  Andreas  on  Jan.  25,    1740,    returned   the  trans- 

Rothe's  hymn — Ich  habe  nun  den  Grund  lation  with  a  suggested  alteration  in  one 

gefunden,  first  published  in  1727,  later  in  verse—'  O  Love,  thou  bottomless  abyss.' 

Herrnhut   Gesang-Buch,   1735  J   and  bY  Wesley  adopted  the  alteration,  and  the 

]6hnWes\ey  in  Jfywns  and  Sacred  Poems,  hymn  passed  into  the  English  Moravian 

1 740.     Wesley  submitted  a  copy  of  the  book.     The  hymn  bears  the  stamp  of  its 

translation  to  P.  H.  Molther,  one  of  the  Moravian  origin,  particularly  in  verse  i, 

German  Moravians  in  London.   Molther,  line  3,  and  in  verse  3. 


May  1736.]  Second  Frederica  Journal  221 

Sun.  23.— At  six  in  the  morning  he  arrived  in  Frederica.  Oglethorpe 
sent  for  him  at  once.  *  Talked  of  the  Spaniards.  All  well.' ' 

They  talked  of  Miss  Fosset,  Savannah,  and  Miss  Sophy.  He  called 
on  Mrs.  Welch,  who  was  'much  afraid.'  At  prayers  three  only  were 
present,  at  first ;  eventually  the  congregation  increased  to  nineteen.  He 
had  a  serious  conversation  with  Horton,  who  with  Major  Richards  had 
been  captured  by  the  Spaniards  under  a  flag  of  truce  and  had  only  been 
rescued  without  bloodshed  by  Oglethorpe's  resourcefulness  and  courage. 
He  also  saw  Dison,  chaplain  of  the  Independent  Company,  of  whose 
morals  Charles  had  formed  a  low  estimate.  He  preached,  administered 
Holy  Communion,  dined  with  Oglethorpe,  conversed  with  Mrs.  Hird, 
Reed,  and  Appee.  Germans  came,  and  they  sang  together.  Mrs.  Welch 
sent  for  him.  Mr.  Hawkins,  Oglethorpe,  and  Mr.  Mackay  talked  together  ; 
and  when  all  had  gone,  at  midnight  he  read  his  Journal  to  Oglethorpe, 
he  being  'quite  open.' 

At  i  a.m.  they  '  talked  of  Mrs.  Welch  and  Mrs.  Hawkins ;  he  [Oglethorpe] 
open  and  friendly.'  At  two  they  '  talked  of  Savannah  and  Frederica ; 
he  convinced.'  At  three  they  *  talked  of  his  life  and  company  ;  he  affected.' 
And  so  the  long  day  came  to  an  end  ;  it  began  on  board  the  anchored 
boat  in  St.  Simon's  Road  at  half-past  five  on  the  Sunday  morning, 
and  included  no  moments  of  rest  or  cessation  from  profoundly  anxious 
pastoral  duty.  At  four  he  slept,  and  at  5.15  rose  for  private  prayer 
and  the  usual  round  of  conversation,  visitation,  exposition,  until  9.30, 
when  he  'lay  down  without  a  bolster.'  The  next  morning  he  was  ill, 
but  sickness  does  not  seem  to  have  shortened  the  day  or  lessened  his 
labours  for  the  people. 

Wed.  26. — In  the  early  morning  he  read  Gother  and  prayed  for 
Frederica.  At  six  Oglethorpe  sent  for  him  to  converse  of  Mrs.  Lawley. 
Mrs.  Welch  came,  and  Mr.  Appee.  It  was  a  fast,  and  he  kept  it  rigidly, 
visiting  or  receiving  members  of  his  flock,  hour  after  hour,  his  only 
recreation  '  singing,'  and  the  only  other  variant  employment  two  services 
of  prayer  and  exposition.  The  last  entry  but  one  in  the  day's  record 
is — 'Q?  Is  she  in  love?'  The  final  entry  is  laconic,  and  suggestive  of 
the  utter  discomfort  in  which  his  nights  were  spent :  '  Fleas :  no  sleep. 
12  slept.' 

Thur.  27. — He  began  the  day  as  early  as  usual,  but  he  was  compelled 
to  take  physic.  Talking  over  the  case  of  Mrs.  Hawkins  with  Delamotte, 
he  notes  the  one  word  'clear,'  referring,  we  may  assume,  to  the  con- 
clusion which  dawned  upon  him  the  night  before.  Mr.  Horton  came 
in  great  trouble.  Within  and  without  there  were  the  gravest  causes  for 
anxiety.  The  Spaniards  disputed  Oglethorpe's  right  to  establish  an 
English  colony  on  St.  Simon's  Island,  claiming  it  as  a  possession  of 
the  Spanish  Crown,  and  Horton  knew  that  the  colony  was  a  rope 
of  sand.  Wesley  was  reading  his  Greek  Testament,  sleeping  and  singing, 

1  In  his  printed  Journal  Wesley  says  personal   and    pastoral  life   during   this 

not  a  word  of  the  exciting  public  events  visit,    adds  little  to  our  knowledge  of 

agitating  Frederica.      Even   the   Diary,  affairs.     Charles  Wesley  is  much   more 

though  preserving  an  hourly  record   of  communicative. 


222 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1736. 


Fri.  28. — I  read  the  Commendatory  Prayer1  by  Mr.  Germain, 
who  lay  at  the  point  of  death.  He  had  lost  his  speech  and 
his  senses.  His  eyes  were  set,  neither  had  he  any  discernible 
motion  but  the  heaving  of  his  breast.  While  we  stood  round 
him,  he  stretched  out  his  arms,  rubbed  his  head,  recovered  his 


when  Mrs.  Welch  came,  saying  that  Mrs.  Hawkins  wanted  to  see  him. 
He  ignored  her  request,  and  read  Canones  Critici  until  interrupted  by 
Mr.  Reed  and  Lawley.  The  rest  of  the  day  passed  without  incident,  except 
that  he  visited  Mr.  Lassel,  read  Kempis  to  him  and  Hird,  and  'buried 
a  man.' 

Fri.  28. — The  books  used  in  his  work  during  these  days  were  the 
Greek  Testament,  Kempis,  and  Gother's  Sinners  Complaint  to  God. 
The  two  former  he  read  in  preparing  for  the  daily  expositions ;  the 
Greek  Testament  he  read  every  day  with  Delamotte ;  Kempis  he  some- 
times read  to  the  sick  and  to  such  spiritually-minded  persons  as  the 


1  Germain  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the 
soldiers  of  the  little  colony.  It  was  his  child 
whom  Charles  Wesley  wished  to  baptize 
by  immersion,  and  his  arrest  for  shooting 
on  Sunday  morning  (March  21)  was  the 
beginning  of  trouble  in  Frederica  (C.  W.'s 
Journal,  vol.  i.).  The  'Commendatory 
Prayer '  was  one  of  three  prayers  inserted, 
in  1662,  at  the  close  of  the  Office  for  the 
Visitation  of  the  Sick.  These  prayers 
were  intended  for  special  cases, — for  '  a 
sick  person,  when  there  appeareth  small 
hope  of  recovery ' ;  '  A  Commendatory 
Prayer  for  a  sick  person  at  the  point 
of  departure '  ;  *  A  Prayer  for  persons 
troubled  in  mind  or  conscience.'  The 
addition  took  the  place  of  the  Prayer 
and  Psalm  of  anointing  in  the  First 
Edw.  VI  Prayer-book,  just  as  they 
took  the  place  of  the  Sacrament  of  Ex- 
treme Unction  in  the  Roman  Catholic 
Missal.  In  the  Diary  Wesley  calls  it '  the 
last  Prayer ' ;  in  the  Journal  '  the  Com- 
mendatory Prayer.'  This  removes  all 
doubt  as  to  which  of  the  three  prayers 
was  used.  A  little  more  than  a  year 
before,  on  April  25,  1735,  John  Wesley 
had  used  this  same  prayer  in  the  death- 
chamber  of  the  rectory  at  Ep  worth  : 

O  Almighty  God,  with  whom  do  live  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  after  they 
are  delivered  from  their  earthly  prisons  ;  we 


humbly  commend  the  soul  of  this  Thy  servant, 
our  dear  brother,  into  Thy  hands,  as  into  the 
hands  of  a  faithful  Creator  and  most  merciful 
Saviour ;  most  humbly  beseeching  Thee  that 
it  may  be  precious  in  Thy  sight.  Wash  it, 
we  pray  Thee,  in  the  blood  of  that  immaculate 
Lamb  that  was  slain  to  take  away  the  sins  of 
the  world  ;  that  whatsoever  defilements  it 
may  have  contracted  in  the  midst  of  this 
miserable  and  naughty  world,  through  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh,  or  the  wiles  of  Satan,  being 
purged  and  done  away,  it  may  be  presented 
pure  and  without  spot  before  Thee.  And 
teach  us  who  survive,  in  this  and  other  like 
daily  spectacles  of  mortality,  to  see  how  frail 
and  uncertain  our  own  condition  is,  and  so  to 
number  our  days,  that  we  may  seriously 
apply  our  hearts  to  that  holy  and  heavenly 
wisdom,  whilst  we  live  here,  which  may  in 
the  end  bring  us  to  life  everlasting,  through 
the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  Thy  only  Son  our 
Lord.  Amen. 

We  know,  from  the  sermon  preached 
in  Savannah  not  many  weeks  before,  how 
his  father's  death  lived  in  his  memory. 
As  he  recited  this  prayer  in  the  dying 
soldier's  palmetto  hut  at  Frederica,  he 
must  have  recalled  his  father's  last 
words,  '  Now  you  have  done  all,'  and  his 
brother  Charles's  description  of  the  closing 
scene  :  '  This  was  about  half  an  hour  after 
six ;  from  which  time  till  sunset  he  made 
signs  of  offering  up  himself,  till  my 
brother  having  again  used  the  prayer, 
the  very  moment  it  was  finished  he 
expired.' 


May  1736.]  Second  Frederico,  Journal  223 

sight,  speech,  and  understanding ;  and  immediately  sending  for 
the  bailiffs,  settled  the  affairs  of  his  family  ;  and  then  lay  down, 
and  died. 

At  the  first  service  on  Sunday,  May  30,  were  only  five ;  at 
the  second,  twenty-five.  The  next  day  I  made  Mr.  Lassel's 
will ;  who,  notwithstanding  his  great  weakness,  was  quite  revived 
when  any  mention  was  made  of  death  or  of  eternity. 


Hirds.  Gother's  book  he  kept  for  the  disciplining  of  Mrs.  Hawkins  and 
other  sinners.  The  entries  are  curious  : 

4  Private  prayer.     5  Kempis,  sung,  prayed  with  Delamotte. 

6  Greek  Testament,     private   prayer   again,     sent   for  Mrs   Hawkins :    Greek   with 

Delamotte. 

7  Gother  for  her.     German. 

8  Talked,  conversed,  \,  read  the  last  prayer  by  Mr  Germain.     She  not  come. 

9  He  recovered.     Visited  sick. 

In  the  afternoon  : 
2  Gother.     3  Sent  for  Mrs  Hawkins.     She  would  not  come. 

The  interpretation  is  obvious.  He  had  serious  misgivings  about  this 
notable  convert.  She  wanted  to  talk  with  him.  He  silently  declined  to 
obey  her  summons,  and  discussed  the  whole  case  with  Delamotte  as  the 
only  available  member  of  'our  Company.'  He  again  made  it  a  matter 
of  prolonged  prayer — prayer  alone  and  with  Delamotte.  As  the  result 
he  armed  himself  with  a  drastic  pastoral  remedy — Gother's  Sinner's 
Complaint  to  God.  Twice  in  this  one  day  he  thus  armed  himself,  and 
sent  for  her.  The  result  on  each  occasion  was  the  same  :  *  She  would 
not  come.' 

Sat.  29. — In  the  top  corner  of  the  page  are  the  words  : 

Salute  solam  May  29,  Sa.  1736. 

cogitem. 

The  words  in  the  corner  opposite — probably  a  continuation  of  the  quotation — 
are  illegible,  all  the  pages  being  more  or  less  stained  by  water. 

It  was  the  festival  of  the  restoration  of  the  Royal  Family,  which,  however, 
did  not  appeal  to  the  people  of  Frederica.  Five  only  were  present  to  hear 
Wesley  read  the  appointed  prayers  and  psalms ;  in  the  evening  one  only 
attended.  Three  hours  he  gave  to  his  Journal ;  in  the  evening  he  buried 
Mr.  Germain. 

Sun.  30. — The  chief  points  of  interest  are  the  growing  friendliness  of 
the  surgeon  and  his  wife,  a  visit  to  the  Fort,  and  the  reading  of  '  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hawkins's  case  to  Delamotte.'  Passing  the  surgeon's  door,  Mrs.  Haw- 
kins invited  him  in,  her  husband  regaling  him  on  peas  in  place  of  the  bread 
which  constituted  his  present  diet.  They  were  '  very  civil.' 

Mon.  31. — *  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins  very  civil  and  serious  and  open.'  He 
wrote  his  Journal,  and  in  the  afternoon  made  Mr.  Lassel's  will. 


224  John   Wesley's  Journal  [June  me. 

JUNE  i,  Tues. — After  praying  with  him,  I  was  surprised  to 
find  one  of  the  most  controverted  questions  in  divinity,  dis- 
interested love,  decided  at  once  by  a  poor  old  man,  without 
education  or  learning,  or  any  instructor  but  the  Spirit  of  God. 
I  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  paradise  (to  which  he  had  said 
he  was  going);  he  said,  'To  be  sure,  it  is  a  fine  place.  But 
I  don't  mind  that ;  I  don't  care  what  place  I  am  in.  Let  God 
put  me  where  He  will,  or  do  with  me  what  He  will,  so  I  may 
but  set  forth  His  honour  and  glory.' 

Thur.  3. — Being  Ascension  Day,  we  had  the  Holy  Com- 
munion ;  but  only  Mr.  Hird's  family 1  joined  with  us  in  it.  One 
reason  why  there  were  no  more  was,  because  a  few  words  which 
a  woman  had  inadvertently  spoken  had  set  almost  all  the  town 
in  a  flame.2  Alas !  how  shall  a  city  stand  that  is  thus  divided 


JUNE  i,  Tues.—  He  ended  the  section  of  the  Journal  on  which  for  some  days 
he  had  been  engaged.  An  attempted  explanation  and  reconciliation  between 
offending  neighbours  seems  to  have  been  in  progress,  with  the  result  that 
in  the  morning  Mrs.  Hawkins  was  very  serious,  and  in  the  afternoon,  at  a 
small  foregathering,  she  was  *  much  affected  and  open ' :  at  evening  prayer 
nine  were  present,  including  Mrs.  Hawkins.  That  night  Wesley  'slept 
sound.' 

Wed.  2. — At  five  he  was  'in  the  water.'  He  was  an  expert  swimmer. 
At  eight,  with  a  party  of  friends,  he  went  to  inspect  the  Acre  Lot.  Before 
nightfall  there  were  signs  of  a  returning  storm  in  the  small  community. 

Holy  Thursday,  3. — It  was  Ascension  Day.  Some  hours  he  spent  in 
meditation  on  a  sermon  which  he  does  not  seem  to  have  preached,  the 
people  being  in  no  mood  for  sermons.  Five  only  attended  at  Holy  Com- 
munion. A  reflection  on  '  Mr.  Meyer's  [or  Meier's]  Christianity,'  made  by 
some  unnamed  person  in  the  presence  of  '  much  company,'  ruined  the  great 
Festival.  In  the  afternoon  he  went  to  see  '  the  house,'  and  '  talked  with  the 
workmen,'  wrote  his  Diary,  walked,  meditated. 


1  The  Hirds  were  the  Quaker  family  from  the  all -pervading  presence  of  the 
baptized     by     Wesley    on    board     the  surgeon's   wife.     Wesley  still  clung   to 
Simmonds  (Nov.  16,  1735).     They  were  the  belief  that  this  unhappy  woman  was 
true   friends    to   the   Wesleys.     Charles  sincere  during  those  lucid  moments  when 
persuaded  Mr.  Hird  to  use  his  influence  she  professed  to  be  *  seriously  affected.' 
with  the  people  to  lay  aside  all  thought  Others  believed  her  to  be  a  clever  hypo- 
of  leaving  the  colony  (Charles  Wesley's  crite.     An  account  of  the  case,  with  the 
Journal,  p.  10).     Hird  and  Davison  were  exception  of  a  fragment  rudely  torn  from 
appointed  constables  in  Frederica.     The  its  place,  has  perished. 

latter  also   was  a  loyal  friend — Charles  In  so  small   a  community  the  doctor 

Wesley's  '  Good  Samaritan.'  and  his  wife  filled  a  large  place.     They 

2  Much  as  we   wish   to  do  so,   it  is  ranked    with   Oglethorpe,    Horton,    the 
impossible  to  study  the  Diary,  and  escape  naval  and  military  officers  of  the  station, 


June  1736.] 


Second  Frederica  Journal 


225 


against  itself ;  where  there  is  no  brotherly  love,  no  meekness,  no 
forbearing  or  forgiving  one  another ;  but  envy,  malice,  revenge, 
suspicion,  anger,  clamour,  bitterness,  evil  speaking,  without  end  ? 
Abundant  proof  that  there  can  be  no  true  love  of  man,  unless  it 
be  built  on  the  love  of  God. 

Sun.  6. — Calling  on  Mr.  Lassel,  and  asking  how  he  did, 
1  My  departure,'  said  he, '  I  hope  is  at  hand.'  I  asked,  '  Are  you 
troubled  at  that ? '  He  replied,  'Oh  no ;  to  depart,  and  to  be 
with  Christ,  is  far  better.  I  desire  no  more  of  this  bad  world. 
My  hope  and  my  joy  and  my  love  is  there.'  The  next  time  I 
saw  him  he  said,  ' I  desire  nothing  more  than  for  God  to  forgive 


Fri.  4. — By  five  o'clock  he  was  at  '  the  house.'  Six  times  on  this  page 
the  'house'  is  named.  He  began  a  new  section  of  his  Journal.  In  the 
evening  he  went  to  see  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins.  '  She  was  out  of  humour.' 

Sat.  5. — By  half-past  four  he  was  at  the  garden,  where  he  *  sowed,'  had 
a  good  talk  with  Mr.  Hawkins,  met  Mr.  Lawley  and  Hird,  and  at  six 
'  fished.'  The  '  house '  is  central  in  his  thoughts,  so  much  so  that  he  begins 
himself  to  '  work '  upon  it.  Twice  on  this  page  he  names  his  work  on  the 
house.  Full  of  enthusiasm  about  some  new  project,  he  does  not  neglect 
pastoral  visitation  nor  his  special  work  in  trying  to  save  the  worst  '  case  '  in 
Frederica.  He  converses  'close.'  Finding  her  ' reserved,'  he  '  walked  with 
her  to  the  Acre  Lot,'  where  her  husband  was. 

Sun.  6.— He  notes  the  attendances— 13  at  morning  prayers;  25  for 
the  sermon  ;  9  communicants ;  and  26  at  afternoon  exposition.  He  sang 
repeatedly  throughout  the  day. 


and  the  Wesleys.  When  Oglethorpe  and 
the  officers  were  away  on  duty,  the  gossip 
of  the  town  gathered  round  the  surgery 
and  the  parsonage.  The  furious  out- 
breaks of  the  doctor's  wife,  who  had 
nearly  murdered  a  constable,  and  the  ex- 
traordinary efforts  made  by  the  scholarly 
parson  to  convert  both  the  woman  and 
her  husband,  could  not  fail  to  excite 
interest.  What  wonder  that  this  woman 
— gay*  clever,  passionate,  sentimentally 
religious,  half  demented,  playing  a 
double,  if  not  a  treble,  part — became  a 
centre  of  mischief  and  a  source  of  daily 
anxiety  to  the  pastor,  and  indeed  to  all 
who  were  responsible  for  the  peace  of 
the  little  community  ?  She  swung  from 
one  extreme  to  another  ;  was  now  in 
floods  of  repentance,  and  now  in  fires  of 
demoniacal  passion.  It  was  at  once  the 
VOL.  I. 


most  difficult  and  the  most  dangerous 
case  in  Frederica.  For  those  reasons  it 
appealed  to  Wesley.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  that,  had  he  succeeded  in  securing 
Surgeon  Hawkins  and  his  wife  as  con- 
sistent communicants,  he  would  have 
created  a  moral  force  in  the  colony  that 
would  have  gone  far  to  make  Frederica 
a  strong  outpost  of  the  English  Church, 
and  indeed  of  the  British  Crown.  He 
failed,  partly  because  he  did  not  per- 
ceive, until  it  was  too  late,  that  the 
sheep  were,  after  all,  but  wolves  in 
sheeps'  clothing.  The  story,  as  it  slowly 
unrolls  in  the  Diary,  may  be  tedious, 
but  it  must  always  be  remembered 
that  it  was  experience,  discipline, 
and  one  among  many  causes  driving 
both  the  Wesleys  towards  their  true 
place  and  vocation. 

12 


226 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[June  1736. 


my  many  and  great  sins.  I  would  be  humble.  I  would  be  the 
humblest  creature  living.  My  heart  is  humble  and  broken  for 
my  sins.  Tell  me,  teach  me,  what  shall  I  do  to  please  God  ?  I 
would  fain  do  whatever  is  His  will.'  I  said, '  It  is  His  will  you 
should  suffer.'  He  answered, '  Then  I  will  suffer.  I  will  gladly 
suffer  whatever  pleases  Him.' 

Mon.  7. — Finding  him  weaker,  I  asked,  '  Do  you  still  desire 
to  die  ? '  He  said,  '  Yes  ;  but  I  dare  not  pray  for  it,  for  fear  I 
should  displease  my  heavenly  Father.  His  will  be  done.  Let 
Him  work  His  will,  in  my  life  or  in  my  death.' 

Tkur.  10. — We  began  to  execute  at  Frederica  what  we  had 
before  agreed  to  do  at  Savannah.  Our  design  1  was,  on  Sundays 

Mon.  7. — At  4.45  he  is  surprised  to  find  'no  men  at  the  house.'  He 
'  sought  them.'  Throughout  the  day  *  the  house '  occupied  his  attention.  Von 
Reck  and  his  brother,  and  Ausberg,  called.  He  wrote  to  Charles,  and  had, 
as  usual,  a  busy  day  '  with  the  people.'  At  night  he  '  could  not  sleep  for  flies 
and  company.' 

Tues.  8.— 'All  went  to  the  house.'  He  reports  Mrs.  Hawkins  'in  a 
passion  and  utterly  unreasonable.'  He  administers  the  Communion  to 
Mr.  Lassel,  and  has  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Dison,  chaplain  to  the  Inde- 
pendent Company. 

Wed.  9. — After  dinner  he  worked  for  an  hour  and  a  half  on  the  house, 
visited,  and  wrote  his  Journal.  He  talked  with  Dison,  Von  Reck,  and 
Horton,  and  wrote  to  Charles  and  Oglethorpe. 

Thur.  10. — Twice  '  the  house  '  is  named.  At  midday  he  worked  for  more 
than  two  hours,  apparently  finishing  the  new  room.  After  evening  prayers 
Mark  Hird  remained,  and  they  'began  to  sing '  and  *  converse.' 


1  THE  HOUSE  in  which  the  society  met. 
— No  explanation  is  given  as  to  its  size  or 
purpose.  Was  it  a  temporary  church,  a 
school-room,  a  parsonage,  a  parish-room, 
or  something  of  all  four?  The  largest 
congregation  assembling  in  Frederica  at 
one  time  was  forty-four.  At  first,  and 
possibly  to  the  close  of  the  Wesley 
period,  the  public  services  were  held  in 
the  store-house,  or  guard-room.  It  is 
probable  that  at  the  very  beginning  one 
building  served  the  triple  purpose  of 
store,  guard-room,  and  church.  In  Charles 
Wesley's  time  there  was  no  parsonage ; 
he  occupied  a  corner  in  Mr.  Reed's 
house  or  hut.  At  his  first  visit  John 
lay  in  the  guard-room  ;  that  is  to  say, 
in  the  temporary  church.  On  the  oc- 


casion of  his  second  visit  he  at  first 
lodged  probably  with  Reed,  Davison,  or 
Hird.  The  house  he  himself  helped  to 
build  may  afterwards  have  become  his 
home.  If  so,  the  case  is  exactly  parallel 
to  that  of  Savannah,  where  undoubtedly 
the  parsonage  was  used  as  a  meeting- 
place  for  the  society.  To  a  man  who 
never  '  went  to  bed,  as  it  is  called,'  who 
lay  down  on  the  floor,  in  a  corner  of  a 
hut,  on  the  ground,  or  on  the  deck  of 
a  boat,  who  lived  almost  exclusively  on 
bread,  and  who  had  disciplined  himself 
to  despise  the  luxuries  and  even  the 
common  comforts  of  life,  it  was  a  matter 
of  indifference  where  he  made  his  home. 
A  house  was  useful  for  study,  writing, 
for  the  storage  of  books  and  papers,  for 


so. 


5 

*/&,*  ****•**?* 

,    5" 


FACSIMILE    PAGE    OF    DIARY,    FINISHING    '  THE    HOUSE. 


227 


FACSIMILE,    FIRST    MEETING    IN    '  THE    HOUSE  '    (S£g    PAGE    231). 


228 


June  1736.] 


Second  Frederica  Journal 


229 


in  the  afternoon,  and  every  evening,  after  public  service,  to  spend 
some  time  with  the  most  serious  of  the  communicants  in  singing, 
reading,  and  conversation.  This  evening  we  had  only  Mark  Hird. 


conversation  with  friends,  for  shelter  in 
rain  and  sickness,  for  meetings ;  it  might 
even  be  an  essential  for  the  conservation 
of  work  and  the  instruction  of  converts. 
For  these  reasons  he  built  a  house  in 
Frederica.  For  similar  reasons  he  fenced 
his  garden  and  built  therein  an  arbour. 
The  house  may  have  been  used  as  a 
dwelling  ;  that  its  original  design  was  the 
provision  of  a  suitable  place  in  which  the 
society  might  meet,  there  can  be  no  doubt. 

THE  SOCIETY.— Wesley  does  not  so 
call  it.  '  Company'  was  still  his  favourite 
word.  It  described  all  gatherings  of 
earnest  Christians  for  mutual  edification. 
Savannah  and  Frederica  were  places  that 
sorely  needed  cultured  and  closely  as- 
sociated Christian  life.  Such  life  might 
now,  as  in  early  Christian  days,  fulfil  in 
part  the  purpose  of  an  ordained  pastorate. 
He  could  not  himself  hope  to  remain 
long  in  either  place.  His  mission  was 
to  the  Indians.  Ingham,  in  preparation 
for  missionary  work,  was  learning  the 
Indian  language,  and  had  gone  to  live 
near  one  of  the  tribes.  Charles  had 
utterly  broken  down.  Neither  Ogle- 
thorpe  nor  the  S.P.G.  had  succeeded 
in  finding  additional  help.  When  John 
returned  to  Savannah,  would  either 
Charles  or  Ingham  take  his  place  in 
Frederica?  Even  if  they  did,  was  there 
much  hope  of  success,  apart  from  the 
creation  of  a  Christian  social  force — a 
living  church,  united,  spiritual,  zealous 
for  God  ?  This  was  the  *  design '  which 
issued  in  the  first  societies  formed  in 
America — the  creation  of  an  organ- 
ized Christian  fellowship — companies- 
societies.  Like  their  prototype,  the  Ox- 
ford Society,  they  were  in  all  essential 
points  Methodist  societies. 

THE  HYMNS  they  sang. — Singing  was 
a  prominent  feature  in  the  gatherings  of 
these  little  companies.  It  will  be  noted 
that  he  puts  'singing'  first — 'in  singing, 
reading,  and  conversation.'  With  this 


the  Diary  is  in  agreement.  Suitable 
hymns,  however,  were  scarce.  It  has 
been  said,  on  high  authority,  that  before 
1736  the  Church  of  England  had  no 
hymn-book.  It  had  two  metrical  versions 
of  the  Psalms — Sternhold  and  Hopkins, 
and  the  New  Version  by  Tate  and  Brady. 
It  had  books  like  George  Herbert's 
Temple  and  Jeremy  Taylor's  Golden 
Grove.  It  had  devotional  books  in  which 
hymns  were  inserted.  But  of  hymn- 
books  proper  there  were  none.  Wesley, 
in  his  daily  visits  to  the  Moravians,  on 
shipboard  and  at  Savannah,  heard  hymn- 
singing  of  an  entirely  new  order.  The 
printed  Journal  gives  no  glimpse  even  of 
the  revolution  in  church  psalmody  which 
was  finding  voice  in  this  insignificant  and 
scattered  colonial  parish.  But  Wesley's 
Diary  lifts  the  veil,  and  we  see  the  gentle, 
spring-like  forces  gathering  strength — 
forces  which  in  a  little  while  were 
destined  to  bring  colours,  fragrances,  and 
melody  to  all  the  Churches.  The  be- 
ginnings were  obscure,  fitful,  and  without 
visible  promise.  A  would-be  missionary, 
cut  adrift  from  his  old  life,  driven,  against 
his  will,  into  strange  and  not  very  con- 
genial work ;  little  groups  of  men, 
women,  and  young  people,  needing  song 
for  the  uplifting  of  their  religious  life, 
passionate  words  of  faith  and  hope  and 
love  sung  to  stately  choral  music  ;  a 
master  in  language-learning,  with  an 
hereditary  and  highly  trained  gift  for 
picturesque  expression  and  musical 
rhythm, — these  were  the  elementary  and 
providential  preparations.  The  result 
was  seen,  first,  in  early-morning  de- 
votions, when  two  or  three  met  together 
to  read  and  pray  and  sing  ;  then  in  sick- 
chambers  where  men  and  women,  dying 
friendless  and  forlorn  in  a  strange  land, 
opened  wide  their  eyes  at  the  sound  of 
a  musical  voice  singing  a  new  song  ; 
then  in  Wednesday,  Friday,  and  Sunday 
meetings  of  '  our  little  companies ' ;  and 


2  30 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[June  1736. 


But  on  Sunday  Mr.  Hird  and  two  more  desired  to  be  admitted. 
After  a  psalm  and  a  little  conversation  I  read  Mr.  Law's  Christian 
Perfection,  and  concluded  with  another  psalm. 

Fri.  ii. — In  the  early  morning  he  resumed  German,  sang,  transcribed 
German,  read  Gother,  and  continued  German  until  eleven,  when  he  read 
prayers  and  expounded. 


last  of  all,  in  the  daily  public   prayers, 
and  at   the  weekly  celebration  of  that 
holy  Mystery  which  Wesley,  borrowing 
his   Lord's  word   and  following  the   ex- 
ample of  the  ancient  Church,  called  the 
1  Eucharistic  Feast.'    For  these  purposes 
he  transcribed  German  psalms  and  hymns, 
translated  them,  recast  them  into  noble 
English  verse,  and  taught  his  people  to 
sing  them.      Me  added  to  his  manuscript 
collection  some  of  Watts's  choicest  metri- 
cal renderings  of  the  Psalms,  a  Spanish 
psalm,  a  French  hymn,  quaint  examples 
from  George  Herbert,  and  a  few  of  Austin's 
hymns   culled    from    Hickes's    Reformed 
Devotions.     As   yet   he  had  no  thought 
of  printing,  or  of  any  wider  use  for  his 
slowly  accumulating  store  of  psalms  and 
hymns.     He  was  only  a  voice  singing  in 
the    wilderness.     Charles    had    not    yet 
found  his   inspiration.     The  old  father, 
now  gone   to   the   Church   Triumphant, 
and  '  my  brother  Samuel.'  whose  poems 
he    had    just    revised,    were    the     only 
members   of  the    Wesley    family   repre- 
sented  in   the   collection.     Of  his  own 
original  work  there  was  nothing,  except 
a  single   verse   the   history  of  which    is 
characteristic.      It   was   added  to   three 
verses  borrowed  from  Hickes  for  use  in 
meetings  of  a  select  society  in  Frederica. 
Wesley's  first  thought  for  the   'com- 
pany '  of  communicants   was   that    they 
should    meet    every   day   after   evening 
prayers    and    every   Sunday    afternoon. 
This  he  quickly  modified.     The  society- 
meeting  was  to  be  held  on  Wednesdays 
and  Fridays — the  fast-days  of  the  Holy 
Club  and  of  the  early   Church  ;  also  on 
Sunday    afternoons.      The    Charlestown 
Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns,  pub- 
lished a  few  months  later,  was  divided 
into  three  sections  :  '  Psalms  and  Hymns 


for  Sunday '  ;  c  Psalms  and  Hymns  for 
Wednesday  or  Friday  ' ;  and  '  Psalms 
and  Hymns  for  Saturday.'  The  second 
section  consists  of  confessional  and  peni- 
tential hymns — such  as 

1  O  Thou  that  hear'st  when  sinners  cry.' 
'  Behold  the  Saviour  of  mankind.' 
'  With  joy  we  meditate  the  grace.' 
'How  sad  our  state  by  nature  is!' 
No.    xviii.    is    entitled     Inconstancy. 
Three  of  its  verses   are  borrowed  from 
Hickes's  Devotions.      They   reflect    the 
spiritual    condition   of    those,   including 
Wesley  himself,  who,  in  the  new  '  house  ' 
at  Frederica,  sang  the  hymn  on  Wednes- 
day or  Friday  : 

Lord  Jesus,  when,  when  shall  it  be, 
That  I  no  more  shall  break  with  Thee? 
When  will  this  war  of  passions  cease, 
And  my  free  soul  enjoy  Thy  peace? 
Here  I  repent  and  sin  again  ; 
Now  I  revive,  and  now  am  slain ; 
Slain  with  the  same  unhappy  dart 
Which,  O !  too  often  wounds  my  heart. 

In  Hickes  nine  verses  follow,  which 
Wesley  declined  to  transcribe,  and  could 
not  sing.  They  begin  thus  : 

Tis  not,  alas,  on  this  low  earth 
That  such  pure  flowers  can  find  a  birth  : 
Only  they  spring  above  the  skies, 
Where  none  can  live  till  here  he  dies. 

Even  now,  in  his  pre-conversion  days, 
he  cannot  accept  such  teaching.  So  he 
composes  (or  borrows  from  some  un- 
traced  source)  a  new  verse  : 

Guide  Thou,  my  Lord,  guide  Thou  my  course, 
And  draw  me  on  with  Thy  sweet  force. 
Still  make  me  walk,  still  make  me  tend, 
By  Thee  my  Way,  to  Thee  my  End ; 

And  he  leaves  the  hymn  unfinished, 
with  a  semicolon  that  points,  finger-like, 
to  a  coming  time  when  he  shall  have 
learned  more,  seeing  no  longer  darkly, 
but  face  to  face. 


June  1736.]  Second  Frederica  Journal  231 

Sat.  12. — Being  with  one  who  was  very  desirous  to  converse 
with  me,  but  not  upon  religion,  I  spoke  to  this  effect :  '  Suppose 
you  was  going  to  a  country  where  every  one  spoke  Latin,  and 
understood  no  other  language,  neither  would  converse  with  any 
that  did  not  understand  it ;  suppose  one  was  sent  to  stay  here  a 
short  time,  on  purpose  to  teach  it  you  ;  suppose  that  person, 
pleased  with  your  company,  should  spend  his  time  in  trifling 
with  you,  and  teach  you  nothing  of  what  he  came  for :  would 
that  be  well  done  ?  Yet  this  is  our  case.  You  are  going  to  a 
country  where  every  one  speaks  the  love  of  God.  The  citizens 
of  heaven  understand  no  other  language.  They  converse  with 
none  who  do  not  understand  it.  Indeed,  none  such  are  admitted 
there.  I  am  sent  from  God  to  teach  you  this.  A  few  days  are 
allotted  us  for  that  purpose.  Would  it  then  be  well  done  in  me, 
because  I  was  pleased  with  your  company,  to  spend  this  short 
time  in  trifling,  and  teach  you  nothing  of  what  I  came  for  ?  God 
forbid  !  I  will  rather  not  converse  with  you  at  all.  Of  the  two 
extremes,  this  is  the  best' 

12  Began  dinner :  sent  for  to  the  Fort  together  with  Mr  Hawkins  and  company, 
i  With  Mrs  Hawkins,  she  angry,  Mr  Hawkins  would  not  come, 
a  Dined  with  her,  conversing,  she  milder. 

3  Mr  Hawkins  came,  she  very  angry.     They  quarrelled. 

4  He  went ;  talked,  she  a  little  milder. 

5  He  came,  she  very  angry,  quarrelled,  alas  ! 

6  Great  truth  (?)  which  she  could  not  bear.     Got  no  good. 

Sat.  12. — All  the  duties  of  this  day,  including  exposition,  sick-visiting, 
and  prayer,  were  faithfully  performed,  but  with  constant  interruptions  by 
the  surgeon  and  his  wife.  The  harassed  pastor's  consolation  was  Law's 
Christian  Perfection,  singing,  and  the  Greek  Testament.  Mr.  Hawkins  did 
not  leave  him  till  eleven  o'clock  at  night. 

Whit  Sunday,  13.— This,  according  to  his  own  estimate,  was  one  of  the 
notable  days  in  his  life — the  day  on  which  he  succeeded  in  executing 
what  he  and  his  Moravian  friends  (see  p.  197)  had  'before  agreed  to  do  at 
Savannah.'  The  *  design '  really  was  begun  three  days  earlier,  on  Thursday, 
June  10,  the  day  on  which  he  put  the  finishing-touch  to  'the  house.'  On 
that  day  after  evening  prayers  and  exposition  he  began  a  meeting — a  society- 
meeting  like  the  one  already  commenced  in  Savannah,  and  similar  to  those 
held  in  Oxford  by  the  Holy  Club,  and  those  in  Bristol  and  London  two 
years  later.  For  the  first  meeting  of  the  society,  only  one  person  came 
from  the  outside — Mark  Hird,  the  first  Methodist  in  Frederica.  John 
Wesley,  Charles  Delamotte,  and  Mark  Hird,  in  the  first  Methodist  society- 
room  built  for  the  purpose,  met  for  half  an  hour,  from  8.45.  'Began 
singing  and  conversed  until  9.15,'  is  the  only  description  in  the  Diary. 
He  then  walked  with  Delamotte,  conversing  for  an  hour.  The  next  evening 


232  John   Wesley  s  Journal 

Wed.  1 6. — Another  little  company  of  us  met ;  Mr.  Reed, 
Davison,  Walker,  Delamotte,  and  myself.  We  sang,  read  a 
little  of  Mr.  Law,  and  then  conversed.  Wednesdays  and  Fridays 
were  the  days  we  fixed  for  constant  meeting. 


the  only  person  who  came  was  Mrs.  Patterson,  with  whom  he  conversed 
closely  for  half  an  hour.  On  Saturday  night,  at  the  same  hour,  he  sang 
with  Delamotte  and  company,  and  on  this  Whit  Sunday  held  the  first  full 
meeting  of  the  new  society.  At  four  in  the  afternoon  Mrs.  Mackay,  Phoebe 
Hird,  and  Betty  Hazle  came.1  First  they  talked,  probably  as  to  the  design 
in  holding  these  meetings  ;  they  then  conversed  seriously,  sang,  began  Law's 
Christian  Perfection^  and  at  5.45  closed  the  meeting  with  another  hymn. 
Remembering  how  small  a  place  Frederica  was,  and  how  godless,  the 
congregations  at  the  public  services  were  some  proof  of  the  influence  the 
minister  was  winning  among  the  people — at  8  o'clock  exposition,  1 5  ;  at 
eleven  sermon  30,  including  Mr.  Moore,  lieutenant  of  the  Hawk ;  at  Holy 
Communion,  12  ;  at  afternoon  exposition,  37.  He  visited  two  families,  wrote 
for  Lassel,  who  was  dying,  and  ended  the  day  by  rousing  the  anger  of 
Mrs.  Hawkins  because  he  persisted  in  treating  her  to  religious  conversation, 
his  final  comment  being  '  Got  no  good.' 

Mon.  14. — This  morning  he  had  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Patterson, 
who  was  minister  to  the  Scotch  in  their  settlement  at  Darien.  He 
was  sent  for  by  his  first  Simmonds  convert,  Mr.  Tackner  ;  with  him  he 
conversed  and  prayed  in  German,  afterwards  translating  Law's  Christian 
Perfection  (i.e.  a  reading  in)  into  German.  Among  the  other  parishioners 
on  whom  he  called  was  Mrs.  Walker,  the  sick  woman  whom  he  visited  on 
board  the  London  Merchant  (p.  114).  In  the  afternoon  he  'nailed  pales' 
round  his  garden.  Mrs.  Hird  and  her  friends  attended  the  society- 
meeting ;  they  sang.  Mrs.  Hawkins  came  to  supper,  and  was  '  in  a  good 
humour.' 

Tues.  15. — This  morning  he  'worked'  in  his  garden.  The  entries  recall 
the  first  Diary  and  the  garden  at  Wroot : 

9  Made  an  arbour.     4  Worked  ;  Gother.     6  Garden  ;  conversing ;  gathered  flowers. 

The  same  evening,  after  a  close  conversation,  Mrs.  Hawkins  'utterly 
renounced  my  friendship.  Be  it  so.' 

Wed.  1 6. — The  night  before  he  had  acquiesced  in  Mrs.  Hawkins's  re- 
nunciation of  his  friendship  ;  but  this  morning,  as  he  prayed,  he  thought 
of  her  again,  resolved  to  write  a  letter,  and  spent  nearly  four  hours  in  its 
composition.  Its  prodigious  length  probably  helped  to  defeat  its  purpose. 
He  held  two  society-meetings  :  one  for  men,  referred  to  in  the  text,  at  two 
in  the  afternoon  ;  and  one  for  women  and  girls  after  evening  prayers.  Mr. 
Reed  was  the  principal  member  of  the  first,  and  Phoebe  Hird  of  the  second. 
Singing  was  a  prominent  feature  in  both. 


1  The  Diary  gives  the  names  clearly,  and  The  'other  two'  were  'Mrs.  M[ac]k[ay] 
in  this  order.  '  Mr.  Hird,'  of  the  printed  and  Betty  Hazle,'  the  latter  a  daughter 
Journal,  is  an  error  for  *  Phoebe  Hird.'  of  Mrs.  Tackner. 


June  1736.]  Second  Fredericd  Journal  233 

T/iur.  17.— An  officer  of  a  man-of-war,  walking  just  behind 
us,  with  two  or  three  of  his  acquaintances,  cursed  and  swore 
exceedingly  ;  but  upon  my  reproving  him,  seemed  much  moved, 
and  gave  me  many  thanks. 

Sat.  19. — Mr.  Oglethorpe  returned  from  the  south,  and 
gave  orders  on  Sunday,  the  2Oth,  that  none  should  profane 
the  day  (as  was  usual  before)  by  fishing  or  fowling  upon  it. 
In  the  afternoon  I  summed  up  what  I  had  seen  or  heard  at 
Frederica  inconsistent  with  Christianity,  and,  consequently, 

Thur.  17.— He  visited  much,  sang  frequently,  and  reproved  once. 
Between  five  and  six  o'clock  he  was  singing  as  he  walked,  when  the 
occasion  for  reproof  referred  to  in  the  Journal  occurred.  He  does  not  give 
the  naval  officer's  name.  Having  reproved  his  blasphemies,  he  resumed  his 
song,  and  continued  singing  and  meditating  for  an  hour.  After  evening 
prayers  Mark  Hird  and  company  came,  and  Wesley  again  sang. 

Fri.  1 8. — The  fast  excluded  dinner  and  supper  ;  but  it  did  not  to-day 
exclude  a  meal  of  bread  at  6  a.m.,  nor  the  chocolate  that  Mr,  Horton  gave 
him  between  eight  and  nine,  and  that  he  religiously  entered  in  his  Diary. 
The  special  morning  exercise  was  the  transcription  of  German — probably 
another  German  hymn,  either  for  his  sick  friend  Tackner  or  for  use  in  his 
society-meeting.  Again  there  is  distinct  evidence  of  two  society-meetings. 
The  first  began  at  two  o'clock  and  ended  at  seven,  members  coming  to  the 
house  in  groups  or  singly.  The  second  consisted  of  Phoebe  Hird  and  her 
company,  with  whom  he  sang,  as  he  had  done  with  her  brother  the  night 
before.  The  prolonged  meeting  held  earlier  in  the  day  he  thus  chronicles  : 

2  Mr  Davison,  Walker,  Mark  Hird.     Prayed,  Law,  conversed,  sung.  .  .  . 

3  Mrs  Colville  came,  talked,  conversed. 

4  Conversed  till  4.15,  walked,  conversed  with  Mr  Hird,  meditated. 

5  Law,  sung.     6  Delamotte  came,  conversed.     7  At  home,  within,  dressed. 

8  Read  prayers,  expounded,  Mrs  Hawkins  there.     Phoebe  Hird  and  company,  sung. 

We  may  infer,  with  some  certainty,  that  the  successive  meetings  of  the  society 
were  held  in  '  the  house,'  and  that  the  house  was  built  in  the  '  Acre  Lot,'  a 
part  of  which  Wesley  had  fenced  in  as  a  garden.  After  two  hours  indoors, 
on  a  hot  day  in  June,  talking,  singing,  and  reading,  Wesley  was  glad  to 
adjourn  to  the  garden,  where  he  walked  with  Mr.  Hird,  reading  Law  and 
singing.  Davison  and  Hird,  being  constables,  could  not  both  attend  at  the 
same  hour.  They  evidently  relieved  one  another,  each  coming  to  the 
meeting  when  off  duty.  Delamotte,  who  probably  had  been  teaching 
the  children,  came  last  of  all.  At  seven  Wesley  returned  home,  robing  for 
evening  service. 

Sat.  19. — By  4.15  he  was  at  the  Bluff  to  take  boat.  Mr.  Oglethorpe 
came.  Interview  with  him  and  Mr.  Horton  (who  had  acted  as  magistrate 
during  the  chiefs  absence).  He  had  a  private  talk  with  Burk,  one  of  his 
Simmonds  converts,  who,  it  will  be  remembered,  rowed  him  one  day 
to  Cowes.  Burk  brought  news  of  Savannah  that  distressed  him,  news 
apparently  that  was  afterwards  discussed  with  Horton.  These  new  colonies 


234  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [June  me. 


with  the  prosperity  of  the  place.  The  event  was  as  it  ought : 
some  of  the  hearers  were  profited,  and  the  rest  deeply  offended. 

This  day,  at  half  an  hour  past  ten,  God  heard  the  prayer 
of  His  servant ;  and  Mr.  Lassel,  according  to  his  desire,  was 
'dissolved  that  he  might  be  with  Christ' 

Tues.  22. — Observing  much  coldness  in  Mr.  Horton's  be- 
haviour, I  asked  him  the  reason  of  it.  He  answered,  '  I  like 
nothing  you  do.  All  your  sermons  are  satires  upon  particular 
persons,  therefore  I  will  never  hear  you  more  ;  and  all  the  people 
are  of  my  mind,  for  we  won't  hear  ourselves  abused. 

*  Besides,  they  say  they  are  Protestants.  But  as  for  you,  they 
cannot  tell  what  religion  you  are  of.  They  never  heard  of  such 
religion  before.  They  do  not  know  what  to  make  of  it.  And 
then  your  private  behaviour — all  the  quarrels  that  have  been  here 
since  you  came  have  been  'long  of  you.  Indeed,  there  is  neither 
man  nor  woman  in  the  town  who  minds  a  word  you  say.  And  so 
you  may  preach  long  enough ;  but  nobody  will  come  to  hear  you.1 

He  was  too  warm  for  hearing  an  answer.  So  I  had  nothing 
to  do  but  to  thank  him  for  his  openness,  and  walk  away. 

prospered  in  proportion  as  they  enjoyed  firm,  just,  and  wise  government. 
Causton's  rule  was  the  reverse.  At  two  Mark  Hird  came.  Wesley  sang  and 
read  Law  with  him  for  an  hour.  He  dined  with  Oglethorpe.  After  evening 
prayer  he  visited  with  Oglethorpe  for  more  than  an  hour.  At  the  service 
he  notes  the  presence  of  Oglethorpe  and  Mrs.  Hawkins,  and  quotes  '  Job 
xxxi.'  It  was  the  previous  day's  Morning  Lesson.  At  ten  o'clock  Oglethorpe 
talked  to  the  bailiffs  for  an  hour. 

Sun.  20. — The  people  seem  to  have  been  stirred  up  by  the  arrival  of 
Oglethorpe,  and  perhaps  also  by  the  visitation  of  the  night  before.  The 
attendances  at  public  worship  suddenly  rose  to  13  at  eight,  40  at  eleven, 
and  44  at  three,  when  Oglethorpe  himself  was  present. 

Man.  21. — For  the  first  time,  in  Frederica,  we  find  trace  of  a  parsonage  : 

7  With  Oglethorpe  and  F.  Moore,  in  talk.     Mr  and  Mrs  Hawkins  at  my  house. 

8  With  Oglethorpe  and  Mr  Ha[ydon]  and  Horton. 

He  buried  Lassel  in  the  evening.  After  prayers  Mark  Hird  and  his 
friends  came  ;  Wesley  sang  and  conversed  :  Oglethorpe  was  there  also. 

Tues.   22. —  He  began  to  pack,  for  he  was  about  to   leave    Frederica, 
Savannah — a     much     more     important     place — requiring     his     presence. 
Mr.  Horton  was  the  unnamed  person  whose  description,  reported  by  Wesley 
himself,  has  been  so  often  quoted.     The  note  in  the  Diary  is  simply  this  : 
6  Packed  :  in  talk  with  Horton  ;  he  very  angry. 

He  saw  many  people  in  the  course  of  the  day,  but  apparently  to  little 
purpose.  Twice  he  enters  the  now  familiar  formula,  '  Got  no  good.'  The 
only  gleam  of  sunshine  is,  '  Mark  Hird  came,  sung.' 


June  1736.]  Second  Frederica  Journal  235 

Wed.  23. — I  had  a  long  conversation  with  Mr.  M upon 

the  nature  of  true  religion.  I  then  asked  him  why  he  did  not 
endeavour  to  recommend  it  to  all  with  whom  he  conversed.  He 
said, '  I  did  so  once,  and  for  some  time  I  thought  I  had  done 
much  good  by  it  But  I  afterwards  found  they  were  never  the 
better,  and  I  myself  was  the  worse.  Therefore  now,  though 
I  always  strive  to  be  inoffensive  in  my  conversation,  I  do  not 
strive  to  make  people  religious,  unless  those  that  have  a  desire 
to  be  so,  and  are  consequently  willing  to  hear  me.  But  I  have 
not  yet  (I  speak  not  of  you  or  your  brother)  found  one  such 
person  in  America.' 

4  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear ! '  Mark  the  ten- 
dency of  this  accursed  principle ! l  If  you  will  speak  only  to 
those  who  are  willing  to  hear,  see  how  many  you  will  turn  from 
the  error  of  their  ways !  If,  therefore,  striving  to  do  good,  you 
have  done  hurt,  what  then  ?  So  did  St.  Paul.  So  did  the  Lord 
of  life.  Even  His  word  was  '  the  savour  of  death '  as  well  as 
'the  savour  of  life.'  But  shall  you  therefore  strive  no  more? 
God  forbid !  Strive  more  humbly,  more  calmly,  more  cautiously. 
Do  not  strive  as  you  did  before — but  strive  while  the  breath  of 
God  is  in  your  nostrils. 

Being  to  leave  Frederica  in  the  evening,  I  took  the  more 
notice  of  these  words  in  the  Lesson  for  the  day  :  *  Whereunto  2 
shall  I  liken  the  men  of  this  generation  ?  They  are  like  unto 
children  sitting  in  the  market-place,  and  saying,  We  have  piped 
unto  you,  and  ye  have  not  danced  ;  we  have  mourned  to  you, 
and  ye  have  not  wept.  For  John  the  Baptist  came  neither 
eating  bread  nor  drinking  wine  ;  and  ye  say,  He  hath  a  devil. 


Wed.  23. — He  wrote  his  Journal,  talked  with  Oglethorpe  '  of  Savannah, 
also  of  himself.'  In  the  afternoon  he  '  wrote  for  Oglethorpe  on  business.' 
He  finished  his  packing,  visited,  sat  by  Mrs.  Hawkins,  who  had  fallen  ill  and 
was  'very  angry.1  In  the  evening  Mark  Hird  came  and  found  him  ill. 

8  Read  prayers,  expounded.     Mr  Hird  and  company,  sung,  conversed. 

9  Conversed  at  Mr  Col  well's  about  Mrs  Hawkins.     She  very  sad.     Prayed  for  her. 

10  Mrs  Patterson's,  and  Mrs  Colwell's,  about  [her],  faint.     Mr  Hawkins.     She  very 

sad.   Oglethorpe  there  ;  conversed  with  Mr  Hawkins  of  her.    Took  leave.    She  very 
soft.     Prayed. 

11  In  the  pettiawga,  prayed,  slept,  set  out. 


1  This  principle  was  adopted  by  many  a  For  an  account  of  the  first  settlers  in 
Moravians,  and  apparently  by  Zinzendorf  Georgia,  see  Franklin  as  quoted  in  Lady 
himself.  Huntingdon's  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  275,  note. 


236  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [June  me. 

The  Son  of  Man  is  come  eating  and  drinking;  and  ye  say, 
Behold  a  gluttonous  man,  and  a  wine-bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners  ! '  (Luke  vii.  31-4). 

About  eleven  at  night  we  took  boat ;  and  on  Saturday,  26th, 
about  one  in  the  afternoon,  came  to  Savannah.  Oh,  what  do 
we  want  here,  either  for  life  or  godliness  !  If  suffering,  God  will 
send  it  in  His  time. 


THIRD  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 

JUNE  27,  Sun. — About  twenty  joined  with  us  in  morning 
prayer.  An  hour  or  two  after,  a  large  party  of  Creek  Indians 
came,  the  expectation  of  whom  deprived  us  of  our  place  of 
public  worship,1  in  which  they  were  to  have  their  audience. 

Thur.  24. — The  voyage2  was  eventless.  With  a  fair  wind,  among 
islands  which  at  midsummer  must  have  been  surpassingly  beautiful,  the 
periagua  made  its  way.  Wesley  was  depressed.  His  mind  was  full  of 
the  past.  His  thoughts  found  expression  in  letters,  written  on  the  swiftly 
gliding  boat,  to  Mrs.  Hawkins,  Mr.  Colwell,  and  Mrs.  Colwell.  On  the 
second  day  (Friday,  25th)  Fitzwater's  boat  joined  them.  Colliton,  Reeves, 
and  Yoakly  were  on  board— Indian  traders,  probably,  on  their  way  to 
Savannah,  where  they  expected  to  meet  Mr.  Oglethorpe  and  his  secretary. 
They  drank  chocolate  together.  At  Dog  Island  it  was  'very  hot.'  Early 
on  Saturday  morning  he  called  the  sleeping  crew  and  gave  them  chocolate. 
The  two  boats  'set  out  together'  at  5.15,  and  by  ten  o'clock  reached 
Thunderbolt.  He  had  a  serious  conversation  with  Colliton  and  Reeves, 
both  of  whom,  he  notes,  were  '  convinced.'  Overland,  with  Fitzwater  and 
Delamotte  as  comrades,  he  walked,  preaching  to  Fitzwater  all  the  way,  he 
being  'seriously  affected.'  By  noon  he  was  once  more  at  home  with  Charles, 
hearing  the  news  and  reading  a  letter  from  Spangenberg.  Later  in  the 
day  Oglethorpe  arrived,  travelling,  probably,  by  the  scout-boat  which,  with 
H.M.  sloop  Hawk,  was  at  the  service  of  the  Governor.  At  eight  he  read 
prayers  and  expounded,  afterwards  calling  on  his  friends  the  Germans.  At 
midnight  he  'lay  down.3 

Sun.  27. — The  Diary  page  tor  this  day  is  the  first  on  which  Byrom's 
shorthand  appears.     The  few  words,  however,  in  the  fifth  column  of  the 

1  In    Savannah,    as    we    have    seen,  this  particular  day  was  held.     The  in- 

Wesley  read   prayers  every  day  at  five  serted  shorthand    supplies    the   missing 

or  six  or  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning.  information.     The    Germans    lent    their 

In  view  of  the  expected  visit  of  Indians,  house  of  meeting. 

the    court-house,     in     which    ordinarily  2  Charles  Wesley  in  his  Journal,  under 

public    worship    would     be    held,    was  the  same  date,   simply  notes  the  fact — 

requisitioned    for    conferences.     Neither  *  Mr.  Oglethorpe  and  my  brother  returned 

the  Journal  nor  the  Diary  in  its  original  from  Frederica.'     But  Charles's  Journal 

form  explains  where  the  early  service  on  as  printed  was  greatly  abbreviated. 


June  1736.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  237 

ruled  page  seem  to  be  insertions  written  on  December  20,  when  Wesley, 
turning  back,  utilized  the  vacant  spaces  in  his  Diary  for  notes  of  a 
later  date. 

From  eight  o'clock  he  began  to  read  his  Frederica  Journal  to  Charles 
and  Ingham,  continuing  till  ten.  On  this  exercise  he  writes  in  shorthand 
the  word  'religions.' 

10.  Greek  Testament ;  conversed.     Oglethorpe  forbids  prayers  because  Indians  coming, 
xi.  With  him  spoke  not ;  conversed  with  Ingham. 

Wesley  was  displeased.  In  shorthand  he  inserted  the  word  *  reluctant.' 
At  one  o'clock,  and  again  at  three  and  four,  the  Indians  are  named.  At  this 
point,  in  shorthand,  is  inserted  the  significant  word  'Scheme,'  indicating, 
probably,  the  fact  that  on  this  Sunday  afternoon  Wesley  discussed  with  the 
Indians  a  scheme  of  missionary  work.  At  five  he  read  prayers  and  Charles 
preached,  Oglethorpe  and  fifty  others  being  present.  After  the  service  he 
walked  with  Oglethorpe,  conversing  and  meditating.  He  supped  and  sang 
with  the  Germans,  and  at  9.30  lay  down  for  the  night  in  the  garden.  The 
parsonage,  like  the  court-house,  was  in  the  possession  of  the  Indians. 

Mon.  28. — At  five  he  read  prayers  and  expounded,  removing  immediately 
after  the  service  to  the  German  quarters,  thus  making  room  for  the  Indian 
delegates,  who  arrived  at  7.30  a.m.  Their  presence  in  Savannah  was 
regarded  as  an  event  of  political  and  commercial  importance.  For  Wesley 
the  visit  had  still  greater  value.  It  might  open  the  way  to  the  missionary 
work  for  which  he  and  Ingham  had  come  to  America.  The  Indians  and 
Ingham  talked  together  of  the  alphabet  which  Ingham  had  been  studying 
for  some  time.  At  nine  Wesley  was  'in  talk  with  Ingham  and  John  [Reinier]  ; 
they  were  all  agreed.'  The  remaining  entries  for  this  day  illustrate  Wesley's 
power  of  detachment  and  concentration.  It  was  amidst  the  excitement  of 
embarkation  at  Gravesend  that  he  began  his  study  of  German,  and  now, 
on  a  day  when  the  whole  town  must  have  been  in  a  turmoil  because  of  the 
Indian  visitors,  he  began  the  study  of  Spanish.  For  two  hours  he  forgot 
the  worry  of  life  in  the  joy  of  a  new  language.  At  noon  he  dined,  and  sang 
with  the  Germans,  resuming  Spanish  at  two.  A  thunderstorm  broke  in  the 
afternoon,  during  which  he  meditated  and  slept.  He  was  '  quite  dispirited.' 
But  John  Brownfield  came,  and  heard  him  read  his  Journal,  and  at  night  he 
was  cheered  to  find  Ingham  and  Delamotte  *  very  zealous.' 

Tues.  29.— After  a  bath  in  the  river  he  again  read  his  Journal  to  John 
Brownfield.  Oglethorpe  and  Captain  Watson  are  named.  The  latter,  as 
we  learn  subsequently,  was  under  charges.  There  are  negotiations,  probably 
in  relation  to  Indians  and  traders.  Wesley,  evidently  dissatisfied  with 
the  proceedings,  and  with  the  secrecy  observed,  writes  in  the  Diary,  '  I 
know  nothing.'  Charles,  who  was  still  acting  as  secretary,  and  who,  as 
he  tells  us,  took  down  all  the  conversations  with  Indians  and  others  in 
shorthand,  significantly  leaves  these  days  blank  in  his  Journal.  John 
Wesley  did  not  approve  the  policy  at  this  time  influencing  Oglethorpe 
and  others.  He  certainly  disapproved  the  high-handed  injustice  meted 
out  to  Captain  Watson.  Oglethorpe  knew  this ;  hence  his  reticence. 
Hence  also  Wesley's  despondent  tone.  It  was  as  a  messenger  of  peace 
and  righteousness  to  the  Indians  he  had  forsaken  all  and  come  to 


238  John   Wesley  s  Journal  r June  1736. 

Wed.  30. — I  hoped  a  door  was  opened  for  going  up  imme- 
diately to  the  Choctaws,1  the  least  polished,  that  is,  the  least 
corrupted,  of  all  the  Indian  nations.  But  upon  my  informing 
Mr.  Oglethorpe  of  our  design,  he  objected,  not  only  the 
danger  of  being  intercepted,  or  killed  by  the  French  there ; 
but  much  more,  the  inexpediency  of  leaving  Savannah 
destitute  of  a  minister.2  These  objections  I  related  to  our 


Georgia.  He  could  be  no  party  to  an  attempt  to  overreach  them.  With 
Oglethorpe  he  was  always  unreserved,  and  he  had  a  right  to  expect  similar 
*  openness '  from  him.  If  policies  in  relation  to  lands  and  trading  and 
hunting  rights  were  studiously  concealed  from  him,  he  could  scarcely  help 
suspecting  that  they  were  not  such  as  he  could  approve. 

It  was  St.  Peter's  Day.  The  Lessons  read  at  the  eleven-o'clock  service 
were  Ecclus.  xv.  and  Acts  iii.  We  may  imagine  his  thoughts  as  Charles 
read  the  words  in  the  presence  of  the  congregation  : 

He  hath  not  commanded  any  man  to  be  ungodly  ; 

And  He  hath  not  given  any  man  licence  to  sin. 

And  again,  in  the  Second  Lesson,  probably  with  the  Indians  present : 

Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  and  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  your 
fathers,  saying  unto  Abraham,  And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed. 

In  the  afternoon  John  Brownfield  came,  and  cheered  him,  for  the  Diary  note 
is  'Courage.'  But  when  the  conversation  turned  on  Savannah,  the  note 
changed—'  God  help ! '  Then  came  Tomo-chachi  and  his  company  of 
Indians,  also  Causton  ;  and,  in  the  evening,  Von  Reck.  The  Saltzburghers 
at  New  Ebenezer  were  concerned  in  these  negotiations. 

Wed.  30. — The  strain  of  these  days  affected  his  health.  For  two  suc- 
cessive days  he  was  compelled  to  take  'physick.'  In  the  garden  he  sings, 
and  reads  Sharpe's  Sermons,  and  consults  '  John,'  who  usually  appears  on 
the  scene  when  Wesley  is  ill.  He  *  thought  of  going  to  the  Choctaws.'  He 

1  For  Wesley's  account  of  the  Choctaw  the    great    enterprise.      Savannah     and 
Indians,  see  p.  407.  Frederica,   with   their   allied  plantations 

2  Oglethorpe's  attitude  towards  Wesley  and    settlements,    were  outliers  of   the 
is    inexplicable,    unless    we     remember  empire.      They    were    not     the    paltry 
(i)   that   Wesley's  conviction  of  a  call  villages  and  hamlets  that  some  writers 
to  missionary  work   among  the  Indians  have  imagined,  but  the  beginnings  of  a 
never  wavered   during  his   residence  in  great  state,   and  at   the  same  time  an 
the  colony ;  and  (2)  that  whatever  may  experiment  in  national  and  philanthropic 
have  been  Oglethorpe's  antecedent  con-  colonization  upon  which  the  Government 
victions  with  reference  to  the  desirability  and   the    British   nation  were   fastening 
of  such  a  mission,  his  present  conviction  their  eyes.     If  the  enterprise  failed,  Ogle- 
was    clear    and    decisive,   namely,    that  thorpe,    the    Trustees,   and    the   S.P.G. 
Wesley  had  a  peculiar  fitness  for  work  would   be  disgraced.     In  John   Wesley 
among  the   colonists.     The  colony  was  Oglethorpe  had  discovered,  providentially 
everything     to     Oglethorpe.      He    had  as  he  believed,    a  man  of  extraordinary 
staked  his  reputation  on  the  success  of  capacity  and  aptitude  for  affairs.    The 


July  me.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  239 

brethren1  in  the  evening,  who  were  all  of  opinion  we  ought 
not  to  go  yet. 

JULY  i,  Thur. — The  Indians  had  an  audience;  and  another 
on  Saturday,  when  Chicali,2  their  head  man,  dined  with  Mr.  Ogle- 
thorpe.  After  dinner,  I  asked  the  grey-headed  old  man  what 
he  thought  he  was  made  for.  He  said, '  He  that  is  above  knows 
what  He  made  us  for.  We  know  nothing.  We  are  in  the  dark. 
But  white  men  know  much.  And  yet  white  men  build  great 
houses,  as  if  they  were  to  live  for  ever.  But  white  men  cannot 
live  for  ever.  In  a  little  time  white  men  will  be  dust  as  well 
as  I.'3  I  told  him,  '  If  red  men  will  learn  the  good  book,  they 
may  know  as  much  as  white  men.  But  neither  we  nor  you 
can  understand  that  book,  unless  we  are  taught  by  Him  that 
is  above  ;  and  He  will  not  teach,  unless  you  avoid  what  you 
already  know  is  not  good.'  He  answered, '  I  believe  that.  He 
will  not  teach  us  while  our  hearts  are  not  white.  And  our  men 
do  what  they  know  is  not  good  :  they  kill  their  own  children. 
And  our  women  do  what  they  know  is  not  good  :  they  kill  the 
child  before  it  is  born.  Therefore  He  that  is  above  does  not 
send  us  the  good  book.' 

Hearing   the   younger   of  the   Miss   Boveys  was   not  well, 

saw  others  besides  Oglethorpe — Miss  Sophy  at  Causton's,  Colonel  Blake 
(who  probably  represented  South  Carolina),  with  whom  he  dined,  Ingham, 
Delamotte,  and  Appee.  With  Ingham  and  Delamotte  he  held  a  second 
conversation,  which  elicited  the  caustic  remark,  '  Got  no  good  with  Ingham.' 
After  the  evening  exposition  he  again  talked  over  the  Indian  mission  scheme 
with  his  friends  the  Germans.  At  ten  he  wrote  the  fateful  words,  *  Clear, 
not  go  yet.' 

JULY  i,  Thur. — After  the  early-morning  exposition  he  met  Oglethorpe, 
but  'could  not  speak.'  He  retreated  into  his  Spanish  studies  for  two  hours, 
when  Mr.  Parker,  the  chief  bailiff,  calling,  he  walked  with  him  to  his  lot, 
returning  at  noon  for  dinner,  sleep,  and  visitation  of  the  sick.  In  the 
afternoon  there  was  a  prolonged  *  Indian  talk.'  He  is  ill,  distressed  at  the 
thwarting  of  his  cherished  Indian  missionary  project,  dissatisfied  with  Ogle- 
thorpe and  with  affairs  generally.  Twice  during  the  day  he  sleeps,  and, 
greatest  wonder  of  all,  only  reads  prayers  and  expounds  once. 


Indian  mission  might  be  important,  even  relation    to    this    matter    shared    Ogle- 

from  a  political  point  of  view,  but  not  thorpe's  opinion. 

in    comparison    with    the   new    colony.  2  Journal,  Oct.  20,  1739. 

Hence  Oglethorpe's  decision.  s  Wesley  referred    to    this   when    he 

1  The  Moravian  Brethren,  whom  Wes-  visited  the  Duke  of  Gordon's  new  house, 

ley  always  consulted  in  emergencies,  in  May  1784. 


240 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[July  1736. 


I  called  upon  them  this  evening.  I  found  she  had  only  the 
prickly  heat,  a  sort  of  rash,  very  common  here  in  summer. 
We  soon  fell  into  serious  conversation,  after  I  had  asked  if 
they  did  not  think  they  were  too  young  to  trouble  themselves 
with  religion  yet,  and  whether  they  might  not  defer  it  ten 
or  a  dozen  years.  To  which  one  of  them  replied,  '  If  it  will 
be  reasonable  ten  years  hence  to  be  religious,  it  is  so  now : 
I  am  not  for  deferring  one  moment.' 

Fri,  2. — The  page  for  this  day  has  a  special  interest.     It  introduces  a 
new  hymn  to  the  worship  of  the  Christian  Church  : * 

4  Private  prayer ;  sleep. 

5  Private  prayer ;  Germans  ;  Gother ;  sung. 

6  Translated  verses  ;  sung ;  Spanish  ;  Kvpec. 

7  Verses  ;  sung  ;  Spanish. 

8  Verses  ;  sung ;  Spanish. 

9  Sung  Spanish  verses. 


1  Among  the  verses  here  referred  to 
as  translated  (or  transcribed)  from  the 
Spanish  and  repeatedly  sung  on  this  day, 
must  have  been  the  hymn,  '  O  God,  my 
God,  my  all  Thou  art.'  In  its  original 
form  it  will  be  found  in  the  Poetical 
Works  of  J.  and  C.  Wesley,  edited  by 
G.  Osborn,  D.D.  It  is  there  entitled, 
'  God  our  Portion,'  and  is  described 
as  '  From  the  Spanish.'  In  a  footnote 
the  editor  says  :  '  This  noble  version  of 
Ps.  Ixiii.  was  inserted  in  the  book  of 
1738,  and  therefore  probably  translated 
in  America.  The  Spanish  author  is 
unknown.' 

With  some  degree  of  certainty  we  now 
know  that  Wesley  translated  the  hymn 
whilst  residing,  temporarily,  with  the 
Moravians  in  Savannah  ;  that  it  was  the 
firstfruits  of  his  study  of  Spanish — a 
study  now  undertaken  that  he  might  read 
Spanish  devotional  literature  and  be  able 
to  minister,  in  their  own  tongue,  to  such 
Spanish -speaking  Indians  or  colonists  as 
he  might  find  in  the  wilds  of  Georgia. 
We  know  the  day  and  hour  when  he 
made  a  first  rough  draft  of  the  transla- 
tion. That  Wesley  did  not  insert  the 
hymn  in  his  first  edition  of  Psalms 
and  Hymns i  published  in  Charlestown 
(1736-7),  was  probably  due  to  the  fact 
that  he  already  had  a  sufficient  number 


of  psalms  for  his  purpose.  He  may  also 
have  felt  some  hesitation  in  so  quickly 
publishing  a  version  which  was  still  in 
its  crude  form.  On  June  28,  1736,  he 
first  began  Spanish  ;  on  July  2  he  trans- 
lated the  verses.  Of  course  he  was  a 
Latin  and  French  scholar,  and  doubtless 
already  had  some  familiarity  with  col- 
loquial Spanish  and  Italian.  He  could 
scarcely  have  lived  for  so  many  months 
next  door,  so  to  speak,  to  Spaniards 
without  learning  something  of  their 
language.  In  his  Journal  (April  1737) 
he  says,  '  Began  to  learn  Spanish,  in 
order  to  converse  with  my  Jewish 
parishioners.'  This,  however,  does  not 
militate  against  an  earlier  acquaintance 
with  literary  or  even  colloquial  Spanish. 
It  is  not  improbable  that  the  arrival 
of  Indians,  accompanied  possibly  by 
a  Spanish  interpreter,  incited  him  to 
attempt  the  reading  of  Spanish.  The 
Oglethorpe  official  correspondence,  in 
which  he  so  frequently  assisted,  brought 
him  and  his  chief  into  written  com- 
munication with  Spanish  officers  and 
colonists.  Once  during  these  days  he 
'  wrote  for  Charles ' ;  that  is  to  say,  he 
wrote  for  the  colonial  secretary  a  letter, 
or  letters,  in  German  or  Spanish,  which 
Charles  could  not  himself  write.  This 
may  be  conjectural,  but  it  reasonably 


July  1736.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  241 

10  Verses ;  sung  \  meditated  f  read  prayer. 

11  Expounded  ;  Ingham  read  prayer. 

12  Visited  Betty  Wright  and  company ;  dinner, 
i  Wrote  letter  for  Charles.       2  Letter. 

3  Prayer  with  them  ;  talked,  conversation. 

4  Letter  \  \  sung.1 

6  Walked,  rain,  Germans,  sung,  Kempis ;  prayer. 

7  At  home  ;  supper  ;  conversation. 

8  With  Germans ;  sung ;  conversed  with  them  9 ;  prayer. 

From  this  extracted  page,  as  also  from  others,  the  devotional  minutes 
have  been  omitted.  The  figures  inserted  in  the  lines  are  notes  of  time. 

Sat.  3. — Oglethorpe  sent  for  him.  The  conversation,  which  no  doubt 
again  referred  to  Wesley's  work  in  the  colony,  resulted  in  a  letter  'for 
me  to  the  Bishop  of  London.'  Returning  home,  he  dressed  as  for  service. 
Presently  Oglethorpe  sent  for  him  to  the  court.  The  Indians  were 
there.  For  an  hour  they  conversed.  Captain  Watson  came,  and  was 
tried.  'He  was  heard."  Oglethorpe  took  leave  of  the  Indians.  After- 
wards, at  Oglethorpe's  house,  he  dined  with  Chicali  and  Malatchi, 
conversing  for  an  hour  with  them.  Company  came,  and  Wesley  returned 
home,  where  he  found  Appee  in  the  garden  :  he  was  about  to  leave  for 
Charlestown.  In  the  evening  Wesley  visited ;  James  Burnside  was 
calling  on  Miss  Bovey.  The  younger  of  the  two  sisters  was  engaged 
to  be  married  to  Appee,  who  at  this  time  was  regarded  as  Charles 
Wesley's  probable  successor  in  the  secretaryship  ;  the  elder  was  afterwards 
married  to  James  Burnside,  who  seems  to  have  been  clerk  in  Causton's 
office,  and  was  on  terms  of  sincere  friendship  with  the  Wesleys. 


explains  the  meaning  of  an  otherwise  At  this  the  magistrates,  of  whom 

obscure  entry.  The  translated  hymn,  as  Causton  was  chief  and  worst,  were  in 

finally  edited  for  publication  (1738)  in  consternation.  They  hoped  'he  would 

what  was  really  a  new  and  greatly  revised  not  discourage  government ' ;  by  which 

edition  of  the  Charlestown  Collection  they  meant  the  power  to  imprison  people 

will  be  found  in  App.  XVII.  vol.  vi.  without  trial,  or  proof,  or  indeed  hearing. 

That  Hymn-book  did  not  exhaust  John  It  was  on  the  advice  of  John  Wesley  that 

Wesley's  store  of  psalms  and  hymns  Oglethorpe  made  this  vigorous  attempt 

transcribed  or  translated  by  him  for  use  to  reform  the  maladministration  of  justice, 

in  his  pastoral  work  whilst  in  Georgia.  Charles  says  :  '  He  dismissed  them,  and 

1  For  letters  written  at  this  time  to  told  me  he  feared  his  following  my 

Mr.  Hutcheson  and  Mr.  Vernon,  see  brother's  advice  in  hearing  all  complaints 

Works,  vol.  xii.  pp.  43-4.  would  ruin  the  people  ;  and  he  should 

-  A  month  earlier,  in  this  same  magi-  never  have  any  to  serve  him.  I  replied, 

strates'  court,  Charles  Wesley  heard  I  thought  the  contrary ;  and  that  such 

Oglethorpe  address  the  people  to  the  liberty  was  the  happiest  thing  that  could 

following  effect :  happen  to  the  colony,  and  much  to  be 

'  If  any  one  here  has  been  abused  desired  by  all  good  men.'  This  explains 
or  oppressed  by  any  man,  in  or  out  much  in  the  after  treatment  of  John 
of  employment,  he  has  full  liberty  of  Wesley.  Little  wonder  that  Causton 
complaining.  Let  him  deliver  in  his  and  his  satellites  desired  to  be  rid  of 
complaints  in  writing  at  my  house.  I  a  man  who  protested  against  a  petti- 
will  read  all  over  by  myself  and  do  every  fogging  imitation  of  the  Stuart  travesty 
particular  man  justice.'  of  justice. 


242  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Juiyme. 

Wed.  7. — I  called  there  again,  being  determined  now  to 
speak  more  closely.  But  meeting  company  there,  prudence 
induced  me  to  put  it  off  till  another  opportunity. 

Sun.  4. — Mr.  Colliton  — whom  he  had  seen  on  Fitzwater's  boat  with 
Reeves  and  Yoakly  during  his  voyage  from  Frederica— called  ;  also 
Chicali.  They  conversed  together.  If  Colliton  was  an  Indian  trader,  as 
seems  probable,  he  would  be  able  to  interpret  during  Wesley's  conversation 
with  Chicali.  Ingham  read  prayers  and  preached.  At  the  Eucharist 
there  were  seventeen  communicants.  After  dinner  Wesley  wrote  to 
Rivington  the  publisher,  and  read  a  sermon.  Later  he  read  Hickes 
with  Delamotte. 

Man.  5. — In  the  early  morning  the  inspiration  to  sing  and  write  fell 
upon  him.  He  was  interrupted  by  a  request  to  visit  Captain  Watson 
and  by  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Hawkins  ;  but  eventually  he  escaped,  and  spent 
a  full  hour  in  transcribing  and  '  singing  George  Herbert.' ' 

In  the  afternoon  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Hawkins,  and  walked  with  Charles, 
who  was  'in  trouble.'  His  relations  with  Oglethorpe  and  the  colony  were 
approaching  a  crisis. 

Tues.  6. — At  the  five-o'clock  morning  service  Miss  Sophy  and  Miss 
Fosset  were  present.  He  afterwards  walked  with  them,  and  they  accom- 
panied him  to  the  parsonage.  This  was  the  beginning  of  a  practice 
which  eventually  led  to  the  greatest  trouble  of  Wesley's  life  in  Georgia. 
He  resumed  his  letter  to  Mrs.  Hawkins,  relieving  the  sorrow  of  a  painful 
exercise  by  interludes  of  song.  The  letter  occupied  an  hour  and  a 
half  in  transcription.  In  later  life  he  learnt  the  value  of  short,  sen- 
tentious letters.  He  also  wrote  for  Charles — evidently  in  connexion  with 
his  brother's  critical  affairs,  for  he  adds  *  Kvpu  /3o;?&t.'  He  then  abridged 
Carolina  papers.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Parker  called.  He  ended  a  day  of  worrying 
thought  and  event  in  a  sleepless  night. 

Wed.  7. — At  four  o'clock,  after  private  prayer,  he  reports  himself  as 
*  lively.'  In  place  of  the  usual  exposition,  he  is  *  in  the  water  with 
Charles  and  Delamotte.' 2 

1  If  we  may  judge  from  frequent  re-  2  On  this  early-morning  bath,  Charles 
ferences  at  this  time  to  '  Herbert '  and  writes :  'July  7. — Between  four  and  five 
'singing,'  he  now  began  or  continued  this  morning  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I  went 
the  selection  and  adaptation  of  hymns  into  the  Savannah.  We  chose  this  hour 
from  George  Herbert's  Temple.  In  for  bathing,  both  for  the  coolness  and 
the  Charlestown  Collection  two  or  three  because  the  alligators  were  not  stirring  so 
of  these  hymns  appear.  In  later  editions  soon.  We  heard  them,  indeed,  snoring 
the  number  is  increased  to  forty-two.  all  around  us  ;  and  one  very  early  riser 
As  a  Christian  poet  Wesley  popularized  swam  by  within  a  few  yards  of  us.  On 
him  in  the  early  eighteenth  century  and  Friday  morning  we  had  hardly  left  our 
for  all  future  time.  It  was  in  Savannah  usual  place  of  swimming  when  we  saw  an 
that  he  began  to  render  this  service  to  alligator  in  possession  of  it.  Once  after- 
literature  and  to  the  Christian  Church.  wards  Mr.  Delamotte  was  in  great  danger, 
But  not  all  the  skill  of  Wesley  sufficed  for  an  alligator  rose  just  behind  him,  and 
to  make  George  Herbert  an  acceptable  pursued  him  to  the  land,  whither  he 
voice  in  modern  church  psalmody.  narrowly  escaped.' 


July  1736. j  Third  Savannah  Journal  243 

Thur.  8. — Mr.  Oglethorpe  being  there  again,  and  casually 
speaking  of  sudden  death,  Miss  Becky  said,  '  If  it  was  the 
will  of  God,  I  should  choose  to  die  without  a  lingering 
illness.'  Her  sister  said,  '  Are  you,  then,  prepared  to  die  ? ' 
She  replied,  'Jesus  Christ  is  always  prepared  to  help  me. 
And  little  stress  is  to  be  laid  on  such  a  preparation  for  death 
as  is  made  in  a  fit  of  sickness.' 


After  a  fast-day  breakfast  on  bread,  he  *  cleaned  and  catalogued'  his 
books,  slept,  transcribed  and  sang  hymns,  visited,  and  gratefully  recorded 
the  fact  that  in  a  thunderstorm  he  was  'not  afraid.'  Amongst  others  he 
visited  Mrs.  Mellichamp,  who  was  in  trouble.  Her  son,  a  disreputable 
and  dangerous  character,  wished  to  marry  Miss  Sophy  Hopkey,  and, 
according  to  her  account,  threatened  to  murder  her  and  any  lover  she 
might  choose  in  preference  to  himself.  John  Wesley  gave  Charles  an 
hour,  reading  for  him  (i.e.  dictating)  and  then  writing.  The  'company' 
he  met  at  Miss  Bovey's  was  Mrs.  Vanderplank. 

Thur.  8.— During  these  summer  days  he  lived  in  the  garden. 

4  Garden,  private  prayer. 

5  Read  prayers,  expounded,  garden,  on  business.     10  there. 

6  On  business  in  garden,  in  talk. 

And  again,  after  he  had  spent  an  hour  in  cleaning  and  covering 
books  (probably  the  books  of  his  lending-library)  he  returned  to  work 
in  his  garden.  At  nightfall,  when  the  cares  of  an  anxious  and  a  sorrowful 
day  were  ended,  he  came  home  and  conversed  with  Delamotte  in  the 
garden.  Singing  and  the  transcription  of  verses  are  again  prominent. 
Entries  like  these  are  frequent : 

10  Sung;  diary;  transcribed  verses,     n  Visited,  verses.1 

There  were  several  anxieties  in  the  inner  circle.  A  Parker- Mellichamp 
complication  had  to  be  dealt  with ;  Miss  Bovey  was  dying,  so,  apparently, 
was  Tomo-chachi.  Oglethorpe  sent  for  Wesley.  They  took  boat  together 
for  Yamacraw,  the  Indian  village  up  the  river,  and  saw  Tomo-chachi, 

1  He  seems  to  have  tested  every  hymn  devotional  meetings  of  the  Holy  Club, 
he  selected,  altered,  translated,  or  com-  Norris,  Hickes,  Herbert,  the  Herrnhut 
posed,  by  singing  it  repeatedly — by  Collection,  Freylinghausen's  Gesang-Buch, 
himself,  with  his  friends,  in  public  or  with  French  and  Spanish  devotional 
'  society  '  worship,  or  in  his  visitation  works,  were  the  principal  helps  he  at  this 
of  the  sick.  Unfortunately  the  Diary  time  had  for  a  work  the  importance  of 
never  tells  us  which  hymn  was  sung,  which  he  himself  did  not  realize,  and 
and  only  occasionally  helps  identifica-  which  indeed  is  not  yet  understood.  How 
tion  by  indicating  its  source.  With  few,  even  among  expert  writers,  under- 
Watts  as  a  writer  he  had  been  familiar  stand  that  it  vn&John  Wesley,  not  Charles, 
from  Oxford  days.  The  negative  evidence  who  led  the  way  in  the  hymnological 
of  the  Diary  suggests  that  the  numerous  transformation  which  within  a  few  years 
selections  from  Watts,  which  take  front  was  to  revolutionize  the  worship  of 
rank  in  the  Charlestown  Collection,  were  praise  in  the  English  Church  and  through- 
made  in  Oxford,  and  were  used  in  the  out  Christendom  ! 

VOL.  I.  13 


244 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[July  1736. 


Sat.  10. — Just  as  they  had  done  drinking  tea,  Mrs.  Margaret, 
seeing  her  colour  change,  asked  if  she  was  well.  She  did 
not  return  any  answer  ;  and  Dr.  Tailfer  *  soon  after  going  by, 

who  was  '  very  ill.'  Wesley  seized  the  opportunity  to  talk  with  Oglethorpe 
about  Mellichamp  and  Parker.  Whilst  they  were  with  the  Indian  king, 
Ingham  and  Mrs.  Musgrove  came.  Returning  by  boat,  Oglethorpe  was 
'ill  with  grief.'  Oglethorpe  was  fond  of  the  old  chief,  whom  he  had 
taken  to  England,  and  whose  life  was  at  this  juncture  so  important  to 
the  colony. 

Fri.  9. — The  early  hours  were  devoted  to  *  verses,'  which  he  transcribed, 
or  translated,  and  sang  repeatedly.  Twice  he  was  with  Oglethorpe,  in 
the  evening  by  request. 

Sat.  10. — Oglethorpe  is  distressed.  He  clings  to  Wesley.  At  4.45 
he  comes  to  him,  and  remains  all  the  morning,  in  the  garden,  walking, 
or  in  the  Governor's  house.2 


1  Dr.  Talser  or  Tailfer  (Talser  is  a 
misprint  for  Tailfer),  was  joint  writer,  with 
Anderson  and  others,  of  A  True  Historical 
Narrative  of  the  Colony  of  Georgia,  dedi- 
cated to  Oglethorpe  and  published  at 
Charlestown  in  1741.  (See  Peter  Force's 
Tracts  in  the  British  Museum  Library.) 

*  From  an  early  period,'  writes  Tyerman 
in  his  Life  of  Whitefield  (vol.  i.  p.  447), 
'  Tailfer  had  been  turbulent,  and  his  daily 
employment  had  been  to  misrepresent  the 
public  measures,  disperse  scandal,  and 
incite  discontent.'  We  have  a  graphic 
account  of  the  state  of  public  affairs  in 
Georgia,  and  especially  in  Savannah, 
three  or  four  years  later  (in  1740).  The 
beginning  of  trouble,  however,  may  be 
traced  to  causes  at  work  as  early  as  1736 
— causes  which  Oglethorpe  found  more 
difficult  to  deal  with  than  the  plots  of 
Florida  Spaniards.  Unscrupulous  settlers, 
wanting  labour  for  their  plantations, 
clamoured  for  the  right  to  import  negroes. 
Oglethorpe  and  the  Trustees  refused  to 
sanction  the  slave-trade.  Wesley,  unlike 
Whitefield,  who  sympathized  with  the 
malcontents,  stood  firmly  by  the  Trustees 
in  their  non-slavery  policy.  The  cruelties 
practised  on  negro  slaves  in  South 
Carolina  Charles  Wesley  exposed  on  his 
return  to  England  :  white  slavery — of 
which  there  were  notorious  examples  even 
in  virtuous  Georgia — John  Wesley  de- 
nounced. Another  principle,  cherished 


alike  by  Oglethorpe,  the  Trustees,  and 
the  Wesleys,  was  the  exclusion  of  spiritu- 
ous liquors  from  ordinary  sale  in  the 
colony.  John  Wesley's  first  act  on  land- 
ing was,  as  we  have  seen,  to  stave  the 
rum-casks.  The  Holy  Club,  before  landing, 
had  taken  a  solemn  vow  of  abstinence 
from  wine  and  flesh.  In  the  scurrilous 
pamphlet  which  Tailfer  and  Anderson 
dedicated  to '  His  Excellency  James  Ogle- 
thorpe,' they  say  : 

You  have  protected  us  from  ourselves 
by  keeping  all  earthly' comforts  from  us.  You 
have  afforded  us  the  opportunity  of  arriving 
at  the  integrity  of  primitive  times  by  entailing 
a  more  than  primitive  poverty  upon  us.  The 
valuable  virtue  of  humanity  is  secured  to 
us  by  your  care  to  prevent  our  procuring,  or 
so  much  as  seeing,  any  negroes  (the  only 
creatures  proper  to  improve  the  soil),  lest 
our  simplicity  might  mistake  the  poor  Africans 
for  greater  slaves  than  ourselves.  And,  that 
we  might  fully  receive  the  benefit  of  those 
wholesome  austerities,  you  have  denied  us 
the  use  of  spirituous  liquors,  which  might 
at  least  divert  our  minds  from  the  contem- 
plation of  our  happy  (!)  circumstances. 

This  specimen  of  colonial  satire,  though 
belonging  to  a  slightly  later  date,  suffi- 
ciently explains  the  bitter  hatred  cherished 
in  Georgia  against  Oglethorpe  and  the 
Wesleys.  It  may  also  throw  light  on  the 
Governor's  present  distress. 

2  No  explanation  of  this  prolonged 
private  conference  between  Wesley  and 
Oglethorpe  is  given.  Side-notes  in  the 


July  1736.] 


Third  Savannah  Journal 


245 


she  desired  him  to  step  in,  and  said,  'Sir,  my  sister,  I  fear, 
is  not  well.'  He  looked  earnestly  at  her,  felt  her  pulse,  and 
replied,  '  Well,  madam,  your  sister  is  dying ! '  However,  he 
thought  it  not  impossible  bleeding  might  help.  She  bled 
about  an  ounce,  leaned  back,  and  died. 

As  soon  as  I  heard  of  it  I  went  to  the  house,  and 
begged  they  would  not  lay  her  out  immediately,  there  being 
a  possibility,  at  least,  she  might  only  he  in  a  swoon  ;  of 
which,  indeed,  there  was  some  slight  hope,  she  not  only 
being  as  warm  as  ever,  but  having  a  fresh  colour  in  her 
cheeks,  and  a  few  drops  of  blood  starting  out  upon  bending 

At  two  he  visited  ;  at  three  he  spent  an  hour  with  the  Gentians  in 
conversation  and  singing  ;  at  four  Mr.  Parker  came  ;  after  evening  prayer 
he  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Dison  ;  they  supped  ;  at  the  court-house  news 
came  of  Miss  Bovey's  sudden  death.  He  was  to  and  fro  between  the 
court-house  and  Miss  Bovey's.  He  saw  the  dead  girl.1  At  seven,  during 
a  violent  storm,  he  '  prayed  with  Oglethorpe.' 


Diary  show  that  all  the  interest  centred 
in  Oglethorpe.  Wesley  is  '  lively,'  and 
all  the  members  of  'our  Company'  are 
well.  Oglethorpe  alone  is  distressed. 
At  five-o'clock  prayers  he  is  present. 
After  prayers,  '  he  with  me,  garden,  con- 
versed ;  he  right.'  For  two  hours  the 
conversation  continues,  and  again  for 
three  hours.  At  noon  Wesley  returns  to 
the  parsonage  and  dines,  returning  to  his 
troubled  friend  immediately.  *  He  quite 
right  and  serious  ! ' 

i    Conversation  till  1.30;    diary,  verses, 
prayer. 

The  interpretation  suggested  is  that 
Wesley,  on  his  return,  finding  Oglethorpe 
as  he  left  him,  '  quite  right,'  and  still  in 
a  serious  frame  of  mind,  resumed  the 
conversation  for  half  an  hour,  and  closed 
the  conference  by  reading  to  him  verses 
from  his  Diary,  and  by  prayer.  The  Diary 
volume  then  in  use,  and,  judging  from  its 
appearance,  carried  about  with  him  daily, 
is  the  one  from  which  these  notes  are 
extracted.  The  verses  read  to  Oglethorpe 
are  probably  some  of  those  written  at  the 
end  of  this  *  Hendrix  Diary.' 

The  trouble  harassing  Oglethorpe  was 


no  mere  local  and  temporary  dispute,  but 
the  far  graver  question  of  his  relation 
to  the  Trustees  and  the  English  Govern- 
ment, involving,  as  it  did,  the  fate  of  the 
whole  enterprise.  (Wright's  Memoir  of 
Oglethorpe.') 

1  Charles  Wesley's  note  on  this  event 
emphasizes  the  impression  it  produced  : 
*  Saturday ',  July  10. — I  was  waked  by 
the  news  my  brother  brought  us,  of 
Miss  Bovey's  sudden  death.  It  called  up 
all  my  sorrow  and  envy.  "Ah,  poor 
Ophelia  !  "  was  continually  in  my  mind, 
"  I  thought  thou  shouldst  have  been 
my  Hamlet's  wife."  Mr.  Appee  was  just 
set  out  for  Charlestown,  on  his  way  to 
Holland,  intending  to  return  when  he 
had  settled  his  affairs,  and  marry  her. 

But  death  had  quicker  wings  than  love. 
The  following  evening  I  saw  her  in  her 
coffin,  and  soon  after  in  her  grave.'  See 
also  letter  from  Wesley  to  Miss  Anne 
Granville,  Telford's  John  Wesley,  p.  242. 
Dr.  T.  Hales,  one  of  the  Georgia 
Trustees,  who  came  to  see  Charles  Wesley 
at  Mr.  Hutton's  house  after  his  return 
to  England,  was  much  interested  in  the 
account  of  Miss  Bovey's  death. 


246  John   Wesley's  Journal 


her  arm  ;  but  there  was  no  pulse  and  no  breath  ;  so  that, 
having  waited  some  hours,  we  found  her  'spirit  was  indeed 
returned  to  God  that  gave  it.* 

I  never  saw  so  beautiful  a  corpse  in  my  life.  Poor  comfort 
to  its  late  inhabitant  !  I  was  greatly  surprised  at  her  sister. 
There  was,  in  all  her  behaviour,  such  an  inexpressible  mixture 
of  tenderness  and  resignation.  The  first  time  I  spoke  to  her, 
she  said,  '  All  my  afflictions  are  nothing  to  this.  I  have  lost 
not  only  a  sister,  but  a  friend.  But  this  is  the  will  of  God. 
I  rely  on  Him  ;  and  doubt  not  but  He  will  support  me 
under  it.' 

This  evening  we  had  such  a  storm  of  thunder  and  lightning 
as  1  never  saw  before,  even  in  Georgia.  This  voice  of  God,  too, 
told  me  I  was  not  fit  to  die  ;  since  I  was  afraid  rather  than 
desirous  of  it.  Oh,  when  shall  I  wish  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be 
with  Christ  ?  When  I  love  Him  with  all  my  heart. 

Almost  the  whole  town  was  the  next  evening  at  the  funeral  ; 
where  many,  doubtless,  made  a  world  of  good  resolutions.  Oh, 
how  little  trace  of  most  of  these  will  be  left  in  the  morning  !  It 
is  a  true  saying,  '  Hell  is  paved  with  good  intentions.' 


Sun.  ii. — The  event  of  to-day  was  the  funeral  of  Miss  Bovey.  Ingham 
took  the  morning  sermon  and  Communion.  The  evening  sermon  Wesley 
prepared  in  the  garden.  He  also  wrote  two  papers  on  Miss  Bovey, 
one  being  an  account  of  a  conversation  she  had  with  Mrs.  Weddal. 
The  '  Mrs.  Margaret '  named  in  the  printed  Journal  seems  to  have  been 
Mrs.  Margaret  Wamsley.  At  the  'funeral,'  which  is  distinguished  from 
the  '  burial,'  there  was  *  no  talk ' ;  after  prayers  and  sermon  he  buried, 
and  'spoke.'  Only  a  fragment  of  Wesley's  account  has  survived,  unless, 
indeed,  the  original  papers  are  treasured  in  some  American  family. 

Man.  12. — After  five-o'clock  prayers,  in  place  of  the  usual  exposition,  he 
conversed  seriously  with  Miss  Sophy.  He  was  studying  German  when 
Oglethorpe  sent  for  him.  Another  long  conversation  was  punctuated  by 
the  cry,  '  Kvpt*  /3oij0«  ! ' 

10  Began  to  methodize  his  [Oglethorpe1  s]  business. 

This  duty  might  have  been  continued,  but  after  two  hours  '  company  came.' 
So  he  wrote  letters  to  Mr.  Appee  and  Mr.  Colwell.  Visiting  Miss  Bovey  in 
the  evening,  he  found  her  in  '  excellent  temper.'  An  hour's  conversation 
left  her  'serious  and  much  affected.'  This  lady  played  an  increasingly 
important  and  kindly  part  in  Wesley's  Savannah  ministry.  An  intelligent 
and  spiritually-minded  woman,  she  opened  her  house  for  Wesley's  religious 
meetings. 


joiy  1738.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  247 


Tues.  13. — After  the  early-morning  exposition  he  read  Charles's  letter  to 
Oglethorpe,  interviewed  Mrs.  Lacy,  who  had  come  in  from  Thunderbolt, 
and  read  another  letter ;  '  at  Oglethorpe's  ;  he  asleep  ;  meditated,  prayed  ; 
with  Oglethorpe  interpreting  and  sorting  letters.'  Then  he  'wrote  letters 
for  the  Parish,'  visited,  dined,  read  more  letters,  visited — and  so  on  to  the 
end  of  the  day,  with  interludes  for  his  friends,  whom  he  never  neglects,  and 
for  Mrs.  Causton  and  Miss  Sophy,  who  are  more  and  more  in  evidence.  It 
is  a  diligent,  devout  life,  much  traversed  by  affairs,  and  not  without  its 
human  emotions. 

Wed.  14. — A  long  day  of  letter-reading,  and  of  writing  on  Government 
business,  lay  before  him.  He  anticipated  the  usual  hour  for  prayers,  and  by 
5.15  was  at  Oglethorpe's  reading  letters,  a  task  which  he  sanctified  by  private 
prayer.  Many  of  these  official  letters  must  have  been  in  Spanish,  French, 
or  German.  This  was  a  fast-day,  and  he  did  not  break  his  fast  until 
1.30.  It  was  nearly  six  before  he  finished  his  work.  He  then  returned 
home,  dressed,  supped,  went  to  Miss  Bovey's,  where  he  met  Miss  Sophy, 
and  began  the  reading  of  Young's  Last  Day.  Oglethorpe  joined  the  little 
company.  They  talked  together  and  were  all  much  affected.  After  evening 
prayers  he  returned  to  Miss  Bovey's,  ended  the  reading,  and  engaged  in  '  a 
close  conversation  on  dress  and  company.' 

Thur.  15.— During  Oglethorpe's  breakfast  hour,  the  day  before,  he  wrote 
a  letter  to  Mrs.  Hawkins  (which  may  also  have  been  part  of  the  Governor's 
business).  This  he  now  transcribed.  At  seven  he  was  again  with  Oglethorpe, 
writing  for  him  until  eleven,  when  parish-visiting  claimed  him.  Mrs.  Smith, 
Mrs.  Bush,  Mr.  Gilbert,  Johnson,  and  Mr.  Ducat  were  on  his  list.  Was  this 
the  'Johnson'  after  whom  a  square  in  Savannah  (referred  to  in  Whitefield's 
Life]  was  named  ?  In  the  evening  a  company  again  met  at  Miss  Bovey's,  to 
whom  he  *  read  my  sermon.'  '  She  in  tears.' 

Fri.  1 6. — For  seven  hours  and  a  half  he  wrote  for  Oglethorpe,  again 
breaking  his  fast  at  1.30.  They  talked  together  for  an  hour.  'Writ'  for 
another  hour,  *  sorted  papers,'  went  home  for  the  usual  Holy  Club  devotions  ; 
but  Oglethorpe  sent  for  him  again,  and  he  wrote  for  him  until  the  time  of 
Miss  Bovey's  meeting,  the  public  exposition,  and  the  daily  visit  to  the 
Germans. 

Sat.  17. — Oglethorpe  was  asleep  when  his  friend  called  at  six  o'clock,  so 
he  spent  an  hour  writing  verses.  When  Oglethorpe  awoke  Wesley  gave 
five  hours  to  writing  petitions,  which  were  numerous  and  complicated 
enough  to  require  more  than  an  hour  for  their  sorting. 

Sun.  1 8. — A  curious  entry  to-day  has  not  yet  been  explained  : 
9  Meditated,  conversed  with  Delamotte  ;  at  Mrs.  Pember's. 
10  Married  her  and  Sr  Fr  B.  [Sir  Francis  Bathurst] ;  read  prayers, 
it  Sermon  and  Eucharist.     17  Communicants. 

Both  before  and  after  the  afternoon  service  he  catechized.    Apparently  at 

Miss  Bovey's,  where  every  evening  a  religious  meeting  seems  at  this  time  to 

have  been  held,  he  read  Scougal.    The  last  entry  for  the  day  also  is  curious  : 

9  At  home,  garden,  meditated,  Scotsman  came,  and  Charles  came. 

Man.  19.— He  again  found  Oglethorpe  asleep  at  six  o'clock,  and,  as  in 
later  days  when  his  tired  preachers  overslept  themselves,  he  was  troubled. 


248  John    Wesley  s  Journal 


Tues.  20.  —  Five  of  the  Chicasaw  Indians  *  (twenty  of  whom 
had  been  in  Savannah  several  days)  came  to  see  us,  with  Mr. 
Andrews,  their  interpreter.2  They  were  all  warriors,  four  of 
them  head  men.  The  two  chief  were  Paustoobee  and  Mingo 
Mattaw.  Our  conference  was  as  follows  : 

Q.  Do  you  believe  there  is  One  above  who  is  over  all  things  ? 

Paustoobee  answered,  We  believe  there  are  four  beloved  things 
above  :  the  clouds,  the  sun,  the  clear  sky,  and  He  that  lives  in  the  clear 
sky. 

Q.  Do  you  believe  there  is  but  One  that  lives  in  the  clear  sky  ? 

A.  We  believe  there  are  Two  with  Him,  Three  in  all. 

Q.  Do  you  think  He  made  the  sun,  and  the  other  beloved  things  ? 

A.  We  cannot  tell.     Who  hath  seen  ? 

Q.  Do  you  think  He  made  you  ? 

A.  We  think  He  made  all  men  at  first. 

Q.  How  did  He  make  them  at  first  ? 

A.  Out  of  the  ground. 

Q.  Do  you  believe  He  loves  you  ? 

A.  I  do  not  know.     I  cannot  see  Him. 

Q.  But  has  He  not  often  saved  your  life  ? 

A.  He  has.  Many  bullets  have  gone  on  this  side  and  many  on 
that  side  ;  but  He  would  never  let  them  hurt  me.  And  many  bullets 
have  gone  into  these  young  men  ;  and  yet  they  are  alive.3 


But  '  Miss  Bovey  was  up.'  He  filled  the  spare  hour  by  writing  verses 
with  the  Germans.  It  was  nine  before  he  could  begin  the  Governor's 
business,  and  then  he  wrote  for  him  petitions  and  other  documents  until  five, 
when  he  visited  at  his  desire.  The  evening  meeting  at  Miss  Bovey's,  with 
Mr.  B.  Burntside  (as  he  calls  him)  and  Miss  Sophy  present,  and  Scougal's 
Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of  Man,  read  by  Wesley,  proved  an  effective  counter- 
attraction  to  the  ball  held  in  the  town  that  evening.  The  same  evening 
4  Ingham  left  us,'  henceforth  making  his  home  among  the  Indians  of 
Yamacraw,  which  was  not  far  from  the  Cowpen. 

Tues.  20. — He  wrote  his  Journal.  At  nine  the  Chicasaws4  came.  He 
wrote  out  the  conference  which  Charles  took  in  shorthand,  reading  it  to 
the  Germans.  At  five  the  Chicasaws  held  their  last  audience.  The 
evening  was  spent  at  Miss  Bovey's  in  reading  Scougal,  at  the  church, 
and  with  the  Germans. 


1  Journal,  p.  408.  See  Digest  of  S.  P.  G.  Robertson's  History  of  America.  (Journal, 

Records,  p.  28.  July  6,  1781.) 

*  Probably  the  Rev.  Mr.  Andrews,  one  *  Phonetic  spelling  is  a  characteristic 

of  the  agents  of  the  S.P.C.K.  See  of  all  the  Diaries.  Here  the  name  is 

Minutes  of  that  Society.  spelt  Chickesaws  ;  in  the  Journal  it  is 

3  See  this  quoted  in  a  review  of  Dr.  Chicasaws. 


July  1736.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  249 

Q.  Then,  cannot  He  save  you  from  your  enemies  now  ? 

A.  Yes,  but  we  know  not  if  He  will.  We  have  now  so  many 
enemies  round  about  us,  that  I  think  of  nothing  but  death. 
And  if  I  am  to  die,  I  shall  die,  and  I  will  die  like  a  man.  But 
if  He  will  have  me  to  live,  I  shall  live.  Though  I  had  ever  so  many 
enemies,  He  can  destroy  them  all. 

Q.  How  do  you  know  that  ? 

A.  From  what  I  have  seen.  When  our  enemies  came  against  us 
before,  then  the  beloved  clouds  came  for  us.  And  often  much  rain, 
and  sometimes  hail,  has  come  upon  them ;  and  that  in  a  very  hot  day. 
And  I  saw,  when  many  French  and  Choctaws  and  other  nations 
came  against  one  of  our  towns  ;  and  the  ground  made  a  noise  under 
them,  and  the  beloved  ones  in  the  air  behind  them ;  and  they  were 
afraid,  and  went  away,  and  left  their  meat  and  drink  and  their  guns. 
I  tell  no  lie.  All  these  saw  it  too. 

Q.  Have  you  heard  such  noises  at  other  times  ? 

A.  Yes,  often  ;  before  and  after  almost  every  battle. 

Q.  What  sort  of  noises  were  they  ? 

A.  Like  the  noise  of  drums,  and  guns,  and  shouting. 

Q.  Have  you  heard  any  such  lately  ? 

A.  Yes ;  four  days  after  our  last  battle  with  the  French. 

Q.  Then  you  heard  nothing  before  it  ? 

A.  The  night  before  I  dreamed  I  heard  many  drums  up  there ; 
and  many  trumpets  there,  and  much  stamping  of  feet  and  shouting. 
Till  then  I  thought  we  should  all  die.  But  then  I  thought  the  beloved 
ones  were  come  to  help  us.1  And  the  next  day  I  heard  above  a 
hundred  guns  go  off  before  the  fight  began  ;  and  I  said,  '  When  the 
sun  is  there,  the  beloved  ones  will  help  us,  and  we  shall  conquer  our 
enemies.'  And  we  did  so. 

Q.  Do  you  often  think  and  talk  of  the  beloved  ones  ? 

A.  We  think  of  them  always,  wherever  we  are.  We  talk  of  them 
and  to  them,  at  home  and  abroad ;  in  peace,  in  war,  before  and  after 
we  fight ;  and,  indeed,  whenever  and  wherever  we  meet  together. 

Q.   Where  do  you  think  your  souls  go  after  death  ? 

A.  We  believe  the  souls  of  red  men  walk  up  and  down,  near  the 
place  where  they  died,  or  where  their  bodies  lie ;  for  we  have  often  heard 
cries  and  noises  near  the  place  where  any  prisoners  had  been  burned. 

Q.  Where  do  the  souls  of  white  men  go  after  death  ? 

A.  We  cannot  tell.     We  have  not  seen. 

Q.  Our  belief  is,  that  the  souls  of  bad  men  only  walk  up  and 
down  ;  but  the  souls  of  good  men  go  up. 

A.  I  believe  so  too.     But  I  told  you  the  talk  of  the  nation. 

1  Journal,  July  6,  1781. 


250  John   Wesley's  Journal 


(Mr.  Andrews.  —  They  said  at  the  burying,  they  knew  what  you  was 
doing.  You  was  speaking  to  the  beloved  ones  above,  to  take  up  the 
soul  of  the  young  woman.)  1 

Q.  We  have  a  book  that  tells  us  many  things  of  the  beloved  ones 
above  ;  would  you  be  glad  to  know  them  ? 

A.  We  have  no  time  now  but  to  fight.  If  we  should  ever  be  at 
peace,  we  should  be  glad  to  know. 

Q.  Do  you  expect  ever  to  know  what  the  white  men  know  ? 

(Mr.  Andrews.  —  They  told  Mr.  Oglethorpe  they  believed  the  time 
will  come  when  the  red  and  white  men  will  be  one.) 

Q.  What  do  the  French  teach  you  ? 

A.  The  French  black  kings  2  never  go  out.  We  see  you  go  about  : 
we  like  that  ;  that  is  good.3 

Q.  How  came  your  nation  by  the  knowledge  they  have  ? 

A.  As  soon  as  ever  the  ground  was  sound  and  fit  to  stand  upon,  it 
came  to  us,  and  has  been  with  us  ever  since.  But  we  are  young  men  ; 
our  old  men  know  more  :  but  all  of  them  do  not  know.  There  are  but 
a  few  whom  the  Beloved  One  chooses  from  a  child,  and  is  in  them, 
and  takes  care  of  them,  and  teaches  them.  They  know  these  things  ; 
and  our  old  men  practise  ;  therefore  they  know.  But  I  do  not  practise  ; 
therefore  I  know  little. 


Wed.  21. — Writing  the  Journal,  a  long  letter  to  Mrs.  Hawkins,  and 
1  petitions '  for  Oglethorpe  occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  day.  At  four  he 
dressed  for  pastoral  visitation  and  prayers  ;  walked  in  the  garden,  reading 
Heylin  and  praying.  Miss  Nunes  was  added  to  the  little  devotional  com- 
pany that  met  daily  in  Miss  Bovey's  house.  The  morning  and  evening 
expositions,  the  evening  worship  with  the  Moravians,  the  daily  fellowship 
with  Delamotte  and  any  other  member  of  '  our  Company '  who  happened  to 
be  at  hand,  continued.  Charles  Wesley  writes,  '  I  heard  by  my  brother  that 
I  was  to  set  sail  in  a  few  days  for  England.' 

Thur,  22. — From  six  till  dinner  he  was  writing  for  Oglethorpe,  with 
whom  he  dined.  Company  came,  amongst  others  Mr.  Johnson  and 
Mr.  Causton.  A  burial  compelled  the  postponement  of  the  reading  in 
Scougal  at  Miss  Bovey's.  Charles  says  that  he  got  '  their  licences  signed 
by  Mr.  Oglethorpe,  countersigned  them  myself,  and  so  entirely  washed  my 
hands  of  the  traders.'  This  strengthens  the  impression  that  Charles  had  no 
love  for  business,  and  no  natural  aptitude  for  the  post  into  which  he  drifted 
contrary  to  his  brother  Samuel's  advice. 


1  See  Spectator,  No.  56,  for  the  Indian  from    a    Protestant    missionary,    a  chief 
notions  of  the  future  of  their  beloved  ones.  said,   'That  goes  straight  to  my  heart, 

2  By  the    'black   kings'   the    Indians  not  like  that  other  nonsense  talk.     The 
meant  priests.  Great  Spirit  wants  clear  here  ' — pointing 

3  Some  of  the    Indians   were   shrewd  to  his  heart — '  never  mind  face.     Water 
enough  to  see  the  effects  of  the  '  black  on  face  all  go  for  nothing  to  bad  man ' 
kings' '  religion.    After  hearing  the  gospel  {Life  of  Sir  Rowland  Hill}. 


jmy  1736.1  Third  Savannah  Journal  251 


Man.  26. — My    brother  and  I  set  out   for   Charlestown,  in 


Fri.  23.— The  morning  was  given  to  Oglethorpe  and  to  letters  written  to 
Mr.  Hutcheson  and  Mr.  Vernon. 

Sat.  24.— From  seven  till  one  he  sat  with  Oglethorpe  in  the  court-house. 
At  first  none  came.  He  filled  an  idle  hour  with  writing.  Whether  the  long 
session  was  justified  or  not,  he  does  not  say.  It  was,  however,  a  practical 
carrying  out  of  his  advice  to  the  Governor.  Apparently  it  was  at  this  time — 
either  to-day  or  on  the  previous  day — that  Miss  Sophy  sailed  away  to 
Frederica.  Wesley  conversed  with  her  after  morning  prayers  on  the  Friday 
morning.  When  next  her  name  appears  in  the  Diary  she  is  in  Frederica, 
lodging  at  the  Hirds  with  Miss  Fosset.1  Another  burial  interfered  with 
Miss  Bovey's  meeting. 

Sun.  25.— This  was  Charles  Wesley's  last  day  in  Savannah.  His 
brother  began  the  day  with  much  prayer,  alone  and  with  Delamotte.  At 
an  early  service  Miss  Bovey  was  present  and  nineteen  others,  and  amongst 
them  Oglethorpe,  who  brought  letters.  John  wrote  for  him  until  10.45, 
when  he  read  prayers.  Oglethorpe  was  present,  and  a  congregation  of 
seventy.  Charles  preached  and  administered  the  Eucharist  to  seventeen 
communicants,  including  Miss  Bovey.  John  at  once  resumed  official  work, 
and  continued,  with  a  brief  interval  for  dinner,  until  five,  when  Charles  again 
preached.  Oglethorpe  and  the  Wesleys  adjourned  to  Miss  Bovey's,  where 
they  spent  Charles's  last  evening  in  Georgia. 

Mon.  26. — Up  to  the  last  moment,  on  this  as  on  many  occasions, 
Wesley  discharged  his  prescribed  duties,  reading  prayers  and  expounding. 
Miss  Bovey  was  there,  and  heard  the  *  words  which  concluded  the  Second 
Lesson  and '  Charles  Wesley's  *  stay  in  Georgia — "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence." ' f 


1  The    ladies*  seem    to  have    had   a  fellows  ready  to  catch  at  the  office  ;  and 
separate  hut,  but  Hird  was  their  host.  in  my  absence  I  cannot  put  in  one  of 

2  Charles  Wesley  writes  (Journal,  Sun.,  my  own  choosing.     The  best  I  can  hope 
July   25)  :    'I   resigned   my   secretary's  for  is  an  honest  Presbyterian,  as  many 
place    in  a    letter  to    Mr    Oglethorpe.  of  the  Trustees  are  such.     Perhaps  they 
After  prayers    he   took   me   aside,  and  may  send  me  a  bad  man  ;  and  how  far 
asked  me  whether  all  I  had  said  was  not  such   a  one  may  influence  the   traders, 
summed  up  in  the  line  he  showed  me  on  and  obstruct  the  reception  of  the  gospel 
my  letter  :  among  the  heathen,  you  know.     I  shall 

Magis  apta  /MIS  tua  dona  rtlinquo.  be  in  England  before  you  leave  it.    Then 

Sir,  to  yourself  your  slighted  gifts  I  leave ;  you  may  either  put  in  a  deputy  or  resign. 

Less  fit  for  me  to  take  than  you  to  give.  '"You  need  not  be  detained  in  England 

I   answered,  I   desired   not  to  lose  his  above  three  days  ;   and   only  speak   to 

esteem,  but  could   not  preserve  it  with  some  of  my  particular  friends — Vernon, 

the  loss  of  my  soul.      He  answered,  he  Hutchinson,  and  Towers — to  the  Board 

was    satisfied   of   my   regard   for    him  ;  of  Trustees  when  called  upon,  and  the 

owned  my  argument   drawn    from    the  Board  of  Trade. 

heart  unanswerable;  and  yet,  said  he,  '" On  many  accounts  I  should  recom- 

"  I   would   desire   you  not    to    let    the  mend     to    you    marriage    rather    than 

Trustees      know     your     resolution     of  celibacy.     You   are  of  a  social  temper, 

resigning.      There    are     many     hungry  and  would   find   in  a  married  state  the 


252 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[July  1736. 


order  to  his  embarking  for  England  ; J  but  the  wind  being  con- 
trary, we  did  not  reach  Port  Royal,  forty  miles  from  Savannah, 

Oglethorpe  brought  more  letters,  as  did  the  Germans.  Certain  of  the 
letters  the  Governor  read  in  the  presence  of  them  all.  At  noon  the  boat 
was  on  the  bar,  but  the  wind  being  contrary  they  could  not  proceed. 
Wesley  read  an  'account  of  Carolina.'  At  half-past  three  he  bathed,  at  four 
ate  and  resumed  the  story  of  Carolina  ;  at  8.30  he  slept. 


difficulties  of  working  out  your  salvation 
exceedingly  lessened,  and  your  helps  as 
much  increased." ' 

On  this  it  may  be  remarked  :  (i) 
Charles  Wesley  held  his  appointment 
direct  from  the  Trustees,  and  was  not, 
strictly  speaking,  Oglethorpe's  private 
secretary,  but  'secretary  for  Indian  affairs' 
under  Oglethorpe  :  hence  he  counter- 
signed the  traders'  licences.  (2)  Both 
Charles  and  John  were  troubled  in  con- 
science with  respect  to  some  of  the 
transactions  with  traders  and  Indians, 
which  their  position  compelled  them  to 
countenance.  (3)  The  crucial  questions 
affecting  colonial  and  missionary  policy, 
then  and  for  many  generations  following, 
were  the  treatment  of  native  races,  negro 
slavery,  and  the  liquor  traffic.  Civil 
rulers  and  ministers  of  the  gospel,  who 
took  up  a  distinctively  Christian  attitude 
on  these  questions,  were  bound  to  ex- 
asperate those  who  lived  only  for  greed 
and  pleasure.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we 
have  no  difficulty  in  interpreting  hints  of 
perplexity  and  trouble.  (4)  John  Wesley's 
loyalty  to  Oglethorpe — a  loyalty  all  the 
more  remarkable  because  he  was  not 
convinced  as  to  Oglethorpe's  entire 
innocence  in  the  matter  of  Mrs.  Hawkins 
and  Mrs.  Welch — never  wavered.  It 
accounts  for  his  silence  in  the  Journal  and 
Diary.  (5)  The  women  of  Georgia,  in 
both  Savannah  and  Frederica,  were  re- 
sponsible for  many  disasters  that  overtook 
a  noble  enterprise.  In  Oglethorpe's 
opinion  a  clergyman  of  a  '  social  temper,' 
if  unmarried,  was  likely  to  increase  the 
mischief-making  power  of  unscrupulous 
women.  He  courteously  puts  the  case 
in  another  form  ;  but  it  is  not  difficult, 
with  the  Wesley  record  in  Frederica 


before  us,  to  read  between  the  lines. 
Undoubtedly  Oglethorpe  was  right.  We 
may  imagine  John  and  Charles  Wesley 
in  Georgia  married  to  strong,  intelligent, 
conscientious,  sympathetic  women.  How 
different  the  story !  How  different  the  early 
history  of  the  American  Southern  States  ! 
1  Neither  the  Wesleys  nor  Ingham  in- 
tended to  leave  the  colony.  It  was 
necessary,  however,  that  one  of  them 
should  visit  England.  The  Trustees 
needed  information  at  first  hand.  The 
mission  needed  recruits  and  relief. 
There  was  much  poverty  on  all  the 
stations.  The  Diary  pages  bear  significant 
testimony  to  the  ravages  made  by  sick- 
ness and  death.  Within  a  few  months 
George  Whitefield  was  collecting  money 
for  the  orphan  children  of  Georgia.  At 
first  there  was  some  doubt  as  to  whether 
John,  Charles,  or  Ingham  should  visit 
England.  Probably  Ingham's  departure 
to  Yamacraw  helped  the  final  decision. 
This  seems  to  have  been  taken  during 
those  long  conferences  between  Ogle- 
thorpe and  John  Wesley  which  form  so 
marked  a  feature  in  the  Diary  during  the 
last  days  of  July.  Charles  could  be 
better  spared  than  John.  He  was  an 
indifferent  secretary,  and  had  no  en- 
thusiasm for  such  work.  It  was  not, 
as  he  now  knew,  his  vocation.  After 
his  first  round  of  letter-writing  in 
Frederica,  he  wrote,  '  I  would  not  spend 
six  days  more  in  the  same  manner  for  all 
Georgia.'  On  the  other  hand,  John 
Wesley  had  become  indispensable.  He 
did  his  own  work  and  his  brother's. 
He  was  not  only  an  exceptionally  able 
secretary,  with  a  gift  for  languages,  a 
command  of  clear,  sententious  English, 
and  the  pen  of  a  swift  writer,  but  was 


July  1736.] 


Third  Savannah  Journal 


253 


till  Wednesday  evening.     The  next  morning  we  left  it.     But 
the  wind  was  so  high  in  the  afternoon,  as  we  were  crossing  the 

Tues.  27. — Sailing  northward  among  the  islands  he  sang,  and  read  Law 
and  German  alternately,  until,  at  ten,  the  boat  anchored  near  an  island 
or  mainland  station  where  lived  a  man  named  Harris,  with  whom  Wesley 
conversed  seriously,  afterwards  visiting  sick  women,  reading  prayers  and 
expounding,  as  he  did  every  day  whether  on  boat  or  shore.  He  and  Charles 
had  a  quiet  hour  to  themselves.  As  the  day  lost  its  intense  heat  they  set 
out  again,  singing,  reading  Law,  and  rowing. 

Wed.  28. — By  seven  they  reached  Hilton  Head,  where  he  sang,  read 
Law,  expounded,  influenced  Mrs.  Dawson  for  good,  set  out  in  the  great 
*  heat,'  singing,  reading  Law,  and  feeding  on  melons,  until,  in  the  evening, 
they  came  to  Beaufort.  There  a  Mr.  Wood  and  'the  Committee'  were  in 
session  at  Serjeant's  ;  Wesley  joined  them.  But  what  the  business  was,  or 
what  the  Committee,  is  not  revealed. 

Thur.  29. — With   a  fair  wind,  singing   and   reading,  they  came  to  St. 


a  wise  counsellor,  a  methodical  man  of 
affairs,  a  born  organizer  and  ruler  of 
men  ;  absolutely  fearless  and  candid,  and 
as  silent  as  the  grave.  To  John  Wesley 
Oglethorpe  clave  more  and  more.  There- 
fore not  John,  but  Charles,  was  chosen 
for  a  mission  to  England  the  duties  of 
which  Oglethorpe  thought  might  be 
discharged  in  three  days  !  No  one  then 
imagined  that  Charles  would  never 
return.  Samuel  Wesley  did  not  approve 
the  appointment  of  his  youngest  brother 
as  either  missionary  or  secretary.  He 
knew  both  Charles  and  Oglethorpe,  and 
understood  better  than  most  the  con- 
ditions under  which  such  an  enterprise 
as  the  Georgia  Mission  must  be  carried 
out.  John,  he  thought,  having  declined 
the  duty  of  keeping  the  Epworth  home 
together  for  his  mother  and  sisters, 
might  safely  go  to  Georgia ;  but  Charles, 
he  was  firmly  convinced,  should  have 
stayed  at  home.  The  event  justified  his 
prevision.  Charles  accomplished  nothing 
by  going  to  Georgia.  He  lost  rather 
than  gained — learned  nothing,  did 
nothing.  With  the  best  intentions  he 
hindered  rather  than  helped.  He  was 
much  too  highly  strung,  too  sensitive, 
too  delicate  in  physique,  for  the  rough 
life  of  Frederica.  Secretarial  duties  he 
detested,  rarely  discharging  them  when 
his  more  versatile  brother  was  at  hand. 


His  one  supreme  gift,  as  far  as  we  know, 
lay  dormant  during  all  the  months  of  his 
voyage  to  and  residence  in  Georgia. 
America,  if  so  disposed,  might  enroll 
John  Wesley  as  one  of  her  sacred  poets, 
but  not  Charles.  We  do  not  know  a 
single  hymn  which  was  written  there 
by  the  poet  of  Methodism. 

In  England— at  the  university,  in 
social  circles,  in  the  time  immediately 
preceding  his  *  conversion  ' — Charles 
Wesley's  power  to  attract  and  sway 
young  life  was  remarkable.  Oxford 
Methodism — indirectly  the  beginning  of 
Methodism  in  Cambridge  University — 
Robert  Kirkham,  Morgan,  Whitefield, 
Ingham,  William  Delamotte,  were  all  of 
them  Charles  Wesley's  trophies.  The 
unconscious  imitation  of  his  handwriting 
by  members  of  the  Holy  Club  is  a  silent 
testimony  to  the  influence  he  wielded. 
Can  we  trace  even  the  faintest  evidence 
of  such  influence  in  Georgia?  There, 
unlike  his  brother,  he  was  sterilized, 
paralysed,  all  but  slain  intellectually  and 
spiritually,  as  well  as  physically.  Georgia 
did  nothing  for  Charles  except  ruin  his 
health,  and  he  did  nothing  for  Georgia 
until  long  after  he  had  left,  never  to 
return.  '  When  the  boat  put  off  I  was 
surprised  that  I  felt  no  more  joy  in 
leaving  such  a  scene  of  sorrows.' 


254  John   Wesley  s  Journal 


neck  of  St.  Helena's  Sound,  that  our  oldest  sailor  cried  out, 
1  Now  every  one  must  take  care  for  himself.'  I  told  him,  '  God 
would  take  care  for  us  all.'  Almost  as  soon  as  the  words  were 
spoken,  the  mast  fell.  I  kept  on  the  edge  of  the  boat,  to  be 
clear  of  her  when  she  sank  (which  we  expected  every  moment), 
though  with  little  prospect  of  swimming  ashore  against  such  a 
wind  and  sea.  But,  f  How  is  it  that  thou  hadst  no  faith  ?  '  The 
moment  the  mast  fell,  two  men  caught  it  and  pulled  it  into  the 
boat  ;  the  other  three  rowed  with  all  their  might,  and  '  God 
gave  command  to  the  wind  and  seas  '  ;  so  that  in  an  hour  we 
were  safe  on  land. 

Sat.  31.  —  We  came  to  Charlestown.  The  church  is  of  brick, 
but  plastered  over  like  stone.  I  believe  it  would  contain  three 
or  four  thousand  persons.  About  three  hundred  were  present 
at  the  morning  service  the  next  day,  when  Mr.  Garden  1  desired 


Helena  Road,  where  the  wind  rose  and,  in  the  Sound,  became  a  storm 
which  'broke  the  sail.'  At  three  they  were  safe  on  shore,  where  the 
brothers  resumed  their  singing  and  reading  as  though  nothing  had 
happened.  At  seven  they  were  rowing,  and  at  nine  sleeping. 

Fri.  30. — The  wind  was  again  fair.  He  read  Macarius  *  and  sang .  At 
6.30  they  reached  Bennet's  Point.  At  eight,  in  the  boat,  he  read  prayers 
and  expounded.  For  two  hours  it  rained,  but  he  still  read  Macarius  and 
sang,  until  noon,  when  they  *  dined  on  bread-and-butter,'  and  were  not  a 
little  affrighted  by  the  falling  of  the  mast.  But  he  again  read  Macarius 
and  sang.  They  lost  themselves,  but  found  their  way,  and  rowed,  and 
sang,  and  read,  and  prayed,  until,  at  8.30,  they  lay  down  and  slept. 

Sat.  31.— At  nine  they  reached  Lad's  Island,  where  'a  man  and  dog 
were  surly ' ;  so  they  set  out  again,  reading  and  singing,  until,  at  noon, 
John  began  to  think  of  a  sermon  to  preach  in  Charlestown  the  next  day. 
At  2.30  they  were  at  Stono  Bridge.  There  he  walked  with  Charles, 
Macbain,  and  Mr.  Sweeney.  Another  person  named  is  Wallis.  The 
intention  was  to  walk  into  Charlestown  ;  but  Macbain  was  tired  at  Ashley, 
so  at  Sarreau's,  or  Mrs.  Belinger's,  horses  were  engaged,  and  in  three 
hours  they  reached  Charlestown.  Finding  that  Mr.  Eveleigh  (he  appears 

1  The  Rev.  Alexander  Garden  was  the  irregularity.     For   Wesley's    opinion    of 

Bishop    of     London's    Commissary    for  Garden,    see    p.    349.      The    letters    of 

South  Carolina.     There  being  no  bishop  Dr.     Garden,    addressed     to     Linnaeus 

in     the    colony,    it    was    regarded    as  and    Ellis,    are    valuable.      They    may 

within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  diocese  of  be     found      in      Sir     J.     E.      Smith's 

London.     Whitefield  described  Garden  Selections     of    the     Correspondence     of 

as  '  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.'     This  Linnaeus. 

was  none  the  less  true  because,  at  a  later  2  '  An   Extract  from  the  Homilies  of 

date,  he  suspended  Whitefield  from  his  Macarius'  takes  up  60  pp.  in  Wesley's 

ministerial     office     for     some     apparent  Christian  Library,  vol.  i. 


AU«.  1736.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  255 

me  to  preach  ;  about  fifty  at  the  Holy  Communion.  I  was  glad 
to  see  several  negroes  at  church,  one  of  whom  told  me  she 
was  there  constantly,  and  that  her  old  mistress  (now  dead)  had 
many  times  instructed  her  in  the  Christian  religion.  I  asked 
her  what  religion  was.  She  said  she  could  not  tell.  I  asked 
if  she  knew  what  a  soul  was.  She  answered,  'No.1  I  said, 

I  Do  not  you  know  there  is  something  in  you   different  from 
your  body  ?     Something  you  cannot  see  or  feel  ?  '     She  replied, 

I 1  never   heard   so   much  before.'     I    added,   '  Do   you   think, 
then,  a  man  dies  altogether  as  a  horse  dies  ? '    She  said, '  Yes, 
to  be  sure.'     O  God,  where  are  Thy  tender  mercies  ?     Are  they 
not  over  all  Thy  works  ?     When  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
arise  on  these  outcasts  of  men,  with  healing  in  His  wings ! 

AUG.  2,  Mon. — I  set  out  for  the  Lieutenant-Governor's  seat, 
about  thirty  miles  from  Charlestown,  to  deliver  Mr.  Ogle- 
thorpe's  letters.  It  stands  very  pleasantly,  on  a  little  hill,  with 
a  vale  on  either  side,  in  one  of  which  is  a  thick  wood  ;  the  other 
is  planted  with  rice  and  Indian  corn.  I  designed  to  have  gone 
back  by  Mr.  Skene's,  who  has  about  fifty  Christian  negroes.1 

later  as  Rev.  Laserre  Eveleigh),  who,  as  Charles  tells  us,  had  engaged  to 
provide  lodgings,  had  gone  to  bed,  they  slept  at  an  inn. 

AUG.  i,  Sun. — With  the  help  of  a  barber  John  dressed  before  calling  on 
Mr.  Eveleigh  and  Mr.  Garden,  in  whose  church  he  that  morning  preached, 
administering  the  Eucharist  to  fifty  communicants,  among  whom  was  'one 
negro  woman.' 

His  first  duty  was  to  deliver  Oglethorpe's  dispatches  to  Colonel 
Broughton,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  South  Carolina.  At  eleven  o'clock 
on  Sunday  night  he  was  called  by  La-rong,  presumably  the  guide  appointed 
to  conduct  him  to  the  Governor's  place.  At  midnight  he  was  at  La-rong's 
house.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  later  they  set  out,  and  walked  until  four  in  the 
morning,  when  they  halted  and  made  a  fire.  At  five  they  set  out  again,  and 
at  seven  reached  Mr.  Ware's  ;  '  they  at  prayer.'  From  half-past  eight  to 
eleven  was  the  last  stage  of  the  journey.  At  Colonel  Broughton's  he 
remained  for  dinner  and  conversation,  setting  out  on  the  return  journey 
at  2.30.  The  rest  of  this  exhausting  journey  may  be  given  in  the  broken 
words  of  the  Diary  : 

I  Dined,  conversed,  2.30  set  out;  meditated;  very  hot;  handkerchief. 
4  The  tavern  ;  talked  ;  horse  tired.     5  Set  out ;  led  my  horse ;  thirst ; 
10  At  Quarterhouse ;  they  would  not  let  me  in  ; 
\\\  Mr  Barton's  ;  they  let  me  in ;  in  talk;  supper. 

1  One  of  the  rules  drawn  up  by  the  which  reached  the  ears  of  the  Trustees 
Trustees  forbade  the  employment  of  before  Wesley  sailed  for  Georgia.  For 
negroes ;  this  was  soon  set  aside — a  fact  the  attitude  of  Oglethorpe  and  Wesley 


256 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[Aug.  1736. 


But  my  horse  tiring,  I  was  obliged  to  return  the  straight  way 
to  Charlestown. 

I  had  sent  the  boat  we  came  in  back  to  Savannah,  expecting 
a  passage  thither  myself  in  Colonel  Bull's.  His  not  going  so 
soon,  I  went  to  Ashley  Ferry  on  Thursday,  intending  to  walk 
to  Port  Royal.  But  Mr.  Belinger 1  not  only  provided  me  a  horse, 
but  rode  with  me  himself  ten  miles,  and  sent  his  son  with  me 


AUG.  3,  Tues. 

5  Dressed;  in  talk;  set  out;  private  prayer;  6.30  met  MrDwight; 
7  he  lent  me  his  horse  ;  7.30  at  home.     8  On  business  in  town. 

This  interval,  spent  in  the  town  on  business,  is  the  only  point  during  this 
visit  to  Charlestown  at  which  a  possible  visit  to  Lewis  Timothy,  printer  and 
publisher,  can  be  surmised. 

At  eleven  he  called  on  Mr.  Garden,  and  was  introduced  to  Colonel 
Fenwick's  family.  'Jerry'  (or  Jeny,  probably  an  abbreviated  name),  who 
seems  to  have  been  responsible  for  the  voyage  home,  was  out.  Wesley 
returned  to  Mr.  Garden's  for  dinner.  At  Judge  Trot's  he  was  caught 
in  a  storm.  The  Diary  at  this  point  is  hopelessly  confused.  Twice  within 
two  pages  attempts  have  been  made  (by  Wesley  himself)  to  supplement  its 
defects.  The  following  provisional  itinerary  is  suggested  :  AUG.  4,  Wed. — 
At  three  Wesley  rises  ;  at  four  sets  out  with  Charles  and  Appee  ;  at  5.30 
they  reach  the  Quarterhouse,  where  they  rest  awhile  ;  at  seven  the  two 
brothers  set  out  (what  becomes  of  Appee  we  are  not  informed)  ;  at  nine 
they  are  at  Mr.  Guy's  (Rev.) ;  at  ten  at  Mrs.  Belinger's  ;  at  11.30  Wesley 
walks  in  the  garden  ;  at  12.30  the  minister  of  Charlestown  reappears  ;  he 
dines,  and  at  6.30  sets  out  with  Charles  for  Charlestown.  After  this  there  is 
confusion.3 

At  Ponpon  they  (John  Wesley  and  his  friends)  dine  ;  at  Ashepoo  Ferry 
they  sup  and  sleep.  By  4.30  they  are  called  for  breakfast ;  at  8.30  they 
reach  Jehu  Bartoc's,  where  melons  refresh  them ;  at  10.30  they  arrive  at 


towards  this  and  cognate  subjects,  see 
p.  244. 

1  See  p.  352. 

2  It  may  be  that  we  have  two  distinct 
entries   for   Aug.  4,   the   first   recording 
John  Wesley's  doings  on  that  day,  and 
the  second  Charles  Wesley's.      If  so,  it 
would  appear  that  Charles  accompanied 
his  brother  as  far  as  Ashley  Ferry,  Appee 
leaving  them  at  the  Quarterhouse  ;  that 
whilst  John  and  Charles  halted  at  Mrs. 
Belinger's  hospitable  house,  walking  in 
the  garden  and  conversing   for   the  last 
time,  the  minister  of  Charlestown  arrived, 
and,  after  dinner,  returned  with  Charles 


to  Charlestown,  where  the  latter  was 
rejoined  by  Appee.  Meanwhile,  John 
Wesley  rode  ten  miles  south  with  Mr. 
Belinger,  senior,  and  afterwards  twenty 
miles  farther  with  Belinger,  junior. 

It  would  scarcely  be  worth  while  to 
linger  thus  over  a  confused  record,  but 
for  one  fact  which  stands  out  clearly. 
The  friendship  with  Appee  belonged  to 
Charles  rather  than  to  John.  At  a  critical 
moment  it  drew  Charles  somewhat  away 
from  his  brother,  the  result  being  that 
John  was  thrown  into  more  intimate 
companionship  with  Mr.  Garden  and 
others. 


Aug.  1736.]  Third  Savannah  Journal  257 

to  Cumbee  Ferry,  twenty  miles  farther  ;  whence,  having  hired 
horses  and  a  guide,  i  came  to  Beaufort  (or  Port  Royal)  the 
next  evening.1  We  took  boat  in  the  morning ;  but,  the  wind 
being  contrary  and  very  high,  did  not  reach  Savannah  till 
Sunday,  in  the  afternoon. 


Cumbee  Ferry,  where  they  have  an  interview  with  Mr.  Bull's  overseer,  who 
accompanies  Wesley  to  Mr.  Griffith's,  where  young  Belinger  leaves  him. 
Beaufort,  on  the  island  of  Port  Royal,  he  reaches  at  7.30;  sups  with  Serjeant, 
whose  acquaintance  he  made  on  his  outward  voyage ;  calls  on  Mr.  Jones,  who 
may  have  been  the  minister  of  the  place. 

Sat.  7. — At  the  inn  he  again  sees  Mr.  Jones.  At  10.45  ne  takes  boat 
for  Savannah,  a  journey  of  forty  miles,  reading  Millar's  Propagation  of 
Christianity. 

Wind  high — against  us. 

7  Mrs  Dawson's,  conversed,  supped.     8.  Set  out,  private  prayer. 
9^  Storm  ;  could  not  bear  up  ;  lay  by. 

Sun.  8. — At  4.30  they  were  again  under  weigh.  Reading  Ostervald's 
Catechism  he  reached  Tybee  Creek,  where  they  again  lay  by.  At  four 
the  boat  arrived  at  Savannah.  Wesley  dressed,  dined,  prayed  with 
Delamotte,  and  saw  Miss  Bovey  and  the  Germans. 

Mon.  9. — The  one  day  spent  in  Savannah  was  devoted  chiefly  to  the 
Journal  and  to  pastoral  visitation.  At  five  he  packed  for  the  voyage  to 
Frederica,  which  was  to  commence  the  next  day.  At  Miss  Bovey's  evening 
meeting  he  read  his  Journal.  It  was  nearly  midnight  before  he  had  finished 
his  work  on  the  Journal.3 


1  Wesley  parted  with  his  brother  on  with  Lewis  Timothy  for  the  printing  of 

Aug.  5,  and  Charles  sailed  for  England  the  Charlestown  Collection  of  Psalms 

on  Aug.  II.  and  Hymns — which,  as  we  now  know, 

-  This  section  of  the  Journal  must  have  was  even  then  taking  definite  shape — 

contained  a  full  account  of  his  voyage  and  of  his  conferences  with  Mr.  Garden, 

to  Charlestown,  of  his  interview  with  This  Journal  is  one  of  the  missing  docu- 

the  Lieut.-Governor  of  South  Carolina,  merits.  If,  as  is  probable,  it  was  written 

of  his  adventures  during  long  journeys  in  the  same  volume  that  contained  the 

in  an  interesting  province,  of  his  parting  account  of  Wesley's  next  visit  to  Frederica, 

with  Charles,  of  the  business  transacted  and  is  still  in  existence,  it  will  be  in  a 

in  Charlestown,  of  the  friends  he  made  mutilated  condition.  The  leaves  torn 

and  the  books  he  bought  or  borrowed,  out  are  those  (already  referred  to)  in 

and  of  the  tentative  arrangements  made  the  Colman  Collection. 


258  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Aug.  m«. 


THIRD  FREDERICA  JOURNAL 

AUG.  10,  Tues. — Finding  Mr.  Oglethorpe  was  gone,  I  stayed 
only  a  day  at  Savannah  ;  and  leaving  Mr.  Ingham  and  Delamotte 
there,  set  out  on  Tuesday  morning  for  Frederica.  In  walking  to 
Thunderbolt  I  was  in  so  heavy  a  shower,  that  all  my  clothes  were 
as  wet  as  if  I  had  gone  through  the  river.  On  which  occasion  I 
cannot  but  observe  that  vulgar  error  concerning  the  hurtful- 
ness  of  the  rains  and  dews  of  America.  I  have  been  thoroughly 
wet  with  these  rains  more  than  once,  yet  without  any  harm 
at  all.  And  I  have  lain  many  nights  in  the  open  air,  and 
received  all  the  dews  that  fell  ;  and  so,  I  believe,  might  any 
one,  if  his  constitution  was  not  impaired  by  the  softness  of 
a  genteel  education. 

At  Thunderbolt  we  took  boat ;  and  on  Friday,  August  13, 
came  to  Frederica,  where  I  delivered  Mr.  Oglethorpe  the  letters 
I  had  brought  from  Carolina.  The  next  day  he  set  out  for  Fort 

Tues.  10. — He  discharged  his  ministerial  duties  as  usual  up  to  the  last 
moment.  At  10.15  ^e  set  out  with  Jemmy  (Billinghurst  ?  see  p.  126), 
and  in  hard  rain  walked  across  country 'to  Thunderbolt,  arriving  at 
one  o'clock.  Mrs.  Causton  was  there,  no  doubt  with  letters  and  final 
messages  for  her  niece,  who  was  visiting  the  Hirds  at  Frederica.  At  four 
he  embarked  and  sang  his  way  to  Skidoway,  where  he  arrived  at  six.  He 
sang,  read  prayers,  and  expounded  for  a  congregation  of  eight. 

Wed.  ii. — He  called  the  crew  at  2.45,  and  slept,  read  German  and  Law 
as  far  as  Pine  Island,  which  they  reached  at  eight.  Leaving  at  nine,  he  read 
Law's  Serious  Call,  sang,  dined,  read  German  and  the  Serious  Call  until 
six.  So  high  was  the  wind  that  they  could  not  cross  St.  Katherine's 
Sound. 

Thur.  12. — All  day  they  seem  to  have  beat  about  St.  Katherine's  Island, 
once  landing,  until  after  six,  when  they  reached  Clark's  Bluff. 

Fri.  13. — As  on  the  previous  day,  he  read  Law  and  German,  and  sang 
until  evening,  when  they  arrived  at  Frederica.  He  first  saw  Oglethorpe, 
who  talked  of  Miss  Sophy.  He  then  went  to  Mr.  Hird's,  where  he  found 
her  and  conversed — 'She  quite  right.'  At  ten  he  prayed  with  J.  B.  (i.e. 
Jemmy  B — t),  who  seems  to  have  been  his  personal  attendant ;  Delamotte 
did  not  accompany  him  to  either  Charlestown  or  Frederica. 

Sat.  14, — His  four  o'clock  private  prayer  was  by  himself,  but  at  five 
he  prayed  with  '  J.Bt.'  Ten  persons  came  to  his  exposition.  In  a  private 
interview  he  found  Oglethorpe  ( open  and  friendly.'  He  went  to  the  Hirds, 
to  the  Colwells,  and  called  on  Mrs.  Hawkins,  but '  I  was  not  as  before.'  At 


Aug.  1736.]  Third  Frederica  Journal  259 

St.  George.  From  that  time  I  had  less  and  less  prospect  of 
doing  good  at  Frederica  ;  many  there  being  extremely  zealous 
and  indefatigably  diligent  to  prevent  it,  and  few  of  the  rest 
daring  to  show  themselves  of  another  mind  for  fear  of  their 
displeasure.1 

noon  he  again  called  at  Mr.  Hird's,  where  he  found  Oglethorpe.  When  the 
Governor  had  gone  for  dinner,  Wesley  adds  the  significant  words,  *  Read 
Collection  *  to  Miss  Sophy.'  The  six  minutes  of  hourly  prayer  between  one 
and  two  o'clock  he  spent '  with  three.'  As  Mark  Hird  is  named  in  the  next 
line  and  Miss  Fosset  was  ill,  the  three  would  be  Miss  Sophy,  Mark,  and 
either  Phoebe  or  her  mother.  The  Hirds  were  trusted  by  Oglethorpe, 
Wesley,  Sophy  Hopkey,  and  Miss  Fosset.  Before  the  public  evening 
service  he  read  prayers  with  Miss  Sophy.  At  night  he  was  informed  that 
Mr.  Moore s  and  company  were  '  very  angry.'  The  rule  of  hourly  prayer 
was  still  observed. 

Sun.  15. — At  early  prayers  eight  were  present,  at  morning  sermon  twenty- 
six,  and  at  Holy  Communion  ten.  He  to-day  read  his  Journal  to  Miss 
Sophy.  At  the  afternoon  society-meeting  there  were  present  Mark  Hird, 
Mrs.  and  Mr.  Hird,  Mr.  Tackner,  Miss  Sophy,  and  Miss  Fosset,  who  'with 
me  sung ' ;  he  read  Law  ;  they  sang  again,  and  they  all  were  '  seriously 
affected.'  His  note  at  the  end  of  the  page  is,  '  Too  long  with  them.' 

Mon.  16. — With  Miss  Hopkey  he  ended  the  reading  of  his  Journal.  To 
Mrs.  Colwell  he  read  his  Collection.  After  visiting  he  was  seized  with 
sudden  sickness  : 

10  At  home  ;  shook  ;  headache  ;  sung  ;  slept. 

11  Hot  fit ;  sung ;  meditated  ;  slept. 

12  Hot  fit  ;  wrote  diary  ;  began  to  walk  ;  sweat, 
i  Sweat ;  slept ;  cool. 

For  the  rest  of  the  day  he  pursued  his  usual  course. 

Tues.  17. — He  had  spent  an  hour  or  two  with  a  System  of  Theology  and 
British  Theology,  when  his  attack  of  intermittent  fever  returned  :  '  A  little 
cold,  a  little  hot,  sweat,  headache,  sweat.  Mr.  Hawkins  came.'  The 
temptation  to  administer  spiritual  medicine  was  irresistible  ;  he  notes  that 
the  doctor  was  *  serious  and  open.'  At  three  the  patient  was  well  enough  to 
hold  a  society-meeting,  at  the  end  of  which  *  they  went  to  Mrs.  Hawkins.' 
He  then  discussed  her  case  with  Mrs.  Lawley.  Mrs.  Hird  and  Mrs. 
Robinson,  concerned  for  his  health,  came.  The  former  fed  him  with  bread- 
and-butter,  whereupon  he  read  prayers  and  expounded,  and  held  another 
society-meeting. 

1  i.e.  the  displeasure  of  the  'many.'  *  Three    'Moores*   (or    'Moor'    and 
For  an  account  of  the  '  Fragment '  that  '  Moore '  ;  Wesley's  spelling  of  names  is 
follows,  see  note  on  p.  261.  never    quite    reliable)     appear,    in    the 

2  This,  without  doubt,  was  the  Collection  Journal  and  the  Georgia  Correspondence  : 
of  Psalms  and  Hymns  which  he  had  been  ( I )  The  husband  of  Oglethorpe's  servant ; 
slowly  preparing.    It  is  interesting  to  note  (2)   Lieut.    Moore   of    the    Hawk-,    (3) 
that  reading   to    members   of  his   flock  Mr.  Francis  Moore,  Oglethorpe's  trading 
formed  part  of  his  editorial  preparation.  agent.   Here,  probably,  the  first  is  meant. 

VOL.  I.  14 


260  John   Wesley 's  Journal  [Aug.  ms. 


Fragment  of  Lost  Journal 

[.  .  .  I  had  heard  of  him  ;  to  which  he  gave  me  a  satisfactory 
answer.  And  at  parting  we  agreed  that  neither  for  the  future 
should  believe  or  relate  anything  of  the  other,  till  he  had  first 
mentioned  it  to  himself. 

\_Fri.  20. — Mr.  Oglethorpe  returned.  Between  five  and  six  in 
the  evening  I  called  at  Mr.  Hawkins's  for  my  decoction  of  the 
bark.  He  was  not  at  home.  She  desired  me  to  sit  down,  and 
sat  down  by  me.  I  told  her  the  being  ill-treated  by  those  from 
whom  I  expected  it  had  given  me  little  concern.  But  it  had 
grieved  me  to  find  Mr.  Hawkins  joining  with  them,  whom  I  used 
to  look  upon  as  my  friend.  She  asked  how  he  had  treated  me 
ill.  I  answered,  '  By  exposing  my  brother's  paper,  which  as  a 
friend  he  should  have  shown  to  me  only.'  She  said,  *  All  the 
women  in  the  town  are  uneasy  and  affronted  at  the  two  Greek 
words  there.  They  think  them  a  general  reflection  on  them  all. 
Pray  tell  me,  who  do  they  mean  ?  '  The  substance  of  my  answer 
was :  (i)  '  What  my  brother  says  is  not  said  by  me,  neither  am 
I  accountable  for  it ;  (2)  this  was  writ  before  we  had  explained, 
when  all  things  were  dark  :  he  is  now  of  a  quite  different 
opinion  ;  (3)  I  take  him  to  mean  by  those  words  only  two 
persons,  you  and  Mrs.  Welch.' 


Wed.  1 8. — The  day  began  as  usual.  After  morning  prayers  he  returned 
to  the  book  on  British  Theology  he  was  reading  the  day  before.  At  9.30  he 
was  seized  with  strong  shaking,  from  which  he  did  not  recover  until  two 
in  the  afternoon.  In  the  evening  he  'took  a  vomit.'  The  fever  and  the 
violent  measures  adopted  for  its  reduction  must  have  left  him  weak  and  in 
no  condition  to  '  fight  with  beasts  at  Ephesus.' 

Thur.  19. — Reading  George  Herbert  *  to  them '  and  reading  to  Miss 
Sophy  letters  to  and  from  Morgan  were  his  principal  occupations. 

Fri.  20. — The  occupations  of  a  day  memorable  in  the  story  of  Wesley's 
Georgia  life  are  specially  interesting.  He  was,  as  we  have  seen,  in  feeble 
health,  but  rose  at  4.45.  Praying  for  half  an  hour,  he  fell  asleep  ;  but  awoke 
in  time  for  prayers  and  exposition,  at  which  ten  were  present.  He  conversed 
with  Miss  Sophy  ;  read  Mr.  Hawkins's  case.  At  nine  he  was  at  home, 
transcribing  George  Herbert.  This  he  finished,  and  turned  to  The  Negro's 
Advocate^  which  he  read  for  two  hours.  At  home  (he  seems  to  have  dined, 
&c ,  with  the  Hirds  and  slept  elsewhere,  possibly  in  the  room  he  built 
during  his  former  visit)  he  sang  with  Miss  Sophy  and  Mark  Hird,  reading 


Aug.  1736.] 


Third  Frederica  Journal 


261 


[She  started  up,  said  I  was  '  a  villain,  a  scoundrel,  a  pitiful 
rascal,'  with  several  other  titles  of  the  same  kind.  In  the  midst 
of  her  speaking  Mr.  Hawkins  came  in.  She  told  him  I  said 

'  that  dog  my  brother  meant  her  by  those  d d  words ' ;  upon 

which  he  immediately  joined  her,  bestowed  much  of  the  same 
sort  of  eloquence  both  upon  him  and  me,  only  intermixed  with 
more  oaths  and  imprecations.  I  was  much  grieved,  and  indeed 
could  not  refrain  from  tears.  I  know  not  whether  they  inter- 
preted this  as  fear  ;  but  they  rose  in  their  language,  and  told  me 
they  would  uncase  [unfrock]  us  both.  I  replied,  *  The  sooner 

Law  and  again  singing.  It  was  at  five  o'clock  that  the  episode  occurred 
which  Wesley  so  minutely  describes  in  his  Journal.1  The  reference  in  the 
Diary  is  brief: 

5^  Mrs  Hawkins  ;  she  very  abusive. 

6  Mr   Hawkins  came  ;    both  very  abusive.     Adieu !    £  in  talk  with  Oglethorpe  of 

them. 

7  Read  prayers,  expounded  ;  ^  Mr  and  Mrs  Hawkins  came  (21  and  Oglethorpe  there) 

to  Oglethorpe  and  me  ;  they  complained  ;  they  abusive. 

8  In  talk  with  them  and  Oglethorpe  £  ;  got  no  good ;  within  with  Oglethorpe. 

9  Oglethorpe  sent  for  Horton  ;  he  accused  me. 
£  Mrs  Hird's,  within  ;  10. 


1  It  is  at  this  point  that  a  fragment, 
torn  from  one  of  the  Wesley  note-books, 
fills  in  one  of  the  many  blank  spaces  in 
the  printed  Journal.  The  fragment  is 
now  in  the  Colman  Collection.  It  con- 
sists of  fourteen  pages,  one  of  which  is 
the  first  draft  of  a  letter  to  Oglethorpe. 
The  pages  are  numbered  148  to  160.  It 
would  appear,  therefore,  that  once  there 
was,  in  some  unknown  person's  posses- 
sion, a  volume  of  Wesley's  manuscript 
Journal  containing  147  pages  of  narrative, 
plus  the  pages  from  161  to  the  end.  The 
printed  extracts  give  but  an  imperfect 
idea  of  the  whole,  which,  as  we  now 
know  from  the  Diary,  must  have  been 
extremely  interesting  and  valuable.  By 
whom  or  for  what  reason  the  fourteen 
pages  were  rudely  torn  from  the  volume 
there  is  no  evidence  to  show.  We  do 
know,  however,  that  the  whole  Colman 
Collection  is  a  mere  survival.  In  its 
original  condition— which  we  may  be 
perfectly  sure  was  much  more  considerable 
than  now — it  was  in  the  custody  of  the 
minister  occupying  Wesley's  house  in 


City  Road.  John  Pawson,  with  a  fiery 
zeal  against  what  he  regarded  as  danger- 
ous literature,  began  to  burn  Wesley's 
note-books  and  letters.  How  much  he 
destroyed  we  do  not  know.  Henry 
Moore,  hearing  of  these  exploits,  hastened 
home,  and  was  happily  in  time  to  save  the 
books  and  letters  of  the  Colman  Collec- 
tion. It  is  quite  likely  that  these  pages 
were  torn  out  to  be  burned,  and  that 
Moore  rescued  them.  The  volume  from 
which  they  were  torn  may  have  been 
given  away,  either  by  Pawson  or  Moore, 
as  a  memento  of  Wesley,  or  may  have 
been  rescued  by  Mrs.  Pawson  and  appro- 
priated, like  the  first  Oxford  Diary. 
It  was  Henry  Moore  himself  who  gave 
away  the  second  Georgia  Diary  now  in 
the  possession  of  Bishop  Hendrix.  (See 
above,  pp.  205-6.) 

There  is  now  no  reason  why  this 
curious  fragment  should  not  be  published. 

The  first  five  lines,  apparently,  are  the 
incomplete  account  of  Wesley's  interview 
with  Oglethorpe  before  he  went  south  to 
St.  George's  Fort. 


262  John   Wes leys  Journal  [Aug.  me. 

the  better,  and  that  I  would  go  to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  just  now.'  I 
did  so,  and  gave  him  a  plain  relation  of  what  had  occurred. 
After  prayers,  they  came  too  ;  but  were  so  warm  and  used  such 
language  in  the  very  relating  their  case,  that  Mr.  Oglethorpe 
was  obliged  to  check  them  more  than  once.  After  a  long 
hearing,  Mr.  Oglethorpe  said,  (i)  that  my  brother  had  been 
guilty  of  an  indiscretion  in  writing  that  paper ;  (2)  that  this 
was  not  imputable  to  me,  who  was  no  way  accountable  for  what 
he  said  ;  and  that  therefore  (3)  they  had  done  very  ill  in  abusing 
me  in  a  manner  no  way  justifiable  or  excusable.  With  this 
reprimand  he  dismissed  them. 

[Sat.  21. — I  spent  an  hour  with  Mr.  Horton,  and  laboured 
to  convince  him  I  was  not  his  enemy.  But  it  was  labour  in 
vain.  He  had  heard  stories  which  he  would  not  repeat,  and 
was  consequently  immovable  as  a  rock.  Many  things  indeed 
he  mentioned  in  general,  as  that  I  was  always  prying  into 
other  people's  concerns,  in  order  to  set  them  together  by 
the  ears  ;  that  I  had  betrayed  every  one  who  had  trusted  me  ; 
that  I  had  revealed  the  confessions  of  dying  men ;  that  I 
had  belied  every  one  I  had  conversed  with,  himself  in  particular, 
to  whom  I  was  determined  to  do  all  the  mischief  I  could. 


Sat.  21. — A  sure  sign  of  physical  exhaustion  is  the  sleep  that  interrupts 
his  private  devotions.  A  person  called  Verplank  (a  name  familiar  to 
American  citizens  in  later  days)  appears  on  the  scene.  At  eight  Wesley 
had  an  interview  with  Horton.  He  'quite  angry;  got  no  good.'  An 
hour  later  Mrs.  Welch  came  ;  *  she  quite  scurrilous  and  profane.3  F.  Moore, 
on  the  contrary,  was  'open  and  friendly.'  Wesley  sang  a  hymn  from 
his  Diary.  The  little  leather-bound  volume  would  necessarily  be  at 
hand  whenever  he  wrote  up  his  Journal.  Which  of  the  four  hymns 
(App.  XVII.  vol.  vi.)  did  he  sing?  Was  it 

O  Jesu,  source  of  calm  repose? 
or, 

My  soul  before  Thee  prostrate  lies? 

Both  hymns  were  in  his  Collection,  and  either,  sang  on  this  morning 
of  sore  distress,  in  this  *  land  of  wars  and  pain,'  would  comfort  his 
weary  spirit.  Most  readers  will  select  the  second  because  of  its  striking 
fitness  for  this  time  of  deep  humiliation.  At  noon  he  was  still  writing 
his  Journal.  He  dined  at  the  Hirds,  held  two  devotional  meetings,  at 
both  'singing,'  at  one  'reading  The  Humble  Heart]  and  at  the  other 
1  beginning  Cave.'  Seven  times  during  the  day  he  sang.  Verplank 
attended  his  first  society-meeting ;  he  had  a  private  interview  with 
Oglethorpe. 


Aug.  1738.]  Third  Frederica  Journal  263 

But  whenever  I  pressed  him  to  come  to  particulars,  he  absolutely 
refused  it.  I  asked  him  what  motive  he  thought  I  had  to 
proceed  thus.  He  said  he  believed  it  was  a  pure  delight 
in  doing  mischief,  and  added,  '  I  believe,  in  a  morning  when 
you  say  your  prayers,  you  resolve  against  it ;  but  by  the 
time  you  have  been  abroad  two  hours,  all  your  resolutions 
are  vanished,  and  you  can't  be  easy  till  you're  at  it  again.' 

[Here  Mrs.  Welch,  coming  up,  asked  with  a  curse  what 
I  meant  by  saying  she  was  an  adultress,  and  entertained 
me  and  a  pretty  many  other  auditors  with  such  a  mixture 
of  scurrility  and  profaneness  as  I  had  not  heard  before. 
God  deliver  thee  from  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bond 
of  iniquity ! 

[I  now  found  what  remained  was  to  look  upon  my 
(once)  acquaintance,  as  well  as  my  late  friend,  as  dead,  and 
so  neither  to  speak  [to  nor]  of  them.  But  on  Sunday,  the  22nd, 
between  three  and  four  in  the  afternoon,  Mrs.  Hawkins 
sent  me  by  her  maid  a  note,  wherein  she  desired  to  speak 
with  me  upon  an  affair  of  importance.  I  paused  a  little, 
and  asked  the  servant  whether  she  knew  what  her  mistress 
wanted.  She  said,  *  No ' ;  upon  which  I  replied,  '  If  a 
parishioner  desires  my  company,  I  must  go ;  but,  be  sure, 
stay  you  within.' 

[When  I  came  in,  she  said,  *  Sir,  sit  down.'  I  sat  down 
on  the  bedside.  She  stood  close  to  me,  with  her  hands 
behind  her,  and  said,  '  Sir,  you  have  wronged  me,  and  I 
will  shoot  you  through  the  head  this  moment  with  a  brace 
of  balls.'  I  caught  hold  of  the  hand  with  which  she  presented 
the  pistol,  and  at  the  same  time  of  her  other  hand,  in  which 
she  had  a  pair  of  scissors.  On  which  she  threw  herself  upon 
me,  and  forced  me  down  upon  the  bed,  crying  out  all  the 
while,  '  Villain,  dog,  let  go  my  hands,'  and  swearing  bitterly, 
with  many  imprecations  both  on  herself  and  me,  that  she 
would  either  have  my  hair  or  my  heart's  blood.  I  was  very 
unwilling  either  to  cry  out,  which  must  publish  to  all  the 
world  what,  for  her  sake,  I  desired  should  be  more  private ; 
or  to  attempt  rising  by  force,  which  could  not  have  been  done 
without  hurting  her.  Just  then  the  maid  came  in,  whom 
she  ordered  to  reach  a  knife,  swearing  she  would  be  the  death 


264  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Aug.  use. 

of  her  if  she  did  not.  The  woman  stood  trembling,  not 
knowing  what  to  do.  Her  two  boys  [servants]  came  in  next, 
whom  she  bid  to  hold  my  hands,  and  I  desired  to  take  hold 
of  their  mistress.  But  they  did  not  dare  to  do  either.  Then 
came  in  Mr.  Davison  the  constable,  and  Mr.  Reed,  who,  on  my 
desire,  were  going  to  take  her  by  the  arms,  when  Mr.  Hawkins 
came  in,  asked  what  that  scoundrel  did  in  his  house,  and 
commanded  them  at  their  peril  not  to  touch  his  wife.  Upon 
this  encouragement  she  struggled  again  to  get  her  hands 
loose  ;  but  not  being  able,  seized  on  my  cassock  with  her 
teeth  and  tore  both  the  sleeves  of  it  to  pieces,  and  then 
fixed  upon  my  arm,  four  men  (for  Mr.  Robinson  and  Ward 
were  now  come)  standing  by,  and  not  daring  to  hinder  her. 
I  then  spoke  to  Mr.  Hawkins,  who,  seeing  the  company 
increase,  took  her  round  the  waist  and  lifted  her  up.  I  went 
to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  and  gave  him  a  simple  narration  of  what 
had  happened.  He  sent  for  them  both  and  for  Mr.  Horton. 
She  defended  all,  saying  he  had  not  done  her  justice  for  the 
wrong  she  had  received,  and  therefore  she  had  done  herself 
justice.  After  a  long  hearing,  her  husband  and  she,  promising 
better  behaviour  for  the  future,  were  dismissed. 

[I  thought  here  had  been  a  full  end  of  all  ;  but  every 
hour  brought  me  fresh  reason  to  believe  the  contrary.  Mr.  Haw- 
kins related  what  had  passed  wherever  he  came,  in  such 

Sun.  22. — Quite  early  he  had  a  serious  conversation  with  Mr.  Reed, 
the  friend  upon  whom  he  relied  to  take  pastoral  charge  of  the  faithful 
few  when  he  should  leave  Frederica.  At  first  Miss  Sophy  and  her 
friend  were  present.  When  they  left,  Wesley  and  Reed  talked  on  for 
half  an  hour.  As  a  preparation  for  preaching  Wesley  read  The  Contrite 
Heart,  meditating,  singing,  and  dressing.  At  the  service  thirty-two 
were  present.  After  Holy  Communion  he  *  sang  and  prayed  with  them.' 
After  dinner  he  read  Cave,  walked  with  the  two  ladies,  and  was  singing 
from  his  Diary  when  Mrs.  Hawkins  sent  for  him.  On  the  tragic  scene 
so  fully  described  in  the  Journal,  he  writes  in  the  Diary  the  ejaculation — 
*  Alleluia  to  God  !  !  ! '  His  subsequent  interview  with  Oglethorpe  is  briefly 
noted,  also  with  Horton  and  Mrs.  Lawley.  At  six  in  the  evening  fifty  persons 
heard  him  expound.  The  Second  Lesson  that  evening  was  2  Pet.  ii. 
Miss  Sophy  and  her  friends  at  the  after-meeting  heard  a  reading  from 
Law,  and  joined  in  singing  two  psalms  or  hymns.  Davison,  one  of  the 
constables,  and  his  company  supped  with  him  at  Hird's.  He  slept  at 
his  own  house  ;  but  Mark  Hird  and  Reed,  both  of  them  stalwart  and  trusty 
friends,  were  his  body-guard.  It  was  not  safe  to  leave  him  alone. 


Aug.  me.]  Third  Frederica  Journal  265 

a  manner  as  he  judged  proper.  Mrs.  Hawkins  did  the  same. 
A  report  likewise  went  through  the  town  that  I  designed  to 
steal  away  in  the  night.  Many  advised  me  very  seriously  not 
to  go  ;  others  came  to  take  their  leave.  Finding  how  things 
were  managed,  early  in  the  morning  I  sent  Mr.  Oglethorpe 
the  following  letter : 

Aug.  23. 
[Sir, 

[I  choose  to  write  rather  than  speak,  that  I  may  not  say  too 
much.  I  find  it  is  utterly  impossible  anything  should  be  kept 
secret  unless  both  parties  are  resolved  upon  it.  What  fell  out 
yesterday  is  already  known  to  every  family  in  Frederica ;  but  to 
many  it  has  been  represented  in  such  a  light  that  'tis  easy  to  know 
whence  the  representation  comes.  Now,  Sir,  what  can  I  do  more  ? 
Though  I  have  given  my  reputation  to  God,  I  must  not  absolutely 
neglect  it.  The  treatment  I  have  met  with  was  not  barely  an 
assault :  you  know  one  part  of  it  was  felony.  I  can't  see  what  I 
can  do  but  desire  an  open  hearing  in  the  face  of  all  my  country- 
men of  this  place.  If  you  (to  whom  I  can  gladly  entrust  my  life 
and  my  all  in  this  land)  are  excepted  against  as  partial,  let  a  jury 
be  impanelled,  and  upon  a  full  inquiry  determine  what  such  .breaches 
of  the  law  deserve. 

[I  am,  Sir, 

[Your  obliged  and  obedient  Servant. 

Mon.  23. — It  was  at  six  in  the  morning  he  wrote  the  letter  to  Ogle- 
thorpe which  he  inserted  in  the  Journal.  Horton,  Reed,  Hird,  and 
others  saw  him  repeatedly.  Oglethorpe  sent  for  him  twice.  On  the 
second  occasion  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins  were  there,  and  the  Governor 
attempted  a  reconciliation,  on  which  Wesley  remarks,  *  Alas  ! '  * 


1  It  was  characteristic  of  Wesley  that,  sake,  if  only  he  might,  no  matter  at  what 

having    realized   his  duty  as    a    pastor  risk  to  himself,  save  some.      We  think  of 

responsible  to  God  for  the  cure  of  souls,  Wesley  as  a  soul-saving  evangelist  from 

he  should  cleave  to  it  at  all  costs,  until,  the  hour  of  his  'evangelical  conversion'; 

by  some  unmistakable  sign,  he  was  set  but  the  spirit  of  the  evangelist,  mounting 

free.     He  believed  that  God  had  called  into  what  the  world  regarded  as  a  mania, 

him  to  fulfil  this  ministry  of  restoration  was   in    him    long    before    he    reached 

for  a  woman  who,  on  her  own  showing,  Aldersgate   Street.     The  Diaries  prove, 

was   a   sinner  of   deepest   guilt,   whose  beyond  possibility  of  question,  that,  from 

husband  was  the  only  doctor  in  the  town  the  '  boy  *  who  served  in  his  house  to  the 

and  Wesley's  personal  friend.     He  might  Governor  whom  he  himself  served,  he 

suffer,  lose  his  best   friends,   anger   his  faithfully    strove    to    save    every    man, 

brother,  be  misunderstood  and  reviled  by  woman,  and  child  who  crossed  his  path, 

those  whose  good  opinion  he  valued  ;  yet  His  friends  may  have  thought  his  methods 

he  was  willing  to  be  a  fool  for  Christ's  injudicious.    Six  months  earlier  Spangen- 


266  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Aug.  me. 

[Mr.  Oglethorpe  sent  for  Mr.  Horton,  who  came  from  him 
to  me,  spoke  largely  of  the  necessity  of  union  among  our- 
selves, how  we  were  surrounded  with  enemies,  of  the  many 
divisions  already  in  the  town,  and  the  probability  that  this 
would  increase  them.  He  then  informed  me  that  he  was 
ordered,  nevertheless,  if  I  insisted  on  it,  to  open  a  court ;  but 
he  thought  (to  speak  freely)  it  would  be  much  better  to 
terminate  things  in  a  more  friendly  manner.  I  told  him  I 
had  no  desire  of  doing  any  hurt  either  to  Mr.  or  Mrs. 
Hawkins  ;  but  that  I  must  secure  myself  against  future 
insults,  and  put  a  stop  to  their  misrepresentations  of  what 
was  past.  He  said  he  would  talk  with  them  on  those  heads, 
and  return  to  me  with  their  answer.  This  he  soon  did, 
assuring  me,  in  their  name,  that  I  should  have  no  further 
reason  of  complaint. 

[At  one  Mr.  Oglethorpe  sent  for  me  and  talked  fully 
upon  the  same  subject ;  and  at  eight  again,  at  which  time 
I  found  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins  sitting  with  him.  For  above 
an  hour  was  he  labouring  to  reconcile  us.  No,  I  had  obliged 
them  beyond  all  reconciliation.  The  wrongs  I  had  done 
might  be  forgiven  (for  indeed  they  were  none  at  all) ;  but 
my  friendship  never  can  till  the  day  of  their  death.  How- 
ever, something  like  an  agreement  was  patched  up,  one 
article  of  which  was  that  we  should  speak  to  each  other  no 
more.  Blessed  be  God  who  hath  at  length  given  me  a  full 
discharge,  in  the  sight  of  men  and  angels,  from  all  intercourse 
with  one  '  whose  heart  is  snares  and  knots  and  her  hands 
as  bands.' 


Tues.  24. — St.  Bartholomew's  Day  was  observed  in  due  form.  At 
the  five-o'clock  exposition  ten  were  present,  at  the  sermon  twenty-four, 
at  Holy  Communion  eight.  The  reading  of  sermons  and  singing  of 
hymns,  the  writing  the  Journal  and  reading  of  Prior,  one  of  his  favourite 
poets,  filled  the  day.  Rain  prevented  work  in  the  garden. 

berg,  discussing  this  very  case,  warned  discharged  him  from  all  further  obligation, 

him  to  desist.     We,  at  this  distance  of  he  gratefully  accepted  his  release.      His 

time,  may  share  Spangenberg's  opinion ;  words  are  worth  pondering  :  '  Blessed  be 

yet  nothing  can  take  from  the  splendour  God  who  hath  at  length  given  me  a  full 

of  his  loyalty  to  the  duty  of  the  hour,  discharge,  in  the  sight  of  men  and  angels, 

as  he  conscientiously  conceived  it.     But  from   all   intercourse  with   one  "  whose 

when  the  founder  and  Governor  of  the  heart  is  snares  and  knots  and  her  hands 

colony,  knowing  all  the  facts,  deliberately  as  bands."  ' 


Auf.  1736.]  Third  Frederica  Journal  267 

\Fri.  27. — Fr.  Don  Antonio  de  Arredondo  came  to  St.  Simon's 
from  the  Havanna,  to  treat  with  Mr.  Oglethorpe.  He  said  he 
had  full  powers  from  the  King  his  master  to  conclude  as  he 
judged  convenient.  Captain  Gascoigne  set  up  tents  for  him 
and  his  attendants  on  Jekyl  Island,  over  against  St.  Simon's. 
The  ship  lay  in  the  river  between.  Mr.  Oglethorpe  came  down 
to  him  from  Frederica  every  day,  for  six  or  seven  days  suc- 
cessively. After  which  he  returned  to  the  Havanna^\ 

Sat.  28. — I  set  apart  (out  of  the  few  we  had)  such  books  [as 
were  of  most  general  use],  towards  a  library  at  Frederica.  [At 
eleven,  while  I  was  with  Mrs.  Patterson,  who  was  dangerously  ill, 
Mrs.  Hawkins  came  in  and  sat  down.  But  I  exchanged  not  a 
word  with  her,  good  or  bad.  In  the  afternoon  I  walked  with 
Mark  Hird  to  the  Fort,  where  the  Independent  Company  is 
placed,  on  the  other  side  of  the  island.]  About  five  we  set  out 
homeward;  but  [the  night  overtaking  us,  and]  my  guide  not 

Wed.  25.— Mark  Hird  still  kept  guard  at  night.  With  Miss  Sophy 
Wesley  read  Heylin's  Tracts.  Three  hours  he  gave  to  Oglethorpe,  who  had 
pressing  anxieties.  Spaniards  threatened  the  frontiers  of  the  colony ; 
Indian  allies  were  not  always  proof  against  the  wiles  of  the  enemy,  and 
the  colony  was  a  house  divided  against  itself.  In  Wesley  the  Governor 
found  a  wise  and  confidential  adviser.  He  was  writing  '  an  account '  when 
Miss  Sophy  came  ;  she  heard  him  read  Heylin's  Tracts^  as  also  did  the 
sick  whom  he  visited  later  in  the  day.  At  the  evening  exposition  he  was 
not  a  little  surprised  to  see  Mr.  Horton  present,  and  a  congregation  of 
thirty. 

Thur.  26. — Some  hours  he  devoted  to  hymns  and  letters.  Heylin 
and  Hickes  (Reformed  Devotions)  were  his  companions  in  visitation  and 
in  his  pastoral  treatment  of  Miss  Sophy  and  her  friend.  In  the  after- 
noon he  walked  with  them  to  Mr.  Reed's  lot.  Again  thirty  came  to 
evening  prayers.  After  supper  he  read  Cave. 

Fri.  27. — He  awoke  sick,  but  after  sleep  was  able  to  read  prayers, 
expound,  and  receive  friends.  Reed  took  him  to  his  lot,  where  he 
helped  to  make  an  arbour,  work  in  which  he  was  skilled.  Law,  Hickes, 
and  Cave  were  his  authors  for  the  day.  In  his  pastoral  visitation  he 
utilized  letters  from  English  friends.  With  Mrs.  Patterson  (a  Scotch 
Presbyterian),  who  was  very  sick,  he  read  Hickes,  selecting,  no  doubt, 
the  prayers  and  psalms  'for  the  Afflicted.'  At  nine  Oglethorpe  sent  for 
him  to  hear  the  negotiations  with  the  Spanish  envoy.  Before  retiring 
for  the  night  he  read  Hickes,  but  'could  not  sleep  for  Pauvre,'  possibly 
the  Indian  who  was  in  the  town. 

Sat.  28.— He  again  went  to  Reed's  lot,  and  again  Oglethorpe  sent 
for  him.  Letters  had  come,  which  he  read ;  they  consulted  together  ; 
at  home  his  own  letters  awaited  him.  For  an  hour  he  transcribed 


268  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Aug.  me. 

being  perfect  in  the  way,  we  were  soon  lost  in  the  woods.  [It 
was  a  starlight  night,  but  neither  of  us  knew  which  way  the 
town  lay.  We  walked,  however,  straight  forward,  and  crept 
where  we  could  not  walk,]  till  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock  ; 
when,  being  heartily  tired  and  thoroughly  wet  with  dew,  we  lay 
down  and  slept  sound  till  morning. 

About  daybreak,  on  Sunday,  the  29th,  [we  fixed  on  one  of 
the  brightest  stars,  and  resolved  to  steer  straight  towards  it,  as 
long  as  it  appeared.  About  six  we  lost  sight  of  our  star,  but] 
found  ourselves  soon  after  sunrise  in  the  Great  Savannah, 
near  Frederica.  By  this  good  providence  I  was  delivered  from 
another  fear,  that  of  lying  in  the  woods ;  which  I  find  by 
experience  is,  in  fair  weather,  and  to  a  person  in  tolerable 
health,  a  mere  'lion  in  the  way.' 

[I  was  now  in  hourly  expectation  of  setting  out  for  Savannah. 
Mr.  Reed  promised  to  read  evening  prayers  in  my  absence,  and 
five  or  six  persons  agreed  to  spend  an  hour  together  every  day 
in  singing,  reading,  and  exhorting  one  another.] 

hymns ;  for  another  hour  sorted  books  for  a  library.  The  difficulties 
of  travel  are  illustrated  by  the  following  entries  : 

12  Hickes ;  conversed  ;  dined  ;  set  out  with  Mark,  conversed. 

1  Conversed. 

2  Walked  together  ;  bemired. 

3  Lost ;  return  ; 

4  At  the  Fort ;  agreed  to  walk  with  Delegal  junior. 

5  Set  out ;  conversed  ;  bemired. 

6  Lost ;  prayed ;  found  way. 

7  Lost ;  prayed  ;  found  way  ;  lost  again. 

8  Walked  ;  tired. 

9  Lay  down  by  wood  ;  slept  sound. 

Sun.  29.— Early  they  set  out,  conversing  and  singing.  By  six  they 
were  at  home.  In  half  an  hour  Wesley  was  dressed,  reading  prayers, 
and  expounding  to  a  congregation  of  ten.  He  was  reading  Hickes  when 
Oglethorpe  sent  for  him.  After  a  long  private  consultation  he  wrote 
for  him.  Returning  home,  he  had  to  converse  with  Mr.  Sweeney,  from 
whom  he  '  got  no  good.'  At  last  he  found  opportunity  to  read  his  Greek 
Testament  for  a  few  minutes,  and  to  dress  for  preaching  and  Holy 
Communion.  The  books  he  read  with  one  and  another  were  Heylin, 
Hickes,  Law,  and  Cave. 

Mon.  30. — Much  business  had  to  be  transacted  at  home  and  with 
Oglethorpe.  Between  two  readings  in  Hickes  he  read  'verses  on  Death,3 
and  thought  out,  or  wrote,  a  meditation  thereon.  He  had  a  conversation 
with  Jemmy,  doubtless  regarding  their  approaching  return  to  Savannah. 
Probably  it  was  Jemmy,  of  whom  we  have  heard  nothing  for  several  days, 


sept.  1736.]  Third  Frederica  Journal  269 

SEPT.  2,   Thur. — I   set   out   in  a  sloop,  and   about  ten  on 
Sunday   morning   came   to   Skidoway ;    whence,   after   reading 

who  brought  the  letters  Wesley  this  morning  read  to  Oglethorpe.  He  was 
walking  in  the  garden  at  home  when  Mark  and  Miss  Sophy  came  ;  with 
them  he  had  an  hour's  conversation  and  prayer.  He  walked  with  Miss 
Sophy  and  her  friends  to  Mrs.  Colwell's  lot,  and  had  'a  good  time.'  They 
met  a  rain-storm  and  returned  home  very  wet.  At  supper-time  Ausberg  came. 
Tues.  31. — Every  morning  after  prayers  he  at  this  time  read  Heylin  to 
Miss  Sophy. 

9  Transcribed  verses. 

10  Altered  verses. 

11  Altered  verses, 

12  Hickes'  Devotions. 

1  Dined  together. 

2  Read  Poem  on  Death  ;  at  home. 

3  Mr  Reed  within  ;  Miss  Sophy  and  company  ;  sung  ;   Law. 

4  Sung;  Hickes. 

This  last  was  one  of  the  devotional,  society,  or  *  company '  meetings 
which  he  seems  to  have  held  almost  every  day,  the  chief  features  of  which 
were  singing  and  the  reading  of  a  book  of  devout  meditation. 

At  six  o'clock  he  'marked  Psalms  and  Hymns.'  At  evening  prayers  he 
read  from  Quesnel,  closing  with  psalm  or  hymn.  He  then  read  Hickes,1 
supped,  and  read  Cave. 

SEPT.  i,  Wed. — This  was  his  last  day,  for  the  present,  in  Frederica. 
He  read  Hickes  for  Matins,  Vespers,  and  Compline  ;  but  at  the  time  of 
Lauds  he  was  holding  a  private  conference  with  Oglethorpe.  He  began  to 
read  The  Contrite  Heart^  and  continued  the  reading  of  Law  and  Quesnel. 
He  saw  Captain  Dempsey  and  several  friends. 

Thur.  2. — He  conducted  service  as  usual,  conversed  with  Miss  Sophy, 

1  Hickes  provides  daily  services, —  It  is  clear  that  the  Collection  of  Psalms 
Matins,  for  the  early  morning  ;  Lauds,  and  Hymns  was  in  course  of  preparation, 
for  noon ;  Vespers,  for  the  evening ;  For  tentative  use  in  the  small  society- 
and  Compline,  for  the  close  of  the  day.  meetings  at  Frederica,  the  Collection, 
Wesley  did  not  always  use  Hickes  ;  nor,  though  unfinished,  was  enough.  Hymn 
when  using  his  Devotions  for  a  period,  by  hymn  its  quality  was  tested  by  use. 
did  he  read  the  four  full  services  for  each  An  analysis  of  the  Diary  would  show 
day.  He  followed  the  advice  given  *  To  that  the  discovery,  translation,  tran- 
the  Reader,'  omitting  this  or  that  as  scription,  and  alteration  of  a  hymn  were 
time  and  opportunity  offered.  On  Tues-  accompanied  by  frequent  singing.  In 
day  31,  for  instance,  he  was  unable  to  private  devotions,  in  public  worship,  in 
use  Hickes's  Office  for  Matins,  but  at  his  society-meetings,  at  the  bedside  of 
twelve  he  read  the  Lauds,  at  four  the  the  sick,  and  in  ordinary  intercourse  with 
Vespers,  and  at  eight  Compline.  Each  friends,  he  sang  the  psalms  and  hymns 
office  had  its  choice  of  psalms,  its  lessons,  which  formed  the  first  Hymn-book,  and 
its  prayers  and  responses,  its  hymn.  It  also  many  of  those  which  were  after- 
helps  the  student  of  Wesley  to  follow  wards  included  in  the  editions  of  1739, 
him  through  these  devotions,  especially  1740,  and  1741.  How  many  of  these 
if  the  circumstances  through  which  he  were  composed  by  himself  can  only  now 
was  passing  are  remembered.  be  conjectured. 


270  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Sept.  1735. 

prayers  and  preaching  to  about  half  a  dozen  people,  I  set 
out  for  Thunderbolt,  and  thence  for  Savannah  in  the  after- 
noon. 

FOURTH  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 

[SEPT.  6,  Mon. — Many  complaints  being  made  of  what  had  been 
done  in  my  absence  by  Mr.  Dison,  chaplain  of  the  Independent 
Company,  who  had  now  been  at  Savannah  several  weeks,  I 

read  Hickes's  Matins,  and  by  eight  o'clock  was  with  Oglethorpe  at  the  Bluff, 
noting  gratefully  that  he  was  '  at  one  with  him.'  Waiting  for  the  boat  that 
was  to  take  him  on  board  the  sloop,  he  began  Worthington  On  Resignation, 
read  Lauds,  also  Worthington  to  Miss  Sophy,  who  seems  to  have  accom- 
panied him  to  the  Bluff.  Miss  Fosset  came  also  to  bid  him  farewell.  They 
dined.  At  twelve  he  set  out  in  the  sloop,  reading  Worthington,  conversing 
with  Mr.  Stuart.  After  another  reading  in  Worthington,  he  began  Spanish 
grammar,  and  worked  at  it  for  two  hours. 

Fri.  3. — To-day,  having  finished  Worthington,  he  read  Watts. 

Sat.  4. — He  read  Dr.  Knight's  sermons,  sang  frequently,  and  began  Potter 
On  Church  Government.  By  seven  o'clock,  the  wind  being  contrary,  he  was 
*  afraid  ;  so  very  sick  ! '  It  was  midnight  before  he  felt  *  a  little  better.' 

Sun.  5. — This  morning  he  was  well  enough  to  pursue  his  study  of  Bishop 
Potter  (the  bishop  who  had  ordained  him,  and  who  now,  as  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  was  disposed  to  look  with  favour  on  Moravian  orders) ;  at  9.30 
the  sloop  reached  Skidoway,  where  a  boat  came  to  take  him  to  Mrs.  Mouse's 
house.  There  he  read  prayers  and  expounded  to  a  congregation  of  nine. 
His  hostess  accompanied  him  in  the  boat  to  the  sloop.  Bishop  Potter's 
book  was  his  companion  as  far  as  Thunderbolt,  where  he  dined  and  con- 
versed with  Mrs.  Lacy.  At  two  he  set  out  for  Savannah,  reading  Potter 
as  he  walked.  At  four,  arrayed  in  canonicals,  he  read  prayers  and  expounded 
to  forty  of  his  old  parishioners.  At  5.15  Mrs.  Causton  came,  eager,  no 
doubt,  for  news  of  her  niece.  The  rest  of  the  evening  was  spent  exactly  as 
though  he  had  not  just  returned  from  a  long  and  perilous  journey — praying 
with  Delamotte,  walking  in  the  garden  with  him  and  Ingham,  and  visiting 
his  friends  the  Germans.1 

Mon.  6. — Under  this  date  the  Diary  makes  no  allusion  to  Mr.  Dison 
and  his  irregularities.  He  probably  heard  what  had  occurred  from  Dela- 
motte, John  Brownfield,  whom  he  visited,  and  Miss  Bovey,  with  whom  he 

1  In  a  framework  of  apparently  trifling  Through  these  hour-by-hour  Diary  pages 

details,  how  vivid^the  picture  of  Wesley,  we  see  John  Wesley — student,  missionary, 

at  thirty-three,  in  training  for  habitual  evangelist,  parish  priest— being  girded  for 

concentration  of  thought  and  purpose,  a  work  of  which  he  never  dreams,  and 

for  a  methodical  and  scrupulous  economy  tuning  the   Church's   harpsichord  for  a 

of    time,    and    for    a    singular    gift    of  service  of  song  that  was  to  awaken  and 

adaptation   to    the    ever-varying   claims  charm  successive  generations, 
of  personal  friendship  and  church  duty  ! 


sept  1736.1  Fourth  Savannah  Journal  271 

went  to  his  lodgings,  and  taxed  him,  (i)  with  baptizing  several 
strong,  healthy  children  in  private  houses,  which  was  what  I 
had  entirely  broke  through  ;  (2)  with  marrying  several  couples 
without  first  publishing  the  banns — a  custom  which  he  knew 
was  contrary  to  the  rubric  and  canon  both ;  and  (3)  with 
endeavouring  to  make  a  division  between  my  parishioners  and 
me,  by  speaking  against  me  before  them  both  as  to  my  life 
and  preaching.  The  two  last  charges  he  denied  ;  but  owned 
the  first,  promised  never  to  do  it  again,  and  did  the  very  same 
thing  the  next  day.  O  Discipline  !  where  art  thou  to  be  found  ? 
Not  in  England,  nor  (as  yet)  in  America. 

\_Wed.  8. — Mr.  Von   Reck  and  his  brother  came  to  town  in 
order  to  their  passage  to  Europe.      Neither  of  them  was  well 


to-day  resumed  the  interrupted  lessons  in  French.     A  much  more  important 
subject  presented  itself  in  the  letters  from  home  which  awaited  his  arrival : 

7  Read  letters  and  Delamotte  prest  to  go  home. 

8  Letters,  conversed  ;  at  Miss  Bovey's,  conversation ;  she  right. 
10  At  home  prayed  with  Delamotte  on  business. 

Again  at  noon,  before  their  frugal '  dinner  on  bread-and-butter,'  he  prayed 
with  Delamotte,  as  also  at  three  and  six.  His  love  for  Delamotte,  who, 
although  not  always  in  agreement,  was  ever  a  faithful  friend  and  helper,  is 
very  apparent  in  these  frequent  prayers.  To  all  intents  and  purposes  he 
was  Delamotte's  tutor,  and  as  such  held  himself  responsible  to  the  young 
man's  father.  After  his  English  service  he  sang  with  the  Germans  and 
read  to  them  his  Journal.  This  was  his  deliberately  chosen  way  of  taking 
his  friends  into  his  confidence  with  regard  to  the  momentous  events  which 
had  happened  in  Frederica. 

Tues.  7. — His  hour  of  rising  varied ;  therefore  the  hour  for  morning 
prayers.  His  diet  also  had  changed  from  plain  bread  to  bread-and-butter. 
He  saw  Mr.  Causton,  Mrs.  Causton,  Mr.  Dison  ;  meditated  on  his  letters ; 
dined  at  noon  ;  visited  Thomas  Mellichamp  (who  may  at  this  time  have 
been  in  prison),  Betty  Wright,  Mrs.  Causton  and  company,  and  Mr.  Causton. 
Returning  home  he  prayed,  gave  Miss  Bovey  her  lesson  in  French,  and 
read  to  her  his  Collection.  After  his  hour  with  the  Germans  he  wrote  to 
Mr.  Hird  and  Miss  Sophy.  Six  times  on  this  page  the  name  of  Causton 
occurs.  One  of  the  grievances  against  Wesley,  as  appears  from  the  True 
Account,  was  his  close  intimacy  with  Causton.  His  enemies  assumed  that 
he,  Causton,  and  Oglethorpe  were  in  alliance  against  the  interests  of  the 
colonists ;  in  other  words,  against  their  policy  in  relation  to  negro  slavery 
and  the  liquor  trade.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  facts  as  to  Causton 
were  at  this  time  unknown.  Neither  Wesley  nor  Oglethorpe  understood  the 
man  until  later. 

Wed.  8.— The  three  friends  observed  the  Wednesday  fast  of  the  Holy 
Club,  and  breakfasted  on  bread.  Wesley  wrote  to  Oglethorpe  on  business, 


272  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [Sept.  me. 

recovered  from  the  fever.  The  next  morning  I  desired  them  to 
make  use  of  our  house  while  they  stayed. 

[Fri.  10. — We  began  our  morning  prayers  at  a  quarter  past 
five,  an  hour  we  hope  to  adhere  to  all  the  winter.  Between 
fifteen  and  twenty  persons  constantly  attend  them,  besides  the 
children  and  the  rest  of  our  own  family. 

[I  had  often  observed  that  I  scarce  ever  visited  any  persons, 
in  health  or  sickness,  but  they  attended  public  prayer  for  some 
time  after.  This  increased  my  desire  of  seeing  not  only  those 

to  Charles,  to  Mrs.  Hutton  (praying  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte),  to  Mr. 
Newman,  and  began  a  letter  to  *  Brother  Wright'  (Hetty  Wesley's  husband). 
He  prayed  again  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte,  also  at  three,  before  the 
bread-and-butter  dinner.  His  anxiety  for  Ingham  and  Delamotte,  whose 
future  was  uncertain,  is  very  pathetic.  To  Miss  Bovey  he  was  acting  as 
tutor  in  French  and  pastor.  In  his  close  religious  intimacies  he  was  in  the 
habit  of  reading  extracts  from  his  Journal,  letters  (which  were  often  in  the 
nature  of  religious  essays  or  small  treatises),  and  such  devotional  literature 
of  his  own  collection  or  composition  as  chanced  at  the  time  to  be  on  hand. 
An  entry,  several  times  repeated,  in  connexion  with  Miss  Bovey,  suggests 
that  he  read  to  her  not  only  his  Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns,  still 
incomplete,  but  also  his  Prayers,  a  copy  of  which,  in  his  own  handwriting, 
has  been  preserved  in  the  Colman  Collection.  Reed  and  Mark  Hird  in 
Frederica,  and  Miss  Bovey  in  Savannah,  he  was — consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously— training  as  lay  pastors  in  the  innermost  circle  of  the  Christian 
Church.  They  were  to  the  church  in  Georgia  what  helpers,  class-leaders, 
and  leaders  of  bands  were  to  the  Methodism  of  the  next  decade.  One  of 
the  complaints  urged  against  Wesley  in  the  True  Account  was  that  he 
'  appointed  deaconesses.' 

Thur.  9. — He  scrupulously  notes  variations  in  diet,  and  especially  unusual 
luxuries.  This  morning,  for  instance,  the  friends  breakfast  on  bread-and- 
butter  again,  and,  later  in  the  morning,  Wesley  drinks  '  chocolate  with  Von 
Reck.'  To  prepare  for  guests  whom  he  had  invited  to  stay  at  the  parsonage, 
he  made  ready  the  parlour  and  cleaned  it.  To-day  he  wrote  at  length  to 
his  brother  Samuel  on  business,  probably  in  relation  to  his  mother  and 
sisters,  for  whom,  jointly  with  Samuel,  he  was  responsible.  To  Miss  Bovey 
he  read  Prayers  and  the  Poem  on  Death,  which  he  had  written  or  tran- 
scribed or  translated  in  Frederica,  and  to  which  he  appears  to  have  attached 
some  importance. 

Fri.  10.— Letters  were  written  to  Sister  Patty,  Whitefield,1  and  Clayton. 
The  visitation  of  the  sick  is  absorbing  more  and  more  of  his  time.  Letters, 


1  The   letter    to    Whitefield,   coupled  being  felt  in  Savannah.     A  phrase  in  the 

with  the  pressure  of  sick-visitation  and  hitherto  unpublished  Journal  for  this  day 

the  increasing    mortality,    suggests   that  (Sept.  10)  would  lead  to  the  conclusion 

already  the  need  for  some  special  pro-  that  Wesley  was  turning  the  Savannah 

vision   to  shelter    orphan   children  was  parsonage  into  an  orphanage.     There  can 


sept.  1736.]  Fourth  Savannah  Journal  273 

who  were  sick,  but  all  my  parishioners  as  soon  as  possible  at 
their  own  houses.  Accordingly  I  had  long  since  begun  to  visit 
them  in  order  from  house  to  house.  But  I  could  not  go  on  two 
days,  the  sick  increasing  so  fast  as  to  require  all  the  time  I 
have  to  spare  (which  is  from  one  in  the  afternoon  till  five).  Nor 
is  even  that  enough  to  see  them  all  (as  I  would  do)  daily.  So 
that  even  in  the  town  (not  to  mention  Frederica  and  all  the 
smaller  settlements)  there  are  above  five  hundred  sheep  that  are 
(almost)  without  a  shepherd.  He  that  is  unjust  must  be  unjust 
still.  Here  is  none  to  search  out  and  lay  hold  on  the  Mollia 
tempora  fandi,  and  to  persuade  him  to  save  his  soul  alive.  He 
that  is  a  babe  in  Christ  may  be  so  still ;  here  is  none  to  attend 
the  workings  of  grace  upon  his  spirit,  to  feed  him  by  degrees  with 
food  convenient  for  him,  and  gently  lead  him  until  he  can  follow 
the  Lamb  wherever  He  goeth.  Does  any  err  from  the  right 
way?  Here  is  none  to  recall  him.  He  may  go  on  to  seek 
death  in  the  error  of  his  life.  Is  any  wavering?  Here  is  none 
to  confirm  him.  Is  any  falling  ?  There  is  none  to  lift  him  up. 
What  a  single  man  can  do  is  not  seen  or  felt.  Where  are  ye 
who  are  very  zealous  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts  ?  Who  will  rise  up 
with  me  against  the  wicked  ?  Who  will  take  God's  part  against 
the  evil-doers  ?  Whose  spirit  is  moved  within  him  to  prepare 
himself  for  publishing  glad  tidings  to  those  on  whom  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  never  yet  arose,  by  labouring  first  for  those  his 
countrymen  who  are  else  without  hope  as  well  as  without  God 
in  the  world  ?  Do  you  ask  what  you  shall  have  ?  Why,  all 
you  desire.  Food  to  eat,  raiment  to  put  on,  a  place  where  to 
lay  your  head  (such  as  your  Lord  had  not),  and  a  crown  of  life 
that  fadeth  not  away  !  Do  you  seek  means  of  building  up 
yourselves  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God  ?  I  call  the  God 


daily  services,  devotional  meetings,  and  intercourse  with  the  Germans  seem 
at  this  time  to  prevail  over  everything.  It  is  only  with  difficulty  that  he  can 
read  at  all.  Whole  days  pass  without  reference  to  books  of  any  description. 
To-day  he  has  conversation  with  Toltschig. 

be  little  doubt  that  many  of  the  letters  the    remarkable    passage    which    closes 

written  by  Wesley  at    this    time  were  the  Journal-fragment  now  rescued  from 

on  behalf  of  the    orphan  children  and  oblivion.     Cf.  Tyerman's  Life  of  White- 

destitute    colonists    of     Georgia.      The  Jield,  vol.  i.  p.  60. 
spirit     of    his    appeal    is    reflected    in 


274  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [sept.  1736. 

whom  we  serve  to  witness,  I  know  of  no  place  under  heaven 
where  there  are  more,  or  perhaps  so  many,  as  in  this  place. 
Does  your  heart  burn  within  you  to  turn  many  others  to 
righteousness?  Behold  the  whole  land,  thousands  and 
thousands  are  before  you.  I  will  resign  to  any  of  you  all 
or  any  part  of  my  charge :  choose  what  seemeth  good  in 
your  own  eyes.  Here  are  within  these  walls  children  of  all 
ages  and  dispositions.  Who  will  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  till  they  are  meet  to  be  preachers 
of  righteousness  ?  Here  are  adults,  from  the  farthest  parts  of 
Europe  and  Asia  and  the  inmost  kingdoms  of  Africa.  Add  to 
these  the  known  and  unknown  nations  of  this  vast  continent, 
and  you  will  indeed  have  a  great  multitude  which  no  man 

can J] 

Mon.    13. — I   began   reading,  with   Mr.   Delamotte,   Bishop 
Beveridge's2  Pandectae  Canonum  Conciltorum.     Nothing  could 


Sat.  1 1.— He  wrote  to  Mr.  Vernon  and  to  Mr.  Thorold— *  Squire  Thorold,' 
as  Whitefield,  to  whom  he  sent  a  present  of  ten  guineas,  called  him.  He 
had  an  interview  with  'John.'  He  began  to  catechize  the  children. 

Sun.  12. — The  attendances  were,  at  early-morning  prayers,  25  ;  at  the 
sermon,  35  ;  at  Holy  Communion,  13  ;  and  at  the  afternoon  catechizing,  50. 
For  some  unexplained  reason  there  was  no  meeting  at  Miss  Bovey's  this 
afternoon  ;  but  at  Mrs.  Gilbert's  he  prayed,  sang,  read  the  Country  Parson 
(G.  Herbert's  A  Priest  to  the  Temple;  or,  the  Cotmtry  Parson,  His 
Character,  and  Rule  of  Holy  Life),  and  again  sang.  Ingham  appears  to 
have  been  present. 

Man.  13. — The  page  is  interesting. 

4  10.  Prayed  with  Delamotte  ;  began  Codex  Canonum. 

5  Meditated  ;  read  prayers,  expounded,  n  present, 


1  Here  the  fragment  abruptly  ends.  2  William  Beveridge  ;  born  1637  ; 

The  powerful  closing  passage  may  be  died  1708  ;  admitted  to  St.  John's 

compared  with  the  letters  to  Whitefield  College,  Cambridge,  at  the  age  of  sixteen 

and  others  written  from  Georgia  during  years ;  became  eminent  in  Oriental 

these  weeks.  scholarship  and  ecclesiastical  learning  ; 

The  reference  to  settlements  reminds  a  voluminous  writer  ;  vicar  of  Ealing 

us  that  Wesley  was  already  feeling  his  and  rector  of  St.  Peter's,  Cornhill ; 

way  towards  an  itinerating  evangelism  and  successively  prebendary  of  St.  Paul's, 

a  circuit  system.  Savannah,  Frederica,  archdeacon  of  Colchester,  and  preben- 

Thunderbolt,  Skidoway,  Irene,  Yama-  dary  of  Canterbury.  He  declined  the 

craw  (or  Cowpen),  were  already  on  his  see  of  Bath  and  Wells  as  successor  to 

list.  One  might  add  the  German  section  Bishop  Ken,  when  he  was  deprived  ;  but 

in  Savannah,  New  Ebenezer,  Darien,  accepted  the  bishopric  of  St.  Asaph  in 

and  other  stations  occasionally  visited.  1704.  Beveridge's  remarkable  work  con- 


sept,  me.]  Fourth  Savannah  Journal  275 

so  effectually  have  convinced  us  that  both  Particular  and 
'  General  Councils  may  err,  and  have  erred ' ;  [and  of  the 
infinite  difference  there  is  between  the  decisions  of  the  wisest 
men  and  those  of  the  Holy  Ghost  recorded  in  His  Word  ;]  and 
that  things  ordained  by  Councils  as  necessary  to  salvation  have 
neither  strength  nor  authority  unless  they  be  taken  out  of  Holy 
Scripture. 


6  Hair  cut ;  at  home  and  talked. 

7  Talked  together. 

8  Wrote  Journal. 

9  Journal. 

10  Marked  Journal. l 

11  Marked  Journal. 

12  Dined ;  marked. 

1  Marked  ;  visited. 

2  Visited. 

3  Visited. 

4  Miss  Bovey's  ;  Mr  Houston ;  intimate  talk. 

5  Began  Fleury's  Mceurs  des  Israelites  with  me. 

6  At  home ;  burial ;  talked  together. 

7  Read  prayers,  expounded  ;  Germans. 

8  Germans  £;  interview  with  Mr  Parker;  at  nine  with  Delamotte  and  Ingham  9.45, 

prayed. 

Tttes.  14. — For  about  two  hours  he  read  'psalms,'  probably  with  a  view 
to  the  hymn-book  project  which  was  maturing. 

Wed.  15. — He  wrote  to  his  sister  Emily  and  Mr.  Rivington.  Was  it  his 
wish  to  publish  through  Rivington,  and  did  Rivington  decline  to  publish  so 
great  a  novelty,  strengthened  in  his  objection  by  the  fact  that  the  book 
placed  in  the  forefront  ten  psalms  from  Dr.  Isaac  Watts's  collection  ?  This 
morning  he  indulged  in  coffee,  and  spent  some  hours  in  his  garden,  some- 
times working  and  sometimes  singing  and  meditating. 

Thur.  16. — He  wrote  to  Mr.  Home,  Sister  Kezia,  'my  mother,'  Sister 
Ellison,  Sister  Nancy,  Seraius,  Hervey.  He  also  spent  some  time  in  sorting 
letters.  He  must  have  received  quite  recently  a  large  number  of  highly 
important  letters,  only  a  few  of  which,  as  far  as  we  at  present  know,  have 
survived.  These  all  bear  marks,  in  the  form  of  dates  and  other  endorsements, 
of  the  *  sorting '  which  at  intervals  he  practised. 

Fri.  17.— He  was  still  busy  reading  or  writing  letters.  One  to  Dr. 
Burton  must  have  been  voluminous,  for  he  spent  two  hours  in  writing  it. 
More  interesting,  though  perhaps  less  important,  were  letters  to  his 


sisted  of  a  collection  not  only  of  all  the  no  doubt  a  daily  record,  or  nearly  so. 

Apostolic  Canons,  that  is  to  say,  of  those  This  he  marked  for  extraction  and  tran- 

attributed  to  the  Apostles,  but  also  those  scription.     It  was  these  extracts  he  sent 

of  eleven  Councils  ;  also  of  a  number  of  home   to   his  brother    Samuel    and    to 

paraphrases     and    letters,    and    of    the  comrades   in   the    Holy  Club.     One   of 

Canons  of  the  four  General  Councils,  £c.  the  manuscript  copies  is  thus  marked  in 

1  The  Journal  in  its  original  form  was  pencil. 
VOL.1.  15 


LIBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 


276  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Sept.  me. 

Mon.  20. — We  ended  the  Apostolical  Canons^  of  which  I 
must  confess  I  once  thought  more  highly  than  I  ought  to  think. 
[Of  them  Bishop  Beveridge  observes  that  they  are  the  decrees 
of  the  several  Synods,  which  met  at  several  places,  and  on 
several  occasions,  in  the  second  and  third  age  after  Christ ;  and 
are  therefore]  called  Apostolical,  because  partly  grounded  upon, 
partly  agreeing  with,  the  traditions  delivered  down  from  the 
Apostles. 

He  further  observes,  ['  That  as  they  were  enacted  by  different 
Synods,  so  they  were  collected  by  different  persons  ;  till,  about 
A.D.  500,  John,  Bishop  of  Constantinople,  placed  them  at  the 
head  of  the  Canons,  which  he  then  collected  into  one  Code ; 

old  friends  'Aspasia'  and  'Selima' ;  in  other  words,  to  the  celebrated  Mrs. 
Delany  and  her  sister  Anne  Granville.  The  names  of  new  parishioners 
whom  he  visited  are  given.  To  the  lesson  in  French  for  Miss  Bovey 
a  long  reading  from  Law  was  added,  with  conversation.  French,  for  a 
deaconess  or  class-leader  in  Savannah,  was  more  than  an  accomplish- 
ment ;  it  was  almost  a  necessity.  Preparation  for  exposition  was  usually 
made  whilst  walking  in  the  garden,  sometimes  Greek  Testament  or  other 
devotional  book  in  hand.  There  is  a  marked  absence  of  '  singing  '  in 
the  records  of  these  days.  When  it  does  occur,  it  is  in  close  proximity 
to  *  psalms '  or  *  verses.' 

Sat.  1 8. — He  read  Fleury's  Catechism  to  Ingham.  After  serious  con- 
versation with  Causton,  by  which  he  was  'convinced,'  and  with  Mrs. 
Causton,  by  which  she  was  'seriously  convinced,'  he  returned  home  and 
spent  an  hour  in  transcribing  and  altering  verses.  In  the  garden  he 
read  French  and  German  (hymns?)  and  sang.  In  the  evening,  after 
prayers,  communicants  came,  and  he  began  to  read  Bishop  Patrick's 
Prayers.  Before  leaving  he  sang  and  prayed  with  them  and  'read  my 
mother's  letter.'  These  were  the  children  and  young  people  whom  he 
and  Delamotte  so  diligently  instructed,  and  whose  admission  to  Holy 
Communion,  after  long  probation  and  most  careful  preparation,  was  one 
of  the  charges  urged  against  him  in  the  True  Account. 

Sun.  19. — For  the  first  time  Ephrem  Syrus  appears  as  a  book  read  in 
preparing  for  the  pulpit.  There  were  sixteen  communicants.  Before  the 
afternoon  service  he  catechized  the  boys  alone,  and  after  the  service 
catechized  again.  Twenty  were  present. 

Mon.  20. — He  worked  on  the  transcription  of  his  Journal  in  conjunction 
with  Von  Reck,  who  also  kept  a  journal.  The  Recks  were  still  living 
with  him  in  the  parsonage,  and  he  made  the  most  of  the  opportunity  to 
perfect  his  knowledge  of  German.  With  the  communicants  he  read 
Patrick's  Prayers,  sang  and  prayed,  afterwards  spending  an  hour  with  the 
Canons. 

The  interval  between  September  20  and  October  12  is  blank  in  the 
Journal.  The  Diary  fills  the  missing  days. 


Sept.  1736.]' 


Fourth  Savannah  Journal 


277 


since  which  time  they  have  been  in  force  in  the  Eastern  Church. 
But  then,'  he  adds]  (Codex  Canonum  Ecclesiae  Primitivae^  p.  159  ; 
and  why  did  he  not  observe  it  in  the  first  page  of  the  book  ?), 

Tues.  21.— He  spent  two  hours  with  his  Journal,  and  an  hour  meditating 
on  a  sermon  and  singing.  He  then  robed,  went  to  the  Germans,  read  prayers, 
preached  to  a  congregation  of  seventeen,  and  administered  the  Eucharist 
to  nine  communicants,  noting,  *  No  wine  there  ! '  From  one  to  four  o'clock, 
as  usual,  he  visited  ;  the  names  are  given.  He  ended  the  afternoon  with  a 
reading  from  Law  at  Miss  Bovey*s,  followed  by  serious  conversation.  In 
the  evening,  after  the  exposition,  he  visited  the  Germans,  with  them 
reading  the  'Councils.'1 

Wed.  22. — He  rose  at  four,  and  prayed  with  Delamotte,  but  was  sleepy, 
hot,  and  sick.  Nevertheless  he  expounded  as  usual,  and  after  a  cup  of 
coffee,  which  seems  to  have  been  his  remedy  for  malarial  sickness,  he  spent 


1  The    studies    of    missionaries    were 
prescribed  by  the  S.P.G.     They  included 
the  Codex   Canonum.      Wesley,  in  this 
course  of  reading,  was  acting  according 
to  his  instructions.     He  began  the  study 
shortly  after  four    o'clock   on   Monday, 
Sept.  13,  reading  with  Delamotte.   There 
is  no    further    reference    to     the    sub- 
ject until    Sept.   19,  when,  both   in  the 
afternoon   and   evening,    the  Apostolical 
Canons  were   read.      Probably   Wesley 
knew  the  book,  and  only  read  portions 
from    time    to    time    with    Delamotte. 
After  the  2Oth,  when   the  reading  with 
Delamotte  ended,  he  took  the  work  to 
the  Germans,  reading  it  with  them  night 
after  night,  until  the  26th  of  the  month, 
when,  for  Wesley  personally,  it  became 
a  subject  of  prolonged  morning   study. 
Either  alone  or  with  the   Germans  he 
continued  the  study  until  Oct.  4. 

2  We  are  not  told  in  so  many  words 
that   it   was   so,  but   many  details  pro- 
duce an  impression,  gradually  approach- 
ing conviction,  that  at  this  time,  in  faith, 
ecclesiastical     leanings,     worship,     and 
ministerial    duty,    Wesley    was    closely 
identified  with  the  Moravians.     On  this 
day,  for  instance,  he  reads  prayers  and 
expounds  at  five  in  the   morning,  pre- 
sumably in  the  building  that  served   as 
an  English  church  ;  but  at  ten  he  reads 
prayers,  preaches,  and    administers    the 
Communion  with  the  Moravians.     This 


is  the  more  remarkable  because  it  was  an 
English  church  festival  (of  St.  Matthew). 
But  it  was  quite  in  harmony  with  the 
ideals  which  Zinzendorf,  Spangenberg, 
and  other  Moravian  leaders  at  this  time 
cherished.  Their  views,  also  it  should 
be  remembered,  found  favour  with  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  (Potter)  and 
with  the  Prussian  court  chaplain.  We 
know  that  Wesley  had  asked  James 
Hutton  to  obtain  information  respecting 
the  attitude  of  English  Church  leaders 
towards  Moravian  orders  ;  and  it  is  quite 
conceivable  that  his  correspondence  with 
Zinzendorf,  Spangenberg,  and,  through 
Oglethorpe,  with  the  Bishop  of  London, 
now  his  diocesan,  may  have  touched  on 
this  apparently  momentous  question, 
namely,  whether  on  S.P.G.  mission 
stations  English  clergy  might  not  co- 
operate with  Moravian  ministers,  recog- 
nizing their  orders  as  valid,  and  therefore 
their  administration  of  the  Sacraments. 
Ecclesiastically  the  Saltzburghers  were 
in  a  different  position.  They  were  not 
Moravians.  Their  orders  were  not  re- 
cognized as  valid  ;  therefore  Wesley, 
being  at  this  period  in  bondage  to  the 
most  rigid  interpretation  of  canon  law, 
refused  to  admit  their  baptisms  as  valid. 
As  he  shortly  came  to  see,  it  was  all 
highly  absurd  ;  but  we  have  to  accept 
him  as  we  find  him — self- portrayed  in  his 
own  Diary. 


278  John   Wesley  s  Journal  toot  me. 


1  they  contain  the  discipline  used  in  the  Church  at  the  time  when 
they  were  collected  ;  not  when  the  Council  of  Nice  met,  for 
then  many  parts  of  it  were  useless  and  obsolete.' 

five  hours  with  his  Journal.  There  was  much  illness  in  the  town  ;  burials 
were  frequent  ;  Wesley  himself  was  far  from  robust.  To-day  he  buried 
Mrs.  How  and  child.  He  began  Clemens. 

Thur.  23.— His  Journal  (in  which  he  wrote  on  the  Mystics),  a  letter  to 
Miss  Sophy,  business  with  Causton,  visitation,  burial  of  Matt.  Banish,  French 
with  Miss  Bovey,  and  the  Canons,  filled  the  day. 

Fri.  24.— After  morning  prayers  and  coffee,  he  spent  six  hours  with  the 
Mystics.  He  visited,  wrote  again  to  Rivington,  and  to  '  Mr.  Laserre  of 
Charlestown ' ;  interviewed  Ingham,  who  came  in  from  Yamacraw,  gave 
Miss  Bovey  her  lesson  in  French  and  a  reading  in  Law — '  she  sad.'  He 
went  to  the  churchyard  to  bury  a  German,  but  there  was  'no  corpse.' 
He  closed  a  busy  day  with  the  belated  funeral  and  Canons  with  the 
Germans. 

Sat.  25. — The  Mystics  again  absorbed  the  morning.  After  dinner  he 
4  shaved,'  visited,  catechized,  christened  Parker,  and  met  his  communicants' 
class. 

Sun.  26. — The  Canons  took  the  place  of  the  Mystics.  The  attendances 
were  24  at  morning  prayers,  10  at  Holy  Communion,  and  50  at  the  afternoon 
catechizing. 

Mon.  27. — Burntside  (he  thus  spells  Burnside's  name)  is  *  seriously 
affected  ? '  The  day's  study  begins  with  the  Mystics,  but  the  Canons  soon 
displace  them.  He  converses  with  Mrs.  Musgrove. 

Tues.  28. — French  grammar  and  the  beginning  of  a  German  grammar 
varied  the  monotony  of  canonical  studies.  He  wrote  'names,'  as  in 
after  years  he  so  often  did.  He  held  a  serious  religious  meeting  with 
boys,  singing  with  them  in  the  garden  and  praying.  He  sang  also  with  his 
communicants'  class  after  evening  exposition.  Did  he  sing  Brevint's 
sacramental  hymns,  or  Hickes's,  or  his  father's  'Behold  the  Saviour  of 
mankind'?  Any  of  these  is  possible.  In  Savannah,  for  the  present,  the 
communicants'  class  seems  to  have  taken  the  place  of  the  society-meeting. 

Wed.  29. — He  began  to  transcribe  a  German  '  Dicconary.'  He  wrote 
letters  for  the  sick,  spent  several  hours  in  pastoral  visitation,  and  *  buried 
Lady  Batfhurst].' 

Thur.  30. — The  German  Dictionary,  visiting,  and  the  Canons,  with  the 
usual  services,  teaching,  and  devotions,  filled  the  day. 

OCT.  i,  Fri. — Nearly  the  whole  day  was  given  to  German  (probably 
the  dictionary),  and  to  visiting.  The  Brownfields  were  on  his  sick  list. 

Sat.  2. — He  is  *  very  lively,'  and  accounts  for  it  by  the  cold.  German, 
with  an  interlude  for  French,  visiting  for  five  hours,  and  his  communicants' 
class  are  the  features  of  the  day.  A  cross  may  indicate  Passion  hymns  as 
those  he  sang  with  the  class.  There  is  a  return  in  this  section  of  the  Diary 
to  the  more  precise  and  introspective  methods  of  earlier  Diaries.  This,  no 
doubt,  is  the  explanation  of  certain  letters,  figures,  and  signs  that  appear  in 
the  third  and  fourth  columns. 


Oct.  1736.]  Fourth  Savannah  Journal  279 

OCT.  12,  Tues. — We  considered  if  anything  could  yet  be 
done  for  the  poor  people  of  Frederica ;  and  I  submitted 
to  the  judgement  of  my  friends,  which  was  that  I  should 

Sun.  3. — At  3.45  he  '  prayed  and  sang  with  them ' ;  '  very  lively.'  During 
early  hours  Ingham  returned,  and  read  and  preached  for  Wesley.  More 
names  were  written.  After  catechizing,  Wesley,  Ingham,  and  Delamotte 
walked  together.  At  night  they  read  the  Canons,  also  the  verses  on  Death. 

Mon.  4. — The  reading  of  the  Canons  with  the  Germans  was  finished. 
After  morning  prayers,  on  this  and  following  days  he  felled  trees. 

Tues.  5. — With  Delamotte  he  read  Hebrew  and  German.  In  the  afternoon 
the  three  friends  went  to  the  Plantation.  Returning,  he  read  German  verses. 
With  the  Germans  in  the  evening  he  began  'Cotelerri'  g'  (i.e.  John  B. 
Cotelerius,  a  seventeenth-century  King's  Greek  Professor,  and  writer  on  the 
early  Fathers). 

Wed.  6. — An  attack  of  sickness  yielded  to  a  rigid  fast  and  tree-felling. 
He  worked  steadily  at  German  until  11.15,  when  he  began  his  customary 
round  of  pastoral  visitation.  French  lesson,  evening  exposition,  a  religious 
meeting  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Causton,  Mrs.  Gilbert  and  company,  ended  the 
long  day's  work.  He  broke  his  fast  with  the  Germans  at  nine,  or  thereabouts. 

Thur.  7. — Tree-felling,  German,  and  visiting  ;  Ingham  comes  to  dinner — 
'  he  very  zealous.' 

Fri.  8. — The  German  work  was  interrupted  by  business  for  Delamotte 
and  Ingham  ;  for  the  former  he  taught  school,  praying  in  German.  A 
Spaniard  came,  for  whom  he  wrote  a  certificate.  The  first  visit  in  the  after- 
noon was  to  Haselfo  (probably  the  Spaniard),  whom  he  found  'very  serious.' 
This  being  the  Friday  fast,  he  did  not  eat  until  six  o'clock.  He  read  prayers 
and  expounded  with  the  Germans,  thirty  being  present,  and,  quite  worn  out, 
slept.  Afterwards  he  walked,  meditated,  and  sang  in  the  German  garden. 

Sat.  9. — He  was  now  preparing  for  his  fourth  visit  to  Frederica,  and 
had  conversation  with  Ingham,  who  was  to  be  left  in  charge  at  Savannah, 
with  Delamotte  to  assist.  Books  were  sorted  and  goods  packed.  He  had 
an  interview  with  Mrs.  Causton,  whose  niece  was  in  Frederica.  He  wrote 
lists  of  names,  catechized  the  children,  visited,  and  *  could  not  speak ' ; 
prayed  again  and  again  with  Delamotte,  once  more  met  his  communicants' 
class,  and  *  transcribed  verses.' 

Sun.  10. — The  reading  of  Ephrem  Syrus  was  his  preparation  for  preach- 
ing, and  at  intervals  through  the  day  he  returned  to  the  same  writer,  of  whom 
he  thought  highly. 

Mon.  1 1 . — The  marks  of  anxiety  for  the  friends  he  was  about  to  leave 
are  apparent.  After  early  prayers  he  visits  Mr.  Neimer  (no  doubt  one  of  his 
many  sick  parishioners).  He  then  has  a  special  celebration  of  Holy  Com- 
munion with  Ingham  and  Delamotte.  He  writes  for  Miss  Bovey,  trans- 
cribing verses  for  her,  and  again  takes  school  for  Delamotte.  *  Dr.  Nun.' 
and  Mr.  Boltzius,  the  minister  of  the  Saltzburghers,  come. 

Tues.  12. — This,  his  last  day  for  some  time  in  Savannah,  he  spent  chiefly 
in  reading  Ephrem  Syrus  to  various  persons,  including  Delamotte,  who  is 
frequently  named. 


280 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[Oct.  1736. 


take   another  journey   thither  ;    Mr.    Ingham    undertaking    to 
supply  my  place  at  Savannah  for  the  time  I  should  stay  there. 

[About  five  in  the  evening,  being  to  set  out  for  Frederica 
the  next  day,  I  asked  Mr.  Causton  what  commands  he  had  to 
Miss  Sophy.  Some  of  his  words  were  as  follows :  '  The  girl 
will  never  be  easy  till  she  is  married.'  I  answered,  '  Sir,  she  is 
too  much  afflicted  to  have  a  thought  of  it.'  He  replied,  '  I'll 
trust  a  woman  for  that.  There  is  no  other  way.'  I  said,  '  But 
there  are  few  here  who  you  would  think  fit  for  her.'  He 
answered,  '  Let  him  be  but  an  honest  man — an  honest,  good 
man ;  T  don't  care  whether  he  has  a  groat.  I  can  give  them  a 

Wed.  13. — He  read  prayers  and  expounded  as  usual,  drank  chocolate 
with  Miss  Bovey,  saw  Mr.  Belinger,  junior,  whose  acquaintance  he  had 
made  during  his  Charlestown  journey,  visited  several  persons,  held  final 
interviews  with  Causton— with  whom,  for  some  unexplained  reason,  he  was 
cross — and  went  with  Delamotte  to  the  Bluff.  From  the  Bluff,  at  half-past 
two,  he  set  out  on  his  journey,  again  having  as  his  companion  Jemmy 
B[illinghurs]t.  He  read  Potter  all  the  way  to  Mrs.  Lacy's  at  Thunder- 
bolt. At  six  he  went  on  board  the  boat,  singing,  privately  praying,  but 
'without  words.'  He  read  prayers  at  Skidoway,  and  at  nine  set  out 
singing,  Mr.  Mouse  sailing  with  him.  One  unexplained  entry  at  the  end 
of  each  of  the  five  last  lines  is  'no  words.'  This  closes  the  fourth 
Savannah  Diary.1 


1  This  hitherto  unread  Diary,  like 
earlier  ones,  bears  constant  testimony  to 
the  orderliness  and  neatness  of  Wesley's 
daily  life  in  Georgia — in  a  word,  to  his 
Methodism.  He  rose  early  and  retired 
early  ;  the  first  hour,  or  hour  and  a  half, 
of  the  morning  he  reserved  for  devotion — 
private,  '  company,'  and  public.  He 
read  the  Scriptures  according  to  the 
Calendar,  and  expounded  (usually  the 
Second  Lesson)  twice  everyday  ;  morning, 
noon,  and  evening  he  prayed,  following 
the  rule  of  the  early  Church,  which  had 
been  adopted  by  '  our  Company '  in 
Oxford  ;  after  breakfast  he  read  or  wrote 
until  twelve,  except  on  Sundays  and 
church  fasts  and  festivals,  when  he 
pieached  and  administered  Holy  Com- 
munion. In  the  afternoon  he  visited  the 
sick  and  those  .who  needed  pastoral 
tending ;  always  he  seems  to  have  had 
pupils— Delamotte,  Ingham,  Miss  Bovey, 
German  friends,  and  later  Miss  Sophy ; 


he  taught  Greek,  Hebrew,  French, 
German,  church  history,  canon  law,  and, 
in  the  case  of  John  Reinier,  anatomy. 
The  regularity  of  his  life  was  often 
broken  in  upon  by  urgencies — the  claims 
of  Oglethorpe  for  secretarial  and  con- 
sultative service,  journeys  by  land  and 
sea,  attacks  of  sickness  :  such  interrup- 
tions he  accepted  as  inevitable,  never 
permitting  more  than  a  temporary  arrest 
of  the  habitual  course  and  rule  of  his  life. 
Thrown  out  of  gear  for  an  hour,  a  day, 
or  a  week,  he  returned  with  unerring 
instinct  to  the  normal,  so  that  there  was 
never  more  than  a  minimum  waste  of 
time  ;  and  he  never  murmured  at  these 
interruptions. 

These  hitherto  unrecorded  weeks  in 
the  autumn  of  1736  are  an  admirable 
example  of  Wesley  as  a  colonial  *  coun- 
try parson ' — in  the  prime  of  life, 
moderately  High  Church,  studious,  pas- 
toral ;  friendly  within  limits,  but  always 


Oct.  1736.] 


Fourth  Savannah  Journal 


281 


maintenance.'  I  asked,  '  Sir,  what  directions  do  you  give  me 
with  regard  to  her  ? '  He  said,  '  I  give  her  up  to  you.  Do 
what  you  will  with  her.  Take  her  into  your  own  hands. 
Promise  her  what  you  will.  I  will  make  it  good.'] 


mindful  of  old  friends  and  kinsfolk  ;  a 
preacher  and  tutor,  abstemious  to  the 
point  of  severe  asceticism,  poetical,  musi- 
cal, observant  of  natural  phenomena  ; 
able  to  walk  great  distances,  to  sleep  in 
the  woods  or  on  bare  boards,  to  swim, 
ride,  row,  sail  a  boat,  and  work  with 
tools ;  he  cleaned  his  own  house  and 
cultivated  his  own  garden.  All  his  old 
classical  and  metaphysical  books  (except 
Plato  for  a  few  days),  his  games,  stage- 
plays,  and  romances  he  laid  absolutely  on 
one  side.  The  one  prominent  idiosyn- 
crasy of  his  former  life  that  survived  was 
his  fondness  for  the  companionship  of 
women,  who,  however,  must  be  religious 
and  intellectual,  like  his  sisters  and  the 
lady  comrades  and  correspondents  of 
earlier  days.  These  last  he  had  not,  as 
is  generally  assumed,  discarded ;  their 
names  remain  on  his  list  of  special 
correspondents  in  this  Hendrix  Diary 
side  by  side  with  those  of  his  most 
cherished  kinsfolk  and  friends. 

The  Diary  that  runs  parallel  with  his 
fourth  Savannah  Journal  marks  :  (i)  His 
comparative  freedom  from  temptation. 
He  was  too  busy,  and  too  happy  in  his 
work,  to  wander  far  in  either  deed  or 
thought.  There  are  no  such  self-up- 
braidings  as  mark  almost  every  page  in 
the  first  Oxford  Diary.  (2)  His  bondage 
to  rule.  He  lived  a  slavishly  methodical 
life,  and  he  never  girded  against  the  law 
of  outward  observance,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, cherished  it  as  one  of  the  friendliest 
features  of  his  appointed  course  as  a 
Christian  minister.  It  is  astonishing 
how  rarely  his  hours  of  devotion,  and 
especially  the  minutes  given  to  prayer  at 
the  end  of  each  hour  throughout  the  day, 
are  interrupted.  The  long  line  of  figures 
running  down  the  centre  of  each  page 
may  be  slightly  varied.  (Here,  for 
instance,  are  those  for  the  page  at  which 
we  have  halted.  Beginning  at  four 


o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  devotional 
minute  register  reads  :  6.  5-  6.  6.  5.  6. 
5.  5.  5.  6.  6.  5.  5.  6.  6.  6.  :  the  rule  is 
6  minutes,  but  often  7,  or,  as  here,  5> 
never  more  than  7,  or  fewer  than  5, 
minutes  are  given.)  But  it  is  only  now 
and  then,  on  the  rarest  occasions — in  a 
storm,  or  when  some  matter  of  business 
unusually  urgent  is  on  hand — that  a 
break  occurs  in  the  sequence.  As  a  rule, 
wherever  he  is,  or  however  occupied,  one 
hour  is  separated  from  another  by  six,  or 
five,  or  seven  minutes  spent  in  prayer,  or 
singing,  or  some  other  form  of  devotion. 
Often  these  minutes  given  to  God  and 
the  religious  culture  of  his  own  soul  are 
counted  at  the  foot  of  the  page.  From 
the  Easter  of  1725,  under  the  influence 
of  Thomas  a  Kempis,  Jeremy  Taylor,  and 
'  Varanese,'  he  began  to  build  up  this  life 
of  rigid  subjection  to  law,  rule,  and  metho- 
dical habit.  His  mother,  on  the  whole, 
though  not  without  warning,  encouraged 
this  scheme  of  life ;  his  father  also 
approved  and  warned;  his  brother 
Samuel  was  affectionately  critical ;  his 
sisters  were  wistful,  secretly  proud, 
gently  satirical.  His  spiritual  mentors 
were  often  changed,  and  thus  variety  was 
secured.  Charles  and  Morgan  supplied 
a  strain  of  enthusiasm,  the  latter  in  the 
direction  of  practical  and  philanthropic 
service.  John  Clayton  to  a  great  extent 
took  the  place  of '  Varanese,'  but  led  him 
back  to  the  ideals  of  the  early  Church, 
whilst  Gambold  encouraged  his  leaning 
towards  Mysticism.  Among  books  of 
devotion,  William  Law  took  the  place  of 
Jeremy  Taylor,  and  Hickes,  at  intervals, 
of  Kempis ;  whilst  Scougal,  Herbert, 
Heylin,  Ephrem  Syrus,  Bishop  Patrick, 
and  others  come  in  succession.  Jeremy 
Taylor,  his  earliest  devotional  friend, 
does  not  at  present  appear  on  the  Diary 
page  ;  intellectually  he  had  quarrelled 
with  him,  as  afterwards  he  quarrelled 


282 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


(Oct.  1736. 


FOURTH  FREDERICA  JOURNAL 

[OCT.  13,  Wed. — I  set  out  for  Frederica,  and]  came  thither 
early  on  Saturday  morning,  and  found  few  things  better  than 
I  expected. 

Sat.  1 6. — [I  met  Mark  Hird  on  the  Bluff,  who  gave  me  a 
melancholy  account  of  the  state  of  things.]  The  morning 
and  evening  prayers,  which  were  read  for  a  while  after  my 
leaving  the  place,  had  been  long  discontinued,  and  from 
that  time  everything  grew  worse  and  worse.  [Mr.  Tackner 

Thur.  14. — At  3.30,  the  wind  being  fair,  he  called  the  crew.  He  read 
Potter  for  some  hours,  'ending'  him  at  eleven.  By  two  they  were  at 
Mrs.  Clark's  Bluff,  where  he  walked,  meditated,  sang,  read  Patrick,  and 
expounded  in  German.  He  supped  with  them  and  remained  the  night. 

Fri.  15. — He  again  called  the  crew  at  3.30.  At  six  they  were  on  shore. 
In  a  calm  he  sat  on  the  boat  reading  Rogers  On  the  Thirty -nine  Articles 
alternately  with  Bishop  Patrick,  taking  the  Country  Minister's  Advice  as  an 
interlude,  until  at  four  in  the  afternoon  he.  ended  Patrick  and  refreshed 
himself  with  German.  At  six  they  rowed  awhile,  landed,  supped,  prayed, 
and  at  seven  slept. 

Sat.  1 6.— At  3.30  he  reached  Frederica,  met  Mark  Hird ;  *  in  trouble, 
alas  !  in  trouble.  Ah,  my  Frederica  ! ' 1 


with  William  Law  ;  but  Jeremy  Taylor's 
Rules  of  Holy  Living  are  wrought  into 
the  texture  of  the  Oxford  Methodism 
that  dominates  this,  the  best  part,  of  his 
life  in  Georgia.  It  was  the  '  best,' 
partly  because  undisturbed  by  female 
influence.  There  was  no  Mrs.  Hawkins 
to  irritate  by  her  folly  ;  and  no  winsome 
Miss  Sophy  to  allure,  by  her  fondness, 
from  the  lofty  purpose  which  had  brought 
him  to  Georgia,  a  purpose  which  was 
only  in  abeyance  through  force  of  cir- 
cumstances. In  his  friendship  with  Miss 
Bovey  there  is  no  trace  of  sentimental 
affection.  She  was  in  love  with  Burn- 
side,  Causton's  chief  clerk,  whom  shortly 
after  she  married.  We  may  think  of  her 
as  the  Miss  Bolton  or  the  Miss  Ritchie 
of  Georgia  Methodism — '  the  one  woman 
in  America  whom  I  have  found  without 
guile.' 

1  Even  more  powerfully  than  the  Journal 
the  Diary  impresses.     In  few  words  we 


see  the  complete  collapse  of  the  elaborate 
structure  of  outward  righteousness — of  a 
religion  built  up  according  to  rule  and 
law,  but  without  life  or  root  in  itself. 
So  long  as  the  master-builder  was  there 
to  watch  with  ceaseless  vigilance  and  to 
control  with  imperious  will,  the  structure 
held  together  and  seemed  to  prosper. 
But  as  soon  as  his  presence  was  with- 
drawn, it  toppled  into  the  dust  like  a 
house  of  cards.  But  we  see  also  the 
amazing  courage  and  promptitude  of  the 
builder.  He  cries  out  in  pain  and  dis- 
appointment, 'Alas  !  Ah,  my  Frederica!' 
— and  without  the  loss  of  a  single 
moment  begins  to  rebuild.  Let  us  put 
the  record — the  words  of  which  are 
condensed  into  single  letters,  but  about 
the  interpretation  of  which  there  can  be 
no  question — into  narrative  form  : 

At  3.30  Wesley  lands.  Mark  Hird— 
of  whom  he  might  have  written,  '  Mark 
is  profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry ' — 


Oct.  1736.] 


Fourth  Frederica  Journal 


had  thrown  off  the  form  as  well  as  the  power  of  godliness  ; 
and  so  had  most  of  his  neighbours  who  ever  had  pretensions 
to  it. 

[Even  poor  Miss  Sophy  was  scarce  a  shadow  of  what  she 
was  when  I  left  her.  Harmless  company  had  stole  away  all  her 
strength.  Most  of  her  good  resolutions  were  vanished  away ; 
and,  to  complete  her  destruction,  she  was  resolved  to  return  to 
England.  I  reasoned  with  her  much,  but  with  no  success  ;  she 
could  not  see  that  she  was  at  all  changed,  and  continued  fixed 
in  her  resolution  of  leaving  America  with  the  first  ship  that 
sailed.  I  dropped  the  argument  for  the  present,  finding  the  veil 
was  upon  her  heart.  I  begged  of  her  to  pray  earnestly  to  God 
to  direct  her  to  what  was  best.  I  then  read  to  her  some  of  the 
most  affecting  parts  of  the  Serious  Call  and  of  Ephrem  Syrus. 
I  was  at  first  a  little  surprised  and  discouraged  ;  but  I  soon 
re-collected  my  spirits,1  and  remembered  my  calling,  and  the 


meets  him.  He  learns  the  truth  about 
his  converts,  services,  and  society- 
meetings.  In  deep  distress  he  sits 
down  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  sends 
Mark  to  gather  a  company,  sleeps  in 
peace  for  half  an  hour,  rises,  dresses  in 
full  canonicals,  and,  with  a  congregation 
of  nine  souls,  reads  prayers  and  expounds. 
Without  waiting  to  eat,  he  begins  with 
his  backsliding  Israel,  going  from  house 
to  house,  dealing  with  the  faithless  ones 
individually,  using  precisely  the  same 
means  which  availed  before — his  garden, 
hymns,  psalms,  Heylin,  prayers,  conver- 
sations;  with  the  simplicity  of  a  child 
he  puts  forth  the  old  charm,  believing 
that  once  more  the  errant  souls  will  fall 
under  its  mystic  spell. 

In  all  this  we  may  discern  the  char- 
acteristics which,  4  after  Pentecost,'  went 
far  to  ensure  the  triumph  of  the  evangel 
preached  by  Wesley — his  dauntless 
courage,  his  unwavering  trust  in  men 
when  once  he  had  taken  them  into  his 
confidence,  and  his  dogged  pursuit  of  the 
same  end  by  means  which  he  had 
satisfied  himself  were  right.  The  weak- 
ness in  this  Frederica  episode,  as  in  the 
whole  Georgia  enterprise,  lay  in  this — 


that  he  did  not  as  yet  fully  understand 
the  mystery  of  '  the  law  of  the  spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus.' 

1  Two  parallel  lines  of  thought  and 
emotion  are  distinctly  traceable  in  both 
Journal  and  Diary.  The  first,  which 
concerns  his  work,  is  the  more  promi- 
nent ;  the  second,  which  will  now  become 
more  and  more  conspicuous,  concerns 
his  relationship  to  Miss  Sophy  Hopkey. 
The  unpublished  Journal,  coming  to  our 
help,  makes  this  hitherto  confused  story 
quite  clear. 

The  untroubled  hand,  with  which  for 
more  than  a  month  past  he  has  been 
writing  his  Diary,  has  gone.  It  is  in 
tremulous  handwriting,  recalling  the 
Storm  Diary  of  the  outward  voyage,  that 
he  records  his  first  interview  with 
'  my  Friend.'  Miss  Sophy  is  the  first 
person  with  whom  he  converses  after  his 
masterful  resuscitation  of  morning  prayer. 
She  is  *  open  but  not  affected.'  Repeated 
onslaughts  on  her  soul  produce  no  effect. 
His  whole  battery  of  devotional  and 
hortatory  books,  with  interludes  of  reason- 
ing, singing,  and  prayer,  fails  to  shake 
her  resolution.  She  is  determined  to  go 
to  England  by  the  first  ship. 


284  John    Wesley  s  Journal 


word  which  cannot  fail  :  '  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  you  than  he 
that  is  in  the  world.' 

Non  me,  qui  caetera,  vincet 
Impetus,  at  rapido  contrarius  evehar  orbi.  —  OviD.1 

I  began  with  earnest  crying  to  God  to  maintain  His  own 
cause,  and  after  the  evening  prayers  were  ended  invited  a  few 
to  my  house,  as  I  did  every  night  while  I  stayed  at  Frederica. 
I  read  to  them  out  of  the  exhortations  of  Ephrem  Syrus  —  the 
most  awakenia  writer,  I  think,  of  all  the  ancients.  We  con- 

^ 

eluded  our  reading  and  conversation  with  a  psalm  ;  and  I 
trust  our  God  gave  us  His  blessing.  [My  next  point  was  to 
divert  Miss  Sophy  from  her  fatal  resolution  of  going  to 
England.] 

Mon.  1  8.  —  Finding  there  were  several  Germans  at  Frederica, 
who,  not  understanding  the  English  tongue,  could  not  join  in 
our  public  service,  I  desired  them  to  meet  me  at  my  house  ; 


Sun.  17. — Mark  seems  to  have  quietly  resumed  his  old  habit  of  sleeping 
in  the  hut — the  Hirds'  hut,  apparently  placed  at  Wesley's  disposal  until  his 
own  house  shall  again  be  fit  for  occupation.  Mark  is  another  Delamotte — 
friend  and  servant,  guardian  and  minister.  At  4.30  the  master  is  praying 
with  him.  (The  surname  is  dropped  ;  always  with  Wesley  a  sign  of  affec- 
tion or  confidence.)  Fourteen  are  present  at  early  prayers.  Mark  brings 
backsliding  Tackner.  They  converse,  pray,  sing,  and  are  seriously  affected. 
He  preaches  to  an  amazing  congregation — forty-six — and  administers  Holy 
Communion.  Mr.  Dison,  chaplain  of  the  Independent  Company  on  the 
other  side  of  the  island,  has  returned  from  Savannah  after  doing  there  all  the 
mischief  in  his  power.  Forty-two  are  present  at  evening  prayer.  Ephrem 
Syrus  is  the  book  to  which  Wesley  now  pins  his  faith,  but  neither  services 
nor  readings  have  much  effect  on  Miss  Sophy.  '  She  got  little  good.' 

But  the  Germans  come  after  supper,  and  '  are  serious,'  and  sing.  He 
reads  Ephrem  Syrus  to  '  Timothy,'  and  they  sing.  Was  this  Lewis  Timothy, 
the  printer  of  the  Charlestown  Collection  ?  If  so,  why  was  he  in  Frederica  ? 

Mon.  1 8. — Certain  entries  are  of  interest : 

4  Private  prayer  for  myself. 

5  Private  prayer  for  my  mother  and  company. 

6  Dressed,  read  prayers,  expounded. 

7  Conversed  with  Miss  Sophy  ;  Hickes  ;  talked  with  her ;  conversed. 

8  Cleaned  my  house.  - 

9  Cleaned  ;  in  trouble  with  Hird  [Mark's  father] ;  German. 

1  *  I  shall  not  be  conquered  by  the  force  the    original    the    futures    are    presents 

that  conquers  all  things  else,  but  I  shall  (evehor,    vincit).      Wesley   quotes   from 

ride  out  in  opposite  motion  to  the  swiftly  memory,  and  adapts  to  his  own  purpose, 

moving  circle '  (from  Ovid,  Metam.  ii.  2  The  house  on  which  he  had  worked 

73).     Sol  is  speaking  to  Phaethon.     In  with  his  own  hands  he  now  cleaned  and 


Oct.  1736.]  Fourth  Frederica  Journal  285 

which  they  did  every  day  at  noon  from  thenceforward.  We 
first  sang  a  German  hymn  ;  then  I  read  a  chapter  in  the  New 
Testament ;  then  explained  it  to  them  as  well  as  my  little  skill 
in  the  tongue  would  allow.  After  another  hymn  and  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  I  concluded  with  the  Blessing. 

\JFues.  19. — In  the  evening  I  asked  Miss  Sophy  if  she  was 
still  determined  to  go  to  England.  On  her  answering  *  Yes,' 
I  offered  several  arguments  drawn  from  the  topics  of  religion 
against  it.  But  they  did  not  appear  to  make  any  impression. 
Then  I  pressed  her  upon  the  head  of  friendship.  Upon  which 
she  burst  into  tears,  and  said,  *  Now  my  resolution  begins  to 
stagger  ' ;  as  it  did  more  and  more  every  day. 

He  continued  his  German  studies  until  noon,  when  the  Germans  came, 
'sung,  Bible,  sung,  dined— 10  of  us.'  This  was  a  new  society-class,  but  in 
German. 

Tues.  19. — The  weariness  of  reaction  was  setting  in.  He  did  not  awake 
until  five,  and  after  half  an  hour  of  private  prayer  fell  asleep  again  ;  but 
resting  fifteen  minutes,  he  again  prayed,  and  at  six  read  prayers  and 
exhorted.  At  seven  he  was  with  Miss  Sophy,  praying,  reading  Heylin  and 
Hickes  ;  he  began  a  course  of  Milton  with  her,  probably  from  his  own 
annotated  copy  more  than  half  a  century  later  destroyed  at  the  City  Road 
preachers'  house.  He  was  reading  Ephrem  Syrus  when  Miss  Sophy  came 
again  ;  he  read  Law  to  her,  talked  of  her  going  to  England,  *  got  no  good ' ; 
in  her  hut  (a  hut  seems  to  have  been  assigned  to  her  and  Miss  Fosset : 
Frederica  was  barely  one  year  old,  and  had  not  yet  progressed  far  beyond 
its  primitive  palmetto  huts)  again  read  Milton.  After  evening  prayer 
'  they  came,'  and  he  read  Ephrem,  sang,  and,  in  a  word,  held  his  society- 
class  as  aforetime.  Once  more  he  talked  to  Miss  Sophy  of  going  to 
England  ;  *  she  doubted.' 

Wed.  20. — At  the  usual  seven-o'clock  reading  he  succeeded  in  making 
some  impression  on  Miss  Sophy.  Law's  Serious  Call  did  what  Heylin, 
Ephrem  Syrus,  Hickes,  and  John  Milton  could  not  accomplish:  'she 
was  affected  much.'  In  the  evening  he  wrote  to  the  Trustees.  He 
expounded  twice  a  day  and  held  his  small  meetings.  His  own  reading  was 
almost  exclusively  devotional. 

Thur.  21. — Nothing  distinguishes  the  day  from  days  immediately  pre- 
ceding. 

Fri.  22.— He  rouses  from  lethargy,  and  is  once  more  the  faithful  pastor. 
At  three  he  prays,  at  four  sleeps,  at  five  prays  ;  then  he  converses  seriously 
and  prays  with  Mark.  He  visits  Davison  the  constable,  and  Lawley,  of 


reconsecrated  by  a  sacred  use.      If  the  had    grace    and     capacity    for    Oxford 

English  would  not  use  it,  he  would  turn  Methodism.     As  in   Savannah,  so  here 

to  the  Germans,  of  whom  a  small  number  in  Frederica,  they  might  become  worthy 

had  settled  in  the  town.     They  at  least  members  of  'our  Company.' 


286 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[OC*.  1736. 


{Sat.  23. — Between  five  and  six  in  the  evening  Mr.  Ogle- 
thorpe  returned  from  the  southward.  I  was  in  the  Fort  with 
Mr.  Horton  when  he  came.  He  ran  to  Mr.  Horton,  kissed  him, 
and  expressed  much  kindness  to  him,  but  took  no  notice  of  me, 
good  or  bad,  any  more  than  if  I  had  not  been  in  the  room.  I 
was  not  surprised,  having  long  expected  it.  When  I  mentioned 
it  to  Miss  Sophy,  and  added, '  Now,  Miss  Sophy,  you  may  go  to 
England,  for  I  can  assist  you  no  longer ;  my  interest  is  gone ' ; 
she  answered,  'No,  now  I  will  not  stir  a  foot'  'If  Mr.  Ogle- 
thorpe/  I  said,  '  advised  you  to  go,  he  may  be  displeased.'  She 
replied,  '  Let  him  be  pleased  or  displeased.  I  care  not ' ;  and 
then,  turning  to  me  with  the  utmost  earnestness,  she  said,  '  Sir, 
you  encouraged  me  in  my  greatest  trials.  Be  not  discouraged  in 
your  own.  Fear  nothing.  If  Mr.  Oglethorpe  will  not,  God  will 
help  you.' 

[Sun.  24. — I  had  a  long  conversation  with  Mr.  Oglethorpe, 
in  consequence  of  which  I  told  her: '  Miss  Sophy,  Mr.  Oglethorpe 
thinks  it  best !  that  you  should  return  to  Savannah  immediately.' 
She  fell  into  a  great  passion  of  tears,  and  said  she  could  not 


whom  he  writes  '  Gratia  sa.'  He  read  Hickes  with  Miss  Sophy  and  Mrs. 
Mouse  (of  Skidoway). 

Sat.  23. — He  visited  Mr.  Horton,  who  was  '  very  ill  and  irritable.'  Mr. 
Oglethorpe  came,  and  was  '  cold  and  strange.'  At  home  Vernon  came — 
probably  Mr.  Vernon's  son,  who  had  been  committed  to  Wesley's  pastoral 
care. 

Sun.  24. — The  conversation  with  Oglethorpe  took  place  before  the 
public  service.  Immediately  after  Miss  Sophy  was  informed  of  the  decision, 
and  was  'grieved.' 


1  However  Wesley  may  have  inter- 
preted Causton's  words  (before  he  left 
Savannah),  Miss  Sophy  would  have 
understood  their  significance.  Her  uncle 
was  contemplating  a  marriage  between 
Wesley  and  his  wife's  niece,  an  alliance 
which,  from  his  point  of  view,  and  cer- 
tainly from  Oglethorpe's,  was  much  to  be 
desired.  It  meant  the  abandonment  of 
the  Indian  mission,  the  definite  appoint- 
ment of  Wesley  to  the  pastorate  of 
Savannah,  and  ultimately,  perhaps,  to  a 
position  of  ecclesiastical  power  and  in- 
fluence for  the  whole  state  of  Georgia  ; 
it  meant  that  Wesley,  who  by  this  time 


was  known  as  a  man  of  high  administra- 
tive ability  and  prescient  political  insight, 
would  remain  in  the  colony,  Oglethorpe's 
trusted  adviser  and  secretary,  a  blameless 
English  gentleman,  in  a  state  which 
sorely  needed  disinterested  and  capable 
leaders;  a  scholarly  and  eloquent  preacher 
who,  in  less  than  a  year,  had  made  his 
mark  not  only  in  this  colony  but  also  in 
the  neighbouring  state  of  South  Caro- 
lina ;  a  courageous  loyalist,  who  had 
become  a  terror  to  evildoers,  whose  name 
stood  for  culture,  duty,  citizenship,  and 
who  was  equally  acceptable  to  English 
and  Germans.  Naturally  Oglethorpe 


Oct.  1736.]  Fourth  Frederica  Journal  287 

bear  the  thoughts  of  it.  I  talked  with  her  near  an  hour,  told 
her  Mr.  Causton's  engagement  to  make  good  whatever  I  should 
promise  her,  so  that  she  had  only  to  make  her  own  terms  ;  and 
I  left  her  a  little  more  composed. 

Mon.  25. — [I  asked  Mr.  Oglethorpe  in  what  boat  she 
should  go.  He  said,  '  She  can  go  in  none  but  yours,  and 
indeed  there  is  none  so  proper.'  I  saw  the  danger  to  myself, 
but  yet  had  a  good  hope  I  should  be  delivered  out  of  it, 
(i)  because  it  was  not  my  choice  which  brought  me  into 
it ;  (2)  because  I  still  felt  in  myself  the  same  desire  and 
design  to  live  a  single  life ;  and  (3)  because  I  was  persuaded 
should  my  desire  and  design  be  changed,  yet  her  resolution 
to  live  single  would  continue. 


Mon.  25. — At  six  in  the  morning  he  married  Mr.  Weston  and  Miss 
Fosset,  immediately  afterwards  reading  prayers  and  expounding.  At  ten 
he  had  a  brief  interview  with  Oglethorpe,  and  at  11.30  set  out  with  Miss 
Sophy.  'Jemmy,'  who  had  accompanied  him  from  Savannah,  was  with 
him,  and  the  usual  boat's  crew.  Whether  the  boat  conveyed  passengers 
or  goods  we  are  not  informed.  The  Diary,  which  at  first  is  in  rude  hand- 


desired  to  see  him  well  married  and  friend,  Miss  Fosset,  was  about  to  be 

settled  in  the  colony.  married.  The  lover  who,  with  ferocious 

For  other  but  equally  cogent  reasons  threats,  dared  her  to  think  of  anybody 

Causton  desired  to  see  this  well-born  except  himself  was  in  prison  for  fraud. 

Oxford  clergyman,  who  was  trusted  alike  She  had  no  one  in  Frederica  to  trust 

by  the  Trustees,  the  S.P.G.,  and  the  except  the  Hirds,  with  whom,  in  some 

Governor,  married  to  his  wife's  niece.  sense,  she  lodged.  Up  to  Mr.  John 

Such  a  marriage  would  go  far  to  secure  Wesley  she  looked  with  reverent  affection, 

his  somewhat  precarious  position  in  the  To  her  he  was  a  grave,  learned,  saintly 

colony.  Mrs.  Causton  also  desired  the  clergyman,  almost  old  enough  to  be  her 

marriage,  if  only  in  the  interests  of  her  father,  who  had  come  into  her  circle  out 

niece,  who,  until  safely  married,  was  of  another  world.  She  loved  and  feared 

sure  to  be  a  continual  source  of  trouble.  him  in  about  equal  proportions.  And 

It  is  not  difficult  to  realize  the  anxiety,  now  Colonel  Oglethorpe,  in  her  eyes 

amounting  almost  to  consternation,  with  king  of  the  country,  had  decreed  that  she 

which  Wesley  contemplated  the  situa-  should  return  to  Savannah,  where  her 

tion.  He  was  the  bond-slave  of  vow  and  uncle  and  aunt  would  certainly  tyrannize 

rule  and  conviction,  and,  as  he  conscien-  over  her,  and  where  Mellichamp  might 

tiously  believed,  of  divine  calling  ;  at  the  murder  her  ;  and,  to  add  to  her  perplexity 

same  time  he  was  'a  man  of  like  pas-  and  distress,  she  was  to  return  in  the 

sions ' — devout  and  affectionate.  next  boat,  and  under  the  escort  of  Mr. 

Miss  Sophy  Hopkey  also,  of  whom  we  John  Wesley,  whom  she  secretly  loved 
may  still  think  as  a  simple,  inexperienced  and  really  dreaded  as  a  being  of  almost 
girl,  without  guile  or  artifice,  was  pro-  preternatural  saintliness  and  authority.  In 
foundly  troubled.  She  had  reason  to  England  the  Mellichamps  were  well  con- 
dread  a  return  to  her  uncle's  house.  Her  nected  (see  Georgia  letters,  Record  Office). 


288 


John   Wesley's  Journal 


[Oct.  1736. 


writing,  adds  little  of  interest  to  the  Journal  story.  Every  hour  he  prays 
with  Miss  Sophy,  and  sometimes  sings.  Fleury's  Manners  of  the  Ancient 
Christians  is  read  until  exhausted.  They  row  long  distances,  frequently 
land,  walk,  lie  down  as  described  in  the  Journal,  and  once  *  eat  oysters.' 
On  Friday  morning  a  wind  storm  rises.  The  same  night  a  wakeful  hour 
is  beguiled  by  an  exposition  of  the  Excellent  Woman.  And  so,  after 
many  delays,  they  at  last  come  to  Skidoway,  where  they  see  Mr.  Wattle, 
Mr.  Griffin,  and  Mr.  Mouse  :  thence  to  Thunderbolt  and  Mrs.  Musgrove's, 
and  home  on  Sunday,  October  31.* 


1  The  Diary  version  of  this  extraordinary 
voyage  is  a  mere  fragmentary  record  of 
times,  places,  and  barely  noted  events. 
The  whole  story,  as  told  in  the  Journal, 
of  which  the  above  is  only  the  beginning, 
is  complete  and  transparently  truthful. 
It  is  so  perfect  in  composition  and  hand- 
writing that  it  might  be  sent  to  the  press 
without  touch  of  editorial  pen.  Written 
from  the  point  of  view  of  personal  ex- 
perience, it  reveals  Wesley  in  the  act  of 
studying  himself.  At  a  critical  moment 
in  his  life  he  diagnoses  his  own  case.  It 
is  a  psychological  review  of  motives  and 
emotions  by  a  man  torn  by  inward  con- 
flict—a conflict  between  duty  and  affec- 
tion. The  story  gains  in  impressiveness 
when  we  discover  the  time  and  place  of 
its  final  revision,  for  no  doubt  the  sub- 
stance of  the  narrative  was  written  more 
briefly  and  hurriedly  at  a  much  earlier 
period.  The  MS.  from  which  we  quote 
has  never  before  been  published.  It 
bears  no  marks  of  haste,  and  is  obviously 
a  document  composed  with  care,  with 
conscientious  regard  for  exactitude,  and 
by  a  master  of  literary  style.  It  was 
written  more  than  a  year  after  the  events 
described  took  place  ;  written  not  in 
Georgia,  but  in  Oxford,  in  the  old  rooms 
at  Lincoln  College  where  the  Holy 
Club  had  so  often  met,  and  at  a  date 
(March  12,  1738)  when,  as  we  know 
from  the  Journal,  Wesley  was  profoundly 
moved  by  spiritual  realities.  It  will 
assist  the  student,  and  add  to  the  in- 
terest of  the  general  reader,  if  at  this 
point  the  Journal  for  March  2  to  15, 
1738,  is  quoted  : 

FEB.  28,  Tues.—I  saw  my  mother  once 
more.  The  next  day  I  prepared  for  my 


journey  to  my  brother  at  Tiverton.  But  on 
Thursday  morning,  MARCH  2,  a  message  that 
my  brother  Charles  was  dying  at  Oxford 
obliged  me  to  set  out  for  that  place  imme- 
diately. .  .  . 

With  regard  to  my  own  behaviour,  I  now 
renewed  and  wrote  down  my  former  re- 
solutions : 

i.  To  use  absolute  openness  and  unreserve 
with  all,  &c. 

Sal.  4.— I  found  my  brother  at  Oxford, 
recovering  from  his  pleurisy ;  and  with  him 
Peter  Bohler,  by  whom  (in  the  hand  of  the 
great  God)  I  was,  on  Sunday,  the  sth,  clearly 
convinced  of  unbelief,  of  the  want  of  that 
faith  whereby  alone  we  are  saved. 

Accordingly  I  began  preaching  this  new 
doctrine,  &c. 

Fri.  10. — Peter  Bohler  returned  to  London. 
Tues.  15.— I  set  out  for  Manchester.  ; 

The  date  of  the  document  we  are 
considering  falls  in  the  above  blank — 
March  12,  1738.  It  is  important  to  note 
the  facts.  He  had  just  left  his  aged  mother. 
He  had  come  to  Oxford,  as  he  supposed, 
to  see  his  brother  die.  On  Sunday  he 
had  passed  through  one  of  the  greatest 
spiritual  crises  of  his  life.  Memories 
of  Epworth,  Oxford,  and  Georgia  were 
upon  him.  He  was  at  the  bar  of 
his  own  conscience,  face  to  face  with 
the  Searcher  of  hearts.  He  turned 
the  small  note-book  of  forty-four  pages 
which  he  had  just  filled  with  the  story 
of  another  of  his  many  life-crises,  and 
on  the  blank  outside  leaf  he  inscribed 
the  memorable  words  :  '  SNATCHED  AS 
A  BRAND  OUT  OF  THE  FIRE.' 

On  the  first  inside  page,  immediately 
before  the  narrative,  he  wrote  the  fol- 
lowing texts  :  '  The  Lord  knoweth  the 
thoughts  of  man  that  they  are  but  vain.' 
*  O  give  me  not  up  unto  my  own  heart's 


oct  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  289 


FIFTH  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 

[WE  set  out  about  noon.  The  afternoon,  and  so  the  greater 
part  of  the  following  days,  we  spent  partly  in  using  Bishop 
Patrick's  Prayers^  and  partly  in  reading  the  first  volume  of 
Fleury's  History  of  the  Churcli>  a  book  I  chose  for  her  sake 
chiefly,  as  setting  before  her  such  glorious  examples  of 
truth  and  patience,  in  the  sufferings  of  those  ancient  worthies, 
1  who  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin.' 

[In  the  evening  we  landed  on  an  uninhabited  island, 
made  a  fire,  supped,  went  to  prayers  together,  and  then 
spread  our  sail  over  us  on  four  stakes,  to  keep  off  the  night 
dews.  Under  this  on  one  side  were  Miss  Sophy,  myself, 
and  one  of  our  boys  who  came  with  me  from  Savannah  ;  on 
the  other,  our  boat's  crew.  The  north-east  wind  was  high 
and  piercingly  cold,  and  it  was  the  first  night  she  had  ever 
spent  in  such  a  lodging.  But  she  complained  of  nothing, 
appearing  as  satisfied  as  if  she  had  been  warm  upon  a  bed 
of  down. 

[The  next  morning,  as  we  crossed  Doboy  Sound,  the 
wind  being  high  and  the  sea  rough,  I  asked  her,  *  Miss 
Sophy,  are  not  you  afraid  to  die?'  She  answered  calmly, 
1  No,  I  don't  desire  to  live  any  longer.  Oh  that  God  would 
let  me  go  now!  Then  I  should  be  at  rest.  In  the  world  I 
expect  nothing  but  misery.' 

[In  the  evening,  the   wind   being   contrary,  we   landed   on 


lusts,  neither  let  me  follow  my  own  ordinary  document  ?  The  surmise  which 

imaginations.'  best  fits  in  with  all  we  know  of  his  habits 

The  writing  within  is  the  story  of  his  in  relation  to  such  matters  is  one  that 

friendship  with  Miss  Sophy,  from  invests  the  MS.  with  new  significance 

March  13,  1736,  when  he  first  spoke  to  and  sacredness.  It  is  precisely  the  kind 

her,  to  March  12,  1737,  when  she  of  paper  he  would  write  for  his  mother, 

married  Mr.  Williamson.  The  fact  that  he  had  just  seen  her,  and 

By  a  curious  coincidence  the  MS.  that  she  had  read  his  written  Journal 

thus  written  was  purchased  on  March  12,  in  which  so  many  of  these  particulars 

1903,  by  the  Rev.  Charles  H.  Kelly  were  noted,  would  strengthen  this  sur- 

from  Mr.  Herbert  Weise,  in  whose  mise.  It  is  a  perfectly  fair  copy,  without 

family  the  document  had  been  treasured  abbreviations,  which  his  mother's  aged 

possibly  for  more  than  a  hundred  years.  eyes  would  have  no  difficulty  in  de- 

For  whom  did   he  write   this   extra-  ciphering. 


290  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Oct.i736. 

the  south  end  of  St.  Katherine's  Island.  And  here  we  were 
obliged  to  stay  till  Friday ;  so  that  I  had  time  to  observe 
her  behaviour  more  nearly.  And  the  more  I  observed,  the 
more  was  I  amazed.  Nothing  was  ever  improper  or  ill-timed. 
All  she  said  and  did  was  equally  tinctured  with  seriousness  and 
sweetness.  She  was  often  in  pain,  which  she  could  not  hide ; 
but  it  never  betrayed  her  into  impatience.  She  gave  herself 
up  to  God,  owning  she  suffered  far  less  than  she  deserved. 

\Wed.  27. — In  the  afternoon  we  fell  into  a  conversation  on 
'Lying  in  order  to  do  good.'  She  owned  she  used  to  think 
there  was  no  harm  in  it,  and  that  she  had  herself  sometimes 
done  it  to  me  ;  but  added,  '  she  was  now  convinced  no 
lying  was  lawful,  and  would  therefore  watch  against  all 
kinds  of  it  for  the  future.' 

\TJiur.  28. — In  the  afternoon,  after  walking  some  time, 
we  sat  down  in  a  little  thicket  by  the  side  of  a  spring. 
Here  we  entered  upon  a  close  conversation  on  Christian 
holiness.  The  openness  with  which  she  owned  her  ignorance 
of  it,  and  the  earnest  desire  she  showed  for  fresh  instruction, 
as  it  much  endeared  her  to  me,  so  it  made  me  hope  she 
would  one  day  prove  an  eminent  pattern  of  it. 

[Frt.  29. — We  ventured  to  set  out,  though  the  wind  was 
very  high.  The  waves  dashed  over  the  boat  every  moment,  and 
the  cold  was  extremely  piercing.  She  showed  no  concern,  nor 
made  any  complaint,  but  appeared  quite  cheerful  and  satisfied. 

[It  was  not  without  some  difficulty  that  in  the  afternoon 
we  landed  on  St.  Katherine's  again.  Observing  in  the  night, 
the  fire  we  lay  by  burning  bright,  that  Miss  Sophy  was 
broad  awake,  I  asked  her,  *  Miss  Sophy,  how  far  are  you 
engaged  to  Mr.  Mellichamp  ?  '  She  answered, '  I  have  promised 
him  either  to  marry  him  or  to  marry  no  one  at  all.'  I  said 
(which  indeed  was  the  expression  of  a  sudden  wish,  not  of  any 
formed  design),  '  Miss  Sophy,  I  should  think  myself  happy  if 
I  was  to  spend  my  life  with  you.'  She  burst  out  into  tears 
and  said,  '  I  am  every  way  unhappy.  I  won't  have  Tommy  ; 
for  he  is  a  bad  man.  And  I  can  have  none  else.'  She  added, 
*  Sir,  you  don't  know  the  danger  you  are  in.  I  beg  you 
would  speak  no  word  more  on  this  head.'  And  after  a 
while,  'When  others  have  spoken  to  me  on  the  subject,  I 


NOV.  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  291 

felt  an  aversion  to  them.  But  I  don't  feel  any  to  you.  We 
may  converse  on  other  subjects  as  freely  as  ever.'  Both  my 
judgement  and  will  acquiesced  in  what  she  said,  and  we 
ended  our  conversation  with  a  psalm. 

[Sat.  30. — In  the  afternoon  we  landed  on  Bear  Island, 
and  walked  together  for  near  two  hours.  Here  again  Miss 
Sophy  expressed  the  strongest  uneasiness,  and  an  utter 
aversion  to  living  at  Mr.  Causton's,  saying,  with  many  tears, 
1 1  can't  live  in  that  house  :  I  can't  bear  the  shocks  I  meet 
with  there.'  I  said,  '  Don't  be  uneasy,  Miss  Sophy,  on  that 
account.  If  you  don't  care  to  be  at  Mr.  Causton's,  you  are 
welcome  to  a  room  in  our  house ;  or,  which  I  think  would 
be  best  of  all,  and  your  aunt  once  proposed  it,  you  may 
live  in  the  house  with  the  Germans.'  She  made  little  reply. 

[About  five  we  took  our  boat  again,  and  in  the  evening 
came  to  Rattonpossom,  another  uninhabited  island  about 
thirty  miles  from  Savannah.  Here  our  provisions  failed ; 
neither  could  we  find  any  firewood,  except  one  old  stump  of 
a  tree,  nor  so  much  as  two  or  three  stakes  to  prop  up  our 
sail.  Miss  Sophy  hung  her  apron  on  two  small  sticks,  which 
kept  off  a  little  of  the  north  wind  from  her  head,  and  lay 
down  on  the  ground  under  the  canopy  of  heaven,  with  all 
the  signs  of  perfect  content. 

[Sun.  31. — We  came  to  Thunderbolt.  Here  we  agreed 
that  I  should  walk  to  Savannah  and  meet  her  at  the  landing. 
She  went  to  Mr.  Causton's  directly.  About  five  Mr.  Causton 
came  to  my  house,  largely  protesting  his  obligations  to  me, 
and  repeated  again  and  again  that  whatever  I  desired  with 
regard  to  Miss  Sophy  he  would  consent  to.  After  talking 
again  with  her  upon  it,  I  desired,  (i)  that  she  should  come 
to  my  house  every  morning  and  evening;  (2)  that  at  his 
house  she  should  come  into  no  company  but  by  her  own 
choice  ;  (3)  That  she  should  be  no  more  upbraided  with 
Mellichamp,  nor  should  he  be  mentioned  before  her. 

[Nov.  i,  Mon. — She  was  eighteen  years  old.  And  from  the 
beginning  of  our  intimate  acquaintance  till  this  day,  I  verily  believe 
she  used  no  guile  :  not  only  because  even  now  I  know  no  instance 
to  the  contrary,  nor  only  because  the  simplicity  of  her  behaviour 
was  a  constant  voucher  for  her  sincerity  ;  but  because  of  the  entire 

VOL.  I.  1 6 


292  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Nov.  me. 

openness  of  all  her  conversation,  answering  whatever  questions  I 
proposed,  without  either  hesitation  or  reserve,  immediately  and 
directly.  Another  thing  I  was  much  pleased  with  in  her  was,  that 
whenever  we  were  conversing  or  reading,  there  was  such  a  stillness 
in  her  whole  behaviour,  scarce  stirring  hand  or  foot,  that  c  she 
seemed  to  be,  all  but  her  attention,  dead.'  Yet  at  other  times 
she  was  all  life — active,  diligent,  indefatigable ;  always  doing  some- 
thing, and  doing  with  all  her  might  whatever  her  hand  found  to 
do.  For  indeed,  if  the  weakness  of  her  body  did  not,  her  sense 
of  honour  would  not  hinder  her  doing  anything. 

[Nor  did  she  at  all  favour  herself  on  account  of  that  weakness; 
she  could  not  remove,  she  would  not  indulge  it.  Softness  and 
tenderness  of  this  kind  she  would  not  know,  having  left  the  delicacy 
of  the  gentlewoman  in  England.  She  utterly  despised  those  in- 
conveniences which  women  of  condition  in  England  would  think  worse 
than  death.  With  bread  to  eat  and  water  to  drink  she  was  content ; 
indeed  she  never  used  any  drink  beside  water.  She  was  patient  of 
labour,  of  cold,  heat,  wet,  of  badness  of  food  or  of  want ;  and  of 
pain  to  an  eminent  degree,  it  never  making  any  alteration  in  her 
speech  or  behaviour,  so  that  her  frequent  headache  was  only  to 
be  discerned  by  her  paleness  and  the  dullness  of  her  eyes. 

[Little  of  a  gentlewoman  in  delicacy  and  niceness,  she  was  still 
less  so,  if  possible,  in  love  of  dress.  No  philosopher  would  have 
despised  her  £coov  <£iAoKoo-/x,ov.  Though  always  neat,  she  was  always 
plain.  And  she  was  equally  careless  of  finery  in  other  things.  It 
was  use  she  considered,  not  show  •  nor  novelty  either,  being  as 
little  concerned  for  new  as  for  fine  or  pretty  things.  The  same 
disregard  she  had  for  what  are  called  diversions,  such  as  balls, 


Nov.  i,  Man. — He  arrived  in  Savannah  on  Sunday  afternoon,  and 
fell  at  once  into  the  routine  of  daily  services,  private  devotions,  and 
pastoral  business  ;  to  which  were  now  added  the  extraordinary  duties 
involved  in  the  arrangement  entered  into  with  the  Caustons  and  Miss 
Sophy.  She  slept  at  home,  and  spent  her  mornings  and  evenings  at 
the  parsonage,  alone,  or  more  frequently  with  Wesley  and  Delamotte 
and  their  guests.  In  the  evening  Miss  Bovey  came,  and  others,  to  share 
the  readings  and  singing  which  still  formed  the  main  feature  of  the 
society-meetings. 

On  this  Monday  morning  he  rose  at  four,  spent  one  hour  in  private 
prayer,  and  read  prayers  and  expounded  at  five.  Miss  Sophy  was 
present.  In  the  garden  he  prayed  with  her,  and  afterwards  walked 
with  Ingham  and  Delamotte.  The  rest  of  the  day  was  spent  mainly 
in  pastoral  visitation.  In  the  evening  he  resumed  worship  with  the 
Moravians.  Later  he  read  Valdesso  to  Miss  Sophy.  She  returned  home 
shortly  after  nine. 


NOV.  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  293 

dancing,  visiting ;  having  no  desire  either  to  see  or  be  seen,  unless 
in  order  to  be  wiser  and  better. 

[Not  that  her  love  of  retirement  or  want  of  curiosity  was  owing, 
as   some   supposed,   to  want  of  sense.     Her  constant,  even  serious- 
ness  was   very   far   from   stupidity.     Indeed,    her   understanding   was 
not   of  a   piece  with   her  years.     Though   unimproved,   it  was  deep 
and  strong.      It  reached  the  highest  things  and  the  lowest.      It  rose 
to  the  greatest,  yet  stooped  to  the  least.     With  fine  sense  she  had 
a    large    share    of    common    sense,    and    particularly   of   prudence, 
suiting   herself  readily   to  all   persons  and  occasions,    nature   in  her 
supplying    the    place    of   experience.        Her    apprehension    was    so 
quick   that  there  was  scarce  ever  need  to  repeat  a  thing  twice  to 
her,    and    so    clear   as    to   conceive    things    the    most   remote   from 
common  life   without  any  mistake   or   confusion.      But   she   was  by 
no  means   fond  of  showing  her  sense ;   seldom   speaking   when    she 
could  decently  avoid  it,   and  then  in  few  words,   but  such   as  were 
clear  and   pertinent,   and   contained   much   in   little   compass.      One 
reason   of  her  speaking   so   seldom   was   the  mean  opinion  she  had 
of  herself,    particularly   of  her   own   understanding,   which   was   also 
the   great   cause   of  her   constant   eagerness   for   instruction,   and  in- 
deed   for    improvement    of    every   kind,    as    she   was   very   sensible 
of  her  want  of  all.      Hence   too   it   was  that  she  was   so   teachable 
in  things  either  of  a  speculative  or  practical  nature,  so  readily  con- 
vinced   of    any     error     in     her    judgement     or     oversight     in     her 
behaviour,  and  so  easily  persuaded  to  lay  aside  her  own  designs  or 
measures  and  pursue  those  which  others  advised.      Indeed,  one  would 
almost   have  thought   she   had   no  such   ingredient   in   her  nature  as 
self-will. 

[As  her  humility  was,  so  was  her  meekness.  She  seemed  to 
have  been  born  without  anger.  Her  soul  appeared  to  be  wholly 
made  up  of  mildness,  gentleness,  longsuffering.  Then  especially, 
when  she  had  to  do  with  those  who  had  injured  her  beyond  the 
manner  of  men,  she  stayed  for  no  entreaty  before  she  forgave ;  but 
of  one  thing  she  was  not  easily  convinced,  that  any  one  needed  her 
forgiveness  or  had  done  ill  either  to  her  or  any  other.  She  was 
with  difficulty  induced  to  believe  any  evil  which  she  did  not  see. 
And  even  when  she  could  not  help  believing,  still  she  took  care 
1  to  speak  evil  of  no  man. ' 

[And  as  her  greatest  enemies,  so  much  more  the  greatest  strangers 
had  a  share  in  her  good  will  and  affection.  She  was  a  friend  to  human 
kind.  To  whomever  was  distressed  she  was  all  sympathy,  tenderness, 
compassion.  But  to  any  whom  she  particularly  called  a  friend  her 
behaviour  can  only  be  conceived,  not  expressed.  Such  was  the  spirit 
of  gratitude  that  ran  through  it ;  such  the  softness,  the  sweetness  of 


294  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Nov.  me. 

every   part  of  it ;   yet  still   preserving  in  all  that   yielding  easiness   a 
modesty  pure  as  the  light. 

[The  temper  of  her  heart  towards  God  is  best  known  by  Him  '  who 
seeth  in  secret.'  What  appeared  of  it  was  a  deep,  even  reverence, 
ripening  into  love,  and  a  resignation  unshaken  in  one  of  the  severest 
trials  which  human  nature  is  exposed  to.  The  utmost  anguish  never 
wrung  from  her  a  murmuring  word.  She  saw  the  hand  of  God,  and 
was  still.  She  said  indeed,  *  If  it  be  possible,  Father  ! '  But  added, 
'  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt ! ' 

[Such  was  the  woman,  according  to  my  closest  observation, 
of  whom  I  now  began  to  be  much  afraid.  My  desire  and  design 
still  was  to  live  single  ;  but  how  long  it  would  continue  I  knew 
not.  I  therefore  consulted  my  friends  whether  it  was  not  best 
to  break  off  all  intercourse  with  her  immediately.  They  ex- 
pressed themselves  so  ambiguously  that  I  understood  them  to 
mean  that  I  ought  not  to  break  it  off.  And  accordingly  she 
came  to  me  (as  had  been  agreed)  every  morning  and  evening. 

[The  time  she  was  at  my  house  was  spent  thus.  Immediately 
after  breakfast  we  all  joined  in  Hickes's  Devotions.  She  was 
then  alone  till  eight.  I  taught  her  French  between  eight 
and  nine,  and  at  nine  we  joined  in  prayer  again.  She  then 
read  or  wrote  French  till  ten.  In  the  evening  I  read  to  her 
and  some  others  select  parts  of  Ephrem  Syrus,  and  after- 
wards Dean  Young's  and  Mr.  Reeve's  Sermons.  We  always 
concluded  with  a  psalm. 

[This  I  began  with  a  single  eye.  But  it  was  not  long 
before  I  found  it  a  task  too  hard  for  me  to  preserve  the 
same  intention  with  which  I  began,  in  such  intimacy  of 
conversation  as  ours  was. 


Tues.  2. — He  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Trustees  and  began  French  with 
Miss  Sophy.  Her  lesson  lasted  an  hour.  Invariably  he  closed  each 
lesson  with  prayer  or  a  psalm.  On  this  first  occasion  he  prayed  with 
her  and  Delamotte.  Two  lines  follow  which  may  be  of  considerable 
importance  : 

10  Wrote  French. 

11  French  ;  F'  G.  with  French,  sung  it. 

The  interpretation  suggested  is  that,  when  the  French  lesson  closed, 
Wesley  wrote  French  on  his  own  account  for  an  hour  and  a  quarter. 
He  then  turned  to  Freylinghausen's  Gesang-Buch  (in  which  he  would  find 
tunes  as  well  as  German  hymns)  and  sang  the  hymn  from  the  French 
which  he  had  copied,  intending  to  translate  and  reversify  it.  At  noon 


NOV.  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  295 

he  sang  devotionally  with  Delamotte,  dined,  abridged  French  (it  may 
have  been  grammar,  catechism,  or  hymns),  and  began  his  usual  round 
of  pastoral  visitation.  In  the  afternoon  he  resumed  French  with  Miss 
Bovey,  and  in  the  evening  read  Ephrem  Syrus  with  her  and  Miss 
Sophy. 

Wed.  3.— He  has  developed  an  enthusiasm  for  French,  and  is  writing 
an  Abridged  Grammar?  At  eleven  he  prayed  for  Oglethorpe  and  him- 
self. In  the  evening,  after  reading  Ephrem  Syrus  with  Miss  Sophy 
and  singing  the  usual  psalm,  he  remarks,  '  I  fear  for  her.' 

Nov.  4,  5,  6. — The  days  passed  without  variation  from  the  usual 
routine,  except  that  on  the  6th  Indians  came,  recalling  Wesley  by 
their  presence  to  the  divine  vocation  which  brought  him  to  America, 
and  which  he  confesses  the  present  arrangement  with  Miss  Sophy  is 
seriously  threatening. 

Sun.  7. — Miss  Sophy  did  not  come  until  the  evening.  Before  the 
morning  service  he  and  Ingham  had  'close  conversation.' 

Mon.  8. — He  began  a  German  Grammar,  working  at  it  through  the 
early  morning  hours.  The  rest  of  the  morning  he  spent  with  Hickes's 
Christian  Priesthood.  During  each  of  these  days  he  visited  his  flock 
with  all  diligence,  and  did  not  neglect  prayers,  the  catechizing  of 
children,  or  his  personal  morning  studies.  But  always,  morning  and 
evening,  Miss  Sophy,  with  her  guardians'  full  consent,  was  in  the 
parsonage  to  be  taught,  read  to,  or  prayed  with.  Every  afternoon 
pastoral  visits  were  paid,  and  Miss  Bovey  received  her  lesson  in  French. 
Wesley  also  was  making  his  own  tools— a  Hymn-book,  a  French  Grammar, 
a  German  Dictionary,  a  German  Grammar,  a  Catechism,  and  a  Selection 
of  Prayers  for  devotional  purposes. 

Tues.  9.— At  ten  he  took  boat  up  the  river  to  visit  the  small  colony 
at  Irene.  Hickes's  Reformed  Devotions  was  his  companion  in  the  boat. 
On  his  arrival  he  cut  down  trees,  and  had  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Musgrove 
and  Sinauki.  Returning  in  the  afternoon,  he  saw  Ingham,  probably  at  his 
house  near  the  Cowpen. 

Wed.  10. — The  German  work  was  interrupted  by  misgivings  and 
qualms  of  conscience,  ending  in  a  new  *  Resolution,'  which  he  frankly 
communicated  to  Miss  Sophy.  He  then  fled  for  refuge  to  Hickes,  and 
wrote  in  the  Diary  the  devotional  letters  of  an  earlier  time,  '  T  G.'  In 
the  evening,  when  Miss  Bovey  and  Miss  Sophy  came,  he  read  to  them 
a  sermon  and  sang  a  psalm. 

Thur.  ii. — At  four  he  prayed  with  Delamotte  and  read  Hebrew  and 
German.  After  prayers  Miss  Sophy,  Causton,  and  Mr.  Williamson 
came.  He  wrote  to  Mr.  Reinier  (probably  John  Reinier),  saw  John 
Brownfield,  and  wrote  to  Verelot  and  Charles.  *  F'  G '  (Freylinghausen's 
Gesang-BuchT)  with  Miss  Sophy;  conversed;  resolutions;  read  Hickes. 
Mr.  Reed  and  Mr.  Robinson,  from  Frederica,  came. 


1  In  1751  Wesley  printed  a  Short  French  School.     The  original  draft,  now  in  the 

Grammar.     It  is  republished,  with  other  Colman   Collection,    was    the   Abridged 

grammars,  in  the  Works.  In  its  complete  French  Grammar  prepared  for  the  use  of 

form    it   was    prepared    for   Kingswood  Miss  Sophy  Hopkey  in  Savannah. 


296  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Nov.  me. 

[Nov.  12,  Fri. — By  a  careful  inquiry  of  many  persons,  I 
came  to  the  full  knowledge  of  a  strange  piece  of  history. 
Mr.  T(ailfer),  a  surgeon  of  Edinburgh,  debauched  the  only  child 
of  one  Mr.  Ure,  a  lawyer,  his  distant  relation.  He  then 
persuaded  her  to  sign  a  writing  which  she  had  never  read, 
and  to  go  over  with  him  to  America.  She  did  so, 
partly  out  of  fear  of  her  father,  but  chiefly  out  of  love  for 
him.  When  she  came  hither,  having  been  brought  to  bed 
in  Carolina,  he  treated  her  as  a  common  servant ;  and  not 
only  so,  but  beat  her,  and  that  very  frequently  to  such  a 
degree  that  the  scars  made  by  the  whip  a  year  before  were 
plainly  visible  at  this  time.  The  fault  commonly  was  that 
'  the  child  cried  when  he  had  company.1  After  he  had  kept 
her  thus  for  about  two  years,  and  she  had  borne  him  a 
second  child  (the  first  being  dead),  he  married,  and  sold  her 
to  one  of  the  Indian  traders. 

[When  I  met  him  and  her  before  Mr.  Oglethorpe,  he 
allowed  the  facts  and  defended  them ;  only  he  said  he  had 
not  sold  her,  but  made  a  present  of  her  to  the  Indian  trader. 
Mr.  Oglethorpe  after  a  full  hearing  determined  that  she  should 
be  set  at  liberty  (with  an  allowance  out  of  the  public  store) 
to  work  for  herself  and  her  child.] 

Fri.  12. — At  morning  prayer  he  expounded  the  I23rd  psalm.  This 
is  the  first  occasion  on  which  he  indicates  the  subject  of  his  exposition. 
It  was  a  departure  from  his  ordinary  Second  Lesson  exposition.  At 
seven  he  wrote  to  L.  Percival,  and  to  Mr.  Carter  '  of  eating.'  At  eight 
Mr.  Oglethorpe  came.  At  nine  he  had  an  interview  with  him ;  prayed 
with  Miss  Sophy  and  began  with  Dr.  Tailfer.  He  saw  Mrs.  Causton. 
Went  out  with  Mrs.  Mouse,  who  evidently  had  come  in  the  boat  with 
Oglethorpe  from  Frederica.  At  eleven  was  again  at  Oglethorpe's. 

He  out  to  others  ;  me  at  home.  Dressed.  Mr  Brownfield,  conversed ;  Communion ; 
Mr  Tripper's.  Rachel  Ure  and  Mrs  Mouse. 

These  seem  to  have  been  witnesses  in  the  case  of  *  Rachel  Ure  v. 
Dr.  Tailfer'1  whom  Oglethorpe  examined.  For  the  rest  of  the  day  he 
seems  to  have  been  busily  engaged  with  him  and  others  in  the  investigation 
of  this  case.  (Cf.  Journal,  same  date.  The  Diary  supplies  the  name  of 
this  notorious  doctor.) 

Sat.  13. — He  continued  his  letter  on  eating,  and  wrote  to  his  brother 
Samuel. 


1  This  sufficiently  accounts  for  Dr.  Sophy  Hopkey)  were  joint  authors  of 
Tailfer's  animus  against  Wesley  and  Ogle-  The  True  Account  of  the  State  of  Georgia 
thorpe.  He  and  Williamson  (who  married  (App.  XVIII.  vol.  vi.). 


NOV.  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  297 

Tues.  23. — Mr.  Oglethorpe  sailed  for  England,  leaving  Mr. 
Ingham,  Mr.  Delamotte,  and  me  at  Savannah,  but  with  less 
prospect  of  preaching  to  the  Indians  than  we  had  the  first  day 


Sun.  14.— The  day  does  not  differ  from  others,  except  that  he 
reintroduces  Heylin  and  reads  one  of  Dr.  Young's  sermons. 

Mon.  15. — Letters  and  pastoral  work,  including  the  writing  of  letters 
for  parishioners  and  the  burying  of  the  dead,  occupied  the  day. 

Tues.  1 6. — After  two  interviews  with  Oglethorpe  he  set  out  with 
Ingham  and  Delamotte  for  Irene,  where  for  three  hours  he  felled  trees. 

Wed.  17. — More  than  once  he  has  referred  to  a  letter  he  wrote  to 
Oglethorpe.  Once  he  reviewed  it,  and  now  spent  the  whole  morning 
in  transcribing  it.  Mrs.  Musgrove  came.  They  had  a  long  conversation 
in  the  garden.  Oglethorpe  sent  for  him.  In  the  afternoon  he  buried 
Mr.  Tolney,  also  a  child.  There  is  much  business  on  hand  with  Ogle- 
thorpe and  others. 

Thur.  1 8.— Again  he  transcribes  a  letter,  and  reads  a  letter  from 
the  Bishop  of  London  'for  Negro's  Book  on  Confirmation.'  Other 
letters  are  referred  to.  All  this,  probably,  is  secretarial  work  for  Ogle- 
thorpe, who  is  preparing  for  his  journey  to  England.  Each  evening  he 
reads  a  sermon  to  Miss  Sophy  and  her  friends,  and  sings  a  psalm. 

Fri.  19. — He  reads  a  letter  to  Delamotte  and  Miss  Sophy  before 
sending  it  to  Oglethorpe.  A  short  French  letter  follows,  with  a  psalm, 
and  some  hours  of  letter-writing  and  transcription. 

Sat.  20. — Practically  the  whole  day  was  spent  on  business  with  Ogle- 
thorpe, Causton,  and  others,  and  in  letter-writing  or  copying.  In  the 
evening  he  began  Dr.  Bray's  Circular  Letters. 

Sun.  21. — He  and  Delamotte,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  school,  were 
busy  with  catechumens  : 

9  Freylinghausen's  Gesang-Buc/i  with  Delamotte  ;  conversation  of  catechumens. 

He  devoted  some  time  to  the  Catechism  he  was  preparing.  In  the 
afternoon  he  catechized  the  children,  of  whom  forty  were  present.  There 
appear  to  have  been  eighteen  catechumens.  A  letter  was  written  to 
Sir  John  Phillips,  whose  generosity  was  making  it  possible  for  George 
Whitefield  to  carry  on  the  work  of  the  Holy  Club  at  Oxford.  His  last 
duty  for  the  day  was  the  reading  of  Dr.  Bray's  Circular  Letters  to  Miss 
Sophy  and  Delamotte. 

Mon.  22.— The  hurry  of  business  has  passed.  After  his  manner  he 
resumes  the  studies,  devotions,  and  pastoral  work  which  Oglethorpe's 
projected  visit  to  Europe  has  to  some  extent  interrupted — French,  German, 
German  grammar,  and  readings  in  Ephrem  Syrus. 

Tues.  23. — He  wrote  a  letter  to  his  brother  Samuel.  Mr.  Ingham 
came  in  from  Yamacraw,  probably  to  attend  the  funeral  of  Mrs.  Musgrove's 
only  son,  whose  name,  given  in  the  Diary,  is  '  Ned.'  At  Causton's  there 
was  'conversation  on  eating' — a  subject  upon  which  Wesley  still  held 
extreme  views.  No  reference  is  made  to  Oglethorpe's  sailing  on  this 
day.  He  sailed  the  day  following. 


John   Wesley  s  Journal  rNov.me. 

we  set  foot   in   America.      Whenever    I   mentioned  it,  it  was 
immediately  replied,  'You  cannot   leave  Savannah  without  a 
minister.'     To  this  indeed  my  plain  answer  was,  *  I  know  not 
that    I    am    under   any   obligation    to   the  contrary.      I    never 
promised    to  stay  here  one  month.      I   openly  declared    both 
before,  at,  and  ever  since  my  coming  hither  that  I  neither  would 
nor  could   take  charge  of  the  English  any  longer  than  till  I 
could  go  among  the  Indians.'     If  it  was  said,  *  But  did  not  the 
Trustees  of  Georgia  appoint  you  to  be  minister  of  Savannah  ? ' 
I  replied,  *  They  did  ;  but  it  was  not  done  by  my  solicitation : 
it  was  done  without  either  my  desire  or  knowledge.     Therefore 
I    cannot   conceive   that   appointment    to   lay   me   under   any 
obligation  of  continuing  there  any  longer  than  till  a  door  is 
opened  to  the  heathen  ;    and   this  I  expressly  declared  at  the 
time  I  consented  to  accept  of  that  appointment.'     But  though 
I  had  no  other  obligation  not  to  leave  Savannah  now,  yet  that 
of  love  I  could  not  break  through ;  I  could  not  resist  the  im- 
portunate request  of  the  more  serious  parishioners  'to  watch 
over   their   souls   yet  a  little  longer  till  some  one  came  who 
might  supply  my  place.'      And  this  I  the  more  willingly  did 
because  the  time  was  not  come  to  preach  the  gospel  of  peace 
to   the   heathen  ;  all   their   nations   being   in    a   ferment ;   and 
Paustoobee  and   Mingo  Mattaw  having  told  me,  in  terms,  in 
my  own  house,  ' Now  our  enemies  are  all  about  us,  and   we 
can  do  nothing  but  fight  ;  but  if  the  beloved  ones  should  ever 
give  us  to  be  at  peace,  then  we  would  hear  the  great  Word.' 

[In  the  evening  of  November  23  I  buried  Mrs.  Musgrove's  only 
son  ;  who  would  probably  have  been  quite  lost  in  grief,  but  that 
God  diverted  her  from  it  by  the  pain  of  a  violent  rheumatism. 

Wed.  24. — He  rose  soon  after  one  in  the  morning  ;  at  two  pushed 
off  the  boat  ;  at  2.30  set  out.  At  three  they  were  aground ;  waded ;  got 
off ;  with  Oglethorpe ;  at  four  rowed,  conversed,  sang.  At  six  it  was 
very  rough;  at  nine  they  were  aground  at  Dokoume ;  waded;  got  off; 
rowed ;  over  the  marsh  on  Tybee  ;  James  Dean  and  company  there  ; 
walked  to  Tybee  ;  in  the  lighthouse ;  walked  back ;  '  sea  overtook  us  ; 
oysters  ;  Mr.  How  came,  slept.'  At  four  they  set  out  together,  and  by 
eight  reached  Mr.  Causton's.1 


1  One  of  the  peculiarities  of  this  sen-  farewell  to  his  friend.  The  same  pecu- 
tentious  narrative  is  the  fact  that  he  does  liarity  is  found  in  the  story  of  Charles 
not  indicate  the  point  at  which  he  bade  Wesley's  departure. 


Nov.  1736.1 


Fifth  Savannah  Journal 


299 


Thur.  25.— At  seven  he  set  out  for  the  Cowpen,  Miss  Sophy  and  others 
accompanying  him.  Mrs.  Musgrove  was  ill  and  in  trouble.  As  they  walked 
he  read  Bray,  also,  later,  'to  Mrs.  Musgrove  and  them  all.'  He  remained 
with  the  sick  woman  for  an  hour  or  two. 

Fri.  26. — He  now  turned  his  attention  again  to  Spanish,  apparently 
dealing  with  the  grammar,  as  he  had  already  dealt  with  French  and  German 
grammars.  Six  hours  at  a  stretch  he  gave  to  this  work,  the  only  relief 
being  a  reading  from  Hickes,  conversation  with  his  pupil  in  French,  and 
the  hourly  five-minutes'  prayer. 

Sat.  27. — At  seven  he  read  Hickes's  Devotions,  worked  again  at  Spanish, 
and  sang  a  Spanish  psalm  or  hymn.  At  ten  he  read  Dr.  Bray's  Tracts, 
and  at  twelve  Gilpin's  Life. 

Sun.  28. — Gilpin's  Life  was  his  preparation  for  preaching.  The  con- 
gregation numbered  thirty-seven ;  there  were  fourteen  communicants. 
Bray's  Tracts  he  again  read.  In  the  evening  hour  with  Miss  Sophy  and 
Delamotte  he  read  letters. 

Mon.  29. — Another  long  morning  he  devoted  chiefly  to  Spanish.  He 
visited  Ross,  who  was  dying.  It  being  a  fast-day,  he  did  not  eat  until  six, 
when  he  paid  his  daily  visit  to  the  Germans. 

Tues.  30. — It  was  the  feast  of  St.  Andrew.  He  thought  much  on  the 
sermon,  and  preached  it  to  a  congregation  of  twenty-one,  administering 
Holy  Communion  after.  He  read  letters  from  Charles,  and  buried  Ross 
in  the  churchyard. 

At  this  point  are  the  four  hymns !  translated  from  the  German,  to  which 
reference  has  already  been  made  more  than  once.  We  do  not  know  the 
date  of  the  writing,  but  it  must  have  been  some  weeks  earlier  than 
December  1736. 


1  Three  of  the  hymns  have  numbers 
attached,  by  which  the  original  source 
whence  they  were  drawn  before  trans- 
lation might  be  traced  : 

O  Jesus,  Source  of  sweet  repose, 
Thy  like  nor  man  nor  angel  knows. 

From  Freylinghausen,  freely  translated. 

124.    My  soul  before  Thee  prostrate  lies, 
To  Thee,  her  source,  my  spirit  flies. 

Translated  from  C.  F.  Richter ;  first 
published  in  Freylinghausen's  Gesang- 
Buch,  1704. 

215.   Jesu,  to  Thee  my  heart  I  bow, 

Strange  flames  far   from   my  soul  re- 
move. 

Zinzendorf :  free  translation. 

The  fourth  hymn  (numbered  306,  see 
facsimile  on  p.  216)  might  be  an  original. 
But  in  all  probability  it  also  is  a  transla- 
tion. Its  source  has  not  yet  been  traced. 
It  is  not  in  the  Charlestown  Collection , 
nor  in  the  Wesley  Poems  : 


306.    To  Thee  with  heart  and  mouth  I  sing, 

To  all  the  earth  make  known, 
My  heart's  desire,  my  God  and  King, 
What  Thou  to  me  hast  shown. 

That  Thou  the  everlasting  Source 

Of  mercy  art,  I  know, 
From  whom,  with  never-ceasing  course, 

Unnumbered  blessings  flow. 
What  are  we,  Lord  ?  of  all  we  have 

What  hath  our  eye  surveyed, 
But  what  Thy  bounty,  Father,  gave, 

But  what  Thy  hand  hath  made  ? 
Who  hath  yon  beauteous,  starry  plain 

Fixed  by  His  powerful  voice? 
Who  with  soft  dews  and  timely  rain 

Bids  our  parched  fields  rejoice  ? 

Who,  when  chill    snows  earth's    face 
bespread, 

Who  then  gives  fires  to  shine? 
Who  crowns  with  oil  our  cheerful  head, 

And  glads  our  hearts  with  wine  ? 

Life,  motion,  sense !  whose  gifts  are 
these  ? 

Whose  all-disposing  hand 
Our  borders  guards,  and  golden  peace 

Preserves  throughout  our  land  ? 


3OO  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [Dec.  me. 

[In  the  beginning  of  December  I  advised  Miss  Sophy  to  sup 
earlier,  and  not  immediately  before  she  went  to  bed.  She  did 
so ;  and  on  this  little  circumstance  (for  by  this  she  began  her 
intercourse  with  Mr.  Williamson)  what  an  inconceivable  train  of 
consequences  depend  !  not  only 

All  the  colour  of  remaining  life 

for   her ;    but    perhaps    all    my   happiness    too,   in    time    and 
eternity !] 

DEC.  i,  Wed. — German  was  the  main  subject  of  study.  'Mild  frost' 
set  in.  '  Read  letter  from  Watkins.' 

Thur.  2. — The  frost  became  severe.  He  wrote  to  Charles,  to  Rev. 
Laserre,  Eveleigh,  and  to  Watkins. 

Fri.  3. — He  notes  the  rapid  changes  of  temperature :  at  four  in  the 
morning  *  severe  frost ' ;  at  seven  '  milder '  ;  at  nine  '  mild ' ;  at  twelve 
'warm.'  Moses  Nunes  came,  also  Mr.  Hermsdorf.  With  Nunes  (see 
p.  345)  he  seems  to  have  read  Spanish.  He  buried  a  German. 

Sat.  4. — In  the  early  morning  it  was  very  warm,  then  cloudy,  then  rain. 
French  and  German  work  continued,  and  the  ordinary  routine. 

Sun.  5. — As  a  help  in  sermon  preparation  he  read  Freylinghausen's 
Gesang-Buch  and  Thomas  a  Kempis.  Sixty  were  present  at  the  afternoon 
catechizing.  A  devotional  book,  Nicodemus  j  or,  A  Treatise  on  the  Fear 
of  Man,  is  named.  Later  it  gave  a  title  to  one  of  Wesley's  lost  Journal 
note-books.  Still  later  it  was  translated  and  abridged  for  the  Methodist 
Societies.1 

Mon.  6. — This  was  a  noteworthy  day,  as  will  appear. 

4  Prayed  with  them  ;  German.     Mild,  wind. 

5  On  business  ;  read  prayers,  expounded ;  Miss  Sophy  came  ;  13  present. 

6  Talked  ;  sat  within ;  Hickes.  7  German. 

8  With  Miss  Sophy  ;  French  ;  in  talk ;  German. 

9  Prayed  with  them  ;  began  shorthand. 

10  Shorthand;  garden;  shorthand.  n  Shorthand;  German. 

From  this  time  onward  shorthand  was  studied  and  practised,  until,  in 
the  Diary,  it  was  substituted  for  the  abbreviated  longhand  and  cipher 
hitherto  used. 

Tues.  7. — At  six  he  ended  the  German  grammar  he  was  compiling  or 
abridging  ;  at  seven  he  began  to  abridge  Nicodemus^  writing  in  a  bound 
book  now  lost.  His  weather-notes  are :  at  4  '  warm  rain '  ;  I  p.m.  '  mild, 


1  One  of  the  Weise  MSS.  on  its  last  of  '  collecting '  the  books  he  read.     Not 

page  remarks,  *  It  goes  on  in  the  bound  a  few  of  his   abridgements  and   tracts, 

(Nicodemus)    book.'      Because    of    the  published  in  later  years,  were  prepared 

wholesale  destruction  of  note-books  and  in  Georgia.      There  is  little  trace  now 

MSS.  which  took   place  after  Wesley's  of  the    *  idleness '   habit   against   which 

death   we   should   have   known  nothing  he  fought  in  1725-7.      His   friendships 

of  Wesley's  literary  activity  in  Georgia  in  Georgia,  notably  those  in  which  Miss 

but  for  the  notes  preserved  in  the  Diary.  Hopkey  and   Miss  Bovey  figured,  were 

He  had  not  abandoned  his  Oxford  plan  intimately  associated  with  study,  teach- 


Dec.  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  301 

DEC.  9,  Thur. — Hearing  a  poor  woman  was  dangerously 
ill,  I  went  to  her  immediately.  She  told  me  [that  she  had 
long  wanted  to  speak  with  me,  and  had  sent  several  messengers 
—who  never  came — ]  that  she  had  many  things  to  say.  But 
the  time  was  past ;  for  her  weakness  prevented  her  saying  more, 
and  on  Friday  the  loth  God  required  her  soul  of  her. 

[Sun.  12. — I  read  the  Proclamation  against  Profaneness  to  a 
numerous  congregation.  The  Acts  of  Parliament  appointed  to 
be  read  in  churches  were  read  on  the  following  Sunday  ;  and 

fair';  6  'full  moon';  9  'cold.'  These  notes  he  continues.  A  complete 
record  for  December  1736  could  be  given. 

Wed.  8. — Hickes,  Nicodemus^  shorthand,  Dr.   Bray's  Tracts  were  still 
the  subjects  of  study  or  reading.     One  line  is  a  mystery  : 
c  ...  for  four  C.     Lots.     Kept  to  cool,  fair. 

The  C  may  mean  Causton  or  Church  ;  the  reference  seems  to  be  to 
the  sale,  or  transfer,  of  lots  in  the  country.  On  his  deposition  Causton 
retired  to  his  lot  near  Savannah. 

*  Thur.  9. — After  morning  prayers  he  walked  with  Causton,  and  had  a 
long  conversation  respecting  the  town.  At  eight  he  read  Blair's  sermon  on 
our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  At  nine  he,  Miss  Sophy,  and  Delamotte 
set  out  for  the  Cowpen.  They  found  Mrs.  Musgrove  better  and  Mrs.  Salter 
there.  With  Mrs.  Musgrove  he  read  an  account  of  Florida.  On  his  return 
in  the  evening  he  twice  visited  Mrs.  Clark,  the  woman  referred  to  in  the  text. 

Fri.  10. — Hickes,  shorthand,  Nicodemus^  Freylinghausen,  Tracts •, 
French,  German,  and  '  Entick's  book ' l  were  the  books  he  read.  Thrice  he 
conversed,  or  prayed,  or  read  with  '  the  boys.'  He  notes  a  *  very  sharp  frost.' 

Sal.  ii. — Shorthand,  Nicodemus^  French,  Calveto,  Nelson's  Address 
(which  he  read  walking  to  Thunderbolt)  were  his  studies  for  the  day.  At 
home  he  had  interviews  with  Mr.  Clark  and  Mr.  Bradley,  buried  Mrs.  K. 
Clark,  and,  at  home,  conversed  with  *  Bob  Bradley.'  Every  morning  he 
read  French  and  prayed,  or  sang,  with  Miss  Sophy,  and  every  evening  gave 
her  a  devotional  reading.  Expositions  and  pastoral  visits  were  continued 
with  exemplary  regularity. 

Sun.  12. — Hickes  with  Miss  Sophy,  Freylinghausen's  Gesang-Buch  with 
Ingham,  the  going  of  *  Jemmy,'  conversation  with  '  John,'  the  Proclamation 
of  Profaneness — at  which  seventy  were  present — and  Dr.  Owen  ('Excellent!') 
— these  were  the  day's  features. 

Mon.  13. — German,  Owen,  Hickes,  Nicodemus,  the  Gesang-Buch^  Kempis, 

ing,  and  the  culture  of  the  soul.    Wesley  It  was  translated  in  Scotland  soon  after, 

in  Georgia    was    never    '  triflingly   em-  A  second  edition  was  published  in  Edin- 

ployed.'  burgh,  1731.     Wesley's  appears  to  have 

On  JNicodemuS)  Green's  Wesley  Biblio-  been  taken  from  this  edition,  but  it  is 

graphy  says  :  '  The  Treatise  was  written  considerably  abridged.     It  was  a  suitable 

by  August  Herman  Francke,  Minister  of  pamphlet  for  the  early  Methodists.' 
Glaucha,  and   Professor  of  Divinity  at  '  Probably  The  Evidence  of  Ch ristianity 

the   University  of  Hall  (Halle),   1701.  (London,  1729). 


3O2  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Dec.  me. 

have  since  been  put  in  execution,  by  those  ministers  of  God 
here  who  bear  not  that  character  in  vain.] 

besides  French  and  shorthand.  If  close  study  and  devotional  literature 
could  keep  alive  the  flame  of  piety,  Wesley  in  Savannah  must  have  been  a 
burning  and  shining  light. 

Tues.  14. — The  severe  frost  had  gradually  given  way  to  'mild,'  'fair,' 
'  warm  and  cloudy '  weather.  The  only  event  causing  this  to  differ  from 
other  days  was  a  call  from  Causton  and  a  visit  to  his  lot. 

Wed.  15. — In  some  unexplained  way  Mrs.  Hawkins  appears  on  the 
scene,  and  he  writes,  '  Cave  ! ' 

Thur.  1 6. — Without  unusual  event. 

Fri.  17. — A  sidelight  is  thrown  on  his  habit  of  morning  exposition. 

5.   m.rpbxli2tb. 

The  interpretation  is  this  :  at  five  o'clock  he  meditated.  Read  prayers  ; 
began  exposition  of  the  last  twelve  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
ending  the  service  with  a  psalm  from  the  New  Version  (Tate  and  Brady). 
The  line  might  have  been  undecipherable  but  for  the  Calendar.  The  book 
appointed  for  Second  Lessons  in  December  is  the  Acts.  There  were 
three  festival  days  with  their  special  Lessons  ;  allowing  for  these,  the 
'last  twelve'  chapters  (xvii.  to  xxviii.  inclusive)  would  finish  the  book  and 
end  the  year.1 

The  same  day  is  noteworthy  for  another  reason.  He  had  abjured  his 
classical  studies — even  Homer  and  Horace.  But  to-day  he  read  Plato 
before  expounding  among  the  Germans  ;  and  again  at  eight  and  nine  o'clock 
with  Miss  Bovey  and  her  friends,  closing  the  reading  with  singing  and 
prayer.  How  interesting  if  we  could  discover  the  book  of  Plato  from  which 
he  read  !  Does  the  Second  Morning  Lesson  supply  a  clue  ?  It  was  the 
story  of  St.  Paul's  visit  to  Mars'  Hill  and  his  sermon  on  the  Athenian  '  altar 
to  the  Unknown  God.'  (Cf.  Wesley's  Notes  on  the  New  Test.>  Acts  xvii.) 
And  what  psalm  or  hymn  was  sung,  and  to  what  tune  ?  It  might  have  been 
No.  III.,  for  Wednesdays  and  Fridays,  in  the  Charlestown  Collection  : 

Through  every  Age,  eternal  God, 

Thou  art  our  Rest,  our  safe  Abode  ; 

High  was  Thy  throne  ere  Heaven  was  made, 

Or  Earth,  Thy  humble  Footstool,  laid. 

(Watts  :  Psalm  xc.) 

Sat.  1 8. — After  two  hours  with  Owen,  Hickes,  and  Nicodemus^  he  walked 
with  Delamotte  towards  Irene,  and  about  nine  came  to  the  Spr  [cypress] 

1  This  is  one  of  several  tests  by  which  John  Wesley,  except,  perhaps,  Charles 

the  accuracy  of  the  principles  of  de-  H.  Spurgeon.  He  learned  the  art,  and 

cipherment  has  been  demonstrated.  forced  Charles  to  learn  it,  in  Georgia. 

All  this  daily  exposition  of  Scripture  It  was  not  without  its  bearing  on  the 

was  laying  a  foundation  for  the  prodigious  Notes  on  the  New  Testament^  which 

sermon  production  and  expository  pro-  became  part  of  the  doctrinal  standard  of 

ficiency  of  future  years.  No  great  preacher,  Methodism  and  essential  in  the  pulpit 

holding  a  public  position,  ever  produced  equipment  of  all  the  early  Methodist 

so  many  sermons,  and  in  such  variety,  as  preachers. 


Dec.  1736.]  Fifth  Savannah  Journal  303 

• 

swamp.  On  his  return  home  Ingham  came.  He  ended  Nicodemus,  and 
considered,  probably  with  Ingham,  a  *  Scheme  for  Psalms.'  Dr.  Hirsch 
came.  Again  the  'Scheme  for  Psalms'  was  discussed.  At  night  it  is  once 
more  referred  to,  and  '  10 '  appear  to  be  the  number  of  psalms  selected. 
This  agrees  exactly  with  the  ten  psalms  from  Watts  which  are  placed  at 
the  beginning  of  the  Charlestown  Collection* 

Sun.  19. — A  German  psalm  formed  part  of  his  four-o'clock  devotions. 

5  German  ;  end  Scheme. 

This  probably  refers  to  the  end  of  the  first  section— Psalms  and  Hymns  for 
Sunday — of  the  new  book.     It  closes  with  a  hymn  from  the  German  : 
O  Jesu,  Source  of  calm  repose, 
Thy  like  nor  man  nor  angel  knows. 

Later  in  the  day  he  begins  a  new  section,  which  he  calls,  '  Scheme  for 
Hymns,'  or  'Hymn-book' — lit.  '  Hym.' 

He  writes  Resolutions,  a  process  invariably  connected  with  momentous 
events  in  his  life.  The  '  Scheme '  is  to-day  all-important ;  he  names  it  no 
less  than  six  times  on  this  one  page. 

Man.  20. — With  some  relapses  into  longhand,  he  now  writes  his  Diary 
in  shorthand.  He  selects  Byrom's  system  from  among  all  others,  because 
his  brother  Charles  is  an  expert  writer,  and  they  will  now  be  able  to 
communicate  with  one  another  without  fear  of  prying  eyes.1 

1  The  first  verse  in  the  first  Methodist  Weston's    shorthand    to    his    pupils    at 

Hymn-book    strikes    the    true    note    of  Oxford.      There  is  no  evidence  that  he 

worship  :  ever  used  this  system  for  his  own  work, 

Ye  holy  souls,  in  God  rejoice;  or  that  he  ever  communicated  the  cipher 

Your  Maker's  praise  becomes  your  voice.  of  his  first  Di         to  any  friend  or  pupil. 

Great  is  your  theme,  your  songs  be  new :  ,,  ,       ,      it_       ,    ,          .  .,         ,    . 

Sing  of  His  Name,  His  Word,  His  Ways,  ^y^m's  shorthand,  learnt  on  the  advice 

His  works  of  nature  and  of  grace,  of  Charles,  he  adhered  to  throughout  the 

How  wise  and  holy,  just  and  true  !  remainder  of  his  life.     A  facsimile  of  the 

Like  all  the  ten  psalms  which  Wesley,  first  and  also  of  the  last  example  of  John 

free  from  his  brother  Charles's  presence  Wesley's  shorthand  is  interesting.    We  do 

and  influence,  selected   for  the  leading  not  realize  how  much  we  owe  to  Byrom. 

place  in  the  Charlestown  Collection,  this  We  sing  his  hymn  every  Christmas  Day — 

metrical   psalm   was  written  by  Watts. 

T  j     j         T\     /-\  i  Christians,  awake,  salute  the  happy  morn ! 

Indeed,  as  Dr.  Osborn  truly  says,  *  More 

than  one-third  of  the  whole  number  con-  And  'but  for    his    shorthand   we  could 

tained  in  this  little  volume '  are  borrowed  scarcely  have  had  a  Journal  so  full  and 

from  the  Psalms  and  Hymns  of  Dr.  Watts.  continuous. 

*  From  a  note  in  one  of  the  earlier  The  following  is  a  transliteration  of  the 

Diaries    we    learn    that  Wesley   taught  first  entries  in  shorthand  (see  p.  305): 
December  20. 

4  Prayed  with  Delamotte  :  drest :  6  read  resolutions :  German. 

5  Drest  [i.e.  robed] :  read  prayers  :    6  12  present. 

6  Owen  :  the  religious  talk  (?)  6 

7  Scheme  of  hymns.  6 

8  Scheme :  prayed  with  them.  6 
Q  Transcribed  hymns.  6 

10  Transcribed  hymns.  6 

11  Transcribed.  6 

The  writing  is  imperfect,  but  the  meaning  Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns.  The 
is  plain.  He  was  preparing  copy  for  the  opening  psalms  were  already  selected, 


3°4  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Dec.  me. 


Wed.  22.— Mr.  Delamotte  and  I,  with  a  guide  [who  had 
gone  that  way  before,]  set  out  to  walk  to  the  Cowpen.  When 
we  had  walked  two  or  three  hours,  [we  came  to  a  creek  which 
our  guide  had  forgot :]  he  did  not  know  where  we  were.  [There 
was  no  remedy  but  wading  through.]  In  an  hour  or  two  we 
came  to  a  cypress-swamp,  directly  across  our  path,  through 
which  likewise  we  were  to  walk,  the  water  being  about  breast 
high.  A  mile  or  two  beyond,  we  were  out  of  all  path  and  out 
of  all  our  knowledge.  However,  we  went  on  till  past  sunset, 
and  then  sat  down  on  the  driest  spot  we  could  find,  intending 
after  a  while  to  make  a  fire,  and  so  stay  there  till  morning. 
But  finding  our  tinder  was  all  wet,  we  were  at  a  stand.  I 
advised  to  walk  on  still  ;  but  both  my  companions,  being  faint 
and  tired,  were  for  lying  down,  which  we  accordingly  did  about 
six  o'clock.  The  ground  was  wet  as  well  as  our  clothes,  which 
in  a  short  time  (it  being  a  sharp  frost)  were  as  hard  as  the 
tree  we  lay  against.  However,  I  slept  till  six  in  the  morning. 
There  fell  a  heavy  dew  in  the  night,  so  that  when  we  rose  the 
side  that  had  been  uppermost  was  white  as  snow.  In  less  than 
an  hour  we  came  to  a  plantation,  [and  after  resting  a  little 
to  Mrs.  Musgrove's].  Nor  did  any  of  us  receive  any  hurt  at 
all,  but  came  home  in  the  evening  [in  perfect  health]. 

Tues.  21. — He  was  again  engaged  on  hymns,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Camp- 
bell. At  noon  he  was  in  the  guard-house  with  the  magistrates.  Returning 
home,  he  worked  at  his  Scheme,  and  was  again  with  the  magistrates, 
apparently  at  a  great  dinner. 

Wed.  22. — He  worked  on  the  hymns  to  the  last  moment  ;  at  10.30  he  set 
out,  as  described  in  the  Journal,  his  companions  being  Delamotte  and 
James  Smith.  Through  rain  they  walked  and  sang,  until,  at  1.30,  wet,  they 
reached  the  Creek,  and,  shortly  after  three,  the  cypress-swamp.  Wet  and 
cold,  they  plodded  on  to  a  hut,  where  they  tried  to  light  a  fire  ;  but  the 
tinder  was  wet.  Fireless,  they  lay  down  all  together,  the  frost  being  very 
sharp,  and  slept.  They  were  awakened  many  times  by  frost  and  cramp. 
This  was  at  nine  o'clock.  At  eleven  a  heavy  dew  fell  and  froze  over  the 
ground  and  their  clothes.  Beneath,  the  ground  was  wet,  and  their  case 
seemed  almost  desperate. 

Thur.  23. — At  six  they  rose,  prayed,  succeeded  in  kindling  a  fire,  set 
out,  passed  the  swamps,  and  at  seven  reached  Captain  Williams's  *  planta- 

and  copied  for  the  press ;   he  was  now  in   Bristol.      On   this   occasion   he    and 

copying  hymns  and  editing  them.  his    family    treated    Wesley  and    Dela- 

1  This  was  the  gentleman  planter  who  motte  with  hospitality.     '  All  very  kind, 

swore  the  lying  affidavit  against  Wesley  Eat  ! ' 


FACSIMILE    OF    WESLEY'S    FIRST    SHORTHAND    (see    PAGE    303). 


305 


Dec.  1736.]  Fifth  Frederica  Journal  307 


FIFTH  FREDERICA  JOURNAL 

DEC.  28,  Tues.—  [Mr.  Delamotte]  and  I  with  a  better  guide 
set  out  for  Frederica  by  land.  [We  stayed  that  night  and  the 
next  morning  at  the  Cowpen,]  and  in  the  evening  came  to  Fort 
Argyle.  [It  stands  pleasantly  on  the  high  bank  of  the  river 
Ogeechy,  having  woods  at  a  little  distance  on  every  side.] 
Here  we  were  obliged  to  stay  till  the  next  afternoon.  Then 
we  went  on  to  Cooanoochi  river,  over  which  we  swam  our 
horses  by  the  side  of  the  small  canoe  in  which  we  crossed  it 


tion.  At  8.30  they  set  out  again.  At  Mrs.  Musgrove's  they  found  Ingham. 
There  they  had  coffee  and  shelter.  At  noon  he  read  prayers  and  expounded  ; 
at  a  quarter  past  they  set  out  for  Irene.  In  the  late  afternoon  they  returned 
home,  and  instantly  Wesley  resumed  work  as  though  nothing  had  happened. 
Exhausting  journeys,  perils  by  the  way — none  of  these  things  moved  him. 
In  the  evening  Mr.  Williamson  came. 

Fri.  24. — Owen,  Hickes,  and  Nicodemus  are  the  books  read  ;  but  hymns 
are  the  all-absorbing  enthusiasm,  even  to  the  exclusion  of  Miss  Sophy,  who 
is  quite  silent.  In  the  morning  he  read  hymns,  in  the  afternoon  transcribing 
what  had  been  selected  and  altered. 

Sat.  25. — There  is  no  trace  of  special  Christmas  Day  celebration,  except 
the  sermon  and  Holy  Communion.  An  hour  or  two  he  devoted  to  hymns. 
In  the  evening  he  buried  a  German.  The  record  is  partly  in  shorthand  and 
partly  in  longhand. 

Sun.  26. — He  married  G.  Rone,  read  a  letter  from  Spangenberg,  and 
had  an  interview  with  Hermsdorf,  who  appears  to  have  brought  news 
from  Frederica. 

Mon.  27. — The  principal  events  of  the  day  were  the  return  of  Causton,  a 
conversation  with  Delamotte  on  Frederica,  and  the  reading  of  Mr.  Mouse's 
letters  to  Miss  Bovey  and  Miss  Sophy.  The  reading  lasted  from  seven 
until  a  quarter  to  ten.  Probably  these  were  letters  written  by  friends  in 
Frederica  and  brought  by  Mr.  Mouse,  who  seems  to  have  been  an  Indian 
trader. 

Tues.  28. — He  began  a  letter  to  Spangenberg,  and  was  busy  all  the 
morning.  At  two  he  took  boat  up  the  river  with  Delamotte,  to  call 
on  Mrs.  Musgrove.  Ingham  returned  with  him  to  Savannah,  and  read 
prayers  and  expounded.  They  packed  for  a  long  overland  journey. 

This  was  his  fifth  and  last  journey  to  Frederica.  In  the  depth  of  winter 
the  voyage  by  sea  was  judged  to  be  impracticable.  Probably  no  boat  was 
running.  In  part  Wesley  may  have  been  influenced  by  a  desire  to  see 
members  of  his  pastoral  charge  on  various  settlements  and  plantations  en 
route.  Who  the  *  better  guide  '  was  we  do  not  know.  *  Francis  '  is  named. 
The  Diary  itinerary  contains  an  exact  description  by  compass  of  the  route 


308  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Dec.  1736. 

ourselves.  We  made  a  fire  on  the  bank,  [set  up  our  blankets 
for  a  tent,  commended  ourselves  to  God,]  and,  notwithstanding 
the  rain,  slept  quietly  till  the  morning. 

\Fri.  31. — After  riding  through  woods  between  thirty  and 
forty  miles,  we  made  a  good  fire,  and  cheerfully  ended  the  old 
year.] 

taken.  The  following  transliteration  of  the  notes  may  be  of  interest  to 
travellers  in  Georgia  : l 

Wed.  29. — Read  prayers  and  expounded  ;  coffee;  packed;  on  business. 

11.30  Set  out  NW. 

12    W :  SW,  private  prayer  :  sang ;  W.  SSW.  W.  3  over  stones. 

4  Swamp.  SW  :  <j|  River  Swamp.  SE  :  E  : 

5  SSE.     5^  past  the  Swamp.     6.  ferried. 

6  At  Fort  Ogeechy. 

7  Mr  Finlay's.     Supped  together  ;  read  prayers,  expounded. 

8  At  Mr  Fitchet's  ;  slept. 

Thur.  30.— 

6  Talked  within.     7  read  prayers,  expounded  ;  walked  with  Finlay. 

9  Fort,  60  Indians  came  ;  in  talk  together. 

n£  Diary  :  12  walked,  meditated,  private  prayer  ;  sang, 
ij  Set  out  S.  SSW  : 
3    At  Cowanoochi,  ferry  boat  not  come. 

5  Fire ;  5^,  boat  come,  ferried  ;  6\  fire,  rain,  supped,  prayer,  8  sang. 

7  Made  camp,  sang,  supped,  prayed,  expounded  ;  J  rain. 

Fri.  31.— 

6  Talked,  read  prayers,  on  business  ;  8J  set  out  SSW  :  private  prayer  : 
12.20  very  branch[ed]  and  de[cayed] 

i     Set  out  S  by  E  to  S  by  W.     Private  prayer.     5^  bee  tree,  camped. 

6    Talked,  conversed  close  with  Francis  [the  guide]  ;  he  affected  ;  read  prayers,  8£. 


1  Here  and  there  the  entries,  which  xiii.  41).'  Wesley,  in  the  Preface  to 

obviously  were  made  under  difficulties,  the  Abstract  which  he  published  in 

are  almost  undecipherable.  The  main  1739,  says  :  '  This  work  of  God  in  the 

features,  however,  of  this  record  of  a  soul  of  man  is  so  described  in  the  fol- 

long  and  interesting  journey  across  a  lowing  treatise,  as  I  have  not  seen  it 

little-known  country  in  the  depth  of  in  any  other,  either  ancient  or  modern, 

winter,  are  reliable.  It  is  only  small  in  our  own  or  any  other  language.  So 

and  immaterial  details  that  are  obscure.  that  I  cannot  but  value  it  next  to  the 

In  connexion  with  Wesley's  remarks  Holy  Scriptures,  above  any  other  human 

on  extempore  prayer  it  is  of  interest  to  composition,  excepting  only  The  Chris- 

note  that  this  is  probably  the  first  occa-  tian  Pattern,  and  the  small  remains  of 

sion  on  which  he  himself,  even  at  family  Clemens  Romanus,  Polycarp,  and  Ig- 

devotions,  offered  extempore  prayer.  natius.'  Whitefield  shared  his  opinion. 

It  seems  to  have  been  Mr.  McLeod  It  must  be  remembered  that  Wesley  at 

of  Darien  who  first  introduced  him  to  this  time  was  much  under  the  influence 

Haliburton's  Life — 'The  Reverend  of  the  Mystics.  Dr.  Watts  also  published 

Learned  and  Pious  Mr.  Thomas  Haly-  an  edition.  (Cf.  Green's  Wesley  Biblio- 

burton,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Divinity  in  graphy.)  McLeod  is  frequently  referred  to 

the  University  of  St.  Andrews  (Acts  in  the  Georgia  documents  (Record  Office). 


Jan.  1737.]  Fifth  Frederica  Journal  309 

1737.  JAN.  i,  Sat. — Our  provisions  fell  short,  our  journey 
being  longer  than  we  expected  ;  but  having  a  little  barbecued 
bear's  flesh  (that  is,  dried  in  the  sun)  [which  we  had  reserved 
for  such  an  occasion],  we  boiled  it,  and  found  it  very  whole- 
some [though  not  very  agreeable]  food. 

Sun.  2. — We  came  to  the  settlement  of  the  Scotch  High- 
landers at  Darien,  [about  twenty  miles  from  Frederica.  I  was 
surprised  to  hear  an  extempore  prayer  before  a  written  sermon. 
Are  not  then  the  words  we  speak  to  God  to  be  set  in  order  at 
least  as  carefully  as  those  we  speak  to  our  fellow  worms  ?  One 
consequence  of  this  manner  of  praying  is,  that  they  have  public 
service  only  once  a  week.  Alas,  my  brethren  !  I  bear  you 

JAN.  i,  1737,  Sat.— 
5^  Prayers,  talked,  they  sought  horses  ;   7^  They  found  them  ! 

8  Set  out  NE :  9,  E :  E  by  S  :  private  prayer. 

11  SE  :  private  prayer  ;    12  Yamase. 

1  Camped ;  dined  ;  i£,  set  out  W  ;    4  N  :  SW  :  4,  past  first  swamp. 
6    Camped  ;  talked  and  eat  bear  ;   8  Rained,  read  prayers ;  8|. 

Sun.  2.— 

5  Talked,  read  prayers,  ill. 

7^  Set  out,  private  prayer  :  S  by  W  :  5  Swamps,  6  ponds. 
ii£  Darien  ;  Mr  Mackintosh's  ;  they  very  civil. 

12  Prayers,  sermon  ;  i^  Mr  Mac.'s,  dinner,  walked  with  Mr  Macleod 

3    Conversed,  tea,  conversed  ;  4  walked  with  Delamotte,  and  to  the  Fort ;  conversed. 

5^  Mr  Mon[ro] ,  maid  and  Mrs  Patterson  there ;  conversed. 

7|  Mrs  Mackintosh's  supper  and  singing  ;  I  prayed  extempore ! 
8^  Mr  Macleod's  to  bed. 

Man.  3.— 

6f  Walked,  meditated,  prayed ;  7!  wood ;  8£  Monro,  Mr  Mackintosh  and 
company. 

9  Talked  within  ;  9^  Mr  Macleod's,  read  Catechism  of  Assembly. 

ii     Mr  Macleod  came,  conversed;  12  slept ;  i  Mr  Mackintosh's  ;  headache. 

2  Dined,  in  talk  together  £  ;  began  Haliburton's  Life,  slept. 

4f  Monro's,  talked  together ;  7^  Captain  Mackintosh's  supped  ;  9  set  out  with 
Mr  Humble  and  Delamotte ;  expounded  ;  \  in  the  pettiawga  ;  read  prayers 
to  them  [or  '  and  sang '] 

Tuts.  4.— 

6|  Windbound  ;  read  prayers ;  talked  intimately. 
8    Haliburton ;  12  dined  ;  Haliburton ;  5^  talked,  retiring. 

6  Private  prayer  ;  7  read  prayers,  meditated ;  8J  cold,  not  so  ill. 

Wed.  5.— 
4^  Private  prayer,  meditated ;   6f  private  prayer ;  7  dressed,    talked ;   Fleury ;    xi 

conversed. 

if  Frederica,  Mr  Hird's  ;  all  well ;  he  not  serious. 
2    Dined  within ;  3^  walked  with  Delamotte,  conversed  ;  5  at  home,   on  business, 

prayed  with  Delamotte. 

6    Supped,  read  prayers,  expounded,  and  they  with  us  sung  ;  16. 
7^  Expounded  hymn  ;  within  ;  he  came  and  within ;  io£  Mark's  house  ;  in  trouble. 
VOL.  I.  17 


3 1  o  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Jan.  1737. 

record,  ye  have  a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  know- 
ledge. 

[Yet  it  must  be  owned  that  in  all  instances  of  personal  or 
social  duty  this  people  utterly  shames  our  countrymen :  in 
sobriety,  industry,  frugality,  patience  ;  in  sincerity  and  open- 
ness of  behaviour  ;  in  justice  and  mercy  of  all  kinds,  being  not 
content  with  exemplary  kindness  to  one  another,  but  extending 
it,  to  the  utmost  of  their  ability,  to  even  the  stranger  that  is 
within  their  gates.] 

Mr.  McLeod,  their  minister,  is  a  serious,  prudent,  resolute, 
and  (I  hope)  a  pious  man. 

On  Monday  evening  (January  3),  I  left  Darien  [in  a  periagua, 
it  being  about  twenty  miles  by  water  from  Frederica. 

\Wed.  5. — In  the  afternoon  we  came  thither,  and  took  up 
our  quarters  at  Mr.  Hird's.]  Most  of  those  we  met  with  were, 
as  we  expected,  cold  and  heartless.  I  could  not  find  one  who 
had  retained  his  first  love.  '  O  send  forth  Thy  light  and  Thy 
heat,  that  they  may  guide  them,  and  lead  them  unto  Thy  holy 
hill ! ' 


Thur.  6  — He  resumed  the  hymns,  and  being  in  a  treacherous  place 
again  wrote  the  Diary  in  shorthand.  He  read  Haliburton's  Life,  and 
visited. 

Fri.  7.— The  whole  day  he  spent  in  devotional  exercises  and  the  reading 
of  Haliburton. 

Sat.  8. — Read  Haliburton.  At  the  usual  morning  exposition  eight 
were  present,  and  in  the  evening  fourteen.  He  had  an  interview  with 
Mrs.  Hird. 

Sun.  9. — At  morning  prayers  twelve  were  present,  at  the  ten-o'clock 
sermon  seventeen,  at  Holy  Communion  six,  and  in  the  afternoon  forty-four. 
These  figures  show  that  even  now  he  could  draw  the  people  ;  but,  apart 
from  his  personal  magnetism,  he  had  not  learned  how  to  hold  them.  In 
spare  hours  he  read  Haliburton. 

Mon.  10. — He  and  Delamotte  had  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Weston, 
formerly  Miss  Fosset. 

Tues.  1 1  .—Haliburton  was  still  the  main  subject  of  reading. 

Wed.  12. — He  seems  on  this  occasion  to  have  done  but  little  visiting 
in  Frederica;  he  had  small  encouragement  to  do  so.  Not  improbably 
the  Hirds  warned  him  to  remain  at  home.  He  appears  to  have  limited 
his  personal  intercourse  to  the  Hirds  and  the  Westons.  Reed  and  other 
old  friends  seem  to  have  left  the  town.  His  work  indoors  was 
limited  to  Greek  with  Delamotte,  and  Haliburton  for  the  good  of  his  own 
soul.  He  must  have  read  with  great  care,  making  extensive  notes.  He 
read  extracts  to  the  Hirds,  one  evening  questioning  them  on  the 


Jan.  1737.]  Fifth  Frederica  Journal  311 

[Tues.  18. — At  night  we  had  as  sharp  a  frost  as  any  I 
remember  in  England.  We  lay  in  a  very  small  room,  and  had 
a  fire  all  night.  Notwithstanding  which,  not  only  all  the  water 
in  the  room  was  frozen,  but  our  ink  too,  which  stood  on  a  table 
almost  close  to  the  fireside. 

[Sat.  22. — Mr.  Tackner  told  me  the  occasion  of  his  breaking 
with  Mark  Hird,  the  only  Christian  friend  he  had.  He  owned 
himself  to  blame,  and  expressed  an  earnest  desire  of  a  thorough 
reconciliation.  This  was,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  effected  the 
next  day,  and  they  joined  together  in  the  Sacrifice  of  Thanks- 
giving. 

[Sun.  23. — In  the  morning  I  spoke  to  two  or  three  who 
were  going  a-shooting  ;  but  they  made  light  of  it,  and  went  on. 

reading  ;  Mr.  Hird  questioned  him,  and  it  gave  him  great  pleasure 
to  know  that  his  old  friend  was  interested.  The  next  morning,  at  4.30, 
he  prayed  with  Mr.  Hird,  Mark,  Phoebe,  and  Delamotte.  Then  he  had  a 
quiet  hour  with  Haliburton.  At  six  he  talked,  sang,  meditated,  recollected, 
prayed :  six  were  present.  It  was  one  of  his  society-meetings.  He 
returned  to  Haliburton,  walked,  at  dinner  enjoyed  a  good  talk ;  read 
Haliburton  for  two  hours,  and  again  for  two  hours  in  the  evening,  finishing 
the  day  with  the  usual  devotional  exercises.1 

Fri.  14. — The  day  was  given  almost  exclusively  to  Haliburton.  On 
Saturday  he  ended  it,  and  forthwith  took  a  walk,  and  '  saw  hymns.'  After 
dinner,  writing  his  Diary,  he  '  saw  psalms ' ;  and  after  dinner  *  ended 
psalms.'  This  may  refer  to  a  revision  of  copy,  or  to  the  reading  of 
proofs,  or  to  a  further  selection  of  hymns  and  psalms. 

Sun.  1 6. — Twenty-five  came  to  hear  him  preach,  and  there  were  eight 
communicants.  On  Monday  and  Tuesday  hymns  were  still  his  chief  concern. 

Wed.  19.— He  is  still  selecting  or  writing  hymns.  He  now  begins 
to  transcribe  those  recently  studied. 

Thur.  20. — To-day  he  reads  German  hymns. 

Fri.  21. — He  married  Ward ;  Dison  married  Toby  ;  coffee.  He  after- 
wards wrote  his  Journal  for  some  hours. 

Sat.  22. — One  of  the  disappointments  that  greeted  him  on  his  return 
to  Frederica  was  an  estrangement  between  two  of  his  most  reliable 
disciples— his  first  two  converts  on  board  the  Simmonds.  Tackner  and 
Mark  Hird  had  quarrelled.  To-day  he  had  a  conversation  with  Tackner, 
who  was  '  convinced  and  affected.'  Later  he  saw  Mr.  Hird.  In  the  after- 
noon he  'tested  Mrs.  Colwell,'  another  of  his  old  friends.  At  night  he 
read  the  Life  of  Mahontet. 

Sun.  23. — Thirty-one  heard  his  sermon,  among  them  'all  the  Scotch, 

1  From  Frederica  came,  almost  more  future — the  preaching-house,  the  hymn- 
than  from  Savannah,  the  beginnings  of  book,  the  class-meeting,  the  band- 
many  things  in  the  Methodism  of  the  meeting,  the  lay  helper. 


3 1 2  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Jan.  1737. 

I  then  represented  it  to  the  magistrates,  who  two  days  after 
directed  an  order  to  the  constables  to  be  more  watchful  in 
preventing  this  and  all  other  profanation  of  the  Lord's  Day. 

\Tues.  25. — Being  on  board  a  sloop  which  lay  in  the  river, 

I  heard  Mr.  M p  (Mellichamp)  was  on  his  journey  to 

Savannah,  and  therefore  determined  to  be  there  myself  as  soon 
as  I  could.] 

Wed.  26. — After  having  beaten  the  air  in  this  unhappy  place 

eight.'  There  is  no  further  reference  in  the  Diary  to  the  quarrel 
between  Tackner  and  Mark  Hird.  Two  of  his  Scotch  friends  called  this 
afternoon  ;  also  Mr.  Parkins. 

Mon.  24. — The  first  line  only  of  the  Diary  is  in  shorthand.  He  awoke 
sick,  but  prayed  with  Delamotte,  and  by  six  was  well  enough  to  read 
the  Life  of  Mahomet.  At  seven  Mr.  McLeod  came  ;  they  had  a  long 
talk  together,  continuing  the  conversation,  probably,  of  the  previous  day. 
He  does  not  say  so,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  to  this  Scotch 
minister,  whom  he  greatly  admired,  he  committed  his  little  flock  in 
Frederica.  At  nine  returned  to  the  Life  of  Mahomet,  on  which  he 
meditated.  At  eleven  he  packed ;  at  two  he  was  at  the  store-house  on 
business  with  Mr.  Patterson1  and  in  talk  with  Penrose ;  at  3.30  he  was 
at  home  conversing  with  Pierce. 

As  though  to  prepare  for  an  ordeal,  he  spent  much  time  in  private 
prayer,  and  with  Bishop  Patrick's  Prayers.  At  5.45  Mrs.  Hawkins  came. 
After  evening  prayers  he  conversed  and  prayed  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawkins, 
Mr.  Dison,  chaplain  to  the  Independent  Company,  being  present.  He 
then  transacted  business,  and  ended  the  day  with  Mark  and  William. 
At  10  o'clock  Delamotte,  who  had  been  away  on  his  own  affairs,  came. 

Tucs.  25. — This  was  his  last  day  in  Frederica.  In  the  early  morning 
he  read  prayers  and  expounded.  At  ten  he  again  read  prayers  and 
preached  a  sermon  to  a  congregation  of  sixteen,  administering  Holy 
Communion  afterwards  to  four  persons.  It  was  the  Feast  of  the  Conversion 
of  St.  Paul.  The  appointed  Lessons  were  Wisdom  v.  and  Acts  xxii.  to 
verse  22. 

At  one  he  was  on  board  Captain  Ellis's  sloop  with  Dison  and  Mr. 
McLeod.  He  dined  with  them ;  in  the  afternoon  he  heard  of  Mellichamp, 
and  met  Mr.  Horton,  who,  to  his  great  surprise,  was  civil.  He  and  Dela- 
motte discussed  Miss  Sophy's  peril,  and  prayed  for  her.  Once  more  he  read 
prayers  and  expounded,  eighteen  being  present.  After  supper  he  had  a 
conversation  with  Hird,  Horton,  and  Pearce  (or  Pierce). 

Wed.  26. — His  first  thought  in  the  morning  was  for  Miss  Sophy.  He 
spent  some  time  privately  in  prayer  for  her.  At  10.30,  in  Penrose's  boat, 
he  set  sail,  reading  Machiavelli's  Works.  At  noon  the  next  day  (Jan.  27) 


1  Probably  this  Mr.  Patterson  was  an  and  was  in  pastoral  charge  of  the  eight 
'  elder  '  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  Scotch  Highlanders  in  that  part  of  the 
Darien.  He  lived  in  or  near  Frederica,  colony.  McLeod  was  the  chief  minister. 


Jan.  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  313 

for  twenty  days,  at  noon  I  took  my  final  leave  of  Frederica.  It 
was  not  any  apprehension  of  my  own  danger,  though  my  life 
had  been  threatened  many  times,  but  an  utter  despair  of  doing 
good  there,  which  made  me  content  with  the  thought  of  seeing 
it  no  more. 


SIXTH  SAVANNAH  JOURNAL 

IN  my  passage  home,  having  procured  a  celebrated  book 
(The  Works  of  Nicholas  Machiavel)^  I  set  myself  carefully  to 
read  and  consider  it.  I  began  with  a  prejudice  in  his  favour, 
having  been  informed  he  had  often  been  misunderstood  and 
greatly  misrepresented.  I  weighed  the  sentiments  that  were 
less  common,  transcribed  the  passages  wherein  they  were  con- 
tained, compared  one  passage  with  another,  and  endeavoured 
to  form  a  cool,  impartial  judgement.  And  my  cool  judgement 
is,  that  if  all  the  other  doctrines  of  devils  which  have  been 
committed  to  writing  since  letters  were  in  the  world  were 
collected  together  in  one  volume,  it  would  fall  short  of  this ; 
and  that,  should  a  Prince  form  himself  by  this  book,  so  calmly 
recommending  hypocrisy,  treachery,  lying,  robbery,  oppression, 
adultery,  whoredom,  and  murder  of  all  kinds,  Domitian  or  Nero 
would  be  an  angel  of  light  compared  to  that  man. 

Mon.  31. — [After  having  been  detained  several  days  on 
Sapolo  Island  by  mists  and  contrary  winds,  at  last  I]  came  to 
Savannah.  [Finding  Miss  Sophy  was  with  Mrs.  Musgrove  at 
the  Cowpen,  a  place  where  I  doubted  she  would  learn  little 
good,  I  went  up  thither  the  same  evening.  She  took  boat  and 
came  down  with  me  immediately,  as  it  was  not  her  custom  to 


they  were  still  his  companions,  but  he  notes  that,  alternately,  he  read 
Bishop  Patrick.  On  Jan.  28  they  were  driven  back  again,  landed  'in 
hard  rain,'  sat  with  Peter,  and  contrived  to  read  prayers.  On  the  29th  he 
still  read  Machiavelli  and  Patrick  alternately,  having  to  contend,  first  with 
thick  fog,  and  then  hard  rain.  On  the  3Oth  they  sang  and  prayed  in  the 
rain,  and  set  up  a  tent,  in  which  they  spent  the  day,  Wesley  and  Delamotte 
singing,  praying,  and  reading  Patrick  all  day.  At  seven  they  slept,  but  at 
eleven  a  storm  broke. 

Mon.  31. — They  reached  Skidoway,  but  the  wind  being  contrary  they 
landed.  By  noon  they  were  at  Thunderbolt,  and  by  2.45  with  the  Germans 
in  Savannah.  At  Cowpen  he  met  Ingham  also.  With  his  usual  quenchless 


3 i 4  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Feb.  1737. 

deny  me  anything.  For  indeed  from  March  13,  1736,  the  day 
I  first  spoke  to  her,  till  that  hour,  I  cannot  recollect  so  much  as 
a  single  instance  of  my  proposing  anything  to  her,  or  expressing 
any  desire,  which  she  did  not  fully  comply  with.] 

FEB.  i,  Tues. — Being  the  anniversary  feast,  on  account  of 
the  first  convoy's  landing  in  Georgia,  we  had  a  sermon  and  the 
Holy  Communion. 

The  next  morning,  being  informed  of  Miss  Bovey's  design 
to  marry  shortly,  I  went  to  her,  and  told  her  with  all  plainness 
my  thoughts  of  Mr.  Burnside  and  of  the  whole  affair.  Though 
we  did  not  entirely  agree  in  our  judgement,  she  took  it  as  it 
was  intended.  Here  is  one  woman  in  America  in  whom  to 
this  day  I  have  found  no  guile. 


zeal  he  prayed,  expounded,  and  read  Law  with  Miss  Sophy  ;  '  she  quite  open 
and  affected.5 1 

FEB.  i,  Tues. — The  only  allusions  to  the  anniversary  festival  are  the 
morning  sermon,  with  thirty-three  in  attendance,  the  celebration  of  the 
Eucharist,  with  thirteen  communicants,  and  a  dinner,  of  which  he  writes, 
'Sent  for  to  Penrose's  ;  much  company  ;  dined.'* 

After  morning  prayers  he  conversed  with  Miss  Sophy  respecting  Melli- 
champ,  who,  being  released  from  prison,  had  become  dangerous.  He  then 
accompanied  her  to  Mr.  Causton's  house.  In  the  evening  he  read  Hali- 
burton's  Life  to  a  company  at  Miss  Bovey's.3 

Wed.  2. — It  being  the  '  Purification  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,'  he  again 
preached  and  administered  Holy  Communion.  Wesley  never  spared  him- 
self, and  never  sought  excuses  for  relieving  his  people  from  what  he  regarded 
as  the  binding  obligation  of  appointed  services. 


1  During  the  days  following  he  re-  Diary  suggests  this  :  '  Miss  Sophy  came  ; 

sumed  his  ordinary  habits  as  pastor  and  on  business  with  Miss  Bovey ;  she  open 

teacher,  seeing  much  of  Miss  Sophy,  and  and  convinced.'  Why  Wesley  objected 

becoming  more  and  more  involved  in  a  to  Miss  Bovey's  marriage  with  Mr.  Burn- 

quasi-engagement,  in  which  he  struggled  side  we  are  not  told.  There  was  nothing 

for  freedom  and  a  clear  path  of  duty.  against  his  moral  character.  As  clerk 

From  Feb.  3  until  Friday  u,  the  Diary,  in  Mr.  Causton's  store,  his  position  may 

greatly  condensed,  is  written  on  two  not  have  been  lucrative ;  but  that  was 

spare  pages  at  the  beginning  of  the  book.  not  likely  to  be  an  objection  in  Wesley's 

-  It  was  an  appointed  Fast,  but  Wesley  eyes,  and,  as  we  shall  presently  see, 

did  not  think  it  fitting  that  on  such  a  day  Burnside  was  a  man  of  moral  courage, 

the  people  should  be  required  to  fast.  with  a  mind  of  his  own,  who,  in  a 

He  himself  dined  in  company  and  supped  moment  of  perplexity  and  peril,  could 

with  the  Germans.  act  with  decision.  Probably  he  wished 

3  It  was  evidently  Miss  Sophy  who  to  retain  her  as  a  deaconess.  One  of  the 

told  Wesley  of  her  friend's  intention  to  charges  against  Wesley  in  the  True  His- 

marry  Mr.  Burnside.  A  reference  in  the  tory  was  that  he  appointed  deaconesses. 


Feb.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  3 1 5 

\TJmr.  3. — I  was  now  in  a  great  strait.  I  still  thought  it 
best  for  me  to  live  single.  And  this  was  still  my  design  ; 
but  I  felt  the  foundations  of  it  shaken  more  and  more  every 
day.  Insomuch  that  I  again  hinted  at  a  desire  of  marriage, 
though  I  made  no  direct  proposal.  For  indeed  it  was  only 
a  sudden  thought,  which  had  not  the  consent  of  my  own 
mind.  Yet  I  firmly  believe,  had  she  (Miss  Sophy)  closed 
with  me  at  that  time,  my  judgement  would  have  made  but 
a  faint  resistance.  But  she  said  'she  thought  it  was  best 
for  clergymen  not  to  be  encumbered  with  worldly  cares,  and 
that  it  was  best  for  her,  too,  to  live  single,  and  she  was 
accordingly  resolved  never  to  marry.1  I  used  no  argument 
to  induce  her  to  alter  her  resolution. 

[Upon  reflection,  I  thought  this  a  very  narrow  escape ; 
and  after  much  consideration,  I  went  to  Mr.  Toltschig,  the 
pastor  of  the  Moravians,  and  desired  his  advice,  whether  I 
had  not  best,  while  it  was  yet  in  my  power,  break  off  so 
dangerous  an  acquaintance.  He  asked,  '  What  do  you  think 
would  be  the  consequence  if  you  should  ? '  I  said,  '  I  fear 
her  soul  would  be  lost,  being  surrounded  with  dangers,  and 
having  no  other  person  to  warn  her  of  and  arm  her  against 
them.'  He  added,  'And  what  do  you  think  would  be  the 
consequence  if  you  should  not  break  it  off?'  I  said,1  I  fear 
I  should  marry  her.'  He  replied  short,  '  I  don't  see  why  you 
should  not.' 

[I  went  home  amazed  to  the  last  degree  ;  and  it  was  now 
first  that  I  had  the  least  doubt  whether  it  was  best  for  me 
to  marry  or  not,  which  I  never  before  thought  would  bear 
a  question.  I  immediately  related  what  had  occurred  to 
Mr.  Ingham  and  Delamotte.  They  utterly  disapproved  of 
Mr.  Toltschig's  judgement,  and  in  the  evening  went,  as  I  desired 
they  would,  and  talked  largely  with  him  and  Antone  (the 
Moravian  Bishop  Seifart)  about  it  It  was  midnight  when 
I  went  to  them  ;  but  even  then  they  did  not  seem  to  be 
fully  assured.  Mr.  Ingham  still  insisted  I  had  not  sufficient 
proof  of  her  sincerity  and  religion,  since  the  appearance  of 
it  might  be  owing  partly  to  an  excellent  natural  temper, 

Thur.  3. — At  six  Miss  Sophy  came  for  her  lesson  in  French.  Hickes's 
Reformed  Devotions  was  the  book  used. 


3 1 6  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Feb.  1737. 

partly  to  her  desire  of  marrying  me.  I  asked, '  How  he  could 
reconcile  such  a  desire  with  what  she  had  said  on  Thursday.' 
He  said,  '  Very  well  ;  she  would  soon  recall  those  words,  if  I 
made  a  direct  proposal.'  He  added  that  I  could  not  judge 
coolly  of  these  things  while  I  saw  her  every  day,  and  there- 
fore advised  me  *  to  go  out  of  town  for  a  few  days.'  I  clearly 
saw  the  wisdom  of  this  advice,  and  accordingly  went  to 
Irene  the  next  day,  four  miles  from  Savannah.  But  first 
I  writ  two  or  three  lines  which  I  desired  Miss  Bovey  to  give 
Miss  Sophy.  They  were,  I  think,  in  these  words  :  *  Feb.  6. 
I  find,  Miss  Sophy,  I  can't  take  fire  into  my  bosom,  and  not 
be  burnt.  I  am  therefore  retiring  for  a  while  to  desire  the 
direction  of  God.  Join  with  me,  my  friend,  in  fervent  prayer, 
that  He  would  show  me  what  is  best  to  be  done.' 

[When  I  came  to  Irene,  I  did  not  care  to  ask  counsel  of 
God  immediately,  being  '  a  man  of  so  unclean  lips.'  I  there- 
fore set  aside  Monday  the  7th  for  self-examination ;  adding 
only  that  general  prayer,  whenever  thoughts  arose  in  my 
heart  concerning  the  issue  of  things,  '  Lord,  Thou  knowest ! 
If  it  be  best,  let  nothing  be  allowed  to  hinder  ;  if  not,  let 

Fri.  4. — In  spite  of  a  troubled  mind  he  resolutely  went  through  the  day's 
devotions  and  tutorial  and  pastoral  work.  At  Miss  Bovey's,  where  he  called 
in  the  afternoon  to  give  a  French  lesson,  he  found  Miss  Sophy,  and  broke 
his  Friday  fast  by  drinking  a  cup  of  coffee.  Returning  home,  Mr.  Burnside 
came  to  talk  about  the  banns  of  marriage.  Wesley's  only  note  on  the 
subject  is,  *  Got  no  good.'  Later  he  discussed  'banns'  with  Miss  Bovey,  and 
*  Got  little  good.'  So  he  prayed  privately  for  them. 

Sat.  5. — Every  morning  this  week,  directly  after  five-o'clock  prayers, 
he  read  Owen  to  Miss  Sophy — John  Owen,  the  great  Puritan,  whose 
writings  were  not  entertaining.  Little  wonder  if  this  half-dazed  girl  felt 
that  '  clergymen  should  not  marry.'  It  was  on  this  day,  after  much 
meditation  and  prayer  (he  carefully  notes  the  hour,  10.45),  that  he  con" 
suited  Mr.  Toltschig  and  another  German  friend.  He  dined  with  them, 
and  afterwards  went  visiting  and  catechizing.  At  5.15  he  consulted  Ingham 
and  Delamotte.  They  all  prayed  together,  and  in  the  end  gave  judgement 
against  Miss  Sophy.  Then  he  returned  to  the  Germans,  who  were 
much  more  sympathetic.  Still  later  he  prevailed  upon  Ingham  and 
Delamotte  to  return  with  him  to  the  Germans,  who,  after  much  prayer 
and  godly  talk,  cast  lots  and  declared  themselves  'for  it.3 

Sun.  6. — The  'note  to  Miss  Sophy'  was  written  after  dinner;  he 
then  went  with  Mrs.  Musgrove  to  Irene. 

From  this  to  Feb.  1 1  the  Diary  is  a  half-intelligible  record  of  unrest. 
The  interesting  fact  is  that  he  strove  against  himself,  not  only  by  help 


Feb.  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  3 1 7 

nothing  be  allowed  to  affect  it.'  And  this  exercise  I  con- 
tinued for  several  hours  with  some  measure  of  cheerfulness. 
But  towards  evening  God  hid  His  face,  and  I  was  troubled. 
My  heart  sank  in  me  like  a  stone.  I  felt  how  bitter  a  thing 
it  is  for  a  spirit  of  an  unbounded  appetite  to  be  left  a 
prey  to  its  own  desires.  But  it  was  not  long.  For  I  no 
sooner  stretched  forth  my  hands  to  Heaven  and  bewailed 
my  having  departed  from  Him,  than  God  sent  me  help  from 
His  holy  place,  and  my  soul  received  comfort. 

[Tues.  8. — The  next  morning  I  was  obliged  to  go  down 
to  Savannah.  There  I  stayed  about  an  hour  ;  and  there 
again  I  felt,  and  groaned  under  the  weight  of,  an  unholy 
desire.  My  heart  was  with  Miss  Sophy  all  the  time.  I  longed 
to  see  her,  were  it  but  for  a  moment.  And  when  I  was 
called  to  take  boat,  it  was  as  the  sentence  of  death  ;  but 
believing  it  was  the  call  of  God,  I  obeyed.  I  walked  awhile  to 
and  fro  on  the  edge  of  the  water,  heavy  laden  and  pierced  through 
with  many  sorrows.  There  One  came  to  me  and  said,  '  You 
are  still  in  doubt  what  is  best  to  be  done.  First,  then,  cry 
to  God,  that  you  may  be  wholly  resigned,  whatever  shall 
appear  to  be  His  will.'  I  instantly  cried  to  God  for  resignation. 
And  I  found  that  and  peace  together.  I  said,  '  Sure  it  is  a 
dream.'  I  was  in  a  new  world.  The  change  was  as  from 
death  to  life.  I  went  back  to  Irene  wondering  and  rejoicing ; 
but  withal  exceeding  fearful,  lest  my  want  of  thankfulness 
for  this  blessing,  or  of  care  to  improve  it,  might  occasion  its 
being  taken  away. 

[I  was  now  more  clear  in  my  judgement  every  day.  Beside 
that  I  believed  her  resolve,  never  to  marry,  I  was  convinced 

of  prayer  and  meditation,  but  also  by  more  mundane  devices.  He  was 
now  at  Irene,  and  now  at  home.  An  Indian,  Mrs.  Musgrove,  Peter, 
the  boat,  felling  trees,  'blazing'  in  the  woods  for  pathways,  reading 
aloud,  singing,  and  other  distractions  are  named.  One  reason  why  his 
retreat  to  Irene  failed  to  restore  perfect  self-control,  and  therefore  did 
not  save  him  from  sorrow  and  humiliation,  was  the  fact  that  at  intervals 
he  continued  the  writing  of  the  '  Account  of  Miss  Sophy ' — the  Account 
transcribed  at  Oxford,  to  which  we  are  indebted  for  such  clear  in- 
formation respecting  this  case  of  love  and  conscience.  The  Diary  shows 
that  during  these  days  he  again  and  again  added  to  the  written  story, 
thus  letting  his  mind  dwell  upon  a  series  of  experiences  that,  for  his  own 
sake,  had  better  have  been  forgotten. 


3 1 8  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Feb.  1737. 

it  was  not  expedient  for  me,  for  two  weighty  reasons:  (i) 
because  it  would  probably  obstruct  the  design  of  my  coming 
into  America,  the  going  among  the  Indians ;  and  (2)  because 
I  was  not  strong  enough  to  bear  the  complicated  tempta- 
tions of  a  married  state.1 

[Sat.  12. — Of  this  I  informed  my  friends  at  my  return  to 
Savannah. 

[Mon.  14. — About  seven  in  the  morning,  I  told  her  in  my 
own  garden,  '  I  am  resolved,  Miss  Sophy,  if  I  marry  at  all, 
not  to  do  it  till  I  have  been  among  the  Indians.' 

Sat.  12. — Shortly  after  five  o'clock  Peter,  his  boatman  and  companion 
during  his  journey  to  Irene,  joins  him.  He  breakfasts  on  rice,  and 
continues  the  writing  of  his  account  of  Miss  Sophy.  At  seven  he  sets 
out  for  the  Cowpen,  where  he  prays,  drinks  tea,  and  converses  with  Mrs. 
Musgrove,  who  listens  *  seriously.'  On  the  return  journey  he  spends  two 
hours  or  more  '  mending  the  way,'  Peter,  no  doubt,  helping.2  It  was  after 
dinner  that  he  '  informed '  his  *  friends — Burnside,  Delamotte,  and  the 
German  brethren.'  The  rest  of  the  day  he  spent  as  usual. 

Sun.  13. — Five  times  before  preaching  he  prayed,  alone  or  with  Dela- 
motte, and  twice  sang.  Thomas  a  Kempis  and  meditation  were  his  only 
other  helps  in  preparing  the  sermon.  After  dinner  'John3  came.'  At 
prayers  in  the  afternoon  he  spoke  on  the  rubric.  Eighty  were  present. 
At  half-past  three  '  the  people  came,'  and  he  held  one  of  his  class-  or  band- 
meetings  :  '  Sung,  read,  sung,  read,  sung,  prayer.'  Then  he  visited. 

Mon.  14. — After  prayers  he  treated  Mrs.  M ,  Delamotte,  and  Miss 

Sophy  to  '  Owen,  tea,  and  conversation.' 

8  Explained  with  Miss  Sophy,  private  prayer;  uneasy. 

9  In  talk  with  Delamotte,  diary  ;  more  uneasy.     Ku'pte  /Soviet  1 
10  Answered  Charles's  letter. 

The  excitement  from  which  he  was  suffering  shows  itself  in  errors,  one  of 
which  he  himself  corrects. 


1  A  third  volume  of  the  Georgia  Diary  2  Wesley  dreaded  idleness,  especially  in 

now  comes  into  use.      Like  others  of  the  time  of  trouble  and  anxiety.     It  was  one 

series,  it  already  contained  transcriptions  of  the  sins  he  most  frequently  referred  to 

and  fragmentary  notes  when  Wesley  de-  in  his  first  Oxford  Diary.     (See  p.  54. ) 

termined  to  utilize  its  spare  pages  for  the  Whatever    his     anguish     of    heart,    he 

Diary.     Among  these  are  copies  of  two  resolutely     clave     to     his     duty     as     a 

letters  written  to  Dr.  Burton,    Sept.  30  minister— prayers,    preaching,     visiting, 

and  Oct.   10,  1735.      There  is  also  the  catechizing,  and  meeting  the  society  and 

first  of  a  series  of  Discourses  concerning  preparation   classes.      And    the    greater 

Sacrifice  in  General,  entitled,  The  Primi-  his  weakness  and  suffering,  the  more  he 

tive  Communicant,  Heb.  x.  8.     Wesley's  sang  and  made  verses, 
stock  of  note-books  is  nearly  exhausted,  3  The   French   doctor  (Reinier),  who 

for  he  crowds  the  last  days  of  July  1735,  owed  much  to  Wesley  and  loved  much, 

and  the  whole  of  August,  into  the  spaces  always  coming  to  him  in  times  of  stress 

at  the  foot  of  the  Diary  pages.  or  sickness. 


Feb.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  319 

[Tues.  15. — The  next  morning  she  told  me,  *  People  wonder 
what  I  can  do  so  long  at  your  house ;  I  am  resolved  not  to 
breakfast  with  you  any  more.  And  I  won't  come  to  you 
any  more  alone.' 

[Wed.  16. — She  said, '  I  don't  think  it  signifies  for  me  to  learn 
French  1  any  longer.'  But  she  added, '  My  uncle  and  aunt,  as 
well  as  I,  will  be  glad  of  your  coming  to  our  house  as  often  as 
you  please.'  I  answered, '  You  know,  Miss  Sophy,  I  don't  love  a 
crowd,  and  there  is  always  one  there.'  She  said, '  But  we  needn't 
be  in  it.' 


Tues.  15. — Miss  Sophy's  final  breakfast  at  the  parsonage  was  accompanied 
with  another  reading  from  John  Owen  and  '  close '  conversation.  He  wrote 
to  the  Trustees,  Dr.  Bray's  Associates,  the  rector  of  Lincoln  College,  and 
Dr.  Cutler.  He  then  wrote  his  Diary,  walked,  thought  on  a  sermon,  read 
Kempis,  dined,  and  gave  two  hours  to  pastoral  visitation.  In  the  evening 
Miss  Sophy  heard  a  reading  from  Haliburton's  Life,  and  they  sang. 

Wed.  16. — According  to  the  Diary  it  was  on  this  day  that  Miss  Sophy 
declared  her  intention  not  to  breakfast  with  Wesley  and  Delamotte  any 
more.  As  this  was  a  critical  moment  in  Wesley's  life,  it  will  be  interesting  to 
note  exactly  what  happened.  Miss  Sophy  came  as  usual  to  the  five-o'clock 
morning  prayers,  but  'would  not  stay.'  From  seven  to  eleven  Wesley 
wrote  letters  to  Burton,  Hutchings  (see  Works,  vol.  xii.  p.  45),  '  Mon.,' 
and  Whitefield  ;  posted  his  Diary,  went  into  the  garden  for  meditation  and 
singing,  and  visited.  At  one  he  held  a  devotional  meeting,  at  which 
Mr.  Campbell,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  and  Miss  Sophy  were  present.  It  was  a  fast-day, 
and  there  was  no  dinner,  or  any  other  refreshment,  except  tea  at  six  in  the 
morning  and  three  in  the  afternoon.  The  whole  day  was  given  to  letter- 
writing  and  devotional  exercises. 

1  Mr  Campbell,  Mrs  Gilbert,  Miss  Sophy,  sung,  prayed,  sung,  prayed,  sung. 

2  Garden,  conversed,  she  quite  open  ;  got  no  good  ;  meditated.     She  would  breakfast 

with  me  no  more. 

That  she  had  no  intention  then  to  abandon  the  religious  life  is  evident  from 
the  fact  that  after  evening  prayers  she  and  the  members  of  her  little 
company,  or  class,  remained  for  reading,  conversation,  and  singing. 

Thur.  17. — Miss  Sophy  came  for  early  prayers,  but  did  not  remain  for  the 
parsonage  breakfast.  Wesley  went  to  the  Germans,  wrote  *  for  them  '  a  long 
letter  to  Mr.  Causton,  and  transcribed  it.  After  tea  in  her  own  home  Miss 
Sophy  had  a  French  reading,  and  again  attended  the  evening  society-meeting. 

Fri.  1 8. — She  was  one  of  the  eighteen  who  came  for  prayers.  Wesley 
wrote  letters  to  Chapman,8  Horn,  Hervey,  Sarney,  and  Mr.  Jones  of  Beau- 

1  The  French  lessons  were  still   con-  (App.  XIX.  vol.  vi.),  one  of  the  finest 
tinued.  letters  of  this  period.     Or  it  may  have 

2  This  probably  is   the  beginning  of  been  a  letter  to  the  Rev.  William  Chap- 
the  letter   on   cheerfulness  and  holiness  man,    one   of    the  less-known  members 
written   to    his    friend    Mrs.    Chapman  of  the  Holy  Club. 


\. 


320  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Feb.  1737. 

[Sat.  19.— I  called  upon  her  at  Mr.  Causton's,  and  we  walked 
together  in  the  garden.  She  did  not  seem  to  be  affected  with 
anything  I  said,  but  was  in  such  a  temper  as  I  never  saw  her 
before,  sharp,  fretful,  and  disputatious.  Yet  in  an  hour  she 
awaked  as  out  of  sleep,  told  me  she  had  been  very  ill  all  day, 
and  indeed  scarce  in  her  senses,  and  feared  she  had  given  a 
sufficient  proof  of  it  in  her  behaviour,  which  she  begged  I  would 
not  impute  to  her,  but  solely  to  her  disorder.] 

Thur.  24. — We  ^agreed  that  Mr.  Ingham  should  set  out  for 

fort.  Instead  of  dinner  he  read  to  the  boys.  Except  this,  his  only 
reading  for  the  day  was  the  Greek  Testament,  and,  after  the  evening  class, 
of  which  Miss  Bovey  was  leader,  Machiavelli  (Wesley  always  spells 
Machiavet). 

Sat.  19. — The  hour  hitherto  given  to  Miss  Sophy  and  French  he  spent 
in  reading  Machiavelli  and  in  writing  a  long  letter  to  his  brother  Samuel. 
The  rest  of  the  day  he  gave  to  visiting,  catechizing,  and  devotion.  On 
his  talk  with  Miss  Sophy  the  only  note  is,  '  She  not  affected.'  Mr.  How's 
class  met  after  evening  prayers. 

Sun.  20. — Before  morning  service  he  had  a  conversation  with  Christie 
the  Recorder,  who  a  few  months  later  became  one  of  his  bitterest 
enemies.  At  the  afternoon  prayers  and  catechizing  100  were  present. 
Before  the  service  he  read  the  Canons.  At  four  he  conversed  with  Miss 
Sophy  in  the  garden,  and  at  five  met  Mrs.  Gilbert's  class  or  band.  They 
sang,  read,  sang,  prayed,  sang.  They  drank  tea  together  and  conversed. 
At  7.15  Miss  Sophy  went  home,  and  Wesley  went  to  the  Germans. 
Later  he  had  a  consultation  with  Ingham  and  Delamotte. 

Mon.  21. — A  boat  was  about  to  sail  for  Frederica.  He  seized  the 
opportunity  to  write  to  Mr.  Horton.  After  dinner  he  went  to  Miss  Sophy's 
Acre  Lot,  where  he  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Causton,  and  afterwards 
with  Mrs.  Causton.  He  drank  tea  with  them,  they  talked  together  ;  he 
wrote  to  Mr.  Hird,  of  Frederica,  visited  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  at  four 
o'clock  set  out  for  home,  reading  his  Greek  Testament.  At  home  he  saw 
Mr.  Ellis,  and  had  a  serious  conversation  with  Ingham  on  business.  His 
note  after  evening  prayers  is  'very  heavy.5  But  he  met  Miss  Bovey's 
class,  in  which  he  read,  prayed,  sang. 

Tues.  22. — He  spent  some  hours  writing  '  for  Miss  Sophy.'  Toltschig 
called.  At  Mr.  Causton's  there  was  *  company,  talk,  and  tea.'  Otherwise 
the  day  was  without  incident. 

Ash   Wednesday,  23.— In  the  early  morning  he  had  an  interview  with 
Watson,1  on  which  his    note  is  *  Strange  ! '      He  seems  to  have  seen  him 
with  Causton,  who  examined  the  case.     The  day  was  spent  as  Sunday. 
Thur.  24.— For  his  sermon  to-day  he  made  unusual  preparation,  writing 


1  Probably  the  Captain  Watson  whose  a  plantation  adjoining  the  Cowpen,  and 
imprisonment  is  before  referred  to,  and  not  far  from  Captain  Williams's.  See 
whose  release  is  noted  later.  He  owned  Georgia  letters,  Record  Office. 


Feb.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  321 

England  ;  chiefly  that  he  might  confer  vith  our  friends  there, 
and  endeavour  to  bring  over  some  of  them  to  help  us.1 

Sat.  26. — [A  passage  offering  to  Pennsylvania,  where  he  was 
to  call  on  Mr.  Spangenberg  to  go  with  him,  he  embraced  the 
opportunity,  and  embarked  about  three  in  the  afternoon.  May 
God  give  him  a  happy  return !] 

By  Mr.  Ingham  I  writ  to  the  Founders  of  Parochial  Libraries 
(Dr.  Bray's  Associates 2),  who  sent  a  library  to  Savannah  in  the 

fully.  It  was  St.  Matthias's  day,  and  the  appointed  lessons  were  Wisdom 
xix.  and  Luke  vii.  He  preached  at  eleven  and  administered  the  Communion. 
This  is  the  first  place  in  the  Georgia  Diary  in  which  he  uses  the  word,  writing 
it  out  in  shorthand  fully.  After  dinner  he  wrote  the  letter  to  Oglethorpe 
which  is  published  in  his  Works  ^  vol.  xii.  p.  42. 

3  Mr  Causton's,  within. 

4  Talked  together  of  going  to  England  :  Miss  Sophy  much  affected. 

Again  in  the  evening, 

7  Prayers,  Miss  Bovey  et  cetera. 

8  Read,  sung  K.  within  with  Miss  Sophy  ;  she  owned  her  friendship. 

9  Writ  to  my  brother  Charles. 

Fri.  25.— The  greater  part  of  the  day  was  absorbed  in  the  writing  of  a 
sermon,  transcribing  the  letter  *  writ '  to  Charles,  and  writing  hymns.  In  the 
afternoon,  at  Miss  Bovey's,  there  was  conversation  with  Delamotte,  Ingham, 
and  Miss  Sophy.  It  was  their  last  meeting  before  Ingham's  departure. 

Sat.  26. — Again  Wesley  worked  at  a  sermon.  At  two  '  Ingham  went.' 
Apparently  he  took  with  him  all  the  letters  which  his  friend  had  for  some 
time  been  diligently  writing. 


1  Ingham   wrote   to    Charles    Wesley  Plantations.      Dr.  Thomas    Bray   (born 
(Oct.    22,     1737),    'I    have    no     other  1656,  died    1730)   was   Commissary  of 
thoughts  but   of   returning   to  America.  Dr.   Compton,    Bishop   of  London,   for 
My  heart's   desire   is   that   the   Indians  organizing  the  English  Church  in  Mary- 
may  hear  the  gospel.      For  this  I  pray  land,   and  one  of  the   founders  of  the 
both    night   and    day.'      But   his  return  S.P.G.      He   raised  a  fund  for  the  dis- 
was   not    to    be  ;    his    own   countrymen  tribution  of  small  parochial  libraries  at 
needed  him.     He  arrived  in  London  in  home,  and  especially  on  the  plantations. 
July,  saw  Charles  Wesley  (July  30),  was  Whitehead,  in  his  Life  of  John  Wesleyt 
at  his  own  house  in   Ossett  in   Sept.,  gives  a  full  account  of  Dr.  Bray,  whose 
and  commenced  in  that  part  of  Yorkshire  work  for  the  colonies,  for  prisoners,  and 
a  ministry  of  remarkable  power  and  use-  for  foreign  missions  was  one  of  the  re- 
fulness.     His  after-history  is  interwoven  markable  facts   in    the   religious  history 
with    the     Evangelical    Revival.      The  of  the    first   quarter   of  the   eighteenth 
Inghamite   societies    still   surviving    are  century.     Its   influence   on  Wesley  and 
not,  as  some  have  supposed,  '  off-shoots  '  early  Methodism,  especially  in    relation 
of  Methodism.  to  popular  Christian  literature,  was  con- 

2  The    official    title    of    the    Society  siderable.     The  Journal  of  the  Trustees 
was  The  Associates  of  the  late  Dr.  Bray  (Record   Office)   shows  the    importance 
for  instructing  the  Negroes  of  the  British  attached  to  Dr.  Bray's  work. 


322 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[Feb.  1737. 


latter  end  of  last  year.  It  is  expected  of  the  ministers  who 
receive  these  to  send  an  account  to  their  benefactors  of  the 
method  they  use  in  catechizing  the  children  and  instructing  the 
youth  of  their  respective  parishes.  That  part  of  the  letter  was 
as  follows  *  : 

Our  general  method  is  this  :  A  young  gentleman,2  who  came  with 
me,  teaches  between  thirty  and  forty  children  to  read,  write,  and  cast 
accounts.  Before  school  in  the  morning,  and  after  school  in  the  after- 
noon, he  catechizes  the  lowest  class,  and  endeavours  to  fix  something 
of  what  was  said  in  their  understandings  as  well  as  their  memories. 
In  the  evening  he  instructs  the  larger  children.  On  Saturday,  in  the 
afternoon,  I  catechize  them  all.  The  same  I  do  on  Sunday,  before 
the  evening  service.  And  in  the  church,  immediately  after  the  Second 
Lesson,  a  select  number  of  them  having  repeated  the  Catechism,  and 
been  examined  in  some  part  of  it,  I  endeavour  to  explain  at  large,  and 
to  enforce  that  part,  both  on  them  and  the  congregation. 

Some  time  after  the  evening  service,  as  many  of  my  parishioners 
as  desire  it  meet  at  my  house  (as  they  do  also  on  Wednesday  evening), 
and  spend  about  an  hour  in  prayer,  singing,  and  mutual  exhortation. 
A  smaller  number  (mostly  those  who  design  to  communicate  the  next 
day)  meet  here  on  Saturday  evening ;  and  a  few  of  these  come  to  me 
on  the  other  evenings,  and  pass  half  an  hour  in  the  same  employ- 
ment.3 


1  The  Diary  shows  that  the   society- 
meetings    were    much    more    numerous 
than  Wesley  states  in  the  account  which 
he  gives  to  Dr.  Bray's  Associates  of  the 
parochial  work  of  Savannah. 

2  The  *  young  gentleman '  was  Dela- 
motte,  whose  charges  were  included  in 
Wesley's  ,£44  drawn  from  the  Trustees. 
The  S.P.G.    sent  out   schoolmasters  as 
well  as  clergymen.     There  is  no  evidence 
that  Delamotte  was  maintained  as  the 
educational    agent    of    the    Society    in 
Georgia  ;  but  it  is  clear  from  this  letter 
that  he  acted  as  such,  and  that  Wesley 
reported  his  work  to  the  Associates,  who 
practically  were   a  department    of   the 
S.P.G.     (See  below,  p.  353.) 

'  In  the  Colman  Collection  there  is  a 
letter  in  Delamotte's  handwriting,  which, 
though  belonging  to  a  period  a  few 
months  later,  will  be  of  service  in  this 
connexion,  because  it  reveals  Delamotte's 
personality,  and  shows  how  desperate 


were  the  attempts  to  destroy  the  ad- 
vanced religious  life  of  Methodism  in 
Georgia.  The  meetings  for  fellowship 
and  religious  instruction  were  the 
especial  objects  of  malicious  slander. 
There  were  the  strongest  reasons  of  self- 
interest  accounting  for  the  unscrupulous 
attacks  made  upon  the  Methodists. 
Negro  slavery,  white  slavery,  rum-drink- 
ing, and  promiscuous  dancing  were  op- 
posed by  the  Wesleys  and  their  friends. 
Delamotte's  letter  in  the  Appendix  is 
abridged.  It  was  necessary  that  Wesley 
should  know  exactly  what  were  the  lies 
told  about  the  members  of  society,  so 
that  he  might  defend  them  before  the 
Trustees  and  the  public.  The  lie  in  detail 
cannot  be  printed.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered that  those  attacked  were  children 
of  the  State,  and  were  in  part  maintained 
by  Government  grants  and  public  sub- 
scription. App.'XX.  voLvi.  (See  Minutes 
and  Correspondence  of  the  Trustees.) 


Feb.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  323 

[When,  on  Thursday  the  24th,  I  mentioned  to  Miss  Sophy 
that  either  Mr.  Ingham  or  I  must  go  to  England,  she  fixed  her 
eyes  upon  me  all  the  time  I  spoke,  changed  colour  several  times, 
and  then  broke  out,  '  What,  are  you  going  to  England  ?  Then 
I  have  no  tie  to  America  left.'  Mrs.  Causton  said, '  Indeed  I 
think  I  must  go  too.  Phiky,  will  you  go  with  me?'  Miss 
Sophy  answered, '  Yes,  with  all  my  heart.'  Mrs.  Causton  added, 
'  Last  night  you  said  you  would  not.'  She  said,  '  True ;  but 
now  all  the  world  is  alike  to  me.' 

[Walking  home  with  her  from  my  house  in  the  evening,  I 
asked  her, '  Miss  Sophy,  what  did  you  mean  this  afternoon  by 
saying  if  I  went  to  England,  you  had  no  tie  to  America  left  ? 
She  answered  with  tears,  '  You  are  the  best  friend  I  ever  had 
in  the  world.  You  showed  yourself  a  friend  indeed  at  a  time 
when  no  one  else  would  have  afforded  me  any  more  than 
common  pity.'  I  said,  '  You  would  hardly  confess  this  if  the 
Trustees  should  be  set  against  me,  and  take  away  all  I  have 
here.'  She  replied  with  much  earnestness,  *  Indeed  I  would  ; 
and  you  or  your  friends  can  never  want  while  I  have  anything.' 

[Calling  at  Mrs.  Causton's  (Saturday  26th),  she  was  there 
alone.  This  was  indeed  an  hour  of  trial.  Her  words,  her  eyes, 
her  air,  her  every  motion  and  gesture,  were  full  of  such  a 
softness  and  sweetness  !  I  know  not  what  might  have  been 
the  consequence  had  I  then  but  touched  her  hand.  And  how 
I  avoided  it  I  know  not.  Surely  God  is  over  all ! 

[Sun.  27. — After  all  the  company  but  Miss  Sophy  was  gone, 
Mr.  Delamotte  went  out  and  left  us  alone  again.  Finding  her 
still  the  same,  my  resolution  failed.  At  the  end  of  a  very 
serious  conversation,  I  took  her  by  the  hand,  and,  perceiving 
she  was  not  displeased,  I  was  so  utterly  disarmed,  that  that 
hour  I  should  have  engaged  myself  for  life,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  full  persuasion  I  had  of  her  entire  sincerity,  and  in 
consequence  of  which  I  doubted  not  but  she  was  resolved 
(as  she  had  said)  '  never  to  marry  while  she  lived.' 

[A  moment's  reflection  when  she  was  gone  convinced  me 
that  I  had  done  foolishly.  And  I  once  more  resolved  by  God's 
help  to  be  more  wary  for  the  future.  Accordingly,  though  I 

Sun.  27. — This  morning  he  married  Mr.  Neale  and  Mrs.  Amatus.  In 
the  evening  he  conversed  with  Captain  Hermsdorf '  of  the  Germans.' 


324  John   Wesley's  Journal  [March  1737. 

saw  her  every  day  in  the  following  week,  I  touched  her  not. 
Yet  on  Thursday  evening  (March  3),  after  we  came  from 
her,  Mr.  Delamotte  was  deeply  concerned.  I  had  never  seen 
him  in  such  uneasiness  before.  He  said,  with  many  tears,  '  He 
found  we  must  part,  for  he  could  not  live  in  that  house  when 


Mon.  28.— After  morning  prayers  he  'read  Resolutions,'  no  doubt  to 
fortify  himself  in  this  time  of  severe  temptation.  He  then  *  writ  one,'  i.e. 
a  new  resolution  ;  or  it  might  mean  that  he  signed  his  name  to  the  re- 
solutions already  written,  thus  reaffirming  them.  These  probably  are  the 
brief  series,  a  copy  of  which  is  transcribed  (partly  in  shorthand)  on  a  spare 
page  in  the  second  Georgia  Diary. 

Dec.   19.   1736. 
In  the  Name  of  God. 

1.  To  be  more  watchful,  before  and  in  prayer. 

2.  To  strive  more  to  be  thankful  in  eating. 

3.  Not  to  touch  even  her  clothes  by  choice  :  think  not  of  her. 

4.  Every  hour,  Have  I  prayed  quite  sincerely?     Pray  that  you  may,  watch,  strive. 

5.  Look  into  no  book  but  the  Bible  till  Christmas. 

6.  From  12  to  4  o'clock,  prayer,  meditation,  or  parish,  no  writing  or  reading. 

7.  At  Miss  Bovey's,  start  up  the  moment  you  end  the  paragraph.     No  word  after- 

ward. 

8.  Speak  no  untended  or  unintended  word.1 

8  The  Lurid  Logic. 
9,  ii  Logic. 

12  Walked,  meditated,  sung, 
i  Drest,  Fleury. 

The  rest  of  the  day  passes  in  rigid  attention  to  the  routine  of  his 
office. 

MARCH  i,  Tues.— Greek  Testament,  Hebrew,  and  German  occupied 
most  of  the  morning  There  is  again  no  mention  of  dinner.  In  the  after- 
noon he  walked  with  Miss  Bovey  to  Miss  Sophy's  Acre  Lot,  where  he  gave 
lessons  in  French  and  Logic. 

8  The  Hero,  read  examinations. 

9  Mr  Causton's,  conversed,  Boltzius  there. 

Wed.  2. — With  the  exception  of  coffee  at  six  in  the  morning  and  tea  at 
three  in  the  afternoon,  the  day  was  kept  as  a  strict  Lenten  fast.  Its  hours 
were  given  chiefly  to  German. 

Thur.  3. — He  wrote  to  Laserre,  of  Charlestown,  and  to  the  Bishop  of 
London.  In  the  dinner  hour  he  walked,  and  read  Wake's  Epistles. 

5  Williamson,  tea  together. 

6  Together,  \  at  home,  meditated,  German. 

7  Conversed  with  Telchig,  \  Prayers. 

8  Miss  Bovey  et  cetera,  read  Tilley's  Sermon,  prayer,  sung.     Diary. 

9  Talk  with  Delamotte  of  Miss  Sophy,  he  sad  ;  private  prayer. 


1  This  is  not  a  corrected  sentence,  but       unwatched  word,  and  no  insincere  word  : 
a  remarkable  example  of  Wesley's  senten-       a  fine  exposition  of  the  'idle  word.' 
tious  phrasing.     He  means — no  careless 


March  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  325 

I  was  married  to  Miss  Sophy.'  I  told  him, '  I  had  no  intention 
to  marry  her.'  He  said, '  I  did  not  know  my  own  heart ;  but 
he  saw  clearly  it  would  come  to  that  very  soon,  unless  I  broke 
off  all  intercourse  with  her.'  I  told  him,  '  This  was  a  point  of 
great  importance,  and  therefore  not  to  be  determined  suddenly.' 
He  said,  *  I  ought  to  determine  as  soon  as  possible ;  for  I  was 
losing  ground  daily.'  I  felt  what  he  said  to  be  true,  and  there- 
fore easily  consented  to  set  aside  the  next  day  for  that  purpose. 

MARCH  4,  Fri. — [Having  both  of  us  sought  God  by  deep 
consideration,  fasting,  and  prayer,  in  the  afternoon  we  conferred 
together,  but  could  not  come  to  any  decision.  We  both 
apprehended  Mr.  Ingham's  objection  to  be  the  strongest,  the 
doubt  whether  she  was  what  she  appeared.  But  this  doubt 
was  too  hard  for  us  to  solve.  At  length  we  agreed  to  appeal 
to  the  Searcher  of  hearts.  I  accordingly  made  three  lots.  In 
one  was  writ  '  Marry ' ;  in  the  second,  '  Think  not  of  it  this  year.' 
After  we  had  prayed  to  God  to  'give  a  perfect  lot,'  Mr. 
Delamotte  drew  the  third,  in  which  were  these  words,  'Think 
of  it  no  more.'  Instead  of  the  agony  I  had  reason  to  expect, 
I  was  enabled  to  say  cheerfully,  '  Thy  will  be  done.'  We  cast 
lots  once  again  to  know  whether  I  ought  to  converse  with  her 
any  more ;  and  the  direction  I  received  from  God  was,  '  Only 
in  presence  of  Mr.  Delamotte.' * 

[I  saw  and  adored  the  goodness  of  God,  though  what  He 
required  of  me  was  a  costly  sacrifice.  It  was  indeed  the  giving 
up  at  once  whatever  this  world  affords  of  agreeable — not  only 
honour,  fortune,  power  (which  indeed  were  nothing  to  me,  who 
despised  them  as  the  clay  in  the  streets),  but  all  the  truly 
desirable  conveniences  of  life— a  pleasant  house,  a  delightful 


Fri.  4. — Mr.  Lacy,  of  Thunderbolt,  present  at  morning  prayers.  They 
conversed.  After  half  an  hour's  conversation  in  the  garden  Wesley  wrote 
to  the  Trustees.  '  He  (Lacy)  quite  melted.5 


)  y 


4  Conversed  with  Delamotte  of  Miss  Sophy,  $  writ  words,  private  prayer. 

5  Private  prayer,  20,  prayer  with  Delamotte,  lots,  prayer,  talk  of  it  no  more. 

6  Sung  with  boys  ;  Germans,  sung,  et  cetera,  conversed. 

On  Wesley's  practice  of   sortilege,  and  diaries  of  the  times, 

learnt  from  devout  Moravians,  see  Tyer-  a  It  may  have  been  during  this  visit 

man's  Whitcfield,  vol.  i.  p.  n.     lllustra-  that  Mr.  Lacy  told  Wesley  the  story  of 

tions  abound  in   the  devotional   letters  David  Jones.     See  p.  344. 

VOL.  I.  1 8 


326 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[March  1737. 


garden,  on  the  brow  of  a  hill  at  a  small  distance  from  the 
town  ;  another  house  and  garden  in  the  town ;  and  a  third  a 
few  miles  off,  with  a  large  tract  of  fruitful  land  adjoining  to  it.1 
And  above  all,  what  to  me  made  all  things  else  vile  and 
utterly  beneath  a  thought,  such  a  companion  as  I  never  ex- 
pected to  find  again,  should  I  live  one  thousand  years  twice 
told.  So  that  I  could  not  but  cry  out :  O  Lord  God,  Thou 
God  of  my  fattier 's,  plenteous  in  mercy  and  truth,  behold  I  give 
Thee,  not  thousands  of  rams  or  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil, 
but  the  desire  of  my  eyes,  the  joy  of  my  lieart,  the  one  thing  upon 
earth  which  I  longed  for !  O  give  me  Wisdom,  which  sitteth  by 
Thy  throne,  and  reject  me  not  from  among  Thy  children  /] 

To-day  I  writ  to  the  Trustees2  an  account  of  our  year's 
expenses,  from  March  I,  1736,  to  March  I,  1737;  which, 
deducting  extraordinary  expenses  such  as  repairing  the  par- 
sonage house,  and  journeys  to  Frederica,  amounted,  for  Mr. 
Delamotte  and  me,  to  £44  4*.  ^d?  [At  the  same  time  I  accepted 
of  the  £50  a  year  sent  by  the  Society  for  my  maintenance  ; 
which  indeed  was  in  a  manner  forced  upon  me,  contrary  both  to 
expectation  and  desire.] 

Sat.  5. — From  six  to  eleven  he  read  Wake,  then  visited  and  catechized. 
At  12.30  he  dined— the  first  dinner  for  six  days.  He  went  to  the  Lot  and 
gave  a  lesson  in  logic  ;  Mellichamp  came.  After  prayers  Mr.  How's  class 
met.  They  read,  sang,  prayed. 


1  Miss   Sophy  possessed   property   in 
her  own  right.     Her  'lot 'is  frequently 
referred   to.      She  had    assured   Wesley 
that,  as  long  as  she  had   means,  neither 
he  nor  any  of  his  friends   should  want. 
She  was   also   heiress   (presumptive)    to 
the  Caustons,  who  held  an  estate,  or  lot, 
at  Hogstead,  a  few  miles  from  Savannah, 
and  also  a  large  town  house. 

2  The    Trustees     for    Georgia     num- 
bered  twenty-one.     Men   of    high   rank 
and    spotless    integrity    were    enrolled. 
Their    duties   were   to   appoint   officers, 
regulate  the  concerns  of  the  colony,  and 
collect   subscriptions  for  fitting   out  the 
colonists  and  supporting  them  until  they 
could  clear  the  land  and  earn  their  own 
livelihood.       The   Trust  was   straitened 
(Gent's  Mag.  1739,  p.  23);  nevertheless, 


whilst  the  Bishop  of  London  complained 
of  the  cost  of  the  Mission,  the  Trustees 
did  not.  Wesley  received,  reluctantly 
and  under  protest,  ^50  from  the  S.P.G., 
and  £20  for  outfit.  In  his  letter  to  the 
Trustees,  Wesley  refers  to  one  who  has 
charged  him  with  embezzling  the  goods 
of  the  Trustees,  and  demands  the 
name  of  his  accuser.  In  their  reply 
(June  15,  1737),  they  state  that  they 
had  never  heard  of  such  a  charge,  nor  do 
they  entertain  the  slightest  suspicion. 
In  the  national  charges  for  1744  is 
included  the  item  :  '  Extraordinary 
charges  in  Georgia  from  Sept.  1738,  to 
Sept.  29,  1743,  ^66,109  13*.  loo?.' 

*  In  the  Georgia  papers  (Record  Office, 
C.O.  5,  639,  No.  75)  is  the  original  letter. 
See  p.  398,  and  App.  XXI.  vol.  vi. 


Marcn ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  327 

From  the  directions  I  received  from  God  this  day  touching 
an  affair  of  the  greatest  importance,  I  could  not  but  observe, 
as  I  had  done  many  times  before,  the  entire  mistake  of  those 
who  assert,  'God  will  not  answer  your  prayer,  unless  your 
heart  be  wholly  resigned  to  His  will.'  My  heart  was  not  wholly 
resigned  to  His  will.  Therefore,  not  daring  to  depend  on 
my  own  judgement,  I  cried  the  more  earnestly  to  Him  to 
supply  what  was  wanting  in  me.  And  I  know,  and  am 
assured,  He  heard  my  voice,  and  did  send  forth  His  light  and 
His  truth. 

\_Mon.  7. — Mr.  Causton  asked  me  to  ride  with  him  to  his 
plantation,  four  miles  from  Savannah.  I  was  quite  struck  with 
the  pleasantness  of  the  situation  :  the  hill,  the  river,  the  woods, 
were  delightful,  and  shot  a  softness  into  my  soul  which  had  not 
left  me  when  at  our  return  he  asked  me  to  drink  a  dish  of 
tea  at  his  house.  Soon  after  I  came  in,  Miss  Sophy  went  out,  and 
walked  to  and  fro  between  the  door  and  the  garden.  I  saw  she 
wanted  to  speak  to  me,  but  remembered  my  resolutions,  especially 
that  to  converse  with  her  only  in  Mr.  Delamotte's  presence. 
Yet  after  a  short  struggle,  the  evil  soul  prevailed  in  me,  and  I 
went.  Immediately  she  catched  hold  of  both  my  hands,  and 
with  the  most  engaging  gesture,  look,  and  tone  of  voice  said, 
'  You  never  denied  me  anything  that  I  desired  yet,  and  you 
shall  not  deny  me  what  I  desire  now.'  I  said,  '  Miss  Sophy, 
I  will  not ;  what  is  it  ? '  She  answered, '  Don't  say  anything  to 
her  that  offered  me  the  letter  the  other  day.  My  refusing  it 
has  given  her  pain  enough  already.'  I  replied, '  I  will  not.  And 
if  you  had  told  me  of  it  before,  I  would  not  have  told  your 


Sun.  6. — The  day  was  as  usual.  In  the  evening  he  wrote  to  Hird, 
Mr.  Weston,  and  Mr.  Robinson,  of  Frederica  ;  also  to  Mr.  Causton. 

Mon.  7. — This  morning  he  went  with  Mr.  Causton  to  the  '  Five-Hundred- 
Acre  Lot,'  where  they  cut  trees  and  felled. 

This  must  have  been  the  estate  to  which  Causton  retired  after  his 
deposition  from  office  as  store-keeper  and  chief  magistrate. 

12  Walked  with  him,  good  time, 
i  He  blessed,  Delamotte  came,  dinner, 
a  Walked,  he  directed  the  workmen. 

3  Walked. 

4  Set  out.     Lost. 

5  Walked. 

6  At  Mr  Causton's,  within,  with  Miss  Sophy. 


328  John    Wesley  s  Journal 


(March  1737. 


uncle  of  it,  as  Mr.  Williamson  did.'  She  said,  '  Did  he  ?  Well,  I 
find  what  you  have  often  said  is  true.  There  is  no  trusting  any 
but  a  Christian.  And  for  my  part,  I  am  resolved  never  to  trust 
any  one  again  who  is  not  so.'  I  looked  upon  her,  and  should 
have  said  too  much  had  we  had  a  moment  longer.  But  in  the 
instant  Mr.  Causton  called  us  in.  So  I  was  once  more  €  snatched 
as  a  brand  out  of  the  fire.' 1 

\Tues.  8. — Miss  Sophy  and  Mr.  Delamotte  breakfasting  with 
me,  I  asked  her  what  she  now  thought  of  Mr.  Mellichamp. 
She  said,  '  I  thank  God  I  have  entirely  conquered  that  in- 
clination.' After  some  serious  conversation  interposed,  I  said, 
1 1  hear  Mr.  Williamson  pays  his  addresses  to  you.  Is  it  true?' 
She  said,  after  a  little  pause,  '  If  it  were  not  I  would  have  told 
you  so.'  I  asked,  '  How  do  you  like  him  ? '  She  replied,  '  I 
don't  know  ;  there  is  a  great  deal  in  being  in  the  house  with 
one.  But  I  have  no  inclination  for  him.'  I  said,  '  Miss  Sophy, 
if  you  ever  deceive  me,  I  shall  scarce  ever  believe  any  one 
again.'  She  looked  up  at  me  and  answered  with  a  smile, '  You 
will  never  have  that  reason  for  distrusting  any  one ;  I  shall 
never  deceive  you.'  When  she  was  going  away,  she  turned 
back  and  said, '  Of  one  thing,  sir,  be  assured  :  I  will  never  take 
any  step  in  anything  of  importance  without  first  consulting 
you.' 

[She  went,  and  I  saw  myself  in  the  toils.  But  how  to 
escape  I  saw  not.  If  I  continued  to  converse  with  her,  though 
not  alone,  I  found  I  should  love  her  more  and  more.  And 


Tues.  8. — Miss  Sophy  came  to  prayers,  remained  to  breakfast,  and  heard 
Wesley  read  Wake  and  Clemens.  After  a  visit  to  Mr.  Montagu's,  he  spent 
many  hours  in  writing  *  the  Psalm.'  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  which  was  the 
psalm  he  wrote,  or  sang,  except  the  fact  that  it  was  the  eighth  morning  of 
the  month.  He  enters  brief  and  not  very  intelligible  remarks  on  the  Diary 
page  :  *  That  not  worthy  of  her ! '  '  She  [Mrs.  Causton]  very  angry  at 
Miss  Sophy  ;  read  letter  from  me.'  The  final  entry  on  the  page  is  : 
II  Miss  Sophy  engaged.  Alas  ! 


1  From  his  childhood,  schooled  by  his  transcribed  in  Oxford  (March  9,  1738), 

mother  and  afterwards  by  a   mysterious  and  it  appears  as  a  legend,  together  with 

Providence,  Wesley  believed  himself  to  a  drawing  of  a  burning  house,   on  one 

be,   in  more  senses  than  one,  '  a'  brand  of     the    engraved     portraits     published 

snatched  out  of  the  fire.'     This  was  the  during  his  life.     (See  Weise  MSS.  in  the 

prophetic  word  inscribed  on  the  MS.  he  Wesleyan  Conference  Office.) 


March  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  329 

the  time  to  break  it  off  was  past.  I  felt  it  was  now  beyond 
my  strength.  My  resolutions  indeed  remained.  But  how  long  ? 
Yet  a  little  longer,  till  another  shock  of  temptation,  and  then 
I  well  knew  they  would  break  in  sunder  as  a  thread  of  tow 
that  has  touched  the  fire.  I  had  many  times  prayed  that  if  it 
was  best  our  intercourse  should  break  off,  and  that  if  I  could 
not  do  it  she  might.  But  this  too  I  saw  less  and  less  reason 
to  expect.  So  that  all  these  things  were  against  me,  and  I 
lay  struggling  in  the  net ;  nay,  scarcely  struggling,  as  even 
fearing  to  be  delivered. 

[After  evening  prayers,  Miss  Bovey  came  (as  usual)  to  my 
house,  with  Miss  Sophy,  who  was  in  the  utmost  consternation. 
She  begged  me  to  go  and  pacify  her  aunt  I  went  and  found 
Mrs.  Causton  in  great  disorder,  with  an  open  letter  in  her 
hand,  which  she  gave  me  to  read,  telling  me  she  had  just 
intercepted  it.  It  was  writ  by  Mr.  Mellichamp  to  Miss  Sophy. 
I  told  her  I  hoped  things  were  not  so  ill  as  she  apprehended  ; 
and  when  she  was  a  little  more  composed,  I  went  at  her  desire 
to  make  some  further  inquiries.  In  half  an  hour  I  returned 
and  found  Mrs.  Causton  chiding  Miss  Sophy  very  sharply. 
Some  of  her  expressions  were, '  Get  you  out  of  my  house  ;  I 
will  be  plagued  with  ye  no  longer.'  And  turning  to  me  she 
said,  *  Mr.  Wesley,  I  wish  you  would  take  her  ;  take  her  away 
with  ye.'  I  said,  *  Miss  Sophy  is  welcome  to  my  house,  or 
anything  that  I  have.'  Miss  Sophy  answered  only  with  tears. 
About  ten  I  went  home,  though  with  such  an  unwillingness 
and  heaviness  as  I  had  scarce  ever  felt  before. 

\Wed.  9. — About  ten  I  called  on  Mrs.  Causton.  She  said, 
'  Sir,  Mr.  Causton  and  I  are  exceedingly  obliged  to  you  for  all 
the  pains  you  have  taken  about  Sophy.  And  so  is  Sophy  too ; 
and  she  desires  you  would  publish  the  banns  of  marriage  between 
her  and  Mr.  Williamson  on  Sunday.'  She  added,  '  Sir,  you  don't 
seem  to  be  well  pleased.  Have  you  any  objection  to  it  ? '  I 
answered,  '  Madam,  I  don't  seem  to  be  awake.  Surely  I  am  in  a 
dream.'  She  said,  '  They  agreed  on  it  last  night  between  them- 
selves after  you  was  gone.  And  afterwards  Mr.  Williamson 
asked  Mr.  Causton's  and  my  consent,  which  we  gave  him  ;  but 
if  you  have  any  objection  to  it,  pray  speak.  Speak  to  her.  She 
is  at  the  Lot.  Go  to  her.  She  will  be  very  glad  to  hear  any- 


330  John   Wesley's  Journal  [March  1737. 

thing  Mr.  Wesley  has  to  say.  Pray  go  to  her  and  talk  to  her 
yourself.'  I  said, '  No,  madam  ;  if  Miss  Sophy  is  engaged,  I  have 
nothing  to  say.  It  will  not  signify  for  me  to  see  her  any  more.' 
I  then  offered  to  (leave)  ;  but  she  pressed  me  to  stay,  at  least  till 
the  rain  was  over.  The  burden  of  her  conversation  was  still, 
1  Why  are  you  uneasy?  '  and  '  Go  and  talk  with  her  yourself.' 

[I  doubted  whether  all  this  were  not  artifice,  merely  designed 
to  quicken  me.  But  though  I  was  uneasy  at  the  very  thought 
of  her  marrying  one  who,  I  believed,  would  make  her  very 
unhappy,  yet  I  could  not  resolve  to  save  her  from  him  by 
marrying  her  myself.  Besides,  I  reasoned  thus,  '  Either  she  is 
engaged  or  not  ;  if  she  is,  I  would  not  have  her  if  I  might :  if 
not,  there  is  nothing  in  this  show 1  which  ought  to  alter  my 
preceding  resolution.' 

[Thus  was  I  saved  purely  by  my  ignorance  ;  for  though  I 
did  doubt,  I  would  not  believe.  I  thought  it  unkind  and  unjust 
to  believe  an  artifice  of  which  I  had  not  full  proof.  Oh,  let  no  one 
ever  fear  the  being  lost  by  thinking  no  evil !  Had  I  known  the 
snare,  I  had  perished  thereby.  All  the  world  could  not  have 
saved  me.  Had  I  then  seen  the  real  case  to  be  this — '  She  is 
engaged,  but  conditionally  only.  Mr.  Williamson  shall  marry 


Wed.  9. — The  page  (see  opposite)  reveals  Wesley's  distress.  He  always 
regarded  this  as  one  of  the  most  sorrowful  days  of  his  life.  The  following 
is  the  transliteration  : 

4  Private  prayer,  prayer,  diary,  ^  private  prayer. 

5  Meditation,  Prayers. 

6  Coffee,  conversed,  ^  Clement. 

7  Within  with  Mrs.  Ann,  ^  with  Mrs.  Bush. 

8  Within,  £  Clement. 

9  Clement  if  logic. 

10  Mrs  Causton's,  in  talk  with  her.     Miss  Sophy  to  be  married  ;  meditation. 
12  At  the  Lot,  within  with  her,  quite  distressed  ! 

1  Within.     Confounded  ! 

2  Took  leave  of  her,  ^  at  home.     Could  not  pray  ! 

3  Tried  to  pray,  lost,  sunk  ! 

4  Bread,  conversed  with  Delamotte.     Little  better  1 

5  Mr  Causton  came,  in  talk,  tea. 

6  Kempis  ;  Germans.     Easier  ! 

7  Prayers. 

8  Miss  Sophy  et  cetera,  £  within  with  her,  f  with  Delamotte,  prayer. 
No  such  day  since  I  first  saw  the  sun  ! 

O  deal  tenderly  with  Thy  servant ! 
Let  me  not  see  such  another  ! 


The  word  thus  used  is  found  in  Shakespeare,  Milton,  Addison,  &c. 


331 


March  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journa I  333 

her,  if  you  will  not ' — I  could  not  have  stood  that  shock.  I 
should  have  incurred  any  loss  rather  than  she  should  have  run 
that  hazard,  of  losing  both  her  body  and  soul  in  hell.1 

[From  Mrs.  Causton  I  went  home  full  of  perplexity.  After 
some  time  spent  in  prayer,  I  desired  Mr.  Delamotte  to  go  to  the 
Lot,  and  ask  if  my  company  would  be  agreeable.  In  the 
meantime,  seeing  nothing  but  clouds  before  me,  I  had  recourse 
to  the  oracles  of  God.  I  received  two  answers.  The  first  was, 
'  Blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  daughter  ;  for  thou  hast 
showed  more  kindness  at  the  latter  end  than  at  the  beginning.' 
The  other  (which  was  part  of  the  Morning  Lesson  on  Saturday, 
August  27,  following  the  Court-day  on  which  I  expected  my 
trial)  was  in  these  words  :  *  If  I  be  an  offender  or  have  com- 
mitted anything  worthy  of  death,  I  refuse  not  to  die.  But  if 
there  be  none  of  these  things  whereof  they  accuse  me,  no  man 
may  deliver  me  unto  them.' 

[Soon  after  Mr.  Delamotte  came  back  I  went.  Mr.  William- 
son and  she  were  together.  She  began  with  her  usual  sweetness* 
1  Why  would  you  put  yourself  to  the  trouble  of  sending?  What 
need  of  that  ceremony  between  us?  You  know  your  com- 
pany is  always  welcome  to  me.'  Then  silence  ensued,  which 
Mr.  Williamson  broke  thus  :  '  I  suppose,  sir,  you  know  what  was 
agreed  on  last  night  between  Miss  Sophy  and  me.'  I  answered, 
*  I  have  heard  something ;  but  I  could  not  believe  it,  unless  I 
should  hear  it  from  Miss  Sophy  herself.'  She  replied, '  Sir,  I 
have  given  Mr.  Williamson  my  consent — unless  you  have  any- 
thing to  object.'  It  started  into  my  mind,  '  What  if  she  means, 
unless  you  will  marry  me  ? '  But  I  checked  the  thought  with, 
1  Miss  Sophy  is  so  sincere  :  if  she  meant  so,  she  would  say  so ' ; 
and  replied,  '  If  you  have  given  your  consent,  the  time  is  past ; 
I  have  nothing  to  object.'  Mr.  Williamson  desired  me,  if  I  had, 
to  speak,  and  then  left  her  and  me  together.  'Tis  hard  to 

1  Two    things    are    clear:     (i)    the  nineteen)  was  terrified  by  a  designing, 

Caustons    and    Miss    Sophy    desired    a  unscrupulous  man,  just  as,  a  little  while 

perfectly  regular   marriage,  after   banns  before,  she  had  been  nearly  frightened, 

were  duly  published,  and    in  their  own  by  threats  of  murder,  into  a  marriage  with 

church  at  Savannah.    The  hasty  marriage  Mellichamp,  who  was  also  a  scoundrel, 

within  four  days  of  the  engagement,  at  (2)  Williamson  was  a  man  of  no  charac- 

Purrysburg,    without   banns,  and   by   a  ter.     He  had  everything  to  gain   by   a 

notorious  violator  of  law  and  usage,  was  marriage   with    Causton's   niece.       The 

practically  forced.     The  girl  (she  was  not  result  justified  Wesley's  apprehensions. 


334  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [March  1737. 

describe  the  complication  of  passions  and  tumult  of  thought 
which  I  then  felt :  fear  of  her  approaching  misery,  and  tender 
pity  ;  grief  for  my  own  loss  ;  love  shooting  through  all  the 
recesses  of  my  soul,  and  sharpening  every  thought  and  passion. 
Underneath  there  was  a  faint  desire  to  do  and  suffer  the  will 
of  God,  which,  joined  to  a  doubt  whether  that  proposal  would 
be  accepted,  was  just  strong  enough  to  prevent  my  saying 
plainly  (what  I  wonder  to  this  hour  I  did  not  say),  '  Miss 
Sophy,  will  you  marry  me  ?  '  As  soon  as  I  could  speak,  I 
reminded  her  of  her  resolution,  '  If  she  married  at  all,  to 
marry  none  but  a  religious  man/  and  desired  her  to  consider 
whether  Mr.  Williamson  was  such.  She  said,  *  She  had  no 
proof  to  the  contrary.'  I  told  her,  'That  was  not  enough. 
Before  she  staked  so  much  upon  it,  she  ought  to  have  full, 
positive  proof  that  he  was  religious.'  She  said  again,  '  I  no 
otherwise  consented,  than  if  you  had  nothing  to  object.'  Little 
more  was  said,  tears  in  both  supplying  the  place  of  words. 
More  than  an  hour  was  spent  thus.  About  two  Mr.  William- 
son came  again.  1  think  it  was  just  as  he  came  she  said,  '  I 
hope  I  shall  always  have  your  friendship.'  I  answered, '  I  can 
still  be  your  friend,  though  I  should  not  stay  in  America.' 
She  said,  '  But  I  hope  you  won't  leave  us.'  I  said,  '  I  can't 
at  all  judge  how  God  will  dispose  of  me.'  She  added, c  How- 
ever, you  will  let  me  have  your  correspondence  ?  '  I  replied,  '  I 
doubt  it  cannot  be.'  I  then  exhorted  them  both  to  '  assist 
each  other  in  serving  God  with  all  their  strength '  ;  and  her 
in  particular  '  to  remember  the  many  instructions  and  advices 
I  had  given  her.'  I  kissed  them  both,  and  took  my  leave  of 
her  as  one  I  was  to  see  no  more. 

[I  came  home  and  went  into  my  garden.  I  walked  up  and 
down,  seeking  rest  but  finding  none.  From  the  beginning  of  my 
life  to  this  hour  I  had  not  known  one  such  as  this.  God  let 
loose  my  inordinate  affection  upon  me,  and  the  poison  thereof 
drank  up  my  spirit.  I  was  as  stupid  as  if  half  awake,  and  yet 
in  the  sharpest  pain  I  ever  felt.  To  see  her  no  more:  that 
thought  was  as  the  piercings  of  a  sword  ;  it  was  not  to  be 
borne,  nor  shaken  off.  I  was  weary  of  the  world,  of  light,  of 
life.  Yet  one  way  remained,  to  seek  to  God — a  very  present 
help  in  time  of  trouble.  And  I  did  seek  after  God,  but  I  found 


March  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  335 

Him  not.  I  forsook  Him  before :  now  He  forsook  me.  I  could 
not  pray.  Then  indeed  the  snares  of  death  were  about  me  ; 
the  pains  of  hell  overtook  me.  Yet  I  struggled  for  life ;  and 
though  I  had  neither  words  nor  thoughts,  I  lifted  up  my  eyes 
to  the  Prince  that  is  highly  exalted,  and  supplied  the  place  of 
them  as  I  could :  and  about  four  o'clock  He  so  far  took  the 
cup  from  me  that  I  drank  so  deeply  of  it  no  more. 

[Soon  after  I  writ  a  note  to  Mr.  Causton,1  who  came  to  me 
about  five  o'clock  and  told  me,  *  I  don't  approve  of  this  match. 
Mr.  Williamson  asked  my  consent  this  morning ;  but  I  have 
neither  denied  nor  given  it.  Indeed  I  have  often  promised 
Sophy,  so  she  would  not  have  Mellichamp,  she  should  have 
whom  she  would  beside.  But  what  passed  between  her  and  you 
at  the  Lot?'  I  told  him  without  any  disguise.  He  said,  'If 
you  loved  her,  how  could  you  possibly  be  so  overseen  as  not  to 
press  her  when  she  was  so  much  moved  ? '  He  added,  '  I  will 
tell  her  my  thoughts  of  it  once  more,  and,  if  you  please,  so 
may  you.  But  if  she  is  not  then  convinced  I  must  leave  her  to 
herself.' 

[Had  he  then  said  plainly, '  If  you  please,  you  may  have  her 
still ;  but  if  you  won't,  another  will,'  I  know  not  what  might 
have  been  the  event ;  or  had  Mr.  Delamotte  left  us  alone,  when 
she  came  to  my  house  after  evening  prayers.  Mr.  Williamson 
begged  her  not  to  stay  after  the  rest  of  the  company.  But  she 
did  very  readily.  He  walked  to  and  fro  on  the  outside  of  the 
house,  with  all  the  signs  of  strong  uneasiness.  I  told  her,  '  Miss 
Sophy,  you  said  yesterday  you  would  take  no  steps  in  any- 
thing of  importance  without  first  consulting  me.'  She  answered 
earnestly  and  many  times  over,  '  Why,  what  could  I  do  ?  I  can't 


1  Assuming  Causton  to  have  been  the  judging    of   Causton    at  this  time,   we 

contemptible  rogue  described  by  Tyer-  should  not  forget  that  the  enemies  who 

man  and  others,  it  must  nevertheless  be  so  grossly  slandered    Wesley  were   the 

confessed  that  he  was  not  without  fore-  persons  on  whom  we  depend  ultimately 

sight  and  insight.     It  was  to  his  interest  for  the  information  that  blackened  Caus- 

to   stand    well   with    the   Trustees  and  ton's    character.     That    he    played    the 

Oglethorpe  and  the  S.P.G.,  and  there-  tyrant  in  prosecuting  Wesley  there  can 

fore  with  the  Wesleys  and  their  friends.  be  no  doubt ;  nor  can  he  be  exonerated 

He    evidently    admired     Wesley,    both  from  deceit  and  fraud  :  but  all  else  against 

trusting  and  fearing  him.     There  is  every  him  comes,  let  it  be  remembered,  through 

reason  to  believe  that  he  sincerely  desired  tainted  sources  (see  Journal  of  Trustees, 

to  see  him  married  to  Miss  Sophy.     In  Record  Office). 


336  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [March  1737. 

live  in  that  house.  I  can't  bear  these  shocks.  This  is  quite  a 
sudden  thing.  I  have  no  particular  inclination  for  Mr.  William- 
son. I  only  promised  if  no  objection  appeared.  But  what 
can  I  do?'  Mr.  Williamson,  coming  in  abruptly,  took  her  away, 
and  put  a  short  end  to  our  conversation. 

[However,  in  the  morning !  I  called  once  more  at  Mr.  Caus- 
ton's  and  desired  to  speak  with  her.  Mr.  Williamson  told  me, 
'  Sir,  you  shall  speak  with  her  no  more  till  we  are  married.  You 
can  persuade  her  to  anything.  After  you  went  from  the  Lot 
yesterday,  she  would  neither  eat  nor  drink  for  two  hours  ;  but 
was  crying  continually,  and  in  such  an  agony  she  was  fit  for 
nothing.'  I  said,  'To-morrow,  sir,  you  may  be  her  director, 
but  to-day  she  is  to  direct  herself.'  I  desired  a  piece  of  paper 
and  writ  these  words,  '  Miss  Sophy,  will  you  see  me  or  not  ? ' 
Mr.  Causton  bade  Mrs.  Causton  carry  it  up,  and  Miss  Sophy 
immediately  came  down.  We  went  into  the  garden  and 
I  asked,  *  Are  you  fully  determined  ? '  She  said,  '  I  am.'  I 
replied,  'Take  care  you  act  upon  a  right  motive.  The  desire 
of  avoiding  crosses  is  not  so.  Beside,  you  can't  avoid  them. 
They  will  follow  and  overtake  you  in  every  state/  Mr.  William- 
son then  coming  to  us,  I  advised  them  to  have  the  banns 
regularly  published,  exhorted  them  to  love  and  serve  God, 
told  them  they  might  always  depend  on  my  friendship  and 
assistance,  and  went  home  easy  and  satisfied. 

[In  the  afternoon  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I  went  to  the  Lot, 
where  I  read  them  Bishop  Hall's  Meditation  on  Heaven ;  during 
which  Miss  Sophy  fixed  her  eyes  on  Mr.  Williamson  and  me 
alternately  for  above  half  an  hour,  with  as  steady  an  observa- 
tion as  if  she  had  been  drawing  our  pictures.  Mr.  Williamson 
afterwards  told  me,  '  He  should  always  be  glad  of  my  advice, 
and  hoped  I  would  still  favour  them  with  my  conversation, 
which  he  should  look  upon  as  a  particular  happiness  both  to 
her  and  him.'  I  answered,  *  I  hope  we  shall  all  be  happy  in 
the  place  we  have  been  reading  of.'  Of  which  indeed  I  had  so 
strong  a  persuasion  that  I  returned  rejoicing  and  wondering  at 


Thur.   io.— The  Diary  page  adds   nothing   of  importance  to  the  nar- 
rative. 


Thursday,  March  io,  1737. 


March  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  337 

myself.     The  next  morning *  she  set  out  for  Purrysburg,  and  on 
Saturday,  March  12,  1737,  was  married  there;  this  being  the  day 
which  completed  the  year  from  my  first  speaking  to  her ! 
[Transcribed,  March  12,  1738.] 


Fri.  ii.— He  began  the  day  with  prayer  and  singing.  'Pain.'  He 
read  prayers,  drank  coffee  twice,  conversed  with  Mr.  How  and  Mr.  Causton, 
and  found  some  relief  in  the  'German  Dictionary'  which  he  was  compiling. 
4 Light  came!'  At  ten  he  had  'much  more  pain.'  At  eleven,  in  'much 
pain,'  he  began  Job,  and  was  '  easier.'  Instead  of  dinner  he  read  Kempis 
and  talked  to  his  boys.  His  old  friend  Mr.  Brownfield,  who  had  been 
his  comrade  in  so  many  anxieties,  came,  and  remained  some  time.  He 
found  help  among  the  Germans,  with  whom  he  spent  the  evening, 
talking  to  them  '  of  Miss  Sophy,'  who  by  this  time  was  in  Purrysburg 
with  Miss  Bovey. 

Sat.  12. — He  was  still  in  'much  pain,'  and  seems  to  have  feared  (or 
hoped)  that  his  days  were  numbered,  for  he  wrote  his  will.  'To-day 
Miss  Bovey  and  Miss  Sophy  were  married  at  Purrysburg  !  !  ! '  * 

Sun.  13.— At  three  in  the  morning  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burnside  and  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Williamson  returned  from  Purrysburg.  At  early  morning  prayers 
forty  were  present,  among  them  'Miss  Sophy.'  At  the  public  worship 
and  sermon  sixty  were  present,  but  neither  of  the  bridal  parties.  '  Miss 
Sophy,'  however,  came  as  usual  with  her  small  company  for  the  after- 


1  Friday,  March  II.  marriage  was  deliberate,  and   probably 

2  A  question  arises  as  to   the  strict  after  due  publication  of   banns  in   the 
legality  of  Miss  Sophy's  marriage.     On  church  at  Purrysburg.     Burnside  and  his 
Wednesday,  March  9,  Mrs.  Causton  asked  affianced  bride  did   not  ask  Wesley  to 
him,  on  behalf  of  her  niece,  '  to  publish  marry  them,  probably  because,  for  some 
the  banns  of  marriage  between  her  and  unknown  reason,  he  did  not  altogether 
Mr.  Williamson  on  Sunday.'     On  Satur-  approve  of  the  marriage.      They   were 
day,  March   12,  before  banns  could  be  both   his   friends,   and   he  had  a  great 
published,  they  were  married  at  Purrys-  regard  for  them  ;  but  he  thought   their 
burg.     In  the  subsequent  pages  of  ihe  marriage  imprudent,  perhaps  premature. 
Diary  Miss  Bovey  is   always  called  by  Still,    it    was    perfectly    regular.     Miss 
her  married  name—'  Mrs.  Burnside ';  but  Sophy's  was  hurried.    Engaged  on  Tues- 
Miss  Hopkey  is  always  '  Miss   Sophy,'  day   night,  the  8th,  they  were  married 
and  rarely,  if  ever,   '  Mrs.  Williamson.'  on   Saturday,  the    I2th,   in  the  teeth  of 
In  the  Journal,  however,  and  apparently  Wesley's  entreaty  that  they  would  put  up 
in  all   public  references  to  her,  she  is  the  banns  in  due  and  legal  form.   Wesley's 
'Mrs.  Williamson.'     To  himself  he  re-  insistence  on  the  proper  formalities  may 
fused  to  admit  the  absolute  validity  of  have  irritated  many,  but  of  course  it  was 
the  marriage.     He  protested,  and  rightly,  right,  and  in  the  interests  of  the  women 
against  the  carelessness  and  illegality  of  and  their  unborn  children. 

the   Purrysburg  minister's   proceedings.  It  was  on  this  day,  twelve  months  later, 

We  shall  hereafter  find  that  his  appeal  to  that  Wesley,  in  his  own  rooms  at  Lincoln 

the  Bishop  of  London's  Commissary  bore  College,  transcribed  the  '  Account  of  Miss 

fruit,  and  for  the  future  marriages  with-  Sophy '  here  printed   for  the  first  time 

out  banns  were  forbidden.     Miss  Bovey's  (see  Weise  MSS.  in  W.M.  Conf.  Office). 


338  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [March  1737. 

\Tues.  15. — I  invited  Mr.  Williamson  to  my  house,  whom 
I  was  surprised  to  find  exceedingly  angry.  He  told  me 
(among  many  other  warm  things)  that  I  hated  both  him 
and  his  wife;  that  he  had  looked  upon  her  as  his  wife  for 
above  six  weeks  ;  that  she  herself  had  not  only  declared  she 
would  never  come  within  my  house,  but  begged  of  him  not 
to  do  it,  nay,  not  to  go  out  alone,  for  she  believed  if 
Mr.  Delamotte  or  I  caught  him  we  should  murder  him.  I 
desired  to  talk  with  her  myself;  but  he  said,  'She  would 
never  consent  to  it.'  So  we  parted  as  we  met. 

[Sat.  19. — He  told  me,  '  I  should  talk  with  her  if  I  would.' 
Accordingly  in  the  evening  I  met  her  at  Mrs.  Burnside's. 
Only  we  three  were  present.  I  taxed  her  with  insincerity 
before  and  ingratitude  since  her  marriage.  As  to  the  first 
she  said,  '  I  was  never  insincere  to  you.  On  the  noon  of 
that  day  when  the  letter  was  taken,  I  told  Mr.  Williamson 

noon  class.  At  the  close  of  afternoon  prayers  Wesley  conversed  with 
his  friend  Mr.  Burnside.  He  also  met  Mr.  How's  class  in  the  usual 
manner,  catechized  the  children,  walked  with  Delamotte,  visited  the 
Germans,  and  had  a  conversation  with  Hermsdorf.  All  day  until  night- 
fall he  suffered  pain.  Fleury's  Manners  of  the  Ancient  Christians  was 
with  him  in  all  his  preparation  for  a  trying  service.  He  again  read  Job. 

Mon.  14. — He  awoke  at  four,  easier  of  his  pain.  At  nine  he  had  a 
conversation  with  Mrs.  Burnside.  The  day  as  usual.  *  Miss  Sophy '  appeared 
at  evening  prayers.  The  marked  distinction  between  Mrs.  B.  and 
Miss  S.  is  preserved  in  the  Diary  henceforth.  His  reading  to-day  was 
Kempis,  Greek  Testament,  and  Pope's  Epistles. 

Tues.  15. — He  notes  that  at  prayers  neither  Miss  Sophy  nor  her 
husband  was  present.  The  interview  with  Williamson  took  place  at  five 
in  the  parsonage  garden.  He  wrote  to  Mr.  Kimberley  and  the  Bishop 
of  London  ;  also  read  an  account  of  the  Danish  Mission. 

Wed.  16. — He  wrote  to  Mrs.  Burnside,  with  whom  the  former  friendly 
relations  are  resumed,  except  that  for  a  while  the  French  lessons  are 
discontinued. 

Thur.  17. — He  returns  to  his  work  on  'hymns,'  'transcribing';  also 
the  Mission,  the  account  of  which  he  had  read,  and  seems  now,  after 
his  manner,  to  be  condensing  for  Mr.  Burnside.  The  Creek  Indians 
again  engaged  his  attention  ;  he  visited  the  Cowpen,  which  was  near 
one  of  their  settlements.  Returning  home  he  read  prayers,  fifty  being 
present,  and  afterwards  read  Worthington  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burnside. 

Fri.  1 8. — He  resumes  the  normal  routine.  After  evening  prayers 
Mr.  Burnside's  class  meets  in  the  usual  manner. 

Sat.  19. — It  was  after  morning  prayers  that  he  conversed  with 
Mr.  Williamson,  and  in  the  evening  with  'Miss  Sophy'  at  Mrs.  Burn- 


March  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  339 

I  should  be  glad  to  serve  him  as  a  friend,  but  now  resolved 
never  to  admit  him  as  a  lover/  After  more  to  the  same 
effect,  she  said,  '  I  own,  I  could  not  have  denied  you  had 
you  pressed  me  to  marriage  at  any  time  when  my  temper 
was  ruffled.'  As  to  the  second,  she  said,  '  It  was  not  you 
but  Mr.  Mellichamp's  friends  who,  I  feared,  might  hurt 
Mr.  Williamson.  Indeed,  many  instances  of  your  anger  and 
resentment  have  been  related  to  me  since  my  marriage,  but 
I  could  hardly  believe  them.  Nor  could  they  ever  provoke 
me  to  say  anything  disrespectful  of  you.  The  most  I  have 
ever  said  was,  "  Well,  whatever  he  may  say  or  do,  now  or 
hereafter,  I  will  always  own  the  man  has  been  my  friend 
and  done  me  more  service  than  any  person  living." ' 

[I  believed  what  she  said,  and  received  her  as  a  communicant 
the  next  day. 

[Sun.  20. — The  Communion  ended,  I  spoke  to  her  in  the 
street,  and  exhorted  her  '  not  to  be  weary  of  well-doing.' 
Before  we  parted  she  told  me  plainly, '  Mr.  Williamson  thinks 
it  makes  me  uneasy,  and  therefore  desires  me  to  speak  to  you 
no  more.' 


side's.      More  important  is  the  fact  that  during  this  day,  at  intervals,  he 
worked  on  *  hymns '  and  *  made  verses.' 

7  Hymns.  9  Made  Verse. 

8  Hymns.  10  Verse. 

11  Writ  verse,  ^  Mrs  Woodruffs,  within,  Mrs  Burnside's,  within. 

12  Dinner,  in  talk,  £  Verse.  i  Visited.     They  seemed  affected. 
2  Catechized,  £  Verse.                            3  Verse.1 

Sun.  20. — He  notes  that  '  Miss  Sophy '  came  to  the  Communion. 
Another  line  is  important : 

7  £  Mr  Causton's,  in  talk,  read  Watts. 

Mon.  21. — 'Writ 'to  Mr.  Kimberley.  He  spent  some  hours  in  writing 
to  '  Miss  Sophy.'  He  and  Delamotte  drank  tea  with  Mrs.  Burnside, 
afterwards  walking  with  them  to  her  lot. 

Tues.  22. — This  is  also  an  important  page,  because  it  shows  that  the 
'verses'  he  made  were  'hymns,'  and  illustrates  his  manner  of  hymn- 


1  As  soon  as  Wesley  found  an  absorbing  in  the  lives  of  his  suffering  followers, 
occupation,  his  mind,  and  even  his  hand,  The  handwriting  is  again  beautiful,  and 
recovered  tone  and  firmness.  These  the  shorthand  clear  and  free  from  mis- 
hymns  and  verses  were  his  salvation  takes.  He  always  differentiates  between 
from  despair,  as  they  were  destined  to  be  translation  and  original  composition. 


34°  John   Wesley  s  Journal  rMarch  1737. 

Thur.  24. — About  nine  in  the  morning  a  fire  broke  out  in 
the  house  of  Mr.  Robert  Hows1  [a  tithing-man],  which  in  less 
than  an  hour  consumed  it  [and  all  that  was  in  it,  except  two 
saws.  The  wind  carried  the  flame  from  the  neighbouring  houses, 
so  that  it  spread  no  farther].  The  next  day  a  collection  was 
made  for  him  in  the  town,  and  the  generality  of  the  people 
showed  a  surprising  willingness  to  give  a  little  out  of  their 
little  for  the  relief  of  a  necessity  greater  than  their  own. 
[Only  one  gentleman  (so  called  by  the  courtesy  of  England) 

writing  (see  opposite).     The  hymns  were  for  use,  therefore  as  made  they 
were  tested  by  singing. 

8 1  Walked,  verse,  sung. 

9  Made  verse,  sung. 

10  Verse,  sung. 

11  Verse,  writ  them. 

12  Writ  them,  drest,  f  visited. 

1  Visited. 

2  Visited,  f  transcribed. 

3  Tea,  conversed,  40  Logic. 

4  Transcribed,  J  walked,  sung. 

5  Walked,  sung,  private  prayer,  Greek  Testament. 

Wed.  23. — He  wrote  *  verse  '  and  the  '  Account,'  and  at  two  in  the 
afternoon  gave  Mr.  Burnside  a  lesson  in  French.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that  Mr.  How's  class,  with  its  usual  reading,  singing,  and  prayer,  met 
in  the  evening.  The  next  day  the  class-leader's  house  was  burnt  down. 

Thur.  24. — The  hymns  are  introduced  in  the  early-morning  devotions 
with  Delamotte.  He  tested  them,  first  on  himself,  and  then  on  his  friend, 
before  using  them  in  pastoral  visitation,  in  public  worship,  and  in  the 
classes.  Whilst  Mr.  How's  house  *  was  burning  Wesley  was  reading, 
walking,  and  making  new  verses.  Hymns  claimed  his  attention  at  intervals 
until  the  close  of  the  day,  when  he  met  Mr.  Burnside's  class. 

Fri.  25. — Most  of  this  day  was  spent  in  making  a  collection  for  Mr.  How. 
It  was  the  Feast  of  the  Annunciation,  with  Sermon  and  Communion. 
Wesley  himself  collected  the  money  from  house  to  house. 

Sat.  26. — Hymns  and  the  collection  still  occupied  his  attention.  At 
eleven  o'clock  he  read  to  Mrs.  Burnside  the  '  Account  of  Miss  Sophy.' 
Mr.  How's  class  met  in  the  evening.  This  Saturday  class,  as  Wesley 
himself  explains,  was  specially  a  preparation  for  Holy  Communion.  It 
was  conducted  like  the  other  classes — with  singing,  reading,  and  prayer. 


1  In   the   Diary   the   name   is  always  Correspondence,    Record    Office    (App. 

spelt    '  How.'     How    was   parish  clerk  XXII.  vol.  vi.). 

under  Mr.  Quincy       Wesley  supported  -  Charles  Wesley  describes  the  burning 

his   application  for   assistance,   and   the  down   of   other   houses.      Each    had    a 

Trustees  agreed  that  the  cost  of  rebuild-  frame  of  timber,  measuring  16  ft.  by  24, 

ing  his  house  should  be  defrayed  out  of  its  sides  consisting  of  unplaned  boards,  its 

the 'Fund  for  religious  uses.'     Georgia  floor  of  rough  deals,  and  its  roof  of  shingles. 


341 


Apm  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  343 

said,  '  He  thought  the  helping  one  another  was  giving  a  bad 
example,  and  therefore  he  would  not  be  concerned  in  it.' 

\Thur.  31. — At  his  own  repeated  desire,  I  visited  one 
(Mr.  Young)  who  had  long  sat  in  the  seat  of  the  scorner :  I 
am  not  without  hopes  that  one  of  that  character  will  at  length 
find  the  wisdom  he  seeks. 

[APRIL  i,  Fri.— Once  a  day  from  this  time  I  visited  a 
young  gentleman *  who,  by  a  happy  misfortune,  had  gained 
both  leisure  and  inclination  to  think  more  deeply  on 
Christianity  than  he  had  before  done.  Oh  fair  blossoms ! 


Sun.  27.— He  married  Patrick  at  eight  o'clock,  entertained  afterwards 
at  breakfast,  and  'gave  a  Bible.'  After  dinner  he  wrote  hymns  in  the 
garden,  meditated,  and  then  catechized.  At  3.45  Mr.  How's  class  or  band* 
met.  They  read,  prayed,  sang,  read,  sang,  conversed  till  half-past  five, 
when  they  had  tea  and  conversation. 

Mon.  28. — He  wrote  to  Mrs.  Hutton,  to  James  Hutton,  to  Mr.  Macquin, 
and  Bailey  ;  to  Mr.  Wogan— a  long  letter  ;  to  Brother  Samuel.  This  letter 
was  probably  the  one  in  which  he  gave  Samuel  an  account  of  the  disastrous 
ending  of  his  *  love  affair.'  In  his  reply  Samuel  says,  *  I  am  sorry  you  are 
disappointed  in  one  match,  because  you  are  very  unlikely  to  find  another.' 

4  Visited. 

5  Read  hymns.     25  Greek  Testament,  sung. 

6  Meditated,  sung,  Germans. 

At  eight  o'clock  he  met  Mrs.  Vanderplank's  class,  to  which  he  seems 
to  have  read  Fleury's  Manners  of  the  Ancient  Christians. 

Tues.  29. — He  was  reading  Fleury  in  the  early  morning  when  Mrs.  Van- 
derplank  joined  the  parsonage  company  at  breakfast.  From  seven  to  eleven 
o'clock  he  was  engaged  in  writing  the  famous  letter  to  Mrs.  Chapman 
on  Christian  Cheerfulness  (App.  XIX.  vol.  vi.). 

Wed.  30.— He  continued  the  transcription  of  the  letter  written  on 
Tuesday.  Wrote  to  the  Society  (S.P.G.) ;  also  to  Sir  Erasmus  Phillips. 
These  letters  he  transcribed.  In  the  afternoon  he  resumed  his  French 
lesson  with  Mrs.  Burnside,  and  Logic  with  her  and  Delamotte. 

Thur.  31.— He  wrote  to  the  Trustees  and  'for  the  People.'  This  was 
evidently  a  petition  of  considerable  length  and  importance.  He  spent  two 
hours  in  pastoral  visitation. 

APRIL  i,  Fri.— He  wrote  to  Mr.  Horton,  of  Frederica,  and  to 
Mr.  Hird.  The  *  young  gentleman '  whom  he  to-day  began  to  visit  was 
Mr.  Grant.  Usually  he  paid  the  visit  in  the  early  morning.  Apparently 


'  See  Delamotte's  letter  to  Wesley,  select  Sunday-afternoon  meeting.  Phrase- 

App.  XX.  vol.  vi.  ology  of  a  later  date  is  used  in  these 

8  It  is  Wesley  himself  who  draws  the  annotations,  but  only  because  no  other 

distinction,  more  than  once,  between  the  words  so  aptly  or  so  accurately  describe 

wider  week-day  meeting  and  the  more  their  nature. 


344  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [April  1737. 

But  who  can   tell  whether  any  fruit  will  be  brought  to  per- 
fection ?] 

About  this  time  Mr.  Lacy,  of  Thunderbolt,  called  upon 
me ;  when,  observing  him  to  be  in  a  deep  sadness,  I  asked 
what  was  the  reason  of  it  And  a  terrible  one  indeed  he  gave, 
in  the  relation  following  :  * 

In  1733  David  Jones,  a  saddler,  a  middle-aged  man,  who  had  for 
some  time  before  lived  at  Nottingham,  being  at  Bristol,  met  a  person 
there,  who,  after  giving  him  some  account  of  Georgia,  asked  whether 
he  would  go  thither;  adding,  his  trade  (that  of  a  saddler)  was  an 
exceeding  good  trade  there,  upon  which  he  might  live  creditably  and 
comfortably.  He  objected  his  want  of  money  to  pay  his  passage  and 
buy  some  tools,  which  he  should  have  need  of.  The  gentleman 
(Capt.  W.)  told  him  he  would  supply  him  with  that,  and  hire  him 
a  shop  when  he  came  to  Georgia,  wherein  he  might  follow  his  business, 
and  so  repay  him  as  it  suited  his  convenience.  Accordingly  to  Georgia 
they  went ;  where,  soon  after  his  arrival,  his  master  (as  he  now  styled 
himself)  sold  him  to  Mr.  Lacy,  who  set  him  to  work  with  the  rest  of 

the  pastoral  attention  given  to  the  man  was,  on  this  first  visit,  repeated 
to  the  wife  or  mother. 

7  Visited  Mr  Grant,  conversed,  prayed ;  ditto  Mrs. 

He  called  at  Causton's,  and  wrote  to  Mr.  Weston,  of  Frederica,  to  whom 
he  had  married  Miss  Fosset.  The  day  was  kept  as  a  strict  Lenten  fast. 
Coffee  at  six,  bread  at  nine,  tea  at  three.  At  eleven  he  conversed  with 
W.  W.  (Williamson).  He  then  read  Kempis  and  spent  an  hour  in  private 
prayer  for  'Miss  Sophy5  and  others,  and  in  conversation  and  prayer  with 
the  Burnsides. 

1  Writ  heads  of  divinity. 

2  Mrs.  Burnside's,  within,  French. 


1  The  evidence  is  not  sufficiently  de-  they  would  have  compulsory  white 
cisive  to  warrant  the  removal  of  this  labour.  This,,  as  in  the  case  of  David 
narrative  to  an  earlier. date,  but  the  Diary  Jones  and  Rachel  Ure,  was  as  cruel 
indications  point  to  Friday,  March  4,  as  negro  slavery.  Wesley  denounced 
as  the  day  on  which  Mr.  Lacy  '  called '  slavery,  whether  coloured  or  white,  and 
and  gave  Wesley  an  account  of  David  was  hated  accordingly.  Hence  the 
Jones.  It  was  in  Bristol  that  Jones  met  famous  Bristol  affidavit,  sworn  by 
'Capt.  W.'  It  is  probable  that  this  Captain  Williams,  which  precipitated 
Captain  W.  was  the  notorious  Captain  the  publication  of  the  Journal.  White- 
Williams  who  owned  a  large  plantation  field's  popularity  was  not  hindered  by 
not  far  from  the  Cowpen,  and  was  denunciations  of  slavery.  He  not  only 
himself  connected  closely  with  Bristol.  sympathized  with  the  planters  in  their 
The  Trustees  forbade  negro  slavery.  demand  for  coloured  slave-labour,  but 
The  planters  urged  the  impossibility  of  himself  owned  slaves  at  the  Bethesda 
profitable  colonization  except  by  forced  Orphan  House.  The  Trustees' notes  and 
labour.  If  they  could  not  have  negroes,  letters  on  slavery  are  instructive. 


April  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  345 

his  servants  in  clearing  land.  He  commonly  appeared  much  more 
thoughtful  than  the  rest,  often  stealing  into  the  woods  alone.  He  was 
now  sent  to  do  some  work  on  an  island  three  or  four  miles  from 
Mr.  Lacy's  great  plantation.  Thence  he  desired  the  other  servants 
to  return  without  him,  saying  he  would  stay  and  kill  a  deer.  This  was 
on  Saturday.  On  Monday  they  found  him  on  the  shore,  with  his  gun 
by  him,  and  the  fore  part  of  his  head  shot  to  pieces.  In  his  pocket 
was  a  paper  book ;  all  the  leaves  thereof  were  fair,  except  one,  on 
which  ten  or  twelve  verses  were  written,  two  of  which  were  these 
(which  I  transcribed  thence  from  his  own  handwriting) : 

Death  could  not  a  more  sad  retinue  find ; 

Sickness  and  pain  before,  and  darkness  all  behind  ! 

Sun.  3. — This  and  every  day  in  this  great  and  holy  week 
we  had  a  sermon  and  the  Holy  Communion,  [and  at  least 
twelve  communicants]. 

Mon.  4. — I   began  learning   Spanish,  in  order  to  converse 

Sat.  2. — Between  four  and  five  he  read  German  and  hymns.  After 
prayers  he  saw  Mr.  Hunt,  drank  tea,  and  for  more  than  an  hour  '  writ  heads 
of  divinity.'  During  his  morning  visit  to  Mr.  Grant  he  read  and  prayed. 
The  rest  of  the  morning  he  wrote  heads  of  divinity.  After  dinner 
he  set  out,  praying  privately  all  the  way  to  Thunderbolt.  The  rest  of 
the  day's  Diary  is  written  in  plain  words,  with  but  slight  abbreviation. 

2  £  Thunderbolt,  within. 

3  Coffee,  within,  £  set  out,  private  prayer. 

4  Private  prayer,  made  verse. 

5  Conversed  with  Fitzwalter,  40,  at  home,  on  business. 

6  Tea,  Germans. 

7  Read  Prayers.     Mr.  How  and  company,  read,  sung.      Transcribed  verse  for  Miss 

Sophy. 

8  Mr  Causton's,  he  out,  conversed  with  Miss  Sophy,  Mrs  Causton,  Mr  Williamson,  10. 
10  Could  not  sleep,     n  Mrs  Brownfield  came.     Could  not  sleep.     12. 

'THE  GREAT  AND  HOLY  WEEK'  (in  Greek) 

Sun.  3. — At  four  he  awoke  for  private  prayer,  but  slept  till  five,  when  he 
dressed  and  read  prayers.  At  seven  he  wrote  verse  ;  he  gave  two  hours  to 
sermon  preparation.  In  the  evening,  at  Mr.  Causton's,  '  company  came,' 
wasting  the  hours  in  talk  until  after  supper,  when  Wesley  succeeded  in 
leading  a  serious  conversation. 

Mon.  4.— Mr.  Finlay  to  early  breakfast.  He  transcribed  the  Journal, 
prepared  and  preached  a  sermon,  and  administered  Holy  Communion. 

5  Walked,  Greek  Testament,  sung,  meditated. 

6  Sung  with  Delamotte,  in  talk  with  Dr  Nunes,1  Germans. 

1  Dr.    Nunes,    a   Spanish    Jew,    was  Molinos)    '  O  God,  my  God,  my  all  Thou 

engaged     to    give    Wesley    lessons     in  art' (see  p.  240).     What  he  now  *  began ' 

Spanish.       He     already     had     learned  to  learn  was  how  to  preach  and  converse 

enough  to  read  and  translate  the  hymn,  in  Spanish, 
by  an  unknown  Spanish  mystic  (possibly 

VOL.  I.  19 


346  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [April  1737. 


with  my  Jewish  parishioners  ;  some  of  whom  seem  nearer  the 
mind  that  was  in  Christ  than  many  of  those  who  call  Him 
Lord. 

[Good  Friday -,  8. — I  had  told  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burnside  God 
would  expect  at  their  hands  the  service  which  I  could  perform 
for  her  (Mrs.  Williamson)  no  longer.  And  from  this  time  to 
the  8th  of  April  I  conveyed  by  them  the  several  advices  she 
seemed  to  stand  the  most  in  need  of ;  for  which  they  had 
always  thanks  at  least,  and  fair  promises. 

[Finding  little  effect  from  them,  I  spoke  to  her  myself 
under  Mr.  Causton's  shed.  This  was  our  third  conversation 
since  her  marriage,  and  lasted  near  half  an  hour ;  but  no 
private  one,  four  or  five  persons  being  in  the  house  within 
sight  of  us,  and,  if  they  pleased,  hearing  too.  She  professed 
large  obligations  to  me  :  I  exhorted  her  to  fulfil  all  righteous- 
ness. And  before  we  parted,  in  consequence  of  a  conversation 
I  had  had  with  Mrs.  Burnside  concerning  her,  I  gave  her  that 
much  controverted  advice,  which,  fairly  represented,  I  will  avow 
before  all  the  world,  '  In  things  of  an  indifferent  nature  you 
cannot  be  too  obedient  to  your  husband  ;  but  if  his  will  should 
be  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  you  are  to  obey  God  rather 
than  man.'  It  may  be  observed  that  this  day,  of  her  own  free 
choice,  she  fasted  till  the  evening. 

[Sat.  9. — After  the  Communion  I  spake  to  her  again  in 
the  street  to  the  same  effect,  which  was  our  fourth  conference. 
She  now  told  me  in  so  many  words,  '  Mr.  Williamson  is  not 
unwilling  I  should  talk  with  you  because  he  thinks  it  makes 


Tues.  5. — He  again  worked  on  his  Journal. 

Wed.  6. — The  days  pass  without  breach  of  the  routine — prayers, 
Journal,  Grant,  sermon,  Communion,  Spanish,  one  or  another  of  the 
classes,  hymns. 

Thur.  7.— After  the  Communion  he  gave  three  hours  to  French  and 
Spanish  alone,  taking  his  lesson  from  Dr.  Nunes  as  usual. 

Good  Friday,  8. — This  was  a  day  of  disturbance  with  reference 
to  the  Caustons,  and  on  public  grounds.  After  a  conversation  with  *  Miss 
Sophy,'  he  asks,  'Is  all  well  ? '  At  one  o'clock  Mr.  Causton  sent  for  him, 
'alarmed.'  At  four  o'clock  he  was  again  at  Mr.  Causton's,  making  the 
following  significant  note :  *  Captain  Gray  and  Indians.'  There  was 
evidently  some  anxiety  in  the  colony  with  reference  to  the  Indians. 

Easter  Eve,  Sat.  9. — After  the  Communion  he  had  the  conversation 
with  '  Miss  Sophy '  to  which  he  refers  in  the  Journal.  At  the  close  of 


Apm  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  347 

me   uneasy,   but   because   he   is  afraid  it  would  make  me  too 
strict'] 

Tues.  12. — Being  determined,  if  possible,  to  put  a  stop  to  the 
proceedings  of  one  in  Carolina,  who  had  married  several  of  my 
parishioners  without  either  banns  or  licence,  and  declared  he 
would  do  so  still,  I  set  out  in  a  sloop  for  Charlestown.1  [We 
passed  the  bar  on  Wednesday.]  I  landed  there  on  Thursday, 
and  related  the  case  to  Mr.  Garden,  [the  minister  of  Charlestown 
and]  the  Bishop  of  London's  Commissary,  who  assured  me 
he  would  take  care  no  such  irregularity  should  be  committed 


the  Spanish  lesson  he  read  Hickes's  Reformed  Devotions  with  Delamotte 
and  had  an  interview  with  Rachel  Ure,  the  doctor's  daughter,  whom  he 
had  rescued  from  slavery.  'Cx^/y.ctfc 

Easter  Sunday,  10. — At  eight  Paustoobee  came.  In  the  evening, 
apparently  in  the  German  quarters,  he  had  a  talk  with  *  Agnes,'  and  after- 
wards wrote  an  account  of  her. 

Mon.  ii. — At  six  o'clock,  whilst  in  talk  with  Mr.  Causton,  Tomo- 
chachi,  &c.,  came.  Later  he  had  an  interview  with  Toltschig  and  others. 

Tues.  12. — Preparing  for  a  journey  to   Charlestown,  he  packed,  trans- 
acted business  with  a  number  of  people,  preached  and  administered  the 
Communion,  and   at   three   o'clock   embarked   on  the  sloop.     With  a  fair 
wind  he  set  out.     Several  persons  are  named  as  fellow  passengers. 
5  Private  prayer,  singing.  6  Singing.  7^  Tybee  Bar,  slept. 

Wed.  13. — He  sang  and  read.  On  Charlestown  Bar  the  wind  was 
contrary. 

Thur.  14. — At  half-past  six  in  the  morning  he  landed  at  Charlestown, 
called  on  Mr.  Eveleigh,  talked  with  Mrs.  Matthews  and  company,  and 
from  eight  to  half-past  nine  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Timothy,  the 
publisher  of  the  Charlestown  Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns.  He  then 
saw  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Laserre,2  and,  after  transacting  business,  called  on 
Mr.  Garden,  the  Bishop  of  London's  Commissary,  with  whom  he  dined. 
In  the  afternoon  he  was  at  Jeremy  Trot's,  and  at  four  drank  tea  with 
Mr.  Braithwaite  and  company,  where  he  *  saw  the  silkworms,'  probably  a 


1  Charlestown,    the  capital,  was  also  missionaries.    (Digest  of  S.  P. G.  Records t 

the  key  of  the  colony.      Great   irregu-  pp.  1-18.) 

larities  were  practised  on  the  plantations  On    the  strange   mortality  and  good 

generally,  and  not  merely  at  Purrysburg.  report  of  these  missionaries,  see    W.M. 

For  the  whole  of  North  Carolina,  at  this  Mag.^  1856,  p.  426. 

time,  there  was  only  one  itinerant  mis-  2  Laserre  and  Eveleigh  seem  to  be  dis- 

sionary — the  Rev.  J.  Boyd.  tinct  persons,  but  elsewhere  one  and  the 

For  further  particulars  see  Tyerman's  same.  Was  *  Mr.  Eveleigh '  the  father  and 

Wkitefitlcfs  Life  and  Letters ,  vol.   i.  p.  '  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Laserre '  son  and  daughter- 

207,  and  the  Digest  of  S.P.G.   Records.  in-law?     Mr.    Samuel  Eveleigh   was  a 

South  Carolina  was  favoured  with  noble  leading  merchant  in  Charlestown. 


348  John   Wesley's  Journal 

for  the  future.  [He  said  that  he  believed  no  other  clergyman 
in  the  province  would  be  guilty  of  such  irregularity,  but  that 
howsoever  he  would  caution  them  against  it  at  the  general 
meeting  of  the  clergy,  which  was  to  be  the  week  following. 

[Fri.  15. — I  walked  over  to  Ashley  Ferry,  twelve  miles 
from  Charlestown,  and  thence,  in  the  afternoon,  went  to 
Mr.  Guy,  the  minister  of  Ashley,  and  to  Colonel  Bull's  seat,  two 
miles  farther.  This  is  the  pleasantest  place  I  have  yet  seen 
in  America  ;  the  orchard  and  garden  being  full  of  most  of 
those  sorts  of  trees  and  plants  and  flowers  which  are  esteemed 
in  England,  but  which  the  laziness  of  the  Americans  seldom 
suffers  them  to  raise.] 

Sun.  17. — Mr.  Garden1  (to  whom  I  must  ever  acknowledge 
myself  indebted  for  many  kind  and  generous  offices)  desiring  me 
to  preach,  I  did  so,  on  these  words  of  the  Epistle  for  the 
day :  '  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world,  and 
this  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith.' 3  To  that  plain  account  of  the  Christian  state  which 
these  words  naturally  led  me  to  give,  a  man  of  education 
and  character  seriously  objected  (what  is  indeed  a  great 

new  colonial  industry.  He  complains  that  he  *  got  no  reading/  He  does 
not  refer  to  the  purpose,  or  purposes,  of  his  visit  to  Charlestown.  The  Diary 
is  very  much  condensed,  and  little  more  than  a  record  of  persons  visited, 
with  here  and  there  a  few  slight  personal  touches. 

Fri.  15. — He  read  Kidd's  Demonstration  of  the  Messiah^  called  on 
Mr.  Guy,  saw  Mr.  Belinger,  had  a  pleasant  time  at  Colonel  Bull's  with 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Bull  and  the  young  ladies.  They  walked  in  the  garden, 
and  Miss  Charlotte  played  on  the  npinet.  After  supper  he  had  the 
satisfaction  of  '  close  conversation,3  and  they  were  *  seriously  affected.' 
He  returned  to  Mr.  Guy's. 

Sat.  1 6. — After  talking  with  Mr.  Guy,  he  set  out,  reading  Kidd, 
until,  at  eight  o'clock,  he  reached  Mr.  Lloyd's.  He  was  able  to  render 
some  service  in  writing  for  Thicken,  one  of  his  fellow  passengers  on  the 
sloop.  At  noon  he  returned  to  Mr.  Garden's.  He  again  saw  Jeremy 
Trot  and  Mr.  Braithwaite. 

Sun.  17. — He  wrote  to  his  brother  Charles,  read  prayers  in  Mr.  Garden's 
church,  dined  with  Mr.  Laserre,  heard  Mr.  Garden  preach,  and,  at 
J.  Trot's,  conversed  with  the  ladies  and  had  tea.  In  the  evening  he 
wrote  to  his  mother  at  Mr.  Laserre's. 


1  For  an  account  of  the  Rev.  A.  Garden,  2  The  sermon  he  afterwards   sent   to 

whose  character  Wesley  greatly  appre-       Mr.  Garden.     ( Jackson's  Life  of  Charles 
ciated,  see  p.  254.  Wesley ',  p.  113.) 


April  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  349 

truth),  '  Why,  if  this  be  Christianity,  a  Christian  man  must 
have  more  courage  than  Alexander  the  Great.' 

\Mon.  1 8. — I  had  a  conversation  of  some  hours  with 
Mr.  Garden,  whom  I  found  (very  different  from  the  repre- 
sentation I  had  heard)  to  be  a  man  of  extensive  knowledge, 
both  as  to  things,  books,  and  men,  and,  as  far  as  I  can 
judge,  of  an  excellent  spirit] 

Tues.  19. — We  left  Charlestown  ;  but  meeting  with  stormy 
and  contrary  winds,  after  losing  our  anchor  and  beating  out 
at  sea  all  night,  on  Thursday ',  the  2ist,  we  with  some  diffi- 
culty got  back  into  Charlestown  harbour. 

[I  was  now  resolved  to  use  more  freedom  of  speech  than 
before,  and  not  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  And 
this  by  God's  assistance  I  did  this  evening  as  well  as  the 
remaining  days  I  spent  here,  whatever  company  I  was  in.] 

Fri.  22. — It  being  the  time  of  their  annual  Visitation, 
I  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  [at  Mr.  Garden's]  the  clergy 
of  South  Carolina ;  [who  severally  assured  me  they  would 
never  interfere  with  me  in  anything,  nor  (in  particular)  marry 


Mon.  1 8. — He  spent  three  hours  in  the  early  morning  'transcribing 
hymns,'  had  the  long  conversation  with  Mr.  Garden  to  which  he  refers 
in  the  Journal,  read  an  account  of  Christian  Indians  at  Mr.  Eveleigh's, 
where  he  dined,  and  at  nine  in  the  evening  he  '  corrected  proof.' ! 

Tues.  19. — He  sang  at  five  o'clock,  'transcribed  a  German  grammar,' 
wrote  his  Journal,  and  saw  the  fort. 

9  Mr  Timothy's  ;  Garden  and  company. 

10  Clavisae  Linguae  St. 

11  On  board.     Read  Italian  Grammar. 

12  Italian,  \  dinner,  diary,      i  Italian. 

3  At  Sutherland  Fort,  company,  meditated.     4  Tea  together. 

5  On  board,  ended  Italian  Grammar. 

6  Supper,  \  private  prayer,  singing,  8  lay  down. 

Wed.  20. — He  spent  the  day  of  storm  in  reading  Gother  and  singing. 

Thur.  21. — Read  Gother  until  they  landed.  At  noon  he  dined  at 
Jeremy  Trot's.  At  six  there  was  a  gathering  at  Mr.  Lloyd's,  which  in- 
cluded Mr.  Guy,  Mr.  Jones,  and  Mrs.  Laserre,  the  result  being  that  they 
were  'affected.' 

Fri.  22.— In  connexion  with  the  meeting  of  the  clergy  at  Mr.  Garden's, 
other  names  are  introduced. 


1  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  refers  to  the  Charlestown  Hymn-Book  which 
Mr.  Lewis  Timothy  was  printing.     (App.  XVII.  vol.  vi.) 


350  John   We s leys  Journal  [April  1737. 

any  persons  of  our  province  without  a  letter  from  me 
desiring  them  so  to  do.  At  eleven  we  all  went  to  church 
together.  Nor  was  I  ever  more  sensible  of  the  comfort  of 
joining  with  the  assembly  of  the  faithful,  than  now  that 
I  had  been  some  days  secluded  from  it]  In  the  afternoon 
we  met  again,  where  was  such  a  conversation  for  several 
hours,  on  Christ  our  Righteousness  [and  our  example,  with 
such  seriousness  and  closeness]  as  I  never  heard  in  England 
in  all  the  visitations  I  have  been  present  at. 

Sat.  23. — Mentioning  to  Mr.  Thompson,1  minister  of  St. 
Bartholomew's,  near  Ponpon,  my  being  disappointed  of  a  pass- 
age home  by  water,  he  offered  me  one  of  his  horses  if  I  would 
go  by  land,  which  I  gladly  accepted  of.  He  went  with  me 
twenty  miles,  and  sent  his  servant  to  guide  me  the  other  twenty 
to  his  house.  Finding  a  young  negro  there,  who  seemed  more 
sensible  than  the  rest,  I  asked  her  how  long  she  had  been  in 
Carolina.  She  said  two  or  three  years  ;  but  that  she  was  born 
in  Barbados,  and  had  lived  there  in  a  minister's  family  from  a 
child.  I  asked  whether  she  went  to  church  there.  She  said, 
'Yes,  every  Sunday,  to  carry  my  mistress's  children.'  I 
asked  what  she  had  learned  at  church.  She  said,  '  Nothing  ; 
I  heard  a  deal,  but  did  not  understand  it.'  '  But  what  did  your 
master  teach  you  at  home?'  '  Nothing.'  'Nor  your  mistress? 
'  No.'  I  asked,  '  But  don't  you  know  that  your  hands  and 
feet,  and  this  you  call  your  body,  will  turn  to  dust  in  a  little 
time  ? '  She  answered,  '  Yes.'  '  But  there  is  something  in 
you  that  will  not  turn  to  dust,  and  this  is  what  they  call  your 
soul.  Indeed,  you  cannot  see  your  soul,  though  it  is  within  you  ; 
as  you  cannot  see  the  wind,  though  it  is  all  about  you.  But  if 
you  had  not  a  soul  in  you,  you  could  no  more  see,  or  hear,  or 
feel,  than  this  table  can.  What  do  you  think  will  become  of 

Sat.  23.— Wrote  his  Journal.  '  Mrs.  Delegal  sent.  I  could  not  go 
with  her.'  Talked  with  Mr.  Thompson  and  Mr.  Guy  on  business,  and 
with  Mr.  Garden  privately.  The  name  of  the  negro  woman  with  whom 
he  conversed  was  '  Nanny.3 

1  The  question  has  been  raised  whether  St.  Genny's  in  October  1738  is  no  bar 
this  was  the  Mr.  Thompson  of  St.  Genny's  to  this  theory.  He  was  sufficiently  in- 
to whom  Wesley  ministered  in  after  years.  terested  in  Whitefield's  mission  to  Georgia 
The  Cornish  vicar  had  been  a  chaplain  to  send  him  £6  igs.  towards  the  cost  of 
in  America.  The  fact  that  he  was  at  the  enterprise. 


April  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  351 

your  soul  when  your  body  turns  to  dust  ? '  'I  don't  know.' 
1  Why,  it  will  go  out  of  your  body,  and  go  up  there,  above  the 
sky,  and  live  always.  God  lives  there.  Do  you  know  who  God 
is  ? '  '  No.'  '  You  cannot  see  Him,  any  more  than  you  can 
see  your  own  soul.  It  is  He  that  made  you  and  me,  and  all  men 
and  women,  and  all  beasts  and  birds,  and  all  the  world.  It  is 
He  that  makes  the  sun  shine,  and  rain  fall,  and  corn  and  fruits 
to  grow  out  of  the  ground.  He  makes  all  these  for  us.  But 
why  do  you  think  He  made  us  ?  What  did  He  make  you  and 
me  for  ? '  'I  can't  tell.'  *  He  made  you  to  live  with  Himself 
above  the  sky.  And  so  you  will,  in  a  little  time,  if  you  are 
good.  If  you  are  good,  when  your  body  dies  your  soul  will  go 
up,  and  want  nothing,  and  have  whatever  you  can  desire.  No 
one  will  beat  or  hurt  you  there.  You  will  never  be  sick.  You 
will  never  be  sorry  any  more,  nor  afraid  of  anything.  I  can't 
tell  you,  I  don't  know  how  happy  you  will  be ;  for  you  will 
be  with  God.' 

The  attention  with  which  this  poor  creature  listened  to  in- 
struction is  inexpressible.  The  next  day  she  remembered  allj 
readily  answered  every  question  ;  and  said  she  would  ask  Him 
that  made  her  to  show  her  how  to  be  good. 

Sun.  24. — I  preached  twice  at  Ponpon  chapel,  on  the  [former 
part  of  the]  thirteenth  chapter  of  the  first  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  [and  before  the  morning  sermon  (as  Mr.  Thomp- 
son had  desired,  great  part  of  the  congregation  being  Dissenters) 
used  an  extempore  prayer.]  Oh,  how  will  even  the  men  of 
Carolina  rise  up  in  the  judgement  against  this  generation  and 
condemn  it !  They  come,  many  of  them,  eight,  ten,  or  twelve 
miles  to  hear  the  gospel.  Ye  hear  it  not  when  it  is  preached  at 
your  own  doors  ! 

\_Mon.  25. — Mr.  Thompson  sent  his  servant  with  me  to 
Mr.  Belinger's,  at  Ashepoo  Ferry,  who  the  next  day  went  with 


Sun.  24. — The  congregation  at  Ponpon  numbered  70.  He  dined  at 
Mr.  Edy's. 

Mon.  25. — After  early  breakfast  he  set  out  with  Mr.  Edy.  At  eight 
Mr.  Webster  joined  them.  At  nine  he  was  at  Mr.  Belinger's.  At  twelve  at 
Mr.  Gerardeau's,  where  he  slept  and  dined,  and  read  '  Paradise  Regained.' 
He  reached  Ashepoo  at  five  o'clock,  still  reading  Milton.  At  six  Mr.  Belinger 
came  ;  at  7.30  Mr.  Gerardeau. 


35  2  John    Wesley  s  Journal  tApriim? 

me  himself  to  one  Mr.  Palmer's,  five  miles  short  of  his  own 
plantation  at  Chulifinny.] 

Wed.  27. — I  came  to  Mr.  Belinger's  plantation,  where  the 
rain  kept  me  till  Friday.  Here  I  met  [an  old  negro *  who 
was  tolerably  well  instructed  in  the  principles  of  Christianity, 
and  who,  as  well  as  his  fellow  negroes  and]  a  half  Indian 
[woman]  (one  that  had  an  Indian  mother  and  a  Spanish 
father)  seemed  earnestly  desirous  of  further  instruction.  One 
of  them  said,  *  When  I  lived  at  Ashley  Ferry,  I  could  go  to 
church  every  Sunday,  but  here  we  are  buried  in  the  woods. 
Though  if  there  was  any  church  within  five  or  six  miles,  I 
am  so  lame  I  cannot  walk,  but  I  would  crawl  thither.' 

Mr.  Belinger  sent  a  negro  lad  with  me  [on  Friday,  who 
conducted  me  safe]  to  Purrysburg  [in  the  evening ;  a  town  the 
most  without  the  appearance  of  a  town  I  ever  saw,  with  no  form 
or  comeliness  or  regularity].  Oh,  how  hath  God  stretched  over 
this  place  '  the  lines  of  confusion  and  the  stones  of  emptiness  ' ! 
Alas  for  those  whose  lives  were  here  vilely  cast  away,  through 
oppression,  through  divers  plagues  and  troubles  !  O  earth  !  how 
long  wilt  thou  hide  blood  ?  How  long  wilt  thou  cover  thy  slain  ? 
This  lad  2  too  I  found  both  very  desirous  and  very  capable  of 

Tues.  26. — He  set  out  with  Mr.  Belinger,  in  hard  rain,  and  at  11.30 
reached  Combee.  At  three  they  dined  at  Hugh  Brian's,  who  went 
with  them  to  Mr.  Palmer's,  where  they  encountered  a  storm. 

Wed.  27. — Wesley  had  an  attack  of  sickness,  which  compelled  him  to 
rest  and  live  on  a  milk  diet. 

Thur.  28. — During  these  days  he  read  Milton,  wrote  his  Journal,  sang, 
walked  out  whenever  possible,  and  conversed  with  negroes  on  the  plantation, 
who  were  *  seriously  affected.' 

Fri.  29. — He  resumed  his  journey,  reaching  Chulifinny  Creek  at  eight 
o'clock,  but  could  not  pass.  Conversed  with  a  negro,  and  sang  until  ten 
minutes  past  ten,  when  he  set  out  and  reached  Purrysburg  at  7.15.  There 
he  was  entertained  at  Mr.  Nutman's. 


1  Dr.  Burton  wrote  to  Wesley :  '  One  among  which  the  unlawful  marriage  of 

end  for  which  we  were  associated  was  Miss  Sophy  was  prominent,  explains 

the  conversion  of  negro  slaves.'  Ogle-  Wesley's  strong  feeling  about  the  place, 
thorpe  asked  Zinzendorf  to  send  more  2  Wesley  was  always  deeply  interested 

Brethren  as  missionaries  among  the  in  the  negroes.  See  a  letter  from  a 

negroes  of  South  Carolina.  gentleman  in  Virginia  describing  the 

It  is  said  that  Purrysburg  was  the  first  work  of  a  clergyman  (the  Rev.  W. 

place  in  the  province  to  introduce  slavery.  Davies)  on  their  behalf,  and  noting  their 

This  crime  against  humanity  and  other  natural  gift  for  music,  quoted  in  Journal, 

'  irregularities,' ecclesiastical  and  moral,  July  27,  1755. 


May  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  353 

instruction.  And  perhaps  one  of  the  easiest  and  shortest  ways 
to  instruct  the  American  negroes  in  Christianity  would  be, 
first,  to  inquire  after  and  find  out  some  of  the  most  serious  of 
the  planters.  Then,  having  inquired  of  them  which  of  their 
slaves  were  best  inclined  and  understood  English,  to  go  to  them 
from  plantation  to  plantation,  staying  as  long  as  appeared 
necessary  at  each.  Three  or  four  gentlemen  at  Carolina  I  have 
been  with  that  would  be  sincerely  glad  of  such  an  assistant, 
who  might  pursue  his  work  with  no  more  hindrances  than 
must  everywhere  attend  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 

Sat.  30. — I  [took  boat,  and  before  noon]  came  safe  to 
Savannah.  Here  I  found  my  little  flock  in  a  better  state  than 
I  could  have  expected,  God  having  been  pleased  greatly  to 
bless  the  endeavours  of  my  fellow  labourer  1  while  I  was  absent 
from  them.  [Those  who  desired  to  be  followers  of  Christ  had 
not  made  my  absence  an  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  assembling 
themselves  together ;  and  by  the  blessing  of  God  on  their 
endeavours,  most  of  them  were  more  steadfast  and  zealous  of 
good  works  than  when  I  left  them. 

[MAY  3,  Tues. — I  walked  to  the  three  hundred  acres  of  land 

Sat.  30. — Leaving  Purrysburg  at  six  o'clock,  at  9.15  he  arrived 
at  Mrs.  Matthews's  (late  Musgrove).  At  noon  he  reached  Mr.  Causton's, 
and  at  one  o'clock  resumed  his  ordinary  routine  of  pastoral  work,  reading 
Fleury  and  catechizing,  walking  with  Delamotte  and  reciting  his  adven- 
tures in  Carolina.  At  four  he  was  at  Mr.  Brownfield's.  At  five  he  prayed 
with  Delamotte  and  read  the  Greek  Testament.  At  seven  he  read  prayers 
and  expounded,  afterwards  meeting  Mr.  How's  communicants'  class, 
reading  Brevint,  praying,  and  singing.  At  nine  he  was  at  Mr.  Burnside's. 

MAY  i,  Sun. — He  had  hitherto  regarded  himself  as  only  temporarily  in 
pastoral  charge  of  the  church  at  Savannah,  and  had  therefore  not  complied 
with  all  the  formalities  legally  connected  with  the  induction  of  an  incum- 
bent. But  now,  probably  as  the  result  of  a  consultation  with  the  Bishop 
of  London's  Commissary,  Mr.  Garden,  he  publicly  '  subscribed  the  Prayers.' 

Mon.  2.— He  'writ  Prayers.'  'Writ'  to  Charles,  to  Mr.  Laserre,  to 
Mrs.  Laserre  and  Miss  Molly.  He  visited  some  of  his  Spanish  parishioners, 
and,  twice,  Mr.  Grant. 

Tues.  3. — Sitting  in  his  garden,  he  spent  two  or  three  hours  writing  the 

1  Ingham     had    already     sailed     for  and   Accounts   of  the  Georgia  Trustees 

England.       Delamotte     was    the     only  show  that  Delamotte's  voluntary  services 

'  fellow  labourer '  left.    Both  at  Frederica  were  recognized,  though   not   with   any 

and  Savannah,  Wesley  was   driven   by  payment     in    the    nature   of   a    salary, 

stress  of  circumstances  to  employ  a  lay-  (See  above,  p.  322.) 
man  as   his  substitute.      The   Minutes 


354  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [May  1737. 

which  were  set  apart  for  glebe :  and  believed  it  would  be  worth 
while  to  make  a  small  garden  upon  a  part  of  it,  which  would 
enable  either  me  or  my  successor,  without  any  expense,  to  give 
many  of  these  poor  people  a  sort  of  relief  which  in  summer 
especially  is  very  acceptable  to  them. 

[Sat.  J. — I  took  a  walk  to  Hampstead,  a  little  village  of  ten 
families  about  five  miles  south  of  Savannah.     But  I  found  no 


Journal.  At  one  he  had  a  conversation  with  William  Williamson.  At  three 
o'clock  he  walked  with  Mr.  Johnson  and  Mr.  Bradley  round  the  glebe. 
They  did  not  finish  their  work  until  after  six  o'clock,  when  Mr.  Bradley 
drank  tea  with  him. 

Wed.  4. — One  of  the  most  interesting  letters  that  has  survived  from 
these  Savannah  days  is  the  one  Wesley  wrote  to  Mrs.  Chapman  (App.lXIX. 
vol.  vi.)  on  *  Christian  Cheerfulness.'  In  the  early  Oxford  days  John 
Wesley  was  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments  of  university  society.  But 
for  this  letter  and  a  few  stray  hints  in  the  Diary,  we  should  infer  an 
entire  change  from  cheerfulness  to  austerity.  This  morning,  in  the  usual 
conversation  following  prayers,  at  which  Captain  Hermsdorf  and  his  friends 
were  present,  there  occurs  in  the  Diary  the  rare  word  'jocularity.'  The 
Journal  and  the  Italian  Grammar  divide  interest  to-day.  The  latter  he  was 
carefully  studying.  He  also  read  Wheatley  On  Common  Prayer.  A 
domestic  anxiety  appears  to  have  arisen  in  which  Mrs.  Anne,  Rachel, 
and  others  figure.  It  seems  probable  that  Mrs.  Anne  was  housekeeper  at 
the  parsonage,  and  that  Rachel,  the  Edinburgh  jtartSffi  daughter  whom 
Wesley  rescued,  lived  in  the  house  as  servant.  It  must  be  remembered  that, 
during  the  greater  part  of  his  residence  at  Savannah,  the  parsonage,  which 
was  a  larger  house  than  any  other  in  the  town  except  Mr.  Causton's,  was 
utilized  by  Wesley  as  an  orphanage  or  refuge  for  the  distressed.  Visitors 
from  Frederica,  Irene,  Ebenezer,  and  other  places,  lodged  there.  We 
have  many  illustrations  of  this  in  the  Diary.  A  housekeeper  and  servant 
were  therefore  necessary. 

Thur.  5. — Mr.   Grant,   whom  he  had   so   diligently  visited,  was  so  far 
improved  in  health  that  he   could  attend   morning  prayers.      For  many 
hours  Wesley  worked  at  his  Journal,  writing  and  transcribing.     An  hour  he 
gave  to  Italian,  and  then  visited.     The  last  entry  has  a  special  interest : 
9  Played  upon  the  flute  for  half  an  hour. 

Fri.  6. — Again  he  devoted  several  hours  to  the  Journal.  The  discarded 
hourly  ejaculatory  prayer  reappears,  and  is  continued  at  intervals  for  some 
time.  Weary  of  writing,  he  took  a  walk  and  read  Bedford  on  Sir  Isaac 
Newton's  Chronology.  There  follows  at  noon  a  mysterious  shorthand 
writing  that  seems  to  mean  'the  time  for  dinner,'  i.e.  he  regarded  noon 
of  the  day  as  the  most  appropriate  time  for  dinner.  In  the  afternoon  he 
walked  with  Delamotte  to  the  glebe.  They  had  a  long  talk,  probably  on 
the  project  to  which  reference  is  made  in  the  Journal. 

Sat.  7.— He  wrote  to  Laserre,  Mark  Hird,  and  Mrs.  Dalton  ;  read 
Beresford  ;  and,  after  dinner,  set  out  for  Hampstead  and  Highgate,  reading 


May  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  355 

one  there  with  whom  I  could  talk,  they  not  understanding  mine, 
nor  I  their  Dutch.  From  thence  I  went  to  Highgate,  a  mile 
west  of  Hampstead,  having  the  same  number  of  families.  But 
neither  could  I  converse  with  these,  who  spoke  French  only, 
except  one  family.  Till  the  inhabitants  of  these  villages  have 
learned  English,  that  objection  does  not  affect  them  which  lies 
so  strong  against  the  rest,  viz.  that  by  placing  them  so  distant 
from  any  other  minister,  and  in  so  small  numbers  that  they 
cannot  expect  one  of  their  own,  you  compel  them  to  be  without 
public  worship,  and  in  effect  to  be  without  God  in  the  world. 

[I  was  in  doubt  whether  I  could  admit  Miss  Sophy  to  the 
Communion J  till  she  had,  in  some  manner  or  other,  owned  her 

on  the  way,  to  and  fro,  the  Account  of  Hutchesoris  Works.  He  sang  occa- 
sionally, and  at  Highgate  seems  to  have  had  a  pleasant  time  with  Mr.  Brown. 
Two  Communion  Preparation  classes — Mr.  How's  and  Mrs.  Gilbert's — he 
met  after  morning  prayers. 

Sun.  8. — More  than  once  at  this  time  he  entered  an  exact  account  of  the 
order  of  morning  and  evening  prayers.  A  suggested  interpretation  of 
the  letters  and  signs  used  is  the  following : 

5  Drest,  diary,  private  prayer,  £.  Read  Collect,  Proper  Psalms,  Sung  Hymn,  said 
Creed,  i.  2.  3.  4.  Collects :  Tate  and  Brady. 

Mr.  Delamotte  had  the  ague.  At  the  close  of  the  afternoon  catechizing, 
prayers,  band-  or  class-meeting,  Wesley  sang  twice  and  prayed  with  his 
invalid  friend.  Later  he  had  prayer  again  with  him,  and  talk  as  he  lay  in  bed. 
Wesley  always  felt  specially  responsible  for  Delamotte's  health,  education, 
and  religious  life. 

Mon.  9. — The  Diary  is  kept  at  this  time  with  minute  care.  Much  atten- 
tion is  given  to  the  Journal,  to  pastoral  visitation,  to  the  regulations  of  the 
Holy  Club,  and  to  the  order  of  public  devotion.  This  afternoon  he  walked 
with  Delamotte  and  also  with  the  boys  (apparently  of  Delamotte's  school) 
to  the  glebe,  where  they  felled  trees  for  two  hours,  cheering  one  another 
with  song.  Ground  at  the  glebe  was  being  prepared  for  cultivation  with  a 
view  to  the  employment  of  the  poor.  He  came  home  for  a  funeral  and 
prayers.  Afterwards,  at  Mr.  Grant's,  '  Verse,  prayer,  death  verse.' 

Tues.  10. — His  Journal,  the  boys,  Mr.  Grant,  and  the  Apparatus  Biblicus 
filled  the  day.  He  wrote  a  letter  to  *  Mr.  Marg.' 

Wed.  ii. — This  differed  little  from  the  previous  day  except  that  he  again 
felled  trees  with  the  boys,  reading  the  Apparatus  Biblicus  on  his  way  to  and 
from  the  glebe,  ending  the  book  at  home. 

Thur.  12. — 'Miss  Sophy'  was  present  at  morning  prayers,  also  Mr. 
Grant,  who  stayed  for  tea  and  conversation.  After  three  hours  with  the 
Journal  he  sorted  papers,  and,  dinner  over,  'writ  Miss  Sophy's  case '  until 

1  The  rules  of  the  S.P.G.  required  the  missionaries  to  be  careful  as  to  whom  they 
admitted  to  the  Lord's  Table. 


John   Wesley  s  Journal  [May  1737. 

fault  and  declared  her  repentance.  I  doubted  the  more,  because 
I  was  informed  she  had  left  off  fasting,  and  because  she  neglected 
all  the  morning  prayers,  though  still  acknowledging  her  obliga- 
tion to  both,  which  made  a  wide  difference  between  her  neglect 
and  that  of  others.  But  after  much  consideration,  I  resolved 
to  take  Mr.  Delamotte's  advice,  and  to  bear  with  her  till  I  had 
spoken  with  her  once  more. 

[My  journey  to  Charlestown  delayed  this  for  a  while.  But 
on  Monday  y  May  16,  I  did  speak  to  her  under  the  shed  at 
Mr.  Causton's  from  seven  till  evening  prayers.  This  was  our 
fifth  conversation,  in  which  I  earnestly  exhorted  her  to  avoid 
all  insincerity  as  she  would  avoid  fire ;  to  hold  fast  all  the 
means  of  grace  ;  and  never  to  give  way  to  so  vain  a  thought 
as  that  she  could  attain  the  end  without  them.  1  hoped  my 
labour  was  not  in  vain,  for  she  promised  fair  and  appeared 
deeply  serious.] 

Wed.   1 8. — I  discovered  the  first  convert  to  Deism  that,  I 

five  o'clock.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  question  of  fasting  figures 
conspicuously,  and  that  in  the  evening,  possibly  with  reference  to  this  disci- 
plinary case,  he  again  read  Wheatley  On  Common  Prayer. 

Fri.  13. — The  'case  of  Miss  Sophy'  is  again  in  the  forefront,  occupy- 
ing the  whole  morning.  In  this  connexion  he  reads  Irenaeus  on  Sacrifice 
and  Stillingfleet.  He  discusses  the  case  with  the  Germans,  continues 
writing,  and  in  the  afternoon  reads  Herbert.  In  the  evening  he  talks  with 
Mr.  Williamson.  After  evening  prayers  he  is  still  engaged  in  the  study  of 
'  the  case.' 

Sat.  14. — This  was  a  somewhat  similar  day  ;  but  Delamotte  and  the 
Germans  interposed,  and  the  whole  afternoon  was  spent  in  felling  trees. 

Sun.  15. — Nothing  exceptional  occurred,  save  a  conversation  with  William 
Williamson  and  the  reading  of  letters. 

Mon.  16. — After  two  hours'  work  he  ended  'the  case.3  During  a  long 
interview  with  Mr.  Causton  '  Miss  Sophy  came.'  He  remembered  her  in 
private  prayer,  and  had  an  interview  with  her  before  evening  prayers.  '  She 
very  serious.' 

Tues.  17.— He  read  Hopkins's  Sermons.  In  the  early  morning  he  accom- 
panied Mr.  Causton  and  Mr.  Grant  to  Hogstead,  the  Causton  lot,  where 
he  had  late  breakfast  with  Mrs.  Causton  and  conversation  with  Agnes — 
apparently  a  friend,  or  possibly  servant,  of  the  Caustons.  She  is  frequently 
named.  They  fished,  while  Wesley  read  Kempis.  In  the  afternoon  he 
and  Grant  returned,  partly  by  water,  for  Fitzwater  the  boatman  is  named. 
More  than  once,  as  on  previous  occasions,  Wesley  complains  that  he 
*  got  no  reading.'  At  home  he  read  the  Greek  Testament,  and  at  prayers 
expounded. 

Wed.  1 8. —He  transcribed  Fleury  (probably  the  Catechism),  afterwards 


May  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  357 

believe,  has  been  made  here.  He  was  one  that  for  some  time 
had  been  zealously  and  exemplarily  religious.  But  indulging 
himself  in  harmless  company,  he  first  made  shipwreck  of  his 
zeal,  and  then  of  his  faith.  I  have  since  found  several  others 
that  have  been  attacked.  They  have,  as  yet,  maintained  their 
ground  ;  but  I  doubt  the  devil's  apostles  are  too  industrious  to 
let  them  long  halt  between  two  opinions. 

Wed.  25. — I  was  sent  for  by  one  who  had  been  a  convert  to 
the  Church  of  Rome,  but  desired  to  return  to  the  Church  of 
England  ;  being  deeply  convinced  (as  were  several  others),  by 
what  I  had  occasionally  preached,  of  the  grievous  errors  the 
Church  of  Rome  is  in,  and  the  great  danger  of  continuing  a 
member  of  it. 

Upon  this  occasion  I  cannot  but  observe  the  surprising 
infatuation  that  reigns  in  England,  and  especially  in  London. 
Advice  upon  advice  did  we  receive  there,  to  beware  of  the 


published;  had  interviews  with  Brownfield,  Rachel,  Fitchet,  Dr.  Garrett 
(probably  '  the  Deist '),  and  others  ;  and  wrote  an  account  of  Savonarola. 
After  meeting  Mr.  How's  class  he  played  the  flute  from  8.50  to  9.15. 

Ascension  Day,  19.— The  day  was  spent,  according  to  the  law  of  the 
colony,  as  a  church  festival. 

Fri.  20. — Journal-writing,  tree-felling,  and  reading  (Clarke's  Lives}  occu- 
pied the  day.  The  persons  named  are  Brownfield,  Delamotte,  Grant,  and 
the  Burnsides. 

Sat.  2i.— The  Journal,  a  Bible-reading  with  the  Germans,  catechizing, 
and  Mr.  How's  Communion  Preparation  class,  were  his  main  pursuits. 

9  Sung.     £  Writ  Scheme  of  Sermon. 
10  Sermon. 

Sun.  22. — The  day  passed  without  exceptional  event. 

Mon.  23.— At  eight  he  married  Mr.  Foster.  All  the  marriages  were  in 
the  morning,  and  the  burials  in  the  evening.  At  9.15  he  left  for  Thunder- 
bolt, reading  Clarke's  Lives  as  he  walked.  At  11.15  he  arrived,  but 
Mrs.  Lacy  was  out.  So  he  set  out  again,  still  reading,  and  came  round  to 
Mr.  Causton's  lot,  where  Mrs.  Causton  gave  him  dinner.  In  the  afternoon 
Fitzwater  came.  With  him  he  returned,  conversing  and  reading  all  the 
way.  In  the  evening  Boltzius  came. 

Tues.  24. — The  day  passed  without  special  event. 

Wed.  25. — The  person  to  whom  reference  is  made  in  the  Journal  seems 
to  have  been  a  Mrs.  Fallowfield.  He  had  a  long  conversation,  'she  serious, 
open  and  affected';  immediately  after  he  wrote  the  interesting  passage  in 
the  Journal.  The  whole  section,  though  to  some  extent  given  in  the  printed 
extract,  is  here  reproduced  from  Wesley's  MS.,  and  is  more  forceful  and 
graphic  than  the  printed  version. 


358  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [May  1737. 

increase  of  Popery  ;  but  not  one  word  do  I  remember  to  have 
heard  of  the  increase  of  Infidelity.  [Now  this  overgrown  zeal 
for  Protestantism,  quite  swallowing  up  zeal  for  our  common 
Christianity,  I  cannot  term  anything  better  than  infatuation.] 
This  was  quite  surprising,  for  these  very  plain  reasons:  (i)  be- 
cause as  bad  a  religion  as  Popery  is,  no  religion  at  all  is  still 
worse ;  a  baptized  Infidel  being  twofold  more  a  child  of  hell 
than  the  [fiercest]  Papist  in  Christendom ;  (2)  because  as 
dangerous  a  state  as  a  Papist  is  in,  with  regard  to  eternity,  a 
Deist  is  in  a  far  more  dangerous  state,  if  he  be  not  (without 
repentance)  an  assured  heir  of  damnation  ;  and  (3)  because  as 
difficult  as  it  is  to  recover  a  Papist,  'tis  far  more  difficult  to 
recover  an  Infidel.  This  I  speak  from  the  strongest  of  all  proofs, 
experience.  I  never  yet  knew  one  Deist  reconverted  1 ;  whereas, 
[even  in  this  place,  I  do  not  know  of  more  than  one  Papist 
remaining,  except  an  Italian  or  two  whom  I  cannot  yet 
speak  to.] 

\Fri.  27. — Hearing  just  ;  before  evening  prayers  that  Mrs. 
Causton  was  taken  dangerously  ill  at  Hogstead,  as  soon  as 
prayers  were  over  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I  walked  thither.  We 
found  her  something  better,  with  Mr.  Causton  and  all  her 
family  about  her  :  all  of  whom  took  the  visit  as  it  was  in- 
tended, and  professed  much  obligation  to  us.] 

Sun.  29. — Being  Whit  Sunday,  four  of  our  scholars,  after 
having  been  instructed  daily  for  several  weeks,  were,  at  their 
earnest  and  repeated  desire,  admitted  to  the  Lord's  Table.  I 
trust  their  zeal  hath  stirred  up  many  to  remember  their  Creator 


Thur.  26. — The  Journal,  pastoral  visitation,  and  the  felling  of  trees  are 
again  the  most  important  events  of  the  day. 

Fri.  27. — He  wrote  to  Hird  and  Mr.  Hutcheson.  It  was  immediately 
after  evening  prayers  that  he  set  out  with  Delamotte  to  visit  Mrs.  Causton  at 
Hogstead,  who  was  better  before  Wesley  left. 

Sat  28. — He  administered  Holy  Communion  to  Mr.  Turner  and  again 
visited  Mrs.  Fallowfield. 

Whit  Sunday ',  29. — Early  in  the  morning  he  had  a  conversation  with 
William  Williamson,  and  later  with  Bishop  Anton  and  Toltschig.  The 
event  of  the  day  was  the  admission  of  four  children  to  Holy  Communion. 
John  Dudd  seems  to  have  been  the  leader  of  the  young  communicants. 
Wesley  had  a  private  conversation  with  them  before  the  service,  and  we 


But  Lampe,  Walsh,  and  other  Deists  he  afterwards  saw  converted. 


June  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  359 

in  the  days  of  their  youth,  and  to  redeem  the  time,  even  in 
the  midst  of  an  evil  and  adulterous  generation. 

Indeed,  about  this  time  we  observed  the  Spirit  of  God  to 
move  upon  the  minds  of  many  of  the  children.  They  began 
more  carefully  to  attend  to  the  things  that  were  spoken  both 
at  home  and  at  church,  and  a  remarkable  seriousness  appeared 
in  their  whole  behaviour  and  conversation.  Who  knows  but 
some  of  them  may  '  grow  up  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fullness  of  Christ '  ? 

[JUNE  4,  Sat. — God  showed  me  yet  more  of  the  great- 
ness of  my  deliverance,  by  opening  to  me  a  new  and  unexpected 
scene  of  M.  S.'  dissimulation.  O  never  give  me  over  to  my 
own  heart's  desires,  nor  let  me  follow  my  own  imaginations  ! 

[Going  to  speak  to  Mr.  Brown  field,  and  not  finding  him  at 
home,  I  fell  into  a  conversation  with  Mrs.  Brownfield  upon  Mrs. 
Williamson.  She  told  me,  '  Mr.  Brownfield  warned  me  of  her 


may  infer,  from  a  note  in  the  Diary,  that  they  afterwards  dined  with  him  at 
the  parsonage,  and  that  he  again  conversed  with  them.  One  boy  (probably 
Gilbert)  he  specially  catechized  before  the  afternoon  service.  Wesley's 
constant  and  minute  care  for  the  boys  is  repeatedly  emphasized  in  the  Diary. 
In  the  evening,  after  prayers,  he  read  The  Song  of  the  Three  Children — a 
book  of  the  Apocrypha  which  from  early  Oxford  days  was  a  special  favourite 
of  his.  He  used  to  read  it  in  the  church  and  at  the  rectory  during  his  visits 
to  Stanton. 

Man.  30. — It  is  significant  that  this  morning,  at  six  o'clock,  Mr.  How,  to 
whom  Wesley  was  indebted  for  assistance  in  training  the  boys  who  the  day 
before  had  taken  their  first  Sacrament,  had  an  hour's  conversation  with  him. 
Fleury,  catechizing,  and  another  celebration  of  the  Holy  Communion  are 
noted. 

Tues.  31. — Mrs.  Manley  came  to  breakfast  this  morning.  At  eight  he 
had  a  talk  with  Dr.  Canon.  At  nine  Wesley  visited  the  school  and 
catechized.  He  dressed,  read  prayers,  preached  the  sermon,  and  again 
administered  the  Communion.  The  afternoon  was  devoted  to  visitation 
and  Spanish. 

JUNE  i,  Wed. — Wesley  now  devoted  his  attention  to  Grammars,  of 
which  he  more  or  less  completely  prepared  several  before  leaving 
Savannah. 

Thur.  2. — Grammars,  visitation,  and  Spanish  occupied  the  day. 

Fri.  3. — Grammars,  Spanish,  and  French.  A  special  visit  to  Mrs.  Fallow- 
field — *  she  very  seriously  convinced.' 

Sat.  4. — In  addition  to  the  Grammars,  he  meditated  verses  during  his 
walk  to  Mr.  Causton's  in  the  country.  At  this  time  *  Agnes  and  Rachel ' 
were  with  Mrs.  Causton.  Returning  home  in  the  evening,  he  continued  his 
verse-making,  and  at  night  wrote  the  verses  he  had  made. 


360  John   Wesley  s  Journal  t June  1737. 

long  ago  in  words  to  this  effect :  "  Polly,  have  a  care  of  Miss 
Sophy  ;  she  is  above  your  match." '  She  went  on,  '  On  Sunday 
se'night,  before  the  stir  about  your  letter  was,  I  dined  at  Mr. 
Causton's  ;  and  being  after  dinner  in  the  garden  with  Miss  Sophy, 
I  taxed  her  with  inconstancy  to  Tom  Mellichamp.  She  said 
she  was  not  inconstant  to  him,  but  loved  him  as  well  as  ever, 
and  would  come  to  my  house  to  speak  to  me  about  him.  On 
Tuesday  she  came,  and  desired  me  to  send  a  letter  for  her  to 
Dolly  Mellichamp,  to  give  poor  Tommy  an  opportunity  of 
clearing  himself.  I  told  her  I  would  not  do  it  for  the  world 
without  first  asking  Mr.  Brownfield's  advice,  which  I  did.  His 
advice  was  to  have  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  it.  The  next  day 
she  came  to  me  crying  and  saying,  "  I  am  ruined  ;  my  uncle 
says  they  have  put  Tommy  in  jail  again."' 

[What  could  I  do  now  ?  Go,  and  tell  her  of  her  fault 
between  me  and  her  alone  ?  So  I  should  have  chosen,  either 
as  a  friend  or  a  pastor  ;  but  being  cut  off  from  this,  all  that 
remained  was  to  inquire  of  others  as  diligently  as  I  could 
whether  this  were  not  a  false  accusation.  First,  then,  I  asked 
Mr.  Brownfield  to  tell  me  frankly  how  far  one  might  depend  on 
Mrs.  Brownfield's  word  ?  He  answered,  '  Perhaps  she  may  not 
tell  you  all  the  truth  she  knows  ;  but  be  assured  she  will  tell 
you  nothing  but  the  truth.'  I  asked  him  next  if  he  had  ever 
advised  her  to  have  a  care  of  Miss  Sophy.  He  said  he  had, 
and  repeated  the  words.  I  inquired  further  if  she  had  ever 
asked  his  advice  about  sending  a  letter  from  Miss  Sophy 
to  Dolly  Mellichamp.  He  said,  *  Yes  ;  and  he  had  advised 
her  to  have  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  it.' 

[I  could  think  of  but  one  thing  more,  which  was  to  hear 
what  Mrs.  Causton,  who  knew  her  best,  had  to  say  in  her 
defence.  I  went  therefore  to  Hogstead,  where  she  was,  and  told 
her  so  much  of  my  objections  against  Mrs.  Williamson  as  I 
could  without  betraying  my  authors  to  the  resentment  of  the 
family.  She  strenuously  maintained  that  Mrs.  Williamson  had 
never  said  anything  false,  or  dissembled  with  me  at  all.  Some 
of  the  words  she  spoke,  leaning  her  head  back  and  lifting  up 
both  hands,  were,  '  By  the  Lord  God,  Sophy  is  as  innocent  as  a 
new-born  child  ;  and  I  know  she  has  as  great  a  value  for  you  as 
for  any  person  alive,  except  Mr.  Williamson/ 


June  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  361 

[I  related  this  to  Mr.  Delamotte,  and  at  his  instance  con- 
sented still  to  admit  her  to  the  Holy  Communion.  But  a  new 
hindrance  now  occurred  She  would  not  admit  herself.  Looking 
over  the  Register,  I  found  she  had  absented  herself  five  times  in 
April  and  May  only ;  and  in  this  month,  June,  four  times  more, 
viz.  the  nth,  I2th,  24th,  and  29th.  To  clear  up  all  difficulties 
at  once,  I  determined  to  speak  to  her  yet  again. 

[Sun.  5. — I  baptized  Richard  Turner,  aged  forty,  and  his 
son  Thomas,  aged  fourteen.  About  this  time  we  observed  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  move  upon  the  minds  of  many  of  the  youth 
of  this  place.  Who  knoweth  but  some  of  them  may  work 
together  with  Him  till  they  come  to  the  measure  of  the  stature 
of  the  fullness  of  Christ  ? 

\Tues.  7. — I  writ  to  my  sister  Kezzy  and  made  her  an  offer 
of  living  with  me  here.  But  upon  reflection,  I  was  in  doubt 
whether  I  had  done  well,  considering  the  slippery  ground  on 
which  I  stand.  However,  I  leave  the  whole  matter  in  God's 
hands.  Let  Him  order  for  us  what  is  best ! 

[Fri.  10. — I  buried  the  only  child  of  a  fond  parent,  who  had 
been  snatched  away  from  him  in  a  moment,  falling  into  a  well, 
and  being  stifled  there  before  those  with  whom  he  had  been  just 


Trinity  Sunday,  5. — At  early-morning  prayers  Richard  T.  Turner 
was  baptized.  Special  attention  seems  to  have  been  devoted  to  individuals 
and  to  '  the  boys.' 

Mon.  6. — Whilst  engaged  on  the  Grammars  letters  were  received  from 
England. 

Tues.  7. — He  wrote  to  his  sister  Kezia  and  to  Mr.  Butler.  After  much 
business  with  Causton  and  others,  he  made  verses  in  the  garden,  dined  and 
visited.  He  added  to  his  Spanish  work  with  Dr.  Nunes  a  lesson  in 
Hebrew.  In  the  evening  *  read  letters  from  England.' 

Wed.  8. — He  sorted  books,  probably  received  by  that  mail  for  the 
parochial  library.  After  Dr.  Nunes's  lesson  in  Spanish,  Wesley  gave  a 
lesson  in  English  to  *  Miss  Zipporah,'  who  probably  was  Dr.  Nunes's 
daughter. 

Thur.  9. — During  these  days  '  on  business '  is  one  of  the  most  frequent 
entries.  The  *  business,'  as  we  now  know  from  the  Journal,  was  the  case 
of  Mrs.  Williamson  (Miss  Sophy).  Mr.  Boltzius  again  came  to  Savannah 
and  Wesley  read  his  Journal. 

Fri.  10. — Conversed  with  Boltzius  of  Count  Zinzendorf.  Wrote  to  Mr. 
Hird,  Mark  Hird,  Mr.  Mason,  Mr.  Verelist,  Mr.  Horton,  and  Charles 
(probably  Jacques  Charles).  In  the  evening  he  buried  Mr.  West's  son, 
and,  later,  'sung  verses,'  i.e.  a  hymn  he  had  made. 

VOL.  I.  20 


362  John   Wesley* s  Journal  [Jun«m7. 

playing  could  help  him.     A  happy  misfortune,  I  trust,  to  his 
father,  who  sees  and  adores  the  hand  of  God  therein,  and 

Humbled  in  the  dust, 
Now  owns  with  tears  the  punishment  was  just. 

\Sat.  ii. — Having  been  desired  some  time  before  by  Mr. 
Causton  to  hear  what  the  people  had  to  say  against  him,  that 
he  might  have  an  opportunity  either  of  clearing  himself  or 
removing  the  complaint,  I  told  him  plainly  some  of  the  things 
they  complained  of.  He  could  not  bear  it,  but  turned  full  upon 
me,  said  he  was  surprised  I  of  all  people  should  join  with  his 
enemies,  and  said  many  other  warm  things,  to  my  great  surprise, 
though  1  had  been  warned  before  that  thus  it  would  be.  I  was 
first  prompted  to  say  in  my  heart,  Now  I  may  be  excused  from 
speaking  on  this  head  any  more.  But  I  soon  recollected  that 
my  commission  is  to  speak,  '  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether 
they  will  forbear.'] 

Sat.  n. — 'John  came.'  We  have  a  glimpse  of  other  anxieties  of  the 
times. 

7  In  talk,  Mr  Causton' s,  in  talk  of  the  people's  accounts,  he  (Mr  C)  very  affected 

8  In  the  Store,  in  talk.       9    At  home,  Telchig  and  Antone,  explained  with  them. 
10  Drest,  meditated  on  sermon  ;  £  read  Prayers.       n  Preached,  Communion. 

St.  Barnabas's  Day  ;  the  Lessons  were  Ecclus.  x.  and  Acts  xiv.  After 
catechizing  the  children  he  walked  with  Mr.  Burnside  to  the  Lot  and  felled 
trees. 

Sun.  12. — Wesley  had  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Williamson,  Mr.  Dela- 
motte,  and  Mr.  Griffiths.  At  night  he  read  the  account  he  had  written  of 
Miss  Sophy. 

Mon.  13. — He  gave  three  hours  to  verses,  walking  as  he  composed. 
During  the  day  he  sang  with  various  persons  whom  he  visited. 

Tues.  14. — He  read  Watts  after  prayers,  as  he  had  done  the  night 
before  ;  wrote  to  Clayton,  to  Charles,  to  Mr.  Hall  (who  had  married  his 
sister).  He  then  went  to  the  Caustons'.  They 'were  not  open.'  At  night 
he  buried  Mrs.  Bradley. 

Wed.  15. — He  had  another  conversation  with  Dr.  Garrett,  the  Deist. 
1  Business '  and  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Williamson  and  others  relate,  no 
doubt,  to  the  '  Case.'  Another  burial  is  noted. 

Thur.  16. — He  wrote  to  James  Hutton,  and,  at  length,  to  his  old  friend 
*  Selima'  (Miss  Anne  Granville,  the  sister  of  Mrs.  Delany).  He  then  visited 
Mr.  Bradley,  whose  wife  he  had  buried  two  days  before  ;  also  Mr.  Fallow- 
field.  In  the  afternoon  he  drank  tea  with  Mrs.  Fallowfield,  whom  he  found 
very  zealous.  During  these  days  *  singing '  is  frequently  named,  also 
'  verses.' 

Fri.  17. — Singing  and  verses  are  the  most  prominent  features  of  the  day. 


June  1731]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  363 

Sat.  25. — Mr.  Causton,1  the  store-keeper  and  chief  magistrate 
of  Savannah,  was  seized  with  a  slow  fever.  I  attended  him 
every  day  (as  I  did  any  of  my  parishioners  who  were  in  any 
painful  or  dangerous  illness),  and  had  a  good  hope  from  [the 

Sat.  18. — After  prayers  'John  came.'  Wesley  is  still  composing  verses. 
He  has  little  time  for  reading.  There  is  evidently  much  sickness  in 
Savannah,  and  burials  are  almost  daily.  He  himself  is  in  doubtful  health. 
He  frequently  *  sleeps.' 

Sun.  19. — Verses  and  prayer  are  his  preparation  for  preaching.  At  the 
afternoon  service  he  read  the  appointed  Psalms,  sang  from  a  hymn-book, 
said  the  Athanasian  Creed,  prayed,  and  closed  the  service  with  Tate  and 
Brady.  When  Mr.  How  and  his  select  class  came,  a  verse  was  made,  read, 
or  sung.* 

Mon.  20. — At  six  he  began  an  English  Grammar,  but  was  interrupted 
by  a  call  to  visit  the  sick.  He  returned  to  the  Grammar,  and  was 
again  interrupted.  Visiting  Mr.  West,  he  walked  with  him  to  his  lot, 
conversing.  In  the  afternoon  he  found  Dr.  Nunes  in  talk  with  Miss 
Zipporah. 

Tues.  21. — English  Grammar,  with  an  interruption  involving  a  visit  to 
Mr.  Causton's,  then  'talk,  tea,  and  Miss  Sophy.'  Returning  home,  he 
meditated  before  resuming  his  work  on  the  Grammar.  At  eleven  he  sang 
for  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  After  dinner,  he  visited. 

Wed.  22.— Grammar,  French,  Spanish,  and  singing  occupy  his  time. 
-    Thur.  23. — He  walked   to  the   Lot  with   Mr.   Griffith,  visited,   wrote, 
sang  ;  the  last  entry  for  the  day  is  *  Watts's  hymns.' 

Fri.  24. — To-day  he  worked  for  several  hours  on  a  sermon  which  he 
preached,  administered  the  Communion,  and  dined  with  the  French 
missionaries.  Twice  reference  is  made  to  Watts,  and  persons  are  in- 
dicated whose  abbreviated  names  cannot  be  identified. 

Sat.  25. — Grammar,  verse,  visitation  filled  the  hours  of  the  day.  He 
goes  with  Mr.  Bradley  to  visit  Highgate,  where  the  French  had  their  settle- 
ment. After  prayers  he  calls  on  Mr.  Causton  and  finds  him  better. 

Sun.  26. — The  day  was  without  unusual  event  except  a  visit  to 
Mr.  Causton,  who  was  again  very  ill.  Another  burial  is  noted. 

Mon.  27. — He  secures  four  hours  for  work  on  grammar,  but  otherwise 
the  day  is  spent  with  the  sick  and  in  burying  the  dead.  Twice  he 
records  against  himself  that  his  visits  were  '  too  long.' 


1  Fr.  Moore,  who  sailed  in  the  Sim-  Causton,  fled  the  colony  to  escape  punish- 

monds,  became  store-keeper  too,  and  in  ment  on  a  still  more  serious  charge. 

1744  published  an  account  of  his  voyage.  *  Often  it  is  impossible  to  say  which 

Before  he  left  England  Causton  was  de-  is   meant.       Hymns   and    singing    were 

tected  robbing  the  revenue.    Oglethorpe,  taking  a  more  and  more  prominent  place 

who  appointed  him  bailiff,  deposed  him  in  his  personal  devotions,  in  his  pastoral 

for     misapplying     public    -funds.      See  visitation,    and   in   the  social   means  of 

Anderson's     History    of    the     Colonial  grace.      Nor   were   they    excluded  from 

Church.      Williamson,    who    succeeded  public  worship. 


364  John   Wesley's  Journal 

manner  wherein  he  bore  it,  and]  the  thankfulness  he  showed  for 
my  attending  him,  that  it  would  be  a  blessing  [both  to  him  and 
his  dependents]. 

JULY  3,  Sun. — Immediately 'after  the  Holy  Communion,  [as 
we  returned  from  church,  I  said,]  '  Mrs.  Williamson,  [have  you 
any  reason  to  believe  that  from  the  day  I  first  saw  you  till  this 
hour,  I  have  dissembled  with  you?'  She  answered,  '  Indeed,  I 
don't  believe  you  have.  But  you  seem  to  think  I  have  dis- 
sembled with  you.'  I  told  her  I  did  so,]  and  began  to  explain 


Tues.  28.— An  entry  of  special  interest  occurs  to-day : 
9  Collected  Hymns. 
10  Hymns. 

This  strengthens  the  belief  already  suggested  by  many  notes,  that  having 
published  one  Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns,  he  was  preparing  a 
second  series.  The  last  entries  for  the  day  are  : 

8  Prayers  ;  sung,  conversed,  \  verse. 

9  Prayer,  lay  down.     Buried. 

Wed.  29. — It  was  St.  Peter's  Day.  The  service  consisted  of  three 
collects,  a  sermon,  singing,  and  the  Communion.  More  verses  were 
written,  and  again,  in  the  evening,  there  was  a  burial,  after  which 
Mr.  How's  class  met. 

Thur.  30. — There  are  six  entries  of  verses  at  intervals  through  the 
day.  Delamotte  accompanied  him  to  the  Lot  and  assisted  in  opening  a  new 
school.  Wesley  wrote  the  names.  The  Diary  at  this  time  bears  little  if 
any  trace  of  the  disciplinary  turmoil  through  which  he  was  passing. 

JULY  i,  Friday. — Twice  he  notes  the  '  great  heat.'  This  morning  he 
was  called  at  four — an  unusual  circumstance  except  when  on  travel.  He 
drank  coffee,  began  Archbishop  Wake,  called  early  to  see  Mr.  Causton, 
who  was  now  convalescent,  and  then  began  a  long  round  of  pastoral 
visits.  At  half-past  twelve,  in  place  of  dinner,  he  slept  for  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  and  immediately  resumed  his  round  of  visitation.  But  at  two 
he  fulfilled  an  appointment,  and  Mrs.  Burnside  had  her  lesson  in  French. 
The  tea  she  gave  him  at  three  was  his  first  meal  since  the  five- 
o'clock  coffee.  In  half  an  hour  he  was  at  work  again.  Mrs.  Fallowfield 
and  some  unnamed  person  at  Dr.  Nunes's  were  affected  by  his  earnest 
conversation.  At  Mr.  Causton's  he  transacted  'business  for  the  priest.' 
Another  burial  awaited  him  at  eight.  This  record  may  give  some  idea 
of  how  Wesley  worked  in  time  of  sickness  and  death. 

Sat.  2. — He  conversed  privately  with  the  boys,  and  afterwards  prayed 
with  their  teacher,  Mr.  Delamotte.  He  wrote  to  Mr.  Baker,  visited,  saw 
the  Germans,  catechized,  slept,  visited,  sang  and  walked,  praying  or 
reading  the  Greek  Testament. 

Sun.  3. — Fleury  and  Kempis,  with  singing  and  prayer,  prepared  him 
for  the  sermon.  After  Holy  Communion,  at  which  fifty-five  were  present, 
he  conversed  with  'Miss  Sophy.'  This  is  the  sixth  conversation  referred 


juij  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  365 

with  her  upon  it.  But  the  more  I  spoke  the  more  angry  she 
appeared,  till  after  a  few  minutes  she  turned  about  and  went 
abruptly  away  ;  [thus  putting  an  end  to  our  sixth  and  last 
conversation. 

[Being  unwilling  to  trust  my  own  judgement,  I  went  to 
Mr.  Burnside,  told  him  the  case,  and  asked  how  he  thought  I 
ought  to  act.  He  answered  plainly,  '  Sir,  the  case  is  clear. 
While  things  appear  to  you  as  they  do  now,  you  cannot  admit 
her  to  the  Holy  Communion.  The  consequences  of  rejecting 
her  you  know ;  but  be  they  what  they  will,  that  does  not  alter 
your  duty.'  Hereon  I  determined  to  do  what  I  judged  my  duty, 
but  with  all  the  mildness  and  prudence  God  should  give  me. 

\_Mon.  4. — I  went  once  more  to  Mr.  Causton's,  to  give 
Mrs.  Williamson  another  opportunity  either  of  clearing  herself 
or  owning  her  fault.  But  she  said  nothing  at  all.]  Mrs.  Causton 
indeed,  [desiring  me  to  take  a  walk  in  the  garden,  talked  largely 
of  Sophy's  innocence  ;]  told  me  she  was  exceedingly  grieved  for 
what  had  passed  the  day  before,  and  added  more  than  once, 
4  Cannot  you  write  and  tell  her  what  you  dislike  ? '  I  answered, 
'Yes,  I  will.' 

But  first,  [on  Tuesday]  I  writ  the  following  note  to  Mr. 
Causton : 

SIR, 

To  this  hour  you  have  shown  yourself  my  friend ;  I  ever  have 
and  ever  shall  acknowledge  it.  And  it  is  my  earnest  desire  that  He 
who  hath  hitherto  given  me  this  blessing  would  continue  it  still. 

But  this  cannot  be,  unless  you  will  allow  me  one  request,  which  is 
not  so  easy  an  one  as  it  appears.  Do  not  condemn  me  for  doing  in  the 
execution  of  my  office  what  I  think  it  my  duty  to  do. 

If  you  can  prevail  upon  yourself  to  allow  me  this,  even  when  I  act 
without  respect  of  persons,  I  am  persuaded  there  will  never  be,  at  least 


to  in  the  Journal.  His  consultation  with  the  Burnsides  is  noted,  also  the 
extreme  heat. 

Mon.  4. — He  now  read  Clement.  But  visitations  still  encroached  on 
the  time  usually  devoted  to  study.  This  evening  he  had  a  consultation 
with  Mrs.  Causton  respecting  *  Miss  Sophy.' 

Tues.  5. — At  seven  o'clock  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Causton,  and  at  eight  to 
1  Miss  Sophy,'  transcribing  both  letters.  He  talked  with  Mr.  Brownfield, 
the  Germans,  and  Mrs.  Burnside  of  '  Miss  Sophy.'  The  Diary  bears 
traces  of  agitation. 


366  John    Wesley's  Journal 

not  long,  any  misunderstanding  between  us.  For  even  those  who  seek 
it,  shall,  I  trust,  find  no  occasion  against  me,  except  it  be  concerning  the 
law  of  my  God. 

July  5,  J737-  I  am,  &c. 

[An  hour  or  so  after,  I  sent  the  following  note  to  Mrs. 
Williamson,  which  I  wrote  in  the  most  mild  and  friendly  manner 
I  could,  both  in  pursuance  of  my  resolution  to  proceed  with  all 
mildness,  and  because  Mrs.  Williamson  told  me  she  was  so  much 
grieved  already. 

[If  the  sincerity  of  friendship  is  best  to  be  known  from  the  painful 
offices,  then  there  could  not  be  a  stronger  proof  of  mine  than  that  I 
gave  you  on  Sunday  :  except  that  which  I  am  going  to  give  you  now, 
and  which  you  may  perhaps  equally  misinterpret. 

[Would  you  know  what  I  dislike  in  your  past  or  present  behaviour  ? 
You  have  always  heard  my  thoughts  as  freely  as  you  asked  them.  Nay, 
much  more  freely ;  you  know  it  well,  and  so  you  shall  do,  as  long  as  I 
can  speak  or  write. 

[In  your  present  behaviour  I  dislike  (i)  your  neglect  of  half  the 
public  service,  which  no  man  living  can  compel  you  to;  (2)  your 
neglect  of  fasting,  which  you  once  knew  to  be  a  help  to  the  mind, 
without  any  prejudice  to  the  body ;  (3)  your  neglect  of  almost  half 
the  opportunity  of  communicating  which  you  have  lately  had. 

[But  these  things  are  small  in  comparison  of  what  I  dislike  in  your 
past  behaviour.  For,  (i)  You  told  me  over  and  over  you  had  entirely 
conquered  your  inclination  for  Mr.  Mellichamp.  Yet  at  that  very  time 
you  had  not  conquered  it.  (2)  You  told  me  frequently,  you  had  no 
design  to  marry  Mr.  Williamson.  Yet  at  the  very  time  you  spoke  you 
had  the  design.  (3)  In  order  to  conceal  both  these  things  from  me, 
you  went  through  a  course  of  deliberate  dissimulation.  Oh  how  fallen  ! 
How  changed  !  Surely  there  was  a  time  when  in  Miss  Sophy's  life 
there  was  no  guile. 

[Own  these  facts,  and  own  your  fault,  and  you  will  be  in  my 
thoughts  as  if  they  had  never  been.  If  you  are  otherwise  minded,  I 
shall  still  be  your  friend,  though  I  cannot  expect  you  should  be  mine. 

To  Mrs.  Williamson,  July  5.] 

Wed.  6. — Mr.  Causton  came  to  my  house  with  Mr.  Parker J 
and  Mr.  Recorder.  [He  complained  I  had  sent  him  a  letter 
he  could  not  understand,  and  added  with  much  warmth,]  '  How 


1  Charles    Wesley    calls   Mr.     Bailiff      Whatever  his  faults,  the  Trustees  reposed 
Parker  '  the  first  tribune  of  the  people.'      confidence  in  him. 


July  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  367 

could  you  possibly  entertain  such  a  thought  of  me  as  that  I 
should  oppose  you  in  executing  any  part  of  your  office?'  I 
said  bluntly,  '  Sir,  what  if  I  should  think  it  the  duty  of  my 
office  to  repel  one  of  your  family  from  the  Holy  Communion  ? ' 
[He  made  large  reply,  one  part  of  which  was,]  '  If  you  repel 
me  or  my  wife,  I  shall  require  a  legal  reason.  But  I  shall 
trouble  myself  about  none  else.  Let  them  look  to  themselves.1 

\Thur.  7. — I  was  unawares  engaged  in  a  dispute  with 
Dr.  Nunes,  a  Jew,  concerning  the  Messiah.  For  this  I  was 
afterwards  much  grieved,  lest  the  truth  might  suffer  by  my 
weak  defence  of  it] 

Sat.  9. — Meeting  with  a  Frenchman  of  New  Orleans1  on 
the  Mississippi  [who  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Chicasaws, 
and  had  lived  several  months  among  them],  he  gave  us  a  full 
and  particular  account  of  many  things  which  had  been  variously 
related.  And  hence  we  could  not  but  remark,  What  is  the 
religion  of  nature,  properly  so  called  ?  or,  that  religion  which 
flows  from  natural  reason,  unassisted  by  revelation,  even  in 
those  who  have  the  knowledge  of  many  truths,  and  who 
converse  with  their  beloved  ones  day  and  night?  But  too 
plainly  does  it  appear  by  the  fruits,  '  that  the  gods  of  these 
heathen  too  are  but  devils.' 


Wed.  6. — A  long  walk  in  the  early  morning  to  Thunderbolt,  making 
verse  as  he  journeyed,  or  reading  Archbishop  Usher,  relieved  the  tension. 
He  drank  tea  with  the  Lacys.  Read  prayers  and  preached  to  the  family. 
Returning  home,  he  made  verses  all  the  way,  and  then  wrote  them.  It 
was  at  four  o'clock  that  Mr.  Causton,  Recorder  Christie,  and  Deputy 
Parker  called. 

•  Thur.  7. — He  spent  the  morning  in  reading  Clemens.1  Visited,  saw 
Dr.  Nunes,  read  with  him,  and  notes  the  fact,  '  could  not  answer  him.' 
Mrs.  Mouse  of  Skidoway  came  at  six  o'clock.  Delamotte  and  Mrs.  Anne 
made  her  welcome. 

Fri.  8. — He  wrote  to  Mr.  Garden  and  a  Mr.  P . 

Sat.  9. — He  was  in  court  from  seven  until  10.30  a.m.  He  catechized 
as  usual,  and  at  three  visited.  At  Mr.  Emery's  he  met  the  Frenchman 
referred  to  in  the  Journal. 


1  The  Scots  Magazine  gives  a  long  he  was  reading  Polycarp.  '  Clement ' 
account  of  the  cruelties  of  the  French  in  before  named  was  Clement  of  Alex- 
Carolina  (1754,  p.  71).  amlria.  He  devoted  much  attention  at 

•Clemens    Romanus.     On    the    nth  this  time  to  the  early  Fathers, 


368  John    Wesley  s  Journal 

The  substance  of  his  account  was  this  : 

Some  years  past  the  Chicasaws  and  French  were  friends.  The 
French  were  then  mingled  with  the  Nautchee  Indians,  whom  they  used 
as  slaves ;  till  the  Nautchees  made  a  general  rising,  and  took  many  of 
the  French  prisoners.  But  soon  after,  a  French  army  set  upon  them, 
killed  many,  and  carried  away  the  rest.  Among  those  that  were  killed 
were  some  Chicasaws,  whose  death  the  Chicasaw  nation  resented ;  and, 
soon  after,  as  a  French  boat  was  going  through  their  country,  they  fired 
into  it,  and  killed  all  the  men  but  two.  The  French  resolved  on 
revenge ;  and  orders  were  given  for  many  Indians  and  several  parties 
of  white  men  to  rendezvous  on  the  26th  of  March,  1736,  near  one  of 
the  Chicasaw  towns.  The  first  party,  consisting  of  fifty  men,  came 
thither  some  days  before  the  time.  They  stayed  there  till  the  24th,  but 
none  came  to  join  them.  On  the  25th  they  were  attacked  by  two 
hundred  Chicasaws.  The  French  attempted  to  force  their  way  through 
them.  Five  or  six  and  twenty  did  so ;  the  rest  were  taken  prisoners. 
The  prisoners  were  sent  two  or  three  to  a  town  to  be  burned.  Only 
the  commanding  officer  and  one  or  two  more  were  put  to  death  on  the 
place  of  the  engagement. 

'  I,'  said  he,  '  and  one  more  were  saved  by  the  warrior  who  took 
us.  The  manner  of  burning  the  rest  was,  holding  lighted  canes  to 
their  arms  and  legs,  and  several  parts  of  their  bodies,  for  some  time, 
and  then  for  a  while  taking  them  away.  They  likewise  stuck  burning 
pieces  of  wood  into  their  flesh  all  round,  in  which  condition  they  kept 
them  from  morning  till  evening.  But  they  commonly  beat  them  before 
they  burn  them.  I  saw  the  priest  that  was  with  us  carried  to  be 
burned ;  and  from  head  to  foot  he  was  as  black  as  your  coat  with 
the  blows  which  they  had  given  him.' 

I  asked  him  what  was  their  manner  of  life.  He  said,  '  They  do 
nothing  but  eat,  and  drink,  and  smoke,  from  morning  till  night ;  and, 
in  a  manner,  from  night  till  morning.  For  they  rise  at  any  hour  of  the 
night  when  they  wake,  and  after  eating  and  drinking  as  much  as  they 
can,  go  to  sleep  again.'  See  the  religion  of  Nature  truly  delineated!  2 

\Mon.  n. — Mrs.  Williamson  miscarried,  as  Mrs.  Causton  told 
one,  because  of  my  chiding  her  eight  days  before ;  as  she  told 

Sun.  io.— The  day  was  spent  as  usual. 

Man.  ii.— He  read  Polycarp,  the  Psalms,  and  Fleury.     'Ch.  Charles' 
(he  means  Jacques  Charles)  came.     French.1 

1  Probably  he  was  now  taking  lessons  not  qualify  him  so  to  preach  that  the 

in  conversational   French,    so    that    he  people  could  understand, 

might  be  able  to  preach  to  the  settlers  at  2  Earlier     editions    show    that     this 

Highgate.    A  while  before  he  discovered,  sentence   is    a    comment,    and    not   the 

on  a  visit  there,  that  his  knowledge  did  title  of  a  book. 


July  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  369 

another,  because  of  my  unkind  letter  ;  as  she  herself  said,  be- 
cause of  the  hurry  and  concern  which  Mr.  Williamson's  illness 
threw  her  into. 

[Tues.  12. — I  read  Dr.  Humphrey's  account  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Society  for  Propagating  the  Gospel ;  concerning 
which  I  could  not  but  observe  :  (i)  that  nine  out  of  ten  of  the 
missionaries  sent  into  America  have  died  before  the  end  of 
the  fourth  year  ;  (2)  that  out  of  the  vast  number  not  above 
two  (or  three  at  most)  are  mentioned  who  were  not  well  spoken 
of  by  all  men.  '  If  these  then  were  the  disciples  of  Christ,  the 
scandal  of  the  cross  is  ceased  ! '  Concerning  the  conversion  of 
the  heathen,  I  could  not  but  add  in  my  letter  to  Dr.  Humphrey : 

[Where  is  the  seed  sown,  the  sanguis  martyrum  ?  Do  we  hear  of 
any  who  have  sealed  the  faith  with  their  blood  in  all  the  vast  con- 
tinent? Or  do  we  read  of  any  Church  flourishing  in  any  age  or 
nation  without  the  seed  first  sown  there?  Give  "me  leave,  sir,  to 
speak  my  thoughts  freely.  When  God  shall  put  it  into  the  hearts  of 
some  of  His  servants,  whom  He  hath  already  delivered  from  earthly 
hopes  and  fears,  to  join  hand  in  hand  in  this  labour  of  love ;  when  out 
of  these  He  shall  have  chosen  one  or  more  to  magnify  Him  in  the 
sight  of  the  heathen,  by  dying  not  with  a  stoical  or  Indian  indifference, 
but  blessing  and  praying  for  their  murderers,  and  praising  God  in 
the  midst  of  the  flames  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory, — then 
the  rest,  '  waxing  bold  by  their  sufferings,  shall  go  forth  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  God,  and  by  the  power  of  His  might  cast  down  every 
high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  faith  of  Christ.  Then  shall 
ye  see  Satan,  the  grand  ruler  of  the  new  world,  as  lightning  fall  from 
heaven  !  Then  shall  even  these  lands  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  seas.1 


Tues.  12.— Polycarp,  the  Psalms,  Fleury,  and  another  French  lesson, 
filled  the  morning  hours. 
Wed.  13.— 

4j  Private  prayer,  prayer.  5    Prayers,  £  coffee,  conversed  (25). 

6    Writ  hymns.  7    Spanish,  \  hymns. 

8    Hymns,  Mrs  Anne  in  talk.  9    Sung  with  Delamotte,  hymns. 

10    Jacques  Charles,  French,  \  visited.  n    Visited,  £  Germans. 

xa    Visited.  i    Drest,  £  Germans. 

2    Mrs  Burnside's,  French.  3    Tea,  good  time. 

4  At  home,  eat,  \  walk. 

5  Private  prayer,  \  Lot ;  conversed,  private  prayer. 

6  In  talk,  private  prayer,  £  sung,  meditated. 

7  Meditated,  \  Prayers.  8    Mr  How,  &c.,  within,  diary. 

This  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the  Diary  pages  at  this  time.     The  hourly 


370  John   Wesley's  Journal  [July  1737. 

[Sun.  17. — I  had  occasion  to  make  a  very  unusual  trial  of 
the  temper  of  Mr.  Boltzius,  pastor  of  the  Saltzburghers,  in  which 
he  behaved  with  such  lowliness  and  meekness  as  became  a 
disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.] 

Sat.  23. — [The  strange  esteem  which  Mr.  Causton  seemed  to 
show  for  us,  by  which  means  we  had  nothing  without  but  ease 

minutes  of  devotion  are  always  given,  and  the  special  marks  in  connexion 
with  the  regulations  of  the  Holy  Club. 

Thur.  14. — Ten  times  the  word  'hymns '  occurs  on  this  page.  Boltzius, 
the  Saltzburgher  chief  minister,  was  with  him  at  nine  and  all  the  evening. 
Probably  he  was  a  guest  at  the  parsonage.  Wesley  dined  with  the 
Germans,  continuing  his  hymnal  work,  which,  we  may  infer,  was  that  of 
*  collecting,'  or  compiling.  The  presence  of  Boltzius,  and  Wesley's  intimate 
relations  at  this  time  with  the  Germans,  would  lead  one  to  assume  that 
German  hymns  for  the  most  part  were'being  read,  translated,  or  transcribed. 

Fri.  15. — Boltzius,  Jacques  Charles,  and  Dr.  Nunes  are  all  named  in 
connexion  with  hymns.  At  noon  he  read  with  the  boys,  prayed  and 
apparently  read  hymns  to  them. 

Sat.  1 6. —At  five-o'clock  prayers,  instead  of  expounding  the  Second 
Lessons  as  he  usually  did,  he  expounded  the  Psalms,  ending  with  prayer 
and  Tate  and  Brady.  The  Psalms  for  the  morning  were  the  79th  to  the 
8 1 st.  Jacques  Charles  again  came.  Tutor  and  pupil  talked  together. 
Mrs.  Gilbert's  class  met  at  noon,  with  much  singing,  prayer,  and  conver- 
sation. At  one  he  catechized,  and  at  two  worked  on  hymns.  Late  in  the 
evening  he  went  to  the  Cowpen. 

Sun.  17. — This,  doubtless,  was  the  day  on  which  Boltzius  was  refused 
the  Communion  : 

6  Tea,  conversed  ;  garden,  within  with  Boltzius. 

7  Within.      8.  Conversed  of  the  Communion. 
9  Conversed  \,  meditated. 

Mon.  18.— Fleury,  whose  Catechism  he  was  translating  and  preparing 
for  publication,  occupied  his  attention  ;  but  the  Williamson  business  was 
becoming  more  and  more  acute,  and  not  Brownfield,  the  Burnsides, 
Delamotte,  the  Caustons,  nor  the  Germans  could  hold  him  back  from 
that  which  he  conceived  to  be  his  duty.  Late  in  the  day  'verses'  are 
again  named. 

Tues.  19. — He  again  devoted  his  attention  to  hymns. 

Wed.  20. — Nothing  out  of  the  ordinary  way  occurred.  He  is  still 
working  on  hymns. 

Thur.  21. — Jacques  Charles  came  and  talked  French  with  him. 
Hymns,  visiting,  French,  German,  and  Spanish  constituted  the  principal 
work  of  the  day. 

Fri.  22.— He  wrote  to  Dr.  Humphrey.  (See  Tyerman's  Wesley >  vol.  i. 
p.  141.) 

Sat.  23.— He  wrote  to  Dr.  Cutler  (see  App.  XXIV.  vol.  vi.)  and  to 
the  Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel, 


July  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  371 

and  plenty,]  occasioned  my  expressing  myself  thus  in  a  letter  to 
a  friend  :  '  How  to  attain  to  the  being  crucified  with  Christ,  I 
find  not ;  being  in  a  condition  which  I  neither  desired  nor 
expected  in  America — in  ease  and  honour  and  abundance.  A 
strange  school  for  him  who  has  but  one  business,  Tv^vdfyiv 
kavrov  7T/309  eixrefleiav.' l 

Wed.  27. — [In  the  evening,]  I  rejoiced  to  meet  once  more  that 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  August  Spangenberg. 

[Sat.  30. — I  began  taking  a  more  exact  account  of  my 
parishioners  by  going  from  house  to  house.  By  the  best  com- 
putation I  can  make,  there  are  now  in  the  town  of  Savannah  five 
hundred  and  eighteen  souls,  one  hundred  and  forty-nine  of 
whom  are  under  sixteen  years  of  age.  About  one  hundred 
and  eighty  of  the  adults  are,  or  are  called,  of  the  Church  of 
England. 


Sun.  24. — Did  not  differ  from  other  Sundays  of  the  same  period. 

Mon.  25. — He  wrote  names  twice  in  the  day.  Mrs.  Fallowfield,  the 
ex-Roman  Catholic,  being  seriously  impressed  herself,  brought  friends  to 
the  parsonage  with  whom  also  Wesley  conversed.  A  Mrs.  Ash  is  named. 

Tues.  26. — He  transcribed  a  letter,  and  saw  Mr.  Causton,  who  was 
still  more  or  less  an  invalid.  With  him  he  had  a  good  talk  and  reading. 
Frequently  he  enters  'writ  name.'  This  probably  refers  to  an  addition 
to  his  roll  of  communicants,  to  his  list  of  persons  to  be  visited,  or  to 
the  members  of  the  various  classes  he  organized.  Wesley  throughout 
life  attached  great  importance  to  the  writing  of  such  lists  of  names. 

Wed.  27. — At  9.30  in  the  evening  Mr.  Spangenberg  junr.  came.  So 
strict  is  Wesley  in  the  observance  of  fasts  that  he  notes  the  fact  if,  earlier 
than  nightfall,  he  eats  on  those  days. 

Thur.  28. — He  began  the  translation  of  Fleury's  Mceurs  des  Chretiens. 
He  dined  with  the  Germans,  and  spent  an  hour  with  Spangenberg. 

Fri.  29. — He  worked  on  Fleury,  and  spent  some  time  among  the  Ger- 
mans with  John  (Reinier),  with  Spangenberg,  and  with  Toltschig. 

Sat.  30. — He  began  the  account  of  his  parish  at  six  in  the  morning. 
The  Germans  are  frequently  named,  and  once  he  *  wrote  for '  one  of  them. 
In  the  evening  he  made  Mr.  Bradley's  will. 


1  The  words  are  slightly  altered  from  if  any  poor  and  religious  men  or  women 

I  Tim.  iv.  7.     In  Mill's  text,  which  pro-  of  Epworth  or  Wroot  could  come  over  to 

bably  Wesley  used,  they  read  yvpva&  Si  him  ;  inviting  them  with  a  promise  of 

atavrbv,  &c.,  '  And  exercise  thyself  unto  land  enough,  and  of  provisions  till  they 

godliness.'   The  ease  and  honour  did  not  could  live  upon  its  produce.     Contrast 

long  continue  ;  but  Wesley's  impressions  this  with  his  words  to  the  poor  Switzers 

were  so  favourable  that  he  wrote  to  his  (Journal,  Sept.  2,  1738). 
mother  saying  he  should  be  heartily  glad 


372  John    Wesley  s  Journal 

[Sun.  31. — Having  been  long  in  doubt  concerning  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  Moravian  Brethren,  at  Mr.  Spangenberg's  desire 
I  proposed  to  them  the  following  queries,  to  each  of  which 
is  subjoined  the  substance  of  their  answer. 

[i.  What  do  you  mean  by  conversion  ? 

*  The  passing  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan 
unto  God  '  (Acts  xxvi.  25-33). 

2.  Is  it  commonly  wrought  at  once,  or  by  degrees  ? 

*  The  design    of   passing  thus  from  darkness   unto  light  is  some- 
times wrought  in  a  moment  (Acts  xvi.  25-34) ;  but  the  passage  itself 
is  gradual '  (Acts  ii.  37,  &c.). 

3.  Ought  we  so  to  expect  the  Holy  Ghost  to  convert  either  our 
own  or  our  neighbour's  soul  as  to  neglect  any  outward  means  ? 

4  Many  things  are  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  helps  to  an  entire 
conversion.  So  reading  the  Scripture  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  14),  hearing  it 
(Acts  xvi.  14),  fasting  (Joel  ii.  12),  self-examination  (Lam.  iii.  40),  the 
instructions  of  experienced  persons  (Acts  ii.  37),  fervent  prayer.  None 
therefore  ought  to  neglect  any  of  these,  when  it  is  in  their  power  to  use 
them.' 

4.  Ought  we  so  to  expect  the  Holy  Ghost  to  interpret  Scripture  to 
us  as  to  neglect  any  outward  means  ?     Particularly,  inquiring  into  the 
sense  of  the  ancient  Church  ? 

'  The  Scripture  is  clear  in  all  things  necessary  to  be  known.  And 
the  more  obscure  parts  of  it  will  be  made  plainer  by  prayer,  meditation, 
temptation,  and  experience,  and  by  comparing  them  with  the  plain  parts. 
We  wish  the  writings  of  the  ancient  Church,  especially  of  the  apostolic 
age,  were  more  valued,  and  (we)  neither  despise  nor  neglect  them,  where 
there  is  opportunity  of  reading  them  and  comparing  them  with  the 
Scripture.' 

5.  What  is  the  visible  Church  ? 

*  Where  there   is  a  society  of  men  united  together  in  apostolical 
order  and  discipline  and  endued  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  there  is  a 
visible  Church.     Such  was  once  that  of  Rome,  Corinth,  and  others.' 

6.  What  is  faith  ? 

VTrooTacris,  Trpay/xaTcov  cXcy^os  ov 


Sun.  31. — He  again  wrote  for  Germans.  In  the  evening  there  was  a 
burial. 

During  July  the  sickness,  involving  at  first  so  much  pastoral  visitation 
and  mournful  duty  in  the  churchyard,  seems  to  have  gradually  abated. 
All  the  routine  of  work — prayers  and  expositions  twice  a  day,  sermons 
and  Communion  on  Sundays  and  holy-days,  tutorial  work,  and  the 
meeting  of  various  classes — is  strictly  observed,  and  also  private  devotions. 


July  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  373 

7.  Does  it  precede  or  follow  the  use  of  the  means  of  grace  ? 
'  It  ordinarily  cometh  by  hearing.' 

8.  Is  faith  perfected  by  good  works  or  only  shown  thereby  ? 
'  By  works  faith  is  made  perfect.' 

9.  Do  you  believe  those  called  the  Athanasian,  the  Nicene,  and  the 
Apostles'  Creed  to  be  agreeable  to  Scripture  ? 

*  We  do,  if  they  are  rightly  understood.' 

10.  Do  you  believe  the  Mosaic  precepts  concerning  unclean  meats  to 
be  binding  ? 

'  No  further  than  is  expressed,  Acts  xv.1 

11.  Is  it  lawful  to  bear  arms,  or  to  defend  one's  life  by  force  ?     '  No.1 

12.  To  put  offenders  to  death  ?    '  Yes.' 

13.  Togo  to  law?     'No/ 

14.  To  be  a  magistrate  ?     c  Yes.' 

15.  To  swear  when  required  by  a  magistrate  ? 
No  answer.     (Their  judgement  is,  No.) 

1 6.  Is  celibacy  a  state  more  advantageous  for  holiness  than  marriage? 

*  Yes,  to  them  who  are  able  to  receive  it.' 

17.  Are    the    ministrations    of   a    man    not    episcopally   ordained 
valid  ? 

1 8.  Does  the  wickedness  of  a  man  episcopally  ordained   make  his 
ministrations  invalid  ? 

'  I  dare  neither  affirm  nor  deny  either  of  these  questions  universally.' 

19.  About  what  age  do  you  commonly  begin  to  instruct  children  in 
religion  ? 

'  From  their  mothers'  womb.' 

20.  And  what  age  do  you  commonly  confirm  and  begin  to  instruct 
and  prepare  them  for  the  Lord's  Supper  ? 

4  We  instruct  children  in  Christianity  from  their  infancy,  but  so  as 
to  regard  their  understanding  rather  than  memory.  I  have  known  a 
child  of  eight  years  old  admitted  to  communicate  and  a  man  of  seventy 
not  yet  admitted.' 

21.  Is  the  Lord's  Supper  a  means  of  grace  ?      '  Yes.' 

22.  About  what  age  do  you  commonly  admit  children  to  join  with 
you  in  public  prayer  ? 

'  We  do  not  so  much  regard  the  natural  as  the  spiritual  life.' 

23.  What  qualifications  do  you  require  in  them  before   you  admit 
them  to  communicate  ? 

'  To  know,  to  love,  and  to  follow  Christ.' 

24.  Are  all  the  brethren  and  sisters  constant  in  attending  the  public 
prayers  ? 

*  Every   one   may   be   present   at    the   daily   prayers,   but    is    not 
compelled.' 


374  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Au*m7. 

25.  When  any  are  absent,  are  they  themselves,  or  the  rulers  of  the 
Church,  judges  of  the  cause  of  their  absence  ? 

'The  overseers  of  the  Church  inquire  the  cause  of  them,  and 
admonish  them  if  they  suspect  slackness.' 

26.  Do  you  prefer  extempore  to  set  forms  of  prayer  in  public? 

1  Our  hymns  are  forms  of  prayer.  For  the  rest,  every  one  speaks 
as  he  is  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.' 

27.  How  do  you  interpret  that  commandment   of  our   Lord,  'Ye, 
when  ye  pray,  say,  Our  Father  '  ? 

'As  a  command  to  avoid  vain  repetitions  in  prayer.' 

28.  Do  your  public   prayers   contain   the   four    parts   required    by 
St.  Paul,  i  Tim.  ii.  i  ? 

'No.' 

29.  Have  you  any  joint  intercession  for  enemies  ? 
'  No ;  but  we  pray  daily  for  all  men.' 

30.  Of  the  few  prayers  recorded    in  the  New  Testament,   are  the 
greater  part  addressed  to  Christ,  or  to  the  Father  through  Christ  ? 

'  We  believe  the  Son  equal  with  the  Father.' 

31.  Have  you  any  fixed  or  joint  fasts  ? 

'  No  ;  but  we  appoint  them  frequently.'] 

AUG.  i,  Man. — I  set  out  with  Mr.  Spangenberg  on  my 
long-intended  journey  to  Ebenezer.1  In  the  way,  I  told  him 
the  calm  we  had  so  long  enjoyed  was  now  drawing  to  an  end  ; 
that  I  hoped  he  would  shortly  see  I  was  not,  as  some  had  told 
him,  a  respecter  of  persons  ;  but  was  determined,  God  being 


AUG.  i,  Mon. — At  8.30  he  set  out  with  Spangenberg  and  his  friends, 
landing  at  Fort  Augustine  at  10.30.  Thence  they  walked  to  Old 
Ebenezer,  where  the  first  Saltzburghers  had  settled.  At  nine  in  the  evening 
they  arrived  at  New  Ebenezer,  the  more  recent  settlement. 


1  When   the   first   company   of  Saltz-  pronounced  the  usual    benediction.     To 

burghers  arrived  at  Savannah  under  Bar  on  the  town  which  they  intended  forthwith 

von  Reck,  the  choice  of  a  situation  was  to  build  they  gave  the  name  of  Ebenezer. 

offered  them,  and  they  selected  one  the  The      'poor      Saltzburghers'     were    a 

scenery  of  which  bore  some  resemblance  remnant    of     the     25,000    driven    from 

to  that  of  their  own  country.     Here  they  their  homeland  by  the  Roman  Catholics  ; 

knelt    down    before    God,    in     grateful  ;£33,ooo  was  raised  for  them  in  London, 

acknowledgement  of  all  His  mercies  to  Whitefield  greatly  admired  the  piety  and 

them    in    their    extensive    and   perilous  industry  of  the  settlers  whom  he  visited 

wanderings.      With   the   Bible   in   their  at    New    Ebenezer.      See    an    account 

hands,   they  then    marched   up   to    the  published  by  the  S.P.C.K.  ;    Tyerman's 

place  which  they  deemed  the  most  suit-  Wesley ',  vol.  i.  p.  113;  and  Introduction 

able  as  the  site  of  a  town ;   they  then  to  Jackson's  edition  of  Charles  Wesley's 

sang  a   hymn,    and  one   of  the   pastors  Journal,  p.  29. 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  375 

my  helper,  to  behave  indifferently  to  all,  rich  or  poor,  friends 
or  enemies.  I  then  asked  his  advice  as  to  the  difficulty  I 
foresaw  ;  and  resolved,  by  God's  grace,  to  follow  it. 

In  the  evening  we  came  to  [the  Old  Town,  which  is  more 
pleasantly  situated  than  any  settlement  I  have  yet  seen  in 
Georgia.  But  the  soil  is  exceeding  barren,  and  likewise  liable 
to  be  overflowed  upon  any  sudden  or  violent  rain.] 

New  Ebenezer,  where  the  poor  Saltzburghers  are  settled, 
[is  about  six  miles  distant  from  it,  lying  upon  a  high  bluff 
close  to  the  river.  Here  is  some  fruitful  land,  but  not  much, 
the  pine-land  bearing  scarce  anything.]  The  industry  of  this 
people  is  quite  surprising.  Their  sixty  huts  are  neatly  and 
regularly  built,  and  all  the  little  spots  of  ground  between  them 
improved  to  the  best  advantage.  One  side  of  the  town  is  a 
field  of  Indian  corn  ;  on  the  other  are  the  plantations  of  several 
private  persons — all  which  together  one  would  scarce  think  it 
possible  for  a  handful  of  people  to  have  done  in  one  year. 

[I  was  much  pleased  with  the  plainness  of  dress  of  Mrs. 
Boltzius  and  Mrs.  Gronau,  but  more  with  what  little  I  saw  of 
their  behaviour.  It  appeared  to  be  their  delight  as  well  as 
their  custom  to  be  the  servants  of  all.  The  hospitality, 
openness,  and  piety  of  their  husbands  could  not  be  less 
agreeable.1 

[They  proposed  to  Mr.  Spangenberg,  in  the  most  mild  and 
friendly  manner,  the  objections  they  had  against  him.  Most  of 
them  fall  in  with  the  preceding  questions.  The  rest,  relating 
chiefly  to  the  Count's  exposition  of  Scripture  and  method  of 
public  prayer,  fully  convinced  me  that  he  likewise  is  but  a  man. 


Tues.  2.— He  walked  with  Boltzius,  the  chief  minister  of  the  Saltzburghers, 
and  conversed.  Later,  he  sang  with  Gronau,  the  assistant  minister,  and 
listened  to  a  conversation  between  Boltzius  and  Spangenberg.  He  returned 
home  by  way  of  Purrysburg,  supping  there,  and  leaving  by  boat  at  midnight. 
He  steered  until  1.15,  when  he  slept  until  half-past  three;  then  he  again 
steered,  crossing  the  Sound  at  four.  At  six  he  arrived  at  home,  drank 
tea,  conversed  with  Delamotte,  and  immediately  began  visiting.  But  at 
ten  he  slept,  in  his  Diary  acknowledging  weariness.  At  noon  he  was  with 
the  Germans,  fulfilling  all  the  ordinary  duties  of  the  after-part  of  the  day. 


1  See  interesting  particulars  in  a  letter  of  one  of  their  two   ministers  in    The 
Arminian  Mag.  1789,  p.  148. 


John    Wesley's  Journal  [Aug.  1737. 

O  Thou  Giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  how  will  men 
so  full  of  faith  and  love  adorn  the  gospel  of  Thy  Christ,  when 
Thou  shalt  give  them  a  due  reverence  for  the  good  old  paths, 
and  the  openness  and  plainness  of  speech  which  He  used  in 
whose  lips  was  no  guile  !] 

Wed.  3. — We  returned  to  Savannah. 

\_Fri.  5. — I  gave  Mr.  Causton  an  account  of  our  journey.] 

Sun.  j. —  I  repelled  Mrs.  Williamson  from  the  Holy  Com- 
munion [for  the  reasons  specified  in  my  letter  of  July  5,  as  well 
as  for  not  giving  me  notice  of  her  design  to  communicate  after 
having  intermitted  it  for  some  time.  I  foresaw  the  consequences 
well,  but  remembered  the  promise  in  the  Epistle  for  the  day, 
*  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above 
that  ye  are  able  ;  but  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a 
way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it.1 

[In  the  evening  Mrs.  Williamson,  in  conversation  with 
Mrs.  Burnside,  expressed  much  anger  at  my  repelling  her  from 
the  Holy  Communion.  Mrs.  Burnside  told  her,  '  You  was  much 
to  blame,  after  receiving  that  letter  from  Mr.  Wesley,  to  offer 
yourself  at  the  Table  before  you  had  cleared  yourself  to  him. 
But  you  may  easily  put  an  end  to  this  by  going  to  Mr.  Wesley 
now,  and  clearing  yourself  of  what  you  are  charged  with.'  She 
replied,  '  No,  I  will  not  show  such  a  meanness  of  spirit  as  to 
speak  to  him  about  it  myself,  but  somebody  else  shall.'] 


Thur.  4. — To-day  he  frequently  read  the  Greek  Testament. 

Fri.  5. — There  are  several  references  to  work  ;  and  as  they  usually  occur 
in  connexion  with  walking,  they  probably  indicate  labour  bestowed  upon  the 
new  garden  in  the  glebe. 

Sat.  6. — He  wrote  to  Mr.  Spangenberg,  whose  name  occurs  thrice  in 
the  day. 

Sun.  7. — After  early  prayers  he  spent  an  hour  with  Spangenberg  and 
Eckstein,  meditated,  prayed,  and  prepared  his  sermon.  Then  came  the  act 
of  discipline  upon  which  he  had  so  long  thought,  prayed,  consulted — the 
act  destined  to  revolutionize  his  life,  eventually  driving  him  from  America 
back  to  his  own  country.  This  is  the  simple  entry  : 

10  £  Prayers,  sermon. 

11  \  Eucharist,  Miss  Sophy  repelled. 

The  rest  of  the  day,  with  its  catechizing,  prayers,  select  society-meetings, 
and  conversation,  passed  as  usual,  except  that  there  was  the  burial  of 
the  dead. 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  377 

Mon.  8. — Mr.  Recorder  of  Savannah  issued  out  the  warrant 
following : 

GEORGIA,  SAVANNAH  Ss. 

To  all  Constables^  Tithingmen,  and  others^  whom  these  may 
concern  : 

You,  and  each  of  you,  are  hereby  required  to  take  the  body  of 
John  Wesley,  Clerk : 

And  bring  him  before  one  of  the  bailiffs  of  the  said  town,  to  answer 
the  complaint  of  William  Williamson  and  Sophia  his  wife,  for  defaming 
the  said  Sophia,  and  refusing  to  administer  to  her  the  Sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  in  a  public  congregation,  without  cause ;  by  which  the 
said  William  Williamson  is  damaged  one  thousand  pounds  sterling : 
And  for  so  doing,  this  is  your  warrant,  certifying  what  you  are  to  do  in 
the  premisses.  Given  under  my  hand  and  seal  the  8th  day  of  August, 
Anno  Dom.  1737.  THO.  CHRISTIE. 

[After  evening  prayers,  we  joined  with  the  Germans  in  one 
of  their  lovefeasts.  It  was  begun  and  ended  with  thanksgiving 
and  prayer,  and  celebrated  in  so  decent  and  solemn  a  manner 
as  a  Christian  of  the  apostolic  age  would  have  allowed  to  be 
worthy  of  Christ.] 

Tues.  9. — [I  was  apprehended  by  virtue  of  a  warrant  from 
the  Recorder,  and  carried  before  the  magistrates,  Mr.  Bailiff 
Parker  and  Mr.  Recorder.  Mr.  Jones,  the  constable,  served  the 
warrant.  Mr.  Williamson's  charge  against  me  was  :  (i)  that 
I  had  defamed  his  wife  ;  (2)  that  I  had  causelessly  repelled 
her  from  the  Holy  Communion.  The  first  article  I  denied.] 
As  to  the  second,  being  purely  ecclesiastical,  I  could  not 
acknowledge  their  power  to  interrogate  me.  Mr.  Parker  told 
me, '  However,  you  must  appear  at  the  next  Court,  holden  for 
Savannah.'  Mr.  Williamson,1  who  stood  by,  said,  '  Gentlemen, 
I  desire  Mr.  Wesley  may  give  bail  for  his  appearance.'  But 


Mon.  8. — Two  lines  may  be  quoted  from  the  evening  record  : 
6  Within,  ^  Mrs  Turner,  talk  of  Mrs  Causton,  they  very  angry ! 
8  Germans,  Agape,  sung,  prayer,  eat,  sung,  prayer. 

Tues.  9. — The  day,  which  must  have  been  one  of  unusual  excitement, 
was,  if  anything,  fuller  of  pastoral  duties  than  usual.    At  seven  in  the 


1  Mr.  Williamson,  it  is  said,  arrived  Anderson  in  the  scurrilous  attack  upon 

in  the  colony  soon  after  Wesley.      He  Wesley.     On  the  deposition  of  Causton 

was    associated  with    Dr.    Tailfer    and  in  1738,  he  was  appointed  Recorder. 
VOL.  I.  21 


378  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Aug.  1737. 

Mr.  Parker  immediately  replied,  'Sir,  Mr.  Wesley's  word  is 
sufficient' 

[Soon  after  an  advertisement  was  set  up  (by  Mr.  William- 
son), forbidding  any  one  to  carry  me  out  of  the  province,  as 
being  '  guilty  of  divers  notorious  offences,  under  the  penalty  of 
one  thousand  pounds.'  The  Evening  Lesson  was  the  eleventh 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Oh  may  I  ever  have 
respect  unto  the  recompense  of  reward,  and  esteem  the  reproach 
of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt !] 

Wed.  10. — Mr.  Causton  (from  a]  just  regard,  as  his  letter 
expressed  it,  to  the  friendship  which  had  subsisted  between  us 
till  this  affair)  sent  me  a  letter,  wherein  he  required  that  I  would 
meet  him  in  the  court-house  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  and 
[before  all  the  people]  give  my  reasons  why  I  repelled  his 
niece  from  the  Holy  Communion.  [I  could  not  assent  to  this 
on  several  accounts,  as  (i)  because  'all  the  people'  were  not 
proper  judges  of  ecclesiastical  matters  ;  (2)  because  I  was  un- 
willing to  expose  her  ;  and  (3)  because  I  foresaw  Mr.  Causton 
himself  would  probably  be  insulted  by  the  people.] 

I  answered,  '  I  apprehend  many  ill  consequences  may  arise 
from  so  doing.  Let  the  cause  be  laid  before  the  Trustees.' 

[About  seven  Mr.  Gough,  the  officer  on  duty,  rang  the  bell 
for  relieving  the  guard.  It  was  soon  rumoured  abroad  that 
this  bell  rung  for  my  trial,  which  occasioned  a  vast  concourse 
of  people.  Soon  after  Mr.  Causton  came  to  my  house,  from 
whose  behaviour  I  clearly  saw  that  whatever  the  most  vindictive 
temper  could  contrive,  and  lawless  power  execute,  that  I  was 
to  expect.  I  determined,  however,  God  being  my  helper,  to 
follow  the  directions  He  gave  in  the  Lesson  for  the  day :  *  Let 
us  lay  aside  every  weight,  .  .  .  and  let  us  run  with  patience  the 
race  that  is  set  before  us,  looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and 
finisher  of  our  faith ;  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him 
endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at 
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.'] 

Tkur.   II. — Mr.    Causton    came    again    to   my   house.     His 

morning  the  constables  came  with  a  warrant,  '  Before  the  magistrates.' 
The  presence  of  Spangenberg,  and  the  friendliness  of  the  Burnsides  and 
others,  are  gratefully  noted. 

Tkur.  ii.— At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  Mr.  Causton  called.    '  He  very 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  379 

language  was  now  rougher  than  before.  Among  many  other 
sharp  words,  he  said, '  Make  an  end  of  this  matter.  Thou  hadst 
best  My  niece  to  be  used  thus  !  I  have  drawn  the  sword,  and 
I  will  never  sheathe  it  till  I  have  satisfaction.' 

Soon  after  he  added, '  Give  the  reasons  of  your  repelling  her 
before  the  whole  congregation.'  I  answered, '  Sir,  if  you  insist 
upon  it,  I  will ;  and  so  you  may  be  pleased  to  tell  her.'  He 
said,  *  Write  to  her,  and  tell  her  so  yourself.'  I  said,  '  I  will ; 
and  after  he  went,  I  wrote  as  follows : 

To  Mrs.  Sophia  Williamson. 

AT  Mr.  Causton's  request,  I  write  once  more.  The  rules  whereby 
I  proceed  are  these  : 

'  So  many  as  intend  to  be  partakers  of  the  Holy  Communion,  shall 
signify  their  names  to  the  Curate,  at  least  some  time  the  day  before. 
This  you  did  not  do. 

1  And  if  any  of  these  .  .  .  have  done  any  wrong  to  his  neighbours, 
by  word  or  deed,  so  that  the  congregation  be  thereby  offended,  the 
Curate  .  .  .  shall  advertise  him,  that  in  any  wise  he  presume  not  to 
come  to  the  Lord's  Table  until  he  hath  openly  declared  himself  to  have 
truly  repented.' 

If  you  offer  yourself  at  the  Lord's  Table  on  Sunday,  I  will  advertise 
you,  as  I  have  done  more  than  once,  wherein  you  have  done  wrong. 
And  when  you  have  openly  declared  yourself  to  have  truly  repented,  I 
will  administer  to  you  the  mysteries  of  God.  JOHN  WESLEY. 

August  n,  1737. 

Mr.  Delamotte  carrying  this,  Mr.  Causton  said,  among  many 
other  warm  sayings,  '  I  am  the  person  that  am  injured.  The 
affront  is  offered  to  me ;  and  I  will  espouse  the  cause  of  my 
niece.  I  am  ill-used ;  and  I  will  have  satisfaction,  if  it  be  to  be 
had  in  the  world.' 

Which  way  this  satisfaction  was  to  be  had  I  did  not  yet 
conceive.  But  on  Friday  and  Saturday  it  began  to  appear. 

[In  the  Evening  Lesson  were  these  comfortable  words  :  '  I 
will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee ;  so  that  we  may  boldly 


angry  ! '    At  five  in  the  evening  Toltschig — always  a  trusty  friend  and 
counsellor — came  and  remained  an  hour. 

Fri.  12. — At  six  in  the  morning  he  'writ  Account  of  Mr.  Causton 
et  cetera]  and  then  spent  an  hour  in  *  singing  with  Delamotte.'  In  the 
afternoon,  at  Mrs.  Burnside's,  he  read  Francke's  Nicodemus. 


380  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Aug.  1737. 

say,  The  Lord  is  my  helper  :  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do 
unto  me.' 

\Fn.  12. — On  this  and  the  following  days  Mr.  Causton  read 
to  as  many  as  he  conveniently  could  all  the  letters  which  I  had 
writ  to  him  or  Miss  Sophy,  from  the  beginning  of  our  acquaint- 
ance :  not  indeed  throughout,  but  selecting  such  parts  of  each 
as  might  bear  an  ill  construction,  and  inserting  here  and  there 
a  few  words  to  make  things  more  clear  to  the  apprehension  of 
the  hearers.  The  rest  of  the  family  in  the  meantime  were 
very  industrious  in  convincing  all  they  could  speak  to  'that 
Mr.  Wesley  had  done  this  merely  out  of  revenge  because 
Sophy  would  not  have  him.'  I  sat  still,  and,  I  thank  God, 
easy  at  home,  having  committed  my  cause  to  Him,  and  remem- 
bering His  word  which  was  read  this  night,  '  Blessed  is  the 
man  that  endureth  temptation  :  for  when  he  is  tried,  he  shall 
receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promised  to  them 
that  love  Him.' 

[Sat.  13. — Calling  on  one  who  knew  my  whole  intercourse 
with  Miss  Sophy  from  the  beginning,  I  found,  notwithstanding, 
that  a  few  conversations  with  Mr.  Causton  had  convinced  him 
that  I  was  wholly  in  the  wrong.  I  said  little,  believing  the  time 
was  not  yet  come  ;  and  indeed  doubting  whether  it  might  be 
the  will  of  God,  inasmuch  as  He  saw  it  to  be  best  for  me  that 
I  should  be  condemned  and  despised  of  all  men.] 

The  words  of  St.  James,  read  on  Saturday,  were :  ( My 
brethren,  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Lord  of  glory,  with  respect  of  persons.' 

I  was  only  afraid  lest  those  who  were  weak  should  'be 
turned  out  of  the  way ' ;  at  least  so  far  as  to  forsake  the  public 
'  assembling  of  themselves  together.'  But  I  feared  where  no 
fear  was.  God  took  care  of  this  also.  So  that  on  Sunday,  the 
1 4th,  more  were  present  at  the  morning  prayers  than  had  been 
for  some  months  before.  Many  of  them  observed  those  words 

Sat.  13. — Wesley  continued  writing  the  account  of  Mr.  Causton.  The 
storm  through  which  he  was  passing  does  not  seem  to  have  disturbed  either 
his  personal  devotions  or  public  work. 

Sun.  14. — Mr.  Dison,  the  chaplain  of  the  Independent  Company  in 
St.  Simon's  Island,  came  after  morning  prayers.  He  was  a  man  in  whom 
the  Wesleys  had  no  confidence.  At  eight  Wesley  read  the  'Last  Prayer' 
by  the  side  of  Robert  Poison. 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  381 

in  the  first  Lesson,  *  Set  Naboth  on  high  among  the  people  ; 
and  set  two  men,  sons  of  Belial,  before  him,  to  bear  witness 
against  him.'  [No  less  remarkable  were  those  read  in  the  after- 
noon, concerning  Ahab  and  Micaiah  in  the  Evening  Lesson, 
*  I  hate  him,  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good  concerning  me,  but 
evil.'  Oh  may  I  ever  be  able  to  say  with  Micaiah,  *  What  the 
Lord  saith  unto  me,  that  will  I  speak ' ;  and  that,  though  I  too 
should  be  '  put  in  prison  and  fed  there  with  bread  of  affliction 
and  with  water  of  affliction.' 

\_Mon.  15. — Mr.  Causton  desired  Mr.  Burnside,  one  who  had 
been  employed  two  years  and  a  half  in  casting  up  and  transcrib- 
ing accounts  for  the  Trustees,  to  sign  a  certificate,  containing 
three  heads  :  (i)  that  Mrs.  Williamson  had  been  for  ten  months 
last  past  as  constant  a  communicant  as  any  other  ;  (2)  that  he 
could  conceive  no  reason  why  she  should  be  now  repelled  ; 
(3)  that  she  was  and  had  been  of  an  unblamable  behaviour. 
Mr.  Burnside  said, '  He  could  not  sign  it  with  a  safe  conscience, 
knowing  it  to  be  false.'  Upon  which  Mr.  Causton,  after  many 
severe  reproaches,  discharged  him  from  his  employment,  and 
told  him  he  hoped  he  would  never  expect  any  more  favours 
from  him. 

[Notwithstanding  this  example  made  of  the  first  refuser,  I  do 
not  hear  of  any  more  than  two,  out  of  between  twenty  and  thirty 
communicants,  with  whom  Mr.  Causton  had  any  better  success. 
However,  names  of  some  sort  or  other  must  be  had,  and  a  good 
number  was  accordingly  procured  to  a  paper  the  very  first  article 
of  which  was  shamelessly  false  (for  she  had  omitted  communicat- 
ing nine  times  in  three  months),  and  which,  had  it  been  ever  so 
true,  not  one  of  them  was  able  to  testify. 

[All  this  week  Mr.  Causton  employed  his  utmost  power  and 
art  and  application  to  prepare  the  persons  who  form  the  Grand 
Jury  here  against  the  next  court  day,  which  was  Monday  the 
22nd  instant.  He  was  talking  with  some  or  other  of  them 
day  and  night.  His  table  was  open  to  all.  Whatever  they 


Mon.  15.— At  six  o'clock  he  set  out  with  'John'  for  the  Cowpen  and 
Irene,  conversing,  reading  Kempis,  and  singing  by  the  way.  He  returned 
home  for  dinner,  and  saw  Toltschig  and  Bishop  Anton.  At  five  o'clock 
special  prayer  was  offered  for  Mr.  Causton  and  *  Miss  Sophy.'  The  classes 
continued  to  meet. 


382  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Aug.  1737. 

pleased  to  have  from  the  stores  was  delivered.  Old  misunder- 
standings were  forgot.  And  nothing  was  too  much  to  be  done 
or  promised  to  those  who  a  week  before  could  not  procure  a 
morsel  of  bread.  This  evening  was  the  last  time  Mr.  Causton 
was  at  church,  or  any  of  his  family  ;  Mrs.  Causton  declaring 
she  would  come  there  no  more  while  I  stayed  at  Savannah.] 

Tues.  1 6. — [Fearing  more  of  the  communicants  might  be 
ensnared  or  offended  by  the  reports  so  carefully  propagated, 
I  complied  with  the  request  of  several  of  them,  drew  up  a 
short  relation  of  the  case,  and  read  it,  after  evening  prayers 
were  ended,  in  the  open  congregation.  And  this  evening  I 
suppose  it  was,  that  poor]  Mrs.  Williamson  was  induced  to 
swear  to  and  sign  [the  memorable]  affidavit,  insinuating  much 
more  than  it  asserted  ;  but  asserting  that  Mr.  Wesley  had 
many  times  proposed  marriage  to  her,  all  which  proposals  she 
had  rejected.  [A  case  hitherto  full  as  deplorable  as  that  of 
Theomachus  !  God  forbid  it  should  have  the  same  event ! 

\Wed.  !?(?)  and  the  following  days  I  possessed  my  soul  in 
patience,  casting  all  my  care  on  God,  and  speaking  very 
sparingly,  lest  I  should  speak  amiss.]  On  Thursday  or  Friday 
the  panel  for  the  Grand  Jury  was  delivered  to  the  officers.  But 
after  the  persons  first  impanelled  were  summoned,  twenty-four 
more  were  added  to  the  number.  [This,  Mr.  Causton  well  con- 
sidered, would  add  weight  to  everything  transacted  by  them  ; 
which  would  then  appear  to  be  the  general  sense  of  the  people  : 
besides  that  so  many  being  engaged  in  the  same  work  they 
would  encourage  one  another  to  take  bolder  steps  than  a  few 
would  dare  to  venture  on. 

[I  was  now  informed  that  Mr.  Causton  intended  to  proceed 

Tues.  1 6,  and  Wed.  17.— Nothing  out  of  the  ordinary  course  is  noted. 

Thur.  1 8.— The  day  seems  to  have  been  spent  for  the  most  part  in  the 
country.  Wesley  left  home  at  7.15.  Familiar  as  he  was  with  the  country 
between  Savannah  and  the  Cowpen,  he  lost  his  way.  Two  entries  may 
be  quoted  : 

8  Lost,  Gesang-buch.     Mr  Vel  [?  ister]  in  talk. 
10  Gesang,  wrote  the  Case.     [He  met  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthews,  late  Musgrove.] 

The  Captain  whom  he  visited  may,  not  improbably,  have  been  '  Captain 
Williams,'  who  had  a  plantation  in  that  neighbourhood— the  Captain  of 
Bristol  notoriety. 

Frim  jg. — He  buried  in  the  evening.  Mr.  Burnside's  share  in  the  suffering 
of  persecution  is  the  most  prominent  feature. 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  383 

on  three  or  four  several  indictments.  But  whether  it  were  so 
or  no,  I  was  not  careful,  being  instructed  by  the  Lesson  for  the 
evening,  *  Behold,  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  fruit  of  the 
earth,  and  hath  long  patience  for  it.  Be  ye  also  patient, 
stablish  your  hearts ;  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh.' 

[Sat.  20. — In  the  afternoon,  remembering  the  former  kind- 
nesses of  Mr.  Causton  and  Miss  Sophy,  I  was  strongly  moved 
to  pray  for  them  with  my  might,  with  earnest  cries  and  many 
tears.  '  O  think  not  then  that  God  hath  forgotten  to  be  gracious, 
or  that  He  will  shut  up  His  lovingkindness  in  displeasure.' 

[Sun.  21. — God  gave  us  a  day  of  rest. 

\Mon.  22. — The  Morning  Lesson  was  the  twentieth  chapter 
of  the  Acts,  a  great  part  of  which,  by  the  grace  of  G0d,  I  could 
with  confidence  apply  to  myself.  When  the  Court  was  met, 
Mr.  Causton  gave  a  long  charge  to  the  Grand  Jury,  to  maintain 
their  rights  and  privileges,  and  not  to  suffer  any  person  to 
infringe  their  liberty  or  usurp  an  illegal  authority  over  them. 
Forty-four  jurors  were  then  sworn,  a  great  majority  of  whom 
were  well  prepared  for  their  work,  either  by  previous  application 
from  Mr.  Causton  or  by  avowed  enmity  to  me  or  to  the  Church 
of  England.]  One  was  a  Frenchman,  who  did  not  understand 
English,  one  a  Papist,  one  a  professed  infidel,  three  Baptists, 
sixteen  or  seventeen  other  Dissenters  ;  and  several  who  had 
personal  quarrels  against  me,  and  had  openly  vowed  revenge. 

Mrs.  Williamson's  affidavit  was  next  read,  of  which  I  desired 
a  copy.  Mr.  Causton  answered  that  I  might  have  one  from 
any  of  the  newspapers,  [for  it  would  be  printed  in  them  all 
immediately. 

[The  affidavit  was  as  follows  : 

PROVINCE  OF  GEORGIA,  SAVANNAH  Ss. 

[SOPHIA  Christiana  Williamson,  the  wife  of  William  Williamson, 
of  Savannah  aforesaid,  maketh  oath,  that  about  twelve  months  since 
she  was  committed  to  the  care  of  Mr.  John  Wesley,  the  missionary 

Sat.  20. — A  conversation  on  the  Sacrament  with  Mrs.  Gough  is  noted. 
Her  husband  received  the  Communion  in  the  afternoon. 

Sun.  21. — Nothing  of  special  interest  occurred. 

Mon.  22. — The  Case  is  named  frequently.  Between  nine  and  twelve  it 
was  in  Court.  After  dinner  Miss  Sophy  *  went  to  the  Grand  Jury'  ;  prayer 
for  her.  It  may  be  some  indication  of  the  agitation  through  which  Wesley 
was  passing  that  here  a  blot  fell  on  the  page. 


384  John   Wesley's  Journal  fAug.  1737. 

residing  in  this  Province,  by  her  relations,  which  care  the  said  John 
Wesley  discharged  with  a  great  deal  of  seeming  fidelity  for  two  or 
three  months.  And  this  Deponent  further  saith  that,  after  the  said 
three  months,  the  said  John  Wesley  began  to  use  his  endeavours  to 
alienate  the  affections  of  the  said  Deponent  from  her  said  relations  ; 
and  often  in  very  pathetic  terms  urged  to  her  the  necessity  of  her 
forsaking  them  and  leaving  their  house  in  order  to  cohabit  with  him, 
alleging  that  the  said  John  Wesley  would  maintain  her,  and  basely 
insinuating  that  she  never  could  -make  so  good  a  progress  to  salvation 
while  she  lived  with  them  as  she  could  if  she  lived  wholly  with  him. 
And  this  Deponent  further  saith  that  the  said  John  Wesley,  finding 
all  the  aforesaid  arguments  and  persuasions  ineffectual,  he,  the  said 
John  Wesley,  frequently  made  several  overtures  of  marriage  to  the 
Deponent,  without  acquainting  her  relations  thereof,  as  they  have 
informed  this  Deponent.  And  the  better  to  induce  this  Deponent 
thereto,  he,  the  said  John  Wesley,  often  alleged  that  he  could 
easily  alter  anything  in  his  way  of  life  that  was  disagreeable  to  her : 
though  he,  the  said  John  Wesley,  had  always  prescribed  to  this 
Deponent  the  same  way  of  life  he  then  led  as  the  only  means  of 
obtaining  salvation;  to  corroborate  which  he  always  added  that  he 
endeavoured  to  imitate  the  primitive  fathers,  who  were  strict  imitators 
of  the  life  of  Christ.  And  this  Deponent  further  saith  that  the  said 
John  Wesley  further  added  that  whereas  he  had  no  settled  habitation, 
and  in  this  regard  Deponent  might  not  like  his  present  wandering  way 
of  life,  he  would  procure  to  himself  the  settlement  of  Savannah; 
and  used  other  arguments  which  this  Deponent  cannot  at  present 
recollect,  whereby  he  gave  this  Deponent  to  understand  that  he  would 
lay  aside  his  former  intentions  of  going  among  the  Indians,  in  case  this 
Deponent  would  approve  of  him  for  a  husband.  And  this  Deponent 
further  saith  that  about  three  days  before  her  marriage  with  the 
said  William  Williamson,  the  said  John  Wesley  came  to  this  Deponent 
and  urged  very  much  to  know  whether  this  Deponent  had  not  been 
overpersuaded  or  forced  to  agree  to  the  said  marriage,  and  whether 
it  might  not  still  be  prevented.  Adding  again  that  if  there  was 
anything  in  his  way  of  life — by  which  he  gave  this  Deponent  to 
understand  he  meant  fasting  and  the  other  severe  mortifications 
which  he,  the  said  John  Wesley,  and  she,  this  Deponent,  by  his 
instruction,  had  then  strictly  practised  for  about  six  months — which 
she,  the  said  Deponent,  had  any  dislike  to,  he,  the  said  John  Wesley, 
would  make  all  these  things  easy  to  her,  in  case  she  would  consent  to 
marry  him.  And  this  Deponent  further  saith  that  ever  since  her  marriage 
with  the  said  William  Williamson,  he,  the  said  John  Wesley,  hath  taken 
all  opportunities,  in  her  husband's  absence,  to  persecute  this  Deponent 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  385 

and  to  force  his  private  discourse  to  her,  wherein  he  hath  often  terrified 
her  with  the  danger  her  soul  would  be  in  if  she  did  not  continue 
to  spend  her  time  and  converse  with  him,  the  said  John  Wesley, 
in  the  same  manner  she  did  before  marriage.  And  this  Deponent 
further  saith  that  particularly  about  three  months  since  the  said 
John  Wesley  being  at  this  Deponent's  house  among  other  company 
who  were  then  busy  with  this  Deponent's  uncle,  he,  the  said  John 
Wesley,  took  an  opportunity  to  follow  this  Deponent  to  the  back 
door,  and  there  told  this  Deponent  that  it  was  necessary  for  the 
benefit  of  her  soul  that  he  should  still  continue  to  converse  with 
her ;  that  she  must  not  mind  what  the  world  said  on  such  an  occasion ; 
and  that  she  must  contrive  some  opportunity  or  proper  times  for 
him  to  converse  with  her.  To  which  this  Deponent  answered,  'She 
wondered  he  could  desire  any  such  thing,  when  he  knew  this 
Deponent's  husband  had  so  often  forbidden  him,  and  she  had  so 
often  refused  him  so  to  do.' 

Signed  by  Sophia  Christiana  Williamson.  Sworn  before  me  this 
1 6th  day  of  August,  1737. 

HENRY  PARKER. 

Transcribed  from  the  copy  taken  and  attested  by  Mr.  Burnside.] 

Then  the  Court  delivered  to  the  Grand  Jury  the  following 
paper,  entitled  : 

A  LIST  OF  GRIEVANCES  PRESENTED  BY  THE  GRAND  JURY  FOR 
SAVANNAH,  THIS  DAY  OF  AUGUST,  1737 

[THAT  whereas  the  Colony  of  Georgia  is  composed  of  a  mixed  number 
of  Christians,  members  of  the  Church  of  England  and  Dissenters, 
who  all  or  most  part  would  attend  divine  ordinances  and  communicate 
with  a  faithful  pastor  of  the  Established  Church :  the  Rev.  Mr.  John 
Westley,  who  for  the  present  serves  the  cure  of  Savannah,  has  not 
as  the  law  directs  emitted  any  declaration  in  this  place  of  his  adherence 
to  the  principles  of  the  Church  of  England.  We  have  the  more 
reason  to  complain  of  grievances,  that  the  said  Revd.  person  (as  we 
humbly  conceive)  deviates  from  the  principles  and  regulations  of 
the  Established  Church,  in  many  particulars  inconsistent  with  the 
happiness  and  prosperity  of  this  Colony,  as — 

Prima,  by  inverting  the  order  and  method  of  the  Liturgy ; 

2.  By  changing  or  altering   such  passages  as   he   thinks  proper 
in   the  version  of    Psalms   publicly  authorized   to   be   sung    in    the 
church. 

3.  By    introducing    into    the    church    and    service    at  the  Altar 
compositions  of  psalms  and  hymns  not   inspected  or  authorized  by 
any  proper  judicature; 


LIBRARY  ST.  MARY'S  COLLEGE 


386  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Aug.  1737. 

4.  By  introducing  novelties,  such  as  dipping  infants,  &c.,  in  the 
Sacrament  of  Baptism,  and  refusing  to  baptize  the  children  of  such 
as  will  not  submit  to  his  innovations; 

5.  By  restricting  the   benefit   of    the   Lord's   Supper   to  a   small 
number  of  persons,  and  refusing  it  to  all  others  who  will  not  conform 
to  a  grievous  set  of  penances,  confessions,  mortifications,  and  constant 
attendance  of  early  and  late  hours  of  prayer,  very  inconsistent  with 
the  labour  and  employments  of  the  Colony ; 

6.  By  administering  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  boys 
ignorant  and  unqualified,  and  that  notwithstanding   of  their  parents 
and   nearest   friends   remonstrating   against  it,  and  accusing  them  of 
disobedience  and  other  crimes,  &c. ; 

7.  By  refusing  to  administrate  the  Holy  Sacrament  to  well-disposed 
and   well-living    persons,    unless   they   should    submit   to   confessions 
and  penances  for  crimes  which  they  utterly  refuse  and  whereof  no 
evidence  is  offered ; 

8.  By   venting   sundry  uncharitable   expressions   of  all  who  differ 
from   him,   and   not    pronouncing   the   Benediction   in   church,  until 
all  the  hearers  except  his  own  communicants  are  withdrawn ; 

9.  By   teaching   wives   and   servants    that   they   ought    absolutely 
to  follow  the   course   of  mortification,  fastings,  and  diets  of  prayers 
prescribed  by  him,  without  any  regard  to  the  interest  of  their  private 
families,  or  the  commands  of  their  respective  husbands  and  masters  ; 

10.  By  refusing  the  Office  of  the  Dead  to  such  as  did  not  communi- 
cate with  him,    or   leaving    out    such    parts    of  that    Service    as    he 
thought  proper; 

11.  By   searching   into   and   meddling   with   the  affairs   of   private 
families,  by  means  of  servants  and  spies  employed  by  him  for  that 
purpose,  whereby  the  peace  both  of  public  and  private  life  is  much 
endangered ; 

12.  By     calling     himself    'Ordinary,'     and     thereby     claiming     a 
jurisdiction  which  we  believe   is   not   due  to   him,    and   whereby  we 
should  be  precluded  from  access  to  redress  by  any  superior  jurisdiction. 

We  do  with  all  respect  and  deference  to  the  person  and  character 
of  the  Revd.  Mr.  John  Westley,  present  these  our  grievances  :  not 
from  any  resentment,  but  allarnarly  that  such  relief  may  be  afforded  in 
time  coming  as  shall  be  judged  necessary  for  the  interest  of  peace 
and  religion  in  this  Province. 

[This  odd  Presentment  was  at  first  both  opposed  and 
defended  with  much  warmth.  But  it  was  soon  agreed  to  lay 
it  aside  ;  perhaps  not  so  much  for  the  notorious  falsehood  of 
many  parts,  as  for  the  extreme  uncouthness  of  the  whole. 


Aug.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  387 

[They  examined  Mrs.  Williamson  in  the  afternoon,  and 
afterwards  Mr.  Causton,  and  Mrs.  Causton  on  Tuesday. 
Mrs.  Williamson  declared  she  had  no  objection  at  all  to  my 
behaviour  before  her  marriage ;  Mr.  Causton  that  he  should 
not  have  denied,  if  I  had  ever  asked  his  consent  to  marry  her, 
and  Mrs.  Causton  that  it  was  at  her  request  I  wrote  the  letter 
to  Mrs.  Williamson  of  July  5. 

[  Wed.  24.— The  Grand  Jury  inquired  into  the  ecclesiastical 
grievances.  This  likewise  occasioned  warm  debates,  but  the 
majority,  being  sure  men,  prevailed  at  length  and  carried  all 
the  points  ;  so  that  on  Thursday  Mr.  Causton  had  the  joy  of 
a  complete  victory.  It  was  now  therefore  time  for  God  to 
arise,  and  to  take  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness.  And  that 
His  hand  might  be  the  more  remarkably  visible  therein,  He 
chose  Mr.  Causton  himself  for  His  instrument ;  who  being 
informed  they  were  falling  on  other  matters  beyond  his 
instructions,  went  to  them,  and  behaved  in  such  a  manner 
that  in  one  quarter  of  an  hour  he  turned  two-and-forty  of  the 
forty-four  into  a  fixed  resolution  to  inquire  into  his  whole 
conduct.  They  entered  directly  upon  the  examination  of 
witnesses  on  that  head,  and  continued  so  to  do  all  Friday 
(Aug.  26).  On  Saturday  (27th),  Mr.  Causton,  finding  all  his 
arts  ineffectual,  and  that  they  were  resolved  to  go  through 

Tues.  23. — He  wrote  to  Mr.  Hird.  His  early  morning  devotions  were 
taken  singing.  The  Case  occupied  some  hours.  There  was  a  burial  in  the 
evening.  Afterwards  he  met  Mrs.  Burnside's  class,  and  read  the  Case. 

Wed.  24.— St.  Bartholomew's  day.  After  sermon  and  Communion, 
Mr.  Boltzius  came.  They  dined  at  Mrs.  Burnside's,  and  read  the  Case. 

Thur.  25.— A  number  of  friends— Mr.  How,  Mr.  West,  Mr.  Vander- 
plank,  and  others — are  named  in  connexion  with  the  Case.  Wesley  evidently 
regarded  it  as  a  matter  of  importance  that  his  personal  friends,  who  all  may 
have  been  counted  amongst  his  converts,  should  clearly  understand  the  main 
features  of  a  case  which  he  instinctively  seems  to  have  regarded  as  one  of 
the  critical  factors  in  his  life.  Hence  the  care  with  which  he  wrote  it,  and 
his  persistence  in  reading  what  he  had  written  to  those  who  shared  his 
confidence  and  the  responsibilities  of  his  work. 

Fri.  26.— To-day  Wesley  read  the  Case  to  Mrs.  Fallowfield  and  to 
Mrs.  Vat. 

Sat.  27.— At  nine,  walking,  he  made  verses,  and  at  9.30  worked. 
Resuming  his  walk,  after  an  hour's  work,  probably  in  the  garden,  he  again 
made  verses  ;  so  also  in  the  afternoon.  He  seems  to  have  sung  the  verses 
he  had  just  made. 


388  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Sept.  1737. 


with  their  work,  adjourned  the  Court  till  Thursday  (Sept.  i) 
following,  and  spared  no  pains  to  bring  them,  in  the  meantime, 
to  another  mind.  But  the  jurors  he  had  added  for  my  sake 
gave  such  spirit  to  the  rest,  that  all  his  labour  was  in  vain.1 

[Thus  far,  however,  he  prevailed,  that  on  Thursday,  Sept.  I, 
the  Grand  Jury  delivered  two  Presentations  into  Court  con- 
taining ten  indictments  against  me.  They  were  read  in  Court 
as  follows : 

SAVANNAH  Ss. 

[WHEREAS  several  disputes  have  happened  within  the  Town  and 
County  of  Savannah,  concerning  matters  of  religion  and  morality ; 
and  whereas  it  is  apprehended  that  many  ill  consequences  may  attend 
evil  proceedings,  in  affairs  of  this  solemn  nature, 

[Therefore  we,  the  Grand  Jury  of  the  said  Town  and  County, 
being  duly  sworn  on  the  twenty-second  of  this  month,  think  it  our 
duty,  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  to  prevent  the  bad  impressions  which 
may  be  made  upon  the  minds  of  well-disposed  persons  through  the 

Sun.  28. — It  is  characteristic  of  this  time  that,  with  the  exception  of 
Fleury,  Kempis,  and  the  Greek  Testament,  he  read  little,  but  sang  and 
prayed  much.  This  morning,  however,  before  morning  prayers,  he  read  a 
Homily. 

Mon.  29. — He  wrote  his  Journal,  visited  the  sick,  and  in  the  afternoon 
walked  to  the  lot,  where  he  worked. 

Tues.  30. — He  wrote  his  Journal,  and  read  a  letter  from  Count 
Zinzendorf. 

Wed.  31. — The  entry  for  this  day  is  brief,  and  the  final  entry  made  in 
this  Third  Georgia  Diary.  Its  transliteration  may  be  quoted  : 

4  Private  prayer,  sung. 

5  Prayers,  tea,  conversed  (35). 

6  Journal,  J.  prayer  with  Delamotte.     Journal, 
jo  \  Visited. 

ii  f  Germans,  Journal. 

1  Fleury. 

2  \  Mrs  B's,  within. 

3  Tea,  in  talk  f  Nunes,  Spanish. 

4  Dispute  40. 

1  The    scurrilous    attacks    made     on  missed,  Causton  '  was  obliged  to  make 

Wesley  at  this  time  were  not  forgotten.  an  assignment  of  his  beautiful  residence 

They  were  referred  to  in  The  European  at  Oakstead  (Hogstead  or  Oxtead?),  was 

Mag.     1789.      The     charges     preferred  summoned  to  England  to  appear  before 

against    Causton    by   the    same    Grand  the  Trustees,  who  obliged  him  to  return 

Jury  were  sent  to  England  on  Sept.   i,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  needful 

and  the  next  year  Causton  was  dismissed  vouchers,    and    on    the    return    voyage 

for  embezzlement.      Parker  had  become  found  a   watery  grave'  (see  other  par- 

his    chief   opponent.       On    being    dis-  ticulars  in  Gent.'s  Mag.  I739>  P-  22)« 


sept.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  389 

artful  misrepresentations  of  ill-designing  people.  And,  having  carefully 
examined  several  persons  and  papers,  do  upon  our  oaths  present  John 
Westley,  clerk,  of  the  said  Town  and  County,  for,  that  he  the  said 
John  Westley,  did  after  the  twelfth  day  of  March  last,  several  (times) 
privately  force  his  conversation  to  Sophia  Christiana  Williamson,  wife 
of  William  Williamson,  of  the  said  Town  and  County,  contrary  to 
the  express  desire  and  command  of  him,  the  said  William  Williamson, 
and  also  the  repeated  promises  of  him,  the  said  John  Westley ;  and  did 
likewise,  after  the  date  aforesaid,  write  and  privately  convey  papers  to 
the  aforesaid  Sophia  Christiana  Williamson  contrary  to  the  desire  and 
command  of  him,  the  said  William  Williamson,  which  proceedings  did 
occasion  much  uneasiness  between  the  said  William  Williamson  and 
Sophia  Christiana  Williamson  his  wife,  contrary  to  the  peace  of  our 
Sovereign  Lord  the  King,  his  crown  and  dignity. 

True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for" that  he  did,  on  or  about 
the  seventh  of  this  instant  August,  refuse  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  to  the  said  Sophia  Christiana  Williamson,  and  to  the  great 
disgrace  and  hurt  of  her  character ;  from  which  proceeding  we  con- 
ceive that  the  said  John  Westley  did  assume  an  authority  contrary  to 
the  laws  established,  and  to  the  peace  of  our  Lord  the  King,  his 
crown  and  dignity. 

True  Bill. 
August  23,  1737. 

SAVANNAH. 

[WHEREAS  the  Colony  of  Georgia  is  composed  of  a  mixed  number 
of  Christian  members  of  the  Church  of  England  and  Dissenters,  who  all 
or  most  part  would  willingly  attend  Divine  Ordinances  and  communi- 
cate with  a  faithful  pastor  of  the  Established  Church  :  And  whereas 
great  uneasiness  hath  been  occasioned  among  many  well-disposed 
persons,  being  members  of  the  Church  of  England  and  Dissenters  in 
the  Town  and  County  of  Savannah  in  the  Colony  aforesaid,  by  reason 
of  sundry  wrong  proceedings  in  the  form  of  Divine  Service  and 
administration  of  Sacraments  in  the  said  Town  of  Savannah  : 

[We,  the  Grand  Jury  of  the  Town  and  County,  being  duly  sworn 
on  the  twenty-second  of  this  month,  think  it  our  duty,  as  much  as  in 
us  lies,  to  prevent  the  bad  impression  which  may  be  made  on  the 
minds  of  well-disposed  persons,  through  the  artful  misrepresentation  of 
ill-designing  men.  And,  having  carefully  examined  several  persons,  do 
upon  our  oaths  present  John  Westley,  of  the  said  Town  and  County, 
clerk,  for  that  he,  the  said  John  Westley,  hath  not  since  his  arrival  at 
this  town,  emitted  any  Public  Declaration  of  his  adherence  to  the 


390  John   Wesley  s  Journal  tseptm?. 

Principles  and  Regulations  of  the  Church  of  England,  contrary  to  the 
laws  established,  and  to  the  peace  of  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  King,  his 
crown  and  dignity. 

True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  he  hath,  for  many 
months  past  since  his  said  arrival,  divided  on  the  Lord's  Day  the 
Order  of  Morning  Prayer,  appointed  to  be  used  in  the  Church  of 
England :  He,  the  said  John  Westley,  only  reading  the  said  Morning 
Prayer  and  the  Litany,  at  five  or  six  of  the  clock,  and  wholly  omitting 
the  same  between  the  hours  of  nine  and  eleven  of  the  clock,  the  cus- 
tomary time  of  Public  Morning  Prayer,  contrary  to  the  peace  of  our,  &c. 

True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  he  did,  on  or  about 
the  month  of  April  1736,  refuse  to  baptize  otherwise  than  by  dipping 
the  child  of  Henry  Parker,  of  the  said  Town  and  County,  unless  the 
said  Henry  Parker  or  his  wife  would  certify  that  the  said  child  was 
weak  and  not  able  to  bear  dipping ;  he,  the  said  John  Westley, 
adding  to  his  refusal,  that  unless  the  said  parents  would  consent  to 
have  their  said  child  dipped,  it  might  die  a  heathen ;  contrary  to  the 
peace  of  our,  &c. 

A  True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  notwithstanding  his 
having  administered  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  William 
Gough,  of  the  said  Town  and  County,  sometime  in  or  about  the  month 
of  March  1736,  he,  the  said  John  Westley,  did  within  one  month  after 
the  said  date  refuse  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  him,  the 
said  William  Gough,  saying  he  heard  the  said  William  Gough  was  a 
Dissenter,  contrary  to,  &c. 

A  True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  he  did,  in  the  latter 
end  of  June  1736,  refuse  reading  the  Office  of  Burial  of  the  Dead  over 
the  body  of  Nathanael  Polhill,  only  because  the  said  Nathanael  Polhill 
was  not  of  the  said  John  Westley 's  opinion  :  by  means  of  which  refusal, 
the  said  Nathanael  Polhill  was  interred  without  the  appointed  Office  for 
the  Burial  of  the  Dead,  contrary  to  the  peace,  &c. 

A  True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  on  or  about  the 
tenth  day  of  this  month,  he  in  presence  of  Thomas  Causton  did 
presumptuously  call  himself  Ordinary J  of  this  place,  assuming  thereby 


1  The  title  '  Ordinary  '  may  have  been  Wesley's  accusers  suppose  that  the  title 
used  by  Wesley  in  the  Moravian  sense.  was  synonymous  with  '  bishop '  ?  What, 
Zinzendorf  was  an  'Ordinary.'  Did  then,  of  the  '  Ordinary '  of  Newgate  ? 


sept.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  391 

an  authority  which   we  apprehend  did  of  no   right   belong  to   him, 
contrary  to  the  peace,  &c. 

A  True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  he  did  on  or  about 
the  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  week  last  refuse  William  Aglionby  to  stand 
Godfather  to  the  child  of  Henry  Manley,  giving  no  other  reason  than 
that  the  said  William  Aglionby1  had  not  been  at  the  Communion 
Table  with  him  the  said  John  Westley,  contrary  to  the  peace,  &c. 

A  True  Bill. 

[Do  also  present  the  said  John  Westley,  for  that  he  did,  in  or  about 
the  month  of  July  last,  baptize  the  child  of  Thomas  Jones,  having  only 
one  Godfather  and  one  Godmother;  contrary  to  the  peace  of  our 
Sovereign  Lord  the  King,  his  crown  and  dignity. 

A  True  Bill.] 
August  31,  1737. 

SEPT.  2,  Fri. — [The  Court  sat  again.  I  then  spoke  to  this 
effect :  '  As  to  nine  of  the  ten  indictments  against  me,  I  know 
this  Court  can  take  no  cognizance  of  them,  they  being  matters  of 
an  ecclesiastical  nature,  and  this  not  being  an  Ecclesiastical 
Court.  But  the  tenth,  concerning  my  speaking  and  writing  to 
Mrs.  Williamson,  is  of  a  secular  nature ;  and  this  therefore  I 
desire  may  be  tried  here,  where  the  facts  complained  of  were 
committed.'  Little  answer  was  made,  and  that  purely  evasive  ; 
in  which  for  the  present  I  acquiesced. 

[In  the  afternoon  I  moved  the  Court  again  for  an  immediate 
trial  at  Savannah ;  that  those  who  were  or  might  be  offended 
might  clearly  see  (so  I  concluded  what  little  I  said)  *  whether 
I  had  done  any  wrong  to  any  one,  or  whether  I  had  deserved 
the  thanks  of  Mrs.  Williamson  and  Mr.  Causton  and  all  his 
family.' 

[In  Mr.  Causton's  answer,  which  was  full  of  civility  and 
respect,  was  one  very  unguarded  expression.  *  Perhaps  things 
would  not  have  been  carried  so  far  had  you  not  said  that 
afternoon,  "  You  believed  if  Mr.  Causton  appeared,  the  people 
would  tear  him  to  pieces ;  not  so  much  out  of  love  to  you 
as  out  of  hatred  to  him  for  his  abominable  practices."  ' 

1  Aglionby  was  an  infidel — *  in  all  over  him.  He  would  not  allow  White- 
respects  a  disreputable  fellow.'  White-  field  to  pray  with  him  on.  his  death- 
field  refused  to  read  the  Burial  Service  bed. 


392  John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[Sat.  3. — I  was  seized  with  a  violent  flux,  which  so  weakened 
me  before  evening  that  I  had  much  ado  to  get  to  church.  But 
when  I  was  there,  God  renewed  my  strength,  so  that  I  did 
not  shorten  the  service.  The  next  day  I  was  mu  h  better, 
and  in  two  days  more  it  pleased  God  to  restore  me  to  perfect 
health. 

[Wed.  7. — Mr.  Dison,  chaplain  to  the  company  of  soldiers  at 
Frederica,  called  at  a  house  where  I  was,  and  said  that  he 
had  now  authority  from  the  magistrates  to  perform  ecclesiastical 
offices  at  Savannah,  and  should  begin  so  to  do  the  next  day,  by 
reading  prayers,  preaching,  and  administering  the  Sacrament. 
On  Thursday  the  8th,  at  nine,  the  first  bell  was  accordingly 
rung  ;  upon  which  I  wrote  and  sent  by  Mr.  Delamotte  the 
following  note: 

To  the  Magistrates  of  the  Town  of  Savannah. 

[GENTLEMEN,  Aug.  [Sept.}  8,  1737. 

If  you  are  not  apprised  that  Mr.  Dison  intends  this  day  publicly 
to  perform  several  ecclesiastical  offices  in  Savannah,  and,  as  he  says,  by 
your  authority,  I  do  now  apprise  you  thereof,  and  am,  Gentlemen,  your 
humble  servant,  J.  W. 

[Mr.  Delamotte  delivered  it  to  Mr.  Recorder.  However,  at 
ten  the  bell  rung  again,  and  Mr.  Dison  entered  upon  his  office, 
by  reading  prayers  and  preaching  in  the  church  to  Mrs.  Causton 
(Mr.  Causton  being  walked  out  of  town),  Mr.  Williamson, 
Mrs.  Williamson,  and  eight  or  ten  more.  He  told  the  congregation 
he  should  do  so  every  Thursday  ;  that  he  had  intended  likewise  to 
administer  the  Lord's  Supper,  but  some  of  his  communicants 
were  indisposed  ;  and  that  he  would  administer  Baptism  also  to 
as  many  as  he  was  desired. 

[Fri.  9. — Mr.  Delamotte  believed  it  would  be  proper  for  me 
to  go  myself  to  England,  chiefly  to  prevent  or  remove  the  mis- 
representations which  Mr.  Williamson  and  his  wife  (who  were 
to  go  in  the  next  ship)  might  spread  abroad.  I  begged  advice  of 
Him  who  had  hitherto  directed  me,  and  received  the  two  fol- 
lowing answers  (the  one  I  interpreted  as  a  personal  caution, 
the  other  as  foretelling  the  event  of  things),  '  He  went  out  and 
found  one  of  his  fellow  servants  which  owed  him  an  hundred 
pence.  And  he  caught  him  by  the  throat,  saying,  Pay  me  that 


sept.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  393 

thou  owest' — *  Cast  out  the  scorner,  and  contentions  go  out,  yea 
strife  and  reproach  shall  cease.' 

[Sat.  10. — Having  consulted  my  friends,  I  laid  aside  the 
thoughts^  of  going  to  England,  thinking  it  more  suitable  to 
my  calling  still  to  commit  my  cause  to  God,  and  not  to  be 
in  haste  to  justify  myself;  only  to  be  always  ready  to  give 
to  any  that  should  ask  me  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  me. 

[Sun.  1 1. — After  explaining  to  the  congregation  those  words 
of  our  blessed  Master,  '  It  must  needs  be  that  offences  will 
come,'  I  read  to  them  a  paper  which  I  had  read  before,  on 
March  10,  1736,  being  the  day  I  entered  upon  my  ministry 
at  Savannah.  I  had  then  apprised  them  of  the  offences  that 
must  needs  come,  and  forewarned  them  of  the  occasions,  as : 
(i)  that  I  must  admonish  every  one  of  them,  not  only  in  public, 
but  from  house  to  house  ;  (2)  that  I  could  admit  none  to  the 
Holy  Communion  without  previous  notice  ;  (3)  that  I  should 
divide  the  morning  service  on  Sundays,  in  compliance  with  the 
first  design  of  the  Church  ;  (4)  that  I  must  obey  the  Rubric  by 
dipping  all  children  who  were  able  to  endure  it ;  (5)  that  I  could 
admit  none  who  were  not  communicants  to  be  sureties  in 
Baptism  ;  (6)  that  in  general,  though  I  had  all  the  ecclesiastical 
authority  which  was  entrusted  to  any  within  this  Province, 
yet  I  was  only  a  servant  of  the  Church  of  England,  not  a 
judge,  and  therefore  obliged  to  keep  to  her  regulations  in  all 
things. 

[I  made  a  short  application  to  remind  them  that  all  the 
offences  lately  taken  had  sprung,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  one 
or  other  of  these  occasions.  Excepting  only  one,  '  The  not 
declaring  my  adherence  to  the  principles  and  practices  of  the 
Church  of  England '  ;  which  being  a  charge  1  had  not  the  least 
suspicion  of,  I  could  not  guard  against. 

[Mon.  12. — I  was  desired  to  read  over  the  following  paper, 
designed  to  be  sent  to  England  immediately  :] 

To  the  Honourable  the  Trustees  for  Georgia. 

WHEREAS  two  presentments  have  been  made,  the  one  of  August  23, 
the  other  of  August  31,  by  the  Grand  Jury  for  the  town  and  county  of 
Savannah,  in  Georgia,  against  John  Wesley,  clerk. 

We,  whose  names  are  underwritten,  being  members  of  the  Grand 
Jury,  do  humbly  beg  leave  to  signify  our  dislike  of  the  said  present  - 

VOL.  I.  22 


394  John   Weskys  Journal 

ments  ;  being  by  many  and  divers  circumstances,  thoroughly  persuaded 
in  ourselves  that  the  whole  charge  against  Mr.  Wesley  is  an  artifice  of 
Mr.  Causton's,  designed  rather  to  blacken  the  character  of  Mr.  Wesley 
than  to  free  the  colony  from  religious  tyranny,  as  he  was  pleased,  in  his 
Charge  to  us,  to  term  it.  But  as  these  circumstances  will  be  too  tedious 
to  trouble  your  Honours  with,  we  shall  only  beg  leave  to  give  the 
reasons  of  our  dissent  from  the  particular  bills. 

With  regard  to  the  First  bill,  we  do  not  apprehend  that  Mr.  Wesley 
acted  against  any  law,  by  writing  or  speaking  to  Mrs.  Williamson, 
since  it  does  not  appear  to  us  that  the  said  Mr.  Wesley  has  either 
spoken  in  private,  or  wrote  to  the  said  Mrs.  Williamson,  since  March  12 
(the  day  of  her  marriage),  except  one  letter  of  July  the  5th,  which 
he  wrote  at  the  request  of  her  uncle,  as  a  pastor,  to  exhort  and 
reprove  her. 

The  Second  we  do  not  apprehend  to  be  a  true  bill ;  because 
we  humbly  conceive  Mr.  Wesley  did  not  assume  to  himself  any 
authority  contrary  to  law.  For  we  understand,  '  Every  person 
intending  to  communicate  should  signify  his  name  to  the  Curate, 
at  least  some  time  the  day  before';  which  Mrs.  Williamson  did  not 
do;  although  Mr.  Wesley  had  often,  in  full  congregation,  declared 
he  did  insist  on  a  compliance  with  that  Rubric,  and  had  before 
repelled  divers  persons  for  non-compliance  therewith. 

The  Third  we  do  not  think  a  true  bill ;  because  several  of  us 
have  been  his  hearers,  when  he  has  declared  his  adherence  to  the 
Church  of  England,  in  a  stronger  manner  than  by  a  formal  declaration ; 
by  explaining  and  defending  the  Apostles',  the  Nicene,  and  the 
Athanasian  Creeds,  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  the  whole  Book  of 
Common  Prayer,  and  the  Homilies  of  the  said  Church ;  and  because 
we  think  a  formal  declaration  is  not  required  but  from  those  who 
have  received  institution  and  induction. 

The  fact  ^alleged  in  the  Fourth  bill  we  cannot  apprehend  to  be 
contrary  to  any  law  in  being. 

The  Fifth  we  do  not  think  a  true  bill ;  because  we  conceive 
Mr.  Wesley  is  justified  by  the  Rubric,  viz.  c  If  they '  (the  parents) 
*  certify  that  the  child  is  weak,  it  shall  suffice  to  pour  water  upon 
it.'  Intimating  (as  we  humbly  suppose)  it  shall  not  suffice  if  they  do 
not  certify. 

The  Sixth  cannot  be  a  true  bill ;  because  the  said  William  Gough, 
being  one  of  our  members,  was  surprised  to  hear  himself  named, 
without  his  knowledge  or  privity;  and  did  publicly  declare  it  was 
no  grievance  to  him,  because  the  said  John  Wesley  had  given  him 
reasons  with  which  he  was  satisfied. 

The  Seventh  we  do  not  apprehend  to  be  a  true  bill ;  for  Nathanael 
Polhill  was  an  Anabaptist,  and  desired  in  his  life-time  that  he  might 


sept.  1737.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  395 

not  be  interred  with  the  Office  of  the  Church  of  England.  And  further, 
we  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  Mr.  Wesley  was  at  Frederica, 
or  on  his  return  thence,  when  Polhill  was  buried. 

As  to  the  Eighth  bill  we  are  in  doubt,  as  not  well  knowing  the 
meaning  of  the  word  *  Ordinary.'  But  for  the  Ninth  and  Tenth, 
we  think  Mr.  Wesley  is  sufficiently  justified  by  the  Canons  of  the 
Church,  which  forbid  'any  person  to  be  admitted  godfather  or 
godmother  to  any  child,  before  the  said  person  has  received  the 
Holy  Communion ' ;  whereas  William  Aglionby  and  Jacob  Matthews 
had  never  certified  Mr.  Wesley  that  they  had  received  it. 

This  paper,  showing  the  sense  of  the  minority  of  the  Grand 
Jurors  concerning  the  Presentments,  was  transmitted  to  the 
Trustees.  It  was  signed  by  twelve  of  the  Grand  Jurors,  of  whom 
three  were  Constables,  and  six  more  Tithingmen  ;  who,  con- 
sequently, would  have  made  a  majority,  had  the  Jury  consisted, 
as  it  regularly  should  have  done,  of  only  fifteen  members,  viz. 
the  four  Constables  and  eleven  Tithingmen. 

\Thur.  15. — Mr.  Bradley  desired  me  to  step  with  him  to 
Mr.  Causton's  to  be  a  witness  to  the  conclusion  of  a  conference 
at  the  beginning  of  which  I  was  present,  by  Mr.  Causton's 
desire,  on  July  18.  I  was  very  averse  to  such  a  work,  but 
believed  I  could  not  honestly  decline  it,  though  I  knew  an 
artful  man  would  some  way  turn  it  to  my  disadvantage.  And 
so  (I  was  some  weeks  after  informed)  he  has  done,  by  sending 
two  or  three  affidavits  to  the  Trustees  ;  in  which,  I  suppose 
(for  a  copy  of  them  he  refused),  he  has  turned  the  tables 
and  accused  me  of  the  incivility  which  I  then  received 
from  him.] 

Fri.  30. — Having  ended  the  Homilies,  I  began  reading 
Dr.  Rogers's  eight  sermons  *  to  the  congregation ;  hoping  they 
might  be  a  timely  antidote  against  the  poison  of  infidelity  which 
was  now  with  great  industry  propagated  among  us;  [it  being 
about  this  time  that  Mr.  Causton  read  a  clause  of  the 
Trustees'  Charter  to  the  two  fathers  of  the  unfaithful,  to 
show  them  that  if  they  would  hold  a  meeting  under  the 
name  of  Quakers,  I  could  not  hinder  them. 


1  Rogers    published  four    volumes  of      held  the  living  of  St.  Giles's,  Cripplegate, 
sermons,  as  well  as  an  able  tractate  on       until  his  death  in  1729. 
The   Visible  and  Invisible  Church.     He 


396  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Oct.  1737 

[OCT.  6,  Thur. — Two  of  the  communicants  on  whose  account 
much  suspicion,  animosity,  and  dissension  had  arisen  among 
the  rest,  gave  glory  to  God  by  clearly  and  openly  declaring 
what  had  passed  between  them,  and  referring  the  whole  to 
their  pastor  and  a  select  number  of  their  brethren,  whereby 
peace  and  unity  were  restored  and  established.] 

Fri.  7. — I  consulted  my  friends  whether  God  did  not  call 
me  to  return  to  England.  The  reason  for  which  I  left  it 
had  now  no  force,  there  being  no  possibility,  as  yet,  of 
instructing  the  Indians ;  neither  had  I,  as  yet,  found  or  heard 
of  any  Indians  on  the  continent  of  America  who  had  the 
least  desire  of  being  instructed.  And  as  to  Savannah,  having 
never  engaged  myself,  either  by  word  or  letter,  to  stay  there 
a  day  longer  than  I  should  judge  convenient,  nor  ever  taken 
charge  of  the  people  any  otherwise  than  as  in  my  passage 
to  the  heathen,  I  looked  upon  myself  to  be  fully  discharged 
therefrom  by  the  vacating  of  that  design.  Besides,  there  was 
a  probability  of  doing  more  service  to  that  unhappy  people 
in  England  than  I  could  do  in  Georgia,  by  representing, 
without  fear  or  favour  to  the  Trustees,  the  real  state  the  colony 
was  in.  After  deeply  considering  these  things,  they  were 
unanimous  that  I  ought  to  go ;  but  not  yet.  So  I  laid 
the  thoughts  of  it  aside  for  the  present,  being  persuaded 
that  when  the  time  was  come,  God  would  'make  the  way 
plain  before  my  face.' 

[Tues.  ii. — I  went  to  Ebenezer  to  inquire  of  Mr.  Boltzius 
and  Gronau  whether  I  could  do  them  any  service,  if  God 
should  prosper  me  in  my  journey.  If  '  the  hand  of  the  diligent 
maketh  rich/  this  poor  people  cannot  be  long  in  the  present 
distress.  On  Wednesday  evening  I  came  back  to  Savannah. 

\Thur.  13. — I  inadvertently  mentioned  Mr.  Causton's  desiring 
me  to  write  the  Trustees  an  account  of  the  Scotch  at  Savannah. 
A  Scotch  gentleman  who  was  present  acquainted  his  country- 
men with  it,  who  seemed  at  first  to  resent  it  highly.  But 
Mr.  Causton  flatly  denying  it,  they  appeared  pretty  well 
satisfied.] 

Sat.  15. — Being  at  Highgate,  a  village  five  miles  from 
Savannah,  consisting  of  (all  but  one)  French  families,  who,  I 
found,  knew  but  little  of  the  English  tongue,  I  offered  to  read 


oct.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  397 

prayers  there  in  French  every  Saturday  in  the  afternoon.  They 
embraced  the  offer  gladly.1 

\Thur.  20. — A  Court  was  held  in  order  to  pass  sentence 
on  Captain  Watson,  who  had  been  two  years  and  eleven  months 
confined  as  a  lunatic.  But  oppression  had  not  yet  made 
him  mad.  He  offered  to  prove  by  witnesses  then  in  court 
that  the  verdict  on  which  this  sentence  was  to  be  grounded 
had  never  been  given,  and  was  entirely  different  from  that  verdict 
which  the  Jury  on  November  20,  1734,  had  delivered  to  the 
Court  in  writing.  But  his  witnesses  were  not  suffered  to 
speak,  and  he  was  remanded  to  his  confinement. 

Sat.  22. — I  read  prayers  in  German  likewise,  to  the  German 
villagers  of  Hampstead 2  ;  and  so  continued  to  do  once  a  week. 
We  began  the  service  both  at  Highgate  and  Hampstead 
with  singing  a  psalm.  Then  I  read  and  explained  a  chapter 
in  the  French  or  German  Testament,  and  concluded  with 
prayers  and  another  psalm. 

[Sun.  23. — Having  ended  Fleury's  Manners  of  the  Ancient 
Christians,  we  began  to  instruct  the  children,  in  public  as 
well  as  private,  in  a  short  paraphrase  of  our  Lord's  Sermon 
on  the  Mount] 

Sat.  29. — Some  of  the  French  of  Savannah  were  present 
at  the  prayers  at  Highgate.  The  next  day  I  received  a  message 
from  them  all,  '  That  as  I  read  prayers  to  the  French  at 
Highgate,  who  were  but  few,  they  hoped  I  would  do  the 
same  to  those  of  Savannah,  where  was  a  large  number  who 
did  not  understand  English.' 

Sun.  30. — I  began  so  to  do  ;  and  now  I  had  full  employ- 
ment for  that  holy-day.  The  first  English  prayers  lasted 
from  five  till  half  an  hour  past  six.  The  Italian,  which  I 
read  to  a  few  Vaudois,  began  at  nine.3  The  second  service 


1  Wesley's  closing  ministry  in  Georgia  and  fifty  for  Spangenberg.     Whitefield's 
was     remarkably     polyglot.        English,  Journal  mentions  these  villages. 
Germans,    French,    Spaniards,    Italians  s  Wesley  could  not  speak  Italian  very 
heard  in  their  own  tongue,  wherein  they  well.     The  Vaudois  had  been  invited  to 
were  born,  the  wonderful  works  of  God.  the  colony  to  assist  in  the  tending  and 

2  Highgate  and   Hampstead  together  management  of  silkworms.     In  a  poem 
numbered  fourteen  families.     Oglethorpe  Samuel  Wesley  mentions  *  silks  for  the 
promised  the  Brethren,  and  secured,  a  ladies'    as    one    of  the   benefits  to  be 
grant  of  five  hundred  acres  for  Zinzendorf  gained  by  the  founding  of  the  colony,  in 


398  John  Wesley's  Journal  [Nov.  1737. 

for  the  English,  including  the  sermon  and  the  Holy  Communion, 
continued  from  half  an  hour  past  ten  till  about  half  an  hour  past 
twelve.  The  French  service  began  at  one.  At  two  I  catechized 
the  children.  About  three  began  the  English  service.  After 
this  was  ended,  I  had  the  happiness  of  joining  with  as  many 
as  my  largest  room  would  hold,  in  reading,  prayer,  and  singing 
praise.  And  about  six  the  service  of  the  Moravians,  so  called, 
began  ;  at  which  I  was  glad  to  be  present,  not  as  a  teacher, 
but  a  learner. 

\_Mon.  31. — The  Grand  Jury  sitting  in  the  court-house, 
we  had  the  evening  prayers  in  the  school,  which  held  upwards 
of  thirty  persons  conveniently.  The  rest  stood  without,  but 
I  hope  not  so  far  off  as  to  fail  of  that  blessing  which  God 
giveth  to  all  that  diligently  seek  Him.1 

[Nov.  I,  Tues. — Colonel  Stephens  arrived,  by  whom  I 
received  a  benefaction  of  .£10  sterling ;  after  having  been 
for  several  months  without  one  shilling  in  the  house,  but  not 
without  peace,  health,  and  contentment]  2 

Thur.  3. — I  appeared  again  at  the  Court  holden  on  that 
day.  [Being  informed  it  was  Mr.  Hugh  Anderson 3  who 
had  asserted  'that  I  went  from  house  to  house  to  stir  up  the 
people  to  mutiny,  and  that  I  had  publicly  affirmed  myself  to 
be  the  Bishop  and  Ordinary  of  this  place,'  I  took  an  opportunity 
this  day  to  desire  the  Court  he  might  either  prove  or  retract 
these  assertions.  But  Mr.  Causton  said,  '  It  is  not  a  proper 
time.'  So  I  acquiesced,  and  let  the  matter  sleep.4 

\FrL  4. — Mr.  Burnside  having  let  his  house  in  town,  as 
resolving  to  remove  immediately  into  the  country  so  soon  as 
he  had  a  small  hut  built,  I  invited  him  and  his  family  to  stay 
at  my  house  in  the  meantime.  The  next  day  Mr.  Watson  was 
set  at  liberty,  after  a  confinement  of  two  years,  eleven  months, 
and  nineteen  days.  And  on  Sunday  the  6th,  being  fully  satisfied 

which  he  took  deep  interest.     The  Com-  sympathetic   letter:    'The    V.-Prov.    of 

mon  Seal  of  the  Corporation  had  on  one  Eton  has  given  you  ^10  for  your  private 

side  silkworms  at  work,  with  the  motto  use  and  doing  works  of  charity '  (Moore, 

'  Non  sibi,  sed  aliis.'  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  324).     See  p.  326. 

1  During  November  Wesley  continued  3  Author  with  Tailfer  of  the  History. 
to    preach  (Stephens's  Journal   of  the  *  Wesley  was  cheered  by  letters.     One 
Proceedings  in  Georgia).  from  Dr.  Cutler,  of  Boston,  is  now  in  the 

2  Dr.  Burton  wrote  for  the  Trustees  a  Colman  Collection  (App.  XXIV.  vol.  vi.). 


NOV.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  399 

of  his  integrity  as  well  as  understanding  (though  he  neither  dis- 
guised the  faults  he  had  before  been  guilty  of),  I  admitted  him 
to  the  Holy  Communion.] 

Tues.  22.— [Mr.  Causton  *  desired  to  have  a  conference  with 
me  wherein,  he  said,  he  doubted  not  but  he  should  clear  up  all 
the  misunderstandings  which  had  been  between  us.  Accordingly 
at  three  in  the  afternoon  I  went  to  him.  He  spoke  many  fair 
woros,  but  I  now  knew  their  sterling  value.]  He  likewise  read 
me  the  affidavits  made  September  15,  in  one  of  which  it  was  ex- 
pressly asserted  that  I  had  assaulted  2  Mr.  Causton  in  his  own 
house,  calling  him  liar,  villain,  and  so  forth.  [But  he  assured  me 
*  none  of  these  affidavits  was  gone  to  the  Trustees ' ;  and  it 
was  true,  for  he  had  sent  only  the  copies.]  It  was  at  this 
conversation,  Mr.  Anderson  told  me  I  had  been  reprimanded 
in  the  last  Court,  for  an  enemy  to  and  hinderer  of  the  public 
peace.  [We  all  parted,  in  appearance,  friends.] 

I  again  consulted  my  friends,  who  agreed  with  me  that 
the  time  we  looked  for  was  now  come.  The  next  morning  I 
went  to  Mr.  Causton  again  and  told  him  [I  did  not  think  it 
proper  for  a  hinderer  of  the  public  peace  to  stay  in  the  place 
where  [he  was  so,  and  that]  I  designed  to  set  out  for  England 
immediately.  I  posted  up  an  advertisement  in  the  Great 
Square  3  to  the  same  effect,  and  then  quietly  prepared  myself 
for  the  journey. 

[Wed.  30. — I  went  to  Mr.  Causton4  once  more  to  desire 
money  for  the  expenses  of  it  (the  journey  to  England).  The 
same  evening  two  children  were  baptized,  as  were  three  more  the 

1  Before  Oglethorpe  sailed  for  England  to  Georgia,  and  in  Savannah,  as  Keeper 

he  said,  *  Causton,  whatever  you  do,  take  of  the  Trustees'  Stores  ;  and  that,  as  chief 

heec,  if  you  regard  my  favour,  that  you  magistrate,  he  was  guilty  of  gross  mal- 

do  n>t  quarrel  with  Mr.  Wesley  '  (Moore's  administration  and  tyranny.  He  was 

Wes'ey,  p.  1 19).  dismissed  from  both  offices  by  Oglethorpe 

8  In  Wesley's  MS.  the  word  is  as-  on  his  return  to  Georgia  in  Oct.  1738. 

saulied',  in  the  first  edition  abtised.  And  yet  Wesley  himself  never  pleaded 

3  Now  re-named  Percival  Square.  Causton's  bad  character,  or  Williamson's, 

4  Jackson  and  Tyerman,  in  commenting  as  a  justification  of  his  own  severe  pastoral 
on  the  prosecution  of  Wesley,  quote  from  discipline.     When  Church,  vicar  of  Bat- 
a  panphlet,  published  at   Charlestown  tersea,  in  1745,  and  Bishop  Warburton, 
in  17+1,  written  'by  P.  Tailfer,  M.D.,  in  1746,  reproached  him  with  the  finding 
H.  Aiderson,  M.A.,  and   others,  land-  of  the  Grand  Jury,  he  defended  himself 
owners  of  Georgia,'  to  show  that  Causton  without  referring  to  the  allegations  against 
was  giilty  of  dishonesty  before  he  came  Causton,  or  to  his  penal  dismissal  from 


400  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Dec.  1737. 

day  following  (the  youngest  two  years  and  a  half,  the  eldest  six 
years  old)  whose  parents  had  been  Anabaptists.] 

DEC.  2,  Fri. — I  proposed  to  set  out  for  Port  Royal,  Carolina, 
about  noon,  the  tide  then  serving.  But  about  ten  the  magis- 
trates sent  for  me,  and  told  me  I  must  not  go  out  of  the 
province  ;  for  I  had  not  answered  the  allegations  laid  against 
me.  I  replied,  '  I  have  appeared  at  six  or  seven  Courts  suc- 
cessively in  order  to  answer  them.  But  I  was  not  suffered  so 
to  do,  when  I  desired  it  time  after  time.'  Then  they  said, 
however,  I  must  not  go,  unless  I  would  give  security  to  answer 
those  allegations  at  their  Court.  I  asked,  '  What  secu.Tity  ? ' 
After  consulting  together  about  two  hours,  the  Recorder  showed 
me  a  kind  of  bond,  engaging  me,  under  a  penalty  cf  fifty 
pounds,  to  appear  at  their  Court  when  I  should  be  required. 
He  added,  *  But  Mr.  Williamson,  too,  has  desired  of  us,  thit  you 
should  give  bail  to  answer  his  action.'  I  then  told  him  plainly, 
1  Sir,  you  use  me  very  ill,  and  so  you  do  the  Trustees.  I  will 
give  neither  any  bond  nor  any  bail  at  all.  You  know  your 
business,  and  I  know  mine.' 

In  the  afternoon  the  magistrates  published  ar  order, 
requiring  all  the  officers  and  sentinels  to  prevent  my  going 
out  of  the  province,  and  forbidding  any  person  to  assist  me 
so  to  do.  Being  now  only  a  prisoner  at  large,  in  a  place  where 
I  knew  by  experience  every  day  would  give  fresh  opportunity 
to  procure  evidence  of  words  1  never  said,  and  actions  I  never 
did,  I  saw  clearly  the  hour  was  come  for  [me  to  fly  for  my  life,] 
leaving  this  place  ;  and  as  soon  as  evening  prayers  were  over, 
about  eight  o'clock,  the  tide  then  serving,  I  shook  off  the  dust 
of  my  feet,  and  left  Georgia,  after  having  preached  the  gospel 
there  [with  much  weakness  indeed  and  many  infirmities,]  not 
as  I  ought,  but  as  I  was  able,  one  year  and  nearly  nine  months.1 
['  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things 
which  make  for  thy  peace ! '] 

office.     (See  Wesley's  Works,  vols.  viii.  Table  because   he    was  not  episcopally 

and  ix.)    Wesley  himself  acknowledged  baptized.) 

that  his  ministerial  discipline  at  Savannah  *  Yet  Whitefield  says  in  his  Journal 

was   mistaken    and    unwise.      (See   his  (June  2,   1738) :   '  The  good   Mr.  John 

admission,  Journal,  Sept..  1749,  on  the  Wesley    has    done    in    America,    tnder 

case  of  Boltzius,  the  Saltzburgh  minister  God,  is  inexpressible.     His  name  is  very 

whom  he  refused  to  admit  to  the  Lord's  precious  among  the  people,  and  he  has 


Dec.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  40 1 

During  this  time  I  had  frequent  opportunities  of  making 
many  observations  and  inquiries  concerning  the  real  state  of 
this  province  which  has  been  so  variously  represented,  the 
English  settlements  therein,  and  the  Indians  that  have  inter- 
course with  them.  These  I  minuted  down  from  time  to  time  ; 
a  small  extract  of  which  I  have  subjoined. 

1.  Georgia1  lies  in  the  3oth  and  3ist  degree  of  north  latitude.    The 
air  is  generally  clear,  the  rains  being  much  shorter,  as  well  as  heavier, 
than  in  England.     The  dews  are  very  great.     Thunder  and  lightning 
are  expected  almost  every  day  in  May,  June,  July,  and  August.     They 
are  very  terrible,  especially  to  a  stranger.     During  those  months,  from 
ten  in  the  morning   to   four   in  the  afternoon,  the   sun  is  extremely 
scorching.     But  the  sea-breeze  generally  blows  from  ten  till  three  or 
four.     The  winter  is  nearly  of  the  same  length  as  in  England.     But 
the  midday  sun  is  always  warm,  even  when  the  mornings  and  evenings 
are  very  sharp,  and  the  nights  piercing  cold. 

2.  The  land  is  of  four  sorts — pine-barren,  oak-land,  swamp,3  and 
marsh.      The  pine-land  is  of  far  the  greatest  extent,  especially  near 
the  sea-coasts.     The  soil  of  this  is  a  dry,  whitish  sand,  producing  shrubs 
of  several  sorts,  and  between  them  a  spiry,  coarse  grass,  which  cattle 
do  not  love  to  feed  on.     But  here  and  there  is  a  little  of  a  better  kind, 
especially  in  the  savannahs, — so  they  call  the  low,  watery  meadows, 
which  are  usually  intermixed  with  pine-lands.     It  bears  naturally  two 
sorts  of  fruit, — whortleberries,  much  like  those  in  England ;  and  Chin- 
kapin-nuts, a  dry,   harsh   nut,   about   the   size  of  a   small  acorn.     A 
laborious  man  may,  in  one  year,  clear  and  plant  four  or  five  acres  of 
this  land.     It  will  produce,  the  first  year,  from  two  to  four  bushels  of 
Indian  corn,  and  from  four  to  eight  of  Indian  pease,  per  acre.     The 
second  year  it   usually   bears   half   as   much ;    the   third,   less ;    the 
fourth,  nothing.3 

laid    such    a    foundation    that    I    hope  able  to   its   projectors '  (see  Thomson's 

neither  men  nor  devils  will  ever  be  able  Liberty,    Part    V,   lines  638-46).      The 

to  shake.'  Royal    Charter   was    granted    in    1732. 

1  Georgia  was  the  only  strip  on  the  The    colony    contained    59,475    square 

eastern    coast  of  America    not    already  miles. 

parcelled  out ;  it  was  a  wilderness  over  2  The  Americans  suffered  in  these 
which  England  held  only  a  nominal  swamps  and  sandy  deserts,  called  Pine- 
jurisdiction.  The  objects  aimed  at  by  barrens,  in  the  War  of  Independence 
the  Trustees  were  fully  stated  by  Dr.  (Cassell's  History  of  England,  vol.  iv. 
Burton  in  his  published  sermons,  and  in  p.  274). 

an  official  pamphlet  issued  hi  1733  (see  s  But,  when  cultivated,  oranges,  rice, 

Jackson's     Life     of    Charles     Wesley},  wheat,  peas,  and  Indian   corn  grew  in 

Southey    says  :    '  No    colony  was    ever  abundance  (see  *  Extract  of  T.  Rankin's 

established  upon  principles  more  honour-  Journal '  in  Lives  of  the  Early  Methodist 


402  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Dec- 1737. 

3.  Vines,  mulberries,   and   peach-trees   it   bears   well.     The  white 
mulberry  is  not  good  to  eat.     The  black  is  about  the  size  of  a  black- 
berry, and  has  much  the  same  flavour.     In  fresh  pine-land,   Indian 
potatoes   grow   well — which  are   more   luscious    and   larger   than   the 
Irish  ;  and  so  do  water-melons  and  sewee-beans,  about  the  size  of  our 
scarlet,  but  to  be  shelled  and  eaten  like  Windsor  beans. 

4.  Oak-land  commonly  lies   in   narrow  streaks   between  pine-land 
and  some  swamp,  creek,  or  river.     The  soil  is  a  blackish  sand,  pro- 
ducing several  kinds  of  oak  (though  none  exactly  like  the  English), 
bay,  laurel,  ash,  walnut,  sumach-trees,  gum-trees  (a  sort  of  sycamore), 
dog-trees   (covered   in    spring   with   large   white   flowers),   and    many 
hickory-trees,  which  bear  a  bad  kind  of  walnut.     In  the  moistest  part 
of  this  land  some  persimmon-trees  grow  (which  bear  a  sort  of  yellow, 
clear,    luscious   plum),  and   a   few   mulberry-  and  cherry-trees.      The 
common  wild  grapes  are  of  two  sorts,  both  red.     The  fox-grape  grows 
two  or  three  only  on  a  stalk,  is  thick-skinned,  large-stoned,  of  a  harsh 
taste,  and  of  the  size  of  a  small  Kentish  cherry.     The  cluster-grape  is 
of  a  harsh  taste  too,  and  about  the  size  of  a  white  currant. 

5.  This  land  requires  much  labour  to  clear ;  but  when  it  is  cleared 
it  will  bear  any  grain  for  three,  four,  or  sometimes  five  years,  without 
laying  any  manure  upon  it.     An  acre  of  it  generally  bears  ten  bushels 
of  Indian  corn,  besides  five  of  pease,  in  a  year ;  so  that  this  at  present 
is  justly  esteemed  the  most  valuable  land  in  the  province. 

6.  A  swamp  is  any  low,   watery  place  which  is  covered  with  trees 
or   canes.     They  are   here   of  three   sorts — cypress,   river,  and  cane 
swamps.      Cypress-swamps *   are   mostly   large   ponds,    in   and   round 
which  cypresses  grow.      Most  river-swamps  are  overflown  every  tide 
by  the  river  which  runs  through  or  near  them.     If  they  were  drained, 
they  would  produce  good  rice  ;  as  would  the  cane-swamps  also ;  which 
in  the  meantime  are  the  best  feeding  for  all  sorts  of  cattle. 

7.  The  marshes   are   of    two   sorts :    soft   marsh,   which   is   all   a 
quagmire,  and  absolutely  good  for  nothing;  and  hard  marsh,  which 
is  a  firm  but  barren  sand,  bearing  only  sour  rushes.     Marshes  of  both 
sorts  abound  on  the  sea  islands,  which  are  very  numerous,  and  contain 
all  sorts  of  land.     And  upon  these  chiefly,  near  creeks  and  runs  of 
water,  juniper-trees  and  cedars  grow. 

8.  Savannah   stands  on  a   flat   bluff  (so  they  term   any  highland 


Preachers,    vol.   v.    p.   185.      See    also  (Dec.  22,   1736).      Many  of  the  British 

Bertram's     Travels,     Arminian      Mag.  troops  lost  their  lives  in  these   swamps 

1793,  f°r  an  account  of  the  fertility  of  (Ann.  Register,  1739,  pp.  182-3).     Rice 

this   territory,    and  Gent's   Mag.    1739,  was  one  of  the  staple  commodities,  and 

p.  23).  was  of  great  service  to  both  sides  in  the 

1  See      '  cypress  -  swamp,'      p.      304  War  of  Independence. 


Dec.  1737.] 


Sixth  Savannah  Journal 


403 


hanging  over  a  creek  or  river),  which  rises  forty-five  feet  perpendicular 
from  the  river,  and  commands  it  several  miles  both  upward  and 
downward.  The  soil  is  a  white  sand  for  above  a  mile  in  breadth, 
south-east  and  north-west.  Beyond  this,  eastward,  is  a  river-swamp; 
westward  a  small  wood,  in  which  was  the  old  Indian  town.  On  the 
other  side  of  the  river  is  a  marshy  island,  covered  with  large  trees. 
South-west  of  the  town  is  a  large  pine-barren,  which  extends  backward 
to  a  branch  of  the  Alatamahaw  river.1 

9.  St.  Simon's  Island,  having  on  the  south-east  the  Gulf  of  Florida, 
on  the  other  sides  branches  of  the  Alatamahaw,  is  about  one  hundred 
miles   south  of  Savannah,   and   extends   in   length  about   twenty,  in 
breadth  from  two  to  five  miles.     On  the  west  side  of  it,  on  a  low  bluff, 
stands  Frederica,2  having  woods  to  the  north  and  south ;  to  the  east, 
partly  woods,  partly  savannahs,  and  partly  marshes.     The  soil  is  mostly 
a  blackish  sand.     There  is  not  much  pine-land  on  the  island  ;  the 
greatest  part  being  oak-land,  intermixed  with  many  savannahs  and  old 
Spanish  or  Indian  fields. 

10.  On  the  sea-point,  about  five  miles  south-east  of  the  town,  is  the 


1  See  Annual  Register  for  1779,  p.  31, 
for  a  description   of  the   district ;   also 
Whitefield's  Journal,  p.  90,  par.  9.     The 
Spaniards  alleged  that  St.  Simon's  be- 
longed to   them   (Whitefield's    Journal, 
p.  90),  of  which  island  Frederica  was  the 
chief  town.     It  boasts  the  best,  deepest, 
and    safest    harbour    on    the   American 
coast  below  the  Chesapeake. 

2  Of  the  present  condition  of  Frederica 
and  the  island  of  St.  Simon's,   Bishop 
Hendrix    says  :     (i)   Frederica    was    of 
chief  importance  as  the  principal  town 
on  St.  Simon's  Island,  and  the  site  of  the 
fort  there,  which  guarded  the   Georgia 
settlement  from    the    Spaniards  of   St. 
Augustine.     There  was  never  a  town  of 
much  size,  the  garrison  constituting  the 
larger  population.     (2)  There  is  no  town 
called  Frederica  now  on  the  site  of  the 
old  town  of  Wesley's  day,  only  a  small 
settlement  consisting  of  a  few  farm-houses, 
together  with  a  country  school-house,  and 
church  building  of  the  Protestant  Epis- 
copal Church,  near  which  is  the  Anson 
Dodge   Home    for    orphan  boys.     This 
worthy  institution    was    founded    by    a 
former   rector,    the    Rev.   Anson  J.   P. 
Dodge,  in  memory  of  his  son,  a  little  lad 


who  lost  his  life  by  being  thrown  from  a 
buggy.  Mr.  Dodge  left  quite  a  sum  of 
money  for  the  founding  of  Episcopal 
churches  in  the  destitute  parts  of 
Georgia.  By  virtue  of  this  fact  St. 
Simon's  Island,  with  a  population  of  only 
720  (540  of  whom  are  negroes),  is  served 
almost  wholly  by  the  Protestant  Epis- 
copal Church.  The  remaining  1 80  people 
are  divided  as  follows :  Episcopalians, 
ii  ;  Methodists,  6 ;  Baptists,  16  ;  Roman 
Catholics,  13.  Frederica  was  the  second 
parish  in  Georgia,  Christ  Church,  Savan- 
nah, being  the  first.  Mr.  Dodge  left  at 
his  death  in  1898  three  white  churches 
and  two  for  negroes.  Among  the  negroes 
there  is  a  small  Methodist  congregation 
served  by  a  local  preacher.  The  Pro- 
testant Episcopal  Church  has  one  negro 
clergyman  on  the  island.  (3)  Frederica 
was  situated  on  the  west  side  of  St. 
Simon's  Island,  near  the  northern  end, 
and  was  separated  from  the  mainland  by 
a  channel  not  wider  than  the  Thames  at 
London  Bridge.  This  information  was 
supplied  to  Bishop  Hendrix ,  of  the  Metho- 
dist Episcopal  Church  South,  in  November 
1901,  by  the  rector  on  the  island  the 
Rev.  D.  Walter  Wynn. 


404 


John    Wesley's  Journal 


[Dec.  1737. 


fort  where  the  soldiers  are  stationed.1  But  the  storehouse  in  Frederica 
better  deserves  that  name ;  being  encompassed  with  regular  ramparts 
of  earth,  and  a  palisaded  ditch,  and  mounted  with  cannon,  which 
entirely  command  the  river. 

11.  About  twenty  miles  north-west  from  St.  Simon's  is  Darien,  the 
settlement  of  the  Scotch  Highlanders,  a  mile  from  Fort  King  George, 
which  was  built  about  seventeen  and  abandoned  about  eleven  years 
since.       The  town  2  lies  on  the  mainland,  close  to  a  branch  of  the 
Alatamahaw,    on    a    bluff   about   thirty    feet   above  the  river,  having 
woods  on  all  sides.     The  soil  is  a  blackish  sand.     They  built  at  first 
many  scattered  huts;  but  last  spring  (1736),  expecting  the  Spaniards, 
they  built  themselves  a  large  fort,  and  all  retired  within  the  walls  of  it. 

12.  Augusta,  distant  from  Savannah  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  and 
five  from  old  Savannah  Town,  is  designed  to  stand  in  an  old  Indian  field, 
on  a  bluff,  about  thirty  feet  high.     A  small  fort  of  wooden  piles  was  built 
there  in  1737  ;    but  no  house  was  then  built,  nor  any  more  ground 
cleared,  than  Mr.  Lacy  and  his  men  found  so. 

13.  Old  Ebenezer,  where   the   Saltzburghers  settled  at   first,3   lies 
twenty-five    miles    west    of  Savannah.       A   small  creek   runs   by  the 
town,  down    to   the   river,    and   many  brooks   run  between   the  little 


1  Oglethorpe     commissioned    William 
Cook  as  engineer,  with  the  salary  of  fifteen 
shillings  a  day  ;    but,  upon  pretence  of 
sickness,   when   the   Spaniards  came  to 
invade  Georgia  with'a  fleet  and  an  army 
of  between  four  and  five  thousand  men, 
he  left  the  country  (Gent.'s  Mag.  1744, 

P.  336). 

2  The  town  was  called  New  Inverness. 
This  fort  is  mentioned  in  Oglethorpe's 
report  on  the  threatened  invasion  of  the 
colony  by  the  Spaniards. 

3  '  Two  years  afterwards  (1735)  a  large 
and  important  addition  was  made  to  the 
settlement  by  the  immigration  of  a  body 
of  German  Protestants,    who  were   ex- 
pelled from  the  province  of  Saltzburgh  on 
account  of  religion.     About  two  hundred 
of  these  exiles  (who  altogether  amounted 
to  25,000,  or  a  tenth  of  the  whole  popu- 
lation)  embarked  for  Georgia   in    four 
transports,  which  they  were  enabled  to 
equip    through     the     liberality    of    the 
S.P.C.K.,  a  society  which  continued  to 
supply  them  with  funds  for  the  support 
of  their  schools  till  the  separation  of  the 


American  Colonies  from  Great  Britain.' 
(Hawkins's  Notices?) 

On  the  occasion  of  his  first  visit  to 
New  Ebenezer  (July  10,  1738),  White- 
field  writes  :  '  They  are  blessed  with  two 
such  pious  ministers  as  I  have  not  often 
seen.  They  have  no  courts  of  judicature, 
but  all  little  differences  are  immediately 
decided  by  their  ministers,  whom  they 
look  upon  and  love  as  their  fathers. 
They  likewise  have  an  Orphan  House,  in 
which  are  seventeen  children  and  one 
widow,  and  I  was  much  delighted  to  see 
the  regularity  wherewith  it  was  managed. 
I  gave  Mr.  Boltzius,  one  of  their  minis- 
ters, some  of  my  poor  stores  for  his 
orphans.  He  called  them  all  before  him, 
catechized,  and  exhorted  them  to  give 
God  thanks  for  His  good  providence 
towards  them  ;  then  prayed  with  them, 
and  made  them  pray  after  him ;  then 
sang  a  psalm  ;  and  afterwards  the  little 
lambs  came  and  shook  me  by  the  hand, 
one  by  one.  So  we  parted,  and  I  scarce 
was  ever  better  pleased  in  my  life.' 

In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Isaac  Watts,  Zeigen- 


Dec.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  405 

hills :  but  the  soil  is  hungry,  barren  sand ;  and  upon  any  sudden 
shower  the  brooks  rise  several  feet  perpendicular,  and  overflow  what- 
ever is  near  them.  Since  the  Saltzburghers  removed,  two  English 
families  have  been  placed  there:  but  these,  too,  say  that  the  land  is 
good  for  nothing  ;  and  that  the  creek  is  of  little  use ;  it  being  by 
water  twenty  miles  to  the  river,  and  the  water  generally  so  low  in  the 
summer-time  that  a  boat  cannot  come  within  six  or  seven  miles  of 
the  town. 

14.  New  Ebenezer,  to  which  the  Saltzburghers  removed  in  March 
1736,  lies  six  miles  eastward  from  the  old,  on  a  high  bluff,  near  the 
Savannah  river.     Here  are   some   tracts  of  fruitful  land,  though  the 
greatest    part   of  that   adjoining    to   the    town    is  pine-barren.     The 
huts,  sixty  in  number,  are  neatly  and  regularly  built ;  the  little  piece 
of  ground  allotted  to  each  for  a  garden  is  everywhere  put  to  the  best 
use,  no  spot  being  left  unplanted.     Nay,  even  one  of  the  main  streets, 
being  one  more  than  was  as  yet  wanted,  bore  them  this  year  a  crop  of 
Indian  corn. 

15.  About  ten  miles  east  of  this,  on  a  creek,  three  miles  from  the 
river,  was  the  village  of  Abercorn.     Ten  families  settled  here  in  1733, 
but  it  is  now  without  inhabitant.      Four  miles  below  the  mouth  of 
Abercorn  Creek  is  Joseph's  Town,  the  settlement  of  two  Scotch  gentle- 
men.1    A  mile  below  was  Sir  Francis   Bathurst's  plantation  ;   and  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  from  this  Walter  Augustine's  settlement.     But  both 
these  are  left  without  inhabitant. 

1 6.  A  mile  below  this  is  Captain  Williams's  2  plantation  ;  a  mile  from 
thence  Mrs.  Matthews's  (late  Musgrove),  commonly  known  by  the  name 
of  the  Cowpen ;  adjoining  to  which  is  the  land  belonging  to  Captain 
Watson,  on  which  is  an  unfinished  house,  swiftly  running  to  ruin.     A 
mile  from  this  is  Irene,3  a  house  built  for  an  Indian  school,  in  the  year 
1736.     It  stands  on  a  small  round  hill,  in  a  little  piece  of  fruitful  ground, 
given  by  the  Indians  to  Mr.  Ingham.      The  Indian  town  is  within  a 
furlong  of  it. 

17.  Five  miles  south-west  of  Savannah,  on  a  small  rise,  stands  the 


hagen,    court    chaplain    to    the    Queen  of  Dr.  Watts>  p.  72,  quoted  by  Tyerman) . 

Consort  of  George   II,    says    of  them  !  Among  the  settlers  were  persons  of 

(Nov.    1737):     'In  every  respect  they  prosperity,   who    hoped    to    turn    their 

are  suffering   great   poverty  and   hard-  capital  to  good  account 

ships.      Their   pious   and    indefatigable  2  For   Captain  Williams,   see  p.   8$, 

minister,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Boltzius,  acquaints  and  App.  II.  vol.  vi. 

me  that  any  old  rag  thrown  away  in  *  Irene  was  so  called  from  the  name  of 

Europe  is  of  service  to  them  ;  for  instance,  the  ship  that  brought  out  the  first  settlers. 

old  shoes,  stockings,  shirts,  or  anything  Ingham  lived  there.     Whitefield  opened 

of  wearing  apparel  for  men  or  women,  a  school  at  Highgate.     The  Hampstead 

grown  people  or  children '  (Milner's  Life  villagers  were  from  Switzerland. 


406 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[Dec.  1737. 


village  of  Highgate.1  It  has  pine-land  on  three  sides,  and  a  swamp  on 
the  fourth.  Twelve  families  were  placed  here  in  1733,  nine  whereof 
remain  there.  A  mile  eastward  of  this  is  Hampstead,  settled  with 
twelve  families  also,  a  little  before  Highgate,  five  of  which  are  still 
remaining. 

1 8.  Six  miles  south-east  of  Savannah  is  Thunderbolt.     Three  families 
are  settled  here,  near  a  small,  ruinous  fort.     Four  miles  south  of  this  is 
the  island  of  Skidoway  2 ;  on  the  north-east  point  whereof  ten  families 
were  placed  in  1734  (a  small  fort  was  built  here  likewise),  but  nine  of 
them  are  either  dead  or  removed  to  other  places.     A  small  creek  divides 
Skidoway  from  Tybee  Island,  on  the  south-east  part  of  which,  fronting 
the  inlet,  the  lighthouse  3  is  built.     Ten  families  were  settled  here  in 
1734 ;    but  they  are  part  dead,  and  part  removed,  so  that  the  island  is 
now  again  without  any  fixed  inhabitant. 

19.  Twelve    miles    southward  from    Savannah,    by   land,   is   Mr. 
Houstoun's  plantation ;   and   forty   or   fifty  miles   from  him,    up   the 
Ogeechy  river,4  that  where  Mr.  Stirling  for   some   time  lived.     Fort 
Argyle  stands  twenty  miles  from  this,   on  a  high  bluff,   by  the  river 
Ogeechy.     It  is  a  small,  square,  wooden  fort,  musket-proof.     Ten  free- 
holders were  settled  near  it  ;  but  eight  of  them  are  gone,  and  the  land 
they  had  cleared,  lying  waste,  will,  in  a  few  years,  be  as  it  was  before. 

20.  The  southernmost  settlement  in  Georgia  is  Fort  St.  Andrew.5 
It   stands  fifty  miles   south  of  Frederica,  on   the   south-west   side   of 
Cumberland  Island,  upon  a  high  neck  of  land,  which  commands  the 
river  both  ways.     The  walls  are  of  wood,  filled  up  with  earth,  round 
which  are  a  ditch  and  palisade. 

21.  It  is  hard  to  pick  out  any  consistent  account  of  the  Georgian 
Indians6    from    the    contradictory    relations   of    their    traders.     The 


1  Three     hundred     French    religious 
refugees   settled   in  a   Virginia    village 
in  1699.     The  S.P.C.K.,  at  Dr.  Wood- 
ward's instance,  sent  them  tracts.     See 
Whitefield's  Journal  for  his  ministrations 
to  the  French  colonists  of  Highgate  :  he 
admired  the   industry  of  the  villagers. 
'There  is  an    Italian  family  that  had 
woven  as  fine  silk  as  any  made  in  Pied- 
mont' (Genf.'s  Mag.  1739,  p.  23). 

2  The  principal  family  in  1736,  when 
John  and  Charles  Wesley  held  services  in 
the  island,  was  that  of  Mr.  Mouse,  who 
seems  to  have  been  a  trader.     He  or  his 
wife  was  often  in  Frederica  and  some- 
times in  Savannah. 

3  This    lighthouse    is    mentioned    in 


connexion  with  British  operations  (Ann. 
Reg.  1779,  p.  30). 

4  On  the  banks  of  the  Ogeechy  the 
Moravians  built  their  first  settlement  in 

1735- 

5  This  fort  is  often  mentioned  in  the 
early  history  of  the  settlement.     In  May 
1736  Oglethorpe   led   an  expedition  to 
Point  St.  George,  '  within  sight  of  the 
Spanish     look-out,'    and    to    Fort    St. 
Andrews.     On  his  return  he  dictated  a 
report    for     the     Trustees    to     Charles 
Wesley,  who,  in  his  Journal  (pp.  23-25), 
gives  an  interesting  account. 

6  These  were    known  as    the   Creek 
Indians,  numbering  at  this  time  about 
25,000.     They  were  divided   into   eight 


Dec.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  407 

following  is  extracted,  partly  from  those  wherein  all,  or  the  generality 
of  them,  agree ;  partly  from  the  relations  of  such  as  have  been 
occasionally  amongst  them,  and  have  no  interest  in  making  them 
better  or  worse  than  they  are. 

22.  Of  the  Georgian  Indians  in  general  it  may  be  observed  that 
they  are    not    so    properly   nations    as   tribes    or    clans,   who  have 
wandered  thither  at   different  times — perhaps   expelled   their   native 
countries  by  stronger  tribes — but  how  or  when  they  cannot  tell,  being 
none  of  them  able  to  give  any  rational  account  of  themselves.     They 
are  inured  to  hardships  of  all  kinds,  and  surprisingly  patient  of  pain. 
But  as  they  have  no  letters,  so  they  have  no  religion,  no  laws,  no 
civil  government.      Nor   have   they  any   kings   or  princes,   properly 
speaking ;    their  meikos,   or  headmen,   having    no   power    either   to 
command   or   punish,   no  man   obeying   them   any   further    than   he 
pleases.     So  that  every  one  doeth  what   is  right   in   his  own   eyes; 
and  if  it  appears  wrong  to  his  neighbour,  the  person  aggrieved  usually 
steals  on  the  other  unawares,  and  shoots  him,  scalps  him,  or  cuts  off 
his  ears,  having  only  two  short  rules  of  proceeding — to  do  what  he 
will,  and  what  he  can. 

23.  They  are  likewise  all,  except  perhaps  the  Choctaws,1  gluttons, 
drunkards,  thieves,  dissemblers,  liars.     They  are  implacable,  unmerci- 
ful; murderers  of  fathers,   murderers  of  mothers,  murderers  of  their 
own  children — it  being  a  common  thing  for  a  son  to  shoot  his  father 
or  mother  because  they  are  old  and  past  labour,  and  for  a  woman 
either  to  procure  abortion,  or  to  throw  her  child  into  the  next  river, 
because  she  will  go  with  her  husband  to  the  war.     Indeed,  husbands, 
strictly  speaking,  they  have  none ;  for  any  man  leaves  his  wife  (so 
called)  at  pleasure,  who  frequently,  in  return,  cuts  the  throats  of  all  the 
children  she  has  had  by  him.     Whoredom  they  account  no  crime,  and 
few  instances  appear  of  a  young  Indian  woman's  refusing  any  one. 
Nor  have  they  any  fixed  punishment  for  adultery ;  only,  if  the  husband 
take  his  wife  with  another  man,  he  will  do  what  he  can  to  both,  unless 
speedily  pacified  by  the  present  of  a  gun  or  a  blanket. 

24.  The  Choctaws  2  only  have  some  appearance  of  an  entire  nation, 
possessing  a  large  extent  of  land,  eight  or  nine  hundred  miles  west  of 
Savannah,  and  many  well-inhabited  towns.     They  are  said  to  have  six 


tribes.     Niccachumpo,  'the  long  chief,'  was   sent,  had  many  converts  (see  the 

in  the  name  of  these  confederated  tribes,  Christian  History,  1743). 

conducted    the    first    parley    with    the  a  For  the  Choctaws,  see  p.  238.     In 

British  adventurers.  1903    Madison    E.    Jefferson,    *a    full- 

1  The   Moravian  settlers  asked  for  a  blooded  Choctaw,'  was  made  a  Methodist 

missionary  to  preach   to  these  degraded  elder,  and  a  minister  of  the  same  tribe 

people.     Christian   Henry   Rauch,    who  took  part  in  the  ordination. 


408  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Dec.  1737. 

thousand  fighting  men,  united  under  one  head.  At  present  they  are 
in  league  with  the  French,1  who  have  sent  some  priests  among  them, 
by  whom  (if  one  may  credit  the  Choctaw  traders)  ten  or  twelve  have 
been  baptized. 

25.  Next  to   these,  to  the  north-east,  are   the  Chicasaws.     Their 
country  is  flat,  full  of  meadows,  springs,  and  rivers.     In  their  fields, 
though  six  or  seven  hundred  miles  from  the  sea,  are  found  sea-shells 
in  great  numbers.     They  have  about  nine  hundred  fighting  men,  ten 
towns,  and  one   meiko,  at  least,  in  every  one.     They  are  eminently 
gluttons,  eating,  drinking,  and  smoking  all  day,  and  almost  all  night. 
They  are  extremely  indolent  and  lazy,2  except  in  war ;  then  they  are 
the  most  indefatigable  and  the  most  valiant  of  all  the  Indians.      But 
they  are  equally  cruel  with  the  rest,  torturing  and  burning  all  their 
prisoners,  whether  Indian  or  European. 

26.  East  of  them,  in  the  latitude  of  35°  and  36°,  about  three  or 
four  hundred  miles  from  Savannah,  lie  the  Cherokees.3     Their  country 
is  very  mountainous,  fruitful,  and  pleasant.     They  have  fifty-two  towns, 
and  above  three  thousand  fighting  men.     In  each  town  are  three  or 
more  headmen,  who  keep  up  a  sort  of  shadow  of  government,  having 
power  to  set  the  rest  to  work,  and  to  punish  such  as  will  not  join  in  the 
common  labour.     They  are  civil  to  strangers,  and  will  do  anything  for 
them,  for  pay,  being  always  willing,  for  a  small  piece  of  money,  to 
carry  a  message  for  fifty  or  sixty  miles,  and,  if  required,  a  heavy  burden 
too ;  but  they  are  equally  cruel  to  prisoners  with  the  Chicasaws,  though 
not  equally  valiant.      They  are   seldom   intemperate  in  drinking  but 
when  they  can  be  so  on  free  cost.     Otherwise,  love  of  drink  yields  to 
covetousness — a   vice    scarcely   to   be  found   in    any   Indian    but   a 
Cherokee. 

27.  The  Uchees4  have  only  one  small  town  left  (near  two  hundred 
miles  from  Savannah)  and  about  forty  fighting  men.     The  Creeks  have 
been  many  times  on  the  point  of  cutting  them  off.     They  are  indeed 
hated  by  most,  and  despised  by  all  the  other  nations,  as  well  for  their 
cowardice,  as  their  superlative  diligence  in  thieving,  and  for  out-lying 
all  the  Indians  upon  the  continent. 


1  See  Digest  of  S. P. G.  Records,  p.  28.  of  the  year,  from  morning  to  night.' 

2  'Lazy.'       In    his    Appeal    Wesley          3  The  Cherokees  were  the  friends  of 
writes  :  '  I  have  seen  a  large  company  of  England.    (See  Holmes,  vol.  i.  p.  387  ; 
reasonable     creatures     called     Indians,  and  '  Sorrows  of  the  Cherokees,'  in  W.M. 
sitting  in  a  row  on  the  side  of  a  river,  Mag.  1856,  p.  802.) 

looking  sometimes  at  one  another,  some-  4  In  a  report  to  the  Trustees  Ogle- 
times  at  the  sky,  and  sometimes  at  the  thorpe  mentions  the  readiness  of  the 
bubbles  on  the  water.  And  so  they  sat,  king  of  the  Uchees  to  help  him  against 
unless  in  time  of  war,  for  a  great  part  the  Spaniards. 


Dec.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  409 

28.  The  Creek  Indians1  are  about  four  hundred  miles  from 
Savannah.  They  are  said  to  be  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  Choctaws, 
to  the  north  by  the  Chicasaws,  to  the  east  by  the  Cherokees,  and  to 
the  south  by  the  Alatamahaw  river.  They  have  many  towns,  a  plain, 
well-watered  country,  and  fifteen  hundred  fighting  men.  They  have 
often  three  or  four  meikos  In  a  town  ;  but  without  so  much  as  the 
shadow  of  authority,  only  to  give  advice,  which  every  one  is  at  liberty 
to  take  or  leave.  But  age  and  reputation  for  valour  and  wisdom  have 
given  Chicali,8  a  meiko  of  the  Coweta-Town,  a  more  than  ordinary 
influence  over  the  nation ;  though  not  even  the  show  of  regal  power. 
Yet  neither  age,  wisdom,  nor  reputation  can  restrain  him  from  drunken- 
ness. Indeed,  all  the  Creeks,  having  been  most  conversant  with  white 
men,  are  most  infected  with  insatiate  love  of  drink,  as  well  as  other 
European  vices.  They  are  more  exquisite  dissemblers  than  the  rest  of 
their  countrymen.  They  know  not  what  friendship  or  gratitude  means. 
They  show  no  inclination  to  learn  anything,  but  least  of  all 
Christianity;  being  full  as  opinionated  of  their  own  parts  and  wisdom 
as  either  modern  Chinese  or  ancient  Romans.3 

DEC.  3,  Sat. — We  came  to  Purrysburg  4  early  in  the  morning. 
Here  I  endeavoured  to  procure  a  guide  to  Port  Royal,  [whither 
we  hoped  to  walk  before  evening].  But  none  being  to  be  had, 
we  set  out,  [with  the  best  directions  we  could  procure,]  an  hour 
before  sunrise.  [In  half  an  hour  we  lost  the  path  ;  an  hour  after, 
we  came  to  a  plantation,  where  a  lad,  undertaking  to  guide  us  for 
a  mile  and  a  half,  led  us  just  so  much  out  of  the  way,  and  then 
delivered  us  to  an  old  Frenchman,]  by  whom  we  were  brought 
into  a  little  blind-path,  running  along  a  line  of  blazed  trees, 
which  he  said  would  lead  us  directly  to  Port  Royal.  In  this  we 
walked,  being  four  in  all,  two  of  whom  intended  to  go  for  England 


1  These  were  the  Indians  among  whom  little  to  his  sufferings  in  Georgia,  have 
Ingham  lived  for  a  few   months.     He  succeeded.     The  present  elected  chief  is 
began  a  grammar  of  their  language,  or,  an    elder    in  the    M.E.    Church   South 
perhaps  more  truly,  a  vocabulary.  (Dr.  Hoss  in  The  Methodist  Recorder). 

2  See  Whitefield's  Journal  (Tyerman),  *  Dr.  Burton,  in  one  of  his  letters,  says 
vol.  i.  p.  135,  and  App.  XXV.  vol.  vi.  that  the  people  of  this  place  began  the 

8  The  Creek  Indians  are  now  largely  buying  of  negroes.  Oglethorpe  said, 
a  Christian  people,  made  so  by  the  '  Slavery  is  against  the  gospel  as  well  as 
labours  of  the  Methodist  ministers.  If  against  the  fundamental  laws  of  England.' 
Wesley  himself  failed  in  his  mission  to  Purrysburg  figures  in  the  war  of  the 
the  Indians,  his  children,  who  follow  in  rebellion  (see  Ann.  Reg.  1779,  p.  181). 
their  father's  footsteps,  owing  everything  Locke  is  said  to  have  drafted  a  constitu- 
te his  example  and  teaching,  and  not  a  tion  for  Carolina. 

VOL.  I.  23 


4io  John   Wes leys  Journal  [000.1737. 

with  me,  and  the  other  to  settle  in  Carolina.  About  eleven  we 
came  into  a  large  swamp,  without  path  or  blaze,  where  we 
wandered  up  and  down  near  three  hours.  About  two  we  gat 
out,  found  a  blaze,  and  traced  it  till  it  divided  into  two  ;  one 
of  which  we  followed  through  an  almost  impassable  thicket, 
the  briers  of  which  dealt  but  roughly  both  with  our  clothes 
and  skin,  till  we  came  to  the  end  of  the  blaze.  We  then  prayed 
to  God  to  direct  us,  and  forced  our  way  through  the  thicket  once 
more,  searched  out  the  other  blaze,  and  traced  that  till  it  came  to 
an  end  too. 

It  now  grew  towards  sunset  ;  so  we  sat  us  down  on  the 
ground,  faint  and  weary  enough.  Indeed,  had  the  day  continued 
we  could  not  have  gone  much  farther,  having  had  no  sustenance 
since  five  in  the  morning,  except  [about  a  quarter  of  a  pint 
of  rum  and]  a  cake  of  gingerbread  [which  Mrs.  Burnside  had 
persuaded  me  to  take  with  me].  A  third  part  of  this  we  had 
divided  among  us  for  dinner,  another  third  we  took  for  our 
supper,  and  the  rest  we  reserved  for  the  next  day.  Our  worst 
want  was  that  of  water,  having  met  with  none  all  day.  I  thrust 
a  cane  we  had  into  the  ground,  and,  drawing  it  out,  found  the  end 
moist.  Upon  which  two  of  our  company  fell  to  digging  with 
their  hands,  and  at  about  three  feet  depth  found  good  water. 
We  thanked  God,  drank,  and  were  much  refreshed.  The  night 
was  sharp,  [and  we  had  no  means  of  making  a  fire].  However, 
there  was  no  complaining.  But  after  we  had  commended  our- 
selves to  God,  we  lay  down  close  together,  and  I  at  least  slept 
till  morning. 

Sun.  4. — God  renewed  our  strength  so  that  we  rose  neither 
faint  nor  hungry,  and  having  committed  ourselves  to  His  pro- 
tection, and  drank  each  of  us  a  draught  of  water,  set  forward  for 
Port  Royal.  We  steered  by  the  sun,  as  near  as  we  could,  east. 
But  finding  neither  path  nor  blaze,  and  the  woods  growing 
thicker  and  thicker,  we  judged,  after  an  hour  or  two's  trial,  it 
was  our  best  course  to  return,  if  we  could,  by  the  way  we  came. 
The  day  before  I  had  broke,  though  I  knew  no  reason  why, 
many  young  trees  almost  all  the  way  we  went.  These  we  found 
a  great  help  in  many  places,  where  neither  blaze  nor  path  was  to 
be  seen.  At  twelve  we  ate  the  remainder  of  our  cake,  and, 
meeting  some  moist  ground,  dug  as  before  and  found  water. 


Dec.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  4 1 1 

Between  one  and  two  God  brought  us  safe  to  Benjamin  Arieu's 
house,  the  old  man  whom  we  had  left  the  day  before.1 

In  the  evening  I  read  French  prayers  to  a  numerous  family 
a  mile  from  Arieu's  ;  one  of  whom  undertook  to  guide  us  to 
Port  Royal,  which  he  said  was  between  forty  and  fifty  miles  off. 
In  the  morning  we  set  out,  but  took  care  to  carry  a  good  loaf  of 
bread  with  us.  About  sunset  we  asked  our  guide  if  he  knew 
where  he  was,  who  frankly  answered,  '  No.'  However,  we 
pushed  on,  sometimes  in  a  path  and  sometimes  out,  till  about 
seven  we  came  to  a  plantation,  which  indeed  was  many  miles 
[off]  that  we  designed  to  go  to.  But  here  we  got  good  potatoes 
and  a  lodging  ;  by  the  next  evening,  after  many  difficulties 
and  delays,  we  landed  on  Port  Royal  Island.3 

Wed.  7. — We  walked  to  Beaufort,  [on  the  other  side 
of  Port  Royal  Island.  Here  we  met  with  many  of  our  old 
neighbours  of  Savannah,  who  appeared  heartily  glad  to  see  us. 
Our  interview  much  resembled  that  of  persons  who,  having 
by  different  ways  escaped  out  of  a  common  shipwreck,  naturally 
relate  to  each  other  the  fears  and  dangers  they  have  gone 
through,  and  the  means  of  their  deliverance  from  them. 

[Both  this  and  the  following  day  the  gentleman]  (Mr.  Jones,3 
the  minister  of  Beaufort)  who  invited  me  to  his  house  gave 
me  a  lively  idea  of  the  old  English  hospitality.  [Yet  observing 
the  elegance  and  more  than  neatness  of  everything  round  about 
him,  I  could  not  but  sigh  to  myself  and  say, '  Heu  delicatum 
discipulum  dun  magistri  ! '] 

Thur.  8. — Mr.  Delamotte  came,  with  whom  on  Friday  the 
9th  I  set  out  for  Charlestown  by  water.  [In  the  evening,  the 
wind  having  been  against  us  all  day,  we  were  hospitably  enter- 
tertained  at  Mr.  Cockram's  plantation.  I  cannot  say  so  of  the 
poor  folk  at  whose  plantation  we  landed  the  next  day  ;  who, 
however,  at  last  gave  us  a  few  bad  potatoes,  of  which  they  plainly 
told  us  we  robbed  the  swine.  The  wind  continuing  contrary, 


1  Whitefield's  friend  Horton  was  lost  p.  640,  and  George  Whitefield's  Letters, 
in  the  woods.  vol.  i.  p.  241.    A  legacy  of  £100  was 

2  Port  Royal  Island  was  of  great  mili-  bequeathed  by  the  Rev.  L.  Jones,  of  St. 
tary  value  to  the  British  (Ann.  Reg.  .1779,  Helens,  for  the  support  of  a  free  school 
pp.  185,  208).  at  Beaufort  (Digest  of  S.P.G.  Records). 

8  For     Mr.    Jones     see     Anderson's  Nine  missionaries  wereisent  to  the  planta- 

History  of  the  Colonial  Church,  vol.  iii.  tions  in  1700-1. 


4 1 2  John   Wesley  s  Journal  ^^  1737> 

we  could  but  just  reach  John's  Island  on  Monday,  the  I2th,  in 
the  morning.  Here  we  were  obliged  to  stay  till  noon.  Our 

provisions  falling  short,  we  desired  of  Mr.  G a  little  meat  or 

drink  of  any  sort,  either  with  or  without  price  ;  and  with  much 
difficulty  obtained  some  potatoes,  and  liberty  to  roast  them  in 
a  fire  which  his  negroes  had  made  a  distance  from  the  house.] 

Tues.  13. — Early  we  came  to  Charlestown,1  where  I  expected 
trials  of  a  quite  different  nature,  and  far  more  dangerous ; 
contempt  and  hunger  being  easy  to  be  borne  :  but  who  can  bear 
respect  and  fullness  of  bread  ? 

Wed.  14. — Being  desired  [by  Mr.  Garden's  assistant]  to  read 
prayers,  I  was  much  refreshed  by  those  glorious  [prophecies 
and]  promises  which  were  exhibited  to  us  both  in  the  seventy- 
second  Psalm  and  in  the  First  Lesson,  the  fortieth  chapter  of 
Isaiah.  ['  Amen  !  May  those  who  trust  in  the  Lord  renew  their 
strength ' ;  and  *  let  all  the  earth  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  His 
majesty ! '] 

In  the  afternoon,  visiting  a  poor  man  who  in  all  probability 
had  not  many  days  to  live,  we  found  him  full  of  the  freshest 
advices,  domestic  and  foreign,  and  busy  in  settling  the  affairs  [of 
Muscovy  and  Persia,]  of  the  Czarina,  Prince  Thamas,  and  the 
Ottoman  Porte.  [Surely  the  notion  of  the  Platonists  is  right :] 

Quae  cura  nitentis(-es) 
Pascere  equos,  eadem  sequitur,  tellure  repostos.2 

For  if  a  soul  quivering  on  the  verge  of  life  has  still  leisure  to 
amuse  itself  with  battles  and  sieges,  why  may  not  the  same 
dreams  continue,  even  in  the  sleep  of  death  ? 

\Thur.  15. — I  began  to  feel  the  effects  of  ease  and  harmless 


1  Whitefield  was  charmed  with  Charles-  '  He  views  with  wonder  in  the  distance 
town  ;  he  also  was  well  treated  here,  as  his  the  heroes'  arms  and  shadowy  battle-cars. 
Diary  shows.    SctMeth.  Mag.  1798,  p.  62.  Their  spears  stand  fixed  in  the  soil,  and 

2  Nitentis  is   a   variant   form    of    the  here  and  there  their  steeds,  unharnessed, 
plural.     The  whole  passage  reads  :  roam  grazing  over  the  plain.     The  same 

Arma   procul   currusque    virum    miratur  delight  they  took  in  chariots  and  armour 

inanes.  when  alive,  and  the  same  care  they  took 

Slant  terra  defixae  hastae,  passimque  soluti  to  feed  their  sleek   steeds,   attends   them 

Percampum  pascuntur  equi.    Quae  gratia  ^   ^^ed  though  they  be.' 


Armorumque  fuit  vivis,  qua*  cura  nitentes  The  italidzed  WOrds  translate  the  lineS 

Pascere    equos,     eadem     sequitur,    tellurt  quoted     by    Wesley.     (W.H.S.     vol.     v. 

repostos.  p.  24.) 
VIRGIL,  Aen.  vi.  651-5. 


Dec.  ITS?.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  413 

conversation,  having  no  spirit  left  in  me.  So  that  I  should 
have  fallen  an  easy  prey  to  any  temptation  which  had  then 
attacked  me.  But  the  next  day  it  pleased  God  to  give  me 
new  life  ;  and  I  again  rejoiced  in  His  strength,  and  felt  a 
good  hope  that  I  should  continue  to  watch  and  pray,  and 
not  enter  into  temptation.] 

Fri.  1 6. — I  parted  from  the  last  of  those  friends  who  came 
with  me  into  America,  Mr.  Charles  Delamotte,1  from  whom 
I  had  been  but  a  few  days  separate  since  October  14,  1735. 

Sun.  1 8. — I  was  seized  with  a  violent  flux,  which  I  felt 
came  not  before  I  wanted  it.  Yet  I  had  strength  enough 
given  to  preach  once  more  to  this  careless  people  ;  and  a  few 
'  believed  our  report.' 

Thur.  22. — I  took  my  leave  of  America,2  though,  if  it 
please  God,  not  for  ever,  going  on  board  the  Samuel,  Captain 
Percy,  with  a  young  gentleman  who  had  been  a  few  months 
in  Carolina,  one  of  my  parishioners  of  Savannah,  and  a  French- 
man, late  of  Purrysburg,  who  was  escaped  thence  with  the 
skin  of  his  teeth.3 

Sat.  24. — We  sailed  over  Charlestown  bar,  and  about  noon 
lost  sight  of  land.  The  wind  was  fair,  but  high,  as  it  was  on 
Sunday  the  25th,  when  the  sea  affected  me  more  than  it  had  done 
in  the  sixteen  weeks  of  our  passage  to  America.  I  was  obliged 
to  lie  down  the  greatest  part  of  the  day.  being  easy  only  in 
that  posture. 

Mon.  26. — I  began  instructing  a  negro  lad  in  the  principles 
of  Christianity.  The  next  day  I  resolved  to  break  off  living 
delicately,  and  return  to  my  old  simplicity  of  diet ;  and  after 
I  did  so,  neither  my  stomach  nor  my  head  much  complained 
of  the  motion  of  the  ship. 

Wed.  28. — Finding  the  unaccountable  apprehensions   of  I 

1  Delamotte    sailed    for    England   on  '  That  is  my  desire  and  design,'  that  is, 
June  2,   1738,  the   poor  people  deeply  to  return.    John  Wesley,  in  a  letter  to 
regretting  his  departure.    Whitefield  lent  Whitefield    many  years  later,   seriously 
him  ^15,  which  the  Trustees  refunded,  planned  another  visit  to  the  New  World, 
to  pay  his   passage.      See  Meth.  Mag.  s  The    Frenchman    is    mentioned    on 
I79^>  P'  359,  and  W.H.S.  Proceedings.  p.   367.      Eleanor   Hayes  also   returned 

2  Both    John    and    Charles    Wesley  (seeTyerman,  vol.  i.  p.  165).    She  became 
cherished  the  hope  of  returning.      When  one  of  the  first  London  Methodists.      Of 
again  in   England,  Charles  Wesley  said  her  an  interesting  notice  may  be  found 
to  James  Vernon,  one  of  the  Trustees,  in  the  W.M.  Mag.  1867,  p.  147. 


4 i 4  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [Jan.  1738 

know  not  what  danger  (the  wind  being  small  and  the  sea 
smooth),  which  had  been  upon  me  several  days,  increase,  I 
cried  earnestly  for  help  ;  and  it  pleased  God,  as  in  a  moment, 
to  restore  peace  to  my  soul. 

Let  me  observe  hereon,  i.  That  not  one  of  these  hours 
ought  to  pass  out  of  my  remembrance,  till  I  attain  another 
manner  of  spirit,  a  spirit  equally  willing  to  glorify  God  by 
life  or  by  death.  2.  That  whoever  is  uneasy  on  any  account 
(bodily  pain  alone  excepted)  carries  in  himself  his  own  con- 
viction, that  he  is  so  far  an  unbeliever.  Is  he  uneasy  at  the 
apprehension  of  death  ?  then  he  believeth  not  '  to  die  is  gain  ' : 
at  any  of  the  events  of  life  ?  then  he  hath  not  a  firm  belief  that 
*  all  things  work  together  for'  his  'good.'  And  if  he  bring 
the  matter  more  close,  he  will  always  find,  beside  the  general 
want  of  faith,  every  particular  uneasiness  is  evidently  owing 
to  the  want  of  some  particular  Christian  temper. 

1738,  JAN.  i,  Sun. — All  in  the  ship,  except  the  captain 
and  steersman,  were  present  both  at  the  morning  and  evening 
service,  and  appeared  as  deeply  attentive  as  even  the  poor 
people  of  Frederica  did,  while  the  word  of  God  was  new  to  their 
ears.  And  it  may  be  one  or  two  among  these  likewise  may 
'bring  forth  fruit  with  patience.' 

Mon.  2. — Being  sorrowful  and  very  heavy,  though  I  could 
give  no  particular  reason  for  it,  and  utterly  unwilling  to  speak 
close  to  any  of  my  little  flock  (about  twenty  persons),  I  was  in 
doubt  whether  my  neglect  of  them  was  not  one  cause  of  my  own 
heaviness.  In  the  evening,  therefore,  I  began  instructing  the 
cabin-boy  ;  after  which  I  was  much  easier. 

I  went  several  times  the  following  days,  with  a  design  to 
speak  to  the  sailors,  but  could  not.  I  mean,  I  was  quite  averse 
from  speaking ;  I  could  not  see  how  to  make  an  occasion,  and 
it  seemed  quite  absurd  to  speak  without.  Is  not  this  what  men 
commonly  mean  by  *  I  could  not  speak '  ?  And  is  this  a 
sufficient  cause  of  silence,  or  no  ?  Is  it  a  prohibition  from  the 
Good  Spirit  ?  or  a  temptation  from  nature  or  the  Evil  One  ? 

Fri.  6. — I  ended  the  '  Abridgement  of  Mr.  de  Renty's  Life.' 1 

1  This   was   published    by   Wesley  in       Life  of  Monsieur  de  Renty>  a  late  Noble- 
1741,  with  the  title  An  Extract  of  the      man  of  France.    Green,  in  his   Wesley 


jan.  1738.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  415 

Oh  that  such  a  life  should  be  related  by  such  an  historian !  who, 
by  inserting  all,  if  not  more  than  all,  the  weak  things  that  holy 
man  ever  said  or  did,  by  his  commendation  of  almost  every 
action  or  word  which  either  deserved  or  needed  it  not,  and  by 
his  injudicious  manner  of  relating  many  others  which  were 
indeed  highly  commendable,  has  cast  the  shade  of  superstition 
and  folly  over  one  of  the  brightest  patterns  of  heavenly 
wisdom. 

Sat.  7. — I  began  to  read  and  explain  some  passages  of  the 
Bible  to  the  young  negro.  The  next  morning,  another  negro 
who  was  on  board  desired  to  be  a  hearer  too.  From  them  I 
went  to  the  poor  Frenchman,  who,  understanding  no  English, 
had  none  else  in  the  ship  with  whom  he  could  converse.  And 
from  this  time  I  read  and  explained  to  him  a  chapter  in  the 
Testament  every  morning. 

Sun.  8. — In  the  fullness  of  my  heart,  I  wrote  the  following 
words  : 

By  the  most  infallible  of  proofs,  inward  feeling,  I  am  convinced, 

1.  Of  unbelief;  having  no  such  faith  in  Christ  as  will  prevent  my 
heart  from  being  troubled ;  which  it  could  not  be,  if  I  believed  in  God, 
and  rightly  believed  also  in  Him  : 

2.  Of  pride,  throughout  my  life  past ;  inasmuch  as  I  thought  I  had 
what  I  find  I  have  not : 

3.  Of  gross  irrecollection ;   inasmuch  as  in  a  storm  I  cry  to  God 
every  moment ;  in  a  calm,  not : 

4.  Of  levity   and    luxuriancy   of    spirit,    recurring    whenever    the 
pressure  is  taken  off,  and  appearing  by  my  speaking  words  not  tending 
to  edify  ;  but  most  by  my  manner  of  speaking  of  my  enemies. 

Lord,  save,  or  I  perish  !     Save  me, 

1.  By  such  a  faith  as  implies  peace  in  life  and  in  death : 

2.  By  such   humility  as  may  fill  my  heart  from  this  hour  for  ever, 


Bibliography,  says  :  '  This  is  extracted  abridged  to  67.'  Six  editions  were  pub- 
from  "The  Holy  Life  of  Monr.  De  lished  during  Wesley's  life.  If  Wesley 
Renty,  a  late  Nobleman  of  France  and  blames  the  historian,  he  praises  his  sub- 
sometimes  Councellor  to  King  Lewis  ject.  The  French  marquis  is  mentioned 
the  1 3th.  Written  in  French  by  John  in  Wesley's  Works,  vols.  viii.  x.  xi.  xii. 
Baptist  S.  Jure,  and  faithfully  translated  and  xiii.  His  proof  of  the  Trinity  by 
into  English,  by  E.  S.  Gent,  London  :  the  testimony  of  consciousness  influenced 
John  Crook,  at  the  Sign  of  the  Ship  in  the  Wesleys,  E.  Perronet,  and  others ; 
St.  Paul's  Churchyard,  1658."  The  358  it  may  be  traced  in  the  Wesleyan  Hymn- 
pages  of  this  translation  are  carefully  book. 


416 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[Jan.  1738. 


with  a   piercing    uninterrupted   sense,  Nihil  est  quod  hactenus  fed ; 1 
having  evidently  built  without  a  foundation  : 

3.  By   such   a   recollection   as   may   cry   to   Thee   every  moment, 
especially  when  all  is  calm  :  Give  me  faith,  or  I  die  ;  give  me  a  lowly 
spirit ;  otherwise,  mihi  non  sit  suave  vivere  :  2 

4.  By  steadiness,  seriousness,  o-e/xvor^s,  sobriety  of  spirit ;  avoiding, 
as  fire,  every  word  that  tendeth  not  to  edifying  ;  and  never  speaking 
of  any  who  oppose  me,  or  sin  against  God,  without  all  my  own  sins  set 
in  array  before  my  face. 

This  morning,  after  explaining  these  words  of  St.  Paul,  *  I 
beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present 
your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God/  I 
exhorted  my  fellow  travellers  with  all  my  might  to  comply 
with  the  apostle's  direction.  But  '  leaving  them  afterwards 
to  themselves,'  the  seriousness  they  showed  at  first  soon 
vanished  away. 

On  Monday  the  Qth,  and  the  following  days,  I  reflected  much 
on  that  vain  desire,  which  had  pursued  me  for  so  many  years, 
of  being  in  solitude  in  order  to  be  a  Christian.  I  have  now, 
thought  I,  solitude  enough.  But  am  I  therefore  the  nearer 
being  a  Christian  ?  Not  if  Jesus  Christ  be  the  model  of 
Christianity.  I  doubt,  indeed,  I  am  much  nearer  that  mystery 
of  Satan  which  some  writers  affect  to  call  by  that  name.  So 
near,  that  I  had  probably  sunk  wholly  into  it,  had  not  the  great 
mercy  of  God  just  now  thrown  me  upon  reading  St.  Cyprian's 
works.8  '  O  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret ! '  Stand 
thou  in  the  good  old  paths. 


1  'What  I  have  hitherto  done  is 
nothing. '  Imitatio  of  Thomas  a  Kempis, 
I.  19,  \.(W.H.S.  vol.  vii.  p.  34). 

*  '  Let  life  be  a  burden  to  me.'  Or, 
more  literally,  '  Let  it  be  no  pleasure  to 
me  to  live.'  A  reminiscence  of  Terence, 
Heaut.  ill.  i.  73:  'Tibi  autem  porro 
ut  non  sit  suave  vivere.'  {W.H,S. 
v.  25.) 

8  Cyprian  embraced  the  Christian 
faith  at  Carthage,  A.D.  246,  and  in  two 
years  became  bishop  of  that  See.  For 
a  time  he  fled  from  persecution,  and, 
while  away,  wrote  some  of  his  works. 
In  288  he  suffered  martyrdom  under 
Valerian.  Wesley  admired  his  writing, 


and  in  his  long  letter  to  Dr.  Conyers 
Middleton  he  defended  Cyprian  against 
that  author's  attack  (Wesley's  Works, 
vol.  x.  pp.  45-50).  Cyprian  had  no 
sympathy  with  the  dreamy  and  specu- 
lative genius  of  the  East.  His  stern 
assertion  of  ecclesiastical  order  and 
sacerdotal  domination,  his  rigid  asceti- 
cism, and  his  dauntless  heroism  in  the 
time  of  pestilence,  appealed  to  Wesley 
at  this  juncture.  Later  in  his  Journal 
he  refers  to  the  famous  bishop  as  a 
Governor  of  the  Church.  A  study  of 
Cyprian  would  probably  reveal  one  of 
the  many  sources  of  Wesley's  scheme 
of  life  and  discipline. 


Jan.  1738.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  4 1 7 

Frz.  13. — We  had  a  thorough  storm,  which  obliged  us  to 
shut  all  close,  the  sea  breaking  over  the  ship  continually.  I 
was  at  first  afraid x ;  but  cried  to  God,  and  was  strengthened. 
Before  ten  I  lay  down  ;  I  bless  God,  without  fear.  About 
midnight  we  were  awakened  by  a  confused  noise  of  seas  and 
wind  and  men's  voices,  the  like  to  which  I  had  never  heard 
before.  The  sound  of  the  sea  breaking  over  and  against  the 
sides  of  the  ship,  I  could  compare  to  nothing  but  large  cannon 
or  American  thunder.  The  rebounding,  starting,  quivering 
motion  of  the  ship  much  resembled  what  is  said  of  earthquakes. 
The  captain  was  upon  deck  in  an  instant.  But  his  men  could 
not  hear  what  he  said.  It  blew  a  proper  hurricane  ;  which 
beginning  at  south-west,  then  went  west,  north-west,  north,  and, 
in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  round  by  the  east  to  the  south-west 
point  again.  At  the  same  time  the  sea  running  (as  they  term  it) 
mountain-high,  and  that  from  many  different  points  at  once,  the 
ship  would  not  obey  the  helm  ;  nor  indeed  could  the  steersman, 
through  the  violent  rain,  see  the  compass.  So  he  was  forced 
to  let  her  run  before  the  wind,  and  in  half  an  hour  the  stress 
of  the  storm  was  over. 

About  noon  the  next  day  it  ceased.  But  first  I  had  resolved, 
God  being  my  helper,  not  only  to  preach  it  to  all,  but  to  apply 
the  word  of  God  to  every  single  soul  in  the  ship  ;  and  if  but 
one,  yea,  if  not  one  of  them  will  hear,  I  know  '  my  labour  is 
not  in  vain.' 

I  no  sooner  executed  this  resolution  than  my  spirit  revived, 
so  that  from  this  day  I  had  no  more  of  that  fearfulness  and 
heaviness  which  before  almost  continually  weighed  me  down. 
I  am  sensible  one  who  thinks  the  being  in  orco,  as  they  phrase 
it,  an  indispensable  preparative  for  being  a  Christian,  would 
say,  I  had  better  have  continued  in  that  state  ;  and  that  this 
unseasonable  relief  was  a  curse,  not  a  blessing.*  Nay,  but  who 
art  thou,  O  man,  who,  in  favour  of  a  wretched  hypothesis,  thus 
blasphemest  the  good  gift  of  God  ?  Hath  not  He  Himself 
said,  '  This  also  is  the  gift  of  God,  if  a  man  have  power  to 


1  Wesley  speaks  more  strongly  as  to  Whitefield  on  his  first  re  turn  from  America, 

his  fear  on  p.   140  (W.M.  Mag.  184$,  2  *  Rather  I  would  in  darkness  mourn.' 

p.  656).     Compare  the  storm  mentioned,  (Meth.  Hymn-book,  1904,  No.  442,  VY. 

pp.     142-3 ;    also    that     described     by  3  and  4.) 


4 i 8  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Jan.  ms. 

rejoice  in  his  labour  '  ?  Yea,  God  setteth  His  own  seal  to  his  weak 
endeavours,  while  He  thus '  answereth  him  in  the  joy  of  his  heart.' 
Tues.  24. — We  spoke  with  two  ships,  outward-bound,  from 
whom  we  had  the  welcome  news  of  our  wanting  but  one  hundred 
and  sixty  leagues  of  the  Land's  End.  My  mind  was  now  full 
of  thought,  part  of  which  I  writ  down  as  follows  : 

I  went  to  America,  to  convert  the  Indians  ;  but  oh,  who  shall 
convert  me  ? L  who,  what  is  he  that  will  deliver  me  from  this  evil  heart 
of  unbelief?  I  have  a  fair  summer  religion.  I  can  talk  well ;  nay,  and 
believe  myself,  while  no  danger  is  near.  But  let  death  look  me  in  the 
face,  and  my  spirit  is  troubled.  Nor  can  I  say,  '  To  die  is  gain ' ! 

I  have  a  sin  of  fear,  that  when  I've  spun 
My  last  thread,  I  shall  perish  on  the  shore  1 8 

I  think,  verily,  if  the  gospel  be  true,  I  am  safe  :  for  I  not  only 
have  given,  and  do  give,  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor  ;  I  not  only 
give  my  body  to  be  burned,  drowned,  or  whatever  God  shall  appoint 
for  me ;  but  I  follow  after  charity  (though  not  as  I  ought,  yet  as  I  can), 
if  haply  I  may  attain  it.  I  now  believe  the  gospel  is  true.  *  I  show 
my  faith  by  my  works,'  by  staking  my  all  upon  it.  I  would  do  so  again 
and  again  a  thousand  times,  if  the  choice  were  still  to  make.  Whoever 
sees  me,  sees  I  would  be  a  Christian.  Therefore  '  are  my  ways  not  like 
other  men's  ways.'  Therefore  I  have  been,  I  am,  I  am  content  to  be, 
*  a  by- word,  a  proverb  of  reproach/  But  in  a  storm  I  think,  What  if 
the  gospel  be  not  true  ?  Then  thou  art  of  all  men  most  foolish.  For 
what  hast  thou  given  thy  goods,  thy  ease,  thy  friends,  thy  reputation, 
thy  country,  thy  life  ?  For  what  art  thou  wandering  over  the  face  of 
the  earth  ? — A  dream,  a  cunningly-devised  fable  !  Oh,  who  will  deliver 
me  from  this  fear  of  death  ?  What  shall  I  do  ?  Where  shall  I  fly 
from  it  ?  Should  I  fight  against  it  by  thinking  or  by  not  thinking  of 
it  ?  A  wise  man  advised  me  some  time  since,  '  Be  still,  and  go  on.' 
Perhaps  this  is  best,  to  look  upon  it  as  my  cross ;  when  it  comes,  to  let 
it  humble  me,  and  quicken  all  my  good  resolutions,  especially  that  ol 
praying  without  ceasing ;  and  at  other  times,  to  take  no  thought  about 
it,  but  quietly  to  go  on  '  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.' 3 

[For  many  years  I  have  been  tossed  by  various  winds  of  doctrine. 


1  See    this    repeated    on    next  page.  that   Wesley  had    some    expectation  o: 

1  Sir,    I    perceive   that  you   would    fain  being  made  bishop  of  the  province, 

convert  the  world.     But  you  must  wait  2  Donne. 

God's  own    time.'      So   Law  wrote  to  *  The  paragraphs  which    follow    are 

Wesley.     Law  described   the   going  out  from  a  '  private  paper '  quoted  by  Moore 

to  Georgia  as  the  project  of  a  '  crack-  (Life,  vol.  i.  p.  342). 
brained  enthusiast,'   while    others    held 


Jan.  i738.i  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  4 1 9 

I  asked  long  ago,  *  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? '  The  Scripture 
answered,  Keep  the  commandments,  believe,  hope,  love ;  follow  after 
these  tempers  till  thou  hast  fully  attained,  that  is  till  death;  by  all 
those  outward  works  and  means  which  God  hath  appointed,  by  walking 
as  Christ  walked. 

[I  was  early  warned  against  laying,  as  the  Papists  do,  too  much 
stress  on  outward  works,  or  on  a  faith  without  works ;  which,  as  it  does 
not  include,  so  it  will  never  lead  to,  true  hope  or  charity.  Nor  am 
I  sensible  that  to  this  hour  I  have  laid  too  much  stress  on  either; 
having  from  the  very  beginning  valued  both  faith,  and  the  means  of 
grace,  and  good  works,  not  on  their  own  account,  but  as  believing 
God,  who  had  appointed  them,  would  by  them  bring  me  in  due  time 
to  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ. 

[But  before  God's  time  was  come,  I  fell  among  some  Lutheran  and 
Calvinist  authors,  whose  confused  and  indigested  accounts  magnified 
faith  to  such  an  amazing  size  that  it  quite  hid  all  the  rest  of  the 
commandments.  I  did  not  then  see  that  this  was  the  natural  effect 
of  their  overgrown  fear  of  Popery ;  being  so  terrified  with  the  cry  of 
merit  and  good  works,  that  they  plunged  at  once  into  the  other  extreme. 
In  this  labyrinth  I  was  utterly  lost ;  not  being  able  to  find  out  what 
the  error  was,  nor  yet  to  reconcile  this  uncouth  hypothesis  either  with 
Scripture  or  common  sense. 

[The  English  writers,  such  as  Bishop  Beveridge,  Bishop  Taylor,  and 
Mr.  Nelson,  a  little  relieved  me  from  these  well-meaning,  wrong-headed 
Germans.  Their  accounts  of  Christianity  I  could  easily  see  to  be,  in 
the  main,  consistent  both  with  reason  and  Scripture.  Only  when  they 
interpreted  Scripture  in  different  ways,  I  was  often  much  at  a  loss. 
And  again,  there  was  one  thing  much  insisted  on  in  Scripture— the 
unity  of  the  Church — which  none  of  them,  I  thought,  clearly  explained 
or  strongly  inculcated. 

[But  it  was  not  long  before  Providence  brought  me  to  those  who 
showed  me  a  sure  rule  of  interpreting  Scripture,  viz.  'Consensus 
veterum :  quod  ab  omnibus,  quod  ubique,  quod  semper  creditum.' 
At  the  same  time  they  sufficiently  insisted  upon  a  due  regard  to  the 
one  Church  at  all  times  and  in  all  places. 

[Nor  was  it  long  before  I  bent  the  bow  too  far  the  other  way :  i.  By 
making  antiquity  a  co-ordinate  rather  than  subordinate  rule  with 
Scripture.  2.  By  admitting  several  doubtful  writings  as  undoubted 
evidences  of  antiquity.  3.  By  extending  antiquity  too  far,  even  to  the 
middle  or  end  of  the  fourth  century.  4.  By  believing  more  practices 
to  have  been  universal  in  the  ancient  Church  than  ever  were  so.  5.  By 
not  considering  that  the  decrees  of  one  Provincial  Synod  could  bind 
only  those  provinces  whose  representatives  met  therein.  6.  By  not 
considering  that  the  most  of  those  decrees  were  adapted  to  particular 


42O  John    Wesley's  Journal  [Jan.  i738. 

times  and  occasions ;  and  consequently,  when  those  occasions  ceased, 
must  cease  to  bind  even  those  provinces. 

[These  considerations  insensibly  stole  upon  me  as  I  grew  acquainted 
with  the  Mystic  writers,  whose  noble  descriptions  of  union  with  God 
and  internal  religion  made  everything  else  appear  mean,  flat,  and 
insipid.  But  in  truth  they  made  good  works  appear  so  too;  yea, 
and  faith  itself,  and  what  not?  These  gave  me  an  entire  new  view 
of  religion — nothing  like  any  I  had  before.  But,  alas  !  it  was  nothing 
like  that  religion  which  Christ  and  His  apostles  lived  and  taught. 
I  had  a  plenary  dispensation  from  all  the  commands  of  God :  the  form 
ran  thus,  'Love  is  all;  all  the  commands  beside  are  only  means  of 
love :  you  must  choose  those  which  you  feel  are  means  to  you,  and 
use  them  as  long  as  they  are  so.'  Thus  were  all  the  bands  burst  at 
once.  And  though  I  could  never  fully  come  into  this,  nor  contentedly 
omit  what  God  enjoined  ;  yet,  I  know  not  how,  I  fluctuated  between 
obedience  and  disobedience.  I  had  no  heart,  no  vigour,  no  zeal  in 
obeying;  continually  doubting  whether  I  was  right  or  wrong,  and 
never  out  of  perplexities  and  entanglements.  Nor  can  I  at  this  hour 
give  a  distinct  account  how  or  when  I  came  a  little  back  toward 
the  right  way :  only  my  present  sense  is  this — all  the  other  enemies 
of  Christianity  are  triflers ;  the  Mystics  are  the  most  dangerous  of  its 
enemies.  They  stab  it  in  the  vitals ;  and  its  most  serious  professors 
are  most  likely  to  fall  by  them.  May  I  praise  Him  who  hath  snatched 
me  out  of  this  fire  likewise,  by  warning  all  others  that  it  is  set  on 
fire  of  hell.] 

We  went  on  with  a  small,  fair  wind,  till  Thursday  in  the 
afternoon  ;  and  then  sounding,  found  a  whitish  sand  at  seventy- 
five  fathoms :  but  having  had  no  observation  for  several  days, 
the  captain  began  to  be  uneasy,  fearing  we  might  either  get 
unawares  into  the  Bristol  Channel,  or  strike  in  the  night  on  the 
rocks  of  Scilly. 

Sat.  28.— Was  another  cloudy  day  ;  but  about  ten  in  the 
morning,  the  wind  continuing  southerly,  the  clouds  began  to 
fly  just  contrary  to  the  wind,  and,  to  the  surprise  of  us  all,  sank 
down  under  the  sun,  so  that  at  noon  we  had  an  exact  observa- 
tion ;  and  by  this  we  found  we  were  as  well  as  we  could  desire, 
about  eleven  leagues  south  of  Scilly. 

Sun.  29. — We  saw  English  land  once  more,  which  about 
noon  appeared  to  be  the  Lizard  Point.  We  ran  by  it  with  a 
fair  wind,  and  at  noon  the  next  day  made  the  west  end  of  the 
Isle  of  Wight. 


Jan.  1738.  j 


Sixth  Savannah  Journal 


421 


Here  the  wind  turned  against  us,  and  in  the  evening  blew 
fresh  ;  so  that  we  expected,  the  tide  being  likewise  strong  against 
us,  to  be  driven  some  leagues  backward  in  the  night :  but  in  the 
morning,  to  our  great  surprise,  we  saw  Beachy  Head  just  before 
us,  and  found  we  had  gone  forwards  near  forty  miles. 

Toward  evening  was  a  calm  ;  but  in  the  night  a  strong 
north  wind  brought  us  safe  into  the  Downs.  The  day  before, 
Mr.  Whitefield  l  had  sailed  out,  neither  of  us  then  knowing  any- 
thing of  the  other.  At  four  in  the  morning  we  took  boat,  and  in 
half  an  hour  landed  at  Deal  ;  it  being  Wednesday,  FEBRUARY  I, 
the  anniversary  festival  in  Georgia  for  Mr.  Oglethorpe's  landing 
there. 


It  is  now  two  years  and  almost  four  months  since  I  left  my 


1  On    Georgia's     shore    thy    Wesley   shall 

attend, 
To  hail  the  wished  arrival  of  his  friend. 

This  was  a  prophecy  not  destined  to  be 
fulfilled.  The  lines  are  from  the  Gent.'s 
Mag.  Nov.  1737.  When  Wesley  landed 
at  Deal  at  half- past  four  in  the  morning, 
great  was  his  surprise  to  hear  that  White- 
field  was  close  at  hand.  '  Still  smarting 
from  the  wrongs  he  had  suffered  at 
Savannah,  he  immediately  dispatched  a 
letter  advising  the  young  evangelist  to 
relinquish  his  mission.'  On  this  Tyer- 
man  writes  the  following  note  :  '  It  is  a 
well-known  fact  that  in  early  life  Wesley 
publicly  maintained  that  in  matters  of 
importance,  when  the  reasons  on  each 
side  appeared  to  be  of  equal  weight,  it 
was  right  to  decide  the  question  by  cast- 
ing lots '  (see  Wesley's  Principles  of  a 
Methodist  further  Explained,  1746). 
Strangely  enough,  this  was  the  method 
he  adopted  to  ascertain  whether  White- 
field  ought  to  abandon  his  mission  to 
Georgia.  In  his  letter  to  Wesley  in 
1740,  during  their  Calvinistic  quarrel, 
Whitefield  recalled  the  incident.  Wesley, 
it  may  be  remembered,  resorted  to  the 
'  lot '  to  determine  whether  he  could 
marry  Miss  Sophy  or  not.  He  also 
adopted  the  same  means  to  decide 
whether  he  should  preach  and  print  his 


memorable  sermon  on  4  Free  Grace.' 
Sortilege,  as  it  was  called,  was  one  of 
the  practices  which  Wesley  learnt  from 
the  devout  Moravians.  (See  p.  325  ;  also 
Tyerman's  Life  of  Whitefield,  vol.  i. 

P-  "SO 

George  Whitefield,  born  at  the  Bell 
Inn,  Gloucester,  in  1714,  was  admitted 
a  servitor  to  Pembroke  College,  Oxford  ; 
he  watched  the  young  men  called  '  Metho- 
dists '  going  through  a  scoffing  crowd  of 
comrades  to  the  Sacrament'at  St.  Mary's, 
and  '  longed  to  be  one  of  them  ' ;  sought 
out  by  Charles  Wesley,  he  gladly  joined 
them.  He  was  ordained  by  Bishop 
Benson,  of  Gloucester,  when  the  Wesleys 
were  in  Georgia.  With  his  natural  gift 
of  oratory  and  his  early  acquisition  of 
dramatic  power,  he  became  at  once 
amazingly  popular.  John  Wesley,  in 
Georgia,  wrote  to  him  :  '  Only  Mr. 
Delamotte  is  with  me  till  God  shall  stir 
up  the  hearts  of  some  of  His  servants, 
who,  putting  their  lives  in  their  hands, 
shall  come  over  and  help  us  where  the 
harvest  is  so  great  and  the  labourers  so 
few.  What  if  thou  art  the  man,  Mr. 
Whitefield?'  Obeying  the  call,  the 
Whittaker,  in  which  he  sailed,  left  Deal 
on  the  evening  of  Jan.  31,  1738,  and 
the  Samuel,  with  Wesley  on  board, 
arrived  next  morning. 


422 


John    Wesley's  Journal 


[Jan.  1738. 


native  country,  in  order  to  teach  the  Georgian  Indians  J  the 
nature  of  Christianity.  But  what  have  I  learned  myself  in  the 
meantime  ?  Why,  what  I  the  least  of  all  suspected,  that  I,  who 
went  to  America  to  convert  others,  was  never  myself  converted 
to  God.2  '  I  am  not  mad,'  though  I  thus  speak  ;  but  '  I  speak 
the  words  of  truth  and  soberness ' ;  if  haply  some  of  those  who 
still  dream  may  awake,  and  see,  that  as  I  am,  so  are  they.3 

Are  they  read  in  philosophy  ?  So  was  I.  In  ancient  or 
modern  tongues  ?  So  was  I  also.  Are  they  versed  in  the 
science  of  divinity  ?  I  too  have  studied  it  many  years.  Can 
they  talk  fluently  upon  spiritual  things  ?  The  very  same  could 


1  The   Moravians,  too,  had  come   on 
this  errand,  as  well  as  to  obtain  a  settle- 
ment  where  they  could  enjoy  their  re- 
ligious observances  without  interference. 
Wesley's  failure  may  be  compared  with 
that  of  the  first  missionary  to  Northumbria, 
St.  Aidan.     (Lightfoot's  Leaders  of  the 
Northern  Church,  p.  37.) 

2  Wesley's  own  comment  on  this  is,  '  I 
am  not  sure  of  this.'      This  note,  and 
those  on  the  following  page,  which  appear 
for  the  first  time  in  Thomas  Jackson's 
edition  of  the  Journal,  were  without  doubt 
taken  by  him  from  Wesley's  corrected 
copy.      In    his    Autobiography  Jackson 
gives  a  clear  account  of  the  misfortunes 
which  befell  the  earlier  editions  of  the 
Journal.      He  writes    (p.    234) :    '  Two 
editions  of   his    Works,   both   of  them 
professing  to  be  complete,  had  already 
appeared  ;  one  in  the  years  1771-4,    in 
thirty-two  duodecimo  volumes ;  and  the 
other    in    1809-13,    in    sixteen    octavo 
volumes.     The  first  of  these  editions  was 
published  under  Mr.  Wesley's  personal 
sanction.      The   printer  whom   he   em- 
ployed was  William  Pine,  of  Bristol,  a 
member  of  his  own  Society,  but  one  of 
the  most  careless  owners  of  a  printing- 
press  that  ever  tried  the  temper  of  an 
author.     It  was  well  for  him  that  he  had 
to   deal  with  so   meek  a   man  as  John 
Wesley,  rather   than   with   Dr.    Samuel 
Johnson,  who  would  certainly  have  felled 
him  to  the  ground  when  the  extent  of 


the  mischief  he  had  done  was  ascertained. 
He  not  only  defeated  Mr.  Wesley's  de- 
sign to  send  out  his  Works  in  a  correct 
and  amended  form,  but  sent  them  forth 
in  a  far  worse  condition  than  they  had 
ever  been  in  before.  For  this  edition 
Mr.  Wesley  had  provided  excellent  paper 
and  an  elegant  type  ;  but  on  reading  the 
volumes  after  they  had  been  issued,  he 
found  not  only  important  words  and 
clauses,  but  whole  paragraphs  left  out, 
and  more  than  a  hundred  pages  of  his 
Journal  omitted  !  In  many  places  the 
sense  was  seriously  marred,  and  in  others 
entirely  perverted.  Having  found  out 
the  extent  of  the  evil,  the  author  affixed 
to  each  volume  a  frightful  list  of  errata  ; 
and  in  the  copy  which  he  retained  in  his 
own  library  he  corrected  every  volume 
with  his  own  pen.  .  .  .'  With  respect 
to  the  Benson  edition  of  the  Journal, 
similar  carelessness  was  displayed  both 
by  printer  and  editor,  for  they  '  entirely 
overlooked  the  tables  of  errata  which 
the  author  had  prepared  with  great  care.' 
8  And  yet  on  Dec.  I,  1772,  Wesley 
writes  to  his  brother  :  *  Let  me  be  again 
an  Oxford  Methodist  !  I  am  often  in 
doubt  whether  it  would  not  be  best  for 
me  to  resume  all  my  Oxford  rules,  great 
and  small.  I  did  then  walk  closely  with 
God,  and  redeemed  the  time.  But  what 
have  I  gained  during  these  thirty  years  ?  ' 
See  distinctions  between  a  son  and  a 
servant  in  Wesley's  Sermons. 


Jan.  1738.]  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  423 

I  do.     Are  they  plenteous  in  alms  ?     Behold,  I    gave   all    my 
goods  to  feed  the  poor.     Do  they  give  of  their  labour  as  well 
as  of  their  substance  ?     I  have  laboured  more  abundantly  than 
they  all.     Are  they  willing  to  suffer  for  their  brethren  ?     I  have 
thrown  up  my  friends,  reputation,  ease,  country  ;  I  have  put  my 
life  in  my  hand,  wandering  into  strange  lands  ;  I  have  given  my 
body  to  be  devoured  by  the  deep,  parched  up  with  heat,  con- 
sumed by  toil  and  weariness,  or  whatsoever  God  should  please 
to  bring  upon  me.     But  does  all  this — be  it  more  or  less,  it 
matters  not — make  me  acceptable  to  God  ?     Does  all  I  ever  did 
or  can  know,  say,  give,  do,  or  suffer,  justify  me  in  His  sight  ? 
Yea,  or  the  constant  use  of  all  the  means  of  grace  ?   (which, 
nevertheless,  is  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty).     Or  that  I 
know  nothing  of  myself ;  that  I  am,  as  touching  outward,  moral 
righteousness,  blameless  ?     Or  (to  come  closer  yet)  the  having 
a  rational  conviction  of  all  the  truths  of  Christianity  ?     Does 
all  this  give  me  a  claim  to  the  holy,  heavenly,  divine  character 
of  a  Christian?     By  no  means.     If  the  oracles  of  God  are  true, 
if  we  are  still  to  abide   by  '  the  law  and   the  testimony,'  all 
these  things,  though,  when  ennobled  by  faith  in  Christ,1  they 
are  holy  and  just  and  good,  yet  without  it  are  '  dung  and  dross/ 
meet  only  to  be  purged  away  by  '  the  fire  that  never  shall  be 
quenched.' 

This,  then,  have  I  learned  in  the  ends  of  the  earth, — that  I 
*  am  fallen  short  of  the  glory  of  God ' :  that  my  whole  heart  is 
'  altogether  corrupt  and  abominable ' ;  and  consequently  my 
whole  life  (seeing  it  cannot  be  that  an  '  evil  tree '  should  '  bring 
forth  good  fruit ')  :  that,  *  alienated '  as  I  am  from  the  life  of 
God,  I  am  '  a  child  of  wrath,' a  an  heir  of  hell :  that  my  own 
works,  my  own  sufferings,  my  own  righteousness,  are  so  far 
from  reconciling  me  to  an  offended  God,  so  far  from  making 
any  atonement  for  the  least  of  those  sins,  which  '  are  more  in 
number  than  the  hairs  of  my  head,'  that  the  most  specious  of 
them  need  an  atonement  themselves,  or  they  cannot  abide  His 
righteous  judgement :  that  '  having  the  sentence  of  death '  in  my 
heart,  and  having  nothing  in  or  of  myself  to  plead,  I  have  no 
hope,  but  that  of  being  justified  freely, '  through  the  redemption 


1  •  I  had  even  then  the  faith  of  a  servant,          *  '  I  believe  not '  (Wesley), 
though  not  that  of  a  son '  (Wesley). 


424  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Jan.i738. 

that  is  in  Jesus' ;  I  have  no  hope,  but  that  if  I  seek  I  shall  find 
Christ,  and  '  be  found  in  Him,  not  having  my  own  righteousness, 
but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  God  by  faith.' 

If  it  be  said  that  I  have  faith  (for  many  such  things  have 
I  heard,  from  many  miserable  comforters),  I  answer,  So  have 
the  devils — a  sort  of  faith  ;  but  still  they  are  strangers  to  the 
covenant  of  promise.  So  the  apostles  had  even  at  Cana  in 
Galilee,  when  Jesus  first  {  manifested  forth  His  glory  '  ;  even  then 
they,  in  a  sort,  '  believed  on  Him  ' ;  but  they  had  not  then  '  the 
faith  that  overcometh  the  world.'  The  faith  I  want 1  is '  a  sure 
trust  and  confidence  in  God,  that,  through  the  merits  of  Christ, 
my  sins  are  forgiven,  and  I  reconciled  to  the  favour  of  God.' 
I  want  that  faith  which  St.  Paul  recommends  to  all  the  world, 
especially  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  :  that  faith  which  enables 
every  one  that  hath  it  to  cry  out, '  1  live  not ;  but  Christ  liveth  in 
me  ;  and  the  life  which  I  now  live,  I  live  by  faith  in  the  Son 
of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me.'  I  want  that 
faith  which  none  can  have  without  knowing  that  he  hath  it 
(though  many  imagine  they  have  it,  who  have  it  not) ;  for 
whosoever  hath  it,  is  '  freed  from  sin,  the '  whole  '  body  of  sin 
is  destroyed '  in  him  :  he  is  freed  from  fear,  '  having  peace  with 
God  through  Christ,  and  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God.'  And  he  is  freed  from  doubt,  '  having  the  love  of  God 
shed  abroad  in  his  heart,  through  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given 
unto  him ' ;  which  '  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  his  spirit, 
that  he  is  a  child  of  God.' 2 


We  cannot  close  the  profoundly  interesting  volume  of  Wesley's 
Georgia  Journal  without  attempting  an  estimate,  however 
rough,  of  the  writer's  gains  and  losses.  His  losses  for  the  most 
part  were  negative,  and  perhaps,  under  the  circumstances,  in- 
evitable. He  had  a  singularly  vivacious  and  impressionable  tem- 
perament. His  ideal  of  Christian  cheerfulness  notwithstanding, 
he  attempted  to  repress,  if  not  destroy,  that  which  should  have 

1  '  The  faith  of  a  son  '  (Wesley).  ing  love  absolutely  necessary  to  our  being 

2  The  following  extract  from  the  Min-  in  His  favour,   or   may  there   be   some 
utes  of  Conference,  1774,  illustrates  this:  exempt  cases?     A. — We  dare  not  say.' 
'  Q.  I. — Is  a  sense    of   God's   pardon 


Jan.  1738.  j  Sixth  Savannah  Journal  42S 

been  only  curbed  and  guided  (App.  XIX.  vol.  vi.).  He  discovered, 
when  too  late,  that  the  task  was  impossible.  God  would  not 
by  His  grace  work  a  miracle  that  was  not  really  necessary.  He 
placed  himself  on  the  horns  of  a  dilemma  that  was  not  of 
God's  creation,  and  suffered  accordingly.  Neither  by  nature 
nor  vocation  was  he  a  loveless  celibate.  Nor  is  there  any 
evidence  that  his  call  to  evangelize  the  Indians  was  of  God. 
His  clear  and  candid  letter  to  Dr.  Burton  shows  that  the  mission 
was  undertaken  in  the  interests  of  his  own  salvation  (App.  XII. 
vol.  vi.).  He  desired  to  save  them  in  order  that  he  might  save 
himself!  For  a  courageous  man,  he  had  a  strange  terror  of 
death  ;  also  an  overmastering  fear  lest,  through  some  failure  in 
doing  or  suffering,  he  should  lose  his  own  soul  or  be  cast  away. 

His  bondage  to  ecclesiastical  law,  his  merciless  adhesion  to 
a  system  that  did  not  belong  to  that  age  or  to  such  a  com- 
munity, must  have  gone  far  to  neutralize  the  benefit  to  himself 
of  a  life  highly  spiritual. 

He  lost  what  he  might  have  gained,  those  primary  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  in  their  highest  development,  '  Love,  joy,  peace.' 

On  the  other  hand,  his  gains  were  remarkable.  He  learnt 
German,  Spanish,  Italian,  and  conversational  French.  He  com- 
piled many  grammars  and  some  dictionaries,  condensed  several 
books  of  devotion,  biography,  theology,  and  ecclesiastical  history  ; 
prepared  a  catechism  for  children  and  a  manual  for  catechumens. 
The  foundations  of  the  expository  work  which  in  after  years 
enabled  him  to  instruct  his  societies  in  daily  five-o'clock  morning 
services,  and  in  class-meetings,  and  which  eventually  made  his 
Notes  on  the  whole  Bible  possible,  were  laid  in  Oxford  and 
Georgia.  He  wrote  with  the  utmost  care  many  of  his  finest 
sermons,  not  a  few  of  which  are  to-day  studied  by  candidates 
for  the  ministry  and  for  ordination  the  world  around.  No  in- 
considerable portion  of  The  Christian  Library  had  its  beginnings 
in  Georgia.  The  decipherment  of  the  Diaries,  written  day  by 
day  in  Georgia,  makes  it  certain  that  a  large  number  of  hymns 
published  in  the  earliest  Methodist  '  Collections '  were  selected, 
considerably  edited,  translated,  or  composed  by  John  Wesley. 
He  popularized  Watts,  Herbert,  Austin,  his  father,  his  elder 
brother,  and  the  finest  of  the  German  and  Moravian  hymn- 
writers  ;  he  opened  the  windows  of  the  Church,  so  that  songs  of 

VOL.  I.  24 


426  John    Wesley's  Journal  [Jan.  1731 

Spanish  mystics  and  French  Protestants  were  heard  in  the 
sanctuary  ;  and  to  these  contributions,  which  could  only  have 
been  made  by  a  true  poet  with  the  soul  of  a  musician,  he 
added,  if  we  mistake  not,  many  original  compositions.  It 
was  in  Georgia  that  he  compiled  the  first  hymn-book  ever 
prepared  for  use  in  the  English  Church,  and  in  South  Carolina 
he  printed  and  published  it.  High  Churchman  though  he  was, 
he  bowed  to  the  behests  of  his  literary  conscience,  and  placed 
in  the  forefront  of  his  Collection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns  ten  of 
the  metrical  psalms  composed  by  the  foremost  Dissenter  of  the 
day.  He  learnt  in  Georgia  the  true  and  manifold  uses  of 
German  hymns ;  he  translated  them  in  versions  that  have  never 
been  surpassed  ;  and  tested  them,  as  he  tested  all  his  hymns,  in 
the  fellowship-meetings  of  Savannah  and  Frederica,  at  the  bed- 
side of  the  sick,  and  in  homely  social  circles  ;  and  the  strong  pre- 
sumption is  that  to  the  compositions  of  English  church  psalmody 
he  added  choice  examples  of  German  music,  singing  immortal 
melodies  to  psalms  and  hymns  of  his  own  selection,  translation, 
or  composition. 

He  pursued  his  investigations  into  the  then  obscure  regions 
of  early  church  history,  and  ascertained  the  facts,  doctrinal  and 
disciplinary,  concerning  one  of  the  most  remarkable  develop- 
ments of  modern  ecclesiastical  history — a  development  destined 
to  play  a  great  part  in  the  making  of  Methodism  and  in  the 
revival  of  religion  generally.  He  mastered  the  geographical,  his- 
torical, and  economic  facts  concerning  the  new  colony,  and  placed 
the  information  in  due  form  at  the  disposal  of  the  Trustees  and 
the  English  Government.  During  many  months  of  arduous  labour 
and  heavy  trial  he  served  Oglethorpe,  Causton,  and  the  people 
as  political  adviser  or  as  an  unrivalled  secretary. 

But  the  crowning  achievement  was  the  slow  moulding  of 
the  Methodist  system.  The  circuit,  the  society,  the  itinerant 
ministry,  the  class-meeting,  the  band-meeting,  the  lovefeast ; 
leaders  and  lay  assistants  ;  extempore  preaching  and  prayer  ; 
and  even  the  building  of  a  meeting-house, — all  this,  and  much 
else  in  the  form  and  spirit  of  early  Methodism,  came  to  John 
Wesley  in  Georgia,  and  was  transplanted  by  him  to  English  and 
Irish  cities  and  villages — a  tree  of  life  the  leaves  of  which  were 
to  be  for  the  healing  of  the  nations. 


PART  THE  SECOND 
THE  JOURNAL 

FROM   FEBRUARY    i,    1738,   TO  AUGUST    12,    1738 

(FROM  THE  ARRIVAL  IN  ENGLAND  TO  THE  RETURN   FROM  GERMANY) 

[Sit  note  on  ntxt  page} 

For  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth 
all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  Hins 
to  life  everlasting. — I  TIM.  i.  16. 


427 


Neither  journal  in  MS.  nor  continuous  diary  assists 
the  annotation  of  Wesley's  Second  Extract.  The  promise 
of  the  title-page — common  to  all  the  editions — is  not  ful- 
filled, for  in  this  section  the  Journal  proper  ends  with 
August  12,  1738.  Wesley,  however,  did  not  return  from 
Germany  until  Saturday,  September  9.  The  title-page  is 
probably,  in  part,  the  work  of  the  printer.  The  dates  in 
the  journal- heading  are  correct.  In  the  interval  between 
August  12,  1738,  and  the  date  of  publication  (September 
29,  1740),  occurred  the  controversy  with  Philip  Henry 
Molther  on  Stillness,  followed  by  the  secession  of  Wesley 
and  his  adherents  from  the  Fetter  Lane  Society  and  the 
organization  of  the  United  Societies  at  the  Foundery. 
These  events,  coupled  with  the  slanders  of  '  Fogg's 
Journal'  and  the  Williams  Affidavit,  influenced  the 
selection  of  extracts  from  the  Journal,  and  account  for 
allusions  in  the  Preface  to  the  Second  Part. 


PREFACE 

1.  THAT  men   revile  me,  and  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  me; 
that  I  am  become  as  it  were  a  monster  unto  many ;  that  the  zealous  of 
almost  every  denomination  cry  out,  *  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the 
earth,'— this  gives  me,  with  regard  to  myself,  no  degree  of  uneasiness. 
For  I  know  the  scripture  must  be  fulfilled,  'If  they  have  called  the 
Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub,  how  much  more  them  of  His  house- 
hold ? '     But  it  does  give  me  a  concern  with  regard  to  those  who,  by 
this  artifice  of  the  devil,  are  prevented  from  hearing  that  word  which  is 
able  to  save  their  souls. 

2.  For  the  sake  of  these,  and  indeed  of  all  who  desire  to  hear  the 
truth  of  those  things  which  have  been  so  variously  related,  I  have  been 
induced  to  publish  this  further  account ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  it  will 
even  hence  appear  $to  all  candid  and   impartial  judges  that  I  have 
hitherto  lived  in  all  good  conscience  toward  God. 

3.  I  shall  be  easily  excused,  by  those  who  either  love  or  seek  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity,  for  speaking  so  largely  of  the  Moravian  Church ; 
a  city  which  ought  to  be  set  upon  a  hill.     Their  light  hath  been  too 
long  hid  under  a  bushel ;  it  is  high  time  it  should  at  length  break  forth, 
and  'so  shine  before  men,  that  others  also  may  glorify  their  Father 
which  is  in  heaven.' 

4.  If  any  should  ask,  '  But  do  you  think  even  this  Church  is  perfect, 
without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  ? '     I  answer  plainly,  '  No  ; 
though  I  trust  it  will  be,  when  patience  has  had  its  perfect  work.'     But 
neither  do  I  think  it  right  to  entertain  the  world  with  the  spots  of  God's 
children. 

5.  It  has  been  further  asked  whether  I  imagine  God  is  to  be  found 
only  among  them.     I  reply,  '  By  no  means.     I  know  there  is  a  God  in 
England,  and  we  need  not  go  to  seek  Him  in  strange  lands.'     I  know 
that  in  our  own  He  is  very  nigh  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him  ;  and 
therefore  I  think  those  unwise  (to  say  no  more)  who  run  to  inquire 
after  Him  in  Holland  or  Germany. 

6.  When  I  went,  the  case  was  widely  different.     God  had  not  then 
'  made  bare  His  arm '  before  us  as  He  hath  now  done ;  in  a  manner,  I 
will  be  bold  to  say,  which  had  not  been  known  either  in  Holland  or 
Germany   at   that   time,   when   He   who    ordereth  all   things   wisely, 

429 


430  John    Wesley  s  Journal 

according  to  'the  counsel  of   His  own  will,'  was  pleased  by  me  to 
open  the  intercourse  between  the  English  and  the  Moravian  Church. 

7.  The  particular  reason  which  obliged  me  to  relate  so  much  of  the 
conversation  I  had  with  those  holy  men  is  this:  In  September  1738, 
when  I  returned  from  Germany,  I  exhorted  all  I  could  to  follow  after 
that  great  salvation,   which  is  through  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ; 
waiting  for  it  '  in  all  the  ordinances  of  God,'  and  in  *  doing  good,  as 
they  had  opportunity,  to  all  men.'      And  many  found  the  beginning 
of  that  salvation,  being  justified  freely,  having  peace  with  God  through 
Christ,  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,  and  having  His  love  shed 
abroad  in  their  hearts. 

8.  But  about  September  1739,  while  my  brother  and  I  were  absent, 
certain  men  crept  in  among  them  unawares,  greatly  troubling  and  sub- 
verting their  souls  \  telling  them  they  were  in  a  delusion,  that  they  had 
deceived  themselves,  and  had  no  true  faith  at  all.     '  For,'  said  they, 
'  none  has  any  justifying  faith  who  has  ever  any  doubt  or  fear,  which 
you  know  you  have  ;  or  who  has  not  a  clean  heart,  which  you  know  you 
have  not :  nor  will  you  ever  have  it,  till  you  leave  off  using  the  means 
of  grace,  so  called ;  till  you  leave  off  running  to  church  and  sacrament, 
and  praying,  and  singing,  and  reading  either  the  Bible  or  any  other 
book ;    for  you   cannot   use   these   things   without   trusting  in   them 
Therefore,  till    you  leave  them  off,  you  can  never  have  true  faith ; 
you  can  never  till  then  trust  in  the  blood  of  Christ.' 

9.  And  this  doctrine,  from  the  beginning  to  this  day,   has   been 
taught  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Moravian  Church.     I  think,  therefore, 
that  it  is  my  bounden  duty  to  clear  the  Moravians  from   this  asper- 
sion ;  and  the  more,  because  I  am  perhaps  the  only  person  now  in 
England  that  both  can  and  will  do  it.     And  I  believe  it  is  the  peculiar 
providence  of  God  that  I  can,  that  two  years  since  the  most  eminent 
members  of  that  Church  should  so  fully  declare  both  their  experience 
and  judgement,  touching  the  very  points  now  in  question. 

10.  The  sum  of  what  has  been  asserted,  as  from  them,  is  this  : — 

'  (i)  That  a  man  cannot  have  any  degree  of  justifying  faith  till  he 
is  wholly  freed  from  all  doubt  and  fear,  and  till  he  has,  in  the  full, 
proper  sense,  a  new,  a  clean  heart. 

'  (2)  That  a  man  may  not  use  the  ordinances  of  God,  the  Lord's 
Supper  in  particular,  before  he  has  such  a  faith  as  excludes  all  doubt 
and  fear,  and  implies  a  new,  a  clean  heart.' 

In  flat  opposition  to  this,  I  assert, — 

'  (i)  That  a  man  may  have  a  degree  of  justifying  faith  before  he  is 
wholly  freed  from  all  doubt  and  fear,  and  before  he  has,  in  the  full, 
proper  sense,  a  new,  a  clean  heart. 

'  (2)  That  a  man  may  use  the  ordinances  of  God,  the  Lord's  Supper 


Preface  431 

in  particular,  before  he  has  such  a  faith  as  excludes  all  doubt  and  fear, 
and  implies  a  new,  a  clean  heart.' 

I  further  assert,  *  This  I  learned  (not  only  from  the  English,  but 
also)  from  the  Moravian  Church.' 

And  I  hereby  openly  and  earnestly  call  upon  that  Church  (and  upon 
Count  Zinzendorf  in  particular,  who,  I  trust,  is  not  ashamed  or  afraid 
to  avow  any  part  of  the  gospel  of  Christ)  to  correct  me,  and  explain 
themselves,  if  I  have  misunderstood  or  misrepresented  them. 

JOHN  WESLEY. 

LONDON, 

September  29,  1740, 


THE    JOURNAL 

From  February  i,   1738,  to  June  13,   1738 

1738.  FEBRUARY  I,  Wed. — After  reading  prayers  and 
explaining  a  portion  of  Scripture  to  a  large  company  at  the 
inn,  I  left  Deal,1  and  came  in  the  evening  to  Faversham. 

I  here  read  prayers,  and  explained  the  Second  Lesson  to 
a  few  of  those  who  were  called  Christians,  but  were  indeed 
more  savage  in  their  behaviour  than  the  wildest  Indians  I 
have  yet  met  with. 

Fri.  3. — I  came  to  Mr.  Delamotte's  at  Blendon,2  where  I 
expected  a  cold  reception.  But  God  had  prepared  the  way 
before  me ;  and  I  no  sooner  mentioned  my  name,  than  I 
was  welcomed  in  such  a  manner  as  constrained  me  to  say, 
'  Surely  God  is  in  this  place,  and  I  knew  it  not !  Blessed 
be  ye  of  the  Lord  !  Ye  have  shown  more  kindness  in  the 
latter  end  than  in  the  beginning.' 

In  the  evening  I  came  once  more  to  London,3  whence  I 
had  been  absent  two  years  and  near  four  months. 


1  The  first  Wesleyan  preaching  within  on    Nov.    2,    1737,    he    heard    Charles 
the  county  of  Kent  (Meth.  Mag.   1880,  Wesley  read  Bishop  Hall.      Charles  was 
p.  39).     The  service  at  Faversham,  like  a  frequent   visitor   at   Blendon,    as  also 
that  at  Deal,  was  also  held,  probably,  were     Ingham     and     Whitefield.      (C. 
at  the  inn,  as  were  so  many  of  the  earliest  Wesley's  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.  76-9,  &c. ; 
devotional  meetings  before  private  houses  Whitefield's  Journal,  pp.    132,   133.) 
were  opened  to  Wesley.     Later,  rooms  s  The   London  home  of  the  Wesleys 
were  hired,  or  built,  in  which  the  early-  was  with  the  Huttons  in  Great  College 
morning    services    were    held   and    the  Street,  on  the  south  side  of  Westminster 
societies  met.      But  until  comparatively  Abbey.     John  Hutton  was  a  Nonjuring 
recent     times     inns,     especially     those  clergyman.      His  son  James  was  led  to 
with  'assembly  rooms,'    were   used    for  Christ   by  the   Wesleys.     His  was  the 
Methodist  worship.  dominant  lay  mind  in  the  society  founded 

2  Mr.  De  La  Motte,  J.P.,  of  Blendon  May  i,  1738.     Ultimately  he  became  the 
Hall,  near  Bexley.     His  place  of  business  leading    layman    amongst     the    English 
in  London  was  at  Fresh  Wharfe,  where,  Moravians  (L.  Q.  Rev.  vol.  cxliii.  p.  189; 

432 


I.    PETER    BOHLER. 

3.    COUNT    ZINZENDORF. 


2.    JOHN    GAMBOLD. 
4.    JAMES    HUTTON. 


433 


peb.  1738.]  In   London  435 



Many  reasons  I  have  to  bless  God,  though  the  design  I 
went  upon  did  not  take  effect,  for  my  having  been  carried 
into  that  strange  land,  contrary  to  all  my  preceding  resolutions. 
Hereby  I  trust  He  hath  in  some  measure  *  humbled  me  and 
proved  me,  and  shown  me  what  was  in  my  heart1  Hereby 
I  have  been  taught  to  '  beware  of  men.'  Hereby  I  am  come 
to  know  assuredly  that,  if  *  in  all  our  ways  we  acknowledge 
God,'  He  will,  where  reason  fails,  *  direct  our  path,'  by  lot 
or  by  the  other  means  which  He  knoweth.  Hereby  I  am 
delivered  from  the  fear  of  the  sea,  which  I  had  both  dreaded 
and  abhorred  from  my  youth. 

Hereby  God  has  given  me  to  know  many  of  His  servants  ; 
particularly  those  of  the  church  of  Herrnhut.  Hereby  my 
passage  is  opened  to  the  writings  of  holy  men  in  the  German, 
Spanish,  and  Italian  tongues.1  I  hope,  too,  some  good  may 
come  to  others  hereby.  All  in  Georgia  have  heard  the  word 
of  God.  Some  have  believed,  and  begun  to  run  well.  A 
few  steps  have  been  taken  towards  publishing  the  glad  tidings 
both  to  the  African  and  American  heathen.  Many  children 
have  learned  c  how  they  ought  to  serve  God,'  and  to  be  useful 
to  their  neighbour.  And  those  whom  it  most  concerns  have 
an  opportunity  of  knowing  the  true  state  of  their  infant  colony, 
and  laying  a  firmer  foundation  of  peace  and  happiness  to  many 
generations. 

Sat.  4. —  I  told  my  friends  some  of  the  reasons  which  a  little 
hastened  my  return  to  England.3  They  all  agreed  it  would 
be  proper  to  relate  them  to  the  Trustees  of  Georgia. 

Accordingly  the  next  morning  I  waited  on  Mr.  Oglethorpe, 
but  had  not  time  to  speak  on  that  head.  In  the  afternoon  I 


Meth.   Mag,    1857,    p.    156;    Recorder ;  '    French    authors    he    had    read    in 

Winter  No.  1899,  p.  64  ;  and  Benham's  Oxford. 

Memoirs  of  James  Hutton).     On  Friday*  *  On    Saturday    the    4th    Oglethorpe 

Feb.   3,    Charles    Wesley  writes:     'In  learnt     from     Charles     Wesley    of    his 

the  afternoon  news  was  brought  me  at  brother's  arrival.     '  Oglethorpe,'  Charles 

James   Hutton's   that    my    brother    was  writes,    'was  very   inquisitive    into  the 

come  from  America.    I  could  not  believe,  causes  of  his  coming ;  said  he  ought  not 

till  at  night  I  saw  him.     He  comes,  not  to  have  returned  without  the  Trustees' 

driven  away,  but  to  tell  the  true  state  leave.    At   ten,  before   the  Council   [of 

of  the  colony  ;   which  according  to  his  the  Board  of  Trade]  I  heard  the  fresh 

account  is  truly  deplorable.'  pleadings  for  Carolina.' 

* 


436 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[Feb.  1738. 


was  desired  to  preach  at  St.  John  the  Evangelist's.1  I  did 
so  on  those  strong  words,  '  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a 
new  creature.'  I  was  afterwards  informed,  many  of  the  best 
in  the  parish  were  so  offended,  that  I  was  not  to  preach  there 
any  more. 

Mon.  6. — I  visited  many  of  my  old  friends,  as  well  as  most 
of  my  relations.8  I  find  the  time  is  not  yet  come  when  I 
am  to  be  *  hated  of  all  men.'  Oh  may  I  be  prepared  for 
that  day  ! 

Tues.  7. — (A  day  much  to  be  remembered.)  At  the  house 
of  Mr.  Weinantz,3  a  Dutch  merchant,  I  met  Peter  Bohler,4 
Schulius,  Richter,5  and  Wensel  Neisser,6  just  then  landed  from 


1  At    Millbank,    Westminster.       The 
sermon,  in  a  more  or  less  revised  form, 
appears   among    the    standard    sermons 
under    the    title   of   '  Sin   in  Believers.' 
Some     paragraphs     (see     5-11)     were 
certainly  of  later  date.      Wesley's  brief 
popularity   in  Anglican  and  aristocratic 
circles  at  this  time  arose  from  the  fact 
that   he   had  just  returned  from  a  still 
popular  colony. 

2  We  miss  the  Diary  which  would  have 
told   us   who   were   the  friends  and  re- 
latives  he  visited   in  London.     Charles 
Wesley's    Journal    sheds    light    on    the 
question.     The  Lamberts,  Wrights,  Dr. 
Matthew   Wesley's   family;    Mrs.    Pen- 
darves,    possibly   other   members  of  the 
Granville  family,  the  Huttons  ;  Thomas 
Broughton,  curate  at  the  Tower,  and  still 
a  member  of  the  Holy  Club  ;  the  Dela- 
mottes   at   Fresh   Wharfe;    Archbishop 
Potter,  whom  Charles  saw  on  this  same 
day  ;  Bishop1  Gibson,  the  Vernons,  and 
others. 

'  Of  Mr.  Weinantz,  the  '  Dutch 
merchant,'  we  know  nothing  (the  name 
of  his  son  is  spelt  Wynantz,  Dec.  27, 
1783) ;  nor  do  we  know  the  house 
in  which  this  memorable  meeting  took 
place. 

4  Peter  Bohler,  born  in  1712  at  Frank- 
fort-on-the- Maine,  was  brought  up  a 
Lutheran.  In  1731  he  entered  the 
University  at  Jena.  The  religious  in- 
fluence in  Lutheran  churches  nick- 


named '  Pietism '  led  him  to  seek 
experimental  religion  and  to  adopt  those 
views  of  justifying  faith  which  he  after- 
wards pressed  upon  the  Wesleys.  Count 
Zinzendorf,  the  protector  of  the  Moravian 
refugees  at  Herrnhut,  visited  Jena,  and 
became  acquainted  with  Bohler  and 
Professor  Spangenberg.  This  interview 
eventually  led  these  two  Lutheran 
Pietists  to  join  the  Church  of  the 
Moravian  Brethren.  The  Count  ap- 
pointed Bohler  tutor  to  his  son ;  and 
when  he  himself  became  a  'bishop  of 
the  Moravian  Church,  his  first  episcopal 
act  was  the  ordination  of  Peter  Bohler  to 
the  Moravian  ministry,  and  this  regard- 
less of  the  fact  that  he  had  already  been 
acting  as  a  Lutheran  minister  at  Berthels- 
dorf.  When  Wesley  met  him  in  London, 
Bohler  was  on  his  way  to  America  as  a 
missionary  to  Georgia  and  the  negroes  of 
Carolina.  Possibly  through  the  Dela- 
mottes  at  Fresh  Wharfe  Wesley  heard  of 
the  arrival  of  these  German  brethren.  A 
letter  for  Zinzendorf  from  John  Toltschig, 
which  he  had  brought  from  Savannah,  he 
handed  over  to  Bohler. 

6  'The  aged  brother  Richter  from 
Stralsund  remained  about  six  months, 
ministering  chiefly  to  the  few  Germans 
who  in  1737  were  united  in  London  by 
Count  Zinzendorf  (Memoirs  of  fames 
Hutton,  p.  27). 

8  Frederick  Wensel  Neisser  had  been 
on  a  mission  to  England  ten  years  earlier. 


Feb.  1738.] 


In   London 


437 


Germany.  Finding  they  had  no  acquaintance  in  England, 
I  offered  to  procure  them  a  lodging,  and  did  so  near  Mr. 
Hutton's,  where  I  then  was.1  And  from  this  time  I  did  not 
willingly  lose  any  opportunity  of  conversing  with  them,  while 
I  stayed  in  London. 

Wed.  8. — I  went  to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  again,  but  had  no 
opportunity  of  speaking  as  I  designed.  Afterwards  I  waited 
on  the  Board  of  Trustees,  and  gave  them  a  short  but  plain 
account  of  the  state  of  the  colony  :  an  account,  I  fear,  not 
a  little  differing  from  those  which  they  had  frequently  received 
before ;  and  for  which  I  have  reason  to  believe  some  of  them 
have  not  forgiven  me  to  this  day.2 


Eventually  George  Schulius  alone  accom- 
panied Bohler  to  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
Neisser  returning  to  Germany  (Memoirs 
of  Janus  Hutton,  p.  17,  et  seq.). 

1  John  Hutton's  house  was  afterwards 
occupied  for  a  time  by  Count  Zinzendorf. 
On  his  return  from  Georgia  Charles 
Wesley  waited  on  the  Primate,  several 
noblemen,  and  members  of  the  Georgia 
Trust.  In  August  1737  he  saw  the 
King  and  Queen,  and  was  invited  to 
dine  with  them.  The  Wesleys  and  their 
friends  were  welcome  guests  in  College 
Street  until,  largely  as  the  result  of 
Peter  Border's  teaching,  the  Moravian- 
Methodist  views  on  conversion,  justifica- 
tion, and  the  new  birth  were  more  fully 
developed.  To  these  views  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hutton  were  exceedingly  averse. 
Their  son  (James)  and  their  daughter, 
both  strongly  attached  to  the  Wesleys, 
also  received  the  truth  as  expounded  by 
Peter  Bohler.  The  parents  were  irre- 
concilably offended.  James  Hutton  was 
a  printer  and  bookseller.  His  shop,  '  at 
the  Bible  and  Sun,  without  Temple  Bar,' 
was  in  Little  Wild  Street.  West  End 
Methodists,  in  1740,  could  buy  there 
Hymns  and  Sacred  Poems,  vols.  i.  and  ii., 
price,  bound,  2s.  6d.  each ;  two  Extracts  of 
the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley's  Journal,  price, 
stitched,  8of.  each  ;  a  Collection  of  Forms 
of  Prayer >f or  Every  Day  oj  the  Week  ; 
two  Tracts ;  two  Sermons,  and  Nicode- 


mus  ;  or,  a  Treatise  on  the  Fear  of  Man 
(see  Wesley's  Journal,  ist  ed.  adv.  page). 
When  Wesley  had  finished  his  Abridge- 
ment of  the  Life  of  Haliburton,  he  wished 
James  Hutton  to  publish  it.  His  father 
and  mother  absolutely  forbade  him  to 
do  so,  on  the  ground  that  Haliburton 
was  a  Presbyterian,  and  wrote  of  religious 
experiences.  They  charged  him  to 
publish  no  books  of  a  similar  kind 
(Jackson's  Life  of  C.  Wesley,  vol.  i. 
p.  129).  But  for  prejudice,  Charles 
Rivington  or  James  Hutton  might  have 
published  Wesley's  Journal.  It  would 
then  have  escaped  the  maltreatment  it 
received  at  the  hands  of  Felix  Farley 
and  Pine.  Although  James  Hutton  did 
not  print  and  publish  Haliburton's  Life, 
he  sold  the  book  at  the  Bible  and 
Sun. 

*  Charles  Wesley  gives  a  much  fuller 
account :  '  Wed.  Feb.  8. — I  was  with 
the  Trustees,  who  were  surprised  at  my 
brother's  account  of  Georgia,  the  fewness 
of  the  people,  &c.  Fri.  Feb.  10. — We 
dined  at  Vernon's,  who  accosted  me, 
"Well,  sir,  I  hope  you  intend  returning 
to  Georgia."  I  answered,  "  That  is  my 
desire  and  design."  I  heard  more  of  the 
great  discouragements  the  poor  people 
labour  under.  Sat.  Feb.  n. — I  heard 
Clerk  plead  for  Georgia  before  the 
Council  [of  the  Board  of  Trade]  and  Mr. 
Oglethorpe's  speech.' 


438 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[Feb.  1738. 


Sun.  12. — I  preached  at  St.  Andrew's,  Holborn,1  on  'Though 
I  give  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  though  I  give  my 
body  to  be  burned,  and  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me 
nothing.'  Oh,  hard  sayings  !  Who  can  hear  them  ?  Here 
too,  it  seems,  I  am  to  preach  no  more. 

Wed.  15. — I  waited  on  the  Trustees  again,  and  gave  them  in 
writing  the  substance  of  what  I  had  said  at  the  last  Board.2 


1  In  the  church  of  St.  Andrew, 
Holborn,  his  father  had  been  ordained 
priest  by  Bishop  Compton  (Feb.  26, 
1689).  The  sermon  preached  by  his  son 
John  was  the  one  on  '  Love,'  with  which 
he  entered  on  his  ministry  in  Savannah — 
the  sermon  in  which  he  told  the  story  of 
his  father's  death  (No.  cxxxix.).  In  the 
churches  of  St.  John  and  St.  Andrew, 
though  he  knew  it  not,  he  was  entering 
upon  a  new  and  greater  ministry.  Two 
sermons  on  I  Cor.  xiii.  were  pub- 
lished in  the  Works  (vol.  vii.  pp.  45, 
482).  The  earlier  version  is  published 
last.  The  one  preached  many  years 
later  also  contains  an  autobiographi- 
cal reminiscence :  '  I  knew  a  young 
man,  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago,  who,  during 
the  course  of  several  years,  never  en- 
deavoured to  convince  any  one  of  a 
religious  truth,  but  he  was  convinced ; 
and  he  never  endeavoured  to  persuade 
any  one  to  engage  in  a  religious  practice, 
but  he  was  persuaded.  What  then  ? ' 
Recalling  the  wellnigh  innumerable 
entries  in  the  Diary  in  which  such  con- 
victions and  persuasions  are  recorded, 
one  cannot  doubt  as  to  the  identification 
of  the  '  young  man.' 

2  The  day  following  Charles  writes : 
'  Mr.  Oglethorpe  told  me,  "  Your  brother 
must  have  a  care.  There  is  a  very  strong 
spirit  raising  against  him.  People  say  he 
is  come  over  to  do  mischief  to  the  colony. 
He  will  be  called  upon  for  his  reasons, 
why  he  left  the  people."  I  answered, 
"Sir,  he  has  been  twice  before  at  the 
Board  for  that  purpose,  but  was  not 
asked  that  question,  and  therefore  had 
no  opportunity  to  answer  it.  He  will 
attend  them  again  on  Wednesday  morn- 
ing." I  waited  on  his  lordship  of 


London,  and  informed  him  of  my 
brother's  return.  He  spoke  honourably 
of  him ;  asked  many  questions  about 
Georgia  and  the  Trustees ;  forgot  his 
usual  reserve,  and  dismissed  me  very 
kindly.'  In  the  Journal  of  the  Georgia 
Trustees  (Record  Office  C.O.  5),  under 
date  Dec.  7,  1737,  is  the  following 
entry  :  '  Read  several  letters  from  Mr. 
Williamson  at  Savannah  to  the  Trustees 
complaining  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John 
Wesley's  having  refused  the  Sacrament 
to  his  wife,  Mrs.  Sophia  Williamson, 
with  Mrs.  Williamson's  Affidavit  there- 
upon, and  two  Presentments  of  the 
Grand  Jury  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wesley  for 
the  said  refusal,  and  for  several  other 
facts  laid  to  his  charge.  Ordered,  That 
copies  of  the  said  letters  and  Affidavit  be 
sent  over  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley 
desiring  him  to  return  his  answer  to  the 
same  as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  that  a 
letter  be  sent  to  Mr.  Williamson  to 
acquaint  him  of  the  said  copies  being 
sent  to  Mr.  Wesley ;  and  that  if  he  has 
anything  new  to  lay  before  the  Trustees 
he  should  show  it  first  to  Mr.  Wesley 
and  then  send  it  over  to  them  ;  and  that 
the  Trustees  think  he  should  not  have 
made  his  application  to  the  world  by 
advertising  his  complaints  before  he  had 
acquainted  the  Trustees  with  them.' 
There  is  no  further  reference  to  Wesley 
in  the  Journal  of  the  Trustees  until 
Wednesday,  Feb.  22,  1738,  when  we 
find  the  following :  '  The  Rev.  Mr. 
John  Wesley  attended  and  delivered  into 
the  Board  a  Narrative  of  his  own  relating 
to  the  complaints  of  Mrs.  Williamson 
and  three  certificates:  one  signed  by 
Mr.  James  Burnside  dated  Savannah, 
Nov.  I,  1737 ;  another  of  the  same 


feb.  1738.] 


In    Oxford 


439 


Whatsoever  further  questions  they  asked  concerning  the 
state  of  the  province,  I  likewise  answered  to  the  best  of  my 
knowledge. 

Fri.  17. — I  set  out  for  Oxford  with  Peter  Bohler,  where  we 
were  kindly  received  by  Mr.  Sarney,1  the  only  one  now  remain- 
ing here  of  many  who,  at  our  embarking  for  America,  were 
used  to  '  take  sweet  counsel  together,'  and  rejoice  in  '  bearing 
the  reproach  of  Christ.' 

Sat.  1 8.— We  went  to  Stanton  Harcourt,  to  Mr.  Gambold,1 


date,  signed  by  Margaret  Burnside  ;  and 
another,  signed  by  Charles  Delamotte, 
dated  Savannah,  Oct.  25,  1737.'  On 
Wednesday,  April  26,  1738,  'The  Rev. 
Mr.  John  Wesley  attended  and  left  the 
appointment  of  him  by  the  Trustees  to 
perform  ecclesiastical  offices  in  Georgia  : 
Resolved,  That  the  Authority  granted  to 
the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley  to  do  and 
perform  all  religious  and  ecclesiastical 
offices  in  Georgia  dated  Oct.  10,  1735, 
be  revoked.'  This  closes  the  matter,  so 
far  as  the  Georgia  Trustees  and  their 
records  are  concerned. 

1  Mr.  Sarney  is  frequently  named  in 
the  answering  portion  of  Charles  Wesley's 
Journal.      His  name  appears  on   John 
Wesley's  list  of  friends  with  whom  he 
corresponded  whilst  in  Georgia.    Charles 
writes  (Feb.  17),  'I  came  in  the  Oxford 
coach  to  my  old  lodgings  at  Mr.  Sarney's.' 
Later  (Sept.  28)  he  writes,  '  I  called  on 
my  friend  that  was,  John  Sarney,  now 
estranged  by  the  offence  of  the  Cross.' 
Peter  Bohler,  in  a  letter  to  Zinzendorf 
(W.M.  Mag.  1854,  p.  687),  writes:  'I 
travelled  with   the   two   brothers,  John 
and   Charles   Wesley,   from    London   to 
Oxford.      The  elder,   John,  is   a  good- 
natured    man :     he    knew    he    did    not 
properly  believe  on    the    Saviour,   and 
was  willing  to  be  taught.     His  brother 
...  is  at  present  very  much  distressed 
in  his  mind,  but  does  not  know  how  he 
shall  begin  to  be  acquainted   with   the 
Saviour.' 

2  John  Gambold,  born  April  10,  1711, 
at  Puncheston,  Pembrokeshire  :  son  of  a 
clergyman  of  unaffected  piety  and  purity. 


At  fifteen  he  entered  as  servitor  in  Christ 
Church,  Oxford;  in  1730  he  joined  the 
Holy  Club,  and  in  1733  was  ordained  by 
Dr.  Potter.  At  Stanton  Harcourt,  in 
Oxfordshire,  the  living  of  which  he  held 
from  Lord  Harcourt  for  some  years,  his 
sister  kept  house  for  him.  Kezia 
Wesley,  the  youngest  child  of  the  Ep- 
worth  rectory,  was  a  guest  in  the  house 
when  her  brothers  and  Peter  Bohler 
paid  this  visit.  John  Gambold  and  the 
Wesleys  were  strongly  attached  friends 
in  their  Oxford  days.  Some  of  Gam- 
bold's  poems  were  introduced  into 
Hymns  and  Sacred  Poems^  1739.  He 
afterwards  became  a  Moravian.  His 
farewell  address  to  his  old  parishioners 
shows  that,  in  resigning  his  living, 
he  was  moved  by  a  desire  to  '  enjoy 
fellowship  with  a  little  flock  of  His 
sheep,  who  daily  feed  on  the  merits  of 
His  passion,  and  whose  great  concern 
it  is  to  build  up  one  another  in  their  most 
holy  truth,  and  to  propagate  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus  for  the  good  of  others.' 
He  was  made  a  Moravian  bishop,  preach- 
ing in  Fetter  Lane  Chapel,  living  a 
blameless  life,  and  cherishing  a  vain  hope 
of  union  with  the  Anglican  Church.  We 
are  indebted  to  John  Gambold  for  the 
most  vivid  description  of  John  Wesley 
and  the  Holy  Club  written  during 
Wesley's  absence  in  Georgia  {Mcth. 
Mag.  1798,  p.  172).  One  of  his  sermons 
survives  among  the  Wesley  MSS. 
in  the  Colman  Collection.  Charles 
Wesley's  note  for  Feb.  18  shows  that 
he  did  not  travel  with  John  and 
Bohler  to  Stanton  Harcourt,  but  met 


440  John   Wesley's  Journal  [Feb.  ms. 

and  found  my  old  friend  recovered  from  his  mystic  delusion, 
and  convinced  that  St.  Paul  was  a  better  writer  than  either 
Tauler  or  Jacob  Behmen.  The  next  day  I  preached  once 
more  at  the  Castle  (in  Oxford)  to  a  numerous  and  serious 
congregation. 

All  this  time  I  conversed  much  with  Peter  Bohler 1  ;  but  I 
understood  him  not,  and  least  of  all  when  he  said,  Mi  f rater, 
mi  frater,  excoquenda  est  ista  tua  philosophia.  '  My  brother,  my 
brother,  that  philosophy  of  yours  must  be  purged  away.' 

Hon.  20. — I  returned  to  London.  On  Tuesday  I  preached 
at  Great  St.  Helen's  *  on  'If  any  man  will  come  after  Me, 
let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  daily,  and 
follow  Me.' 

Wed.  22. —  I  was  with  the  Trustees  again,  to  whom  I  then 
gave  a  short  account  (and  afterwards  delivered  it  to  them  in 
writing)  of  the  reasons  why  I  left  Georgia. 

Sun.  26. — I  preached  at  six  at  St.  Lawrence's  ;  at  ten  in  St. 
Katherine  Cree's  church  ;  and  in  the  afternoon  at  St.  John's, 
Wapping.  I  believe  it  pleased  God  to  bless  the  first  sermon 
most,  because  it  gave  most  offence  ;  being  indeed  an  open 
defiance  of  that  mystery  of  iniquity  which  the  world  calls 
prudence,  grounded  on  those  words  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Gala- 
tians,  '  As  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh, 
they  constrain  you  to  be  circumcised  ;  only  lest  they  should 
suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  Christ' 

Mon.  27. — I  took  coach  for  Salisbury,  and  had  several  oppor- 
tunities of  conversing  seriously  with  my  fellow  travellers.  But 
endeavouring  to  mend  the  wisdom  of  God  by  the  worldly  wis- 
dom of  prefacing  serious  with  light  conversation,  and  afterwards 


them  there  :    '  We  prayed  and  sang  to-  gate  Street,  involved  a  Tuesday  lecture- 

gether.      In    the    evening   I    prayed    at  ship,  accepted  Whitefield's  recommenda- 

Mr.   Sarney's  with  some  scholars  and  a  tion  of  his  friend  Thomas  Broughton  for 

Moravian.'  this  service.     Afterwards  Broughton  lost 

1  When  Wesley  and  Bohler    walked  the  lectureship  because  of  his  loyalty  to 
through  the  college  squares,  they  were  Whitefield.    Charles  Wesley  remained  in 
mocked.     When  the  former  was  troubled  Oxford.   Whilst  his  brother  was  travelling 
at   this  treatment  of  a  stranger,  Bohler  to    London,    he    was    teaching    Bohler 
said,  '  My  brother,  it  does  not  even  stick  English.      The    day    following    he    fell 
to  our  clothes.'  sick.      This   was   the    severe   attack   of 

2  An  aged  and  infirm  clergyman,  whose  pleurisy  which  brought   him  to  death's 
incumbency  of  Great  St.  Helen's,  Bishops-  door  and  prevented  his  return  to  Georgia. 


Feb.  1738.]  In     Oxford  44 1 

following  that  advice  of  the  Mystics^ '  Leave  them  to  themselves,' 
all  I  had  said  was  written  on  the  sand.  '  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin 
to  '  my  '  charge  ! ' 

Tues.  28. — I  saw  my  mother  once  more.1  The  next  day  I 
prepared  for  my  journey  to  my  brother  at  Tiverton.  But  on 
Thursday  morning,  March  2,  a  message  *  that  my  brother 
Charles  was  dying  at  Oxford  obliged  me  to  set  out  for  that 
place  immediately.  Calling  at  an  odd 8  house  in  the  afternoon, 
I  found  several  persons  there  who  seemed  well-wishers  to 
religion,  to  whom  I  spake  plainly  ;  as  I  did  in  the  evening, 
both  to  the  servants  and  strangers  at  my  inn. 

With  regard  to  my  own  behaviour,  I  now  renewed  and 
wrote  down  my  former  resolutions : 4 

1.  To  use  absolute  openness  and  unreserve  with  all  I  should 
converse  with. 

2.  To    labour    after     continual    seriousness,    not    willingly 
indulging   myself  in   any  the   least  levity  of  behaviour,  or  in 
laughter, — no,  not  for  a  moment. 

3.  To  speak  no  word  which  does  not  tend   to  the  glory  of 
God  ;  in  particular,  not  to  talk  of  worldly  things.     Others  may, 
nay,  must.     But  what  is  that  to  thee  ?     And, 


1  At    Fisherton,    now    a    suburb    of  Hopkey  in   Georgia.      (See   above,    p. 
Salisbury,    Westley    Hall    had    held    a  288.) 

living  from  1736.     From  his  mother  he  *  Not  a  misprint.     The  word  is  used 

inherited  a  house  there  ;  from  his  father,  in  the  sense  of  '  out-of-the-way.'     Ariel, 

Homington   Manor.      In    a    manuscript  in  The  Tempest^  says :  '  The  king's  son 

chronicle  it  appears  that  his  '  friends  Ed.  have  I  ...  left  .  .  .  in  an  odd  angle  of 

Baker,   Westcot,    Sydenham    Burrough,  the  isle  '  (i.  ii.  223). 

lo:  Marsh,  and  others  fitted  up  a  place  *  The  'former   resolutions'  may  refer 

of  preaching  in   Fisherton.'      Hall  was  to  those  made  during  the  voyage  home, 

one  of  John  Wesley's  pupils  at  Oxford.  to    the    undated    series   entered    in    his 

He  married  Martha  Wesley,  and  at  this  second  Georgia  Diary,  or  to  the  whole 

time  Mrs.  Wesley  was  his  guest.     (See  series  written  in  Journal  and  Diary  from 

W.H.S.  vol.  v.  p.   146.)  1725  onwards.     (See  above,  pp.  47-52.) 

2  The     message     that     arrested     his  Students  of  Wesley's  diaries,  and  indeed 
journey    to  Tiverton  was  fraught  with  of  all  his  writings,  will  be  familiar  with 
momentous    consequences.      It   brought  his  insistence  on  '  openness '  and  '  serious- 
him,    under    impressive    circumstances,  ness.'     The   Twelve  Rules  of  a   Helper 
again  into   close   contact  with    Bdhler  ;  emphasize  these  virtues.   Compare  No.  7  : 
and    it    gave    him    days    of   leisure    in  '  Tell  every  one  what  you  think  wrong 
Oxford   for  the  careful  transcription  of  in  him,'  &c.     And  No.  2 :  '  Be  serious, 
the    document    in    which   he    told    the  ...  Avoid    all   lightness,    jesting,    and 
story  of  his  relations  with   Miss  Sophy  foolish  talking.' 


442 


John   Wesley  s  journal 


[March  1738. 


4.  To  take  no  pleasure  which  does  not  tend  to  the  glory  of 
God  ;  thanking  God  every  moment  for  all  I  do  take,  and  there- 
fore rejecting  every  sort  and  degree  of  it  which  I  feel  I  cannot 
so  thank  Him  in  and  for} 

MARCH  4,  Sat. — I  found  my  brother  at  Oxford,  recovering 
from  his  pleurisy  ;  and  with  him  Peter  Bohler,2  by  whom  (in 
the  hand  of  the  great  God)  I  was,  on  Sunday  the  5th,  clearly 
convinced  of  unbelief,  of  the  want  of  that  faith  whereby  alone 
we  are  saved.3 

Immediately  it  struck  into  my  mind,  '  Leave  off  preaching. 
How  can  you  preach  to  others,  who  have  not  faith  yourself  ? ' 
I  asked  Bohler  whether  he  thought  I  should  leave  it  off  or  not. 
He  answered,  'By  no  means.'  I  asked,  'But  what  can  I  preach?' 
He  said, '  Preach  faith  till  you  have  it ;  and  then,  because  you 
have  it,  you  will  preach  faith.' 

Accordingly,  Monday  the  6th,  I  began  preaching  this  new 
doctrine,  though  my  soul  started  back  from  the  work.  The  first 
person  to  whom  I  offered  salvation  by  faith  alone  was  a  prisoner 
under  sentence  of  death.  His  name  was  Clifford.4  Peter  Bohler 
had  many  times  desired  me  to  speak  to  him  before.  But  I  could 
not  prevail  on  myself  so  to  do ;  being  still  (as  I  had  been 
many  years)  a  zealous  assertor  of  the  impossibility  of  a  death-bed 
repentance.6 


1  With  this  we  may  compare  the  test 
for   lawful  and  unlawful   pleasure   given 
to  his  young  friends  by  one  of  Wesley's 
successors  at  Christ  Church  :  '  That  we 
should  not  dare  to  live  in  any  scene  in 
which  we  dare  not  die*  (Pref.  to  Lewis 
Carroll's     Sylvie     and    Bruno).        The 
second    Rule    in    the    Bennet    Minutes 
(W.H.S.     Publ.     No.    I)    reads     thus: 
'  Avoid  all  lightness  as  you  would  avoid 
hell-fire,   and    laughing    as    you    would 
cursing  and  swearing.' 

2  At  Oxford  Bohler  preached  twice  a 
day,  in  addition  to  holding  private  con- 
versations.     The   students    Washington, 
Watson,  and  Coombes  met  in  his  bands. 
Bohler    relates    a   weighty   conversation 
with  Wesley,  in  which,  as  they  walked, 
the  latter  said,   '  If  what  stands  in  the 
Bible  is  true,  then  I  am  saved.' 


3  '  With   the  full  Christian  salvation.' 
This  note  is  not  in  the  first  edition,  or 
in  Works,  1771-4,  or  in  Benson's  edition 
(1809).    It  is  either  Jackson's,  or,    more 
probably,  Wesley's. 

4  See    below,    where    the    expression 
'  the  condemned  man  '  points  to  a  person 
well  known  or  referred  to  recently  in  the 
Journal — not  improbably  this  '  Clifford.' 
If  so,   we  have  here  not  only  Wesley's 
first  offer  of  salvation  through  faith  alone, 
but  his  first  convert  under  the  preaching 
of  this  doctrine. 

5  It    was     in     the    interval     between 
Monday,  March  6,  and  Tuesday,  the  I4th, 
that  Wesley  wrote  the  document  which 
he  entitles,  '  An  Affair  with  Miss  Sophy 
Hopkey.'     (See   above,   p.    288.)      The 
autograph  account  is  now  in  the  possession 
of  the  W.M.  Conference  Office. 


March  1738.] 


Journey  to  Manchester 


443 


Fri.  10. — Peter  Bohler  returned  to  London. 

Tues.    14. — I   set  out   for   Manchester  with   Mr.   Kinchin,1 


1  Charles  Kinchin  was  a  Fellow  of 
Corpus  Christi  College,  rector  of 
Dummer,  a  small  parish  in  Hampshire, 
and  one  of  the  early  members  of  the 
Holy  Club.  He  strove  both  in  Oxford 
and  Dummer  to  carry  out  the  principles 
of  the  Oxford  Methodists  (see  Tyerman's 
Life  of  Whitefield,  voL  L  p.  58). 
During  an  absence  from  his  parish, 
occasioned  by  his  election  as  dean  of 
his  college,  Whitefield  supplied  for 
him,  and,  later,  Hervey.  Whitefield 
says  that  Kinchin  was  elected  Dean  of 
Corpus  Christi ;  but  he  is  never  so  styled 
in  either  John  or  Charles  Wesley's 
Journal.  He  died  in  1742— one  of  the 
humblest,  truest,  most  faithful  of  the 
Methodist  brotherhood  of  Oxford.  In 
a  letter  to  Charles  Wesley  (Dec. 
1736)  Whitefield  says,  '  Mr.  Kinchin  is 
all  heart.'  In  the  first  volume  of  The 
Arminian  Magazine  are  letters  from 
Kinchin  and  his  sister.  See  also 
Whitefield's  letters,  several  of  which 
were  written  to  Kinchin.  In  the  Col- 
man  Collection  is  a  letter  from  Kinchin 
to  Wesley,  in  which  he  craves  his 
prayers  'that  God  would  bless  my 
journey  and  design  of  publishing.'  He 
refers  to  a  sermon  upon  The  Necessity 
and  Works  of  the  New  Birth,  for  the 
printing  of  which  he  desired  from 
the  Vice-Chancellor  (Dr.  Mather)  'the 
Liberty  of  the  University  Press.'  '  The 
Vice-Chancellor,'  he  says,  '  has  wrote 
me  no  answer.  I  propose,  therefore,  to 
wait  upon  him  at  Oxford  to  know 
whether  he  received  my  letter,  and  to 
desire  Mr.  Gambold  and  Mr.  Wells  to 
peruse  my  sermon.'  He  would  like 
Wesley  '  to  see  it  too.'  He  proceeds 
to  expostulate  with  Wesley  because,  as 
he  thinks,  he  has  *  evaded '  a  promised 
service  to  Mr.  Fox,  who  was  in  straits, 
could  not  pay  his  rent,  was  in  debt,  and 
without  proper  livelihood.  Wesley  had 
offered  to  'recover'  the  'Castle  Stock  by 
collecting  the  subscriptions  in  arrears.' 
VOL.  I. 


This  he  had  failed  to  do,  supposing, 
when  he  went  away,  that  Kinchin  would 
supply  his  place.  The  letter  throws  light 
on  the  work  of  the  Holy  Club,  and  it 
shows  Wesley's  continued  interest  in 
that  work.  It  is  addressed  to  'The 
Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley,  at  Mrs.  Grevil's, 
Grocer,  in  Wine  Street,  Bristol/  and 
is  endorsed  '  Oct.  9,  1739.  Answered 
Dec.  17': 

How  so,  my  brother?  Who  is  most 
concerned  to  fulfil  your  engagements  ?  You 
or  1  ?  If  the  care  of  my  parish  would  have 
allowed  me  to  have  resided  in  Oxford  after 
I  had  resigned  my  fellowship,  yet  why 
should  you  imagine  that  I  would  of  course 
take  upon  me  your  engagement  to  pay 
Mr.  Fox's  rent,  without  your  giving  me  any 
intimation  of  what  you  had  done,  or  of 
what  you  would  have  me  do,  in  your  stead  ? 
I  knew  nothing  of  what  you  had  engaged, 
till  Mr.  Fox  told  me,  which  occasioned  my 
wriiing  to  you  upon  the  subject.  And  he 
said  nothing,  as  I  know  of,  as  to  your 
promising  out  of  the  Castle  Stock.  Yon  say, 
'  While  I  am  here,  I  can't  solicit  contribu- 
tions at  Oxford.'  No  more  can  I  while  I  am 
here,  by  word  of  mouth,  speak  to  you  at 
Bristol.  You  say,  'I  shall  rejoice  to  hear 
you  have  fixt  him  in  some  business.'  Mr. 
Fox  is  in  debt.  His  debts  should  be  paid 
first.  The  last  business  he  and  we  can 
think  of  is  to  buy  and  sell  fowl  and  pigs 
(which  he  could  keep  in  his  yard)  and 
cheeses.  There  will  be  need  of  about  £30. 
Mr.  Hutchings  writes  every  day  to  Mr.  Ing- 
ham  to  ask  charity  for  him.  I  am  to  write  to 
Lady  G ,  Mr.  Stonehouse,  &c.  We  pro- 
pose he  shall  have  the  money  we  can  raise 
by  way  of  loan,  which  we  may  withdraw 
upon  mismanagement,  and  to  make  him 
accountable  for  everything.  You  know  how 
much  you  was  for  his  staying  at  Oxford, 
when  there  was  a  motion  for  his  settling  at 
London.  If  you  shall  rejoice  to  hear  him 
fixt  in  some  business,  send  a  helping  hand, 
my  dear  Brother,  and  do  as  we  do  upon 
this  occasion  ;  then  it  is  likely,  with  God's 
blessing,  you  may  see  him  fixt  in  some 
business  soon.  We  all  join  in  love  to  you 
and  all  friends  around  you.  We  constantly 
pray  for  you,  and  desire  your  prayers.  If 
you  write  within  a  week,  direct  to  Mr.  Fox's. 
Your  unworthy  brother, 

C.  KINCHIN. 

Under  the  influence  of  Bohler  and  his 
25 


444  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [March  ITSS. 

Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi,  and  Mr.  Fox,1  late  a  prisoner  in  the 
city  prison.  Between  five  and  six  we  called  at  Chapel-on-the- 
Heath,  where  lived  a  poor  man,  sometime  prisoner  in  the  Castle 
of  Oxford.  He  was  not  at  home  ;  but  his  wife  came  to  us,  to 
whom  Mr.  Kinchin  spoke  a  few  words,  which  so  melted  her 
heart  that  she  burst  out  into  tears,  and  we  went  on  rejoicing 
and  praising  God. 

About  eight,  it  being  rainy  and  very  dark,  we  lost  our  way ; 
but  before  nine  came  to  Shipston  [on  Stour],2  having  rode 
over,  I  know  not  how,  a  narrow  foot-bridge,  which  lay  across 
a  deep  ditch  near  the  town.  After  supper  I  read  prayers  to 
the  people  of  the  inn,  and  explained  the  Second  Lesson  ;  I 
hope  not  in  vain. 

The  next  day  we  dined  at  Birmingham,  and,  soon  after  we 
left  it,  were  reproved  for  our  negligence  there  (in  letting  those 
who  attended  us  go  without  either  exhortation  or  instruction), 
by  a  severe  shower  of  hail.  At  Hednesford,3  about  five,  we 
endeavoured  to  be  more  faithful ;  and  all  who  heard  seemed 
serious  and  affected. 

In  the  evening  we  came  to  Stafford.  The  mistress  of  the 
house  joined  with  us  in  family  prayer.  The  next  morning  one 
of  the  servants  appeared  deeply  affected,  as  did  the  ostler 
before  we  went.  Soon  after  breakfast,  stepping  into  the  stable, 
I  spake  a  few  words  to  those  who  were  there.  A  stranger  who 
heard  me  said,  *  Sir,  I  wish  I  was  to  travel  with  you ' ;  and 
when  I  went  into  the  house,  followed  me,  and  began  abruptly, 
'  Sir,  I  believe  you  are  a  good  man,  and  I  come  to  tell  you  a 
little  of  my  life.'  The  tears  stood  in  his  eyes  all  the  time  he 


Moravian  friends,  Kinchin  resigned  his  senior  (above  p.  90).  For  Fox,  see 
deanery,  fellowship,  and  parish,  in-  March  14,  April  30,  and  Dec.  10. 
tending  to  become  an  itinerant  preacher.  See  also  Wesley  letters  at  Fetter  Lane, 
Hervey  protested  in  a  letter  of  twelve  Nov.  16,  1738;  Moravian  Messenger, 
printed  pages,  and  Whitefield  expostu-  1877,  p.  50.  See  especially  letter  of 
lated.  Had  he  lived,  Kinchin  would  Richard  Morgan  to  Wesley,  Nov.  27, 
probably  have  followed  in  the  foot-  1735  (App.  IV.  vol.  vi.).  One  of  the 
steps  of  Ingham,  Gambold,  and  others.  Societies  met  in  Fox's  house. 
Members  of  the  Kinchin  family  appear  2  In  a  detached  part  of  Worcester- 
later  in  Moravian  lists.  shire. 

1  As  to  the  class  of  prisoners  in  the  3  Wesley  spells  the  word  according 
city  prison  of  Oxford,  see  Wesley's  to  the  popular  pronunciation,  '  Hedge- 
Introductory  letter  to  Richard  Morgan,  ford.' 


March  1738.]  Journey  to  Manchester  445 

spoke  ;  and  we  hoped  not  a  word  which  was  said  to  him  was 
lost. 

At  Newcastle,  whither  we  came  about  ten,  some  to  whom 
we  spoke  at  our  inn  were  very  attentive  ;  but  a  gay  young 
woman  waited  on  us,  quite  unconcerned.  However,  we  spoke 
on.  When  we  went  away  she  fixed  her  eyes,  and  neither 
moved  nor  said  one  word,  but  appeared  as  much  astonished  as 
if  she  had  seen  one  risen  from  the  dead. 

Coming  to  Holmes  Chapel  about  three,  we  were  surprised  at 
being  shown  into  a  room  where  a  cloth  and  plates  were  laid. 
Soon  after  two  men  came  in  to  dinner.  Mr.  Kinchin  told  them, 
if  they  pleased,  that  gentleman  would  ask  a  blessing  for  them. 
They  stared,  and,  as  it  were,  consented  ;  but  sat  still  while  I 
did  it,  one  of  them  with  his  hat  on.  We  began  to  speak  on 
turning  to  God,  and  went  on,  though  they  appeared  utterly 
regardless.  After  a  while  their  countenances  changed,  and  one 
of  them  stole  off  his  hat,  and,  laying  it  down  behind  him,  said 
all  we  said  was  true  ;  but  he  had  been  a  grievous  sinner,  and 
not  considered  it  as  he  ought ;  but  he  was  resolved,  with  God's 
help,  now  to  turn  to  Him  in  earnest.  We  exhorted  him  and 
his  companion,  who  now  likewise  drank  in  every  word,  to  cry 
mightily  to  God,  that  He  would  *  send  them  'help  from  His 
holy  place.' 

Being  faint  in  the  evening,  I  called  at  Altrincham,  and  there 
lit  upon  a  Quaker,  well  skilled  in,  and  therefore  (as  I  soon 
found)  sufficiently  fond  of,  controversy.  After  an  hour  spent 
therein  (perhaps  not  in  vain),  I  advised  him  to  dispute  as  little 
as  possible  ;  but  rather  follow  after  holiness,  and  walk  humbly 
with  his  God.  Late  at  night  we  reached  Manchester. 

Fri.  17,  we  spent  entirely  with  Mr.  Clayton,1  by  whom, 
and  the  rest  of  our  friends  here,  we  were  much  refreshed  and 
strengthened.  Mr.  Hoole,2  the  rector  of  St.  Ann's  Church,  being 

1  Rev.  John  Clayton,  son  of  a  Man-  and  a  chaplaincy  and  fellowship  at  the 

Chester  bookseller :  named  to  Wesley  by  Collegiate  Church.     He  was  a  Nonjuror, 

Rivington  in    1732;    joined    the    Holy  a  High  Churchman,  and,  with  his  friend 

Club ;  induced  the  Wesleys  to  adopt  the  Dr.  Deacon,  an  active  sympathizer  with 

fasts  of  the  early  Church.     He  entered  the  Pretender  in  the  rebellion  of  '45,  for 

Brasenose  College  in  1726,  became  Holme  which  he  was  inhibited  by  the  Bishop  of 

Exhibitioner  in  1729,  and  went  lo  Man-  Chester,  but  shortly  after  restored.     See 

Chester    in    1733,   where    he    held    the  p.  114. 
incumbency  of  Trinity  Church,  Salford,  -  The  tmnihtor  of  T«aoo>     $"* 


446  John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[March  1738. 


taken  ill  the  next  day,  on  Sunday  the  I9th,  Mr.  Kinchin  and 
I  officiated  at  Salford  Chapel  in  the  morning,  by  which  means 
Mr.  Clayton  was  at  liberty  to  perform  the  service  of  St.  Ann's  ; x 
and  in  the  afternoon  I  preached  there  on  those  words  of 
St.  Paul,  f  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature.' 

Early  in  the  morning  we  left  Manchester,  taking  with  us 
Mr.  Kinchin's  brother,  for  whom  we  came,  to  be  entered  at 
Oxford.  We  were  fully  determined  to  lose  no  opportunity  of 
awakening,  instructing,  or  exhorting  any  whom  we  might  meet 
with  in  our  journey.  At  Knutsford,  where  we  first  stopped, 
all  we  spake  to  thankfully  received  the  word  of  exhortation. 
But  at  Talk-o'-th'-Hill,  where  we  dined,  she  with  whom  we 
were  was  so  much  of  a  gentlewoman  that  for  near  an  hour 
our  labour  seemed  to  be  in  vain.  However,  we  spoke  on. 
Upon  a  sudden  she  looked  as  one  just  awaked  out  of  a  sleep. 
Every  word  sank  into  her  heart.  Nor  have  I  seen  so  entire 
a  change  both  in  the  eyes,  face,  and  manner  of  speaking  of 
any  one  in  so  short  a  time. 

About  five,  Mr.  Kinchin  riding  by  a  man  and  woman  double- 
horsed,  the  man  said,  '  Sir,  you  ought  to  thank  God  it  is  a 
fair  day ;  for  if  it  rained,  you  would  be  sadly  dirty  with  your 
little  horse.'  Mr.  Kinchin  answered,  '  True ;  and  we  ought 
to  thank  God  for  our  life,  and  health,  and  food,  and  raiment, 
and  all  things.'  He  then  rode  on,  Mr.  Fox  following  ;  the  man 
said,  '  Sir,  my  mistress  would  be  glad  to  have  some  more  talk 
with  that  gentleman.'  We  stayed,  and  when  they  came  up 
began  to  search  one  another's  hearts.  They  came  to  us  again 
in  the  evening  at  our  inn  at  Stone,  where  I  explained  both 
to  them  and  many  of  their  acquaintance  who  were  come 
together  that  great  truth,  Godliness  hath  the  promise  both 
of  this  life  and  of  that  which  is  to  come. 

Tues.  21. — Between  nine  and  ten  we  came  to  Hednesford. 
Just  then  one  was  giving  an  account  of  a  young  woman 
who  had  dropped  down  dead  there  the  day  before.  This  gave 
us  a  fair  occasion  to  exhort  all  that  were  present,  '  so  to  number ' 
their  own  'days'  that  they  might  apply  their  'hearts  unto 
wisdom.' 

In  the  afternoon  one  overtook  us  whom  we  soon  found  more 


Wesley  had  preached  there  June  3,  1733. 


March  1738.]  Journey  from  Manchester  447 

inclined  to  speak  than  to  hear.  However,  we  spoke,  and  spared 
not.  In  the  evening  we  overtook  a  young  man,  a  Quaker,  who 
afterwards  came  to  us  to  our  inn  at  Henley,  whither  he  sent  for 
the  rest  of  his  family  to  join  with  us  in  prayer  ;  to  which 
I  added,  as  usual,  the  exposition  of  the  Second  Lesson.  Our 
other  companion  went  with  us  a  mile  or  two  in  the  morning ; 
and  then  not  only  spoke  less  than  the  day  before,  but  took 
in  good  part  a  serious  caution  against  talkativeness  and 
vanity. 

An  hour  after  we  were  overtook  by  an  elderly  gentleman, 
who  said  he  was  going  to  enter  his  son  at  Oxford.  We  asked, 
'  At  what  college  ? '  He  said  he  did  not  know,  having  no 
acquaintance  there  on  whose  recommendation  he  could  depend. 
After  some  conversation,  he  expressed  a  deep  sense  of  the  good 
providence  of  God  ;  and  told  us  he  knew  God  had  cast  us 
in  his  way  in  answer  to  his  prayer.  In  the  evening  we  reached 
Oxford,  rejoicing  in  our  having  received  so  many  fresh  instances 
of  that  great  truth,  '  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and 
He  shall  direct  thy  paths.' 

Thur.  23. — I  met  Peter  Bohler  again,1  who  now  amazed  me 
more  and  more  by  the  account  he  gave  of  the  fruits  of  living 
faith, — the  holiness  and  happiness  which  he  affirmed  to  attend 
it.  The  next  morning  I  began  the  Greek  Testament  again, 
resolving  to  abide  by  '  the  law  and  the  testimony ' ;  and  being 
confident  that  God  would  hereby  show  me  whether  this 
doctrine  was  of  God. 

Sun.  26. — I  preached  at  Whitam  2  on  '  the  new  creature,'  and 
went  in  the  evening  to  a  society  in  Oxford,  where  (as  my 
manner  then  was  at  all  societies),  after  using  a  collect  or 
two  and  the  Lord's  Prayer,  I  expounded  a  chapter  in  the  New 


1  Peter  Bohler  gives  his  own  account  being  present.  Friday  the  24th  Wesley 

of  this  interview,  at  which  both  the  'began  the  Greek  Testament  again,' 

Wesleys  were  present.  (See  Lockwood's  probably  remained  in  Oxford  with  Charles 

Life  of  Peter  Bohler,  p.  74.)  or  rode  over  to  Stanton  Harcourt  to 

a  It  is  suggested  (W.H.S.\o\.  v.  p.  94)  visit  Gambold,  and  on  Sunday  morning 

that  this  is  a  printer's  error  for  Wycombe  preached  at  Wytham,  which  on  Bacon's 

(High)  ;  but  this  is  highly  improbable.  Road-map  is  only  a  few  miles  N.W.  of 

They  arrived  in  Oxford  on  the  evening  Oxford.  Wjfytham  Abbey  is  not  far 

of  Wednesday  the  22nd,  met  Bohler  on  from  Stanton  Harcourt,  in  the  direction 

Thursday,  Charles,  still  a  convalescent,  of  South  Leigh  and  Witney. 


448  John   Wesley  s  Journal  [April  ms. 

Testament,  and  concluded  with  three  or  four  more  collects 
and  a  psalm.1 

Mon.  27. — Mr.  Kinchin  went  with  me  to  the  Castle,  where, 
after  reading  prayers,  and  preaching  on  '  It  is  appointed  unto 
men  once  to  die,'  we  prayed  with  the  condemned  man,  first  in 
several  forms  of  prayer,  and  then  in  such  words  as  were  given 
us  in  that  hour.  He  kneeled  down  in  much  heaviness  and 
confusion,  having  'no  rest  in'  his  'bones,  by  reason  of  his 
'  sins.'  After  a  space  he  rose  up,  and  eagerly  said, '  I  am  now 
ready  to  die.  I  know  Christ  has  taken  away  my  sins  ;  and 
there  is  no  more  condemnation  for  me.'  The  same  composed 
cheerfulness  he  showed  when  he  was  carried  to  execution  ;  and 
in  his  last  moments  he  was  the  same,  enjoying  a  perfect  peace, 
in  confidence  that  he  was  '  accepted  in  the  Beloved.' z 

APRIL  i,  Sat.— Being  at  Mr.  Fox's3  society,  my  heart  was 


On  April  i  the  Diary  is  resumed.  The  form  is  considerably  modified. 
The  page  is  ruled  into  five  compartments  ;  but  there  is  neither  ejaculatory 
nor  hourly  prayer,  and  certain  details,  which  abounded  in  earlier  Diaries, 
have  almost  wholly  disappeared.  Byrom's  shorthand  is  used.  Errors  are 


1  In  devotional  '  manner '  these  socie-  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from 
ties  differed,  it  should  be  noted,  from  the  those  meetings  of  an  earlier  and  later 
untitled  meetings  held  in  Savannah  and  period  in  which  fellowship  and  experience 
Frederica.  The  latter  were  held,  as  a  were  the  most  prominent  features.  No 
rule,  on  Wednesday  and  Friday  evenings,  doubt  the  '  religious  society '  often  merged 
after  evening  prayers  and  exposition.  into  a  Moravian  or  a  Methodist  society. 
Their  characteristic  features  were  sing-  But  at  first  it  was  quite  distinct, 
ing,  reading,  and  conversation.  Hymns  *  At  the  Castle,  with  this  condemned 
of  an  experimental  character  were  used :  man,  we  see  these  two  earnest  Church- 
the  readings  from  Law,  Kempis,  Scougal,  men  anticipating  the  freer,  more  personal, 
Haliburton  were  necessarily  brief,  and  and  more  experimental  devotionalism  of 
intended  to  incite  conversation.  The  a  time  now  close  at  hand.  Churchman- 
Sunday-afternoon  meetings  of  the  (still  ship  is  in  transition.  First  prayers, 
untitled)  inner  circle  followed  the  same  preaching,  several  forms  of  prayer  ;  then 
plan.  The  absence  of  '  prayer '  (until  '  such  words  as  were  given,'  with  con- 
Wesley  learnt  the  value  of  extempore  viction,  faith,  justification,  assurance, 
prayer  from  the  Presbyterian  Highlanders  perfect  peace. 

of  Darien)  is  not  remarkable  when  we  *  In   a   letter    to   Wesley   in   Georgia 

remember  that  the  meetings  immediately  (Nov.  27,  1735)  Richard  Morgan  junior 

followed  evening   prayers.     So  also  the  says :     '  I     read     every     Sunday     night 

absence  of  the  Bible  from  the  meetings  to   a   cheerful   number   of  Christians   at 

is  accounted  for.  The  '  religious  societies '  Mr.  Fox's  (Oxford).     Mr.   Fox  and  his 

in  London,  Bristol,  and  here  in  Oxford,  wife  are  most  zealous  Christians,  and  are 

whether  found  by  Wesley  or,  as  in  this  earnestly   bent    on    going    to    Georgia.' 

case,  founded  by  Wesley  and  his  friends,  Whitefield  used  to  sing  and  pray  there. 


Apm  1738.]  In  Oxford  449 

so  full  that  I  could  not  confine  myself  to  the  forms  of  prayer 
which  we  were  accustomed  to  use  there.  Neither  do  I  purpose 
to  be  confined  to  them  any  more  ;  but  to  pray  indifferently, 
with  a  form  or  without,  as  I  may  find  suitable  to  particular 
occasions.1 

Sun.  2. — Being  Easter  Day,  I  preached  in  our  College 
chapel  on  '  The  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  dead 
shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear 
shall  live.'  I  preached  in  the  afternoon,  first  at  the  Castle,  and 
then  at  Carfax,  on  the  same  words.  I  see  the  promise ;  but 
it  is  afar  off. 

Believing  it  would  be  better  for  me  to  wait  for  the 
iccomplishment  of  it  in  silence  and  retirement,  on  Monday  the 


nther  frequent.  For  this  reason,  or  because  he  wished  to  ensure  a  correct 
record  of  persons  and  places,  the  writer,  after  the  first  few  pages,  inserts 
nanes  in  longhand.  A  few  lines  transliterated  will  sufficiently  indicate  the 
chuacter  of  the  Diary  for  this  month  : 

4^  Prayer,  writ  sermon. 

6  Prayer,  sermon. 

7  Coffee,  sermon. 

8  Prayers. 

9  Charles  read  his  Journal,  prayer,        singing. 
12^  Dinner,  read  my  sermon. 

1  At  Mr  Fox's. 

2  Castle,  Prayers, 

3  With  Charles,  he  read  his  Journal,        tea. 

In  the  evening  he  again  read  Charles's  Journal,  and  at  eight  attended  a 
so:iety  at  Washington's  for  Bible  reading,  singing,  &c.  It  was  10.30  before 
he  lay  down. 

Easter  Sunday. — He  rose  later  than  usual.  At  eight  he  robed  for 
P  -avers  ;  at  nine  preached  and  took  the  Communion—'  all  serious,  all 
stayed.'  The  rector  on  whom  he  called  was  '  kind ' ;  Charles  read  his 
Journal ;  twice  he  was  at  Fox's  ;  once  at  the  Castle ;  in  the  afternoon 
he  read  prayers  and  preached  at  Carfax  (the  home  of  the  Broughtons), 
and  he  saw  his  old  friend  Mr.  Vesey. 

Mon.  3. — He  walked  with  Fox  in  the  early  morning  ;  they  preached  and 
read  sermons.  At  \i\  he  was  at  Mrs.  Pocock's,  where  he  conversed  and 
drank  tea.  At  three  he  left  for  Dummer,  where  he  arrived  at  seven, 


1  For  their  newly  formed  practice  of  expositions  and  extemporary  prayers'). 

extempore  prayer  the  two  brothers  were  The  letter  from  which  this  is  quoted  is 

greatly    censured,   particularly  by   their  from  Samuel  Wesley  to  John,  April  16, 

brother    Samuel    (Moore,    Life,   vol.    i.  i?39,  and  is  obviously  a  reply  to  a  letter 

P-    377  >    and    ^r-    Priestley's   Original  in  the   Works  (vol.  xii.  p.  30)  which  is 

Letters,    p.    96  :    '  Banish    extemporary  misdated. 


450  John    Wesley's  Journal 


3rd  I  complied  with  Mr.  Kinchin's  desire,1  and  went  to  him  at 
Dummer,  in  Hampshire.     But  I  was  not  suffered  to  stay  here 


and  found  a  Mr.  Pike,  who  left  an  hour  later.  The  day  following  (Tuesday 
the  4th)  he  wrote  his  Diary  and  Journal,  and  spent  the  day  in  devotions, 
reading,  visiting,  walking,  and  journal-reading.  Miss  Molly  and  Stephen 
enjoyed  the  benefit  of  his  religious  exercises. 

Wed.  5. — He  spent  the  day  much  in  the  same  way;  Bible-reading, 
Journal,  logic,  fasting,  conversation  with  Miss  Molly  and  Stephen,  with 
visits  in  the  village,  occupied  the  time.  At  'Vigor's'  he  sang  and  read 
the  Bible. 

Thur.  6. — To-day  Kinchin  and  his  sister  accompanied  Wesley  to  Wood- 
mancot.  Earlier  in  the  day  he  read  a  sermon  to  Miss  Molly,  and  later 
began  M.  De  Renty's  Life. 

Fri.  7. — He  read  Morgan's  letters  to  Miss  Molly  and  Stephen.  After 
dinner  : 

Read  Morgan's  letters,  3  visited,  4  conversed  to  Miss  Molly,  f  catchsup  children. 

Mr.  Pike  came  to  afternoon  tea,  prayers,  and  a  reading  of  Mr.  Collettes 
Letters  by  Stephen.  They  had  further  conversation,  reading,  and  prayer, 
and  retired  to  rest  at  9.30. 

Sun.  9. — He  preached,  gave  the  Communion,  read  Haliburton,  cafe- 
chized  the  children,  read  the  Bible  to  *  Goody  Rogers,'  and  ended  the  diy 
conversing  with  Miss  Molly. 

Mon.  10. — Miss  Molly  was  taken  ill.  The  day  and  several  days  follov- 
ing  are  absorbed  by  the  domestic  calamity. 

Tues.  ii. — Sanderson,  who  seems  to  have  been  the  doctor  in  attendance, 
pronounced  Miss  Molly  a  little  better. 

10    Read  De  Renty  to  them  ;  n^  set  out,  meditating  and  praying. 
2    At  Stockbridge.     Dinner,  talked  to  the  hostler. 
3^  Set  out.     5  Sarum.     In  talk  of  Miss  Molly. 

Late  at  night  he  spent  half  an  hour  with  'my  sister'  (Mrs.  Hall). 

Wed.  12.— He  left  early  and  lost  his  way,  but  at  7|  reached  Stockbridg?, 
where  he  talked  seriously  to  all.  At  Sf  he  again  set  out,  praying,  singinj, 
meditating,  and  conversing  with  a  stranger  by  the  way. 

i if  Woodmancot,  Miss  Molly  there,  in  talk  together,  tea. 
i^  Dinner,  she  worse. 

In  the  evening  he  went  on  to  Dummer,  after  evening  prayers  visiting  an  old 
parishioner — *  Goody  Fist ' — she  reading  letters,  and  he  reading,  singing, 
and  praying  with  her. 


1  The  Kinchin  family  as  it  appears  in  to  Woodmancot,  which  was  a  few  miles 

the  Diary  consisted  of  Charles,  Stephen,  distant.      Wesley  remained  by  night  in 

and  James  (presumably   brothers),   and  Dummer,  sleeping  part  of  the   time   at 

'  Miss  Molly '  (sister).      Strangely  Mrs.  Mr.  Terry's.     Woodmancot  was  on  the 

Kinchin  ('  Esther  Kinchin,'  of  Memoirs  way   both  to    Salisbury,   where   Wesley 

of  James    Hutton}    does    not    appear.  Hall  and  his  wife  (Martha  Wesley)  lived, 

During  Wesley's  visit  the  family  removed  and  to  Winchester. 


^'--  -^  p 

VV       ^  .-v  r "    -     (          J 


*-•?.£« 

*    U  •  N« 


\ 


u    ^ 


~ 


K.  • 


>  ^ 


M^  - 
^^r 
^-  --  ^~ 


-X  \ 


«-c    * 

—   T- 


r~  t- 


.-^x- 


451 


April  1738.]  Duntmer  to  London  453 

long  ;  being  earnestly  pressed  to  come  up  to  London,  if  it 
were  only  for  a  few  days.  Thither,  therefore,  I  returned,  on 
Tuesday  the  i8th. 


Thur.  13.— He  walked  over  to  Woodmancot,  spending  the  day  there. 
His  reading  was  Isaac  Mills,  De  Renty,  and  logic.  The  day  following  he 
again  went  to  Woodmancot.  In  the  afternoon  he  accompanied  Ur.  Coombes 
to  Winchester,  talking  with  him  of  Miss  Molly.  Returning  to  Woodmancot 
in  the  evening,  he  found  the  patient  '  very  ill.'  At  Dummer,  which  was  still 
his  head  quarters,  he  seems  to  have  been  the  guest  of  Mr.  Terry,  whose 
father,  *  old  Mr.  Terry,'  was  there. 

Sat.  15. — So  anxious  was  he  for  news  of  the  sick  woman  that  he  left  at 
six,  reaching  Woodmancot  at  seven.  He  read  Haliburton  to  her — his  chief 
remedy  at  this  time  for  a  troubled  mind.  A  surgeon — Mr.  Lawrence — 
'  refused  to  bleed  Miss  Molly.'  Twice  the  Diary  records  the  fact  that  she 
was  4  very  ill.'  In  the  evening,  at  Dummer,  he  visited  '  Goody  Vigors.' 

Sun.  16. — He  had  a  busy  day.  It  began  at  4.30,  when  he  'drest,'  prayed, 
read  his  Bible,  meditated,  prepared  a  sermon,  and  at  seven  was  at  Wood- 
mancot, about  an  hour's  walk  distant.  At  8.30  he  went  to  Popham,  the 
next  parish,  where  he  read  prayers,  preached,  and  administered  Holy 
Communion.  At  eleven  he  returned  to  Dummer  for  prayers  and  sermon, 
dining  at  Woodmancot,  where  also  he  read  prayers  and  preached  his 
sermon.  Miss  Molly  was  still  ill.  In  the  evening  he  set  out  with  Stephen 
and  'Jimmy'  (James)  for  Dummer,  where  he  visited  'Goody  Vigors.' 

Mon.  17. — He  left  Dummer,  visiting  Woodmancot,  where  he  conversed 
seriously  to  Stephen,  Miss  Molly,  and  James.  After  prayer  he  set  out  with 
Stephen  and  Charles  (Kinchin),  and  dined  at  Mrs.  Pocock's.  He  had 
parted  with  Stephen  at  Newbury.  'Washington,'  'Croutch,'  and  other 
Oxford  persons  are  named.  On  Tuesday  the  i8th,  at  seven  in  the  morning, 
he  writes:  'At  home,  sang  with  Charles.'  If  this  is  Charles  Wesley,  the 
'at  home'  must  have  been  Oxford.  He  arrived  in  Oxford  from  Newbury 
on  the  1 7th,  found  his  brother  still  at  Mr.  Sarney's,  and  left  the  next  day 
for  London.  At  Oxford  he  began  the  Life  of  A.  M.  Schumann* 

Wed.  19. — He  travelled  by  way  of  Beaconsfield,  arriving  at  James 
Hutton's  about  four  in  the  afternoon.  The  same  evening  he  went  with 
Hutton  to  Mr.  H[utton  senr.]  at  Westminster.  The  negative  evidence  of 
the  Diary  points  to  the  fact  that,  although  the  two  brothers  travelled  the 
same  day  to  London,  they  did  not  travel  together. 

Thurs.  20. — He  wrote  to  Charles  Kinchin,  saw  Mr.  Broughton  and  friends, 
wrote  to  Charles  Delamotte,  to  Mrs.  Prince,  and  to  Molly  Kinchin  ;  dressed, 
and  went  with  James  Hutton  to  Mr.  Stonehouse's,  at  Islington,  where  they 
dined  and  talked  of  the  Mystics.  At  four  they  had  prayers,  tea,  and  conver- 
sation. At  5.30  they  set  out,  and  at  6.15  arrived  at  Mr.  Bray's,  where 
they  sang  and,  apparently,  covenanted  together,  singing  and  reading 
prayers.  He  supped  'at  home,'  that  is  with  James  Hutton. 


1  Anna  Maria  Van  Schurmann.     See       blue-stocking  and  Quaker  of  the  seven- 
Edinb.  Review -,  April  1908  :  'A  Dutch       teenth  century.'     Born  1607,  died  1678. 


454  John    We s leys  Journal  [April  ms. 

Sat.  22. —  I  met  Peter  Bohler  once  more.1  I  had  now  no 
objection  to  what  he  said  of  the  nature  of  faith ;  namely,  that 
it  is  (to  use  the  words  of  our  Church)  'a  sure  trust  and  con- 
fidence which  a  man  hath  in  God,  that  through  the  merits  of 
Christ  his  sins  are  forgiven  and  he  reconciled  to  the  favour  of 
God.'2  Neither  could  I  deny  either  the  happiness  or  holiness 
which  he  described  as  fruits  of  this  living  faith.  '  The  Spirit 
itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  the  children 
of  God/  and  c  He  that  believeth  hath  the  witness  in 
himself '  fully  convinced  me  of  the  former  ;  as  ( Whatsoever 
is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin,'  and  *  Whosoever 
believeth  is  born  of  God'  did  of  the  latter.  But  I  could  not 
comprehend  what  he  spoke  of  an  instantaneous  work.  I  could 
not  understand  how  this  faith  should  be  given  in  a  moment : 
how  a  'man  could  at  once  be  thus  turned  from  darkness  to 
light,  from  sin  and  misery  to  righteousness  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost.  I  searched  the  Scriptures  again  touching  this 
very  thing,  particularly  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles :  but,  to  my 
utter  astonishment,  found  scarce  any  instances  there  of  other 
than  instantaneous  conversions  ;  scarce  any  so  slow  as  that  of 
St.  Paul,  who  was  three  days  in  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth. 
I  had  but  one  retreat  left ;  namely,  '  Tkusy  I  grant,  God 


Fri.  21. — In  the  early  morning  he  preached  at  St.  Antholin's,  called 
at  Bray's,  returned  home,  called  at  Mr.  H.'s,  wrote  to  Mr.  Brown  of 
Highgate,  saw  Charles,  Mr.  Sha — ,  Captain  Curran,  and  Mr.  Broughton. 

Sat.  22. — After  early  prayers  he  saw  Mr.  Clark.  He  talked  Charles 
into  conviction ;  at  1 1.45  set  out,  Dr.  Cisporn  ;  in  talk  of  Miss  Molly;  5.30  at 
Bohler's,  sang  ;  he  (Bohler)  read  letters.  Returning  home,  he  supped  and 
wrote  to  Charles  Kinchin  and  wrote  his  Diary. 


1  *  A  right  searching  conversation  with  in  God,  that  by  the  merits  of  Christ  his 
the  two  Wesleys '  is  Bohler's  verdict  on  sins  be  forgiven,  and  he  reconciled  to  the 
this   interview.      (Moravian    Messenger,  favour  of  God,  and  to  be  partaker  of  the 
1875,  P-  I44<)  kingdom  of  heaven  by  Christ,  when  he 

2  These    words    are    taken   from    the  liveth  ungodly,  and  denieth  Christ  in  his 
Homily  '  Of  Salvation,'  which  deals  fully  deeds  ?      Surely   no   such   ungodly   man 
with  the  whole  subject  of  Justification  by  can  have   this  faith  and  trust  in  God.' 
Faith.     In  the  above  quotation  reference  On  the  faith  which  is  followed  by  God's 
is  made  to  those  who  profess  to  be  in  justifying  grace,  and  on  the  faith  of  the 
a  justified  state,  but  show  by  their  evil  justified,  this    great   homily  teaches  the 
works  they  are  not.      The  whole  passage  doctrines  which  Wesley  taught  on  these 
is  as  follows  :  '  How  can  a  man  have  this  subjects  the  remainder  of  his  life.     See 
true  faith,  this  sure  trust  and  confidence  Lon.  Q.  Rev.  Jan.  1902,  pp.  141-2. 


Apm ma]  Peter  Bohler  455 

wrought  in  the  first  ages  of  Christianity  ;  but  the  times  are 
changed.  What  reason  have  I  to  believe  He  works  in  the 
same  manner  now?1 

But  on  Sunday  the  23rd,  1  was  beat  out  of  this  retreat  too,1 
by  the  concurring  evidence  of  several  living  witnesses  ;  who 
testified  God  had  thus  wrought  in  themselves,  giving  them 
in  a  moment  such  a  faith  in  the  blood  of  His  Son  as  translated 
them  out  of  darkness  into  light,  out  of  sin  and  fear  into  holiness 
and  happiness.  Here  ended  my  disputing.  I  could  now  only 
cry  out, '  Lord,  help  Thou  my  unbelief ! ' 

I  asked  Peter  Bohler  again  whether  I  ought  not  to  refrain 
from  teaching  others.  He  said,  '  No ;  do  not  hide  in  the 
earth  the  talent  God  hath  given  you.'  Accordingly,  on 
Tuesday  the  25th,  I  spoke  clearly  and  fully  at  Blendon  to  Mr. 


Sun.  23.— At  six  in  the  morning  he  preached  at  St.  Ann's.  At  Mrs. 
West's  he  drank  tea.  At  ten  he  read  prayers  at  Wapping,  and  preached. 
At  Mr.  Parker's  he  prayed,  dined,  and  conversed.  At  2.30  he  read  prayers 
and  preached  at  St.  Helen's.  At  five  he  was  *  at  home  with  Bohler  and 
others,  and  was  convinced  ...  at  once.'* 

6  Tea,  singing,  the  Cross;    7   conversed  to   Bohler,  prayer  ;   7.30  Mr.  H[utton]'s, 

the  Cross. 
8  Singing,  prayer,  9  conversed  with  Metcalf,  \  supper,  io£  at  home. 

Man.  24. — Prayers,  Mr.  Metcalfs,  learnt  to  sing,  Mr.  Broughton's,  at 
home,  Islington,  conversation  with  Mr.  Stonehouse  ;  *  read  the  way  to 
the  Sabbath  of  rest.'  In  the  evening  he  was  at  Blendon  with  Mr.  Broughton. 
At  7.30  Miss  Hetty  sang.  Mrs.  Delamotte,  Miss  B.,  and  Charles  sang  and 
conversed  till  supper-time.  Mr.  Piers  remained  until  10.30.  Once  more 
he  prayed  and  sang,  not  retiring  until  near  midnight. 

Tues.  25. — At  4.45  he  was  praying  and  singing  with  them  again.  He 
continued  the  same  exercises,  with  an  interval  for  meditation  and  tea,  until 


1  'I  took,'  says  Bohler,  'four  of  my  Wesley  and  printed  in  his  first  hymn- 
English  brethren  to  John  Wesley.  They  books,  but  omitted  in  recent  editions.] 
told,  one  after  another,  what  had  been  During  the  singing  of  the  Moravian 
wrought  in  them.  Wesley  and  those  version  he  often  wiped  his  eyes.'  In  his 
that  were  with  him  were  as  if  thunder-  own  room  Wesley  declared  to  Bohler 
struck  at  these  narratives.  I  asked  John  that  he  was  now  satisfied  as  to  what  had 
Wesley  what  he  then  believed.  He  said  been  said  of  faith,  and  he  would  now 
four  examples  were  not  enough.  I  replied  question  no  more.  See  Green's  John 
I  would  bring  eight  more  here  in  London.  Wesley,  Evangelist ',  p.  185,  for  a  fuller 
After  a  short  time  he  stood  up  and  said,  account. 

"We  will  sing  that  hymn  '  Hier  legt  2  Most  of  these  names  are  found  in 

mein  Sinn,'  &c."  ['  My  soul  before  Thee  the  *  Lists  of  Moravian  Officials.'    See 

prostrate    lies' — a  hymn   translated    by  Benham,  Memoirs  of  James  Hutton. 


456 


Jo  fin    Wesley  s  Journal 


[April  1738. 


Delamotte's  family  of  the  nature  and  fruits  of  faith.  Mr. 
Broughton  and  my  brother  were  there.1  Mr.  Broughton's2 
great  objection  was,  he  could  never  think  that  I  had  not 
faith,  who  had  done  and  suffered  such  things.  My  brother 
was  very  angry,  and  told  me  I  did  not  know  what  mischief 
I  had  done  by  talking  thus.  And,  indeed,  it  did  please 
God  then  to  kindle  a  fire  which  I  trust  shall  never  be 
extinguished. 

On    Wednesday  the  26th,   the  day  fixed  for  my  return  to 
Oxford,  I  once  more  waited  on  the  Trustees  for  Georgia  ;  but, 


eight,  when  he  set  out  with  Mr.  Broughton.  At  ten  he  talked  with  John 
D[elamotte].  At  11.15  he  was  with  Bohler — the  '  Cross.3  At  one  he  was  at 
Islington  with  Mr.  Hall  and  Sister  Patty. 

3!  At  home,  Miss  Claggetsv there,  Bohler  conversed,  tea. 

6  St.  Helen's,  read  prayers,  preached,  8  at  home,  writ  to  Mr.  Kinchin,  to  Mr. 
Clayton,  10  in  talk  together  \. 

Wed.  26. — Harvey  and  Metcalf  appear.  He  calls  at  Mr.  Bray's  ;  at  the 
Trustees'  House,  'left  my  papers.'  Mr.  H.,  dinner.  In  the  afternoon  he  set 
out  with  Bohler.  They  walked  together  an  hour  (towards  Oxford),  when 
Bohler  left  him.  He  read  his  Greek  Testament  until,  at  4.15,  he  reached 
the  Green  Man,  where  he  drank  tea  and  conversed.  At  five  he  left  and  read 
the  Greek  Testament  as  far  as  Gerrard's  Cross,  where  he  supped  and  slept. 


1  Charles  Wesley's  description  of  this 
memorable  discussion  is  graphic : 

I  took  a  ride  to  Blendon.  In  the  afternoon 
we  made  Mr.  Piers  [Wesley  spells  the  name 
Peers]  a  visit ;  and  returning-,  found  Mr. 
Broughton  and  my  brother  at  Blendon. 

APRIL  25,  Tues.  —  Soon  after  five,  as  we 
were  met  in  our  little  chapel,  Mrs.  Delamotte 
came  to  us.  We  sang  and  fell  into  a  dispute 
whether  conversion  was  gradual  or  instan- 
taneous. My  brother  was  very  positive  for 
the  latter,  and  very  shocking ;  mentioned 
some  late  instances  of  gross  sinners  believing 
in  a  moment.  I  was  much  offended  at  his 
worse  than  unedifying  discourse.  Mrs. 
Delamotte  left  us  abruptly.  I  stayed,  and 
insisted  a  man  need  not  know  when  first 
he  had  faith.  His  obstinacy  in  favouring 
the  contrary  opinion  drove  me  at  last  out  of 
the  room.  Mr.  Broughton  was  only  not  so 
much  scandalized  as  myself.  After  dinner 
he  and  my  brother  returned  to  town.  I 
stayed  behind,  and  read  them  the  Life  of  Mr. 
Haliburion  :  one  instance,  but  only  one,  of 
instantaneous  conversion. 

2  Thomas  Broughton  was  'the  son  of 
Thomas  Broughton,    of  Carfax,    Oxon., 
gent.,  University  College,  matric.     Dec. 


17,  1731,  aged  nineteen;  Fellow  of 
Exeter  College,  1734-41  ;  rector  of 
Wotton,  Surrey,  1753  until  his  death, 
Dec.  21,  1777'  (see  above,  p.  440). 
Broughton  was  drawn  for  a  while  towards 
the  Moravian  societies,  reading  prayers 
and  preaching  at  a  lecture  that  was 
maintained  by  those  societies.  But 
church  questions,  and  especially  a  'form 
of  baptismal  regeneration,  separated  him 
from  his  old  friends.  Jackson,  in  his  Life 
of  Charles  Wesley,  says  that  Broughton 
*  strenuously  denied  that  sinners  were 
justified  by  faith.  One  day,  when  Charles 
pressed  him  with  The  Book  of  Homilies, 
he  confessed  that  was  a  work  he  had 
never  read '  (vol.  i.  p.  159)-  Some  of 
the  authorities  on  Broughton's  subsequent 
career  say  that  he  became  Secretary  of 
the  S.P.G.  They  confuse  the  S.P.G. 
with  the  S.P.C.K. 

3  The  Claggets  were  wealthy  and  dis- 
tinguished Moravians.  See  the  Hutton 
Lists. 


Apm  1738.]  In  Oxford  457 

being  straitened  for  time,  was  obliged  to  leave  the  papers  for 
them  which  I  had  designed  to  give  into  their  own  hands.  One 
of  these  was  the  instrument  whereby  they  had  appointed  me 
minister  of  Savannah  ;  which,  having  no  more  place  in  those 
parts,  I  thought  it  not  right  to  keep  any  longer.1 

Peter  Bohler  walked  with  me  a  few  miles,  and  exhorted 
me  not  to  stop  short  of  the  grace  of  God.  At  Gerrard's  Cross f 
I  plainly  declared  to  those  whom  God  gave  into  my  hands 
the  faith  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  as  I  did  next  day  to  a  young 
man  I  overtook  on  the  road,  and  in  the  evening  to  our  friends 
at  Oxford.  A  strange  doctrine,  which  some,  who  did  not 
care  to  contradict,  yet  knew  not  what  to  make  of;  but  one 
or  two,  who  were  thoroughly  bruised  by  sin,  willingly  heard 
and  received  it  gladly. 

In  the  day  or  two  following  I  was  much  confirmed  in  the 
1  truth  that  is  after  godliness '  by  hearing  the  experiences  of 
Mr.  Hutchins,3  of  Pembroke  College,  and  Mrs.  Fox ; 4  two 
living  witnesses  that  God  can  (at  least,  if  He  does  not  always) 
give  that  faith  whereof  cometh  salvation  in  a  moment,  as 
lightning  falling  from  heaven. 

Thur.  27.— He  left  at  4.30,  reading   Greek  Testament,  until,  at  7.30, 
he  reached  Mr.  Crouch's,  where  he  had  tea,  conversation,  and  prayer. 
9    Set  out,  overtook  a  man,  conversed,  read  the  Bible  to  him. 
n£  At  the  hut,  conversed  ^,  set  out  with  the  man  isj,  Tetsworth. 

He  reached  Oxford  at  five.  There,  at  his  sister's,  he  met  Mr.  Evans.  He 
seems  to  have  lodged  at  Mr.  Sarney's.  The  day  following  he  spent  with 
Mr.  Kinchin,  Mr.  Hutchings,  and  at  Mr.  Fox's  meeting.  He  wrote  to 
Hugh  Brian  and  others. 

Sat.  29.— Letters  and  the  Castle  occupied  most  of  the  day.  He  notes 
an  interview  with  Mr.  F.  (or  V.)  Hutchings.  He  closes  the  day's  Diary  with 
one  of  his  cipher  confessional  marks. 

Sun.  30. — He  preached  at  the  Castle  and  administered  Holy  Communion  ; 
wrote  to  Sal(mon)  and  James  Kinchin,  and  heard  a  sermon. 

Here  occurs  an  unexplained  break  in  the  Diary.  The  next  entry,  on  the 
same  page,  is  *  Wed.  May  23,  1739.' 

1  Record  Office,  C.O.  5.     See  above,  Dr.  Richard  Hutchins,  rector  of  Lincoln— 
p.  109,  and  App.  XI.  vol.  vi.  also  one  of  Wesley's  friends — but  a  totally 

2  Probably     so     named    from     Lord  different  person.  See  Thomas  M'Cullagh 
Gerhard,  the  Royalist  leader  at  Newbury.  in   Lon.    Q.    Rev.  Jan.    1905,    p.    145  ; 

1  Twice  in  the  Diary  Mr.  Hutchins  (or  and   IV.H.S.  vol.  v.  p.  151,  where  the 

Hutchings,  as  the  name  is  also  spelt  on  question  is  fully  discussed, 

the  same  page)  is  referred  to.    This  is  *   The  meeting  is  referred  to  in  later 

not,  as  Tyerman  erroneously  supposes,  records  as  '  Mrs.  Fox's  Society.' 


458 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1738. 


MAY  i,  Mon. — The  return  of  my  brother's  illness  obliged 
me  again  to  hasten  to  London.1  In  the  evening  I  found  him 
at  James  Hutton's,  better  as  to  his  health  than  I  expected  ; 
but  strongly  averse  from  what  he  called  'the  new  faith.' 

This  evening  our  little  society  2  began,  which  afterwards  met 
in  Fetter  Lane.  Our  fundamental  rules  3  were  as  follow  : 

IN  obedience  to  the  command  of  God  by  St.  James,  and  by  the 
advice  of  Peter  Bohler,  it  is  agreed  by  us, 

i.  That    we    will   meet   together   once    a   week   to   'confess   our 


1  On  April  28   Charles  writes:   'No 
sooner   was   I   got    to  James   Hutton's, 
having  removed  my  things  thither  from 
his   father's,  than  the  pain   in   my  side 
returned,  and  with   that  my  fever.  .  .  . 
Towards  midnight  I  received  some  relief 
by  bleeding.      In  the  morning  Dr.  Cock- 
burn  came    to   see  me  ;    and  a   better 
physician,  Peter  Bohler,  whom  God  had 
detained  in  England  for  my  good.' 

2  This  was  not,  as  Whitehead,  Tyer- 
man,    and  others   following    their   lead, 
have  erroneously  believed,    a  Moravian 
society  ;    nor    was    it     the     Methodist 
Society.     It  is  true,  however,  that  out  of 
it     eventually     sprang     the     organized 
Methodism   of  the   *  United    Societies,' 
and    also    the  Moravian  society  which 
became  the  Moravian  Church.     The  con- 
temporary records  that  clearly  define  the 
nature  of  this  society  are   the  Journals 
of  John    and   Charles   Wesley  and    of 
George  Whitefield  ;  the  letters  of  James 
Hutton  (Memoirs  of  James  Hutton,  by 
D.  Benham) ;  and  a  manuscript  account 
of  the  Fetter  Lane  Society,  by  William 
Holland,   one  of  the  original  members. 
Holland's  Account  is   preserved   in   the 
archives  of  the  Moravian  chapel,  Fetter 
Lane.     The  facts,  as  first  stated  by  the 
Rev.  John  Telford  (Life  of  Wesley,  ist  ed. 
p.  148,  published  1886)  and  afterwards, 
in  1891,  by  the  Rev.  T.  M'Cullagh,  show 
clearly  that  it  was  a  Church  of  England 
society  : 

The  '  little  society '  was  formed  May  i, 
i738,  at  James  Hutton's  residence  and  book- 
seller's shop,  The  Bible  and  Sun,  Little 


Wild  Street,  west  of  Temple  Bar,  and  not  far 
from  Drury  Lane.  The  founders  were  John 
and  Charles  Wesley,  Piers,  vicar  of  Bexley, 
and  a  few  others.  It  was  formed  at  '  the 
command  of  God  by  St.  James,  and  by  the 
advice  of  Peter  Bohler.'  The  last  named 
was  present,  it  being  three  days  before  he 
left  for  America.  At  its  origin  only  two  rules 
were  agreed  to ;  four  weeks  after  three 
other  rules  were  added,  and  on  Sept.  25 
the  code  was  completed  by  the  addition  of 
twenty  more  rules.  About  the  same  time 
the  meeting-place  was  changed  from  Little 
Wild  Street  to  a  room  in  Fetter  Lane.  The 
members  professed  to  belong  to  the  Church 
of  England,  and  as  such  they  went  in  a  body 
to  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  headed  by  Charles 
Wesley  and  George  Whitefield,  to  receive  the 
Lord's  Supper.  The  society  had  lovefeasts 
and  bands,  as  the  Methodist  societies  had 
when  formed.  In  the  frequent  absences  of 
the  Wesleys  from  London,  the  Fetter  Lane 
society  got  into  a  condition  of  great  con- 
fusion, and  among  the  more  drastic  measures 
for  restoring  order  was  the  exclusion  from 
the  society  of  two  factious  members  named 
Wolff  and  Shaw,  'because,'  says  Charles 
Wesley,  'they  disowned  themselves  members 
of  the  Church  of  England.' 

Whether  this  little  Church  of  England 
society  ever  met  in  Fetter  Lane  Chapel 
is  doubtful.  At  its  removal  from  James 
Hutton's  house  it  met  in  '  a  room  in 
Fetter  Lane.'  The  chapel  was  not  leased 
by  Hutton  until  after  the  disruption. 
See  below,  p.  475  ;  Homes  and  Haunts, 
pp.  22-4  ;  Lon.  Q.  Rev.  vol.  cxciii.  pp. 
145-8. 

8  The  Moravian  theory  respecting  these 
rules  is  that  they  are  Wesley's  original 
draft,  and  that  they  were  afterwards 
expanded  into  the  thirty- three  *  Orders ' 
printed  in  Memoirs  of  fames  Hutton. 


May  1738.]  Rules  of  the  '  Little  \  Society'  459 

faults  one  to  another,  and  pray   one  for  another,  that  we   may   be 
healed/ 

2.  That   the  persons  so  meeting   be  divided   into  several  bands, 
or  little  companies,  none  of  them  consisting  of  fewer  than   five  or 
more  than  ten  persons.1 

3.  That  every  one  in  order  speak  as  freely,  plainly,  and  concisely  as 
he  can,  the  real  state  of  his  heart,  with  his  several  temptations  and 
deliverances,  since  the  last  time  of  meeting. 

4.  That  all  the  bands  have  a  conference  at  eight  every  Wednesday 
evening,3  begun  and  ended  with  singing  and  prayer. 

5.  That  any  who  desire  to  be  admitted  into  the  society8  be  asked, 
*  What  are  your  reasons  for  desiring  this  ?     Will  you  be  entirely  open  ; 
using  no  kind  of  reserve  ?     Have  you  any  objection  to  any  of  our 
orders  ? '  (which  may  then  be  read). 

6.  That  when   any  new  member  is   proposed,  every  one  present 
speak  clearly  and  freely  whatever  objection  he  has  to  him. 

7.  That  those  against  whom  no  reasonable  objection  appears   be, 
in  order  for  their  trial,  formed  into  one  or  more  distinct  bands,  and 
some  person  agreed  on  to  assist  them. 

8.  That    after   two   months'   trial,   if    no    objection  then  appear, 
they  may  be  admitted  into  the  society. 

9.  That  every  fourth  Saturday  be  observed  as  a  day  of  general 
intercession. 

10.  That  on  the  Sunday  seven-night  following  be  a  general  lovefeast, 
from  seven  till  ten  in  the  evening. 

11.  That   no   particular  member  be  allowed    to    act    in    anything 
contrary  to   any  order  of  the  society;  and  that  if  any  persons,  after 
being  thrice  admonished,   do  not  conform  thereto,  they  be  not  any 
longer  esteemed  as  members. 

Wed.  3. — My  brother  had  a  long  and  particular  conversa- 
tion with  Peter  Bohler.  And  it  now  pleased  God  to  open 
his  eyes  ;  so  that  he  also  saw  clearly  what  was  the  nature 
of  that  one  true  living  faith,  whereby  alone,  '  through  grace, 
we  are  saved.' 

Thur.  4. — Peter  Bohler  left  London,  in  order  to  embark 
for  Carolina.  Oh  what  a  work  hath  God  begun,  since  his 


1  This  Wesley  did  with  his  first  Bristol  of  new  members.     From  the  beginning, 
converts,  following,  in  general,  the  plan  in  all  forms  of  associated  religious  life, 
adopted  in  Savannah.  Wesley  insisted  on  'openness.'     He  im- 

2  This  was  the  Bristol  night,  and  one  posed  it  on  others  and  rigorously  obeyed 
of  the  two  Savannah  nights.  it  himself,  often  thereby  bringing  himself 

3  They  obeyed  this  mode  of  proposal  into  difficulty. 


460  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [May  1738 

coming  into  England !  Such  an  one  as  shall  never  come  to 
an  end  till  heaven  and  earth  pass  away.1 

Friday  and  Saturday  I  was  at  Blendon.  They  now 
'  believed  our  report.'  Oh  may  '  the  arm  of  the  Lord '  be 
speedily  '  revealed  unto  them  ' ! 

Sun.  7—\  preached  at  St.  Lawrence's  in  the  morning, 
and  afterwards  at  St.  Katherine  Cree's  church.  I  was  enabled 
to  speak  strong  words  at  both,  and  was  therefore  the  less 
surprised  at  being  informed  I  was  not  to  preach  any  more 
in  either  of  those  churches. 

Tues.  9. — I  preached  at  Great  St.  Helen's,  to  a  very 
numerous  congregation,  on  '  He  that  spared  not  His  own 
Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not  with 
Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  '  My  heart  was  now  so 
enlarged  to  declare  the  love  of  God  to  all  that  were  oppressed 
by  the  devil,  that  I  did  not  wonder  in  the  least  when  I  was 
afterwards  told, '  Sir,  you  must  preach  here  no  more.' 

Wed.  io.— Mr.  Stonehouse,2  vicar  of  Islington,  was  con- 
vinced of  'the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.'  From  this  time  till  Satur- 
day the  1 3th,  I  was  sorrowful  and  very  heavy;  being  neither 
able  to  read,  nor  meditate,  nor  sing,  nor  pray,  nor  do  any 

1  This  is  one  of  Wesley's  exclamations  Hungerford     Park,      Berks,     Aug.     5, 
added  at  a  much  later  date.     At  this  date  1714,   and   became  A.M.   of  Pembroke 
nothing  had  occurred  to  justify  such  a  College,  Cambridge,  June  8,  1736,  and 
thanksgiving.      Perhaps  all  the  persons  in    1738  vicar    of    Islington,    of  which 
at  this  time  influenced  by  Bohler's  teach-  living  his  family  were  the  impropriators, 
ing  scarcely  amounted  to  fifty.     His  use-  and  which  he  sold  on  July  i,  1740,  having 
fulness    consisted    chiefly    in    preparing  resigned    the    cure.  .  .  .  He     died     at 
instruments  for  carrying  on   the   work.  Bristol  in  1793'  (Benham's  Memoirs  of 
Charles  Wesley  had  given  Peter  Bohler  James  Hutton,  p.  268).     Wesley  called 
lessons  in  English.    Bohler  addressed  the  upon  him  at  East  Brent,  near  Bristol, 
Societies  in  Latin,  his  words  being  trans-  Aug.  23,    1781,   and   quaintly  describes 
lated  by  Viney  the  tailor,  who  is  men-  him,    adding,    *  Perhaps    if    I   had   his 
tioned    Feb.    19    and   June    16,    1744.  immense  fortune   I   might  be  as   great 
When  Bohler  left,  John  Bray,  a  brazier  an  oddity  as    he.'     He   married  Mary, 
living  in  Little  Britain,  near  Smithfield —  daughter    of    Sir    John     Crispe,    Bart. 

1  an  illiterate  mechanic,'  his  friend  Charles  Benham  at  some  length  memorializes  her 

Wesley  called  him — was  entrusted  with  and   her  husband    and  their  connexion 

Bohler's    work.       To    the    sympathetic  with    Zinzendorf    and     the    Moravians, 

quietness  of  this  lowly  home,  Charles,  still  The  surmise  that  Charles  Wesley  was  at 

an  invalid,  was  carried  in  a  chair  from  one  time  his  curate  has  been  effectually 

the  controversy  and  opposition  of  Great  disproved    by   an    investigation    of   the 

College  Street.  Islington  vestry  records  (  W.H.S.  vol.  v, 

2  George   Stonehouse    was   '  born    at  pp.  238-9). 


May  1738.]  Bohlers  Letter  461 

thing.     Yet  I   was  a  little  refreshed  by  Peter  Bohler's  letter, 
which  I  insert  in  his  own  words : 

CHARISSIME  ET  SUAVISSIME  FRATER, 

IftTENT/ssiiuo  amore  te  diligo,  multum  tui  recordans  in  itinere 
meo,  optando  et  precando  ut  quamprimum  viscera  misericordeae  crucifixi 
Jesu  Christi,  tui  gratia  jam  ante  sex  mille  annos  commota,  menti  tuae 
appareant :  ut  gustare  et  tune  videre  possis,  quam  vehementer  te  Filius 
Dei  amaverit  et  hucusque  amet,  et  ut  sic  confidere  possis  in  eo  omni 
tempore,  vitamque  ejus  in  te  et  in  came  tua  s entire.  Cave  tibi  a  peccato 
incredulitatis,  et  si  nondum  vicisti  illud,  fac  ut  proximo  die  illud  vincas, 
per  sanguinem  Jesu  Christi.  Ne  differ,  quaeso,  credere  tuum  in  Jesum 
Christum  ;  sed  potius  promissionum  ejus  quae  pertinent  ad  miserandos 
peccatores,  cor  am  facie  ejus  benigna  sic  mentionem  fac,  ut  non  aliter  possit 
quam  praestare  tibi,  quod  multis  aliis  praestitit.  O  quam  multus,  quam 
magnus,  quam  ineffabilis,  quam  inexhaustus,  est  illius  amor  !  llle  certe 
jamjam  paratus  est  ad  auxilium  ;  et  nihil  potest  ilium  offendere  nisi 
incredulitas  nostra.  Crede  igitur.  Fratrem  tuum  Carolum  et  Hall, 
nomine  meo  saluta  multum;  et  admonete  vos  invicem  ad  credendum,  et 
tune  ad  ambulandum  coram  facie  Domini  dxpi/Jois,  et  ad  pugnandum 
contra  diabolum  et  mundum  i>o/>ufuos,  et  ad  crudfigendum  et  conculcandum 
peccatum  omne  sub  pedibus  nostris,  quantum  nobis  datum  est  per  gratiam 
secundi  Adami,  cujus  vita  excedit  mortem  prioris  Adami,  et  cujus  gratia 
antecellit  corruptionem  et  damnationem  prioris  Adami. 

Dominus  tibi  benedicat.  Permane  in  fide,  amore,  doctrina,  com- 
munione  sanctorum  ;  et  breviter,  in  omni  quod  habemus  in  Novo  Foedere. 
Ego  sum  et  maneo, 

Tuus  indignus  Prater, 

PETRUS  BOHLER. 

In  Agris  Southamptonianis, 
Die  $>vo  Maii,  1738. 

I  LOVE  you  greatly,  and  [think  much  of  you  in  my  journey,  wishing 
and  praying  that  the  tender  mercies  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Crucified, 
whose  bowels  were  moved  towards  you  more  than  six  thousand  years 
ago,  may  be  manifested  to  your  soul :  that  you  may  taste,  and  then 
see,  how  exceedingly  the  Son  of  God  has  loved  you,  and  loves  you 
still ;  and  that  so  you  may  continually  trust  in  Him,  and  feel  His  life 
in  yourself.  Beware  of  the  sin  of  unbelief;  and  if  you  have  not 
conquered  it  yet,  see  that  you  conquer  it  this  very  day,  through  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Delay  not,  I  beseech  you,  to  believe  in  your 
Jesus  Christ ;  but  so  put  Him  in  mind  of  His  promises  to  poor  sinners 
that  He  may  not  be  able  to  refrain  from  doing  for  you  what  He  hath 
done  for  so  many  others.  Oh  how  great,  how  inexpressible,  how  un- 

VOL.  I.  26 


462  John    Wesley  s  Journal 

exhausted  is  His  love !     Surely  He  is  now  ready  to  help  ;  and  nothing 
can  offend  Him  but  our  unbelief. 

Believe,  therefore.  Greet  in  my  name  your  brother  Charles  and 
Hall ;  and  admonish  one  another  to  believe,  and  then  to  walk 
circumspectly  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  fight  lawfully  against  the  devil 
and  the  world,  and  to  crucify  and  to  tread  all  sin  under  your  feet, 
as  far  as  you  are  permitted  through  the  grace  of  the  second  Adam, 
whose  life  exceeds  the  death  of  the  first  Adam,  and  whose  grace  far 
surpasses  the  corruption  and  damnation  of  the  first  Adam. 

The  Lord  bless  you !  Abide  in  faith,  love,  teaching,  the  com- 
munion of  saints;  and  briefly,  in  all  which  we  have  in  the  New 
Testament.  I  am, 

Your  unworthy  brother, 

PETER  BoHLER.1 

Sun.  14. — I  preached  in  the  morning  at  St.  Ann's,  Alders- 
gate,  and  in  the  afternoon  at  the  Savoy  chapel,2  free  salvation 
by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  I  was  quickly  apprised  that  at 
St.  Ann's  likewise  I  am  to  preach  no  more.3 

So  true  did  I  find  the  words  of  a  friend,4  wrote  to  "my  brother 
about  this  time  : 

I  have  seen  upon  this  occasion  more  than  ever  I  could  have 
imagined,  how  intolerable  the  doctrine  of  faith  is  to  the  mind  of  man, 
and  how  peculiarly  intolerable  to  religious  men.  One  may  say  the 
most  unchristian  things,  even  down  to  Deism ;  the  most  enthusiastic 
things,  so  they  proceed  but  upon  mental  raptures,  lights,  and  unions ; 
the  most  severe  things,  even  the  whole  rigour  of  ascetic  mortification ; 
and  all  this  will  be  forgiven.  But  if  you  speak  of  faith  in  such  a 
manner  as  makes  Christ  a  Saviour  to  the  utmost,  a  most  universal  help 
and  refuge ;  in  such  a  manner  as  takes  away  glorying,  but  adds 
happiness  to  wretched  man  ;  as  discovers  a  greater  pollution  in  the 
best  of  us  than  we  could  before  acknowledge,  but  brings  a  greater 
deliverance  from  it  than  we  could  before  expect, — if  any  one  offers 
to  talk  at  this  rate,  he  shall  be  heard  with  the  same  abhorrence  as  if 
he  was  going  to  rob  mankind  of  their  salvation,  their  Mediator,  or  their 

1  For    notes  on   Wesley's  translation  same  Sunday.     Henry  Moore,  who  had 
see  W.H.S.  vol.  v.  p.  25.  access  to  the  originals,  prints  Wesley's 

2  The   Savoy  had  been  the  scene  of  letter    to    Law,    dated    May    14,    1738. 
Horneck's  awakening    ministry,  which,  Law's  reply  was  written  on  the   igth, 
about     1676,    originated    the    Religious  and  Wesley's  reply  on  the  3oth.     Moore 
Societies.  also  gives  a  letter  of  earlier  date :  Oxford, 

3  It  was  during  these  days  of  waiting  June  26,  1734.  (See  App.  XXVI.  vol.  vi.) 
that    the    correspondence   with   William  *  Moore  gives  this  fine  letter  (by  John 
Law  must  be  placed.     It  began  on  this  Gambold)  at  greater  length  (Life,  i.  380). 


May  1738.]  The  Day  of  Pentecost  463 

hopes  of  forgiveness.  I  arn  persuaded  that  a  Afontanist  or  a  Novation, 
who  from  the  height  of  his  purity  should  look  down  with  contempt 
upon  poor  sinners,  and  exclude  them  from  all  mercy,  would  not  be 
thought  such  an  overthrower  of  the  gospel  as  he  who  should  learn, 
from  the  Author  of  it,  to  be  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners,  and  to 
sit  down  upon  the  level  with  them  as  soon  as  they  begin  to  repent. 

But  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  For  all  religious  people  have 
such  a  quantity  of  righteousness,  acquired  by  much  painful  exercise, 
and  formed  at  last  into  current  habits ;  which  is  their  wealth,  both  for 
this  world  and  the  next.  Now,  all  other  schemes  of  religion  are  either 
so  complaisant  as  to  tell  them  they  are  very  rich,  and  have  enough  to 
triumph  in ;  or  else  only  a  little  rough,  but  friendly  in  the  main,  by 
telling  them  their  riches  are  not  yet  sufficient,  but  by  such  arts  of  self- 
denial  and  mental  refinement  they  may  enlarge  the  stock.  But  the 
doctrine  of  faith  is  a  downright  robber.  It  takes  away  all  this  wealth, 
and  only  tells  us  it  is  deposited  for  us  with  somebody  else,  upon  whose 
bounty  we  must  live  like  mere  beggars.  Indeed,  they  that  are  truly 
beggars,  vile  and  filthy  sinners  till  very  lately,  may  stoop  to  live  in  this 
dependent  condition — it  suits  them  well  enough.  But  they  who  have 
long  distinguished  themselves  from  the  herd  of  vicious  wretches,  or 
have  even  gone  beyond  moral  men, — for  them  to  be  told  that  they  are 
either  not  so  well,  or  but  the  same  needy,  impotent,  insignificant  vessels 
of  mercy  with  the  others,  this  is  more  shocking  to  reason  than  tran- 
substantiation.  For  reason  had  rather  resign  its  pretensions  to  judge 
what  is  bread  or  flesh,  than  have  this  honour  wrested  from  it — to  be 
the  architect  of  virtue  and  righteousness.  But  where  am  I  running  ? 
My  design  was  only  to  give  you  warning  that,  wherever  you  go,  this 
*  foolishness  of  preaching '  will  alienate  hearts  from  you  and  open 
mouths  against  you. 

Fri.  19. — My  brother  had  a  second  return  of  his  pleurisy. 
A  few  of  us  spent  Saturday  night  in  prayer.1  The  next  day, 
being  Whit  Sunday,  after  hearing  Dr.  Heylyn  2  preach  a  truly 


1  '  The  frequent  returns  of  his  pleurisy          2  Dr.  Heylyn  was  the  popular  rector  of 

and  his  very  enfeebled  state  appear  to  St.   Mary-le-Strand.     Wesley  was  well 

have  alarmed  his  friends,  who  began  to  known  to  the  doctor,  in  concert   with 

be  apprehensive  that  his  end  was  near.  whom    it    had    been    arranged    that    he 

His  brother  John,  therefore,  and  a  few  should   prepare  an  edition   of  Thomas 

others  met  together  on  Saturday  evening  a   Kempis.      Wesley  was  familiar   with 

and  spent  the  night  in  prayer.     The  next  Heylyn's  writings,  as  his  Georgia  Diary 

day  was  Whit  Sunday,  on  the  morning  proves.     William  Law  was  at  one  time 

of  which  he  was  enabled  to  believe  to  the  Heylyn's  curate.     Both   he  and  Wesley 

saving  of  his  soul'   (Jackson's  Life  of  were  influenced  by  him.     See  Telford's 

Charles  Wesley,  vol.  i.  p.  133).  Life  of  John   Weslty^  p.  100. 


464  John   Wesley  s  Journal  tMay  ITSS. 

Christian  sermon  (on  'They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost '  ;  '  and  so,'  said  he,  '  may  all  you  be,  if  it  is  not  your 
own  fault'),  and  assisting  him  at  the  Holy  Communion  (his 
curate  being  taken  ill  in  the  church),  I  received  the  surprising 
news  that  my  brother  had  found  rest  to  his  soul.1  His  bodily 
strength  returned  also  from  that  hour.  '  Who  is  so  great  a  God 
as  our  God  ? ' 

I  preached  at  St.  John's,  Wapping,  at  three,  and  at  St. 
Benet's,  Paul's  Wharf,  in  the  evening.  At  these  churches 
likewise  I  am  to  preach  no  more.  At  St.  Antholin's  I  preached 
on  the  Thursday  following.2 

Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday,  I  had  '  continual  sorrow 
and  heaviness '  in  my  '  heart ' ;  something  of  which  I  described, 
in  the  broken  manner  I  was  able,  in  the  following  letter  to  a 
friend  : 

Oh,  why  is  it  that  so  great,  so  wise,  so  holy  a  God  will  use  such  an 
instrument  as  me  !  Lord,  '  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead  ! '  But  wilt 
Thou  send  the  dead  to  raise  the  dead?3  Yea,  Thou  sendest  whom 
Thou  wilt  send,  and  showest  mercy  by  whom  Thou  wilt  show  mercy  ! 
Amen  !  Be  it  then  according  to  Thy  will !  If  Thou  speak  the  word, 
Judas  shall  cast  out  devils. 

I  feel  what  you  say  (though  not  enough),  for  I  am  under  the  same 
condemnation.  I  see  that  the  whole  law  of  God  is  holy,  just,  and 
good.  I  know  every  thought,  every  temper  of  my  soul,  ought  to  bear 
God's  image  and  superscription.  But  how  am  I  fallen  from  the  glory 
of  God  !  I  feel  that  '  I  am  sold  under  sin.'  I  know  that  I  too 
deserve  nothing  but  wrath,  being  full  of  all  abominations ;  and  having 
no  good  thing  in  me  to  atone  for  them,  or  to  remove  the  wrath  of 
God.  All  my  works,  my  righteousness,  my  prayers,  need  an  atonement 
for  themselves.  So  that  my  mouth  is  stopped.  I  have  nothing  to 
plead.  God  is  holy,  I  am  unholy.  God  is  a  consuming  fire;  I  am 
altogether  a  sinner,  meet  to  be  consumed. 

Yet  I  hear  a  voice  (and  is  it  not  the  voice  of  God?)  saying, 
'  Believe,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.  He  that  believeth  is  passed  from 


1  For    the    full    account    of    Charles  interval,  Nov.   15,  1778,   and   Feb.   25, 
Wesley's   conversion,    see    his    Journal,  1781.       At     this    time    Richard    Venn 
new  edition,  p.   146.  (father  of  John  Venn)  was  rector.     He 

2  'For  the   last   time'  (ist  ed.).     So  died  in  1739. 

he  may  have  thought  at  the  time ;  but  3  Cf.  a  remarkable  letter  (MS.   Coll. 

he     preached    there     again,     Nov.     9,  Book-Room)    of    July    27,      1766,     to 

Dec.     15,     1738,     and,    after     a     long  Charles  Wesley. 


May  i73«.]  A  Review  of  Life  465 

death  unto  life.  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only- 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life.' 

Oh  let  no  one  deceive  us  by  vain  words,  as  if  we  had  already 
attained  this  faith  ! 1  By  its  fruits  we  shall  know.  Do  we  already  feel 
'peace  with  God'  and  'joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost'?  Does  'His  Spirit 
bear  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God  ? '  Alas  ! 
with  mine  He  does  not.  Nor,  I  fear,  with  yours.  O  Thou  Saviour  of 
men,  save  us  from  trusting  in  anything  but  Thee  !  Draw  us  after 
Thee  !  Let  us  be  emptied  of  ourselves,  and  then  Mil  us  with  all  peace 
and  joy  in  believing  \  and  let  nothing  separate  us  from  Thy  love,  in 
time  or  in  eternity.8 

What  occurred  on  Wednesday  the  24th,3  I  think  best  to  relate 
at  large,  after  premissing  what  may  make  it  the  better  under- 
stood. Let  him  that  cannot  receive  it  ask  of  the  Father  of  lights 
that  He  would  give  more  light  to  him  and  me. 

1.  I  believe,  till  I  was  about  ten  years  old  I  had  not  sinned 
away  that  '  washing  of  the  Holy  Ghost '  which  was  given  me 
in  baptism  ;  having  been  strictly  educated  and  carefully  taught 4 
that  I  could  only  be  saved  '  by  universal  obedience,  by  keeping 
all  the  commandments  of  God' ;  in  the  meaning  of  which  I  was 
diligently  instructed.     And  those  instructions,  so  far  as  they 
respected  outward  duties  and  sins,  I  gladly  received  and  often 
thought  of.     But  all  that  was  said  to  me  of  inward  obedience 
or  holiness  I  neither  understood  nor  remembered.      So  that  I 
was  indeed  as  ignorant  of  the  true   meaning  of  the  law  as  I 
was  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

2.  The  next  six  or  seven  years  were  spent  at  school;5  where, 


1  '  That  is,  the  proper  Christian  faith.'  But  she  makes  May  28  a  Sunday,  which 
(This  note  is  not  in  the  first,  or  in 'the  agrees  with  the  Journal.     {Memoirs  of 
1774,  or  in  Benson's  edition.)  James  Hutton^  pp.  33-40.) 

2  The  name  of  this  '  friend '  has  not  *  The  details  of  the  *  strict  education  ' 
yet  been  discovered.     It  may  have  been  and  4  careful  teaching '  are  best  studied 
Gambold,     Kinchin,     Miss     Molly,    or  in   the   letter  written  by  Mrs.  Susanna 
Clayton.     The  last  paragraph  points  to  Wesley  in   1732,  and  published  in  the 
some  one  who,  like  himself,  was  seeking  Journal  after  her  death  (Aug.  1742). 
rest.  *  A    memorandum    in   Wesley's  own 

3  Mrs.  Hutton,  in  her  letter  to  Samuel  writing  shows   that   on  Jan.    28,   1714, 
Wesley  junior,  makes  the  date  for  Charles  he    was    nominated    by    the    Duke    of 
Wesley's  conversion   May   22,   and    for  Buckingham  on  the  foundation  of  Char- 
John's  '  just  as  he  awaked '  on  May  25.  terhouse.      His  Grace,  who  was  at  the 


466  John    Wesley* s  Journal  [May  1738. 

outward  restraints  being  removed,  I  was  much  more  negligent 
than  before,  even  of  outward  duties,  and  almost  continually 
guilty  of  outward  sins,  which  I  knew  to  be  such,  though  they 
were  not  scandalous  in  the  eye  of  the  world.  However,  I  still 
read  the  Scriptures,  and  said  my  prayers  morning  and  evening. 
And  what  I  now  hoped  to  be  saved  by,  was,  (i)  not  being  so  bad 
as  other  people  ;  (2)  having  still  a  kindness  for  religion  ;  and  (3) 
reading  the  Bible,  going  to  church,  and  saying  my  prayers. 

3.  Being  removed  to  the  University  for  five  years,1  I  still 
said  my  prayers  both  in  public  and  in  private,  and  read,  with 
the  Scriptures,  several  other  books  of  religion,  especially  com- 
ments on  the  New  Testament.     Yet  I  had  not  all  this  while  so 
much  as  a  notion  of  inward  holiness  ;  nay,  went  on  habitually, 
and  for  the  most  part  very  contentedly,  in  some  or  other  known 
sin :  indeed,  with  some  intermission  and  short  struggles,  espe- 
cially before  and  after  the  Holy  Communion,  which  I  was  obliged 
to  receive  thrice  a  year.     I  cannot  well  tell  what  I  hoped  to  be 
saved   by  now,  when  I   was   continually  sinning   against   that 
little  light  I  had  ;  unless  by  those  transient  fits  of  what  many 
divines  taught  me  to  call  repentance. 

4.  When  I  was  about  twenty-two,  my  father  pressed  me  to 
enter  into  holy  orders.2     At  the  same  time,  the  providence  of 
God  directing  me  to  Kempis's  Christian  Pattern}  I  began  to 
see,  that  true  religion  was  seated  in  the  heart,  and  that  God's 
law  extended  to  all  our  thoughts  as  well  as  words  and  actions. 
I  was,   however,  very  angry  at   Kempis  for  being  too  strict ; 


time  Lord  Chamberlain,  had  long  been  exhaustive  and  careful  study  of  the  first 

a  friend  of  the  Wesleys.     The   charity,  Oxford  Diary,  a  fair  sample  of  which  has 

founded  by  Thomas  Sutton,  celebrated  been  given  in  the  Introduction  (above, 

its  centenary   in   the  year  that  Wesley  pp.  36-70),  would  enable  us  to  picture, 

came   up  from    Epworth.      There  were  with  some  fullness  of  detail,  Wesley's  life 

forty  boys  on  the  foundation.     For  parti-  in  Oxford  and  Wroot  from  1722  to  1727. 
culars    of    the     Charterhouse     life     see  3  By  what  means   'the  providence  of 

Telford's  Life  of  Wesley,  p.  23.  God '  directed  him  to  Kempis's  Christian 

1  He   was   elected   from  the   Charter-  Pattern  would   probably  be  revealed  if 
house   to-  Christ    Church,    and    entered  the  hitherto  undiscovered  correspondence 
Oxford  University  June  24,  1720,  a  week  of  the  year  1725  became  accessible.     For 
after    his  seventeenth    birthday.       The  an  extremely  probable,   if  not   certain, 
three  brothers  spent  their  undergraduate  identification  of  his  *  first  religious  friend,' 
days  at  Christ  Church.  see  above,  p.  12.      For  the  letters  and 

2  Our  knowledge   of    Wesley's    daily  other  extracts  which  throw  light  on  this 
life  at  Oxford  begins  at  this  point.     An  identification,  see  above,  pp.  13-16. 


May  1738.]  A  Review  of  Life  467 

though  I  read  him  only  in  Dean  Stanhope's  translation.  Yet 
I  had  frequently  much  sensible  comfort  in  reading  him,  such 
as  I  was  an  utter  stranger  to  before  ;  and  meeting  likewise 
with  a  religious  friend,  which  I  never  had  till  now,  I  began  to 
alter  the  whole  form  of  my  conversation,  and  to  set  in  earnest 
upon  a  new  life.  I  set  apart  an  hour  or  two  a  day  for  religious 
retirement.  I  communicated  every  week.  I  watched  against 
all  sin,  whether  in  word  or  deed.  I  began  to  aim  at,  and  pray 
for,  inward  holiness.  So  that  now,  '  doing  so  much,  and  living 
so  good  a  life,'  I  doubted  not  but  I  was  a  good  Christian. 

5.  Removing  soon  after  to  another  College,1   I  executed  a 
resolution  which  I  was  before   convinced  was  of  the   utmost 
importance, — shaking  off  at  once  all  my  trifling  acquaintance.    I 
began  to  see  more  and  more  the  value  of  time.    I  applied  myself 
closer  to  study.     I  watched  more  carefully  against  actual  sins ; 
I  advised  others  to  be  religious,  according  to  that  scheme  of 
religion  by  which  I  modelled  my  own  life.     But  meeting  now 
with  Mr.  Law's  Christian  Perfection 2  and  Serious  Call,  although 
I  was  much  offended  at  many  parts  of  both,  yet  they  convinced 
me   more  than  ever  of  the  exceeding  height  and  breadth  and 
depth  of  the  law  of  God.     The  light  flowed  in  so  mightily  upo^ 
my  soul,  that  everything  appeared  in  a  new  view.     I  cried  to 
God  for  help,  and  resolved  not  to  prolong  the  time  of  obeying 
Him  as  I  had  never  done  before.     And  by  my  continued  endea- 
vour to  keep  His  whole  law,  inward  and  outward,  to  the  utmost 
of  my  power,  I  was  persuaded  that  I  should  be  accepted  of  Him, 
and  that  I  was  even  then  in  a  state  of  salvation. 

6.  In  1730  I  began  visiting  the  prisons;  assisting  the  poor 
and  sick  in  town  ;  and  doing  what  other  good  I  could,  by  my 
presence  or  my  little  fortune,  to  the  bodies  and  souls  of  all  men.8 


'On  March   17,    1726,   Wesley   was  the  Diary,  Wesley  was  diligently  reading 

elected  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College.     The  William  Law. 

Fellowship  was  for  natives  of  Lincoln  *  It  was  William  Morgan,  one  of  the 

county,  and  had  previously  been  held  by  first  members  of  the  Holy  Club,  if  not 

John     Thorold,     afterwards     Sir    John  the    very    first,    who    led    the  way   in 

Thorold,  the  ancestor  of  notable  English  charitable     work.       Gam  bold,     in     his 

Churchmen  of  the  nineteenth  century.  account  of  Wesley  at  Oxford  ( Afeth.  Mag. 

2  In    1726  William   Law's   Christian  1798),  says   that    Wesley    paid  for   the 

Perfection  was  published.      In  December  services  of  a  schoolmaster  to  teach  poor 

of  the  same  year,  immediately  after  a  children.     (See  above,  first  subscription 

long  visit  to  Stanton,  as  we  learn  from  list  of  the  Holy  Club,  p.  91.) 


468  John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1738. 


To  this  end  I  abridged  myself  of  all  superfluities,  and  many 
that  are  called  necessaries  of  life.  I  soon  became  a  by-word  for 
so  doing,  and  I  rejoiced  that  my  name  was  cast  out  as  evil.  The 
next  spring  I  began  observing  the  Wednesday  and  Friday  Fasts,1 
commonly  observed  in  the  ancient  Church ;  tasting  no  food  till 
three  in  the  afternoon.  And  now  I  knew  not  how  to  go  any 
further.  I  diligently  strove  against  all  sin.  I  omitted  no  sort 
of  self-denial  which  I  thought  lawful  ;  I  carefully  used,  both 
in  public  and  in  private,  all  the  means  of  grace  at  all  opportu- 
nities. I  omitted  no  occasion  of  doing  good  ;  I  for  that  reason 
suffered  evil.  And  all  this  I  knew  to  be  nothing,  unless  as  it 
was  directed  toward  inward  holiness.  Accordingly  this,  the 
image  of  God,  was  what  I  aimed  at  in  all,  by  doing  His  will,  not 
my  own.  Yet  when,  after  continuing  some  years  in  this  course, 
I  apprehended  myself  to  be  near  death,  I  could  not  find  that 
all  this  gave  me  any  comfort  or  any  assurance  of  acceptance 
with  God.  At  this  I  was  then  not  a  little  surprised ;  not 
imagining  I  had  been  all  this  time  building  on  the  sand,  nor 
considering  that  '  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that 
which  is  laid  '  by  God,  '  even  Christ  Jesus.' 

7.  Soon  after,  a  contemplative  man 2  convinced  me  still  more 


1  The  addition  of  the  Wednesday  and  sideration.       Or  we    may   look    farther 
Friday  fasts  of  the  early  Church  to  the  afield.      Little   if  any  notice  has   been 
disciplinary  rules  of  the  Holy  Club  was  taken  of  the  influence  of  the  Rev.  Mr. 
the  first  outcome  of  Wesley's  friendship  Hoole,  rector  of  Haxey,  Samuel  Wesley's 
with  John  Clayton  (see  above,  p.  101).  friend   and  nearest   neighbour,  on  John 
How   literally  and  faithfully  he  carried  Wesley    and    the    earliest  days  of   the 
out  this  rule  of  holy  living  is  evidenced  Evangelical  Revival.      Yet  he  seems  to 
by  the  records  of  the   Georgia   Diary.  have  been  a  sympathetic  friend,  a  wise 
Hitherto   no    biographer    has    surmised  counsellor,  and  a  neighbour  to  be  surely 
the  extent  to  which,  during  his  voluntary  trusted  in  times  of  emergency.     It  was 
exile  in  Georgia,  he  denied  himself  in  Mr.  Hoole  who,  after  the  fire,  first  of  all 
meats  and  drinks  and  sleeping  and  other  came  to  the  rescue  with  practical  help, 
things.  The  letter,  copied  in  the  handwriting  of 

2  The  *  contemplative  man '  was  not,  one  of  the  rectory  daughters,  in  which 
apparently,   a  person  casually  met ;  nor  Susanna    Wesley    told   Mr.    Hoole   the 
is  the  reference  to  one  interview,  but  to  tragic  story,  is  in  the  Colman  Collection, 
several    'conversations.'      The    date  of  It    was    first  published,    in  extenso,   in 
this    intercourse    was   shortly   after   the  Wesley  Studies  >  p.  43.    Many  years  later, 
friendship  formed  with  Clayton.    William  as  we  learn  from  the  first  Oxford  Diary, 
Law,  Mystic  and  Nonjuror,  presents  him-  Mr.    Hoole  was   still  the  friend  of  the 
self   as    a    probable    candidate   for   the  family.     John  Wesley,  whilst  serving  as 
honour.     But  the  credentials  of  Gambold,  his  father's  curate  at  Wroot,  frequently 
Clayton,  or  Hervey  are  worthy  of  con-  visited  him.     Still  later,  when  persecu- 


May  1738.] 


A  Review  of  Life 


469 


than  I  was  convinced  before,  that  outward  works  are  nothing, 
being  alone ;  and  in  several  conversations  instructed  me  how  to 
pursue  inward  holiness,  or  a  union  of  the  soul  with  God.  But 
even  of  his  instructions  (though  I  then  received  them  as  the 
words  of  God)  I  cannot  but  now  observe  (i)  that  he  spoke  so 
incautiously  against  trusting  in  outward  works,  that  he  dis- 
couraged me  from  doing  them  at  all ;  (2)  that  he  recommended 
(as  it  were,  to  supply  what  was  wanting  in  them)  mental  prayer, 
and  the  like  exercises,  as  the  most  effectual  means  of  purifying 
the  soul  and  uniting  it  with  God.  Now  these  were,  in  truth,  as 
much  my  own  works  as  visiting  the  sick  or  clothing  the  naked  ; 
and  the  union  with  God  thus  pursued  was  as  really  my  own 
righteousness  as  any  I  had  before  pursued  under  another  name. 
8.  In  this  refined  way  of  trusting  to  my  own  works  and 
my  own  righteousness  (so  zealously  inculcated  by  the  Mystic 


tion  assailed  the  Holy  Club,  John 
Wesley  wrote  for  advice  to  a  '  clergyman 
of  known  wisdom  and  integrity,'  giving 
him  a  particular  account  of  all  proceed- 
ings (May  1 8,  1731).  This,  as  White- 
head  learnt  from  the  '  private  Journal,' 
was  Mr.  Hoole.  Henry  Moore  (vol.  i. 
p.  162)  says:  'About  this  time  [early, 
probably,  in  1729,  when  Wesley  was  still 
at  Wroot],  a  serious  man,  whom  he  had 
travelled  many  miles  to  see  [this  would 
be  true  of  the  distance  between  Wroot 
and  Haxey],  said  to  him,  "  Sir,  you  wish 
to  serve  God  and  go  to  heaven?  Re- 
member that  you  cannot  serve  Him 
alone.  You  must  therefore  find  com- 
panions or  make  them  ;  the  Bible  knows 
nothing  of  solitary  religion."  He  never 
forgot  this.  Therefore  on  his  return  to 
the  University  he  first  spoke  to  his 
brother,  Mr.  Charles  Wesley/  &c. 
Moore  then  proceeds  to  sketch  the 
founding  of  the  Holy  Club.  Who  was 
Henry  Moore's  '  serious  man  '  ?  No  one, 
so  far  as  we  know,  meets  all  the  require- 
ments of  the  case  except  Mr.  Hoole. 
This,  apparently,  is  the  earliest  sugges- 
tion of  the  idea  of  Christian  fellowship  in 
the  religious  experience  of  John  Wesley. 
It  amply  accounts  for  the  fact  that,  in  the 
Morgan  emergency,  he  wrote  for  advice 


not  only  to  his  father,  but  also  to  the 
'clergyman  of  known  wisdom  and 
integrity'  who,  on  the  hypothesis,  had 
first  suggested  the  idea  of  fellowship  to 
his  mind.  It  is  quite  possible  that  in 
Mr.  Hoole  we  also  have  the  'contem- 
plative man  '  of  Wesley's  autobiographi- 
cal narrative. 

Emphasis,  however,  must  always  be 
placed  on  Law's  part  in  the  preparatory 
work  of  the  Evangelical  Revival,  and 
especially  in  the  initiation  of  the  Wesleys 
into  the  more  mystical  aspects  of  religious 
experience.  '  It  is  true,'  Wesley  wrote 
in  1 760,  '  that  Mr.  Law,  whom  I  love 
and  reverence  now,  was  once  a  kind 
of  "oracle"  to  me  (Sept.  17,  1760).' 
Charles  Wesley  used,  even  in  old  age,  to 
say,  '  Mr.  Law  was  our  John  the  Baptist.' 
Moore,  who  reports  this  (/#fc,  vol.  i. 
p.  107),  adds,  '  He  (Mr.  Law)  put  them 
on  a  kind  of  penance,  which  thoroughly 
showed  them  their  own  hearts,  but 
which  gave  them  no  victory  over  sin,  no 
peace  or  joy  in  believing.'  Wesley's 
view  of  the  influence  of  Mysticism  upon 
his  religious  experience  at  this  time  is 
strongly  stated  in  a  remarkable  passage 
of  the  Return- Voyage  Journal  (see  above, 
p.  420).  Wesley's  first  visit  to  Law  was 
in  July  1732  (Moore,  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  190). 


470  John    Wesley  s  Journal  [May  me. 

writers),  1  dragged  on  heavily,  finding  no  comfort  or  help 
therein  till  the  time  of  my  leaving  England.  On  shipboard, 
however,  I  was  again  active  in  outward  works ;  where  it  pleased 
God  of  His  free  mercy  to  give  me  twenty-six  of  the  Moravian 
brethren  for  companions,  who  endeavoured  to  show  me  *  a 
more  excellent  way.'  But  I  understood  it  not  at  first.  I  was 
too  learned  and  too  wise.  So  that  it  seemed  foolishness  unto 
me.  And  I  continued  preaching,  and  following  after,  and 
trusting  in,  that  righteousness  whereby  no  flesh  can  be 
justified. 

9.  All  the  time  I  was  at  Savannah  I  was  thus  beating  the 
air.     Being  ignorant  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  which,  by 
a  living  faith  in  Him,  bringeth  salvation  'to   every  one  that 
believeth,'  I  sought  to  establish  my  own  righteousness ;  and  so 
laboured  in  the  fire  all  my  days.     I  was  now  properly  *  under 
the  law '  ;    I   knew  that  '  the  law '   of  God  was   '  spiritual  ;    I 
consented   to   it  that   it  was  good.'     Yea,  '  I  delighted  in  it, 
after   the   inner   man.'      Yet   was    I    '  carnal,   sold    under   sin.' 
Every  day  was  I  constrained  to  cry  out,  'What  I  do,  I  allow 
not :  for  what  I  would,  I  do  not ;  but  what  I  hate,  that  I  do. 
To  will  is '  indeed  *  present  with  me :  but  how  to  perform  that 
which  is  good,  I  find  not.     For  the  good  which  I  would,  I  do 
not ;  but  the  evil  which  I  would  not,  that  I  do.     I  find  a  law, 
that  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me  ' :   even 
1  the  law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,' 
and  still  '  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin.' 

10.  In  this  vile,  abject  state  of  bondage  to  sin,  I  was  indeed 
fighting  continually,  but  not  conquering.    Before,  I  had  willingly 
served  sin  :  now  it  was  unwillingly  ;  but  still  I  served  it.     I  fell, 
and  rose,  and  fell  again.     Sometimes  I  was  overcome,  and  in 
heaviness  :  sometimes  I  overcame,  and  was  in  joy.     For  as  in 
the  former  state   I   had  some  foretastes  of  the  terrors  of  the 
law  ;  so  had  I  in  this,  of  the  comforts  of  the  gospel.     During 
this  whole  struggle  between  nature  and  grace,  which  had  now 
continued  above  ten  years,  I  had  many  remarkable  returns  to 
prayer,  especially  when  I  was  in  trouble ;  I  had  many  sensible 
comforts,  which  are  indeed  no  other  than    short  anticipations 
of  the  life  of  faith.     But  I  was  still  '  under  the  law,'  not  '  under 
grace'  (the  state  most  who  are  called  Christians  are   content 


May  i73«.]  A  Review  of  Life  471 

to  live  and  die  in) ;  for  I  was  only  striving  with,  not  freed  from, 
sin.  Neither  had  I  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  with  my  spirit,  and 
indeed  could  not ;  for  I  'sought  it  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  were 
by  the  works  of  the  law.' 

ii.  In  my  return  to  England,  January  1738,  being  in  immi- 
nent danger  of  death,1  and  very  uneasy  on  that  account,  I  was 
strongly  convinced  that  the  cause  of  that  uneasiness  was  unbelief; 
and  that  the  gaining  a  true,  living  faith  was  the  '  one  thing 
needful '  for  me.  But  still  I  fixed  not  this  faith  on  its  right 
object :  I  meant  only  faith  in  God,  not  faith  in  or  through 
Christ.  Again,  I  knew  not  that  I  was  wholly  void  of  this  faith  ; 
but  only  thought  I  had  riot  enough  of  it.  So  that  when  Peter 
Bohler,  whom  God  prepared  for  me  as  soon  as  I  came  to  London, 
affirmed  of  true  faith  in  Christ  (which  is  but  one)  that  it  had 
those  two  fruits  inseparably  attending  it,  'dominion  over  sin 
and  constant  peace  from  a  sense  of  forgiveness,'  I  was  quite 
amazed,  and  looked  upon  it  as  a  new  gospel.  If  this  was  so, 
it  was  clear  I  had  not  faith.  But  I  was  not  willing  to  be  con- 
vinced of  this.  Therefore  I  disputed  with  all  my  might,  and 
laboured  to  prove  that  faith  might  be  where  these  were  not : 
for  all  the  scriptures  relating  to  this  I  had  been  long  since 
taught  to  construe  away  ;  and  to  call  all  Presbyterians  who  spoke 
otherwise.  Besides,  I  well  saw  no  one  could,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  have  such  a  sense  of  forgiveness,  and  not  feel  it.  But 
I  felt  it  not.  If,  then,  there  was  no  faith  without  this,  all  my 
pretensions  to  faith  dropped  at  once. 

12.  When  I  met  Peter  Bohler  again,  he  consented  to  put 
the  dispute  upon  the  issue  which  I  desired,  namely,  Scripture 
and  experience.  I  first  consulted  the  Scripture.  But  when  I 
set  aside  the  glosses  of  men,  and  simply  considered  the  words 
of  God,  comparing  them  together,  endeavouring  to  illustrate 
the  obscure  by  the  plainer  passages,  I  found  they  all  made 
against  me,  and  was  forced  to  retreat  to  my  last  hold,  'that 
experience  would  never  agree  with  the  literal  interpretation  of 


1  The  influence  of  storms  on  the  ex-  the  realization  of  his  need  for  saving  faith, 
perience  of  the  Wesleys  was  an  abiding  Whilst  the  storm  was  still  raging  he 
memory,  as  may  be  gathered  from  the  resolved,  not  only  to  preach  the  new- 
hymns.  The  storm  of  the  return  voyage  found  truth  to  all,  but  *  to  apply  the 
brought  John  Wesley  one  step  nearer  to  word  of  God  to  every  soul  in  the  ship.' 


472  John    Wesley  s  Journal 


those  scriptures.  Nor  could  I  therefore  allow  it  to  be  true, 
till  I  found  some  living  witnesses  of  it.'  He  replied,  he  could 
show  me  such  at  any  time  ;  if  I  desired  it,  the  next  day.  And 
accordingly  the  next  day  he  came  again  with  three  others,  all 
of  whom  testified,  of  their  own  personal  experience,  that  a  true 
living  faith  in  Christ  is  inseparable  from  a  sense  of  pardon  for 
all  past  and  freedom  from  all  present  sins.  They  added  with 
one  mouth  that  this  faith  was  the  gift,  the  free  gift  of  God  ; 
and  that  He  would  surely  bestow  it  upon  every  soul  who 
earnestly  and  perseveringly  sought  it.  I  was  now  throughly 
convinced  ;  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  resolved  to  seek  it 
unto  the  end,  (i)  By  absolutely  renouncing  all  dependence,  in 
whole  or  in  part,  upon  my  own  works  or  righteousness  ;  on 
which  I  had  really  grounded  my  hope  of  salvation,  though  I 
knew  it  not,  from  my  youth  up ;  (2)  by  adding  to  the  constant 
use  of  all  the  other  means  of  grace,  continual  prayer  for  this 
very  thing,  justifying,  saving  faith,  a  full  reliance  on  the 
blood  of  Christ  shed  for  me  ;  a  trust  in  Him,  as  my  Christ, 
as  my  sole  justification,  sanctification,  and  redemption. 

13.  I  continued  thus  to  seek  it  (though  with  strange  indif- 
ference, dullness,  and  coldness,  and  unusually  frequent  relapses 
into  sin)  till  Wednesday ',  May  24.  I  think  it  was  about  five 
this  morning,  that  I  opened  my  Testament  on  those  words, 
Ta  /jueyicrTa  r\^lv  KOI  rl/jLia  €7rayye\fjLara  Se^caprjTat,  LVCL  yevrja-Qe 
Oeias  KOivwvol  <£v<reo)9.  '  There  are  given  unto  us  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises,  even  that  ye  should  be  partakers 
of  the  divine  nature '  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  Just  as  I  went  out,  I 
opened  it  again  on  those  words,  '  Thou  art  not  far  from  the 
kingdom  of  God.'  In  the  afternoon  I  was  asked  to  go  to 
St.  Paul's.  The  anthem  was,  '  Out  of  the  deep  have  I  called 
unto  Thee,  O  Lord :  Lord,  hear  my  voice.  O  let  Thine  ears 
consider  well  the  voice  of  my  complaint.  If  Thou,  Lord,  wilt 
be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss,  O  Lord,  who  may 
abide  it  ?  For  there  is  mercy  with  Thee  ;  therefore  shalt  Thou 
be  feared.  O  Israel,  trust  in  the  Lord  :  for  with  the  Lord 
there  is  mercy,  and  with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption.  And 
He  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all  his  sins.'  1 


1  Sir  Frederick  Bridge  states  that  *  the       the  one  composed  by  Henry  Purcell,  a 
setting  could  have  been  none  other  than       former  organist  of  Westminster  Abbey.' 


473 


May  1738.] 


A  Society  in  Aldersgate 


475 


14.  In  the  evening  I  went  very  unwillingly  to  a  society  in 
Aldersgate  Street,1  where  one  was  reading  Luther's  preface  to 
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans?  About  a  quarter  before  nine,  while 


1  Two  rival  sites  claim  the  honour  of 
being  the  place  of  John  Wesley's  con- 
version—Trinity Hall,  Little  Britain, 
and  Hall  House,  Nettleton  Court.  "  Both 
are,  or  rather  were,  '  in  Aldersgate 
Street ' ;  each  at  one  time  housed  a 
religious  society.  The  problem  is  dis- 
cussed exhaustively,  and  without  bias, 
by  the  Rev.  H.  J.  Foster  in  Wesley 
Studies,  p.  81-7  ;  also  in  the  Pro- 
ceedings of  the  W.H.S.  vol.  iii.  pp. 
246-8;  and  vol.  v.  pp.  246-7.  The 
authority  for  the  Little  Britain  site  is 
The  History  and  Antiquities  of  Dis- 
senting Churches  and  Meeting- Houses  in 
London,  Westminster,  and  Southward, 
<Sv.— By  Walter  Wilson,  of  the  Inner 
Temple,  1810,  vol.  iii.  pp.  350-64. 
Originally,  Trinity  Hall  was  part  of  a 
religious  house  belonging  to  the  abbots  of 
Clugni  in  France;  in  1738  the  lower  part 
was  a  coffee-house,  and  the  upper  room 
served  as  a  chapel  for  a  congregation  of 
Nonjurors,  from  whom,  according  to 
Wilson,  *  it  passed  into  the  possession  of 
the  Methodists.'  For  this  statement 
Wilson  has  no  evidence  except  the  two 
passages  in  Wesley's  Journal,  May  24, 
and  Sept.  20,  1738.  Wilson,  how- 
ever, is  regarded  as  a  trustworthy 
authority.  Hall  House  was  in  Nettle- 
ton  Court,  on  the  other  side  of  Aldersgate 
Street.  The  exact  site  has  been  located 
by  Mr,  Lupton  in  tit^-soi^Wast-angle^of 
the  $n&B&f&&£^ 
in  Aldersgate  Street.  Until  recently 
the  sole  evidence  in  support  of  this 
identification  was  a  statement  in  Benham 
that  James  Hutton  took  a  room  in  Nettle- 
ton  Court,  and  had  a  *  Society '  there. 
But  in  1875  the  Moravian  Messenger,  in 
an  autobiographical  memoir  of  Brother 
John  West,  a  prominent  member  of  the 
Fetter  Lane  church,  threw  additional 
light  on  Hutton's  society.  '  I  attended,' 
West  says,  'the  ministry  [of  Whitefield] 
for  the  first  time  towards  the  latter  end 


of  1737.  I  thought  within  myself,  this 
is  indeed  something  new,  and  omitted  no 
opportunity  to  hear  him.  About  this 
time  I  heard  of  a  religious  society  which 
met  weekly  in  Nettleton  Court,  Aiders- 
gate  Street, land  it  was  not  long  before 
I  joined  them.  The  brethren  James 
Hutton  and  John  Edmunds  were  of  the 
number.  When  Brother  Bohler  came  to 
England  ...  at  our  request,  he  formed 
us  into  bands.  After  Mr.  Wesley  with- 
drew from  us,  I  was  in  a  great  strait 
whom  to  follow.  .  .  . '  It  should  be 
remembered  that  whilst  Charles  Wesley 
was  at  this  time  the  guest  of  Bray  in 
Little  Britain,  his  brother  John  was  the 
guest  of  James  Hutton  in  QceaL  Wild 
Street,  and  the  probability  is  that  he 
would  accompany  his  host  to  the  society 
he  had  founded,  which,  it  is  clear,  met 
in  Nettleton  Court.  On  the  whole  the 
balance  of  evidence  is  in  favour  of  the 
Nettleton  Court  site. 

2  It  has  been  suggested  that  William 
Holland  was  the  '  one '  who  '  was  reading 
Luther's  Preface '  on  May  24.  He  was 
a  remarkable  man,  a  member  of  the 
Church  of  England,  but  in  union  with 
the  Brethren.  His  name  appears  first  in 
a  List  of  'The  Congregation  of  the 
Lamb,  with  its  officers  and  servants 
as  settled  in  London,  Oct.  30,  1742.' 
He  is  described  in  the  List  as  :  '  I. 
William  Holland,  Painter,  in  a  large 
way  of  business,  of  Basinghall  Street, 
over  against  Blackwell  Hall,  near  Guild- 
hall.' He  ranked  in  the  Moravian 
Church  as  the  first  '  Congregation 
Elder.'  It  is  to  a  manuscript  account 
in  his  handwriting,  in  the  archives  of  the 
Moravian  church  in  Fetter  Lane,  .that 
we  are  indebted  for  the  facts  that  remove 
beyond  doubt  the  vexed  question  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  society  founded  by  the 
Wesleys  in  Fetter  Lane  (May  I,  1738). 
The  following  is  William  Holland's 
account  of  what  Charles  Wesley  has 


476 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1738. 


he  was  describing  the  change  which  God  works  in  the  heart 
through  faith  in  Christ,  I  felt  my  heart  strangely  warmed.  I 
felt  I  did  trust  in  Christ,  Christ  alone  for  salvation  ;  and  an 
assurance  was  given  me  that  He  had  taken  away  my  sins,  even 
mine,  and  saved  me  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death. 

15.  I  began  to  pray  with  all  my  might  for  those  who  had  in 
a  more  especial  manner  despitefully  used  me  and  persecuted  me. 
I  then  testified  openly  to  all  there  what  I  now  first  felt  in  my 
heart.     But  it  was  not  long  before  the  enemy  suggested,  '  This 
cannot  be  faith  ;  for  where  is  thy  joy  ?  '     Then  was  I   taught 
that  peace  and  victory  over  sin  are  essential   to   faith  in  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation  ;  but  that,  as  to  the  transports  of  joy 
that  usually  attend  the  beginning  of  it,  especially  in  those  who 
have  mourned  deeply,  God  sometimes  giveth,  sometimes  with- 
holdeth  them,  according  to  the  counsels  of  His  own  will. 

1 6.  After  my  return  home,  I  was  much  buffeted  with  tempta- 
tions ;  but  cried  out,  and  they  fled  away.     They  returned  again 


chronicled  more  briefly  in  his  Journal 
under  May  17  :  '  Shortly  before  Peter 
Bohler's  departure  for  Georgia,  he  and 
Mr.  Wesley  began  a  band.  I  was  gone 
at  that  time  for  a  few  days  into  the 
country.  After  my  return,  in  speaking 
with  one  of  our  society  on  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  as  preached  by  him,  and 
reading  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans,  I  was  conscious  that  I 
was  not  in  the  state  there  described.  I 
became  very  uneasy,  made  a  diligent 
search  for  books  treating  of  faith  in 
Christ,  and  was  providentially  directed 
to  Martin  Luther's  Commentary  on  the 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  I  carried  it 
round  to  Mr.  Charles  Wesley,  who  was 
sick  at  Mr.  Bray's,  as  a  very  precious 
treasure  that  I  had  found,  and  we  three 
sat  down  together,  Mr.  Charles  Wesley 
reading  the  Preface  aloud.  At  the 
words,  "  What,  have  we  then  nothing 
to  do  ?  No,  nothing  !  but  only  accept 
of  Him  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom  and  righteousness  and  sanctifica- 
tion  and  redemption,"  there  came  such  a 
power  over  me  as  I  cannot  well  describe ; 
my  great  burden  fell  off  in  an  instant  ;  my 


heart  was  so  filled  with  peace  and  love 
that  I  burst  into  tears.  I  almost  thought 
I  saw  our  Saviour  !  My  companions, 
perceiving  me  so  affected,  fell  on  their 
knees  and  prayed.  When  I  afterwards 
went  into  the  street,  I  could  scarcely 
feel  the  ground  I  trod  upon.'  It  should 
be  added  that  Holland  went  to  York- 
shire and  left  the  Moravian  Church  in 
1747,  but  only  because  he  found  it  im- 
practicable to  be  called  a  Moravian 
brother  without  separating  from  the 
National  Church  and  her  Thirty-nine 
Articles.  He  died  in  Feb.  1761.  It  is 
extremely  probable  that  this  was  the 
reader  under  whom  John  Wesley's  heart 
was  strangely  warmed.  If  so,  we  have 
the  singular  coincidence  that  Charles 
read  to  him  and  he  read  to  John. 
But  what  was  read?  The  text  of  the 
Journal,  as  it  has  reached  us,  says  dis- 
tinctly :  Luther's  Preface  to  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans.  One  can  scarcely  be 
surprised  that  a  doubt  has  arisen  with 
reference  to  this  statement.  Is  '  Romans ' 
a  misprint,  or  error  of  association,  for 
1  Galatians '  ?  The  discovery  of  a  missing 
Diary  would  set  the  question  at  rest. 


May  1738.] 


Hymns  of  Conversion 


477 


and  again.  I  as  often  lifted  up  my  eyes,  and  He  '  sent  me  help 
from  His  holy  place.'  And  herein  I  found  the  difference 
between  this  and  my  former  state  chiefly  consisted.  I  was 
striving,  yea,  fighting  with  all  my  might  under  the  law,  as 
well  as  under  grace.  But  then  I  was  sometimes,  if  not  often, 
conquered  ;  now,  I  was  always  conqueror.1 

17.  Thur.  25. — The  moment  I  awaked,  'Jesus,  Master,'  was 
in  my  heart  and  in  my  mouth  ;  and  I  found  all  my  strength 
lay  in  keeping  my  eye  fixed  upon  Him,  and  my  soul  waiting  on 


1  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  many  of 
the  finest  hymns  in  the  Wesley  collec- 
tions preserve  the  memory  of  the  stirring 
spiritual  experiences  through  which  the 
two  brothers  coincidentally  at  this  time 
passed.  Who  actually  wrote  these 
hymns  of  conversion,  whether  John  or 
Charles,  we  may  never  now  be  able  to 
ascertain.  These  and  many  other  hymns 
of  an  early  period  were  published  by 
John  and  Charles  Wesley  in  a  volume 
entitled  Hymns  and  Sacred  Poems.  The 
text  on  the  title-page  and  the  manner  of 
its  printing  indicate  the  motif  of  the 
book: 

For  tht  Grace  of  GOD  that  bringeth 
Salvation  unto  ALL  MEN  hath  appeared  : 
rEwe^atoj  yap  rj  \-apis  TOV  ©eow  r\  <r<i>r»jptOf  iraffiv 
a^puJTrois.]  Teaching  us,  (hat  denying  Un- 
godliness and  worldly  L  ttsts,  we  should  live 
soberly,  righteously  and  godly  in  this  present 
World;  looking  for  that  blessed  Hope,  and 
the  glorious  Appearing  of  the  great  GOD,  and 
our  Saviour  JESUS  CHRIST  ;  who  gave  Hint- 
self  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from 
ALL  INIQUITY,  and  purify  unto  Himself  a 
peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  Works. — TIT. 
ii.  ii,  12,  13, 14. 

BRISTOL:  Printed  and  sold  by  Felix 
Farley,  &c.,  1742. 

In  this  volume  three  well-known 
*  Thanksgiving  '  hymns  follow  Charles 
Wesley's  'Wrestling  Jacob.'  They  are 
of  the  same  metre,  and  were  probably 
written  at  or  near  the  same  time  : 

•O  what  shall  I  do  my  Saviour  to  praise  ? ' 

'  O  heavenly  King,  look  down  from  above,' 
and 

'  My  Father,  my  God,  I  long  for  Thy  love.' 

In  the  index  of  the  '  Hymn-Book  '  (1875) 


these  hymns  are  marked  W.,  with 
reference  to  which  it  is  necessary  to 
recall  the  note  given  in  the  Preface  of 
that  edition:  'Where  no  name  follows 
the  first  line  in  the  Index,  the  hymn 
may  be  taken  as  the  production  of  Mr. 
Charles  Wesley.  The  letter  W.  is  affixed 
to  those  hymns  which  first  appeared  in 
publications  for  which  the  Wesleys  were 
jointly  responsible  ;  in  this  case  it  cannot 
be  determined  with  certainty  to  which 
of  the  two  brothers  a  hymn  should  be 
ascribed.'  It  is  possible  that  the  three 
hymns  in  question  were  composed  by 
Charles  Wesley  ;  but  if  so,  there  is  strong 
presumptive  evidence  that  when  he  wrote 
the  last  of  the  three  his  mind  was 
running  on  the  experiences  described  by 
his  .brother  John  in  this  section  of  the 
Journal.  The  hymn  echoes  the  Journal : 

I  wrestle  not  now,  but  trample  on  sin. 
For  with  me  art  Thou,  and  shalt  be  within, 
Whilst,    stronger  and  stronger   in    Jesus's 

power, 
I  go  on  to  conquer,  till  sin  is  no  more. 

The  attack  in  Great  College  Street  is 
reproduced  : 

My  foes  dost  control  and  quiet  their  strife  ; 
Thou  rulest  my  passion,  my  pride,  and  self- 
will. 

The  probabilities  seem  to  favour  the 
theory  that  John  Wesley  wrote  this 
hymn,  and  perhaps  the  other  two  of  the 
same  series  also.  The  internal  evidence 
indicating  Charles  Wesley's  authorship 
is  limited  to  a  single  phrase,  '  Thou 
savest  me  from  sickness '  ;  but  John 
also  was  often  sick. 


478 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1738. 


Him  continually.  Being  again  at  St.  Paul's  in  the  afternoon, 
I  could  taste  the  good  word  of  God  in  the  anthem,  which  began, 
*  My  song  shall  be  always  of  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord : 
with  my  mouth  will  I  ever  be  showing  forth  Thy  truth  from 
one  generation  to  another.'  Yet  the  enemy  injected  a  fear,  '  If 
thou  dost  believe,  why  is  there  not  a  more  sensible  change  ? ' 
I  answered  (yet  not  I),  '  That  I  know  not.  But  this  I  know, 
I  have  "  now  peace  with  God."  And  I  sin  not  to-day,  and  Jesus 
my  Master  has  forbid  me  to  take  thought  for  the  morrow.' 

1 8.  'But  is  not  any  sort  of  fear,'  continued  the  tempter, 
'  a  proof  that  thou  dost  not  believe  ?  '  I  desired  my  Master 
to  answer  for  me,  and  opened  His  Book  upon  those  words  of 
St.  Paul,  '  Without  were  fightings,  within  were  fears.'  Then, 
inferred  I,  well  may  fears  be  within  me ;  but  I  must  go  on, 
and  tread  them  under  my  feet.1 

Fri.  26. — My  soul  continued  in  peace,  but  yet  in  heaviness 
because  of  manifold  temptations.  I  asked  Mr.  Toltschig,2  the 


1  On  the  nature  of  the  change  which 
took  place  on  this  memorable  occasion, 
and  on  its  immeasurable   importance  in 
relation  to  all   the  future,   no   one  has 
written   with   greater    insight    than   Dr. 
Rigg,  not  only  in  his  Living  Wesley ,  but 
also  in  his  Churchmanship  of  John  Wesley. 
From  another  point  of  view,  one  of  the 
most  illuminating  comments  will  be  found 
in    the    letter    John    Wesley    wrote    to 
Samuel  and  Ursula  Wesley  in  the  autumn 
of  the  same  year  (  Works,  vol.  xii.  p.  33). 

2  In   Benham's   Memoirs    of   Hutton> 
John    Toltschig     is     frequently    named. 
After    the   settlement   of   the   Moravian 
exiles  in  Upper  Lusatia,  and  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  congregation  in  Herrnhut, 
messengers  were   sent  to  Count  Zinzen- 
dorf's  friends  with  historical  accounts  of 
the  persecuted  church.     The  deputation 
to    England    (1728)   consisted    of    three 
Moravian     brethren — Wenzel      Neisser, 
John  Toltschig,  and  David  Nitschmann. 
In  the  spring  of  the  year  1735  a  company 
of  ten  missionaries,  under  the  conduct  of 
Toltschig,  reached  London  on  their  way 
to  Georgia.     Augustus  Gottlieb  Spangen- 
berg     had    preceded     them    (Benham's 


Hutton,  pp.  17,  1 8).  That  this  is  the 
Toltschig  whose  name  so  frequently 
appears  in  Wesley's  Georgia  Journal  is 
placed  beyond  doubt  by  a  note  in  Ben- 
ham.  Referring  to  Ingham's  friendship 
with  the  Moravians  in  Georgia,  he  writes : 
'  The  knowledge  and  love  which  he  had 
of  and  for  the  Brethren  in  general  in- 
duced him,  at  Br.  Toltschig's  return  from 
Georgia  to  London,  to  accompany  him 
to  Holland  and  Germany,  to  visit  the 
congregations  of  the  Brethren  there.'  A 
year  later  Toltschig  joined  Ingham  in 
Yorkshire,  as,  still  later,  did  Bohler  and 
Neisser.  In  the  lists  of  the  Pilgrim 
House  Congregation  (Hutton,  pp.  229-33) 
are  names  around  which  interest  gathers, 
as  for  instance,  'William  Holland,'  the 
reader  of  Luther's  Preface  ;  William 
Oxlee,  one  of  Wesley's  correspondents 
at  this  time  ;  Stonehouse,  vicar  of  Isling- 
ton ;  and  William  Delamotte,  brother  of 
Charles,  of  whom  it  is  recorded,  *  who 
also  preached  the  gospel  with  great 
blessings,  and  went  soon  after  to  the 
Lamb.'  Among  the  sisters  in  the  Pilgrim 
congregation,  Judith  Toltschig  is  named  ; 
she  is  '  sick  waiter ' ;  also  Mary  Stone- 


May  1738.] 


In  Peace 


479 


Moravian,  what  to  do.  He  said,  '  You  must  not  fight  with 
them,  as  you  did  before,  but  flee  from  them  the  moment  they 
appear,  and  take  shelter  in  the  wounds  of  Jesus.'  The  same  I 
learned  also  from  the  afternoon  anthem,1  which  was, '  My  soul 
truly  waiteth  still  upon  God  :  for  of  Him  cometh  my  salvation  ; 
He  verily  is  my  strength  and  my  salvation,  He  is  my  defence, 
so  that  I  shall  not  greatly  fall.  O  put  your  trust  in  Him 
always,  ye  people  ;  pour  out  your  hearts  before  Him  ;  for  God 
is  our  hope.' 

Sat.  27. — Believing  one  reason  of  my  want  of  joy  was  want 
of  time  for  prayer,  I  resolved  to  do  no  business  till  I  went  to 
church  in  the  morning,  but  to  continue  pouring  out  my  heart 
before  Him.  And  this  day  my  spirit  was  enlarged  ;  so  that 
though  I  was  now  also  assaulted  by  many  temptations,  I  was 
more  than  conqueror,  gaining  more  power  thereby  to  trust  and 
to  rejoice  in  God  my  Saviour. 

Sun.  28. — I  waked  in  peace,  but  not  in  joy.  In  the  same 
even,  quiet  state  I  was  till  the  evening,  when  I  was  roughly 
attacked  in  a  large  company  as  an  enthusiast,  a  seducer,  and 
a  setter-forth  of  new  doctrines.2  By  the  blessing  of  God,  I  was 


house  and  Louisa  Hutton.  Later,  in  a 
list  of  '  Boys  and  Girls,'  who  are  called 
'Labourers'  Children,'  we  find  Ignatius 
Toltschig,  Isaac  Holland,  and  Ignatius 
Ingham.  Many  of  the  names  in  these 
Yorkshire  Moravian  lists  recall  (perhaps 
accidentally)  the  names  of  north-country 
Methodist  families.  We  must  not  forget 
that  the  Moravian  and  Ingham  societies 
in  Yorkshire  prepared  the  way  for 
Methodism.  How  Toltschig,  together 
with  *  Brother  and  Sister  Spangenberg,' 
led  the  Pilgrim  congregation  to  York- 
shire, settling  at  a  place  called  New- 
house,  near  Halifax,  and  how  they  *  went 
in  and  out,  preaching  the  gospel  in  many 
towns  and  villages  around  to  many  thou- 
sand souls,'  is  told  quaintly  by  Benham  ; 
also  the  story  of  '  Lamb's  Hill,'  near 
Pudsey  ;  the  Synod  having  directed  Mr. 
Ingham  and  his  wife,  Lady  Margaret,  to 
buy  it  for  a  settlement  for  the  pilgrims, 
they  gladly  consented,  'from  which  time 
it  has  always  been  impressed  upon  our 
VOL.  I. 


hearts  to  build  a  congregation  house, 
where  the  pilgrims  might  live  and  fly  in 
and  out.' 

How  often  in  times  of  doubt  and 
perplexity  had  he  consulted  Toltschig  ! 
By  far  the  most  influential  man  in  the 
little  community  of  Georgia  Moravians, 
ranking  in  that  respect  before  Bishop 
Anton  Seifart,  if  not  also  before  Spangen- 
berg himself,  was  the  venerable  John 
Toltschig. 

1  Wesley's  indebtedness  to  the  anthems 
sung  in  St.  Paul's  at  this  time  has  often 
been  noted. 

*  This  scene  took  place  in  Mr.  Mutton's 
house  in  College  Street.  Mrs.  Hutton 
describes  it  in  a  letter  to  her  old  friend 
and  next-door  neighbour,  Samuel  Wesley 
junior.  She  recalls  the  hospitality  which, 
after  his  departure  from  Westminster, 
she  and  her  husband  had  shown  to  his 
brothers,  and  to  '  ten  or  twelve  of  their 
friends.'  *  But  your  brother  John,'  she 
writes,  '  seems  to  be  turned  a  wild 

27 


480 


John    Wesley  s  Journal 


[May  1788. 


not  moved  to  anger,  but  after  a  calm  and  short  reply  went 
away ;  though  not  with  so  tender  a  concern  as  was  due  to  those 
who  were  seeking  death  in  the  error  of  their  life.1 

This  day  I  preached  in  the  morning  at  St.  George's, 
Bloomsbury,  on  '  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith/  and  in  the  afternoon  at  the  chapel  in  Long 
Acre  on  God's  justifying  the  ungodly ;  the  last  time  (I  under- 
stand) I  am  to  preach  at  either.  '  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou 
wilt.' 


enthusiast,  or  fanatic,  and,  to  our  very 
great  affliction,  is  drawing  our  two 
children  into  these  wild  notions  by  their 
great  opinion  of  Mr.  John's  sanctity  and 
judgement.'  She  implores  him  to  '  con- 
fine or  convert  Mr.  John  when  he  is  with 
you.  For  after  his  behaviour  on  Sunday, 
May  28,  when  you  hear  it,  you  will 
think  him  a  not  quite  right  man.'  It 
was  in  Mr.  Hutton's  study,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  a  great  number  of  people,  that 
*  Mr.  John  got  up  and  told  the  people 
that  five  days  before  he  was  not  a 
Christian,  and  this  he  was  as  well 
assured  of  as  that  five  days  before  he  was 
not  in  that  room,  and  the  way  for  them 
all  to  be  Christians  was  to  believe,  and 
own  that  they  were  not  now  Christians. 
Mr.  Hutton  was  much  surprised  at  this 
unexpected,  injudicious  speech  ;  but  only 
said,  "  Have  a  care,  Mr.  Wesley,  how 
you  despise  the  benefits  received  by  the 
two  sacraments.'"  At  supper  in  the 
parlour,  '  he  made  the  same  wild  speech 
again,  to  which  I  made  answer,  "  If  you 
was  not  a  Christian  ever  since  I  knew 
you,  you  was  a  great  hypocrite,  for  you 
made  us  all  believe  you  was  one.' "  She 
goes  on  to  report  a  sharp  discussion 
between  her  husband  and  Mr.  John,  and 
adds  :  *  Now  it  is  a  most  melancholy 
thing  to  have  not  only  our  two  children, 
but  many  others,  to  disregard  all  teach- 
ing, but  by  such  a  spirit  as  comes  to 
some  in  dreams,  to  others  in  such  visions 
as  will  surprise  you  to  hear  of.  If  there 
cannot  be  some  stop  put  to  this,  and  he 
can  be  taught  true  humility,  the  mischief 
he  will  do  wherever  he  goes  among  the 


ignorant    but    well-meaning     Christians 
will  be  very  great.' 

1  In  the  correspondence  and  Journals 
of  this  period,  dates  and  other  details  are 
confused.  Mrs.  Hutton  dates  Charles's 
conversion  May  22,  c  as  his  brother  John 
was  praying.'  She  falls  into  a  similar 
error  with  reference  to  John's  conversion  : 
'  Mr.  John  was  converted,  or  I  know  not 
what,  or  how,  but  made  a  Christian, 
on  May  25.'  Charles  Wesley  says — and 
Moore  follows  the  error— that  on  Sunday, 
May  28,  his  brother  set  out  for  Tiverton. 
He  mistakes  the  month.  It  was  on 
March  28  that  this  journey  began — the 
journey  that  was  arrested  by  Charles's 
illness,  and  diverted  first  to  Oxford  and 
then  to  Manchester.  Charles  Wesley's 
Journal  was  compiled — often  some  time 
after  the  events  described — from  diaries, 
letters,  and  memoranda.  In  the  hurry 
of  travel,  in  sickness,  and  especially 
during  days  of  unwonted  excitement,  it 
was  only  natural  that  errors  should  creep 
in.  If  at  this  distance  of  time  we  read 
through  the  letters  passing  from  one  to 
another,  not  among  godless  enemies,  but 
in  the  inner  circle  of  kinsfolk  and  friends, 
and  compare  them  with  the  Journals,  we 
shall  find  abundant  proof  that  the  Wesleys 
were  being  driven  hither  and  thither  on 
waves  of  intense  spiritual  excitement. 
The  phenomena  recall  the  days  of  Pente- 
cost and  the  prophecies  of  Joel.  No 
wonder  that  godly  and  sober-minded 
people  like  Mrs.  Wesley,  and  Martha 
Hall,  and  the  Huttons,  and  Samuel 
Wesley,  and  Hervey,  and  Broughton 
were  perplexed  and  distressed. 


May  1738.]  Spiritual  Experience  481 

Mon.  29. — I  set  out  for  Dummer1  with  Mr.  Wolf,  one  of 
the  first-fruits  of  Peter  Bohler's  ministry  in  England.  I  was 
much  strengthened  by  the  grace  of  God  in  him:  yet  was  his 
state  so  far  above  mine,  that  I  was  often  tempted  to  doubt 
whether  we  had  one  faith.  But,  without  much  reasoning  about 
it,  I  held  here  :  '  Though  his  be  strong  and  mine  weak,  yet  that 
God  hath  given  some  degree  of  faith  even  to  me,  I  know  by  its 
fruits.  For  I  have  constant  peace;  not  one  uneasy  thought. 
And  I  have  freedom  from  sin  ;  not  one  unholy  desire.' 

Yet  on  Wednesday  did  I  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  not  only 
by  not  watching  unto  prayer,  but  likewise  by  speaking  with 
sharpness  instead  of  tender  love  of  one  that  was  not  sound  in 
the  faith.  Immediately  God  hid  His  face,  and  I  was  troubled  ; 
and  in  this  heaviness  I  continued  till  the  next  morning,  June  I, 
when  it  pleased  God,  while  I  was  exhorting  another,  to  give 
comfort  to  my  soul,  and,  after  I  had  spent  some  time  in  prayer, 
to  direct  me  to  those  gracious  words,  '  Having  therefore  boldness 
to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  let  us  draw  near 
with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith.  Let  us  hold  fast 
the  profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering  (for  He  is  faithful 


1  Nearly  all  the  material  facts  belong-  against    doubt    within    and    temptation 

ing  to  the  daily  life  are  ignored.     It  is  from  without.     Note  his  experience  on 

the  ever- varying  spiritual  experience  on  Thursday,  June    I,   Saturday,  June  3, 

which  he  dwells.     He  went  to  Dummer,  and  following   days.      It   would    be  an 

no  doubt,  to  see  his  friends  the  Kinchins.  instructive    exercise    to    reproduce     the 

Mr.  Wolf,  who  appears  as    '  Shepherd  thoughts,  emotions,  and  doings  of  these 

Wolf  in  the  Moravian  lists,  was  one  of  days  immediately  following  his   convcr- 

the    converts   whose    testimony  had  so  sion.     For  such  a  study  we  have  ample 

greatly  impressed  him  on  May  I.     Pro-  materials  in  the  daily  lessons  and  prayers 

bably  he  hoped  that  his  personal  testi-  he   read,    in   the  anthems    sung  in   St. 

mony  might  be  equally  helpful  to  Miss  Paul's,    in    the    sermons    he    preached, 

Molly  and  her  brothers.     When  he  left  some  of  which  were  afterwards  printed, 

Dummer  we  are  not  told ;  but  on  Satur-  in  the  letters  he  wrote  and  received,  in 

day  the  3rd  he  was   in  London  again.  the   collection   of    Psalms    and   Hymns 

His  second  letter  to  Mr.  Law,  in  which  published  in  1738,  and  in  his  habit,  so 

he    complains    bitterly  of   his   master's  frequently  referred   to   at   this  time,  of 

imperfect  teaching,  was  written  on  Tues-  opening  the  Testament  and  taking  any 

day,  May  30,  and  therefore  at  Dummer.  Scripture,  and  especially  any  'great  and 

It    was    whilst    exhorting    one    of    his  precious    promise,'  as  a  message    from 

Dummer  friends  that  the  cloud   began  Heaven.     The  text,  2  Pet.  i.  4,  brought 

to    lift.      Even    in    these    days,    when  before  him  on  the  memorable  24th  of 

alternating  joy  and  depression  character-  May  seems  to  have  been  a  sacred  centre 

ized  the  new-found  life  of  faith,  good  around   which  his  devotional    thought* 

works    were    Wesley's    surest    remedy  gathered. 


482  John   Wesley  s  Joiimal 

that  promised) ;   and   let  us   consider  one  another   to  provoke 
unto  love  and  to  good  works.' 

JUNE  3,  Sat. — I  was  so  strongly  assaulted  by  one  of  my 
old  enemies,  that  I  had  scarce  strength  to  open  my  lips,  or  even 
to  look  up  for  help.  But  after  I  had  prayed,  faintly,  as  I  could, 
the  temptation  vanished  away. 

Sun.  4. — Was  indeed  a  feast-day.  For  from  the  time  of 
my  rising  till  past  one  in  the  afternoon,  I  was  praying,  reading 
the  Scriptures,  singing  praise,  or  calling  sinners  to  repentance. 
All  these  days  I  scarce  remember  to  have  opened  the  Testament, 
but  upon  some  '  great  and  precious  promise.'  And  I  saw  more 
than  ever  that  the  gospel  is  in  truth  but  one  great  promise, 
from  the  beginning  of  it  to  the  end. 

Tues.  6. — I  had  still  more  comfort,  and  peace,  and  joy ;  on 
which  I  fear  I  began  to  presume  :  for  in  the  evening  I  received 
a  letter  from  Oxford  which  threw  me  into  much  perplexity.  It 
was  asserted  therein,  *  That  no  doubting  could  consist  with  the 
least  degree  of  true  faith  ;  that  whoever  at  any  time  felt  any 
doubt  or  fear  was  not  weak  in  faith,  but  had  no  faith  at  all ; 
and  that  none  hath  any  faith  till  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
life  has  made  him  wholly  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.' 

Begging  of  God  to  direct  me,  I  opened  my  Testament  on 
I  Cor.  iii.  I,  &c.,  where  St.  Paul  speaks  of  those  whom  he  terms 
1  babes  in  Christ/  who  were  *  not  able  to  bear  strong  meat,'  nay 
(in  a  sense)  *  carnal ' ;  to  whom  nevertheless  he  says, '  Ye  are 
God's  building,  ye  are  the  temple  of  God.'  Surely,  then,  these 
men  had  some  degree  of  faith ;  though,  it  is  plain,  their  faith 
was  but  weak. 

After  some  hours  spent  in  the  Scripture  and  prayer,  I  was 
much  comforted.  Yet  I  felt  a  kind  of  soreness  in  my  heart, 
so  that  I  found  my  wound  was  not  fully  healed.  O  God,  save 
Thou  me,  and  all  that  are  *  weak  in  the  faith,'  from  '  doubtful 
disputations  ! ' 

Wed.  7. — I  determined,  if  God  should  permit,  to  retire  for  a 
short  time  into  Germany.  I  had  fully  proposed,  before  I  left 
Georgia,  so  to  'do,  if  it  should  please  God  to  bring  me  back  to 
Europe.1  And  I  now  clearly  saw  the  time  was  come.  My 


Charles  Wesley  had  formed  a  similar  resolution  in  1737- 


June  1738.] 


A    Great  Manifesto 


483 


weak  mind  could  not  bear  to  be  thus  sawn  asunder.  And  I 
hoped  the  conversing  with  those  holy  men  who  were  themselves 
living  witnesses  of  the  full  power  of  faith,  and  yet  able  to  bear 
with  those  that  are  weak,  would  be  a  means,  under  God,  of 
so  establishing  my  soul,  that  I  might  go  on  from  faith  to  faith 
and  '  from  strength  to  strength.' 

Thur.  8. — I  went  to  Salisbury,  to  take  leave  of  my  mother.1 
The  next  day  I  left  Sarum,  and  on  Saturday  came  to  Stanton 
Harcourt.  Having  preached  faith  in  Christ  there  on  Sunday 
the  nth,  I  went  on  to  Oxford*;  and  thence  on  Monday  to 


1  The  note  in  Journal,  June  13,  1739, 
proves  that  on  this  occasion  Wesley 
read  to  his  mother  the  document  de- 
scribing his  religious  experience  up  to 
May  24.  Mrs.  Wesley's  disapproval  of 
her  son's  new  faith  and  experience  was 
not  founded  on  this  statement,  against 
which  she  had  no  objection,  but  upon 
prejudiced  accounts  which  reached  her 
through  Mrs.  Hutton  and  her  son 
Samuel.  The  Rev.  Samuel  Badcock,  in 
a  letter  to  Mr.  John  Nichols  dated 
South  Molton,  Dec.  5,  1782,  and 
published  by  Nichols  first  in  No.  xx.  of 
the  Bibliotheca  Topographica  Britannica, 
and  afterwards  in  his  Literary  Anecdotes 
of  the  Eighteenth.  Century,  vol.  v.  p. 
217,  and  since  copied  by  others,  says, 
speaking  of  Mrs.  Wesley,  '  She  lived 
long  enough  to  deplore  the  extrava- 
gances of  her  two  sons  John  and 
Charles.  She  considered  them  as  under 
strong  delusion  to  believe  a  lie;  and 
states  her  objections  to  their  enthusiastic 
principles  (particularly  in  the  matter  of 
assurance)  with  great  strength  of  argu- 
ment in  a  correspondence  with  their 
brother  Samuel.'  This  calumny,  for  it 
is  one,  may  be  easily  rebutted.  Mr. 
John  Wesley  answers  it  thus,  quoting 
the  first  paragraph  about  '  deploring 
their  extravagances.'  '  By  vile  repre- 
sentations she  was  deceived  for  a  time  ; 
but  she  no  sooner  heard  them  speak  for 
themselves  than  she  was  thoroughly 
convinced  they  were  in  no  delusion,  but 
spoke  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness. 


She  afterwards  lived  with  me  several 
years,  and  died  rejoicing  and  praising 
God.'  The  whole  matter  has  been  fully 
dealt  with  by  Whitehead,  Clarke,  and 
others.  A  summary  is  given  by  Dr. 
Stampe  in  the  Richmond  College  Inter- 
leaved Journal,  from  which  the  above 
is  quoted. 

*  In  the  Journal  Wesley  ignores  the 
fact  that  on  Sunday  afternoon,  June  II, 
he  preached  in  St.  Mary's,  Oxford, 
before  the  University,  the  sermon,  after- 
wards published  by  James  Hutton,  on 
Salvation  by  Faith.  It  was  his  first 
publication  after  his  conversion,  and  a 
great  manifesto.  In  the  edition  of  his 
Works  published  in  1771  he  placed  it 
first,  before  all  the  discourses  which 
formed  part  of  the  doctrinal  standard 
of  Methodism.  He  had  preached  from 
the  same  text  in  Georgia  and  Charles- 
town.  Another  sermon  on  the  same 
text  he  preached  in  the  last  year  of 
his  life.  The  true  date  of  the  sermon 
was  not,  as  in  the  Works,  June  1 8,  but 
one  week  earlier,  June  u.  Apparently 
he  preached  it  twice  on  the  same 
Sunday,  in  the  morning  at  Stanton 
Harcourt  and  in  the  afternoon  at  St. 
Mary's.  Richard  Green,  in  his  Wtsley 
Bibliography,  suggests  that  the  error 
began  probably  in  an  anonymous  edition 
of  the  sermon  printed  in  Dublin,  1747 — 
the  first  if  not  the  only  edition  on 
which  any  date  appears.  Wesley  did 
not  add  the  date  until  1771.  The  ab- 
sence of  a  Diary  for  these  months  of  1 738 


484 


John   Wesley  s  Journal 


[June  1738. 


London,  where  I  found  Mr.  Ingham  just  setting  out.  We 
went  on  board  the  next  day,  Tuesday  the  I3th,  and  fell  down 
to  Gravesend  that  night. 


may  partly  account  for  Wesley's  error, 
if  we  may  suppose  that  the  volume  con- 
taining that  Diary  had  been  lost  or 
destroyed  before  1771.  It  was  in  St. 
Mary's,  Oxford,  that  John  Henry  New- 
man, a  century  later,  preached  the 
sermons  that  heralded  the  advent  of 
Tractarianism.  Remembering  this,  how 
significant  the  words  of  Wesley  in  this 
great  sermon — the  sermon  that  heralded 
the  advent  of  the  Methodist  Revival  ! 
*At  this  time  more  especially  will  we 
speak,  that  ' '  by  grace  we  are  saved 
through  faith  "  ;  because  never  was  the 
maintaining  this  doctrine  more  seasonable 
than  it  is  at  this  day.  Nothing  but  this 
can  prevent  the  increase  of  the  Romish 
delusion  among  us.  'Tis  endless  to 
attack,  one  by  one,  all  the  errors  of  that 
Church.  But  salvation  by  faith  strikes  'at 
the  root,  and  all  fall  at  once  where  this 
is  established.  It  was  this  doctrine 
(which  our  Church  justly  calls  "the 
strong  rock  and  foundation  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion")  that  first  drove  Popery 
out  of  these  kingdoms,  and  'tis  this  alone 
can  keep  it  out.' 

Wesley  reminded  the  University  that 
when  salvation  by  faith  was  first  preached 
it  aroused  the  adversary  ;  so  also  by  lies 
and  calumny  he  sought  to  affright  Martin 
Luther  from  reviving  it.  And  then, 
remembering,  we  cannot  doubt,  the  debt 


he  himself  owed  to  the  teaching  of 
Martin  Luther,  he  added  these  remark- 
able words  :  '  Nor  can  we  wonder  thereat ; 
for  as  that  man  of  God  observes,  How 
would  it  enrage  a  proud,  strong  man 
armed,  to  be  stopped  and  set  at  nought 
by  a  little  child,  coming  against  him 
with  a  reed  in  his  hand  ?  Especially 
when  he  knew  that  little  child  would 
surely  overthrow  him,  and  tread  him 
underfoot.  Even  so,  Lord  Jesus  !  Thus 
hath  Thy  strength  been  ever  made  per- 
fect in  weakness  !  Go  forth  then,  thou 
little  child,  that  believest  in  Him,  and 
His  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible 
things  !  Though  thou  art  weak  and 
helpless  as  an  infant  of  days,  the  strong 
man  shall  not  be  able  to  stand  before 
thee.  Thou  shall  prevail  over  him,  and 
subdue  him,  and  overthrow  him,  and 
trample  him  under  thy  feet.  Thou 
shalt  march  on  under  the  great  Captain 
of  thy  salvation,  conquering  and  to 
conquer,  until  all  thine  enemies  are 
destroyed,  and  death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory. 

'  Now  thanks  be  to  God  which  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  whom,  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  blessing  and  glory,  and 
wisdom,  and  thanksgiving,  and  honour, 
and  power,  and  might,  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen.' 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


Printed  by  Haaell,  Watson  &  Vineyt  Ld,,  London  and  Aylesbury. 


287.1 
W516J 


111162 
v*1 


JON* 


111162 
v.1 


