Title: The English Works of Wyclif Hitherto Unprinted (EETS O.S. 74)
Creator: John Wyclif (c. 1330-1384) (F. D. Matthew, Editor)
Publisher: London: Early English Text Society / Trubner & Co., 1880
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1880; public domain by date. Archive.org item
  metadata carries no access-restricted-item flag, confirming open
  access, checked directly against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25,
  this session.
Source: Internet Archive item englishworksofwy00wycl
  (archive.org/details/englishworksofwy00wycl), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes, direct datanode) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text
  file, 2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors
  (Middle English orthography renders inconsistently through OCR); not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  and a mid-document sample this session.

..  ::  .'.liw.ji 


Volume 


^ATEFU  v: 


and 


|M6L1SF> 

UBieAtn 


V 

m 

s 

t. 

'O; 

BnBSS  ^ 

A  ti! 

UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

DIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  AT  URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 

oerson  charging  this  material  is  responsible  for  its 
iwal  or  return  to  the  library  on  or  before  the  due  date, 
minimum  fee  for  a  lost  item  is  $125.00,  $300.00 
ound  journals. 

t,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books  are  reasons 
sciplinary  action  and  may  result  in  dismissal  from 
Jniversity.  Please  note:  self-stick  notes  may  result  in 
lages  and  lift  some  inks. 

m  via  the  Telephone  Center  at  217-333-8400, 
262-1510  (toll-free)  or  circlib@uiuc.edu. 
jw  online  by  choosing  the  My  Account  option  at: 

//www.library.uiuc.edu/catalog/ 


iN  02  2008 


illt^  (gnijlislt  Morh  of 


gitlicrjo  Eiigrinted. 


Agents  for  the  sale  of  the  Early  English  Text  Society’s  Publications. 

DUBLIN  :  "WiLLiAiu:  McGee,  18,  Nassau  Street. 

EDINBUBGH :  T.  G.  Stevensoj?",  22,  South  Erederick  Street. 
GLASGOW :  J.  Maclehose. 

BE  KLIN  :  Ashee,  &  Co.,  Unter  den  Linden,  20. 

NEW  YOEK  :  C.  Scrienee  &  Co. ;  Heis^y  Holt  &  Co. 
PHILADELPHIA :  J.  B.  LiPPiifCOTT  &  Co. 


N 


UP'/=;y 

UNivERSirVoniLiNOfs. 


ynctym^v^^i^  h0^A4 

^npmtp  ip  y^y^cf^/^t^c 

Am^c 
V^RtdUt^  I 


'  tt^* 

^  0  J  { 

ttwcy 

ttr  JHK  jg^'  iW 


MS  LAMBETH  551:  LEAF.  16;  ABT  1450  A  .-ij . 

’S  TRACT  AGAINST  THE  CLERGy’s  HOLDING  PROPERTY. 

,1 


E.  E.  TEXT  SOCIETY. 


English 

of 


ithclita  Inpinfjd. 


EDITED  BY  / 

F.  D.  MATTHEW. 


LONDON: 

PUBLISHED  FOB  THE  EABLY  ENGLISH  TEXT  SOCIETY, 
BY  TEUBNEE  &  CO.,  57  and  59,  LUDGATE  HILL. 


1880. 


HERTFORD : 

PRINTED  BY  STEPHEN  AUSTIN  AND  SONS. 


S’  2'  o ,  -g 
■yuO  •  'I  ^ 


J 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


List  of  Manfsceipts  used  .....  vii 
Inteoductioe"  : — 

Wyclif s  Life  .  .  .  .  .  .  i 

■  His  attack  on  the  doctrine  of  Transubstantiati on  .  .  xx 

-"His  doctrine  of  Dominion  ....  xxxii 
"  His  doctrine  as  to  Ecclesiastical  Endowments  .  xxxviii 
,  —His  relations  with  the  Eriars  .  .  .  .  xliii 

His  Character  .  .  .  .  .  .  xlvi 

I.  Of  the  Leaven  of  Pharisees  ....  1 

— ^II.  How  Men  ought  to  obey  Prelates  .  .  .28 

III.  The  Hule  and  Testament  of  St.  Erancis  .  .  39 

lY.  Of  Prelates  .  .  .  .  .  .52 

Y.  Speculum  de  Antichristo  .  .  .  .  108 

YI.  Of  Clerks  Possessioners '  .  .  ’  .  .  .114 

'^YII.  How  the  OfS.ce  of  Curates  is  ordained  of  God  .  .  141 

YIII.  The  Order  of  Priesthood  .  .  .  .  .164 

IX.  Three  Things  destroy  this  World  .  .  .180 

X.  Of  Eeigned  Contemplative  Life  .  .  .  .187 

XI.  The  Paternoster  .  .  .  .  .197 

XII.  The  Ave  Maria  ......  203 


XIII.  How  Satan  and  his  Children  turn  Works  of  Mercy  upside 

down,  and  deceive  Men  therein,  and  in  their  five  wits  210 
XIY.  How  Religious  Men  should  keep  certain  Articles  .  219 

XY.  Of  Servants  and  Lords  .  .  .  .  .226 

XYI.  Why  Poor  Priests  have  no  Benefice  .  .  .  244 

XYII.  How  Antichrist  and  his  Clerks  travail  to  destroy  Holy 
Writ 


253 


VI 


0 


CONTENTS. 


rAOB 

XYIII.  How  Satan  and  his  Priests  and  his  feigned  Eeligious 
cast  by  three  Cursed  Heresies  to  destroy  all  Good 
Living,  and  maintain  all  manner  of  Sin  .  .263 

XIX.  Of  Poor  Preaching  Priests  .  .  .275 

XX.  Augustinus  .  .  .  .  .  .281 

•^XXI.  Of  Dominion  .....  282 

XXII.  Tractatus  de  Pseudo-Freris  .  .  .  .294 

XXIII.  Of  Confession  .  .  .  .  .  325 

XXIY.  Of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity  .  .  .  346 

XX Y.  De  Sacramento  Altaris  .  .  .  .356 

XXYI.  The  Clergy  may  not  hold  Property  .  .  .  359 

Appendix  on  the  Wrongfulness  of  their  Undertaking 
Secular  Work  .  .  .  .  .  393 

Authorities  in  support  of  the  Tract  .  .  .396 

Authorities  in  support  of  the  Appendix  .  .  402 

XXYII.  De  Ofdcio  Pastorali  .  .  .  .  .405 

XXYIII.  De  Papa  .  .  .  .  .  .458 

Appendix — Extracts  on  Papal  Citations  from  two  Latin  Tracts  ,  483 
Hopes  .......  489 

Glossaeial  Index  .  .  .  .  .  .537 


LIST  OF  MANUSCEIPTS. 


Most  of  the  MSS.  from  which  this  volume  is  taken  have  been  used 
by  Mr.  Arnold  for  his  Select  English  Works  of  Wyclif,  and  I  have 
thought  it  best  to  keep  to  the  distinguishing  letters  assigned  by  him  in 
his  lists  (I.  xvii.  and  III.  xiii.). 

A.  Bodleian,  788. 

I  have  not  seen  this  MS.,  which  Mr.  Arnold  describes  as  a  small 
thick  folio  ....  on  good  but  thin  parchment,  sparingly  ornamented 
with  blue  and  red  flourishes  and  head-letters.”  He  assigns  it  to  the 
last  decade  of  the  fourteenth  century.  He  has  printed,  I  believe,  all 
its  contents  except  the  one  short  tract  which  it  has  furnished  to  this 
volume.  No.  XXY. 

0,.  New  College,  Oxford,  95. 

This  MS.  consists  of  148  leaves  of  vellum,  4^x7,  written  in  a  hand 

of  the  fifteenth  century.  It  has  a  subscription,  “Johannes  Wy - ,” 

and  contains  only  sermons  and  tracts  by  Wyclif.  All  except  that  here 
given  (No.  XXIY.)  were  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold. 

X.  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  290. 

A  small  folio  on  vellum  of  the  fourteenth  or  early  fifteenth  century. 
It  is  well  and  clearly  written,  but  by  a  careless  scribe,  who  evidently 
thought  little  of  the  meaning  of  the  words  he  copied.  The  text  of 
tracts  I.  to  XX.  is  founded  on  this  MS. 

AA.  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  C.  III.  12. 

A  MS.  on  vellum,  about  8x0,  219  leaves.  It  seems  to  be  a  copy 
from  the  same  original  as  X.,  but  is  imperfect.  The  handwriting  is 
irregular;  sometimes  formal,  and  at  others  straggling,  as  if  the  writer 
were  hurried  or  weary.  In  contrast  to  X.  the  copyist  seems  to  have 
been  interested  in  his  work,  and  I  suspect  him  of  occasionally  strength¬ 
ening  expressions  to  relieve  his  own  mind.  (See,  for  example,  the  various 
readings  in  the  tract  on  Curates,  from  chap.  xv.  onwards,  p.  132.) 
Erom  leaf  188  a  new  handwriting  begins,  and  it  is  probable  that  the 
two  halves  of  the  volume  owe  their  connexion  only  to  a  similarity  of 
subject  and  the  favour  of  the  printer.  (See  Shirley’s  Catalogue,  xii.) 
It  is  from  the  second  half  that  the  tract  on  Dominion  (our  No.  XXI.) 
is  taken. 


VIII 


LIST  OF  MANUSCRIPTS. 


CC.  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  C.  Y.  6. 

A  MS.  on  vellum,  about  X  4^  inches,  in  a  neat  bandwriting  of  the 
first  part  of  the  fifteenth  century.  It  contains  some  tracts  which  are 
not  Wyclif’s,  but  has  also  several  which  are  certainly  his.  Some  of 
these  are  in  Mr.  Arnold’s  third  volume,  and  it  has  furnished  us  with 
our  IS'os.  XXII.,  XXIII. 

LL.  Lambeth,  551. 

A  MS.  on  vellum  of  59  leaves,  5|x4  inches,  written  without  orna¬ 
ment,  but  clearly  and  carefully.  Dr.  Todd  classed  it  in  his  catalogue 
of  the  Lambeth  Library  as  of  the  fourteenth  century,  but  the  best 
opinions  I  could  obtain  assign  it  to  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth.  The 
facsimile  which  serves  as  frontispiece  will  give  judges  an  opportunity 
of  deciding  for  themselves. 

On  the  fly-leaf  is  written:  I  take  this  to  bee  on  of  the  scoles  of 
Daynolde  pecocke  who  wrote  in  K  Henry  the  6  tyme  abute  an°  1457.” 
Below  is  :  Jon  wicklyfe  was  in  the  beginning  of  Bichard  ye  seconds 
tyme  an°  1377  ;  ”  and  below  this  again,  in  the  hand  of  Dr.  James,  is  : 
‘‘  this  booke  is  Wickelyfes  and  is  called  De  qucestionihus  variis  contra 
clerum.'’^  The  volume  contains  nothing  beyond  the  tract  printed  here, 
Xo.  XXYI. 

MM.  Ashburnham  XXYII. 

A  MS.  on  vellum,  about  6f  x4|,  written  legibly,  but  without  any 
attempt  at  adornment,  in  a  charter  hand  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The 
copyist  has  gone  through  his  work  and  corrected  it.  The  MS.  contains 
only  three  English  tracts,  one  of  which,  our  Xo.  XXIII.,  is  also  in 
CC.  The  other  two  (our  Xos.  XXYII.,  XXYIII.)  are  printed  from 
this,  the  only  known  copy  of  them.  The  rest  of  the  volume  is  occupied 
with  Latin  works,  from  which  I  have  given  some  quotations  in  the 
Xotes. 

SS.  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge,  A,  4,  12. 

I  have  used  this  MS.  only  for  the  collation  of  Tract  Xo.  XX.,  and 
unfortunately  failed  to  notice  that  it  had  been  entered  in  Mr.  Arnold’s 
list  as  X.  He  describes  it  in  his  Introduction  to  the  first  volume, 
pp.  xiv.  and  xx. 

Besides  these  MSS.,  which  have  furnished  my  text,  I  have  been 
favoured  with  the  use  of  the  great  MS.  belonging  to  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge,  B.  16,  2,  which,  besides  the  philosophical  treatise  de  Ente, 
contains  the  OpusBvangelicum,  and  a  complete  set  of  the  Latin  sermons. 
A  few  (28)  of  these,  part  of  the  40  sermons  ‘‘compositi  dum  stetit  in 
scolis,”  are  in  the  Lambeth  MS.  23.  The  only  other  MS.  of  Wyclif’s 
works  which  I  have  been  able  to  reach  is  the  De  Mandatis  Divinis  in 
the  University  Library  at  Cambridge  (LI.  5.  13),  and  I  have  read  only 
a  few  chapters  of  this. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  date  and  place  of  Wyclif’s  birth  are  alike  uncertain.  Of 
the  date  all  we  know  is  that  he  died  in  1384,  and  that  he  was 
then  an  old  man,  since  two  years  before  he  speaks  of  himself  as 
“  in  fine  vitae.’’ ^  We  may  place  it  somewhere  about  1320.  As 
to  the  place,  the  only  information  we  have  is  from  Leland,  who, 
writing  two  centuries  after  the  event,  tells  us  that  he  was  born 
at  Spreswell,^  and  elsewhere  says  that  he  sprang  from  the  village 
of  Wycliffe-on-Tees.^  No  such  village  as  Spreswell  exists,^  and 
we  may  content  ourselves  with  supposing  that  he  belonged  to 
the  family  which  held  the  manor  of  Wycliffe,  and  that  his 
birthplace  was  not  very  far  away  from  the  parent  house. 

We  have  no  record  of  his  early  life,  and  can  only  guess  that 
in  the  fourth  decade  of  the  century  he  went  to  Oxford,  where 

^  See  Fasciculi  Zizaniorum,  p.  xii. 

2  They  say  that  John  Wiclif  haereticus  was  born  at  Spreswell,  a  poore  village,  a 
good  myie  from  Richemont. — Itinerarium,  v.  99. 

2  Unde  Wigclif  haereticus  originem  duxit. — Collectanea,  ii.  329. 

^  Two  different  attempts  have  been  made  to  account  for  Spreswell.  "Wliitaker 
suggested  that  the  village  meant  was  Hipswell,  and  this  is  made  more  probable  by 
Mr.  Walbran’s  discovery  that  in  an  old  MS.  of  extracts  from  Leland  the  name  is 
given  as  Ipreswell  (Harleian  842,  If.  76).  Dr.  Vaughan  on  the  other  hand  gives  an 
explanation  which  would  be  most  satisfactory  if  we  could  accept  it.  In  a  letter  to 
ihsi  Athenmum  of  April  20,  1861,  he  writes,  “Spreswell,  or  Speswell,  stood  close 
to  the  river  Tees,  half  a  mile  from  Wycliffe,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  river.”  His 
authority  for  this  statement  is  “  John  Chapman,  a  gentleman  of  respectable  position 
in  Gainsford,”  whose  great-grandfather  was  the  last  person  married  in  a  chapel  which 
stood  there  till,  soon  after  his  marriage,  it  fell  down.  To  the  objection  that  this 
Spreswell  would  he  at  least  ten  miles  from  Richmond,  Dr.  Vaughan  replies  that  there 
is  a  spot  about  three  miles  below  Wycliffe  marked  in  the  local  maps  as  Old  Richmond. 
The  existence  of  a  Richmond  older  than  that  which  takes  its  name  from  the  Castle 
founded  by  Alan  of  Brittany  is  impossible,  and  the  name  is  probably  an  antiquary’s 
guess  as  to  the  ruined  village  of  Barford.  It  makes  its  first  appearance,  as  far  as  I 
can  discover,  on  a  map  of  1770.  No  trace  of  this  Spreswell,  which  is  not  “within  a 
good  mile  of  Richmond,”  can  be  foxmd  to  support  Mr.  Chapman’s  statement.  I  have 
gone  into  detail  on  this  point,  because  Dr.  Lechler  has,  very  naturally,  treated  Dr. 
Vaughan’s  statement  as  conclusive. 


h 


11 


OXFORD  STUDIES. 


doubtless  be  followed  with  assiduity  and  success  the  regular 
course  of  study.  What  this  was  we  may  learn  from  the  laws 
published  by  Mr.  Anstey.  Four  years  were  passed  in  verbal 
studies — grammar,  rhetoric,  and  logic — before  the  student  could  . 
determine  and  be  admitted  a  bachelor  ;  three  full  years  must  be 
given  to  science — arithmetic,  music,  geometry,  and  astronomy 
— before  inception  as  a  Master.^  These  seven  years’  labours 
won  but  the  Leah  of  an  Arts  degree  ;  he  who  would  attain  to' 
the  Rachel  of  theology  had  to  pass  through  another  and  longer 
service.  Seven  years  were  needed  before,  as  a  Bachelor  of 
Theology,  he  could  lecture  on  the  Sentences  ;  and,  lastly,  he 
must  study  the  Bible  “  biblice  ”  for  three  years  and  lecture  on 
one  of  the  Canonical  books  before  he  could  come  forth  in  his 
full  glory  as  a  Master  or  Doctor  of  Theology.^  Thus  the  full 
course  required  at  least  seventeen  years,  and  might  be  delayed 
indefinitely  by  absence  from  the  University. 

The  special  bent  of  Wyclif’s  studies  we  have  to  divine  from 
hints  scattered  through  his  works.  These  show  that  he  had 
devoted  some  time  to  the  acquisition  of  such  physical  science  as 
was  to  be  gained  in  the  Oxford  of  that  day,  where  Grossetete’s 
name  was  held  in  honour,  and  where  men  were  probably  still 
living  who  had  known  Roger  Bacon.  It  is  well  worth  notice,” 
says  Dr.  Lechler,  “how  often  and  with  what  predilection  Wyclif 
refers  to  this  domain  of  knowledge.  At  one  time  it  is  arithmetic 
or  geometry  which  furnishes  him  with  illustrations  of  some 
truth  or  relation  ;  at  another  he  uses  physical  or  chemical  laws, 
facts  of  optics  or  acoustics,  to  explain  moral  or  religious  truths.”^ 
Wyclif  tells  us  expressly  that  he  had  studied  optics  in  his 

4 

^  Munimenta  Academica  (Eolls  Series),  pp.  410,  416.  The  list  of  books  to  be 
read  for  the  Master’s  degree  is  given  on  p.  414.  This  double  course  of  studies,  the 
Trivium  and  Quadrivium,  is  summed  up  in  the  line  ‘  ‘  Lingua,  tropus,  ratio  ;  numerus, 
tonus,  angulus,  astra.” 

2  Id.  pp.  389,  391. 

3  Lechler,  Johann  von  Wiclif,  i.  280. 

*  Quando  fui  junior  et  in  delectacione  vaga  magis  sollicitus,  coUegi  diffuse  pro- 
prietates  lucis  ex  codicibus  perspective  et  alias  veritates  mathematicas,  quas  secundum 
consideracionem  ad  finem  moralem  concepi  in  Scriptura  intelligi. — Sermons,  ii.  53, 
MS.  Trin.  Coll.  Cambridge,  2265.  In  the  same  sermon  he  notices  the  experiment  of 
making  a  coin  visible  by  covering  it  with  water  to  show  refraction. 


WYCLIF  MASTER  OF  BALLTOL.  Ill 

In  another  direction  Lewis  claims  for  him  a  knowledge  of 
Civil  and  Canon  Law  and  of  our  own  municipal  laws.^  Some 
acquaintance  with  the  Canon  Law  was  needful  to  a  theologian, 
and  was  not  wanting  to  Wyclif;  but  it  would  be  hard  to 
show  that  he  had  made  a  special  study  of  Civil  Law,  or  that 
he  knew  more  of  the  Common  Law  of  England  than  might  be 
expected  from  the  active  part  which  he  took  in  University  life 
and  in  State  affairs. 

One  would  like  to  know  who  were  his  teachers,  but,  in  spite 
of  numerous  quotations,  his  writings  give  us  no  hint  of  personal 
relations  with  the  men  from  whom  he  learned  most.  He  prob¬ 
ably  took  his  doctrine  of  Predestination  from  Bradwardine,  and 
his  theory  of  Dominion  from  Fitzralph,  Archbishop  of  Armagh  ; 
while  he  may  have  caught  from  William  of  Ockham,  the  bold 
defender  of  the  Empire  against  the  Pope,  his  strong  belief  that 
it  is  the  duty  of  priests  to  live  in  poverty.  Any  or  all  of  these 
he  may  have  known,  and  he  must  almost  certainly  have  been 
brought  into  contact  with  Fitzralph.  I  do  not  know  whom  we 
are  to  look  to  as  his  master  in  philosophy.  Dr.  Lorimer,  relying 
on  Wood’s  statement  that  the  Northerners  held  with  Scotus  and 
the  Southerners  with  Ockham,  suggests  that  his  birthplace  de¬ 
termined  his  philosophical  opinions  and  made  him  a  Realist.^ 

Happily  we  may  now  cease  from  speculating  on  what  may  have 
been,  as  we  arrive  at  the  first  certain  fact  recorded  concerning 
Wyclif,  that  in  1360  he  was  Master  of  Balliol  College.^  The 
next  year  the  College  presented  him  to  the  living  of  Fillingham, 
in  Lincolnshire,  and  shortly  afterwards  he  resigned  his  master¬ 
ship.^  His  acceptance  of  this  cure  does  not  seem  to  have  kept 
him  long  away  from  Oxford.  He  had  already  written  most  if 
not  all  of  the  logical  and  metaphysical  treatises  which  won  for 
him  the  reputation,  recorded  by  an  unfriendly  chronicler,  that 
“  he  was  second  to  none  in  philosophy,  and  without  peer  in  the 

^  Lewis,  p.  2. 

2  Lechler,  English  Translation,  i.  150.  (Additional  note  by  translator.) 

2  On  May  18th,  1361,  Wyclif  was  summoned  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas'  as 
Master  of  le  Baillolhalle. — Hist.  Man.  Commission,  Report,  iv.  p.  448.  It  seems 
as  if  Balliol  were  the  family  college  of  the  Wyclifs.  See  Ease.  Ziz.  xi.  note  1. 

*  On  February  3rd,  1362,  Stephen  de  Cornwall  was  Master. — H.M.C.  iv.  450. 


I 


IV 


WARDENSHIP  OF  CANTERBURY  HALL. 


learning  of  the  schools/’^  whilst  his  energy  and  practical  saga¬ 
city  had  made  him  a  man  of  mark  and  influence  in  the  Uni¬ 
versity.  In  1365  he  was  appointed  Warden  of  Canterbury 
Hall.  This  college,  which  has  since  been  absorbed  in  Christ¬ 
church,  had  been  founded  two  years  before  by  Simon  Islip, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  The  foundation  was  originally  for 
eleven  scholars,  eight  seculars  and  three  monks,  under  a  warden 
who  was  to  be  a  monk  chosen  by  the  Archbishop  from  three 
presentees  of  Christchurch  Convent.^  This  mixed  constitution 
worked  ill,  and  in  1365  the  Archbishop  removed  the  monks  and 
made  the  college  entirely  secular,  under  Wyclif  as  its  new 
warden.  The  chapter-convent  resented  this  infringement  of  its 
rights,  and  when,  after  Islip’s  death,  a  monk,  Simon  Langham, 
was  appointed  Archbishop,  little  time  was  lost  in  replacing  the 
monks  and  the  original  warden.  Wyclif  appealed  to  the  Pope, 
but  the  influence  of  Archbishop  and  Convent  was  powerful,  and 
the  decision,  after  three  years’  litigation,  was  against  him.^ 

There  are  alwaj^s  persons  who  can  believe  in  no  motive  that 
is  not  selfish,  and  there  were  enemies  of  Wyclif  who  imputed 
his  reforming  zeal  to  his  disappointment  in  this  afiair.  Such 
charges  may  sometimes  be  useful  as  giving  the  measure  of  those 
Avho  bring  them.  We  may  well  believe,  however,  that  Wyclif’s 
experience  during  this  lawsuit  may  have  brought  home  to  him 
the  corruptions  of  the  Court  of  Avignon,  and  may  have  led  him 
to  use  sharper  language  than  he  had  hitherto  employed  con¬ 
cerning  ecclesiastical  abuses. 

The  office  of  Warden  of  Canterbury  cannot  for  its  own  sake 
have  been  of  great  importance.  Its  income,  which  we  cannot 
suppose  to  have  been  great,  can  have  had  little  attraction  for 
one  whose  habits  were  ascetic,^  and  whose  worst  enemies  never 

'  Knighton,  2644. 

2  It  win  be  remembered  that  Canterbury  was  a  monastic  cathedral,  and  the  chapter 
consisted  of  the  Christchurch  monks. 

3  There  has  been  much  dispute  as  to  whether  the  John  Wyclif  of  Canterbury  Hall 
were  the  reformer  or  his  contemporary  namesake,  who  was  vicar  of  Mayfield.  I  do 
not  think  we  can  resist  the  direct  evidence  of  Woodford  (quoted  F.  Z.  517)  and  the 
Chronicon  Anglise  (p.  115),  strengthened  as  they  are  by  the  passage  from  the  De 
Ecclesia  cited  by  Dr.  Lechler  (ii.  574). 

^  Ease.  Ziz.  xlvi. 


CONTROVERSY  ABOUT  TRIBUTE  TO  THE  POPE. 


V 


ventured  to  accuse  him  of  greed.  JSTor  did  he  need  the  honour 
which  such  a  position  might  give,  for  his  fame  had  spread 
beyond  Oxford,  and  at  the  time  when  Langham  deprived  him 
of  his  mastership  he  was  high  in  the  King’s  favour  and  held 
some  office,  probably  a  royal  chaplaincy,  at  the  court. ^  This 
appears  from  a  paper  printed  by  Lewis,^  which  forms  one  step 
in  a  controversy  between  Wyclif  and  some  unknown  monk  on 
the  right  of  kings  to  exact  fines  and  forfeitures  from  delinquent 
priests.  The  monk  tried  to  cut  the  ground  from  under  Wyclif’s 
feet  by  asserting  that  the  King  had  lost  his  right  to  rule  in 
England,  since  he  had  failed  to  pay  the  Pope  the  annual  rent  of 
700  marks  by  which  the  realm  was  held  according  to  the  terms 
of  John’s  submission.  To  this,  as  a  clinching  argument,  he  de¬ 
manded  a  direct  answer.  Wyclif  knew,  or  at  least  suspected, 
that  his  opponent  was  trying  to  entrap  him  into  utterances 
which  could  be  used  to  his  disadvantage.  He  declares  himself 
surprised  that  his  opponent  should  press  him  to  answer  an 
argument  which  does  not  concern  him  more  than  any  other 
speculative  theologian  or  legist.  “  But,”  he  says,  three 
reasons  have  been  given  me  why  he  acts  thus  :  first,  that  I  may 
be  ill-spoken  of  at  the  Homan  Court,  and  be  deprived  by  heavy 
censures  of  ecclesiastical  benefices.  Secondly,  that  hence  the 
favour  of  the  Homan  Court  may  be  reflected  upon  him  and  his. 
And,  thirdly,  that  our  Lord  the  Pope  having  freer  rule  in 
England,  civil  possessions  may  be  more  plentifully  heaped  upon 
the  abbeys  without  the  check  of  fraternal  rebuke.”^  Accordingly 

'  He  describes himseK  as  “peculiaris  regis  clericus  ”  (Lewis,  p.  349),  and  is  taunted 
by  bis  opponent  Cunningbam  with  being  of  tbe  bouse  of  Herod. — FAsc.  Ziz.  p.  14. 

2  Life  of  Wiclif,  p.  349.  Lewis’s  text  is  very  bad  ;  “tbe  fault  of  bis  MS.,”  says 
Dr.  Sbirley.  There  is  a  copy  at  Lambetb  (No.  537),  in  tbe  bandwriting  of  Dr, 
Janies,  wbicb  is  very  mucb  better,  and  I  bave  corrected  my  quotations  from  tbis. 

2  Et  miror  quam  plurimum  quare  cum  tanta  instantia  expetunt  [  ?  expetivit]  solu- 
tionem  bujus  rationis  et  tractatum  istins  materise,  et  specialiter  cum  tantum  sit  ipsa 
mibi  et  rationibus  meis  indifferens  sicut  cuicunque  speculative  tbeologo  vel  legistse. 
Et  pepigimus  quod  non  quserendo  diverticulas  alienas,  peripsimata  fructus  quse  coli- 
mus,  vel  ambages  procedet  directe  ad  improbandum  questionem  quam  priucipaliter 
pepigit  impugnare.  Sed  tres  causoe  dictse  sunt  micbi  cm:  boc  facit ;  prime  ut  persona 
mea  sit  ad  Romanam  Curiam  diffamata  et  aggravatis  censuris  ab  ecclesiasticis  bene- 
ficiis  sit  privata.  Secundo,  ut  exbin c  sibi  et  suis  benevolentia  Romanae  Curiae  sit 
reportata.  Et  tertia  causa,  ut,  dominante  domino  Papa  regno  Augliae  liberius, 
copiosius  et  voluptuosius  sine  freno  correptionis  fraternae  sint  Abbatbiis  civilia  dominia 
cumulata. — Lewis,  351. 


VI 


DEBATE  IN  PARLIAMENT. 


Wyclif  refuses  to  pronounce  upon  the  question,  but  contents 
himself  with  setting  out  the  answers  which  he  has  heard  given 
in  a  certain  council  of  lay  lords.  Now  there  can  be  little 
doubt  as  to  the  occasion  referred  to  by  Wyclif.  In  1366 
Urban  Y.  claimed  the  arrears  of  tribute  due  under  John^s 
vassalage.  Edward  referred  the  claim  to  Parliament,  which 
rejected  it  without  hesitation,  on  the  ground  that  John  had  no 
power  to  bind  the  realm  without  its  assent ;  and  the  la}^  lords 
offered  further  that  if  the  Pope  should  make  any  attempt  to 
enforce  his  claim,  they  would  resist  it  with  all  their  might.^ 
AYe  have  then  in  this  paper  of  Wyclif ’s  what  purports  to  be  a 
partial  report  of  the  debate  on  this  occasion,  and  it  is  accepted 
as  such  alike  by  Dr.  Lechler  and  Dr.  Shirley.^  I  confess  to 
much  doubt  on  this  point.  I  can  believe  that  some,  and  even 
most,  of  the  arguments  given  in  the  tract  were  used  in  the 
Council-room  ;  but  the  speeches  recorded  are  curiously  Wyclifite 
in  their  tone,  and  the  parliaments  of  Edward  the  Third’s  time 
must  have  been  singularly  unlike  those  that  have  succeeded 
them  if  each  speaker  confined  himself  to  urging  one  definite 
and  distinct  point  as  in  this  report.  Whatever  the  lords  really 
said,  their  chief  use  here  is  to  act  as  mouthpieces  for  opinions 
which  Wyclif  wished  to  support,  and  from  this  point  of  view 
the  tract  is  important,  as  showing  how  many  of  his  character¬ 
istic  tenets  he  had  already  arrived  at.  Thus  from  the  speech  of 
the  second  lord  we  see  that  Wyclif  already  held  that  voluntary 
poverty  was  incumbent  on  the  clergy.  The  third  lord  treats  the 
Pope  with  a  roughness  which  Wyclif,  speaking  in  his  own 
person,  would  hardly  have  ventured  on  until  later  in  his  career. 
He  argues  that  tribute  can  only  be  due  to  the  servant  of  the 
servants  of  God^  in  return  for  service,  and  “we  know  by 

'  Rot.  Pari,  II.  290a. 

^  Lechler,  i.  330 ;  Shirley,  F.  Z.  xix.  Dr.  Shirley  is  mistaken  in  saying,  “  We 
know  that  it  set  the  question  at  rest  for  ever.”  Gregory  XI.  repeated  the  demand 
in  1374,  and  we  have  a  curious  accoimt  of  the  way  in  which  it  was  met  and  refused 
in  the  continuation  of  theEulogium  Historiarum,  iii.  337,  We  might  fancy  that  this 
was  a  misplaced  narrative  of  what  took  place  in  1366  hut  for  the  prominent  part 
played  by  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  was  out  of  England  in  that  year.  We  assign 
Wyclif’ s  tract  to  the  earlier  occasion,  on  the  ground  that  the  phrase  about  “  ecclesi¬ 
astical  benefices  ”  refers  probably  to  the  Canterbury  Hall  Wardenship. 

3  Servus  servorum  Dei,  the  title  generally  used  by  the  Pope  of  himself  in  buUs  and 
formal  letters. 


wycltf’s  position  at  court. 


Vll 

experience  that  we  get  neither  bodily  nor  spiritual  help  from 
Pope  or  Cardinals.’’  ^  Passing  by  the  rest  we  must  note  the 
sixth  lord’s  speech.  Since,”  he  says,  Christ  is  the  chief 

lord,  and  the  Pope  is  a  sinner  who,  according  to  the  theologians, 
if  in  mortal  sin  lacks  dominion,  and  cannot  consequently  trans¬ 
mit  to  the  English  any  right  to  the  kingdom,  all  we  need  for  a 
true  dominion  over  the  realm  is  to  keep  ourselves  from  mortal 
sin  and  give  of  our  wealth  rightly  to  the  poor,  and  so  hold  our 
kingdom,  as  hitherto,  immediately  from  Christ,  since  he  is  the 
chief  lord,  giving  of  himself  full  and  sufficient  authority  to  all 
dominion  of  the  creature.”  Here  we  have  clearly  laid  down  the 
famous  doctrine  of  dominion  as  founded  in  grace,  of  which  more 
must  be  said  presently.  Meanwhile  the  tone  of  the  tract  shows 
that  Wyclif  was  actively  engaged  in  political  life.  “  If,”  says 
he,  “  I  had  such  things  to  assert  against  my  king,  they  would 
have  been  brought  forward  before  now  in  the  parliament  of  the 
lords  of  England,”  ^  and  this  remark  gives  some  colour  to  Dr. 
Lechler’s  supposition  that  Wyclif  had  a  seat  in  Parliament.^ 
Dr.  Lechler  even  goes  further,  and  takes  the  description  “  pecu- 
liaris  regis  clericus  ”  to  mean  that  Wyclif  was  summoned  to 
the  Parliament  of  1366  as  a  clerical  expert,  or,  in  modern 
phrase,  as  a  Government  Commissioner.  The  clerks  of  Parlia¬ 
ment  were,  I  believe,  appointed  by  the  House,  and  I  doubt  if 
any  one  else  was  admitted  to  the  sittings  besides  the  elected 
members,  but  it  is  possible  that  Wyclif  may  have  been  sum¬ 
moned  to  the  Great  Council.^ 

Whatever  the  official  position  which  Wyclif  occupied,  he 
was  not  at  this  time  a  solitary  advocate  of  novel  ideas,  but  a 

^  Cum  non  edificat  regnum  nostrum,  nec  spiritualiter  nec  corporaliter,  sed  defalcando 
temporalia  per  se  et  suos,  comfortat  pecimia,  favore  et  consilio  inimicos,  videtur  quod 
debemus  provide  premissam  pensionem  subtrabere. — Lewis,  352.  I  should  find  no 
difficulty  in  believing  that  such  language  as  this  was  used  in  the  debate ;  it  is 
characteristic  of  the  temper  of  the  time. 

2  Lewis,  350. 

3  Lechler,  i.  331  et  seq.  It  must,  however,  be  remarked  that  the  taunt  conveyed 
here  would  be  more  effective  if  it  meant  that  his  opponent  had  a  seat  in  Parliament, 
but  wanted  courage  to  speak  out  there. 

^  See  Stubbs’  Const.  Hist.  ii.  259,  260.  There  are  at  least  two  other  occasions  on 
which  Wyclif  speaks  of  having  heard  something  in  Parliament.  See  Shirley,  P.  Z. 
xxi.  and  Lechler,  i.  332. 


vni 


POPULAR  FEELING  ABOUT  THE  CHURCH. 


prominent  supporter  of  views  which  were  popular  in  the  country. 
The  laity,  and  especially  the  gentry,  were  straitened  in  their 
means.  The  wealth,  which  in  the  earlier  and  more  brilliant 
years  of  the  French  war  poured  in  from  plunder  and  ransoms, 
had  been  wasted,  and  the  heavy  taxation  aroused  a  jealousy  of 
the  clergy,  who  seemed  in  comparison  but  lightly  burdened. 
Englishmen  were  also  jealous  of  the  power  wielded  by  the  Papal 
Court,  now  seated  at  Avignon,  and  in  too  close  relations  with 
their  French  enemies.  In  1371  this  jealousy  of  the  clergy 
found  vent  in  a  petition  from  the  Commons  that  the  great 
offices  of  state  should  be  taken  from  the  bishops  who  held  them 
and  entrusted  to  lay  hands.^  In  the  same  year  the  taxation  of 
the  clergy  was  made  heavier,  and  special  attention  was  directed 
to  lands  held  by  the  Peligious  which,  having  come  into  mort¬ 
main  since  1291,  were  subject  to  pay  their  share  of  a  lay  subsidy.^ 
A  passage  quoted  by  Dr.  Shirley  ^  from  Wyclif ’s  treatise  on 
Civil  Dominion  makes  it  appear  that  the  confiscation  of  endow¬ 
ments  to  support  the  war  was  spoken  of  seriously  in  Parliament. 

In  the  following  year  distrust  of  Avignon  was  roused  anew 
by  the  advent  of  a  papal  collector,  one  Arnold  Guarnerius.  He 
was  compelled  to  take  an  oath  to  be  true  and  loyal  to  the  King, 
to  keep  the  Council  informed  as  to  all  letters,  papal  or  others, 
that  he  received,  and  neither  to  send  money  out  of  the  realm, 
nor  to  leave  it  himself  without  special  licence.^  Still  more  signi¬ 
ficative  of  the  temper  of  the  Commons  is  a  petition  of  this  year 
praying  the  King  to  deprive  any  beneficed  priest  or  curate  who 
lives  openly  with  a  concubine,  if  after  six  months  the  Ordinary 
has  failed  to  do  so.^  Evidently  the  times  were  changed  since 
Becket  carried  the  popular  voice  with  him  in  claiming  freedom 
from  the  lay  courts  for  clergymen  even  when  guilty  of  crime. 

While  the  nation  was  thus  ill-disposed  towards  the  whole 
ecclesiastical  system,  its  disgust  and  indignation  were  specially 
directed  against  the  Papal  Court,  and  against  the  provisions  by 
which  the  French  Pope  was  able  to  bestow  rich  English  benefices 


^  Eot.  Pari.  ii.  304. 
3  Fasc.  Ziz.  xxi. 

®  Eot.  Pari.  ii.  314. 


2  Stubbs,  Const.  Hist.  ii.  423. 
^  Eymer,  iii.  p.  ii,  933. 


WYCLir  AN  AMBASSADOR  TO  BRUGES. 


IX 


on  foreigners  who  never  came  near  their  cure.^  Year  after 
year  the  Parliament  renewed  its  complaints,  until,  in  1374,  a 
mission  was  sent  to  Bruges  to  treat  with  the  Pope’s  representa¬ 
tives  on  this  matter.  Wyclif  was  one  of  the  Commissioners, 
and  his  name  was  put  prominently  forward ;  but  even  then  the 
trick  was  known  of  putting  a  popular  man  on  a  commission,  and 
neutralizing  his  efforts  by  associating  him  with  obstructives. 
The  King  and  the  Pope  had  their  jealousies  and  their  quarrels, 
but  they  could  often  work  together  to  mutual  profit,  and  the 
system  was  practically  left  untouched,  to  be  a  cause  of  remon¬ 
strance  to  many  more  parliaments.  Within  a  few  months  the 
law  against  provisions  was  repealed,  and  a  papal  provision  trans¬ 
lated  the  head  of  the  Commission,  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  Bangor,  to 
the  richer  see  of  Hereford. 

We  may  well  suppose,  with  Dr.  Lechler,  that  this  embassy, 
however  fruitless  as  to  its  main  object,  was  not  without  effect  on 
W3^clif  himself.  As  far  as  we  know  it  was  the  first  time  he 
had  been  out  of  England,  and  his  stay  in  Bruges^  brought  him 
into  contact  with  leading  ecclesiastics — Spanish,  French,  and 
Italian — and  gave  him  an  insight  into  the  ways  and  motives  of 
the  Papal  Court.  There  is  another  manner  in  which  it  may 
have  influenced  his  career.  John  of  Gaunt  was  at  Bruges, 
engaged  in  negociations  with  France,  and  is  likely  to  have  come 
into  closer  relation  with  W^^clif  than  before. 

The  time  was  coming  when  Wyclif  would  need  a  protector. 
In  1377  the  first  attempt  was  made  to  call  him  to  account.  He 
had  been  snarling  at  the  Church  for  some  time,  we  are  told,  in 
revenge  for  his  deprivation  of  the  Wardenship  of  Canterbury 
Hall,  and  had  begun  to  promulgate  false  opinions  such  as,  in 

^  Die  Gemeinen  befanden  sicb  in  ibrem  vollen  Recbte.  Nicbt  etwa  vom  wycliff- 
iscben  sondern  vom  strengkatholischen  Standpunkte  aus  musste  getadelt  werden,  wenn 
vom  Kircbeneinkommen  jabrlich  mebr  als  20,000  Mark  dem  in  Avignon  residirenden 
Papste  und  den  Cardinalen  zuflossen,  von  welclien  man  sicb  nacb  kurzer  Zeit  (1378) 
iiberzeugen  konnte,  wie  wenig  ibnen  die  Interessen  der  Kircbe  am  Herzen  lagen. 
Ibre  Interessen  bestanden  darin,  dass  ein  Cardinal  Decbant  von  York,  ein  anderer 
von  Salisbury,  ein  dritter  von  Lincoln,  drei  andere  Erzdecbanten  von  Canterbury,  von 
Durham  und  Suffolk,  mebrere  Praebendarien  von  Tbam,  von  Nassingdon,  von  York 
waren. — C.  Holier,  Anna  von  Luxemburg,  p.  17.  Holier,  a  Catbolic,  may  be 
trusted  not  to  exaggerate  abuses. 

^  He  was  away  from  July  7tb  to  September  14tb. 


X 


WYCLIF  PROSECUTED  BY  THE  BISHOPS. 


spite  of  their  emptiness,  tickled  the  ears  of  those  who  listened 
to  him.^  Of  his  false  doctrines  only  a  few  are  specified,  and 
those  not  the  worst.  They  are — that  the  Pope  has  no  power 
in  binding  and  loosing  more  than  other  priests  ;  that  endow¬ 
ments  cannot  be  given  in  perpetuity,  since  it  will  always  be 
right  to  withdraw  them  from  unworthy  holders ;  and  that 
temporal  lords,  if  in  need,  may  seize  the  possessions  of 
the  endowed  clergy.^  He  gained  many  followers  of  high 
rank,^  among  whom  were  the  Duke  of  Lancaster  and  Lord 
Henry  Percy,  and  relying  on  their  support  preached  his  heresies 
boldly  in  London,  and  attracted  many  of  the  citizens.  At  last 
the  Bishops  (Courtenay  probably  the  most  active  among 
them)  stirred  up  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Simon  Sud¬ 
bury,  who  but  for  the  pressure  put  on  him  would  have 
preferred  a  quiet  life,  and  Wyclif  was  summoned  to  appear 
at  St.  Paul’s  on  February  23.  He  obeyed  the  summons,  but 
not  after  the  fashion  of  one  who  has  to  humble  himself  before 
men  in  authority.  He  was  accompanied  by  Lord  Henry 
Percy  and  the  Duke.  They  forced  their  way  violently  through 
the  crowd  assembled  in  the  Cathedral,  in  spite  of  the  rebuke 
of  the  Bishop  of  London,  who  declared  he  would  have  re¬ 
fused  them  entrance  had  he  expected  such  behaviour.  Having 
reached  the  Lady  Chapel,  where  the  Court  was  to  be  held,  the 
Duke  and  Barons  took  their  place  beside  the  Bishop,  and  Lord 
Henry  Percy  bade  Wyclif  be  seated.  He  had  need  of  a  soft 
seat  since  he  had  many  things  to  answer.”  Courtenay  not  un¬ 
reasonably  insisted  on  his  standing  while  his  cause  was  being 
tried.  This  led  to  a  quarrel,  in  which  the  Duke  joined;  but  in 
strong  language  the  Bishop  was  a  match  for  the  two.  Some 
hasty  words  of  the  Duke’s  caused  an  excitement  among  the 

1  Chronicon  Anglise,  115.  My  narrative  here  is  mainly  an  abridgment  of  that  in 
the  Chronicon. 

2  These  charges  seem  to  he  fairly  stated,  with  the  reservation  that  by  “  temporal 
lords  ”  must  he  understood  the  government  of  the  state,  acting  for  public  purposes. 

2  Wyclif’s  strongest  supporters  seem  to  have  been  among  the  gentry.  “  Oo  comfort 
is  of  kny^ttis,”  he  says,  “  ])a,t  ]>ei  savor en  myche  ]7e  gospel  and  ban  wille  to  rede  in 
Englishe  }>e  gospel  of  Cristis  liif.” — Sermon  Ixvi.  (S.  E.  W.  i.  209.)  Until  he  sent  out 
his  poor  preachers,  he  could  only  appeal  to  those  who  had  wealth  to  get  books  and 
education  to  read  them. 


FAILURE  OF  THE  PROSECUTION. 


XI 


crowd  of  citizens,  and  in  tlie  tumult  the  Court  broke  up  without 
having  accomplished  anything.^ 

Dr.  Shirley  attributes  all  these  proceedings  to  the  Bishops’ 
wish  to  strike  at  John  of  Gaunt  through  his  client,  and  this 
may  well  have  been  one  among  several  motives  that  urged 
them  to  action.  Yet  apart  from  this  they  had  reasons  enough 
for  desiring  to  silence  Wyclif.  To  say  nothing  of  the  hatred 
that  greedy  men  bear  to  those  who  threaten  their  gains  (and 
there  was  much  greed  among  the  higher  clergy),  we  cannot 
doubt  that  the  mass  of  churchmen,  then  as  always,  wished  to 
see  the  Church  increasing  in  wealth,  honour,  and  worldly  in¬ 
fluence.^  How  could  they  but  be  shocked  at  a  priest  who 
aimed  at  stripping  the  Church  of  endowments,  and  reducing  its 
prelates  from  the  magnificence,  in  which  they  vied  with  the 
greatest  nobles,  to  a  simple  life,  where  the  only  rivalry  should 
be  in  poverty  and  humility  ?  If  the  Bishops  were  slow  to  act,  it 
was  probably  because  they  knew  how  strongly  Wyclif  was  sup¬ 
ported,  and  dreaded  the  storm  which  they  were  sure  to  arouse ; 
and  it  may  even  be  true,  as  Walsingham  tells  us,  that  it  needed 
the  Pope’s  command  to  goad  them  into  activity.  In  any  case 
this  first  move  had  failed.  It  may  have  had  the  result  of 
making  Lancaster  more  unpopular,  but  it  left  Wyclif ’s  position 
at  least  as  strong  as  before  he  was  attacked. 

News  must  soon  have  reached  Rome^  that  the  heretic  had 
baffled  the  attempt  to  silence  him,  and  that  the  assault  must  be 
renewed  in  a  more  formal  and  deliberate  manner.  Nineteen, 
conclusions  attributed  to  Wyclif  were  selected,  and  condemned 
as  erroneous  or  heretical.^  It  is  probably  to  the  time  when  this 

I 

1  Walsingham,  whose  account  is  much  shorter  than  that  in  the  Chronicon,  differs 
materially  on  two  points.  He  says  that  the  prosecution  was  due  to  the  orders  of  the 
Pope,  and  that  the  result  of  the  Council  was  that  the  Archbishop  imposed  silence  on 
Wyclif. — Wals.  i.  325. 

^  A  good  example  of  such  feeling  in  an  honest  churchman  is  Laud’s  exultation  at 
the  appointment  of  Juxon  as  treasurer,  “  and  now  if  the  Church  will  not  hold  up 
themselves  under  God,  I  can  do  no  more.” — Quoted  by  Mr.  Gardiner,  Personal 
Government  of  Charles  I.,  ii.  246. 

3  Gregory  had  arrived  there  from  Avignon  in  January. 

^  These  were  picked  out  from  a  list  of  about  fifty  which  had  been  sent  to  the  Curia. 
— Appendix  to  Chron.  Angliee,  p.  396.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  due  honour  has  not 
been  done  to  the  senders.  One  of  the  most  interesting  and  most  hopeless  problems  in 
this  matter  is,  whence  came  the  first  impulse  to  a  prosecution. 


XU 


PAPAL  BULLS  AGAINST  WYCLIF. 


list  was  being  prepared,  and  when  the  Bisbops,  smarting  under 
defeat,  were  looking  forward  to  their  revenge,  that  we  must 
assign  an  outburst  of  the  Bishop  of  Bochester,  who  told  Wyclif 
in  Parliament  that  his  conclusions  had  been  condemned  by  the 
Curiad  The  Roman  Court  had  evidently  determined  that  the 
work  should  be  done  effectively  this  time.  A  series  of  bulls 
was  sent  over  to  England.  One  was  addressed  to  the  Eniversity 
of  Oxford,  and  ordered  that  Wyclif  should  not  under  any  pre¬ 
tence  be  allowed  to  defend  his  evil  teaching,  but  should  at  once 
be  arrested  and  delivered  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  or 
the  Bishop  of  London.  To  these  two  prelates  came  three  other 
bulls ;  one  enjoining  them  to  warn  the  King  and  nobles  against 
Wyclif ’s  errors  ;  another  commanding  them  to  secure  Wyclif 
at  once,  and  examine  him  as  to  the  doctrines  of  which  he  was 
accused,  to  send  to  Rome  a  report  of  the  examination,  and  keep 
him  in  chains  until  the  Pope’s  pleasure  was  made  known.  In 
case  they  should  be  unable  to  carry  out  these  instructions,  the 
third  bull  instructed  them  to  summon  Wyclif  to  appear  in  the 
Papal  Court  for  judgment  within  three  months.  A  fifth  bull 
was  addressed  to  the  King,  praying  him  to  facilitate  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  the  others.^ 

The  bulls  do  not  seem  to  have  met  with  an  eager  welcome. 
The  Bishops  were  probably  disheartened  by  their  recent  failure, 
and  saw  that  the  times  were  unpropitious,  for  the  King  was  on 
his  death-bed  and  Lancaster  was  the  chief  power  in  the  State,^ 
so  they  lay  by  for  awhile  and  made  no  attempt  to  execute  their 
commission.  True,  soon  after  Richard’s  coronation,  Lancaster 
withdrew  from  public  life  for  a  short  period  ;  but  the  government 
was  not  more  favourable  to  Rome  than  before.  At  this  very 
time,  when  Wyclif  was  under  the  shadow  of  the  papal  con¬ 
demnation,  the  Great  Council  asked  for  his  judgment  on  the 
question  whether  they  could  rightly  refuse  to  allow  money  to 
be  carried  out  of  the  realm  in  spite  of  the  Pope’s  demands.  His 

^  Unde  episcopus  Roffensis  dixit  mihi  in  publico  parliamento  stomachando  spiritu, 
quod  conclusiones  meae  sunt  dampnatae,  sicut  testificatum  est  sibi  de  ciuia  per  Instru- 
mentum  notarii. — De  Ecclesia,  c.  15  ;  quoted  by  Lechler,  i.  332. 

The  bulls  are  in  Walsingbam,  i.  345,  and  Chron.  Angliae,  174. 

3  The  bulls  were  dated  May  22nd.  Edward  III.  died  June  21. 


THEIR  RECEPTION  AT  OXFORD. 


Xlll 


answer  is  uncompromising.^  He  does  not  merely  allow  that 
they  may  refuse,  he  insists  that  they  are  bound  to  do  so.  As 
to  the  dangers  attending  such  a  course,  it  is  not  likely,  he 
says,  that  the  Pope  will  lay  an  interdict  on  England  ;  and 
“  even  if  the  disciple  of  Antichrist  should  break  forth  into 
such  madness,  one  comfort  is  that  such  pretended  censures 
are  not  binding  before  God.’^^  He  goes  on  to  urge  that 
the  superfluous  wealth  of  the  clergy  should  be  withdrawn 
from  them,  and  what  is  left  so  used  as  to  establish  true 
peace  in  the  Church.  This  indirect  challenge  was  bold 
enough  ;  and  soon  afterwards,  at  the  meeting  of  Parliament, 
Wyclif  laid  before  it  a  pamphlet  in  which  he  enumerated 
the  charges  brought  against  him,  and  defended  himself  on 
each.^  To  the  public  he  appealed  in  another  tract,  written 
anonymously,  specially  directed  against  the  validity  of  un¬ 
just  excommunication,  which  if  allowed,  he  saj^^s,  would  set 
the  Pope  above  God,  and  ruin  the  Christian  Church.^  Seven 
months  after  the  date  of  the  bulls  the  Commissaries  plucked  up 
courage  to  proceed.  On  December  18th  they  sent  down  a  letter 
to  the  University,  inclosing  the  Pope’s  bulls,  and  ordering  their 
execution.  The  University  was  to  gather  all  possible  informa¬ 
tion  concerning  the  conclusions  and  send  it  on  to  the  Bishops, 
while  Wyclif  w’as  to  be  cited  to  appear  before  them  after  thirty 
daj^s.^  Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  the  letter,  a  congregation 
was  held  to  consider  what  course  should  be  taken.  Wyclif  and 
his  friends  maintained  that  to  imprison  him  at  the  Pope’s 
request  would  be  to  allow  the  Pope’s  rule  in  England.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  was  generally  felt  that  the  papal  command  could 
not  be  entirely  disregarded,  and  the  Yice-Chancellor  (a  monk) 

1  Printed  in  Fasc.  Ziz.  p.  258. 

2  Sed  snpposito  quod  Antichristi  discipulus  prorampet  in  tantam  vesaniam,  ununi 
solamen  est  quod  tales  praetensse  censurse  non  obligant  quoad  Deum. — F.Z.  265.  This 
is  a  reaffirmation  of  the  doctrines  condemned  in  Conclusions  Nos.  8,  15. 

3  Fasc.  Ziz.  245. 

^  De  Condemnatione  XIX  Conclusionum.  —  Fas.  Ziz.  481,  etc.  To  these  tracts  of 
defence  and  counter  attack  we  may  add  one  on  the  oath  taken  by  the  Papal  Collector 
in  1372  (see  above,  p.  viii),  where  Wyclif  urges  that  the  Collector  should  be  looked 
after  more  strictly  and  made  to  keep  his  oath.  We  cannot  fix  an  exact  date  to  this 
tract,  but  it  belongs  to  the  beginning  of  Richard’s  reign.  Printed  in  Lechler,  ii.  576. 

5  The  letter  is  in  Lewis,  Appendix  No.  17,  p.  314. 


XIV 


THE  PROSECUTION  IS  STOPPED. 


ordered  Wyclif  to  remain  a  prisoner  in  Black  Hall.^  The  con¬ 
clusions  were  then  submitted  to  the  regent  masters  in  Theology, 
and  these  gave  in  their  opinions  to  the  Chancellor,  who  deter¬ 
mined  on  their  behalf  that  the  conclusions  were  true,  but  likely 
to  cause  scandal.^  The  writer  to  whom  we  owe  this  account 
goes  on  to  say  that  Wyclif  proved  the  truth  of  the  conclusions 
before  the  Archbishop  and  the  Bishop  of  London,  who  requested 
him  to  cease  from  discussing  the  subject  of  them.^  We  may 
doubt  whether  his  unaided  arguments  would  have  been  so  con¬ 
vincing,  but  he  was  strongly  supported.  The  London  populace, 
which  had  now  rallied  to  his  support,  broke  into  the  chapel  at 
Lambeth  and  interrupted  the  proceedings.  What  was  of  far 
more  weight,  the  Princess  Joan  sent  a  message  forbidding  any 
decision  against  Wyclif,  which  struck  such  terror  into  the 
Bishops  that  they  became  as  a  man  that  heareth  not,  and  in 
whose  mouth  are  no  reproofs.^  And,  as  if  this  interference  had 
not  sufficiently  indicated  the  leanings  of  the  Court,  the  Yice- 
Chancellor  of  Oxford  was  called  to  account  for  his  partial 
obedience  to  the  Pope’s  commands,  was  thrown  into  prison 
for  a  time,  and  compelled  to  resign  his  office.^  Soon  after¬ 
wards  the  Pope  died,  and  no  further  action  was  taken  upon 
the  bulls. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  Wyclif  was  not  cowed  by  this  prose¬ 
cution.  He  drew  up  a  summary  of  his  opinions  in  thirty-three 
conclusions,  which  he  circulated  in  Latin  and  English,  and 
which  were  in  some  wav  forwarded  to  the  Boman  Court. 
Yet  he  had  to  be  careful  for  his  personal  safety,  and  did  not 
appear  when  cited  again,  for  he  had  been  told  that  the  Arch¬ 
bishop  had  applied  to  him  the  text,  a  little  while  and  ye  shall 
see  him,  and  again  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  him.” 
He  adds  that  many  are  taught  (he  knows  not  by  whom)  that  it 

^  The  imprisonment  was  evidently  merely  formal,  and  it  seems  likely  that  Wyclif 
lodged  at  Black  Hall.  There  may  have  been  two  Halls  of  that  name,  as  in  Mun. 
Acad.  (p.  240)  we  find  mention  of  a  “  little  Black  Hall.” 

2  Eas  veras  esse  sed  male  sonare  in  auribns  auditorum. — Eulogium  Historiarum 
(continuation),  iii.  347. 

3  The  paper  presented  in  his  defence  is  in  Chron.  Anglise,  184,  Wals.  i.  357. 

Chron.  Angliae,  183.  Wals.  i.  356. 

®  Eulogium  Historiarum,  iii.  348. 


THE  GREAT  SCHISM. 


XV 


would  be  a  work  of  charity  to  put  him  out  of  the  way  by 
buruin-g  or  otherwise.^ 

A  novel  ferment  was  now  introduced  into  W3^clif’s  active 
mind.  Urban  YI.  had  been  Pope  only  a  few  months  when  the 
Cardinals,  alienated  by  his  fierce  temper  and  desirous  to  return  . 
to  Avignon,  elected  an  Antipope,  Clement  YII.  The  rivals  at 
once  began  to  contend  by  force  of  arms  for  the  spiritual  father¬ 
hood  of  Christendom.  Each  proclaimed  a  crusade,  offering 
unheard-of  indulgences  to  all  who  supported  him,  and  pardon- 
mongers  spread  abroad  "”gh  Europe,  vaunting  their  wares 
with  a  cynicism  uuouijjaoo^a.  by  Tetzel.^  No  wonder  that 
Wyclif  was  deeply  moved,  and  that  we  may  now  mark  a  new 
departure  in  his  teaching.  Hitherto,  however  severely  he  spoke 
of  the  Pope  and  the  Curia,  he  had  acknowledged  the  primacy  of 
the  Poman  See  ;  now  he  began  to  proclaim  that  the  Church 
would  be  better  without  a  Pope.  Nor  is  the  change  in  him 
confined  to  an  alteration  in  his  views  as  to  the  constitution  of 
the  Church.  Hitherto  we  have  seen  him  mixed  up  with  practical 
politics,  taking  part  in  them  from  the  ecclesiastical  side  and  for 
religious  purposes,  but  as  councillor  or  pamphleteer  urging,  sup¬ 
porting  or  defending  the  policy  carried  out  by  lay  statesmen. 
Henceforth  he  withdraws  into  the  purely  religious  domain, 
and  contents  himself  with  striving  by  personal  influence  and 
writing  to  purge  the  Church  of  abuses,  and  induce  his  country¬ 
men  to  purer  and  more  spiritual  views  of  religion.  "VYe  must 
not,  however,  exaggerate  the  change  in  him,  which  was  prob¬ 
ably  unconscious.  In  relating  the  middle  period  of  Wyclif’s 
life,  the  biographer  necessarily  dwells  on  the  moments  when  his, 
subject  comes  out  into  full  light  and  shows  himself  engaged  in 
action,  and  passes  over  the  unrecorded  private  life,  and  that 
quiet  work  of  influencing  friends  and  disciples,  which  may  have 
been  the  most  important  of  activities.  In  the  lives  of  most  men 
of  letters  the  years  are  marked  by  the  succession  of  books,  but 

^  See  the  quotation  from  the  De  Yeritate  Sanctse  Scripturee  in  Fasc.  Ziz.  xxxiv. 

2  Dicebatur  enim  qnod  quidam  de  Commissariis  suis  asserebant  quod  ad  eorum 
praeceptum  angeli  de  cselo  descenderent  et  animas  in  purgatoriis  locis  positas  de  poenis 
eriperent  et  ad  caelos  absque  mora  deducerent. — Knighton,  2671.  Compare  the 
account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Cardinal  of  St.  Praxed. — Wals.  i.  452. 


XVI 


WYCLir’s  POOR  PRIESTS. 


j  altliough  the  mass  of  Wyclif ’s  work  shows  that  his  literary  pro¬ 
duction  was  unceasing,  we  are  still  unacquainted  with  the  details 
of  it.  We  cannot  date  with  certainty  any  of  his  books  written 
before  1378,  and  until  his  works  are  printed  we  cannot  hope  to 
range  them  even  approximately  in  order,  or  to  trace  their  rela¬ 
tion  to  his  active  life.  But  in  spite  of  all  difficulty  as  to  dates, 
we  cannot  doubt  that  by  this  time  he  had  set  his  hand  to  two 
great  tasks  of  a  purely  religious  character — the  training  of  his 
poor  priests,  and  the  translation  of  the  Bible. 

Wyclif’s  aim  in  instituting  the  poor  priests  was  to  supply  the 
defects  of  the  existing  parsons,  who  too  often,  after  collecting 
their  tithes  and  dues,  held  the  saying  of  services  to  be  their  only 
duty,  and  left  their  flock  without  preaching  or  spiritual  instruc¬ 
tion.  The  want  had  long  been  felt,  and  the  mendicant  orders 
were  founded  in  the  attempt  to  meet  it.  Preaching  had  been 
the  distinctive  work  of  the  Dominicans,  while  the  Franciscans 
had  settled  in  the  worst  and  most  neglected  parts  of  the  towns 
and  had  laboured  assiduously  among  the  poor.  But  societies 
which  lived  by  begging  were  always  tempted  to  win  popular 
favour  in  unworthy  ways,  and  before  the  end  of  the  fourteenth 
century  the  friars  had  won  an  unenviable  reputation,  which 
may  be  read  in  every  storj^'-book  or  satire  of  the  time.  The 
task  that  they  had  failed  in  was  yet  to  be  done,  and  Wyclif 
tried  to  train  men  to  do  it.  To  be  poor  without  mendicancy,’’ 
says  Dr.  Shirley,  to  combine  the  flexible  unity,  the  swift 
obedience  of  an  order,  with  free  and  constant  mingling  among 
the  poor,  such  was  the  ideal  of  Wyclif ’s  simple  priests.”  ^  And 
he  goes  on  to  suggest  that,  if  Wyclif  had  died  before  his  denial 
of  transubstantiation,  ‘‘  his  name  might  have  come  down  to  us 
in  another  form,  and  miracles  have  been  wrouo-ht  at  the  tomb 
of  their  founder  by  the  brothers  preachers  of  St.  John  Wyclif.” 
In  this  last  suggestion  Dr.  Shirley  scarcely  does  justice  to 
Wyclif ’s  practical  insight.  The  tendency  of  all  human  things 
to  crystallize  into  set  forms  might  have  made  the  poor  priests 
into  an  order,  but  if  so  the  spirit  and  intention  of  their  founder 
would  have  been  lost.  JSTo  formal  initiation,  no  irrevocable 


^  Fasc.  Ziz.  xl. 


I  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  BIBLE.  XVll 

I 

Yow,  indeed  no  vows  at  all,  seem  to  have  been  required  from 
these  disciples  of  his.  He  set  before  them  his  ideal  of  the 
Christian  ministry — voluntary  poverty  and  faithful  preaching — 
and  urged  them  to  act  upon  it.  Their  itinerancy  was  but  an 
accident  of  the  time,  a  means  of  meeting  the  difficulties  that 
they  were  to  encounter ;  ^  and  to  bind  them  by  vows  or  special 
observances  would  have  been  directly  contrary  to  the  freedom 
of  the  gospel  as  Wyclif  preached  it.  It  must  be  noticed  that 
Wyclif^s  views  on  this  point  are  quite  as  important  from  the 
'  practical  side  as  from  the  ideal.  If  you  look  upon  an  order  or 
a  rule  of  life  as  higher  and  more  holy  than  others,  you  will 
naturally  wish  to  attract  men  to  it,  and  dread  to  injure  them  by 
exclusion ;  you  will  attempt  to  fortify  them  by  vows  and  all 
other  safeguards  against  falling  back  into  a  lower  state  ;  and  in 
consequence  you  will  be  burdened  with  a  number  of  adherents 
who  have  no  real  vocation,  and  are  constantly  seeking  to  adapt 
the  rule  to  their  requirements,  instead  of  trying  to  live  up  to 
it.^  Wyclif  had  before  him  the  history  of  all  the  religious  orders 
as  a  warning  against  this  danger,  and  he  seems  specially  to 
have  shunned  this  rock  which  had  been  so  fatal  to  them.^  I 
take  it  that  in  the  poor  priests  we  are  not  to  see  the  attempted 
foundation  of  a  new  order,  but  an  effort  to  excite  and  utilize  the 
energies  of  individuals  who  had  come  under  Wyclif’s  influence. 

Of  his  other  religious  task,  the  translation  of  the  Bible,  I 
need  say  little ;  its  consequence  to  English  religion  and  the 
English  tongue  is  generally  recognized.  We  have  but  to  look 
at  the  long  list  of  MSS.  given  at  the  beginning  of  Forshall  and 
Madden’s  great  edition,^  and  to  remember  that  these  are  but 

1  See  the  tract,  Why  poor  priests  have  no  benefice,  No.  XVI.,  especially  the  close, 
and  the  De  Officio  Pastor  ah,  NolkXXVII. 

2  ‘  ‘  And  ]?is  is  a  gret  disceit  of  J^e  fend  under  colour  of  perfeccion  and  chastite. 
For  he  stire)?  men  to  hei^e  poyntis  of  perfeccion  when  he  knowij?  or  supposij?  hem 
unable.” — S.  E.  W.  hi.  190. 

3  “  It  is  licly  ]7at  Cristis  preestis,  Jiat  stooden  til  Jiat  monkes  comen,  tiuneden  to 
myche  fro  Cristis  lawe  and  monkes  lyveden  jjan  wel  heter.  But  J>es  monkes  stoden 
awhile,  and  turneden  soimer  to  coveitise ;  and  aftir  monkes  camen  Jies  chanouns  ; 
and  after  chanouns  camen  freris.  And  so  greet  defaute  was  in  prestis  bifore  J^at  j^es 
newe  ordris  camen  in.  But  as  J^es  newe  ordris  changen  in  clojjis,  in  hokis,  wij?  ojier 
ritis,  so  jjei  varien  in  Goddis  office  fro  ]?at  ]>at  Crist  bad  his  preestis  do.” — The  Church 
and  Her  Members,  S.  E.  W.  hi.  345. 

^  There  are  170  numbers. 


Xvlii  ATTACK  ON  VARIOUS  CHURCH  PRACTICES. 

the  gleanings,  after  time,  neglect,  and  the  zeal  of  the  inquisitor 
have  gathered  in  their  harvests,  and  we  see  how  widely  the 
translation  was  disseminated  ;  how  eagerly  men  caught  at  the 
opportunity  of  reading  the  Bible  in  their  mother-tongue. 

These  labours,  even  without  the  further  evidence  supplied  by 
his  books,  are  enough  to  show  that  when  most  engaged  in  politics 
Wyclif’s  aim  was  religious  reform,  and  that  he  was  not  merely  an 
ecclesiastical  agitator.  Many  causes  may  have  combined  to 
withdraw  him  from  the  political  arena.  Dr.  Shirley  suggests 
tliat  IJrban’s  removal  from  Avignon,  and  still  more  his  quarrel 
with  the  King  of  France,  had  restored  the  popularity  of  the 
Papacy,  and  that  Wyclif  was  no  longer  supported  against  Pome 
by  the  national  feeling  ;  but  the  strong  petition  against  provi¬ 
sions  and  Urban’s  abuse  of  them  in  the  parliament  of  January, 
1380,^  shows  that  the  English  jealousy  of  the  Curia  was  not 
overpast.  Probably  as  Wyclif  became  more  and  more  involved 
in  theological  controversies,  his  eagerness  as  to  public  affairs 
decreased  ;  while  the  passions  which  he  had  roused  against  him 
made  him  less  valuable  as  an  ally  or  an  agent.  We  shall 
presently  see  cause  to  believe  that  he  had  no""  forfeited  the 
favour  of  his  powerful  protectors. 

I  The  immediate  effect  of  the  Great  Schism,  and  the  quarrels 
I  which  accompanied  it,  was  to  bring  W37^clif  into  undisguised 
I  opposition  to  the  Papacy  as  an  institution  ;  and  once  fairly 
;  started  in  his  campaign,  he  directed  his  assault  against  the 
^  whole  line  of  the  Church  system  then  existing.  The  luxurious 
and  worldly  lives  of  monks  and  prelates ;  the  prevalence  of 
unworthy  influence  and  simony  in  the  presentation  to  benefices ; 
the  gross  abuses  of  the  bishops’  and  archdeacons’  courts,  especi¬ 
ally  the  practice  of  exacting  fines  for  incontinence  and  other 
sins  instead  of  requiring  amendment ;  all  these  gave  wide  scope 
for  denunciation.  Even  the  most  orthodox  reckoned  such  thinofs 
wrong,  and  men  who  were  canonized  saints  had  inveighed  against 
them  as  bitterly  as  Wyclif ;  but  there  was  this  novelty  in  his 
method  that,  instead  of  laying  all  blame  on  individuals,  he 
looked  for  the  root  of  the  evil  in  the  authorized  constitution  and 


^  Eot.  Pari.  iii.  82. 


ABSOLUTION  AND  INDULGENCES. 


XIX 


practices  of  the  Church.  Thus  when  he  attacked  the  luxury  of 
the  prelates,  he  did  not  content  himself  with  lamenting  that  his 
contemporaries  had  fallen  so  far  from  the  apostolic  standard,  but 
denounced  the  principle  of  endowment,  introduced  as  he  be¬ 
lieved  by  Constantine,  and  urged  the  rulers  of  the  State  to  take 
away  the  riches  which  corrupted  the  Church.  He  found  another  | 
weapon  against  the  dominant  hierarchy  in  appealing  to  the  pres- 
byterian  constitution  of  the  primitive  Church,  in  which  bishops 
and  priests  were  the  same.^  The  bishops,  he  says,  have  reserved 
to  themselves  confirmation,  ordination,  and  the  consecration  of 
places,  but  such  reservations  hinder  and  do  not  profit  the  Church.^ 
Against  the  grossly  superstitious  customs  of  the  day  'W’yclif^s 
method  was  the  same.  The  root  of  almost  all  these  was  a  belief 
in  the  unlimited  effect  of  the  priest’s  absolution,  and  in  the 
power  of  the  Church  to  grant  indulgences.  Without  this  the 
pardon-mongers  would  have  gone  away  empty ;  the  shrines 
would  have  remained  unvisited  ;  no  throng  of  pilgrims  would 
have  poured  money  into  the  Roman  treasury  ;  no  gold  and 
jewels  would  have  been  lavished  at  Walsingham  and  Canter¬ 
bury.  Wyclif  declared  that  only  true  penitence  and  confession  to 
God  were  needed  to  gain  his  pardon,  and  that  the  enforcement 
of  private  confession  was  a  mischievous  practice  of  late  intro¬ 
duction.  He  scorned  as  a  fiction  the  doctrine  of  saints’  merits 
laid  up  in  reserve  at  the  disposal  of  the  Pope.^  All  merit,  he 


^  Sed  unum  aiidacter  assero,  quod  in  primitiva  ecclesia  ut  tempore  Paidi  sufEecerunt 
duo  ordines  clericorum  scilicet  sacerdos  atque  diaconus.  Secuudo  dico  quod  in  tempore 

apostoli  fuit  idem  presbyter  atque  episcopus . tunc  enim  nou  fuit  adinventa 

distinctio  papse  et  cardinalium,  patriarcharum  et  archiepiscoporum,  episcoporum  et 
archidiaconorum,  officialium  et  decanorum  cum  ceteris  officiariis  et  religionibus  pri- 
vatis  quorum  non  est  numerus  neque  ordo. — Trial,  lib.  iv.  cap.  15,  p.  296. 

2  Itaque  omnes  operaciones  concernentes  sacerdotes  cesarios,  in  quantum  tales,  non 
proficiunt  directe  ad  beatitudinem,  sed  impediunt  vel  retardant.  Et  ita  est  de  tribus 
dignitatibus  sive  ofliciis  que  episcopus  sibi  servat ;  que  sunt  juvenum  confirmacio, 
clericorum  ordinacio  et  locorum  consecracio. — Dialogus,  c.  24,  MS.  Asliburnham,  1 

3  And  so  )iis  fonned  fantasye  of  spiritual  tresour  in  hevene,  jiat  ecbe  pope  is  maad 
dispensour  of  >is  tresour  at  bis  owne  will,  >is  is  a  lijt  word,  dremed  wij^outen  ground. 
For  Jjanne  ecb  pope  scbulde  be  lord  of  J^is  bevenly  tresour,  and  so  he  schulde  be  lord 
of  Crist  and  oj^ere  seyntis  in  hevene,  je,  ^if  he  were  a  fend,  as  was  Judas  Schariot. 
Lord  !  whi  schulde  God  of  hevene  make  )?is  fend  such  a  lord  ?  sij?  it  is  propre  unto 
God  to  dele  such  meritis,  and  alle  meritis  Jjat  be}?  in  hevene  be]?  fully  rewarded,  so 
]? at  none  is  ydil,  but  nedlyche  mut  be  do. — De  Pontificum  Eonianorum  Schismate, 
S.  E.  W.  iii.  262. 


XX 


TRANSUBSTAXTIATION. 


says,  is  in  the  hands  of  God,  who  keeps  to  himself  the  distribu¬ 
tion  of  it.  hTot  only  so,  but  the  Pope  cannot  know  the  real 
state  of  a  man,  and  may  grant  pardon  to  one  who  is  in  mortal 
sin,  and  unable  to  profit  by  the  gift.^  With  indulgences  went  all 
the  cognate  practices :  letters  of  fraternity,  special  prayers, 
masses  for  particular  souls.  That  these  things  were  widely 
abused  was  evident  to  all,  and  many  a  parish  priest  and  prelate 
would  have  been  glad  to  see  some  check  placed  upon  the  friars, 
who  were  the  worst  ofi'enders.  The  evils  might  have  been 
partially  restrained  by  stricter  discipline  and  the  withdrawal  of 
exemptions ;  but  they  could  be  ended  only  by  uprooting  the 
doctrines  of  which  they  were  the  outgrowth.  Wyclif  seems  to 
have  grasped  this  fact,  and  to  have  worked  more  strenuously 
against  the  various  forms  of  indulgence  and  assigned  merit 
than  against  any  other  tenets  of  the  Church.  His  sagacity  was 
vindicated  when,  after  a  century  and  a  half,  during  which  the 
orthodox  reformers  had  proved  their  impotence,  Luther  selected 
the  same  point  for  his  first  and  deadliest  assault. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  discuss  the  minor  points  in  which 
Wyclif  departed  from  Church  tradition,  and  we  may  pass  on  to 
the  great  development  which  marked  his  last  years — his  attack 
on  the  doctrine  of  Transubstantiation.  Here  he  was  upon  new 
and  dangerous  ground.  Hitherto  he  had  been  able  to  appeal 
to  the  moral  sense  of  the  laity,  and  had  sometimes  been  sup¬ 
ported  by  their  prejudices  and  passions.  They  might  care  little 
for  the  doctrine  of  Dominion  in  its  scholastic  form,  but  they 
welcomed  eagerly  the  bold  assailant  of  the  outrageous  claims 
and  exactions  of  the  Papacy  ;  and  this  all  the  more  when  the 
Pope  was  French  and  an  enemy.  The  magnificence  and  "world- 
liness  of  the  prelates,  the  extortions  and  abuses  of  the  ecclesi¬ 
astical  courts,  evidently  wanted  reform,  and  there  was  no  need 
to  look  closely  into  the  grounds  on  which  reform  was  urged. 
Even  when  W yclif  ventured  into  a  more  dogmatic  region  ;  when 
he  questioned  the  priestly  power  of  absolution  and  the  Pope’s 

^  N’ec  indulgenciis  debemus  credere,  sicut  nee  papa  vel  sua  curia,  cum  nescit  si  ista 
persona  cui  concedit  dictam  indulgenciam  sit  dampnanda;  sicut  nec  scit  si  sit  voluntatis 
dei  concedere  quod  ipse  annuit  sic  iu  bullis. — Dialogus,  c.  13,  MS.  Asbb.  If.  103(5>. 


TRANSUBSTANTIATION. 


XXI 


authority  in  purgatory ;  when  he  struck  at  indulgences,  special 
masses,  and  the  numberless  devices  for  making  money  do  the 
work  of  goodness  and  setting  future  blessedness  up  to  sale,  he 
had  still  on  his  side  the  spiritual  instincts  of  his  audience ;  he 
was  in  many  cases  censuring  abuses  which  were  against  the 
authoritative  teaching  of  the  Church,  although  supported  by 
almost  all  her  officers. 

In  the  campaign  on  which  he  now  entered  no  such  appeal  to 
the  interests  of  morality  could  serve  his  turn.  The  doctrine 
which  he  impugned  was  the  result  of  a  constant  and  instinctive 
desire  on  the  part  of  the  Christian  Church  to  heighten  the 
dignity  of  its  central  act  of  worship,  combined  with  an  un¬ 
shrinking  intellectual  analysis.  It  had  been  the  business  of 
the  schoolmen  to  find  a  rational  and  logical  theory  corresponding 
to  the  highest  utterances  of  mystical  devotion.  The  popular 
mind,  intolerant  of  subtleties,  knew  nothing  of  substance  or  acci¬ 
dents,  and  when  Wyclif  raised  a  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
consecrated  bread,  his  opponents  accused  him  of  denying  Christ’s 
presence  in  the  host,  while  his  followers  fancied  that  they  settled 
the  question  by  saying  that  any  one  could  see  the  host  was  bread, 
and  the  very  mice  knew  it  for  such.^ 

This  simple  appeal  to  the  senses  may  have  attracted  some 
partisans,  but  the  publication  of  novel  ideas  on  such  a  point 
was  certain  to  give  ofience  to  many  devout  persons,  who  felt  as 
if  the  dignity  of  the  sacrament  was  attacked.  One  is  naturally 
led  to  ask  what  motives  impelled  Wyclif  to  this  course,  and  the 
inquiry  is  of  equal  interest  whether  he  be  regarded  as  an  earnest 
reformer  or  a  hunter  after  popular  favour.  Perhaps  the  simplest 
and  most  direct  way  of  getting  at  the  truth  is  to  take  his  own 
account  of  the  matter  :  “Of  all  heresies  that  have  ever  sprung 
up  in  the  Church,  I  think  none  was  ever  more  cunningly  brought 
in  by  hypocrites  or  cheats  the  people  in  more  ways  than  this ; 
for  it  robs  the  people,  it  makes  them  commit  idolatry,  it  denies 
the  faith  of  Scripture,  and  in  consequence  by  unbelief  provokes 


^  Wyclif  himself  throws  this  as  a  taunt  against  his  opponents,  “Mures  autem 
hahent  servatam  notitiam  de  panis  substantia  sicut  prime,  sed  istis  infidelibus  istud 
deest,  etc.” — Trial,  iv.  5,  p.  260. 


Xxii  GROWTH  OF  WYCLIF’s  OPINIONS. 

the  Truth  in  many  ways  to  anger.”  ^  This  vehement  denunci¬ 
ation,  when  translated  into  plain  fact,  seems  to  mean  that  the 
current  doctrine  led  the  people  into  an  excessive  and  supersti¬ 
tious  reverence  for  the  elements  of  the  Sacrament,  and  that  this 
superstition  was  made  the  means  of  increasing  the  power  and 
gain  of  the  priesthood.  It  may  be  supposed  that  this  is  only 
the  moral  colouring  which  a  controversialist  tries  to  throw  over 
a  cause  adopted  for  other  and  lower  reasons.  The  decision  on 
this  point  must  depend  on  the  bias  of  the  judge  ;  but  in  support 
of  Wyclif’s  statement  it  may  be  noted  that  his  opponent  Tys- 
sington  allows  that  the  language  used  by  controversialists 
might,  if  spoken  before  the  people,  lead  them  to  heathenish 
notions.^  I  believe  that  if  we  look  back  to  Wyclif’s  earlier 
utterances  on  this  subject,  made  before  he  had  come  into  colli¬ 
sion  with  the  orthodox  opinion,  we  may  trace  the  gradual  de¬ 
velopment  which  led  him  to  heresy.  In  a  sermon  preached,  I 
believe,  in  1367,  he  speaks  of  various  errors  relating  to  the  host, 
and  goes  on  :  “  It  seems  enough  for  the  Christian  to  believe  that 
the  body  of  Christ  is  in  some  spiritual  and  sacramental  manner 
at  every  point  of  the  consecrated  host,  and  that  next  after  Grod 
honour  is  to  be  chiefly  rendered  to  that  body,  and  in  the  third 
place  to  that  sensible  sacrament,  as  to  an  image  or  tomb  of 
Christ.”  ^  This  passage,  as  indeed  the  whole  of  the  sermon  in 
which  it  occurs,  shows  a  disposition  to  dwell  upon  the  spiritual 
side  in  preference  to  the  logical  or  dogmatic  account  of  the  Sacra¬ 
ment.  Such  a  disposition,  not  in  itself  incompatible  with  ortho¬ 
doxy,  was  likely  to  be  strengthened  in  him  by  a  philosophical 


^  Trialogus,  ir.  2,  p.  248. 

2  “Non  tamen  vulgariter  et  coram  laicis  conceditur  communiter  videri  ant  sentiri, 
nisi  cum  hac  determinatione  in  forma  et  specie  panis ;  ne  populus  pronus  ad  idolatriam, 
nesciens  distingnere  inter  sensibile  in  se  et  sensibile  in  alio,  credat  speciem  panis,  ant 
aliud  quod  immediate  et  in  se  sentitur,  esse  corpus  Cbristi ;  et  sic,  ut  dictum  est, 
turpiter  paganizent.” — Ease.  Ziz.  173. 

3  Multi  ex  dicto  isto  capiunt  occasionem  erroris,  putantes  hii  quod  panis  est  corpus 
Cbristi,  hii  quod  panis  fiet  et  est  corpus  Cbristi,  bii  quod  panis  convertetur  in  corpus 
Cbristi  per  desicionem  (sic)  panis  secundum  quamlibet  ejus  partem,  et  sic  de  multis 
ficticiis  ex  quibus  infideles  despiciunt  fidem  nostram.  Videtur  igitur  satis  esse 
Cbristiano  credere  quod  corpus  Cbristi  sit  quodam  modo  spirituali  [et]  sacramentali  ad 
omne  punctum  bostie  consecrate,  et  quod  illi  corpori  sit  post  deo  honor  principaliter 
tribnendus,  et  tercio  loco  illi  Sacramento  sensibili  tanquam  ymagini  vel  sepulcro 
Cbristi. — Early  Sermons,  No.  XX.  *MS.  Lambeth,  23. 


THEIR  CONNEXION  WITH  HIS  PHILOSOPHY. 


XXlll 


difficulty  in  satisfying  himself  as  to  any  theory  of  tran substanti¬ 
ation.  On  this  point  there  is  a  connexion  between  his  earliest 
and  latest  doctrines,  which  seems  hitherto  to  have  escaped  the 
notice  of  his  biographers.  In  one  of  his  early  works,  ‘  De  Ente,’ 
a  treatise  of  350  closely- written  folio  pages,  the  last  four  chapters 
bear  the  sub-title  ^  De  Adnichilacione,’  and  are  devoted  to 
proving  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  Grod  {i.e.  is  not  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  his  nature)  to  annihilate  anything.^  Here,  however, 
the  orthodox  doctrine  of  the  Host  has  to  be  dealt  with  as  an 
exception.  If,  as  was  generally  held,  the  substance  of  the 
bread  ceased  to  be  at  consecration,  annihilation  was  taking  place 
daily,  and  the  denial  of  it  was  an  open  heresy.  For  a  time 
Wyclif  got  over  the  difficulty  by  saying  that  “  the  substance  of 
the  bread  is  not  annihilated,  since  its  accidents  remain,  although 
it  is  changed  as  to  its  whole  form.’’  ^  Such  subtle  distinctions 
were  not  likely  to  disarm  his  adversaries,^  or  to  continue  to 
satisfy  his  own  inquisitive  and  logical  mind.  A  curious  account 
of  the  changes  in  his  opinions  is  given  by  his  opponent  Wood¬ 
ford,  writing  after  his  death  :  “  While  the  said  Master  John,” 
he  sa3''s,  “was  a  sententiary'^  at  Oxford,  and  even  a  responding 
bachelor,^  he  held  publicly  and  in  the  schools  that,  although  the 
sacramental  accidents  were  in  a  subject,  yet  that  the  bread 
ceased  to  exist  at  consecration.  And  being  much  questioned 
as  to  what  was  the  subject  of  those  accidents,  for  a  considerable 
time  he  replied  that  it  was  a  mathematical  body.  Afterwards, 
when  this  position  had  been  much  argued  against,  he  answered 
that  he  did  not  know  what  the  subject  of  the  accidents  was,  yet 

he  asserted  clearly  that  they  had  a  subject.  How  in  these 

1 

^  I  have  tried  to  read  these  four  chapters,  hut  have  to  confess  that  the  double 
crahbedness  of  contractions  and  scholastic  reasoning  make  me  unable  to  follow  a  good 
deal  of  them.  Dr.  Shirley  has  given  some  quotations  from  them  in  the  preface  to  the 
Fasciculi  Zizaniorum. 

2  Substantia  panis  in  eucharistia  non  annihilatur,  propter  remanentiam  accidentium 
licet  ipsa  corrumpatur  secundum  totam  formam. — F.  Z.  Ivii. 

^  Among  a  list  of  heresies  “  quas  prime  jactavit  in  aera  ”  is  “  Quod  Deus  non  potest 
annihilare  creaturam.” — F.  Z.  2.  Dr.  Shirley  says  that  this  doctrine  had  been  actually 
condemned  by  Archbishop  Langham  (F.  Z.  xxvii)  ;  but  he  quotes  no  authority,  and  I 
have  not  yet  met  with  the  statement  elsewhere. 

^  A  student  who  had  reached  the  period  when  he  might  lecture  on  the  sentences, 
after  which  he  might  take  his  degree  of  B.D. 

^  A  B.D.  of  two  years’  standing. 


Xxiv  DATE  OF  THE  ATTACK  ON  TRANSUBSTANTIATION. 

articles  and  in  his  confession  he  lays  down  expressly  that  the 
bread  remains  after  consecration  and  is  the  subject  of  the  acci¬ 
dents/’  ^  This  account  is  no  doubt  substantially  correct.  Wood¬ 
ford’s  view  of  Wyclif  is  that  of  a  heretic  cunningly  preparing 
his  way  and  gradually  increasing  in  audacity.  A  more  sympa¬ 
thetic  observer  will  see  in  the  same  facts  the  signs  of  a  gradual 
and  irresistible  change,  due  to  logical  necessities  which  he 
shunned  facing  as  long  as  possible.  Had  he  been  a  solitary 
student  he  might  have  shunned  them  all  his  life  ;  but,  exposed 
to  the  conflict  of  the  Schools,  he  was  driven  to  find  an  expla¬ 
nation,  and  was  too  honest  to  maintain  any  which  did  not  satisfy 
his  own  mind.  When  pressed  he  could  not  but  see  that  to 
speak  of  a  mathematical  body  as  a  substance  was  a  scholastic 
figment ;  and  not  less  artificial  was  the  explanation  that  the 
substance  in  which  the  accidents  of  the  host  existed  was  a  quality 
or  a  quantity.^  Arrived  so  far,  the  next  step  was  to  fall  back 
on  the  language  of  the  Bible,  and  assert  that  since  the  bread 
was  said  to  he  Christ’s  body,  the  host  was  both  bread  and  the 
body  of  Christ.  This,  however,  was  but  the  original  statement 
of  which  the  Church  dogma  was  the  explanation  ;  the  inevitable 
question  was  how  the  host  could  be  both  at  once.  Wyclif ’s 
reply  came  in  short  to  this,  that  the  presence  was  sacramental ; 
that  in  some  special  way,  which  he  could  not  define  but  which 
was  not  dimensional  or  corporal,  Christ  was  present  according 
to  his  promise.  He  threw  on  his  opponents  the  charge  that 
they  denied  the  host  to  be  either  bread  or  Christ’s  body.  Not 
bread,  for  its  substance  was  gone,  and  all  that  remained  was 
whiteness,  roundness,  etc. ;  not  Christ’s  body,  for,  though  they 
said  that  the  body  was  at  every  point  of  the  consecrated  wafer, 
they  did  not  admit  that  it  was  the  wafer,  or  that  the  visible 
whiteness  and  roundness  were  accidents  of  the  body. 

It  seems  probable  that  Wyclif  began  to  maintain  these  views 
publicly  at  Oxford  in  1380.  He  was  at  this  time  in  the  thick  of 

1  P.  Z.  XV.  note  4. 

2  Fratres  autem  prudenciores  sustinent  quod  ista  hostia  consecrata  sit  nichil  in  forma 
nicliili.  Nichil  quidem  est,  quia  vel  est  quantitas  ut  dicant  predicatores,  vel  qualitas 
ut  dicunt  minores,  vel  aggregacio  ex  eisdein. — De  Sermone  Domini  in  Monte,  c.  29,  MS. 
T.C.C.  364^;. 


PROCEEDINGS  AGAINST  WYCLIF  AT  OXFORD. 


XXV 


a  controversy  on  the  lawfulness  of  the  religious  orders,  on  sturdy 
begging,  and  on  the  duty  of  monks,  imposed  even  by  their  rule, 
to  labour  with  their  hands. ^  Doubtless  his  opponents  were  glad 
to  draw  him  upon  ground  where  they  were  the  champions  of 
Church  doctrine  rather  than  of  their  own  practice.  He  soon 
formulated  his  opinions  and  committed  himself  to  three  conclu¬ 
sions,^  which  afterwards  formed  the  base  of  the  Archbishop’s 
condemnation.  The  Chancellor  of  the  IJniversitv,  William 
Berton,  was  an  old  adversary,^  and  seized  his  opportunity.  He 
called  together  some  doctors  of  theology  and  civil  law,  who 
unanimously  condemned  the  novel  teaching  as  heretical,  and 
issued  an  order  forbidding  any  one  to  maintain  these  assertions 
either  in  or  out  of  the  Schools.  The  condemnation  was  published 
in  the  School  of  the  Augustines  at  the  very  moment  when  Wyclif 
was  lecturing  in  support  of  his  theses.  He  declared  that  neither 
the  Chancellor  nor  any  of  those  in  league  with  him  could  alter 
his  opinion,  and  appealed  to  the  King.^  In  reply,  John  of  Gaunt 
came  down  to  Oxford  and  ordered  him  to  speak  no  more  on  the 
subject.  Wyclif,  instead  of  obeying,  issued  his  Confession,  in 
which  he  stated  his  position  clearly.^  The  University  was  in 
high  excitement  and  a  storm  of  pamphlets  followed. 

The  Chancellor  had  forwarded  a  copy  of  his  condemnation  to 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  doubtless  expecting  him  and  the 
Bishops  to  take  action  in  the  matter ;  but  in  little  more  than  a 
month  Sudbury’s  head  was  struck  off  by  the  rebels  on  Tower 
Hill,  and  the  see  was  vacant  until  November.  Meanwhile  within 
the  University  the  controversy  took  a  turn  favourable  to  Wyclif. 
Probably  this  was  due  to  the  old-standing  jealousy  between  the 
Seculars  and  the  Beligious.  The  quarrel,  as  we  have  seen,  began 
with  a  discussion  about  the  Orders,  and  the  activity  of  the 
Monks  and  Friars  may  have  driven  their  rivals  to  the  side  of 

^  Compare  tlie  account  of  controversies  in  F.  Z.  239-241  with  a  poem  printed  in 
Wright’s  Political  Poems,  i.  253.  A  better  text  is  given  by  Dr.  Lechler,  ii.  621. 

2  F.  Z.  106. 

3  F.  Z.  241. 

^  F.  Z.  114.  The  writer  blames  him  for  appealing  to  the  King  instead  of  to  “pope, 
bishop  or  ordinary.”  By  the  Statutes  of  the  University  his  choice  lay  between  King 
and  Pope,  all  appeals  to  lower  authorities  being  forbidden. — Munimenta  Acad.  232. 

*  Printed  in  F.  Z.  115. 


XXVI 


WYCLIFITE  PARTY  IN  POWER  AT  OXFORD. 


Wyclif.^  Moreover  Berton’s  action  in  inviting  the  inter¬ 
ference  of  the  Archbishop  may  have  roused  the  ready  jealousy 
of  episcopal  meddling.  From  these  or  other  motives  the 
elections  for  the  next  year  were  favourable  to  the  Wyclifite 
party,  and  returned  a  Chancellor  and  proctors  in  their 
interest. 

Things  were  not  going  so  well  outside,  at  least  among  the 
governing  classes,  who  found  much  to  perplex  them.  The 
itinerant  preachers  were  going  their  rounds  as  usual,  regardless 
of  the  Bishops’  prohibitions,  declaiming  against  the  friars,  who 
were  not  slow  to  reply.  The  people  threw  themselves  into  the 
quarrel,  and  every  sermon  was  an  occasion  for  debate  if  not  for 
actual  fi^hting’.^  At  the  same  time  a  wave  of  reaction,  due  to 
the  rebellion  of  the  previous  year,  was  passing  through  the 
gentry,  leading  them  into  a  fierce  repression  of  disorder.  Still 
there  was  a  strong  body  among  the  Commons  who  charged  the 
late  disturbances  on  the  Friars,  ^  and  it  was  probably  in  reliance 
on  the  support  of  this  party  that  Wyclif  when  Parliament  met 
laid  before  it  seven  propositions.^  In  these  he  asserted  that  the 
King  did  not  owe  obedience  to  the  Pope,  that  money  ought  not 
to  be  sent  out  of  the  realm  to  Pome,  that  cardinals  and  others 
should  not  be  allowed  to  hold  benefices  without  rendering  due 
service,  and  that  it  was  the  King’s  duty  to  confiscate  the 
temporals  of  delinquent  bishops  or  clerics.  Beyond  this  he 
maintained  that  since  Church  endowment  is  the  property  of 
the  poor,  it  might  be  used  for  State  needs  to  prevent  excessive 
taxation.  Lastly,  that  the  King  ought  not  to  employ  bishops 
or  curates  in  secular  work. 

^  Of  twelve  doctors  consulted  by  Berton,  six  were  friars  and  two  monks. 

2  Vix  aliquis  eorum  prsedicaret,  quin  ad  pugnam  inter  se  audientes  provocarentur, 
et  scliismata  in  villis  fierent. — F.  Z.  27’^.  So  too:  “Hoc  anno  (1382)  fratrum 
elemosynae  subtrahuntui',  mendicantes  laborari  jubentur,  preedicare  non  sinuntur, 
denariorum  prsedicatores  et  domorum  penetratores  vocantur.” — Eulogium  Hist,  (cont.) 
p.  355. 

^  See  the  letter  of  the  Mendicant  Orders  to  the  Duke  of  Lancaster. — F.  Z.  292. 
Jack  Straw  was  reported  to  have  confessed  that  the  rebels  meant  to  destroy  all  the  en¬ 
dowed  clergy,  and  leave  only  the  friars  alive. — Wals.  ii.  10.  As  a  countercheck  to  this 
John  Ball  was  said  to  have  described  himself  as  a  disciple  of  Wyclif. — F.  Z.  273. 

^  “  Scribit  ad  dominos  et  magnates.” — Wals.  ii.  51.  This  may  only  mean  that  the 
propositions  were  circulated  as  a  broadsheet  or  pamplilet  among  such  of  the  nobles 
and  gentry  as  were  inclined  to  the  Wyclifites. 


COUNCIL  AT  THE  BLACKFRIARS. 


XXVll 


Sucli  a  manifesto  was  sure  to  incense  tlie  ortliodox  party,  and, 
if  we  may  believe  the  writer  of  the  Fasciculi,  the  Parliament 
pressed  the  Archbishop  to  make  an  end  of  these  heresies^ 
Courtenay,  nothing  loath,  summoned  a  Council  to  deliberate 
upon  them.  It  met  for  business  on  May  21st  ^  at  the 
Dominican  Convent  (which  stood  where  the  Times  Office  now 
is,  and  left  its  name  of  Blackfriars  to  the  neighbourhood), 
and  unanimously  condemned  24  conclusions  as  heretical  or 
erroneous.  Of  ten  denounced  as  heretical,  the  first  three 
relate  to  the  Eucharist,  the  remainder  to  Church  govern¬ 
ment  or  endowment.  The  fourteen  classed  as  erroneous  deal 
with  the  power  of  prelates  to  excommunicate,  the  duty  of 
preaching,  and  the  uselessness  of  special  prayers  and  reli¬ 
gious  orders.  It  will  be  seen  that,  as  far  as  doctrine  was 
concerned,  the  net  was  spread  wide ;  since  all  the  leading 
opinions  for  which  Wyclif  was  notorious  are  enumerated 
and  condemned.  There  is  however  no  attack  on  him  by 
name. 

Meanwhile  his  supporters  were  busy  at  Oxford.  On  As¬ 
cension  Day  (May  15)  Nicholas  Herford  preached  a  sermon  in 
his  defence,  and  another  Wyclifite,  Philip  Pepyndon,  was 
appointed  to  preach  on  Corpus  Ohristi  Day  at  St.  Frideswide. 
The  orthodox  party  begged  that  this  fresh  scandal  might  be 
prevented,  and  the  Archbishop  sent  down  Peter  Stokes,  a 


^  ‘  ‘  Milites  et  alii  qui  congregati  sunt  ex  parte  regni  et  parliamenti  requirebant 
arcbiepiscopum  cum  suis  suffragancis  ut  finem  facerent  de  talibus  erroribus  et  hseresi- 
bus.” — F.  Z.  272.  There  is  some  reason  to  suspect  that  the  author’s  wishes  have 
coloured  his  narrative.  Parliament  met  on  the  7th,  and  the  Council  was  summoned 
for  the  17th,  which  shows  rather  an  excess  of  promptitude  in  acting  on  the  pressm’e 
of  the  members.  But  there  is  a  stronger  reason  against  accepting  this  version.  To 
the  acts  of  this  Parliament  on  the  Official  Roll  was  appended  one  ordering  the  Sheriffs 
and  other  officers  to  arrest  all  wandering  preachers  at  the  request  of  the  Bishop  (Rot. 
Pari.  III.  1243.).  As  soon  as  parliament  met  again  at  Michaelmas,  the  Commons 
prayed  that  this  statute,  to  which  they  had  not  assented,  might  be  cancelled.  We 
may  suppose  that  this  entry  was  made  by  influential  persons  of  the  Church  party  to 
override  opposition  in  the  Commons.  Courtenay  needed  no  pressure  to  make  him 
attack  an  old  adversary. 

2  Dr.  Lechler  says  May  19th,  following  Netter’s  narrative  (F.  Z.  272) ;  but  in  the 
acts  of  the  Council  we  And  May  21,  both  in  F.  Z.  (p.  288)  and  in  the  Lambeth  Regis¬ 
ter.  The  same  date,  is  given  in  Walsingham  for  the  earthquake  which  took  place 
while  the  Council  was  sitting. — Wals.  ii.  66. 


XXVlll 


PETER  STOKES  AT  OXFORD. 


Carmelite  and  a  headstrong  opponent  of  Wyclif.^  He  arrived 
on  the  eve  of  the  feast  (June  4th)  and  presented  his  letters  to 
the  Chancellor.  Next  morning  he  was  to  proclaim  the  con¬ 
demnation  from  the  pulpit  of  St.  Frideswide,  and  went  to 
execute  his  commission,  but  he  found  Hepyndon  already  in 
possession.  The  Chancellor  was  present  in  state,  with  the 
mayor  of  the  town  and  an  armed  guard,  while  in  the  Church 
were  some  twenty  men  with  arms  concealed  under  their  robes. 
Stokes,  conscious  that  many  errors  remained  for  him  to  confute, 
did  not  yet  desire  martyrdom,  so  he  sat  trembling  till  the 
Chancellor  and  Hepyndon  had  gone  off  together,  and  then 
slunk  away.  Next  day  he  called  on  the  Chancellor  to  verify  his 
powers,  and  received  an  assurance  that  he  should  be  helped  in 
his  task  if  the  University  would  allow  it.  Stokes  placed  no  faith 
in  fair  words.  What  would  be  done  he  could  not  tell,  but  he 
knew  he  was  in  danger  of  his  life,  and  besought  the  Archbishop 
with  tears  not  to  allow  him  to  perish.^  A  few  days  later 
(Tuesday,  June  10)  he  mustered  courage  to  dispute  in  the 
Schools  in  opposition  to  Repyndon,  but  even  then  he  saw  or 
fancied  a  dozen  opponents  with  hidden  weapons,  and  expected 
to  have  been  slain  before  he  could  leave  his  chair.  It  must 
have  been  a  relief  to  the  timid  inquisitor  to  receive,  on  the 
same  dayj  letters  recalling  him  to  the  Archbishop.  Rigge,  the 
Chancellor,  was  already  in  London,  and  at  the  second  meeting 
of  the  Council  he  was  called  upon  to  justify  himself.  There  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  really  held  Wyclifite  opinions.  He 
was  one  of  the  twelve  Oxford  doctors  who  condemned  Wyclif’s 
doctrines  on  the  Eucharist  when  they  were  first  broached,^  and 

^  The  Lollard  poet  gives  a  description  of  him — 

Tunc  accessit  alius,  Stokis  nominatus, 
rufus  naturaliter  et  veste  dealbatus, 
omnibus  impatiens  et  nimis  elatus 
et  contra  veridicos  dirigens  conatus. 
with  an  0  and  an  I  sub  tarn  rubra  pelle 
■  animus  non  habitat  nisi  mixtus  felle. — Lechler,  ii.  631. 

2  Unum  autem  venerabili  paternitati  vestrse,  si  placet,  notifico  ;  quod  in  hac  causa 
nihil  ulterius  aiideo  facere  metu  mortis.  Unde  et  flebiliter  vestrum  implore  praesidium 
ne  occasione  hujus  causae  vel  ego,  vel  socii  mei,  jacturam  patiamur  corporis  atque 
vitae. — Letter  from  Stokes  to  the  Archbishop,  F.  Z.  301. 

,  3  F.  Z.  113. 


WYCLTFITE  PARTY  CRUSHED. 


XXIX 


his  recent  support  of  the  Reformers,  in  which  he  was  evidently 
backed  by  the  University,  was  probably  due  to  the  corporate 
jealousy  of  the  friars^  and  bishops.  In  the  present  case  the 
University  could  count  on  support  from  neither  King  nor  Pope 
and  resistance  to  the  hierarchy  was  unavailing.  Rigge  gave 
way  at  once.  At  the  intercession  of  the  Bishop  of  Winchester 
he  was  pardoned,  and  enjoined  to  prevent  Wyclif  and  his 
followers  from  preaching  or  performing  any  scholastic  act  until 
they  had  purged  themselves  of  the  charges  hanging  over  them.^ 
He  pleaded  that  he  was  afraid  to  execute  the  commission 
forced  upon  him,  but  his  excuses  were  not  allowed.  His 
publication  of  the  condemnation  excited  a  storm  of  anger^on 
the  part  of  the  seculars,  who  declared  that  the  religious  wished 
to  ruin  the  University.  The  anger  however  was  helpless,  the 
corporate  resistance  of  the  University  was  crushed,  and  it  re¬ 
mained  only  to  deal  with  the  individual  offenders,  who  appealed 
in  vain  to  the  Duke  of  Lancaster,  and  were  left  to  struggle 
hopelessly  against  the  whole  force  of  Church  and  State.  In  a 
few  months  all  the  Oxford  leaders  except  Wj^clif  had  been 
dealt  with.'^  Strangely  enough,  we  have  no  account  of  Wyclif 
during  all  this  time.  Knighton  indeed  says  that  he  appeared 
before  the  bishops  in  Oxford  and  recanted,  but  the  text  of  the 
recantation,  as  given  by  Knighton,  is  a  strong  assertion  of  the 
original  heresy  while  the  records  of  the  Council  which  tell  us 
all  about  the  other  heretics  are  silent  as  to  Wyclif.  It  is  to  be 


^  The  Lambeth  Eegister  gives  a  curious  proof  of  the  intensity  of  this  jealousy. 
After  Repyudon  and  Aston  had  recanted  publicly  before  the  Convocation  which  met 
at  Oxford  in  November,  Eigge,  as  Chancellor,  accused  Peter  Stokes  and  two  other 
friars  of  heresy.  Their  defence  was  that  they  had  supported  the  false  propositions 
only  as  a  scholastic  exercise.  The  Archbishop,  “  videus  gravem  discordiam  inter 
Universitatem  et  religiosos  exortam  fecit  eos  Kcet  cum  ditlicnltate  Concordes,  et  dimi- 
sit  eos  in  pace.” 

2  Wyclif,  Herford,  Eepyndon,  Aston,  and  Bedeman  are  mentioned  by  name. — 
'F.  Z.  310. 

3  Bedeman  recanted  Oct.  18th,  Eepyndon  Oct.  23rd,  Aston  Nov.  20th.  Herford 
disappeared,  and  most  probably  went  to  Eome  and  was  imprisoned  there  by  the 
Pope. 

^  Holler,  Anna  v.  Luxemburg,  p.  81,  says  that  we  may  take  the  positive  assertion 
of  Knighton  as  to  the  recantation,  and  suppose  that  a  wrong  document  was  copied  by 
mistake.  One  must  have  made  up  one’s  mind  which  way  the  facts  ought  to  he  to 
assert  them  on  such  authority. 


XXX 


WYCLIF  AT  LUTTERWORTH. 


noticed  that  throughout  these  transactions  of  1382  ^  he  had 
been  in  the  background,  and  it  is  possible  that  he  had  already 
retired  to  Lutterworth,  but  this  alone  would  not  have  saved 
him  at  a  time  when  his  followers  were  hiding  to  avoid  arrest. 
He  once  makes  an  allusion,  which  may  possibly  refer  to  this 
time :  ‘‘  I  have  pledged  myself,”  he  says,  “  not  to  use  out  of 

the  Schools  the  term  substance  of  material  bread  and  wine.”^ 
This  sounds  as  if  he  had  been  called  to  account,  and  had  been 
dismissed  on  undertaking  some  formal  conditions  as  to  future 
controversy.  But  the  form  is  not  suitable  to  a  man  who  was 
prohibited  from  all  scholastic  acts,  and  the  passage  may  allude 
to  the  silence  enjoined  at  an  earlier  period  by  the  Duke  of 
Lancaster.^ 

Why  Wyclif  was  allowed  to  escape  so  easily  is  a  puzzling 
question,  and  I  cannot  think  that  Dr.  Lechler  has  accounted 
for  it  by  the  supposition  that  public  feeling  was  favourable  to 
him  and  prevented  severe  measures.  More  probably  he  had 
still  powerful  protection  at  Court,  but  if  so  it  is  curious  that  no 
chronicler  makes  any  complaint  of  interference  on  his  behalf. 
One  last  supposition  is  that  he  was  already  attacked  by  the 
paralysis  which  first  struck  him  about  two  years  before  his 
death. ^  Whatever  was  the  cause  of  his  impunity,  it  seems  that 
the  condemnation  of  his  doctrines  had  no  direct  effect  upon 
him,  except  perhaps  in  driving  him  from  Oxford.  Evidently 
neither  actual  nor  threatened  evils  made  him  bate  one  jot  of 
heart  or  hope.  His  doctrines  had  been  condemned,  his  friends 
scattered  and  silenced,  and  he  was  worn  with  age  and  palsied, 
yet  in  the  prosecution  of  his  work  neither  courage  nor  energy 
failed  him,  and  his  literary  activity  during  this  last  period  of 
his  life  would  have  been  wonderful  even  in  a  man  of  full 
strength.  Tracts,  Latin  and  English,  came  in  quick  succession 
from  his  pen,  and,  as  if  these  were  not  enough  to  occup}"  him, 

*  We  learn  notliing  of  Ms  doings  from  the  narrative  in  F.  Z.  272-333,  and 
Bepyndon  and  Herford  are  the  heroes  of  the  Latin  poem  already  quoted. 

Trial,  iv.  36,  p.  375. 

3  F.  Z.  114,  see  above  p.  xxv. 

^  “  Iste  Wycleff  fuit  paralyticus  per  duos  annos  ante  mortem  suam,  etc.”  This 
passage  comes  from  an  accoimt  of  Wyclif’ s  death,  given  by  Gascoigne  on  the  authority 
of  John  Horn,  who  had  been  Wyclif’s  curate  for  two  years. — Printed  in  Lewis,  336. 


SECOND  CITATION  TO  ROME. 


XXXI 


he  gave  in  the  Trialogus  a  complete  and  orderly  summary  of 
his  doctrine,  starting  from  the  highest  topics  of  abstract 
theology  and  coming  down  to  details  of  doctrine  and  Church 
government.  In  his  retirement  at  his  quiet  rectory  of  Lutter¬ 
worth  he  could  no  longer  exercise  any  immediate  influence  on 
the  rulers  of  the  country,  but  he  watched  with  interest  the 
course  of  events,  and  was  strongly  moved  to  indignation  by 
Bishop  Spencer’s  Flanders  Crusade  in  1383,  an  expedition  as 
blundering  in  its  management  as  it  was  immoral  in  the  purpose 
and  method  of  its  undertaking.  He  recurs  to  it  again  and 
again,  with  an  iteration  which  now  at  least  is  wearisome,  some¬ 
times  dwelling  only  on  the  evils  it  had  caused  directly,  more 
often  on  the  scandalous  traffic  in  indulgences  by  which  money 
had  been  raised  for  its  support.  This  enables  us  to  date  many 
of  his  later  works,  but  otherwise  there  is  little  change  to  be 
noticed  in  him  unless  it  be  a  more  fixed  and  fervent  conviction 
of  the  corruption  of  the  Church  and  of  the  need  of  reform. 

Outwardly  his  life  was  uneventful,  but  one  doubt  still  hangs 
over  the  close  of  his  career.  It  is  commonly  said  that  the 
summons  to  Home,  which  fell  through  with  the  death  of 
Gregory  XI.,  was  renewed  by  Urban,  and  that  mortal  sickness 
alone  saved  him  from  having  to  make  his  appearance  before  the 
Pope.  A  paper  is  extant  which  has  always  been  taken  for  a 
letter  to  the  Pope  in  answer  to  the  summons.^  Dr.  Lechler 
remarks  that  this  is  not  a  letter,  and  is  not  addressed  to  the 
Pope,  and  that  consequently  we  must  reject  the  story  of  the 
summons.^  I' think  he  is  clearly  right  in  his  premises;  the 
form  in  which  the  paper  is  cast  is  certainly  not  such  as  would  be 
adopted  in  a  letter  to  the  Pope ;  but  I  cannot  follow  him  to  his 
conclusion.  The  title  given  to  the  document  in  the  Fasciculi 
shows  that  Walden  believed  Wyclif  to  have  been  summoned, 
and  the  letter  itself  reads  to  me  like  a  justification  of  dis¬ 
obedience  to  the  Pope’s  mandate,  written  for  circulation  in 
England.  I  incline  to  believe  that  Wyclif  was  summoned,  and 

'  The  English  version  is  in  S.  E.  W.  iii.  504  ;  the  Latin  in  Ease.  Ziz.  341,  with 
the  title,  “Copia  cnjiisdam  literae  magistri  JohannisWycclyti  missae  Papae  Urbano  VI. 
ad  excusationem  de  non  veniendo  sibi  ad  citationem  suam,  a.d.  1384.” 

2  Lechler,  i.  713  (English  ed.  ii.  284.) 


wyclif’s  death. 


xxxii 

further  that  he  excused  himself  on  the  ground  of  illness,  and 
received  some  support  and  protection  from  the  King.^  If  the 
summons  was  issued  about  the  time  of  the  Council,  it  might 
partly  account  for  Wyclif’s  escape  from  prosecution,  since  the 
bishops  would  not  be  concerned  to  judge  one  who  was  before  a 
higher  tribunal.  Yet  they  would  probably,  as  in  1377,  be 
charged  with  the  duty  of  sending  him  to  Home,  and  we  should 
expect  to  find  some  notice  of  their  attempting  to  execute  their 
commission.  On  the  whole  it  is  most  likely  that  a  citation  was 
issued  in  1384.  If  so,  the  Pope  had  but  little  time  to  insist 
upon  obedience.  On  Innocents  Day,  1384,  Wyclif  was  a  second 
time  struck  with  paralysis,  while  hearing  mass  in  his  church  at 
Lutterworth.  He  lingered  speechless  for  three  days  and  died 
on  Dec.  31st.  His  enemies  saw  a  special  judgment  in  his  death 
on  the  feast  of  St.  Sylvester,  the  Pope  whom  he  had  so  often 
blamed  as  the  first  corrupter  of  the  primitive  Church. 

In  this  sketch  of  Wyclif’s  life  I  have  reserved  one  or  two 
points  for  a  more  extended  notice.  First  among  these  is  his 
teaching  as  to  ‘‘Dominion,”  important  from  the  weight  that 
he  attached  to  it,  and  still  more  as  having  been  the  subject  of 
more  attack  and  misunderstanding  than  any  other  of  his  doc¬ 
trines.  His  contemporaries  accused  him  of  using  it  to  incite 
the  populace  to  revolt  and  pillage,  and  the  charge  is  still  from 
time  to  time  brought  against  him.  Before  attempting  his 
defence  I  will  try  to  make  clear  what  the  theory  was,  and  in 
what  form  he  upheld  it. 

The  source  and  limit  of  Dominion  was  a  question  much 
discussed  in  the  fourteenth  century.^  The  claims  of  the  papacy 
had  been  growing  as  its  hold  on  the  consciences  of  men  was 
loosened.  It  was  mainly  upon  religious  and  moral  grounds  that 
Gregory  YII.  rested  in  his  quarrel  with  Henry  lY. ;  his  right  of 

1  One  of  my  chief  grounds  for  this  belief  is  Wyclif’s  tone  in  speaking  of  citations, 
which  seems  to  me  that  of  a  man  personally  interested.  To  give  my  readers  an 
opportunity  of  judging  for  themselves  I  have  printed  as  an  Appendix  passages  from 
two  tracts  in  the  Ashburnham  MS. 

2  Es  war  die  Eigenthumsfrage  die  hrennende  Erage  der  Zeit,  die  in  tausendfacher 
Ahwechslung  immer  von  Neuem  widerkehrte,  gerade  den  scharfsinnigen  wie  auf  die 
Besserung  der  Zeit  gerichteten  Mann  unwiderstehlich  anzog,  sich  mit  ihr  zu  beschaf- 
tigen. — Constantin  Hbfler,  Anna  von  Luxemburg,  p.  20. 


DOCTRIINE  OF  DOMINION,  ITS  GROWTH. 


XXXlll 


interference  was  based  upon  tbe  crimes  of  the  individual 
emperor  rather  than  upon  the  general  political  supremacy  of 
the  Pope.  No  lofty  moral  or  spiritual  purpose  could  be  ascribed 
to  Clement  YI.  in  his  quarrel  with  Lewis  of  Bavaria,  and  the 
chief  aim  of  the  conditions  imposed  upon  the  prostrate  Emperor 
was  to  secure  a  public  acknowledgment  of  the  subjection  of  the 
Empire  to  the  Holy  See.  Nor  were  the  claims  of  the  Popes 
confined  to  the  Empire,  where  a  long  quarrel  might  well  have  led 
to  exaggerated  demands.  The  secular  lordship,  which  even  in  the 
eleventh  century  they  had  asserted  over  Spain,  Corsica  and 
Hungary,  was  now  extended  over  a  great  part  of  Europed 
However  shadowy  their  authority  in  these  lands  might  be,  the 
claim  challenged  criticism,  and  criticism  had  not  been  refused. 
The  study  of  the  Civil  law  had  raised  up  a  body  of  lawyers,  who 
in  scholarship  and  self-confidence  held  no  unequal  rivalry  with 
the  theologians.  While  Lewis  of  Bavaria  was  struggling  with 
the  Pope,  a  band  of  publicists,  Marsilio  of  Padua,  John  of 
Jaudun,  and  William  of  Ockham,  had  maintained  boldly  and  i 
aggressively  the  divine  origin  and  the  independence  of  secular  ' 
government.  They  found  the  Pope  pretending  to  an  authority 
over  all  Christians  which,  spiritual  in  its  source  and  defended 
on  spiritual  grounds,  was  in  practice  constantly  extended  to 
worldly  matters ;  and  in  reply  they  marked  out  jealously  the 
limits  of  the  spiritual  power,  they  declared  that  lay  rule  was 
not  only  independent  but  also  supreme  in  its  own  province,  and 
that  the  property  and  persons  of  the  clergy  ought  to  be  subject 
to  its  laws. 

I 

To  these  men,  who  wrote  as  avowed  defenders  of  the  Empire, 
the  Emperor  was  the  head  and  source  of  all  secular  government, 
and  to  him  in  their  system  accrued  all  the  rights  which  they 
strove  to  wrest  from  ecclesiastical  hands.  But  the  Emperor 
was  ill-fitted  to  bear  the  honour  they  laid  upon  him.  He 
exercised  only  a  nominal  supremacy  and  that  within  compara¬ 
tively  narrow  limits ;  while  in  a  country  that,  like  England,  had 

^  On  this  point  see  Milman’s  Latin  Christianity,  B.  xi.  c.  7  (vol.  vii.  p.  13  of 
the  3rd  edition) .  See  also  Dr.  C.  Holler’s  Die  Avignonesischen  Papste  (Vienna,  1871) 
where  it  is  strongly  brought  out. 

d 


XXXIV 


DOCTRINE  OF  DOMINION. 


never  acknowledged  subjection  to  him,  discussions  as  to  the 
translation  of  the  Empire  from  East  to  West  were  futile.  Yet 
some  one  must  take  his  place ;  if  not  as  the  guardian  of  the 
world’s  peace,  at  least  as  the  chief  lord  from  whom  all  pro¬ 
perty  must  be  held.  Eitzralph,^  if  none  before  him,  cut  the 
:  kiiot  by  maintaining  that  God  himself  was  the  chief  lord  of  all 
possessions,  from  Him  every  man  held  as  far  as  any  true  rights 
of  ownership  were  concerned,  and  to  Him  must  do  service.  If 
'  he  failed  in  this  service,  that  is,  if  he  fell  into  mortal  sin,  he  for¬ 
feited  his  rights.^  This  is  the  doctrine  of  Dominion  which 
Wyclif  upheld,  and  which  he  is  sometimes  believed  to  have 
invented.  Once  received,  it  cuts  short  the  old  quarrel  between 
Pope  and  Emperor,  since  it  does  away  with  the  need  of  either  as 
a  fountain  of  secular  authority.  All  rulers  and  owners  hold 
direct  from  God  as  their  dominus  capitalist  who  has  delegated  his 
powers  to  no  vicegerent. 

I  have  sketched  the  growth  of  this  theory  because  it  is  only 
thus  that  we  can  see  the  object  of  those  who  first  developed  it. 
Whatever  use  the  weapon  might  be  put  to  later,  it  was  forged 
,  to  defend  lay  authority  against  the  Pope.  But  it  does  not  need 
much  consideration  to  discover  that,  stated  baldly,  it  might  be 
employed  to  dangerous  ends.  When  Wyclif  says  :  “  For  he 
I  that  standeth  in  grace  is  very  lord  of  things,  and  whoever  faileth 
•  by  default  of  grace,  he  faileth  right  title  of  the  thing  that 
\  he  occupieth  and  unableth  himself  to  have  the  gifts  of  God,”  ^ 
!  his  language  easily  lends  itself  to  the  malicious  gloss  of  Pohr- 
bacher  :  “  Comme  les  partisans  de  Wiclif  se  donnaient  pour  des 
saints,  et  leurs  adversaires  pour  des  mechants,  I’application 
etait  facile.”  Wyclif  and  his  true  disciples  drew  no  such 

1  Eichard  Fitzralph,  Archbishop  of  Armagh.  Wyclif  looked  up  to  him  as  a 
teacher,  aud  often  speaks  of  him  with  respect  (see  Trialogus,  pp.  158  and  285).  In 
the  tract  on  Clerks  Possessioners,  p.  128  of  this  volume,  he  is  called  St.  Ei chard,  but  I 
need  hardly  say  that  he  never  received  the  honours  of  formal  canonization. 

2  Omnis  inobediens  justis  imperiis  domini  sui,  in  his  quae  contingunt  domini  sni 
dehitam  servitutem,  jus  perdit  omnium  pro  dehito  servitio  a  suo  domino  impensorum, 
et  in  ilia  forefacit :  sed  homo  recepit  dominium  a  deo  pro  prsestando  sibi  dehito  obse- 
quio  :  ergo  inohediendo  justis  imperiis  dei,  mortaliter  peccando,  perdit  dominium  a 
deo  sihi  impensum,  et  forefacit  illud.  Quoted  from  Fitzralph  by  Woodford,  in  his 
treatise  against  Wyclif  (Brown’s  Fasciculus  Eerum  Expetendarum,  i.  237). 

3  S.  E.  W.  iii.  88. 


ITS  APPLICATION. 


XXXV 


conclusion  from  it.  In  the  first  place,  as  Dr.  Shirley  has 
pointed  out,i  he  does  not  look  upon  dominion  as  a  power,  but 
as  a  habit  or  relation  of  the  natural  man.  “  There  are,”  he 
says,  “  two  titles  by  which  a  man  holds  temporal  goods  ;  the 
title  of  original  justice  and  that  of  earthly  justice.  By  the 
title  of  original  justice  Christ  possessed  all  worldly  goods,  as 
Augustine  often  says  ;  by  that  title — the  title  of  grace — all  i 
things  belong  to  the  just ;  but  civil  possession  has  little  to  do 
with  that  title.  Wherefore  Christ  and  his  disciples  despised 
civil  rule  and  possession,  and  contented  themselves  with  holding 
only  according  to  the  first  title.”  ^  Here  we  see  that  Wyclif 
brings  civil  possession  into  contrast  with  true  dominion.  It 
is  with  the  latter,  as  an  ideal,  that  he  meets  the  ideal  which 
ascribes  to  the  Pope,  as  God’s  vicar  on  earth,  the  right  of  control 
over  all  earthly  things,  secular  as  well  as  spiritual. 

From  another  side  the  doctrine  had  an  ethical  attraction  for 
him,  since  it  gave  to  the  owner  of  property  a  higher  sanction 
and  motive  for  action  than  he  could  draw  from  merely  human 
law.  Thus  he  remarks  that  the  King’s  right  to  rule  does  not 
allow  him  to  follow  only  his  own  pleasure,  since  he  is  bound  to 
observe  the  law  of  his  chief  lord,  to  the  profit  and  advancement 
of  his  kingdom.^  In  the  artificial  constitution  of  society  in  the 
fourteenth  century  no  tie  was  reckoned  as  more  binding  than 
that  of  the  feudal  tenant  to  his  lord.  The  doctrine  of  Dominion 
set  up  a  similar  obligation  to  God.^ 

We  see  then  the  main  drift  of  the  doctrine  and  its  value  to 
Wyclif.  It  cut  at  the  root  of  the  Pope’s  usurped  power  and 
gave  to  the  layman  freedom  with  increased  responsibility. 

But,”  it  may  be  asked,  did  not  Wyclif  go  on  to  draw  from  it 
other  and  harmful  corollaries  when,  after  the  full  development 

1  F.  Z.  Ixiii. 

2  Trial,  iv.  17,  p.  306. 

^  Sed  revera  de  rege,  ut  procuratore  citra  Ckristum,  non  seqnitur  :  ipse  dominatur 
hiis  temporalibns,  ergo  licet  sibi  consumere  ipsa  quomodocunique  volnerit :  quia  cum 
sit  vere  (?)  peccabilis,  habens  super  se  capitalem  dominum,  oportet  quod  observet  in 
expendendo  sua  temporalia  legem  capitalis  domini  ad  augmentum  et  commodum  regni 
sui,  ut  patet  ex  lege  bumana. — De  Mandatis,  cap.  25,  MS.  IJniv.  Camb.  LI.  5,  13. 

^  Dicitur  quod  racione  sui  proprii  et  veri  dominii  verum  est  quod  [Deus]  non  eget 
nostro  servicio,  sed  nos  econtra  egemus  ut  serviamus  pro  babendo  suo  domini o. — Early 
Sermons,  No.  19,  MS.  Lambeth. 


XXXVl 


DOCTRINE  OF  DOMINION. 


of  his  opinions,  he  found  Church  and  State  united  against  him  ? 
When  he  appealed  to  the  people  in  his  tracts,  did  he  not  hold 
out  to  his  followers  the  bait  of  a  temporal  reign  of  the  saints  ?  ’’ 
He  neither  did  nor  could.  Beside  the  distinction  which,  as  we 
have  seen,  carried  his  theory  into  the  ideal  region,  he  put  a 
practical  obstacle  in  the  way  of  those  ‘‘  too  hasty  heads  for 
ordering  worlds  who  might  have  tried  to  make  an  ill  use  of 
it.  While  he  taught  that  the  man  in  mortal  sin  forfeited  his 
dominion,  he  also  taught  that  no  one  could  tell  what  sin  was 
mortal.  For  he  did  not,  like  the  Boman  Casuists,  divide  sin 
into  the  categories  of  mortal  and  venial  according  to  the  nature 
of  each  act ;  for  him  the  only  mortal  sin  was  that  of  which  the 
sinner  was  finally  impenitent.  The  predestinate  cannot  sin 
thus  ;  the  reprobate  (or,  as  he  prefers  to  call  them,  the  fore¬ 
known)  will  do  so.  But  since  his  doctrine  of  predestination  is 
not  supplemented  by  one  of  assurance  there  can  be  no  separation 
of  sheep  and  goats  in  this  life,  where  no  man  can  know  even 
what  is  his  own  state  ;  much  less  what  is  that  of  others.  “  If 
the  pope  asked  me,”  he  says,  “  whether  I  were  ordained  to  be 
saved  or  predestinate,  I  would  say  that  I  hoped  so,  but  I  would 
not  swear  it,  nor  affirm  it  without  condition,  though  he  greatly 
punished  me ;  nor  deny  it,  nor  doubt  it,  would  I  no  way.”  ^ 
Those  who  know  how  thoroughly  Wyclif’s  doctrines  are 
interwoven  so  as  to  form  a  consistent  whole  will  see  that  there 
was  no  fear  of  his  using  this  theory  of  dominion  as  a  dangerous 
solvent  of  society,  but  we  are  not  left  to  mere  inference  in  this 
matter.  Wyclif  constantly  asserted  the  duty  of  obedience  even 
I  to  wicked  rulers,  and  it  is  curious  that  one  paradoxical  phrase 
in  which  he  expressed  this  truth  was  brought  against  him  as  a 
-heresy.  “  Item  quod  Deus  debet  obedire  diabolo  ”  was  the 
seventh  proposition  condemned  in  the  Council  of  London.  The 
words  sound  strangely  and  are  marked  by  the  exaggeration  of 
the  Schools ;  but  if  we  take  obedience  to  mean  the  rendering  of 
fit  service,  we  shall  see  that  it  is  only  an  emphatic  way  of  saying 
that  we  must  give  to  every  one  his  due.^  So  Christ  ministered 

1  S.  E.  W.  iii.  426. 

2  See  S.  E.  W.  iii.  437. 


TEACHING  AS  TO  CIVIL  OBEDIENCE. 


XXXVll 


to  Iscariot,  when  he  was  a  devil,  and  he  submitted  himself  to 
Satan  to  be  tempted.  It  follows  that  the  Christian  must  subject 
himself  to  those  who  by  God’s  ordinance  and  allowance  are 
placed  over  him. 

If  we  turn  from  principles  to  the  manner  in  which  Wyclif 
enforced  them  we  shall  find  him  perfectly  consistent.  So  far 
as  my  knowledge  of  his  works  goes,  there  is  only  one  passage 
which  is  open  to  misinterpretation  on  this  point.  It  occurs  in 
a  sermon  on  the  parable  of  the  talents.  “If  thou  ask  who  shall 
take  away  goods  from  these  unjust  men,  since  they  be  com¬ 
monly  mighty  and  no  man  dare  take  from  them,  Christ  answers 
here  and  may  not  lie  ;  this  just  man  to  whom  God  giveth 
heaven  taketh  from  this  unjust  man  that  that  him  seemeth  to 
have  ;  and  not  by  his  own  authority,  nor  by  strength  of  himself, 
but  by  authority  of  God  and  by  virtue  of  his  law.”  ^  Taken  by 
itself  this  quotation  might  seem  to  justify  the  good  in  depriving 
the  wicked,  but  on  reference  to  the  context  it  is  clear  that 
'VVyclif  is  insisting  upon  the  ideal  or  spiritual  possession,  since 
he  goes  on  to  say  :  “  And  some  men  that  shall  be  safe  although 
they  seem  now  poor,  nevertheless  they  have  now  heaven  and 
all  goods  of  this  world;  but  this  having  is  now  hid  and  yet 
unknown  to  man  ;  for  God’s  right  is  not  yet  put  in  possession.” 

The  theory  of  Dominion  is  developed  most  in  the  Latin  '' 
works,  and  finds  little  place  in  the  popular  tracts,  but  the  latter 
contain  many  assertions  of  the  duty  of  obedience  to  wicked  men. 

I  will  content  myself  with  one  quotation,  which  is  specially 
directed  against  those  who  misused  the  doctrine  of  Dominion. 

“  But  yet  men  doubt  commonly  whether  men  should  pay  their 
debts  to  these  men  that  they  know  live  in  wicked  life.  And  it 
seems  nay,  by  reason  of  God,  for  such  men  ben  unworthy  to 
have  any  goods ;  yea  to  have  life  given  of  their  God ;  how  be 
they  worthy  to  receive  their  debts  ?  since  they  have  lost  title 
of  all  rightfulness.  But  here  men  think  by  God’s  law  that 
men  should  stir  such  shrews  to  serve  truly  their  God  both  by 
word  and  deed,  and  pay  them  their  debts  and  hope  for  their 


'  S.  E.  i.  260. 


XXXVlll 


ECCLESIASTICAL  ENDOWMENTS. 


amendment.  For  as  God  wills  that  they  live,  so  he  wills  that 
men  give  {i.e.  pay)  them.  And  therefore  teaches  St.  Paul, 
that  Christian  men  that  be  servants  serve  well  their  heathen 
lords,  by  reason  of  their  God.  And  so  we  grant  well  that  such 
receive  unjustly  and  to  their  damnation  debts  that  men  pay 
them,  and  yet  their  debtors  meritoriously  give  these  goods.”  ^ 
The  latter  part  of  this  passage  sums  up  very  shortly  WycliPs 
belief.  The  wicked  receive  wrongfully,  yet  it  is  right  we 
should  yield  them  their  worldly  dues.  The  question  of  for¬ 
feiture  is  one  to  be  settled  with  their  chief  lord,  God,  who  will 
exact  a  strict  account,  and  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  it. 

I  now  pass  to  another  characteristic  doctrine  of  the  Reformer, 
the  sinfulness  of  endowments  for  the  clergy.  This,  although 
distinct  from  the  theory  of  Dominion,  was  closely  connected 
with  it.  God,  from  whom  all  earthly  lordship  is  derived,  gives 
it  all  in  fee  to  lay  rulers  and  forbids  the  clergy  to  have  any 
share  in  it.  Wyclif  appealed  to  the  precedent  of  the  Jewish 
law  by  which  the  priests  were  to  have  no  inheritance  in  the 
land,  and  urged  the  example  of  Christ  and  his  apostles  who 
lived  in  voluntary  poverty.  It  is  a  favourite  saying  of  his, 
borrowed  from  Augustine,  that  as  lay  lords  represent  the 
Godhead  of  Christ  in  exercising  the  power  which  he  has 
entrusted  to  them,  so  priests  represent  his  manhood  and  are 
bound  to  follow  his  humility.  There  was  nothing  new  in  this, 
since  it  had  been  maintained  long  before  by  the  imperialist 
writers.  Moreover  it  was  only  a  consistent  application  of  ideas 
which  were  dominant  throughout  Christendom.  The  Church 
did  not  insist  on  poverty  in  her  ministers,  but  accounted  it  a 
note  of  the  higher  life,  a  part  of  the  vow  of  every  regular.  The 
monk’s  rule  allowed  him  nothing  of  his  own,^  the  friar  was  for- 

1  S.  E.  ’VV.  iii.  175.  See  too  the  tract  on  Servants  and  Lords  in  this  volume,  espe¬ 
cially  p.  229,  also  S.  E.  W.  iii.  147,  ‘‘  Moreover  it  were  to  wit,  etc.”  Among  the 
Latin  works  where  the  duty  is  enforced  may  be  mentioned  the  De  Sex  Jugis,  printed 
in  JDr.  Lechler’s  Appendix  (ii.  601).  This  deserves  notice  because  it  is  a  tract  com¬ 
piled  as  an  instruction  to  the  poor  priests. 

2  Precipue  hoc  vitium  pecuhare  radicitus  amputandum  est  de  monasteriis,  ne  quis 
presumat  aliquid  dare  aut  accipere  sine  jussione  abbatis,  neque  aliquid  habere  proprium, 
nullam  omnino  rem,  neque  codicem,  neque  tabulas,  neque  graphium,  sed  nihil  omnino. 
— Pule  of  St.  Benedict,  xxxiii. 


SCANDALS  IN  THE  CHUECH. 


XXXIX 


bidden  a  share  even  in  corporate  possession.^  Wyclif  would 
acknowledge  no  select  higher  life.  Christ’s  rule  was  binding 
and  was  better  than  any  that  men  could  lay  down,  and  since  he 
taught  poverty  both  by  precept  and  example,  the  clergy  was 
bound  to  follow  his  bidding  and  live  on  the  free-will  offerings 
of  the  people.  In  short  Wyclif  advocated  a  purely  voluntary 
S3^stem,  denouncing  not  merely  state  subsidies  but  all  endow¬ 
ments.  Like  Dante  ^  he  traced  the  ills  of  the  Church  to  jbhe 
donation  of  Const^tine,  which  Sylvester  had  sinned  in 
accepting  and  which  had  since  spread  corruption  through 
Christendom.  The  laity,  who  have  sinned  in  heaping  these 
fatal  gifts  upon  the  Church,  are  bound  to  withdraw  them  by 
wise  and  gradual  means.^  The  support  appointed  by  Gfod  for  ' 
the  clergy  is  the  tithe,  and  the  payment  of  it  is  a  duty  so 
binding  that  it  may  be  enforced  by  excommunication,  always 
on  the  condition  that  the  discipline  is  exercised  for  the  good  of 
the  sinner  and  not  for  the  greed  of  the  priest.  On  the  other 
hand  if  the  pastor  fails  in  his  service,  his  flock  should  punish 
him  by  withdrawal  of  tithes,  but  this  may  only  be  done  by 
orderly  consent  of  the  parishioners  and  not  by  individual  caprice. 

1  can  safely  leave  to  others  the  task  of  criticizing  Wyclif ’s 
plan  for  enforcing  wilful  povert,”  but  I  may  be  allowed  to 
remark  that  on  this  subject  there  was  much  excuse  for  extra¬ 
vagance.  The  wealth  of  the  Church  was  the  occasion,  if  not 
the  cause,  of  such  scandals  as  we  now  And  it  hard  to  imagine. 
Pluralists  who  held  benefices  by  the  hundred.  Popes  who  sold 
their  patronage  openly,  and  prelates  who  knew  nothing  of  their 
offices  but  their  net  yield,  were  the  rulers  of  the  Church.^ 

^  See  Rule  and  Testament  of  St,  Francis  (below,  pp,  42  and  46). 

2  Inf.  xix.  115.  Par.  xx.  65. 

^  Wyclif’ s  scheme,  wMch  provides  some  protection  for  vested  interests,  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Trialogus,  iv.  19  (p.  313). 

^  See  Mcolaus  de  Clamengiis,  De  corriipto  Ecclesim  Static  in  Brown’s  Fasciculus 
Rerum  Expetendarum,  vol.  ii.  p.  555,  etc.  Here  is  bis  account  of  the  pluralism  of 
the  Cardinals  :  ‘  ‘  Quantse  illud  aviditatis  est,  quod  tantam  multitudinem  beneflciorum 
invicem  repugnantium  tenent  ?  quod  Monacbi  simul  et  Canonici  sunt  regulares  et  se- 
culares  ?  quod  sub  eodem  habitu  omnium  religionum,  ordinum,  professionum,  jura  et 
officia  beneficiaque  possident.  Non  quidem  duo  vel  tria,  decern  vel  viginti,  sed  cen- 
tena  et  ducentena,  et  interdum  usque  ad  quadringenta  vel  quingenta  aut  amplius : 
Nec  parva  vel  tenuia  sed  omnium  pinguissima  et  optima,”  etc.  (p.  559).  In  another 
place  he  says  that  no  one  nowadays  in  taking  a  cure  of  souls  inquires  into  anything 


xl 


wyclif’s  moderation. 


What  wonder  if  an  earnest  reformer  longed  to  clear  away  the 
riches  which  seemed  to  be  choking  all  spiritual  life  ?  I  do  not 
wish  however  to  defend  Wyclif’s  views  but  to  explain  them, 
and  I  am  only  trying  to  show  that  he  does  not  step  beyond  the 
reasonable  bounds  of  ecclesiastical  politics.  It  is  only  by  dis¬ 
ingenuous  devices  of  controversy  that  his  advocacy  of  disendow- 
ment  has  been  confused  with  his  theories  as  to  Dominion  in 
order  to  represent  him  as  a  socialist  and  a  leveller.^ 

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  upon  these  questions  relating  to 
property,  because  until  they  have  been  studied  it  is  impossible 
to  understand  Wyclif’s  real  position.  Had  his  teaching  been 
as  dangerous  and  subversive  as  some  writers  represent  it,  we 
cannot  suppose  that  he  would  have  found  favour  and  support 
with  the  statesmen  of  his  time>  and  that  not  merely  with  one  or 
two  prominent  men  or  at  one  particular  crisis,  but  during 
twenty  years  of  active  life.  Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  I 

venture  to  sav  that  one  of  Wvclif’s  most  marked  characteristics 

%/  %/ 

is  his  essential  moderation.  Even  when  his  language  is  most 
vehement  the  thought  and  purpose  beneath  it  are  sane  and  rea¬ 
sonable.  He  indulges  himself  in  heaping  charges  upon  the 
prelates  or  friars  who  are  for  the  moment  the  objects  of  his 
invective ;  they  are  spiritual  manslayers,  they  are  necromancers, 
they  are  ghostly  adulterers  and  Sodomites ;  and  as  each  fresh 
sin  is  added  to  the  list,  the  accusation  is  justified  with  more  or 
less  logical  ingenuity.  These  “  ornaments  to  debate  ”  are 
partly  due  to  habits  of  paradox  acquired  in  the  Schools,  and 
partly  they  are  outlets  for  his  fervid  indignation.  But  if  we  go 
down  to  the  kernel  of  thought,  we  find  no  wildness.  Whether 
the  question  in  hand  be  one  of  doctrine  or  discipline,  Wyclif  has 
considered  it  carefully  both  in  principle  and  in  its  practical 
bearings.  It  is  this  characteristic  that  entitles  him  to  his 


but  tbe  amount  of  the  income;  “  Nee  vero  tantopere  quseritur,  quanti  sit  preesenti 
homini  et  in  Ecclesia  rite  servienti  valor  beneficii,  quam  quid  suo  possessori  longius 
otia  agenti,  et  perpetuo  fortassis  abfuturo,  annuo  proventu  reddere  valet.”  (p.  556). 
De  Clamengis,  it  must  be  remembered,  lies  under  no  suspicion  of  heretical  leanings. 
He  was  one  of  tbe  many  good  men  who  lamented  the  abuses  of  the  Church,  but  lacked 
courage  to  take  part  in  any  real  reform. 

^  On  the  difference  between  endowments  and  lay  property,  see  the  tract  On 
Servants  and  Lords,  p.  229. 


HIS  DEALING  WITH  CONFESSION. 


xli 


eminence  as  the  first  of  the  Reformers.  Long  before  his  time 
there  had  been  heated  sectaries  who  had  denounced  the  whole 
system  of  the  Church,  but  Wyclif  was  the  first  to  submit  it  to 
a  searching  proof,  to  examine  the  prevalent  practices  and  ask 
how  it  was  they  bent  away  from  the  ideal  at  which  they  ought 
to  aim.  In  his  conclusions  he  forestalled  in  many  points  the 
judgments  of  the  more  moderate  reformers  of  the  sixteenth 
century. 

The  note  of  a  fanatic  is  that  he  cannot  see  that  there  is  some 
soul  of  goodness  in  things  evil ;  the  institution  or  person  that 
offends  him  is  bad  and  must  be  swept  away,  and  he  would 
think  it  waste  of  time  to  inquire  what  accidental  good  it  may 
do  or  to  what  use  it  was  originally  designed.  Now  it  is  a 
favourite  practice  of  Wyclif  to  look  back  to  the  origin  of  the 
practice  that  he  is  discussing,  and  even  in  the  act  of  condem¬ 
nation  he  is  ready  to  recognize  occasional  merits.  Take  for 
example  this  account  of  the  ordinance  of  confession:  “This 
confession  that  is  made  to  man  hath  oft-times  been  varied  in 
varying  of  the  Church.  For  first  men  confessed  to  God  and 
to  the  common  people,  and  this  confession  was  used  in  the  time 
of  the  apostles.  Afterwards  men  were  confessed  more  specially 
to  priests  and  made  them  judges  and  counsellors  of  their  sinful 
life.  But  in  the  third  time,  since  the  fiend  was  loosed.  Pope 
Innocent  ordained  a  law  of  confession  that  each  man  of  dis¬ 
cretion  should  once  in  the  year  be  privily  confessed  of  his  own 
priest,  and  added  much  to  this  law  that  he  could  not  ground. 
And  although  this  Pope’s  ordinance  do  much  good  to  many 
men,  nevertheless  many  men  think  that  it  harmeth  the  Church.”  ^ 
It  is  not  enough  to  say’ that  this  passage  is  not  fanatical;  it 
shows  a  temper  which  is  fundamentally  opposed  to  fanaticism, 
and  this  is  the  more  noticeable  because  it  comes  from  a  tract  of 
late  date  and  vehement  tone.  Again,  on  the  subject  of  image- 

^  S.  E.  W.  iii.  255.  This  is  from  a  tract  written  about  1382.  Compare  the 
following  passage  “  Nam  quacunque  bora  quis  peccaverit  debet  conteri,  et  in  tantum 
quo  sibi  proderit  .  .  .  babita  sacerdotum  copia  confiteri  ”  (Early  Sermons,  No.  I.  MS. 
Lambeth).  I  give  this  passage,  written  when  bis  views  were  less  advanced,  as  show¬ 
ing  the  same  principle  and  the  same  temper  of  setting  the  spiritual  advantages  above 
the  formal  rule. 


xlii 


ADORATION  OF  THE  SAINTS. 


worship  and  the  adoration  of  saints,  Wyclif,  while  opposing 
himself  to  the  prevalent  uses  of  the  Church,  spoke  with  reason 
and  moderation.  He  denounced  the  waste  of  treasure  on  “  dead 
stocks,’’  ^  but  allowed  that  images  were  not  forbidden  to 
Christians,  who  may  use  them  to  excite  devotion,  and  must 
always  be  careful  not  to  adore  the  sign  in  place  of  the  thing 
signified.  If  devotion  is  once  paid  to  the  image  itself,  or 
miraculous  powers  are  attributed  to  it,  it  becomes  an  evil  instead 
of  a  benefit,  and  thus  the  setting  of  one  image  above  another 
is  an  act  of  idolatry.^  Here  we  see  how  he  tries  to  find  a 
principle  to  judge  by,  and  does  not  content  himself  with  vague 
invective. 

In  treating  of  the  adoration  of  saints,  he  shows  the  same 
spirit.  Ho  devotions  to  saints,  he  says,  can  be  of  any  avail  ex¬ 
cept  so  far  as  they  honour  Christ  or  excite  men  to  love  him,  and 
since  all  gifts  can  be  obtained  only  through  his  mediation,  it 
seems  to  many  that  it  would  be  better  to  pray  directly  to  him.^ 
In  accordance  with  this,  we  may  notice  that  in  the  tract  on  the 
Ave  Maria  printed  in  this  volume  there  is  nothing  said  of  invok¬ 
ing  the  help  of  the  Virgin,  although  her  example  is  insisted  on, 
as  might  be  expected  from  one  who  believed  her  to  be  sinless. 
Yet  although  he  thus  prefers  prayer  to  Christ,  he  can  scarcely 
be  said  to  discourage  those  who  find  devotion  to  the  saints 
profitable  ;  but  there  is  no  indecision  in  his  language  as  to  the 
abuses  which  clustered  round  the  worship  of  the  saints  ;  the 
treasure  wasted  on  their  shrines,  the  time  thrown  away  on  pil¬ 
grimage,  the  superstitious  regard  for  relics.^  Most  likely  it  was 

^  ^  Below,  pages  7  and  210. 

2  Et  sic  uni  ymagini  plus  aSecti  quam  alter!  adorant  ymagines,  quod  indubie  est 
idolatria. — De  Mandatis  Divinis,  cap.  15,  MS  IJniv,  Camb.  LI,  5.  13. 

3  Trial,  iii.  30  (p.  235).  So  too  in  tlie  Dialogus,  c.  14  :  Et  videtur  multis  nulla 
oracio  porrecta  specialiter  sancto  Christi  est  laudabilis,  nisi  de  quanto  acuit  devocionem 
in  Cbristnm,  sic  quod  si  omnes  intenciones  et  omnes  oraciones  uuiri  possent  in  Chris¬ 
tum,  ....  esset  utilius  Christiano  omnes  oraciones  specialiter  Christo  porrigere. — 
MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  1045. 

^  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  even  while  he  stiU  upheld  prayers  to  the  saints,  his  views  on 
these  matters  were  decided.  In  a  sermon  preached  at  St.  Mary’s,  Oxford,  on  the  fes¬ 
tival  of  the  Assumption,  in  which  he  says  that  all  human  beings  need  to  ask  Mary’s 
aid,  he  supposes  that  God  may  have  removed  her  body,  like  those  of  Moses  and  St. 
John,  to  prevent  the  harm  which  would  have  come  from  worshipping  it. — Early 
Sermons,  XXVI.  MS.  Lambeth. 


WYCLIF  AND  THE  FRIARS. 


xliii 


indignation  against  these  abuses  that  led  him  to  question  the 
doctrines  on  which  they  depended. 

These  examples  are  enough  to  show  Wyclif’s  temper  and 
method,  and  it  would  be  tedious  and  unprofitable  to  discuss  in 
detail  every  point  on  which  he  differed  from  the  dominant 
opinion  of  his  time.  Everywhere  we  find  the  same  habit  of  ' 
judging  forms  and  rites  by  their  tendency  to  promote  moral  : 
and  spiritual  aims  ;  and  since  the  Church  of  his  time  had  be¬ 
come  a  mass  of  formalism,  it  was  inevitable  that  he  should  find 
himself  in  opposition  to  its  most  cherished  practices. 

There  remains  yet  one  matter  which  I  cannot  pass  over ; 
Wyclif’s  opposition  to  the  friars.  Until  lately  it  was  supposed 
that  his  first  public  action  was  in  opposition  to  the  mendicant 
orders,  that  he  threw  himself  into  the  lists  against  them  at 
Oxford  in  succession  to  Fitzralph.  Dr.  Shirley  first  showed 
this  to  be  an  error,  and  Dr.  Lechler  has  given  quotations  from 
some  of  Wyclif’s  earlier  works  which  express  respect  for  the 
friars,  as  following  the  life  of  poverty  incumbent  on  all  priests.^ 
If  we  could  rely  on  the  authority  of  his  antagonist  Woodford, 
we  should  believe  that  it  was  only  the  opposition  of  the  friars 
to  his  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist  which  led  him  to  attack  them. 
This  view  has  been  accepted  by  Dr.  Lechler,  who  dates  Wyclif’s 
first  assault  upon  the  friars  in  1381,  and  thus  throws  the  whole 
of  the  controversy  with  the  Mendicants  into  the  last  three  years 
of  his  life.^  There  is  considerable  authority  for  this  view.  Be¬ 
sides  the  statement  of  Woodford  we  have  the  information  from 
a  contemporary  chronicler  that  in  1377  Wyclif,  in  disputing  at 
Oxford  against  the  possessions  of  the  clergy,  gave  much  praise 
to  the  Franciscan  rule.^  In  spite  of  this  I  cannot  put  the 
beginning  of  the  quarrel  so  late.  To  go  no  further  than  the 
present  volume,  the  tract  De  Officio  Pastorali,  as  I  have  shown 
in  the  head-note,  is  not  later  than  1378,  and  yet  the  friars  are 
attacked  in  it  without  mercy.  The  use  of  the  cant  phrase 

1  Lechler,  i.  586. 

2  In  the  English  translation  Dr.  Lechler  modifies  this  statement  slightly.  He 
says:  “  From  1378  we  date  a  period  of  a  few  years  in  which  Wyclif  began  to  attack 
the  Mendicants  upon  single  points  of  error  and  abuse.” — ^^^ol.  ii.  143. 

2  Eulogium  Historiarum  (continuation),  p.  345. 


xliv 


CAUSE  OF  QUARREL  WITH  THE  FRIARS. 


“  cayms  castels  ’’  for  the  friars’  houses  is  enough  to  show  that 
the  quarrel  was  already  bitter.^  We  must  not  assume  that  any 
tract  which  does  not  refer  to  Wyclif’s  sacramental  doctrine  was 
written  before  that  doctrine  was  developed,  hut  it  is  safe  to  say 
that,  if  the  strife  between  him  and  the  friars  had  been  first  or 
chiefly  aroused  by  the  Eucharistic  controversy,  it  would  have 
been  mentioned  in  any  long  tract  specially  directed  against 
them,  yet  we  find  no  notice  of  it  in  the  De  Pseudofreris  (our 
JSTo.  XXII.).  The  same  is  the  case  in  some  of  the  Latin  tracts^ 
while  in  one,  the  De  Contrarietate  Duorum  Dominorum,  ^  there  is 
a  very  marked  instance,  since  in  the  course  of  a  fierce  attack  upon 
the  friars  Wyclif  gives  a  list  of  seven  heresies  of  which  they  are 
guilty,  in  which  there  occurs  no  mention  of  the  Host.  These 
considerations  support  the  view  which  I  have  already  expressed 
on  other  grounds,^  that  at  the  time  when  Wyclif  first  declared 
his  heresy  as  to  the  Sacrament  he  was  in  the  thick  of  a  con¬ 
troversy  with  the  friars.  I  may  add  that  the  antagonism  is  not 
disproved  by  showing  that  Wyclif  spoke  with  respect  of  the 
founders  of  the  Mendicant  orders.  As  we  may  see  by  the  tract 
on  the  Pule  of  St.  Francis  (our  Xo.  III.),  while  he  objected  to  all 
separate  orders,  what  made  him  most  wrathful  with  the  friars 
was  that  they  professed  the  poverty  which  was  his  own  ideal  but 
were  untrue  to  their  rule  ;  nor  is  there  any  reasonable  doubt 
that  there  were  scandals  enough  among  them  to  account  for  his 
hostility.  If  I  may  trust  the  impression  made  by  reading  a 
great  deal  of  his  invective,  I  should  say  that  the  abuses  which 
most  stirred  his  wrath  were  those  connected  with  the  various 
forms  of  indulgence  and  absolution  ;  the  sale  of  pardons  and 
letters  of  fraternity,  the  offer  of  special  prayers,  and  the  claims 
of  holiness  for  all  admitted  to  the  habit,  even  in  the  death  agony. 
When  and  how  his  earlier  good  opinion  was  changed  into  dislike 
can  only  be  a  matter  of  conjecture,  but  such  an  efiect  may  well 

^  This  is  found  also  in  the  Latin  version  of  the  tract,  which  Dr.  Lechler  assigns  to 
1378. 

2  e.g.  De  Servitute  Civili  (Shirley,  68)  and  de  Nova  Prevaricantia  Mandatornm. 
(Shirley,  79). 

2  No.  83  in  Shirley’s  Catalogue. 

^  See  above,  p.  xxv. 


WYCLir’s  CHARACTER. 


xlv 


have  been  produced  by  his  experience  as  a  parish  priest.  Nothing 
can  have  been  more  trying  to  a  parson  who  was  doing  his  best 
to  keep  alive  the  flame  of  spiritual  religion  in  his  flock  than  the 
visit  of  one  of  these  vagrant  friars,  preaching  a  catch-penny 
sermon,  shriving  men  of  sins  which  they  were  ashamed  to  confess 
to  their  own  pastor,  and  generally  encouraging  the  belief  that 
a  few  easy  benefactions  to  the  convent  would  take  the  place  of 
penitence  and  good  life.  I  would  not  for  a  moment  suggest 
that  friars  were  always  or  even  mostly  of  such  a  type,  but  very 
many  such  were  to  be  seen  in  the  villages.  Jealousy  once 
aroused  was  likely  to  be  increased  by  the  reports  of  Wyclif’s 
poor  priests,  between  whom  and  the  friars  there  was  a  constant 
rivalry  which  often  came  to  open  quarrelling.  If  we  take  into 
account  besides  the  permanent  antagonism  between  regulars  and 
seculars  at  the  University,  from  the  influence  of  which  Wyclif 
can  scarcely  have  escaped,  ^  we  shall  find  both  public  and 
personal  causes  enough  to  set  him  against  the  friars  long  before 
they  led  the  attack  on  his  sacramental  doctrines. 

We  have  now  passed  in  review  the  most  distinctive  points  in 
Wyclif’s  teaching,  of  which  the  main  lines  are  clear  even  with 
our  present  materials,  although  many  details  cannot  be  settled 
until  more  of  his  Latin  works  are  published.  A  natural  curi¬ 
osity  leads  us  to  turn  from  doctrines  and  opinions,  and  ask  what 
the  man  was  like.  Portraits  exist  which  are  said  to  represent 
him,  but  of  too  recent  a  date  to  allow  us  to  rely  on  their  authen¬ 
ticity.  From  verbal  description  all  we  know  is  that  he  was 
thin  and  worn,  and  most  innocent  of  conversation,  and  that  he 
had  a  charm  of  manner  which  led  men  of  the  highest  rank  to 
delight  in  his  society.  Judging  from  his  works  it  is  rather 
difficult  to  discern  in  wffiat  the  charm  consisted.  They  are 
marked  by  learning  and  earnestness,  and  are  occasionally  re¬ 
lieved  by  touches  of  witty  or  humorous  sarcasm,  but  they  lack 
the  strong  personal  stamp  which  wins  our  regard  for  Luther  in 
spite  of  all  his  faults.  Of  Wyclif’s  own  feelings,  his  inward 
struggles,  his  doubts  and  hesitations,  we  learn  nothing  ;  even 

^  We  may  trace  it  in  his  complaint  that  the  friars  monopolise  books  (pp.  128  and 
221),  which  was  made  also  by  Fitzralph  in  his  Defensio  Curatorum. 


xlvi  wyclif’s  character. 

wlieii  lie  tells  iis  how  he  has  changed  an  opinion  it  is  in  a  quiet 
unimpassioned  way  as  a  simple  relation  of  fact.  ISTor  do  we 
find  in  him  what  may  he  called  the  religious  genius ;  the  deep 
insight  into  spiritual  things,  the  vivid  sense  of  the  invisible 
presences,  which  at.  times  carries  Luther,  as  it  does  St.  Bernard 
or  St.  Theresa,  into  mystical  rapture.  Wyclif’s  piety  is  fervent 
and  unfeigned,  hut  never  lifts  him  out  of  himself ;  his  distinc¬ 
tion  is  moral  and  intellectual — a  moral  energy  which  could  not 
he  satisfied  with  anything  short  of  an  ideal,  fearless  intellectual 
activity  which  proved  all  things,  and  shrank  from  no  conclu¬ 
sions  in  an  honest  and  devout  search  after  truth.  This  pre¬ 
ponderance  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  sides  of  his  nature 
over  the  emotional  accounts  in  some  degree  for  the  sense  of 
hardness  which  we  are  conscious  of  in  reading  his  works.  When 
angered  by  a  mischievous  doctrine  or  an  evil  practice,  he  is  apt 
to  express  and  justify  his  indignation  so  freely  that  even  his 
positive  teaching  seems  to  be  tinged  with  polemic  harshness. 
He  was  conscious  of  the  defect,  and  tells  us  that  he  strove  and 
prayed  against  it,^  but  it  was  to  the  end  of  his  life  too  strong 
for  him.  Yet,  whatever  were  his  faults  of  temper,  he  must 
have  possessed  a  singular  attractiveness.  Ho  mere  reputation 
for  learning  and  intellect  could  have  made  him  the  adviser  of 
the  King,  the  companion  of  nobles,  the  head  of  a  party  at 
Oxford,  and  the  adored  leader  of  a  band  of  faithful  friends  and 
disciples  there  and  at  Lutterworth.  Hot  even  the  rancour  of 
his  enemies  could  impugn  the  blamelessness  of  his  life,  and  the 
only  sins  they  charged  against  him  were  pride  of  intellect  and 
desire  of  distinction,  accusations  which  no  one  can  hope  to 
escape  who  sets  himself  against  the  prevailing  beliefs  and 
customs  of  his  time.  He  has  however  been  blamed  for  cowardice 
by  those  who  have  accepted  Knighton^  s  very  suspicious  story  of 

^  See  a  passage  from  the  DeVeritate  quoted  by  Dr.  Shirley,  F.  Z.  xlv.  Dr.  Shirley 
speaks  of  ‘  a  quick  temper,’  hut  what  Wyclif  acknowledges  is  that  something  of  vin¬ 
dictiveness  was  apt  to  be  mingled  with  his  righteous  anger.  Another  characteristic 
avowal  is  this  :  “  Omnes  enim  cogitamus  superflue,  quomodo  vindicta  caperetur  de 
hostibus  Christi  atque  ecclesise,  et  potius  cogitamus  imprecando  istam  vindictam  quam 
alia  media  misericordise,  quae  sic  injuriantibus  cederent  ad  salutem.” — De  Sex  Jugis, 
Lechler  (Appendix),  ii.  603. 


'VVYCLir's  COUKAGE. 


xlvii 


liis  recantation  at  Oxford.^  Even  apart  from  tMs  lie  is  said  to 
have  been  shifty  ;  speaking  out  his  opinions  vehemently  and 
fully  before  his  disciples  and  the  crowd,  denying,  veiling,  or 
minimizing  them  before  authority.  I  do  not  think  he  is  fairly 
open  to  censure  on  this  point,  l^o  doubt,  when  put  upon  his 
trial,  he  explained  away  some  of  the  charges  brought  against 
him.  In  his  defence  handed  in  to  the  Bishops  in  1378  he  says 
that  some  of  the  charges  were  founded  on  the  reports  of  youths 
who  had  heard  him  lecture,^  and  even  if  the  delators  had  by  a 
singular  chance  been  accurate,  yet  sentences  detached  from  their 
context  must  sometimes  have  needed  qualification.  Yet  any 
one  who  looks  through  his  defence  will  see  that  in  many  cases 
he  substantially  upholds  his  original  theses,  and  that  so  clearly 
that  the  Bishops  would  certainly  have  condemned  him  if  they 
had  been  free  to  act.  The  pertinacity  with  which  during  the 
last  years  of  his  life  he  reiterated  his  most  heterodox  doctrines 
in  all  ways,  in  tracts  and  sermons  as  well  as  in  formal  treatises, 
shows  that  he  did  not  shrink  from  braving  the  authorities  of 
the  Church.  If  we  bear  in  mind  how  solitary  he  then  was, 
without  any  party  to  encourage  him  by  their  applause  or  nerve 
him  by  their  expectations,  we  shall  wonder  at  his  constancy 
rather  than  accuse  him  of  faint-heartedness. 

1  need  say  little  as  to  the  character  of  the  tracts  which  are 
printed  here.  In  the  short  head-notes  that  I  have  prefixed  to 
each  I  have  tried  to  call  attention  to  the  salient  points  of  in¬ 
terest,  and  to  give  my  best  judgment  as  to  authenticity.  I  may 
however  remark  that  while  the  book  has  been  going  through 
the  press  I  have  been  permitted  to.  use  the  volume  of  Latin 
Sermons  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  have 

^  Hofler  tries  to  back  up  the  accusation  by  the  following  quotation  from  the  tract 
de  Apostasia :  “  Sed  protestor  publice  in  hiis  scriptis  quod  si  aliqua  persona  ecclesiae, 
etiam  Eobertus  Gibbonensis  (the  Antipope  Clement  VII.)  vel  aliquis  de  suis  com- 
plicibus,  et  multo  magis  si  papa  noster  Urbanus  VI.  vel  alius  Catholicus  de  sibi  fideliter 
adhaerentibus  docuerit  aliquam  partem  hujus  sententise  esse  falsam,  volo  paratissime 
revocare.” — Anna  von  Luxemburg,  p.  81.  Hofler  treats  this  as  a  profession  of  obedi¬ 
ence,  put  on  to  shield  himself  from  the  charge  of  pertinacious  heresy  and  leave  a  way 
open  to  recant.  Was  there  ever  a  reformer  or  innovator  who  did  not  express  his 
willingness  to  recant  if  any  one  would  teach  him  better  ? 

2  “  Et  quia  per  pueros  reportata  est  sententia  fidei,  quam  dixi  in  scholis  et  alibi,  ac 
magis,  per  pueros  etiam  usque  ad  Eomanam  curiam  transportata,”  etc. — Wals.  i.  357. 


xlviii 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRACTS. 


read  tlie  Latin  tracts  in  tile  Aslibnrnliam  MS.,  and  tbe  result 
of  this  increased  knowledge  of  Wyclif’s  unquestioned  works  is 
to  make  me  lean  more  to  tke  side  of  genuineness  than  when 
most  of  tke  head-notes  were  written.  A  critic  must  have  much 
more  faith  in  his  verifying  faculty  than  I  possess  if  he  can 
hope  always  to  decide  with  certainty  whether  a  given  tract  was 
written  by  Wyclif  or  by  one  of  his  intimate  associates,  but  I 
can  safely  affirm  that  the  contents  of  this  volume  are  Wyclifite 
if  not  Wyclif’s  ;  that  they  represent  the  views  which  he  main¬ 
tained,  rarely  if  ever  coloured  by  the  exaggerations  of  the  later 
and  more  violent  Lollards. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  a  certain  sameness  which 
makes  these  tracts  rather  tiresome  to  read  continuously.  Yet 
any  one  who  does  so  will  be  rewarded  now  and  then  by  touches 
which  depict,  sometimes  humorously,  the  manners  of  the  time. 
The  bad  side  of  the  friar  is  shown  to  us  under  many  aspects  ; 
as  a  pardoner  with  stolen  bulls  and  false  relics  (p.  154),  as  a 
pedlar  carrying  ornaments  or  pet  dogs  as  presents  to  ladies  who 
were  sure  to  return  his  gifts  with  interest  (p.  12),  or,  as  he 
was  more  generally  seen  upon  his  rounds,  accompanied  by  an 
“  Iscariot  into  whose  bag  was  poured  the  produce  of  his 
sturdy  begging,  while  he  evaded  the  rule  which  forbade  him  to 
touch  coin  by  counting  it  with  a  stick  or  wearing  gloves  (p.  49)  ; 
or,  lastly,  he  is  presented  to  us  as  an  interloping  preacher, 
crying  down  the  parish  priest  and  tickling  the  ears  of  the 
people  in  the  hope  of  a  good  collection  (pp.  443-445).  Else¬ 
where  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  frivolous  crowd  that  hung 
about  the  great  prelates  (as  about  other  noblemen),  dressed  in 
the  most  extravagant  fashions  of  the  day,  and  swearing  curious 
and  profane  oaths  unmeet  for  the  ears  of  their  patrons  (p.  38). 
Or  coming  to  the  parish  priests  we  may  see  by  the  vices  of 
which  they  are  accused — drunkenness,  lewdness,  and  gambling 
— that  the  prevailing  standard  of  morals  among  them  was  low, 
since  otherwise  such  reproaches  would  have  been  absurd  and 
ineffective.  It  may  perhaps  be  well  to  add  that  we  must  not 
look  here  for  a  fair  picture  of  friars  or  secular  clergy.  Men 
like  Wyclif  whose  mission  is  to  make  the  crooked  straight; 


PURPOSE  OF  THIS  VOLUME. 


xlix 


preacliers,  reformers,  prophets,  do  not  supply  us  with  an  im¬ 
partial  sketch  of  manners.  The  evils  against  which  they  strive 
engross  their  attention,  and  we  can  no  more  trust  to  their  de¬ 
lineations  than  to  those  of  a  satirist,  yet  they  are  full  of  instruc¬ 
tion  to  one  who  knows  how  to  read  them  with  due  allowance.^ 

Even  on  matters  that  are  not  ecclesiastical  we  have  some 
notices  of  interest.  The  complaints  of  jury-packing  (p  182), 
and  perversion  of  justice  (p  247),  of  extortionate  taxation  and 
seizure  of  goods  in  exchange  for  worthless  tally  sticks,  of  serf¬ 
dom  enforced  unjustly  (pp.  233,  234) ;  all  these  show  us  how 
the  weak  had  to  suffer,  and  how  much  food  was  daily  given  to 
that  fire  of  indignation  which  after  long  smouldering  broke 
forth  in  the  wild  rebellion  of  the  peasants. 

I  have  yet  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the  purpose  and  plan  of 
this  volume.  My  object  has  been  to  complete  the  publication 
of  Wyclif’s  English  works.  With  this  view  I  have  printed  all 
the  tracts  enumerated  in  Dr.  Shirley’s  Catalogue  that  were 
omitted  by  Mr.  Arnold,  except  when  there  is  a  strong  balance 
of  evidence  against  their  authenticity.  The  exceptions  are  : — 
No  1.  A  collection  of  sermons  ascribed  to  Wyclif  only  by  a 
guess  of  Dr.  Yaughan  ;  ^  Nos  6-9.  Commentaries  on  the  Gospels 
and  the  Apocalypse,  which  are  by  a  later  writer  ;  ^  No.  11,  parts 
1  and  7,  which  are  shown  by  Mr.  Arnold  to  be  by  another 
author.^  With  regard  to  No.  48,  I  think,  with  Mr.  Arnold, 
that  it  is  not  Wyclif’ s,  and  I  have  left  it  out  with  less  hesita¬ 
tion  since  it  has  been  printed  by  Dr.  Todd.^ 

Of  the  pieces  that  are  printed  here,  De  Officio  Pastorali  ”  and 
“De  Papa”  (Shirley  61  and  62)  are  undoubtedly  genuine,  but 
were  out  of  Mr.  Arnold’s  reach  at  the  time  his  book  was  brought 
out.  The  rest  of  the  volume  consists  of  his  leavings.  On  questions 

1  I  am  setting  down  truisms,  but  Mr.  Arnold  is  so  seyere  upon  "Wyclif  for  bis 
pnesidedness  that  I  feel  bound  to  apologize  lest  I  incur  tbe  same  condemnation. — S. 
E.  W.  iii.  ix. 

2  See  note  in  Shirley’s  Catalogue  and  S.  E.  W.  i.  p.  iii. 

3  S.  E.  W.  i.  p.  iv.  and  Lechler,  i.  440  (i.  334  English  edition). 

^  S.  E.  W.  iii.  p.  vi.  There  are  bits  inserted,  which  may  probably  be  by  Wyclif. 
The  piece  will  be  edited  for  this  Society  by  Canon  Simmons  among  his  Lay  Folks’ 
Catechisms. 

^  Three  treatises  by  John  Wycklyffe,  D.D.,  Dublin  1851. 

e 


1 


METHOD  OF  EDITING. 


of  gemiineness  and  interest,  whicli  have  to  be  determined  by 
internal  evidence,  it  is  impossible  that  any  two  students  should 
be  exactly  in  accord,  and  it  is  not  for  me  to  complain  that  the 
gleanings  left  for  me  are  scarcely  less  worth  than  the  harvest 
which  Mr.  Arnold  gathered.  Some  of  these  tracts,  e.g.  ‘‘On 
Feigned  Contemplative  Life  ”  (No.  X.),  and  “  On  Servants  and 
Lords’^  (No.  XY.),  seem  to  me  to  be  above  the  average  even  of 
his  third  volume  in  interest. 

As  to  the  method  pursued  in  editing,  several  tracts  are  from 
unique  copies,  and  required  only  careful  transcription  and  cor¬ 
rection  of  the  press.  Where  two  or  more  MSS.  gave  me  the 
opportunity  of  collation,  I  have  not  attempted  to  note  mere 
differences  of  spelling,  lest  I  should  encumber  the  page  with 
footnotes  and  references  to  an  intolerable  degree.  Whenever 
it  was  possible  I  have  kept  the  reading  of  the  MS.  which  has 
served  as  groundwork,  giving  the  alternatives  in  the  note,  and 
have  corrected  the  text  only  where  I  thought  there  could  be  no 
doubt  it  was  faulty.  I  have  given  in  the  margin  the  references 
for  texts  quoted  by  Wyclif,^  but  I  have  not  tried  to  trace  home 
his  many  quotations  from  the  Fathers,  etc. 

In  the  notes  I  have  adduced  some  parallel  passages  from  the 
Latin  works.  It  would  have  been  easy  to  add  many  from  the 
English  sermons  and  tracts  already  published  ;  but  as  my  object 
was  to  show  the  resemblance  of  the  text  to  Wyclif’s  authentic 
writings,  I  have  drawn  by  preference  from  the  Latin,  as  their 
genuineness  is  unquestionable.  An  additional  motive  for  this 
course  is  that  the  Latin  works  are  for  the  most  part  less  readily 
available  than  the  English,  and  for  a  similar  reason  I  have 
taken  as  much  as  possible  from  MSS.,  in  the  hope  that  if  my 
quotations  should  not  seem  to  the  point,  their  insertion  may  be 
excused  by  their  intrinsic  interest. 

I  must  not  omit  to  acknowledge  the  kindness  which  has  made 
my  work  possible.  For  the  loan  of  MSS.  I  have  to  thank  His 
Gfrace  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  Provost  and  Fellows 
of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  and  the  Eight  Hon.  the  Earl  of 

^  When  the  verse  number  is  in  brackets,  e.g.  Luke  x.  [7],  the  reference  to  the 
chapter  is  given  in  the  MS. 


THANKS  FOR  ASSISTANCF.  li 

Asliburnliam.  The  use  of  the  Ashhurnham  MS.  has  been 
doubly  valuable  to  me,  both  as  enabling  me  to  add  two  import¬ 
ant  and  authentic  tracts,  and  as  giving  me  an  opportunity  of 
studying  the  Latin  tracts  contained  in  it,  many  of  them  unique. 
The  strict  regulations  binding  on  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi 
College,  Cambridge,  do  not  allow  of  the  loan  of  MSS.,  but  I 
have  much  reason  to  be  grateful  to  Mr.  Lewis,  the  Librarian, 
for  affording  the  utmost  facility  in  the  use  of  the  MS.  from 
which  most  of  the  tracts  in  this  volume  are  copied. 

I  have  also  to  thank  Professor  Atkinson  of  Trinity  College, 
Dublin,  and  Mr.  S.  J.  Herrtage  for  generous  assistance,  and 
especially  my  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Furnivall,  without  whose 
encouragement  my  task  would  not  have  been  undertaken,  and 
whose  ready  helpfulness  has  been  most  useful  to  me 
throughout. 


p  »  * 


'x: 


If' 


•Jf, 


f 

t  • 


..  • 


J 


'  V 


-  . 

-if-  ■ 


’<■»  •5 

'  '  '.■' 'iL' 


K 


‘■  Y  •-  • 


/ 


^1* 


I 


•  ». 


L 


>' 


'  V-  ■■■ 


.»  >  -  V  -'  .  - 

V  ”  ‘  ■' 


« 


*  s 


\ 


COEEECTIOjSTS. 


Page  8,  1.  33 

for 

takis 

read 

talis. 

P.  21,  1.  1 

?  j 

Wtt/i 

w7t7o 

P.  22,  1.  19 

> } 

pat 

j; 

J^at. 

P.  30,  1.  14 

) } 

^ritti 

n 

|»ritti. 

P.  46,  1.  25 

)) 

]7ertyneJ? 

>  > 

pertyne]^ 

P.  80,  1.  19 

>  j 

pouj 

>  > 

>oup 

P.  129,  1.  1 

)  > 

leuyng 

>> 

lenyng. 

P.  218,  1.  11,  margin 

}} 

Eccles 

>  > 

Ecclus. 

P.  224,  1.  28 

} ) 

jjart 

> ) 

13art. 

P.  286,  margin 

>> 

Jod  X.  9 

>  > 

Job  X.  4. 

P.  334,  1.  5 

>> 

disceyeud 

>> 

disceyued. 

P.  350,  1.  13,  dele  full  stop  after  hope. 

P.  400,  1.  8,  insert  comma  after  vermis. 

P.  425,  1.  33,  dele  full  stop  after  clede. 

P.  497.  Note  on  undren.  Canon  Simmons  has  kindly  sent  me 
some  quotations  from  “  The  Seven  Canonical  Hours  of  Prayer  in  the 
Anglo-Saxon  Church,”  1715,  which  show  that  undern  originally 
meant  tierce^  however  loosely  it  was  used  later.  The  word  was 
growing  antiquated  in  Wyclif’s  time.  It  occurs  four  times  in  the 
first  version  of  the  Pible,  but  is  always  omitted  in  the  second. 


WYCLIF’S  ENGLISH  TRACTS. 


I. 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHAEISEES. 


ViTH  regard  to  this  tract,  as  with  many  that  follow,  I  can  give  no 
decided  opinion  as  to  authorship.  I  find  it  monotonous  and  poor  in 
style,  but  in  substance  it  contains  nothing  that  may  not  be  Wyclif’s, 
while  there  is  so  much  of  his  characteristic  teaching  that  it  must  he 
by  one  of  his  intimate  disciples  if  not  by  himself.  The  reference  to 
Bishop  Spencer’s  crusade  (p.  8)  shows  that  it  was  written  about  1383. 
In  some  parts  it  very  much  resembles  the  Fifty  Heresies  and  Errors  of 
Friars,  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold,  No.  xxrv.  Compare  especially  pp.  14,  15, 
with  Chapter  xvii.  of  the  Fifty  Heresies  (S.  E.  W.  III.  280). 

There  is  a  lively  description  in  Chap.  in.  of  the  tricks  of  the  friars, 
which  agrees  well  with  Chaucer’s  description  of  his  friar,  whose 

typet  was  aye  farsed  fuU  of  knyfes 
And  pynnes  for  to  give  faire  wyfes. 

The  touch  about  their  making  friends  with  women  by  giving  them 
pet  dogs  (p.  12)  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  peculiar  to  this  tract. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.,  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 

SUMMAEY. 


Chap.  I. 

II. 

.  III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 


Christ  commands  us  to  flee  the  leaven  of  Pharisees,  who  belonged  to  a 
singular  religion.  The  Eeligious  of  these  days  are  like  them. 

Proofs  of  hypocrisy.  Their  pride,  envy,  persecution  of  true  preachers, 
covetousness,  self-indulgence,  and  unchastity. 

How  they  offend  against  each  of  the  Ten  Commandments. 

How  they  do  the  contrary  of  the  works  of  bodily  mercy. 

How  they  do  the  contrary  of  the  works  of  spiritual  mercy. 

How  they  fail  in  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity. 

The  duty  of  exposing  their  wickedness. 

Cowardice  and  falseness  prevalent  among  all  classes.  Faults  of  priests. 
Faults  of  Lords. 

Faults  of  Commons. 

The  faults  of  the  Eeligious  are  much  the  worst. 


1 


2 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  I. 


Attendite  a  fermento  phariseorwm  c^uod  est  ypocrisis 

Jjucce,  12°. 

Capitulum  -prmum. 


Christ’s  com-  Crist  comandib  to  his  disciplis  and  to  alle  cristene  men  to 

the  leaven  of  vndirstonde  &  flee  be  sowrdow  of  pharisees,  be  wiche  is 
Pharisees,  .  .  ,  ^  ^  . 

who  were  men  of  ypocrisie.  Pirst  pharisees  been  men  of  synguler  religioun 
g  ar  religion,  synful  men,  biside  ]>e  ordynaunce  of  god  ]>at  is 

tan^t  in  holi  writ.  And  yn  cristes  tyme  j^ere  weren  ]?re 

sectes  of  ordres  founden  of  mannys  ordinaunces,  as  pharisees, 

saduces  and  esseis.  of  two  fe  flrste  mathew  spekef  in  his 

gospel.  And  of  Je  fridde  spekef  Je  maister  of  stories.  The 

flrste  two  weren  grete  men  of  name  and  hauynge,  and  weren 

and  enemies  to  stronge  enemyes  to  crist  &  his  lawe,  and  disceyueden  be  peple 
Christ,  .  .  . 

by  ypocrisie,  &  weren  ful  coueitous.  And  j^erfore  Seint 
so  that  Christ  Joon  baptist  &  crist  clepede  hem  ypocretis  &  si^rpentis  and 

called  them  .  ^  ^  J  r  r 

hypocrites,  and  addir  kyndles,  &  jhu  cursede  hem  ofte,  jee  eijte  tymes,  as  J^e 

CllTS0d 

gospel  sei]?.  But  crist  louede  &  sauede  sumwe  gode  men  of 
Exceptions.  hem,  as  nicodeme  &  poul,  &  broujte  hem  out  of  her  ordris 
to  fredom  of  j^e  gospel  &  distroied  j^ese  ordris,  as  holi  writ 
Religious  o’ffiers  sei]?.  And  ^if  oure  newe  religious  ben  in  J^ese  same  synnys, 


are  like 
Pharisees. 


as  ful  of  coueitise  &  ypocrisie,  &  stryuen  ^ajens  ]>e  fredom  of 

gospel  &  cristis  lif  &  his  apostlis,  j^ei  ben  cursid  of  god ; 

and  ]7ei  shullen  be  broujt  out  of  here  ordris  maad  of  synful 

men  &  broujt  clenly  to  ]7e  gospel  &  fredom  of  cristis  ordre, 

for  it  is  most  p^rfit  &  most  esi  to  Wynne  heuene  by  &  most 

sikir,  for  most  myjt,  most  wisdom,  &  most  charite  of  jhu 

crist  fat  made  it  and  made  nou^t  f ise  newe  ordris.  And  pf 

They  are  not  bei  haddew  be  needful  or  profitable  he  wolde  haue  maad  hem 
founded  or  sane- 


tioned  by  Christ,  by  hym  silf  or  by  his  apostelis,  or  teld  in  holi  writ  bi  what 

man  &  what  tyme  f  ei  shulden  haue  come  in ;  but  nou^t  of  al 

Sufficiency  of  bis  is  founden  in  holi  writ,  in  wich  is  al  nedful  and  profltable 
holy  writ.  ^ 

They  are  under  ordynaunce  of  holi  chirche  ;  &  f orfore  al  fis  nouelrie  of 
pocrisy”*^  ordris  is  suspect  of  ypocrisie  &  luciferis  pride  and  blasfemye 


Chap,  L] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


3 


of  antecristis  ypocrisie.  last  men  doon  ]?is  nouelrie  for  vein 
glorie  &  for  getynge  more  plentifousli  of  wordli  godis  bi 
abite  &  o]7er  sygnes  of  holinesse  ;  si]7]7e  j^ei  my^ten  lyue  as 
plesandeli  to  god  &  as  moche  profit  to  holi  chirche,  and  full! 
ocupie  al  f  e  myitis  boj^e  of  soule  &  body  be  clene  religionn 
pat  crist  made  hym  self  to  his  disciplis  &  prestis  as  bi  ]7ese 
nouelries  maad  of  ydiotis  &  synful  wrecchis  of  lucifers  pr«de ; 
for  bei  ben  taken  as  holier  men  &  holden  hem  self  more  They  pnde  them - 

■»  selves  more  on 

worfi  for  fise  newe  ordinaunces  of  her  owen  fonnyd  heuedis,  than 

pat  letten  hem  from  pe  better  ocupacioun,^  '^'J’an  for  clennesse  “p®^2^lcorp.*^] 
of  cristis  ordre,  ]70uj  ]7ei  semen  ^  neuore  so  porfitly  crist 
in  holy  lyuyng  and  trewe  techyng  wi]?oute  j^is  newe  pro¬ 
fessions  and  cermonyes,  pe  whiche  crist  and  his  apostlis 
diden  neuore  ne  taujten  in  al  holy  writ.  It  is  a  fendis  pride 
a  synful  creature  to  putte  defautte  in  fe  ordynausce  of  crist, 
seiynge  in  word  or  dede  J^at  crist  tau^te  not  his  disciplis  and  defective, 
his  pr(9stes  pe  beste  ordre  and  religious,  but  lefte  pe  beste 
ordre  bihynde  a  ]?ousand  jeer  and  more  til  sathanas  was  vn- 
bousden  to  desceyue  men  bi  lesyngis  and  ypocnsie,  and  sij^en 
crist  made  and  taujte  pe  beste  religious,  it  is  a  stynkynge 
pride  of  luciferis  children  to  leue  pe  betre,  and  constreyne 
men  to  leue  pe  hetere,  and  take  and  nede  men  to  holde  toipe 
pe  worse.  Of  blasphemye,  for  ]?es  newe  religious  seyn  in 
word  or  dede  j^at  crist  myjt  not,  coude  not,^  or  wolde  not  teche 
cristen  men  pe  beste  religion  to  Wynnes  heuene  by ;  and  jif 

Ms  be  sob  crist  was  not  god,  for  basne  he  was  oute  of  charite.  and  thus  that  he 
^  ^ .  .  .  .  .  was  not  God. 

And  in  ]7is  same  j^ei  seyn  priueily  |>at  a  synful  ydiot  was 

more^  wis  and  fullere  of  charite  j^an  ihu  crist,  si]?  bi  hem  ]?is 

synful  ydiot  jaf  and  vsed  a  betere  religious  pan  enere  dide 

crist  god  almyjty.  ypocrisie  is  a  fals  feynyng  of  holynes 

whan  it  is  not  in  trewbe  bifore  god,  and  so  ypocrisie  is  fully  Hypocrisy  most 

^  °  ^  ^  ^  ^  opposite  to 

contrarie  to  crist,  pat  is  trew]?e  as  j?e  gospel  teche]?,  and  it  is  Christ,  who  is 

vl/UblX* 

comusly  pe  moste  perylous  synne  of  alle.  Por  comusly 
an  ypocrite  dop  neuere  verrey  penausce,  for  trist  pat  he  has 

^  Tip  to  this  point  is  copied  from  A  A,  as  the  text  in  X  is  illegible  from  damp. 

2  suwen  AA.  3  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


4 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  II. 


Hypocrites  the 
worst  thieves. 


in  his  owen  holy  feyned  lif  and  for  likyng  of  veyne  glorie 
and  for  wy/^nynge  of  worldly  goodis  ;  and  ypocritis  ben  most 
cursed  before  al  Q>\er  J>eues,  for  j^ei  ben  j^eues  of  goodis  of 
grace  and  dysceyuen  o]7er  men  in  goodis  of  v^rtu,  \at  ben 
betere  j^an  goodis  of  fortune  or  goodis  of  kynde,  and  as  a  ]7ing 
is  hetere  so  j^e  mysusyng  ]7er-of  is  more  dampnable,  as  lyncolne 
and  oj>er  clerkis  prouen  ;  and  per  fore  crist  in  |>e  gospel 
cursid  so  ofte  ypocritis  more  J^an  of^re  synful  men. 


Capitulum  2“- 


Tests  of  hypo 
crisy : 


See  now  wbej^^r  our^  religious  jjis  day  ben  ypocritis. 

^if  ])ei  bynden  hem  self  hi  berte,  word  and  sygnes  to  moste 
mekenesse  after  crist  and  bis  apostelis,  and  pt  ben  most 


pride  in  worldly  proudc  of  worldly  goodes,  of  beaute,  of  welscbap,  of  strengbe 

goods, 

of  body,  of  connyng,  of  worldly  and  flescbly  frenscbipe,  of 
*[p.  3MS,]  kyn,  and  of  bolynesse  ^of  ber^  singuler  religion,  j^an  ben  |>ei 
moost  cursed  and  synful  ypocritis. 


^if  ]7ei  maken  hem  self  in  sijte  of  peple  more  boli  ^  j^an  opere 
boasting  of  men  and  bosten  J’ereof  in  owtward  signes  or  wordes,  as  morn- 
speciai  holiness,  abite,  lettris  of  frat^rnite,  pat  crien  beri?  bolynesse  and 

synguler  deuocions  bifor  men,  and  bibynde  ceesen  of ;  and  do 
]7is  for  worldely  wynnyng  and  veyn  glorie,  and  preisen  more 
here  owen  longe  preieris  j^an  oper  mennus,^  pei  ben  j^an  foule 
ypocritis. 

^  bynden  bem  to  most  charite  and  ];er  wi]?  ben  in 


envy  among 
themselves  and 
hatred  of  true 
teachers, 


gret  enuye  amongis  bem  self,  and  ban  dispitt  and  indignacion  of 
good  lyf  and  trewe  techyng  of  cristis  gospel  pat  symple  men 
don  out  of  here  ordre,  ]?es  ben  perilous  ypocritis  and  cursed 


of  god  for  defaute  of  charite. 


delight  in  mis-  ^if  j^ci  ben  glad  of  here  enemys  myslyuyng  or  tecbynge,  to 
otheL,*^^”^  lette  j^er-by  men  to  tecbe  frelicbe  goddis  lawe,  ]?ei  ben  cwrsed 
ypocritis. 


^if  J’ei  bynden  bem  to  most  pacience  and  mercy  and  per 


^  omitted  X. 

2  The  MS.  contraction-mark  is  that  for  -us,  though  ‘  mannes’  occurs  on  p.  30,1.  22,  and 
in  the  first  two  sheets  at  least,  all  the  other  noun  flexions,  except  this  ‘  mennws  ’  (or 
‘mannws’)  are  in  ‘is,’  ‘ys’  or  ‘es.’ 


Chap.  II.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHAKISEES. 


5 


wy]?  haten  and  ben  woode  wro]?  yfiih  men  j^at  trewly  dispisen 

synne  and  repronen  here  ypocresie,  and  pursuen  hem  cruely  persecution  of 

those  that  preach 

and  with  ont  mercy  J^at  frely  and  sadly  techyn  |>e  gospel  and  the  Gospel, 

J>e  comauwdements  of  god  wherby  here  symonye  and  ypocrisie 
is  more  knowen  of  ]>e  peple,  Jeanne  j^ei  ben  cruel  ypocntis. 

^if  fei  pursuen  trwe  men  for  techyng  of  fe  gospel,  and  seyn 
])eYe  wi]?  ]7at  ]7ei  pursuen  hem  for  errours  j^at  ]?ei  seyn  openly 
to  ]>e  peple  when  j^ei  lien  &  falsly  sclauwdren  trewe  men, 
but  ]7e  pursuyt  is  maad  for  pr^stes  techyng  men  where  )?ei 
schuUen  do  her*?  almes  to  her^  moste  nedy  nei^bores  aft^r  fe 
gospel ;  fan  be  f ei  cwrsed  ypocritis. 

f  ei  maken  pr^latis  and  lordis,  bi  here  fals  flateryng  encouraging  ^ 
and  lesyngis  in  confessions  and  preuei  conseils,  to  lette  prestis  g^eacMng  of  the 
to  preche  goddis  lawe  and  to  lette  f e  peple  to  knowe  and  to 
kepe  fe  comauwdemewtis  of  god,  lest  freris  ypocrisie  and 
wynny[n]g  be  stoppid  and  fe  peples  almes  bet^re  spendid, 
fanne  be  fei  cwrsed  ypocritis. 

U  iif  fei  come  in  to  fe  chirche  to  holde  and  meyntene  f  e 
poU(?rt  of  crist  and  his  apostelis  and  bynden  hem  f  er  to,  and 
fer  with  ben  most  coueitouse  abouten  worldely  goodis,  summe  covetousness 

■’  under  pretence 

aboute  temporal  almes  nedles  and  summe  aboute  worldely  of  poverty, 
lordyschype,  bi  ypocrisie  and  lesyngis  and  flat^ryngs,  f  ei  ben 
fan  trecherous  ypocritis  and  perilous  enemys  of  crist  and  his 
chirche. 

f  ei  maken  profession  to  most  hey  pouort  and  to  be  *[p.  4  ms.] 
deed  to  fe  world  and  worldely  f ingis,  and  wif  f is  stryuen 
ny]t  and  day  who  of  hem  may  bilde  gaiest  wast  housis  and  building  of  gay 

houses, 

costly  places,  as  chirchis  or  castelis  to  herberwen  lordis  iwne 
and  ladyes,  and  beggen  of  pore  men  f er-to  fat  ban  noujt  to 
lyuen  by  ne  here  children,  fei  ben  perilous  ypocritis  and 
dysceyuen  riche  and  poore. 

^if  fei  ordeynen  ydiotis  to  ben  lymytowrs  fat  best  kuwnyn 
begge,  and  holde  goode  men  and  kuwnyng  in  holy  writt  fro 
prechynge,  and  disceyuen  men  bi  pardons,  lettris  of  fraternite  deceiving  men 

by  pardons  and 

and  priuat  preieris  for  to  geten  worldely  muk  more  fan  letters  of  fra- 
soule  helfe,  fanne  be  fei  fals  ypocritis  and  worschipen 
false  maummetis. 


6 


or  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  II. 


luxury  in  houses, 
vessels  and  food, 


neglect  of 
preaching, 


studying  law 
instead  of  holy 
writ, 


indulgence  in 
rich  food. 


Phil.  iii.  19. 

encouraging 
lords  in  oppress¬ 
ing  their  tenants, 


fornication  and 
adultery. 


*[p.  5  MS.] 
sodomy. 


The  devil  brings 
together  such 
‘  lumps  ’  of 


1  ]7ei  bynden  bem  to  traueile  faste  and  techyng  of  j^e 
gospel  frely,  as  crist  and  his  apostelis  diden,  and  her-wi]? 
ordeynen  costly  chambris  and  beddis  and  siluerene  vessel  and 
gay  clojies  and  costly  mete  and  drink,  as  knyjttis,  baronns 
or  erlis,  and  pri^chyn^  not  but  onys  or  Juries  in  ]?e  jeer  bi- 
fore  grete  lordis  and  comuwtees  for  veyn  glorie  or  worldely 
wynnyng,  |>ei  be  Jeanne  ypocntis  at  ]?e  fulle. 

^if  jiei  traueilen  faste  in  aristole^  and  newe  sophymes  to  ben 
clepyd  maistres,  and  |>an  traueilen  not  in  holy  writt  but  veyn 
pleies  &  corioustees,  and  excusen  hem  her-bi  fro  preiynge  and 
rysynge  at  mydnyjt,  j^ei  ben  ypocritis  ;  for  J^ei  dow  not  goddis 
Si9puyce  in  hem  selfe  but  drawen  o)>ere  men  ]7er-fro. 

^if.  ]7ei  bynden  hem  to  grete  penauwce  and  abstynence  of 
mete  and  drynk  and  per-of  bosten  to  pQ  peple,  and  \iere-wiih 
seken  lustys  of  costly  metis  and  drynkis,  and  bien  hem 
derrere  I’an  lordis  don,  and  dwellen  in  courtis  with  lordes 
and  ladies  to  feden  heri?  bely  faat,  and  leuen  her^  deuocions 
of  cloistre,  |»ei  ben  foul  ypocritis,  for  j^ei  maken  here 
stynkynge  bely  here  false  god  as  seynt  poule  sei]?. 

j^ei  plesen  lordes  and  ladies  in  synne  and  couwforten 
horn  to  don  extorcions  to  here  pore  tenauwtes  and  to  meyn- 
tene  false  causes  for  to  haue  lykyngis  of  here  foule  wombe ; 
]7ei  ben  wickid  ypocritis  and  robberis  of  poore  men  and 
traitours  to  lordes  and  ladyes. 

^  ]if  ]7ei  bynde  hem  self  to  dene  chastite  bo]7e  of  body  and 
soule  and  of  dede  and  wille,  and  here-wi]?  don  foruycaciouw 
and  auoutr^'e  wi]i  wyues  and  nonnes,  and  slen  worn  men  pat 
w«t^-stonden  ^'hem  in  ]7is  synne  ;  j7ei  ben  foule  ypocritis. 

If  pei  don  j^e  cursed  synne  of  sodom  wi]?  hem  self,  and 
seyn  to  nyse  wymmen  pat  it  is  lesse  sywne  to  trespase  with 
hem  fan  w^tA  ofere  weddid  men,  and  vndir  taken  for  pQ 
synne  of  j^e  womraen,  and  norischen  ryche  men  and  wymmer^ 
in  lecherie  and  in  auoutree  for  monye  and  to  haue  here  owne 
lustis  ;  pei  ben  cursid  ypocritis  and  distroien  cristendom. 
It  seme]?  pe  deuyl  gedre]?  siche  lumpis  of  jonge  men,  fatte 
^  omitted  X.  ^  Aristotile  AA. 


Chap.  Ill,] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


7 


and  lykynge  and  ydyl,  and  byndib  hem  fro  wyues,  ])at  men  young  men  to  in- 

.  .  crease  adultery. 

myjten  haue  hi  goddis  lawe,  to  maken  false  heiris  and  to 
for-do  ])Q  kynde  of  men  and  so  make  erj^e  cursed  of  god 
and  alle  his  seyntis.  And  ]7us  J^ei  ben  ypocritis  moste  damp- 
nable  bi-for  god. 

H  lif  pei  seyn  pat  pel  ben  most  holy  and  best  men  of 
religion,  and  per  wi}*  lyuen  in  most  pride,  most  enuye  and 
■wra|>e,  in  most  coueitise  and  ydilnesse,  in  most  glotone, 
dronkennesse,  or  surfet  and  leccherie.^ 


CapUulum  3“- 

See  now  where  pei  breken  falsly  alle  J^e  comauwdemewtis  how  they  break 
01  god*  ^11  pel  cnesyn  to  be  reulid  more  ait^r  pe  ordynau7^ce  ments* 
of  synful  men  and  ydiotis  j^an  aft^r  pe  dene  ordynau^ce  of  i.  They  worship 
crist,  and  seyn  |>at  synful  mennws  ordynauwce  is  before  and  setting  men’s 
sikerere  for  men  and  mor^  p^rfit  |>an  is  pe  dene  ordynauwce  Christ’s, 
of  crist ;  j^ei  worschipen  false  goddis  and  ben  heretikys  and 
blasphemes ;  and  so  ])ei  breken  j^e  first  mauwdement  of  god. 

^if  ]7ei  dreden  more  and  ponyschen  more  for  brekynge  of 
synful  me?^nes  contradicions  j^an  for  com auwde mentis  of  god 
cursedly  broken,  and  studien  and  louen  more  her^  priuat 
reulis  |>an  pe  hestis  of  god,  ]7ei  worschepen,  louen  and  dreden 
more  synful  men,  and  in  caas  dampnyd  deuelis,  j^an  god 
almy^ti.  for  as  austyn  sei]?  a  man  maki]?  fat  fing  his  god  Austyn. 
f  e  whiche  he  dredif  most  or  louef  most. 

^  ]if  f  ei  chargen  men  more  to  seke  blynde  stockys  or  ymagis  They  set  more 
and  to  offre  to  hem  more  fan  to  pore  bedrede  men  and  more  images  than 

^  ^  keeping  God’s 

fan  to  charge  goddis  hestis;  fei  worschipen  false  goddis.  commands, 
for  f ou^  a  man  broke  goddis  hestis  fei  wole  soone  and  lijtly 
assoile  him,  but  pf  he  make  a  vow  to  a  blynd  pylgrymage  or  Pilgrimages, 
to  sende  his  oflPrynge  to  siche  a  stok ;  fat  schal  not  be  dis- 
pensid  wif  but  reserued  to  a  grettere  satrap.  And  in  f is  fei 
chargen  more  f  e  brekynge  of  a  folie  a-vow  of  synful  men  fan 
f  e  brekynge  of  goddis  "^^estis ;  but  whef  ere  is  more  ydolatrie  ?  *[p.  q  ms.] 

1  Probably  there  should  follow  “  ]?ei  ben  cursid  ypocritis,”  unless  the  preceding  clause 
is  to  be  taken  as  part  of  the  sentence.  But  in  both  MSS.  it  is  distinctly  marked  off. 


8 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  III. 


faiseiy^\o  ^draw  ^  sweren  in  veyn  and  many  false  o]?is  to  bigile  jonge 

children  to  her^  veyn  religion,  sweryng  j^at  it  is  ]>e  beste; 
who  taki]?  'pe  name  of  god  in  more  ydelnesse  and  more 
dispitt?  ]if  ]7ei  taken  pe  charge  to  ben  trewe  vikeris  or 
sernauntis  of  crist  and  j^er-wi]?  taken  vpon  hem  falsly  j^at 
]7inge  pat  is  reserued  to  god  only,  as  to  make  men  partyners 
Letters  of  frater- of  her (9  medeful  dedis,  and  to  graunte  hem  be  blisse  of 

iiity  and  indul¬ 
gences  for  the  heuene  and  pardon  to  slee  cristen  men  for  to  meyntene 

crusade. 

worldely  lordschip  and  coueitise  of  pat  prist  pat  schulde 
be  most  meke,  most  pore,  most  redy  to  dye  for  cristen  mennws 
soulis  ;  who  taki|>  more  cursidly  pQ  name  of  god  in  veyn  ? 
They  undertake  II  Jei  vndirtaken  to  brynge  soules  out  of  purgatorie  bi 
of  purgatory  for  heri?  preiers  and  here  to  receyuen  myche  gold  or  rentis,  and 

money. 

per -wip  lyuen  in  pride,  enuye  and  operQ  grete  synnes ;  who 
taki]?  more  goddis  name  in  veyn,  and  more  cursidly  dis- 
Lukeyi.  46.  ccyuc]?  cHsteu  men?  ^  For  crist  sei]?  to  siche  men  in  pe 
gospel  of  seynt  luk :  What  seie  jee  to  me  lord  I  lord !  and 
Matth.  XV.  8.  don  not  my  comauwdementis ;  and  \n  pe  gospel  of  matheu 
sei]?  crist  pat  siche  ypoaritis  worschipen  him  wi]?  outen 
Prov.xxviii.  [9.]  cause ;  and  by  Salomons  bok  sei]?  god  j^at  his  preiere  is  cursid 
and .  abhomynable  pat  turnep  a  wey  his  eris  J^at  he  herg  not 
MaM  ]‘^  goddis  lawe  ;  and  also  bi  pe  prophete  ysaie  and  malachie  and 
austyn  and  gregory  and  many  moo. 

HI.  They  use  the  ^  ^if  bci  maken  hem  besi  on  be  holy  day  to  preche  fablis 

holiday  to  preach  u  i  j  ^  X  Jr 

fables  and  to  beg.  and  lesyngis  to  pe  peple  and  not  J^e  gospel,  and  gon  fro 
place  to  place  and  fro  man  to  man  to  begge  of  por(0  men  for 
here  false  lesyngis,  and  letten  men  fro  here  deuocioua ;  ]?ei 
They  draw  people  kepen  not  wel  here  holiday.  ^  ^if  bei  drawen  be  peple  in  be 

to  church  to  ad-  ^  Jll/j  X  x  r  X 

Sows  ?tc  ^and  coryouste  of  gaye  wyndownes  and  colours  and 

not  to  repent.  peyntyngis  and  babwynrie  fro  conpul^^ccion  of  here  synnes 
and  fro  ihynde  of  heuenely  )7inges,  and  fede  riche  men  wi]? 
pore  mennws  goodis,  wi|?  costly  metis  and  wynes  and  wast 
spicerie  to  glotonye,  dronkenesse,  lecherie,  and  weiward  takis, 
and  suffren  pore  men  hungry  and  J^risti  and  in  gret  mischef ; 
pei  kepen  euyl  here  holyday  and  letten  opere  men  to  kepen 
it.  ^  Jif  ]7ei  studien  on  pe  holy  day  aboute  exp^rymentis  or 


Chap.  Ill  ] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


9 


wiche  craft  ^  veyn  songis  and  ^  knackynge  and  harpynge, 
gyternynge  &  daunsynge  &  o])ere  veyn  triflis  to  geten  j^e 
stynkyng  lone  of  damyselis,  and  stere  hem  to  worldely 
vanyte  and  synnes ;  Jei  breken  foule  per  holyday  and  ben 
procuratours  of  J^e  fend. 

1  j^ei  worschipen  gretly  here  singuler  patroun  and  dis- 
pisen  god  J^e  trynite  and  ihu  crist  our(9  goode  fad^r,  when 
]?ei  putten  his  lawe  and  his  ordynanwce  bihynde ;  per 
worschipen  not  here  fadir  after  goodis  lawe.  ^if  j^ei  louen 
more  here  singulere  congregacion  J^an  J^e  comynte  of  cristen 
men,  j^ei  worschipen  not  bnt  dispisen  owr<?  modire  holy 
chirche.  pf  J7ei  drawen  parischenes  fro  obedience  and  lone 
&  ^  sacramentis  of  here  gostely  fadris  for  here  owne  wynnyng, 
as  in  confessions  and  beriynge  &  herynge^  of  massis  for 
offryng;  how  worschipen  ]7ei  and  techen  opere  to  worchipe 
here  gostli  fadris  ?  ^if  j^ei  drawen  children  fro  fadir  and 
modir  and  maken  hem  of  here  singulere  religious,  I’at  ]7ei 
may  not  susteyne  here  heldris  lif  be  j^ei  neuer  so  feble  and 
pore ;  how  worschipen  ]?ei  god  and  techen  childre  to  leue  pe 
mausdement  of  god  and  to  suffere  fadire  and  modir  to  perische 
for  feyned  obydience  to  synful  mannss  tradiciouss  ?  certis 
j^is  ilke  fals  religious  is  gilty  of  j^efte  and  manquellyng 
also,  si]7  he  is  cause  of  ]7e  old  pore  mannss  de]?. 

^  ^if  Jjei  haten  and  sclausdren  with  false  lesynges  trewe  men 
to  techen  frely  holy  writt  and  repreuen  synne,  and  namely 
ypocrisie,  and  falsly  pursuen  hem  to  pe  de}>,  j^ei  slen  hem, 
and  ioon  pe  euasngelist  seij?  as  to  here  dampnacion.  ]if  ]?ei 
conforten  men  to  slee  here  brej^ren  in  false  werris,  by  open 
prechynge  or  preuei  conseilynge,  or  vndirtakynge  for  false 
domesmen  pat  slen  innocent  men  for  coueityse  or  esmyte 
whasne  men  ^euen  hem  myche  tresoure ;  j^ei  ben  false 
menquelleris  and  most  gyltif  of  alle. 

^  ^if  j^ei  letten  curatis  and  poreprestis  to  techen  men  goddis 
lawe  bi  sotil  ypocrisie  and  sleijtis  of  an^fcristis  lawe,  for 


*[p.  7MS.] 

They  go  to 
dances  to  meet 
young  women. 


IV.  They  set 
their  patrons 
above  God,  who 
is  their  father, 


and  their  order 
above  their  mo¬ 
ther,  the  Church. 

They  draw  away 
parishioners 
from  their  spi¬ 
ritual  father  (the 
curate) . 


They  seduce 
children  from 
their  parents  to 
enter  the  orders. 


V.  They  hate, 
slander,  and  per¬ 
secute  true 
preachers. 


I  John  iii.  15. 

They  encourage 
men  to  slay  their 
brethren  in  war.  [ 


They  hinder  true 
preaching, 


omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  omitted  X. 


10 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  III. 


drede  lest  her^  ypocrisie  be  parceyued  and  her(9  wynnynge 
and  so  commit  and  Worldly  fame  leid  a-doun  ;  j^ei  ben  cursed  manquelleris, 
and  gylti  of  dampnacion  of  alle  ]7e  soulis  j^at  perischen  for 
le  defaute  of  kuwnynge  and  kepynge  of  goddis  comauwde- 
mentis. 


VI.  They  preach  lei  pr(9cben  principaly  for  worldeli  muk  or  veyn 

advantage^  and  glorie,  and  SO  precben  here  owne  sotiltes  to  be  preised  of 
adulterers.  men,  and  not  ^symply  and  pleynly  'pe  gospel  of  crist  for  bis 
glorie  and  sauyng  of  mennws  soulis ;  j^ei  don  gostely  lecherie 


bi  goddis  word  as  poul  sei]?. 

They  set  philo-  lei  seyn  and  meyntenen  in  scole  and  ol^re  placis  lat 

Hoiy^ Writ.  le  wordis  of  holy  writt  ben  false  and  man(9re  of  spekyng  of 

newe  idiotis  is  trewe,  lei  don  gostly  auoutrie  and  putten 
falsnesse  and  blasphemye  vpon  god ;  for  in  lat  lei  seyn  lat  an 
helene  philosofre  or  a  newe  synful  caitif  is  wittiere  and 
trewere  Ian  almy^ti  god,  je  lat  god  is  fals  and  a  foie  and  les 


helene  blasphemes  and  newe  dremeris  ben  trewe  and  witti. 

physic  they^om^  ^  feynen  hem  sotil  of  fisik  and  knowynge  of  wym- 

mit  adultery.  menys  comploxcion  and  preuyte,  seiynge  lat  siche  siknesse 

or  del  schal  com  to  hem  in  absence  of  her^  housbondis  but 
^if  lei  haue  mannws  helpe,  and  lus  defoulen  on  and  oler ; 
lei  breken  foule  lis  comauwdement  lat  biddil  men  do  no 
lecherie ;  and  in  lis  poynt  men  dreden  lat  les  pharisees 
geten  hem  moo  holderis  vp  for  here  putrie  Ian  for  here 
trewe  prechyng  or  holy  lyf. 


They  visit  wives 
when  the  hus¬ 
bands  are  away. 


^  Whanne  lordis  ben  fro  horn  in  werris,  in  iustis  and  par- 
lementis  and  in  dyuerse  lordschipis,  and  whanne  marchauwtis 


ben  out  of  lond  or  in  fer  cu^trees  for  her(?  marchauwdise,  and 


wha7^ne  plowmen  ben  al  day  in  le  feld  at  here  plowj  ore 
medes ;  Ian  les  pharisees  presen  faste  to  here  wyues  vnder 
colour  of  holynesse. 


VII.  They  steal  ^  ?if  l^i  stclen  mennws  children,  bole  gentyl  mennwe  and 

children  to  re-  i  r.  if  u  ^  j  i  i.  •  j  i? 

emit  their  order,  pore,  to  make  hem  01  here  synguler  ordre  lat  is  maad  of 

synful  men  and  confermyd,  &  in  cas  of  ^  deuelis  and  not  of 

god ;  lei  don  cursed  lefte  ajenst  le  seue[n]le  mauwdement  of 


^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  III.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


11 


god.  for  many  men  ben  drawen,  bi  lesynges  and  ^iftis  and 
so  by  symonye,  fro  j^e  bet^re  ordre  to  ]7e  werse  and  maad 
more  cursed  and  deppere  dampnyd  in  belle.  For  I’ouj 
children  ben  bronjt  be  lesyngis,  symonye  and  fals  bihestis 
in-to  ]?is  feyned  ordre  bifore  tyme  of  discrecion  and  ben  not 
able  fer-to,  ^it  fei  schulle  be  nedid  bi  peyne  of  dampnynge 
in  belle,  as  fei  seyn,  and  bi  drede  of  bodely  dej?  to  holde 
for]?  j’is  feyned  religion  a^enst  here  conscience  and  fredom 
of  be  gospel,  and  he  bat  most  stelib  children  to  bes  priuatis  Wickedness  and 

^  .  .  mischief  of  child 

ordris  is  most  preised  of  J?es  cursed  congregacion,  and  Jat  is  stealing. 

a  cwrsed  reward.  For  he  ]^at  stelij?  an  oxe  or  a  cowe  is  a 

j>ef  and  gretly  '^'peyned  bi  mannw5  lawe ;  myche  more  owip  *[p.  9  ms.] 

he  to  be  ponyschid  bo]7e  of  god  and  man  pat  stelij?  his  owne 

child,  pat  is  bet^re  ]?an  alle  worldely  goodis  ;  and  her(?-bi 

ben  gentil  mennus  heiris  distroied,  and  so  lordis  and  also 

laboreris  and  sumtyme  trewe  prestis  and  curatis  ben  made 

beggeris  and  lesyngmongeris  to  destruction  of  londis.  ]if 

]?ei  techen  wyues,  prentis,  s^ruauwtis  and  children  to  stele  They  teach  de- 

c  i.  -i.-  j  j  j-  j  pendents  to  steal 

tro  here  housbondis,  maistris  and  ladir  and  modir  and  ^euen  for  their  benefit, 
it  to  ]?es  pharisees,  as  hildegar  sei]?,  b^i  ben  perilous  be^ys  Hiidegar. 
to  make  discenciouw  among  manye.  ^if  bei  feynen  hem  nedy  They  feign  po- 

‘  verty  togetalms, 

and  pore  whanne  b^i  ben  ryche  and  proude,  and  beggen  of 

be  pore  peple,  and  maken  men  to  wene  bat  b^i  schulden  haue 

more  bank  of  god  to  ^eue  here  almes  to  riche  possessioners 

or  oper  ryche  pharisees  ban  to  jeuen  it  to  here  pore  neijbores 

as  crist  biddib  ;  b®^  foule  beues,  for  b^i  robben  pe  almes  and  so  rob  the 

^euere  bobe  of  feib,  of  worldely  catel,  and  pore  bedrede  men  ^ 

of  here  liflode. 

H  bei  putten  on  here  pore  brebren  pat  lyuen  wel  and 'v^hi.  They  ac- 

C11S6 

reprouen  hem  of  here  synnes  bat  bei  wolden  distroie  holy  , 

^  ./  /  /  j  wishing  to  de¬ 

religion,  and  here-fore  disceisen  hem  and  putten  hem  in  religion, 

prison,  and  sum  tyme  morbere  hem  ajenst  goddis  lawe  and 

be  kyngys  ;  bei  beren  false  wyttenesse  ajenst  here  nei^ebore, 

and  ben  cursed  manquelleris.  ^  ^if  bei  beren  on  pore  prestis 

bat  techen  pQ  trewbe  of  be  gospel  and  be  goodenesse  of  cristis 

ordynauwce  bat  bei  wolde  distroie  holi  chirche,  and  her^-fore  ^nd  holy  church. 


12 


OP  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  III. 


Francis. 


*[p,  10  MS.] 

IX.  They  co'vet 


pursuen  hem  to  fe  def  and  makew  prelatys  lordis  and  comunes 
to  do  also ;  ]7ei  beren  false  wittenesse,  and  ben  manquelleris 
and  irreguler^  bifore  god  and  traitowns  to  god  and  alle  holi 
They  persecute  chirche.  hf  loi  puTsuen  to  be  deb  pore  freris  serabitis,  bat 

friars  who  keep  ^  j  r  j  j  r  ^  j 

the  rule,  kepen  frauwseis  renle  and  testament  to  fe  rijte  vndyrstond- 

ynge  and  wille  of  frauwceis  wi)>  outen  glose  of  antecristis 
and  so  bear  false  clerkis ;  b^i  beren  false  wyttenesse  a^eyns  hoTe  patron  and 
ben  caynis  bre^ren  ]?^t  killyd  his  hvo^er  fore  his  goode 
lyuynge.  pf  j^ei  seyn  'pat  cristis  lawe  is  not  ynow^  and  pe 
beste  to  renle  holy  chirche,  but  lawis  of  proude  coueitouse 
and  worldly  clerkis  ben  nedful  and  bet^re,  and  stryuen 
a^enst  goode  men  pat  techen  pe  goodnesse  and  excellence  of 
cristis  lawe  and  his  ordynauwce  and  declaren  pe  falsenesse 
and  ypocrisie  of  worldly  prestis  newe  lawis ;  heren 

false  witnesse  and  ben  traitours  to  god  and  stynkynge 
blasphemes.  -  • 

]if  bei  coueiten  vnresonabiliche  pe  housis,  b^t  ben  goodis 
vnmeble  of  here  neijeboris  as  londis  or  rentis,  or  perpetual 
almes  of  cohris,  sib  b^i  bynden  hem  to  pouert  of  crist  and  his 
apostelis,  b^i  broken  pe  neynbe  mauwdement  of  god. 

X.  They  seduce  bei  leden  a-wey  mennws  wyues  or  we^^ches  in  here 

maldens.^'^^  uowe  habitis,  to  do  lecherie  bi  hem  as  hem  liste,  b^i  broken  pe 
laste  comauwdemewt,  ^if  bei  maken  wyues  and  oper  wymmew 
hure  sustris  bi  lettris  of  fraternite  or  ob^re  iapes,  and  geten 
children  vpon  hem  to  make  hem  freris  or  nuwnes  to  holde  vp 
here  veyn  sectis  bi  lordischipe,  b^i  coueiten  euyle  here 
nei^bores  wyues  and  wenchis ;  namely,  pf  b^i  waiten  hem 
in  feldis  alone  or  gardyns  and  sleen  hem  per  by  keruynge  to 
They  become  moche  vsynge  of  lecherie.  ^if  bei  becomen  pedderis  berynge 

pedlars  that  they  ^  , 

may  get  large  knyuos,  pursis,  pynnys  and  girdlis  and  spices  and  sylk  and 

gifts  for  small.  .  ,,  i  p  •  n  i  i  ^  i 

precious  pellure  and  lorrouris  tor  wymmew,  and  b^^to  smale 

Make  presents  gentil  hondis,  to  getc  loue  of  hem  and  to  haue  many  grete 
of  lap-dogs. 

pftis  for  litil  good  ore  noujt ;  bei  coueiten  euyle  here  nei^eboris 
goodis. 

cakJ-seUers.°^^  1[  P^^  bou  made  wafreris,  ^euynge  lordes,  ladies  and  riche 

men  a  fewe  peris,  appelis  or  nottis  to  haue  huge  pftis  to 


Chap.  IV.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


13 


]}e  couent,  euyl  f>ei  coueiten  here  nejeboris  goodis.  J^ei 
meyntenen  men  in  extorscions,  in  robberie,  in  false  sweryng  They  maintain 

.  .  men  in  oppres- 

to  sille  oner  dere  ]7er  marchauwdise  and  bie  to  grete  cheep  sion 

of  pore  men,  and  in  lecherie  and  grete  synnes,  vndirtakynge 

for  fes  cursed  men  at  domes  day  for  part  of  wynnyng ;  f ei 

coueiten  euyle  ber^  neijeboris  goodis ;  for  J^ei  dysceyuen  her(? 

soulis  herfore  to  euere  dampnynge  in  belle.  and  pf  j^ei 

breken  j^is,  and  worse  alle  ])e  comauwdeme?^tis  of  god;  ]tei 

ben  perilous  ypocritis  and  disceyuen  foule  cristen  men  to 

meyntene  goddis  traitors  principaly.  geten  hem 

worldly  offis  in  lordis  courtis,  summe  to  ben  stiwardis  of 

halle,^  summe  to  ben  kecbene  clerkis,^  suwme  to  ben  lordis 

anyneris,  and  summe  to  ben  conseilours  and  reuleris  of  werris, 

and  also  to  bein  cbamberleyns  to  lordes  and  ladies,  and  putten 

out  pore  gentil  men  of  here  office,  and  forsaken  here  cloistre  leave  their 

and  oj^er  deuocions  for  to  baue  lykynge  of  mete  and  drynk 

and  clojt  and  worldly  worscbipe,  and  to  sende  a  grett  qu.aniiie 

to  here  couent  ]7at  pore  bedrede  men  schulden  baue  ;  '^'’^doine  *[p-  h 

]7ei  ben  ypocritis,  enemyes  of  pore  gentil  men  ^  and  tre^itours 

of  pore  men  and  of  lordes  and  ladies. 


Gdipitulum  4“- 


See  now  where  j^es  religious  don  ajenst  \e  werkis  of  mercy  They  offend 
bojje  bodili  and  gostely.  pf  j^ei  wasten  delicat  metis  and  of^mercy.^^°^^* 
drynkis  and  ^euen  nou^t  to  pore  men  of  here  owene  secte  ne  They*^rat  richly, 

1,,,.  1  hut  do  not  feed 

opere  pat  ben  in  gret  nede,  but  drawen  pore  mennws  almes  the  poor, 
and  liflode  to  here  owne  couent  ]iat  ha]?  to  moche  of  worldly 
goodis,  to  make  festis  huge  to  lordis  and  ladies  and  riche 
men  of  contres ;  ]?ei  feden  not  pore  men  but  robben  hem  of 
here  liflode,  and  so  ben  manquelleris  bifore  god. 

^  ^if  ]?ei  feynen  hem  to  be  men  of  abstynence  and  grete  They  drink  ale 
penau?^ce,  and  ]?er  wij?  drynkyn  dilicious  ale  and  spisid  and 
heije  wynes,  and  beggen  of  \e  comune  peple  to  holden  vp 


1-1  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


14 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  IV. 


]7is  realte,  and  ^euen  lordis  and  ladies  ]7es  swete  drynkys  for 

and  leave  the  to  magnyfie  bes  sectis,  and  suffren  her^  owene  breWren  bobe 
poor  to  perish  of  .  .  i  i  • 

thirst.  i^^ne  and  oute  to  perische  for  Jurist  and  myscbef ;  pei 

^euen  not  drenk  to  pore  jjristi  men  but  ra]7(?re  drawen  here 
sustynauwce  fro  hem  vndir  colour  of  holynesse,  and  so  ben 
worse  ]7an  comune  ]?eues  and  outlawis,  for  ]7ei  take  fro  riche 
men  and  p«rte  oft  wi]?  pore  men. 

They  have  rich  ^  3^1  gederen  to  hem  self  many  wast  and  precious  clo]7es 
clothes, 

and  do  not  share  feyued  bcggerie  and  sotil  ypocrisie,  and  parti]?  not  with 
poo™  poi*©  nedy  men  ]?at  han  nakid  sidis  and  tome  sleues  and  here 

children  steruen  for  cold,  neij^er  here  owen  bre]?eren,  be  ]?ei 
in  neuere  so  gret  myscbef  &  cheueren  for  cold,  hou  clojje 
]7ei  nakid  men,  whanne  hi  ypocrisie  ]?ei  drawen  fro  hem  ]7is 
bodily  almes  bi  whiche  ]?es  poralis  schulden  be  clo]7id  and 
kept  fro  de]?.  certis  fei  ben  cursed  disceyueris  bofe  of  pore 
and  riche,  and  ben  irreguler  bi-for  god  for  myschefous  dej? 
They  have  great  hat  les  nedv  men  suffren.  tian  grete  waste  houses 

tertain  lords  and  for  fo  rescevucn  lordis  and  ladies,  ^e  to  soiorne  among  hem 

ladies,  hut  give  ^ 

poor^^^^^^  daies  and  jeris,  and  op&re  riche  men  ny^t  and  day,  and  helpen 
not  pore  nedi  men  with  herigberwe  in  grete  placis  as 
kyngis  paleis,  but  ra]?ere  drawe  pore  mennws  goodis  fro  hem 
to  ]?es  waste  placis,  hou  receyue  ]?ei  pore  men  to  herberwe  ? 
They  get  the  namely,  wha?^ne  lei  disceyuen  riche  men  in  makyng  restitu- 

means  to  build 

by  encouraging  ciou?^  of  extorcions  and  euyl  geten  goodis,  and  suren  hem 

rich  men  in  sin. 

of  al  perel  ^if  ]7ei  maken  siche  costly  houses  and  wast  paleises 
*[p.  12  MS.]  to  men  ^']7at  haue  forsaken  alle  worldly  ioie  and  pride  and 
taken  cristis  mekenesse  and  gret  pou^rt  bi  wilful  profession, 
it  seme]?  fat  fei  ben  preuy  enemys  of  pore  men  and  dis¬ 
ceyueris  of  riche  men  and  sclauwderis  of  crist  puttyng  on  hym 
siche  worldly  pompe  and  ypocrisie. 

Use  of  the  big  And  pf  fei  seyn  \at  grete  chirchis  ben  worschipful  to  god 
and  lykynge  for  ]?e  peple  to  some  god  iwne,  axe  hem  what 
Decay  of  parish  charite  it  is  to  laten  parische  chirchis  fallen  doun  for  defaute, 

churches.  ' 

where  ]?e  peple  schulde  heere  goodis  worde,  goddis  soruyce, 
and  resceyue  here  sacramentis,  and  to  maken  newe  chirchis 
as  castelis  wif  outew  nede  j  and  whefor  crist  preied  most  in 


Chap.  IV.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


15 


Je  ny^t  in  hillis,  as  fe  gospel  seif,  and  tau^te  mychel  fe 

peple  in  desert  and  in  f  e  wilde  felde,  and  seide  \at  f e  heije 

temple  schulde  be  distroied  for  fe  synne  of  prestis  fat  weren 

f(?r-inne.  And  seyn  fat  lucifer  and  adam  s^rneden  not  god 

in  heuene  ne  paradis  as  fei  scbulden,  but  iob  seruede  wel 

god  in  fe  donge  hille  and  adam  also  in  fe  valey  of  wepynge, 

and  so  dide  crist  in  fe  hillis,  and  fe  propbete  danyel  in  fe 

deen  of  lyonys.  and  fouj  men  suffreden  resonable  cost  of 

cbirchis  whi  schulde  fei  suffre  so  grete  cost  of  kechenes  and  Waste  on  offices 

^ate  housis  and  wast  chambris  for  lordis  and  ladies  and  riche  rooms. 

men,  and  a  frere  to  haue  a  chambre  for  an  erl  or  duk  or  a 

kyng  wha^ne  he  is  bouwden  to  fe  pou^rt  of  crist,  sif  fis  cost 

is  geten  bi  beggen  of  pore  men  and  disceit  of  riche  mennws 

almes.  ^if  fei  visiten  not  pore  men  in  prison  for  charite  of 

god  and  sauynge  of  soulis,  bute  riche  men  in  here  prospmte  "They  Tisit  the 

°  o  t  i.  i.  prosperous, 

to  han  potrt  of  here  worldly  goodis,  hou  don  fei  werkis  of 
m^rcy?  for  sumtyme  for  enuye  and  hate  ful  trewe  men  ben 

men,  wrongly 


sett  in  prison,  and  f  anne  it  were  most  nede  to  conforte  hem  p"*^  prison, 
in  bodi  and  soule  ajenst  defaute  of  mete  and  drynk  and  clof 
and  grucchynge  ajenst  god  or  dispeir  ;  but  it  is  worse  jif 
fei  be  ypocrisie  and  false  beggynge  reuen  fro  pore  prisoneris 
f e  almes  fat  fei  schulden  ellis  haue. 

^  ]if  fei  visyten  not  pore  men  in  here  sikenesse  but  riche  They  do  not  visit 

*  •  •  tli0  sicl^ 

men  wif  preue  massis  and  placeboes  and  dirige,  fouj  pore 
men  ben  neui^re  so  deuout  and  han  neu^re  so  myche  nede  to 
ben  amendid  of  her^  lif,  hou  seken  fei  f e  helpe  ^  of  soule  ? 
but  only  or  principaly  worldly, muk  or  auauntage.  where 
helpen  fei  sike  men  of  bodely  almes,  f ouj  "^'fei  hem  self  han  *[p.  i3  ms.] 
neuere  so  muche  wast  of  mete  and  drynk,  but  raf  ere  in  siclie 
tyme  fei  gedren  fro  sike  men  al  fat  fei  may.  to  get 

^  ^if  fei  ben  faste  aboute  to  haue  riche  men  biried  in  here  They  bury  only 
housis  for  wynnynge’and  offrynge  and  worldly  meyntenauwce 
and  forsaken  pore  men  to  be  biried  fere,  fei  ben  false 
ypocritis,  traueilynge  in  coueitise  and  pride  and  fefte,  for 
fei  drawen  riche  men  fro  her  gostly  fadris  and  here  owne 

t  lielj^e  AA. 


16 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  V. 


They  persecute 
poor  priests, 


and  put  true 
men  in  prison. 


They  bring  up 
poor  men  to 
judgment  for  not 
giving  what  they 
promised. 


Failure  in  works 
of  spiritual 
mercy. 

They  preach  fa¬ 
bles  instead  of 
Christ’s  gospel, 


put  special 
prayers  above 
the  Paternoster. 


teach  men  to 
care  for  wealth, 


parischenys,  and  so  departen  in  tyme  of  de]?  curatis  and  here 
gostly  children. 

^  ^if  ]7ei  pnrsuen  pore  prestis  to  prison  and  hodily  de]?,  as 
hangynge,  drawynge  or  brennynge,  for  j^ei  techen  trewely 
and  frely  j^e  gospel  of  ihu  crist  and  techen  men  wiche  hen 
false  prophetis  and  ypocritis,  si]?  holy  writt  spekij?  of  siche- 
and  hiddi]?  cristen  men  knowe  hem  hi  here  opyn  werkis 
and  flee  fro  hem  ;  ]?awne  hen  ]?ei  perilous  ypocritis  and 
heretikis  ajenst  goddis  worschipe  and  sauynge  of  cristene 
sonlis. 

If  lif  fei  jiursnen  trewe  lige  men  of  fe  kyng  to  endityng 
falsly  and  wyttyngly  for  ]?ei  reprouen  here  open  synnes,  hon 
visiten  ]7ei  men  in  prison  ?  si]?  ]?ei  drawe  trewe  men  to  prison 
to  loos  of  catel  and  de]?  wi]?  outen  resonable  cause. 

^  ^if  pei  drawen  pore  hnshondemen  to  dom  for  ]?e  hi-hejten 
]?em  almes  su^tyme  and  now  ben  taujt  to  ^euen  here  almes 
to  pore  neijeboris  aftir  ]?e  gospel,  or  pat  may  not  now  paie 
so  gret  almes  for  poU(9rte  and  myschif  pat  pei  ben  inne,  hou 
don  ]?ei  pe  werkis  of  mercy  ?  si]?  ]?ei  don  opynly  ajenst 
charite. 


See  now  where  ]>ei  fallen  in  werkis  of  gostly  mercy, 
first  pf  ]?ei  techen  opynly  fablys,  cronyklis  and  lesyngis  and 
leuen  eristis  gospel  and  pe  manwdeme?«tis  of  god,  and  pt  don 
]?ei  ]?is  principaly  for  worldly  wynnynge,  frendschipe  or  veyn 
name  pei  don  apnst  pe  chifwerk  of  gostly  mercy ;  nameliche 
pf  ]?ei  techen  fat  here  singuler  preiere  is  betere  fan  f e  pater 
noster  pat  crist  made  him  self,  and  fat  preiynge  bi  lippis 
is  plesauwt  to  god  fou^  mennw5  lif  fat  preien  be  cursed  of 
god  f6r  brekynge  of  his  hestis  and  defaute  of  charite. 

fei  couwseilen  men  to  be  bysi  a-boute  worldliche 
richessis  more  fan  a-boute  here  soule  helfe  and  f e  blisse  of 
heuene,  and  conseilen  men  more  to  taken  vengauwce  bi  open 
werre  of  here  bref ren  fan  to  sufiren  paciently  wrongys  and 


Chap.  V,] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


17 


haue  m^rcy  on  oper  nei^eboris  ;  j^ei  don  foule  ^'ajenst  I’e 

secuwde  work  of  gostly  m&rey,  to  dampnacion  of  many  men 

bob  of  body  and  soule.  conseilen  men  to  leue  be  advise  entering- 

.  _  ^  ^  ■'  into  religious 

fredom  of  cristis  ordre  and  take  here  singuler  ordre  maad  orders, 
of  synful  men,  seiynge  ])at  it  is  j^e  beste  for  hem  vp  peril 
of  here  sonle ;  j^ei  don  ajenst  J^e  charite  for  lone  of  her^  owne 
worschipe  or  wynnynge  and  blasphemen  ajenst  god,  makynge 
hem  self  as  witti  as  ]?e  holy  gost.  si)>  it  is  reseruyd  only  to 
j}e  holy  gost  to  ^euen  ful  conseil  of  ^ingis  ]7at  [ben]  not 
expr^sly  comauwdyd  ne  defendid  in  holy  writt,  and  ]?ei  taken 
J^is  pinge  vpon  hem  whawne  J?ei  ensuren  to  men  }>at  it  is  best 
for  hem  to  be  men  of  priuat  religion,  and  also  j^ei  conseilen 
sumtyme  euene  a^enst  J^e  sterynge  of  j^e  holy  gost,  and  maken 
men  dispeire  dampnyd  for  schrewidnesse  of  }>is  ordre  and  of 
men  'per-inne,  for  per-\)j  ]jei  lasten  more  and  ben  more  hardid 
in  synne  and  ypocrisie. 

^  ^if  ]7ei  chastisen  not  here  hreperen  for  grete  synnes,  so  j^at  punish  open  sins, 
pei  be  preue,  but  ou^rscharply  ponyschen  hem  for  smale  ones, 
synnes  j^at  ben  open  and  make  hem  seme  vnholy  to  j^e  world ; 

]7ei  fallen  foule  in  werkis  of  charite  and  ben  false  ypocritis. 

and  pf  lei  chastisen  not  here  brej^ren  for  opyn  sweryng 

veynly  and  pride  and  inpacience  and  false  coueitynge  of  ^er 

neijeboris  goodis,  but  for  litil  trespasynge  ajenst  her^  owne  punish  more  sins 

statutis  or  customys  ;  pei  fallen  in  dwe  chastisynge  of  synne,  than  against  God, 

for  lei  chargen  not  dispit  or  trespas  don  a^enst  god,  but  a^enst 

here  owen  worldly  worschipe  and  name  of  holynesse. 

^  ^if  lei  conforten  not  pore  men  in  her^  myschif  bole  of  visit  the  rich  and 
^  ^  ^  not  the  poor. 

soule  and  body  but  suffren  hem  perische  for  dispeir  or  defaute 
of  bodily  goodis,  but  \2^erQ  visiten  hem  in  here  prospmte 
for  worldly  muk ;  lei  fallen  fully  in  werkis  of  charite  and 
m^rcy  to  here  brel^ren.  ^  ^if  lei  gon  gladly  andfaste  to  lordis  They  go  gladly  to 

T  *1  TT  j  llOIlSGSj  but 

nousis  ana  ladies  pax  ben  gloriously  araied,  and  deynen  not  shun  those  of  the 
to  come  in  pore  mennws  houses  for  stynk  and  ol^re  fille ;  sUnk  and  filth, 
hou  suen  lei  charite  ?  sil  crist  sparid  not  to  visyte  pore  men 
in  a  foul  stynkynge  stable  and  cold,  and  in  le  colde  greue 
and  in  belle,  and  in  many  foule  weies  in  lis  world,  bole  in 


2 


18 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  V. 


gret  hunger  and  frist  and  gret  werynesse  and  cold  and 

muclie  sclauwdrynge  and  cursynge  and  opere  peynes  ynowe. 

^  ]if  ]7ei  wolen  not  forjeue  litel  trespace  don  ajenst  hem  self  or 

feyned  seyntis  of  here  singnler  secte  hut  moste  cruelly 

*[p.  15  MS.]  "^pursueri  men  j^^rfore ;  pei  forsaken  pacience  and  mekenesse 

and  ensau^wple  of  cristis  lif.  and  men  dreden  j^at  enuye, 

rancour  and  euyl  wille  dwelli]?  longest  amonges  hem  of  alle 

They  bear  malice  ohere  men,  be  lei  lordis,  be  bei  prelatis,  bou?  bei  ben  men 
longer  than  any  /  r  >  /  ?  / 

other  men,  of  armys ;  but  wher^  is  falsere  holynesse,  and  so  foulere 
ypocrisie  ?  for  jiou^  a  man  speke  ajenst  a  lord,  clerk  or  prelat 
he  schal  sonere  be  reconsilid  be  weie  of  mekenesse  ]?an  to 
newe  feyned  religions ;  for  j^ei  wolen  pursue  to  de]?  or  open 
schame,  and  pt  vndir  colour  of  holynesse. 

1  lif  ]?ei  soone  lesen  pacience  and  brmggyn  men  out  of 
They  will  not  pacionco  \ai  speken  ajenst  here  ypocrisie  and  euyl  dedis ; 

bear  reproof. 

hou  don  j^ei  werkis  of  mercy,  si]?  ]?ei  schulde  be  here  meke¬ 
nesse  and  pacience  bryngyn  o^ere  in-to  reste  and  pees  of 
body  and  soule.  ^if  j^ei  profren  gentil  men  and  o\ere  to 
fijte  wi]?  hem  whawne  ]?ei  reprouen  hem  of  here  opyn  wyckyd 
dedis,  hou  ben  ]?ei  ensaumple  of  crist  and  his  apostelis  to 
sane  opere  men  in  reste  and  charite  ?  it  seme]?  ]?ei  ben  fendis 
children  to  stryue  a^enst  ]?e  treu]?e,  and  meyntene  syn  and 
brynge  oper  men  to  belle  hi  procurynge  of  fijt  and  lesynge 
of  pacience  and  charite. 

H  ]?ei  cursen  and  warien  and  pursuen  here  enemyes  and 
axen  vengauwce  of  god  ajenst  hem ;  hou  suen  ]?ei  charite  of 
crist  ]?at  biddi]?  men  to  lone  here  enemyes,  and  don  good  to 
men  ]?at  haten  vs,  and  to  preie  for  hem  ]?at  falsly  chalengen 
vs  and  falsly  and  wickidly  pursuen  vs  ?  pf  ]?ei  don  ]?us  and 
Welle  werse  ajenst  ]?e  hestis  of  god  and  werkis  of  mercy  bo]?e 
bodily  and  gostly,  ]?ei  ben  foule  ypocritis  and  not  wor]?i  but 
to  be  putt  out  fro  cristen  men  and  defoulid,  and  not  wor]?i 
to  be  putt  in  ]?e  er]?e,  fat  is  to  haue  ]?e  leste  office  in  ]?e 
chirche. 


They  are  re¬ 
vengeful. 


Chap.  VI.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


19 


G^pitulum  6“’ 

See  now  j^ei  faile  in  fei]?,  hope  and  charite.  hope^^nd  j 

]7at  0  part  holdi]?  wi]?  o  pope  and  ]iQ  to\er  wi]?  o  no]?6re  chanty.  ^ 

pope,  and  eche  partie  seie  and  techi]?  as  bileue  J^at  }>is  pope  some  support  j 

,  one  pope,  some  | 

18  verray  and  noon  ol^re,  and  alle  lat  bileuen  not  so  ben  another,  yet  they  i 

_  .  communicate  to-  I 

cursed  beretikis  out  of  bileue  ;  ]>ei  ben  alle  out  of  bileue  and  gether.  ‘ 

bryngen  alle  oj^er  out  of  bileue;  and  jit  J^ei  comunen  to- 

gidre  bojie  partis  as  cnsten  men,  and  so  ]7ei  seyn  o  j^ing  and 

don  ]>e  contrarie  as  ful  false  men.  ]if  |>ei  tecben  opynly  They  teach  that 

and  meyntene  ]7at  l^e^  bileue  ]7at  crist  and  bis  apostelis  hotter  thin 

taujten  is  not  j^e  best  and  ynowj  to  brynge  men  to  heuene, 

but  lawis  maade  of  worldly  pri^stis  ben  nedful  and  bet^re 

to  reule  holy  cbircbe  bi ;  j^ei  erren  foule  ^un  ]?e  fei]?  and  *[p.  i6  ms.] 

blaspbemen  crist  god  and  man.  jif  J^ei  seyn,  written  and 

tecben  openly  ];at  IpQ  sacrament  of  l^e  auter  lat  men  seen  They  teach  that 

-1  y  1  1  the  sacrament  of 

bitwen  pe  pr^stis  hondis  is  accidentis  wip-outen  suget  and  the  altar  is  only 

neiji^r  bred  ne  cristis  body ;  si]?  holy  writt  sei]?  ]7at  it  is 

breede  and  cristis  precious  body,  ]?ei  ben  cursed  beretikis. 

jif  ]?ei  putten  on^  crist  bat  be  beggid  as  bei  don  fro  tou?^  to  that  Christ 

<  i  ^  ^  r  hegged  as  they 

touw  and  fro  bous  to  hous  wij?  open  cryeng ;  ]?ei  erren  foule  ‘lo¬ 
in  ]?e  feij?  and  putten  errowr  vpon  crist.  jif  ]?ei  disceyuen  They  deceive 
men  in  feij?  bi  fals  pardons,  bi  mannws^reier^ bi  lett^ris  of  pa^rdons^^ 
fraternyte  and  bi  here  feyned  roten  abite  ;  ]?ei  ben  false 
propbetis  bauynge  ]?e  lickenesse  of  holy  religion  and  dis-  2  Tim.  hi.  5  (?). 

troien  cristis  religion,  as  poul  sei]?.  and  so  ^  of  signes  of 

anticrist,  of  fiftene  tokenes  bifore  domes-day,  and  of  veyn 
nouelries  wi]?-outm  noumbre  as  to  men. 

^if  ]?ei  bopen  to  plese  god  more  bi  kepynge  of  here  owne  They  have  more 
tradicions  and  singuler  obedience  and  profession  to  synful  own  traditions 

.  i  -1  n  1  than  in  Christ’s 

wrecchis,  and  maken  opore  more^  sikyrly  to  bopen  ]?us,  ]?anne  gospel, 

for  kepynge  of  cristis  gospel  and  trewe  obedience,  ecbe  man 
to  o]?or  in  ]?e  drede  ®  of  crist  as  crist  and  bis  apostelis  diden, 

]?ei  failen  foule  in  good  hope. 

^  here  X.  ^  of  X.  s  omitted. 

^  more  is  inserted  iu  AA  by  a  corrector.  ^  degre  X, 


20 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  VII. 


II  ]7ei  louen  more  fonnyd  ordynauwce  of  men  ]?an  ordy- 
They  seek  their  nauwce  of  ihu  crist,  bei  seken  more  here  owne  worschipe 

own  praise  more  .  ,  . 

than  the  praise  jjan  worschipe  of  god,  ^if  setten  here  hertis  more  ahoute 
worldly  muk  j^an  ahoute  verteuous  lif  and  ]>e  blisse  of  heuene 
and  sauynge  of  cristen  soulis ;  ]7ei  fallen  foule  ajenst  charite 
and  alle  o]?ere  vertues.  ]7is  men  my^ten  schewe  hi  seuene 
jiftis  of  ]>e  holy  gost,  hi  myspendynge  of  fyue  wittis,  hi  sixe 
consentis  of  synne,  and  colourynge  and  meyntenynge  of  alle 
synnes  preue  and  apert,  and  namely  hi  false  p^rocurynge  of 
matrymonye  hi  soteltees  and  queyntese  and  false  bihetynges, 
and  fals  dyuors  makynge,  hou  j^es  newe  feyned  religious  hen 
anticristis,  sent  prmyly  of  fe  fend  to  disceyue  men  in  gostly 
goodis  and  worldly,  and  norischen  hem  esily  in  synne,  and 
dryuen  hem  to  belle  to  eui^rlastynge  de]?.  and  'perfore 
comauwdi]?  crist  J>at  we  be  war  and  flee  fro  j^e  ypocrisie  of 
pharisees. 


They  make  falsi 
divorces. 


Capztulum 


Luke  xii.  2. 


Christ  bids  us 
speak  the  truth 
boldly. 

*[p.  17  MS.] 


Luke  xii.  4. 


And  [Christ]  sei]?  jiat  ])er  is  no  ]?ing  keuerid  ])at  ne  it 
schal  be  schewid,  and  pere  is  no  ]7ing  hid  so  priue  j^at  it  ne 
schal  be  wist  and  knowen.  for  po  j^ingis  J^at  ^e  ban  seyd 
in  derknessis  schullen  be  seid  in  li^t,  and  pat  J^ing  pat  ^e  ban 
spoken  in  ^our^  couchis  or  smale  beddis  schal  be  prechid  in 
pQ  roof  of  housis.  Here  crist  meni]?  j^at  men  schulden  be 
war  and  oppynly  telle  pQ  '^'trew]7e  a^enst  j^is  ypocrisie ;  for 
pou^  it  be  now  hid  it  schal  be  schewid  at  pe  laste  at  pe  day 
of  dom.  ^  And  also  cowardise  of  cristis  disciplis,  pf  ]7ei  spare 
for  bodyli  peyne  and  dep  to  telle  openly  j^e^  treujie  of 
goddis  lawe.  And  ]7erfore  telli]?  crist  after  to  his  disciplis 
pat  pei  schuldeT^  drede  god  and  no  j^ing  ellis  souereynly. 
So]?!!  sei]?  crist :  I  sei  to  ^ow,  my  frendis,  pat  p  ben  not 
agast  of  hem  pat  sleen  pe  body  and  haue^  no  ]?ing  more®  to 
do  after  fes  jiinges ;  but  I  schal  schewe  ^ou  whom  ^e  owen* 
to  drede.  drede  je  hym  souereynly,  pat  after  pat  he  haj?  sclayn 


’  omitted  X. 


’  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


Chap.  VII.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


21 


fe  bodi,  ha]?  power  to  sende  bo]?e  bodi  and  soule  to  belle  y^tih 
outen  ende.  so,  I  say  to  ^ow;  drede  je  him.  here  crist  wol 
\ai  men  drede  no  ]?ing  principaly  but  god  and  bis  offence, 
for  pf  men  dreden  bodili  peynes  and  de]?,  and  \erioTe  ceessen 
to  telle  openly  ]?e  treu]?e,  J?ei  ben  wi]?  ]?is  vnable  to  resceyue 
]?e  blisse  of  beuene ;  and  pf  ]?ei  seyn  openly  and  sadly  Je 
treu]?e  of  god,  no  ]?ing  may  barmen  bem  so  ]>at  ]?ei 
kepen  pacience  and  cbarite.  ^  And  berefore  seij?  crist  aftir- 
ward  to  conforte  bis  disciplis  bi  reson :  ne  be  not  fyue 
sparwis  sold  for  an  balpeny,  and  on  of  bem  is  not  forjetyn  ^  Luke  xU.  6. 
bifore  god ;  but  also  alle  ]?e  beris  of  ^oure  beuyd  ben  nou??^- 
brid,  ])erfore  nyle  jee  drede;  ^e  ben  of  more  pris  ]?an  many 
sparwis.  as  pf  crist  menede  and  made  ]?is  reson  :  si]?  god 
alrayjty  taki]?  so  gretkepyng  of  smale  briddis  ]?at^  on^  of  bem, 

3e  be  ^  leste,  is  not  for;eten,  bow  mycbe  more  scbal  god  kepen  let  notMng 

^  J  ^  I  ’  J  o  jr  happen  to  us  but 

^ow ;  si]?  be  is  almy^ty,  alwytti,  and  al  ful  of  good  wille,  & 

\ere  may  no  ]?ing  come  wff^  outen  bis  wittyng  and  bis 
ordynau?^ce,  and  it  is  al  for  ]?e  beste.  ^  And  no  ]?ing  may 
ajenstonde,  so  ]?at  men  takyt  paciently  and  ]?anke  bem 
\eriere ;  and  wbawne  ]?e  beris  of  oure  beuyd  ben  cou?^tid  ]?at 
]?ei  may  not  be  lost,  where  we  may  be  lost  o]iere  in  bodi  or 
soule,  si]?e  ecbe  of  vs  is  betre  ]?an  ]?e  beris  of  oure  bed.  as 
pf  crist  seide  ]?at  no  ]?ing  of  vs,  nere  of  bodi  ne  of  soule,  may 
periscbe  ne  suffre  peyne  to  oure  barim,  so  \at  we  kepen 
pacience  and  cbarite.  at  ]?e  laste  word  crist  make]?  vs  siker  to 
dye  for  his  lawe  bi  reward  of  ]?e  blisse  of  beuene,  wha?^ne 
be  sei]?  ]?us,  ]ia\,  ecbe  who  eu^re  knowlechi]?  me  bi-for  men,  Luke  xU.  8. 
and  mannws  sone  scbal  knowleche  hym  bi-fore  ]?e  angelis  of 
god.  here  crist  clepi]?  bym  self  manwws  sone,  for  be  is  ]?e 
sone  of  ]?e  ®  vergyne  marie,  and  so  a  p^rsone  of  mankynde,  ]iai 
is  clepyd  a  man  bi  specbe  of  holy  writt.  and  knowlecbynge  how  we  must 
®  is  seid  here  fore  verrei  knowlegchynge  ®  of  crist,  bo]?e  in  herte 
bi  saad  fei]?  \at  he  is  verrey  god  and  yervej  man  wUh  outen 
synne,  &  alle  degrees,  i?^  ]?oujt  and  specbe  and  dede  and  alle 
circumstauwcis  \er  of,  and  witnessynge  in  word  ]?e  treu]?e  of 
1  forjeuen  X.  ^  l>an.  ^  or  X,  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X.  omitted  X. 


22 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


j^e  gospel,  hou  crist  lyuede  most  mekely  and  most  porely  and 
most  virtuously  bi-forn  alle  oj^ire  men  as  fe  gospel  tecbe]?  > 
and  knowlechynge  in  lif,  lyuynge  aftir  ]?e  lawe  of  god  and 
»[p.  18  MS.]  in  ^wille  to  die  j’er-fore  jif  it  be  nede  ;  j^is  virrei  knowlechynge 
schal  make  men  to  ben  approued  of  crist  at  ]>&  day  of  dome, 
biforn  alle  compayne  of  angelis  and  seyntis  and  good 
creaturis  and  euyle,  hou  ]7ei  were  virrei  wittenesse  of  crist 
in  erj^e  bifore  men,  and  in  fulwille  to  sutfre  scla^idris 
pursuynge  and  bodili  de]?  for  ]7e  loue  of  ihu  crist  and  his 
lawe. 


Cdipitulum  8“- 

Here  may  men  touche  j^e  cowardise  and  fal[s]nesse  of  pristis, 

lordis,  marchauwtis  and  alle  oj^ire  men  j^at  fallen  in  charite 

anemtis  god  and  his  lawe.  where  ben  J>o  pristis  j>at  maken 

Are  they  priests  liem  SO  bisy  aboute  grete  benefices,  wordly  worschipis  and 

woridfyrewarS?  stynkynge  muk  or  drit  of  worldeli  richesse,  fat  f ei  wolen 

travaile^  ny^t  and  day  in  lordis  courtis,  in  worldely 

They  do  secular  offis,  for  litel  cost  takynge  of  be  lord  in  hope  of  beneficis ; 
work  in  hope  of 

a  benefice.  and  SO  bisily  pat  vnnef  IS  may  f  ei  at  reste  seie  metenes  or 
masse  w«t7^  deuociouw.  ofire  pristis  rennen  out  of  oure  lond 
ouer  grete  sees  and  f  oruj  londes  of  enemyes  in  piril  of  here 
lif,  in  gret  cold,  imn^ur,  frist,  stormes  and  tempestis,  \at  it 
is  wondir  hou  fei  may  lyue ;  but  hou  bisi  maken  f ei  hem 
self  and  of  ire  to  lerne,  kepe  and  teche  goddis  lawe  ?  cirtis 
but  ^if  f  ei  more  bisily  lerne  bi  grete  triiueile  and  studie  holy 
writt,  and  kepen  it  trewly  in  here  lyuynge,  and  openly  to 
^eue  good  ensaumple  to  alle  men,  and  prichen  it  sadly  and 
trewly  with  als  myche  traueile  and  more,  and  pt  it  be  nede 
ben  wilfuf  to  die  f irfore,  f ei  may  drede  ful  sore  fat  f ei  ben 
out  of  charite  and  out  of  feif,  but  pf  it  be  ded  feif  as 
fendis  ban ;  for  f  ei  trtzueilen  more  for  worldly  worschipe  and 
stynkywge  drit  fan  for  loue  of  god  and  helfe  of  mannws  soule. 

They  take  gold  .  i,  •  -u  ^  ^  l  ^  ^ 

out  of  the  land  And  pt,  fat  IS  werse,  fei  beren  gold  out  of  englond,  and 


^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  VIII.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


23 


sumtyme  it  comib  to  our^  enemys  and  Iper-hi  tei  ben 

J  X  j  enemies. 

strengyed  a^enst  vs,  and  bi  takynge  of  prisoneris  of  oure 

nacion,  and  su^tyme  oure  enemys  killen  many  of  oure  loud 

]?orouj7  sicbe  traueile  for  benefices  to  gret  reprof  of  oure 

rewme.  And  pf  j>e  gold^  come  to  rome,  jier-bi  ben  benefices 

of  ]7e  chircbes  bou^t  and  sold.  ^  For  who  so  may  most  gold  sold  at 

brynge  surest  schal  be  sped  to  grete  benefices,  j^ou^  he  be 

vnable  bojie  of  kuwnynge  and  lif,  and  able  men  of  kuwnynge 

and  lif  ben  putt  bihynde ;  su?wme  for  pel  willen  not  chaffare 

by  symonye,  and  suw^me  bi  bisinesse  of  studie  and  techynge 

of  holy  writt,  for  pei  ^  wollen  neiper  dwelle  in  lordis  courtis 

ne  renne  to  rome  wi]?  pe  kyngis  gold,  and  pf  gooddis  lawe  and 

mannw5  and  reson  ben  wel  soujt  j^is  chaffarynge  wi]?  suche 

benefyces  and  gold  is  symonye  on  bojie  partis ;  and  so  heresie, 

as  ]7es  lawereris  written  openly  in  here  owene  lawe.  And  These  Rome- 

tus  bes  rome  renneris  beren  be  ^kyngys  gold  out  of  oure  lond  gTd  for  iead.°^ 

.  *[p.  19MS.] 

&  bryngen  apn  deed  leed  and  heresie  and  symonye  and 

goddis  curse,  and  comunly  whawne  bes  h(?retikis  comen  bi  when  they  have 

^  ^  bought  their 

symonye  to  gret  benefices  bei  ben  not  bisi  to  lerne  be  gospel  benefice, they  wui 
&  teche  it  cristen  men,  but  ^eue  hem  to  huy^tynge  and  in  it- 
hauk[y]nge  and  veyn  pleies,  and  hanten  tauernys  of  wyn  and  Their  dissipated 
ale,  aboute  strumpetis  and  grete  festes,  riche  dobing  and  hlwking'^^^a/d 
gay  squyeris  and  opere  getteris,  pat  al-most  noon  schal  be  taTems^  and 
so  nyse  and  worldly  proude  as  bes  stynkynge  heretikis.  and 
pf  ony  poore  pr^stis  wole  come  to  here  chirchis  and  treuly  They  call  poor 
dispise  synne  and  irely  teche  goddis  lawe,  pQ  gospel  oi  ihu  for  preaching 

.  T  T  .  .  God’s  law. 

cnst,  and  comauwdementis  of  god,  b^s  coueitous  symonyentis 
welen  be  pQ  firste  to  lette  hem  wdA  b^®  grete  colowr  pat  suche 
prechoris  ben  heretikis ;  and  bis  b^i  seyn  for  b^i  hen  ful  of 
heresie  and  wolden  b^*t  no  man  spoke  ajenst  here  cursed  lif. 
bus  b^i  techen  not  hem  self  but  ensauwple  of  pride,  lecherie 
and  ob^re  synnes,  and  letten  ob^re  trewe  pr^stis  to  techen 
goddis  lawe.  and  bis  is  on  of  pe  most  vengauwce  pat  god 
takib  on  synful  men,  to  sufire  suche  ypocritis  to  reule  pe 
peple  &  drawe  hem  to  helle  bi  wib-drawynge  of  goddis  word 


t  god  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


24 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  IX. 


and  ^euynge  of  opyn  *  ensaumple  of  synne.  for  hane  ]?ei  iiere 

myr]?©  and  iolite,  nowarde  to  hem  hon  faste  woluys  of 

They  have  made  helle  wirien  cristen  soulis  &  beren  hem  to  belle ;  for  Jjei  han 
compact  -with  the  i  7  t  i  773* 

devil.  maad  priuyly  couenaunt  ’with  j^e  deuyl  \at  hon  many  benencis 

jjaf^  ])ei  may  gete  hi  lesynges  &  symonye  'pe  deuyl  schal 
strangle  pe  soulis  at  his  wille  as  for  hem,  so  pat  ]7ei  han  here 
lustis  of  grete  statis  and  worschipe  of  pQ  world  and  ple?^te 
of  richessis  and  glotonye  and  lecherie  and  meynteneris  per- 
iwne.  &  ]7is  is  luciferis  pride,  stynkynge  ypocrisie  and  an^t- 
cristis  hlasphemye,  to  crie  and  meyntene  pat  suche  ten  able 
curatis  and  grete  men  of  holy  chirche. 

Capitulum  9“- 

Also  lordis  fallen  foule  in  ypocrisie  and  in  defaute  of 

Lords  fall  into 

hypocrisy  and  charito,  for  tei  ben  redi  to  holde  vp  here  worldly  name, 
want  of  charity  _  ^ 

lordschipe  and  meyntene  here  courtis  wi]?  gret  cost,  sendynge 
in  gOTng  to  law  of  men  boto  of  lawe  and  of  armes,  &  prikynge  bi  here 

and  fighting  for  ■*  7  r  ./  o 

end^  owen  p(?rsones  for  to  plede,  for  to  fi^tte  and  for  to  lyue  & 

dye  per-foTQ,  and  to  be  vengid  on.  mew  pat  don  ajenst  here 
but  will  do  no  wille,  worschipe,  or  profit ;  but  for  to  meyntene  goddis  lawe 

such  thing  for 

God’s  sake,  to  and  stond  for  his  worschipe,  pat  tei  ben  holden  to  vp  peyne 
whose  defence 

they  are  bound  of  lesynge  of  here  lordischipe  &  anemtis  god,  and  lesynge 
by  tenure, 

of  bodi  and  soule  and  helle  wi]7-outen  hende,  who  is  pat 

lord  ]7«t  wolle  treuli  speke,  coste,  traueile,  and  suffre  mekely 

dispit,  pursuynge  and  dej?  iw  tyme  of  nede.  ]7es  lordis  owen 

to  quake  ajenst  domes  day  and  tyme  of  here  de]?,  j^at  more 

bisili  traueilen  to  meyntenen  here  litil  worldely  lordshipe^ 

and  to  seke  here  owen  worschipe  &  drit  of  jjis  world  Jeanne 

»[p.  20  MS.]  j^ei  trwueile  '^'to  meyntene  pe  most  rijtful  lawe  &  ordenauwce 

of  ihu  crist  iw  his  chirche,  &  to  procure,  norische  & 

meyntene  cristen  soulis  iw  good  gouernaile  and  holy  lif. 

certis  pf  j^ei  don  j^us  and  coueiten  per-hi  to  be  holden  goode 

cristen  lordis,  here  pride,  ypocrisie  and  false  coueitise  wole 

brynge  hem  to  euore-lastynge  peyne  in  helle.  ^  Also 

Merchants  fall'  marchauwtis  and  riche  men  of  jiis  wikked  world  fallen  in 
linto  hypocrisy. 

^  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X.  2  vyorscliipe  X. 


I 


/ 


Chap.  X.  OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


25 


moclie  ypomse ;  for  ]?ei  tr^^ueilen  nyjt  &  day,  bi  watir  & 
lond  \n  cold,  &  in  hete,  bi  false  sotiitis  and  cautelis  & 
grete  swerifnlges  nedles  &  false,  for  to  gete  muclie  drit  or  They  are  so  busy 

^  ^  getting  muck 

muk  of  Ms  world,  to  gete  riche  wyues,  &  purchase  londis  of  t^is  world  and 

&  rentis,  &  dewelle  in  pore  mennws  dette  aft^r  ]?at  j^ei  han 

desceyued  hem  in  byynge  of  here  catel;  &  ^it  ben  so  bisi 

in  ]70ujt  &  speche  in  goyng  and  rydyng  abouten  yis  muk  that  they  cannot 

]?at  vnnejie  may  jiei  onys  j^enke  on  god  &  han  mynde  of 

here  false  robberie  hat  bei  vsen  bi  false  wettes  &  mesures  False  weights 

and  measures, 

to  amende  hem.  pf  alle  here  bisinesse  &  lone  goo  ]7us 
wrongly  to  pe  world  &  noujt  or  to  litel  to  heuene  and 
heuenely  j^ingis,  j^ei  fallen  foule  of  holy  lif;  &  jit  holden 
hem  self  holy  &  coueiten  to  ben  holden  holy  of  oji^r 
men,  &  ben  wode  jif  men  speken  treuly  ajenst  here  cursed 
synnes;  but  cartes  ]?is  is  ypocrisie. 


Q^ipitulum  10”’ 

Generaly  ypocrisie  regne]?  among  alle  statis  of  criste^ 
men  ;  for  whame  men  ben  cristened  Jiei  forsaken  ]ie  deuyl, 
al  his  pride  &  al  his  werkis,  ]7«t  ben  werkis  of  synne ; 
and  jit  j^ei  turnen  to  synne  as  an  hound  to  his  spuyng 
and  here-wij?  holden  hem  goode  crista  men.  but  summe 
don  verrey  penauwce  for  j^es  synnes,  &  sum  me  dwelle  eu(?re 
stille  \er-invLQ  &  rennen  to  belle,  as  crist  sei]?  in  }e  gospel 
&  in  J^e  bok  of  iob ;  &  many  men  don  bodily  penauwce, 
as  fastynge  and  goynge  barfot^,  but  J’ei  fasten  not  fro  pride 
ne  enuye  ne  coueitise,  but  preien  for  wrongful  vengau?^ce 
of  o\erQ  enemyes  ajenst  charite,  and  J^is  is  foule  ypocrisie 
to  make  men  holden  hem  holy  whawne  j/ei  stynken  bifore 
god  for  old  endured  synne.  For  god  sei]?  be  ysaye  \at  a 
man  to  turmente  his  bed  and  peyne  his  bodi  only  is  not 
]iat  fast  ]7e  whiche  god  chees,  ^  but  ]7is  is  \q  fast  jjtxt  god 
ches ;  ^  a  man  to  breke  Jie  bondis  of  synne  &  do  werkis 
of  mercy  to  poore  men  &  nedi.'  ^  But  vpon  j^e  text  of 
]7is  gospel  bi  ordre  of  seynt  matheu  Ion  with  j^e  gildene 

omitted  X. 


Hypocrisy  reigns 
among  all  Chris¬ 
tians  since  they 
break  their  bap¬ 
tismal  vows. 


Some  repent, 


some  do  false  pen¬ 
ance,  but  keep 
their  evil  will. 


Isaiah  Iviii.  5. 


John  Chry¬ 
sostom. 


26 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


[Chap.  XT, 


mouj?  seif  fat  a  prest  is  in  dette  to  teche  openly  and  treuly 
f  e  treuf  e  of  goddis  la  we,  and  ellis  lie  is  traitour  to  fe  trenf  e 
of  holy  writt.  ^  So  a  lewyd  man  is  houndyn  to  mayntene 
Duty  of  laymen  fe  treufe  ^  of  holy  writt,  and  ellis  he  is  traitowx  to  god 

to  maintain  the  _ 

truth  of  holy  &  to  his  lawe  and  his  peple,  &  here-fore  riche  men  owen 

writ. 

to  drede  of  treson  and  traitre  a^enst  god  &  his  lawe 
wha^^ne  fei  meyntene  not  fe  treufe  of  fe  gospel,  hut  hen 
ahoute  to  stoppe  it  &  techeris  f  ^r-of  hi  sotil  cautelis  &  false 
lesynges  for  fleschli  loue  or  coueitise.  for  as  iudas  dide  fei 
*[p.  21MS.]  sillen  fe  treufe,  and  so  cnst  \at  is  treufe,  '^for  money  or* 
fleschly  loue.  And  sif  fei  sillen  treufe  \at  is  a  spiritual 
good  for  money  or  worldely  fyng^  fei  ben  cursed  symo- 
nyentis  &  so  h^retikis.  moche  owen  fei  to  quake,  sif  crist 
seif  in  f e  gospel  fat  who  eu^re  dispisif  cristis  disciplis,  in 

fat  he  dispisif  crist;  and  at  fe  day  of  dom  f^re  schal  be 

lesse  peyne  to  sodom  &  gomor,  fat  weren  distroied  for  synne, 
fan  to  fo  men  fat  wolen  not  resceyue  cristis  disciplis  and 
his  gospel,  ne  lyue  aft^r  fe  techyng  of  cristis  gospel, 

principaly  sif  suche  men  slen  crist  as  moche  as  in  hem  is, 
and  dryuen  fe  holy  gost  out  of  his  temple  &  fe  holy 

trynite ;  &  pt  fei  taken  f e  office  to  meyntene  goddis  lawe 
and  techeris  f^r-of,  &  vpon  fis  s^ruyces  fei  ban  fes  heip 
statis  &  lordischipis.  hut  c^rtis  it  is  foul  ypocrisie  fus 
But  lords  and  suffre  synne  regne,  sif  lordis  and  men  of  grete  statis, 
^eacrers^Mks  Hiaires,  ben  so  muche  biholden  to  destroie  it,  &  mowne 
and  chronicles,  ^glle  don  it  in  dede,  &  to  lette  trewe  pr^choris  of  f  e 

gospel,  &  meyntene  pri^chours  of  lesyngis,  fablis  &  cronyclys 
for  monye  &  worldely  frendschipe. 

Q^ipitulum  11.^ 

But  pt  ypocrisie  of  phariseis  is  most  cursed  &  perilous  of 
alle  ofere  ;  for  whawne  fei  ban  disceyued  cristendom  fis 
hu;^drid  ^eer  &  more  hi  ypocrisie  &  false  prechynge  of  fablis 
&  errouris  &  heresies,  magnifyenge  synful  mennas  ordenauwce 

omitted  X.  2  of  X.  2  omitted  X. 

^  This  is  headed  Chap.  XII.  in  X.  In  AA  Chap.  IX.  and  X.  are  run  together,  and 
this  is  marked  Chap.  X. 


Hypocrisy  of 
Pharisees  the 
worst. 


Chap.  XI.] 


OF  THE  LEAVEN  OF  PHARISEES. 


27 


abouen  goddis  lawe  &  ordenauwce,  &  drawen  pore  mennws 
almes  &  liflode  to  proude  beggeris  to  make  grete  wast  houses, 
and  desceyue  men  bi  fals  assoilyng,  bi  fals^  pardon,  bi  veyn^ 
preiers  &  synguler  or  specyal,  &  lettms  of  frat^rnite, 
puttynge  open  beggynge  &  clamours  on  ihw  crist,  J^awne  j^ei 
crien  fast  j^at  poore  pr^stis  treuli  &  frely  pri^chynge  j^e  gospel 
as  crist  biddi]?,  techynge  men  to  do  y^rray  penauwce  for  here 
synnes  &  not  trusten  ouermoche  to  false  pardon  &  cursed 
preieris  of  ypocritis,  &  to  do  here  almes  to  pore  feble  men 
crokid  &  blynde,  as  crist  sei]?  him  self ;  J^at  fei  ben  cause  of 
alle  ^  pert«<rbacio^  of  jie  rewme ;  but  J^ei  lyen  falsly  & 
openly  to  echo  trewe  man.  for  si]?  synne  is  cause  of  'pertur- 
bacion,  &  ]?es  pr^stis  ypon  here  kuwnynge  pat  god  jeue]?  hem 
of  holy  writt  &  ]7er-wi]?  bisien  hem  nyjt  &  day  to  distroye 
synne,  j7ei  ben  aboute  to  make  pees  betwixe  god  &  man. 
&  pei  pat  meyntenen  synne  bi  false  confessionys  &  ve}^ 
special  preieris  &  pardons  ben  most  cause  of  discencion  & 
werris.  but  here  pei  suen  pe  fadir  of  lesyngis  ptxt  stirede 
pe  heije  prestis  &  pharisees  in  cristis  tyme  to  pute  on 
hym  &  his  disciplis  pat  pei  disturbleden  pe  lond  of  iude  & 
wolden  distroie  it,  for  crist  and  his  disciplis  reproueden 
pe  coueitise,  ypocrisie  &  falsenesse  of  pe  heije  pr^stis  & 
false  pharisees,  so  pe  deuyl  steri]?  now  false  newe  pharisees 
of  synguler  religion  wi]?-oute  cristis  ordynamace,  pat  ben 
more  sotil  in  malice  &  lesyngis  and  ypocrisie  pan  ^  pe 
firste,  to  stoppe  pore  prestis  fro  prechynge  of  ‘^']?e  gospel  & 
reprouynge  of  synne,  for  bi  ]?is  offis  of  crist  don  treuly 
here  synnes  of  lesyngis  and  ypocrisie  schulde  be  knowen  and 
distroied  and  goddis  lawe  knowen  and  kept  and  synne  chasid 
out  of  lond.  but  false  ypocritis  stryuen  ajenst  ]?is  profet  of 
cristen  men,  &  clepen  techynge  of  pe  gospel  &  goddis  hestis 
newe  techynge,  &  techynge  of  verrey  penauwce  doynge  &  of 
rijtful  jeuynge  &  of  almes  and  open  prechynge  ajenst  synne 
errour  a^enst  charite.  God  kepe  cristen  men  fro  ypocrisie  & 
false  lesyngis  of  pharisees  and  here  meynte?^eris.  Amen. 

^  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X.  ^  X. 


They  accuse  poor 
priests  of  disturb¬ 
ing  the  realm, 


who  would  make 
peace  between 
God  and  man. 


The  High  Priests 
and  Pharisees  did 
so  with  Christ. 


Now  the  devil 
stirs  up  these  hy¬ 
pocrites  to  stop 
poor  priests  from 
preaching,  lest 
their  lies  and 
hypocrisy  should 
he  known. 

^■[p.  22  MS.] 


28 


II. 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PEELATES. 

I  DO  not  think  this  tract  is  by  Wyclif.  Its  tone  is  not  that  of  a  man 
who  has  known  the  Court  and  been  engaged  in  political  affairs,  but 
rather  of  some  poor  clergyman,  who  felt  the  burdens  laid  upon  him 
by  the  bad  government  of  the  Church,  and  spoke  from  the  bitterness 
of  his  personal  experience.  The  extravagant  expression,  ‘  two  or  three 
thousand  miles  ’  (p.  30),  points  in  the  same  direction.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  text,  1  Cor.  v,  5,  is  used  here  in  the  same  way  as  in  Prelates,  No.  lY. 
in  this  volume,  and  the  warning  against  misusing  the  freedom  given  by 
God  (p.  32)  recalls  a  fine  passage  in  the  tract  on  Peigned  Contemplative 
Life  (No.  X.). 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X,  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Summary. 

Chap.  I.  Prelates  charge  poor  priests  and  those  who  believe  with  them  that  they 
disobey  their  superiors,  that  they  make  light  of  excommunication,  and 
break  the  law.  They  are  willing  to  obey  as  far  as  they  may  in  accordance 
with  God’s  commandments.  But  there  is  a  hardship  in  men  being 
summoned  to  distant  places  for  no  good  purpose.  It  hinders  men  from 
doing  the  duties  which  God  commands.  Wickedness  of  prelates — their 
simony  and  other  sins.  If  prelates  will  do  their  duty,  poor  priests  will 
obey  them. 

II.  As  to  excommunication,  poor  priests  say  that  they  will  not  incur  God’s  curse 
for  anything  in  heaven  or  earth,  but  they  would  rather  he  wrongfully 
cursed  by  man  than  break  God’s  law.  Excommunication  often  inflicted 
from  spite.  Curates  ought  not  to  execute  letters  of  excommunication  which 
they  know  to  be  ill-grounded. 

III.  As  to  law,  true  men  will  obey  man’s  law  so  far  as  it  agrees  with  God’s.  Laws 
are  often  made  only  to  support  the  pride  and  pomp  of  prelates,  and  are  an 
undue  burden. 


I 


Chap.  I.] 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


29 


Hou  mm  owm  obesche  to  prelatis  drede  curs  & 

kepe  lawe. 

C2ipitulum.  ^rimum, 

Prelatis  sclauwdren  pore  pr^stis  &  o^pere  cristen  men  ]>at 
]7ei  wolen  not  obescbe  to  here  souereynes,  ne  dreden  curs, 
ne  drede  ne  kepe  J^e  lawe,  but  dispise  alle  |»ing  'pat  is  ajenst 
here  likynge.  And  herfore  J^ei  ben  werse  pan  iewis  or 
paynymes,  and  alle  lordis  &  pr^^lates  &  my^ti  men  schulden 
distroie  hem,  for  ellis  pei  wolen  distroie  holy  chirche  & 
make  eche  man  to  lyue  as  hym  liki]; ;  and  no  ]7ing  may 
niore  distroie  cristendom. 

^  But  here  poore  pr^stis  &  trewe  men  mekely  wolen  and 
wilfully  obesche  to  god  &  holy  chirche,  &  to  eche  man  in 
er]7e  in  as  myche  as  he  techi]?  treuly  goddis  comauwdementis 
&  profitable  treuj^e  for  here  soulis,  and  no  more  owij?  ony 
man  to  obeche  to  crist  god  &  man,  ne  to  ony  apostle,  and 
jif  ony  worldly  prelat  axe  more  obedience  he  his  an^Arist 
&  luciferis  maister,  for  ihu  crist  is  god  of  rijtwisnesse  & 
treu]7e  &  of  pees  &  charite,  and  may  not  do  a^enst  rijtwisnesse 
ne  treu]?e  ne  hel]?e  of  mennw5  soulis  ne  charite,  si]?  he  may 
not  lye  ne  denye  him  self,  hou  ]7anne  schulde  or  my^tte 
ony  synful  prelat  charge  men  and  constreyne  to  do  ajenst 
ry^twisnesse  &  hel]?e  of  soulis  and’^  good  conscience;  for 
crist  sei]?  in  ]?e  gospel  of  seynt  ion  pat  pe  sone  may  not  do 
but  pat  j^ing  he  hap  seyn  his  fadir  don;  &  ]7(?rfore  crist 
comauwdid  to  alle  me^  pat  ]7ei  schulde  not  bileue  to  him 
but  pf  he  dide  ]?e  werkis  of  pe,  fadir  of  heuene.  where 
cristen  men  schullen  be  constreyned  be  an^Aristis  clerkis  to 
don  aiter  here  comauwdement  whanne  ]?ei  don  not  werkis 
of  god  but  werkis  of  pe  fend  ?  &  ]7us  crist  spekij?  to  j^e  iewis 
&  axe]?  hem  whi  ]?ei  bileuen  not  to  hym  pf  he  sei]?e  trew]?e ; 
as  who  sei]?,  pf  he  seide  nou^t^  treu]?e  ]?ei  schulde  nou^t^ 

^  in  X.  2  omitted  X. 


Prelates  slander 
poor  priests, 
charging  them 
with  disobedi¬ 
ence  to  the  law, 


but  poor  priests 
are  willing  to 
obey  as  far  as 
God’s  command¬ 
ments  allow. 


John  V.  19. 


John  X.  37. 


John  viii,  [46]. 


30 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  I. 


bileue  to  bym.  and  ]>er-{or  crist  sei]?  to  j^e  iewis  who  of 
^on  schal  repreue  me  of  synne,  &  he  wold  \at  eche  maw 
hadde  do  so  ^if  he  myjtt  treuly.  \eHovQ  in  tyme  of  his  passion 
crist  seide  to  bischopis  seruaunt  whawne  he  smote  him 

John  xviii.  [23].  he  face:  ^'df  I  haue  spoken  euyl,  here  boR  witnesse  of 
euyl.  &  si]?  prelatis  ben  vikeris  of  cnst,  ]?ei  owen  to  suen 
to  hym  in  ]?is  obedience  &  axe  no  more  of  ony  man.  ^  But 

Prelates  want  here  is  ])e  sore  in  ]?is  obedience  ;  prelatis  axen  ]?at  pr^stis 

their  subjects  to  n  i 

come  to  any  dis-  &  ohere  sugetis  schulden  come  for  here  souereyns  whider 

tant  corner  of  the  ,  .  . 

diocese.  eu^re  hem  likid,  at  ]?e  fer]7este  place  of  here  diecise,  ]70u^ 

pr^latis  kuwnyn  not  holy  writt  ne  kepen  it,  but  don  opynly 
]?er  ajenst  many  weies ;  &  ]?is  is  wrong  for  many  skillis. 
first,  si]?  crist  god  &  man  sou^te  mannws  soule  lost  ]?oru^ 
synne  bi  ^ritti  ^eer  and  more  wi]?  grete  traiuele,  werynesse 
&  many  peynes,  bi  many  ]?ousand  myles  vpon  his  feet,  in  gret 
cold  and  stormes  &  tempestis,  prdatis  schulden  not  couch  e 
in  castellis  &  suffre  ]?e  fende  to  deuoure  cristene  soulis,  & 
]?anne  make  a  pore  man  to  renne  two  or  J’re  ]?ousand  myles 

With  their  wealth  ^  ^eue  hem  here  ensaumple  of  pride  &  ohere  synnes.  sil? 

and  horses,  they  ‘  ■'  j  j 

should  go  after  hei  han  SO  myche  tresour  &  grete  hors,  &  ben  heiie  vikeris 

thear  subjects.  /  o  ?  ^ 

of  crist  to  seue  his  lif  in  mekenesse  and  pouerte  and  harde 
tr^7ueile  to  sane  mennes  soulis,  and  si]?  ]>ei  ben  holden  to  spende 
here  catel  and  lese  here  bodily  lif  for  sauynge  of  cristen  soulis 
as  did  crist  &  his  apostelis,  myche  more  owe  ]>ei  to  spende 
a  litil  traueile  and  money  to  seke  &  visyte  synful  men  & 
esen  hem  ^  in  body  &  soule.  And  not  maken  hem  nedlis 
to  spende  here  litel  catel  and  be  iwpacient  &  grucchynge 
a^enst  god  &  man  &  out  of  charite.  for  we  reden  not  in 
al  ]?e  lawe  of  grwce  ]>at  crist  or  ony  of  his  disciplis  vsede 
]’is  symonynge  or  axid  ]?is  obedience  of  ony  synful  man  riche 
or  pore,  lord  whi  schulde  a  synful  ydiot  axe  more  obedience 
]?an  ^  diden  crist  &  his  apostelis  ?  &  we  rede  not  in  ]?e  lawe 
of  grace  crist  apperid  comuwly  bifore  ]?e  heije  pr^stis 
and  pharisees  fore  here  symonynge  ne  his  apostelis  after 
sendynge  of  ]?e  holy  goste,  But  jif  fei  weren  constreyned 

1  omitted  X.  2  j^^t  X. 


Chap.  I.] 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES, 


31 


bi  violence  or  ellis  ^if  |»ei  weren  \n  place  where  criste  tau^te 

in  Je  temple.  ^  Also  crist  techi]?  in  the  gospel  \at  a  man 

owi]?  to  leue  ]>&  lasse  good  &  do  |>e  more ;  si]?  he  comauwdid 

a  man  to  lene  ]?e  heriynge  of  his  fadir  and  go  pr^che  ]?e  Matthew  viii.  21. 

gospel.  ]?awne  a  pr(3st  schnlde  not  leue  prechynge  of  the  Priests shouidnot 

.  .  ...  go  away  from 

gospel  &  renne  to  vncerteyn  placis  for  biddynge  of  worldly  their  preaching. 

for  any  such 

prelatis,  enemyes  to  god  &  his  s^ruauwtis,  si]?  prechynge  bidding, 
of  ]?e  gospel  is  beWe  ]?an  bodely  rennynge  so  to  ferre  placis, 
for  peril  of  enemyes,  for  wastynge  of  pore  mennws  goodis, 
and  for  drede  of  rebelte  a^enst  god.  for  seynt  ierom  sei]? 
in  ]?e  popis  lawe  ]?at  he  \at  leue]?  ]?e  more  good  or  putte]? 
it  behynde  ]?e  lesse  good  synne]?  not  menely  but  greuously. 
si]?  siche  ^omonynge  of  prelatis  is  not  grouwdid  in  cristis  lif  *[p.  24  ms.] 
ne  his  apostelis  ne  reson,  but  in  an^mristis  power  bi  dowynge 
of  clerkis  wi]?  seculer  lordischipe  a^enst  holy  writt.  and 
]?us  iwstede  of  cristis  mekenesse  &  pouert  and  charite  and 
trewe  techynge  of  ]?e  gospel  is  broujt  in  worldly  pr/de  of 
prestis  and  coueitise  &  enuye  and  discencion  in  cristis  peple, 

&  bodily  turmentynge  bi  prestis,  as  ]?ou^  ]?ei  weren  worldly 
lordis  of  ]?e  kyngis  lege  men  bo]?e  of  bodi  &  of  catel,  & 
chargynge  of  soulis  wft/^  grete  chargis  ajenst  ]?e  fredom  of 
goddis  lawe  and  the  hel]?e  of  soulis  her-bi  broujt  in;  for 

]?es  worldly  prelatis  chargen  men  to  speke  not  apnst  here  Prelates  do  not 

pride  and  coueitise  ne  brynge  hem  to  ]?e  ordynau?^ce  of  cnst,  i^ad  a^^good\fe” 
but  ra]?er  to  lyue  hem  self  in  pride  and  falsnesse  of  ]?is  shouid^Tseen^in 
world  ]?an  to  turne  to  ]?e  mekenesse  and  trewe  lif  and  to  ]?enke 
on  here  de]?  day,  for  bi  ]?i8  goode  lif  of  seculeris  ]>q  lif  of 
worldly  prelatis  schulde  be  knowen  for  ypocrisie  and  cursed- 
nesse.  and  ]?us  bi  ]?is  feyned  power  of  somonynge  and 
cursynge  worldly  prelatis  ben  maad  cruel  turme?^tours  of 
.  cristis  seruauwtis,  and  schewen  hem  self  &  make,  but  Prelates  perse- 

falsly,  lordis  of  mennws  bodies  &  catel  &  soulis  also,  to  servants, 

stoppe  &  lette  good  lif  of  cristene  men,  ]?at  ]?e  holy  trynyte 
may  not  do  for  his  rijtwisnesse  &  charite;  but  where  ben 
falsere  an^mristis,  perilousere  heretikis,  &  cursedher  blasphe- 
meres.  ^  Also  no  man  owi]?  to  putte  by-hynde  goddis 


32 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES.  ' 


[Chap.  I. 


Prelates  make 
men  leave  their 
•wives  and 
families, 


and  make  curates 
leave  their  flocks 
unkept  among 
the  -wolves  of 
hell. 


Luke  vi.  39. 

Worldly  prelates 
are  blind  guides, 
who  lead  them¬ 
selves  and  others 
to  hell. 


»[p.  25  MS.] 


A  summons  to  a 
higher  judge  ex¬ 
cuses  from  at¬ 
tendance  on  a 
lower. 


biddynge  and  byddynge  of  a  synful  man  bifore  ;  &  god 
biddi]?  ecbe  man  vp  peyne  of  dampnacion  \at  ha]?  wif  & 
children  &  meyne  to  gouerne  hem  wel  \n  goddis  lawe. 
j^awne  no  weddid  man  owij?  to  leue  his  wife  &  children  & 
meyne  vngouerned,  &  goo  many  hundred  myles  in  drede 
of  ]7eues  &  enemyes,  &  wast  his  goodis  &  suffre  his  folk 
to  pmsche  in  soule  or  in  body,  and  myche  more  no  curat 
owij?  to  leue  his  schepe  vnkept  among  ]?e  wolues  of  helle, 
&  ride  with  grete  coost  to  ferre  placis  for  pride,  ennye  or 
coneitise  of  worldly  clerkis.  &  ]?is  reson  maki]?  sikernesse 
for  pr^stis  to  dewelle  with  goddis  peple  &  profite  to  hem, 
&  for  children  to  take  cure  of  here  heldris,  &  not  ride  ne 
renne  aboute  &  leue  fis  heste  of  god  vndon  for  somonynge 
of  worldly  pr^latis.  Also  crist  seij?  in  ]>q  gospel  ]iat  pf 
]?e  blynde  lede  ]7e  blynde  ]?ei  fallen  bo]?e  into  ]?e  lake.  ]?awne 
si]?  worldly  prelatis  ben  blynde  in  goddis  lawe,  bo]?e  in 
kuwnynge  \er-oi  &  lif  per-after,  no  man  schulde  be  led 
bi  hem  in  kepynge  of  his  soule,  for  drede  lest  ]?ei  falle  bo]? 
in- to  ^ helle.  For  si]>]?e  ]?ei  ledyn  hemself  to*  helle-ward  for 
ignorauwce  of  holy  writt  or  coueitise  of  worldeli  worschipe, 
hei^e  states  &  worldly  muk,  ]>ei  wolen  lede  opere  men  ]?e 
same  weie.  &  ]>us  I’ei  ben  cursed  of  god,  for  pat  pat  is  good 
&  goddis  lawe  ]»ei  dampnen  for  euyl  &  erroure,  ^  pat  pat  is 
errour  &  ^  euyl  a^enst  goddis  lawe  ]?ei  chesen  &  techen  for 
good  and  profytable  ;  &  ]?us  J^ei  dampnen  hemself  &  alle 
pat  ben  led  bi  hem.  Also  bi  reson  &  mannw^  lawe  pf 
a  man  be  somonyd  to-gidre  to  pe  hei^ere  iuge  &  a  lasse 
he  schal  be  excused  fro  pe  lasse  bi  pe  vertue  of  pe  hei^ere 
iuge;  but  eche  man  is  somoned  first  of  god  to  worschipe 
hym  in^  alle  his  witt  &  alle  his  my^t,  bifor  pat  a  worldly 
prelat '  somone  hym  to  renne  aboute,  in  whiche  rennynge 
his  witt  &  his  my^t  schullen  be  perid ;  panne  bi  \ertue  of 
]?is  cheef  domesman  he  owi]?  to  be  excused  fro  ]?is  somonynge 
of  worldly  prelat.  but  be^  pe  suget  ware  of  feynynge  here, 
pat  he  waste  not  ne  mysvsse  pe  pftis  of  god  vnder  colowr 
omitted  X.  2_2  omitted  X.  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


Chap,  I.] 


HOiy  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


33 


of  fis  fredom;  for  god  wole  haue  rekennynge  of  echo 
dede,  of  echo  word,  &  of  echo  ]7ou^t,  &  of  eche  jifte,  & 
echo  tyme,  &  moment.  And  be  fe  worldly  prelat  ward  of 
blasphemye  here,  J?at  he  compelle  not  for  his  pride  fis 
suget  to  putte  bihynde  ]>e  betre  worschipynge  of  god  and 
vnd^r  colour  of  obedience  make  hym  to  myspende  ]>e  tyme  & 
goddis  pftis.  ^  Also  men  of  lawe  &  resoun  seyn  it  is  worst 
of  alle  to  take  ^  dom  vndir  a  suspect  domesman ;  but  f  es 
worldly  '  prelatis  ben  suspect  domesmen  anemtis  goddis  These  prelates 

are  suspected 

seruau?^tis,  for  been  enemys  to  J7e  persone  of  cnstis 
seruau^ztis  &  also  to  cause  of  god.  for  comuwly  J^ei 
comen  to  here  statis  bi  symonye  &  so  ben  heretikis,  as  he  Prelates  mostly 

^  come  to  their 

popis  lawe  sei]?,  &  contynen  ^  in  pride,  coueitise,  extorciou?^s,^  simon^ 

&  meyntenynge  of  here  synne  &  o\erQ  mennys  for  annuel 
rente,  &  haten  &  pursuen  bof  e  cnstis  lawe  &  his  S(9ruauwtis 
\at  speken  ajenst  here  synne,  to  amende  hem  \er-oS.  &  alle 
\at  ben  vnkunnynge  in  goddis  lawe ;  how  schulde  a  treue 
man  be  demyd  bi  suspect  iuges.  &  siche  vnkunnynge  & 
euyl  leuynge  pnlatis  ben  most  hardy  to  dampne  trewe 
^  treuthis  of  holi  writ  &  pwrsue  trewe  ^  men  to  prison  &  de]? 

J;at  meyntenen  holy  writt  &  trewjje  ajenst  here  coueitise, 

pride,  symonye  &  lustis.  ^  And  newe  religious  assessours  The  assessors 

of  fes  vnkunnynge  worldely  prelatis  ben  more  suspect  fan  lates  take  from 

ony  o\er ;  for  f  ei  grounden  hem  in  f  is,  \at  holy  writt  is  are  uniS;\o judge*. 

fals  but  here  owen  doctonrs  and  gloses  ben  trewe.  And 

so  fei  putten  falsnesse  &  defaute  of  witt  in  god,  &  seyn 

fat  a  synful  ydiot  &  in  caas  a  deuyl  of  belle  is  trewere, 

wittiere  &  more  ful  of  charite  &  myjt  to  teche  men  treuf e 

fanne  is  fe  trinyte  &  ihu  crist  god  &  man.  &  fei  haten 

more  cristis  s^ruauntis  f«t  stonden  for  fe  trewfe  of  holy 

writt  &  ihu  cristis  leuynge  &  reprouen  here  ypocrisie  & 

schewen  here  falsnesse  to  f e  peple ;  and  fey  ®  ben  more  sotil 

in  malice,  &  dysceyuen  more  lordis  &  ladies  &  fe  comunes 

in  feif  &  charite,  &  maken  hem  to  triste  \at  it®  is  almes 

^  make  AA.  ^  conteynen  X.  ®  omitted  X. 

omitted  X.  ®  omitted  X.  *  omitted  X. 


34 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  I. 


*[p.  26MS.]  to  distroye  trewe  men  stonden  ^for  goddis  lawe  &  trewe 

lyuynge.  &  ]7us  ]7e  dampnable  ignorauwce  of  goddis  lawe 

&  cursed  lif  of  ]7es  worldly  prelatis  &  stronge  meyntenynge 

of  here  owen  synne  &  o]7ere  mennws  ben  cause  whi  pore 

prestis  &  cristen  men  ban  hem  suspect  of  heresie  &  enemyte 

bojje  of  goddis  cause  &  his  seruauntis;  &  j^^r-fore  ]^e  flen 

2  John,  10.  fro  hem  as  an^ecrist  and  heretykes,  as .  ioon  jie  eu^wngelist 

Let  prelates  do  techib  in  his  epistilis.  But  lete  prelatis  studie  bisili  &  treuly 
their  duty,  and  ^  ^  ^  .  .  .  *^ 

obey  th^em\ruiy^  ^  writt  &  lyuen  opyn  wel  ]7er-aftir,  and  distroie  opyn 
synne  of  oj^^re  men  be  here  witt  and  myjt,  &  pore  prestis 
&  cristene  men  wij^-outen  ony  somonynge  wolen  wi]?  gret 
traueile  and  cost  and  wille,  jee  bi  londe  &  bi  water,  mekely 
come  to  hem  &  don  hem  obedience  &  reuerence,  as  J7ei 
wolden  to  petir  &  poul  &  cristis  apostlis.  deme  fe  world 
whe]7(?r  ]7is  dyuysion  belong  on  worldely  prelatis  vnkuwnynge 
and  cursed  of  lif,  or  on  pore  prestis  and  trewe  men  j^at  fayn 
desiren  ny^t  &  day  to  knowe  goddis  wille  &  worschipe 
&  do  it  bifore  alle  o\erQ  fingis. 


C2ipitulum.  2'”- 


Christian  men 
will  not  deserve 
God’s  curse 
for  any  worldly 
good, 


As  to  cursynge,  cristen  men  seyn'trewely  }at  fei  dreden 
it  so  moche  J^at  Jjei  wollen  not  wilfully  &  wityngly 
disserue  goddis  curse,  neij^^r  for  good  in  er]7e  ne  in  heuene ; 


hut  they  will  ue  mannws  curse  in  as  myche  as  it  acordif  wif  fe  ri^tful 

gladly  suifer 
man’s  curse 

break  God’s  law.  suffre  mann^(!s  wrongful  curs  fan  wityngly  &  wilfully 


curs  of  god;  but  fei  wolle  wif  grete  ioie  of  soule  raf^re 


breke  ony  comauwdement  of  god  for  to  Wynne  fer-bi  alle 
worschipis  of  fis  world,  and  to  kepe  here  body  in  alle 
likyngis  neuere  so  longe ;  &  raj^ere  to  suffre  sclauwdryng 
&  backityng  and  prisonyng  and  exilid,  hangyng,  drawyng, 
quarterynge  and  brennynge  wif  helpe  and  grace  of  god 
fan  to  forsake  fe  treufe  of  holy  writt  &  lif  of  crist,  for 
ellis  fei  weren  not  in  charite  ne  in  weie  of  saluacion.  but 
Antichrist’s  an^Aristis  clerkis  magnyfien  so  myche  mannw5  curs  fat 
ma?s curse^^^^  fei  taken  noon  hede  to  fe  dredeful  curs  of  god;  as  ^if 

^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  II  ] 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


35 


men  were  more  my^tti  &  ri^tful  }?an  is  almy^tti  god  m 
trynyte.  for  ]70u^  men  broken  opynly  alle  ]?e  comauwde- 
me^^^tis  of  god  &  lyuen  in  pride,  coneityse,  enuye,  glotonye 
and  c>\er  synnes,  but  pf  it  be  lecberie,  \erQ  renne]?  no 
mannws  curs;  ne  for  lecberie  pf  men  wolen  paie  rente  bi 
^eere  &  dwelle  stil  ^er-irme,  als  longe  as  bym  lisle ;  so  al  j^e 
drede  is  turned  to  mannws  curs  and  no  J^ing  to  goddis  curs. 

^  But  pf  a  man  trespas  litel  or  noujt  apnst  a  pr^lat 
or  apnst  J^e  wynnywge  of  clerkis,  he  schal  be  cursed  & 
pursued  j^at  al  |»e  ende  of  his  kyn  may  haue  sorowe  j^^rfore ; 
^ee,  ]70u^  a  treu]7e  of  holy  writt  &  reson  be  seid  bi  charite 
apnst  jje  pride,  coueitise  &  open  wrong  ]>at  pr(?latis  don 
to  here  nei^boris,  bo|>e  in  here  gostly  offis  &  also  worldly 
wrongis;  and  here-bi  j^ei  ponyschen  more  for  here  owen 
dispit  or  wrong  ]7an  for  dispit  of  god  almy^tty.  ^  But  here 
men  musen  ^  whi  pr^latis  ben  so  redy  to  curse  in  here  owne 
cause,  si]7  petir  techi]?  cristen  men  to  blisse  &  not  no  werie 
ne  curse;  &  god  biddi]?  vs  loue  oure  enemyes  &  don  good 
to  hem  \at  haten  .vs,  and  to  preie  for  men  ])ai  falsly 
pursuen  vs.  si]?  he  cu[r]se]?  ano]?(9r  man  for  his  owne 
vengauwce  or  worldly  catel  more  ]>mne  for  to  venge  synne 
don  apnst  god  &  for  ]?e  hel]?e  of  J?e  cursed  mann«^s  soule 
cursij?  hiw-self,  for  he  doi]?  apnst  charite,  as  gregori  techij? 
in  ]7e  popis  lawe.  cartes  men  dreden  pat  ]?es  pV(?latis  be;^ 
ful  of  goddis  curse  for  here  symonye  in^  here  entre,  & 
sillynge  of  sacr^^raewtis  &  gostly-  officis,  as  ordres  jeuynge  for 
money,  &  halwynge  of  chirchis  &  auteris,  &  for  extorcions 
of  pore  men,  &  meyntenynge  of  synful  men  in  here  synne 
for  money,  pat  j^ei  ban  no  part  of  goddis  blissyng  and 
perfoie  cursed  fruyt  spryngi]?  out  of  a  cursed  tree. 

^  Lord,  whi  schulde  curatis  pranouwsen  here  hieperm  a 
cursed  for  nakid  lettris  of  syche  coueitous  pr^latis,  enemyes 
of  crist  &  his  s^ruauntis,  whe^  J^ei  knowe  no  cause  bi-for 
god  where-for  ]?ei  be  cwrsed  of  hym  but  han  euydence  bi 
spekynge  &  open  lif  of  here  neiejboris  pat  |?ei  ben  in  good 


They  curse  for  HO 
sin  but  lechery, 
and  for  that  they 
will  take  a  rent. 


Men  cursed  for 
personal  oifences, 


*[p.  27  MS,] 

even  for  rebukes 
given  in  charit 


1  Peter  ii.  [23  ?] 
Matt.  V.  [44.] 


23qu.  4c'^‘  inter 
querelas. 


These  prelates 
are  cursed  by 
God  for  their 
simony. 


Curates  should 
refuse  to  execute 
these  letters  of 
excommunica¬ 
tion  if  they  know 
them  to  he  un¬ 
just. 


f  mowe  sen  X. 


2  &  X. 


36 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  II. 


lif  &  in  charite.  Si]?  crist  seij?  in  ]?e  gospel  \at  lie  \at 

Matt.  V.  22.  sei]?  to  his  bro]?er  :  ]?ou  fool !  wi]?-out  sufficiente  cause,  & 

he  ]?at  sei]?  to  his  hxo'per  pat  hap  pe  holi  gost  wi]?  good 

lif  &  charite  pat  he  is  voide  &  wi]7-oute  kuwnynge,  schal 

he  gilti  of  helle,  'wheper  ]?is  be  charite  to  curse  a  man  for 

Poor  men  cursed  sexe  pans  whan  he  may  vnnej'is  lyue  be  al  his  traueile, 
for  sixpence.  /.i  t,  i  r-i 

&  for  he  trauelip  not  at  here  som[_owJynge  an  hundrid  myle 
or  moo  or  lesse  &  lene]?  not  his  wif  &  children  yngouerned. 
for  pf  a  preste  pronouwse  siche  a  man  a  cursed  j^at  is  blissed 
of  god  he  lip]>  vpon  his  bro}>(gr  &  beri]’  fals  witenesse  apnst 
goddis  dom.  for  ]?ou^  he  apere  not  at  here  somonynge  to 
^euen  hem  mony  at  here  wille,  he  may  hen  excused  apnst 
god .  &  man  for  many  skillis.  periox  ]?is  nakid  lettre  of 
coueitouse  pr^latis  is  no  sykirnesse  anemtis  god  to  pro- 
nouwse  a  cristen  man  for  cursed,  &  noon  obedience  schulde 
constreyne  a  priest  to  wittenesse  a  falshede  apnst  his  broj^^r 
and  apnst  his  conscience  hut  jif  it  be  an^mristis  obedience, 
for  Curtis  god  wole  not  constreyne  a  man  to  ]?is  false 
ohedyence.  Lord,  where  an^^’cnst  &  his  clerkis  schuUen. 
Prelates  might  :?[f  p^glatis  knowen  pat  Ms  man  were  cursed  of  god  for 

to^^^ve^broTen  ^rokyug  of  his  hestis  ]7ei  my^ten  pronouwse  ]?is  to  ]7e  peple 
to  make  opere  men  to  flee  his  companye  as  an  he]>ene 
mannys.  But  comuwly  fei  knowe  not  ]?is  so  wel  as  opere 
pore  men,  '^'for  pei  taken  no  reward  to  pe  hestis  of  god, 
but  al  to  here  owen  lawes  &  customes.  J?e  apostelis  hadde« 
]?is  power  when  a  synful  man  was  rebel  apnst  goddis  lawe 
to  pue  pe  fend  power  of  his  body  to  tr^^ueilen  it,  so  pat 
Prelates  pretend  pe  soule  Were  saaf.  But  owre  prflatis  ban  not  ]?is  power, 
to  slay  t  eso  .  feynen  pat  ]?ei  sleen  pe  soule  hi  per  cursyng 

wawne  pe  bodi  is  neuere  pe  werse,  &  panne  pei  techen  lordis 
and  teach  lords  to  cnprisone  pe  hodi  aftir  fourti  daies  a  cursyng,  pou^  pe 
bod^y^after ’forty  niau  be  cwrsed ^  for  holdyng  goddis  hestis ;  &  maken  lordis 
to  ben  turmentowris  of  cristene  men,  whawne  pe  fendis 
doren  not  touche  hem  for  drede  of  god.  ]?is  cursynge  schulde 
he  suspendid  for  pml  on  alle  sidis,  and  trewe  techynge  of 


God’s  command¬ 
ments. 


*[p.  28  MS.] 
1  Cor.  V.  5. 


days’  curse. 


^  blessed  AA. 


Chap.  III.] 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


37 


cristis  gospel  &  holy  ensaumplis  of  prelatis  lif  &  manasynge 
of  p^rgatorie  &  helle  and  confortynge  of  ]7e  blisse  of  heuene 
schnlde  be  schewed  &  regne  among  cristene  peple ;  and  J^es 
foure  schulden  maken  men  to  flee  synne  &  lyue  wel  &  ende 
in  p^rfit  charite,  &  J’is  were  best  for  alle  parties. 

Capitulum 

As  to  lawe,  trewe  men  seyn  fat  f ei  willen  mekely  &  i™as^S 
wilfully  drede  &  kepe  goddis  lawe  vp  here  kuwnynge  &  oVd’s^^iaw 
my^t,  &  eche  lawe  of  mai>«Des  makynge  in  as  myche  as  fei 
witen  fat  it  aeordif  wif  goddis  lawe  &  reson  &  good  con¬ 
science  &  to  f e  rijtful  execucion  f er-of ;  &  god  him  self  may 
bynde  man  no  more  to  his  owen  lawe  for  his  endeles  ri^twis- 
nesse  &  charite  f«t  he  haf  to  mawnes  soule.  lord,  where 
synful  men  \at  ben  an^mristis,  &  in  caas  deuelis  in  flesch  & 
blood,  may  bynde  men  more  to  here  wickid  lawis  &  wrong 
execucions  of  hem  fawne  god  wille  bynde  hem  to  his  most 
ri^tful  lawe  &  profitable,  cristen  men  knowen  wel  of  feif 
fo^t  neifor  petir  ne  ponl  ne  ony  creature  may  do  ou]t-lawe- 
fully  a^enst  fe  trewf  e  of  holi  writt  ne  ajenst  f  e  edificacion  of 
holy  chirche,  fo^t  is  good  techynge  &  gouornynge  &  amend- 
ynge  of  cristene  soulis.  what  power  han  fan  worldly 
prolatis  to  make  so  many  wickid  lawes  ?  sif  god  cursef 
hem  hcti  maken  wickid  lawes,  &  comauwdif  fo^t  no  man  schal  God  bids  that  no 

^  ,  -*  ■*  man  add  to  his 

adde  to  his  wordis  ne  drawe  fro  hem  vp  peyne  of  grete  words. 

cursynge  of  god  &  dawpnynge  in  helle.  fat  is  to  seie  fat  no 

man  adde  false  sentence  ne  false  glose  to  holy  writt,  for 

fan,  as  ierom  seif,  he  is  an  heretik ;  and  fat  no  man  drawe 

ony  treufe  fro  goddis  wordis,  for  fei  enclosen  alle  nedeful 

treufe  &  profitable  for  mannys  soule.  &  to  fis  entente  sif 

poul  in  his  pistel  fat  pf  ony  man,  ^ee  apostil  or  angel  of  Gai.  i.  8, 

heuene,  proche  ofor  f ing  fan  is  taujte  of  crist  &  his  apostelis 

^  he  is  cursid.  And  Seint  Jon  seife,^  in  f e  ende  of  fe  Rev.  xxU.  18. 

apocalips,  fat  pf  ony  man  adde  fus  to  goddis  wordis,  god 

schal  brynge  vpon  hym  alle  fe  vengauwces  wryten  in  fe 

omitted  X. 


38 


HOW  MEN  OUGHT  TO  OBEY  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  III. 


*[p.  29  MS.] 

God’s  law  enough 
to  study. 


Isa’-ah  xxix.  13. 
Matt.  XV.  8,  9. 


Saints  in  the 
pope’s  law  bid  us 
obey  only  Christ. 


1  Peter  iv.  11. 


apocalips,  &  pf  ony  man  wi]7drawe  jjus  fro  goddis  wordis> 
god  schal  don  hym  out  of  bok  of  lif.  ^  Lord,  si]?  goddis 
lawe  is  so  myclie  &  so  hard  to  vndirstowde,  as  austyn  & 
o\erQ  seyntis  techen,  ]?at  ]?ou^  echo  man  hadde  neuere  so  gret 
witt  &  my^tte  lyue  hool  &  sond  in  bodi  &  wittis  til  fe  day 
of  dome,  he  schulde  eu^re  haue  ynowj  to  lerne  and  ocupie 
him  ]?mne  at  j^e  fulle,  whi  schulle  wordly  curatis  & 
prelatis  ^  make  so  many  bokis  of  here  newc  lawis  for  to 
meyntene  here  pride  &  coueitise  &  worldly  array  ?  si]?  men 
be  nowe  of  lesse  wittis  &  schortere  tyme  &  feblere  of  com¬ 
plexion.  certis  pe  chargen  men  ou^r  my^t  &  maken  hem 
bysy  to  kuwne  wrongful  tradiciouws  of  synful  folis  makynge 
&  to  leue  holy  writt  vnstudied,  vnknoud  &  vnkept ;  &  ]?is  is 
a  sotil  cautel  of  pe  fend  to  for-do  goddis  lawe  &  knowynge 
&  loue  of  oure  goode  god.  And  p&rfore  crist  pleyne]?  of  ]?is 
peple,  bi  pe  prophete  ysaie,  &  in  pe  gospel  also,  pat  is  peple 
worschipi]?  him  in  lippis  but  here  herte  is  fer  fro  god,  &  fei 
worschipen  hym  witA-outen  cause,  for  ]?ei  techen  pe  loris  of 
men  &  here  mauwdemewtis.  &  pt  seyntis  in  pe  popis  lawe 
reprouen  euyle  lawis  vngrouwdid  in  holy  writt  &  reson,  &  hem 
pat  maken  hem  also,  &  seyn  pat  we  owen  to  take  hede  what 
crist  sei]?,  &  to  no  man  ellis  but  in  also  myche  as  he  acordi]? 
wij?  cHst,  &  he  his  false  pat  sei]?  or  teche]?  ony  ]?ing  pat  is 
not  euydently  grouwdid  in  goddis  lawe.  &  perfore  seynt 
petyr  comauwdij?  pf  ony  speke,  loke  he  speke  as  goddis  wordis. 
]?us  ]7es  worldly  pr^latis  drawen  cristen  men  fro  holy  writt 
pat  is  pe  beste  lawe  &  constreyne  men  to  here  owne  lawis  ful 
of  errour,  maad  to  coloure  here  cwrsed  pride  &  coueitise ;  for 
]7ei  ponysche  men  sorere  for  broken  of  here  owen  lawis  ]?an 
for  brekynge  of  goddis  lawe,  &  louen  &  chirischen  men  of 
here  lawe  and  dispisew  &  putte?^  abac  men  of  goddis  lawe. 
Late  wordly  pr^latis  ceesse  to  schlauwdre  pore  men,  seynge 
pat  ]7ei  wolen  not  obesche  to  here  souereyns  &  dreden  not 
curs  but  dispise  lawe.  for  in  alle  fes  fre  J>ei  ben  clere  bifore 
god  &  man  pf  rijt  &  reson  &  charite  be  wel  sou^t. 

^  X.  inserts  and. 


39 


III. 

THE  EHLE  AND  TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FKANCIS. 

This  tract  is  distinguished  among  the  many  directed  against  the  friars 
by  its  method  of  attack.  The  first  and  longer  part  consists  merely  in 
a  translation  of  the  rule  by  which  the  Franciscans  admitted  themselves 
bound,  and  the  comment  confines  itself  to  pointing  out  how  completely 
that  rule  was  disregarded  or  evaded.  The  peculiar  interest  of  the 
tract  lies  in  its  bringing  before  us  how  nearly  in  its  idea  the  Franciscan 
order  approached  the  body  of  poor  priests,  whom  Wyclif  sent  out  to 
preach.  When  the  writer  complains  that  at  Eome  “false  menours  ” 
persecute  those  who  would  keep  Francis’  rule  to  the  letter,  we  have  an 
expression  of  the  sympathy  which  we  might  have  divined  between  the 
Lollards  and  the  Spiritual  Franciscans.  (Cf.  the  Tract  on  the  Leaven 
of  Pharisees.)  But  before  we  have  read  to  the  end  we  find  the  author 
true  to  the  “  freedom  of  the  gospel,”  which  Wyclif  consistently  preached, 
declaring  that  no  other  order  than  Christ’s  is  needed,  since  those  who 
can  carry  out  the  highest  and  best  life  have  that  duty  laid  upon  them 
by  Christ’s  order  to  serve  God  with  all  their  heart  and  all  their  strength. 
We  may  compare  with  this  the  saying  (S.  E.  W.  III.  452),  “Every 
conseil  of  Crist  is  to  sum  man  and  sum  tyme  a  precept.” 

I  think  that  the  author  is  Wyclif.  The  tract.  Fifty  Heresies  of  Friars, 
printed  by  Mr.  Arnold  (No.  24),  seems  like  an  amplification  of  this ;  and 
it  is  probably  of  later  date,  as  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  is 
attacked  there,  but  not  mentioned  here. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.,X,  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  A  A, 
and  with  the  Oxford  MS.  W.  All  through  W.  has  \o  for  fe ;  hor  for  her  ; 
hom  for  hem ;  and  has  the  third  person  singular  in  s. 

SUMMAEY. 

The  greater  part  of  this  tract  is  simply  a  translation  from  the  Latin  of  the  law  laid 
down  for  the  Franciscans  by  their  founder.  To  this  is  added  a  short  comment,  pointing 
out — 

1st.  That  the  testament  is  binding  upon  Franciscans  ; 

2nd.  That  the  Franciscans  keep  neither  rule  nor  testament,  failing  in  obedience, 
in  poverty,  and  in  charity. 

After  this  general  statement  of  their  faults  comes  an  account  of  various  ways  in  which 
they  evade  the  letter  of  the  rule.  The  tract  ends  with  a  declaration  that  no  rule  is  of 
use  except  so  far  as  it  agrees  with  that  laid  down  by  Christ. 


40 


RULE  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


[Chap.  I. 


JJis  liis  J>e  reule  of  seynt  fraunseis. 

Capitulum  primum. 

The  rule  is  to  pe  reule  and  lyuynge  of  frere  menours  is  l^is :  to  kepe 
lioly  gospol  of  onro  lord  ihu  crist,  lyuynge  in  obedience, 
poverty,  and  wil'-outen  propre,  &  in  chastitie.  Prere  frauwseis  biheti]?^ 
cnastity.  obedience  and  reuerence  to  ]?e  lord  ]?e  pope  honorie,  &  to  his 

successouris,  ]>g  whiche  entren  bi  gen_^ral  &  holy  eleccion,  & 
to  j^e  chirche  of  rome,  &  be  oj^^re  freris  holden  to  obesche^ 
to  frere  frau?^seis  &  to  his  successowris. 


Of  hem  ]?«t  wole^  take  }>is  lif,  hou  }?ei  schulle^  be 

resceyued. 


m.3 


Any  one  desiring 
to  enter  the  Order 
is  to  be  examined 
by  the  provincial 
minister. 

«[p.  30  MS.] 


He  must  have  no 
■wife  or  must  dis¬ 
pose  of  her  pro¬ 
perly. 


Capitulum  2 

^if  ony  wille  take  J^is  lif,  &  comen  to  oure  hre]?&ren,  sewde 
hem  to  \q  mynystris  prouyncials,  to  whom  only,  &  not  to 
o\ere,  be  grauntid  ^leue  to  resceyue  freris.  jierfore  late  ]7e 
mynystris  diligently  examyne  hem  of*  }>e  comuw  fei]?  and 
\e  sacr(?mentis  of  holy  chirche,  j^at  pf  j^ei  beleuen  alle  j^es 
j^ingis,  and  wilen  fej^fully  knowleche  hem,  &  stedefastly  kepe 
hem  to  \e  ende  of  J^e  world,  &  pf  ]7ei  han  noon  wyues,  or 
pf  ]7ei  han  wyues  &  here  wyues  ben  entrid  in- to  religion,  or 
ellis  j^at  here  wyues  han  puen  here  housbondis  lyue®  bi 
auctorite  of  ]ie  bischop  of  ]7e  diocise  &  now  maad  a  yow  of 
chastite  or  cowtynce,  and  here  wyues  ben  of  sich  age  \at 
noon  euyl  suspecion  may  be  reysed  of  hem,  late  J^e  prouyn- 
cials  seie  to  hem  wordes  of  \e  holi  gospel  ]>ai  jiei  goo  & 
sille  alle  here  goodis  &  pue  hew^  to  pore  men,  &  pf  ]7ei  may 
not  do  j^is  here  goode  wille  is  ynow  to  hem ;  &  be  ^e  freris 
&  here  mynystris  war  \at  }»ei  be  not  bisi  of  here  temporal 
goodis,  ]7at  ]7ei  don  freli  of  here  j^ingis  what  euore  \e  lord 
inspiri]?®  to  hem.  ^  Ne}>eles  pf  conseil  be  nedful  her-to,  haue 
jje  mynystris  leue  to  sende  hem  to  suwme  men  'pat  dreden  god, 
bi  whos  conseil  here  goodis  schullen  be  puen  to  pore  men. 
aftirward  grauwte  pe  mynystris  to  hem  cloj7is  of  probacion, 
pat  is  tb'^  seie  tweie®  cotis  or  kirtlis  wi]7-outen  hood  and 
a  girdil  &  a  brech  &  a  chaperon  to  pe  girdel,  but  pf  oper 
fing  aftor  god  be  seyn  to  ye  mynystris.  ^  But  whawne  pe 
per  of  probacion  is  endid  be  J^ei  resceyued  to  obedience, 
bihetynge  to  kepe  fis  lif  &  reule ;  &  in  no  manure  schal  it 

*  bebetis  W.  2  obesfe  X.  ^  In  W.  this  is  reckoned  as  part  of  Chapter  I. 

^  for  X.  ®  leeve  W.  ®  enproprif  X. ;  inspiraverit  Lat.  omitted  X.  ®  two  W. 


Must  give  a-way 
all  bis  posses¬ 
sions. 


Is  to  bave  a  year 
of  probation. 


Chap.  III.] 


RULE  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


41 


be  lelfel  to  hem  to  goo  out  of  fis  ordre  vp  ^  fe  oomauwdement  once  fully  ad- 
of  le  lord  j^e  pope,  for  aftir  ])&  holy  gospel  no  man  sendynge  ^ay^'^e^e  the 
his  hond  to  ^e  plowj  and  lokenge  a-]en  is  able  to  j^e  Order, 
kyngdom  of  god.  &  haue  ^ei  J^at  han  bihi^t  obedience  cotis 
or  kirtlis’^  wi]?  an  hood  and  an  o^er  wifouten^  hood;  Jei 
\at  wilen  haue  schon  &  be  nedid  l^r-to  may  here  hem. 

^  And  be  alle  freris  clojid  wi]?  foule  clojis,  &  Jei  may  pese  aii  friars  to  wear 
hem  ajen  or  cloute  hem  of  sacchis  &  oj^^re  pecis  wi]?  J7e  foul  clothes  and 
blissyng  of  god.  And  I  moneste  &  stire  fes  freris  fei  Ss. 
dispise  not  and  deme  not  \o  men  whom  J^ei  seen  clo^id  wij? 
softe  Clovis  &  colourid,  &  vse  delicat  metis  &  drynkis,  but 
more  eche  of  hem  deme  &  dispise  him  self. 


Of  goddis  seruyce  &  fastywgys,  &  hou  freris  schullen 

go  bi  ]>Q  world. 

'‘Capitulum  3”**^ 

Do  clerkis  deuyn  oflScis®  aft^r  j^e  ordre  of  ]>o^  holy  chirche  Clerks  to  say 
of  rome,  out  taken  ]>e  sautir,  of  wheche  j^ei  may  haue  ex^ept^^arthey 
breuyaries,  pat  is  smale  sauteris  or  abreggid;  but  late  lewid  may  use  abridged 
freris  seie  four  &  twenti  pater  nostris  for  matynes,  for  laudis  Laymen  to  say 
fyue,  for  prime,  tierce,  vndren  &  noon,  for  eche  of  hem  seuene  76  paternosters 
pater  nostris,  &  for  euensong  twelue,  &  for  compleyn  seuene. 

^  And  preie  ]7ei  for  dede  men.  and  faste  pei  fro  J^e  feste  of  fasting, 
alle  hawen7  til  pQ  natyuyte  of  crist,  &  ]70®  holy  lenten  j^at  *[p- ms.] 
bygynne]?  fro  pe  twelve  day  of  cristemasse  to  pe  fulle  fourti 
dales,  jje  whiche  lenten  oure  lord  halwid  wi]?  j^is  holy  fast, 
be  lei  blissed  of  pe  lord  j7at®  fasten  wilfully  ]7is  lenten;  & 
be  lei  not  constreyned  pat  wilen  not,  but  faste  lei  anol^r 
lenten  til  le  resurrecciouw  of  le  lord,  but  in  opere  tymes 
ben  lei  not  holden  to  faste  but  on  le  friday ;  but  in  tyme  of 
opyn  nede  ben  le  freris  not  boR7^den  to  bodily  fast,  but 
I  conseile,  amoneste,  and  stire  my  freris  in  oure  lord  ihu  Friars  to  behave 
crist  lat  whawne  lei  gon  bi  le  world  lat  lei  chide  not  and  ^troad^^^ 
stryue  not  bi  wordis,  &  lat  lei  iuge  not  ol^re  men,  but 
lat  lei  ben  mylde,  peisble  and  manerly,  homly  &  meke, 
spekynge  of  al  lingis  as  it  is  semely.  &  lat  fei  schullen 
not  ride  but  jif  lei  ben  nedid  for  opyn  nede  or  siknesse.  ^  In¬ 
to  what  euere  hous  lei  schullen  entre  seie  lei  first,  pees  be 
to  lis  hous,  &  aftir  le  holy  gospel  be  it  lefiul  to  hem  to  ete 
of  alle  metis  lat  ben  sett  to  hem,  as  I  haue  seid. 


^  upon  W.  2  coote  or  kirtel  W.  ^  wi]?  an  out  X.  and  AA. 

cap°i- ij™*  W.;  omitted  X.  ^  office  W.  ®  omitted  X.  and  AA. 

’  halowe  W.  ®  omitted  X.  and  AA.  ^  &  X.  j^an  X. 


42 


RULE  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


[Chap.  IV. 


pat  Freris  resceyuew  no  money. 

Capitulum  4'”-^ 

No  friar  to  receive  j  comauwde  stedefastlv  to  alle  freris  hat  in  no  manere  ]?ei 

money  or  pence  •'  • ,  .  •  •*  o 

directly  or  in-  resceyue  no  money  or  pens ;  neiper  bi  hem  self  ne  mene  ^ 

directly.  p^rsone  putt  bitwixe.  nej^eles  for  nede  of  sike  men  &  to 

clo]7e  o\ere  freris  bi  gostly  frendis  only,  jie  mynystrys  & 
custodis  schullen  here  bisy  cure,  vpe  placis  &  tymes  &  colde 
regiou^zs  or  contres;  as  J^ei  schulle  see  \at  it  is  spedy  to 
here  nedy.  fat  fis  fing  be  eu^rmore  saaf,  fat  as  it  is  seid 
f ei  resceyue  no  pens  ne  money. 


Of  f  e  manere  of  trauayle  of  freris. 


Capitulum  5”^*  ^ 

Friars  to  avoid  Oure  freris  to  whom  god  haf  ^ouen  grace  to  traueile,  labore 
idleness.  ^  deuoutly  SO  f«t  ydelnesse  enemy  of  soule  be 

excludid  or  putt  awey.  And  f  ei  quenche  not  fe  spirit  of 
holy  deuocion  and  preire  to  whiche  of  er  spiritual  *  f  ingis 
schullen  serue.  But  of  fe  hire  of  labozzr  receyue  fei  neces¬ 
saries  for  hem  self  &  here  bref eren  wif-outen  pens  or  mony, 
and  \at  mekely,  as  it  is  semynge  to  s^ruauzztis  of  god 
foloweris  of  f e  moste  holy  pouert. 


pat  freris  apropren  no  J’ing  to  Bern  self,  &  Bou  fei 
scBulle^z  axe  almes,  &  of  sike  freris. 

Capitulum  6”^-  ® 

Friars  may  own  Freris  scBulle  no  fing  apropre  to  Bern  self  neif^r  Bous  ne 
nothing.  place  ne  ony  of^r  fing,  but  as  pilgrimes  &  gestis  or  come- 

lyngyns  in  fis  world,  in  pou(9rt  &  mekenesse  seruynge  to  fe 
lord,  goo  fei  tristiliche  for  almes,  and  hem  nedif  not  to  be 
a-schamyd,  for  oure  ®lord  made  hymsilf  pore  in  fis  werld®  for 
vs.  fis  is  fe  Beynesse  of  fe  moste  Bey^  pouert,  fat  makif 
^ou  my  bref^ren  heiris  &  kyngis  of  fe  kyngdom  of  heuenys ; 
*[p,  32  MS.]  fis  haf  maad  jou  pore  in  f  ingis  &  enhauwsed  jou  in  virtues. 

be  fis  ^oure  porcion,  or  deel,  fat  bryngif  pi^rfitely  to  fe 
lend  of  lyuynge  men.  to  fe  whiche  pou(3rt  fe  most  loued 
bref ^ren,  hooliche  cleuynge  for  f e  reu^rence  of  oure  lord 
ihu  cris't,  wile  ^e  noofing  haue  lastinge  fe  world  vnder 
to  heuene.  And  where  eu^re  freris  ben  &  fynden  hem  to-gidre 
rien  y  oge  er.  homly  bitwixe  hem  self,  &  sikyrly  schewe 

eche  to  oj?er  his  nede.  for  pf  a  modir  norschef  &  louef  here 
fleschly  child,  wif  hou  mychel  more  diligence  schal  on  lone 


^  cap™-  iij™-  W. 

^  So  in  all  MSS.  The  Latin  has  ‘  temporalia.’ 


s  4m.  w. 

omitted  X. 


2  none  X. 

6  yiti.  yy. 


Chap,  IX.] 


RULE  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


43 


&  norische  his  gostly  broj^er,  &  ony  of  hem  falle  in-to  sike- 
nesse  o]?ere  freris  schullen  serue  hym  as  ]7ei  wolden  be  seruyd 


Of  penauwce  to  be  putt  to  freris  for  symes. 


Capitulum  7 


m.  1 


^if  ony  of  freris  hi  tisynge  of  j^e  enemye  happen  to  synne  provincial  minis- 
deedly  be  synnes  of  whiche  it  is  ordeyned  among  freris  b«t  enjoin 

J^ei  rennen  to  here  mynystris  prouyncial,  j^e  same  freris  ben  sins, 
holden  to  renne  to  hem  also  sone  as  fei  may  wi]?-outen 
dwellyng.  &  ]}o  mynystris  pf  |>ei  ben  prestis  schulh^  wij? 
mercy  enyonye  hen  penauwce,  &  pf  fei  ben  noone  prestis 
make  }>ei  to  be  enyoyned  to  hem  bi  oj>er  freris  of  fe  ordre, 
as  it  seme]?  to  spede  most  aftir  god.  &  J’ei  schullen  be  war 
j>at  ]7ei  be  not  wra]?id  and  disturblid  for  'pe  synne  of  ony,  for 
wraje  &  disturblynge  letten  charite  in  hem  &  opere. 

Of  pe  chesyng  of  j^e  general  mynystere  of  ]?e 
prouyncial  chapitris  of  j^e  ordre. 


Capitulum  8”*’® 

Be  alle  freris  holden  to  haue  euermore  on  of  pe  freris  of  Choice  of  the 
]?is  religion  a  general  mynystre  &  seruauwt  of  al  pe  bre]?erhed,  order?^ 

&  be  I’ei  holden  to  obliche  stedefastly  to  him.  &  whawne 

he  die]?  pe  chesynge  of  his  successowr  be  maad  ^  of  mynistris 

prouincial  &  custodis  in  pe  ohapitre  of  witsontide,  in  whiche  Holding  of 

chapitre  be  pe  ^  mynystris  prouyncial  holden  euermore  to  chapter. 

come  to-gidre,  where  euer  it  ha]?  ^  ben  ordeyned  of  pe  general 

mynystre;  &  onys  in  pre  ^eer,  or  at  anopere  terme  lasse  or 

more  as  it  is  ordeyned  of  pe  forseid  mynystre.  &  pf  it  seme 

ony  tyme  to  pe  generalte  of  mynystris  prouyncial  &  custodis 

pat  ^e  forseide  mynyster  is  not  sufiS.cient  to  pe  seruyce 

&  comune  profite  of  freris,  ®be  pe  forseide  freris®  holden, 

to  whom  pe  chesynge  is  jouen,  to  chese  hem  anoper  in  pe 

name  of  god  to  here  kepere.  Aftir  pe  chapitre  of  witsonday 

pe  mynystris  &  custodis  may  eche  bi  hem  self,  pf  ]?ei  wilen 

&  it  seme  to  hem  spedeful,  in  pe  same  ^eer  in  here  custodries 

onys  clepe'^  to-gidre  here  hreperen  to  chapitre. 


Of  prechours  to  pe  puple. 

Capitulum  ® 

Preche  not  freris  in  ]?e  bischonriche  of  ony  bischop  whanne  Friars  not  to 

•  •/  j.  T)rG&cii  witliiii 

pe  bischop  a^en  sei]?  hym,  &  noon  of  freris  be  hardy  in  ony  the  diocese  of 

manure  to  preche  to  pe  peple  but  pf  he  be  examyned  &  Sn^t^is^wiii 

aprouyd  of  pe  mynystre  of  ]?is  fraternyte,  &  pat  pe  office 

1  vjm.  yy.  2  omitted  X.  ^  vijm.  yy,  omitted  X. 

®  hit  has  W.  ®-®  omitted  X.  ’  calle  W.  ®  viij°i'  yy. 


44 


RULE  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


[Chap.  IX, 


*[p.  33  MS.] 


Officers  to  rule 
mildly, 


and  friars  to  be 
obedient. 


Friars  not  to 
enter  nunneries, 


^  haad  X. 
®  see  X.; 


of  prechynge  be  grauwted  to  bym  of  j^e  mynystre.  ^  Also  I 
moonest  &  stire  J>e  same  freris  pat  in  pr^chynge  pat  fei 
maken  heri?  specbis  be  examyned  as  chast  &  to  profit  &  to 
edificacion  of  |>e  peple.  Schewynge  to  hem  vices  &  virtues, 
peyne  &  glorie,  wif  schortnesse  of  sermon,  for  pe  lord  haj  ^ 
maad  abreggid  word  vpon  pQ  erfe. 

Of  pe>  monestynge  &  of  correcciou^. 
Capitulum  10“-^ 

Freris  j^at  ben  mynystris  &  serua^^tis  of  opere  freris  schnllew 
visite  and  moneste  here  brej^eren  mekely  &  charitably,  & 
]7ei  Schuller  correcte,  not  comma/^dyDge  to  hem  ony  J^ing 
pat  be  ajenst  here  soule  and  oure^  renle.  And  freris  pat 
ben  soget  owen  to  ]7enke  pat  for  god  pei  ban  forsaken  here 
owen  willes;  werfore  I  comauwde  stedfastly  to  hem  pat 
J^ei  obeche  to  here^  mynystris  in  alle  j^ingis  put  j^ei  han 
behi^t  to  oure  lord  to  kepe,  &  noon  controtrie  }>ingis  to  here 
sonle  &  to  oure  reule.  &  where  euere  ben  ony  freris  pat  wisten 
or  knewen  j^at  j^ei  may  not  kepe  gostly  pe  reule  ^ei  may  & 
owen  to  renne  to  here  mynystris,  &  ^e  mynystris  owe  to 
resceyue  hem  benygnely  &  hi  charite,  and  haue  ]7ei  so  muche 
famularite,  or  homlynesse,  aboute  hem  pat  J^ei  may  seie®  to 
hem  &  do  as  lordis  to  here  seruauwtis.  for  whi  so  it  schal  be, 
pat  mynystris  be  s^ruauwtis  of  alle  freris.  I  amoneste  &  stire 
in  oure  lord  ihu  crist  pat  freris  ben  war  &  flee  fro  alle  pride, 
fro  veyn  glorie,  enuye  and  coueitise,  &  cure  &  bisynesse  of 
J>is  world,  fro  detraccion  &  grucchynge.  &  recke  not  pat^ 
pei  ben  vnkur-nynge  to  lerne  letteris,  but  vndirstonde  ]7ei 
pat  aboue  alle  thingis  j^ei  owen  to  desire  to  haue  pe  spirit  of 
pe  lord  &  his  holy  werchynge,  and  eu^re  preie  to  god  wij? 
dene  herte,  &  haue  mekenesse  &  pacience  in  pursuyt  &  in 
inflrmyte,  and  to  loue  hem  pat  pursuen  vs  &  reprouen  & 
dispisen  vs.  for  oure  lord  sei]? :  loue  ^e  pure  enemyes,  & 
preien  for  hem  pat  pursuen  pu,  and  for  men  pat  falsly 
chalengen  pw.  blissed  be  ]7ei  pat  suffren  persecucion  for 
ri^twisnesse,  for  here  is  pe  kyngdom  of  heuenys ;  &  who  euere 
lasti]?  in-to  pe  ende  he  schal  be  saaf. 

'p.at  freris  entre  not  i;^-to  abbeies  of  nu7^nes. 
Capitulum 

I  comauwde  stably  to  freris  pat  |>ei  haue  not  suspect  com- 
panyes  or  conseilis  of  wymmen,  &  pat  ]7ei  entren  not  ^e  abbeies 
of  nuwnes,  out  take  po  to  whom  fro  pe  see  of  apostaile  is 

2  ix™*  W.  3  ]2or  W.  ^  j7o  W. 

ut  dicere  possint  Lat.  ®  omitted  X.  ’  x™*  W. 


Chap.  XIII.] 


RULE  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


45 


licence  grauwtid ;  and  be  j^ei  not  maad  godfadris  of  men,  nor  to  act  as 
last  bi  f  is  occasion  among  freris  &  of  freris  be  gendrid  godfathers, 
sclau^dre. 

Of  ])e  manere  of  goynge  among  sarasyns  &  o]?efe  men 

out  of  bileue. 

Capitulum 

Who  en^re  of  freris  bi  inspiraciown  of  god  wilen  goon  Missionaries  to 
among  sarasyns  &  opgre  vnbelefful,  axe  j^ei  lene  j^^rof  of 
here  mynystris  prouyncyal,  and  ^eue  j^es  mynystris  to  noon  minister, 
lene  to  go  but  to  hem  whom  ];ei  seen  ablee  to  be  sent  to 
]?is  J’ing.  I  enyoyne  to  mynystris  bi  obedience  pat  I’ei  axe 
of  pe  lord  j^e  pope  on  of  j^e  cardynales  of  pe  "^chirche  of  *[p.  34  ms.] 
rome,  pat  be  gou(9rnour,  meyntenour,  and  correctour  of  j^is 
frat^rnyte,  j^at  we  be  enere  suget  to  pe  feet  of  J^e  same 
holy  chirche,  and  stable  in  general  fei]?  of  cristene  men,  & 
pat  we  kepe  pou^rt  &  mekenesse  &  pe  holy  gospel  of  oure 
lord  ihu  crist,  pe  whiche  we  han  stedefastly  bi-hi^t  or 
awowid  bi  profession. 

Here  endi]?  j^e  reule  of  seynt  frauwseis,  &  here  bigywne]?  pe 
testamewt  of  seywt  froiwnceis. 

Capitulum  13”*-^ 

In  Jje  name  of  pe  fadir  &  sone  &  j^e  holy  gost.  Amen.  Testament  of 
Honre  lord  hap  puen  to  me  frau7^seis  to  bigynne  to  do 
penauwce ;  &  whawne  I  was  in  ouore  myche  synnes  it  semyd 
to  me  bittrere  to  see  leprous  men,  and  pe  same  lord  brou^te  ms  dealings  with 
me  among  hem  and  I  dede  morcy  wi]?  hem.  &  wawne  I 
departed  fro  hem  pat  pvag  pat  was  semynge  bitter  to  me  was 
turned  to  me  in-to  swetnesse  of  soule  &  bodi.  &  aftirward 
I  stood  a  litel  and  wente  out  bf  _te  world,  &  oure  lord  jaf 
me  sich  feij?  in  chirchis  pat  J.  schulde  preie  pm  sympli  & 
seie :  we  worschipen  pe,  lord  ihu  crist,  at  alle  j^e  chirchis 
pe  wiche  ben  in  al  pe  world,  and  we  blissen  to  pe  for  by 
]7yn  holy  crois  pa  hast  a^en  bou^t  pe  world. 

^  Aftirward  j^e  lord  jaf  to  me  &  ^eue]?  so  myehe  ieip  pat  His  respect  for 
I  wille  renne  to  pe  prestis  pat  lyuen  aftir  pe  forme  of  J^e 
chirche  of  rome  for  j^e  ordeynynge  of  hem,  al-j^ou^  ]7ei 
diden  to  me  p^rsecucion.  &  Jjou^  I  hadde  as  myche  wisdom 
as  hadde  salamon  &  I  founde  litel  pore  prestis  of  j^is 
world  j^at  dwelle^^  in  parichis  I  wille  not  pr^che  ajenst 
here  wille.  and  I  ^  wille  honoure  alle  pr^stis  as  my  lordis, 

&  I  wile  not  biholde  in  hem  ony  synne,  fore  in  hem  I 

1  xjm*  W.  2  Testamentum  francisci  "W.  ®  omitted  X.  and  AA. 


46 


TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FEAN  CIS. 


from  whom  he 
receives  Christ 
in  the  sacrament. 


How  the  Order 
was  formed. 

*[p.  35  MS.] 


Friars  to  receive 
nothing;  not 
even  churches 
nor  dwelling- 
places. 


;  Friars  are  on  no 
I  account  to  get 
I  letters  from  the 
j  court  of  Rome. 


Any  friar  who 
breaks  the  Rule 
or  is  a  heretic 


take  ki  discrecion  goddis  sone  &  ]?ei  ben  my  lordis.  & 
here-fore  I  do  pat  I  see  noo  bodily  j^ing  in  this  world 
of  hym,  pe  heijest  goddis  sone,  but  his  holieste  bodi  & 
blood  pat  pei  resceyuen  &  j^ei  only  mynystren  to  oper^. 
&  I  wile  abouen  alle  j^ingis  honoure  j^es  holieste  preuytes 
or  mysteries,  &  putte  |>es  holieste  names  in  most  precious 
places,  &  where  eu^re  I  fynde  his  wordis  writen  in 
vnlelful  placis  I  wile  gedre  &  preie  pat  j^ei  ben  gedrid 
&  kepte^  \n  an  honeste  place.  &  we  schal  worschipen  \n 
herte  &  word  alle  clerkis  of  dyuynyte  pat  mynystren  to  vs 
most  holy  wordis  as  hem  pat  mynystren  to  vs  ^e  holy  gost 
&  lif.  And  after  pat  j^e  lord  hadde  ^ouen  to  me  of  freris 
no  man  schewid  to  me  what  I  schulde  do,  but  he  pat  is 
hipest  schewid  to  me  pat  I  schulde  lyue  after  j?e  forme  of 
pe  gospel:  &  I  in  fewe  wordis  &  sympliche  maade  to 
write  it,  &  pe  lord  pope  confermyd  it  to  me.  And  summe 
comen  ^  to  taken  j^is  lif.  And  }>ei  ^auen  to  pore  men  alle 
j^inges  j^at  |>ei  my^tten.  And  j^ei  weren  "^apeied  wi]?  o  cote 
or  kirtil  w«tA-ynne  forj^e  &  w«tA-oute  for]?  &  wolde  not 
haue  more,  clerkis  schulden  seie  here  ofScis  aftir  clerkis, 
but  lewed  freris  schulde  se^'e  pe  pater  noster.  and  we 
dwelten  to-gidre  in  chirchis,  &  weren  idiotis,  &  vnderloute 
to  ale  men.  &  I  traueiled  wi]>  myn  hondis  &  wile  traueile, 
&  I®  wile  pat  alle  o]>ere  freris  tr^ueile  in  labour  pe  whiche 
pertjnep  to  honeste,  &  pei  pat  kuwnen  not,  lerne  ]'ei;  not 
for  coueitise  to  take  hire,  but  for  ensample  to  putte  awey 
idelnesse;  &  whawne  men  ^euen  vs  noujt  renne  we  to  pe 
borde  of  pe  lord,  axynge  almes  fro  dore  to  dore. 

^  God  schewid  to  me  ]>is  salutacion  pat  I  schulde  seie,  pe 
lord  ^eue  pees  to  ]?e,  J’^rfor  be  freris  war  pat  pei  resceyue 
not  in  no^  manure,  nei^igr  chirchis,  ne  placis  to  dwellen  onne, 
ue  ony  oper  ]7ingis  pat  ben  bilded  for  hem,  bat  as  it  seme]» 
holy  pou^rt,  pe  whiche  we  han  bi-fore  seid  in  pe  reule,  eu^r- 
more  dwellynge  J^ere  as  gestis  &  comelyngis  &  pilgrymys. 
I  comau?^de  sadly  to  alle  freris  be  obedience  pat  where  so 
eu^re  pei  ben  be  pei  not  chargid"  to  axe  ony  lettre  in  pe 
court  of  rome,  neiper  be  hem  self  ne  by  mene  p^rsone  put 
bitwyxe,  wi]>  pe  blissynge  of  god.  And  I  wile  pat  freris 
obeche  to  pe  general  mynystre  of  l^is  fraternyte  whom  it 
plesed  to  me  to  ^eue  perto,  and  I  wile  pat  I  be  so  taken 
in  his  hondis  pat  I  may  not  goo  or  do  ajenst  his  obedience 
&  his  wille,  for  he  is  my  lord.  &  J’ouj  I  be  simpul  ®  &  sik 
ne]>ele5  I  wile  euere  haue  a  clerk  pat  schal  do  me  dyuyne 
ofS.ce  aiter  pe  reule.  And  pe  pat  ben  foundeu  pat  don  not 
]?e  ofSce  aft^r  pe  reule  &  wilen  varie  on  oper  manure  &  be  not 


^  he  putt  W. 
^  any  W. 


2  omitted  X.  and  AA. 
®  hardy  X. 


3  omitted  X.  and  AA. 

®  sinful  A  A.;  Latin  simplex. 


TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


47 


of  ry^t  cnsten  feib,  be  alle  freris  holden  bi  obedieoce  where  to  be  kept  under 

eu(3re  j^ei  ben  ]?at,  where  eui^re  ]7ei  schulle  fynde  ony  of  ]700,  brought  to  the 

]7ei  schullen  presenten  hym  to  J^e  nexte  custode  of  pat  place  Cardinal  of  Osua. 

where  eudre  fei  fynden  sychon.  and  be  pat  custode  holde 

sadly  bi  obedience  to  kepe  hym  strongly  as  a  man  in  bondis 

day  &  nyjt,  so  pat  he  may  not  be  delyuerid  of  his  hond  til  he 

represente  hym  ^in  his  owen  persone  in  ];e  hondis  of  his 

mynystre,  and  be  pQ  mynystre  holden  sadly  bi  obedience  to 

holde  hym  bi  freris  pat  kepe  men  ny^t  &  day  as  in  bondis 

til  pat  he  represente  hym  to  pe'^  cardynal  hostiense,  j^at  is 

lord,  gonernowr,  meyntenowr  &  corectour  of  alle  j^e  fraternyte. 

And  seie  not,  freris,  pat  j^is  is  ano}>er  reule :  for  it  is  a  tms  is  not  a  fresh 
remembrauwce,  amonestynge,  a  reprouynge,  and  my  testament 
pe  whiche  I  frere  franwseis,  litel,  make  to  my  blissed  hieperen, 
pat  for  jiis  ^  we  kepe  bettere  pe  reule  pe  whiche  we  han  bihi^t 
to  pe  lord.  &  pe  general  mynystre  &  alle  ojiere  mynystris 
&  custodes  ben  holden  bi  obedience  to  ^  adde  no  j^ing  to  jies  *[p.  36  ms.] 
wordis  ne  drawe  j^er  fro  &  rede  J^ei  Jies  wordis. 

And  I  comauwde  bi  obedience  to  alle  my  hveperen,  bo]7e  The  rule  to  be 
clerkis  &  lewid,  pat  pei  putte  not  glosis  ynto  pe  reule,  ne  literally, 
seynge  wi]?  j^es  wordis:  ‘‘so  Jiei  wilen  be  vndirstonden,’’ 
but  as  ]7e  lord  ^af  to  me  sympliche  and  pureliche  to  seie  &  to 
write  pe  reule;  and  vndirstowde  ^e  j^es  wordis  so  symplely 
and  clenly  w^t^-oute  glose  &  kepe  ^ee  hem  in  to  pe  ende 
wi]i  holy  werchynge.  and  who  euere  kepi]?  ]7is  be  he  fulfillid 
in  heuene  w«tA  pe  blissynge  of  ]?e  hei^est  fadir,  and  be  he 
fulfillid  in  erjie  with  pe  blissynge  of  his  louyd  sone,  wi]? 
pe  holiest  gost  confortour,  &  wi]?  alle  virtues  of  heuenes  and 
wij?  alle  seyntis ;  and  I  frere  frauwseis,  ^oure  litel  and  ^oure 
seruant,  conferme  to  ^ou  how  eu^re  myche  I  may  wi]?-in  & 
wi]?-outew  ]?is  moste  holy  blissyng.  Amen. 

Here  endi]?  pe  testame^^t  of  sey/it  fram^seis.^ 


[Comment.] 

But  here  Je  menours  seyn  pat  pe  pope  dischargi]?  hem  of 
jiis  testament  &  sei]?  pat  ]?ei  ben  not  holden  per~to,  for  a  man 
hap  not  lordschipe  ne  iurisdiccion  ypon  his  pere,  &  si]?  pe  pope 
was  more  pan  frauwseis  he  myjtte  not  bynde  pe  pope  pat  he 
ne  my^te  dispense  &  reproue  what  he  wolde.  ^  But  to  ]?is 
trewe  men  seyn  ]?U8,  pat  freris  ben  bouwden  to  ]?is  testament 
for  many  skillis :  first  frauwseis  sei]?  pat  god  schewid  hym 


The  minors  say 
that  they  are  dis¬ 
pensed  by  the 
pope  from  obey¬ 
ing  this  testa¬ 
ment, 

and  that  the  pope 
is  above  Francis. 


Reasons  -why 
they  are  bound 
to  this. 


‘-1  omitted  W. 


2  omitted  X.  and  AA. 


3  Finis  testamenti  W. 


48  COMMENT  ON  THE  TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


They  forsake  the 
obedience  of  God, 
and  obey  a  sinful 
idiot. 


*[p.  37  MS.] 


This  profession 
came  in  only 
when  Satan  was 
unbound. 


J^is  lyuyng  and  not  man;  Janne  oper  }is  testament  is  of 
goddis  wille  or  frauwseis  is  fals  pat  seij?  so.  ^if  it  be  goddis 
wille  pQ  pope  may  not  do  ajenst  it,  pf  frauwseis  be  false  in 
]7is  seiynge  his  doynge  cam  of  pQ  fend  ^  of  belle  pB.t  is  fadir 
of  lesyngis.  ^  Also  frau7^seis  sei]?  pat  ])is  testament  is  noon 
oper  renle  but  J^e  firste,  and  pmue  as  pei  taken  j^e  firste  reule 
so  moste  j^ei  take  j^e  testament,  si]7]7en  j^ei  ben  al  oon.  ^  Also 
it  semi]?  pat  frau?7seis  in  his  laste  daies  schulde  beste  knowe 
pe  treu]7e  &  most  be  in  charite  to  his  bre]?eren,  &  ]7an  he 
made  ]?is  testame77t ;  &  herefore  it  seme]?  pat  he  was  a  Here 
&  out  of  charite  but  pf  ]?is  testament  were  acordynge  wi]? ' 
goddis  dom;  but  what  pope  or  deuyl^  schulde  ]?a7^ne  distroie 
it  ?  ^  Also  men  seyn  pat  he  is  cursed  pat  letti]?  pe  rijtful 
wille  of  a  dede  man.  But  ]?is  testament  is  rijtful  wille  of 
dede  frauwseis ;  panne  it  semi]?  pat  pat  pope  pat  letti]?  it  &  pe 
freris  also  ben  acursed  of  god,  of  frauwseis,  and  of  alle  hawen. 

^  As  to  pe  substance  of  the  reule  ]?ei  forsaken  obedience  of 
god  and  obeschen  to  a  synful  idiot  biddy nge  pe  contrd^rie  of 
goddis  wille,  pe  whiche  synful  ydiot  is  in  cas  a  dampnyd 
deuyl,  &  so  for  plesynge  of  pe  world  or  lustis  of  here  flech 
pei  leuen  pe  comauwdementis  of  god  &  don  vnri^tful 
comau?7dement  of  ]?e  fend,  &  magnyhen  more  obedience  to 
synful  men,  &  in  caas  to  fendis,  pan  obedie7^ce  '^'to  crist  pat 
is  eueremore  medeful;  &  so  ]?ei  seyen  pat  a  good  ]?ing  doou 
after  pe  comauwdement  of  god  is  not  of  so  gret  meri^t  as  a 
]?ing  don  after  pe  comau77demewt  of  a  synful  ydiot,  &  in  cas 
a  dep  deuyl  in  helle.  but  ]?is  newe  profession  was  not  vsed 
of  crist  &  his  apostelis  but  in  pe  time  pat  sathanas  was 
vnbou77den,  as  ]?e  apcalips  telli]? ;  and  so  it  semi]?  pat  ]?es 
newe  ordris  distroien  obedience  of  cristis  lawe  (bi  whiche 
eche  man  is  holden  obeche  to  oper  in  ]?e  drede  of  crist,  pat  is 
in  as  myche  as  ony  techi]?  a  noper  to  don  pe  wille  of  god)  & 
magnyfie  obedience  to  synful  men,  ^ee  a^enst  pe  proceptis 
of  god.  and  so  as  myche  as  is  in  hew  ]?ei  maken  a  synful 
idiot  &  in  cas  a  dawpnyd  deuyl  in  helle  more  than  almyjti 


^  deuel  "W. 


*  ordeyned  W. 


COMMENT  ON  THE  TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


49 


god  in  trinyte,  for  |>ei  don  more  aftir  his  false  comauwdement 
]7an  aftir  comauwdement  of  almy^ty  god. 

^  To  fe  secuwde  part  of  reule  wij^-outew  proprete  of 
worldly  goodis;  si]?  propre  ]?ing  stondij?  most  in  wille  & 
]7ei  traueilen  more  for  propre  worschipe  or  wynnynge  ]?an 
for  comune  profit  of  cristen  men,  it  seme]?  ]?ei  don  alle  ajenst 
]?is  reule ;  for  ]?ei  han  grete  housis  proprid  to  hem  self,  many 
costly  bokis,  &  rayche  hid  tresowr  biried  in  here  houses  fro 
]?e  comu?^te  of  cristen  nien  lyuynge  in  ]?e  world  bi  gret 
labor,  as  god  enyoyned  adam  ;  &  ]?is  tresowr  is  kept  proprely 
to  idel  men  or  fendis,  si]?]?en  it  is  geten  by  false  lesyngis, 
false  beggynge,  &  fals  meyntenynge  of  foule  synnes.  ^  Also 
0  strong  beggere  or  flaterere  ha]?  a  chau?wber  for  a  lord,  erl 
or  duk  wi]?  many  prociouse  iuellis,  &  ano]?(?r  frere  ha]? 
nakid  sidis  &  many  other  myscheues  ]?ou^  he  be  wor]?  siche 
a  ]?ousand  bifore  god.  ^  As  to  chastite  deme  men  of  here 
bodily  chastite,  but  of  gostly  chastite  it  seme]?  ]?at  ]?ei  ben 
alle  avoutreris,  for  ]?ei  halde  religious  ]?at  is  maad  of  synful 
men  bettre  ]?an  religion  maad  of  crist  hym  self,  &  ]?ei  chargen 
more  tradicions  or  customes  maad  of  here  owen  errouris  ]?an 
]?e  iust  lawis  &  heste  maad  of  almy^tty  god,  &  ])us  is  gostely 
matrimonye  bitwixe  crist  &  cristen  mennws  soulis  broken, 
si]?  it  stondi]?  in  ri^tfulnesse  &  mi^rcy  &  fei]?. 

^  But  see  now  hou  freris  don  openly  ajenst  ]?is  reule  & 
testament,  also  in  takynge  money  many  weies;  for  ]?ei 
leden  wi]?  hem  a  scarioth  stolen  fro  is  eldris  by  ]?efte  to  robbe 
pore  men  bi  beggynge  dampnyd  of  goddis  lawe.  &  seen 
more  ypocrisie  of  hem :  ]?ei  wolen  telle  gold  and  money 
&  touche  it  wi]?  a  sticke  or  wi]?  gloues  &  a  grete  cuppe 
of  gold  or  pece  of  siluer  wor]?  many  markis  to  drynke  noble 
wyn  of,  but  ]?ei  wilen  not  touche  an  halpeny  or  fer]?ing 
wi]?  ]?e  coyn  &  armes  of  ]?e  cros  &  of  the  kyng,  &  ]?is  seme]? 
for  dispit  of  ]?e  cros  or  of  ]?e  kyng,  for  a  weeg  of  siluer^  or 
a  cuppe  of  gold  ]?ei  wolen  handil  faste,  and  ]?e  money  ]?at 
]?ei  robben  of  pore  men  bi  fals  beggynge  ]?ei  wolen  leyn  it 

^  gold  W. 


As  to  the  rule 
which  forbids 
them  to  hold  pro¬ 
perty,  they  break 
it  in  many  ways. 


Their  rich 
chambers. 


They  take  money 
in  many  ways. 


They  lead  with 
them  an  Iscariot. 


They  will  count 
money  with  a 
stick, 


hut  will  not 
touch  a  half¬ 
penny  with  the 
bare  hand. 


*[p.  38  MS.] 


4 


50 


COMMENT  ON  THE  TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


They  wear  rich  vndir  here  beddis  bed  at  ny^t.  &  so  of  clojjing  j^ei  don 

ajenst  j^is  reule  in  many  manures;  for  men  seen  j^at  ]?e 

kyng  or  ]7e  emperowr  myjtte  wi]?  worscbipe  were  a  garnemewt 

of  a  frore  for  goodnesse  of  do]?,  &  namely  of  sucbe  freris 

as  scbnlden  most  kepe  pouert  of  crist  &  his  apostelis,  as 

ben  clepid  maistris  of  diuynyte,  but  verreily  maistris  of 

errour  boj^e  in  techynge  &  in  ensaumple,  &  summe  oone  ha]? 

wast  clo]?is  &  costi,  and  a  no\er  symple  frere  \ai  nys  not 

so  gret  flaterere  nakid  or  to  rent.  ^  As  to  propre  j^ingis  freris 

seyn  ]?at  \q  pope  is  lord  worldly  of  housis,  bokis,  iewelis 

They  slander  the  and  al  bat  bei  ban,  but  her  semeb  mycbe  Yenym :  first  be 
pope.  \  .  ■' 

euyl  children  putten  in-to  here  fadir  j^e  pope  venym  of 
worldly  lordscbipe  si]?  ]?ei  may  not  baue  it  for  distroynge 
of  here  pi^rfecciouw,  &  yit  ]?ei  seyn  \at]iQ  pope  mot  be  most 
holy  &  perfyt  &  nexte  sue  crist  in  alle  manure  V(9rtues,  & 
]?us  ]?ei  putten  a  veyn  ]?orn  in  bis  feet.  As  to  here  kyng 
They  are  untrue  ]?ei  ben  vnkynde  vntrewe,  for  wi]?-outen  bis  leeve  ^  or  is 
conseil  ]?ei  alien  in-to  straunge^  rewmes,  &  in  caas  to  oure 
enemyes,  al  ]?at  fei  may  gete  bi  robberie  of  pore  men^  & 
fiaterynge  &  o\erQ  false  menes  in  ]?e  lond  \ai  \ei  dwellij? 
iwne;  &  so,  jif  ]?e  pope  ben  enemye  to  oure  lond  &  sende 
enemyes  to  oure  lond,  be  ba]?  many  stronge  bouses  as 
caastelis;  &  pf  ]?ei  ben  bis  ri^tfully  oure  kyng  may  not 
warne  ne  lette  bis  boste  to  reste  in  ]70  places,  &  ]?anne  is  oure 
reprove^^grea?  pml.  ^  As  auemtis  pr^cbynge,  men  knowew  wel 

]?at  freris  wile  fiatere  &  spare  to  reproue  scharply  syones 
of  grete  men  for  drede  of  los  of  worldly  goodis  or  frendiscbipe 
or  fauour;  &  so  for  lone  of  here  stynkynge  bely  fei  laten  fe 
fend  strangle  many  ^  soulis,  and  pt  dispisen  and  letten  o\erQ 
men  to  precbe  the  treu]?e  of  goddis  lawe,  laste  here  synne 
were  knowen  &  here  pride  &  worldly  wynnynge  leid  a  doun. 
^  And  pt  ]?ei  tellen  not  scbortly  ne  plenerly  ®  ]?e  gospel,  &  vices 
&  vertues,  &  peynes  and  ioie,  but  maken  longe  talis  of  fablis, 
or  cronyclis,  or  comenden  here  owen  nouelries.  ^  As  anemtis 

1  love  X.  2  stronge  X.  and  AA.  ^  omitted  X.  and  AA. 

*  mennus  W.  ^  pleynely  W, 


men 


COMMENT  ON  THE  TESTAMENT  OF  ST.  FRANCIS. 


51 


tr^zueile  of  freris  it  is  knowen  hou  lei  gon  ydel  fro  contre  instead  of  work- 

•*  ing  they  live  in 

to  contre,  &  fro  toun  to  toun,  &  fro  hous  to  hous,  beggynge  idleness. 

nedles  of  pore  men,  techynge  ojiere  to  ben  idel,  &  stelen 

mennw5  children  to  jiis  ydelnesse,  where  ]?ei  ben  taujt  to  lyue 

in  swet  of  here  body  bi  comauwdement  of  god  and  bi  here 

owen  renle  &  by  ensaumple  of  petir  and  poule ;  whanne 

petir  fischid  aftir  cristis  resurreccion,  &  ponl  traueilid  wi)’  «[p.  39  ms.] 

his  hondis  after  cristis  ascencion;  and  seynt  austyn  techi]? 

muwkis  to  labore  wi]?  here  hondis,  &  so  doj?  seynt  benet  & 

seynt  bernard.  ^  Also  bisiden  rome  frere  menours  bi  false  persecute 

name  pursnen  trewe  pore  ireris  to  dep,  tor  as  myche  as  pei  spiritual) 

wolden  kepe  frauwseis  reule  to  ]?e  lett^re  in  pouert  &  meke- 

nesse  &  in  grete  penau?^ce,  &  ]?er-fore,  ]?ou^  \ei  hane  name 

of  franseis  freris,  pei  ben  enemys  of  crist  &  frauwseis  &  cruel 

man-sleeris.  ^  Also,  pf  frauwseis  take  only  pe  gospel  and  no 

]7ing  addi]?  ^  of  his  owne  per-to,  it  schulde  not  be  clepid  ^ 

frau?^seis  reule  but  reule  of  crist  or  of  pe  gospel;  &  pf  he 

putte  to  pe  gospel  of  his  owne  fyndynge,  whi  schulde  he  make 

per-of  a  newe  ordre,  si]?  pe  ordre  pat  crist  made  hiw  self  is 

most  perfit  &  most  lijt  &  most  siker  to  geten  heuene  by,  & 

what  goode  dede  ony  man  may  doo  he  is  holden  to  don  it  God’s  order  bids 

bi  ]?is  most  comanwdement  of  god  i  ^*]?ou  schalt  lone  pi  lord  thing  we  can. 

pi  god  of  ale  ]?in  herte,  of  al  pi  lif,  of  al  pi  ]?oujtis,  &  of  al 

pi  steng]?es  or  myitis.”  what  nede  is  it  panne  to  make  aneper 

religion,  si]?  pat  pat  crist  made  is  I-nowj  at  pe  fulle ;  &  so 

si]?  noone  apostle  of  crist  ne  angel  of  heuene  hap  ony  power 

but  pf  it  be  to  edificacion  &  profit  of  holy  chirche,  pe  pope 

hap  no  ^  power  to  dispense  apnst  frauwseis  testament  &  his 

reule,  si]'  J'ei  ben  al  on,  but  pf  it  be  to  profit  of  holy  chirche 

pat  men  kepen  neiper  his  reule  ne  his  testament.  Of  ]?is  reule 

&  errour  myjte  men  speke  ful  myche.  But  god  for  his  morcy 

brynge  clerkis  to  cristis  clene^  religion,  si]’  it  is  pe  beste  on 

alle  weies  &  most  profitable  to  alle  po^rties.  Amen. 

^  asdip  X.  2  calde  W.  ^  omitted  X.  and  AA.  ^  trewe  X.  and  AA. 


1 


52 


IV. 

OF  PEELATES. 

This  tract  is  less  orderly  in  arrangement  and  fuller  of  repetition  than  is 
usual  in  Wyclif’s  work,  but  some  parts  of  it  are  worthy  of  him,  and  it 
contains  no  opinions  that  are  not  to  be  found  in  his  genuine  writings. 
There  is  a  great  resemblance  between  this  and  the  tract  on  the  ofS.ce  of 
Curates,  IN^o.  YII.  Both  have  references  to  the  Crusade  in  Planders,  and 
are  therefore  late  works  of  Wyclif,  if  his  at  all;  while  both  of  them  are 
silent  as  to  his  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  and  are  comparatively  mild  in 
their  language  as  to  the  Friars,  who  are  not  treated  as  at  all  worse  than 
the  monks.  This  would  be  natural  enough  in  Wyclif ’s  earlier  years,  but 
is  not  in  accordance  with  his  usual  tone  after  1380.  I  incline  to  think 
that  they  were  written  by  an  intimate  disciple  rather  than  by  the  master. 

As  to  evidence  of  date,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  mention  of 
‘‘  anticrists  bullis  to  maken  cristene  men  to  werre  with  each  othere  ” 
(p.  73),  and  of  pardons  granted  ^‘to  make  discensioun  &  werris”  (p.  82) 
refer  to  Spencer’s  Crusade,  although  it  is  just  possible  that  they  may  point 
to  one  of  the  other  occasions  on  which  popes  have  encouraged  bloodshed. 

The  tone  as  to  persecution  is  uncertain.  The  passage  (p.  87)  “prisonen 
hem  and  slen  hem  algates  in  wille''  looks  as  if  the  infliction  of  death  for 
heresy  was  not  yet  allowed.  There  is  stronger  language  in  the  Sermons 
and  the  Trialogus.  Yet  we  are  told  on  p.  79,  that  lords  who  support  poor 
priests  are  cursed  and  taken  to  prison  “if  thei  stonden  sadde  in  goddis 
cause.”  This  may  have  happened  in  Wyclif ’s  time,  merely  as  the  result  of 
excommunication,  but  I  know  no  instance  of  it.  Were  the  tract  written 
much  after  his  death,  its  tone  would  probably  be  fiercer. 

I  cannot  identify  the  “litel  harlot”  who  “dispiseth  the  pope  and 
stroieth  his  lordship,”  p.  83. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 

A  leaf  is  wanting  in  AA.  from  end  of  Chapter  xli.  to  the  early  part  of 
Chapter  XLiii.  “for  his  entier  sorwe  of  synne.” 

SUMMAEY. 

Chap.  I.  Prelates  are  bound  to  preach,  since  they  take  the  place  of  apostles  whom 
Christ  ordered  to  preach.  Examples  and  warnings  from  Scripture.  Wicked¬ 
ness  of  neglect.  Prelates  more  bound  to  preach  than  the  people  to  pay 
tithes.  Duty  of  making  them  amend. 


53 


Chap.  II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIIL 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 


Xil. 

XIII. 

XIV. 
XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIIII. 


Prelates  will  not  allow  priests  to  preach  without  their  licence.  They 
permit  the  new  religious  to  go  about  preaching  lies  and  fables,  hut 
it  is  on  condition  that  they  do  not  preach  against  the  sins  of  prelates, 
and  that  they  pay  largely  from  the  money  which  they  extort. 

Prelates  are  heretics,  for  by  their  life  they  set  an  example  of  living  against 
Christ’s  law.  Their  pomp,  litigiousness,  luxury  and  covetousness. 

Prelates  rob  the  king’s  lieges  by  taking  money  for  licences  to  sin.  They 
bribe  nobles  and  jurors  to  support  them,  hut  curse  all  who  try  to 
correct  them. 

Prelates  come  to  their  benefices  by  simony.  Nature  of  simony.  Its 
prevalence.  Common  forms  of  it.  Worst  in  the  Court  of  Rome,  and 
most  harmful.  Condemnation  of  simony  in  Scripture.  It  is  a  heresy. 
Bishops,  friars,  and  curates  alike  guilty  of  it. 

Prelates  think  more  of  the  consecration  of  churches  and  ornaments  than 
of  consecrating  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  which  they  leave  to  every 
priest,  while  they  keep  the  others  for  themselves.  They  use  these 
offices  as  a  means  of  extortion. 

Prelates  teach  man’s  law,  but  hinder  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Prayer 
to  God  to  give  courage  to  his  servants,  and  understanding  to  lords. 

Prelates  care  more  for  money  than  for  men’s  souls.  Witness  the  sin- 
rents. 

Prelates  live  in  lechery  and  lead  others  into  sin.  They  raise  money  from 
poor  men,  who  want  it  to  live  on.  They  publish  bulls  to  encourage 
wars.  They  allow  friars  to  go  about  begging.  Thus  they  kill  men’s 
souls. 

Prelates  lay  more  stress  on  their  own  curse  than  on  God’s.  They  enforce 
their  excommunication  by  imprisonment.  For  real  sins  they  sell 
absolution,  hut  they  put  true  preachers  under  curse,  and  condemn 
them  by  false  witness. 

Prelates  deceive  men  by  their  false  prayers  and  singing.  Prayer  without 
good  life  useless.  God  only  knows  the  worth  of  each  man’s  prayer. 
Prayers  of  wicked  men  are  not  made  useful  by  the  virtue  of  the  Church. 
If  they  cannot  pray  effectively  for  themselves,  neither  can  they  for 
others. 

Prelates  frighten  men  by  their  excommunications ;  forbid  true  preachers, 
and  persecute  those  who  would  support  them. 

Prelates  deceive  men  by  indulgences,  which  have  no  authority  from 
Christ,  and  are  useless  except  as  a  means  of  extortion.  Pardon  is 
wholly  in  God’s  hands. 

Prelates  make  the  way  to  heaven  harder  by  their  new  laws.  They  add 
also  new  points  to  the  Creed ;  as  the  headship  of  the  pope. 

Prelates  exalt  themselves  above  Christ;  for*he  told  men  to  judge  him 
by  his  deeds,  and  they  say  their  subjects  should  not  judge  them. 

Prelates  stop  men  from  doing  God’s  will,  as  in  saying  mass  and  preaching. 
They  pretend  it  is  to  stop  heresy,  but  they  are  not  true  judges  of 
heresy,  for  they  neither  know  nor  keep  God’s  law. 

Prelates  refuse  obedience  and  taxes  to  secular  lords.  Christ  paid  tribute 
to  the  Emperor.  Much  more  should  they  who  are  rich  help  the 
land.  They  set  example  of  rebellion. 

Prelates  worse  than  Jews,  for  they  persecute  Christ  in  his  members  and 
take  blood-money. 


54 


Chap.  XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 


XXXIX. 


XL. 


XLI. 

XLII. 

XLIII. 


Avarice  of  prelates,  their  litigiousness,  oppression ;  their  pomp  and  war¬ 
like  ways. 

Prelates  teach  other  men  to  maintain  them  in  their  sins  and  to  persecute 
poor  priests. 

Prelates  set  more  store  by  their  own  laws  than  hy  the  gospel. 

Prelates  teach  that  nothing  in  the  church  is  lawful  that  is  not  confirmed 
hy  the  pope,  who  is  commonly  the  worst  of  prelates  and  antichrist. 

Prelates  are  enemies  of  peace,  counselling  war  to  divert  attention  from 
their  own  sins.  Besides  advising  it,  they  take  part  in  it. 

The  worldly  and  pompous  life  of  prelates  an  ill  example. 

Money  sent  out  of  the  realm  to  bring  preferment  and  to  maintain  suits 
at  Eome. 

Prelates  hy  their  invention  of  new  laws  declare  Christ’s  laws  to  be  in¬ 
sufficient,  and  so  slander  Christ. 

Prelates  make  men  assent  to  their  false  teaching,  and  deceive  lords  so  as 
to  make  them  imprison  true  men. 

Prelates  make  men  study  new  laws,  and  keep  them  from  studying 
Holy  Writ. 

Prelates  make  lords  imprison  any  one  who  has  been  under  curse  for  forty 
days.  Lords  should  make  sure  that  the  curse  is  rightful. 

Prelates’  arguments  for  their  claims  to  obedience  and  power  are  like  the 
arguments  of  apes  and  gluttons. 

Prelates  despoil  all  classes  of  men  in  different  ways. 

Prelates  think  more  of  their  parks  being  broken  than  of  breaking  of 
God’s  laws. 

Prelates  take  upon  them  the  state  of  the  apostles,  and  live  contrary  to 
it,  so  deceiving  men  like  enemies  who  mount  false  arms. 

Prelates  compel  priests  to  fight  in  person. 

Evils  caused  by  celibacy  of  priests. 

Prelates  silence  those  who  would  rebuke  them,  lest  their  hypocrisy  be 
known,  and  they  lose  their  endowments. 

Prelates  maintain  vicious  men  in  their  retinue. 

Prelates  deceive  men  as  to  pilgrimages  and  pardons,  and  teach  them  to 
care  more  for  vows  than  for  God’s  laws. 

Prelates  rob  the  lower  clergy  in  assessment  of  taxes. 

Prelates  are  dumb  dogs,  who  do  not  warn  the  flock  committed  to  them, 
but  give  it  to  Satan  in  exchange  for  wealth. 

Prelates  crucify  Christ  and  slay  his  apostles  spiritually,  and  so  are  worse 
than  Jews. 

Prelates  blaspheme  the  Holy  Ghost  by  preventing  true  preaching. 

Prelates  claim  the  power  of  absolution,  which  God  has  reserved  to 
himself.  They  have  only  power  to  act  as  messengers.  Yet  they  lay 
more  stress  on  their  absolution  than' on  God’s  forgiveness. 


Chap.  I.J 


OF  PRELATES. 


55 


Here  it  telle]?  of  prelatis. 

Oapitulum.  Viimum, 


^'pat  pr^latis  leuen  pr^chynge  of  fe  gospel  &  ben  gostly 
manquelleris  of  mewnys  soulis,  And  satbanas  transfignrid 
in-to  an  anwgel  of  li^t,  &  ben  gostly  sodomytis  worse  faw 
bodily  sodomytis  of  sodom  and  gomor.  first,  crist  sei]?  in 
gospel  of  seyn  ion  ]iat  he  was  boren  &  cam  in-to  j^e 
world  for  J7is  ende,  to  ^  here  witnesse  to  treu]?e ;  also  crist 
cam  in-to  ]?is  world  to  seke  and  to  sane  mankynde,  I’e 
whiche  was  perischid.  &  certis  crist  sauyd  mannw^  soule 
bi  trewe  lyuynge  in  his  owen  persone,  &  trewe  &  opyn  & 
fre  pr^chynge  of  j^e  gospel,  &  wilful  passion  &  dej?  for 
pr^chynge  &  meywtenynge  of  j^e  gospel ;  &  to  I’is  same  ende 
&  werk  crist  ordeyned  alle  his  apostlis  &  disciplis,  bo]>e 
bi-forn  his  de]>  &  aft^r  his  resurreccion,  to  preche  ]>us  j^e 
gospel  to  alle  men.  j^awne,  si]?  prdatis  &  pr^stis  ordeyned 
of  good  comen  in  ]>e  stede  of  postlis  &  disciples,  J’ei  ben 
alle  bouwden  bi  ihu  crist  god  &  man  to  preche  I’us  ]?e  gospel. 
^  Also  crist  biddi]?  ]7ries  to  petir  ]>at  pf  pet(?r  lone  crist  ]?at 
he  fede  his  scheep ;  ]?at  ben  cristen  soulis ;  &  first  fede  bi 
ensaumple  of  good  lif,  ]»e  secuwde  tyme  bi  trewe  techynge 
of  fe  gospel,  and  fe  fridde  tyme  bi  wilful  sufiPrynge  of 
dei]?,  to  make  men  stable  in  Jie  gospel  &  in  hope  of  blisse : 
&  here-to  crist  comauwded  his  disciples  to  pr^che  opynly  ]7e 
treu]?e  ]7«t  ]?ei  herden  priuely,  &  drede  not  men  ]iat  turmenten 
&  slen  I'e  bodi,  but  drede  h.jm  ]?at  may  putte  body  &  soule 
in-to  belle  wi]?-outen  ende.  ^  Of  ]7es  two  gospellis  it 
is  deer  ]?at  prdatis  ]?at  pr^chen  not  ]?us  }>e  gospel  louen 
not  crist,  but  don  fully  ajenst  his  heste,  whawne  ]?ei  leuen 
for  drede  of  men  to  teche  J^e  gospel;  &  ]7us  ]?e  he^e  pr<9stis 
ely  was  dede  for  he  tau^te  not  his  children  goddis  lawe 
and  reproued  not  at  fulle  here  synnes,  &  ]}e  arke^  or 
couere  of  god  was  conquerid  in-to  enemyes  hondis,  &  goddis 
^  betere  inserted  X.  2  «  whicbe”  both  MSS. 


*[p.  65  MS.] 
Prelates  neglect 
preaching. 


John  xviii.  37. 

Christ  came  to 
hear  witness  to 
the  truth. 

Luke  xis.  10. 


He  preached  and 
suffered  death 
for  preachijig, 

and  ordered  his 
apostles  to 
preach. 

Prelates  come  in 
the  place  of 
apostles, 

and  are  bound 
to  preach, 

[John  xxi.  15.] 

Christ’s  com¬ 
mand  to  Peter. 


[Matt.x.  27,  28.] 


Warning 

Eli. 


from 


56 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  I. 


[1  Sam.  iv.] 

[Isaiah  vi.  5.] 

[Ezekiel  iii.  18.] 


[]  Cor.  ix.  16.] 
Man  cannot  live 
spiritually  but  by 
God’s  word. 

*[p.  66  MS.] 

Prelates  that 
withdraw  it  are 
murderer's. 

[Matt.  xvi.  23.] 

They  are  Satans 


transformed  into 
an  angel  of  light. 


They  are  spiritual 
Sodomites. 


[Grossetete.] 


[Gregory.] 


peple  ou^rcomen,  and  many  j^ousandis  slayn  in  "bataile  as 
])e  first  bok  of  kyngis  telli]?.  ^  And  herefore  holy  prophete 
ysaie  crie]?  j^at  woo  is  to  hym,  for  ]>at  he  was  stille  and 
dwelte  among  synful  peple,  &  telle  hem  not  here  synnes, 
si]7  jjis  is  offis  of  a  prophete.  also  god  se]?  to  prelatis  hi 
ejechiel,  \at  ]if  a  synful  man  die  in  his  synne  &  }»e  prelate 
telle  him  not  his  peyne  for  synne,  god  schal  seke  synful 
mannws  bloode,  \at  is  his  synne,  of  j^e^  prelatis  hondis.  ^  And 
here-for  sei]?  poul  woo  is  to  hym,  is  euerlastynge 
da?wpnacion,  hut  pf  he  preche  gospel ;  &  si]?  cristen  men 
may  not  lyue  gostly  but  bi  goddis  word,  ^  prelatis  ]?at  wi}’- 
drawen  ]?us  goddis  word  fro  here  sugetis  ben  cause  of  de]> 
of  here  soulis,  \at  is  a  ]?ousand  folde  worse  fan  is  def  of 
body,  &  so  fei  be  worse  man-sleeris  fan  fei  fat  only  sleen 
fe  body.  ^  And  sif  petir  was  sathanas  for  he  wolde  haue 
lettid  cristis  def  &  saluacion  of  mannws  soule,  him  wnwyt- 
tyngge;  moche  more  fes  prelatis  ben  sathanas,  fat  fus 
myche  contrarien  cristis  wille  &  sauynge  of  mennws  soulis 
foru^  prechynge  of  fe  gospel,  &  fei  ben  turned  in-to  an 
auwgel  of  li]t,  for  fei  feynen  hem  in  fe  stede  of  apostlis  & 
worche  wif  f e  fend  to  sufiri?  mennws  soulis  go  to  helle ;  & 
sif  goddis  word,  bi  whiche  men  schulden  gostly  be  gendrid 
goddis  sones,  is  hetere  fan  bodely  seed  of  man  bi  whiche 
fe  body  of  man  schulde  be  gendred,  &  fes  prelatis  mysusen 
fis  bet^re  seed,  fa^ne  fei  don  more  synne  fan  diden  fe 
sodomytis  fat  wasted  manas  seed;  for  euere  fe  betre  fat 
a  f ing  is  f e  worse  &  f e  more  abhomiwable  is  f e  mysusynge 
fer-of.  &  fe  grete  doctour  lyncolne  robert  grosted  grouwdif 
fis  pleynly  fat  siche  pri^latis  fat  leuen  to  preche  fus  cristis 
gospel  ben  more  abhomiwable  and  enemy s  of  god  &  his 
peple  fan  weren  fe  cursed  men  of  sodom  &  gomor.  &  sif 
god  sef  bi  fe  prophete  fat  euyl  pr^stis  ben  cause  of  fallynge 
of  fe  peple,  alle  manure  men  ben  bouwde  to  amende  fis 
defaute ;  for  ellis  fei  stonden  not  in  goddis  hestis  ne  charite. 
&  here-fore  gregory  seif  fat  no  man  harmef  more  cristis 


^  ]?ere  X. 


Chap.  II.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


57 


chirche  j?an  he  \ai  haj?  j^e  name  of  ordre  &  holynesse  and 
^er-wi^  lyueth  euele,  for  comu?^ly  no  man  reprouej?  hym, 

&  men  taken  gretly  .ensanmple  of  his  synne;  &  jj^rfore 
crist  purgid  fe  temple  ^iih  his  owen  hondis,  as  \e  gospel 
telli]),  in  ^  tokene  ]?at  jif  pr(3stis  weren  good  ]?e  peple  schulde 
sone  be  amendid.  &  for  Ms  skille  trewe  men  seyn  \at  prMatis  prelates  are  more 

.  pound  to  preach 

hen  more  bouwden  to  prdche  trewely  j^e  gospel  J^an  j^es  sugetis  than  their  people 

^  .0  pay  tithes. 

hen  holden  to  paie  here  dymes,  for  god  chargi]?  ]?at  more, 

and  ])at  is  more  profitable  to  boj^e  pdtrties  &  more  esy.  And 

j^erfore  prMatis  ben  more  cursed  to  cesse  of  ]?is  prechynge 

]7awne  }e  sugetis  ^if  J^ei  cessen  to  paye  tij^es ;  ^e,  whanne  here 

prMatis  don  wel  here  offis.  ^  Also  prMatis  ben  more  bouwden  Prelates  more 

^  ^  bound  to  preach 

to  jjis  pr^chynge,  for  j^at  is  comauwdeme?^t  of  crist  bifore  than  to  say 

his  dep  &  eke  aftir,  jian  to  seie  matynes,  masse,  euen  song, 

or  placebo,  for  j^at  is  mannws  ordynauwce ;  Jeanne  si]?  prelatis 

ben  not  wor]»i  to  haue  dymes  &■  ofiPrynges  ^if  ]?ei  don  not 

matynes,  masse  &  oper  mannes  ordeynyngis,  moche  more 

pf  ]7ei  don  not  ]»is  he^e  ordynau?«ce  of  god ;  &  here-fore  sei]> 

crist,  ^if  pe  salt  be  fon?^yd  it  is  not  worthf  ou^r  |?is,  but  ^if 

it  be  to  be  cast  out  &  be  defoulid  of  men ;  ]?at  is  ^if  prMatis  [Matt.  v.  13.] 

failen  of  good  lif  &  techynge,  bei  moten  be  bus  seruyd  of  Men  who  can 
°  ^  JO?/  /  j  amend  prelates’ 

men,  for  ^if  men  ynder  hem  knowe  bis  defaute  &  may  faults  and  do  not, 
amende?^  it  &  don  not,  pel  consenten  &  meyntenen  he??j  in  ^^ettmg  them. 
]?is  grete  synne. 

Capttulum  2“- 

Also  prMatis  letten  men  to  do  goddis  wille  &  comauwde-  preiatL^^forbid 
ment,  &  so  j^ei  neden  hem  to  be  dampnyd,  &  letten  many  to  ^7thout^°their°^  - 
here  goddis  lawe ;  for  prMatis  letten  &  forbeden  prigstis  to 
preche  pe  gospel  in  here  iurdiccion  or  bischope-riche,  but 
^if  pei  han  leue  &  letWis  of  hem;  &  jit  god  comauwde]?  & 
chargi]?  alle  his  ^  prestis  to  preche  freely  the  gospel,  for  alle 
cristis  apostlis  &  disciplis  weren  chargid  to  preche  pe  gospel.  All  priests  are 
&  alle  pr^stis  ordeyned  of  god  comen  oper  in  staat  of  apostlis  to  pfeach,^ 
or  disciplis  of  crist,  as  bede  &  pe  popis  lawe  seij? ;  ]?anne  [Bede.] 

f  &  X.  2  j,es  X. 


58 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  II. 


[MalacM  ii.  7.] 


[Gregory.] 
whether  they 
have  little  know¬ 
ledge  or  much. 


[Jerome.] 


[Austin.] 


To  teach  the 
gospel,  that  is, 
the  right  way  to 
heaven,  is  a  work 
of  mercy. 


[Exodus  xxiii.  4.] 


[Mark  hi.  4.] 


[1  John  hi.  17.] 


*[p.  68  MS.] 


alle  pr^stis  ben  cbargid  to  precbe  Jjg  gospel.  Also  god  sei]? 
be  propbete,  j^at  lippis  of  a  pr^st  kepen  kuwnynge  of 
goddis  lawe,  &  men  seken  the  lawe  of  his  mou]?,  for  he  is 
an  auwgel  of  ]>&  lord  of  compaynes.  an  auwgel  is  a  messager,  ’ 
]7awne  si]?  ]>Q  prest  gen^raly  is  a  messager  of  god  he  mot 
schewe  his  message,  J^at  is  ]>q  gospel,  in  whiche  is  p^rfitly 
teld  goddis  wille;  and  gregory  vpon  j^e  gospel  prone]?  wel 
\at  eche  prost  mot  pr(9che,  haue  he  litel  kuwnynge  or  moche. 
^  Also  gregory  sei]?  in  ]?e  popis  lawe,  \ai  who  euore  come]? 
to  prostod  taki]?  ]?e  ofidce  of  a  bedele  or  criere  to  goo  bi-fore 
]?e  dredful  doom  ^  of  god ;  and  ^  as  in  ]?e  old-e  lawe  ]?e  prest 
Bchulde  die  pf  he  ne  entrid  i7^-to  a  sanctuarie  wi]?-outen 
noyse,  so  in  ]?e  lawe  of  grace  pf  a  prost  be  doumb  of  ]?e 
prochynge  he  stere]?  goddis  wrat]?e  vpon  hym.  &  si])  men 
ben  gretly  cursid  ]?at  don  ajenst  ]?e  popis  lawe,  as  men  seyn, 
&  ]?is  is  a  grete  popis  lawe,  groimdid  on  goddis  lawe  &  reson 
&  charite,  moche  more  ben  ]?ei  cursed  ]?at  don  apnst  ]?is  lawe. 
^  Also  ierom  sei]?  ]?at  prestis  owen  to  pr^che  bifore  bischopis, 
&  ]?ei  owen  to  be  glad  ]?^rof  for  \at  is  here  worschipe.  ^  Also 
austyn  in  a  sermon  sei]?  ]?«t  eche  man  is  holden  to  teche  ]?e 
good  ]?at  he  can ;  ^e,  ]?ouj  he  kuwne  litel.  ^  Also  it  is  a  gret 
werk  of  meraj  to  teche  men  ]?e  rijtte  weie  to  henene,  & 
eche  man  is  holden  hi  comau7^dement  of  god  to  do  werkis 
of  m^rcy;  ]?an  is  eche  prest  holden  to  teche  ]?e  gospel,  ]>at 
is  ]?e  ri^t  weie  to  henene.  ^  Also  in  ]?e  holde  lawe  a  man  is 
holde  to  brynge  ]?e  beste  of  his  enemye  in-to  ]?e  ryjtte  weie ; 
moche  more  is  a  man  holden  to  brynge  his  bro]?^res  soulis 
out  of  synne  in-to  good  weie  to  henene  ward.  And  hi  ]?is 
reson  alle  cristis  enemyes  weren  stoppid  to  speke  ajenst  him 
whawne  he  helid  a  sik  man  vpon  ]?e  sabaat  day,  as  ]?e  gospel 
telli]?.  '  ^  Also  \at  riche  man  is  out  of  charite  ]?at  helpi]?  not 
his  bro]?er  in  bodely  nede,  pf  he  may  wel,  as  ioon  ]?e 
eu^ijwngelist  sei]? ;  myche  more  is  a  man  nedid  bi  charite  to 
releu e  his  bro]?6res  soule  out  of  myschif  of  synne,  pf  he 
haue  kuwnynge  of  goddis  lawe.  ^  Also  men  demen  it  a  grete 


^  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


Chap.  II.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


59 


charite  to  sane  a  mannws  bodi  fro  def  or  drynccbyng;  it 

is  moche  more  charite  to  sane  mennws  soulis  fro  dej?  of  synne 

&  of  belle  hi  trewe  pr(?cbynge  of  goddis  la  we.  ^  A  lord,  what 

deuelis  blyndnesse  and  cursednesse  is  ]?is,  wbanne  j^e  pr^lat 

or  curat  is  chargid  of  god,  vp  peyne  of  his  owen  dampnacion, 

to  teche  le  gospel  &  comauwdementis  of  god  to  alle  his 

sugetis,  &  here-wi]?  can  not  teche  ]7us,  or  may  not  for  worldly  fto*p^othe°rs 

bisynesse,  or  wole  not  for  idelnesse  or  negligence,  I’an  to 

lette  opere  to  pr(?che  frely  gospel  of  crist  &  saue  mennws 

soulis ;  but  ]7a«ne  ]?ei  senden  o^ere,  }>at  tellen  lesyngis, 

fablis,  &  cronyclis,  &  robben  be  peple  bi  fals  beggyngis,  while  they  send 

&  dore  not  telle  hem  here  grete  synnes  &  auoutrie  ^  lest  I’ei  ^  ten  fables  and 

lesen  wynnynge  or  frendischipe.  ^  Certis  he  were  a  cruel 

fadir  pat  my^tte  not  ^eue  his  owene  childre  bred  |>ouj  J^ei  that^wiii 

p^rischedew  for  hunger,  &  pt  wolde  not  suffre  anoper  man  ^^ngry^'chiidren 

to  helpe  j^es  children  bi  weie  of  m^rcy ;  but  moche  more  others 

cruel  ben  j^es  pr(3latis  &  curatis,  pat  Kuwnen  not  or  may  not 

or  wolen  not  ^eue  here  gostly  children  gostly  bred  of  j^e 

gospel,  fouj  here  soulis  ben  m  neuere  so  gret  myschef,  & 

pt  forbeden  &  cursen  op&re  men  pf  j^ei  wole^  for  mercy 

jeue  here  hreper  techyng  of  goddis  lawe,  boj^e  treuly  &  frely, 

w«tA-outen  beggynge  as  crist  biddib.  ^  It  semeb  bat  syche  Prelates  and  the 

.  .  .  .  .  new  religious  fear 

prdatis  &  newe  religious  ben  a-ferd  of  cristis  gospel,  for  it  Christ’s  gospel. 

approuef  not  but  distroief  worldly  lordschipe  of  pr^latis  & 

feyned  holynesse  of  newe  religious ;  si];  cristis  religion  pat  he 

made  for  prestis  is  J7e  beste,  most  pi^rfyt,  most  esy,  &  most 

siker.  And  oure  ihu  wolde  haue  no  worse  religion  in  prestis 

fan  fat  pat  he  made  himself.  ^  Also  it  semef  fat  sich  iurdic- 

cion  of  pr^latis,  fat  fus  letten  cristis  gospel,  dryuen  awey  god 

fro  mannw5  soule,  &  V(?rtuous  lif  &  charite,  &  bryngef  f  e  fend 

in,  and  cherischif  hym  &  synnes  &  debatis  &  werris.  nef  eles 

men  supposen  pat  newe  religious  han  leue  of  worldly  pr^latis  These  new  re- 

°  ^  ligious  are  al- 

to  pr^che  here  fablis  and  lesyngis  &  to  robbe  f e  pore  peple 
bi  beggyng,  vpon  this  condiccion,  pat  f ei  pr^che  not  spedily 
ajenst  symonye,  extorsions  &  of ^re  orible  synnes  of  false  against 


omitted  X. 


60 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  II. 


and  give  prelates  prelatis,  &  \ai  fei  ^Gue  J^GS  Worldly  pr^latis  gold  in  grot 
muc  gold.  quantitG,  j^at  j^oi  robbon  of  poro  mon.  ^  And  \us  ]7GS  worldly 
pr(9latis  dampnon  bom  solf  fos  nowG  roligions,  bom  solf,  & 
also  opere  pr^stis  pat  woldon  precbo  pQ  gospol  trowely  &  froly 
as  mocbG  as  in  bom  is,  and  pe  poplo  also  ;  si]?  ]?Gi  suffron  not 
pe  poplo  to  boro  goddis  word  froly,  bnt  losyngis,  fablis,  and 
These  prelates  perto  to  ^  bo  robbid,  &  ]?us  J?Gs  pr^latis  bon  procuratours  of 
the  tiend!°^^  ^  po  fond,  Gnomyos  of  crist,  &  traitours  to  ^  bis  poplo. 


Prelates  teach, 
against  Christ 
and  his  apostles, 
*[p.  69  MS.] 


both  in  word  and 
example. 


Luxury  and 
pomp  *of  their 
life, 


their  fat  horses, 
their  plate. 


their  crowds  of 
attendants. 


Capifulum  S’”- 

Also  comuwly  pr^latis  bon  false  propbetis  &  beretikis,  for 
pei  mdede  ^  seyn  beresie  &  tecben  ajenst  ibu  crist  &  bis 
apostlis ;  for  ajenst  cristis  wilful  pou^rt  ]?ei  tecben  in  dodo 
worldly  coueitise  &  mocbe  wast  in  worldly  goodis,  &  ajenst 
cristis  mekenesse  ]?ei  tecben  in-dede  pompe  &  pride  of  pe 
world  &  of  bere  statis,  and  ajen  cristis  bysynesse  in  pr^cbynge 
&  pr^ieyng  &  traueile  bi  contrees  fei  tecben  in-dede  vanyte  & 
idelnesse,  &  ben  ^euen  to  glotonye  &  worldly  bisynesse,  & 
bauwten  courtis  of  lordis  &  worldly  plees,  &  ben  doumb  fro 
pe  gospel  &  tellen  bere  owen  lawis  to  magnyfie  bere  power 
&  pride  &  coueitise,  &  coucben  in  castelis  as  lordis ;  &  wij? 
all  ]?is  ]?ei  seyn  pat  cristis  &  bis  apostlis  lif  &  bere  proude 
lif  acorden,  &  seyn  pat  ]?ei  lyuen  as  crist  &  bis  apostlis  diden. 

^  A  lord !  si]?  pr^latis  comen  in  stede  of  apostlis,  bon  may 
]?ei  for  scbame  lyue  so  contr(3jriously  a^enst  bere  pore  lif, 
in  wast  sernauwtis,  in  grete  fatte  bors  &  nedles,  in  sbynyng 
vessel,  in  gret  aray  of  clo]?is ;  ^e,  more  pan  many  grete  lordis. 
certis  in  ensaumple  of  bere  lif  pei  tecben  errour  a^enst  crist 
&  bis  apostlis,  si]?  pei  seyn  pat  ]?ei  suen  crist  and  apostlis  in 
manure  of  lyuynge.  0  lord !  wbat  tokene  of  mekenesse  & 
forsakynge  of  worldly  richesses  is  ]?is ;  a  pr^lat  as  an  abott 
or  a  priour,  pat  is  ded  to  pe  world  &  pride  &  vanyte  ]?er-of, 
to  ride  wi]?  foure  score  bors,  wi]?  barneis  of  siluer  &  gold, 
&  many  raggid  &  fittrid  squyeris  &  epere  men  swerynge 
berte  &  bonys  &  nailis  &  epere  membris  of  crist,  &  to  spende 


1  omitted  X. 


2  of  X. 


Chap.  III.] 


OF  PKELATES. 


61 


wip  erlis  &  barpns  &  here  pore  tenauwtis  bo]7e  Jousand  markis 
&  pouwdes  to  meyntene  a  false  plee  of  pe  world,  &  forbarre 
men  of  here  rijt.  &  ^es  ypocrit«s  seyn  pat  j^is  is  worschipe 
of  holy  chirche,  but  c^rtis  j^ei  lien,  but  pf  |>ei  clepen  be 
contrarie  name  pe  deuelis  chirche  to  be  holy  chirche,  as  pei 
clepen  hem  self  men  of  religion  &  pat  ]7ei  forsaken  ^e  world ; 
but  certis  j^ei  distroien  holy  religion  &  magnyfien  veyn 
religion,  of  whiche  seynt  lames  speki]?,  &  forsaken  traueile 
&  peyne  &  dissese  of  pe  world,  &  han  lordschipis,  rentis, 
gaie  houses  &  costy,  &  welfare  of  mete  &  drynk,  ^ere  ]7ei 
myjtten  vnnele  before  haue  bene-bred  &  watir  or  feble  ale. 
^e,  wij?  moche  care  &  traueile  now  ynnej^e  ony  mete  ^  or  wyn 
may  serue  &  plese  hem,  but  likerousnesse  &  lustis  of  here 
bely  han  now  alle  pe  bisinessis,  and  deuocion  &  holynesse  & 
penauwce  litel  or  ri^t  noujt.  Of  j^is  veyn  pride  of  religious 
it  seme]?  wel  ]?ei  ben  not  bok  of  cristis  pou^rt  &  holynesse, 
as  ]?ei  seye  in  here  wordis,  but  bok  of  pride,  coueitise,  vanyte 
&  epere  synnes,  to  disceif^  of  goddis  peple  &  distroiynge  of 
his  lawe.  ^  harde  eriep  seynt  bernard  ajenst  pompous  prdatis 
&  axe]?  hem  ]?us :  ^ee  ^  pr^latis,  what  do]?  gold  in  ^oure  bridelis 
&  epere  araies,  where  it  kepe  hem  fro  cold ;  we  p^rischen 
for  hunger  and  cold,  seyn  pore  men,  oure  goodis  ]?ei  ben  pat 
^e  wasten  from  vs,  ]?ei  ben  drawen  cruelly  a^enst  m^rcy,  & 
lus  ^ee^  don  tweie  euele  ]?ingis,  on  for  ^oure  pride  &  wast 
of  pore  mennws  goodis  ^e  gon  to  helle,  And  we  pore  men 
pmschen  in  ]?is  world  for  ^oure>  vanyte  &  pride.  &  si]?  pe  lif 
of  pr^latis  is  bok  &  ensaumple  of  sugetis,  as  grosted  sei]? 
wi]?  many  moo,  &  ]?ei  lyuen  so  opywly  in  pride,  coueitise  & 
idelnesse,  passynge  alle  epere,  ]?ei  ben  open  heretikis  & 
stronge,  pat  han  no  schame  of  here  heresie,  for  heresie  in 
fals  lif  meyntened  is  werse  ]?an  heresie  only  in  herte  or 
wordis,  and  for  sclauwdere  pat  ]?ei  ^euen  to  epere  men  bi 
here  cursed  lif  god  him  self  curse]?  hem  in  pe  gospel  &  sei]? 
]?us :  who  to  pat  man  bi  whom  come]?  a  sclauMre,  pat  is 
ensaumple  to  do  synne,  it  spedi]?  to  him  pat  a  mylneston  of 

2  j?e  X.  *  ]?ei  X. 


their  lawsuits. 


They  say  that 
this  is  worship 
of  holy  church, 
but  they  must 
mean  the  devil’s 
church. 

They  say  they 
are  religious 
and  forsake  the 
world ; 

but  they  have  all 
sorts  of  good 
things,  who 
before  profession 
could  hardly  get 
bean  bread ; 
now  they  are 
hard  to  ^ease. 


Bernard’s  rebuke 
to  proud  prelates. 


*[p.  70  MS  ] 


They  are  open 
heretics. 


A  cause  of 
scandal. 


^  nite  X. 


2  dissect  X. 


62 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  III. 


[Matt  xviii.  6,] 

Gregory. 

It  were  good  for 
evil  prelates  that 
they  had  lived 
in  a  lower  state  ; 
they  should  be 
damned  to  less 
pain. 


Covetousness  of 
prelates. 

All  their  offices 
are  done  for 
money  or  pomp. 


They  pray  only 
for  show. 


assis  be  hangid  in  bis  necke,  &  ]7«t  be  be  dreynt  iw-to 
depnesse  of  ]?e  see.  is,  sei]?  gregory,  it  spedi]?  to  euyl 

pr^latis  ])ai  ^euen  ensauwpele  of  synne  to  here  sngetis  \at  j^ei 
weren  in  lowere  staat  of  worldly  labour  &  wer 

dampnyd  to  depe  belle ;  for  j^an  ]7ei  scbnlden  bane  lesse 
peyne  ]>m  to  lyue  *  euele  in  j^e  be^e  staat  &  tecbe  opere  men 
do  synne,  for  ]7ei  ben  worjji  as  many  dej^es  as  pei  jeuen  euyle 
ensaumples  of  synne  to  bere  sngetis.  But  lord,  wbo  is  nowe 
so  coueitous  abouten  worldly  lordscbipis  &  temporal  goodis 
as  oure  prolatis,  for  comuwly  alle  here  visitacion,  alle  bere 
sacramentis  and  ordris  ^euynge  &  halwynge  of  placis  &  vesty- 
mentis  &  blissyng  is  don^  for  coueitise  &  worldly  pride  & 
dignyte;  alle  bere  preue  spekyng  &  procbyng  &  tecbyng 
in  scolis  is  for  coueitise  &  magnyfyynge  of  here  worldly 
staat :  who  is  more  idel  in  goddis  s^ruyce,  more  in  glotonye 
&  wastynge  of  pore  mennws  goodis  in  schynynge  vesselis 
&  operQ  costis  ?  &  ^if  j^ei  preien,  pat  is  wi]7-outen  deuocion 
to  plese  pQ  peple,  &  comuwly  for  offrynge,  &  cotidian  distr/- 
bucion,  &  stynkyng  lif  of  lecberie,  robberie,  pride,  coueitise, 
glotonye ;  |>at  j^ei  raj^ore  stiren  god  to  wraj^e  &  vengauwce 
pdiU  to  morcy  &  pite,  as  goddis  lawe,  austyn  &  gregory  & 
op  ere  seyntis  witnessen.  but,  lord,  si]?  heresie  stondi]?  most 
in  cursed  lif,  were  ben  more  heretikes,  si]?  J?ei  ben  most 
synful  in  opyn  &  preuy  cursed  lyuynge  j  but  where  scbal 
ony  be  deppere  dampnyd  in  belle  ? 


Q2ipitulum  4'”* 

Prelates  allow  Prelatis  also  robben  J?e  pore  lige  men  of  po  king  bi  fals 
sin,  if  they  will  extorisions  taken  bi  colour  of  holy  correccion,  &  ^euen  men 
^  ^  leue  to  dwellen  in  synne  fro  jer  to  ^er,  fro  seuene  ^er  to 

seuene  ^er,  &  comuwly  al  bere  lif,  ^if  J’ei  paien  bi  jere  twenti 
sbillyngis  or  more  or  lesse,  and  ]7us  bi  sutilte  of  sathanas 
•[p.  71  MS.]  iian  ^'fouwde  newe  peynes  orible  &  scbameful  to  make  men 

paye  a  gret  rauT^son,  to  jeue  gold  &  bafe  hem  in  lustis  of 
saffi^to^eet  2000  synne  as  swyn  in  feen.  And  men  seyn  fat  su»^me  biscbopis 


1  leve  X. 


2  ben  X. 


Chap.  IV.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


63 


geti]?  in  o  yer  two  JoRsand  mark  or  pouwdis;  &  jif  he  laste 
twenty  ^eer  bischop  wi]?  j^is  robberie,  It  wole  come  to  sixti 
])Ousa^d  mark  j^at  he  robbi]?  of  ]7e  kingis  lige  men.  ^  And  ]7us 
]7es  wickede  pr^latis  sillen  cristene  mennws  soulis  to  sathanas 
for  money,  for  whiche  soulis  crist  schedde  his  pr(?cious  herte 
blod  vpon  ]7e  cros.  And  here-fore  ]7ei  ben  worse  J^an  iudas 
for  many  skillis,  for  ]7ei  sillen  crist  in  a  manure  as  iudas  dide 
wi]?  more  dispit  &  more  stynkynge  coueitise,  &  pt  |>ei  hiren 
lordis  to  meyntene  hem  in  j^is  cursednesse,  &  jeue  pore 
mennws  goodis  to  hem  for  ]?is  ende,  &  hiren  also  iurrouris  & 
opere  gentil  men  of  contre  to  forswere  hem  wyttyngly  on 
pQ  bok  &  not  to  putten  hem  vp  for  extorsioneris  &  j^eues ; 
&  wha?^ne  j^ei  schulden  be  principal  dukis  in  crist  cost  to 
fijtte  &  teche  operQ  men  bi  here  ensaumple  to  fyjtte  ajenst 
synnes,  as  false  traitouris  pei  turnen  pe  bak  &  techene 
cristene  men  to  offre  hem  redy  to  pe  deuelys  sacrifice,  a 
pore  man  ]?ei  constreynem  to  synne  bi  manas,  chydyng  & 
losse  of  catel  &  sclau?^drynge,  but  ^if  he  wolen  consente  to 
hem  &  fauoure  hem  in  here  wrong  lif;  &  jif  he’wol  do  so, 
jjanne  he  is  an  holy  sone,  &  ha]?  pftis  &  worldly  frendischipe 
&  fauour  &  an^mristis  false  blissyng  &  goddis  trewe  curs. 
And  ]7ei  flatren  lordis  whawne  pei  meyntenen  ]?es  an^fcristis 
pr^latis  to  robbe  here  tenauwtis,  &  seyn  j^ei  worschipen  ]?anne 
god  &  holy  chirche,  &  ^euew  lordis  grete  pftis  of  gold  & 
iuelis  &  pfl^rdons,  &  licence  to  synge  in  oratories  &  opere 
veyn  fingis,  and  ^if  lordis  wolen  distroie  fes  synnes  of 
robberie  &  sathanas  marchauwdise,  panne  an^fcristis  pr^latis 
wolew  sclauwdren  hem,  curse  hem,  &  entirdite  hem  &  here 
londis.^  And  ]7us  alle  men  ben  conquerid  to  pe  fend  almost, 
&  ]7us  ]7es  cursed  pilatis  not  pr^latis  ben  verray  an^^'cristis, 
procuratours  of  sathanas,  &  tr^itours  of  ihu  crist  &  his 
peple. 


or  3000  marks  a 
year  by  these  sin- 
rents. 

Thus  they  sell 
souls  to  Satan, 


and  are  worse 
than  Judas. 


They  bribe  lords 


and  jurors. 


They  make  poor 
men  sin. 


They  flatter  lords 
who  support 
them, 


and  gi-ve  them 
rich  gifts  with 
pardons  and 
privileges ; 
hut  they  resist 
any  attempt  of 
lords  to  correct 
them. 


Pilates  not 
prelates. 


^  here  lordis  X. 


64 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  V. 


Prelates  usually 
enter  upon  their 
benefices  by 
simony. 


Gregory. 

Simony  is  of 
three  kinds : 
coming  to  a  bene¬ 
fice  (a)  by  gift 
of  money, 


(J)  by  favour  of 
others  rather 
than  by  merit, 
*[p.  72  MS.] 

(c)  by  worldly 
service  done  to 
others. 


They  do  their 
office  neither  in 
good  life  nor 
preaching ; 


they  do  not  even 
comply  with  the 
pope’s  law. 

Title  of  grace 
needful  to  them. 


At  their  death 
they  are  not  fully 
contrite. 


or  they  would 
make  restitution; 


but  this  happens 
seldom  or  never. 


Capitulum  S’”' 

Also  pri^latis  comuwly  ben  symonyentis  in  here  entre,  in 
processe  of  here  benefis,  &  in  ]fe  ende  of  here  lif,  &  jfawne 
in  alle  ]7es  tymes  jtei  ben  heretikis,  so  '^at  alle  o\ere  synnes 
ben  holden  for  nou^t  in  comparison  of  ]7is  symonye,  as  ]fe 
beste  part  of  ]fe  popis  la  we  sei];.  for,  as  gregory  &  jfe 
popis  lawe  seijf,  in  j^re  manures  is  symonye  don.  First 
whawne  a  man  come]?  to  a  benefis  of  ]?e  chirche  bi  ^ifte  of 
money  or  worldly  goodis  bi  hym  self  or  bi  o^ere  menes. 
life  secnwde  tyme  whawne  a  man  come]?  ]?^r-to  bi  preiere 
of  lordis  or  ladies  or  o]?ere  men  more  than  for  kuwny77ge 
^of  goddis  lawe  &  holy  lif.  ^  ]?e  ]>ride  tyme  whawne  a  man 
comeJ>  \er-io  bi  worldly  seruyce  of  lordis  &  ladies,  of  pr^latis, 
or  o])ere  my^tty  men  more  panne  for  good  lif  and  kun77ynge ; 
but  who  come]»  hellis  to  pr^lacie?  &  in  processe  pei  mys- 
penden  pore  mennws  goodis,  in  wast  metis  &  festis  of  ryche 
men  &  pride  of  ]?is  world,  &  don  not  here  office  comu77ly 
nepere  in  good  lif  ne  trewe  pr^chynge,  &  resignen  not  here 
benefis  goten  ]?us  by  symonye;  &  pat  pei  moten  algatis  do 
pf  ]?ei  schullen  be  saaf  vp  ]?e  popis  lawe,  &  neu^re  in  wille 
to  hauen.  it  ajen  but  pf  it  be  bi  rijt  title,  &  algatis  confirma- 
cion  of  god  bi  titel  of  grace  is  nedeful  to  hem.  And  J’at 
come]?  not  but  bi  verray  repentau77ce  of  synne  don  bi-fore, 
&  bi  trewe  lif  &  techynge  &  meyntenynge  of  goddis  lawe 
vpon  here  ku77nynge  &  my^t.  &  in  here  endynge  ]?ei  han 
not  comuwly  ful  contricion  for  here  synnes,  as  for  myspen- 
dynge  of  pore  mennws  goodis,  for  false  extorsions,  for  sillyng 
of  sacramentis,  for  norischynge  &  meyntenynge  of  epere  men 
in  synne,  as  pride,  coueitise,  &  glotonye  &  alle  epere  :  for 
pf  ]?ei  hadden  ]?anne  contricion  ]?ei  schulden  restore  J>es 
wickid  extorsions  vp  here  myjt,  &  warne  epere  men  of  pe 
synnes  in  whiche  pei  hadden  norischeden  hem ;  but  ]’is 
come]?  seldom  or  neu^re,  &  perieve  it  seme]?  pat  pei  dien 
heretikis  but  pf  god  helpe  more  in  the  laste  poynt  of 
partynge  of  pe  soule  &  body,  &  ellis  ]?ei  dien  dampnyd 


Chap.  V.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


65 


fendis  of  helle.  ^  But  lordis  &  ladies  here  mosten  ben  wel  Lords  and  ladies 

should  know  that 

war,  for  uf  hei  ^euen  benefis  to  clerkis  fore  here  worldly  it  is  simony  to 

'  ^  J  <  '>  give  benefices  for 

s^ruyces,  princypali  as  for  kechene  clerkis  &  countyngge  or  worldly  service, 
daunsynge,  for  palfreis  or  keuercheris,  gold  or  6\er  worldly 
s^ruyce,  it  is  foul  symonye  &  cursed  on  h’oj^e  parties,  as 
goddis  lawe  and  j^e  chirche  &  holy  seyntis  techen.  ^  And 
also  pf  J^ei  ^euen  a  benefis  for  men  hen  of  here  kyn,  or  for 
fleschly  loue,  or  worldly  frendischipe,  or  ellis  for  fe  clerk  ^  favouT^*^^^ 
is  manly  to  j^e  lord  in  gay  cloj^inge,  \n  grete  festis,  gret 
archerie,  or  ony  o^pero  veyn  iapis  more  j^an  for  ]?e  worschipe 
of  god  &  profit  of  mawnes  soule,  it  is  stynkynge  symonye 


hi-fore  god,  as  lawes  and  seyntis  techen.  ^  And  here  ben  j^re 
poyntis  of  treson  to  god  &  his  peple ;  j^e  first  is  |;o^t  lordes 
&  ladies  ben  tratowrs  ]iat  holden  curatis  in  worldly  offices 
fro  ]?e  soulis  '^at  )»ei  ban  cure  of;  for  god  ^eue|>  hym  lordi- 
schipis  &  prosentyn_<7ge  of  chirchis  to  meyntene  goddis  lawe 
&  help  trewe  prostis  to  teche  his  peple  J’e  gospel  &  mauwde- 
mewtis  of  god,  &  pf  }>ei  holden  wi]?  goddis  tresour  curatis 
in  here  worldly  soruyce  or  chapellis,  &  letten  hem  to  kepe 
cristene  soulis,  ]>e  whiche  crist  boujt  wi]?  his  procious  blod, 
]7ei  ben  foul  traitours  to  ‘-^'ihu  crist  &  to  peple  ]iat  j^ei 
disceyuen  j^us ;  but  pt  more  treson  is  in  clerkis  \at  coueiten 
&  taken  j^is  worldli  office  wi]?^  cure  of  cristene  soulis  and 
may  not  do  hem  to-gedre,  for  \oi  schulden  teche  j^e  lordis 
f e  treufe  of  goddis  lawe  &  also  fe  peril  in  fis  poynt,  &  don 
noujt,  for  ope  of  grettere  benefices  or  for  flaterynge  of  here 
lordschipe ;  but  the  moost  tratowrie  of  alle  stondi]?  in  fals 
confessouris,  \at  schulden  telle  \o  treu]?e  of  goddis  lawe  & 
don  not  for  lesynge  of  worldly  lordischipe,  frendeschipe, 
fauowr  or  worldly  wywnyng,  bo]?e  of  J>e  lord  &  his  meyne 
&  of  false  curat  ]ier-to ;  &  j^us  \o  lord  or  the  lady  hire]? 
costly  a  fals  iudas  to  his  confessour,  \at  suffrij?  him  &  ledij? 
him  fe  heije  weie  to  helle.  ^  Also  prelatis  ben  ful  of  symonye 
whanne  ]?ei  mynystren  here  sacramentis  or  ony  gostly  office 
for  money  or  j^ank  or  preiynge  of  men  of  ])e  world  or  for 
^  celrk  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


Three  points  of 
treason  to  God 
and  his  people. 

1st.  When  lords 
and  ladies  keep 
curates  from 
their  cure  to  em¬ 
ploy  them  in 
worldly  office. 


*[p.  73  MS.] 

2nd.  Worse  trea¬ 
son  is  in  the 
clergy  who  take 
these  offices. 


3rd.  The  worst 
treachery  is  in 
false  confessors. 


Prelates  are  full 
of  simony  when 
they  administer 
sacraments,  etc., 
for  worldly  rea¬ 
sons. 


5 


66 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  V. 


most  harmful. 


All  people  run 
thither. 


ony  worldly  S(?ruyce.  Por  crist  bidde]?  hem  jeue  al  frely 
taken  it  freely  of  god,  &  J7e  prophete  sei}?  he  as  blissed 
received.  kepi]?  his  hondis  clene  fro  alle  manure  pfte,  &  he  is  cursed 

]>at  do]?  ]?e  werk  of  god  wi]?  necgligence  or  fraude.  ^  And  it 
is  a  foul  fraude  to  [do~l  ]?is  gostly  office  for  worldly  reward 
or  for  ]?anke  or  preisynge  of  synful  men,  whawne  ]?ei  schulden 
do  it  for  goddis  worschipe  frely  &  hel]?e  of  mannws  soule. 

court”of  Romels  ^  symonye  of  ]?e  court  of  rome  do]?  most  harm,  for 

it  is  most  comune  &  vnder  most  colour  of  holynesse,  &  robbi]? 
most  oure  lond  of  men  &  tresour;  for  alle  nacions  of  this 
cristendom  rennen  ]?ider  as  to  welle  of  trew]?e  and  gostly 
helpe,  &  ]?ei  ben  most  disceyued,  for  ]?ei  wenen  ]?at  ]?ere  is 
no  symonye  for  holynesse  of  ]?e  court  of  rome.  &  many 
kuwnynge  men  &  able  ben  dede  bi  ]?e  weie,  what  wi]?  tr<?ueile 
&  cold  &  opere  myschefis  &  enemyes,  &  ofte  rauwsonyd,  & 

trSur?  moche  gold  to  rau?^son,  to  spende  bi  ]?e 

the  land  wcic^c ;  ^0  to  speudc  at  rome  many  ^eris  &  daies,  to  paie 

to  pay  for  hulls.  ggjjg  bullis,  to  pledc  for  benefices,  offryngyus,  dymes, 
&  many  mo  causes,  to  paie  ]?e  pope  ]?e  first  froytys,  &  cardy- 
nals  &  bribouris  to  spede  here  nedis,  &  for  pardons,  quyenals, 
priuylegies,  for  assoilyngis  of  wowes,  &  many  feyned  iapis, 
to^Rome  is  rap-  supposen  alle  ]?es  passen  ]?re  fiften]?es ;  &  alle  go]? 

than^  three  owre  lond  comu?^ly  in-to  enemy s  hondis,  &  for  al  ]?is 

fifteenths,  come]?  a  litcl  ded  lede,  &  mayntenynge  of  false  plee,  &  strif, 

in  return  for  o  t  t  .  «  .  . 

which  we  get  a  &  goddis  curs,  &  symonye,  &  heresie.  for  fif  it  be  symonye  a 

little  lead  and 

much  mischief,  clerk  to  s^rue  a  lord  for  a  benefice  &  ]?e  lord  to  resceyue  per- 
fore  gold  or  gold  wor]?,  bi  pe  same  skil  it  is  symonye  to  sdrue 
pe  pope  in  sich  a  8trau?«ge  traueile  and  centre,  &  ^eue  hym  ^ 

payfirS??uits  fS  ^  frystefruytes  for  pfte  of  a  chirche ; 

church^^  ^  ^  whawne  a  lord  hap  ]?e  gold  for  his  pr^sentynge  pe  gold 

*[p.  74  MS.]  dwell!]?  stille  in  oure  lond,  but  whanne  pe  pope  hap  pe  furste 
r”st  t.n^.herp^m^  fruytcs  pe  gold  gop  out  &  comc]?  neu^re  a^en.  And  so  for 
pardons,  pf  pei  ben  ou^t  wor]?i  pei  mosten  be  free,  &  to  take 

for  ^pardo^s^  m  goddis  grace  and  so  symonye,  & 

simony.  bo]?e  parties  ben  cursed  of  god  &  man;  &  so  an^mrist 

hap  forbarrid  pe  fredom  of  goddis  lawe  in  schriftis,  masse, 


Chap.  V.] 


OF  PKELATES. 


67 


syngynge,  &  o];ere  deuocions  &  taki]?  gold  of  men  to  brynge  Antichrist  sells 

„  Til  !•  .a  little  of  the 

nom  sam  del  to  bis  iredom,  &  so  robben  hem  bi  ypocnsye  freedom  which 

he  has  taken 

as  jif  it  were  not  leful  to  do  profit  to  ^  menn«^s  soulis  wi)>-out  away. 

dispensynge  of  an2^«crist.  But  now  to  scbewe  pe  malice  & 

cursednesse  of  symonye ;  first,  almy^tti  god  dampnej?  it  in  Condemimtions 

pe  olde  lawe,  crist  in  pe  gospel,  &  is  apostlis  after  pe  sendywge  scripture. 

of  be^  holy  gost:  first,  whawne  be  wickid  kyng  ieroboam  Jerohoam  pun- 
•*  ^  ^  ^  ished  for  selling 

made  false  mau^metis  &  stockis  and  worschipide  hem  for  the  priesthood, 

almyjtty  god,  bi-cause  pat  he  selde  pe  prest-hode  of  ]7es 

false  goddis  for  worldly  pftis  god  almy^tty  distroied  hym 

&  alle  his  seed,  also,  for  giesy  toke  money  &  clobis  of 

naaman  whanne  helise  pe  prophete  his  maistir  hadde  helid 

hym,  pe  leper  of  naaman  cleuyd  to  hym  &  his  generacion 

euere  aftir,  in  tokene  pat  gostly  lepre,  J^at  is  heresie,^  schulde 

dwelle  wij>  alle  syche  as  taken  ^  money  or^  money  wor]?  for 

gostly  offices;  ^e,  wi}>-outen  couenant  makynge.  also  god 

sei]?  bi  pe  prophete  malachie  to  j^e  iewis  pat  his  wille  is  not 

to  hem:  ‘‘For  per  nys  noon  j^at  shitti]?  frely  pe  doris  of  pe  Maiachii.  lo. 

temple.”  j^anne  god  chargi]?  more  j^e  betre  offis  as  makynge 

of  sacr<?mentis  &  ^eeuynge  of  ordris,  pat  men  plese  hym 

not  but  ^if  j^ei  don  hem  frely.  ^  Also  crist  in  pe  gospel  drof 

out  of  j^e  temple  hem  J^at  selden  &  boujten  per-innej  jee,  ^^^eTempre^^*^ 

wi]?  his  owen  hondis,  pht  we  reden  not  of  many  opere  synful 

men  poi  he  tok  so  moche  vengauwce  in  his  firste  comynge, 

in  tokene  pet  he  scharpliest  schal  ponysche  hem  j^at  don 

symonye.  Also  petir  seyde  to  ’symon  magus ;  j^i  money  be 

wif  fe  in-to  loos  of  dampnacion,  for  fou  gessedest  to  haue 

goddis  pftee  J^orouj  money.  ^  Also  symonye  is  contrarie  to  al  ^aii^the 

pe  hole  trinyte  &  to  echo  persone  per-of;  first  to  pe  fadir, 

for  whawne  god  wole  not  and  may  not  brynge  vnable  men 

in-to  benefices  of  |>e  chirche  for  his  ri^twysnesse  &  vnablete 

01  hem  sell,  pei  presumen  to  comen  in  bi  symonye;  as  ^if  money  and  deceit 

,  ex'!  11  j  n  are  put  above  the 

pe  peny  &  lalsnesse  ot  pe  lend  were  more  pan  pe  myjt  of  Father’s  will, 

pe  fadir  of  heuene.  also  ihu  crist  is  dore  bi  whiche  men  Christ  is  the  door, 

schulde  entre  in-to  offices  &  benefices  of  pe  chirche,  & 

1  of  X.  2  omitted  X.  3  j^ere  ne,  in  both  MSS.  omitted  X. 


68 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap,  V. 


but  simoniacs 
enter  another 
'way. 

*[p.  75  MS.] 

Simoniacs  sell 
the  Holy  Ghost. 


Arius. 


Pope’s  law 
ordains  horrible 
penalties  against 
simoniacs. 


Prevalence  of 
simony. 


Friars  forsake 
Christ’s  poverty, 


and  allure  young 
children  by 
simony. 


Curates. 


Simony  reigns 
in  all  states  of 
the  church, 


symonyentis  wolen  come  in  bi  ano]?^^  weie  of  falsnesse, 
as  ]7ei  wolden  putte  awey  ihu  cnst,  &  be  more  maistris 
&  more  witty  ]7an  be.  Also  symonyentis  as  ^'mycbe  as  in 
bem  is  sellen  ]7e  boly  gost,  &  maken  him  jjral  or  bouwden 
to  synfnl  men  &  fendis,  wbawne  j^ei  sillen  &  biggen  Jtws  bis 
pftis;  &  j^^rfore  ]?ei  ben  worse  beretikis  ]7an  j^e  cursed  beretik 
arrian  &  his  secte  ]iai  made  Jje  boly  gost  lesse  in  my^t  J^an 
]>Q  fadir  &  ]7e  sone,  &  s^ruant  to  hem  boje  as  fe  lawe  sei]?. 
For  as  ]7e  synne  of  sodom  was  moost  a^enst  kynde  &  so 
most  synne  in  fo  olde  lawe,  so  is  symonye  as  doctowrs  seyn 
most  a^enst  gr«ce  &  most  synne  in  j^e  lawe  of  grd^ce.  And 
]7(?r-fore  in  ]>&  popis  lawe  decrees  &  decretals  symony  is 
gen^raly  clepid  heresie,  &  orible  peynes  ordeyned  ajenst 
men  \ai  don  symonye  on  ony  manure  bi  hem  self  or  o\erQ 
mene  person  es,  bi  here  wille  &  consent,  &  in  sum  cas  bem 
YuwyttyTzge.  ^  Also  generaly  prelatis  regnen  in  symonye, 
as  biscbopis,  mu7^kis,  cbanons,  &  freris,  &  lesse  curatis ;  for 
bischopis,  muwkis  &  cbanons  sillen  p^rfeccion  of  cristis 
pouert  &  bis  apostlis,  &  also  trewe  pr^chynge  for  a  litil 
stynkyng  muk  or  drit,  &  worldli  lordscbipe,  &  wombe  ioie 
and  idelnesse,  &  freris  forsaken  fe  p^rfit  pou^rt  of  crist  and 
bis  apostlis  for  pride  of  fe  worldly  staatis  &  flaterynge 
and  ypocnsie  &  beggynge  to  geten  esely  &  plen- 
teuously  catel  of  lordis  &  ladies  &  comunes,  &  to  geten 
^onge  cbildre  to  here  feyned  ordre  by  symonye,  as  aplis, 
purses  &  o])erB  iapes  &  false  bibestis,  &  bi  false  stelynge 
ajenst  here  frendis  wille,  and  ajenst  goddis  comauwdemewt. 
And  lesse  curatis  forsaken  boly  lif  &  trewe  pr(schynge  of 
crist  &  bis  apostlis  for  bisynesse  &  worscbipe  of  ]>e  world 
&  for  glotonye  &  dru7^kenesse  &  lecberie ;  &  ofte  bi  open 
symonye  comen  to  here  benefices,  &  dwelle^i  stille  in  bem 
wbawne  jiei  ben  vnable  to  tecbe  goddis  lawe  in  word  & 
dede ;  &  fus  symonye  regnej?  in  alle  staatis  of  fe  cbirche, 
bojie  in  statis  grouwdid  of  crist  &  in  oj’^re  grou^^did  of  foolis 
as  pf  ])ei  weren  statis  of  boly  cbirche,  but  ]>ei  ben  statis 
of  fe  wicked  cbirche  brou^te  in  by  lesyngis  &  ypocrisie. 


Chap.  VI.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


69 


And  si]?  he  kyng  &  lordis  ben  chargid  of  god  to  distroie  and  king  and 

.  .  .  .  lords  consent 

fis  synne  &  opere,  &  mowen  don  it  &  don  it  not,  Jei  ben  to  it. 

consenteris  &  fautouris  per-of. 


CapiYulum  6”*’ 


Also  prelatis  balden  pe  halwynge  of  dede  stonys  or  dede  Prelates  tMnk 

^  ^  consecration  of 

er]?e  &  opere  ornamentis  of  pe  cbirche,  as  vestymei^tis,  clo]7is,  churches, chrism, 

0^  xnojfo 

cbalis,  &  oile,  &  crem,  more  worH  ban  be  balwynge  and  worth  than  con- 

’  /  j  j  JO  secration  of  the 

blissynge  of  pe  sacrtijmentis  of  pe  auter,  pat  is  verray  cristis 
flecb  &  his  blood ;  &  so  it  seme]?  pat  pei  b olden  dede  stonys 
&  dede  er]?e  &  roten  clo]?is  more  wor]?i  pan  cristis  owen 
precious  body  &  bis  blood.  ^  For  ]7ei  holden  to  bem  self  for  they  keep 

the  former  to 

balwynge  of  auter  stonys,  cbircbis  &  cbircbe  ^erdis  &  obere  themselves,  and 

let  any  priest 

clobis  of  be  ^  cbircbe  as  more  worbi  &  precious,  &  suffren  make  the  sacra- 

^  ^  ^  ^  ■'  ^  ^  ment  of  the  altar. 

pore  prestis,  be  neuere  so  ynkuwnywge  and  vicious  76  ms.] 

anemtis  god  so  bat  pei  speke  not  a^enst  b®  synne  of  prelatis, 

to  make  pe  sacrament  of  pe  auter  echo  day,  as  pf  pat  were 

lesse  worbi  &  lesse  precious.  ^  Also  bei  wolen  suffre  an  auter  They  win  leave 

1  these  0 dices  un* 

ynbalwedid,  or  a  cbircbe  or  a  cbircbe  ^erde  suspendid  &  no  done  if  iheir  fees 
.  n  1.  i.  n  1  be  not  fully  forth- 

masse  seyd  per-mne,  p  lourtene  nyjt,  ^e  a  moneb,  je  longe  coming. 

ynowb,  pf  fourty  pens  ben  bihynden  of  ten  mark  or  ten 

pound ;  &  alle  bis  b^i  taken  bi  extorsions,  bi  befte  &  symonye, 

&  hauen  no  mercy,  be  pe  peple  neuere  so  poor,  neuere'so  nedy, 

&  neuere  so  deuout  to  here  goddis  ^word  or^  seruyce;  but 

where  ben  worse  tirau?^tis  &  heretikis?  &  b^s  i?^  alle  here 

dedis  of  gostly  offices  b^i  cursen  hem  self  &  pe  peple  also, 

for  bei  don  not  bat  bat  longib  to  here  office  for  stynkynge 

symonye,  &  maken  pe  peple  to  consente  &  meynteyne  here 

synne  of  symonye  &  beresie,  for  b^i  don  many  sotil  menys,  simony  in  this 

as  grauwten  pe^rdon  &  here  feyned  blissyng  to  balwyng  of 

cbircbis,  to  make  b©  peple  wilful  to  here  bem  vp  in  here 

synne.  ^  And  pf  ony  man  for  drede  of  god  &  bis  conscience  Prelates  perse- 

ajenstonde  bi®  extorsion  and  robberie  &  symonye  be  scbal  oppose  their 

be  rebukid,  dispised,  suwned,  cursed,  lese  bis  catel  &  in  cas 


^  omitted  X. 


-  2_2  omitted  X. 


70 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  VI. 


his  bodi  to  prison  or  to  def,  &  sumtyme  be  in  hate,  in  strif 

&  enuye,  &  ful  of  his  wrecchid  lif.  &  pf  he  consente  wilfully 

to  l^is  foule  symonye  Jeanne  he  is  dede  in  synne,  as  poul 

seif,  &  pf  he  apnstonde  it,  what  bi  cautelis  of  an^«crist  & 

malice  of  fe  fend,  he  schal  be  towrmentid  bi  wraffe  & 

vnpacience  &  traueile  &  peyne  of  his  bodi  &  loos  of  his 

catel,  fat  vnnefis  schal  he  be  sauyd  but  nedid  to  be 

dampnyd ;  &  f us  it  semef  pat  f ei  pat  schulden  be  most 

principal  helperis  to  cristene  mennws  soulis  fei  ben  most 

principal  procuratours  of  f  e  fend  to  encombrO  hem  in  synne. 

Gwi  keeps  these  and  pt  it  semef  pat  oure  goode  god  kepif  fes  veyn  ofldces 

priests  to  save  &  foyned  sacramentis  fro  his  pore  pr^^stis  pat  fei  gon  not 
them  from  hell.  /  ^  r  r  /  /  o 

fe  brode  weie  to  belle  for  mysusynge  of  hem. 


Q2ipitulum  7'"' 


Prelates  care 
more  for  worldly 
goods  than  for 
Christ’s  gospel. 


Gregory. 


*[p.  77  MS.] 
They  will  not  let 
the  gospel  he 
preached  hut  at 
their  will. 


Satan  quoted 
scripture,  and  so 
showed  it  more 
respect  than  they. 


Prelatis  also  setten  more  pris  bi  a  litel  styngynge  ^  drit 
of  worldly  goodis  fan  fei  don  bi  fe  moste  holy  gospel  of 
ihu  crist ;  for  fe  grete  bysynesse  pat  fei  han  abouten  worldly 
goodis  &  fe  litel  trdjueile  &  study yng  abouten  cristis  gospel 
prouen  wel  fat  fei  louen  more  fis  worldly  muk  fan  fe 
gospel  of  ihu  crist;  for  fe  dede  doynge  is  proff  of  loue, 
as  gregory  seif,  &  here-fore  fei  pri^isen  &  techyn  mannws 
lawis  &  here  owen  tradiciouws  to  gete  fe  peny  by,  but  fei 
leuen  &  dispisen  fe  gospel  &  letten  it  to  be  pr(?chid,  for  fe 
gospel  techif  fe  holy  lif  of  crist  &  his  apostlis  &  dampnef 
fe  cursed  lif  of  fes  worldly  prelatis,  &  fei  commauwden 
pat  no  man  schal  ^'prdche  fe  gospel  but  at  here  wille  & 
lymytacion,  &  forbeden  men  to  here  fe  gospel  vp  peyne  of 
fe  grete  curs,  but  sathanas  in  his  owne  pi^rsone  durste 
neudre  do  so  myche  dispit  to  crist  &  his  gospel,  for  he  aleid 
holy  writt  to  crist  &  wolde  haue  proued  his  entente  fer-bi. 
&  sif  it  is  cristis  conseil  &  comau77dement  to  prdstis  generaly 
to  prdche  fe  gospel,  and  fis  fei  moten  not  do  wif-oute7^ 
leue  of  fes  pr(?latis,  pat  in  cas  ben  fendis  of  belle,  fawne 

^  stynkynge  AA. 


Chap.  VII.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


71 


pr^stis  may  not  do  cristis  conseilis  &  hestis  wij^-outew  leue 
of  fendis.  A,  lord  ihu !  for  fes  synful  foolis,  &  in  cas 
fendis  of  hello,  ben  more  myjtti  &  witti  }>an  ]?ou,  ]7at  trewe 
men  may  not  do  fe  wille  wij^-outen  auctorite  of  siche  fendis. 
^  A,  lord  god  almyjtty,  al  witti  &  alle  ful  of  charite,  hou 
longe  wilt  ]70U  suffre  )>es  an^Aristis  to  dispise  ]?e  in  j^yn 
holy  gospel  &  lette  ]7e  helj^e  of  cristene  mennws  soulis? 
Endeles  rijtful  lord,  j^is  ]70U  suffredest  for  synne  generaly 
regnynge  among  fe  peple,  but  endeles  m^rcyful  &  goode 
lord,  helpe  j?!  pore  wrecchide  pmtis  &  S(3ruauwtis  to  fore 
li  peple  to  haue  loue,  drede  &  reuerence  to  j^i  gospel,  & 
lette  not  to  do  j^i  worschipe  &  wille  for  fals  ferynge  of 
an^Aristis  &  fendis  of  belle.  ^  Almyjtti'lord  god  and  m(9rciful 
&  endeles  witty,  si]?  ]?d)u  suffredest  petir  &  alle  apostlis  ^  to 
haue  so  grete  drede  &  cowardise  in  tyme  of  ]?i  passion  ]?at 
]?ei  flowen  alle  awey  for  drede  of  de]?  And  for  a  litel  pore 
wommmmts  vois,  and  aftirward  by  confort  of  ]?e  holy  gost 
madist  hem  so  stronge  \at  \ei  weren  afford  of  no  man,  no 
peyne  ne  de]? ;  helpe  nowe  bi  jeftis  of  ]?e  same  holy  gost  ]?i 
pore  seruau?^tis  ]iat  al  \er  lif  ban  ben  cowardis,  &  make 
hem  stronge  &  bolde  in  ]?e  cause  to  meyntene  ]7i  gospel 
ajenst  an^«cristis  &  tirauwtis  of  ]?is  world.  &  graunte  grace 
to  oure  lordis  alle  to  meyntene  j?!  gospel  &  ]?in  ordynaunce, 
&  specialy  to  seke  ]?i  worschipe  &  myjttily  distroie  synne; 
for  to  fis  office  fou  hast  ordeyned  lordis.  ^  Almyjtti  lord, 
it  seme]?  nowe  to  ^  foolis  of  this  world  ]?at  J?!  cause  is  ou^re- 
comen  and  an^/crist  ha]?  J>e  victorie,  &  pore  men,  lord, 
doren  not  abide  \i  s^ruyce ;  but  now  lord,  for  giorie  of  J>in 
owe  name,  &  for  sauynge  of  cristene  soulis  whom  ]?ou 
boujttest  wi]?  ]?in  pr<9cious  herte  blood,  &  for  distroynge  of 
boost  &  pride  of  an^^crist  &  his  \at  now  ben  so  heije  & 
myjtty,  grauwte  ]?i  seruau?^tes  grace  to  laste  trewe  in  ]?e 
gospel  &  preche  it  trewely  in  word  &  dede;  &  ]?i  lordis 
to  meyntene  it  styfly  ajenst  an^^cristis  clerkis ;  &  ]?i 

comunes,  lorde,  to  kepe  ]?in  hestis  &  knowe  an^Aristis 


^  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


72 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  YU. 


disceit,  &  clenly  take  ]>i  gospel  in  reuerence  &  lette  not 
for  false  drede  of  an^ecrist  &  of  ere  fendis.  so  be  it,  lord. 


Odipitulum.  S’”* 


Prelates  care 
more  for  money 
than  for  Christ’s 
blood. 

*[p.  78  MS.] 


Also  prelatis  setten  more  pris  bi  j^e  roten  peny  j^awne 
j^ei  don  bi  fe  precious  blood  of  ibu  crist,  for  J^e  ende  of 
schedynge  of  ^  cristis  bloode  was  to  sane  manwws  soulis  & 


it  was  pris  for  bem ;  fmne  as  fei  louen  more  fe  roten  peny 
\Q.njie  fe  sauynge  of  cristene  soulis,  so  }>ei  louen  more  fe 
roten  peney  }»an  fe  blood  of  ihu  crist,  &  in  tokene  fer-oi  J>ei 


ben  besy  hope  ny^t  &  day  to  gete  Jie  ]?eny  wif  falsnesse, 
cautelis  &  tirauwtrie,  but  of  mennws  soulis  is  left  care;  ^if 


fe  peny  fayle  fei  ben  woode  for  wra)?|ie  &  sorowe,  ^if  mennws 
toS^nomattS  soulis  gon  to  belle  bi  brekynge  of  goddis  comauwdementis 
pennyf  no  warde,  so  fat  fe  peny  come  faste  to  fille  here  bondis  & 

coffris.  &  berefore  men  seyn  jiei  maken  marcbauTedise  wi]? 
money  &  mewnys  soulis  to  satbanas,  for  j^ei  ^euen  men 
licence  to  dwelle  in  synne  for  awnuel  rente  as  longe  as  bem 


likib,  &  fus  satbanas  getib  soulis  to  belle  for  be  roten  peny  ; 

They  are  sorry  , 

whenmenreform  for  men  sevn  b^t  cavpbas  bischopis  ben  sory  wbawne  men 
and  cease  to  pay  i  j 

sin-rent.  forsaken  here  olde  synnes  and  paien  nomore  here  annuel 


rente.  ^  And  seyn  fat  fei  may  not  bolde  good  bous  bi  sicbe 
men,  as  ]70RJ  I’ei  wolde  sende  jjousande  soulis  to  satanas 


for  to  baue  mocbe  roten  money  &  a  proude  name  in  fe 


world  of  gret  bousholdyng. 


C^ipitulum  O’”- 


Prelates  Mil  men 
spiritually. 


Loose  life  of 
prelates, 

imitated  by 
curates 


Also  pr^latis  killen  men  gostly,  jeuynge  euyl  ensauw^ple  & 
disceyuynge  pore  men  of  here  almes,  &  wib-drawynge  goddis 
word  bi  whicbe  ^ei  schulde77  lyue  gostly,  for  ensaumple  of 
pride,  coueitise,  wra^be,  ynmercy,  vanyte,  glotonye  &  lecberie 
bei  ^euen  to  alle  men  aboute;  &  manye  of  b^s  synnes  ben 
so  open  fat  it  nedib  no  more  to  declare  hem,  but  of  lecberie 
men  seyn  b^t  many  pr(?latis  ben  ful  b^^-of  &  of  b®  i^oste 
cursed  spices  fer-of,  b^-t  it  is  scbame  to  written  it  but  more 
to  done  it  in  dede ;  &  lowere  curatis  taken  ensaumple  at  bem 


Chap.  IX.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


73 


&  seyn,  whi  may  not  we  hane  lewmannws  si]?  ]?e  biscliop  ha]? 

so  manye  ?  &  sugetis  taken  ensauwple  at  here  curatis,  bo]?e  and  laymen. 

weddid  men  &  sengle.  &  ]?us  prdatis  bi  ]?is  cursed  ensaumple 

sleen  in  als  mychel  as  in  hem  is  alle  mani^re  men,  for  ]?ei 

dorn  not  for  schame  of  her  owen  synne  sadly  amende  o\erG  Prelates  dare  not 

«  •  foi*  sld9;iii@  coriTCCtf 

synful,  ne  wi]?-stonde  wronges  of  souereyns  ]?at  ]?ei  don  to  men  of  sin, 

pore  men.  ^  And  here-wi]?  pr^latis  disceyuen  ^  pore  men  of  nor  oppose  op¬ 
pression. 

here  almes,  for  bi  fals  pardon  ]?ei  maken  men  to  ^eue  here 

nedi  liflode  to  here  cathedral  chirches  ]?at  han  no  nede,  & 

make  ]?e  pore  men  to  hope  of  more  ]?ank  of  goddis  mercy  to 

don  here  almes  to  riche  houses  &  riche  men  more  ]?an  to  don 

it  to  here  pore  nei^ebo]?eris  ]?at  ben  bedrede,  febil,  &  crokid 

&  blynd,  &  ]?er-wi]?  han  nou^t  of  here  owen.  And  certis  ]?is 

is  worse  ]?efte  ]?a?^  to  robbe  hem  as  an  owtlawe  do]?.  For  he 

taki]?  comuwly  gold  or  siluer,  but  ]?er  prelates  taken  ^'bo]?e  of  *[p.  79MS.] 

pore  men  &  disceyuen  hem  in  fei]?,  hope  &  charite,  &  also 

]?ei  sufifen  o]?ere  false  pardoneris  disceyuen  ]?e  peple  for  a 

litel  money,  &  lesse  curatis  hauwten  ]?is  false  craft.  ^  Also  prelates  take 

]?es  prelates  bi  extorsions  and  maistrie  taken  ]?e  litel  good 

]?at  ]?ei  schulden  lyue  bi  ]?at  ]?ei  geten  bi  gret  swoot  of  here 

body,  &  ]?us,  as  god  sei]?  of  tyrau?^tis,  ]?ei  taken  here  skyn  Micah  m.  2. 

fro  ]?e  bak,  &  eten  &  drynkyn  meiinus  blood,  wha^^^ne  ]?ei  be 

raueine  &  ypocrisie  disceyuen  hem  of  here  goodis  bi  whiche 

here  bodely  lif  schulde  be  susteyned,  &  whiche  goodis  ]?ei 

gaten  bi  hard  traueile  &  wastyhg  of  flech  &  blood;  &  \us 

]?ei  ben  manquelleris  &  irreguler  bi-fore  god  &  his  auwgelis. 

^  Also  ]?ei  prechen  not  cristis  gospel  in  word  &  dede  bi  whiche 
cristene  men  schuld  lyue  holy  lif  in  charite,  but  blaberen  publish  bulls  en¬ 
force  an^Aristis  bullis  to  maken  cristene  men  to  werre  echo  fight  with  each 

.  .  .  .  .  .  other. 

wi]?  o]?ere  m  hope  to  wynne  heuene  bi  siche  werris,  &  pt 
]?ei  letten  trewe  men  to  teche  treuli  &  frely  cristis  gospel 
&  his  comau?^deme?^ti8,  but  ]?ei  senden  newe  ypocritis  to 
pr^che  fablis  &  lesyngis  &  to  flateren  mm  in  synne,  &  to 
robbe  ]?e  pore  peple  bi  fals  beggynge  dampnyd  of  goddis 
lawe,  &  pt  ]?ei  maken  ]?e  peple  to  erre  in  bileue  &  to  trowe 

^  disceyuem  X. 


74 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  IX. 


fat  crist  beggyd  f us  als  fei  don ;  but  certis  f is  bis  an  open 
heresie  ajenst  cristis  gospel  &  his  lif,  &  as  fe  olde  lawe  & 
f  e  newe  schewyn  pleynly ;  &  f us  f  es  pr^latis  killen  mennws 
Thus  they  kill  soulis  bi  sclauwdre  of  here  owen  euyl  lif,  bi  disceit  of  almes, 

men’s  souls. 

&  suffrynge  of  false  techeris  &  false  robberis  of  f  e  peple. 


im. 


Prelates  lay  more 
weight  on  their 
own  curses  than 
on  God’s. 


Curses  enforced 
by  imprisonment. 


Absolution  may 
be  bought. 


True  teachers  of 
God’s  law  put 
under  curse. 


»[p.  80  MS.] 


Unjust  rules  of 
evidence. 


Q^pitulum  10' 

Ouere  f  is  pr(3latis  charges  more  here  owen  c^^rsyng,  \ai  is 
many  tymys  fals,  fan  f e  moste  ri^tful  curse  of  god  almy^tty. 
And  here-bi  fei  menen  &  schewen  m  dede  but  falsly  fat 
f ei  ben  more  fan  almy^tty  god  in  trinyte.  ^  For  ^if  a  man 
be  acursed  of  pralatis,  ^e  wrongly,  a-noon  alle  men  ben  tau^t 
bi  hem  to  flee  him  as  a  iew  or  a  sarsyn,  &  pf  he  dwelle 
fourty  daies  in  here  curs  he  schal  be  taken  to  prison.  But 
f 0  fat  ben  cursed  of  god  for  bregynge  of  his  hestis,  as 
proude  men,  enuyous,  coueitous,  glotons  &  lecherouse,  ben 
not  ponyschid  fus,  but  holden  virtuous  &  worfi  &  manly 
men ;  &  so  goddis  curs  is  seit  at  noujt  but  wrongful  mannes 
curs  is  chargid  aboue  fe  cloudis.  And  ^it  fouj  a  man  be 
cursed  of  god  &  of  a  pr(?lat  also  trewly,  ^if  he  wole  leue 
gold  or  money  at  a  false  mannws  wille  he  schal  be  assoilid 
as  anemtis  men,  fou^  he  dwelle  in  his  synne  &  fawne  in 
goddis  curs.  ^  But  see  now  f  e  mysusynge  of  mawnws  curs ; 
pf  a  trewe  man  displese  a  worldly  prelat  for  techynge  & 
meyntenynge  of  goddis  lawe,  he  schal  be  sclauwdrid  for  a 
cwrsed  man  &  forboden  to  teche  cristis  gospel,  &  fe  peple 
chargid  vp  peyne  of  f  e  grete  curs  to  flee  &  not  heren  s[i]ch 
a  man  for  to  sane  here  owen  soulis ;  &  f is  schal  be  don 
vnder  colour  of  holynesse;  for  fei  wolen  seie  fat  siche  a 
man  techif  heresie  &  brynge  many  false  witnesses  &  notaries 
in  his  absence,  &  in  presence  speke  no  word,  &  fei  feynen 
f  is  false  lawe,  pf  f  re  or  four  false  witnesses  hirid  bi  money 
seye  sich  a  fing  a^enst  a  trewe  man,  fan  he  schal  not  be 
herd,  fou^  he  wolde  proue  fe  contrarie  bi  two  huwdrid  or 
fre;  &  fes  false  men  seye  in  here  doynge  fat  cnst  was 
lafuUy  don  to  fe  def,  &  susanne  also,  for  bi  sich  witnessis 


I 


Chap.  X.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


75 


fei  weren  dampnyd,  but  cristene  men  bileue  tecbif  fe 

contrarie.  &  bi  J^is  false  lawe  fei  may  prone  heretikis  whom  By  such  rules 

euore  j^ei  wolen ;  ^e,  crist  &  alle  his  apostlis  &  alle  his  be  proved. 

martirs  &  trewe  men  in  J^is  world,  &  proue  echo  kyng  in 

cristendom  forsworn  &  no  kyng ;  but  cortis  god  techi]?  in 

his  lawe  j>at  o  trewe  man,  as  danyel  dede,  schal  conuycte 

two  false  prostis ;  &  ]>e  prophete  hely  conuycte  eijte  hu^drid  i  Kings  xviii. 

&  mo  of  false  prostis  &  prophetis  of  baal.  &  ]?es  prolatis 

wolen  distroie  al  goddis  lawe  pat  teehi]?  hou  false  witnesse 

schullen  be  ponyschid,  for  j^ei  wolen  not  haue  hem  conuycted 

of  here  falsnesse  bi  mo  trewe  men ;  &  jit  wha?^ne  a  man  is 

falsly  cursed  of  a  prolat,  je  j70uj  pe  prolat  be  a  deuyl  of  belle, 

he  schal  not  be  assoilid  til  J^at  he  swere  to  stonde  to  here  o?S^bmiss1on^^'^ 

dom  jjou  it  be  ajenst  goddis  lawe  &  his  conscience.  &  ]?us 

jjei  ben  fully  contrarie  to  goddis  dom  &  ryjtwisnesse,  for 

jif  a  man  haue  terespassid  neudre  so  ajenst  god  he  wole 

assoile  him  for  verray  contricion  wi]7-outen  siche  sweryng 

or  chargyng  of  vnresonable  j^ingis,  but  pei  falsly  enhaunsen 

hem  aboue  god  almytti.  ^  _pus  it  stondij?  of  mannws  curs ; 

apostlis  of  crist  hadden  power  to  take  mennys  bodyes  to  cSst’s'a^sties 

sathanas  to  traueilen  hem  whanne  Jei  weren  rebelle  ajenst  Sfes™latan 

goddis  hestis  til  Jei  weren  meke  ajen  for  peyne  &  for  woo,  souis^*^^^ 

&  so  to  saue  pQ  soule ;  but  nowe  anif^’cristis  clerkis  cursen  ^i^rks^^curse 

pQ  soule  in-to  helle  as  j7ei  feynen,  but  pQ  body  is  neui^re 

pQ  more  traueilid.  &  certis  ]7es  ben  cruel  fadris  p^t  ]ius 

violently  cursen  here  children  in-to  helle,  not  for  rebelte 

ajenst  god  ne  his  lawe,  but  for  cristene  men  wij^-stonden 

pQ  prdlatis  coueitise  or  his  pride,  or  for  j^ei  techen  &  meyn- 

tenen  pQ  gospel  of  ihu  crist.  ^  Also  whawne  J^ei  cursen  for  JeWes^Yeaiiy.^”^' 

here  coueitise  &  here  owen  vengauwce  J>ei  cursen  hem  self, 

as  pe  lawe  sei]?,  for  J7ei  bent  out  of  charite  ajenst  god  & 

man.  ^  Also  whawne  ]7ei  cursen  a  man  j7at  meyntenej?  goddis 

lawe  paciently  &  stably  god  blisse]?  ajenst  here  cursyng, 

but  pei  blynden  so  pe  peple  Jat  goddis  blissyng  is  sett  at 

noujt,  but  here  false  curs  is  drede  more  fan  god  almyjtty. 

Also  whawne  f ei  blissen  a  man  fat  meyntenef  hem  in  here 


76 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  X. 


*[p.  81MS.]  ce^rsed  god  him  self  curse];  fat  man,  as  god  seij;  hi  fe 
prophete,  but  ];ei  blyndyn  so  fe  peple  fat  here  false  blissywg 
is  magnyfied  &  goddis  rijtful  curs  is  not  dred,  &  ];us  foi 
putten  goddis  dom  &  blissynge  &  cursynge  bihynde  &  setten 
hem  at  noujt,  &  magnyfien  here  owen  false  dom  and  blissynge 
&  cursynge  aboue  god  almy^tty :  but  in  of  ere  placis  is  more 
of  ];is  matere. 

Qdipitulum  ll”"- 

Prelates  deceive  Also  pr(?latis  discevuen  lordis  &  alle  cristene  men  bi  veyn 

men  by  vain  x 

song^^^  preieris  of  mou];,  &  veyn  knackyng  of  newe  song  &  costy, 

for  bi  title  of  preire  fei  ban  many  worldly  lordscbipis  & 

duties^  many  pariscbe  cbircbis  approprid  to  hem,  &  don  neifer  ofdce 

of  pr^latis  as  cnstis  disciplis  diden,  neifer  ofdce  of  lordis  as 

];ei  owen  to  do  bi  goddis  lawe,  neifer  fe  office  of  p^rsones  ne 

buUive  in  luxury  vekeris  to  here  parischenes ;  but  lyuen^  in  pompe  &  pride, 

coueitise,  &  in  y^rnffe,  slou];e  &  in  ydelnesse,  &  stenkynge 

lecberie,  glotonye  &  drouwkenesse,  &  gret  ypocrisie,  and  so 

tecben  fe  fendis  armys  of  synne  &  distroiew  fe  clennesse  of 

cnstis  lif  as  mocbe  as  fei  may.  preiere  stondij;  principaly^ 

Prayer  consists  in  good  lif,  &  of  Hs  preiere  spekib  crist  wbawne  be  seib  in 
chiefly  in  goadJ-  ®  ’  /  i  r  /  ^  -  — 

life,  Ij^e  gospel  fat  we  mosten  euere  preie;  for  austyn  &  of  ere 

seyntis  seyn  as  longe  as  a  man  dwelle];  in  cbarite  so  longe  he 
and^in  desire  to  preie];  wel.  ^  Also  preiere  stondi];  in  holy  desir  to  do  goddis 
wille,  &  of  ];is  speki];  goddis  lawe  &  seyntis  ful  myche. 
and  in  word.  ^  Also  preiere  stondi];  in  word,  as  comuwly  men  speken,  &  ];is 

is  nou^t  wor]’  but  pf  it  be  don  wi];  deuocion  &  clennesse  & 
bolynesse  of  lif.  ^  For  holy  writt  sei];  fat  his  preynge  is 
abbomynable  foi  turnef  awey  &  beri];  nou^t  fe  lawe ;  fat 
is  to  seie,  fat  fulnlli];  not  goddis  lawe  in  bis  lif.  And  of 
sicbe  vikede  men  sei];  god  bi  his  prophete  :  wbawne  ^e  scbulle 
multiplie  pure  preieris  y  scbal  not  here  ^ou.  ^  And  god  sei]; 
bi  fe  propbete  to  suche  men :  y  scbal  warrie  or  curse  to  pure 
blissynges,  &  god  sei];  bi  salamon  fat  fe  sacrdjfice^  of  wicked 
men  ben  abbomynable,  &  austyn  sei];  in  many  placis  fat  pf 
];ou  lyuest  in  glotonye  &  dronkenesse,  what  eu^re  fi  tonge 

f  lyuem  X. 


Prov.  xxviii.  9. 


Isaiah  i.  15. 

Mai.  ii.  2. 
Prov.  XV.  8. 
Austin. 


Chap.  XI.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


77 


sowne]?,  ]7i  lif  blaspheme]?  god ;  &  gregory  sei]?  wbawne  be 
pat  displesej?  is  sent  for  to  preie,  wi]?-outen  doute  j^e  herte 
of  him  pat  is  wroj?  is  stirid  to  worse  wvappQ.  A  lord,  si]? 
prelatis  ben  so  fer  fro  goddis  lawe  pat  ]?ei  wolen  not  pr^cbe 
bem-self  ne  suffre  operQ  men  to  pr^che  ]?e  gospel  trewely  & 
frely,  bou  abbominable  is  here  preire  bi-fore  god  almy^tty. 
lord,  si]?  pr(3latis  witte  not  where  here  preiere  be  acceptable 
or  dampnable,  wbi  magnyfien  ]?ei  it  so  mocbe  &  sillen  it  so 
dere  ?  for  a  lewid  mannws  preiere  pat  scbal  be  sauyd  is  wi]?- 
onten  mesnre  betre  pan  pat  prelat  pat  scbal  be  dampnyd,  & 
si]?  no  prelat  wbot  where  be  scbal  be  dampnyd,  wbi  silli]? 
be  his  cursed  preiere  to  ]?e  lewid  man  so  dere  ?  ^  And  per-iove 
god  kepi]?  to  his  owne  knowynge  pQ  wor]?ynesse  of  mannes 
preiere,  for  men  scbulden  not  vse  marchauwdise  of  symonye 
]?erby;  for  god  tecbi]?  vs  be  seynt  poul  ^if  a  man  resceyue 
vnwor]?ily  pe  sacri^ment  of  pe  auter  pat  man  resceyue]?  bis 
dampnacion.  And  si]?  pr^latis  hondis  ben  ful  of  blood,  bo]?e 
of  quellyng  of  men  wi]?  here  owen  hondis  suwtyme,  &  bi 
wille  &  fals  conseilynge  to  wronge  werris,  &  ful  of  synne,  as 
symonye,  extorsions  &  robberie,  &  of  meyntenyng  in  synne 
for  ^er  to  ^er  for  money,  bou  scbal  god  here  hem  ?  si]?  be  sei]? 
nay  hym-self  bi  pe  propbete :  foule  ben  oure  lordis  blent  to 
meyntenen  open  traitours  of  god,  bi  gret  cost  of  rentis  & 
lordiscbipis  &  ^ifte  of  grete  benefices,  for  here  stynkynge  & 
abbomynable  blastis  &  lowd  criynge ;  for  bi  ]?er  grete  criyng 
of  song,  as  descbaunt,  couf^tre  note  &  orgene,  ]?ei  ben  lettid 
fro  studynge  &  pr^chynge  of  pe  gospel  ;  &  here  owene 

fyndynge  vp,  pat  crist  &  apostlis  spoken  not  of,  as  is  ]?is 
newe  song,  ]?ei  clepen  it  goddis  seruyce,  &  magnyfien  it  at 
pe  fulle,  but  good  lif  &  tecbynge  of  pe  gospel  pei  setten  at 
nou^t.  And  ^it  crist  comauwdi]?  pat  most  of  alle  ]?ingis  in 
]?is  world ;  &  ]?us  ]?ei  ]?enken  it  ynow^  to  kepe  here  owene 
fyndyngis  and  to  traueilen  aboute  hem,  ]?ou  pei  leuen  pe 
ordynau?^ce  of  god  &  studynge  of  bis  lawe,  &  pus  it  is 
verrefyed,  but  on  an  euyl  manure,  pat  seynt  poul  sei]> : 
wbawne  pe  pr^stbod  is  translatid,  it  is  nede  pat  pe  lawe  be 


Gregory. 

Prayer  of  wicked 
men  abominable. 


A  good  layman’s 
prayer  better 
than  a  bad  pre¬ 
late’s. 

*[p.  82  MS.] 

Worth  of  prayer 
known  only  to 
God. 


1  Cor.  xi.  29. 


Fanciful  music 


hinders  them 
from  preaching 
the  gospel. 


Hebrews  vii.  12. 


78 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XI. 


translatid;  for  whanne  pr^sthod  stod  in  holy  pri^stis  of^  lif 
&  studiouse  &  ku^enynge,  Janne  was  holy  writt  ynowj  to  hem 
&  studied  &’  kept  in  dede  wi]?  gret  reuerewce ;  but  nowe, 
Priests  given  to  wha^ne  pr(9sthold  stondeb  in  peny  clerkis  &  stmardis  of 

secular  office,  as  .  . 

stewards,  etc.  lordis  houses  &  ladies  &  ydiotis  &  symonyentis  &  proude 
wrecchis  ful  of  all  manure  synne,  it  is  nede  to  haue  newe 
lawes  maad  of  synful  foolis  to  colouren  fis  synne  by  and  to 
gedre  gredely  ti|»es  whawne  ]7ei  don  not  here,  office  ;  for 
goddis  lawe  helpe]?  hem  not  her-to  but  dampne]?  here  pride, 
symonye,  coueytise  &  oj^^re  synnes.  ^  And  ^it  an^mnstis 
Antichrist’s  clerkis  feynen  bat  bou^  synful  pr^latis  &  cursed  ben  not  herd 

CICxaS  X1IB.L 

the  prayer  of  such  iiere  preiere  for  here  owen  holynesse,  ^it  preiere  of  ^  siche 

IS  heard  by  virtue  ^  ^  /  x 

of  holy  church,  fg  herd  in  veHu  of  holy  chirche ;  but  ]7is  dremyng  nys  not 
grouwdid  in  ony  place  of  holy  writt,  for  god  sei]?  gen^raly 
]7at  J>is  preiere  is  abhowinable  jjat  turne]?  awey  &  herip  not 
goddis  lawe;  &  comu?^ly  suche  cursed  prelatis  ben  no  part 
of  holy  chirche,  in  cas  pat  pei  sullen  be  dampnyd ;  also 
hut  God  does  not  svche  cursed  prestis  dispisen  god  in  his  face,  hou  schulde  god 

hear  the  wicked  ° 

*[p.  83  MS.]  here  hem  fawne,  si]?  in  cas  fei  ben  fendis  of  belle  ?  ^  Also 

when  they  pray  god  herib  not  siche  cursed  men  for  hem  self,  hou  schulde  he 
Charity  should  ]’a?«ne  here  hem  for  opero  men,  whawne  charite  schuld  bigyne 
begm  at  nome.  hem-self.  ^  Also  in  pe  olde  lawe  god  tok  gret  vewgauwce  of 

hem  pat  offreden  o]?er  fier  ]?an  god  ordeyned  in  his  sacrafice, 
&  ]7is  fire  was  token  of  charite,  pat  who  eu^re  dede  ony 
sacrifice  to  god  wi]?-outen  charite  schulde  not  ben  acceptid, 
but  vengauwce  schulde  come  on  him  oper  gostly  or  bodily ; 
but  p&  fend  blyndij?  men  bi  syche  false  colour  to  tristen  in 
ypocritis  preieris,  &  sumtyme  in  preieris  of  fendis,  &  not  to 
amende  hem  of  here  synne  but  lapero  to  meyntene  hem  per- 
Thus  the  people  iwne  ;  &  bus  is  our^  peple  disceyued  bi  veyn  preieris  of  synful 
vain  prayers.  ypocritis,  &  holy  writt  not  knowen  ne  kept,  but  vanyte, 
pride  &  opero  synnes  ben  meyntened,  &  holi  lif  of  pr^stis  & 
opero  men  is  dispised. 

1  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XII.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


79 


Qdi'pitulum  12“' 

Prelatis  also  feren  cristene  men  bi  here  false  censures,  as 

Prelates  frighten 
men  by  false 
censures, 

goddis  lawe  &  his  ordynau;^ce ;  for  whawne  prestis  wolden 
gladly  lyue  wel  aftir  gospel,  &  pr^che  goddis  lawe  & 
dispise  &  distroie  synne,  jjanne  worldly  pr(?lates,  for  drede 
of  here  owen  symonye  &  extorsions  of  pore  men,  comauwden 
prestis  to  preche  not  wi}>-outen  here  leue,  &  ]7aw.ne  pri^stis 
schullen  neuere  gete  leue  or  ellis  swere  bei  schal  not  p^^each 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  unless  they  swear 

preche  a^enst  j^e  grete  synnes  of  prelatis.  And  ^if  prestis  not.  to  preach 
prechen  trewely  &  frely  j^e  gospel  of  crist  &  reprouen  of  prelates, 
generaly  synne,  J7es  emperours  clerkis  ]?at  stryuen  a^enst  ^rue 

cristis  lyuynge  wolen  somone  hem  fro  contre  to  contre  ;  &  pi'oachers. 

^if  j^ei  dwellen  wi]?  cristene  peple  &  techen^  hem  goddis 
lawe  &  don  not  aftir  here  wrong  heest,  ^  j^ei  wolen  suspenden 
pore  prestis  fro  masse  &  prechynge  &  alle  goddis  seruyce,  & 
curse  hem  &  prisone  hem  bi  J>e  kingis  power;  &  so  trewe 
prestis  schullen  be  cursed  &  prisoned  for  ]?ei  don  frely  werkis 
of  mercy  &  charite  &  comauwdemewt  of  god,  &  leuen  j^e 
contrarie  comau^dement  of  a  synful  fool  &  in  cas  of  a 
maistir  deuyl  of  helley  And  ^if  lordis  wolen  helpe  pore 

^ ^  ‘  If  lords  support 

prestis  in  rijt  of  goddis  lawe,  &  brynge  proude  worldly 
clerkis  to  mekenesse  &  pouert,  as  god  comau;^di]?  hew  in  under  interdict, 
his  lawe,  j^ei  schullen  be  suspendid  from  alle  goddis  seruyce 
and  here  londis  entirditid  &  Jei  cursed  &  taken  to  prison 
^if  ]7ei  stonden  sadde  in  goddis  cause,  &  j^es  feyned  j^eues  P^^on. 
seruen  of  j^is,  to  forbede  men  to  do  goddis  seruyce  &  his 
comauwdemewt  &  profit  of  here  soulis  for  feyned .  drede  ^  of 
an^^’crist  &  so  maken  men  more  to  dreden  an^^’crist  &  his 
peynes,  &  in  caas  synful  foolis  &  deuelys  of  helle,  j^an 
almy^tty  god  in  trinyte  &  his  offense,  &  to  lese  Je  blisse  ^ 

of  heuene;  &  jjus  an^mristis  prelatis  don  more  harm  to 
cristene  men  &  maken  hem  more  to  breke  goddis  hestis  ]?an 
]?e  deuelis  in  helle,  neuere  weren  men.  but  a^enst  ]7es 

i?  1  j’lx'ii?!  Men  should  with- 

leyned  censures  men  schulden  ben  armed  wip  lep  oi  pe  stand  such  cen- 

f  techem  X.  ^  dredre  X. 


suspendynge,  cursynge  and  enterditynge,  Jo^t  ]>ei  kepe  not 


80 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XII. 


Saif  more  fat  f ei  forbeden  men  do  goddis  wille, 

f  e  more  strong  schulden  f  ei  be  to  do  it ;  &  drede  not  here 
curs,  for  f  anne  god  blissef  hem ;  &  ajenst  bodely  peyne 
be  armed  wif  pacience  &  charite  &  hope  of  heuenely  blisse ; 
&  fan  an^^cristis  power  schulde  soone  be  broujt  douw  & 
holy  writt  knowen  &  kept  &  meyntened ;  but  goddis  lawe  ^ 
is  fis,  fat  pr(?latis  preche  to  synful  men  fe  foulnesse  of 
here  gretee  synnys  and  horible  peynes  of  helle,  &  hou 
soone  f ei  may  getew  m^rcy  of  god  in  fe  blisse  of  heuene 
Lords  siiouid  for  verrey  contricion.  And  uf  bei  wolen  not  leue  here 

pumsn  those  who  ‘  ^ 

will  not  leave  opyn  synncs  for  al  fis,  f awne  lordis  schulden  ponysche  here 

their  open  sms.  ^  J  J  s  >  s  r  j 

bodies  in  prison  or  by  loos  of  catel,  for  fis  is  lordis  office 

Formerly  men  as  pctir  &  poul  techen.  Sumtyme  men  weren  forboden  of 
of  evil  life  were 

forbidden  to  trewo  pr^stis  to  vsc  &  do  sac;-«mentis  in  open  cursed  lif, 

ments.  ^  is  trewc  suspewdynge.  But  nowe  goode  men  ben 

suspendid  fro  doyng  of  goddis  hestis  til  fat  fei  paien  a 
Now  a  priest  may  wret  tribuyt  to  au^ecrist  or  his  officeris.  But  fo?  a  man 

live  as  he  likes  if  ®  ^ 

he  will  pay  a  be  neu^rc  SO  openly  cursed  of  god  he  schal  be  suffred  nf 

37011 

he  wil  paie  a  rente  to  an^Arist  or  hise,  pouj  he  neu<?re  so 
foule  dispise  god  &  dawpne  his  owne  soule  &  dysceyue  fe 
peple.  &  f  us  alle  f  es  feyned  censures  ben  an^mristis  panter 
&  arraes,  to  lette  trewe  men  fro  .Ve  yccuyce  of  god  almyjtty 
and  to  make  men  to  forsake  god  in  his  lawe  for  drede  of 
an^mrist  and  fendis  of  helle. 


Q^pitulum  13^”' 


Indulgences. 


Pardon  from  su¬ 
perfluous  merits 
of  saints 


Also  pr^latis  disceyuen  foule  cristene  men  by  feyned  in¬ 
dulgences  or  pd^rdons  &  robben  hem  cursedly  of  here  money  ; 
for  fei  techen  men  fat  for  staciones  of  rome  &  for  ^euynge  of 
almes  aftir  synful  mennes  wille  fei  schullen  haue  fousa7^dis 
of  ^eris  of  pardon,  &  also  pardon  wif-outen  noumbre  to 
mawnys  vndirstondynge.  &  fis  pardon  is  forjeuenesse  or 
remyssion  of  peynes  whawne  men  ben  verrely  contrit  of  alle 
here  synnes  bi  virtue  of  cristis  passion  &  martirdom,  & 
holy  meritis  of  seyntis  fat  fei  diden  more  fan  was  nedful 


^  omitted  X. 


OF  PRELATES. 


81 


Chap.  XIII.] 


for  here  owene  blisse.  but  Ms  crist  tauite  neu^re  in  al  be  not  taug-ht  by- 

_  ■'  Christ  or  his 

gospel  &  neuere  vsed  it,  neij^^r  petir  ne  poul  or  ony  oj^^r  apostles, 
apostle  of  cnst;  &  jit  fei  myjtten,  couden,  &  weren  in 
most  charite  cO  teche  &  vse  ]?is  pardon  jif  per  had  ben  any 
siche,  for  in  crist  was  alle  manure  of  good  lore  &  good  lif 
&  charite,  &  most  aftir  in  his  apostlis ;  &  si]?  crist  fond  & 
taujtte  ^  al  pat  is  nedful  &  profitable  &  he  taujte  not  ]?i8  *[p.  85  ms.] 
pardon,  pan^  fis  pardon  nys  neiper  nedful  ne  profitable. 

^  Also  alle  men  pat  ben  in  charite  ben  partyneris  of  cristis  Sarity^  a?r 

passion,  &  of  alle  goode  dedis  fro  pe  bigynnynge  of  >e 
world  til  pQ  last  ende  ]?er-of,  bi  J?e  most  ryjtful  delyng  of 
ihu  crist  as  moche  as  it  is  ryjtful,  &  more  schal  no  man 
haue  for  no  grant  of  ony  ^  creature  of  god ;  pan  for  ]?is  popis 
grauwt  or  bischopis  neuore  pe  more  of  pardon,  panne  men 
ben  grete  foolis  pat  bien  ]?es  bulles  of  pardon  so  dere,  &  fools  to  buy  these 
maken  hem  more  bisy  to  geten  hem  pan  to  kepe  pe  hestis  of 
god  &  to  jeue  here  almes  to  pe  most  pore  &  nedi  neijeboris; 
for  it  seme]’  pat  ]?ei  ben  out  of  fei]?,  hope  &  charite;  for 
]?ei  tristen  to  haue  more  J’ank  to  do  here  almes  aftir  synful 
mennws  wille  &  techynge,  je  to  ryche  houses  or  ryche  men 
pat  han  no  nede,  -pan  for  to  do  here  almes  aftir  cristis 
techynge  &  to  most  nedy  men.  ^  Also  jif  pe  day  of  doom  The  day  of  judg- 
come  bi-iore  pes  pousand  jeer  or  pardon  come  out,  panne  before  th4e  par- 
]?es  pardons  ben  false,  for  aftir  pe  dom  schal  be  no  purga-  pired. 
torie ;  but  no  man  wot  hou  soone  pe  doom  schal  come ; 
ne]7eles  pe  pope  &  his  ofiiceris  in  ]?es  indulgences  presumen 
to  ben  euene  wi]?  god  in  knowynge  eertejalj  pe  comyng 
of  pe  dom  &  in  departyng  of  meritis  to  whom  pat  hem 
liki]?.  But  bo]7e  ]?es  ben  enproprid  to  god,  &  pan  it  is 
blasphemye  for  ony  creature  to  take  ]?is  to  hym  as  do]’  pe 
pope  wi]?  his  meyne.  ^  Also  it  seme]?  pat  pe  pope  &  his  ben  The  pope  is  want- 
out  of  charite  jif  ]?ere  dwelle  ony_soule  in  purgatorie,  for  py  one^rem'ains 
he  may  wi]’  ful  herte  wi]?-outen  ony  oper  cost  delyuere 
hem  out  of  purgatorie,  &  ]?ei  ben  able  to  resceyue  suche 
helpe  si]?  pei  ben  in  grace ;  pan  jif  he  delyuere  hem  not  out 
1  no  X. ;  but  corrected  in  margin. 


6 


82 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


Man  cannot  know 
what  God’s  judg¬ 
ment  is. 


These  pardons 
are  given  for 
money. 

They  should  be 
given  to  make 
men  better. 


^[p.  86  MS.] 


Pardon,  as  a 
spiritual  gift, 
should  be  given 
freely. 


A  rich  man  may 
buy  a  thousand 
years. 

A  poor  bedrid 
man  that  can’t 
go  on  pilgrimage 
gets  none. 


They  say  that  the 
payment  is  for 
the  seal. 

Our  country  pays 
thousands  of 
pounds  for  a 
little  lead. 

They  sell  the 
goose  for  nought 
and  charge  for 
the  garlick. 


Pardons  make 
rich  men  dread 
sin  less. 


of  pwrgatorie  him  lacki]?  charite,  &  jif  he  haue  not  power  to 
delyuere  alle  j^an  is  he  out  of  charite  &  disceyu^re  of  mannws 
soule,  si]?  he  techij?  }?at  his  gostly  tresour  es  eniles  meche, 
&  is  neu^re  ]?e  lesse  ]7ouj  he  pdtrtid  it  gen^raly  among  alle. 
^  Also  it  passe]?  mannws  knowynge  what  is  goddis  dom  to 
suche  soulis,  ]?anne  it  seme]?  a  gret  pride  for  a  synful  man  to 
make  hym  certeyn  &  maistire  of  goddis  dom  ]?at  he  knowi]?  not. 
^  Also  ]>es  pardons  gon  not  for  charite  but  for  worldly  drit  as 
it  seme]?,  for  pf  pardon  schulde  be  grauntid  it  schulde  he 
graunted  for  to  make  pees  &  charite,  &  not  for  to  make 
discencion  &  werris,  &  o  cristene  man  to  slen  his  hroj/er ;  & 
for  to  stire  men  to  kepe  goddis  hestis,  not  to  do  aftir  singuler 
wille  or  worldly  profyt  of  synful  men  ]?at  seken  here  owene 
worschipe  or  worldly  wynnynge  more  ]?an  sauyng  of  cnstene 
soulis  ;  &  for  to  seie  pater  noster  ]?at  crist  made  hym  self, 
&  not  for  singuler  preieres  made  of  vs  self  ^'for  loue  of  an 
er]>ely  kyng ;  but  in  al  ]?is  is  ]?e  contrarie  don  as  men  seyn 
in  dede,  wherfore  it  is  al  out  of  charite  &  ]?an  it  is  nou^t 
wor]?.  ^  Also  pf]?i^  pardon  be  an  heuenely  jiefte  &  gostly  it 
schulde  be  jeuen  frely  as  crist  techi]?  in  ]>e  gospel,  &  not 
for  money  ne  worldly  goodis  ne  fleshly  fauowr  ;  but  pf  a 
riche  man  wol  bie  dere  bulle,  he  schal  haue  a  bulle  of 
pardon  wi]?  ]70usand  ^eris  ]?ou^  he  be  cwrsed  of  god  for  his 
synful  lif,  &  a  pore  bederede  man  ]?at  ha]?  no  money  &  may 
not  traueile  to  rome  or  to  suche  ano]?er  place,  he  schal  haue 
no  pardon  of  ]?e  pope,  ]?ouj  he  be  holy  &  ful  of  charite :  ]>an 
sij>  ]?is  pardon  schulde  be  frely  ^ouen,  pf  \er  ony  suche  be,  it 
is  ]>efte  [&]  roberie  to  take  ]?us  myche  gold  ]?^r-fore  ;  but  here 
ypocritis  seyn  ]?at  ]’ei  taken  no  ]?ing  for  pardon  but  for  ]?e 
bulle  Jat  is  selid :  c^rtis  a  litel  deed  leed  costi]?  many  Itousand 
pond  bi  ^ere  to  oure  pore  loud,  sikir*?  ]>ei  disceyuen  ]?e  peple 
&  iapen  hem,  for  ]?ei  sillen  a  faat  goos  for  litel  or  nou^t,  but 
]?e  garlek  costi]?  many  shillyngis.  ^  Also  }>is  feynd  pardon 
disceyue]?  many  men,  for  riche  men  tristen  to  flee  to  heuene 
]?^r-bi  wi]?-outen  peyne  &  \er-iovQ  dreden  synne  ]?e  lesse,  & 
of  verrey  contricion  &  leuynge  of  synne  &  of  doynge  almes  to 


Chap.  XIV.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


83 


most  nedy  men  is  lytil  spoken  of,  for  pf  it  were  so]7ly  teld 

]7is  pardon  schulde  be  sette  at  nonjt.  gret  falsnesse  is  ]?is  to 

magnyfie.Je  popis  power  so  mychil  in  purgatorie  no  man  wrong  thus  to 

here  can  teche  bi  holy  writt  ne  reson,  si]?  we  seen  in  fis  p^p||*^p?wer.  ^ 

world  \ai  a  litel  harlot  dispisej?  ]?e  pope  &  stroie]?  his  Pope’s  weakness 

lordischipe,  &  pt  he  do]?  al  his  myjt,  alle  his  witt,  &  alle  his 

wille,  to  be  vengid  vpon  siche  a  pore  harlot.  )?ane  it  seme]? 

for  many  skillis  \at  ]?is  feyned  pardon  is  a  sotil  marchau?^dise 

of  ani(/cristis  clerkis,  to  magnyfie  her  feyned  power  &  to 

geten  worldly  goodis,  &  to  make  men  drede  not  synne,  but 

sikirly  to  walwe  ]?^r-mne  as  hogges ;  &  merueile  it  is  ]?at 

synful  foolis  doren  graunte  ony  ]?ing  of  meritis  of  seyntis  ; 

for  al  ]?at  euere  ony  seynt  dide  may  not  brynge  o  soule  to  No  saint  by  his 

...  merits  can  bring 

heuene  wi]?-outen  grace  &  myjt  of  cristis  passion,  &  alle  one  soul  to 

heaven. 

meritis,  ]?at  ben  medeful  dedes,  of  alle  seyntis  but  only 
cristis  ben  not  euene  wor]?  to  ]?e  ioie  of  heuene,  as  poul 
seih ;  &  sib  god  grau?^til?  to  eche  maw  part  of  alle  medeful  God  grants  merit 

^  ,  to  men  without 

dedis  als  mochel  as  it  is  wor]?i,  no  man  schal  haue  more  part  regard  to  hulls. 

of  ]?es  dedis  for  alle  ]?es  bulles,  &  neu^re  ]?e  lasse  ]?ouj  no 

man  grauwte  siche  part  ne  siche  bullis ;  &  ]?es  feyned 

pardons  makew  mew  to  tristen  more  in  grauwtynge  of  a  synful 

man,  &  in  cas  of  a  deuyl  of  helle,  fan  in  fe  rijtfuleste 

grauwt  of  houre  lord  ihu  crist.  almy^tty  god  for  his  endeles 

mercy  distroiej?  fis  pride,  coueitise,  ypocrisie  &  heresie  ^  of  *[p.  87  ms.] 

fis  feyned  pardon,  &  make  men  bisi  to  kepe  his  hestis  &  sette 

fully  here  triste  iw  ihu  crist.  Amen. 

Q^ipitulum  14”'* 

Prelatis  also  maken  be  weie  to  heuene  hardere  baw  crist  Prelates  make 

■*  hard  the  way  to 

made  it,  &  so  letten  men  to  go  to  heuene  &  fer-fore  ben  heaven, 
cursed  of  god.  Por  fei  entren  not  hem  self  into  ]?e  kyngdom  Mattxxiii.  is. 
of  heuene  &  letten  hem  fat  wolden,  as  crist  seif  in  fe 
gospel,  for  f  ei  make  many  newe  lawes  of  hem  self,  &  by  new  laws 
chargen  men  to  studie  hem  &  kepe  hem  more  fan  f e  gospel ;  making. 

&  sif  f  e  gospel  &  holy  writt  is  occupacion  ynowj  for  men 


84 


or  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


in  fis  lif,  more  \at  men  be  ^  occupied  abouten  mawnys 
lawis  \at  expounen  not  ]>e  gospel,  ]>e  more  jjei  ben  drawen 
fro  ]7e  gospel  &  j^e  lesse  knowen  ]7at  &  j^e  worse  kepen  it. 

They  add  new  Also  prelatis  maken  many  newe  poyntis  of  bileue,  &  seyn 

points  to  the 

creed—  j^at  it  ^  is  not  ynow^  to  bileue  in  ihu  crist  &  to  be  cristened, 

as  crist  sei]?  in  gospel  of  mark,  But  jif  a  man  bileue 

as  the  pope’s  be  bischop  of  rome  be  heuyd  of  holy  cbircbe.  And  certis 

headship  of  the 

church.  Je  apostlis  of  ihu  crist  constreynenden  neuere  ony  man  to 

bileue  J^is  of  hem  self,  &  ^it  ]>ei  weren  certeyn  of  here 
sauynge  in  heuene  ;  hou  schulde  ]?an  ony  synful  wrecche, 
fat  wot  neuere  where  he  schal  be  da»^pnyd  or  sauyd,  con- 
streyne  men  to  bileue  pat  he  is  heuyd  of  holy  chirche  ?  certis 

^evir*^^  ^  f  ei  constreynen  me^  sumtyme  to  bileue  pat  a  deuyl  of  helle 
is  heuyd  of  holy  chirche,  whawne  f  e  bischop  of  rome  schal 
be  dampnyd  for  his  cursed  endynge  in  synne. 


Qjdi'pitulum.  15“' 


Christ  bade  men 
to  judge  him  by 
his  works. 


John  vii.  24. 


Prelates  say  that 
their  subjects 
ought  not  to 
judge  them. 


2  Cor.  xii.  2. 


Also  prdatis  magnyfien  hem  self  abouen  ihu  crist  god  and 
man.  Bor  ihu  crist  comauwdid  &  taujte  opynly  pat  men 
schulden  not  ^eue  credence  to  hym  but  ^if  he  dede  fe  werkia 
of  fe  fadir  of  heuene.  But  oure  pr^latis  chalengen  pat  we 
^eue  credence  to  hem  ^  where  f  ei  don  wel  or  euyl.  Also 
cfist  seif  to  fe  iewis  of  him  self  pat  fei  schullen  deme  a 
ri^tful  doom  &  not  aft^r  f  e  face.  And  in’  his  passion  tyme 
crist  bade  a  synful  harlot  &  cursed  to  here  wittenesse  of 
euyle  in  cas  ^if  crist  had  seid  eny  euyle.  But  oure  prdatis  fat 
don  euyle  bofe  in  dede,  speche  &  fou^t,  crien  kenely  fd^t 
sugetis  schullen  not  deme  hem,  fouj  fei  don  opynly  a^enst 
charite.  also  poul  biddif  fat  his  sugetis  demen  pat  f ing  f «t 
he  seif  aftdr  pat  he  was  rauyschid  in-to  f  e  f  ridde  heuene  ; 
but  oure  prelatis  wolen  not  pat  we  deme  here  seiynge,  f  ouj 
it  be  contrme  to  goddis  lawe  opynly,  &  certis  fis  is  fe 
deuyl  cast  of  helle  to  distroie  f  e  treuf  e  of  holy  writt  &  f  e 
lif  of  ihu  crist  &  his  apostlis,  and  to  coloure  pride  &  coueitise 


1  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


^  omitted  X. 


Chap..  XVI.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


85 


&  symonye  &  extorsions  as  moclie  as  eu^re  ]7ei  wolen,  for  bi 
here  cast  men  schullen  not  reproue  hem  j^er-of,  what  synne 
euere  J^ei  don. 

Qdipitulum  16""- 

Prelatis  also  constreynen  men  to  cesse  &  do  not  J>e  wille 
&  hestis  of  god,  but  pf  J>ei  ban  leue  of  goddis  enemys,  &  in 
cas  of  deuelis  of  helle.  Por  pf  pr^stis  wolen  seie  here  masse 
&  techen  ]7e  gospel  in  a  bischopis  diocise,  a  noon  he  schal 
be  forboden  but  pf  he  haue  leue  of  fat  bischop,  &  he^  schal 
paie  comuwly  for  fat  leue  myche  money  or  ellis  swere  fat  he 
schal  not  speke  ajenst  grete  synnes  of  fat  bischop  &  of^re 
prestis  &  here  falsnesse.  And  pt  it  is  a  grete  werk  of 
charite  &  m^rcy  to  teche  men  f  e  ri^tte  weie  to  heuene,  &  f  es 
men  schullen  noujt  doo  wif-outen  leue  of  fe  bischop,  fouj 
he  be  neu^re  so  proud,  neuere  so  coueitous  &  cursed  for 
symonye  &  extorsions,  &  many  tymes  sich  a  bischop  schal  be 
dampnyd,  &  fanne,  as  crist  seif,  he  is  a  deuyl.  fan  it  is 
verefied  fat  a  cristene  man  schal  not  do  f e  wille  of  god  wiih- 
outen  leue  of  goddis  enemye,  &  of  a  fend  of  helle ;  as  pf  f  e 
leue  &  f  e  comauwdement  of  god  were  not  ynow^  to  don  his 
wille,  but  pf  a  man  haue  leue  of  siche  a  cursed  creature. 
And  pf  siche  a  cursed  creature  ^  seie  nay,  goddis  wille  schal 
ben  vndon  &  his  lawe  &  wille  vnknowen  and  not  kept.  And 
f  is  is  don  for  drede  of  loos  of  here  worldly  pride  &  coueitise, 
&  of  worldly  lordischipis  f^^t  fei  han  apnst  cristis  lawe  & 
his  techynge  &  his  owen  lif  and  his  apostlis  ;  but  f is 
forbedyng  is  colourid  by  holynesse,  for,  as  prelatis  feynen, 
pore  prestis  wolden  teche  heresie  for  fei  knowen  not  goddis 
lawe  ;  but  c^rtis  f  es  prdatis  demen  heresie  alle  \at  is  ajenst 
here  lykyng  &  lustis  of  here  flech ;  &  fei  ben  ful  vnable  to 
teche  f e  treuf e  of  goddis  lawe,  for  fei  studien  not  f ^r  aboute 
&  lyuen  contrmously  f  ^r-to ;  wherefore  f  e  holy  gost  techif 
hem  not  al  sof  e,  but  f  e  spirit  of  lesyngis  sterif  hem  to  lette 
knowy[n]ge  of  goddis  lawe  &  sauynge  of  soulis  vnd^r  colour 
^  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X. 


*[p.  88  MS.] 
Prelates  prevent 
men  from  doing 
the  will  of  God, 


As  to  say  mass, 
or  teach, 
without  leave  of 
the  bishop. 


though  he  may 
be  a  very  devil. 


It  is  pretended 
that  this  is  to 
stop  poor  priests 
preaching  heresy. 
They  call  all 
they  do  not  like 
heresy. 


The  spirit  of  lies 
stirs  them  to 
hinder  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  God’s 
law. 


86 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XVI. 


of  holynesse,  for  ]7ei  demen  bi-fore  \at  men  wolen  tecbe 
heresie ;  as  jif  |>ei  weren  euene  ’wi]?  god  knowynge  mennys 
hertis.  And  ^if  pore  men  seyn  ]7e  sof  e  \at  no  man  may  a^en 
seie,  J^an  pr^latis  seyn  \ai  it  is  ^  seyd  for  euyl  entent  &  so 
hywdren  J^e  treu|’e  &  taken  vp  hem  ]7e  dom  \ai  is^  reseruyd 
to  god  him  self,  &  J^^rfore  Jei  hen  blasphemes. 

Q^pitulum  17“* 

Prelates  refuse  Also  pr^latis  distroien  most  be  obedience  &  mekenesse  of 

obedience  and 

taxes  to  secular  goddis  lawe,  for  j^ei  seie  \at  jiei  owen  not  to  be  suget  to 

seculer  lordis  to  paien  hem  taxis  in  helpe  of  comunes, 

&  owen  not  to  be  amendid  bi  here  sugetis  of  here  opyn 

synnes,  but  only  of  ]>e  pope  ])at  is  here  souereyn;  &  he 

of  no  man  in  herfe  for  he  is  greteste  of  alle.  for  oure 

lord  ihu  crist  was  suget  to  ]>e  hej^ene  emperour  &  paide 

him  tribute  for  hym  &  his  chirche,  &  pt  he  hadde  no 

seculer  lordischipe  ne  plente  of  dymes,  moche  more  schulden 

'^'I'es  riche  pmtis,  ]7at  han  seculer  lordischipe  ajenst  goddis 

lawe  &  grete  luelis  &  plente  of  worldly  goodis,  helpe  fe 

kyng  &  ])e  lend  to  meyntene  pore  men  in  reste  &  charite. 

&  si]?  erist  was  most  meke  &  most  obediente  to  al  men, 

And  fes  pralatis  ben  vikeris  of  crist  to  jeue  ensaumple  of 

mekenesse,  ]?ei  owen  to  be  most  meke  &  obedient  to  alle 

here  sugetis;  for  bi  goddis  lawe  eche  man  owe]?  to  be  suget 

&  obedient  eche  to  o]?6re  in  ]?e  drede  of  crist.  Also  in  dede 

]?ei  schewen  most  rebelte  a^enst  god  &  cristene  men,  lyuynge 

in  pride,  coueitise,  idelnesse,  extorsions,  lecherie,  glotyne 

&  wastynge  of  pore  mennws  gooddis,  &  ]?us  ]?ei  ben  lik  to 

lucifer  &  ben  an^^cristis,  holdynge  hem  self  more  wor]?i 

]?an  eu^re  was  ihu  crist  god  &  man.  And  it  seme]?  ]?at  ]?ei 

techen  here  sugetis  heresie  bi  here  false  open  lif,  for  here 

lif  schulde  be  bokis  of  ®  o]?(3re  sugetis  vnder  hem,  &  as  bokes 

ben  ^  false  \ai  techen  heresie,  so  ben  ]?es  pr^latis  heretikis  ]iat 

bytiSS^SampTe.  techen  &  meyntenen  synne  bi  here  cursed  ensaumple  ^euynge. 

^  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X. 

3-3  This  is  added  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  in  a  later  hand,  and  sugetis 
is  written  sugenes. 


Christ  paid  tri¬ 
bute  to  the 
Emperor. 


*[p.  89  MS.] 


As  vicars  of 
Christ  they 
should  give 
example 
meekness 


of 


But  are  most 
rebellious, 


Chap.  XIX.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


87 


Cdipitulum  18”*- 

Pr<9latis  also  ben  worse  j^an  iewis  \at  naileden  crist  on  Prelates  perse- 

1  PT*  c^te  Christ  in 

pe  cros,  tor  pei  pnrsuen  cnst  in  ms  membris  tor  pei  seyn  his  members, 
])e  tren]7e  a^enst  here  cursed  lif,  &  sclau«dren  hem  wi]? 
lesingis,  &  cursen  hem  &  prisoner  hem  &  slen  hem,  algatis 
in  wille.  And,  as  crist  sei]?,  it  is  all  on  to  dispise  &  pursue 
on  ]7at  sei}?  ]7e  treuj^e  of  crist  &  to  pursue  crist  god  &  man. 

And  Jis  newe  pursuynge  of  pr^latis  is  don  hi  more  sutil 
ypomsie  &  after  more  benefice  resceyued  of  cristis  passion, 

&  whanne  it  were  most  nede  to  haue  helpe  in  goddis  cause 
a^enst  ani^^cristis  clerkisi  pat  destroyen  pe  treu]7e  of  cristis 
lif  &  his  apostlis  in  word  &  dede ;  &  jit  pr^latis  resceyuen 
&  axen  gredely  pat  ilke  money  for  whiche  iust  blood  is  tJg 
spilt,  pat  pQ  iewis  wolden  not  do;  &  0U(?r  fis  pr^latis  sillen 
cristene  soulis  to  sathanas  for  money,  &  so  in  manure  defoulen 
cristis  blood  &  setten  it  at  noujt ;  &  bisien  hem  ny^t  &  day 
hou  ]7ei  may  hi  an^«cristis  iurdiccion  &  feyned  censures 
stoppe  pr(9stis,  pat  )?ei  prechen  not  pQ  gospel  to  delyuere 
soulis  out  of  pQ  deuelis  bondis. 


Capitulum  IQ"”* 

Prelatis  also  makew  hem  self  most  vnable  to  kepe  fe  gospel 
of  crist  bi  here  grete  bysynesse  abouten  roten  goodis,  &  bi 
pompe  &  host  of  j^is  world,  for  j^ei  ben  most  bisi  of  alle  men 
in  I’e  world  to  geten  worldly  goodis  bi  pe^rchase,  &  to  holden 
hem  bi  false  plee,  &  disdeyne  to  see  a  pore  mannws  rijt  & 
worche  aft^r  good  conscience,  but  pf  ony  man  kaste  to  helpe 
pore  men  in  here  rijt  a^enst  grete  prdatis  he  schal  haue  here 
enemyte,  &  be  sciawndrid  to  j^e  kyng  &  grete  lordis,  & 
pursued  bi  false  cautelis  til  he  be  vndon,  pf  j^ei  may  bi  ony 
lesyng.  so  pat  wha?2ne  j^ei  schulden  ben  most  wilful  pore  & 
pr^che  j^e  gospel  ^  of  cristis  pou^rt  &  his  apostlis,  I’ei  may  not 
for  schame,  for  sclauwdryng  of  hem  self,  and  lest  ]7ei  maken 
here  owen  ypocrisie  knowen  to  J^e  peple ;  &  herefore  j^ei 

1  omitted  X. 


Prelates  disable 
themselves  from 
keeping  Christ’s 
law  by  their 
avarice. 

Litigiousness. 


Hunt  down  any 
one  who  supports 
poor  men’s  rights 
against  them. 


*[p.  90  MS.] 

Are  ashamed  to 
preach  the  truth 
lest  it  reflect  on 
them. 


88 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


hiden  cristis  pou^rt  fro  Je  peple,  &  lien  vpon  hym  cursedly 
to  coloure  here  worldly  lif ;  for  here  I’oujt,  speche,  cost  & 
tr^ueile  is  more  ahoute  worldly  goodis  j^an  goddis  lawe  in 
studynge  &  techynge  &  holy  lif  of  hem  self  &  peple. 
Pomp  and  spien-  And  ifi  Worldly  aray  &  wast  meyne  &  grete  corseris  &  cloj^is 
of  gold  &  worldly  armure  fei  passen  erlis,  &  atteynen  to 
Slay  men  ^th  kyugis  aray  in  bataile  to  slee  cristene  men  wih  here  owen 

their  own  hands.  ^  ^  n 

cruel  &  cursed  hondis  ;  hut  hou  may  J^ei  pr(?che  ]>e  gospel  of 
•  pacience,  meknesse,  pees  and  charite  in  |>is  cursed  vengauwce 
knfghts^  takynge  ?  C(9His  ]7ei  hen  sathanas  kny^ttys,  turned  in-to 
angelis  of  li^t  hi  name  of  pr^stod  and  religion,  to  disceyue 
cristene  peple  in  fei]?,  hope  &  charite.  but  woo  to  suche 
an^mnstis  prelatis,  j^us  blasphemynge  crist  &  sclauwdrynge 
cristene  men, 

Capitulum  20”*- 

Prelates  teach  Also  prelatis  techen  &  hiren  lordis  &  comunes  &  clerkis  to 

them  in  their  blaspheme  god  &  dispise  his  lawe  &  ordynauwce ;  for  hei 
wickedness.  .  ■  . 

techen  lordis  &  alle  oj^^re  men  to  meyntene  hem  in  worldly 
lordschipis,  pompe  &  pride,  coueitise,  extorsions,  piliynge  & 
robbynge  of  j^e  peple  vnd^r  colour  of  holy  correccion.  & 
notwij^stondynge  j^at  goddis  lawe  &  ensaumple  of  cristis  pore 
life  dampnen  ®  seculer  lordschipis  in  clerkis  &  coueitise  & 
worldly  lif,  pt  ]?ei  graunten  pardon  wi)>-outen  mesure  & 
^ouen  grete  benefices  &  huge  tresowr  of  gold  &  worldly 
fauour  &  sathanas  blissyng  to  lordis,  clerkis  &  comineris,  for 
to  meyntene  an^fcristis  worldly  clerkis  in  ]?es  synnes  ajenst 
god  &  his  halwen,  &  for  to  pursue  &  sclauwdre  &  enpnsone 
And  to  persecute  &  slee  &  brenne  pore  pr(?stis  hat  techen  holy  writt  &  cristis 

poor  priests. 

gospel  of  pou^rt  &  mekenesse  ajenst  here  worldly  lif.  &  to 
]7is  ende  j^es  wickid  ydolatrours,  worschiperis  of  false  goddis. 
False  pardons,  grau^tcn  to  ]7es  manquelleris  out  of  bileue  &  charite  pardons, 
part  of  massis  &  oji^re  preieris,  ^e  to  flee  to  heuene  bi-fore  ]?e 
bodi  be  cold,  &  ]7us  blynde  an^mristis  prelatis  leden  blynde 
lordis,  clerkis  &  comunes  to  helle  for  coueitise  &  brekynge  of 
goddis  comauwdemewtis. 


^  dampnem  X. 


Chap.  XXIL] 


OF  PRELATES. 


89 


Q^ipitulum.  21“* 

Prelatis  also  setten  more  pris  bi  here  owen  tradicions, 
maade  for  to  meyntene  here  pride  &  worldly  wynnynge,  J^an 
bi  j^e  gospel  of  ihu  crist ;  for  ]?ei  studien  faste  &  techen  here 
owene  constitucions,  &  ponyschen  men  ^  sore  pf  j^ei  don  on^t 
ajenst  hem  or  ku;^nen  hem  not,  but  j^ei  studien  litel  or  nou^t 
cristis  gospel  &  lesse  techen  it,  &  recken  lest  j^ou^  men 
kuwnen  not  gospel  ne  kepen  it  not ;  but  faste  j^ei  techen 
]>G  nede  &  ]>e  auau?^tage  &  trewj^e  of  here  owen  lawis,  & 
seyn  \at  '^'holy  writt  is  hard,  not  so  nedful  as  here  owen 
lawes,  but  it  is  false  to  letWe,  &  men  wity]?  neu^re  what 
it  mene]?.  &  j7us  |»ei  seyn  in  dede  \at  newe  lawes,  maade  in 
tyme  J^at  sathanas  is  ynbouwden  of  worldly  prelatis  ful  of 
coueitise  symonye  &  heresie,  ben  betere  &  trewere  fan  lawe 
of  f  e  gospel,  maad  &  tau^t  of  ihu  crist  god  &  man ;  &  on  f  is 
ypocrite  manere  f ei  seyn  preuely  fat  fonnyd  worldly  here- 
tikes  ben  wiser  &  trewere  fan  f e  holy  gost,  fan  crist  & 
his  apostlis;  ^ee  fat  fes  worldly  clerkis  ben  wise  &  trewe 
&  in  grete  charite,  &  god  fe  trinyte  &  ihu  crist  &  his 
apostlis  ben  foolis,  false  &  out  of  charite ;  ^  sif  fes  worldly 
moldwarpis  ful  of  symonye  &  heresie  maken  so  open  lawis 
so  profitable  &  so  trewe,  &  god  wif  his  helperis  makef 
derke  lawis  vnprofitable  and  vntrewe. 


Prelates  lay  more 
stress  on  their 
own  constitu¬ 
tions  than  on 
Christ’s  gospel. 


*[p.  91  MS.] 
They  say  holy 
writ  is  hard  and 
not  literally  true. 


Thus  they  make 
foolish  heretics 
wiser  than  the 
Holy  Ghost. 


Q^ipitulum  22”"- 

¥ 

Also  prolatis  techen  fat  fer  nys  no  fing  leful  in  holy 
chirche  in  erfe  wif-outen  leue  &  confermynge  of  an^^crist, 
&  maken  all  f  e  chirche  suget  to  hym ;  for  f  ei  seyn  openly 
fat  f ^r  is  no  fing  lefiel  among  cristene  men  wif-outen  leue 
of  f e  bischop  of  rome,  f ouj  he  be  an^^crist  ful  of  symonye 
&  heresie ;  for  comuwly  of  alle  pr^stis  he  is  most  contrarie 
to  crist  bof  e  in  lif  &  techynge,  &  he  meyntenef  most  synne 
bi  pr^uylegies,  exempcions  &  longe  plees,  &  he  is  most 


Prelates  teach 
that  nothing  is 
lawful  without 
leave  of  the  pope, 


who  may  he 
antichrist, 

for  he  is  usually 
of  all  prelates  the 
most  contrary  to 
Christ  in  life  and 
teaching. 


^  more  X. 


2  &  X.  AA. 


90 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXII. 


proud  ajenst  cristis  mekenesse,  most  coueitous  of  worldly 
goodis  &  lordschipis  ajenst  fe  pou^rt  of  crist  &  his  apostlis, 
&  most  idol  in  gostly  werkis  &  occupied  in  worldly  causes 


ajenst  crist  besy  traueyle  &  his  apostlis  in  pr^chynge  of 


gospel,  &  most  principale  sillere  of  benefices  &  veyn  in- 
dulgencis  &  sacr^mentis  where  crist  comauw^i]?  men  to  jeue 
frely  alle  gostli^  ]?ingis  as  j7ei  ban  frely  resceyued  hem  of 
god.  &  pt  ]?es  worldly  pr^latis  feynen  \at  it  is  not  lefful 


They  say  that  a  to  a  pr^st  to  tocho  cnstis  gospel  frclv  wiV-outen  licence 

priest  may  not  o  j.  ./  j 

^fth^ut^ieave^^f  or  his  prelatis  vnd^r  hym,  I’ouj  god  comauwdej? 

him  or  his.  pr^stis,  hi  Open  techynge  &  his  lawe  and  opyn  ensaumple 


of  cnstis  lif,  to  teche  ]?is ;  &  so  ]?ei  menen  \at  pf  j^is  proude 
That  is,  a  priest  pr^st  &  contrarie  to  crist  &  his  lawe  sende  not  a  cristene 

may  not  fulfil  ^ 

God’s  commands  man  ^  hi  witnesso  of  his  buUis  or  lettms  of  his  lowere 
■without  the  leave 

of  Christ’s  pnlatis  he  may  not  fulfil  be  hestis  of  god  ne  werkis  of 
merorj ;  &  so  pf  ]?is  principal  enemy  of  crist  &  his  coueitous 
clerkis  wolen  lette  a  cristene  man  to  kepe  goddis  hestis  & 
poyntis  of  charite,  he  mot  leue  goddis  comauwdement  vndon 
&  ohiche  to  hem  at  here  wille,  &  fus  ]7ei  menen  Jis  ende 
\at  cristene  men  may  not  come  to  heuene  hi  kepynge  & 
holdynge  of  trewe  fei]?  &  charite  hut  pf  an^ecrist  &  his 
worldly  clerkis,  ful  of  coueitise,  symonye  &  heresie,  ben 
meyntened  in  here  olde  pride  &  cursednesse  apnst  treuj^e 
of  god  almy^tty;  for  ellis,  as  j^ei  feynen,  ]?er  may  be  no 
*[p.  92  MS.]  bischop  no  pr^st  ne  cristendom  ne  sacrdimentis ;  but  certis 


Jis  is  foule  heresie  &  blasphemye,  for  herby  cristene  men 
Thus  men  would  ben  suget  to  an^^crist  &  his  symonye  &  feyned  censuris  & 

DG  STlDdGCt  to 

antichrist  more  to  sathanas  more  ban  to  ihu  crist  &  his  lawe. 

than  to  Christ.  ■* 


C2ipitulum  23“* 


Prelates  stir  up 
wars 


to  call  attention 
,  from  their  own 
*  wickedness. 


Prelatis  also  ben  enemys  of  pees,  conseilouris  &  meyn- 
tenouris  of  werris,  &  irreguler  anemtis  god,  &  here  preieris 
ben  cursed ;  for  j^ei  dreden  pf  lordis  weren  in  reste  &  pees 
\at  fei  schulden  p^rceyue  cursednesse  of  here  symonye, 


^  omitted  X. 


*  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XXIII.] 


OF  PRELATES.  . 


91 


ypocnsie,  coueitise,  &  robberie  of  here  pore  tenauwtis,  & 

suffre  not  pr^latis  ^  be  worldly  lordis  &  tirau7^tis,  as  J’ei  ben 

now,  &  \er-iQiQ  Jei  casten  to  occnpie  lordis  in  werris,  and 

conseilen  '^er-io  vnder  colour  of  wisdom  &  cbarite  \at  ]?ei 

may  regne  in  here  lustis  &  coueitise  as  hem  lyhe]?.  for 

nf  bei  weren  trewe  procuratouris  of  pees,  bei  schulden  They  ought  to 

gladly  &  ioiefully  coste  alle  here  worldly  lordschipis  &  here 

flesch  &  blood  &  bodily  lif  to  make  pees  &  cbarite  amongis 

cristene  men,  &  techen  lordis  and  comunes  in  open  sermons 

and  confessions  &  priue  conseillynge  peryl  of  werris, 

&  namely  of  wrongful  werris,  &  hou  harde  it  is  to  fijtten 
in  cbarite,  &  tellen  openly  &  priuely  J^e  goodnesse  & 
prefit  of  pees  &  reste,  &  hou  men  schulden  not  haue 
verray  pees  but  bi  holy  lif  &  meyntenynge  of  treuj^e  & 
ri]twisnesse  &  distroiynge  of  wrong  &  synnes.  but  now 
bes  worldly  prelates  ben  cheef  conseilours  to  werris  for  hut  are  chief 

*  .  .  .  .  .  counsellors  to 

pride  &  coueitise,  &  ben  present  in  here  owene  persones  in  ’war, 

.  and  fight  in  per- 

costy  array  as  kyngis,  &  meyntene  many  men  of  armes  son. 
to  slee  cristene  men  in  body,  &  j^ei  hem  self  killen  many 
Jjousand  in  soule  &  bodi  be  cursed  ensauwple  of  euyl  lif  & 
meyntenynge  in  synne  for  money,  &  bi  cursed  conseil  priue 
&  apert ;  &  \er-ioTe  j^ei  ben  cursed  of  god  &  irreguler,  &  of^God^^^  cursed 
wha?^ne  j^ei  preien  to  god  &  ^  holden  vp  here  hondis  ful  of 
cristene  blood,  god  seij?  bi  j^e  prophete  ysaie  ]iai  he  wole  Isaiah  i.  15. 
not  here  hem  ne  resceyue  here  sacrifices,  &  bi  prophete 
malachie  god  curse]?  to  here  blissyngis,  &  in  many  places  MaiacM  ii.  2. 
of  holy  writt.  for  bei  don  not  here  sacrifices  bi  mekenesse  They  do  their 

services  not 

of  herte  &  mornynge  &  corzpunccion  for  here  synnes  &  be  meekly  hut  with 

^  J  I  fanciful  singing 

peplis,  but  wi]>  knackynge  of  newe  song,  as  orgen  or  deschant  oma- 

&  motetis  of  holouris,  &  wij?  worldly  pride  of  costy  vesty- 
mentis  &  oj^^re  ornementis  boujt  wij?  pore  mennws  goodis, 

&  sufiren  hem  pmsche  for  meschef  &  laten  pore  men  haue  So  the  poor  have 

naked  sides,  and 

nakid  sidis  &  dede  wallis  haue  grete  plente  of  wast  gold. 

^  ^  o  much  gold. 

1  pr^stis  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


92 


.OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXIV. 


Prelates  dis¬ 
credit  Christ’s 
order  and  life  by 
their  worldly  life. 


Their  plate,  rich 
food, and  wine, fat 
horses,  furs,  and 
splendid  retinue. 
»[p.  93  MS.] 


Grossetete. 


They  teach 
wicked  life. 


Prelates  send 
away  money  of 
the  realm  to 
aliens  and 
enemies. 


as  first-fruits, 
and  to  buy  pre- 
ment. 

This  is  simony. 


1  Sometimes  the 
;  Court  of  Rome 
I  is  our  enemy. 


C^Lpituljmx  24'”- 

Also  pr^latis  distroien  |>e  ordre  &  lif  of  crist  &  liis  apostlis 
bi  here  worldly  lif  &  array  &  host  &  pride,  &  bryngen  ]7e 
peple  in-to  heresie  of  cnstis  pore  lif;  for  jjei  leuen  not  as 
pore  pr^stis  aftir  crist  &  his  apostlis,  but  as  lordis,  jee  kyngis 
or  emp^rours,  in  shynynge  vessel  &  delicat  metis  &  wynes, 
'^in  fatte  hors  &  precious  pellure  &  ryche  cloj^is  &  proude  & 
leccherous  squyeris  &  meyne,  &  J^es  vanytes  wasten  pore 
mennws  goodis  &  suffren  hem  goo  dailes  whanne  j^ei  han 
nedis  to  pursue.  &  wi)>  alle  jiis  ]?ei  seyn  j^at  ]7ei  lyuen  in 
Je  staat  of  cnstis  apostlis  &  ben  here  vikeris  &  successouris, 
&  maken  ]ie  comune  peple  bileue  Jdit  crist  &  his  apostlis 
lyueden  Jus ;  &  sij  Je  lif  of  pr^latis  is  book  &  in  ensaumple 
to  oj^re  sugetis,  as  lyncolne  seij,  Jes  prelates  ben  heretikes 
&  maistris  of  heresie,  Jat  Jei  techen  to  Je  comunes  bi  here 
owen  wickid  lif  \ai  is  a  bok  to  here  sugetis,  &  Jus  for  cnstis' 
pore  lif  &  meke  &  traueilous  is  taujt  a  lordly  lif,  proud  & 
veyn  occupacion  of  worldlynesse  &  vanyte  of  Jis  world. 

Qdipitulum  25”"* 

Prelatis  ou^re  Jis  robben  oure  lend  of  mochil  tresowr,  & 
senden  it  to  aliens  &  enemys  of  oure  rewme  &  bryngen  ajen 
goddis  curs  &  heresie;  for  Jei  don  not  here  spiritual  offis 
aftir  goddis  lawe,  &  jit  gredely  gedren  dymes  &  offryngis  & 
procurasies,  &  senden  moche  gold  coine  ^  for  Je  firste  fruytis, 
&  to  purchase  &  apropre  to  hem  moo  b(9n^fices,  pr^uylegies 
&  indulgences ;  &  Jis  is  Jefte  &  symonye  jif  goddis  lawe  & 
mawnws  &  reson  be  soujt,  &  Je  sillere  of  benefices  &  spiritual 
Jingis  &  Je  jeuere  of  gold  for  hem  ben  cursed  of  god  &  man 
&  .ben  foule  heretikis.  &  sumtyme  Je  court  of  rome  his 
worldly  aduersarie  to  oure  lond,  &  namely  in  fauowr  of  oure 
enemys;  but  more  harme  is  of  gostly  ennemyte,  whanne 
Jei  enuenymen  oure  peple  wij  cursed  symonye  and  meyn- 
tenynge  &  consent  of  synne  bi  blynde  obedience,  for  jif 
^  senden  moche  gold  to  Eome  A  A, 


Chap,  XXVI.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


93 


ony  worldly  pr(9lat  wole  do  ony  wrong  ajenst  rijt  &  reson,  lie  Prelates  buy  pri- 

vil0g'6s  to  liolp 

schal  geten  a  priueilege  or  exempcion  or  sentence  of  curs  them  to  do 
for  his  gold  sent  &  spendid  at  rome,  &  moche  gold  go]?  out  Money  sent  to 
of  oure  lond‘  hi  longe  pledynge  at  rome,  &  rijt  horn  a  doun, 

&  synne  contyned^  &  meyntened,  j^at  vnnej^is  dar  ony  man 
speke  ]?era^enst ;  and  ]?us  is  oure  lond  robbid  of  gold,  &  curs 
&  heresie  brou^t  in,  and  synne  longe  meyntened,  &  rijtwis- 

nesse  stoppid. 

~  • 

Capilulum  26”*- 

Also  pr(?latis  seyn  \>at  holy  writt  is  not  sufficient  to  reule  Prelates  say  that 
holy  chirche,  &  techeris  \>er-Qi  ben  not  profitable  to  he  peple,  enough,  and  that 

^  _  j  1.  i.  >  statutes  are 

but  here  owen  statutis  maade  of  synful  foolis  ben  most  nedful  “^o^e  profitable. 

&  techeris  ]?er-of,  And  meyntenowrs  of  chydynge  &  strif  ben 

most  nedful  &  profitable  to  ]?e  peple.  for  ^if  holy  writt  were 

ynow  for  gouornynge  of  ]?e  chirche,  it  were  veyn  &  vnreson- 

able  to  occupie  men  wij?  moo  lawis,  si]?  men  ben  now  of 

feblere  complexion  &  lasse  wytti  &  of  schortere  lif  ban  men  Men  weaker  than 

.of  old  time. 

weren  in  olde  tyme.  &  it  is  luciferis  pride  &  more  to  seie  *[p.  94  ms.] 

]?at  techeris  of  mannys  tradicions  maade  of  synful  foolis  ben 

more  profitable  &  nedeful  to  cristene  peple  ]?an  techeris  of 

]?e  gospel  &  goddis  comau?^dementis ;  but  \er  is  0  cursed 

cause  of  alle  his  seiynge;  hei  loue  more  here  owen  worldly  They  say  this  for 

wynnynge  &  pride  &  lustis  fan  wy?^ny?^ge  of  soulis  to  blisse 

by  mekenesse  &  holy  lif.  And  here  owen  lawes  and  techeris 

f^r-of  meyntenen  &  procuren  fis  coueitise  &  lustis,  &  holy 

writt  &  trewe  prechowrs  fer-of  dampnen  al  fis,  &  techen 

wilful  pouort  &  mekenesse  &  gret  tr«ueile  &  penauwce  of 

clerkis ;  &  for-fore  fei  comenden  here  owen  lawes  &  here 

techeris,  &  putten  goddis  lawe  &  treue  prochouris  per-of  bi- 

hynde.  &  heere  hei  putten  on  crist  bohe  defaute  of  witt  They  accuse 

Christ  of  a  want 

&  charite ;  for  sih  crist  maade  not  the  beste  lawe  for  holy  of  knowledge  or 

f  charity. 

chirche,  as  fei  feynen,  &  telde  not  whanne  &  of  whom  it 
schulde  be  maad,  him  lackid  witt  &  charite,  but  c^rtis  fis  his 
foule  heresie  putt  on  crist  priuely  for  to  meyntene  here 
owen  coueitise  &  pride. 


1  conteyned  X. 


94 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXVIl. 


Q2ipitulum  27’”' 


Prelates  compel  Prelatis  constrevnew  men  of  symple  vnderstondywg  to  renne 

men  to  assent  to  j  r  jo 

their  errors  in-to  errouris  &  to  blaspheme  god ;  for  ]?ei  constreynen  suche 

symple  men  to  assente  to  here  dampnacion  of  treu]?es  of 

goddis  la  we,  hi  multitude  of  worldly  clerkis  blynde  jjorouj 

an/by\hreats^^^  coueitise  &  pride,  &  bi  mauas  &  drede  of  prisonynge  and 

brennynge,  &  suffren  not  men  to  resten  in  holy  writt  &  in 

j^ingis  \at  ]7ei  may  understonde,  but  constreyne  hem  to 

assente  to  nowelries  of  newe  doctours,  \at  leuen  holy  writt 

&  reson  &  feynen  dremes  &  myraclis  to  plese  coueitous 

clerkis  &  to  greet  veyn  glorie  for  here  witt,  &  Jus  Jei  bileuen 

blyndly  in  many  poyntis  a^enst  goddis  doom.  And  pt  Jes 

prelatis  desceyuen  lordis  &  maken  hem  pursue  &  prisone 

trewe  men  Jat  wolen  not  assente  to  errouris  ou^r  holy  writt 

and  reson.  And  Jus  Jes  prelatis  ben  an^mristis  turmentowrs 

of  sathanas  for  to  pursue  &  sle  trewe  pr^stis  in  goddis 

lawe,  &  maken  lordis  turmentowrs  of  Je  fend  to  ponysche 

cristene  men,  for  Jei  holden  Je  bou^des  of  holy  writt  & 

meyntenen  Je  trewje  of  cristis  lif  ajenst  worldly  pr(?latis  ful 

of  coueitise  &  heresie. 


They  deceive 
lords  to  make 
them  imprison 
true  men. 


C^pitulum  28’”- 


Prelates  stop  pr^latis  closen  or  stoppen  be  weie  to  Je  blisse  of 

men  from  study-  ^  . 

ing  holy  writ,  heuene  &  open  Je  brode  weie  to  belle ;  for  Jei  stoppen  & 
study  traditions,  letten  men  fro  ku?^nynge  &  kepynge  &  techynge  of  holy 
writt,  Jat  is  entre  &  rijt  weie  to  Je  blisse  of  heuene,  &  neden 
men  to  bisien  hem  aboute  studiynge  &  kepynge  &  techyng 
of  synful  mennys  tradicions  ful  of  errowr,  Jat  ben  maad 


for  pride  &  coueitise,  &  also  to  lerne  pride  &  coueitise  & 


*[p.  95  MS,] 

Men  have  so 
much  to  do  with 
learning  these 
new  laws,  that 
they  have  no 
time  to  study 
God’s  law. 


worldly  lif  &  to  hau^te  &  meyntene  suche  wrecchid  worldly 
lif  of  clerkys,  &  Jis  is  Je  brode  weie  to  belle.  Sumtyme 
men  hadden  traueile  &  werke  at  Je  ful  to  studie  &  kepe  & 
teche  goddis  lawe  bi-fore  Jat  Jes  newe  lawes  of  worldly 
clerkis  weren  broujt  vp,  &  nowe  men  ben  occupied  aboute 


Chap.  XXIX.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


95 


lernynge  &  techyng  of  hem  in  alle  here  lif,  j^at  vnnej^e 

may  J^ei  loke  &  sauonre  holy  writt  in'  here  laste  dayes ;  & 

he  pat  can  not  f  es  worldly  statntis  maad  for  singnler  wille 

and  coueitise  is  hoolden  hut  a  fool  and  vnahle  to  teche  & 

reule  cristene  peple,  ]?ouj  he  kuwne  and  kepe  &  teche  neu^re 

so  wel  cristis  gospel  <Ss  goddis  comauwdementis.  &  to  ]7is 

ende  bes  worldly  moldwerpis  taken  keies  of  helle  in  stede  These  moles 

of  keies  of  te  kyngdom  of  heuenes,  for  pei  taken  ypocnsie  of  heii  instead 

,  .  of  the  keys  of 

&  worldly  tirauwtrie  &  bostful  worldly  lif,  &  meyntenynge  heaven, 
of  synne  hi  fals  pardon  &  fals  ahsolucion  &  cursed  preieris, 

&  leuen  kuwnynge  &  techynge  of  holy  writt  &  edefiynge 
of  cristene  soules  to  heuene  by  good  ensau»^ple  of  here 
holy  lif. 


Qdipitulum.  29”*' 

Prelatis  also  maken  lordis  twrmentowris  of  sathanas  to  Prelates  make 
prisone  cristene  men  for  t-ei  holden  goddis  lawe;  for  bei  man  when  he  has 
maken  lordis  to  enprisone  men  whawne  pei  dwellen  fourti  communication 

forty  days. 

dales  in  sentence  of  curs,  &  here  owene  lawe  techij?  opynly 
psit  men  schullen  dwelle  in  curs  hi  al  here  lif  vp  peyne  of 
dampnacion,  has  whawne  a  man  haj?  weddid  a  wowman  sibbe  case  where  a 
to  mm  in  degree  oi  eonsBJigumjte  or  kyn  wicne  ^  degre  is  remain  under 

*  curse  by  tlieir 

forboden  in  holy  writt,  &  ha]?  not  witnesse  ynowe  to  prone  own  law. 

fis  in  mannws  dom,  ]70uj  he  knowe  it  neu^re  so  C(9rteynly, 

he  schal  be  cursed  in  constorie  &  may  not  ryse  out  of  ]7is 

curs,  for  fanne  he  schulde  do  wytty?^gly  a^enst  goddis  hestis 

&  his  conscience,  &  ]7us  fis  man  schal  eu^re  in  ]?is  lif  be 

cursed  for  he  wil  not  wyttyngly  do  ajenst  goddis  comauwde- 

mentis  &  his  ri^t  conscience.  ^  lord,  what  charite  is  it  to 

prisone  sich  a  man,  &  pt  j^es  an^^cristis  clerkis  cursen  men  They  curse  men 

al  day  for  money  for  techyng  of  goddis  lawe  &  for  werkis  God?Taw'^and 

of  m^rcy  &  ri^twisnesse,  &  for  pat  pei  wolen  not  assente  to  works. 

errouris  ajenst  holy  writt  expr(?sly  &  ajenst  reson.  ^  Lord 

god,  hou  schullen  an^^cristis  mynystn's  of  rijtwisnesse  be 


^  omitted  X. 


96 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXIX. 


Lords  should  Gxcused  at  day  of  dom,  si];  j^Gi  GupnsonG  falsly  trGWG 

the  curse  is  just,  mGii  bi  fals  discGit  of  worldly  borctikys ;  per-fore  ]7gs  lordis 

scbiildon  bo  cortoyn  pat  \q  curs  woro  ri^tful,  &  ];at  pe  man 

and  imprison  till  wGrG  Gudurid  in  synuG  &  drGdG  not  god  no  his  ycngauwcG, 
amendment,  not 

for  fines.  &  pQjx  ponyschc];  hym  til  ho  woldc  drodc  god  and  amondc 

his  lif,  &  not  til  ho  woldo  jgug  monoy  to  an^mnstis  clorkis 
at  horG  willG. 


G2ipitulum  SO”** 

-*[p.  96  MS.]  Also  pr^latis  discGyuGn  cristonc  mon  bi  licknossG  of  apis 

Prelates  argue  ,  ^  \ 

gluttons^ and  &  bi  argumGutis  of  glotouGS  til  pe  poplo  broko  goddis  hostis 

&  moytonon  horn  in  boro  cursod  lustis.  Por  apis  whawno 

fci  SGGn  a  man  don  ony  jjing  bi  bom  wolon  assaio  to  don 

pe  samG  dodis  til  ]7Gi  bon  pmscbid  for  dofauto  of  crafto  or 

kuwnyngG ;  &  glotonos  arguGn  J;us,  si);  it  is  good  to  mo  to  gIg 

or  drynko  ];us  mocho,  And  moro  motG  &  dry;^k  is  hetere, 

pan  it  is  hetere  to  mo  to  gIg  &  drynk  ]7us  mochG  morG ;  & 

bi  fis  colour  foi  cGsscn  not  til  pei  bctcn  &  drynkync  her 

IcggGS  &  hondis  out  of  my^t  &  hero  heuyd  out  of  witt  &  ben 

as  dede  boggGs.  pus  faren  pe  worldly  pr^latis.  pci  scyn, 

Like  apes  they  si]?  pe  pcplo  scbuldcu  worscbipG  grcgorii,  petir  &  poulo,  & 

Since  Pli0 

people  worship  ob^rG  trGWG  apostlis  of  cHst,  &  bGi  comcu  in  bG  staat  of 

Peter  and  other  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

apostles,  apostlis,  j^a^G  pe  pGplG  scbuldGn  worschipGn  bGm  ];us  mochG. 

Sey  ^e'^wor-^^  but  fci  takGU  uo  iGwardo  bou  ]7GS  apostlis  comon  to  fis  staat, 

in^^the%Tace^of  bi  ordoynywgG  &  cbGsyngG  of  god  &  for  holy  lif  &  trowe 

Siey  do  not  con-  pe\  didcu  to  cnstGUG  pcplG,  in  trGWG  tGcbyngG 

apostie?°came*^to  gospGl  bo];G  iu  word  &  dGdG ;  &  bou  fGi  comGn 

this  state,  staat  by  symonyG,  bi  cbGsyngG  of  worldly  clorkis, 

and  how  differ-  ^  i 

entiy  they  come  &  in  cas  Quyko  douclis  in  uGch  &  blood,  &  don^  not  boro 
to  it.  ^ 

officG  but  lyuGn  in  prido,  couoitisG,  robborio  of  pe  poplo,  & 

in  flcscbly  lustis  j^at  cristis  apostolis  dodon  not.  Also  pei 

They  argue,  too,  arguon  bus,  sib  potir  &  poul  &  opere  apostlis  of  crist  baddon 
The  apostles  had  ^  ^ 

keys  of  heaven :  koios  of  bcuGno  &  powor  to  byndo  &  vnbyndo  synnos,  whicbo 
doyngG  was  conformod  in  bouGno,  &  wg  bon  in  Jg  staat  & 


^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XXXI.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


97 


successouris  of  hem,  "ban  we  han  be  same  power;  hut  tei -we  aretheirsuc- 

•*  _  ^  *  cessors  and  have 

loken  litel  \at  mannws  eleccion  maki]?  hem  not  in  sich  staat,  the  same  power, 
hut  chesynge  of  god  &  kuwnynge  of  holy  writt,  &  souereyn 
traueile  &  holy  lif,  &  techynge  &  meyntenynge  of  fe  gospel, 

&  brennynge  charite  to  defe  for  goddis  loue,  &  sauynge  of 
cristene  soulis ;  &  comu^ly  ]?ei  hen  fer  fro  alle  j^es  goodnesse 
&  wlappid  in  pride  &  coueitise  &  moo  synnes.  Also  bes  Like  gluttons 

they  argue  thus ; 

worldly  moldwarpis  arguen  ]7us  as  glotons;  si]?  it  is  good  it  is^  good^for 
to  pr^stis  to  haue  worldly  goodis  for  here  necessarie  liflode  &  enough  for  liveii- 

^  °  then  the 

helynge,  as  poul  techij?  &  reson,  &  ]7anne  j?e  more  ]?e  betre;  more  the  better, 
til  ]7ei  hen  smyten  in  coueitise  &  occupacion  of  fis  world, 

\ai  Jei  sauouren  noujt  of  gostly  Jingis,  hut  riot  &  pride  & 
roten  muk  of  Jis  world.  &  pf  it  be  good  to  haue  holy  writt 
&  pr^sthod  and  knyjthod  and  laboreris  to  serue  god  &  reule 

t 

]7e  peple ;  ]?an  it  is  betre  to  make  moo  newe  lawis  &  moo 
ordris  in  ]?e  chirche,  til  ]?e  lawe  of  god  be  for^eten  &  newe 
tradicions  in  excercise  &  newe  ordris  magnyfied  more  fanne 
]?e^  clene  ordre  ]?at  crist  made  himself;  &  hi  ]?es  iapis  ]?ei 
disceyuen  fe  peple,  &  gedren  to  hem'^'self  ]?e  goodis  of  ]?is  *[p,  97  ms.] 
world  &  magnyfien  hemself,  here  ordris,  &  here  lawes  more 
]?an  crist  &  his  lawis,  &  maken  j^e  peple  to  holden  vp  ]?is 
ypocnsie  &  heresie. 


Qdipitulum  31”** 


Prelates  also  spoilen  lordis  of  here  rentis  bi  dowynge  of  Prelates  rob  lords 

^  ^  ’  I  .  hy  endowments, 

Je  chirche,  &  lowe  curatis  bi  approprynge  of  parische  chirchis 
&  bi  pencions  &  cost  of  here  officeris,  &  kei  robben  ke  pore  , 

^  ’  J  J  ^  the  poor  by  fees 

peple  bi  yeyn  priueylegies  &  feyned  halwynge  of  chirches,  and  sin-rents ; 


auteris  and  chirche^erdis,  &  o]>ere  sacrd^mentis  seld  for  money 
and  by  annuel  rentis  for  lecherie  &  oj^ere  synnes;  &  here- 


fore  ]7ei  may  be  wel  licned  to  swolwis  of  ke  see  &  belle,  are  like  whiri- 

H  ,  pools,  which  take 

resceyuen  al  vat  kei  may  &  ^elden  not  aien ;  &  kus  kei  aii  and  return 

■*  nothing. 

\at  schulden  most  forsake  ]?e  worlde  &  worldly  coueitise  & 


yanyte  be;^  most  sette  in  ]?e  world  &  leste  coueiten  heuene 


^  omitted  X. 


7 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXXI. 


&  gostly  goodis ;  &  ]7ei  fat  schuldew  most  lede  J?e  peple  to 
heuene,  bi  trewe  techy nge  of  holy  writt  &  ensaumple  of 
wilful  pouert  &  mekenesse  &  bisy  tr^ueile  in  praieris  & 
deuocions  &  penau^ce,  leden  f  e  peple  to  belle  bi  here  worldly 
lawis,  coueitise,  pride  &  queyntise  of  fe  world,  &  ydelnesse 
&  glotonye  &  fleschly  lustis;  &  hou  j^ei  robber  j^es  parties 
it  is  open  ynowj,  fer-ioxQ  we  moten  telle  of  more  ypocrisie 
lesse  knowen. 


Capitulum  32"** 

Prelates  care  Also  pr^latis  chargen  more  here  park  &  br[e]kynge  fer-oi 
parks  being  fm  goddis  hestis  &  brekyDge  of  hem.  ^Por  jjei  pursuen 

God’s  laws.  more  &  cruelliere  for  brekynge  of  her(?  parkis  fm  for 

brekywge  of  goddis  comauwdemewtis  to  sane  here  soulis  bi 
spiritual  medecyne ;  &  j^ei  ben  more  bisy  to  loke  j^at  here 
park  be  wel  kepte  fmnQ  to  loke  fat  goddis  hestis^  ben 
kepte  of  goddis  peple ;  &  ]7ei  receruen  assoilynge  for  brekynge 
of  here  park  to  hem  self,  bnt  fei  ^euen  assoylynge  for 
brekynge  of  goddis  hestis  to  eche  parische  pr^st  or  curat. 
Por  jjei  holden  here  park  more  derworj^i  to  hem  ]?aw  f& 
comauwdemewtis  of  god,  &  seken  more  bisily  here  owen 
worldly  worschipe  and  ^  conetise  fon  honour  of  god  & 
sanynge  of  cristene  soulis;  &  her^  is  ydolatrie  &  heresie 
open  ynowj,  &  blasphemye  of  god  among  worldly  &  hej^en 
men. 


-G^pitulum.  SB”*- 

Prelatis  also  entren  vnder  colour  &  studie  of  cristis  apostlis 
&  lyuen  &  teche  contr^itriously  to  hem  &  don  most  harm  to 
cristendom,  ^ee  more  ]7an  ony  soudon  or  sarsyn  or  ofer  men 
Prelates  by  evil  of  wroug  bileue.  ^  Por  sij>  J^is  stat  is  most  wortfi  in  fo 
state  of  the  chirche,  &  bei  lyuen  so  worldly  &  synfully  foT-inno  & 
good  life  in  tumeu  it  vpsodou,  pel  distroien  most  be  goode  lif  of  cristen- 

Christendom,  . 

dom  &  techen  most  perilous  heresye.  And  herefore  ])ei 


^  omitted  X. 


2  j^an  X 


Chap.  XXXIV.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


99 


bicomen  Je  deuelis  iogelowrs  to  blynde  mennws  gostly  ei^en ; 
fei  maken  men  wene  ]7at  here  worldly  lif  &  cursed  ys  \q 
holy  lif  of  cristis  apostlis,  &  ]7us  bryngen  in  errour  &  heresie 
in  ]7e  peple,  &  ben  sathanas  transfigwrid  iw-to  an  auwgel  of 
]i]t,  &  verrefien  J^is  word  of  holy  writt,  ]7at  J^ei  ben  made  a 
spectacle  to  angelis  &  men,  but  on  euyl  manure,  where  J^ei 
schulden  ben  ^  a  spectacle  of  angelis  &  men  to  loken  owne 
with  ioie  for  here  stronge  fijttywge  a^enst  enemys  of  soule  bi 
mekenesse,  wilful  pou^rt,  &  grete  tr^iueile  in  techynge  of 
gospel,  &  suffrywge  of  peynes  &  de]?.  p^rfore  in  en- 
saumple  of  cristene  men  to  sue  hem  in  ]7es  poyntis  j^ei  ben 
a  spectacle  to  angelis  &  mew  to  wonder  on  here  cwrsed  pride, 
coueitise  &  ydelnesse  in  gostly  trwueile,  &  cowardise  iw  cristis 
bataile,  &  lettew  charite  of  cristene  men  bi  her^  euyl  en- 
saumple,"  &  ]jus  iw  stede  of  cristis  apostlis  ben  comen  iw 
viserid  deuelis,  to  disceyuew  men  iw  good  lif  &  bryngen  hem  to 
sathanas  here  maister,  &  in  ^  |>is  manure  J’ei  pleien  j>e  pagyn 
of  scottis ;  for  as  scottis  token  ]?e  ^  skochen  of  armes  of  seynt 
george  &  here-bi  traieden  englischemen,  so  j^es  an^mristis 
prelatis  takew  name  &  staat  of  cristis  apostlis,  as  pf  j^ei 
wolden  helpe  &  lede  cristene  men  ri^tte  weie  to  heuene 
as  ]?ei  diden,  but  here-bi  J’ei  betr^^ien  cristene  men  in-to 
synne  by  suynge  of  her*?  techynge  &  cursed  lif,  &  leden  hem 
faste  ]>e  weie  to  helle. 


Become  devil’s 
jugglers. 


1  Cor.  iv.  9. 
*[p.  98  MS.] 


Instead  of 
Christ’s  apostles 
we  have  masked 
devils, 

who  play  tricks 
like  the  Scots 
when  they  took 
the  scutcheon  of 
St.  George  to  sur¬ 
prise  the  English. 


Capitulum  34'”' 

Also  pr^latis  ^?owstreynen  pr(?stis  to  lese  charite  &  blaspheme  Prelates  compel 

.■oT  1*  iPi'T  .  priests  to  fight 

crist  &  disceyue  his  peple ;  tor  pei  neden  pr^stis  to  fijtte  &  person, 

werre  iw  here  owen  persone  apnst  cristene  men,  &  here 

abouten  spende  pore  mewnys  liflode  for  to  hauen  a  veyn 

name  of  hardynesse  &  Jtank  of  lordis  pat  kuwnen  neiper  witt 

ne  reson  5  for  bei  senden  opyn  comissions  to  alle  curatis  commissions 

,  .  ordering  them  to 

vndir  here  deuelis  lurdiccions  bi  V(?rtue  of  mahouwdis  ready  armed, 
o^iediewce  &  bi  manas  of  pe  kyngis  power  to  make  hem 

f 

I  ^  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X. 


100 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXXIV. 


redi  wi]?  armure  to  werre  iolily  ajenst  cristene  men.  ^  And 
her^-by  is  armnre  of  pacience  and  charite  and  holi  preiere 
&  trist  in  god  putt  awey,  &  fe  deuelis  lawe  of  cruel te, 
enemyte  &  veyn  trist  in  mannys  my^t  brou^t  in.  But  goddis 
curs  renne]?  many  Jousand  tyme  wi]?  al  j^is.  &•  bere-bi  ben 
balf  dede  men  confortid  to  fijtte  &  slee  cristene  men  & 

'Worldly  prelates  renuen  to  belle  bedly :  &  so  bes  'worldly  prelatis  ben  cbef 

are  chief  captains  ■*  ^ 

of  Satan’s  army,  capteyns  &  arraiouris  of  satbanas  batailis  to  exile  good  lif 
&  cbarite,  but  certis  no  tonge  in  Jis  lif  may  telle  bou  many 
soulis  gon  to  belle  bi  J^es  cursede  capteyns  &  an^mristis 
iurdiccion  &  censures. 


Prelates  con-  ' 
d  emn  matrimony, 
which  Christ 
allows. 

Many  priests  live 
foul  life. 


*[p.  99  MS.] 


Sometimes  sin 
is  hid  by  per¬ 
jury  and  child- 
murder. 

Sometimes  prac¬ 
tised  openly  and 
•without  shame. 

Prelates  make 
money  by  it. 


(j^pitulum  SS”"* 

Prelatis  also  ben  'weiward  ypocntis,  blynde  lederis,  swol- 
wynge  grete  cameile  al  bool  &  siynge  or  clensynge  a  litel 
gnatte;  for  j^ei  resceyuen  &  purcbasen  bi  gret  ypocrisie 
seculer  lordiscbipis,  a^enst  goddis  lawe  olde  &  newe  &  en- 
saumple  of  cristis  lif  &  bis  apostlis,  as  lefful,  profytable  & 
nedeful;  &  forsaken  as  venym  matrimonye,  'pat  is  lelfel  bi 
boly  writt,  til  newe  vowis  of  contynense  of  worldli  clerkis 
weren  brpujt  in  bi  disceit  of  pQ  fend.  Por  many  pr^stis  now 
kepen  neiper  matrimonye  ne  cbarite,  but  defoulen  wyues, 
maidenes,  widewis  &  nu^nes  in  ecbe  manure  of  lecberie,  & 
children  ben  morferid,  &  synne  a^enst  kynde  is  not  dene 
fleed.  For  satbanas  caste  to  purchase  worldly  honour  & 
ple?^te  of  worldly  goodis  &  welfare  &  ydelnesse  to  ^cnge 
prestis,  &  dalliauwce  wi]?  wor^men  &  priue  rownyng;  &  is 
redy  ny^t  &  day  to  stere  boje  pd^rtis  to  leccberie,  &  suwtyme 
to  byden  here  synne  bi  fals  o)>is  &  morj^eryng  of  children, 
&  sumtyme  bau^ten  it  opynly  &  scbameu  not  J^er-of;  & 
ber-bi  bei^e  prdatis  wynnen  many  ]70usand  pondis  in  fe'we 
^eris  &  bolden  grete  bousbolde  as  lordis,  &  fus  by  Jis 
ypocrisie  in  boje  poyntis  ben  lordis  &  pr^stis  &  comun.es 
encombrid,  &  goddis  lawe  dispisid  &  broken,  &  synnes 
gedrid  in  grete  hordis. 


Chap.  XXXVII.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


101 


Chpitulum  36”'- 

Also  pr(?latis  bi  sotil  ypocrisie  horden  &  meyntenen  here  Prelates  shelter 

their  sins  and 

synne  &  opere  mewnys ;  for  j^ei  seyn  pat  in  here  absence  other  men’s, 
men  may  not  speke  a^enst  here  open  cwrsed  synnes  for  They  say  it  is 
synne  of  bacbitynge  &  schlawndrynge ;  &  Jiei  ben  so  malicious  agSSt  them^  in 

lllBlr  3il)S6IlC6 

&  my^tti  in  worldly  power  pa,t  Jei  wolen  snffre  no  man  to 

speke  ajenst  her  synnes  in  here  presence ;  &  so  Jei  wolde^ 

bi  ypocrisie  haue  ]iis  ende,  pat  no  ma^  schulde  speke 

opynli  &  sadly  a^enst  here  cursednesse  in  no  mamre,  but 

snffre  hem  wexe  roten  in  here  lustis  &  robbe  pe  peple 

&  disceyue  cristendom  wiji-oute^  ony  letting ;  but  certis  Jes 

an^Anstis  clerkis  lien  falsly  ajenst  cristis  lore  &  profile  of 

cristene  men.  For  crist  &  his  apostlis  reproueden  pharisees  phSeSin  their 

&  heroude  &  heretikis  in  here  absence  &  to  j^e  peple,  as 

gospillis  &  pistles  witnessen,  to  oure  ensaumple  to  do  so 

w^'t^  charite  &  discrecion,  &  Jei  ben  sclau?^drid  bi-fore  god 

&  his  angelis  &  goode  men  in  erjie  bi  here  opyn  cursed  lif ; 

&  Jo  me;^  pat  reprouen  bi  charite  &  discrecion  here  opyn 

synnes  helpeu  to  amenden  here  synnes  &  don  awei  here 

scla^^wdre ;  but  of  sclauwdre  anemptis  god  &  his  angelis  J^JtMng^aLut 

recken  hei  not,  but  alle  here  care  is  last  here  ypocrisie  bi 

knowen  to  lordis  &  myjtty  men,  for  drede  of  takyng  awey 

of  here  temporal  lordischipis  pat  ben  cause  of  here  synful  endow- 

lyf.  &  ]uis  lei  ben  cursed  of  god ;  for  pat  ping  pat  is  verrey 

sclau^^dre  j^ei  clepen  &  reckenen  as  no  sclauwdre,  &  l^t  jiing 

l^t  is  no  sclawwdre  but  remedie  j^er  ajenst  pei  crien  &  clepen 

sclauwdre;  but  alle  ^is  is  for  ]7ei  wolden  dwelle  stille  in 

robbyng  of  j^e  peple  &  here  cursed  lustis  &  sclauwdre,  & 

disceyue  cristten  men  in  good  techynge  and  ensaumple  of 

holy  lif. 

Qdipituhm  3  7“' 

Prelatis  also  blasphemen  god  &  techen  obore  men  to  don  Prelates  live 

■r  °  J  in  pomp  and 

le  same ;  for  jiei  lyuem  hem  self  in  pride  &  coueitise  &  vicious 

louen  &  norischen  &  meyntenen  suche  yicious  folis,  &  haten 


102 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XXXVII. 


and  oppress 
virtuous  men. 


*[p.  100  MS.] 


They  ought  to 
put  down  wicked¬ 
ness  in  their 
retinue. 


&  dispisen  mekenesse  &  wilful  pou^rt,  &  so  j^ei  don  v^tuouse 
men  &  oppr^ssen  hem ;  &  ]7us  j^ei  cowspiren  a^enst  crist  ^  & 
his  virtuous  lif  &  his  meke  s^ruauntis,  &  ben  sathanas 
procuratouris  to  meyntene  synful  men  in  his  s^ruyce.  For 
Curtis  J>ei  hen  cursed  of  god  ^if  ]7ei  meyntenen  wityngly  & 
wilfully  proude  lordis  &  leccherours  of  here  owne  meynne 
in  here  housholde ;  for  ^if  j^ei  loueden  god  &  j^e  soulis  of 
here  seruauntis  jjei  schulden  amende  ]?is  cursed  lif  or  ellis 
putten  hem  out  of  here  companye;  but  now  for  pride  of 
hem  self  &  wynnyng  of  drit  j^ei  holden  for]?  suche  cursed 
meyne  to  sclauwdre  oj^^re  men.  ^  But  as  crist  and  poul 
witnessen,  suche  prelatis  hen  cursed,  &  forsaken  cristis 
fei]?,  &  ben  werse  ]?an  he]?en  men  neuere  resceyueden 
cristendom. 


Qdipitulum  SS”*- 

Prelates  deceive  Also  pr^latis  disceyuen  cristene  men  in  feih,  hope  &  charite 

men  by  their  ^  ^  ^ 

novelties  of  hi  here  nouelerie  of  massis  at  rome,  at  scala  celi,  &  newe 

pilgrimages  and 

pardons.  pdrdous  &  pilgrimages;  for  ]7ei  maken  ]?e  peple  to  bileue 

or  triste  ]?at  pf  a  pr^st  seye  a  masse  at  scala  celi  for  a  soule 
it  schal  onoon  ben  out  of  pi^rgatorie,  ]?ou^  god  of  his  ri^twis- 
nesse  ordeyne  j^at  soule  to  abide  ]?ere  fourty  ^ere  or  mo,  & 
J>ou^  \q  pr^st  be  cursed  for  symonye  &  pride ;  for  as  ]>ei 
They  say  that  a  feyneu  falslv  be  masse  may  not  be  peirid.  certis  be  sacra- 

wicked  priest  ^  ^  . 

does  not  make  ment  may  not  be  paired  for  synne  of  be  prdst ;  but  be  preiers 
less  effectual.  of  cursed  prestis  in  be  masse  ben  cursed  of  god  &  his  angelis, 
The  prayers  of  a  &  C(?rtis  a  pr^st  may  be  so  cursed  &  in  heresie  \a\,  he  makib 

wicked  priest  _  ^ 

are  accursed.  not  ]>&  sacrament.  &  god  only  knowib  whawne  his  synne 
is  in  fat  degre  &  whawne  in  lesse,  but  eu^re  it  is  harmful 
to  him  fat  makeb  fo  sacrament  vnworbily.  &  hi  bes  feyned 
By  these  pardons  P^^^^ons  be  peple  leueb  to  do  here  almesse  to  pore  nedy  men 
mSdfrectS!  enprisoned  bi  god  himself  &  dob  ryche  men  &  wasteris, 
&  hopib  to  haue  more  b^iik  of  god  ber-by  fhia.  to  do  it  aftyr 
cristis  owne  techynge;  &  b®®  prelatis  chargen  more  folye 


^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XXXIX.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


103 


avowis  of  siche  pilgrimagis  &  brekynge  of  hem,  ]?an  j^e  strong 
comauwdeme^tfs  of  god  &  brekynge  of  hem,  &  ]7us  J^e  peple 
dredib  ^  more  to  broke  bis  folie  avowis  maad  of  here  owen  More  stress  laid 

■*  ^  on  vows  than  on 

errour  ban  to  broke  eoddis  comanwdemewtis,  &  louen  more  God’s  command- 

°  .  ments. 

here  folye  avowis  to  fulfille  hem  ]?an  to  fulfille  goddis 
hestis;  &  fus  J^ei  ben  disceyued  bi  ]?es  nouelries  in  feif, 
hope  &  charite  bi  ]?es  anticristis  pr«3latis. 

Cap^MMm  39”*- 

Prelatis  also  ben  malicious  foxis  &  rauyschynge  wolnes,  Prelates  oppress 

J  J  o  7  poor  curates  and 

oppressynge  pore  curatis  &  awnnel  prestis  in  here  iurdiccion ;  aSessing’^S^ 

for  wha;^ne  'pe  kyng  &  lordis  axeden  of  grete  prelatis  subsidies 

&  dymes  for  here  temp^raltes  J^ei  grau?^ten  hem  so  pat  pore 

curatis  &  annueleris  may  be  taxid  at  here  settyng ;  &  so  alle 

pQ  charge  fallij?  on  here  pore  curatis,  &  opere  &  pe  riche 

prelatis  gon  free  or  hellis  wynnen  a  porcion  to  hem  self  of 

goodis  of  here  pore  curatis.  &  ]7us  whawne  pei  han  robbid 

lordis  bi  ypocWsie  of  here  temporal  lordischipis  sotylly  & 

wrongfully  ]?ei  rauyschen  j^e  goodis  of  pore  pr^stis  ynd^r 

hem ;  &  pus  pei  don  wrong  to  lordis,  wrong  to  pore  curatis,  T^ey  wrong  all 

&  to  pore  comunes  also ;  &  bi  fes  seculer  lordischipis  J^at 

]7ei  han  be  ypoensie  j^ei  ben  emp^rowrs  &  tirau^tis  of  opere  -[p.  loi  ms.] 

pr^stis.  &  pt  Jei  owen  to  be  most  meke  of  alle  opere^  and 

most  bisi  in  studiynge  &  techynge  of  holy  writt  &  ensaumple 

of  alle  goode  manure  of  lif,  boj^e  to  cristene  men  &  to  hej^ene ; 

but  alle  j^es  gostly  goodis  ben  rauysched  &  stolen  from  holy 

chirche,  &  contrme  synnes  brou]t  in  in  stede  of  hem  bi 

fis  dowynge  of  pri^stis  wif  seculer  lordischipis;  &  j^is  is 

werse  j^an  rauyschynge  &  stelynge  of  alle  worldli  goodis  & 

sleynge  of  many  j^ousand  of  mmnus  bodies,  as  soulis  & 

virtues  ben  betre  Jan  roten  drit. 

^  drawij?  X. 


104 


OP  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Isaiah  M.  10. 

Prelates  are 
dumb  dogs,  so 
stuffed  ■with 
worldly  goods 
that  they  do 
not  bark. 


They  undertake 
to  lead  the  peo¬ 
ple  past  danger¬ 
ous  ways  and 
enemies, 

but  allow  Chris¬ 
tian  souls  to  be 
strangled  by 
wolves  of  hell. 


They  persecute 
those  who  would 
preach. 


They  have  a  com¬ 
pact  with  Satan 
to  give  him  souls 
if  he  gives  them 
wealth. 


Cap/Mwin  40”*‘ 

Also  pr^latis  ben  doumbe  houwdis  pat  may  not  berke  in 
tyme  of  most  nede  but  ben  traitours  to  god  &  his  peple ; 
for  pei  ben  so  chokid  wi]?  talow  of  worldly  goodis  and  oc- 
cupacion  abonten  hem,  pat  J^ei  may  not  preche  pe  gospel  & 
wame  J^e  peple  of  jfe  deuelis  disceitis;  &  si]?  ]?ei  taken  pe 
charge  &  ofSs  to  lede  pe  peple  bi  so  perilous  weies  &  enemyes 
bi  trewe  pr(?chynge  of  pe  gospel  &  ensaumple  of  here  owne 
holy  lif,  &  suffren  cristene  soulis  be  stranglid  wi]f  wolnys 
of  helle  jforouj  here  doumbnesse  &  occupiynge  aboute  pe 
world,  pei  ben  cursed  traitours  to  god  &  his  peple;  &  ^it 
to  fulfille  pe  fendis  cruelte  Jei  pursuen  &  cursen  jif  ony 
pore  pr(?st  wole  prdche  freli  cnstis  gospel  &  delyuere  cristene 
soulis  oute  of  pe  fendis  hondis  &  leden  hem  pe  ri^tte  weie 
to  heuene.  alle  cristene  men  schulden  crie  out  on  ]fis  false 
treson  &  fendis  malice  &,  as  crist  sei]?  in  pe  gospel,  casten 
hem  out  of  cristene  mennus  dompanye  for  here  olde  heresies 
&  cursed  disceit  of  cristene  soulis ;  for  pei  han  maad  a  preue 
couenauwt  wi]?  sathanas  here  maister,  pat  he  schal  haue 
soulis  of  here  feyned  iurdiccion  so  pat  ]7ei  haue  here  worldly 
pride  &  coueitise  &  ydelnesse  &  fleschly  lustis  at  here  wille : 
but  woo  to  suche  traitours  of  cristene  peple. 


Cap^M^^m  41”’* 

Worldly  prelates  Worldly  prdlatis  gostly  don  crist  on  be  cros  &  sleen 

crucify  Christ 

spiritually,  his  prophetis  &  his  apostlis ;  for  pei  don  cristis  holy  lif  & 
techynge,  &  so  i?^  a  manure  crist  hym  self,  on  pe  cros  of 
lesyngis  &  bitraien  him  to  hejfene  men  whawne  j^ei  ^euen 
when  they  give  cure  of  soulis  to  Worldly  foolis,  worse  ba;^  ben  hebene 

cure  of  souls  to  .  .  *  * 

worldly  fools,  hou?^dis.  And  so  ]7ei  don  crist  on  pe  cros  of  vnkyndenesse 
&  dispit,  And  hereby  dispisen  hym  more  ]7an  diden  iewis 
Crisostom.  nailynge  crist  on  bodili  cros.  and  seynt  ion  crisostom,  or 
Austyn.  pQ  gildeue  mou]?,  &  seynt  austyn  witnessen  plenerly 

Bernard.  Jig  sentence ;  &  bernard  sei]?  fat  a  man  pat  synnef  opynly 


Chap.  XLII.] 


OF  PEELATES. 


105 


a^enst  goddis  hestis  &  jeiie]?  cursed  ensaumple  to  men 

dispisij?  ^  more  god  &  do]?  more  wrong  to  hym  ]?an  iewis 
whawne  ]?ei  naileden  him  bodely  on  ]7e  cros.  Por  crist  louede 
more  cristene  men  ^  soulis  }?an  bis  owen  bodily  lif ;  &  ]?is 
cursed  man  drawi]?  fro  crist  alle  soulis  als  mocbe  as  in  him 
is,  &  ]?e  iewis  drowyn  fro  him  bis  bodily  lif  ]?at  be  louede 
lasse;  &  ]?ei  slen  bis  propbetis  &  apostlis,"^  wbanne  ]?ei  do 
cursedly  ajenst  bere  tecbynge  &  maken  it  fals  as  mocbe  as 
]?ei  ku?^ne :  ]?is  sentence  witnessi]?  ion  crisostom  vpon  ]?e 
gospel  of  seynt  matbeu ;  &  ]7us  ]?ei  sillen  crist  &  bitraien 
bym  for  money  wba;^ne  ]?ei  forsaken  ]?e  treu]?e  of  boly  writt 
&  boly  lif  for  worldly  bonowr  &  coueitise,  &  ambrose  &  bede 
witnessen  ]?is  poynt. 


And  do  more 
wrong  to  him 
than  did  the 
Jews. 


*[p.  102  MS.] 

They  slay  apos¬ 
tles,  etc.,  when 
they  do  against 
their  teaching. 
Crisostom. 


Ambrose. 

Bede. 


Capitulum  42. 

Prelatis  blaspbemen  ajenst  ]?e  boly  gost ;  for  ]?ei  quencben  S^e^g^fts  ^oT”he 
bis  ^Iftis  &  suffren  not  cristene  men  to  tecbe  goddis  peple  allowing^ rne^n  to 

_ •  I  •  T  •  i.  i_i  •  •  oi_*  USB  sucli  ffifts* 

wip  sicne  ^iitis,  but  maken  nem  to  waste  pes  precious  pitis ; 
and  so  as  to  bere  entent  &  to  bere  dampnacion  ]?ei  quencben 
]?e  boly  gost.  Por  in  bere  wille  ]?ei  distroien  bis  werkis, 

&  ]?e  synne  is  demed  bi  ]?e  entent,  ]70uj  ]?e  ende  come  not 

for]?  but  be  lettid  bi  goddis  my^t.  For  wbawne  ]?ei  ben 

vnable  bi  ignorauwce  &  wickid  lif  to  tecbe  cnstene  peple 

goddis  lawe,  ]?ei  wollen  not  sufifre  trewe  men  tecbe  frely 

cristis  gospel  wi]?-outen  bere  leue  &  lettris,  ]?ou^  trewe  men  chrisVs^gospe? 

ben  neu(9re  so  mocbil  charged  &  stired  of  god  to  pr^cbe  bis 

gospel,  but  ]?ei  don  ]?is  for  ]?ei  Wolden  baue  money  for  bere  ^y^^^^money 

lettris  &  swerynge  ]?at  men  not  precbe  ajenst  bere  synnes,  a?tacT^heiTsiru 

]?ou^  ]?ei  ben  neu^re  so  opyn  cursed  traitours  of  god  &  bis 

peple ;  as  men  gessen  ]?at  veyn  religious  don  to  baue  leue  to^pLach 

of  ]?es  goddis  traitours  to  sewe  fablis,  cronyclis,  &  lesyngis 

for  to  robbe  ]?e  pore  peple  aftir-ward  bi  clamouse  beggynge, 

dampnyd  bi  goddis  lawe ;  &  ]?us  ]?ei  ^euen  leue  to  satbanas 

pri^scbowrs  for  to  precbe  fablis  &  flaterynge  &  lesyngis,  &  to 

1  dispese]?  X. 


2  omitted  AA. 


106 


OF  PRELATES. 


[Chap.  XLII. 


disceyue  peple  in  fei]?  &  good  lif  &  robbe  hem.  of  here 
worldly  goodis,  &  to  patten  blasphemy e  vpon  crist  bi  here 
opyn  beggynge  &  letten  cristis  pr^chowrs  to  pri^che  frely  J^e 
gospel  lat  wole  not  flatere  but  seyn  j^e  so]?  to  echo  man  & 

Craft  of  their  eche  staat  aftir  goddis  lawe.  but  bi  suche  ypocnsie  hei 

proceedings.  °  ^  ±  j 

letten  ]7us  pr^chyng  of  cnstis  gospel,  last  lordis  &  comunes 
perceyuen  here  falsnesse,  j^ei  forbeden  not  ytterly  ]?at  men 
schulden  not  pr(?che  ]7e  gospel,  but  ])at  men  schnlden  not 
pr^che  wi]?-outen  here  leue;  &  si]?  ]?ei  ben  ful  of  coueitise, 
symonye,  pride,  extorsions  &  oj^^re  falsnesse,  ]?ei  wolen  ^eue 
to  no  man  leue  ]?«t  ]?ei  supposen  wole  seie  ]?e  soj^e  &  not 

In  fact  they  com-  spare,  &  SO  in  entente  &  dede  bei  comauwden  bat  no  trewe 

mand  that  no  . 

true  man  shall  man  schal  pr<$che  be  gospel.  &  bi  bis  bei  casten  to  ende 

preach  the  gospel.  ^  ^  t 

in  here  coueitise,  symonye  &  robberie  &  meyntenynge  of 
an^icristis  chirche,  &  it  is  to  drede  last  ]?ei  enden  in  ]?is 
blasphemye  a^enst  jie  holy  gost. 


Prelates  blas¬ 
pheme  against 
the  F ather  in  pre¬ 
tending  to  powers 
reserved  to  him. 

They  pretend  to 
absolve, 

while  they  are 
only  messengers 
to  say  that  God 
absolves  for  con¬ 
trition. 

*[p.  103  MS.] 


They  lay  more 
weight  upon  their 
absolution  than 
God’s. 


Cap/Mwin  43”** 

^it  worldly  pr^latis  blaspheme;^  a^enst  god  ]>e  fadir  of 
heuene;  for  ]?ei  taken  vpon  hem  power  ]?at  is  specyaly  & 
onely  reserued  to  god;  ]?at  is  assoilynge  of  synnes  &  ful 
remission  of  hem ;  for  ]?ei  taken  on  hem  principal  assoilynge 
of  synnes  &  maken  ]>e  peple  to  bileue  so ;  wha;^ne  ]?ei  haue 
only  assoilynge  as  ^vikeris  or  massageris  to  witnesse  to  ]?e 
peple  ]?at  god  assoili]?  for  contricion,  &  ellis  neij^^r  angele 
ne  man  ne  god  hym  self  assoili]?  but  pf  ]?e  synnere  be  contrit ; 
]?at  is  fully  haue  sorowe  for  his  synnes,  &  haue  wille  raj>6re 
to  sufPre  los  of  catel  &  worldly  frendischipe  &  honour  & 
bodely  dej?  ]?an  to  do  wityngly  ajenst  goddis  comau?^dement 
&  wille ;  &  ]?ei  chargen  more  here  owen  assoilynge  ]?an 
assoillyng  of  god,  for  pf  a  man  come  to  here  schrifte  & 
sacramentis  ]?ei  assoilen  hym  &  maken  siker  ]?ouj  ]>e  man 
lie  vpon  hym  self  &  be  not  assoilid  of  god ;  &  ]?ouj  a  man 
be  neu^re  so  treuly  assoilid  of  god  for  his  entre  sorwe  of 
synne  &  charite  fat  he  haf  now  to  god,  f ei  seyn  f «t  he  his 


Chap.  XLIII.] 


OF  PRELATES. 


lor 


dampnable  but  jif  he  be  assoilid  of  hem  he  haue  space 
j?er-to,  pouj  ]7ei  ben  cursed  heretikis  &  enemyes  of  crist  & 
his  peple.  &  ]jus  j^ei  take^  litel  reward  to  god  whawne  he 
sei]7,  what  euere  tyme  a  synful  man  ha]?  so  enteir(9  sorowe 
for  his  synnes  he  schal  be  saaf.  ]?es  pr^latis  schulden  pr^che 
]?is  cowtricion  &  mercy  of  god  &  ioies  of  heuene,  &  ]?e  peril 
of  schrifte  wi}?-outen  repentauwce,  &  foulnesse  of  synnes, 
&  grete  peynes  of  helle^  &  rijtwissnesse  of  god  to  make  ]?e 
peple  to  flee  synne  &  kepe  trewly  goddis  comau?^deme?^tis, 
&  not  disceyuen  hem  bi  here  owene  power  of  assoilynge, 
ne  bi  fals  pardon  ne  fals  preieris  &  o]?er  nouelries  bi  side 
goddis  lawe.  of  ]?es  ]?re  &  fourty  errouris  &  heresies  may 
men  see  hou  euele  prelatis  disceyuen  cristendom.  For  of 
hem  &  non  o]?ere  is  ]?is  speche,  &  hou  ]?ei  ben  cause  of 
werris  &  euele  lif  m  ]?e  peple,  and  of  here  dampnacion. 
God  for  his  endles  myjt  and  mercy  amende  fes  errouris  and 
o]?ere,  jif  it  be  his  wille.  Amen. 


They  should 
preach  contrition 
and  the  danger 
of  shrift  without 
repentance. 


We  have  seen 
three  and  forty 
errors  of  prelates. 


May  God  amend 
them. 


108 


Y. 

SPECULIJM  DE  ANTICHEISTO. 


I  HAYE  little  doubt  that  tbis  tract  is  by  Wyclif;  it  seems  to  me  to  bear 
the  stamp  of  genuineness  in  style  as  in  matter.  The  assertion  of  free¬ 
will  on  p.  110  may  surprise  some  who  know  how  prominent  a  place  was 
held  by  predestination  in  Wyclif’s  theological  system,  but  it  will  be  seen 
that  in  dealing  with  the  next  point  of  Antichrist  and  his  clerks,  predesti¬ 
nation  is  treated  as  a  recognized  truth.  This  double-sided  assertion  of 
doctrine  is  usual  with  Wyclif,  who  declares  in  plain  terms  Cum  prcedesti- 
natione  et  prmcientia  stab  Uhertas  arhitrii  (see  Lechler,  I.  509). 

The  tract  seems  to  be  early  in  date,  belonging  to  a  time  when  the  poor 
priests  were  already  causing  scandal,  but  when  no  violent  measures  had 
been  taken  to  repress  them.  It  must  have  been  written  before  Wyclif  de¬ 
veloped  his  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  or  he  could  hardly  have  mentioned 
the  mass  as  he  does  on  p.  112,  without  any  reference  to  the  falsity  of 
transubstantiation . 

I  have  retained  the  title,  though  not  found  in  either  MS.,  for  the  sake 
of  distinction  from  Ko.  XYII. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 

SUMMAUT. 

Antichrist  and  his  clerks  object  to  preaching — 

I.  That  it  causes  dissension,  and  that  Christian  men  should  seek  peace  and  charity. 
To  which  true  men  say  that  Christ  has  bidden  them  to  preach,  and  that 
preaching  does  more  good  than  harm. 

II.  That  preaching  is  against  charity,  because  it  hardens  enemies.  It  is  better  to 
pray  for  them. 

True  men  cite  Christ’s  example.  Some  men  are  saved  through  preaching ;  others 
made  better  for  a  time.  Besides  in  all  assemblies  there  are  some  good  men 
who  profit. 

Ill,  That  preaching  can  do  nothing  for  men  who  are  ordained  by  God  either  to  perish 
or  be  saved. 

True  men  say  that  God  ordains  men  to  be  saved  through  preaching ;  that 
men  have  free  will,  and  God  will  give  them  grace  if  they  desire  it. 

IV.  That  prayer  is  more  profitable  than  preaching. 

True  men  say  that  preaching  is  better  than  praying  by  mouth.  Christ  commanded 
preaching,  but  not  matins  or  evensong.  It  is  uncharitable  for  a  man  to  wrap 
himself  in  contemplation  when  he  might  be  teaching  others.  Yet  priests  are 
to  pray  devoutly. 


SPECULUM  DE  ANTICHRISTO. 


109 


speculum  de  AnticJiristo, 

Hou  ani^«cnst  &  liis  clerkis  feren  trewe  prestis  fro 
prechynge  of  cristis  gospel  bi  foure  disceitis. 


First  }»ei  seyn  ]}at  prechynge  of  pe  gospel  maki]?  discewcion 
&  enemyte,  &  si]?  cristene  men  schulde  make  pees  & 
charite,  as  j^e  gospel  seif,  fei  sckulden  cesse  of  prechynge, 
sif  per  comef  more  harm  fan  good  f er-of.  Here  trewe  men 
seyn  pat  crist  cam  in-to  fis  world  not  to  make  pees  of  synful 
men  to  lyuen  in  here  fleschly  lustis  &  worldly  ioie  at  here 
lykyng,  but  to  departe  ^  hem  fro  synful  lif  bi  f e  gospel,  fat 
is  clepid  swerd  of  fe  holy  gost.  &  fouj  luciferis  children 
ben  wode  &  sleen  hem  self  bi  sterynge  of  here  fadir  for 
enemyte  &  here  owen  cruel  hertis,  pt  cristene  men  schullen 
not  cesse  to  do  f e  ^  comauwdement  &  honour  of  god  &  poyntis 
of  charite  to  here  brefren  ;  for  crist  &  his  apostlis  leften  not 
pr(?chynge  of  fe  gospel,  &  pt  fe  deuelis  lyms  maden  dis- 
cencion  &  grucchynge  &  fijttynge  a^enst  hem  And  goode 
men  resceyuy?^ge  cristis  gospel,  to  ^eue  vs  ensaumple  to  laste 
trewe  in  prechynge  fouj  an^^cristis  clerkis  grucchen.  &  fus 
cristene  mew  schulde  make  verrey  '^pees  hitwene  god  & 
cristene  soulis  bi  trewe  kepynge  of  his  hestis,  &  distroie 
fals  pees  of  cursed  men  and  don’  here  traueile  to  amende  hem 
for  ellis  fei  failleden  in  charite.  For  bi  fis  sotil  ypocrisie 
an^«crist  wolde  quenche  &  owtlaue  holy  writt  &  make  alle 
men  dampnyd ;  for  he  wolde  heuere  stire  summe  of  his 
seruauwtis  &  stryue  &  debate  for  prechynge  of  goddis  word, 
&  fus  schulde  no  maw  knowe  goddis  word  hi  prechynge. 
And  certis  jif  ony  man  preche  iw  grace  f^r  comef  more  good 
per-of  fan  alle  fendis  lymes  may  don  harm,  fou^  many 
fousand  sathanas  children  hen  deppere  dampnyd  for  here 
rebelte  ajenst  god  &  his  gracious  techynge. 

1  do  parte  X.  2  omitted  AA. 


Antichrist  and 
his  clerks  say 
that  preaching 
should  be  stop¬ 
ped, 

first,  because  it 
disturbs  peace. 

Christ’s  peace  is 
not  that  men 
should  live  at 
ease  in  their  lusts. 


Lucifer’s  children 
may  be  mad, 


yet  Christians 
must  fulfil  God’s 
orders,  / 


which  are  to  he 
truein  preaching. 
*[p.  104  MS.] 


Antichrist  would 
else  soon  stop 
preaching  by 
stirring  up  strife 
against  it. 


If  a  man  preach 
in  grace  it  does 
good, 

though  Satan’s 
children  may  be 
deeper  damned. 


110 


SPECULUM  DE  ANTICHRISTO. 


Secondly,  Anti¬ 
christ’s  clerks 
say  that  men 
should  cease 
from  preaching 
lest  they  harden 
their  enemies. 


Ezekiel  iii.  26. 


Matthew  vii.  6. 


UPe  secuwde  tyme^  j^ei  seyn  ]iat  men  schulden  cesse  of 
pr^chynge  for  charite  of  here  enemyes.  For  hi  pr^chynge  here 
enemyes  he  stired  to  hate  &  mansleynge  of  holy  pr^chouris  & 
not  amewdid.  for  \erQ  hen  many  j^ousand  ]7«t  schullen  ben 
dampnyd  &  not  leue  here  synne  for  ony  pr(9chyDge,  hut  more 
da?wpnid  for  fei  heren  goddis  word  &  don  not  J^^r-aftir.  And 
for  j^is  charite  sei]?  god  to  ]?e  prophete  \at  he  schal  make 
his  tounge  cleue  faste  to  Je  roof  of  his  moujt,  for  fe  peple  is 
]7us  hard  ajenst  god  &  his  techynge.  And  jius  comauwde]? 
crist  \a\j  men  schullen  not  ^eue  holy  jiingis  to  hondis  & 
putten  precious  perils  to  hoggis,  &  god  bidde]?  to  his  prechowr 


fdjt  he  speke  not  f^re  goddis  word  where  is  noon  herynge. 
^  Here  trewe  men  seyn  \a\>  ]?ei  schulden  loue  more  god  & 
We  ought  to  pray  cristene  soulis  "ban  here  owene  temporal  lif.  And  borfore 

for  our  enemies  * 

as  Christ  did  on  techib  goddis  lawe  to  here  enemyes  &  preie  for  hem  hertly 

the  cross  and  /  o  j  r  j 

St.  Stephen,  weren  dede,  as  crist  dide  on  Jie  cros  &  his  apostlis  to 


who  suffered 
wilfully  to  give 
us  example. 

Through  preach¬ 
ing  more  are 
saved  and  fewer 
damned. 

Sometim'es  men 
are  led  to  amend 
for  a  while, 


and  they  do  good 
works  by  nature 
which  will  lessen 
their  pain  in  hell. 


here  dej?  &  namely  seynt  steuene.  And  pt  j^ei  weren  corteyn 
]7o;t  here  enemyes  schulden  slen  hem,  jierfore,  to  teche  vs  ]7at, 
jjei  suffreden  wilfully  to  ^eue  vs  ensaumple  to  sue  hem  m 
]7is.  &  ]iou^  men  schullen  algatis  he  dampnyd  pt  it  helpi]? 
hem  ]i«t  goddis  word  is  pr^chid,  for  fer-by  moo  men  ben 
sauyd  &  fewere  dampnyd  &  so  lesse  peyne  to  hem  algatis. 
And  pt  sumtyme  j^ei  ban  compuwcion  &  leuen  here  synnes 
long  tyme  &  ben  \n  grace  &  charite  for  a  tyme,  fat  is  betre 
fan  alle  fis  world,  ^e  to  hem ;  &  god  jeuef  to  eche  man  a 
free  wille  to  chese  good  or  euyl  &  god  is  redi  to  pue  hem 
grace  pf  fei  wolen  resceyuen  it ;  &  p*t  f  ei  done  here-by 
many  goode  dedis  of  kynde  &  for  hem  schullen  haue  moche 
reward  in  fis  world  at  f e  laste  &  lesse  peyne  in  belle,  and 
it^  is  gret  vengauwce  of  god  wha^ue  he  wif-drawif  pr^chynge 


fro  a  comynalte.  For  fei  ben  not  worfi  to  here  goddis  word 
&  f ^rfore  fei  schullen  be  deppere  dampnyed ;  and  where  a 


In  a  gathering  of 
people  there  are 
generally  some 
good. 


gedrynge  of  peple  is  summe  comynly  ben  goode,  &  for  hem 
principaly  men  pr^chen  goddis  word  &  not  for  hou^^dis  fat 
berken  apnst  god  &  his  lawis,  ne  for  swyn  fat  baf en  hem  \n 


1  omitted  AA.  ^  omitted  AA.  ^  jit  AA. 


SPECULUM  DE  ANTICHRISTO. 


Ill 


synne  &  wolle  neuere  leuen  hem  for  drede  of  peyne  ne  hope  ^  of 
blisse.  And  df  pr^chours  '^'weren  C(?rteyn  lat  alle  a  comynalte  if^Jeaciiers 

knew  there  were 

wolden  not  here  goddis  word  lei  wolden  not  pr(9che  here  but  none  who  would 

,  listen  they  would 

goo  to  oj?er  peple,  as  cnst  biddiji,  for  |>ei  schullen  not  fayle  in  go  elsewhere, 
o  place  or  o\ere  of  summe  good  men  til  ])e  day  of  dome  come. 

^  J:?e  j^ridde  tyme  Jiei  seyn  pat  goode  men  schulden  be  sauyd 
]70u^  no  prechynge  be,  for  jiei  may  not  pmsche,  as  god  sei]?.  prl^^t^ation 
And  summe  wickid  men  schullen  neu^re  come  to  blisse  for  no 
prechynge  in  erjie.  ^  Here  seyn  trewe  men  jiat  as  god  ha]?  ^j^a^Q^^ordalL 
ordeyned  goode  men  to  blisse,  so  god  ha]?  ordeyned  hem  to 
come  to  blisse  bi  prdchynge  &  kepyng  of  goddis  word;  and ^ 
so  as  pei  schullew  nedis  come  to  blisse,  so  ^ei  moten  nedis  i^eepmg  his  word, 
here  &  kepe  goddis  hestis,  &  herof  ^erxiep  pr^chynge  to  hem ; 
and  suwzme  wickid  men  now  schullen  be  conu^rtid  bi  goddis 
grace  &  herynge  of  his  word.  And  who  knowe]?  pe  mesure 
of  goddis  merej,  to  whom  herynge  of  goddis  word  schal  ]>us 
profile  ?  eche  man  schal  hope  to  come  to  heuene  &  enforce  Every  man  is  to 
hym  to  here  &  fulfille  goddis  word,  for  si^  eche  man  ha]?  a  heaven? 
free  wille  &  chesyng  of  good  &  euyl,  no  maw  schal  be  sauyd  a  man  is  saved 

or  damned  as  he 

but  he  pat  willefully  here]?  and  endeles  kepib  goddis  hestis,  wiifudy  keeps  or 

breaks  God’s 

and  no  maw  schal  be  dampnyd  but  he  pat  wilfully  &  endeles  behests, 
breki]?  goddis  comauwdemewtis,  &  forsaki]?  pus  &  blaspheme]? 
god.  &  herynge  of  goddis  word  &  grace  to  kepen  it,  frely 
^ouyn  of  god  to  man  but  pf  he  wilfully  dispise  it,  is  ri^t  weie 
to  askape  ]?is  peril  &  come  to  endeles  blisse ;  &  here-fore 
synfuP  men  owen  wi]?  alle  man(?re  mekenesse  &  reu^rence  & 
deuocion  heren  goddis  word  &  grucchen  not  ne  stryue  ajenst 
pr(?chynge  of  cristis  gospel. 

^  pe  fir]?e  tyme  ]?ei  seyn  pat  men  schulden  cesse  of  Fourthly,  Anti- 

1  /I  1  1  •  t  •  Christ  says  that 

prechynge  &  leuen  hem  ^  to  holy  preiers  &  cowtewplacion  men  should  leave 

.  .  preaching  and 

lor  pat  helpe]?  more  cristene  men  &  is  betre.  %  Trewe  give  themselves 

to  prayer. 

men  seyn  boldly  pat  trewe  prechynge  is  betre  pan  preiynge  preaching  is 
bi  mou]?e,  ^e  ]?ouj  it  come  of  herte  &  dene  deuociouw,  &  it  h?g'^f\t^edifies^* 
edifie]?  more  pe  peple ;  &  perfoie  crist  comauwdid  specialy 

1  op  X.  corrected  into  ‘  hope  ’  by  a  later  hand.  ^  omitted  X. 

3  omitted  AA.  ^  omitted  X. 


112 


SPECULUM  DE  ANTICHRISTO. 


Isaiah  vi.  8. 

1  Cor  ix.  16. 

Ezekiel  iii.  17. 
Jerome.' 


Gregory. 


«[p.  106  MS.] 
Christ  never 


his  apostlis  &  disciplis  to  pr^che  gospel,  &  not  to  close  hem 
in  cloistris  ne  chirchis  ne  stones  to  preie  ]>us.  And  ]>erioiQ 
ysaie  seied  woo  is  to  me  for  I  was  stille.  And  poul  sei]? : 
woo  is  to  me  ^if  I  preche  not  'pe  gospel.  &  god  sei]?  ^  to  j^e 
prophete,  ^if  he  schew  not  to  fe  synful  man^  his  synnys  he 
schal  be  dampnyd  l^r-fore.  Jerom  seij?  as  myche  as  innocent 
lif  profiti]?  hi  merit  &  holynesse,  so  moche  it  harmej?  pf  it 
a^enstonde  nou^t  ®  wicked  enemys  of  goddis  lawe.  And 
gregori  seij?,  pat  men  of  gret  kuwnyng  &  virtuous  lif  pat 
chesen  stilnesse  &  desert  for  lone  of  contemplacion  ben  giltif 
of  as  many  sonlis  as  j^ei  my^tten  sane  hi  techynge  & 
dwellynge  in  pe  world ;  &  pus  pr^chynge  is  algatis  best, 
nejeles  deuout  preiere  of  mew  of  good  lif  is  good  in  certeyn 
tyme,  hut  it  is  a^enst  charite  for  prestis  to  preie  euere  more 
and  no  tyme  to  pr^che ;  sij?  cnst  chargi]?  prestis  more  for  to 
pr^che  pQ  gospel  Jan  to  seie  masse  dr  matynes,  for  he  ne 
,  ^  spekib  not  of  matynes  ne  euensong  opynly,  '^ne  manure  of 

speaks  of  matins  v  /  o  r  j  j  i 

or  evensong,  masse  now  vsed,  but  only  of  le  sacff^ment ;  but  he  comauwdib 

hut  he  commands  j  ^  j 

priests  to  preach,  to  pr^stis  for  to  pfijche  pe  gospel  hi-fore  his  de]?  and  aftir. 
Grossetete.  And  per-iore  pe  grete  clerk  lyncoln^  prone]?  pat  trewe 
pr^chynge  of  pe  gospel  passi]?  alle  oj^ore  goode  werkis  pat 
man  do]?  in  er]?e ;  &  newe  doctours,  ^e  of  mawnys  lawe,  seyn 
pat  prochynge  passe]?  pe  masse  iw  nyne  profiles.  &  ]?us  sei]? 
poul  pat  god  sent  hym  for  to  proche  pe  gospel  &  not  to 
cristene  men ;  and  ion  pe  ewawgelist  sei]?,  ^if  a  man  see  his 
'bioper  haue  nede  &  close  his  morcy  fro  hiwi  ha]>  not  charite. 
moche  more  pf  men  hen  in  nede  of  soule  per  is  no  charite  iw 
prostis  but  pf  ]?ei  techen  hem  goddis  comauwdemewtis  ^if  pei 
Christ  says  men  ban  kuwnynge  &  ^  leiser  per-te  ;  &  ihu  seip  pat  men  schullen 
Sho^  he  dampnyd  ^if  ]?ei  failen  in  bodily  werkis  of  morcy,  pat  is 

works  of  mercy.  ordeyned  to  hem.  &  ]?us  prostis  may  not  cesse  of 

Preaching  is  prochynge  for  suche  preiynge,  for  pan  ]?ei  leften  pe  betre 
If  they  neglect  it  fiug,  &  to  hem  grettere  comauwdemewt,  &  deden  pe  lesse  & 
cSity^andthSi  lesse  wor]?i,  &  pus  ]?ei  weren  out  of  charite ;  &  panne  here 
thmi  prayers  aie  preierig  S0hpii(ten  not  ben  acceptable  to  god,  for  ]?ei  sueden 

1  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


1  Cor.  i.  17. 

1  John  iii.  17. 


SPECULUM  DE  ANTICHRTSTO. 


113 


not  crist  fat  cam  from  heuene  to  saue  soulis  bi  pr^chynge  of 
be  gospel,  lord,  wbat  cbarite  is  it  to  a  kuwnynge  man  to  charity  is 
^cbese  his  owen^  contemplacion  in  reste,  &  snffre  of^ere  men  contempiTtion 

goo  to  belle  for  bregynge  of  goddisjiestis,  jwhamie  he  may  ”for 

_ Ij^tly  teche  hem  &  gete  more  }»ank  of  god  in  litil  techynge  teaching? 

]^an  bi  longe  tyme  in  suche  preieris^  perfore  pr(?stis  schulden 
studie  holy  writt  &  kepe  it  in  here  owen  lif,  &  teche  it  opere  Yet  priests  are 

men  trewely  &  frely,  &  pat  is  best  &  most  cbarite.  And  in  <ievou jy. 

certeyn  tymes  preie  most  ^  detioutly  &  haue  sorowe  for  here 
synnes  &  oj^re  mewnys.  And  J>an  J^ei  schullen  be  as  pQ 
firmament  oner  litel  sterris  in  comparison  of  opere  seyntis  in 
henene.  God  brynge  vs  alle  to  pat  glorious  blisse  for  his 
endeles  mercy.  Amen. 

^  omitted  AA. 


t 


8 


114 


YT. 

OF  CLEEKS  POSSESSIONEES. 


I  HESITATE  to  pronounce  an  opinion  as  to  the  authorship  of  this  tract.  In 
expression  it  often  resembles  lY.  and  YII.,  but  it  has  points  of  likeness  to 
others  which  I  cannot  assign  to  the  same  hand.  The  mention  of  the  voice 
heard  at  the  first  endowment  of  the  Church  (Chap,  ix.),  and  the  reference 
to  the  parallel  between  the  three  estates  and  the  persons  of  the  Trinity 
(see  opening  of  Chapters  xxxi.  xxxii.  xxxiii.),  connect  it  with  'No.  XXYl. 

There  are  touches  of  irony  {e.ff.  Chap,  vin.)  which  are  like  "Wyclif, 
and  the  phrase  “Antichrist’s  martyrs”  (Chap,  x.)  is  applied  to  the 
“irreligious  that  have  possessions,”  in  a  tract  on  the  Seven  Works  of 
Mercy,  which  is  probably  genuine  (S.  E.  W.,  III.  171). 

If  the  tract  he  Wyclif’s,  we  may  date  it  rather  before  1380.  The  friars 
are  already  a  bad  set  who  “bear  the  banner”  for  subtlety  and  sham 
poverty,  but  they  are  not  yet  the  habitual  adversaries  whom  Wyclif 
cannot  refrain  from  attacking. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Chap.  I. 


II. 

III. 

lY. 

Y. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 


SUMMAET. 

Clerks  possessioners  destroy  priesthood,  knighthood,  and  the  commonalty. 

Priesthood,  by  giving  themselves  to  worldly  business,  by  appropriation  and 
its  consequences,  by  luxurious  life  and  neglect  of  preaching. 

Knighthood,  by  taking  into  amortisement  lands  which  should  sustain  knights 
to  govern  the  people. 

The  commons  by  depriving  them  of  the  services  of  priests  and  knights,  by 
oppression  in  rents  and  fines,  and  by  wasteful  expenditure. 

They  say  by  their  deeds  that  Christ’s  example  is  insufficient. 

They  disobey  God,  and  teach  that  lords  may  not  amend  them,  nor  commons 
withdraw  their  tithes. 

They  set  their  rules  above  Christ’s,  and  punish  breaking  them  more  severely 
than  idle  swearing. 

They  shelter  themselves  under  the  names  of  saints,  hut  live  wickedly. 

They  tell  lies  about  saints  to  colour  their  own  worldly  life. 

They  get  goods  under  pretence  of  spending  them  in  alms  and  spend  them  on 
pomp. 

They  take  upon  themselves  heavier  burdens  than  did  Christ,  since  they  add 
worldly  lordship  to  the  duties  of  the  priesthood ;  and  of  these  conflicting 
calls  they  attend  most  to  the  unworthy. 

Secular  lordships  in  the  church  lead  to  simony,  and  wealth  of  the  orders 
brings  men  to  them  for  ease  and  luxurious  life. 

The  possessioners  are  Antichrist’s  martyrs,  dead  to  holiness,  who  will  spend 
money  and  life  to  maintain  their  worldly  possessions. 


115 


Chap.  XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 


XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 


XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 


XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 


They  preach  seldom,  and  then  for  show,  and  hinder  those  who  would  truly 
preach  the  gospel. 

Monks  and  canons  profess  a  rule  of  community  of  goods,  yet  they  hold 
property. 

They  hold  rules  made  by  sinful  men  more  perfect  than  those  made  by 
Christ,  letting  a  monk  become  a  friar,  while  he  may  not  become  a  simple 
priest. 

They  care  more  for  the  praise  of  men  than  for  the  praise  of  God. 

They  hind  themselves  to  contradictories,  to  be  dead  to  the  world,  and  to  do 
worldly  business  at  command  of  the  abbot. 

They  set  the  worse  above  the  better,  man’s  rule  above  Christ’s ;  and  if  any 
will  leave  their  order  . for  a  better  life,  they  persecute  him. 

Their  wasteful  use  of  goods  belonging  to  the  poor,  in  dress  that  is  too  costly 
and  much  too  large  and  loose. 

They  engross  to  themselves  all  the  good  books,  and  will  neither  lend  nor 
use  them. 

They  give  hospitality  only  to  the  rich  and  oppress  the  poor. 

They  visit  widows  and  orphans,  but  only  to  get  their  property. 

They  mislead  lords  into  persecuting  God’s  servants. 

They  claim  licence  to  commit  crime,  by  denying  the  right  of  the  civil  power 
to  deprive  them  of  property. 

They  make  men  leave  the  study  of  holy  things  to  attend  to  worldly  business. 

They  are  insatiable,  trying  to  get  all  property  into  their  dead  hands. 

They  are  quick  to  plead  in  the  courts,  and,  beside,  are  ready  to  damn  those 
who  deny  their  demands. 

They  incite  to  war  and  so  slay  men. 

They  oppress  the  meek  and  uphold  the  proud. 

They  pretend  to  watch,  but  sleep  more  than  other  men. 

They  inveigle  young  children  into  their  orders. 

Their  deceits  as  to  special  prayer. 

They  persecute  Christ  in  the  persons  of  his  true  disciples. 

They  blaspheme  against  the  Holy  Ghost  by  stopping  preaching. 

They  blaspheme  the  Father  by  preventing  lords  from  maintaining  God’s 
ordinance  as  to  the  clergy. 

They  do  away  with  the  rule,  on  which  they  are  founded,  of  abstinence, 
poverty  and  labour.  ’ 

They  are  strong  theives  who  rob  the  church  of  the  spiritual  goods  of 
poverty,  simplicity,  and  meekness. 

They  mislead  lords,  interpreting  the  oath  to  maintain  the  church  as  up¬ 
holding  them  in  their  possessions  even  if  wrongful. 

They  are  heretics,  but  they  bring  charges  of  heresy  against  true  preachers 
to  blind  the  people. 

They  accuse  true  preachers  of  stirring  up  strife,  but  it  is  themselves  who 
are  in  fault. 

They  care  more  that  respect  should  be  paid  to  them  than  to  God,  and,  like 
the  J ews,  persecute  for  fear  of  losing  their  possessions  and  honour. 

They  get  all  lordships  into  their  hands,  but  will  not  pay  taxes. 


116 


or  CLERKS  FOSSESSIONEES. 


[Chap.  I. 


«[p.  107  MS.] 
Possessioners  de¬ 
stroy  priesthood, 
knighthood,  and 
commons. 

How  they  should 
live  as  priests. 


By  worldly  pos¬ 
sessions  they  are 
turned  to  worldly 
business  in  place 
of  devotion. 


They  take  bene¬ 
fices  by  appro¬ 
priation, 

and  do  nothing 
for  the  parish¬ 
ioners, 

but  put  in  a  vicar 
at  low  pay. 


Thus  wise  clerks 
are  kept  out  of 
benefices, 


almsdoing  stop¬ 
ped, 


poor  children  not 
sent  to  school. 

They  make 
money  by  masses; 


set  no  example  of 
holy  life, 

but  retire  into 
cloisters  to  live 
at  their  ease. 


f  is  is  of  clerkis  possessioneris. 

Capitulum  primnm. 

^'C^erkis  possessioneris  fordon  presthod,  kny^thod  &  comineris ; 
for  ]7ei  taken  j^e  ordre  of  pr^sthod  &  bynden  hem  to  kepe 
Jis  ^  ordre  &  holi  lif  &  techynge  of  goddis  peple  aftir  cristis 
lif  &  his  apostlis,  &  specialy  in  verrey  mekenesse  &  ^  wilful 
pomrt  &  bisi  trdtueile  in  techynge  of  goddis  la  we  &  wilful 
del  suffrynge  l^r-fore.  But  hi  ^es  worldly  possessions  and 
lordischipis  j^ei  ben  turned  to  pompe  &  pride  &  coueitise  & 
grete  bisynesse  of  worldly  plees  &  worldly  festis  &  seculer 
lawis,  lat  deuocion  &  holy  meditacion  &  studyynge  &  techynge 
of  cristis  holy  gospel  is  for^eten,  &  discencion  among  cristene 
men  brou^t  in,  &  meyntenynge  of  wrongis  &  oppri^ssynge 
of  pore  men  bi  here  worldly  power  and  cautelis  holden  vp. 
also  lei  taken  benefices  wil  cure  bi  appropriacion,  ]>at  is  maad 
bi  fals  suggestion  &  symonye,  &  techen  not  le  parischenes 
goddis  lawe  ne  mynystre  hem  sacrt^mentis  ne  releuen  pore 
men  wil  residue  of  tiles  &  offrynges.  But  setten  ler  a  viker 
or  a  parische  pr(?st  for  litel  cost,  lou^  he  be  vnable  hope  of 
ku7^nynge  and  lif  to  reule  his  owene  soule,  &  for  pou^rt  of 
benefis  he  may  not  go  to  scole,  ne  lerne  at  horn  for  bisynesse 
of  newe  syngynge  &  gedrynge  of  tyles  &  mynystringe  of 
sacr^mewtis  &  opere  occupacions.  &  lus  wise  clerkis  ben 
putt  out  fro  benefices  l^t  myjten,  couden  and  wolden  teche 
le  peple  le  gospel  &  goddis  hestis,  &  blynde  lederis  ful  of 
coueitise,  lecherie  &  opdre  synnes  brou^t  in ;  &  almes  doynge 
to  pore  men  of  le  parische  &  hospitalite  &  fyndynge  of  pore 
children  to  scole  &  so  clergie  aftirward  ben  outlawid.  also 
lei  taken  le  ordre  of  pr^sthod  to  seie  massis  for  money,  & 
whanne  lei  schulden  be  gostly  lijt  of  le  world  bi  opyn 
ensaumple  of  holy  lif  &  trewe  prechynge  of  holy  writt,  as 
crist  comauwdid  to  alle  his  apostlis  &  disciplis,  lei  hiden 
hem  self  in  gay  cloistris  &  lyuen  in  lustis  of  flech  &  glotonye, 

1  his  X.  3  aA. 


Chap.  I.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


117 


drouwkenesse  &  ydelnesse  &  sleep.  &  as  j^ei  feynen  J^ei  ben  Their  luxury, 
exempt  from  prechynge,  \at  crist  comauwde]?  to  pr^stis,  bi  Jxemp?ftl)m'^^ 
profession  maad  to  synful  foolis  &  in  cas  to  sathanas  \at 
teche]?  hem  |>e  contrOTie  of  goddis  comauwdementis ;  &  pf  ony 
such  religious  be  stirid  bi  charite  &  conscience  to  goo  to 

o  o  moved  to  preach 

cristene  peple  &  proche  hem  goddis  lawe  he  schal  be  lettid  ^ig^oh^Sce 
bi  an^/cristis  obedience  vp  peyne  of  dedly  synne  &  prisonynge  on  pain  of  prison 

or  even  death. 

&  sumtyme  of  bodely  de]?.  &  ]7us  j^es  possessioneris,  &  namely 
religious,  leuen  goddis  comauwdement  &  ^'werkis  of  morcy  *[p.  los  ms.] 

&  charite  vndon  for  obedience  of  synful  men,  And  distroien  Thus  they  de- 

^  ^  stroy  priesthood. 

pr^sthod  &  trewe  techynge  &  holi  lif  of  ]7e  peple  in  eche 

degree.  ^  Also  ]7ei  distroien  knyphod  bi  wiles  of  ]>e  fend,  for  ^n^Mhood^^^hy 

]7ei*  han  grete  lordischipis  amorteised  to  hem;  hi  whiche  lord-  j^^dsh^ps^^amor 

schipis  knypis  schulden  be  susteyned  to  gouerne  }e  peple  wMchkn^’hts 

&  j^ei  moten  now  faile  boj^e  in  noumbre  &  power;  & 

amorteisynge  come]?  in  bi  ypocrisie  of  preiynge  be  mou]?  This  is  done  by 

]?at  is  praised  of  hem  more  ]?an  prechynge  of  ]?e  gospel ;  but  ing. 

C(9rtis  ]?is  is’^  merueile,  for  none  of  alle  ]?es  ]?«t  preien  ]?us 

whot  where  his  preiynge  schal  tt^rne  in-to  his  owene  damp- 

nacion,  and  J^an  is  it  litel  wor]?  to  o]?ere  synful  men;  & 

almypti  god  sei]?  \at  ]?e  sacrifices  of  wickid  men  ben  abhomi-  ®- 

nable  and  that  he  schal  curse  to  here  blissynges ;  &  ]?e  preire 

of  ]>ai  man  ]7it  twrne]?  awey  his  erris  to  here  not  goddis  lawe  Prov.  xxviii.  9. 

is  abhomb^able  or  cursed :  &  ®  bawne  sib  god  comau?^dib  so  God  commands 

^  ^  ^  that  the  clergy 

often  in  his  lawe  bobe  olde  &  newe  b^t  clerkis  ne  schulden  should  hold  no 

^  ^  lordships. 

haue  non  seculer  lordischipis  &  j^ei  hauen  so  many,  &  so 
faste  meyntenen  hem,  here  preynge  is  cursed  &  abhomi?^able. 

And  pf  seynt  austyn,  seynt  gregory  &  seynt  bernard  &  o]?ere 
seyntis  &  reson  wij?  manere  of  lyuynge  of  ]?es  proude  posses¬ 
sioneris  ben  wel  soujt  in  matere  of  preiynge,  ]?ere  wole  seue 
a  sentence  of  grete  wepynge  &  mornynge,  schewynge  how 
men  ben  disceyued  bi  ypocritis  preire  bo]?e  in  fei]?  hope  & 
charite  &  worldely  goodis  &  pees  &  reste.  for  pf  a  lord  or  if  a  layman  love 

1,  ,  .j  ^11  o  T  God  better  than 

a  laborer  loue  betdre  god  pan  pes  veyn  religious  &  proude  these  religious 

PI,  .  •  1  1  •  T  •  .  ,  ,  do,  his  prayer  is 

&  lecherous  possessioneris,  pe  lewid  manys  preiere  is  bet^re  more  worth. 


1  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  omitted  AA. 


118 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSTONERS. 


[Chap.  I. 


Austyn. 

Gregory. 

Jerome. 


‘Seynt’  bede. 


]7aii  alle  here  criynge  &  knackynge ;  &  certis  it  were  ra]?ere 

bh-e^timm  nouo  lordis  to  hire  suche  proude  clerkis  to  seie  ne\\er 

say  mass.  masse  ne  matines  in  fis  cursed  lif  J^an  to  holde  &  to  meyntene 

hem  in  j^is  man(9re  preiynge  ;  for  her  lyf^  is  blasphemye  vnto 

god,  as  austyn  sei]?;  &  Jei  stiren  god  of  treuj^e  raf^re  to 

vengauwce  ]7au  to  m^rcy,  as  seynt  gregori  sei]?.  And  Jj^rfore 

seynt  ierom  criede  &  wrot  to  his  de]?  \at  clerkis  schulden 

lyue  on  dymes  &  offrynges  J^at  is  goddis  ^ari  &  not  haue 

secnler  lordischipis  ne  worldly  richesses,  hut  in  pon^rt  sue 

cristis  cros :  &  seynt  bede  wrot  to  J^e  ^  erchehischop  of  ^ork 

lat  pfte  of  kynges  whawne  ]?ei  janen  temporaltes  to  clerkis 

was  most  fool  jeuynge,  &  telli]?  many  harmes  comynge 

Austyn’sexampie.  |>er-of ;  &  l^rfore  whawne  seynt  austyn  sey  ®  his  clerkis 

wexe  proude  for  litel  rente  ]7at  ]7ei  hadden  he  priede  J^e 

peple  of  his  cite  to  taken  j7e  rentis  a^en  and  suffre  hem 

lyue  on  goddis  part,  fat  ben  tijes  &  offrynges,  as  holy 

martir  possidonye  writti]?  of  seynt  austynes  lif.  panne  si]? 

trewe  techynge  of  curatis  is  leid  doun  by  apropriacion  of 

parische  chirches,  &  knyjtthod  bi  amorteysynge  of  iem^orol- 

Possessioners  de-  tees  is  mochel  distroied,  &  be  pore  peple  hard  piled  bi 
stroy  the  com-  .  ^  * 

mons  by  prevent-  coueitouse  clerkis  opyuly ;  it  sueb  bat  bes  proude  posses- 

ing  good  teaching  _  j-v./  jjjj.  x 

and  gpod  govern-  sioueris  distroieu  ]?e  comunes  of  fe  lond,  si]?  ]?ei  fordon  trewe 

in  61X1  y 

*[p.  109  MS.]  techynge  bi  curatis  &  clerkis  &  good  gouernaile  bi  kny^ttis, 

coiiectiiTg^^rents  &  ^en  cruel  in  gedrynge  of  here  rentis  &  mercymentis  more 
and  fines ;  lordis  woldeu,  and  ^euen  ensaumple  of  pride  &  coneitise 

gat^n'^-^^^'^^  ^  wrongful  meyntenywge  of  worldly  plees  ajenst  rijt  &  good 

conscience,  &  letten  almes  of  curatis,  &  wasten  pore  mennys 
pomp^and^Sut-  li^ode  in  pride  &  glotonye  &  worldly  array  more  ]?an  grete 
lordis  may  wel  atteynen  to. 


Possessionerssay  Also  bes  possessioueris  seyn  in  dede  bat  cristis  lif  &  en- 

by  their  acts  that 

Christ’s  example  saumpel  b(9r-of  is  insufficient  &  lif  sikerere  *  bi  worldly  lawes 
is  insufldcient.  ^  . 

is  betre;  for  ]?ei  forsaken  pore  lif  &  meke  aftir  crist  &  his 
^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  gej?  X.  ^  sikere  X. 


Chap.  III.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


119 


apostlis,  &  taken  worldly  sykernesse  for  fe  betre;  &  her^ 
fei  blaspbemen  crist  &  ben  out  of  rijt  feif.  And  ]if  J?ei 
witten  pat  cristis  lyf’^  and  trewe^lif  of  clerkis  ensaumplid 
l^r-aftir  is  best  &  most  esy  &  most  siker  for  pQ  soule,  ]?ei 
ben  oute  of  charite  to  forsake  pe  best  taujt  [&]  ensaumplid  of 
crist,  and  to  take  a  lif  ordeyned  of  synful  foolis  &  coueitouse 
of  worldly  pride  &  name  &  auer ;  &  jif  fei  meyntenen  stifly 
Jis  eiTour  fei  ben  stronge  heretikis. 

Capitulum  S’”* 

Proude  possessioners  ben  tr^xitours  of  god,  of  lordis  &  of  ^aitors^°to  ^God, 
pe  comune  peple.  pei  ben  traitours  of  god,  for  J>ei  distroien 
bis  ordynauwce  bat  be  made  for  clerkis,  &  in  stede  of  To  God,  by  de- 

■'  ^  ^  stroying  bis  ordi- 

mekenesse  &  wilful  pou^rt  &  discrete  penauwce  brengen  \n  nance, 
coueitise,  pride  &  wombe  ioie  and  ydelnesse.  &  fei  bryngen 
lordis^  \n  ]7is  errowr  of  bileue,  j^at  J^ei  ben  in  dette  to  meyn¬ 
tenen  bew  in  j^is  worldly  lif,  &  J^at  lordis  may  not  mayntene  ®  ^g^^t^at^^iords 
cristis  ordynauwce  in  clerkis  for  drede  of  an^«3ristis  curs  &  chnst’s\aws°^oa 
brekyng  of  bere  op  bi  wbicbe  fei  ben  sworne  to  meyntene  clergy, 
boly  cbircbe ;  for  pat  pat  is  pe  fendis  cbirc[be],  pat  ben  proude 
clerkis  &  coueitouse,  pei  clepen  boly  cbircbe  to  turnen  alle 
ling  ypsodoun  as  an^^cristis  disciplis.  &  pat  is  boly 
cbircbe,  j^at  ben  trewe  tecberis  of  cristis  mekenesse,  wilful 
pou^rt  &  gostly  trd^ueile  &  meyntenowrs  of  cristis  ordynauwce, 

Jei  clepen  beretikis  &  pursuen,bem  to  pe  dep  worse  pan  don  Persecute  true 
bejene  men,  for  no  man  schulde  be  bardi  to  tecbe  &  meyn¬ 
tene  boly  writt  a^enst  bere  cursed  lif.  &  bei  bryngen  They  teach  com- 

■'  '  mons  that  they 

comunes  in  jjis  errowr,  l^t  pf  ^ei  taken  ony  ping  preuely  or  must  not  with- 

ap^rtly  fro  an^«-cristis  cbircbe  &  bis  clerkis  bei  scbullen  be  mentsfrom  A.nti- 

■'  Christ’s  church. 

cwrsed  &  prisoned  &  dawpnyd  in  belle ;  je,  j^ouj  ^es  worldly 
coueitouse  clerkis  lyuen  neu^re  so  opynly  a^enst  goddis  lawe, 

&  tecben  opynly  cursed  beresie.  &  Jei  tecben  pe  comune 
peple  pat  pei  scbullen  baue  goddis  blissyng  &  blisse  of  beuene 
pf  lei  paien  treuly  bere  tiles  &  offryngis  to  bem,  wbawne 
lei  lyuen  in  opyn  lecberie  &  coueitise  &  don  no  ling  bere 
^  ber  A  A.  2  omitted  X.  ^  treule  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


120 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  III. 


gostly  office,  but  bi  word  &  ensauwple  of  euyl  lif  leden  ]>e 
peple  to  belle. 

Cap'tulum 

They  care  more  Also  les  possessiouers  setteu  more  pris  bi  reulis  of  synful 

for  rules  of  men  "*.... 

than  for  rules  of  men  j^an  bi  reulis  of  ihu  crist  god  &  man ;  for  ]7ei  taken  reulis 
of  synful  me^  as  benetis  &  oj^^re  popis  and  holden  hem  more 
p^rfit  fan  ]>e  clene  reule  of  crist.  &  ]>ei  cha[r]gen  more  to 

*[p.  HOMS.]  broke  suche  tradiciou?^s  "^maad  of  synful  men  ]7an  to  broke  jje 
comauwdementis  of  god  &  poyntis  of  cliarite ;  &  for  to  prone 

A  priest  or  monk  Joke  where  a  prest  or  monk  schal  ben  hardere  ponyschid 

IS  punished  more  ^  ^  l  ^ 

for  breaking  brokywge  of  be  popis  lawe  or  of  benetis  reule,  ^e,  for 

profane  swear-  ^pekynge  of  here  owene  statutis,  pan  for  ydel  sweryng  of 
herte  &  bonys  of  crist  &  brekynge  of  pe  holy  day ;  &  here-bi 
may  mew  see  where  J^es  possessiouers  louen  &  dreden  more 
goddis  hestis  or  synful  mewnys  tradicions. 

Capitulum  5”"' 

They  shelter  :2it  bos  possessioners  ontreu  vnd^r  colour  of  seyntis  &  lyuen 

themselves  under  v 

saints  ajenst  ]?es  seyntis ;  for  j^ei  comen  in  vnder  colour  of  seynt 

benet  &  seynt  austyn  to  lyue  iw  mekenesse  &  pouert  &  bi 
labour  of  here  hondis  for  her  liflode,  and  bi  ypocrisie  ]7ei 
rennen  in-to  pride,  coueitise,  worldly  worschipe  &  welfare 
&  idelnesse,  &  ben  wode  whanne  men  tellen  pe  so]7e  of  cristis 
gospel  &  his  pore  lif  &  pe  soj^e  of  here  owene  reule  &  profes¬ 
sion  ;  for  bi  ]7is  techynge  here  ypocrise  and  lesyngis  schulde 
be  knowen,  &  pei  be  turned  to  here  first  grouwd  or  ellis  for¬ 
saken  al.  &  lis  wheren  grete  peyne  for  proude  men  & 
delicat;  &  periore  j^ei  maken  a  scheld  of  ypocrisie  &  worldly 
frendischipe  ajenst  fis  treu]7e. 

Q^ipUulum  G”*- 

They  slander  the  Also  bes  proude  possessiouers  lien  on  seyntis  &  sclauwdren 

saints  to  justify  j  x  j-  j 

pride  coloure  ]?er-by  here  owene  false  pride  ; 

for  f  ei  writen  J^at  Jis  is  benetis  lif  &  thomas  of  canterburies, 


and  live  most 
unsaintly. 


Chap.  VIII.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


121 


whawne  lei  lyueden  &  endeden  in  contrOTie  manure.  And  They  bring  out 

•'  ^  the  worldly  deeds 

lei  bryngen  for]?  poyntis  of  here  worldlynesse  wha?^ne  ]?ei  which  saints  did, 

diden  ajenst  holy  lif  &  techynge  of  crist,  &  hiden  here  grete 

sorowe  &  penauwce  'pat  ]?ei  diden  for  s[i]ch  wildenessis ;  &  “penance 

alle  ]?is  is  for  ]?ei  wolden  coloure  here  owene  synne  hi  ]?es 

seyntis  &  makew  ]?e  peple  wene  ]?at-  ]7es  seyntis  camen  to 

heuene  hi  ]?is  mir]?e  of  worldly  lyuynge  &  likywge  of  here 

flesch;  &  ]?us  ]?ei  brengen  cristene^  peple  in  eirour  ajenst 

pe  fei]?  bi  lesyngis  putt  on  seyntis. 

Capitulum  7”*’ 

pes  proude  possessioners  ben  leues  &  here  tikis ;  for  lei  They  get  posses-  ^ 

^  •'  ■*  sions  under  pre- 

comen  bi  false  menys  as  ypocrisie  &  lesyngis  to  ]?es  grete  ' 

lordischipes  &  bi  colour  to  spende  hem  in  almes  of  pore  men,  ' 

but  pei  wasten  hem  in  glotonye  &  pompe  &  pride  &  worldely  f^'^gi^ttray^^nd 
gaynesse,  as  pelure  &  costelewe’*  clolis  &  proude  slitterede  gay  clothes, 

.  and  attendants, 

squyerys  &  haukis  &  hondis  &  mynstralis  &  ryche  men ;  &  j^awks  hounds 
bi  colour  pat  crist  was  ]?us  worldly  lord,  l^rfore  j?ei  schulden  mmstreis. 
haue  lus  seculer  lordischipis  bi  heritage  of  crist  as  his  most 
wor]?i  s^ruau^tis;  but  crist  sei]?  in  pe  gospel  of  seynt  ion  36. 

pat  his  kyngdom  is  not  of  ]?is  world,  &  hadde  not  bi  worldly 
lordischipis  where  onne  to  resten  his  owene  hed;  l^rfore 
it  is  heresie  to  putte;^  ]?is  seculer  lordischipe  on  crist,  & 
herbi  disceyuen  cristene  men  in  fei]?  &  worldly  goodis,  & 
maken  hem  to  meyntenen  clerkis  i?^  here  ^  heresie. 


Capitulum  8"”’ 


Also  ]?es  ypocrit  is  possessionerschargen  hem  self  more  pan  They  take  more 
crist  ^and  his  apostelis  wolden  or  my^tten,  &  wittyngly  take  themselves  than 
le  werse  &  leuen  ]?e  betre.  For  bi  als  moche  as  ]?ei  haue  apostles, 
seculer  possessions  more  ]?an  crist  &  his  apostlis  hadden  ]?ei 
ben  bi  pat  bouwden  ]?e  more,  &  ]?ei  ben  bou?«den  to  holy  lif 


&  trewe  techynge  bi  pr^sthod  in  as  mochil  as  fei  may  f^rfore ; 
&  fei  taken  bisynesse  of  f e  world  &  leuen  studiynge  & 


^  cristis  AA.  ^  costelewo  X.  ^  x  (corrected  by  a  later  hand). 


122 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


and  in  rules  of 
their  orders  j 


so  they  leave 
God’s  commands 
undone, 


and  thus  rise  from 
good  to  evil. 


techynge  of  holy  writt  &  deuociouw  in  preiere  &  finkynge 
of  heuenely  swettenesse ;  &  J^ei  chosen  raf ^re  to  lyue  vnd(?r 
sywgnler  obedience  &  profession  maad  to  worldly  foolis  }an 
to  lyue  hi  forne  of  fe  gospel  in  \at  fredom  \at  crist  jaf  to 
prostis.  &  forfore  ]7ei  ben  many  times  nedid  &  bi  ypocrisie 
disceyued  to  leue  goddis  hestis  vndon  &  to  porforme  J>e 
wrongful  biddynge  of  antecrist;  &  bi  J^is  feyned  obedience 
is  strif  &  enuye  brou^t  in  and  pride  &  worldly  lordischipe 
meyntened  in  dede  men;  &  ]7us  fei  risen  fro  virtue  to 
synne,  fro  mekenes  to  pride,  fro  wilful  pouort  to  coueitise 
&  lordischipe,  fro  grete  penauwce  &  gostly  tmueile  to  glotonye 
&  ydelnesse. 


These  secular 
lordships  bring 
simony  and 
covetousness. 


Qdipitulum  O”"’ 

pes  seculer  lordischipis  in  clerkis  bryngen^  in  symonye, 
coney tise  &  glotonye  &  ydolatrie,  j^at  is  worschipynge  of  false 
goddis;  for  bi  cause  of  Jis  lordischipis  men  comen  to  grete 
prelacies  &  o^ere  degres  of  \q  chirche  bi  money  &  worldly 


Great  prelacies  fauour  &  pledynge  &  fi3ttynge,  where  bei  schulden  come  to 
are  got  by  money,  ^  . 

lawsuits,  and  hem  hi  mekenesse  and  holy  lif  &  bisy  trd^ueile  in  studiynge 
&  techynge  of  goddis  lawe ;  &  feyned  religious  possessioners 
The  religious  join  cOmen  to  bes  ordris  for  sikernesse  of  worldly  welfare  &  pride 

their  order  for  _  ■* 

pride  and  ease.  &  eise  of  body,  where  ])e  schulden  come  to  hem  to  be  dede 
to  |>e  world  &  to  lyuen  in  penau?2ce  &  ^  streit  pou^rt  as  cristis 


apostlis,  &  ]7us  ]?ei  suen  ]7is  holy  staat  of  pou^rt  &  penauwce 
for  worldly  richesse  &  wombe  ioie.  And  herfore  j^ei  ben  ful 
of  symonye  &  heresie,  as  reson  &  lawe  techen,  &  }>ei  wasten 
They  "^aste^  moche  good  in  ryot  &  glotonye  &  pledynde  &  meyntenynge 
and  lawsuits.  of  wrongis  ajenst  pore  gentil  men  &  comunes.  And  si]?  al 
]7es  wastid  goodis  ben  pore  mennws  liflode,  as  ierom  &  lawe 
Thus  they  techen,  &  he  bat  defraudeb  pore  men  Wr-of  is  a  man  of  blood 

defraud  the  poor  .  .  .  .  , 

and  are  guilty  of  spilid,  ]?es  possessioners  ben  mansleeris  &  irreguler  &  cursed 
of  god ;  &  si]?  coueitise  &  glotonye  ben  seruage  of  mauwmetrie, 
Coiossians  iii.  5.  as  poul  sei]?,  ]?es  possessioners  honouren  false  goddis.  for  ]?es 


wied  ^when  ^the  ^  many  mo  ]?e  angel  seyd  ful  so]?e  whawne  ]?e  chirche 

^  brengynne  X.  ^  of  X. 


Chap.  X.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


123 


was  dowid  pat  jjis  day  is  venym  sched  iw-to  pe  chirche ;  for  chur^  was  first 
pei  pat  schuldew  be  most  meke  &  wilful  pore  &  in  most 
deuocion  &  myrrowr  of  alle  Y<?rtues  to  worldly  men  ben  now 
turned  in-to  luciferis  pride  &  sathanas  coueitise  and  an^^cristis 
ypocrisie  &  ydelnesse,  &  ben  myrrowr  of  alle  synnes,  &  no 
tonge  in  fis  lif  can  telle  pQ  harmes  ber-of. 


Q2ipitulum  10”*' 

Jit  fes  proude  possessioners  ben  an^«cristis  martiris,  for  fei 
'^ben  reised  bi  hym  fro  de]?  of  ^  worldlynesse  and  vanyte  to  lif 
of  lordis  and  werris  &  falsnesse;  for  in  here  profession  ]7ei 
ben  holden  dede  to  pe  world  &  vanyte  &  ^  likynge  J7or-of. 
But  in  desirynge  &  holdynge  seculer  lordischipis  &  worldly 
honour  &  delicat  mete  &  drynk  &  gaye  cloj^is  J^ei  schewen 
in  dede  j^o^t  j^ei  ben  ri^t  freisch  in  bodely  lif,  but  I  suppose 
pat  j^ei  ben  dede  to  holynesse  &  penau?^ce  &  profitynge  to 
operQ  men ;  &  namely  )>ei  schewen  J»is  reisynge  in  pledynge 
&  werrynge  in  here  owene  porsones,  &  in  couwseilynge  opere 
men  to  werre  on  cristene  men  for  worldly  goodis ;  for  pat  j^ei 
don  more  cruelly  ]?an  worldly  lordis,  as  men  knowen  of 
piety  nge  &  cowseilynge  to  werris.  per  tore  it  seme]?  to  summe 
men  ]?at  ]?ei  feynen  hem  dede  to  gete  pray  of  worldly  lordi¬ 
schipis  &  richesse;  as  pQ  fox  feynej?  hym  dede  tiP  briddis 
comen  to  his  tounge,  &  pmne  he  schewi]?  hym  on  lyue 
deuourynge  &  swelwynge  of  hem;  &  ]?us  ]?ei  ben  dede  to 
profitynge  of  opere  men  &  here  temparaltees  ben  mortesid, 
pat  is  co?«fermyd  in  ]?is  de]?,  for  ]?ei  comen  neuere  to  seculer 
men  pf  ]7ei  may,  ]?ouj  ]7ei  ben  getyn  bi  neui^re  so  fals  title 
&  ajenst  conscience;  for  ]7ei  wolen  not  see  mennys  rijt,  ne 
worsche  aftir  good  ^  conscience,  but  bosten  of  ]?ousand  markis 
&  ]?ousand  poundis  J’^t  ]?ei  wolen  coste  in  plee  bi-fore  pat  pei 
lesen  ony  fote  of  lond;  &  of  suche  religious  wrecchis  seij? 
Robert  grosted  pat  siche  on  is  a  dede  careyne  gon  out  of  his 
sepulcre  wlappid  with  clo]?is  of  mornynge,®  dryuen  &  stirid 

^  or  X.  2  Qf  X.  3  to  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ®  morynge  X. 


Possessioners 
are  Antichrist’s 
martyrs. 

*[p.  112  MS.] 


They  should  be 
dead  to  the  world, 


but  they  show 
themselves  fresh 
enough  in  bodily 
life, 

but  are  dead  to 
holiness. 

For  in  lawsuits 
and  in  stirring  up 
to  war  they  are 
worse  than  lay 
lords. 

They  feign  death 
for  prey,  as  the 
fox  does  to  catch 
birds. 


They  are  dead  to 
the  profit  of 
others  and  their 
landis  amortised, 
confirmed  to  that 
death. 


They  boast  how 
much  they  will 
spend  in  law. 


Grosted. 


124 


or  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  X. 


They  will  spend  of  be  deuvl  among  men.  And  for  bis  worldly  lif  &  coueitise 

money  and  life  to  ■* 

whify°iife^^^^^  wolen  coste  &  die  to  meyntene  it ;  but  for  to  meyntene 

but  will  do  be  treube  of  cristis  lif  in  mekenesse  &  poU(9rt  &  bisi  tmueile 

nothing  to  main-  . 

taiiihChrist’s  in  pr^chynge  jie  gospel  jiei  wolen  not  tmueile,  but  raji^re 
pursue  bem  to  deji  jiat  trdtueilen  for  ]iis  holy  lif ;  &  ]?us  ]>ei 
lyuen  in  delices  of  ]>q  world  &  here  flech,  &  ]7(?rfore  ]?ei  ben 

Romans  vm.  13.  ^0(Je  to  god  as  poul  seiji,  &  SO  jiei  lyuen  an^mristis  lif  & 
meyntene  pat  to  here  dej?  ajenst  cristis  lif  and  lawe  & 
techeris  per-of. 


Qdipitulum  ll'”- 


They  stop  true  proude  possessioners  ben  an^mristis,  for  bei  letten  trewe 

men  from  preach¬ 
ing  the  gospel,  men  to  pr(9che  pQ  gospel  of  ihu  crist  &  suffren  not  pQ  peple 

knowe  goddis  lawe  bi  whiche  pei  schulden  be  sauyd.  For 

cupied^with  nie  dowid  ben  so  occupied  aboute  Jie  world  and  newe 

^eir^  new  Xus^  and  song  &  feyned  obedience  to  worldly  foolis  pat 

piSh^eiLmf^  f  studie  &  pr^che  goddis  lawe  in  centre  to  cristis 

peple.  ^And  pf  fei  preche  selde  whawne  fei  pr^chen  crony clis 

and  poetry  to  get  ^  poisies  &  newe  fyndynges  ^  of  hem  self,  &  maken  false 

nessf  comendaciones  of  dede  men  for  to  geten  a  name  of  veyn  sotilte 

hut  nothing  of  &  worldly  bank,  &  leuen  to  preche  cristis  gospel  and  his 

lywynge;  &  pf  op  ere  men  wolen  treuly  &  frely  preche  pe 

gospel  &  dispise  synne,  as  crist  comauwde]?,  ]7es  proude 

and  hinder  those  possessioueris  ^  letteu  hem  bi  cautelis  of  an^mristis  censuris 

that  would 

anT*^^rsecuti^n^  ^  Worldly  power  &  sclauwdrynge  &  prisonynge,  &  dryuen 
*[p.  ii3MS.]  hem  '^'out  of  londe  &  ellis  brennew  hem  jif  j^ei  may.  &  j^is 
is  for  drede  leeste  cristis  pore  lif  &  meke  &  trt^ueilous  & 
peyneful  be  knowen,  &  hou  clerkis  &  namely  religious  ben 
bouwden  to  holde  sich  pore  lif  &  meke  &  peyneful  in  ^  reson- 
able  abstynence,  &  traueile  in^  studiynge  &  preeh.jnge  of 
holy  writt,  &  ellis  as  crist  seij?  f ei  schulde  be  put  out  & 
chrit’^e^xampie  ^^ispiscd  of  men ;  for  bi  Jis  pr^chynge  here  worldly  lif  & 
ture^^rom'^Tt^^'  coueitise  schulde  awey  &  penaunce  &  trt^ueyle  come  a^en. 

should  be  known. 

1  feyndyngis  AA.  2  possioners  X.  2  and  X.  ^  and  X. 


Chap.  XIII.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


125 


Q^ipitulum.  12”*' 

_pes  proude  possessioners  ben  rotid  in  lesyngis  ajenst  cnst 
&  his  trewbe,  for  as  seynt  bernard  &  anselme  seyn  monkis  Monks  and 

•*  ^  canons  should 

&  chanons  bew  botiwden  to  be  same  lif  bat  pore  mm  of  live  as  the  first 

■*  Christians, 

imusaXem  helden  aft^r  sendynge  doun  of  ]7e  holy  gost.  And 
bei  selden  ^  her  possessions  &  putter  be  pris  to  alle  cristene 

J  tr  i  /  r  possessions  and 

in  comyn  conuertid  &  \er  was  no  nedy  man  amongis  hem.  ^tif'^aii'^Chris- 

For  it  was  ^ouen  to  eche  man  as^  it  was  nede,  &  non  of  hem 

seide  j^at  ony  j^ing  was  his  owene ;  but  alle  J^ingis  weren 

ii^^  comune  to  hem.  but  monkis  &  chanons  appropren  alle 

j^ingis  to  hem  self  &  not  to  comunete  of  cristene  men ;  & 

pes  possessioners  seyn  in  word  \at  alle  ]7ingis  ben  comune, 

but  in  dede  bei  han  proprete  &  stryuen  &  pleden  berfore ;  But  these  hold 

^  jr  JT  j  r  j  ^  property, 

^it  seynt  ierom  &  anselm  seyn  ]7at  J^e  croune  of  clerkis  crie]?  ® 

poU(9rt,  &  here  clobinge  crieb  honeste,  holynesse  &  forsakynge  and  falsify  the 

^  _  pretence  made  in 

of  Jie  world,  &  helles  here  signes  ben  false  &  J^ei  ben  lesyng-  their  clothing, 
mongeris  &  lesynge  in  it-self.  but  now  ]7ei  ben  riche  & 
proude  &  coueitouse  &  ful  of  enuye  &  glotonye,  &  ben  fe 
fendis  children  for  j^ei  louen  \us  lesyngis,  as  seynt  ambrose 
seil,  &  fei  disceyuew  fe  peple  bi  ypocnsie. 


Capitulum  IS”"* 

Possessioners  holden  bat  religion  bat  crist  made  lesse  p^rfit  Possessioners 

■'  y  •*  ^  hold  the  religion 

ban  is  religiou?^  fouwden  of  a  synful  man,  for  bei  holden  a  ly  Christ 

i  J  ^  I  less  perfect  than 

reule  maade  not  of  seyntis  but  of  here  owene  worldly  hedis 

more  pi^^^fit  fan  religion  of  pr^sthod  fat  crist^  made  in  his 

fredom ;  for  f  ei  holden  here  owene  tradicions  more  perfit 

fan  reulis’  fat  crist  made  in  f e  gospel,  for  pf  reulis  of 

pmthod  maad  in  fe  gospel  were  more  p^rfit  fan  fe  reules 

of  newe  monkis,  it  were  laweful  for  a  pr^st  to  leue  here  for  they  win  not 

reules  &  gon  to  reulis  of  pr(9sthod  as  crist  made  hym  in  f  e  come  T°"simpie 

gospel,  for  it  is  laweful  to  passe  fro  f  e  lasse  p^rfit  to  f  e  more  ’ 

p^rfit,  but  monkis  wole?^  not  suffre  for  no  reson,  but  fei 

t  sendenX.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  treitli  (?),  may  creithX.  ^  omitted  X. 


126 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSTONERS. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


yet  they  will  let  wrolen"]  suffre  a  monk  noo  to  beggeris  ordre  wbame  be  axib 
him  become  a  ^  ■* 

begging  friar,  leue,  pou}  bee  gete  it  neu^re ;  &  pus  pei  bolden  pe  ordre  of 
beggeris  maad  of  synfnl  men  more  p^rfit  j^an  religion  of 
prestbod  maad  of  ibu  cnst  god  &  man. 


CapiYulum  14”** 


They  care  more 
for  worldly 
wealth  and 
praise,  than  for 
virtue  and  God’s 
praise. 


Also  j^es  possessioners  dredew  more  lesynge  of  bere  tem- 
poraltees  pan  loos  of  goodis  of  yertue  &  of  cbarite,  &  cbargen 
more  name  &  preisynge  of  men  |>an  preisynge  and  pan\  of 


god;  for  ])ei  dreden  more  to  displese  lordis  &  my^tty  men, 


bi  seynge  &  meyntenynge  of  a  profitable  treuj^e,  for  loos 
of  bere  temporaltees  pan  to  displese  god  bi  suffrynge  of  opyn 
*[p.  114  MS.]  synne  &  domnpnesse,  for  wbicbe  pei  ben  dampnable,  as  seynt 


Romans  i.  32.  poul  sei]? ;  &  ]?ei  cbargen  more  kepynge  of  bere  veyn  sygnys 


&  cnstomes,  for  to  baue  preisynge  of  men  pat  pei  bolden  wele 
bere  religion,  pan  kepynge  of  goddis  bestis  &  poyntis  of 


cbarite  &  discret  penaiiwce  for  preisynge  &  J^ank  of  god ; 
&  bere  is  ^  foule  ypocrisie  &  cursed  blaspheme  &  forsakynge 
of  god  as  seynt  poul  witnesse]?  plenerly  in  holy  writt. 


Capitulum  15'”- 

h^TthemYeives  possessionei’s  byndeu  hem  self  to  contradiccion  &  j^ing 

to  impossibilities,  j^pogible ;  for  Jjoi  bynden  hem  self  to  be  dede  to  pe 

;^^te^<iead  to  the -v^rorld  &  forsaken  it  &  bysynesse,  &  on  pe  teper  side  pei 
and  to  do  any  bynden  hem  to  obedience  for  to  take  worldli  bisynesse  aftir 

worldly  business  . 

to  which  their  biddynge  of  a  worldly  &  synful  &  coueitous  &  vnkuwnynge 
abbot  calls  them. 

abbot  or  priour,  &  ]7is  ]7ei  moten  do  bi  virtue  of  j^is  obedience, 
]70U^  god  stire  hem  to  be  betre  occupied  aboute  studiynge  & 
techynge  of  holy  writt,  &  |>us  manuus  comau?^demewt  is 
p^rformyd  bi  blyndnesse  &  ypocrisie  &  goddis  comauwdement 
&  more  profit  of  cristene  soules  is  putte  bihynde.  But  it 
seme];  ];ei  forsaken  hunger  &  ];urst^  &  penaunce  &  tr(?ueile 
to  be  lordis  &  riche  &  lyue  in  bodyli  ayse  on  alle  sidis;  & 
]7us  pe  fend  bi  bis  worldly  clerkis  disceyuej;  men  by  colour 
1  his  X.  2  byndynge  X.  ^  jirest  X. 


Chap.  XVII.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


127 


of  holynesse,  &  brynge]?  hem  to  worldly  lyuynge  wha;^ne 
}7ei  wenen  to  come  out  fer-of,  &  ]7us  caste]?  he/w  bi  here 
owene  turn. 


Capitulum  16“’ 

^it  religious  possessioners  ben  grouwdid  &  holden  for]?  bi  J^^emers^^and^^' 
blasphemye  &  heresie ;  for  ]7ei  ben  grouwdid  on  ]7is,  ]7at 
statutis  maad  of  a  synful  fool  ben  bet^re  in  here  dom  pan 
]?e  lawis  pat  cnst  ordeynede  for  pr^stis  &  clerkis,  for  ellis 
]?ei  wittyngly  forsoken^  be  betre  &  token  ^  be  worse  &  for  they  maintain 

*  ■»  the  worse  against 

helden  ^  it  forth,  &  weren  out  of  charite.  And  uf  bei  meyn-  better,  and 

'  j  are  out  of  chanty, 

tenen  an  errowr  ajenst  charite  ]?ei  ben  heretikis ;  &  pf  ]?ei  and  so  heretics, 

seyn  pat  here  reulis  ben  betre  pan  cristis  reulis  jouen  to 

prestis  &  clerkis,  ]?ei  blasphemen  ajenst  god,  &  so  at  pe  tJeir^ruie^Sve 

begynnynge  ]?ei  ben  blasphemys  on  alle  sides  or  at  pe  leste  JiaspSme!^^ 

knowen  not  cristene  bileue ;  &  in  holdynge  for]?  comynly 

]?ei  ben  blasphemys,  for  ]?ei  letten  a  prest  to  lyue  &  teche 

as  crist  comauwdid  in  pe  gospel,  &  pei  letten  a  cristene  teaching. 

man  to  serue  his  god  in  ]?e  beste  manure.  For  pf  a  pr^st 

of  her  feyned  ordre  wole  lyue  poreli  &  iustly  &  goo  freli 

aboute  &  teche  frely  goddis  lawes,  ]?ei  holden  him  apostata 

&  prisonen  hym,  &  holden  hym  cursed  for  ]?is  pr^stis  lif  poorly  Tnd 

comau?^did,  ensauwplid  of  cnst  &  his  apostlis ;  &  so  pf  a  pS? Mm  ^ 

cristene  man  wole  forsake  a  wickid  worldly  coue?^t  ful  of  ^  Christian 

pride,  ypocrisie,  coueitise  &  symonye,  after  snybbynge  as 

crist  teche]?  in  pe  gospel,  ]?ei  pursuen  him^  as  apostata  & 

cursed  man,  for  he  do]?  as  crist  &  his  apostelis  techen ;  & 

]?is  is  cursed  blasphemye  of  god.  &  ne  were  ]?is  prison  & 
sclau?^drynge  fewe  goode  men  or  none  schulden  dwelle  amonge  otherwise  few 

°  good  men  would 

suche  couentis  for  drede  of  consentynge  to  ®  here  synnes.  remain  there. 


Qwpitulum  17'"’ 

^'Also  ]?es  possessioners  wasten  bi  ypocrisie  nedeles  many  «[p.  ii5  ms.] 

pore  mennys  goodis,  for  seculer  possessioneris  han  many 

precious  clo]?is  &  costy  &  riche  pelurisj  &  alle  ]?is  is  wast  Their  rich  cloth¬ 
ing 

1  forsaken  X.  2  taken  X.  3  holden  X,  ^  hem  X,  &  consenynte  of  X. 


128 


OF  CLEEKS  POSSESSIONEES. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


bought  out  of 
poor  men’s 
goods. 


Their  clothes  are 
so  loose  that  four 
or  five  men  might 
he  clad  from  one 
monk’s  hood, 
and  the  great 
frock  catches  the 
wind  and  stops 
their  work. 


They  get  hold  of 
many  books  in 
various  ways, 


and  let  them  rot 
in  their  libraries, 
neither  using  nor 
letting  others 
use  them. 


Friars  the  chief 
offenders. 


Defensio  Cura- 
torum.  Brown’s 
Fasciculus, ii.474. 


of  pore  mennys  goodis,  si]?  bi  here  owen  lawe  what  euere 
clerkis  han  is  pore  mennys,  &  j^ei  schulde  teche  to  cristene 
men  bojie  in  word  ^  &  ensauwple  of  here  owene  dedis  jie 
pou^rt  &  symplenesse  of  crist  &  his  apostlis.  Also  religious 
possessioneris  wasten  pore  menn^^s  goodis  \n  wide  clojiis  & 
precious,  ]7at  foure  or  fyue  nedy  men  myjtten  welle  be  clojied 
wij?  0  cope  hood  of  a  monke,  &  jiat  large  cloji  serue]?  to 
gidre  wynd  &  lette  hiw  to  go  &  do  his  dedis ;  &  pt  Jiei  ben 
brou^t  in-to  chirche  to  reise  vp  cristis  pouert  &  his  apostlis 
&  lyuen  \n  mornynge  and  penaunce  and  to  be  deed  to  \q 
world  but  by  ypocrisie  al  jiis  is  turned  vpsodoun,  what  in 
wast  meyne  and  proude  and  hi^e  houses  and  glotonie  and 
ydulnesse.  And  so  in  ensaumple  and  dede  j^ey  techen  heresie 
and  blynden^  fe  people  in  feith  and  lyf  of  crist  and  his 
apostles  to  ])e  contrarie  as  cursed  disciples  of  antecrist. 

CsL^itulum  18. 

^yt  jies  possessioners  ben  j^eues  and  so  striers  of  clergye 
and  of  good  lif  in  the  people,  for  ]7ei  han  manie  bokes, 
and  namely  of  holy  writt,  Summe  by  bygging  and  some  by 
pfte  and  testamer-tis  and  some  bi  ®  o]>ere  disceitis  and  sutiltees, 
and  hyden  hem  from  seculer  clerkis  &  suffren  }>es  noble  bokes 
wexe  roten  in  here  libraries,  &  nei]>er  wolen  sillen®  hem  ne 
lenen  hem  to  oj^^re  clerkis  ]iat  wolden  profiten  bi  studiynge 
il^^  hem  &  techen  cristene  peple  jie  weie  to  heuene.  &  in 
]7is  defaute  ben  religious  mendynauntis  as  principal  j^euys 
&  forgoeris  of  an^Arist,  'pat  seculeris  &  curatis  may  almost 
gete  no  bok  of  value,  and  herby,  as  seynt  Kichard  prim  at  of 
irland  witnesse]?,  J^ei  casten  to  distroie  clergie’  of  seculeris 
and  tfewe  techynge  of  ^e  peple.  lord  si]?  ]?es  bokis  ben 
more  nedeful  to  mannys  good  lif  pan  gold  or  siluer,  &  he® 
is  out  of  charite  pat  see]?  his  broker  haue  nede  of  worldly 
sustenau77ce  &  help!]?  him  not  wha77ne  he  may  esely;  hou 
moche  more  ben  fes  religious  out  of  charite,  pat  helpen  not 

1  world  X.  2  omitted  X.  ^  -^yorldly  AA.  ^  bynden  X. 

®  omitted  X.  ®  omitted  X.  ^  clergise  AA.  ®  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XX.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


129 


seculer  clerkis  &  curatis  of  }>es  bokis  neij^er  be  jifte  ne  leuyng 
ne  sillyng  for  no  ^  money. 


Qsipitulum  IQ”"- 


Clerkis  possessioners  ben  foule  out  of  charite  &  blynden 
foule  be  peple ;  for  bou?  bei  ban  many  grete  houses,  costlewe  They  have  great 

.  .  costly  houses, 

&  wasty,  &  alle  \at  f  ei  ban  ouer  here  strecte  ^  liflode  is  pore 

mennys,  as  here  owen  seyntis  &  lawis  seyn,  ^it  pore  men  may  and  show  no  hos- 

^  ^  ^  ^  J  pitality  to  poor 

not  be  herbwerid  amonojis  hem  in  here  grete  castelis  or  men,  but  only  to 

^  lords  and  ladies. 

paleis,  but  lordis,  &  ladies  namely,  schullen  soiouren  ^  amongis 
hem  many  jeris.  lord,  hou  schulde  J^es  traitours  ben  excused 
at  domesday,  si]?  crist  seij?  ]?o  me?^  ]?at  not  herberwid  suche 
pore  herberweles  schulle?^  be  dampnyd.  where  ypocrisie  & 
worldli  pride  &  ^  coueitise  &  lecherie  schullen  make  him  *[p- ms.] 


exempt  fro  dedis  of  mercy  &  comauwdement  of  god;  for  a 

bayli,  stiward  &  riche  men  of  lawe  schullen  haue  festis  &  ^  or  stew- 

robis  &  mynystralis,  riche  clobis  &  huge  uftis,  but  pore  men  ■ 

J  J  ’  i  r>  I  •>  r  ing  ^nd  presents, 

schullen  stonde  with  oute  &  goo  dailes  but  jif  fei  geten 

knockis  &  reprouynge  &  wrong  extorsions  &  euyl  paynge  of  ^^i®go°‘daiies^ 

here  hire;  &  ]it  ]?es  mendynau?^tis  passen  alle  o]?ere  posses- 


sioners  in  ]7is  ypocrisie  &  defaute  of  pite  for  to  gete  worldly  Friars  the  worst 
]?ank  &  grete  wynnynge. 


Capitulum  20”** 

1 

pes  possessioners  ben  foule  ypocritis  vnder  name  of  religion  & 
cursed  of  crist  for  here  disceitis  hi  whiche  ^ei  disceyuen  cristene 
peple  ;  for  wha?^ne  seynt  iame  techij?  \at  ]?is  is  dene  religion  James  i.  27. 
anemtis  god,  to  visite  fadirles  children  &  moderles  &  wedewis 
in  here  tribulacion,  &  to  kepe  hym^  self  vnblekkidor  defoulid 
fro  bis  world;  bd  visiten  riche  men,  &  namely  wydewis,  for  instead  of  visiting 

^  ^  .  .  widows  in  tribu- 

to  haue  here  goodis  to  caymes  castel,  &  sikeren  hem  of  so  lation,  they  visit 

rich  ones  to  get 

many  massis  &  preieris  durynge  ]7e  world;  &  pt  ]?ei  witte  not  their  goods, 
where  here  preiere  twrne  to  here  owene^  da»^pnacion,  &  be  tmder  pretence  of 

^  ^  JT  7  prayers  for  them. 

Cursed  of  god,  &  stire  god  of  holynesse  &  treufe  to  yengauwce 
^  omitted  X.  ^  streyte  AA.  ^  soiornen  AA.  ^  hem  AA.  ®  men  X. 


9 


130 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  XX. 


for  here  owene  wickid  lif  &  ypocrisie.  'perioxQ  crist  cwrse]? 
Matt.  xxm.  14.  gcribis  &  pharisees,  ypocritis,  fat  eten^  widewis  houses  hi 
suche  longe  preieris.  &  fei  visiten  not  fadirles  children  & 
They  do  not  give  moderles  and  widewis  to  releue  hem  hi  almes  ^euynge,  hut 

alms  to  widows  ^  e  ^ 

and  orphans,  enqueren  siche  children  &  widewis  ^if  fei  may  disceyue  hem 
the\r purchasynge  of  here  rentis  &  o^erQ  goodis  hi  flaterynge 
Friars  the  worst,  wordis  &  sikemesse  of  gostly  helpe ;  &  in  f  is  ypocrisie  fes 
mendynauwtis  heren  fe  baner  for  svtilte  &  feyned  pou(?rt. 


O^Lpitulum  21”** 


They  mislead 
lords  hy  making 
them  persecute 
God’s  servants. 


^it  fes  possessioners  blynden  lordis  &  myjtty  men  to 
twrmewten  goddis  s^ruauwtis,  bi  prisonynge  &  of  ere  bodily 
peyne,  whawne  f  ei  forsaken  proude  &  coueitouse  men  endurid 
in  here  synnes  &  seruen  god  in  f  e  beste  manere  after  here 
power  &  ku?^nynge  bi  fredom  of  f e  gospel ;  &  f us  f ei 
disceyu'en  lordis  in  feif ,  hope  &  charite,  &  maken  lordis  fe 
deuylis  ^  twrmentowrs  wawne  f  ei  hopen  to  plese  god  in  meyn- 
tenynge  of  holy  religion. 


They  say  that 
secular  lords  may 
not  take  goods 
from  them  for 
their  faults. 


Then  if  they 
conspire  against 
the  king, 

he  may  not  even 
fine  them  a  far¬ 
thing. 

*[p.  117  MS.] 


Capitulum  22”** 

Also  fes  possessioners,  wif  helpe  of  false  freris,  sotil 
ypocritis,  &  cursed  h^retikis,  dampnen  holy  writt,  fe  kyngis 
regalie  &  wise  men  of  oure  lond,  for  to  meyntene  here  false 
geten  possessions  &  worldly  lif;  for  fei  crien  fat  it  is  heresie 
or  errour  a^enst  goddis  lawe  fat  seculer  lordis  may  take 
tewp(9ral  goodis  fro  clerkis  trespasynge  bi  longe  custome ;  & 
certis  pf  seculer  lordis  may  not  take  temporal  goodis  fro 
clerkis,  fawne  fouj  clerkis  trespassen  neu^re  so  moche,  ^e 
in  traiterie,  conspirynge  fe  kyngis  def  &  quenys  &  alle  fe 
lordis  &  ladies  &  comunes  of  oure  lond,  fe  kyng  may  not 
ponysche  hem  bi  o  ferfing  worf,  &  fawne  is  goddis  lawe 
fals  fat  ^euef  power  to  kyngis  &  seculer  ^'lordes  to  ponysche 
gen^raly,  outakif  no  ma^^ ;  &  many  mo  orible  conclusions 
suen  of  f  is  dampnynge,  as  men  han  writen  in  many  placis. 


^  heten  X. 


2  deuel  X. 


Chap.  XXIV.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


131 


commands  above 
God’s. 


Capitulum  23”*’ 

Possessioners  also  constreynen  pr^stis  to  lene  stiidiynffe  of  They  force  priests 

f  to  leave  study  of 

holy  writt  &  deuocion  &  pr^chynge,  &  neden  hem  hi  virtue  iioiy  things, 
of  obedience  &  peyne  of  prisonynge,  &  dawpnacion  as  J^ei 

feynen,  to  bisien  hem  nedles  nyjt  &  day  wif  worldly  occu-  tJemseWes  with 
pacion,  ajenst  cristis  reule  &  here  owene  profession,  for  ellis  affairs, 

fei  seyn  here  couent  schulde  porische  &  here  religion  goo 
doun ;  &  ]7us  bi  obedience  maad  to  synfnl  man,  &  in  cas  to 
fendis,  fei  fordon  obedience  to  god  lord  of  al  J;ingis.  &  pf 
a  synfnl  ydiot  bidde  hem  do  j^e  lesse  goode,  &  god  biddej? 
hem  do  j^e  more  goode,  j^ei  schullen  lene  j^e  more  good  & 
sterynge  of  crist  &  ]>e  holy  gost  for  fis  feyned  obedience  to 
a  synfnl  caitif;  &  fws  wha^ne  fei^  bynden  hem  to  forsake 
f e  world  &  be  dede  per-to,  fei  ben  qnekenyd  bi  an^^'cristis 
obedience  &  maade  more  worldly  j^an  ony  ojj^re  men. 

G^pitulum  24”*- 

Also  ]?es  possessioners  ben  nQuere  fnl  of  worldly  goodis  & 
secnler  lordischipis,  bnt  enere  pnrchasen,  be  it  rijt  be  it 
wrong,  bi  gold,  be  ypocrisie  ^of  preiere  ^  &  bi  pt^rdons ;  for  pe 
coneitonse  man  schal  not  be  fnlfillid  wij?  money,  as  god  sei]? ; 

&  so  ]?ei  broken  pQ  renle  of  crist  tan^t  &  comauwdid  bi  seiwt 
ponl  to  alle  pr^stis :  we  hawynge  liflode  &  conerynge  be  we 
apeied  wi]?  fes  finges ;  &  fns  is  ieromyes  prophecie  fnlfillid 
pat  fro  pQ  leste  to  pe  moste  j^ei  stndien  to  coneitise.  &  si]? 
pel  may  not  gonerne  wel  pe  peple  as  lordis  schnlden,  ]?ei 
wolle  not  cesse  til  alle  be  conqnerid  in -to  here  dede  hondis 
to  distroie  lordis  &  comnnes  &  holy  lif  of  pr(?stis;  &  certis 
oper  ]’ei  ben  of  more  my^t  &  witt  to  do  bo]?e  temporal  office  & 
spmffial  to-gidre  ]?an  weren  crist  &  his  apostlis,  or  elles  ]?ei 
ben  foolis  disceyned  bi  pride  &  coneitise  of  ]?is  world;  for 
crist  &  his  apostlis  conden  not  or  my^t  not  or  wolde  not  do  ^ 

]7es  offices  to-gidre,  bnt  weren  fnlly  occnpyed  wi]?  spmffial 
office ;  &  ]7ns  ]7es  possessioners  sclanwdren  cristis  lif  &  ben  ont 
of  fei]?,  hope  &  charite,  &  harde  rotid  \n  heresie. 

1  Jiis  AA.  2_2  omitted  X.  ^  ^  X.  corrected  by  a  later  hand. 


They  are  always 
getting  goods  and 
lordships. 


Ecclus.  xiv.  9. 

I.  Tim.  vi,  8. 
Jer.  vi.  13. 


Trying  to  have 
all  things  in  their 
dead  hands, 


they  must  be 
more  able  than 
Christ  and  his 
apostles, 


who  found 
spiritual  office 
full  occupation; 

thus  they  are 
rooted  in  heresy. 


132 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  XXV. 


Cdipitulum  25”*' 


of^Se  wS^are  possessioncrs  fat  byndew  bem  to  p^rfit  conseilis  of  crist 

Srt ^  forsake  fe  world  ben  moste  bisy  to  stryue  and  plede  for 

worldly  possessions  bi  londis  lawe,  &  curse  also  for  dymes, 

besides  that,  they  je,  for  foure  ^  penywor]?  good  curse  many  ^ousand  soules  to 

goods  worth  a  belle,  lord !  bou  ben  j^ei  in  cbarite,  for  so  litel  good  damp- 

nynge  so  many  soulis,  as  mocbe  as  in  bem  is;  si]?  Jei  scbulden 

They  should  he  lese  alle  worldly  goodis,  te  and  bere  owene  lif,  for  to  saue  o 
willing  to  give  up  j  o  i  t  7 

all  their  goods  to  soule  bi  be  lawe  of  cbarite.  cartes  bes  ben  religious  of  an^«- 

cristis  &  satbanas  Jat  maken  so  grete  stryues  &  discencions, 

&  to  brynge  men  out  of  cbarite  for  to  geten  to  bem  a  litel 

St.  Bernard.  drit  of  temporal  goodis.  litil  setten  ]7ei  bi  seynt  bernardis 

word,  ]?at  wbat  eui^re  ]70u  baldest  to  ]?e  of  ty]?es  &  offryngis 

*[p.  118  MS.]  ouer  symple  liflode  *'&  streit  closing,  it  is  not  ]?in;  it  is  ^efte, 

In  many  cases  it  raueyne  &  sacrelegie.  in  many  casis  ^  sugetis  may  lefidy  wib- 
is  lawful  to  refuse  .  .  t  1  ,  ,  .  . 

tithes ;  bolde  tijis  by  goddis  lawe  &  mannys  also ;  pan  it  is  satbanas 


werk  &  an^tcnstis  to  curse  a  man  for  he  wole  not  paie  bis 
ti]?es  to  a  cursed  man,  ajenst  goddis  lawe  &  mannys  &  ajenst 
Yet  even  in  such  conscience  rvitfully  grouwdid,  &  \>eriom  bereue  him  his 

hurt  Ms  body  ami  pcync  bis  body,  &  dampne  bis  soule.  Sij?  crist  &  his 
damn  his  soul,  apostlis  curscdcn  neu(9re  ne  tau^ten  to  curse  for  ti]?es,  but  \q 

contr^rie,  as  ]?e  gospel  tecbej? ;  &  si]?  ]?es  te]?es  ben  geten  to 


hem  bi  fals  suggestion  &  meny  tymes  by  symonye,  &  ^it  ben 
superfine  to  hem,  alle  ]?es  ti]?es  ben  pore  menus  liflode,  &  ]?ei 
These  tithes  ben  manquelleris  in  defraudynge  it  &  manyfold  cursed  & 

should  be  poor  i  •  i  j  i 

men’s  Uvelihood.  grouwdid  in  gret  bcresie. 


Qdipitulum  26***- 

Also  ]?es  possessioners  ben  counseillours  to  many  fousand 
They  incite  to  mcnnws  de]?  for  to  meyntene  here  possessions  &  worldly  lif ; 

W3.r 

for  ]?ei  cowseilen  lordis  to  werre  vpon  cristene  men  for  to  kepe 
here  lordischipis  &  worldly  lif  in  reste;  &  si]?  fi^ttere  & 
and  so  are  mur-  conseilcrc  \er-to  bcn  mansleeris  bi  goddis  lawe  &  mawnys, 
alle  ]?es  possessioners  ben  manquelleris  &  irreguler,  &  as 

^  omitted  X.  ^  c^as  X.  ®  stonde  X. 


Chap.  XXIX.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


133 


ysaye  sei]?,  for  here  hondis  ben  ful  of  blode  god  scbal  not  Isaiah  i.  is. 
here  bem  in  preieris;  but  as  god  sei]?  be  ]7e  propbete  malechie  MaiacWii.  2. 
god  scbal  curse  to  here  blysyngis ;  &  whawne  siche  men  gon 
wi]7  ora  pro  nobis  in  procession  ^  j^ei  blasphemen  god  &  stiren 
him  to  vengau^ce,  as  austyn  &  gregori  tecben  pleynly, 

Q^pitulum  27”*' 

pes  possessioners  ben  specyaly  cristis  enemys  &  an^^cristis,  They  despise  the 
for  fei  dispisen  &  sclanwdren  &  pursuen  meke  men  &  pore, 

&  enhannsen  &  preisen  &  fauoren  proude  men  ^  &  disolute ; 
for  pf  ]>eT  be  ony  among  hem  ]>at  drawe  bem^  to  pouert 
&  deuocion  &  reproue  here  pride  &  ypocrisie,  be  scbal 
be  clepid  ypocnte,  distroier  of  holy  chircbe,  &  sumtyme 
prisoned,  pat  it  were  betre  to  him  dwellen  among  bej^ene 
]7an  in  suche  congr^gacions ;  &  he  ]7djt  is  glorious  to  j^e  world 
&  sotil  to  gete  worldly  muk  or  drit  of  worldly  frewdiscbipe, 

]70uj  be  leue  his  deuocion  &  goddis  s^ruyce,  be  is  a  noble 
man  &  wole  meyntene  holy  chircbe;  &  ]?us  fei  ben  cursed 
of  god,  for  Jei  seyn  pat  good  is  euyl  &  euyl  good. 

Capitulum  28"”- 

^it  ]7es  possessioners  disceyuen  men  by  ypocrisie  &  wastes 
mocbe  good  in  veyn ;  for  bei  feynen  hem  to  rise  at  mydnytt,  They  pretend  to 

_  .  .  j  j  i  }  midnight, 

&  spe^den  li^t  &  oj^^re  costis  maken,  &  bi  day  slepen  mocbe  so  they  waste 

more  per-fore,  pat  alle  Mnffis  aocountid  bei  ban  mocbe  more  more  sleep  by  day 

^  ^  than  they  lose  by 

tyme  to  slepe  pan  ony  oj^i^re  common  men.  &  jjus  j^ei  faren  night, 
as  ]7eues,  slepynge  on  pe  day  &  wagynge  in  pe^  ny^t  to  robbe  They  are  ute 
men  of  here  catel  by  ypocrisie  of  ]7is  wakynge  &  preiynge, 

&  berbi  pel  turnen  pe  nyjt  in-to  day  &  day  in-to  ny^t  & 
makew  mocbe  wast. 

Capzlulum  29”** 

Also  bes  possessioners  makew  goddis  bouses  a  deen  of 

J  ^  o  house  a  den  of 

feues;  "^'for  fey  maken  here  chircbes  placis  of  marcbauwdise 

for  wynnynge  and  bryngenge  in  pnge  children  in-to  here  using  it  to  in¬ 
veigle  young 

^  profession  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  AA.  ^  omitted  AA, 


134 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  XXIX. 


children  into  religion,  bi  ^iftis  &  certeyn  of  welfare  &  else  of  bodi,  & 
their  order.  °  ^  ^ 

norischew  bem  in  glotonye  &  coneitise ;  &  geten  priuylegies 
of  kyngis  to  meyntene  eche  ^ef  in  here  place  wi]^-outen 
restitucion,  &  stryuen  &  pleden  to  meyntenen  j^is  wrong 
priuylegie  more  Jan  Je  best  reule  of  here  ordren  or  ony 
poynt  of  charite. 


Qdipitulum  30”^‘ 


Their  deceits  as 
to  special  prayers. 


Jit  Jes  possessioners  disceyue^  lordis  bi  feynynge  ^  of  special 
preieris;  for  Jei  maken  lordis  to  bileue  fat  here  special 
preiere,  as  famulorwm  &  benefactorwm,  schal  twrne  to  lordis 
aftir  grau7^tynge  &  lymytynge  of  synful  foolis,  &  more 
principaly  to  hem  for  here  worldly  goodis  ^euynge  fan  to 
o^ere  men  }>at  ben  in  more  charite  ;  &  ]7us  j^e  ri^tfnl  delynge 
of  god  for  le  goode  lif  of  men  is  forjeten,  &  delynge  of 

t 

synful  foolis  j^at  knowen  not  ^e  ablenesse  of  men  &  ri^tful 


dom  of  god  is  holden  for]? ;  &  herby  my^tty  men  ben  broujt  • 
Men  are  led  to  out  of  bileue  to  triste  more  in  special  prdynge  &  appliynge 

believe  more  in  ^  _  i.  ^ 

SS^in^aS  synful  men  fan  in  fe  ri^tful  partynge  of  god  &  rijtwis- 
justice  and  in  nesse  of  here  owene  lif,  &  bi  trist  of  suche  special  preieris 

good  life.  ^ 

lordis  vnddrstonden  \at  fei  schulden  be  excused  fouj  fei  don 
euyl  in  here  owen  lif.  lorde !  sif  none  of  alle  fes  religious 
whot  where  his  preiere  turne  to  his  owene  dampnacion,  hou 


doren  f  ei  chaffaren  fus  wif  worldly  possessions  &  rentis  for 
here  preieris;  sif  fei  owen  to  wyten  fat  here  preieris  ben 
They  ought  to  cwrsed  &  abhomiwable  to  god,  for  f ei  broken  cnstis  hestis 

know  that  their  °  ^  ■' 

hominabie  toGod  holdynge  f  US  Boculor  loi’dischipis,  &  lyuen  in  pride, 
siL  coueitise,  ypocrisie,  glotonye  &  ydelnesse,  fat  drawen  hem 

to  synne  of  sodom  &  maken  hem  worschiperis^  of  false  goddis. 


SI”*' 

They  persecute  Clorkis  possessioners  pursuen  crist  to  def  &  bitraien  him 

O'ldi  xs4^ 

for  stynkynge  drit;  for  fei  sclau?«dren,  cwrsen  &  parsuen 

fortheypersecute  falslv  to  def  trewo  tocheris  of  cristis  lif  &  goddis  hestis  fat 
true  teachers,  j  i  o  j 

1  fyninge  X. 


2  worchiperis  X. 


Chap.  XXXII  ] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


135 


wolden  saue  mewnys  soiilis  bi  trewe  &  free  pri^ohynge  of 
gospel  wil'-outen  glosynge  &  beggywge ;  &  j^ei  suffren,  helpen 
&  meyntenen  false  precbouris,  gloseris,  to  robbe  Je  peple  and  maintain 
bi  fals  beggywge,  bi  symonye  &  ypocrisie  &  blasphemye 
putt  vpon  crist ;  so  \ai  ^  possessioners  may  holden  forj^e  here 
seculer  lordischipis  &  worldli  lif  a^enst  goddis  lawe,  in  dis- 
troiynge  &  blasphemynge  of  cristis  lif  and  cristene  feif,  in 
distroiynge  of  seculer  lordis  &  o]?^re  prestis  &  curatis  &  of 
comunes  also,  as  it  is  seid  bifore;  &  as  crist  sei]?  ]7is  false 
sclaundrywge  &  pwrsuynge  of  cristis  disciplis  for  J^is  ende  is 
pursuynge  of  crist  &  of  ]>e  holy  trinyte. 


Cspitulum.  32"”- 


]it  ]?es  possessioners  blasphemen  ajenst  |>e  holy  gost;  for 
fei  wolen  not  sutfre  men  to  fulfill e  his  wille  ne  his  jiftis  & 
saue  me^^nws  soulis  bi  trewe  techynge  of  goddis  hestis  & 
poyntis  of  charite,  ^’but  constreynen  men  bi  gret  violence 
&  torment  to  leue  goddis  stirynge’^  &  goddis  lawe  &  wille 
vndon.  Por  Jei  feynen  Jat  men  schulden  not  teche  goddis 
lawe  wi|>-outen  here  leue.  And  J^ei  wolen  jeue  no  leue 
whar-ne  men  wolen  vtterly  teche  J^e  pou^rt  &  mekenesse  & 
bisy  tr^ueile  of  crist  &  his  apostlis  &  prechynge  }>e  gospel, 
&  dawpnen  here  coueitise  &  pride  &  worldly  lif  &  ydelnesse 
&  ypocrisie ;  &  ]7us  as  moche  as  is  in  hem  ]?ei  distroien  ])e 
holy  gost  &  ]?e  holy  trinyte ;  '&  ^  specialy  bi  ^  ]7is  ypocrisie 
]7at  no  man  schul  preche  wi]7-outen  here  leue.  for  si]?  ]?ei 
ben  ennemyes  of  crist  &  his  lawe,  as  it  is  schewid  bi  here 
opyn  euyl  lif,  &  in  caas  deuelis  of  helle,  fei  casten  fat  no 
man  schal  teche  trewely  cristis  lawe  wif-outen  leue  of 
cristis  trt^itour  &  of  deuelis  in  helle;  &  so  prestis  ben  con- 
streyned  bi  bodily  peynes  &  def  to  leue  goddis  wille  & 
precept  for  contrtirie  comauwdement  of  goddis  traitour,  & 
in  caas  a  deuyl  in  fiech,  as  ihu  crist  seif  of  iudas  scariof . 

1  X  inserts  ]?e.  ^  surynge  X.  3-3  special  al  AA. 


They  blaspheme 
against  the  Holy 
Ghost 

by  forbidding 
men  to  preach 
without  their 
leave, 

*[p.  120  MS.] 


which  they  will 
not  give  to  one 
who  will  preach 
truly  Christ’s 
poverty. 


John  vi.  70. 


136 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  XXXIII. 


Q^pitulum.  33"”' 


They  blaspheme 
aeainst  the 
Father, 

in  that  they  pre¬ 
vent  lords  from 
maintaining 
God’s  ordinance 
as  to  the  clergy, 


pes  proiide  possessioners  blasphemen  ajenst  }>e  my^t  of 
fadir;  for  bi  here  worldly  power  &  sotilte  &  malice  ]?ei 
letten  lordis  power,  Jjat  Jei  may  not  meyntene  goddis  ordy- 
nan;^^ce  in  j^e  clergie  &  saue  here  owene  soulis  &  gouerne 
wel  here  ^  tenau^tis  &  comunes ;  &  bi  j^e  same  cautel  ]7ei 


letten  pr(9stis  to  teche  treuely  &  freely  goddis  lawe  &  his 


ordynauwce  bi  power  gr^zwntid  of  god,  last  here  pride  & 
worldly  worschipe  be  broujt  doun,  &  mekenesse  &  holynesse 


ensau?wplid  of  crist  and  his  apostlis  knowen  &  kept,  & 
ypocnsie  &  o]>erQ  synnes  aspied  ‘  &  distroied ;  &  so  as 


and  so  ma^ify  an^Mirist  lei  magnyfven  hem  self  &  here  power  more  ban 

them  selves  above  j  o  j  j  j.  j 

god  &  his  power. 


Capitulum  34'"' 


^it  ]7es  possessioners  twrnen  abstinence  &  penau^ce  in-to 
glotonye,  &  tr«ueile  in-to  ydelnesse,  &  pou^rt  in-to  coueitise ; 


They  profess  fop  hei  ben  grou7^did  in  abstynence  after  crist  &  his  apostlis, 
abstinence,  i  o  j  r  > 

J>u^yurn  to  glut-  &  namely  ^es  newe  religious,  &  Jei  twrnen  hem  in-to  glotonye 
&  delicat  liflode  more  comynly  j^an  o\ero  men;  &  j^ei  ben 
poverty,  grou?^did  on  poU(9rt  aftir  crist  &  his  apostlis,  but  j^ei  ben 

Svetousness*;  twmed  iw-to  Worldly  coueitise  bi  ^  many  sotiltes  &  ypocrisie ; 

labour,  &  jei  ben  grou?«did  on  labor  of  here  hondis  bi  here  owene 


but  turn  to  sale  reule,  &  nt  bei  twrnen  bat  labor  in-to  preieris  bi  moub  ^  & 

of  prayers  and  '  '  ^  * 


idleness. 


ben  idel  &  veyn;  &  |>us  bi  colour  of  holynesse  j^ei  stijen 


iw-to  synnes  on  eche  side. 


C^ipitulum  35 


m. 


Proude,  possessioners  ben  perilous  ]7eues  &  cursed  heretikis; 
They  say  that  he  for  bei  affermeu  who  eu^r  takib  ony  tempigral  goodis  fro  holy 

who  takes  tern-  ,  ,  °  . 

porai  goods  from  chirche,  bat  is  b®  comynte^  of  clerkis  aftir  here  dom,  he  is  a 

the  Church  is  a  ^  J  s  J  ,  .  i 

they^Lbthe  ^  cursed  in  dede ;  b^nne  si]?  taken  awey  pe  noble 

^piS^i  goods  good  of  wilful  pouert  &  symplenesse  &  mekenesse,  in 

t  omitted  AA.  ^  ^spie  X.  ^ 


^  monye  X.  ®  comutiete  X.  ®  jeef  X. 


Chap.  XXXVII.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


137 


whiche  V(?rtues  crist  grouwdid  holy  chirche,  hen  stronge 

Jeues  &  an^^cnstis  disciplis.  &  si]?  J’ei  meyntenen  so  harde  and  are  strong 

ttiicvcs 

]?is  wickid  ]?eefte,  &  robben  holy  chirche  fro  J’is  noble  tresor 
of  pou^rt  &  mekenesse,  and  defonlen  it  wij’  drit  of  worldly 
lordischipe  ajenst  ]?e  "^wille  of  ihu  crist  here  spouse,  J>ei  hen  «[p.  121MS,] 
cursed  heretikis  &  here  meyntenours  also,  &  ]?us  fei  ben 
an^^^'cristis  peruertynge  cristendom. 


O&pitulum  SB”’ 

?lt  ]?es  possessioners  bryngen  lordis  out  of  bileue,  &  make?^ 
hem  hi  blynde  swerynge  meyntene  ]?e  coueitise  &  worldly 
lif  of  an^^'cnstis  clerkis,  whawne  hi  virtue  of  here  o]?  ]?ei 
schulden  distroie  ]?e  false  coueitise  &  pride  of  worldly  clerkis : 
for  ]>es  lordis  sweren  to  meyntenen  ]>e  priuylegyes  &  fre- 
domos  &  ri^ttis  of  holy  chirche ;  &  hi  ]?is  o\  ]?ei  moten  nedis 
meyntenen  ])e  perfit  fredom  of  holy  lif,  of  mekenesse  &  pouert 
&  o]?ere  goode  virtues  ]?at  crist  ordeyned  to  ]?e  chirche ;  but 
an^^'cristis  clerkis  chalengen^  bi  ]7is  o]>  ]?at  lordis  owen  to 
meyntene  here  false  lordischipis,  pride  &  coueitise,  &  wrong 
customes  of  pr^scripcion  ajenst  goddis  lawe^  &  good  con¬ 
science  ;  for  ^if  ]?es  an^/cristis  clerkis  han  holden  wrongfully 
a  cristene  mannys  good  lond  o^^r  rentis^  or  o\er  goodis  bi 
]?ritti  ^eer  or  fourty  w«tA-outen  ony  axynge,  ]?ei  seyn  ]?is 
synful  possession  so  longe  cowtynued  maki]>  hem  worldly 
lordis  of  ]?is  good;  &  ]?us  ]?ei'maken  lordis  to  meyntene 
fraudis  &  falsnesse  ajenst  goddis  hestis,  whame  lordis  wenen 
to  meyntene  rijtful  lawes  for  worschipe  of  god;  but  c^rtis 
here  is  moche  ]?efte,  moche  treson  &  moche  harm  of  soulis 
on  eche  side  meyntened  bi  ]?is  blynde  swerynge. 


They  deceive 
lords  as  to  the 
meaning  of 
oaths. 


Lords  swear  to 
maintain  the 
rights  of  the 
Church. 
Antichrist’s 
clergy  say  this 
means  their  false 
possessions 


and  wrong  cus¬ 
toms, 


as  when  they 
claim  land  by 
prescription, 
though  wrong¬ 
fully  obtained. 


Q>2jpitulum  ST”"’ 

Also  ]?es  possessioners  dampne?^  trewe  men  techynge  frely  They  condemn. 

tru.0  prG3cliGi*s  of 

&  trewely  ]?e  gospel  &  goddis  hestis  for  heretikis,  for  to  the  gospel  as 

ll61*6ticS 

coloure  here  owen  worldly®  lif,  but  J>ei  hem  self  ben  foule 
^  X. 


2  ckalagen  X. 


3  omitted  X. 


^  trentis  A  A.  ■ 


5  omitted  X. 


138 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  XXXVII. 


while  they  are  heretikis  for  here  cursed  pride,  coueitise  &  enuye  hat  ]7ei 

heretics,  ,  •  i  •  p 

dwellen  iwne  &  meyntenen  strongly;  but  of  ])is  verry  heresie  & 
most  perilous  wolen  f  ei  not  f  enke  ne  speke,  ne  suffre  opere 
hut  will  not  hear  trewe  men  to  speke  a^enst  it  for  to  saue  here  soulis  &  helpe 

to  be  reproved;  _ 

op&re  men  out  of  synne.  &  ]^us  ]7ei  faren  wij?  cristene  men 
&  holy  writt  as  diden  scribis  &  phariseis  wi]^  crist  &  his  apostlis 
&  his  gospel,  &  whawne  J^es  pharisees,  scribis  &  hije  prestis 
weren  ful  of  heresie  &  blasphemye  fei  putten  alle  fes  synnes 
as  Scribes  and  ou  crist  &  his  apostlis  to  blvude  he  comune  peple,  &  so  hes 

Pharisees  im-  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

puted  sin  to  possessiouers  don  now  bi  more  ypocrisie  &  more  sotilte  & 

Christ  and  his  ^ 

disciples.  more  cruelte. 


Q2ipitulum  3  8”*’ 

They  slander  fes  proude  possessioners  disclauwdren  trewe  prechours  of 

trii6  pr6scli6rs 

as  cause  of  ])e  gospel  &  cristis  lif  for  makeris  of  discencion  &  debate 
strife, 

among  neijeboris  in  ]>e  lond ;  whawne  ]7ei  hem  self  wi]?  here 
cursed  lif  &  confederacie  wij?  tirauwtis  for  here  gold  ben 
hut  they  are  the  cause  of  disceucion  &  enemyte.  for  wi]?  pore  mennws  liflode 

real  causes  of  dis-  ..  ,  .  oit  i 

sension,  pel  uiren  my^tty  men  to  stryue  &  plede  ajenst 

by  spending  the  techynge,  &  helpe  &  releuynge  &  encressynge  of  seculer 

property  of  the 

poor  in  litigation  lordis,  &  helpe  &  releuynge  of  pore  comunes;  &  J7us  as 
cursed  pharisees  &  scribis  &  hije  pr(?stis  ]7ei  putten  here 
owen  cursed  synnes  vpon  trewe  men  to  lette  goddis  lawe  to 
*[p.  122MS.]  be  knowen,  &  hiden  &  colouren  ^meyntenen  here  olde 
synnes  and  traitere  bi  strong  pursuynge  to  de]?  of  alle  trewe 
and  by  persecu-  men  as  moche  as  hei  may,  &  herbi  hei  ben  manquelleris  & 

tion  of  true  men.  j  >  j  x 

pursueris  of  crist  &  endurid  in^  old  heresie. 


Capilulum  39'”* 

Also']7es  possessioners  magwifye^  hem  self  more  ]>an  ihu 
crist,  &  seken  more  here  owene  name  &  honour  I’an  honour 
They  expect  to  of  god  &  helpe  of  cristene  soulis ;  for  hei  axen  &  coueiten 

he  regarded  as  P 

holy  while  they  name  of  holyucsse  &  reu^rence  wib  bis  proude  worldly  lif, 

lead  a  worldly  X  r  .  . 

life,  &  jiat  schal  no  ma?^  reproue  hem  of  here  opyn  ypocrisie, 

and  will  not  be  .  •  o  -i  • 

reproved.  symonye  &  coueytise  :  &  ihu  crist  my^tte  not  kepe  hoiynesse 

f  omitted  AA.  2  X  inserts  “he.” 


Chap.  XL.] 


OF  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


139 


•wij?  suche  worldly  lif  &  axe  such  worldly  reuerence  as  J^es 

possessioners  don.  And  ihu  crist  was  redy  to  be  reproued  Christ  was  willing 
^  to  be  reproved. 

of  his  enemyes  pf  }>ei  myjtten  fynde  ony  defaute  in  him. 
hut  jit  ^  fes  possessioners  hen  ful  of  synne,  &  J^ouj  f ei  hen 
most  houwden  to  pacience,  mekenesse  &  charite  jit  ]7ei  hen 
wode  wha?^ne  men  wolen  amende  here  cursed  lif  hi  techynge 


of  gospel;  &  jif  men  dispisen  hem  or  don  not  worldly 
reuerence  to  hem  |»ei  ben  wode  wro]?  &  wolen  he  vengid  vp 
al  here  myjt;  but  ]70uj  men  dispisen  god  in  here  pr(?sence 
hi  cursed  swerynge  or .  oj^^re  synnes  ]?ei  chargen  not,  &  jit 
]70uj  here  owene  seruauwtis  do  so,  ]7at  is  worse  to  h.em,  J^ei 
chargen  it  ^  not.  hut  as  j^e  iewis  diden  crist  to  de]?  for  drede 
of  lesyng  of  here  lordischipe  &  worldly  name  &  honour,  so 
j^es  possessioners  don  here  power  to  do  alle  trewe  men  to  de]? 
}>at  techen  cristis  gospel  &  mekenesse  &  poU(?rt  ajenst  here 
false  newe  lawis  &  pride  &  coueitise,  &  hou  J^ei  enuehymyn 
cristendom  hi  word  &  dede. 


They  are  angry 
if  respect  is  not 
paid  to  them, 
hut  they  do  not 
mind  men,  even 
their  servants, 
swearing  in  their 
presence. 

The  Jews  put 
Christ  to  death 
from  fear  of  losing 
honour  and  lord- 
ship, 

so  these  posses¬ 
sioners  would  do 
with  true  men 
now. 


Q^pitulum  40"'- 

^it  jjes  ypocritis  possessioners  hen  traitouris  to  god,  to 
lordis,  &  to  comunes  also ;  for  j^ei  han  almost  j^e  tresor  of  ]7e 
lond  &  worldly  lordischipe,  ajenst  goddis  lawe;  &  whawne 
]>Q  kyng  ha]?  nede  of  a  taxe,  ]7ei  wolen  not  paie  for  pore 
men,  not  wi]?stondynge  ]?at  ]?ei  ben  procuratouris  of  pore 
men,  &  al  j^at  ]?ei  han  ^  ouer  here  owen  symple  liflode  is  pore 
mennw5  good,  as  goddis  lawe  &  mannws  techen  opynly,  hut 
for  to  plede  &  meyntene  wrongis  &  putten  men  out  of  here 
lond  &  meyntenen  false  prauelegies  ajenst  charite  &  good 
conscience  ]?ei  han  fousand  markis  &  poundis;  &  here  ]7ei 
chalengen  aboue  cnst  &  alle  his  apostlis  ]>at  ]?ouj  ]?ei  han 
almost  alle^  lordischipis  amorteised  to  hem,  jit  ]7ei  wolen 
not  paien  tribute  ne  taxe  ®  to  ]?e  kyng  for  meyntenaunce  of  ]?e 
rewme  &  sauynge  of  pore  mennns  lif;  &  jit  crist  paide  for 
him  &  his  disciplis  tribute  to  fe  emp^roure,  fouj  he  hadde 

1  omitted  AA.  2  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 

^  alle  is  added  in  X.  by  a  later  hand.  ^  axe  A  A. 


They  get  all  the 
treasure  of  the 
land  into  their 
hands, 

and  will  not  pay 
taxes ; 


but  in  lawsuits 
they  will  spend  a 
thousand  pounds. 


They  will  not  pay 
tribute ; 


yet  Christ  paid 
tribute  to  the 
Emperor. 


140 


or  CLERKS  POSSESSIONERS. 


[Chap.  XL, 


They  challenge 
this  exemption 
by  Antichrist’s 
power. 


='[p.  123  MS.] 


non  such  temp^raltees.  &  J^is  exerapcion  j^ei  chalengen  hi 
anficnstis  power  &  not  hi  god  almyjtty,  for  he  constreyne]? 
clerkis  to  be  suget  to  seculer  lordis  &  to  lyue  a  iust  lif  & 
symple  &  pore  wij^-outen  worldly  lordschipe  opyn  beggynge 
\n  virtuous  mene.  god  almy^tty  stirej?  prestis,  lordis  & 
comunes  to  knowe  ypocrisie,  heresie  &  treson  of  an^/cnstis 
worldly  clerkis,  &  knowen  &  meyntenen  j^e  rijtful  ordynauwce 
of  god  &  }?e  p^rfit  fredom  of  Je  gospel.  Amen. 


1  omitted  AA. 


141 


VIL 


ROW  THE  OFFICE  OF  CHEATES  IS  OEDAIHED 

OF  GOD. 


I  HAYE  already  said  (in  the  Preface  to  No.  IV.)  that  I  think  this  tract 
to  he  by  another  hand  than  Wyclif’s,  but  the  tone  of  thought  is  very 
like  his.  The  date  of  it  is  evidently  after  1383,  as  Bishop  Spenser’s 
crusade  in  Flanders  is  mentioned  as  a  thing  of  the  past  (Chapter  xvi.). 

When  we  read  the  complaint  (Chap,  xxn.)  of  the  clergy  who  leave 
their  parishes  and  go  to  school  (that  is,  of  course,  to  the  University),  in 
order  to  lead  a  loose  life  there,  we  are  not  suppose  that  the  writer  had 
any  dislike  to  the  Universities.  Oxford  was  a  chief  centre  of  Wyclifite 
influence,  and  Wyclif  himself,  in  1368,  received  from  his  bishop  two 
years’  leave  of  absence  from  his  living  (Fillingham)  to  study  at  Oxford, 
where,  our  tract  tells  us,  “good  priests  traveilen  faste  to  lerne  goddis 
lawe.”  Its  author  had  rubbed  shoulders  with  the  men  who  went  to 
study  “  Civil  and  Canon,”  and  did  little  good  thereat,  or  at  most  learned 
to  “crack  a  little  Latin  in  Consistories.”  The  scholar  is  as  indignant 
against  fast  men  who  degrade  the  seat  of  learning,  as  the  reformer 
against  priests  who  neglect  their  parishes.  We  may  suppose  the  writer 
to  be  one  of  Wyclif’ s  Oxford  friends— perhaps  Herford  or  Purvey. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Stjmmaey. 


Chap.  I.  Curates  care  too  much  for  worldly  goods. 

II.  Men  run  about  after  benefices  and  buy  them.  The  money  thus  spent 
would  be  better  employed  in  re’ducing  taxation. 

III.  Wayward  curates  are  Satans  transformed  into  angels  of  light — angels 
not  of  God  but  of  the  devil. 


IV.  Curates  study  law  books  instead  of  the  Bible. 

V.  They  go  to  law  for  trifles  of  tithe,  bringing  heavy  charges  on  their 
subjects,  or  cursing  and  imprisoning  them. 

YI.  They  set  their  parishioners  an  example  of  worldliness. 


142 


Chap.  VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 
XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 
XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 


XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 


They  teach  men  to  war ;  they  despise  the  poor  and  flatter  the  rich. 

They  will  not  teach  Holy  "Writ  nor  let  others  teach  it. 

They  waste  the  money  of  the  poor  in  pomp  and  luxury. 

They  serve  lords  in  worldly  business  and  neglect  God’s  work. 

They  welcome  cheating  pardoners,  hut  hinder  true  preachers. 

They  neglect  God’s  command  to  preach. 

They  excommunicate  for  not  paying  tithes,  hut  not  for  sin. 

They  waste  the  money  of  the  poor  in  hawking  and  hunting. 

They  haunt  taverns,  play  games  of  chance,  and  get  drunk. 

Eefuse  the  sacrament  to  those  who  do  not  pay  tithes,  or  will  not  con¬ 
tribute  to  wars  such  as  Spenser’s  crusade. 

They  take  benefices  without  knowing  the  gospel,  and  teach  the  people 
evil. 

They  relate  chronicles  and  stories  of  false  miracles  to  mislead  the 
people. 

They  go  shares  with  pardoners,  who  deceive  the  people. 

They  hate  good  priests  and  love  bad  ones. 

"Wicked  curates  take  refuge  in  lords’  courts,  and  use  the  protection  of , 
lords  to  avoid  discipline. 

They  go  under  pretence  of  study  to  the  Universities,  and  lead  a  riotous 
life  there. 

The  more  learned  of  them  use  the  Civil  and  Canon  Law  to  annoy  the 
poor,  and  neither  have  nor  care  for  knowledge  of  the  Bible. 

They  let  worldly  clerks  condemn  God’s  law,  and  stop  true  preachers ; 
while  they  preach  the  traditions  of  Antichrist. 

They  study  Civil  and  Canon  Law  and  neglect  God’s  law. 

They  forbid  the  people  to  judge  their  words  or  deeds. 

They  forbid  laymen  to  read  the  Gospel  in  their  mother-tongue. 

They  deceive  men  as  to  absolution,  leading  them  to  trust  in  shrift  and 
gifts  rather  than  in  contrition  and  amendment. 

They  rob  people  by  their  pitiless  excommunications. 

They  take  tithes  according  to  neither  Testament,  but  according  to  sinful 
laws. 

They  get  benefices  by  simony,  and  neglect  them  afterwards. 

Under  pretence  of  liberties  of  the  Church  they  make  the  people  main¬ 
tain  bad  priests  in  their  evil  ways. 

They  say  that  if  these  bad  ways  are  maintained,  priests’  prayers  will 
bring  reward,  but  any  attempt  to  reform  priests  is  cursed.  Final 
apostrophe  to  curates. 


Chap.  I.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


143 


Hou  ])e  office  of  curatis  is  ordeyned  of  god. 
In  dei  nomiwe.  Amen. 


[Capitulum  L] 

Tor  \q  office  of  curatis  is  ordeyned  of  god  &  fewe  don  it 
wele  &  many  ful  euyle,  I^rfore  telle  we  suwme  defautis^  to  Faults  of  curates, 
amende  hem  wi]?  goddis  helpe.  Pirst  Jei  ben  more  bisi 
aboute  worldly  goodis  fan  virtues  &  goode  kepywge  of  More  busy  about 
mennw5  soulis :  for  he  \)at  can  best  geten  richesses  of  bis  than  about  men’s 
world  to-gidre  &  holde  grete  houshold  &  worldly  aray,  he 
is  holden  a  wor]?!  man  of  holy  chirche,  ]70uj  he  conne  not 
be  leste’*  poynt  of  be  gospel;  &  such  on  is  preised  &  born  Hethatisricbis 

praised  by  the 

vp  of  ]?e  bischop  &  here  officeris  at  ^e  fulle ;  but  j^at  curat  bishop, 
jeueJ?  hiw  to  studie  holy  writt  &  teche  his  ^  paryschenys 
to  saue  here  soulis,  &  lyuej?  in  mekenesse,  penauwce  &  bisi 
trdjueile  a  boute  gostly  bingis,  &  reckib  not  of  worldly  ^  “eek 

°  J  ’  J  priest  IS  despised 

worschipe  &  richesse,  is  holden  a  fool  &  distroiere  of  holy  persecuted. 

chirche,  &  is^  dispised  &  pursued  of  hije  pr^stis  &  prdatis 

&  here  officeris,  &  hatid  of  o^erQ  curatis  in  centre;  &  ^is 

makij?  many  curatis  to  be  necgligent  in  here  gostly  cure  & 

^eue  hem  to  occupacion  &  bisynesse  of  worldly  goodis.  }7es 

necgligent  curatis  J^enken  ful®  litel  hou  dere  crist  bou^te 

mannys  soule  wi]?  his  precious  blood  &  de]?,  &  hou  harde 

rekenynge  schal  he  make  at  domes  day  for  J^es  soulis.  centis 

it  semeb  bat  bei  ben  out  of  cristene  mennys  feib;  for  bei  Negligent  curates 

1  1  \  .  are  out  of  the 

maken  hem  not  redy  to  come  pedir  &  answere  wel  hou  \q\  faith, 

camen  in-to  here  benefices  &  hou  f  ei  lyueden  &  taujten  & 

spendiden  pore  mennns  goodis;  for  ^if  Jei  hadden  bis  feib  or  they  would 

livG  better# 

redy  in  here  mynde  fei  wolden  bigynne  a  betre  lif  &  con- 
tynue  fer-inne. 

1  defaute  AA.  *  beste  X.  ^  is  X.  *  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  AA, 


144 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  II. 


Q^pitulum.  2”*- 


They  will  run  \)q  secuwde  defaute.  pei  rennen  faste  bi  lond  &  watir  in 

after  fat  bene-  ^  ^  ^  * 

^ces,  grete  pmlis  of  bodi  &  soule  for  to  geten  fatte  benefices,  but 


but  will  not  go  a 
mile  to  preach' 
the  gospel. 


Col.  iii.  5. 


j7ei  wolen  not  goo  comuwly  a  myle  for  to  pr^cbe  pe  gospel, 
pou^  cristene  men  rennen  to  belle  for  defaute  of  knowynge  & 
kepynge  of  goddis  lawe.  &  c^rtis  here  pei  schewen  in  dede 
pat  pei  ben  foule  blend  ^  w^'t^  coueitise,  &  worschipen  false  ^ 
goddis,  as  seynt  poul  seip,  sip  pe[i]  louen  so  moche  worldly 
richesses  &  so  moche  traueilen  perfore  ny^t  &  day  in  poujt  & 
dede,  &  so  litel  traueilen  for  goddis  worschipe  &  sauynge  of 
cr«stene  soulis.  but  who  may  excuse  pes  coueitouse  clerkis 


Guilty  of  simony,  fro  symonye  &  heresie  in  pis  poynt?  neij^er  goddis  lawe  ne 

tbe^co^untry^to  reson,  ne  good  conscience.  &  hou  myche  gold  gop 

purchasynge  of  benefices  iw-to  ^'aliens 
hondis,  &  hou  moche  is  jouen  priuely  to  men  in  pe  lond,  late 
pe  kyng  &  his  witti  conseil  enquere,  &  pei  schal  fynde  many 
pousand  pouwdis:  &  late  alle  pat  helpe  pe  comunes  in  pis 
grete  talliage,  &  late  alle  clerkis  be  warnyd  &  charged  ^by  pe 

should  h^fOT^  ^  ^  lordes  of  pe  rewme  ^  p^^t  pei  don  no  more  symonye 

bidden  under  for  benefices,  vp  peyne  of  lesynge  of  here  benefices  &  prison- 
severe  penalties.  ’fSTJ  j  n  r 

ynge  &  exilynge ;  sip  pis  symonye  makip  hem  chef  heretikis 


as  here  owene  lawe  seip  plenerly,  &  pat  pei  may  not  be  sauyd 
but  pf  pei  forsake  pe  benefice  geten  bi  symonye,  and  alle  here 
fautours  &  consentours  to  pis  symonye  rennen  in  pe  same 
dampnacion  as  goddis  lawe  &  mannws  witnessen. 


Capitulum  S”"- 

Wayward  curates  pe  pridde  defaute  of  weiward  curatis  pat  pei  ben  auwgelis 
formed  into  of  helle  &  bew  sathanas  transfigurid  in-io  an  auwgel  of  li;t  to® 

angels  of  light ;  •  ‘  . 

lede  men  queyntely  to  helle ;  for  in-stede  of  trewe  techynge  ' 
do  not  preach  of  cnstis  gospel  pei  ben  doumbe,  or  elles  teller  lesyngis  of  ‘ 

Christ’s  gospel;  ...  ^ 

mewnys  tradicions  for  pride  &  coueitise  of  worldly  goodis ;  &  ; 
for  ensaumple  of  good  lif  pei  sclauwdren  here  parischenys  1 

^  blent  A  A.  ^  falser  X.  3_3  omitted  X.  omitted  A  A.  ®  and  A  A.  \ 


Cfap.  IV.] 


145 


A 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 

many  weies  bi  ensaumple  of  pride,  enuye,  coueitise  &  vnre-  set  bad  examples; 

sonable  vengau;^ce,  so  cruely  cursynge  for  tifes  &  euyl  curse  for  tithes, 

CTistomes  ;  &  for  ensaumple  of  holy  deuocion  &  deuout  preiere 

&  werkis  of  mercj  Jiei  techen  iw-dede  ydelnesse,  glotonye, 

dronkenesse  &  lecberie,  &  meyntenynge  of  j^es  synnes  &  many 

moo.  Tor  si]?  pr^stis  hen  clepid  auwgelis  in  holy  writt,  &  }»es  Maiachiii.  7. 

curatis  bryngen  not  message  of  god  but  of  J^e  fend,  as  here 

wickid  lif  scewi]?,^  j^ei  ben  not  auwgelis  of  god  but  auwgelis  of 

]>e  fend;  &  ]7e  trewe  clerk  robert  grosted  writij?  to  J^e  pope  Grosted. 

lat  curatis  ben  sathanas  tr^tnsfigwrid  in-to  au77gel  of  li^t  for 

]?ei  prechen  ^  not  cristis  gospel  bi  word  &  good  lif,  ]70uj  j^ei 

diden  no  more  synne®;  and*  si|»  seynt  petir  was  clepid  sathanas  st.  Peter  called 

of  crist,  as  j^e  gospel  telli];,  for  he  was  contrarie  to  goddis  Matt.’xvi.  23. 

wille  &  sauourid  not  heuenly  ]iingis,  wel  ben  ]7es  euele 

curatis  clepid  sathanas,  si]?  ]iei  ben  more  contrarie  to  goddis 

wille  &  sauouren  less  gostly  Jingis  &  sauynge  of  cristene 

soulis. 


Qdjpitulum  4'”- 

pe  fourjie  errowr ;  }at  }>ei  chargen  more  statutis  of  synful 

men  moste  resonable  lawe  of  god  almyjtty ;  for  j^ei  God’s. 

dreden  more  |>e  popis  lawe  &  statutis  maad  of  bischopis  &  ®  of 

ojiere®  officeris  jian  j^e  noble  lawe  of  the  gospel,  &  herefore 

bei  han  many  grete  bokis  &  costy  of  mannws  lawe  &  studien  They  have  law 
^  ..7  0  j  ^  ^  ^  books  and  study 

hem  faste.  But  fewe  curatis  hauibe  bible  &  exposiciouns  ®  of  them,  but  few 

•’  priests  have  the 

]7e  gospelis,  ^  &  litel  studien  on  hem  &  lesse  donne  after  hem. 

But  wolde  god  jiat  euery  parische  chirche  in  j^is®  lond  hadde 
a  good  bible  &  good  expositouris  on  ]>e  gospellis,  &  Ji^t  \e 
pr^stis  studiende®  hem  wel  &  tau^ten  trewely  j^e  '^'gospel  &  *[p.  125MS.] 
goddis  hestis  to  Je  peple  ;  for  \anae  schulde  good  lif  regne,  & 
reste  &  pees  &  charite ;  &  synne  &  falsnesse  putt  a  bak.  god 
brynge  J^is  ende  to  his  peple.  amen.*® 

t  schewi]?  AA.  ^  techen  AA.  ^  omitted  X.  *  in  X. 

5-®  her  AA.  ®  expositours  X.  ’^-7  omitted  AA. 

®  A  A.  inserts  werld.  ®  studien  AA.  omitted  X. 


10 


]46 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  V. 


Lawsuits  for 
tithes. 


Summon  men 
and  take  their 
goods, 

or  curse  them, 


and  then  put 
them  in  prison. 


Contrary  to 
Christ’s  example. 


Luke  ix.  55. 
1  Peter  iii.  9. 
Rom.  xii.  21. 


Curates  do  r  ot 
love  their  sub¬ 
jects’  souls  when 
they  will  give 
them  to  the  de'vil 
for  fourpence. 


The  people 
should  insist  as 
much  on  curates 
doing  their  work. 


Csipitulum.  S”"- 

pe  fyuejjG  defaute;  j^at  )?ei  hauwten^  strif  &  plee  &  ge;^dren 
enuye  &  hate  among  lewed  men  for  tyj’es,  whawne  j^ei  don  not 
here  office  ajenward  ;  for  now  j^ei  leuen  prechywge  of 
gospel  &  crien  faste  aftir  tyj^es,  &  somonen  men  to  chapitre 
&  hi  fors  taken  here  goodis,  &  ellis  cnrsen  hem  seuene  fote 
abone  ]7e  erj^e  &  seuene  foot  wij^-iwne  ]7e  her]7e  &  seuene  fote 
on  eche  side ;  &  afterward  drawen  mew  to  prison,  as  ]?ei 
weren  kyngis  &  emperowrs  of  mennws  bodies  &  catel,  & 
for^eten  clenly  j^e  mekenesse  &  ]?e  pacience  of  crist  &  his 
apostlis,  hou  j^ei  curseden  not  for  ty]7es  whawne  mew  wolden 
neij»er  ^eue  hem  mete  ne  drynk  ne  herbwre.  But  crist 
hlamyd  his  apostlis  whawne  ]?ei  wolden  axe  suche  vengauwce, 
as  fe  gospel  of  seynt  luk  teche]?,  &  seynt  petir  hidij?  blisse 
oJ>^re  men,  ^e  here  enemis,  &  not  haue  wille  to  curse,  &  poul 
teche]?  pat  we  schulden  not  do  euele  for  euyl,  But  ouer 
come  an  euyl  dede  hi  good  doynge  ajen.  Lord,  hou  louen 
]7es  curatis  here  sugetis  soulis  pat  wolen  for  foure  pens 
bitake  hem  hodi  &  soule  to  pe  fend,  ^e,  whawne  j^ei  may 
not  paie  for  verray^  poU(9rt,  &  whawne  ]7ei  don  not  here 
gostly  office ;  &  j^anne  pe  curatis  hen  more  cursed  of  god  for 
wi]7drawynge  of  techynge  iw  word,  in^  dede,  iw  good  en- 
saumple  j^awne  j^e  sugetis  wi]?drawynge  tijjes  &  otfryngis 
whawne  j^ei  don  wel  here  gostly  office.  &  wold  god  pat  ^  pe 
peple  wolde  axe  as  faste  of  j^e  curatis  gostly  office,  pat  j^ei 
ben  more  holden  to  paie,  as  pe  curatis  axen  dymes  &  offryngis, 
&  pe  curat  loue]?  more  his  owene  worldly  good  j^an  his 
sugetis  soule  ®  pat  wole  brynge  his  parischen  out  of  cherite 
&  pacience  &  coste  ten  mark  or  twenti  for  a  cause  of  fre 
pens  or  foure. 


Qdipitulum  6"”* 

Curates  set  an  ex-  pQ  gixte  defaute ;  pat  tei  techen  here  parischens  hi  here 

ample  of  world-  ^  ^  * 

linep  to  their  dedis  and  lif:  bat  is  a  hok  to  here  sugetis,  to  loue  &  seke 

flock.  '  0  7 

^  AA  inserts  is.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  &  X. 

^  omitted  AA.  s  x  inserts  &. 


Chap.  VII.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


147 


worldly  glorye  &  to  reckon  noujt  ^  of  heuenely  Jingis ; 
for  Jei  maken  hew  self  bisy  ni^t  &  day  to  geten  worldely 
avau^^semewtis  &  here  owene  worschipe  &  dignyte  in  j^is 
world  and’^  plede^  &  st[r]yuen  j^^rfore,  &  helden^  it  grete 
ri^twissnesse  to  holder  fort  &  meyntene  a  poynt  of  worldly  They  strive  for 

^  X  J  ^  worldly  privi- 

priuylegie  &  dignyte ;  but  aboute  gostly  dignite  &  hi^e  degre 

of  heuenly  blisse  j^ei  wolen  not  st[r]yue  a^enst  gostly 

ennemys ;  for  J>ei  stryuew  not  who  schal  be  most  meke 

most  wilful  pore  &  most  bisi  in  opyn  pr^chyuge  &  pnuey  “ost. 

couwseilynge  hou  men  schal  conquere  heuene,  as  dide  crist 

&  his  apostlis,  but  restew  as  mold-warpis  in  wrotynge  of  They  are  like 

•  moles 

worldly  worschipe  &  er]7ely  goodis,  as  ]70u^  j^ere  were  no  lif 

but  only  iw  J^is  wrecchid  world ;  &  j^us  where  ]7ei  schuldew 

lede  here  parischenys  to  heuene  bi  trewe  techynge  &  holy 

ensauwple  &  gret  desir  of  heuenely  byn^es,  bei  ledew  hem  to  lead  their  parish- 

helle  ward  bi  cwrsede  ensaumple  of  pride,  coueitise  &  euyl 

techynge  ^Ho  sette  here  lykynge  endeles  iw  ioie  &  worschipe  of  *Cp-  i26  ms.] 

Jis  wrecchid  world. 


(^ixpitulum  7”** 

pe  seuen]7e  errowr ;  jiat  J^ei  techen  synful  men  to  bie  helle 

ful  dere  &  not  to  come  to  heuene  \at  is  profred  hem  for 

litel  cost;  for  bei  techen  cristen  men  to  sufre  moche  cold,  They  teach  Chris- 

tian  men  to  war, 

hungwr  &  jurist  &  moche  wakynge  &  dispisynge  &  betynge  for 

to  gete  worldly  honowr  &  a  litel  drit  bi  fals  werrynge  out  of 

charite ;  &  ^if  ]7ei  brywgen  hem  moche  gold  j^ei  assoilen  hem 

lijtly  &  maken  hem  siker  bi  here  preieris  &  grauwten  hem 

goddis  blissynge,  but  )>ei  techew  not  hou  here  parischenys  instead  of  howto 

schulden  dispose  hem  to  resceyue  ^iftis  of  j^e  holy  gost  & 

kepe  condicions  of  charite,  doynge  trew]7e  &  good  cowscience 

to  eche  man  boj^e  pore  &  riche  ;  &  jif  ]?ei  ben  pore  bi  aduen- 

ture  of  world  or  wilfully  bi  drede  of  synne,  fei  dispisen  Despise  the  poor, 

hem  &  settew  hem  at  nou^t  and  seyn  ]?ei  ben  cursed  for  J^ei 

han  not  moche  muk ;  &  ^if  |>ei  han  mochel  worldly  catel  flatter  the 


^  omitted  X. 


2  inX. 


2  horden  X. 


148 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  VII. 


geten  wi|>  false  oj^is,  false  weijtis,  &  o]7(?re  disceitis,  j^ei 
preisen  hem  &  b[l]isse^  hem  &  seyn  god  is  wi]?  hem  ^  & 
blisse]?  hem.^ 


Q/difitulum 

tSie^\ingdom  of  defaute ;  ]7ei  shitten  Je  kyngdom  of  heuene  hi- 

^eaven  against  men,  &  neij^dr  gon  in  hem  self  ne  suffren  o]>ere  men 
Matt,  xxiii.  13.  entren ;  for  j^ei  shitten  holy  writt,  as  j>e  gospel  &  com- 
auwdemewtis  &  condic[i]ownes  of  charite  J^at  ben  clepid  Je 
kyngdom  of  heuene,  hi  here  false  newe  lawis  &  euyl  glosynge 
They  will  not  &  euyl  techynge  ;  for  neltdr  hei  wolen  lerne  hem  self  ne 

teach  holy  writ,  j  j  c?  /  / 

nor  let  others  techen  holv  writt,  ne  sutfre  ob^re  men  to  don  it  leste  here 
owene  synne  &  ypocrisie  be  knowen  &  here  lustful  lit  wi]i- 
drawen.  &  ]7us  Jiei  closen  cristis  lif  &  his  apostlis  fro  j^e 
comune  peple  hi  keies  of  anif^cnstis  iuridiccion  &  censures, 
&  maken  hem  not  so  hardy  to  seye  a  treuj^e  of  holi  writt 
a^enst  here  cursed  lif,  for  schal  he  holden  detraccion  & 
Theymakethe  enuve  &  a^enst  charite :  &  herfoie  hei  make  he  peple  to  sue 
their  statutes,  here  techynge  &  here  statutis  &  customes  &  to  leue  goddis 
to  hell.  techynge,  &  herbi  leden  hem  blyndly  in-to  belle  ;  &  j^us 

closen  ]7e  kyngdom  of  heuene  fro  hem  &  leden  hem  to  belle  hi 
here  blynde  ypocrisie  &  coueityse,  as  crist  seij  hym  self.^ 


Capitulum  9^* 

They  waste  poor  pe  neyfnlhe  errowr ;  hat  hei  wastes  pore  mennws  goode  in 

men’s  goods  in  _ 

pompandluxury,  ryche  pellure  &  costy  clojiis  &  worldly  aray,  as  festis  of 
ryche  men  &  glotonye  &  dronkenesse  &  lecherie  sumtymes, 
for  ]7ei  passen  grete  men  in  here  gaye  pellure  &  precious 
clofis  &'wast  festis  &  tatrid  squeyeres  &  o\erQ  meyne,  \at 
semen  rajidre  turmentowrs  jian  cnstene  men  ;  &  he  \at 
wast^  most  of  pore  mewnws  liflode  is  holden  most  worjii 

without  thinking  &  niost  uoble  man  of  holy  chirche.  litel  h^nke  hei  hou 

of  the  labour  by 

which  they  were  sore  pore  mew  t^diueilen  &  spend en  here  flesch  blood 

earned.  ^  ^ 

*[p.  127  MS.]  aboute  Je  goddis  Jiei  wasten  so  nedeles ;  &  hou  seynt 


omitted  AA. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  waste]?  AA. 


Chap.  XI.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


149 


bernard  erie]? :  what  euere  ])mg  curatis  holden  of  auterage  Bernard. 

oner  a  sympule  liflode  &  cloj^inge  it  nys  not  here  but  o]>erG 

memius,  &  it  is  J’efte  &  raueyne  &  sacrdegie ;  &  hou  euyl  it 

is  to  suffre  pore  men  perische  for  hmigme  &  ]7riste  &  cold,  & 

here  curatis  han  fatte  hors  with  gaye  sadlis  &  bridelis.  hou  Their  fat  h^opes 

°  •'  and  gay  saddles. 

resonable  is  j^is  poynt  ]?at  ]?g  procuratour  of  pore  men  schal  Poor  inen^s  pro^ 
haue  so  riche  pelure  &  esy  fare  of  body,  bo]?  of  mete  &  drynk  than^their  prin- 
&  reste,  &  pore  men  whos  ]?es  goddis  \ien  schulle?i  haue  so 
moche  peyne  &  payn  defaute. 

Q2ipitulum  10”^- 

pe  tenhe  defaute;  hat  hei  hauraten  lordis  courtis  &  ben  They  hang  about 

^  lords’  courts  and 

occupied  in  worldly  office  &  don  not  here  cure  to  here  busy  themselves 

with  secular 

parischenys,  &  ^it  ]?ei  taken  mo  worldly  goodis  \ertoTe  j^an  office. 

crist  &  his  apostlis.  And  c^rtis  ]?is  is  gret  trt^itere,  for  what 

man  druste  vndertake  to  kepe  men  biseged  in  a  feble  castel 

wi]?  many  stronge  enemy s,  &  ]?awne  fle  in- to  an  hogherdis 

office  &  lete  enemys  take  ]?is  castel  &  distroie  it?^  were  not 

]?is  opyn  treson,  and  ^is  kepere  gilty  of  he  castel  lesynge  This  is  treason 

.  .  to  God. 

&  alle  men  ]ier-inn.e  ?  So  it  is  of  ]?es  curatis  &  cristene 
soulis  of  whiche  j?ei  taken  cure,  ]7at  ben  bisegid  wi]?^  fendis, 
wha^^ne  pei  leuen  hem  vnkept  &  bisien  hem  in  worldly  office 
&  lordis  courtis.  whi  ben  not  ]?es  lordis  pat  ]?us  holden  The  lords  who 

....  .  ,  „  .  -  employ  them  are 

curatis  in  here  courtis  &  worldly  offices  traitowrs  to  god  traitors  too. 
almy^tty,  si]?  ]?ei  drawen  ’awey  his  chef  knyttis  fro  here 
gostly  bataile  whawne  &  where  J’ei  were?^  most  nedful.  for 
]?is  seruyce  pat  lordis  han  of  curatis  aboute?^  worldly  office 
cristene  soulis  ben  vntau^t,  &  woluys  of  belle  stranglen  hem 
&  encombren  hem  in  endles  dispeir. 

Q^ipitulum  11”*- 

pe  eleuenhe  exiour ;  ht^t  hei  chargen  more  wrongful  Care  more  for 
y*  j  j  o  o  men’s  commands 

mauwdemewtis  of  synful  men  pan  pe  most  rijtful  comauwde-  than  for  God’s. 
me?^tis  of  god  ;  for  ^if  pe  pope  or  bischop  sende  a  letter 


^  omitted  X. 


2  bi  AA. 


150 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  XI. 


They  welcome  a  for  to  rescevuG  a  p^?rdoner  to  disceyue  le  peple  bi 

cheating  par-  ini  ,  i  i  jvnii.  A 

doner  with  the  grauwt  01  ^  many  bousand  ^eer  to  pt^rdon,  he  schai  be  sped 

pope’s  letter, 

hut  forbid  a  true  algatis ;  but  ]>er  come  ony  trewe  man  to  preche  frely  & 

j)r  eaclier , 

trewely  ]>e  gospel,  he  schai  be  lettid  for  wrongful  comauwde- 
ment  of  a  synful  man.  &  |»us  j^ei  dreden  more  synful  men 
j^an  god  almy^tty,  sij?  ^ei  putten  goddis  comauwdemewt  &  his 
ri^tful  wille  bihynde  &  putten  a  synful  mann«^s  wille  &  wrong 
comauwdement  bifore.  &  jjus  for  here  owene  worldly  profit 
thefrpeSfrom  ^  bodely  aysG  fei  stoppen  here  parischenys  fro  herynge  of 
gQ(j(jig  lawe,  J’at  is  fode  of  soule,  &  leden  hem  blyndly  to 
helle;  &  j^es  ben  euele  fadris  ]?at  ]?us  cruelly  enfamynen  here 
sugetis  soulis  &  dryuew  hem  to  dampnacion  for  loue  of 
worldly  muk  or  bodily  ayse,  or  for  drede  of  wrecchid 
an^«cristis  j>at  ben  goddis  trtjitours  &  his  peplis. 


hearing 
law. 


They  despise 
preaching, 

*[p.  128  MS.] 

tmVtions  g^^spel,  &  ]7ei  wolen  lerne  bisily  mennus  tr<?dicions  for 

worldly  wynnynge,  but  not  j^e  gospel  j^at  crist  god  &  man 
tau^te  &  comauwdid  curatis  to  techen  )»at  to  lif  &  dej?;  & 
Curtis  as  j^ei  louen  to  studie,  kepe  &  teche  j^e  word  ^  of  synful 
men  bifore  the  word  of  god,  so  ])ei  louen  synful  men  or  pride 
or  worldly  drit  j>at  come]?  of  mennws  lawe  more  almyjtty 
god  &  ]?e  blisse  of  heuene ;  &  C(5rtis  herfore  ]?ei  ben  traitours 
of  god  &  cheuenteynes  in  ]?e  fendis  boost  to  lede  mew  in¬ 
to  helle. 


Capitulum  12”^’ 

pe  twelve  errowr;  \at  fei  dispisew  J?e  principal  office 
comauwdid  of  "^'god  to  curatis,  &  bisen  hem  aboute  nouelries 
maad  of  synful  men ;  for  comuwly  ]?ei  kuwnen  not  pr(9che 


Csipitulum  13'”- 

n^ate^mo^^or  ]?rittene  errowr ;  ]?ei  cursew  here  gostly  children  more 

money  than  for  gf  worldly  catel  .]?an  for  brekynge  of  goddis  hestis. 

Go“?i™dS  fouj  a  man  breke  opynly  J?e  hestis  of  god,  lyuynge  iw 

be  summoned, 

^  omitted  X.  2  omitted  X.  2  -^yorld  X. 


:hap.  XIV.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


151 


pride,  in  false  swerynge,^  in  opyn  brekynge  of  ]?e  holy  day, 
he  schal  not  he  sor^pned  ne  ponysched  ne  cursed  bi  hem. 

But  lif  a  mm  be  bihynde  of  tiles  &  ol^re  offrvngis  &  but  if  he  is  behind 

cust[u]mes  maad  of  synful  men,  he  schal  be  sompned,  and^curs^'^”^^'^ 
ponyschid  &  cursed,  ^e  bou^  he  may  not  lyue  out  of  o^^re  though  be  can- 

TT.  not  atford  to  pay. 

mennus  dette  &  fynde  his  wit  &  his  children  bi  goddis 
comauwdemewt ;  &  j^us  j^ei  seken  more  J^ere^  owene  worschipe 
&  wynnynge  \m  ]>e  worschipe  of  god  &  sauynge  of  cristene 
soulis ;  &  lus  lei  worschipen  false  goddis  for  here  false 
coueitise.  wonder  it  is  pat  j^es  curatis  cursen  so  sore  for  here 
owene  cause  where  j^ei  schulden  be  pacient  as  crist  was  ®  and 
hise  apostlis  ^ ;  &  so  litel  reckon  of  dispit  don  to  god  where 
lei  schulden  taken  al  resonable  vengaui^^ce.^ 


Q2ipitulum  1 4'”- 

_pe  fourtenle  ;  lei  taken  here  worldly  myrle,  haukynge  &  They  waste 

money  in  bawk- 

huntynge  &  ol^re  vanytes  doynge,  &  suiiren  woluys  of  helle  ing  and  bunting. 

stranglen  mennws  soulis  bi  many  cursed  synnes.  lei  schulden 

drawe  men  fro  worldly  vanytes  &  techen  hew  le  pmlis  of  lis 

lif  &  to  lenke  on  here  del  day,  &  be  myrrowr  to  hew  to 

morne  for  here  synnes  &  opere  mennws  &  for  longe  tariynge 

of  heueneley  blisse,  &  laste  in  holy  preieris  &  trewe  techynge 

of  le  gospel  and  aspiynge  le  fendis  cautelis,  &  warne 

cristene  men  of  hem.  But  now  le  more  lat  a  curat’ hal  of 

pore  mennys  goodis,  le  more  comur-ly  he  wastil  in  costy 

fedynge  of  houndis  &  haukis,  &  suffre  pore  men  haue  grete 

defaute  of  mete  &  drynk  &  cloil ;  but  hou  schullen  lei 

answere  to  crist  at  le  dredful  day  of  dom,  lat  lus  holder  pore 

menn^^s  Mode  fro  hem  &  wasten  it  in  such  worldly  vanyte  ? 

certis  lei  schullen  be  dawpnyd  for  mansleeris  bole  of  body  &  They  will  be 

soule,  &  for  sleeris  of  crist  wil  le  wickid  iewis  pat  nayleden  murderers. 

hiw  on  le  cros. 

^  werynge  X.  ^  here  AA.  omitted  X. 

^  In  AA  this  last  clause  runs  “  and  where  J^at  ))ei  shulden  take  suche 
unresonable  vengeaunce.” 


152 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  XV. 


Q^ipitulum  15”*’ 


They  haunt 
taverns, 


^[p.  129  MS.] 


play  at  tables, 
chess  and  hazard; 


get  drunk. 


He  that  goes 
most  to  taverns 
is  most  praised 
for  liberality. 


pe  feftenjie;  fat  fei  haiiwteii  tauernes  out  of  mesure  & 
stiren  lewid  men  to  dronkenesse,  ydelnesse  &  cwrsed  swerynge 
and  ^  chydynge  &  fijttynge ;  for  fei  wolen  not  traueilen  faste 
in  here  gostly  office  aft<9r  crist  &  his  apostlis,  ^  fat  ful  bisili 
haf  tau^t  hem^ ;  ferfore  fei  fallen  to  nyse  pleies,  at  tables, 
chees  &  hasard,  &  heten  f  e  stretis,  &  sitten  at  f  e  tauerne  til 
fei  ban  lost  here  witt,  &  fan  chiden  &  stryuen  &  fijten  suw- 
tyme,  &  sumtyme  neif^r  ban  eije  ne  tonge  ne  bond  ne  foot  to 
helpe  hem  self  for  dronkenesse,  &  be  f  is  ensaumple  fe  lewed 
peple  wenef  fat  dronkenesse  ^  is  no  synne  ;  but  he  fat  wastif 
most  pore  mewnys  goodis  at  tauernes,  makynge  hym  self  & 
of^re  mew  drowken,  is  most  preised  of  nobleie  &  curtesie  & 
goodnesse  &  largenesse  &  worf  inesse  ^  of  f  e  world.^  lord, 
bou  wel  ben  fes  dronken  curatis  disposid  to  serue  god  & 
mynystre  sacramentis,  &  namely  of  confession  in  tyme  of  def , 
to  here  sugetis. 


C^ipitulum  16”*- 

Will  not  commn-  pe  sixtenf  e ;  fei  wolen  not  ^eue  f  e  sacramentis  of  f  e  aut^r, 

nicate  those  who  ■*  j^j  /  j  j  i 

tithes  cristis  body,  to  here  paryscbenys,  but  ^if  fei  paied  here 

or  have  not  con-  tifes  &  offryngis,  &  but  ^if  fei  ban  paied  money  to  a  worldly 

crusade.  prest  to  slee  cristene  men.  &  ^if  men  douten  of  fis,  late  hem 

Spencer’s  crusade  enouere  fe  sofe  bou  it  was  wbanne  fe  biscbop  of  norwich 
in  Flanders.  .  ^  ^  ^ 

went  iw-to  flauwdris,  &  killed  hem  hi  many  f  ousandis  &  made 
hem  oure  enemys.  litel  reckon  fes  curatis  in  what  deuocion 
&  charite  here  pariscbenys  resceyuen  cnstis  body,  wbanne 
fei  openly  taken  hem  vp  fro  goddis  ^  bord,  &  stiren  hem  to 
vnpacience  &  enuye  &  bate  for  a  litel  muk  fat  fei  cbalengen 
to  hem  self. 


omitted  X.  2  added  by  a  later  hand  in  X. 

3-3  These  words,  omitted  in  X,  are  added  as  a  correction  in  AA. 
*  omitted  AA. 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


153 


Capitulum  IT"*' 

pe  seuentenj^e ;  ben  blynde  lederis  ledynge  blynde  ^ 
peple  to  synne  bi  here  euyl  ensanmple  &  fals  disceit  in 
techynge,  &  at  be  laste  iw-to  helle :  for  bei  knwnen  not  They  will  take 

°  ’  -•  /  ^  ^  .  benefices  _  with- 

0  poynt  of  ]7e  gospel  ne  whiten  what  j^ei  reden,  pt  \ei  wolen 
take  a  fat  benefice  wi]?  cure  of  mannws  soule ;  &  neij^^r 
kuwnen  reule  here  owene  sonle  ne  opere  mennys,  ne  wolen 
spedly  lerne  ne  sufifre  ob^^e  men  to  teche  here  parischenys  and  stop  other 

-*  _  ^  ...  men  from  preach- 

trewly  &  frely  j^e  gospel  &  goddis  hestis.  And  pt  j^ei  crien  ing. 
fast  bat  b®  peple  schal  doo  aft^r  hem,  whewne  bd  knowe  not 
be  rijtte  weie  to  heuene ;  &  so  bei  leden  symple  peple  in 
errowr  &  synne  whawne  ]>e  peple  weneb  for^  to  do  wel,  & 
make?^  ])e  peple  to  demen  good  euyl  &  euyl  good,  &  to  wende 
be  weie  to  helle  whawne  bei  wenen  to  goo  to  heuene. 


Capitulum  18"^* 


pe  eijtenb  ;  b®i  prophetis,  techiwge  fals  crony clis  & 

fablis  to  colour  here  worldly  lif  berby,  &  leuen  ]>e  trewe 
gospel  of  ihu  crist ;  for  bei  lonen  welle  to  telle  hou  bis  seynt 
^  or  bis  ®  lynede  in  gay  &  costy  clobis  &  worldly  aray,  ^  &  pt 
is  a  grete  seynt.^  But  bei  leuen  to  teche  be  grete  penau;^ce 
&  sorow  b<^t  bei  diden  aft^r  ward,  for  which  bei  ®  pleseden 
god  &  not  for  here  worldly  lif,  &  b^s  bei  make  be  peple  to  ® 
wene  b^t  worldly  lif  of  pr<9stis  &  veyn  cost  of  hem  &  waste 
of  pore  mennws  goodis  plesib  god  &  is’’’  v<srtuous  lif,  apnst 
cristis  lif  &  his  techynge  &  his  apostlis  also ;  &  b®i  techen 
also  hou  for  curs  of  a  synful  man  be  creature  of  god,  as  a 
loof,  \a\>  trespasid  not,  was  mowlid  &  fordon,  &  make  b® 
peple  bileue  ^b^^  b^^  ^  goode  cristene  man  kepy;^ge  welle  goddis 
hestis  schal  be  da^wpnyd  for  a  wrongful  curs  of  a  worldly 
pmt,  pdit  in  caas  is  a  daw^pnyd  fend,  &  b^s  bei  bryngen  be 


They  tell 
chronicles  and 
fables  when  they 
preach, 
libelling  the 
saints. 


They  relate  false 
miracles. 


*[p.  130  MS.] 

They  teach  that 
a  good  man  may 
be  damned  by  ex- 
communication. 


^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 

X  reads  &  fit  it  is  a  grete  synne. 

5  cut  away  from  margin  in  X.  ®  omitted  X. 


3-3  omitted  AA, 
’  his  X. 


154 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  XVIII. 


peple  out  of^  cristene  fei]?  bi  here  false  crony clis  &  ^here  sotele* 
fablis.  Eor  crist  seij?  ]?at  men  scbullen  be  blissed  of  god 
vt^bawne  men  scbullen  curse  bem  &  pursue  bem  &  seie  alle 
euyl  ajenst  bem  falsly  for  ])e  loue  of  crist  &  bis  trew]7e.  And 
]7e  peple  bileue]?  ]?e  contr^?rie  of  ]?is  tecbynge  of  crist  bi  j^is 
fablis  &  seyntis  dedis,  or  lesyngis  putt  on  seyntis. 


Q2ipitulum  19”*‘ 


They  go.  shares 
■with  pardoners, 
■who  deceive  the 
people 


■with  stolen  bulls 
and  false  relics ; 


hut  they  bring 
the  la-w  to  bear 
against  an  honest 
priest. 


rhe  pardoner 
?ets[  f- money  "out 
poor  people, 


and  sends  it 
abroad. 


The  people  are 
made  bold  to  re¬ 
main  in  sin. 


pe  neyntenjie;  fei  assenten  to  pardoners  disceyuynge  fe 
peple  in  fei]?  &  cbarite  &  worldly  goodis  for  to  bane  part  of 
bere  gederynge,  &  letten  prestis  to  pr^cbe  ]>e  gospel  for  drede 
laste  bere  synne  &  ypocresie  be  knowen  &  stoppid  ;  for 
wbawne  }>ere  come]?  a  pardoner  wi]?  stollen  bullis  &  false 
relekis,  grauntynge  mo  jeris  of  pardo?^  ]?an  comen  bifore 
domes  day  for  jeuynge  of  worldly  catel  to  ricbe  placis  where 
is  no  nede,  be  scbal  be  sped  &  resceyued  of  curatis  for  to 
baue  part  of  ]?at  be  geti]?  ;  but  a  pr^ste  ]?at  wole  telle  ]>e 
trew]?e  to  alle  men  wi]?-outew  glosynge  &  frely  wi]?-outen 
beggynge  of  ]?e  pore  peple,  be  scbal  be  lettid  bi  sotil 
cauyllacions  of  mannws  lawe,  for  drede  last  be  toucbe  ]?e  sore 
of  bere  conscience  &  cursed  lif.  &  ]?i's  pardoner  scballe  telle 
of  more  power  ]?an  eu^re  crist  grauntid  to  petir  or  poul  or 
ony  apostle,  to  drawe  'pe  almes  fro  pore  bedrede  nei^eboris 
psit  ben  knowe?^  feble  &  pore,  &  to  gete  it  to  bem  self  & 
wasten  it  ^ful  synfulli^  in  ydelnesse  &  glotonye  &  lecberie, 
&  senden  gold  out  of  oure  lond  to  ricbe  lordis  &  bousis  where 
is  no  nede  &  make  oure  lond  pore  by  many  sotile  ^  weies ;  & 
here  bi  ]?e  peple  is  more  bold  to  ®lien  stille  ®  in  her®  synne,  & 
wene]?  not  to  baue  as  mycbe  fank  &  reward  of  crist  for  to 
do  here  almes  to  pore  feble  men,  as  crist  biddij?  in  pe  gospel, 
as  whawne  ]?ei  don  bere  almes  to  riche  bousis  aftir  grau/^t 
of  synful  foolis ;  &  this  is  opyn  errowr  ajenst  cristene  fei]?. 


^  omitted  X. 

^  omitted  X. 

’  omitted  AA. 


2-2  omitted  X. 
5-5  lyue  X. 


3-2  omitted  X. 
5  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XXII.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


155 


Qdi'pitulum  2 O'”' 

pe  twenti]?e ;  'pat  a  pr^st  of  good  lif  &  deuout  &  trewe 
pr^’chour  of  goddis  lawe  is  dispised,  hatid  &  pursued  of  They  hate  good 

_  ^  priests  and  love 

worldly  curatis,  &  a  fals  pr(9st  of  worldly  lif  &  aray  bad  ones; 

sulfren  men  wexe  roten  in  here  cursed  synne  is  louyd,  preised 

&  cherischid  among  ^such  synful  folis;^  for  J^ei  seyn  such  a 

good  pr(9st  is  ^  an  ydiot  and  ^  an  ypocrite  &  sclauwdri]?  men  of  they  call  a  good 

holy  chirche  &  letti]^  men  to  do  here  deuocion  to  holy  chirche ;  and  siand^er!^*^^ 

&  hi  here  dom  a  pr^st  pat  line]?  corny n  worldly  lif  &  stiri]? 

no  men  to  wraj?  hi®  reprouynge  hem  of  here  opyn  synnes 

do]?  moche  worschipe  to  holy  chirche  &  fencrescej?  mennw5 

deuocion ;  &  ]?us  for  here  coueitise  &  pride  trewe  pr(9stis  hen 

put  ahak  &  dispised,  &  ydel  prestis  &  worldly  he  preised  & 

cherischid,  &  ]7is  maki]?  many  men  slowe  in  good  lif  & 

pr^chynge  and  manye  '^to  loue  worldly  lif  &  ydelnesse  ^  &  *[p- i3i  ms.] 

vanyte.^ 


Capifulum.  21 


pQ,  on  and  twentehe ;  hei  hiden  &  meyntenen  her  synnes  &  vicious  curates 

^  ^  ^  hide  their  sins 

operQ  mennt^s  hi  proteccion  &  helpe  of  lordis,  pat  here 
souereyns  may  not  correcte  hem  ne  compelle  hem  to  resi¬ 
dence.  for  whawne  is®  a  vicious  curat  of  lecherie  or  of® 
vnkuwnynge  he  wole  haue  lettris  of  kyng  &  lordis  to  dwelle  and  get  letters 

^  ^  &  from  king  or 

in  here  courtis  in  worldly  offices  &  he  absent  fro  his  cure  ; 

hat  his  souereyn  schal  not  dore  correcte  him  for  drede  of  his  s®  that  their 

■*  *'  superiors  dare 

temp^raltees  &  wra]?]?e  of  lordis;  &  ]?us  lordis  hen  made  punish  them. 

schildis  of  synne  for  a  litel  money  or  worldly  s^ruyce  of 

wickid  curatis,  pat  rijtwisnesse  may  not  for]?  ’in  hervertuouse 

lyuynge.’ 


Capitulum  22'”- 


pe  two  &  twen[ti]]>e ;  pat  many  of  hem  ynder  colour  of 


lernynge  of  he  gospel  lerne  statutis  maade  of  synful  men  &  They  leam  men’s 

■*  statutes  instead 


hem  X. 
5  his  X. 


2-2  omitted  X. 
®  omitted  X. 


2  ]ie  X.  omitted  X. 

omitted  X. 


of  the  gospel. 


156 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  XXII. 


worldly  pr<9stis,  &  lyuen  \n  ydelnesse,  glotonye,  dronkenesse 
&  lecherie,  &  bew  eu^re  J^e  lengere  j^e  more  vnable.  Por 
When  beneficed,  wbawne  j^ei  ban  grete  benefices,  p^ranentwre  by  symonye,  & 
connen  not  teche  here  sugetis  to  sane  here  soulis,  &  doren  not 
holden  here  lemmannys  at  home  for  clamour  of  men,  j^ei  gon 
to  scole  &  fare^  wel  of  mete  &  drenk  &  reste  &  studyen  wi]? 
]>e  cuppe  &  ^  struwpatis ;  where  goode  pr^stis  tr^ueilen  faste 
to  lerne  goddis  lawe,  j^ei  gon  for  manere  to  cyuyle  or 
canon,  &  don  litel  good  \er  at  ^as  trewe  men  finken^ ;  &  \us 
]?ei  wasten  pore  mennws  liflode  in  hordom  &  glotonye,  & 
lernen  lorelschipe,  &  to  curse  cristene  men  for  here  goodis,  & 
^euen  to  here  sugettis  ensaumple  of  pride  &  coueitise  & 
glotonye  &  lecherie  &  ydelnesse. 


and  afraid  to  keep 
their  lemans  at 
home,  they  go  to 
the  university 
and  study  with 
the  cup  and 
strumpets, 


and  learn 
rascality. 


Capitulum  23.* 

ing^^The^uTe  ^  twenti|>e  ;  J^e  more  ku;^nynge  mm  of  hew^ 

their  knowledge  myspe^den  here  witt  &  kuwnynge  in  meyntenauwce  of 

synne,  as  of  pride  &  coueitise  of  clerkis  &  oppr^ssynge  of 
pore  parischenys  bi  wrong  customes  for  drede  of  plee  & 
censuris,  &  meyntenynge  false  cansis  in  constories  for  gold ; 
&  taken  pensions  of  lecherous  me^  &  wommen  for  ^  to  helpe 
hew  to  bafe  hem  in  here  synne  as  swyn  in  fen.  &  herby 
If  one  can  crack  }^q  F^t  Can  cracke  a  litil  latyn  in  constories  of  hebene  mennws 
Civil  or  .Canon  Jawe  &  worldlv  pr^stis  lawe  &  can  helpe  to  anoie  a  pore  man 

I.5JW  no  1C  nom  •/X  X  X 

bi  knackis  or  chapitris,  is  holden  a  noble  clerk  &  redy  &  wys, 
fouj  he  kuwne  not  rede  wel  a  vers  in  his  sauter  ne  vnd^r- 
stonden  a  comune  auctorite  of  holy  writt ;  &  siche  knackeris 
ben  as  proude  of  here  veyn  kuwnynge  as  lucifer,  &  setten  not 
bi  pore  mennws  knwnynge  in  goddis  lawe,  but  dispisen  hem  & 
goddis  lawe  as  jiouj  it  were  no  lawe,  &  comenden  here  owene 
lawe  &  hem  self  more  \djn  holy  writt  &  ihu  crist  &  his  apostlis 
^fat  so  blessidly  lyueden®;  &  Jis  makif  synne  &  falsnesse  to® 
regne,  &  fei]?  &  treufe  &  charite  be  defoulid  &  qnenchid. 


wise, 

though  he  can 
hardly  read  a 
verse  in  his 
Psalter. 


^  AA  inserts  here  viciouse. 

3  In  X  the  heading  of  this  chapter  is  omitted, 
omitted  X.  ®  omitted  X. 


2-2  omitted  X. 
^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XXV.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


157 


Q^pitulum  24.^ 

X)Q  foure  &  twentile:  ])ai  lei  maken  le  dene  lawe  of  god  They  put  the  law 

'  I  ^  J  i  J  of  God  under  the 

vnd^r  j>e  feet  of  an^«cnst  &  his  clerkis,  &  treu]7e  of  j^e  gospel  feet  of  Antichrist 

be  dampnyd  for  errowr  &  ignorauwce  of  worldly  clerkis ;  for 

les  worldly  clerkis  hat  lyuen  in  glotonye  &  studien  to  drynke  Worldly  clerks 

^  .  .  .  decide  on  points 

hei^e  wynes^  base  fisik  wi]?  strumpetis  pr^sumen  bi  here  of 

pride  to  be  domes  men  of  sotil  &  hei^e  mysterijs^  &  priue 

articlis  of  holy  writt,  &  blyndly  dampnen  treules  of  cristis  and  condemn  the 

’  J  J  r  j  truth  because  it 

gospel,  for  lei  be^  ajenst  here  worldly  lif  &  fleschly  lustis ;  is  against  them. 
&  les  blynde  bosardis  wolen  dampnen  trewe  men  jiat  techen 
trewely  &  frely  holy  writt  ajenst  here  synnes  to  be  heretikis, 

Por  no  maw  schnlde  here  goddis  lawe  tauwjt  bi  suche  trewe  They  will  not  let 

O  i.  others  preach, 

here  owne  trdiaicions  &  not  and  themselves 

preach  only  their 

]>Q  gospel ;  &  so  holy  writt  schal  be  owtlawid  or  oppr^ssid  bi  traditions, 
wronge  statntis  of  synful  mennys  makynge  ;  but  certis  alle 
crestene  men  schal  crie  out  on  ]ies  deuelis  blasphemyes  & 
cursed  heresies  of  an^mrist  &  his  worldly  fonned  clerkis. 


men,  &  jiei  hem  self  wole  prijche 


Capitulum  25'”’^ 

pe  fyue  &  twentibe  errowr  :  bei  chesen  newe  lawis  maad  of  They  choose  laws 

i  ’  /  made  of  men.  and 

synful  men  &  worldly  &  coueytise  prijstis  &  clerkis  to  reule  “e^®^t^the  laws 

pe  peple  bi  hem  as  most  nedful  &  best  lawis,  &  forsaken  pe 

p^rfiteste  lawe  of  j?e  gospel  &  pistlis  of  crist  &  his  apostlis, 

as  not  p^rfit  ne  fully  ynou?  ne  trewe ;  for  now  bebene  mennws  civil  and  Canon 

.  .  I  .  .  .  Law  are  read  in 

lawis  and  worldly  clerkis  statutis  ben  red  in  vnyuersitees,  &  the  Universities, 

curatis  lernen  hem  faste  wip  grete  desir,  studie  &  cost,  but  pe® 

lawe  of  god  is  litel  studied,  litel  costid  bcT  aboute,  &  lesse  hut  not  the  Bible, 

save  the  Old 

kept  &  tau^t ;  but  be  olde  testament  for  wynnyng  of  tybes  &  Testament  in 

.  .  .  ,  support  of  tithes. 

oiFryngis  is  swmwhat  practised;  &  pe  gospel  pat  techep ®  cristis 
mekenesse  &  wilful  pou^rt  &  bisi  traueilej  iw  pr^chynge  to 
saue  cristene  soulis,  for  it  constreynep  prestis  to  pis  holy  lif, 
is  litel  loued  &  studied  &  taujt  but  rapere  dispised  &  hyndrid 
&  maade  fals  bi’  speche  of  anU'cristis  clerkis.  &  iw  pis  pei 

^  23  X.  2  with  wyues  AA.  ®  mynysters  X.  ^  24  X. 

^  omitted  X.  ^  teckid  X.  AA  inserts  J^e  niciouse. 


158 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CERATES. 


[Chap.  XXV. 


Thus  they  say 
that  Christ  gave 
an  insufficient 
law. 


Christians  should 
reject  these  laws 
when  not  founded 
on  the  gospel. 


Gal.  i.  8. 


They  bid  their 
subjects  not 
judge  the  clergy 
either  for  works 
or  words. 

Christ  bade  men 
judge  him. 

John  vii.  24. 

John  X.  38. 

*[p.  133  MS.] 
John  xviii.  23, 


1  Cor.  X.  15. 


seyn  ]fat  crist  is  vnwytty,  out  of  charite  &  treu]7e,  si]?  he  ^af 
not  a  sufficient  lawe  &  ]>e  heste  for  reuelynge  of  his  peple,  & 
]?at  worldly  fonned  clerkis  of  sathanas  &  ant«cnst  hen  wittiere, 
trewere  &  in  more  charite  ]7an  ihu  crist,  si]?  here  lawes  ben 
betre  &  more  nedful  for  cristene  men  j^an  ]?o^  lawis  ]?at  crist 
himsilf made.  But  on  this  blasphemy e  heresie  schullen  alle 
cristene  men  crieh  out  &  take  fully  J>e  gospel  to  here  reule  ^  & 
hel]?e,^  &  not  sette  hi  ]?es  newe  lawis  ^maad  of  synful  wrecchis* 
but  in  also  moche  as  ]?ei  ben  grouwdid  in  holy  writt  expresly 
or  good  reson  &  trewe  conscience  &  charite ;  for  as  god  hi 
seynt  poul  techi]?,  who  eiiere  teche]?  op  ere  lawes  he  is  cursed 
of  god ;  ^e,  ]?ou^  he  were  an  angil  of  heuene ;  for  god  may 
not  make  o]>ere  lawis  ajenst  his  gospel  &  charite,  whi  schulde 
antffirist  &  his  clerkis  ? 

Qdipitulum  26”'-® 

_pe  sixe  and  twenti^e ;  pei  magnyfyen  hem  self  ahouen  crist 
god  &  man ;  for  pei  comauwden  here  sugetis  pat  J^ei  owen  not 
to  iuge  clerkis,  ne  here  opyn  werkis  ne  here  techynge.  But  do 
aftir  here  techynge,  he  it  trewe  he  it  fals.  But  oure  lord  ihu 
crist  comauwdid  his  enemys  to  deme  of  hym  a  rijtful  dom  & 
not  aftir  pe  face.  Also  oure  lord  ihu  bad  his  enemys  hileue 
to  his  werkis  ]?ou^  ]?ei  wolden  not  hileue  to  him,  &  bad  pat 
^'men  schulden  not  hileue  to  hym  ^if  he  dide  not  pe  werkis  of 
his  fadir.  ^  Also  crist  bad  to  his  enemys  pat  ]»ei®  schulde  here 
witnesse  of  euyl  ^if  he  had  spoken  euyle,  &  seynt  poul  biddi]> 
his  hereris  deme  pat  pat  ^  he  seide,  where  ]?es  worldly  foolis 
wolen  be  an^Aristis  more  maistris  pan  crist  god  &  man,  Si]> 
]?ei  wolen  not  be  demyd  &  amendid  bi  cristis  ®  peple  vnd(9r 
hem  of  -here  opyn  werkis  a^enst  goddis  hestis  ne  of  here  fals 
lesyngis  pat  ]?ei  techen  in  stede  of  cristis  gospel,  c^rtis  a 
more  blasphemye  ground  castid  neuere  sathanas  to  norische 
synne  of  clerkis  &  fals  disceit  in  techynge,  &  to  lede  blyndly 
cristene  soulis  to  helle. 

^  l^e  X.  2  omitted  X.  2_3  omitted  X.  omitted  X. 

®  25  X.  ®  he  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  cristene  AA. 


Chap.  XXVIII.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


159 


They  forbid  secu¬ 
lar  men  to  read 
the  gospel  in 
their  mother 
tongue. 

God  bids  every 
man  to  keep  his 
commandments 
before  him. 

Deut.  vi.  6. 

Ecclus.  vi.  37. 


I  Peter  iii.  15. 


Q^pitulum  27.^ 

pe  seuene  and  twenti]7e;  J^ei  bew  an^«cnstis  lettynge  cristene 
men  to  kuwne  here  bileue  &  speken  of  holy  writt ;  for  j^ei 
cn’en  opynly  j^at  seculer  men  schullen  not  entirmeten  hem  of 
le  gospel  to  rede  it  in  heir^  modir  tonge,  hut  heere^  her  gostly 
fadris  pri^che  &  do  aft^r  hem  in  alle  j^ingis ;  hut  j^is  is  ex- 
presly  ajenst  goddis  techynge.  Eor  god  comauwdi]?  generaly 
to  eche  lewid  man  l^ai  he  schal  haue  goddis  hestis  hi-fore  hym 
&  teche  hem  to  his  children  ^  &  also  to  hise  meyne,^  &  ^e  wise 
man  hiddi]?  euery  cristene  man  ]iat  alle  his  tellynge  be  in 
hestis  of  god  altherhijest,®  &  \at  he  haue  eu^re  more  in  mynde 
])Q  comauwderae^tis  of  god.  And  seynt  petir  hiddi]?  cristene 
men  he  redi  to  ^eue  reson  of  oure  feij?  &  ope  to  teche  eche 
man  ]7at  axit  it,  &  god  comauwdid  his  pri^stis  to  pr^che  j^e 
gospel  to  eche  man,  &  j^e  skille  is  for  alle  men  schulde7^  ku7^ne 
it  and  reule  here  lif  j^er  aftir.  lord,  whi  schulde  worldly  pr^stis 
forbede  seculer  men  to  speke  of  j^e  gospel  &  goddis  hestis,  si]? 
god  ^eue]7  hem  gret  witt  of  kynde  &  gret  desir  to  knowen  god 
&  louen  him.  for  j^e  more  goodnesse  \ai  j^ei  knowen  of  god 
]>e  more  ]7ei  schullen  loue  god.  where  worldly  prestis  schullen 
for  here  owene  vnku7^nyngnesse  &  sleu]7e  &  ydelnesse  &  pride® 
stoppe  cristene  men  to  knowe  god  &  serue  hym  vp  ^e  ^iftis 
Jat  god  ^euej?  hym.  he^ere  scole  of  an^fcrist  to  distroie 
cristene  mennys  bileue  &  charite  herde  neuere  creatwre  fro 
makyng  of  ]7e  world  j^an  is  j^is  blasphemye  heresie,  j^at  lewid 
men  schulden  not  entirmeten  hem  of  j^e  gospel. 

Cnpitulum  28”*-^ 

pe  ei^te  &  twentij^e ;  fei  disceyuen  cristene  men  in  doynge  They  deceive  men 
of  verray  penauwce ;  for  fei  doren  not  telle  soj^e  hou  nedis  for  ^they^^Sre 
fei  mosten  forsake  alle  falsnesse  in  craftis,  in  oHs,  &  alle  amenTment^^S 

-  essential  to  con- 

synne  vp  here  ku?«nynge  &  power,  &  for  no  good  in  erj^e  trition, 
wityngly  &  wilfully  do  ajenst  goddis  hestis,  nei^er  for  lucre 
ne  drede  ne  bodily  dej?,  &  ellis  it  is  not  verrey  "^contricion,  &  *[p.  134ms.] 


The  more  men 
know  God  the 
more  they  will 
love  him. 


1  26  X. 

^  alyerhijest  X. 


2  omitted  X. 

®  X  inserts  &. 


^  omitted  X.  .  ^-4  omitted  X. 
7  27  X. 


160 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  XXVHI. 


and  to  absolu¬ 
tion; 


but  they  speak 
much  of  tithes 
and  offerings. 


Thus  they  lead 
people  to  trust  to 
priest’s  absolu¬ 
tion  without  true 
penance ; 


and  say  that  a 
man  who  is  truly 
contrite  cannot 
be  saved  without 
shrift. 


They  rob  people 
by  their  excom¬ 
munications, 


and  make  them 
uphold  wrong 
customs. 


ellis  god  wole  not  asoile  hem  for  no  confession  of  mouef,  ne 
for  assoilynge  of  pr(?stis,  ne  bullis  of  pdtrdon,  ne  lettris  of 
frat($rnyte,  ne  massis,  ne  preieris  of  ony  creatur  ^  in  er|ie  or  in 
^fe  hlis  of  ^  heuene;  but  fei  speken  mochil  of  tijes  &  offryngis 
in  ]7is  confession,  &  litel  of  restitucion  &  doynge  of  almes  to 
pore  bedrede  ^  men,  But  of  masse  pens  &  chircbe  gaynesse. 
&  herby  J^e  peple  is  brou^t  out  of  bileue,  tristynge  ]>ai  here 
synne  is  forjoue  for  here  pr^stis  assoylynge,  ]fou^  ]7ei  don  not 
Yerrey  penauwce  as  god  teche]?  hym  self.  And  herby  J^ei 
magnyfien  more  here  owene  assoilynge  jfaw  assoilynge  of  god 
for  verrey  contricion,  whawne  god  him  self  sei]?  ^  in  what 
kynne  hour  a  synnere  ha]?  inwardly®  sorowe  for  his  synnys  he 
schal  be  saue,  ]?ei  wolen  make  ]7is  word  ®  fals,  seynge  \ai  he 
schal  not  be  saf  be  he  neu(9re  so  contrit  wi]?outen  schrifte  of 
mou]?  maad  to  hem,'’'  ]?at  ben  in  cas  jfo  fendis  procuratours  to 
disceyuen  men  in  here  soulis  helfe  for  here  vnkuwnynge  & 
pride  &  coueitise. 

Csipitulum  29”"'^ 

]pe  neyne  &  twentije ;  fei  robben  cristene  peple  of  goodis 
of  fortune,  of  goodis  of  kynde  &  goodis  of  grace  bi  feyned 
censuris  of  here  owen  lawis ;  for  ]?ei  cwrsen  so  dispitusly  pf 
men  paie  not  monye  at  here  lykynge,  fat  fei  chalengen  bi 
synful  mannws  lawis  &  newe  customes  &  deuocions  &  not  of 
goddis  lawe,  fat  no  man  dar  wif-seie  hem  in  here  wrong  for 
drede  of  curs,  pnsonynge,  &  lesyngis  of  pacience  &  charite ; 
&  herbi  fei  maken  cristene  men  as  bestis  holde  forf  here 
wrong  customes  &  mannus  lawe,  &  not  knowe  goddis  lawe  & 
fe  ri^tte  weie  to  heuene.  certis  it  were  lasse  cruelte  to  sus- 
pende  men  fro  bodily  mete  &  drynk  &  make  hem  dede  bodily 
fan  to  suspende  hem  fro  herynge  of  fe  gospel  &  goddis 
hestis,  fat  is  lif  of  fe  soule.  lord,  hou  cursed  an^Aristis  ben 
fes  worldly  prelatis  &  curatis  fat  cursen  trewe  men  for 
pr^chynge  &  herynge  of  holy  writt. 

^  curature  X.  2_2  omitted  X,  ^  bedere  X. 

^  omitted  X.  ®  in  worldly  X.  ®  lord  AA. 

’  synful  men  AA.  ®  28  X. 


Chap.  XXXI.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


161 


\m. 


Qdipitulum  30' 

pe  l7rittil7e ;  lei  taken  not  dymes  &  oiFryngis  bi  forme  of  They  do  not  take 

^  I  i  ^  J  J  JO  tithes  according 

]7e  olde  testament  &  p<?rtyn  hem  in  comyn  to  alle  pr^stis  & 
mynystris  nedful  in  be  chirche,  ne  bi  forme  of  be  gospel  nor  ask  a  simple 

■'  living  according 

takynge  a  symple  liflode  ^ouen  of  free  deuocion  of  ]>e  peple  to  the  New  Testa- 

XUvUv  y 

wi]7-onten  constreynynge  &  cursynge,  as  crist  &  his  apostlis 
diden.  but  bi  jie  newe  lawe  of  synful  men  o  priest  chalengi]?  t^gg°"aii^^«ie 
him  self  alle  tij^es  of  a  gret  contre  bi  worldly  plee  &  newe  ^ 

censures;  &  neijier  lyue]?  as  a  good  prest,  ne  techij?  as  a  curat, 
ne  deli]?  j^e  residue  to  pore  men  as  a  good  cristene  man. 

^But  wasti]?  hem  in  pompe  &  glotonye  &  o]?ere^  synnes,  &  *[p.  135MS,] 
lettij?  trewe  prestis  to  do  ]?e  ofSce  enyoyned  to  hem  bi  god 
almy^tty.  certis  it  seme]?  ]?at  ]?es  ben  not  prestis  after  goddis 
lawe  but  after  synful  mennws  ordynau?^ce,  to  be  maistris  of 
god  &  lordis  of  cristene  peple,  si]?  ]?ei  holden  neuer  nei]?er 
lawe  of  god  in  ^  dymes  takynge,  &  taken  hem  bi  vyolence  & 
stronge  curses  a^enst  mennws  goode  wille,  &  maken  ]?e  peple 
out  of  pacie?^ce  &  charite  bi  here  pledynge,  &  don  not  wel 
here  gostly  office. 


Q^pitulum  31”^' 


pe  on  &  ]?ritti]?e ;  ]?at  at  ensaumple  of  serpewtis  ]?ei  semen 
bisily  to  lordis  in  seculer  offices  for  noujt  as  who  sei]?,  and  in 
]?e  ende  poisonen  ]?e  lordis  wi]?  venym  of  symonye  is 
worse  ]?an  ony  bodily  poison.  &  whawne  ]?ei  ban  a  benefice 
wi]?  cure  of  mennws  soule  ]?ei  dwellen  stille  in  worldly  office 
of  lordis,  &  spenden  pore  menn^s  liflode  in  riot  &  wombe  ioie, 
&  suffren  cristene  men  perische  in  body  &  soule  for  defaute  of 
techynge  &  werkis  of  mercy,  how  cwrsed  serpentis  ben  ]?is 
weiward  curatis  ]?at  ]?us  enuenymyn  hem  self,  ]?e  lordis  & 
comunes  wi]?  venym  of  symonye,  of  pride  &  glotonye  &  alle 
man  ere  of  synne. 


They  serve  lords 
for  nothing  to  get 
a  benefice 


when  they  have 
a  benefice,  they 
neglect  their 
cure,  and  still 
take  worldly 
office. 


They  are  serpen  ts 
who  spread  the 
venom  of  simony. 


^  A  A.  inserts  synful. 


2  &  X. 


11 


162 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


[Chap.  XXXII. 


They  make  lords 
and  commons 
maintain  bad 
priests, 


under  pretence  of 
maintaining  the 
liberties  of  the 
Church. 

New  service. 


So  Antichrist’s 
priests  are 
maintained. 


Q^ipitulum  32"”* 

pe  two  &  ]7ritti}>e  ;  j^ei  maken  lordis  &  comunes  bi  blynd 
deuocion  &  ypocrisie  to  meyntenen  worldly  clerkis  in  pride, 
coueitise  &  ydelnesse  &  false  techynge  of  an^^cristis  errowrs 
vndir  colour  of  fredom  &  worschipynge  of  boly  chirche  & 
goddis  lawe.  For  J^ei  crien  faste  \ai  lordis  &  comunes  moten 
meyntenen  goddis  s^ruauwtis  in  bis  s^ruyce  &  lawis  &  ^ 

libertes  of  boly  cbircbe,  &  maken  newe  S(9ruyce  likynge  to 
worldly  menn«^s  eris  &  newe  lawis  &  customes  for  here  owene 
wynnynge  &  pride,  &  leuen  fat  S(?ruyce  &  dene  lawe  fat  god 
made  to  prestis  for  most  profit  on  ecbe  side.  &  f  us  wbawne 
lordis  &  comyns  wenen  to  meyntenen  goddis  prostis  &  bis 
lawe,  fei  meyntenen  an^fcristis  prostis  and^  here  lawis  & 
wrong  customes  &  pride  &  of  ore  synnes  i^-stede  of  mekenesse 
&  of  ore  vortues,  &  magwifyenge  of  mennws  lawis  &  dispisynge 
of  goddis  lawis. 


They  teach  that 
if  men  maintain 
worldly  clerks, 
they  shall  be  re¬ 
warded  through 
their  prayers, 


and  if  they  try  to 
make  priests  live 
holy  life  they  will 
he  cursed,  etc. 


*[p.  136  MS.] 


Apostrophe  to 
curates. 


Qdipitulum.  33”^' 

pe  f re  &  f rittif e ;  fei  tecben  cristene  men  to  blaspheme 
god  &  bolde;^  werre  a^enst  bym ;  for  fei  tecben  cristene  men 
to  meyntenen  mennys  lawis  &  ordynauwces  for  betre  &  more 
nedful  f aw  f  e  dene  lawe  of  crist  &  his  witty  ordynauwce ; 
&  crien  faste,  pf  cristene  men  meyntenen  fe  multitude  of 
worldly  clerkis  iw  here  newe  lawis  &  customes  &  libertes  fei 
scbullew  baue  goddis  blissynge  &  prosporite  &  pees  &  reste,  bi 
so  many  deuout  prostis  seculer  &  religious  preiynge,  redynge 
&  syngynge  ny^t  &  day ;  &  pf  fei  wolden  brynge  prostis  out 
of  fis  glorious  lif  &  new  song  to  mekenesse  &  gostly  pouort 
&  bisi  trwueile  in  lernynge  &  procbynge  of  f  e  gospel,  as  crist 
&  bis  apostlis  diden,  fei  scbullen  be  cursed  &  baue  werre  & 
myscbif,  bofe  iw  fis  world  &  fe  tofer;^  &  fis  makef  fe 
blywde  peple  to  werre  apnst  god  &  his  ordynauwce  &  pursueu 
bis  tecberis  as^  heretikis.  ^0  je  curatis,  seef  fes  heresies  & 

1  omitted  AA.  2  y;. 

^  AA  inserts  he)>en. 


2  ]?at  o]7er  AA. 


Chap.  XXXIII.] 


THE  OFFICE  OF  CURATES. 


163 


blasphemyes  &  many  moo  suynge  of  pure  wickid  lif  & 
weiward  techynge,  &  forsake  hem  for  drede  of  helle,  & 
twrne  to  good  lif  &  trewe  techynge  of  j^e  gospel  &  ordynauwce 
of  god,  as  cnst  &  his  apostlis  diden,  for  reward  of  heuenely 
hlisse,  &  in  confessions  &  o]?ere  spechis  charge  p  more 
brekenge  of  goddis  hestis  j^an  brekynge  of  foly  bihestis  of 
newe  pylgrymagis  &  offryngis  ;  &  teche  cnstene  men  to  turne 
suche  fonnyd  a-vowis  in-to  betre  almes,  as  cnst  techi]?  in  jie 
gospel.  Almyjtty  god  brynge  curatis  in-to  holy  lif  &  trewe 
techynge  d£ter  cnst  &  his  apostlis.  Amen. 


164 


Till. 

THE  OEHER  OF  PEIESTHOOD. 


Of  this  tract  I  can  only  say  that  it  may  he  by  "Wyclif.  If  so  it  must  he 
one  of  the  earliest  of  his  English  tracts,  written  before  his  order  of  poor 
priests  had  been  fully  organized.  It  may  be  taken  to  express  that  strong 
sense  of  the  faults  prevalent  among  the  clergy  which  led  him  to  institute 
his  order  of  preachers. 

The  writer  was  certainly  a  zealous  lover  of  his  University,  as  may  be 
seen  from  his  complaint  (Chapter  xxiii.)  that  the  clergy  stir  rich  men  to 
support  chaplains  and  chantry  priests  rather  than  poor  scholars. 

Chapter  xxii.  deserves  notice  for  its  attack  on  priests  who  excite  the 
people  to  war  by  processions  and  public  prayers.  (Cf.  p.  170,  1.  3.)  Is 
this  utterance  due  only  to  a  personal  horror  of  bloodshed,  or  does  it  point 
to  the  existence  of  a  peace  party  ? 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Eublin  MS.  AA. 


Chap.  I. 
II. 

III. 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 

VII. 

YIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 


SUMMAET. 

Priests  commit  simony  in  using  influence  and  bribes  to  be  ordained. 

Priests  sell  their  masses,  and  otrer  a  share  in  the  mass  to  those  who 
pay  them. 

Priests  are  so  ignorant  that  they  cannot  read  the  service  properly. 

Priests  live  idle  and  luxurious  lives,  haunting  taverns,  etc. 

Priests  neglect  their  duties  and  take  secular  ofiice  with  lords. 

Priests  take  money  to  say  prayers  and  by  evil  life  make  their  prayers 
vain. 

Priests  care  chiefly  for  new  song,  which  sets  people  dancing,  but  hides 
the  words  of  Holy  Writ. 

Priests  care  more  to  keep  the  Ordinal  of  Salisbury  than  God’s  com¬ 
mandments. 

Priests  take  rash  vows  of  chastity  and  do  not  keep  them. 

Priests  fear  to  reprove  vice  in  their  patrons. 

Priests  who  preach  falsely  are  Satans  transformed  etc. 

Worldly  priests  seek  their  own  gain  more  than  the  good  of  souls. 


165 


Chap.  XIIL 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 
XVIII. 
XIX. 
XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 


Priests  carry  on  business  as  maltsters  and  cattle-dealers. 

They  care  more  for  forms  of  service  than  for  following  God’s  commands. 
Covetousness  of  worldly  priests. 

Too  many  men  become  priests,  because  the  life  is  an  easy  one. 

The  excuses  priests  make  for  sin. 

Priests  do  not  try  to  keep  their  patrons  from  sin. 

Many  priests  poison  their  masters’  minds  against  true  teachers. 

Priests  claim  falsely  the  power  of  restricting  and  assigning  the  benefit 
of  their  prayers. 

They  teach  men  to  give  money  to  friars  instead  of  doing  good  to  their 
poor  neighbours. 

They  excite  the  people  to  unjust  wars. 

They  get  rich  men  to  waste  their  gifts  on  mass-priests  and  law-students. 

They  get  men  to  found  chantries  for  useless  priests. 

They  lead  men  to  trust  to  their  prayers  more  than  to  good  life. 

They  persecute  God’s  servants  and  slander  his  law. 

Priests  break  God’s  law  from  fear  of  the  bishops. 

They  cease  to  obey  God  by  preaching,  etc.,  because  the  bishop  suspends 
them. 

Nobleness  of  priest’s  office  and  exhortation  to  priests  and  nobles. 


166 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


[Chap.  I. 


is  for  ])e  ordre  of  presthod. 


Faults  of  priests. 


Simony. 

In  taking  orders 
for  low  motives. 


In  using  influence 
to  get  ordination 
even  when  unfit. 


In  payments  to 
bishops’  officers. 


Formerly  holy 
men  eschewed 
the  priesthood 
from  modesty. 

Mere  children 
get  themselves 
ordained  and 
lead  useless 
lives. 


Capitulum  primuw. 

Tor  fe  ordre  of  pri^sthod  is  ordeyned  of  god  boj^e  in 
olde  lawe  &  fe  newe,  And  many  pr(?sti8  kepen  it  ful  euele, 
telle  we  summe  errowrs  of  pr^stis  to  amende  hem  wij?  goddis 
grace.  First,  comynly  fei  comen  to  here  ordris  by  symonye 
many  weies,  for  ]?ei  ben  more  maad  pr^stis  for  worldly  honour 
&  aisy  lif  &  welfare  of  body  J^an  for  deuocion  to  lyue  in 
clewnesse  &  holynesse  &  penau?^ce,  &  gret  gostly  traueile  in 
preieris  &  studiynge  &  techynge  of  goddis  lawe,  &  to  suffre 
persecucion  &  sclandre  &  prisonynge  jjerfore ;  &  so  j^ei  siller; 
in  manere  ]^e  spiritual  lif  of  cristis  ^  apostilis  &  disciplis  for  a 
litel  drit  &  wowbe  ioie,  &  j^is  is  cursed  gostly  symonye  & 
heresie  bifore  god.  &  what  lettris  &  preieris  ]7ei  maken  for 
to  ben  ordrid  pr^stis  whawne  ]7ei  ben  vnable  bo]7e  of  lif  & 
kuwnywge  men  may  knowew  opynly,  &  j^is  is  styngynge  ^ 
heresie  of  symonye  ;  &  pt  }ei  jeuen  a  gret  rau?^son  to 
bischopis  officers  for  lettris  &  veyn  customes  or  fei  may  be 
ordrid  &  do  execucion  of.  here  office ;  &  ]70uj  pr(?latis  &  here 
officeris  ben  grettere  heretikis  for  sillynge  of  ]7es  ordris  &  j^is 
extorcion  doynge,  nefeles  ]7es  pr^stis  ne  be]?  not  alle  excused 
for  ]?ei  consenten  ]>er-to  ra]?ere  fan  fei  wolen  be  harde 
examynyd  &  lettid  of  here  ordris.  sumtyme  holy  men  & 
ku?^nynge  is-scheweden  ^  to  be  pr^stis  for  heijenesse  of  fe 
ordre.  But  now  ^onge  childre  vnable  bofe  of  lif  &  kuwnynge 
presen  faste  to  be  prestis  in  name  &  ^  not  in  dede,*  &  aftirward 
wolen  not  bisien  hem  to  lerne.  But  bete  stretis  vp  &  doun  & 
synge  t&  pleie  as  mynystrelis,  &  vse  vanytees  &  ydelnesse. 


Will  notsaymass 
except  for  money. 


Qdipitulum  2^' 

Also  fei  lyuen  comynly  in  symonye,  sillynge  here  massis 
&  fe  sacrament  of  cristis  body  for  worldly  muk  &  wombe 


^  crist  X.  2  stynkynge  AA.  ^  eschewen  AA.  ^  X  inserts  not  in  name  &. 


Chap.  III.] 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


167 


ioie;  for  comynly  J^ei  wolen  sille  here  masse  for  annuel  salarie, 

&  ellis  not  dwellen  wi]?  a  man  but  where  ]>ei  may  most 

Wynne,  &  seyn  more  masse  for  loue  of  j^e  peny  for 

deuocion  or  charite  to  criste  &  cristene  soulis.  '^‘for  be  j^e  *[P- 

masse  seide  in  herynge  of  fe  peple  schortly  &  vndewoutly, 

litel  sauour  of  holynesse  schal  men  fynde^>^  wi]?  hem,  but 

nycete  &  pleye  &  goynge  to  \q  tauerne  &  o\erQ  vanytes.  it 

seme]?  resonahle  \at  a  goode  pr^st  haue  resonable  liflode  to 

serue  god  of  wilful  almes  of  ]?e  peple,  &  not  hi  lonynge  & 

bedynge  as  who  wold  selle  a  worldly  ]?ing;  for  ]?e  prest  may 

not  make  his  ^  maist^r  lord  ne  partyner  of  his  masse,  but  only  ^  sharer  in  his 

god  for  his  goode  lif  &  ^  charite ;  but  many  pr<?stis  don  ]?e 

masse  more  for  money  &  bodily  welfare  ]?an  for  deuocion  & 

worschipe  of  god,  &  wollen  not  don  j^e  masse  but  for  hope 

of  worldly  wynnynge ;  &  certis  alle  bes  sellen  criste  as  iudas  Those  who  say 

mass  only  for 

dide,  &  worse,  for  he  is  nowe  knowen  for  god  &  glorified  in  money  are  worse 

than  Judas. 

his  ma^^hede,  &  nowe  ha]?  schewid  mo  benefices  to  mankynde 
]?an  he  hadde  do  in  iudas  tymes,  &  alle  ]?es  condicions 
aggregen  ]?is  cwrsed  sillynge  of  cristis  body. 

Q^pitulum  3'"' 

Also  ]?ei  sclauwdren  &  defoulen  ]?e  holy  ordre  of  pr^sthod 
hi  worldly  lif  &  ignorauwce  ®  of  holy  writ  ® ;  for  sumtyme  god  ignorance  of 

priests. 

seide  bi  his  prophete  m  reprof  of  worldly  pr^stis  fat  ]?e  prest  Hosea  iv.  9. 

is  as  fe  peple.  But  nowe,  as'seynt  bernard  seif,  prdstis  ben  Bernard. 

more  worldly  &  vicious  fan  fe  comune  peple,  f«t  bi  hem  f e 

peple  takif  ensaumple  &  boldnesse  ^  in  synne ;  &  f  ei  ben  so 

vnku?«nynge  f  d^t  men  scornen  he»^  in  seynge  of  here  s^ruyce,  ^heir  reading  is 

&  ®  redywge  of  here  pistil  &  gospel,  but  god  seif  to  such  a 

pr^st :  f  ou  hast  caste  a  weie  kuwnynge  of  my  lawe  &  I  schal  Hosea  iv.  6. 

caste  f e  aweie  fat  f ou  be  not  sette  in  pr^sthod  to  me.  &  pt 

ignorau?ice  of  good  lif  &  goddis  hestis  is  werse  fan  ignorau;^ce 

of  latyn  or  of  ony  oj>er  langage  ;  f  erfore  pr^stis  schulden  don 

here  bisynesse  to  lyue  wel  &  vnd^rstonde  &  knowe  goddis 

^  isX.  2  inAA.  2_3  &liolyX.  ^  blodnesseX.  ®  inX. 


168 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


[Chap.  III. 


Mai.  ii.  7, 


wille  &  teche  it  \n  word  &  dede,  &  be  ^  myrrour  of  holynesse 
to  J7e  peple,  &  goddis  angelis,  as  god  sei]?  bi  j^e  prophete. 


Q2ipitulum  4”*- 


Priests  lie  long 
abed, 

burry  through 
their  services. 


haunt  taverns, 
talk  loosely. 


Prestis  also  sclauTedreTi  peple  bi  ensauTwple  of  ydelnesse  & 
wau7^tou7^nesse ;  for  comynly  j^ei  chouchen  ^  in  softe  beddis 
wha7^ne  o^ere  men  risen  to  here  labour,  &  blabren  out  matynys 
&  masse  as  hunteris  wij^-outen  deuocion  &  cowtemplacion,  & 
hien  faste  to  mete  richely  &  costly  arayed  of  beste,  &  j^an 
to  slope ;  &  soone  a-noon  to  tablis  &  chees  &  tauerne  & 
betynge  of  pauement,  &  j^an  spekew  of  lecherie,  of  de- 
prauynge  of  goode  men,  ]7at  wolen  ^  not  sue  here  companye ; 
&  ]7awne  come]?  dro7^ke7^nesse,  chidynge  &  fijttynge  &  many 
tymes  mansleynge,  &  bi  j^es  prestis  &  here  wantownesse 
moche  peple  is  broujt  to  lecherie,  glotonye,  ydelnesse  &  fefte. 


Q2ipitulum  5”*- 

Priests  take  too  pr^stis  occupien  hem  oner  moche  in  worldly  occu- 

much  worldly  ^  ^  '' 

Sermen\— pacions  &  seculer  offices  ajenst  holy  writt  for  plesynge  of 
lordis  &  hope  of  benefices ;  for  comuwly  pmtis  ben  stiwardis 

as  kitchen-clerks  &  clorkis  of  kocheno  &  resceyuouris  &  rente  gedereris  & 

and  rent  collec- 

tors.  hnwteris,  &  leuen  here  gostly  office  vndon,  &  han  more 

*rp.  138  MS.]  ^  wakynge  &  rekenynge  &  traueile  for  a  litel  worschipe  &  muk 

Work  harder  for  ®  ®  ^ 

worldly  profit  Tjan  haue  many  trewe  S(9ruauntis  of  god  for  alle  here  doynge, 

vants.  &  ]je  endis  ben  ful  dyuerse.  for  ]?e  first  bisynesse  &  care, 

but  pf  god  helpe  fe  more,  brywgej?  euerlastynge  care  &  peyne 
of  helle;  &  Je  io^er^  lijt  tr«ueile  &  ioiful  bryngi]?  eu^r- 
lastynge  blisse  of  heuene  in  body  &  soule. 


Q^pitulum  6”*- 


Priests  oflfer  vain  Prestis  also  disceyuew  cristen  men  bi  here  veyn  preieris 

prayers  for  j  r 

money.  &  abhomiwable  to  god  for  here  lecherie  &  o^ero  synnes ;  for 

]?ei  taken  ful  mochil  hire  for  to  seie  here  matynes  &  masse  & 

t  by  AA.  2  coucben  AA.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  ]?at  other  AA. 


Chap.  YU.] 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


169 


deuocions,  &  be?^  foul  lecchouris,^  ful  of  pride 

&  coueitise,  glotonye  &  ydelnesse ;  &  make^  J’e  peple  wene 
]>at  here  preieris  hen  acceptable  to  god,  &  jit  god  sei]?  bi  his 
prophete  ]pat  he  curse]?  suche  wickid  mennws  blissyngis,  and^  Mai.  11.  2. 
jjat  mannw5  preiere  is  abhomwable  &  cursed  \ai  twrne]?  a  wey  Prov.  xxviii.  9. 
his  here  &  heri]?  not  goddis  lawe ;  &  god  sei]?  bi  fe  prophete 
ysaie  to  suche  wickid  men  fat  he  wol  not  here  hem  whawne  isaiab  i.  is. 
fei  maken  many  pri^ieris ;  for  who  lyuef  ^  best  preief  best,  Good  life  the 

'b6st  pr&yor* 

&  no  maw  preif  wel  but  jif  he  leue  wel,  as  austyn  &  of  <sre  Austyn. 
doctours  techen  pleynly,  f  anne  is  here  a  gret  disceit  of  euyl 
pr^stis.  Por  whan  men  purposen  to  fynde  trewe  s^ruauntis 
to  god,  fei  fynden  his  enemy s  &  tr^itours,  &  here  preieris 
cursed  of  god  for  here  synful  lif. 


'  C^ipitulum  7'”' 

Also  fei  magnyfien  more  newe  songe  fouwden  of  synful 
mew  faw  fe  gospel  of  ihu  crist,  f^^t  is  cristene  rnennw^ 
saluacion ;  for  fei  bisien  hew  fastere  to  kuwne  &  do  &  teche 
f  is  newe  song  fan  to  kuwne  &  kepe  &  teche  cristis  gospel ;  &  New  fashioned 

chaunting 

fis  is  m^rueile,  for  fis  song  distractif  fe  syngere  fro  deuocion  hides  the  sense; 

&  lettif  men  fro  consceiuynge  of  f  e  sentence  ;  &,  as  austyn 

&  gregory  techen  wel,  preiere  is  betre  herd  of  god  bi 

compuwccion  &  wepywg  &  stille  devociow,  as  moyses  &  ihu 

crist  diden,  fan  bi  gret  criynge  &  ioly  chauwtynge  f wt  stiref 

men  &  wowmen  to  dauwsynge  ’&  lettif  mew  fro  f  e  sentence  of  sets  men  and 

.  .  .  women  dancing. 

holy  writt,  as  Magnyncat,  sanctws  &  agnus  d(?i,  fat  is  so 

broken  bi  newe  knackynge.  it  semef  god  seif  bi  fes 

newe  singeris  as  he  dide  iw  fe  gospel  to  pharisees,  “fis  peple  Matt. xv.  8. 

honouref  me  wif  lippis  but  here  herte  is  fer  fro  me,  fei 

worschipen  me  wif-outen  cause,  techynge  lore  &  comauwde- 

mentis  of  men.”  moyses  &  ihu  crist  &  his  apostlis  preiden  bi  Apostles  prayed 

^  .  .  quietly  by  night. 

nyjt  stillely  iw  hilles,  wif  clennesse  of  lif  &  gret  desir  of 
rijtwisnesse  &  brennynge  charite  to  frende  &  enemys,  &  here 
fore  god  herde  hym  graciously,  but  now  newe  men  crien  These  new  ways 

unlike  theirs. 

^  ^  lecherous  X.  2  omitted  X.  ^  leueth  X. 


170 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


[Chap.  VII. 


*[p.  139  MS.] 


They  care  more 
for  the  Salisbury 
Ordinal  than  for 
Christian  life. 


Priests  take  vows 
rashly  and  are 
often  unchaste. 

They  live  sump¬ 
tuously  and  idly. 


Dally  with  nice 
■uomen. 

1  Cor.  ix.  27. 


2  Cor.  xii.  7. 


hije  to  meIln^^5  eris  wij?  stynckynge  lecherie,  pride,  coueitise 
&  o^ere  synnes,  &  in  wille  to  meyntene  synful  meniiW5 
ordynauwce  contraviQ  to  goddis  ordyna^l7^ce,  &  desiren  cruel 
vengauwce  on  here  enemy s ;  &  herefore  we  axen  onre  owene 
dampnacion  in  )>is  preiere,  &  pf  god  suffre  vs  hane  onre  desir, 
\at  is  vengau7^ce  of  god  to  hane  onre  wille  to  grettere  peynes 
of  '^helle,  for  god  hati]?  vs. 

C^pikilum  8”"- 

^it  ]7ei  chargen  more  J>e  ordynal  of  salnsbnry  j7an  j^e  hestis 
of  god ;  for  pf  a  pr^st  faile  a  poynt  of  his  ordynal,  ]iai  is  no 
poynt  of  cristene  mennws  feij>,  he  schal  be  reproned  scharply 
&  openly  anon  &  of  manye.  But  ]7ou^  a  pr^st  faile  opynly 
a^enst  goddis  hestis  bi  veyn  swerynge,  bi  pride,  hi  coueitise 
&  vanyte  &  ydelnesse  nomaw  almost  chargi]?  pat,  but  lie^e]?  & 
iapij?  &  helpij?  hym  J^^r-to.  ful  vnable  ben  j^es  foolis  to 
mynystre  sacrdimentis  &  to  be  mediatours  bitwixe  god  & 
synful  man.^ 

Q2ipitulum  Q”"*  ^ 

Also  many  pr^stis  vnwisly  taken  a  wow  of  chastite  & 
defoulen  wyues,  widewis  &  maydens  ;  Por  ]7ei  taken  pr<9sthod 
for  to  lyuen  esely  &  fare  wel,  &  take  no  reward  to  here  help 
hoot  complexon,  but  norischen  it  in  welfare  of  mete  &  drynk 
of  pQ  beste  &  riche  cloj^is  &  softe  beddis,  &  traueilen  not,  & 
ben  ^onge  &  idel  &  li^t  chered  &  wordid  &  han®  daliaunce 
wi|>  nyce  wommen ;  &  alle  j^is  brynge]?  many  brondis  of 
lecherie;  &  sij?  seynt  poul  chastised  his  flesch  wij?  so  gret 
traueile  &  peyne  &  abstynence,  &  pt  vnnej^is  my^te  he 
ouercome  lustis  of  lecherie,  hou  may  j^es  jonge  foolis  dene  be 
kept  fro  f  is  synne  wi]?  J^is  ^  lusty  lif  &  idel  &  daliauwce  of 
wommen. 

'  men  AA. 

2  In  AA  the  numbering  of  this  chapter  is  omitted,  so  that  all  which 
follow  it  are  numbered  one  less  than  they  should  be. 

^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XII.] 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


171 


Cdipitulum  lO”*' 

Also  ]7ei  doren  not  repr{)ue  men  of  here  opyn  synnes  hi 
forme  of  gospel  for  displeisynge  of  here  maistris  &  P^'trons. 
leesynge  of  here  salarie ;  for  many  of  hem  seyn  ])us “I 
wole  not  displeise  him  of  whom  I  hane  my  lyuynge.”  a,  je 
blynde  foolis,  drede  ]e  more  to  lese  a  morsel  of  mete  j^an  o 
poynt  of  charite  ?  drede  je  more  to  offende  an  erj^ely  wrecche 
]?an  god  almy^tty  ?  lone  ^e  more  wombe  ioie  &  worldly 
myr]7e  j^an  ]7ank  of  god  &  ioye  of  heuene  ?  sette  je  more 
prise  hi  pure  stynkynge  bely  ]>an  bi  pure  lord  ?  p  reueren 
god  &  worschipen  false  goddis  many  weies  &  ben  hugely 
cursed,  of  ^e  holy  trinyte  &  alle  his  auwgelis.  hou  doren  p, 
cursed  wrecchis,  seie  pure  masse  \n  j^is  lif  to  pure  dampnacion,  i  Cor.  xi.  29. 
as  god  sei]?  bi  seynt  poul,  &  ofte  p  reden  it. 


Qdipitulum  11”** 

Also  for  gostly  li]t  of  good  ensaumple  &  trewe  techynge 

]7ei  hilden  out  foul  derkenesse  of  many  synnys ;  for  si]?  god 

sei]?  bi  his  prophete  ]?at  a  pmt  is  au?^gel  of  god,  ]?at  is  ajiai.  u.  7. 

messager  to  telle  goddis  wille  to  ]?e  peple,  &  ]?ei  leuen  ]?i8  &  Priests  give  ex- 

tellen  lesyngis  &  wrecchidnessis  of  synnys,  bei  ben  angeles  instead  of  being 

TOT  patterns  of  holi- 

of  sathanas  tr(?nsngwrid  into  ^  angelis  of  li^t ;  for  j^ei  han  name  ness. 

of  holynesse  &  of  goddis  trewe  s^niauntis  &  ben  not  so  in 

dede.  &  si]?  crist  sei]?  in  ]?e  gospel  ]?«t  pr(?stis  owen  to  be  Matt.  v.  13, 14. 

salt  of  ]?e  er]?e  &  li^t  of  ]?e  world,  ]?at  is  myrrour  &  ensaumple 

to  make  men  bareyne  fro  synne  &  bi  li]t  of  trewe  techynge 

brywge  he]?ene  men  to  cristene  fei]?,  hou  ben  ]?ei  not  traitours 

to  god  procuratouris  of  sathanas  wha^^ne  ]?ei  leuen  ]?us  *[p.  140MS.] 

gostly  lif  &  trewe  pr^chynge  of  the  gospel  &  puen  ensaumple 

of  synne  &  boldnesse  ]?er-iwne  ? 


Q^ipitulum  12“^’ 

Also  worldly  pr^stis  ben  an^e'cnstis  disciplis,  sekynge  here  seek  earthly  gain 

1  .0  °.  morethantowin 

owene  worldly  honour  &  wynnynge  more  pan  goddis,  &  souls. 


1  &  to  X. 


2  hous  X. 


[Chap.  XII. 


172 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


1  John  ii.  22. 


Isidore  and 
Jerome. 


Priests  are 
traders,  etc., 


horse  dealers, 
maltsters, 
cattle  dealers, 


helj^e  of  mennys  soulis;  for  tr^ueilen  faste  aboute  here 
owene  worldly  honour  and  lucre  &  ben  wode  jif  ony  man 
speke  ajenst  hem,  but  of  goddis  worschipe  &  hel]?e  of 
cristene  soulis  chargen  ]7ei  ful  litel ;  &  seme]?  wel  bi  here 
lif,  studye  &  spekynge,  for  it  is  aboute  worldly  goodis  &  not 
aboute  studie  &  techynge  of  holy  writt ;  &  ion  ]?e  eu^wngelist 
sei]?  &  seyn  austyn  declari]?  ]?at  ]?o  men  ]?at  ]?U8  denyen  ihu 
ben  an^^'cristis,  &  setti]?  ensaumple  of  forsworen  men,  of 
lechouris  &  coueitouse  men  &  vsureris  ^  &  many  moo ;  & 
seynt  ysedore  &  ierom  accorden  ]?er-to. 


Gdipitulum  13' 

Prestis  also  ben  machauwtis,^  as  comu?^ly  as  ^  worldly  men 
&  more  sotil  &  falsere,  &  leuen  here  gostly  office  ;  for  ]?ei  ben 
corseris  &  makers  of  malt,  &  bien  schep  &  neet  &  sellen  hem 
for  wynny?ige,  &  beten  marketis,  &  ent^rmeten  hem  of 
meddlers  at  love  louedaies,  holdynge  wij?  fors  of  armes,  ]?at  ]7ei  ben  myrrour 
of  coueitise  &  worldly  lif  &  pride  &  of  discencion  amonge 
Bad  priests  the  cHstene  peple,  for  of  alle  wicked  men  weiward  prestis  ben 
chiff  whame  ]7ei  twrne  to  cursednesse,  for  ]?ei  ben  sotil  &  ban 
reste  &  ]?e  fend  is  more  maistir  in  hem  for  brekynge  of  ]?e 
holy  ordre. 


men. 


Qs^pitulum  14”*' 

Also  ]?ei  ben  foule  ypocritis,  clensynge  ]7e  gnatte  & 
Priests^ca^emore  g^olwynge  ]?e  g[r]ete  camaile  alhool;  for  jif  ]7ei  fallen  in 

preacMn'g  and  song  &  o\ere  newe  sygnes  fouwden  of  synful 

good  life.  chargen  ]?at  as  a  greuous  synne  for  to  be  dampnyd  in 

belle  'pe'rfore,  but  ]?ouj  ]?ei  fallen  foule  in  pr^chynge  of  cristis 
gospel  &  holdynge  of  goddis  hestis  ]?ei  chargen  not  a  straw, 
but  rayere  letten,  dispisen  &  pursuen  falsly  J?o  prestis  ]7at 
bisien  hem  to  do  ]?is  grete  poynt  of  charite ;  &  jit  ^  Jes 
Pretend  devout-  ypocHtis  feyuen  hem  ful  holy  in  sijte  of  ]?e  peple,  &  knelynge 


ness. 


^  usuris  X.  2  marchauntis  A  A. 

^  jit  added  in  X  by  a  later  hand. 


3  omitted  X. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


173 


&  knockynge  on  here  brest  &  oj>ere  signes,  as  jif  j^ei  wolen 
flee  to  god  al  bool,  &  jit  ben  his  stronge  enemys  &  disceyueris 
of  his  peple. 

CapiYulum  15”*’ 

^it  jjes  worldly  pr^stis  ben  lik  to  belle,  neuijre  ful  of  Frov,  xxvii.  20. 
coueitise  in  no  degree ;  for  J^ei  connen  not  be  a-paied  wij?  a 
resonable  liflode  ne  resonable  cloMnge,  but  euere  redy  to  take  Take  all  they  can 

■'  ■  ^  ^  and  pay  only  in 

of  alle  men  Jouj  Jei  ban  no  nede,  &  euele  dispenden  it  &  i^ad  prayers. 

qwiten  not  ajen  but  stynkynge  pr^iere  bifore  god,  &  lyuen 

forj?  in  ydelnesse  &  pride  &  opere  vanytes;  for  here  berte  is  idleness. 

oU(9rmoche  on  worldly  goodis  &  ^  veyn  statis,  what  eu^re  j^e 

tonge  scb[e]wi]7  wi]7-outen  for]?.  &  this  is  a  venymous  rote 

fat  makij?  here  seruyce  &  preieris  not  acceptable  to  god  & 

belpeful  to  cristene  peple  as  fei  scbulden  be.  "^'J^erfore  f is  *[p.  141  ms.] 

coueitise  scbulde  be  fleed  of  alle  pr(?stis,  as  ground  of  alle 

synnes  as  poul  sei]?.  1  Tim.  vi.  10. 


Gdipitulum  16"”* 

Also  Jei  ben  f  eues,  robbynge  pore  men  of  here  sustenauwce 
bi  colour  of  holynesse ;  for  Jei  bijen  faste  to  be  pr^stis  mo  Men  take  orders 
fan  ben  nedful  for  J^e  peple,  for  to  baue  esy  lif  &  welfare  &  easy'i^e,^ 
ban  ^  ]>e  almes  pat  god  ordeyned  to  pore  nedy  men  pat  ban  and  eat  up  the 
not  of  here  owene  &  may  not  labore  for  sikenesse  or^  elde;  keep  the  poor. 

&  al  is  demyd  holynesse  for  belpe  of  here  preieris,  &  jit  J>e 

beste  of  hem  wot  not  what  bis  preiere  is  worjje  &  where 

it  turne  to  bis  owene  dampnacion  or  saluacion.  &  c^rtis  j^at 

man  pat  louel?  best  god  preieb  best,  not  for  0  man  only  'Tbe  best  prayer 

but  for  alle  men  bat  ben  able  to  baue  part  b^r-of,  be  be  “^^n  who  loves 

^  r  /  J  Godbest. 

scbepbe[r]de  or  ploughman.^  f^rfore  pr^stis  owen  to  lyuen 
wel  &  wasten  not  pore  mennws  liflode  in  pride,  glotonye  & 
aperQ  vanytes. 

^  omitted  AA.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  of  x.  .  4  plowbman  X. 


174 


The  excuses 
priests  make 
for  sin. 


They  fail  to  wan 
their  patrons  o 
their  sins. 


Many  of  them 
poison  their 
masters’  minds 
against  good 
priests, 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD.  [Chap.  XVII. 

Q^ipitulum  IT”"’ 

Prestis  weiward  of  lif  turnen  vpsodouw  cristis  tecliynge  bi 
lesyngis  &  ypocrisie ;  for  j^ei  colouren  pride  wi]?  honeste  & 
clennesse,  wra]?]ie  &  vengauwce  bi  manlynesse  &  rijtwisnesse, 
enuye  bi  prudence  &  wisdom,  coueitise  bi  ri^t  traueile  &  wis 
kepynge  of  goodis  to  do  almes  in  nede  &  pursuynge  of  ri^t, 
sleuj^e  bi  sauynge  of  mawnes  body  &  worjiinesse,  glotonye  bi 
largenesse  &  fedynge  of  pore  men  &  belpynge  of  viteleris  & 
o)>ere  men  of  craftis,  dronkenesse  bi  good  felawescbipe  & 
gendrynge  of  charite  &  solasynge  of  mennws  wittis,  lecherie 
bi  belpynge  for]?  of  ]?e  world  &  kyndely  dede ;  &  ]?is  ]?ei  don  to 
excuse  here  owene  synne,  &  norischen  oj^ere  men  ]?er-iwne  for 
]?ank  &  worldly  wynnynge ;  but  certis  ]?es  ben  an^mristis  & 
perilous  heretikis. 

Q2Lpitulum.  18“‘ 

Also  ]?ei  ben  foule  ypocritis  &  setten  more  prise  be  an  oxe, 
hors  or  asse  hi  soule  of  here  maistir  ]?at  costi]?  mychil 
on  hem ;  for  ^if  ]?ei  seen  vnresonable  bestis  of  here  maistris 
or  o]?ere  m^nnus  fallen  in  a  perilous  lake  ]?ei  wolen  trd^ueile 
&  helpe  &  crien  to  men  aboute  til  ]?e  vnresonable  beste  be  out 
of  perils ;  but  ]70u^  here  maistris  ^  soule  be  in  ]?e  foule  lake  of 
old  custumable  synne,  &  body  &  soule  in  poynt  to  be  dampned 
wi]?-oute  ende,  ]?ei  schullen  not  helpe  to  brynge  hem  out  of  ]?is 
peril,  nei]?er  bi-  trewe  conseilynge  ne  trewe  prechynge  ne 
stirynge  of  gostly  frewdis  to  ]?is  helpe ;  &  her-by  ]>ei  schewen 
]?at  here  herte  is  seeit  to  loue  his  muk  &  not  is  soule.  but 
where  ben  falsere  trmtouris  ]>an  ]jes  prestis  ]?at  wole  not  helpe 
here  maistris^  out  of  ]?is  moste  peril,  but  ra]?ere  norische  hem  & 
conseile  hem  ]?er-i;tne  for  to  haue  here  owene  lustis  &  welfare. 

Q^pitulum  19”*- 

Hany  of  hem  poisonen^  gostily  here  maistris  for  ]?e  benefices 
]?at  ]7ei  receyuen  of  hem ;  for  ]?ei  conseilen  here  maistris  faste 

^  maistir  X.  ^  his  maistre  X.  ^  poisen  X. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


175 

r 


fat  fei  tristen  not  to  pore  pr(9stis  &  witty  clerkis  trewely 
techynge  fe  gospel  &  comauwdemewtis  of  god  &  where  men 
owe  to  do  here  almes,  but  lyuen  forf  aft^r  '^'olde  errouris  &  , 

lesyngis  &  an^«cristis  pr(?chouris  fat  pr^chen  for  here 
wynnynge  &  fablis  &  newe  soteltes  for  veyn  name  of  clergie, 

&  bidde  hem  do  as  here  fadris  diden,  fat  many  tyme  lyuede 
\n  falsnesse  to  gete  goodis  of  f  is  world  and  myspendeden  ^ 
hem  in  pride  &  glotonye,  &  f  ei  witen  neu^re  where  f  ei  dieden 
out  of  charite  &  ben  dampned  \n  belle ;  &  fus  f  ei  conseilen 
here  maistris  to  lyue  forf  \n  here  cwrsede  synne  &  not  to 
amende  hem. 


Cdipitulum  20’”' 

Also  f  ei  diseeyuen  f  e  peple  in  feif  of  cristendom ;  for  f  ei  ^re- 

maken  fe  peple  ween  fat  fei  schullew  not  haue  part  of  here  th™*^braefir^o^ 
preieris,  f ou^  fei  ben  in  charite,  but  ^if  fei  paien  moche  money 
to  a  pr(9st  fat  is  ydel  &  vicious,  for  pf  men  wisten  fat  fei 
schulden  haue  part  of  alle  goode  preieris  bi  mercy  of  god  as 
moche  as  is  rijtful,  fei  wolden  do  here  almes  to  here  pore 
neijeboris  as  crist  biddif,  &  not  fynde  so  many  worldly 
prestis  fat  kuwnen  no  goode  &  non  woien  lerne,  ne  teche 
of  ere  men  to  lyue  wel  ^  ne  lyue  wel  ^  hem  self,  but  fus  fei 
makew  hem  maistris  &  lordis  of  goode  preieris  &  sillen  hem  to 
men  fat  hem  likif  for  money,  &  taken  not  reward  to  partynge 
of  god,  hou  he  is  chief  lord  &’grauntif  part  of  good  preieris  God  gives  to 
to  euery  goode  man  fat  is  in  grace  as  moche  as  is  rijtful. 


Q2Lpitulum  21^- 

Wykede  pr^stis  also  diseeyuen  cristene  men  in  hope;  for  Teach  men  to 

.  inn  give  alms  to  friars 

fei  techen  fat  men  schulle^  haue  more  f ank  of  god  to  do  here  and  pardoners 

,  ^  instead  of  to  the 

almes  to  riche  freris  &  false  pardoneris  &  to  make  grete  waste  poor; 
housynge,  fa;^ne  helpe  here  pore  neijeboris  in  clofinge  & 
housynge  &  out  of  dette  &  prison,  &  parische  chirchis 


^  myspenden  X. 


2-2  omitted  X. 


176 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


vplond ;  &  C(9rtis  fis  is  an^icristis  techynge,  for  men  emen 
&  geten  moche  wraj^le  of  god  \n  doynge  syche  nouelries  for 
worldly  name  &  ignorau^^ce,  ]>e  whiche  nouelries  god  biddi]? 
not,  &  in  leuynge  werkis  of  m^rcy  where  god  comauwdi]? 
hem  to  be  don,  for  bi  j^is  techynge  j^ei  wenen  ]?at  it  is  almes 
that  is,  to  mis-  to  mvspenden^  here  goodis  &  leuen  goddis  comau?^dement  vndo. 

spend  their  goods 


Capttulum  22”*' 

They  encOTrage  discevueu  cristene  men  in  charite;  for  bei  conforten 

pardons,  etc.,  j^g^  -j^g  fijtte  ajenst  cristene  men  in  false  werris  for  pride  & 
coueitise  bi  sikernesse  of  here  veyn  preieris  ]7at  ben  cwrsed  of 
and  by  crying  god ;  &  hereto  bei  wolen  crie  ora  pro  nobis  abouten  be  grete 

Ora  pro  nobis 

about  the  street,  stretis  j^at  god  distroie  here  cristene  bre]7gren  &  ^eue  hem 
schort  lif,  euyl  sped  &  wicked  ende ;  &  here-bi  j^ei  axen  here 
owen  dampwacion,  as  god  sei]?  in  pator  noster  &  oj^ore 
itwouidhebetter  placis  of  be  gospel.  it  Were  betre  to  crie  faste  Wt  be  peple 

to  pray  for  recon-  ,  .  * 

ciliation.  amendid  here  lif,  &  jjat  god  helpe  vs  &  oure  enemys  ajenst  ]>e 
fend  &  make  us  frewdis  in  crist. 


Capitulum  23”'* 

They  encourage  5it  bes  worldly  prostis  disceyuen  riche  men  in  here  almes ; 

rich  men  to  sup-  .  _ 

port  mass  priests  for  bei  wolen  not  stire  riche  men  to  fynde  pore  children  able 
instead  of  sup-  ■*  j  x. 

Kchooi^^^^^^^^  ^  to  scole  for  to  lerne,  but  to  fynde  proude 

*[p.  143  MS.]  prostis  at  horn  to  crie  faste  in  j^e  chirche  in  si^tte  of  ^']7e  world, 
&  helpe  to  serue  hem  at  j^e  mete  &  opere  worldly  ofiS.ces ;  & 
aiso^  ^for'^^^aw  stiren  hem  to  fynde  summe  pr^stis  to  lawe,  jjat  maken 

m^scMef’^*^”  dyuorsis  &  holden  false  causes  &  dispisen  oj^^re  symple 

pr^stis  J?at  lyuen  in  mekenesse  &  deuocion  &  medlen  not  of 
but  do  not  lead  syche  pledynge,  but  bei  stiren  not  riche  men  to  fynde  a  good 

men  to  support  ^  •  • 

good  preachers,  deuout  pr^st  able  01  witt  &  wille  to  lerne  holy  writt  &  pr^che 
it  freely  to  ]7e  peple  to  saue  here  soulis ;  &  j^is  makij?  moche 
fat  holy  writt  is  not  knowen  ne  kept,  ne  tau^t  trewely  & 
frely  as  it  schulde  be. 


^  myspendynge  X. 


2  hope  X. 


Chap.  XXVL]  THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


177 


Q^pitulum  24’”' 

Also  lei  maken  riche  men  &  tirauwtis  to  holde  werre  They  make  rich 

men  found  chan- 

ajenst  god  aft^r  here  de]?  day ;  for  whanne  j^es  riche  tries, 

marchau?^tis  &  tiranwtis  dien  &  mowen  no  lengere  meyntene 

sywne  in  j^is  world  hi  here  owen  persone,  ]?an  j^ei  fynden  many 

worldly  &  synful  pr^stis,  hi  goodis  falsly  geten  \at  schulden 

he  restorid  to  pore  men,  not  to  lerne  &  teche  holy  writt  as 

crist  comauwdil  hut  dwelle  at  o  place  &  crie  on  hey  wil  newe  ^^here  they  keep 

-*  ■'up  useless  chant- 

song  ]7«t  lettij?  deuocion  &  }»e  sentence  to  be  vnd^^rstonden ;  & 

]7es  worldly  pr^stis  letten  most  oj^^re  prestis  \at  lyuen  wel  & 
techen  wel,  last  here  synne  be  aspied  &  here  wynnynge  & 
bodily  ayse  ceese. 


Q?ipitulum  25”*' 

Also  j^ei  disceyuen  ye  peple  to  holde  for]?  here  olde  cursed 
lif  &  synne:  for  lei  seyn  lat  lei  wolen  preie  for  hem,  &  lei  They  lead  men  to 

schullen  ben  excused  to-fore  god  for  ]?e  almes  pat  ]jei  don  in  leadin^^a^^goo^d 
fyndynge  hem  to  seie  masse  &  matynes  &  euensong  &  placebo 
&  dirige ;  &  herbi  ]?e  peple  is  bolder  to  dwelle  in  synne.  but 
les  pr^stis  schulden  witnesse  opynly  lat  alle  le  seyntis  in  the  saints 

J  I  J  cannot  bring  a 

heuene  may  not  brynge  a  man  to  heuene  wi]?-outen  his  owen  ^eave^^*^ 
goode  lif,  kepynge  pe  hestis  of  God,  &  endynge  in  charite. 


Capitulum  26”*' 

Also  ]?es  euele  pr^stis  pursuen  crist  in  his  membris  &  nailen 
hym  on  pe  croos  of  lesynges  &  vnkyndenesse  ;  for  ]?ei 
sclau??-dren  cristis  s^ruauwtis  wil  lesynges  &  haten  hem,  &  They  persecute 

^  ^  Christ’s  servants 

helpe  to  lette  hem  fro  trewe  pr(?cbynge  hi  suspendynge,  and  ^y^to  stop 
symonynge  ^  &  cursynge  &  mannws  iurdicciouw,  &  seyn  pat  it 
was  god  world  be  for  ]?at  pr^stis  pr^cheden  &  si]?  ha]?  ben 
discencion  &  werris  &  pestilencis ;  &  alle  ]?is  is  to  lette  goddis 
word  pat  it  be  not  knowen  &  kept  &  opynly  tau^t.  &  ]?ei 
sclau?^d^e?^  goddis  lawe  wi]?  many  errouris  &  make?^  it  God^sfaw^^^ 
ynsawory  to  worldly  men,  for  as  moche  as  }?ei  wolden  pat  it 

t  somenynge  AA. 


12 


178 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


[Chap.  XXVI. 


*[p.  144  MS.] 
Obey  the  bishops 
rather  than  God 

for  fear  of  the 
courts. 


They  leare  God’s 
work  undone, 


because  the 
bishop  suspends 
them. 


were  not  knowe[n]  lesse  ^  pei  were  lettid  of  here  ^  coueitise  & 
bodily  welfaire  &  aise,  &  it  is  al  on  to  pursue  p'us  cristis 
s^ruau?^tis  &  to  pursue  crist,  as  he  sei]?  in  pe  gospel,  &  to  lie 
pus  on  his  lawe^&  to  lien  on  him  self  as  ion  cnsostom  & 
austyn  &  ambrose  witnessen. 

Cdipitulum  27"”' 

Also  lei  dreden  more  synful  men  &  in  cas  fendis  of  belle 
Ian  almy^tty  god  in  tn’nyte  ;  for  j^ouj  god  comauwdid  hem 
to  prische^  goddis  lawe  in  word  &  ensaumple,  &  fauoure  trewe 
men  &  helpe  hew  &  prdche  ^e  gospel,  j^is  doren  j^ei  not  done 
ne^  helpe  op  ere  J^i^r-to  for  drede  of  a  wrongful  mauwdement  ^of 
a  bischop  or  his  officeris;  for  panne^  j^ei  schulden  be  somoned  & 
traueiled  &  dispised  &  suspendid  of  here  masse  as  pei  dreden, 
and  alle  j^is  were  medful  pf  j^ei  wolden  take  it  paciently.  but 
lei  dreden  ou^re  litel  le  grete  peyne  of  helle  to  whiche  god 
schal  sende  hem  for  defaute  of  charite  doynge  his  wille 
bifore  alle  ol^re  lingis ;  &  lus  lei  dreden  more  le  bischopis 
lettre  Ian  le  gospel  of  crist,  &  so  le  bischop  more  Ian  oure 
lord  god  almy^tty,  &  1  is  is  foule  blasphemy e. 

Capitulum  28'”- 

^it  lei  leuen  Si^ruyce  of  god  vndon  for  a  cwrsed  sathanas  & 
an^fcrist  biddil  hem  ceesse ;  for  wha^ne  le  bischop  or  his 
mynystris  somonen  hem  &  lei  comen  not  but  ben  betre 
occupied  to  serue  god  in  deuocion  &  clennesse  of  lif  &  to 
helpe  cnstene  soulis  to  heuene,  a  noon  lei  schullen  be 
suspendid  fro  seynge  of  masse  &  pr<9chy?^ge  of  le  gospel; 
&  lus  lei  leuen  goddis  s^ruyce  &  comauwdemewtis  vndon  for 
le  comau7^dement  of  an^ecrist  &  sathanas;  &  lus  bischopis 
officeris  &  curatis  &  prestis  fallen  oute  of  bileue  &  renne  in¬ 
to  blasphemye  &  heresie  &  drawen  le  comyn  peple  aft^r  hem 
i;^-to  errour. 

^  last  A  A.  2  here  not  in  X.  through  the  margin  being  cut  away. 

3  teche  AA.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ®  in  AA. 


Chap.  XXIX.] 


THE  ORDER  OF  PRIESTHOOD. 


179 


G2ipitulum.  29”"* 

But  goode  pr^stis,  '^at  lyuen  wel  in  clennesse  in  j^ou^t 
&  ^  speche  &  ^  dede  &  good  ensaumple  to  j^e  peple,  &  techen 
goddis  lawe  vp  here  kuwnynge,  &  tr^ueile  fast  ny^t  &  day  to 
lerne  hetre  &  teche  opynly  &  lastyngly,  ben  verrey  prophetis 
of  god  &  holy  au7^gelis  of  god  &  gostly  li^t  of  ^e  world,  as 
god  sey]?  hi  his  prophetis  &  ihu  crist  in  j^e  gospel,  &  seyntis 
declaren  it  wel  hi  auctorite  &  reson.  je  pr^stis  j^enke  on  Jjis 
noble  ofS.ce  &  wor]?!,  &  do|>  it  wilfully  vpon  ^oure  kuwnynge 
&  power,  j^enke,^  je  lordis  &  my^tty  men  j^at  fynden  pr^stis, 
hou  dredeful  it  is  to  meyntene  worldly  prigstis  in  here  lustis, 
J7at  neij^er  kuwnen  goode  ne  wolen  lerne  ne  lyuen  holiliche 
in  lis  noble  ordre.  for  ]e  may  li]tly  amende  hem  wij^-outew 
coste  or  tr<3!ueile,  tellynge  hem  ^at  je  wolen  not  fynde  hem 
but  pf  ]7ei  don  here  besynesse  to  lyue  wel  &  lerne  &  preche 
gospel,  &  Curtis  j^an  j^ei  wolden  don  it  in  dede.  A,  j^enke 
^e,  grete  men,  j^at  J^is  were  a  j^ousand  fold  betre  ]7an  to 
conquere  al  J^e  world,  &  her-by  schulde  be  no  more  cost  to 
^ou  ne  tmueile  ne  deisese,  but  worschipe  to  god  &  endeles  good 
to  ^ouwre  ^  self,  to  pr^stis  &  to  alle  cristendom.  god  for  his 
endeles  m^rcy  &  charite  brynge  jjis  holy  eude.  Amen. 


Nobleness  of 
priest’s  office. 


Exhortation  to 
priests 


and  lords, 


who  can  amend 
evil. 


^  in  AA. 


2  jenke  X. 


3  }o\v  A  A. 


180 


IX. 

THEEE  THINGS  DESTEOY  THIS  WOELD. 


Theee  is  nothing  in  this  tract  which  can  give  ns  any  certainty  as  to 
authorship  or  date.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  false  confessors  are 
friars ;  and  that  the  lawyers,  who  are  charged  with  gross  hypocrisy, 
are  priests. 

The  complaints  of  packing  and  bribing  juries  are  worth  notice. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Stjmmaet. 

False  confessors  are  tke  chief  cause  of  sin,  since  they  excuse  sins  on  condition  of 
gifts  to  religious  houses.  They  waste  money  in  luxurious  living,  and  get  dis¬ 


pensation  from  their  rule  . p.  181 

"Wicked  lawyers  encourage  quarrels,  suborn  perjury,  pack  juries,  oppress  the  poor,  , 

They  pretend  to  he  religious  .  182 

Ecclesiastical  lawyers  worst  of  all.  They  uphold  the  Civil  Law  above  God’s  Law. 

They  make  divorces,  and  raise  quarrels  between  man  and  wife  .  184 

False  merchants  cheat,  and  teach  their  apprentices  and  servants  to  cheat.  They 

are  usurers  .  185 

False  confessors  worst  of  all,  since  they  encourage  the  rest  .  186 


THREE  THINGS  DESTROY  THIS  WORLD. 


181 


_pre  jjingis  distroien  ]?is  world,  false  confessoures,  false 
men  of  la  we,  &  false  marcKauwtis. 

*  False  confessoTiris  ben  cause  of  alle  f  e  synne  Jat  regne]?  Ja^^e^confLsors 

among  clerkis,  among  lordis,  amonge  comunes ;  for  |>ei  taken 

l^e  charge  to  hele  alle  men  of  synne,  &  don  not  here  power 

]?er-to,  but  meyntenen  &  conforten  hem  jjer-iwne  for  worldly 

wynnynge,  frendishipe  &  worschipe.  for  ]7ei  schuldew  teche 

hem  here  grete  synnes  &  peynes  for  hem,  &  but  pf  men 

wolden  leue  here  synnes  &  take?^  goddis  word  in  reu^rence, 

pei  schulden  leue  here  companye,  &  go  to  opere  to  whom  J^ei 

my^ten  profile  more,  as  crist  taujte  his  apostlis.  &  j^at  is 

worse,  bei  seyn  ^  bat  bei  wolen  answere  for  men  at  domes  day  They  win  excuse 

■*  ^  _  any  sins,  if  men 

for  to  excuse  hem  fif  bei  wolen  ^efe  hem  or  here  hous  to  make  ^ni  make  gifts 

<  J  ^  to  their  houses. 

gaye  wyndowis  or  veyn  housynge  &  nedles  moche  gold  or 

siluer;  &  so  pat  fat  schulde  be  delid  among  most  nedy  men  should  go’to 

bi  comauwdement  of  god  fei  wasten  in  veyn  &  nedles  houses,  the  poor, 

&  fat  f ing  pat  schulde  be  restorid  men,  for  it  was  taken  of 

hem  bi  extorsion  &  wronge  menys,  fei  taken  to  hemself  to 

maken  festis  to  riche  men.  ^lordis  fei  resceyuen  to  here 

housynge,  &  letten  osteleris  of  here  offices  &  wynnynge,  & 

maken  iubilees  fat  we  reden  not^  of,  offi  kyngisne  empi^rouris, 

to  be  f anne  excused  of  risynge  at  mydny^t  &  opere  deuocions  Seek  excuses  to 
_  ^  o  j  j  i  j  escape  their  rule. 

in  whiche  as  fei  seyn  stondif  perfeccion  of  here  ordre.  & 
fus  wha^ne  fei  schulden  be  most  p^rfit  fei  leuen  here 
p(9rfeccion  &  maken  veyn  cost  &  gret,®  not  to  '^'fede  pore  men  *[p.  leiMS.] 
but  lordis  pat  han  no  nede,  to  forsake  pat  pat  sumtyme  was 
p^rfeccion.  &  nf  fe  potestatis  of  here  ordre  dispiwsen  wif  Dispensations 

■*  _  ■*  from  rule  are 

hem  lawefully,  fan  fei  maken  hem  more  p^rfit  in  lif  fan  fei  profitable. 

weren  bifore,  for  ellis  fei  don  hem  harm  in  soule  &  peieren 

hem  to  godward,  pat  no  creature  may  lesefully  ®  do ;  pm  it 

were  more  p^rfeccion  to  leue  here  singuler  obedience  &  Then  it  would  he 

.  .  .  .  better  to  leave 

obseruauwcis,  as  fei  don  now  in  most  p^rfeccion,  &  ellis  fei  the  rule. 

^  AA  inserts  for  ]?ei  sei.  ^  X  inserts  as,  ^  omitted  X. 

*  omitted  X.  ®  omitted  X.  ®  leffully  AA. 


182 


THREE  THINGS  DESTROY  THIS  WORLD. 


The  only  cause 
for  alterin  g  a  rule 
is  that  a  man 
may  serve  God 
better. 


False  confessors 
the  devil’s  nurses. 


Wicked  lawyers 


encourage 

quarrels, 


sutiorn  perjury, 


pack  and  intimi¬ 
date  juries. 


get  the  land  into 
their  hands  and 
ruin  the  real 
heirs. 


ben  cursed  alle  pat  approuen  siche  iubilees  &  dispensacious. 
And  si]?  J?is  dispensacion  is  wel  don  as  j^ei  seyn,  fan  god 
approuef  it  for  certeyn  cause,  but  opere  cause  is  per  noone  • 
but  pat  fis  man  schal  bet^re  serue  god  wif-outen  fes 
obseruauwces  fan  to  holden  hem  forf ;  fanne  what  man  frere 
or  munk  schal  bet^re  serue  god  wif-oute?^  siche  obseruauwcis 
of  freris  or  muwkis  fan  wif  hem,  god  approuef  fd^t  pat  frere 
or  monk  leue  here  obseruauncis  &  twrne  to  fredom  of  cristis 
gospel.  But  it  semef  whai^ne  lordis  heren^  a  false  confessour 
f ei  hiren  an  an^fcHst  to  leden  hem  to  helle.  And  fus  false 
confessouris  ben  fe  fendis  norisses^  to  norisse  mennws  soulis  in 
synne  &  to  brywge  hem  to  sathanas ;  &  fus  in  a  maner  f ei 
sillen  soulis  to  sathanas  for  a  litel  stynkynge  drit  or  wombe 
ioie  or  pride  &  worldly  worschipe,  &  fus  f ei  ben  tr^itouris  to 
god  almyjtty,  to  clerkis,  lordis  &comeneris,  &  dawpnen  hem  self. 

Also  false  men  of  lawe  disceyuen  moche  fis  world,  for 
fei  tellen  not  sadly  &  trewely  hou  fe  lawe  stondif.  But 
norischen  pledynge  &  debate  among  men  for  to  haue  a  veyn 
name  &  wynnen  hem  a  iitil  worldly  stynkynge  muk  wif 
goddis  curs,  &  wittyngly  meyntenen^  fe  fals  p«rtie  bi 
cauelacions,  &  forbarien^  pore  men  of  rijt,  pat  f  ouj  a  pore  man 
ban  nenere  so  muche®  ri^t  pt  fei  wole  make  many  doseyns  to 
forsweren  hem  on  fe  book  to  getehem  self  fank  or  wynnynge. 
but  f  es  ben  false  procuratouris  of  sathanas  to  dryue  mennws 
soulis  to  helle ;  for  jif  f  er  be  a  trewe  man  in  a  centre  he 
schal  not  come  on  ^  his  queste  pf  he  may  deuoyde  hym,  &  jif 
he  seie  fe  sofe  he  schal  haue  his’’’  hate,  sclauwdrynge,  loos  of 
his  catel  or  of  his  lif  in  fis  ®  world ;  &  f es  laweieris  f anken  & 
flateryn  &  meyntenen  false  men  &  helpen  hem  ®  what  fei 
may ;  &  fus  fei  ben  special  procurators  &  false  knyjttis  or 
champions  of  fe  deuyl  to  meyntenen  falsenesse,  &  distroien 
treuf e  &  kny^ttis  of  treuf e,  equyte  &  charite ;  &  herby  fei 
geten  ^°hem  gold^°  &  purchasen  rentis  &  londis  of  lordis  & 

^  hiren  AA.  ^  norisses,  a  later  hand  in  X.  ^  in  mayntenens  AA. 

^  forharren  AA.  ®  opyn  AA.  ®  to  AA. 

"  is  X.  ®  AA  inserts  wrecchid.  ^  omitted  X.  omitted  X. 


THREE  THINGS  DESTROY  THIS  WORLD. 


183 


distroien  verrey  heieris,  &  ]7is  distroie]?  moclie^  oure  lond. 

for  hoii  schulde  rijt  be  among  sucbe  men,  ]7at  ^is  day  ban  but  Theirriehescome 

here  penye  &  anoon  purchasen  rentis  &  londis  to  be  peris  wij?  honest. 

knyttis  or  barons.  Certis  falsnesse  avauwse]?  hem,  &  jj^rfore  ]7ei 

maken  sacrifice  to  ]>e  fend,  lord,  hou  schal  god  here  hem  \n 

here  moste  nede,  si]?  j^ei  wolen  not  here  a  pore  man,  haue  '^^he  *[p.  162  ms.] 

neu(?re  so  grete  rijt.  certis  si]?  men  schullen  be  dampnyd  for  hear  the  poor. 

deiaute  oi  werkis  oi  m^rcy^  mocne  more  pei  pat  woien  not  for  their  oppres¬ 
sions 

opene  here  mou]?  to  speke  o  word  for  treu]?e  &  goddis  lone ; 

but  moche  more  schullen  ]?ei  be  da^?^pnyd  for  extorcions  & 

false  plees  ]?«t  ]?ei  meyntenen  wittyngly,  or  wha?^ne  ]?ei  owe 

to  witte  it,  a^enst  trewe  partie;  but  most  ]?ei  schullen  be  depe 

da??^pnyd  for  here  grete  ypocrisie,  for  ]?ei  maken  it  so  holy  Their  pretences 

bo]?e  in  word  &  signes,  as  knockynge  on  here  brest,  knelynge 

&  seiynge  of  matynes  &  euensong,  &  herynge  of  massis,  & 

many  o]?(?re  deuocions  to  coloure  here  falsnesse,  ]?at  symple 

men  supposen  no  more  rijtwisnesse  in  ony  man  ]?at  leueth  in 

herhe.  but  ^it  iurrouris  in  questis  wolen  forsweren  hem  Jurors  often  for- 

.  ,  swear  themselves 

Wittyngly  for  here  dyner  &  a  noble,  &  \at  so  custumablice  hat  for  a  dinner  and 

a  noble, 

]?ou]  a  man  haue  neuere  so  opyn  ri]t  to  a  lordischipe  anemptis 
mannys  la  we  &  also  goddis,  ]?at  many  questis  wolen  wittyngly 
swere  ]?at  it  is  not  his  for  a  litel  money  ;  &  so  ]?ei  sillen  crist 
hat  is  treuhe,  as  iudas  dide,  for  a  litel  money,  &  hei  ben  so  the  more  that 

^  y  they  get  absolu- 

esely  assoiled,  but  falsly  of  false  confessouris  for  a  litel  part  tion  so  easily, 
here  wicked  catel,  ]?at  ]?ei  maken  no  conscience  for  ]?is  cursed 
pmurie  but  ben  endurid  or  hardid  ]?er-inne  as  fendis  of  belle. 

&  has  lordis  &  oWe  men  ben  nedid  for  his  falsnesse  to  holden  Lords  are  obliged 

^  ^  .  to  keep  them  in 

hem  at  fees  &  o^ere  grete  costis,  for  ellis  wi]?  here  wiles  &  P^y- 

falnesse  ]?ei  wolen  dryue  lordis  &  gentil  men  out  of  here  housis, 

heritage  &  alle  here  goodis ;  &  bi  ]?is  falsnesse  a  fewe  pore 

wrecchis  myjten^  conqueren  in-to  here  owene  hondis^  in 

schort  tyme  almost  al  ]?e  lordischipe  ]?at  may  be  sold  on  ony  * 

resonable  manure.  &  hou?  it  be  bou?t  opynly  atenst  he  lawe.  They  make  it  as 

^  \  J  ?  r  }  defend 

lit  bi  cauellacions  hes  lawieris  holden  it  forh,  hat  he  riitful  one’s  own  pro- 

j  ^  perty  as  to  buy 

heir  may  as  wel  bien  a  straunge  ®  lordischipe  as  geten  his  a  new  one. 
t  AA  inserts  of.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  housis  AA.  *  only  X.  ^  stronge  X. 


184 


THREE  THIJ^GS  DESTROY  THIS  WORLD. 


Ecclsiastical 
lawyers  the  worst 
of  any. 


They  keep  causes 
so  long  that  it  is 
always  cheapest 
to  pay  a  fine, 
right  or  wrong. 


*[p.  163  MS.] 
Sin-rents. 


Even  if  a  bishop 
would  do  his 
duty,  the  lawyers 
stop  him. 


They  set  up  the 
civil  law  against 
the  gospel. 


owene.  ^  Also  falsse  laweieris  maken  lordis  &  opere  men 
to  meyntenen  false  causis  &  do  wrongis  to  here  neijeboris, 
whawne  ^e  lordis  wenen  ]7at  it  is  so]?,  &  so  priuely  maken 
lordis^  dampnable  for  here  wrong  meyntenywge. 

But  of  laweiris  of  pe  consistorie  or  chapitris  is  more  synne 
&  ypocrisie  to  schewe.  for  jiei  tarien  men  in  here  courtis 
lou^  pe  rijt  neuere  so  pleyn,  pat  men  ben  ful  [weary]  of  here 
peyneful  lif  so  Jei  ben  hurlid  abouten  ;  for  pf  a  trewe  man  be 
falsly  sclaundride  &  come  among  hem  it  is  lijttere  to  make  a 
fyn  for  moche  money  pan  to  purge  hym,  be  it  nonere  so  opyn 
knowen ;  for  ellis  he  schal  be  hurlid  fro  contre  to  contre,  fro 
day  to  day,  pat  he  schal  be  cotumax  &  cursed,  &  panne  stonde 
at  here  wille,  or  ellis  for  tr<?ueile  &  cost  be  ful  [weary]  of  his 
lif.  ^  And  louj  a  man  be  neuere  so  cursed,  pf  he  wole  paie  an 
annuel  rente  to  j^es  lawieris  &  to  ^^e  cursed  court  or  to 
bischopis  almes,  he  schal  bajie  hym  in  his  synne  as  longe  as  he 
wole  Jius  paie ;  &  pf  jiere  be  ony  good  bischop  pat  wole  chace 
pe  fendis  of  lecherie  or  vsurie  &  siche  moo,  anoon  coueitous 
laweieris  wi]?  here  gnackis  &  iapis,  delaies,  excusacions  &  fals 
appelis,  letten  pe  bischop  to  ponysche  ^is  synne.  &  cursed- 
nesse  of  ]iis  synne  regne}  forp  bi  a  jeer,  hauynge  pe  apel  in 
pe  heijere  court,  &  sumtyme  as  long  as  ]7is  cursed  man  lyue]? ; 
&  also  whame  a  trewe  pr($st  wolde  bi  goode  conscience  &  bi 
forme  of  pe  gospel  distroie  synne,  j^an  lawieris  makei»e  pracees 
bi  sotilte  &  cauyllacions  of  lawe  cyuyle,  pat  is  moche  he]7ene 
mennw5  lawe,  &  not  accepten  the  forme  of  pe  gospel,  as  jif  pe 
gospel  were  not  so  good  as  paynymes  lawe.  &  j7us  ]7ei  seyn 
pe  gospel  is  not  ynowj  to  reule  holy  chirche  by,  but  synful 
mennus  lawis  ful  of  errour  ben  more  nedful  ]?an  pe  gospel 
per-to.  &  f  us  J^ei  seyn  in  dede  pat  crist  was  a  fool  &  out  of 
charite;  for  si]?  he  taujte  not  pe  beste  lawe  for  to  reule 
cristene  mennys  soulis  bi,  as  ]?ei  seyn,  he  was  out  of  charite ; 
for  he  myjtte  &  coude  jeue  pe  beste,  &  si]?  he  demyd  pat 
pe  gospel  was  pe  beste,  &  it  is  not  ]7e  beste  as  ]?ei  seyn, 

^  Some  pages  are  wanting  here  in  AA.  containing  all  the  rest  of  the 
tract  except  six  lines  at  the  end. 


THREE  THINGS  DESTROY  THIS  WORLD. 


185 


]7an  j^ei  seyn  j>at  crist  was  a  fool.  &  so  J^ei  putten 

gospel  bihynde  &  dispisen  it  &  magnyfien  paynymes  lawes  & 

o]>erQ  synful  menays  lawes  for  j^e  beste,  &  seyn  in  dede  \at 

paynymes  &  o^erQ  synful  men,  j^at  in  caas  be  dampnyd  deuelis, 

weren  wisere  &  betre  ]7an  ihu  crist,  sij?  ]>%{  jeuen  betre  lawes 

&  more  nedfui  for  holy  chirche  ]7an  euere  dide  ihu  crist  ;  & 

herefore  j^ei  reulyn  clerkis  bi  j^es  worldly  wronge  lawis,  & 

maken  oure  clerkis  worldly  &  to  forsake  holy  writt,  for  it 

dampne]?  pride  &  coueitise  clerkis  &  teche]?  mekenesse  &  to 

flee  coueitise  &  oj^ere  synnes.  Eut  paynymes  la  we  &  worldly 

clerkis  lawe  meyntene  pride,  coueitise,  extorcions  &  oj^i^re 

synnes,  &  j^er -fore  ]>ei  ben  studied  of  worldly  clerkis,  & 

goddis  owene  wordis  ben  dispised.  ^  Also  }>ei  makew  men 

to  forsweren  hem  &  norischen  hem  j^erinne,  &  maken  men  to 

charge  more  ]>e  peny  |>an  J^e  trewe  conscience  &  mau^^dementis 

of  god,  &  b^r-to  maken  dyuors  bi  false  witnesse  &  ob^re  Make  divorces  by 
°  i  ^  ^  J  false  witness. 

cautelis,  &  so  reisen  debatis  &  enemytes  bitwene  weddid  men  Cause  quarrels 

between  men  and 

&  here  wiwes  hi  many  priue  menys  of  an^mrist.  &  pt  \e  their  wives, 
fend  teche]?  hem  to  make  orible  peynes  of  here  owene  wille 
for  smale  synnys,  to  make  men  for  fere  to  paye  moche  money 
to  hem  ;  &  riche  men  &  myjtti  ben  not  ponyschid  bi  here 
lawis,  be  here  synne  neu^re  so  opyn,  but  pore  men  ben 
ponyschid,  p  ]70uj  jjei  ben  trewe  &  dene,  but  pf  ^ei  paien  to 
an^mrist  aftir  his  wille.  &  ji^s  ^‘j^es  courtis  ben  courtis  of  *Cp- ^s.] 
wrong  &  falsnesse  &  not  eristic  but  fendis,  to  exile  treu|>e 
&  charite  &  holy  writt  &  to  meyntene  falsnesse  &  synne  & 
magnifien  synful  mennys  lawis  more  j^an  ]>e  gospel. 

^  Also  false  marchauwtis  bryngen  vp  &  susteynen  moche  False  merchants 
synne  to  distroie  \>e  world  ;  for  bei  lyuen  comynly  bi  falsnesse  and  teach 
as  bi  false  swerynge,  false  mesure  &  false  weitis,  &  techen  J^is  cheat^STi? 
falsnesse  to  pnge  prentis,  &  preisen  hjm  most  \at  foulest 
raymej  alle  \e  membris  of  crist  falsly,  &  most  sotilly  can 
bigilen  fe  peple,  &  pf  ony  s^ruau^t  of  here  wole  do  treuje 
&  drede  synne  he  is  holden  but  a  fool  &  ynfrifty  &  schal 
neuere  be  man  ;  &  pt  j^es  false  marchau;^tis  bien  gret  chep  & 
sillen  out  of  cours  dere  &  briwgen  fro  hejene  men,  &  o\ere 


186 


THREE  THINGS  DESTROY  THIS  WORLD. 


encourage 

luxury, 


are  usurers, 


lead  evil  lives. 


Tlie  false  con¬ 
fessors  are  the 
worst  of  all ; 


for  they  let  these 
men  live  in  their 
sins  if  they  veill 
endow  religious 
houses. 


cursed  men  ]7at  ban  name  of  cristene  men,  many  newe  gises 
of  pride  &  worldly  vanyte,  &  magnyfien  hem  aboue  ])e 
cloudis ;  where-fore  j^e  lordis  &  oj^^re  men  ben  drawen  fro 
jjinkynge  of  god  &  heuenely  j^ingis,  &  setten  here  wittis  & 
likyngis  in  ]7es  newe  vanytees  &  fantom  of  worldly  glorie. 
&  moste  of  here  wynnynge  stow-di]?  in  fals  vsure,  so  moche 
\at  ]>ei  han  enuenymed  almost  alle  clerkis,  alle  lordis,  &  alle 
opere  men  wi]?  j^is  cursed  vsure ;  summe  bi  doynge  of  vsure, 
summe  bi  consentynge  per-to  &  for  meyntenynge  j^er-of,  &  so 
]7ei  briwgen  cursyngis  to  alle  men  comynly  of  oure  lond.  & 
^it  ]7ei  lyuen  in  glotonye,  dronkenesse  &  lecherie  as  hoggis,  & 
in  coueitise,  ydelnesse,  pride,  enuye  &  wra]i|>e  as  fendis ;  & 
]7is  cursed  lif  j^ei  techen  in  word  &  dede  to  oj^^re  pore  men  as 
sathanas  procuratouris  &  cursed  heretikis.  but  pt  false  con- 
fessouris  pat  leden  hem  &  reulen  hem  in  j^is  cursed  lif,  & 
wolen  not  tellen  hem  pe  soj7e  for  drede  of  lesynge  of  here 
frendischipe  &  worldly  wywnynge  but  conforten  hem  in  ]7is 
synful  lif  &  vndertaken  for  here  synnes  at  domes  day,  don 
most  cursed  synne  of  alle.  for  ]7ei  techen  j^es  foolis  to  make 
gret  cost  of  wast  houses  of  freris  or  of  oiperQ  veyn  religion,  or 
to  holde  proude  &  worldly  pr^stis,  or  to  fou^>^de  a  college  of 
worldly  clerkis  or  religious  a^enst  goddis  lawe,  &  p6r-\)i  to  be 
sauyd  j^ouj  j^ei  dwellen  stille  in  here  synne  &  maken  no 
restitucion  to  men  pat  pai  han  disceyued,  •&  j^ouj  j^ei  don  not 
here  almes  to  pore  men  &  nedy  j^at  ben  bedered  &  mo  we  not 
helpe  hem  self,  but  suffren  hem  to  p^rische  for  myschief. 
&  Jjus  lordis  &  riche  men  hiren  false  confessouris  wi]?  grete 
spensis  pat  leden  hem  faste  to  helle ;  &  pe  comune  peple  is 
constreyned  bi  an^fcnstis  lawis  to  meyntene  wi]?  tij^is  & 
offryngis  false  curatis  &  confessouris,  J^at  disceyuen  hem  in 
techynge  of  goddis  lawe  &  norischen  hem  in  synne  &  so 
leden  hem  to  helle.  And  ]7us  bi  j^es  men  ^  falsnesse  regne]?, 
&  treu|>e  &  virtuous  lif  ben  distroied,  &  so  ]7es  pve  fals  men 
distroien  fis  world  boj^e  in  soule  &  in  ^  worldly  goodis. 


^  many  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


187 


X. 

OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIYE  LIFE. 


I  THINE  this  is  an  early  work  of  Wyclif’s.  It  is  certainly  higher  in  tone 
and  better  in  style  than  many  in  this  volume.  Especially  to  be  noticed 
is  the  passage  on  p.  193,  where  the  author,  after  inveighing  against  the 
heavy  burden  of  ritual  ordinances  laid  upon  priests,  returns  upon  himself 
with  the  warning  that  men  must  not  abuse  the  freedom  to  which  he 
exhorts  them  by  making  it  an  excuse  for  sloth,  for  that  is  the  devil’s 
snare.  So,  too,  the  complaint  (p.  194)  that  priests  lead  a  lower  life  than 
their  conscience  dictates,  for  fear  of  hurting  the  sick  conscience  of  their 
brethren,  is  a  touch  finer  than  is  common  in  these  polemical  papers. 
How  often  may  Wyclif’s  impetuous  exhortations  to  revolt  have  been 
parried  by  such  considerations  as  these  ? 

The  scribe  who  wrote  the  Corpus  MS.  (X.)  made  a  curious  blunder 
with  this  tract,  as  has  been  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Arnold,  S.  E.  W.  III.  507. 
Owing  most  likely  to  the  displacement  of  some  leaves  in  the  MS.  from 
which  he  copied,  he  transferred  the  last  part  of  this  tract  to  the  end  of 
“  A  Petition  to  the  King  and  Parliament,”  while  bringing  the  last  part  of 
the  Petition  to  the  end  of  this.  As  is  often  the  ease  with  him,  he  passed 
over  the  junction  in  happy  unconsciousness  that  he  was  writing  nonsense. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Shmmaet. 

Contemplation  (so  called)  is  made  an  excuse  for  not  preaching  . p.  188 

Contemplation  to  come  in  heaven  after  good  life  here  .  189 

The  devil  prevents  men  from  preaching  by  diverting  their  attention  to  singing  in  a 

tricky  and  artificial  way .  191 

In  a  large  choir  a  few  sing  and  the  rest  stand  dumb  .  192 

The  Ordinal  of  Salisbury  interferes  with  preaching,  for  it  burdens  men  with  so 

many  rites  that  they  have  no  time  for  good  works  . t.  192 

Men  who  know  better  waste  their  time  on  services  for  fear  of  giving  offence  .  194 

Worldly  business  hinders  preaching .  194 

Christ  and  his  Apostles  preached  and  did  not  administer  alms  .  195 


188 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


*[p,  165  MS.] 
Contemplative 
life  made  a  plea 
for  not  preaching. 


Christ  hid  his 
disciples  preach. 
Luc  ix.  &  X. 
Mark  xvi.  [15.] 


Isaiah  IviiL  [1.] 
E;cekieliii.  17  and 
xxxiii,  7. 

Gregory. 


Mai.  ii.  [7]. 
Examples  of 
Christ  and  John 
Baptist. 

Mat.  iii.&iv.  &v. 


Jer.  i.  [5.] 


Of  feyned  contemplatif  lif,  of  song,  of  Jie  ordynal  of 
Salisbury,  &  of  bodely  almes  &  worldly  bysynesse 
of  pr(9stis  ;  bou  bi  Jies  foure  fend  letti]?  bem  fro 
precbynge  of  ]?e  gospel. 

^  First  wbanne  trewe  men  tecben  bi  goddis  la  we  wit  &  reson 
j^at  eche  pr^st  owi]?  to  do  his  my^t,  bis  ^  wit  &  bis  wille  to 
pr^cbe  cnstis  gospel,  ]7e  fend*^  blyndi]?  ypocritis  to  excuse 
hem  by  feyned  contemplatif  lif,  &  to  seie  \at  si]?  it  is  j^e  beste 
&  ]7ei  may  not  do  bojie  to-gidre,  ]iei  ben  nedid  for  charite  of 
god  to  leue  j^e  precbynge  of  j^e  gospel  &  lyuen  in  contempla- 
cion.  See  nowe  j^e  ypocrisie  of  j^is  false  seiynge;  crist  taujt  & 
dide  beste  lif  for  prestis,  as  oure  fei]?  tecbi]?,  si]?  he  was  god  & 
my^te  not  erre;  but  cnst  preched  j^e  gospel  &  charged  alle  his 
apostlis  &  disciplis  to  goo  &  pr^che  gospel  to  alle  men:  j^an 
it  is  ]>e  beste  lif  for  prijstis  in  |>is  world  to  pr^che  ^  &  teche  ^ 
j^e  gospel.  ^  Also  god  in  ]ie  olde  lawe  techi]?  ]7at  ]>e  office  of  a 
prophete  is  to  schewe  to  'pe  peple  here  foule  synnys ;  but  eche 
pr^st  is  a  prophete  bi  his  ordre,  as  gregory  seyj?  vpon  pe 
gospellis,  j^anne  it  is  j^e  office  of  eche  pr<?st  to  pr(?che  &  telle 
pe  synnys  of  j^e  peple,  &  in  j^is  manure  schal  eche  prest  be  an 
auwgel  of  god  as  holy  writt  seij?.  ^  Also  Crist  &  ion  baptist 
leften  desert  &  pr^cheden  J7e  gospel  to  here  de];  periom,  &  j^is 
was  most  charite,  for  ellis  j^ei  weren  out  of  charite  or  peierid 
in  charite,  pat  my^te  not  be  in  hem  bo]7e,  si]?  pQ  ton  was  god, 
&  no  man  o&er  crist  was  holyere  ]?an  baptist  &  he  synned  not 
for  ]7is  pr^chynge.  ^  Also  j^e  holy  praphete  Jeromye  halwid  \n 
his  modet  wombe  myjtte  not  be  excused  fro  pr^chynge  bi  his 
coT^templacion,  but  chargid  of  god  to  preche  j^e  synnes  of  ]?e 
peple  &  suffre  hard^  peyne  perfore,  &  so  weren  alle  pe  pro- 
phetis  of  god.  ^A  lord,  si]?  crist  and  ion  baptist  &  alle  pe 
praphetis  of  god  weren  nedid  bi  charite  to  come  out  of  desert 

and  AA.  *  fendis  X.  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 

■Im. 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


189 


to  pr(9che  to  j^e  peple  &  leue  here  solitarie  ^  preiere,  hou  dore 
we  fonnyd  heretikys  seie  pat  it  is  betre  to  be  stille  &  preie 
oure  owen  fonnyd  ordynauwce  j^an  to  pr^che  cristis  gospel  ? 

Lord,  what  cursed  spirit  of  lesyngis  stiri]?  pri^stis  to  close  hem 

in  stonys  or  wallis  for  al  here  lif,  si]?  crist  comauwdij?  to  alle 

his  apostlis  &  pr^stis  to  goo  in-to  alle  ]?e  world  &  preche  ]?e 

gospel,  certis  ]?ei  ben  opyn  foolis  &  don  pleynly  a^enst  cristis 

gospel  &,  ^if  ]?ei  meyntenen  ]?is  errour,  ]?ei  ben  cursed  of 

god  ^  &  ben  perilous  ypocritis  &  heretikis  also  ;  &  si]?  men 

ben  holden  heretikis  pat  done  a^enst  pe  popis  lawe,^  &  ]?e 

beste  part  of  pe  popis  lawe  ^  sei]>  pleynly  pat  eche  pat  come]?  the^prLst^is 

to  pr(?sthod  taki]?  pe  ofS.ce  of  a  bedele  or  criere  to  goo  bifore  ^ 

domesday  "^to  crie  to  pe  peple  here  synnes  &  vengau?^ce  of  god,  •[?.  166  ms.] 

whi  ben  not  po  prestis  heretikis  pat  leuen  to  preche  cristis 

gospel,  &  compelle  op  ere  treue  men  to  leue  pr^chynge  oi  pe 

gospel,  si]>  ]?is  lawe  is  seynt  gregoryes  lawe,  grou?^did  opynly  in  Gregory. 

goddis  lawe  &  reson  &  charite,  &  opere  lawes  of  J»e  peple  ben 

contrarie  to  holy  writt  &  reson  &  charite  for  to  meyntene 

pride  &  coueitise  of  an^^cristis  worldly  clerkis.  but  ypocritis 

allegen  be  gospel,  \>at  magdaleyne  chees  to  hereself  be  beste  Mary  Magdalen 

^  I  ^  ^  ^  j  ^  ^  /  not  to  be  taken 

Xiart  whanne  she  saat  bisiden  cristis  feet  &  herde  his  word ;  as  a  model,  since 

^  ^  she  was  a  woman 

so]>  ^  it  is  pat  ]’is  meke  sittynge  &  deuout  herynge  of  cristis  and  not  a  priest. 

wordis  was  best  to  magdeleyne,  for  sche  hadde  not  ofS.ce  of 

pr^chynge  as  pr^stis  han,  si]?  sche  was  a  womman  pat  hadde 

not  auctorite  of  goddis  lawe  to  teche  &  preche  opynly.  but 

what  is  ]?is  dede  to  prdstis  pat  han  expr^sse  pe  comau?^dement 

of  god  &  men  to  preche  ]?e  gospel  ?  where  ]?ei  wolen  alle  be 

wo?wmen  in  ydelnesse,  &  suen  not  ihu  crist  in  lif  &  prdchynge  , 

pe  gospel  pat  he  comauwdi]?  hym  self  bo]>e  in  po  olde  lawe 

and  newe.  ^Also  ]?is  peisible®  herynge  of  cristis  word  & 

brennynge  loue  pat  magdeleyne  hadde  was  pe  beste  -part,  for 

it  schal  be  ende  in  heuene  of  good  lif  in  fis  world ;  but  in  Contemplative 

]?is  world  ®  pe  beste  lif  for  prestis  is  holy  lif  in  kepynge  heaven. 

goddis  hestis  &  trewe  pr^chynge  of  fe  gospel,  as  crist  dide  & 

^  solarie  X.  ^  omitted  X.  3-^  omitted  X. 

*  seij?  AA.  3  posible  X,  '  ®  lif  X. 


190 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


These  hypocrites 
takedreamingfor 
contemplation. 


Luke  xxi.  36. 
1  Thess.  V.  17. 


“  Pray  without 
ceasing,”  is  not 
said  of  spoken 
prayer. 


Austyn. 


Prov.  xxviii.  9. 


Possessioners 


*[p.  167  MS.] 


ought  to  learn 
what  contempla¬ 
tive  life  is. 


chargid  alle  his  pr^stis  to  do  same^;  &  jtes  ypocritis 
wenen  j^at  here  dremys  &  fantasies  of  hem-self  ben  contem- 
placion,  &  j^at  preehjnge  of  ]?e  gospel  be  actif  lif,  &  so  ]7ei 
menen  yat  crist  tok  j^e  worse  lif  for  j^is  world,  &  nedid  alle 
pr^stis  to  leue  ]>e  betre  &  take  the  worse  lif;  &  ]7ns  ^es  fonnyd 
ypocritis  pntten  ervour  in  ihu  crist.  But  who  ben  more 
heretikis?  ^  Also  ]?es  blywde  ypocritis  alleggen  \at  crist  biddi]? 
vs  preie  euermore,  &  poul  biddi]?  '^at  we  preie  wij^-oute 
lettynge,  &  j^an  we  pr^stis  may  not  pr^che  as  J^ei  feynen 
falsly.  but  here  ]7es  ypocritis  schullen  wite  ]iat  crist  &  poul 
vnd^rstonden  of  preiere  of  holy  lif,  \at  eche  man  do]?  as 
lorige  as  he  dwell!]?  in  charite  ;  &  not  of  babelynge  of 
lippis  ]?d!t  no  ma7^  may  eu^re  do  wi]7-outen  cessynge,  for  ellis 
no  man  in  ]?is  world  my^te  fulfille  ]?e  comau7^dement  of  crist ; 
&  ]?is  techi]?  austyn  &  o\iero  seyntis.  &  si]?  men  ]?at  fulfillen 
not  goddis  lawe  &  ben  out  of  charite  ben  not  acceptid  in  here 
preiynge  of  lippis,  for  here  preiere  in  lippis  is  abhomynable, 
as  holy  writt  sei]?  bi  Salomon,  ]?es  pr^stis  ]?at  pr(9chen  not  J?e 
gospel  as  crist  biddi]?  ben  not  able  to  preie  god^  for  mercy, 
but  disceyuen  hemself  &  ]?e  peple  &  dispisen  god  &  stireT^ 
hym-  to  wra]?]?e  &  vengauwce,  as  austyn  &  gregory  &  o]?ere 
seyntis  techen ;  &  principaly  ]?es  ypocritis  ]?at  han  rentes  & 
worldly  lordischipes  &  parische  chirchis  approprid  to  hem, 
a^enst  holy  writt  bo]?e  old  &  newe  by  symonye  &  lesyngis  on^ . 
crist  &  his  apostelis  for  stynkynge  gronyngys  &  a-bite  of 
holynesse  &  for  *  distroiynge  of  goddis  ordynaimce  &  for 
singuler  profession  maade  to  foolis  &  in  cas  to  fendis  of  helle. 
]?es  foolis  schullen  lerue  what  is  actif  lif  &  cowtemplatif 
bi  goddis  lawe,  &  ]?awne  ]?ei  my^tten  wite  ]?at  ]?ei  han  nei]?er 
he  ton  ne  he  toi]?er,  si]?  ]?ei  chargen  more  veyn  statutis  of^ 
synful  men,  &  in  cas  of®  deuelys,  ]?an  ]?ei  chargen  ]?e  heste  of 
god  &  werkis  of  mercy  &  poyntis  of  charite.  &  ]?e  fende 
blywdi]?  iiem  so  moche  J>ei  seyn  m-dede  ]?at  ]?ei  moten 


omitted  X. 
^  fro  X. 


2  omitted  X, 
5  &X. 


3  &X. 

®  omitted  X. 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


191 


neu^re  preie  to  plesynge  ^  of  god,  si]?  ]?ei  vnablen  hem.  self  to 
do  ])e  office  of  pr(9stis  hi  goddis  lawe  &  pwrposen  to  ende  in 
here  feyned  deuocion  ^at  is  blasphemye  to  god. 

^  Also  bi  song  ]?e  fend  letti]?  men  to  studie  &  pri^che  ]>e  gospel; 
for  si}?  mannys  wittis  ben  of  c^rteyn  mesure  &  myjt,  ^e  more  }>at 
]?ei  ben  occupied  aboute  siche  mannws  song  ]?e  lesse  moten  ]?ei  be 
sette  aboute  goddis  lawe ;  for  }>is  stiri]?  men  to  pride  &  iolite 
&  lecherie  &  ol’^re  synnys,  &  so  vnable}>  hem  many  gatis  to 
vnd(?rstonde  &  kepe  holy  writt  ]^at  teche]?  mekenesse,  mornynge 
for  oure  synnys  &  oj>6re  mennus,  &  stable  lif  &  charite.  & 
^it  god  in  all  }>e  lawe  of  grace  chargi}>  not  siche  song  but 
deuocion  in  herte,  trewe  techy nge  &  holy  spekynge  in  tonge,  & 
goode  werkis  &  holy  lastynge  in  charite  &  mekenesse ;  but  mannus 
foly  &  pride  stie]>  vp  euere  more  &  more  in  ]?is  veyn  nouelrie. 
Pirst  men  ordeyned  songe  of  mornynge  whawne  ^ei  weren  in 
prison,  for  techynge  of  }?e  gospel,  as  ambrose  men  seyn,  to 
putte  awey  ydelnesse  &  to  be  not  vnoccupied  in  goode  manure 
for  }»e  tyme ;  &  }at  songe  &  oure  ^  acordi]>  not,  for  oure  stiri]? 
to  iolite  &  pride,  &  here  stiri};  to  mornynge  &  to  dwelle  longer 
in  wordis  of  goddis  lawe.  _pan  were  matynys  &  masse  & 
euen  song,  placebo  &  dirige  &  comendacion  &  matynes  of  oure 
lady  ordeyned  of  synful  men,  to  be  songen  wi}?  heije  criynge 
to  lette  men  fro  ]?e  sentence  &  vndi^rstondynge  of  pat  pat  was 
pus  songen,  &  to  maken  men  wery  &  vndisposid  to  studie 
goddis  lawe  for  akyng  of  hedis :  &  of ^  schort  tyme  }?anne 
weren  ®  more  veyn  iapis  fouwden ;  deschaunt,  countre  note  & 
orgon  &  smale  brekywge,  pat  stiri]?  veyn  men  to  daunsynge 
more  pan  to^  mornynge,  &  here-fore  ben  many  proude  & 
lecherous  lorelis  fouwden  &  dowid  wi}?  temporal  &  worldly 
lordischipis  &  gret  cost,  but  }?es  foolis  schulden  drede  pe 
scharpe  wordis  of  austyn,  pat  sei]? :  as  oft  as  pe  song  liki}?  me 
more  pan  do]?  pe  sentence  pat  is  songen,  so  oft  I  confesse  pat 
I  synne  greuously.  ^And  pf  }?es  knackms  excusen  hem  bi 
song  in  pe  olde  lawe ;  seie  pat  crist,  pat  best  kepte  }?e  olde 
lawe  as  it  schulde  '^'be  aftirward,  taujt  not  ne  chargid  vs  wi}? 

^  preisynge  X.  2  AA.  ^  oj,ere  X.  ^  omitted  AA.  »  omitted  X. 


Singing 


hinders  men  from 
attending  to  God’s 
law. 


God  orders  not 
such  song. 


Ambrose. 


Gradual  growth 
of  formal  services. 


Singing  hinders 
understanding  of 
the  words,  and 


gives  head-aches. 


Austyn. 


*[p.  168  MS.] 

®  omitted  X. 


192 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


sich  bodely  song  ne  ony  of  his  apostlis,  but  wi]?  deuocion  in 

herte  &  holy  lif  &  trewe  pr(?cbynge,  &  \ai  is  ynow]?^  & 

beste.  but  who  schulde  j^awne  charge  vs  wi]?  more  ouere  ])e 

fredom  and  li^tnesse  of  cristis  lawe  ?  &  pf  j^ei  seyn  ]?at 

The  angels  sing  angelis  heryen  god  bi  song  in  heuene;  seie  bat  we  kuwnew  not 
in  heaven. 

]?at  song,  but  ]?ei  ben  in  ful  victorie  of  here  enemys  &  we 

be^  in  perilous  bataile,^  &  in  j?e  valeye  of  wepynge  &  mornynge; 

&  oure  song  letti]?  vs  fro  betre  occupacion  &  stiri]?  vs  to  many 

grete  synnes  &  to  for^ete  vs  self,  but  oure  fleschly  peple  ha]? 

more  lykynge  in  here  bodely  eris  in  sich  knackywge  & 

taterynge  ]?an  in  herynge  of  goddis  lawe,  &  spekynge 

People  hire  of  be  blisse  of  heuene,  for  bei  wolen  hire  proude  pr(9stis  & 
priests  for  their 

tricky  singing ;  o]pere  lecherous  lorelis  ]?us  to  knacke  notis  for  many  markis  & 

but  will  not  give  poundis ;  but  bei  wolen  not  ^eue  here  alraes  to  prestis  & 
true  alms. 

children  to  lerne  &  to^  teche  goddis  lawe  ;  &  ]?us  bi  ]?is 
nouelrie  of  song  is  goddis  lawe  vnstudied  &  not  kepte,  & 
pride  &  o]?^re  grete  synnys  meyntenyd.  &  ]?es  fonnyd  lordis 
&  peple  gessen  to  haue  more  J?ank  of  god  &  to^  worschipe 
hym  more  in  haldynge  vp  of  here  owen  nouelries  wij?  grete 
cost  ]?an  in  lernynge  &  techynge  &  meyntenynge  of  his  lawe 
&  his  s^ruauwtis  &  his  ordynau?^ce.  but  where  is  more 
In  a  large  choir  (Jigeeit  in  feib,  hope  &  charite?  for  wha^>^ne  ber  ben  fourty  or 
and  the  rest  look  fyfty  in  a  queer  j^re  or  foure  proude  &  lecherous  lorellis 
schullen  knacke  ]?e  most  deuout  Si^ruyce  pat  noman  schal  here 
pe  sentence,  &  alle  opere  schullen  be  doumbe  &  loken  on  he??» 
as  foolis.  &  pQ.nnQ  strumpatis  &  ]7euys  preisen  sire  iacke 
or  hobbe  &  williem  pQ  proude  clerk,  hou  smale  ]?ei  knacken 
here  notis ;  &  seyn  pat  pei  semen  wel  god  &  holy  chirche, 
wha^ne  ^ei  dispisen  god  in  his  face,  &  letten  opere  cristene 
men  of  here  deuocion  &  co?7^puwccion,  &  stiren  hem  to  worldly 
vanyte ;  '  &  ]?us  trewe  semyce  of  god  is  lettid  &  ]?is  veyn 
knackynge  for  oure  iolite  &  pride  is  preised  abouen  pe  mone. 
Ordmai  of  Sails  ^  Also  j^e  ordynalle  of  Salisbury  letti]?  moche  prechynge  of  j?e 
gospel ;  for  foils  chargen  pat  more  pan  pe  maundemewtis  of 
god  &  to  studie  &  teche  cristis  gospel ;  for  pf  a  man  faile  in 
^  baitale  X.  *  omitted  X. 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


193 


his  ordynale  men  holden  fat  grete  synne  &  reprouen  hym  fer- 

of  faste,  but  jif  a  preste  breke  be  hestis  of  god  men  cbargen  made  more  of 

fat  litel  or  noujt;  &  so  pmtis  seyn  here  matynes,  masse  mands. 

&  euensong  aftir  Salisbury  vsse,  fei  hem  self  &  oj^^re  men 

demen  it  is  ynowj,  J^ouj  fei  nelfer  pr^che  ne  teche  J>e  hestis  of 

god  &  fe  gospel.  &  |>us  ]7ei  wenen  pat  it  is  ynowj  to  fulfille 

synful  mennws  ordynauwce  &  to  leue  pe  rijtfulleste  ordynauwce 

of  god  pat  he  chargid  pr^stis  to  pijrforme.  but,  lord,  what 

was  pr^stis  office  ordeyned  bi  god  bifore  pat  Salisbury  vss  was 

maad  of  proude  pr^stis,  coueitous,  lecherous  dronkelewe?  *[p.  169MS.] 

where  god  pat  dawpne]?  alle  ydelnesse  chargid^  hem  not  at 

pe  full  wi]?  pe  beste  occupacion  for  hem  self  &  opere  men  ? 

hou  doren  synful  folis  chargen  cristis  pri^stis  wib  so  moche  Burden  of  so 

many  rules, 

nouelrie,  &  eu(9rmore  cloute  more  to,  pat  ]7ei  may  not  frely  do 

goddis  ordynauwce?  for  be  iewis  m  be  olde  lawe  haden  not  so  more  than  under 
°  ^  ^  ^  ^  the  Old  Law. 

manye  seremonyes  of  sacrifices  ordeyned  bi  god  as  pr(9stis  ban 
now  rijttis  &  reulis  maade  of  synful  men.  And  jit  pe  olde 
lawe  in  j^es  charious  customes  mosten  nedes  cesse  for  fredom 
of  cristis  gospel ;  but  ]?is  fredom  is  more  don  awei  bi  j^is 
nouelrie  j^an  bi  customes  of  j^e  olde  lawe ;  &  J'us  many  grete 
axen  where  a  pr^st  may  wi]7-outen  dedly  synne  seie  his  masse 
wi]?~outen  matynys;  &  ]7ei  demen  it  dedly  synne,  a  pr(3st  to 
fulfille  j^e  ordynauwce  of  god  in  his  fredom  wi]7-oute  nouelrie 
of  synful  men,  pat  letti]?  pr^stis  fro  pe  betre  occupacion,  as 
jif  j^ei  demen  it  dedly  synne  to  leue  j^e  worse  J’ing  ^  &  take 
pe  betre  whawne  ]7ei  may  not  do  bo]?e  to-gidre.  &  pus,  lord, 

]7in  owen  ordynau:>^ce  paUpou  madist  for  pi  pr(9stis  is  holden 
evTour  &  distroied  for  pe  fonnyd  nouelrie  of  synful  foolis,  & 
in  cas  of  fendis  in  helle.  ^  But  here  men  moste  be  war  b^^t  Men  must  not 

abuse  Christ’s 

vnder  colour  of  J^is  fredom  ]7ei  ben  betre  occupied  in  pe  lawe 
of  god  to  studie  &  teche  it,  &  not  slouj  ne  ydel  in  ouermoche 
sleep  &  vanyte  &  eper  synnes,  for  pat  is  pe  fendis  pant^r. 

^  See  now  j^e  blyndnesse  of  J^es  foolis ;  ]7ei  seyn  pat  a  pr^st  may  Matins  held 
be  excused  fro  seiynge  of  masse  pat  god  comauwdid  him  self  than^the^mass^ 


chargen  X. 


2  teching  A  A. 


13 


194 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


to  J^e  substance  fer-of,  so  ]>at  he  here  on.  But  he  schal  not  he 
excused  but  jif  he  seie  matynes  &  euensong  him  self  ^at 
synful  men  han  ordeyned,  &  ]?us  )>ei  chargen  more  here  owene 

"^Vorlc  wsstod  on  AT  T  •i*  T  1. 

service  books  lyndynge  ]7aii  cnstis  comaui^aement.  A  lord,  ^ir  alle  pe 
given  to  bibies.  studie  &  tr<?ueile  ]7at  men  han  now  abowte  Salisbury  vss  wi]? 

multitude  of^  newe  costy  portos,  antifeners,  graielis,  &  alle 
opere  bokis  weren  twrned  in-to  makynge  of  biblis  &  in 
studiynge  &  techynge  per-of,  hou  moche  schulde  goddis  lawe 
be  for]7ered  &  knowen  &  kept,  &  now  in  so  moche  it  is 
hyndrid,  ynstudied  &  vnkept.  lord,  hou  schulden  riche  men 
ben  excused  pat  costen  so  moche  in  grete  schapellis  &  costy 
bokis  of  mannas  ordynauwce  for  fame  &  nobleie  of  ]7e  world, 
&  wolen  not  spende  so  moche  aboute  bokis  of  goddis  lawe  & 
for  to  studie  hem  &  teche  hem,  si]?  ]?is  were  wi]?-oute  com¬ 
parison  betre  on  alle  siddis  &  lyjttere  &  sykerere.  but  pt 

better  waste  their  Tuen  pat  knowen  pe  iredom  or  goddis  ordynau^ce  for  pr^stis 
time  on  services  t  i  i 

that  they  may  to  be  pe  beste  wip  grete  sorow  of  herte  seyn  here  matynes, 
not ca\ise scandal.  „  ,  i  i  i  i  n*  i  i  j 

masse  &  euensong,  whawne  per  schulden  ellis  be  betre  occupied, 

last  pei  sclaui^dren  pa  sike  co^sciei»^ce  of  here  hreperen  pat  pt 

knowen  not  goddis  lawe.  god  brynge  ]7es  pr(9stis  to  |?e  fredom  to 

studie  holy  writt,  &  lyue  per-aiter,  &  teche  it  oper  men  frely, 

&  to  preie  as  long  and  as  moche  as  god  meue]?  "^hem  per-to,  & 

ellis  turne  to  opere  medeful  werkis,  as  crist  &  his  apostlis  diden ; 

&  pat  ]?ei  ben  not  constreyned  to  blabre  alle  day  wij?  tonge  & 

grete  criynge,  as  pies  &  iaies,  jiing  pat  pei  knowen  not  &  to 

peiere  here  owen  soule  for  defaute  of  wis  deuocion  &  charite. 

Also  bysynesse  of  worldly  occupacion  of  pr<3stis  letti]? 

pr^chynge  of  pe  gospel,  for  pei  ben  so  besy  fer^  aboute 

&  namely  in  herte,  pat  ]?ei  fenken  litel  on  goddis  lawe  & 

han  no  sauour  per-te.  ^  And  seyn  pat  ]?ei  don  ]?us  for 

hospitalite  &  to  releue  pore  men  wi]?  dedis  of  charite ;  but, 

hou  euere  me?^  speken,  it  his  for  here  owen  coueitise,  &  lustful 

lif  in  mete  &  drynk  &  precious  clo]?is,  &  for  name  of  pe 

world  in  fedynge  of  riche  me?^,  &  litel  or  noujt  come]?  frely 


*[p.  170  MS.] 


Worldly  business 
stops  priests  from 
preaching. 


1  &x. 


2  omitted  X. 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


195 


to  pore  men  han  most  nede.  But  ]7es  prestis  scliulden  sue 
crist  in  manure  of  lif  &  trewe  techywge ;  but  crist  lefte  sich 
occupacion,  and  his  apostlis  also,  &  weren  betre  occupied  in 
holy  preiere  &  trewe  techynge  of  J^e  gospel ;  &  j^is  determi- 
^acion  &  ful  sentence  was  ^ouen  of  alle  ]7e  apostlis  to-gidre 
wha;^ne  |>ei  hadden  resceyued  ]7e  plenteuous  pftis  of  ]?e  holy 
gost.  Lord !  where  jjes  worldly  pr^stis  ben  wisere  j^an  ben 
alle  apostlis  of  crist  ?  it  semeth  'pat  ]7ei  ben  or  ellis  ^  j^ei  ben^ 
fooles.  also  crist  wolde  not  take  j^e  kyngdom  whan  |>e  puple 
wolde  haue  maad  him  kyng,  as  iones  gospel  telle]? ;  but  if  it 
haade  be  a  pr(?stis^  office  to  dele  aboute  ]?us  bodily®  almes, 
Crist  pat  coude  best  haue  do  ]?is  office  wolde  haue  take  j^es 
temporal  goodis  to  dele  hem  among  poeU(9re  men;  but  he 
wolde  not  do  ]?us,  but  fley  and  took  no  man  of  pe  aposteles 
wij?  him,  so  faste  he  hiede.  lord,  where  worldly  pr^stis 
ku^^nen  bett^re  don  ]7is  partinge  of  worldly  goodis  pan^  ihu 
crist?  And  pf  j^ei  seyn  pat  crist  fedde  pe  puple  in  desert 
w^’t^  bodily  almes  manye  ]?ousand,  as  j^e  gospel  saij? ;  pat 
dide  crist  by  miracle  to  shewe  his  godhede  and  to  teche  pr^stes 
houj  ]?ei  schulden  fede  gostly  cristene  men  by  goddis  word ; 
for  so  dide  cristis  aposteles  and  hadde  not  where-of  to  do 


Christ’s  example 
and  his  apostles’, 
who  would  not 
serve  tables. 

Acts  vi.  [2], 


John  vi.  [15]. 


Christ  fled  when 
the  people  would 
have  made  him 
king. 


The  apostles  had 
not  wherewith  to 


bodily  almes,  whan  ]?ei  mijten  haue  had  tresour  and  iuelis  give  aims. 

y-nowe  of  kynggis  &  lordis.  Also  peW  sai]?  in  dedis  of  Acts  iu.  6. 

apostlis  to  a  pore  man  pat  to  him  neiper  was  gold  ne  siluer, 

and  pt  he  performede  wel  pe  office  of  a  trewe  pr^st ;  but  oure 

pr^stis  ben  so  bysye  aboute  worldly  occupacioun  pat  pei  semen 

bettere  bailyues  or  reues  ban  gostly  pr(?stis  of  ihu  crist.  Bor  Priests  now  are 

f  r  o  J  r  ^  more  like  bailiffs. 

what  man  is  so  bysy  aboute  marchau;^dise  and  opere  worldly 
doyngis  as  ben  preostes,  pat  shulden  hen  ly^t  of  heuenly  lif 
to  alle  men  aboutew  hem?  but  certes  ]?ei  shulde  be  as  bysy 
aboute  study  in  ge  of  goddys  lawe  and  holy  prayer,  not  of 
iamvlomm  but  of  holy  desires  and  dene  meditacioun  of  god, 
and  trewe  techinge  of  pe  gospel,  as  ben  laboreris  aboute 
worldly  labour  for  here  sustenaunce ;  and  muche  more  bysie  ' 


omitted  X. 


2  apostlis  AA. 


3  bodi  X. 


^  of  X. 


OF  FEIGNED  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE. 


]7ei  mijten,  for  fey  ben  more  holden  for  to  lyue  wel,  and 
^eue  ^  ensaumple  of  holi  lif  to  f  e  puple  &  trewe  tecbinge  of 
holy  writ  fanne  f e  people  is  holder  to  ^yue  hew  dymes  or 
offring^s  or  ony  bodily  almes ;  and  f^rfore  prestis  shnlde  not 
leue  ensaumple  of  good  lif  &  studyinge  of  holi  writ  &  trewe 
techinge  \er-oi  ^  for  no  *  bodily  almes,  ne  for  worldly  goodis, 
ne  for  sauynge  of  here  bodily  lif.  and  as  crist  sauede  f  e 
world  by  writynge  &  techiwge  of  foure  Euaungelistis,  so  f  e 
plots,  fend  castef  to  dampne  fe  world  and  prijstis  for  lettynge  to 
pr^che  f  e  gospel  by  f  es  foure ;  by  feyned  contewplaciouw, 
by  song,  by  Salisbury  vse,  &  by  worldly  bysynes  of  prestis. 
God  for  his  mercy  styre  f  es  pri^sUs  to  i^reche  f  e  gospel  in 
word,  in  lif,  and  bewar  of  sathanas  disceitis.  Amen. 


1  omitted  X. 


2-2  ne  X. 


197 


XI. 

THE  PATERNOSTER. 


This  tract  should  be  compared  with  that  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold  (S.  E.  W. 
III.  98),  to  which  it  has  many  points  of  likeness. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  Wyclif  should  have  written  more  than  one 
tract  in  explanation  and  praise  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  since  he  was  never 
tired  of  opposing  its  excellence  to  the  vanity  of  the  church  prayers  of  his 
day.  There  is  nothing  here  which  enables  us  to  fix  either  date  or  author¬ 
ship  with  certainty,  but  I  take  the  tract  to  be  genuine  from  its  close 
connexion  with  that  which  follows,  as  to  which  I  have  scarcely  any 
doubt. 

The  tract  is  found  only  in  X.  from  which  it  has  been  copied. 


Summary. 

The  prayer  is  taken  by  petitions,  each  of  which  is  explained,  and  to  each  is  assigned 
some  special  virtue.  Finally  comes  a  praise  of  the  prayer  and  of  Christ’s  goodness 
in  giving  it  to  us. 


1 


198 


THE  PATERNOSTER. 


_pis  his  ])e  pater  noster. 

*[p.  172  MS.]  Oure  fadir  J^at  art  \n  heuenes,  halwid  be  fi  name.  Jji  reume 
or  kyngdom  come  to  fe.  be  Ji  wille  don  \n  herfe  as  it  is 
douw  \n  heuene.  ^eue  to  vs  to-day  oure  eche  dayes  bred. 
&  forjeue  to  vs  oure  dettis,  ]7at  is  oure  synnys,  as  we 
forjeuen  to  oure  dettouris,  '^a\j  is  to  men  ban  synned  \n 
vs.  &  lede  vs  not  iw-to  temptacion,  but  delyuere  vs  from 
We  are  to  love  euyl.  amen,  so  be  it.  Wbawne  we  seyn,  oure  fadir  \a\,  art 

each  other  as  ^  ^ 

children  of  one  '^n  heueues,  we  ben  taujt  to  loue  eche  o^ero,  as  brej?ren  of  o 
fadir  &  o  modir  bodily,  &  moche  more,  si]?  god  is  oure  fadir 
made  vs  of  noujt ;  &  we  ben  tau^t  to  lyuen  in  mekenesse 
eche  to  o^er,  &  to  desire  heuenly  I’ingis,  as  virtues  &  holy  lif, 
&  don  alle  oure  dedis  preuyly  &  apert  for  ]?e  honowr  of  god 
&  ]?e  blisse  of  heuene ;  &  so  oure  lif  owij?  to  be  in  heuenys 
be  holy  desir  &  lastynge.  &  J?us  at  ]?e  bigynny7^ge  we  moten 
be  meke  &  in  charite  to  alle  men,  bojje  cristene  &  he]?ene,  & 
frendis  &  enemyes,  ■&  ellis  we  ben  not  wor}?i  to  preie  fis 
1st  petition.  -^atev  nost^r.  wha^^^ne  we  seyn,  halwid  be  ]?i  name,  we 
weprayforhoii-  preien  \at  we  ben  maad  holy  &  stable  in  virtues  bi  ]?e  holy 
name  of  god  &  his  grace  &  his  virtue ;  \at  we  ben  holy  bi 
grace  as  oure  fadir  god  is  holy  of  hym  self,  in  ]?is  word  we 
axen  deuoutly  sadnesse  of  fei]?,  wif-oute  whiche  feij?  we  may 
not  plese  god ;  &  we  preien  ]?at  alle  man(?re  of  pride,  bofe  in 
,  foujt  &  spekynge  &  dede  &  alle  manure  berynge  &  counte- 
naunce,  be  putt  awey  fro  vs,  for  suche  pride  maki]?  men 
and  meekness,  luciferis  children;  &  fat  alle  manure  verrey  mekenessis  be 
grounded  iw  vs  ajenst  fis  pride,  for  verrey  mekenesse  makif 
2nd  petition.  VS  goddis  children.  ^  whawne  we  seyn  f  i  kyngdom  or  reume 
come  to  f e,  we  preien  fat  alle  men  &  wommm  lyuywge  in  f is 
*[p  173  MS  ]  world  fat  schullew  be  sauyd,  &  alle  fat  ben  departed  come  ^Ho 
f  e  Blisse  of  Heuene  as  soone  as  god  wole,  to  see  f  ^re  oure 
blissed  spouse  ihu  crist,  &  haue  endeles  ioie  wif  him  &  his 
(thfchurch^con-  augelis  &  seyutis.  for  alle  angelis  &  men  &  wommen  fat 
shall  be  saveA  schullen  be  sauyd  ben  goddis  kyngdom  &  holy  chirche  ;  & 


THE  PATERNOSTER. 


199 


cure  lord  ihu  is  kyng  of  j^is  reume  &  heed  of  ]7is  holy 

chirche;  &  alle  ]70  \at  schullen  be  dampnyd  in  helle  ben 

deuelis  chirche  or  synagoge,  &  j^e  deuel  is  here  false  prince 

&  kyng,  but  her  tiraunt.  &  here  "we  axen  trewe  hope  we  pray  for  hope 

&  lastynge  to  haue  ]7e  blisse  of  heuene,  be  mercy  of  oure  god 

&  bi  oure  goode  lif  &  endynge  in  perfit  charite.  in  J’is  word  and  charity, 

we  preien  alle  cursed  enuye  &  hate  be  putt  awey  from  vs, 

&  \at  alle  brennynge  charite  to  god  &  oure  euene  cristene  be 

so  sadly  rotyd  in  vs  ]iat  it  faile  neuere  in  J^is  lif  for  no  ]7ing 

\at  may  be.  ^  Wha?^ne  we  seyn,  fei  wille  be  don  in  erfe  3rd  petition. 

rijt  as  it  is  in  heuene,  we  preien  ]iat  we  don  ]iq  wille  of  god 

wij7-outen  any  errour  &  wij^-outen  any  cessynge,  as  blissed 

au^>^gelis  don  euere  in  heuene,  &  fat  we  don  f is  wille  of  god 

wif  rijt  fulle  vnd^rstondynge,  &  wif  grete  desir  &  ioie  & 

likynge,  &  not  wif  heuynesse  &  grucchynge.  ^  In  f is  word 

we  axen  pat  in  alle  f  ingis  oure  wille  be  confermed  to  goddis 

wille,  pat  no  f  ing  may  dept^rte  oure  wille  &  oure  loue  fro 

god,  pat  is  endeles  good  &  rijtful.  ^And  here  we  preien 

algatis  to  geten  be  heje  virtue  of  charite,  w«tA-outen  whiche  We  pray  for 
.  '*  .  charity, 

alle  of ^re  f ingis  ben  not  worfi  to  vs  to  brynge  vs  to  heuene. 

&  here  we  preien  pat  god  kepe  vs  fro  wickid  coueitise  of 

worldly  goodis,  pat  we  offenden  not  goddis  comaui^^dementis  and  to  be  kept 

from  breaking 

ne  good  conscience,  neif(?r  for  wynnynge  ne  holdynge  forf  of  God’s  command- 

en  ts . 

worldly  goodis ;  for  he  pat  bi  brekynge  of  goddis  hestis,  as  bi 
false  sweryngis,  false  mesures  or  weijtis,  or  ony  sleijtte, 
getif  or  holdif  his  neijeboris  goodis,  dof  not  goddis  wille,  but 
is  fef  &  tmtour  of  god  &  his  neijeboris  bi  goddis  lawe. 

^  Whawne  we  seyn,  jeue  vs  to-day  oure  eche  dayes  breed,  we  4th  petition, 
preien  for  nedeful  sustenaunce  of  oure  body,  &  for  to  haue  we  pray  for  bodi- 
vnderstondynge  &  kepynge  of  goddis  word,  &  namely  of  his 
hestis  pat  ben  gostly  sustenaunce  of  oure  soule,  &  fat  we  ban 
f  is  sustenaunce  trewely  geten,  not  by  raueyne  ne  extorsion  ne  honestly  got, 
falsnesse,  but  fat  it  be  spendid  in  S(9ruyce  of  god  &  his  drede ; 

&  fat  we  fanken  mekely  oure  god  for  alle  his  grace  &  jiftis 
fat  he  ^euef  vs  of  his  grete  goodnesse.  ^In  fis  word  we 
preien  to  haue  fe  virtue  of  prndence  to  knowe  whiche  and  for  prudence. 


200 


THE  PATERNOSTER. 


*[p.  174  MS.] 

Phil.  iii.  19. 
5th  petition. 

We  pray  for 
mercy. 


Doesnot  forbid 
us  to  ask  for 
debts. 


We  pray  for 
righteousness. 


6th  petition. 


We  pray  not 
he  overcome 
temptation, 


and  to  have 

spiritual 

strength. 


susteIlau7^ce  is  nedeful  &  resonable  to  vs,  &  what  we  owen  to 
do  ]7<?rfore  to  god,  &  in  what  mesure  we  schullen  take  it,  to 
putte  awey  alle  manure  glotonye  &  dronkenesse  &  coriouste 
&  wast  of  metis  &  drynkis ;  for  ]?is  glotonye  &  dronkenesse 
maki]7  men  to  lone  more  here  bely  &  here  golet  ]ian  god 
almyjtty;  "^'for  J^ei  maken  here  wombe  here  false  god,  as  seynt 
poul  seif.  'Wha7^ne  we  seyn,  &  for-^ene  vs  onre  dettis,  fat 
is  onre  synnes,  as  we  forjeuen  to  hour^  dettouris,  fat  is  to 
men  pat  ban  trespassed  ajenst  vs,  we^  preien  pat  god  hane 
m^rcy  on  vs  as  we  ban  mercy  on  hem  fat  han  wraff id  vs. 
C(9rtis  pf  we  han  no  m^rcy  on  hem  pat  trespassen  ajenst  vs, 
we  preien  god  ajenst  onre  owene  heed  fd^t  he  dawpne  vs  for 
onre  synnys.  bnt  here  men  moten  forjeue  fe  rancour,  hate 
&  enyl  wille  of  here  herte  to  here  nei^eboris,  but  fei  may 
lawefully  pursue  worldly  dette,  so  fat  fei  do  fis  bi  iuste 
menes,  &  kepe  pacience  &  charite ;  &  ^if  men  ben  pore  & 
iust  of  lif  &  wolden  fayn  paie,  &  traueile  bisily  fdrfore  in 
treufe,  &  ben  not  wastouris  of  here  litil  good,  fame  fis 
preiere  wole  pat  siche*  pore  ben  notprisonyd  ne  peyned,  but  bi 
pacience  &  mercy  suffer  til  fei  may  paie.  In  fis  word^  we 
preien  to  haue  fe  virtue  of  rijtwisnesse  to  putten  out 
vnresonable  wraffe  &  vengaunce,  &  holden  vs  sadde  in 
verrey  mercy  &  pacience  a^enst  malencolie  &  puttynge  awey 
of  reson,  so  fat  reson  &  mercy  reule  welle  alle  oure  stiryngis 
of  herte  &  speche  &  doynge.  Whame  we  seyn,  &  ne  lede 
vs  not  i7^-to  tewptacion,  we  preien  pat  god  suffre  vs  not  bi 
'  wif  drawynge  of  his  grace  &  helpe  be  oudreomen  in  tempta¬ 
tions  of  fe  deuyl,  of  fe  world,  &  of  f e  fleschly  lustis  or  foule 
delectacions.  for  it  is  profitable  to  be  temptid  &  wif-stonde 
f e  temptacions  bi  helpe  of  god  &  his  angelis,  for  fere  is  oure 
mede  &  ioie  restorid ;  but  it  is  euyl  to  ben  ouorcomen  in  fis 
temptacion,  &  pat  schal  not  be  but  be  oure  owene  necligence 
&  slou^te  &  fals  likynge  in  synne.  perfore  in  fis  word  we 
preien  to  haue  fe  virtue  of  gostly  strengfe,  to  be  strong  bi 

1  MS.  he.  2  vrhiche.  ®  MS.  world. 


THE  PATERNOSTER. 


201 


helpe  of  fe  holy  gost  a^enst  alle  temptacions,  &  \at  we  ben 
not  hardid  in  synne,  but  fat  we  waken  in  holy  preieris  & 
good  occupacion,  &  bane  saad  mynde  of  fe  schortnesse  of 
lykynge  in  synne,  &  on  fe  bittre  peynes  of  purgatorie  &  belle; 

&  pf  we  wolen,  bi  fis  mynde  &  occupacion  sif  goddis  grace 

&  helpe  is  redy,  we  scbullen  ou^rcomen  alle  oure  temptacions 

&  gete  oure  corone  in  heuene  wif-outen  ende.  ^  Wba^ne  we 

seyn,  but  delyuere  vs  fro  euyl,  we  preien  fat  god  delyuere  7th  petition. 

vs  from  alle  euyl  of  synne  &  peyne  bofe  of  body  &  soule  in 

fis  lif  &  in  purgatorie  t  &  namely  fro  peyne  of  belle,  &  fat  andpam, 

we  falle  not  i^-to  dispeir  of  goddis  mercy  for  olde  rotynge  & 

custome  in  synne.  In  fis  word  we  preien  to  baue  f  e  vertue 

of  temperaunce,  to  take  so  worldly  goodis  &  myrfe  fat  we 

for^eten  not  god  in  beuenly  blisse,  &  fat  we  tempere  so  fe 

stiryngis  of  oure  fleiscb  fat  we  delen  not  fleiscbly  wif  ony 

woman  but  pf  it  be  in  verrey  &  laweful  ^matr^monye;  &  in  *[p-  175MS.] 

drede  of  god,  &  not  as  bestis  wif-outew  reson,  fat  ben  alle 

seit  abouten  here  lustis  &  for^eten  god  &  alle  his  werkis. 

for  f e  archangel  raphael  taujte  tobie  fat  f e  deuyl  haf  power  Tobit.  vi.  17. 

oner  siche  men  fat  \us  defoulen  fe  ordre  of  matrimonye  & 

don  al  for  here  lustis  &  for^eten  god  &  his  drede  &  don  as 

bestis  wif -oute  discrecion.  ^  God  delyuere  vs  from  alle  euyl  of 

synne  preuy  &  apert,  &  namely  fro  endury?^ge  in  synne  & 

dispeir  of  goddis  m^rcy,  &  fro  bodely  werris  &  vengau7^ce  & 

peynes,  bofe  in  fis  lif  &  purgatorie  &  helle ;  &  graunt  vs  bi 

rijt  feif  trewe  &  p^rfit  charite  to  gete  heuenely  blisse.  so  be  it 

ihu  for  fi  grete  m<?rcy.  ^Certis  fis  pater  noster  passif  alle  Excellence  of  the 

of ^re  preieris  m  auctorite,  in  sotilte  &  profit  bofe  of  soule  & 

body.  It  is  of  most  auctorite  ;  for  oure  lord  ihu  crist,  god  & 

man,  made  it  &  comauwdid  cristene  men  to  seie  it ;  but  of  ore 

preieris  ben  made  bi  men,  &  enclosen  noon  ofor  sentence 

fan  dof  fis  pator  nostor,  but  pf  it  be  errour.  f orfore  as  ihu 

crist  is  more  worfi  f  of  ore  synful  men,  so  fis  pator  nostor 

is  of  more  auctorite  fan  is  preiere  maad  of  of  ere  men,  fouj 

here  preiere  be  good,  fis  pator  nostor  is  more  sotil  fan 

^  Scored  through  in  MS. 


202 


THE  PATERNOSTER. 


opere  preieris ;  for  it  is  maad  of  endeles  wisdom  &  charite  of 
crist,  &  enclose^  alle  finkyngis  \at  hen  nedful  bo]7e  for  body 
&  soule  in  ]?is  world  &  \e  to]>er ;  &  oure  lord  ibu  made  it  in 
schorte  wordis  &  mocbe  witt,  for  men  schulden  not  be  heuy 
ne  excusen  hem  fro  kuwnynge  &  seiynge  \er-ei.  it  is  of  most 
profit,  for  jif  a  man  seie  it  wel  he  ne  scbal  faile  no  ]7ing  ^ai  is 
nedful  &  profitable  for  bodily  lif  &  vortuous,  to  brynge  men 
to  beuene  &  haue  blisse  in  body  &  soule  wi]?-outen  ende.  lord, 
bou  mocbe  ben  j7ei  to  blame  ]?at  bisien  hem  aboute  preieris 
maade  of  synful  men  &  leuen  ]?is  paW  VLOsteT  J^at  is  best  & 
most  besy  of  alle,  &  comprohendi]?  alle  goodis  for  body  & 
soule.  blissed  be  )»is  endeles  goode  lord,  j^at  of  bis  endeles 
wisdom  &  charite  taujte  ]7is  scborte  preiere.  Amen. 


203 


XII. 

THE  AYE  MAMA. 


I  HAYE  no  doubt  of  the  genuineness  of  this  tract.  The  tone  and  manner 
are  Wyclif’s,  and  the  invective  against  the  frivolity  of  the  gentry  suits 
better  a  man  who  had  lived  at  court  than  one  of  the  obscure  poor  preachers. 
Besides  the  general  style  there  is  one  passage  which  bears  a  special  mark 
of  Wyclif.  On  page  208  we  are  told,  “  God  the  Trinity  is  with  each 
creature  .  .  .  'to  keep  it;  for  else  it  should  turn  to  naught.”  The  belief 
of  the  immanence  of  God  in  all  created  things  is  one  which  Wyclif  held 
firmly.  (Of.  Cum  ergo  in  qualibet  creatura  est  Trinitas  increata. — Trial,  iv. 
27.)  The  doctrine  was  brought  into  popular  use  in  his  latest  controversies 
on  the  Eucharist,  but  used  as  it  is  here,  in  a  different  connexion  and  in¬ 
cidentally,  it  is  a  sign  of  the  hand  of  the  master  rather  than  one  of  his 
pupils. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  MS.  A.  4.  12., 
at  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge,  which  I  have  distinguished  in  the 
notes  as  SS. 


SUMMAET. 

How  this  invocation  is  made  up,  and  the  lesson  from  it.^  .  p.  204 

The  evil  of  women  who  are  given  to  vanity .  204 

Prevalence  of  frivolity  among  gentlefolk .  205 

Gross  amusements  at  Christmas.  .  206 

The  bad  spirit  prevalent  in  courts .  207 

How  God  was  with  Mary  and  is  in  men .  208 


204 


THE  AVE  MARIA. 


How  this  invoca¬ 
tion  is  made  up. 


Luke  i.  28. 


Luke  i.  42. 


*[p.  176  MS.] 
Indulgences, 


Y 


Evil  life  blas¬ 
phemes  Jesus 
and  Mary. 


J^is  is  ])e  aue  maria. 

Heil  fou/  marie,  ful  of  grace,  ]>e  lord  is  wi]?  fe. 
blissed  be  Jou  among  wywmen,  &  blissed  be  }e  fruyt  of  j^i 
wombe,  ihu  crist.'^  amen,  so  be  it.  pe  arcangel  gabriel 
sent  of  god  grette  oure  ladie  seynte  marie  wi]?  j^es  wordis, 
beil.  be  j^on  fnl  of  grace.  }e  lord  is  wi]?  ye.  blissed  be 
foil  among  wymme7^.  &  he  seide  no  moo  wordis,  as  f e  firste^ 
gospel  of  seynt  Ink  techif,^  but  elizebeth,  f e  modir  of  seynt 
ion  baptist,  seide  fes  wordes  to  oure  lady  whawne  sche  hadde 
conseyued  crist ;  blissed  be  f on  among  wymmen  &  blissed 
be  f  e  fruyt  of  f  i  wombe.  as  f  e  same  gospel  techif  ^ ;  but 
cristene  men  for  deuocion  adden  to  f  es  tweie  wordis,  marie  & 
ihu  crisf;  men  seyn  fat  popis  graunte  moche  pardon  f^r- 
fore,  but  hou  euf^re  it  be  of  pardon,  f  is  addynge  to  is  trewe, 
for  fe  gospel  techif  *  vs  fes  names  &  fei  stiren  men  to  deuo¬ 
cion.  ^Here  men  &  workmen,  &  namely  gewtil  wommen, 
schulden  lerne®  mekenesse,  chastite,  charite,  sobirnesse  & 
schamefastenesse,  to  be  aschamyd  of  eche  euyl  speche,  & 
namely  of  lecherie  &  euyl  contenaunce  of  synne  &  ribaudrie 
&  vilonye®  and'^  lerne  holy  deuocion,  &  fanne  fei  worschipen 
wel  ihu  here  gostly  spouse  &  seynt  marie  his  modir ;  &  jif 
fei  lyuen  in  pride  of  herte  for  nobeleie  of  blood  or  ®  kyn  & 
rentis  &  richessis  of  f  e  world,  &  han  iwdignacion  and  ®  dispit 
of  of  ^re  pore  men  or  wymmen ;  and  delyten  hem  in 
lecherie  in  ony  degree ;  or  in  hate  &  enuye  or  glotonye  & 
dronkenesse  &  boldnesse  in  synne,  &  colouren  &  meyntenen 
it  and  lyuen  in  riot,  daunsynge  &  lepynge  in  ny^ttis  &  slepen 
out  of  reson  on  fe  morwe,  &  forjeten  god  &  his  drede  & 
deuocion  of  preieris  ;  what  eu^re  here  tonge  blabre,  here  euyl 
lif  blasphemef  &  dispisif  bof  e  ihu  here  noble  spouse  &  his 
modir  marie,  tresour  of  clewnesse  &  deuocion.  ^  And  ^if  fei 

^  omitted  SS.  ^  omitted  SS.  ®  omitted  SS, 

^  tellij?  SS.  ®  lyuen  al  in  SS.  ®  vilenjje  X. 

’  omitted  X.  ^  &  X.  ^  omitted  X.  omitted  X. 


THE  AVE  MARIA. 


205 


maken  hem  more  bisi  in  herte  &  dede  to  be  ^  gale  and  costelewe  women  who  care 

more  for  fine 

of  array  ^  of  clobis  &  keuercbers  and  perils  &  ribanys,  or  clothes  than 

^  virtues  are  the 

siche  yany tes,  to  maken  here  body  fresch  and  ^  likynge  to  devil’s  snare.  j 

mennws  ei^en  to  coueiten  hem,  j^an  to  gete  virtues  m  here 

soule  to  make  it  fair  to  fe  holy  trinyte  &  to  ihu  here  wor]?ieste 

spouse,  j7ei  ben  out  of  charite,  &  j>e  deuelis  panter,  to  kacche 

men  in-to  synne  of  lecherie  &  many  moo  synnes^  &  holde 

hem  ]7(?r-mne,  til  sathanas  drawe  hem  bo]?e  in®- to  helle;  & 

what  eu^re  nobleie  or  dignyte  ]?at^  j^ei  han  in  j^is  world,  be  j^ei 

gentil  men  or  wymmen,  for  jiis  cursed  lif  ]>ei  ben  cherlis 

or  bonde  wymmew  of  synne,  &  fendis  of  helle,  &  gostly  spouse 

brekeris  or  avoutreris,  &  lemmans  of  foule  sathanas  pat  is 

foulere  Jan  ony  mesel  or  leprous  in  Jis  world.  &  but  pf  Jei 

atnenden  hem  in  Jis  world  ^  Jei  schullen  be  of  hem  pat  god 

spekij  of  in  iobis  bok.®  ^pei  leden,  seij  god,  here  dales  in  Jobxxi.  is. 

lustful  goodis  &  myrjis  of  Jis  world  &  i^>^  a  poynt  of  tyme 

falle;^  douw  in-to  helle.  sumtyme  curtesie  &  genterie  was  Courtesy  and 

gentility  are 

vertuouse  ®  lif  &  honest  in  word  &  dede  &  alle  m^nere  of  now  degraded, 
good"^  berynge,  &  suster  of  holynesse;  but  now  it  is  turned 
in-to  yanyte  &  nysete  &  knackis  &  iapis  &  is  jate  of  synne, 
of  pride,  of  rebandrie,  sleuje,  coueitise,  glotonye,  dronkenesse 
&  lecherie  &  meyntenynge  of  synne  &  hordam,®  of  wrajje  & 
enuye  &  host  &  cursed  swerynge  &  wast  of  goodis  &  robbynge 
of  pore  men  distroiynge  of  londis  &  good  cristendom.^ 

^  0  ^e  gentil  wommen,  Jenki J  hon  noble  wommen  &  dene  &  on 

stedefast  han  be  bifore  ^ou,  as  oure  lady  seynt  marie,  niarie 
magdaleyne,  sussanne,  katmne,  margare,  anneys,^®  cicile  *[p.  177  ms.] 
many  moo,  &  take  what  goode  ensaumple  ^e  may  of  here 
mekenesse  &  holynesse;  for  whawne  wymmew  ben  twrnyd  when  women  are 

^  ^  good  it  is  hard  for 

fully  to  goodnesse  ful“  hard  it  is  bat  ony  man  passe  hem  in  men  to  bebeuer, 

goodnesse.  And  as*^  hard  it^^  is^®  ]>at  ony  man  passe  hem  in 

°  J  J  r  them  in  wicked- 

synne  whawne  Jei  ben  twrnyd  to  pride  &  lecherie  &  dronke- 


gaie  in  costelewe  array  X.  ^  in  x.  3  omitted  X. 

^  lyfe  SS.  ®  Jie  bok  of  iob  SS.  ®  vertues  X. 

omitted  X.  3  herd  X.  omitted  SS. 

margarete,  agnes  SS.  omitted  X.  omitted  X. 


THE  AVE  MARTA. 


^^306 


t 


/Young  women 
I  may  sometimes 
/  dance. 


Gross  amuse¬ 
ments  at  Christ¬ 
mas. 


I 


Too  much  care 
given  to  the  body 
and  its  adorn¬ 
ment. 


Noblemen  should 
repress  swearing 
and  loose  talk  in 
their  presence. 


nesse.  I  gesse  wel  ]iat  pnge  wymmen  may  sumtyme  daunsen  ^ 
in  mesure  to  haue  recreacion  and  lijtnesse,  so  j^at  haue  j^e 
more  j^oujt  on  myrj^e  in  heuene  &  drede  more  &  lone  more 
god  ]7er-by,  &  synge  honeste  songis  of  cnstis  incarnacion, 
passion,  resnrexion  &  ascencion,  &  of  j^e  ioies  of  oure  ladi,  & 
to  dispise  synne  &  preise  YeriuQ  in  alle  here  doynge*^;  but 
nowe  he  J^at  kan  best  pleie  a  pagyn  ^  of  ]>q  deuyl,  syngynge 
songis  of  lecherie,  of  batailis  and^  of  lesyngis,  &  crie  as  a 
wood  man  &  dispise  goddis  maieste  &  swere  bi  herte,  bonys 
&  alle  membris  of  crist,  is  holden  most  merie  mon^  &  schal 
haue  most  J^ank  of  pore  &  riche ;  &  f is  is  clepid  worschipe 
of  ]ie  grete  solempnyte  of  cristismasse ;  &  \us  for  ]>q  grete 
kyndenesse  &  goodnesse  \at  crist  dide  to  men  'in  his  incar¬ 
nacion  ®  we  dispisen  hym  more  in  outrage  of  pride,  of 
glotonye,  lecherie  &  alle  manure  harlotrie.  &  bi  j7is  doynge 
J>e  fend  brynge]?  in  iolite  of  body  &  myrjje  &  likynge  & 
newe  fyndynge  vp  of  synne,  iw-stede  of  holynesse  &  gostly 
ioie  &  herynge  of  god  for  his  endeles  charite,  mercy, 
mekenesse  &  kyndenesse.  lord,  where  is  ^ai  man  or  wommaw 
makiji  hym  so  bisi  to  make  his  soule  fair  in  vertues  ^  to 
goddis  sijtte  as  he  maki]?  hym  bisi  aboute  atir  of  body  for  ]7e 
sijtte  of  men?  Alas,  ]iai  so  gret  cost  &  bisynesse  is  sette 
abouten  j^e  roten  body,  ]iat  is  wormes  mete  &  a  sak  of  drit  &  dust 
&  aschis;  but  aboute  ]7e  soule  made  to  ymageof  j^e  trinyte, 
&  jie  whiche  soule  crist  bou^te  so  dere  wi]?  his  precious  herte 
blood,  is  no  bisinesse  to  dense  it  ouf^  of  synne  but  to 
brynge  it  iw-to  more  synne  bo]?  nyjt  &  day.  litel  j^enk  ]7es 
woode  men  &  wommew.  on  cristis  pouert  &  cold  &  pouert  of  his 
modir  &  what  lif  he  lyuede  in  ]7is  world  in  so  gret  penauwce 
&  dispit  &  wepynge  for  oure  synnys  &  what  schameful  dej?  he 
suffrid  at  ]?e  laste.  ]7es  lordis  &  ladies  schulden  suffre  in  here 
presence  &  courtis  no  dispisynge  of  god  bi  wood®  swerynge, 
bi  wordis  of  lecherie,  ny®  o]?ere  rebaudrie  and  vnresonable 


^  playen  hem  SS. 
^  omitted  X. 

’  ones  SS. 


2  cuwnyng  SS. 
^  carnacion  X. 
®  oJ?es  SS. 


3  pagent  SS. 
®  vertuose  X. 
9  beX. 


THE  AVE  MARIA. 


207 


speche  ;  for  ^if  J^ei  suffreden  ony  of  here  s^ruauwtis  to  dispise 
oure  erj^ely  kyng  moche  ponyschynge  schulde  come  Ho  hem^ 

&  ]7ei  ben  holden  false  &  traitour  ^  to  j^e  kyng.  o  bon  moche 
more  traitours  &  false  ben  ]7es  worldly  lordis  ^  to  crist  kyng  of 
alle  beuene  &  alle  erj^e  &  belle,  wbawne  j^ei  beren  sicb  dispit 
don  to  bis  maieste  &  refreynen  not  here  seruauwtis  \er-oi. 

Curtis  ensaumple  of  clennesse,  honeste  &  bolynesse  cam  sum- 
tyme  "^Hro  lordis  courtis  to  ]7e  comyns,  &  }>an  was  holy  lif  \n  *[p,  178  ms.] 
worscbipe  among  pore  &  riche.  But  now  come]?  ensaumple  of  Courts  set  a  bad 
pride,  glotonye,  lecberie  &  bal  harlotrie  fro  lordis  courtis  to  ]?e  commons, 
comyns.  And  bere-fore  regne]?  synne  m  alle  man(?re  peple 
wiJ?-outen  scbame.  ]?us  ]?e  fend  blyndi]?  men  to  clepe  ]7is 
cursed  bauntynge  of  arlotrie  &  synne  gret  worscbipe  of  god, 

&  to  clepe  deuocion  of  preieris  &  sade  mynde  of  cristis  poU(?rt, 
penau72ce  &  de]?  &  of  ])e  day  of  dome  ypocrisie  &  folie ;  & 
sucbe  men  ben  not  worbi  to  dwelle  in  lordis  courtis,  laste  bei  Good  men  not 

■’  *  allowed  to  live  m 

dryuen  awey  ]?e  deuyl  &  bis  scole  of  synne  &  vanyte  to  courts. 

displesynge^  of  jonge,  nyce  folis,  &  bryngen  in  crist  in-to 

cristen®  mennws  soulis  &  bis®  scole  of  virtues  &  honeste  in 

]70ujt,  worde  &  dede,  to'’'  plesynge  of  god  &  sauynge  of 

mennws  soulis.  ^  Heil  marie,  j^at  is  wel  be  to  ]?e,  marie ;  or 

ioie  be  to  be.  for  bi  ®  bat  womman®  eue  cam  sorowe,  peyne  &  Eve  brought  sor- 

row  to  men, 

WOO  to  mawkynde  for  scbe  tristed  not  sadly  to  goddis  word 

but  tristed  to  ]?e  fendis  gabbynge  &  coueited  ou^rmoche 

kuT^nynge  &  di7^gnyte;  but  bi  sad  bileue  &  mekenesse  & 

cbarite  of  marie  cam  ioie  & 'saluacion  to  mankynde,  for  her  Mary  brought 

bi  scbe  conseyuede  crist  as  j^e  gospel  sei]?.  ]?^rfore  flee 

lesyngis  &  pride  &  holde  sadly  bileue  of  goddis  word  w«tA 

mekenesse  &  cbarite  &  ]?on  scbalt  bane  part  of  maries  ®ioie 

blisse  of  beuene  eueremore.  marie  cristis  modir  was  ful  of 

grace,  seynt  steuene  was  ful  of  grace,  as  holy  writt  sei]?.  Acts  vi.  8. 

but  lasse  ]?an  oure  lady,  &  oure  swete  lord  ibu  was  ful  of 

grace  aboue  steuene  &  oure  ladi  &  so  \er  ben  ]?re 

omitted  X.  ^  as  false  traitours  SS.  3  omitted  X. 

^  dispisyng  SS.  ®  omitted  X.  s  gg_ 

7  in  X.  omitted  X.  9-9  blessyng  &  be  SS. 


208 


THE  AVE  MARIA. 


God  is  in  all 
creatures, 


but  in  good  men 
by  grace, 


and  in  angels  by 
showing  himself 
clearly. 


degrees  of  plente  of  grace.  \e  leste  of  J^is  plente  was  in 
steuene,  fe  mydil  in  oure  lady,  but  j>e  most  in  oure  lord  ihu 
crist.  God  tnnyte  is  wi]?  eche  creature  bi  myjt,  wisdom 
&  goodnesse  to  kepe  it,  for  ellis  it  schulde  turne  to  no^t ;  but 
god  is  wif  goode  men  of  virtuous  lif  bi  grd!ce  to  approue  & 
accepte  here  doyngis  &  helpe  hem  ]7er-iwne,  to  rewarde  hem 
in  blisse  ]7(?rfore,  &  dwellij  in  here  soulis  as  his  owen  temple, 
&  maki]?  hem  ioifully  dwelle  in  his  s^ruyce  &  suffre  ^  gladly 
alle  dispitis  &  p^rsecucion  for  his  name  ;  but  god  is  in  angelis 
&  seyntis  in  heuene  bi  clier  schewynge  of  his  godhed  to  hem 
&  makynge  hem  to  knowe  alle  ]?ingis  &  haue  alle  euere 
\ei  desiren  wij?-outen  ony  anoye  or  peyne.  ^Blissed  be  ]jou 
among  wymmen ;  'pat  is  more  pan  ony  oper  wommaw,  for 
noon  oper  was  so  sad  in  bileue  ne  so  meke  ne  so  chast  ne  so 
goode  in  alle  manure  holynesse  &  namely  in  brennynge 
charite.  ^if  Jou  wilt  haue  part  of  maries  blisse  &  goddis 
blissynge  sue  marie  in  j^is  holy  lif  &  ^  namely  in  j^es  seuene, 
feip,  hope,  &  charite,  &  mekenesse,  chastite,  sobirnesse,  & 
brynnynge  desir  of  ri^twisnesse.  And  blissed  be  pe  fruyt  of 
pi  womb :  pat  is  ihu,  for  bi  his  mercj  &  grace  come]?  alle 
goodnesse,  &  namely  bi  his  trewe  techynge  &  wilful  de]?  & 
endeles  my^t,  be  whiche  he  schal  reise  alle  men  at  domes  day 
&  jif  blisse  of  heuene  in  bodi  &  soule  to  po  pat  ende  in 
p(9rfit  charite.  god  ^eue  vs  grace  to  ]?enke  on  cristis  m^rcy  & 
rijtwisnesse  &  maries  sadnesse  in  bileue,  &  mekenesse  to  make 
ende  in  p^rfit  charite.  Amen. 


1  suffrij?  X. 


2  inX. 


209 


XIIL 

HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  etc. 

The  tiresome  series  of  antitheses  between  Christ  and  the  fiend  with  which 
this  tract  begins  are  in  Wyclif’s  worst  manner,  if  indeed  they  are  his. 

The  characteristic  point  of  this  tract  is  its  insistence  on  the  hardships 
of  imprisonment  for  debt,  on  the  cruelty  of  those  who  infiict  it  unjustly, 
(pp.  211  and  214),  and  on  the  folly  of  those  who  fall  into  it  through 
drunkenness  (p.  217).  I  do  not  remember  any  other  tract  in  which  this 
point  is  pressed  so  much. 

Whoever  the  author  was,  he  knew  the  poor  and  felt  for  them ;  notice, 
among  other  things,  his  description  of  the  bed-rid  poor  as  couching  on 
muck  or  dust  (p.  211),  and  his  complaint  that  the  aged  poor  had  to  drink 
water  and  fell  into  fevers.  (Did  he  look  upon  wine  as  a  febrifuge  ?) 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA., 
where  the  first  chapter  and  part  of  the  second  are  wanting. 

SUMMAEY. 

Chap.  I.  The  works  of  bodily  mercy  are  enumerated,  and  the  perversions 

of  them  prevalent  among  bad  priests,  etc.  . p.  210 

II.  Contains  a  similar  list  of  contrasts  as  to  the  works  of  spiritual  mercy  212 

III.  The  temptations  offered  us  by  the  five  senses  are  enumerated  and 

contrasted  with  the  right  use  of  the  senses.  .  216 


14 


210 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


[Chap.  I. 


*[179  MS.] 
Christ  orders  us 
to  feed  the  poor ; 
the  devil  teaches 
us  to  make  feasts 
for  the  rich, 


and  to  give  them 
wine  and  spiced 
ale, 

and  to  let  the  sick 
poor  drink  water. 


Christ  teaches  us 
to  clothe  the 
naked;  the  devil 
teaches  to  waste 
rich  clothes  on 
vagabonds. 


Men  of  religion 
spend  the  money 
of  the  poor  on 
adorning  horses 
and  vestments. 


They  waste  money 
in  decorating 
images. 


Christ  teaches  to 
give  shelter  to 
the  poor ; 


Hou  sathanas  &  his  children  t^^men  werkis  of  mercy 
vpsodom  &  disceyuen  men  ])er-mne  &  in  here  fyne 
wittis. 

Q^ipitulum  pMmm. 

^'Eirst  crist  comanwdi]?  men  of  power  to  fede  hungry  pore 
men ;  .fend  &  his  techen  to  make  costy  festis  &  waste 
many  goodis  on  lordis  &  riche  men  &  to  suifre  pore  men 
sterue  &  perische  for  hunger  &  o\erQ  myschenys ;  ^e,  men 
]iat  feynen  hem  ful  of  charite  &  religion  gadren  propre 
goodis  to  hem  seluen  &  festen  delicatly  lordis  &  ladies  & 
riche  men  &  sutfre  here  pore  brej^ren  begge  for  meschef  & 
fare  ful  harde.  crist  comauwdi]?  to  ^eue  drynk  to  j^rusty  men 
&  wymmen;  J^e  fend  &  his  techen  to  purueye  heij  wyn  & 
spised  ale  &  strong  for  riche  men  &  lordis  to  make  hem 
dronken  &  chide  &  fijtte  &  forjete  god  &  his  lawe,  &  to  sutfre 
pore  \at  ban  noujt  of  here  owene  &  may  not  labore  for 
febilnesse  or  sikenesse  &  blyndenesse  drynke  wat(?r  &  falle  in 
feueris  or  ellis  pmsche.  crist  comauwdi]?  to  cloj^e  nakyd  men 
&  wymmen  wha^me  ]7ei  ban  nojt  of  here  owene ;  '^er-io  \q 
fend  &  his  techen  to  jeue  costly  cloj^is  &  manye  to  riche  men 
&  mynstr«lis  or  shaualdours  for  worldly  name,  &  sutfre  pore 
men  haue  nakid  sidis  &  schakynge  lippis  &  hondis  for  cold 
]>at  woo  is  hem  wi]?  ]7e  lif.  ^e,  prelatis  &  men  of  singuler 
religion,  ])at  taken  j^e  charge  to  ben  procuratouris  &  dis- 
penderis  of  pore  mennws  liflode,  cloj^en  fatte  horsis  &  gaie 
sadlis  &  bridlis  &  mytris  &  croceris  wi]?  gold  &  siluer  & 
precious  stonys  &  8uffre7^  pore  men  &  children  perische  for 
cold ;  &  pt  ]7es  prelatis  &  newe  religious  comen  in  staat  of 
cristis  pouert  &  his  apostlis,  &  techen  &  crien  ]iat  what  euere 
]7ei  han  is  pore  mennws  goode.  pt  riche  men  cloj^en^  dede 
stockis  &  stonys  wi]?  precious  cloj^is,  wi]?  gold  &  siluer  & 
perils  &  gaynesse  to  pe  world,  &  sutfren  pore  men  goo  sore 
a  cold  &  at  moche  meschefe.  Crist  techij?  to  herbwre  pore 
men  pat  han  non  houses  ne  peny  to  peye  for  here  innys ;  pQ 

^  closen  MS. 


Chap.  I.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


211 


fend  &  liis  techen  to  herberwe  riche  men  &  lordis  wil  sret  the  devil  teaches 

-*  to  entertain  rich 

cost  &  deyitte  for  worldly  worschipe,  &  sutfre  pore  men  i»en  grandly, 
wander  \n  stormys  &  slepe  wi]?  j^e  swyn,  &  many  tymes 
suffre  not  hem  come  wi)>-iwne  here  ^atis,  &  to  fynde  many 

„  ,  •  1  -i.-  n  •  ,  The  religious 

excusacions  &  coloure  pis  doynge.  ^e,  ypomtis  oi  priuat  build  great 

, .  .  ,  .  -  .  houses. 

religion  maken  grete  houses  &  costy  &  gaely  peyntid  "^'more  *[p.  isoms.] 
Ian  kyngis  &  lordis  bi  sotil  beggynge  &  confessions  &  trentalis 
&  meyntenynge  of  synne,  [and]  herberewe  lordis  &  riche  men 
&  namely  ladies,  &  suffre  pore  men  lie  wil-outen  or  geten 
houslewth  at  pore  men  or  ellis  pmsche  for  wedris  &  cold. 

^  Crist  techil  to  visite  sike  men  &  couwforte  hem  &  helpe  hem  Christ  teaches  to 

.  ....  visit  the  sick ; 

ot  sustenauwce ;  be  fend  &  his  techen  to  visiten  riche  men,  the  devil  teaches 

.  .  ,  ^  to  pay  visits  of 

lordis  &  ladies  in  here  prospmte  &  lykynge  to  be  holden  ceremony  to  the 

prosperous. 

kynde  &  curteis,  &  to  couwforte  eche  oj^er  in  synne  &  to  haue 

lustis  of  glotonye,  lecherie  &  opere  schrewidnessis,  but  of 

pore  men  pat  ben  beddrede  &  couchen  in  muk  or  dust  is  litel 

poujt  on  or  no^t.  ^  ]it  ypocritis  of  feyned  religion  visiten  Friars  as  bad  as 

not  fadirles  children  &  modirles  &  widewis  in  here  tribu- 

lacion  &  kepe  not  hem  self  vnbleckid  fro  j^is  world,  as  seywt 

iame  techi]? ;  but  visete  oft  riche  men  &  wymmen,  &  namely  James  i.  27. 

riche  widewis,  for  to  gete  worldly  muk  by  false  disceitis  & 

carien  it  home  to  caymes  castelis  &  an^^cnstis  couent  & 

sathanas  children  &  marteris  of  glotonye.  ^  Crist  techeb  to  Christ  teaches  to 

.  .  ■*  visit  men  in 

visite  men  in  prison  &  helpe  to  delyuere  hem  hi  good  manure  prison ; 

&  couwforte  hem  bi  almes  muynge :  be  fend  &  his  presonen  the  devil  and  his 

,  ,  ■*  ,  imprison  for  debt 

pore  men  for  dette  whawne  bei  ben  not  at  power  to  paie,  &  men  who  do  their 

^  ^  ^  best  to  pay. 

tr«ueile  nyjt  &  day  &  lyuen  ful  harde,  &  to  lyue  wi]?  trew^e 
&  susteynen^  wif  &  children,  &  on  hem  is  no  mercy,  ht  feyned  religious 

*'  '  j  ^  j  persecute  poor 

religious  men  pursuen  pore  prestis  to  prison  &  to  brennynge  priests, 
bi  many  cursed  lesyngis  &  sclauwdrynge  priue  &  apert,  for  as 
mochel  as  j^ei  prechen  trewly  &  frely  cristis  gospel  &  goddis 
hestis  &  reprouen  here  ypocrisie,  symonye,  coueitise  &  oj^ere 
disceitis ;  &  pt  Jes  ypomtis  blenden  lordis  &  prelatis  to 
enprisone  siche  pore  prestis  techynge  ^e  trenj^e  bi  comauwde- 
ment  &  ensaumple  of  crist  &  his  apostlis,  not-wijstondynge 

^  susteynem  MS. 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC.  [Chap.  I. 

]^at  lordis  &  prislatis  ben  charged  vp  peyne  of  dawpnacion 
to  helpe  hem  &  meyntene  j^is  trenj^e  &  pr^chonris  of  it. 
^  It  is  holden  a  work  of  mercy  to  birie  dede  men  after  ]>Q 
techynge  of  goddis  lawe ;  j^e  fend  techi]?  worldly  riche  men, 
clerkis  &  religious,  to  make  solewpnyte  whawne  riche  men 
ben  dede  wi]?  dirige  &  messis  &  wax  &  rengynge  &  grete 
festis,  but  wha?^ne  pore  men  ben  dede  vunej^e  wole  ony  man 
Sfthe^^Lrrfon”  derige  or  masse.  ]it  feyned  religious 

wii^^iake’  ^no  ''^^leu  come  to  riche  mennws  dirige  in  grete  multitude  & 
room  for  the  poor.  biried  in  here  chirche,  &  stryuen  &  flatten  for 

j^e  dede  careyne  for  loue  of  offrynge  &  worldly  honour,  but 
pore  men  schullen  not  lie  among  hem  j^ouj  J>ei  axen  it 
neuere  so  faste  for  charite.  &  jjus  in  stede  of  werkis  of 
bodely  m^rcy  &  charite  is  comen  in  ypocrisie  of  worldly 
*[p.  181MS]  name  &  coueitise  &  norischywge  "^'of  synne  &  sotil  excusynge 
jjer-of,  &  enyl  is  clepid  good  &  good  euyl. 


212 


Burial  of  the 
dead. 


Q^pitulum  2"”- 


Christ  says  we 
should  teach 
God’s  command¬ 
ments  ; 


the  devil  teaches 
tricks  of  money¬ 
getting, 


Werkis  of  mi^rcy  ben  worse  turned  vpsodouw.  crist  sei]?  it 
is  a  souereyn  werk  of  mi^rcy  &  charite  to  teche  vnlernyd 
men  ]>e  rijtte  weie  to  heuene,  ]?at  is  j^e  gospel  &  goddis 
comawndementis ;  ]>q  fend  &  his  seyn  it  is  grete  charite  to 
teche  ^onge  men  &  o]!erQ  sotil  craftis  &  nedeles  &  qneynte 


slei^tis  to  disceyue  schepische  men  of  worldly  goodis  &  make 

and  stirs  up  hem  Self  riche  &  bostful  &  pronde.  &  j^e  fend  bi  sotil  menys 

cures  to  men  of  Ypocrisie  &  symonve  stireb  lordis  &  myitty  men  to  make 
■who  are  foolish  J  J  ^ 

and  worldly.  an  ydiot  &  fool  curatour  of  cristene  sonlis,  pat  neiper  may  ne 
kan  ne  wole,  for  his  opyn  synne  &  worldly  lif  &  ignorauwce 
of  holy .  writt  &  necligence  &  worldly  yanyte  &  drede  of 
worldly  shame  &  loos,  teche  hem  goddis  lawe,  ne  snffre  opere 


to  teche  hem  frely  &  trewely  wij^-onten  flaterynge  for  drede 
last  his  owene  falsnesse  be  knowen  ;  &  ^it  ]7es  cursed 
auaunsynge  is  clepid  charite  to  helpe  |>us  a  pore  man.  But 
A  poor  wretch  of  an  ydiot  &  a  lecherous  wrecche  schal  be  sett  to  kepe  pe  soulis 
after^the  parish,*  foi"  litel  pris,  &  pQ  more  lorel  goo  on  haukynge  &  huwtywg, 


Chap.  II,] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


213 


&  s^rue  in  lordis  courtis,  in  worldly  offices,  &  fe  deuyl  drawij? 

wi]7  his  helpis  alle  ])at  he  may  to  helle  &  J7is  is  clepid  mercy  ininting. 

&  charite ;  but  Jjis  deuelis  charite  puttij?  oute  charite  &  loue 
of  god  &  bryngi]?  in  loue  of  money  &  synne  &  hate  of  virtues 
&  cristene  soulis.  crist  sei]?  it  is  werk  of  meraj  to  conseile  at 
p^rti  hou  a  man  schal  best  lyue  in  ]7is  or  J^is  special  poynt. 
he  fend  &  his  seyn  it  is  merorv  &  charite  to  conseile  men  to  instead  of  giving 

•*  •'  ^  true  advice,  the 

holde  forh  craftis  \)at  hei  vsen  a^enst  here  conscience  &  devil’s  children 

I  s  i  i  let  a  man  make 

excusen  hem  hi  almes,  as  masse  syngynge  &  makynge  of 

\ 

nedles  houses  &  costy.  &  whawne  clerkis  schullen  conseile 

lordis  &  Qi\erQ  men  hou  J^ei  may  best  s^rue  god  &  saue  here 

soulis  in  here  a-staat,  j^is  conseil  is  turned  iw-to  worldly 

wisdom  as  bildynge  of  castellis  &  arraiynge  of  housholde  in 

lond  of  pees  &  of  werre.  &  whawne  it  [is]  reserued  to  j^e 

holy  gbst  to  ^eue  vtterly  conseil  in  special  poyntis  \a\>  ben  not 

expr^sly  comaundid  ne  forboden  in  holy  writt,  worldly  clerkis 

ful  of  pride,  symonye,  coueitise  &  ojiere  synnys  jeuen  fulbut 

conseil  ajenst  ]?e  holy  gost  &  ajenst  ]>e  heljie  of  J^e  soule  for 

here  owene  pride  &  coueitise ;  &  J^us  conseil  of  ]>e  holy  gost 

&  profit  of  soulis^  is  putt  bihynde  &  conseil  of  j^e  world  & 

jje  fleisch  &  of  sathanas  is  putt  for]?,  god  biddi]?  lordis  & 

souereyns  schulden  in  resonable  manere  chastise  here  sugetis, 

s^ruauntis  &  childre?^  whawne  ]?ei  trespassen  opynly  in  word 

or  dede  ajenst  goddis  comau?^dementis ;  \q  fend  &  his  techen  The  devil  teaches 

pat  suggettis  &  seruaums  ben  cruely  beten,  pyned,  prisoned  subjects  and  ser- 

&  suwtyme  hangid  &  drawen  for  worldly  trespas  &  defaute 

of  here  "^'s^ruyce  doynge,  &  vnreuerence  a^enst  worldly  *  [p.  i82  ms.] 

souereyns,  but  of  trespas  &  dispit  of  god  &  his  lawe  no 

charge  but  mirhe^  &  liynge  &  iapynge.  worldly  prolatis  of  Worldly  prelates 

‘  .  ,  forbid  rulers  to 

an^mrist  seyn  \at  lordis  schullen  chastise  here  sugetis  of  punish  lechery 

and  perjury. 

worldly  causes,  but  not  of  lecherie  ne  pride  ne  forswerynge, 
be  it  neu^re  so  opyn,  for  ]?at  longe]?  to  iurdiccion  of  prelatis  ; 
ne]?eles  ^if  ]7ei  han  money  of  ]?es  lecherous  ]?eues  ]?ei  schullen 
lie  in  here  cursed  synne  fro  ^eer  to  ^eer,  je  be  al  here  lif  pf  sin-rents. 

1  AA  begins  here,  the  first  part  of  the  tract  being  lost.  ^  myjpe  X. 


214 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


[Chap.  II. 


Ill-treatment  of 
the  poor. 


The  clergy  curse 
those  who  cannot 
pay  tithes,  and 
the  friars  beg 
from  those  who 
have  nothing  for 
themselves. 


God  teaches  to 
forgive  wrongs 
and  ill  will ; 

the  devil  teaches 
revenge. 


]7ei  paien  moche  &  redily.  clerkis  seyn  jjat  lordis  ben  cwrsed 
pf  J^ei  chastisen  hem,  ]iouj  ^ei  ben  neuf^re  so  foule  lecherous 
&  neuere  so  cursed  heretikis,  for  symonye  &  coueitise  & 
meyntenynge  of  synne  &  robbynge^  pore  tenauwtis  bi  extor- 
cions  for  an^^'cnstis  correccions  &  veyn  halwynge  of  chirchis 
&  auteris  &  opere  iapis.  ^lord,  soone  &  esely  schulde  synne 
be  hurlid  oute  of  lond  pf  lordis  wolden  in  al  here  wille,  al 
here  witt  &  power  dispise  sywne  &  synful  wrecchis,  &  preise 
&  meyntene  virtue  &  v^f’tuous  men ;  &  C(?rtis  j^ei  ben  holden 
her-to  vp  peyne  of  dampnacion,  for  ellis  j^ei  fallen  in  mercy 
&  charite.  god  techi]?  it  is  mercy  to  couw-forten  men  fallen  in 
myschif  &  disese.  pe^  fend  &  his  techen  pat  it  is  almes  to 
pursuen  men^  to  prisonynge  &  exilynge  whawne  j^ei  ben 
brou^t  dou7^  bi  sodeyne  loos,  as  bre^ny«ge  &  robbynge,  for 
riche  men  beren  hem  on  honde  pat  it  is  for  here  synne  & 
mysreulynge  of  hem  self,  &  ellis  opere  bro^elis  wolden  renne 
awey  wi]?  riche  mennws  good,  &  l(9r-fore  ]7ei  schulden  be  seet 
in  strong  prison  til  pei  perische  for  hunger  &  myschef  & 
dispeiren  &  grucchen  ajenst  god;  &  pus  for  lone  of  rotyn  dritt 
J;ei  don  pat  is  in  hem  to  dampne  many  soulis.  pt  worldly 
clerkis  cursen  for  dymes  &  offryngis,  ]70U^  men  ben  ful  pore  & 
lei  don  no  ping  here  offis,  &  veyn  religious  cessen  not  to  begge 
&  craue  of  pore  men,  j^ouj  here  rente  be  bihynde  &  here 
werk^  bestis  in  distresse  &  wif  &  childe  hungry  &  nakyd,  & 
so  lei  bryngen  hem  in-to  more  myschif  &  couwforten  hem  not 
but  bi  lesyngis  &  ®  fals  gr^untynge  of  gostly  helpe,  pat  is  not 
in  here  power  but  only  in  goddis  ®  delynge.  ^  God  techil 
pat  it  is  mercy  to  forpue  trespasis  &  wrongis  don  ajenst  men 
hem  self  &  algatis  rancor  &  ewil  wille  of  herte ;  pe  fend  & 
his  seyn  l^t  it  is  manlynesse  &  rijtwisnesse  &  almes  to  betyn 
gadlyngis  &  be  vengid  on  hem  pat  don  hem  wrong,  for  ellis 
leues  &  lorellis  wolden  ou^rrenne  hem  &  here  sugetis  wolden 
not  drede  hem ;  but  comynly  lis  chastysynge  is  don  bi  pride, 
coueitise  &  out  of  charite.  &  lou^  lordis  &  grete  men  wynnen 

3  omitted  X. 

®  goode  X. 


1  robben  AA. 
^  wrek  X. 


2  omitted  X. 
5  of  X. 


Chap.  II.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


215 


herby  worldly  name  &  temp(9ral  goodis,  fei  lesen  cbarite  & 

here  soule  pat  ben  worj^i  a  ]?ousand  ^fold  betre  ]?an  alle  erj^ely  •[p.  183  MS.j 

tr(9sour.  ^  God  sei]?  it  is  mercy  &  charite  to  suffre  men 

mekely  &  wisly  wha/^ne  ]7ei  ben  out  of  reson  as  wro]?  & 

malencolious;  J^e  fend  &  his  seyn  pat  fis  is^  couwardise  & 

leesynge  of  worldly  name  &  boldynge  of  euyl  doeris  ;  &  J^erfore 

for  o  schrewed  word  a  man  mot  quyte  anoj^er  or  moo,  &  so 

of  euyl  dedis  come]?  hate  &  strif,  &  fi^ttynge  &  pledynge  be 

reised  &  witt  &  reson  &  charite  exilid,  &  many  men  perischid 

in  bodi  &  soule.  god  comauwdi]?  vs  to  loue  oure  enemys  of 

oure  herte  &  doo  good  to  men  ]?at  hati]?^  vs  &  preie  for  men 

pat  pursuen  vs  wrongfully  &  falsly ;  pe  deuyl  &  his  seyn  pat  te^ihouid 

it  is  ri]tful  to  hate  oure  enemys  &  don  heuyl  &  harm  to  hem 

pat  haten  vs  &  falsly  pursuen  vs,  &  axe  vengauwce  of  oure 

enemys  &  false  pursueris,  for  ellis  we  schulle^  norische 

oure  enemys  in  here  sywne  &  ouerrenne  vs  &  distroie  vs, 

oure  wifis  &  children  &  goodis,  &  ]7(9rfore  we  willen  defende 

vs  pe  while  pat  we  may.  trewe  men  seyn  to  pe  fend  &  his 

disciplis  pat  pf  we  kepen  goddis  hestis  oure  god  wole  fi]ten 

for  vs  &  maken  oure  enemys  afferd,  &  bi  oure  goode  pacience  figiitforus. 

&  charite  &  herty  pmynge  for  oure  enemys®  ]?ei  schulden  be 
goddis  grace  cesse  of  here  wrong  &  turne  to  pees  &  charite  ; 

&  ]?is  is  li^ttere  &  betere  ]?an  to  conquere  al  ]?e  eipe  bi  dynt 
of  swerid.  &  pf  oure  enemys  ben  endurid  in  synne,  as  was 
pharaoo,  oure  godde  wolde  ordeyne  pe  beste  for  vs  bo]7e  for 
body  &  soule  pf  we  kepen  mekenesse,  paciewce  &  charite ;  & 
si]?  werris  comen  to  men  for  synnys  let  mew  leue  here  cwrsed 
sywne  &  god  of  mercy  &  pees  wole  ^eue  vs  reste  &  pees  of 
alle  er]?ely  enemyes.  bi  ]?es  cautelis  &  many  moo  the  fend  & 
his  disciplis  distroien  werkis  of  mercy  &  fallen  in-to  loos  of 
]?ingis  pat  pei  coueiten  mochel  &  in-to  endelis  myschefes  pat 
]?ei  wolen  to  askape,  for  ]?ei  wolen  not  be  reulid  bi  goddis 
lawe  &  reson  but  bi  hire  wille,  &  per-fore  alle  ]?ingis  schal 
turne  ajenst  hem  at  pe  laste. 


^  omitted  X. 


2  haten  AA. 


®  synnys  AA. 


216 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


[Chap.  III. 


The  devil  makes 
our  five  senses 
means  of  sin. 

Sight  is  used  by 
the  devil  to  stir  up 


lust, 


covetousness. 


*[p.  184  MS.] 


Hearing  leads 
them  to 


lust,  slander, 


hate 


and  vain  swear¬ 
ing. 

Smelling 


leads  to  luxurious 
eating  and  drink¬ 
ing. 


C^ipitulum  3'”- 

^it  fe  fend  disceynej?  men  bi  here  fyue  wittis  &  make]? 
hem  menys  to  synne  where  ]?ei  schulden  be  menys  to  Y^rtne 

good  gouernale  of  men  :  first  he^  stiri]?  men  to  seen 
vanyte  of  ]?is  world  &  setten  here  herte  \er~omiQ  &  forjeten 
god  &  his  werkis ;  also  he  stiri]?  men  to  see  faire  wymmen, 
&  brywgi]?  mynde  of  hem  &  greet  likynge  of  lecherie  i?^-to 
mennw5  hertis  til  ]?ei  consenten  to  synne  &  fulfillen  it  in 
dede.  ^  Also  whawne  men  seen  lordischipis  of  ]>is  world  & 
precious  iuelis  &  gold  &  siluer,  faire  hors  &  scheep  &  o]?dre 
goodis,  ]?e  fend  stire]?  hem  to  desire  hem  vnskilfnlly  &  sette 
more  here  herte  on  hem  ]?an  on  virtues  &  blisse  of  heuene ; 
&  'panne  ]?ei  fallen  m-to  pride  &  coueitise  &  opere  synnys. 
but  men  schulden  see  ^goddis  werkis,  as  heuene  &  er]?e,_  & 
goddis  creaturis  &  herbi  knowen  pe  myjt,  pe  wytt  &  good- 
nesse  of  pe  lord  pat  made  alle  ]?ingis  of  not,  &  drede  hym 
oner  alle  ]’ing«s  &  loue  hm  ouer  alle  creaturis.  ^Wha?^ne 
men  schulden  here  goddis  comauwdemewtis  &  poyntis  of 
charite  &  ri^twisnesse  &  treu]?e,  pe  fend  stiri]?  hem  to  heren 
foul  speche  of  leccherie,  of  bacbytynge  of  neijeboris  & 
lesyngis  for  to  haue  mynde  &  likynge  of  synne  &  to  stire 
men  to  hate  &  enuye  &  pledynge  &  fijttynge,  so  pat  meke- 
nesse  &  pacience  &  charite  schullen  be  lost  &  cursednesse  of 
synne  regne]?,  pat  vnnefe  can  ony  man  kepe  his  tonge  fro 
fals  &  veyn  swerynge  &  schrewid  spekynge  bo]?e  of  lecherie 
&  false  spekyngis.  ^  Whawne  men  schullen  in  spirit  smelle 
pe  swettenesse  &  ]?e  holynesse  of  ihu  crist  &  his  lif,  &  smelle 
bi  bodily  witt  pe  swettenesse  &  good  odour  of  herbis  &  spicis 
&  trees^  &  opere  creaturis,  to  loue  god  &  s^rue  god  &  herie 
hym  for  his  goodnesse,  pe  fend  stiri]?  men  to  sette  here  lust 
in  smelly ?^ge  of  lekerous  metis  &  drynkis  to  take  ouer- 
mochil  of  hem,  til  ]?ei  lesen  here  wittis  &  for^eten  god  & 
his  scruyce  &  fallen  in  lecherie  &  slepen  as  hooggis,  &  chiden 
&  fijttew  as  woode  houwdis,  &  sweren  herte  &  bonys,  &  cursen 

^  in  X.  2  j,ei  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  HI.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


217 


&  warien  &  pr^chew  opynly  cursed  lesyngis,  &  jeuen  en- 

saumple  of  synne  as  cruel  fendis  of  helle.  for  bi  fis  doynge 

lei  blasphemen  god  &  styrew  men  to  synne  more  spedly  ^an 

don  many  Jousand  fendis  bi  hem  self,  whawne  men  schulden 

taste  &  take  mete  &  drynk  in  resonable  mesure  to  sustene  Taste 

here  lif  &  labore,  &  ^i^r-fore  j^ank  god  &  serue  hym  mekely 

&  wilfully  &  loue  hym  hertly,  Je  fend  stirij?  men  to  sewe 

here  owene  lustis  of  flesch,  to  walwe  in  glotonye  &  drouwke-  leads  to  drunken 

nesse  as  swyn  in  ^e  feen,  ]ia[>  J^er  is  nei^^r  witt  ne  reson  in 

hem,  ne  my^t  to  goo  on  j^e  erj^e  sumtyme ;  &  to  fulfille  j^is 

stynkynge  glotonye  &  dronkenes  J^ei  seken  many  stretis 

&  tauernes  to  seke  lekerous  morselis  &  swete  drynkis,  &  SrowS 

borowen  o]?er  mennws  catel  &  payen  not  a^en  many  tymes ; 

for  hereby  J^ei  wasten  here  owene  goodis  &  oper  mennus 

&  comen  to  pou^rt  &  ben  caster  in  prison  til  j^ei  steruen.  & 

bi  lis  glotonye  &  dronkenesse  poi  wastes  here  owen  bodi  & 

wittis  &  fallen  in-to  sikenesse^  on  many  maneris  &  lesen 

worldly  catel  &  myjttis  of  ^e  soule,  as  vndi^rstondynge, 

mynde  &  reson,  &  geten  peynes  of  belle  i^  bodi  &  soule,  but 

pf  lei  amende  hem  trewely  in  lis  world.  le  fend  techil 

glotonys  &  dronkelewe  men  to  excuse  lis  wast  on  lis 

manure:  “God  made  alle  goode  mete  &  drynke  couenable 

for  men  schulden  spende  it  &  lyue  ler-by;”  but  lei  taken 

non  hede  of  le  mesure  ne  hou  falsly  lei  lyuen  apnst  goddis 

lawe,  &  hou  crist  &  his  seyntis  tau^ten  &  vseden  abstynence 

&  penauwce,  &  hou  cnstene  men  schulden  conquere  heuene 

bi  brekywge  '^'of  fleschly  lustis,  as  crist  techil  in  le  gospel,  &  *[p.  185MS.] 

hou  crist  &  poul  &  petir  comauwden  vs  pat  we  schullen  not  iTeterii.  ii. 


fille  le  desiris  of  oure  flesch,  but  as  gestis  or  comelyngis  & 
pilgrimes  absteynen  hem^  fro  fleschly  desires  pat  flatten  apnst 


drynk  &  dole  &  alle  ol^re  necessaries,  so  pat  he  be  strong 
to  s^rue  god  &  do  his  labowr  aftir  le  staat  l^t  god  settil  him 


1  drynkenssis  A  A. 

2  In  AA.  ‘  hem  ’  has  been  cancelled  by  underdotting.  It  should  have 
been  corrected  to  ‘  us.’ 


218 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  CHILDREN,  ETC. 


[Chap.  III. 


Touch  leads  to 
lust. 

Eccles.  xiii,  1. 


Prevalence  of 
uncleanness. 

Jeremiah  ix.  21. 


i«ne,  so  moche  ]>e  betre  boj^e  for  body  &  soule  &  alle  opere 
men.  but  hou  euere  we  excusen  vs  we  wasten  nedeles  moche 
goode  bo]?e  in  mete  &  drynk  &  clojjis,  werbi  pore  men 
schulden  be  holpen  &  we  betre  seme  god  &  lesse  bisi  aboute 
]7e  body  &  more  bisy  aboute  god  &  hel|>e  of  oure  soulis  bi 
lesse  cost  &  spendywge  pf  we  holden  goode  mesure. 
fend  disceyue]?  men  &  wymmen  bi  touchynge  of  membris 
ordeyned  for  genderure  of  mankynde,  &  bi  kissyng  &  clippyng 
is  ]>e  fier  of  lecherie  kyndlid  &  norischid  in  herte  til  \e  dede 
sue,  &  many  tymes  long  custome  in^  J^is  cursed  synne.  j^erfore 
seij?  j^e  wise  man,  he  ]>at  handli]?  pich  schal  be  foulid  \er-oi : 
\at  is  men  handlynge  wymmen  &  kyssywge  hem  schullen  be 
blickid  wi]7  lust  of  lecherie,  o]>er  in  herte  e\er  in  body  or  ellis 
in  bo|>e.  j^erfore  ierom  &  seyntis  seyn  fleynge  fro  suche 
companye  &  abstynence  &  saad  traueile  is  best  medecyne 
apnst  lecherie  ;  but  ]7is  weiward  dalliaunce  wi]?  wymmen  is 
so  comyn  J>«t  vnne]7e  can  ony  man  kepe  hjm  dene,  or  sengle 
or  weddid  or  men  of  ordre  of^  religion.  And  ]7us  it  is 
verrifyed  \at  god  sei]?  by  Jeromye;  de]?  ha]?  entrid  by  ^oure 
wyndowis,  '^at  ben  fyue  wittes.  bi  ]7es  queyntises  &  many 
moo  ]?e  fend  disceyue]?  men  &  of  iwstmmewtis  or®  menys  & 
armu[r]e  of  virtue  he  maki]?  instrwmentis  or  menys  &  armowr 
of  synne.  God  grau?zte  vs  grace  to  haue  mynde  on  ]>e 
peynes  \ai  crist  suffrede  in  his^  herte,  in  his  hondis  &  feet, 
in  his  heed,  in  his  si^tte,  &  herynge,  spekynge,  smellynge,  & 
tastynge,  &  in  eche  place  of  his  bodi  fro  j^e  heued  to  ]?e  sole 
of  ]?e  foot,  &  to  spende  alle  \e  myjttis  of  soule  &  bodi  &  oure 
fyue  wittis  trewely  in  his  s^myce,  to  seke  his  worschipe 
in®  alle  ]7ingis  &  distroie  synne  &  falsnesse  bo]7e  in  oure  self 
&  o\ere  men,  &  to  holde  &  meyntene  virtuous  lif  &  rijtwis- 
nesse  &  pees  &  charite.  Amen. 


1  &X. 


2  and  AA. 


3  ofX. 


*  omitted  X. 


5  &X. 


219 


XIY. 

HOW  EELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD  KEEP  CERTAIN 

ARTICLES. 

I  SEE  nothing  in  this  tract  to  give  us  any  certainty  as  to  its  authorship. 
It  is  simply  an  enumeration  of  the  faults  charged  against  the  religious 
orders,  thrown  into  the  form  of  a  wish  that  they  may  be  avoided. 

The  special  points  for  notice  are  the  mention  of  astronomy  among  the 
subjects  taught  in  the  religious  schools  (No.  39),  and  the  complaint  that 
the  friars  were  “  too  homely  with  gentlewomen  by  colour  of  physic  ”  (No. 
38),  (cf.  Prof.  Brewer’s  preface  to  Monumenta  Franciscana,  pp.  xliii-xlvi). 
The  same  charge  is^  made  in  the  tract  Of  the  Leaven  of  Pharisees.  The 
abuse  of  bishoprics  in  partilus  injidelium  conferred  on  men  who  only 
desire  episcopal  orders  for  the  profit  to  be  made  of  them  at  home 
(No,  40)  is,  I  think,  mentioned  nowhere  else  in  this  volume.  It  is 
attacked  in  the  Great  Sentence  of  Curse  (S.E.W.  Ill,  300). 

We  may  see  from  No.  42  the  kind  of  retort  made  by  the  friars  on  the 
poor  preachers. 

The  only  indication  of  date  is  in  No.  26,  where  we  learn  that  one 
of  the  points  of  the  poor  preachers  was  the  application  of  the  prophecies 
of  Antichrist  to  the  Pope.  The  preachers  are  not  likely  to  have  begun 
with  arguments  of  this  kind.  Still  we  cannot  lay  much  stress  on  this 
argument ;  such  use  of  prophecy  had  long  been  familiar  to  the  Fraticelli. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 

I  have  omitted  the  usual  summary  as  useless  with  a  mere  list  like  this. 


220 


HOW  RELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD,  ETC. 


How  religious  men  shoulde  kepe  certayne  Articles.^ 


I  * 

II. 

*[p.  186  MS.] 

III. 


IV. 

1  Cor.  xiii.  4. 

V. 

Religious  men 
should  love 
poverty. 

Phil.  iii.  8. 


Col.  iii.  5. 
VI. 

Temperance. 

vn. 

VIII. 


IX. 

Keeping  God’s 
laws  more  than 
man’s. 


X. 


Cristene  men  preien  mekely  &  deuoutly  to  almyjtty  god 
]?at  he  graunte  his  grace  for  his  hendeles  mercy  to  oure 
religious,  ho]7e  possessioneris  &  mendynauntis,  j^at  J^ei 
assenten  to  ]iis  fewe  treuj^is.  ^  First,  pat  J^ei  louen  more 
heuenly  }>ingis  J^an  worldly  pat  soone  schullen  passe,  pe 
secunde,  pat  j^ei  setten  more  pris  &  deynte  hi  goddis  comauwde- 
mentis  ]7an  hi  tradicions  maad  ^'of  here  owene  synful  hedis.® 
^  pe  jiridde,  pat  J^ei  holden  in  herte,  in  word,  &  dede  pat  pe 
noble  religion  maad  of  ihw  ^  crist  for  prestis  in  here  clennesse 
&  fredom  is  more  perfit  pan  ony  newe®  religion  maad  of 
synful  men  pat  ofte  erreden  in  pou^t,  word  &  dede.  ^ pe  tirpe, 
pat  |>ei  chargen  more  sixtene  condicions  of  charite  j^an  here 
bodely  abite.  ^  J^e  fifte,  pat  ]iei  loue  more  pouert  of  pe  gospel, 
to  whiche  |>ei  ben  bouMen  bi  here  owene  reule  &  profession, 
pan  richesse  of  pe  world,  pat  ben  clepid  drit  bi  seynt  J^oul  in 
holy  writt,  for  which  richessis  J^ei  make  ofte  sacrifice  to 
fendis  &  honouren  false  goddis  as  seynt  poul  sei]?.  ^  pe  sixte, 
pat  jiei  loue  more  resonable  abstynence  J^an  glotonye,  wombe 
ioie  &  ydelnesse.  ^  pe  seuen]7e,  pat  ]?ei  loue  more  pe  treu]?e  of 
holy  writt  pan  ypocrisie  &  lesyngis  of  pe  fend.  ^  j^e  ejte,  pat 
]7ei  loue  more  j^e  honowr  of  god  &  saluacion  of  mennws  soulis 
pan  here  owen  worldly  pride  &  veyn  glorie  &  singuler  profit. 
^  j^e  neyen]7e,  pat  pei  setten  more  prise  bi  jie  most  rijtful  & 
most  profitable  ordynaunce  ®  of  god,®  bojie  for  clerkis,  lordis 
&  comunys,  j^an  bi  pe  wrongful  &  vnwitty  ordynaunce  of 
synful  men  pat  barmen  alle  ]ies  j^re.  ^j^e  ten]7e,  pat  jiei  louen 
more  &-kepen  betre  j^e  most  witti  reulis  of  ihu  crist  pan  pe 


^  The  title  in  AA.  is  “  Hou  men  of  priuat  religiouw  schulden  loue 
more  j^e  gospel,  goddis  heste  and  his  ordynaurce  pan  ony  newe  lawis, 
newe  reulis  and  custumes  and  ordynauncis  of  synful  men,”  The  title 
given  above  is  inserted  in  X  by  a  later  hand ;  having  been  omitted  by  the 
scribe.  I  have  left  the  shorter  title  for  its  greater  convenience. 

2  The  numbers  at  the  side  are  only  in  AA.  ^  dedis  X. 

*  omitted  X.  ®  rewe  X.  omitted  X. 


HOW  RELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD,  ETC. 


221 


ynwitti  constitucions  of  synful&  worldly  men.  ^]7e  elleuen]7e,  xi. 

\at  ]7ei  magnyfien  more  obedience  maad  to  god  in  cristendom 
takynge  biforme  of  jie  gospel  j^an  newe  obedience  maad 
singularly  to  a  synful  man,  fat  is  not  comauwdid  of  god 
neif  ensaumplid  of  ihu  crist  &  his  apostlis  but  don  of  here 
owene  synguler  ordynauwce.  ^  pe  twelf e,  j>at  noman  be 
dispised  ne  ponyschid  for  good  lyuynge  in  suynge  ihu  cristis 
steppis  bi  forme  of  f e  gospel.  ^  pe  frittenfe,  fat  f ei  studie  xiii. 

&  kepe  more  fe  fredom  &  priuylegies  grauntid  of  ihu  crist 

in  fe  gospel  fan  wrongful  priuelegies  gr^^untid  of  synful 

men,  bi  whiche  bofe  pride  &  coueitise  &  fefte  &  wrongis 

ben  meyntened  many  tymes.  fourtenfe,  ]^at  fei  ben 

verreyly  dede  to  pompe  &  pride  &  coueitise  of  fe  world  &  to 

glotonye  &  to  fleschly  synnes,  &  not  ded  fro  nedful  tr«!ueile 

&  profitenge  to  oj^ere  men  vp  fe  ^iftis  f^^t  god^  haf  puen 

hym.  ^  pe  fiftenf e,  fat  fei  ben  not  goddis  maistris,  to  dwelle 

eu^rmore  in  o  place  &  o  manure  of  lif  at  here  owene  lust, 

but  frely  &  wilfully  aftir  goddis  ^iftis  tr^ueilen  &  dwelle  j>er 

fat  it  ^  is  most  worschipful  to  god  &  most  nedful  &  profitable 

to  cristene  soulis.  ^fe  sextenfe,  fat  fei  ben  verrey  bokis  & 

myrrowrs  of  mekenesse,  wilful  pouort  &  of  besi  traueile  in 

goddis  cause  &  holynesse  to  alle  men  in  f  e  world,  &  not  bok 

or  myrrowr  of  ^  pride,  of  coueitise,  of  ydelnesse  &  worldly  lif  *[p.  187MS.] 

to  drawe  worldly  men  ®  i7^-to  coueitise  &  of  ore  synnys  &  at 

here  laste  to  helle.  f e  seuentenf e,  fat  fei  drawe7^  not  noble  xvii. 

bokis  of  holy  writt  &  holy  doctouris  &  of  ore  nedeful  sciencis 

fro  curatis  &  clerkis  i^^-to  here  owene  cloistris,  fat  ben  as 

castellis  or  paleicis  of  kyngis  &  emporouris,  &  sutfre  hem  be  Not  to  monopo- 

,  •  lise  books  that 

closed  fore  &  waxe  rotyn,  &  neifor  ^eue  hem  ne  lene  hem  they  do  not  use. 
ne  selle  hem  to  curatis  &  clerkis,  fat  myjtten,  couden  & 
wolden  lerne  holy  writt  &  teche  it  frely  for  loue  of  mennws 
soulis.  f e  eijtenf e,  fat  fei  louen  more  comyn  profit  of  cristene  xviii. 
men,  bofe  gostly  &  bodily,  fan  here  synguler  worldly  profit 
&  here  owene  bodily  ayse  &  welfare,  f e  neyntenfe,  fat  fei  xix. 


^  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  omitted  X. 


222 


HOW  RELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD,  ETC. 


Not  to  promote 
dissension  by 
multiplying 
sects. 


XX. 


Not  to  waste  the 
money  of  the  poor 
on  building  great 
houses. 


Jerome, 

XXI. 

Not  to  stop  resti¬ 
tution  by  leading 
men  to  rely  on 
prayers  which 
may  be  worth  not 
a  farthing. 

XXII. 

Not  to  be  greedy 
in  begging. 


XXIII. 


XXIV. 

Not  to  bribe 
great  men  to 
uphold  them  in 
wrong. 


XXV. 


*  [p.  188  MS.] 
XXVI. 

Not  to  persecute 
true  preachers. 


make  not  discencion  ne  gendre  strif  ne  enuye  among  cristene 
men  bi  multipliynge  of  newe  sectis,  newe  abitis  &  newe  bi- 
lawis,  But  drawe  to  vnyte  &  cbarite,  as  ]?er  is  o  god,  o 
bileue,  &  o  cristendom.  ]>e  twenti]7e,  jiat  ]?ei  suffre  not  pore 
men  to  be  oppr^ssid  bi  taxis  &  opere  chargis  more  ]7an  Jiei 
may  wel  here,  j^e  while  pat  ]?ei  ban  plente  of  richesses  & 
wast  iuelis  to  purchase  londis  &  lordiscbipis  &  bilde  grete 
waste  houses,  si]?  alle  here  goodis  ben  pore  mennws  goodis, 
&  pQi  ben  but  spenderis  or  keperis  of  j^e  goodis  &  procura- 
towris  of  pore  men,  as  seynt  ierom  &  pe  lawe  of  pe  chirche 
witnessen.  j^e  on  and  twenti]>e,  pat  j^ei  cowforten  not  riche 
men  in  here  false  lif,  &  stoppe  not  restitucion  to  be  maad  to 
pore  men  bi  sikyrnesse  of  here  perpetual  preiere,  whawne  ]’ei 
witten  not  where  here  preiere  be  wor]?  o  fer]’ing.  pQ  two 
&  twenti]?e,  pat  pQi  make  not  comyns  so  pore  bi  sotil 
ypocrisie  of  gredy  beggynge  &  trentalis,  to  make  grete  festis 
&  waste  housynge,  pat  pe  comyns  may  not  forjie  to  paie  here 
tribut  to  pe  kyng  &  rentis  to  lordis  &  dymes  &  offrynges  to 

curatis.  j^e  ]?re  &  twen]7e,  pat  in  alle  jiingis  ]?ei  ben  bisi  to 

seke  goddis  worschipe  &  loue  hym  &  his  lawe  &  holde  no 
custome  ne  tradicion  pat  hyndri]?  hem^  to  serue  god,  but  take 
goode  customes  in  as  moche  as  ]?ei  helpen  hem  to  kepe  goddis 
hestis  &  no  more,  for  lif  ne  for  de]?.  god  brynge  hem  to  ]?is 
charite.  pe  foure  &  twenti]?e,  pat  pei  hiren  not  grete  men 

bi  gold  fees  &  robees  &  false  gostly  helpe  to  be  goddis 

traitouri^,  holdynge  ajenst  his  lawe  &  his  ordynauwce  to 
magnifye  an^mristis  clerkis  &  synful  mennws  ordynauwce. 
pe  fyue  &  twenti]>e,  pat  pei  quenche  not  pe  pftis  of  god  & 
so  pe  holy  gost  as  moche  as  is  in  hem,  lettynge  trewe 
pr^chyhge  of  pe  gospel,  laste  here  pride,  coueitise  &  ypocrisie 
be  knowen.  pe  sixe^  &  twentife,  "^'pat  pei  pursuen  not  crist 
in  his  membris  for  trewe  pr^chynge  of  holy  writt  &  trewe 
schewynge  of  synne  to  pe  peple,  &  of  an^mrist  &  his  clerkis, 
bi  prophecie  of  ihu  crist  &  his  apostlis,  pleynly  taujt  & 


^  hym  X. 


2  si]?e  X. 


HOW  RELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD,  ETC. 


223 


comaundid  of  god  to  be  tau^t  trewely  &  opynly  to  his  peple. 

]7e  seuene  &  twentij^e,  ]?at  ]7ei  blywdyn  not  ]>Q  kyng  &  lordis  xxvii. 

bi  ypocrisie  &  false  lesyngis  to  meyntene  wrong  ordynaunce 

of  synful  men  for  pride  &  coneitise,  ajenst  goddis  lawe  &  here 

owene  profit  &  helpe  of  j^e  comyns.  ]?e  ei^te  &  twenti];e,  xxviii. 

\iai  bei  approprien  not  parische  chirchis  to  oner  riche  houses  Not  to  appropriate 
-L 1.  i  ,  X  parish  churches 

hi  false  sugestions  &  symonye,  &  putten  here  an  ydiot,  &  andputinincom- 
°  J  J  ^  i  j  1  petent  curates. 

^euen  hyw  to  litel  liflode  &  taken  alle  j^e  profite  to  hem  self, 

&  letten  goode  curatis  of  here  lifiode  &  trewe  techynge  of 

cristene  peple  &  helpe  of  pore  men  in^  parischis  &  goddis 

seruyce  &  holdywge  vp  of  'pe  chirchis  in  hilynge  &  bokis  & 

opere  ornamentis.  pe  nyne  and  twenti|»e,  pat  pei  procuren  not  xxix. 

children  to  here  religion  bi  sikyrnesse  of  worldly  lordischipe  Not  to  seduce 

&  wombe  ioie  &  ydelnesse,  &  )>awne  make  hem  bi  profession  their  order  by 

ill  means. 

bynde  hem  to  grett  poiiort  &  to  be  dede  to  worldly  myr]7e  & 
likynge ;  sij?  po  j^at  comen  more  to  j^es  religious  for  pride, 
coueitise,  sikyrnesse  of  bodily  welfare  j^an  for  loue  of  meke- 
nesse  to  lyue  in  pouort  &  discret  abstynence  &  penaur^ce,  ben 
cursed  &  symonyentis  hi  pQ  entre.  pe  ]7ritti)>e,  pat  ]?es  xxx. 
mewdynauntis  disceyuen  not  children  bi  lesyngis  &  ypocrisie 
&  biheste  of  worldly  honour  &  welfare  as  wel  as  gret  prolatis 
&  bischopis  to  come  &  lyue  herby  in  here  priuat  secte, 
preisynge  it  more  Jan  Je  noble  &  free  religion  maad  &  kept 
of  ihu  crist  &  his  apostlis.  pe  on  &  brittibe,  pat  bei  stolen  xxxi. 

.  ,  '  ^  Not  to  kidnap 

not  riche  mennws  children  &  pore,  &  leden  hem  to  ferre  children, 
contres  fro  here  frendis  &  holde  hem  cloos  til  Jei  ben  prafessid 
a^enst  here  wille,  &  Jan  suffre  hem  not  to  goo  out  Jouj  Jei 
ben  vnable  to  kepe  Jis  religion;  sij  Jei  sillen  in  a  manure 
Jes  children  to  Jis  priuat  ordre  for  worschipe  &  worldly 
wynnyng  &  cow-streyne  hem  to  here  dampnacion.  Je  two  xxxii 
&  JrittiJe,  pat  Jei  sende  not  gold  out  of  Je  rewme  in-to  Notto  send  money 
aliens  hondis  for  to  gete  priuylegies  &  dispensacions  a^enst  dom'^tVhuy 'difi 
Je=^  poyntis  of  here  reule  ?if  it  be  resonable  &  profitable,  &  the? ?uie! 
jif  it  be  vnresonable  &  ynprofitable  late  no  man  bynde  hym 


1  &X. 


*  omitted  AA. 


224 


HOW  RELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD,  ETC. 


XXXITI. 

That  they  should 
be  subject  to  the 
bishops  and  the 
law. 

XXXIV. 

Nor  buy  exemp¬ 
tions  from  the 
pope. 

»  [p.  189  MS.] 


Grosted. 

XXXV. 


That  they  should 
he  made  to  keep 
their  founder’s 
will. 


XXXVI, 

Not  to  make 
quarrels  between 
curates  and  their 
parishioners. 
XXXVII. 


XXXVHI. 

Not  to  get  into 
ladies’  company 
under  pretence 
of  doctoring. 


per-to ;  But  lyue  frely  vnder  dene  religion  fat  crist  maade 
in  whiche  may  noon  errour  be.  ]ie  fve  &  J^rittij^e,  fat,  si]i 
]?ei  preisen  so  mochil  obedience  maad  to  man,  fat  jiei  ben 
not  exempt  fro  obedience  to  bischopis  &  to  fe  comyn  lawe 
bo]ie  of  fe  chircbe  &  of  fe  lond.  fe  foure  &  Jirittij^e,  fat 
fei  puen  not  a  pencion  of  moche  gold  to  j^e  pope  for  to  be 
exempt  fro  visitacions  of  bischopis  &  iust  correccion,  si]?  fei 
holden  '^mannws  obedience  so  medful,  last  herby  ]?ei  waxen 
rotyn  in  synne  &  fe  ordynaries  doren  not  amende  hem  hi 
forme  of  fe  gospel  for  ]?es  weiward  exempcions,  si]?  robert 
grosted  clepi]?  siche  exempcion  fe  deuelis  nettis.  ^]?e  fyue 
&  ]?ritti]>e,  si]'  it  is  a  grete  sentence  oi  fe  chirche  fat  who 
euere  do]»  a^enst  fe  rijtful  wille  of  a  dede  man  is  cursed, 
late  it  be  enquired  where  J'es  religious,  myspendynge  here 
goodis  in  pompe  &  worldly  plees  &  newe  pwrchasynge,  & 
leuynge  fe  noumbre  of  pr^stis  &  helpynge  of  pore  men,  a^enst 
here  foundouris  wille,  &  getynge  priuylegies  &  dispensynge 
ajenst  here  reulis  maad  of  holy  men  as  J’ei  seyn,  where  ]?ei 
ben  cwrsed  or  not ;  &  pf  ]?ei  ben  late  alle  men  helpe  &  make 
hem  kepe  fe  friste  ri^tful  wille  of  here^  foundowr  &  patron. 
fe  sixe  &  ]?ritti]?e,  ]?at  J^ei  make- not  enuye,  strif  &  plee 
bitwixe  curatis  &  hem  and’^  bitwixe  curatis  &  here  sugetis 
for  here  priueleygies  of  confession  &  sepulture  &  mortuaries 
&  false  lesyngis  makynge.  fe  seuene  &  ]?ritti]?e,  fat  }»ei 
norischen  not  men  &  wommen  in  lecherie,  in  wrowg  disceit  of 
fals  chaffarynge  &  extorcion  doynge,  lettynge  verrey  resti- 
tucion  of  euyl  goten  goodis  &  fe  schame  of  grete  sywneris  pf 
]?ei  were  schryue  at  here  owene  curatis,  for  to  haue  fart  of 
]?is^  robberie,  &  make  worldly  festis  &  wast  houses  apnst 
here  pouert  &  profession,  bi  colour  of  trentalis  &  longe 
preieris  in  si^tte  of  men.  fe  eijte  &  ]'ritti]?e,  fat  fei  ben 
not  in  lordis  courtis  reuleris  of  here  householdis  &  worldly 
ofS-cis,  &  to  homly  wij»  gentil  wymmen  bi  colour  of  fisik,  for 
drede  of  sclauwdrywge  &  mysdoynge,  si]?  fei  lyuen  in  reste  & 


^  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  his  X. 


HOW  RELIGIOUS  MEN  SHOULD,  ETC. 


225 


welfare  of  body  &  ben  ^onge  &  stronge  of  complexion,  & 

satbanas  is  redi  to  tempte  hem.  ^j^e  nyne  &  ]7ritti]?e,  xxxix. 

bei  studien  bisily  holy  writt  &  techen  it  more  ban  veyn  To  study  holy 

.  .  .  writ  rather  than 

sophistrie  &  astronomye  &  more  j^an  ]>e  popis  decretalis  &  astronomy, 
fablis  &  cronyclis;  si]?  pat  it  his  best  &  most  nedeful  &  ]?ei 
han  grete  wittes  of  kynde  &  grete  leiser  to  studien  ]?us.  pe 
forti]?]?e,  pat  ]7ei  ben  not  maad  bischopis  of  hej^ene  men  &  XL. 
sweren  to  goo  bider  &  cowuerte  hem,  &  bawne  meyntened  Bishops  m 
to  be  suffragans  &  sellen  sacrd^mentis  &  robben  pe  peple 
&  maken  hem  haue  goddis  curs  for  here  money,  pe  on  &  xli. 
fourtife,  pat  pes  newe  religious  blasphemen  not  god  in  Nottoexcommu- 
bnl^yjlff^  of  here  ordre  apostata  &  cursed  ^if  he  lyue  withdraw "  from 

long  cristeh®  peple  where  he  hap  resonable  euydence  to 
profit  most  pi  good  ensaumple  of  holy  lif  &  trewe  &  free 
prechywge  flaterynge  &  beggywge  &  lesyngis 

sewynge.  ^  ^  fourti]?e,  pat  pei  blasphemen  not  god,  xlii. 

takynge  vp-e^  knowynge  approprid  to  god,  pat  ]?is 

prost  coueiti'f  fredom  of  pe  ^gospel  for  his  eise  &  lustis  mhimsdh^^^ 
sywne  of  bo'^^  >  child  schal  betre  some  god  in  ]’is 

newe  ordre  j  tfian  in  dene  ordre  pat  crist  maade ;  pat  it  is 
betre  to  be^pS®  ^  ®  foolis  styrynge  pan 

do  morcy  tol  cristene  soulis  aftir  stirynge  of  god.  pe  j^re  &  xliii. 
fourti]?e,  pa!^  preise  not  more  obedience  to  synful  men  bi 
synguler  profession,  not  ensaumplid  2  of  crist  &  his  apostlis,  J^der^  ah 
pan  medful-  obedience  of  children  to  fadir  &  modir  &  of 
soruauntis  lordis  &  maistris ;  si]?  god  techi]?  &  com- 

aunde  ]?is  obedience  &  pe  merit  per-ot,  last  mannws  folie  be 
helped  monj  goddis  ordynauwce.  pe  laste,  pat  alle  clerkis  xliv 
of  religion/^  opere  examynen  wel  whiche  is  pe  beste  ordre 
for  prostis,  where  it  be  possessioneris  ordre  or  mendynauntis 
or  ellis  pt  Baene  pat  crist  made  &  kepte  &  his  apostlis  alle; 
pat  is  fredom  &  clewnesse  of  cristis  reule  in  pe 

gospel.  pr^stis  kepe  pe  beste  &  leae  pe  lesse  profit, 

god  for  Ips^  endeles  m^rcy  brynge  alle  pr^stis  her-to  &  make 
lordis  &  komyns  to  constreyne  hem  to  ]?is.  Amen. 


above 


omitt^ 


d  AA. 


2  ensaumplis  in  both  MSS. 


3  omitted  X. 


15 


226 


XY. 

OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


I  HAVE  little  doubt  of  the  authenticity  of  this  tract,  or  of  the  date  to 
which  we  ought  to  assign  it.  It  was  written  soon  after  the  Wat  Tyler 
riots,  when  Wyclif  and  his  followers  were  discredited  by  a  supposed 
complicity  with  John  Ball  (cf.  Wals.  II.  33).  The  indignant  disclaiming 
of  Socialist  doctrine  is  fearlessly  combined  with  denunciation  of  the 
oppressions  committed  by  the  rich.  The  complaint  that  “lords^rive  with 
their  tenants  to  bring  them  into  thraldom  more  than  they  should  by  reason 
and  charity”  (p.  234),  is  a  proof,  if  one  were  needed,  of  the  kind  of  in¬ 
justice  which  led  to  the  revolt.  The  author  had  lived  am  ,mg  the  poor 
and  been  an  eye-witness  of  oppression,  or  he  would  not  .jave  insisted 
with  such  force  on  the  need  of  the  lord’s  presence  to  control  tile  extortions 
of  his  steward  (p.  240),  nor  should  we  have  had  the  touch  of  the  white 
(tally)  sticks,  which  the  poor  were  made  to  accept  for  their  goods  (p.  233). 

The  distinction  between  refusing  tithes  to  wicked  priests  and  withhold¬ 
ing  dues  from  wicked  lords  or  creditors,  is  clearly  stated  on  pp,  229-230. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Summary. 


The  duty  of  servants . 

The  devil  moves  some  men  to  teach  that  no  Christian  should  serve 

Such  teachings  unjustly  imputed  to  poor  priests  . 

To  refuse  rent  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  withhold  tithes . 

The  duty  of  lords  . I 

God  may  take  away  lordship  from  those  who  abuse  it  .  l 

Wrongs  done  to  poor  men  by  prelates  . 

»  purveyors  . 

»  „  lawyers  . . . 

Strifes  from  attempting  to  bring  men  into  serfdom . 

„  hypocrisy  in  religion  .  ] 

Falseness  in  prelates,  confessors,  lawyers,  merchants,  servants,  and  especial! 
the  clergy . 

Duties  of  lords . 

Faults  of  gentlemen  who  encourage  evil  living  in  the  clergy  . 


in 


p.  227 
227 
229 

229 

230 

232 

233 

233 

234 

234 

235 

237 

238 
241 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


227 


Of  seruau?^tis  &  lordis  hou  eclie  sctial  kepe  his  degree. 

First,  S(3ruauntis  schullen  trewely  &  gladly  S($rue  to  here  Duty  of  servants. 

lordis  or  maistris  &  not  be  fals  ne  idel  ne  grucchynge  ne 

heuey  \n  here  s^ruyce  doynge,  but  holde  hem  paied  of  j^e 

staat  of  s^ruauntis,  in  whiche  god  ha]?  ordeyned  he»^  for  here 

beste  to  holde  hem  in  mekenesse  ajenst  pride,  &  besi  traueile 

a^enst  ydelnesse  &  slouj^e.  for  seynt  poul  biddi]?  \at  pf  ]?ou  i  Cor.  vU.  [21.] 

be  clepid  a  s^ruauwt,  recke  ]?ou  not  j^er-of ;  ]?«t  is  to  seie  be 

not  g''ucchynge  ne  heuy  J^rfore.  ^  Also  poul  techi]?  \us  :  ^e  Ephes.  vi.  [5. 

seruauntis  obeische  to  fleschly  lordis  wi]?  drede  &  ''’kynge 

or  tremelynge,  in  sympilnesse  of  joure  herte,  as  to  crist;  not 

s^ruynge  at  j^e  eije,  as  plesynge  to  men,  but  as  S(?ruauwtis  of 

crist,  doynge  ]?e  wille  of  god  of  herte,  wij?  goode  wille 

s^ruynge  as  to  ]?e  lord  of  alle  lordis  &  not  to  men  ;  wittynge 

]>at  eche  man  what  eu^re  good  J’ing  he  do  schal  resceyue  \at 

of  \q  lord,  be  he  s^ruauwt  or  bonde  or  free  man;”  \ai  is  to 

seie  reward  of  god  for  ]?at  good  doynge.  ^  Also  poul  techi]?  Coi.  m.  [22.] 

]ius  seruauwtis ;  ‘  ‘  obeche,  ^e  seruauwtis,  bi  alle  ]?ingis  to  fleschly 
lordis.  what  ]?ing  eu(9re  ^e  don  worche  je  of  herte,  }?at  is 
wisdom  &  wille,  as  to  }?e  lord  &  not  to  men,  witynge  \at  of 
])&  lord  ^e^  schulle  take^  retribucion,  J^at  is  mede  or  reward, 
of  heritage  in  heuene.  s^rue  je  to  j^e  lord  crist ;  for  who  j^at 
do]?  wrong  or  iniiirye  schal  resceyue  ]?at  ]?ing  pat  he  ha]? 
wickydly  don,  &  anemptis  'god  is  not  accepcion  or  takynge 
of  pmonys.”  pat  is  o  man  schal  not  be  sparid  in  goddis  dom 
for  his  richessis  or  lordschipis  or  heij  blood,  &  a  pore  man 
be  ponyschid  for  a  litel  trespas,  as  men  don  in  ]?is  wickid 
world,  but  eche  man  schal  be  ponyschid  after  his  owene  gilte, 

&  "^'eche  man  rewardid  aft^r  his  owene  goode  lif.  but  here  pe  *[p,  191  ms.] 
fend  rnoue]?  suwme  men  to  seie  pat  cristene  men  schullen  not  False  Socialist 
be  si?ruauwtis  or  ]?rallis  to  he]?ene  lordis,  si]?  pei  ben  false  to 
god  &  lasse  wor]?y  pan  cristene  men ;  n^iper  to  cristene  lordis, 
for  J?ei  ben  bref^ren  in  kynde,  &  ihu  crist  bou^te  cristene 


1  he  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 

men  on  f e  crois  &  made  hem  fre ;  but  ajenst  fis  heresie  poul 
writi]?  \us  in^  goddis  la  we:  “  what  kywne  seruau?^tis  hen  vnder 
^ook  of  s^ruage  dome  ]7ei  here  lordis  wor]?i  alle  manure 
honowr  or  worschipe,  \at  name  &  techynge  of  lord 
he  not  blasphemy d,”  \at  is,  kolden  wrongful  &  dispised ;  & 
]7is  word  is  vndirstonden  of  hej^ene  lordis.  “  but  J’o  s^ruauwtis 
\at  ban  trewe  or  cristene  lordis,  dispise  j^ei  not  to  se^rue  hem 
for  ]iat  |>ei  ben  brej^^ren  boj^e  in  kynde  &  in  fei]?,  but  more 
serue  }>ei  for  j^e  lordis  ben  cristene  &  louyd,  j^e  whiche  ben 
partyneris  of  good  dede.  teche  j^ou  ]7es  ]?ingis,”  sei]?  poul  to 
bischop  thymothe,  “  bo]?e  to  men  \at  ben  vnlerned,  And  stire 
men  ]>at  ben  lerned  &  necligent  in  doywge.  pf  ony  man 
techi]?  oj7^r  wise,  &  accordij?  not  to  j^e  hoole  wordis  of  oure 
lord  ihu  crist  &  to  ]iai  lore  ]iat  is  after  pitee,  he  is  proude, 
no  ]7ing  kuwnynge,  but  weilynge  or  languyschynge  aboute 
questiouws  &  fijttynge  of  wordis,  of  whiche  ben  gendred 
enuyes^  st[r]yues  &  blasphemes,  \ai  ben  dispisyngis  of  god, 
euyl  suspescions  &  fijttyngis  to-gedre  of  men  ]>at  ben  corupt 
Titus  ii.  [8  10.]  in  herte  or  soule,  \at  ben  priued  fro  treuj^e.”  ^Also  poul 
techij?  \ai  generaly  cristene  men  &  wymmen  schullen  be  so 
holy  of  lif,  ]iat  men  out  of  bileue  be  aschamed  &  haue  noon 
euyl  to  seie  of  cristene  men,  &  chargi]?  seruauwtis  to  be  suget, 
or  vnderlout,^  to  here  lordis,  &  plesynge  in  alle  ]?ingis,  & 
not  ajen  seiynge,  not  doynge  fraude,  but  in  alle  ]7ingis 
schewynge  good  fei]?  or  fidelite  or  treuj^e,  to  worschipe,  or  to 
make  fair  in  alle  j^ingis  j^e  techynge  of  god  oure  saueour. 
1  Peter  iii.  [16.]  And  j^^rfore  techi]?  petir  \ai  cnstene  men  schullen  haue  so 
good  conscience  &  so  good  lif  \at  enemys  of  oure  fei]?  'hat 
bakbiten  or  myspeken  of  vs  ben  confounded,  &  also  ]7ei  '^at 
falsly  chalengen  oure  goode  lif  in  crist  be  stoppid ;  &  petir 
1  Peter  ii.  [12,]  speki]?  more  pleynly  of  ]7is  matir,  &  comaundi]?  cristene  men 
to  haue  goode  lyuynge  amonge  hej^ene  men,  ]7«t  in  j^at  J'ing 
]7at  fei  myspeken  of  vs,  as  of  mysdoeris,  '[at  fei  beholden 
&  see  vs  of  oure  goode  werkis,  &  glorifie  god  in  [e  tyme  of 


228 

1  Tim.  vi.  [1.] 


1  &x. 


*  enemy es  X. 


3  under  lout  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


229 


visitacion.  ^But  ^it  suwme  men  pat  ben  out  of  charite 
sclaundre?^  pore  prestis  wi]?  J^is  errowr,  pat  S6ruau?^tis  or 
tenau;^tis  may  lawefully  wij^holde  rentis  &  s^ruyce^  fro  here 
lordis  whawne  lordis  ben  opynly  wickid  in  here  lyuynge.  & 
jjei  maken  ]?is  false  "^lesyngis  vpon  pore  pr^stis  to  make  lordis 
to  hate  hem,  &  not  to  meyntene  treu]7e  of  goddis  lawe  pat 
]7ei  techen  opynly  for  worschipe  of  god  &  profit  of pe  reume 
and  sto'hl.ynge  of  pe  kyngis  pouer  distroynge  of  synne. 
for  ]7es  pore  '"ostis  distroien  most  hi  goddis  lawe  rebelte  of 
soruauwtis  ajcwi]?  lordis,  &  charge  soruauwtis  to  be  suget  ]>ouj 
lordis  bi  tiraL&  ^s,  for  seynt  petir  techi]?  pus “Be  ye  sor- 
uauwtis  suget  ‘‘u;  lordis  in  alle  manore  of  ^  drede,  not  only  to 
goode  lordis  &  ^Donere,®  but  also  to  tirauwtis,  or  siche  pat 
drawen  fro  goddis  scole.’’  for,  as  seynt  poul  seij?,  eche 
man  owi]?  to  be  cuget  to  heijere  potestatis,  pat  is  to  men 
of  hei^e  power,  for  ]7er  is  no  power  but  of  god ;  &  so  he  pat 
a^enstondi]?  power,  stondi]?  a^enst  pe  ordynauwce  of  god  ; 
but  ]?ei  pat  a^er.stonden  geten  to  hem  self  dampnacion.  & 
perfore  poul  biddi]?  pat  we  be  suget  to  princes  bi  nede,  &  not 
only  for  wrappe  but  also  for  conscience ;  &  jj^rfore  ,  we  paien 
tributis  to  princis,  for  j^ei  ben  mynystris  of  god ;  &  poul 
biddi]?  vs  paie  c  ettis  to  alle  men,  tribut  to  hym  pat  we  owen 
tribut,  &  so  of  taliage  for  j^ingis  boren  aboute  in  lond,  &  so 
drede  &  also  worschipe  or  honour.  &  pu^  S(9ruauwtis  schulden 
trewely  &  wilfully  s^ruen’ lordis  &  here  maistris,  &  lyue  in 
reste,  pees  &  charite,  &  stire  lordis,  |»ou^  j^ei  weren  hej^ene 
lordis,  to  good  cristene  ieip  &  holy  lif  bi  here  pacience  & 
opyn  trewe  lif  &  meke.  &  ]?is  is  a  feyned  word  of  ani^^'cristis 
clerkis  j^at,  pf  sugetis  may  letfully  wij^drawe  ti}>es  &  offryngis 
fro  curatis  pat  openly  lyuen  in  lecherie  or  grete  ojj^re  synnes 
&  don  not  heif’e  office,  pan  seruauwtis  &  tenauwtis  may  wi|>- 
drawe  here  s^ruyce  &  rentis  fro  here  lordis  pat  lyuen  opynly 
a  cursed  lif.  for  to  j^e  first  sugetis  han  pe  auctorite  of 
goddis  lawe  &  mannws  lawe  also,  but  not  to  wij^drawe 


Some  men  impute 
iEese  Socialist 
ieachings  to  poor 
jriests. 


^[p.  192  MS.] 


i 

1  Peter  ii.  [18.] 


Romans  xiii.  [L] 


To  withdraw 
rents  is  not  the 
same  as  to  with- 
cli'aw  tithes. 


1  servyces  AA.  ^  on  X.  ^  x.  ^  omitted  AA.  ®  honoiire  X. 


I 


230 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


Si^ruyce  &  rentis  fro  wickid  lordis ;  but  ben  cbargid  of  god 
bi  petir  &.  poul  to  be  j7U8  suget  to  wickid  lordis ;  &  J^^rfore 
Matt.  xvii.  [27.]  crist  paiede  for  bym  &  bis  apostlis  tribut  to  J^e  bej^ene 
emperowr.  &  we  reden  not  pat  be  or  ony  apostle  paide  tifes 
to  pe  wickid  beije  pr^stis  aft^r  tyme  fat  be  began  to  preche. 
Rom.  xiii.  [1-7.]  ^Also  lordis  ban  power  of  mennws  bodies  &  catel  in  resonable 
maner,  &  temperale  swerd  &  worldly  power  bi  goddis  lawe 
to  compelle  men  to  do  bere  seruyce  &  paie  rentis.  bi  f e 
gospel  &  cristis  lif  &  bis  apostlis,  pr^stis  ban  n'^^'sicbe  power 
to  constreyne  men  to  paie  bem  dymes,  &  'w■ba7^ne 

f  ei  don  not  bere  gostly  office,  but  barmen  bc^^^^^^g^tis  in  fals 
tecbynge  &  euyl  ensauTwple  of  lif.  but  foi^’j^si  deden  wele 
bere  office  &  men  wolden  not  paie  dymes,  suffren 

Luke  ix.  [55.]  mekely  &  not  curse,  as  ihu  crist  dide. 

The  duty  of  lords.  See  we  now  bou  lordis  scbulden  lyue  in  b'^®  astaat.  first, 

*[p.  193  MS.]  fei  ^scbulden  knowe  goddis  lawe  &  studie  ^  meyntene  it, 
&  distroie  wrong  &  meyntene  pore  men  in  1®^®  I'ijt  to  lyue 
in  reste,  pees  &  cbarite,  &  suffre  no  ^  men  vn(^'^^  colour  of  bem 
to  do  extorcions,  bete  men,  &  bolde  pore  m-^  but  of  ri^t  bi 
strengfe  of  lordiscbipis.  ^For  pus  spekif  'l^bly  writt  in  fe 
Deut.  xvii.  [16.]  fifte ^  bok  of  goddis  lawe;  ‘‘wbawne  fe  kynj  is  ordeyned  bi 
f  e  cbesynge  of  god  &  of  his  peple,  he  scbal  'bt  multiplie  to 
bym  self  many  hors,  he  scbal  not  baue  many^Jbes  to  drawe 
bis  berte  to  lustis,  &  he  scbal  not  baue  outebf  mesure  grete 
weijttis  of  siluer  &  gold,  but  aiter  pat  be  sc^^i  sitte  in  sege 
of  his  regne,  be  scbal  writte  to  him  fe  bok  ^  goddis  lawe  in 
a  volym,  takynge  ensaumplerie  of  pr^stis  o  kynrede  of 
leuy,  &  baue  it  wif  him,  &  he  scbal  rede  ft  alle  fe  daies 
of  his  lif,  pat  he  kuwne  drede  fe  lord  his  od  &  kepe  his 
wordis,  fe  wbicbe  ben  comauwdid  in  fe  lav®)  &  his  berte 
scbal  not  be  lift  vp  i7^-to  pride  vpon  his'brefei-b,  &  be  scbal 
not  croke  in-to  fe  rijtte  side  ne  iw-to  fe  left  i^o,  pat  be  & 
his  cbildreT^  regne  long  tyme  vpon  Israel.”  ^A.lso  kyngis  & 
To  seek  wisdom,  lordis  schulde  axe  of  god,  bi  gret  desir  &  holjlifj  wisdom  of 


1  not  X, 


2  first  AA. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


231 


heuenely  j^ingis  &  kuwnywge  of  er]7ely  ]7ingis  to  reule  goddis 
peple  bi,  &  not  richessis,  ne  worldly  substaunces/  ne  worldly 
glorie,  ne  vnresonable  vengauwces  of  here  enemys,  ne  long 
lif  \n  I'is  world,  as  kyng  samon^  dede,  &  l^rfore  god  jaf  him 
wisdom  of  heuenely  j^ingis  &  of  erj^ely  j^ingis  &  richessis  & 
substaunce  &  glorie,  \a\,  neu^re  kyng  bi-fore  hadde  so  moche 

ne  aftir.  ^Also  so^  kyngis  &  lordis  schulden  be  clo]7id  wi]?  Jobxxix.  [14, 

etc.] 

rijtwisnesse  &  ri^tful  dom  as  wi}?  a  diademe,  &  be  eije  to  a 
blynd  man  &  foot  to  ]>g  crokid  or  haltynge,  &  be  fadir  of 
pore  men,  &  wi]?  most  diligence  sike  j^e  cause  \at  knowe 
not,  &  defoule  &  distroie  ]>e  power  of  a  wickid  man,  &  take 
a-wey  j^e  prey  out  of  his  tee]?;  &  wha?^ne  pei  sitten  as  kyngis* 

&  compaynes  stonden  aboute  ]?ei  schulden  [be]  confortours 

of  mornynge  men  &  men  ful  of  myscheyf,  &  delyuere  pore 

men  criynge,  &  fadirles  children  &  moderles  pat  han  noon 

helpe,  &  so  haue  blyssynge  of  him  pat  was  in  poynt  to 

perische,  &  conforte  pe  widwis  herte.  ]»es  goodnessis  &  many 

moo  vsed  pe  holy  kyng  iob,  &  ben  in  holy  writt  for  ensaumple 

of  kyngis  &  lordis.  Also  god  him  self  sei]>  bi  ieromye  pat  jerem.  xxii.  3. 5. 

he  schal  take  vengaunce  on  hem  pat  demeden  not  ri^thfully 

pe  cause®  of  widwe,  pe  cause  of  fadirles  &  modirles,  &  pe  cause 

of  pore  men.  Also  god  hym  self  sei]>  ®  by  ysaie,  pat  princes  isaiah  i.  [I6.] 

schullen  cesse  to  don  euele  &  lerne  to  do  wel,  &  seke  dom, 

&  helpe  men  oppr^ssid  wrongly,  &  ^eue  dom  to  fadirles  & 

modirles,  &  meyntene  pe  widwe,  &  come  &  reproue  him ;  pat 

is  to  seie,  but  pf  he  pan  helpe  hem.  &  ]>(9rfore  sei)>  holy  writt  prov.  xx.  [28.] 

pat  mercy  &  trew]?e  kept  of  kyngis,  &  his  trone  is  maade 

strong  bi  mekenesse  &  mercy,  &  pe  kyng  pat  sitti]?  in  sete  of  *[p.  194  ms.] 

Prov  XX »  8 

dom  distroie]?  alle  euyl  in  his  lokynge,  &  so  it  plesi]?  more  to 

god  to  do  mercy  &  dom  pan  to  do  sacrifices ;  &  ]?us  salamon  prov.  xxv.  5. 

sei]?,  pat  ]?ei  pat  don  wickedly  ben  abhominable  to  pe  kyng, 

for  his  sete  is  maade  stable  bi  rijtwisnesse  ;  &  ]?us  seif  dauid,  psaim  xcLx.  4. 

pat  pe  hononr  of  fe  kyng  louef  dom ;  &  for  f e  ri^tful  &  witti 

dom  pat  salamon  dide  bitwixen  tweie  comyn  wymmen,  alle 

^  sustenaunces  X.  ^  salamon  A  A.  ^  omitted  X . 

*  lyngis  X.  ®  omitted  X.  ®  omitted  X. 


232 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS, 


Rom.  xiii.  [3.] 


1  Peter  ii.  [13,] 


Col.  iv.  [1.] 


Ephesians  vi.  [9,] 


Ecclus  X.  [8.] 


j>e  lend  of  Israel  drede  hym.  &  j)erfove  teclii]?  poul  '^at 
princes  ben  not  to  drede  of  good  w'erk  but  of  euyl,  &  a  man 
sette  in  grete  power  beri]?  not  wi]7-oute  grete  cause  ]>e  swerd, 
\at  is  worldly  power,  for  he  is  a  mynystre  of  god  to  do 
vengau?^ce  to  him  fat  dof  euyle.  &  seynt  petir  techif 
gen^raly  cristene  men  to  be  suget  to  eche  man  for  god,  &  to 
f e  kyng  as  to  souereyn  bifore  of^re,  &  to  dukis  as  seynt  of 
fe  kyng^  to  vengauwee  of  mysdedis  or  mysdoeris  &  to 
preisynge^  of  goode  dedis  or  goode  doeris.  ^Also  poul  techif 
lordis  fws:  “^e  lordis,  jeue  to  seruauwtis  ]iat  fing  \at  isri^tful 
&  equite  &  euene,  witynge  fat  ^e  also  ban  a  lord  in  heuene.” 
also  poul  seif  in  a-pistel  of  ephesyns  :  “  &  ^e  lordis,  do  to 
seruauritis  fe  same  fingis,  \at  is  goode  rijtwisnesse  &  equyte 
of  herte,  &  wif  goode  wille,  forjeuynge  manasse ;  witynge 
fat  bofe  ^oure  lord  &  hern  is  in  heuenes,  accepciou?^^  of 
persones  is  not  anemptis  god ;  ”  \at  is,  god  sparet  not  for 
richesse  ne  lordischipe  ne  worldly  frendischipe  to  ponysche 
synnes,  &  sparet  not  for  pou^rte  to  rewarde  good  lyuynge  of 
pore  S(9ruauwtis. 

^  Sif  f is  is  f  e  office  of  kyngis  &  lordis,  to  venge  f  us  synnys  &  to 
preise  &  rewarde  goode  dedis,  pf  lordis  leuen  f is  office,  &  meyn- 
tenen  synful  men  &  wrong  doeris,  &  helpen  not  pore  men  in  here 
ri^t,  f  ei  may  drede  f  ^?t  here  kyngdom  &  lordischipis  schulle^  be 
translated  i;^-to  anof folk,  as  fe  wyse  man  seif :  “a  kyngdom 
is^  translated  from  o  peple  in-to  anof^r  for  vnrijtwisnesse,  & 
iniuries  or  wrongis,  &  contekis  or  debatis,  &  for  dyu^rse  giles 
or  disceitis.”  for  men  dreden  ®  fat  vnri^twisnesse  a^enst  god 
regnef  in  oure  lond ;  for  men  dreden  more  to  displese  an 
erfely  dedly  wrecche  for  lesynge.of  worldly  frendischipe  fan  to 
displese  god  almy^tty  &  to  lese  his  moste  blissed  frendischipe  ; 
&  loue  more  to  performe  a  wrong  comauwdeme^t  of  proude 
luciferis  children  fan  to  pigrforme  f e  moste  rijtful  comauwde- 
mewt  of  god,  fat  is  esy  &  sikirere ;  &  louen  more  a  litel 
stynkynge  drit  of  worldly  goodis  fan  fei  louen  fe  blisse  of 


^  lyng  X. 

^  excepcion  X. 


2  preiynge  X. 
®  omitted  AA. 


3  in  X. 

®  dredem  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


233 


heuene ;  for  many  men  maken  hem  more  bisy  to  geten 
worldly  muk  j^an  to  geten  virtues  &  holy  lif,  &  maken  more 
Borowe  wha^ne  j^ei  fallen  fro  worldly  catel  in-to  pou^rte  j’an 
whawne  ]>ei  fallyn  fro  grace  &  charite  &  oj^^re  virtues  i?^-to 
many  orble^  syunys.  Also  men  '^louen  more  to  venge  wrongis  *[p- 

jVXbh  3.r6  3.pt  to 

&  dispites  don  to  here  owene  p^rsonys  or  lordischipis  ]?m  to  revenge, 
venge  wronggis  or  dispitis  don  ajenst  j^e  mageste  of  god 
almyjtty  ;  as  jif  a  man  speke  a  word  of  litel  reprof  or  vilonye 
of  a  lord  or  a  grete  man  of  j^is  world  he  schal  be  pwrsued  & 
peyned  per-fore  pat  alle  pe  world  or  many  men  schullen 
wond^re  vpon  hym,  but  jif  men  speken  falsnesse  bi  oure  god, 
seiynge  pat  cn’st  beggede^  as  men  don  now  nedles,  or  dispisen  Friars, 
his  name  bi  cursid  swerynge,  or  speken  vilonye  of  lecherie  Swearing, 
or  of  QperQ  foule  synnys  to  foule  cristene  soulis  perhi,  j^ei  ben 
not  pursued  ne  hurlid  out,  but  chirischid  &  holde  goode 
felawis,  &  summe  ^it  ben  holden  holy  men,  for  goddis  lawe 
is  not  knowen  &  here  ypocrisie  is  jit  hid,  &  |>us  vnrijtwis- 
nesse  regne]?  vpon  many  sidis. 

muries  or  wrongis  ben  dow  to  pore  men  many  weies ;  wrongs  of  poor 
for  prdatis  techen  hem  not  treuely  goddis  lawe,  iiQiper 
\7i  word  ne  ewsauwple  of  holy  lif,  &  jit  j^ei  cursen  faste 
for  here  dymes  &  offrywgis  of  pore  men,  whawne  ]7ei 
schulden  xo^pere  jeue  hem  worldly  goodis  j^au  take  of 
hem;  for  prdatis  wasten  in  pride,  glotonye,®  worldly  pleas  wickedness  of 

prsldtcs* 

&  grete  festis  of  lordis  and  riche  men  ]7e  tresor  of  pore  men, 

pe  while  J^ei  ben  in  moche  peyne  &  wrecchidnesse  in  bodi 

&  soule;  &  jit  prelatis  wolen  not  do  sacramentis  &  here 

gostly  office  to  here  sugetis,  as  halwynge  of  chirchis  and 

auteris  &  chirchejerdis  &  opere  ornementis,  but^  jif  men  bien 

hem  for  moche  money;  &  jjawne  comynly  j^e  biere  &  pe 

sellere  ben  cursed  of  god.  also  lordis  many  tymes  don  Lords  do  wrong 
.  .  ,  to  the  poor. 

wrongis  to  pore  men  bi  extorscions  &  vnresonable  mercy- 

mentis  &  vnresonable  taxis,  &  taken  pore  mennas  goodis  Take  their  goods 

and  pay  them 

&  paien  not  perfore  but  white  stickis,  &  dispisen  hem  &  with  taiiy-sticks. 

^  orrible  AA.  2  begge  X. 

®  gloterie  AA.  and  so  generally  through  the  tract.  ^  omitted  X. 


234 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


manassew  hem  &  sumtyme  beten  hem  whanne  |>ei  axen  here 
peye.  &  ]}us  lordis  deuouren  pore  mennws  goodis  in  glotonye 
&  wast  &  pride,  &  j^ei  pmschew  for  myschief,  hungwr  & 
Jurist  &  colde,  &  pere  children  also ;  &  jif  here  rente  be  not 
redily  paied  here  bestis  ben  stressid  &  j^ei  Jjwrsned  wi]70uten 
mercy,  poa^  pei  be  neuere  so  pore  &  nedi  &  ouerchargid  wi]? 
age,  febilnesse  &  loos  of  catel  &  wi]?  many  children.  & 
^it  lordis  wolen  not  mekely  here  a  pore  mannws  cause  & 
helpe  hym  in  his  rijte,  but  suffre  sisouris  of  contre  to  distroie 
hem,  but  ra|»ere  wyj^holde^  pore  men  here  hire,  for  whiche 
]?ei  han  spendid  here  fleisch  &  here  blood.  &  so  iw  a  manere 
fei  eten  &  drynken  pore  mennw5  fleisch  &  blood  &  ben 
man(}^uelleris,  as  god  pleyne]?  bi  his  prophetis.  where-fore 
Isaiah  i.  [15.23.]  god  sei]?  hi  pQ  prophetc  ysaie,  pat  siche  lordis  ben  felawis  of 
J^euys  &  here  hondis  ben  ful  of  blood,  &  perioxe  whawne  ]7ei 
*[p.  196MS.]  preieu  many  preieris  bi  mou]?  &  holden  vp  ^here  hondis,  god 
wole  not  here  hem  ne  resceyue  here  offryngis  pat  ben  wrong¬ 
fully  geten  of  pore  mennw5  goodis  bi  extorcions  &  raueyne 
&  robberie.  &  ^it  men  of  lawe,  pat  schulden  distroie  siche 

Wrongs  done  by  falsnesse  bi  here  offices  &  don  eche  man  riit  &  reson,^  meyn- 
lawyers.  ‘ 

tenen  wrong  for  money  &  fees  &  robis,  &  forbaren  pore  men  fro  ^ 
here  ri^t,  pat  it  is  betre  to  hem  to  pursue  not  for  here  rijt,  be  it 
neu^re  so  opyn,  j^an  to  pursue  &  lese  more  catel  for  disceitis  of 
delaies  and  cauellacions  &  euele  wills  ^  pat  j^ei  vsen ;  &  J^us 
wrong  is  meyntened  &  trew]7e  &  rijt  outlawid  in  many  statis. 

^Also  stryues,  contekis  &  debatis  ben  vsed  in  oure  lond, 

for  lordis  stryuen  wi]7  here  tenauwtis  to  brynge®  hem  in 

Serfdom.  jjraldom  more  ]7an  j^ei  schulden  bi  reson  &  charite ;  &  j^ei 

grucchen  a^en,  &  cursen  &  warien  ny^t  &  day,  &  grete  men 

Wrongs  done  at  of  J^is  world®  debatcn,  &  meyntenen  debatis  at  louedaies  ; 
lo've-days. 

&  who  so  may  be  strengere  wil  haue  his  wille  don,  be  it 
wrong  be  it  rijt,  &  ellis  make  debate  among  many  hundrid 
&  Jjousand  men  &  sumtyme  many  courtres,  &  by’^  sich 
debatynge  many  men  holden  grete  houses  &  grete  araies  & 

*  as  X.  ^  ^  inserts  &.  ^  for  X.  *  willes  X. 

®  brynke  X.  ®  worldly  AA.  ’  omitted  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


235 


grete  costis.  &  summe  lordis,  seme  tei  neui^re  so  holy  &  Some  lords  main- 

^  '  i  •'  tain  wrong  by 

deuout  \n  here  preieres,  wolen  to  meyntene  name  of  here  foi'ce. 

lordischipe  beten  men  of  contre,  &  meyntenen  oj^iere  mysdoeris 

\er-io,  ]70uj  men  pursuen  ri^t  &  reson  in  good  manure,  &  j^is 

is  for  falsnesse  of  a  Here  &  coueitise  &  worldly  pride.  & 

clerkis  striuen  for  holy  writt  &  seyn  'bai  it  is  most  trewe  True  clerks  strive 

^  \  Holy  Writ. 

&  best  to  reule  cristene  mennws  soulis  bi,  but  ypocritis  seyn 

]iat  holy  writt  is  fals,  &  newe  lawis  maad  of  worldly  clerkis 

ben  betre  for  cristene  men  j^an  holy  writt,  &  'perfoie  ]>ei 

studien  mannws  lawis  &  techen  hem  to  coloure  bi  here  pride  Hypocrites  study 

&  coueitise ;  &  leuen  jje  gospel  &  goddis  la  we,  for  it  dampnej? 

pride  &  coueitise  of  clerkis,  &  techi]?  mekenesse  &  wilful 

pou^rte  &  bisynesse  in  preiere  &  gostly  occupacion.  trewe  True  clerks  main- 

clerkis  seyn  ]7at  \a\j  religion  &  ordre  \a\j  crist,  god  &  man, 

maade  is  most  perfit,  most  lijt  &  most  siker  for  my^t,  wisdom 

&  charite  of  ]?e  lord  ;  but  ypocritis  seyn  newe  religion,  ^^^.eiigion^s 

fouwden  of  synful  men  &  gadrid  of  many  errouris,  of  foolis  & 

worldly,  proude  &  coueitise  wrecchis,  is  best ;  &  \eriom  j^ei 

leuen  cristis  religion  in  his  owene  fredom,  &  bynden^  hem  bi 

singuler  profession  to  synful  foolis.  &  pt  crist  &  his  apostlis 

tauten  neuore  ne  vseden  siche  profession.  &  herfore  many 

children  ben  broujt  to  siche  newe  religion  for  lone  of  worldly 

pride  &  welfare  of  body  more  j^an  for  holy  lif  to  some  god  in 

penauwce  &  clennesse  of  soule,  &  su??^  ben  stolen  I’efly  fro 

here  frendis,  &  summe  bi  false  lesyngis  &  false  bihestis 

broujt  jjor-to,  &  for-j^inke  it  aftor,  &  be  not  suffred  to  turne 

to  cristis  dene  religion,  jjou^  ]jei  ben  ynable  to  j^is  newe 

religions  maade  of  synful  mennws  "^'ordynauwce  ;  &  so  m  *[p.  197  ms.] 

summe  manore  ]?ei  ben  nedid  to  be  dampnyd  for  ypoorisie 

&  grucchynge  of  conscience,  &  leuynge  of  betre  )»ing  & 

holdynge  forj  of  fe  worse  wyttyngly.  ^  Trewe  clerkis  seyn  True  clerks  set 

also  ]^at  cristis  lyuynge  &  his  apostlis  in  wilful  pouert,  wi]?-  a'^^pLtem^^for 

f  prissts* 

outen  fals  &  nedeles  beggyng  &  whi]7-outew  worldly  lordischipis, 
is  most  porfit  in  itself  &  best  for  alle  clerkis,  si]?  crist  god  & 
man  chees  ]?is^  lif  for  fe  beste ;  &  he  my^tte  not  erre  neif^r  in 
1  byndem  X.  *  omitted  X. 


236 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


Possessioners 
have  lands, 


bnt  do  not  rule 
as  lords, 


or  teach  as 
priests. 


Lords  misled  by 
these  hypocrites. 


]70U^t  ne  in  word  ne  dede,  but  suwme  ypocritis  seyn  ajenst 
]7is  in  worde  or  dede  or  boj^e,  pat  it  his  best  to  feyne  holy 
pouert  aftir  crist  &  his  apostlis,  &  per-wip  lyuen  in  lustis  of 
worldly  gaynesse,  of  costy^  housynge  &  grete  more  }7an  lordis 
don,  &  in  costy  clo]?ing  for  ony  lord,  &  in  cost  of  mete  or 
drynke  &  makywge  of  grete  festis  of  riche  men.  &  j^is  lif  J^ei 
holden  vp  hi  fals  beggynge  of  pore  men,  pat  may  not  wel 
paie  here  rentis  to  lordis  &  here  dymes  &  offryngis  to  curatis 
&  meyntene  here  wif  &  children  &  lene  out  of  dette,  trd^ueile 
]iei  n^u^re  so  besily  ny^t  &  day.  &  be  J^ei  neu(9re  so  pore  & 
in  grete  dette  j^es  ypocritis  ceessen  not  to  robbe  hem  bi  fals 
beggywge,  dampned  of  goddis  lawe.  oj^^re  ypocritis  seyn  in 
dede  pat  it  is  betre  for  clerkis  to  haue  worldly  rentis  & 
lordischipis  dowid  to  hem  &  parische  chirchis  approprid  to 
hem^  bi  symonye  &  lesyngis  pan  to  lyue  in  wilful  &  honest 
pouert  as  crist  &  his  apostlis  diden.  &  ^it  ]7ei  reulen  not 
wele  pe  peple,  as  lordis  schulden,  but  seyn  pat  ]7ei  ben  dede 
to  j^e  world;  techen  not  pe  peple  goddis  lawe  in  word  & 
ensaumple  as  pr^stis  schulden,  but  seyn  it  falle]?  not  to  hem 
to  pr^che  ;  &  j^ei  tr^^ueile  not  for  here  liflode,  as  god  enyoyned 
adam  for  his  penaunce,  &  poul  triaiueiled  wi]?  his  hondis  in 
nede  for  his  sustenaunce,  but  j^ei  lyuen  corny nly  in  ydelnesse 
&  glotonye  &  enuye  &  many  oji^r  synnys,  &  feynen  holy- 
nesse  in  syngynge,  in  preynge  of  mou]?  &  customes  maad  of 
mannw5  errowr,  more  pan  in  lyuynge  after  cristis  gospel.  & 
whawne  trewe  clerkis  meyntenen  here  trewe  part  bi  holy 
writt  &  reson  &  ensaumple  of  cristis  lif  &  his  apostlis,  & 
newe  ypocritis  meyntenen  here  fals  part  bi  ground  of  synful 
men  &  bi  ypocrisie  &  worldly  power  &  ^iftis  of  money  & 
censures,  as  suspendynge,  cursynge  &  prisonynge,  &  panne  is 
debat  &  strif  reised  at  pe  fulle.  for  many  lordis  &  grete 
men  ben  disceyued  bi  j^e  multitude  of  ypocritis,  &  many 
blente  bi  ^iftis  of  money  &  worldly  profitis  j^at  J^ei  geten  of 
]7es  ypomtis,  &  summe  bi  fleschly  loue  &  worldly  frendi- 
schipe,  &  for  pat  fewe  stonden  wi]?  pe  trewl’e  &  but  fewe 

1  gostly  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  omitted  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


237 


lordis  or  riche  cristene  men  stonden  hi  goddis  lawe  &  profit 
of  cristene  mennus  soulis  for  to  Wynne  ]>e  hlisse  of  heuene ; 

&  torfore  pore  clerkis  ben  sclauwdrid  for  heretikis,  for  tei  Poor  priests  are 
seyn  ]>e  treujje  of  holy  writt,  &  hurlid  &  cursid  &  prisonyd 
&  lettid  to  proche  j^e  gospel,  for  drede  laste  j^ei  warne  j^e 
peple  aftor  cristis  techynge  of  j>e  false  disceitis  of  an^^'crist  & 
his  worldly  &  proude  &  coueitouse  clerkis.  &  ]7us  str[i]ues 
&  dehatis  ben  reised  &  meyntened  in  cure  lond. 

^  Also  diuorse  gilis  or  disceitis  &  falsnesses  rengnen  moche 
in  oure  lond;  for  prolatis  hiden  fe  gile  of  here  symonye  &  simony  in  pre- 
ypocrisie,  pat  ynnej^is  come]?  ony  to  ony  grete  benefice 
wi]?onten  symonye,  priuy  or  apert ;  &  pus  alle  pr^stis  & 
lordis  &  comyns  also  ben  enuenymed  wij?  heresie  of  cwrsid 
symonye,  &  pr^latis  pat  schnlden  distroie  synne  &  chasse  it^ 
out  of  londe  wolen  meyntene  men  in  sywne  of  leccherie  & 
opere  fro  ^eer  to  ^eer  for  a  pencion  hi  ^ere,  &  clepen  ]7is  holy  sin-rents. 
correction  ;  &  pei  ben  wode  pf  ony  lord  or  operQ  myjtty  man 
lette  hem  of  ]?is  correction,  pe  whiche  is  roherie  &  extor¬ 
sion.  \n  cowfessouris  regnel?  moche  gile  for  bei  cowforten  &  Confessors  flatter 

for  selflshreasons 

norischen  grete  men  of  ]?is  world  in  here  synnys  for  to  gete 
a  benefice,  .worldly  wynnywge  or  frendischipe  or  lustis  of ^ 
here  stynkynge  bely,  &  vnd^r  colour  of  holynesse  leden  men 
to  ]?e  jatis  of  helle  &  sellen  soulis  to  sathanas  for  drit  of 
worldly  goodis  &  wombe  ioie  for  a  while ;  for  ]?ei  doren  not 
'  telle  hem  pQ  so]?e  &  gretnesse  of  here  foule  synnys  &  horiblite 
of  peynes  of  helle,  &  forsake  here  companye  whawne  ]?ei 
wolen  dwelle  stille  in  here  synne,  leste  pei  lese  worldly^ 
worschipe  &  lustis  pat  j^ei  seken  more  I’an  to  saue  cristene 
soulis.  In  men  of  lawe  regnep  moche  gile,  for  ]?ei  meyntenen  Deceitfulness  of 
^falsnes  for  wynnynge  &  maken  lordis  to  ^  meyntene  wrongis 
&  don  wrongis  whawne  lordis  hopen  to  do  ri^t  &  plese  god,  & 
bi  here  coueitise  &  falsenesse  pei  pwrchasen  londis  &  rentis 
ynowe  and  don  many  extorsions  &  beren  don  j^e  ri^t  bo]?e  of 
pore  &  riche,  &  pt  ]?ei  maken  it  so  ®  holy  in  signes  outward, 

2  omitted  X. 


lawyers. 


^  omitted  X. 
omitted  X. 


^  omitted  X. 
®  omitted  X 


238 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


Merchants  cheat, 


so  do  servants ; 


hut  most  of  all 
the  clergy, 
who  sell  vain 
prayers  and 
pardons. 


»[p.  199  MS.] 


Duties  of  lords. 


They  should  set 
good  example. 


as  ^if  ]7ei  weren  angelis  of  heuene,  to  colour  here  falsenesse 
&  blywde  j^e  peple  '^erhj.  ^In  marchauwtis  regne]?  gile  in  ful 
grete  plente,  for  j7ei  sweren  falsly  he  alle  grete  membris  of 
crist  &  bi  alle  myjtty  god  in  trinyte  \at  here  chaffere  cost  so 
moche  &  is  so  trewe  &  profitable,  to  bigile  peple  &  to 
teche  jonge  prmtis  j^is  cwrsed  craft,  &  proisen  hyw  most  \at 
most  bigile]?  ]?e  peple,  &  hiden  here  vsure  &  colouren  it  bi 
sotil  cautelis  of  ]?e  fend  ]?«t  fewe  men  may  proue  )?is  vsure  & 
amende  hem  ]?or-of  bi-fore  ]?e  day  of  dom.  s^ruau?itis 

regnej?  gile,  for  ]7ei  tro^ueilen  faste  awhile  in  presence  of  here 
maister,  &  in  absence  ben  ydel  &  iapen  &  don  litel  good,  & 
sweren  faste  \at  ]?ei  may  not  labore  treweliere  &  bisiliere  ]?an 
]7ei  don.  &  pt  genoraly  in  clerkis  regne]>  most  gile,  for  ]?ei 
disceyuen  men  bi  here  veyn  preieris  &  pardons  &  indulgencis, 
for  ]?ei  knowen  not  ]?e  goodnesse  of  here  preieris  ne  abilnesse 
of  men  ]?at  ]7ei  preien  fore,  but  ]?ei  owen  to  drede  sore  ]?at  ]?ei 
stiren  god  to  vengauwce  for  here  owene  wickid  lif ;  &  ]?er 
come]?  no  pardon  but  of  god  for  good  lyuynge  &  endynge  in 
charite,  &  ]?is  schal  not  be  boujt  ne  solde  as  pr(?latis  chafferen 
]?e8  dayes ;  for  who  is  in  most  charite  is  beste  herde  of  god, 
be  he  schepeherde  or  lewid  man,  or  in  ]?e  chirche  or  in  ]?e 
feld ;  &  who  kepi]?  wel  ]?e  hestis  of  god  schal  haue  pardon 
]?e  blisse  of  heuene,  &  noon  oj^ere  for  creatwre  vnder  god. 
&  ]?ws  gile  regne]?  in  many  statis  &  personys  \at  oure  lond 
may  drede  sore  a  conquest.  But  pf  synne  &  gile  be  chasid  out 
&  treu]>e  &  charite  meyntened  soone. 

but  nowe  be  lordis  wel  war  ]?at  ]?ei  don  mi^rcy  &  charite 
&  good  conscience  to  her  seruauntis,  for  ellis  ]?ei  schuUe  gete 
no  m^rcy  ne  loue  of  god,  for  wrong  oppr(9Ssynge  of  pore 
men  axi]?  vengaunce  of  god,  as  do]?  wrong  mansleynge;  &  loke 
lordis  ]?at  ]?ei  reule  wel  s^ruauntis  &  tenauntis,  ]?at  ]?ei  drede 
god  &  his  wra]?]?e  ]?e  more,  &  flee  synnys  &  lyue  virtuously  & 
in  treu]?e  anemtis  god  &  man;  for  lordis  owen  to  pue  holy 
ensau?nple  of  lif  to  siruauntis  &  sugetis,  &  ponysche  hem  for 
here  wickid  lif  anemtis  god  more  fan  for  falsnesse  of  dispit 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


239 


don  a^enst  here  owene  p^rsone  or  worldly  profit ;  &  to  preise, 
cherische^  &  lone  &  rewarde  hem  for  here  holy  lif  &  treuje 
more  J^an  for  pleisynge  of  here  owene  porsone  or  for  doynge 
of  here  worldly  auauwtage  or  profit.  &  \us  schullew  lordis 
]>at  ben  vortuous  in  hem  self  norische  vortuous  soruauwtis  & 
trewe  to  god  &  man,  &  reproue  &  ponysche  wickid  trecchouris® 

&  cwrsed  of  lif ;  &  \us  schulde  synne  among  hem  &  oj^ore  be 

hurlid  out  &  troube  &  vortuous  lif  meyntened  &  cherischid.  Not  to  use  bad 

laws  for  the  op- 

^  Also  lordis  schullen  don  non  extorsions  to  here  pore  soruauwtis  pression  of  their 

servants, 

bi  ne  worldly  lawe  ne  customes,  for  alle  )>es  lawes  &  customes 
bew  noj^ing  wor]?  but  pf  j^ei  ben  reulid  bi  charite  &  good 
conscience  ;  &  lordis  owen  to  procure  good  &  reste  &  pees  to  oriettheirofficers 
here  soruau;^tis  as  goode  fadris  &  helperis,  &  suffre  not  here 
stiwardis  or  ony  officeris  to  don  hem  wrong,  for  si]?  j^ei  may 
distroie  ]7is  wrong®  &  don  not,  ]7ei  ben  fautoris  &  meyntenors 
of  fis  wrong,  &  schulle  be  ponyschid  as  ]?e  doeris,  as  seynt  Rom.  i.  [32.] 
poul  sei]?,  &  in  many  cas  more  scharply,  for  here  meyntenynge 
do]?  more  harm  &  wrong  wickid  stiwardis  bi  hem-self;  1  Timothy v.  [8.] 

for  seynt  poul  sei]?  pleynly  \at  he  ha]?  not  cure  or  kepy^ge 
of  his  owene,  &  most  of  his  owene  homly  meyne,*  ha]?  for¬ 
saken  ]?e  fei]’  &  is  worse  ]?an  an  he]?ene  man.  of  ]>is  it  seme]> 
opynly  \ai  ]iat  lord  ]?at  chargi]’  ®  not  what  wrong  or  extorsions 
his  ofidceris  don  vnder  hym  forsaki]>  ]?e  ri^e  fei]?  &  is  worse 
]?an  an  he]’ene  man;  for  he  do]?  more  harm  to  a  cristene 
man,  &  distroie]?  more  cristene  religion,  &  maki]?  hate  & 
grucchynge  &  discencion  bitwixe  pore  &  riche,  &  anemtis  god ; 
for  ]?ei  my^ten  soone  enquere  of  trewe  men  of  ]iq  contre 
]?e  falsnesse  of  here  officeris  &  amer-de  hem,  pf  ]>ei  loueden 
treu]?e  of  god  rijtful  helpe  of  pore  men  as  moche  as  ]?ei  *[p.  200MS.] 
louen  hel]?e  of  here  body  &  holsumnesse  of  here  bodily  mete ; 

&  but  pf  ]>ei  don  ]>us  ]?ei  fallen  out  of  charite  as  it  seme]?, 
for  ]jei  louen  more  ellis  here  bely  &  hem  self  ]?an  ]?e  honowr 
of  crist  &  rijtful  gou^rnaile  of  goddis  peple.  &  lordis  schulden 
warne  here  officeris  \at  jif  ]>ei  don  wrong  to  here  pore 

^  cMrch  X.  2  treccberous  X.  ^  omitted  X. 

*  omitted  AA.  ^  chargid  X. 


240 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


tenau^tis  ]7ei  scTiulden  be  put  out  of  here  offices  &  lese  here 

Lords  are  de-  freudischipe  &  lordiscbipe,  &  banne  ■wolde?^  officeris  of  lordis 

ceived  who  gro  to  l  /  j 

matins  and  do  ben  war  of  extorsious  &  wrong  meyntenauwce.  &  lordis  ben 

not  look  after 

their  officers.  foule  discejued  to  dwelle  att  home  \n  lustis  of  glotonye  '& 
lecherie  &  ydelnesse,  &  to  seie  here  matynes  &  oj?ere 
deuocions  in  mouj?  &  not  in  herte  ne  dede,  &  to  suffre  pore 

Prov,  xxi.  3.  men  distroied  hi  euyl  officeris ;  for  god  sei]?  bi  salamon  it  is 
betre  to  do  m^rcy  &  rijtful  dom  jfan  to  offre  sacrifies.  for  ]ie 

No  use  writing  presence  of  jjo  rijtful  lord  schulde  more  distroie  wrowgis  & 
to  ©vil 

officers,  who  euyl  meyntenauwce  ban  many  lettms  sent  to  euyl  officeris, 

know  they  may  ^  i  j  j  ^ 

gard^hem*^^'  charge  not  to  do  ri^t  aft^r  lett^ris,  for  \er  is  no 

more  pwrsuet  don  after  jie  deed  lettre.  ^  What  is  it  wor]?  a 
lord  to  crie  bi  word  to  god,  whame  many  pore  men  axen 
rijtfully  yewgauwce  ajenst  hi^?^  for  extorsions  &  wrongis  ])at  he 
&  his  officeris  don  or  suffren  ^  to  be  don  in  his  name,  whawne 
he  may  letten  hem ;  for  ]>m  he  is  consentowr  or  autor  of 
siche  wrongis.  for  god  wole  sonere  here  many  pore  rijtfully 
criynge  vewgauwce  ]7an  a  lord  &  many  ypocritis  axynge 
vnri^tfully  helpe  &  wynnywge  of  worldly  goodis ;  for  god 
sei]7  ]7fift  he  wole  not  here  synful  men  criynge  to  him  in  tyrae 
of  here  nede  whawne  ]7ei  wolen  not  here  pore  men  &  helpe 

Lords  ought  to  hem  in  here  wrongis  &  myscheues  \>ai  bei  ben  mne.  ^  Also  a 

keep  the  clergy  in  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

order, .  grete  vnrijtwisnesse  regne]?  among  lordis  whawne  j^ei  wolen 

not  distroie  pride,  coueitise  &  worldly  lif  of  clerkis  Ipat 
barmen  so  moche.  cristene  peple.  for  pf  lordis  wolden  dispise 
]7e  pride  of  coueitouse  clerkis  &  not  conferme  hem  ne* 
meyntene  here  worldly  lordiscbipe  &  symonye,  \ai  is  opynly 
dampnyd  bi  holy  writt  &  cristis  lyuynge,  j^es  proude  worldly 
clerkis  ful  of  coueitise  &  lecherie  &  o^ere  synnes  schulden 
sone  ben  abatid,  &  holy  lif  &  trewe  techynge  schulde  be  brou^t 
a^en.  but  here  renne]?  moche  gile  &  ypocrisie  of  an^mrist  & 
his  cbrkis,  for  pei  seyn  pat  seculer  lordis  han  no  power  ypon 
clerkis,  but  jif  pr^latis  clepen  hem  to  chastise  clerkis  whawne 
pei  ben  rebel  &  wolen  not  ben  amendid  bi  here  pr(?latis.  for 


‘  suffre]?  X. 


2  no  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


241 


salamon  putte  adoun  on  hei?  pri^stis  &  ordeyned  anol^r  in  his  i  Kings  ii.  [27.] 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  Example  of 

place,  &  owtlawid  j^e  firste  wij^-outen  axynge  helpe  of  clerMs  Solomon. 

for  traiterie  don  to  salamon  &  his  peple ;  &  treson  ajenst  crist 

&  his  lawe  &  his  peple  is  more  J^an  treson  ajenst  an  erj^ely 

kyng  &  more  schulde  be  ponyschid.  &  as  petir  &  poul  techen, 

lordis  hen  ordeyned  of  god  to  venge  mysdedis  and  mysdoeris 

&  to  preise  goode  dedis  &  goode  doeris;  j^a^zne  ]>e  more  ]iai  ^a  *[p.  201  ms.] 

synne  is,  le  more  howen  lordis  to  ponysche  it ;  hut  le  synne  sin  of  the  clergy 

^  ^  ^  is  worse  than  sin 

of  clerkis  is  more  J^an  ]7e  synne  of  o\erQ  lewid  men,  |>awne  of  laymen. 

lordis  owen  more  to  ponysche  synne  of  clerkis  ]7a7^ne  J^e  synne 

of  o]!er  men.  &  it  is  more  synne  &  perilous  to  goddis  peple 

wha7^ne  lowere  clerkis  meyntenen  here  synne  &  grete  pr^latis 

sulfren  hem  \er-m\ie,  &  consenten  ])er-to  for  necligence  or 

coueitise,  pan  whawne  pr^latis  don  here  bisynesse  to  distroie 

synne  &  pursue  wickid  clerkis.  per- fore  lordis  owen  to 

ponysche  more  wickid  clerkis  wha7^ne  pri^latis  slepen  & 

fauouren  hem  in  synne  for  moneye, ^  for  ellis  my^tten  kyng- 

domes  ben  conquerid  for  ^  necligence  of  coueitouse  prelat^5,  as 

it  was  in  J^e  lond  of  israel.  &  herefore  whame  crist  was 

preised  of  pe  peple,  he  wente  in-io  pe  temple  &  wi]?  his 

hondis  droof  out  symonyewtis,  to  ^eue  ensaumple  to  lordis  to 

do  pe  same ;  &  j^erfore  petir  &  poul  outaken  not  clerkis  fro 

ponyschynge  of  lordis.  j^anne  si]?  goddis  lawe  ^eue]?  general 

power  to  seculer  lordis  for  to  ponysche  mysdoeris,  whi 

schulden  pei  not  ponysche  euyl  clerkis,  bat  most  drawen  clergy  ought  not 

'  .  to  be  ^exempt 

op^re  men  to  synne  &  so  to  disturblynge  of  rewmes  ?  si]’  from  law. 
crist  suffred  paciently  wrongful  de]?  of  pilat,  J7at  was  a 
seculer  iustise,  moche  more  schulden  clerkis  suffren  ri^tful 
ponyschmge  of  here  synnys  bi  seculer  lordis ;  for  poul  forsok  Acts  xxv.  11. 
not  to  take  de]?  of  seculer  domes  men  jif  he  hadde  deserued 
it,  &  also  appelid  to  j^e  he]’ene  emp^rowr  of  rome ;  &  j^us  it 
seme]?  pat  po  clerkis  J’^^t  wolen  not  be  amended  bi  seculer 
lordis  dom  ben  out  of  mekenesse  &  pacience  &  charite,  & 
hi^en  hemself  aboue  crist  &  his  apostlis  a^enst  goddis  ordy- 
nau77ce  bi  luciferis  pride,  &  ben  cwrsed  an^^cristis.  &  pt 

^  meney  X.  2  to  X. 


16 


242 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


lordis  don  gret  wrong  &  gile,  for  pei  auaunsen  lewid  men  of 

fermenf^  to  b^ad  ^  Ij^ynge  to  benefices  wij?  care  of  many  ^  soulis, 

priests,  ^  taken  to  hem  self  pe  profit  of  j^e  grete  benefices  for  many 

^eris,  &  holden  many  benefy[c]ed  men  m  here  chapelis  for 
'  nouelrie  of  newe  song,  &  make7^  summe  prostis  stiwardis  of 
and  employ  here  housholde,  &  summe  prostis  clerkis  of  here  kechene,^  & 

priests  in  all  sorts 

of  secular  work,  summe  prostis  here  anditours,  &  surzme  prostis  tresoreris, 
&  summe  anmeneris,  &  suwme  stiwardis  of  here  courtis,  & 
summe  conseileris  &  reuleris  of  here  worldly  plees,  arraies  & 
worldly  dedes,  as  fonj  no  man  conde  worldly  ofS.ce  but  ]?ei ; 
&  wolen  not  sufife  hem  goo  teche  pe  soulis  for  whiche  j^e 
schullen  answere  at  domes  day,  &  for  whiche  crist  schedde 
his  procious  herte  blood,  but  suffren  &  meyntenen  pe  wolues 
of  helle  to  slee  cristeoe  mennws  soulis  bi^  synne,  &  letten 
almes  dede  bo]7e  gostly  &  bodily,  &  so  ]7ei  ben  cursed  traitoe^rs 
to  god  &  to  his  prestis  &  his  pore  peple.  &  more  traitorie  of 
•[p.^  202  MS.]  god  &  his  peple  is  in  pes  pr^stis  ]?  at  ^'wilfully  &  costly  procure 
the  priests  who  to  haue  his  worldly  ofiS.ces  &  dwellen  per-inne  &  leuen  here 

take  such  ofittce.  ■'  * 

gostly  ofSce  vndon.^  but  most  traiterie  of  god  &  his  peple  is 

Worst  of  all  are  in.  fals  confessouris  hat  schulden  telle  lordis  he  grete  peril  of 
false  confessors.  ^  '' 

jiis  synne  &  oj^ere,  &  wolden  not  for  drede  of  loos  of  worldly 
frendschipe  &  lordischipe  &  worldly  worschipe  &  wynnywge ; 
for  j^ei  sette  more  ®  hi  a  litel  stynkynge  dritt  of  ]?is  world  J^an 
bi  helpe  of  cristene  soulis  &  frendischipe  of  god  &  J^e  blisse 
of  heuene.  Also  many  ietteris  of  contre  pat  wolen  make 
hem  self  gen  tel  men  &  han  litel  or  noujt  to  lyue  onne,  & 
Gentlemen  stand  ohere  lordis  also  wolen  preise  a  worldly  prelat  or  curat  &  here 

by  a  curate  that  t 

feasts  them,  what-  him  vp,  hou?  he  be  neuere  so  vicious  in  lecherie,  pride  & 

ever  his  character . 

coueitise  &  oj^ere  synnes,  so  j^at  |>is  worldly  curat  maki]?  hem 
grete  festis  &  wasti]?  pore  mewnws  almes  in  pftis  of  wyn  & 
vanytes;  ^e,  fouj  he  be  a  market  betere,  a  marchaunt,  a 
meyntenour  of  wrongis  at  louedaies,  a  fals  suerere,  a  man- 
quellere  &  inreguler.  but  pf  per  be  a  gostly  curat  or  pr^st 
pat  lyue]?  a  good  lif  in  mekenesse  &  doynge  almes  to  pore 


1  memiys  AA.  *  lecherie  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  undir  AA.  ^  omitted  X. 


OF  SERVANTS  AND  LORDS. 


243 


men,  &  not  wastynge  pore  mennws  almes  \n  veyn  feste  or  tut  a  priest  who 
^  ...  .  pooi‘iy> 

suche  getteris,  but  bolde  hym  \.n  his  preieris  deuoutly  &  \n 
techynge  of  goddis  lawe  trewely  &  \n  his  trewe  stondy?^ge  of  annoyed, 
holy  writt,  he  schal  be  holde  a  nyggard,  an  hound,  or  an  hoog, 
an  ypocrite  &  an  heretik  ;  namely  pf  he  reproue  hem  of  here 
wickid  lif  &  teche  hem  j^e  beste  weie  to  heuene  bo]?e  in  word 
&  dede,  &  so  be  hurlid  &  pursued  priuely  or  ap(?rtly,  &  so 
hatid  amonge  hem  \at  he  schal  be  fayn  to  sette  his  chirche  to 
ferme  to  suche  a  gettere  nerehonde  for  noujt,  or  ellis  for 
fals  sclaundre  putt  on  him  lese  his  chirche,  or  for  schame 
or  anoy  flee  \q  centre,  &  bi  j^is  wrowg  ben  many  men 
lettid  fro  goddis  s^ruyce  &  trewe  techynge.  And  pt  lordis 
don  many  wrongis  &  giles  in  here  offices,  for  J^ei  wasten  here 
tyme  in  slou];e  &  ydelnesse,  &  wasten  here  goodis  in  best  & 
pride  &  glotonye;  &  he  '^at  best  can  do  J^is  is  holden  of 
worldly  men  best  lord  &  most  worschipful,  principaly  pf  he 
meyntene  his  men  to  bete  pore  men  &  do  wrongis  bi  lone 
daies,  holdywge  &  meyntenynge  of  causes  \at  rift  &  lawe  may 
not  haue  his  cours.  &  ]7us  whawne  J^ei  schulden  haue  hous-  Lords  keep  up 
hold  01  rijtwise  men  &  virtuous  oi  lit,  pei  meyntenen  proude  ducted  ruffians, 
luciferis  children,  extorsioneris,  robberies,  &  reuers,  to  distroie 
here  pore  nei^ebores  &  maken  here  hous  a  den  of  Irenes,  & 
ben  procuratours  of  fend  to  holde  vp  falsnesse  &  o]ierQ 
synnes,  &  to  putte  dou^  goddis  lawe  ^  &  his  s^ruauwtis.  for 
lordis  schulden  tr<?ueile  als  faste  to  kuwne  holy  writt,  &  do 
treuj^e  &  equyte,  &  meyntene  ri^t  of  pore  men  ^  &  reste  &  pees  *[p-  203  ms.] 
vp  here  kuwnywge  &  power,  as  pore  men  ben  bisi  to  labore 
for  here  owene  liflode  &  to  paye  here  rentis  to  lordis ;  for 
god  sei]?  bi  dauyd:  now,  ^e  kyngis,  vnd^rstonde ;  be  fe  Psalms  ii.  lo. 

lerid  ]?at  demen  ]?e  erj^e  ;  serue  ^e  to  j^e  lord  wi]?  drede  of 
herte,  &  enyoie  je  to  hym  wi]?  quakynge.”  &  |>e  wise  man  wisdom  yi.  6. 
sei]?  fat  fe  most  hard  dom  schal  ben  to  hem  fat  ben  aboue 
o]7ere,  &  ihu  sei]?  fat  to  whom  is  moche  bitokene,  of  hym  schal  Luke  xii.  48. 
moche  ben  axid.  god  stire]7  2  lordis  to  distroie  synne  &  norische 
Ttues  &  holy  lif  of  clerkis  &  alle  oferQ  ®  sugetis.  Amen. 

^  omitted  X.  ^  gti^e  AA.  3  a  A. 


244 


XVI. 

« 

WRY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


This  tract,  whoever  may  be  its  author,  is  vigorously  written.  It  has  a 
special  interest  as  a  full  statement  and  defence  of  the  motives  which  led 
Wyclif  to  institute  his  order  or  company  of  poor  priests. 

As  evidence  in  favour  of  Wyclif’s  authorship,  we  may  notice  the  phrase 
“  moo  sacraments  than  Christ  used  and  his  apostles.”  In  the  Trialogus 
we  find  complaints  that  sacraments  are  multiplied  so  as  to  be  a  burden  to 
the  Church,  and  Confirmation  and  Extreme  Pnction  are  said  not  to  have 
enough  ground  in  Scripture  to  be  necessary  to  salvation  {Trials  hook  iv. 
chapters  xi.,  xiv.,  xxv.).  His  doctrine  of  dominion  is  brought  in  on  p. 
247.  Perhaps  we  may  see  a  touch  of  personal  feeling  in  the  statement 
that  a  curate  cannot  get  leave  of  absence  to  study  God’s  law  without 
payment.  Had  Wyclif  found  it  necessary  to  buy  leave  to  absent  him¬ 
self  from  Fillingham  in  1368  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  the  tone  of  several  passages  would  lead  us  to  attri¬ 
bute  them  to  one  of  the  poor  priests  rather  than  to  Wyclif.  It  seems 
unlikely  that  the  rector  of  Lutterworth  would  speak  of  a  man  who  accepted 
a  cure  as  binding  himself  to  o  synguler  place  as  a  tey  dogge,”  p.  252. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus, MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 

SUMMAET. 


Chap.  I.  Prevalence  of  simony.  Corruption  at  Pome . p.  245 

Lords  keep  curates  in  their  private  service  .  246 

Curates  get  office  to  be  exempt  from  the  ordinary .  247 

II.  Poor  priests  dare  not  take  office,  fearing  to  waste  the  goods  of  the  poor  248 

They  may  not  exercise  their  duties  freely  .  .  249 

They  are  scouted  if  they  do  not  waste  money  on  feasts  .  249 

Evils  of  prelates’  courts .  251 

III.  Poor  priests  refuse  benefices  because  they  can  do  more  good  without 

them  .  251 

Good  results  which  would  follow  the  adoption  of  their  way  of  life  .  252 

/ 


Chap.  I.] 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


245 


Whi  pore  prestis  ban  none  benefice. 

Capitulum  primum. 

Summe  causes  meuen  summe  pore  pr^stis  to  resceyue  not  causes  'why  poor 

priests  do  not 

benefices ;  J^e  friste  for  drede  of  symonye,  pe  secu^^de  tor  take  benefices, 
drede  of  myspendywge  pore  mennw5  goodis,  ]?e  ]?ridde  for 
drede  of  lettynge  of  bettre  occupacion  ]?at  is  more  lijt  or  eisy, 
more  certeyn,  &  more  profitable  on  euere  side,  for  pf  men 
scbulde  come  to  benefices  be  fift  of  prelatis  ber  is  drede  of  Prevalence  of 

_  ^  simony, 

symonye ;  for  comynly  ]?ei  taken  the  friste  fruytis  or  o];ore 
pensions,  or  holden  curatis  \n  office  in  here  courtis  or  chapelis 
or  o]7ore  veyn  offices,  fer  fro  prostis  lif  taujt  &  ensaumplid  of 
crist  &  his  apostlis;  so  j^at  comuwly  siche  benefices  comen 
not  frely,  as  crist  comau^dij?,  but  raj^ore  for  worldly  wy^nywge 
or  flaterynge  or  preisy^ge  &  j^ank  of  my^tty  men  &  lordis,  & 
not  for  abilnesse  of  kuwny^^ge  of  goddis  lawe  ^  &  trewe 
techynge  of  gospel  &  ensaumple  of  holy  lif.  &  here-fore 
comynly  j^es  prelatis  &  resceyueris  ben  foulid  wi]?  symonye, 

]iai  is  cursed  heresie  as  goddis  lawe  &  mannws  lawe  techen 
opynly  &  many  seyntis.  &  grete  merueile  it  is  now  ]?at,  si]? 
seynt  gregory  seyj?  in  pleyn  lawe  of  ]?e  chirche  &  o]?ere  bokis  Gregory. 

]?at  siche  men  as  desiren  benefices  schulden  not  haue  hem, 
but  men  \at  fleen  hem  for  drede  of  vnabilnesse  of  hemself  & 
grete  charge,  as  dide  moyses,  ieromye,  austyn,  gregory  &  holy 
seyntis;  &  now  who  can  faste  renne  to  rome  &  here  gold  out  Benefices  bought 

at  Rome. 

of  be  lend  &  paie  it  for  deed  leed  &  a  litil  writynge,  &  stryue 
&  plede  &  curse  for  ti]?e8  &  o\erQ  tempf^ral  profitis,  \at  ben 
clepid  wi]?  an^mristis  clerkis  rijttis  of  holy  chirche,  schal 
haue  grete  benefices  of  cure  of  many  ]?ousand  soulis ;  ]?OR?  ^ 
he  be  vnable  of  kuwnywge  of  holy  writt,  not  in  wille  to  teche 
&  preche  his  sugetis,  but  of  cursed  lif  &  wickid  ensaumple  of 
pride,  of  coueitise,  glotonye,  lecherie  &  oj^re  grete  synnys. 
but  ]?ere  be  ony  symple  man  ]?at  desire]?  to  lyue  wel  &  teche 


1  omitted  X. 


2  ]?ei  X. 


246  WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE,  [Chap.  I. 

treuely  goddis  lawe  &  dispise  pride  &  oj^^re  synnys,  boj^e  of 
True  priests  pr^atis  &  ob^re  men,  he  ^  schal  ben  holden  an  ypocrite,  a 

persecuted.  •' 

*[p-204  MS.]  newe  techere,  an  heretik,  &  not  snffred  to  come  '^'to  ony 

benefice,  but  pf  ’^he  have"'^  ony  litel  pore  place  to  lyuen  a  pore 
lif  onne,  he  schal  be  so  pursued  &  sclauwdrid  \ai  he  schal  be 
putt  oute  bi  wiles,  cautelis,  fraudis  &  worldly  violence,  & 
enprisoned,  disgratid  or  bre?^t,  pf  an^mristis  clerkis  may  for 
Lords  keep  ony  gold  &  cursed  lesyngis.  ^  And  pf  lordis  schullen  pr^sente 

own  service.  clerkis  to  benefices  J^ei  wolen  haue  comynly  gold  in  grett 

qudjwtite,  &  holden  J^es  curatis  in  here  worldly  ofiS.ce,  &  suffren 
]^e  wolues  of  helle  to  stranglen  mennws  soulis,  so  j^ei  haue 
moche  gold  &  here  ofiSce  don  for  nou^t,  &  here  chapelis  holden 
vp  for  veyn  glorie  or  ypocrisie ;  &  pt  J^ei  wolen  not  pr^sente 
a  clerk  able  of  kumywge  &  of  ^  good  lif  &  holy  ensaumple  to 
]>e  peple,  but  a  kechen  clerk  or  a  penne  clerk  or  wis  of^ 
bildynge  of  castelis  or  worldly  doynge,  j^ouj  he  kuwne  not 
rede  wel  his  sauter  &  knowe]?  not  comauwdementis  of  god 
ne  sacramentis  of  holy  chirche.  &  pt  summe  lordis  to 
Indirect  bribery,  colouren  here  symonye  wole  not  take  for  hem  self,  but  keuer- 
chiefs  for  j^e  lady,  or  a  palfray,  or  a  tonne  of  wyn ;  &  whawne 
summe  lordis  wolden  presente  a  goode  man  &  able  for  loue  of 
Bad  influence  of  god  &  cristene  soulis,  summe  ladies  ben  menys  to  haue  a 

some  ladies.  .  . 

dauwsere,  a  trippere  on  tapitis,  or  hu^tere  or  haukere,  or 
a  wilde  pleiere  of  someres  gamenes  for  flaterynge  &  pftis 
goynge  bitwixe,  &  pf  it  be  for  dauwsynge  i^  bedde  so  moche 
j}e  worse.  &  ]?us  it  seme]?  pat  boj^e  prelatis  •&  lordis  comynly 
maken  a  cwrsed  an^«crist  &  a  quyk  fend  to  be  maister  of 
cristis  peple,  for  to  leden  hem  ®  to  helle,  to  sathanas  here 
maistir,  &  suffre  not  cristis  disciplis  to  teche  cristis  gospel  to 
his  children  for  to  saue  here  soulis;  &  so  ]7ei  tr^ueilen  to  exile 
crist  &  his  lawe  out  of  his  heritage,  pat  is  cristene  soulis,  pat 
he  boujte  not  wij?  roten  gold  ne  siluer  but  wi]?  his  precious 
herte  blood  pat  he  schedde  on  pe  crois  bi  most  brennynge 
charite.  but  in  ]7is  pr^sentynge  of  euyl  curatis  and  holdynge 


1  omitted  AA. 
^  omitted  X. 


2-2  omitted  X. 
®  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  A  A. 


Chap.  I.] 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE.  • 


247 


of  curatis  in  worldly  office,  lettynge  hem  fro  here  gostly  cure, 

hen  fre  degrees  of 'tr^iterie  ajenst  god  &  his  peple.  ^  pe  friste 

is  in  pr^latis  &  lordis  }at  J7us  holden  curatis  in  here  worldly 

office;  for  ]7ei  han  here  hei^e  statis  in  ]>e  chirche  &  lordischipis  “  secular  office. 

for  to  purueie  treue  curatis  to  ]>e  peple,  &  to  meyntene  hem 

in  goddis  la  we  &  ponyschen  hem  pf  j^ei  fallen  in  here  gostly 

cure,  &  hi  ]7is  ]7ei  holden  here  lordischipis  of  god.  pan  pf 

]7ei  maken  euyl  curatis  &  holden  hem  in  here  worldly  office, 

,&  letten  hem  to  lede  goddis  peple  ]>e  rijtful  weie  to  heuene, 
but  helpen  hew  &  constreynen  hem  to  lede  ]>e  peple  to  helle 
ward  hi  wij^-drawynge  of  goddis  word  &  hi  euyl  ensauwple 
puynge,  pei  ben  weiward  traitowrs  to  god  &  his  peple,  & 
vikeris  &  procuratowrs  of  sathanas.  ^it  more  traiterie  is  in 
false  curatis  pat  puen  mede  ^or  hire  to  comen  in- to  siche  *[p- 205  ms.] 

*  ‘  ...  2.  Curates  who 

worldly  offices,  for  to  spare  here  muk  &  leie  it  in  tresor,  &  to  office, 
gete  lordischipe  &  mauwtenauwce  apnst  ordynaries,  pat  pei 
doren  not  clepen  hem  to  residence  &  saue  here  soulis,  but  ordinary, 
couchen  in  lordis  courtis,  in  ^  lustis  &  aise  of  here  flech  for  to 
gete  moo  fatte  benefices,  &  purposen  not  spedly  to  do  here 
gostly  office,  woo  is  to  po  lordis  pat  ben  leed  wip  suche 
cursed  heretikis  &  ^  an^^'cnstis,  traitowrs  of  god  &  his  peple, 

&  namely  traitowrs  to  lordis  hem  self,  where  lordis  my^tten  Lords  might  find 

‘  secular  men  to 

not  fynde  in  alle  here  lordischipe  trewe  worldly  men  to  reule 

here  houshold  &  worldly  offices,  but  pf  pei  taken  \er-to 

curatis  pat  ben  opynly  falsp  traitowrs  to  god  &  his  peple  ? 

where  lordis  ben  so  blyndid  ®  pat  pei  pf^rceyuen  not  pat  siche 

traitowrs,  pat  opynly  ben  false  to  god,  pat  pei  wolen  moche 

more  ben  false  to  hem  ?  but  pe  most  traiterie  is  in  fals  3.  False  confes- 

confessouris,  pat  schulden  bi  here  office  warne  prdlatis  & 

lordis  of  pis  grete  peril,  &  clerkis  also,  pat  pei  holden  none 

siche  curatis  in  here  worldly  offices;  for  pei  don  not  pis  last 

pei  losen  lordischipe  &  frendischipe  &  pftis  &  welfare  of  here 

stynkynge  bely ;  &  so  pei  sillen  cristene  soulis  to  sathanas  for 

to  haue  lykyngis  of  here  stynkynge  bely,  &  makew  prelatis  & 


1  &X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  byndid  AA. 


248  WHY  POOS,  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE.  [Chap.  I. 

lordis  &  curatis  to  lyue  \.n  synne  &  tr^^iterie  ajenst  god  &  his 
peple.  &  so  ajenst  j^e  hire  \a\i  lordis  jeuen  here  confessouris 
deceive  lords,  j^ei  disceyuen  hem  in  here  soulis  hel]?e,  &  meyntenen  hem 
in  cursed  traiterie  of  god  &  his  peple,  &  j^us  almost  al  \e 
world  go]?  ^  to  helle  for  ]?is  cursed  symonye  &  false  confes- 
Prevaience  of  sours.  for  comynly  prelatis,  lordis  &  curatis  hen  enuenymed 

simony,  j  j  r  i  j 

wij?  ]?is  heresie  of  symonye,  &  neu^re  don  verey  repentaunce 
&  satisfaccion  \er-iom ;  for  wha?^ne  ]?ei  han  a  fat  benefice 
pd  persistence  geten  by  symonye  ]?ei  forsaken  it  not,  as  ]>ei  ben  bouwden  bi 
here  owene  lawe,  but  wittyngly  vsen  for]?  ]>at  symonye,  & 
lyuen  in  riot,  coueitise,  pride,  &  don  not  here  office  nei]?^r  in 
good  ensaumple  ne  trewe  techynge.  &  ]?ws  ani^mristis  clerkis, 
enemyes  of  crist  &  his  peple,  bi  money  &  flaterynge  &  fleschly 
loue  gedrynge  to  hem  ledynge  of  ]?e  peple,  &  forbarre  trewe 
pr(9stis  to  teche  hem  goddis  lawe ;  &  j>eriore  ]?e  blynde  ledi]? 
]?e  blynde  &  bo]?e  p^^rtis  rennen  in-lo  synne,  &  ful  many  to 
helle.  &  it  is  huge  wonder  ]7at  god  of  his  rijtwisnesse  dis- 
troie]?  not  ]>e  housis  of  prelatis  &  lordis  &  curatis,  as  sodom 
&  gomor,  for  ]?is  heresie,  extorsions  &  o]iere  cursednesses 
]?ei  hauwten,  &  for  drede  of  ]?is  synne  &  many  moo  snwme 
pore  wrecchis  resceyue  no  benefices  in  ]?is  world. 


C^pitulum  2”*' 


Poor  priests  fear  ^it  ]?ouj  pore  pr^stis  my^tten  frely  geten  pr^sentacion  of 
to  tSikc  l)©xi©fic©s 

lest  they  should  lordis  to  haue  benefices  wil?  cure  of  soulis,  ]?ei  dreden  for  ^ 

waste  the  goods 
of  the  poor. 

*[p.  206  MS.] 


myspendynge  of  poore  mennws  goodis ;  &  ]?is  is  more  drede 
]?an  '^*]?e  first  as^  anemtis  here  owene  p(9rsonys.  for  pr^stis 
owen  to  holde  hem  paied  wi]?  fode  &  hilynge,  as  seynt  poul 
techi]? ;  &  pf  ]?ei  han  more  it  is  pore  mennws  goode,  as  here 
owene  lawe  &  ierom  &  goddis  lawe  seyn,  &  ]?ei  ben  kepers 
\er-oi  &  procuratours  of  pore  men.  But  for  institucion  & 
Induction  fees,  i/^duccion  he  schal  jeue  moche  of  ]?is  god  ]?at  is  pore  mennws 
to  bischopis  officers,  archdekenes  &  officialis  ]>at  ben  to  riche, 


1  Tim.  vi.  [8], 


Jerome. 


^  aboute  has  been  inserted  in  X.  but  crossed  out. 


2  of  X.  ‘  ^  omitted  X. 


Chap.  II.] 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


249 


&  not  frely  comeu  \er-io}  And  wha?«ne  bischopis  &  here 

officeris  comen  &  feynen  to  visite,  ]70uj  j^ei  norischen  men  in  visitation  fees. 

open  synne  for  awnuel  rente,  &  don  not  here  office  but  sillen 

soulis  to  sathanas  for  money,  wrecchid  curatis  ben  nedid  to 

fasten  hem  richely  &  jeue  procuracie  &  synage ;  ^e,  a^enst 

goddis  lawe  &  mannws  &  reson  &  a^enst  here  conscience.  & 

also  bei  schulle^^  not  be  suffrid  to  teche  treuly  goddis  lawe  They  are  not 

allowed  to  speak 

to  here  owene  sugetis  warne  hew  of  false  prophetis,  &  out. 

disceyuen^  hem  boj^e  in  bileue  &  techynge  &  good  lif  &  er]7ely 

goodis,  as  crist  do]7e  in  j^e  gospel,  &  comauwdij?  curatis  to  do 

Jje  same  yp  peyne  of  here  dampnacion ;  for  ]7a«ne  J^ei  mosten 

crie  to  ]>q  peple  I’e  grete  synnys  of  prdatis  &  newe 

feyned  religious,  as  god  biddi]? ;  but  J^ei  demen  ]>at  siche 

sadde  reprouyngis  of  sywne  is  enuye,  sclaundrywge  of  pr<9lat^5, 

&  distroiynge  of  holy  chirche.  &  bei  schullen  not  be  suffrid  Nor  use  church 

^  ^  censures  freely. 

to  do  scharp  execucion  of  goddis  lawe  a^enst  here  sugetis,  ben 

]7ei  neu^re  so  opynly  cursed  of  god  &  sclauMris  of  cristene 

religion,  jif  heije  clerkis  of  an^mrist  ban  pftis  &  pensions 

hi  ^ere  to  sufre  cursed  men  in  opyn  avoutrie  &  obere  synnys.  Adulterers pro- 
^  ,  ....  tected  by  the 

for  whame  bei  ben  falsly  amendid  bi  officialis  &  denes  no  man  officials  and 

■*  _  deans  to  whom 

be  hardy  to  waken  hem  out  of  here  lustis  of  synne,  for  tiiey  pay  rent. 

schulde  distroie  iwrdicciouw  &  wy^nywge  of^  prelatis,  &  j^is 

cursed  extorsion  is  clepid  bi  ypocrisie  ])e  grete  almes  of  anti- 

cristis  clerkis  ^ ;  but  here-by  I’ei  maken  large  kechenes, 

holden  fatte  hors  &  houwdis  &  haukis  &  strompetis  gaiely 

arraied,  &  suffren  pore  men  to  sterue  for  myschief,  &  ^it 

suffren  &  constreinen  hem  to  goo  ]>e  brode,  weie  to  belle. 

^  Also  many  tymes  here  patrons  &  olfiere  getteris  of  couwtre  & 

ydel  schaueldouris  willew  loke  to  be  festid  of  siche  curatis,  &  Curates  have  to 

'  feast  their  pat- 

ellis  maken  hem  lese  b<^t  litel  binff  bat  bei  &  pore  men 

J  /  o  /  j  r  vagabonus. 

schulden  lyue  bi ;  so  bat  bei  schullen  not  spende  be  dymes 
&  offryngis  aft^r  good  conscience  &  goddis  lawe  but  waste 

1  of  X. 

2  disseyuen  AA.  Perhaps  it  should  he  disseruen.  If  not  we  must  read 
“  that  ”  for  “  and  ”  just  before. 

3  for  X. 


^  omitted  X. 


250 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


[Chap.  II. 


*[p.  207  MS.] 

Obliged  to  pro¬ 
nounce  unjust 
curses, 

or  themselves  are 
summoned  and 
harassed. 


A  devout  priest 
who  does  not  give 
feasts  is  hated. 


Not  allowed  leave 
of  absence  for 
study. 


Pay  for  ordina¬ 
tions  or  appoint¬ 
ments. 


hem  on  suche  my^tty  &  riche  men  &  ydel,  &  ellis,  for  tr^ueile, 
cost  &  enemy te  &  dispisynge  ]?at  ]7ei  schullen  suffre  &  on 
to]7er  side  for  drede  of  conscience,  hem  is  betre  to  forsake  al  j^an 
to  holde  it  for]?.  ^Also  echo  good  day  comynly  ]?es  smale  curatis 
schullen  haue  lettms  fro  here  ordynaries  to  summone^&  to  curse 
pore  men  for  noujt  but  for  coueitise  of  an^^'cristis  clerkis; 
&  but  jif  ]?ei  somonen  &  cursen  hew,  j^ouj  ]7ei  knowe  no  cause 
whi  anemtis  god  &  his  lawe,  ]?ei  ben  hurlid  &  somnyd  fro 
day  to  day,  fro  fer  place  to  ferl’ere,  or  cursed  ^or  lese  here 
benefices  or  profitis  ^  j;er-of;  for  elles  as  pr^latis  feynen  ]?ei^ 
bi  here  rebelte  schulden  soone  distroie  prelatis  iurisdiction, 
power  &  wyT^nyT^ge.  ^  Also  whame  pore  prt^stis  first  holy  of 
lif  &  deuout  in  here  preieris  ben  benefised,  but  ]if  ]?ei  ben 
worldly  &  bisy  aboute  ]?e  world  to  make  grete  festis  to  riche 
p(9rsony8  &  vikeris  &  riche  men  &  costy  &  gaily  arraied,  as  ^ 
here  staat  axij?  bi  fals  dom  of  ]?e  world,  ]?ei  schullen  be  hatid 
&  hayned  doune  as  houndis,  &  eche  man  redi  to  peiere  hew  in 
name  &  worldly  goodis.  &  so  many  cursed  disceitis  ha]?  an^f- 
crist  broujt  vp  bi  his  worldly  clerkis  to  make  curatis  to^ 
myspende  pore  mennw5  goodis  &  not  don  ®  trewely  here  office, 
or  ellis  to  forsaken  al  &  late  an^^cristis  clerkis,  as  lordis  of 
]?is  world,  ^e  more  cruely  ]?an  oj>ere  tirauwtis,  robbe  ]?e  pore 
peple  bi  feyned  sensures  &  teche  ]?e  fendis  lore  bo]?e  bi  open 
pr^chynge  &  ensauwple  of  here  cwrsid  lif.  ^Also  jif  siche 
curatis  ben  stired  to  gone  lerne  goddis  lawe  &  teche  here 
parischenys  J’e  gospel,  comynly  ]?ei  schullen  gete  no  leue  of 
bischopis  but  for  gold  ;  &  wha^zne  ]?ei  schulle7^  most  profite  in 
here  lernynge  ]?an  schulle  ]?ei  be  clepid  horn  at  ]?e  pr^latis 
wille,  &  ^if  ]?ei  schullen  haue  ony  heije  sacr^^me7^tis  or 
poyntis  of  ]?e  hei^e  pr(?latis,  comynly  ]?ei  schulle  bie  hem  wi]? 
pore  mennws  goodis  wi]?  hook  or  wi]’  crok ;  &  so  ]?ere  is  ful 
gret  pml  of  euyl  spendynge  of  ]?os  goodis,  bo]?e  ajenst  heije 
prelatis,  anemtis  riche  men  of  contre,  as  patrones,  p^rsones  & 
opere  gettouris  of  contre,  &  here  owene  kyn  for  fame  of  pe 


omitted  AA. 
^  omitted  X. 


2  jjer  AA. 

^  omitted  X. 


3  &X. 


Chap.  III.] 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


251 


world  &  for  scTiame  &  euyl  demynge  of  men.  &  certis  it  is 
gret  wond(9r  fat  god  sutfrif  so  longe  fis  synne  vnponyschid 

opynly,  namely  of  pr^latis  conrtis  fat  ben  dennys  of  feues  &  arl^^ilrders^'^of 
larderis  of  lielle ;  &  so  of  here  ofidceris  fat  ben  sotil  in  malice 
&  coueitise ;  &  of  lordis  &  my^tty  men,  fat  schulden  distroie 
f  is  wrong  &  opere  &  meyntenen  treufe  &  goddis  s^rnau^tis, 

&  now  meyntenen  anf^cristis  falsenesse  &  his  clerkis  for  part 

of  fe  wywnywge.  &  hou  symple  prestis  durren  take  siche 

benefices,  but  pf  f  ei  weren  myjtty  of  kuwnyi^^ge  &  goode  lif  & 

herty  to  a^enstonde  f es  wrongis  &  moo  fan  ^  we  may  now 

touche  for  f  e  multitude  of  hem  &  sotil  coloury^ge  bi  ypocrisie. 

but  Curtis  god  suffrif  siche  ypocritis  &  tirauntis  to  haue  name 

of  prelatis  for  grete  synnys  of  f  e  peple  &  vnworfinesse  fi^r-of, 

fat  eche  part  lede  of er  ^  to  helle  bi  blyndnes  of  f e  fend ;  & 

fis  is  a  fousand  fold  more  vengauwce  fan  pf  god  distroie 

bodely  bofe  partis  &  alle  here  goodis  erfe  f^r-wif,  as  he  *[p.  208MS.] 

dide  bi  sodom  &  gomor ;  for  f e  lengere  fat  f ei  lyuen  f us  in 

synne,  fe  grettere  peynes  schullen  f ei  haue  in  helle  but  pf 

fei  amenden  hem.  &  fis  drede  &  many  moo  maken  suwme 

pore  pr^stis  to  resceyuen  non  bewefices. 


Q2ipUulum  3”*- 

But  pt  fouj  pore  prestis  myjtten  haue  frely  pr^sentacion  of 

lordis,  &  ben  holpen  bi  meyntenynge  of  kyngis  &  helpe  of 

goode  comyns  fro  extorsions  of  pr^latis  &  of  ^re  myspendynge 

of  fes  goodes,  fat  is  ful  hard  in  fis  grete  regnynge  of  oMi- 

cristis  clerkis  j  pt  fei  dreden  sore  fat  bi  fis  singuler  cure  Poor  priests  fear 

ordeyned  of  synful  men  fei  schulden  be  lettid  fro  betre  hinder  them  from 
.  ,  .  .  better  service, 

occupacion  &  fro  more  profit  of  holy  chirche,  &  fis  is  f e  moste 
drede  of  alle  as  anemtis  here  porsonys.  for  fei  han  cure  & 
charge  at  fe  fulle  of  god  to  helpe  here  breforen  to  heuene 
ward,  bofe  bi  techynge,  preiynge  &  ensaumple  jeuynge ;  &  it 
semef  fat  fei  schullen  most  esily  fulfille  fis  bi  general  cure 
of  charite,  as  dide  crist  &  his  apostlis,  fouj  fei  byr^den  hem  They  can  do 


l^at  X. 


2  open  X. 


252 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


[Chap.  III. 


more  good  wlien 
not  chained  to 
one  place. 

Matthew  x.  23.  ■ 
Can  escape  per¬ 
secution. 


They  live  by  alms, 
which  is  more 
Christlike  than 
taking  tithes. 


Thus  men  would 
give  alms  more 
freely, 


there  would  be 
fewer  lawsuits. 


Benefices  lead 
priests  into 
worldly  busi¬ 
ness. 

*[p.  209  MS  ] 


not  to  0  synguler  place  as  a  tey  dogge,  &  bi  ]?is  jiei  may  most 
sikirly  sane  hem  self  &  helpe  here  brejj^ren  ;  for  now  j^ei  ben 
free  to  flee  fro  o  cite  to  a  no]7er  whawne  ]7ei  ben  pursued  of 
an^mristis  clerkis,  as  biddi]?  crist  in  ]?e  gospel.  Also  no  we 
]?ei  may  best  wi]i-oute  chalyngynge  of  men  goo  &  dwelle 
among  j^e  peple  where  jiei  schullen  most  proflte,  &  \n  couen- 
able  tyme  come  &  goo  aftir  stirynge  of  j^e  holy  gost,  &  not 
be  bouwden  bi  synful  mennws  iurdiccion  fro  j^e  betre  doynge. 
^Also  now  ]?ei  suen  crist  &  his  apostlis  neer,  \n  ]?us  takynge 
almes  wilfully  &  frely  of  J^e  peple  'pat  J^ei  techen,  jiawne  in 
takynge  dymes  &  offryngis  bi  customes  ]?at  synful  men 
ordeynen  &  vsen  now  in  pe  tyme  of  grdtce.  ^  Also  |>is  is  more 
medeful  in  boj^e  sidis  as  ]?ei  vnderstonden  bi  cristis  lif  &  his 
apostlis;  for  jjus  pQ  peple  ^eue]?  hem  almes  more  wilfully  & 
deuoutly,  &  j^ei  taken  it  more  mekely  &  ben  more  besy  to 
lerne,  kepe  &  teche  goddis  la  we,  &  so  it  is  j^e  betre  for  boj^e 
sidis.  ^  Also  bi  ]7is  manure  myjtte  &  schulde  pe  peple  ^eue 
frely  here  almes  to  trewe  pr(9stis  pat  trewely  kepten  here 
ordre  &  frely  &  opynly  taujten  pe  gospel,  &  wi]7-drawen  it  fro 
wickede  pr^stis,  &  not  be  constreyned  to  paie  here  ti]7es  & 
ofifingis  to  open  cursed  men  &  ^  meyntene  hem  in  here  opyn 
cursednesse ;  &  ]7us  schulde  symonye,  coueitise  &  ydelnesse  of 
worldly  clerkis  be  leid  doun,  &  holynesse  &  trewe  techynge 
&  knowynge  of  goddis  lawe  be  brou^t  in,  bo]ie  in  clerkis  & 
lewid  men.  ^Also  ]7us  schulde  stryuynge,  pledynge  &  curcynge 
for  dymes  &  offryngis  &  hate  &  discord  among  prestis  &  lewid 
men  be  endid,  &  vnyte,  pees  &  charite  meyntened  &  kept. 
^Also  j^es  beneflces  bi  ])is  cours  j^at  men  vsen  no  we  bryngi]?  in 
worldlynesse  &  nedeles  bisynesse  aboute  worldly  officis,  pat 
crist  &  his  apostlis  wolden  neiu^re  "^'take  vpon  hem  ;  &  ^it  pei 
weren  more  my^tty,  more  witti,  &  more  brennynge  in  charite 
to  god  &  to  pQ  peple,  boj^e  to  lyue  pQ  best  manure  in  hem  self 
&  ^  to  teche  op  ere  men.  Also  coueitise  &  worldly  bisynesse  ® 
of  clerkis  &  occasion  of  coueitise  &  worldlynesse  of  pe  peple 


^  X  inserts  not. 


2  omitted  AA. 


3  sikirnesse  X. 


Chap.  III.] 


WHY  POOR  PRIESTS  HAVE  NO  BENEFICE. 


253 


schulden  be  don  awey,  &  cristis  pou^rt  &  bis  apostlis  bi 
ensaumple  of  pore  lif  of  clerkis  &  tr^’ste  in  god  &  desirynge 
of  heuenely  blisse  schulde  regne  in  cristene  peple.  ^Also  |>an 
Bcbulde  pr^stis  studie  boly  writt  &  be  deuout  \n  bere  pmeris, 

&  not  be  taried  wi|>  newe  offices,  as  newe  songis  &  moo 

sacrrtmentis  j^an  ^  crist  vsede  &  bis  apostlis,  I’at  taujten  vs  New  sacraments. 

alle  treu]7e  &  spedly  sauynge  of  cristene  peple.  ^Also  mocbil 

blaspbemye  of  pr^latis  &  oj^^re  men  of  feyned  obedience  & 

nedles  sweryngis  maad  to  worldly  prdatis  scbulden  ]? an  Needless  oaths. 

cessen,  &  souereyn  obedience  to  god  &  bis  lawe  &;  escbewynge 

of  nedles  oj^es  &  forswerynge  scbulde  regne  among  cristene 

men.  ^Also  ]7an  scbulde  men  escbewe  comynly  alle  ]>e  p^rilis  Summary  of  the 

seid  bifore  in  ]?e  first  cbapitre  &  |>e  secuwde  &  many  j^ousand 

mo,  &  lyue  \n  elennesse  &  sikernesse  of  cowscie?^ce.  ^Also  j^an 

scbulde  pr^stis  be  bisy  to  syke  ^  goddis  worscbipe  &  sauynge 

of  mennws  soulis,  &  not  bere  owene  worldly  glorie  &  wywny?^ge 

of  worldly  drit.  ^Also  'pan  scbulden  pr^stis  lyue  licb  to 

angels,®  as  ]?ei  ben  angelis  of  offices,  where  |>ei  lyuen  now  as 

swyn  \n  flescbly  lustis,  &  twrnen  ajen  to  bere  formere  synnes 

as  bouwdis  to  bere  sp[e]wy?^ge,  for  babuwdauwce  of  worldly 

goodis  &  ydelnesse  in  bere  gostly  office  &  on^re  mocbe 

bisynesse  aboute  j^is  wreccbid  lif.  for  ]7es  dredes  &  many 

]?ousand  mo,  &  for  to  be  more  licb  to  cristis  lif  &  bis  apostlis, 

&  for  to  profite  m.ore  to  bere  owene  soules  &  opere  mennws, 

summe  pore  pri^stis  ]7enken  wi]?  goddis  belpe^  to  trdsneile 

aboute  where  }>ei  scbulden  most  profiten  by  enydence  pat  god 

^ene]?  hem,  pQ  while  J^ei  ban  tyme  &  litel  bodily  strengje  & 

joujje.  nej^eles  J^ei  dampnen  not  curatis  pat  don  wel  here  Do  not  condemn 

office,  so  pat  fei  kepen  liberte  of  pe  gospel,  &  dwellen  where 

f  ei  scbnllen  most  profite,  &  J?at  Jei  techen  trewly  &  stabely 

goddis  lawe  a^enst  false  propbetis  &  cursed  fendis  lymes. 

Crist  for  his  endeles  mercy  belpe  his  prestis  &  comyn  peple  to 
be  war  of  an^^cristis  disceitis,  &  goo  euene  pe  rijtte  weie  to 
benene.  Amen,  ibu  for  jjin  endeles  cbarite. 

^  pat  X.  2  se]j-e  aA.  ^  angel  X.  ^  omitted  X. 


254 


XYII. 

HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS  TRAYAIL  TO 

DESTROY  HOLY  WRIT. 


This  tract  should  be  compared  with  a  short  fly-leaf  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold, 
S.  E.  W.  III.  186. 

I  cannot  pretend  to  any  sure  judgment  as  to  the  authorship,  but  there 
is  nothing  in  it  at  variance  with  Wyclif’s  teaching.  It  seems  to  have 
been  written  when  the  controversy  with  the  poor  priests  had  been  carried 
on  some  time,  and  when  they  found  it  necessary  to  justify  their  constant 
appeals  to  God’s  law  (Talem  enim  habebant  terminum  in  omnibus  suis 
dictis,  semper  prsetendendo  legem  Dei ;  Goddis  lawe,  Knighton  2664.) 
It  is  possible  that  the  need  of  such  a  justification  would  be  soon  felt  even 
among  the  popular  preachers,  as  it  must  certainly  have  been  discovered 
very  early  in  the  schools.  We  need  not,  therefore,  assign  a  very  late  date 
to  this  composition. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 

Stjmmaby. 


Chap.  I.  As  Christ  ordained  four  Gospels,  so  Satan  has  four  devices  to  set 
,  men’s  authority  above  that  of  the  Gospel.  These  devices  are 
specially  used  by  friars  for  the  glory  of  their  orders  . p.  255 

II.  The  first  false  pretence  is  that  the  Church  is  of  more  authority 

than  the  Gospel,  since  it  decreed  which  gospels  should  be  received  256 

III.  The  second,  that  Austin  says  he  would  not  believe  the  Gospel, 

unless  the  Church  told  him .  258 

Austin’s  meaning  is  misrepresented  .  258 

Duty  of  maintaining  the  truth  .  .  259 

IV.  The  third,  that  men  only  know  the  Gospel  by  the  Church  .  259 

The  true  ground  of  faith  is  Christ  himself  .  260 

V.  The  fourth,  that  men  believe  the  Gospel  without  knowing  why  .  260 

Eaith  is  given  by  God ;  its  power  .  261 


Chap.  I.] 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


255 


Hou  an^^crist  &  liis  clerkis  tri?ueileii  to  distroie  toly 
writt  &  to  make  cristene  men  vnstable  i?^  ]?e  fei]? 
&  to  sette  here  ground  in  deuelis  of  helle. 

C^pitulum 


As  houre  lord  ihu  crist  ordeynede  to  make  his  gospel  sadly  Christ  ordained 

.  his  four  evange- 

knowen  &  mevntened  a^enst  heretikis  &  men  out  of  bileue  bi  lists  to  teach  the 

“  ^  ^  _  faith. 

writtynge  of  his  foure  euawngelistis,  so  he  deuel  sathanas  so  Satan  has  four 
^  ^  ^  false  reasons  to 

casti]?  bi  an^^cnst  &  his  worldly  false  clerkis  to  distroie  holy  upset  it. 

*  writt  &  cristene  mennns  bileue  bi  foure  cursed  weies  or  fals  *[p*  210  ms.] 


resons.  Upe  first,  \at  chirche  is  of  more  auctorite  &  more 
credence  fan  is  ony  gospel.  ^  pe  secunde,  fat  austyn  seif  f d^t 
he  wolde  not  bileue  to  f  e  gospel  but  pf  f e  chirche  taujte  hym 
so.  ^  J7e  f ride,  fat  no  man  now  on  lyue  wote  whiche  is  f e 
gospel  but  pf  it  be  bi  approuynge  of  f  e  chirche.  ^  pe  fourf  e, 
pf  men  seyn  fat  f ei  bileuen  fat  fis  is  f e  gospel  of  matheu  or 
ion,  f ei  axen,  whi  bileuest  f on  fat  fis  is  f e  gospel ;  as  who 
seif,  fer  is  no  cause  but  for  f e  chirche  confermef  it  &  techef 
so.  pes  foure  euydences  &  many  moo  makif  fe  fend  to 
blynde  men  in  bileue,  fat  fei  schulden  not  knowe  whiche  is 
synne,  which  is  y(?rtu,  which  is  treufe,  which  is  falsnesse, 
which  is  good,  which  is  euyl,  &  which  is  goddis  heste,  & 


1.  The  Church  is 
of  more  author! ty 
than  any  gospel. 

2.  Saying  of  St. 
Austin. 

3.  That  we  know 
which  are  the 
gospels  hy  the 
approval  of  the 
Church. 

4.  A  sceptical 
question.  Why 
men  should  be¬ 
lieve  any  gospel 
to  be  such. 


These reasons  are 
invented  by  the 
devil  to  blind  men 
as  to  good  and 
evil. 


which  is  lesynge  of  f  e  fend  for  to  brynge  alle  men  blyndly  to 

helle.  &  f  es  newe  religious  &  principaly  freris  pr^chen  fes  They  are 

.  preached  hy  the 

euydences  &  sowen  hem  among  lewid  men  ‘  in  centres  to  religious  orders, 

.  ,  .  and  mostly  by 

stoppe  pore  pr^stis  &  lewid  men,^  fat  fei  ben  not  hardy  to  friars, 

speke  of  f  e  gospel  &  holy  writt  &  goddis  comaundementis  & 

ioies  of  heuene  &  of^  synnes  &  peynes  of  purgatorie  &  of 

helle,  lest  fei  stiren  men  to  rise  out  of  synnys  for  drede  of 

peynes,  &  to  lyfe  in  V(?rtuous  lif  for  to  haue  fe  blisse  of 

heuene.  &  fis  disceit  in  bileue  is  maad  &  coniected  of  fes 

cursed  pharisees  for  to  magnyfie  here  newe  feyned  ordres,  for  the  glory  of 
p  ,  p  p  ,  ,  ,  -i  •  i-  1  T  •  1.  ,  the  new  orders, 

lounden  01  syniul  men,  not  only  wif  cnstis  dene  religion  but 


i-t  omitted  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


256 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


[Chap.  I. 


for  which  they 
care  more  than 
for  saving  their 
own  or  other 
men’s  souls. 


First  ground. 


They  point  to  the 
gospels  of  Nico- 
demus  and  others 
which  the  Church 
set  aside. 

The  .  Church 
might  have  made 
another  choice. 

*[p.  211  MS.] 


These  heretics 
understand  hy 
the  Church  the 
Pope  and  his 
supporters. 


The  Holy  Ghost 
moved  the  holy 
clergy  of  the  first 
times  to  take 
these  gospels  and 
not  the  others ; 


more  l^an  it  or  ony  part  of  holy  writt ;  &  for  ^  J^ei  willen  not 
be  conuyct  of  here  pride  &  ypocrisie  &  forsake  here  coueitise 
&  lu'stis  of  here  hely  &  here  propre  wille.  p^rfore  ])ei  wilen 
raj^ere  renne  to  belle  fullire,^  &  drawe  alle  men  aft^r  hem 
heedly  hi  distroiynge  of  cristene  fei|>,  j^an  to  come  to  cristis 
dene  religion  wi]?  fredam  of  ]7e  gospel  ]7at  is  ordeyned  of  god 
of  endeles  wisdom  wi]?-outen  errowr  of  ony  synful  man ;  for 
j^ei  mosten  jian  knoweleche  here  falsenesse  &  ypocrisie,  hi  ]?e 
whiche  j^ei  disceyueden-cristene  men  fro  j^e  bigyngne  of  here 
nouelries  til  jiis  tyme.  hut  luciferis  pride  &  coueitise  of 
worldly  muk  &  of  heij  astatis  and  ^  worldly  worschipe  may 
not  sutfre  ]iis  mekenes,  as  men  dreden  ful  sore,  for  old  enuye 
of  sathanas  &  hard  rotynge  in  synne. 

Capifulum  2”^- 

See  we  now  hou  f  ei  hryngen  in  J^e  first  cwrsed  ground,  \a\j 
]>e  chirche  is  of  more  autorite  &  credence  j^an  is  j^e  gospel, 
pei  seyn  pat  nychodeme  &  many  moo  writen  pe  gospellis  of 
cristis  lif  &  his  techynge,  &  pe  chirche  putte  hem  awey  & 
approued  J^es  foure  gospellis  of  matheu,  mark,  luk  &  ion. 
pan  pe  chirche  myjte  as  wel  haue  putt  out  j^es  foure  & 
approued  ]7e  to]7ere  gospelleris ;  si]?  it  was  in  free  wille  & 
power  of  pe  chirche  to  reproue  &  dampne  whiche  pei  wolden 
&  approue  &  accepte  whiche  hem  lykede ;  &  perioxe  men 
schulden  hileue  more  to  pe  chirche  pan  to*  ony®  gospel. 
^  First  ]?es  fercasty?^ge  heretikis  vndorstonden  hi  pe  chirche  pe 
pope  of  rome  &  his  cardynalis,  &  pe  multitude  of  worldly 
clerkis  assentynge  to  his  symonye  &  worldly  lordischipe 
aboue  alle  kyngis  &  emp^rowrs  of  ]?is  world  ^  for  ellis  it  were 
not  to  here  purpos  to  magnyfye  pe  chirche  as  ]?ei  now  don. 
panne  trewe  men  seyn  pat  pe  clergie  pat  first  was  kuwnywge 
&  holy  of  lif  was  stirid  hi  pe  holy  gost  to  take  ]7es  gospellis 
&  charge  not  cristene  peple  wi]?  mo;  si]?  ]?es  hen  ynowe  & 

^  herfore  X.  2  fulbere  AA.  ^  of  X. 

*  omitted  A  A.  ®  our  X. 


Chap.  II.] 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


257 


profitable^  at  j^e  fulle,  &  ben  figured  in  many  prophecies  of 
goddis  lawe ;  &  j^es  foure  witnessis  weren  acceptid  of  ]7e  holy 
gost  to  j^is  writynge  for  many  skillis  ])at  we  may  not  telle 
now;  but  cortes  be  chirche  my^tte  not  haue  putt  awey  bes  buttheChurcii 

^  ,  could  not  do 

gospellis  &  acceptid  j^e  oj^ere.  tor  j^an  it  hadde  don  ajenst  ]ie  otherwise. 

dom  of  god  &  ajenst  ]^e  treu]7e  of  ihu  crist  &  a^enst  charite  of 

Ipe  holy  gost,  for  to  putte  awey  ]7es  witnesses  ]^at  knewen 

more  of  goddis  pr^uyte  &  weren  holiere  of  lif,  &  to  take 

witnessis  not  so  kur-nywge  of  goddis  dom  ne  so  holy  of  lif  ne 

so  meke  ne  so  stable  in  fei]?  &  in  lone  of  ihu  crist.  but  ]7es 

sotil  heretikis  trd^ueilen  ny^t'&  day  to  ensaumple  ]ie  multitude  These  heretics 

try  to  set  the 

of  worldly  clerkis,  'bat  ben  ful  of  symonye,  pride,  coueitise,  authority  of  a 

worldly  clergy 

glotonye,  lecherie  &  o]76re  synnes,  aboue  ihu  crist  &  his  above  that  df 
gospel,  for  to  haue  here  worldly  lif,  pride  &  lustis  meyntened, 

'\>at  no  man  schulde  lette  he»^  in  here  worldly  glorie  ne  dis- 

trurble  hem  of  here  lustis,  j^ouj  j^ei  neuere  so  foule  lien  of^ 

god  &  sclau;^dren  his  peple.  for  ]iei  wolen  make  here  cursed 

lif  &  heresies  to  be  gospel  &  bileue  of  cristene  men ;  but 

where  ben  more  cursed  traitouris  to  god  &  his  lawe  &  more 

perilous  &  false  prophetis  to  cristene  peple  ?  for  god  com-  Rev.  xxii.  is. 

auwdi]?  vp  peyne  of  his  grete  curs  &  deep  dampnynge  in  helle 

j^at  no  man  schal  wi]7-drawe  fro  his  lawe  ony  poynt  of  treu]7e, 

ne  adde  j^er-to  ony  nouelrie  j^at  is  not  appraued  of  j/e  trinyte, 

&  ihu  crist  sei]?  '^at  his  gospel  is  euerlastynge  testament.  But 
]7ei  wolen  for-don  it  wi]?  a  stynkynge  blast  of  an^«cristis 
cwrsed  moub.  lord,  hou  doren  cristene  men  meyntene  siche  Christians  should 

■'  _  ^  not  maintain  such 

heretikis,  a^enst  goddis  techynge  &  pees  of  cristene  peple  ?  iieretics. 
siche  weiward  heretikis  ben  ful  vnable  to  reule  pralatis  & 
lordis  &  comyns  in  schrifte,  in  prachynge  &  praynge  &  oj^are 
poyntis  of  here  soule  heljie,  for  ]?ei  disceyuen  hem  in  fei]?  & 
good  lif,  for  to  haue  here  owene  pride  &  coueitise  &  lustis 
born  vp,  &  so  drawen  alle  men  to  helle  ]7at  ben  reulid  bi 
suche  false  cowfessours,  false  prachours  &  false  conseilours. 

t  p^rfyt  AA.  2  qjj 


17 


258 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


[Chap.  III. 


Cdipitulum  3"”' 


The  second  wheel 
in  the  devil’s 
Avain. 

♦[p.  212a  MS.] 


By  the  Church 
Austin  means 
Christ,  and  the 
apostles  and 
saints ; 


hut  these  heretics 
understand  the 
worldly  clergy. 


St.  Austin  is 
slandered. 


Christians  should 
uphold  Christ’s 


See  now  ]?e  secuwde  wheel  in  J>is  deuelis  wayn ;  ]?ei  here 
vpon  austyn  j^at  he  sei]?  ]7us,  he  wolde  not  bileue  to  j^e 
gospel  hut  jif  ]7e  chirche  seide  it.  so  trewe  men  answeren 
]7us  :  suppose  ^  ]?at  austyn  sei]?  |»is  word,  he  seide  to  )>is 
entente,  \ai  but  jif  crist,  heuyd  of  holy  chirche,  &  seyntis  in 
heuene  &  ]7e  apostlis  of  crist,  j^at  ben  holy  chirche,  seiden  & 
approueden  ]iis  gospel,  ellis  he  wolde  not  bileue  \er-io ;  &  ]7is 
vnderstondynge  is  ful  trewe  &  resonahle  &  accordynge  to  J^e 
lett^re  of  austyn.  hut  ]?ei  vnd(?rstonden  ]7us,  hut  ^if 
multitude  of  cwrsed  worldly  clerkis  approue  j^is  for  jie  gospel, 
ellis  austyn  wolde  not  bileue  to  J^e  gospel  of  ihu  crist ;  &  si]? 
austyn  was  &  is  so  gret  a  doctour  of  holy  chirche,  no  ma?^ 
schulde  bileue  to  jie  gospel  but  pf  ]?e  chirche  of  ]?es  prdlatis 
confermen  J?at  ]?is  is  ]?e  gospel  of  crist.  panne pf  ]?e 
multitude  of  an^^’cristis  clerkis  approuen  not  ]?e  gospel  ne 
treu]?e  of  holy  writt,  no  man  schulde  holde  ^  ]?e  gospel  ne  ony 
comau?^dement  of  god,  ne  meyntene  ony  treu]?e  ajenst  an^^- 
crist  &  his  worldely  prdatis.  but  what  heresie  myjtte  soonere 
distroie  cristene  mennws  bileue  ?  &  god  forbede  pat  austyn 

were  in  ]?is^  pmlous  heresie,  or  ony  cristene  man.  p^r-fore 
it  is  cwrsed  lesynge  to  sclaund[r]e  seynt  austin  wi]?  ]?is  cursed 
errour,  to  ®  coloure  here  owene  false  vnderstondynge  &  heresie 
hi  ]?is  holy  doctour.  for  hi  ]?is  cursed  wheel,  pf  an^/cristis 
clerkis  darapne  cristene  mennws  fei]?  &  ]?e  comau?^deme^^^tis  of 
god  &  poyntis  of  charite,  &  hrywgen  in  here  owen  weiward 
lawis  to  holden  vp  here  pride  &  coueitise,  &  to  curse  men 
for  ]?ei  don  werkis  of  charite,  men  moten  vp  peyne  of 
dampn'acion  receyue  here  cursed  dedis  as  bileue,  &  forsake  ]?e 
gospel  of  ihu  crist,  &  take  fendis  lesyngis  in  stede  of  goddis 
lore ;  &  moo  cursed nesse  to  distroie  cristene  fei]?  ]?an  wole  sue 
of  ]?is  cwrsed  vndf^rstondynge  may  no  man  ne  fend  ymagyne  til 
]?e  day  of  dom.  perfore  cristen  men®  schulden  stonde  to  ]?e  de]? 


^  suppo  X. 

^  omitted  X. 


2  jan  X. 

®  omitted  X. 


3  olde  X. 

®  omitted  X. 


Chap.  IV.] 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


259 


for  meyntenyiige  of  cristis  gospel,  &  trewe  yiid(3rstondynge 
\er-of  geten  bi  holy  lif  &  gret  studie,  &  not  sette  here  fei]? 
ne  triste  in  synful  prelatis  &  here  cursed  clerkis,  ne  in  here 
Ynd(0rstondynge  of  holy  writt,  for  j^ei  ben  vnable  wi]?  j^is 
worldly  lif  ful  of  pride,  coueitise,  glotonye  &  ydelnesse,  as  ^ 
haukynge  &  hui^ty;?ge,  &  pleiynge  at  J^e  chees  &  tablis,  & 
riot  &  daunsynge,  &  festis  makynge,  dronkenesse  &  lecherie, 
to  perceyue  ]7e  treuj^e  of  holy  writt  &  heije  pr^uytees  of  god. 
for  crist  sei]?  in  ]7e  gospel  ]7at  ]7e  fadir  of  heuene  hidi]?  ]?es 
treu]7es  fro  worldly  wise  men  &  queynte,  &  schewi]?  hem  to 
meke  men  as  weren  cristis  disciplis.  &  ]?e  wise  man  sei]?  ]?at 
]7e  wisdom  schal  not  entre  iw-to  an  euyl  willid  man,  for  ])Q 
drede  of  god  is  bigynnynge  &  plente  of  wisdom,  &  ]?ei  han 
not  ]?is  drede  ;  j^an  ]7ei  han  not  jjis  wisdom,  ])eriove  it  is 
luciferis  pride,  &  passe]?  it,  to  constreyne  men  to  take  vnder- 
stondynge  of  holy  writt  aft^r  ]?e  witt  &  dom  of  siche 
worldly  "^'clerkis,  ]?at  ben  enemys  of  crist  &  his  lawe  &  his 
s^ruau^tis,  for  ]?ei  ben  bly;^^de  in  goddis  lawe  &  good  lif,  & 
leden  blynde  men  to  belle,  as  crist  sei]?  in  j^e  gospel  ,*  for  in 
steed  of  keies  of  heuene,  ]?«t  ben  kuwny;^ge  of  holy  writt  & 
power  to  distroie  sy?^ne  &  saue  cristene  soulis  bi  trewe 
techynge  &  good  ensaumple,  ]?ei  han  ignorauwce  of  goddis 
lawe,  &  no  wiP  to  studie  &  lyue  ]?6r-aftir,  but  kumynge  & 
practisynge  in  here  owene  wickede  lawis  for  pride  &  coueitise, 
&  feynen  hem  power  of  tirau^^^trie  to  stoppe  treue  men  fro 
pr^chynge  of  ]?e  gospel,  &  jif  ]?ei  pr(9chen  a^enst  here  wille  to 
curse  hem  &  prisone  hem  &  brenne  he?w^;  &  c^rtis  fes  ben 
keies  of  helle. 


gospel  to  the 
death,  and  not 
put  their  trust 
in  prelates, 


whose  spiritual 
eyes  are  blinded 
by  luxury. 


Matt.  xi.  25, 


Prov.  ix.  10. 


*[p.  2126  MS.] 


They  lead  blind 
men  to  hell, 


of  which  they 
have  the  keys. 


Capitiilum  4”** 

See  now  j^e  ]>ridde  wheel  of  sathanas  chaar.  pes  cautelous  Third  wheel  in 

...  o  ^  •  o  1  Satan’s  car. 

clerkis  &  religious  oi  luciier  seyn  vat  no  man  wot  whiche  is  That  men  know 

I  the  gospel  onlv 

the  gospel  but  bi  approuynge  &  cowfermynge  of  be  chirche.  Church’s 

^  approval, 

but  trewe  men  seyn  fat  to  here  vnd^rstondynge  fis  is  ful  of 


&X. 


2  wel  X. 


2  omitted  AA. 


260 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


[Chap.  IV. 


but  Christians 
have  this  cer¬ 
tainty  given  by 
Christ, 


1  Cor.  iii.  11. 


who  is  the  only 
and  unfailing 
ground  of  faith. 


The  fourth  wheel 
of  Belial’s  cart. 


Christians  believe 
in  the  gospel,  as 
they  do  in  God. 


*[p.  212c  MS.] 


falsed ;  for  cristene  men  ben  c^rteyn  of  bileue,  bi  gracious 
^ifte  of  ihu  crist,  ]?at  ]?is  treuj^e  tau^t  bi  crist  &  his  apostlis  is 
]iQ  gospel,  ]70U^  alle  an^^cristis  clerkis  crien  neu^re  so  faste  ])& 
contrarie  vp  peyne  of  curs  &  prisonynge  &  brennywge.  & 
j^is  bileue  is  not  groundid  on  ]>e  pope  &  his  cardinalis,  for 
j^mne  it  moste  faile  &  ben  vndon,  as  j^ei  failen  &  ben  sumtyme 
distroied,  but  on  ihu  crist,  god  &  man,  &  on  ]7e  holy  trinyte ; 
&  so  it  may  neudre  faile  but  in  defaute  of  him  j^at  schulde 
loue  god  &  S(?rue  him  &  faile]?  in  ]7es  two  poyntis,  for  almy^tty 
god  &  his  treu]?es  ben  foundement  of  cristene  mewnws  fei]?. 
And  as  poul  sei]?,  fou?^dement  may  no  man  sette  biside  ]?at 
]?at  is  sette,  ]?at  is  ihu  crist.  pdrfore  pou^  anifecrist  &  alle 
]7es  ^  worldly  clerkis  ben  biried  depe  in  belle  for  here  cursed 
symonye,  pride,  &  coueitise  &  opere  synnys,  ^it  cristene  fei]? 
faile]?  not ;  for  ]?ei  ben  not  ground  per-of  but  ihu  crist  is 
ground  per-of.  for  he  is  oure  god  &  oure  beste  maistre,  euere 
redy  to  teche  trewe  men  alle  J^inge  pat  is  profitable  &  nedful 
to  here  soulis ;  &  he  may  not  faile  in  ]?is  techywge  but  for 
vnablete  of  him  pat  schulde  resceyue  ]?is  techynge. 

C^ipitulum.  5”'* 

pe  four]?e  whel  of  belialis  carte  is  ]?is :  pf  cristene  men 
seyn  poi  knowen  bi  bileue  pat  ]?is  is  cristis  gospel,  ]?es 
malicious  heretikis  axen  whi  ]?ei  bileuen  ]?at  ]?is  is  gospel, 
but  trewe  men  axen  of  hem  a^enward  whi  ]?ei  bileuen  ]?at 
god  is  god ;  &  pf  ]?ei  tellen  a  good  sufficient  cause,  telle  we 
pe  same  cause  whi  we  bileuen  ]?at  ]?is  is  cristis  gospel,  but 
]?es  heretikis  wolden  haue  ]?is  cause  :  for  ]?es  prolatis  techen  pat 
]?is  is  cristis  gospel ;  &  ]?anne  ^  poi  wolden  haue  of  ]?is  cause 
alle  here  false  purpos,  pat  what  euore  ]?es  prolatis  techen 
opynly  &  meyntenen  stedfastly,  were  of  as  gret  autorite  or 
more  ]?an  is  cristis  gospel;  so  ]?ei  wolden  distroie  holy  writt 
&  cristene  fei]?,  &  meyntenen  pat  what-euere  poi  don  were  no 
synne.  but  cristene  men  taken  here  fei]?  of  god  bi  his 


1  his  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


Chap.  V.J 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


261 


gracious  whawne  he  ^eiie]?  to  hem  knowynge  &  vnd^r- 

stondynge  of  treujjes  nedful  for  to  saue  mennws  soulis  hi,  & 

grace  to  assente  in  here  herte  to  suche  treu]7es;  &  J^is  men 

clepen  fei]?.  &  of  j^is  fei]?  cristene  men  hew  more  certeyn  J^an  What  faith  is. 

ony  man  is  of  ony^  worldly  J?ing  hi  ony  bodily  witt ;  &  \er- 

fore  crist  reprouej?  most  defaute  of  bileue,  bo]7e  in  ]7e  iewis  & 

in  his  disciplis,  &  J^^rfore  cristis  apostlis  preieden  ^  most  to 

haue  stabilnesse  in  feih;  for  it  is  unpossible  hat  ony  man  plese  Man’s  need  of 

^  _  faith  and  its 

god  wi|»-outen  fei]?,  &  so  crist  ^rei&Q  principaly  ]7at  j^e  fei]?  of  power. 

petir  &  o]7ere  disciplis  schulden  not  faile  endeles ;  &  goddis 

lawe  telli]?  hou  bi  fei]?  seyntis  wrou^ten  alle  here  grete  wondris 

&  meruailis  ])at  J^ei  diden.  &  pf  an^ecrist  seie  here  ecke 

man  may®  feyne  ]>at  he  ha]?  rijt  fei]?  &  goode  vnd^rstondynge 

of  holy  writt  ^ouyn  of  god  whanne  he  is  in  errowr,  late  a 

man  seke  in  alle  ]?ingis  trewely  ]?e  honour  of  god  &  lyue  iustly 

to  god  &  man,  &  ]>a?^ne  god  wole  not  faile  to  him  in  ony  ]?ing 

lat  is  nedful  to  hym,  nei]’er  in  fei]?  ne  ynderstondynge  ne  in 

answere  apnst  his  enemyes.  &  for  feij?  is  scheld  of  cristene 

men  apnst  alle  temptacions  of  ^e  fend  &  ground  of  alle 

yertues,  jj^rfore  sathanas  ordeyned  jjes  newe  sectis  to  be  so  Satan,  to  weaken 

till  li&s  rSiiscd 

manye  &  haue  name  of  ku^ny;^ge  &  holynesse  bifore  alle  up  these  new 

sects, 

o]?ere,  &  ground!]?  in  hem  pride,  enuye,  coueitise,  glotonye, 
lecherie  &  ypocrisie  to  walwe  among  ]?e  peple  &  stire  hem  bi 
word  &  ensaumple  to  be  vnstable  in  ]?e  fei]? ;  &  stire]?  heip 
worldly  prelatis  to  be  fauour^ble  to  hem  &  meyntenen  hem  in 
]?is  ypocrisie  to  coloure  here  owene  synne  ]?er-bi,  &  to  lette 
treue  men  to  pr^che  pleynly  &  frely  cristis  gospel  &  pe  hestis 
of  god  for  sauynge  of  mannus  soule.  &  here-bi  &  [bi]  many 
moo  disceitis  schulden  cristene  men  knowe  how  ]?es  newe 
religious  ben  false  prophetis  &  cursed  sectis,  of  whiche  crist  of  which  Christ 

and  his  apostles 

&  liis  apostlis  prophecieden  bifore,  &  taujten  men  to  knowe  prophesied, 
hem  bi  here  werkis,^  pat  ben  ypocrisie,  coueitise  &  meyn- 
tenynge  of  synne  bi  fals  pr^chynge,  flaterynge,  fals  conseilynge 
&  sclau?^derynge  of  trewe  men,®  &  makynge  ®  men  siker  of 

1  only  X.  2  preiseden  X.  3  omitted  X. 

^  clerkis  AA.  ^  omitted  X.  s  maken  X. 


262 


HOW  ANTICHRIST  AND  HIS  CLERKS. 


[Chap.  V. 


Letters  of  fratei"' 
nity. 

2  John  10. 


2  Thess.  iii.  14. 


*[p.  213  MS.] 


gostly  helpe  bi  fals  letteris  of  fraternyte  &  many  o\erQ  nouel- 
ries  broujt  vp  bi  ypocrisie  &  coueitise.  &  as  ion  j^e  euawngelist 
comauwdi]?,  cristene  men  schulden  not  resceyue  hem  in-to  here 
houses  ne  seie  to  hem,  heil.  &  poul  biddi]?  \at  men  schulden 
not  comune  wi]?  hem,  ]7ei  ben  confoundid  &  schamed  of 
here  false  heresie  &  twrne  to  cristis  dene  religion  wi]7-outen 
errour  of  synful  mmnus  tradicions.  God  almy^tty  strengjje 
his  litil  flok^  ajenst  J^es  foure  whelis  of  sathanas  chaar,  a^enst 
^'an^^cnstis  clerkis  &  helperis,  &  make  hem  stronge  in  ri^tful 
fei]7,  hope  &  charite,  to  seke  trewely  j^e  worschipe  of  ihu  crist 
&  sauynge  of  mennws  soulis;  to  dispise  an^mnstis  host  & 
feyned  power;  &  wdlfully  &  ioiefully  suffre  peyne  &  reproue^ 
in  world  for  'pe  name^  of  ihu  &  his  gospel,  to  ^eue  sade 
ensaumple  to  opere  for  to  folowe  &  conquere  pe  hei^e  blisse  of 
heuene  bi  glorious  martirdom  as  oj^^re  seyntis  diden  bifore. 
Ihu  for  j^in  endeles  myjt,  endeles  wisdom,  endeles  goodnesse 
&  charite,  grauwte  to  ys  synful  wrecchis  J^is  bone.  Amen. 

^  folk  X.  2  reprof  AA.  ^  p^nne  AA. 


263 


XVIII. 

HOW  SAT  AX  AND  HIS  PEIESTS,  etc. 


I  SEE  no  reason  to  deny  the  authenticity  of  this  tract.  In  complaining  of 
the  manner  in  which  Scripture  was  wrested  to  all  ends  by  setting  aside 
its  literal  sense,  Wyclif  was  insisting  on  a  favourite  topic.  It  is  curious, 
however,  to  find  him  maintaining  the  right  of  preaching  against  wicked 
men  by  name,  since,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no  personal  attack  in  any 
of  his  works ;  the  nearest  approach  to  it  being  his  allusions  to  Spencer’s 
action  in  heading  the  Flanders  Crusade.  It  is  possible,  having  regard 
to  the  context,  to  suppose  that  he  means  only  class  names  (such  as 
‘  prelates,’  ‘friars,’  etc.).  He  may  have  been  taxed  with  want  of  charity 
in  attacking  special  classes,  instead  of  confining  himself  to  a  general 
denunciation  of  sin.  It  seems  that  in  any  case  his  attacks  were  returned. 

Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS.  AA. 


Summary. 

Chap.  I.  Three  heresies  prevalent .  1.  That  holy  writ  is  false.  2.  That  it 
is  lawful  to  lie.  3.  That  it  is  uncharitable  to  denounce  sins  of 


great  men  . .  p.  264 

The  first  two  are  upheld  in  schools  of  divinity ;  the  third  by  pre¬ 
lates  and  great  men  .  265 

II.  They  say  that  holy  writ  is  false,  since  against  both  testaments  they 

maintain  that  the  clergy  may  hold  secular  lordship  .  265 

They  advocate  a  false  mode  of  interpretation,  refusing  the  literal 

sense  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  266 

Reasons  for  such  advocacy  .  267 

III.  Lies  are  brought  in,  because  prelates  and  new  religious  are  false, 

having  forsaken  the  way  in  which  they  are  hound  to  live  .  268 

Abuses  of  the  orders ;  child-stealing,  etc .  269 

Lying  in  act  has  led  to  lying  in  word  .  .  .  ... .  270 

IV.  Prelates  and  false  religious  say  that  it  is  against  charity  to  expose 

their  sins  .  271 

It  is  a  priest’s  duty  to  warn  men  of  their  sins  .  .  .  271 

Prelates  and  religious  attack  other  men  in  their  sermons  ....  .  273 

But  they  wish  to  shut  the  mouths  of  reprovers,  lest  they  should  lose 

influence  and  wealth  .  273 


264 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


[Chap.  I. 


Three  ways  to 
bliss  ordained  by 
God. 


Three  heresies : 

1.  That  holy  writ 
is  false. 

2.  That  it  is  law¬ 
ful  to  lie. 

3.  That  it  is 
against  charity 
to  denounce  sins 
oi  great  men. 
Conclusions  from 
these  opinions. 


Hou  sathanas  &  his  pr^^stis  &  his  feyned  religious 
casten  hi  ]?re  cursed  heresies  to  distroie  alle  good 
lyuynge  &  mayntene^  alle  manere  of  synne. 

Capitulum  'primum. 

As  almy^tty  god  in  trinyte  ordeynejt  men  to  come  to  ])e  blisse 
of  heuene  bi  |>re  gronndis,  bi  knowynge  of  trinyte  bi  sad 
fei]7,  bi  treue  kepynge  of  goddis  hestis,  &  bi  p^rfit  charite 
&  endeles,  so  sathanas  &  his  worldly  clerkis  &  his  feyned 
religious  ful  of  sotil  ypocrisie  casten  to  distroie  alle  vertuous 
lif  &  iustise,  &  meyntene  alle  manure  of  synne  bi  j^es  ]>Ye 
cursed  groundes.  pe  first  is  \at  holy  writt  is  fals ;  j^e  secuwde 
]iat  it^  is  lefiful  &  medful  to  lie;  j^ridde  ]>at  it  is  ajenst 
charite  to  crie  opynly  ajens  pr^latis  synnes  &  o]?&r  my^tty 
mennys.  for  as  ]?ei  seyn  j7is  is  bacbitynge  or  detraction  & 
sclauwdrywge,  to  brywge  men  out  of  deuocion  to  god  &  holy 
chirche,  &  make  men  of  religion  of  euyl  name  where  I’ei 
weren  bifore  holden  goode  &  holy ;  &  J^is  prechynge  stire]? 
lordis  &  opere  men  to  wi]?drawe  worldly  goodis  fro  men  of 
holy  chirche,  &  so  hyndri]?  goddis  s^ruyce  &  pmeris  for  }7e 
pees  &  maken®  discencion  &  enuye.  for  pf  holy  writt  be  fals 
men  may  haue  noon  autorite  j^er-bi  to  reproue  sywne  &  praise 
virtues  &  virtuous  lif.  &  pf  it  be  leffel  &  meritorie  to  leie, 
]7an  no  man  ha]?  ground  to  stire  men  fro  synne  bi  grete  peynes 
bihijte  bi  cristis  word,  ne  stire  men  to  virtues  bi  grete  ioies 
of  heuene.  for  si]?  it  is  medful  to  lie,  as  ]?ei  seyn,  crist  vsed 
]?is  medful  craft  at  j^e  fulle,  &  no  man  may  Jeanne  wite  in 
whiche  autorite  he  seide  so]>  &  in  whiche  he  leijede.  &  pf  it 
be  ajenst  charite  to  preche  &  crie  openly  a^enst  synne  of 
pr^latis  &  men  of  J?e  chirche  &  o\erQ  myjtty  men,  ]ian  cristis 
lif  &  his  techynge  &  his  apostlis  &  prophetes  in  ]?e  olde  lawe 
&  his  comauwdementis  to  his  praphetis  weren  ajenst  charite, 


^  meyntenynge  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


3  sic  in  both  MSS. 


Chap.  II  ] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


265 


ful  of  detraccion  &  sclaundrywge.  but  what  heresies  myjtte 
more  blaspheme  god,  more  distroie  holy  writt  &  virtuous  lif, 

&  more  norische  synne  &  cursed  men  in  here  lustis  ?  &  c^rtis 
wi]?-iwne  j^is  seuene  jeer  worldly  coueitouse  clerkis  &  feyned 
religious  ^  meyntened  \n  scolis  of  dyuynite  two  he  firste  Two  of  these 

''  ■*  heresies  openly 

heresies,  &  nt  holden  it  a  noble  dede  to  susteyne  h.Qm  ;  he  *[p-  214  ms  ] 

‘  ■  ./  j  mamtamed  m 

Jiridde  heresie  regnyd^  ]?an  &  jit  do]?  more  &  more  among 

^reld^tis,  feyned  religious  &  lordis  &  comyns  for  more  part,  y^ien^t^ with  pre 

hou  stiren  suche  here  tikis  &  blasphemes  god  of  treujie  to 

mercy  bi  here  preieris,  si]?  god  curse]>  to  here  blyssyngis,  as 

he  sei]?  bi  prophete  malechie,  &  here  preiere  is  abhowziwable  &  Maiachi  ii.  2. 

cursed,  for  ]7ei  twrnen  awey  &  heren  not  goddis  lawe  & 

fulfillen  it  in  dede.  hou^  meyntenen  lordis  ]>e  treu]?e  of  ]?e 

gospel  &  holy  writt,  si]?  ]?ei  meyntenen  siche  blaspheme 

heretikis  to  be  dowid  in  seculer  lordischipe  ajenst  goddis 

comauwdement  &  ensaumple  of  cristis  lif  &  his  apostlis  ?  hou 

douw  prestis  here  office  ]>at  schulde  witnesse  ]?e  treu]?e  of 

goddis  lawe  to  suffre  peyne  &  de]?  ]>erfore  ?  hou  don  comunes 

here  trewe  seruyce  to  god,  ]?at  meyntenen  siche  heretikis  & 

worschipen  hem  in  word  &  dede  wha?^ne  ]>ei  owen  to  knowen 

here  opyn  falsnesse  ?  it  is  grett  m^ruaile  ]>at  god  of  his 

endles  rijtwisnesse  ^  distroie]?  not  alle  ]?is  cwrsed  peple  to  helle 

for  ]>es  cwrsed  blasphemyes  &  erresies®  &  wickid  meyntenynge; 

but  certis  ]?e  lengere  \at  he  spare]?  bi  m^rcy,  ]?e  sorere  schal 

]?e  vengauwce  be  but  jif  men  amenden  hem. 


Qdipitulum  2”"* 

See  now  hou  ]>es  cwrsed  heretikis  bryngen  in  ]?e  firste  These  heretics 
blasphemye.  first  hei  seyn  &  meyntenen  hat  clerkis  may  i^^faise,  by^ sup- 

...  .  porting  things 

leitully  bane  seculer  lordischipis  &  lyue  in  pompe  &  worldly  forbidden  in 
welfare  as  lordis.  &  holy  writt  old  &  newe  &  cristis  ®  lif  & 
his  apostlis  dampnen  }>is  pride  &  wrecchednesse  in  clerkis. 

&  neden  hem  to  mekenesse  &  wilful  traueile  &  pou^rt.  & 


^  omitted  X. 
4  mercy  X. 


2  regnep  X. 

®  heretikis  X. 


3  and  AA. 
®  crist  X. 


266 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


[Chap.  II. 


They  invent  a 
logic  that  is  con¬ 
trary  to  holy 
writ. 


They  say  that 
holy  writ  is  not 
to  be  taken  liter¬ 
ally, 

but  as  explained 
by  prelates. 

*[p.  215  MS.] 


Matt.  XV.  14. 


But  these  pre¬ 
lates  have  not 
the  Holy  Spirit 
to  teach  them 
the  truth. 


many  men  aleggen  faste  holy  writt  ajenst.  worldly  lif  of 
clerkis ;  \eriorQ  j^ei  seyn  j^at  holy  writt  is  fals,  for  trewe  men 
schulden  haue  noon  auctorite  a^enst  here  cursed  lif.  pe 
secuwde  tyme  j^ei  fy^den  vp  a  newe  manure  of  speche  or  logik, 
]>at  is  aoniraiiQ  to  j^e  speche  of  holy  writt ;  &  for  j^ei  wolen 
meyntenen  here  owen  fyndynge  as  good  &  trewe,  ]75rfore  ];ei 
seyn  ]iat  ]>&  speche  of  holy  writt  is  fals  ]iat  reuersi]?  ^  here 
owene  fonnydnesse.  &  here  j^ei  maken  god  a  fool  &  fals,  in 
as  moche  as  in  hem  is,  &  schewen  hem  self  wise  men  & 
trewe ;  &  algatis  feynen  hem  self  wisere  &  treuere  ]7an  god 
almy^tty.  ^  pe  ]7ridde  tyme  jiei  coueten  name  of  wisdom  & 
worschipe  of  j^is  world  &  here  owene  excellence  more  ]7anne 
goddis  honour,  &  j^^rfore  |>ei  disdeynen  to  sue  mekely  ]?e 
speche  of  goddis  lawe  &  |»e  lif  of  crist  &  his  apostlis,  but 
maken  newe  lawis  &  logik  ]>at  maken  holy  writt  derk  &  fals 
to  comyn  vnderstondynge  of  hem  &  here  folweris.  &  ^it 
]?ei  schame  sumdel  to  seie  to  cristene  lordis  ]iat  holy  writt  is 
fals,  but  ]7ei  don  worse  hi  sotel  ypocnsie  j^at  holy  writt  is  fals 
to  ]7e  wordis  but  j^e  vnderstondynge  ]ier-oi  is  trewe ;  &  j^is 
vnderstondynge  hangij?  in  det^rminacmn  of  worldly  prelatis, 
yai  kunnen  not  holy  writt  &  ben  not  able  to  "^'haue  inspiracion 
of  y  holy  gost  hi  here  holy  lif,  for  ]?ei  ben  comynly  ful  of 
symonye,  pride,  coueitise,  glotonye,  lecherie,  manquellynge 
&  opere  synnys,  &  open  heretikis  &  enemys  of  crist  &  his 
lawe  &  his  trewe  s^ruauntis.  &  ihu  crist  sei]?  pat  siche  ben 
blynde  &  leden  blynde  men  in-to  pe  lake  of  synne  &  at  j^e 
laste  to  helle ;  for  pf  ]?ei  han  money  &  gold  at  here  lykynge 
bi  extorsion  &  robberie,  J^ei  reckon  not  of  cristene  soulis  hou 
foul  deuelis  deuouren  hem.  &  pe  holy  gost  dwelli]?  not  in 
siche  proude  &  coueitouse  clerkis,  for  j^ei  ben  templis  of  pe 
fend  &  j^ei  worschipen  fals  goddis  &  dwellen  in  ^  ydolatrie, 
hou  schulde  god  teche  hem  J>e  precius  treu]?es  of  his  lawe? 
but  Curtis  bi  j^is  ypocrisie  j^ei  wolen  brynge  in  what  heresie 
pat  hem  liki]?  &  meyntene  it  for  good  treu]7e  &  profitable. 


^  resceyueth  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


Chap.  II.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


267 


for  ]?ei  seyn  ]?at  here  sentence  &  dom  is  vndf^rstondynge  of 

holy  writt;  &  tes  worldly  prelatis  wolen  make  a  congregacion  How  they  get 

adherents. 

of  hem  self  &  clerkis  assentynge  to  hem,  summe  for  worldly 
drede  &  worldly  fauour,  summe  for  gold  &  hope  of  heneficis, 

&  summe  for  drede  of  curs,  priuynge  of  heneficis  &  sclanwdre 
&  prisonywge  &  brennynge.  but  se  now  ]?e  wodnesse  of  J^is 
hlasphemye.  first  pf  holy  writt  be  fals,  certis  god  autor  ^  its 

ji^r-of  is  fals,  &  si]?  ]?ei  graunten  ]7e  friste  errour,  ]?ei  moten  author,  is  false. 

graunte  al  ]iat  sue]?  \er-of.  also  ]?ei  feyne^  ]7at  a  fool  &  a 
cursed  deuyl  is  wisere  &  trewere  ]?an  ihu  crist  god  &  man, 
si]?  here  speche  is  wittiere  &  trewere  ]?an  ]>q  speche  of  god  in 
holi  writt,  &  ]?is  reson  is  pleyn.  suppose  ]iat  ]7is  clerk 
writy^^^ge  or  techynge  contrdsrie  speche  to  holy  writt  schal  be 
dampnyd,  for  ]?an  he  is  a  deuyl  as  crist  sei]?  of  iudas,  &  as  ]?ei 
feynen  his  writynge  &  techynge  is  wittiere  &  trewere  ]?an 
techynge  &  writynge  of  god  almy^tty ;  ]?an  it  sue]?  opynly 
\at  di  fool  &  a  cwrsed  deuyl  is  wittiere  &  trewere  ]?an  ihu 
crist,  kyng  of  wisdom  &  treu]>e.  Lord,  si]?  ]?e  holy  gost  is 
autour  &  Welle  of  witt  &  treu]?e,  whe]?er  he  taujtte  not  goddis 
prophetis  &  cristis  apostlis  to  write  &  speke  treu]?e;  whe]’er 
]?e  fend  sathanas  techi]?  proude  &  coueitouse  clerkis,  ful  of 
symonye  &  o^ere  synnys,  more  witt  &  treu]?e  ]’an  ]?e  holy 
gost  techere  of  alle  treu]?e  tau^te  cristis  apostlis  &  eud^wnge- 
listis,  ]?at  weren  sad  in  bileue  &  charite  &  holy  &  trewe  in  lif 
&  techynge.  &  whawne  al  ]?e  ground  is  sou^t  of  ]?is  heresie 
it  stondi]?  in  ]?is  poynt,  holy  writt,  goddis  owene  word,  is 
fals  for  ]?is  cursed  heretik  mysvnderstondi]?  it,  or  for  it  dis- 
plese]?  ]?is  heretik  &  reproue]?  ]?is  synne.  but  certis  hi  ]?is  skille 
he]?ene  men  &  fendis  maken  god  most  false  of  alle  ]?ingis,  for 
]?ei  ynderstonden  ]?at  god  is  most  fals  &  wrongful  &  dampne]? 

XI16SG  liGrGtics 

hem  most  for  here  synnys.  but  it  fari]?  hi  holy  writt  &  cursed  see  amiss  like 

drunken  men. 

clerkis  &  foolis  as  it  fari]?  hi  drouTzken  men  &  ]?e  mone  '^'And  *[p.  216MS.] 
candel ;  ]?ei  demen  of  o  mone  or  candel  to  be  two,  for  ]?ei 
ben  yndisposid  to  deme  &  knowe  ]?e  treu]?e  bicause  of  here 


^  autorite  AA. 


268 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


[Chap.  II. 


drowkenesse,  so  ]7es  foolis,  bi  here  pride,  coueitise  &  o]?erG 
sjnnjs,  ben  vnable  to  conseyue^  j^e  heije  trewj^is  of  goddis 
word ;  &  perfore  j^ei  seyn  pat  it  is  fals,  for  ]7ei  ban  not  witt 
ne  grace  to  tr^^ueile  aboute  trewe  vnderstondynge  j^^r-of  for 
worldly  occupacion  &  ydelnesse. 


.  Q^pitulum  S”"’ 


Worldly  priests 
maintain  lying. 


New  religious 
brought  in  to 
imitate  Christ, 


are  turned  to 
hypocrisy, 


and  become  a 
mere  lie. 
Psalm  V.  6. 


John  viii.  39. 


!N’ow  see  whi  meyntenywge  of  lesyngis  is  brou^t  in.  god 
sei]?  pat  no  jiing  plesi]?  to  a  fool  bnt  folie ;  so  no  J^ing  plesi]? 
comynly  to  a  false  man  but  falsnesse ;  &  for  j^es  worldly 
prdlatis  &  newe  pharisees  be?^  grouMid  in  lesyngis,  perfore 
jiei  comenden  lesyngis  &  meyntenen  hem.  for  pr^latis  comen 
in  ]7e  staat  of  cristis  apostlis  to  lyue  in  pou^rt,  mekenesse  & 
trtjueyle  of  Jie  gospel  as  J^ei  deden,  but  J^ei  ben  twrned  to 
coueitise,  worldly  lordischipis,  pride,  ydelnesse  &  vanyte,  & 
twrnen  cristis  lif  and'^  techynge  vpsodom.  Also  newe  religious 
ben  broujt  in-te  pe  chirche  to  reise  up  cristis  mekenesse, 
poudrt  &  penauwce,  &  to  ben  a  bok  of  ]?is  poufgrt  &  dispisynge 
of  pe  world  to  alle  men  to  loken  on,  &  pei  ben  turned  to 
ypocrisie,  pride,  coueitise,  glotonye  &  sloujie  &  bisynes  ®  of  pe 
world  more  j^an  opere  worldly  men,  &  ben  fals  bokis  ful  of 
synne  &  heresie ;  pat,  as  ierome  &  anseml  ^  witnessen,  here 
croune,  here  tonsure,  here  abitis  ben  ful  of  lesyngis  &  pei 
ben  but  feyned  &  peyntid  men  of  religion,  &  not  only 
lesyngmongeris  but  pure  lesyngis.  &  sij?  god  sey]?  in  pe 
sauter  jiat  alle  pat  speken  lesyngis  schullen  ben  lost,  hou 
moche  more  schullen  pei  ben  lost  pat  ben  pure  lesyngis. 
p)e  secuwde  tyme,  crist  sei]?  to  pe  iewis,  pf  ^e  weren 
abrahamws  childre;^  ^e  schulden  do  werkis  of  abrahdtm ;  & 
per-iove  sei]?  austyn  wi]?  oj^ere  seyntis  pat  j^ou  art  his  soone 
whoos  werkis  pou  dost,  pan  si]?  pe  fend  is  fadir  of  lesyngis, 
as  crist  sei]?,  ]?es  worldly  clerkis,  &  namely  feyned  religious, 
comenden  lesyngis,  for  to  witnesse  in  word  &  dede  pat  ]?ei  ben 


^  conceyue  A  A. 
2  lesyngis  AA. 


2  “in”  in  both  MS. 
^  sic  in  both  MS. 


Chap.  III.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


269 


j^e  fendis  children,  for  ^if  J^ei  weren  cnstis  children  J^ei 
schulden  holde  treuj^e  in  word  &  wille  &  dede  &  meyntenen 
pat,  and  dispisen  alle  manure  of  lesyngis  &  falsnesse  &  synne 
vp  here  kimnywge  &  power ;  &  as  ion  j^e  eu^^wgelist  sei|>,  jjei 
schulden  wilfully  putte  hem  to  de]?  for  to  distroie  lesyngis, 
si]?  lesyngis  stondi]?  more  in  false  dedis  ]?an  in  wordis,  as  ^ 
holy  writt,  amhrose  &  opere  seyntis  witnessen  pleynly.  ^  J:^e 
bridde  tyme,  ]?es  newe  ordris  &  flaterynge  myitte  not  be  These  new  orders 

■’  J  T  I  j  a  j  I  could  not  be  sus- 

susteyned  wi]?-oute  lesyngis,  bo]?e  in  word  &  dede,  in  J’is  without 

mdoaere  as  pQi  now  ben ;  &  for  to  schewe  '^'pat  ]?is  veyn  religious  «[p.  217  ms.] 

louen  more  here  owene  muencions  &  here  owene  lustis  ]7an 

pe^  dene  religion  of  cristis  ordynau7^ce  &  gret  poU(3rt  & 

peynful  lif  aft^r  crist  &  his  apostlis,  pei  preisen  lesyngis  for 

to  beren  vp  ]7es  veyn  nouelries  &  haunte  here  lustis.  for  ^if 

cristis  owene  ordre  &  ensaumple  of  his  lif  &  his  apostlis  hen 

betere  &  profitere  ]?an  ony  newe  maad  of  synful  men,  it  is  a 

foul  lesynge  to  chese  wityngly  &  meyntene  pQ  lesse  p^rfit/  & 

forsake  ]?e  li^ttere,  sikerere  &  perfitere.  ^  Also  it  is  a  cwrsed 

lesyng  to  drawe  children,  bat  ban  hut  litil  discrecion,  to  bes  Children  in- 

.  .  ,  ,  '  veigled  into 

newe  feyned  religious  hi  ^eftis  &  hi  hehestis  ®  of  worldly  the  orders, 

lordischipe,  honour  &  sikernesse  of  bodily  welfare,  more  ]?an 

to  holde  wilful  pouert  &  penaunce  &  dispit  &  forsakynge  of 

alle  worldly  ]?ing,  for  al  ]?is  is  symonye  &  heresie  pf  it  be  wel 

sou^t ;  but  it  is  a  cwrsedere  lesyng  to  stele  ^onge  children  fro 

here  frendis  &  hi  false  disceitis  make  hem  to  be  professed, 

sumtyme  a^enst  here  wille,  &  suffre  hem  not  to  gon  out  of  ]?is 

veyn  ordre,  ]?ouj  pei  knowen  hem  self  vnahle  per-to.  ^Eor 

su?wtyme  ]?es  childre7^  frendis  fallen  in  mornynge  to  dej? ;  & 

sumtyme  hi  myschef  ben  dede  where  here  children  ]?us  stolen  so  that  their 

schulden  ellis  helpe  hem ;  &  sumtyme  J?es  children  schulde7^  without  support! 

be  goode  techeris  &  reuleris  of  pe  peple,  &  now  ben  cursed 

jpocritis,  ful  of  coueitise,  lecherie,  enuye  &  grucchynge 

a^enst  god  ;  &  now  J?ei  ben  nedid  to  rob  pe  pore  peple  hi  fals 

beggynge,  &  sclauwdren  crist  wij?  ]?is  clamose  beggywge 


1  ofX. 

3  omitted  X. 


2  both  MSS.  repeat  “  more  ”  here. 

*  profit  X.  5  bestis  AA. 


270 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HTS  PRIESTS. 


[Chap.  III. 


Ambrose. 

1  Jobnii.  21  (?). 


■Wisdom  i.  11. 


Ecclus.  XX.  27. 

Zech.  V.  4. 

'«[p.  218  MS.] 
Austin. 


Lies  are  always 
bad,  but  truth 
should  be  spoken 
in  season. 


dawpned  of  goddis  lawe,  &  pt  j^es  open  ]?efte  is  stlfly  meyn- 
tened  ajenst  goddis  laiMe,  reson  &  charite  bi  sotil  ypocrisie,  & 
no  cbasti^ynge  don  \er-onnQ.  for  men  -wenen  j^at  j^es  stronge 
]7eues  ben  vndi^r  no  kyngis  la-we  ne  pr^latis  la-vi^e  m  oure  lond. 
for  men  vnd^rstonden  \at  fewe  men  of  discrecion  comen  to 
]7es  nouelries  but  siche  ^onge  bi  stelynge  or  disceyuynge,  or 
ellis  bi  coueitise  of  ■worldly  honour  &  sikernesse  of  wombe 
ioie.  &  herefore  J^es  veyn  religious  preisen  lesyngis,  dampnyd 
bi  holy  -writt  old  &  ne-we,  for  cnstis  treu]7e.  &  j^e  deuel  is 
lesyngis  fadir  &  disceyued  mankynde  bi  lesynge  &  broujt  it 
iw-to  sorowe  &  peyne,  as  ]?e  gospel  ]?e  first  part  of  holy 
■writt  schewi]? ;  &  j^^rfore  sei]?  ambrose  j^at  alle  men  \at  louen 
lesynges  ben  j^e  deuelis  children,  ion  eu<7Mngelist  sei]?  jjat  ^ 
no  lesyng  is  of  god ;  j^awne  it  is  of  j>e  deuyl  sij?  he  is  fadir  of 
lesyngis.  perfoie  j^e  wise  man  sei]?  jiat  mou]?  j?at  lei]?  slee]? 
]?e  soule ;  &  a  ]?ef  is  more  wor]?i  to  be  su'ifrid  pan  pe  lastynge 
of  a  lesyngmongere ;  &  dauid  sei]?  pat  god^  schal  dampne  alle 
men  pat  speken  lesyngis,  &  ]?e  prophete  zacharie  sei]?  pat_ 
goddis  curs  come]?  "^to  ]?e  hous  of  lieris,  &  seynt  austyn  declare]? 
in  many  bokis  pat  of  ^  ei^te  manure  lesyngis  pe  leste  is  synne, 
&  who  eu^re  techi]?  pe  contrarie  disceyue]?  pe  peple.  but  for 
]?es  veyn  religious  forsaken  ®  pe  techynge  &  lif  of  crist,  mene 
persone  in  trinyte,  per^ore  ]?ei  ku77nen  no  mene  bitwixe 
seiynge  so]?e  in  eche  tyme  &  bitwixe  lesynge.  suTwtyme  it 
harme]?  men  to  seie  pe  ®  so]?e  out  of  couenable  tyme  &  eu^re 
it  harme]?  to  lie,  but  sumtyme  it  p?*ofiti]?  to  be  stille  &  abide 
a  couenable  tyme  to  speke,  as  dide  crist  &  his  apostlis,  &  ^if 
]?es  veyn  religious  knowen  ]?is  pei  schulde  haue  no  colour  to 
make  lesyngis.  but  per  is  o  gret  cause  whi  pei  comenden  so 
lesyngis.  ]?ei  maken  profession  to  lyue  bi  labour  of  here 
hondis,  bi  benetis  reulis  &  frauwseis  &  austynes,  &  to  be  deed 
to  pe  world,  &  to  be  ensaumple  &  bok  of  wilful  pou^^rt, 
mekenesse  &  grete  penau7^ce  &  ’  abstynence ;  &  now  ]?ei  ben 
twrned  to  alle  manure  of  schrewdnesse,  harlotrie  &  synne  ;  & 

*  of  X.  2  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X.  ^  omitted  X. 

®  forsakynge  X.  ®  omitted  AA.  ’  omitted  X, 


Chap.  IV.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


271 


jj^rfore  J^ei  forsaken  cristis  scole  of^  treu]7e  &  magnyfien  j^e 
denelis  scole  of  lesyngis ;  as  j^ei  first  token  lesyng  of  lif,  so 
lei  meyntenen  now  lesyng  m  word  to  coloure  j^er-bi  bere  olde 
cwrsed  lif,  ]7at  no  man  may  bryngen  hem  out  l^r-of. 

Qdipitulum  4""' 

See  nowe  j^e  ^ridde  heresie  \at  may  hoold  of  olde  sy^nys.^ 
pes  worldly  prelatis  &  peyntid  religions,  beried  in  here  olde 
sy?^ne,^  symonye,  coueitise  &  pride  &  robberie,  seyn  l^t  it  is  is^a^sfu 
ajenst  charite  to  crie  opynly  here  cursed  disceitis  to  lordis  &  to'^^’^denounce 
comyn  peple,  &  namely  in  here  absence,  but  see  'pe  waiward- 
nesse  &  cursednesse  of  j^es  deuelis  ypocrisie  &  sheld  of  synne. 

Almy^tty  god,  ful  of  charite,  comau^>^dil  to  ]7e  prophete  ysaie  Isaiah  iviii.  i. 

to  crie  &  cesse  not,  &  to  schew^  to  his  peple  here  grete 

synnes.  synne  of  comyns  is  grete,  sy^ne  of  lordis  &  my^tty 

men  &  wise  is  more,  but  synne  of  pr(?latis  is  most,  &  most 

blyndej?  j^e  peple.  pan  treue  men  ben  holden  bi  goddis 

heste  to  crie  most  ajenst  j^e  synne  of  prelatis,  si]?  it  is  most  & 

harmej?  most  j^e  peple.  Also  crist  sei]?  who  ^  to  hym  ^at  Luke  xvii.  i. 

sclau^dril  a  litel  child  of  hem  j^at  ben  cristene.  but  pr^latis 

of  le  world  &  peyntid  foolis  of  religion,  bi  here  opyn  pride, 

coueitise,  glotonye,  lecherie,  extorsions  &  meyntenynge  of 

synne,  sclauwdren  most  be  peple ;  for  her-bi  bei  ben  bolde  to  But  the  sin  of 

,  /  ir  r  ;  j  ^  prelates  should 

walwe  in  sywne  preue  &  apert ;  banne  a?enst  bis  synne  denounced 

^  r,  7  i  j  j  more  than  any 

schulden  trewe  men  crie  most.  ^  Also  god  sei]?  bi  j^e  prophete  other, 
ezechiel  j^at  ^if  a  synful  man  lie  in  synne  &  j^e  prophete  Ezekiel  m.  is. 
schewe  hym  not  j^e  poril  of  his  synne  ne  vengau^>^ce  of  god, 
lor-fore  synful  man  schal  die  in  his  synne  &  prophete 
schal  answere  for  hym,  &  so  boj^e  schullen  be  dampnyd.  & 
sij  eche  prost  is  an  angel  &  prophete  bi  his  prosthod,  '^'as  *|-p  219  ms.] 
seynt  gregory  sei];,  eche  prest  is  in  dette  to  telle  synful  men  Gregory, 
here  synnes  ^at  J>ei  may  ameMe  hem.  ^  Also  god  seif  bi  f  e 

1  &  AA. 

2  AA  reads  Ipat  maj?  hoord  of  olde  synnes.  I  suspect  both  readings  are 

corrupt.  2  omitted  AA.  ^  wo  AA. 


272 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


[Chap.  IV. 


Ezekiel  iii.  17. 


Opinions  of  the 
fathers. 


Gregory. 

Isidore. 

Austin. 


Gregory. 


Matt.  xxiv.  24. 
Matt,  vii,  16. 


1  John  iii.  17. 


Luke  xiv.  5. 


prophete  ezechiel  ]>at  god  ha]?  jouen  a  pr^st  to  be  a  spie  to 
aspie  ]?e  sotil  disceitis  of  ]>e  fend  &  warne  ]?e  peple  of  hem ; 
hut  among  alle  ]7e  helpis  of  ]7e  fend  a  wickid  pr^lat  or  a  fals 
religious  is  ]>q  moste.  panne  a  trewe  pr^st  owi]?  most  to 
warne  j^e  peple  of  hem.  &  ]>erioT&  gregory  sei]?^  &  lawe  of 
]?e  chirche  ])at  no  man  harme]?  more  cristene  peple  ]?awne  he 
\at  ha]?  name  of  ordre  or  holynesse  &  ]?^r-wi]?  lyue]?  wickidly  ; 
for  his  synne  is  taken  to  e7^saumple  of  o]>ere.  &  ]?erfore  sei]? 

gregory  in^  his  pastoralis  ]?at  prdatis  hen  wor]?i  to  haue  as 

^  # 

many  de]?es  as  ]?ei  senden  ensaumples  of  synne  to  here  sugetis 
&  to  men  ]?at  comen  after  hem.  and  ysidre  &  ]?e  lawe  sei]?  ]?at 
he  ]?at  consenti]?  &  fauoure]?  a  man  in  synne  schal  be  reproued 
hi  most  greuous  reprofe.  &  austyn  sei]?  in  ]?e  lawe,  \at  a 
hischop  ]?(^t  consent!]?  to  o]?er  menn^^s  sywnes  schulde  ra]?^re 
he  clepid  an  vnchastised  hound  ]?an  a  hischop,  &  in  token  of 
]?is  crist  purged  ]?e  temple  &  noon  o]?ere  place  hi  vengauwce 
bodily  take  in  his  owene  p(9rsone.  &  gregory  &  o]?ere  seyntis 
seyn  ]?at  euele  pr^stis  ben  cause  of  synne  of  ]?e  peple.  perfore 
men  schulden  most  ponysche  ]?is  most  synne  of  pr^latis  & 
religious  ]7at  is  cause  of  o]?ere  &  of  distraction  of  rewmes. 
Also  must  sei]?  in  pe  gospel  pat  false  prophetis  &  false  cristis 
schullen  ryse  &  disceyue  manye,  &  biddi]?  vs  be  war  of  hem  & 
flee  hem  &  knowe  hem  hi  here  werkis,  &  telli]?  what  condi- 
cions  &  werkis  pat  pei  schullen  haue.  panne  pf  pri^stis 
knowen  ]?es  false  an^/cristis  &  false  prophetis  hi  tokenes  of 
goddis  lawe  &  warne  not  pe  peple  of  hem,  pei  hen  giltif  of 
loos  of  cristene  soulis.  Also  ion  pe  eu^wngelist  sei]? :  pf  ony 
man  see  his  ’bxoper  haue  nede  &  schitte  his  purs  &  m^rcy  fro 
hym,  charite  dwell!]?  not  in  hym ;  moche  more  pf  pr(?stis 
knowen-  pat  mennws  soulis  ben  in  myschief  of  fals  bileue 
broujt  in  hi  an^^cristis  clerkis,  ]?ei  ben  out  of  charite  hut  pf 
]?ei  helpen  hem  out  of  ]’is  myschief^  sip  pis  ^  is  most  myschief 
in  pis  world.  &  pi^rfore  crist  seip  ^  in  pe  gospel  jif  it  he 
m^rcy  to  helpe  a  beste  falle  in  pe  lake,  moche  more  raerej  is 


1  omitted  X. 


2  &  X. 


2  omitted  X. 


^  omitted  AA. 


Chap.  IV.] 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


273 


it  to  drawe  mennws  soulis  out  of  errour  &  peril  of  soule ;  .}at 
is  disceit  in  bileue  brou^t  in  bi  coueitouse  clerkis  &  luciferis 
children,  but  an^«.’cristis  prelatis  &  veyn  religious  seyn  hat  wicked  prelates 

.7  0.//  ga^y  ^g  ’^vrj.ong  to 

it  is  aienst  charite  to  nemne  hem  bi  name  in  open  sermon  &  against 

‘  -L  them  by  name. 

in  here  absence,  trewe  men  seyn  here  hat  ihu  crist  reproued  Example  of 

Ctirist. 

scribis  &  pharisees  bi  name  &  in  here  absence,  as  he  gospel  Matt.  xxiu. 
witnessi]?  in  many  placis,  &  ei]te  tymes  bi  name  cursed  hem 
&  cleped  hem  ypocritis,  &  telde^  to  Jte  comune  peple  here 
^'false  coueitise,  ypocrisie  &  pride.  &  ihu  clepid  herode  a  fox  ♦[p.  220 ms.] 
in  his  absence  &  in  his  presence  spak  no  word  to  him,  as  Luke  xxiu.  8, 9. 
diuerse  gospellis  seyn.  &  ut  an^mristis  clerkis  tellen  false  Antichrist’s 

priests  slander 

lesyngis  in  open  sermons  vpon  certeyn  personys  &  in  here  certain  persons 
absence,  so  jtei  don  opewly  ajenst  here  owene  techywge ;  but 
an^mrist  wolde  haue  ]?is  ende,  'pat  in  absence  of  his  cursed 
worldly  prelatis  &  heretikis  men  schulden  not  reproue  here 
cursed  sywnes  for  drede  of  lesyngis  of  charite  &  for  bacbitynge. 

&  an^/crist  make]?  hem  so  my^tty  pat  in  here  presence  no  man 
dar  speke  ajenst  here  opyn  synnes  but  pf  he  wole  be  dede 
anoon.  And  so  an^mrist  wolde  hat  no  man  schulde  speke  Antichrist  would 

fain  shut  his  re- 

a^enst  here  synne  in  no  manere,  but  suffre  hem^  to  robbe  pe  provers’ mouths. 

peple  &  brynge  in  heresies  &  distroie  cristen-dom.  But  0 

principal  cause  is  whi  jtei  sey  ]?us ;  pf  it  be  charite  to  crie 

]?us  ajenst  synnys  of  worldly  prelatis  &  veyn  religious,  si]? 

many  of  hem  ben  kuwnywge  &  reulen  lordis  &  prelatis  & 

my^tty  men  in  confession,  hei  mostew  warne  hem  pat  clerkis  They  fear  lest 

■*  1  /  men’s  eyes  should 

schulde;^  lyue  in  pouert  &  mekenesse,  &  hot  in  worldly  be  opened  to 
,  ,  ,  ^  ^  their  sins. 

lordischipis  ne  in  por^pe  &  vanyte  as  pei  now  don ;  &  warne 
lordis  pat  pei  amende  wickid  clerkis  of  here  opyn  symonye  & 
robbynge  of  here  tenauntis ;  &  warne  lordis  &  comyns  hou 
god  curse]?  to  blissyngis  &  preieris  of  men  of  cursed  lif,  &  J’at 
here  preiere  turne  in-to  sywne,  as  god  hym  self  &  gregory  & 
pe  lawe  witnessen,  &  hou  pr^stis  &  religious  pat  ben  out  of 
charite  &  lyuen  apnst  goddis  comau^^dementis,  as  in  glotonye, 
dronkenesse  &  enemyte  &  pride,  stiren  god  bi  here  veyn 


^  telle  X.  2  omitted  X. 


18 


274 


HOW  SATAN  AND  HIS  PRIESTS. 


[Chap.  IV. 


Austin. 


Who  liveth  best 
praye^th  best. 


AntiQbrist’s 
clerks  fear  to  lose 
their  riches. 


*  [p.  221  MS.] 


preiynge  to  vengauwce  m]>ere  ]iaii  m^rcy.  &  as  austyn  sei]?, 
whateu^re  heryyngis  of  god  here  touwge  blabere  here  lif 
blaspheme]?  god ;  &  as  god  seij?  him  self  here  preynge  is 
cursed  &  abhomynable.  &  c^rtis  J?aiine  schulde  lordis  knowe 
ypocHsie,  heresie  &  disceit  of  worldly  priglatis  &  feyned 
religious ;  &  jiawne  schulden  cristene  men  wite  who  Qnere 
lyue]?  best  preie]?  best ;  &  a  symple  paW  noster  of  a  ploujman 
j>3it  his  in  charite  is  betre  ]?an  a  jiousand  massis  of  coueitouse 
pr(0latis  &  veyn  religious  fuP  of  coueitise  &  pride  &  fals 
flaterynge  &  norischywge  of  synne.  And  for  ]?es  an^Aristis 
clerkis  louen  more  here  owene  heynesse  &  pride  &  worldly 
ioie  &  welfare  ]?an  cristis  honour  &  virtuous  lif  of  cristene 
peple,  J?er-fore  ]?ei  ratellen  ]?at  it  is  a^enst  charite  to  tellen 
opynly  here  cursed  disceitis  &  synnes  I  last  lordis  &  comyns 
taken  fro  hem  here  wast  worldly  goodis,  &  constreynen  hem 
to  kepe  mekenesse  &  pou^rt  &  pe?^naunce,  as  god  techij?  & 
here  owene  profession.  ])us  almy^tty  god  in  trinyte  distroiej? 
J?es  ]7re  nestis  of  an^Arist  &  his  clerkis,  &  stire]?  alle  manere 
of  men  to  meyntene  ]?e  treuj^e  of  holy  writt  &  distroie  lesyngis 
&  openly  preche  ajenst  ypocrisie,  heresie  &  coueitise,  bo]?e  in 
word  &  dede,  of  alle  euyl  prolatis  &  prostis  &  peyntid  reli¬ 
gious  ;  for  ]7an  schal  goode  lif  &  treuj^e  &  pees  &  charite 
regne  among  cristene  men.  Ihosu  crist  for  ]?in  endeles  morcy 
graunte  vs  J?is  ende.  Amen. 


^  omitted  AA. 


275 


XIX. 

OF  POOR  PREACHIXa  PRIESTS. 


I  GIVE  this  title  for  want  of  a  better,  but  the  tract  has  no  heading  in  the 
MS.  It  is  a  summary  of  the  wishes  of  the  writer  as  to  reform  in  Church 
and  State ;  the  first  thirteen  points  of  the  poor  priests  relating  to  the 
clergy,  and  the  eighteen  which  follow  (and  which  might  almost  he  taken 
as  a  separate  tract),  having  reference  to  the  duties  of  secular  rulers. 

I  am  inclined  to  date  it  1377.  The  first  year  of  a  new  reign  would  be 
a  suitable  time  for  the  issue  of  a  programme  such  as  this ;  and  there  is  a 
stronger  ground  for  the  supposition  in  the  correspondence  of  several 
‘points’  with  petitions  of  the  Commons  in  Richard’s  first  Parliament. 
The  tract  certainly  belongs  to  the  fourteenth  century.  The  desire  that 
no  priest  or  religious  should  be  prisoned  without  open  doom  (p.  279) 
marks  a  time  when  no  Act  of  Parliament  had  sanctioned  the  burning  of 
heretics,  but  when  the  bishops,  alarmed  at  the  spread  of  heresy,  were 
taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands. 

I  can  give  no  decided  opinion  as  authorship,  but  all  the  points  are 
within  the  scope  of  Wyclif’s  teaching. 

The  tract  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  Corpus  MS.  X. 


I 


276 


OF  POOR  PREACHING  PRIESTS. 


Of  poor  preacliing  Priests. 


*[p.  234  MS.]  ^'pe  first  general  poynt  of  pore  pr^stis  hat  pr^clien  in  engelond 

Three  general  ^  ^ 

points^of  poor  is  ]?is ;  ]pat  ])e  lawe  of  god  be  wel  knowen,  taujt,  meyntened, 
priests.  magnyfied.  ^  pe  secu?^de  ]?at  pe  grete  opyn  synne  pat  regne]? 

in  diu^rse  statis  be  distroied,  &  also  beresie  &  ypocrisie  of 
an^«cnstis  &  his  folweris.  ^  pe  ]7ridde  pat  verrey  pees,  pros- 
p(?rite  &  brennywge  charite  be  encresed  in  cristendom,  & 
namely  in  pe  rewme  of  engelond,  for  to  bry^ge  [men]  redily 
Special  points,  to  be  blisse  of  heuene.  %  pe  first  special  poynt  is  Ms,  bat 

1. ThatChristians  /  ‘'f  ^  /  •' 

and  the  clergy  cnstene  men,  &  namely  clerkis  of  scole  &  curatis,  studie,  kepe, 

should  set  holy 

writahovealihu-  teche,  &  meyntene  holy  writt  more  ban  newe  statu tis,  cus- 

man  authorities.  ^  j  j 

2.  That  all  classes  tomes  &  srerlymonyes  maad  of  synful  men.  Pe  secuwde,  pat 

live  m  their  own  l.  j.^  j  ii  j-  ■/ 

*=[p.  235  MS.]  he  ordynauwce  of  ihu  crist  be  stedfastly  ^'kept  in  alle  degres, 

01  lii0  diS 

Christ  ordained.  gQ  clerkis  lyue  clenly  on  spiritualte,  as  crist  &  his 

apostlis  deden,  &  ^euynge  ensaumple  of  mekenesse,  pacience 
&  heuenly  lif  &  charite ;  &  pat  alle  seculer  lordischipis  twrne 
dene  to  seculer  lordis,  as  god  biddi]?  in  pe  olde  testament  & 
newe,  &  pat  J^ei  don  ri^twisnesse,  mercy  &  pite,  &  rijtly 
gouerne  pe  comouws  in  reste,  pees  &  charite,  iuste  customes, 
[&]  resonable  rentis  to  here  lordis  &  maistris;  &  pat  pe  comyns 

3.  Thatthe  order  wilfully,  mekely  &  trewely  do  here  seruyce.  ^pe  ]7ridde,  pdX 

of  priesthood  be 

set  above  all  be  ordre  of  presthod  wib  clennest  reulis  of  cristis  gospel  be 
holden  [&]  meyntened  boj^e  perfiter  &  esier  &  sikerer  ]7an  ony 
newe  [ordre]  ^  or  secte  wij?  bilawis,  customes,  obseruau^cis 
founden  of  synful  men,  pat  ofte  erreden  in  jjou^t,  worde  & 

bedesteVe™^^^  dede.  ^po  filpe,  pat  cursed  heresie  of  symonye  in  j^e  clergie 
be  distroied  boj^e  in  benefices,  ordris,  sacr^mentis  &  pardons. 

t4ns^of^pre^ates  ^  fifte,  pd,t  pe  raueyne  &  extorcion  of  prdatis  &  here 
he  stopped.  officeris,  j^at  i'ei  don  vnder  colour  of  iuridiccon  &  alraes  in 
meyntenynge  of  synne  for  annuel  rente,  wisly  &  trewely  be 
stoppid,  &  J7at  J?ei  be  wel  chastised  for  robbynge  of  pe  kyngis 
hold  ^no  sec^ar  men.  ^  pe  sixte,  pat  curatis  ben  not  occupied  in  worldly 

offices. 

1  Not  in  MS.,  but  some  sucb  word  is  evidently  wanted. 


OF  POOR  PREACHING  PRIESTS. 


277 


office  in  lordis  courtis,  leuynge  cnstene  soules  vngouerned 

&  vntaujt,  for  bo]?e  J^e  lord  &  clerk  don  gret  traiterie 

to  god  &  his  peple ;  &  \at  fals  cowfessonres  \at  norischen 

men  in  synne  for  worldly  worschipe,  worldly  wynny?^ge, 

welfare  &  ese,  be  hurled  out  of  office  &  courtis  for  drede  of 

schedywge  of  worldly  venyme.  ^  pe  seuenj^e,  \at  clerkis  be  ^g'^ubjecnoThe 

meke  &  obeschauwt  to  worldly  lordis,  as  cnst  &  his  apostlis  rulers. 

weren,  &  be  not  norischid  in  grete  synne  by  an^mristis 

exempcion,  leste  cnstene  rewmes  be  distroied  for  suffrauwce 

&  meynteny^ge  of  cwrsed  synnes.  ^pe  eijtebe,  \>ai  cnstene  8.  Thatmencare 

men  drede  more  be  riatful  cwrsYna:e  of  god  for  brekynge  of  curse  than  for  ex- 
.  _  /  /  j  o  D  communication, 

his  hestis  j^en  wrongful  cursynge  of  synful  men,  ]>at  cursen 
men  for  trewe  prechynge  of  ]?e  gospel  &  fulfillynge  of  ]>& 
werkis  of  mercy;  for  god  blisseb  where  bei  cursen.  ^pe  g.Thatfirstfmits 

.  and  wrongful 

nyn|»e,  pat  pore  men  of  pe  rewme  be  not  robbid  for  symonye  fees  be  no  more 

of  pe  firste  fruytis  bi  pe  bischop  of  rome,  ne  bi  pe  bischepis  at 

horn  for  halowynge  of  chirchis  &  auteris,  &  prouyng  of  testa- 

mentis  &  aqw^tauwcis.  ^  pe  tenjie,  pat  cristene  men  jeue  more  lo.  That  Christ’s 

credence  to  cristis  gospel  &  his  lif  J^an  to  ony  bullis  of  synful  abovf  biuis. 

bischopis  of  ]iis  world,  or  ellis  pei  forsaken  crist  and  taken 

an^^cnst  &  sathanas  for  here  chief  gouernour.  Pe  elleuenbe,  ii.  That  usury 

be  stopped. 

pat  ]?e  sotil  vsure  of  riche  clerkis  &  marchauwdes  be  hurled 
out  of  lond,  &  borwyng  &  lynynge  be  frely  don  to  pore  men 
for  goddis  sake,  ^pe  twelffe,  pat  no  lege  man  of  oure  kyng  12.  That  men  be 

^  X*  1  i?  1  i-  1  T  •'1  I  •  not  iinprisoncd 

prisoned  lor  wrongrui  cursynge  oi  pr^iat,  pe  wniie  ne  is  ^[p.  236  ms.] 

redy  to  be  iustified  bi  holy  writt  &  trewely  don  his  office,  ^co^mmunicatef 

^pe  brittenbe,  bd;t  who  euere  dob  most  symonye  &  meynteneb  is.  That  simony 

be  held  as  heresy . 

most  synne  be  demed,  knowen  &  tretid  most  heretik,  most 
aduersarie  of  ihu  crist  &  principal  an^^crist.  ^^if  ony  mm 
kan  proue  bi  holy  writt  or  resow  pat  J^es  poyntis  ben  false, 
pore  pr^stis  wolen  mekely  ben  amendid,  &  hertely  preien  alle 
goode  men  to  helpe  hem  in  here  trewe  cause  for  worschipe  of 
god,  hel|»e  of  here  soulis,  &  saluacion  of  cristene  rewmes. 

^  pes  ben  eijtene  poyntis  to  distroie  grete  wrongis  &  synnes  by^^wMch^'^^the 
&  strengjie  pe  pees  &  charite  in  oure  lond,  pf  J^e  kyng,  lordis  strengEed. 

&  comyns  wolen  prdtctise  hem  wel. 


278 


OF  POOR  PREACHING  PRIESTS. 


1,  Swearing  to  be 
repressed. 


2.  False  witnesses, 
and  those  who 
suborn  them,  to 
he  punished. 


3.  Maintaining  of 
false  causes  to  be 
repressed. 


4.  Kidnapping  of 
children  by  friars 
to  be  punished. 


5.  Friars  not  to  be 
allowed  to  beg. 


*[p.  237  MS.] 


6,  Disguised 
amortisement  of 
land  to  be  in¬ 
quired  into. 


jbe  grete  blasphemye  of  goddis  name  in  veyn  & 
fals  swerynge  &  vnlefully  creaturis,  as  bi  cristis  woundes, 
nayles  &  o\ere  membris,  be  refreyned  bi  drede  of  peynes 
sett  bi  kyng,  lordis  &  comouwte  of  cristene  peple,  lest 
god  take  grete  vengau77ce  on  onre  peple,  boj^e  in  ]7is 
wor[l]d  &  in  J^e  to\er.  ^pat  falsse  witnesse  in  assises 
&  o\erQi  causes,  ]7at  forsweren  liew  for  coueitise,  loue  or 
drede  or  hate,  &  alle  fat  procuren  hem  f^r-to,  ben  opynly 
ponyschid  in  ensaumple  of  of^re ;  for  ellis  schal  no  man 
meyntene  his  heritage,  goodis  or  lif  for  multitude  of  false 
questis.  ^pat  meyntenowrs  of  false  causes  bi  strengfe  or 
lordischipe  or  bi  sotel  cauillacions  feyned  on  f  e  lawe  be  wisly 
refreyned  &  scharply  ponyschid  in  cure  lond ;  for  ellis  no  pore 
man  schal  ben  hardy  to  chalenge  his  owene  goodis,  neif^r 
riche  man  but  ^if  he  wole  make  opyn  debate  or  werre;  or 
ellis  treufe,  pees  &  charite  schullen  be  exilid,  &  wrong  & 
mansleyng,  fefte  &  werre  be  hauntid,  til  oure  lond  be  con- 
querid  bi  enemys  or  hef  ene  men,  as  it  haf  ofte  ben  bi-fore  fis 
tyme.  1[pat  fe  open  fefte  of  mennws  children  fat  feyned 
religious  vsen  vnder  colour  of  holynesse  be  scharply  ponyschid 
&  forbeden,  for  bi  fis  many  children  ben  deppere  dampned 
fan  f ei  schulden  ellis ;  &  f ei  may  not  worschipe  here  eldris  as 
god  biddif  ne  vsen  f  e  fredom  of  cristis  gospel ;  for  whawne  f  ei 
bef  stolen  awey  fro  here  eldris,  ^e  wif-mne  age  of  discrecion, 
f  ei  schul  not  forsake  f  e  habit  of  freris  for  drede  of  prisonynge 
&  def ,  f  ou^  it  be  agens  here  wille  &  conscience  ;  &  f  ou^  here 
frendis  seke  neu^re  so  faste  f  ei  schullen  not  fynde  hem,  so  f  ei 
schul  be  led  fro  place  to  place.  ^  pat  pore  tenauntis  of  oure 
lond  be  not  robbid  bi  fe  gredy  &  nedles  beggeris  of  sotel 
ypocritis  hauynge  f  e  name  of  religiouse  men,  &  f  «jt  ihu  crist 
be  not  sclauMred  her  by  a^Fermy7^ge  ’^'fat  he  beggede  nedely 
fro  hous  to  hous,  as  feyned  religiouse  vsen  nowe ;  sif  holy 
writt  forbedif  siche  beggynge,  f  ou^  summe  beggen  myjte  be 
suffrid  in  tyme  of  grete  node.  ^  pat  f  e  sotil  amortasywge  of 
seculer  lordischipis  fat  is  don  bi  menene  hondis  in  fraude  of 


OF  POOR  PREACHING  PRIESTS. 


279 


fe  kyngis  statute  be  visely  ^  enquyred,  &  fe  goodis  twrned  \n 
belpe  of  ]>e  rewme  \n  sparynge  of  ]>e  pore  comons  of  taxes. 

^  _pat  be  almes  of  lordis  ?ouen  to  ^reloHs  &  religious,  vp  c^rteyn  r.Misuseofchari- 

.  table  foundations 

condicions  to  fede  Cdrteyn  pore  men  &  o\er  bospitalite  &  to  be  amended, 
cdrteyn  noumber  of  good  prdstis,  be  wisly  amendid  bi  ]?e  kyng 
&  lordis  wbawne  J^es  goodis  be]?  twrned  in-to  pompe,  glotonye 
&  lecherie  &  meyntenynge  false  purchases;  for  fe  kyng  & 
lordis  ben  patrons  &  meyntenours  of  many  sy?^nes  to  dis¬ 
traction  of  be  lond.  Pat  be  Pore  comons  be'  not  chargid  wib  8.  The  super- 

^  11  r  /  Jr  ^  ^  X  fluoug  -vvrealth  of 

taxis,  be  while  clerkis,  &  namely  religiouse,  han  sup^rfluyte 

of  riches  of  gold  &  siluer  &  riche  vesselis  &  ob^re  iewelis ;  i^eiief  of  taxation. 

sib  alle  bes  goodis  ben  pore  mennws  goodis,  &  clerkis  ben  not 

lordis  of  hem  but  proctours,  to  spende  hem  trewely  in  pore 

mennws  nedis,  as  goddis  lawe  &  mannys  witnessen.  5f 

wast  tresour  hanged  on  stockis  &  stones  be  wisly  spendid  in  9.  The  treasure 

of  shrines  and 

defence  of  be  rewme,  &  releuynge  of  be  pore  comou?^s ;  b^t  images  to  be 

be  peple  of  oure  lond  be  not  brou^t  to  maumetrie,  ne  befte,  ne  purposes. 

lecherie  meyntened  vnddr  siche  pilgrimage,  ne  almes  drawen 

fro  pore  nedy  men  bou3t  wib  cristis  precious  blood.  5[pat  be  lo.  The  clergy  to 
^  ll.r/|^g  kept  to  their 

clergie  of  oure  londe  be  refreyned  fro  pride,  glorious  array  &  ’«^ork. 
worldly  occupacion,  &  namely  oure  pr^latis  &  curatis ;  arn  ^ 
chargid  hi  fe  kyng  &  lordis  to  teche  wel  here  sugetis  hi 
ensaumple  of  good  lif  &  opyn  &  trewe  pr^chynge  of  be  gospel, 
as  bisily  &  redily  as  bei  asken  here  tibes.  51 The  clergy  to 
clergie  be  lettid  to  kepe  trewely  &  frely  be  gospel  of  ihu  crist  keep  and  teach 
in  good  lyuywge  &  trewe  techynge,  for  no  feyned  priuelegie 
or  tradicions  founden  vp  of  synful  wrecchis.  51  Pat  no  pr(9st  or  12.  No  priest  to 

be  imprisoned 

religious  in  oure  lond  be  prisoned  wib-oten  opyn  dom  &  trewe  without  open 

^  /  Jrj  ^  judgment. 

cause,  fully  knowen  to  oure  kyng  or  his  trewe  conseil ;  for 
ellis  worldly  pr^stis  &  feyned  religious  may  stoppe  trewe  men 
from  pr^chynge  of  holy  writt  &  magnyfyhg  of  'pe  kyngis 
regalie,  &  murbere  pe,  kyngis  lege  men  wib-outew  answere. 

51  pat  pe  obedience  of  children  to  fader  &  to  modir  &  of  ^3.  obedience  of 
S(?ruau?^tis  &  tenauwtis  to  here  lordis  &  maistris,  be  whiche  servants  to  be 

'  •*  preached. 


^  ?  bisily;  or,  perhaps,  for  avisely  =  carefully. 


2  Fand 


280 


OF  POOR  PREACHING  PRIESTS. 


»[p.  238  MS.] 


14.  Market?  and 
fairs  not  to  be 
held  on  Sunday 
nor  in  church. 


15.  Adultery  not 
t  o  be  compounded 
for. 

16.  Sanctuary  not 
to  be  abused. 


1 7.  The  clergy 
not  to  usurp  the 
king’s  rights. 


18.  The  king  and 
his  lords  to  follow 
God’s  law. 


obedience  crist  vsed  &  tanjtte  &  comauwdid  it  ^  be  magnyfied 
&  pr(9chid  more  }an  ony  newe  feyned  obedience  fon7^den  of 
synful  men,  ]7e  whiche  obedience  neiji^r  crist  ne  bis  "^apostlis 
deden  ne  taujten  ne  comauwden  ne  conseileden  opynly  j?er-to, 
^  ]?at  chepynge,  &  namely  feiris,  be  not  vsed  on  balidaies, 
&  algatis  on  ]7e  Sunday  &  in  holy  chirche,  for  j^at  is  expr^sly 
a^enst  goddis  comau7^dement  &  comon^  lawe  of  holy  chirche. 
^  pat  open  lecherie  &  avoutrie  be  not  sulfrid  in  grete  placis  in 
oure  rewme,  ne  meyntened  for  annual  rente,  for  fat  is  vterly 
a^enst  goddis  biddynge.  ^  pat  fefte  &  raueynen  &  mansleyng 
&  robberie  be  not  meyntened  in  seyntiwarye  vnd^r  colour  of 
priuylegie ;  sif  kyng  &  cristene  men  ben  sworen  to  meynten 
eche  man  in  his  rijt  &  distroie  wrong  &  falsenesse.  ^pat 
worldly  clerkis  &  feyned  religious  vsurpen  not  fe  kyngis 
regalie,  ne  stelle  fro  hym  his  holy  power  grauwted  of  god  for 
no  criynge  or  ypocrisie ;  sif  f ei  ben  sworn  to  be  trewe  to  fe 
kyng  &  furfere  his  worschipe  &  profit  of  his  lond.  ^  pat  f e 
kyng  &  lordis  gou^rne  hem  self  in  here  astaat  as  god  ordeyned 
it,  in  gret  wisdom,  my^t  of  men  &  sufficient  riches  to  ajen- 
stonde  wrong  &  mysdoeris,  &  helpe  pore  men,  fadirles  & 
modirles  &  widewes  &  aliens  in  here  lordischipe  &  worschipe, 
&  reward e  trewe  men,  to  reule  clerkis  in  mekenesse,  wilful 
pou^rt  &  bisynesse  of  gostly  trt?ueile  for  helpe  ofimawnys 
soule,  as  crist  &  his  apostlis  diden,  and  suffre  hem  not  to 
haunten  an^^cristis  ypocrisie  &  tirauntrie  of  fe  comoni^s  bi 
feyned  censures,  iurisdiction  &  power  of  prisonynge.  &  fat 
fei  reule  here  s^ruauwtis  &  tenauwtis  in  rijt  mercy,  pees  & 
charite,  &  suffre  no  man  hardy  to  broke  goddis  hestis  in  here* 
presence,  ne  ony  man  don  wrong  or  dispit  to  ofere,  but  in 
alle  in  worschipe  of  eche  ofere  in  vnyte,  pees  &  charite. 


^  MS.  inserts  to.  Perhaps  the  sentence  should  be  corrected  by  repeat¬ 
ing  “  be  magnyfied  &  prechid.”  2  lierte  MS. 


AUGUSTINUS. 


281 


XX. 


[This  fly-sheet  is  merely  a  piece  of  translation,  and  is  only  printed  for  the  sake  of 
completeness.  Copied  from  the  Corpus  MS.  X.] 


Augustim^s.  Arguam  te  nescis. 

pe  holy  doctour  seynt  austyn  spekyng  in  ]?e  persone  of  crist 
vnto  synful  men  sei]?  \n  ^is  wise :  I  schal  reproue  ^e,  &  \n 
what  manure  &  whanne  ]7on  wenest  not  I  schal  reproue  ^e. 

I  holde  me  stille  whawne  J^ou  dost  amys;  hut  I  wole  not 
holde  me  stille  wij?  my  iugement,  I  schal  reproue  j^e.  what 
schal  I  don  vnto  J^e  whawne  j^at  I  reproue  ]7e  ?  I  schal  sette 
lin  self  hifore  J^in  owene  face.  ^Xow  so^ly  whawne  Jjou  dost 
amys  ]70u  wenest  \at  ^ou  art  good,  for  ]70u  wilte  not  seen  j?! 
self,  pou  reprouest  o\er  folk,  J70U  ne  lookest  not  on  ]?i  self ; 

J70U  acusest  o]>er  folk,  but  ]70U  ne  j^enkest  not  on  J^i  self ;  ]70u 

puttest  o]7or  folk  biforn  J^in  eien,  Jjou  puttest  ]7i  self  bihinde 

])i  bake,  but  whawne  I  reproue  j^e  I  do  ])e  contrarie.  I  take 

J?e  fro  ]>i  bak,  &  putte  ]7e  bi-for  ]7in  owene  eien.  pou  schalt 

loke  vpon  self  &  j^ou  schalt  bewayle  j^i  self,  &  ^an  schal 

lore  '^ben  no  manere  hou  J^ou  schalt  amende  ^i  self,  pou  *[p.  239  ms.] 

dispisest  now  ^e  tyme  of  morcy,  j^e  tyme  of  iugement  come]? ; 

for  lou  hast  songen  to  me  in  holy  chircbe  j^es  wordes : 

M^sor^oor^?iam  et  iudicmm  cantabo  tibi  domine  etc.  ^  Lord  I 

schal  synge  to  ]>e  Jji  morcy,  &  ^i  iugement  out  of  oure  mouj? 

cornel,  &  cristis  chirchis  proclay  men  euore  where  cristis  morcy 

&  eke  his  iugement  &c.  I^ow  is  le  tyme  of  morcy  to  amende 

vs.  ^it  is  not  come  le  tyme  of  iugement.  we  ban  space,  we 

ban  place,  we  don  synne,  eke  amende  we  oure  giltis. 


282 


XXI. 


OF  DOMINION. 


Dk.  Shielet  retains  Bale’s  title  of  this  tract,  De  Dominio  Divino,” 
while  saying  “it  is  certainly  erroneous.”  I  have  preferred  to  keep  near 
to  the  old  name,  which  after  all  is  not  very  wrong.  It  is  true  that  the 
chief  subject  of  the  tract  is  the  wrongfulness  of  Church  endowments,  and 
of  the  clergy’s  exemption  from  secular  jurisdiction,  but  the  ground  of  the 
argument  is  that  dominion  (whether  possession  or  jurisdiction)  is  set  by 
God  in  the  hand  of  lay  rulers,  who  may  not  alienate  it  without  his  leave. 
We  see  here  how  the  doctrine  of  dominion  bore  on  that  of  the  unlawful¬ 
ness  of  endowments. 

I  fancy  that  I  see  here  signs  of  translation  from  the  Latin.  However 
this  may  be,  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  tract  is  substantially  Wyclif’s.  I  can 
find  no  evidence  as  to  date. 

Copied  from. the  Dublin  MS.  AA.,  where  only  it  is  found. 


Summary. 

Chap.  I.  It  was  ordained  in  the  old  law  that  priests  should  live  of  tithes  and 
offerings.  It  is  said  that  this  law  has  passed  away,  and  that  lords 
would  not  he  free  if  they  might  not  give  away  their  property  in 
endowment . p.  284 

God  is  chief  lord  of  all  property,  which  therefore  cannot  he  alienated 
without  his  leave,  and  he  has  forbidden  in  both  testaments  the 
endowment  of  the  clergy  .  284 

This  prohibition  is  moral,  and  has  not  been  repealed,  having  as 
much  sanction  as  the  command  to  give  tithes  to  the  priesthood, 
which  the  clergy  enforce  .  285 

Evils  which  follow  the  reversal  of  God’s  law.  Lay  lords  are  bound  to 

amend  these  evils,  and  their  confessors  should  urge  them  to  do  so  286 

II.  The  commands  of  Scripture  clear.  Examples  set  by  Christ  and  his 

Apostles  . .  286 

The  advocates  of  endowments  appeal  to  charters,  which  can  have 

no  weight  against  God’s  law  .  287 

The  Pope’s  cursing  not  to  he  regarded.  This  thunder  curseth  the 
well  that  it  comes  from  . 


288 


283 


Miracles  and  the  example  of  saints  are  insufficient  sanctions. 


Miracles  may  be  the  devil’s  work,  and  all  are  not  saints  that  are 
called  so  . p.  288 

God’s  law  is  the  only  safe  guide,  and  this  forbids  possession  to  the 
clergy,  who  should  be  near  to  Christ  in  poverty .  289 

[II.  Antichrist’s  clerks  say  that  the  clergy  should  be  judged  only  by 
ecclesiastical  judges ;  hut  every  man  must  judge  his  neighbour, 
and  the  only  judgment  that  God  forbids  is  foolish  judgment  .  289 

Judgment  may  be  foolish,  as  ignorant,  hasty,  or  founded  on  wrong 
principles  .  290 

God  has  given  men  their  senses  and  their  conscience  to  judge  with, 
and  if  they  do  not  use  these  they  are  no  better  than  beasts  ;  but 
the  devil  would  like  to  make  them  judge  blindfold,  as  the  Jews 
did  with  Christ  .  291 

IV.  The  devil  says  that  God  forbids  men  to  judge  their  brethren  .  291 

Christ  bade  the  Jews  judge  him,  which  he  would  not  have  done  if 
laymen  might  not  judge  clerks  .  291 

Prelates  should  be  thankful  to  those  that  reprove  them  .  292 

Duty  of  bearing  God’s  chastisements  .  293 


1 


284 


OF  DOMINION. 


[Chap.  I. 


[Of  Dominion.] 


Capitulum  primum, 

■^Si]?  many  falce  gloseris  maken  goddis  lawe  derk  &  letten 

seculere  men  to  snsteyne  it  &  kepew  it ;  of  siche  falce  gloseris 

schulde  ech  man  be  war.  it  is  seid  ofte  tyme,  in  oolde  lawe, 

]7at  pr^stis  &  clerkis  scbulde  lyue  on  goddis  part ;  I’at  is  to 

seie,  on  dymes  &  offeryngis,  &  haue  noon  o^er  heritage  among 

her^  bri]76ren.  but  adu^rsarie  of  goddis  lawe  seij?  her^  bi  his 

glose,  ]?at  j^is  schulde  be  kept  in  ]>e  oolde  testament,  &  is  no 

An  adversary  says  nedo  to  be  kept  in  be  tyme  of  grace,  for  partys  of  be  oolde 
this  law  is  done  .  ~  . 

away.  lawe  beu  nowpassid;  &  but  jif  lordis  my^te  ^eue  her^  heritage 

to  clerkis,  as  bischoppis  &  abbotis  &  oj^^r  holy  housis,  jjei 
were  ynfree  to  helpe  her^  soulis  &  her*?  fadris,  &  so  j^ei  wereJ^ 
no^t  ful  lordis  of  here  owne  goodis.  But  heie  we  schal  sup- 
God  is  chief  lord  pose  as  Cristeu  me?^nes  bileue,  bat  god  is  cheef  lord  of  eche 

of  everything  in  _  ^  ^  ^ 

the  world.  fiug  of  ]?is  world.  And  so,  al  ^if  kyngis  &  oj^^re  han  free 
lordschipe,  nej^eles  god  is  more  free  lord  of  j^at  same  J'iwg,  ne 
Owners  may  not  nou3t  leeful  to  seculere  lordis,  to  alyene^  his  lordschipe 

alienate  their  '  j  j  xr 

possessions  with- leeue  of  god :  as  in  mawnes  lordschipe  a  litil  lord 
out  his  leave,  -<  o  7  jr 

ha]?  no  leeue  to  aliene?^  his  heritage  but  bi  leue  of  ]?e  cheif  lord, 
&  ]7is  lawe  ha]?  mor^  resouw  in  ]?e  lordschipe  of  god.  Heri? 
therefore  endow-  niay  we  se,  sib  lordis  of  bis  world  hadde  nott  leeue  of  god  bus 

ments  made  ^  .  . 

without  his  leave  dowe  his  clerkis,  her^  fool  ^ifte  schulde  nott  stonde  bi  skile: 

should  not  stand.  ’  ‘  ‘ 

sib  god  may  nojt  be  contrarie  to  him  silf.  But  god  ofte  tyme 
^me^ts^^forbids  testamentis  forbedib  his  clerkis 'to  be  bus  dowid  ; 

toe  clergy.^  ^  cautel  of  b©  fend,  schulde  be  now 

broken  for  defaute  of  ground,  ne  grucche  nojt  herfore  ]>at 
god  is  cheif  lord,  for  it  fallib  to  his  godhed  to  be  lord  of  eche 
God  a  courteous  bing,  &  mor(9  curteys  lord  may  no  man  haue,  ne  more  profitable 
lawis  to  lede  a  man  by  resou?^.  for  bis  lord  suffrib  noujt 
*[p.  I88&MS.]  to  leese  good  but  bi  resouw,  "^ne  he  axib  ]>&&  uo  rente  but  for 
bi^  owne  profile ;  &  bus  b®  strewgbe  of  goddis  lawe  axeb 
ajen  bis  lordschipe,  &  fillynge  of  goddis  lawe  b^t  sueb  grace 


*[p.  188  MS.] 


In  the  old  law 
priests  were  to 
live  on  tithes 
and  offerings. 


Chap.  I.] 


OF  DOMINION. 


285 


&  pees,  and  se  lewidnesse  of  ]7is  resouw,  j^at  ]?es  lawis 

han  no  strengj^e  for  ]>ei  hm  of  J^e  oolde  lawe,  }?at  myche  is  Falsity  of  the 

1  ,  ,  1  j-  j?  1  plea  that  these 

went  awey.  certis  so  ben  pe  ten  comauwdementis  oi  pe  laws  are  no 

TT  longer  in  force. 

oolde  lawe,  j^at  ecn  man  mote  kepe  pf  ne  wole  be  saued ;  and 
so  sermonyalis  of  ]>e  oolde  lawe  &  snmme  iudycialis  bynde^ 
nou^t  now,  but  moralis  bynden  euere,  sib  bei  stondew  in  The  moral  com- 

^  ^  .  mandments  of 

V(9rtues.  And  so  forsakynge  of  worldly  richessis  scholde  bi  the  old  law  are 

^  still  binding. 

mor(3  skile  be  kept  now  ]7a^ne  in  j^e  oolde  lawe.  And  herfore 

crist  &  his  apostlis  kepte^  ]iis  ful  streytly,  &  ]7ei  telden  beste 

how  ]7e  lawe  schulde  be  kept,  more-ouer  mew  may  se  j^at 

si]7]7e  ]7es  same  lawis  ben  scharply  holden  in  jiing  j^at  touchi]?  The  laws  are 

wywnynge,  as  iw  dymes  &  offryngis,  by  ]ie  same  skile  }?ei  as  to  exacting 

t/lthlGSj 

schulden  be  kept  iw  lordschipe ;  or  ellis  we  weren  to  myche  they  ought 

^  equally  to  be 

chargid  &  mut  leeue  seruese  of  crist,  bat  he  hab  ordeyned  vs  kept  in  refusing 

®  i  J  ownership. 

to  do.  Also  crist  &  his  apostlis  techew  vs  to  lyue  beter  jiawne 

bes  patrouws  of  bes  newe  ordris ;  &  bei  lyuedew  pore  liif,  &  Christ  and  Ms 

^  ^  ■*  .  apostles  the  best 

fledde  lordschipe  as  venym.  lord,  whi  schulde  not  we  do  so  teachers,  and 

_  they  lived  in 

aftir  ]7ese  holy  patrouws  ?  and  whawne  j^ou  seist  b^t  goddis  poverty. 

lawe  makij?  b®®  lordis  vnfree  to  helpe  hem  wib  her^  owne 

goodis,  bobe  in  body  &  soule,  it  is  knowen  binge  bat  contrwrie 

fallib,  bi  bat  lordis  reuersen  ordeynauwce  of  crist,  &  bus  Lords  reverse 

for  lordis  fooly  fallen  many  harmes  bobe  to  lordis,  clerkis  &  Christ, ^and^Srm 

comunes.  lordis  hew  maked  pore  &  eke  fewe  in  noumbre,  & 

ofte  tymes  b^i  tiew  nedid  to  spoyle  her^  tenauwtis,  &  bi  They  are  im- 

gruccning  ajey^  pei  aisturbiyn  pe  pees ;  and  pis  nedid  nojt  to  spoil  their 

'  teirSfidts 

falle  pf  lordis  of  bis  world  hadden  al  bis  lordschipe  of  bis 

world  iw  her^  hond  ordeyned  wel  ]>erfore.  more  riche 

clerkis  passen  lordis  iw  hous'^'holde  &  meyne,  iw  glorie  of  bis  *[p.  189  ms.] 

world,  iw  power  &  richessis.  And  so  it  may  falle  bat  b^i 

taken  fro  lordis  werris  &  powers  a-proprid  unto  lordis,  for  one  The  clergy  take 

4  •  T  "T*  T*  ii  ^poi^  them  the 

narme  m  goddis  iawe  bryngip  m  opir.  Also  clerkis  bi  work  of  lords. 

symonye  envenemyn  hem  silf,  &  pf  bei  stode  iw  pouert  bei  fel 

nojt  iw  bis  perel.  Also  goodis  of  bis  rewme  hew  yuel  dispendid  Goods  of  the 

in  hondis  of  bes  clerkis  &  ^euew  vnto  false  men,  bobe  vnto  aiiens.^^^^^ 

alienes  &  men  of  bis  lond;  &  so  goodis  of  bis  rewme  ben 

yuel  distryed.  Also  bes  clerkis  bew  herbi  ynabled  to  pme  & 


286 


OF  DOMINION. 


[Chap.  I. 


The  clergy  hin¬ 
dered  from  God’s 
service. 

Jod  ix.  9. 

Disquiet  is 
brought  upon 
the  country. 

Negligence  of 
lords  in  correc¬ 
tion  is  a  kind 
of  consent. 


to  seme  god  as  he  comau;^de]7  hem ;  and  j^is  is  ]?e  moste  harme 
a^ens  god  &  man,  for  J^is  nedi]?  rewmes  to  lyuew  in  werres. 
for  job  seij?  in  his  book,  &  resou7^  approue]?,  j^at  no  man 
reuersi]?  god  but  pf  he  haue  vwpees;  and  so  Jjis  dowynge  a^ens 
goddis  lawe  doi]?  harme  to  lordis  &  clerkis  &  comunys,  bofe 
bodily  harme  &  harme  to  here  soulis,  &  negligent  of  lordis  in 
amendemewt  here-of  is  a  manere  of  consence  &  greggi]?  here 
sywne ;  &  it  harme]?  here  elderis  fat  bigan  f is  errour,  ne  good 
dof  it  noon ;  but  mouef  lordis  to  pride  fat  here  kyn  haf  f us 
fouwdid  housis  of  religiou?^.  and  sif  god  in  his  lawe  cursif 
men  fat  brekew  it,  it  semef  fat  bofe  ben  cursid,  lordis  & 


Confessors  and  clerkis,  and  herfore  confessouris  &  alle  fat  hm  on  goddis  half 

others  should  •* 

law  oTood  schulde  moue  &  maynteyne  f is  lawe  of  oure  god.  &  siffe  f e 
moste  vnfredom  is  vwfredom  of  sywne,  for  fat  makif  a  ma?^ 
seruauwt  to  noujt  &  seruau?^t  to  f  e  fend,  &  dampnef  him  in 
helle,  coueytise  of  fredom  schulde  moue  men  her-to,  and  so 
sywne  bi  his  manere  bryngif  his  doere  into  f e  same  myre  fat 
he  eschewif . 


Qapitulum  2^' 


Laws  of  New 
Testament  so 
clear  that  it  is 
needless  to 
answer  false  in¬ 
terpreters, 


*[p.  189&  MS.] 

who  break  the 
law, 

1  Cor.  xvi.  22. 


and  are  cursed 
of  God. 


Matthew  X.  10. 


The  seuene  lawis  of  f  e  newe  testament  ben  so  open,  &  pere- 
to  confermed  wif  f e  liif  of  crist  &  of  his  apostlis,  fat  it  is  no 
nede  to  reuerse  fes  gloses  fat  feyne?^  to  fes  lawis  a  falce 
vnd^rstondinge,  &  teche;^  clerkis  to  lyue  on  worldly  manure, 
but  fes  religious  seculere  pr^stis,  &  so  many  clerkis,  bi 
brekynge  of  f  is  lawe,  hen  cursid  of  god  &  venemyn  cristendome. 
for  crist  him  silf  techef  bi  word  of  seynt  poul  fat  he  is  cursid 
of  god  fat  louef  no^t  crist ;  but  sif  he  onely  louef  crist  fat 
kepif  his  wordis,  who  euere  brekif  cristis  lawe  is  cursid  of 
god,  and  he  fat  fauorif  f is  part  or  assentif  her^-wif ;  &  his 
cursynge  is  more  fan  cursynge  of  fe  pope,  or  ony  of^re 
sensuris  fat  he  kan  feyne ;  &  so  clerkis  of  f is  lond  semen  ^ 
irreguler^,  for  fei  ha?^  so  longe  leyen  in  so  gret  cursinge. 
Also  in  f e  tyme  of  grace  crist  for-bede  his  apostlis  fat  fei 


^  senen  MS. 


Chap.  II.] 


OF  DOMINION. 


287 


schulde  noujt  ber^  in  J^e  weye  pat  wolde  lette  hem  to  precbe ; 
myche  more  clerkis  schulde  nojt  take  on  hem  such  lordschipe, 
I'at  wolde  lette  more  to  preche  &  to  seme  god ;  si]?  clerkis  ben 
now  more  pore  of  pftis  of  god  &  more  bisi  aboute  pe  world, 
]?awne  to  here  staues  or  kotis  or  hoosis  or  gretynge  of  folke 
pat  crist  forbeed  his  apostlis.  Also  we  schulden  haue  mynde 
on  pe  passion?^  of  crist,  hou  dere  he  bou^te  his  lawe  whawne 
he  was  deed  herfore,  for  al  pat  he  suffride  &  kyndenesse  pat 
he  dide  was  to  comende  his  lawe  to  men  pat  comen  aftir  him. 
0,  how  vnkynde  hen  fei  j^at  dispisen  fis  lawe,  or  for  to  brekew 
it  or  to  pntte  opere  byfore  it.  certis  j?ei  hen  cursid,  as  pe 
salme  sei]?,  and  suche  bew  vnable  to  pme  or  to  ^eue  ony 
sacramentis.  and  pf  pat  heresie  were  wel  knowen,  ]?es  clerkis 
were  heretikis  more  panne  ony  opere ;  for  pei  defenden  here 
part  a^eiies  goddis  lawe  hi  falce  lawis  &  cautels  to  her(3  lyues 
ende.  But  ^it  antecristis  clerkis  prouen  hi  her(9  resouws  pat 
pe  kyng  &  pe  rewme  mote  nede  maynteynen  hem,  si]7]7e  ]?ei 
ben  swore^  to  pe  grete  charite.^  But  here  we  schal  snpposen 
as  cristen  mewnes  bileue,  pat  no  mewnes  lawis  ne  chartirs 
maad  of  men  ban  streng]?e  but  in  as  myche  as  goddis  lawe 
conferme]?  hem ;  for  what  is  ony  chartre  or  ony  lawe  wor]?, 
But  jif  god  conferme  it  by  his  ^'lawe  ?  &  so  j^is  grete  chartre 
wolde  mone  hi  goddis  wytt,  pat  kyngis  &  here  rewmes  schulde 
maynteyne  pe  chirche  by  pe  ordeynannce  of  god,  &  distroie 
pe  contrarie.  and  pf  we  taken  hede  bo]?e  kyngis  &  rewmes 
bi  here  opyn  o]?is  schulden  take  awey  ]7es  rentis  pat  pe  fend 
hap  dowid  wij?  clerkis  a^ens  cristis  ordeynannce.  tfor  no  wise 
man  wolde  seie  pat  lordis  by  here  o]?is  schulde  maynteyne 
lawe  of  pe  fend  a^ens  ihesu  crist ;  and  so  to  chalenge  of  pe 
kyng  to  maynteyne  alle  here  chartres  &  alle  here  newe  lawis 
pat  ]7ei  han  founden  were  to  chalenge  pe  kyng  as.]7e  fendis 
seruannt ;  and  pere  were  onere  myche  dispit  to  here  lyge  lord, 
and  ^if  fon  seie  pat  cursyngis  purchased  of  pe  pope  and 
opere  felle  sensuris  fondured  ouere  til  englond  schulde  fere 
onere  rewme  to  do  siche  fingis;  Here  we  schal  suppose  as 


Christ  forbade 
his  apostles  to 
take  anything 
that  could  hin¬ 
der  them  from 
preaching. 


Luke  X.  4. 


Psalm  cxix.  21 . 
Despisers  of 
Christ’s  law 
accursed,  and 
unable  to  give 
sacraments. 
They  are  the 
worst  heretics. 


Magna  Carta. 

Charters  void  if 
against  God’s 
law. 


*[p.  190  MS.] 

Kings  should 
maintain  the 
Church  after 
God’s  ordi¬ 
nance. 


If  England  is 
threatened  with 
cursing  and  cen¬ 
sures. 


^  Sic  in  MS.  for  chartir. 


288 


OF  DOMINION. 


[Chap.  II. 


cure  bileue  ]?at  no  mannes  cursynge  ba]?  ony  strengj^e  but  in 

as  mycbe  as  god  hiwsilf  cursi]?  ;  and  so  ofte  tyme  cursi]?  ]^e 

we  answer  that  fendis  mynystris,  &  god  "him  silf  blissib  and  be  fend  cursib ; 

God  blesses  when  .  .  ^ 

the  devil  curses,  &  jjou  seie  j^at  moo  men  stonden  wi]?  sicbe  cursynge  |>awne 

wi]?  blissynge  of  god,  &  hem  schulde  we  trowe ;  here  oure 

tnfst  ^^od™af  techi]?  VS  J^at  goddis  lawe  is  trewe  &  mote  stonde,  al  ^if 

though  a  ma-  hgj.0  [jg  mo  fendis  ba?^  trewe  men,  and  triste  to  no  man  in  bis 
•  mater  but  to  goddis  lawe ;  for  j^at  sei]?  god  himsilf,  J^at  may 
neu(9re  be  false. ^  0  how  hardy  be  we  maad  to  werren  on  oure 
briji^ren,  &  how  foule  cowardis  to  stonde  in  goddis  cause,  & 
C(?rtis  all  fis  is  maad  bi  Je  fendis  craft,  drede  we  noujt  J?is 
Curses  settle  at  j7ondir,  for  it  turne]?  a^en  &  cursi]?  ]>e  welle  'pat  it  come  fro. 

ffor  men  stable  in  bileue  ben  a  I’ick  walle  to  turne?^  a^en  jiis 
fondir  pat  it  ^  p^rsif  nojt.  But  pt  ]?ou  seist  J^at  oure  rewme 
stood  in  myche  ioye  wha;^ne  pe  chirche  was  putt  &  mayntened 
*[p.  190JMS.]  in  jiis  staat,  &  so  it  were  ful  dredeful  ^to  distrie  jiis  staat. 

But  certis  jiis  is  a  fendis  skile  to  makew  vs  drede  in  fei]? ; 
but  we  schal  vndirstonde,  as  goddis  lawe  techi]?  us,  j^at  ofte 
Earthly  prosper-  tymes  fendis  childre?^  passen  her(9  in  welbe  be  children  of  god 

ity  not  a  proof  of  ^  ^ 

righteousness.  j,at  aftir  schal  haue  blisse.  &  so  it  is  a  feble  skile  :  pf  oure 

rewme  hadde  suche  welj^e  whawne  b^i  di<3e  &  maynteyned 

suche  staat  to  pe  chirche,  panne  bei  diden  wel  &  plesauwly  to 

god.  make  goddis  lawe  bi  iuge?  for  pat  mote  nedis  be,  &  bis 

iuge  may  nojt  folde  ne  faile  in  ri^twisnesse  ;  and  as  be  gospel 

seib  bis  i^ge  is  adu(5rsarie  to  ech  man  in  erbe  b^-t  holdib  nojt 

goddis  lawe.  But  bou  seist  bat  myraclis  &  lyues  of  holy  men 

approuew  bi®  dowynge  of  be  chirche,  and  god  wib  his  seyntis ; 

who  schulde  be  so  hardy  to  breke  siche  an  ordeynauwce  ? 

But  her^  schulde  we  wyte  bat  many  suche  sygnes  comew  ofte 

of  be  fend*  for  mewnes  firste  sywne  ;  so,  as  seynt  poul  seib,  p& 

fend  hab  power  for  to  figuren  him  in-til  an  auwgel  of  lijt ;  &  so 

he  is  vntrewe  man  bat  trowib  to  siche  signes  as  myche  as  he 

trowib  to  be  feib  of  goddis  lawe.  &  so  it  is  no  bileue  b<^t  alle 

All  are  not  saints  hgg  men  ben  seyntis  bat  ben  hirid  of  be  pope  to  ben  holden 
that  are  canon-  ^  j  j  x  a 

siche;  and  fewe  men  woot  how  bes  wondris  comen  bat  we 
1  faile  MS.  2  is  MS. 


Testimony  of 
miracles  and 
saints  for  en¬ 
dowment. 


2  Cor.  xi.  14. 
The  devil  may 
work  wonders. 


ized. 


Chap.  III.] 


or  DOMINION. 


289 


clepyn  myraclis,  w}ie]7^r  of  good  or  yiiel ;  ffor  well  we  wy ten 
j?at  ]>e  fend  doij?  ofte  myche  good,  stonde  we  stable  in  oure 
bileue,  for  J^at  may  neii^re  faile.  But  j^e  fend  replyej?  apnst 
]7is  trujje,  and  seij?,  j^e  king’s  gram^t  bi  his  owne  chartre  & 
bullis  of  jje  pope  confermed  ]7is  dowynge,  how  schulde  men 
denye  ))is  or  distroie  it,  But  jif  J^ei  reu^rsen  al  j^e  ordynauwce 
of  j^is  rewme  ?  Here  I  woot  ]7at  men  of  lawe  ber^  moued  bi 
siche  resouws.  But  professouris  of  goddis  lawe  schulde  stonde 
by  her^  bileue,  and  putte  abac  mawnes  lawe,  but  jif  goddis 
lawe  ap’^proue  it ;  &  so  ^if  chartris  of  men  bew  contrarie  to 
goddis  lawe,  ]7es  chartres  schulde  be  wayschen  and  goddis 
lawe  schulde  stonde ;  and  so  ^if  j^es  poscessioneris  toke  fre  j^is 
in  her^  lond  and  allegede  here  chartris,  and  trewe  men  goddis 
lawe,  J^awne  schulde  men  se  whiche  were  goddis  children  & 
whiche  ]?e  fendis  children  by  maynteyn[yn]ge  of  ]?es  lawis.  and 
so  j>e  fend  can  noujt  do  but  ^if  he  ouere  do,  wha?^ne  he  argue]? 
]7us,  ]?at  ^if  a  rewme  were  purgid  of  errouris  in  goddis  lawe, 
fanne  were  jjis  rewme  distryed.  wele  I  woot  ]?at  goddis  lawe 
^eue]?  seculer  lordschipis  to  seculer  lordis  &  forbedi]?  hem  to 
clerkis.  j^e  laboureris  of  cristis  chirche  ban  leffully  rentis  & 
worldly  possessiou^s  oj>ere  ]?an  clerkis  han,  ffor  ]7ei  ben  hijere 
in  degree  and  neer  to  crist  in  pou^rte ;  &  bofe  J’es  Jingis  to- 
gidre  may  Jei  nou^t  haue. 


God’s  law  is  the 
only  safe  guide. 


The  devil  pleads 
bulls  and  char¬ 
ters,  and  says  the 
laws  of  the  realm 
will  be  over¬ 
thrown. 


#[p.  191  MS.] 
No  laws  or 
charters  should 
weigh  against 
God’s  law. 


God’s  law  forbids 
possessions  to 
clergy, 


whose  distinction 
should  be  that 
they  are  near 
Christinpoverty. 


Qapitulum  3“* 


But  a^ens  ]?is  blaberen  antecristis  clerkis,  and  aleggen  goddis 
lawe,  but  to  false  sentense,  Jat  seculer  mm  schulde  no^t  iuge  Antichrist’s 

•  clerks  say  that 

or  clerkis,  how  euere  ]?ei  don;  tor  pei  han  prapre  luges,  as  the  clergy  should 
popis  &  bischopis  &  iugis  vndir  hem ;  &  her-to  ]?ei  by  tUS^  proper 

leggen  but  lewydly  goddis  lawe.  Here  schal  we  wite  ]?at 


\erQ  ben  many  iugementis,  as  iugeme^^t  bi  goddis  lawe  and 
iugement  by  ma?^nes  lawe,  &  in  bo]>e  ]?es  lawis  be^  many 


manure  iugementis ;  and  schal  we  trowe  fat  ech  man  of  dis-  Different  kinds 
crecioun  schal  iuge  of  his  neijbore,  be  he  more  or  lesse,  be  he 


prest  or  clerk,  lord  or  ellis  pore  man,  and  so  to  al  f  e  speche 
fat  is  in  goddis  lawe  aloonely  fool  iugement  is  f ^re-inne  for- 


Foolish  judg¬ 
ment  the  only 
one  forbidden, 


19 


290 


OF  DOMINION. 


[Chap.  III. 


i.e.  judging 
ignorantly, 


*LP-  191&  MS.] 


Eom.  xiv.  4. 

or  hastily,  on  too 
little  evidence, 


or  on  too  great 
reliance  on  au¬ 
thority, 

(thus  men  are  de¬ 
ceived  by  popes), 


or  in  laying  down 
false  principles. 


Rings  should 
have  the  jus¬ 
tice  of  bulls 
examined. 


►[p.  192  MS.] 


fendid ;  &  man  may  iuge  folily  upon  many  maneris ;  as  pf  a 
man  iuge  of  J’ing  ]7at  lie  knowi]?  no^t,  as  many  men  presumen 
to  iuge  a  man  to  heuene,  or  ellis  iuge  him  to  helle  bi  her(3 
feyned  cursynge,  &  so  prelatis  ^'ofte  tymes  blasfemew  in  god,  & 
takew  on  bem  iugement  &  knowynge  of  god ;  and  j^is  iuge- 
ment  dampned  poul,  for  prelatis  scbulde  nojt  iuge  seruauwtis 
of  god  in  j^at  J^ei  knowe  noujt.  ]>e  secouwde  foly  of  iugement 
stondi]?  in  J^is,  J^at  mew  iugen  to  li^tly  &  bi  litil  euydence  to 
good  or  to  yuel,  ]iat  sue]?  nojt  \er-oi ;  as  pf  a  man  iuge  for 
fame  of  bis  \)xo\er  or  for  autorite  of  name,  \at  what  eu^re  be 
seye  [is]  so]?e,  and  seki]?  no^t  ]?e  resouw  of  ]7ing  ]7at  be  sei]?;  & 
]7us  hew  men  disceyued  iw  iugement  of  popis  and  of  o\er 
prelatis  &  of  o'pere  comyntes,  &  ofte  tymes  on  ]?is  wise  bew 
mew  disceyued  of  iugement  of  myraclis,  &  many  o'per  signes, 
and  jius  mewnes  iugementis  bew  ofte  ful  of  errouris  wbawne  ]?ei 
iugen  by  mawnes  entent  bi  ouere  ^  lijt  euydence.  mew  schal 

I 

eu^re  suppose  ]?e  good,  but  pf  open  euydence  tecbe  ]?e  con- 
trarie,  of  ]?iwgis  ]?at  men  ]?enken  on.  the  ]7ridde  manere  of 
errour  ]?at  falli]?  iw  mawnes  iugement  is  falceheed  of  her(? 
prynciple  ]?at  ]?ei  grouwdem  hem  on ;  as  falce  wytnesse  ]?at 
gone  on  a  quest  gabben  in  ber^  witnessis,  ]?ei  maken  j>e  iuge 
erre  and  pupplische  a  sentence  contrarie  to  trew]?e.  &  ri]t 
]7us  multitud  of  antecristis  disciplis  may  moue  mew  to  leue 
cristis  lore ;  but  blessed  be  god,  \at  in  eu^ry  cbirche  baj? 
ordeyned  masse  bookis  to  witnesse  bis  gospel.  And  ]?us 
scbulde  kyngis  bi  worscbipe  of  ber^  staat,  constreyne  here 
lyge  freris  &  here  o]?ere  clerkis,  vp  peyne  of  here  leggeauwce, 
to  telle  trew]7e  of  ]7es  bullis  &  of  ]?es  o\ere  nouelries,  wbe]7er 
]7ei  bew  of  bileue,  &  grouwde  bem  iw  resouw  or  iw  goddis 
lawe,  &  examyne  here  proues  whe]?er  j^ei  ben  trewe  men.  and 
]?us  scbulde  ]?e  rewme  be  reuled  bi  rijt,  and  falce  men  distroyed 
]?at  venemen  rewme ;  &  ]?us  scbulde  men  iuge  ]?at  bew  goddis 
seruauwtis,  al  pf  ]?ei  stirte  nojt  vp  in  pilatis  cbaier.  and  so 
ecb  iugement  ]?at  is  "^'nojt  grouwdid  in  god  scbulde  be  deed  of 
men  as  disceyt  of  fe  fend,  ffor  god  him  silf  is  trewe J?e,  as  fe 


1  evere  MS. 


Chap.  IV.] 


OF  DOMINION. 


291 


gospel  sei]?,  and  ]?e  fend  is  fadir  of  lesyngis.  and  so  sum  good 

iugement  is  of  memes  out-wittis,  as  "bei  iugen  whiche  mete  is  Some  judgment 
_  .  .  is  by  the  senses, 

good  &  whiche  mete  is  yuel,  &  sum  men  iugement  is  of 
mennes  witt  wi]7mue,  as  men  iugen  how  j^ei  schal  do,  by  lawe 
of  consieuce :  as  cristeu  men  schal  iu2:e  to  whom  hei  don  herd 
almes,  and  ]7at  j^ei  feden  nou^t  fendis  children  among  herd 
owne  heed.^  &  it  were  al  on  to  reue  fro  worldly  me?^  j^is 
iugement,  &  to  seie  bat  bei  be;^  bestis  dampnable  for  herd  without  such 

°  '  J  J  ^  judgment  men 

folye.  And  ]7us  j^e  fend  may  hide  mennes  wittis  &  bobbe  hem  wouidhe beasts. 

\n  herd  resouw,  as  j^e  iewis  diden  wi]?  crist,  &  leden  hem  to 

helle  as  blynd  avocatis  of  fend.  ]?is  blynde  boffetynge 

schulde  worldly  men  eschewe,  ffor  it  helpi]?  noujt  to  j^is  world 

ne  to  ])Q  toper  world.  And  wite  wel  ]7es  lordis  j^at  god  hap 

^euen  hem  resoui^  for  to  Seruen  him,  and  loken  herd  owne 

profijt ;  ffor  j^is  lord  of  his  curtesye  axe]?  no  seruyse  of  man, 

but  pf  it  turne  to  his  profyt  &  no^t  to  po  profyte  of  god.  and 

lus  it  were  al  on  autecrist  to  teche  j^at  men  schulde  nojt  iuge 

of  dedis  of  his  clerkis,  &  to  seie  \at  he  is  lorde  aboue  ihdsu  crist. 

Qapitulum  4“- 


A^eyns  ]?is  pe  fend  grucchi]?  bi  many  blynde  resouns,  and  seij* 
lat  god  forbeedi]?  his  men  to  iuge  of  here  hviperon.  Eut  we 
schulde  trowe  to  wordis  pat  god  puttij?  in  his  lawe.  ffor  god 
biddij?  pat  a  man  schulde  assaye  him  silf,  and  so  ete  of  j^e 
breed  pat  is  ]7e  sacrid  oost.  ffor  he  pat  eti]?  unworj^ily  etij? 
his  owne  jugement,  ffor  he  iugi]?’  nojt  wisely  j^e  worlinesse  of 
goddis  body.  &  j^e  holy  salme  sei]?:  “vnderstond,  ^e  kyngis; 
and  schaak  of  jou  rudenesse,  ^e  ^at  jugen  londis.”  Sum  tyme 
iugement  god  grauwtid  to  kyngis,  as  davi]?  &  salamon  &  many 
oj^ere  kyngis.  &  pf  jiou  seie  pat  popis  lawe  speki]?  oper  wise 
of  "^'jugement,  haue  po  popis  lawe  more  suspette ;  sij?  goddis 
lawe  spekej?  ]7us,  and  }>us  crist  biddi]?  pe  iewis  to  iuge  of 
him  ri^t  iugement.  Lord,  wheper  ^es  clerkis  ben  mor^ 
hi^e  ouere  seculeris  |>an  was  our  lord  ihesu  crist  o\\.ere  Jjes 
falce  iewis  ?  ffor  trewe  men  be;^  eertejn  pat  crist  bad  hem 


The  devil  says 
God  forbids  men 
to  judge  their 
brethren. 

1  Cor.  xi.  28. 

God’s  law  teaches 
otherwise. 


Psalm  ii.  10. 


The  pope’s  law 
not  to  he  trusted. 
*[p.  1926  MS.] 
John  vii.  24. 
Christ  hade  the 
Jews  to  judge 
him. 


1  Pherd. 


292 


OF  DOMINION. 


[Chap.  IV. 


The  king’s  rights 
attacked. 


Crimes  of  priests 
punishable  by  the 
law  of  England. 


Gal.  ii.  [11.] 


Matt,  xviii.  [15.] 


Reproof  is  a  duty 
of  charity. 


*[p.  193  MS.] 


We  should  he 
glad  to  be  re¬ 
proved. 


Ecclus.  [xxi.  7?] 


Prov.  XV.  [10,] 
Titus  i.  [13.] 


no^t  jiige  of  him  but  ^if  it  were  leeful  to  lewid  men  to  iuge  of 
clerkis ;  and  so  it  wer«  al  on  to  denye  siche  iugeme7^t  and 
denye  regalye  j^at  falli]?  to  ]7e  kyng.  Lord,  whej^er  ]>e  lawe 
of  ynglond  schal  be  now  distried  bi  fablis  of  heretikis  con- 

t  _ 

trarie  to  goddis  lawe?  Wei  I  woot  ])at  men  were  wont  bi 
iugement  of  ynglond  to  dampne  pr^stis  and  clerkis  for  robberie 
&  ]?efte,  and  also  for  trayterie  and  oj^er  smale  trespas ;  and  ^if 
J^ei  now  denye  ]7is  ]7ei  denye  ]>e  regalye.  And  j^us  seie  to 
antecrist  ])at  crist  bad  men  iuge  of  him  boj7e  bi  his  godhede 
and  eke  by  his  manheed.  Lord,  whej^er  antecristis  clerkis 
ben  more  ]ian\ie  was  crist?  Also  seynt  poul  iugi]?  of  petris 
sy77ne,  and  a^en-stoode  him  for  he  was  reprouable.  Lord, 
whe]7(?r  prelatis  now  be7^  mor*?  conformed  in  grace  fawne  was 
seynt  petir  Jeanne  aftir  sonde  of  j^e  holy  goost?  Also  ech  mm 
schulde  bi  ]>e  lawe  of  ]>e  gospel  vndirnyme  ech  'bro'per  ]7at 
synne]?  a^ens  him.  Eut  comunly  ]ies  prelatis  sywnen  ajens 
lewid  me?^ ;  j^awne  lewid  men  by  her(9  fei]?  schulde  vndirnyme 
]?es  prelatis.  And  so  it  is  al  on  to  oute-take  j^es  prelatis  fro 
suche  snybbinge  of  ]>e  peple  &  make  hem  more  ]ian  crist; 
ffor  ^if  crist  my^te  haue  sywned  he  wolde  ]7us  haue  be  blamed. 
Also  by  |>e  lawe  of  charite  ech  man  schulde  loue  ech  oj^ere ; 
and  si]?  god  ha]?  ^euen  men  witt  to  se  ]?at  prelatis  don  yuel, 
bi  ]?e  lawe  of  charite  ]?ei  schulde  moue  hem  to  good.  &  so  it 
were  al  on  to  take  prelatis  fro  ]?is  iugement  and  seie  ]?at  ]7ei 
hen  fendis  ]7at  may  nou^t  be  amendid.  •  also  bi  goddis  lawe  a 
man  schulde  for  charite  drawe  '^his  enemyes  beste  oute  of  ]?e 
lake ;  but  god  ha]?  more  reward  of  men  ]?a7^ne  of  beestis, 
panne  myche  more  schulde  a  man  helpe  men  oute  of  sywne. 
also  si]?  ech  of  vs  schuld  knowe  him  silf  sy77ful  and  be  glaad 
of  seuene  goostly  werkis  of  mercy,  he  schulde  haue  ioye  pat 
men  reproued  him  of  his  sywne ;  and  certis  so  wele  ech  man 
but  ]?e  quyk  deuel ;  ffor  he  for  his  pride  wele  not  be  blamyd 
of  god.  And  herfore  seith  pe  wise  man  pat  he  pat  hati]? 
blamynge  is  sutere  of  pe  fend,  rebelle  a^ens  god.  And  salamon 
sei]?:  “  he  pat  dispisi]?  his  blamere  schal  be  sodenly  distried  & 
nojt  helid  of  his  sywne.”  And  herfore  teche]?  seynt  poul  to 


Chap,  IV.] 


OF  DOMINION. 


293 


reprove  siche  ful  harde.  fFor  fus  dide  crist  onre  alf ere 

majstir  reprouynge  ]7es  pharisees,  and  so  he  dide  to  peple  Matt.  xxiu. 

clepynge  him  sathanas,  and  so  charite  chacchi]?  men  to  j^is 

iust  jugement.  ffor  goddis  lawe  techi]?  vs  to  don  to  oj^^re  Matt,  vU.  [12.] 

men  as  we  schulden  willen  J^at  j^ei  didew  to  vs.  But  who  led 

hi  resonw  putt  iw  greet  perel  wolde  no^t  be  glaad  to  haue 

helpe  j?ere  of?  But  sijje  ech  man  by  sywne  is  in  an  huge  perel, 

he  schulde  be  glaad  of  eche  ]7ing  pat  warne]?  him  of  his  perelle, 

pf  it  be  neuere  so  lowe  &  werse  j^an  man  in  kynde.  Por  ellis 

men’  iw  obedient  as  pe  firste  apostata.  "Wei  I  rede  iw  goddis 

lawe  poi  god  was  obedient  unto  voys  of  man  as  to  his  owne  Josh  x.  [12,] 

instrument.  And  so  sij^e  ech  creature  )>at  telli]?  a  man  a 

treuj^e  is  instrument  of  god  to  schewe  him  j^is  tru]7e,  it  wer^ 

oon  to  dispise  j^is  instrument  in  J^is  and  to  dispise  pe  iiupo  of 

pe  lord  pat  he  schewif.  But  he  were  oute  of  resoun  pat  were 

smyten  in  feueris  or  ellis  in  a  frenesye  or  ony  oj^^r  siknesse 

j^at  wolde  nojt  take  his  medicine  or  reule  of  anoper  man,  al 

^if  it  were  displesynge  to  him  for  a  tyme.  Thus  meke  men  & 

trewe  men  blamen  no^t  pe  creature  pat  tellij?  hem  a  truj^e  in 

name  of  god,  si]7e  j^e  lord  moeue]?  hem  for  profyt  *of  men  to  *[p.  1936  MS.] 

tellen  hem  goddis  wille,  in  him  schulde  J^ei  heren.  and  so 

nf  we  can  se  clerkis  schulde  wib  ioye  suffre  temporal  lord-  The  clergy  ought 

■'  *'  .to  with  their 

schipis  be  taken  awey  from  hem.  For  wel  we  wyten  hat  his  temporal  lord- 
^  ^  ^  ^  ships  joyfully. 

were  no]t  a^ens  goddis  lawe  ne  hyndrid  hem  no^t  to  gete 
hi]e  setis  in  heuene ;  but  raper^  disposide  hem  to  come  to 
myche  blisse  and  fus  schulde  ech  man  willen  as  god  him  silf 
biddi]?  hem. 

And  so  take  heede  what  god  biddih  hee  do  &  do  hat  and  1^0,  God’s  will 
noon  oh^r,  for  al  opere  is  synne.  &  loke  to  alle  hiagis  hat  chastisement. 

CO  men  to  h^e  to  suffre  and  suffre  it  mekely,  sih  god  nedih  pee 
perto  &  sendih  it  for  he  beste,  al  ^if  hou  kanst  nojt  se  it ;  as 
a  child  is  ofte  betyn  for  his  owne  profyte  and  ^it  he  grucchih 
her-a^ens,  for  he  seeh  nojt  pe  resoun.  and  his  moueh  many 
men  mekely  to  suffre  whateu(gre  comeh  to  hem,  for  so  biddih 
charite. 


t  weren  probably  omitted. 


294 


XXII. 

TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 

I  EEGARD  this  tract  as  almost  certainly  Wyclif’s,  and  in  this  I  am  sup¬ 
ported  by  Mr.  Arnold’s  opinion,  who  omitted  it  only  because  he  had 
printed  so  much  invective  against  the  Eriars.  It  has  an  interest  as  showing 
that  Wyclif  felt  it  necessary  to  justify  his  attacks  upon  the  Mendicants, 
though  it  must  be  owned  that  the  apology  takes  the  form  of  a  renewal  of 
the  offence.  But  we  must  not  disregard  the  ‘  pseudo  ’  which  forms  part 
of  the  title,  and  is  not  forgotten  in  the  text.  What  Wyclif  inveighed 
against  is  the  evil  which  followed  from  admitting  and  binding  to  an  order 
men  who  did  not  live  in  the  spirit  of  its  founder.  With  a  true  follower 
of  St.  Francis  Wyclif  would  have  had  much  in  common.  Even  as  it  was, 
he  admits  there  were  good  men  among  them :  as  Paul  and  Nicodemus 
were  among  the  Pharisees,  to  whom  he  delighted  to  liken  them. 

This  higher  temper  may  be  noticed  in  his  dealing  with  the  practice  of 
midnight  prayers  (p.  317).  Such  rising  to  pray  he  says  may  be  good,  or 
it  may  be  a  hindrance  to  a  man  whom  God  calls  to  some  better  occupation, 
and  it  is  presumptuous  to  make  a  binding  rule  on  the  subject.  So  in  his 
Latin  sermons  he  says,  Hon  observant  omnia  que  Christiana  religio 
precipit  et  observat,  cum  non  observant  mensuram  ”  (MS.  Trin.  Coll. 
Camb.  fo.  195).  Of  his  rougher  humour  there  is  a  good  specimen  on 
p.  319,  where  he  likens  friars  between  whom  there  is  ill-feeling  to  dogs 
in  a  sack. 

Among  the  marks  of  authenticity  we  may  note  the  incidental  use  of  the 
doctrine  of  Dominion  (p.'316)  and  of  Wyclif ’s  favourite  point  that  it  is 
impossible  to  tell  of  any  man  whether  he  will  be  saved  or  damned  (p.  317). 
Another  characteristic  passage  is  that  onp.  312:  ‘‘We  graunten  mekeliche 
that  ...  we  faylen  in  the  heyghnesse  of  charite.”  Wyclif  knew  that 
his  besetting  fault  was  intemperance  in  attack.  In  a  passage  quoted  by 
Dr.  Shirley  (F.  Z.  xlv.  note)  he  tells  us  that  he  was  accused  of  vindictive¬ 
ness  and  spite ;  and  in  the  tract  De  Sex  Jugis  (Lechler  ii.  603)  he  says : 
“  Omnes  enim  cogitamus  superflue,  quomodo  vindicta  caperetur  de  hostibus 
Christi  atque  ecclesise,  et  potius  cogitamus  imprecando  istam  vindictam 
quam  alia  media  misericordise,  quae  sic  injuriantibus  cederent  ad  salutem.” 

I  must  not  omit  to  notice  that  this  sharp  attack  on  the  Friars  contains 
no  mention  of  the  Eucharist,  but  I  cannot  on  that  account  disregard  the 
weighty  reasons  in  favour  of  its  genuineness. 

Copied  from  the  only  MS.,  Dublin,  C.  v.  6.  [CC.]. 


295 


SUMMAET. 


Chap.  I. 


11. 


III. 

IV. 

V. 

yi. 

YII. 


Till. 


Many  people  cannot  bear  to  bear  friars  spoken  of  as  false,  but  we 
must  do  as  God’s  law  bids.  We  are  bid  to  reprove  sin  ;  and  as 
Christ  reproved  Pharisees  we  must  reprove  these  new  orders, 

which  are  Pharisees  from  Christians  . p.  296 

We  must  not  blame  untruly,  hastily,  or  on  false  principles ;  nor  from 

envy,  but  from  love . . .  297 

Wrongfulness  of  trying  to  stop  such  language,  since  it  is  used  by  Paul  298 


There  is  good  and  evil  in  the  orders.  Some  friars  leave  the  convent  and 

get  better  employment ;  yet  they  encourage  the  others  who  remain  298 

Their  observances  are  superfluous.  Christ’s  rebuke  to  Pharisees .  299 

The  New  Testament  forbids  sects,  but  these  orders  make  sects  .  299 

Covetousness  of  prelates  and  friars,  who  ought  to  take  little  and 
return  much .  300 

A  sect  is  a  new  order,  with  a  new  patron  and  rule .  .  .  301 

Christ’s  sect  does  not  insist  on  clothes  .  301 

St.  Peter’s  prophecies  of  the  new  sects  and  their  evils  .  302 

How  St.  Paul  speaks  of  them  .  303 


See  whether  St.  James  spoke  of  these  friars.  He  speaks  of  two 
religions  :  one  pure,  the  other  vain.  The  pure  religion  is  that  of 
Christ.  Not  kept  by  friars.  Their  various  faults  .  304 


St.  Jude  prophesies  of  apostates  and  his  warnings  in  their  details 


correspond  to  the  ways  of  friars  .  306 

St.  John’s  warnings  against  the  friars  .  309 

His  writings,  like  all  other  authors  of  the  New  Testament,  teach 
us  to  reprove  friars.  They  attribute  ill-will  to  their  reprovers, 
but  God  is  the  judge  of  intent  .  311 

The  fiend’s  clergy  say  that  in  reproving  them  we  make  ourselves 
equal  with  ,  God,  whereas  we  are  sinful.  We  acknowledge  our 
sins,  hut  believe  that  we  are  Christ’s  servants,  and  that  we  speak 

as  he  bids  us  .  312 

Christ’s  example.  Need  of  reproof .  313 

The  fiend  gives  six  reasons  to  love  these  orders — 

I.  Their  dress.  But  it  is  wasteful  .  31-5 

II.  Abstinence.  Not  true  of  all  of  them,  and,  if  true,  not 

necessarily  good  .  316 

III.  The  excellence  of  their  prayers.  They  do  not  know  that 

they  will  be  saved.  Their  selling  prayers  shows  a  bad 

conscience  .  317 

Their  rules  are  presumptuous .  3 1 8 

IV.  The  holiness  of  the  society.  They  are  not  all  holy,  nor  is 

their  united  prayer  necessarily  powerful  .  318 

Good  life  the  best  prayer,  and  the  cloister  is  often  not  the 

best  life  .  319 

V.  Their  special  prayers.  Their  prayers  are  not  so  good  as  the 

Paternoster,  or  Christ  would  have  taught  them  .  320 

VI.  Their  handsome  churches  and  appointments.  These  they 
ought  to  grieve  for,  since  they  are  got  by  robbery,  spoiling 

the  poor,  and  injuring  parish  churches  .  321 

Christ  warns  us  against  these  sects.  We  are  bound  to  withstand 

them .  323 

If  we  are  shown  to  err,  we  will  turn  to  the  truth  .  324 


296 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  I. 


Tractatus  de  Pseudo-freris. 


Capitulum  primum. 


•[p.  81  MS.] 
INIany  people  dis¬ 
like  to  hear  friars 
called  hypocrites. 


It  is  a  duty  to 
reprove  sin. 
Matt,  sviii.  [15.] 


One  of  Christ’s 
apostles  was 
Iscariot. 

Why  should  these 
new  orders  be 
above  reproof  t 


Christ  reproved 
Pharisees. 

Matt,  xxiii.  [13- 
33.] 


'^For  many  bere;«  heuy  ]iai  freris  bew  clepid  pseudo  or 

ypocrit/s,  an^ecnst«s  or  fend^'j,  or  ony  siche  name,  it  wer^ 

to  telle  wbt^t  godd^s  lawe  sey];  her^,  &  bi  lore  of  godd«s  lawe 

me^  sllulde^^^  stonde  stilly,  ffirst  mew  takew  of  bilee ue 

]?ei  shuldew  reproue  sywne ;  si]?  crist  techij?  j^dtt  jif  ]?yw  hmo^er 

sywne]?  iw  ]?ee,  \ou  shalt  juries  reproue  hy?w ;  &  fro  ]?e 

bigywnywg  of  world  til  ]?is  tyme  was  it  vsid  \ai  mew 

/ 

shuldew  reproue  sywne  for  loue  &  worship  of  god.  for  it  wer^ 
al  oon  to  lette  ]?is  &  to  lette  mew  to  be  goddis  childrew,  and  to 
forsake  crist  god  &  take  mew  fulliche  to  ]?e  fend,  &  so  forsake 
cristis  mauwdemewtw,  &  bi-come  j^e  fendu  seruauwt.  But  for 
siche  an  heresye  so?wme  mew  shuldew  suffri?  martirdom,  & 
sowme  mew  make  resouws,  &  somme  mew  vsen  heri?  worldliche 
strewg]?e ;  si]?  crist,  heued  of  martrfs,  deyede  to  destrie 
}?is  heresye,  &  alle  hise  martr^s  aftir  deyedew  in  ]?e  same 
cause ;  and  heyj  pr(?stis  of  ]?e  temple  wi]?  pharisees  fat  crist 
reprouede  werew  more  and  bet^re  grouwdid  ]?ew  bew  ]?e  sectis 
of  ]?ise  freris.  Aftirwa[r]d  mew  supposew  fat  ]?ise  freris  may 
lytlyche  err^ ;  &  bi  dedis  fat  fame  telli]?,  ]?ei  sywnew  & 
harmew  meche  fe  peple.  Si]?  crist  welle  of  religiow  \iore 
chees  to  hym  tuelue  apos^lis,  &  jit  oon  of  hem  was  Sharioth, 
whom  it  was  leueful  to  reproue  —  wh(j5t  v^rtu  hauew  ]?ise 
newe  ordris,  fat  bew  cropew  in  wi]?-oute  grouwd,  fat  mew  shal 
not  reproue  hem,  harmew  ]7ey  neu(?re  so  myche  fo  chirche  ? 
hit  wer(3  al  oon  to  grauwte  ]?is,  &  jiue  it  vp  to  ]?e  fend,  & 
fyjte  no  mor^  iw  goddis  cause,  but  assewt  to  ]?e  fend  what 
eu£!re  he  do ;  &  it  is  al  oon  to  reproue  sywne,  &  to  reproue 
p($rsones  fat  sywnew.  lord,  si]?  freris  sywnew  ofte,  why 
shuldew  not  mew  reprouew  hem,  &  jif  al  fe  secte  assewte]?, 
speke  we  sharpliche  a  jew  ]?e  secte  ;  ]?us  spak  crist  sharpliche 
ajew  fe  secte  of  pharisees,  as  matheu  telli]?  iw  eyhte  woes  fat 


Chap.  I.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


297 


crist  spak  h.Qm,  &  pt  crist  louede  p^rsones  of  hew,  as 
were^  poul  and  nychodeme.  lorde,  sij?  ]7ise  newe  ordris  ben  ^hege^  are 
pharisees  fro  cristen  men,  whi  shulden  not  men  by  ensauwple  c^^^stfa^ns 
of  mst  speke  sharpliche  ajen  her*?  synne  ?  but  in  ilche  werk  There  must  be 

order  in  reproof. 

god  aski]?  ordre,  &  so  in  blamyng  of  freris.  ^*Two  |»ingis  *[p.  8i6  ms.] 

ben  in  J^is  ordrd  ]iat  cristen  men  shulden  holde ;  ffirst  \at  men 

Wt  blamen  hew  shulden  holde  treube  &  not  gabbe  on  hew:  Order  requires 
.  .  .  .  .  that  blame  be 

for  al  pf  ]7ise  ordris  vsen  ]?is  craft,  pt  j^ei  don  herd  amys,  for  true, 
crnft  of  lyyng  is  not  leueful,  si]?  it  is  openliche  apn  treu]7e, 

&  so  it  is  apn  crist,  ]?e  whiche  is  j^e  first  treu]?e.  &  ]?ns  men 
may  leuefulliche,  but  of  hard,  fyjte,  plete  &  scorne,  but  ]?e 
crdtft  of  lyyng  is  dawpned  gendralliche,  &  hus  cristen  men  for  all  lying  is 

damnable. 

shulden  be  war  to  putte  falsliche  blame  on  freris  ;  &  herford 

many  men  speken  gfelndralliche  of  herd  synne,  &  leuen  to  Some  men  try  to 

avoid  being  per- 

descende  to  pdrsones  lest  ]?ei  medlen  fals  wij?  so]?.  &  ]?ns  ]?ei  sonai; 

speken  hi  dondicioun,  or  supposyng,  or  gessyng,  ]iai  pf  freris 

don  ]?us  cristen  men  schulden  be  war  wi]?  hew.  neudr]?elees 

we  witen  bi  ]?e  cours  of  godd«s  lawe  \at  ]?ise  men  j^at  ben 

disposid  &  knowen  defaute  in  certeyn  pdrsones  shulden  but  personal  re¬ 
proof  may  be  a 

reproue  hdw  in  herd  beerd,  but  eudre  by  mekenesse  &  loue.  duty. 

]?us  baptist  reprouede  heroude  of  his  open  synne.  &  officials  John  Baptist, 
and  freris  haunten  ofte  ]?is  craft  amys,  when  ]?ei  louen  mord 
monee  or  ordris  ]?en  ]?ei  don  heel]?e  of  herd  soulis,  &  ofte  ]?ei 
punysshen  men  bi  peyne  pat  god  approue]?  not.  pe  oper 
condicioun  of  blamyng  pat  cristen  men  shulden  holde  is  pat 
l?ei  shulden  blame  no  men  ’bi  enuye  or  coueytyse,  but  That  blame  be 

,  ,  .  .  not  due  to  envy 

algaUs  bi  charite  pat  ]?ei  hauen  to  god  &  to  his  chirche ;  jhe,  or  covetousness, 
to  po  pdrsones  pat  pci  snybbe?^,  al  pf  ]?ei  shal  be  dawpned 
aftir,  &  pus  noon  man  shulde  cnrse  an  oper  but  for  loue  Reproof  should 
pat  he  ha]?  to  hyw,  as  god  dawpneth  neudr  his  sdrvaunt  but 
for  mdrcy  &  for  loue.  &  pus  in  speche  apn  freris  men  casten 
to  holde  ]?ise  two,  and  pf  pci  faylen  in  ouper  of  hew  pci  cryen 
on  god  mdrcy  &  help ;  for  wo  is  vs  pf  we  ben  stille,  &  speken 
not  apn  herd  synnes,  wenne  we  witen  pat  pci  synnen  open¬ 
liche  apn  bileue,  &  leden  many  soulis  aftir  hew  by  wrong 
weye  as  fendis  don.  &  pus  men  supposen  of  freris  pat  sowme 


298 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  I. 


John  vi.  [70.] 
Some  friars  will 
be  damned,  and 
are  devils, 

*[p.  82  MS,] 


but  we  must  not 
say  this  of  any 
one  friar, 
but  speak  heartily 
against  their 
errors. 


[2]  Cor.  xi.  [26.] 
Faul  speaks  of 
false  friars. 

Let  them  blame 
Holy  Writ. 


of  hew  shal  be  dawpned,  &  j^ewne  we  witew  hi  ]>e  gospel  j’at 
]>ei  \>en  quike  fend^5.  lord,  who  shulde  lette  men  to  speke 
here  as  crist  doi]?  ?  si]?  hi  siche  cowune  sp.eche  '^'his  lawe 
shulde  be  hetere  knowe7^,  but  as  we  wite7^  not  of  j^is  freri? 
whe]7(?r  he  shal  be  dampned,  so  we  kepew  vs  in  our*?  speche 
]>at  we  clepew  not  ]?is  frer^  a  fend,  but  a^en  errours  ]7d^t  J^ey 
sowen  me7^  shulde7^  speke  hertliche ;  &  bi  siche  reprouywgis 
god  may  Uirne  j^ise  freris  to  goode,  &  kepe  sugeUV  in  goddis 
weye,  pat  ellis  woldeT^  go  the  weye  to  helle.  &  as  anentts 
fals  freris,  resou7^  techi]?  pat  ]?ise  be7^  fals,  &  poul  speki]?  pat 
perile  is  in  fals  freris.  lord,  whi  shulde7^  mew  be  lettid  to 
speke  pus,  si]?  godd/s  lawe  sei]?  so?  dawpne  ]?ou  ]?is  holi 
writ,  &  lette  pou  men  to  rede  it,  &  releese  her^  oblishywg 
bi  cowune  vse  pat  god  approue]?,  &  penne  per  is  som  colour 
to  blame  mew  pat  vsen  ]?is  word,  but  freris  bew  oblishid  of 
god  &  bi  her*?  rewele  to  seye  ]7is  word,  &  as  ]?ei  seyew  freris 
werew  penne  &  lowge  bifori?,  &  sowme  false,  what  shulde  lette 
pe  holi  goost  to  speke  of  fals  freris  bi  poul. 


Qapitulum  2“- 

^it  cristew  mew  shuldew  be  war  iw  here  speche  a]en  freris. 

Some  friars  are  ^  fQj.  sowme  bew  goode  and  sowme  euele,  mew  shuldew 

good  and  some  °  ' 

specifie  ]?ise  euele,  &  not  rep7*oue  good  wij?  euele  lest  pei 

erredew  iw  blamywg  here  hreperen,  &  herfor*?  cristew  mew  han 

declarid  hou  mew  shuldew  knowe  a  pseudo-frer^  &  what  is  good 

and  there  is  good  iw  her^  ordr^  &  what  iw  herg  ordrg  is  euel,  as  so  myche  of  here 
and  evil  in  their  .  ... 

order.  ordre  IS  good  as  IS  seid  iw  goddis  lawe,  &  as  myche  of  here  ordr^ 

is  euele  as  discordij?  fro  goddis  lawe ;  but  many  ]7ingis  may 
be  wel  -don,  &  ^it  j^ei  ben  euele  knytted  to-gedr(9 ;  as  tyme 
&  oper  cfrcuwstauwce  pat  limitew  peyne  for  a  dede  bew  a^ew 
pe  fredow  pat  cHst  wole  haue  iw  hise  lawe.  &  pus  ]?ise  goode 
Friars  leave  the  mew  of  freris  drawew  hem  fro  here  priuat  rewelis  &  fro  here 

convent, 

lyuywg  iw  comune,  lest  it  neede  hem  to  broke  goddu  lawe ; 
and  get  work  that  as  somme  froris  procwren  to  be  bisshopis,  somme  to  be  lystris 

releases  them 

from  the  rules ;  and  liue  out  of  comunos,  &  somme  to  be  wi]?  lord^e  or  laydis, 


Chap.  IT.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-ERERIS. 


299 


&  so?wme  freris  to  bi  wi]?  bissbopis ;  but  j^at  ]?at  J^ei  seyn  is 
best,  as  obedience  to  here  souereyw  &  risywg  at  myd-nyjt 
whi]?  kepywg  of  here  priuat  reulis  &  sewywg  of  here  chapitr^s, 
j^ise  be^  warliche  put  abac  wi]?  moost  witty  of  freris. 

But  ^it  \er  hen  ouer-many  '^'cowordis  &  foolis  stondywg  in  fis  yet’they^ncour- 
fredom,  si]?  ]?ey  dar  not  repreue  here  comunes  in  kepy^g  of  rfmain^°to  i^ep 
here  obseruau?^c^5,  but  dwelle?^  in  her  naked  habitus  in  tokene  and^ '^themselves 
ei  wole?^  twrne  aJe?^.  &  cert^s  in 
but  errowr  on  many  sydis ;  for  siche  kepywg  of  ]?ise  habit^s 
techi]?  ]?at  ]?ei  laste?^  in  ]7is  sy?^ne,  &  eo?^sente?^  to  ]?e  first 
errours,  as  ypocrit^s  a^ens  god.  and  ]?erfore  many  mew 

woldew  eewsele  hat  bei  castedew  a-wey  bise  habitus  &  sich  fool  ’which  they 

^  ^  should  cast 

oblysshywg,  and  tokew  fredo»^  of  cristas  lawe ;  &  ]?ws  techi]?  away. 

ilche  word  of  crist,  ]?at  reproue]?  ]?ise  newe  sectis,  for  here 

newe  obseruauwc«s  to  whiche  bey  oblishew  hew  so  myche  Theirobservances 

_  _  are  superfluous, 

smacchew  sow  weye  ypocrisie,  or  ellis  ]?ey  bew  superflue,  and  and 
oblishen  mew  wi]?-oute  chesouw  ajew  ]?e  fredow  of  crisUe  lawe.  Christ. 

&  herfore  crist  clepi]?  so  ofte  pharisees  ypocrit^s,  &  sey]?:  “flle  Lukexii.  [i.] 
jee  fro  sourdou  of  pharisees,  ]>wt  is  ypocrisye,  for  ]7ei  bew 
blauwchid  wi]?-oute  as  sepulcris,  and  wi]?-iwne  ful  of  fyl]?e. 

Wo  be  to  ^ou,  pharisees,”  seyth  crist,  ‘^]?wt  bew  hud  menu-  Christ’s  rebuke 

to  Pll3iI*lS00S 

mewt^s ;  and  mew  wawdrywge  on  hew  knowew  not  ]?e  fil]?e  Luke  xi.  [44.] 

wi]?iwne.  oon  of  ]?e  wyse  mew  of  lawe  onsuerede  to  crist,  and 

seyde  \us ;  mayster,  seywg  ]?ise  ]?ingis,  ]?ow  makest  to  ys  greet 

strif.  and  crist  seyde  to  ]?is  niaw  :  &  wo  to  ^ou,  wise  mew  of  and  to  lawyers. 

lawe,  \at  chargew  mew  wi]?  bir]?ins  \at  ]?ei  may  not  her*?,  and 

^ee  wi]?  ^our^  oon  fynger  touchew  not  ^our^  makid  bir]?ins.” 

&  her^  mew  takew  of  crista  wordis  \at  mew  shuldew  not  lette 

to  speke  for  god,  al  jif  ]?ei  suffrew  harm  for  her(9  speche ;  for 

crist  tolde  mor(?  sharpliche  ]?is  wo,  whew  ]?is  lawer^  hadde 

tolde  ]?is  perile.  &  mew  may  see  of  ]?e  same  word  \at 

<?(?wsenteris  to  siche  ypocrit«5  bew  iw  ]?e  same  daw^pnaciouw, 

si]?  crist  sey]? :  “and  to  ^ou  be  wo.”  Also  bi  ]?e  newe  lawe  bew 

secUs  ofte  reproued,  &  noow  drede  ]?ise  newe  ordris  makew  ^ak®  divers 

diuerse  seeks,  &  so  bi  ouri?  bileue  ]?ise  ordris  bew  reproued.  “I  st?^Paui’s  wam- 

woot,  sei]?  poul,  \at  aftir  myw  discess  wolues  of  raueyw  shal  aSs  xx.  [29.J 


]?is  is  noon  wisdom, 


wear  the  habit, 


300 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  II. 


come  \n  to  f e  cliirclie,  and  J^ei  slial  not  spar^  fe  floe.  &  of 
^ou'silf  shal  rise  wicked  mew,  spekywge  p(9ruerse  jjywgis,  so 
fei  ledew  disciplis  aftir  hewi,  &  herfor^  wake  ^ee,  & 
J^ewke  onne  hou  bi  fre  ^eer  nyjt  &  day  y  ceessede  not  bi  teris 
monestywge  ilche  of  jon ;  &  now  y  commewde  jou  to  god  and 
*[p.  83  MS.]  to  word  of  "^his  grwee,  wbiche  is  myjty  to  edifye  &  pue 
heritage  iw  alle  halewid.  but  silner  and  gold  or  do]?  of  non 
of  pu  coueytide  I,  as  jee  puie  self  witew,  for  to  neede  of 
];ingis  j^at  i  hauede  and  to  bem  j?at  werew  wi]?  me  ministredew 
]?ise  hond«5,  bi  tr^^uel  j>at  i  me  self  dide.  alle  J^ise  J^ing^s 
bane  i  sbewid  to  ^ou,  for  mew  j^at  tr^fuelen  j^us  motew  take 
sike  mew  &  belpe  bem  wij?  sicbe  goode^,  &  bane  mywde  of  j^e 
word  of  lord  ibesu,  for  be  seyde  \at  it  is  mor(9  blissid 
These  words  have  more  to  pue  to  take.”  pise  wordis  of  boli  writt,  si]?  ]?ei 

more  authority  ,  «  ,  „  . 

than  the  rules  of  bew  feyp  of  cristou  mew,  bew  mor^  to  pr^yse  pew  alle  propri? 
neededthePope’s  rewel  of  Hse  uewe  ordfis  ;  for  here  autonrs  werew  lesse  worb, 

confirmation. 

&  bauew  neede  \ai  fe  pope  cowferme  bem.  for  poul  was 

betere  &  mybtyer(9  ]?ew  alle  ]7e  patrouws  of  ]?ise  new  ordris ; 

&  now  pope  dowferme]?  boli  writt,  si]?  it  is  first  dowfermed  of 

god.  &  noo  drede  poul  telli]’  h.Qve  a  rewele  ]?at  cristew 

mew  sbuldew  bolde,  &  first  mew  may  see  her(3  hou  poul 

Paul  prophesies  pwopbecyede  so];  of  comywg  of  ]?e  newe  secUs  iw-to  ]?e  ebirebe, 
of  the  new  sects. 

boJ»e  oon  &  o\er,  &  hou  J>ei  sbal  be  wolues  of  raueyn  &  not 
spar(9  ]?e  floe  ]iat  ]?ei  bew  iwne;  for  whd  prdat  or  religiose 
Covetousness  of  spai’i]?  to  pile  ]?e  comune  peple,  but  coueytif  gold  &  silui^r 
and  Mars,  &  clo]?,  far^  ]?e  peple  neu<?re  so  euele.  as  freris  whew  ]?ei 
beggew  of  mew  ]?enkew  not  hou  ]?ei  bew  rycber(9  ]?ew  pord  mew 
]?ei  beggew  of,  \at  bauew  greet  neede  for  hem  &  beoris 
to  ]?yng  ]?at  freris  tillew  of  bem,  and  certu  ]?is  spoylywg  is 
who  are  worse  falsei’i?  ]?ew  opew  raueyn  of  dai  ]?eues.  But  poul  taujte  aftir 
’  hou  be  laborede,  to  pue  ewsaumple  to  mew  aftir  ]?at  ]»ei 
sbulden  not  bilde  hem  castels  &  line  oon  por(3  mew  bi 

It  is  better  to  give  beggerye.  for  it  is  bo]?e  needeful  to  mew  to  pue  &  to  take 
than  to  take.  of  beri?  breth^wen  ;  but  ]>e  first  <?e>wdiciouw  is  beWe,  &  ’^erioxe 

that  they  live  on  cHst  &  poul  usedew  it.  and  pr^laU^  hat  bauew  cur^  of  soulis 

as  little  as  pos¬ 
sible,  lokew  hou  scarsly  ]?ei  may  liue,  &  wi]’  hou  lytil  of  sicbe  almes 


Chap.  III.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


301 


Jei  neede/i  to  charge  }e  peple,  &  hou  largeliche  j?ei  jeuew  JberaU^teachiug 

ajen  lore  and  ensaumple  of  holynesse.  pis  rewle  si]?  it  is  example. 

bileeue  '^shulde  be  studied  of  alle  J^ise  sect^s,  &  not  take  an 

oper  lesse  good  but  pf  pat  j^is  rewele  faylede ;  &  herfor*?  poul 

heriede  god  pat  he  broujte  not  in  siche  sectu,  but  by  dene 

lore  pat  crist  tau3te  poul  liuede  &  tau^te  ober.  studie  wyse  Let  wise  men 

■*  .  .  .  study  these  words 

mm  on  bis  word  of  poul,  &  loke  bei  ri^tliche  wheber  bise  of  Paul,  and  see 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  if  these  sects  are 

sectis  bew  euele  &  wor]?!  to  be  left  bi  godd^'s  lawe,  &  to  be  evil, 
spoken  a^ew  sharpliche.  &  j^erfore  sey]?  poul  to  eo^forte  mew, 
hou  ]?ei  shuldew  haue  mywde  of  cristis  word,  &  hou  crist  shal 
pue  to  mew  pat  louew  hym  word  &  gretce  to  repreue  hem, 

&  ]7is  word  moue]?  suw^me  mew  to  speke  ajew  j^ise  new  ordris. 


Qdipitulum  3“* 


It  were  to  wite  ouer  j^is  what  goddis  lawe  mene]?  bi  j^ise 
sectis  ;  &  it  seme]?  to  many  mew  pat  a  secte  is  a  newe  ordre 
bi  newe  patrouw  &  newe  lawe,  as  was  pe  secte  of  cwistew  mew, 
and  Cfist  haue]?  ful  autorite  to  make  siche  a  blessid  secte  for 
hym  &  hise  pat  comew  aftir  to  ]?e  ende  of  pe  world,  pf 
a  cristen  man  haue  a  custom  pat  pwefiti]?  to  hym  for  a  tyme, 
but  he  haue]?  now  patrouw  ne  rewele  but  crist  &  lore  pat  he 
ha]?  puew,  he  maki]?  not  a  newe  secte  o]?er  pen  secte  of  cristew 
mew.  &  pf  benet  or  dominie  or  frauweiss  or  bernard  or  angel 
of  heuene  make  a  newe  secte  upon  cnst«s  secte,  he  is  herfore 
wor]?i  to  be  blamed ;  &  ]?is  secte  shulde  be  despisid  &  cristes 
secte  shulde  be  holde  dene,  as  ]?e  secte  of  macamethe  taki]? 
meche  of  crist^5  secte,  but  it  varie]?  iw  som  rewele  &  iw  clo]?is 
&  iw  patrouw,  &  so  don  sectis  of  our^  newe  ordris,  &  of  bo]?e 
]?ise  prophecie]?  poul.  Crist  grouwdede  not  his  secte  iw  sich 
changywg  of  clo]?is,  'but  iw  rewle  of  virtues  pat  hen  vnsensible 
to  men,  &  tolde  nou^t  bi  siche  abitis,  but  iw  as  meche  as  ]?ei 
helpedew  to  virtues,  &  ]?us  mew  shuldew  not  be  weddid  wi]? 
hem,  but  change  hem  lest  her*?  lone  err^.  &  pus  seyew  summe 
pat  these  freris  habitus  to  whiche  freris  bew  pus  oblishid,  pat 
hen  pus  large  &  variauwt  as  werew  habits  of  pharisees,  ^s^ruew 


A  sect  is  a  new 
order,  with  anew 
patron  and  a  new 
rule. 

Christ  was  the 
founder  of  a  new 
sect, 


whichmen  should 
not  leave, 


but  keep  it  free 
from  change. 


Mahomet’s  sect 
takes  much  of 
Christ’s,  hut 
varies,  and  so  do 
these  new  orders. 

Christ  laid  no 
stress  on  clothes, 


as  the  friars  do. 
*[p.  84  MS.] 


302 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  III. 


Hiis  religion  takes 
now  one  habit, 
now  another ;  as 
he  did  on  Good 
Friday, 


Habits  a  pretence 
of  holiness, 

[2]  Peter  ii.  [1.] 


Let  people  judge 
if  these  sects  do 
not  love  their 
patron  better 
than  Paul, 
and  if  their  order 
does  not  make 
them  love  Christ’s 
rule  less. 


Is  he  not  a  fool 
who  changes  a 
good  order  for 
one  grievous  and 
imperfect. 


[2  Peter  ii.  2.] 


To  love  their 
orders  more 
than  Christ’s 
»[p.  846  MS.] 
is  spiritual 
lechery. 


J>e  fend  to  putte  in  lesyngws  &  to  destrie  por.?  mewnws  goodfs. 
Cristis  religion  telli]?  lityl  bi  sicbe  sensible  babitfs,  but  now 
taki]?  oon  &  now  an  o]76’r,  as  dide  crist  on  good  fryday.  for 
j^ise  habitis  crien  to  ]iq  folc  holynesse  &  stablenesse,  ]iai  god 
wole  bane  bid  to  bym,  &  \us  j^ei  bew  ofte  false  signes 
&  garnemewtfs  of  ypocnt«5,  as  crist  clepi]?  ofte  pharisees. 
And  J7us  seij?  petre  in  bis  book,  j^at  is  aboue  alle  J^ise  patrouns, 
Soj^elicbe  per  weren  fals  propb(9tis  ^  in  J^e  peple,  as  sbal  be  in 
^ou  mastris  of  lesywg/s,  pai  sbal  bry?^ge  in  sectfs  of  loss,  boj^e 
of  religiou?^  &  soul,  as  men  mai  openlicbe  see  now,  &  j^ei 
denyen  pa\j  lord  j?at  ba]?  bou^t  bew,  ibdsu  crist.  for  when  ]7ei 
leuew  cristis  secte,  or  louen  it  lasse  for  j^ise  newe  sectes,  ]iei 
slaken  in  ]7is  here  loue  to  crist,  &  pus  pei  hen  cwrsid  of  bym. 
&  iuge  pe  peple  wbej^^r  ]7ise  sectfs  louen  ber(9  patroun  betere 
pen  poul  or  epere  seynUs,  pat  weren  betere  to-for^  god  pen 
j^ise  patrouns,  &  louen  lesse  j^e  rewele  of  crist  &  cristfs 
ordynaunce  for  here  ordris,  &  ber^  dedfs  wolen  openlicbe 
sbewe  pat  |>ei  don  pus  wi]7-oute  cause,  wbi  sbulden  not  ]7ise 
sect^s  be  reproued  ?  si]?  ]?ei  ben  pus  secU's  of  lesyng ;  not  of 
leesyng  of  worldlicbe  worship  ne  worldliche  vauntage,  as 
we  may  see,  but  of  lesyng  of  virtues  &  of  blisse  for  herd 
vnkyndenesse.  And  herfori?  sei]?  petre  aftir,  pat  j^ise  sect^’s 
leden  vp-on  hem  hasty  lesynge  of  virtues  &  blisse  bi  herd 
cbargyng  wij?  newe  ordris.  who  wolde  seie  ]?at  be  ne  were 
a  fool  pat  bauede  a  good  ordrd  pat  my^te  not  faile,  &  pt 
bryngij?  in  a  newe  ordrd  pat  is  boj^e  heuy  &  vnpdrfijt,  &  letti]? 
pe  first  parfyt  ordrd  bo]’e  to  be  loued  &  bolden.  Juge  pe 
peple  wheper  ]?ise  freris  bi  herd  newenesse  pat  ]?ei  ban 
founden  breken  ofte  cristis  ordre,  bo]>e  to  hem  &  to  pe  peple. 
And  pus  sei]?  petrd  aftir,  pat  many  sbal  sewe  her  lecberyes, 
bi  whom  pe  weye  of  treu]?e  sbal  be  blasfemed.  It  is  knowen 
]?yng  now  pat  many  louen  mord  J?ise  newe  ordris  pen  pei 
louen  pe  ordre  of  crist,  &  don  mord  worship  to  hem,  &  ]?is  is 
gostlicbe  lecberie  fro  crist  pe  spouse  of  pe  chircbe,  J?is 

^  propheris  MS. 


I 


Chap.  III.] 


TR.\CTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


303 


is  opone  blasfemye  si]?  roten  ordinauwce  of  mew  is  more 

worshipid  &  mor*?  told  bi  pen  ]?e  ordinauwce  of  crist.  Petre 

tellij?  aftir  of  ]?e  frut  pat  come]?  of  siche  newe  ordris :  In  [2  Peter  ii.  3  ] 

coueytise  wi]?  feyned  wordis  ]?ei  sbal  chaffar(3  of  ^ou.  It  is 

knowew  hou  be  pope  wi]?  bis  court  chaffari]?  wib  simple  mew  Sale  of  benefices 

■*  •'  ^  ^  and  absolution. 

iw  henefieis  &  assoilywg,  &  cert^’s  ]?is  is  a  newe  secte  foundew 

ou^r  pe  secte  of  cnst ;  &  pus  chaffarew  possessioners  bi 

auarice  wi]?  seculer  mew  ;  &  ]?ise  freris  chaffarew  now,  & 

sillew  cuwtrees  to  begge  ;  &  iw  alle  ]?ise  wordis  bew 

feyned  of  gostliche  suffrage  wi}?-oute  grouwde.  pus  regneth 

chaffarywg  of  pr^stis  and  lewid  mew  by  auarice.  But  petre 

telli]?  aftir  to  whtzt  ende  ]?ise  sect«s  brywgyn  mew  :  To  ]?ise 

sect«5  ceessi]?  not  pe  iugemewt  pat  is  now  &  bifore  tymes, 

&  here  leesiwg  nappi]?  not.”  Hoo  maw  dredi]?  pat  haue]>  witt 

pat  petre  ne  reprouede  her^  ]?ise  sect«5.  wbwt  cristew  ma?^ 

shulde  not  speke  ajew  hem  bi  autorite  of  crist  &  petre  ?  ^if 

petre  prophecyede  not  bise  sect/5,  telle  bei  what  be  wordis  of  Peter’s  prophecy 

^  ^  ^  ^  is  clearly  of  these 

petre  menew.  And  of  ]?ise  sectes  speki]?  poul  to  his  disciple  ®®cts. 
tymothe  :  “  pe  holi  gost  sei]?  opewliche  pat  in  pe  last  tymes  [i]  Tim.  iv.  [i.] 

summe  shal  depart  fro  bileeue,  takywge  hede  to  spiritis  of 
errour  &  to  loris  of  fendis,  pe  wiche  fendw  spekew  lesywg  in 
ypocrisie;  hauywge  her^  t;owsciewce  brewt  wi]?  hoot  yren  of 
coueytise ;  &  forfenden  to  wedde,  &  abstenew  fro  mete,  pat 
god  hap  ordeyned  to  trewe  mew  to  take  wi]?  ]?awkywgis  of  god, 

&  to  hem  pa,t  han  knowe  trew]?e.”  Her^  ilche  maw  on  goddfs 
half  shulde  trowe  ]?ise  word«s  of  poul,  si]?  god  sey]?  he?w 
openliche  to  hy?w.  &  pus  it  seme]?  pat  poul  wolde  mene  pat  Paul’s  words 

•  •  •  TGfcr  to  tllGSG 

in  tymes  of  ]?ise  ordris  mew  departew  fro  bileeue  pat  ]?ei  orders, 
shuldew  bane  of  cristis  ordr^,  &  many  takew  ouer-meche  hede 
to  gostliche  mew  of  ]?ise  ordris,  pat  errew  as  ypocritw  & 
magwifien  here  owen  ordris.  &  now  drede  siche  seniours 
ben  fendis  pat  spekew  lying  iw  ypocrisie,  &  pei  hauew  her*? 
t;owscience  brent  wi]?  fier  of  coueytise,  for  al  pat  pei  may  gete 
to  her^  ordr^,  of  mew  or  of  worldliche  good^5,  pei  ]?ewken  pei 
getew  newe  to  god,  pat  god  is  wel  payed  per^ftp,  &  pus  ]?ise 
ypocritfs  '^'letten  to  wedde  bo]?e  of  pr^stis  &  of  nuwnes,  &  bi  *[p.  85  ms.j 


304 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  III. 


]7is  J’ei  fallen  in  foul  leccherie,  leuywg  J^at  \at  god  ha]? 
grauwtid  ;  &  ]7us  j^ise  freris  forberew  fleshe  \ai  crist  vsede 
&  grauwtede  to  ete.  &  \us  j^es  newe  obs(?ruauwc«s  don  harm 
[2]  Tim.  iii.  [5.]  to  chirche  many  weyes.  &  I’is  applie]?  poul  to  sect«s  ]>at 
haue^  licnesse  of  pitee,  but  ]?ei  denyew  ]7e  YeriM  \er-oi]  for 
]7ei  haue^  no^  coit^science  to  robbe  pore  mm  to  magwifie  here 
new  ordris,  &  to  fordo  cristfc®  ordinau?^ce;  but  hou  deneye;^ 
not  j^ise  mew  ]?e  vertu  of  pitee  to  god  and  man  ? 


Qapitulum  4“- 


Matt.  xii.  [30.] 
James  i.  [27.] 


The  pure  religion 
of  which  James 
speaks,  is  that 
which  Christ  or¬ 
dained. 


Friars  visit,  hut 
it  is  the  rich ; 


or,  if  the  poor,  it 
is  to  get  from 
them  what  they 
can  ill  spare. 


James  iii.  15. 

The  wisdom  of 
these  orders  is 
earthly,  sensual, 
devilish. 


See  we  wh«t  James  sei]?  \at  wroot  to  tuelue  kywredis,  &  so 
to  alle  cnstew  mew,  whej^igr  he  speke  ouht  of  freris.  but  pf 
god  spake  her*?  of  freris,  certu  '|>ei  bew  not  wi]?  hym,  &  crist 
sei]? :  “who  ]!at  is  not  wi]?  me,  he  mot  neede  be  a^ew  me.” 
Jamws  telli]?  of  two  religions ;  first  is  clone  wit-oute  wem, 
&  ]7is  mot  nede  be  crisU’^  religiouw,  bojie  for  ]>q  patrouw  & 
rewele ;  secouwde  is  veyn  religiouw,  &  ^at  haue]?  o^er 
patrouw  and  rewele.  James  sei]?  ^at  clene  religioun  & 
wijioute  wem  bifore  god  &  ])g  fader  is  j^is,  to  visite  moderlees 
child  re  w  &  widewis  iw  her^  twibulacion,  &  kepe  hy  /w  silf  wi]?- 
oute  wem  fro  foulywg  of  ]7is  world.  James  speki]?  not  heer^ 
of  ]>G  ordwis  j>at  holdew  here  castels  or  liuew  as  ankeris,  but  of 
J^e  religiouw  ]iat  crist  ha^  ordeyned  to  fijte  wij?  'pe  world 
&  profile  to  needi  mew,  as  crist  dide  wi]?  hise  aposfiis.  And 
pf  ]7ou  seie  j^o^t  freris  visitew  modirlees  childrew  &  widewis  ; 
soj^eliche  pe  fend  visiti]?  mew,  but  to  deceyue  hem  &  harme 
hem  ;  &  pus  j^ise  frer^s  visitew  mew,  but  riche  mew  iw  heere 
welfare.  And  cristfs  ordre  biddij?  mew  to  kepe  hem  vnfoulid 
fro  j^e  world,  but  freris  seldom  or  neuere  but  whew  coueytise 
fouli];  hem ;  for  whew  ]7ei  visitew  pore  mew  or  widewis,  j^ei 
don  to  gete  goodus  of  hem,  as  corn,  monee,  chese  or  som-whwt 
pat  nedi]?  more  hem  jien  ];e  freris ;  &  pus  pei  helpew  hem  not 
iw  tribulaciouw,  but  to  deceyue  here  bodi  &  soule.  &  herfore 
sey]?  iames  aftir,  j^at  rewle  or  wisdom  of  ]?ise  ordris  is 
worldliche,  beestliche,  &  fendliche,  &  Jiis  is  veyn  religiouw. 


Chap.  IV.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


805 


pe  rewele  is  first  worldliche,  ^'for  j^ei  ben  ou^rcomew  of 
world,  &  specbe  of  men  plesij?  hem  not  but  ^if  it  twrne  hem  to 
world«s  vy^nywg,  &  sich  a  rewele  mot  neede  ouercome  \e 
fiesh  of  siche  freris,  for  ]7ei  seke?^  lust  as  bestis,  •&  coueyte^^ 
likywgis  of  fiesh.  &  j^is  rewele  is  \e  deuelis  ;  as  J^e  deuel  is 
here  patrouw  in  j^is,  “  &  j^er^,”  sei]?  James,  “is  enuye  &  strif 
wher(9  sich  a  veyn  religion  regne]?.”  But  \e  rewele  of  clene 
religious  hauej?  ey^t  co;^diciou?^8  '^at  iames  telli]?.  “  ffirst  it  is 
chast,  pesible,  temperat,  tretable ;  ^  assewtyng  to  goode  J^ing^’s, 
]ier-wi\  ful  of  m^rcy,  ful  of  goode  fruyt^'s,  &  iugi]?  wi]7-oute 
feynyng.”  Juge  wise  me^  whe^er  j^ise  ey^te  hen  kept  in  ]>e 
ordris  of  freris.  Bodiliche  chastite  is  ofte  broken,  but  ofter<3 
chastite  of  soule ;  ffreris  fi^tew  in  mowg  hem  silf,  &  helpe7^  to 
fijte  2i-)en  reeaumws ;  ffreres  hauew  a  newe  man^r  in  alle  j^e 
ded/s  ]7at  I’ci  dow  heer^,  but  \e  old  maner  was  ful  good  j^at 
crist  ^af  to  hise  disciplis.  pe  aposfiis  werew  so  tretable,  j?at 
p’f  men  taujtew  hem  a  bet^re  ordr^  or  pat  ou^t  of  her^  bileeue 
wer^  fals,  J^ei  woldew  sone  assewte  to  treu]7e ;  but  j^is  J^iwg 
my^te  not  be,  for  stablenesse  of  her^  patrouw.  ffreris  mai  be 
pleywliche  conuict  bo]?e  of  her^  ordri?  &  heere  treu]7e,  &  pt 
heere  pride  letti]?  hem  to  assente  ^  to  J^is  treu]7e,  boj^e  of  her^ 
ordr/s  &  heer^  opiniouws;  but  ]7ei  seke^  mawnes  help  &  fals 
dilayes  to  lette  knowywg  of  treuj^e,  &  ]7us  j^ei  con^enten  not  to 
good,  but  bi  heer^  power  striuew  a^en  it.  And  whew  j^ei 
spoylew  pore  mew,  J^ei  bew  not  ful  of  mercy,  but  louew  betere 
stones  of  heere  housis  j^ew  pore  mew  or  oj^ere  frems.  Hem 
wawti]?  good  fruyt,  whew  j^ei  pwrsewew  trewe  prestos  bi 
gabbywgis  &  bi  gylis  for  pei  prechew  freliche  pe  gospel, 
ffiaterywg  pat  j^ise  mew  vsen  telli]?  pat  j^ei  iugew  not  wi]7-outew 
feynywg.  pis  is  j^e  veyw  religiouw  pat  James  speki])  of;  “  for 
who  euere  wene]?  pat  he  be  religiose,  &  refrenej?  not  his 
tuwge,  but  deceyue]?  his  herte,  J^is  mawnes  religion  is  veyn.” 
pise  freris  bew  dou?wbe  iw  many  placfs  when  '^'j^ei  shulde  speke 
to  heere  bretheren  of  pe  treu]?e  of  godd^s  lawe  &  oj^ere  weyes 
pat  helpew  to  vertues ;  but  whew  J^ei  comew  out  of  fis  prisouw 


*[p,  85&  MS.] 


James  iii.  [17.] 
The  eight  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  rule 
of  pure  religion 


not  kept  by  the 
friars. 


Apostles  were 
willing  to  learn. 


Friars  strive  to 
prevent  the  truth 
being  known. 


This  is  the  vain 
religion  of  which 
James  speaks. 
[James  i.  26.] 


*[p.  86  MS.] 
These  friars  are 
dumb  when  they 
should  speak, 


^  tretatable  MS. 


2  assento  MS. 


20 


306 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERTS. 


[Chap.  IV, 


but  ready  to  tell 
lies. 


[James  ii.  9.] 

Friars  are  ac- 
ceuters  of  per¬ 
sons. 


They  speak  by 
God’s  law,  but  db, 
the  reverse ; 

covet  to  be 
masters, 


James  v.  [1-3.] 


and  to  heap  up 
riches. 


]?ei  bew  dilauy  in  heoxe  tuwg«s  in  gabbywgn's  &  otb^r  iapis  J’at 
souwew  not  to  charite  :  Juge  mm  wbe]7^r  ony  freris  ben  siche 
\at  bauew  sich  \ejn  religion.  James  telli]?  aftir  bi  cristis 
rewele  \at  mm  shuldew  not  accepte  persones  ;  but  mew  seyew 
'^at  freris  don,  bo]7e  of  here  bre]7^ren  &  oj^er  men,  for  pf  a 
frere  be  a  moA'&ier  or  a  riehe  frer<9  iw  mowg  hise  \>re\eren,  be 
shal  be  loutid  &  worshipid  mor(9  \en  crisU's  la  we  techi]? ;  & 
\us  frens  worshiped  seculer  lord^s,  to  gete  worldlicbe  help  of 
hem.  &  \us  freris  spekew  bi  goddz’s  lawe,  but  ]7ei  don  euew  \e 
reuers,  as  crist  seif  of  pharisees,  \at  pei  seyen  but  fei  don 
not.  pus  freris  reden  in  goddis  lawe,  pat  pei  shal  not  be 
makid  maystris,  &  f is  fei  coueytew  wif  f e  synne,  wherfor^ 
fis  maystirship  is  forfendid.  &  pus  iames  forbedif  cristew 
mew  to  be  riche  here,  for  rust  &  wormes  destrien  heer*? 
richesse,  &  pat  doif  harm  to  f  e  comunes ;  but  pt  f  ise  freris 
gederew  monee  &  oper  good^s  to  hem  self,  &  bew  propre  iw 
heer^  hauywg  apw  f e  rewle  of  charite,  &  but  pf  fise  wordis  of 
iames  don  for  f  ise  ordris,  I  am  certeyn  pat  now  word  of  iames 
approuef  fise  newe  religions. 


Capitulum  S'”- 

Se  we  ouer  f  is  whwt  iude  seif  of  apostataes  of  f  ise  ordris,  hou 
f  ei  werew  first  punyshid  of  god  in  tyme  of  f  e  old  lawe.  for  crises 
religiouw  lastif  eu^r,  bof  e  to  f  e  dai  of  dom  &  aftir,  &  alle  f ise 
Jude  12.  newe  religiouws  moten  haue  ende  f ewne  or  bifor(?.  Jude  seif  fat 

f ise  apostataas  bew  iw  heer^  mete's  filf is,  fat  feedew  mew  wif -oute 
mear they*^ have  hem  self;  &  fws  freris,  for  heer^  metis  fwt  fei 

their  °s^ouis  'Sth  of  lordis&bishopis,  feedew  heer^  soulis  ajew  bi  fablis,  &  bew 

Their  habits  can-  ^"^oute  to  hyde.heer(3  sywnes,  but  certis  largenesse  of  heer^  abitis 
noj;h^ide  sms  from  not  sywnes  fro  god.  pei  mai  blywde  mew  for  a  tyme  bi 

her^  feyned  absolucions,  but  whewne  mew  shal  rekene  biforecrist 
*[p.  866  MS.]  \n  day  of  his  last  iugemewt,  f  er^  fise  habitis  shal  be  a  weye, 
awayatthejudg-  '^'fise  rewelis  &  fise  religiouws,  &  religion  of  cristi’s  lawe  shal 

ment  day.  ,  /  o  >  & 

shyne  few-ne  for  kepywg  per-ei\  for  ypocritis  shal  be  depperst 
dawipned  of  alle  f e  fendis  fat  shal  be  iw  belle.  Jude  seyf 


Chap.  V.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


307 


aftir,  ]>at  Jise  men  ben  cloudis  wif-oute  watir,  ]iat  ben  boren  ciauds  without 
aboute  wi]?  wy^dis ;  &  }>is  a-cordi]?  to  fals  prestis,  for 
philosophris  seyn  bi  resonw  \ut  it  is  eir  of  pestilence  when  it  pestilential, 
seme]?  to  reyne  &  reynej?  not,  as  it  fallij?  bi  siche  cloud^s,  for 
]?ei  letten  ]?e  li^t  of  heuene  &  temperen  not  ]?e  erj^e  bi  reyn. 

&  ]ius  it  falli]?  gostliche  bi  men  \at  shulden  prdche  godd^'s 
lawe,  &  letten  to  teche  ]?is  lawe,  &  occupien  siche  pr^latfs 
state  bi  gabbyng  &  fagyngis,  &  not  bi  reyn  of  goddis  word ; 

&  ]7is  is  a  pmlose  tyme  of  pestilence  of  mannes  soule.  Jude 

sei]?  aftir  \at  ]7ise  ben  heruest  trees  wi]?oute  fruyt,  twyes  Trees  without 

deed,  &  j^e  rootis  ben  drawen  up ;  &  \us  ]?ei  ben  hydous  trees. 

J^is  word  shulde  be  dred  of  pr<9latfs,  si]?  ]?ei  ben  trees  in  ]?is 

world  :  &  ]?ei  shulden  heie  gostliche  fruyt  as  don  Q\er  trees  in  s^^^h  are  prelates 

heruest,  but  ]?ei  ben  wi]?oute  fruyt,  as  was  ]?e  fyge  tree  \at  ] 

crist  cnrsede,  for  ne^er  in  prdchyng  ne  good  lyf  ]?ei  profiten  to 

]?e  peplis  soule.  And  ]?ns  ]?ei  ben  twyes  dede,  deed  body  & 

soule,  deed  in  ]?is  world  &  in  ]?e  o]?(?r,  deed  in  heere  owen 

persone,  deed  in  profityng  to  o]?er  men.  And  heer(3  rootfs  ben 

tnrned  up ;  for  her^  loue  shulde  be  hid,  &  bi  growyng  of  ]?is 


roote  ]?ei  shulden  profile  to  mennes  soulis ;  but  pf  heero  loue 
be  ficchid  on  worldliche  ]?ingis  moro  ]?en  on  heuenliche  ]?ingis, 

]?e  rote  is  tnrned  up,  &  ]?ei  ben  drye,  wi]?oute  fruyt.  Whe]?er 

]jat  freris  or  o]?ore  men  failen  ]?ns  in  heero  ofiS.ce,  iiide 

prophecyde  of  hem,  al  pf  ]?ey  weren  not  in  his  tyme  ;  for  as 

petre  sei|>,  “cristas  aposfiis  haueden  clero  spirit  to  prophecie.”  [2  Peter i.  i9(?)] 

And  Mse  men  ben  boren  aboute  bi  wyndis  of  vnstablenesse,  &  BM-ne  about  by 

■'  ''  ’  winds, 

heyhid  to  grete  statfs,  now  hero  &  now  ]’ero,  for  hem  wanti]? 

]?e  rote  of  loue  \ai  shulde  be  picchid  in  goddis  lawe,  &  Jns 


wyndns  mouen  not  ]?ise  trees  to  growe  stableliche  in  ]?e 

chirche.  Jude  seih  aftir,  'hat  ]?ise  ben  flodis  of  be  wood  see,  Floods  of  the 

.  .  .  raging  sea  froth- 

bat  froben  heero  owen  confucions.  '^'It  is  knowen  bat  holi  *[p.  87  ms.] 

^  ^  .  .  .  .  their  own 

chirche  is  a  ship  in  ]?e  see,  &  ]?ing  ]?at  moost  noye]?  }?is  ship  confusion; 

ben  felle  flodis  of  ]?is  world  ;  &  pf  freris  hauen  ]?ise  two,  noo 

drede,  god  vndirstood  hem  hero,  &  pf  ]?ei  fro}?en  bi  irose  fisege 

apn  men  ]?at  tellen  hem  treu]?e,  noo  drede  ]?ei  frozen  heero  tha?  are^  a^gry 

_  1*  1  OT.A  witli  tbosG  wlio 

owen  t?(?wiusion,  &  makew  neer^  malice  mor^  knowen.  &  but  teii  them  truth. 


308 


TRACT ATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  V. 


Men  hope  by  re¬ 
proof  to  amend 
some  friars  and 
to  open  people’s 
eyes. 

Wandering  stars. 


Nature  of  comets, 
they  betoken 
pestilence ; 
such  are  wicked 
priests. 


Enoch’s 

prophecy. 


The  false  friars 
come  up  to  Jude’s 
description ; 
murmurers,  etc. 


*  [p.  876  MS.] 


Their  begging  is 
a  complaint  of 
poverty. 


They  wander 
after  their  own 
lusts.  ' 


^if  iude  spak  her^  of  freris  he  spak  in  noo  place  of  j^ise  sectfs. 
Lord,  si]?  crist  &  hise  apos^lis  spakew  sharpliche  ajews  mewnes 
sywnes,  &  J?ei  bidden  we  shlllde7^  sewe  hem,  whi  shulde7^ 
we  not  so  speke  aftir  ?  ^if  a  maw  be  iw  despeyer  of  malice  of 
]7is  wood  see  or  \at  mew  shal  be  helpid  fro  it,  ]>emie  is  it  noo 
boote  hym  to  speke  a^ew ;  but  mew  hopew  bi  goddfs  grace  wi}' 
sich  sharp  speche  &  trewe,  \at  somme  freris  shal  be  amewdid, 
&  ]7e  peple  shal  knowe  hem  be  We.  And  ]ius  seij?  Jude  aftir, 
\ai  ]'ise  mew  ben  erryng  sterris,  to  whom  \e  tempest  of 
derkenesse  is  kept  wi]?outew  ende.  It  is  knowen  bi  philoso- 
phris  \at  ]>e  sterre  herid  or  beerdid  erri]?  fro  heuene  iw  his 
mouywg,  &  bitokene]’  pestilewce,  &  so  it  is  of  wickid  prestis 
]>at  erven  fro  kepywg  of  goddis  lawe.  &  j>us  pf  frerts  wolew 
excuse  hem  pat  iude  speki]?  not  of  he^w,  pei  motew  excuse  hem 
first  pat  ]?ei  liuew  not  wickidliche,  for  eu^re  mew  werew 
holdew  bi  godd«s  lawe  to  speke  ajew  goddis  adu^rsaries.  And 
herfor^  sei]?  iude  aftir,  pat  “  enoc  pe  seuenj^e  p^rsone  fro 
ad^7m  prophecied  of  siche  wickid  mew  :  lo,  god  come]>  iw  hise 
J>ousynd  seyntis  to  make  iugemewt  ajew  alle  wickid,  &  to 
reproue  alle  wickid  mew  of  al  J^e  werkis  of  heeri?  wickidnesse 
iw  whiche  pei  didew  wickidliche;  &  of  alle  hard  j^ywgis  bi 
whiche  wickid  mew  ban  spokew  a^ew  god.’  ’  Mew  motew  o]?er 
denye  god,  or  seye  pat  fro  l^e  bigywuyng  of  pe  world  it  was 
leueful  to  reproue  wickid  mew.  Whi  shuldew  not  mew  reproue 
siche  frerfs  ?  si]?  god  ha]?  ordeyned  many  ]?ousynd  to  mayw- 
tene  his  cause  ajew  pe  fend.  And  herfore  sey]>  iude  aftir, 
hou  mew  shal  knowe  siche  pseudoes.  ‘‘pise  bew  gruccheris, 
ful  of  pleynt,  wandringe  oftir  heer*?  desyris,  &  her^  mou]? 
speki];  pride,  makiwge  ^persones  wondirful  bi  cause  of  her^ 
wywnyng.”  ^if  freris  ben  not  spokew  of  her(9  ]?ei  motew  line 
]?us  iustliche,  pat  ]?ei  grucche  not  ajew  here  pouerte  bi  pe 
criyng  of  here  beggywgis.  And  pf  alle  heere  do]?  is  tellew  to 
mew  pat  ]?ei  bew  needi  beggers,  &  pei  wolew  take  of  pore  & 
riche  al  maner  of  god^s  pat  pei  mai  gete,  J’ewne  pei  bew  fals 
&  ful  of  playnt  of  ]?e  pouerte  pat  J’ei  ban  chosen.  And  pf 
freris  after  ]?is  feyned  pouerte  wawdrew  iw  reumes  aftir  here 


Chap.  VI.]  TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-ERERIS.  309 

lustis,  &  chesen  to  ete  wij?  riche  mew  wher(9  J’ei  may  fare 
lustfulliche,  &  haue  heer^  daliauwce  wi]?  wymmew  for  her^ 
leccherose  lyues ;  who  dredi]?  j^at  god  ne  spat  her^  hi  iude  of 
fise  freris  ?  And  ^if  fei  spekew  proudliche  to  mew  of  heer(3  They  speak 

j  -  o  j'  1  1  1  ‘  1  T*oi  proudly  of  them- 

ordris  &  oi  here  persones ;  hou  pei  passew  op^re  ordris  &  opi^r  selves  and  their 

ordcfs* 

p^rsones  bifor^  hem  in  holynesse  &  iw  witt ;  &  pus  glosen 

persones  wondirful,  boj^e  of  heer^  ordris  &  wi]7-oute,  bi  cause 

of  heer(9  wywnywg,  who  dredi]?  pat  god  ne  spak  here  of  siche 

freris  pat  don  pus  ?  And  iude  moue]?  cristen  mew  aftir  to  be 

war  &  reproue  siche  mew:  “But  ^ee,  ful  der^  hreperen,  haue 

mywde  of  pe  wordis  pat  werew  seyd  byfor^  of  pe  aposdis  of 

our(9  lord  ih^^u  crist,  pat  han  seyd  to  pu,  pat  in  j^e  laste  tymes 

shal  come  gilours  wandring  aftir  heeri?  desyris,  not  iw  good 

religion,  pise  bew  ]7ei  |>at  departew  hem  silf  bestial,  &  hauew 

not  pe  holy  goost.”  Juge  mew  whej^^r  freris  bew  siche; 

certis  penne  god  spak  here  of  hem,  for  god  woot  al  j^ing  pat  is  ^urc^of^angers 

to  come,  &  warne]?  his  chirche  of  pmlis  of  it.  ^if  ])ise  freris 

bew  gylours  bo]7e  of  mew  &  of  childrew,  bi  pe  holynesse  j^wt 

)>ei  biheetew  to  robbe  mew  of  heere  goodis,  &  wawdren  iw 

cuwtrees  aftir  heer(^  desyris,  to  placis  &  p^rsones  wherd  J^ei 

hopen  to  far*?  aftir  lustis  of  heer^  flesh,  jjewne  god  spak  heer*? 

of  freris.  And  pf  freris  departew  heer*?  duellywg  fro  op  ere 

mew,  boj^e  lerid  &  lewid,  &  wawdrew  not  as  crist  or  hise 

aposflis,  mor^  to  edifie  J^e  peple  pen  for  lust  or  worldliche 

wywnywg,  pewne  god  spak  her^  of  hem.  Hue  pe  freris  bi 

goddfs  la  we  &  teche  ]?ei  mew  pat  J^ei  ben  not  siche. 

Capitulum  G”*’ 

^  Jon  euwwngelist  spak  sharpliche  of  j^is  mature,  bo)>e  iw  epistel  *[p.  88  ms.] 

Witness  ot*  St# 

of  his  wisdom  &  iw  his  book  of  priuetees;  but  for  he  spekib  ber*?  John  in  Ms 

^  ^  Ar  /  /  epistles. 

mystiliche,  &  fewe  wolen  j^er*?  approue  his  sentence,^  per  fore  leue 
we  j^is  book,  &  speke  we  a  word  of  hise  epistlis.  Ion  sei]?  iw  his 
book  hou  alle  mew  shuldew  kepe  charite,  &  so  mew  shuldew 


^  setence  MS. 


310 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-ERERIS. 


[Chap.  TI. 


Men  should  love 
things  according 
to  their  goodness, 

hut  they  love  ac¬ 
cording  to  the 
order. 


[1]  Johniii.  [15.] 


When  they 
preach  they  show 
love  for  worldly 
goods. 


They  appeal  not 
to  God’s  law,  but 
to  stories  and 
bulls. 


[1]  John  ii.  [18.] 


[1  John  iv.  3.] 
*  [p.  886  MS.] 


Various  ways  of 
leaving  hold  of 
Christ. 


loue  j^ing^s  aftir  ]^at  j^ei  ben  goode.  But  berd  jienkew  somme 
j^at  freris  fallen  openliche,  for  bi  grauwte  of  hem  self  oj^ere 
ordris  ben  bet^re  }»ew  beerew,  &  jit  ]?ei  louen  morg  ber*?  owen 
fen  fei  don  fe  bet^re  ordris.  as  jif  men  askedew  of  f ise  four*? 
sect^s  whefer  alle  j^ise  ordris  hen  euene  goode,  ]7ei  wolew  seye 
anon:  “nay,  but  oon  is  heiere  fen  an  ofer]^^  &  fus  bi  berd 
owen  specbe  j^ey  teller  fat  j^ey  leue72  fe  bet^re  and  louen 
pdrsones  of  ber^  ordr(3  not  euene  aftir  fat  fei  hen  goode,  &  so 
]7is  diuision  of  freris  bi  j^ise  ordris  fat  ben  not  groundid  maki]? 
a  priuee  enuye  and  putti]?  out  loue  of  god;  but  eeriis>  fenne  ]?ei 
ben  mansleers  &  of  fe  fend«s  religion,  for  ion  seij?  fat  ilcbe 
man  fat  hati]?  bis  hxofer  is  mansleer.  &  ]7us  it  seme]?  of 
beer(3  lyues,  fat  many  of  bem  ben  irreguler ;  &  fus  in  tr^uel 
of  ]7ise  freris,  When  J7ei  wandren  aboute  to  pr^cbe,  it  seme]; 
fat  ];ei  louen  mor^  woridlicbe  goodis  ];en  beel];e  of  soulis  fat 
];ei  visiten  ;  &  wbo  dredi];  fat  sicbe  ordris  ne  ben  broujt  in  bi 
fe  fend?  ]7ei  leuen  to  proue  bi  goddis  lawe beyjnesse  of  ];ing/s 
fat  fei  preysen  so ;  but  bi  tails  bynej^e  bileeue,  &  bi  bull  of 
fe  pope  ]7ei  prouen  beyjnesse  of  heere  patroun  &  bolynesse  of 
here  ordr^.  &  fus  sei]?  ion  so];elicbe  fat  ];er  ben  now  many 
makid  anticristis  ;  for  alle  j^ise  men  fat  ben  ajen  crist  in  her^ 
loue,  ];ei  louen  not  moost  crist  of  alle  jjingis  fat  hen.  but 
];ise  men  louedon  more  crist,  jif  ];ei  baueden  oonlicbe  crist 
bere  patroun;  for  vnordynel  love  of  bere  patroun  departi); 
bem  fro  bool  loue  of  crist ;  &  fus  fei  bauen  not  god  bere 
fadir,  but  somme  patroun  byne];e  god  ;  &  fenne  ];ei  ben 
an^mristis  and  fendis  children,  as  ion  sey];.  &  fus  seij;  ion, 
fat  ilcbe  spirit  fat  lousij;  ibesu  is  not  of  god  ^'but  an^ecrist,  & 
fus  fer  ben  pseudo-propbe^is  now  in  ];is  laste  bour  broujt  in. 
Men  may  louse  ibesu  crist  on  many  maneres  ajens  god,  as  be 
fat  trowi);  not  of  crist  fat  be  is  bo];e  god  &  man,  but  trowi); 
fe  oon  not  fe  other,  lousij;  crist  ajen  bileue.  and  ];ise  men 
lousen  crist  fat  maken  bise  membris  beere  special  patrouns,  & 
leuen  to  haue  crist  oonlicbe  beere  patroun,  werbi  fei  louen 
lasse  crist.  &  j’ise  men  lousen  crist  fat,  bi  beere  precbyng  or 
beere  lif,  maken  J;at  crist  is  vnstablelicbe  in  mennes  bertis 


Chap.  VT.] 


TRACT ATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


311 


wher(3  he  was  bifor^.  &  boje  freris  and  pr<?stis  lousen 
crist  on  many  manures,  &  ]7U5  mew  hauew  of  holy  writ  pe 
names  pat  pei  putten  oon  freris.  Ion  telli]?  iw  his  secuwde 
epistle  hou  mew  shuldew  leue  siche  an^^cristis,  &  not  receyue 
hem  iw-to  heer^  housis  ne  greete  hem  iw  pe  weie ;  &  iw  mowg 
alle  pe  remedies  pat  god  spak  ajen  siche  mew,  j^is  is  a  special 
remedie  of  god,  to  which  ilche  maw  is  holdow.  for  ion  sei]? 
pat  wh<«t  maw  sei|>  heyl  to  siche  an^ecristis  shal  haue  part  of 
heere  werkis  for  assent  pat  he  pue]?.  &  meche  more  jif  a  maw 
norisshe  hem  wi]?  hise  goody’s,  or  defende  hem  iw  worde  & 
dede,  for  j^ewne  he  defendi]?  crist/s  ewmyes ;  &  cert^s  bi  lawe 
pat  men  vsen  j^ewne  he  is  traitour  to  crist ;  &  ]?is  perile 
shuldew  mew  flee  mor^  j^ew  perele  of  mawnes  lawe.  &  herfor*? 
biddi]?  iow  pat  ‘  ‘  mew  shuldew  assaye  siche  prmee  mew,  ^heper 
]7ei  hew  on  godd^s  side,”  for  mony  siche  hew  an^ecrisU's.  &  bi 
certeyn  rewele  of  iow,  pf  ony  siche  louse  crist,  he  is  pat  ilke 
pat  men  shuldew  fle,  boj^e  iw  speche  &  iw  lyf.  &  pus  pf  it 
wer^  wel  studied  oui^r,  mony  of  ]?ise  newe  ordris  shuldew  be 
pus  fled  as  an^^crist^s  for  diuision  j^at  j^ei  makew ;  &  j^us  bi 
alle  pe  autours  pat  ben  iw  pe  newe  lawe  mew  shulden  speke 
]7us  apw  freris,  whew  J>ei  don  piis  ajew  crist.  &  it  wer(?  al  oon 
to  mew  to  lette  j^is  iw  word  or  dede  &  to  destrie  bileeue  pat 
god  ha]?  puew  iw  |?e  newe  lawe.  but  as  it  is  seyd  bifore  mew 
shuldew  kepe  hem  iw  godd^s  bouwdis  &  kepe  treu]?e  &  good 
entewt ;  &  pus  for  charite  of  pe  chirche  &  of  freris  speke  ]7ise 
word^s ;  cert^s  ]?ise  wordis  hew  soj^e,  &  ilche  maw  shulde 
grauwte  hem.  But  oon  errour  is  iw  ]?is  mature  whew  freris 
<?owtinuew  iw  heere  sywne,  &  iugew  to  wh^t  entewt  oper  men 
seien  ]?ise  treuj^is  to  hem.  But  her<3  ]?ise  word«s  bew  suspect 
for  many  resouws  of  goddis  lawe.  It  is  propr^  to  god  to  iuge 
entewt  pat  maw  haue]? ;  what  fend^'s  ben  ]?ei  pat  takew  on  hem 
to  wh«t  entewt  a  maw  speki]?.  Cert*s  alle  pe  fend^s  iw  helle 
kuwnen  not  see  a  mawnes  entent,  &  mew  shuldew  not  iw  ]?is 
hye  hem  abone  fend^'s  but  pf  god  hadde  bedew  hem  ]?is.  & 

]?us  mew  shewen  hem  nakid  of  resouw ;  whew  pat  noon  of  hem 
kan  prone  fat  fis  sentewce  pat  mew  seyen  is  fals  bi  godd/s 


Friars  and  other 
priests  do  this. 


2  John  [11.] 


A  supporter  of 
Antichrist  is  a 
traitor  to  Christ. 


1  John  iv.  [1.] 


Thus  we  have 
cited  all  authors 
of  the  new  law  to 
justify  reproof  of 
friars. 


*[p.  89  MS.] 

Friars  attribute 
had  intentions  to 
their  reprovers. 


God  is  the  judge 
of  intent. 


312 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  VI. 


The  friars  are  like  lawe,  but  trewG  &  sewyuge  of  bileuG,  J^ey  sbewen  ferrer*?  hou 

^?li3ris00s 

j^ei  hen  disciplis  of  fals  pharisees,  ]>e  whiche  hauede^^  J'is 
meaner  whe?^  ]?ei  myJte7^  not  denye  cristas  dedfs,  \at  \ei  ne 
werew  goode  in  hem  self  &  ful  of  myraclis  &  grace  of  god,  ^ei 
who  spoke  ill  of  deprauede/i  le  man^r  of  doyng,  &  hus  crist  in  hise  dedis.  pei 

Christ’s  works,  ^  ^  *  .  . 

seydew  som  tyme  \a\j  crist  was  not  on  godd^'s  syde,  but  wi]?  ^e 
because  he  broke  fend,  for  he  kepte  not  his  haliday  in  doy^g  of  siche  myraclis. 

Oth^re  seyde^  pat  crist  dide  pise  wondris  in  pe  vertu  of 
beelzebub.  &  pus  pei  castedew  to  depraue  crist  when  pei 
myjtew  not  forsake  pe  treupe  ;  &  pus  pei  shewen  hem  luciferis 
children  pat  wolen  not  amende  hem  self,  but  studien  hou  pei 
may  depraue  men  pat  tellen  hem  treupe  to  here  good. 


The  devil’s  clergy 
say  that  we  make 
ourselves  even 
with  God, 


while  we  are  sin¬ 
ful. 


We  acknowledge 
our  sin. 


*[p.  896  MS.] 

hut  believe  our¬ 
selves  Christ’s 
servants, 

and  what  we  say 
profitable  to  the 
Church. 


Capitulum  7”*’ 

Bvt  her(3  grucchen  pe  fendfs  clerkis  pat  pus  accusen  men, 
&  seyn  pat  pei  ben  dene  of  pis.  But  we  ben  coupable  in  pis 
synne ;  for  we  maken  vs  euene  wip  crist,  &  trowen  our(9  wordis 
as  we  weren  god,  &  forsaken  pat  we  erren  in  entent  as  seyntfs 
in.heuene,  but  oure  dedis  &  our^  lif  shewen  openliche  pe  con- 
trarie.  Her^  we  graunten  mekeliche  pat  in  pis  &  al  our*?  lif 
her<?  we  erren  ofte  &  faylen  in  pe  heypesse  of  charite,  &  her- 
ioxe  we  weylen  her^  pat  we  synnen  pus  in  pis  lif.  «fe  pus  we 
wolen  not  be  euene  wip  crist,  but  trow  pat  "^'we  ben  hise 
synneful  s^ruauntfs,  &  in  v^rtu  &  worschip  of  hym  we  seyen 
pe  trewpe  pat  he  hap  taujt;  &  ofte  we  erren  in  entent  & 
desyren  veniaunce  in  rancour,  but  we  ben  war  pat  we  seyn 
sop  &  profitable  to  crist^s  chirche ;  &  when  pat  god  puep  vs 
grace  we  leuen  errour  of  pis  entent,  &  witen  pat  we  shulden 
not  leue  hero  for  crepyng  in  of  siche  synnes,  sip  we  shulden 
synne  moro  leuynge  to  speke  sharpliche  pis.  &  \us  bi  process 
of  tyme  we  trowen  pat  god  wole  clenese  ouro  entent,  &  pus 
when  we  ben  in  qniete  we  don  pis  moost  for  goddis  worship,  & 
also  for  profit  of  his  chirche,  &  for  good  pat  freris  mai  haue. 
"Wei  we  witen  of  ouro  bileeue  pat  we  shulden  sewe  crist,  but 
he  reprouede  men  sharpliche  pat  diden  pus  ajen  god ;  whi 


Chap.  VII.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


313 


sliulden  not  we  do  so,  si]?  we  grau?^te?^  vs  cristis  disciplis  ? 

Petre  ^af  co^^sel  to  crist  Ipat  he  shulde  not  tus  suffr(9  deeK  as  Mat. xvi.  [22,23.] 

.  ,  '*  _  ^  Christ’s  example. 

cnst  tolde  bifore  \at  he  wolde ;  hut  crist  seyde  ajen  to  petr^, 
for  charite  ])at  he  hanede  to  hym:  ‘‘Go  hihynde  me,  Sathanas; 
for  ]?ou  sauerist  not  ]iq  treu]7e  of  god.”  Her<9  may  we  see 
openliche  hou  crist  lettede  not  for  loue  of  petre  to  reproue  Christ  reproved 
hym  sharpliche ;  whi  may  not  mew  do  so  to  freris,  jif  ]?ei  ioved’him.^° 
trespassew  mor^  openliche  &  to  mor^  harm  of  crisG’s  chirche. 

Also  we  may  see  iw  j^ise  wordy's  hou  we  hen  holdew  to  sewe 
crist,  &  to  suffr(3  peynes  of  our^  body  for  mor^  good  of  our<9 
soule,  & herfore  bad  crist  petre  here :  “go  aftir  me  Sathanas.” 

Mew  \at  wolen  aboue  cristis  lore  not  sewe  hywi  but  go  hifore 

hen  sathanas,  as  petre  was,  but  crist  reprouede  ]?is  iw  petre.  Matt.  vii.  [15.] 

also  crist  tellij?  twt  “mew  shuldew  fle  fro  fals  propheGs,”  &  tellij?  Christ’s  warning 

,  ,  ^  ,  .  against  false  pro- 

two  eowdicions  hi  whiche  mew  shuldew  knowe  he?w  ;  fdrst  “  ]?ei  phets. 
comew  iw  cloj^is  of  sheep,”  for  ypocritis  bigilew  mew  hi  j^is. 

Aftir  “  ]?ei  hew  wolues  of  raueyn,”  si]?  for  worldliche  good/s  ]?ei 

feynew  holynesse.  &  crist  sey]?  aftir  hou  men  shal  knowe 

he?w  hi  ]?e  fruytts  ]?at  comew  of  hem.  ]if  freris  she  wen  hi  ■ 

here  dedts  }at  ]?ei  hew  siche  fals  prophetes,  crist^s  chirche  *[p.  90MS.] 

he  harmed  by  hem,  whi  shulden  not  me^i  teche  here  gylis  ? 

bo]?e  for  loue  of  cristew  mew,  &  for  loue  of  ]?e  freris ;  si]?  crist 

biddi]?,  ]?at  “  jif  ]?in  brother  sywne]?  iw  ]?ee,  ]?ou  shalt  snybbe 

hym.”  Othere  we  motew  forsake  crist,  or  telle  here  sharpliche  Matt.  xvih.  [is.] 

as  he  ha]?  taujt.  &  \us  we  redew  ]?wt  crist  aftir  ]?at  he  was  Christ’s  reproof 

.  „  --  -  ,  ..  .  to  the  disciples  at 

risen  iro  deed  reprouede  sharpliche  hise  disciplis  tor  here  Emmaus. 

defaute  iw  bileeue:  “  0  foolis,  &  slow  to  trowe  iw  ]?ing/s  ]?at  Lukexxiv.  [25.] 

prophetis  han  seyd  ofte.”  Lord,  si]?  crist  repreuede  ]?us  hise 

disciplis  for  loue  of  hem,  and  clepede  hem  foolis  &  slow  to 

trowe,  why  may  not  mew  bi  lore  of  crist  reproue  more  foolis 

for  more  perile  ?  &  ]?is  mew  shuldew  do  sharpliche,  for  softe 

word^s  mouen  not  ]?ise  mew.  And  marc  telli]?  ]?«t  crist  spak  Mark  m.  [21.] 

so  sharpliche  ]?at  somme  of  hise  disciplis  seyden  ]?wt  crist  bi 

hise  dedis  was  twrned  iw-to  woodnesse,  &  \us  many  mew  for 

sich  slow]?e  of  sharp  reprouywg  synnew  meche,  for  sharp  usefulness  of 

wordis  by  tew  ofte  where  soft  speche  shulde  not  moue ;  &  ]?us 


314 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  VII. 


1  Sam.  iii,  13.  men  sejen  hely  fe  heyj  prest  was  dampned,  for  lie  re- 
proued  hise  sones  but  to  softliche  &  slowliche ;  &  in  ^is 

synnen  mony  mew,  &  herfor*?  freris  shuldew  loke  whe]7^r  ^ei 
ben  coupable  iw  ^is  sywne,  &  amewde  hem  sone  l^rof,  &  iuge 
JohiiTii.  [24.]  not  by  fac/s  of  mew,  for  crist  biddi]? :  ITe  wole  jee  iuge 

aftir  le  face,  but  iuge  ^ee  iust  iugemewt  of  ling^s  '^ai  ^ee 

Isaiah  vi.  [5.]  knowew  wel.”  &  herfor^  sei]?  ysaie:  “Wo  is  me  for  I  heelde 

[Ezekiel  iii.  18.]  myw  pees.”  and  god  sey]?  to  ezechiel,  “  si]?  be  ha]?  puew  hym 

offys  &  wit,  but  pf  he  telle  mew  peril  &  synne  he  shal  be 

dampned  for  ]?is  synne.”  &  ]?is  moue]?  somme  mew;  si]?  god^ 
puew  hem  witt  &  power,  lest  ]?ey  disusen  pft  of  god,  ]?ei  vsen 
1  Cor.  ix.  [16.]  it  when  nede  is;  &  ]?us  sei]?  poul:  “Wo  is  me  pf  i  preche 
not,”  &  telle  ]?e  peple  heere  sywnes.  &  herfore  god  biddi]?  his 
prophete  to  telle  his  peple  heere  foule  sywnes.  &  \us  sei]? 
Tytus  3°.  [should  poul  to  tite,  ]?e  bisshop,  “reproue  ]?ou  wi]?  al  comauwdemewt,” 
2Tim.  iv.  [2.]  &  poul  biddi]?  tymothe  to  reproue,  to  preie  &  to  blame,  '^but 

*[p.  906  MS.]  couenabliche  &  wi]?oute  ceesywg.  poul  biddi]?  hjm  reproue 

mew,  &  ]?ws  mew  shuldew  not  blame  herfor^,  but  pf  ]?ei 
fordiden  goddis  lawe,  &  excusedew  mew  at  domes  day  of  reprof 
]?wt  god  wole  pue ;  but  ]?is  blasfemye  dar  not  freris  seye ;  & 
Two  sects—  herfor  mew  wolew  trowe  godd«s  lawe.  Tuo  sect^'s  ]>er  bew,  & 
]?e  oon  reproue]?  sywne  hardliche,  &  ]?is  secte  approue]?  crist  iw 
word  &  dede  ;  ]?e  o]?^re  secte  hidi]?  sywne  as  an?^oc7ist  &  hise 
The  first,  Christ’s,  clerkis.  &  noo  drede  ]?e  firste  secte  is  cristis  lore,  &  ]?e  o\er  ]?e 
leproveth  sm,  ^  firste  secte  deyede  crist  &  hi  hym  alle  hise 

apos^lis,  &  ]?is  ]?ey  tau^tew  iw  worde,  as  we  han  told  ofte 
the  second,  that  biforo.  be  secouwde  secte  bat  hydi]?  sywne  was  iw  tyme  of 

hides  sin,  is  lately  ^  _  T  . 

renewed.  bo]?e  goddfs  lawis,  but  now  it  is  late  renewelid  iw  ]?e  tyme  of 
]?ise  newe  ordris ;  but  noo  maw  shulde  trowe  hem  heie,  as  noo 
maw  shulde  be  frero  but  pf  bi  impossible  god  tolde  maw  \at 
Hiding  sin  is  the  he  shulde  make  hym  a  frero ;  &  Ms  hidywa;  is  clepid  pees 

peace  that  Christ  .  ^  ^  i  j  o  7 

came  not  to  send,  'pat  crist  com  not  to  sende  iw  er]?e,  but  to  depart  worldliche 
frendfs  for  moro  loue  pat  mew  shuldew  haue  to  god.  &  ]?us 
We  need  not  wait  Pf  niew  shuldew  leue  to  reproue  til  bei  werew  dene  wib-oute 

to  be  sinless  be-  ‘  •' 

fore  reproving. 


1  ha]?  probably  omitted. 


2  biddetb  MS. 


Chap.  VIII.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


315 


sywne,  pay  shuldew  neu(?r  reproue  her^,  si]?  apos^lis  ■were?^  not 
wi]7-oute^  sywne  ;  but  godd^'s  lawe  dampnep  j^is,  pat  men 
shuldew  reproue  a  sywne  &  wi]?  j’is  sywne  mor^  in  J^e  synne 
l^t  lei  reprouew.  &  pus  kepe  we  vs  fro  greete  sywnes;  & 
speke  we  wyseliche  ajen  opera  syrane;  &  who  pat  seyp  ajera  ^is, 
he  is  on  pa  fend«s  syde.  hou  sharpliche  pat  mera  shuldera  God  must  teach 

,  .  .us  how  to  re- 

speke  a^era  syrane,  &  hi  what  ordr^,  god  mo  teche,  for  hid  prove, 
syrane  pat  man  is  irane  letti]?  hym  ofte  to  knrane  J^is  lore.  Wei 
I  woot  l^^t  crist  &  baptist  reprouedera  mera  for  here  syrane  & 
clepedera  hem  kyradlyragis  of  eddris ;  &  god  woot  wheper  mera 
bera  now  worse,  lyue  we  wel,  &  triste  we  to  god  l^^t  he  wole 
jiue  vs  <?oracel  ira  j^is,  &  haue  we  eu^re  onre  hertis  to  hym,  and 
comune  entent  to  plese  hym  ! 


Capihdum  8”*- 

It  were  to  wite  ou^r  ^e  falshede  of  enideraeis  pat  pa  fend 
hap  brouht  ira  to  loue  hise  newe  ordris.  al  ^if  loue  be  good 
^if  it  be  dene  ira  crist,  ]it  vnordinel  loue  grouradid  ira  falshed 
is  noyose  to  men  for  many  enchesouras.  ^  Sixe  euideracis  *[p.  91  ms.] 
makyj?  pa  fend  to  loue  j^us  hise  ordris.  ffirst  for  heer^  six  evidences 
habit«s  ;  l^t  J^ei  bera  passyragliche  holy,  hare  gurdlis  &  al  herd  should  be  loved : 
atier  ]}at  falli]?  to  hem,  &  ilche  mm  louej?  kyndeliche  holy- 
nesse  of  his  broj^dr.  But  herd  shuldera  mera  wite  pat  holynesse 
is  ira  le  soule  &  ira  noon  bodiliche  ]7mg  but  ^if  hit  spnhge  fro 
lat,  &  ^it  it  is  lytil  or  nou]t  but  ^if  it  be  grouradid  ira  treu^e. 

But  mera  ban  told  ofte  j^e  cause  whi  J^d^t  siche  atieris  my^ten 

profite.  Boj^e  colours  &  figuris  bera  shapera  to  deceyue  ^e 

folc,  to  suppose  pat  ]7ei  bera  holy  j^at  hauera  siche  signes  wi]?- 

oute  ;  but  crist  biddi]?  pat  mennras  holynesse  be  hid  fro  siche 

signes.  &  so  ^e  offys  of  hera^,  who  so  vudirstondij?  hem  wel, 

is  to  she  we  heerd  ypocrisie  &  to  hyde  heerd  syranes  wi]7-irane 

for]?.  &  herford  sei]?  crist  of  pharisees  pat  “  j^ei  bera  Matt.  xxUi.  [27.] 

blaurachid  sepulcris.”  lord,  what  helpil  wydnesse  of  habitus  Use  of  wide 

habits, 

of  Jise  ordris  ?  it  seme]?  pat  to  fise  tuo  bi  cast  of  pa  fend ; 
ffirst  to  make  hera^  mord  hidliche  to  breede  he?ra  grete  balyes,  beiue^^ 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS.  [Chap.  VIII. 

for  many  of  siche  ordris  hauew  heer(9  balyes  for  heeri?  god. 
pe  secuwde  cause  of  j^is  wydnesse  is  wastyng  of  godd/s  good ; 
for  alle  good^s  of  j^is  world  bew  goodis  of  god  ]>e  cheef  lord, 
&  be  jiueJ?  hem  to  hise  por^  mew  }>at  seruen  hym  treweliche. 
&  so  ilche  j^reed  of  siche  cloj^is  ]?at  ben  tuo  wast  &  too 
costliche  beri]?  wi]?  hym  a  wrong  boj^e  to  god  &  maw,  & 
specialliche  whew  ]7ise  cloj^is  hew  too  riche  &  costliche.  ^if 
j^ise  cloj^is  hew  gurde  &  mor^  large  iw  widnesse,  j^ei  beren  on 
hem  mor(3  synne,  for  more  ypocrisie  iw  hem.  And  knott^s  J^at 
The  clothes  are  a  bitokenew  peuaunce  hongywge  bifori?  fro  be  bodi  bew  signes  of 

cover  for  aypo-  ^  o*/  o  /  o 

ypocrisie  &  noow  o])er  holynesse ;  &  pus  widnesse  of  siche 
clojjis  is  an  hord  to  hyde  synnes,  as  gabbywgis  &  ypocrisie,  pf 
it  be  not  superflue.  &  trowywg  of  holynesse  of  hem  bryngi]? 
iw  many  heresies,  pat  ]7ise  do]? is  ben  more  hooly  j;en  werew 
pQ  do]? is  of  crist.  Si]?  pilat  my^te  haue  be  dampned  al 
pf  he  hadde  dyed  iw  cristis  cloj^is.  &  ]7us  ]7ise  habitus  of 
=*[p.  91&  MS.]  pe  newe  ordris  blerew  pe  eyen  of  pe  peple  &  ^hyden  heere 
priuey  robberye,  &  oper  good  don  ]?ei  but  lytel ;  but  pf  j^ei 
verifyen  iudis  wordis,  pat  siche  bew  trees  twrned  vpsodouw, 
for  roote  &  inward  of  hem  bew  shewid  wi]7-oute  to  pe  world, 
and  falsnesse  of  here  entewt  is  hid  fro  mew  hi  ]?is  twrnywg. 
it  shulde  be  knowen  to  cristew  mew  pat  alle  siche  sensible 
signes  bew  not  signes  of  hoolynesse,  but  pf  ]?ei  makew  hooly- 
second  deceit  of  nesse  iw  mew.  ^  pe  secuwde  deceyte  of  be  fend  bi  whiche  he 

the  fiend ;  ...  ...  .  -  .  , 

That  such  orders  bigylib  simple  mew  stowdib  iw  bis ;  pat  siche  ordris  lyuew 

meat.  scars  fro  good  mete,  &  so  scarsnesse  of  heere  foode  telli)?  to 

men  pat  ]7ei  ben  hooly.  But  here  mew  seyen  to  pe  fend  pat 

They  do  not  all  ]?ise  signes  bew  ofte  false,  for  many  of  ]7ise  newe  ordris  liuew 

lustfulliche  iw  heere  foode  &  pat  mew  mai  see  wel  bi  growywg 

&  colour  of  here  body,  but  ]?is  may  falle  ofte  tymes  pat 

some  have  too  summe  brej^eren  of  bise  ordris  faylew  ouer-meche  iw  mete  & 

much  and  some  i  i  . 

too  uttie.  drynk,  &  summe  ben  too  wel  fed  bi  vneuene  partywg  of  here 
goody's;  &  so  ]?is  poynt  of  siche  ordris  stondij?  iw  ]?ise  two 

trary  ^ to^  °the  where  rewele  of  apostlis  was  to  haue  alle  Jingo's 

Apostles’ ;  comune  &  be  partid  to  ilche  as  he  hauede  nede,  ]?ise  ordris 

don  pe  contraiie]  &  so  si]?  apoeflis  rewele  was  good,  spring- 


316 


and  to  waste 
God’s  goods. 


Chap.  Till.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-ERERIS. 


317 


ynge  of  goodd^s  wille,  j^is  rewele  mot  node  be  euel  &  come  of 
lawe  of  lucifer.  pe  secuwde  fruyt  of  I’is  delyng  sto?^dij7  \n 
]?is  poynt,  ])at  siche  etyng  is  priuee  &  hid  fro  o^erQ  bre]7^reii, 
&  so  it  .askij?  priuee  bousis  &  priuee  S(9ruice  to  performe  it. 
&  ]>us  whew  holynesse  shulde  be  hid,  &  lustliche  foode  shulde 
be  exilid,  j^is  delywg  doi]?  ]7e  contraiiQ  &  come]?  of  ]?e  fend 
heeif?  patrouw.  &  \us  j^ei  don  not  oonliche  iw  ]7is  partywg 
wrong  to  heer^  owen  brej^eren,  but  to  por^  mew  wij^oute  ]?ise 
ordris  whom  ]?ei  spoylen  of  heer(0  goodes.  &  se,  when  crist 
biddit  hise  disciplis  to  ete  &  drywgke  ]?e  met«s  \ai  ben  iw 
folc  ]iat  thei  comew  to,  j^ise  ordeynew  ]?e  contraxie,  \ai  ]?ei 
haue  propre  foode  for  heer(9  mou]?  \at  passi]?  ofte  ]?e  "^'bouwdis 
of  resouw.  &  \us  when  siche  ordr«s  han  forsake  propi^rtee 
&  take  al  iw  comune,  ]?ei  ajen  heer^  owne  ordr<?  hauew  heer<? 
properte  iw  lust,  &  comunete  iw  simple  foode  is  forbedew  bi 
here  ordr^,  &  poul  menej?  to  tymothe  j?wt  sich  is  blasfeme 
abstinewce.  ^  pe  )?ridde  deceyt  of  ]?ise  ordris  is  pat  ]?ei  passen 
oj^ere  iw  preyeris,  bo]?e  for  tyme  j^ei  pr^yen  &  for  multitude 
of  he?w.  Who  shulde  not  bye  deri?  siche  preyeris?  si]?  ]?ei 
brywgen  mew  swiftliche  to  heuene ;  &  oper  mew  whew  ]?ei 
slepen  on  nyjtis  hauew  of  hew^  preyeris  at  mydnyjt,  ]?ijt  crien 
devowteliche  on  god  bi  cler*?  Toys,  stif  &  dene.  Her^  mew 
seyen  pat  iw  ]7is  poynt  many  seculers  bew  deceyued,  for  ]?ise 
ordris  witew  not  whe]?(9r  pat  ]?ei  shal  come  to  heuene,  &  so 
whe]?^r  pat  heer^  preyeris  pf;ofitew  to  hem  or  any  oper  maw. 
hou  is  heere  eowsciewce  brewt,  pat  ]?ei  dar  ]?us  sille  siche 
preyeris ;  &  algat^s  si]?  it  is  proprid  to  god  to  parte-  merit^s 
as  hym  liki]?,  &  noow  maw  may  approue  hise  merit/s  but  as 
god  iugi]?  pat  it  is  wor]?i;  &  ]?us  ]?is  preyere  of  ]?ise  ordris  is 
of  a  nest  of  blasfemye  &  chaffarywg  of  fend^s  preyere  bi  pe 
craft  of  symonye.  &  where  pei  makew  hem  a  rewele  to  ryse 
reweleliche  at  mydnyjt,  pei  passen  crist  &  dadd  &  pe  ordy- 
nauwce  of  pe  godhede  ^ ;  for  god  vndisposi]?  ofte  tymes  mew  to 
ryse  pus  at  mydnyjt,  &  aski]?  of  hem  a  betere  lif,  pat  pei 


it  comes  from 
Lucifer. 


They  wrong  their 
brethren  and  the 
poor. 

Luke  X.  [7.] 

•[p.  92  MS.] 


[1  Tim.  iv.  3.] 

The  third  deceit 
is  that  their 
prayers  surpass 
all  other  men’s. 


They  cannot  tell 
■whether  they  will 
go  to  heaven. 

To  sell  their 
prayers  shows 
their  seared 
conscience. 


Rule  of  rising  at 
midnight 


not  always  profit¬ 
able. 


^  gogkecle  MS. 


318 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  VIII, 


To  make  rules 
without  God’s 
leave  is  presump¬ 
tion, 

[1]  Rings  xviii. 
[27.] 


*[p.  926  MS.] 


Thieves  and  roh- 
hers  fast  and 
watch  more  than 
these  orders. 


The  fourth  deceit 
is  holiness  of  the 
company. 


and  force  of 
iinited  prayer. 


Example  from 
prayers  to  men. 


Masses. 


The  convent  of 
Christ’s  apostles 
was  the  heat,  but 
it  contained  Is¬ 
cariot. 


puttew  of  bi  heer^  statute.  Crist  duelled  in  pr^yere  al 
nyjt,  but  bi  byw  silf  wi|>oute  sicbe  couewtis ;  &  so  j^ise 
ordris  holde7^  not  cristis  rewele  JiQ\er  in  tyme  ne  in  stide, 
for  crist  prfgyede  wij^oute  sicbe  CT^iynge,  lyk  to  j^e  state  of 
iwnocewce,  bi  bym  self  vndir  cope  of  beuene.  Sicbe 
risyng  may  som  tyme  do  good  &  ofte  it  doi]?  yuel;  &  j^us  to 
pue  rewele  wij^oute  god  were  pr^sumpcion  of  a  fend,  &  to 
make  a  rewele  j^us  to  crie  on  god  were  a  signe  of  blasfeme 
folye  ;  as  wbo  seyde  bi  'pe  propb^^is  word :  “  crye  ^ee  fast, 
for  pure  god  slepi]?,  or  ellis  be  is  in  som  priuee  place,  or 
ellis  ocupied  wip  opere  men.”  '^'We  grau7^ten  pat  criyng 
profiti]?  som  tyme,  but  not  to  make  pus  rewele  per-oi.  bit 
is  knowen  to  me7^  of  resooT^  pat  many  signes  ben  nakid  to 
moue  mew  j^at  pr^yeris  of  jiise  ordris  bew  bet(?re  pen  oper 
comune  lyues ;  for  fastywg  comej?  ofte  in  robberis,  bo]7e  iw 
watir  &  iw  lond,  mecbe  mor^  pen  ordris  takew,  but  biddywg 
of  god  fayli]?  hew  bojie ;  &  wakywg  at  mydny^t  falli]?  to 
leues  pat  robbew  mew  ;  &  pf  )jise  outlawis  passew  ]iis  rewele, 
it  is  for  ]7ei  robbew  men  priueliche,  &  berfore  j^ey  feynew 
opere  causis  wberby  beer*?  pr^yere  is  so  good.  ^  pe  fourjje 
cause  iw  ordr^  is  bolynesse  of  her*?  compaynye ;  &  as  many 
mew  drawen  a  ship  or  don  an  oper  dede  of  strewg^e  wber*? 
fewer*?  sbuldew  not  do  J^is  dede,  so  it  is  iw*^  craft  of  pr*?yng; 
many  mew  whew  jiey  bew  gederid  pr*?yen  mor^  plesiwglicbe 
to  god  ]7en  wen  ^ei  ben  scaterid  iw  twywny,  or  fewe  to 
preye  god  berfore.  &  j^is  j^ei  prouew  bi  mawnes  custowi ; 
whew  a  peple  wole  pr*?ye  a  lord,  ]iei  gederew  hew  bool  to- 
gider*?,  &  preyen  ^  mekelicbe  &  wi|>  knelywg.  &  pus  mew 
shapew  for  many  massis  to  brywge  a  soule  anoon  to  beuene  ^ ; 
wbo  wolde  not  procwre  sicbe  helperis  to  preye  god  & 
shende  j^e  fend.  But^  here  cristew  mew  penkew  jiat  jiise 
wordis  smaccbew  ofte  falsbede  &  blasfemye  apn  god,  but 
bou  sulden  pei  eowferme  preyere  ?  It  is  seyd  ofte  bou  pat  pQ 
couewt  of  cristes  apos^lis  passede  alle  opere  couewt/s  bojie  iw 
1  prigyem  MS.  ^  heuenene  MS.  ®  Bub  MS. 


Chap.  VIII.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


319 


patrouw  &  in  rewele,  &  jit  oon  of  hem  was  scarioth ;  hou 
many  scariothis  hew  in  ]7ise  couewtfs  ?  &  felowship  of  siche 

psendoes  lettil  o^er  me^^^  to  preye,  for  hou  shulde  ])at  man 
pr^ye  wel  Jat  ha]?  enuye  to  his  broker  &  stondij?  \n  queer  wij? 
hym,  next  hym  or  a  syde?  si]?  siche  daliaunce  wole 
gregge  his  ire,  &  vnable  hym  to  haue  oujt  of  god.  &  \us  ]?ei 
fare?^  ofte  as  do?^  doggis  in  a  poke ;  oon  drawi]?  for]?  an-o]?^r 
ajen ;  but  hou  shulde  sich  drawy?^g  helpe  to  drawe  ]?e  ship  of 
holy  chirche  bi  fisshis  ]?at  bew  ]?us  deepe  in  watir  ?  many  of 
hem  wolde;^  drawe  before  jif  ]?ei  stoodew  hem  self  al  one. 
&  ]?is  blasfeme  lickenesse,  comunes  pr(?yen  ]?us  to  lordis, 
telli]?  openliche  ]?is  heresye  ]?at  ]?ise  newe  ordris  hauew  her^  ; 
for  god  for  his  gr^ttnesse  is  in  ilehe  place  of  ]?is  world,  & 
redy  to  helpe  me^  sooner*?  in  what  place  \at  ]?ei  lyuew  bet^re. 
&  ]?us  as  freris  lyues  techen,  it  wer^  good  to  many  men  ]?at 
ben  closid  in  ^ise  ordris  \at  ]?ei  disportede^  hem  in  ]?e  world, 
for  siche  auentyng  many  times  fordoi]?  enuye,  ire  &  lust, 


A  man  cannot 
pray  well  when 
he  stands  next 
to  a  brother 
whom  he  hates. 


They  are  like 
dogs  in  a  sack. 


*[p.  93  MS.] 


God  is  every¬ 
where,  and  helps 
men  soonest 
where  they  live 
best. 

Many  men  would 
live  better  in  the 
world  than  as 
friars. 


&  ]?ise  ]?re  synnes  ofte  tymes  letten  ]7ise  men  to  pr(?ye 
deuoteliche  ;  &  \us  it  is  open  heresie  too  trowe  ^at  ]7ristyng 
of  ordris  in  oon  cloystr^  or  in  oon  hous  helpi]?  god  heeri]? 
hem  betere,  al  jif  ]?ei  liuen  worse  or  ellis  not  betere  to  godd/s 


pay.  for  al  ]?ing  is  present  to  god,  &  sich  ]?ristyng  helpi]?  in  the  cloister 

.  n  1  o  man’s  sin  in* 

not  to  hym,  but  jif  it  make  men  worse,  for  the  synne  of  oon  jures  others. 

p^rsone  bi  siche  ]?ristyng  fouli]?  mor^  hise  bro]?^re.  Lord, 

si]?  disciplis  of  crist  aftir  hat  he  was  went  to  heuene  weren  The  apostles 

■*  ’  were  scattered 


scaterid  in  mony  cuntres,  &  weren  not  ]?rungen  in  siche  abroad. 

couentis,  what  wit  shulde  moue  ]?ise  ordris  aftir  to  geder^ 

hem  ]?us  ajen  skile?  certfs  a  fool  may  wel  see  ]?at  ]?is 

resoun  faili]?  fouliche,  &  crist  gederede  tuelue  apos^lis,  ^eriore 

an^^crist  shal  gedr^  moo ;  god  reyne]?  in  ]?is  ordr^,  \eriore 

an^^crist  shulde  jette  in  wallis.  god  wole  ]?at  men  quiken 

]?is  er]?e,  &  ben  spred  aboute  in  vertu  of  god,  &  ]7is  taujten 

cristis  apos^lis  fro  ]?at  ]?ei  weren  quikid  of  crist  heer^  maistre ;  [2  Tim.  in.  7.] 

but  ]?ise  ordris  wolen  eu^re  be  disciplis  &  neu^re  come  to 

knowyng  of  treu]?e.  &  ]?us  ]?ei  moten  neede  be  euer  pun- 

yshid  as  disciplis  of  an^^crist,  but  jif  ]?ei  lernen  som  tyme 


320 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUEO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  Till. 


to  go  out  of  ]7ise  newe  ordris,  si]?  ]?ei  letter  cristis  lawe  to 
The  fifth  deceit  is  rownuG  &  double  profvt  of  hoolv  chirche.  H  pe  fifbe  deceyt  of 

that  they  pretend  ^  ^  .  n  r  r  j 

more^^  efflcfe^nt  psGudoGS  stoudi]?  falslicbe  ]?is  fejujug,  ]>at  J?ei  make?^ 

p^ayer^^  Lord’s  ^  newG  craft  to  pr^jG  &  to  louG  god,  &  SO  )?is  IlGWe  ciaft  is 

hetere  ]?en  al  ]?e  ordr*?  j>at  crist  ba]?  makyd  ;  &  ]?us  ]?ei  haue?^ 

special  pr^yeris  makid  of  newe  bi  ]?e  pope  ]?at  ben  bet^re  )?en 

]?e  pat^r  nost(?r,  for  mor(9  pardou?^  falli]?  to  hem.  ]?ise  wordis 

*[p.  936  MS.]  may  m one  me?^  J?at  wolew  '^'folyliche  trowe  to  hem,  but  ion 

[1]  Johniv.  [1.]  biddij?  me?*  to  assaye  spirits,  whe]?6re  ]?ei  ben  on  godd?'s 

syde.  &  pus  men  hen  not  wi]?  god,  ]?at  holde?e  wij?  man 

more  pen  wi]?  crist.  Oure  bileue  techi]?  us  pat  crist  is  bo]?e 

god  &  man,  &  so  he  is  al  my^ty,  al  witty,  &  al  ful  of  good 

No  pope  nor  pre-  wille.  &  Ws  noo?^  pope  ne  oper  prelat  haue]?  witt  ne  power 

ledge  or  power,  but  of  crist,  in  as  meche  as  he  sewip  cnst  bifore  opere  of  hise 

but  of  Christ. 

True  knowledge,  felowis :  &  SO  it  is  a  feyned  power,  a  feyned  wit,  &  feyned 
etc.,  is  shown  in  ^ 

following  Christ,  good,  al  pat  is  not  shewid  in  dede,  in  trewe  sewyng  of  cnst. 

&  ]?us  wh«t  man  pat  enere  sei]?  pat  he  maki]?  betere  preyere 
]?en  crist,  &  ordeyne]?  per-to  more  pt^rdouw,  blasfeme]?  as 
an^ecrist ;  &  pus  pe  old  maner  was  betere  to  preye  &  to 
plese  god  ]?en  ony  newe  preyer  mai  be,  hou  euere  an^ecnst 
Letmenshowthe  speke  here.  She  we  men  bi  godd^'s  lawe  or  resouw  pe  good- 

goodness  of  these  .  . 

prayers  by  God’s  nessG  of  siche  ppeyeris,  &  pat  }?ei  plesen  so  meche  to  god  as 
law  or  reason. 


pei  hen  feyned  of  ]?is  nouelrie  ;  &  ellis  me?^  shuldew  not  trowe 
to  hem,  but  have  hem  suspect  bi  maner  of  lif.  Wei  I 
wott  pe  fend  may  feyne  sich  goodnesse  of  hise  preyern 
&  heyjnesse  of  his  power,  for  men  mai  not  see  it ;  &  herfore 
he  mai  pursewe  mew  but  pf  pej  grauwten  ]?is  excellewce,  but 
noow  maw  shulde  trowe  ]?is  but  if  God  taw^te  it  as  bileeue. 

And  here  is  weye  to  antecrist,  to  pwrsewe  cristew  mew  for 

]?ei  holdew  hem  in  pe  bouwdes  pat  crist  hap  puew  to  bileeue. 

If  these  prayers  Cristew  mew  trowen  Ms,  pat  9if  Mse  preyeris  weren  so  goode, 

were  so  good,  j  ’  j  i  j  r  j  o  7 

prist  youid  wolde  haue  shewid  hem  bifore,  when  hise  vikeris  &  his 

have  taught  them  ’ 

sooner.  peple  werGw  betere,  &  pus  ]?ei  ben  foolis  pat  trowen  ]?is 

Paternoster  the  goodnessG  of  Hse  newG  preyer^s ;  for  be  pater  noster  is  be 

best  of  prayers. 

best  preyere  pat  ony  pope  or  man  kon  ordeyne.  for  who 
shulde  autorise  pat  god  shulde  more  be  payed  of  ony  preyere  ? 


Chap.  VIII.] 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


321 


&  it  is  al  oon  to  seye  ]^at  a  preyere  is  bet^re,  &  ]>at  it  plesi]? 

god  morg ;  but  who  mai  do  J^is  but  god  ?  for  god  oonliche 

mai  jiue  grace  &  mori?  accepte  mew  to  mede ;  &  j^us  trowe 

we  not  in  jjise  pr(9yeri8,  si]?  hem  wawti]?  grouwd.  &  pus  pf  *[p.  94  ms.] 

lif  *of  ]7ise  newe  ordris  be  mor<3  medeful  J^ew  mawnes  lif  was 

woned,  it  mot  neede  be  grauwtid  of  god,  for  newe  ordinauwce 

is  but  fantym  her^  ;  &  pus  si]?  good  lif  of  mew  pat  ben 

wandrynge  iw  ]?is  weye  is  bet^re  prejere  to  god,  pf  it  plese 

mor«?  to  god.  Wh»t  lif  pat  plesi]?  mor^  to  god  is  beWe  Good  life  is  the 

preiere  to  god ;  as  lif  of  a  trewe  plow  maw  or  ellis  of  a  trewe 

heerde  is  betere  preyere  to  god  pen  preyere  of  any  ordr*?  pat 

god  loue]?  lesse,  blaber^  ]?ei  neu^re  so  meche  wi]?  lippis.  as 

it  is  likeliche  pat  baptist  preyede  bet^re  bi  hym  silf  iw  desert 

pen  ony  p(3rsone  of  ]?ise  newe  ordris,  for  hise  lippis  ben  lesse 

wor]? ;  &  pus  heiere  lif  helpi]?  more  to  soulis  pen  massis 

or  ]?ise  newe  pr^yeris.  pe  sixte  deceyte  of  ypocrite’s,  pat  The^sixth  deceit 

bigyli]?  mew  iw  ]?is  mature,  is  pat  ]?ei  liuew  honestliche  iw  honourably  in 

dmiTcliy  lioiis09 

chirche,  iw  hous,  &  iw  gardyw,  &  in  alle  ornamewt«s  pat  fallew  etc. 

to  worship  of  god ;  who  shulde  not  loue  sich  a  sect,  bo]?e  bi 

kynde  &  bi  resouw  ?  Her*?  mew  ]?enken  pat  pe  fend  vsi]?  hise 

ypocrisie,  &  cow^rarieliche  to  crist  moue]?  mew  bi  sensible 

signes.  it  is  good  &  resonable  mew  to  haue  chirchis  iw  Churches  are 

good, 

mesur*?,  &  iw  numbr*?,  &  iw  weyhte,  aftir  pe  hooly  trmitee ; 

but  benne  it  is  nedeful  pat  ]?ei  be  makyd  bi  iust  dispensis,  hut  they  should 

^  he  built  with  re- 

&  to  profit  of  be  lend  iw  which  bei  hew  makid  iwne,  &  not  do  gard  to  justice, 
^  s  j  tQ  profit  of 

wrowg  to  old  chirchis  bi  weye  of  heero  newe  fyndywg  ;  &  so  tiie  people. 

alle  housis  &  places  shuldew  be  shapew  bi  loro  of  crist.  But 

somme  mew  ]?enkew  pat  freres  bildywg  faili]?  iw  alle  ]?ise  ]?re  Friars]  building 

1X1  tll0S6 


poywtes.  It  is  comuneliche  makid  bi  slyh  robbywgis  of  pe  points, 
fend,  so  pat  it  is  al  oon  to  see  bildywgis  of  ]?i8e  newe  ordris, 

&  to  see  a  fendes  holde,  makid  of  robberye  of  poro  mew; 

&  so  when  mew  loken  on  heero  castelis  bei  hauew  matore  to  when  men  look 

.  T  •  o  1  •  T  •  IT  1  friars’  castles 

wepe,  bo]?e  ]?ise  ordris  &  seculeris,  but  specialliche  I’e  poro  theyshouidweep, 
peple.  for  pf  we  loken  to  cristes  lif,  he  forsok  sich  bildyng,  Luke  xix.  [4i.] 
&  lokyng  on  pe  citee,  pat  he  seyde  was  apn  pe  aposfiis,  he 
wepte  per  upon  for  greet  synne  pat  it  hoordede.  &  when 


21 


322 


TRACTA.TUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


=»[p.  946  MS.] 
Matt.  xxiv.  [2.] 


Such  houses  turn 
away  from  the 
state  of  inno¬ 
cence. 


Heb.  xiii.  [14.] 


They  lead  men  to 
love  this  world. 


They  are  built 
out  of  the  spoils 
of  the  poor,  and 
are  but  a  heap  of 
wrongs. 


The  founders  of 
the  orders  or¬ 
dained  no  such 
buildings. 


*[p.  95  MS.] 

These  churches 
injure  the  parish 
churches. 


crist  wente  out  of  j^e  temple  sat  \n  j>e  mouwt  ajen  it,  hise 
disciplis  for  wondryng  \er-oi  &  to  see  his  wit  Jjer-of  askedei^ 
whej^^r  he  sau.  alle  J7ise  wondirful  byldywgis.  &  crist  an- 
suerede  to  hise  apostlis,  &  tolde  hem.  hou  hym  likede  herof : 

Sof>eliche  i  seye  to  ]ou,  tyme  shal  come  soone  heraftir  ]iat 
noow  stoon  shal  he  left  here  on  ixn.-o\er,  j^at  it  ne  shal  be 
destryed;”  and  so  it  fel  soone  aftir,  when  ievusalem  was 
destryed.  pre  j^ywgis  shulden  moue  me^i  to  be  glad  of  sich 
byldywg  :  On,  for  it  turne]?  a-wey  fro  ]>e  state  of  innocence  ; 
&  herfore  crist  &  baptist  &  o^ere  seynt«s  makeden  noon  siche. 
_pe  secuwde  cause  shulde  moue  to  be  glad  of  siche  byld- 
ywg  is,  ]?at  god  sey]?  hi  poul :  we  hauen  not  heri?  a 

duellynge  citee,  hut  we  sekew  heuew  to  come.”  &  no^  drede 
siche  housyng  raaki]?  many  to  loue  |>is  world,  &  to  duelle  in 
lustis  ]7^r-of,  &  leue  loue  of  j^e  o^erQ  worlde.  _pe  j^ridde 
cause  j^at  men  shulde?^  haue  to  loke  on  siche  byldyng  is  \at  j^ei 
shulden  j^enke  on  j^e  pore  peple ;  hou  ofte  \at  j^ei  ben  spoylid 
hi  suttil  fraudis  of  j^e  fend  bifore  j^at  siche  housis  weren 
hildid,  j^at  hew  but  an  beep  of  wrongis.  pise  J^re  causis 
shuldew  not  pue  maters  of  ioye  to  men  of  resouw,  but  ra]?(3re 
mat«?re  of  sorowe  to  telle  hasty  destriyng  of  hem.  men  may 
see  ouer  wh.e\er  j^ise  patrouws  vseden  |>ise  housis  in  sich 
mesur^,  &  leften  in  heere  rewlis  aftir  |>at  heere  disciplis 
shulden  bilde  ]7us ;  &  si]?  ]?e  contrariQ  is  so]?,  to  whiche  ]?ise 
ordr^s  ben  streytliche  sworen,  it  seme]?  \at  ]?e  fe?^d  shapi]? 
a  disport  to  hise  clerkis  to  serue  hym  inne.  &  so  pf  mew 
chargen  mesur^,  ]?ise  placis  &  bildywg  of  hem  passew  mesure 
\at  god  ha]?  tau]t,  &  so  ]?ei  ben  agew  goddis  power.  &  pf 
we  taken  heede  to  }?e  noumbre  of  siche  castel  of  ]?e  fend,  ]?ey 
ben  apn  wisdom  of  crist,  si]?  he  approuede  not  siche  housis. 
for  si]?  in  tyme  of  more  wisdom  \er  weren  chirchis  &  housis 
ynowe,  what  wisdom  "^is  it  to  multiplie  ]?ise,  &  destrye 
hoolyer(3  old  placis  ?  certis  iwiuries  ben  don  to  parisshe 
chirchis  bi  siche  newe  chirchis  of  ordris  ;  &  pf  ]?us  wrongis 
of  a  place  shulden  lette  mew  to  herye  god  \ero,  siche  placfs 
of  newe  ordris  shulden  be  fled  as  fendis  boletus.  And  pf  we 


TRACTATUS  DE  PSEUDO-FRERTS. 


323 


Chap.  VITI.] 
✓ 


weyn  aryht  dispensis  bi  lore  of  j^e  hooly  goost,  \er  is  neyj^er 

stoon  ne  tree  \n  alle  siche  newe  ordris  placis  j^at  it  ne  is 

grouwdid  bi  wrong,  &  tewporid  bi  robbyng  of  pore  men.  They  are  built  by 

&  ]7us  siche  bildyngis  makyn  pride,  &  not  comiomt  of  goddis 

prisouwneris,  for  j^ei  ben  not  fed  bi  ]7is,  but  robbid  of  goodis 

}>at  ]7ei  shulden  bane ;  &  j^is  is  not  lore  of  }>e  hooli  goost,  but 

techy wg  of  ]7e  kyng  of  pride.  &  ]7us  ornamentis  ]?at  |>ise  Ornaments. 

freris  ordris  vsen  be^  toolis  to  bigyle  ]>e  peple,  &  to  feede 

heere  bodiliche  eye,  &  robbe  ]?e  eye  of  heere  soule,  as  somme 

of  jjise  newe  ordris  hauen  costy  encewseris  to  encense  beddis 

of  men  &  of  wymmew  &  to  spoyle  hem.  tus  kei  assoylen  "They  absolve 

''  ^  f  j  j  0ien  long  dead, 

men  j^at  were?^  longe  deed  byfore  ;  &  soulis  of  siche  me?2  bew 

in  helle  as  somme  men  supposen ;  &  }>ise  blynde  mew  j^at 

assoylen  j^us  kunnen  not  teche  j^e  cowtrarie  of  j^is.  &  ]7us  j^ey 

doon  Jjis  for  monee,  &  not  for  deuociouw,  but  ^if  siche  blynde 

blasfemyes  be  clepid  deuociouw  of  freris.  pus  ornamewt^’s  of 

ypocritis  barmen  j^e  peple  j^at  J’ei  duellen  wij?,  &  al  heer^ 

lif  doi]?  harm  to  mew  boj^e  to  body  &  to  soule.  &  I’us  fendis 

children  bygilen  mew  bi  j^ing  j^at  hem  seme]?  good,  &  maken 

hem  trow  ]?at  it  profiti]?,  but  pt  it  doi]>  meche  harm.  &  si]> 

alle  lyues  of  siche  men  ben  ful  of  he  fendis  deceytis,  men  deceits  are 

sufficen  not  to  telle  heer^  gylis,  but  bi  ]7is  men  may  knowe 

somme.  And  here  ben  somme  mew  moued  to  trowe  ]>at  crist 

speki]?  in  his  lawe  of  sich  man^r  of  ypocritis,  to  teche  his 

peple  to  tie  hem.  for  si]?  crist  is  yeree  god/  &  knowip 

"^'clereliche  al  ]?ing  to  come,  alle  ]?ise  deceytis  bew  prigsent  to  956  ms.] 

hym  ;  whwt  shulde  lette  hym  to  telle  hem  ?  Certis  charite  of 

Crist  shulde  neede  hym  to  warne  mew  her^.  &  ]?us  resouw  agaSst^^^Siese 

moue]?  mew  to  suppose  fat  crist  tellif  of  gilis  of  ]?e  pope,  M?tt.  xxiv. 

&  aftir  of  gilis  of  f ise  new  sectis,  for  alle  fise  ben  lemes  of 
antecrist.  whi  shulde  not  crist  telle  here  of  hem  ?  and  fus 
fenken  somme  fat  it  wer^  a  medeful  dede  &  good  preyere  to 
god  to  a^enstonde  f ise  new  sect’s,  &  clenese  cristis  ordi- 
nauwce  fro  sich  errours  fat  ben  broujt  inne.  Lordis,  clerkis 


1  good  MS. 


324 


TRACTATES  DE  PSEUDO-FRERIS. 


[Chap.  Till. 


&  comunes  shulden  helpe  here  for  mede  of  crist,  &  oldnesse  of 
]?ise  errours  shulde  not  moue  to  leue  hem,  si]?  god  is  myjty 

Meek  men  think  ynou  to  helpe  &  destrve  hem  alle.  pis  entent  hauen  meke 

that  Christ’s  or¬ 
dinance  is  best.  men  hi  grace  &  hileeue  of  crist,  pat  his  ordinauwce  was  and  is 

*.  best,  and  oper  contrarie  ordinaunce  is  enel ;  &  hileeue  techip 

pat  [he]  mai  not  fayle  to  helpe  men  pat  trauelen  wel  here. 

feasras  of  those  Examine  pou  wel  pe  grounde  an  pe  resoun  of  newe  men,  pat 

who  attack  us.  geyen  pey  holden  pe  lawe  and  pe  ordinau?^ce  of  crist,  &  we 

ifweerr,  we  will  trauelen  to  destrye  hem.  for  certis  uf  we  erreden  here  in 

turn  to  truth  ... 

when  taught.  Wit  or  wille  bi  fals  lore,  we  wolden  mekeliche  a-noon  turne 
to  treupe  when  it  were  taujt.  Amen. 


Explicit  tractatus  de  pseudo  freris. 


325 


XXIII. 

« 

OF  COXFESSIOX. 


De.  Shieley  says  that  this  tract  is  the  same  as  the  Latin  De  Eucharistia 
et  Poenitentia.  The  latter  is  found  only  at  Yienna,  and  I  have  not  been 
able  to  compare  the  two.  I  have,  however,  no  doubt  that  this  is  genuine. 
Its  presence  in  the  Ashburnham  MS.  tells  much  in  its  favour,  while  the 
evidence  of  style  seems  to  me  to  mark  it  as  decidedly  Wyclifs.  His 
predestinarian  doctrines  are  incidentally  referred  to  on  p.  329 :  “  who  is 
he  'pat  letti]?  god  to  saue  men  as  he  hap  ordeyned  .  .  .  before  pe  world 
was  made  ?  ” 

There  are  curious  notices  on  pp.  333  and  335  of  the  prevalent  fashion 
of  keeping  private  confessors  and  of  the  influence  which  such  men  wielded. 

The  attack  on  transubstantiation  at  the  end  of  the  tract  shows  it  to  be 
late. 

Copied  from  the  Dublin  MS.  CC,  and  collated  with  the  Ashburnham 
MS.  MM. 


SUMMAET. 


Two  yirtues  are  in  man’s  soul :  holiness  and  knowledge.  Holiness  is  the  more 
important.  To  holiness  confession  is  needful.  Definition  of  confession.  Con¬ 
fession  of  sin  is  made  to  God  or  to  man.  The  latter  may  be  either  open  or 
private,  but  must  be  voluntary  . p.  327 

Private  confession  is  unnecessary,  unauthorized  by  Christ  or  by  the  practice  of  the 

early  Church.  It  is  a  device  to  increase  the  power  of  the  Pope  .  328 

It  is  limiting  God’s  power  to  say  a  man  cannot  be  saved  without  shrift.  Private 
confession  gives  occasion  to  sin  .  .  329 

Possible  abuses  from  the  law  of  regular  confession.  The  proper  priest  may  be 

unfit.  Confession  hinders  preaching  .  .  330 

The  methods  of  absolution  vary.  Some  seem  to  claim  fellowship  with  God  for 
the  priest.  Arbitrary  assignment  of  penance.  Leads  to  buying  sin  for 
money  .  332 

The  devil  wishes  all  men  to  believe  that  priests  only  have  power  to  absolve,  and 

the  four  orders  of  friars  unite  to  maintain  this.  Evil  of  private  confessors  .  334 


326 


It  would  be  well  to  bave  two  priests  to  bear  penance,  as  it  would  prevent  mischief 
and  increase  wholesome  shame.  Some  confessions  would  be  better  divulged  . p.  335 


Confession  has  done  much  good  and  much  harm.  It  should  not  be  obligatory. 


None  of  the  confessors  are  equal  to  the  task  they  undertake.  General  and  open 
confession  sufficient .  336 

All  sin  is  offence  against  God .  337 

Need  of  sorrow  for  sin.  God’s  free  grace  a  reason  for  avoiding  sin  .  338 

Antichrist  argues  that  without  the  outward  sign^of  shrift  the  sacrament  of  penance 

is  destroyed .  339 

God’s  courtesy  does  not  in  all  cases  require  audible  confession,  and  all  good  deeds 

may  be  called  sacraments  .  340 

The  keys  given  to  St.  Peter  are  knowledge  and  power,  which  were  given  also  to 
the  other  apostles.  The  knowledge  is  knowledge  of  God’s  law,  the  power  is 
that  of  preaching  and  teaching  .  341 

Antichrist  cites  the  ten  lepers  that  Christ  bid  show  themselves  to  the  priest  .  342 

It  was  Christ  that  healed  them ;  aud  we  should  follow  the  Samaritan’s  example 

and  thank  Christ  for  forgiveness  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  343 

Arguments  of  Antichrist  from  James  v.  16 ;  from  the  raising  of  Lazarus  ;  and 

from  John’s  baptism,  shown  not  to  bear  on  private  confession  to  priests  .  343 

Exhortation  to  priests  to  attend  to  preaching  and  to  avoid  claiming  to  perform 

miracles  in  the  transubstantiation  of  the  Host  .  345 


OF  CONFESSION. 


327 


l^ofa  de  Confessione. 

^'Two  virtues  ben  in  mawnes  soule  by  whycbe  a  man  shuld 
be  rewled ;  ^  hoolynesse  in  mawnes  wille,  &  good  kunnyng  in  *[p- 1276  ms.] 
bis  witt.  hoolynesse  shuld  put  out  synne,  &  good  ^  kuwnynar  Holiness  should 

...  °  rule  a  man’s  will; 

shuld  put  out  foly ;  but  as  wille  ha]?  principalite  to-fore  witt  knowledge  his 

of  mawnes  soule,  so  hoolynesse  is  more  wor]7e  \mTiQ  is 

ku«nynge  of  synful  man.  for  wuckud  au7^gels  ban  myche  Holiness  of  the 

kuwnyng,  but  ]?ei  ban  noujt  of  hoolynesse.  And  ellis  iche 

man  wer^  hoolier  aftur  ]>at  he  is  more  kumynge ;  but  poule 

seij?  ]iat  mawnes  kuwnyng  bolni]»  hym  bi  pride,  but  in  oure  [i]  Cor.  vUi.  [i.] 

lord  ihesu  crist  was  kuwnynge  &  hoolynesse  euen,  for  he  was 

ful  &  heierst  in  kumyng  &  heierst  hooly,  bol’e  god  &  man. 

and  ]?us  he  seith  in  lones  gospel:  “who  of  ^ou  shal  reproue 

me  of  sywne,”  ^as  ^if  crist  wolde  seye  to  hem  “y  may  John  viii.  [46.] 

not  sywne®  si]?  I  am  god;  and  ]?us  nou^t  may  reproue  me  of 

synne.”  but  crist  sei]»  next  aftur  ]iat  sith  he  sei]?  treu]?e ;  whi 

^  trowe?^  ]?ei  not  to  hym  ?  In  ]7ise  two  wordis  ]?at  crist  ha]? 

seid,  may  we  see  hoolynesse  &  kuwnynge.  and  hou  hoolynes 

go]?e  before  &  ku?^nyng  sue]?  in  wor]?inesse ;  for  lyue  a  man 

hooly  lyf,  and  kuwnynge  I-now  wil  folow  aftur.  To  make 

hoolynesse  in  me?^  is  t^ewfession  nedful ;  and  hdrfor  shuld  Confession  needed 

hooly  churche  witt  sumwhat  of  coT^fession.  Co?^fession  gene- 

raly  is  knowlechynge  made  wi]?  wille ;  and  sum  t?owfession  is 

made  wi]»-oute  sy^ne,  and  sum  is  knowlechynge  of  synne ;  &  bo]?e 

]?ise  two  ben  goode  in  man,  but  ]?e  first  is  mor^  wor]?e  in  crist. 

Mathew  tellih  hou  crist  <?owfessed  to  his  fadur,  ®lord  of  J?is  world,®  Mt.  2°. 

,  .  ,  .  „  .  [should  be  Matt, 

&  ptt  crist  my^t  not  syr-ne,  and  ]?is  dOT^fessiour-  myjt  not  be  xi.  25.] 
veyne.  Confessions  ]?at  man  maki]?  of  synne  is  made  of  man 
is  two  manors.  Summe  is  mad  oonly  to  god  truly  by  herte  confession  may 
or  mou]?e.  And  sum  <?osfessious  is  made  to  man,  and  ]?at  or  to  man| 
may  be  on  many  manures ;  oujdr  opynly  &  ®  gdn^raly,  as  mes  open 

^  CC  inserts  in.  ^  j?is  MM.  omitted  CC. 

trowe  je  CC.  ®-®  omitted  CC.  ®  or  CC. 


328 


OF  CONFESSION. 


or  private. 

*[p.  128  MS.] 

Cm  2m  mm. 


Privy  confession 
not  needful. 


Was  not  ordered 
by  Christ. 


John  viii.  [11.] 


Acts  ii.  [41.] 

Nor  used  in  the 
early  Church. 


t?owfesseden  in  fe  oolde  lawe;  Or  priuely  &  rownywgly,  as 
mew  t^owfessen  nowe-a-daies.  whewne  a  man  is  t?owstreyned 
by  bodily^  peyne  to  telle  his  gilte,  ^^he  t^owfesse]?  not;  but^ 
cowfession  mnt  be  wilful,  or  ellis  it  is  not  medeful  to  man. 

It  were  to  wite  oner  in  J^is  mater,®  whej^^r  priue  t?owfession 
made  to  pr(?stis  be  nedeful  to^  synful  mew,  &  wh(9r]7is  dowfessiouw 
is  groundid.  and  it  seme]?  fat  it  is  not  nedful,  but  brou^t 
in  late  be  fe  fend ;  for  crist  al witty  vsed  it  not,  ne  noon  of 
hise  apostles  aftur.  And  if  it  were  nedful  to  man,  crist  wolde 
have  vsed  it  or  taujt  it.  Whewne  crist  forjaue  marie  magde- 
leyne  hir  synnes,  he  vsed  not  siche  rownynge  ;  awd  whewne  he 
forjaue  petir  hise  sywnes,  &  poule  his,  &  ofer  mew  herew  J^at 
he  clensid,  he  vsid  not  sich  rownywg  in  ere,  ne  siche  asoylyng 
as  prestis  vsen  nowe ;  and  pus  whewne  crist  clensed  fe  a- 
woutrer,  j^at  j^e  lewes  alegeden  shulde  be  stoned,  crist  vsed 
not  j^is  eowfession  to  hir,  but  bad  hir  go  and  wilne  to  sywne 
no  more,  and  si]?  fat  crist  myjt  not  faile  in  ordynauwce  to 
hise  cbirche,  &  he  left  ]?is  dowfessiouw,  it  semyth  ]?at  it  is  not 
nedeful ;  for  if  it  wer^,  ]?ewne  crist  fay  lid  in  leuynge  it ;  and 
also  petr^  &  alle  ofer  apostles,  and  also  alle  ofer  popis  faileden 
fat  weren  til  Innocews  cam,  whewne  fe  fende  was  loused, 
and  ptt  mew  weren  clewsed  of  her  synne  ficher  &  bettur 
f  ewne  fei  weren  aftwr,  for  I  rede  in  fe  boke  fat  luk  wrote 
of  apostles  dedis,  hou  fre  fousand  twrned  in  oon  daye  fro 
lewes  fables  to  mstis  lawe,  &  noon  of  hem  was  f  us  cowfessid 
to  prestis.  as  fe  story  tellif,®  petir  bade  he/w  generdlj  haue 
sorowe  &  be  baptized  ychoow;  but  god  tellif  not  her*?  of 
shrifte,  but  fat  fei  token  fe  hooly  goost;  and  fus  here 
synnes  werew  forjyuew  of  god  wif-outew  siche  ^?owfessiouw  as 
we  nowe  vsen.  and  fus  it  semif  to  many  men  fat  cristen 
mew  myjten  wele  be  saued  wif-outen  sich  <?owfessiouw ;  as 
fei  wer^  be-fore  pope  Innocewt,  and  fus  it  semef  ^res\xm^- 
ciouw  of  fis  pope  to  make  fis  lawe  ;  for  hooly  churche  shuld 


^  omitted  MM. 
^  CC  inserts  j>e. 


3  for  MM. 

®  skewi]?  MM. 


3  omitted  CC. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


329 


not  j^iis  be  charged  wi]?  newe  lawes,  ^  whewne  oolde  sufficedew;  *[p.  mb  ms.] 
and  ]7us  me?^  seyne  \at  ]?e  fend  kest  this  for  wywnyng  & 
hijnes  of  preestis :  and  in  token  of  ]?is  defaute  makers  of  J^is 
lawe  weren  so  marrid  'bat  her  lawe  byndeb  noo  p^rsone  but  The  law  ordering 

^  .  it  is  invalid. 

only  suche  ]7at  ben  bo]7e  mew  &  wywmen.  ])is  semij?  a 
feendis  pr^sumpcion  to  him  j^at  knowe]?  not  kynd  of  lawe  to 
ordeyne  lawe  iw  sich^  a  maner/  of  whiche  noo  sich(3  shwldi?  be 
made.  and  ]7us  it  seme]?  to  many  mew  pat  an^ecrist  ha]?  a  device  of  Anti- 

clii 

cast  ]?is  cast  to  make  alle  mew  soget  to  the  pope;  &  lede 
hem  aftur  pat  hym  liki]?.  lord,  wherg  is  fredom  of  crist 
whewne  men  ben  costen  ^  in  siche  bondage  ?  Crist  made  hise 
seruauwtes  free,  but  an^ecrist  ha]?  made  hem  bonde  ajeyne. 

And  certis  ]?er  is  noo  autorite  pat  gaue  him  leue  to  make 
men  ]?us  ]?rallis. 

^itt  it  were  to  wite  pe  reson  of  goddis  lawe  whi  men  C“  3“  MM. 
shulden  hoolde  hem  in  here  bondes,  &  not  make  lawe  fro 
cristis  ordr^.  It  is  oft  seid  in  goddis  lawe  pat  mew  shulden  Deut.  iv.  [2.] 
not  adde  perto  ne  take  perfro,  lest  ]?ei  fallen,  si]?  it  is  made 
at  poynt  deuyse ;  and  ]?us  it  seme]?  a  feendis  presu?wpciouw, 
pat  hi^e]>  himsilf  a-bouen  god,  to  make  ]?us  a  newe  lawe  wi]?- 
outen  leeue  of  pe  furst  treu]?e.  Also  ]?is  lawe  of  cowfessiouw  Thei  aw  is  against 
pat  iche  man  mut  nedis  shryuew  oonys  in  pe  ^er  priuely  to 
his  propur  prest,  it  seme]?  opun  a^ens  reson.  for  a  maw  may  be 
baptized  in  tyme  pat  he^  ha]?  discreciouw,  anon  aftur  be  ded 
wi]?-outew  doynge  of  dedly^  synwe.  lord,  whi  shuld  ]?is  man  be 
daw2pned  al  if  he  shriue  him  not  ]?us  ®iw  pe  ^eer®?  Ion  baptist 
shroof  hym  neuer  ]?us,  ne  any  apostle  of  crist ;  and  ptt  bileue 
nedi]?  vs  to  grauwte  pat  pei  ben  seyntes  iw  heuew.  and  ]?us 
it  may  fallen  of  many  martyres,  &  of  mew  pat  ban  no  propur 
pr(?st.  who  is  he  pat  letti]>  god  to  saue  men  as  he  hap 
ordeyned  before  pe  pope  &  his  lawe  camew  iwne,  &  before  pe 
world  was  made  ?  Also  god  gyue]?  frely  his  grace,  not-wi]?- 
stondynge  mawnes  lawe.  whi  may  not  '^god  do  grace  to  hise  *[p.  129  ms.] 

^  mater  MM.  ^  castun  M]\I.  ^  omitted  CC.  ' 

^  omitted  CC.  ®  dely  CC.  omitted  CC. 


330 


OF  CONFESSION. 


sm. 


treue  seruauwtes  J^at  seruew  him  wele,  al  if  \er  were  noo  siche 

prest  nor  pope  ?  as  sumtyme  was  now.  hou-en(5r  an^ecnst 

glau^r,  he  lette]?  not  god  to  do  his  wille ;  for  he  may 

disseyne  ’  foolis,  but  not  god,  hou-euer  he  speke.  also  heleeue 

techi]?  men  J^at  if  a  man  he  coniriiQ,  god  ]7ewne  forjyue]?  him 

his  sywne ;  but  who  may  lette  god  fro  ]7is  ?  David  speke]? 

[Psaimxxxii.is,]  to  god  ]?us :  “I  seide,  i  shulde  shryue  my  sywnes  a^ews  me 

to  ]?ee,  lord ;  &  ]>ou  for^auest  me  my  synnes.”  lord,  wher  god 

be  not  as  merciful  as  he  was  in  ]>e  olde^  lawe?  Ko  ]?ing 

shuld  lett  \er-to,  but  ]?at  he  becam  man  for  mercy  ;  &  ]?us  it 

seeme]?  a  blasfeme  heresie  to  seie  ]?at  man®  may  not  ellis  come 

to  heuew,  but  if  he  fulfille  J?is  roten  lawe  fat  was  f us  late 

made  of  an^ecrist.  Also  god  may  not  ^yue  occasiouw  to  two 

persones  for  to  sywne,  for  f ewne  he  were  auctor  of  synne  & 

Privy  confession  contravie  to  himsilf :  but  bi  fis  priueye  shrift  a  frere  &  nuwne 
g^ives  occasion  to 

may  sywne  to-gidre ;  and  close  hemsilf  in  a  chaumbre  bi  lok 
in-sted  of  feyned  assoylynge ;  for  I  suppose  as  knowen  f  ing, 
fwt  whewne  a  lawe  is  feyned  wifoutew  god,  &  of  fis  lawe 
comef  myche  synne,  f is  lawe  ^yuef  occasion  to  al  fat  sywne ; 
^  but  f is  lawe  ^yuef  occasiouw  to  do  so  as  it  fallif  ofte.^ 
lord,  whefir  god,  fat  seif  bi  lob  fat  a  maw  shuld  make 
couenauwt  wif  hise  wittis  to  f  enke  not  on  ®  a  virgyne, 
ordeyned  sich  a  lawe  to  men,  fat  prestis  &  wymmen  shulde 
twrne  her  faces  to-gider,  &  speke  of  lustful®  foutes  &  dedis, 
which  my^t  do  harme  to  hem  bofe;  but  fis  lawe  ^yuef 
occasiouw  to  do  sywne  as  it  fallif  oft.  Also  fus  may  lordws 
&  laidis  be  nedid  to  trowe  sich  mew,  &  lettid  to  holde  goddis 
lawe,  and  to  stonde  for  ri^t  on  cristis  syde.  lord,  if  iche  lord 
of  ynglond  &  his  wiif  hadew  two  schariotis  to  lede  hem  &  her 
meyne  and  her  werkis  to  fe  puple,  hou  lijtly  my^t  antecrist 
conqwer^  f e  churche  and  distruy^e  cristis  rewme  ? 

'^'And  pt  men  maken  moo  resons  to  meue  fe  chirche  to 
knowe  fe  treuf  e  &  fredam  of  goddis  lawe,  so  fat  fe  churche 


[Job  xxxi.  1.] 


Cm  4ra  mm. 
»[p.  1296  MS,] 


^  distroyje  CC. 
omitted  CC. 


2  wolde  CC. 
^  wij?  CC. 


3  he  CC. 

®  synful  CC. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


331 


be  not  made  bonde  bi  noo  disceitis  of  an^^cnst,  but  stonde  in 

])e  same  fredam  j^at  crist  ha]?  ^ouew.  God  ^yuej?  non  occasion 

to  an^^crist  for  to  sywne ;  but  bi  J’is  feyned  assoylyng  he  ha]’ 

occasion  to  sywne  in  ]?e  churche,  and  ]’us  ]’is  power  is  not  of 

crist,  wherby  ]’is  assoylyng  is  feyned ;  and  ]’us  ]’e  fend  mut 

nedis  gabb  whewne  his  prestis  assoilen  bus.  for  bus  be  pope  Possible  abuses 

my^t  kepe  to  hym  to  name  whom  euer  he  wolde  proper 

prestis,  and  make  couenau?^t  wi]>  ]’is  prest  \at  he  assoyle]’  no 

man  but  if  he  jyue  so  myche  mono  ;  or  ellis  behey^t  to  holde 

on  his  syde,  and  ]’us  a?^^ecrist  my^t  soone  conc^weice  lordshipes 

&  eke  rewmes  to  hym.  and  ]?U8  curatis  &  parishe  prestis 

my^ten  spuyle  ]7e  puple  as  freres  done ;  and  ]?us  it  were  a 

benyfice  to  purchace  of  ]?e  pope  to  be  a  prapur  preste  ]?us. 

and  it  falle]*  oft  \ai  sich  propur  prestus  ben  vn-able  to  here 

shriftis ;  and  \q  maker  of  ]7is  lawe  may  not  make  alle  siche 

propre  prestis  able,  and  so  he  eowstreyne]*  men  in  cas  to 

shryue  hem  to  an  vnable  prest.  but  who  shuld  preise  ]’is 

lawe  ]?erfore?  si]?  yuel  frute  witnessi]?  yuel  rote.  As  ^  if  a  pope 

make  a  lawe  \at  who  euer  he  lymyti]’  to  here  eo?^fessiou?^  of 

]?is  man  or  eo?^fessio^^  of  ]?is  comu[n]atee,  he  shal  here  ]’ise 

me?^nes  shrift,  &  he  ^  is  founder  vnable  aftur,  ]7e?^ne  ]?is  popis  become 

lawe  wi]?  treu]’e  in-dede  may  lijtly  jyue  occasiou?^  of  syne. 

and  if  bou  seist  hat  siche  bullis  of  be  pope  vndwrsto?^den  euer  Pope’s  bulls 

■*  ■'  i  L  i-  licensing  confes- 

a  eo?^diciou?^ ;  \at  if  ]’is  persone  bi  goddis  lawe  shal  profijt 
in®  fulfillyng  of  ]’ise  popes  bulles,  ]?ewne  ]>&  popes  bullis 
shule?^  haue  streng]>e,  &  elles  ]’ei  shulen  not  stonde  in  stede : 

Certis  if  ]’ise  popis  bulles  shulen  be  undwrstonde?^  wi]’  sich 

a  label,  ]?ew-ne  ]?ei  weren  not  profitable  to  purchasour  ne 

to  ]>e  churche;  ^'for  who  ^  shuld  take  ony  benyfiss  of  ]?e  *[p- 13oms.] 

puple  ^  wi]’  sich  bullis,  if  his  ablete  shulde  be  proued  in  werk 

be-fore  he  were  acceptid  ?  so]?e  it  is  ]?e  more  able  man  to  god 

shuld  qwewche  ]’is  ablete  of  ]’is  man;  and  ]>is  skil  moued 

hooly  me?j  to  stryue  not  for  suche  ablete.  but  crist  jaf  reule 

'  al  CC.  ^  omitted  CC.  ^  into  CC. 

who  shuld  not  take  eny  benyfice  of  ]?e  pope  CC. 


332 


OF  CONFESSION. 


This  confession 
hinders  preach¬ 
ing. 


If  this  law  is 
profitable, 


Christ  is  to  blame 
for  not  having 
instituted  it. 


Cm  5m  mm. 

The  words  of 
absolution  vary. 


^[p.  1306  MS.] 


The  different 
forms. 


The  Greeks’  is 
the  least  evil, 
being  only  a 
prayer. 


to  ]>e  lewes  to  iuge  hym  able  bi  hise  werkis,  but  wele  mm 
witen  \at  nej^^r  popis  bullis  ne  tr^ueile  for  hew  by  coueitise 
maki]?  j^is  mm  but  inor(3  vnable  ^  to  gete  oujt  by  suche 
bullis.  Also  j^is  lawe  is  full  suspecte,  for  it  lettej?  bettur 
occupying,  &  aske]?  werse  occupyinge,  ]?at  is  not  grounded  in 
goddis  lawe.  ]?at  prelate  j^at  shriue]?  shuld  pr^che  j^e  puple, 
and  he  }>at  is  shriue^  shuld  her^  goddis  worde;  but  bi  Jiis 
shriftew  hm  boj^e  J?ise  lettid.  and  noo  drede  ]?ei  werew 
bettr^,  si]?  crist  vsed  hem  &  not  ]?is  shrift,  &  bad  hem  be 
vsed,  &  not  ]?is.  So  it  seme]?  \at  an^^crist  bi  ]?is  putti]?  cristis 
ordynauwce  abake ;  and  we  taken  here  as  opynly  knowen, 
\at  whe?^ne  eny  harm  come]?  of  a  lawe,  &  ]?at  lawe  is  not 
grouwdid  in  skyl,  it  ^yue]?  occasions  of  ]>is  harme;  for  reson 
excuse]?  not  ]?is  lawe,  fat  ne  it  make]?  blamefuly  fis  harme. 
and  if  it  wer(?  reson  in  fis  popis  tyme  to  make  fis  lawe  to  fe 
churchis  profite,  it  wer^  as  myche  resou^  fat  fis  lawe  had 
ben  Ysed  bi-for(9  fis  popis  tyme ;  but  f  e^ne  werew  crist  &  petre 
&  oper  popes  to  blame  pat  leften  it  f  us.  lord,  what  meued 
fis  late  popes  to  make  furst  fis  lawe,  whewne  f e  fend  was 
vnbouwden,  and  god  meued  not  crist  ne  hise  vikers  to  sue  it, 
whewne  it  semed  as  myche  skil.  wher  fis  pope  was  god  of 
heuen,  so  fat  mew^  may  not  know  his^  reson. 

But  ^itt  f^r  comef  more  harme  of  fis  lawe  of  cowfessiou?^, 
Ifor  co?^fessours  varien  in  wordis  of  assoylyng,  as  fei  done  in 
wordis  of  her  cwrsyng,  &  gabben  cowmynly  wif  blasfeme 
wordis  ajews  beleeue  ;  and  it  is  licly  to  many  men  sif 
f e  pope  kan  not  teche  fise  wordis  fat  prestis  shuldew  seie 
"^'bi  goddis  lawe,  he  can  not  grounde  f  is  lawe  in  reson. 
Suwme  prestis  seyne  symply  ‘‘I  assoyle  fe  of  fi  synnes;” 
&  leyne  her  hondes  on  her  hedes,  or  ellis  touches  hew  wif 
a  jerde.  Suwme  prestis  seyne  a  mor(9  raunge;  fei  preyen 
furst  fat  god  assoyle  hym,  &  afftur  fei  assoylen  hym  bi 
autorite  ^ouen  to  hem.  ^  fe  f ridde  man^r  &  leste  yuel,  fat 
men  seyn  fat  greks  han,  is  fat  fe  prest  pr^yef  pat  god 

1  vnable]?  bym  CC.  ^  god  CC.  ^  j?i®  ^ 


OF  CONFESSION. 


333 


assoyle  hym  &  leuyng  worde  of  assoylyng ;  and  Jus  he  my^t 

assoyle  at  home  hym  ]>at  were  a  Jousand  myle  fro  hym. 

and  lewed  me^  tat  weren  bettur  my^ten  tiis  assoyle  better  Good  laymen 
^  ^  ...  might  absolve 

tewne  wickid  pr^stis.  ffor  it  is  licly  tat  a  pr^st  ordeyned  to  thus  better  than 

■'  wicked  priests. 

be  dawpned  assoylej  not  Jus;  but  what  prest  or  man  con- 
fessid  wot  wher  Jis  pr^st  shal  be  dampned.  and  Jis  shrift  Jus 
broujt  inne  semej  to  marr^  Je  churche  in  bileeue,  as  Je  prest  The  priest  makes 

himself  God’s 

made  hym  goddis  felow,  as  god  and  he  shulde;^  assoile  to-  fellow. 

gidre ;  or  ellis  Jat  god  mut  nedis  assoile  whewne  Je  pr^st 

makij  his  sygne.  Suche  many  blassefemys  ajeynes  Je 

beleue  ben  sowen  of  an^^crist  in  Jis  mater,  ffor  god,  Jat 

jyueJ  grace  &  is  in  Je  soule,  assoyleth  &  doj  a-wey  synne, 

and  Jis  may  not  Je  prest  do,  sij  it  is  propur  to  god,  and,  sij  itbeiongstoGod 

no  man  shuld  lije  a  lytle  lesyng  to  saue  Je  worlde,  a  prest  tionf^^^ 

shuld  not  seye,  “y  assoyle,”  whe^ne  he  not  neu^r  whejir  god 

assoyle.  ffor  he  knowej  neij^r  wher  Jis  man  cowfessid  seye 

treuje  ypon  (?o;tscyence,  or  wher  Jat  he  be  contrite,  as  he 

knowej  not  hy»t-self ;  and  I  suppose  he  wite  Je  soje,  ptte  he 

knowij  not  Je  qwantite  of  peyne  Jat  god  wole  Jat  Jis  man 

haue  for  hise  trespase  ajeynes  god,  for  penauwce  is  arbitr«rie.  Amount  of  pen- 

now  more  &  nowe  lesse,  aftur  Jat  Je  prest  wole  lymyte,  be  he 

neuer  so  grete  a  fool.  And  here  spry;^gen  many  errours  ajens 

beleue  on  boje  sydis;  for  Je  prest  gedrej  hym  ofte^  moneye  or 

money  worje  by  suche  penauwce,  and  so  bi  priuey  symony 

he  harmej  )iem  boJe  &  Je  churche.  and  Jus  a  frere  or  a  prest 

haj  as^  leue  to  be  seurerly  a  eowfessour  of  a  lord  or  of  a  ^lady  •[p,  isi  ms.] 

confessor 

as  ^  to  be  ^  a  simple  bischop ;  for  bi  Jis  office  he  takij  his  is  as  well  off  as  a 
worship  &  his  wywnyng,  as  if  he  were  pope,  and  it  were 
hard  to  telle  Je  harme  Jat  comej  be  many  of  Jise  eo/^fessours.  Dangers  from 
lor  Je  pope  &  Je  emperour  my^te  priuely  be  poysened  bi  confessors, 
suche  fadres,  and  rewmes  myjtew  lijtly  be  destruyjed  by 
couwseilis  \at  Jei  jyuen  to  lordis,  for  no  drede  Jei  ben  cause 
of  me^nes  sywne  eo^fessid  to  hem.  anentis  Je  persone  Jat  is 
eowfessid  fallen  many  errours  ajews  bileeue,  as  Je;t  he  Jat  is 


1  of  CC. 


®  CC  inserts  myebe. 


3-®  omitted  CC. 


334 


OF  CONFESSION. 


Sin  might  he 
bought  as  you 
would  an  ox  or 
a  cow. 


Cm  6m  MM. 


The  devil  tries  to 
keep  absolution 
in  the  hands  of 
popes  and  pre¬ 
lates. 


The  friars  hold 
together, 


*[p.  1316  MS.] 

to  keep  up  this 
confession  that 
the  devil  has 
taught. 


Ladies,  too,  have 
confessors  of 
great  name. 


coi^fessid  trowe  as  bileeue  ]iat  al  bis  sywne  is  for^yiiew  be-for 
god,  as  co^l^fessour  telle]?  hym.  and  ^itt  it  may  falle  ]?at 
boj^e  ]?ise  shulen  hen  dampned  for  her  foly ;  for  ofte  J?e 
fjoi^fessid  is  not  contrite  &  twrnej?  a^eyne  to  his  sy?^ne ;  and 
siche  treting^  occasions  ]iat  ]?ei  bo]?e  ben  disceyeud;  and 
]?e  ma?^  ]?at  is  f;o?^fessed  wenej?  \at  god  doi]?  him  wrong  if  he 
haue  euer  mor(9  peyne  for  his  sy?^ne  \enjie  ]?e  prest  enioyne]?. 
and  ]?us  syme  myjt  be  boujt  for  money,  as  who  by^e  an  ox 
or  a  kowe ;  and  so  riche  men  hade?«  occasiou?^  to  drede  not 
for  to  sywne,  whe?^ne  J?ei  myjten  for  a  lytle  moneye  be  ]?ns 
assoyled  of  alle  her  sywnes ;  and  pore  men  myjten  dispeir^, 
for  ]?ei  haden  not  to  by^e  ]ius  synne.  Such  many  errours 
fallow  &  fewe  mew  spekew  a^eynes  hem. 

But  ^itt  \e  feend  feyne]?  here  a  lesynge  to  excuse  pr^stis 
hise  seruaunU's ;  he  sei]?  J^at  alle  mew  shulden  beleue  ]?at  what 
man  ]?at  his  pr<?st  assoyle]?,  whdit  ever  penauwce  he  enioyne]?, 
he  is  assoiled  be-for^  god ;  and  \us  popes  &  prelates  kepew  to 
hew  silf  assoylyng,  in  which  ly]?e  wywnywg ;  and  ]7us  who- 
euer  a^eyne  seye  ]?is  is  p^^rsued  as  an  heretike,  &  ]7us  by  hise 
olde’^  wiles  he  knytti]?  to-gidre  mew  to  helpe  popis  &  cardinales, 
bischopes  &  freres  to  crie  ]?is  as  bileeue;  &  freris  mouew 

lordis  &  ladies  to  defend  ]?is  lawe  by  strewgj^e,  and  bi  ]?is  gile 

* 

]?ei  leden  lordis  as  a  man  ledi]?  a  prisoner ;  &  cristis  secte  is 
made  pore,  &  ]?ise  foure  ben  enhauwsed  hije;  so  ]?at,  but  if 
crist  helpe  his  secte,  ])e  foure  new  wolew  brywge  '^nt  a-down; 
and  ]?ei  foure  ben  knyttid  to-gidre  in  ]?is  eewfessiouw  ]7at  her 
maister  ha]?  tau^t,  as  if  oon  seid  to  ano]?ur,  “helpe  me  here,  & 
I  shul  helpe  ]?ee.”  a  ]?us  a  frere  ]?at  is  a  eowfessowr  to  kyng  or 
to  a  duke  is  ympe  or  pere  to  a  bishop,  by  ]?e  feyning  of  ]?is 
eowfessiouw,  for  ]?ei  seien  he  ledi]?  his  soule  eeuen  to  heuen  by 
goddis  lawe.  and  qwenes,  duchesses,  and  o]?er  ladies  han 
eowfessours  of  grete  name,  for  as  ]?ise  ladies  ben  felowes  to 
lordis,  so  her  eowfessours  bew  felowis  to  o]?ur.  and  ]?us  ]?ise 
lordis  ]?at  shuldew  be  free,  ben  oft  made  ])ral  bi  ygnoraunce 


1  tretee  MM. 


2  omitted  CC. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


335 


^of  suche  <?owfessours^;  for  assoyli?^ge  of  suche  cowfessours  ha]? 

lytel  v^rtu  or  non;  but  assoilyng  of  god  aftur  pat  a  ma?^nes 

liif  is  wor]?i  fordo]?e  sy?^ne,  &  punyse]?  it  til  pat  it  be  fully  for- 

^yuew.  it  is  seide  co»^mu?^ly,  bat  coupabilnesse  of  sywne  is  it  is  commonly 
.  ,  .  said  that  in  abso- 

for-?yuen,  and  dt  bat  sy?^ne  dwellib  to  be  punysbid,  but  not  lution  the  guilt 

_  .  .  .  .  forgiven,  but 

for  to  be  dampned  in  belle.  &  al  j^is  ]?ing  is  priuey  to  god,  the  sin^must  be 

bo];e^  to  know  it  &  to  do  it;  as  an  erjily  lord  ^yuej?  not  to  his 

seruauwt  power  to  for^yue  his  trespasse,  but  ]?at  he  doi]?  in 

his  owne  wille,  &  make]?  his  seruauwt  to  telle  it.  miche 

more  god  of  heuen  for^yue]?  synne,  whe?z  he  knowe]?  man  pat 

he  is  wor]?i  for  sorowe  of  herte  &  for  treue  seruyce  ]?at  he 

doi]?  aftur.  and  ]?us  it  is  a  blasfemy  pat  ro?^fessours  seyn  in 

]?is  Tsidiier,  pat  ]?ei  forjyue/2-  synne  don  ajens  god,  &  treten 

peyne  aftur  her  lykyng.  Al  ]?is  is  propur  to  god,  but  whi  ^an^^j^who^doe.' 

shulde  he  make  hem  hero  his  felowis?  and  it  shal  be  shewed 

his  fellows. 


aftur,  pat  ]?is  beleue  may  not  be  grouped ;  but  ]?e  feende  is 
about  to  twrne  falsehed  in- to  treu]?e,  and  twrne  hope  in- to 
bileue,  &  dedis  of  hate  in-to  charite;  &  J?us  fredam,  ]?at 
crist  gaf  to  hise  children,  he  wole  twrne  falsely  in-to  ]?raldam. 
for  now  it  is  a  lordly  ]?ing  to  have  sich.  a  proper  oowfessour, 
and  god  wot,  but  ]?e  lord  wot  not,  wher  he  be  a  feend  of 
helle;  and  algatis  if  he  feyne  hym  power  to  assoyle  moro 
]?e?^ne  he  haj? ;  for  by  "^sicli  ypocrisie  may  he  drawe  hem  bo]?e 
to  helle,  and  do  harme  to  ]?e  churche  ]?us  mor^  pQnnQ  he  do]7e 
on  ]?e  to]?ur  syde.  , 

And  jitt  it  semi]?  pat  suche  pr^stis  J?at  heren  ^!6»?^fessiouns 
oblische^  hem  folily  to  here  ]?us  confessions ;  and  so  non  weri? 
discrete  prest  J^us  shryuyng,  as  pe  popes  lawe  biddi]?.  and 
ptt  pe  pope  biddi]?  in  his  lawe  pat  eontessours  be  discrete,  & 
pei  here  aloon  me?^nes  sy?«nes;  but  it  seme]?  vndiscretly 
spoken,  for  it  were  better  ioyne  two  prestis  to  be  witnesse  of 
mawnes  shrifte.  for  two  witnessis  ben  bettre  penne  oon,  & 
more  acordyng  to  goddis  lawe ;  for  bo]?e  in  pe  oolde  lawe,  & 
in  pe  newe,  men  toldew  commy?^ly  her  sy?^ne ;  as  ]?at  ]>eef 


It  is  the  fashion 
to  have  a  private 
confessor. 


*[p.  132  MS.] 


Cm  7m  mm. 
Priests  that  bind 
themselves  to 
hear  confessions 
are  foolish, 

but  confessors 
should  be  dis¬ 
creet. 

It  would  be  better 
for  priests  to  hear 
confessions  in 
couples. 

The  old  way  was 
to  confess  pub¬ 
licly. 


omitted  MM. 


2  but  CC. 


336 


OF  CONFESSION. 


The  shame  of 
confession, 

-which  is  part  of 
penance,  -would 
be  greater. 


Priests  do  not 
know  how  to 
enjoin  penance 
justly. 


*[p.  1326  MS.] 

They  give  lighter 
penance  than  of 
old. 


It  might  be  good 
to  reveal  some 
confessions. 


tolde  in  j^e  crosse  to  crist  hise  fordone  sywne ;  he  shroue  hym 
more  medefully,  ]7ewne  don  ^  mew  now^  rownyng  with  pr(9stis,  for 
crist  telli]?  in  J^e  gospel  \at  he  behyjt  hym  he  shulde  be 
wi]?  hym  iw  pwradise  '^at  same  daye;  &  sich  absolucion  ^aue  no 
pope  aftur  j^is  lawe.  &  if  ]70u  seist  ]?at  no  man  wolde  shrine 
h.jm  at  oonys  to  many  pr^stis,  &  so  shulde  mawnes  sywne 
be  hidde,  &  many  dawpned  \at  now  ben  saued.  Gertie  sifen 
]?ei  shulde  haue  shame  to  telle  her  sywnes  ]7us  to  oo  prest,  & 
Jjis  shame  is  j^e  moost  part  of  penauwce,  and  make]?  penauwce 
more^  medeful,^  It  seme]?  it  were  more  medeful^  to  shriue 
togidre  to  twey  prestis.  hou  oft  ^auew  mew  glorie  to  god 
shriuyng  to  mo  mew  ]7ewne  to  two ;  as  whewne  tweyn  prestis 
seien  ny^e  masse,  many  shryuew  hem  to  boJ>e  to-gidre.  And 
but  pf  ]?is  shrift  were  medeful,  ]?e  churche  vsed  it  wi]?-outen 
cause,  and  J’us  as  men  hiden  here  sywnes  to  shriue  hem  to¬ 
gidre  to  many  prestis,  so  many  men  hiden  here  synnes  to 
shriue  hem  to  oo  preest  alone.  And  si]?en  prestis  han  not  J^e 
craft  to  enioyne  a  iust  penauwce,  it  seme]?  ]?wt  J’ei  ben  foolis 
to  take  so  grete  a  charge  vpon  hem ;  and  if  a  man  ]>at  slouj  a 
lord  shulde  be  hanged  for  ®his  de}'e,®more  shulde  ]?at  leche  ]?at 
slouj  a  mawnes  soule  be  hanged  of  god  for  his  foly.  see  we 
what  penauwce  was  ^sumtyme  enioyned  to  men  ]?at  sywneden 
greuously,  and  see  we  penauwce  nowe  ewioyned ;  &  ]?ise  two 
a-corde  ful  litil,  and  as  lawers  moten  grauwt  pat  ]?is  penauwce 
writen  was  goode ;  so  ]?ei  moten  grauwt  pat  synners  lyuen  as 
longe  as  summe  of  hem  diden,  and  it  wer^  as  myche  nede  to 
leye  now  as  myche  penauwce  to  summe,  as  was  penne  nede  to 
many  of  hem ;  and  ]?us  noo  prest  ]?at  lyue]?  nowe  ha]?  ]?is 
craft  to  leye  euen  ]?is  penauwce.  what  wisedam  were  penne 
to  make  ]?is  lawe,  'or  prestis  to  take  ]?i8  craft  on  hem  ?  and 
specialy  si]?  prestis  ben  bouwden  on  grete  peyne  to  hele  ]?is 
synne ;  and  hit  my^t  fellen  iw  many  caice  pat  it  were  bo]?e 
almes  &  nede  to  shewe  mewnes  sywne  ]?at  ben  shriuen,  but 


omitted  CC. 
^  nedeful  CC. 


2  omitted  MM. 
®  ]7is  dede  MM. 


2  nedeful  CC. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


337 


whi  shulden  pr^stis  ben  puny  shed  berfore?  Men  writen 
in  latyn  many  rescues  ageyne  ]?is  shrift. 

Men  dreden  here  to  seie  fe  treuj^e,  but  summen  fenken  fat  C“  8“  MM. 
it  standes  in  fis;  fat  cowfessio^  made  to  god,  wif  worfi 
penauwce  ioyned  f^rwif,  is  betW  fan  fis^  C(9wfessiou7^  made 
to  any  prest  or  pope,  but  I  wot  fat  f ise  newe  ^^owfessiouws  confession  has 
han  don  myche  good  in  f  e  churche,  &  f  «rwif  myche  harme  ;  and  much  harm, 
and  god  woot  whef  was  mor(3  of  hem.  and  it  is  certeyne 
fat  fis  newe  shrifte  be-gan  by  ordynauwce  of  f e  pope,  for  no 
man  can  telle  ellis  hou  &  whewne  fis  shrifte  begawne,  and  fis 
witnessif  her  prop«<r  doctour  of  f  e  popes  lawe  opynly;  and  so 
it  semef  to  many  men  fat  fis  lawe  shuld  not  be  holder  as  it  should,  not  he 
goddis  lawe  ne  Quer  mor.?,  but  in  fat  tyme  whe?^ne  reson  of 
god  shulde  moue  mewnes  ^;owsciens  fat  fis  cowfessiouw  wold 
don  hew  good,  and  if  any  man  aske  mor^,  he  axif  mor(? 
f  ewne  god  wole  axe,  for  god  ordeynef  neu^r  a  lawe  ne  mew 
to  p(9rfourme  it  but  if  fis  lawe  wer*?  grounded  in  resouw, 
and  mew  shuldew  p(9rfourme  it  wif  wille ;  for  ellis  it  wer<9 
noo  meede^  to  do  it,  but  if  it  were  wilful  suwtyme;  and  fws  fis 
lawers  han  nede  to  grouwde  fis  lawe  vpon  reson,  &  to  teche  «[p.  134  ms.] 

.  n  ‘  n  Lawyers  should 

wheche  ben  able  pr^stis  to  here  f  us  mewnes  eowfessiouw ;  for  show  ground  in 

reason  for  the 

ellis  shuld  no  maw  bi  resouw  telle  f  us  his  schrift  to  any  law. 

prest.  and  fus  men  of  eewscience  wolen  not  telle  here  fus 

her  sywne  to  prestis;  for  fei  seyne  fat  no  prest  is  able,  but  Men  of  conscience 

say  that  no  priest, 

oonly  crist,  to  here  fus  shriftes ;  and  if  eny  diffame  hew  or  but  only  Christ, 

is  able  to  hear 

pwrsue  hem  by  fis  lawe,  fei  baden  shewe  hem  an  able  prest  confessions  thus. 

to  here  fus  sywnes  of  hem,  and  fei  wolen  blefely  shryue  hem 

fus,  and  ellis  not,  as  fis  lawe  techif .  but  what  prest  fat  it 

be,  fat  is  sywful  &  couetouse,  &  proferif  hiw  fus  to  here 

mewnes  schrifte,  shewif  hiwself  vnable  ferby  ?  for  if  he  had 

not  couetise  of  worldly  goodis  &  subiectiouw  of  folk,  he  shuld  if  priests  did  not 

.  .  covet  wealth  and 

preche  to  fe  puple,  &  leue  al  siche  rownyng  fat  is  uw-  authority,  they 
.  .  .  _  _  *  would  rather 

gruwdid ;  for  sich  prechiwg  by  cristis  lawe  made  many  mew  preach, 
to  leue  her  synne,  but  I  rede  not  in  goddis  lawe  fat  fis 
rownyng  made  euer  maw  iust ;  and  if  it  dide,  it  was  becase, 

^  MM  inserts  seen.  ^  CC.  3  nede  CC. 

*  w 


22 


338 


OF  CONFESSION. 


Ask  the  Pope 
what  is  deadly 
sin;  what  are  the 
proofs  of  contri¬ 
tion  ;  what  is  the 
rule  for  enj oining 
penance  ? 

He  and  all  his 
clerks  cannot  tell 
you. 

General  confes¬ 
sion  is  enough. 


Cm  gm  mm. 


Antichrist  has 
stopped  preach¬ 
ing. 


*[p.  134&  MS.] 


All  sin  is  against 
God. 

Men  are  often 
punished  for 
deeds  that  do  not 
offend  God. 


Sins  against  God 
are  not  punished, 
or  only  because 
they  ofend  men. 


We  should 
humble  ourselves 
for  our  sins. 


God’s  greatness 
and  kindness 
should  both 
move  us  to  sor¬ 
row. 


as  a  wro;^ge  may  sumtyme  make  rijt ;  and  algatis  synful  mew 
}>at  ban  prestis  suspect  of  couetyse  &  of  vnkuwnywg  in  }>is 
craft  shuld  kepe  j^is  shrift  fro  seek  prestis.  but  begywne  we 
at  ]7e  pope,  &  aske  \iim  of  dedly  sywne,  &  hou  mew  sbuldew 
know  dowtricion,  &  whi  siche  penauwee  shal  be  enioyned  ; 
and  it  seme]?  to  many  men  \at  alle  ]?e  popes  &  ]?dre 
clerkis  kuwnen  not  telle  on  of  ]?ise  ]7re ;  and  \eriorQ  ]?ei  wolen 
sbryue  hem  to  god.  general  sebrifte  &  opyn  to  man  wole  ]?ei 
make,  &  is  I-nowj,  so  ]7at  it  come  of  dowtricion  &  treue 
penaunce  ]?wt  mew  spekew  of. 

Eor  it  were  not  to  ^yue  occasion  to  horde  sywne  &  to  holde 
it,  \eriov  mew  sbuldew  by  goddis  lawe  moue  mew  to  forsake 
synne,  and  ]?us  sbuldew  prestis  do  be  prdchyng ;  but  an^dcrist 
ha]?  suspendid  hit  now.  maw  shuld  have  sorowe  of  his  sywne, 
for  gretnesse  of  ]»e  kynd  lord,  &  harm  of  leesing  of  his  grace, 
&  for  oblishyng  to  grete  peyne.  No  maw  sywne]»  as  we 
speken  herd  but  if  he  sywne  '^'ajen  god,  for  who  eudr  sywne]? 
not  ajews  hym,  be  his  trespas  neudr  so  myche  punyshed  here, 
he  may  not  be  dawpned  in  belle  j>erfore,  and  ellis  it  werd  no 
sywne  of  man.  &  ]?ms  mew  punyshew  ofte  men  herd  in 
mewnes  courte  ful  greuously  for  dedis  ]?at  mew  callen  tres¬ 
passes,  &  jitt  god  is  not  wro}>e  for^  hem ;  but  it  may  falle  oft 
j>at  men  erren,  &  punyshen  not  ]?e  trespasses  of  god,  ne  for 
]?at  it  is  don  ajews  god,  but  for  mewnes  wywnyng ;  or  for  ]?at 
it  misse-liki]?.  hem.  and  ]?enke  we  hou  a  man  wole  meke 
him  to  a  worldly  lord  for  trespasse  don  to  hym ;  &  bi  ourd 
fei]?  god  is  mord  lord  wi]?outew  mesurd  ]?ewne  any  er]?ly  kynge  ; 
herfore  we  shulden  be  meke  to  god  for  trespasses  pat  we  ban 
don  to  hym,  and  specialy  for  his  kyndenesse  pat  he  made  vs 
first  of  nou]t,  &  si]?en  bou^t  vs  fro  ]?e  fendes  prisouw,  &  giue]? 
vs  aye  grace  in  alle  ourd  goodis ;  and  he  is  redy  to  jyue  vs 
blisse,  if  we  seruew  him  pdrfijtly.  and  ]?us  bo]?e  ]?e  gretnesse 
of  ]?is  lord  &  his  kyndenesse  shuld  meue  us  to  sorow  for  ourd 
synnes.  a  man  ha]?  a  myche  for}?inkyng  for  leesyng  of  loue 
&  of  an  erfely  lorde;  wh<?t  witt  or  treu]?e  is  in  ]?at  maw 


1  wi>  CC. 


or  CONFESSION. 


339 


J^at  sorowe]?  not  for  losse  of  godd/s  gr(^ce  ?  we  han  sorowe 
for  losse  of  two  goodis,  of  worldly  goodis,  &  goodis  of  kynde  ; 
and  jitt  we  sorowen  to  lytil  for  lesyng  of  goodis  of  grace  ;  & 
^itt  J>ei  ben  pe  moost  goodis  of  j^ise  ]7re  goodis  ]7at  a  man  ha]7e. 
and  si]?en  beleeue  tecbi]?  vs  pat  men  I’at  breken  goddis  hestis, 
&  maken  not  a-see]7e  j^erfore,  moten  nedis  be  dampned  in  belle, 
Drede  of  ]7is  grete  peyny  sbuld  moue  men  to  sorowe  for  synne. 
&  ]7us  ambrose  &  gregory  seyne  pat  penne  a  man  tmp  fully 
sorowe,  whewne  bym  displesi]?  fordon  synne,  &  not  eft  wil 
sywne  ageyne;  an  jjus  is  j^at  man  contrite  of  sywne,  j^at  be 
vngodeli  to  god  baj?  don,  pat  be  ba]?  perfit  wille  to  leue  it, 
and  for  no  J^ing  wil  sywne  ageyne.  j^ise  me;^  pat  ban  "^a  litil 
displesyng  &  ben  ful  nyj  to  synne  ageyne  ban  no  penauwce  of 
ber  synne,  be  pei  neuer  so  oft  I-sbriuew ;  and  J^us  j^e  shrift  pat 
is  J7us  made  make]?  mew  bardy  to  sywne  ageyne,  for  cowtriciouw 
mut  be  grouwdid  in  sad  loue  of  ib^su  crist,  so  pat  contricioiin 
seye  sad  sorowe  for  sywne  pat  is  don,  and  sadde  loue  to  synne 
not  ajeyne,  as  mycbe  or  mori?  as  was  likyng  to  sywne.  and 
]?is  kuwne  not  we  knowe  ful  certeyne,  but  ban  glymeryng  & 
supposyng,  &  ]7us  we  motew  lyue  ber(?  in  beleue  &  in  bope  to 
crist,  pat  rijt  entent  &  goode  werkis  grouwde  vs  in  hope,  pat 
crist  wole  saue  vs.  and  he  pat  trusti]?  to  popis  bulles  or 
assoylinge  fro  peyne  &  synne,  or  ojjur  wordis  of  rowfessours, 
pat  ]?ei  feynen*  bisyde  goddis  lawe,  is  folily  disceyued  in  bise 
bileue  &  in  hope,  &  ]>us  be  dispeyre]? ;  but  we  shulden  beleue 


Ambrose  and 
Gregory. 
What  true  re¬ 
pentance  is. 


*[p.  135  MS.] 
Without  sorrow 
for  sin  shrift  is 
useless. 


We  cannot  know 
that  we  are  truly 
contrite, hut  must 
hope  so. 


No  trust  to  be 
placed  in  the 
Pope’s  hulls, 


but  in  the  great¬ 
ness  of  God’s 


pat  grace  of  god  is  so  gret  &  plewtyuouse,  pat  if  a  man  sywne  grace. 

neuer  so  micbe  ne  so  longe  in  bis  lyue,  if  he  wole  aske  of  god 

mercye  &  be  eowtrite  for  bis  sywne,  god  wole  for^yue  hi?w  his 

sywne  wi]»outen  sicbe  iapes  feyned  of  prestis.  but  be  men 

war  of  ]>is  perile,  pat  eowtinuauwce  of  mawnes  synne  wi]?outew  Use  hardens  sin, 

sorowe  &  displesauwce  wole  make  bis  synne  harde,  &  bereue 

him  power  to  sorowe  periore,  &  to  gete  mercy,  and  ]?us  mew 

sbuldew  euer  drede  synne,  &  flee  to  knytt  on  to  a-noper ;  for 

whewne  a  maw  synkis  iw  pe  myre,  at  J?e  laste  he  may  not  belpe 

bym  self. 


1  eynen  CC. 


340 


OF  CONFESSION. 


Cm  IQm  mm. 

Antichrist  urges 
that  heretics  will 
destroy  the  sacra¬ 
ments. 

Psalm  Ixxi.  22, 


The  sacrament  of 
confession  like  a 
harp. 


*[p.  1356  MS.] 


Such  figurative 
interpretations 
good  when  well 
taken, 

but  this  is  not  to 
the  point. 


The  courtesy  of 
God  does  not  ask 
all  men  to  make 
audible  confes¬ 
sion. 


A  man  may  re¬ 
pent  silently  as  he 
may  sin  silently. 


It  weri?  to  witt  to  assoyle  skils  ]7at  an^ecrist  maki]?  a^ews 
]7is  waye.  ffurst  he  sei]?  pat  heretikes  woluw  distruy^e  pe 
seuew  sacrum ent«s ;  for  j^at  stondi]?  in  ^;owfessiou?^  of  mou]?, 
&  sorow  of  hert,  &  a-seet  makywg,  and  herfor  sei]?  david  in 
his  boke :  ‘‘]7on  god  j^at  art  my  god,  I  shal  synge  to  pe  \n 
an  harpe.”  an  harpe  haj^e  J^re  partis  of  hym ;  pe  ouermost 
in  which  ben  stringis  wrastid,  pe  secouwde  is  pe  holow  part 
of  pe  harpe,  pe  fridde  kayttef  Jjise  two  to-gidre.  Rijt  so  in  ^  fis 
sacrament  mut  be  contrieiomi  for  j^e  furst  part,  &  aftwr  a 
ma^^^  mut  synge  to  god  in  voice  for  ]7e  secouwd  part,  and  J^e 
)?ridde  tyme  he  must  make  a-see]?  &  knytt  j^ise  two  partes 
to-gidre.  what  herityke  or  fool  is  he  j^at  wold  distru^e  j^is 
gostly  harpe  ?  her(3  men  seyen  J^at  trewe  entent  shuld  be  to 
declare  rijt  beleue,  hou  men  shulden  harpe  her^  to  god,  as 
david  did  &  eper  seyntis  ;  for  many  kuwne  not^  wrast  j^is  harpe, 
&  opur  kuwne  not  harpe  whmne  it  is  dijt.  Suche  wittis 
gyuew  to  goddis  worde  ben  goode  whewne  J^ei  ben  wele 
taken ;  and  ]7is  witt  J>at  her^  is  seid  telli]?  pat  e.  man  shulde 
shriue  hym  to  god,  &  maki]?  no  mywde  of  rownynge  shrift, 
fat  is  late  bronjt  iwne  hi  f e  pope,  and  iche  man  pat  holdif 
beleeue  %rantep  pat  a  man  shuld  shriue  him  to  god,  ^e,  &  to 
man,  hi  voice  of  moufe,  and  haue  sorow  for  his  sy?^ne, 
&  pertov  make  to  god  a-seef  for  synne ;  but  fis  is^  don  apertly 
to  pr(3stis,  whm  fei  be^  good  &  louew  more  fe  heele  of 
mewnes  soules  f  ewne  her  goodis  by  coueytise.  but  her^  men 
shulden  vndwrstonde  pat  pe  cwrtesie  of  god  askif  not  of  iche 
maw  to  shriue  him  f  us  by  voice  of  mouf  e ;  for  as  many 
synnew  greuously  wif-iwne  iw  herte,  as  did  f  e  fend,  so  many 
mew  maken  aseef  bi  sorow  of  herte,  fat  may  not  speke  or 
wantef  oportunytee  to  shryue  hym  to  man  bi  voice ;  and  rijt 
so  as  a  maw  may  sywne,  so  he  may  here  make  aseef  e ;  for 
god  is  as  redy  to  jyue  merej  as  he  is  redy  to  take  vewiauwce. 
triste  wele  to  god  &  holde  his  lawe,  &  f  ewne  f  on  shriuest  f  e 
wele  to  him ;  &  synge  to  him  wif  ten  stringis,  fat  ben 
kepinge  of  fe  ten  hestis;  and  sorowe  of  trespasse  a^eyns  hem 

^  omitted  CC.  ^  omitted  CC.  ^  omitted  CC. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


341 


ten  shal  wraste  fis  harpe  to  a-corde  welle.  and  many  mm 
fallen  in  J^is  wrastyng  &  in  goostly  syngyng  aftur ;  and  so 
lis  priuey  sorowe  of  herte  is  no  sacrament  of  ^e  churche,  ne 
priuey  rownywg  late  broujt  inne,  for  sacramentis  ben  open 
&  knowen.  but  wbenne  a  mm  wij  coniritQ  berte  shriuej? 
him  opynly  to  god  or  man,  \mnQ  bis  voice,  |>at  is  token  of  bis 
booly  sorowe  of  berte,  may  be  caMed  a  sacrament,  as  men 
knowen  fat  discriuen  it.  &  Jus  we  largen  in  sacramentis, 
for  iche  good  sensible  dede  J7at  we  don,  or  j^at  spring!]?  of 
mawnes  cbarite,  may  be  callid  a  sacrament ;  and  ]?us  ]7re 
reisyngis  of  dede  bodies  ]?at  crist  dide,  as  gospel  telli]?, 
may  be  called  ]?re  sacramentis,  for  ]?re  twrnyngis  of  man  to 
god.  Summe  mm  twnen  to  god  wi]?-iwne,  &  suwme  aftur  ]?at 
]?ei  hab  sywned  wiJ?-outward,  and  summe  fro^fat  ]?ei  ban^ 
sywned  in  custom ;  and  ]?us  ]?e  rysyng  of  ]?e^  lasar  was  a  grete 
sacrament,  as  men  reden  in  j?e  cburcbe.  and  ani^i^crist  may 
bigyle  foolis  bi  sicb  lewde  resouws  as  be  maki]?,  but  goddis 
lawe  telli]?  wele  ]?e  falsbed  of  sucbe  resouws. 

And  ptt  grucche]?  an^^crist,  and  sei]?  ]?at  crist  telli]?  in  ]?e 
gospel  bow  crist  specified  to  petre  to  ^yue  bym  ]?e  keyes  of 
beue^  ;  and  so  petre  mut  baue  a  viker  ]?at  sbuld  specialy 
here  ]?e  keyes,  and  ]?ise  keyes  sbulden  opyn  &  bynde  to 
for-jyue  syfmes,  and  opyn  men  beuen,  &  to  cwrse  o]?ur  mew 
]?at  don  a^en  goddis  lawe. 

Here  we  seyne  be  goddis  tecbyng  ]?at  micb  errour  is  in  ]?is 
poynt.  Summe  ben  so  nyj  beestis,  ]?at  ]?ei  vndwrstondew 
bodily  keyjes,  by  wbicbe  beuen  ^ates  sbulden  be  openid  and 
stokune,®  &  petur  is  porter  in  ]?is  office.  ]?e  secouwde  errour 
in  ]?is  poynt  is  mor(?  p^relouse  in  ]?e  cburcbe,  for  pbaresees 
alargen  ber  browes  &  gogelew  fer^  fro  goddis  lawe ;  ]?ei  seyn 
]?at  ]?ise  keyes  ben  goostly  witty's  &  power,  jyuew  to  bem  to 
bynde  &  assoile  men  aftwr  ]?e  witt  approprid  to  bem ;  and 
berby®  ]?e  fend  feyne]?  oft  bi  bis  viker  mtemi^t  many  errours 
in  ]?e  cburcbe,  &  do]?e  mycbe  barme  to  foolis. 

The  }?ride  weye  of  bileeue  sei]?  ]?at  J?er  ben  many  key^es ; 


Secret  confession 
is  no  sacrament ; 


sacraments  are 
open  and  known. 


*[p.  136  MS.] 


In  another  sense 
all  good  deeds  ar 
sacraments. 


Cm  Urn  mm. 

Keys  of  heaven 
given  to  Peter, 
and  so  to  his 
vicar. 


Some  men  fools 
enough  to  fancy 
material  keys  and 
Peter  a  porter. 


Pharisees  say  the 
keys  are  a 
spiritual  power 
to  bind  and  loose. 


j?at  J?at  CC.  2  omitted  MM.  ^gperidMM.  *fouleMM.  ®  herfor  CC. 


342 


OF  CONFESSION. 


The  keys  are 
knowledge  and 
power, 


♦[p.  136&  MS.] 
given  to  Peter, 
afterwards  to  the 
apostles. 


Without  Peter’s 
knowledge  and 
good  life,  the 
Pope  is  porter 
of  hell  gates. 


The  knowledge 
must  be  of  God’s 
law. 

The  power  does 
not  consist  in 
absolution. 


but  in  teaching, 
preaching  and  re¬ 
proving. 


Cm  12m  mm. 

Christ  sent  the 
ten  lepers  to  the 
priest,  an  argu¬ 
ment  for  shrift. 


Austyn. 


si]i  crist,  Jat  may  not  sywne,  callej?  bojie  ]>e  keyes  of  heuenes 
&  ]je  ^ates  of  hello ;  and  no  doute  to  grete  witt  j^e  keyes  of 
heue?^  hen  vndwrstondew  witt  &  power,  );at  pr^stis  han  to 
telle  men  ]>e  wille  of  god,  &  to  wurche  aftwr  J^is  witt ;  and  so 
god  ^ane  to  petr(9  fes  two  keies  for  him  &  hise ;  and  aPtwrward 
god  jaue  to  Jie  apostles  ]ies  two  keyjes  for  hew  &  hers,  and 
Jius  an^^crist  au^te  to  shame  to  chalenge  oonly  petres  key^es, 
but  he  had  passyngly  witt  &  lijf  aftw  petur;  for  if  he 
reu^rse  hiw  in  ]iise  two,  he  is  porter  of  helle  ^ates.  and  ]?is 
witt  ]iat  crist  speki]?  of  stonde]?  not  in  mawnes  lawe,  ne  in 
o\ur  curiouse  lawes,  as  matematik,^  or  lawes  of  kywde,  but  it 
stonde]?  in  goddis  lawe  to  holde  mew  iw  mesur  Jierof,  &  to 
teche  cristen  men  hou  jiei  shulden  lyue  to  god  &  maw,  & 
come  to  heuew.  and  I  dar  not  seie  for  drede  of  god,  \ai  J^is 
power  stonde]?  in  assoilyng  &  cwrsyng  as  men  practisen  to- 
daye ;  for  petre  forfendid  to  cwrse,  &  vsed  not  fis  assoilynge ; 
but  by  autorite  of  god  to  pr^che  &  to  teche  cristis  weie,  &  to 
repreue  wickud  mew  bojie  in  word  &  in  dede;  \at  seme]?  to  be 
])e  power  ]?at  god  ^aue  petwr  &  his  felowes.  and  it  seme]?  to 
many  mew  ]?<?t  if  a  pr^st  presume  for  pride  \a\j  he  ha]? 
passywgly  ]?is  power,  in  ]?at  he^  shewi]?  ]?at  he  wanti]?  it ;  but  it 
seme]?  ]?at  iche  prest  ]?at  telli]?  trewly  fe  lawe  ^  of  god  ha]?  fis 
power,  more  or  lesse,  aftur  ]?at  god  wole  jyue  him,  &  mewnes 
rules  or  mewnes  chesiwg^  ben  not  gospel  in  ]?is  poynt,  ne  any 
beleue  ]?at  ]?ei  ben  so]7e,  if  ]?e  gospel  grouwde  hew  not;  and 
]?erfor^  kepe  wele  goddis®  lawe,  &  lyue  ]?ou  iw  bileue  of  crist. 
and  ]?us  suwwhat  bi  ]?ise  wordis  may  anif^cnstis  resouw  be 
asoyled.  But  we  sufficew  not  to  shewe  now  ]?e  errours  Jat 
ben  grounded  in  ]?i8  mater. 

But  ptt  argue]?  an^ecrist  \at  ]?is  sentewce  is  heresie,  for 
crist  bad  ten  leprouse  mew  go  &  shewe  hew  to  ]?e  pr^stis ;  and 
bi  ]?is  he  tau^t  opynly  ^at  it  nedi]?  to  be  shriuew  at  pr^stis, 
and  to  ]?is  crist  gaue  pr^stis  power,  but  wherto  but  to 
assoyle  ?  Here  men  seyne  aftur  austyn,  no  witt  of  holi 

^  makamete  CC.  ^  omitted  CC.  ^  wille  MM. 

^  cle?^syng  CC.  ®  cristis  MM. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


343 


writt,  but  if  [it]  be  literal  witt,  proue]?  ou^tby  autorite  of  it; 
but  ]}&  literal  witt  is  jjis :  crist  bad  ten  leprouse  men  go  & 
shewe  to  pr(9stis,  as  it  was  boden  in  J^e  ^olde  lawe,  but 
jjise  pr(9stis  in  ]>e  oolde  lawe  assoiledew  not  rowny?^gly,  as  we 
don  nowe,  but  bi  signes  of  goddis  lawe  j^ei  sbeweden  wbeche 
mew  werew  leprouse,  &  whicb.  weren  not  leprouse,  and  to  her 
iugemewt  sbulden  men  stonde.  but  crist  taujt  iw  jjis  gospel  pat 
he  cam  not  to  destruje  J>e  lawe,  but  to  fulfille  it,  as  he  tellij? 
be-for^  bi  mathewe ;  and  to  j^is  entente  crist  bad  pe  mesels 
go  and  shewe  hem  to  prestis.  and  )>us  freris  my^ten  telle  pe 
puple  pat  holy  writt  ha)?  mystily  ^  ]?is  witt  what  euerp^i  wolen 
seye;  and  j?us  mew  tellen  pat  freris  tellen  pat  wh<?t  treu)>e 
pat  J?ei  seyne,  if  it  be  noteful  to  pe  puple,  penne  pat  trewfe 
is  pe  gospel ;  and  ]?us  alle  sywnes  J^at  pe  freris  don,  or  any 
trewj?e  pat  [J’ei]  may  teche  men  is  ]?e  gospel  of  crist.  but 
god  forbede  pat  it  wer^  so  ;  for  no  drede  ]?ise  mewnes  defautis 
ben  so]?e,  &  it  is  profitable  j^at  ]?ei  ben  knowen  to  pe  puple, 
lest  pat  ]7ei  disceyue  hem.  ]7us  mew  vndwrstondew  not  pe 
gospelle  of  ihesu  crist  but  ]?ei  taken  pe  lettir  per-oft,  &  aftur 
vndurstonden  it  vp  pe  grammer,  and  seyntes  haw  taujt  pat 
pat  furst  witt  is  pe  gospel,  and  gyue  we  to  adu(?rsaries  hero  pat 
mew  shuldew  goo  &  shewe  he?w  to  prostis,  for  so  mew  diden 
bifore  tyme  bo]?e  in  pe  oolde  lawe  &  iw  pe  newe,  but  hou 
shulde  mew  take  of  ]?is  to  roune  wi]?^  prostis  &  ]7us  to  be 
assoiled  ?  and  marke  we  wele,  j^is  gospels  witt,  &  it  seme]? 
opyn  perhj  pat  ]?ise  ten  cammen  not  to  pe  prostis ;  for  crist 
he-ledde  laem  by  pe  weye,  and  so  ]?is  gospel  techij?  vs  hou 
crist  him  self  clensi]?  of  sywne ;  &  to  him  is  ]7is  thanke  propur, 
&  ney]?ur  to  pope  ne  oowfessour;  for  crist  take]?  a-wei  pe 
sywne,  &  ]?ei  not,  but  disceyuew  men ;  &  ]?us  men  shulden  be 
aliens,  as  was  ]?is  samaritaw,  and  twrne  ajew  &  ]>anke  crist,  & 
not  gyue  money  to  ]?ise  prostis ;  for  crist  wole  assoyle  mew 
wele,  al  if  ]?ei  gon  not  ]?us  to  rome.  for  crist  bi  his  godhed 
is  in  iche  place  of  pe  worlde,  and  bi  pat  he  take]?  away 


Scriptural  proof 
must  rest  on  the 
literal  meaning. 

»[p.  137  MS.] 


The  lepers  showed 
themselves  to  the 
priest  as  the 
judge  of  leprosy 
appointed  by  the 
old  law. 


Matt.  V.  17. 

Friars  might  thus 
make  what  they 
pleased  out  of 
Scriptui'e. 


Men  cannot 
understand  the 
gospel  unless 
they  take  it 
literally. 

Grant  that  men 
were  to  show 
themselves  to  the 
priest, 

it  was  not  thus 
whisperingly. 


The  ten  came  not 
to  be  healed  of 
the  priest,  for 
Christ  healed 
them  by  the  way. 
Then  it  is  Christ 
that  cleanseth 
from  sin. 


Menshould  thank 
Christ,  and  not 
give  money  to 
priests. 


^  iustly  CC. 


2  &  CC. 


2  wist  CC. 


344 


OF  CONFESSION. 


Men  need  not 
make  pilgrimages 
to  Rome. 


sy  wne  whewne  he  maki]?  men  able  ]>er-to ;  &  pilgrimage  wi]? 
siche  offrywge  vnabli]?  mew  oft  to  be  assoyled  of  god. 


Cm  13m  mm.  ^But  ^itt  argueb  an^ecrist  "bat  lames  biddib  mew  shriue 

*[p.  1376  MS.]  ^  ^  ^  V  .  . 

Antichrist’s  her  svwnes ;  and  no  drede  god  biddib  bi  lames  bat  iche 

arguments.  .  . 

James  V.  16.  synful  maw  do  SO ;  &  bat  prestis  shuld  assoyle  mew  techib 
his  disciples  to  hg  risynge  of  lazar,  for  crist  bad  to  hise  apostlis  bat 

loose  Lazarus,  i  j  n  7  tr  j 

teaches  that  shulden  vnknytt  his  bondis.  and  bus  mew  shriuew  in 

priests  should  1  J  X 

Men^confessed  at  ^^i^tis  tyme,  whewne  Ion  baptist  washed  hem.  why  shuld 
John’s  baptism,  fonrme  of  holy  churche  ? 


Answer. 


James  bids  con¬ 
fess  one  to 
another. 


Her^  men  seyne  j^at  it  wer(?  good  to  holde  fonrme  of 
hooly  chnrche,  as  mew  diden  before  J^at  tyme  j^at  J^e  fend  was 
ynbonwden  &  j^is  lawe  made,  for  J^ewne  crist  assoiled  jjicker 
men  jjewne  he  dide  aftur  fe  tyme  of  J^is  lawe.  and  to  fe  first 
autorite  j^at  is  aleggid  of  lames  epistle ;  mew  shuldew  merke 
hou  lames  biddi]?  j^at  mew  shulden  shriue  iche  to  o\ur  j^e 
sywnes  ]7at  j^ei  fellen  inwe,  &  ]7us  jiei  shuldew  knowlecbe 
mekeli  j^e  freelte  J^at  J^ei  werew  iwne,  and  not  oon  feyne  as  an 
ypocrite  J^at  he  were  more  hooly  before  a-nojjwr,  &  had  vertu 
to  forjyue  sywne.  &  J^is  worde  j^at  lames  speki]?  maki]?  not 
for  |?e  emperour  prelatis;  for  bi  j^is  word  j^at  lames  speki]? 
iche  man  shulde  shriue  him  to  his  brojjwr,  and  knowlecbe 
mekely  freelte  j^at  he  is  iwne.  si]?  crist  sei]?  \at  iche 
man  ]?at  hije]?  himsilf  shal  be  lowid,  hou  shuld  not  ]?ise 
emperour  prelatis  be  lowid  bi  \e  sentewce  of  crist,  si]?  ]?ei 
hi^en  hemsilf  wi]?-outew  skil  of  ]?ing  ]?at  is  approprid  to  crist  ? 


and  ]?us  ]?ise  emperour  prelatis  sywnen  ajen  ]?is  worde  ]?at 
lames  biddi]?.  And  as  a-newtis  ]?e  secound  worde  ]?at  crist 
The  case  of  had  to  hise  apostlis  whewne  he  had  qwickened  lazar,  he  brouit 
that  Christ  re-  Qut  of  his  sepulcre  al  knyttid  in  hise  bondis,  &  bad  hem 

serves  to  himself  ,  ^  ’ 

spfritifaUife  vnbynde  him.  pis  mysty  witt  of  ]?ise  dedis  telli]?  vnto 

true  mew  ]?at  crist  appropri]?  to  himsilf  to  qwiken  dede  mew 


hut  leaves  men 
still  bound  in  evil 
habits, 


gostly,  &  to  make  hem  stonde  iw  grace,  but  ptt  crist  leue]? 
bondis  of  sywnes,  ]?at  bew  yuel  costoms  to  falle  iw  sywnes,  and 


•[p.  138  MS.]  crist  ‘^biddib  apostlis  &  prestis  to  vnknytt  bise  bondis  bi 

which  priests  /  j 

should  unloose  trewe  pr^chiwg.  but  bis  office  is  dispised  ‘  &  cristes  owne 

by  good  preach-  j.  o  /  x- 

ing. 


^  suspended  MM. 


OF  CONFESSION. 


345 


office  is  misse-taken  ;  for  now  pr^stis  pr^chen  not  to  J^ise  mew 
]7at  bew  cowuertid  bi  grace  of  crist,  but  }>ei  seyn  }>ei  fordon 
sywne  and  ]7at  is  more  j^ewne  any  precbynge,  and  ]7us  \ei  gon 
bifore  cnst,  &  leuew  ]?e  mauwdemewt  j^at  he  biddi]?,  and 
an^ecrist  can-not  dispreue  ]?is  witt  bi  resouw  ne  godis  lawe. 

And  as  a-newtis  be  bridd  worde,  bwt  men  bat  weren  baptized  The  confession  at 

John’s  baptism  IS 

of  lone  eowfesseden  here  synnes,  &  so  shulde  we ;  I  grauwt  not  said  to  have 

'  7  0  been  made  prmly 

bis  word  bat  is  seid,  but  ]ie  gospel  seib  nebir  ]>sit  b^i 
shrouen  her  sywnes  to  Ion,  ne  bi  b^s  rounywge  to  prestis. 
but  it  is  lickly  b^t  ychone  of  hem  shryuew  mekely  his 
sywne  to  ob^r,  and  so  her  baptym  was  medefuld  &  so  what 
maw  shryueb  him  mekely  to  god  or  to  man,  no  drede  god 
for^yueb  him  his  sywne,  &  jyueb  him  grace;  but  bis  falleb 
not  euer  more  whewne  a  maw  shriueb  him  to  b^  emperour 
clerk;  je,  if  he  shriue  him  to  be  pope.  &  b^is  alle  autorites 
bat  ben  fouwden  in  goddis  lawe,  b^*t  ^techen  ]?at^  men  shulden 
shriue  hem,  ben  to  grauwt  to  bis  witt;  hat  men  shuldew  All  scripture 

.  .  teaches  to  confess 

shriue  hem  to  god,  and  iw  case  to  her  brobwr,  whewne  it  to  God,  and  to 

■*  ^  man  if  it  be  pro- 

profitib  to  hem.  but  an^ecrist  shulde  sliame  here  b^t  if  mew  fitabie. 

shuldew  bus  shriue  hem,  b^^ue  bei  shuldew  telle  be  emperour 

clerkis  in  her  eeris  alle  her  sywnes,  &  do  what  bei  biddew 

hem  do,  for  ellis  god  wole  not  assoile  hem.  if  bou  be  a  prest 

of  cnstis  secte,  holde  be  payde  of  his  lawe  to  teche  his  puple 

cristas  gospel,  alif  bou  feyne  bee  no^  more  power ;  for  crist  hab  po^er 

^yue  power  I-nowe  to  his  prestis  to  teche  his  churche ;  &  teach, 

enioyned  hem  siche  office  bat  ?yueb  hem  not  occasiouw  to 

sywne.  &  bus  power  \at  prestis  han  stawdeb  not  iw  trans-  S^th^Host^m- 

substansmge  ot  be  oste,  ne  iw  makyng  or  accidewws  lor  to  stand  of  them- 

•  s©lvcs  i't  c  ©siist 

stonde  bi  hemsilf;  for  bis  power  grauwted  not  god  to  crist  ne  apart  from  sub- 

Cf  QMrtp  J 

to  any  apostle,  and  so  crist  hab  speciali  power  to  do  awey 

mewnes  sywne ;  &  bise  miracles  b<^t  bew  feyned  b«t  no  maw  ^j^^aT^camoT^be 

may  see  ne  knowe,  as  bei  waxew^  w2t^out  profit,  so  bei  haw  no  Se^ofitiesrand 
grouwde  in  god.  groundless. 

Explicit  trac^a^us  ®  de  cowfessfowe  &  penitewcia.® 

1  nedeful  CC.  omitted  CC.  ^  omitted  CC. 

^  weren  MM.  only  in  MM. 


346 


XXIY. 

OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHAEITY. 


Me.  Aenold  thought  this  tract  not  improbably  the  work  of  "Wyclif,  but 
did  not  print  it,  because  he  “  found  it  to  be  a  remarkably  dull  composition 
and  to  contain  not  a  single  new  idea.”  He  may  not  be  alone  in  this 
severe  judgment ;  but  after  several  fiercely  polemical  tracts,  it  is  almost 
a  relief  to  come  upon  a  specimen  of  Wyclif’s  simple  evangelical  teaching. 
Even  here  his  foes  are  not  forgotten,  and  his  attack  on  the  friars,  and  on 
their  teaching  as  to  the  Eucharist,  marks  the  tract  as  a  late  one.  I  have 
very  little  doubt  that  it  is  authentic. 

There  is  a  curious  reference  in  Chapter  lY.  to  Antinomian  opinions, 
which  we  should  not  have  expected  to  be  prevalent  among  Wyclif’s  hearers. 

Copied  from  the  MS.  at  Hew  College,  Oxford  (Q),  and  collated  with 
the  Dublin  MS.  CC. 


SUMMAET. 


Chap.  I.  Men  must  learn  about  Eaitb,  Hope  and  Charity  . p.  347 

What  Faith  is,  and  how  needful  to  man  .  347 

II.  Ways  in  which  Faith  may  fail .  348 

III.  What  Hope  is  . .  .  349 

IV.  The  contraries  of  Hope  and  Faith  .  350 

V.  Charity  the  wedding  garment,  without  which  no  man  can  come  to 

heaven .  .  351 

Friars  go  contrary  to  all  three  virtues .  352 

VI.  The  sixteen  conditions  of  charity  .  353 

These  are  enough  to  bring  a  man  to  heaven  .  355 


Chap.  I.] 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


347 


’^Sicut  enim  corpus  sine  spmYu  moritur  ita  opera  sine 
fide,  iacobi  3°.  fides  sine  operibus  mortua  est.^ 

\Cajpitulum  primum.'] 

For  it  is  seide  in  boldynge  of  oure  haly-day  ]iat  we  scbulde 
ocupie  j^e  tyme  in  precbynge  ^  and  preiynge  ^  and  deuoute 
herynge  of  j^e  lawe  of  god,  and  oner  J^is^  many  freris,  as 
bastardis  to  goddis  lawe,  tellen  iapes  or  lesyngis  &  leeuen  ]?e 
gospel ;  herfore  schulde^  mew  lerne  of  bre  good^  vertues,  bat  Paul’s  gospel  teiis 
J^e  gospel  of  poule  clepi]?  fei]?,  hope,  &  charite.  ffei]?  is  charity^”^^ 
grouwd  of  alle  oj^er  vertues ;  &  \er-ioiQ  poule  clepi]?  it  schelde  aii^othef  v°irti^s^ 
of  alle  ®  cristen  men.  ffor  amonge  sixe  armwres  noon  is  more 
nedeful.  but  feib  may  be  taken  on  manye  maneres.  ^  Sum  Different  mean- 

,  ings  of  the  word 

tyme  feif  is  clepid  ]7e  truthe  J^at  mew®  trowen,  &  so  \er  is  ‘faith.’ 

a  comune  fei]?  to  alle  cristen  men.  ^  Sum  tyme  fei]?  is 

clepid  vertu  jfat  maken’  trewe  mew,  &  so  eche  trewe  man 

ha]?  diuerse  fei]?.  and  sum  tyme  feij?  is  clepid  oure 

trowynge  in  werkys.  and  by  jfes  ]?re  membris  may®  ]?ou 

knowe  goddis  lawe  ]?at  speki]?  of  fei]?  on®  diuerse  maneres. 

seynt  poule  clepij?  feij?  ground  of  goostly  ]?ingis  jfat  men 

schulden  hope  to  haue  in  heuen ;  and  here  men  seen  hem 

not,  but  trowen  bi  word  of  god,  if  ]?ei  seruen  him  treuly,  to 

haue  hem  in  heuew.  and  so  specialye  by  fei]?  ben  mew  made 

trewe  "^'to  god;  and  whos[o]  fayli]?  in  fei]?  he  is  fals  to  god,  •[p.  1246MS.] 

&  tristij?  not  to  hijs  treuthe,  as  he]?en  men  don  not.  and 

herfore  seith  seynt  poule  ]?at  cristen  mewnw5  fei]?  is  mene  of 

alle  herd  gode  werkis^^  ]>at  ]?ei  here  don.  ffor  seyntis  by 

fei]?  discoumfiteden  rewmes,  ^he  \q  rewmes  of  ]?e  fende ;  &  [Heb.  xi.  33.] 

fat  is  more  maistri  fan  wyn  rewmes  of  men,  for  enemyes  ben 

moo  &  more  koynte  in  fer  dedis  bi  wylis  of  here  capteyns, 

1  no  text  in  CC.  omitted  CC.  ^  omitted  CC.  ^  goddis  CC. 

^  omitted  CC.  ®  we  CC.  maki]?  CC.  ®  maist  CC.  ®  in  CC. 
io_io  omitted  CC.  werlkis  Q,  vertues  CC.  queynt  CC. 


348 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


[Chap.  I. 


^  &  jjus  seyntis  haw  wrou^t  fair^  &  iust  dedis,^  for  noman  may 

God  cannot  be  laste  in  harde  lif  for  god  but  if  he  haue  feib,  hi  whiche  he 
served  without  .  .  ^  t  r, 

faith.  lasti])  SO ;  ne  noman  may  s^rue  blis  of  god  but  if  he  haue 

fei]?,  bi  whiche  he  serui]?  it;  and  schortly  noman  synni]? 

ajenws  god  but  if*  he  fayle  in  fei]?,  Jiat  groundi]?  goddis 

You  would  take  werkis.  ^  as  if  kou  haddist  a  lettre  bat  H  kynge  sent  bee 

Uom  the  seelid  wij?  hijs  priuey  seele,  &  worschipid  ]iee  myche  &  hijt 

]7ee  greet  eritage  to  be  at  ®  hij  s  retenu  &  serue  hy m  treuly, 

pou  woldest  don  of  jiin  hoode  and  kisse  hijs  seel  for  hope  of 

rewarde.  god  is  miche  more  pan  any  lord  of  erthe ;  he  sent 

a  lettre  to  man  by  moyses  hijs  messang^fre,  jiat  is  more  worj? 

The  command-  l^an  any  pope  or  cardynal.  hijs  lettre  is  hijs  mawndemewtis, 

through  Mos^s^*^  ^  g^«ce  in  moyses  soule  is  hijs  priue  seel,  ’better  ]ien  eny 
kyngis  signe.  ^hijs  seruice  is  lijt  &  hijs  eritage  is  myche, 
for  it  is  pe  blis  of  heuen  lastynge  *wi]7-outen  ende,*  and 
here-of  schuldew  men  not  fayle  wiji-outew  greet  forfeture. 
take  ®  hed  to  mennus  feij?  how  bisily  ]iei  traueylen  for  godes 
&  worschip  of  Jie  worlde,  &  leeue  traueyle  to  god,  &  po\x 
mayst  wel  see  pat  feip  feili]?  hem. 


Capitulum  2“' 


Faith  may  fail  in 
thi'ee  ways. 

1.  By  default. 


B 


ut  in  Jire  manures  may  mewnus  feij?  fayle.  Sum 
faylen  in  ieip  for  defaute  of  it ;  as  ®  men  j^at  trowen 
not  to  god  pat  he  wil  reward  hem  of  pe  blis  of  heuen  for  her 

2.  It  may  be  too  trewe  s^Fuice.  2°.  ^  sum  mew  faylen  in  feij?,  for  it  is  so 

thin,  so  that  it 

cannot  resist  the  bynne,  &  eke  li^t’  to  perische  wib  dart  by  saujt  of  bin 

darts  of  the 

enemy.  enemye ;  as  mew  pat  ben  assaylid  by  her  flesche  or  by  j^e 

world,  or  in  lustis  or  in  peynes  ^yuen  it  vp  to  ®  sone,  for  litil 
trist  pat  jjei  han  in  mede  of  her  lord,  and  herfore  crist 
oftew  tymes  reprouyde  hys  apostlis  for  litilnesse  of  her  feip, 
whan  Jei  fayleden  to  trist  on  hym.  3°.  ^  and  sum  ®  faylen  iw 


omitted  Q,. 
for  euere  CC. 
7-’  ee>  CC. 


2  omitted  Q. 

®  0,.  inserts  we. 
®  omitted  Q. 


3  omitted  Q. 

6  of  KK. 

®  summew  CC. 


Chap.  III.] 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


349 


here  fei]?  J7at  han  her  scheld  holid,^  &  by  spere  of  here  enemye 
]7ei  ben  often  kylde;  &  ben  suche  men  ])at  trowen  many 
trowj^es,  &  in  sum  '^'J^ei  faylen  as  men  out  of  here  fei]? ;  for 
as  he  j7at  byndi]?  hym  to  kepe  goddis  hestis  mut  kepe  hem 
alle,  as  seynt  lames  sei]?,  so  he  j^at  byndi]?  him  to  fei]?  of  hijs 
god,  mut  kepe  it  al  hoole  stifly  &  in  ordre.  ffor  if  ]7i  schelde 
were  at  Jji  backe,  ]7ou  myjtist  sone  be  kilde.  for  J7e  fendes  of 
belle  trowen  alle  ]7at  we  trowen,  but  hem  fallen  charite  to 
bynde  her  schelde  in  ordre,  &  herfore  ben  ]?ei  dampned  by  ^ 
her  defourmed  scheeld.  ^  &  herfore  schulden  we  trowe  alle 
fe  lawe  of  god,  &  trowe  ]?at  it  is  trewe  by  eu^ry  part  of  it ;  3 
for  if  pou  trowe  myche  of  it,  &  trowist  pat  sum  is  fals,  by  ]?is 
hoole  of  pi  schelde  art  pou  deed  to  god ;  ^  as  freris  j^at 
trowen  many  articlis  of  pe^  treuthe  &  faylen  in  pe  treu]7e 
of  pe  sacrid  boost,  schal  be  dampnyd  herfore  But  if  fei 
turne  ajen  &  trowe  in  wordes  of  crist,  pat  sei]? :  “]?is  is  my 
bodye.”  but  no  we  freris  trowen  neper  pat  ]?is  oost  is  brede 
ne  pe  ®  bodye  of  crist,  ne  neper  of  jjis  may  be ;  but  crist  sei]? 
surely:®  ‘‘]?is  breed  is  my  bodye.”  but  hou  ar  pei  not 
heretikis  j^at  trowen  ajen  crist  here  ?  ^  and  pus  eu(?ryche  man 
haj?  a  maner  of  feip,  syn  eche  man  trowi]?  J7at  god  alle 
J^ingis  ben,  but  hijs  fei]?  is  rente  in  particuler  erroures  pat 
trowi]?  fals  of  j^e  ieip,  by  any  part  of  it.  and  so  oure  good 
god  byndij?  vs  not  to  eu^rmore  trowen  &  specyaly  eche 
article  of  j^e  treuj^e,  for  sum  ben  so  sutil  pat  first  in  blis  of 
heuen  seyntis  schulen  knowe  hem  pat  now  g[e]n6raly  trowen 
hem.  for  if  ]70U  trowist  in  pi  god,  j^at  trow]?e  wil  sufS.ce  pee ; 
but  noman  trowi]?  in  god  but  he  pat  loue]?  him  &  hope]? 
by  his  good  lif  to  haue  ®  pe  blis  of  heuen.® 


3.  The  shield  may- 
have  holes  in  it, 
i.e.  faith  may  be 
imperfectinsome 
points. 

*[p.  125  MS.] 


[James  ii.  10.] 


The  devils  belie  ve 
but  have  not 
charity. 


We  must  believe 
all  the  la-w  of 
God. 


Friars  fail  in  be¬ 
lief  as  to  the 
Host, 


which  they  be¬ 
lieve  to  be  neither 
bread  nor  Christ’s 
body. 


General  belief 
enough. 

Some  articles  so 
subtle  that  we 
shall  know  them 
first  in  heaven. 


[^Capitulum  3”*-] 

HOpe  is  pe  seconade  Yertn  j^at  god  himself  axi]?,  &  is  ful 

diuerse  fro  ieip  pat  we  han  spokun  of.  ffor  feij?  is  of  ]?ingus  Difference  be- 
pat  was  &  ben  &  schul  be,  but  hope  is  al  only  of  J?inges  pat  Faith. 

holde  0,. 


^  omitted  CC. 


2  for  CC. 

®  so]?li  CC. 


2  ])er-of  CC. 
2  in  Q. 


^  omitted  Q,. 
blisse  of  god  CC. 


350 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


[Chap.  III. 


*[p.  1256  MS.] 


Nota  bene. 


Hope  is  less  than 
belief  or  know¬ 
ledge,  but  above 
doubt. 


[John  xvi.  8.] 


ben  to  come,  as  we  trowen  ]7at  god  made  j^e  world  of  nonjt, 
&  we  trowen  J^at  crist  is  now  bodily  in  beuen,  &  schal 
eU(3rmore  be  aft^r  ]>e  ^  day  of^  dom.  ^also  feij?  is  boj^e  of 
gode  Jiing  &  euyl,  bo]?e  of  \am  j^at  ha]?  fei]?  &  of  o\er 
creaturis,  bnt  hope  is  al  only  of  hym  \ai  ha]?  hope  and 
only  of  good  ]>inge  in  ]?e  blis  of  heuen.  as  we  trowen  \at 
many  men  schnl  ^be  dampned  in  belle,  &  ])at  many  o]?ur 
schul  be  saned  \n  heuen ;  but  no]?ur  we  hopen  ]?is  damp- 
nacmn  ne  ]?is  saluac/on,  for  we  hopen  al  only  ]7at  towchi]? 
oure  owne  blis.  and  so  trowthe  of  cnsten  men  putti]>  hew 
owte  of  dowte,  &  maki]?  hem  so  surely  trowe  ^  here  bileue, 
]?at  ]?ei  schulden  stonde  for  J?is  treuj'e,  to  dee]?  of  herg  bodye. 
^but  so  it  is  not  of  hope,  if  we  looken  wel,  as  ia.e\er  we 
witen  ne  we  trowe  now  to  be  sauyd, '  &  jhit  we  hopen  it 
wi]?-outen  ony  dowte.  and  so  hope  is  werke  of  soule  bi-ne]>e 
oure  bileue,  &  so  by-nethe  knowynge  but  a-bouen  douti^ge. 
and  so  hope  of  er]?ely  pinge  is  not  vdrtu  of  hope,  but 
comunely  it  smacchi]?  synne,  for  it  letti]?  hope  of  heuew. 
and  so  it  is  all  diuerse  to  hope  and  to  trowe ;  but  ]?is  is 
a  sutil  mater  to  clerkis  for  to  knowe,  but  comune  ®  sentence 
here-of^  suffici]?  to  o]>ure  men. 

CapiYulum  4“* 

[B]vt  si]?  ^  philosopheres  seyn  pat  contraries  ban  oon  lore, 
fei]?  and  hope  techen  vs  to  knowe  contraries  of  hem.  ffei]? 
hap  in  fidelite  contrarie  to  hiw,  and  hope  ha]?  desperac/on 
as  his  contrOTie.  and  as  fei]?  is  ground  of  alle  o]>ur  vertues, 
so  i?e-fidelite  is  ground  of  alle  o]?ur  synnes.  ^  and  herfor 
sei]?  crist  pat  god  schal  reproue  pe  worlde  first  of  ]?is  synne, 
for  it  grouwdi]?  alle  opere.  ®wan-hope  of  me?^  is  a  greet  synne, 
for  noman  is  dawpned  wi]?-outen  ]?is  wanhope.  for  he  pat 
lasti]»  in  ]?is^  sy?^ne  to  his  lyues  ende,  and  ha]?e  no  sorowe 

omitted  CC.  ^  tkorowe  Q,.  speclie  CC. 

^  omitted  CC.  Q  inserts  for.  ®  hys  Q,. 


Chap.  V.] 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


351 


of  hijs  synne  ne  hope  to  haue  forjyu[ii]es,  he  syniie]?  ajen  j^e  Despair  is  the  sin 

holy  goost;  fat  neuer  schal  be  forpfen  h\m,  no\er  in  f is  S!s?  ^  ^ 

worlde  ne  in  fe  tofur,  as  crist  hiw  silf  seif,  and  many  \er  [Matt.  xii.  3i.] 

ben  fat  synnen  in  fis  synne  longe  bifore  fei  dien.  ^[but 

fa?^ne  it  lastif  eu^re,  as  eche  man  f«t  god  knowif  to  be 

dampned  in  belle,  berif  eu(9re-lastmge  synne  ajen  fe  holy 

gost;  for  as  fe  holy  gost  is  fe  laste  pi^rsone  of  god, 

aft^r  whom  comef  noon  o\ur,  so  it  is  of  fis  synne.  ffor  no 

■^'man  may  synne  aft^r  fis  last^  synne.  ^  and  so  by  two  weyes  *[p.  126  ms  ] 

fallen  men  in  despeyre.  1°.  Sum  for  fei  trowen  not  in  f e  come  from— 

.  .  .  1.  Not  believing 

m^rcy  of  god ;  &  fes  ben  cayms  childir(0  &  seyn  her  synne  is  in  God’s  mercy. 

more  fan  her  dissert  is  to  s^rue  blis  or  ellis  goddis  meroj. 

2°.  and  sum  synnen  in  dispeyre  ajenws  rijtwisnes  ^  of  god ;  2.  Not  believing 

as  fes  fat  seyn  in  her  lif :  “late  me  synne  ynowe,  for  god  punish  sin. 

wole  neu^re  lese  f he  haf  ^  dere  boujt.”  and  so  alle  fat 

schul  ben  dampned  ben  eu^re  more  in  synnyng  a^en  fe  holy 

gost,  &  eu(9re  in  despeyriwge.  ^  as  if  a  man  drof  t?owtinuely 

in-to  fe  erfe  a  stake,  til  he  were  in  dispeire  fat  he  myjt 

drawe  it  vp.  fe  stake  is  fe  synne  hardnd  in  mannws  hert; 

f e  malle  fat  he  drinef  it  wif  is  newe  rehersynge  of  synne ; 

and  suche  at  f  e  ende  of  her  lif  lacken  power  &  grace  to  trist 

in  helpe  of  f^r  god  and  hope  to  be  sauyd. 


\_Capitulum  5”"] 

1 

[p]E  fridde  v^rtn  of  god  is  lone  or^  charite,  and  it  haf 
two  brauwchis,  as  lone  of  god  &  lone  of  man.  &  beste  mene  Love  is  twofold : 
to  kepe  fis  lone  wer^  man  torto  lerne  &  lone  torto  kepe  two 
tables  of  goddis  lawes,®  for  bi  fes  &  ellis  not  kepif  man  him 
in  charite.  and  fis  vertn  clofis  man  at  domas-day  wif  This  virtue 

_  •*  .  .  *  clothes  man  in 

bride-clof  is,  &  fis  clof  e  may  neuere  be  lost  in  fis  world  ne  the  wedding  gar- 

ixi0nt;^ 

in  he  tof  ur(0.  ffor  noman  may  come  to  heuene  but  he  haue  without  which 
fis  clof inge,  ne  no  man  may  haue  fis  clothe,  but  if  he  come  tieaven. 
to  heuen ;  &  so  mew  fat  schnlen  be  dampned  ban  but 


1  omitted  Q.  *  rijtfulnesse  CC.  ®  omitted  Q.  ^  &  Q,.  ®  hestis  CC. 


352 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHATIITY. 


[Chap.  V. 


*[p.  1266  MS.] 


the  friars’  per^ 
sons,  but  hate 
their  sins. 


feyned  charite.  But  lyue  wele  after  goddis  lawe  &  hope  to 

haue  ]7is  ^  loue,  for  no  man  schal  knowe  ne  trowe  to  haue  it 

Friars  love  their  but  if  god  wole  telle  him  priueyly.  %  and  so  freris,  bat  louen 
habit  more  than  ^  _  ■* 

the  garment  of  more  her  habite  pat  j^ei  han  ordeyned  hem  J^an  pe  clo]?e  of 
charite  pat  god  hap  schapen  his  sones,  ben  yuel  disposid  to 
haue  |>is^  elope  of  charite;  Si]?  per  loue  is  turned  amys  to 
charge  more  her^  habite,  to  lesyn  it  or  leeuen  it,  to  clo]?e  per- 
wi]?  per  bodye,  ]?an  to  lese  ]?i8  charite  to  clo]7e  per-wip  per 
soule ;  for  often  ]7ei  lese  charite  in  pri^sens  of  man,  but  if  ]?ei 
losten  ]?is  habite  ]?us,  as  ]?ei  falsly  feynen,  ]?ei  were  opyn 
apostates  and  losten  pe  luf  of  god,  for  as  ]?ei  feynen  falsly 
god  "^‘louej?  more  ]?is  clo]?inge  pan  clo]?inge  of  per  soule  wi]? 
]?is  clo]?e  of  charite;  and  ]?is  is  open  heresie  by  many  kyn 
skylles.  but  here  men  douten  comuwly  where  men  schuld 
toe  friars^  ner^  heretikys,  but  it  is  no  drede  pat  ne  men  schulde  loue 

per  kynde  &  hate  pe  same  kynde  in  pat  pat  pel  ben  so  yuel, 
and  so  pe  persones  bi  hem-silf  schulden  be  loued  in  charite, 
&  her^  synnes  by  hemsilf  schulden  men  hate  for  goddis  loue.^ 
ffor  he  is  not  trend  to  crist  pat  loue]?  ]?ws  hijs  enemye;  and 
pus  he  is  trend  to  pe  frere  pat  hati]?  pus  his  synne  &  worchi]? 
to  distrie  it  &  purge  him  ]?er-fro.  ^  and  ]?is  moue]?  manye 
men  to  speke  of  ]?re  heresies  pat  many  freres  be  smyttid  i?^ne, 
&  contrarien  ]?es  ]?re^  virtues,  ffor  who  myjt  more  contrme 
feip  pan  sey  pat  crist  sei]?  fals  whan  he  sei]?  pat  “  ]?is  brede  is 
myn  owne  bodye,”  for  ]?is  may  neper  be®  brede  ne  pe  bodi  of 
enst,  but  it  is  accident  or  nou^t,  as  freres  feynen  falsly.  & 
pus  ]?ei  chesen  hem  a  place  to  falsen  crist  in  hijs  visage,  and 
ierom  wi]?  oJ?ur  seyntis  fat  tellen  fis  wit  of  crist.  ffreres 
seyn  priueyly  fat  fei  spake  her^  eresie,  sifen  an^mrist  f^r 
maystef  seif  euen  f  e  contrme.  ^  f  e  secouwde  vertu  of  fes 
fre  ®  many  freres  reuersen,®  for  crist  taujt  in  hijs  lawe  fat  men 
Hope  in  begging,  schulde  not  begge,  but  holde  euen  his  ordre,  &  fei  schulde 
come  to  heuen;  fes’  freres  seyn  fe  contrarie,  &  grownden 


Men  reverse  these 
three  virtues : 


Faith  in  the 
matter  of  toe 


Host, 


^  CC.  inserts  last. 
^  omitted  Q,. 


2  ]?e  0,.  2  sake  CC. 

moue)i  freres  to  reuersen  Q. 


^  omitted  Q. 
’  >e  Q. 


Chap.  VI.] 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


353 


he»i  an  ordre  of  per  wilful  beggyng,  bi  mew  J^at  han  no  nede ; 

and  herbi  schulde  men  hope  to  sitt  bye  in  heuen,  for,  as  J^ei 

lien  falsly,  crist  beggid  ^  pus,  ^  pQ  j^ridde  of  }>es  virtues  is 

cordraiiedi  bi  freres,  si)>en  it  is  no  charite  to  falsly  passe 

crist.  for  crist  seij?  to  hijs  cosyns  j^at  by  hijs  manhed  he  had  [Matt.  xx.  23.] 

no  power  to  ^yue  hem  leue  to  sit  on  hijs  ri]t^  side,  but  to  j^e 

godhed  iw  hijs  fadure  is  propred  J^is  power;  but  freres  seyn  Charity  in  giving 

opuwly  by  lett^res  of  her^  frat^rnite  pat  ]?ei  ]yuen  per  brej^^ren  nity. 

leue  to  haue  p«rt  of  per  blis ;  and  Ms  mvit  bei  not  do  but  if  and  so  claiming 

j  ^  ^  ^  power  beyond 

j^ei  ]ouew  mew  leue  to  sitt  on  pe  ri]t  bond  of  crist  as  if  }>ei  that  of  Christ, 
passed  him.  &  f  is  sownes  not  charite  but  luciferes  pride. 


[_OapituIum  6”*] 


B 


vt  si])  cloj’inge  of  ])is  loue  is  myche  loued  of  god,  &  more  *[p.  i27  ms.] 
wor]7e  to  man  ])an  al  ]7is  worldes  richessis,  man  schuld  ful 
bisily  knowe  propirtees  of  ])is  loue.  but  poule,  pat  was  Properties  of 
rauesched  vnto  be  brid  heuen,  &  herde  derne  wordes  of  god,  st.^Pauh* 
pat  ben  not  here  leful  vs  forto  speke,  telli])  sixtene  prqiirtes  \  cor.  xiii.  4. 
pat  suen  ])is  charite.  pQ  first  is  pat  charite  is  patient  of  i.  is  patient  of 
wronges.  for  al  oure  charite  mut  be  ensaumpled  of  crist ; 
but  crist  was  so  patient,  as  seynt  petre  sei]?,  pat  whan  he  was  [-1  p^ter  a.  23.] 
mys-said  he  cursid  not  ajen,  ne  when  he  suffrid  wrowges  he 
manassid  not  ajen.  0  what  charite  ha]?  he  to  suffre  wronge 
for  cristis  loue  pat  wol  not  sufire  a  li]t  word,  but  ^eld  a  worse 
ajen  ?  Hfe  secouwde  propirte  is  ])is:  pat  charite  is  benyngne.  2.  is  benign, 
for  it  is  not  ynow  to  suffre,  for  so  don  J)efis,  but  do  good  in 
soule  a^enws  yuel  suffrid ;  for  pat  is  good  loue  of  pQ  fire  of 
charite,  &  is  clepid  benignite  by  propirte  of  word.  and 
her(?-fore  clerkis  seyn  pat  per  ben  ]7ree  lawes ;  pQ  first  is  lawe 
of  oure  good  ^  god  to  do  good  for  yuyl ;  pe  toj^ure  is  lawe  of  pe 
worlde,  to  do  good  for  good  &  yuel  for  yuel,  as  mannus 
man^r  is ;  pe  ])rid  is  pe  deuelis  lawe,  to  do  yuel  for  good,  & 

]7is  is  mamr  of  mew  whan  fei  ben  turned  to  deuelis.  pe 


^  CC.  inserts  ‘not.’ 


2  omitted  CC. 


3  omitted  Q. 


23 


354 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


[Chap.  VI. 


3.  Envieth  not.  J^rid  propirte  ]>at  sue]?  j^is  secouwde  is  J7«t  charite  haj^e  noon 

enuye  to  noon  kyn  ]?inge,  for  it  lone]?  wel  god  &  alle  goddis 

4.  Hurtethnot.  creatures.  ^  ]7e  fourj^e  propirte  pat  sue]?  of  ]?is  riche  vertu 

is  pat  charite  wi]?’Outen  for]7e  wirchi]?  not  schrewidly 
for  as  ]?is  first  jock  bigynnij?  wi]?  paciens,  &  8i]?en  goij? 
into  worchi^ge  of  a  mannws  soule,  so  mut  ]7is  o]?ur  joc 
forsake  yuel  wi]>-iwne,  &  ^also  wijj-oute^  hi  ordre  of  god. 

5.  Is  not  puffed  fyuep  mauer  of  charite  stonde]?  in  ]?is,  pat  it  bolne]?  not 
Is  not  ambi-  pnde,  syn  it  is  pus  patient.  &  pQ  sixte  sue]?  here-of, 


up 


tious. 


pat  it  coueiti]»  not  worldly  worschip ;  for  al  worschipe  of 
her^own^^  charite  sche  putti]?  oonly  ^  in  god.  pe  seue]>  condic^on  pat 
sue]?  ]?is  ®  charite  is  pat  it  seki]?  not  propre  godes  to  hir  silf, 
but  seki]>  worschip  to  god  &  profyte  to  his  chirche.  ^]>e 
[8.^]  isnotwaste- propirte  of  charite  stondi]>  in  ]?is,  pat  charite  wrathi]? 

]>er  ^  not  al  if  it  suffre  wronge,  and  perfore  it  is  lijt  to  men  to 
[90  Thmketiino  g^anOe  wtth  pees  &  charite.  pe  neynt  propirte  of  charite 

is  deppero  pan  ]?es  opere,  pat  it  ]>enki]>  not  yuel,  for  siche 
]>oujt  turne]?  to  yuel ;  as  iob  maad  couenaunt  to  ]>enke  not 
^  pe  tente]?  propirte  pat  sui]>  J?is  vertu  of 
m  iniquity,  charite  is  pat  sche  ioyethe  not  of  wickidnesse,  as  auwgelus  in 
heuen  ioyen  of  payn  of  fendis  but  not  of  hero  wickidnesse. 
&  per-iove  ]?is  condicmn  sue]>  aftor  charite,  pat  it  ioye]?  wi]? 
god  of  trowj’e  pat  he  loue]?.  ^  pe  twel]?e  condicmn  pat 
sue]?  ]?is  charite  is  pat  sche  take]?  mekely  what  euore  ]?ing 
pat  come]>  hir,  to.  ]»e  ]?rittente  condiciouw  stondi]»  in  ]?is,  pat 
charite  trowi]>  al  pat  enere  god  sei]? ;  and  si]?  no  ]?inge  is  good 
but  pat  god  sei]?,  charite  trowi]?  alio  good  ]»ing,®  jhe  profyte  of 
synnes.  tfor  mew  pat  dreden  god,  if  ]>ei  fallen  in  synne,  ]?ei 
ben  more  waro  pat  ]?ei  synnew  not  eft,®  &  ]?anken  more  god 
of  hijs  gracious  helpe,  &  alle  medeful  dedis  haue  pei  part  off. 
^  ]?e  fourtene]?  condicmn  pat  sue]?  aftor  charite  stondij? 
in  ]?is  poynt,  pat  sche  hopi]?  alle  ]?inge  turne]?  to  good  of 
au  goddis  childwr  pat  dreden  him  in  loue.  pe  fiftente  condicmn 


•[p.  1276  MS.]  „ 

10.  Rejoicethnot  O’!  ^  virgyne 


[ll.]butrejoicetb 
ill  the  truth. 

12.  Beareth  all 
things. 


[13.]  Believeth 
all  things. 


14.  Hopeth  all 
things. 


si]?  yuel  dede  wi]?oute  CC. 
*  omitted  Q. 


2  koolly  CC. 
®  omitted  Q. 


2  in  Q. 

®  ofte  Q. 


Chap.  VI,] 


OF  FAITH,  HOPE  AND  CHARITY. 


355 


Jjat  sue]?  ]>is  charite  is  ]>at  sche  susteyne]?  wi]?  wille  alle 
harmes  ]>at  come]?,  jlie^  sche  is  not  discou?^fortid  if  goddis 
helpe  bidi]>  longe.  ^and  so  he  laste  condicmn  ]?at  suet  ]>is  rie.]  Never 
blessid  vertu  is  ]iai  scbe  falli]?  neuer  dou?^,  but  lasti]?  forjie 
for  euere  in  ]?is  world  &  in  ]?e  to]>me,  as  loue  of  god  faili]>  uot. 

&  if  a  man  knewe  ^  no  more  of  goddis  lawe  but  ]»ise  sixtene 
condicmns  &  bisyede  him  to  kepe  bem,  be  myjt  lijtly  come  to 
beuen  &  wite  who  went  amys. 

Expliciuwt  ffeif  hope  &  cbarite.® 

^  }hit  Q.  2  koude  CC.  ^  only  in  CC. 


1 


356 


XXY. 


DE  SACRAMENTO  ALTARIS. 


In  this  little  tract  "Wyclif  sums  up  the  difference  between  his  teaching  on 
the  Eucharist  and  that  of  the  friars.  It  is  curious  to  see  him  taking  up 
the  position  of  a  loyal  son  of  the  Church,  and  complaining  that  his 
adversaries  accuse  the  Pope  and  the  Court  of  Rome  of  heresy.  As  the 
tract  is  evidently  a  fragment,  it  may  he  that  in  the  larger  piece  from 
which  it  was  taken  he  had  alleged  some  utterance  of  the  Roman  see  in 
his  favour ;  perhaps  the  oath  of  Berengarius,  to  which  he  often  appealed, 
although  his  opponents  might  have  cited  it  on  their  side  with  at  least 
equal  confidence. 

Copied  from  the  Bodleian  MS.  (A),  and  collated  with  the  Dublin  MS. 
(AA). 


Stjmmaky. 


The  friars  say  that  the  bread  which  Christ  broke  is  neither  bread  nor  his  body  . p.  357 

They  accuse  the  Church  of  sharing  their  heresy  .  357 

The  true  faith  is  that  the  Host  is  both  bread  and  Christ’s  body  .  357 


DE  SACRAMENTO  ALTARIS. 


357 


De  Sacramento  altaris  corpus  dommi. 


O' 


f  ^alj^e^  fei|»  of  ]7e  gospel  gederen  trewe  nle;^,  wi|’  opyne 
co;^fesciou^^^  of  ]7es  newe  ordris,  }>«t  men  shulden  rette  hew 
eretikis,  &  so  not  comyne  wij?  hew.  forj^ei  denyen  ]?e  gospel 
&  comyn  bileeue,  pat  ]?at  breed  j^at  crist  took  in  hise  hondis 
&  blesside  it  &  brae  it  &  ^af  it  to  hise  disciplis  for  to  ete,  was 
his  owne  bodi  bi  vertn  of  his  wordis.  &  jjus  j^ei  denyen  pat 
pe  oost  sacrid,  whijt  &  ron?^d,  pat  bifore  was  breed,  is  maad 
goddis  bodi  bi  MertM  of  hise  wordis.  but  j7ei  seien  pat  peve  is 
goddis  bodi,  &  pat  is  not  goddis  bodi,  but  it  is  noujt  or 
accident  worse  pan  ony  breed  ;  &  J^us  j^ei  accusen  j^e  court  of 
rome,  bishops  &  prelatis,  &  seiew  pat  j^ei  shulden  seie  so  bi 
criste^  me;^nys  bileeue.  &  no  wondir  is,  si]?  ]?es  freris 
accuseden  per  bre]?^ren  &  ]?ei  ^  bigan  first  at  crist ;  &  seidew 
pat  he  was  as  ^  an  eretyk,  &  oure  kmg  wij?  his  rewme,  but 
hew  shamede  to  seie  ]’is  openli,  but  ]?ei  seiden  ]?is  priuyli. 
&  si]?  ]?ei  ban  lastid  so  longe  in  ]?is  errour  ^criste^  mew 
shuldew  fiee  hew  as  he]?en  mew  out  of  pe  feip.  &  if  ]?ei 
somene  symple  men  for  ]?is  accusiwg,  symple  mew  seiew  pat 
]?ei  supposen  freris  siche,  but  ]?ei  afiermew  not  hew  sich ;  but 
euydence  pei  han  of  ]?is  errour  in  bileue,  &  many  opere  pat 
freris  seiew,  and  if  ]?is  be  not  so]?,  late  ]?es  freris  purgew  hew^, 
for  we  han  herd  ofte-tymes  many  freris  techew  ]?us.^  Crist 
&  his  apostlis  &  pe  olde  seintis  pat  werew  til  pat  pe  fend  was 
vnbouwduw,  &  pe  courte  of  rome  bi  open  witnesse  of  her  lawe? 
techew  ]?i8  bileue;  pat  pe  sacrid  oost  whijt  &  rouwd  pat  men 
seew  iw  pe  preestis  hondes  is  \eri  goddis  bodi  iw  forme  of 
breed,  but  freris,  si]?  pe  fend  fader  of  lesyngis  was  vnbouwduw, 
seiew  pat  it  is  an  accident  wi]?-outew  suget  or  noujt,  &  mai  iw 


»[p.  96  MS.] 

These  new  orders 
are  hereties. 
They  deny  that 
the  bread  that 
Christ  broke  was 
his  body ; 


but  say  that  the 
host  is  accident 
or  nothing. 


*[p.  97  MS.] 
Christian  men 
should  avoid 
them. 


What  the  true 
belief  is. 


omitted  AA. 
3  omitted  A  A. 


2  omitted  A  A. 

*  AA.  breaks  off  here. 


358 


DE  SACRAMENTO  ALTARIS. 


noo  wise  be  goddis  bodi ;  &  so  j^ei  glosew  ])e  wordis  of  holi 
writt  euen  to  J^e  contrarie,  &  J^ei  leuew  J^e  wordis  of  holi 
writt,  &  cbesew  hew  newe  fou?^dew  termes  of  hew-silf,  & 
seiew  jiat  }>ei  hen  so]?,  but  ]?e  wordis  of  holi  writt  bew  false  & 
ful  of  eresie  ;  and  so  ]?ei  seiew  pnuyli  ]iai  crist  &  hise  apostlis 
&  ]?es  oolde  seintis  &  fe  court  of  rome  werew  opyn  eretikes. 


) 


359 


XXYI. 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 

With  ah  Appendix  on  the  Weongeulness  of  their  Pndeetaking 

Secular  Work. 


No  external  evidence  authorizes  us  to  attribute  this  tract  to  Wyclif.  It 
does  not  even  derive  credit  from  being  bound  up  with  other  works  believed 
to  be  his,  since  it  fills  the  little  volume  in  which  only  it  is  found. 

Dr.  Shirley  admitted  it  to  his  catalogue  on  the  ground  of  style,  and  it 
is  only  on  that  ground,  and  for  its  general  consonance  with  Wyclif ’s 
habits  of  thought,  that  it  can  be  ascribed  to  him.  I  find  it  very  difficult 
to  arrive  at  a  decided  opinion.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  more  orderly  and 
less  vivacious  than  most  of  Wyclif ’s  pamphlets ;  with  scarcely  any  of  his 
characteristic  outbursts  of  lament  over  abuses  or  invectives  against  those 
who  practise  them.  It  relies  more,  too,  on  citations  of  authorities  than  is 
his  custom.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  passages  that  look  like  his 
work,  such  as  (p.  368)  the  story  of  the  bishop  who  looked  forward  to  the 
time  when  the  gentry  should  be  the  hired  soldiers  of  the  Church,  and  the 
warning  (p.  372)  that  when  the  clergy  have  once  got  power,  “  the  secular 
party  may  go  pipe  with  an  ivy-leaf,”  (otherwise  whistle  for)  the  return 
of  any  part  of  it. 

In  substance  the  tract  is  purely  Wyclifite,  but  it  has  no  trace  of  his 
latest  developments.  If  it  is  by  the  master,  it  must  be  one  of  the  earliest 
compositions  in  this  volume,  as  it  has  much  more  likeness  to  his  writings 
of  1365-1375  than  to  those  of  his  latest  years.  The  difference  will  be 
strongly  felt  if  it  is  compared  with  the  Supplementum  Trialogi,  which 
deals  with  the  same  subject. 

Copied  from  the  Lambeth  MS.  (LL). 


360 


% 


SUMMAEY. 

Chap.  I.  To  the  three  persons  of  the  Trinity  answer  the  three  states  in 


Secular  lords  to  the  Father  .  362 

Priests  to  the  Son  .  362 

Commons  to  the  Holy  Ghost .  363 

Each  has  its  own  duties,  and  may  not  infringe  on  the  province  of 

another  .  364 

II.  Christ  in  the  old  law  gave  no  possessions  to  the  clergy,  but  ordered 

them  to  live  on  tithes  and  other  offerings  .  364 

This  law  is  still  binding,  since  it  was  confirmed  by  Christ .  366 

It  ought  then  to  he  kept  more  strictly  now  than  under  the  old  law  367 

III.  The  lordship  of  priests  is  against  the  commands  and  the  example 

of  Christ  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  368 

The  priests  aim  at  getting  all  property  into  their  hands  .  369 

They  try  to  stop  the  mouth  of  those  who  would  preach  the  truth .  369 

The  secular  power  of  priests  is  a  cause  of  confusion  .  370 

Lords  must  amend  the  evil,  or  they  will  he  guilty  of  consenting  to 
it  .  ...„  .  .  .  .  370 

IV.  The  evil  is  great  and  increasing  .  372 

The  clergy  say  they  are  upholding  the  rights  of  Holy  Church  .  373 

But  the  chief  lord  of  all  property,  God,  has  forbidden  them  to 

possess  property  .  373 

Scriptural  and  patristic  authorities  .  374 

Y.  Silvester  committed  a  great  sin  in  accepting  lordship,  and  was 

guilty  of  simony  . .  .  377 

Contrast  of  his  behaviour  with  that  of  Elisha  to  Naaman,  and  with 
that  of  Christ  .  377 

VI.  The  deed  of  Silvester  being  wrong,  the  endowment  of  the  clergy, 

which  is  founded  upon  it,  must  he  wrong .  ’ .  379 

We  may  blame  what  Silvester  did  without  blasphemy  .  380 

We  must  follow  the  saints  only  so  far  as  they  follow  Christ  .  381 

VII.  Covetous  clerks  allege  the  example  of  Hugh  and  other  saints  .  382 

It  is  not  safe 'to  take  any  creature  as  a  pattern  .  382 

The  clergy  bargain  and  even  fight  for  property  .  383 

St.  Peter  behaved  far  otherwise  .  .  383 

VIII.  The  clergy  and  religious  say  that  they  hold  their  property  in 

common,  as  did  the  first  Christians  .  .  .  .  384 

They  say,  too,  that  they  hold  it  not  by  secular  dominion,  but  as 

perpetual  alms  .  384 

They  quarrel  like  lords  for  rights  of  jurisdiction  and  of  gallows  385 

It  is  not  alms  to  take  from  secular  lords  and  give  to  the  clergy  386 


361 


Chap.  IX.  God  provided  for  all  states  tliat  he  ordained,  and  he  commanded  the 
priests  to  act  as  proctors  for  the  poor,  and  he  content  with 

food  and  raiment  . . . p.  386 

It  is  presumptuous  to  add  to  a  provision  made  by  God  and  secured 

by  Christ’s  promise .  388 

Endowment  is  not  alms,  and  should  he  taken  away  from  the  priest¬ 
hood  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  388 

Oaths  sworn  to  maintain  it  are  not  binding,  since  it  is  sinful  .  389 


X.  It  is  thought  wrong  to  alienate  entailed  land  from  those  to  whom  it 

is  entailed  .  390 

God,  the  chief  lord,  ha,s  given  to  lay  lords  in  perpetuity  all  secular 

lordship  .  .  .  .  .  391 

It  is  wrong  to  divert  it  to  the  clergy ;  yet  the  clergy  have  laid 

hands  on  it,  under  pretence  of  holiness  .  .  .  .  392 

Laymen  should  follow  the  rule  of  ecclesiastical  corporations,  which 

forbid  all  alienation  of  property  .  392 

The  clergy  have  enough  with  tithes,  offerings  and  fees  .  392 

Appendix.  The  clergy  ought  not  to  take  secular  oflSce  .  .  393 

Lay  lords  should  not  induce  them  to  do  so  .  .  .  .  394 

Bishops  should  show  lords  the  peril  of  thus  withdrawing  the  clergy 

from  their  duty  .  395 

Lords  should  look  that  they  do  not  set  up  prelates  who  neglect  their 

duty  as  watchmen  .  395 

Authorities  (in  Latin)  against  the  secular  lordship  of  priests  .  396 

Authorities  against  the  secular  office  of  priests  .  402 


362 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  ]SOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  I. 


*[p.  2  MS.] 

[1  Cor.  iii.  11.] 


The  Chrirch  is 
founded  on  three 
states, 

answering  to  the 
three  persons  of 
the  Trinity. 
Secular  lords 
answer  to  the 
Father — 


Rom.  xiii.  [4.] 


*  [p.  2h  MS.] 


[Rom.  xii.  19.] 


who  are  God’s 
vicars  for  punish¬ 
ing  and  reward¬ 
ing. 

•[p.  3  MS.] 

To  the  Son 
answers  the 
estate  of  clergy. 


*  Fundamewtuw  aliud  nemo  potest  ponere  preter  id 
quod  positum  est  q^^od  est  cristm  Jhesi/s. 

[Cafitulum  /.] 

Almyjty  god  ]>e  tnnyte,  fadir,  sonne  and  holy  gooste, 
boj^e  in  jje  olde  lawe  and  j^e  newe  ha]?  fowndid  his  chirche 
up-on  ]7re  statis,  awnswerynge  or  acordynge  to  ]7e8  ]>re  p^rsones 
and  her  propirtes.  So  fat  to  ]?e  fadir  in  trinyte,  to  whom  is 
apropred  power,  awnsweri]?  fe  state  of  seculer  lordis,  fro  ]?e 
hijest  knyjte,  ]?at  is,  or  schuld  be,  j^e  emperoure,  to  \q 
lowest  sqwyer  ]?at  by  wai  of  ofS.ce  of  his  state  berij?  ]?e 
swerde.  For  ]?is  state  in  holy  chirche  saynt  poule  calli]? 
powers,  and  saij?  \at  ]?is  power  beri]?  ]7e  swerde  not 
wi]?-owte  cause,  but  to  avenge  ]?e  wra]?  of  god  in-to  hym 
]>at  misdoi]?,  ^and  to  supporte  and  mayntene  hym  ]7at  wel 
do]?e.  ]?is  is  ]?e  sentence  of  poule  l^ere.  And  ]?is  state  or 
power  is  ]?e  vicar  of  j>e  god-heede,  as  it  may  be  growndid 
here.  And  as  saynt  Austyn  sai]?  in  ]?e  booke  of  qwestyons  of 
]>e  olde  lawe  and  ]?e  newe,  and  in  o]>er  dyuers  placis.  And 
so  as  it  bylongi]?  to  ]?e  godheed  of  criste  to  avenge  hym  on 
his  ennemys  and  to  rewarde  his  trewe  saruandis,  as  god 
hymsijlfe  sai]?,  as  ]?e  apostle  rehersij? :  “To  me,”  sai]?  god, 
“  it  longi]?  to  do  vengance  and  I  schal  rewarde.”  And  also 
]?e  prophete  seij?  ]?at  “god  shal  rewarde  eu^ry  man  aftir  his 
werkis.”  So  it  by-longij?  here  up-on  er]?e  to  'pe  state  of 
seculer^  lordis,  as  vicars  of  godhede,  to  do  in  ponyschynge 
and  rewardynge  to  ^pe  ennemyes  and  seruandis  of  god. 

To  pG  secunde  persone  in  trmyte,  to  whom  is  apropred 
wisdam  or  kuwnynge,  awnswerij?  pe  state  of  pe  clergy  or  of 
pr^sthode;  pQ  whiche  by  bissy  study  and  contemplacyon 
schulde  gete  hem  heuenly  kunnynge,  wherby  pdi  schulde 
teche  pG  peple  J?e  way  to  heuen  and  lede  hem  per-mxiG. 


Chap.  I.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


363 


*[p.  36  MS.] 
Austin. 


which  is  the  vicar 
of  Christ’s  man¬ 
hood, 


And  herfor  sai]?  god  by  his  prophete  Malachie :  “  Labia  Mai.  u.  [7.] 
sacerdotis  custodiunt  scienciaw,  et  legem  exqniriint  ex  ore 
ejus,  quia  angelws  dommt  exercituuw  est  ” — “Je  lippis  of  fe 
prtfst  kepyn  kuwnynge,  and  the  pepilb  schul  seke  lawe  of 
his  mou]7e,  for  he  is  J^e  awngell  of  god.”  And  herfor  criste, 
supposynge  j^at  j^is  heuenly  kunnynge  schuld  be  in  the  state 
of  pr^sthode,  coTwmaundid  hem  alle  in  his  ascencyon  in 
po  wordis  pat  he  saide  to  '^his  apostles,  and  in  hem  to  alle 
oper  prestis,  as  saynt  awstyn  sai]?  in  a  sermon  j^at  bigynne]? 
fus :  ‘‘Si  diligenter  attendites  etcetera,”  pat  pai  schulden 
teche  and  preche  J^e  gospell(9  to  his  peple,  j^e  whiche  gospel  is 
heuenly  kuT^nynge.  Por  J>is  state  in  pe  chirche  is  pe  vicar  of 
j^e  ma77hede  of  criste,  as  saynt  austyn  sai]?  in  a  booke  pat  is 
alegyd  to-fore.  And  so  as  criste  cam  in  his  manhede  to  teche 
and  preche  pe  gospell^  and  to  suffre  meekly  p^rsecucion 
perfore,  so  schulde  pe  state  of  prestis,  Jat  ben  vicaris  of  his 
manhede,  do  as  he  coTTimaundit  hem  in  his  ascencyon  and 
oft-times  byfore. 

To  pe  J’l’idde  persone  in  trmyte,  to  whom  is  apropryd  true 
loue  or  goode  will^  to  j^e  fadir  &  sonne,  ^  awnswerij?  ]7e  state 
of  pe  comowte,  pe  whiche  owi]?  true  loue  &  obedyente  wilL 
to  pe  statis  of  lordis  &  prestis,  as  saynt  poule  teche]?, 
saynge  :  “  Serui  obedite  diominm  v^s^ris  carnalibus  cum  omni 
timore  et  tremore,”  pat  is:  “  Seruandis  obeyij?  to  jour 
temporally  lordis  wij?  alle  dr^de  and  tremblynge.”  Also 
saynt  poule  saij?  ]?us  :  “  Obedite  prypositis  vys^ris;  ipsi  enim 
vigilant  tanquam  reddituri  racmnem  pro  animdhus  vys^ris :  ” 
pat  is:  “obei]?  to  joure  souereyns;  forso]?e  ]?ai  waken  as  for  to 
jeue  acowntis  for  joure  soulis.”  By  ]?es  souereyns  is  undir- 
stonde  pe  state  of  prysthode ;  pe  whiche  schulde  bisyly  wake 
in  studiynge  and  prychynge  of  goddis  lawe  to  alle  cr^sten 
peple,  and  to  jeue  goode  ensaumple  in  her  lyuynge.  And  in 
]?is  euery  man  '^is  bonden  to  obey  to  her  doctrme.  And  »[p.  46  ms.] 
perioxe  poule  sai]? :  “  Be  je  fylowers  of  me  as  I  am  of  criste.”  [i  cor.  xi.  i.] 
And  efte  he  sai]? ;  “  ]?ouj  we  or  an  awngelly  of  heuen  pryche  Gai.  i.  [8.] 
to  jou  bysidis  pat  fat  we  ban  prychid,  be  he  acursid.”  And 


and  should  follow 
his  commands. 


To  the  Holy 
Ghost  answers 
*[p.  4MS.] 
the  state  of  the 
commons. 


Eph.  vi.  [5.] 


Heh.  xiii.  [17.] 


364 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY\ 


[Chap.  I. 


Priests  should  SO  bi  fis  sentence  pr^stis  scbulden  not  bane  worldly  lorde- 

have  no  worldly 

lordships.  schippis;  Sip  criste  and  nis  apostles  ban  uttirly  forfendid  bem, 

bo]7e  in  ber  lyuynge  and  tecbynge,  as  it  sni]?  playnly  ber-aftir. 

For  it  was  neu^r  cristis  lore  to  make  pr^stis  ricbe  and 

These  three  states  knvitis  pore.  And  SO  bes  bre  statis  ben,  or  scbulde  be, 
are  enough.  ^  i  i.  j  j  i 

sufficient  in  goddis  cbircbe  ;  or  ellis  men  mosten  say  ]7at  god 
is  and  was  fawty  in  ordenance  of  boj^e  bis  lawis.  And  in 
full  euydence  and  open  tooknynge  ]7at  god  taki]?  j^is  or- 
■*[p.  5MS.]  denance  in  bis  cbircbe  "^‘as  full  sufficient,  and  in  no  wise 
fawtye  in  scarste  or  excesse  per-of,  criste,  wisdam  of  j^e 
trmyte,  by  wbicbe  wisdome  ]7e  cbircbe  is  ordend  and  fowndid 
up-on  jjes  ]7re  statis,  tecbi]?  us  in  all  bis  lawe  to  kepe  & 
to  mayntene  ]?is  ordenance  with-owten  addynge  \er-io  or 
abregynge  ]>er-iro.  wberfor  poule  sai]? :  ‘‘no  man  may 
putt  an  o'per  grounde  bysidis  \ai  ]?at  is  putt,  ]7e  wbicbe  is 
QrisiQ  ibesu.” 


Capitw/^^m  ij. 


In  the  old  law 
God  assigned  all 
possessions  to  the 
laity. 

»[p.  56  MS.] 
None  to  the 
priests, 

Num.  xviii.  [20.] 


who  were  to  live 
of  the  offerings 
to  God, 


such  as  first  fruits 
and  tithes, 


Ere  it  scbal  be  scbewid  bow  god  bati]?  worldly  lord escbip  in 
b  state  of  bis  clergye,  ]?at  scbulde  p^rforme  tbe  pi^rfeccyon 
of  gospell.  For  in  j^e  olde  lawe,  wber  god  made  an 
ordynance  bow  &  wber-wi]?  J^ai  scbulde  lyue  in  every  state, 
be  assigned  J^e  worldly  possescyons  to  ]7e  seculer  party,  and 
bad  J^at  prestis  scbulde  by  no  way  baue  eny  possescions  wi]? 
]>at  o\er  partye  of  J^e  peple.  Saue  j^e  people  was  cbargid  of 
god  to  ordeyn  |>e  prestis  and  deeknys  bousis,  not  to  be  lordis 
of  bem  but  to  dwelle  in  bem.  And  on  same  wise  ]7ai 
badden  subarbis  to  fede  ^er  ])e  beestis  '^at  scbuld  be  offred 
sacrifice  to  god  in  temple.  And  god  saide  be  wolde  be  J^e 
parte  of  j^e  pri^stis  and  deknys ;  j^at  is  to  mene,  j^at  ]>o  ]7ingis 
Jiat  I  scbal  assigne  to  bem,  J»e  wbicbe  ]?ingis  ben  offred  to  me, 
scbal  be  ber  parte  and  ber  lyuynge.  And  so  god  assignyd  to 
]?e  pr<9stis  and  deknys  first  fruytis  and  tipis  and  oper 
certeyn  deuocyons  of  pQ  peple,  pQ  wbicbe  was  lijflode  I- 


Chap.  II.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


365 


now^e  ^'for  hern  wi]?  alle  her  seruandis  and  o]?er  meynje.  *[p.  e  ms.] 

And  he  chargid  sore  and  harde  \q  peple  to  ]7enke  on  his  which  God 

clergi,  and  ]?at  ]^ai  defraude  not  hem  of  j^e  parte  J^at  god  ha]?  peopie^strongiy 

assignyd  to  hem.  Eor  ]?ai  hadden  noone  o\er  possesyon  ^ 

amonge  ]?e  o\er  peple,  ne  eny  schuld  haue.  So  ]?at  goddis 

parte  was  fus  assignyd  to  ]?e  trybe  or  kynrede  of  leuy ;  of  ]?e 

whiche  kynrede  wern  goddis  prestis  in  ]?e  old  lawe,  and  of 

noone  o\erQ.  And  Ms  ordynance  of  god  as  tochynge  ]?e  The  priests  might 

.  not  even  have 

linode  of  pri^stis  was  kept  ful  streytly,  so  fer  forte  \at  to  offerings  unless 

^  ^  expressly  assign - 

J^ingis  ]?at  wer  offrid  to  god  in  ]7e  temple  by  denocyon  of  ]7e  ed  to  them. 

peple,  ]?e  whiche  wer  not  by  lawe  of  god  expr^sly  assigned 

to  the  kynrede  of  leuy,  weren  kept  fro  ]?e  use  of  ]?at  *[p-  ms.] 

kynrede  to  ]?e  comon  profete  of  alle  ]?e  peple;  as  to  j^e  4Kingsxii.^[4-i5] 

repairs  of  ]?e  temple,  and  to  rawnson  ]7e  kynge  and  ]?e  rewme 

at  nede,  as  scripture  berij?  witnesse  in  the  tyme  of  goode 

kyngis  Joas  &  Josias.  For  sij?  god  had  assigned  lyflode  to  ]?e 

kynrede  of  leuy  aftir  his  owne  witte,  and  he  may  not  be 

fawty  in  his  worchinge  or  ordenance,  it  had  ben  a  dampnable 

prigsuwpcion  for  to  haue  ordend  more  lijflode  to  hem.  And 

not-witstondinge  tat  kynge  dauyd,  purposynge  to  encrese  te  Example  of 

David, 

worschip  of  god  in  his  peple,  ordend  syngers  and  players  in 

dyuers  musical  iwstrumentis  to  serue  byfore  god  in  ]?e  temple ; 

pt  presumyd  he  not  to  take  eny  ]7inge  ]iat  god  had  assigned 

to  ]?e  temporall  parte  of  his  peple,  and  endowe  wi]?  siche 

goodis  ]?es  "^'mynystres  of  ]?e  temple;  but  he  chese  ]?es  men*[p*7MS.] 

of  ]?e  tribe  or  kynrede  of  leuy  and  lett  hem  lyue  on  her  owne 

parte,  and  so  kept  ]7e  temporalte  hoole  wi]7-owte  eny  peyr- 

ynge  \eroi.  And  salamon  his  sonne,  the  wisest  kynge  ])at  and  of  Solomon, 

eu^r  was,  dide  ]?e  same.  And  si]?  kynge  dauid,  ]?e  chosen  of 

god  aftir  his  owne  herte  &  full  of  ]?e  spirite  of  prophecye,  and 

Salomon  his  wise  sonne  also,  durste  not  chawnge  te  ordenance  who  would  not 

■’  alienate  goods 

of  ]?e  goodis  mouable  and  vnmouable,  ]?e  whiche  god  had  by-  given  to  them, 
take  to  her  gouernance,  and  make  pr^stis  ryche,  as  ]?ouj  god 
had  not  sufficiently  ordend  for  hem  in  his  lawe.  And  wi]? 

]?is,  not-wi]?stondynge  ]iat  kynge  danyd  was  so  fulb  of 
V(?rtuous  and  kyngly  condycions  ]?at  he  is  sett  in  scripture  as 


366 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  II. 


•[p.  1b  MS.] 

Our  kings  should 
not  dare  to  do 
otherwise. 


The  old  law  in 
this  is  confirmed 
by  the  new. 

♦[p.  8  MS.] 


This  point  is  a 
part  of  the  moral 
law,  not  to  he 
destroyed  or  dis¬ 
pensed  with. 

Christ  and  his 
‘  college  ’  kept 
this  law. 


Whence  did 
monks,  canons, 
etc.,  get  exemp¬ 
tion  from  it  ? 


a  patrone  &  ensaumple  of  alle  goode  kyngis.  how  dar  oure 
kyngis,  ]7at  han  not  ]?es  pftis  of  god,  so  expresly  a^ens  goddis 
lawe,  ]7e  olde  and  ]>&  newe,  presume  to  ouerturne  all  the 
gloriouse  ordinance  of  god  a-bowte  siche  temporaltes,  and  make 
the  state  of  presthode  lordis  a^ens  ]7e  lyfe  and  lore  of 
cn'ste  and  his  apostles,  and  ajens  proces  of  ]>e  olde  lawe  in 
jjis  poynte,  confermyd  hi  j^e  newe?  In  whiche  he  haj?  so 
openly,  in  worde,  dede,  and  in  ensaumple,  taujte  and 
cowmaundit  hem  \ai  j^ai  schuld  not  he  lordis  so.  And 
understonde  ]?u  here,  \ai  whan  j^er  is  eny  j^inge  dampned  of 
god  in  ]7e  olde  lawe,  if  j^e  same  be  dampnyd  in  newe,  alle 
euydence  ]7at  ben  ajen  syche  a  defawte  in  j^e  olde  lawe  ben 
euen  a^ens  same  "^'in  j^e  newe.  And  so  all  ]ie  lawis  ]>at 
god  jaue  by  moyses  ajens  ]ie  worldly  lordeschip  of  prestis  of 
olde  lawe  be  euen  ajens  j^is,  ]>at  prestis  schulde  be  lordis 
so  in  j^e  newe  lawe.  Si]?  ]?at  moyses  lawe  is  moralb  in  jiis 
poynte,  fat  longef  to  f e  p^rfeccyon  of  pr(9sthode,  cr^'ste  myjte 
not  distroy  fes  lawis  neif^r  dispens  wif  hem,  fat  prestis 
schulden  not  now  be  bunden  to  fes  lawis.  And  sif  cr^'ste 
and  his  colage  my^t  not  be  dispensid  wif  ne  be  exempte  fro 
f e  bondis  of  f e  olde  lawe  in  fis  mater,  I  merueyle  wher  f e 
pryuelegis  commen  alonde  wherby  owre  colagis  of  monkis, 
chanons  or  eny  ofer  endowid  prestis  fat  dwellen  in  siche 


conventycles  daymen  to  be  exempt  fro  fis  bonde  of  f e  olde 
•[p.  86  MS.]  lawe  ^  in  this  poynte,  fat  in  so  many  placis  so  opynly 
Num.xviii.  [20.]  forfendif  hem  siche  lordeschip  ;  for  fus  it  is  writen  :  “Dixit 
dominws  ad  aaron  In  terra  eomm  nichil  possidebitis  nec 
habebitis  partem  inter  eos  Ego  pars  et  hereditas  tua  in  medio 
filiorww  israel.  filiis  Q.utem  leui  dedi  omwes  decimas  israel  in 
possessionem  pro  miw^'sterio  quo  seruiunt  mihi  in  tabernaculo. 
Nichil  aliud  possidebunt  decimarwm  oblacione  content!,  quas  in 
usus  Qovum  et  necessan'a  separaui” — “fe  lorde  sayde  to  aaron, 
and  in  hym  to  alle  f  e  tribe  or  kynred  of  leuy,  of  f  e  whiche 
kynred  wer  f  e  prestis  &  deeknys  :  ^e  schal  haue  no  possescyon 
in  f e  londe  of  f e  childern  of  israelle.  I  am  fine  part  &  fine 
erytage  in  fe  myddis  of  f  e  sonnys  of  israelle.  And  I  have 


Chap.  II.J 


THE  CLEUGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


367 


pue  to  the  sonnys  of  leuy  alle  ]>e  tij^is  of  ^  Israel  in-to  *[p.  9  ms.] 

possescion,  for  j>e  serujce  j^e  whiche  ]>ai  done  to  me  in  \q 

tabernacle.  Jai  schal  haue  noone  o\er  possessyon,  j^ai  schal 

be  payde  wi]?  offrynge  and  ti]?is  J7e  whiche  I  haue  departid 

in-to  her  vsis  and  nedis.”  Also  in  ]7e  booke  of  Deutronomy  Deut.  xviu.  [i,] 

god  saide  thus  :  “  No^a.  habebunt  sac^rdotes,  et  owwes  (\ui  de 

eadem  tribu  sunt,  partem  et  hereditatem  cum  reliquo  popwlo 

israelii  ;  et  sacrificia  domahi  et  oblaciones  commedent,  et  nichil 

aliwd  accipient  de  possescione  fratrum  suorwm” — “  jae  pr^stis 

and  deeknys,  and  alle  ]?o  jaat  ben  of  jae  same  tribe,  schal  not 

have  part  and  heritage  wi]?  ]aat  o^er  peple  of  Israel ;  for  jaai 

schal  ete  jae  sacn'fyce  and  jae  offryngis  of  ]ae  lorde,  and  ]aai 

schal  taake  no  jainge  ellis  of  Jae  possessyon  of  '^'her  brej^ern.”  *[p.  96ms.] 

Also  it  is  writer  jaus:  “  Tribui  2Mtem  leui  non  dedit  posses-  josue  xiu.  [33.] 

oionem  :  quoniam  dominm  dens  Israel  ipse  est  possescio  eoram, 

ut  locutMS  est  illi,” — jaat  is,  whan  moyses  assignyd  jae 

possescyon  of  Jae  londe  of  Israel  amonge  ]>e  peple,  he  ]aue  no 

possescion  to  ])e  tribe  of  leuy.  Eor  whi,  ]>e  lorde  god  of  Israel 

is  ye  possescion  of  j^at  tribe,  as  he  ha]?  spoken  to  hym.  Also 

]?es  lawis,  ]ouen  of  god  by  moyses,  ]?e  holy  prophetis  taujten. 

As  amonge  oper  we  may  rede  of  Ezechiel,  j^at  tawjte  how 
ye  prestis  &  deeknys  schuld  haue  hem-sijlfe  to  godwarde  in 
lyuynge  and  sacrifice  doynge;  for  he  saij?  ]?us :  “  !N’on  est  Ezec.  xim.  [28.] 
autm  eis  hereditas,  ego  autem  hereditas  eorum :  et  posses- 

cmnem  non  dabitis  eis  in  Israel,  ego  enim  '^possessio  eorwm.”  *[p- 10  ms.] 

( 

“Eorso]7e  ]7^r  schal  be  noone  heritage  to  hem;  forso]7e  I  am  ]?e 
heritage  of  hem ;  and  ^e  schal  ^eue  no  possescion  to  hem  in 
Israel,  for  I  am  J?e  possessyon  of  hem.”  And  saynt  Jerom 
saij?  acordynge  her-to :  “  Clericws  nichil  preter  domimim 

possidere  debet,  scilicet,  non  aurum,  non  argentum,  nec  Ep.  xxxiiij. 
possessiowes ;  quia  enm\iniusmodinonYn\i  dominus  esse  pars.” 

“A  clerke  schal  haue  no  possession  but  god;  ]?at  is  to  say, 
neyer  gold,  ne  silu^r,  or  possessions,  for  wij?  siche  god  will(9 
not  be  parte,  ]?at  han  more  ]?an  is  necessary  to  p^rforme  her 
office  wi]?.  Of  ]?is  processe  be-fore  we  may  se  how  expresly 
god  forfendi]?  lordeschip  to  his  prestis  in  f  e  olde  lawe ;  and 


368 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPER'I'Y. 


[Chap.  II. 


Priests  under  the 
old  law  could  not 
»[p.  106  MS  J 
glose  away  their 
obligations  as 
now  they  do. 


Yet  now  priests 
should  obey  more 
perfectly  since 
they  have  richer 
promises. 


]?ai  cowde  not  schake  away  ]jis  bonde  by  a  contrari  glose, 
lijke  ^'as  oure  pr^stis  kan  nowe.  And  bi  j^e  same  bonde  oure 
prestia  ben  bonden  to  kepe  ]7es  lawis,  as  tocbynge  j^e  anoyd- 
ynge  of  worldly  lordescbipis.  And  ou^r  ]?at  j^ai  ben  bonden 
to  j^e  same  by  a  more  pi^rfyte  lawe  J^an  wer  prestis  of  ]>& 
olde  testament ;  ]?erfore  J?ai  schulde  be  fe  more  wifdrawe  fro 
seculer  lordeschip  j^an  pr^stis  of  ]?e  olde  lawe  ;  namely,  si]?  ]?e 
olde  lawe  bybotij?  for  ]7e  kepynge  j^^rof  prospmte  of  ]?is  lyfe, 
and  ]?e  gospelle  bihotij?  ]?e  kyngdome  of  beuen.  And  so  no 
man  may  putte  an  o\er  grounde  bisyde  ]?at  j^at  is  putte 
whicbe  is  cr^ste  ihesu. 


*[p.  11  MS.l 
Luke  xxii.  [25.] 


Christ  has  for¬ 
bidden  priestly 
lordship,  both  by 
word  and  ex¬ 
ample, 


hut  the  clergy 
not  only  disobey 
him,  hut  make 
laws  reversing 
his  commands, 


-»[p  116  MS.] 
by  which  they 
airn  at  getting 
all  property  into 
their  hands. 


Avowal  of  a 
bishop. 


Q)2c^itulum  iij. 

Ore  omr  we  may  se  how  euen  a^ens  cnstis  wordis  in 
M  ]?e  gospelh  pr^stis  ben  ]?ns  lordis,  wher  criste  saij?  ]7us  : 

“Eeges  gencium dowmantur  eor^^m,  vos  antm ^'no;^ sic” — 
“]?e  kyngys  of  he]?en  han  lordeschip  on  hem,  but  ]e  not  so.” 
And  also  a^ens  his  ensaumple  ]?ai  ben  lordis ;  for  whan  he 
was  sow]te  to  be  made  a  kynge,  &  so  to  take  in  hym  worldly 
lordeschip,  he  fledde  in-to  ]7e  hilh  and  prayde,  in  toknynge 
]?at  siche  lordeschip  Was  contrarie  to  ]?e  state  of  ]>e  clergi,  ]?at 
schuld  lyue  in  contemplacyon.  But  clerkis  nowe  lyuen  not 
oonly  contrariously  to  ]7is  techy nge  and  ensaumple  of  crista, 
but  also  ]>a.i  maken  stronge  lawis  reu^rsynge  boj^e  his  wordis 
and  dedis,  and  letten,  in  alh  j^at  |?ai  may,  hem  ]?at  wolde  teche 
]?e  trou]?e  of  criste.  And,  by  ]?is  lawe  ]?at  ]?ai  han  made,  sum 
of  hem  han  saide  ]?at  ]?ai  schuld  gete  owte  of  ]?e  seculer 
hondis  alle  "^the  temporal  lordeschip  ]?at  ]?ai  may,  and  in  no 
caase  delyuer  noone  ajen.  And  erf  ore  a  gentilman  axid 
a  greete  bischop  of  ]?is  londe  :  “In  caase  ]?at  j^e  clergy  hadde 
alle  ]?e  temporal  possescyons,  as  ]?ai  han  now  ]?e  more  parte, 
how  schal  ]?e  seculer  lordis  &  knyghtis  lyue,  &  wher-wi]?  ? 
si]?  god  ha]?  in  bo]?e  his  lawis  alowid  her  staate  and  her 
lijflode.”  And  ]?en  he  awnswerid  &  sayde  ]?at  “]?ai  schuld 
be  clerkis  soudy cures,  and  lyue  by  her  wagis.”  And  certis 


Chap.  III.]  THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 

I 

fis  lawe  of  getynge  in  of  fes  temporaltes  and  J»es  of er  wordis 
of  fis  bischop  ou^te  to  be  taken  bede  to.  For  sif  fai  ban 
now  fe  more  part  of  fe  temporal  lordescbips,  and  wif  fat 
f  e  spiritualtees  and  f  e  greete  mouable  tresonris  of  f  e 
rewme,  fai  may  lightly  make  a  conquest  up-on  fat  otbir 
party;  namely,  sif  fe  temporal  lordis  ben  not  in  noumbre 
and  in  rycbes  lyke  as  fai  wer  sum  tyme  ;  for  fai  ben  sotilly 
spolid  of  ber  lordescbipis,  in  distroyng  of  ber  staate  and 
power  fat  god  sett  bem  in,  and  f e  party  of  f e  clergy  in  alle 
fes  poyntis  ben  encresyd,  and  so  couetously  fai  ben  sette 
up-on  fes  goodis  fat  fai  welden  now,  &  mo  fat  fai  bopen 
to  baue,  fat  fai  will  not  suffre  ber  couetise  to  be  enpugnyd 
openly  ne  pn’uely,  als  ferr  as  fai  may  lett  it.  For 
fe  gospel  of  Jen  saif  fat  bisebopis  and  pbarises  sayden 
of  criste :  “  If  we  leuen  bym  f  us  alle  men  scbul  byleue  in 
bym,  ^'and  romayns  scbulen  comme  &  take  oure  place  and 
oure  folke.”  For  fai  dredden  hem  of  criste,  pf  bis  wordis 
wenten  forfe,  fat  romayns  scbulden  comme  and  fordo  prestis 
and  pbariseis.  As  if  bischoppis  and  abbotis  spaken  to-day 
to-gedre :  ‘‘  byde  we  goddis  lawe,  lest  fes  seculer  lordis 
cowme  and  take  oure  lordescbippis  and  fordo  oure  statis.” 
“And  fro  fat  day,”  fe  gospel  saif,  “fai  foujten  to  sle 
criste.”  So  now  by  more  malyce  fai  killen  bem  fat  techen 
f e  trouf e  of  cristis  gospell^.  and  in  fat  fai  suffre  not  criste 
to  be  alyue  in  fe  sowlis  of  bis  peple  bi  qwike  faytbe,  wbiche 
commif  by  knoulecbe  of  bis  lawe,  fat  fai  so  cruely  hyden 
fro  f e  peple ;  &  fis  is  more  cruel  killynge  of  criste  fan  to 
kille  bym  bodely  in  his  owne  p(?rsone,  ^'for  f^r-of  came  fe 
mooste  goode  to  mankynde,  fat  is,  saluacion  of  fo  fat  ben 
chosen  to  blisse.  But  of  fat  of ^r  man^r  of  killynge  of  criste 
by  hidynge  of  his  lawe  may  no  goode  comme ;  for  it  is  a^ens 
fe  plesance  of  criste,  &  mooste  lykynge  to  fe  fende  and 
lesynge  of  soulis.  And  ferfore  saynt  poule  saif :  “Si 
opertum  est  euau?^gelium  nosivum. :  biis  qw«  p^reuwt  est 
o^erium :  in  quibws  deus  buiws  S(9cwli  excecauit  mentes  in- 
fidelium”  (2  cor.  4) — “pf  fe  gospel  is  bid,  it  is  bid  to  bem 


369 


These  things 
should  be  looked 
after. 


«[p.  12  MS.] 


The  temporal 
lords  are  fewer 
and  poorer  than 
they  were ; 


the  clergy  in¬ 
creased, 


and  intolerant  of 
reproof. 


John  xi.  [47.] 


♦[p.  126  MS.] 

The  Pharisees 
sought  to  kill 
Christ,  because 
they  feared  the 
Romans  might 
come  and  over¬ 
throw  them. 

So  the  bishops, 
fearing  for  their 
lordships,  slay 
them  that  teach 
the  truth  of 
Christ’s  gospel. 

So  the  people 
cannot  have  the 
knowledge  of 
which  faith 
comes. 


*[p.  13  MS.] 


[2  Cor.  iv.  3.] 


24 


370 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  III. 


Our  bishops  and 
religious  show 
the  same  kind  of 
malice  as  did 
*_[p.  135  MS.] 
bishops  and 
scribes  in  Christ’s 
time. 


The  worst  gov¬ 
ernment  of  the 
Jews  was  under 
the  priests. 


So  the  secular 
power  of  priests 
brings  confusion 
into  Christian 
realms. 


Luke  XX.  [25.] 
*[p.  14  MS.] 


CsBsar  should 
have  what  is 
Caesar’s;  the  tem¬ 
poral  sword;  and 
this  includes  all 
secular  lordship. 


If  priests  were 
impartial,  they 
would  allow  this. 
«[p.  145  MS.] 


Christ’s  example. 
He  fled  from 
being  made  a 
king, 


pat  p^rschen,  in  j^e  whiche  god  of  j^is  worlde  hap  blyndid  pe 
mynde  of  Tinfei])ful  men.”  And  ]7us  whoso  bi]7enki]7  hym 
what  .man(9r  malyce  was  practisid  ajens  criste  by  biscbopis 
and  scribis  and  religious  in  tyme  of  his  bodily  presence  here, 
pe  same  malice  in  kynde  ^'he  schal  fynde,  ^he  uphepid,  in  oure 
byschopis  and  religions.  And  as  pe  peple  of  israel  wern 
werste  gouernyd  undir  her  prestis,  whan  pe  gou^rnance  was 
cowmen  holy  in-to  her  hondis,  and  undir  j^at  gou^rnance 
come  in  her  mooste  confusion  &  losten  J^e  holy  londe 
for  eMer ;  so  ben  now  cristen  rewmys  foule  confoundid 
by  worldly  gou^rnaunce  and  lordeschip  pat  prestis  ban  take 
up-on  hem.  And  alwey  as  J>ai  getyn  more  &  more  of  ]7is, 
so  to  more  confusion  drawen  cristen  rewmys.  And  for  crist 
wolde  not  J^at  prestis  schulde  haue  syche  worldly  gou^rnance, 
he  sai]?  to  alle  men :  “  E-eddite  que  sunt  cesaris  cesari,  &  que 
su?^t  dei  deo  ” — “  jeldi]?  to  cesar  po  ]7ingis  J^at  ben  of  cesar, 
and  to  god  po  "^l^ingis  j^at  ben  of  god”  ;  confermynge  to  pe 
seculer  ptj^rty  of  the  chirche  pe  matmal  swerde  wi]?  his 
purtenance  in  pe  persone  of  cesar,  in  whom  j^at  tyme  was 
chefly  ]7is  swerde,  wi]?  alle  j^e  temporaltes  pat  longen  J^^rto. 
And  certis  I  drede  not  but  j^at  pe  seculer  party  of  pe 
chirche,  &  namely  pe  lordis,  han  als  myche  or  more  coloure 
of  pe  firste  party  of  J^is  texte  to  chalenge  oonly  to  hem  pe  tem¬ 
poral  swerde,  wi]?  his  purtenances  j^at  longe]?  perto,  as  seculer 
lordeschipis  wi]?  seculer  iugement  &  seculer  offyce,  as  oure 
prostis  han  euydence  of  pe  secunde  party  of  j^is  tixte  to 
chalenge  pe  tij^is  of  pe  peple,  as  J^ingis  oonly  longynge  to 
hem.  And  if  j^ai  wer  indifferent,  as  pai  demen  j^at  it  is 
wronge  and  "^'dampnable  a  seculer  man  to  take  up-on  hym 
a  prostis  office,  in  prochynge  or  minystrynge  of  sacramentis, 
and  in  disposynge  of  tijjis,  j^at  weren  lymyted  to  I'e  state  of 
pe  clergy,  so  pai  schulden  deme  it  fullo  dampnable  a  prest  to 
ocupie  ]7e  temporal  swerde,  wi]?  j^e  purtenance  pat  longi]? 
per-to  specified  to-fore.  And  in  full  witnes  J^at  pis  lordeschip 
is  dampnable  in  pe  state  of  prosthode,  crist,  in  whom  is  full 
ensauwple  and  loro  of  porfeccyon  of  prosthode,  fled  alio  J^es 


Chap.  TIL] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


371 


lingis ;  for  he  auoidid  j^is  swerde  in  seculer  office,  and  taujte 
his  apostles,  and  \n  hem  alle  o^er  prestis,  to  do  j^e  same  whan 
he  fled  fro  |>e  peple  'pat  wolde  han  sett  hym  in  j^e  office  of 
a  kjmge.  And  whan  he  was  requirid  to  pne  iugement 
hitwene  two  brej/ern  ^'stryuynge  for  heritage,  he  wolde  not 
^eue  lat  seculer  iugement,  hut  saide :  ‘‘Homo,  quis  me 
constituit  iudicem'  ant  diuisorem  super  vos  ?  ” — “  Man,  who 
made  me  a  iuge  or  a  departer  up-on  ^ou?”  And  so  he 
auoidid  j^is  swerde,  and  left  it  to  pe  temporal  poirty  of  his 
chirche  wi]?  all  pe  purtenances.  And  j^is  same  lesson  tau^te 
pe  apostle ;  for  saynt  poule  assigne]?  j^is  swerde  to  j^e  seculer 
lordis,  as  it  is  saide  hifore,  and  techi]?  men  to  pray  firste  for 
suche  men  ;  j^at  pe  peple  mai  lede  a  pesable  lyfe  undir  hem. 
And  he  techih  cristen  men  to  obey  to  hem  whedir  j^ai  ben 
cnsten  or  hej^en  ;  ^e,  all-lou^  pai  ben  tirawntes.  And  saynt 
petir  techij?  j^e  same  lesson,  and  biddid  pe  peple  to  obey  to  ^e 
kynge,  as  to  hym  j^at  is  passynge  "^oper,  &  to  duykys  as  to  po 
pat  ben  sent  of  pe  kynge,  in-to  pe  vengance  of  schrewis 
&  preysynge  of  goode  men.  And  as  touchynge  j^is  seculer 
lordeschip,  saynt  petir  techi]?  how  per  schulde  be  no  lordis  in 
pe  clergy  ;  and  ]?is  worde  most  nedis  be  vndirstonden  of 
seculer  lordeschip,  j^e  which  criste  his  maistir  bifore  forfendid 
to  alle  his  clergi.  Si]?  j^an  j^at  ^is  lordeschip  of  pe  clerkis  is 
so  openli  a^ens  pe  wilb  of  god,  schewid  in  bo]?e  his  lawis,  and 
so  pai  offenden  god  deedly,  &  euer  schulen  while  it  durijrin  hem, 
it  wer  tyme  j^at  cristis  chirche  toke  hede  to  cristis  wordis,  pe 
whiche  he  spak  to  petir  flgurynge  j^is  chirche,  and  saide :  “turne 
pe  swerde  in-to  his  place” ;  as  ]?ouj  crist  ^ wolde  say  ]?us:  “]?ou 
my  chirche,  figurid  bi  petir,  se  how  pe  mat(?rial  swerde  wi]? 
his  purtenances  is  owte  of  his  place ;  l^rfor  do  as  I  cor^maundid 
pe,  and  turne  ]7is  swerde  in-to  his  place  wi]?  his  purtena?^cis, 
as  secular  lordeschipis,  seculer  office  &  seculer  iugement, 
in-to  pe  seculer  arme  of  my  chirche,  as  I  haue  ordeyned.” 
And  certis,  but  if  j^e  chirche  here  effectualy  ]?is  worde  of 
criste,  schal  it  neuer  stonde  in  redy  rule,  ne  aftir  pe  plesance 
of  god ;  and  ]?erfore  lordis  schulden  take  hede  falle  tendirly  to 


*[p.  15  MS.] 

Luc.  xii.  [14.] 
and  refused  to 
act  as  a  judge. 


The  apostles 
teach  obedience 
to  the  secular 
powers. 

[1]  Tim.  ii.  [2.] 


Eph.  vi.  [5.] 
Titus  iii.  [1.] 

1  Peter  ii.  [13.] 


qp.  155  MS.] 


[1]  Peter  v.  [3.] 


It  is  time  that 
the  Church  took 
heed  to  Christ’s 
words, 

«[p.  16MS.] 


or  it  will  never 
he  in  accordance 
with  God’s  will. 
Lords  must  listen 
to  this  voice  of 
Christ,  lest  they 
he  guilty  of  con¬ 
sent  to  sin. 


372 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  III. 


*[p.  16J  MS.] 
Rom.  i.  [32.] 


Apology  for  in¬ 
sistence. 


*[p.  17  MS.] 


Danger  of  delay. 


Extent  of  evil, 


*[p.  176  MS.] 

■whicli  increases 
daily. 


Ifonce  the  clergy 
get  full  power, 
they  will  not  part 
with  it  again ; 


jjis  voyce  of  criste  ]>at  sai]? :  ‘‘  turne  |>is  swerde  ajeyne  in-to  his 
place ;  ”  for  whi  J^is  apostasie  of  jje  clergie  will  not  oonly  be 
cause  of  dampnacion  of  hem  sijlfe,  but  also  of  alle  j^at  mai 
amende  j^is  &  done  not.  For  saynt  poule  sai]?  he  is  not  oonly 
wor]?!  de]7  ]7at  doj^e  yuel  |>ingis,  hut  also  he  ]>at  consenti]?  to  j^e 
doer.  Forsoj^e  alle  fo  consente7^  Ipat  done  not  her  power  to 
amende  syche  defawtis.  And  j^^rfore  no  man  may  putt  an 
oper  grounde  hisidis  fat  fat  is  putt,  f e  whiche  is  criste  ih(?su. 

Capitulum  iiij. 

Ef elesse  of  o  f inge  I  pray  pu  here,  fat  ^e  greue  jou  not, 
n  all-f  ouj  I  forjete  not  lijtly  fe  matmalb  swerde  wif  his 

purtenances,  and  fat  I  desire  hertly  fat  it  wer  turnyd 
a^en  in-to  his  kyndely  place,  wher  god  hym  sijlf  had  putt  it. 
For  whan  crist  was  in  f  e  hondis  of  his  enmyes,  wher  co'^'muT^ly 
men  forjeten  hem  sijlfe  &  all  fat  f  ai  ban  to  do,  pt  he  byf ou^te 
hym  on  fis  swerde,  and  saide  to  petir,  &  in  hym  to  all  his 
clergye:  ‘‘turne  fe  swerde  in-to  his  place.”  And  it  wer  nede 
fat  cnstis  chirche  toke  tente  to  fis  word  hy-tymys ;  for  fis 
swerde  wif  his  purtenance  may  he  drawe  so  fer  owte  of  his 
place  fat  it  wille  he  vnpossihle  to  hrynge  it  ajen.  For  fus  it 
stondif  of  fis  swerde  in  fulb  many  londis,  wher  clerkis  ban 
fully  f e  seculer  lordeschipis  in  her  power ;  &  it  is  ful  like  for 
to  stonde  in  f  e  same  wise  wif -in  a  few  ^eris  in  ynglonde,  but 
if  f e  kny^thode  of  fis  rewme  sett  f e  sowner  honde  upon  fis 
swerde  to  hrynge  it  in-to  his  kyndely  place.  For  well  myjte 
we  se^'uer  fat  slepe  of  litergi  fat  is  fallen  up-on  vs,  fat  fe 
clergi  haf  fro  day  to  day  more  &  more  honde  vp-on  fis  swerde 
wif  his  purtenance.  And  so  fai  ben  likly  durynge  fis  slepe 
in  fe  seculer  p^rtye  to  pull  fis  swerde  owte  of  fe  seculer 
honde  sodenly,  and  so  to  haue  fulk  power  f  ^rof,  as  clerkis  in 
oper  diuers  londis  ban.  And  wete  lordis  well  fat,  if  f  e  clergi 
gete  fis  swerde  oonys  fully  in  her  power,  f e  seculer  party 
may  go  pipe  wif  an  yuy  lefe  for  eny  lordeschipis  fat  pe 
clerkis  wilb  ^eue  hem  a^en ;  for  it  wer  ajens  f e  lawe  fat  fai 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


373 


han  made  as  toucliynge  siehe  lordeschipis  ;  bi  ]>e  whiche  lawe 
jjai  ben  bonden  to  gete  in-to  j^e  elergie  als  myche  of 
possescions  as  }>ai  may,  and  in  no  caas  to  jeue  eny  siche 
'^'lordescbipis  a^en  in-to  J^e  seculer  bonde.  And  j7is  lawe,  as 
experience  tecbi]?  vs,  is  streytly  ynouj  kepte  amonge  hem. 
For  alle  day  it  is  seen  j^at  seculer  men  jeuen  her  temporall 
possessions  to  ]?e  clergi ;  but  cowde  I  neuer  seen  ne  here  ]7at 
eny  siche  lordeschipis  wern  ^euen  a^en  to  j^e  seculer  party. 
Nej^eles  I  wote  welle  ]7at  ]?e  clergi  will  sai  here,  ]?at  all  her 
bissynes  j^at  ]?ai  han  in  j^is  worlde  a-bowte  siche  lordeschipe, 
as  in  stryuynge,  pletynge,  chydynge,  and  fi^tynge,  is  for  the 
ry]te  of  holy  chirche.  But  certis  it  is  merueyl  how  &  by 
whos  autorite  j^is  rijte  cam  a  place.  For  welle  I  wote  j^at  god 
is  fulle  lorde  of  alle  j^is  worlde  aboue  and  also  of  the  erthe 
binej^e,  as  j^e  prophete  dauyd  sai]?:  est  terra  & 

pleni^wdo  '^eius  ” — “j^e  er]7e  and  ]?e  plente  ]?erof  is  ]?e  lordis.” 
And  welle  I  wote  '^at  ]?er  is  no  lorde  here  of  ]?e  er]?e,  but  if  he 
hold  of  hym  as  ehefe  lorde,  &  haue  his  lordeschip  &  hold  it 
by  autorite  of  ]?is  lorde  god.  And  wel  I  wote  forjermore 
]?at  ]?is  chefe  lorde  ha]?  ^eue  a  decre  vp-on  his  clergi,  bo]?e  in 
]?e  olde  lawe  &  in  ]?e  newe,  ]?e  whiche  may  not  be  reuokid 
ri^tfully;  J?at  none  of  ]?e  clergye,  ]?e  whiche  is  ybonden  by 
his  astate  &  office  to  sue  cr^ste  in  ]?e  perfeccion  of  ]?e  gospelle, 
schulde  eny  siche  lorde  be ;  as  it  is  schewid  openli  before  by 
autorite  of  bo]?e  ]?e  lawis  and'  by  ]?e  lijfe  of  cr/ste  and  his 
apostles.  And  ]?erfore  ]?e  holy  doctoure  origene  writi]?  ]?us  of 
goode  pri^stis  &  yuelle :  “  wolt  ]?u  wite  what  difference  is  bitwix 
]?e  pr^stis  ^'of  god  &  ]?e  prfjstis  of  pharao?  pharao  grawnti]? 
londis  to  his  pri^stis ;  forso]?e  god  graunti]?  none  partye  in  ]?e 
er]?e  to  his  pr^stis,  but  sai]?,  ‘  I  am  ^oure  parte.’  ]?erfore  alle 
^e  pr^stis  of  ]?e  lorde  ]?at  reden  ]?es  ]?ingis,  take  hede  &  se 
what  is  ]?e  difference  of  pr^stis ;  lest  ]?ai  ]?at  han  parte  in  ]?e 
er]?e  &  taken  tente  to  bissinessis  and  til]?is  of  ]?e  er]?e  be  not 
seyn  to  be  prestis  of  ]?e  lorde  but  of  pharao ;  for  he  wilb  ]?at 
his  prMis  haue  possessions,  &  hawnte  ]?e  tylynge  of  ]?e  felde 
&  not  of  ]?e  soule ;  he  wol  fat  fai  ^eue  bissynes  to  ]?e  londe, 


for  they  have 
laws  forbidding 
them  to  part  with 
property  ; 


*[p.  18MS.]  ' 

and  they  keep 
their  laws  strict¬ 
ly- 


They  allege  the 
rights  of  the 
Church. 


[Psalm  xxiv.  L] 
•[p.  186  MS.] 


But  all  property 
is  held  under  God 
as  chief  lord, 

who  has  forbidden 
them  to  hold  pro¬ 
perty. 


Origen.  s.  gen, 
horn.  xvi. 


*[p.  19  MS.] 


374 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  IV. 


[Lukexiv.  33.]  &  not  to  'pe  lawG.  But what  cnste  commaundi];,  here  ^e:  ‘He 
I'at  forsaki]?  not  alle  ]?ingis  j^at  he  ha]?  in  possession  may  not 
be  my  disciple.’  Crist  denye]?  him  to  be  his  disciple  j^at  hap 
*[p.  196  MS.]  any  ]7inge  in  possess[i]on,  and  him  pai  forsaki]?  not  alle  ]7ingis 
pa.the  ha]?;  &  what  do  we?  how  rede  we  ]?es  ]?ingis  oure 
sijlfe,  o]?er  how  expowne  we  ]?es  ]?ingis  to  pe  peple?  pe  whiche 
renounce  not  ]?es  ]7mgis  J’at  we  han,  but  we  willen  gete  to  vs 
po  ]?inges  pat  we  hadden  neuer  bifore  we  cam  to  criste.  That 
is  to  forsake  pouert  and  bodely  trauelb  for  to  haue  riches  and 
ese.  But  certis  ]?is  is  contrarie  to  ]?e  apostles  lijfe,  as  saynt 
Matt.  xix.  [27.]  petir  wituessi]?,  saynge  to  criste  :  what  schal  be  to  vs  pat  han 
forsaken  alle  ]?ingis  &  swen  pe  ?  so  petir  axed  not  lordeschip 
&  ese  of  ]?is  lijfe  to  rewarde  for  his  seruyce.”  And  perioi  pe 
*rp.  20  MS.]  holy  doctoure  Odo  m  a  sermon  sail?,  pat  bigynne]?  bus,  ^'Ecce, 

reliqwmws  omnia'.  “Abel  is  dede;  pe  bissynes  of  schipard 
and  spiritual  mornynge  or  weylynge  is  slayne ;  but  cay  me, 
pat  is  possession,  is  kept,  ^ee  and  caym  pe  er]?e-tyller^,  is  made 
pe  hirde  or  gouernor^  of  sowlis.  Eor  it  is  not  axyd  in  pe 
ehirehe  if  he  kan  welh  teche,  or  if  he  kan  wepe  &  weyle  for 
synys,  but  ^ef  h-e  be  caym,  pat  is  an  er]?e-tilyer^  pat  kan  welle 
tilh  ]?e  londe.  And  it  is  no  wondir  ]?ouj  possession  sle  ful 
many,  si]?  it  is  venym.  Eor  pe  same  day  pat  the  ehirehe  was 
endowid  bi  constantyne,  ]?er  was  herde  a  voyce  in  pe  eyre : 
‘to-day  is  venym  sched  in-to  pe  ehirehe.’  for  the  ehirehe  was 
made  more  in  dignite  but  lesse  in  religion.  And  if  it  be  axid 
*[p.  206  MS.]  of  siehe  oone  :  ‘  where  is  pe  schepe  pat  was  bytaken  to  ]?e  ?  ’ 

E^ce  nos^rei^^ili-  awnsweri]?  ‘whe]?(9r  I  am  kepar  of  my  hroper?’  as  ]?ouj  he 
niMs  omnia.  gayde,  ‘  what  charge  is  to  me  of  pe  sowlis,  so  ]?at  I  haue  welb 

ordenyd  for  pe  temporally  goodis.’  Syche  ben  acursid,  as 
cayme  was,  pat  led  owte  pe  schepe  abel  &  brynge  hym  not 
a^en,  but  disseyuen  hym ;  of  whiche  god  sai]?  by  pe  prophete 
Ezechiel,  her  schipardis  han  disseyuyd  hem.”  Alle  ]?is  sai]? 
pe  goode  doctowr  Odo.  To  siche  holy  sentence  of  scripture 
[Isidore.]  &  doctouris  schulden  lordis  take  hede ;  for  saynt  ysydre  sai]?, 


^  gouer  MS. 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


375 


i  nd  it  is  putt  in  J^e  la  we :  “  Seculer  lordis,  pryncis  of  J^e  vsydori  senten- 
worlde,  scliuldei^^  well  wite  &  knowe  Jat  fai  schal  jelde  herd 
rekenynge  &  acowntis  to  god  for  *  holy  chirche,  j>at  j^ai  han  *[p.  21  ms.] 
take  of  criste  to  kepe  &  to  defeude.  For  as  sai]?  the  law ; 

]>er  whej^er  so  euer  j^at  seculer  lordis  rule  holy  chirche  wel  or 

yuell^,  cnste  schal  ax  reknynge  of  hem.  For  undir  seculer 

lordis  power  crist  ha]?  sett  ]?e  rulynge  and  gouernynge  of  his 

chirche.”  And  ]7erfore  saynt  Austyn,  in  ]?e  boke  of  questyons 

of  ]je  olde  lawe  and  ]?e  newe,  &  in  o]?er  dyuers  placis,  saij?  j^at 

kyngis  and  lordis  ben  vicaris  of  pe  godhede.  And  saynte 

poule  sai]? :  “  JS^ot  wi]7-oute  cause  knyjtis  beren  swerde,  but  [^1 

to  avenge  j^e  wra]?e  of  god  in-to  hym  ]?at  mysdo]7e,  &  to 

supporte  &  mayntene  hem  pat  done  wel.”  ^  And  for  wor]7ines 

of  ]7is  astate  saynt  poule  techi]?  to  pray  first  of  alle  for  kyngis  [i]  Tim.  ii.  [2.] 

&  kny^tis,  pa,t  god  ^eue  hem  grace  to  gouern  "^'hem  selfe  &  *[p.  216MS.] 

her  peple,  pat  pai  han  in  gouernance  to  pe  plesance  of  god  & 

to  hel]?e  of  her  owne  sowlis.  And  herfor  saynt  petir  biddi]?  Peterii,  [17.] 

pQ  peple  to  obey  to  kyngis,  as  to  hem  ]?at  ben  passynge  oper, 

&  to  dukys  as  to  po  pat  ben’^  sent  of  kyngis  in-to  pe  vengance 
of  mysdoers  &  to  pe  praysynge  of  goode  men.  And  not- 

wi]?stondynge  alle  ]?es  autorites,  pat  ben  rehersid  afore  a^en 

pe  lordeschipis  pat  pe  clerkis  occupien  expresl}^  ajens  goddis 
lawe,  as  it  schal  be  pleynly  proued  her-aftir  wij?  goddis  help, 
fit  pai  saven  bat  cr«ste  forfendib  hem  not  siche  worldlv  Priests  say  that 

t  i  i  ■*  they  are  forbid- 

lordeschip,  saaf  pat  pai  schuld  not  be  lordis  aftir  j^e  pompe  &  ^oniy  pomp 

pnde  of  ]?is  worlde.  But  |?is  fleschly  glose  &  many  siche 

oper  pat  pai  han  is  no  ]?inge  to  pur'^'pose.  For  god  ha]?  *[p-  22  ms.] 

forfendit  pompe  and  pr^de  to  all  maner  of  men,  and  mysuse  These  are  forhid- 

of  his  goodis ;  for  he  jaue  neuer  man  leue  to  do  synne.  But 

vp  hap  ]?u  art  a  clerke  or  a  religious  man  endowid  wi]>  many 

worldlv  lordeschipis,  and  art  wo  bat  eui^r  crist  was  so  yuel  Rich  priests  may 

^  ^  ^  think  Christ  ill 

avised  to  say,  or  pe  eu^wngelist  to  write,  ]?es  wordis ;  pe  advised  to  speak 

XLLU 

kyngis  of  he]?en  han  lordeschip  upon  hem,  but  not  so ;  and 
woldist  li]tly,  and  it  wer  in  ]?ine  power,  do  ]?is  worde  &  siche 


1  yuel  MS.  (This  clause  is  not  in  the  passage  referred  to.)  ^  bent  MS. 


376 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  IV. 


Matt,  xxiii.  [2.] 

*[p.  22&  MS.] 
Austyn. 


and -want  a  gloss. 


John  X,  [38],  xiv. 
[11.] 

They  should  take 
Christ’s  gloss, 
that  is,  his  deeds. 


John  vi.  [15.] 

*[p.  23  MS.] 

Or,  forsaking 
Christ,  they  will 
become  members 
of  Antichrist. 


oper  owte  of  j^e  gospell(3  for  euer ;  as  waiwerd  clerkis  wolden 
m  seynt  Austyns  time  haue  done  owte,  &  j^ai  wisten  how,  j^is 
worde  of  fegospelh:  “super  cathedram  moyses  sederunt  &c.” 
“  Ypon  moyses  chayer  han  siten  scribis  &  pharyseis  :  alle  j^at 
pai  schal  say  to  ^jou  kepe  &  do  je,  but  do  je  not  aftir  her 
werkis.”  )>us  sai]?  Austyn,  de  uerbis  dommi,  super  isto  textu. 
And  for  als  myche  as  fu  maist  not  undo  for  euer  suche  textis, 
ne  jit  ]m  wilt  do  aftir  pe  letter  of  siche  textis ;  J^erfore 
saist  fu  most  hane  a  glose.  wel  pan  for  goddis  lone,  If  ]7U 
wilt  glose  pe  textis  of  pe  gospelle  pat  ben  so  euen  ajens  pi 
lordeschip,  glose  hem  as  criste  did  and  commaundid  j^e  to 
jeue  fulle  credence  to  his  glose,  whan  he  saide:  “jif  jeleuenot 
me  for  my  wordis,  leue  je  pe  dedis.”  And  if  Ju  bileue 
effectualy  fis  glose,  fu  schalt  not  oonly  forsake  pe  lordeschip 
j^at  ]m  occupiest,  but  also,  raj^er  ]7an  ]?u  schuldist  be  ocupied 
|>erwij?,  ]7U  schalt  renne  awai  ]?er-fro  &  hyde  j^e,  as  cn'stis 
glose  saij?  pat  he  did.  and  if  ]?u  wilt  not  bileue  ef'^fectualy 
cr^stis  wordis  nej^er  his  glose,  pan  ]7U  wilfully  &  obstynatly 
forsakist  crfst  vttirly;  and  so  }>u  bycummyst  a  lymme  of 
anticriste,  for  no  man  may  putt  an  oper  grounde  bysidis  J^at 
fat  is  put,  f  e  whiche  is  cn'ste  ihesu. 


Cdi^itulum  V. 


Christ  offered 
himself  to  his 
passion,  but 
withdrew  from 
kingship. 

•[p.  236  MS.] 


Ere  we  may  se  fat  a  clerk  may  not  be  a  lorde,  or  \ir- 
h  tuosly  occupi  so  seculer  lordeschip.  And  jif  f  u  wilt  wete 
whi,  me  semif  fat  fis  is  a  cause  sufficient  y-nowe.  fat 
cr«ste  haf  forbodun  hem  fis  lordeschip  in  playne  wordis,  as 
it  is  writen  ofte  to-fore,  &  glosid  f  o  wordis  wif  his  dedis ; 
for  whan  he  was  soujte  to  his  passion,  he  profred  hym  silfe, 
but  whan  he  was  soujte  to  be  a  kynge  &  to  haue  taake  up-on 
hym  fe  material  swerde  wif  his  purtenances,  he  fled  and 
^hidde  hym  self  and  left  fis  swerde  hooly  in  his  place; 
techynge  his  prestis  by  fis  ensample  to  do  fe  same.  And  it 
is  no  doute  but  fat  fis  ensaumple  was  a  co^wmaundement  to 


Chap,  V.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


377 


cristis  pr^stis  to  fle  vttirli  j^is  lordeschip.  For  as  seynt 
gregory  sai]? :  “Dowmws  ihesws  cristus  aUu^?  nos  S(?rmonibws, 
sHu-d  Yero  opmbws  a^wmonet.  Ipsa  eniw  facta  eius  prscepta 
sunt,  quia  duw  aliud  tacitws  facit,  quid  agere  debeamws 
imotescit.”  Cristis  dedis  or  ensaumples  ben  commaunde- 
mentis  wbat  we  schulden  do.  And  ]7at  cnste  fled  J>is 
temptacion  of  ]7e  peple  &  bidde  bymself  schuld  teche  pr^stis 
to  fle,  not  oonly  jjis  synfull  &  dampnable  lordeschip  in  j^e 
state  of  pr^sthode,  but  also  ]?at^  ]7ai  fle  j^e  occasion  or  the 
temptaci[on]  "^'J^sr-of.  And  Jis  ensaumpled  cnste  in  his 
fleynge  and  hydynge.  And  not  oonly  ]7is,  but  also  crist 
in  his  doynge  danpnyd  symony,  ]7e  whiche  is  takynge,  or 
an  unruely  wille  to  take  or  to  jeue,  worldly  goode  for  grace, 
or  hi  occasion  of  grace  of  god  mynystred  to  eny  creature. 
For  whan  criste  had  graciously  &  by  myracle  fed  Je  peple, 
]?orow  occasion  of  j^at  grace,  j^is  peple  was  moued  to  take  hym 
&  make  hym  a  lorde ;  but  criste,  a  clere  ensaunple  of 
clennesse  of  pnstis,  by  whom  as  goddis  instrumentis  grace  is 
^ouen  to  lf>e  peple  as  I’is  grace  was  by  ]>e  preste  criste,  fled 
jjis  pfte.  And  in  ]7is  fleynge  of  criste  fro  J^is  lordeschip  aftir 
myracle  &  grace  J^at  god  \q  fadir  had  ministrid  by  hym, 
he  danpned  ]?e  ressauyng  of  ]>e  lordeschip  j^e  whiche 
siluestre  toke  of  constantyne.  And  criste  commendid  & 
confermyd  j^e  dede  of  j^e  blessid  prophete  hely^e,  J^at  refusid 
]7e  jiftis  proferid  to  hym  of  I7aaman  aft^r  fe  miracle  &  grace 
]7at  god  had  done  by  hym  to  Naaman.  17e}>elesse  for  ]7e  more 
open  knowleche  of  J^at  \atl  moue  here,  fu  schalt  undirstonde 
jie  casis  ]7at  bitydden  bytwene  constantyne  &  siluestri? 
&  naaman  &  heli^e  ben  wondir  like ;  for  bofe  fes  seculer 
men  wer  grete  lordis  &  mesels,  and  boj^e  weren  helid  bi 
myracle  of  god,  &  bi  grace  mynystred  to  hem  bi  j^es  two 
prestis.  For  I7aama?^  was  helid  of  god  bi  grace  ministred  to 
hym  bi  helije.  And  constantyne  was  he[lid]  ^‘‘of  god  by  grace 
mimstred  to  hym  bi  siluestre,  as  his  storie  telli]?.  and  bo]? 


Gregorius  omelia 
xYii. 


His  example  is  a 
command. 


*[p.  24  MS.] 

Christ  in  his 
deeds  condemned 
simony. 


*[p.  246  MS.] 

Elisha’s  example . 
4  Kings  V,  [16.] 


Comparison  be¬ 
tween  Elisha  and 
Silvester, 


4  Kings  V. 
*[p.  25  MS.] 


^  MS.  inserts  ‘  but.’ 


378 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  V. 


Contrast — 

Elisha  -would  not 
take  gifts, 

Silvester  took 
■what  the  emperor 
offered. 

*[p.  256  MS.] 


[Gehazi.] 


*[p.  26  MS.] 


Silvester  offended 
against  a  more 
perfect  law. 


]7ai  wer  helid  in  oon  wise,  for  in  water  schewid  of  god  to  j^es 
two  prestis,  and  bi  Jfes  two  prestis  schewid  to  fes  ^  two  sike 
men.  And  aftir  Jjes  gracis  j^us  minystred  by  ]7e8  two  prestis, 
^N’aaman  proferid  to  belike  wondir  grete  pftis  of  mouable 
goodis,  and  constantyne  proferid  to  siluestre  bo]fe  monable 
&  vnmouable  goodis  in  wondir  grete  plente  and  excesse. 
But  not-wi]7stondynge  ]?at  naaman  prayed  fulle  bertly  belike, 
&  enforsid  bym  j^at  be  scbuld  baue  take  ]>o  ^iftis,  vttirly  be 
forsoke  bem ;  but  siluestre  in  ]>e  same  case  toke  'pat  ]fe 
emperoure  proferid  bym,  bo]fe  pe  grete  worldly  ^aray  &  pe 
wondir  grete  lordescbipis.  And  oo  grete  cause  wbi  belike 
wold  not  assent  to  Naaman  to  take  eny  pftis  of  bym  in  fis 
case  was  for  pan  belije  bad  been  a  symonient,  sij?  bis  man 
giezi,  pat  ran  aftir  naaman  and  toke  ^iftis  of  bym  ]forow 
occasion  of  pat  grace  so  minystred,  was  a  symonyent,  not- 
wij^stondynge  j^at  pat  grace  was  not  jeue  by  bym  in  eny  wise 
to  Naaman,  but  j^at  he  toke  po  pftis  bi  occasion  of  pat  grace, 
bow  mycbe  xaper  bis  maister  belije,  pat  had  more  kunnynge 
&  was  bounden  to  more  p(?rfeccion,  scbuld  baue  be  a 
symonyent  jif  be  bad  ressauyd  pat  goode,  si]f  pat  grace  was 
ministred  to  Naaman  by  bym.  And  no  dowte  ]70U^  siluestre 
had  in  ]7is  case  ressauyd  but  mouable  goodis,  be  ^'schulde 
baue  synned  more  gr(9uously  ]fan  giezi  did,  or  belike  scbulde 
pf  be  bad  ressauyd  jjat  naaman  proferid  to  bym  ;  for  siluestir 
trespassid  ajens  a  more  pi^rfite  lawe.  And  what  bi  giezi 
&  balam,  what  by  Judas  &  symon  magws,  pat  wer  symony- 
entis  acursid  of  god  &  ysmyten  wi]?  goddis  vengance,  & 
what  bi  many  fair^  euydencis  of  scr^pture  &  reson  pat  sicbe 
a  man  owjt  to  baue  bad,  he  bad  many  grete  warnyngis  of 
hydousnes  &  pmlb  of  Jfis  synne  oner  pat  bis  pr^decessouris 
hadden ;  and  all(3  Jfis  agregeden  bys  syn.  Here  it-  may  be 
knowen  pat  siluestre  did  not  aftir  pe  ensaumple  of  cnste, 
j^at  fled  whan  he  scbuld  baue  be  made  a  kynge  &  hidde 
bym  self  and  so  wij^-stode  it,  but  be  proferid  bymself  to  bis 


^  to  j-es  to  j^e  MS. 


Chap.  YI.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


379 


passion.  But  '^'siluestir  did  on  j^e  contr^i  wise ;  for  whan 
he  was  sowjte  to  passion,  he  hidde  hym  sijlfe,  as  ]>e  storie  of 
hym  telli]?.  And  whan  he  was  callid  to  J^e  state  of  ]>& 
emp^roure  or  worldly  dignite,  he  in  a  maner  proferid 
hym  self ;  in  als  myche  as  he  manly  wij^stode  not  ]?e 
hidous  &  synfull^  purpose  of  Ipe  emp/^rour^,  but  cowerdly 
consentid  to  his  foly.  And  certis  I  drede  not  |»at  he  had 
neuer  better  cause  of  martirdome  J^an  to  haue  wij’stonde 
j^is  foli  of  j^e  emperour,  in  case  he  wolde  by  violence 
haue  enforsid  hym  to  J^is  lordeschip.  For  as  a  man 
may  conceyue,  in  partye  of  j^at  is  saide  before,  & 
of  euydence  j^at  wi]?  goddis  help  schal  sue  her-aftir,  ]7is 
wickid  dede  was  peruertynge  of  cn’stis  ordenances  in  "^'his 
chirche,  &  harmfulle  &  destruction  to  euery  state  ])erof, 
&  will  be  fynal  confusion  I’erof  but  pf  it  be  remedied. 
And  so  ]7is  man  had  neuer  so  grete  cause  to  fle  &  to  hide 
hym  self  as  whan  he  was  callid  to  ]7is  rialte ;  and  \at  he 
my^te  haue  lernyd  of  cr«ste,  \at  schulde  haue  be  his  maister, 
fat  in  fe  same  case  fled  &  hidde  hymself.  And  fouj 
vnkunnyngnes  my^te  sumdele  excuse  fe  emperour;  jit  fat 
myjt  not  excuse  fis  preste,  fat  owfte  to  knowe,  as  a  finge 
chefly  bilongyng  to  his  p(9rfeccion,  fat  he  schulde  not  be  a 
lorde  on  fat  wise.  For  no  man  may  putt  an  ofir  grounde 
biside  fat  [fat]  is  putt  whiche  is  cr^'ste  iA^su. 


*[p.  26&  MS.] 
John  xviii.  [4.] 
Silvesterreversed 
Christ’s  example. 


He  should  have 
withstood  the 
Emperor’s  will. 


*[p.  27  MS.] 


He  had  not  the 
Emperor’s  excuse 
of  ignorance. 


Qw^itulum  vj. 


ISTd  so  who  so  lokif  wel  fe  dede  of  sduestir,  it  was  ^*ex-  *[p.  276  ms.] 
a  pr(9sly  ajens  f  e  lyuynge  &  f  e  techynge  of  ihesu  criste,  as  it 

is  openli  taw^t  bifore.  And  sif  f  e  endowynge  of  f  e  clergi  Endowment  of 

tliG  clsr^y  is 

is  groundid  vp-on  fis  dede,  we  may  se  by  fis  processe  how  f e  grounded  on  the 
rr  )  J  j  y  If  ^  x  donation  of  Con- 

clergi  is  wondirfulb  enfect  wif  symonye  &  heresie.  For  fis  stantine. 
sinne  in  hem  may  not  be  vndo  till  f  e  temporalli?  lordeschip  in 
hem  be  distried,  whiche  haf  enyenemyd  alle  fe  clergi.  &  pf 
we  taake  hede  to  fis  processe,  we  schal  not  myche  wondir,  all- 


[Chap.  VI. 


380 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


Gorra. 

*[p.  28  MS.] 
[Jerome.] 


4  Kings  iv.  [8.] 


»[p.  285  MS.] 

Christ  lived  on 
offerings, 


as  did  all  the 
apostles. 

Luke  viii.  [3.] 


*[p.  29  MS.] 


We  must  praise 
Christ  and  Elisha 


and  condemn 
Gehazi  and  Sil¬ 
vester. 

This  is  not 
blaspheming 
Silvester. 


]70uj  fe  awngelb  of  god,  aperynge  in  ]>e  eyre  in  fe  tyme  of 
doynge  of  Jiis  wickid  dede,  saide  ]fes  wordis:  “jiis  day  is 
venym  sehed  or  helt  in  ]?e  ckirche  of  god;”  as  gorram  sai]?  up¬ 
on  xij  chapitre  of  apocalips.  And  \eriox  sai]?  "^saynt 
Jerom,  in  vitis  patrum:  “  Si]?  j^e  chirclie  encresid  in  posses- 
syouns,  it  ha]?  decresid  in  vertues.”  And  herfore  criste  ]?at 
was  in  lyke  case  wi]?  Jfes  two  prestis,  helije  &  siluestre,  in 
dawpnynge  of  ]?is  wickid  dede  ]?at  ha]?  so  myche  harmyd  & 
envenymyd  his  chirche,  left  ]?e  way  of  siluestre,  ]?at  toke  ]?is 
worldly  lordeschip,  and  chese  ]?e  way  of  helije  ]?e  prophete, 
]?at  forsoke  ]?o  jiftis  ]?at  naaman  proferid  hym,  and  fled  bo]? 
symony  &  heresy.  And  so,  as  heliye  left  ]?e  grete  richesse 
]?at  naaman  wold  haue  jyue  hym  &  tooke  wor]?ili  ]?e  pore 
ordenance  &  fyndynge  ]?at  a  goode  man  &  his  wyfe  proferid 
to  hym;  ]?at  is  to  say,  a  lytilb  soler,  a  bedde,  a  horde,  a  chair(3, 
&  a  kandilstek,  ]?e  whiche  ^ben  acordynge  to  a  studier  or  a 
contemplatyfe  man ;  So  cnste  forsoke  seculer  lordeschipis,  & 
held  hym  payde  wi]?  ]>e  pore  liflode  ]?at  deuoute  peple 
ministred  to  hym  to  his  nedeful  sustenance  in  his  labours. 
And  ]?us  didden  also  alle  ]?e  apostles,  as  a  man  may  conceyue 
of  ]?e  gospelk  &  in  man.y  o]>er  placis  of  her  lijfls.  For  aftir 
tyme  J?at  god  ]?e  fadir  had  wroujfe  ]?is  grete  miracle  hi  criste 
his  pr^ste,  in  releuynge  of  fyve  ]?ousande  &  mo  ]?at  wern  in 
mysese  of  hunger,  he  avoydid  siche  worldly  rewarde  ]>at 
schulde  haue  be  joue  to  hym  by  occasion  of  minystrynge  of  ]?is 
grace.  Si]?  fan  fat  criste  &  helije  acorden  to-gydre  in  fis 
case,  &  siluestre  reuersif  hem  hof  e  here ;  "^'and  siche  contrarius 
dedis  in  casis  fat  hen  so  lijke  mow  not  be  glosid  to-gedre,  fan 
we  most  nedis,  ^if  we  will  go  a  sure  way,  magnifle  in  worde 
&  dede  f e  doynge  of  belike  &  of  crfste  in  fis  case ;  sif  fat 
helices  dede  is  commendid  in  scripture,  and  cnst  is  truf  e  and 
autor  of  scnpture.  fan  we  moten  dampne  f e  doynge  of  gyezi 
&  of  siluestre,  f us  ferr  strayynge  away  fro  helije  &  cnste  & 
his  gospelk.  And  in  fis  writynge  I  hlasfeme  no  more  siluestre, 
&  fes  holy  men  and  sayntis  fat  han  hen  sif  fis  endowynge 


( 


Chap.  VI.]  THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY.  381 


of  Je  chirche  cam  in,  all-J^ouj  [I]  rehers  &  blame  her  synne, 

J’an  I  do  petir  &  his  felowis  whan  I  say  j^at  ]7ai  synfully 

forsoken  criste,  or  poule  whan  i  say  ]>SLt  he  wickidly  *[p.  296  ms.] 

pursuyd  cWstis  chirche.  for  I  blame  of  no  ]?inge  wher-of  ]>ai 

schuld  be  sayntis,  no  more  j^an  I  do  j^es  apostles ;  alh-]70uj  I 

blame  her  synnys,  J^e  whiche  j^ai  hem  self  dampnyd,  &  wer 

sori  fat  ener  fai  synned  so.  If  or  petir  wept  sor(3  for  his  [75.] 

synne,  as  f  e  gospelb  saif .  and  saynt  poule,  mekely  knowlech- 

ynge  his  synne,  saide  fat  he  was  not  worfi  to  be  callid  [i]  cor.  xv.  [9.] 

apostle  of  criste,  and  fat  bi-cause  pat  he  p«^rsuyd  cr^'stis 

chirche.  And  on  fe  same  wise  siluestri?  and  fes  sayntis 

diden,  or  ellis  schuld  haue  do  for  her  synne.  For  whan  we  saints  to  be 

will  preyse  sayntis,  we  schul  loke  wherin  f  ai  suyd  cr«ste  and  they  followed 

his  la  we  in  worde,  dede,  or  manors,  and  so  ferr  f  ai  ben  worfi  Maw.^ki. 

preysynge  '^'and  no  ferper;  for  cnst  is  fe  mesure  of  vertuous  *[p.  30  ms.] 

lyuynge  &  worchynge ;  and  herfore  he  callif  alle  men  to  sue  Matt.xxviii.[20.] 

hym  &  to  lerne  of  hym,  &  namely  pr(?stis  to  teche  fat  fat  he 

taw^te,  and  fan  we  may  not  erre.  And  herfore  saynt  poule  Eph.  v.  [i.] 

[should  be  1  Cor. 

taujte  cr^'sten  peple  to  sue  hym,  but  no  ferrer  fan  he  suef  xi.  1.] 

ihesu  criste.  And  saynt  petir  remittif  fe  pepilb  to  criste,  for 

to  take  of  hym  ensaumple;  saiynge  f  us:  “  Crist  haf  sufFred  for  1  Peter  ii.  [21.] 

vs,  leuynge  ^ou  ensaumple  fat  ^e  filow  f e  steppis  of  hym  fat 

did  no  synne,  nefir  was  eny  gyle  founden  in  his  moufe.” 

And  so  a  man  may  eu^r  saafly  sue  his  lyuynge  and  techynge 


wiF-owte  eny  errynge  ;  but  &  we  sue  in  alle  fingis  eif(?r  follow  any 
J  J  J  ^  ^  ^  j  o  j  saint  m  all  things 

petir,  poule,  or  siluestr<3,  or  eny  "^-oper  synfulle  man,  we  must  ^^f’^olten 

nedis  errd  in  many  fingis,  as  f ai  diden.  Loke  fan  if  siluestre 

suyd  criste  whan  he  forsoke  f  e  pouert  of  f  e  gospelb  &  by-cam 

a  lorde  vpon  fe  west  empire  of  fe  worlde.  And  if  he  so 

did,  fan  preyse  hym  in  fat  doynge,  &  ellis  not.  for  whi  no 

man  may  putt  an  of^r  grounde  bisidis  fat  fat  is  putt,  fe 

whiche  is  criste  ih^su. 


i 


382 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  VII. 


Qdi^itulum  yij. 

I  ]7is  processe  bifore  saide  men  mow  lerne  to  awnswer^ 
b  to  comon  argumentis  J^at  couetous  clerkis  maken  in  J^is 
mat^r  to  mayntene  wi]?  her  synne.  In  jje  whiche  argumen¬ 
tis  j^ai  aleggen  for  hem  J^e  sinnes  of  her  pr^decessoris,  saynge 
*[p.  31  MS.]  ]7us,  ‘‘seynt  hue,  seynt  thomas  and  seynt  swyj^une  "^'wer  j^us 

Covetous  clerks  lordis,  &  bai  wer  holy  men  here  &  now  ben  seyntis  in  heuen ; 
allege  the  ex-  ’  ^  , 

ample  of  saints;  ]7an  may  we,  be  ]>e  same  skile,  medefulli  taake  up-on  vs  ^is 

temporall  lordeschip,  and  sue  hem  in  But  ^e  scbal 

undirstonde  J'at  ]iis  man^r  of  arguynge  holdi]?  welh  whan  we 

argue  of  god;  for  it  suy]?  well,  “  criste  did  j^us,  saide  or 

wolde  ]ius,  perfor  jjis  was  wel  done,  saide,  or  willid ;  &  so  in 

bis  dede,  worde,  or  wilh,  it  is  holsum,  spedy  &  plesaunt  to 

hut  it  is  never  god  bat  we  sue  hym.”  But  whan  we  argue  of  an  cr(9atur(9 

safe  to  follow  in  _ 

all  ^things  any  ^is  argument  is  to  schorte;  for  it  sue]?  not,  “Petir  saide  or 
did  j^RS,  b^^fore  he  did  or  saide  welh,  and  in  bos  wordis  & 
dedis  it  is  holsum  to  sue  hym;”  for  bis  maner  ^'of  arguynge  is 
vnpreuyd  in  pat  bat  petir  forsoke  criste,  &  in  bat  b^t  he 
smote  of  malcus  ere ;  so  bat  b^s  maner  of  arguynge  of  a 
creature  is  to  schorte.  And  berfor  je  most  argue  bRs:  “  Petir 
saide  or  did  bRS,  and  in  bis  saiynge  or  doynge  he  suyd  pe  life 
&  be  lore  of  ihesu  cr^ste ;  b<^^for  petir  in  bis  did  or  sayde  welle, 
and  in  bis  it  is  holsum  to  sue  petir.”  And  so  musten  oure 
clerkis  argue  whan  bai  aleggen  for  her  lordeschip  be  lyuynge 
of  her  patrons  &  sayntis,  &  sayen  bRs :  Seynt  thomas  & 

seynt  hwe  &  seynt  Swibune  wer  bRS  lordis,  &  in  bis  bai  suyd 
cr/stis  lyuynge  &  his  lore ;  b^^f^r  we  may  lefulli  be  bRS 
h^^horn^hefore  ^  wote  wel  bat  gabriel  schal  blow  his  home  or 

*[p^32  preuyd  be  mynor;  ^'bat  is,  bat  bes  seyntes  or  patrons 

in  bis  suyden  be  lore  or  be  life  of  ih^su  criste.  And  of  bis  ?e 
may  se  bat  siche  nakid  argumentis,  bat  ben  not  dob  id  wib 
cristis  lyuynge  or  his  techynge,  ben  rijt  noujt  worbe,  alle-pou} 
pe  clerkis  ablynden  wib  hem  myche  folke  in  bis  worlde.  But 
here  haue  I  no  leyser  to  telb,  all  jif  I  koujde,  what  chefesaunce 


=»[p.  316  MS.] 


They  should 
prove  that  the 
saints  followed 
Christ  in  this. 


Chap,  VII.] 


THE  CLEEGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


383 


and  costis  ]>e  clergi  raakib,  &  what  werris  j^ai  holden  to  con-  Eflforts  of  the 

4.  -L-  PT.- 

tynu  J7is  symony  &  heresi  so  vnauysely  broujte  in-to  pe  tain  their  lord- 
chirche.  And  ^it  ]iai  sechen  alh  J>e  ways  J^at  |»ai  kan, 

^he  in  so  myche  ]7at  [j^ai]  gone  openli  armyd  into  ]7e  felde  to 
kill  cristen  men  for  to  gete  and  holde  siche  lordeschipe.  And 
not-wij7stondynge  j^at  seynt  petir  was  so  pore  j^at  he  had  Acts  m.  [6.] 
neher  golde  ne  siluer,  as  he  sail?  in  be  dedis  of  be  apostles.  *[p.  326  ms.] 

,  .  /  /  ^  St.  Peter  had  no 

And  his  ob^r  worldly  goode  he  lefte  whan  he  began  to  sue  possessions;  yet 

4  J  ^  ®  they  call  their 

criste.  And  as  tochyng  j^e  tytle  of  worldly  lawe  |>at  he  had 
to  ]iat  goode,  he  made  ueuer  clayme,  ne  neu^r  resseyued  aftir 
worldly  lordeschip.  And  pt  ]7ai  callen  alle  her  hoole  lorde- 
schip  seynt  petirs  grounde  or  lordeschip.  And  j^erfore  saynt 
bernerd  writij?  to  ewgeny  ]>e  pope,  saiynge  ]7us  :  “  pf  ]?u  wilt  ^gnsw^ratfone] 
be  a  lorde,  sike  it  by  an  title  but  not  by  lf>e  apostles  “•  Leap.  6.] 
ryjte,  for  he  my^t  not  ^eue  ]7at  he  hadde  not :  j^at  he  hadde 
he  ^aue,  j^e  whiche  was  bissynes  vp-on  chirchis ;  whejiir  he 
^aue  lordeschip,  here  what  he  sai]? :  ‘  Be  ye  not  lordis  in  ]?e  i  Peter  v.  [3.] 
clergi,  but  be  ^e  made  fourme  &  ensaumple  of  cristis  ^'flokke.’  *[p.  33  ms.] 
And  lest  ]>\i  trow  j^is  to  be  sayde  not  of  trowjie,  take  kepe 
what  crist  sai]?  in  ]ie  gospelh :  ‘]?e  kyngis  of  he]?en  han  lorde¬ 
schip  vp-on  hem,  forsoj^e  je  not  so.’  Se  how  pleynly  lordeschip 
is  forbodyn  to  alle  apostles ;  for  pf  ]7U  be  a  lorde,  how  darst 
]7U  take  vp-on  j^e  apostilhede  ?  or  if  ]7U  be  a  bischop,  how  darst 
]7n  take  vp-on  ])Q  lordeschip  ?  playnly  jiu  art  forbodyn  boj^e  ; 
and  pf  jiu  wilt  haue  bo]ie  to-gydir*?,  J^n  schalt  lose  bo)»e,  and 
be  of  ]7at  noumbre  of  whiche  god  pleni]?  be  ]7e  prophete  ose,  Hosea  via,  [4.] 
saiynge,  ‘  j^ai  regneden  but  not  be  me,  saij?  god.’  And  pf  we 
holden  ]7at  ]7at  is  forboden,  here  we  ]iat  is  bodyn  of  criste:  ‘he 
j^at  is  gratt^r  of  jow,  loke  J7at  he  be  made  as  ^ongar  in  *[p.  336  ms.] 
sympilnes ;  and  he  \ai  is  forgoer,  loke  he  be  a  seruant.’  J^is 
is  ]7e  forme  of  ]ie  apostles  lijfe;  lordeschip  is  forbodon,  & 
seruyse  is  boden.”  ]?is  sai]?  saynt  bernarde  yere.  And  'perfore 
no  man  may  putt  an  oj^^re  grownde  bisidis  ]?at  |>at  is  putt,  j^e 
whiche  is  enste  ih(9su. 


384 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


Acts  iv.  32. 

Clergy  say  they 
have  no  private 
property,  but 
hold  in  common. 


*[p.  34  MS.] 


They  say,  too, 
that  they  do  not 
occupy  as  lords, 
hut  by  perpetual 
alms. 


Johnx.  [^38],  and 
xiv.  [ll.J 


«^[p.  346  MS.] 
Matt,  xxiii.  [3.] 


This  is  untrue. 


Odi^itulum  viij. 

Vt  ^it  I  wote  welb  and  clerkis  &  religious  folke  ])at 
b  louen  unkyndely  J^es  lordlynes,  willen  glose  here  &  say  fat 

fai  occupien  not  siche  lordeschipis  in  propir,  as  seculer 
lordis  done,  but  in  comoun,  like  as  f  e  apostles  &  f  e  p^rfite  *  peple 
diden  in  f e  begynnynge  of  cristis  chirche,  fe  whiche  hadden 
alle  finge  in  comoun,  like  as  suche  clerkis  &  religious  saien 
fai  ban  nowe.  In  tokenyng  wherof  as  no  man  sayd  of  eny 
'^'finge  fat  tyme,  “fis  is  myne ;  ”  so  oure  clerkis  &  religious, 
namely,  whan  f  ai  will  speke  in  termis  of  her  religion.  A  pr^- 
uate  p(9rsone  will(9  not  say,  “fis  or  f  is  is  myne,”  but  in  persone 
of  alle  his  bref  ern  he  wilb  say,  “f  is  is  oure.”  And  ou^r  alb  fis 
f ai  saien,  more  sutilly,  fat  f  ai  occupie  not  fis  bi  title  of  seculer 
lordeschip,  but  be  title  of  perpetual  almes.  But  whateuer  fis 
peple  saien  here,  we  mot  take  hede  to  f e  rewle  of  prefe  fat 
faylif  not,  fe  whiche  rule  creste  techif  vs  in  fe  gospel  in 
dyuers  placis,  wher  he  saif  :  “leue  ^e  fe  werkis,  for  whi  by 
her  werkis  ^e  schul  knowe  hem.”  And  fis  rule  is  wondir 
nedefulle  to  a  man  fat  haf  a  do  wif  eny  men  of  f e  pha%iseis 
condicions  ;  For,  as  cnste  saif,  “  fai  saien  but  fai  done  not.” 
And  so  as  cristis  werkis  beren  witnes  of  hym,  as  he  hym 
sijlfe  saif,  &  schewdyn  what  he  was  &  how  he  lyued ;  so  f e 
dedis  &  fe  maner  of  lyuynge,  or  f e  finge  in  it  sijlfe  berif 
witnesse  wif-oute  fayle  how  it  stondif  amonge  hem  in  fis 
poynte.  And  if  we  take  hede  fus  bi  fis  rule  we,  schal  se  at 
yje  how  f e  clergie  saif  here  of^r-wyse  fan  it  is.  For  in  sum 
place  in'prmate  p^rsone,  and  in  sum  place  in  comuwte,  or 
p^rsone  aggregate,  whiche  is  alle  oone,  as  saynt  austyn  saif 
vp  f  e  sawter,  f  e  clergi  occupief  ^  f  e  seculer  lordeschip 
seculerli,  &  so  in  propre.  For  in  fe  same  wise  as  f e  baron 
or  f  e  kny]te  occupief  &  gouernef  his  baronrye  or  his  knyjtte, 


^  profite  MS. 


2  occupier  MS. 


Chap.  VIII.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


385 


SO  aft^r  J7e  amor^Hesynge  occupie]?  j^e  clerke,  j^e  monke  or 
chanon,  Jje  colage  or  ]>e  couente  ]7e  same  lordeschip,  and 
gon^rni];  it  by  same  lawis  \n  iugement  &  ponyschinge  ;  as 
prisonynge  &  hangynge,  wi)’  siche  <d\er  worldly  tiirmentynge, 
]7e  whiche  sum-tyme  bylongyd  oonly  to  seculer  arme  of  ]>q 
chirche.  jhe,  oft-tymys  we  may  se  how  J^ai  bissyen  hem  to  be 
kyngis  in  her  owne,  &  reioycen  hem  fulh  myche  in  j^at 
cyuylite  or  seculerte,  pf  fai  may  gete  it.  And  ]7is  is  an 
euydence  J»at  ]7ai  wold  gladly  be  kyngis  of  alle  \e  rewme  or 
fe  worlde.  For  wher  her  londis  &  seculer  mennys  franchisen 
to-gydir,  j^ai  stryuen  who  schal  haue  galows  or  o]?er  mamr 
turmentis  for  felouns.  J^ei  kepen  also  vndir  bondage  her 
tenauntis  &  her  '^'issue  wi]?  her  londis.  And  j^is  is  ]?e  mooste 
cyuylite  or  seculer  lordeschipinge  jjat  eny  kynge  or  lorde  ha]? 
on  his  tenauntis.  And  j^erfore  we  may  se  hou  ]?ai  daymen 
in  her  goodis  a  man^r  of  propre  possession,  contrary  to  ]?e 
comounynge  of  ]?e  comon  goodis  in  tyme  of  ]?e  p^rfyte  men  in 
]?e  begynnynge  of  cristis  chirche.  And  what-so-eu^r  ]?e 
clergye  sayen,  ]7air  dedis  schewyn  welb  ]?at  ]7ai  han  not  her 
goodis  in  comoun,  lyke  as  criste  wi]?  his  apostles  &  perfyte 
men  hadden  in  j^e  begynnynge  of  cristis  chirche.  Eor  in 
holdynge  or  hayynge  of  her  goodis  is  propir  of  possessyon 
&  seculer  lordeschipynge,  J?e  whiche  stondi]?  not  wij?  j^e  plente 
of  cristis  perfeccion  in  prestis ;  as  it  sue]?  of  ]?is  processe 
^'and  of  ]?at  \at  is  declarid  before.  And  as  for  ]?at  o]>er  glose 
]?at  clerkis  han  here,  where  ]?ai  saien  ]?at  ]?ai  holden  ]?es 
lordeschipis  by  title  of  perpetual  almes.  Eut  here  je  schul 
undirstonde  ]?at  mercy  or  almes  is  a  willi?  of  relevynge  of 
a  wreche  oute  of  his  mysese,  as  lyncolnyence  sai]?  in  ]?e 
bygynnynge  of  his  dictis.  So  ]?at  pf  a  man  schuld  do 
effectualy  almes,  he  most  loke  ]?at  he  to  whom  he  schuld  do 
almes  wer  in  mysese  and  had  nede  to  be  releuyd.  In 
tokenynge  wherof  criste  oonly  assigne]?  almes  to  ]?o  in  whom 
he  marki]?  mysese.  And  so  of  ]?is  it  wilh  sue,  ]?at  pf  a  man 
releue  oo  wreche  &  maki]?  an  o]?(?re  or  mo,  he  do]?e  noon 
almes,  '^but  ra]?er  maki]?  mysese.  And  myche  more  he  do]?e 


*[p.  35  MS.] 
They  hold  just  as 
the  knight  or 
baron  does, 
and  execute  lay 
justice. 


They  quarrel 
with  lay  lords 
for  the  gallows; 
they  hold  bonds¬ 
men. 

*[p.  355  MS.] 


*[p.  36  MS.] 


Perpetual  alms. 
Definition  of 
alms. 

[Marginal  note 
in  later  hand  “of 
lyncolne,  Robart 
grosted  was  bis- 
hope  a°  1253,  be¬ 
fore  Wicklyf  120 
yeres.”] 

Dicto  ii. 

Luke  xiv.  [14.] 

It  is  not  alms 
to  relieve  one 
wretch  and 
make  another, 
«[p.  365  MS.] 


25 


386 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  \TII. 


or  to  give  to  Doone  almes  he  make  riche  ]jo  j^at  han  noone  nede,  for  als 
no  need;  myche  as  ]7ai  hen  sufficiente  to  hem  sijlf.  j^is  ha]?  no  colour*? 

of  almesse,  for  ]?is  may  bettir  be  callid  a  woodnesse  or  a 
and  for  this  pur-  wastyng  of  goddis  goodis.  And  ou^r  ]?is,  if  a  man  take  fo  goodis 
property^  from  whiche  god  in  ]?e  best  wise,  euen  &  wi]?-owte  errouris,  ha]? 
Godhargi^n^™  assigned  to  ]?e  state  of  seculer  lordis,  &  ^eue  ]?o  goodis  to  eny 
peple  ]?at  ha]?  noone  nede  of  hem,  ^he,  to  whiche  peple  siche 
goodis  ben  forfendit,  ]?is  schiild  be  callid  noone  almesse,  but 
p(?ruertynge  of  goddis  ordynance,  &  ]?e  destruccyon  of  ]?e 
state  of  seculer  lordis,  ]?e  whiche  god  h.a]?  aprouyd  in  his 
[2f’c^o^r^vui\i3  for  as  ^'saynt  poule  sai]?,  “Almes-dede  schuld  be  so 

rewlid  ]?at  it  wer  relevynge  to  \o  ]?at  ressavyn  it,  and  no 
tribulacion  to  ]?o  ]?at  jeuen  it.”  And  myche  xi\\er  it  schuld 
Quod  superest  not  be  vndoynge  of  J?o  bat  done  it.  And  herfore  criste  techih 

date  elemosinam.  . 

Luke  xi.  [41.]  in  ]?e  gospell^  to  do  almes  of  ]?o  ]?inges  ]?at  ben  needeles  or 
superfLue.  And  in  ]?is  dede  a  man  schulde  haue  rewarde  to 
]?e  nede  of  hym  ]?at  he  do]?  almes  to,  and  to  ]?e  charge  of  his 
owne  house,  what  almes  ]?an  I  pr«y  ]?e  was  it  to  vndo  ]?e 
state  of  ]?e  emperoure,  &  make  ]7e  clerkis  riche  wi]?  his 
lordechipis  ?  namely,  si]?  crist  confermyd  to  ]?e  erap^rour  his 
state  wi]?  ]?o  ]?ingis  ]?at  longyd  ]?^r-to,  not-wi]?stondynge  ]?at 
*[p.  37&MS.]  ]7e  emperour*?  ]?at  tyme  was  he]?en.  And  he  ha]?  forfen'^*'dit 

expr^sly  his  clergy  in  worde  &  in  ensaumple  siche  lordeschip. 
give^'^he^^iergy  nooue  almes,  SO  we  mote  say  of  o]>er  kyngys, 

^cui^'iordsT dukis  &  erlis,  barons  &  knyjtis,  ]?at  ben  vndo  herby,  &  ]?e 
clerkis  made  riche  &  worldely  lordis  wi]?  her  goodis.  wher- 
fore  it  may  rijtfully  be  sayde :  “Ko  man  may  putt  an-o]?er 
grounde  bi-sidis  ]?at  ]?at  is  putt  ]?e  whiche  is  crist  ihesu.” 


Capituluw  ix. 

« 

Ere  we  may  se,  hi  ]?e  grounde  of  ]?e  gospelh  and  be 
h  ]?e  ordenance  of  criste,  ]?at  ]?e  clergy  was  sufficyently 
purveyed  for  lyfelode.  Eor  god  ds  so  patrfyte  in  alle  his 
Sufficiently 'for  worchynge  ]?at  he  may  ordeyn  no  state  in  his  chirche  but 
♦[p.^^’^MS.]  if  he  ordeyn  sufficient  liflode  to  ]?e  sa'^^me  state.  And  ]?is 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


387 


is  open  in  goddis  lawe  whoso  takif  heede.  And  }at  vndir  as  for  all  states. 

enery  lawe  of  god  as  vndir  j^e  law  of  i;^nocens  &  of  kynde, 

vndir  j^e  lawe  ^eue  by  moyses,  and  also  vndir  j^e  lawe  ^ouen 

by  criste.  In  j^e  tyme  of  ]>e  state  of  innocence,  we  know 

wel  by  bilene  )»at  god  had  so  ordeyned  for  mankynde,  ]?at  it 

schulde  haue  had  lydode  I-now ;  ^be,  wij^-owte  eny  tenefulb 

labour*?.  And  of  j^e  lawe  of  kynde  criste  speki]?  in  J'e 

gospell*?,  seyinge  ]7us  :  ‘‘ Alle  |>inges  }>at  ^e  ^  wollen  J^at  oj^er  Matt.  vii.  [12.] 

men  done  to  joii,  do  ^e  to  hem.”  And  if  I’is  lawe  had  be 

kepte,  J>sr  schuld  no  man  haue  be  mischeuously  nedy.  And 

in  ]7e  tyme  of  J7e  lawe  ^eue  by  moyses  god  '^'made  a  fulb  *[p.  386  ms.] 

&  sufficient  ordenance  for  alle  his  peple,  and  assigned  ]>e  fyrste 
fruytis  and  tij^is  to  j^e  prestis  &  deeknes.  And  all(?-]70U^  pat 
he  wolde  j^at  per  schulde  be  alleway  pore  men  in  j^e  londe  of 
israell*?,  pt  he  made  an  ordenance  'a^ens  myschevous  nedis, 

&  commaundit  alle  pe  peple  j^at  per  schulde  be  on  no  wyse 

a  nedy  man  and  a  begger*?  amonge  hem ;  as  it  is  wryten.  Deut.  xv.  [4.] 

And  so  in  J^is  lawe  he  ordeynyd  sufficiently  I-now  for  his 

peple.  And  in  j^e  tyme  of  pe  new  lawe  criste  assignyd  j^e 

seculer  lordeschipis  to  temporally  lordes,  as  it  is  taujte  byfore, 

and  alowid  pe  comonte  her  liflode  goten  bi  true  morchandise 

&  hosbondrie  and  eper  craftis,  and  in  worde  &  ensaumple  he 

tau^te  his  prostis  "^Ho  be  procuratouris  for  nedy  peple  &  pJ-^esS  should  be 

pore  at  pe  ryche  men,  &  specifyed  Jes  pore,  &  tau^te  how  pa.i  SXforthep'ool-t 

j^at  wer  mytty  schuld  make  a^purviance  for  syche  pore  folke, 

p^t  j^ai  wer  not  constrenyd  by  nede  for  to  begge ;  as  grete 

clerkis  merken  vp-on  j^is  worde  of  J^e  gospelly  whery  criste 

saij?  ]7us;  ‘‘When  ]7U  makist  p'me  feeste,”  j^at  is,  of  almes,  Luke  xiv.  [12.] 

“  cally  pore,  feble,  lame  &  blynde  ”  He  sai]?  not  “latt  siche 
pore  men  cally  vp-on  j^e,”  but :  “  cally  ]7U  ;  ”  menynge  in  J7at, 
p^t  pM  schuldist  make  a  purvyance  for  siche  peple  J^at  j^ai  be 
not  myschevously  faulty.  And  for  pe  clergy  he  ordenyd 
sufficiently,  techinge  hem  in  worde  and  in  ensaumple  hou  j^ai  s^tisfied^^with 
schuld  holde  hem  apayde  wi]?  lyflode  &  helynge,  mynystred  to 


1  we  MS. 


388 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  IX. 


*[p.  m  MS.] 


Presumption  in 
adding  to  tbe 
provision  made 
by  Christ, 


which  was 
enough  in  the 
early  Church. 

*[p.  40  MS.] 


The  other  states 
are  content  with 
Christ’s  ordin¬ 
ance. 


Christ’s  promise 
assures  them  of 
livelihood.  ’ 


Matt.  vi.  [26.] 
*[p.  40&  MS.J 


So  perpetual 
alms  means  dis¬ 
trust  of  God’s 
governance. 


Endowment 
should  not  he 
called  “almes,” 
but  “  all  a  miss.” 
*[p.  41  MS.] 


hem  for  her  true  labour  '^'in  jte  gospelh,  as  it  is  wryten  to-fore. 
Of  ]tis  ]7an  j7U  mayst  se  houj  god  in  alle  his  lawis  ha]?  sufficiently 
ordend  for  alle  ]?e  statis  ]?at  he  foundit  and  aproued.  And 
houj  it  were  ajens  ]>e  goodnes  and  ]?e  wisdome  of  god  to 
orden  eny  state  but  if  he  ordend  sufficyent  liflode  ])erto. 
Si]?  ]?en  ]?is  ordenance  of  god  was  sufficyent,  als  welb  for  ]>e 
clergi  as  for  o]?er  men,  it  semi]?  a  foule  pr^sumpcyon  to  brynge 
in  a  new  and  a  contrary  ordenance  of  liflode  for  clerkis,  vp-on 
]?at  ordenance  ]?at  crist  had  made  for  hem  by-fore.  Of  I’e 
whiche  ordenance  ]?e  clergy  fulb  many  yere  aftir  ]?e  bi- 
gynnynge  of  cristis  chirche,  whan  it  was  best  gouernyd, 
helden  hem  a-payde.  For  ]?is  mene]?  pat  cristis  "^'ordenance 
was  insufficyent  &  worthi  to  be  vndo.  And  if  we  take  goode 
heede,  ]?ai  hadden  no  more  nede  to  plene  hem  of  ]?is  orde- 
naunce  ]?an  hadden  pe  oper  two  statis  of  his  chirche,  pe 
whiche  in-to  ]?is  day  holden  hem  apayde  wi]?  ]?is  ordenance 
of  criste,  and  desyren  in  grete  party  pat  ]?is  fayre  and 
sufficient  ordenaunce  of  criste  were  fully  kepte.  And  more 
sikirnes  or  ensurance  may  no  man  make  of  eny-]?inge  pan 
criste  hap  of  ]?is  liflode  to  pe  clergy.  For  crist  not  oonly 
affermi]?  to  pe  peple  pat  he  wille  not  fayle  hem  in  liflode 
&  helynge,  but  also  preue]?  ]?is  by  argumentis  pat  may  not  be 
asoylyd,  so  pat  pai  be  true  seruandis  to  hym.  For  crist 
meni]?  ]?us  in  his  arguynge  ]?er :  Si]?  god  fayle]?  not  briddis 

"^'and  lilyes  and.grasse  pat  growen  in  pe  felde,  neiper  he]7eu 
men,  hou  myche  vaper  schal  he  not  fayle  his  true  seruandis.” 
And  so  ]?is  purvyance  of  perpetual  almes,  pat  oure  clerkis 
speken  of,  meni]?  fawte  of  bileue  &  dispeire  of  pe  gracious 
gouernance  of  god.  Si]?  ]?an,  as  it  is  sayde  bifore,  it  is  noone 
almes  to  releue  oo  wreche  and  make  an  o]?er  or  mo ;  and  to 
make  hem  riche  wi]?  temporalle  lordeschip,  pe  whiche  ben 
forfendit  to  siche  peple;  and  namely  if  siche  almes-^evynge 
be  distroynge  or  apeyrynge  of  eny  state  aprevyd  of  god  in 
his  chirche,  it  wille  sue  pat  pe  endowynge  of  pe  clergy  wi]? 
worldly  lordeschipe  owjt  not  to  be  callid  almes,  but  ra]?er  alle 
a  mysse,  or  wastynge  of  goddis  goodes,  “^‘or  distroynge  of  his 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


389 


IS 


ordenance,  For  as  myche  as  ]7e  clergi  was  sufficiently  ordeynyd 
by  criste.  For  whi  ]?is  almes  j^at  clerkis  speken  of  here 
made  many  wrechis,  And  it  was  joue  to  hem  |>at  hadde  no 
node.  And  |>us  it  is  enpeyringe  not  oonly  of  oone  estate  of  All  three  estates 

3.r©  til©  w^ors©  I'or 

\e  chirche,  but  of  alle  j^re,  of  j>e  whiche  I  spoke  of  in  jje  it. 
bigynnynge.  And  so  |>is  almes-jevynge  ha]?  made  alle  owr^ 
rewme,  ^he,  &  as  I  suppose,  falle  nye  all  crestyndome,  full 
pore  and  nedy  and  myscheuous  ouer  'pat  it  schuld  have  be  if 
pe  clergy  had  holde  hem  payde  wi]?  cristis  ordenance.  But 
now  ]?orou  J7is  perpetual  alamysse  jjat  pe  clerkis  and  religious  Christ’s  ordi 
folke  callen  almes,  cristis  ordenaunce  is  yndo  in  sum  londis  overthrown 
hooly,  &  in  ynglonde  for  pe  more  party.  '^And  it  is  likly  to  *[p.  4i6  ms.] 
be  alle  vndo  \n  processe  of  tyme.  For  by  amortesynge  of 
lordeschipis  ]?e  lordis  ben  vndo  In  grete  party.  And  po  pat 
ben  lefte,  by-cause  pat  hem  lakki]?  her  owne  party  ]?orow 
foly  ^ifte  of  her  auncetreris,  ben  ful  nedi.  Fer]?irmore  it  may 
be  vndirstonde  of  j^is  processe  j^at  wi]?drawynge  of  ]?es  withdrawing 

,  n  T  “  1  endowments 

lordeschipis  from  he  clergi,  and  restorynge  ot  hem  to  he  statis  from  the  Church 

is  not  robbery, 

pat  god  hap  assignyd  hem  to,  schuld  not  be  callid  robbery  hut  restitution, 
of  holy  chirche,  as  oure  clerkis  sayen,  but  raper  rijtwise 
restituciou?^  of  goode  wrongfully  and  J?euely  wi]?holde.  And 
perfore  per  may  noon  ope  err  a-vow  bynde  eny  man  to 
mayntene  ]?is  j^efte  and  distryinge  of  goddis  ordenance,  and 
]?is  greete  harmynge  of  cristis  chirche,  as  ]?e  vow  of  iepte  Judges  xi. 
schulde  not  have  bounde  ^*him  to  killd  &  to  sacrifice  his  owne  *[p.  42  ms.] 
doujtdr.  ]^e  pe  ope  of  herode  schuld  not  haue  bounde  hym  Markvi.  [26.] 
to  kill  i?«nocent  Ion.  But  as  Iepte  schulde  have  broken 
his  ope  or  avow,  and  han  offred  an-oj^dr  ]?inge  pat  had 
be  plesynge  to  god  and  acordynge  wij?  his  lawe,  as  saynt  [Austin.] 
awstyn  saij?  vp-on  j^e  same  storie,  so  herode  schuld  have  De  qMestiomh?^ 

&  nov© 

broke  his  ope,  and  a-savyd  innocent  blode,  and  sore  a-  legis. 
repentid  hym  for  his  vnavysid  swerynge.  And  so  schulden  Lords  are  not 

bound  by  oaths, 

lordis  nowe  breke  her  obis,  bat  bai  han  unavisely  and  since  the  things 

_  which  they  have 

wiboute  cowncel  of  holy  scripture  sworne  to  mayntene  bis  sworn  to  main- 

-•  ^  j.  ^  ^  ^  j  tain  are  wrongful. 

pefte  ;  ^he,  heresye  and  symonye,  as  it  is  proued  bifore,  j^e 
whiche  oure  clerkis  callen  perpetual  almes.  And  not  ]7us  sue 


390 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  IX. 


*[p.  426  MS.]  jjer  pr^decessouris  or  progenitouris  in  her  foly  dedis  and 
oj^is  ]>a\>  )>ai  han  made  to  mayntene  J^is  mischeuous  p^r- 
uertynge  of  cristis  ordenance  ;  for  as  J^e  state  of  j^e  clergi  ha]? 
no  power  ne  leve  to  make  ]?e  peple  or  ]?e  lordis  to  synne 
deedly,  or  to  distroye  goddis  ordenance  in  his  chirche,  so  ]?ai 
have  no  leve  or  power  of  god  to  cowncell^  or  to  constreyne  in 
eny  case  ]?e  lordis  or  ]7e  peple  to  swere  to  mayntene  ]?is 
endowynge  of  ]?e  clerkis  and  religyous  folke,  ]?e  whiche  is 
fulb  grete  ]?efte,  heresy  &  symony,  and  wondir  harmful^  to 
cristis  chirche ;  as  it  is  schewyd  in  ]?is  procese  and  in  o\er 
**  writen  bifor*?.  But  ]?e  lordis  specialy  schulde  se  her^  what 

wer  plesynge  not  to  ]?es  clerkis  but  to  god.  And  \ai  schulde 
]?ai  do ;  for  her-to  ]?ai  ben  bounden  by  vertu  of  her  office  vp 
♦  [p.  43MS.]  payne  of  dampnacion.  And  ]?(?r  may  no  man  dispence  '^wij? 

hem  of  ]?at  boonde,  stondynge  her  state.  for  no  man 
schuld  putt  an  o]>er  grounde  bisidis  ]?at  \at  is  putt,  ]?e  whiche 
is  criste  ih(?su. 


Q^'^itulum  X. 


It  is  deemed 
wrong  to  alienate 
entailed  land, 


even  for  service 
done,  or  as  alms. 
*[p.  436  MS.] 


Then  it  is  wrong 
to  take  the  pro¬ 
perty  that  God 
has  assigned  for 
ever  to  one  state 


2^d  ]?^rfore  men  demen  it  a  grete  synne  to  ^eue  lande 
a  entaylid  by  mannys  lawe  fro  ]?e  persone  or  ]?e  kynred  ]?at 
it  is  entaylid  to;  ^he,  alb-]?ou^  it  be  not  so  ^ouen  for  eu^r 
but  for  a  litilb  tyme.  And  ]?ouj  it  be  so  ]?at  ]?e  p^rsone 
or  kynred,  ]?at  siche  londe  is  ^eue  to,  be  nedy  and  haue  leue 
by  goddis  lawe  to  occupie  siche  man(3r  londe  or  lordeschip. 
and  ]7is  [is]  demyd  fulb  grete  synne  amonge  ]?e  peple,  not  oonly 
to  ]?e  ^euer,  but  also  to  ]?e  takeie,  for  bo]?e  ]?ai  done  dampnable 
wronge  to  hem  ]?at  it  is  entaylid  to,  as  ]?e  peple  demij? ;  ^he, 

s 

alb-]?ou^  it  be  ^oue  for  goode  and  true  seruyee  ]?at  ]?e  ressey- 
uowr  ^ffiaj?  done  to  ]?e  ^eu^r  bifore,  or  ellis  bi  way  of  almes  of 
relevynge  of  ]?e  persone  or  kynred  ]?at  is  jeue  to.  Hou^  myche 
ra]?dr  ]?an,  I  pray  ]?e,  wi]?-owte  comp«ryson,  is  it  a  grete  synne,  as 
wel  to  ]?e  ressaueris  as  to  ]?e  ^eueris,  to  take  ]?e  lordeschip  ]?e 
whiche  god,  ]?at  ha]?  fulb  lordeschip  up-on  alb  ]?e  worlde,  hu]? 


Chap.  X.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


391 


joue  bi  perpetual  lawe  or  rijte  to  j>e  stade  of  seculer  lordis, 
and  ^eue  j^is  fro  j^at  state,  to  J^e  whiche  god  entaylid  j^is 
lordeschip,  to  an-o]7er  straunge  peple  of  an-oj^ir  lyne,  I’e 
whiche  ha]?  ne]?er  nede  ne  leue  of  god  for  to  ocupie  it. 
And  if  oure  prestis  clayrne  ti]?is  as  goodis  in  a  maner  entaylid 
to  hem,  for  als  myche  as  god  in  ]?e  olde  lawe  had  joue  & 
entailed  siche  ti]?is  to  ]?e  kynred  of  levy  and  to  noone  o]?er 
lyne  ;  Eor  criste  cam  of  ]?e  lynyage  of  ^'Juda,  to  whiche  lyne 
was  no  tij^is  grauntid;  And  so  as  men  supposen  ]?is  entaile 
was  not  expresly  confermyd  hi  criste  and  his  apostles  to  his 
prestis  in  ]7e  new  lawe.  For  as  it  is  writen  in  policronicon, 
])e  seven]?e  boke,  gregor  j^e  sexte  ordenyd  first  ti]?is  to  be 
payde  to  curatis  oonly.  And  ptt  ]7ai  daymen  so  ferfor]7li 
]?es  ti]?is,  ]?at  no  man  lawfully  may  wi^-holde  hem  orminystre 
hem  save  ]?ai.  ITe  ]?ai  may  be  turnyd  or  jouen  to  eny  o]?er 
state  or  kynred  saue  oonly  to  hem,  all-]?ou^  men  wolden  do 
]?at  undir  coloure  or  bi  titille  of  perpetualle  almes  ;  for  ^is 
schulde  be  demyd  of  j^e  clergy  a  dampnable  synne  &  dis- 
troynge  of  holy  chirche  &  sacrilege.  Hou  myche  ra]7er  ]?en 
is  it  an  hidous  and  a  "^Mampnable  synne,  to  ^eue  or  to  take 
away  ]?e  seculer  lordeschipis  fro  ]?e  state  of  seculer  lordis,  Ipe 
whiche  god  had  jeue  &  entaylid  to  hem,  bi  ]?e  same  lawe 
&  ri^te  by  ]?e  whiche  he  had  ^ouen  ]?e  ti]7is  to  ]?e  prestis  in  j7e 
olde  lawe  ?  and  ]?is  entaile  A/as  neui^r  int^rrupte  or  y-broken 
in-to  cristis  tyme  &  his  apostles ;  and  ]?en  ]?ai  confermyd  ]7is 
entayle  bi  lawe  so  stronge  to  ]>e  seculer  ^artj  ]7at  no  man, 
safe  anticriste  and  his  disciples,  may  openly  enpugne  ]7is 
entaile,  as  it  is  schewid  bifor^.  And  so  as  no  man  schuld 
presume  to  wi]?drawm,  wd]?holde  or  turne  ]?e  ti]?is  fro  ]?e  state 
of  presthode,  as  sayne  ;  so  myche  ra]?er  schuld  no  man 
presume  bi  jeuynge  or  takynge  to  aliene  ]?e  temporal  lorde- 
^'schips  fro  j^e  state  of  seculer  lordis.  And  ]?us  clerkis  han 
not  so  myche  coloure  to  sai  ]7at  ]?e  lordis  &  ]?e  lay  peple 
robben  holy  chirche,  if  j^ai  wij^drew  }e  ti]?is  fro  hem,  for  als 
miche  as  j^ai  han  take  her  temporaltes  fro  hem.  And  ]7is 
takynge  of  j^es  temporaltes  in-to  J?e  handis  of  Je  clergi  ha]? 


and  give  it  to 
another. 


♦[p.  44  MS.] 


The  clergy  claim 
tithes  as  inalien¬ 
able, 


*[p.  446  MS.] 

but  secular  lord- 
ships  are  held  by 
even  stronger 
sanction. 


»[p.  45  MS.] 


Yet  the  clergy 
have  taken  them 
by  robbery,  and 


392 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Chap.  X. 


that  under  pre-  neu^r  fe  lesse  malicG  of  robrye  &  cause  of  malice  in  it  sijlfe, 

t0IlCG  of  llollIlGSS  >  n  I  "T  "i*!  1  1* 

lor  als  micne  as  it  is  done  by  symylacion  ot  noiynes,  pe 

Gen.  iii.  whicbe  is  double  wickidnes.  For  ]7us  lucifer  robbid  Adam 

boj^e  of  goodis  of  fortune,  of  kynde,  and  of  grace.  As  J^e 

clergi  ha]?  robbid,  and  jit  do]’e,  ]?e  chirche  of  ]7es  j^re  maner 

as  Lucifer  de-  goodis :  For  rijt  as  lucifer  did  Hs  harme  to  adam  &  eue, 
ceived  Adam  and 
Eve. 


*[p.  456  MS.] 


vndir  colours  of  loue  &  frendischip  &  helpynge  of  hem,  so 
done  nowj  his  awngelis,  ]7es  ypocritis,  ]?at  transfigure 
hem  sijlf  in-to  awngellis  of  lijt,  and  disseyuen  ]?e  pepill  by 
fals  by-heest  of  heuenly  help,  J’at  ]?ai  willen  procure  to  hem 
rations  are  boXd  goodis  as  ]?ai  sayeu.  And  if  a  bischop  and  his  colage, 

not^ to^pan'wfth  abbot  and  his  couent,  may  not  alien  fro  hem  eny  of  ]?e 

even  ^°tr^^thefr  her  founder  eny  of  ]o 

founder.  possessions  ]7at  he  ha]?  joue  hem,  what  nede  ]?at  euor  he  haue, 

I-bounden  oonly  by  a  posityue  lawe  or  a  tradycion  ]>at  ]?ai 
han  hem  sijlfe  made ;  And  if  eny  siche  lordeschips  be  wi]?- 
drawe,  Alienyd  or  take  fro  hem  by  rechelesnes  of  her  pro- 
decessouris,  }>ai  owjten  on  all  wise,  jhe,  in-to  ]?e  de]?e,  labore 
*[p.  46MS.]  to  [gete]  ]?o  possessions  in-to  her  hondis  ^^‘ajen,  as  ]?ai  saien; 
Much  more,  then,  "gou  myche  more  ban  schuld  not  a  seculero  lorde  or  a  layman 

should  laymen  .  ^  i  ^ 

not  part  with  aliene  fro  hym  &  his  issue,  or  fro  be  state  of  seculer^  lordis 

property  to  ^  ^ 

priests.  seculer  lordeschippis  j>e  whiche  god  ha]>  lymytid  to  '^at 

state  ?  Si]?  he  is  bounden  by  \q  lawe  of  kynde  for  to  ordeyne 
for  his  children.  And  ouer  ]>is  he  is  bounden  by  goddis  lawe 
to  susteyne  ]’e  state  of  seculer  lordis,  ]fe  whiche  is  autorisid 
in  ]>e  chirche  bi  criste  and  his  apostelis.  Of  ]?is  processe  ]?en, 
if  a  man  take  hede,  he  schal  p^rceyue  ]>e  falsnes  of  ]?is  giose, 
whan  oure  clerkis  and  religious  folke  saien  ]’at  ]?ai  holden 
]?es  lordeschipis  oonly  by  tytilb  of  perpetual  almes.  For 
They  have  quite  certis  si]?  ]?es  ti]>is  &  ]?is  offryngis,  ]?e  whiche  as  I  suppose 
*[p.  466MS.]  cowntirvaylen  be  seculer  lordis  rentis  of  be  rewme  or '^'ellis 

tithes  and  offer-  j  i  j 

passen  as  it  is  full  likly  (For  J’ouj  ]»ai  be  lesse  in  oo  chirche, 
]?ai  passen  in  d.n-o\er)  and  ben  sufficient  for  alle  ]?e  pri^stis  in 
cristendome,  &  ]>ai  wer  euen  delyd ;  ]?en  it  wer  no  nede  to 
amortise  seculer  lordeschipis  to  ]?e  state  of  ]?e  clergi ;  ]>e 
whiche  amortesynge  is  vndoynge  of  lordis  &  apostasie  of  ]?e 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


393 


App.] 


clergy.  And  if  ]?is  amortasynge  wer  not  nedefulb,  ]7en  wer  it 
noone  almes,  as  it  is  declarid.  And  ouer  ]>e  tij^ingis  and 
off'ering(9s  ]7at  ben  now  of  certeyne,  ]>&  clerkis  ban  many  grete 
&  smale  p^rquisitiuys,  be  whiche  smacben  of  symony  and  and  fees,  of  which 

^  ^  ^  >  r  .  some  smack  of 

extorcion ;  as  J»e  first  fruytis  of  yacant  beneficis,  prouynge  of  simony, 
testamentis,  for  halowynge  of  chapels,  chircbis,  cbaunceilis 
and  opdr  ournement^'s  of  ^e  cbirche,  &  for  sacrynge  of  ordres, 

&  fulb  many  mo  j^at  for  multitude  may  not  ^wel  be  nowmbred.  *[p.  47  ms.] 
For  well(9  nij  alle  her  blessyngis  ben  sett  to  sale  and  to  prise  All  blessings  set 

to  Srilo 

in-to  crystenynge  &  confirmacion.  wberfor  I  may  now  sai,  as 
I  sayd  at  j^e  bigynnynge  ;  “Eundamewtum  aliud,”  &cetera — 

“JS’o  man  may  putt  an-o'per  ground  bysidis  'pat  ^at  is  putt, 
be  whiche  is  criste  ih(?6iu.”  pe  whiche  grounde  of  lyvynge 
criste  graunte  vs  to  kepe,  J^at  we  may  ascape  j^e  euerlastynge 
paynys  of  helb.  Amen. 


[Appendi^t:.] 

[On  the  Wrongfalness  of  the  Clergy  holding  Secular  Office.'] 

Here-aftir  it  schal  be  schewid  what  p^ryl  it  is  to  pr^stis  to 
be  in  seculer  ofS.ce,  and  to  lordis  to  suflfre  hem  b^7*-inne,  or  to 
excite  hem  per-to. 

Eynt  Cypriane  sai]?  pat  ^orow  j^e  councell(?  of  bischopis  ^er  q.  hj  cap. 

0ip^^3>n  iis» 

s  is  made  a  statute,  j^at  alle  pat  ben  charchid  wi]?  pr^sthode 

"^'and  ordeynyd  in  j^e  service  of  clerkis  schulde  not  seme  *[p.  47&ms.] 
but  to  be  auter,  and  to  mynystr(?  sacramentis,  and  to  take  hede 
to  prayers  and  orysons.  Hit  is  for-sobe  writen  :  ‘‘  no  man  2Tim.  u.  [4.] 
berynge  his  kny^thode  to  god  entrike  hym  wib  seculer  nedis;” 
be  whiche  our^  bischopis  and  oure  predecessouris  biholdynge 
religiously  &  purveynge  hoolsuinly,  dempten  bat  who  so  eu^r 
take  mynystres  of  be  cbirche  fro  spirituall(?  ofSce  to  seculer^, 
bat  per  be  noone  offrynge  done  for  hym,  ne  eny  sacnfice 
halowyd  for  his  sepultur(9.  Eor  bai  disserven  not  to  be 


394 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[App. 


*[p.  48  MS.] 


Luke  xvi.  [1.] 

A  lord  who  sets  a 
pi'iest  to  secular 
office  is  like  a 
bailiff  who  sets 
his  master’s  ser¬ 
vant  to  his  own 
work. 


»[p.  485  MS.] 


2  Tim.  ii.  [4.] 

He  is  acting 
against  God’s 
law. 


Example  of  the 
apostles. 

Acts  vi.  [2.] 


*[p.  49  MS.] 


iii.  decre  in  fine. 

It  is  also  against 
the  Pope’s  law. 


nempnyd  byfore  ]>e  auter  of  god  in  'pe  prayer  of  prestis, 
whiche  willen  clepe  away  pr(?stis  &  mynystres  of  f  e  chirche 
fro  anter.  pis  saij?  saynte  Cipnane.  Her^  men  mow  se 
how  p(?rylous  it  is  to  kynge  &  seculer  lor'^'dis  to  wi]7holde 
eny  pr^ste  in  seculer  bissynes.  pis  is  preuyd  |»us,  for  euery 
seculere  lorde  by  j^e  lawe  of  gospelb  is  goddis  bayly.  But 
if  eny  bayly  hiryd  a  werkeman  wi]?  his  lordis  goode  and  putt 
hym  to  his  owne  seruyce,  he  must  nede  be  vntrue  to  his 
lorde.  Ili^t  so  is  Qaerj  seculer(9  lorde  to  our<3  lorde  ihesu 
criste,  but  if  he  amende  hym,  ]iat  taki]?  a  preste  and  putti]? 
hym  in  his  seculer  office  ;  brekynge  j^e  heest  of  his  lorde  god 
j^at  co/?^manndiJ7  :  “  ]7U  schalt  couett  noon  o]ier  mannys 

s^ruande.”  And  he  wi]?drawi]7  hym  fro  |>e  S(?ruyce  of  god  & 
fro  ]7e  kepynge  of  cristen  mewnys  soulis,  pe  whiche  he  hap 
take  charge  of,  for  whiche  soulis  oure  lorde  ihem  criste  toke 
fleisch  and  blode,  and  suffred  ^'harde  depe,  and  schedde  his 
owne  hert  blode.  pisp^rylous  doynge  of  seculer  lordis  is  hope 
ajens  goddis  lawe  and  mannys.  It  is  ajen  goddis  lawe;  For 
as  saynt  poule  saip  :  “  Ho  man  pat  is  a  parfyte  kny^te  of  god, 
as.  eu^ry  prest  schulde  be  bi  his  ordre,  entirmete  hym  wip 
worldly  nedis  &  bissynessis.”  And  for  pis  ende,  pat  he  may 
so  plese  pat  lorde  to  whose  service  he  hap  putt  hym-silfe,  and 
pat  is  god.  For  siche  worldly  bissynes  in  clerkis  is  a^ens 
her  ordre,  and  perfore  pe  apostles  sayden,  as  it  is  wry  ten  in 
pe  deedis  of  pe  apostles  :  “  It  is  not  enen  vs  to  forsake  pe 
worde  of  god  and  mynystir  to  bordis  of  pore  folke.”  And  if 
it  was  vnequite,  as  pe  apostles  sayden  in  her  common  decre, 
hem  for  to  leue  pe  pr^chynge  of  goddis  worde  &  ministre  to 
pe  ’^'bordis  of  pore  men;  hou  myche  more  vnequite  and 
wronge  to  god  &  man  is  it,  prestis  to  leve  contemplacion, 
studie,  pr^yer^  &  prijchinge  of  goddis  worde,  and  mynistrynge 
to  pore  folke,  for  pe  service  of  a  seculer^  lorde.  Hit  is  also 
ajens  pe  popis  lawe;  For  he  spekip  to  a  bischop  and  biddip 
hym  pat  [he]  warne  openly  prestis  and  clerkis  pat  pai  be  not 
occupied  in  seculer  office,  ne  procuratouris  of  seculer  lordis 
nedis  &  her  goodis.  And  if  prestis  and  clerkis  ben  so  bolde 


App.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


395 


to  occupie  hem  in  siche  bissynes,  and  if  ]7ai  falb  aftir  hi  losse 
of  lordis  goodis ;  ]7an  saij?  ]7e  lawe,  it  is  not  worj^i  '^at  j^ai  be 
holpen  and  socoured  of  holy  chirche,  si]?  ]?oron  hem  holy 
chirche  is  sclaundred.  And  saynte  gregori  wrote  to  \q  defen-  [Gregory.] 
sonr(9  of  rome  in  j^is  manor :  ‘‘  It  is  tolde  to  vs  ]?at  ourg  moost 
Tenement  hro^er  basile  bischop  is  occupied  in  seculer  •[p.  495  ms.] 
causis,  and  kepi]?  vnprofetably  moote  hallis ;  whiche  ]?mge 
maki]?  hym  foule  and  distrye]?  ]?e  reuerence  of  pr^sthode. 
perfore  a-noone  as  ]?u  hast  ressayvid  ]?is  maundement, 
co[m]pell  hym  wi]?  scharp  execucion  to  turne  ajen.  So  ]?at 
it  be  not  lefuU^  to  ]?e  by  noone  excusacion  to  tarye  it  fyve 
days ;  lest  if  in  eny  mamr  ]?u  suffir  hym  eny  langer  to  tary 
\er-mnQ,  ]?u  to  be  coupable  wi]?  hym  anentis  vs.”  And  so 
bischoppis  &  o]?ir  pr^latis  ben  holden  to  teche  and  enforme  Bishops  should 

^  warn  lords 

lordis  to  wi]?draw  hem  fro  ]?is  synne,  and  scharply  to  repreue  against  this  sin. 

pr^stis  and  curatis  vndir  hem  ]?at  ]?ai  ocupie  no  seculer  oifice. 

pis  is  prouyd  ]?us.  ]?e  holy  prophete  Ezechiel  sai]?  :  If  ]?e 

^wayte  or  ]?e  wacche-man  se  ennemys  cum,  and  if  ]?e  peple  *[p-50  ms.] 

be  not  warnyd  &  kepe  not  hem  sijlfe,  but  ennemys  cummen 

&  sle  ]?e  peple ;  ]?en  sai]?  god  ]?at  ]?e  pepilld  is  take  in  her 

wickidnes.  And  of  ]?e  waite  schuld  have  blowe  in  his 

home  wilb  god  axe  acountis  and  reknynge  of  ]?e  blode  and  of  ]?e 

de]?e  of  ]?e  peple.”  But  now  to  goostly  vndirston[din]ge  eu^ry 

bischop  schuld  be  a  waite  or  a  waccheman,  to  ieWe  &  to  warne  watchman,  to 

warn  the  people 

byfore  to  alle  ]?e  peple  by  his,  goode  lyvynge  and  techynge  against  sin. 

]?e  p^relb  of  synne.  And  ]?is  is  ]?e  reson  whi  bischoppis  and 
o]?ir  prelatis  &  prestis  schulde  not  be  occupied  wi]?  worldly 
nedis  and  causis;  For  siche  occupacions  and  chargis  maken 
prestis  slepynge  &  sluwbrynge  in  synne.  And  ]?erfore 
it  is  grete  x^ereWe  to  lordis  to  make  '^'ou^r  hem  goostly  *[p.  505  ms.] 

.  ,  .  .  Lords  should  be 

waytis  and  wacchemen,  as  bischoppis,  p^rsones  and  vikers,  careful  not  to  set 

up  sleepy  watch- 

]?at  ben  slepers  &  slombreris  in  lustis  of  ]?e  fleysch,  &  men. 
blyndid  wi]?  poudir  of  couetise  of  worldly  riches,  and  so 
occupied  in  worldly  nedis  J?at  ]?ai  nei'per  kan  ne  may  kepe 
hem  sijlfe,  ne  noone  o]?er  man.  For  of  ]?is  perelb  &  siche 
o]?ir  a  prelate  fat  ha]?  witt  and  kuwnynge  schuld  scharply 


396 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[App. 


Malachi  ii.  [7.] 


*[p.  51  MS.] 


[Num.  xviii.  20.] 


*[p  515  MS.] 


[Deut.  xviii.  1.] 


[Matt.  X.  9.] 


repreue  &  warne  alle  maner  men,  to  ]7e  schedynge  of  his  owne 
blode,  as  criste  did ;  and  if  he  leue  &  blame  not,  j^en  he 
assenti]?  to  her  trespassis  and  synne]?  deedly.  For  as  sai]?  j^e 
prophete  malachie :  “  prestis  lippis  kepyn  kunynge,  and  j^e 
pepill(9  schal  axe  ]>e  lawe  of  god  of  his  mou]7e ;  for  he  is 
J7e  awngelb  of  god  if  he  kepe  well^  ]>e  ordre  &  j^e  degre  of 
prest'^'hode.”  And  \eriorQ  it  is  not  lefull^  to  eny  man  to 
drawe  to  secnler^  office  messangeris  of  criste,  \at  ha]?  so 
yttirly  forfendit  hem  bo]?e  in  worde  and  in  dede  seculere 
office  in  pr^sthode. 


If  eny  man  stonde  in  donte  of  ]?is  sentence  before ;  here 
suen  autoritees  of  holy  scripture  and  holy  doctouris  in 
latyn  ajens  j7e  seculer  lordeschip  of  prestis. 

Ivilis  ant  secularis  possessio  fuit  inWdicta  sacerdotib«5s  & 
c  leuitis,  ut  patet  Num(9r.  xviii.  Dixit  dommus  ad  Aaron : 

In  t^rra  Gorum  nichil  possidebitis,  n^c  habehitis  pt^rtem 
inter  eos :  Ego  pars  et  hereditas  tua  in  medio  ^iliorw»^  Israeli, 
ffilijs  auiem  leui  dedi  omwes  decmas  Israelis  in  possessionem, 
pro  ^ministerio  quo  seruiunt  mihi  in  tabernaculo  federis. 
Sequitwr :  Solis  filiis  leui  mihi  in  tabernaculo  seruientibws, 
&  portantibws  pocc«^a  popwli,  legittimum  sempiternuw  erit 
in  generacionibw5  vosMs.  JSTichil  aliwd  possidebunt,  deci- 
maxum  oblacione  contenti,  quas  in  usus  Qomm  ^  et  necessaria 
separaui.  .  Item  Deut.  xviii°:  ITon  habebunt  sacerdotes  et 
leuite  &  OTwwes  qui  de  eado??^  tribu  sunt  partem  &  hereditatem 
cum  reliquo  popwlo  israel ;  <\uia  sacrificia  dommi  et  oblaciones 
eius  comedent,  et  n^’^^’l  aliwd  accipient  de  possessione  fratrum 
suorwm.  Deus  enim  ipse  est  hereditas  eorwm,  sicut  locutws 
est  illis.  Supor  quo  glosa :  Ministris  altaris  n^c  terrenis 
possessionibws  adquirendis  concessu??^  est  inhiare.  vnde 
Matt.  x°:  Nolite  possidero  aurum,  neqwo  argentum,  neqwo 


^  Q'dxum  MS. 


Authorities.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


397 


pecuniam  &c^.  et  "post  pauca :  dignws  est  op(9rariw5  cibo  suo. 

Et  alibi,  Qwi  altari  des^ruiunt  cum  altare  '^‘participant.  Non  [i  Cor.  ix.  is.] 
emm  op^rtum,  quod  qui  semper  altari  debent  seruire  officio 
dimno,  inhient  tm’eno  lucro,  quibus  dominus  hereditas  est. 

Quid  ergo  illi  deesse  potest  qui  omnia  habentem  habet. 

hec  ibi.  Item  ezechiel  xliiii :  Non  autem  erit  eis  hereditas,  [Ezek.  xUv.  28.] 

ego  hereditas  eorwm ;  et  possessionem  non  dabitis  eis  in 

israd,  ego  en«m  possessio  eorwm.  Yictimam  p?^o  p^cc^^o  et 

pro  delicto  ipsi  comedent,  et  omno  votum  in  israel  ipsorwm 

erit.  Super  quo  Zoronimus,  libro  xiii°  super  ezechielem : 

Q,ui  autem  talis  extiterit  nt  mimstret  in  s^wc^uario,  et 

ingrediatwr  atrium  interi^^5,  et  offerat  deo  sacrificium,  ita  ut 

verws  sacerdos  sit,  ymmo  imitator  eius  de  quo  scriptum  est, 

tu  es  sacerdos  in  eternum  secundum  ordinem  melchisedech ; 

iste  nullam  he^Jebit  po^rtem  nm  deum,  qui  est  hereditas 

eius,  nec  accipiet  possessionem  in  israel,  hoc  est  inter  vulgus 

ignobile,  %ed  sacerdotalem,  ut  dicat  de  eo  dommus :  ego 

sum  possessio  et  hereditas  eius ;  qnem  cum  venerit  loquatwr 

ac  dicat,  '^‘tenebo  ilium  nec  dimittam  ilium;  et  psallet  cum  *[p.  525  ms.] 

propheta,  pars  mea  dommus.  hec  ille.  Item,  deut°  x°;  Non  Deut.  [x.  9.] 

haSuit  leui  partem  in  possessionibws  cum  fratribws  suis,  quia 

ipse  dommus  possessio  eius,  sicut  promisit  ei.  Item,  Josue  Josii.  [xiv.  4.] 

xiiii :  non  acceperunt  aliam  in  terra  partem  nisi  urbes  ad 

habitandam,  et  suburbana  earam  ad  alenda  iume?^ta  et 

pecora.  Item,  eccl.  xlv°  :  Nam  sacrificia  dommi  edent,  que  eccIus.  [xiv.26.] 

dedit  ipsi  et  semini  eiws.  ceterum  in  terra  gens  ^  non 

hereditabit,  et  pars  non  est  illi  in  gente.  ipse  ewim  pars 

eius  est  et  hereditas.  Item,  Mat.  xx°  :  Scitis  quia  prmcipes  Matt.  [xx.  25.] 

gencium  dommantwr  eoram,  et  qui  maiores  sunt  potestatem 

exercent  in  eos  ;  non  ita  erit  inter  vos,  sed  quicnmque 

voluerit  inter  vos  maior  esse,  sit  vester  mmzster.  Et 

qmcum^'we  voluerit  inter  vos  -primus  esse,  erit  vester  seruus. 

Sicut  filiws  hommis  non  venit  mmistrari  sec?  mmstrare,  et 
dare  animam  suam  reder^pcmrem  pro  multis.  Idem  pate? 


^  sic,  MS.  Vulgate,  gentis. 


398 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLT)  PROPERTY. 


[ArTHORITIES. 


«[p.  53  MS.] 
[1  Pet.  V.  2.] 
Matt.  Luc. 


[1  Tim.  vi.  8.] 


Luke  [xiv.  33.] 


[Bernardus  de 
Consideratione, 
lib.  ii.  cap.  vi.] 


Luke  [xxii.  25.] 

Hosea  [viii.  4.] 

Luke  [xxii.  26.] 

Origenes. 


M«t  x°  et  luc^  xxii°.  Item  pnma  petri  qwmto:  ‘^'Pascite  qui 
in  vobis  est  gr^gem  domini,  prouidentes  non  coacti  ^ed 
spontanee  secundum  dieuxo. :  neqw^  turpis  lucri  gvacio.,  Bed 
voluntarie :  noque  dowmantes  in  clero,  sed  forma  facti  gregis 
ex  ammo.  Item  ad  Thi‘“  vi° :  Habentes  xiutem  alime)^ta  et 
quibw.s  tegam^^r,  hijs  contenti  simws.  lllam  quivolnnt  diuites 
fieri  incidunt  in  temptac^owem  et  in  laqneum  dimboli.  Item, 
luc(9  xiv :  Sic  ergo  omms  ex  vobis  qui  no;^  renuwciat  omnihus 
que  possidet,  no^  potest  mews  esse  discipwlws.  It^m, 
'Bernardus  \ibro  ij  ad  Eugenium  papwm :  Esto,  ut  alia 
quacum^'we  racmne  hec  tibi  vendiees ;  sed  non  apostolico 
iure..  nec  enim  ille  iihi  dare  potuit  qwod  non  habuit : 
qwod  autem  habuit,  hoc  dedit,  sollicitudmem  sup^r  ecclesias, 
numquid  demmacmwm.  Audi  ipswm.  Non  demmantes  in 
clero,  sed  forma  facti  gregis  ex  animo.  Et  ne  dictum  sola 
hnmilitate  putes;  nonne  eciam,  veritate.  Vox  enim  dommi 
est  in  eu^ngelio.  luc^  xxij° :  Reges  gencium  dominantur 
eorum ;  et  infert,  vos  autem  non  sic.  Planum  est,  apos^olis 
interdieiiur  dominatus.  Ergo  tu  et  tih‘  usurpare  audes  aut 
dominans  aposMatum,  aut  apos^olicus  ^  dom^natum.  Plane 
ab  alterutro  prohiberis.  Si  utrwm^we  simwl  habere  velis, 
perdis  utrum^'we.  Alioqum  non  te  exceptum  putes  de  illo 
numero,  de  quibws  sic  eonqueritur  deus,  Osee  octavo :  Ipsi 
regnaueruwt  sec?  now  ex  me.  At  si  iaterdieium  tenemus, 
audiamws  edictum.  luce  xxii.  Qui  maior  est  resirum,  ait, 
fiat  sicut  iunior,  et  qui  precessor  est  sicut  qui  ministrat. 
tforma  apes?olica  hec  est ;  Dommacio  interdicitwr,  indicitwr 
mmistracio.  hec  ibi.  Item,  Origenes  super  gen.  omelia  xvi°. 
Deniqwe  vis  scire  quid  intersit  inter  sacerdotes  domini  et 
sacerdotes  phwrcconis.,  Pharao  terras  concedit  sacerdotibws 
suis,  demmus  autem  sacerdotibus  suis  partem  now  concedit 
in  terra.  Bed  dicit  eis :  Ego  peers  ves?ra.  Obseruate  ergo  qui 
hec  legitis,  omwes  dommi  sacerdotes,  et  videte  que  sit 
differencia  sacerdotum,  ne  forte  qui  pwrtem  hceJent  in  terra, 


^  apostolaius  MS. 


Authorities.] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


399 


et  t^rrenis  cultibws  %c  studijs  vacant,  no?^  tarn  dommi  *[p,  54MS.] 

pharaonis  sac^rdotes  esse  videantwr.  Ille  ewiw  est  qui  vult 
saC(9rdotes  sues  h«Jer^  possessiones,  et  ex6rcer(3  agri  now 
awime  culturam,  Euri  sed  now  legi  op(?rani  dare.  Qhristm 
dommws  nos^(?r,  sacerdotibws  suis  quid  pri^cipit 
audiamus :  Qw^  now,  inquit,  renuwciauerit  omwibws  que 
possidet,  now  po^^s^  mews  esse  discipulws.  Negat  chns^ws 
suum  esse  discipwluwz  quern  viderit  aliquid  possidentem,  et 
eum  qui  now  renuwciat  owiwibus  que  possidet.  Et  quid 
agimws?  qui  bee  aut  ipsi  legimws,  aut  popwlis  exponimus, 
qw^*  now  soluw^  now  renuwciamws  hijs  que  possidemws,  sed  & 
adquirer(?  volumws  ea  que  nuwqwwwi  haSuimws  anteqwwm 
veniremws  ad  p<3!pw^wm.^  &c^.  ^er  processum.  Item,  parysiens^’s  parisiensis. 
libro  de  vieijs,  titulo  de  auaricia  m6rcenariorww^ :  Sciebat 
do/wmws  ocwlwm  ecc/me  iw^pedienduw^  esse  temporalibws  istis 
ab  officio  suo ;  Modicum  enim  pulums  vel  ^'palee  ocwlwm 
omwiwo  cessare  facit  ab  officio  suo.  Immo  voluit  duces 
ecclesie  paup^res  esse,  eo  quod  paupertas  expedita  est, 
sicut  seneca  dicit,  et  subdit :  Si  vis  ommno  vacare  ut  pauper 
sis,  ora  ut  paupm  sis  similis.  Et  si  cetera  membra  corporis 
ad  plura  officia  cowueniant,  ut  lingua  ad  gustum  et  loquelam, 
et  manws  ad  multa  similitor,  ocwlws  tww^wm  vnum  habet,  et 
contactum  torre  maxime  timet.  Sic  oculus  ecclesie  con- 
templatiuws  legi  diwme  debuit  intendere,  et  a  torrenis  istis 
seporari.  lico^  pes  hommis  a  peteris  mombris  eiws  seperatus 
now  sit,  iamen  babet  seporatam  artem  que  ei  desoruit,  & 
artifices  qui  ei  totalitor  circa  calciamenta  eius  intend  sunt. 

Qwwnto  magis  debent  esse  aliqwi  qwi  totab'^or  spiritualibws 
sint  intend.  ^ed  bodie  mag^s  occupata  est  ecc^^sia  in 
temporalibus,  quo  ad  magnawj  pwrtem  swwm,  (\uam  fuerat 
sinagoga.  vn^^o  quwm  fuit  datum  a  "^'constandno  i/wporium  *[p.  55  ms.] 
occidentali  ecc^osie,  fwc^a  est  vox  de  celo,  dicens :  bodie 
infusum  est  venenum  ecc/osie  dei.  bee  ille.  Itm  Odo  in  odo. 
sermone,  Estote  misoricordes:  Stercora  putredmis  sunt  diuicie, 

^  ‘  Christum’  Origen. 


400 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Authorities. 


Versus. 

[Phil.  iii.  8.] 

*[p.  55&  MS.] 


Odo. 

*[p.'56  MS.] 


quibws  volucres  celi,  i.  demones,  excecant  oculos  cupidorwm. 
Et  dicuwtwr  di^«cie  stercora  demonuwi,  q^mIn  omwes 

diw/cias  reputant  tanqw«m  stercora,  nee  querunt  nm  awiwam, 
ynde  dines  c^um  moritwr  quasi  in  tres  porciones  diuiditwr ; 
mundMs  rapit  diuicias,  vermes  cadauer,  et  demones  awimam. 
Et  quilibe^  contentws  sua  poremne  alterius  partem  non 
desiderat ;  ynde  versus : 

Sp^Ve’^us  est  sathane,  caro  vermis  mammona  muwdi ; 

Vnica  plus  duplici  pars  sua  cuique^  placet. 

Item  no?^  iantum  a  demonibws  sed  a  perfectis  diwmie  stercora 
reputantwr  ;  vn^?e  apostolus  :  Omwia  reputaui  tamqwam 
stercora  ut  ohristum.  lucrifacerem.  Pro  hijs  stercoribws 
causidici  clamant  in  foro  ;  clerici  quoque  cantant  in  choro ; 
medici  cum  egrotis  vigilant  '^'in  thalamo.  Pro  hijs  stercorib^^s 
frequenter  illicita  comm^Ytuntar  in  muwdo.  Sequitar:  pociws 
cum  thobia  gaudeamws,  qui,  curata  cecitate  quam  per  stercora 
contraxerat,  visum  recuperauit.  Sic  cum  diwmie  auferuntwr 
ooiilum  iusticie  recuperamws.  Cum  gladiws  furioso  aufertur, 
sanitate  restituta,  graems  refert  illi  qui  abstulit.  Similiter 
si  dolemws  pro  ablacione  temporalium,  quibws  excecamur, 
quibus  inter^icim^^r,  furiosi  sumws.  Et  reddita  nobis  dis- 
crecione,  saltern  in  alia  vita,  illi  qw«  nobis  stercora  ab  oculis 
nos^ris  extersit,  illi  qw?-'  gladium  abstulit  graems  referemas. 
Alibi  appellantur  venenum;  vnde  eodem  die  quo  a  Constantino 
dotata  est  ecc/esm,  in  aere  audita  est  vox  angelica,  dicens  ; 
hodie  infusum  est  venenum  in  ecc^esia ;  maior  quidem  effecta 
est  in  dignitate,  Bed  minor  religione.  Item  Odo  in  sermone 
Ecce  nos  reliqm'mas  omnm :  Abel  moritwr  i.  cura  pastoralis, 
luctws  spmYualis  interimitur,  set  ^'caym,  i.  possessio,  conser- 
uatwr ;  ymmo  pastor  animarwm  caym  agricola  efficitur.  ISTon 
ewim  in  ecc/esia  queritwr  si  sciat  bene  docere,  pro  pecca^is 
lugere,  set  si  sit  caym,  i.  agricola ;  si  sciat  terras  bene  colere. 
Nec  mirum  si  multos  interficit  possessio,  cum  sit  venenum  ; 

1  cvjlibet  MS. 


I 


Authorities,] 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


401 


'vnde  eodem  die  quo  dotata  est  eo^alesio.  a  Constantino  audita 
est  vox  in  aere :  hodie  infusum  est  venenu»^  in  ecc^ma ; 
maior  quidewi  dignitate,  set  minor  religione.  Si  queritwr  : 
vbi  est  ouis  tibi  commissa  ?  r^s^ondet :  l^vimquid  custos 
fratris  mei  sum  ?  quasi,  Que  cura  est  mi/^«  de  animabw^, 
dummodo  disponatwr  bene  de  temporalibws.  Tales  sicut  cairn 
sunt  maledicti  qui  educunt  ouem  abel,  et  now  reducunt,  ^et 
seducunt.  vnde  Ezechiel :  Pastores  eorww  seduxerunt  eos. 

It^w^  Gorbam  super  illo  Apoc.  xii° :  IMisit  serpens  ex  ore 
suo  post  mulierem  aquam  tanqwaw  flumen,  &c.  Per  aquam 
flu?wiwis  sign^eatwr  '^abundancia  temporalis,  que  fluit  cotidie  *[p,.565MS.] ' 
sicw^  aqua.  vnde  ^salmista :  diuicie  si  affluant,  nolite  cor 
apponere.  banc  aquaw  babuwdantissime  misit  draco  in 
ecc/esiam  de«,  do?wmo  permittente,  quwm  a  Constantino 
datum  est  imperium  occidentali  ecc/esie  ;  vnt/e  tuwc  audita 
est  vox  angelorwm  ^  iw  aere  dicencium :  bodie  infusum  est 
venenum  iw  ecc/esia  dei ;  sicut  legitwr  in  apocrifo  Siluestr^. 

Et  quia  iam  appropinquat  venenum  boc  ad  cor  ecc/esie,  ita  ut 
iam  sit  suffocacio  proxima,  clamat  ipsa  ecc^esia  cum  psa^m/sta: 

Saluum  me  fac,  deus,  o^oyiiam  intrauerunt  aque  usqwe  ad 
awimam  meam.  Et  deus  de  sua  bonitate  nuwc  primo  incipit  audire 
ecc/esiam  suam,  et  misit  adiutorem  suum,  scilicet  terram,  que 
absorbere  vult  to  turn  flumen;  vel  principem  terrenum,  qui  vult 
auferre  ab  eccZesia  omnia,  temporalia  sua,  lice^  intencm  now  eadem 
sit  cum  dommo,  qui  ^ro^ter  bonum  ecc/esie  m^^tit  ilium  ex 
m.isericord\a.  bee  ille.  Item  Jerowymws  iw  vitis  patrum  :  jerowymws. 
Ecc/esia  ex  quo  creuit  iw  possessionibws,  decreuit  in  virtutibws. 

Item  Jeronimws  ad  ne^pocianum  ep.  xxxiiii :  Aut  aurwm  ‘[p.  57  ms.] 
repudiemws  nos,  sc.  clerici,  cum  ceteris  supersticionibws 
iudeorwm,  aut  si  aurum  placeat,  placeant  et  iudei,  quos  cum 
auro  aut  probare  necesse  est  nobis  aut  dampnare.  Item 
Jerowymws  ad  nepocianum  :  Clericus  qui  ohristi  seruit  ecclesie 
primo  interpretetwr  vocab[u]lwm  suum,  et  nomiwis  diffinicione 
prolata,  nitatur  esse  qwod  diicituv.  Si  enim  cleros  grece  latine 


1  anglorum  MS, 


26 


402 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Authorities. 


*[p  576  MS.] 


[2  Tim.  ii.  4.] 


*[p.  58  MS.] 
Ixxxviij.  de  cap° 
Eps. 


sors  appellatwr,  propWea  clerici  dicuntwr  de  sorte  sunt 
dom^ni,  yel  (]uia  dommus  ipse  sors,  i.  pars,  clericorwwi  est.  Et 
(\uia  et  ipse  pars  diomim  est,  et  diomiriMm  pd^rtem  habet,  talem  se 
exbiber(?  debe^,  ut  ipse  possideat  dommwm  et  possideatwr  a 
dommo.  Qiui  enim  domtwum  possidet,  et  cum  propb^^a  dicit : 
pars  mea  dommus,  nicbil  extra  d6>»^^^^um  possideri?  potest ;  nam 
si  quippiam  aliud  baJuerit  'pretei  doTwmum,  pars  eius  non  erit 
dominus.  yerbi  gr^d^'a,  si  aurum,  si  argentum,  si  possessionem, 
si  yariam  suppellectilem  babuerit,  cum  istis  partibws  dominus 
pars  eius  fieri  now  dignatur.  Et  paulo  post :  habens  yictum 
etyestitum  bijs  contentus  ero,  ^et  nudus  nudam  crucem  sequar. 
Obsecro  te  itaqwi?  repetens,  iterum  iterumqwi?  monebo,  ne 
ofiicium  clericatws  genws  antique  milicie  puteo,  ne  lucrwm 
seculi  in  cbnsfi  queras  milicia,  ne  plus  bwJeas  (\uam  quando 
clericMs  esse  cepisti. 

Her(0  suen  autorites  in  latyn  of  boly  scripturs  and  doctouris 
a^ens  seculeris  office  of  pr^stis. 

Aulus  apostolus  dicit  ij  thi.  ij°  ad  excludendwm  prelates 
p  et  sac^rdotes  ab  omwi  seculari  offiem  isto  modo  :  l^emo 

militans  deo  implicat  se  negoeijs  secularibws,  ut  ei  placeat 
cui  se  probauit.  Iste  autem  textus  breuis  et  compendiosus 
nposto\i,  ex  fide  quam  importat,  excluderet  omwes  sac^rdotes  et 
pure  clericos  ab  omwi  offiem  seculari.  Quum  seculars  officium 
est  destructiuum  cure  pastoralis.  Immo  ex  canone  apos^olorwm 
dicitur :  ^  'E^iscopus  aut  sac^rdos  aut  diaconws  nequaquam 
’  seculares  curas  assumant.  Sin  Q,utem  assumpserint  deiciantwr; 
quia,  ut  dicit  gre^orius  ibf^^^m.  Inutile  et  yalde  laboriosum 
est  bommem  li^^^ratum  raciocinacionum  causas  assumere,  et  in 
eis  que  now  expedit  se  obligare.  Item,  ibi(^6m  dicit  beatus 
cipre’anws,  cap°  neque :  In  dispensacione  ecc^^sie  banc  regulam  , 
obseruandam  nouerit  unusquisqw^,  ut  nulli  qw^?ntumlibe^ 
exercitate  p^rsone  duo  simul  officia  committat.  Immo  nomiwe 
sac^rdotis  careat  qui  d^i  ministros  a  suis  eyocet  officiis. 
Et  idem  Cipnanus  dicit  qiiod  miwistri  ecc/me  debent  solum 


Authorities.]  THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY.  403 

altari  et  sacrificiis  deseruire,  et  pr^cibus,  study's  et  oracionibus 
yacare.  Et  si  quis  eos  a  spir^Vuali  officio  ad  seculars  duxeret, 
non  ofFere^wr  pro  eo  oblacio,  neo  sacrfficium  pro  sepultura 
eius  celebrabitwr ;  non  eniw  anto  altare  doi  merentur  nomirari 
in  sac/^rdotum  proee  (]ui  sacerdotes  et  miwistros  eoolesie  ab 
altari  volunt  avocaro.  Immo  dicit  beatw5  A.ngustinus  : 
ffornicari  Inommihus  nnnouam  licet,  ne^ociari  autom  ’^oliauihus  *[p.  586  ms.] 

.  .  .  .  .  Ixxxviij.  de  c°. 

lic^^,  aliis  non  \ioet.  Anteqwaw  enim  ecclesiasticws  quis  sit,  ffornicari. 

lioet  ei  negociari ;  facto  ecclesiastico  iam  non  \iQ,et.  Item 

ihidexn  scribitur  sic :  Tuicionem  testamentorwm  o^iscopus  non 

suscipiat.  e^iscopus  nullam  rei  familiaris  curam  ad  se  reuocet, 

^et  leccioni  et  oracioni  et  yorbo  prodicac«oms  to5«^wnimodo 

yacet.  Itm  beatus  petrus  in  epistola  ad  clementem  dicit  xi.  q.  i°.  c°. 

Sicut  en\m  impietatis  est  cr/men  tibi,  o  clemens,  neglectis  yerbi  sicut. 

doi  study's  sollicitudiwes  seculares  suscip^ro,  ita  ynicuiqwo 

laicorwm  poccoi^wm  est  nisi  inuicem  sibi  eoolesmm  in  hijs  que 

ad  commwwis  ysum  yite  portinent  oporam  &de\iter  dederint. 

Ideo  concludit  lex  canonica  apos^olorwm  statuta  sunt  que 

dicunt :  !N’emo  militans  doo  implicat  se  &c^  Proinde  aut 

clerici  sint  sine  accionibws  dommorwm  aut  actores  sine  officio 

clericorum.  Et  uniuorsi  dixerunt ;  hec  obsoruemus.  Itom 

ihidem  sic  scribitwr  hij  qui  in  ecc/osia  domeni  ad  ordi7^em 

promouentwr  clericorwm,  in  nullo  ^'ab  adnaiwistracione  diwma  *[p.  59  ms.] 

auocentwr,  noc  molestiis  et  negociis  secularib?.^s  alligentur  ut 

ab  altaribus  &  sacrificijs  recedant ;  set  die  ac  nocte  celestibws 

rebw<s  et  spir/^ualibus  seruiant  JXem  beatws  petrws  in  epistoldi 

ad  clementem  sic  scribit:  Te  quidem  oportet  irreprobensibilem  xi.  q.  1°.  c” 

_  Te  quidem. 

yiu^re,  et  summo  studio  niti  ut  omnes  yite  huiws  occupaciones 
abicias.  ITon  fide-iussor  existas  nec  aduocatws  licium  fias, 
ne  in  ulla  occupacione  prorsus  inueniaris  muwdialis  negocii 
occasione  porplexus.  IS’eque  enim  iudicem  neq^^o  cognitorem 
secularium  negociacionum  te  ordinary  yult  chns^ws,  ne  pre- 
focatus  pr^sentibw5  hominum  curis,  non  possis  y^rbo  d^i 
yacare.  Hec  yoro  opora  que  minws  tiSe  *congruero  dixiniws 
exbibeant  sibi  iwuicem  yacantes  laici,  et  te  nemo  occupet 
ab  hijs  study s  por  que  salus  datur  hom^’wibus  &c^  Iti^m 


404 


THE  CLERGY  MAY  NOT  HOLD  PROPERTY. 


[Authoeitiks. 


[Decreti  pars  la. 
Dist.  ikxxviii. 
cap.  4.] 

*[p.  596  MS.] 


%re^orius  Eomano  def^wsori :  p^rlatum  est,  inquit,  ad  nos 
reuerendissimuw  fratrem  nostrwm,  basiliu';7^  ep/sco^wm,  velut 
vnum  de  laicis  in  causis  secularibws  ^occupari,  et  pr^torijs 
inutilit^r  obseruire;  que  res  quid^m  et  ipswm  vilem  reddit, 
et  reuerentiam  sacerdotalew  adnicbilat.  statim  ut  experiencia 
tua  hoc  pr^ceptum  suscepmt,  ad  reuertendwm  eum  districta 
execution e  compellat,  Q,uaten^^5  te  illic  consistente  qt«hqw5 
diebus  sub  qualib^^  excusatione  immorari  non  liceat.  !Ne  si 
quolibet  modo  eum  ibidem  amplius  moram  habere  p^rmiseris, 
cum  ipso  apud  nos  grauiter  incipias  esse  culpabilis,  &c. 

Ista  ad  prisons  sufficiuwt  cum  diligent!  scripturarwm 
excercitatione  ad  excitandum  sacerdotes  ne  curis  secularibus 
se  subiciant ;  set  oraeioni,  studio  et  pr^dicaciowi  intendant, 
et  sic,  sp^V^YualibMS  iwimicis  deuictis,  soli  d^o  placere  studeant ; 
ut  cum  ipso  in  celestibus  regnare  T»aleant ;  pr^stante  domino 
nostro  ih^su  christo,  qui  cum  patr^  et  sp^V^Yu  sancto  yiv^'t  & 
regnat  dews.  Amen. 


405 


XXVII. 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


A  Latix  tract  under  this  title  has  been  printed  by  Dr.  Lechler.^  The 
two  are  substantially  the  same,  often  answering  to  each  other  chapter  for 
chapter.  Each,  however,  contains  chapters  which  are  not  in  the  other, 
while  in  details  of  treatment  and  in  language  they  are  independent.  In 
this  case,  as  in  his  defence  of  the  Conclusions  condemned  in  1377, 
Wyclif  has  published  his  argument  in  two  forms  intended  to  appeal  to 
different  classes  of  readers ;  and  we  cannot  doubt  that,  in  this  instance  as 
in  that,  both  forms  were  issued  simultaneously  or  nearly  so.  Dr.  Lechler 
in  his  preface  dates  the  Latin  tract  not  later  than  1378,  and  his  judgment 
is  supported  by  the  mention  (p.  457)  of  Avignon  as  the  residence  of  the 
Pope ;  since  Gregory  XI.,  the  last  of  the  Avignonese  Pontiffs  who  was 
recognized  in  England,  died  March  27,  1378.  This  English  version  of 
the  tract  is  much  more  vehement  against  the  friars  than  the  Latin ; 
although  even  that,  by  the  use  of  the  phrase  ‘castra  caymitica,’  shows 
that  Wyclif  had  already  taken  up  a  position  of  settled  hostility  to  the 
Mendicant  Orders. 

Copied  from  the  Ashburnham  MS.  MM. 

1  Johannis  de  Wiclif  Tractatus  de  Officio  Pastorali  e  codice  Vindobonensi  priraiim 
edidit  Gotthardus  Victor  Lechler.  Lipsise,  1863. 


406 


SUMMAEY. 

Chap.  I.  Two  offices  are  appointed  to  purge  the  Church;  of  knights  and  priests  p.  408 

II.  A  priest  can  avoid  sin  only  by  following  Christ  .  409 

III.  Priests  should  follow  St.  Paul’s  rule  of  contenting  themselves  with 

food  and  clothing  .  .  410 

Temptation  to  break  this  rule,  and  excuses  for  breaking  it .  411 

IV.  Kings  and  lords  do  not  come  under  this  rule  of  poverty  .  412 

Priests  may  distribute  alms,  hut  not  if  it  hinders  their  proper  work  413 
They  should  be  hospitable,  but  simply  and  to  poor  men  .  413 

V.  Priests  ought  to  live  only  on  alms  .  414 

VI.  Tithes  are  alms,  and  should  not  be  enforced  by  law  or  cursing  .  415 

If  the  flock  will  not  support  their  priest,  let  him  go  elsewhere  or 

work  for  his  living .  .  416 

VII.  Priests  are  bound  to  resist  unlawful  exactions  on  the  part  of  prelates  416 

VIII.  Parishioners  should  withdraw  tithes  from  bad  parsons  .  418 

To  judge  prelates  is  a  right  and  a  duty  .  418 

IX.  Tithes  should  also  be  withdrawn  when  churches  are  appropriated ....  419 

X.  Commons  should  withdraw  their  alms  from  places  wrongfully 

endowed  .  421 

XI.  It  is  not  enough  to  give  alms  as  the  Pope  or  Bishop  directs  .  422 

We  must  take  the  trouble  to  learn  G-od’s  will  .  423 

XII.  The  Pope’s  leave  cannot  excuse  from  residence  .  424 

It  is  not  enough  to  put  in  a  vicar  .  425 

XIII.  The  Pope’s  approval  of  appropriation  has  no  weight  .  426 

XIV.  The  need  of  colleges  cannot  excuse  appropriations .  427 

Degrees  often  useless .  428 

XV.  Priars  wish  to  stop  the  translation  of  the  Bible  .  429 

Their  objects  in  so  doing  .  430 

XVI.  Tithes  due  to  good  priests  .  430 

Part  of  them  may  he  given  to  the  poor  .  431 

XVII.  Priests  hound  to  poverty  . .  432 

Quarrels  arising  from  collection  of  tithes  .  433 

XVIII.  Priests  bound  to  preach  .  433 

Wickedness  of  priests  who  waste  money  in  show  or  amusement  .  434 

XIX.  Waste  leads  to  luxury  and  incontinence  .  435 

Evil  of  fining  for  sins .  435 

Curates  who  live  at  the  Eoman  Court  should  not  be  paid .  436 

XX.  Prelates  should  not  set  a  bad  example  by  litigation .  436 

XXI.  Qualifications  needed  in  a  pastor  .  438 

XXII.  Curates  enrich  their  families  out  of  tithes  .  439 

XXIII.  Preaching  a  priest’s  best  work  .  441 

XXIV.  How  men  may  sin  in  preaching  .  442 


407 


Chap.  XXV.  Faults  that  may  be  in  the  hearers  . p.  443 

Friars  get  good  preaching  stopped  .  .  444 

XXVI.  Causes  that  hinder  preaching .  445 

Friars  slander  parish  priests .  445 

XXVII.  Sects  disturb  the  Church  Militant  .  446 

All  the  new  orders  smack  of  sin  .  447 

XXVIII.  Christ’s  apostles  lived  otherwise  than  these  new  orders  .  448 

XXIX.  How  curates  should  he  appointed  .  450 

XXX.  Lords  should  purge  the  Church  .  451 

XXXI.  Evils  of  absentee  curates  .  453 

XXXII.  Avarice  of  priests  and  prelates  .  455 

Duty  of  maintaining  the  truth  .  457 

The  Pope  the  source  of  evil .  457 


408 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  I. 


*[p.  1  MS.] 


*De  offic^o  pastorali. 

\_Capitulum  primumi] 


2-  Of  priests,  to  nou  destried. 
preach  God’s  law. 


Their  fighting 
should  be 
patience  and 


oEsinpur^g  offisis  fat  fallen  to  purging  of  f  e  chirclie.  fe 

?of  Sights  and  \  fallif  to  knyjtis  &  kyngis  wif  of  lordis,  f^?t  shulde 

the^churcS^^^^  defende  wif  strengf  e  f  e  lawe  of  crist  in  his  boundis ;  &  in 

f is  s^ruyss  fei  holden  of  crist  al  f e  lordchip  f nt  fey  ban,  & 
herfore  fey  shulden  be  war  fat  fey  forfete  ajenus  fis  lord, 
fgr  pf  fei  ceessen  of  fis  seruyss  bi  lesse  tyme  or  more  bi  ony 
sloufe,  god  may  imt  forjete  fis  trespas  but  punysshe  it  in  his 
tyme;  &  bi  fis  cause  ben  lordchipis  chaungid,  nou  encreessid 

j:}e  tof^r  ofldss  to  purge  f  e  chirche  fallif  to 
pr^stis,  fat  crist  haf  ordeyned  to  telle  gen(9rally  his  lawe  to 
lordis  &  comyns  what  fey  shulden  do,  &  to  stonde  for  goddis 
lawe  to  bodily  def  pf  it  be  nede.  &  fus  fitting  of  fes  cristis 
suffering  knyjtis  stondif  in  paciense  &  passioun.  &  fus  it  is  to  saye 
Two  things  be-  shortly  heer(9  of  be  ofdss  of  goostly  herde.  per  ben  two  f  ingis 

long  to  the  office  J  ^  ^  ^  ^  . 

herd^^^^hoiy^^lfe  f^.llen  to  fe  olSiss  of  f is  hcrdc,  &  fes  ben  hoolynesse  of  lif 
and  sound  teach-  ^  hoolsumnesso  of  his  lore.  A  curat  shulde  pr^che  to  fe 

puple  treufis  of  goddis  lawe  fat  euer(3  ben  grene,  for  f anne  he 
■  ledif  his  sheep  wel  in  hool  pasture  fat  wole  nut  rote ;  &  for 
hoolynesse  of  lif  tech  if  rude  men  by  groos  ensaumple,  it  is 
nede-ful  to  fis  herde  &  to  his  floe  to  lyue  hoolily.  &  herfore 
seyen  hooly  doctours  fat  f e  lif  of  fis  herde  is  a  bok  to  lewyd 
men,  &  a  marke  fat  fei  shulden  sue  aftir.  &  herfore  sif en 

*  crist  is  fe  beste  herde  fat  may  not  fayle  in  fis  oflQss,  ^o 

•  cristenman  shulde  sue  his  prelate  but  in  as  myche  as  he  suef 
&  fus  an  herde  shulde  passe  in  virtues  his  floe  as  f e 

herde  passif  his  sheep,  for  he  shulde  be  so  sad  in  virtues  &  in 
suyng^  of  fe  firste  herde  fat  nef<9r  for  coueytise  ^  fauour^  ne 
drede  of  def  he  shulde  not  fayle ;  for  fis  herdis  oflfiss  is  f e 
hierste  fat  criste  jyuef  to  ony  man.  &  fus  fey  moten  lerne 
fe  craft  of  loue,  to  loue  crist  bifor^  alle  ofi^re,  &  f  anne  a  man 


Qualities  needed  crist. 
for  the  pastoral 
office, 


which  is  the 
highest  that 
Christ  has  or¬ 
dained. 


Chap.  II.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


409 


louef  pus  crist  whawne  he  kepif  wel  his  hitidiwgis ;  &  ellis  he 

is  npt  wor];y  to  haue  siche  a  maystir,  as  j^e  gospel  seij?.  &  Matt.  x.  [37.] 

pus  j^is  herde  mut  nedis  knowe  bileue,  hope  &  charite.  Por 

jif  he  fayle  in  ony  of  J^ese  he  techi]?  not  wel  his  floe,  ^  ne  *[p-  ms.] 

putti]?  his  lif  for  his  sheep  ajenws  pe  wolf  wha7^ne  mystor  is. 

\_Oapitulum']  2“' 

s  i]7en  a  prost  shulde  be  a  mene  bitwixe  god  &  pe  puple 

&  teche  pe  puple  j^e  wille  of  god,  it  is  knowen  ping  bi  other  men. 
skile  pat  wha77ne  he  erri]?  in  j7is  offiss  he  si7^ne]7  more 
j^an  opere  men ;  &  ]7us  sywnede  scarioth  more  ]?an  oj^ero 
comyn  mew.  it  is  knowuw  bi  bileue  pat  a  maw  shulde  not 
sywne  for  to  wywne  al  j^is  world,  wero  it  neuore  so  lijt  a  sywne ; 
for  ellis  j^is  maw  sywnede  wel,  &  sywnede  wot  iw  sywnynge  ]7ws. 

&  ]?us  a  maw  shulde  not  sywne  al  pf  god  bade  hym  sywne,  but  “P 
god  may  not  bidde  maw  sywne,  as  god  hym  silf  may  not  ^^^o'uid^bil 
sywne.  &  sij^ew  it  mut  nedis  be  sywne  to  fayle  fro  suyngo  of  it™  s^\o’ fail  in 
crist,  man  shulde  not  fayle  iw  j^is  suyt  for  god  ne  for  ony  following  Chnst. 

creature.  &  it  is  knowuw  bi  opyn  skile  pat  it  mut  nedis  be 

sywne  to  fayle  iw  suyng(9  of  crist  for  many  resouws  per  ben 

herof.  for  suywge  of  crist  in  virtues  is  so  good  pat  it  may  not 

be  yuel ;  and  it  is  so  li^t  a  suyt  pat  no  maw  is  excusid^  bi 

nouw  power;  &  crist  chees  siche  a  lif  to  teche  mew  to  sue 

hym,  &  no  man  may  come  to  heuene  but  pf  he  sue  crist  on 

sum  mdmer.  &  jjus  al  sywne  of  man-kynde  stondi]?  iw  defaute 

of  suyt  of  crist;  &  pus  si]?  ech  cristewmaw  haj?  power  of  god  Every  man^h^ 

to  sue  crist,  he  dissusi]?  to  myche  his  power  pat  vsij?  it  not  to  Christ. 

sue  ]?is  lord.  &  heer^  mew  shuldew  be  war^  wi]?  pe  fend  pat 

pej  be  not  blyndid  bi  hym  to  seye  who  may  be  euene  wij? 

crist,  &  J?us  to  allegge  crist  is  but  foly.  pis  is  pe  lewiderste 

fendis  skile  pat  euer^  cam  out  of  his  leesiwgis ;  for  mew  wolew  Men  must  not  try 

not  be  euene  wij?  crist  ne  go  bifore  hym  as  petrg  wolde,  but  c^hiist  or*^go^be^ 

sue  crist  neer  or  ferreri?,  &  ellis  pey  motew  go  amys.  &  ]?is 

may  ech  maw  do  oper  more  nyj  or  ferrer^.  &  ]?us  summe  gon 

bifore  crist  &  suTwme  confrarien  hym  in  per  weye.  pes  mew 


410 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  II. 


Men  go  before 
Christ  who  claim 
an  ungrounded 
power,  as  in  ab¬ 
solution. 


Those  men  go 
contraryto  Christ 
that  do  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  his  bid¬ 
ding. 

•[p.  2  MS.] 


[1  Tim.  vi.  8.] 

Priests  should  be 
content  to  have 
food  andraiment. 


*  This  rule  is 
strictly  binding. 


Each  must  follow 
Christ,  but  none 
can  come  up  to 
him. 


gon  bifore  cnst  }at  feynen  hem  an  hid  power  for  pride  or  for 
couetyise,  alpf  fis  power  be  not  gromdid  in  crist,  &  fus  don 
pri^latis  nou-a-dayes  in  asoyliwg  &  priuylegies.  &  oj^ere  men 
gon  bifore  crist  trowen  J>at  \ey  hen  mouyd  bi  pite  to  stir^ 
a  maw  to  do  a  dede,  &  ^it  it  is  ajenws  goddis  wille ;  &  ]7U8  it 
semy]?  jjat  petr^  was  mouyd  to  lette  crist  to  die  for  mew, 
&  herfore  was  petre  clepid  satanas  &  beduw  go  bihynde  crist ; 
for  no  drede  petr^  hadde  be  dawpnyd  jif  he  hadde  not  sorowid 
for  lis  sywne.  pes  mew  reu^rsen  crist  bi  his  godhed  &  his 
manhed  \at  han  power  of  cristis  godhed  to  do  a  J»iwg  vpon 
resouw,  &  ^it  j^ey  lettew  to  do  it,  doywge  ^']?e  contrwrye  her-of. 
&  sij^ew  god  is  j^e  firste  resouw  many  mew  iw  omissiouw  sywne 
a^enws  crist,  &  j^ey  motew  nedis  contrme  to  hy?w.  &  ]7us  mew 
of  ]7es  newe  ordris  reu^rsew  crist  as  satanas,  for  j^eyleeuew  \at 
crist  biddi]?  &  don  newe  biddiwgis  vndir  his  power. 


Qapitulum  S'”* 

o '  f  lis  golduw  bileue  shuldew  pr^stis  take  ]?is  reule  of  crist 
'pat  poul  ^yue]?  to  tymothe,  &  iw  hym  to  alle  cristew 
pr^stis :  “  hauywge  fode  &  opere  ]>yngis  bi  whiche  we  ben 
skilefuly  keuerid,  be  we  payed  wif  fes  two,”  &  do  we  werk  pat 
prestis  shuldew  do.  for  ech  prest  shulde  sue  crist  bi  pe  power 
pat  crist  hap  jouyn  hym ;  but  ech  prest  may  lijtly  fus  sue 
crist  jif  he  lette  not  hym  silf,  &  pus  sywne  excusi]?  hym  not 
pat  he  sywne  not  iw  ]?is  nouw  suyt.  &  j^us  crist  lyuede  a 
comyn  lif  pat  ech  cristewmaw  may  sue,  &  noon  of  hem  may 
be  euene  wi]?  crist,  for  nedis  cristis  godhed  mut  be  bifore. 
&  lus  ech  cristewmaw  may  rewne  faste  &  he  shal  ay  fynde 
crist  bifore  hym ;  be  he  pore,  be  he  riche,  be  he  feble,  be  he 
witty,  he  may  not  fayle  iw  his  good  wille  pat  ne  he  shal  sue 
crist  in  pat.  &  Jus  shal  ech  cristewmaw  do,  be  he  herde,  be 
he  sheep ;  but  pf  he  take  to  be  herde  he  shulde  passe  iw  witty 
suywg ;  &  Jis  reule  pat  poul  jyueth  mouyde  apostlis  & 
opere  pr^stis,  til  pat  pe  chirche  of  rome  was  dowid,  to  sue 


Chap.  TIL] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


411 


crist  in  j^e  gospels  poui^rt,  &  what  pat  a  pr^st  ha]?  more 
he  hap  his  meede  heer(9  but  not  in  heuene.  &  ]»us  poul 
vndirstoT^dij?  hi  fode,  mete  &  drynk  pat  ben  couenable  to  do 
hetere  ]?e  S(3ruyss  of  god;  &  not  lustly  deyntees  of  pri^stis, 
neper  to  make  per  body  wantouw,  ne  gete  hem  worchip  in 
ouer-greet  meyne.  two  man^r  of  hiliwg  bew  nedeful  to 
pr^stis  pat  shulde?^  do  ]?is  olfiss ;  hiliwg  of  resonable  clo]?is, 
&  eke  hili?zg  of  skileful  housis.  but  be  war  heer^  J?at  sywne 
of  curatis  broujt  in  bi  custom  in  ]?es  two  be  not  cause  of  pj 
sy?^ne  to  spende  to  myche  in  oper  of  hem.  &  si]?e?^  we 
shulde^>^  be  pilgryms  heer^  &  rowe  wisely  in  ]?is  boot  to 
heuene,  ^if  we  passen  ]?is  fode  &  hiling  we  chargen  vs  silf  wi]?- 
outen  fruyt.  &  pus  pr(?stis  shulden  be  war  pat  coueytise 
ou^r  ]?is  reule  of  crist  lette  not  pr<3stis  to  holde  poulis  reule, 
for  panne  ]?ey  synne  in  auerise.  &  ]?us  pr^stis  may  bi  ]?re 
enemyes  be  temptid  to  broke  ]?is  apostlis  reule  ;  bi  per  fleys, 
&  bi  pe  world,  &  bi  pride  of  pe  feud,  pat  pr^st  pat  fedij? 
^hym  silf  to  lustfuly  to  plese  his  fleys  mut  passe  resoun  in 
his  dispensis ;  &  pat  bringij?  in  robbing  of  curatis.  &  pat 
pr^st  synne]?  bi  pe  world  pat  passi]>  ]?is  reule  in  to  greet 
meyne  or  in  to  costly  dispensis,  &  sei]?  I’e  world  nedi]?  herto. 
he  synne]?  bi  tempting  of  pe  fend,  pat  bi  pride  or  worldly 
worchip  coueyti]?  more  of  siche  godis  ^an  resoun  axip  to  his 
offiss.  &  ]?us  onest  pouort  is  best,  moost  suro,  &  moost  lijt  to 
prestis  heero ;  &  bi  ]?is  cause  c#"ist  helde  ]’is  meene  bitwixe 
begging  &  worldly  richees.  &  heero  ben  ]»re  excusaciouns  pat 
ben  seyd  to  excuse  pmtis  synne.  summe  seyen  pat  for  worldly 
worchip  ]?ey  moten  passe  ]7is  reule  of  poul ;  &  pus  ]7ei  desiren 
more  worldly  worchip  pan  worchip  of  heuene  in  staat  of  blis  bi 
pe  holding  of  goddis  reule.  but  whero  is  more  foly  of  man  ? 
pe  secound  excusacioun  of  synne  sei]?  pat  prostis  moten  do 
bodily  almes,  &  algatis  helpe  folc  of  per  kynd.  but  ]?is  telli]’ 
an  opyn  blasfemye,  pat  cHst  was  vnwiss  in  ]?is,  si]?  he  vside 
not  ]?is  in  word  ne  dede,  for  goostly  almes  is  myche  betore  pan 
deling  of  ]?is  worldly  drit.  pe  ]?ridde  excusacioun  of  prostis 
is  pat  pej  moten  nedis  gedero  godis  for  sekenesse  &  eelde 


‘  Food  ’  does  not 
include  dainties. 


Raimentincludes 
the  shelter  of  a 
house. 


We  should  be 
pilgrims  here, 
and  row  in  this 
boat  to  heaven. 


Three  tempta¬ 
tions  to  break  the 
Apostle’s  rule : 


*[p.  2h  MS.] 
the  flesh,  by  feed¬ 
ing  too  lustfully ; 

the  world,  by 
living  with  too 
much  pomp ; 

the  devil,  by  pride 
moving  to  cove¬ 
tousness. 


Three  excuses : 

1.  Winning  of 
worldly  honour. 


2.  Need  of  money 
for  almsgiving. 


3.  Provision  for 
sickness  or  time 
of  need. 


412 


BE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  III. 


&  o])ere  caassis  to  helpe  hew  \n  tyme  of  nede.  pis  is  a^enws 
le  lore  of  crist,  to  triste  in  help  of  worldly  muc,  &  leeue  to 
triste  in  god  almyjti  for  kepiwg  of  his  comauwdemewtis. 


Antichrist  argues 
that  by  this 
reason  kings  and 
lords  should  give 
up  their  wealth. 


God  has  ordained 
diverse  members 
of  Holy  Church, 
and  made  things 
for  their  use. 


Riches  not  need¬ 
ful  to  priest’s 
office. 

*[p.  3  MS.] 


Worldly  power 
and  riches  require 
work  unsuited  to 
priests. 


God  gave  them 
that  lords  might 
serve  him  in  de¬ 
fence  of  his  law. 


Gapitulum  4'”* 

b  ut  heer^  an^^’cnst  argue]?  a^enws  ]?is  lawe  of  god  \at  hi 
]?is  same  skile  lordis  \at  lyuew  worldlily  shulde?^  holde 
hem  payed  of  \er  fode  &  per  hiliwg,  but  wher*?  wer^ 
panne  per  lordchip  &  per  tresour  to  helpe  reumes  ? 

many  siche  ape  resouws  han  mew  herd  a^en us  crist,  as  pf  an 
ape  wolde  argue  ]?us :  “a  mannus  eye  is  in  his  hed  of  sutil 
fode  &  vnhilid,  bi  pe  same  skile  shulde  his  foot.”  pis  fend 
mut  lerne  arguywg,  &  wite  to  what  ende  god  hap  ordeyned 
dyu(9rse  lemes  of  hooly  chirche,  &  perafiiv  shapuw  hew  godis. 
pr(?stis  shuldew  be  in  pe  hierste  staat,  &  sue  crist  in  sur^ 
pouert.  kyngis  &  lordis  shuldew  be  byne]?e  &  shewe  pe 
godhed  of  crist;  &  so  hem  falli]?  to  per  offyss  to  haue  lordchip 
&  worldly  richees,  &  bi  ]?is  shuldew  ]?ey  shewe  cristis  power 
in  his  godhed.  &  cHstis  prestis  shuldew  be  pore  &  paciewt  bi 
cristis  manhed.  But  hou  bew  worldly  godis  nedeful  to  kepe 
siche  offiss  of  ^'pr^stis  ?  clerkis  shulden  shame  of  siche  resouws, 
&  algat^s  hou  ]?ey  passen  crist  in  takiwg  of  worldly  lordchipis 
&  hauywg  of  er]?ely  tresour,  pat  shuldew  be  prop^^r  to  worldly 
mew.  crist  wolde  not  iw  his  persone  ne  iw  his  apostlis  haue 
siche  richessis,  but  kepte  lordchipis  &  worldly  godis  to  kyngis 
&  lordis  of  ]?is  world;  &  c^rtis  ]?ese  axew  bodily  trauel  & 
my^ti  defense  of  goddis  lawe  pat  shuldew  not  acorde  to  pr(0stis ; 
wherfore  shuldew  ]?ei  haue  ]?es  godis?  &  so  worldly  lordis 
shuldew  knowe  wherfore  god  ^af  hew  ]?es  godis,  &  s^rue  god 
bi  ]?es  godis  iw  my^ti  defendiwg  of  his  lawe ;  for  wite  pej  wel 
pat  for  ]7is  defaute  may  ]?ey  be  blamed  of  ]7is  cheef  lord, 
prestis  shuldew  not  lette  ]?is  ordenauwse,  but  helpe  pat  it  wer^ 
kept  of  pe  chirche ;  for  so  dide  crist  iw  word  &  dede,  why 
shuldew  not  his  pr^stis  do  so  ?  auerous  gederiwg  of  tresour  is 
to  blame  iw  ech  staat. 


Chap.  IV.] 


DE  OEFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


413 


^it  argue]?  auif/crist  ajenws  ]?is  lawe  ]?at  poul  ha]?  teld ; 

apostlis  as  ]?ei  were?^  taujt  of  god  cheside?^  to  hem  seuene  The  apostles  ap- 
,,  n  1  I  1  yoiTTTiT  -iTTi  pointed  deacons 

dekenes  to  s^rue  lolc  at  per  mete  &  to  do  bodily  almes.  Why  to  distribute 

alms. 

shuldew  not  pr<3stis  do  so,  si]7e?^  ]?ei  ku^mew  wiselier^  do  JjIs  ?  Acts  [vi.] 

but  heer^  me?^  seyen  as  bifore  pat  ]?is  smacchi]?  an  ape  skile. 

for  we  grauwte?^  to  ]?es  spekeris  pat  bo]?e  lowers  pmtis  & 

dekenes  may  s^rue  trewe  me?^  &  pore  in  departing  of  mete  to 

hem ;  but  ]?ey  shulew  not  bi  ]?is  offiss  leeue  ay  to  preche 

cristis  gospel.  &  so  men  shulde?^  take  heer^  good  hede  hou  The  goods  were 

apostlis  gederide  not  ]?es  godis,  but  seculeris  puttidew  hem  at  apostles’  feet. 

per  feet;  &  ^it  pei  lefte?^  not  to  preche  for  departing  of  ]?es 

godis.  &  ]?us  a  clerk  or  spenser  of  a  curat  may  parte  ]?es  a  curate  may  em¬ 
ploy  his*  spenser’ 

godis  m  ]?e  name  of  hym.  what  lewid  skile  shulde  moue  of  to  distribute 

]?is  pat  pr^stis  shulde?^  be  seculer  lordis,  or  haue  worldly  godis 

in  pr<?pr^,  si]?e?^ '  apostlis  keptef*^  hem  fro  ]?es  two.  &  heerd 

men  answere?^  to  pe  ]?ridde  skile  pat  an^mrist  maki]?  heer^ ; 

poul  techi]?  hou.  pat  bishops  shulde?^  ordeyne  wel  for  per  hous  To  the  argument 

&  herbore  men  wi]?-cute  grucchiwg,  but  herto  pei  moten  haue  should  he^g^ven 

wherof  ou^r  per  fade  &  per  hiliwg.  We  grauwtew  wel  pat  ^ 

siche  bishops  as  hen  keperis  of  parischis  shulde?^  wel  ordeyne 

for  her  housis  bo]?d  in  pr^stis  &  oper  meyne,  so  pat  pey 

haddew  not  to  manye  ne  to  ydil  ne  to  synful.  &  si]?e?^  pey 

shuldew  haue  ynow  bole  of  fode  &  of  hilmg,  ley  shuldew  not  we  say  that  they 

•'  ■*  _  should  have 

euer(?  be  so  nedy  pat  ne  ]?ey  my^tew  helpe  pore  pilgryms.  but  enough  to  help 
heer^  ]?ei  haddew  need  to  be  war  of  herbormg^  ^'of  stronge  *[p.  as  ms.] 
beggeris  &  of  myiti  mew  of  le'  world  to  haue  heer(?  lank  of  but  not  to  enter- 

^  tain  merely  for 

worldly  manhed.  pey  shuldew  kepe  pore  pilgryms  for  tyme  worldly  credit. 
pat  ]?ei  haddew  wher-of,  &  fede  hem  bi  apostlis  fode  &  not  bi 
deyntees  for  worldly  worchip.  &  lis  shulde  teche  siche 
pi^rsones  to  take  more  hede  to  per  pary^shis  to  fede  her  soulis 
goostly,  al  ]if  pey  shulden  do  ]?is  sumtyme.  &  lis  were 
litil  charite  iw  p^rsou?2s  to  spar^  hem  silf  for  a  nyjt  for  to 
helpe  l^r  euene  cnstew,  whawne  ley  sawew  pat  lei  haddew 
nede ;  &  algatis  to  take  siche  gestis  pat  heldew  hem  payed 
wil  siche  godis,  &  werew  of  le  noumbr^  of  hem  lat  poul 
biddil  to  holde  hew^  payed. 


414 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  V. 


Capitulum 


Pastors  should  q 
live  on  the  alms 
of  their  flock. 


f  ]7is  may  mew  se  ouer  ]>at  alle  herdis  of  crist  shiildew  lyue 
of  fe  almes  of  sheep  \at  Jey  techen.  for  ^if  fey  han  rewtis 
bifore  or  worldly  richees,  fei  shuldew  leeue  hem  bifore 


or  lyue  on  hew  bi-syde  \er  sheep.  &  \us  apostils  leftew  \er 


godis  whawne  fey  werew  chosuw  to  cristis  disciplis.  for  ech 
p^rsouw  shulde  hi  charite  sue  crist  as  lichy  as  he  my^te,  but 
Christ  lived  on  crlst  lyuede  of  almes  of  fe  puple  fat  he  taujte  ;  why  shulde 
Lukeviii.  [3.]  a  pr^lat  shame  to  lyue  fus  on  siche  almes  ?  pe  gospel  of  Ink 


seif  hou  marye  maudelen  &  cusees  wif  &  many  of  ere  mynys- 
tridew  to  crist  of  fe  godis  fat  werew  herne  ;  &  ]>us  as  crist 
Why  should  a  was  nedy  for  mew,  so  he  wolde  take  of  f  er  almes ;  hou  shulde 

prelate  shame  to  oait 

do  likewise?  a  prmt  shame  to  take  fus  godis  of  pore  mew  Also  ech 


Toiiveonaimsis  prelat  shulde  lyue  moost  parfit  lif  &  moost  sikire,  but  it  is 

the  most  perfect 

life;  more  parfit  &  sikire  to  lyue  on  siche  almes  faw  hi  ony  ofer 


maner,  &iferfore  prelatis  shuldew  mekely  holde  hew  payed  of 
fis  title,  ^if  fei  hadden  bi  an^^cristis  lawe  weye  to  plete  for 
it  avoids  strife  fcs  godis,  fey  woMew  stryue  &  curse  for  hew  &  wrongly 
cursing.  (Jisturble  f^r  sugetis,  &  fws  to  haue  bi  tit.e  of  almes  as  crist 


hadde  is  more  worchipful,  for  lawe  of  fe  lord  is  bet^re,  &  fus 

pr^stis  ben  more  lik  to  crist.  &  fus  pr^lstis  shulden  bi  title 

In  teaching  their  of  almes  ^yue  lore  &  lediwg  to  far  sugetis;  &  sifew  fis  ^yuywg 

more  than  they  is  myche  betare  faw  bodily  ^yuywg  fat  fe  puple  ^yuef,  it  is 
receive.  i  ^  i  i  • 

more  worchipful  to  pralatis  to  ^yue  fus  goostly  almes  fan  to 
take  bodily  almes,  fat  is  so  litil  &  so  myche  dette,  &  herfore 
Acts  XX.  [35.]  poul  sof ely  fat  it  is  more  blessid  aowdic«ouw  for  to  ^yue 

It  makes  the  betera  fiwg  faw  to  take  fiwg  lesse  worf.  &  fus  lif  title  of 

flock  contribute  _  ^  ^  ^ 

of  free  will,  almcs  rewne  bi-twixe  fis  herde  &  his  sheep,  it  is  more  willeful 


to  fes  sheep  &  so  more  meedeful  to  hew,  &  herfore  wolde 

*fp  ^4  mT]"' poul  take  willefuly  fe  ^ifte  fat  philemon  shulde  "^'jyue  hym. 

and  is  a  spur  for  &  on  f  e  tof  ar  svde  anewtis  f  e  herde  it  turuef  hym  to  more 

good  to  the  pre-  ^  ^  .  .  *  / 

lates.  mekenesse,  &  stirif  hyw  by  skyle  &  shame  to  ^yue  a^en  betare 

men  dS^^onfy  In  pftc.  Also  god  is  SO  skileful  fat  he  wole  not  fat  mew 

tilings  CB>n  f  ii_*i**  1  11*1  D 

be  valued.  chatier^?  Dut  \n  pingis  wnoos  valu  pei  kno^en;  but  lore  & 


Chap.  YI.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


415 


preyour  of  pr^stis  may  not  be  taxid  bi  mawnw5  wit,  &  J^^rfore  player  have  no 

god  wolde  not  \at  it  wer(?  seld  bi  dymes  ne  offeriwgis.  & 

l^rfore  sei|>  crist  in  matbeus  gospel  to  bis  disciplis  tecbew  Matt.  x.  [8.] 

Je  puple:  “  jee  tokew  frely  ^onr^  wit  of  god,  &  jyue  ^ee  it 

frely  to  fe  puple.”  &  }is  sentewse  sbulde^  pr(9stis  take  as  a 

reule  of  bileue,  for  mycbe  wit  &  mycbe  strengjje  bew  in  goddis 

reules  fat  semew  rude. 


Qapitulum  6”*' 


0 


f  fis  it  semyf  to  many  mew  fat  nef^r  persouw  ne  pwf^lat 
sbulde  wriwge  out  f  e  godis  of  bis  sugetis  bi  cursis  ne 
worldly  pie.  for  fey  ben  pure  almes  as  we  supposen,  on 
wbicb  almes  sbulde  rewne  no  pie ;  for  f  ei  sbuldew  be  willeful  & 
puyn  wif-oute  resouw  of  mawnws  dette.  Also  crist  &  bis 
apostlis  nef (?r  cursidew  ne  pletidew  for  f  ^r  dette,  &  fey  sbuldew 
be  ensaumple  to  vs  ;  wby  sbuldew  we  curse  or  plete  for  bem  ? 
&  iw  tokene  ber^-of  god  telde  iw  bis  newe  lawe  litil  or  nou^t 
of  ^yuywg  of  dymes.  &  it  semyf  to  trewe  mew  fat  god  wolde 
fat  dymes  werew  partid  bi-twixe  pr^stis  &  ofi^re  pore  mew 
fat  werew  feble,  lame  or  blynd.  &  tberfore  tellif  luk  iw  bis 
gospel  bou  crist  cam  foruj  samary  wif  bis  disciplis,  &  fey 
woldew  nef  (3r  ^yue  fode  ne  berbore  for  bym  &  bise ;  &  ioon  & 
iames  axidew  of  crist  fat  fier  sbulde  come  douw  fro  beuene  & 
destrie  bem,  as  ely  dide ;  but  'crist  answeride  to  f  es  apostlis 
&  taujte  fat  be  wolde  not  curse  f W5 :  “jee  witew  not,”  seif 
crist,  wboos  spiritis  ^ee  ben,  &  bou  y  loue  mekenesse  & 
paciense ;  for  mawnws  sone  cam  not  iw-to  f is  world  to  lese 
mewnws  soulis  but  to  saue  bem.”  &  iurisdicciouw  of  crist  was 
larger^  &  freer^  fan  fe  popis.  sifew  crist  wolde  not  curse  for 
f  es  wrongis,  &  f  ei  werew  more  f  aw  oure  wrongis,  bi  wbat  lawe 
sbuldew  we  baue  title  to  curse  fus  for  our*?  lesse  wrongis? 
no  drede  crist  badde  more  rijt  to  fes  dymes  f aw  ony  cristew- 
maw  may  baue  to  dymes  or  to  oflferiwgis  or  to  ony  good  by 
mawnw5  lawe  ;  &  sifew  crist  tau^te  iw  fis  dede  not  to  plete  for 


Priests  should 
not  curse  or  go  to 
law  for  money. 


Christ  and  his 
apostles  never 
did  this. 


Little  or  nothing 
said  of  tithes  in 
New  Testament. 


Luke  ix. 
Christ  and  the 

Samaritans. 


Our  wrongs  less 
than  Christ’s. 


416 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  VI. 


*[p.  46  MS.] 


Tithes  were  due 
to  priests  in  the 
old  law,  but  they 
had  to  work  in 
return. 


We  should  not  go 
to  law  except  out 
of  charity. 


A  priest  to  move 
his  flock  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  him  hy 
patience  and  good 
life. 


his  dette,  why  shulde^  not  prestis  sue  crist  heer(3,  sijiew  cristis 
dedis  'bm  myrour  to  hew  ? 

&  pf  ]7ey  takew  of  jie  olde  lawe  \at  dymes  hew  due 
vn-to  pmtis,  myche  more  in  newe  lawe  whanne  pr^gstis 
hew  more  worjiy  hi  crist.  so]?  it  is  \at  dymes  were?^  due 
to  pr^stis  in  j^e  olde  lawe,  hut  were?«  holduw  to  do 
ajen  sleyng  of  beestis  &  hard  s^ruyss.  but  god  forbede  ]?at 
ourd  pr(glatis  oblische  hew  to  trauele  ]?us,  for  ]?awne  ]?ei 
ahide?^  a^enw5  bileue,  sleyng  of  crist  was  ]?a?^ne  figurid. 
Also  no  ma?^  shulde  plete  an  oji^r,  &  algatis  ]?e  curat 
his  sheep,  but  for  charite  to  \q  pleted  maw;  sijiew  poul 
sei]?  ]>at  alle  our(3  dedis  shuldew  be  don  iw  charite,  ^e  ]iat 
shulde  strecche  to  our^  enemyes.  &  pf  ]?ou  seyst  \at  charite 
moue]?  ]?ee  to  plete  jius  for  dymes,  forjyue  \om  he?w  as  crist 
dide;  for  ]?at  is  more  lijt  &  of  more  loue.  &  pf  a  maw  plete 
iw  goddis  cause  &  alegge  \at  ]?ou  hast  sywned  iw  doyng  of 
]?yn  herdis  olhss,  iw  jiiwgis  ]iat  ]70u  shuldist  jyue  ]?i  sheep ;  no 
drede  \om  maist  not  answeri?  heere  ne  iustefie  jiy  part  bi 
goddis  lawe.  &  ]?us  iw  ^e  newe  lawe  si]?ew  pr^stis  bi-guwnew 
to  plete  Jus,  Jei  ban  left  to  do  ]?^r  offiss,  as  ]7ei  leftew  iw 
olde  lawe;  &  so  iw-stode  of  siche  plees  ]?e  curat  shulde  moue 
his  sheep  bi  paciense  &  oj^^re  V(?rtues  &  trewe  trauel  iw  his 
offiss.  &  pf  ]?is  wole  not  moue  ]?e  puple  to  ^yue  hym  J-iwgis 
l^t  ben  nedeful,  turne  fis  pr^lat  to  o^i^r  puple;  for  so  dide 
crist,  &  god  faili]?  not ;  or  ellis  lyue  he  on  his  bodily  trauel  or 
oj^ere  mennus  almes  as  poul  dide. 


Qapitulum  7“‘ 


If  a  prelate  bid  a 
parson  to  collect 
money  wrong¬ 
fully,  the  parson 
must  refuse, 


or  he  assents  to 
wrong. 


0  f  ]?is  grouwd  may  mew  se  oMer,  \at  pf  an  hye  pr^lat  charge 
a  p(?rsouw  to  ^yue  hywi  godis  ji^t  is  not  grouwdid  bi  lawe  ot 
god  for  to  ^yue,  ]?ys  persouw  shulde  not  ^yue  ]?es  godis, 
ne]?(?r  for  cursiwg  ne  o\erQ  censuris.  for  a  maw  shulde  not  asente 
to  sywne  for  noj^iwg  as  it  is  seyd ;  &  no  drede  ]?is  p^rsouw 
assentide  to  ]?e  wrong  of  his  prelat  aboue,  whawne  he  jyuef 


Chap.  YII.] 


BE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


417 


pus  pore  mennus  godis  bi  ^ifte  pat  goddis  lawe  techij?  not.  for 
al  treuj^e  is  in  goddis  lawe,  &  dettis  feyned  wif-ontew  it  ben 
pure  robbery  of  pe  puple;  but  who  shulde  not  a^en-stonde  ]7is? 
&  it  is  all  oon  to  an  hye  pri^lat  to  curse  j^is  'persoun  for  ];is 
cause  &  to  seye :  “  robbe  ]?ou  pore  mew,  &  take  of  hem  so 
myche  good,  &  y  shal  mayntene  pi  robbery,  &  ellis  y  shal 
curse  j^ee  iw  ]7yn  hed  &  suspende  pee  &  pe  puple  pat  ]?ey  her^ 
not  goddis  s^ruyss.”  Who  wolde  not  fie  fro  siche  spuyliwg 
for  siche  feyned  censuris  of  pr(?latis  ?  but  heer^  hap  pe  fewd 
shapuw  a  sharp  cautel  to  streng)>ew  j^is  robbery,  pey  wolew 
bi  process  of  per  lawe  priue  a  maw  of  his  benefiss  &  putte 
iw  an-oper  fend  pat  wole  blely  robbe  pore  mew  &  pus  jyue 
]7is  robbery  to  j^is  prelat  of  an^^crist.  &  ]7is  astonye]?  many 
porsouws  to  stonde  for  ri^t  a^enws  j^e  fend,  but  heero  shuldew 
alle  j^re  ^'partis  of  pe  chirche  helpe  ech  oper  apnus  pe  deuel, 
&  wite  wel  first  pat  suche  cursiwg  or  censuris  ben  vnskileful ; 
&  so  mew  shuldew  quewche  hew  si]?  ]?ei  bew  a^enws  goddis  lawe. 
&  trewe  p^rsouws  wij?  per  pari^schis  shuldew  not  lette  for  siche 
manass  to  stonde  algatis  for  ]?is  treu]7e,  neper  for  dispensis 
ne  peyne ;  for  si]?en  porsouws  shuldew  haue  no  godis  to  ^yue 
per  prolatis  but  of  ]?er  sheep,  what  porsouw  shulde  for  al  ]?is 
world  make  ]?i8  robbiwg  of  pore  mew  ?  &  ^if  manye  woldew 

holde  togederi?  iw  ]?is  bileue  a^enws  pe  fend,  it  wer^  a  triacle 
a^enws  venym  pat  emp(?rour  prelatis  sowew  iw  pe  folc.  for  no 
drede  neper  persouns  ne  puple  shuldew  assente  herto  for  ony 
man.  &  panne  bischops  &  archidekenes  wij?  per  officials  & 
denes  shuldew  not  amersy  pore  mew ;  for  ]?is  is  worse  pan 
comyn  robberye,  si]?ew  ipocrisie  is  feyned  ouor  wrong-takiwg 
of  ]?es  godis.  a  prost  shulde  rapere  leeue  ]?is  offiss  &  sufiero 
dej?  or  he  assentide  by  ony  of  sixe  manor  of  consentis  to  siche 
piliwg  of  pore  mew.  for  it  is  iw  many  caasis  as  myche  sywne 
to  rob  a  wedewe  or  a  pore  fadirles  child  of  a  peny  or  an 
halpeny  as  it  wero  to  robbe  a  riche  maw  of  an  hundrid  markis 
wor]?  godis.  &  no  drede  siche  cowarde  prostis  ben  cause  of  al 
siche  spuyliwg  ;  &  it  is  shewid  by  j^is  ]?efte  pat  fei  louew  more 
per  shepis  godis  j^an  pey  don  heel]?e  of  per  soule,  &  panne  pay 


A  prelate  might 
as  well  hid  him 
go  rob  at  once. 


Good  men  are 
deprived,  and  the 
benefices  given  to 
robbers. 


•[p.  5  MS.] 

All  three  parts 
of  the  Church 
should  join  to 
resist  this,  and 
disregard  curses 
and  censures. 


Archdeacons  fine 
poor  men. 


Six  ways  of  con¬ 
sent. 


27 


418 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  VII. 


Parishioners 
should  withdraw 
tithes  from  priests 
that  fail  in  their 
office. 

To  pay  them  is 
assenting  to  sin. 


2  John  [10]. 

We  are  not  to 
greet  an  evil  man, 
much  less  give 
him  alms. 


Analogy  from 
Canon  Law. 


*[p.  56  MS.] 

[1  Cor.  V.  11.] 

In  giving  goods 
to  had  priests  you 
help  them  to  do 
harm. 


The  devil  says 
people  may  not 
judge  their  pre¬ 
lates. 


faylew  of  gode  herdis,  &  ben  hirid  bynes  or  woluys,  &  ]>e 
puple  shnlde  crye  out  on  siche. 

Q,a]pitulum 

c  ristewmew  of  J^is  ground  J’enken  \ai  parijschens  sbulden 
drawe  fro  p^rsouns  ofFeringis  &  dymes  &  oj^^re  godis 
whanne  j^ey  faylen  opynly  in  \er  offiss,  for  siche  assent  is  to 
blame  ]iat  nurshi]?  pgrsonns  in  siche  synne.  but  what  meede 
wer^  it  to  parijsheus  to  jyue  her  almes  to  siche  a  pr<?lat  to  werr^ 
a^enns  crist  &  his  chirche  &  mayntene  ]7e  fendis  part 
crist  ?  sij’en  crist  ha]?  tau^t  cnstenmen  hou  ]?ey  shulden 
wisely  do  ]ier  almes  ;  not  a^enns  \er  oune  hed,  ne^ajenns  ]>er 
modir  hooly  chirche.  Also  bileue  in  ioons  epistle  tecbij?  ]iat 
men  shulden  not  grete  siche ;  but  it  is  more  to  ^yne  hem  almes 
]?an  to  grete  hem  bi  nakid  word  ;  myche  more  men  shulden 
not  grete  hem  wi]?  almes,  but  fle  fro  hem  as  fro  false  prophetis. 
Also  ]?e  popis  lawe  biddij?  men  to  not  her*?  massis  of  pr<?stis 
]iat  ben  comyn  lechours.  panne  pf  prestis  ben  in  more  synne 
\at  is  more  knowun  to  ]7e  puple,  ]?ey  shulden  not  take  ]?es 
pn^stis  s^ruyss ;  hou  shulden  ]?ey  herfore  ^yue  hem  almes  ? 
Also  poul  '^'biddij?  drawe  men  to  dele  not  wij?  siche  men  \at 
ben  contrarie  to  goddis  lawe,  but  sich  pr^stis  ben  contrarie 
to  god  &  to  his  puple  as  wolues  of  raueyn ;  hou  shulden  men 
]?anne  ^yue  hem  godis  to  ^eruerte  so  myche  puple  ?  for  what 
euer^  pei  don,  in  masse  or  mateyns  or  open  dedis  of  per  lif, 
pey  harmen  hem  silf  &  per  parip  &  oper  puple  ^  pat  is  aboute 
hem.  &  bi  pe,  same  skile  [they  are]  foolis  pat  ^yuen  per  godis 
as  almes  to  siche  pr(?lati8 ;  for  siche  pfte  is  not  almes  but  pfte 
of  belle  to  strengj^e  pe  fend.  &  pe  fend  shulde  shame  heer*? 
to  seye  pat  paripchens  shulden  not  iuge  of  pe  lif  of  per  prelat 
vfheper  pat  he  be  good  or  yuel ;  for  pey  shulden  iuge  to  sue 
hym  in  as  myche  as  he  sue]?  crist.  &  ]?us  si]?  crist  biddi]? 


^  MS.  pupple. 


Chap.  IX.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


419 


iuge  his  werkis,  why  shulde?^  not  me;^  iuge  &  fle  false  pr^latis  ? 
it  is  al  oon  to  seye  ]7is  feynywg  &  to  lette  men  to  fle  fro  fendis 
&  blesse  hem  fro  \er  wickid  werkis,  hut  teche  mew  to  assente 
to  hem.  lord,  sih  crist  biddib  men  \at  hey  shuldew  not  trowe  Christ  tells  us  not 

^  ^  to  believe  in  him 

to  h3'm  but  lif  he  dide  his  fadirs  werkis,  what  nriuylegie  hah  unless  he  does  his 
.  ,  J  r  J  o  /  father’s  works. 

ani^/crist  heer^  '^at  inew  shuldew  trowe  &  susteyne  hym  iw 

do^mg  of  jie  deuels  werkis  ?  Also  crist  techi]?  iw  ^e  gospel  v,  [i3.] 

]pat  pf  salt  vany^sche  awey  it  is  not  wor]?  aftir  but  to  be 

castuw  out  &  be  defoulid  of  mew;  &  j^is  salt  shulde  be  j^es  ^tl^aT'has  lostTls 

prtdatis.  lord,  wher  ]iis  castiwg  out  &  j^is  defouliwg  }at  crist 

speki)i  of  be  jyuywg  of  godis  to  siche  curatis,  &  mayntenywg 

of  hem  iw  ]iis  staat.  lord,  sijiew  mew  dorew  not  mayntene  an 

opyu  traytour  of  ]>e  kyng,  hou  dorew  j^ey  mayntene  a  more 


tray  tour  &  more  harmful  of  ih^su  crist  ?  pe  harme  J^at 


wolde  sue  of  J7is  lore  semy}>  to  stonde  iw  }»is  good,  l«t  pr^stis 
shuldew  shewe  hi  werkis  ^at  J^ey  werew  wor]?}"  to  be 
helpid  ;  but  J^is  lo're  is  tau^t  of  crist,  &  blessid  be  J^e  weye 


]}at  techiji  it.  lugew  vndiscretly  hey  don  hem  more  if  men  judprc 

.  .  .  .  wrongly,  they  do 

harm  han  pr^stis,  for  laste  prestis  iw  Ydrtuous  lif  &  drede  hey  more  harm  to 

^  themselves  than 

not  of  sustenauwse.  to  the  priest. 


Qapitulum  9”*- 


h  is  sentense  of  almes  shulde  strecche  to  plasis  hwt  han  Appropriations 

^  ^  ■'to  colleges. 

chirchis  approprid  ;  as  bew  muwkis  &  chaqouws  &  seculer 
collegies.  per  ben  pre  maner  of  collegies  pat  vsen  jjis  craft 
of  apprapriwg.  pe  flrste  ben  cathedral  chirchis  pat  han  pro- 
uendris  approprid  to  hem  ;  J^e  secouwde  ben  chapels  of  prinsis 
pat  han  chirchis  more  approprid ;  pe  Juidde  ben  collegies  of 
studies  pat  ysen  ]iis  same  craft ;  bi  J^es  may  mew  knowe  ojidre 
pat  han  appropriwg  of  chirchis.  Tor  alle  acordew  iw  j^is,  pat 
Jiey  han  almes  of  paripchens  &  "^^pt  dwellew  not  on  j^e  paries 
as  herdis  for  to  teche  hem ;  &  pey  blasfemew  in  god.  for  pey 
motew  nedis  seye  pat  god  ordeynede  j^is ;  &  si]?  no  cause  is  of 
]?is  almes,  pei  seyen  pat  god  shoop  ]?is  wif-oute  cause.  Also 


420 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  IX. 


They  say  that 
they  pray  for 
their  parishioners 
and  so  profit 
them. 

Their  prayer  is 
worth  little. 


i^hy  should  a 
oor  man  hare 
is  money  taken 
)  support  a 
Cain’s  castle  ’  ? 


These  colleges 
want  to  find 
another  way  to 
heaven  than 
Christ’s. 

Christ  hade  his 
shepherds  live 
among  theirsheep 
and  teach  them ; 


Antichrist  tells 
them  to  live  afar 
and  not  teach. 


‘[p.  6h  MS.] 


god  haf  ordeyned  heer^  in  erfe  almes  to  be  delid  as  he  delij? 
reyn  ;  but  he  delij?  reyn  as  it  is  nede,  hi  smalle  dropis  wher*? 
er]fe  is  drye ;  hou  shame]?  not  au^mrist  heer^  to  make  siche 
dichis  &  waste  drye  er]?e  ?  no  drede  he  is  an  yuel  god,  \at 
]?us  reudrsij?  goddis  ordeynau?^se.  &  ^if  siche  collegies  feynew 
\at  ]?ey  preyen  &  o\erQ  weyes  profited  to  \er  parijschis,  mew 
shuldew  not  ]?us  chaf^eie  wij?  pr^yer^;  for  j^ey  witen  nere  wher 
]7ey  ben  dampnyd.  &  pr^your  of  siche  fendis  is  litil  wor]?,  ^e 
to  hemsilf,  hou  feden  J?ey  sheep  ?  Also  almes  shulde  be  fre 
&  discreet  as  goddis  la  we  techi]?,  for  ellis  it  wer^  not  meedeful, 
&  god  ^aue  no  leeue  to  do  it ;  what  meede  shal  a  pore  maw 
haue  ]?at  he  sufferi]?  a^enus  his  wille  his  almes  be  borun  to 
cayms  castel  to  fede  a  floe  of  an^mristis  ?  c^rtis  jfey  don  ]?es 
pari^schis  no  good  ne  to  general  hooly  chirche,  but  pf  jfei  don 
good  as  ]?e  fend  ]?at  reuersi]?  goddis  ordenauwse.  mew  shuldew 
seke  grouwd  of  siche  collegies,  whe]?er  god  ha]?  ordeyned  hem 
to  be,  &  ]?e  floe  fed  bi  hem  j?at  ben  so  fer  &  so  lewid.  &  ]?us 
]?es  nouelries  of  collegies  semew  to  tempte  crist  as  ]?e  fend, 
for  pey  gon  not  to  heuene  bi  greesis  pat  god  ha]?  ordeyned 
to  lede  ]?idur,  but  pey  wolew  fle  bi  pe  fewdis  craft  & 
leeue  pe  weye  pat  crist  ha]?  set.  crist  ordeynede  pat 
his  herdis  shuldew  dwelle  wisely  vpon  his  sheep,  &  teche 
hem  bo]?e  bi  lif  &  word  hou  pey  shuldew  lyue  to  come  to 
heuene ;  but  an^mrist  casti]?  an-o]?^r  gile,  pat  his  herdis 
dwelle  afer  iw  castels  &  be  doump  of  lore  of  lif  &  lore  of  word 
to  helpe  per  sheep,  &  so  it  is  nedeful  pat  ]?e  puple  be  dis- 
seyued  iw  body  &  soule.  pey  bew  disseyued.  iw  per  body,  for 
]?ei  bew  robbid  of  bodili  good  &  it  is  clepid  almes  bi  ipocrisie. 
&  ]?us  ^’ey  ben  goostly  disseyued,  bo]?e  for  hem  wantij?  techiwg 
to  wende  to  heuene  bi  cristis  weye,  &  for  ]?ey  ben  led  to  belle 
bi  errour  of  pe  fendis  weye.  crist  sei]?  pat  he  is  weye, 
&  grouwde  ]?(?u  ]?is  apropriwg  iw  crist,  for  jif  crist  grouwde  it 
not,  it  is  ]?e  brode  weye  to  belle ;  it  is  a  newe  fouwduw  weye 
"^'for  sutilte  a^enws  charite,  but  pe  kyngis  weye  is  crist  pat 
ledi]?  surely  to  heuene. 


Chap.  X.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


421 


Qapitulum.  10 


m. 


A  nt  ]7us  seyn  su»^me;^  heere  pat,  as  lordis  of  pQ  world  shuldew 
wij^drawe  per  lordchip  fro  clerkis  dowid  ajenws  goddis 
lawe,  so  comyns  of  le  paries  shulde^  wiMrawe  \)er  almes  Commons  should 

^  ^  .  withdraw  their 

&  3yue  it  aftir  le  lore  of  crist,  for  ellis  ley  reui^rsiden  cnst  &  aims  from  priests 

^  ^  wrongly  en- 

dispisidew  hym  &  chosuw  pe  fend.  &  pf  a  prdat,  as  pope  or  dowed. 

bishop,  streyne  pe  puple  a^enw5  per  wille  to  ^yue  per  almes  to 

siche  plasis,  certis  ]7ei  ben  pe  fendis  proctours.  for  crist 

koude  nexiere  make  an  almes  ping  pat  wer^  not  willeful  to 

me?^  &  he  koude  not  ordeyne  siche  buschemewtis  to  robbe  men 

&  to  wouwde  hem.  pes  me^  ben  wouwdid  in  soule  pat  hen 

smytm2  wil  errour  of  virtues ;  &  ]7us  can  an^Arist  bi  many 

mylis  sende  his  arowis  to  woimde  pe  puple,  &  moue  col^- 

sciense  of  men  pat  ]iey  leeue  goddis  lore  &  take  ^e  lore  pat  pe 

pope  biddij?,  as  pf  pe  pope  wer^  hyed  ou^r  crist.  for  crist 

biddi]?  men  ]7us  to  do  almes  to  pore  feble  &  lame  &  blynd,  poor  and  weak, 

but  an^mrist  biddih  to  leeue  Ms,  and  to  do  it  to  stronge  &  idil  Antichrist  to 

^  strong  idlers. 

mew,  pat  ben  nurschid  iw  j^e  fendis  nest  to  be  an  oost  a^en?«s 
crist.  Also  pride  &  coueytise  of  my^ti  mew  of  pe  world 
werew  grouwd  of  siche  nestis  wijioutew  autorite  of  crist ;  & 

]7us  mew  motew  nedis  assente  to  pe  fend  a^enw5  crist  pat 

assentew  to  siche  propriwg  of  chirchis  bisyde  cristis  leeue,  for 

crist  sei]i  pat  who  so  is  not  wi]^  hym  he  mut  nedis  be  a^enws 

hym.  &  ]7us  coueytise  of  popis  &  bishops  assenti]?  to  siche 

appropriwgis,  &  coueytise  of  per  messanger^s  pat  ben  hirid  to 

helpe  hem ;  &  pride  of  mew  of  pe  world  pat  wolew  make  hem 

siche  poondis,  is  an  oj^^r  rote  of  cowsense  a^enws  crist  lord  of 

Jis  world,  but  ech  maw  shulde  J»enke  wisely  pat  his  oune  Men  should  think 

sywne  is  to  myche,  al  pf  he  procure  not  to  be  parsener  of  answerTor  thek 

ol^re  mewnws  sywnes  bi  consent.  &  bis  cowsent  of  myjti  mew  out  sharing  other 

people’s. 

bi  streng]?e  &  cautels  of  J^e  fend  hap  maistry  of  pore  sheep  of 

crist,  &  autorisi]?  siche  wrongis  iw  erj^e.  Also  crist  techij?  iw 

pe  ^ater  nost^r  to  pr^ye  god  to  jyue  ys  our^  breed,  &  it  <our  dS?ybread^ 

shulde  be  maad  our^  breed  bi  our(3  trewe  seruyss  pat  god 


422 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  X. 


no^service  make  ]^GS  pat  hau  chirchis  aproprid  faylen  of  J^is 

vaim  trewe  seruyss  lierfore,  &  }>us  ]?ei  ben  vnbable  to  pr^ye,  but 

[2  Thess.  iii.  10.]  pr^yen  a.^en  per  onne  bed.  &  to  ]7is  purpos  speki]?  poul,  pat 
j^is  mm  pat  trauelij?  not  ete  be  not;  for  jif  be  dide,  be  eet  as 
a  priue  J^ef  mete  of  opere  pore  me^.  sicbe  sutiltees  of  priue 
resou^s  pat  ben  bid  in  goddis  lawe  sbulde^  moue  mew  on 
goddis  syde  to  bolde  cristis  ordenauwse  iw  bis  bouwdis ;  for 
♦[p.  7MS.]  C(9rtis  a  priuey  errour  &  an  bid  wole  briwge  iw  ^'a  gretter^ 

One  hidden  error  ^ 

brings  in  more  oiTour,  as  0  deiaute  pd^t  IS  cowtynued  woile  briwge  iw  a  more 
worse.  defaute.  as  defaute  of  kepiwg  of  o  paries  wole  turne  hewi  to 
pe  fendis  cbildrew,  &  j^ey  wolew  infecte  cuwtreys,  &  cu^ztreys 
wolew  infecte  renmes ;  &  ]7us  it  falli]?  to  kyngis  &  biscbops  to 
stoppe  j^is  errour  for  more  perel. 


Qapitulum  11”*' 


b  ut  beere  moue]?  pQ  fend  mew  to  feyne  falsly  a^euMs  treu]?e. 

Men  think  that  many  mew  takew  as  bileue  pat  bei  ben  lordis  of  per  onne 

they  may  do  as 

they  will  with  godis,  &  bawne  it  is  leeuefiil  to  bem  to  do  per  almes  wber(9 

their  own.  ■' 

How  can  they  euerd  bey  wolew.  but  wberd  sbuldew  bey  do  per  almes  but 

»ive  better  than  .  s  J  ^ 

Pope  tells  to  ^yue  per  dymes  &  per  offeriwgis,  &  to  sicbe  curatis  pat  j^e 
pope  &  biscbops  lymitew  hem,  for  ellis  myjte  a  maw  be 
dampnyd  wib-outew  ony  defaute  of  bym ;  for  bon  sbulde  a 
lewid  maw  do  but  as  bis  prdlat  tecbib  bym  ? 


Everyman  should  Heel'd  mew  seyu  bi  goddis  lore  b^t  ecb  maw  pat  bab  dis- 
learn  inwardly  .  °  •* 

from  God  the  creciouw  sbulde  be  tauit  wib-y77ne  bi  god  of  grete  articlis  of 

erreat  articles  of  i  j  j  o 

bileue ;  but  oon  article  of  bileue  next  aftir  pe  booly  goost  is 


to  trowe  booly  cbircbe  bat  is  cristis  spouse  &  ourd  modir.  & 
bis  is  a  foul  errour  to  take  b^  spouse  of  b®  fend  &  worcbipe 


We  cannot  know  berd  as  cristis  spouse  bob©  iw  word  &  iw  dede.  we  may  not 
who  is  a  member  .  1*1 

of  the  true  ^it  wite  lor  cdrteyu  which  pdrsone  is  ot  cristis  spouse  ot  alle 


Church,  hut  we 
may  guess. 


be  mew  pat  wandrew  beerd,  but  we  may  gesse  &  poi  is  ynow. 


As  we  gessen  b<^t  bis  maw  pat  holdib  wel  cristis  lawe  is  a 
leme  of  booly  cbircbe,  pe  which  cbircbe  is  ourd  modir,  So  we 
gessen  of  an-ob<9r  maw  pat  reudrsib  cristis  lawe,  pat  he  is  a 
leme  of  be  fend  &  no  part  of  booly  cbircbe ;  &  we  sbuldew 


Chap.  XI.] 


DE  OEFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


423 


not  jyue  dymes  ne  offeriwgis  to  siche  men  as  to  hooly  chirche, 

as  we  shulde^  not  loute  ]7e  fend  al  he  shewide  hym  in 

ymage  of  crist.  &  herfore  crist  &  his  apostlis  werei^^  not 

gredy  of  worldly  godis,  but  helde?^  hem  payed  of  fode  & 

hiliwg,  &  so  don  pmtis  of  cristis  chirche.  &  ]7us  si|>  crist  is  we  must  spend 

cheef  lord,  men  motew  dispende  cristis  godis  on  bat  maner  bat  which  Christ  is 

.  ,  lo  i  1  ••  chief  lord,  as  he 

crist  nap  lymyted,  &  not  hou  euere  a  mara  wole,  &  it  is  not  iias  ordered, 
ynow  to  do  good  but  lif  a  man  do  it  wel.  for  be  gospel  of  it  is  not  enough 
loon  tellib  bat  crist  seib  of  suwme  foolis  bat  bei  shulera  deme  right. 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  .  [John  xvi.  2.] 

to  ohesche  to  god  in  pur-suywg  of  his  apostlis ;  as  poul  wente  So  did  Paul  when 

j^at  he  dide  wel  to  drawe  cristewmew  to  ierusalem.  &  |>us  it 

is  nyj  ]>e  perel  to  ^yue  bodily  almes  to  men  but  pf  me;^ 

knowew  hem  betere,  &  \mne  in  litil  quawtite.  &  herfore 

crist  tau^te  not  his  apostlis  to  bisie  hem  abou'^'te  siche  almes  *[p.  76  ms.] 

but  aboute  goostly  almes,  J^at  is  pr^chiwg  of  jje  gospel ;  but 

bodily  almes  is  broujt  yn  bi  freris  &  o^ere  stronge  begg(?res. 

&  ]7es  fendis  clerkis  feynew  almes  whawne  it  is  noon  almes  but 
sy^ne.  &  ]7us  errour  in  bileue,  to  trowe  to  ]?e  pope  &  to 
bischops  as  mew  shuldew  trowe  goddis  lawe,  maki]?  many 
mew  blamed  of  god.  for  mew  shuldew  trowe  to  ]7es  pr^latis 
aftir  \er  dedis  grouwdid  iw  goddis  lawe  ;  but  mew  shuldew 
trowe  to  cristis  lawe  ou^r  bis  as  bileue.  but  ^it  be  fend  The  fiend  says 

■*  ‘  that  men  give 

disseyueb  mew  bat  bey  wuew  not  bis  almes  vnto  ioon  or  to  their  aims  to  God, 

T  X  y  J  X  not  to  John  or 

robert,  but  to  god  &  iw  his  name  bi  good  entewt,  &  j^at  is  iioi>ert, 
ynow ;  for  a  maw  shulde  paye  his  dette  to  hym  ]>at  is  traytour  and  that  debts 

must  be  paid 

to  god.  Heer^  is  myche  for  to  seye,  for  \e  fend  taki];  fals  to  bad  men. 

]7at  foolis  ^yuew  not  \er  almes  to  robert  jtat  is  a  leme  of  ]>e 

fend.  &  pf  ]7ei  ^yuen  jtis  \us  to  god,  j^ei  ^yuew  it  on  an  yuel 

man«9r  ;  but  mew  witew  \at  it  is  dampnable  to  ^yue  to  god  ]>er  Men  must  not  do 

3,11  6vil  sGrvicc  to 

seruyss  yuele  as  ech  fewd  \at  is  iw  belle  jyue]?  to  god  his  God. 
dampnywg.  &  ])us  men  motew  rijte  ])er  entewt,  &  ^yue 
discretly  goddis  godis,  for  wenywg  to  do  wel  iw  many  caasis 
is  not  ynow.  &  as  anewtis  worldly  dette  her  is  an-ob^r  resouw  Paying  debts 

./  j  j  stands  on  another 

]76r-of ;  for  a  maw  may  meedefuly  jyue  it  to  hym  ]>at  shal  footing, 
aftir  be  dampnyd ;  for  fis  is  no  willeful  almes  but  pldiwg  of 
dette  bi  mannws  lawe. 


424 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


[CiiAr.  xn. 


Curates  think  ^ 
that  the  Pope’s 
leave  orprivileg-es 
may  excuse  them 
from  residence. 

j^er  chirchis  &  ^erwen  not  ]ier  puple  'perfoie.  but  heeri?  trewe 

me7^  shulde?^  knowe  j^at  nej^er  pope  ne  oj?er  mm  ba]?  power  to 

God  will  have  kepe  a  man  in  his  benefiss  &  to  do  nou^t  perfore ;  for  god  wole 
due  service.  .  •  m 

not  do  J71S  dede  but  axi]?  due  S(9ruyss  for  ]?is  omss.  &  as  an 
ymage  is  not  ]?e  ma^  al  pf  it  be  lik  to  hym,  so  siche  leeue  of 
a  p^rsouw  makij?  hym  not  herde  but  wolf  to  god;  &  pf  an 
herde  haue  bullis  of  fe  pope  pat  he  dispewsif  heero  wij^  hym, 
The  Pope’s  bulls  alle  siche  bullis  excuse?^  not  bifore  pe  iugemewt  of  god ;  but 
him  take\  share  key  accusen  more  be  pope  to  take  part  of  mennus  dampnywg 

in  the  damnation.  ,  .  u  •  t,  *  v  IT  t,  ’1 

pat  tristen  so  myche  m  pe  popis  bulks  more  pan  in  lawe  or 

skile  of  god.  &  bi  pa  same  skile  bischops  leeue,  pat  is  of  a 

porsouw,  excusij?  hem  not  bifore  god,  but  te[lli]7]  ^  hou  ]7ey 

bien  &  sille^>^  per  peyne;  j^is  chaffero  pas[si]7]^  symonye,  for  it 

is  more  ny^  to  wro7?g  to  jyue  a  man  leeue  for  money  to  si^rue 

not  god  but  to  S(?rue  j^e  fend.  Por  certis  no  man  may  hauQ 

*[p.  8MS.]  j^is  power,  ^'^e  no^  an^fcnst  hym  silf.  &  as  anewtis  seculer 

Priests  ought  to  lordis,  as  kyngis  &  prinsis  &  op  ere  lordis,  me^  shuldew  sharply 
tell  lords  sharply 
of  their  duty  in  telle  to  hem 
this  matter. 

nedis  for  siche  dedis  pat  men  clepew  priuelegies  dampne 
hem  silf,  wi]?  J^es  p^rsouws  pat  j^ey  letter  fro  goddis  offiss. 
&  wolde  god  pat  trewe  pr^stis  wolde^>^  telle  sharply  J^is  perel 
to  lordis ;  for  man  my^te  not  more  opynly  bicome  traytour  to 
his  god  J^an  to  drawe  his  knyjtes  fro  his  S(3ruyss,  &  bri7^ge  in 
The  fiend  says  fendis  &  sle  his  soulis.  but  pt  pe  fend  hap  fou?^dew  cautels 
to  put  in  a  vicar,  to  bridge  in  vikeris  in  pi^rsouws  stede,  &  bi  colour  of  siche 
vikeris  he  sei]?  pat  propriwg  of  chirchis  is  leeueful,  &  nouw 
residense  is  excusid  bi  siche  a  viker  pat  holdij?  his  stede. 
It  were  good  to  Heerf?  men  kenkew  kd^t  it  werd  good  to  haue  a  viker  pat  were 

have  a  vicar  to  -*  ■*  ■* 

take  the  forfeited  nedy  to  take  bodily  almes  of  men  whawne  ]?e  p^rsou^  trauelide 


pat  }»ei  han  no  power  a^eaus  god,  but  ]?ei  moten 


Capitulum  12'"' 

it  pe  fend  blyndi]?  many  curatis  pat  wene^  pat  |>ei  ben  not 
holdup  to  residense  bi  leeue  of  pe  pope  or  of  per  bischop  or 
of  seculerd  lordis  bi  priuylegie,  &  j^us  j^ei  taken  frujtis  of 


*  Illegible  from  tbe  margin  being  rubbed. 


Chap.  XIII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


425 


not  Jperfore ;  but  j^ey  ben  not  in  ]?is  per  vikeris,  but  in  bodily 
tr«uel  &  spuyli;^g  of  meT^.  but  boj^e  J7is  p^rsou^  &  pis  viker 
motew  be  puny^shid  for  per  trespas,  si]?  ecb  ma?^  is  holdu?^  to 
serue  god  bi  al  ]?e  power  pat  he  ha]? ;  for  pf  ]?is  viker  myjte 
Si?rue  ynow,  what  nede  were  it  of  siche  a  persou?^?  certis  but 
to  spuyle  pe  pore  folc,  &  make  more  synne  in  hooly  chirche. 
&  brmgmg  in  of  siche  vikeris,  pat  oftetyme  ben  vnhable 
herdis,  maki]?  hem  pore  &  nedy,  &  sharpi]?  hem  to  spuyle  pore 
puple ;  &  it  maki]?  persou?^s  aboue  more  hardy  to  walowe  in 
synne,  &  many  tymes  pei  hen  vnhable  to  haue  trewely  pe  name 
of  curat.  &  siche  false  names  pat  ben  ]7us  feyned  excusen 
not  bifore  crist,  si]?  crist  is  pe  firste  treu]7e  &  pe  firste  resou?^ 
of  alle  pingis.  We  grauwte  wel  pat  it  were  good  many  prestis 
to  haue  felowis  in  keping  of  a  floe,  oon  to  do  o  ping,  an-o]?er 
an-oper;  as  oon  to  trauele  bodily  in  mynistrmgof  sacr^^me?^tis, 
an-oper  to  trauele  in  preching  &  oper  teching  of  pe  puple ; 
but  loke  pat  ]?es  bo]?e  be  hooly  &  lyue  in  pouert  as  apostlis 
didei^i  &  ech  of  hem  helpe  mekely  oper  as  felowis  drawiwge  in 
goddis  ^oc.  but  ]?is  axi]?  residense  on  sheep  pat  man  is  herde 
of.  god  may  not  be  bigilid  bi  siche  names  &  excusi?^g,  for 
]?is  lord  wole  rikene  wi]?  ]?es  seruau?^tis  fully  aftir  pat  resouw 
axi]?.  ]if  pou  feynest  ]?ee  an  ordre  pat  pou  preyest  &  ]?enkist 
on  god,  &  perwip  ]?ou  hast  cure  bi  py  viker  pa.t  kepi]?  pe 
chirche,  loke  pat  ]?ou  here  not  falsly  pe  name,  but  lyue  in 
pouert  as  baptist  dide,  not  m  hye  castels  of  caym  &  lustful 
fode  as  boris  in  sty;  '^‘*for preyours  pat  siche  booris  make?i  don 
to  many  more  harm  ]?an  good,  for  bi  ]?is  fallas  myjte  a  fend 
or  a  soutere  be  an  herde  oner  a  Jjousynd  men  in  englond  & 
excuse  residense  bi  a  fool. 


If  the  vicar  can 
do  the  work, 
what  need  of  the 
parson  1 

Vicars  are  often 
unfit. 


A  priest  may 
have  a  fellow  to 
help  him, 


but  they  should 
both  reside. 


Do  not  belong  to 
an  order  under 
pretence  of  pray¬ 
ing, 


and  live  like  a 
boar  in  a  stv. 
*  [p.  8b  MS.’] 


Capitulum  13”'- 

?  it  argue]?  pe  fend  to  colour  siche  appropriwgis,  ]?ey  be?^  con-  Antichrist  argues 

tI10SC 

fermed  of  he  pope  &  approuvd  of  he  court,  who  may  im-  propriations  are 

J  ^  ^  J.1.V  j  7  j  approved  by  the 

pu?^gne  ]?is  dede.  but  pf  he  impu?«gne  pe  pope;  &  of  ]?is 
it  wolde  sue  pat  pe  pope  &  hise  hen  opyn  here  tikis,  but  wher(9 
were  ]?is  fijtiwge  chirche  pf  ]?is  wer^  so]?  of  pe  pope,  pf  pe 


426 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


The  Pope’s  ap¬ 
proval  does  not 
show  a  thing  to 
be  right. 


The  Pope  may 
approve  fighting 
in  his  cause. 


Men  that  know 
the  Pope’s  errors 
should  speak  of 
them. 


*[p.  9  MS.] 

The  only  power 
the  Pope  has  is 
to  edify  men  by 
God’s  law. 


pope  &  alle  his  clerkis  werew  dyuydid  fro  cristis  chirche.  for 
holdi^^^g  of  cristis  religious  shulde  stonde  moost  \n  clergye, 
&  algatis  j^es  newe  ordris  as  hen  freris,  miiwkis  &  chanouws. 

heeri?  seyen  trewe  men  in  god  more  hardily  j^an  J^ey  were^i 
wont  ]iai  j^is  is  a  lewid  skile,  pf  ]>e  pope  approue  j^is  ]?iwg 
])mue  ]7is  Jjiwg  mut  nedis  he  trewe,  for  herby  \e  contrarje  is 
fe  more  licly.  for  sif  Je  pope  is  more  tempted  fan  ofore 
men  &  more  led  hi  f e  fend,  it  semyf  hi  f e  popis  cowfermywg 
fat  f is  is  f e  fendis  werk.  &  heero  is  more  colours  in  fis 
resouw  f aw  iw  resouws  fat  aristotle  tellif  fat  pf  a  maw  haue 
a  kempt  bed  f awne  he  is  a  leccherons  maw.  sumtyme  it  may 
falle  so  &  sumtyme  fe  contrarye  may  faile,  as  fe  pope  may 
snmtyme  falle  on  fe  sofe  &  sumtyme  discorde  forfro,  as  he 
may  hi  fauouro  or  money  approue  fijtiwg  of  prostis  &  ful 
asoyliwg  of  mew  fat  fijtew  faste  iw  his  cause,  but  trowe  we 
herfore  fat  god  wole  folde  fro  rijtwesnesse  of  his  lawe  ?  for 
god  is  moost  morsiful  al  pf  he  suffers  siche  blasfemyes,  &  f 
he  wolde  fat  mersy  wer(9  iw  mew  &  for^yuenesse  of  for 
wrongis;  &  not  fat  mew  shuldew  fi^te  to-gidero  for  siche 
lordchip  of  an^mrist.  ]if  it  be  treufe  of  goddis  lawe  god  iw 
fat  cowfermef  it,  &  pf  it  be  falsed  apnwo  god,  pt  it  is  treufe 
as  austyn  seif,  &  so  god  oowfermef  it  to  he  punypchid  hi  his 
wille  ;  but  f  e  fend  is  autour  f  or-of  &  stirif  mew  to  trowe  to 
it.  &  \us  mew  fat  ban  kuwnywg  &  knowew  fe  errours 
of  fe  pope  shuldew  wif  mekenesse  &  obediense  telle  fes 
errouris  to  hym  &  of  ore.  Por  fus  dide  poul  for  lijt 
sywne  fat  petro  did  ajen  fe  chirche,  &  ellis  mew  loueden 
not  fe  pope  ne  iesu  crist  ne  his  chirche.  pus  bi  cautels  of 
f e  fend  is  hate  turnyd  to  name  of  loue  &  lone  turnyd  to  name 
of  hate,  fus  bew  many  mew  disseyued.  &  mew  trowew  as 
bileue  j^at  f e  pope  haf  no  power  but  to  edifie  f e  chirche  bi  f e 
lawe  fat  god  haf  ^ouyn ;  for  poul  seif  he  haf  noon  of  or,  &  he 
hadde  as  myche  as  f  e  pope.  &  sif  fer  is  no  power  but  of 
god,  &  god  jyuef  no  power  to  destrie  his  spouse  ;  nef  or  pope 
ne  of  or  maw  haf  power  but  to  helpe  f  e  chirche  bi  goddis  lawe. 
&  fws  feynywg  of  an^mristis  powero,  fat  is  fals  a^enws  fis 


Chap,  XIV.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


427 


treu]7e,  come]?  of  j^e  fadir  of  lesiwgis  &  disseyue]?  many  mew. 

&  as  anewtis  heresies  of  he  pope  &  his  clerkis  supposen  many  The  Pope  and 

.  .  his  are  heretics, 

trewe  mew  pat  he  &  hise  hew  heretikis,  for  tei  holdew  a^enws  since  they  hold 
,  , .  ,  ...  .  .  .  .  property  against 

goddis  lawe  worldly  lordchipis  iw  pr^stis  hondis,  &  ]7is  is  God’s  law. 

a^enws  crist  &  his  lawe,  &  maynteynew^  wrowg  a^enus  worldly 

lordis.  crist  wole  punyjsche  J^is  heresie  &  make  it  more 

known w  her-aftir,  al  ]if  an^mrist  &  hise  seyn  non  pat  noone 

hew  heretikis  but  pei  pat  seyen  J^ns.  mennus  dilfynywg  of 

heresie  is  litil  war]?  but  to  blame  mew  pat  don  &  spekew  ' 

a^enws  goddis  lawe,  for  siche  ben  mooste  heretikis,  &  |7us 

appropriwg  of  chirchis,  newe  brou^t  iw  bi  be  fend,  soweb  Fviis  brought  in 

'  ‘  *  -’by  appropria- 

symonye  &  lesiwgis  to  make  ]?is  propriwg  to  be  grauwtid.  tions. 

&  pus  algatis  bew  pore  mew  robbid  of  worldly  godis  &  goostly 
help,  &  pe  fend  ha]»  an  entra  to  ouarcome  helples  mew,  as  bew 
mew  of  siche  parijschis  &  opere  pat  assentew  herto. 


Ca_piiulum  14“* 


j  it  argue]>  pe  fend  pat  bi  }>is  foly  ]’at  heera  is  spokuw  alle  col- 

legies  bwt  ben  iw  studies  shuldew  be  destried;  but  where  wera  tions  are  taken 
]?awne  cristewdom  ?  for  jif  philosofie  &  dyuynite  wantidew 
iw  pe  reume  of  englowd,  where  were  ^awne  bileue  of  mew 
or  goddis  lawe  iw  englond  ?  for  collegies  iw  oxneford  & 
caumbrige  bew  fouwdid  on  siche  appropriwgis,  &  collegians 
wendew  out  &  prechen  &  quylienew  many  partis  of  englond ; 

&  degre  takuw  iw  scole  maki]>  goddis  word  more  acceptable, 

&  pe  puple  trowi]’  betere  perto  whawne  it  is  seyd  of  a  maistir. 

heere  mew  seyn  hat  many  goodis  ban  comuw  bifore  of  siche  studies  were  ’ 

^  ,  .  carried  on  before 

studies,  but  neuere  so  myche  sibew  collegies  werew  dowid  as  colleges  were  en- 

•'  _  ^  dowed. 

dide  bifore  per  rentis  werew  proprid ;  &  perfore  it  wer^  good 
pat  ]?es  studies  &  collegies  pat  ben  iw  hem  stoodew  iw  as  myche 
as  J'ei  acordew  to  goddis  lawe  &  lyuew  wel,  &  as  myche  as  ]?ei 
discordew  fro  cristis  lawe  pat  ]?ey  werew  mewdid.  but  si]’  pat 


^  mayntenyd  MS. 


428 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTOEALI. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


The  apostles  took 
no  degree, 

Matt,  xxiii. 
and  Chz'ist  for¬ 
bade  them  to  be 
called  ‘  Master.’ 


»[p.  %  MS.] 


Some  good  comes 
out  of  all  evil. 


Adam  and  Eve 
did  good  in 
sinning. 


Some  priests  that 
have  not  heen  at 
college  are  better 
than  some  that 
have. 


Schoolmen  ■woi’k 
to  get  reputation. 


Money  wasted  at 
inceptions. 


apostlis  toke^  no  siche  degre  &  crist  forfendide  to  be 
clepid  maystris,  it  seme]?  ]?«t  ]?is  he]?en  maner  brou^t  in  in 
studies  discordij?  fro  ]?e  gospel ;  &  as  pr(?cbiwg  of  apostlis  vras 
hetere  ]?an  is  ^rech.\ng  of  ]7es  maystris,  so  pr^stis  wi]?-oute 
degre  of  scole  may  profile  more  ]?an  don  ]?es  maystris.  *Hake 
]?e  good  fro  yuel,  &  holde  J’e  good  &  leeue  ]7e  yuel ;  & 
moue  it  not  ]7ee  ]>at  of  siche  yuel  come]?  myche  good  to 
me?^  &  reumes,  for  god  wole  suffero  noon  yuel  be  don  but 
^if  good  come  ]?erof.  &  ]?us  ^if  comywg  of  good  ]?at  spriwgi]> 
of  yuel  bi  goddis  grace  shulde  moue  me?«  to  do  ]?at  yuel, 
&  continue  it  &  holde  it,  ech  yuel  shulde  be  don  &  a  mm 
shulde  fie  noon  yuel;  for  yuel  of  fendis  doi]?  myche  good, 
as  adam  &  eue  dide?^  good  in  sywnywg,  but  it  was  don  on 
yuel  maner  &  perfore  ]?e  maner  shoulde  be  fled.  &  ]?us  pf 
dyuynite  wer^  lernd  on  ]?at  maner  pat  apostlis  dide?^,  it  shulde 
profile  myche  more  ]?an  it  doi]?  nou  bi  staat  of  scole,  as 
prostis  nou  wi]?-oute  siche  staat  profite?^  more  pan  men  of 
siche  staat;  &  contynue  ]?ey  in  good  lif  &  in  bou?^dis  of 
goddis  lawe,  &  ]7is  shal  make  pe  folc  more  trowe  ]>au  doi]? 
degre  takuw  in  scole.  &  manye  scie?isis  hen  vsid  in  scole 
pat  profited  not  to  goddis  lawe,  but  tarien  &  letten  fro  ]?is 
lawe,  as  poul  techi]?  opynly.  &  ]?us  mannus  lawe  taujt  in 
scolis  letti]?  goddis  lawe  to  growe,  &  no  drede  god  is  ]?at 
maistro  pat  wole  teche  nou  as  redily  as  he  wolde  bifore  ]?is 
tyme,  pf  prestis  lif  be  shapuw  perto.  &  pat  semy]?  no  good 
mene  to  passe  ou^r  cristis  ordenauwse  &  his  lawe  for  good 
pat  god  sendi]?  herof,  for  panne  me?^  shulde^  [not]  drede  to 
sywne.  &  ]?us  mew  of  scole  trauelew  veynly  for  to  gete  newe 
sutiltees,  &  to  magnefie  per  name  for  per  worchip  &  per 
wywny«g,  &  pe  profit  of  hooly  chirche  bi  ]?is  weye  is  put 
abac.  &  iw  makiwg  of  ]7es  maystris  bew  pore  mennus  godis 
ofte  wasted,  &  pe  kyng  of  pride  is  hied  &  cristis  mekenesse 
is  put  bihynde.  many  siche  sywnes  pat  stirew  to  stryues 
comew  of  siche  partis  iw  studies;  &  ]?us  bi  propriwg  of 
chirchis  come]?  rijtly  noon  help  to  pe  chii’che. 


Chap.  XV.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


429 


Qapitulum.  15“* 

a  nt  heer^  "be  freris  wit  \>er  fautours  seyn  \>at  it  is  heresye  Frfars  say  it  is 

^  ^  ^  ,  J  i  ^  heresy  to  trans- 

to  write  ]7us  goddis  lawe  in  english,  &  make  it  knowui^  late  the  Bible, 
to  lewid  me?^.  &  fourty  signes  tey  briwgen  forto  They  give  forty 

signs  to  know  a 

snewe  an  neretik  bew  not  worpy  to  reherse,  for  noujt  grouwdi]?  heretic, 
bew  but  nygromansye. 

it  semyt  first  t<?t  be  wit  of  goddis  lawe  skulde  be  tau^t  God’s  word  should 

*  ^  ...  ^  be  taught  in  the 

\n  ]>at  tuwge  \at  is  more  knowuw,  for  J^is  wit  is  goddis  word,  tongue  known  to 

whawne  crist  seij?  in  ]?e  gospel  ]iat  bojie  heuene  &  erjie  shule?^ 

passe  but  his  wordis  sbule;^  not  passe,  he  vndirstondith  bi 

his  woordis  his  wit.  &  ]7us  goddis  wit  is  hooly  writ,  j^at 

may  on  no  maner  be  fals.  Also  j^e  hooly  gost  ^af  to  apostlis  The  Apostles  at 
.  ,  in  1  Pentecost  had  the 

Wit  at  wit-suwday  for  to  knowe  al  mani^r  langagis  to  teche  gift  of  tongues. 

pG  puple  goddis  lawe  ferhy;  &  so  god  wolde  fat  fe  puple 

wer^  taujt  goddis  lawe  in  dyu^rse  tuwgis ;  but  what  ^'maw  *[p.  lo  ms.] 

on  goddis  half  shulde  reu(?pse  goddis  ordenauwse  &  his  wille  ? 

&  for  bis  cause  seynt  ierom  tr^?uelide  &  trisjnslatide  be  bible  st.  Jerome  trans- 

^  iated  the  Bible 

fro  dyuerse  tuwgis  into  latey/^  fat  it  myjte  be  aftir  tr^^nslatid  into  Latin. 

to  of  ere  tuwgis.  &  j^us  crist  &  his  apostlis  taujtew  fe  puple  in 

fat  tuwge  fat  was  moost  knoAvuw  to  J^e  puple ;  why  shuldew 

not  mew  do  non  so  ?  &  herfore  autours  of  fe  newe  law, 

jiat  werew  apostlis  of  iesu  crist,  writew  fer  gospels  iw 

dyuerse  tuwgis  fat  werew  more  knowuw  to  j^e  puple.  Also 

be  worj^y  reume  of  frauwse,  not-wib-stowdiwge  alle  lettiwgis,  The  French  have 

....  .  .  a  translation. 

hap  translatid  pe  bible  &  pe  gospels  wi]?  of  ere  trewe  sentewsis 

of  doctours  out  of  lateyn  iw-to  freywsch,  why  shulden  not 

engli^sche  mew  do  so?  as  lordis  of  englond  han  j^e  bible  iw 

freynsch,  so  it  wer^  not  apnus  resouw  fat  fey  haddew  fe 

same  sentewse  iw  englijsch ;  for  ]7us  goddis  lawe  wolde  be 

before  knowuw  &  more  trowid  for  onehed  of  wit,  &  more 

acord  be  bi-twixe  reumes.  &  herfore  freris  han  taujt  iw  faug^htthePate^- 

englond  fe  pati^rnoster  iw  engli^sch  tuwge,  as  mew  seyen  iw 

fe  pley  of  jork,  &  iw  many  oj^^re  cuwtreys.  sij^ew  J^e  pat(?r-  ^L^omatthew’s 

nost(9r  is  part  of  matheus  gospel,  as  clerkis  knowew,  why  ushed^ 


430 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


[Chap.  XV. 


may  not  al  be  turnyd  to  englijsch  trewely,  as  is  j^is  part? 
specialy  si)»ew  alle  cristewmew,  lerid  &  lewid,  shulew  be 
sauydj  mote;^  algatis  sue  crist  &  knowe  his  lore  &  his  lif. 

Engiifihmen  may  but  ]7e  comyns  of  engli^schme^  knowew  it  best  in  modir 

1.0^r*n  l^w 

best  in  English,  tuwge,  &  ]7us  it  wer^  al  oou  to  lette  siche  knowing  of  j^e 
gospel  &  to  lette  engli^sch  men  to  sue  crist  &  come  to  heuene. 


There  may  be  Wei  y  woot  defaute  may  be  in  vntrewe  translating,  as 

faults  in  transla¬ 
tion,  myjten  haue  be  many  defautis  in  turnyng  fro  ebreu  in-to 


so  there  may  greu,  &  fro  greu  in-to  lateyn,  &  from  o  langage  i«-to  an- 
Latin  version,  ob^r.  but  lyue  men  good  lif  &  studie  many  p^rsones  goddis 

Let  men  study 

God’s  law,  and  lawe ;  &  whanne  chaungyng  of  wit  is  foundun  amende  bey 
correct  the  mis¬ 
takes.  it  as  resoun  wole.  suwmen  seyn  bd^t  freris  trdtuelen  &  ber 

Three  reasons  ^  t  j 


that  actuate  the  fautOurs  in  ]7is  cause  for  ]?re  chesouws,  ]?at  y  wole  not  afernie, 

lITlclxS* 


1.  They  wish  to  but  god  woot  wher  bey  ben  sobe.  first  bey  wolden  be  seun 

be  thought  the  ,  ^  ^ 

only  men  who  SO  nedeful  to  be  engli^schmen  of  ourd  reume  bat  singulerly 

understand  God’s  ,  .  ^  ^ 

law.  in  her  wit  layj  J;e  wit  of  goddis  lawe,  to  telle  ]je  puple  goddis 


lawe  on  what  man^r  eudre  J^ey  wolden.  &  ]?e  secound  cause 

2.  They  wish  to  herof  is  seyd  to  stonde  in  bis  sentense ;  freris  wolden  lede 

keep  back  what  _  _ 

they  please  of  be  puple  in  techinge  hem  goddis  lawe  &  bus  bei  wolden  teche 
God’s  law.  /Li  to  to  /  r 

sum,  &  sum  hide,  &  docke  sum.  Eor  ]7anne  defautis  in  per 
lif  shulden  be  lesse  knowun  to  pQ  puple,  '&  goddis  lawe 


shulde  be  vntrewelierd  knowun  boj^e  bi  clerkis  &  bi  comyns. 

3.  They  fear  their  be  bridde  cause  pat  men  aspien  stondi]?  in  j^is  as  J^ey  seyn; 

faults  will  be  seen 

when  God’s  law  alle  bes  newe  ordris  dreden  hem  bat  b^r  synne  shulde  be 

is  known.  ■' 

*[p.  106  MS.]  knowun,  hou  J^ei  ben  not  groundid  in  god  to  come  in-to 
pe  chirche,  &  i>us  j^ey  wolden  not  for  drede  pat  goddis  lawe 
wer^  knowun  in  engli^sch,  but  j^ey  myjten  putte  heresye  on 
men  pf  englijsch  toolde  not  what  j^ey  seyden.  god  moue 
lordis  &  bischops  to  stonde  for  knowing  of  his  lawe. 


Qapituhm 

true  p^rfes^t^^^  ^  ^  Were  to  speke  oner  J^is  of  dymes  &  of  offeringis  pat  ben 

hir,?  to  pr<?stis  j^at  don  trewely  per  seruyss;  &  dymes 
ben  clepid  goddis  part  in  goddis  lawe  for  greet  wit. 
many  causis  men  tellen  comynly  why  dymes  ben  clepid 


Chap.  XVI.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


431 


goddis  part,  nyne  partis  'hm  of  creaturis  &  god  is  in  ]?e 
tenle  degre ;  &  in  tokene  \a\j  god  is  lord  gen(?ral  oner  alle 
creaturis,  ^yue;^  god  jje  tenjje  part  in  tokene  of  his 

general  lordchip.  ^e  werkes  of  ]ie  sixe  dayes  in  ‘whiche  god 
made  J^e  world  holder  sixe  kyndis  of  J^iwgis  in  ^is  ordre  of 
ten;  &  jit  ]7er  ben  nyne  ordris  of  auwgels,  al  jif  j^e  firste  bok 
of  ];e  bible  specine  not  J^es  nyne  ordris,  as  poul  doip  in  bis 
bokis.  pG  eyjtbe  maner  of  creaturis  ber^  comyn  ^iwgis  pat 
god  ha]?  maad,  &  booly  writ  speki]?  of  hem  in  many  bokis  of 
goddis  lawe.  j^e  nyne]7e  maner  of  creaturis,  &  J^e  hierste  of 
alle  oj^ere,  is  j^e  mawhed  of  crist :  &  on  J^is  sue]?  bis  godbed, 
&  lis  ten]7e  pin^  is  hierst  lord  of  al  maner  of  creaturis. 
&  god  moue]?  al  maner  of  tuwgis  to  clepe  J^is  firste  noumbre  of 
ten  bi  symple  name  &  aftirward  ^ei  clepe^z  it  bi  a  gederid 
name  ;  &  ^is  may  men  se  in  many  tuwgis.  &  j^is  mouyde 
me^  in  many  agis  to  paye  to  god  pG  tenj^e  part,  so  pat  bi  j^is 
]7ey  eonfesside?^  to  bym  ^e  generalte  of  bis  lordcbip ;  &  j^is 
cause  is  ynow  to  moue  mGn  to  paye  dymes.  but  it  were 
for-to  wite  wbiche  me^  sbuldera  reseyue  dymes.  pG  firste  bok 
of  le  olde  lawe  telli]?  of  abel  &  caym,  bou  j^ey  brewten  ^er 
ty^is  to  god,  &  pG  smoke  wente  up  to  beuene.  &  it  is  licly 
pat  lis  maner  lastide  vn-to  J^e  tyme  of  moyses ;  but  god 
lymytide  in  moysees  lawe  pat  prestis  &  dekenes  sbulde;^^  lyue 
on  dymes,  &  semelily  ^is  maner  lastide  vn-to  j^e  comjng  of 
crist.  but  nou  in  pG  j^ridde  tyme  of  grace  prestis  &  prelatis 
chalengew  to  hem  dymes  &  inGnnus  offerirgis  bi  autorite  of  pG 
olde  lawe,  &  J^is  semy]?  skileful,  so  pat  mew  trauele  wel  wi]? 
hem,  for  mew  sbuldew  paye  per  dymes  jit  as  j^ey  diden  iw  j^e 
olde  lawe,  but  j^ey  sbuldew  not  brewne  hem  nou,  for  per  hew 
many  pore  goddis  seruauwtis.  &  pus  lawe  &  skile  cbaccbij? 
men  to  jyue  to  trewe  prestis  j^es  dymes,  for  j^is  were  moost 
lijt  &  resonable  jif  pat  prestis  lyuew  wel.  &  mew  nedew  not 
to  rikene  heere  bou  ofte  ^e  olde  lawe  biddil  pat  prestis 
sbuldew  haue  hem ;  but  for  crist  &  hise  apostlis  werew  fewe 
&  lyuedew  on  litil  almes,  ^'y  can-not  se  bi  goddis  lawe  pat  ne 
dymes  may  be  partid  amowg  cristis  pore  mew,  pQ  wbiche  crist 


Tithes  are  due  to 
God  as  a  sign  of 
his  universal 
lordship. 

Nine  orders  of 
creatures. 


God  is  the  tenth 
order. 

How  language 
witnesses  to  this. 


Tithes  at  first 
were  burnt ; 


but  in  the  time 
of  Moses  God 
appointed  them 
to  priests. 

This  remains  in 
the  law  of  grace. 


Men  should  pay 
tithes  to  priests  if 
they  live  well. 


But  tithes  maybe 
*[p.  11  MS.] 
partly  given  to 
the  poor. 


432 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XVI. 


Luke  xiv.  [13.]  tellij  in  fe  gospel,  as  pore  feble  &  pore  lame  &  pore  bljnde. 

&  prestis  ben  j^e  firste  for  j^ei  shuldew  be  pore  as  crist,  & 
feble  ]7ey  ben  to  do  ]>er  sernjss  &  to  gete  ]>er-y7i\  fode 
&  tiling,  crist  koude  bi  weye  of  myraclis  &  weye  of  almes 
gete  jmow,  but  pt  crist  was  pore  &  feble  &  figuride  prestis 
aftir  to  come. 


Qapitulum 


Saint  Paul’s  rule 
to  Timothy  more 
binding  than  the 
old  law. 


1  Tim.  vi.  [8.] 


The  two 
really  agree. 


Priests  should 
not  take  the 
tithes  of  many 
churches,  to  have 
more  than  their 
needs. 


If  a  priest  could 
be  two  men,  he 
might  have  two 
men’s  allow¬ 
ances  ; 

yet  pluralism  is 
allowable  when  a 
man  does  not  get 
more  than  he 
needs. 


i  t  wer^  to  shewe  aftir  J’is  ])at  j^e  lawe  \at  god  jyue]?  bi 
seynt  poul  his  apostle  in  his  writing  to  tymothe  shulde 
not  ceesse  for  our^  taking  of  offeringis  &  dymes  bi 
olde  lawe.  Seynt  poul  biddi]?  to  tymothe  &  rikene]?  hym 
silf  as  o  man  to  whiche  \at  he  speki]?  to,  &  ^yue]?  hem  J^is 
reule  of  god:  “whanne  we  han  fode  &  hiling,  be  we  payed  of 
]ies  j^ingis.”  lord,  si]?  ]?is  is  a  skileful  reule  '^at  goddis  lawe 
jyue]?  to  prestis  &  clerkis,  why  shulden  fey  leeue  fis  for 
a  willeful  chesing  fat  fey  taken  of  f e  olde  lawe  ?  specialy 
sif  fes  two  lawis  acorden  bofe  in  wordis  &  resoun  f nt  prestis 
shulden  lyue  on  dymes  &  be  payed  of  fode  &  hiling.  certis 
pf  god  wolde  fnt  f e  toon  ceesside,  we  shulden  not  take  fes 
two  to-gidere  ;  but  god  were  in  f  is  to  blame  fnt  he  telde  not 
which  he  wolde  were  kept.  sifen  we  taken  dymes  of  fe 
olde  lawe  bi  oure  oune  autorite,  leeue  we  not  fis  bileue  fat 
god  ^yuef  vs  bi  poule  apostle ;  algatis  sif  fis  is  skileful  & 
ynow  to  a  trewe  prest.  &  of  fis  may  men  se  ouer  fat  prestis 
shulden  not  gedere  to  hem  dymes  &  offerringis  of  many 
chirchis,  fat  weren  ouer  f er  fode  &  hilinge,  for  f ns  it  were 
not  leeueful  to  a  prest  for  to  do  in  f e  olde  lawe ;  myche  more 
we  shulden  not  do  f  us,  sif  crist  kepte  so  streyt  pouert.  ^if 
a  prest  my^te  be  two  men  &  do  fully  f e  trauel  fat  fellide  to 
hem,  f  anne  it  were  to  hym  a  coulur  to  take  ful  hire  of  two 
men ;  for  men  ben  nou  more  insufficient  fan  fei  weren  in 
cristis  tyme.  but  pt  it  semyf  excusable  to  haue  to-gidere 
many  benefisis,  so  fat  fey  come  not  alle  to-gidere  but  to 
a  skileful  sustenaunse  of  man.  but  be  fou  war  heere  wif 


Chap.  XVIII.]  DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI.  433 


ydilnesse  &  wij?  exceesse  of  dispensis,  &  algatis  putte 

bisynesse  to  s^rue  god  &  helpe  bis  chircbe,  &  loue  more 

]?es  two  j^iwgis  J^an  worldly  worcbip  or  worldly  ricbees.  *[p- 

&  I’us  ]!er  ben  many  mewnws  lawis  of  departing  of  p(?rsouws 

godis,  bon  fey  sbulew  be  delid  on  foure  partis,  bon  fey  & 

berne  sbulen  first  take  mesnrably  of  fes  godis;  fe  secouwd 

part  sbulde  be  ^ouyn  to  pore  &  nedy  folc  wif-outeward  ;  fe 

fridde  part  sbulde  be  ^ouuw  to  maki;^g  of  fe  cbircbe  & 

ournemejitis  of  it ;  &  f  e  fonrf  e  part  sbulde  be  dispendid  to 

kepe  fe  bousis  of  fe  parsonage.  &  fis  parting  were  ofte 

vnskileful,  &  fus  sicbe  general  lawe  wer^  nou^t.  &  'her  ben  Hurtful  disputes 
^  °  ^  ^  as  to  whether 

of ^re  difficultees  beer^,  wbat  fiwg  me^>^  sbuldew  tif e,  as  wode  tithes  are  due 

■*  f  j  a  1  j  from  woods, 

or  erbis  or  e\er  fruyt ;  wber  laboreris  sbulde/i  tife  \er  bir^;  from  wages,  from 
I  J  T  >  j  j  ’  whores,  and 

&  booris  or  vsureris  tife  ])er  wjnnjng ;  wif  many  sicbe  usurers, 
doutis  in  lawe  ;  f  e  wbicbe  dyuynes  sbulde^  leeue  yntretid,  *^hese 
&  lyue  in  poui^rt  &  s^rue  fe  cbircbe.  for  cristis  pr^stis  “Otters. 

sbulde;^  bane  no  custom  to  ocupie  bem  wif  sicbe  stryues, 

but  geder(9  al  \er  bisynesse  to  serue  god  &  bis  cbircbe. 


Qapitulum  IS""’ 


i  t  werd  to  telle  ouer  fis  bou  fes  berdis  sbulde?^  kepe  \>er  Pastors  should 

^  ^  ,  ■*  live  holily  and 

sbeep  in  boolynesse  of  \er  oune  lif  &  in  pr^cbi^g  of  preach  God’s 

goddis  word.  &  f awne  fey  leddew  bew  bi  grene  lesewis 

\ 

&  watdr  of  beuene  pat  hen  boolsum,  &  fis  is  f e  firste  otfyss  of 

fre  fat  fallif  to  a  goostly  sbepparde.  first  sbulde  f  e  persoun  The  priest  should 

r  -r  /  &  J  rr  /  think  that  all  his 

fie  in  bym  silf  lustly  fode  &  proud  aray,  &  f enke  on  fis,  fat  goods  come  from 

^  ^  J  his  poor  parish- 

bis  godis  wbawne  f ei  ben  gederid,  be  fey  neudre  so  many,  ioners, 
hen  gederid  of  bis  pore  parijscbens,  as  be?^  wedewis  &  nedy 
mea  ;  so  fat  o  peny  gederid  fus  wolde  saue  f e  lif  of  bis  sbeep 
fat  steruyf .  &  fus  it  is  a  fendis  boost  to  a  curat  to  auauwte 

hym  fat  be  may  so  mycbe  dispende  bi  ^eer*?,  sif  fei  hen 
cuylid  pens  of  pore  me^ ;  &  fis  is  noon  auau?^t  to  f  e  persouw, 
but  resouw  to  rikene  for  al  fis  almes.  &  fis  is  more  fan 
worldly  dette,  sif  en  be  is  bolduw  to  jelde  bet^re ;  &  oure  iuge 


28 


434 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XVIII. 


*[p.  12  MS.] 
God  is  most 
liberal,  and 
■wisbes  curates 
to  have  what 
they  need. 


and  that  he  will  may  not  be  disseyued,  sif  be  is  crist  wisdom  of  god.  fes 
accounfonhem.^curatis  \at  lyue^  to  lustly  shuldew  ]ienke  bou  godis  \at  J^ey 
ban  ben  gederid  of  pou^rt  of  symple  mew  bi  streit  nede 
&  bard  lif.  but  wbo  wolde  waste  a  pri^cious  water  \ai  were 
distillid  bi  bisy  trwuel,  &  caste  J^is  water  iw  a  lake  where  it 
stood  to  no  mawnws  profit  ?  &  j^es  mew  \at  lyuew  ]7us  lustly  bew 
more  vnbable  to  precbe  &  to  preye ;  but  no  drede,  si]?  oure 
god  is  resouw  &  ]?e  freest  maw  l^at  may  be,  be  wole 
curatis  bane  skileful  fode ;  but  \er  lust  may  not  be  iuge 
beere,  but  resouw  must  nedis  iuge,  for  it  mut  iuge  at  domes 
They  do  not  need  day.  &  be  Same  skile  is  of  ober  aparel,  to  bac,  to  chaumbre 

rich  clothes,  ■*  ,  •  i . 

&  to  balle,  as  many  ban  to  costly  clo]?is,  furrours  &  girdlis 
&  sbap  of  be?w  ;  &  ende  of  ]?is  is  worldly  glory  &  no  profit  to 
or^^andsome  soulis ;  &  J?e  same  sywne  is  iw  aparel  of  chaumbre,  as  iw 

proud  beddis  testeris  &  curteyns  :  bi  )?is  may  muw  se  veyn 
dispensis  \at  ]?e  fendis  cautil  haj?  fouwduw.  curiouste  stowdi]? 
iw  hallis,  bo]7e  iw  makiwg  of  housis,  iw  doseris,  bancurs 
&  cu^sbens,  &  mo  veyn  ]?iwgis  ]?aw  we  kuwnew  rikene,  as  bew 
or  valuable  plate,  di^schis  &  coupis  of  siluer  &  o\er  vessel,  &  costly  naprye. 

iw  alle  siche  sbuldew  persouws  ]?enke  of  Jis  reule  \ai  god  ba]? 
^ouyn  of  skilefuP  ende  of  alle  sicbe  ]?iwgis;  &  mesure  ]je 
menes  bi  ]?is  ende,  &  euere  more  drawe  to  poU(9rt,  pat  it 

on  ^hawk^^and  sicbe  jiiwgis.  but  pr<9stis  wastiwg  iw  oji^re 

hounds  is  damn-  H^gis  as  ben  borsis,  baukis  &  bouwdis,  &  costly  makiwg  of 

able  m  a  priest,  j  ^  7  7  7  j  o 

feestis,  bew  ful  da?wpnable  bifore  god ;  for  ]7ey  sbynew  wij? 
worldly  ioye,  &  bew  writuw  wij?  vicis  ajenws  resouw.  wbat 
skile  is  it  at  ]?e  day  of  doom  to  answers  to  pe  lord  of  ]?es 
godis  pat  pore  mew,  pat  sbuldew  baue  fes  godis,  perijscbe 
wi]7-outew  bi  many  defautis,  &  ber  godis  be  wastid  wif-ywne 
wi]?  rot  &  wormes  &  oper  man^r.  fis  is  no  skileful  acouwte 
to  god  to  jyue  bym  rikenywg  of  bis  ty]?is. 


^  skilefuly  MS. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


435 


Qapitulum  IQ”"- 


0  f  J^is  wasting  of  goddis  godis  sprmgew  sywnes  harmed 
J’e  chirche,  for  siche  ciiratis  not  ensaumple  hou 

mG;^  shuWi  fijte  ajenws  ])er  fleys.  but  it  may  falle 
many  tymes  \at  siche  p^rsou^^s  hi  lecchery  waste  yer  pore 
parijschews  godis,  &  j^is  is  a  greet  sywne.  it  is  yuel  to  kepe 
a  wast  hors  in  stable,  to  destrie  pore  mewnws  godis,  but  it  is 
worse  to  have  a  wow^ma?^  wi]7-ywne  or  wi]7-oute  at  racke  & 
at  mangor,  for  Jjis  holding  is  more  costly  &  more  wast  to 
body  &  soule.  j^e  lawe  speki]?  of  siche  holours  pat  synnen 
]7us  out  of  matrimdnye,  hou  ]?ey  hen  not  weddid  wij?  pe 
chirche  ne  wi]?  god,  pat  is  pe  soulis  spouse;  &  hou  mew 
shuldew  not  hero  per  massis,  &  bi  pe  same  sky'^'le  take  not 
of  hem  noon  oper  spiritual  soruyss.  for  al  per  lif  is  wlappid 
wi|i  sywne,  &  )>ey  don  harm  what  euero  j^ei  don.  &  pus  mew 
shulden  not  ^yue  hem  offeriwgis  ne  oj^ore  ti]?is,  J^e  while 
J^ey  lyuew  ]7us,  for  J^at  wero  consent  to  per  sywne,  &  to  nurshe 
he?w  a^enws  crist.  but  ech  maw  of  jjis  world,  be  he  neuore 
so  my^ti  heere,  pat  maki]?  ]7us  party  a^enws  crist,  mut  nedis 
falle  &  destrie  hyw  silf ;  for  treu]?e  mut  vencusche  al  oper 
j^iwg.  &  j^is  wi]7drawiwg  of  tewiporal  godis  wero  before 
bridil  a^enws  siche  mew  j^aw  to  amorsy  he?w  bi  officials,  bi 
erchedekenes  or  bi  bischops;  for  siche  robbmg  is  but  nurshiwg 
of  more  sywne.  for  siche  a  porsouw  wole  robbe  his  paries 
whawne  he  may  hie  his  sywne  ]7us  lijtly ;  &  so  J^e  pore  mew 
of  his  paries  shulew  hie  his  sywne  bi  double  weye,  boj^e  j^ey 
shulew  paye  J^orfore  to  pe  bischop,  and  be  puny^schid  bi 
cowsent  of  soule.  but  what  is  pe  paries  holpuw  herby,  but 
pf  pe  fend  helpe  a  maw  ?  for  bodily  &  goostly  J^is  curat  doi]? 
harm  to  his  sheep  more  falsly  J^an  koude  pe  fend,  for  he  is 
more  homely  enemye.  &  j^is  wi]7-drawiwg  of  godis  for  )>is 
sywne  semy]?  to  strecche  for  opere  sywnes,  for  pf  an  herde 
be  doump  at  home  &  ^yue  hjm  to  worldly  ocupaciouw,  & 
\\d|>-drawe  his  goostly  help  fro  his  sheep  pat  he  shulde  fede. 


Luxurious 
curates  do  not 
teach  their  people 
to  fight  against 
their  fiesh. 

It  is  bad  to  keep 
a  useless  horse  in 
the  stable, 

but  worse  to  have 
a  woman  at  rack 
and  manger. 

The  (pope’s)  law 
forbids  hearing 
the  mass  of  a 
fornicator. 


*[p.  126  MS.] 


Men  should  with¬ 
draw  their  tithes. 


This  would  be 
better  than 
setting  archdea¬ 
cons  to  fine  them. 


It  is  the  parish¬ 
ioners  who  pay 
the  fines. 


Withdrawal  of 
tithes  may  be 
used  against 
other  sins. 


436 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


The  tithes  may 
he  given  to  help 
poor  men  against 
the  oppression  of 
Antichrist. 


Curates  ■who  live 
at  the  Court  of 
Rome  should  not 
be  paid. 

*[p.  13  MS.] 


Prelates  should 
teach  their  peo¬ 
ple  to  conquer 
the  world  and  the 
devil. 


Readiness  to  go 
to  law  with  them 
is  not  good  teach¬ 
ing. 


or  he  stonde  in  lordis  courtis  or  in  offiss  of  kiwg  or  of 
o]>ere,  and  leeue  ])e  S(?ruyss  ]iai  god  axi]?  to  kepe  his  sheep 
in  goddis  lawe ;  pf  j^is  syme  passe  lecchery,  it  shulde  he 
more  punyphid  hi  skile.  &  so  mew  shuldew  wij-drawe 
])er  tijjis  &  jyue  hew  to  o])ere  wisely,  it  were  an  almes  & 
greet  wit  to  ^yue  tij^is  of  siche  wolues  to  opere  paripchens 
pat  hen  trwuelid  hi  lawis  I’at  an?^mnst  ha]?  hroujt  yn ;  &  so 
ofte  tyme  pe  remen  auwt  of  ti]?is  were  to  litil  for  dispensis 
J7at  an^mnst  maki]?  to  pursue  siche  mew,  pat  stondew  for 
resouw  of  goddis  lawe.  &  hou  euere  iuges  spekew  heere, 
]?is  were  not  ajenws  goddis  lawe,  for  al  siche  almes  of  ti]7is 
shulde  be  ho]7e  skileful  &  willeful ;  but  what  skile  is  it  to 
hire  a  wolf  to  do  harm  to  a  parip?  ]7is  were  a  mouywg  of 
pQ  fend,  pat  stirij?  euewe  a^enws  skile.  &  pe  same  skile  is  of 
curatis  pat  stondew  iw  pe  court  of  rome  forto  gete  mo  benefisis, 
or  to  serue  j^at  wickid  court ;  ^for  ]7es  hew  smyttid  wij? 
symonye  &  don  mew  harm  ouer  pe  see,  as  a  iust  maw  of  ynde 
prefitij?  to  englipch  men;  for  pe  lord  pat  see}>  J?is  meede  is 
euery  where  to  dele  it  wel.  for  sum  help  axi]?  bodily 
residense,  &  sum  help  axi]?  noon ;  as  preyeris  &  many  oj^ere 
gode  dedis  hew  as  wel  don  afer  as  neer ;  hut  ]?is  is  noon 
herdis  ofdss  to  be  hirid  for  ti)?is  or  offeriwgis. 

Qapitulum  20”'* 

t  were  for  to  wite  ouer  hou  prelatis  shuldew  teche  j^er 
i  sugetis  to  vencupche  pe  world  &  pe  fend,  for  to  ]?is  lore 

hen  ]7ei  holduw.  lore  to  vencuphe  pe  world  stondij? 
specialy  iw  charite,  &  iw  fleyng  of  coueytise  to  godis  of  per 
paries  &  oJ?ere ;  &  so  it  semy]?  an  yuel  lore  to  ^yue  parijschens 
ensauwple  to  plete  &  to  stryue  wi]>  hem  for  litil,  whawne  pej 
han  ynow  hi-syde.  for  siche  pie  is  grouwdid  iw  wronge  don 
a^enws  goddis  lawe,  for  hi  goddis  lawe  prestis  shuldew  haue 
no  more  hut  fode  &  hiliwg  for  per  ofSss,  &  al  pe  remenauwt  of 
per  hire  J^ey  shuldew  hope  of  god  iw  hlis.  Also  it  falli]? 


Chap.  XX.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


437 


comynly  pat  a  curat  dispendi]?  as  myche  in  plees  mayntenyd 
for  his  ti]7is  as  be^  pQ  tij^is  in  hem  silf ;  but  wheri?  is  J^anwe 
encrees  of  his  wywnywg?.  it  semy]?  pat  wra]?]7e  of  his 
pari^schen  &  harm  of  hym  sto^iden  for  pe  wjnnjng ;  but  hou 
stondi]?  ]?is  wij?  charite  to  pe  man  pat  prestis  shulde?^ 

algatis  loue  ?  &  ]7us  biddi]?  poul  to  cristewme:^,  but  specialy 

to  curatis,  pat  pey  shulden  be  moost  dere  &  not  defende  per 
oune  p^rsone ;  myche  more  j^ey  shuldew  not  defende  j^e  godis 
pat  hen  not  sib  to  hem,  but  me?^  shulde?^  ^yue  stede  to  ire 
&  algatis  pr^latis,  in  suffering  of  wrong(?  for  siche  ir^,  bayti]? 
a  pari^shen  ajenws  pe  -perBoun  longe  tyme  aftir.  &  pf  j^e 
pope  feyne  heeri?  pat  he  ^yue]?  lawis  &  weye  to  hem  to 

defende  a  mannus  wrongis  in  his  court ;  &  pis  is  shewid  for 

many  wrongis  be^  ri^tid  pere.  &  |>us  j^ey  clepen  hym  a 
champioufi^  of  rijt  of  god,  pat  can  wel  plete  &,  as  j^ey  spekew, 
wy?^ne  to  hooly  chirche  godis  pat  shulden  falle  to  it.  preise 
pey  ]7is  court  pat  han  mat^r,  but  c^rtis  heer^  is  no  mater  ;  for 
j^is  is  a  cautel  of  pe  fend  contrm'ie  to  goddis  lawe.  studie 
}>ey  cristis  paciense  &  make  ]7ei  per  chayer  in  cristis  cros, 
&  loke  jjey  whej^^r  cnst  or  his  apostlis  taujte^  j^us  to  plete 
for  worldly  ]7i?^gis.  &  eertis  ]7ey  mote?^  nedis  sue  crist  pf 

]7ey  wolen  holde  pe  weye  to  heuene.  fro  a  litil  errour  out 
■^of  ]?is  weye  may  a  man  come  hi  grace  a^en,  but  myche 
errour  wij?  errour  of  wit  maki]?  man  to  growe  in  more  errour, 
&  no  drede,  prone  who  euero  wole,  a  special  medicyn  a^en^^s 
pe  world  is  to  leeue  stryues  in  worldly  causis ;  for  pus  taujte 
crist  wi]?  his  membris.  &  pus  who  so  wole  ouercome  pe  fend, 
leeue  he  pe  fendis  lawe  &  pe  world,  &  lede  he  his  lif  bi 
cristis.  lawe,  &  ]7us  he  shal  best  vencuphe  hym  &  ^yue 
ensaumple  to  oj^ore  mew,  boj^e  to  his  pariphens  &  opere,  hou 
jjey  shuldew  vencujshe  pe  fend,  for  ]7es  two  lawis  bew  graues 
to  pe  fend  to  gnaro  mew  iw  his  net.  pf  ]?ou  fle  pride  &  his 
retenu,  J^awne  fou  yencujchist  wel  pe  fend ;  &  teche  f ou  ];is 
rewle  to  oper  mew,  &  fawne  Jjou  doost  a  curatis  office. 


Lawsuits  for 
tithes  sometimes 
cost  as  much  as 
the  tithes, 
and  the  curate 
gains  only  the 
hate  of  his  people , 


[Rom.  xii.  19.] 


The  courts  are 
praised  because 
they  win  goods 
for  the  Church. 


Christ  and  his 
apostles  never 
went  to  law. 


*[p.  136  MS.] 


The  Civil  and 
Canon  Laws  are 
pits  in  which  the 
devil  snares  men. 


438 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


Qapitulum  21”*' 


The  sort  of  pastor 
that  is  wanted. 


He  must  preach 
the  gospel. 


God  does  not 
want  rymes. 


5  it  it  wer^  to  speke  more  of  j^is  pastour^  to  ^yue  to  j^es 
sheep,  for  we  shulew  take  as  bileue  goddis  la  we 
passi]?  alle  oji^re,  bojie  in  autorite  &  in  treuj^e  &  in  wit. 

first  in  autorite ;  for  as  god  passij?  rae?^,  so  goddis  lawe  mut 
passe  in  autorite  mmnus  lawe,  &  herfore  god  bad  his  apostlis 
not  to  pr^che  mawnws  lawe  but  for  to  pmhe  ]>e  gospel  to  al 
man^r  of  men.  &  myche  more  ben  ]iey  to  blame  ]7at  pr^chen 
iapis  &  gabbiwgis ;  for  goddis  word  mut  euer(?  be  trewe  ^if  it 
be  wel  vndirstonduw,  &  ]7is  word  is  more  hoolsum  to  mew 
si]7en  it  is  bileue  &  it  techi]?  to  sue  crist,  &  ]7at  mut  ech  maw 
do  'pat  shal  be  sauyd.  &  ji^rfore  Jienke  we  herowne  nyjt 

6  day,  bo]7e  wakiwge  &  slepiwge,  for  whawne  opere  lawis  motew 
haue  ende  Jiawne  it  shal  dwelle  iw  blis ;  &  pe  herte  of  Jiis  lawe 
is  pe  gospel  of  iesu  crist.  pr^che  pr^stis  Jiis  herte  to  mew 
&  teche  ]7ey  hew  to  loue  crist ;  for  he  is  cursid  J^at  loue]?  hyw 
not  &  sue]?  hyw  not,  as  poul  seij?.  &  c^rtis  ^at  prest  is  to 
blame  pat  shulde  so  frely  haue  pe  gospel,  &  leeue]?  ]?e 
prigchiwg  per-oi  &  turnyj?  hym  to  mawnws  fablis.  for  pe  lawe 
of  god  da^wpnyj?  hym  pat  chesi]?  ]7e  worse  &  pe  heuyero 
&  leeue]?  pe  before  &  pe  lijtero,  boj7e  to  hym  &  to  pe  puple. 
&  god  axi]?  not  dyuysiouws  ne  rymes  of  hym  pat  shulde 
proche,  but  to  telle  euene  goddis  gospel  &  wordis  to  stiro  mew 
perhj.  &  ]?us  curatis  bew  not  excusid  pat  leeuew  to  proche  to 
per  sheep,  for  a  maw  shulde  not  be  curat  but  jif  he  koude 


*[p.  14  MS.]  vn'^'dirstowde  pe  gospel,  &  he  ha]?  to  myche  wawtiwg  of  wit 

to  be  a  curate  pat  cau-uot  teche  hew  herby.  &  pf  a  curat  falle  a  caas  ]?at 

understand  the  he  be  lettid  of  bis  prochiwg  bi  hap  or  defaute  of  kynde, 
gospel  and  teach  ,  i  -i  .  n  . 

it.  whawne  he  prochide  bifore  wel,  teche  he  his  floe  bi  hooly  lif 

The  second  office  &  god  wole  haue  hym  excusid.  be  secouwde  offiss  pat  fallib 

IS  to  keep  the  ,  .  *'  ■* 

wolves-  herdis  is  to  kepe  per  sheep  fro  woluys,  as  false  freris, 

pat  comew  to  mew  to  robbe  per  wolle  &  do  hew  harm,  ben 
clepid  of  crist  woluys  of  raueyn.  and  of  ]?is  perel  shulde w 
p^rsouws  warne  mew.  &  what  opere  false  pr^chouris  pat 


Chap.  XXII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


439 


comei^  to  mew  &  pr^clien  herfore,  ]7ei  bew  woluys  or  foxis  or 
houwdis,  &  alle  bes  shuldew  be  chased  fro  be  floe.  \)Q  bridde  the  third  to 

re  1  r  IT  •  *  •  ^  anoint  the 

offiss  pat  fallij?  to  p^rsouws  is  to  greese  \er  scabbid  sheep  &  scabbed  sheep, 
to  telle  hew  medicyn  of  goddis  lawe  wherby  ]iat  J^ey  may  be 
hool ;  &  ^if  jjes  herdis  faylew  iw  j^es  |»re,  ]7ey  bew  hirid  hynes 
or  woluys.  &  heer^  shuldew  p^rsouws  take  hede  ]>at  ]pey 
spuylew  not  p&r  sheep  for  wrongis  J»at  per  prdatis  axen ;  for 
]^ey  shuldew  leeue  per  cure  bifore. 


Capitulum  22“* 


i  t  wer(3  forto  wite  ouer  hou  curatis  wastew  pore  mewnws 
godis  iw  makiwge  per  kyn  riche ;  bisyde  pat  pey  spendew 
iw  per  oune  p^rsone ;  &  j7U8  ben  many  iw  englond  maad 
riche  fro  ful  symple  staat.  &  it  semyj?  pat  pe  kyng  of  pride 
ha]?  tan^t  ]?is  bi  his  firste  sywne,  for  many  curatis  han  delit 
to  haue  riche  mew  of  per  kyn  &  put  per  eldris  werew  noble 
mew,  as  ^if  per  kynrede  were  noble ;  &  ]?us  hew  silf  shuldew 
seme  noble,  as  jif  ]7ey  camew  of  greet  blood.  &  siche  bew 
turnyd  iw-to  woluys  fro  herdis  staat,  as  ipocritis ;  for  pey 
semew  to  have  an  herdis  staat,  &  ^it  ]?ey  ben  many  tymes 
fendis.  for  we  shuldew  wite  )?is  at  pe  bigywnywg  pat  prestis 
bew  maad  prelatis  of  mew,  not  to  lyue  worldly ly  ne  lustly 
ne  proudely,  but  to  lyue  in  bisy  trauel  to  kepe  per  sheep  & 
wywne  hew  heuene ;  &  so  j^ei  motew  lyue  trewely,  trauelously 
&  perelously,  si]?ew  ]?ei  motew  putte  per  oune  lif  for  per 
sheep,  as  crist  dide.  to  fis  richiwg  of  ]7ersouws  kyn  mouej? 
pe  fend  ]7es  ipocritis  bi  feyned  m^rsy  &  bi  kynde;  &  boj^e 
he  sei]?  comew  of  god.  '^What  maw  shulde  not  haue  mersy 
on  his  pore  kyn  to  helpe  hem,  for  heer^  is  more  cause  of 
mersy  pun  to  helpe  opere  strauwge  mew ;  as  a  maw  louej?  bi 
kynde  more  his  lemes  puu  opere  menuus,  so  bi  kynde  he 
shulde  loue  more  his  kyn  ]?an  opere  strawge  mew.  &  by 
fis  cause  many  pr^latis  coueytew  to  be  riche  &  auauwsen  mew 
of  per  kyn,  al  jif  fey  ben  idiotis ;  but  f e  bileue  of  iesu 


Curates  spend 
tithes  in  en¬ 
riching  their 
kinsfolk. 


Curates  like 
to  have  their 
families  rich 
and  noble. 


*[p.  146 
The  devil  a 
that  mere] 
nature  teac 
to  help 
kindred. 


440 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXII. 


Christ  did  not  cnst  shulde  teche  mew  to  quewclie  tis  pride,  crist  louyde 

enrich  his  mother  - 

and  cousins.  lul  wel  his  kyn,  as  his  modir  &  his  cosyns,  hut  he  louyde 
he?w  not  to  he  worldly  riche  but  forto  lyue  a  pore  lif,  bitwixe 
siche  lichees  &  beggyng;  for  ]7us  mew  shuldew  haue  lyued 
iw  staat  of  iwnocense  &  staat  of  blis,  &  ])is  is  best  for  ]>e  soule 

We  should  live  in  be  which  mew  shuldew  moost  loue.  &  be  loue  of  crist  is 

the  same  way  as  ^  ^ 

Christ.  loue  SO  uedeful  to  cristewmew,  ]iat  \er  loue  is  but  hate  but 

pf  it  be  ensaumplid  of  cristis  loue.  &  fus  clerkis  hatew 
•  \er  kyn  j^at  makew  hem  riche  of  pore  mewnws  godis ;  for  bi 

]7is  harmew  \er  soule  &  makew  hem  sywne  bi  many  weyes. 
\er  body  is  |>us  more  vnhable  to  s^rue  \er  soule  iw  temperur^, 
&  fey  ben  felowis  bi  assent  to  robbe  fes  pore  mew  of  \er 
godis ;  &  no  drede  cause  of  f is  pride  is  vnprofitable  to  hem, 
for  nobley  iw  virtues  shulde  be  coueytid  &  worldly  nobley 
litil  teld  by,  but  iw  as  myche  as  it  helpide  mew  to  kepe 
nobley  iw  V(9rtues.  &  iw  tokene  of  fis  fiwg  crist  cam  bofe 
of  riche  mew  &  pore,  as  of  kyngis  &  bonde  mew  fe  while 
fey  lyuedew  iw  egipt.  &  bofe  fes  condiciouws  didew  good 

These  prelates  whawne  grace  of  crist  mouyde  mew  to  V(9rtues.  &  fus  fes 

and  curates  . 

injure  their  prelatis  harmew  b^r  kyn  to  make  hem  riche  on  bis  maner. 

kindred.  .  ^ 

&  fus  fes  curatis  louywge  fus  f($r  kyn  sywnen  many  weyes 
iw  mani^r  of  loue,  for  fey  louew  f^r  oune  fleys  more  fan  fey 
louew  ])er  brif^ren  iw  god,  &  crist  seif  fey  ben  not  worfy 
of  crist  to  be  clepid  cristewmew ;  &  jit  crist  shulde  be  our(9 
nexste  fadir,  &  his  chirche  ourg  nexste  modir.  &  fus  fes 
prelatis  fwt  turnew  fis  loue  sywnew  bofe  iw  god  &  maw,  & 
disusew  kyndely  wille  as  don  sywneris  iw  leccherye ;  &  f ws 
fey  sywnew  iw  m^rsy  &  loue  &  iw  god  &  f ^r  pore  parischews. 
&  herfore  seif  poul  fwt  p^rsouws  offiss  shulde  not  be  to  parte 
fes  godis,  but  to  pr^che  &  teche  f e  folc  &  holde  hem  payed 
wif  fode  &  hiliwg.  but  litil  errour  &  ydilnesse  iw  fe 

*[p.  15  MS.]  bigywnywg  of  a  staat  briwgif  iw  '^more  aftir,  as  it  fallif 
heere  &  in  of^re  statis. 


Chap.  XXIII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


441 


Capitulum  23“* 

i  t  wer<3  forto  declar(3  heer^  ri^t  ^reahing  of  goddis  Preaching  the 
.  .  best  work  priests 

word  is  ]7e  mooste  worj^y  dede  \at  pr^stis  don  heer*?  can  do. 
amo?^g  for  crist,  mesurd  of  al  good,  vside  moost  Christ  preached 

and  bade  his 

]?is  work  heere  &  taujte  wkawne  he  wente  to  heuene  his  apostles  do  so. 

apostlis  to  do  j^is  werk ;  &  ]7us,  si]7e?^  crist  is  best  maystir, 

it  is  shewid  of  bileue  pat  prechbzg  is  pe  heste  werk  pat  a 

pr^st  doi]?  in  ]7is  weye.  Also  goodnesse  of  werkis  is 

mesurid  hi  frnyt  hat  comeh  of  hem;  but  more  fruyt  comeh  Preaching  brings 

^  ^  ^  iiiore  fruit  than 

of  good  pr^chi^g  pan  of  ony  oj^^^r  werk,  &  j^f^rfore  siche  any  other  work. 

good  pr^chiwg  is  pe  heste  werk  pat  a  pr^st  doi]? ;  for  hi  j^is  fi^i^,.gn®are^bT 

werk  a  pr^st  geti]?  goddis  childre?^  &  maki]?  hem  to  come  to  ^ot^n  to  God. 

heuene.  &  herfore  sei]?  poul  to  his  puple :  ‘‘in  crist  iesu  [i  Cor. iv,  i5.] 
'y  haue  gendrid  pu;”  &  herfore  crist  prdisij?  more  pr0chi7^g  Preaching  better 

...  .  .  than  consecrat- 

of  pe  gospel  pat  gendrij?  ^is  chirche  ]7an  gendrl?^g  of  his  ing  the  elements. 

oune  body,  al  pf  ]7ey  boj^e  ben  gode  werkis.  &  |>us  seyn 

clerkis  pat  gendrur^,  si]?  it  sauej;  comyn  kynde,  is  bet^re 

Ian  is  nurshmg  pat  saue]?  o  p(?rsone  of  j^is  kynde.  &  pus 

sei]?  crist  in  lukis  gospel  to  a  womman  pat  blisside  cristis 

modir  &  sayde,  ‘‘blissid  be  pe  wombe  pat  bar^  j^ee  &  pe  tetis  [Luke  xi.  27.] 

pat  pou.  hast  sokun,”  &  crist  seyde :  “  )e  but  blissid  ben 

pej  pat  heren  goddis  word  &  kepen  it.”  &  bi  pe  same  skile 

or  myche  more  ]?ei  ben  blissid  pat  pr^chen  goddis  word. 

lord,  hou  woTpj  werk  it  is’  to  gendr^  god  in  mannns  soule 

bi  seed  pat  is  goddis  word ;  for  ]7is  mut  haue  greet  meede 

in  heuene,  bo]?e  for  j^e  werk  in  hym  silf  &  of  j^e  children 

pat  comen  per-of.  &  herfore  seij?  ioon  euangelist  pat  he 

hap  no  more  grace  heer^  pan  to  her^  his  children  go  in  treu]?e. 

&  pf  pon.  seist  pat  a  pr(?st/  may  not  gete  siche  children  in 

god;  Curtis  he  may  bi  help  off  god,  &  ellis  no  man  may 

gete  a  child,  for  god  ^yue]?  bi  hym  silf  pe  soule,  &  who  gat 

a  child  but  ^if  it  wer^  jouyn  ?  &  herfore  fenkij?  seynt 

austyn  wel  pat  crist  dide  more  myracle  bi  his  apostlis  to 

turne  so  manye  hefen  men  in  so  short  while  fro  so  wickid 


442 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXIII. 


Good  preaching 
the  best  draft. 

*[p.  156  MS.] 


Great  sin  of 
hindering  it. 


Three  -ways  of 
sinning  as  to 
preaching : 

the  preacher  in 
not  sowing  good 
seed, 


or  in  mixing 
poison  of  worldly 
motive  with  the 
seed, 

[2  Cor.  ii.  17.] 


lif  for  to  be  jius  cristis  cbildre?7,  jian  weren  opere  myraclis 
of  crist ;  &  herfore  Jie  apostlis  chosen  more  to  pr^che  ]ian 
to  do  bodily  almes.  Also  ]7e  more  pat  crist  helpi]?  to  a  werk 
more  it  is  good ;  but  crist  helpi]?  more  specialy  to  prechiwg 
fan  to  of^r  werk,  &  f^rfore  it  mut  nedis  be  bet(?re  for  crist 
endif  it  fus  graciously.  &  herfore  seyn  wise  doctours 
it  is  more  to  pr^che  wel  fan  to  do  ony  of <?r  craft,  as  phisik 
or  alkemonye ;  &  herfore  crist  ^'‘bad  his  apostlis  do  many 
werkis  but  noon  as  fis.  for  in  fis  a  pr^st  clofif  hyr^  in 
cristis  p^rsone  &  getif  cristis  brof  ^r,  his  sister  &  his  modir. 
&  of  fis  may  a  mm  geder^  pat  it  is  more  sy7^ne  to  fayle  in 
fis  fan  to  fayle  in  opere  werkis  pat  ben  not  so  gode  as  fis  is, 
lord,  sif  f  e  sywne  of  sodom  cryede  to  god  for  greet  yemau77se, 
hou  shal  fis  eynne  pat  lettif  fis  gendrur^  crye  to  god  to  be 
a-vengid. 


Capitulum  24”*- 

i  t  wer(3  to  wite  ou^r  fis  hou  mew  fallew  iw  fis  sywne, 
&  what  medicyn  were  ajenws  it,  sif  fis  werk  is  so 
precious,  f  re  maner  of  folc  sywnew  heere ;  suTwtyme 

fe  prest  pat  shulde  preche,  fe  puple  fat  shulde  here  fis 
prechiwg,  &  he  fat  lettif  goddis  word  to  rewne.  fis  prechoure 
may  sywne  on  many  maners  bi  fat  fat  he  sowif  not  good  seed, 
but  iapis  &  gabbiwgis  or  ofere  tryuolis,  &  leeuef  to  preche 
f e  word  of  god.  for  luk  seif  fat  fat  is-  seed  fat  no  defaute 
is  fouwduw  ywne,  al  ^if  f re  defautes  ben  iw  f  e  lend  vpon  which 
fis  seed  is  castuw.  on  of er  maner  fis  prest  fat  sowif  may 
meddle  venym  wif  fis  seed,  as  whawne  he  prechif  for  yeyn 
glory  or  for  coueytise  of  worldly  good.  &  herfore  seif  poul 
to  his  puple  fat  we  ben  not  holours  of  goddis  word,  but  of 
clewnesse,  as  we  spekew  of  god,  we  spekew  bifore  god  iw  crist. 
&  wolde  god  fat  prechours  nou  wolde  lerne  fis  lessouw  of 
poul;  fawne  fey  shuldew  speke  of  god  &  not  fus  of  rotuw 
seed,  &  as  fei  werew  bifore  god,  kepiwge  good  maner  iw  fis 
lordis  presence.  &  fey  shuldew  preche  for  cristis  werchip 


Chap.  XXV.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


443 


on  his  mani^r  not  for  muc.  for  amowg  alle  symonyes  \ai 
euer^  crist  sufferide  in  ]>e  chirche  ]7is  is  J^e  fouleste  of  alle 
opere,  vsid  ofte  of  pri^chour  begg^r^s,  for  J^ey  wole?^  geder^ 
comynly  godis  aftir  pat  ]?ey  han  prechid ;  o|>er  money  or  corn 
or  what  ojere  godis  pat  pey  may  gete.  &  pQ  fonnydnesse 
of  pe  puple  maki]?  hem  parcneris  of  pe  heggeris  sywne,  for 
wha?«ne  |»ey  ^yue^i  hem  godis  heere  j^ey  assente;^  to  per 
symonye.  &  ]7is  is  a  foul  errour  pat  many  seyn  in  ]jis  mater 
pat  J^ey  ^yue^  for  goddis  lone  &  fat  is  ynow  for  hem,  for 
certis  fis  wiss  lord  axif  bof e  his  godis  &  good  maner.  &  for 
f  is  good  maner  mm  haf  meede,  &  ^if  he  faylif  hym  wantif 
meede ;  &  to  destrie  f  is  errour  seif  crist  in  f  e  gospel  of  seynt 
matheu  fat  summe  dampnyd  men  shule?^  seye  to  crist :  “  sire, 
kestidew  we  not  out  fendis  "^in  fy  name  &  didew  vertues  iw 
fy  name?”  but  crist  shal  seye  to  fese  mew:  “  sof ely,  y 
seye  to  jou  y  knowe  ^ou  not  as  childrew  of  blis,  for  ^ee 
failidew  of  good  maner.”  lord,  sif  fes  mew  shulewbe  daw^pnyd 
fat  prechen  goddis  word  iw  cristis  name  &  castew  out  fendis 
&  don  vertues,  what  meede  shulew  fes  heggeris  haue,  fat 
faylew  iw  fis  &  ly^ew  on  crist  &  seyn  fat  crist  beggide  fus 
to  holde  vp  fer  newe  ordris.  crist  wiste  ful  wel  fat  fes 
shuldew  come  whawne  he  bad  hem  not  go  fro  hous  to  hous, 
but  dwelle  iw  oon  &  wende  not  f ewnws,  &  here  not  vpon  fer 
backis  haggis  ne  sachels  to  begge  fus. 


which  is  the 
worst  of  all  forms 
of  symony,  much 
practised  by  men¬ 
dicants. 


Those  who  give 
are  partners  of 
the  sin. 


[Matt.  vii.  22.] 
*[p.  16  MS.] 


Punishment  will 
fall  on  mendi¬ 
cants  who  slander 
Christ. 


[Mark  vi.  8-10.  ] 


Capitulum  25”** 


a  s  anewtis  two  ofere  defautis  fat  lettew  goddis  word  to 

growe,  crist  tellif  f re  defautis  iw  fe  erf e  fat  shulde  take  Christ  tells  of 

,.  T  ,  1-11  o  three  defects  in 

f IS  word,  summew  ben  bi-syde  f  e  weye,  &  so  bisied  wif  the  soil  that 
f e  world  fat  goddis  word  takif  not  wif  hem,  but  f e  fendis  seed, 
lettew  it.  of^re  mew  hew  drye  as  stoons  &  han  no  delit  in 
wordis  but  jif  fey  souwew  to  worldly  wywnywg,  &  fese  wantew 
bofe  grace  &  wisdom,  fe  fridde  maner  of  mew  fat  heren 
goddis  word  hew  so  prickid  wif  worldly  richees  fat  fe 


444 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXV. 


Of  the  worst  sort 
are  emperor  pre¬ 
lates, 


who  do  for  the 
devil  what  he 
cannot  do  him¬ 
self. 


Such  a  prelate  is 
a  wicked  hay- 
ward  stopping 
Christ’s  way. 


*[p.  166  MS.] 


Friars  get  true 
preaching 
stopped  that 
their  false 
preaching  may 
he  spread. 


False  preachers 
should  he 
stopped. 


fenkiwg  on  fes  godis  letti]?  ]>e  word  of  god  to  growe ;  &  to 
J7es  ]7re  may  be  reducid  al  jie  sywne  \n  Jie  hereris.  J>e  Jridde 
mew  sywnew  more,  as  bew  emp^rour  prdatis  j^at  wolew  not 
suffers  a  maw  to  precbe  wbawne  he  telli]?  \er  defautis  but 
whawne  he  pr^isi]?  hem  &  herne,  &  jjis  nurschi]?  myche  sywne. 
for  siche  pr(?latis  kuwnew  not  pr^che  or  wolew  not  for 
bisynesse,  &  lettew  ojii^re  trewe  pr^stis  to  pr^che  bi  \er  lordly 
cautels,  passew  ])e  fend  iw  j^is  sywne  bi  menes  j?at  he  ha]? 
ordeyned  to  hem.  for  ]?e  fend  ha]?  no  iurisdiccfonw  ne  feyned 
power  as  ]>ey  han,  &  ]?us  pat  he  may  not  do  hym-silf  he  doi]> 
bi  siche  s^ruauwtis  to  hym.  &  no  drede  ]?is  is  ]?e  fendis  dede 
to  lette  mew  to  sowe  goddis  word,  for  perhy  per  sonlis  shuldew 
be  fed  &  goddis  worchip  be  don  of  mew,  but  }>ey  makew 
a  goostly  hungir  &  stoppew  pe  worchip  of  god.  but  wher(9 
is  a  worse  condicfouw  folowiwge  prolatis  of  an^fcrist?  it 
wero  yuel  to  lette  gendruro  maad  iw  laweful  matrymonye, 
]?«tpharao  dide  not  iw  egipt  but  dreynte  ]?e  childrew  whawne 
]?ey  werew  borun,  but  ]’is  is  worse  wi]?-outew  mesuro  to  lette 
pus  crist  to  be  gendrid  iw  mew.  siche  a  prolat  serny]?  a 
wickid  hayward  to  lette  trewe  mew  forto  trwuele  &  go 
euene  bi  goddis  weye,  iw  which  crist  ha]?  ^ouyn  hem  leeue  to 
go.  for  god  pat  jjuep  siche  wit  &  wille  shapi]?  pe  puple  to 
take  ]?is  seed.  it  is  al  oon  to  seye  pat  y  shul  lette  pee  bi 
iurisdicciouw,  &  to  seye  ]?is  is  a  place  pat  pe  fend  is  lord  of 
&  not  crist;  &  as  ]?es  wordis  bew  nedis  false,  so  is  ]?is 
iurisdiccfouw ;  for  he  ha]?  no  ri^t  to  seye  ]?es  wordis,  but  ]’ei 
bew  falsly  feyned  of  pe  fend.  &  freris  procurew  corny nly  bo]?e 
lordis  &  bischops  to  lette  ]?is  prochiwg,  so  pat  per  fals  prochiwg 
be  sprad  &  per  wywnywg  ajenws  crist,  &  ]>us  is  pe  puple  robbid 
of  goostly  help  &  bodily.  We  grauwtew  pat  iurisdiccfouw 
shulde  lette  false  pr(3chours  to  pr^che ;  but  nou  ha]?  pe  fend 
turnyd  cristis  chirche  bi  his  prdatis,  pat  he  pat  wolde  treuly 
pr«9che  pe  word  of  pe  gospel  wi]?-outew  hir^,  he  shal  be  put 
a-bac,  &  contrwrie  prechour  shal  be  takuw,  &  ]?us  wickid  hay- 
wardis  of  pe  fend  lettew  }»is  seed  pat  crist  shulde  sowe. 


Chap.  XXTI.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


445 


Gapitulum  26"*- 

a  nt  tus  \er  ben  many  causis  Wt  letter  goddis  word  to  causes  that  pre- 

.  .  vent  preaching; 

rewne,  &  j^e  fend  haj?  trisiuelid  abonte  |7es  cansis  many 
^eer  ful  bisily ;  for  trewe  precbi^^g  of  goddis  word  displesi]? 
myche  to  j^e  fend,  o  cause  is  dowiwg  of  ])e  cbircbe  &  richiwg  Endowment  of 
];^r-of  ovier  cristis  wille,  for  bi  J’is  prdlatis  slepe^  in  synne  which  makes 

prelates  too 

&  ben  to  fatte  to  pr^che  j^e  puple,  &  ]7us  per  bisynesse  is  fat  to  preach. 

stoppid  to  gete  h.Qm  more  of  worldly  muc.  &  j^us  |>ei  fallen 

in  ^L-R-oper  cause  pat  pei  ben  not  payed  of  poulis  reule  to 

baue  yoow  of  fode  &  hili?^g.  &  beer*?  breke?j  out  J^es  freris 

ordris,  for  al  ^if  Jiei  ban  no  worldly  lordcbip  as  ban  prestis 

pat  ben  dowid,  jit  ]7ei  spuylew  men  of  moeblis  &  waste^>^  bem  Friars  rob  men  of 
p  ,  .  p  ,  .  .  ,  p  movable  goods. 

m  ROVimme  &  bousis,  &  pis  excees  is  more  synne  pan  synne  ot 

pe  fend  in  o  p^rsone.  &  ]7us  };ey  turnen  j^e  ende  of  per 

precbing  for-to  gete  bem  sicbe  godis.  &  J^is  entent  mut  nedis 

make  falsed  in  man^r  of  per  prechi>^gJ  for  ];ei  shapen  per  They  preach 

s^rmouns  more  to  gete  bem  good  j^an  to  profite  to  pe  cbircbe ; 

&  as  pe  firste  wile  of  pe  fend  bigan  soone  in  siluestris  tyme, 

so  J’is  secound  wile  bigan  in  grounding  of  J^es  newe  ordris. 

be  bridde  cause  pat  lettib  trewe  pr^cbing  is  appropring  of  Appropriation 

cbircbes.  for  wbanne  cbircbes  ben  approprid,  Jes  curatis  Appropriators 

tellen  not  bi  fis  pr^cbing,  as  munkis  or  chanouns  or  opere  gather  tithes 

collegies,  but  bi  gedering  of  godis;  &  ]?us  jiey  ben  maad 

slowe  to  pr^cbe  &  stronge  to  geder(9  dymes  to  hem.  &  fis 

cautel  cam  latere  yn  &  is  alarged  by  pe  pope,  pe  fourj^e  cause 

is  bringing  in  of  false  freris  bi  many  cuntreys ;  for,  as  it  is  False  friars 

seid  bifore,  jiei  letten  trewe  pr^cbing  to  renne  &  maken 

curatis  bi  many  weyes  to  leeue  fis  moost  worjy  offiss. 

First  ]7ey  robben  bem  many  weyes  &  maken  hem  bisy  for 

to  lyue,  for  J?ey  deprauen  hem  to  per  pariscbens  bi  florijsbid  slander  parish 

wordis  pat  j^ey  bringen  yn ;  &  no  drede  bey  shapen  per  They  preach 

u-j  ^  •  01  -  -i.!  1  elaborate  ser- 

sermouns  oi  dyuy^siouns  &  opere  lapis  pat  bey  maken  ^[p.  i7  ms.] 

'  ,  .  mons  and  teach 

moost  plese  be  puple.  &  bus  bey  erren  in  bileue  &  maken  that  no  others 

^  ^  are  worth  any- 

pe  puple  to  trowe  to  bem  pat  s^rmouns  ben  noujt  but  in  ]7er  thing. 


446 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XX’V’I. 


Simple  curates 
are  afraid  to 
preach. 


The  new  sects 
sin  worse  than 
Sodom  and 
Gomorrha. 


The  people  are 
infected  with 
this  sin. 


People  should 
not  give  to  the 
friars. 


Court  of  Pome 
the  nest  of  Anti¬ 
christ. 


Sects  disturb  the 
Church  militant. 


foorme  &  Jjus  ]?ei  stopper  symple  curatis  \ai  ]?ei  doren  not 
pr^che  to  ]?e  puple,  &  j^is  defaute  of  pr(9climg  of  crist  is  more 
]7an  defante  \n  hereris.  &  so  as  crist  sei]?  \n  j^e  gospel,  boj^e 
sodom  &  gomor  shule^  be  lesse  punysbid  at  domes  day  l^an  J^es 
newe  sectis  broujt  yn ;  for  J^ey  sywnedew  \n  mawnws  seed,  but 
]7es  sy?^new  in  seed  of  god,  }>at  is  goddis  word,  ]iai  pmtis 
sbuldef^  pr^che  to  turne  \q  lewid  puple  to  god.  &  as  it  is 
seyd  bifore,  fe  puple  is  smyttid  bi  J^is  sywne,  for  J^e  puple 
assenti]?  to  hem  bi  iapis  &  wilis  fat  J’ey  tellen  hem.  fe  puple 
shulde  not  trowe  to  j^e  prechour  what  euer^  he  seye  in  ]7is 
staat,  but  ^if  his  word  be  grouwdid  in  god  as  goddis  lawe  or 
suynge  fer-oi.  for  j^is  staat  is  not  couenable  to  telle  iapis 
ne  bourdis  to  mew,  but  fat  j^at  wole  trewely  fede  fer  soule, 
as  is  fe  gospel  &  ofer  goddis  lawe.  &  j^is  bourdiwg  or  of  ere 
iapis  shulde  make  j^es  freris  suspect  heert?  &  make  hem  wante 
worldly  wywnywg,  for  J>ey  bew  wdr]?y  myche  more  peyne ; 
but  lewidnesse  of  j^e  puple  maki]?  hem  nurshe  fer  mooste 
enemyes.  &  god  make  J^is  enemyte  knowuw.  for  ];is  is  fe 
laste  &  |>e  mooste  fendis  cautel;  but  good  wille  &  trewe 
speche  of  goddis  lawe  shulde  make  hem  knowuw.  for  failiwg 
of  goddis  word  &  coueytise  of  mennus  good  shewew  opiwly 
to  mew  whoos  childrew  fat  J^ey  ben.  lord,  si)>ew  pari^shens 
shuldew  take  fe  pr^chiwg  of  fer  oune  curat  &  j^e  mynistriwg 
fat  he  shulde  do,  for  ]7at  shulde  suffise  to  fat  puple,  "Why 
shuldew  not  mew  fle  fro  j^es  false  prophetis,  as  crist  biddi]?  iw 
fe  gospel?  but  bullis  of  fe  court  of  rome  blyndew  many 
mew  heer^,  for  it  semef  fe  bed  of  errour  &  ^ro^ve  nest 
of  auif/cwist. 


Qapitulum  2[7”*‘] 

0  f  ]7is  may  wise  mew  see  fat  |>es  four^  sectis  newe  brou^t 
iw,  as  emp^rour  clerkis,  muwkis  &  chanouws  &  j^es  foure 
ordris  of  freris,  disturblew  moost  j^is  fijtiwge  chirche 
&  puttew  it  fro  fe  cours  of  crist,  &  fus  fes  mew  fat 
nurshew  hem,  as  worldly  lordis  &  fownyd  comyns  &  lewid 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


447 


pr(9stis,  ]>at  kunnen  not  speke  or  dorew  not  speke  in  goddis 
cause,  nurshen  an^^'crist  &  hise  traytourly  ajenus  crist.  _f>at 
ordr^  pat  crist  ha]?  ordeyned  in  his  chirche  8hulde?^  we  holde, 
&  mewde  errours  in  ]7i8  ordr^;  &  not  brh^ge  in  newe  charg 
to  pe  chirche.  for  %s  wanting  of  gode  partis  is  defaute  in 
our(3^niodir  body,  so  sup^rfluyte  is  defaute  in  pQ  same  body; 
For  ]7is  brmgij?  in  ydilnesse  &  chargi?^g  of  hooly  chirche. 
&  bileue  techi]?  mew  pat  per  is  as  myche  wit  iw  pQ  ordenauwse 
of  crist  as  iw  pQ  wordis  of  his  gospel ;  and  bileue  techij? 
ouer  pat  crist  faylide  not  to  his  chirche  to  ^yue  his  ordenauwse 
to  it  in  pe  making  of  hir  partis,  for  mew  puttew  as  myche 
wit  or  more  to  good  ordenauwse  of  maw  as  to  worchiwg  of 
maw  aftir  ]?is  ordenauwse  bifore.  for  wiser*?  mew  motew 
ordeyne  first,  &  lesse  wiss  motew  worche  per-oitir.  &  ]?is 
mouej?  many  mew  to  speke  a^enws  ]?es  four^  sectis,  for  no 
maw  kan  grouwde  he?w  iw  pQ  ordenauwse  of  cristis  lawe,  & 
no  maw  seif  f^^t  crist  format  hem  pf  crist  wolde  f^^t  fey 
werew  of  his  chirche ;  &  f  us  mew  puttew  vpon  crist  of^r  foly 
or  ng<?gligense.  ‘but  who  shulde  her^  fis  blasferaye  but  pf  he 
spake  sharply  a^enw5  it  ?  cristis  ordenauwse  is  put  bi-hynde 
&  his  lore,  &  of er  brou^t  iw,  &  fis  turnef  f e  chirche  vpsedouw, 
&  lettif  mew  to  S(?rue  crist.  and  lewid  foolis,  pat  arguew 
heer^  pat  crist  ordeyned  not  fis  pr(?st,  shuldew  lerne  fe  lawe 
of  porfirie,  hou  god  ordeynede  iw  a  comyn  fiwg  alle  fe 
sywguleris  f^r-of.  &  f us  dwelle  fau  iw  fe  iust  bouwdis  pat 
god  haf  ordeyned  for  his  prljst,  &  f  awne  god  haf  ordeyned 
fee  iw  fe  comyn  kynde  of  prestis.  but  an^^'crist  can-not 
grouwde  pat  god  ordeynede  fe  kynde  of  popis,  ne  of  of^re 
emp(?rour  clerkis,  ne  of  muwkis,  ne  of  chanouws,  ne  of  four*? 
ordris  of  freris,  al  pf  he  ordeynede  good  to  come  of  hem; 
as  god  ordeynede  no  maw  to  sywne  al  pf  he  ordeynede  good 
to  come  of  sywne.  &  fes  four*?  ordris  smacchen  sywne,  sifew 
fei  tellen  not  first  cristis  ordenauwse,  but  bringing  yn  of  fe 
fend  to  reuerse  f e  ordenauwse  of  crist.  &  fus  lordis  of  fis 
world  f*^t  mayntenew  lumpis  of  fes  ordris  &  f *?r  housis  & 
possessiouws,  wif  of^re  fiwgis  pat  fey  ban  fouwduw,  motew 


*[p.  176  MS,] 
Superfluity  in  the 
Church  as  had  as 
defect. 


Christ  gave  no 
ground  for  these 
orders. 


Keep  yourself  in 
the  hounds  that 
Christ  ordained 
for  his  priests. 

Antichristcannot 
prove  that  God 
ordained  these 
four  orders. 


These  four  orders 
smack  of  sin. 


I 


448 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI.  [Chap.  XXVII. 


Cain’s  castles. 


Caring  more  for 
their  bye-laws 
than  for  Christ’s 
law  makes  these 
rotten  sects. 


*[p.  18  MS.] 


nedis  sywne,  \n  as  myche  as  j^ei  reuersew  cristis  ordenauwse, 
&  \n  j^at  \at  j^ey  letten  pore  pr(?stis  to  pr^che  \q  gospel  to  j^e 
puple,  al  pf  pey  ben  not  of  ]7es  newe  ordris  pat  hen  closid  in 
cayms  castels.  y  rede  not  of  cristis  apostlis  pat  J^ey  kepte^ 
j^is  man^r  of  pr^chiwg,  wbawne  pe  hooly  goost  hadde  tanjt 
hem  to  gete  to  crist  al  j^is  world.  &  pat  pr^st  pat  sne]?  pis 
goost  is  in  j^at  ordr^  pat  crist  hap  ordeyned.  weddiwg  wi]? 
fes  newe  bilawis,  passmge  pe  wedding  wi]?  goddis  lawe, 
maki]?  ]ies  newe  rotur.  sectis  &  putti]?  bi-bynde  pe  sect  of 
crist.  &  J’us  jjes  ordris  newe  bron^t  in  hringen  wi]?  hem  a 
newe  bileue,  pat  noon  of  cristis  sect  wi]?-outew  hem  lyne|>  so 
hoolyly  as  J^ey,  pat  lordis  han  a  passiwge  merit  to  grou^tde 
]7es  ordris  &  jyue  hem  godis,  but  pey  ^Vole^  not  do  I’is 
charite,  be  j^ey  neu^r^  woxu?^  so  ryche,  but  j^ey  wolde;^ 
rapere  destrie  oj^^re  newe  ordris  pat  hen  brou^t  in ;  &  }>us  pe 
laste  ordr(?  of  freris  seij?  a^enus  goddis  lawe  pat  willeful 
begging  is  more  meedeful  j^an  ony  lif  of  ]7es  opere  ordris. 


Qapitulum  28“’ 


Christ  ordained 
that  his  apostles 
should  be  separa¬ 
ted, 


and  that  they 
should  be  bound 
to  no  one  place 
or  people. 


The  churches, 
etc.,  of  the  orders 
ruin  old  parish 
churches. 


m  en  may  se  bi  lif  of  ordris  hou  cristis  ordenauwse  is 
lettid.  crist  ordeynede,  as  hym  pou^te  best,  pat  his 
disciplis  aftir  his  steymg  to  heuene  shuldew  be  departid 
oon  fro  an  open.  &  ech  of  hem  shulde  haue  his  folc,  & 
shuldew  not  he  weddid  wij?  mawnt^s  lawe,  ne  wi]?  folc,  ne  wi]? 
housis,  but  holde  hem  payed  of  goddis  lawe,  &  chauwge  folc 
as  god  mouyde  hem,  &  haue  no  propr^  dwellmg  of  per  oune, 
as  crist  j^er  maystir  taujte  bifore.  Al  >]7is  is  reu(?rsid  nou  bi 
help  &' assent  of  mew;  for  herto  helpew  pe  pope  &  prelatis, 
worldly  lordis  &  ordris  hem  silf,  &  pore  mew  hew  nedid  to 
helpe  as  beestis  led  to  be  killid.  costly  chirchis  of  j^es  ordris 
&  opere  housis  pat  }>ey  han  destrien  olde  parip  chirchis 
pat  werew  ordeyned  bi  cristis  apostlis.  &  si]?  crist  is  lord 
of  alle  &  not  contrme  to  hym  silf,  no  drede  mew  han  not 
his  godis  ]?us  to  reu^rse  his  ordenauwse;  &  ]?us  ben  manye 


Chap.  XXVIII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


449 


cayms  castels  maad  &  maytened  to  ]?es  ordris  ajenws  leeue 
of  ]>e  cheef  lord,  but  who  dredi]?  pat  ne  he  is  wro];  her-wij?  ? 
&  j^is  seme]?  pQ  cause  of  werris  &  wrongis  J?at  ben  nou  growuw 
in  j?e  chirche.  lordis  &  me^^  pat  mijtew  helpe  heer^  shulde^ 
make  mew  turne  to  cristis  ordr(9.  &  ^if  persouws  haddew  no 
glebe  &  no  propre  hous  as  eritage,  ]?ey  suedew  more  crist  & 
his  apostlis ;  &  wolde  god  ]?ey  woldew  do  ]7us.  For  it  is 
takuw  of  bileue  pat  pe  ordenauwse  of  crist  bi-syde  siche 
housis  &  cloystris  spedij?  more  to  do  his  s^ruyss  pdM  siche 
contrariQ  ordenauwsis ;  &  her-fore  ]?es  newe  ordris  motew 
nedis  lyue  contraviQ  to  crist.  for  si]?ew  ordenauwsis  &  lyues 
gon  to-gidere  of  mew  heer*?,  as  cristis  ordenauwse  is  chauwgid, 


These  many 
Cain’s  castles  are 
cause  of  wars 
and  wrongs. 


Parsons  would 
be  better  without 
parsonage  or 
glebe. 


Since  the  re¬ 
ligious  leave 
Christ’s  rule, 
their  life  is  also 
contrary  to 
Christ. 


SO  lyues  of  ]?es  lumpis  bew  chauwgid,  &  no  drede  to  pe 
worse,  as  mawnws  ordenauwse  is  worse  pan  cristis.  &  ^it 
lordis  of  Hs  world  to  whom  crist  was  so  kynde  bew  not  Lords  have 

^  ,  priests  living  in 

payed  of  ]?is  reuorsiwge,  but  bew  brou^t  iw  bi  J?e  fend  to  theirhouses.who 

haue  dwelliwge  iw  per  housis  bo]?e  curatis  &  ]?es  newe  ordris, 

as  ]?ou  mayst  se  iw  lordis  housis  porsouws  or  muwkis  or 

chanouws  &  algatis  freris  to  lede  per  meyne.  but  god  mut 

algatis  punyshe  j^is,  for  J?es  porsouws  shuldew  kepe  per  sheep 


aftir  pe  lawe  pat  god  ha]?  ^ouyn  he?w.  but  who  may  reuorse 

goddis  ordenauwse  ^'heero  but  ^if  he  rewne  iw  his  offense,  &*[p.  is&MS.] 


]?us  lordis  sywnew  heero  bo]?e  apnus  god  &  maw  &  lettew 
goddis  pees  to  be  tau^t,  &  ]?us  londis  motew  nedis  be  dis- 
turblid.  &  as  anewtis  ]?es  newe  ordris  pat  ben  scaWid  in 
lordis  housis,  it  is  a  more  vnkyndly  wondin,  .&  helpi]?  pe 
fend  to  marr^  per  housis.  for  as  pey  seyn  pat  grouwdidew  rounders  of 

,  cloisters  say  that 

j?es  cloystris,  ]?es  mew  my^tew  no  more  dwelle  out  per-oi  pan  monks  may  no 

r.  i  1  n  J  O  I  O  i  -1  -1  1  1 

n^s  myjte  dwelle  out  ot  wat^r,  lor  Yertvi  pat  pey  han  p^r-  them  than  fish 
ywne.  for  ellis  ]?es  cloystris  werew  not  nedeful  ne  per  oo]? 
to  kepe  per  reule.  &  siche  wondris  newe  broujt  iw  motew 
nedis  marre  mew  of  pe  world,  for  daliauwse  wi]?  newe  deuels 


briwgi]?  iw  newe  giles  to  lette  cristewmew.  but  su?w  mew  some  men  think 


grucchen  more  heere  pat  persouns  bew  holdew  ]?us  traytourly 
arenas  pe  seruyss  pat  crist  ha]?  lymytid  to  kepe  pe  soulis  of 


that  keeping 
parsons  from 
their  work  is 
even  worse. 


his  sheep,  &  no  drede  crist  pri^isi]?  moost  ]?is  offiss  amowg 


29 


450 


DE  OFFICIO  FASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXYIII. 


th^gs  ^to  o]?ere,  &  ^it  cowsente7^  ]7es  worldly  lordis  in  cowardise 
rights.  ajenws  crist,  for  ]7ey  destnen  not  siche  traytours  of  god,  but 


fat  shulde  be  per  bye  offiss. 


Qapitulum  29 


m. 


WhatmenshoTild 
be  curates,  and 
who  should 
choose  them. 


Claims  of  the 
Pope,  of 

bishops,  and  of 
lay  patrons. 


Simony  in 
appointipents. 


Curates  should 
have  only  food 
and  clothing, 


and  then  there 
would  be  no 
striving  for  cures. 


*[p.  19  MS.] 


m  en  my^tew  heere  toucbe  ouer  f  is  what  man^r  man  is  able 
bi  god  to  be  chosun  to  curatis  offiss,  &  who  shulde  chese 
hym,  &  on  what  maner.  &  no  drede  siche  a  pr(?st  pat 
haf  bof e  wit  &  wille  to  do  fe  fre  offisis  of  an  herde,  fat  ben 
teld  bifore  tyme,  shulde  be  takuw  to  f  is  offis  aftir  f  e  lawe 
&  wille  of  god.  but  who  shulde  chese  hym  f  ^rto  is  myche 
strif  by  mmnus  lawe ;  as  f  e  pope  seif  pat  he  shulde 
lymyte  alle  curatis  to  siche  offisis.  bischops  seyn  pat  fei 
shuldew  ^yue  siche  offiss  who  euer(?  pr^sentif,  &  lewyd 
patrouws  seyn  pat  fey  shuldei^  pr^sente  to  siche  offiss  bi  per 
lordchip,  but  goddis  lawe  tellif  litil  or  nou^t  of  siche  chesiwg 
of  curatis.  &  no  drede  pat  ne  coueytise  &  pride  reyngnew 
in  alle  fes  fre  cheseris,  for  fe  pope  haf  fe  firste  fruytis  & 
many  pftis  gon  bi  symonye,  &  two  opere  axen  S(9ruyss  of 
hym  pat  fey  maken  curat.  &  fus  fenke;^  summer  pat  bi 
goddis  lawe  &  resouw  curatis  shulde;^  wel  do  per  offiss  & 
haue  no  more  but  fode  &  hiliwg,  &  of^r  fe  puple  pat  shulde 
be  tau^t  or  pr^stis  bi  per  oune  wille  shuldew  chese  fis 
s^ruyss  of  pr(9stis;  &  fa?tne  it  wer(9  more  meedeful,  and  no  strif 
shulde  fa^ne  falle  aboute  fe  godis  of  fis  curat,  for  he  shulde 
haue  no  wast  godis  but  fat  pat  were  nedeful  to  his  offiss. 
&  instuyng  wif  iwductiwg  &  many  of  ^re  mawnws  lawis  werew 
not  to  charge,  but  ri^t  offiss  fat  fis  curat  shulde  do.  &  it 
semyf  a  greet  fraldom  brou^t  in  bi  an^mnst  pat  a  puple 
pat  fe  pope  knowif  not,  as  he  knowif  not  fis  able  pr^st, 
shulde  be  nedid  bi  fe  pope  to  take  fis  pr<9st,  &  jyue  hym 
godis  more  fan  goddis  ^'lawe  lymytif  hou  euer^  pat  he 
mynistr^ ;  for  bofe  fis  almes  shulde  be  meedeful  &  frely 
don  bi  goddis  lawe,  &  it  were  to  greet  seruage  to  nede  me» 


Chap.  XXX.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


451 


to  ^jue  \er  godis  to  a  prest  \at  dide  hem  harm,  ^e‘  pf  he  vjQxe 
cause  of  \er  daw^pnywg.  but  ]?e  fendis  part  is  so  strong,  & 
strengj^id  bi  ipocrisie  \dX  mawnws  lawe  is  so  hooly  &  biddi]? 
men  to  obesche  ]ierto  vp  payne  of  \er  dampnaciou^,  j^at 
goddis  lawe  is  put  bihynde.  mew  shuldew  bi  goddis  lawe 
jyue  ]7is  almes  frely  &  wisely  to  ]?at  prelat  \at  S(?ruede  hem 
trewely  iw  j^is  offiss,  and  so  j^ey  motew  kuwne  goddis  lawe 
&  holde  hem  payed  of  j^is  pfte,  for  ]7us  didew  poul  &  o\ere 
apostlis.  what  lawe  shulde  reuerse  ]?is  resouw  ?  &  it  semy]? 
not  a  popis  offiss  to  make  ]7us  pr(?latis  iw  vnknowuw  cuwtreys ; 
for  it  is  neper  grouwdid  in  goddis  lawe  J^wt  per  shulde  be 
siche  a  pope  ne  pat  he  shulde  ]7us  reule  pe  puple  bi  pe 
lordchip  of  his  lawe.  &  no  drede  pf  j^es  two  shuldew  be, 
crist  wolde  haue  ensaumplid  hem ;  for  crist  failide  not  iw 
siche  hye  poyntis  J7wt  werew  so  nedeful  to  his  chirche.  &  ]7us 
crist  iw  leeuywg  of  ]7is  techij?  pat  it  shulde  not  be,  for  ellis 
crist  were  defauty  iw  ordeynywg  for  his  chirche. 


Qapitulum.  SO”*- 

^  it  trewe  mew  han  delit  to  reherse  ]7is  bileue,  for  it  is 
more  precious  J^an  ony  gold  or  precious  stoon,  &  triacle 
to  lordis  &  many  op  ere  to  apwstowde  pe  fend  &  hise. 
&  ]7is  bileue  stondi]?  iw  ]7is,  pat  no  man  shulde  sue  oper  pope 
ne  bishop  ne  ony  auwgel  but  iw  as  myche  as  he  sue]?  crist,  for 
crist  is  bo]?e  god  &  maw.  &  ]?is  bileue  wolde  teche  lordis  to 
purge  per  reumes  of  an^^crist ;  &  si]?en  pe\  han  many  skiles 
pat  prestis  shuldew  not  be  ]?us  dowid,  bo]?e  bi  pe  olde  lawe 
&  ]?e  newe,  &  bi  j^e  lif  pat  crist  ledde,  ]?ey  shuldew  be  heere 
hardy  iw  bileue  &  lette  ]7is  dowiwg  of  an^mrist,  &  neper 
obesche  to  pope  ne  bischop  but  pf  ]?ey  taujtew  pat  pey  suedew 
crist  iw  ]7is.  &  seyntis  pat  ]?ey  kuwnen  alegge  shuldew  nej^^r 

be  heer^  suyd  ne  trowid,  but  pf  it  be  tau^t  pat  ]?ei  suedew 
crist  iw  pat  pat  ]?ey  helden  wij?  ]?is  dowiwg.  &  si]?en  lordis  han 
<?owscience  her-of  &  it  is  sywne  to  do  ajenws  cowscience,  pey 


Men  have  to  pay 
their  priest,  even 
if  he  does  them 
harm. 


Popes  should  not 
appoint  prelates 
in  distant  coun¬ 
tries. 


True  men  de¬ 
light  to  repeat, 
that  no  man 
should  he  fol¬ 
lowed,  save  as 
far  as  he  follows 
Christ. 


Lords  who  be¬ 
lieved  this  would 
stop  endowment. 


452 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


*[p.  195  MS.] 


Christ  always 
gave  a  reason¬ 
able  answer  to 
questions. 


Priests  should 
not  obey  pope  or 
bishop  without 
Christ’s  authori¬ 
ty. 


Kings  should 
appoint  prelates. 


All  these  evils 
come  from  folly 
of  the  clergy  and 
sloth  of  lords. 


shuldew  axe  of  popis  &  pr^latis  hou  jjey  grouwdew  j^is  in  crist. 
&  pf  ]7ey  wolew  not  or  kuwnew  not,  in  \at  j^ey  shewed  \at  ]?ey 
hen  foolis  to  holde  j^is  &  lyue  ]7dr-aftir,  si]?  it  is  not  gronwdid 
vpon  crist.  &  pf  j^ey  seyn  \at  crist  grouwdi]?  it  to  be  don  of 
bis  vikeris,  sbewe  ]?ey  wberd  &  in  wbat  man^r,  &  ]?awne  \er 
conscience  is  clerid.  &  pf  ]?ey  ^'gabben  or  feynew  beerd  nle^^ 
sbuldew  not  trowe  be^  in  ]?is,  but  bane  bem  suspect  of  errour, 
si]?  ]?ey  suew  not  crist  in  ]?is.  for  crist  was  neudre  axid 
questions  \at  ne  be  suyde  bis  godbed  &  made  asee]?  vpon 
resouw  to  bem  ]>ai  axiden  ]?is  questions  of  bym.  &  ]?us  sbul- 
dew  kyngis  axe  ]?e  pope  bou  be  grouwdi]?  ]7is  dowiwg  on  crist, 
&  to  robbe  ]?us  reumes,  &  to  make  bym  pr(?latis  at  bis  wille, 
si]?  cnst  taujte  bis  apostlis  to  cbese  matby  bi  lot.  &  ]?is 
principle  of  bileue  sbulde^  pr^stis  bolde  &  lerne  goddis  lawe, 
&  not  obescbe  to  pope  or  bisbop  but  in  ]?at  ]?at  crist  grouwdi]? 
it;  &,  in  ]?is  cause  ]?ey  may  cbalenge  belp  of  ]?er  er]?ely  lord, 
&,  pf  bem  faylide  belp  beer(9,  be  redy  to  suffers  martirdom. 
&  ciprian  made  ]?is  lawe,  &  it  is  in  \e  popis  bokis,  crist 
onely  sbulde  be  berd  in  ]?at  \ai  be  speki]’  moost  principaly. 
&  ]?us  si]?  ne^er  popis  ne  biscbopis  kuwnew  grouwde  bi  crist  ]?is 
curatis  offiss,  ne  ]iat  ]?ey  sbuldew  ]?us  make  p^rsouws,  ]?e  cbircbe 
sbulde  apnstonde  bem  &  turne  apn  to  goddis  lawe  in  ]?e 
lyuyr-g  of  curatis.  &  it  falli]?  to  kyngis  beerd  to  ordeyne  ]?es 
pr^latis  bi  goddis  lawe,  for  J^ey  sbuldew  quykene  ]?e  kyngis 
puple  &  belpe  \at  ]?e  kynge  ledde  not  deuels.  &  si]?  ]?is  is  ]?e 
fouleste  offiss  me^^  ban  beer^  in  er]?e,  kyngis  shuldew 
belpe  &  mayntene  \er  curatis  apnws  an^mrist  &  bise  ;  &  ]?us 
pf  ]?is  bileue  of  poul  wer*?  wisely  suyd  of  clerkis  &  defendid 
of  worldly  lordis,  as  ]?ey  ben  boldu?5  to  defende  it,  errours 
of  reumes  sbulde?^  be  destried  be?^  broujt  in  bi  miti- 
crist.  for  wise  curatis  sbulde?^  apnstowde  it  &  seculer 
lordis  sbulde^  mayntene  ber^,  &  ]?us  noon  errour  in  goddis 
lawe  reyngny]?  but  for  foly  of  clerkis,  &  for  slou]?e  of 
worldly  lordis  ]?(?t  belpew  not  heere  ajenws  ]?e  fend.  &  ]?us  of 
alle  worldly  godis  \ai  clerkis  ban  in  ])er  bond,  bo]?e  clerkis 
&  pore  men  sbuldew  be  lordis  of  fes  godis,  for  fey  sbuldew 


Chap.  XXXL] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


453 


lyue  in  grace  &  haue  of  hem  hat  hem  nedib  ;  &  no  drede  l>es  Lordship  of  the 

^  •’  clergy  should  be 

two  shuldew  be  goostly  lordis  &  not  worldly.  &  many  mew  spiritual,  as  is 

may  be  to-geder^  jjus  goostly  lordis  of  o  J’yng,  &  haue  vss  \at  in  heaven. 

acordi]?  to  hem  of  j^e  same  j^iwg  wi]?-outew  chidiwg,  as  seyntes 

\at  bew  iw  heuene  han  vss  of  alle  j^es  worldly  godis,  but  j^ey 

wastew  not  j^es  godis  but  ban  ioye  \at  goddis  wille  is  don  of 

hem ;  &  j^is  is  pe  freest  vss  pat  men  han  off  worldly  godis. 

&  ]7us  ^if  ]7is  principle  of  bileue  wer^  wel  practisid  of  pe 
chirche,  goddis  lawe  shulde  turne  ajen  &  mannus  lawe  shulde 
be  dispisid,  for  no  dedis  shuldew  be  acceptid  but  pf  J^ey  ben 
grouwdid  iw  cristis  lawe,  &  so  alle  man(9r  of  mew  '^'shuldew  *[p.  20  ms.] 
stonde  iw  grouwd  of  crist  &  his  lawe. 


Qapitulum  ST”- 


i  t  wer(?  for  to  wite  ou^r  J^is  hou  cristis  chirche  is  disseyued 
bi  suppliyng  of  vikeris,  &  |>es  p(9rsouws  ben  absent  pe 
while,  for  ]7es  p^rsouws  motew  nedis  s^rue  crist  or  iw 
doynge  wel  or  iw  sufferiwge,  &  herfore  J^ey  han  of  cristis 
chirche  per  large  hir^  of  goddis  godis.  ech  siche  persouw  mut 
nedis  answer*?  bi  resouw  to  god  for  alle  his  sheep,  but  mawnws 
lawe  bigili]?  not  god  to  answers  J'us  for  herdis  offiss,  & 
periore  it  mut  be  grouwdid  iw  goddis  lawe  to  holde  ]7us 
residense  bi  viker^.  but  it  semyj?  c^rteyn  of  goddis  lawe  pat 
noon  may  teche  jjis  bi  resouw  to  be  j^us  herde  of  ]?es  sheep, 
&  to  be  ]7us  absent  fro  hem ;  &  herfore  it  semy]?  not  but  to  be 
a  feynywg  of  j^e  fend.  &  perfore  j^is  herdis  floe  may  resonably 
wi]7-drawe  his  hive  for  he  trauelip  not  on  hem  bi  pat  lawe 
pat  he  axi]?  his  hire.  &  cursiwg  is  a  fendis  fyndiwg  to  curse 
mew  ]7us  for  worldly  godis ;  for  jjawne  hauywg  of  ]?es  godis 
is  more  desirid  j^an  blessiwg  of  per  sheep  ;  but  who  may  holde 
charite  &  ]7us  chese  j^is  worldly  hauywg  ?  for  a  maw  shulde  loue 
more  his  sheep  pan  alle  his  godis  or  his  body,  si]?  he  shulde 
putte  his  lif  for  his  sheep,  as  crist  dide.  &  ]?is  mouej?  many 
mew  to  sette  Util  bi  siche  cursiwg ;  for  whawne  maw  curse]?  vn- 


Absent  curates 
and  their  vicars. 


The  curate  is 
responsible  for 
his  flock, 


and  by  God’s  law 
may  not  absent 
himself. 


The  flock  may 
withdraw  his 
hire  if  he  neglects 
his  work. 

To  curse  for 
tithes  shows 
more  care  for 
money  than  for 
the  flock. 


454 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXXI. 


To  employ  a  vicar 
does  not  excuse 
the  curate  to 
God. 


Prayer  and  study 
alone  are  not  the 
work  of  a  curate. 


•[p.  20&  MS.] 


A  parson  that 
does  his  duty 
may  he  some¬ 
times  absent. 


Hirelings  say 
that  if  a  parson 
may  he  absent 
a  few  days,  why 
not  more  ? 


Hard  to  blame  a 
man  who  absents 
himself  to  study 
God’s  law. 


skilefuly,  he  cursi]?  hym  silf  &  not  his  sheep,  also  ]7re  offisis 
of  goostly  herde  motew  haue  his  presence  wi]?  his  sheep ;  for 
who  can  pr^che  to  his  sheep,  or  defende  hem  fro  wolues,  or 
heele  hem  as  curatis  shulden,  hut  pf  he  he  pr(?sent  wi]?  his 
sheep  ?  &  ]7us  siche  residense  hi  viker  maki]?  hym  to  leese 

herdis  offiss  &  ]?is  excusi]?  hym  not  to  god,  ne  his  s^ruyss 
in  mene  tyme  raaki]?  hym  herde  of  ]?es  sheep,  ne  worj^y 
to  take  J>is  hird  of  god.  pf  he  waste  tyme  in  fis  absence 
&  profite  not  to  hooly  chirche,  |>ys  los  of  tyme  accusi]?  hym 
bifore  crist,  jie  firste  herde.  pf  he  do  good  to  chirche  in 
pr^iyng  or  in  studiyngi?,  leue,  what  is  J^is  to  herdis  offis,  al 
pf  it  dispose  mm  '^erio.  mew  may  wel  jyue  to  siche  \er  almes, 
but  not  as  to  herdis  of  hem.  &  si]?  god  liatij?  falsed  of  mew, 
]7is  shulde  not  be  don  bifore  god.  &  si]?  a  maw  iw  no  staat 
shulde  do  oujt  ^ai  he  shamede  to  do  bifore  god,  it  semy]?  ]iat 
no  man  shulde  holde  ]?is  ofdss  &  be  absent  iw  his  body. 
&  ]?us  mew  ben  not  contynuel  herdis  for  ]?e  tyme  ]?wt  ]?ey  ben 
absent  &  kepew  not  \er  sheep  bi  \er  presence,  al  pf  ]?ey 
ppofitew  to  ]?es  mew.  for  '^'ech  maw  \at  is  iw  grace  profit!]?  to 
ech  able  maw  goostly,  &  ]?us  ech  siche  were  herde  of  ech,  but 
]?is  abusiouw  wero  to  strauwge.  pf  a  maw  be  presently  ny^  his 
sheep,  &  fayle  not  to  fede  hem  &  to  defende  hem  &  to  greesse 
hem  iw  tyme,  his  bodily  prosense  is  skileful  to  hym  to  dwelle 
vpon  ]?es  sheep.  &  ]?us  ]?e  porsouw  ]?at  al  ]?e  wouke  disposi]?  hym 
to  proche  to  his  sheep  or  to  defende  hem  &  greesse  hem,  so 
]?at  his  absense  be  resonable,  dwell!]?  a  shepparde  al  ]?is  tyme; 
&  his  presence  doi]?  his  euro  &  couwforti]?  his  sheep  &  febli]? 
]?er  enemy es.  &  as  glotouws  arguen  ]?wt  bi  ]?e  same  skile  fey 
may  ete  more  til  fat  fey  ban  etuw  to  myche,  so  hirid  hynes 
arguew  heero  f wt,  bi  f e  same  skile  f «t  fey  may  be  absent  fro 
fes  sheep  fouro  dayes  or^  fyue,  fey  may  be  absent  for  a 
monef  e  or  an  half  per  or  more  tyme :  &  fis  resouw  haf  more 
colour  of  herdis  f  wt  studien  iw  scole.  &  y  can-not  answero 
heero  pf  mew  studien  goddis  la  we,  &  iw  f  e  mene  tyme  fallen 


1  of  MS 


Chap.  XXXII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORAL!. 


455 


not'to  \er  sheep  in  Jjiwgis  J^at  perteynew  to  \er  offiss.  but  for 
bodily  residense  of  an  able  berde  vpon  his  sheep  is  more  sikir 
j^an  siche  absence,  it  is  good  to  chese  ])e  siker^.  also  as  poul 
sei]?,  ecb  man  sbal  ber(9  bis  oune  charge,  &  ]7us  J^e  viker  of  j^is 
berde  is  chargid  for  his  oune  persone  as  mycbe  as  he  may 
here,  bou  beri]?  be  j^e  pijrsou^s  charge?  Eor  in  tyme  of 
apostlis  \at  iurisdiccmuw  was  not  brou^t  in,  but  oon  shulde 
pr^che  in  o  tyme  &  an-o]?er  in  an-o]?^r ;  alle  ]?es  were^ 
pcrsouws  of  j^es  sheep  &  be  ^at  more  taujte  was  beter^  curat. 
&  ]?us  it  semy]?  ]iat  it  shulde  be  of  many  p^rsones  of  o  paries, 
&  ]7at  p(3rsouw  profiti]?  mor^  is  beter^  berde  to  J^is  paries, 
for  ellis  mm  myjte?^  feyne  falsly  as  many  herdis  as  j^ey 
wolde^i,  &  echoon  to  pile  j^e  puple  wber^  oon  sufficide  for 
hem  alle.  as  pr(9st  &  viker  &  p(?rsouw,  ofdcial,  ercbedekene 
&  bischop,  wij?  many  mm  bitwixe  hem,  be;^  ful  cbargious  to 
j^e  paries,  &  j^ei  alle  don  not  ]?e  offiss  \ai  a  good  berde  shulde 
do ;  but  siche  charging  of  J^e  chircbe  shulde  be  fled  as  greet 
sywne.  for  it  is  noujt  to  bigile  god  &  make  an  vnhable  mm 
p^rsouw  yat  can-not  on  herdis  cur<3  but  his  sheep  kuwne^ 
gouerne  hym,  al  pf  be  geder^  bi  a  proctour  ]?e  fruytis,  as 
ofleriwgis  &  dymes.  for  ellis  a  child  or  a  greke  or  what  offis 
\at  be  hare  my^t^  be  p^rsou^  heer^  in  englond  pf  ]>e  pope 
badde  ^ouyn  hym  leeue,  but  siche  \ai  is  not  goddis  orde- 
nauwse  excusi]?  not  at  domes  day. 


But  it  is  safer 
to  reside. 


In  apostolic  times 
there  were  no 
limitations  to 
special  cures. 


Parishes  are 
burdened  by  the 
many  grades  of 
clergy  and  ofiB.- 
cials. 


If  all  a  parson 
need  do  is  to 
gather  the  tithes 
by  a  proctor,  a 
child  or  a  Greek 
might  be  parson. 


Qapitulum.  32'”- 


b  y  J^is  sentence  may  mew  se  bou  fis  prelacye  is  perelous 

for  it  is  not  fully  grouwdid  iw  crist  %e  in  oj^^r  of  his  *[p.  21  ms.] 
lawis.  for  be  fend  bab  mouyd  mew  bi  pride  &  bi  The  devil  moves 

i  j  X  men  to  undertake 

coueytise  forto  bibete  ]?ey  wolew  do  more  jjan  pey  ban 
power  or  wit  to  do ;  for  take  pou  bede  to  our^  popis,  to 
biscbops  &  to  our^  p(9rsouws,  and  bey  reckon  litil  of  b^r  They  do  not  care 

^  ^  ’  J  ^  ■*  how  great  their 

charge  bou  mycbe  it  be  &  bou  large,  so  bd^t  >  hem  come  charge  is  if  they 

^  J  0  7/  make  money 

wywnywg  &  worldly  worcbip  bi  per  staat.  &  so  si]?  j^e 


456 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


[Chap.  XXXII. 


Saracens  hold 
much  of  Christ’s 
law,  hut  have 
mixed  other  laws 
with  it. 

So  have  the 
popes. 


Priests  should  be 
kept  in  food  and 
clothing  by  the 
parish,  and  care 
no  more  about 
tithes. 


The  people  are 
robbed  to  pay 
fees. 


It  is  lawful  to  pay 
taxes  to  the  king. 


Good  curates 
must  expect 
persecution. 


They  may  be 
suspended ; 


staat  of  prclacye  taki];  sumwkat  of  goddis  lawe  &  sumwkat 
of  mdifiVLUS  lawe  coiitr«rie  to  goddis  lawe,  trewe  me^  shuldew 
purge  |>is  staat  &  lyue  dene  bi  goddis  lawe.  for  saracenes 
wi]?  o]!ere  sectis  bolder  myche  of  cristis  lawe,  but  oj^^re 
lawis  \a\>  meddlen  makew  Jjis  sect  displese  to  god;  & 
god  woot  wber  strauwge  lawis  hen  meddlid  more  vndir 
ourd  pope  wi]?  cristis  lawe  J^an  j^ey  ben  meddlid  in  o\iere 
sectis.  it  semy]?  \at  pr(?stis  \ai  kepen  pari^scbis  shuldew 
tecbe  bem  j^e  gospel  of  cnst  bo]7e  bi.lif  &  bi  word,  &  moue 
hem  to  bolde  cbarite,  &  bisie  hem  not  in  o\ere  j^iwgis  Viewer 
of  ^e  world  ne  mamws  lawe,  &  make  obediense  to  ])er 
prdatis  as  mycbe  as  goddis  lawe  tecbi]?.  fode  &  biliwg 
motew  ]7ey  baue ;  &  it  is  skileful  ]?at  ]per  paries  fynde  hem 
pese  bi  title  of  almes,  &  take  |>ey  no  more  hede  to  dymes. 
but  j^is  lif  mut  nedis  be  broujt  in  bi  litil  &  litil  for  an^mrist. 
&•  ]?is  lore  were  good  to  persouws,  to  ^yue  no  tribut  to  per 
prelatis  &  make  no  strauwge  dispensis  but  jif  goddis  lawe 
mouyde  per-to.  for  alle  ]?es  dispewsis  at  pe  laste  motew  be 
gederid  of  pore  men ;  &  certis  j^is  is  a  foul  offiss  of  a  prest 
to  robbe  bis  puple  to  ^yue  to  biscbop  or  ercbedekene  godis 
pat  god  biddi]?  not.  as  senage  &  procurasies,  &  opere  tributis 
pat  ben  feyned,  hen  not  grouwdid  in  goddis  lawe  &  perfore 
men  sbuldew  dispise  bem.  ^yuy^^g  of  taliage  to  pe  kyng  is 
licly  grouwdid  in  goddis  lawe,  for  cnst  ^af  mekely  to  pe 
emperour  tribut,  as  pe  gospel  sei]?,  but  he  jaf  not  to  pe 
bye  biscbops  ne  pharisees  ne  saducees.  but  siche  curatis 
mote^  arme  hem  wi]?  help  of  god  &  of  trewe  men,  for 
cursiwgis  &  suspendiwgis  wole^  rewne  a^en?-«s  siche '  curatis. 
si]?  biscbops  of  ierusale??^  madew  crist  be  cursid  &  suspendid 
for  pej,  seide;^  be  was  not  on  goddis  half  but  wi]?  belsebub 
a  prince  of  deuels,  &  J?ey  puttide^  men  out  of  synagoge 
pat  cowfessidew  crist  apertly,  &  aftir  pei  suspendidew  bym 
in  ]?e  cros  ful  felly.  ]7is  hangyng  vp  vsid  nou  is  not  so  fel 
but  fals  ynow ;  for  ]7ey  wole?^  bange  vp  treu]7e  &  mayntenywg 
of  goddis  lawe ;  &  ]jei  ponderer  wij?  ]?is  suspending  pat  pei 
don  it  for  rijtwisenesse  to  tecbe  curatis  obedience  &  meke- 


Chap.  XXXII.] 


DE  OFFICIO  PASTORALI. 


457 


nesse  bi  goddis  lawe,  &  al  j^is  is  falsly  feyned  bi  an^^cristis 
^ipocrisie.  but  trewe  pr^stis  sbuldew  trowe  heer(9  ]?at  nej^er 
pe  word  of  per  pr^lat  ne  |»e  word  of  per  somenour  ban  so 
mycbe  maliss  wij?  hem  pat  ne  |>ey  may  precbe  &  s^rue  god 
aftirj^is  suspending.  &  j^e  moost  harm  pat  j^ei  don  is  priuyng 
or  sleyng ;  &  ]7is  shulden  curatis  mekely  suffer)?,  for  ]7is  wolde 
turne  hem  to  rnych)?  good.  &  summon  tellen  wi]?  myche 
declaring  pat  ground  of  j^is  he]7en  custom  spring!]?  in  pe 
chirche  of  pe  pope  &  of  j^e  floe  ground  id  on  hym.  &  pt  ]?is 
man  bi  ipocrisie  seij?  pat  he  sue]?  nexst  crist  of  alle  pe  men 
heer^  in  erpe,  &  hap  moost  power  of  crist  &  of  feynyng  of  }>is 
power ;  hou  he  present!]?  cristis  p^rsone  &  pass!]?  alle  cristis 
apostlis  in  graunting  of  priuylegies  &  pardoun,  it  pass!]?  many 
mennns  wit  for  greetnesse  of  ]?is  power.  &  summon  seyn  pat 
]?is  speche  fall!]?  not  fro  fendis  gabbing  but  pf  pe  pope  speke 
bi  ]?e  contrOTie,  as  a  mount  ha]?  his  name  of  mouyng,  for 
among  alle  men  in  erpe  ]?is  ipocrite  lyue]?  ferrest  fro  crist. 
crist  hadde  not  propr^  good  wher-ynne  he  shulde  reste  his 
hed ;  men  seyn  ]?is  pope  hap  more  ]?an  half  of  pe  empire 
wi]?-outen  his  spuyling.  crist  was  moost  meke  &  moost 
seruysable  &  girte  hym  wi]?  a  do]?  &  wayschide  his  disciplis 
feet,  as  pe  gospel  of  ioon  telli]? ;  pe  pope  sitti]?  in  his  troone 
&  maki]?  lordis  to  kisse  his  feet,  crist  wente  mekely  fro  plase 
to  place  &  prechide  pe  gospel  &  taujte  pouert;  pe  pope 
dwelli]?  in  auynoun  &  doi]?  not  ]?is  but  ]?e  contrarie.  &  so 
si]?  pat  an^^crist  is  he  pat  ’  is  a^enns  crist,  it  semy]>  bi  his 
feyned  lif  pat  he  is  opyn  an^mrist.  &  pf  he  shulde  be  clepid 
an  hil  for  stablenesse  in  ]?is  lif,  ]?is  hye  hil  eclipsi]?  ]?is  sunne 
&  maki]?  wyndis  &  yuele  wederis ;  for  goddis  lawe  is  lettid 
to  shyne  bi  lawis  pat  ]?is  hil  vsi]?,  &  coolding  fro  charite 
maki]?  stormes  bi  ]7is  hil ;  but  grace  of  god  ha]?  helpid  men 
to  cleue  ]?is  hil  &  make  it  knowun,  &  god  contynue  his  help 
heere  &  make  his  lawe  to  shyne  frely.  Amen. 


»[p,  216  MS.] 


but  they  should 
preach  in  spite 
of  suspension. 


The  pope  is  at  the 
bottom  of  this 
heathen  custom. 


He  claims  to  re¬ 
present  Christ ; 


but  it  mugthehy 
contraries  (as  a 
mount  is  so  called 
from  moving) . 


Contrasts  be¬ 
tween  Christ  and 


the  pope. 


Pope  dwells 
at  Avignon. 


He  is  a  hill  that 
eclipses  the  sun 
(Christ). 


God  has  helped 
man  to  cleave 
this  hill. 


Explicit  traetatus  de  officto  pastoral!. 


458 


XXYIII. 

DE  PAPA. 


I  HAVE  no  doubt  that  tbis  tract  is  genuine.  Besides  the  presump-- 
tion  in  its  favour  from  its  occurrence  in  the  Ashhurnham  MS.,  the 
internal  evidence  is  very  strong.  JS^ot  only  the  views  are  Wyclif’s  ;  the 
arguments  and  illustrations  are  such  as  he  frequently  uses  in  his 
authentic  writings.  Thus  the  mention  of  a  cord  and  a  man’s  neck  (p. 
476),  as  examples  of  things  good  in  themselves  that  may  be  bad  in 
combination,  is  to  be  found  also  in  the  Trialogus  (p.  306). 

The  date  of  the  tract  is  probably  about  1380.  The  reference  to  the 
doctrine  of  Transubstantiation  shows  that  Wyclif  had  already  made  up  his 
mind  on  this  point,  but  the  Schism  is  spoken  of  (Chapter  ii.)  in  a  tone 
which  implies  that  it  was  still  recent.  Spencer’s  Crusade  was  not  yet  on 
foot,  or  we  should  have  had  some  notice  of  it. 

How  far  Wyclif  had  gone  in  opposition  to  the  formal  organization  of 
the  Church  is  shown  by  his  assertion  (Chapter  v.)  that  neither  tonsure, 
dress,  nor  bishop’s  words  make  the  priest,  but  power  given  by  Christ. 
The  development  of  the  same  thought  in  Chapter  xi.  shows  that  this  is 
no  hasty  outburst,  but  a  deliberate  expression  of  opinion. 

Copied  from  the  Ashburnham  MS.  MM. 


Summary. 


Chap.  I.  Priests  are  bound  to  preach  the  truth  . p.  460 

Many  evils  of  the  Church  are  created  hy  the  Pope .  461 

II.  God’s  love  to  his  Church  shown  in  the  Schism  .  461 

Contrast  between  Christ  and  the  Pope  .  462 

III.  The  Schism  may  teach  men  to  believe  in  the  Popes  only  as  they 

follow  Christ  .  .  .  463 

Good  results  which  would  follow  .  463 


459 

Chap.  IV.  Men  should  choose  their  prelates  and  love  them  . p.  464 

The  nature  of  the  Host  .  465 

A  Pope  who  is  unsound  in  this  is  unfit  for  his  oflS.ce  .  465 

V.  Antichrist  urges  that  the  Church  would  lose  honour  if  God’s  law 

were  strictly  kept  .  466 

It  would  he  well  if  the  Church  gave  up  worldly  rule  and  honour .  467 

VI.  Antichrist  says  the  Pope  could  not  keep  proper,state  .  468 

Eulers  should  enforce  poverty  in  priests  .  469 

VII.  Pomp  of  popes  and  prelates  .  470 

Princes  may  have  worldly  splendour .  471 

Cardinals  are  hinges  to  the  devil’s  house  .  472 

VIII.  Priests  should  follow  Christ’s  law  and  example  of  poverty .  472 

They  should  be  distinguished  by  virtues.,  not  by  wealth  .  .  473 

They  should  teach  men  to  live  well .  474 

IX.  Lords  who  endow  the  clergy  are  professing  to  amend  Christ’s 

ordinance  .  475 

Constantine  not  to  be  canonized  .  475 

Priesthood  and  lordship  cannot  go  together .  475 

X.  Evil  of  endowments  .  476 

Monasteries,  etc.,  are  dens  of  thieves  .  476 

Perpetuity  belongs  only  to  Christ  . .  478 

XI.  Antichrist  objects  that  the  whole  hierarchy  would  be  destroyed  .  478 

Christ’s  order  would  remain  .  .  .  .  479 

We  should  judge  priests  by  their  good  deeds  .  479 

XII.  Antichrist  urges  that  indulgences  would  come  to  an  end  .  480 

Absolution  rests  with  Christ .  .  .  .  481 

Popes  grant  absurd  indulgences  . . .  482 

Men  should  look  closely  before  they  buy  them  .  482 


460 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap,  I. 


*[p.  25  MS.] 


[Jer,  sxv.  4.] 
God  sent  his  pro¬ 
phets  to  declare 
his  law,  hut  men 
would  not  hear. 

Prov.  i,  [20-28.] 


Some  priests 
think  they  are 
bound  to  teach 
God’s  law. 


Christ  was  the 
poorest  of  men, 
and  Peter  fol¬ 
lowed  him. 


The  devil  has  got 
the  clergy  to  hold 
lordship. 


De  Papa. 

"^Capitulum  ^rimum. 

g  od  seif  bi  ieremye  fat  be  wakide  eerly  to  his  puple 
&  criede  his  lawe  bi  his  prophetis,  fat  werew  martrid  in 
goddis  cause  &  for  profit  of  his  chirche,  bof  e  for  clerkis, 
lordis  &  comyns.  but  god  seif  by  salomo;^  fat  his  wisdom 
cryef  i^  stretis  but  mew  dispisen  his  couwsel  &  wolew  not  lyue 
bi  his  lore,  &  forfore  god  shal  ley^e  iw  fe  tyme  fat  fey  shulew 
perische  ;  f  awne  fei  shulew  crie  to  hym  &  he  shal  not  hero 
&  spede  hem.  fus  god  mouef  many  mew  iw  tyme  of  grace 
to  telle  his  lawe;  &  pt  an^/crist  dispisif  it  &  lordis  bew 
noogligent  iw  for  help.  &  for  prostis  faylen  heero  on  for  syde, 
as  ofore  mew  don,  suiwme  prostis  fenkew  fat  fey  shuldew 
crye  &  telle  goddis  lawe  to  f e  puple ;  for  it  may  falle  fat 
fey  bofe  shulew  perische  for  for  noogligense.  grouwd  of 
cristewmewnws  bileue  seif  fat  crist  is  god  &  maw,  &  was 
porerste  maw  of  lif  &  mekerste  &  moost  vortuous.  cristew- 
mew  taken  ouor  fat  petro  was  cristis  viker,  &  suyde  hym 
iw  manor  of  lif  &  tau]to  fe  chirche  bi  his  lore,  fe  fend 
hadde  ewuye  to  crist  &  ofore  mew  fat  suydew  hym,  & 
temptide  prostis  to  worldly  lordchipis  as  he  temptide  crist  iw 
his  porsone  &,  as  he  lipde  iw  f is  te?wptiwg  &  seyde  fat  he 
wolde  ^yue  to  crist  alle  fe  reumes  of  fe  world  so  fat  he 
wolde  loute  hym,  so  bi  craft  of  his  lesiwgis  he  haf  getuw 
lordchip  to  clerkis.  so  fat  nou  myche  of  f is  world  holdif  on 
am^^'cristis  syde ;  as  many  seyen  fat  f e  pope  shulde  bi  vortu 
of  cristis  lif  be  seculer  lord  of  al  fis  world,  &  bi  his  leeue 
kyngis  ben  lordis.  &  fe  fendis  part  is  heero  so  strowg  & 
colourid  wif  so  many  cautels  fat  fewe  mew  dorew  putte  hem 
out  to  stonde  &  speke  for  goddis  cause,  but  pt  mew  trowen, 
as  fei  dorew,  fat  crist  chees  to  be  pore  to  ^yue  ensauwple  to 
his  prostis  &  ofore  mew  to  triste  iw  god,  &  leeue  to  triste  iw 


Chap.  II.] 


DE  PAPA. 


461 


fis  world  for  ]7ey  motew  dye  &  leeue  it.  &  petre  was  pore 
aftir  crist,  &  alle  fe  apostlis  but  scarioth,  for  he  wolde  be 
riche  &  haue  \n  propre,  &  j^is  broujt  hym  to  double  de]?. 
but  ]7e  fend  ha]?  blyndid  mm,  bo]?e  clerkis  &  lordis,  in 
chirche  ]?«t  ]?ey  bileue?^  ]>e  contrarye ;  &  ]?is  defaute  in  bileue 
reuersij?  armimmmnus  lif,  &  letti]?  hem  to  sue  crist.  for  ]?e 
fend  coueyti]*  myche  to  quenche  bileue  in  ]?e  chirche,  for  ]?is 
is  ]?e  firste  v^rtu  &  ground  of  cristis  religious.  &  for  ^e  pope 
is  holdup  moost  &  nexst  viker  of  iesu  crist,  ferfoie  ]?e  fend 
in  le  pope  ha]?  gederid  many  worldly  poyntis  '^'bo]?e  of 
lordchip  &  worldly  lif,  &  casti]?  to  disseyue  ]?e  chirche  by 
hym.  For  manye  take?^  as  bileue  pat  he  may  not  do  amys, 
but  what  ping  pat  he  gTsmntip  or  sei]?  crist  mut  co/^ferme  it ; 
&  bi  ]?is  cautel  of  ]?e  fend  be^  many  mew  dampnyd  to  helle. 
&  grouwd  of  al  ]?is  disseyt  is  lesiwg  contrwrye  to  treu]»e ; 
for  as  pe  fend  disseyuede  eue  bi  lesiwg  pat  she  shulde  not  dye, 
whawne  god  hadde  seyd  pat  she  shulde  dye  what  day  pat  she 
eet  of  ]?e  appul,  so  ]?e  fend  disseyue])  ]?e  chirche  bi  oon  as  opyn 
lesiwg,  pat  crist  was  heer^  worldly  lord  -moost  bye  of  alle 
op  ere,  &  so  shulde  his  viker  be  pat  is  clepid  pe  pope  of  rome. 
but  whawne  crist  was  temptid  heer^  he  seyde  :  “  go,  satanas.” 
to  teche  alle  cristewmew  hou  pat  crist  wolde  be  pore  ;  &  pt 
per  ben  fewe  mew  pat  wolen  defende  ]?is  bileue,  for  an^^crist 
ha]?  many  clerkis  pat  makew  it  derk  bi  many  weyes. 


The  devil  has 
brought  together 
*[p.  256  MS.]  ■ 
many  deceits  in 
the  Pope. 

Many  believe 
that  the  Pope 
cannot  err. 


People  are  led 
to  believe  that 
Christ  held 
■worldly  lord- 
ship,  and  that 
the  Pope 

should  do  so. 


Qapitulum  2"*- 

i  t  wer*?  to  wite  ou^r  hou  god  shewi]?  loue  to  his  chirche  God’s  love  to  his 

.  p,  "li-  Church  shown  in 

bl  dyuysiouw  ot  ]?es  popis  pat  is  nou  late  lalluw.  OUr(?  the  Great  Schism, 
bileue  techi]?  bi  poul  pat  alle  ]?iwgis  fallew  to  good  Rom.  viu.  [28.] 
to  goddis  childrew  pat  dredew  hym,  &  ])us  shuldew  cris- 
tewmew  take  hem.  pe  firste  bok  of  goddis  lawe  telli])  hou 
god  manaasside  pe  fend:  “y  shal  putte  enemyte,”  sei])  god,  [Gen.  ui.  15.] 
“bitwixe  })ee  &  wommaw,  &  bitwixe  pj  seed  &  heer(?  seed, 

&  she  shal  al  to-squatte  ]?yn  heed.”  &  so  takew  summew  pat 


r 


462 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  II. 


Some  men  think 
that  in  answer 
to  prayer  he  has 
thus  broken  the 
head  of  Anti¬ 
christ. 

The  Pope  is  Anti¬ 
christ  since  he  is 
opposed  to  Christ 
in  life  and  teach¬ 
ing. 

Christ  was  poor ; 
the  Pope  loves 
riches. 


Christ  was  meek; 
the  Pope  is 
proud. 


Christ  was 
familiar ; 


the  Pope  shuts 
himself  up  in 
a  castle. 

Christ  went  to 
=*[p.  26  MS.] 
others ;  the  Pope 
summons  men  to 
come  to  him. 


hooly  preyer  of  J^e  chirclie  maad  to  crist  &  his  modir  mono]? 
hym  to  sende  j^is  grace  douw  to  departe  heed  of  an^^crist,  so 
\at  his  falsed  be  more  knowuw.  &  it  seme]?  to  hem  ]?«t  ]?e 
pope  is  an^t'cnst  heer^  in  erj^e.  for  he  is  a^enws  crist  bo]?e 
in  lif  &  in  lore,  crist  was  moost  pore  maw  fro  his  bir]?e  to 
his  de]?,  &  lefte  worldly  richees  &  beggyng,  aftir  ]?e  staat  of 
iwnocense;  but  an^mnst  a^enws  )?is,  fro  \q  tyme  \at  he  be 
maad  pope  til  ]?e  tyme  \ai  he  be  deed  heer^,  coueytij?  to  be 
worldly  riche,  &  castij?  bi  manye  shrewid  weyes  hou  j?at  he 
may  ]7us  be  riche,  crist  was  moost  meke  man  &  bad  lerne 
]7is  of  hym;  but  mew  seyen  ]?e  pope  is  moost  proud 
maw  of  er]7e,  &  makij?  lordis  to  kysse  his  feet  wheri?  crist 
wayschide  his  postlis  feet.  Crist  was  moost  homely  maw  iw 
lif,  iw  dede  &  iw  word ;  mew  seyew  ]?wt  ]?is  pope  is  not  nexst 
crist  iw  J?is,  for  wheri?  crist  wente  on  his  feet  bo]?e  to  citees 
&  litil  touwnes,  ]?ey  seyen  ]?is  pope  wole  be  closid  iw  a  castel 
wi]?  greet  aray.  Wher^  crist  cam  to  ioon  baptist  to  be 
baptisid  of  hym,  pope  sendi]?  ^  aftir  mew  to  come  to  hym 
wheri?  eu^re  he  be  ;  je,  ^if  crist  haue  sumnyd  hem  for  to  come 
not  to  hym.  crist  bicliptide  ^onge  &  pore  iw  tokene  of  his 
homelynesse  ;•  mew  seyen  \ai  J?e  pope  wole  biclippe  worldly 
worchip,  &  not  trewe  mew  for  goddis  sake  lest  he  vnworchipe 


Christ  was  busy  hym  silf.  crist  was  bisy  to  preche  ]?e  gospel  not  for  his 

in  preaching;  .  -1^.1 

the  Pope  busies  worldly  worchip  ne  wywnywg ;  mew  seyen  pwt  pe  pope 
in™*raws°>^ich  loeue]?  ]?is,  but  he  wole  gladly  make  a  lawe  &  make  j^is  lawe 

II6  sets  SrboVC  •  1*0  ITT  'a*!  _  •  A 

Christ’s.  in  more  worchip  &  more  drede  pan  cristis  lawe.  enst 

Christ  gave  his  louede  SO  myche  his  floe  ])ai  he  puttide  his  lif  for  hem, 

life  for  his  flock ; 

the  Pope  gives  mew  seven  hat  be  pope  loueb  so  myche  worchip  of  be  world, 

sham  absolution 

to  men  who  do  pat  he  wole  teyne  asoyliwg  to  mew  to  go  streyjt  to  heuene, 
so  causes  death  so  b^t  bey  do  a  trwuel  hat  souwneb  to  his  worldly  worchip.  &  so 

in  body  and  soul  ,  J  / 

to  thousands.  his  foly  may  be  cause  of  deb  many  bousynd  mew  bobe  iw  body 
&  iw  soule,  but  hou  sueb  he  crist  in  bis  ?  crist  was  so  paciewt 
h^Tnemfes^;*^  ^  myche  suffcride  his  oune  wrong,  ]?at  he  preyede  for  his 
vengef^^himsdf  enemy es  &  taujte  his  postlis  to  take  no  yewiauwse ;  mew  seyen 
S^cureing?^'^^  \a,t  be  pope  of  rome  wole  be  vengid  on  alle  manors,  bobe  bi 


&  sufieride  sharp  peyne  &  deb  brynge  hem  to  blis ; 


Chap.  Ill,] 


DE  PAPA. 


463 


sleyng  &  bi  cursiwg  &  o^srQ  peynes  ]7at  be  feyne]?.  cnst 

taujte  mew-  to  lyue  wel  bi  his  oune  lif  &  his  wordis,  for  what  ^isUfe; 

be  tau^te  be  did  in  dede,  &  bad  mew  trowe  to  bis  werkis ;  tiie  Pope  says 

‘  '  that  no  other 

mew  seyen  '^at  j^e  pope  goi]?  al  bi  contrt^rye  weye  to  J^is,  for 

bis  lif  is  not  ensaumple  to  oj^^re  mew  bon  ]7ey  sbuldew  lyue, 

for  no  maw  sbulde  lyue  lik  to  hym,  as  be  feyneh  bi  bis  bye  Christ  sought 

staat.  crist  iw  ecb  bis  dede  &  bis  word  soujte  }e  glory  of 

god,  &  sujfferide  many  reproues  iw  bis  manbeed  for  Ms  ende ;  Pope  seeks 

^  ’  ./  jr  j  ^  ixis  own  glory. 

mew  seyen  j^at  j^e  pope  ajenward  seki]?  his  oune  glory  on  alle 
weyes,  ^e,  pf  goddis  worcbip  be  lost.  &  ]?us  he  feyne]?  many 
yngrouwdid  gabbiwgis.  &  pf  J^is  J'iwg  &  many  sicbe  ben  soj^e 
of  ]7e  pope  of  rome,  be  is  yery  an^^’crist  &  not  cristis  yiker 
beer^. 


Capitulum  3”^' 


]>  is  dyuysiouw  of  j^es  popis  may  turne  to  good  of  many 
reumes,  ]>at  mew  trowe  to  no^er  of  hem  but,  for  loue  of 
iesu  cr^’st,  iw  as  myche  as  ]7ey  suen  cnst  iw  \er  lif  &  iw  ]>er 
lore,  for  pf  j^ei  gabbew  of  \er  staat  &  seyen  \at  I’ei  ben 
cristis  vikeris,  &  j^ey  ben  contrarye  to  bym  boj7e  iw  lif  &  iw 
love,  '^'^0  mew  \at  ben  led  bi  J^es  wolues  motew  go  \q  brode 
weye  to  belle  ;  &  j^is  seme]?  ]?e  perelous  tyme  \ai  poul  ba]? 
teld  to  ]?e  cbirche.  &  ]?us  ]?is  were  a  bileue  \at  ecb  maw 
sbulde  grouwde  hym  ywne,  \at  mew  sbuldew  trowe  to  no  pope 
but  as  be  ground!]?  bym  iw  crist ;  &  mew  sbuldew  asaye  ]?is 
ground,  wher  it  be  good  wi]?-oute  disseyt.  &  ]?us  what  ]?e 
pope  bade  do,  but  pf  be  tau^te  ]^at  crist  bade  it,  mew  sbuldew 
not  do  ]?is  aftir  hym  iw  ]?at  ]>at  be  were  cristis  viker,  for  it 
may  falle  ]>ai  ]?e  fend  disseyue  mew  bi  an^icrist,  &  cbalenge 
more  ]?an  crist  dide  &  \us  briwge  strif  iw  cristewdom.  for  ]?e 
fend  may  moue  mewnws  bertis  to  loue  so  mycbe  worldly 
godis  \a\j  ]?ey  stryue  &  fi^te  to-gidere  for  departiwg  of  ]?es 
godis ;  &  ]?us  may  an^fcrist  &  hise  lette  mew  to  lyue  iw  pees, 
lest  \at  ]?i8  lif  iw  pees  make  mew  to  knowe  bis  giles.  &  ]?us 
god  ha]?  ordeyned  medicyn  to  knowe  falsed  of  an^^crist,  \at 


The  Schism  may 
teach  men  to 
obey  Popes  only 
as  they  follow 
Christ, 


«[p.  26S  MS.] 


Men  should  fol¬ 
low  this  rule. 


Popes  may  make 
excessive  claims 
and  cause  strife. 


They  may  stir  up 
trouble  to  hide 
their  tricks. 


464 


DE  PAPA. 


[CflAP.  III. 


Countries  should 
obey  popes  no 
further  than 
God’s  law  war¬ 
rants. 


Thus  realms 
would  be  quit  of 
indulgences. 


If  men  would 
stand  to  the  rule, 
the  Pope  would 
draw  no  money 
from  the  realm. 


=»[p.  27  MS.] 


Christian  men 
should  choose 
their  prelates 
and,  love  them. 


Men  should  try 
to  love  the  Pope. 


he  hie]?  hym  aboue  crist,  &  so  OMer  god,  as  pool  sei]?. 
prefers  reumes  to  ]7es  popis  \at  J>ey  wolew  obesche  to  hem  in 
\e  foorme  of  goddis  lawe,  but  no  more  ]ian  crist  axide ;  &  pf 
jjey  ben  not  payed  her-of,  j^ey  shewen  \at  ]iey  ben  an^mrist, 
si]?  ]>e  mooste  pride  of  hym  is  ]?«t  he  hie]?  hym  aboue  god. 
&  pf  reumes  holde  ]?is  reule,  ]?awne  ]?ey  may  be-  dischargid  of 
blasfemyes  of  indulgeT^sis,  &  of  o\ere  false  feynyT^gis ;  for  it  may 
falle  \at  ]?e  pope  grauwte  to  riche  worldly  me7^  ]»at  ]?ey  shule7^ 
go  streijt  to  heuene  wi]?-oute  peyne  of  purgatorye,  &  denye 
]?is  to  pore  men,  kepe  ]?ey  neu^re  so  goddis  lawe.  siche  many 
giles  of  \e  fend  bly7^de7^  me7^  bi  his  viker,  so  pat  treu]?e  of 
goddis  lawe  is  turnyd  i7^-to  ]7is  vikeris  falseed.  &  shortly  for 
to  seye,  pf  men  stonde7^  bi  ]7is  bileue,  pe  pope  shal  not  take 
of  reumes  neper  money  ne  worldly  godis.  &  herfore  sei]? 
poul,  cristis  vikere,  pat  he  seki]?  ]?es  grekis  soulis  &  he  seki]’ 
not  her  godis,  but  weye  to  brynge  hem  to  blis.  &  no  drede 
]?us  doi]?  crist  to  alle  reumes  pat  ben  his  children,  for  he 
robbi]?  not  his  childre77,  but  ^yue]?  hem  alle  maner  godis, 
bo]>e  goostly  godis  &  worldly.  &  ]?us  dide  crist  heerg 
in  er]7e,  &  pf  pe  pope  passe  heere  crist  &  robbe  his  childrcTi 
as  a  wolf,  no  drede  he  is  an^mrist  &  opynly  pe  fendis  viker. 
&  pf  ]?ou  seyst  pe  pope  mut  haue  godis  of  reumes  to  saue  his 
^staat,  he  shulde  be  pore,  as  crist  was,  &  charge  not  men,  as 
crist  dide  not.  ]?is  reule  shulde  teche  mcT^  whero  a  prolat 
wero  an^^crist,  &  hou  ]7ey  shulde7^  obesche  to  hym,  &  in  what 
pin^  leeue  his  lore. 


Qapitulum  4’"- 

s  i]7en  ech  seculer  criste7^ma7^  shulde  willefuly  chese  his 
prolat,  &  loue  hym  bi  goddis  lawe  as  me77  louydcT^  in  pe 
firste  staat,  pat  was  staat  of  mnocense,  as  alle  mcTt 
shulde7^  haue  louyd  panne,  &  men  shule7^  loue  in  staat  of  blis, 
for  pere  shal  loue  be  at  pe  fulle ;  herfore  shuldcT^  men  seke 
weyes  to  loue  pat  man  pat  shulde  be  pope.  &  amo77g  causis 
of  loue  pe  mooste  cause  pat  enere  god  ordeynede  shulde  be 


I 


Chap.  IV.] 


DE  PAPA. 


465 


good  doyng  of  mew ;  for  bi  J>is  cause  god  makif  h.jm  silf 
louyd,  &  hem  more  louyd  \at  more  dou  good.  ]7e  good 
he  pope  shulde  do  shulde  be  lore  to  come  to  heuene,  &  so  Hs 
pope  mut  kuwne  j^is  lore  ou^r  opere  pat  ben  his  sheep ;  &  si]? 

]?is  lore  is  fully  taujt  iw  goddis  lawe,  as  we  bileuew,  ]?is  pope 

mut  passingly  kuwne  goddis  lawe  &  resouw  per-of.  but  non 

in  pe  reume  of  englond  stryuew  manye  of  pe  sacrid  oost.  of  the 

summe  seyen  pat  ]7is  oost  fro  pe  tyme  pat  it  be  sacrid  is 

verily  goddis  body  &  per-wip  breed,  whit  &  round ;  &  in  ]?is  1 

weye  stonden  lewid  men  bo]?e  more  &  lesse,  &  longe  han  don. 

op&re  seyen  pat  ]?is  oost  is  nou^t  or  an  accident,  pe  which  pej' 

kunnen  not  nemyn  to  men,  but  it  is  not  goddis  body.  ]7is  ; 

questioun  shulden  reumes  sende  to  pe  pope,  to  knowe  his  wit, 

what  we  shulden  trowe  of  fis  oost  fro  pe  tyme  pat  it  be  thmks^on  this 

sacrid ;  &  here-jnne  shulde  he  not  feyne  but  teche  bi  pe 

gospel  or  bi  resoun  what  men  shulden  bileue  heere,  or  ellis  he 

wer^  no  witty  pope.  &  fes  reumes  shulden  take  no  man  to 

per  pope  bifore  pat  tyme  pat  he  hadde  taujt  hem  wel  heere 

by  good  ground  of  goddis  lawe.  For  wel  we  witen  pat  he 

kan  heere  no  skile  but  of  cristis  word  :  but  crist,  whanne  he  Christ  said  the 

bread  was  his 

blesside  j^is  breed,  seyde  pat  ‘‘]7is  is  my  body”;  &  we 
bileuen  pat  crist  lipde  neu^re,  but  seyde  eu^re  so]?  to  greet 
witt.  &  uf  four^  sectis  in  Ms  loud  seyen  heer(3  sol?  of  he 

popis  lawe,  he  hap  seyd  many  hundrid  wynt^r  pat  ]?is  oost  is  aSent  without 
not  goddis  body,  but  accident  wi]?-oute  suget.  &  pf  reumes  subject, 
leeuen  ]?is  lore  &  taken  hem  an^^crist  to  pope,  he  may  make 
hem  to  bileue  what  euere  he  wole  bi  litil  &  litil ;  for  hooly 
chirche  hap  bileuyd  ]?is  ]?ousinde  ^  wynter  &  more  to,  pat  *[p.  27&  ms.] 

]?is  oost  is  goddis  body  in  foorme  of  breed,  &  wyn  his  blood. 

&  trewe  men  shulden  knowe  heere  pat  ]?is  poynt  is  not  so  hye 
pat  ne  ]?ey  may  wite  pe  so]?e,  &  knowe  it  beWe  pan  op  ere 
poyntis  pat  crist  hap  tau^t  in  ourd  bileue.  heer^  may 
cristenmen  soone  wite  which  clerk  or  lord  loue|?  treuj>e  &  hap 
wille  to  stonde  pertore  &  suiFer(3  a  magrey  pf  he  shulde. 

&  Curtis  pat  pope  pat  fayli]?  heer(3  oper  for  kunnyng  or  for  if  so,  he  is  unfit 
wille  is  vnhable  to  take  to  pope  &  lede  his  floe  bi  goddis 


30 


466 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  IV. 


lawe.  &  what  sect  grucchi]?  a^enws  ]?is  is  suspect  of  heresye, 
No  harm  in  for  what  shulde  it  harme  ony  man  j?at  ]7is  treuj^e  wer^  wel 
truth!^^'^^^  discussid.  but  it  wer^  good  to  cristewme^  to  laste  in  \er  olde 
bileue,  \at  J>is  breed  is  goddis  body  &  j^is  wyn  is  goddis 
-  blood,  &  not  an  vnknowuw  j^mg  wi]7-oute  resouw  or  autorite ; 
for  mew  shuldew  holde  \er  olde  bileue  but  pf  J^e  contrarye 
Lords  should  wer(5  wel  tau^te.  &  bus  it  were  a  blessid  dede  ]>at  lordis 

give  no  alms  to  i  i  p  i 

priests  who  do  woldew  not  wue  her  almes  neber  to  o  prest  ne  ober,  bifore  bey 

not  teach  the  .  .  .  ,  . 

truth  in  this.  taujtew  bi  good  witnesse  what  ping  were  j^is  sacrid  oost,  boj^e 
iw  his  kynde  &  iw  figure,  by  maner  pat  pe  gospel  speki]?. 
■&  jius  ^if  god  wolde  fouche-saf,  booly  chirche  shulde  be 
purgid  of  heresyes  in  jiis  mater,  aboute  which  ]7ey  dispendew 
It  is  idolatry  to  mvche,  as  iw  prestis  pat  syngew  masse  ;  &  certis  it  were 
ydolatrye  to  loute  jjus  an  accident.  &  no  maw  durste  seye  til 
nou  pat  accident  is  goddis  body,  for  ]7is  newe  word  may  haue 
no  grouwd,  &  was  not  knowuw  pat  j^ousiwde  jeer  pat  sathanas 
was  bouwduw  iw  belle,  &  jit  he  shame]?  to  seye  ]?is  gabbiwg. 


an  accident. 


Qapitulum 

ut  heere  grucchij?  an^mrist  &  dredi]?  pat  manye  of  his 
clerkis  shulew  wawte  per  worldly  werchip,  &  ]?us  his 
lordchip  shal  be  lesse.  for  jif  goddis  lawe  were  kept 
dene  wi]?-oute  pe  fendis  lawe,  &  pe  ordenauwse  of  crist  were 
dene  wi]?-outew  an^mristis,  where  shuldew  j^es  foure  sectis  be 
that S-s^eSoig Cordis  as  fey  nou  bew  ?  &  fus  f e  chirche  were  destried  pat 

destroyed!' longe  iw  growiwg.  Heere  ban  trewe  mew  seyd  ofte 
ChrisCs^iaw  was  ^  feudis  resouw,  as  jif  fe  arguere  wolde  mene  pat 

a  failure.  faylide  iw  his  lawe  &  iw  his  ordenauwse  which  he 

ordeynede  iw  fe  chirche,  &  f us  mew  menew  alle  iw  dede  pat 
ben  of  fes  foure  sectis.  but,  lord,  where  is  vnbileue  iw 
heretik  but  jif  f is  be  oon  ?  &  f us  it  semef  fat  alle  f es  foure 
smacchen  sumwhat  of  heresye,  &  fey  louew  not  iesu  crist,  for 
1  Cor.  xvi.  [22.]  fey  hatcw  f US  his  lawe.  but  poul  seif  a  sof  word  f wt 
♦[p.  28  MS.]  '^'‘‘who  euere  louef  not  iesu  crist  he  is  cursid  of  god. 


Antichrist  fears  . 
that  his  clerks  t) 
will  lose  honour 


Chap.  V.] 


DE  PAPA. 


467 


&  puttid  fro  hym  as  heretik.”  &  so  ke  mooste  iwco;^uement  The  worst  that 

pat  an^fcrist  kan  bridge  of  ]iis  is  pat  cristis  lawe  word  holdup  keep^iu“-  ^of 

dene  wij^-oute^  an^^’cristis ;  but  jiis  fruyt  were  blessid  & 

profitable  to  j^e  cbirche.  for  jiis  kepte  crist  in  bis  apostlis, 

&  panne  cam  pe  cbirche  to  heuene  &  growide  in  vertus 

beere  in  er]?e ;  &  si|»ew  ha^  it  surakuw  douw.  panne  shuldew 

criste^me?«  knowe  pe  vertu  of  crist  &  of  bis  lawe  ;  hou  pat  he 

is  god  almy^ty  &  bis  lawe  is  fully  ynow  ;  &  j7awne  sbulde;^ 

me^  wite  aftirbou  oj^ere  lawes,  pat  men  ban  foufdu;^,  barmen  thTciiurch'^*^^ 

pe  cbirche  many  weyes,  &  maken  goddis  lawe  lesse  louyd. 

For  kepmg  of  j^es  newe  lawis  occupie|>  me^nws  witt  &  wille, 

&  ax.ip  of  hem  a  bisy  trotuel,  &  ]?us  j^ey  letter  goddis  lawe.  and  hinder  God’s 

&  )ms  ^if  an^fcristis  lawe  were  good,  jit  cristis  lawe  mut 

nedis  be  betere  &  sufficient  in  hym  silf;  &  jius  J^e  tojier  is 

to  mycbe  &  doiji  barm  in  cristis  cbirche,  &  letti]?  cristis 

lawe  to  be  suyd.  &  pus  bringing  in  of  j^es  lawis,  pat  lettij? 

pe  vse  of  cristis  lawe,  is  j^e  mooste  priuey  synne  pat  pe 

fend  hap  foundnn  ajenns  pe  cbirche.  &  so  jiis  blessid  word 

wolde  sue,  pat  foure  sectis  newe  foundun  sbulden  be  voydid 

fro  pe  cbirche,  as  bey  sbulen  not  come  to  blis.  for  alle  bes  These  sects  owe 

^  their  being  to 


inven- 


sectis  ban  mannne  signes,  &  jif  |>es  signes  weren  fully  stryed,  human 
jies  sectis  weren  panne  destried,  as  men  seyen  j^nt  ben  weddid 
wi]?  bent,  but  it  is  not  so  of  cristis  sect  ne  of  pr^stis  j^at 
crist  ordeynede.  for  ioon  baptist  was  a  pr^st,  as  alle  me^ 
in  heuene  sbulen  be  pr^stis.  for  crounne  &  dob  maken  no  Neither  crown, 

■'  dress,  nor  ordi- 

prest,  ne  pe  emp^rours  biscbop  wi]i  his  wordis,  but  power  pat  nation  makes  the 

crist  jyue]? ;  &  jius  bi  lif  ben  pr^stis  knowun.  &  ]ms  cristen- 

men  sbulden  not  lette  for  pe  drede  of  ]7e  fend  &  for  power  of 

bis  clerkis  to  sue  &  bolde  cristis  lawe.  but  wel  y  woot  pat 

j^is  cbirche  hap  be  many  day  in  growing,  &  summe  clepen  it 

not  cristis  cbirche,  but  pe  cbirche  of  wickid  spiritis.  &  dauy]?  [Psalm  xxvi.  5.] 

batide  Jiis  cbirche  as  ech  cristenman  sbulde  do.  &  man  may 

no  hetere  knowe  an^t’cristis  clerk  pan  hi  ]iis,  pat  be  loue]? 

Jiis  cbirche  &  hati]?  pe  cbirche  of  criste  ;  &  jif  pe  pope  be  an 
heed  to  mayntene  j^is  cbirche  ajenn^  crist,  he  is  opyn  ani(«crist 
&  no  part  of  cristis  cbirche.  &  jif  '^'be  &  bis  secte  be  voyde  *[p.  286  ms.] 


468 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  V. 


Luke  xi.  [25.] 


Priests  that  bear 
secular  rule  are 
the  worst  of  men. 


Antichrist  urges 
that  the  Pope 
■would  he  poorer 
than  an  English 
bishop. 


Christ  was  the 
poorest  of  men. 


Luke  xiv.  [33.] 


Men  slide  out  of 
belief  by  listening 
to  chronicles  in¬ 
stead  of  Christ’s 
law. 


fro  cristis  lawe,  &  clensid  wif  besu/wms,  &  maad  fair  wij? 
sensible  signes,  j^awne  j^e  fend  ba]?  a  tokene  to  dwelle  homely 
wi]?  ]7es  mew ;  for  j^es  bew  wordis  of  crist,  ]>e  wbiche  motew 
nedis  be  trewe.  &  Jus  shulde  an^^brist  drede  of  ]>e  word  ]>at 
crist  sei]?  aftir,  j^at  ]7is  kynrede  of  pr(9stis  is  worste  of  alle 
o]?(9re.  for  many  mew  trowew  heeri?  as  pri^stis  iw  'j^e  olde 
lawe,  fro  ]>e  time  of  machabees  vnto  \at  ]7ei  haddew  slayn 
crist,  werew  'pe  worste  kynrede  j^at  god  sufferide  j^awne  to 
lyue ;  so  aftir  cristis  steyiwg,  pf  pr^stis  leeuew  cristis  lawe 
&  bicomew  reuleris  of  ]7is  world  by  newe  lawis  pat  |»ey  ban 
sbapnw,  J^is  is  non  pe  worste  kynrede  pat  is  on  lyue  beer^  iw 
er]7e. 


Qapitulum 

]  it  an^^crist  argue]?  pat  pf  ]?is  sentewse  wente  for]?,  pe 
pope  wer^  as  pore  a  maw  as  ony  biscbop  of  englond  ; 
but  ]?is  were  ajenws  resouw,  pat  ]?e  hiere  maw  sbulde  be 
byne]?e.  Heere  mew  seyen  to  an^^crist  pat  he  argue]?  ajenws 
crist,  &  ]?erfore  cristewmew  motew  nede  answere  sharply  heere 
for  crist ;  for  pf  ]?is  foly  wewte  for]?,  si]?  crist  was  moost  pore 
maw  &  bis  apostlis  pore  aftir,  ]?ey  werew  leest  wor]?  iw  ]?is  world, 
but  what  blasfeme  durste  seye  ]?us,  si]?  it  is  apnws  bileue.  &  ]?us 
goddis  lawe  techi]?  pat  willeful  pouert  of  a  prest,  pf  be  haue 
mekenesse  iw  his  soule  &  o]?ere  vertues  more  ]?an  o]?ere,  be  is 
herby  more  to  god,  &  ]?is  hyenesse  sbuldew  prestis  coueyte. 
&  pus  alle  prestis  of  englond  sbuldew  be  pore  mew,  as  pe  pope, 
for  ]?ey  motew  forsake  per  ricbees  pf  ]?ey  wolew  be  cristis 
prestis.  for  bileue  techi]?  wel  pat  crist  bad  bis  prestis  be 
sicbe ; '  &  we  fyndew  neuere  bi  resouw  pat  crist  cbauwgide 
euere  his  wille.  &  si]?  crist  is  god  iw  heuene,  it  is  ful  hard 
to  reuerse  bis  lawe,  for  no  drede  mew  motew  rikene  ]?erfore  at 
pe  day  of  dom.  &  heere  mew  slidew  out  of  bileue,  bo]?e 
prestis  &  seculeris,  wbawne  ]?ey  tellew  more  bi  a  cronycle  of 
foly  of  an  emperour  pm  ]?ey  tellew  bi  cristis  lawe,  pat  is 
emperour  of  heuene.  &  pe  fend  cowferme}?  bis  part,  &  maki]? 


Chap.  VI.] 


DE  PAPA. 


469 


seyntis  be  canonysed,  'pe  wbiche  resseyuedew  siche  dowyng,  Authority  of  so- 

CftllGd  S3>1U^S 

to  proue  pat  j?is  was  wel  don.  but  heeri?  me^  knowew  pQ 
fendis  cautels,  &  slides  not  fro  bilene  for  j^is ;  for  canonysiwg 
of  ]7es  seyntis  is  not  bileue  of  cnstewmew.  &  ]7us  jif  ]7es  be^ 
seyntes  in  beuene,  |>is  is  bi  vertu  of  crist  pat  j^ey  turnyde^ 
at  pQ  laste  to  hym,  &  Ladder  sorowe  for  per  sywne.  &  pf 
]70u  axe  prof  her-of,  we  seyen  pat  ^if  j^ou  prone  pat  ]7es  be  if.  they  were 

SfiintS)  tliGy  1*6*" 

seyntis,  it  wole  sue  of  ouro  bileue  pat  }>es  seyntis  sorowide^  pented  of  their 

]?us,  ^if  pej  werew  worldly  me^  ]7us,  for  ellis  j^ey  mj^ten  not 

come  to  heuene.  But  myraclis  maad  of  deed  men  hen  be  Miracles  of  saints 

■’no  proof. 

fendis  euydense ;  for  god  may  suffro  ^*]7e  fend  to  do  siche  *[p-  29  ms.] 

signes  &  many  mo.  for  ellis  wolde  not  poul  seye  pat  a  man  i  Cor.  xm.  [2.] 

myite  remoue  hillis  &  nt  fayle  of  charite.  but  df  bes  signes  Sensible  signs  of 
^  .  ^  weight  than 

my  dew  lid^J  f^jle,  stowde  we  iw  bileue  of  crist,  &  leeue  we  insensible  belief. 

siche  signes  of  pe  fend,  for  bileue  is  iwsensible  &  more  trewe 

pan  siche  signes ;  as  J^is  treu]7e  is  iwsensible  pat  two  &  pie  Necessary  truths. 

maken  fyue,  &  it  is  more  certeyn  pan  ony  sensible 

pin^  heerd.  ]?us  bileue  of  hooly  writ  passi]?  alle  jjes  clepid 

myraclis.  &  jitis  wite  wel  lordis  &  reumes  pat  J^ey  motew 

nedis  answers  to  god  hou  pey  ban  holduw  his  lawe  &  stowduw 

sad  iw  his  bileue.  no  drede  bobe  lordis  &  reumes  mydew  Rulers  should 

make  priests  be 

wel  constreyne  pr^stis  to  holde  pe  pouert  pat  crist  ordeynede,  poor, 
for  honeste  of  his  prdstis  &  profit  of  lordis  &  comyns.  & 
whawne  lordis  leeuew  ]?is  power,  assentew  to  fend; 

&  bey  niotew  nedis  be  dampnyd  for  bis  assent  but  d^  ]^ey 

amewdew  it,  &  bi®  i®  blyhdiwg  of  pe  fend  b^t  b^y 

grauwtid  bis  almes.  &  so  b^y  niotew  be  trewe  mew  &  algatis 

mayntene  it  forb,  for  df  mew  lokew  hou  it  cam  iw,  it  cam  not 

iw  bi  very  almes,  but  bi  blyndnesse  of  be  world  &  ipocrisie 

bat  be  fend  taude.  &  euero  be  lengero  pat  it  lastib,  pe  more 

peyne  ban  deed  mewnws  soulis.  &  b^^®  I*®  stirib  mew  to 

laste  iw  sywne  ajenws  god ;  but  wite  bey  wel  wib  pe  fend  pat 

god  mut  nedis  be  per  lord,  b^s  d^*  lordis  han  first  be  foolis, 

ob^w  iw  dowyng  or  leeuywge  to  helpe,  bey  shuldew  haue 

sorowe  of  bis  sywne  &  haaste  hew^  to  make  aseeb*  &  wite 

bey  wel  b^t  god  mut  nedis  be  cheef  lord  of  alle  creaturis,  God  is  chief  lord 


470 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  VI. 


and  they  may  not  &  but  Ilf  ffod  gra^l?^te  hem  leeuG  to  lyue  "biis  pr^stis  bes 

grant  without  his  ^  o  o  x  r  j 

leave.  worldlj  godis,  fe  pfte  \at  j^ey  jaue^  is  noujt  bi  v^rtu  of 

cheef  lord.  &  Jius  an^«crist  &  al  his  help  can  ne]>er  argue 
heerg  ne  answers ;  &  y  am  C(9rteyn  on  domes-day  no  maw  may 
Let  rulers  amend  answer(?  wel  heer^.  j^erfore  mewde  hem  lordis  &  reumes, 
&  seme  jjei  crist  for  ]>er  goode,  for  litil  s^ruyss  for  J^is  tyme 
disserue]?  myche  meede  iw  heuene.  lord,  si]?  lordis  &  reumes 
boj’e  chesen  a  pope  at  '^er  oune  wille,  what  sholde  moue  hem 
to  chese  j^is  pope  more  hye  ]?aw  crist  wolde  chalenge  of  mew  ? 
crist  axide  noon  er]?ly  lordchip  ne  er]?ly  godis,  but  ^af 
heuenely,  &  whawne  he  tok  his  oune  godis  he  tok  hem  for 
help  of  his  tenauwtis,  &  algatis  iw  siche  a  mesur^  \ai  he  was 
not  charious  to  hem.  &  ]?is  lore  han  freris  for^etew  &  alle 
»[p.  29&MS,]  Jies  o^erQ  newe  sectis.  Jjus  ]7e  grace of  god  ha]?  mouyd  to 
trete  ]?is  mat(sr  amowg  cristewmew,  to  loke  wher  ]?ey  wolew 
helpe  hem  silf  whawne  god  ha]?  so  graciously  biguwnyu. 


Qapitulum  7”*- 

* 

]?  er  ben  grouwdis  ]?e  whiche  crist  kepte  cowtrdtrie  to  kepiwg 

Christ  taught  of  pr(9latis  uou.  for  crist  tauite  \at  hoolynesse  shulde 

holiness  in  the  _  _  '  ^  ^  ^ 

iieart.  be  hid  iw  mewnws  hertis  &  not  shewid  to  ]?e  puple  iw 

sensible  signes  wi]?-oute  fruyt ;  for  ]?awne  mew  hopidew  reward 
of  god  &  axidew  not  glory  of  ]7is  world,  but  nou  it  is  turnyd 

Now  a  pope  or  vpsedouw  fro  religiouw  hat  crist  ordeynede,  for  nou  he  is 

prelate  must  have  . 

pomp.  nej^er  pope  ne  prmt,  but  pf  he  haue  a  worldly  meyne  ]?at 

shewe  his  hyenesse  to  ]?e  world,  as  he  wer«9  a  seculer  lord, 
&  bi  ]?is  gile  ha]?  ]?e  fend  broujt  iw  ]?at  more  prestis  shuldew 
haue  worldly  glorye.  &  ]?is  maki]?  ]?e  pope  &  bischops  to  axe 
richessis  to  ]?er  staat;  for,  as  ]?ei  seyen,  ]?er  staat  wolde 
perische  but  pf  siche  richesse  shewide  it  out.  first  ]?es 
pr^latis  blasfemew  iw  crist  &  iw  his  hooly  apostlis.  for 
bileue  techi]»  vs  ]?at  crist  was  bischop  of  mewnws  soulis, 
bet(?re  bi  a  ]?ousynd  part  ]?an  any  si]?  ]?e  chirche  was  dowyd, 
&  so  werew  cristis  apostlis  beter^  ]?an  ony  pope  of  rome. 


Chap.  VII.] 


DE  PAPA. 


471 


For  Hs  name  is  newe  fouwduw,  &  it  bitokenit  wuwdirful ;  for  Pope  a  new  name; 

summe  ]?enke^>^  it  greet  wwndir  worldly  glory  &  boolynesse 

shuldew  be  knyttid  in  o  pi^rsone  ;  si|>  cnst  forsok  it  in  word 

&  dede,  &  bi  his  lore  his  apostlis,  lord,  why  shulde^>^  not 

prdatis  do  non  so  ?  &  by  |>is  cause  ha]?  ]?e  fend  brou^t  yn 

hat  religious  of  bes  newe  ordris  shal  be  shewid  in  sensible  Religion  of  the 

^  ^  _  new  orders  shown 

signes,  as  habitis,  &  bikenes,  &  bye  housis,  &  herfore  ha]>  ]?e  in  sensible  signs. 

fend  broujt  in  ]?«t  cumpany  of  many  lumpis  shal  be  ioyned 

to  0  p^rsone  for  worldly  worchip  of  ]?(?r  staat.  ]?us  \er  hen  f^g^^hurc^h^^ 

many  cardenals  &  many  men  knyttid  to  hem ;  myche  meyne 

to  a  bischop,  &  manye  persones  in  an  ordre,  &  al  is  charge  to 

comyn  men,  &  streng]7e  to  ]?e  fendis  part,  crist  ordeynede 

pat  his  apostlis  fro  tyme  pat  he  steyede  to  heueue  slmldew  be 

scaterid  in  many  cuwtreys  &  conquers  wickid  men  to  crist. 

wel  Y  rede  hat  seynt  ipetre  dwelte  in  a  corieris  hous,  but  Acts  x.  [6.] 

y  rede  not  of  cardenal  ne  page  bat  he  hadde  wib  hym ;  &  ut  ^  currier’s  with- 

_  r  C5  /  j  ^  out  cardmai  or 

]?is  apostle  cam  to  comely  &  cowuertide  hym  wi]?  opere. 

&  ]?us  may  cristewme?^  lerne  bo]?e  of  crist  &  his  apostlis  pat 
religious  of  crist  is  not  in  siche  worldly  signes.  &  so  men 
motew  oper  denye  bileue,  or  seye  pat  cristis  religious  sto^^^di]? 
not  in  siche  signes  as  nou  pe  chirche  is  chargid  wi]?.  so]?  it 
is  ^bat  seculer  prinsis  &  worldly  lordis  mote?^  haue  siche  *[p.  3o ms.] 

^  ^  Princes  may  have 

worldly  signes,  for  }>ey  shulde^^  teche  to  drede  god  by  worldly  spien- 

austernete  &  worldly  drede.  but  it  is  a^enws  cristis  wille 

pat  pr(?stis  meddle  J’es  two  to-gider^,  for  pej  shulde^  teche 

bi  mekenesse  &  paciense,  as  crist  dide.  &  herfore  biddi]’  god 

in  his  lawe  pat  his  men  shuldew  not  be  clo]>id  in  wollu^  [Deut.  xxii.  ii.] 

&  ly^nuw  partid  to-gider^,  to  teche  ]?is  dyu^rsite  in  figure. 

crist  was  bo]?e  ky^^g  &  pr^st,  as'  he  is  bo]’e  god  &  maw,  Christ  was  king 

and  priest, 

&  bus  sum  biwg  fallib  to  hym-  bat  no  cristewmaw  may  come  in  this  none  can 
.  .  ,  .  ,  ,  .  follow  him. 

to ;  but  iw  siche  poyntis  shuldew  mew  lerne  to  sue  bi  virtues 
crist  afer,  &  go  not  bifore  crist,  as  dide  pr^sumpc/on  of  petr^ ; 

&  perioxe  crist  clepide  hym  sathanas  &  bad  petr(3  go  aftir 
hym.  crist  as  a  goode  may  stir  hadde  twelue  apostlis  to 
teche  hem ;  an^«crist  ordeyne]?  many  twelue  to  lyue  worldly 
&  charge  pe  chirche.  crist  koude  ensaumple  kynghod  & 


472 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  YII. 


presthod  \n  her  grou^^dis,  but  pr(?8tis  corner  aftir  cnst 
be^  not  able  to  do  so ;  &  }>us  j^ey  passen  '^er  maystir  crist, 
bo|>e  \n  presthod  &  \n  kny^thod.  &  \us  popis  wolden 
haue  cardenals,  ]7ey  shulde?^  chese  gode  me^  &  pore,  &  loke 
]?at  j^ey  chargide  not  j^e  chirche  bi  costly  aray  &  idilnesse ; 

Simony  and  other  "but  nou  me^  seyen  \>at  cardenals  ben  brou^t  yn  bi  an^^crist 

deceits  in  cardi-  j  .... 

nais,  to  bargeyne  by  symonye,  &  by  oj^ere  disseytis  bigile  mm, 

who  are  hinges  &  \iu8  as  be  pope  is  wwndirful,  so  cardenals  bew  an  herre  to 

to  the  fiend’s  s  X  r  tf  ; 

house.  j^e  fendis  hous.  &  oj^ere  ground  ban  j^ey  noonj  but  for 

an^^crist  wole  ]7us. 


Qapitulum  S”*- 


proue  \ai  it  were  betere  clerkis  to  be  riche  }>an  pore  as 


Antichrist  urges  3  it  it  were  to  reherse  be  euydensis  b«t  ani^^'crist  makib  to 

that  priests  do  x  J  i  i 

some  good  with 
their  wealth ; 

crist;  for  bi  j^is  richees  ]7ei  don  sum  good,  &  bi  so  myche 
they  are  of  the  hgy  ben  be  betere.  for  bey  be;^  of  mmnus  kynde,  as  be^  lordis 

same  nature  as  J  j  x  j  j  ^ 

lords,  and  have 
sense  to  spend 
money. 


}>(j!t  han  siche  godis,  &  j^ey  han  wit  to  spende  }>es  godis 
as  han  oj^ere,  or  ellis  more.  Why  shuldew  not  j^ey  be  betere 
bi  ]7es  richessis  as  oj^ere  ben  ?  Heere  me^  seyen  to  an^^'crist 
J>e^t  wolde  affeerme  crist  a  fool,  as  fend  helde  crist  a  fool 
for  he  wolde  not  take  of  hym  alle  j^e  reumes  of  j^e  world  for 
Christ  wished  his  a  litil  seruyss  to  hym,  \at  crist  as  a  good  god  wolde  his 
of  temptation,  p^estis  were^  in  worchip  &  fer  fro  perels  of  ]?e  fend,  &  Jjus  he 
forbad  to  his  prestis  to  haue  to  myche  of  erj^ly  godis  &  to 
myche  bisynesse  aboute  hem  ;  but  crist  ^af  hem  goostly  godis 
&  ocupiyng  bi  charite.  &  pf  we  marker  staat  of  iwnocense 
&  staat  ])at  auwgels  han  in  heuene,  ]7ey  shuldew  not  be  ]7us 
*[p.  306MS.]  ^oppressid  wi]?  erj^ely  drit  as  riche  me^  ben,  but  J’ey  han 
more  dene  lif  &  more  likiwge  to  mawnws  soule.  &  for  jjis 
cause  ordeynede  crist  \at  his  prestis  shulde^  wante  ]7es 
and  set  an  ex-  richessis,  &  ensaumplide  in  hym  silf  &  his  apostlis  hou  bey 
shuldew  lyue.  crist  wolde  wel  fat  his  prestis  hadde^a  fe  vse 
of  worldly  godis  as  myche  as  wolde  do  hem  good,  but  not  to 
myche  to  lette  fer  soule,  as  me?^  shuldew  bifore  sywne  & 


should  live. 


Chap.  Till.] 


DE  PAPA. 


473 


au^gels  ban  \n  '^er  lif.  &  bi  j^is  vse  men  s]lulde^^^  haue 

goostly  lordchip  of  alle  ]?es  godis,  &  bi  J’e  fruyt  of  virtues 

baue  delit  in  her  god,  &  bas  crist  ordeynede  to  pmtis^moost  Priests  would 

bye  staat  &  rooost  parfit  of  alle  ]?re  partis  of  \e  cbircbe,  “ate^^^ff^^they 

]>(it  prestis  woldew  lyae  b^r-aftir;  as  crist  ^af  to  laboreris 

worldly  godis  &  trtjtuel  also,  &  crist  grauwtide  to  bis  apostlis 

to  trt^uele  aboute  erj^ly  godis,  but  be  forfendide  bem  to  prynte 

b^r  soulis  to  mycbe  wib  erbly  godis.  crist  grauwtide  to 

worldly  lordis  to  baue  gou^rnayle  of  sicbe  godis,  but  he 

graui^tide  to  his  prestis  to  gou^rne  soulis  bi  weye  of  virtues ; 

&  bis  shulde^  b^J  4o  bi  meke  wille,  &  leeue  lordchip 
&  aust(?rnete.  &  bis  be  tau^te  m  dede  &  word  for  loue  b^t 
be  badde  to  his  pr^stis.  se  we  nou  b®  fendis  foly,  what  be 

meneb  wba^ne  be  argueb.  he  wolde  mene  b<^t  crist  was  The  devil  means 

,  ^  that  Christ  was  a 

a  fool  &  to  scars  in  leste  godis.  austyn  seib  ofte-tyme  \ai  fool,  and  too 

_  spai'ing  of  worldly 

b^r  ben  bre  godis  of  mm  ;  godis  of  virtues,  &  godis  of  kynde,  goods. 

&  godis  of  fortune,  b<^t  ben  be  leste.  crist  ordeynede  mew  Christ  ordained 

to  be  riche  iw  godis  of  y^rtu,  for  b^y  bew  best;  &  crist  soods  of  viijtue ; 

ordeynede  godis  of  kynde  as  mycbe  as  b^y  shuldew  s^rue  to  goo^g^of  nature^ 

be  soule.  be  ordeynede  not  so  greet  a  body  ne  so  strong  to 

a  man  as  bab  an  hors  or  ob^r  beeste,  for  it  wolde  do  barm  to 

be  soule.  crist  ordeynede  godis  of  fortune  b<^t  woldew  suffise  and  of  fortune. 

to  mawuMS  body ;  &  b^t^  be  ordeynede  godis  of  y^rtu  wyngis 

to  mew  to  fle  to  beuga^ ;  ant  an^^crist  wolde  faste  to  mew 

godis  of  fortune  bi  coney tise,  shuldew  drenge  a  maw  to 

belle,  &  for  bis  ende  be  shapib  bis-  wel  y  grauwte  b^t  erbly  niches  are  good 

godis  &  worldly  lordcbipis  bew  gode,  for  b^i  bew  goddis  ^ 

creaturis  &  sbapuw  of  god  for  good  ende.  but  godis  of  v^rtu  but  virtues  are 

better. 

ben  b®  betere  b^t  pr^stis  shuldew  haue  passiwgly,  &  more 

perel  is  iw  b®  fifste  godis,  &  b^^fore  crist  wolde  not  b^*t  bis 

pr^stis  haddew  but  litil  of  b^s  godis,  for  perels  &  lettiwg  of 

bet(9re  godis.  &  heer^  shuldew  worldly  mew  take  bede,  bobe  Secular  men 

should  he  careful 

be  lordis  be  comyns,  b<*t  bey  dissusen  not  worldly  godis,  *[p.  3ims.] 

■*  ,  not  to  misuse 

but  take  hem  iw  mesur^  to  b^t  ende  b^^t  crist  bab  ordeyned  goods, 
bem  to  be  vsid,  &  not  ajenws  his  ordenauwse.  crist  ^af  hem 
not  worldly  godis  to  charge  bis  prestis  wib  bi®  loTdcbip,  ne  to 


474 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


stir(3  hew  to  fleysly  sywnes,  as  ben  gloterye  &  lecherye ; 
&  ^if  j^es  two  partis  of  ]7e  chirche  foule;^  J^us  pr(?stis  wi]?  }»es 
godis,  wite  ]?ey  wel  pat  god  wole  punysche  bo]7e  J^es  partis 
&  his  pr^stis.  &  |>us  we  graunten  pat  riche  pr^stis  don  suw 
good  wi]?  j^is  richees,  for  so  don  pe  fendis  in  belle  wi]?  godis 
pat  crist  ha]?  ^ouyn  to  hew,  but  ne]?eles  ]?ey  don  amys ; 
for  ]?ey  shulde^  sette  al  per  bisynesse  pat  j^ey  ban  non  in 
worldly  godis  to  serue  crist  bi  godis  of  grace,  &  ]?is  is  a  greet 
Priests  are  of  the  yy-g  ^rau^tew  tat  pr<9stis  bew  of  rndJinus  kynde,  as 

must’  not^  imid  lordis  &  weddid  me^^^,  but  pt  |?ey  shuldew  not  haue  ]?is 
lordship  or  marry.  loj.(;[g]aip  ne  kyudely  gendrurd  of  children,  but  pf  ]?ey  wolde:?^ 

leeue  ]7is  staat  &  bicome  weddid  men,  for  we  bileue^  pat 
ma5"dynhot  &  goostly  gendruri?  is  beWe  ]?a?^  ]7is.  &  so 

suppose?^  we  pat  ]?es  prestis  ban  beWe  wit  pdM  seculer 
lordis,  applye  pej  ]?is  betere  wit  in  bet^re  vse  to  S(?rue  god ; 
as  beestis  haw  wit  to  ete  &  drvnke,  but  pr^stis  wit  shulde 
toiivevirufo^f^  stowde  iw  ]?is,  but  hou  ]7ey  my^tew  teche  mew  to  lyue 
iw  virtues  bi  goddis  lawe.  but  ]?is  may  nob  pr^stis  do  bi 
robbiwg  of  lordis  &  of  comyns  of  per  lordchip  &  er]?ely  godis ; 
for  ]?is  is  ajenws  god  &  maw. 


Qapitulum  Q"”- 


y  ]7is  sentense  pat  heer<9  is  seyd  shuldew  an^mrist  &  hise 
haue  shame  to  defoule  cristis  prestis  ajenws  pe  ordenauwse 
pat  crist  made.  &  worldly  lordis  &  oj^^re  foolis  pat  helpen 
an^^crist  heere  shuldew  haue  shame  of  ]7is  help,  as  ]?ey  shulew 
shame  at  domes  day;  &  ]?is  shame  shal  be  more  bi  colour  of 
ipocrisye,  for  ]?ey  seyen  iw  ]7es  dedis  pat  ]?ey  don  ]?ns  forcristis 
Worldly  lords  worchip.  for  crist  ordeynede  amys,  but  worldly  lordis 

endowing  the  ^  j  j  j  ^ 

clergy  are  mend-  amewdidew  hym,  as  be  emperour  of  rome  whawne  he  made 
mg  Christ’s  ordm-  j  ’  i  r 

his  prestis  lordis  he  amewdide  pe  apostlis  staat  ou^r  pe 
ordenauwse  of  crist.  but  al  ]7is  smacchi]?  blasfemye  &  wole 

The  emperor  has  i-  lij’j  ^  j  i.  '  i 

been  brought  briwge  pes  lordis  douw,  as  pe  emperours  staat  is  lesse  tor  pis 

down  for  endow-  j,  'j-n  i 

ing  the  Church,  dede  ajenws  cnst.  tor  no  maw  may  do  ajenws  crist  but  pi  he 


Antichrist  and  h 
those  that  help 
him  should  be 
ashamed. 


Chap.  IX.] 


DE  PAPA. 


475 


be  punyssbid  for  ]7is  dede,  but  punyssbiwg  of  mawnws  soule  is 

more  to  drede  ]?an  worldly  harm.  &  j^us  an^/crist  ^'my^te  not  *[p,  si&MS.] 

for  shame  canonyse  j^is  emperour ;  for  it  is  knowuw  j^mg  to 

me;^  })at  |>is  emperour  reu^rside  crist.  &  it  seme]?  to  many 

me;^  Ipat  o  cause  why  he  dide  bus  was  to  hye  his  oune  pr^stis,  One  of  constaa- 

■’  ^  J  ^  j-  ^  tine’s  motives 

wi]?  o]ier  blynd  deuociouw ;  so  ]iat  as  ]7e  emperour  passide 

o]?6re  worldly  lordis,  so  shulde  his  prest  of  rome  &  hise  passe  ^bove^' those  of 

oj^ere  lordis  pr^stis.  &  to  ]?is  wit  he  made  hym  lord  of  rome 

&  myche  of  his  empire,  &.  made  hym  &  his  cardenals  ride 

in  reed  on  hye  ors ;  for  hym  l^oujte  shame  \at  his  clerkis 

shulde^  not  passe  clerkis  of  o]?ere  lordis,  but  as  he  passide 

hem  bi  his  empire,  so  his  prest  shulde  passe  o\ere.  &  certis 

his  were  an  yuel  ground  to  canonyse  his  maw  iw  heuene  :  as  it  He  ought  not  to 

‘‘  *'  canonized. 

were  no  good  cause  to  charge  jie  chirche  to  halewe  hym,  al  pf 

he  seyde  ]?at  pf  he  sawe  a  prest  lie  bi  a  wommaw  he  wolde 

hile  hem  wij?  his  mewtile,  &  not  sclauwdre  hem  of  ]>is  sywne. 

pf  ]?is  emperour  be  iw  blis,  certis  ]?at  is  not  for  ]?is  dede ;  for  bfm^^and^^ma^ 

fynees  was  a  iust  prest,  for  he  stikide  j^e  maw  &  ]?e  womman 

for  b^r  sywne  a^enws  god,  &  j^us  he  vengide  goddis  wrong. 

bis  emperour  dide  many  godis,  but  pt  mew  durstew  neuere 

hidir-to  charge  ]>e  chirche  to  holde  his  day,  &  trowe  \at  he 

were  seynt  iw  heuene.  &  so  mew  seyen  of  seynt  siluester,  Silvester  may  be 

a  saint,  but  if  so 

bat  uf  god  wole  he  is  blissid,  but  bawne  he  hadde  myche  lie  repented  of 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  taking  endow- 

sorowe  aftir  for  bis  lordchip  \at  he  toke,  as  seynt  petre  ment. 

sywnede  ofte  &  bi  oure  feib  he  is  nou  seynt,  but  we  han  no 
siche  feib  siluestre  is  bus  iw  blis.  for  it  is  nede  to 
cristewmew  to  wite  what  bi^g  is  bileue,  &  to  wite  what  is 
bynebe  bileue,  &  putte  not  oure  troube  iw  siche  bi^g-  but  it 
is  licly  to  many  mew  ]iat  siluestre  sywnede  iw  his  hiywg, 

&  petre  ne  poule  ne  ob^re  apostle  wolde  neuere  haue  takuw 

bis  staat ;  but  fruyt  of  his  sorowe  &  ob^re  gode  dedis  ]iat 

he  dide,  wib  b®  grace  of  goddis  wille,  myjtew  haue  maad  hym 

seynt  aftir.  &  bus  mew  shewew  bi  opyn  skyle  defaute  of 

an^mristis  resouw.  many  bi^gis  ben  gode  &  holsum  echone  Things  may  he 

iw  his  kynde,  &  ])&  myngiwg  of  bes  bi^gis  is  vnholsum  to  maw  yet  baTmfxed^*^ 

to  take ;  so  presthod  &  worldly  lordchip  bew  bobe  gode  iw  Iper  fordshipl^^”^^^^ 


476 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  IX. 


kynde,  &  j^e  myngmg  of  jjes  two  wer^  venomous,  in  J^e 

*[p.  32  MS.]  pope,  for  ]7is  lordchip  "^wolde  quewche  j^e  pou^rt  \at  crist 

A  cord  is  a  good  hat  beduw.  &  a  coorde  is  a  good  tiwg,  &  faste  knyttiwg 
thing,  but  tie  it  ^  °  ^  ^  ? 

round  a  man’s  ^er-wi])  is  good  bote  to  maw  &  to  beeste  in  plasis  wher^  it 
throat  and  it  may  J 

strangle  him.  wolde  do  good ;  but  knytte  J^is  coorde  to  mawn-ws  j^rote  &  it 
my^te  soone  strangle  j^is  mm.  so  bynde  \ovi  lordcbip  of  )?is 
world  to  seculer  men  ]>at  ban  wit  &  xertu  to  warche  aftir  jiis 
lordcbip,  aftir  Je  lawe  \at  crist  ba]?  jouyn,  &  it  may  do 
mycbe  good,  goddis  worcbip  &  bis  cbircbis  profit ;  but  knytte 
]7is  lordcbip  to  cnstis  prast  &  it  wole  lette  bym  to  speke  J^e 
lawe  of  god  &  soulis  heelj^e,  &  strangle  bym  &  many  oj^ere. 
]7us  alle  \e  resouws  '^at  ]^e  fend  can  make  ajenus  cHst  & 
cnstis  prastis  may  be  auoydid  bi  oura  fei]?,  &  make  beretikis 
to  sbame  of  bew. 

Capitulum  10”"* 


Antichrist  argues 
that  abbeys  and 
colleges  would  be 
destroyed  if  per¬ 
petual  alms 
ceased. 


It  would  be  better 
if  there  were  no 
such  nests  of  the 
devil. 


Matt.  vi.  [25.] 


Heritage  among 
secular  lords  falls 
sometimes  into 
bad  hands, 


j  it  argue]?  an^mrist  ]?at  bi  ]?is  fel  foly  perpetual  almes  in 
abbeys  &  in  collegies  sbulde  be  destried :  but  where 
were  more  sywne  ?  &  si]?  it  is  greet  meede  to  do  almes 

for  a  tyme,  it  were  mycbe  more  meede  to  co?^tynue  perpetual 
almes;  &  ]?us  cbarteres  of  lordis  &  kyngis  of  ]?er  perpetual 
almes  sbulde?^  be  destried,  &  goostly  belp  ]?e(t  sue]?  ]?er-of,  &  no 
drede  ]?e  pope  is  grour-d  of  alle  sicbe  perpetual  almes.  Heere 
ban  trewe  me^  ofte  seyd  ]?«t  it  were  mycbe  betere  \at  men 
lyuedew  opyn  lif  \an  in  sicbe  nestis  of  ]?e  fend;  for  sicbe 
abbeys  &  collegies  ben  bordis  of  syme  to  berbore  bym. 
&  berfore  sei]?  crist  in  ]?e  gospel  ]iat  men  sbuldew  not  be 
bisi  to  ]?e  morowe  ;  but  an^^crist  ba]?  bardy  maner  to  bolde 
bis  castel  for  many  ^eere.  &  ]’us  J’at  crist  durste  not  do,  ne 
bis  apostlis  aftir  bym,  an^^’crist  dare  blyndly  do  in  boldiwg  of 
sicbe  castels,  &  ]?is  is  a  fendis  cautel  \ai  be  ba]?  broujt  yn  of 
newe.  heritage  of  er]?ly  lordis  goi]?  ofte  tyme  amys  wbawne 
tirau;^tis  &  goddis  tr^ytours  corner  eyris  aftir  gode  men  ;  but 
pt  god  ordeyne]?  grace  beere,  &  ordeyne]?  sunme  to  wante 
eyris,  &  bi  many  priuey  weyes  be  taki]?  yuel  fro  gode  men 


Chap.  X.] 


DE  PAPA. 


477 


but  wbawne  siche  hord  of  fe  fend  is  p^petuald  \n  o  heed,  be 
it  good  be  it  yuel,  it  lasti]?  many  mennus  lyues,  &  it  is 
comynly  yuel.  for  cnst  hadde  but  twelue  apostlis  &  ledde 
hew  in  trauel  &  pou^rt  &  hooly  pr(9chi;^g  of  his  word,  &  jit 
scarioth  was  a  shrewe  for  al  vertu  crist  shewide. 
lord,  wher  popis  &  er]7ly  lordis  han  more  v^rtu  crist 
hadde  heere?  &  |>us  siche  nestis  ^shulde?^  not  be  callid 
p^rpetuel  almes  of  worldly  lordis,  but  dewnes  of  ]7eues,  & 
nestis  of  s^rpew-tis,  &  homely  housis  of  quyc  deuels.  &  j^ey 
don  harm  to  cristis  chirge  hi  pi^rpetualte  in  '^er  sywne ; 
&  o]ier  ground  han  no  me?^  forto  fouwde  siche  de;^nes,  but 
]7at  crist  forfendide  hew  &  shewide  '^er  perel  in  scarioth. 
&  se  ])Q  cautel  of  I’e  fend,  hou  quentely  he  ha]?  broujt  ]?is  yn. 
he  moue]?  ]7es  fouwderis  to  pride,  &  seij?  J^ey  hen  comun  of 
grete  men,  '^at  han  fouw-did  perpetuel  abbeys  in  so  myche 
multitude,  wher^  is  more  satanas  pride  ajenws  mekenesse  of 
iesu  crist?  for  our^  bileue  techi]?  vs  \at  a  maw  doi]?  no 
lengere  merit  ]?aw  ]?e  while  he  lyue]?  heeri?  iw  er]?e ;  hou 
shulde  j^is  meede  euere  laste  ?  ]?es  fouwderis  su£S.cidew  not 
to  fouwde  '^er  oune  soule  iw  virtues;  hou  shuldew  ]?ei  ]?awne 
sufS.se  to  make  so  longe  virtuous  mew  ?  &  jif  ]ier  come  good 

of  ]7is  grouwd,  pore  deed  mew  \at  god  loue]?  betere  han  more 
meede  of  ]?is  good  ]?an  han  ]7es  proude  founderis.  &  se  hou 
an^^'crist  &  ]7es  lordis  stryuew  as  fendis  in  ]7is  poynt.  emti- 
crist  sei]?  \at  al  ]?is  lordchip  felde  to  hym  bi  title  of  crist, 
&  so  ]7es  lordis  jauew  ajen  'godis  \at  j^ey  haddew  vni^^stly 
holduw,  &  so  ]7ei  han  no  more  meede  but  makew  aseej?  for 
formers  sywne ;  &  jit  ]?ey  dwellew  ay  in  sywne  ]?e  while  ]?ei 
holden  ony  lordchip  fro  \e  chirche.  &  ]?us  it  is  not  p<?rpetual 
almes,  but  perpetual  part  of  makiwge  asee]?.  &  certis  suwme 
wordis  \at  heere  ben  seyd  ben  so]?e,  &  suwme  opyn  blasfemye, 
si]?ew  crist,  ]?at  is  lord  of  alle,  forfendide  siche  nestis  iw  ]?e  gospel, 
&  ordeynede  to  his  moost  dere  childrew  \at  ]?ey  shuldew  not 
haue  siche  dweUiwge  place.  &  ]?is  he  ordeynede  for  J?is  ende, 
\ai  mew  shuldew  coueyte  ]?e  place  of  heuene.  &  to  ]>e  foorme 
of  an^^'cristis  skile :  he  &  alle  hise  kuwnew  not  grouwde  }at 


but  this  lasts 
through  the  lives 
of  many  men  and 
mostly  bad  ones. 


Even  among  the 
apostles  there  was 
an  Iscariot. 


*[p.  326  MS.] 

Names  that 
should  he  given 
to  monasteries. 


The  devil  stirs 
men  by  pride  to 
make  such  foun¬ 
dations. 


A  man  can  do  no 
merit  after  his 
death. 


Antichrist  says 
that  all  lordship 
falls  to  him  by 
right,  so  that 
gifts  are  only 
partial  restitu¬ 
tion. 


As  to  the  form  of 
Antichrist’s  rea¬ 
son. 


478 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  X. 


j^is  was  eu^re  ony  alnes  to  make  ]7us  siche  cayms  castels. 

Solomon’s  temple  so]7ely  \n  j/G  olde  lawG  was  Salomons  te^wple  a  figure  of  ]>& 

the  Church,  hut  chirche  M  be  newe  lawe,  but  not  'bat  be  chirche  shulde  be 

not  a  model  ^ 

it.  siche,  but  ire  &  large  vndir  j^e  cope  of  beuene,  &  sto>^de  m 

virtues  of  maw-nws  soule  ;  but  an^^cnst  wole  close  it  nou  in 
coolde  stones  j^at  motew  perisshe.  &  Jius  ]7is  fouwdiwg  yn- 
grou^did  was  noon  almes  at  ]>e  bigywnywg,  &  it  is  not  aftir 
quykenyd  to  be  almes  wiji-oute  skile  ;  but  almes  were  to 
sue  crist  &  ordeyne  mennus  lif  aftir  bis  lawe.  erist  is 
god  'pat  cbalengi]?  propre  to  ordeyne  sicbe  perpetuy tes,  for 
be  is  lord  wiji-oute^  ende ;  wbo  dare  take  fro  bym  ]iis 
lordcbip  ?  do  me^  good  for  per  lif,  &  ^yue  ]iei  to  erist 
perpetuyte,  for  be  can  &  may  do  ]7is  as  bym  liki]?  in  bis 
cbircbe.  &  ]7us  errour  in  sicbe  sywnes  hap  destried  many 
kynredis  &  punyssbid  many  soulis  in  belle,  wbo  so  wyste  pe 
soj^e  bi  crist.  &  jius  sicbe  ebarteres  of  seculer  lordis  &  of 
popis  hm  ofte  witnessis  of  pe  errours  of  per  eldris  pat  were^ 
grouwderis  of  ]7es  sywnes. 


*[p.  33  MS.] 

Perpetuity  be¬ 
longs  to  Christ. 


Capitulum  ll”*- 


ut  pt  an^«crist  grucebi]?  &  sei]?  pat  j^is  is  beresye,  for  it 
tecbiji  a  weye  bi  wbicb  booly  cbircbe  sbulde  be  destried. 
for  pf  per  were  no  pope  in  erjie  ne  no  cardenals  bis 
felowis,  per  were  no  patriarkis,  ne  arebibisebops,  ne  bisebops, 
ne  ercbedekenes,  ne  officials,  ne  persouws,  ne  prestis.  &  pf 
];es  ordris  perissbide^  ]ius,  erj^ely  lordis  sbulde^  suwnere 
perisebe,  &  so  pe  cbircbe  sbulde  dwelle  wiji-outew  ordre, 
as  fendis  wanted  ordre  in  belle  &  ben  in  borrour  wi]i-outei>i 
TiMe  men  reply  ende.  Heere  it  bab  be  seyd  ofte  bi  witnesse  of  trewe  mew  pat 

of  the^threepm-ts  nedis  be  an  ordre  of  ]ire  partis  of  pe  cbircbe,  pat  hen 

of  Holy  Church,  clerkis,  lordis  &  comyns,  &  iw  ecb  of  hem  is  ordre.  for  crist, 

pat  is  bo]7e  god  &  maw  &  beed  &  grouwd  of  booly  cbircbe, 
puttide  ]?is  ordre  pleynly  &  ]af  lawis  to  cowtynue  it,  &  a  maw 
may  no  more  sbewe  pat  be  is  an^mrist  bym  silf  Jiaw  to  reuerse 


Antichrist  sa}"s  v 
that  the  whole  ^ 
order  of  the 
Church  would 
he  destroyed. 


Chap.  XL] 


DE  PAPA. 


479 


]?is  ordr(9,  &  feyne  a  newe  wi|’-oute  ground.  &  si]?  we  takew 

of  goddis  lawe  crist  dwelli]?  wi]?-oute?^  ende,  he  wer^ 

a  fool  out  of  bileue  \at  difidede  heer^  of  cristis  help,  crist 

wole  ordeyne  to  his  chirche  pr^stis  &  ordr^  \at  is  nedeful,  al 

5if  ]7es  foiire  sectis  were?^  su?^ku?^  douw  to  ])er  fadir.  leue 

whawne  ]?e  pope  was  deed  &  cardenals  were?^  not  pt  sprongu?^, 

in  whois  bond  was  ]?e  chirche  \at  wandri]?  heer*?  vpon  er]?e  ? 

Curtis  in  cristis  hond,  \>ai  dwellib  euer^  heed  of  hooly  chirche;  Christ  is  always 

^  *  -f  _  head  of  the 

&  he  mut  nedis  ordeyne  prestis,  summe  hyer^  &  suwme  Church,  and  he 

-)  r  7  j  provide  , 

lower*?,  aftir  \at  he  ^yuej?  hem  grace  to  profile  more  aftir  pi^iests. 

his  lawe.  &  ]?us  pf  ]?^r  were?^  no  popis,  ne  cardenals,  ne 

emperours  prolatis,  hooly  chirche  shulde  stonde  wel  hi  ]?e 

ordro  \at  crist  puttide.  &  pf  ]?ou  axe  who  shulde  make  ]?es 

prostis,  &  bi  what  wordis  &  whois  autorite,  C(?rtis  bileue 

nedij?  vs  to  seye  J^at  crist  mut  make  ]?es  prostis,  o]?or  bi 

wordis  hid  to  vs  or  bi  grace  wi]?-oute  wordis,  as  crist  not 

wi]?-oute?^  cause  made  apostlis  &  telde  vs  not  bi  what  wor'^'dis  *[p.  33&MS,] 

he  made  hem ;  why  shulde  not  crist  do  pt  so  ?  trowe  we  pat 

crist  sitti?^g  in  heuene  is  lettid  to  strecche  his  grace  so  fer  ? 

si]?  he  is  bo]?e  god  &  man,  &  gouorny}?  vs  in  opere  ]7ingis. 

&  3if  pou.  seye  pat  on  Ms  manor  my^te  ech  man  feyne  hym  silf  it  may  be  oh- 
^  ^  ^  ..  ^  ..  .  jected  that  each 

a  staat,  &  seye  pat  he  is  hierste  ma?^  pat  dwelli]?  in  erbe  vndir  man  might  claim 
_  ^  ^  what  portion  he 

crist;  so]?  it  is  pat  many  pseudois  may  speke  myche  wi]?-oute  chose, 
ground,  &  borfore  crist  hab  3ouyn  a  lawe  to  trowe  hem  not  Christ  has  taught 

us  only  to  believe 

but  pf  pey  grounden  hem.  &  si]?  crist  bad  trowe  to  his  such  as  rest  in 

Ins 

werkis  &  ^af  neper  bullis  ne  ’lettris  selid,  me?^  shuldew  more 

trowe  hooly  werkis  pan  popis  bullis  or  bischops  lettris.  for 

alle  ]?ese  bew  not  gospel,  but  pe  fende  may  regne  vndir  ]?es 

writtis  ;  for  bo]?e  popis,  bischopis  &  prostis  may  be  wi]?  ]?es 

pe  fendis  childre?^,  &  no  partis  of  hooly  chirche  but  fendis 

ordeyned  to  be  dampnyd.  trowe  bou  to  virtuous  dedis  of  we  should  judge 

^  ^  priests  by  their 

prestis,  &  algatis  to  per  mekenesse,  pat  pey  coueyte?^  noon  good  deeds, 
hye  staat  pat  is  not  grouwdid  in  goddis  lawe.  &  so  proude 
prestis  &  coueytous  be?^  suspect  of  prestis  staat.  but  ]?is 
suspicmuw  is  not  bileue  ne  hope  pat  man  shulde  haue.  but 
ne]?el0s  ech  man  heere  shulde  lyue  in  hope  pat  bi  his  lif 


480 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  XI. 


he  shulde  come  to  heuene,  for  mekenesse  &  oj?ere  virtues 
]?at  he  ha]?.  &  ]?us  we  shnldew  lyue  in  bileue  in  hope 

&  in  charite,  &  who  so  wantij?  hope  heeri?  he  is  an  opyn 
an^^cnst.  fus  we  hopew  to  he  sauyd,  al  jif  ]?es  pri^latis  hen 
opyn  fendis,  &  onr^  bileue  &  hope  is  picchid  in  ]?e  grace  of 
iesu  crist,  &  our«?  gode  werkis  may  we  knowe  wi]?  entewt  in 
our^  soule.  many  men  trowew  more  to  gode  werkis  ]?an  to 
It  would-be  no  staat  of  pope  or  bischop,  &  so  alle  ]?e8  pontificals  ben  byne]?e 
deals  were  burnt,  hooly  writ,  SO  ]>at  ^if  ]?ey  alle  werew  brent  cnste?^dom  shulde 
stowde  wel.  for  ellis  ^if  freris  fouwdew  wordis  to  sacre  ]ie 
armes  of  a  pmt,  &  }e  pope  ^aue  hym  meede  to  fijte  wij? 
o]>ere  eristenmen,  he  were  out  of  bileue  ]?t?t  trowede  not  to  al 
]?is.  but  fer  be  it  fro  criste^^me;^  to  trowe  siche  cautels  of  )?e 
fend ;  &  bi  ]?is  may  men  se  answer*?  to  ]?e  foorme  of  an^«cristis 
These  new  orders  resou7^.  bes  wordis  of  be  emp^rours  pr^latis  \a\>  hen  not 

distemper  the  .  .  . 

order  of  Christ,  grou^did  in  goddis  lawe  destrien  not  hooly  chirche,  ne  ]>e 

ordr*?  \ai  crist  ha]?  sett;  but  fouwdmg  of  }?es  newe  ordris 

distemp^ri]?  ]7e  ordris  of  crist,  &  ]?us  \e  iendi  steli]?  in  mo 

Popes  and  car-  mew  to  his  stede.  be  ordr*?  of  kyngis  &  dukis  &  kny^tis 
dinals  have  no  ^  ...  ^ 

*[p-  34  MS.]  &  of  s^ruauwtis  to  hem  bew  grouwdid  ^in  goddis  lawe,  but  not 

authority  from  °  ^  ’ 

Christ.  of  popis  &  cardenals.  crist  ordeynede  bi  his  ordr^  ]iat  his 

apostlis  &  his  pr^stis  shulde^  be  felowis  &  meke  mew  &  telle 
not  hye  bi  hem  silf,  &  so  crist  maki]?  distiweefouw  bi-twixe 
Priesthood  con-  ordr^  of  erbly  lordis  &  ordrg  of  his  pr^stis.  for  bat  ordr*?  is 

sists  in  meekness  . 

and  charity.  hid  to  god  &  stondi]?  iw  mekenesse  &  o\ere  dedis  of  charite ; 

&  so  blywdenesse  of  an^^crist  shulde  not  disproue  ]?es  worldly 
lordis,  ne  prone  \at  bi  \e  same  skyle  mut  be  J>is  ordro  of 
emporours  prolatis. 


Oapitulum  12”'- 


Antichrist  asks  X  it  an^^cHst  argueb  \>ai  it  is  nedeful  to  be  chirche  hat  he 

who  is  to  give  ,  .  .  ,  ^ 

indulgences,  if  pope  &  his  cardenals  &  obore  prolatis  reule  it.  for  who 
there  were  no  . 

pope.  shulde  ellis  assoyle  mew  &  grauwte  hem  so  large  iw- 

dulgensis  bobe  of  peyne  &  of  sywne,  haue  bei  neuore  so  longe 
sywned.  &  ob^re  priuylegies  of  \e  pope  may  not  be  teld  of 


Chap.  XII. J 


DE  PAPA. 


481 


erjly  mew.  in  J;is  mati^r  han  c^’istewmew  seyd  priuely  as  chriatian  men 

Jey  durstew,  fat  it  wer^  good  mew  to  be  war  lest  an^mrist  tS  we^  Should 

disseyue  hem.  &  god  wite  it,  mew  woldew  wi]?  wille  seye  Christ’s  deceits. 

treujie  for  worchip  of  crist  &  for  profit  of  his  chirche  &  hope 

to  gete  blis  iw  heuene.  bo]7e  cristewmew  &  an^«crist  grouwdew 

hem  on  ie^u  crist,  but  ^ey  fallow  iw-to  dyuorse  weyes  bi  fe 

temptiwg  of  ]7e  fend,  an^mrist  leeue]?  mekenesse  &  paciense 

wij?  ofere  virtues,  but  cristewmew  holdew  j^es  virtues,  summe 

more  &  summe  lesse.  &  holde  we  j^us  cristis  lawe  wi^-outew 

nouelries  of  an^/crist,  &  seye  we  hou  cristewmew  shuldew  do 

iw  lys  fendis  blast.  &  ]?us  mew  seyen  bi  cristis  lore  fat 

ani^ecrist  failib  first  whawne  he  seib  fat  it  is  nedeful  fat  be  Antichrist  fails ; 

.  since  the  Church 

pope  &  cardenals  reule  cristis  chirche.  for  whawne  cristis  throve  when 

^  there  were  no 

chirche  jirof,  weron  no  siche  pope  &  cardenals ;  &  sifen  j^es  popes  cardi- 

prelatis  werew  comuw  yn  regnede  an^/crist  wi]?  sywne.  & 

anewtis  asoyliwg,  bileue  techi]?  cristewmew  fat  iesu  crist 

mut  nedis  asoyle  pf  ony  maw  shule  be  assoylid,  &  an^mrist  absolved 

may  not  for  shame  denye  opynly  ^is  bileue ;  but  he  sei]?  fat 

crist  mut  nedis  assente  wi]?  hym  iw  asoyliwg,  &  he  grouwdi]? 

Jis  bi  fe  gospel,  but  it  is  shame  to  reherse  it.  so]?  it  is  crist  pJ^SofioolhTg 

grauwtide  to  petro  fat  what  fing  he  asoylide  on  er]?e  shulde 

be  asoylid  iw  heuene,  &  so  it  is  of  byndiwg ;  but  ]?is  was 

lymytid  to  petr*?  &  hise  fat  suyden  j?e  ‘^'steppis  fat  petr^  *[?•  346  ms.] 

wente,  &  whawne  fer  soyliwg  &  fer  byndiwg  acordide  wi]?  god 

iw  heuene.  but  nou  it  is  no  bileue  fat  ]?es  gon  petris  steppis,  ^o^no\^foiio™in 

&  suew  crist  fe  streijt  weye  fat  shulde  lede  herdis  to  heuene.  I’oter’s  steps. 

&  also  it  is  no  bileue  fat  what  tyme  fat  ]?es  pr(9latis  feynew 
hem  to  asoyle,  fej  acordew  wi]?  crist  aboue;  &  so  it  is  no 
bileue  fat  fei  acorden  euer^  wi]?  crist.  Por  as  ]?ey  sywnew  iw 
ofer  fing,  so  ]?ey  sywngw  iw  ]?is  poynt;  for  he  fat  discordi]?  fro 
goddis  wille  iw  his  lif  &  iw  his  dede  may  liitly  discorde  fro  in  their  ufe,  may 

®  ^  J  <  J  do  so  m  their 

god  iw  profecye  of  siche  asoyliwg.  mew  preyen  gode  cristew-  absolution, 
mew  bi  fe  Yertu.  of  iesu  crist  fat  ]>ey  dampne  not  ]?es  wordis 
to  li^tly  wi]?-outew  skyle,  but  reste  in  resouw  &  goddis  lawe  & 
holde  al  fat  ]?ese  techen.  for  ]>is  shuldew  alle  cristewmew  do 
&  passe  not  fe  bouwdis  of  ]?is;  &  ]?is  shuldew  mew  telle  opynly 


31 


482 


DE  PAPA. 


[Chap.  XII. 


The  Pope  may 
give  absurd 
indulgences, 


that  would  keep 
a  soul  quite  out 
of  purgatory. 

It  is  dangerous 
to  believe  these 
things  as  of  faith. 


It  is  not  a  matter 
of  faith  that  this 
or  that  man  is 
pope. 


Such  grants  are 
‘pravileges’;  ask 
the  authority  for 
them  before  buy¬ 
ing 


to  suffer!?  dej?  for  loue  of  treujie.  &  bi  jiis  may  mew  se  wbat 
j^ei  shulew  trowe  of  indulgensis.  it  is  no  poynt  of  bileue 
\ai  ]ie  pope  euere  more  iw  grauwtiwg  of  ]ies  indulgewsis  acordij? 
■wi]?  goddis  wille  ;  as  it  is  no  bileue  j^at  so  longe  sbal  ]?is 
world  stonde,  as  ]>e  pope  grauwti]?  iwdulgewsis.  but  bileue 
techi]?  cristewmew  ]iat  indulgewsis  sbulew  no  longer^  laste ;  & 
]7us  it  is  no  bileue  jif  pope,  for  biddiwg  of  a  kyng,  grauwti]? 
so  large  indulgewsis  ])at  a  maw  may  iw  a  masse  tyme  wberd 
euer^  be  beri]?  ]7is  masse  gete  twenti  jiousynd  jeer  of  pardouw, 
&  ]>at  wole  passe  alle  j^e  tyme  ]?at  soulis  sbulew  dwelle  iw 
purgatorye ;  &  Jius  be  sbal  not  dwelle  iw  peyne  bi  j^e  grauwt 
of  ]?is  pope,  manye  sicbe  j^iwgis  ben  writuw  ]iat  bew  noujt  of 
bileue,  &  'perfoie  it  is  perelous  to  trowe  hem  as  bileue.  We 
bileuew  on  cristis  lawe  \at  jif  maw  sywnede  neuer(?  so  longe, 
&  wer(?  neu^re  asoylid  of  pope  ne  of  bis  pr^st  vndir  bym,  jif 
be  wolde  forsake  bis  sywne  &  be  contrit  for  former*?  sywne  & 
ende  ]iis  lif  on  fis  man^r,  god  wolde  forjyue  byw^  bis  sywne. 
We  kuwnew  not  telle  bou  longe  \at  god  wolde  punyssbe  bym 
iw  purgatorye,  &  ]7is  is  more  grace  of  god  jiaw  ]te  pope  tellij? 
iw  bis  lawe,  for  be  wole  nedis  constreyne  mew  to  be  asoylid 
of  bym  or  bise,  but  ]?is  durste  noon  apostle  do.  &  j? us  it  is 
no  bileue,  as  it  is  no  bileue  \at  J^is  or  }>is  is  very  pope,  for 
mawnw-s  cboys  maki]?  no  pr^st,  bou  euere  J^is  lawe  be  byed. 
for  enleuene  apostlis  to-gider^  durstew  not  obese  matby 
apostle,  &  jit  ]?e  booly  goost  was  wi)’  hem  &  coueytise  was 
awey.  &  j^us  seyen  summe  trewe  mew  ]>at  sicbe  grauwtis  of 
]7e  pope  ]>at  bew  not  grouwdid  iw  goddis  lawe  bew  prauylegies, 
&  litil  war},  &  sij?  fey  ben  not  bileue,  axe  grouwd  of  be;w 
bifore  fou  bie  be?w. 


Explicit  tractates  de  papa. 


APPENDIX. 


Extract  from  tlie  Tract  Be  Servitute  Civili  et  Bominio 
Seculari,  Cap.  Y.  from  MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  87 J  et  seq. 

Bestat  videre  naturaliter  de  dominio  ac  servitute  que  in 
clericis  magis  fetet.  Secte  autem  he  qnatuor  ex  cautela 
diaboli  majorem  servitutem  in  seculares  dominos  introducunt, 
et  specialiter  in  hoc  quod  ipsos  vecordant  ad  dei  ordinanciam 
defendendum.  Tit  incipiendo  a  papa,  ipse  lege  Cbristi  exigit  Pope  cites  per- 
quod  in  regains  exteris  citet  et  precipiat  quod  quecunque  judges 
persone  sub  regum  dominio,  quamcunque  deus  eos  incarcerat, 
compareant  in  tempore  brevi  quod  limitat  suis  judicibus 
responsuri.  1.  Sic  autem  contingit  romanum  presbiterum  and  bids  them 

.  ^  j  'A  come  to  Rome 

insanire  quod  mittat  in  Angiiam  ciericis  quos  contempnit  or  where  else 
ut  respondeant  infra  tempus  modicum  suis  cardiualibus  judi-  lie  may  be. 
cibus  inimicis,  et  ut  macbinetur  banc  stultam  cautelam  diaboli 
quod  Bomam  veniant  vel  ubicunque  papam  esse  contingit, 
sub  pena  crudelissima  responsuri.  Sic  enim  contingeret 
papam  regnicolas  quoscumque  regum  destruere  et  depauperare 
regna  tarn  pecunia  quam  personis. 

2.  Iterum  cum  non  tantum  rutilat  sua  sapiencia  ut  destruat  ^ake^tL^ways 
in  regnis  latrunculos,  videtur  quod  necessitare  vendicat  fideles  safe  for  them, 
ut  per  vias  abruptissimas  et  periculosissimas  tarn  corpori  quam 

anime  capiant  iter  suum.  Christus  autem  non  vendicat 
hujusmodi  potestatem. 

3.  Iterum  contingit  quod  deus  necessitat  citatos  illos  ex  God  may  disable 
infirmitatis  vel  debilitatis  impotencia  quod  infra  tempus  ™earing?o?L 
datum  et  usque  ad  diem  judicii  non  poterunt  per  tan  tarn  citation, 
distanciam  laborare.  Cum  ergo  Christus  ipsis  precipit  quod 

non  sic  laborent  ad  illam  distanciam  et  papa  crudeliter  mandat 
oppositum,  patet  quod  in  hoc  ipse  induit  habitum  anticbristi, 
cum  nemo  posset  esse  Christo  magis  contrarius  quam  tarn 


484 


APPENDIX. 


dominatiye  mandando  oppositum  illius  quod  Christus  tarn 
realiter  precipit  in  ejffectum. 

4.  Iterum  quod  patet  irracionabilitas  hujus  mandati  evidet 
time  fixed.  via  multiplici  ;  nam  papa  de  valde  possibili  potest  interim  in 
inferno  condempnari.  Que  igitur  prudencia  citare  hominem 
dum  nesciat  quorsiim  sicut  nescit  de  prefixo  termino  ubi 
erit,  specialiter  si  sit  yivus  yel  mortuus,  yel  a  dignitate  sua 
depositus  et  in  carcere  violente  reclusus.  Kec  habet  ista 
citacio  fundacionem  aliam  nisi  quod  Christus  accipiendo  ^ 
haptismum  aquaticum  yenit  humiliter  ad  baptistam,  ut  patet 
Jo.  primo  et  Mat.  3°;  ideo  antichristo  pertinet  procedere  per 
yiam  contrariam.^ 

•  •••••••••  * 

qifite^s  citaoiones  tales  notata  causa  possunt  faciliter  in 

by  letter.  Anglia  terminari,  cum  citati  yolunt  humiliter  detegere  et 
mittehdo  scribere  ad  romanam  curiam  fidem  suam.^  Que 
ergo  racio  citandi  tales  incarcerates  domini  pro  hac  causa. 
Certum  quidem  est  ex  fide  quod  apostolus  non  habuit  potes- 
tatem  a  deo  nisi  ad  edificacionem  non  destruccionem  ecclesie 
yel  persone.  Et  si  diabolus  hanc  potestatem  simulayerit,  in 
ista  ficta  simulacione  est  faciliter  convincibilis  esse  mendax. 
Ideo  cum  unus  fidelis  debet  in  illo  casu  quod  precipitur 
obedire  domino  Jesu  Christo,  sanum  consilium  atque  catho- 
licum  yidetur  hominem  tenere  se  domi  et  humiliter  petere 
sufiragium  domini  Jesu  Christi.  In  ipso  enim  clamamus 
abba,  pater,  qui  est  mirabilis  episcopus  animarum.  Et 
martirizacio  ista  diaboli  est  longe  crudelior  atque  callidior 
quam  martirizacio  facta  per  seculares  in  ecclesia  primitiva. 
Immo  libera  nos  domine  ab  isto  periculoso  tempore  et  vene- 
nosis  sagittis  emissis  de  pharetra  antichrist!.  Eya,  milites 
Christi,  seryate  yiriliter  libertatem  yobis  datam  a  domino  non 
solum  quoad  bona  fortune  yel  corpora  sed  quoad  animam  et 
virtutes.  Antichrisfus  enim  licet  stolidus  vendicat  dominari 
omnibus  istis  tribus. 

pbouid'ask\e]p  '  Iterum  yendicare  debet  catholicus  ex  titulo  misericordie 
from  the  king-,  subsidium  a  sano  concilio  regis  sui,  nam  tanquam  certum 
supponitur  quod  papa  non  habet  potestatem  tantam  super 
corpus  hominis  regis  legii  ut  rex  habet ;  quis  ergo  Achitopliel 
proiberet  quod  rex  mandet  tali  suo  legio  ne  ad  pape  man- 
datum  tali  discrimini  se  convertat.  Si  autem  papa  plus  et 
principalius  dominatur  super  homine  regis  legio  quam  rex 

^  I  leave  out  No.  5  as  it  has  to  do  with  the  Pope’s  exacting  oaths  of 
obedience  from  prelates  and  others. 

2  Compare  the  beginning  of  the  so-called  letter  to  Pope  Urban, 

‘  ‘  Gaudeo  plane  detegere  cuicnnque  fidem  meam  quam  teneo,  et  spcci- 
ahter  Eomano  pontifici.” — F.  Z.  341. 


APPENDIX. 


485 


ipse,  cum  potest  esse  inimicus  regis  et  regni,  ut  nuper 
coiitigit  in  eifectum,^  videtur  quod  papa  habet  potestatem  in 
cunctos  regis  regnicolas  in  regem  et  regnum  proprium  rebel- 
lare  ;  ideo  certum  videtur  quod  rex  habet  plus  principalem 
potestatem  super  corpore  hominis  sui  legii  quam  iste  episcopus 
racione  ecclesie.  Aliter  enim  Constantinus  concessisset 
Silvestro  ad  destruccionem  sui  imperii  principalitatem 
dominii  super  singulos  sues  legios;  sed  certum  est  quod 
nec  istud  potuit  nec  papa  debuit  acceptare  tale  dominium. 

Sicut  ergo  rex  potest  et  debet  servare  in  suo  regno  aurum 
vel  jocale,  licet  pro  ipso  papa  mandaverit,  sic  et  hominem 
suum  legium,  cum  in  casu  sit  regno  tarn  uecessarius  ut  hoc 
aurum ;  specialiter  dum  papa  non  habet  aliquid  contra  hunc 
clericum  nisi  quod  legem  dei  et  jus  regni  pupplicat  contra 
refugam  antichristi.  Nec  graviter  ferat  catholicus  quod  fidelis 
sic  postulat  humanum  subsidium  propter  illud  Jer.  17°  : 

Maledictus  qui  conjidit  in  homine  et  ponit  carnem  hrachium  and  would  not  so 
suum^  quia  debemus  in  deo  confidere  principal  ter,  credendo  of°God 
indefectibilitatem  sue  misericordie  tanquam  fidem ;  sed  in 
homine  suppositive  et  ministraliter  possumus  confidere  citra 
fidem,  cum  confidendo  principaliter  in  deo  quod  moveat  suum 
organum  ad  in  tali  justicia  pertinente  magnatibus  adju- 
vandum,  possumus  ad  hoc  per  fideles  evidencias  homines 
inclinare.  Et  unum  credimus ;  quod  quicunque  Achitophel 
consuluerit  regem  ad  oppositum  est  proditor,  a  fide  et  utilitate 
exorbitans  regis  sui.  Necesse  tamen  habemus  p'ercepta 
multitudine  scolarum  antichristi  in  dei  adjutorium  figere 
fidem  nostram. 


The  tract,  “  De  Citacionibus  frivolis  et  aliis  Yersuciis  Anti¬ 
christ!”  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  65),  begins  by  setting 
out  the  question  at  issue. 

Questio.  Si  papa  vel  ejus  vicario  citante  virum  legium 
regis  ut  compareat  coram  eo  personaliter  pro  loco  et  tempore 
que  ipse  voluerit  limitare,  dum  rex  non  licenciaverit,  pre-  is  a  man  bound 
dictus  vir  legius  teneatur  sub  pena  gravis  peccati  coram 
papa  vel  ejus  vicario  in  dictis  loco  et  tempore  comparere? 

Et  videtur  quod  sic,  quia  aliter  ipsum  excomraunicant, 
spoliant,  incarcerant,  vel  occidunt,  quod  non  facerent  nisi 
gravis  culpa  hoc  exigat,  cum  deus  non  potest  punire  horai- 
nem  nisi  culpa  pene  hujusmodi  precedente.  Ergo  conclusio 
vera. 

Sed  antequam  arguitur  ad  partem  contrariam  argucia  ista 
sophistica  est  solvenda.  Constat  quidem  logicis  quod  racio  ista  To  say  so  is  to 

1  This  shows  that  the  tract  was  written  after  the  Great  Schism. 


486 


APPENDIX. 


imply  that  the 
Pope  cannot  err. 


God  may  call  the 
man  in  another 
direction. 


A  man  sins  who 
obeys  the  Pope 
rather  than 
Christ. 


The  Pope  does 
not  know  the 
true  faith  as  to 
the  Host. 


non  habet  colorem  nisi  supposito  hoc  infideli  porrismate,  quod 
nec  papa  nec  ejus  vicarius  errare  poterit  in  hac  parte.  Posset 
enim  esse  quod  talis  sit  antichristus  et  manifestus  diabolus 
extollens  se  inevidenter  (?)  supra  omne  quod  dicitur  deus  ; 
et  tunc  idem  foret  sic  ipsi  annuere  et  antichristo  sive  diabolo 
consentire.  Posset  enim  talis  prelatus  agitari  tanta  insania 
quod,  deo  citante  virum  legium  ad  contrarium,  ipse  citet 
irracionabilissime  contra  deum.  Cum  enim  citare  sit  mandare 
ad  futuram  obedienciam  adimplendum,  patet  quod  stat  deum 
citare  realiter  virum  hunc  legium  per  penam  corporis  quam 
infligit  ne  sic  exeat  regnum  regis.  Et  cum  talis  prelatus 
patenter  citat  ad  contrarium,  patet  lucide  ipsum  esse  facientem 
hoc  scientifice  contra  Christum,  et  per  consequens  anti- 
christum.  Et  cum  Christus  sit  major  dominus,  quia  verus 
deus  et  dominus  dominorum,  patet  patule  quam  necesse  sit 
hunc  virum  legium  non  tali  citacioni  talis  diaboli  consentire. 
Dieit  enim  apostolus  prima  Cor.  10°.  Fidelis  est  deus  qui  non 
permittet  vos  temptari  supra  id  quod  potestis ;  sed  facit  cum 
temptacione  etiam  proventum  ut  possitis  sustinere.  Et  sic 
videtur  quod  imminente  tali  temptacione  diaboli  fidelis  vir 
legius  debet  in  deo  eonfidere  et  Christo  non  illi  diabolo  in  isto 
facinore  obedire ;  quia  sepe  deus  procul  videt  quomodo  talis 
prelatus  presuraens  hanc  Antichrist!  vesaniam  erit,  antequam 
tempus  quod  limitat  venerit,  adeo  impeditus,  quod  non  tunc 
erit  oportunitas  ad  virum  ilium  examinandum,  cum  dei  citacio 
citacionem  talem  diabolicam  sepe  frustrat. 


•  •••••••••• 

Ex  istis  colligitur  quod  quicunque  fidelis  in  domino  sic 
citatus  consenserit  sic  vecorditer  antichristo,  dimittendo 
laborem  injunctum  sibi  a  domino,  peccat  graviter  tanquam 
stolidus  preeligens  sibi  ambiguum,  pro  quo  tarn  corpore  quam 
anima  est  dampnandus.  Cum  ergo  tales  prelati  non  possunt 
occidere  animam  persone  quam  sic  citaverint  in  inferno,  et 
evidens  sit  quod  ex  tali  stulta  obediencia  tarn  corpus  quam 
anima  occidentur,  stultum  videtur,  et  vecors  eleccio  pro 
citacione  tali  frivola  laborare.  Si  enim  sintilla  caritatis 
vigeret  in  isto  prelate  visitaret  talem  provinciam  instar 
Christ!,  vel  saltern  instrueret  ipsam  epistolariter  more  Pauli. 
Sed  sicut  citat  ad  locum  quern  nescit  et  pro  causa  quam 
habitualiter  exprimere  erubescit,  sic  nescit  fidem  catholicam 
etiam  de  hostia  consecrata^  quam  tractat  cotidie,  et  erubescit 
pandere  causam  diabolicam  pro  qua  citat. 


^  This  shows  that  the  tract  was  written  after  "Wyclif  had  attacked  the 
doctrine  of  Transuhstantiation. 


I 


APPENDIX. 


487 


Unde  quia  diabolus  et  quodlibet  ejus  membrum  redarguunt 
seipsos  in  peccatis  que  perpetrant,  notant  quidam  leges  quas 
papa  approbat  in  hac  parte.  iN’am  in  decretis,  18a  distinccione, 
sic  scribitur :  “Si  episcopus  metropolitanus  ad  compro- 
vinciales  episcopos  epistolas  direxerit  in  quibus  eos  aut  ad 
ordinacionem  summi  pontificis  aut  ad  synodum  invitet,  post- 
positis  omnibus  excepta  grava  necessitate  vel  infirmitate 
corporis  ac  precepcione  regia,  ad  constitutum  diem  adesse  non 
differant.”  Ecce  triplex  excusacio  excusat  a  citacione 
metropolitan!,  ut  videtur  si  fuerit  ex  mandate  summi  JuseTffom^a^^' 
pontificis,  cum  ipse  sit  quidam  episcopus  et  per  dei  graciam  citation— 
metropolitanus.  Primum  est  gravis  necessitas  que  videtur  ^chriit’s^flock; 
maxima  in  custodia  Christ!  ovium,  ne  a  lupis  rapacibus  lani- 
entur.  Secundum  est  infirmitas  corporis  propter  quam  ^infirmity; 
deficit  citato  disposicio  data  a  deo  ad  taliter  laborandum.  Et 
?)m  est  precepcio  regia  quando  rex  precepit,  sicut  debet,  suo 
legio  ne  taliter  extra  suam  provinciam  superflue  evagetur. 

Et  omnes  iste  tres  cause  vel  aliquis  earum  in  qualibet 
citacione  hujusmodi  suntreperte,  et  specialiter  cum  rex  regum 
prohibeat  taliter  evagari.  Ad  eleccionem  itaque  summi 
pontificis  qui  est  Christus  indubie  debent  viatores  singuli 
laborare,  cum  Christum  debent  viantes  singuli,  postpositis 
mandatis  et  citacionibus  humanis,  eligere,  juxta  illud 
deuteronomii  dominum  elegisti  Tiodie.  Et  sic  viantes  eligunt 
deum  et  ipse  ab  eis  eligitur  quandocunque  mandatum  sive 
concilium  suum  efiicitur  et  mandatum  humanum  postponitur, 
quod  videtur  debere  fieri  quandocunque  citacio  talis  frivola 
contempnitur  et  voluntas  domini  adimpletur.  Et  sic  dicit  Answer  of  one 
quidam  debilis  et  claudus  citatus  ad  hanc  curiam  quod  pro-  ^^d^mi^who  is 
hibicio  regia  impedit  ipsum  ire  quia  rex  regum  necessitat  et  lame  and  feeble, 
vult  efficaciter  quod  non  vadat.  Dicit  eciam  quod  domi 
oportet  ipsum  eligere  summum  pontificem  Jesum  Christum, 
quod  est  gravis  necessitas,  eo  quod  cum  ejus  omissione  vel 
negligencia  non  potest  ronianus  pontifex  vel  aliquis  angelus 
dispensare. 

In  these  last  sentences  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  doubt 
that  "Wyclif  is  speaking  of  himself. 


NOTES. 


Page  2,  line  1. — The  comparison  of  the  religious  orders  to  the 
Pharisees  was  common  with  Wyclif.  Thus  in  his  tract  on  Matthew 
xxiii.  he  says  :  “  Nee  dubiura  quin  fratres  et  alii  religiosi  novelli, 
divisi  a  vita  communi  secte  Christiane  tarn  in  cerimoniis  quam  in 
loco,  sunt  pharisei.” — MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  76. 

The  comparison  had  been  made  long  before  Wyclif’s  time,  and  is 
to  be  found  in  a  sermon  of  William  of  St.  Amour. — (Brown’s  Pas- 
ciculus  Eerum  Expetendarum,  ii.  43.) 

P.  2,  1.  11. —  Of\e  \ridde  spehe]>  maister  of  stories. 

The  reference  is  to  the  Historia  Scolastica  of  Petrus  Comestor.  The 
book,  which  is  an  abridgment  of  the  Bible  history,  was  very  popular 
in  the  Middle  Ages.  The  account  of  the  Essenes  occurs  in  chap.  xxxi. 
of  the  Historia  Evangelica,  p,  211  of  the  edition  of  Paris,  1513. 

P.  2,  1.  16. — Jesu  cursede  hem  ofte  ^ee  ei]te  tymes. 

In  Matthew  xxiii.  “  Woe  unto  you”  is  repeated  eight  times.  Hence 
the  title  Vse  Octuplex  to  an  English  exposition  of  that  chapter 
printed  in  S.  E.  W.  ii.  379.  There  is  a  Latin  tract  bearing  the 
same  title. — (Shirley,  43.) 

P.  3,  1.  16. — Seiytige  .  .  \at  crist  taufe  not  .  .  ]ie  leste  ordre. 

Ac  si  dedignarentur  vel  erubescerent  sequi  Christum  patronam,  sed 
unum  alium  mendacem  et  grandem  peccatorem  sibi  statuunt,  regulam 
Christi  ordinis  deserendo. — Trialogus,  iv.  35,  p.  371. 

P.  4,  1.  19. — Lettris  of  fraternite. 

The  convents  were  accustomed  to  grant  to  their  benefactors  letters 
entitling  those  named  in  them  to  a  share  in  the  benefits  of  all  prayers 


490 


NOTES. 


and  merits  of  the  convent  or  order.  These  letters  are  a  frequent  sub¬ 
ject  for  satire.  Thus  Jacke  Upland  : 

Why  aske  ye  no  letters  of  bretherheads 
of  other  mens  praiers, 
as  ye  desire  that  other  men 

should  aske  letters  of  you  ? — Wright,  Fol.  Poems,  vol.  ii.  p.  21. 

P.  5,  1.  9. — 'pe  pursuyt  is  maad  for  prestes  techyng  men  where  \ei 
schullen  do  here  almes,  ^c. 

That  is,  the  preachers  had  exhorted  the  people  not  to  give  alms  to. 
friars  and  monks,  but  to  the  sick  and  bedridden  poor.  This  was  a 
common  subject  with  Wyclif  and  his  followers,  and  was  naturally 
not  approved  by  the  religious  orders.  Compare  the  next  article. 

P.  5,  1.  25. — Malcen profession  to  most  hey  pouert. 

There  seems  here  to  be  a  reference  to  the  rule  of  St.  Francis,  where 
we  read:  “pis  is  j^e  heynesse  of  j^e  moste  heyj  pouert”  (p.  42). 
The  friars  professed  a  more  rigid  poverty  than  the  monks,  since 
the  latter  were  bound  only  to  personal  poverty,  whereas  the  friars 
were  forbidden  to  possess  anything  either  individually  or  collectively. 
This  (theoretical)  perfection  of  poverty  was  one  of  the  great  boasts  of 
the  order.  “Una  [paupertas]  est  omnium  Christianorum  quse  excludit 
alienum  et  includit  commune  et  proprium.  Alia  est  monachorum  et 
multorura  religiosorum  quse  excludit  alienum  et  proprium  sed  includit 
et  admittit  commune,  quia  habent  aliquid  in  communi  licet  nihil 
habeant  in  particulari.  Tertia  est  fratrum  Minorum,  quse  excludit 
alienum,  speciale  et  commune  et  includit  solum  simplicem  usum 
facti.” — l^icolaus  Oranus  (Oresme),  Tractatus  in  regulam  Sancti 
Francisci  (Luxemburg,  1626). 

P.  5,  1.  27. —  Oaiest  wast  housis,  Sfc, 

For  the  splendour  of  the  friars’  convents,  see  the  description  in 
Pierce  the  Ploughman’s  Crede,  line  118,  and  still  more  line  156  et  seq. 
In  the  latter  passage,  the  author  may  well  have  had  in  view  the  very 
convent  where  the  Council  was  held  which  condemned  Wyclif’s  doc¬ 
trines  in  1382.  The  church  of  the  Austin  Friars  in  Broad  Street  is 
still  used  by  the  Dutch,  and  although  much  damaged  some  years  ago 
by  fire,  and  by  the  consequent  restoration,  it  presents  a  fair  specimen 
of  a  church  built  with  a  special  view  to  preaching. 

P.  6,  1.  27. — And  slen  wommen  '^at  withstonden  hem  in  \is  synne. 
The  same  charge  is  brought  against  the  friars  farther  on  (p.  12). 
Compare  Chaucer  :  ' 

“For  ther  as  wont  was  to  walken  an  elf, 

Ther  walketh  noon  but  the  lymytour  himself. 


Wommen  may  now  go  saufly  up  and  doun  ; 

In  every  hussch  or  under  every  tre 
There  is  none  other  incubus  hut  he. 

And  he  ne  wol  doon  hem  no  dishonour.” 

Wife  of  Bath's  Tale,  17-25. 


NOTES. 


491 


P.  6,  last  line. — Lumpis  of  ]onge  men. 

So  in  Dialogus,  cap.  28 — “  tales  globos  claustralium.” — MS.  Asli- 
burnham,  If.  114. 

P.  7,  1.  5  from  bottom. — But  pf  he  make  a  vow  to  a  hlynd  pylgrymage. 

The  ‘  greater  satraps  ’  had  sufficient  reason  for  reserving  to  them¬ 
selves  the  right  of  dispensing  with  pilgrimage.  The  value  of  the  right 
may  be  judged  from  Walsingham’s  account  of  the  Cardinal  of  St. 
Praxedes,  who  came  to  England  armed  with  powers  usually  reserved  to 
the  Pope  :  “  Yota  peregrin ationis  ad  Apostolorum  limina,  ad  Terrara 
Sanctam,  ad  Sanctum  Jacobum,  non  prius  remisit  quam  tantam  pecuniam 
recepisset  qnantam,  juxta.  veram  aestimationem,  in  eisdem  peregrina- 
tionibus  expendere  debuissent.” — Walsingham,  ed.  Eiley,  vol.  i.  p.  452. 

P.  7,  1.  3  from  bottom. — Satrap. 

A  favourite  name  of  Wyclif’s  for  worldly  prelates.  So  in  the  Dia¬ 
logus  :  “  Que  ergo  evidencia  movet  hos  satrapas  sic  voluntati  domini 
adversari?” — Cap.  xiii.  (MS.  Ashburnham,  103A) 

P.  8,  1.  7. —  Graunte  hem  \e  Hesse  of  heuene. 

The  Pope  was  liberal  of  indulgences  on  behalf  of  Spencer’s  crusade  in 
Flanders  to  a  degree  which  seems  to  have  shocked  even  the  orthodox. 
Knighton  tells  us  :  “  Habuit  prsedictus  episcopus  indulgentias  mirabiles 
cum  absolutione  a  poena  et  a  culpa  pro  dicta  cruciata  a  papa  Drbano  YI.  ei 
concessas.  Cujus  auctoritate  tarn  mortuos  quam  vivos,  ex  quorum  parte 
contributio  sufficiens  fiebat,  per  se  et  suos  commissarios  a  poena  et  culpa 
absolvebat.  Dicebatur  enim  quod  quidam  de  commissariis  suis  assere- 
bant  quod  ad  eorum  prseceptum  angeli  de  coelo  descenderent  et  animas  in 
purgatoriis  locis  positas  de  poenis  eriperent  et  ad  coelos  absque  mora 
deducerent.” — Twysden’s  Decern  Scriptores,  2671.  Ko  wonder  that 
"Wyclif  spoke  strongly.  In  his  Exposition  of  Matthew  xxiv.  he  says  : 
“  Q,ui  eciam  unquam  audivit  majus  prodigium  quam  quod  talis  refuga 
per  catulos  suos  suscitet  hujusmodi  cruciatam,  quod  quilibet  laborans 
in  suo^  subdolo  negocio  suum  proximum  occidendo  erit  a  pena  et  culpa 
certitudinaliter  absolutus.  Et  sic  statim  advolabit  ad  celum  sine  pena 
purgatorie,  cum  beatis  ceteris  collocatus.” — Ashburnham,  If.  60.  He 
goes  on  to  lay  the  blame  partly  on  the  friars,  without  whom  he  says  the 
Pope  could  not  have  accomplished  such  wickedness. 

P.  8,  last  line. — Experymentis,  or  wiche  craft. 

This  looks  like  a  reference  to  Roger  Bacon,  but  he  was  not  the  only 
student  of  physics  among  the  friars  ;  see  Prof.  Brewer’s  pref.  to  Monu- 
menta  Franciscana :  “I  repeat  that  the  first  sustained  attempts  at 
experimental  philosophy  commenced  with  the  friars,  and  grew  out  of 
the  actual  necessities  of  their  position.” — p.  xliii. 

P.  9,  1.  1. —  Veyn  songis,  ^c. 

Compare  with  this  the  social  accomplishments  enumerated  in  Piers 
Plowman,  B.  xiii.  230 : 

“  Ac  for  I  can  noither  tabre  ne  trompe  *  ne  telle  none  gestes, 

Farten  ne  fytlielen  •  at  festes,  ne  harpen, 
lape  ne  iogly  •  ne  gentlych  pype, 


492 


NOTES. 


Ne  noyther  sailly  ne  saute  •  ne  synge  with  gyterne, 

I  haue  none  gode  gyftes  •  of  j^ise  grete  lordes.” 

P.  9,  1.  14. —  Confessioun  and  heriynge. 

The  inroad  of  strange  confessors,  among  whom  the  friars  were  the 
chief,  was  a  great  trial  to  a  good  parish  priest.  The  sinner  found  it 
easier  and  pleasanter  to  confess  to  a  passing  stranger  than  to  one  who 
knew  all  about  him.  There  were  other  less  worthy  motives  that  kept 
up  a  jealousy  on  this  point.  Thus  Jacke  Upland  : 

“  Why  covet  ye  shrift  and  burying 
of  other  men’s  parishens. 

And  none  other  sacrament 
That  falleth  to  Christian  folke  ? 

Why  busie  ye  not  to  heare 
to  shrift  of  poore  folke, 
as  well  as  of  rich.” 

Wright,  Fol.  Poems  and  Songs,  vol.  ii.  p.  22. 

To  which  Daw  Topias  retorts : 

“  I  trowe  it  he  the  paroche  priest, 

Jacke,  that  thou  meenest 
that  nyl  not  hosel  his  parischens 
til  the  peny  be  paied, 
ne  assoilen  hem  of  her  synne 
withouten  schrift  silver.” — Id.  p.  46. 

Cf.  note  to  p.  224.  Burials  of  rich  men  were  profitable,  as,  beside 
burial  fees,  there  were  always  bequests  for  masses  at  the  tomb. 

P.  10,  1.  18. — 'pei  feynen  hem  sotil  of fisih. 

The  study  of  medicine  was  a  tradition  among  the  friars.  It  had 
begun  with  their  devoted  ministrations  to  the  lepers  and  the  sick  poor. 
“The  practice  of  medicine  is  engrossed  by  the  friars  in  the  thirteenth 
century,”  says  Prof.  Brewer  (Monumenta  Franciscana,  p.  xliv).  With 
this  passage  compare  point  xxxviii.  in  the  tract  “How  Beligious 
Men,”  etc.  (p.  224). 

P.  10, 1.  6  from  bottom, — pan  \es  pharisees  presen  faste  to  here  wyues. 

“  For  when  the  gode  man  is  fro  hame, 

And  the  frere  comes  to  our  dame, 

He  spares  nauther  for  synne  ne  shame 
That  he  ne  dos  his  wille.” 

Political  Poems  [T.  Wright),  264. 

P.  11, 1.  9. — Priuatis  ordris. 

The  plural  form  of  the  adjective  here  should  be  noticed.  Cf. 
Mr.  Skeat’s  note  to  Piers  Plowman,  x.  343,  p.  199. 

P.  11,  1.  20. — As  hildegar  seip. 

St.  Hildegard  (b.  1098,  d.  1179)  was  Abbess  of  St.  Eupert,  near 
Bingen.  She  was  an  ascetic  and  visionary,  whose  prophecies  were 
frequently  cited  by  the  Lollards  for  their  denunciation  of  abuses  in  the 
Church.  She  is  mentioned  in  Trialogus,  iv.  26  (p.  338).  Cf.  Pecock’s 
Eepressor,  483. 


NOTES. 


493 


P.  12,  1.  4. — Fore  freris  seralitis. 

SarabaitaB  originally  meant  men  who  professed  to  be  monks,  but 
subjected  themselves  to  no  rule.  “Tertium  vero  monachorum  teter- 
rimum  genus  est  sarabaitarum  qui,  nulla  regula  approbati  .... 
adhuc  operibus  servantes  seeculo  fidem,  mentiri  Deo  per  tonsuram  nos- 
cuntur.” — Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  cap.  i.  The  term  was  afterwards 
applied  to  the  Waldensian  teachers,  and  in  the  text  it  seems  to  refer  to 
the  spiritual  Franciscans  or  Fraticelli. 

P.  12,  1.  18. — Perpetual almes  of  coffris. 

I  suppose  this  means  endowment  (perpetual  alms)  by  annuity  payable 
in  money,  as  distinguished  from  gifts  of  ‘^unmeble”  property.  Such 
money  would  probably  have  a  chest  or  “coffer”  assigned  to  it, 
especially  if  the  donor  had  limited  it  to  some  particular  purpose.  See 
Mr.  Anstey’s  introduction  to  Munimenta  Academica,  p.  xxxvii,  etc. 

P.  12,  1.  2  from  bottom. — made  wafreris. 

Wafer  was  the  name  commonly  given  to  the  bread  for  the  Eucharist, 
but  it  meant  also  a  sort  of  sweet  cake,  as  does  the  Fr.  gaufre,  and 
the  waferer  was  a  hawker  of  these  cakes.  The  waferers  had  a  bad 
reputation,  if  we  may  believe  Chaucer’s  Pardoner  : 

“  yonge  fruytsteris 
Singers  with  harpes,  baudes,  wafereres, 

Which  that  hen  verray  develes  officeres,”  etc. 

Fard.  Tale,  16. 

Compare  Piers  Plowman,  (B.)  v.  641. 

The  text,  however,  does  not  imply  that  the  religious  actually  turned 
cake-hawkers.  It  only  says  that  they  were  as  bad  when  they  made 
presents  of  eatables  in  the  hope  of  getting  them  returned  with  large 
profit.  The  sarcasm  would  have  the  more  point  if  the  monasteries  were 
often  noted  for  well-prepared  delicacies,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  pastry¬ 
cook’s  art  may  have  been  cultivated  in  the  cloister  then,  as  the  liqueur- 
maker’s  is  now  at  La  Trappe  and  the  Chartreuse. 

P.  13,  1,  10. — '\if\ei  geten  hem  worldly  offis. 

“  Item,  quod  monstruoshis  est,  religiosi  et  monachi,  qui  plus  sunt 
officiales  fisci  quam  Christi,  in  curiis  principum  et  cathedris  judiciorum 
et  cameris  computorum  et  aliis  actibus  secularibus  militantes  contra 
statuta  Canonum.” — Peter  d’Ailly,  De  Emendatione  Ecclesise  (Brown’s 
Ease.  Rer.  Expet.  i.  411). 

P.  13,  1.  13. — Anyneris. 

Annona,  originally  meaning  yearly  produce,  and  thence  corn  or  pro¬ 
visions,  came  to  have  the  sense  of  a  rent  in  kind,  and  also  of  a  daily 
allowance  of  food.  The  annonarius,  the  person  charged  to  deal  with 
the  annona,  might  be  collector,  dispenser,  or  both  together.  If,  as  I 
suppose,  anyneris  is  the  same  word,  it  may  be  represented  by  steward. 

P.  14,  last  line. —  Crist  p'eied  most  in  \e  ny]t  in  hillis,  ^c. 

“  Et  sic  de  vita  Christi  legimus  quod  ipse  elegit  facere  facta  sua  sub 
divo,  cum  in  dupplici  convivio  sub  divo  populum  suum  pavit,  sub  divo 


494 


IsOTES. 


sepius  predicavit,  et  sub  divo  pernoctando  patrem  suum  pro  ecclesia 
exoravit.” — Speculum  Militantis  Ecclesie,  cap.  xxi.  (MS.  Asbburnham, 
If.  109). 

P.  15,  1.  9. —  Cost  of  IcecJienes  and  ^ate  housis. 

So  in  the  Latin  Sermons  (Part  II.  Sermon  49),Wyclif,  after  remarking 
on  the  sumptuous  living  of  the  monks,  complains  of  the  great  kitchens 
which  the  abbots  build.  Then  he  continues:  “  Et  ad  figurandum 
conquestus  suos  atque  dominia  super  dominos  seculares  multe  abathie 
constituunt  sibi  portas  sumptuosas  cum  propugnaculis  tanquam  castra.” 
— MS.  T.C.C.  f.  223.  The  great  stone  kitchen  at  Glastonbury  was  built 
in  the  14th  century,  but  I  believe  its  exact  date  is  disputed.  The  great 
gateways  at  Battle  and  Bury  St.  Edmunds  are  also  of  the  14th  century. 
The  latter  “  combines  in  a  remarkable  manner  a  richly  ornate  character 
with  an  ingenious  system  for  defence  ;  it  is  at  the  same  time  an  orna¬ 
mental  structure  and  a  strong  fortress.” — Turner’s  Domestic  Architec¬ 
ture  in  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  191. 

P.  15,  1.  24i.— -Placeboes  and  dirige. 

Placebo  was  the  name  commonly  given  to  Vespers  in  the  Office  for 
the  Dead,  from  the  first  word  of  the  Antiphon  (with  which  the  service 
opens) :  Placebo  Domino  in  regione  vivorum. — Sarum  Breviary,  ed. 
Procter  and  Wordsworth,  ii.  271. 

Pirige  similarly,  as  the  first  word  of  the  Antiphon  at  Mattins  in  the 
same  Office,  gave  its  name  to  the  Service. — Id.  273. 

'^P.  19,  1.  9  from  bottom.- — The  signs  of  Antichrist  and  the  fifteen 
tokens  before  Doomsday  seem  to  have  been  popular  subjects  of  dis¬ 
course.  The  Apocalypse  supplied  the  groundwork  for  them,  but  the 
popular  fancy  added  much.  Those  who  are  curious  in  such  matters 
may  find  the  whole  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  Cursor  Mundi,  lines 
21971,  et  seq.  (E.E.T.S.  No.  66).  There  is  a  shorter  version  in 
Mr.  Eurnivall’s  “Adam  Davy,”  etc.  (E.E.T.S.  No.  69).  It  is  to  be 
noticed  that  difierent  versions  do  not  agree  exactly  as  to  the  order  or 
even  the  nature  of  the  different  signs. 

Wyclif  speaks  of  them  with  contempt  in  his  Latin  Sermons  :  “  Quo- 
modocunque  autem  illi  sompnient  de  15®^“^*  signis  ante  diem  judicii, 
evangelium  tamen  dicit  Mat.  24^°-:  Sicut  autem  fuit  in  diebus  Noe  ita 
erit  adventus  filii  hominis.  ....  Melius  autem  est  dicto  evan- 
gelio  credere  quam  ypocrisis  codicibus  sompniatis  de  deliramentis 
fantasticis  hebreorum.” — Sermons,  Part  II.  Sermon  51  (MS.  T.C.C. 
H.  225«). 

‘__P.  21,  1.  2  from  bottom. —  Witliouten  synne,  ^  alle  degrees,  ^c. 

I  think  I  ought  to  have  changed  “  &  ”  into  “  in  ”  (and  of  course 
left  out  the  comma  before  it). 

P.  23,  1.  16. — pes  rome  renneris. 

Pome-runners  seems  to  have  been  the  regular  name  given  to  the 
persons  w' ho  gained  a  livelihood  by  acting  as  agents  at  the  Papal  Court. 
There  was  a  vast  amount  of  private  business  continually  in  hand  there, 
such  as  appeals  in  ecclesiastical  causes,  and  the  obtaining  of  dispensa- 


KOTES. 


495 


tions.  Cf.  Sir  John  Paston’s  letter  :  “I  have  answer  ageyn  fro  Eoome 
that  there  is  the  welle  of  grace  and  salve  sufficiaunt  for  suche  a  soore, 
and  that  I  may  be  dyspencyd  with  :  neverthelesse  my  proctore  there 
axeth  a  mj  docatys,  as  he  demythe.  But  Master  Lacy,  another  Borne 
renner  heer,”  etc. — Paston  Letters  (Gairdner’s  edition),  vol.  iii.  p. 
101. 

Wyclif  had  no  doubt  had  painful  experience  of  these  men  during 
his  litigation  about  the  "Wardenship  of  Canterbury  Hall. 

In  Piers  Plowman  (B.  iv.  128)  one  of  the  conditions  of  Beason’s 
Utopia  is — 

“  And  alle  Rottie-renneris  for  robberis  of  byjonde, 

Bere  no  silver  over  see.”^ 

Mr.  Skeat  (note,  p.  82)  understands  the  word  only  of  the  Boman 
procurators  who  came  to  collect  money  in  England. 

P.  24,  1.21 . — Sere  lordischipe  ^  anemtis  god,  ^c. 

I  ought  to  have  struck  out  the  ‘‘  The  reference  is  to 

"Wyclif ’s  doctrine  of  dominion.  If  the  man  does  not  do  his  duty  to 
his  chief  lord,  God,  his  holding  is  forfeited,  and  he  ceases  to  have  any 
true  lordship  before  God. 

P.  27,  1.  6. — Charges  against  poor  priests  of  disturbing  the  realm 
were  common,  and  sometimes  not  without  foundation.  The  narrator 
of  the  Fasciculi  Zizaniorum  says  :  “  Yix  aliquis  eorum  predicaret  quin 
ad  pugnam  inter  se  audientes  provocarentur  et  schismata  in  villis 
fierent  ”  (p.  272).  In  consequence,  he  says,  the  gentry  required  the 
Archbishop  to  put  an  end  to  these  heresies,  and  this  brought  about  the 
Council  of  1382.  Probably  the  troubles  were  due  as  much  to  vehe¬ 
ment  supporters  of  old  things  as  to  the  preachers  of  new ;  but  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  during  the  Conservative  reaction  which  followed 
the  rebellion  of  1381  the  reformers  were  viewed  with  a  new 
suspicion. 

P.  27,  1.  3  from  bottom. — Ri^tful  ^euynge  ^  of  almes,  ^c. 

Probably  the  “&  ”  here  should  be  omitted. 

P.  32,  1.  26. — ^if  a  man  he  somonyd  to-gidre  to  ]>e  hei^ere  iuge,  ^c. 

“  Prelati  citant  homines  longe  melius  in  causa  dei  legitime  occupatos, 
homines  quos  rex  regum  citat  ad  locum  contrarium,  immo  quos  deus 
impossibilitat  ut  sic  compareant.” — De  Sermone  in  Monte,  c.  6  (MS. 
T.C.C.  f.  355a). 

P.  33,  1.  22. — Sewe  religious  assessours. 

The  assessors  in  religious  prosecutions  seem  to  have  been  usually 
taken  from  the  regulars.  Probably  among  them  were  to  be  found  the 
largest  number  of  doctors  of  theology.  In  the  first  meeting  of  the 
Council  of  1382,  in  which  WycliPs  doctrines  and  his  followers  were 
condemned,  sixteen  doctors  of  theology  consented  to  the  decisions,  and 
they  were  all  friars.  In  later  meetings  five  seculars  appear,  but  of 
these,  two  (Bigge  and  Brightwell)  had  been  judged  at  the  first  meet¬ 
ing  and  admitted  to  pardon. — F.Z.  283-291. 


496 


NOTES. 


P.  35,  1.  5. — Ne  for  lecherie  ff  men  wolen  paie  rente  hi  ^eere  ^  dioelle 
stil  \er-inne  ah  longe  as  hym  liste. 

So  in  Latin  Sermons:  “Licenciara  per  annum,  vel  tempos  pecunie 
huic  aptatum,  ad  mechandum  libere  quantumcunque  voluerit.” — 
Sermons,  ii.  20  (MS.  T.G.C.  20la). 

It  was  a  common  cause  of  complaint  that  the  Ordinaries  did  not 
attempt  to  repress  incontinence,  but  made  it  a  source  of  gain.  “Purs 
is  the  ercedeknes  helle,”  says  Chaucer’s  Sompnour  ;  and  fines  seem  to 
have  been  generally  accepted  in  place  of  amendment.  In  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  1372  the  Commons  petitioned  that  if  the  Ordinary  did  not 
deprive  beneficed  clerks  who  kept  concubines,  the  church  should  be 
vacant  at  the  end  of  half  a  year,  and  the  patron  present  anew.  More¬ 
over,  that  in  case  of  the  Ordinary  being  patron,  the  King  should  present 
in  his  stead. — Pot.  Pari.  iii.  314.  In  1382  the  citizens  of  London 
took  the  matter  into  their  own  hands,  imprisoned  some  women  “  in 
prisona  quee  vocatur  Dolium,”  then  cropped  their  hair  close,  and  led 
them  in  derision  through  the  streets.  They  are  said  to  have  been 
stirred  up  by  Wyclif  and  his  followers. — Walsingham,  ed.  Piley, 
ii.  65. 

P.  35,  1.  31. —  Whi  schulde  curatis  pronounsen  here  hre\eren  a  cursed. 

In  one  of  his  Latin  Sermons  Wyclif  lays  down  that  a  priest  must 
not  excommunicate  unjustly,  even  though  his  prelate  bid  him  do  so. 
He  adds  :  “potest  autem  sacerdos  inferior  dicere  parochianis  quod  talis 
prelatus  dicit  se  excommunicare  talem  subditum  ;  immo  caveat  sibi  in 
consciencia  sua  quod  de  illo  sibi  imposito  non  sit  reus,  et  detegat 
virtutem  excommunicationis  ne  simplices  de  ipsa  trepidant  ubi  non  est 
racionabiliter  trepidandum.” — Sermons,  Part  ii.  43  (MS.  T.C.C.  218<^). 
Perhaps  there  is  a  touch  of  worldly  wisdom  here.  In  announcing  the 
fact  of  the  Pishop’s  excommunication  the  priest  would  have  formally 
complied  with  the  letter.  The  practical  results  would  fall  on  the 
excommunicated  person. 

P.  36,  1.  5  from  bottom. — To  enprisone  \e  hodi  aftir  fourli  dales 
a  cursyng. 

It  was  the  duty  of  the  Chancellor  to  imprison  any  one  who  had  been 
for  forty  days  under  the  major  excommunication,  and  to  hold  him  until 
he  was  released  from  ban. 

P.  40,  1.  5. — Pope  honorie. — Honorius  III.,  1216-1227. 

P.  40,  1.  14. — Mynystris  prouyncials. 

The  rulers  of  the  Franciscan  Order  were  called  ministers  (with  a 
reference  to  Matt.  xx.  25).  The  head  of  the  Order  was  the  minister 
generalis,  and  under  him  there  was  in  each  country  a  minister  provin¬ 
cialise,  who  had  charge  of  the  general  interests  of  the  Order.  The  use 
of  the  plural  adjective  ‘  provyncials  ’  will  be  noticed  here.  Compare 
p.  11,  line  9,  and  note  upon  it. 

P.  40,  1.  34. — Tweie  cotis,  ^c. 

The  Latin  runs  :  “duas  tunicas  sine  caputio  et  cingulum  et  braccas 
et  caparonem  usque  ad  cingulum.” 


NOTES. 


497 


P.  41,  1.  18. — Breuyaries,  \at  is  smale  sauteris  or  alreggid. 

This  explanatory  clause  is  not  in  the  Latin.  I  need  hardly  remark 
that  this  is  not  the  usual  meaning  of  breviary.  Compare  the  story 
about  St.  Prancis  and  the  novice  who  wanted  a  psalter  (told  in  preface 
to  Mon.  Pranciscana,  p.  xxx),  where  St.  Prancis  objects,  “When  you 
have  got  a  psalter,  then  you’ll  want  a  breviary,”  etc. 

P.  41,  1.  20. —  Vndren. 

Halliwell  gives  “undern,  nine  o’clock  a.m.”  So,  too,  Mr.  Earle,  in 
his  “  Two  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicles,”  where  the  word  occurs 
s.a.  538  and  540,  and  he  is  supported  by  Plorence  of  Worcester,  who 
translates  in  both  cases  ‘  hora  tertia.’ 

In  Stratmann’s  Dictionary  undern  is  translated  noon,  and  in  our  text 
it  is  given  for  the  hour  of  sext,  which  rightly  belongs  to  mid-day. 
There  is  a  curious  discrepancy  in  the  use  of  the  word  in  the  Wyclifite 
Versions.  In  Mark  xv.  25,  we  find  “  It  was  the  thridde  our,  that 
men  clepen  undruu.”  But  in  v.  33,  many  copies  of  the  same  version 
have,  “  the  sexte  our  or  undurne.”  And  in  John  iv.  6,  we  have  again, 
“  The  our  was  as  the  sixte  or  undurn.”  Here  two  copies  substitute 
forundurn  “  mydday.”  Porshall  and  Madden  (Grloss.  toW.V.)say  “the 
time  from  nine  to  twelve  in  the  morning.” 

P.  44,  1.  5. — 'pe  lord  ha\  maad  abregged  word  upon  er\e. 

A  quotation  from  Bom.  ix.  28,  where  the  Vulgate  has:  “quia 
verbum  breviatum  faciet  Dominus  super  terrara.” 

P.  45,  1.  15. — Stable  in  general  fei\  of  cristene  men. 

The  Latin  is :  “  Stabiles  in  fide  Catholica.” 

P.  45,  1.  22. — The  Testament  of  St.  Francis. 

Another  English  version  of  this  is  printed  by  Prof.  Brewer,  from  a  MS. 
of  the  15th  century,  in  the  Appendix  to  Monumenta  Pranciscana,  p.  562. 

P.  45,  1.  24. —  Whanne  I  was  in  ouere  myche  synne. 

The  Latin  is :  “  Cum  essem  in  peccatis,  nimium  mihi  videbatur 
amarum.” 

P.  45,  1.  4  from  bottom. — Litel  pore  prestis  of  \is  world  pat  dwellen 
in  parichis. 

This  curious  way  of  describing  secular  priests  in  charge  of  parishes  runs 
thus  in  the  Latin :  “  Et  si  haberem  tantam  sapientiam  quantam  Salomon 
habuit,  et  invenirem  pauperculos  sacerdotes  hujussgeculi  in  parochiis  in 
quibus  morantur,  nolo  prsedicare  contra  voluntatem  ipsorum.” 

P.  45,  last  line. — Fore  in  hem  I  tahe  bi  discrecion  goddis  sone. 

“  Quia  Pilium  Dei  discerno  in  eis.” 

P.  46,  1.  5. — I  wile  abouen  all  pingis. 

Here  the  translation  is  again  rather  at  fault.  The  Latin  runs  :  “  Et 
hsec  sanctissima  mysteria  volo  super  omnia  honorare  et  venerari  et  in 
locis  pretiosis  collocare.  Et  sanctissima  nomina  ejus  {i.e.  Christi)  et 
verba  scripta,  ubicumque  invenero  in  locis  illicitis,  volo  colligere,”  etc. 

P.  46,  1.  18. —  0  cote  or  Icirtil  with-ynne  forpe  ^  with-oute  forp. 

“  Pieced”  or  “  clouted  ”  has  been  left  out  here.  The  Latin  runs  : 
“  Eramus  content!  tunica  una  intus  et  foris  repeciata,”  etc. 


32 


498 


NOTES. 


P.  47,  1.  10. — ])e  Cardynal  hostiense. 

The  Cardinal  of  Ostia,  afterwards  Alexander  lY.  As  Pope  he  was 
the  great  supporter  of  the  Mendicants  in  their  quarrel  with  the 
University  of  Paris. — Milman’s  Latin  Christ,  book  xi.  ch.  2. 

P.  47,  1.  18. — Sf  rede  \ei  ]>es  wordis. 

The  translation  here  is  hardly  intelligible  from  excessive  abridg¬ 
ment.  The  Latin  is  :  “  Et  semper  hoc  scriptum  habeant  secum  juxta 
regulam.  Et  in  omnibus  capitulis  quae  faciunt,  quando  legunt  Regulam 
legant  et  ista  verba.” 

P.  48,  1.  13. — Men  seyn  \at  Jie  is  cursed  \at  letti\  \e  ri]fful  wiUe  of 
a  dede  man. 

“Also  all  tho  ben  acursed  that  lette  or  procure  to  lette  the  testa¬ 
ment,  and  the  last  wil  of  folk  whan  they  deye,  of  thinges  that  ben  ther 
owne,  and  that  they  may  skilfully  bequethe  bothe  by  lawe  of  holy 
chirche  and  by  cnstome.” — Monumenta  Eitualia  Ecclesiae  Anglican ae, 
by  Rev.  Wm.  Maskell,  vol.  ii.  p.  294.  Compare  the  tract  on  the 
Great  Sentence  of  Curse,  S.E.W.  iii.  304. 

P.  48,  1.  8  from  bottom. — In  '^e  time  \at  sathanas  was  mlounden,  as 
the  apcalips  telli\. 

A  literal  understanding  of  Rev.  xx.  7  led  Wyclif  and  other 
mediaeval  writers  to  believe  that  from  a.d.  1000  the  Church  had 
rapidly  grown  worse.  (Compare  p.  3.)  Thus,  in  the  Trialogus  (lib.  iv. 
c.  2)  we  find:  “A  tempore  autem  solutionis  Sathanae,  dimissa  fide 
scripturae,  multae  haereses  in  ista  materia,  et  specialiter  inter  fratres  et 
discolos  eis  similes  volitarunt,”  p.  249.  "Woodford  ingeniously  turns 
this  belief  against  Wyclif:  “  Sed  miror  valde  unde  adquisivit  in  hoc 
Johannes  wicliff  tale  privilegium,  quod  omnes  doctores  de  secundo 
millenario  seducti  sunt  per  Sathanam,  illo  solo  excepto.” — Tractatus  de 
peregrinacionihus  ad  loca  sancta  (MS.  Brit.  Mus.  Harleian  635). 

P.  49,  1.  26. — A  scarioth. 

The  Scarioth(Iscariot)was  the  man  who  bore  the  bag  in  which  the  offerings 
were  put  (cf.  John  xii.  5).  He  is  described -in  the  Sompnoures  Tale,  1.46 : 

“  A  stourdy  harlot  ay  went  hem  byhynde. 

That  was  her  hostis  man,  and  bar  a  sak. 

And  what  men  jaf  hem  layd  it  on  his  bak.” 

P.  49,  1.  28. — 'peiwolen  telle  gold  and  money ^  ^c. 

This  absurd  evasion  of  the  Eranciscan  rule  was  commonly  practised, 
and  is  gravely  defended  at  considerable  length  by  Bishop  Pecock  in 
his  Repressor,  Part  v.  chap.  14. 

P.  50,  1.  11. — euyl  children  putten  in-to  here  fadir  ]>e  pope,  ^c. 

“  Q,ue  ergo  caritas  filiorum  in  patrem  et  patronnm,  effundere  in 
tantum  patrem  venenum  tarn  imperfectum  quod  inficeret  filios  si  ser- 
varent  ?  ” — Purgatoriura  secte  Christi  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  52). 

P.  56,  1.  24. — \)es  prelatis  mysusen  \is  hetere  seed. 

“Alii  autem  praelate  Caesarii  sunt  nimis  steriles  et  non  spiritualiter 

prolifici . Yitium  autem  Sodomicum  corporate  est  parvum 

in  comparatione  ad  hoc  peccatum.” — Trial,  lib.  iii.  c.  23,  p.  209. 


NOTES. 


499 


P.  57,  1.  20. — The  reference  at  the  side  should  be  to  Luke  ix.  49, 
instead  of  the  corresponding  text  in  Matthew.  Fonnyd  is  evidently 
the  translation  of  the  Vulgate  insulsum.  In  W.  Y.  (both)  it  is  trans¬ 
lated  “  unsavory.” 

P.  60,  1.  2  from  bottom. — Fittrid  sqiiyeris. 

The  only  other  instance  of  this  word  is  in  Myrc’s  Instructions  for 
Parish  Priests  (E.  E.  T.  S.),  p.  35,  1.  1146 : 

“  Hast  ]70u  ben  proude  .... 

Of  fytered  clo)»es  as  foils  done.” 

It  probably  means  either  slashed  or  cut  into  tags  and  streamers.  So 
in  p.  121,  we  have  ‘‘proude  slitterede  squyerys,”  and  again,  p.  148, 
“  tatrid  squeyeres  and  o]?ere  meyne.”  It  cannot  be  supposed  that 
raggid  or  tatrid  means  that  the  squires  were  shabbily  dressed,  as  the 
ground  of  complaint  is  the  magnificence  of  the  prelate’s  revenue. 

Halliwell  gives  as  a  Yorkshire  phrase,  “  All  in  fitters,  i.e.  in  very 
small  pieces  or  fragments.” 

P.  60,  1.  2  from  bottom. — Swerynge  herte  ^  honys  ^  nailis  ^  o^ere 
memlris  of  crist. 

The  wickedness  of  profane  swearing  was  a  great  point  with  Wyclif 
and  his  followers,  some  of  whom  went  so  far  as  to  declare  all  oaths 
unlawful.  In  one  of  Wyclif’s  Early  Sermons,  he  says:  “diabolus 
precepit  .  .  .  quod  jures  per  vulnera  et  membra  Christi,  ut  has  in 
reputatione  hominum  major  ex  verbis  audacibus ;  et  ad  tantum  in  isto 
invaluit  doctriua  diaboli,  quod  major  pars  hominum  putat  non  esse 
peccatum  sic  jurare.” — Sermon  14  (MS.  Lambeth). 

P.  61,  1.  10. — \)ere  \ei  my^tten  vnne\e  before  liaue  hene-lred,  ^c. 

Compare  the  “  Complaint  of  the  Ploughman  ”  : 

“  And  commonly  such  been  comen 
Of  poore  people  .... 

Her  fathers  suffreth  drought  &  weate, 

Many  hungrie  meales,  thurst  and  cold. 

And  all  this  these  monkes  han  forsake, 

For  Christes  love  and  Saint  Benete  ; 

To  pride  and  ease  have  take ; 

This  religion  is  evill  beseate. 

Had  they  been  out  of  religion, 

They  must  have  hanged  at  the  plowe, 

Threshing  and  diking  fro  tonne  to  tonne, 

With  sorrie  meat,  and  not  halfe  ynowe. 

Wright’s  Political  Poems,  i.  335. 

Bean-bread  was  made  for  horses,  and  was  usually  called  horse-bread. 
Making  it  was  a  special  business,  frequently  if  not  always  separate 
from  that  of  the  regular  baker.  See  Munimenta  Acad.  (Anstey),  p.  577. 
Cf.  English  Gilds,  366. 

P.  61,  last  line. — Mylnestpn  of  assis. 

“  Mola  asinaria,”  Vulgate.  Our  translation  loses  this  descriptive 
touch,  which  was  not  superfluous  in  a  country  where  hand-mills  were 
common. 


500 


NOTES. 


P.  62,  1.  18. —  Cotidian  distrihucion. 

“  Distribucio  quee  Canonicis  fit  quotidie.’’  Dufresne,  wbo  cites  from 
an  ordinance  for  the  Church  of  St.  John  at  Ghent:  “Yice-curati  de 
distributionibus,  corpore  prebendse,  aliisque  prerogativis  praenarratis 
non  gaudebunt,  sed  illorum  portio  absentiae  cedit  Quotidianae,  i.e.  cum 
absentes  fuerint  nihil  recipient  eorum  quae  praesentes  recepissent,  sed  id 
ad  Quotidianam  redibit ;  seu  ad  earn  quae  quotidie  fit  Canonicis  distri- 
butionem.”  The  charge  in  the  text  is  then  that  the  clergy  came  to 
prayers  only  to  get  their  share  of  the  allowances. 

P.  65, 1.  13. — Lordes  and  ladies  hen  tratours. 

“  Secundo  autem  erigunt  seculares  domini  suam  potestatem  contra 
Christum  in  hoc  quod  curatos  presbiteros  contra  suum  sensura  detinent 
in  suo  ministerio.” — De  OflScio  Pastorali,  ed.  Lechler,  p.  38. 

P.  66,  1.  22. — Alle  \es  passen  \re  fiften\es. 

A  fifteenth,  or,  to  speak  more  fully,  a  fifteenth  and  a  tenth,  was  the 
usual  standard  by  which  subsidies  were  granted  in  Parliament.  It  was 
a  tax  on  all  movable  property,  of  one-tenth  in  towns,  and  one-fifteenth 
in  the  country.  Professor  Stubbs  estimates  the  yield  of  a  fifteenth  and 
tenth  at  about  £60,000,  including  the  tenth  which  was  usually  granted 
by  Convocation  at  the  same  time  as  Parliament  voted  the  fifteenth. 
The  clerical  tenth  was  reckoned  at  a  third  of  the  whole  subsidy. — 
Stubbs’  Constitutional  History  of  England,  ii.  549. 

P.  66,  1.  22. — Alle  go\  out  of  owre  lond  comunly  into  enemys  Jiondis. 

“Hon  nostri  sed  inimici  nostri  cum  thezauro  per  ipsum  extracto 
de  Anglia  relevantur.” — De  Juramento  Arnaldi,  printed  by  Lechler, 
vol.  ii.  p.  576. 

P.  68, 1.  24.^ — To  geten  ]onge  eliildre  to  here  feyned  ordre  hy  symonye, 

This  charge  of  seducing  children  was  very  commonly  made  against 
the  friars.  In  1358  (?)  the  University  of  Oxford  passed  a  statute  to 
prevent  the  practice,  in  the  preamble  of  which  it  is  alleged  that  people 
fear  to  send  their  sons  to  the  University  lest  they  should  be  led  to  join 
the  friars  (Munimenta  Academica,  p.  204).  An  award  of  the  King 
ordered  this  statute  to  be  cancelled  in  1366  (Parliament  Bolls,  ii.  290 J).  - 
Pichard  Eitzralph,  in  his  Defensorium  Curatorum,  accuses  the  friars 
of  using  their  influence  as  confessors  to  get  children  (munusculis  datis 
allecti)  to  join  their  order.  He  says  that  he  knew  of  one  child  under 
thirteen  who  was  thus  allured. — Brown’s  Easciculus,  ii.  473.  Compare 
also  S.  E.  W.  ii.  381. 

P.  69,  1.  7. —  Oile  and  crem. 

The  crem  is  the  chrism  or  consecrated  oil,  with  which  the  child  was 
anointed  at  baptism.  The  oil,  distinguished  here  from  the  chrism,  is  that 
for  extreme  unction.  Both  were  consecrated  annually  by  the  bishop. 

P.  74,  1.  6  from  bottom. — And  in  presence  speJce  no  word. 

From  this  it  seems  that  it  was  not  customary  in  the  ecclesiastical 
courts  to  confront  a  man  with  his  accusers.  A  petition  of  the  Com¬ 
mons  in  1414,  complains  that  persons  cited  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts 
could  not  obtain  a  libel  of  what  was  put  upon  them. — Pot.  Pari.  iv.  20 


NOTES. 


501 


P.  75,  1.  24. — body  is  neuere  ]>e  more  traueilid. 

Contrast  the  dread  in  which  the  excommunication  of  St.  Hugh  of 
Lincoln  was  held.  His  biographer  gives  several  instances  where  death 
or  some  other  fearful  punishment  fell  upon  those  whom  Hugh  excom¬ 
municated.  See  especially  book  iv.  chap.  6  of  the  Magna  Vita,  which 
is  headed  ‘‘He  quodam  forestario.  He  quodam  etiam  diacono.  Et 
de  quadam  adolescentula.  Et  de  quibusdam  aliis,  viri  justi  maledictione 
in  carnis  interitum  datis.” — Magna  Yita  S.  Hugonis,  ed.  J.  E.  Himock, 
p.  178.  A  curious  specimen  of  the  stories  told  to  increase  the  dread 
of  excommunication  will  be  found  on  our  p.  153. 

P.  77,  1.  26. — Deschaunt,  countre  note. 

Descant  (or  discant),  discantus,  a  double  song;  originally  the  melody 
or  counterpoint  sung  with  a  plain-song  (Grove’s  Diet,  of  Music). 
Countre-note  is,  I  suppose,  simply  counter-point.  The  descant  had 
been  introduced  long  before  this  ;  as  early,  I  believe,  as  the  twelfth 
century,  but  it  had  spread  slowly,  and  during  the  fourteenth  century 
there  was  a  continual  and  rapid  tendency  towards  increased  elaboration  in 
Church  music.  Descant  gradually  came  to  mean  a  variation  (compare 
Shakspere’s  Two  Gentlemen  of  Yerona,  Act  i.  sc.  ii.  94). 

P.  78,  1.  16. —  Comunly  suclie  cursed  prelatis  ben  no  part  of  holy  chirche, 
in  cas  \at  \ei  sullen  be  dampnyd. 

This  refers  to  Wyclif’s  doctrine  of  the  Church,  which,  properly 
speaking,  he  says,  consists  only  of  the  elect.  Patet  ex  fide  Christ! 
scripturse  et  multiplici  testimonio  sanctorum,  quod  nullum  est  membrum 
sanctse  matris  ecclesiae  nisi  persona  prsedestinata.” — Supplementum 
Trialogi,  cap.  2,  p.  415. 

P.  80,  1.  7  from  bottom. — Staciones  of  rome. 

Stations  are  churches  or  altars,  to  the  visitation  of  which,  under 
certain  conditions,  some  spiritual  privileges  are  attached.  Haturally, 
there  is  no  city  in  which  such  privileges  are  granted  so  lavishly  as 
in  Home.  Mr.  Eurnivall  has  printed  (E.  E.  T.  S.,  Hos.  15  and  25) 
two  versions  of  a  poem  enumerating  the  Stations  of  Pome,  with  the 
indulgences  given  at  each. 

P.  81,  1.  22. — Also  ff\e  day  of  doom  come  bi-fore^  ^c. 

“  Sic  enim  ex  sibi  dubio  concedit  has  fictas  vanas  indulgencias  pro 
multis  milibus  annorum  ultra  diem  judicii ;  sed  valeant  iste  prelatis 
hujusmodi  in  vacuo  infinito,  quia  in  mundo  isto  non  prosunt  Christi 
fidelibus  sed  multipliciter  magis  obsunt.” — Exposition  of  Matthew 
xxiv.  chap.  v.  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  60). 

P.  81,  1.  5  from  bottom. — '^e  pope  and  his  ben  out  of  charited' 

“  Multis  videtur,  cum  papa  posset  faciliter,  sine  sua  depauperacione 
vel  facta  injuria  alicui,  omnes  subjectos  suos  a  pena  et  culpa  absolvere 
injungendo  opus  neutrum  vel  bonum  de  genere,  quod  omnino  excidit 
de  caritate  si  aliqui  de  suis  subditis  sint  dampnati.” — Sermons,  Part 
iv.  7  (MS.  T.C.C.  297 J).  “  Quilibet  papa  foret  fatuus  et  careret 

caritate  si  aliquis  secum  contemporaneus  sit  damnatus ;  cuilibet  enim 
tali  posset  faciliter  talia  carismata  impartiri.  Quid  igitur  obesset  nisi 


502 


NOTES. 


invidia  quod  cuilibet  vianti,  vel  in  purgatorio,  non  tribueret  tale 
donum.” — Sermons,  Part  iv.  21  (MS.  T.C.C.  310<?).  Compare 
also  Trial,  iv.  32  (p.  358).  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  our  text  is  more 
moderate  than  any  of  these  quotations.  They  imply  that  the  pope 
claims  power  to  save  the  wicked  from  damnation,  whereas  here  he  is 
only  asked  to  save  those  who  are  in  grace  from  the  pains  of  purgatory. 
His  power  does  not  extend  beyond  this ;  but  the  vendors  of  indulgences 
did  not  always  confine  themselves  within  strictly  theological  limits 
when  vaunting  the  article  they  had  to  dispose  of. 

P.  82,  1.  16. — IS'ot  for  singular  <preieres  made  of  vs  self  for  hue  of  an 
er\ely  hyng. 

As  to  this  prayer  see  note  to  p.  482,  1.  7. 

P.  86,  1.  13. —  Oure  lordjesu  crist  .  .  ]gaide  him  trilute  forhymSf  his 
chirche. 

Christus  pro  se  et  suo  pusillo  grege  solvit  tributum  Caesari.” — 
Trial,  lib.  iv.  cap.  18,  p.  309. 

P.  87,  1.  12. — Prelatis  resceyuen  ^  axen  gredely  \at  ilhe  money  for 
lohiche  iust  Hood  is  spilt P 

When  a  prelate  had  capital  jurisdiction,  the  escheats  and  fines  con¬ 
sequent  on  the  criminal’s  death  fell  to  him  (compare  Pecock’s 
Pepressor,  p.  369).  If,  then,  his  power  were  stretched  irregularly  to 
putting  heretics  to  death,  he  would  seize  their  property.  Py  the  statute 
of  2  Henry  lY.,  all  landsbelonging  to  convicted  heretics  were  forfeit  to  the 
lord  from  whom  they  held,  and  their  movable  property  fell  to  the  king, 
so  that  the  bishop  would  not  profit  unless  the  offender  was  his  tenant. 

P.  88, 1.  6—10. — Atteynen  tohyngis  aray  .  .  cursed  vengaunce  tahynge  ? 

It  is  possible  that  here  and  in  one  or  two  other  passages  of  this 
tract  we  have  reference  to  the  bloody  repression  of  the  Commons’ 
rebellion.  The  Bishop  of  Norwich  was  one  of  the  first  to  break  it  by 
armed  force. 

P.  88,  1.  4  from  bottom. — ^e  to  flee  to  heuene  hi-fore  ])e  lodi  he  cold. 

“  A  liter  enim  non  publicarent  ut  fidem  catholicam  quod  quicunque 
laborat  cum  tali  episcopo  ad  hunc  finem,  \i.e.  the  Flanders  Crusade] 
vel  juvat  ipsum  nobiliter  in  expensis,  erit  absolutus  a  pena  et  culpa,  et 
sic  infallibiliter  ad  patriam  advolabit.” — Sermons,  Part  iv.  13  (MS. 
T.C.C.  302c). 

P.  89,  1.  21. — Moldwarpis. 

“  Quondam  enim  Christi  vicarii  qui  erant  ut  columbe  ad  fenestras 
suas,  et  quasi  aquiie  a  terrestribus  celitus  evolantes,  modo  versi  sunt  in 
talpas  circa  terrestria  fodientes.” — Sermons,  Part  iv.  18  (MS.  T.C.C. 
307J).  Compare  p.  147. 

P.  91,  1.  39. — Motetis. 

The  word  is  probably  derived  from  the  It.  mottetto,  a  jest,  and  was 
originally  applied  to  a  kind  of  profane  music,  which  in  the  13th  century 
was  censured  by  the  Church.  For  the  last  300  years  it  has  been 
exclusively  applied  to  pieces  of  Church  music  of  moderate  length, 
adapted  to  Latin  words,  and  intended  to  be  sung  at  High  Mass,  either 


NOTES. 


503 


in  place  of,  or  immediately  after,  the  Plain  Chaunt  Offertorium  for 
the  day.  See  Grove’s  Diet,  of  Music. 

P.  92,  1.  9. — Dailes. 

This  word  occurs  again  in  the  tract  on  Clerks  Possessioners  (p.  129), 
hut  I  cannot  find  any  other  instance  of  its  use.  I  have  no  doubt  that 
the  meaning  is  without  judgment,  i.e.  without  redress.  The  ‘  day  ’ 
appointed  for  settling  quarrels  came  to  mean  the  Court  (cf.  German 
‘Tag’  in  Land-Tag;  Prench  ‘jour’  as  in  Grands  Jours;  and  our  own 
‘  Diet  ’),  and  so  the  judgment.  Thus  in  the  W.  Y.  (both)  we  find 
“  that  I  be  demyd  of  ^ou  or  of  mannis  day”  (1  Cor.  iv.  3),  and  in  our 
A.  Y.  we  have  still  daysmans  umpire  in  Job  ix.  33. 

P.  97,  1.  26. — Pencions. 

A  pension  was  a  yearly  payment  charged  upon  a  he^i^fice  in  behalf 
of  some  religious  house  which  the  patron  wished  to  benefit.  This  left 
the  appointment  to  the  cure  still  in  the  patron’s  hands  ;  whereas  in  case 
of  appropriation  the  religious  house  was  rector  and  put  in  a  vicar  to  do 
the  work. 

P.  98,  chap.  32. — Here  is  an  instance  of  the  tone  in  which  a  bishop 
treated  the  terrible  offence  of  park-breaking.  It  is  more  than  two 
centuries  before  Wyclif’s  time,  but  his  contemporaries  doubtless  did 
their  best  to  prove  that  the  practice  of  the  Church  was  uniform,  at  least 
in  this  point.  “Hmc  preedixi,  necesse  habens  apud  vos  clamorem 
facere  de  quibusdum  malis  hominibus  qui  prseterita  hebdomada  parcum 
meum  fregerunt  apud  Humeres  Peld,  et  unum  quern  ibi  habebam  cer- 
vum  nocte  interfecerunt,  et  projecto  capite  cum  pedibus  et  intestinis, 

damnabili  furto  asportarunt . Ego  interim  excommunico  eos 

qui  parcum  meum  fregerunt  et  cervum  meum  interfecerunt  eo  ana- 
themate  quo  Deus  iratus  percutit  animas  impiorum.  Interdico  eis 
ingressum  ecclesiae,  et  corpus  et  sanguinem  Christi,  et  communionem 
totius  Christianitatis.  Maledicti  et  excommunicati  sint  in  domibus,  in 
viis  et  in  agris,  in  silvis  et  in  aquis,  et  in  omnibus  locis  quibus  inventi 
^  fuerint.  Computrescat  caro  eorum  qui  carnem  cervi  mei  devorarunt, 
sicut  computruit  caro  Herodis,  qui  pro  Christo  fudit  sanguinem  inno- 
centem,  cum  Juda  traditore  et  Anania  et  Saphyra  et  Dathan  et 
Abiron.  Habeant  anathema  maranatha,  nisi  cito  resipuerint  et  fecerint 
mihi  satisfactionem.  Eiat,  fiat,  fiat.” — Epistolae  Herberti  Losingm,  ed. 
R.  Anstruther,  p.  70.  It  is  only  fair  to  let  the  bishop  explain  his 
motives:  “Hanc  excommunicationem,  dilectissimi  fratres,  facio,  non 
quia  mihi  sit  multum  de  uno  cervo,  sed  quia  volo  eos  penitere  et  ad 
confessionem  venire  et  deinceps  corrigi  a  tali  furto”  (Ibid.).  It  would 
be  wrong  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  a  man  who  showed  the  high  valire 
he  set  upon  episcopal  correction  by  paying  an  enormous  sum  for  the 
privilege  of  exercising  it.  Many  bishops  in  Wyclif’s  time  gave  the 
same  proof  of  earnestness. 

P.  99,  1.  16. —  Viserid  deuelis. 

This  expression  is  used  in  the  tract  De  Blasphemia  (S.E.W.  iii.  421) : 
“J^ese  freris  wot  not  ....  whefer  fei  ben  now  viserde  devels, 


504 


NOTES. 


as  Schariot  was.”  The  reprobate,  who  will  be  damned,  are  devils,  but 
they  are  masked,  since  they  cannot  he  distinguished  on  earth.  One  of 
the  articles  condemned  as  Wyclif  s  at  the  Council  of  Constance  is : 
“Larvati  diaboli,  id  est  religiosi,  ex  nova  simulata  religione  domesti- 
cati,  non  possunt  in  filios  lucis  cum  necessario  sunt  filii  diaboli.” — 
Brown’s  Fasciculus  Ber.  Exp.  i.  278. 

P.  99,  1.  17. — Pleien  the  pagyn  of  scottis. 

I  cannot  fix  the  occasion  on  which  the  Scots  played  this  trick,  but  it 
may  well  have  happened  more  than  once.  We  may  note  that  Wyclif, 
as  a  native  of  Teesdale  or  the  neighbourhood,  was  likely  to  have  heard 
many  stories  of  border  warfare.  Perhaps  this  may  account  for  the 
somewhat  contemptuous  way  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  Scots  and 
Scotland.  See  a  curious  passage  in  the  Trialogus,  iii.  3  (p.  139). 

P.  100,  1.  6. — Saif  dede  men. 

I  suppose  this  means  priests,  who  should  be  dead  to  the  world,  but 
have  in  fact  only  half  renounced  it,  and  are  revived  to  it  (comforted)  by 
these  wicked  prelates. 

P.  100, 1. 18. — Forsaken  as  venym  matrimonye,  \at  is  leffel  hi  hoUwritt. 

Compare  De  OflScio  Pastoral!,  p.  46,  “  Quomodo  ergo  versi  sunt 
clerici  ab  altilibus  celi  in  colubres,  et  discipuli  Christ!  in  phariseos 
colantes  culicem  et  deglucientes  camelum  ?  Nam  coniugium  secundum 
legem  Christ!  eis  licitum  odiunt  ut  venenum,’’  etc.  Compare,  too, 
S.E.W.  i.  pp.  59  and  364  and  iii.  190. 

P.  102,  1.  17. — Scala  celi. 

The  Church  of  St.  Maria  Scala  Cseli  is  one  of  three  standing  some 
miles  from  Pome  on  the  Ostian  road,  near  the  spot  where  St.  Paul  is 
supposed  to  have  been  beheaded.  It  derives  its  name  from  a  vision  of 
St.  Bernard,  who  saw  some  souls  for  which  he  was  saying  mass 
ascending  by  a  ladder  to  heaven.  The  altar  where  he  had  this  vision 
is  still  shown.  As  to  its  wealth  of  indulgences,  we  read  in  the  Stacyons 
of  Borne : 

“In  pat  place  a  chapelle  ys, 

Scala  cely  called  kit  ys, 

‘  Laddere  of  keuen  ’  men  clepep  hit 
In  honour  of  our  lady,  he  my  witte. 


Whoso  synge]?  masse  in  jjat  chappelle 
For  any  frend,  he  lose]?  hym  fro  helle. 

He  may  hym  hrynge  ]?orow  purgatory  y-wys 
Into-  ]?e  hlys  of  paradys. 

Ther  sowles  ahyde  tylle  domis  day 
In  myche  Joye,  as  y  jou  say. 

And  iij  jer  ar  graunted  more 
Of  holy  popes  pat  haue  hen  pore  : 

And  syx  popes  graunted  pat  panne 
That  lyen  at  seynt  sehastyan. 

Pope  vrhan,  siluester,  &  benet, 

Lyon,  Clement,  conformed  hyt.” 

Folitical,  Poems,  ed.  F.  J.  Furnivall, 
E.E.T.S.  No.  15,  p.  118. 


NOTES. 


505 


P.  102,  1.  26. — A  prest  may  le  so  cursed  and  in  heresie  \at  he  malci\ 
not  \e  sacrament. 

On  this  point  see  note  to  p.  287,  1.  12. 

P.  103,  1.  10. —  Oppressynge  pore  curatis,  8fc. 

In  the  Rolls  Office  there  are  many  bundles  of  ■petitions  from  bishops 
and  abbots  praying  the  Chancellor  to  imprison  persons  who  had  been 
under  excommunication  for  forty  days.  As  a  rule,  the  offence  is  not 
mentioned,  but  it  is  sometimes  specified ;  and  one  that  occurs  often  is 
non-payment  of  the  subsidy  voted  in  Convocation.  In  one  case 
(in  1381),  where  a  schedule  of  names  is  given,  the  amount  due  from 
each  defaulter  is  said  to  be  16  den[arii]  de  Marcha.  The  taxes  that 
year  were  unusually  heavy. — See  Stubbs’  Const.  Hist.  ii.  449. 

P.  103,  1.  13. — Annueleris. 

Annuelers,  or  annual  priests,  were  those  who  earned  their  living  by 
saying  annual  masses  for  the  dead.  In  a  church  where  but  few  masses 
were  required,  the  parson  said  them  and  took  the  fees,  but  a  priest  was 
often  appointed  specially  for  this  purpose.  Sometimes  the  engagement 
was  temporary.  Daw  Topias  speaks  of 

“  al  these  annuelers' 
that  syngen  for  a  tyme, 
taking  for  her  traveil 
as  thei  may  acorde.” 

'VVright,  Fol.  Poems^  ii.  95. 

Often  the  payment  was  by  yearly  stipend,  and  we  find  in  1362  a 
complaint  of  the  Commons  that  the  pestilence  has  caused  such  a  scarcity 
of  priests  that  they  ask  extravagant  wages.  Their  pay  was  then 
limited  to  5  marks  a  year. — Rot.  Pari.  ii.  271<? ;  compare  hi.  501^. 

As  these  clergy  were  not  represented  in  Convocation,  they  had  not  , 
borne  their  share  of  the  tenths  voted  by  that  body,  but  their  increasing 
number  rendered  them  a  tempting  subject  for  taxation,  which  appears 
to  have  been  levied,  in  the  form  of  a  poll-tax  of  6s.  8(^.  on  every  priest, 
for  the  first  time  in  1380. — Wals.  i.  449.  A  tax  thus  newly  levied 
might  well  give  rise  to  such  discontent  as  is  expressed  in  the  text,  but 
we  cannot  place  too  much  reliance  on  this  as  an  evidence  of  date,  since 
20  years  later  the  tax  was  still  spoken  of  as  a  recent  grievance : 

“  and  thus  prelates  and  persouns 
aftir  her  state, 
ben  stended  to  paien 
what  that  nede  askith ; 
but  neither  freres  ne  annuelers 
save  now  late.” 

Peply  of  Friar  Paw  Topias  (Wright,  Pol.  Poems ^  ii.  80). 

See  Stubbs’  Const.  Hist.  hi.  47  and  367. 

P.  104,  1.  2. — Also  prelatis  hen  doumhe  houndis  \at  may  not  herhe  ; 

.  .  for  ])ei  hen  so  chohid  wi\  talow  of  worldly  goodis. 

So  in  Sermons,  “  J^e  fend  ha]?  stranglid  ]7es  houndis  with  talwe,  ]7at  ]?ei 
mai  not  berke.”— S.E.W.  i.  247.  Cf.  S.E.W.  hi.  133  and  440. 


506 


NOTES. 


P.  116,  1.  1. —  Clerhis  possessioneris. 

That  is,  such  orders  among  the  clergy  as  held  endowments  ;  monks, 
canons,  and  secular  chapters.  The  members  of  secular  chapters  could, 
of  course,  hold  property  individually  as  well  as  collectively.  The 
monastic  vow  bound  to  personal  poverty,  but  allowed  property  to  be 
held  by  the  convents,  which  were  often  very  rich. 

P.  116, 1.  15. — The  evils  of  appropriation. 

“Constat  quidem  quod  appropriata  ecclesia  oblaciones  et  decline 
stricte  ad  uidum  abbacie  colliguntur.  Et  cum  necesse  sit  curatum  de 
istis  vivere,  patet  quod  necesse  sit  propter  istam  subtraccionem  officium 
pastoris  deficere.  IJnde  vel  preficitur  vicarius  nimis  inhabilis  ad 
regendum  seipsum  conformiter  legi  dei,  et  per  consequens  nimis  idiot- 
icus  ad  ducendum  hunc  populum  per  artam  viam  que  ducit  ad  celum, 
vel  preficitur  unus  antichrist!  vicarius  qui  secundum  cautelas  tradi- 
cionis  humane  scit  et  optat  de  temporalibus  suum  populum  spoliare.” 
— De  Nova  Prevaricancia  Mandatorum  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  93). 

P.  116,  1.  21. — He  may  not  go  to  scole. 

That  is,  to  the  University ;  but  I  do  not  think  the  “  fyndynge  of  pore 
children  to  scole  ”  (1.  27)  need  be  taken  in  this  sense. 

P.  118,  1.  10. — Seynt  hede  wrot,  etc. 

The  passage  referred  to  is  in  Bede’s  letter  to  Archbishop  Egbert,  and 
runs  : — “  Et  quidem  novimus  quia,  per  incuriam  regum  precedentium 
dohationesque  stultissimas,  factum  est  ut  non  facile  locus  vacans  ubi 
sedes  Episcopalis  nova  fieri  debeat  inveniri  valeat.” — Giles,  i.  122 
(printed  also  in  Stubbs  and  Haddan’s  Councils,  iii.  319).  It  hardly 
bears  the  meaning  which  Wyclif  puts  upon  it.  Bede  was  advocating 
the  establishment  of  more  bishops,  and  complains  that  the  places  where 
their  sees  should  have  been  were  already  occupied  by  monasteries. 
He  goes  on  to  suggest  that  some  of  these  monasteries  should  be  made 
cathedral  churches. 

P.  118,  1.  16. — As  ]>e  holy  martir  possidonye  writti\  of  seynt 
austynes  lif. 

“  Sic  enim  narrat  beatus  possidonius  demagistro  suo  bono  augustino, 
quod  rogavit  cives  iponenses  reaccipere  predia  que  sibi  antea  donave- 
runt,  sic  quod  posset  vivere  pure  de  elemosynis,  ut  vixerunt  Christus 
et  sui  apostoli,  vel  de  decimis  et  oblacionibus,  ut  vixerunt  sacerdotes 
et  levite  veteris  testament!.” — Speculum  Militantis  Ecclesia  (MS. 
Ashburnham,  If.  120J). 

P.  122,  last  Yme.—The  angel  seyd  ful  sothe. 

“Unde  narrant  Chrenicse,  quod  in  dotatione  ecclesiae  vox  angelica 
audita  est  in  aere  tunc  temporis  sic  dicentis  :  ‘  hodie  effusum  est  venenum 
in  ecclesia  sancta  Dei.’” — Trial,  lib.  iv.  c.  18,  p.  309,  compare  pp.  374, 
380  of  this  volume.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  in  the  Chronicles  the  voice 
is  attributed  to  the  Devil  (Polychronicon,  lib.  iv.  vol.  v.  p.  130,  ed. 
Lumby).  Bishop  Pecock,  in  his  Depressor,  insists  strongly  on  this  point; 
for  “  if  this  be  trewe,  whi  and  wherto  schulden  we  beleeue  his  seiyng 
to  be  trewe ;  eithen  he  is  oure  enemy  and  oure  bigiler  ”  (p.  351). 


KOTES. 


507 


P.  123,  1.  10. — In  here  profession  \ei  hen  holden  dede. 

Compare  Jacke  Upland  : 

“  Why  make  you  as  dede  men, 
when  ye  be  professed, 
and  yet  ye  be  not  dede, 

but  more  quicke  beggars  than  you  were  before  ?  ” 

Wright,  Fol,  Poems,  ii.  20. 

P.  123,  1.  suche  religious  wrecchis  seip  Robert  grosted,  ^c. 

“  Cum  secundum  lyncolniensem  claustralis  propter  ambicionem 
temporalium  sic  egressus  sit  sicut  cadaver  mortuum  pannis  funeralibus 
involutum,  de  sepulcro  egressum,  a  diabolo  inter  homines  agitatum.” — 
Early  Sermons,  No.  9,  MS.  Lambeth.  The  passage  is  also  prefixed  as 
a  text  (in  Latin)  to  a  short  tract  Lincolniensis,  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold, 
S.E.W.  iii.  230. 

P.  127,  1.  18. — ^if  a  prest  of  her  feyned  ordre,  ^c. 

Among  the  petitions  in  the  Rolls  Office  (see  note  to  p.  103),  is  one 
of  1387,  from  Bankyn,  prior  of  the  Augustine  friars,  who  ‘^vestrse 
innotescat  reverencise  (i.e.  to  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  Chancellor)  fratres 
nostros  professos,  Willelmum  Pateshull,  Thomam  Beauchamp,  Robertum 
Stokusle,  et  Johannem  Sude,  habitum  et  obedientiam  sanctae  religionis 
temere  reliquisse,’’  and  goes  on  to  say  that  without  the  King’s  help  he 
cannot  bring  them  back  into  the  Lord’s  fold.  It  appears  that  Pates¬ 
hull  had  bought  himself  a  chaplaincy  to  the  Pope,  under  shelter  of 
which  he  ventured  to  bring  charges  of  murder,  torture,  and  nameless 
vices  against  the  brethren  of  his  order  (Chron.  Angliae,  p.  377). 
Bankyn  was  a  member  of  the  Council  of  1382  (Pas.  Ziz.  p.  499). 
Another  petition,  dated  Eebruary,  1382,  is  from  the  prior  of  Sempring- 
ham,  against  John  de  Whiteby,  excommunicated  for  contumacy  and 
flight.  In  this  case,  however,  there  is  nothing  to  show  any  connexion 
with  Wyclif  or  the  Lollards. 

P.  128,  1.  25. — Seynt  Richard. 

“  Seynt  Richard  of  Armauj  ”  occurs  in  the  “  Great  Sentence  of 
Curse”  (S.E.W.  iii.  281).  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  Eitzralph 
was  never  canonized ;  he  did  not  belong  to  the  right  party.  It  was, 
however,  reported  that  he  deserved  the  honour  of  sainthood.  ‘‘Circa 
ista  tempora  Deus  declarans  justitiam  quam  magister  Eitez  Raffe  exer- 
cuit  dum  vixit  in  terris,  ut  impleretur  de  eo  illud  psalraistae  :  ‘  In 
memoria  eterna  erit  Justus,’  per  merita  ipsius  Ricardi,  ad  tumbara 
ipsius,  apud  Dundalk  in  Hybernia,  plura  et  magna  cotidie  operatur 
miracula ;  unde,  ut  dicitur,  fratres  se  male  contentos.” — Extract  from  a 
continuation  of  Higden’s  Polychronicon,  printed  by  Mr.  Thompson  as 
an  Appendix  to  the  Chronicon  Anglise,  p.  400.  So,  too,  in  the 
Chronicon  itself,  “  Quo  in  loco  (Dundalk)  innumera  ad  laudem  Dei  fiunt 
miracula  ”  (p.  48).  The  passage  referred  to  in  the  text  is  in  the 
Defensorium  Curatorum  :  “  Item  aliud  damnum  tarn  grave  quod  tendit 
ad  consumptionera  seu  evacuationem  doctrinae  in  secularibus  cujuslibet 
facultatis,  est  quod  isti  ordines  mendicantium  propter  infinita  lucra 


508 


NOTES. 


quse  mediantibus  praedictis  privilegiis  de  sepulturis  et  confessionibus  et 
aliis  quae  acquirunt,  tantum  multiplicati  sunt  in  conventibus  et 
personis  conventuum.  quod  non  reperitur  in  Studiis  communibus  de 
facultate  Artium,  sacrae  Tbeologiae  et  Juris  Canonici,  ut  fertur  a 
pluribus,  de  facultate  Medicinae  aut  de  facultate  Juris  Civilis,  nisi  rare, 
aliquis  utilis  multum  liber  venalis,  sed  omnes  emuntur  a  fratribus  :  ita 
ut  in  singulis  conventibus  sit  una  grandis  ac  nobilis  libraria,  ut  singuli 
fratres  habentes  statum  in  Studiis,  quales  sunt  modo  innumeri,  nobileni 
habent  librarian! ;  unde  etiam  de  meis  subjectis  rectoribus  tres  aut 
quatuor  misi  ad  Studium ;  et  dictum  est  mihi  quod  quia  nec  Bibliam 
eis  utilem  nec  libros  alios  Tbeologiae  venales  eis  congruos  ibi  poterant 
reperire,  ad  suam  patriam  sunt  reversi,  aut  unus  eorum  saltern  rediit  jam. 
Si  ista  non  sit  in  clero  grandis  j  actura,  nulla  poterit  in  ipso  esse,  cum 
ad  exitum  talem,  ut  videtur,  intendat  quod  clericus  in  Ecclesia  nullus 
remaneat  propter  fratres.” — Brown’s  Easciculus,  ii.  474. 

P.  129, 1.  14. — A  layli,  stiward  .  .  .  schullen  haue  festis  .  .  .  riche 
clo\is  and  huge 

Some  examples  may  be  culled  from  the  Bursar’s  book  of  King’s 
Hall,  Cambridge  (one  of  the  foundations  absorbed  in  Trinity  College)  : 
“  In  uno  exhennio  misso  Thomae  Crosse,  vis.  Item  in  alio  exhennio 

misso  Domino  Ivoni  de  Clyntone,  vis.  id . Item  in  alio 

cultello  dato  Domino  Jervasio  Baroni  de  Scalariis,  mis,  vie?.  Item  in 

cultellis  datis  famulis  suis,  iis . Liberabantur  menestrallis 

in  convivio  Magistri  Eicardi  Goldingtone,  mis.”  And  again  from  the 
Books  of  Commons  of  King’s  Hall :  “  pro  uno  jantaculo  facto  apud 
Infra  Eeceptorem  Scaccarii  pro  Cancellario,  Thesaurario,  Magistro 
Johanni  de  Offord,  et  aliis  de  Concilio  Eegis,  tractantibus  et  consulen- 
tibus  tunc  ibidem  super  negotiis  fundationis  prsedictse.” — Historical 
Manuscripts  Commission,  First  Deport,  pp.  84,  85,  86. 

P.  129,  1.  27. — To  Icepe  hym  self  vnhlekkid  or  defoulid  fro  \is  world. 

There  is  a  curious  use  of  the  negative  here,  the  “un”  in  “un- 
blekkid  ”  being  carried  on  to  “  defoulid.”  In  both  Wyclifite  versions 
the  text  runs  :  ‘‘to  kepe  hym  self  vndefoulid  fro  this  world.” 

P.  129,  1.  4  from  bottom. —  Caymes  castel. 

The  phrase  Caym’s  castle  is  frequently  used  by  "Wyclif  for  a  convent 
of  friars.  He  explains  its  meaning  in  the  Trialogus,  iv.  33  (p.  362)  : 
“Alii  autem  fingunt  ....  quod  in  Caym  fuerunt  istae  sectae 

quattuor  inchoatae . Et  in  testimonium  istorum,  quattuor 

literae  hujus  nominis  Cairn  inchoant  hos  quattuor  ordines,  secundum 
ordinem  temporis,  quo  finguntur  a  fratribus  incepisse,  ita  quod  C. 
Carmelitas,  A.  Augustinenses,  J.  Jacobitas  et  M.  Minores  signiheat.” 

P.  130,  1.  9. — The  side-note  to  chap.  21  is  defective.  It  refers  to 
men  who  left  their  convent  and  profession  in  order  to  preach,  and  so 
incurred  excommunication.  See  p.  127  and  note. 

P.  131,  1.  9. — yf  a  synful  ydiot  lidde  hem  do  \e  lesse  goode,  ^c. 

“  Et  in  ista  bimembri  blasfemia  deserunt  sectam  Christi  ex  quo 
insani  numero  inferunt  inconveniencia  infinita  j  ut  quod  religiosum  et 


NOTES. 


509 


voluntatis  Christi  est  quod  tails  religiosus  subiciat  se  suo  prei)osito 
faciendo  quicquid  mandaverit,  licet  fuerit  stolidissimus  ydiota  ;  quia 
obediencia  ut  inquiunt  est  virtus  maxime  meritoria.” — De  Nova  Pre- 
varicancia  Mandatomm  (MS.  Asbburnham,  If.  95). 

P.  132,  1.  5. — for  foure  ^enywor\  good  curse  many  \ousand  soules 
to  Tielle. 

So  Nicolas  de  Clamengis  :  ‘‘  Sed  hodiernis  diebus  adeo  invaluerunt, 
ut  passim  pro  levissimo  quasi  delicto,  smpe  etiam  pro  nullo  inferantur. 
Sicque  in  nullum  timorem  sed  in  extremum  pervenerunt  contemptum.” 
— De  Corrupto  Ecclesim  Statu  (Brown’s  Pascic.  ii.  558).  The  evil  was 
of  old  standing.  In  the  eleventh  century  Peter  Damiani  pleaded  for 
a  less  liberal  use  of  excommunication. — Letters  to  Nicholas  II.  (i.  7) 
and  Alexander  II.  (i.  14).  It  is  worth  while,  however,  to  note  one 
marked  contrast.  Damiani’s  plea  is:  “  Indignum  quippe  est,  ut 
propter  unius  homuncionis  offensam  tarn  innumerabilis  multitude  homi- 
num  depereat.” — Opera,  vol.  i.  col.  22.  The  souls  perishing  from 
the  curse  excite  his  pity.  With  Clamengis  the  complaint  is,  that  too- 
frequent  use  of  excommunication  has  destroyed  its  terrors. 

P.  133,  last  line. — Bryngenge  in  ]onge  children. 

This  charge  is  more  commonly  made  against  the  friars.  See  p.  68, 
and  note  on  the  passage. 

P.  134,  1.  10. — Famulorum  ^  henefactorum. 

There  is  a  prayer  near  the  beginning  of  the  Canon  of  the  Mass  for 
the  Commemoration  of  the  living,  and  another  at  its  close  for  the 
departed.  Both  begin  with  the  words:  ^‘Memento,  Domine,  famu¬ 
lorum  famularumque  tuarum,”  on  which  follow  the  names  of  those 
who  are  specially  commemorated  on  the  occasion.  Some  such  com¬ 
memorations  were  granted,  or  at  least  promised  (see  Chaucer’s 
Sompnoure’s  Tale)  to  all  benefactors.  The  greater  benefactors  had 
frequently  a  day  assigned  to  them  in  which  mass  was  said  on  their 
behalf.  There  is  a  list  of  such  observances  for  the  University  of 
Oxford  in  Munimenta  Academica,  pp.  370 — 373.  Wyclif  often  speaks 
with  dislike  of  this  famulorum  prayer,  which,  he  says,  is  the  most 
special,  as  the  Paternoster  is  the  most  general,  of  all  prayers. — 
S.E.W.  iii.  441.  So  in  the  tract  on  Matt,  xxiii.  :  ‘‘ingeminant 
multipliciter  ‘  famuli  tui  ’  et  ‘  famule  tue,’  ac  si  deus  foret  dormienset 
non  recolens  merita  viatorum.” — MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  77. 

P.  136,  1.  22. — ])ei  hen  groundid  on  labor  of  here  hondis  hi  here 
owene  reule. 

“  Quia  tunc  vere  monachi  sunt,  silabore  manuum  suarum  vivunt.” — 
Pule  of  St.  Benedict,  cap.  47. 

P.  143,  1.  1. —  office  of  curates. 

It  is,  perhaps,  hardly  necessary  to  remark  that  the  words  ‘‘curate  ”  and 
“  vicar  ”  have  almost  exchanged  meanings  since  Wyclif’s  time.  Curate 
then  meant  the  beneficed  parson  in  charge  of  the  parish.  If  he 
absented  himself,  he  put  in  a  priest  to  do  his  work,  who  was  called  the 
vicar.  A  vicar  was  needed  also  where  the  benefice  was  appropriated 


510 


NOTES. 


to  a  religious  house,  and  gradually  the  appointment  in  such  cases 
became  a  permanent  one.  In  1402  a  statute  was  passed  that  in  all 
appropriated  churches  “  soit  ordeine  Yikair  perpetuel,  institut  et  induct 
canoniquement  en  ycelle,  et  covenahlement  endowez  par  la  discretion 
de  I’ordinaire.” — Rot.  Pari.  iii.  500.  In  Prance  the  cure  is  still  the 
incumbent,  the  vicaire  the  curate. 

P.  144,  1.  17. — And  late  alle  \at  helpe  \ecomunes  in  ])is  grete  talliage. 

In  the  Parliament  held  at  Salisbury  in  April,  1384,  the  Commons 
granted  half  a  fifteenth  to  the  king,  with  a  second  half-fifteenth  if 
peace  could  not  be  made.  “  Protestautz  outre  que  Tune  Moitee  ne 
Pautre,  ne  soit  en  nule  manere  levable,  ne  levee,  sanz  la  condicion 
ensuante.  C’est  assavoir  que  I’Estat  de  Clergie  emporte  &  grante 
selonc  lour  afferant  a  I’une  Moitee  &  I’autre  du  dite  Quinszime,  a  les 
termes  &  jours  suis  ditz,  si  bien  en  salvacion  de  eux  come  des  ditz 
Seigneurs  &  Communes.” — Rot.  Pari.  iii.  168«.  Evidently  a  strong 
feeling  was  abroad  that  the  clergy  ought  to  bear  their  share  of  the 
national  burdens,  and  this  gives  a  slight  additional  probability  to  the 
date  I  have  assigned  to  the  tract. 

P.  145,  1.  9. — 'pe  trewe  clerk  rohert  graded  writi\  to  the  pope,  etc. 

The  passage  occurs  in  the  sermon  preached  before  the  Pope  at  Lyons. 
“IJnde  pastores,  personam  Jesu  Christi  induti  non  annunciantes 
[Christi  evangelium],  etsi  non  superadderent  malitias  alias,  sunt  anti- 
christi  et  satanas  transfiguratus  in  angelum  lucis.” — Brown’s  Ease, 
ii.  251. 

P.  145,  1.  24. — Fewe  curatis  han  \e  hille,  ^c. 

P  may  be  fanciful  in  remarking  that  this  passage  would  be  charac¬ 
teristic  in  the  mouth  of  Purvey,  "Wyclif’s  chief  helper  in  translating 
the  Bible. 

P.  146,  1.  %.-^And  afterward  drawen  men  to  prison. 

Among  the  petitions  for  imprisonment  of  persons  who  had  been  forty 
days  under  excommunication  (see  notes  to  pp.  36,  103),  I  noted  one  from 
the  Bishop  of  Ely  (Jan.  16,  1380),  against  two  men  excommunicated 
at  the  instance  of  John,  rector  of  Xyngston,  “  Occasione  non  solucionis 
decimarum  silve  cedue.”  It  was  very  likely  a  case  of  disputed  right, 
as  tithes  on  woodland  were  due  only  on  silva  cedua,  i.e.  underwood  of 
less  than  20  years’  growth,  and  this  was  a  frequent  cause  of  quarrel. 
In  the  Parliament  Rolls  there  are  several  petitions  for  restraint  of  the 
clergy  in  this  matter. 

P.  149,  1.  5. — Fatte  hors  with  gage  sadlis  ^  Iridelis. 

Wyclif  refers  often  to  the  extravagance  of  the  clergy  in  horses.  The 
complaint  occurs  several  times  in  this  volume,  and  is  to  be  found  also 
in  his  Latin  works  :  Cogitemus  ergo  quod  rex  regura  qui  nunquam 
ante  vel  post  fuit  nisi  pedestris  tunc  sine  sella  non  equum  bellicosum 
sed  rudem  asinam  ascendit.  Per  hoc  vero  datur  ecclesiasticis 
exemplum  quod  sumptuosos  palefridos  non  ascendant,  bona  ecclesie  non 
consumant  cum  sellis,  strepis  atque  frenis  deauratis  vel  antelis  vel 
postelis  de  sericis.” — Early  Sermons,  I.  (MS.  Lambeth  23). 


NOTES. 


511 


P.  152,  1.  22. — Late  hem  enquere  \e  so]>e,  <^e. 

“  Quod  fideles  resistentes  huic  pugne  sacerdotum  {t.e.  the  Flanders 
Crusade)  fuerunt  tarn,  per  spirituale  brachium  excommunicati  quam  per 
seculares  dominos  tribulati.” — Exposition  of  Matthew  xxiv.  chap.  2 
(MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  56). 

P.  153,  1.  3  from  bottom. — pat  a  goode  cristene  man^  ^c. 

One  of  the  grounds  for  prosecuting  Wyclif  was  that  he  taught  that 
excommunication  was  not  binding  except  when  deserved.  In  the  list 
of  conclusions  condemned  by  the  Pope  in  1377,  we  find:  Ho.  11. 
Maledictio  vel  excommunicatio  non  ligat  simpliciter  nisi  quantum 
fertur  in  adversarium  legis  Christi.  Ho.  15.  Credere  debemus  quod 
[papa  vel  alius]  solum  tunc  solvit  vel  ligat  quando  se  conformat  legi 
Christi. — Chron.  Anglise,  ed.  E.  M.  Thompson,  p.  182. 

P.  154,  1,  12. — pere  come\  a  'pardoner  mp  stollen  lullis  ^  false  releJds. 

Compare  Chaucer’s  account  of  the  pardoner — 

“  For  in  his  male  he  hadde  a  pilweheer, 

Which,  that  he  saide,  was  our  lady  veyl : 

He  seide  he  hadde  a  gobet  of  the  seyl 
That  seynt  Petur  hadde,  when  that  he  wente 
IJppon  the  see,  til  Jhesn  Crist  him  hente. 

He  hadde  a  cros  of  latoun  ful  of  stones. 

And  in  a  glas  he  hadde  pigges  hones.” 

Prologue^  694 — 700. 

Generally  speaking  we  may  be  inclined  to  make  some  allowance  for 
colouring  in  the  descriptions  of  satirist  and  reformer — of  Chaucer  and 
Wyclif.  But  in  depicting  the  impudence  of  the  pardoner  there  was 
no  need — one  may  almost  say  no  room  for  exaggeration.  See  Dr. 
Jusserand’s  Essay  on  Chaucer’s  Pardoner  and  the  Pope’s  Pardoners, 
published  by  the  Chaucer  Society  1880. 

P.  157,  1.  23. — For  now  he\ene  mennus  lawis,  8fc. 

Cum  nimis  multi  seculares  hodie  studeant  in  litium  facultate,  ipsa 
quoque  Theologia  in  statu  secularium  paucos  habeat  sectatores  propter 
abusum  Roman  se  curise,  quae  Theologos  contempsit,  et  in  omni  ecclesi- 
astico  gradu  lucrativarum  scientiarum  studiosos  prseposuit. — Pierre 
d’Ailly,  de  Reformatione  Ecclesise.  Brown’s  Fasc.  i.  413.  D’Ailly, 
Archbishop  of  Cambray,  and  a  Cardinal,  was  a  leader  among  the 
orthodox  reformers,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  Council  of 
Constahce. 

P.  165,  1.  27. — Bete  stretis  vp  ^  doun. 

This  use  of  “bete”  recurs  twice  in  this  tract.  On  p.  168, 1.  10,  we 
have  “  betynge  of  pauement,”  a  phrase  still  in  use  in  modern  French 
(battre  le  pave,  aller  et  venir  sans  but,  sans  occupation. — Littre),  On 
p.  172,  1.  15,  we  have  “  beten  marketis,”  which  I  suppose  means  to 
lounge  about  there  merely  for  the  pleasure  of  the  crowd  and  society. 
Such  loungers  were  generally  in  ill  repute,  as  we  may  see  by  the 
secondary  sense  of  swaggerer,  attaching  to  “  market  beter  ”  (see 
Reeve’s  Tale,  1.  16).  We  may  connect  with  this  use  of  the  word  the 
policeman’s  “  beat.” 


512 


NOTES. 


P.  167,  1.  9. — Wot  li  lonynge  ^  ledynge. 

So  in  Pierce  the  Ploughman’s  Crede  (line  716)  : 

“  And  been  at  lone  &  at  bode  *  as  burgeses  vsitbe,” 

which  Mr.  Skeat  explains  “to  deal  with  lendings  and  biddings,  to  lend 
and  bid.”  It  must  be  noticed,  however,  that  Halliwell  .says  that 
‘lone’  is  still  used  in  Devon  as  ‘  a  supplication  for  alms,’  and  perhaps 
‘  lonynge  and  hedynge  ’  may  mean  merely  ‘  begging  and  praying.’ 

P.  167,  1.  26. — Priests  so  vnkunnynge  \at  men  scornen  hem  in  seynge 
of  here  seruyce,  ^  redynge  of  here  pistil  Sf  gospel. 

Giraldus  tells  a  story  how  Hugh  of  Lincoln  entered  a  parish  church 
to  hear  mass,  and  when  mass  was  over,  the  parish  priest  “  statim 
coepit  evangelia  multiplicare,  prime  Initium  sancti  evangelii^  deinde 
Spiritus  Domini.,  demum  Salve  sancte  parens,  et  alia  quaedam  nihil  atti- 
nentia.  Episcopus  antem  his  auditis  facete  subjecit  :  ‘  Quid  eras 
dicturus  est '‘presbyter  iste,  qui  hodie  quod  novit  totnm  effudit?’” — 
Gemma  Ecclesiastica,  D.  1,  xlviii. 

P.  169,  1.  8. —  Who  lyue\  hest  preie^  lest. 

“Opera  autem  justa  plus  orant  pro  homine  quam  mentis  devocio  et 
vocalis  formacio  labiorum.” — Lat.  Sermons,  iv.  3  (M.S.  T.C.C.  293a). 

P.  169,  1.  25. — Magnyficat,  sanctus,  ^  agnus  dei. 

The  Magnificat  was  sung  always  at  vespers.  The  Sanctus  (Sanctus, 
Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Dominns  Deus  Sabaoth.  Pleni  sunt  coeli  et  terra 
gloria  tua  :  Osanna  in  excelsis.  Benedictus,  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini  : 
Osanna  in  excelsis)  is  sung  in  the  preface  to  the  Mass. 

The  Agnus  Dei  (Agnus  Dei  qui  tollis  peccata  mundi;  miserere 
nobis  {his)  Agnus  Dei  qui  tollis  peccata  mundi  da  nobis  pacem)  is  in 
the  ordinary  of  the  Mass, 

P.  171,  1.  14. — And  ofte  ^e  reden  it. 

The  passage  referred  to  forms  the  epistle  for  the  Thursday  in  Passion 
or  Holy  Week,  as  well  as  for  Corpus  Christ!  Day. 

P.  172, 1.  15. — Entermeten  hem  of  louedaies,  holdynge  wi\  forsof  armes. 

A  love-day  was  a  day  appointed  for  settling  differences  by  arbitration  or 
amicable  arrangement.  Doubtless  it  was  often  useful  in  avoiding 
quarrels  and  litigation,  especially  among  equals,  but  its  comparative 
informality  made  it  the  more  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  a  powerful 
oppressor  (compare  pp.  234,  243,  245).  We  get  a  similar  -view  of 
the  custom  in  the  Vision  of  Piers  Plowman  (B.  x.  19) : 

“  Who  can  contreue  deceytes  an  conspire  wronges. 

And  lede  forth  a  loueday  to  latte  with  treuthe  ; 

He  lat  such  craftes  can  to  conseille  is  clepid.” 

P.  173,  1.  19. — pa  hi]en  faste  to  he  prestis  mo  ^an  hen  nedful  for  \e 
peple. 

“  Evidens  quidem  est  quod  clerus  per  talem  copiam  temporalium 
peccat  in  quantitate  et  qualitate,  contrarius  voluntati  domini  jesu 
christi.  In  quantitate  quidem  quo  ad  numerum  proporcionalem 
aliis  partibus  ecclesie  militantis.  Evidens  quidem  est  quod  talis  mun- 


NOTES. 


513 


dana  prosperitas  facit  clerum  in  numero  superfluo  appetere  istum 
statum.” — Speculum  Militantis  Ecclesie,  cap.  29  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If. 
118$). 

P.  177,  chapter  24. — It  should  be  remembered  that,  when  these  tracts 
were  written,  chantries  had  come  to  be  the  commonest  form  of  religious 
foundation.  One  order  after  another  had  fallen  away  from  the  ideal 
aimed  at  in  its  foundation,  till  people  had  almost  ceased  to  look  upon 
monks  and  even  friars  as  good  men  whom  it  was  meritorious  to  help. 
In  endowing  chantry  priests,  they  hoped  to  get  prayers  in  return  for 
their  money,  and  the  formal  religion  of  the  day  looked  upon  this  as  the 
safest  religious  investment. 

P.  177,  1.  4  from  bottom. — Discencion  ^  werris  ^  pestilencis. 

We  fear  this  allusion  will  not  help  us  much  with  the  date  of  the 
tract.  According  to  Walsingham  there  were,  besides  the  Black 
Death,  of  1348,  plagues  in  1361,  1375,  and  in  the  north,  of  England 
in  1379. 

P.  181,  1.  12. — ])ei  ivohn  amivere  for  men  at  domes  day. 

So  the  Minorite  promises  in  Pierce  the  Ploughman’s  Crede  (123-132)  : 

“  And  myjtestou  amenden  us  wi]?  money  of  Jiyn  owne, 
poll  cliuldest  cnely  bifore  Christ  in  compas  of  gold 
In  wide  windowe  westwarde  wel  nije  in  the  myddell. 

And  seynt  Fraimces  himself  schall  folden  the  in  his  cope 
And  presente  the  to  the  trynitie  &  praie  for  thy  sinnes. 


poll}  ton  conne  noujt  )>i  Crede  Kare  j^ou  no  more. 

I  schal  asoilen  ^e,  syre,  &  setten  it  on  my  soule.” 

P.  181,  1.  21. — Jubilees  \at  we  reden  not  of,  of  hyngis  ne  emperouris. 

A  jubilee  was  celebrated  when  a  monk  or  friar  had  completed  the 
fiftieth  year  of  his  profession.  The  order  for  the  ceremony  is  quoted  from 
the  Carmelite  constitutions  in  Ducange,  s.v.  “  Jubileus.”  TheJubileus 
was  excused  from  many  requirements  of  the  rule. 

P.  182,  1.  22. — ])ei  wole  maize  many  doseyns  to  forsioeren  hem. 

The  ‘‘doseyns”  are,  of  course  jurors,  whose  corruption  was  one 
of  the  great  difficulties  in  the  way  of  securing  even-handed  justice. 
In  1364  it  was  enacted  that  any  juror  taking  money  for  his  verdict 
should  be  fined  ten  times  the  amount  of  the  sum  in  question  (Hot. 
Pari.  ii.  288  «) ;  but  the  severity  of  the  punishment  does  not  seem  to  have 
put  an  end  to  the  offence.  A  petition  of  1382  shows  how  juries  could 
be  used  for  extortion  and  oppression,  and  although  much  may  be  laid 
to  the  opportunities  given  by  the  troubles  of  the  previous  year,  we 
cannot  doubt  that  abuses  were  always  frequent.  Compare  the  Coke’s 
Tale  of  Gamelyn,  1.  785 — 

“  For  he  was  fast  about,  bothe  day  and  other, 

For  to  hyre  the  quest  to  hangen  his  brother.” 

It  is  only  fair  to  the  jurors  to  remember  that  they  sometimes  suffered 
from  the  spite  of  the  party  who  thought  himself  aggrieved,  and  that  it 


33 


514 


NOTES. 


was  dangerous  to  give  a  verdict  against  a  powerful  suitor,  altliougli  not 
many  could,  like  Gamelyn,  hang  the  unjust  “sisours.” 

P.  183,  1.  18. — Forsweren  hem  wittynghj  for  here  dyner  a  nolle. 

The  noble  was  half  a  mark,  or  six  shillings  and  eightpence.  As  the 
shilling  then  contained  216  grs.,  it  would  be  worth  about  fifteen 
shillings  and  sixpence  of  our  present  coinage.  Weight  for  weight,  its 
purchasing  power  was  greater  than  now,  but  it  is  hard  to  fix  a  standard 
by  which  to  reckon  this.  Mr.  Seebohra,  measuring  it  by  the  price  of 
wheat,  says  four  times,  which  would  make  the  juryman’s  fee  for 
perjury  about  £3,  besides  the  dinner.  See  an  article  by  Mr.  Seebohm 
in  the  Fortnightly  He  view,  February,  1870. 

P.  184,  1.  5! — Abuses  of  Consistory  {or  FcclesiasticaT)  Courts. 

The  ecclesiastical  courts,  which  were  very  numerous,  determined  all 
causes  matrimonial  and  testamentary.  “  There  were  other  minor  suits 
for  wrongs  for  which  the  temporal  courts  afibrded  no  remedy,  such  as 
slander  in  cases  where  the  evil  report  did  not  cause  material  loss  to  the 
person  slandered.” — Stubbs’  Const.  Hist.  hi.  345.  They  had  besides 
to  enforce  the  payment  of  tithes  and  church  dues,  and  were  charged 
with  disciplinary  power  for  punishment  of  adultery,  fornication, 
perjury,  and  other  vices  which  did  not  come  under  the  common  law. 
The  reputation  of  the  ‘‘ summoner  ”  is  enough  to  show  how  abuses 
pervaded  the  action  of  these  courts.  Professor  Stubbs  has  summed  up 
the  case  concerning  them  in  his  Const.  Hist.  hi.  373. 

P.  190,  1.  6  from  bottom. —  What  is  actiflife  ^  contemplatif. 

Wyclif  would  not  allow  that  the  life  of  the  cloister  had  any  special 
claim  to  he  called  contemplative.  What  was  his  idea  of  contemplative 
life  may  be  seen  in  one  of  his  English  sermons,  Ho.  cxiv.  (S.E.W. 
i.  382).  He  insisted  that  contemplation  would  not  make  a  man  more 
slothful  in  preaching.  In  a  Latin  tract  on  Matthew  xxiv.  he  says  : 
“  Quidam  pure  viventes  secundum  legem  domini  Jesu  Christi,  qui  in 
lecto  contemplacionis  per  vices  dormiunt  et  surgunt  vivacius  spirituale 
cibarium  populo  ministrando  ”  (Ashburnham,  If.  63J).  He  goes  on  to 
say  that  those  who  fail  to  lead  such  a  life,  although  they  may  be 
hermits  or  anchorites,  will  be  damned.  Yet  in  one  tract,  and  that  a 
late  one,  he  uses  ‘‘  activi  ”  in  the  sense  of  laymen. — Purgatorium  secte 
Christi  (MS.  Ashburnham,  b2b).  I  notice  this  as  a  warning  not  to 
lay  too  much  stress  on  single  expressions,  especially  when  they  belong 
to  the  current  theology  of  his  time. 

P.  191,  1.  21. — Matynes  of  oure  lady. 

One  of  the  seven  hours  of  our  Lady  which,  according  to  the  local  use, 
were  said  with  the  canonical  hours ;  and  often  without  them. 

P.  192,  1.  26. — Sire  iacke  or  hobhe. 

Sire  is  here  the  common  title  given  to  a  priest,  as  occasionally  in 
Shakspere. 

P.  193,  last  line,  &c. — Saying  Matins  more  bindmg  than  celebration  of 
Mass. 

It  is  a  mortal  sin  to  celebrate  without  having  said  Matins  {i.e. 


NOTES. 


515 


l^octurns  and  Lauds).  A  constitution  of  Archbishop  Reynolds  says  : 
“Nullus  Sacerdos  parochialis  prcesumat  Missam  celebrare  antequarn 
Matutinale  persolverit  officium,  et  primutn  et  tertiam  de  die. — Lynd- 
woode,  lib.  hi.,  tit.  23.  The  object  of  such  rules  was,  no  doubt,  to 
insure  that  the  celebrating  priest  should  be  duly  prepared  for  his 
functions,  but  one  result  of  them  was,  as  noticed  in  the  text,  to  make 
the  saying  of  hours  more  binding  than  celebration,  since  to  say  the 
“hours”  was  binding  on  every  priest. 

P.  194,  1.  6. — A.ntifeners: 

Antiphonarium,  a  book  containing  the  Antiphons  or  Anthems.  “ISTota 
quod  tale  Antiphonarium  non  solum  continebit  in  se  Antiphonas  .  .  . 
sed  etiam  Invitatoria,  Hymnos,  Responsoria,  Yersus,  Collectas,  Capitula 
et  alia  quae  pertinent  ad  decantationem  Horarum  Canonicarum.” — Lynd- 
woode,  lib.  iii.  tit.  27. 

P.  194,  1.  6. —  Graielis. 

“  Stricte  ponitur  Gradale  pro  eo  qiiod  gradatim  cantatur  post  epis- 
tolam ;  hie  tamen  ponitur  pro  libro  integro  in  quo  contineri  debent 
Officium  aspersionis  aquae  benedictae,  Missarum  inchoationes  sive 
Officia ;  Kyrie  cum  versibus  Gloria  in  Excelsis,  Gradalia,  Halleluja,  et 
Tractus  Sequentiae,  Symbolum  cantandum  in  Missa  Offertoria,  Sanctus, 
Agnus,  Comrnunio,  &c.,  quae  ad  Chorum  spectaut  in  Missae  solennis 
decantatione.” — Ibid. 

P.  198,  1.  2  from  bottom. — For  alle  arigelis  men  ^  ivommen  ]iat 
schullm  he  sauyd  hen  goddin  hyngdom  ^  holy  chirche. 

This  tenet,  that  the  true  Church  consists  only  of  the  predestinate,  is 
often  insisted  on  by  Wyclif.  It  is  found  also  in  the  parallel  passage  in 
the  tract  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold  :  “Alle  lylke  ]7at  schullej7  be  in  blysse 
after  ]7e  dome  rvjtwysliche  may  be  cleped  holy  ehurclie.” — S.E.YL  iii. 
101. 

P.  199,  1.  16 — Coyifermed. 

Probably  a  mistake  of  the  scribe  for  “conformed,”  although  “  con- 
fermed”  may  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  firmly  united. 

P.  204,  1.  14. — ]){s  addynge  to  is  trewe. 

Contrast  on  this  point  the  tract  printed  by  Mr.  Arnold,  S.E.\Y.  iii. 
112:  “  But  for  it  is  hard  [to]  men  to  grounde  hem  [leeue  to  add  ]7us], 
sij’l’e,”  &c.  I  quote  thus  far,  as  Mr.  Arnold’s  text  is  defective;  the 
words  in  brackets  are  supplied  from  the  Dublin  MS.  C.C. 

P.  205,  1.  4  from  bottom. — For  whanne  wymmen  hen  turnyd,  ^c. 

“  Sicut  enim  femina  ad  bonum  dedita  est  specialiter  ecclesie  juvativa, 
quia  organum  domini  in  maria  et  aliis  sibi  in  virtute  similibus ;  sic 
femina  seducta  cautelis  diaboli  superat  in  malicia  multos  viros,  cum  sit 
speciale  rethe  diaboli.” — Sermons,  Part  II.  22  (T.C.C.  202J). 

P.  206,  1.  7. — He  \at  han  hest  pleie  a  pagyn  of])e  deuyl. 

I  think  this  must  refer  to  miracle-plays,  in  which  the  devil  was 
usually  the  leading  comic  part.  Grossetete,  in  a  circular  to  his  arch¬ 
deacons,  complains  that  the  clergy  sometimes  take  part  in  such  plays  : 
“  Faciunt  etiara,  ut  audivimus,clerici  ludos  quos  vocant  miracula,”  and  he 


516 


NOTES. 


desires  that  they  may  be  put  a  stop  to  :  “  Miracula  etiam  et  liidos  supra 
nominatos  et  scotales,  quod  est  in  vestra  potestate  facili,  omnino  exter- 
minetis.” — Eoberti  Grossetete  Epistolse,  ed.  H.  E.  Luard,  Letter  cvii. 

P.  206,  1.  23. — pe  roten  hody^  \at  is  ivormes  mete  ^  a  sah  of  drit. 

“  Cogitaremus  itaque  quod  femina  qiiam  sic  tangimus  est,  nedum  pro 
tempore  suo  horrendum  cadaver  putridum,  sed  in  presenti,  secundum 
regionem  nutriciara  intuita,  saccus  stercorum.”-— De  Mandatis  Divinis, 
cap.  29  (MS.  Univ.  Camb.,  LI.  5,  13).  The  same  idea  recurs,  S.E.W. 
hi.  p.  125. 

P.  207,  1.  3  from  bottom. — Seynt  steuene  was  ful  of  grace. 

Our  A. y.  has  “  full  of  faith,”  but  the  Vulgate  “  plenus  gratia  et 
fortitudine.” 

P.  208.  1.  3. —  God  \e  trinyte  is  wi^  eche  creature  li  my^t,  wisdom  ^ 
goodntsse  to  kepe  it. 

AVyclif’s  doctrine  on  this  point  is  explained  in  Trialogus,  book  ii. 
chap.  xi.  :  “  Certum  est  quod  necessario  Leus  conservet  locum  quem- 
libet  et  quamlibet  creaturam,  et  non  conservat  per  potentiam  ab  eo 
distinctam  [or  distantem]  :  nec  potest  vicissim.  adesse  et  deesse  suae 
fabricae.  Ideo  necessario  est  ubique.  .  .  .  .  ,  Deus  necessario 
secundum  totam  suam  essentiam  perpetuo  est  ubique.  .  .  .  Ideo 
Deus  habet  unura  modum  excellentem  et  proprium,  quo  essentialiter  est 
ubique.  Et  cum  in  Deo  sit  virtus  atque  potentia,  quae  realiter  est 
divina  essentia,  patet  quod  Deus  virtualiter  et  potentialiter  est  ubique.” 
— (Ed.  Lechler,  p.  113.)  It  is  probably  this  doctrine  which  led  to  the 
charge  against  "VVyclif  of  holding  “  quod  Christus  est  vilissima  creatura, 
cum  sit  ipsa  materia  prima,”— r-Easc.  Ziz.  p.  2. 

P.  211,  1.  7. — Trentalis. 

A  Trental  is  an  otfi.ce  of  30  masses  to  be  said  on  so  many  successive 
days  for  the  dead.  It  also  means  the  offering  made  on  consideration 
of  such  masses.  Special  observances  were  usual  on  the  30th  day 
from  the  death.  In  the  Academy  of  October  18th,  1879,  Mr.  Peacock 
printed  the  will  of  Sir  Thomas  Cumberworth  (A.n.  1450),  which  gives 
us  a  good  example  of  the  way  in  which  money  was  distiibuted  on  such 
occasions:  “I  will  the  interment  be  made  at  my  xxx  day  &  the 
abbot  of  Thorneton  do  the  masse  derige  &  the  exquies  &  have  xxs  & 
the  vs  iiij*^  that  he  ows  me  aforesaid  &  I  wil  the  abbot  of  J^eusom  & 
the  abbot  of  Welhow  yf  thay  both  come  to  my  xxx  day  haf  ather  of 
tham  xiis  iiij'^  and  ilke  prior  &  prioris  that  comes  to  the  xxx  day  hafe 
vis  viij^  and  ilke  chanon  or  none  that  comes  to  the  said  xxx  day  have 
xx*^  &  ilke  prest  &  'frere  that  comes  that  day  to  deryge  &  masse  hafe 
iiij*^.”  Purther,  two  priests  are  to  sing  at  the  altar  where  his  wife  and 
father  and  mother  are  buried,  “  &  that  ilken  of  tham  haf  C®  to  say  the 
Trentall  for  hus  in  all  the  hast  that  may  be  getyn  thereto.”  So 
universal  was  the  custom  of  having  a  trental  said  for  the  dead,  that 
we  may  notice  in  the  Poor  Men’s  Gild  of  Norwich  an  order,  “  ]?at 
any  bro]?er  or  sister  of  ]7is  gilde  deye  vii  mile  abouten  j^e  Cite,  or  wilh- 
innen  the  cite,  alle  fe  bretherinand  sistrin  shullen  ben  at  ]7en  enteryng 


NOTES. 


517 


of  ]7e  dede  corps,  and  offerin  at  his  messe,  and  ^euen  xxx*^  for  xxx 
messes  singing  for  ]7eson.le,  and  foralle  cristen  soules.” — English  Gilds, 
E.E.T.S.  No.  40,  p.  41.  In  the  Sarum  Missal  the  Missa  pro  defunctis 
has  a  special  prayer,  secret,  and  post-communion  for  the  30th  day. — 
Sarum  Breviary,  ed.  Proctor  and  Wordsworth,  ii.  529.  It  seems  that 
sometimes  the  30  masses  were  all  said  on  one  day.  In  the  ordinance 
for  the  gild  of  St.  Katherine,  Aldersgate,  the  wardens  are  to  summon 
the  friars  to  say  the  dirge,  “  and  on  ]?e  morwe  to  seie  a  treat  of  masses 
at  same  freres.” — Id.  p.  8. 

P.  212,  1.  5. —  Whanne  riche  men  hen  dede  wi\  dirige,  ^c. 

“  Why  covet  you  not  to  burie 
poor  folk  among  you 
sith  that  they  been  most  holy 
as  ye  saine  that  ye  hen  for  your  povertie  ? 

Why  will  ye  not  be  at  her  diriges 
as  ye  have  been  at  rich  mens, 
sith  God  praiseth  hem  more 
than  he  doth  other  men  ? 

Jacke  Upland,  Wright's  Political  Foems,  ii.  22. 

Our  last  note  supplies  a  good  answer  to  Jacke’s  questions. 

P.  212,  1.  10. — Stryuen  ^  Ji)tten  for\e  dede  eareyne. 

Any  one  who  wishes  to  see  a  lively  description  of  such  a  struggle  will 
do  well  to  turn  to  Erasmus’  colloquy,  Funus. 

P.  213,  1.  6  from  bottom. — Liynge,  probably  for  lei]ynge=^'\oM^\- 
mg.’ 

P.  213,  1.  3  from  bottom. — 'pat  longe\  to  iurdiccion  of  prelatis. 

Eornication  and  adultery  were  cognizable  only  by  the  ecclesiastical 
courts,  and  the  bishops  resented  any  lay  attempts  at  repressing  these 
vices.  Such  attempts  seem  to  have  been  made  occasionally.  I  have 
already  (note  to  ]3.  35)  mentioned  one  on  the  part  of  the  London 
citizens,  related  with  much  indignation  by  Walsingham.  About 
the  same  time,  Aug.  3,  1382,  I  find  a  monition  against  the  hallivi 
of  Canterbury,  who  have  presumed  to  try  adulteries,  etc.,  “  inqui- 
rentes  cognoscentes  et  judicantes,  penas  bannicionis  et  alia  deformia  et 
noviter  adinventa  supplicia  pro  hujusmodi  criminibus  auctoritate  sua 
propria  imponent”  (Lambeth  Begisters).  Banishment  must  have  been 
a  most  objectionable  punishment  in  the  eyes  of  the  ecclesiastical 
officials,  since  it  dried  up  the  sources  of  revenue. 

P.  218,  1.  14. — Fleynge  fro  suche  company e  ^  ahstynence  ^  saad 
traueile  is  lest  medecyne  a^enst  lecherie, 

“  Et  ad  hoc  valet  ista  medecina  triplex  precipue ;  circumspecta 
corporis  maceracio,  loci  et  persone  cum  qua  peccaretur  declinacio,  et 
omnino  tocius  virtutis  cognitiue  assidua  et  sancta  occupacio.” — De 
Mandatis  Divinis,  c.  29  (MS.  IJniv.  Camb.,  LI.  5.  13). 

P.  220,  1.  13. — Sixtene  condicions  of  char ite. 

The  notes  of  charity  given  by  the  Apostle  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  may  be 
counted  as  sixteen,  and  are  so  enumerated  in  the  tract  on  Eaith,  Hope, 
and  Charity,  p.  353. 


518 


NOTES. 


P.  223,  1.  6. — \iat  \ei  approprien  not  parische  chirchis. 

This  is  not  the  only  place  where  Wyclif  notices  that  appropriations 
prevent  the  material  repair  of  the  church,  as  well  as  the  pastoral  care 
of  the  parish  :  ‘‘  Alii  autem  attendentes  ad  seculum  horrent  quod  iste 
basilice  appropriate  tantum  deficiunt  in  tectis  et  ceteris  ornamentis. 
Bed  infinitum  gravior  horror  est  quod  populus  ille,  tanquam  desertus  a 
domino,  deficit  in  spirituali  pastore  qui  ipsum  duceret  ad  beatitudinem 
secundum  regulas  legis  Christi.” — DeHova  Prevaricancia  Mandatorum, 
cap.  5  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  93J). 

P.  224, 1.  10.  aS?]?  role'rt  grosted  clepi'^  siche  exempcion  fo  deuelis  neitis. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  this  expression,  but  in  his  sermon 
preached  before  the  Pope,  Grossetete  denounces  the  evil  of  exemptions. 

Sic  ligantur  pastores,”  he  says,  “  quod  lupis  in  gregem  grassantibus 
nec  ad  modicum  possint  occurrere.” — -Brown’s  Eascic.  ii.  255. 

P.  224,  1.  12. —  it  is  a  grete  sentence  of  '^e  chirche  '^at  who  euere 
do])  a]enst  \e  rifful  wille  of  a  dede  man  is  cursed.  See  note  to  p.  48,  line 
13. 

P.  224,  1.  23. — Mortuaries. 

These  were  fines  or  dues  payable  to  the  parson  or  vicar  of  the  church 
where  a  man  was  buried.  The  religious  in  burying  rich  men  naturally 
caused  quarrels  as  to  the  payment  of  mortuaries.  These  dues  were 
sometimes  of  considerable  amount.  Thus  in  one  case  we  find  the  prior 
of  "VYenlock  claiming  one-third  of  all  the  deceased  possessed  at  the  time 
of  his  death,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  diocese  of  Hereford. — Pot. 
Pari.  ii.  38.  In  another  case  the  chaplains  of  a  free  royal  chapel 
complain  that  the  Chapter  of  Lichfield  have  opened  a  chapel  and  ceme¬ 
tery,  and  taken  away  their  mortuaries.- — Pot.  Pari.  ii.  77. 

P.  224,  1.  8  from  bottom. — schame  of  grete  synneris  pf  \ei  were 
schryue  at  here  owene  curatis. 

EitzPalph,  in  his  Hefensorium  Curatorum,  insists  strongly  on  the  evil 
of  confessing  to  friars,  and  gives  this  among  many  reasons:  “  Quod  in 
confessione  ordinario  facta,  est  erubescentia  amplior  quam  cum  confessio 
est  fratri  facta.”  Of  the  extent  to  which  friars  heard  confessions,  he 
says,  “  Ego  enim  in  mea  dioecesi  (ut  puto)  habeo  dua  millia  subditorum 
qui  singulis  annis  propter  sententias  excommunicationis  latas  contra 
homicidas  voluntaries,  fures  publicos,  incendiaries  et  istis  consimiles 
sunt  excommunicationis  sententiis  involuti,  de  quibus  vix  veniunt  ad 
me  seu  paenitentiarios  meos  quadraginta  in  anno  ;  et  recipiunt  sacramenta 
omnes  tales  ut  caeteri,  &  absolvuntur  vel  absoluti  dicuntur,  nec  per  alios 
quam  per  fratres  ”  (Ease.  Perum.  Expet.  ii.  68).  It  is  to  a  friar  that 
Mede  comes  for  confession  in  Piers  Plowman,  B.  text,  iii.  35. 

P.  224,  1.  2  from  bottom. — To  homly  wi]  gentil  wymmen. 

Compare  a  passage  in  the  tract  On  the  Leaven  of  Pharisees,  p.  10. 

P.  227,  line  5  from  bottom. — 'pe  fend  moue\  summe  men,  etc. 

This  should  be  compared  with  the  tract  Be  Sex  Jugis,  printed  in  Dr. 
Lechler’s  Appendix,  in  which  Wyclif  insists  strongly  on  the  duty  of 
obedience  to  masters,  even  when  tyrannical. — Lechler,  ii.  601. 


NOTES. 


519 


P.  228,  1.  15. —  Weilynge  or  languyschynge. 

In  our  A.Y.  doting,  but  in  Yulgate  languens  circa  questiones.” 

P.  229,  1.  9. — Pore  prestis  .  .  .  charge  seruauntis  to  le  suget  pouj 
lordis  hi  tirauntis. 

“  Homines  sic  tractati  civiliter,  quantumcunque  in  donis  Dei 
gratuitis  et  gracia  Christi  resplendeant,  debent  humiliter  injurias  istas 
pati  :  et  per  passiones  huj  usinodi  debent  communiter  plus  merer!  quam 
in  aliis  officiis  nunc  laudatis.  Sic  enim  meruerunt  Christi  martires 
paciendo  et  sic  docet  Petrus  dominis,  et  discolis,  subici  paciendo.” — De 
Servitute  Civil!  et  Dominio  Seculari,  c.  3  (MS.  Ashburaham,  If.  86). 

P.  231,  1.  25. —  Come  and  reproue  him. 

“  Seke  ^e  doom,  helpe  ^e  bym  that  is  oppressid,  deme  ^e  to  the  fadir- 
les  and  modirles  child,  defende  je  a  widewe.  And  come  ^e  and  repreue 
^e  me,  saith  the  Lord.” — Later  Wyclijite  Version.  “  Et  venite  et 
arguite  me.” — Vulgate. 

P.  231,  1.  27. — Mercy  and  trewpe  kept  of  kyngis. 

There  is  something  wrong  with  the  text  here.  The  Yulgate  has  : 
Misericordia  et  veritas  custodiunt  regem  \  and  the  W.Y.  “Mercy  and 
treuthe  kepen  the  king.” 

P.  233,  last  line. — Paien  not  perfore  hut  white  stickis. 

There  was  often  a  difficulty  in  getting  tallies  cashed.  In  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  1376  Lord  Nevill  was  impeached  for  buying  up  tallies  of 
assignments  made  by  the  king  to  various  persons.  These  he  had  got 
full  payment  for,  while  paying  little  or  nothing  to  their  owners.  He 
was  said  to  have  made  £300  in  this  way.  Two  persons  are  mentioned 
as  having  been  thus  defrauded — the  Lady  de  Pavensholme,  and 
Reynold  Love,  a  merchant  of  London  (Rot.  Pari.  iii.  328).  When 
persons  such  as  these  rated  tallies  so  low,  it  may  be  guessed  what  was 
their  value  to  poor  country  people,  whose  goods  had  been  taken  by 
purveyors.  Cf.  God  Spede  the  Plough  (appended  to  Mr.  Skeat’s 
ed.  of  Pierce  the  Ploughman’s  Crede) : 

The  Kyngis  purviours  also  they  come, 

To  have  whete  and  otys  at  the  Kyngis  nede  ; 

And  over  that’hefe  and  Mutton, 

And  butter  and  pulleyn,  so  god  me  spede  ! 

And  to  the  kyngis  courte  we  moste  it  lede, 

And  our  payment  shal  be  a  styk  of  a  bough  ; 

And  yet  we  most  speke  faire  for  drede — 

I  praye  to  God,  spede  wele  the  plough. 

P.  234,  1.  10. — But  rapere  wypholden  pore  men  here  hire. 

“In  lege  antiqua  Levitici  19“°-  dicitur  ^  Ron  morabitur  opus  merce- 
narii  tui  aput  te  usque  mane.’  Quaravis  autem  istud  exponatur 
communiter  quod  post  completionem  laboris  opus  mercenarii  non  debet 
remanere  per  tempus  culpabile  tenebrosum,  tamen  assistente  indigentia 
mercenarii  debet  merces  retribui  in  completione  laboris.  .  .  Rovit 
mundus  quantum  injuste  multi  mercenarii  sunt  tractati  nunc,  labores 
indebitos  ex  diurnitate  temporis,  ex  qualitate  operis,  et  ex  aliis  circum- 
stantiis  exigendo.” — Erom  tract  De  Sex  Jugis  (Lechler,  ii.  598). 


520 


NOTES. 


P.  234,  1.  27. — Lordis  stryuen  mp  here  tenauntis  to  brynge  hem  in 
\raldom. 

Among  the  petitions  presented  in  the  first  Parliament  of  Richard  11. 
is  one  complaining  that  the  villeins  and  tenants  get  copies  of  Domesday 
hook  which  they  use  to  assert  their  freedom.  Coming  from  the  land¬ 
lords,  this  petition  declares  this  action  to  be  wrongful,  and  attributes  it 
to  certain  agitating  counsellors,  who  misinterpret  the  document. 
Things  had  got  so  bad  already  (in  1377)  that  the  peasantry  helped 
each  other  to  resist  distraint. — Rolls  of  Parliament,  iii.  213. 

P.  240,  1.  22. — Lay  correction  of  clerics. 

“  Mover!  potest  ulterius  si  secularis  populus  debet  de  prelato  hujus- 
modi  judicare,  nam  sic  liceret  ipsum  deponere  et  decimas  et  oblaciones 
suas  subtrahere ;  sed  tunc  forent  forus  ecclesiasticus  et  seculare 
judicium  commixta  ad  invicem  et  confusa,  et  contra  istud  militant 
multe  leges.  Sed  hie  videtur  multis  quod  rex,  cujus  interest  pacificare 
rempublicam,  debet  impedire  adulteria,  furta  et  alia  crimina,  sed  speci- 
aliter  in  prelatis,  cum  ipsa  precipue  perturbant  rempublicam,  et  patet 
exemplum  3  Regum  2  de  Salamone.” — De  Sermone  Domini  in  Monte, 
chap.  32  (MS.  T.C.C.  393c). 

P.  241,  1.  29. — PauVs  appeal  to  Ccesar. 

“  Quomodo  igitur  renueret  papa  vel  prelatus  aliquis  judicari  per 
judicem  secularem,  cum  vas  eleccionis,  instar  magistri  sui  Chiisti 
judicari  sic  eligentis,  appetit  se  taliter  judicari.” — De  Sermone  Domini 
in  Monte,  c.  32  (MS.  T.C.C.  3933). 

P.  242,  1.  4  from  bottom. — A  market  betere. 

The  presence  of  priests  at  markets  seems  to  have  been  a  scandal. 
John  Myrc,  in  his  “instructions  to  Parish  Priests,”  says — 

“  Markets  and  f eyres  I  the  forbede 
But  byt  be  for  the  more  nede.” 

E.E.T.S.  No.  31,  p.  2. 

Market  betere  is  usually  explained  as  a  swaggerer,  but  it  seems  here  to 
be  used  only  in  the  sense  of  a  frequenter  of  markets.  Compare  beten 
marketis,  p.  172. 

P.  243,  1.  21. — Lords  meyntenen  .  .  extorsioneris,  robberies,  ^  reuers. 

The  habit  of  keeping  bands  of  violent  and  disorderly  retainers,  by 
liveries  and  other  gifts,  to  maintain  their  patrons’  quarrels,  was  common 
among  the  great  people  of  the  time.  Statutes  and  petitions  in  Parliament 
were  useless  against  it.  In  one  petition  the  Commons  say — “  qar  si  les 
Meintenances  des  Grantz  soient  tollez  les  faux  felons  &  malveys  serront 
puniz  &  les  Leyes  et  la  Pees  meyntenuz  ”  (Rot.  Pari.  ii.  165).  The 
disorder  did  not  diminish  in  the  first  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  as 
the  Paston  Letters  show  very  clearly,  and  it  was  reserved  for  the 
strong  hand  of  the  Tudors  to  put  down  the  abuse. 

P.  246,  1.  15. —  Or  wis  ofbildynge  of  castelis. 

This  has  often  been  supposed  to  allude  to  William  of  Wykeham,  but 
it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  it  has  any  personal  reference. 


NOTES. 


521 


P.  271,  1.  6. — \ridde  heresie  \at  may  hoold  of  olde  synnys. 

Mr.  Heritage  suggests  that  for  ‘‘  may  ”  we  should  read  “  many.”  I 
am  rather  inclined  to  take  the  reading  of  A.  A..,  co  recting  “  ma|»  ”  to 
“makij?” — “  ]7at  makij?  hoord  of  olde  synnys.”  Cf.  p.  476,  1.  25 — 
“  Abbe)' s  &  collegies  ben  hordis  of  synne.” 

P.  277,  1.  17. — Fees  for  proving  wills. 

Compare  the  petition  of  the  Commons — “  que  y  puisse  estre  declare 
en  cest  Parlement  de  certein  combien  les  Curatours  prendront  pur 
proeve  de  chescun  Testament  et  pur  I’acquitance  d’ycels,  car  ils  preig- 
nent  au  present  tres  grantz  fyns  &  extorcions  pur  ycels,  a  grant  damage 
du  poeple”  (Rot.  Pari.  i.  Ric.  1.  vol.  iii.  p.  253). 

P.  277,  1.  22. — This  proposal  for  lending  freely  to  poor  men  sounds 
revolutionary ;  but,  as  no  means  are  proposed  for  carrying  it  out,  we 
may  take  it  to  be  only  the  expression  of  a  pious  wish  for  the  extirpa¬ 
tion  of  a  practice  which  every  one  thought  sinful.  In  1376  the 
Commons  petitioned  for  more  repressive  laws  against  usury — “  Come 
Torrible  vice  de  I’usure  soit  taunt  espaundu  &  usee  parmy  la  terre,  que 
la  vertu  de  charite,  sanz  quele  nul  puist  estre  sauve,  est  bien  pres  tote 
perdue  ”  (Rot.  Pari.  ii.  3503).  It  may  be  worth  while  to  quote 
Wyclif’s  words  as  to  the  wickedness  of  usury :  “  Usura  autem  videtur 
habere  istam  blasfemam  maliciam  quod  usurarius  vendit  tempus,  quod 
dare  est  deo  propriurn  ;  et  postposita  spe  misericordie  et  retribucionis 
divine  propter  hoc  quod  gracia  bonitatis  sue  adjuvat  fratrem  suum, 
feneratur  ista  temporalia  principaliter  pro  spe  lucri ;  et  quia  iste  sic 
postponit  divinam  ordinanciam,  usura  racionabiliter  inter  peccata 
maxima  est  damnata.” — De  Sermone  Domini  in  Monte,  cap.  58  (MS. 
T.C.C.  3773).  Cf.  S.E.W.  iii.  154,  where  there  is  a  long  piece  on 
usury  in  a  tract  which  is  almost  certainly  Wyclif’s. 

P.  278,  at  bottom. — Amortisemeni  hy  mean  hands. 

One  of  the  petitions  in  the  first  Parliament  of  Richard  II.  is  directed 
against  this  practice.  I  quote  it  for  comparison  with  the  point  in  the 
text — “Pur  ceo  que  les  Religiouses  purchacent  terre,  et  fount  autres 
de  ceo  estre  enfefiez  et  les  ditz  Religiouses  pernantz  les  profitz. 
Et  auxi  terre  lour  est  done  &  autres  persones  enfeflPez  d’icelles  et  les 
ditz  Religiouses  de  ce  pernont  les  profiles.  Q’en  celle  cas  &  en  touz 
autres  que  purront  estre  ymaginez,  q’ils  puissent  estre  ajugez  en  cas 
d’Estatutz  de  Religious’  entfaitz,  &  que  la  Roi  et  autres  Seigneurs  eient 
I’avantage  en  celle  cas  come  est  ordeigne  en  le  dit  Estatut.” — Rot.  Pari, 
iii.  I9a.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  petition  was  presented  also  in  the 
last  Parliament  of  Edward  III. 

P.  279,  1.  14. — pe  wast  tresour  hanged  on  stoclcis  ^  stones. 

“  Unde  ad  honorem  foret  sanctorum  et  utilitatem  ecclesie,  quod 
distributa  forent  pauperibus  jocalla  sepulcrorurn  quibus  stulte 
ac  eciam  inaniter  sunt  ornata. — Sermons,  part  ii.  No.  k2  (MS. 
T.C.C.). 

P.  285,  1.  24. — pei  hen  nedid  to  spoyle  here  tenauntis. 

“  Magnates  ^depauperant  ac  ipsos  necessitant  ad  pauperes  sues 


522 


NOTES. 


tenentes  et  subclitos  insuetis  tallagiis  onerandam.” — Purgatorium  Secte 
Christi  (MS.  Ashburnham,  50). 

P.  286,  1.  3. — JS'o  man  reuersi\  God. 

‘ ‘  E-eyersij?  ”  here  is  used  (or  miswritten)  for  resisteth.”  The 
Yulg.  is  quis  restitit  ei  et  pacem  haluit?  The  reference  should  be  to 
Job  ix.  4. 

P.  286,  1.  14. — ])at  mald\  a  man  seruaunt  to  nou^t. 

This  has  reference  to  the  doctrine  which  Wyclif  had  learned  from 
Augustine  (see  Ease.  Ziz.  liv),  that  evil  has  no  substantive  existence, 
but  is  simply  the  absence  of  good,  as  darkness  is  the  absence  of  light.” 
Thus,  he  says  in  the  Trialogus  (i.  9)  that  sin  has  no  Adea,’ — “  sed 
homo  cognoscendo  creaturam  peccabilem  et  quod  peccat,  sine  ydea,  hoc 
est  per  carentiam  vacuitatis  ydeae  (ut  dicit  Lincolniensis)  cognoscit 
peccatum  ”  (p.  67).  Again,  “  Sed  cum  peccati  non  sit  ydea,  nec 
peccati  productivitas  vel  produoibilitas  est  in  Deo;  oportet  concedere 
peccatum  esse  et,  adesse  vel  potius  abesse  deficere  ”  (p.  74).  See 
Lechler,  i.  509. 

P.  287,  1.  12. —  Unahleto  .  .  .  ^eue  ony  sacramentis. 

AYyclif  has  been  said  to  make  the  efficacy  of  the  Sacrament  depend 
on  the  worthiness  of  the  priest,  and  this  passage  gives  some  colour  to 
the  charge.  Put  if  we  compare  it  with  other  utterances  on  the  same 
subject,  we  shall  find  that  we  must  not  take  the  words  absolutely  in 
this  sense.  In  a  tract  ‘  De  precationibus  Sacris,’  after  reciting  the 
decrees  forbidding  attendance  at  the  mass  of  an  incontinent  priest,  he 
goes  on — ‘‘Nowe  si]?  lecherie  maki]?  priests  unable  to  .  .  .  seie 
masse  ”  (S.E.W.  hi.  225).  Here  we  have  nearly  the  same  expression 
as  in  the  text,  but  the  inability  refers  only  to  legal  disqualification,  not 
to  the  absence  of  Divine  aid  in  consecration.  In  the  same  tract  be  lays 
down  clearly  the  orthodox  doctrine:  “  a  cursed  man  do]?  fully  ]7e 
sacramentis  ]»ou^  it  be  to  his  dampnynge  ”  (p.  227).  In  the  same 
spirit  he  says  of  a  priest  who  is  not  in  grace,  nec  sine  falsitate  dicit 
verba  sacramentalia,  licet  prosint  capacibus.”  Wyclif’s  real  view 
seems  to  have  been  that  since  the  efficacy  of  the  Sacrament  depended 
on  the  assistance  of  Christ,  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  the 
faithful  would  not  be  allowed  to  suffer  for  the  unworthiness  of  the 
priest.  Still  the  priest  who  was  in  mortal  sin  was  no  true  priest,  and 
had  forfeited  all  claim  to  Christ’s  aid,  and  therefore  we  could  only 
suppose  and  hope  in  each  case  it  was  given,  without  asserting  it  as  a 
matter  of  faith.  Et  sic  visa  bostia  adoro  ipsam  conditionaliter,  et 
oranimode  deadoro  corpus  Domini  quod  est  sursum  ”  (Trial,  p.  281). 
Compare  chap.  38  of  the  tract  on  Prelates  (p.  102),  Wyclif’s  authorship 
of  which  is  too  uncertain  to  allow  us  safely  to  draw  arguments  from  it 
as  to  his  opinions.  Dr.  Lechler  has  stated  the  case  for  Wyclif’s 
orthodoxy  very  strongly,  i.  608  et  seq.  (ii.  168  of  the  English  trans¬ 
lation). 

P.  289,  1.  25. — Secular  jurisdiction  over  clerhs. 

Compare  p.  240  and  note. 


NOTES. 


523 


P.  297,  1.  1. —  Crist  louede  persones  of  hem,  as  weren  poul  and 
nychodeme. 

Cf.  Of  the  Leaven  of  Pharisees,  p.  2. 

P.  298,  1.  16. — ^nd  as  pei  seyen  freris  weren  penne  and  longe  hifore. 

Peferring  to  the  Carmelites,  who  pretended  to  a  direct  descent  from 
Elijah. 

P.  299,  1.  27. — '^oure  mahid  hirpins. 

Purthens  of  your  making.  This  curious  nse  of  the  participle  is  not 
suggested  by  the  Latin  of  the  Yulgate,  which  runs — ipsi  uno  digito 
vestro  non  tangitis  sarcinas.” 

P.  301,  1.  25. — secte  of  Macametlie,  etc. 

“  Scimus  quidem  quod  secta  saracenica  multis  fidei  nostre  articulis 
autoritate  legis  dei  consenciat,  et  multos  ritus  honestos  atque  lauda- 
biles  ultra  has  sectas  observat ;  sed  quia  in  necessariis  secundum  legem 
Christi  deficiunt  nec  autoritatem  ab  ipso  accipiunt,  ideo  sunt  infideles 
filii  diaboli  fugiendi.  Quare  igitur  non  iste  secte  que  Christi  ecclesie 
magis  nocent.” — Purgatoriwn  secte  Christi  (MS.  Ashburnham,  53J). 

P.  310,  1.  4. — Jealousies  between  the  different  orders. 

“Cum  sicut  dicunt,  ecce  hie  et  ecce  illuc  est  capud  ecclesie,  ita 
dicunt  hujus  generacionis  filii,  quod  in  ordine  meo  oportet  hominem 
salutem  consequi ;  alius  autem  quod  non,  sed  ordine  meo  oportet 
viantem  compendiosius  et  excellencius  venire  ad  patriam  ;  et  in  omnibus 
istis  postponitur  et  contempnitur  simplex  religio  Christiana.” — Sermons, 
II.  48  (MS.  T.C.C.  222(?).  For  an  amusing  picture  of  these  jealousies, 
see  Pierce  the  Ploughman’s  Crede. 

P.  310,  1.  20. — per  hen  now  many  mahid  anticristis. 

“  Et  nunc  Antichrist!  multi  fact!  sunt.” — Yulgate. 

P.  310,  1.  28. — Ilche  spirit  pat  lousip  jhesu. 

“  Omnis  spiritus  qui  solvit  Jesum.” — Yulgate. 

P.  312,  1.  24. —  Ofte  we  erren  in  entent  and  desyren  veniaunce  in 
rancour. 

This  characteristic  confession  of  Wyclif’s  fault  of  temper  should  not 
be  overlooked.  Cf.  Introduction,  p.  xlvi. 

P.  314,  1.  7. —  Wo  is  me  for  I  heelde  myn  pees, 

“  Yee  mihi,  quia  tacui !  ” — Vulgate. 

P.  314.  1.  16. — Poul  hiddip  iymothe  to  reprove,  to  preie,  ^  to  hlame. 

“Argue,  obsecra,  increpa.” — Yulgate. 

P.  316,  1.  14. — Sanctity  of  the  friar'' s  habits. 

This  common  superstition  is  several  times  mentioned  by  Wyclif. 
“  Et  tantam  vim  virtutis  ponunt  in  suis  habitibus  quod  sperant  si 
persona  aliqua,  vir  vel  femina,  moriatur  in  ipsis  non  dampnabitur  ad 
infernum.” — Purgatorium  Secte  Christi  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  515). 
And  again,  “TJnde  multe  sunt  hereses  in  tali  materia  introducte. 
Tit  quod  sint  habitus  fratrum  tarn  sacri  et  tarn  virtuosi  quod  nullus 
mortuus  in  istis  habitibus  damnabitur  ad  infernum.” — Tract  on 
Matthew  xxiii.  cap,  3  (MS.  Ashb.  If.  72).  Compare  Colloquies  of 
Erasmus :  Funus  and  Exseguice  Seraphiccc. 


524 


NOTES. 


P.  316,  1.  29. — And  \at  men  mai  see  wel  hi  grovoyng  ^  colour  of  here 
hodyd' 

Cf.  song  in  the  Appendix  to  Brewer’s  Monumenta  Pranciscana  (p. 
602) : 

‘  ‘  Men  may  se  by  their  contynaunce 
That  thai  are  men  of  grete  penannce, 

And  also  that  their  sustynaunce 
Symple  is  and  wayke. 

I  have  lyued  now  fourty  jers, 

And  fatter  men  about  the  neres 
pt  sawe  I  neuer  than  are  thes  frers, 

In  contreys  ther  thai  rayke.” 

P.  321,  1.  l.—Men  ^at  hen  wandrynge  in  \is  weye. 

Yiator  is  the  word  generally  used  by  Wyclif  in  his  Latin  works  to 
signify  man  living  on  the  earth. 

P.  321,  1,  9. — What  lif\at'plesi\moreto  god  is  hetere  preiere  to  god. 

‘‘  Cum  quelibet  res  dicit  deo  seipsam,  fidelis  operarius  suis  operibus 
deum  melius  et  ecclesie  utilius  exoraret.” — Speculum  Militantis 
Ecclesie,  cap.  29  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  109^). 

P.  321,  1.  17. — ])at  ]>ei  liuen  honestliche  in  chirche. 

“  Arguitur  enim  communiter  quod  fratres  rnultum  prosunt  ecclesise 
et  non  nocent,  cum  habent  domos  atque  ecclesias,  quibus  regna  mul- 
lipliciter  decorantur.” — Supplementum  Trialogi,  cap.  viii.  (p.  444, 
Lechler’s  ed). 

P.  322,  1.  8. — '^re  \yngis  shulden  moue  men  to  he  glad  of  sich  hyldyng. 

There  is  something  wrong  here.  Wyclif  cannot  have  put  these  three 
reasons  for  gladness  into  the  mouth  of  his  opponents,  even  in  irony ; 
W’hile  to  himself  they  would  be  causes  of  sorrow,  as  he  says  (1.  20). 

P.  327,  1.  26. — Mathew  telli\  hou  crist  confessed  to  his  fadur. 

“  Inillo  tempore  respondens  Jesus  dixit :  confiteor  tibi  Pater,  etc.” — 
Vulg. 

P.  328,  1.  5. — Side  note. 

In  the  Dublin  MS.  C.C.  this  tract  is  not  divided  into  chapters. 

P.  328,  1.  21. —  Til  Innocens  cam. 

“Duplex  est  confessio  singulariter  deo  facta  et  confessio  ex  in- 
stitucione  Innocencii  tercii  facta  proprio  sacerdoti.  Prima  est  dignior, 
fundabilior  et  necessarior  quam  secunda,  quia  de  prima  confessione  et 
penitencia  loquitur  scriptura  generaliter  et  nusquam  de  secunda  ;  immo 
videtur  multis,  cum  ecclesia  melius  militavit  per  mille  annos  et 
amplius  sine  ilia.” — Sermons,  Part  iv.  Ser.  6  (MS.  T.C.C.  296c). 
Confession  was  first  made  of  general  obligation  in  the  4th  Lateran 
Council  under  Innocent  III. 

P.  329,  1.  3. — Mahers  of\is  lawe  weren  so  marrid,  etc. 

“  Sed  gramadici  [sic]  cum  adjutorio  logicorum  impugnanthanc  legem, 
dicentes  quod  solum  pro  ermofroditis  de  virtute  vocabuli  fuit  facta.” 
De  contrarietate  duorum  Dominorum,  cap.  6  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  46^). 

The  bull  runs  “  Omnis  utriusque  sexus.” 


NOTES. 


525 


P.  331,  1.  14. — Propur  prestus  hen  vnahle. 

The  exaggeration  of  difficulties  here  is  rather  extravagant.  The 
proper  priest  was  as  a  rule  the  curate  of  the  parish,  but  there  were 
many  cases  in  which  the  penitent  might  choose  another  confessor,  e.g. 
if  the  priest  were  indiscreet,  a  babbler,  or  in  any  way  personally 
affected  by  the  sin  to  be  confessed  (see  Myrc’s  Instructions  for 
Parish  Priests,  line  824  et  seq.).  The  real  mischief  seems  rather  to  have 
been  in  the  multitude  of  licensed  confessors,  friars  and  others,  who  had 
no  knowledge  of  their  penitents,  and  exercised  no  good  influence  over 
them.  Chaucer’s  Parson  in  his  “  Tale”  insists  upon  the  evil  of  ‘‘  de- 
partyng  of  schrift.”  Ch  notes  to  pp.  9  and  224, 

P.  332,  last  line. — Men  seyn  \at  grelcs  han. 

The  Greek  Church  enjoins  private  confession,  and  has  a  special 
office  for  the  administration  of  the  rite.  The  form  of  absolution  in 
that  Office  is  as  follows  :  “0  my  spiritual  child,  who  dost  confess  to 
my  humility,  I,  a  humble  sinner,  have  no  power  on  earth  to  remit 
sins.  This  God  alone  can  do.  Yet  by  reason  of  that  divine  charge 
which  was  committed  to  the  j!^postles  after  the  Pesurrection  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  words  :  ‘  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,’  etc., 
and  by  that  encouraged,  we  say  :  whatsoever  thou  hast  confessed  to 
my  most  lowly  humility,  and  whatsoever  thou  hast  omitted  to  confess, 
either  through  ignorance  or  any  forgetfulness,  may  God  forgive  thee, 
both  in  this  world  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.”  The  Prayer  Book 
Interleaved,  Campion  and  Beamont,  p.  221,  Pivingtons,  1866. 

P.  334,  1.  9. — Riche  men  haden  occasioun  to  drede  not  jor  to  synne. 

“lit  pauperes  possent  de  remissione  sui  peccati  quo  ad  dominum 
desperare,  et  divites  possent  blasfeme  credere  quod  ab  omni  peccato  suo 
per  imposicionem  manuum  antichristi  possent  sine  dolore  quern  deus 
instituit  liberari.”— Tract  on  Matt,  xxiii.  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  71). 

P.  334,  1.  4  from  bottom.' — Qwenes,  duchesses  and  oper  ladies  han  con- 
fessowrs. 

So  in  the  Tract  on  Matthew  xxiii.  :  ‘‘  Ista  autem  verba  hiis  novis 
sectis  pertinenter  poterunt  applicari,  cum  sint  duces  dominorum  et 
dominarum,  episcoporum  et‘  multorum  magnatuum  ”  (MS.  Ashburn¬ 
ham,  If.  78.) 

P.  341,  1.  10. — And  pits  pre  reisyngis,  etc. 

This  allegorical  interpretation  of  Christ’s  three  miracles  of  raising 
the  dead  to  life  is  taken  from  the  Lathers.  See  Trench  on  the 
Miracles,  p.  427.  He  gives  a  quotation  from  Donne,  which  illustrates 
the  passage  very  well:  “If  I  be  dead  within  doors  (if  I  have  sinned 
in  my  heart),  why  suscitavit  in  domo,  Christ  gave  a  resurrection  to  the 
ruler’s  daughter  within  doors,  in  the  house.  If  I  be  dead  in  the  gate 
(if  I  have  sinned  in  the  gates  of  my  soul),  in  my  eyes  or  ears  or  hands, 
in  actual  sins,  why  suscitavit  in  porta,  Christ  gave  a  resurrection  to  the 
young  man  at  the  gate  of  Pain.  If  I  be  dead  in  the  grave  (in 
customary  and  habitual  sins),  why  suscitavit  in  sepulcro,  Christ  gave  a 
resurrection  to  Lazarus  in  the  grave  too.” 


526 


NOTES. 


P.  343,  1.  10. — And  ]>us  freris  my^ten  telle  \epuple,  etc. 

“  Et  sic  posset  proterviens  totum  sensum  Scripturse  subvertere,  negan- 
clo  sensum  literalem  et  fingendo  sensum  figurativum  ad  libitum.” — De 
Yeritate  Scripturse,  c,  2  (quoted  by  Lechler,  i.  486). 

P.  344,  1.  27. —  JForde  pat  crist  had  to  hue  apostlis  whenne  he  had 
qwichened  la%ar. 

“  Christus  eciam  in  persona  propria  suscitavit  lazarum  de  sepulcro, 
et  mandavit  postmodum  suis  apostolis  solvere  ipsum  ab  institis  quibus 
sensibiliter  est  ligatus,  ac  si  vellet  dicere  in  figura  :  dens  est  qui  tollit 
peccata  mundi,  sed  suis  fidelibus  concedit  postmodum  potestatem  ad 
dimissionem  ilium  populo  declarandum.” — Tract  on  Matthew  xxiii. 
c.  2  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  70^). 

P.  347,  1.  1. — The  words  “  opera  sine  fide”  are  an  addition  either  of 
preacher  or  scribe.  “  3°  ”  is  a  mistake,  the  verse  being  James  ii.  26. 
I  P.  348,  1.  21. — But  in  pre  maneres  may  mennus  feip  fayle. 

Sed  hec  fides  deficit  in  nobis  hodie  tripliciter.  Primo,  scutum 
fidei  oranino  vel  secundum  pluriraum  in  multis  abest,  ut  patet  de 
infidelibus  extra  Christianismum,  et  illi  sunt  omnino  accensi  jaculis 
hostium.  Secundi  vero  licet  habeant  magnam  partem  istius  scuti  cum 
habent  multa  foramina  defectus  fidei  .  .  .  Tercii  vero  sunt  hii  qui, 
licet  habeant  scutum  fidei  integrum  tamen  nimis  remissum  vel  tenue.” 
— Early  Sermons,  l^o.  6,  MS.  Lambeth. 

P.  349,  1.  2  from  bottom. — For  feip  is  of  thingus  .  ...  of  good 
pinge  in  pe  hlis  of  heuen. 

“  Spes  vero  ut  distinguitur  contra  fidem  respicit  bona  speranti 
futura.  Fides  vero  est  de  preteritis,  presentibus,  et  futuris,  tarn  bonis 
quam  malis,'pertinentibus  et  impertinentibus.” — Early  Sermons,  III. 
Lambeth  MS.  (part  i.  No.  25  in  T.C.C.  MS.). 

P.  350,  1.  1^.— Neper  ive  witen  ue  we  trowe  now  to  he  savyd. 

“  Proposito  mihi  si  salvabor  nec  concedo  nec  nego  nec  dubito,  sed 
spero.” — Speculum  Militantis  Fcclesie,  caj).  12  (MS.  Ashburnham, 
If.  113J).  "Wyclif  always  emphatically  denies  the  possibility  of 
assurance.  In  his  tract  “  De  Blasphemia,”  he  says,'“  If  po  pope  asked 
me  whej^er  I  were  ordeyned  to  be  saved,  or  predestinate,  I  wolde  sey 
pQ.i  I  hoped  so,  but  I  wolde  not  swere  hit,  ne  ferme  hit  wij^outen 
condicioun,  |>of  he  grettly  punyscht  me ;  ne  denye  hit,  ne  doute  hit 
wolde  I  no  wey  ”  (S.E.W.  III.  426).  See  introduction,  p.  xxxvi. 

P.  357,  1.  10. — But  it  is  nouf  or  accident  ivorse  pan  any  breed. 

This  is  one  of  ,Wyclif’s  favourite  objections  to  Tran  substantiation. 
The  substance  of  bread  was  gone,  but  the  accidents  remained  and 
without  substance ;  for  the  friars  would  not  allow  that  the  whiteness, 
roundness,  etc.,  of  the  host  were  accidents  of  Christ’s  body.  Conse¬ 
quently  the  consecrated  host  was  a  mere  nothing;  accidents  with  no 
underlying  substance,  and  so  inferior  to  a  straw  which  had  a  substantial 
existence.  So  in  the  tract  on  Matthew  xxiv.  he  says,  “Papa  dicitur 
dogmatizare  quod  ilia  hostia  consecrata  nec  est  panis  nec  corpus  Christi, 
sed  unum  incognitum  infinitum  minus  bonum  quam  hostia  non  sacrata” 
(MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  58). 


NOTES. 


527 


P.  362,  1.  15. — 'pis  state  or  power  is  \e  vicar  of\e  god-Jieede. 

“  Secunda  pars  mee  railitantis  ecclesie  forent  domini  temporales,  qui 
debent  esse  vicarii  deitatis.  Ideo  sepe  meminit  augustinus  quomodo 
rex  est  vicarius  deitatis,” — Dialogus,  chap.  i.(MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  97). 

P.  363,  1.  12. — pis  state  in  ])e  chirche  is  \e  vicar  of  pc  manhede  of 
criste. 

“Unde  Augustinus  sepe  asserit  quod  tales  domini  sunt  vicarii 
deitatis,  si  cut  sacerdotes  .  .  .  sunt  vicarii  humanitatis  Christ!.” — Do 
Set'vitute  Civili  et  Dominio  Secular i,  cap.  2  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  833). 
Compare  p.  375,  1.  8. 

P.  368,  1.  25, — Sum  of  hem  han  saide  pat  pai  schuld  gete  owte  of  pc 
seculer  hondis  alle  the  temporal  lordeschip  pat  pai  magd"* 

So  in  the  Dialogus,  Wyclif  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Mendacium, 

“  Yidetur  quod  doceri  debet  e  converse  quod  clerici  auferant  totum 
seculare  dominium  a  brachio  secular!  et  reservent  ex  integro  ipsum 
sibi.” — (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  119.) 

P.  374,  1.  14. — pc  holy  doctourc  Odo. 

“  Odo  ”  is  quoted  in  the  Apology  for  the  Lollards,  where  Dr.  Todd 
has  identified  a  passage  as  coming  from  the  Flores  Sermonum  of  Odo  de 
Sheritona,  an  English  Cistercian  Monk,  who  flourished  about  the 
year  1184,  and  whose  sermons  were  published  at  Paris  in  1520  ” 
(Dr.  Todd’s  note,  p.  158).  1  should  like  to  find  this  passage,  as  it  is 

an  early  date  for  the  mention  of  the  voice  heard  at  the  time  of  the 
endowment,  but  the  Flores  Sermonum  is  not  in  the  British  Museum. 

P.  374,  1.  15. — pc  lissynes  of  schipard  and  spiritual  mornynge  or 
weylynge  is  slayne. 

In  the  list  of  names  with  meanings  usually  appended  to  the  Yulgate 
we  find  Abel  =  Luctus.  This  applies  only  to  Abel  as  the  name  of  a 
city,  but  Odo  seems  not  to  have  troubled  himself  with  such  minor 
distinctions.  In  the  same  list  is  Cain  i=  possessio. 

P.  379,  line  7,  et  seq. — Silvester'' s  sin  in  accepting  the  donation  of 
Constantine, 

“hlam  licet  cesar  ex  sua  stulticia  vellet  privilegium  tale  concedere, 
viri  tarnen  apostolic!  foret  ipsum  renuere.  Ideo  qui  nititur  excusare  in 
hoc  Silvestrum  vel  ahum  a  peccato  nititur  accusare  Christum  et  con- 
tempnere  Christ!  legem.  .  .  .  Supponi  tamen  potest  quod  sanctus 
Silvester  de  isto  crimine  postmodum  penitebat.” — De  Christo  et  suo 
Adversario  Antichristo  (ed.  P.  Buddensieg,  Gotha,  1880). 

P.  377,  1.  2  from  bottom. —  Constantyne  was  helid  of  god  hj  grace 
ministred  to  hym  hi  silvestre. 

P.  379,  1.  2. —  Whan  he  was  sow]te  to  passion,  he  hidde  hym  sijlfe. 

The  legend  of  Silvester  tells  us  that  Constantine  was  smitten  with 
leprosy,  and  by  counsel  of  the  senators  and  heathen  pontiff  3000  chil¬ 
dren  were  collected  in  order  that  the  emperor  might  be  cured  by  bathing 
in  their  blood.  Constantine  however  refused  to  sacrifice  so  many  lives 
for  his  own  health.  The  next  night  Peter  and  Paul  appeared  to  him 
and  told  him  to  send  for  Silvester,  who  was  then  hiding  from  perse- 


528 


NOTES. 


cution  in  Mount  Seraptis  (Soracte).  The  purifying  waters  of  baptism 
healed  the  Emperor  of  his  leprosy. 

P.  380,  1.  3. — As  Gorram  sai]>. 

Nicholas  de  Gorran,  a  Dominican,  was  a  Fellow  of  Merton.  He 
was  confessor  to  Philip  the  Fair,  of  France,  and  died  a.d.  1295. 
His  Commentary  on  the  Acts,  the  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse,  was 
printed  at  Antwerp  (1620)  from  a  MS.  in  Merton  College.  1  have 
looked  into  it,  but  cannot  find  the  passage  here  quoted. 

P.  380,  1.  15.— -Soler. 

The  meaning  generally  given  to  the  word  is  “an  upper  room,” 
(see  Halliwell  and  Gloss,  to  M.Y.),  and  in  Joshua  ii.  6  Pahah  made 
the  spies  “  stie  up  in  to  the  soler.”  The  word  seems,  however,  to 
have  been  used  for  any  living-room.  In  W.Y.  it  is  frequently  given 
as  an  alternative  to  souping-room  in  translating  ccenaculum,  and  in  the 
account-books  of  King’s  Hall  we  find  the  fellows  lodged  “in  solario 
juxta  gardinum;  et  in  solario  sub  eis  ”  (Hist.  Man.  Com.  First  Eeport 
]).  84). 

P.  382,  1.  14. — But  whan  we  argue  of  an  creature.,  etc. 

“  Cum  ex  fide  eapimus  quod  nullus  sanctorum,  quantacunque 
sanctitate  prepolleat,  est  in  dicto  vel  consuetudine  credendus,  nisi  de 
quanto  illud  consonat  cum  Christo  qui  est  prima  veritas.  Et  per  con- 
sequens,  habita  a  Christo  vivaciori  evidencia  ad  credendum  contrarium, 
istud  est  ex  ilia  forciori  evidencia  dimittendum.” — Speculum  Militantis 
Ecclesie,  c.  16  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  102). 

P.  382,  1.  28. —  Gabriel  schal  blow  his  home. 

One  of  the  articles  condemned  at  the  Council  of  Constance  as 
'Wyclif’s  is — ^“Audacter  prognostico  omnibus  istis  sectis  et  suis  com- 
plicibus,  quod  non  defendunt  fidelibus  quod  sacramentum  sit  accidens 
sine  subjecto  antequam  Christus  et  tota  triumphans  ecclesia  venerit 
equitans,  in  finali  judicio  super  flatum  angeli  Gabrielis.” — Brown’s 
Fasciculus,  i.  267. 

P.  382,  last  line. —  Chefesaunce. 

Chefesaunce  or  chevisance  seems  to  be  the  payment  made  for  a  loan. 
Usury  was  forbidden  alike  by  ecclesiastical  and  common  law,  but 
capitalists  would  not  lend  vuthout  consideration.  Sir  John  Paston’s 
agent  writes  to  him:  “  I  trust  that  I  have  studyed  such  a  mene  that, 
uponsurete  as  ye  may  make,  to  gete  you  an  Cli  or  CC  mark  to  be  lante 
unto  yow  for  an  halfe  yere,  with  oute  any  chevisshaunce  or  losse  of 
good  by  yow.” — Paston  Letters  (Gairdner),  ii.  297. 

In  Pot.  Pari.  ii.  173,  some  merchants  accused  of  extortion  pray  for 
inquiry  lest  men  should  be  afraid  to  deal  with  the  King  ‘  en  chevanches.’ 

Comp.  Chaucer,  Schipmannes  Tale,  329,  and  Piers  the  Plowman 
(B,),  V.  249,  with  Mr.  Skeat’s  note. 

P.  385,  1.  4. — Prisonynge  and  hangynge. 

The  exercise  of  criminal  jurisdiction  by  churchmen  was  felt  to  be  a 
scandal,  although  the  advantages  and  dignity  attaching  to  it  made  it 
an  object  of  ambition.  Bishop  Pecock  ingeniously  pleads  that  the 


NOTES. 


529 


steward  or  bailiff  who  held  the  court  was,  for  that  purpose,  the  King’s 
officer.  “  Whatever  man  the  bischop  or  abbot  so  chesith,  the  King 
therwith  and  theryn  committith  his  power  to  the  same  person  so  chosun, 
and  he  oujte  not  but  in  an  vnpropre  manor  of  speche  be  clepid  (name- 
lich  in  maters  of  deeth)  to  be  stiward  of  the  bischop  or  of  the  abbot, 
but  of  the  King.” — Pecock’s  Repressor,  p.  369. 

P.  387,  1.  16. — schulde  he  on  no  wyse  a  nedy  man  and  a  heggere 
amonge  hem. 

‘‘  Et  omnino  indigens  et  mendicus  non  erit  inter  vos.” — ^Yulgate. 

P.  389,  1.  22. — 'p  erf  ore  \er  may  noon  ope,  etc. 

“  Carte,  inquiunt,  concesse  de  perpetua  elemosyna  sunt  implenda. 
Sed  idem  est  procuratorem  diaboli  sic  arguere  ac  si  intenderit,  si  quis 
juraverit  se  occidere  fratrem  suum  vel  aliquod  f acinus  pro  parte  diaboli 
contra  dominum  perpetrare,  ex  fide  suo  de  servando  juramentum 
tenetur  illud  facinus  adimplere.  Et  sic  racione  diaboli  tenetur  manere 
perpetuo  in  suo  crimine  contra  Christum.” — De  Contrarietate  duorum 
Dominorum,  cap.  4  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  44J). 

P.  393,  1.  25. — No  man  herynge  his  hnyfhode  to  god. 

“  Kemo  militans  Deo.” — Vulgate. 

P.  395,  1.  4. — Saynte  gregori  wrote  to  pe  defensoure  of  rome. 

‘  ‘  Gregorius  Romano  defensore  nostro  SiciliBe.  Peiiatum  ad  nos  est  reve- 
rendissimum  fratrem  nostrum  Basilium  episcopum  (of  Capua)  velut 
unum  de  laicis  in  causis  seecularibus  occupari  et  prsetoriis  deservire. 
[Another  reading  is  ‘  velut  unum  de  ultimis  in  causis  occupari  et  prse- 
toriis  inutiliter  deservire.’]  Quss  res  quoniam  et  ipsum  vilem  reddit,  et 
reverentiam  sacerdotalem  annihilat  statim  ut  experientia  tua  hoc  pre- 
cep  turn  susceperit,  eum  ita  ad  revertendum  districta  exsecutione  com- 
pellat,  quatenus  ei  illic  te  insistente  quinque  diebus  sub  qualibet 
excusatione  immorari  non  liceat  ne,  si  quolibet  modo  eum  ibidem 
moram  habere  permiseris,  cum  ipso  apud  nos  graviter  incipias  esse 
culpabilis.” — Letter,  book  x.  10. 

P.  399,  1.  13. — Parysiensis,  probably  Peter,  ‘‘Cantor  Parisiensis,” 
whose  Yerbum  Abbreviatum  is  quoted  in  the  Apology  for  the  Lollards, 
ed.  by  Dr.  Todd  for  the  Camden  Society,  p.  53.  See  Dr.  Todd’s 
note,  p.  154. 

P.  417,  1.  7  from  bottom. — Sixe  maner  of  consentis. 

“  Consentit  operans,  defendens,  consilium  dans, 

Ac  auctorisans,  non  iuvans  nec  reprekendens.” 

Quoted  by  Lechler  in  a  note  to  the  De  Officio  Pastorali,  p.  15. 

P.  428,  1.  4. — Prestis  wipoute  degre  of  scole  may  profite,  etc. 

Kam  inspiracio  sacerdotura  simplicium  tarn  in  noticia  quam  in 
operacione  voluntaria  plus  proderit  capacitati  fidelium  laicorum  quam 
omnes  dicte  universitates  cum  studiis  suis  adjacentibus.  Speculum 
Militantis  Ecclesie,  c.  26  (MS.  Ashburnham,  \\2h). 

P.  428, 1.  8. —  God  wole  sujfere  noonyuel  he  don  hut  pf  good  come  perof. 

“  Dicunt  enim  fideles  theologi  quod  deus  bonus  non  potest  aliquid 

34 


530 


NOTES. 


malum  sinere,  nisi  ipsum  facial  mnltum  bonum.” — Exposition  of 
Matt,  xxiii.  cap.  5  (MS.  Asbburnham,  If.  74). 

P.  428,  line  5  from  bottom. — In  making  of  ]>es  magstris  hen  pore 
mennus  godis  ofte  wasted. 

Eor  the  cost  of  taking  a  Master’s  degree,  see  Mr.  Anstey’s  preface  to 
Mnnimenta  Academica,  p.  xc,  where  the  various  expenses  are 
enumerated.  Among  other  things  the  new  master  was  bound  to  feast 
all  the  Regents,  or  pay  a  fine  of  20  marks.  It  is  true  that  this  was 
legally  binding  only  on  those  who  possessed  a  certain  income,  but  it 
was  often  difficult  for  men  to  plead  poverty.  Attempts  were  made  to 
restrain  extravagance  by  statute,  but  probably  with  little  effect. 
Wyclif  speaks  elsewhere  of  “  sumptuosas  spoliaciones  pauperum  ad 
incepciones  ac  graduaciones  ”  (Ashburnham,  If.  75J). 

P.  429,  1.  5. — Nou^t  groundi\  hem  hut  nygromansye. 

This  charge  of  necromancy  is  not  to  be  taken  too  literally.  In  the 
tract  de  Contrarietate  duornm  Dominorum  Wyclif  brings  the  same 
accusation,  but  he  explains  the  sense  of  it  so  carefully  that  it  is  clear 
that  he  is  only  indulging  himself  in  the  use  of  another  hard  name  for 
his  opponents.  ‘‘ Extendendo,”  he  says,  “nomen  nigromancie,  potest 
quelibet  ars  falsa  vel  non  fundata  in  lege  domini  ars  nigromantica  bene 
dici.  Et  sic  pseudo  predicantes  vel  practizantes  in  lege  papali,  vel 
alia  lege  hominum  in  lege  domini  non  fundata,  possunt  nigromantici 
vere  dici,  quia  omnes  illi  discunt  et  practizant  legem  mortuam  ex 
instinctu  diaboli  ”  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  43J), 

P.  429,  1.  7. — y)e  wit  of  goddis  lawe  shulde  he  tawf  in  ]?at  tunge  \at 
is  more  knowun. 

“  Lingua  enim,  sive  hebrea,  sive  greca,  sive  latina,  sive  anglica,  est 
quasi  habitus  legis  domini.  Et  per  quemcunque  talem  habitum  ejus 
sentencia  magis  vere  cognoscitur  a  fideli,  ipse  est  codex  plus  racionabiliter 
acceptandus.” — De  Contrarietate  duorum  Dominorum,  cap.  2  (MS. 
Ashburnham,  If.  44). 

P.  429,  1.  27. — Lordis  of  englond  han  \e  hihle  in  freynsch. 

There  is  a  curious  confirmation  of  this  statement  in  M.  Paulin  Paris’s 
“  Catalogue  of  the  MSS.  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Paris.”  The  oldest 
complete  French  Bible  in  the  Library  is  a  fine  MS.  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  which  belonged  in  the  fifteenth  century  to  Louis  de  Bruges, 
seigneur  de  la  Gruthuyse  (Ho.  6701).  Of  this  book  M.  Paris  says, 
“  L’ecriture  et  le  dialecte  du  numero  dont  nous  nous  occupons  semblent 
indiquer  qu’il  fut  execute  en  Angleterre.”  It  is  possible  that  Wyclif 
may  have  seen  this  very  volume  in  the  hands  of  one  of  his  many 
friends  at  the  Court.  We  must  not  omit  to  notice  that  a  revised  transla¬ 
tion  was  undertaken  by  a  contemporary  of  Wyclif,  Raoul  de  Presles 
(d.  1383).  He  does  not  seem  to  have  got  beyond  the  Psalms.  The 
MS.  in  the  Hational  Library  containing  this  is  numbered  6818^. 

P.  429,  line  3  from  bottom. — As  men  seyen  in  \e  pley  of  ^ork. 

Among  the  returns  from  Gilds  made  in  1389  is  one  from  the  Gild  of 
the  Lord’s  Prayer  at  York,  from  which  we  learn  that  “  once  on  a  time 


ISOTES. 


531 


a  play,  setting  forth  the  goodness  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  was  played 
in  the  city  of  York,  in  which  play  all  manner  of  vices  and  sins 
were  held  up  to  scorn  and  the  virtues  were  held  up  to  praise. 
This  play  met  with  so  much  favour  that  many  said,  ‘Would  that 
this  play  could  be  kept  up  in  this  city,  for  the  health  of  souls 
and  for  the  comfort  of  the  citizens  and  neighbours.’  In  conse¬ 
quence  a  gild  was  formed,  with  the  main  object  of  keeping  up  the 
play,  but  combining  with  this  some  forms  of  mutual  aid  common  in 
such  societies.  For  the  greater  honour  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer  the  Gild 
maintained  a  candle  bearer  of  seven  lights  (in  token  of  the  seven 
supplications  in  the  prayer),  which  was  hung  in  the  Minster,  and 
lighted  on  Sundays  and  feast-days.  “  Also  they  are  bound  to  make, 
and  as  often  as  need  be  to  renew,  a  table  shewing  the  whole  meaning 
and  use  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  and  to  keep  this  hanging  against  a 
pillar  in  the  said  Cathedral  church  near  to  the  aforesaid  candle  bearer.” 
This  play  must  be  distinguished  from  the  great  play  acted  by  the 
Corpus  Christ!  Gild  at  York,  representing  the  life  and  passion  of 
Christ,  of  which  a  copy  still  remains  in  the  possession  of  the  Earl  of 
Ashburnham.  This  gild  also  represented  every  ten  years  a  Creed-play, 
bequeathed  to  them  by  William  Hevetor,  a  chantry  priest  of  the  chapel 
of  St.  William  in  Ousebridge.  These  plays  were  probably  later,  as  the 
Corpus  Christi  gild  was  founded  in  1408.  The  people  of  York  kept 
their  love  for  the  plays  after  the  Reformation.  In  1568  there  was 
talk  of  acting  the  Creed-play,  but  it  came  to  nothing.  Again  in  April, 
1572,  the  Council  agreed,  “my  lord  mayor  shall  send  for  the  maistir 
of  St.  Anthony’s,  and  he  to  bring  with  him  the  book  of  the  play  called 
the  Pater  Yoster  play.”  Whether  the  master  brought  it,  and  what 
was  done  with  it,  I  do  not  know.  It  was  something  to  have  kept  the 
popular  favour  for  at  least  two  centuries. — See  English  Gilds  (E.E.T.S. 
Ho.  40),  p.  137  :  and  York  Records  of  the  Fifteenth  Century,  edited  by 
R.  Davies  (London,  1843),  pp.  257,  267,  etc. 

P.  431, 1.  7. — Specific  not  ]ies  7%yne  ordris,  as  poul  doip  in  his  hokis. 

The  nine  orders  of  angels,  as  arranged  by  Dionysius  in  an  ascending 
scale,  are  Angels,  Archangels,  Princedoms,  Powers,  Virtues,  Domina¬ 
tions,  Thrones,  Cherubim  and  Seraphim.  Of  these,  Colossians  i.  16 
supplies  thrones,  dominations,  princedoms,  powers;  and  Horn.  viii.  13 
angels  and  virtues  (our  A.Y.  has  “powers”  also  here) ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16 
adds  “  archangel,”  but  Cherubim  and  Seraphim  are,  I  believe,  not  to 
be  found  in  St.  Paul’s  writings,  or  indeed  in  the  JSew  Testament. 

P.  431,  1.  8. —  Cornyn  \ingis,  i.e.  Uuiversals.  Wyclif,  as  a  realist, 
held  these  to  have  actual  being. 

P.  434,  1.  11,  &c. — It  may  be  worth  while  to  give  the  corresponding 
passage  in  the  Latin  tract :  “  Et  istud  foret  frenum  rectoribus,  ne 

lasciviant  in  esculentis  vel  quibuscunque  concernentibus  personam 
propriam  deminutis  elemosinis  subditorum,  ut  est  de  lecsterniis, 
dorsariis,  aulicis  bancariis,  pulvinaribus,  et  sumptuosis  domorum  ceteris 
ornamentis.  Et  idem  indicium  de  vestibus  ac  surrearum  [I  fancy 


532 


KOTES. 


there  is  a  misprint  here  for  ‘  furrearum  ’]  splendencia.” — cap.  xvi. 
p.  25. 

P.  437,  1.  7. — \ey  shulden  he  moost  dere^'’  etc. 

“  Non  vosmet  ipsos  defendentes,  charissimi.” — Yulgate. 

P.  438,  1.  22. —  God  a:cip  not  dyuysiouns  ne  rymes  of  hym  ]iat  sliulde 
preclie. 

This  is  not  the  only  place  in  which  'W’yclif  speaks  of  the  friars  as 
preaching  verses.  In  the  tract  on  Matthew  xxiii.  he  says  :  “Pratres 
predicant  verba  fictaet  poemata  ripinisata.” — Ashbiirnham,  If.  75.  Ido 
not  know  what  is  meant  by  ‘ripinisata.’  Can  it  be  ‘  rabbinized,’ 
broken  up  under  different  heads  after  the  fashion  of  the  rabbinical 
commentators  ?  If  so,  it  would  answer  to  the  ‘  dyuysiouns  ’  in  the  text. 

P.  442,  1.  7. — ■'Physic  or  alkemonye. 

Alchemy  was  already  in  the  fourteenth  century  discredited  as  being 
usually  practised  by  cheats  (see  Chanounes  Yemannes  Tale,  and  Piers 
Plowman’s 

“  Experimentz  of  alkenamye  J>e  poeple  to  deceyue.” — B.  x.  212); 

but  here  it  seems  to  be  used  in  the  innocent  sense  of  chemistry.  The 
chief  students  of  the  physical  sciences  were  among  the  friars,  whose 
credit  as  physicians  we  have  seen  noticed  (pp.  10,  224). 

P.  442,  1.  6  from  bottom. —  We  hen  not  holours  of  goddis  word. 

“Non  enim  sumus  sicut  plurimi,  adulterantes  verbum  Dei,”  &c. — 
Vulgate. 

P.  443, 1.  3. — ivolen  gedere  comynly  godis  aftir  ]iat  \ei  han  prechid. 

So  in  Exposition  of  Matthew  xxiii.  Wyclif  says  :  “  Et  stulto  stulcior 
potest  ex  usitata  fratrum  predicacione  statim  cognoscere  quod  gracia 
lucri  colligendi  a  populo  statim  post  sermonem  finaliter  predicarunt  ” 
(MS.  Ashburnham,  Iff  75). 

P.  444,  1.  20. — A  wichid  hayward. 

A  hayward  was  properly  a  man  set  to  look  after  the  inclosures  or 
cultivated  ground,  and  prevent  cattle  straying  upon  it  from  the  common 
land.  His  business  was  also  to  prevent  trespass.  Such  an  officer,  the 
Eeldschiitz  or  garde  champetre,  still  encounters  trespassers  on  the 
Continent,  where,  as  in  the  England  of  the  14th  century,  the  fields  are 
not  hedged  off.  At  a  time  when  roads  were  mostly  mere  tracks,  it  is 
easy  to  understand  that  a  man  so  employed  might  abuse  his  powers 
and  stop  travellers  even  where  they  had  a  right  of  way ;  and  this  seems 
to  be  the  drift  of  the  text.  Twice  elsewhere  Wyclif  calls  prelates 
hay  wards  (S.E.W.  i.  104;  iii.  436),  but  in  both  cases  the  word  is 
used  in  its  secondary  sense  of  overseer.  Compare  Mr.  Skeat’s  Notes 
to  Piers  the  Plowman  (pp.  87,  273).  The  duties  of  the  hayward  as  a 
village  officer  seem  to  have  been  various.  In  Paston  Letters  (i.  217, 
Gairdner)  we  find  the  haywards  making  a  distress  and  taking  a  plough 
and  two  horses. 

P.  445,  1.  5  from  bottom. — ])ei  depraiten  {curates)  to  \er  parischens. 

See  Erasmus’  Colloquy,  Trroy^OTrXovo'LoC)  where  two  friars  ask 


NOTES. 


533 


shelter  at  the  house  of  the  parish  priest  and  are  harshly  refused.  He 
gives  a  reason  which  reflects  no  great  credit  on  him  :  “Quia  si  con- 
spiceretis  in  aedibus  meis  gallinam  aliquam  [it  is  hardly  necessary  to 
remark  that  gallina  here  is  equivalent  to  focaria.  The  ‘chicks’  need 
even  less  explanation]  aut  pullos  gallinaceos,  eras  in  condone 
traducerer  apud  populum.  Hanc  soletis  referre  gratiam  communicati 
hospitii.”  And  all  the  friars  can  say  is :  “Hon  omnes  sumus  istius- 
modi.” 

P.  447,  1.  23. — Shulden  lerne  lawe  of  porjirie. 

So  in  Trialogus,  lib.  ii.  c.  1  :  “  Eo  quod  juxta  Porphirium  partici- 
patione  specie!  pures  homines  sunt  unus  homo.” 

P.  449,  1.  5. — ^if  persouns  hadden  no  glebe  f  etc. 

“  Si  autem  curatus  recipit  fructum  istius  glebe,  respuendo  domina- 
clonem  mundanam  in  animo,  fidelis  ministracio  potest  ipsum  quoad 
deum  et  homines  excusare.  Hoc  tamen  videtur  quod  fidelis  curatus 
cum  opportunitatem  habuerit  debet  renunciare  isti  dominio  seculari.” — 
Speculum  Militantis  Ecclesie  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  120J). 

P.  449,  1.  27. — As  \ei  seyn,  etc. 

“  Sicut  enim  piscis  sine  aqua  vita  caret,  itasine  monasterio  monachus, 
ut  dicit  Eugenius  Papa,  15.  q.  1.  Placuit.” — Sermon  of  William  of 
St.  Amour  (Ease.  Per.  Exp.  ii.  43). 

So  in  Piers  the  Plowman — 

“  Whenne  fissches  failen  flode  or  pe  fresche  water, 
pei  deyen  for  droiithe  whanne  pei  drie  ligge ; 

Ri}t  so,  quod  Gregorie,  religioun  roileth 
Sterveth  and  styuketh  and  steleth  lords  almesses. 

That  out  of  coueiit  and  cloystre  coveyten  to  libbe.” 

— B.  X.  295. 

See  Mr.  Skeat’s  note  on  the  passage,  p.  93. 

P.  461,  1.  26. —  God's  love  shown  in  the  Great  Schism. 

“Dei  justicia,  non  sinens  amplius  sine  dirupcione  ecclesiam  malig- 
nancium  ita  stare,  facit  ipsam  ascefolam,  ejus  caput  in  duas  partes 
debiles  dividendo.” — Sermons,  Part  IV.  Ser.  20  (MS.  T.C.C.  309^). 
Compare  the  tract  De  Pontificum  Pomanorum  Schismate,  S.E.W.  iii. 
242  et  seq.,  especially  p.  247. 

P.  462,  1.  12. — Maki^  lordis  to  hyssehis  feet  where  crist  wayschide  his 
postlis  feet. 

“  Valde  diversum  est  a  papa  petere  pedum  oscula  beatorum,  et 
ipsum  papam  lintheo  se  precingere  et  lavare  humiliter,  ut  Christus 
fecit,  pedes  per  ordinem  subditorum.” — Sermons,  IV.  8  (MS.  T.C.C, 
AMd). 

P.  462,  1.  15. —  Where  crist  wente  on  his  feet .  . .  \ei  seyen  \is pope  wole 
be  closid  in  a  castel,  etc. 

“  Christus  circumivit  patrias  pedestre,  oppressis  benefaciens  atque 
sanans.  Papa  residet  tanquam  alter  cosdroe  in  sumptuoso  palacio  ex 
spoliacio  pauperum  fabricate  et.malefacit  pauperibus.” — Exposition  of 
Matthew  xxiv.  c.  3  (MS.  Ashburnham,  If.  bib') 


534 


NOTES. 


‘‘  Quomodo  ergo  antichrlstus sic  extollitur  super  Cliristum quod  residens 
iu  palacio  tanquam  immobilis  sufficit  spiritualiter  visitare  totam  terram 
habitabilem,  mittendo  dominative  per  modum  citacionis  cesarie  post 
quemcunque  sibi  contrarium  quem  voluerit  impugnare  ;  revera  ista  non 
est  regulacio  Christi  cum  ipse  iucessit  humiliter  de  loco  in  locum  per 
civitates  et  castella  predicans  peditentim.” — De  Ordine  Christiano,  c.  4 
(MS.  Ashburnbam,  If.  23^). 

There  is  a  rather  similar  passage  in  a  tract  just  published  by  Dr. 
Buddensieg,  De  Christo  et  suo  Adversario  Antichristo,  c.  xii. 

P.  468,  1.  3  from  bottom. — Tellen  more  hi  a  crony cle  of  foly  of  an 
emperour. 

This  refers,  of  course,  to  the  story  of  the  donation  of  Constantine. 

P.  469,  1.  \0.—3Iyraclis  maad  of  deed  men,  etc. 

Et  secundum  apostolum,  1  Cor.  3°;  Si  viator  habuerit  omnem 
fidem,  ita  ut  montes  transferal,  caritatem  autem  non  habuerit,  nichil 
est.  Multo  magis  ergo  signa  ostensa  a  deo  sive  diabolo  in  presencia 
corporis  mortui  non  indicant  quod  sit  sanctum.  Ideo  una  de  precipuis 
cautelis  diaboli  per  quam  seducit  viantes  est  decepcio  in  hiis  signis.” 
—  Speculum  Militantis  Ecclesie,  cap.  16  (MS.  Ashburnbam,  If. 
105J). 

P.  469,  last  line. —  God  mut  nedis  he  cheef  lord,  etc. 

“  Si  secundum  legem  humanam  non  valet  donacio  nisi  habita  licencia 
doinini  capitalis,  patenter  convincitur  quod  non  valet  aliqua  tails 
donacio  nisi  prehabita  dei  licencia,  qui  est  dominus  duminorum.” — De 
Contrarietate  duorum  Dominorum  (MS.  Ashburnbam,  If.  45). 

P.  471,  1.  T. — For  ]>is  name  is  newe foundun,  and  it  hitoJceni\  wundirful. 

The  only  suggestion  I  can  make  as  to  this  “wonderful”  interpreta¬ 
tion  is  that  Wyclif  connected  Papa  with  nrairal. 

P.  475  1.  2. — Anticrist  myfe  not  for  shame  canonyse  ]>is  emperour. 

Constantine  was  canonized  by  the  Greeks,  and  his  feast  is  on 
May  11,  as  mentioned  by  Higdenin  the  Polychronicon  (Lumby,  vol.  v, 
p.  142).  He  has  never  been  formally  canonized  in  the  Western 
Church,  but  his  name  is  inserted  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum,  under  May  21st, 
where  we  are  told  that  in  Britain  several  churches  and  altars  were  formerly 
dedicated  to  him.  It  is  possible  that  there  may  be  here  some  confusion 
between  the  Emperor  Constantine  and.  two  kings  of  Scotland  of  that 
name  who  were  canonized.  The  speech  of  Constantine  to  the  Nicene 
Council  referred  to  in  line  15  is  reported  by  Higden  in  the  same 
place. 

P.  475,  1.  5. —  0  cause  why  he  dide  ]}us  was  to  hye  his  oune  prestis. 

“  Sed  captato  tempore  seduccionis  populi,  diabolus  movebat  cesarem 
quod,  sicut  ipse  excellebat  alios  seculares  dominos,  sic  sacerdos  suns, 
quem  vocat  romanum  pontificem,  debet  excellere  quoslibet  alios 
sacerdotes.” — Speculum  Militantis  Ecclesie,  c.  34  (MS.  Ashburnbam, 
If.  115J). 

P.  476,  1.  3. — A  coorde  is  a  good  \ing,  etc. 

“Ham  chorda  est  creatura  bona  Dei,  sicut  et  collum  hominis,  et 


NOTES. 


535 


tamen  modus  habendi  illara  circa  collum  hominis  strangulati  est  satis 
odibilis.” — Trial,  lib.  iv.  c.  17,  p.  306. 

P.  477, 1.  17. —  Our  hileue  techi\  vs  ])at  a  man  doi\  no  lengere  merits  etc. 

“  Yidetur  autem  mihi  quod  securissimum  foret  hominem  pro  tem¬ 
pore  quo  yiat  juste  vivere,  et  non  in  suffragio  executorum  vel  aliorum 
oratorum  pro  suis  temporalibus  niinis  confidere.” — Sermons,  lY.  2 
(MS.  T.C.C.  If.  292^^). 

P.  482,  1.  7. — \if  \e  pope,  for  lidding  of  a  Icyng,  graunti\  so  large 
indulgensis,  etc. 

So  in  the  De  Sermone  Domini  in  Monte  (chap.  12),  “Dicitur 
quendam  papam  fecisse  oracionem  quamdam  et  concessisse  ad  instanciam 
regis  francie  duo  milia  annorum,  quocienscunque  habilis  ipsam  dixerit 
inter  consecracionem  et  agnus  dei.” — (MS.  T.C.C.  If.  S57b).  Compare 
also  S.E.W.  i.  354.  Dr.  Todd,  in  a  note  to  the  Lollards’  Apology 
(p.  122),  has  shown  that  this  refers  to  a  bull  of  Boniface  YIII.  He 
quotes  the  prayer  from  a  copy  of  “  Hours  of  the  Yirgin,”  in  which  it 
occurs  with  this  rubric  :  “  Our  holy  father  the  pope  Bonifacius  sextus 
hath  graunted  to  all  them  that  say  deuoutly  this  prayer  folowynge 
betwene  the  eleuacyon  of  our  lorde  et  the  iij  Agnus  dei  x.  thousande 
years  of  pardon.”  A  similar  rubric  from  another  edition  says  2000 
years.  An  allusion  to  this  prayer  and  indulgence  is  to  be  found  also 
on  p.  82. 


I 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Abac,  behind  (put  abaczrre- 
pressed),  38,  145,  332. 

Abbots,  ride  about  with  great 
retinue,  60. 

Abel,  meaning  of  the  name,  374, 
527. 

Abel,  burnt  his  tithes,  431. 

Abide,  persevere  in,  71. 

Abite,  habit,  dress,  3. 

Able,  fit,  11  ;  able  of  witt,  cle¬ 
ver,  176. 

Ablynden,  blind,  382. 

Abreggid,  abridged,  41;  abregynge, 
lessening,  364. 

Absentees,  tithes  should  be  with¬ 
drawn  from,  436. 

Absolution,  is  not  in  the  priest’s 
power,  xix,  106,  333,  481  ; 
made  a  privilege  of  the  rich, 
13,  334,  464,  525;  different 
forms  of,  332,  525. 

Abstinence,  pretended,  of  friars, 
13,  316,  524. 

Abusioun,  abuse,  454. 

Accepcion,  acceptance,  227. 

Accident,  used  in  scholastic  sense, 
352,  357,  465. 


Accountid,  taken  into  account, 
133. 

Active  life,  190,  514. 

Adam,  15,  49,  392,  428. 

Adjective,  plural  form  of,  11,  40, 
492. 

A-doun,  down,  10. 

Adulterers,  protected  by  ecclesias¬ 
tical  authorities,  213,  249,  517. 
See  Sin-rents. 

Aferd,  afraid,  59;  afierd,  71. 

Agast,  afraid,  20. 

Aggregen,  aggravate,  167  ;  agre- 
giden,  pret.  378. 

Agnus  dei,  169,  512. 

Ajen,  back,  in  return,  23,  146. 

Ajens,  against,  2 ;  ajeyns,  12  ; 
ajenus,  408. 

A jenseie, contradict,  86  ;  forbid,  43. 

A^enseiynge,  contradiction,  228. 

A^enstonde,  resist,  21. 

Ajenward,  in  return,  146,  260; 
on  the  contrary,  463. 

D’Ailly,  Peter,  511. 

Ayse,  ease,  150. 

Alamysse,  all  amiss  (a  pun  on 
almesse),  389. 


538 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Alargen,  enlarge,  341  ;  alargid, 
part.  445. 

Ale,  all,  46. 

Aleggen,  allege,  266 ;  aleggid, 
part.  344;  aleid,  70. 

Algatis,  always,  anyhow,  64. 

Al^if,  although,  even  if,  293. 

Alhool,  entirely,  172. 

Alyenen,  alienate,  inf.  284;  alien, 
pres.  ind.  50. 

Aliens,  benefices  purchased  by, 
144. 

Alkemonye,  alchemy,  chemistry, 
442,  532. 

Alle  hawen,  All  Saints’  Day  (Nov. 

1),  41. 

Almesse,  alms,  102. 

Alms,  definition  of,  385  ;  pun  on, 
388  ;  must  be  voluntary,  420 ; 
discretion  needed  in  giving, 
423  ;  enforced  by  process,  16. 

Alms,  perpetual,  12,  384,  385, 
388,  392,  476. 

Alonde,  on  earth  (comen  alonde, 
come  to  exist),  366. 

Aloonely,  only,  289. 

Als,  as,  22 ;  alse,  38. 

Altar,  sacrament  of  the,  19,  152, 
357. 

Altars,  fees  for  consecrating,  69, 
214,  233,  277. 

AlJ;ere,  of  all  (al]7ere  maystir, 
master  of  all),  293  ;  altherhijest 
supreme,  159. 

Alwytti,  omniscient,  21,  71. 

Ambrose,  St.,  105,  125,  269,  339. 

Amersy,  amerce,  fine,  417. 

Amoneste,  admonish,  41 ;  amonest- 
ynge,_  47.  , 

Atnorteised,  put  into  mortmain, 
117;  amorteisynge,  117;  amor- 
tasynge,  278  ;  amortesynge,  385. 

Amortisement,  destroys  knight¬ 
hood,  117,  368. 

Amortisement,  in  fraud  of  the 
statutes,  278,  521. 

Anemtis,  about,  with  regard  to,  24. 


Angels,  nine  orders  of,  431,  531. 

Anyneris,  stewards,  13,  493. 

Ankeris,  anchorites,  304. 

Anneys,  Agnes,  205. 

Annueleris  (or  annual  priests), 
priests  hired  to  say  annual 
masses,  103,  and  note,  505. 

Anoy,  annoyance,  243. 

Anselm,  125,  268. 

Antecristis  martiris,  123. 

Antichrist,  signs  of,  19,  494. 

Antichrist  (the  Pope)  claims  uni¬ 
versal  dominion,  477. 

Antifeners,  books  of  antiphons, 
194,  515. 

Antinomian  arguments  rebutted, 
111,  351. 

Apaied,  satisfied,  173;  apeied, 
46  ;  a-payde,  388. 

Ape  resouns,  96,  412. 

Apeyrynge,  injuring,  388. 

Apere,  appear,  36. 

Apert,  open,  91  ;  apertly,  openly, 
119. 

A-place,  in  place  ;  cam  a  place = 
came  to  exist,  373.  Compare 
Alonde. 

Aplis,  apples;  used  as  bribes  to 
lure  children  to  orders,  68. 

Apostaile,  see  of,  apostolic  see 
(Pome),  44. 

Apostata,  apostate,  127,  225,  306. 

Apostilhede,  apostolate,  383. 

Appelis,  apel ;  appeals,  used  to 
hinder  justice,  184. 

Appelis,  apples,  12;  appul,  461; 
aplis,  68 ;  used  to  entice  children 
into  orders,  12,  68, 

Appropriation,  of  churches,  97, 
116,  190,  223,  236,  419,  427, 
518. 

Apropren,  appropriate,  42 ;  appro- 
pren,  125  ;  aproprid,  fpart.  285  ; 
approprynge,  97. 

Aquitauncis,  quittances,  277. 

Aray,  array,  state,  88 ;  araies, 
trappings,  61. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


539 


Arelideacons,  their  extortions, 
417,  435,  456. 

Arclidekenes,  248  ;  archidekenes, 
417  ;  erchedekenes,  435, 

Archery,  wins  favour  for  priests,  65. 

Architects,  priests  act  as,  213, 
246,  520. 

Aristole,  6  ;  aristotle,  426. 

Armures,  pieces  of  armour,  347. 

Arraiynge,  ordering,  arranging, 
213. 

Arraiouris,  setters  in  array,  com¬ 
manders,  100. 

Arrian,  Arius,  68. 

Aseet,  satisfaction,  340 ;  aseej^e, 
339. 

Aspied,  observed,  136  ;  aspiynge, 
151. 

Assaie,  try,  96  ;  asaye,  463. 

Assis,  (mylneston  of)  62.  See 
note,  499. 

Assises,  an  occasion  of  oppression, 
234,  278. 

Assoile,  absolve,  7  ;  assoilid,  parL 
74;  asoyling,  328;  assoilyngis, 
66. 

Assurance  of  salvation  impossible, 
xxxvi,  350,  526. 

Astaat,  estate,  condition  in  life, 
230. 

Astonye]?,  confounds,  frightens,  417. 

Astronomy,  taught  by  friars,  225. 

Atier,  attire,  315  ;  atir,  206. 

At  perti,  apart,  privily,  213. 

Auaunte,  boast,  433. 

Auctorite,  authority,  71. 

Auentyng,  moving  about  in  the 
open  air,  319. 

Auer,  possessions,  119. 

Auerous,  avaricious,  412. 

Augustine,  xxxviii.  See  Austyn. 

Auynoun,  Avignon,  405,  457. 

Aumeneris,  almoners,  242. 

Auncetreris,  ancestors,  389. 

Auoutrer,  adulterer,  49;  awoutrer, 
adultress,  328. 

Auoutrie,  adultery,  6. 


Avow,  vow,  7. 

Austernete,  austerity,  471. 

Austyn  (St.),  7,  8,  38,  51,  58, 
76,  104,  118,  172,  191,  258, 
270,  272,  274,  281,  342,  362, 
363,  375,  376,  384,  389,  426, 
441,  473. 

Auter,  altar,  19. 

Auterage,  altar  dues,  149. 

Autor,  author,  267. 

Awey,  used  without  verb  for  go 
away;  be  got  rid  of,  124. 

Axe,  ask,  14. 

Babwynrie,  apishness  (baboui- 
nerie),  hence  trick,  deceit  or 
cozenage,  8. 

Bac,  back,  434. 

Bayli,  bailiff,  129. 

Bayte]?,  irritates,  437. 

Balam,  Balaam,  378. 

Balyes,  bellies,  315. 

Bali,  John,  xxvm.,  226. 

Bancurs,  tapestries  or  cloths  to 
cover  Benches,  434.  See  Du- 
cange,  s.v.  Bancale. 

Baner,  beren  j^e,  are  the  foremost, 
130. 

Bangor,  Bishop  of,  ix. 

Baptist,  297,  321. 

Bareyne,  barren,  171. 

Basile,  395. 

Batailis,  armies,  100. 

Becase,  by  chance,  337. 

Bede,  57,  105;  seynt  bede,  118, 
506. 

Bedele,  herald,  crier,  58,  189. 

Bedynge,  167.  See  note. 

Bedrede,  bedridden,  7 ;  bedered, 
186  ;  beddrede,  211. 

Beds  censed,  325. 

Bedun,  bidden,  410. 

Beelzebub,  312  ;  belsebub,  456. 

Beerd,  in  here=:to  their  face,  297. 

Beerded  sterre,  comet,  308. 

Beestliche,  sensual,  304  {animalis, 
Yulg). 


540 


GT.OSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Begging,  forbidden  by  Christ,  352. 

Beheyjt,  promised,  331. 

Belialis  carte,  260. 

Benebred,  bread  made  of  beans 
for  the  use  of  horses,  61,  499. 

Benefactorura,  a  prayer,  134,  509. 

Benefices,  kindnesses,  favours,  167. 

Benet  (St.  Benedict),  51,  120, 
301. 

Beren  heuy,  are  aggrieved,  296. 

Beren  on,  put  upon,  accuse,  11. 

Beren  on  honde,  pretend,  214. 

Beriynge,  burying,  9. 

Bernard,  St.,  xlvi,  51,  61,  104, 
125,  132,  149,  167,  301,  383, 
398,  504. 

Berton,  William,  Chancellor  of 
Oxford,  XXV,  xxvi. 

Besi,  busy,  8. 

Beste,  beast,  58. 

Besumms,  brooms,  468. 

Bete  stretis,  lounge  about,  152, 
166,  511. 

Beten  marketis,  lounge  or  hang 
about  at  markets,  172,  511. 

Betynge  of  pauement,  lounging, 
168. 

Bi,  be,  101. 

Bible,  should  be  studied,  145,  194, 
235  ;  should  be  taken  literally, 
266,  343;  should  be  translated 
into  English,  159,  429,  530. 

Bible,  has  been  translated  into 
Erencb,  429,  530. 

Bicliptide,  embraced,  462. 

Bie,  buy,  13;  biere,  buyer,  233. 

Biforn,  before,  22. 

Biggen,  buy,  58 ;  byje,  334. 

Biheste,  promise,  11  ;  command, 
163. 

Bihete,  v.  promise,  455 ;  biheti]?, 
40 ;  by  bote]?,  368  ;  perf.  be- 
hejten,  16  ;  bihijt,  41  ;  bi- 
hetynges,  20. 

Bikenes,  outward  signs  or  gest¬ 
ures  (?),  471. 

Bileue,  belief,  19. 


Bileue,  v.  used  with  prep,  ‘to,’ 
“bileue  to  him,”  158. 

Birie,  bury,  212. 

Bishop,  saying  of  a,  as  to  lay 
property,  368,  527. 

Bishops  set  example  of  unchastity, 
73. 

Bishops,  their  large  gains  from 
fines  for  incontinence,  63  ;  func¬ 
tions  reserved  to,  69. 

Bishops,  exact  fees  for  leave  of 
absence  to  study,  244,  250  ;  in 
partihus  stay  at  home,  225. 

Bischopricke,  diocese,  43. 

Bisiden,  at  (bisiden  rome),  51. 

Bisien,  v.  busy,  94  ;  bisen,  150. 

Bitake,  inf.  commit,  give,  1 46 ; 
part,  bitokene,  243 ;  bytake, 
365  ;  bytaken,  374. 

Bitydden,  perf.  happened,  377. 

Blaberen,talk  idly,  73, 168, 274, 289 

Black  Death,  513. 

Blackfriars  Council,  xxvii. 

Black  Hall,  at  Oxford,  Wyclif  a 
prisoner  in,  xiv. 

Blasphemes,  blasphemers,  7  ;  blas- 
phemye,  blasphemous,  158. 

Blastis  blowing  (probably  refers 
to  the  organs),  77. 

Blaunchid,  whitewashed,  299. 

Blely,  blithely,  417. 

Blent,  blinded,  77  ;  blend,  144. 

Bleren  J^e  eyen,  impose  upon,  316 
(Yet  schal  I  biere  here  ye. — 
Eeeve’s  Tale,  29). 

Blickid,  stained,  218. 

Bobbe,  mock,  291 

Boden,  bidden,  343. 

Boffetynge,  buffeting,  291. 

Bok,  a  book,  often  used  as  ‘  a  pat¬ 
tern,’  61,  92,  268,  408,  etc. 

Boldynge,  encouragement,  215. 

Bolne]?,  swells,  354. 

Bone,  boon,  262. 

Bonere,  good-natured,  229. 

Books  monopolized  by  the  religious 
orders,  49,  128,  221,  508. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


541 


Boot,  "boat,  411. 

Boote,  avail,  308. 

Borde,  table,  46. 

Boren,  carried,  229  ;  borun,  420. 

Boris,  booris,  boars,  425. 

Borwyng,  borrowing,  277. 

Bosardis,  buzzards,  157. 

Boarding,  jesting,  446. 

Board  is,  jests,  446. 

Bradwardine,  iii. 

Bregynge,  breaking,  74. 

Brenne,  burn,  88  ;  brennynge,  16  ; 
brent,  246. 

Breuyaries,  abridged  psalters,  41, 
427. 

Bribouris,  bribers,  probably  the 
agents  or  Rome-runners  men¬ 
tioned  on  p.  23  {see  note,  p. 
494),  66. 

Brideclolis,  wedding  garment,  351. 

Briddis,  birds,  21. 

Bridles,  decorated,  149. 

Brondis,  brands,  170. 

Broj7elis,  scamps,  214. 

Balls,  papal,  23,  66,  82,  479. 

Burials,  fees  at,  9,  15,  212,  224, 
492,  516,  518. 

Burning,  as  punishment  of  heresy, 
16,  34,  88,  94,  124,  211,  246, 
259,  260. 

Bury  St.  Edmunds,  gateway  at, 
494. 

B  uschementis,  ambushes,  421. 

Caas,  case,  in  caas— perchance,  7  ; 
cas,  10;  pi.  caassis,  412;  caice, 
336. 

Cayme,  Cain,  meaning  of  the 
name,  374 ;  burnt  his  tithes, 
431. 

Caj^mes  castel,  a  friary,  129,  211, 
420,  425,  448,  449,  478,  508. 

Cayphas  bischops,  72. 

Cameile,  camel,  100;  camaile,  172. 

Can,  knows,  95. 

Canon  Law,  studied  too  much,  145, 
156,  437. 


Canonization  of  saints  not  a  matter 
of  faith,  469. 

Canterbury  Hall,  Wyclif’s  war- 
denship  of,  iv. 

Cardinals  unnecessary,  471,  479, 
481;  meaning  of  the  name,  472. 

Careyne,  carcase,  123,  212. 

Cast,  device,  84. 

Caste]?,  overthrows,  127. 

Casten,  devise,  plot,  91. 

Castles  built  by  religious  orders, 
5,  321. 

Catel,  chattel,  goods,  11. 

Cauyllacions,  cavils,  154 ;  caue- 
lacions,  182. 

Caumbridge,  Cambridge  (univer¬ 
sity),  427. 

Cautel,  trick,  wile,  38. 

Ceesen  of,  leave  off,  4. 

Celibacy  of  priests,  a  cause  of 
adultery,  7,  100,  170,  303  ;  of 
child  murder,  100. 

Certeyn,  certainty,  134. 

Certis,  certainly,  9  ;  certes,  25. 

Chaar,  car,  259. 

Chacchi]?,  impels  (catches  or 
chases),  293,  431. 

Chaffare,  v.  bargain,  23 ;  chaf- 
farynge,  23. 

Chayer,  seat,  437. 

Chalengen,  accuse,  44  ;  claim,  84  ; 
chalengi]?,  478. 

Chalis,  chalices,  69. 

Chanons,  canons,  68. 

Chanting.  See  Song,  Hew. 

Chantry  foundations,  177,  513. 

Chapels,  private,  parish  priests 
employed  in,  65. 

Chaperon,  hood,  40. 

Chapitre,  chapter,  43,  146,  156, 
299. 

Charchid,  charged,  393. 

Chargen,  lay  stress  on,  7  ;  chargi]>, 
67  ;  part,  chargid,  74. 

Chargis,  burdens,  31. 

Charious,  burdensome,  193,  470; 
chargious,  455. 


542 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Cliarite,  charter  (Magna  Carta), 
287. 

Charity,  sixteen  conditions  of,  220, 
353,  517. 

Charter,  the  Great,  287. 

Chancer,  1,  490. 

Chees,  chess,  152,  168,  259. 

Chees,  chose,  189. 

Chefesaunce,  interest  or  considera¬ 
tion  for  a  loan,  382,  528. 

Chepyrige,  market,  280. 

Cherlis,  serfs,  205. 

Chese,  cheese,  304. 

Chesen,  choose,  7,  32  ;  perf. 

cheseden,  413;  chees,  25;  ches- 
ynge,  43. 

Cheseris,  choosers,  450. 

Chesoun,  occasion,  cause,  299, 
430. 

Cheuenteynes,  chieftains,  150. 

Cheueren,  shiver,  14. 

Chiff,  chief,  172. 

Chiden,  quarrel,  152;  chidynge, 
152. 

Chif  werk,  masterpiece,  16. 

Children  enticed  into  religious 
orders,  9,  10,  12,  51,  68,  133, 
223,  235,  269,  278,  500. 

Child  murder,  to  hide  inconti¬ 
nence,  100. 

Chirche^erdis,  churchyards,  charges 
for  consecrating,  97,  233. 

Chirischen,  cherish,  38. 

Choristers,  their  bad  ways,  192. 

Chouchen,  lie  (couch),  168. 

Christ,  the  first  reason  of  all  things, 
425  ;  lord  of  all  things,  423, 
448  ;  king  and  priest,  471  ; 
would  not  be  made  an  earthly 
king,  195,  371,  376  ;  paid  tri¬ 
bute  to  the  Emperor,  86,  139, 
456. 

Christ,  the  only  model  to  he  safely 
followed,  382,  451;  his  example 
a  command,  377. 

Christmas  plays,  206. 

Chrysostom,  25. 


Chronicles  preached,  16,  26,  50, 
59,  105,  124,  153. 

Church,  false  notion  of  what  it  is, 
78,  256,  258  ;  consists  only  of 
the  predestinate,  78,  198,  501, 
515. 

Churches  left  unconsecrated  for 
want  of  the  fees,  69. 

Cicile,  Cecily  (St.),  205. 

Cyprian,  St.,  393,  394,  452. 

Citations,  30,  462,  483—487,  495, 
533. 

Civil  law,  too  much  studied,  156, 
184,  185,  235. 

Civil  obedience  insisted  on  by 
Wyclif,  xxxvii,  229,  519. 

Cyuylite,  civil  rule,  385. 

Clamengis,  ISTicolas  de,  xxxix;^., 
509. 

Clamouse,clamorous,  105 ;  clamose, 
269  ;  clamours,  27. 

Clement  YI.,  xxxiii. 

Clement  VII.  (Antipope)  xv, 
xlviiw. 

Clene,  aclj.  pure,  51  ;  clennest, 
276. 

Clene,  adv.  entirely,  100;  clenly, 
146. 

Clenese,  cleanse,  312,  323. 

Clepen,  call,  27;  clepij?,  21;  perf. 
clepede,  2 ;  part,  clepyd,  6. 

Clergye,  learning,  128. 

Clergy  employed  in  lords’  houses, 
13,  65,  168,  242,  246,  333,  449; 
are  architects,  213,  246. 

Clerg)'',  hold  serfs  and  execute  jus¬ 
tice  like  laymen,  385 ;  fight  in 
person,  S83 ;  claim  exemption 
from  lay  judgment,  158,  289, 
291. 

Clergy,  their  extravagance  in 
horses,  149,  434,  510. 

Clergy,  lay  correction  of,  240,  289, 
520  ;  authorized  by  the  law  of 
England,  292. 

Clergy,  state  of,  represents  Christ’s 
manhood,  363. 


GLOSSAKIAL  INDEX. 


543 


Clerkis,  learned  men,  4. 

Clier,  clear,  208. 

Clipping,  embracing,  218. 

CloJ?,  clothes,  13  ;  cloi]?,  151  ; 
cloj^is  of  gold,  88. 

Clothes  giyen  as  presents,  129, 

210. 

Cloute,  V.  patch,  41. 

Coffris,  coffers  (almes  of  coffris), 
12,  493. 

Colage,  college,  385 ;  colage  of 
Christr=the  apostles,  366. 

Colour,  pretence,  excuse,  10,  88. 

Comelyngis,  strangers  (translates 
advened), ^  42,  46,  217. 

Comendacion,  commendatio  ani- 
marum,  one  of  the  services  for 
the  dead  (Sarum  Breviary,  ii. 
282),  191. 

Comets,  a  sign  of  pestilence,  308. 

Comineris,  commoners,  88. 

Comynte,  community,  9 ;  comuntc, 
49;  comynalte,  110;  comunete, 
125. 

Commandments,  The  Ten,  broken 
by  the  E-eligious,  7. 

Community  of  goods  among  monks 
and  friars  a  sham,  384. 

Compayne,  company,  22 ;  lord  of 
compaynesi=lord  of  hosts,  58. 

Complexion,  constitution,  tempera¬ 
ment,  10,  38,  170. 

Comunen,  communicate,  hold  com¬ 
munion,  19  ;  comyne,  357. 

Comounynge,  holding  in  common, 
385. 

Comounte,  commonalty,  commons, 
278;  comonte,  363. 

Concel,  counsel,  315. 

Concubines  kept  by  bishops,  73. 

Confession,  Wyclif’s  teaching  as  to, 
xli;  ought  to  be  voluntary,  328, 
337  ;  does  some  good,  337  ;  may 
lead  to  fornication,  330  ;  would 
be  better  made  to  two  priests  at 
once,  336;  secret  is  not  a  sacra¬ 
ment,  341. 


Confession,  first  enforced  by  Inno¬ 
cent  III.,  328,  337,  524. 
Confession  to  friars,  evils  of,  xlv, 

9,  27,  181,  224,  492,  518,  525. 
Confessors,  private,  65,  248,  325, 
334,  525. 

Confessors,  false,  65,  181,  186, 
237,  242,  247,  277. 

Conforten,  encourage,  176;  part. 
conforted,  100. 

Congregacion,  society,  order,  9. 
Coniected,  devised,  255. 

Conne,  know,  143;  connyng,  know¬ 
ledge,  4. 

Conqueren,  acquire,  183. 
Consecration  of  churches,  altars, 
etc.,  a  means  of  extortion,  35, 
62,  69,  97,  214,  233,  277,  393. 
Consent,  six  manners  of,  20,  417, 
529. 

Constance,  Council  of,  504. 
Constantyne  (the  Emperor)  com¬ 
pared  with  I7aaman,  377,  527  ; 
with  Phinehas,  475  ;  not  canon¬ 
ized,  475,  534. 

Constantine,  donation  of,  xxxix, 
378,  379,  475. 

Constorie,  consistory  (courts),  95, 
156;  consistorie,  184,  514. 
Contekis,  quarrels,  232,  234. 
Contemplation  no  excuse  for  not 
preaching,  113,  188. 
Contemplative  life,  188,  et  sq., 
514. 

Contynce,  continence,  40. 
Contynen,  continue,  33 ;  part. 
contyned,  93. 

Continence,  vows  of,  brought  in 
by  the  devil,  100. 

Contradicions,  traditions,  7.  The 
word  is  very  likely  used  to  im¬ 
ply  that  the  traditions  contradict 
God’s  law. 

Contrarien,  oppose,  56,  409. 
Contrarius,  contrary,  380 ;  con- 
trariously,  85. 

Contrition,  what  it  is,  339. 


544 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Convents,  splendour  of,  5,  27,  49, 
321,  448,  490. 

Conventycles,  societies,  366. 

Coolding,  cooling,  487. 

Cope,  covering  (cope  of  heuene), 
318,  478  ;  a  monk’s  frock,  128. 

Corieris,  curriers,  471. 

Coryouste,  curiosity,  8;  daintiness, 

200. 

Comely,  Cornelius,  471. 

Corpus  Christ!  Gild  at  York,  531. 

Corseris,  coursers,  horses,  88 ; 
horsedealers,  172. 

Corsica  claimed  as  subject  to  the 
Pope,  xxxiii. 

Cosdroe,  Chosroes,  pope  likened  to, 
533. 

Cosyns,  cousins  (Christ’s),  353. 

Cost,  expenditure,  88. 

Coste,  spend,  cost!];,  174;  part. 
•costid,  157. 

Costelevs^e,  costly,  121,  129,  205. 

Costy,  expensive,  76. 

Cotidian  distribucion,  62.  See 
note,  500. 

Cotumax,  contumacious,  184. 

Couche,  lie,  dwell,  30,  60.- 

Couden,  could,  81. 

Coueitise,  covetousness,  2. 

Couenable,  suitable,  217 ;  couen- 
abliche,  314. 

Couent,  convent,  127. 

Couere,  the  ark,  55. 

Council  of  1382,  xxxvi,  495. 

Countre  note,  harmony,  77. 

Countyngge,  keeping  accounts, 
65. 

Coupable,  culpable,  312. 

Coupabilnesse,  guiltiness,  335. 

Courtenay,  Bishop  of  London,  x ; 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  xxvii. 

Courtesy,  decay  of,  205. 

Courtesy  of  God,  284,  291,  340. 

Cowntervaylen,  v.  equal  in  value, 
392. 

Craft,  business,  73. 

Credence,  credit,  255. 


Crem,  chrism,  the  consecrated  oil 
used  in  baptism,  69,  500. 

Cristene,  baptize,  112. 

Cristendom,  Christianity,  102. 

Cristismasse  games,  206. 

Croceris,  crosiers,  210. 

Crois,  cross,  45. 

Croke,  turn,  230. 

Crokid,  deformed,  27. 

Cropen,  crept,  part.  296. 

Croune,  the  tonsure,  125. 

Cruelliere,  more  cruelly,  98. 

Crusade  in  Plunders,  xxxi,  8,  52, 
141,  152,  263,  491,  511. 

Cujshens,  cushions,  434. 

Cuylid,  part,  collected,  433. 

Cumberworth,  Sir  Thomas,  extract 
from  his  will,  516. 

Curate,  use  of  the  word,  509. 

Curates  are  bound  to  reside,  453  ; 
how  they  should  be  appointed, 
450  ;  take  office  in  lords’  houses, 
149,  161  ;  absent  themselves 
under  pretence  of  study,  156. 

Curates,  drunken,  152;  ignorant, 
153,  167,  455  ;  extravagant  in 
dress,  148 ;  given  to  hunting 
and  hawking,  151,  434  ;  give  to 
their  kinsfolk  what  should  go 
to  the  poor,  439. 

Cure,  care,  32,  42. 

Curteys,  courteous,  284. 

Cusees  wif,  414. 

Custode,  warden  (of  the  Pranciscan 
Order),  42,  47. 

Custodries,  wardenships,  districts 
over  which  the  wardens  had 
charge,  43. 

Custumable,  habitual,  174 ;  cus- 
tumabliche,  183. 

Dailes,  without  judgment  or  re¬ 
dress,  92,  128.  See  note, 

503. 

Damiani,  Peter,  509. 

Damyselis,  damsels,  9. 

Dampne]?,  condemns,  67. 


GLOSSARTAL  INDEX. 


545 


Dancing,  helps  men  to  preferment, 
65,  246. 

Dancing,  leads  to  late  hours,  204; 
sometimes  allowable,  206. 

Danyel,  15,  75. 

Dante,  xxxix. 

Dauid,  231,  365;  davi];,  291. 

Deacons,  appointed  by  the  apostles, 
413. 

Debatis,  quarrels,  59. 

Debts,  rich  men  delay  payment 
of  unjustly,  25. 

Debts,  distinguished  from  alms  (or 
tithes),  423. 

Debt,  imprisonment  for,  200,  211, 
214;  incurred  through  drunken¬ 
ness,  217. 

Decknys,  deacons,  364. 

Dede,  dead,  5,  23. 

Dede,  deed,  6,  70. 

Dedis  of  apostlis,  the  Acts,  195, 
383. 

Deel,  subs,  share. 

Defaute,  defect,  4. 

Defendid,  forbidden,  17. 

Defensoure  of  Dome  :  defensor 
civitatis  was  the  title  of  a 
magistrate  whose  chief  duty 
was  to  afford  protection  against 
oppression  on  the  part  of  the 
governor  ;  he  had  a  subordinate 
civil  jurisdiction,  395. 

Defoulid,  trodden  down  (of.  W. 
Y.,  Luke  X.  19  :  “  power  of 
defoulinge  othir  tredinge  on 
serpentis  ”),  18. 

Defourmed,  ill  made,  349. 

Degeneracy  of  mankind,  38,  93. 

Degrees,  university,  of  doubtful 
advantage,  428,  529. 

Degrees,  expense  of  taking,  428, 
530. 

Deisese,  discomfort,  179. 

Deyitte,  ?  dignity  (perhaps  dainti¬ 
ness),  211. 

Deynte,  dignity,  220. 

Delices,  pleasures,  124. 


DeliK  distributes,  161 ;  delynge, 
134;  delid,  181. 

.  Deme,  v.  judge,  84;  perf.  demeden, 
231  ;  dempten,  393 ;  po/rt. 
demyd,  33. 

Denes,  deans  (rural),  249. 

Departe,  separate,  199  ;  departing, 
distributing,  81. 

Depnesse,  depth,  62. 

Deprauen,  slander,  speak  ill  of, 
445;  depraveden,  312;  deprau- 
ynge,  168. 

Derrere,  dearer,  6. 

Derne,  secret,  353. 

Derwor]?!,  dear,  98. 

Deschaunt,  descant,  77,  91,  191, 
501. 

Despair,  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  351. 

Devoyde,  remove  (^'^But  for  a  short 
time  m3"self  I  devoyde.”  — 
Coventry  Mysteries,  243),  182. 

Dichis,  ditches,  420. 

Dictis,  Dicta,  a  book  by  Grossetete, 
385. 

Diffiede,  distrusted,  479. 

Di^schis,  dishes,  434. 

Dijt,  prepared,  340. 

Dilauy,  lavish,  306.  The  word 
occurs  in  S.E.W.  iii.  388,  and 
we  find  also  delauynesse,  ii. 
298,  and  in  both  cases  it  bears 

.  this  meaning.  I  can  find  no 
other  example  of  it. 

Dymes,  tithes,  57. 

Dirige,  mattins  in  the  office  for 
the  dead,  15,  177,  191,  212, 
494,  517. 

Disceisen,  discomfort,  11. 

Disceit,  deceit,  61;  disseyt,  461. 

Dysceyuen,  deceive,  4. 

Discess,  departure,  299. 

Dischargi]?,  relieves,  47. 

Disclaundren,  slander,  138. 

Disgratid,  degraded,  246. 

Dispeir,  despair,  15. 

Dispende,  spend,  433. 


35 


546 


GLOSS  Am  AL  INDEX. 


Dispensations,  from  rule  of  friars, 
182,  223. 

Dispensis,  expenditure,  321. 

Dispit,  spite,  35  ;  contempt,  17. 

Dispitusly,  pitilessly,  160. 

Disport,  playground,  322. 

Dissert,  desert,  deserving,  351. 

Dissese,  discomfort,  61  ;  deisese, 
179. 

Distresse  (legal),  214  ;  used 
harshlj^,  234. 

Distruje,  destroy,  340. 

Disturbances,  charged  on  poor 
priests,  xxvi,  27,  138. 

Disturblyu,  disturb,  285 ;  dis- 
trurble,  257  ;  disturbleden,  27; 
part,  disturblid,  43 ;  disturbl- 
ynge,  43. 

Disusen,  misuse,  440. 

Divinity  Schools,  false  doctrines 
upheld  in,  265. 

Dyuors,  divorce,  20,  176,  185. 

Docke,  cut  away,  430. 

Dolium,  a  prison  in  Loudon,  496. 

Dom,  judgment,  16. 

Domesman,  judge,  32. 

Dominic,  St.,  301. 

Dominion,  doctrine  of,  learned  from 
Pitz-ralph,  iii ;  its  origin  and 
growth,  xxxiii,  xxxiv  ;  its 
value  to.  Wyclif,  xxxv. 

Dominion,  all  held  of  God,  24, 
26,244,247,284,  373,  423,470. 

Dominion,  belongs  to  laymen, 
117,276,373,391,451. 

Domnpnesse,  damnableness,  126. 

Don  of,  take  off,  348. 

Doomsday,  fifteen  tokens  before, 
19,  494. 

Doren,  dare,  36  ;  dorn,  73. 

Doseris,  hangings  for  the  walls,  so 
called  because  they  came  at  the 
back  of  the  people  sitting,  434. 

Doseyns,  dozens  (of  jurors),  182. 

Doump,  dumb,  420. 

Dowe,  endow,  284 ;  part,  dowid, 
124;  dowing,  445. 


Dreynt,  drowned,  62,  444. 

Drenge,  drag,  473. 

Dress,  clerical  extravagance  in, 
60,  92,  121,  148. 

Dryncching,  drowning,  59. 

Drit,  filth,  22. 

Dronkelewe,  drunken,  given  to 
drink,  193,  217. 

Droof,  drove,  241. 

Drowyn,  drew,  105. 

Drunken  men  see  double,  267. 
Drunkenness,  in  priests,  152,  168, 
193;  brings  men  to  poverty, 
217. 

Druste,  durst,  149. 

Dwe,  due,  17. 

Dukes,  leaders,  generals,  63. 
Durren,  dare,  ind.  251. 

Ebreu,  Hebrew,  430. 

Ecclesiastical  courts,  procedure  in, 
74,  156,  500;  abuses  of,  184, 
251. 

Echone,  each  one,  475. 

Eddris,  adders,  315. 

Eelde,  old  age,  411  ;  elde,  173. 
Eeris,  ears,  345. 

Eft,  again,  339,  354,  363. 

Egipt,  440. 

Ejte,  eighth,  220. 

Eien,  eyes,  281;  eijen,  99. 

Ey  ris,  heirs,  476. 

>Eise,  ease,  134. 

Eke,  also,  57. 

Eldris,  parents,  49  ;  ancestors, 
439. 

Ely,  Eli,  55  ;  hely,  314. 

Elizebeth,  204. 

Ellis,  else,  15. 

Emperor,  The,  362,  386. 
Emperours  bischop,  467. 
Emperours  clerkis,  79,  446,  447. 
Emperour  prelates,  444,  479,  480. 
Empire,  rivalry  of,  with  the 
Papacy,  xxxiii. 

Encenseris,  censers,  323. 
Enchesouns,  reasons,  315. 


GLOSSARTAL  INDEX. 


547 


Encombre,  to  set  fast,  as  in  the 
mire,  70. 

Enci’esce]?,  increases,  155. 

Endeles,  infinitely,  71. 

Endityng,  indicting,  prosecuting, 
16. 

Endowment,  of  the  nhurch  is 
wrong,  xxvi,  122,  284,  385, 
388,  445,  476;  voice  heard  at, 
122,  374,  380,  506. 

Endowments,  impoverish  lords, 
97,  285,  369  ;  should  be  re¬ 
stored  to  the  laity,  389. 

Endurid,  hardened,  25. 

Eafamynen,  starve,  150. 

Enfect,  infected,  379. 

Enforce,  strengthen.  111. 

Enforsid,  urged,  pressed,  378. 

Englond,  engelond,  22,  276. 

Enhaunsen,  exalt,  75. 

Enleuene,  eleven,  482. 

Enoc,  Enoch,  308. 

Enpeyringe,  injury,  389. 

Enproprid,  appropriated,  81. 

Enpugne,  impugn,  391  ;  en- 
pugnyd,  369. 

Enqueren,  inquire  for,  seek  after, 
130;  enquyred,  279. 

Ensaumplerie,  example,  230. 

Ensaumplid,  exampled,  119. 

Ensuren,  assure,  17. 

Entails,  391. 

Enterdite,  put  under  an  interdict, 
63  ;  ^art.  entirdited,  79  ;  enter- 
ditynge,  79. 

Entirmete,  meddle,  394 ;  entir- 
meten  of,  159. 

Eutre,  entry,  94. 

Entre,  entire,  106;  enteire,  107. 

Entrike,  entangle,  393. 

Enuenymen,  poison,  92. 

Enyoie  je,  reji.  rejoice,  243. 

Envonje,  enjoin,  43;  enyoyned, 
49. 

Ephesyns,  232. 

Ere,  ear,  328  ;  eris,  8  ;  erris,  117. 

Erryng,  wandering  (stars),  308. 


Erchedekene,  archdeacon,  455, 
456. 

Es,  is,  82. 

Esen,  V.  ease,  30. 

Esi,  easy,  2. 

Esseis,  Essenes,  2. 

Eue,  Eve,  207,  392,  428,  461. 

Euele,  adv.  ill,  57. 

Euen,  just,  394. 

Evil  always  a  source  of  good,  428, 
529. 

Ewgeny,  Eugenius  III.,  383. 

Excommunication  invalid  if  not 
deserved,  34,  153,  454,  511. 

Excommunication  lias  no  effect  on 
the  body,  75,  501. 

Excommunication  for  not  paying 
tithes,  146,  151,  233,  453, 
510. 

Excommunication  a  cause  of  im¬ 
prisonment,  36,  74,  95,  277, 
496,  505. 

Excommunication,  letters  of,  35, 
250. 

Exemption  from  jurisdiction  of 
the  bishops,  224,  247  ;  from  lay 
jurisdiction,  277. 

Experimental  science  practised  by 
friars,  8,  442,  491,  532. 

Expounen,  expound,  84. 

Ezechiel,  395. 

Eaat,  fat,  6. 

Eables  told  to  support  the  orders, 
153,  310. 

Eables  preached,  16,  50,  59,  73, 
105,  153,  175. 

Eace,  appearance,  84,  158. 

Eagyngis,  flatteries,  307. 

Eailleden,  failed,  109. 

Faith,  what  it  is,  261,  347. 

Fallas,  fallacy,  425. 

Falsed,  falsehood,  260. 

Falsen,  give  the  lie  to,  352. 

Famularite,  familiarity,  44. 

Famulorum,  a  prayer,  134,  195, 
509. 


548 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Fantom,  vanity,  186;  fantyra,  321. 
And  worlisshe  riches  how  swa  come, 

I  hald  no}ht  elles  hot  filth  and  fantome. 

— Pricke  of  Conscience,  1196  ;  see 
Dr.  Morris’s  note  on  the  word. 
Faren,  go  on,  act,  96,  138. 

Faste,  busily,  steadily,  6,  15. 
Faulty,  faulty,  387  ;  fawty,  364. 
Fawte,  default,  388. 

Fautouris,  abettors,  69. 

Febli|>,  weakens,  454. 

Feen,  mire,  62. 

Feiris,  fairs,  280. 

Fel,  fierce,  476  ;  adv.  felly,  456. 
Feld,  field,  10. 

Felde,  fell,  477. 

Fend,  fiend,  devil,  9. 

Fendliche,  devilish,  304. 

Fer,  far,  10 ;  ferre,  31  ;  comp. 
ferrer,  381. 

Fercastynge,  scheming,  crafty, 
256. 

Feren,  frighten,  79. 

Ferfor]?li,  far,  391. 

Ferme,  farm,  243. 

Fer|>e,  fourth,. Ill  ;  firj^e,  220. 
Festis,  feasts,  23. 

Fe]?,  faith,  79. 

Ficchid,  fixed,  307. 

Fier,  fire,  78. 

Fiftenj^es,  taxes,  66.  See  note, 
500. 

Figuren,  transfigure,  288.  ■ 

Fi^s,  fish,  449. 

Fille,  fulfil,  satisfy,  217. 

Fynde,  provide  for,  151,  176; 

fyndynge,  116. 

Fynden  vp,  invent,  199. 
Fyndyngis,  inventions,  77  ;  fyn¬ 
dynge  vp,  77. 

Fynees,  Phinehas,  contrasted  wdth 
Constantine,  475. 

First  fruits,  245,  277,  393,  451. 
Idsege,  visage,  307. 

Fisik,  medicine,  knowledge  of 
abused  by  friars,  10,  224. 
Fittrid,  60.  See  note,  p.  499. 


Fitzralph,  Archbishop  of  Armagh, 
iii,  xxxiii,  xliii,  xlv?^.,  128, 
507,  518. 

Flaundris,  Flanders,  152.  See 
Crusade. 

Flen,  fiee,  34;  perf.  fley,  195; 
part,  fieed,  173;  fieynge,  218. 

Fleys,  fiesh,  411,  435. 

Fleysly,  fieshly,  sensual,  474. 

Flori^shid,  ornate,  flowery,  445. 

Flo  wen,  fied,  71. 

Fode,  food,  150. 

Folde,  bow,  bend  aside,  288,  426. 

Foie,  fool,  10. 

Fool,  foolish,  118;  folie,  7 ;  foly, 
163. 

Folily,  foolishly,  290 ;  folyliche, 
320. 

Fonnyd,  foolish,  20;  insipid,  57, 
499. 

Foimydnesse,  foolishness,  266. 

Forbarre,  hinder,  61  ;  forbaren, 
234  ;  forbarien,  182. 

Forbeden,  forbid,  59  ;  perf.  for- 
beed,  287;  part,  forbodun,  376. 

Fordo,  destroy,  38  ;  fordohe,  345; 
fordiden,  314. 

Fordon,  done  before,  339. 

F'orfenden,  forbid,  303. 

Forfeture,  loss,  348. 

For^eue,  abandon,  give  up,  200  ; 
(for^euynge  manasse,  232 ;  trans¬ 
lates  the  Yulg.  remittentes 
minas,”  Eph.  vi.  9). 

Forgoer,  leader,  383;  translates 
the  Yulg.  ‘‘ praecessor  ”  ;  for- 
goeris,  forerunners,  128. 

Forrouris,  furs,  12. 

Forswere,  perjure,  63  ;  forsworn, 
75  ;  forswerynge,  253. 

For];,  may  not  for];,  cannot  go  on, 
155,  222;  usen  for];,  continue 
to  use,  248. 

For]>inke,  repent,  235 ;  for]»ink- 
yng,_  338. 

Forwhi,  because,  44. 

Foule,  foully,  9. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


549 


Poundement,  foundation,  260. 

Pranchisen  togydir,  are  under  the 
same  (private)  jurisdiction,  385. 

Prancis,  St.,  Testament  of,  45,  497. 

Pranciscans  evade  their  rule,  49, 
498  ;  say  they  are  released  by 
the  Pope,  47. 

Praternity,  letters  of,  4,  5,  12,  27, 
160,  262. 

Praticelli,  219  ;  persecuted  by 
other  friars,  12,  51. 

Praunse,  Prance,  429. 

Praunseis,  St.  Prancis,  40;  fraun- 
ciss,  301. 

Preedom  of  God’s  law,  or  the  Gos¬ 
pel,  17,  31,  67,  253,  256,  299, 
330. 

Preelte,  frailty,  344. 

Preewill,  108,  110. 

Preliche,  freely,  4. 

Prench  Bible,  429. 

Prere,  friar,  40. 

Priars,  Wyclifs  opposition  to, 
xliii;  preach  for  gain,  442,  445; 
evade  their  rule  47,  etc.;  errors 
r  aboiit  the  Host,  19,  349,  352. 

Priars  hear  confession,  xlv,  9,  27, 
181,  224,  492,  518,  525  ;  slan¬ 
der  parish  priests,  445,  532 ; 
waste  money  in  adorning  their 
churches,  8,  181,  321. 

Priars,  unchaste,  6,  10,  12,  224, 
305,  309,  490. 

Priars  practise  as  physicians,  10, 
219,  224,  492. 

Priars  send  money  out  of  the  realm 
to  the  King’s  enemies,  50 ; 
build  extravagantly,  5,  27,  50, 
316,  490;  steal  children,  9,  10, 
51,  68,  133,  223,  269,  278. 

Priars,  character  of  their  preaching, 
8,  16,  105,444;  some  good,  298. 

Priars’  habits,  sanctity  attributed 
to,  316,  523. 

Priste,  first,  245. 

Pryste  fruytis,  firstfruits,  66. 

Proytis,  fruits,  66. 


Pulbut,  headstrong,  213. 

Pulle,  at  jje,  sufficiently,  55. 

Pullire,  headlong  (the  Dublin 
MS.  has  fulbere),  256. 

Purniture,  expensive,  used  by 
priests,  6,  434,  531. 

Purrours,  furs,  434. 

Gabbe,  to  lie,  297,  331 ;  gabben, 
ind.  290  ;  gabbynge,  207. 

Gabbyngis,  lies,.  305,  442. 

Gabriel,  382,  528. 

Gadlyngis,  slanderers,  214. 

Gamelyn,  513. 

Gamenes,  games,  246. 

Garlek,  for  goose-stuffing,  82. 

Garnement,  garment,  50,  302. 

Gaten,  got,  per/.  73. 

Gateways,  embattled,  to  abbeys, 
15,  494. 

Gatis,  ways,  191. 

Gaunt,  John  of,  ix,  x,  xi,  xii, 

XXV,  xxix,  XXX. 

Gederen,  gedre,  gather,  14,  46; 
gedre];,  6;  gederynge,  154  ; 
gederid,  431. 

Gederid,  compound  (a  gedrid 
name),  431. 

Gendren,  engender,  146;  gendrid, 
45. 

Gendring,  used  of  consecrating 
the  elements  (gendring[Christ’s] 
body),  441. 

Gendrure,  begetting,  441. 

Generalte,  the  whole  body,  4^. 

Gentry,  bad  example  set  by,  207. 

George,  St.,  99. 

Gessen,  suppose,  think,  105,  192; 
gessedest,  67. 

Gestis,  guests,  42. 

Geti]?,  begets,  441. 

Gettere,  boaster,  23,  243,  249 ; 
also  written  iettere. 

Gidre,  v.  gather,  128. 

Giesy,  Gehazi,  67 ;  giezi,  378,  380. 

Gildene  mouth,  translation  of 
Chrysostom,  104. 


550 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Gilis,  deceits,  305,  323. 

Gilours,  deceivers,  309. 

Gyltif,  guilty,  9,  112,  272;  gylti, 

10. 

Gises,  fashions,  186. 

Gyternynge,  playing  on  the  cittern, 
a  sort  of  guitar,  9. 

Glauer,  v,  chatter,  330. 

]iue  it  vp,  yield,  allow  oneself 
beaten,  296. 

Glastonbury  kitchen,  494. 

Glebe,  449,  533. 

Glymerynge,  indistinct  perception, 
339. 

Glorious,  ostentatious,  162. 

Glose,  commentary,  12. 

Gloseris,  commentators,  284. 
Glosynge,  commenting,  135,  148. 
Glotyne,  gluttony,  86. 

Glutton’s  argument,  97,  454. 
Gnackis,  tricks,  184. 

Gnare,  snare,  437. 

God  is  a  courteous  lord,"  284,  291, 
340  ;  he  is  liberal,  434. 

God,  presence  of,  in  all  creatures, 
203,  208,  516. 

God’s  law,  a  favourite  expression 
of  the  Lollards,  254. 

Gogelen,  squint,  look  aside,  341. 
Gold  exchanged  for  lead  (in  pay¬ 
ing  for  bulls),  23,  66,  245. 

Gold  drained  out  of  England  to 
the  Papal  Court,  22,  66,  92, 

144. 

Golet,  gullet,  200. 

Gomor,  Gomorrha,  26,  248. 

Good  fryday,  302. 

Gorram  (Nicolas  de  Gorran),  380, 
528. 

Gospel,  commentaries  on,  are  scarce, 

145. 

Gospel,  authority  of,  255. 
Gospelleris,  authors  of  Gospels, 
256. 

Gostli,  spiritual,  90;  gostly,  adv.  56. 
Gouernaile,  governance,  24 ;  go¬ 
vernment,  118,  239. 


Graielis,  service  hooks,  graduals, 
194,  515. 

Gratter,  greater,  383. 

Greek  form  of  absolution,  332, 
525. 

Greese,  anoint,  439  ;  greesse,  454. 
Greesis,  steps,  stairs,  420. 

Gregge,  aggravate,  319  ;  greggi]?, 
286. 

Gregor  j^e  sixte,  391. 

Gregory,  St.,  8,  35,  56,  58,  61, 
64,  70,  77,  96,  112,  118,  188, 
245,  272,  339,  377,  395,  529. 
Gregory  XI.,  \\n.,  xiii,  xiv,  405. 
Greke,  a  member  of  the  Greek 
Church,  332,  455,  464. 

Grete,  great,  2  ;  greteste,  86. 
Grette,  greeted,  204. 

Gret  chep,  very  cheap,  185. 

Greu,  Greek,  430. 

Greue,  suh.  grave,  17. 

Groos,  plain,  408. 

Grosted  (Pobert  Grossetete,Pishop 
of  Lincoln),  61,  123,  145,  224, 
507,  510,  518. 

Gruceben,  to  grumble,  111;  gruc- 
chi]7,  466;  grucchynge,  15. 
Gruccheris,  grumblers,  308. 
Guarnerius,  Arnold,  viii. 

|ate  housis,  gate  houses  (expendi¬ 
ture  on),  15,  494. 

^ee,  yea,  2;  ^e,  10  ;  jhe,  297. 

^ee,  ye,  8. 

|eer,  year,  3  ;  ^er,  62. 

]elden,  yield,  give,  97 ;  gilding, 
423. 

^erde,  a  stick,  332. 

)erdis,  yards  (chirche  jerdis),  97, 
233. 

^efe,  to  give,  181  ;  jeuen,  9;  jaf, 
3;  ^auen,  118;  jeuynge,  12; 
^eeuynge,  67 ;  ^ouen,  40. 

]ette,  boast  (?),  319. 

]euere,  giver,  11. 

]if,  if,  2. 

]ifte,  gift,  66  ;  pefte,  82 ;  jeftis, 
71. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


551 


^it,  yet,  4 ;  333,  ^hit,  350. 

^ock,  yoke,  354 ;  joc,  425 ;  jook, 
228. 

^onge,  young,  6 ;  comp,  jongar, 
383. 

^ork,  York  (Archbishop  of),  118  ; 
play  of,  429,  530. 

^ouwre,  your,  179. 

)ouj7e,  youth,  253. 

Habitis,  dress  of  monks  or  friars, 
12  ;  its  excessive  amplitude, 
315  ;  sanctity  attached  to,  316. 

Hayned,  persecuted,  spited,  250,. 
I  cannot  find  this  word  any¬ 
where  else,  but  suppose  it  to 
be  connected  with  Fr.  haine. 

Hayward,  a  keeper  of  inclosures, 
444,  532. 

Halde,  hold,  49;  baldest,  132. 

Halewid,  those  who  are  sanctified 
(translates  sanctificatis,  Yulg.), 
300. 

Half,  behalf,  303. 

Halidaies,  holy  days,  280. 

Halpeny,  halfpenny,  21. 

Haltynge,  lame,  231. 

Hal  wen,  saints,  88. 

Halwid,  hallowed,  41,  188. 

Halwynge,  consecration,  35,  62. 

Han,  have,  inf.  15;  ind.pres.  4; 
hauen,  inf.  99. 

Hangij?  in,  depends  on,  266. 

Hard,  of  hard=:hardly,  297. 

Hardy,  bold,  33. 

Harim,  harm,  21. 

Hasard,  gambling,  152. 

Hauynge,  property,  2. 

Haunten,  frequent,  60 ;  hanten, 
23  ;  practise,  73,  146,  248. 

Hauntynge,  practice,  207. 

Hawen,  saints,  41,  48. 

Hawynge,  having,  131. 

Hawking  by  priests,  23,  151,  212, 
246,  259,  434;  by  monks,  121. 

Hedly,  in  a  headstrong  way,  100  ; 
heedly,  256. 


Heele,  health,  340  ;  heelj^e,  297. 

Heerde,  herdsman  or  shepherd, 
321. 

Hey,  high,  5;  hei^e,  13;  heje,  61 ; 
comp,  he^ere,  159;  sup.  heierst, 
327  ;  hierste,  408. 

Helped,  exalted,  225  ;  heyhid, 
307. 

Heieris,  heirs,  183. 

Heyl,  hail,  welcome,  311. 

Heynesse,  highness,  42. 

Heldris,  parents,  9,  32. 

Hele,  heal,  179;  helid,  58  ; 
heledde,  343, 

Hely,  Eli,  314. 

Hely,  Elijah,  75  ;  helise,  67 ; 
heli^e,  377  ;  heliye,  380. 

\Helynge,  clothing,  97,  387. 

Helles,  else,  125;  hellis,  64. 

Helt,  poured,  380. 

Hem,  them,  2. 

Hende,  end,  24;  hendeles,  endless, 

220. 

Heoris,  theirs,  300. 

Herberwen,  v.  harbour,  entertain, 
5;  herberewe,  211;  herbwre, 
210;  herbwerid,  129;  her- 
boringe,  413. 

Herebervve,  harbour,  shelter,  14; 
herbwre,  146;  herbore,  415. 

Herberweles,  shelterless,  129. 

Here,  their,  2  ;  hern,  theirs,  232  ; 
heeren,  310  ;  heren,  328  ;  herne, 
414. 

Here,  ear,  169. 

Hereris,  hearers,  158. 

Herefore,  therefore,  11  ;  herfore, 
13. 

Heresy,  unjustly  charged  against 
true  priests,  74  ;  prevalent  in 
schools  of  divinit}*,  265. 

Heretics’  property,  to  whom 
forfeit,  502. 

Herford  (Nicholas),  xxvii,  xxix, 
141. 

Herid,  haired  (^'  J^e  sterreherid  or 
beerdid”  =the  comet),  308. 


552 


GLOSSARTAL  INDEX. 


Herie,  worship,  praise,  216  ; 
heriede,  301  ;  herynge,  206  ; 
'part,  hirid,  288. 

Heryyngis,  praises,  274. 

Heris,  hairs,  21. 

Herode,  273,  389;  heroude,  101, 
297  ;  his  oath  not  binding,  389. 

Herof,  for  this,  on  account  of  this, 

111. 

Herre,  hinge,  472. 

Heitis,  hearts,  20. 

Hertly,  heartily,  110. 

HerJ^e,  earth,  86. 

Heruest  trees,  trees  at  fruit  time, 
307. 

Heest,  command,  79 ;  hestis,  7 ; 

]7e  ten  hestis  ”  =;the  Ten  Com- 
m.andments,  340. 

Heten,  eat,  96. 

Heuyd,  head,  3;  heued,  218 ;  hed, 

21. 

Hidliche,  secret,  315. 

Hien,  hasten,  168  ;  hijen,  173  ; 
hiede,  195. 

Hye,  exalt,  311,  475  ;  hi^en,  241 ; 
hyed,  421  ;  hiyng,  475. 

Hi^t,  promised,-  348. 

Hildegar,  11,  492. 

Hilden,  hold  ;  hilden  out= exhibit, 
171. 

Hile,  V.  cover,  475. 

Hilynge,  covering,  248,  411  ; 
church  vestments,  223. 

Hynes,  servants,  418,  439,  454. 

Holler,  Dr.  Constantine,  ix,  xxix, 
xxxii,  xlvii. 

Holde,  fortress,  321. 

Holde,  old,  58. 

Holde  for]?,  practise,  continue,  3, 

11. 

Holderis  up,  supporters,  10. 

Hfjletis,  dens,  caves,  322. 

Hole,  whole,  67,  hool,  100. 

Holy,  wholly,  370  ;  hooliche,  42; 

Holy  days,  breaking  of,  9,  120. 

Holiliche,  holily,  179. 

Holid,  pierced  with  holes,  349. 


Holiness  better  than  knowledge, 
327. 

Holouris,  whoremongers,  adul¬ 
terers,  91,  442. 

Holsum,  wholesome,  382 ;  adv. 
hoolsumly,  393. 

Holsumness,  wholesomeness,  239. 

Homly,  familiar,  41,  477. 

Hondis,  dogs,  12,  121. 

Honorie,  Honorius  III.,  40. 

Hoosis,  hose,  287. 

Hoot,  hot,  170. 

Hope,  what  it  is,  349,  526. 

Hordam,  whoredom,  205  ;  hor- 
dom,  156. 

Hord,  hoarding,  fence  (?),  316. 

Hordis,  heaps,  100  ;  treasuries, 
476. 

Horden,  heap  up,  treasure,  101, 
338;  hoordede,  321. 

Horses,  extravagance  in,  on  the 
part  of  the  clergy,  60,  88,  92, 
149,  210,  249,  434. 

Hospitality  of  bishops,  413. 

Host,  doctrine  of  the,  19,  345, 
349,  352,  357,  465. 

Host,  the  worse  for  consecration, 
357,  526. 

Hostiense,  the  cardynal,  the  Car¬ 
dinal  of  Ostia,  47,  498. 

Houj,  how,  388. 

Houre,  our,  83. 

Housynge,  dwellings,  175. 

Houslewth,  shelter  in  a  house,  211. 

Howen,  ought,  241. 

Hud,  hidden,  299. 

Hue,  Hugh  (St.),  382,  512. 

Hungary  claimed  by  the  Popes, 
xxxiii. 

Hure,  her,  12. 

Hurlid,  bandied  about,  driven, 
184,  233,  250. 

Y,  I,  76. 

lapen, «?.  jest,  trick,  82  ;  lark,  238; 
iapi}?,  170;  iapynge,  213. 

lapes,  jests,  tricks,  12,  65. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


553 


lame,  James  (St.),  129,  211  ; 

James,  61  ;  Jamus,  304 ;  his 
teaching  on  confession,  343. 

Y-broken,  broken,  391. 

Iche,  each,  327. 

Ychoon,  each  one,  all  of  them,  328 ; 
ychone,  345. 

Ydiots,  ignorant  men,  5,  46. 

Idolatry,  it  is,  to  worship  an  acci¬ 
dent,  466. 

Jacke  Upland,  490,  492. 

Jaudun,  John  of,  xxxiii. 

lepte,  Jephthah,  389. 

leroboam,  an  example  of  simony, 
67. 

lerom,  Jerome  (St.),  31,  37,  58, 
112,  118,  122,  125,  248,  380; 
translated  the  Bible,  429. 

Jeromye,  Jeremiah,  188,  231  ; 
ieromyes,  131. 

Terusalem,  125. 

letteris,  braggarts.  See  Getteris. 

Jews,  worst  governed  under 
priests,  370. 

Y^e,  eye;  at  i^e=:at  a  glance,  384. 

Ilche,  each,  every,  297,  310. 

like,  same,  9,  87,  311. 

Images,  worship  paid  to,  xlii,  7  ; 
money  wasted  on,  210,  279,521. 

Ympe,  offshoot,  334. 

Imprisonment  for  debt,  200,  211, 
214;  for  excommunication,  36, 
74,  95,  277,  496,  505. 

In,  against,  296.  ’ 

Incontinence,  prevalence  of,  218. 

Ynde,  India,  436. 

Indignacion,  contempt,  4,  204. 

.-  Induction  fees,  248. 

Indulgences,  8,  82,  150,  238,  464, 
482,  491,  535. 

Innocent  III.,  private  confession 
first  made  binding  by,  328,  524. 

I-now,  enough,  327  ;  ynowj,  12. 

Institution  fees,  248. 

Instuyng,  instituting,  450. 

Intention  can  be  judged  only  by 
God,  311. 


Intil,  into,  288. 

Joan  (Princess)  stops  proceedings 
against  Wyclif,  xiv. 

Joas,  Joash,  365. 

lob,  354 ;  served  God  on  the 
dunghill,  15;  called  king,  231. 
logelours,  jugglers,  99. 
loly,  lively;  169;  iolily,  gladly, 
100. 

Joon,  Jon,  John  (St.)  the  Evange¬ 
list,  9,  34,  37,  195,  327. 

Joon,  John  (St.)  Baptist,  2,  329, 
345,  467. 

John  St.  Chrysostom,  25,  104, 
105. 

Josias,  365. 

Ypocrisie,  hypocrisy,  2. 

Ypocrite,  hypocritical,  89. 

Yren,  iron,  303. 

Irose,  angry,  307. 

Is,  his,  67. 

Ysaye,  Isaiah,  25. 

Ysedore,  172  ;  ysidre,  272,  374. 
Israel,  232  ;  israelle,  366. 
Isscheweden,  eschewed,  166. 
Jubilees,  181,  513. 

Juda,  Christ  belonged  to  the  tribe 
of,  391. 

Judas,  26,  63,  65,  135,  167,  183, 
267,  378. 
lude,  St.,  306. 
lude,  Judsea,  27. 
ludycialis,  judicial  laws,  285. 
luelis,  jewels,  63,  86,  195,  216. 
luge,  judge,  32. 
lurdiccion,  jurisdiction,  57. 

Juries  bribed,  63,  183,  513  ; 

packed,  182. 

Jurisdiction,  criminal,  exercised 
by  ecclesiastics,  385,  528. 
Jurisdiction  of  prelates  protects 
vice,  213. 

lurrouris,  jurors,  63,  183. 
lustis,  jousts,  10. 

Kacche,  catch,  205. 

Kaste,  devise,  intend,  87. 


554 


GLOSSARTAL  INDEX. 


Katerine,  Katherine  (St.),  205. 

Kechenes,  kitchens,  extravagant 
in  monasteries,  15,  494. 

Kechene  clerkis,  13,  65,  168,  242, 
246. 

Keynes,  keys,  power  of,  341. 

Kepyng,  care,  21. 

Kempt,  combed,  426. 

Keruynge,  cutting,  12. 

Kest,  perf.  cast,  kestiden,  443. 

Keuercheris,  kerchiefs,  head¬ 
dresses,  65,  205  ;  keuerchiefs, 
246. 

Keuerid,  covered,  20. 

Kyn,  kind,  sort  (many  kyn 
skillis treasons  of  many  sorts), 
352;  kynne,  160. 

Kynde  nature,  4,  100  ;  race,  7. 

Kyndely,  natural,  174,  372. 

Kyndles,  broods,  2  ;  kyndlyngis, 
315. 

Kynghod,  kingship,  471. 

King’s  Hall,  Cambridge,  508,  528. 

Kynrede,  tribe,  230,  304. 

Kirtlis,  tunics,  40. 

Knackeris,  tricksters,  156. 

Knackis,  tricks,  156. 

Knackynge,  tricky,  artificial  music, 
9,  76,  91,  118,  169. 

Knighton,  xlvi,  254. 

Kny^tte,  land  held  by  knight 
service,  384. 

Knytting,  binding,  476. 

Knoweleche,  acknowledge,  256 ; 
knowlechi)’,  21  ;  knowlech- 
ynge,  327.  _ 

Koynte,  cunning,  quaint,  347. 

Kon,  can,  320;  kunne,  105; 
koude,  471  ;  koujde,  382. 

Kotis,  coats,  287. 

Kunnen,  know,  81. 

Kunnyng,  learned,  5. 

Kunnynge,  knowledge,  10,  23,  58. 

Label,  a  tassel,  Halliwell.  Chaucer 
uses  the  word  for  a  pointer  at¬ 
tached  to  the  astrolabe.  In  the 
text  it  means  a  condition  under 


which  a  hull  is  granted.  The 
idea  seems  to  be  that  of  a  slip 
attached  to  the  bull  and  bearing 
the  conditions,  331. 

Labourers,  defrauded  and  op¬ 
pressed,  233,  519  ;  robbed  by 
prelates,  73. 

Lackid,  used  impersonally  (him 
lackid),  93. 

Ladies,  entertained  at  monasteries, 
129;  keep  confessors,  334; 
help  on  bad  priests,  246. 

Lafully,  lawfully,  74. 

Laity,  should  read  the  gospel, 
159,  429. 

Lay  rulers,  should  correct  the 
clergy,  80,  130,  241,  292. 

Lancaster,  Duke  of.  ^ee  Gaunt, 
John  of. 

Languyschynge,  sick,  228. 

Largen,  are  liberal,  341. 

Largenesse,  liberality,  174. 

Lasse,  less,  31. 

Laten,  late,  let,  14,  38. 

Laudis,  a  service  appointed  to  he 
said  at  3  a.m.  It  is  usually 
joined  with  Mattins,  and  the 
two  make  up  the  first  of  the 
Canonical  Hours,  41. 

Law,  Wyclif’s  knowledge  of,  iii. 

Law  studied  instead  of  Theology, 
157,  511. 

Lawere,  lawyer,  299 ;  lawereris, 
23. 

Lawyers,  harm  done  by,  182,  et 
seqq.,  234,  237  ;  ecclesiastical, 
the  worst,  184. 

Lazar,  Lazarus,  344,  526. 

Lead,  gold  given  for,  23,  66,  245. 

Leccherours,  fornicators,  102;  lec- 
chouris,  169. 

Lechery,  prelates  reserve  punish¬ 
ment  of,  to  themselves,  213. 

Leffel,  lawful,  41  ;  leful,  67 ;  lef- 
ful,  90 ;  leeful,  284 ;  adv.  lef- 
fully,  265;  leffly,  132. 

Lege,  liege,  31. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


555 


Leggeaunce,  allegiance,  290. 

Leggen,  allege,  289. 

Leie,  tell  lies,  264 ;  leif,  270 ; 
lei^ede,  264. 

Leie,  v.  lay,  247 ;  leyne,  286 ; 
leid,  50. 

Leyen,  part,  lain,  286. 

Ley^e,  laugh,  460. 

Leiser,  leisure,  112. 

Lekerous,  savoury,  tempting  to 
gluttony,  216. 

Leland,  i. 

Lemes,  limbs,  members,  323. 

Lemmanys,  concubines,  156  ;  bi¬ 
shops  have  several,  73. 

Lene,  lend,  128. 

Lengest,  longest,  18. 

Lepers,  priest’s  office  in  regard  to, 
343. 

Lepre,  leper,  leprosy,  67. 

Lerid,  learned,  243. 

Lesen,  lese,  lose,  18,  30;  lesynge, 
18. 

Lesewis,  pastures,  433. 

Lesyngis,  lies,  3. 

Lesyng  mongeris,  liars,  11,  125, 
268. 

Letten,  hinder,  3  ;  letti]?,  48 ;  let- 
tid,  56  ;  letting,  101. 

Lettede,  ceased,  refrained,  313 ; 
lett3nge,  ceasing,  190. 

Lettris  of  fraternity,  4,  5,  12,  19, 
27,  160,  262,  353,  489. 

Leue !  an  exclamation  eqhivalent 
to  the  modern  dear  I  probably 
short  for  ‘‘Leue  God!”  454 
1.  11,  479  1.  5. 

Leue,  gladly,  willingly,  333. 

Leuen,  live,  92;  leue^,  183;  leu- 
ynge,  33. 

Leuen,  leave  off,  neglect,  53,  70  ; 
leuejj,  102. 

Leuefulliche,  lawfully,  297. 

Leuy  (tribe  of),  230,  365. 

Lewid,  lay,  unlearned,  26,  77, 
238. 

Lewiderste,  most  ignorant,  409. 


Lewidly,  ignorantly,  289. 

Lewis  of  Bavaria,  xxxiii. 

Liehy,  like,  414. 

Lickenesse,  likeness,  19,  96  ;  com¬ 
parison,  319  ;  licnesse,  304. 

Licned,  likened,  97. 

Lije,  tell  lies,  333  ;  li^e]?,  36. 

Lien  on,  slander,  120. 

Liflode,  livelihood,  11,  18;  lijf- 
lode,  364  ;  lyfelode,  386. 

Lige,  liege,  16,  62. 

Lijtly,  easily,  481. 

Liynge,  laughing,  213,  517. 

Likerousnesse,  daintiness,  61. 

Liki]?  (used  impersonally),  hem 
liki]7,  72,  91,  256. 

Lykynge,  pleasing,  14,  162. 

Likyngis,  delights,  34, 

Lymytacion,  restraint,  70. 

Lymyti]?,  appoints,  gives  a  mono¬ 
poly  to,  331. 

Ly  my  tours,  friars  to  whom  was 
assigned  a  district  within  which 
they  weie  the  official  beggars  of 
the  Convent,  5. 

Lyms,  limbs,  109. 

Lyncolne  (Grossetete),  4,  11,  56, 
92,  112;  lyncolnyense,  385. 

Lynyoge,  lending,  277. 

Liste,  impers.  please,  hem  liste,  12. 

Lystris,  298.  Teachers  or  lecturers 
on  Theology  in  a  monastery  or 
capitular  church.  (I  give  this 
with  doubt,  as  the  best  among 
the  many  meanings  of  “  lector.” 
8ee  Mr.  Skeat’s  Note  to  Piers 
Plowman,  p.  112.) 

Litergi,  lethargy,  372. 

Litigiousness  of  prelates,  61,  87, 
436. 

Lytliche,  easily,  296. 

Lyue,  leave,  40. 

Lywynge,  living,  mode  of  life, 
124. 

Lok,  lock,  330. 

Loke,  look,  take  care,  38  ;  see  95, 
97. 


556 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Londis  lawe,  common  law,  132. 

Longi];,  belongs,  69. 

Lonynge,  lending  (or  begging  ?), 
167  ;  see  note,  p.  512. 

Loos,  loss,  16,  212. 

Lordeschipinge,  exercise  of  lord- 
ship,  385. 

Lordlynes,  lordliness,  384. 

Lords,  duty  of,  to  their  subjects, 
230,  239 ;  impoverished  by  en¬ 
dowment,  97,  285,  369 ;  im¬ 
prisoned  for  helping  true  priests, 
79. 

Lordship.  See  Dominion. 

Lorel,  rascal,  191,  212,  214. 

Lorelschipe,  rascality,  156. 

Lore,  doctrine,  350 ;  lords,  38, 
303. 

Losinga,  Herbert,  503. 

Loue,  praise,  320,  line  4.  Cf. 
Dutch  loven.  I  believe  the  word 
is  not  used  in  this  sense  in  the 

W.  V. 

Louedaies,  courts  of  arbitration, 
172,  234,  242,  243,  512. 

Louse,  loose,  let  go,  310  ;  lousi]?, 
310;  loused,  328. 

Loute,  bow  down  to,  423,  460  ; 
loutid,  306. 

Lucifer,  2,  3,  15,  24. 

Luk,  St.,  146. 

Lumpis,  bodies,  societies,  6,  447, 
449,  491. 

Lustly,  pleasant,  411. 

Luther,  xx,  xlvi. 

Maad,  made,  2. 

Macamethe,  Mahomet,  301. 

Machabees,  468. 

Magdaleyne,  189,  205. 

Magnyficat,  169,  512. 

Magrey,  unpleasantness,  misfor¬ 
tune,  465. 

Mahometans,  their  likness  to  the 
religious  orders,  301,  523. 

Mahound,  Mahomet,  99. 

Maydynhot,  maidenhood,  474. 


Maires,  mayors,  use  their  influence 
on  behalf  of  false  preachers,  26. 

Maistir  of  stories  (Petrus  Comes- 
tor),  2,  489. 

Maistris,  masters  (at  the  uni¬ 
versity),  6. 

Maistry,  mastery,  lordship,  421. 

Malachie,  363. 

Malcus,  Malchus,  382. 

Malencolious,  gloomy,  ill-tem¬ 
pered,  215. 

Maliss,  power  for  harm,  ill  eflect, 
457, 

Malle,  mallet,  351. 

Manas,  menace,  94,  99 ;  manass, 
417. 

Manas,  v.  threaten,  63,  234  ; 

manaaside,  461  ;  manasynge, 
37. 

Manere  for  ]7e,  for  fashion’s  sake, 
156. 

Manhede,  manhood,  167. 

Manly,  courteous,  65,  74. 

Manquelleris,  murderers,  10. 

Manquellyng,  homicide,  9. 

Mansleeris,  murderers,  56. 

Marc  (St.),  313. 

Marchaundise,  merchandize,  63. 

Marchauntis,  merchants,  22,  24 ; 
machauntis,  172. 

Margare,  Margaret  (St.),  205. 

Marie,  the  Yirgin,  21,  204. 

Marie magdeleyne,  328  ;  maudelen, 
414. 

Market  betere,  frequenter  of 
markets,  242,  520. 

Markets,  should  not  be  held  on 
Sundays  or  holidays,  280. 

Marriage  of  priests,  unlawful, 
474;  should  be  allowed,  7, 
100,  303,  504. 

Marrid,  marred,  329. 

Marsilio  of  Padua,  xxxiii. 

Marteris  of  glotonye,  211. 

Massageris,  messengers,  106. 

Mass-books,  a  witness  to  the 
Gospel,  290. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


557 


Masse  pens,  money  paid  for  masses, 
160. 

Masses,  false  trust  in,  167,  318  ; 
said  by  bad  priests,  should  be 
avoided,  418. 

Matematik,  342. 

Matynes,  57,  112,  118,  177,  183, 
193;  mate5ms,  418;  matynys, 
168;  metenes,  22;  matynes  of 
our  lady,  191,  514. 

Matins,  obligation  of  saying,  193, 
514. 

Matheu,  2. 

Mathy,  Matthias,  chosen  by  lot, 
452,  482. 

Maumetrie,  idolatry,  122,  279. 

Maurametis,  idols,  5,  67. 

Maundement,  commandment,  7, 
149. 

Measures,  false,  25,  185,  199. 

Meche,  much,  82,  296. 

Meddle,  mix,  442;  medlen,  297  ; 
meddlid,  456. 

Medes,  meadows,  10. 

Mede,  reward,  247. 

Medeful,  meritorious,  8,  83,  178  ; 
medefulli,  adv.  382. 

Meyne,  household,  followers,  32, 
81  ;  meynne,  102;  meynje,  365. 

Meynteneris,  supporters,  24. 

Meke,  v.  humble,  used  reflectively, 
mekehim=:humble  himself,  338. 

Mekerste,  most  humble,  460. 

Mekenesse,  humility,  4. 

Mendynauntis,  mendicants,  128, 

220. 

Mene,  sub.  mean,  midway,  140. 

Mene,  mediator,  409. 

Mene,  middle,  271  ;  menene,  278. 

Menely,  moderately,  31. 

Menours,  minors,  40. 

Mentile,  mantle,  475. 

Merchants,  their  tricks,  25,  185, 
238. 

Mercymentis,  amercements,  118, 
233. 

Meri^t,  merit,  48. 


Meritorie,  meritorious,  264. 
Merken,  remark,  387. 

Meschef,  mischief,  91. 

Mesel,  leper,  205,  343,  377. 
Messager,  messenger,  58. 

Messis,  masses,  212. 

Measurably,  moderately,  433. 
Metenes,  mattins,  22. 

Meuen,  move,  245. 

Mychel,  much,  15;  mychil,  83. 
Midnight  rising  of  Religious,  133, 
317. 

Myjttis,  powers,  217. 

Mylneston  of  assis,  millstone  of  a 
mill  worked  by  an  ass,  61,  499. 
Mynging,  mixing,  475. 

Mynor,  the  minor  (proposition  in 
a  syllogism),  382. 

Mynstralis,  minstrels,  121. 
Miracles  not  proof  of  sanctit}^  288, 
469  ;  false  stories  of,  94,  153. 
Miracle  plays,  429,  515,  530. 
Myschef,  misfortune,  discomfort, 
14;  myschif,  16;  myscheues, 
49  ;  myscheyf,  231. 
Myschefous,  miserable,  14. 
Mysese,  discomfort,  380. 
Myslyuyng,  evil  life,  4. 
Misse-liki]?,  displeases,  338. 
Myspeken,  speak  ill,  228. 
Myssaid,  reviled,  353. 

Missetaken,  taken  wrongfully,  344. 
Myster,  need,  409. 

Mystiliche,  mystically,  309  ;  mys- 
tely,  343. 

My  sty,  mystical,  344. 

Mytris,  mitres  (jewelled),  210. 
Moche,  much,  3  ;  mochel,  83. 
Moeblis,  moveable  goods,  445. 
Moyses,  Moses,  387. 

Mold warpis,  moles,  89,95,147,502. 
Mone,  money,  331. 

Mone,  moon,  192,  267. 

Money  taken  out  of  the  country 
by  priests,  23,  92,  144,  223. 
Moneste,  admonish,  41  ;  moonest, 
44  ;  monestynge,  300. 


558 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


9! 


Mone]?,  month,  69. 

Monks,  bound  to  maintain  them¬ 
selves  by  labour,  136,  509 ; 
ought  not  to  leave  the  cloister, 
449,  533. 

Monks  become  such  for  worldly 
goods,  61,  122;  their  many 

faults,  115,  et  seqq. 

Moo,  more,  8. 

Mootehallis,  legal  assemblies,  395. 

Moralis,  moral  laws,  285. 

Mornynge,  mourning,  91. 

Mornynge  abite,  garb  of  penitence, 

4. 

Mortal,  what  sin  is,  xxxvi,  338. 

Mortesid,  amortised,  123. 

MorJ^ere,  murder,  11. 

Morjjerid,  murdered,  100. 

Mortuaries,  fines  due  from  pro¬ 
perty  on  the  death  of  the  owner, 
224,  518. 

Morwe,  morrow,  204. 

Moste,  greatest,  174. 

Mot,  must,  50 ;  moten,  57, 

Motetis,  a  sort  of  Church  music. 
See  note,  502. 

Mount,  so  called  from  moving, 
457. 

Mowen,  might,  69  ;  mowne,  26. 

Mowlid,  made  mouldy,  153. 

Muk,  muck,  5,  147.  A  favourite 
expression  of  "Wyclif  for  riches. 

Musen,  consider,  wonder,  35. 

Mut,  must,  285. 


iMaaman,  67,  377. 

Ifakid,  mere,  35. 

Ifame,  reputation,  distinction,  2. 
iNamely,  especially,  9,  20,  279  ; 

nameliche,  16. 
iN’appi]?,  sleeps,  303. 

IS’aprye,  table  linen,  434. 

'Ne,  nor,  3. 

Neden,  compel,  57  ;  nedid,  11,  41. 
Nedy  (should  probably  be  nedys), 
needs,  49. 

Kedles,  needlessly,  51. 


iMeer,  nearer,  252,  289,  409. 

IN'eet,  cattle,  172. 

Neie^boris,  neighbours,  35 ;  nei^e- 
boj^eris,  73. 

17eyn]?e,  ninth,  12. 

j^emne,  v.  name,  nemyn,  465  ; 
nempnyd,  394. 

ISTerehonde,  almost,  243. 

Nej^eles,  nevertheless,  40. 

Nevill,  Lord,  impeached,  519. 

■Kycete,  trifling,  167,  205. 

Nicodeme,  2  ;  nychodeme,  256, 

297. 

Mcodemus,  gospel  of,  256. 

N’ye,  nigh,  389. 

Ny^e,  high  (the  n  carried  on 
from  end  of  the  previous  word), 

336. 

Nigromansye,  necromancy,  429. 

Nyle,  do  not  (ne  wille  used  as  Lat.  \ 
noli),  21. 

Nys,  is  not,  50,  78,  89,  149  (in  \ 
all  these  cases  used  with  another 
negative  nys  not  ”). 

Nyse,  dainty,  fanciful,  trifling, 

23,  152. 

Noble,  a  gold  coin  worth  six 
shillings  and  eightpence,  183, 

514. 

Nobleie,  nobleness,  152,  194 ; 

nobeleie,  204;  nobley,  440. 

Noblemen,  keep  up  bands  of 
ruffians,  243. 

Noye|»,  hurts,  307. 

Noyose,  hurtful,  315. 

Noon,  None,  the  fifth  of  the 
Canonical  hours,  41. 

Noon,  none,  not  one,  19,  23. 

Norischen,  to  nourish,  support, 
encourage,  6,  24  ;  norsche]?,  42. 

Norisses,  nurses,  182. 

Norwich,  bishop  of,  152,  502. 

Not,  nought,  216. 

Not,  knows  not  (ne  wit),  333. 

Notaries,  used  to  take  down  false 
witness  against  preachers,  74. 

Noteful,  needlul,  343. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


559 


IS’ottis,  nuts,  given  as  presents  by 
friars,  12. 

Novelries,  novelties,  50 ;  nowel- 
ries,  94. 

iN’owarde  to  hem,  they  do  not  care, 
24. 

l^urschid,  nourished,  421. 

0,  one  19. 

Oaths,  enforced  needlessly,  253. 

Obedience,  civil,  xxxvii,  229,  519. 

Obedience  to  prelates,  limits  of, 
29,  31,  131,  416. 

Obesche,  obeche,  obey,  29  ; 
obiche,  90 ;  obliche,  probably  a 
mistake  for  obeiche,  43. 

Oblischen,  bind,  335 ;  oblishid, 
oblishyng,  298. 

Ockham,  William  of,  hi,  xxxiii. 

Odo  (de  Sheritona  ?),  374,  399, 
527. 

Of,  by,  78,  89. 

Of  hard,  hardly,  297. 

Oil,  consecration  of,  69,  500. 

Omnis  utriusque  sexus.  The 
bull,  329,  524. 

On,  one,  ^21  ;  oone,  50;  oon,  293. 

Onehed,  unity,  429. 

Onest,  honourable,  411. 

Onys,  once,  6  ;  oonys,  372. 

Onoon,  anon,  102. 

Onsuerede,  answered,  299. 

Oonliche,  only,  310. 

Oost,  host,  63,  291. 

Ope,  hope,  65,  159. 

Opyn,  public,  well  known,  287. 

Opyn,  openly,  publicly,  34. 

Or,  ere,  before,  166. 

Ora  pro  nobis,  sung  in  procession 
through  the  streets,  133,  176. 

Orble,  horrible,  233. 

Ordeynen,  appoint,  5  ;  ordend,  388. 

Ordeynyngis,  oriinances,  57. 

Orders,  jealousies  between,  310, 
523. 

Ordination  fees,  166,  393  ;  bribes 
given  to  avoid  examination,  166. 


Ordynal  of  Salusburjq  170,  193. 

Orgene,  organs,  77 ;  orgen  91  ; 
orgon,  191. 

Orible,  horrible,  59,  130. 

Origene,  373,  398. 

Orphans  cheated  by  monks  and 
friars,  130. 

Ose,  Hosea,  383. 

Oste,  host,  345. 

Osteleris,  innkeepers,  181. 

Ostia,  Cardinal  of,  47,  498. 

Oper,  either,  78. 

Ouer,  besides,  460. 

Ouermost,  uppermost,  340. 

Ournementis,  ornaments,  393. 

Outlawid,  driven  out,  116. 

Outtake,  except,  54;  outaki]?,  130. 

Outwittis,  senses,  291. 

Owen,  own,  3. 

Owen,  ought,  20;  owij?,  11. 

Oxneford,  427  ;  course  of  study 
there,  ii ;  university  supports 
Wyclif,  xxvi,  et  sq. 

Pagyn,  pageant,  206.  With  the 
secondary  sense  of  an  acted 
trick,  99.  note  on  p.  515. 

‘  ‘  In  the  word  pageant  the  final  i  is 
unoriginal,  as  in  ancient  and  tyrant ; 
the  derivation  is  from  the  Low  Latin 
pagina,  fully  vouched  for  hy  the  notes 
in  the  Proniptorium  Parvulorum, 
meaning  a  scaffold  for  the  acting  of 
miracle  plays.” —  From  a  notice  of 
some  remarks  made  hy  Prof.  Skeat 
at  the  Cambridge  Philological  Society, 
Academy^  Dec.  27,  1879. 

Payed  of,  satisfied  with,  432. 

Paynymes,  pagans,  29,  184. 

Paleis,  palaces,  14,  129  ;  paleicis, 
221  ;  paleises,  14. 

Pans,  pence,  36. 

Panter,  snare,  80,  193,  205. 

Parceyued,  perceived,  10. 

Pardoneris,  distributors  of  indul¬ 
gences,  73,  150,  154,  175,  511. 

Pardons,  indulgences,  5 ;  useless 
if  sold,  66. 


560 


GLOSSARTAL  INDEX. 


Parischenes,  parishioners,  9,  16, 
76,146,436;  paries  (or  parish?), 
418. 

Parish  churches  ruined  by  appro¬ 
priation,  223  ;  the  competi¬ 
tion  of  the  friars,  14,  322,  448. 

Parysiensis,  399,  529. 

Park  breaking,  98,  503. 

Parliament,  debate  in,  reported  by 
Wyclif,  vi ;  Wyclif  present  in, 
yiin. 

Parsener,  partner,  421. 

Parsones,  parish^ priests,  76. 

Parte,  divide,  share,  14  ;  partid, 
316. 

Partynge,  distribution,  134,  175. 

Partyneris,  sharers,  81. 

Passen,  exceed,  surpass,  66,  88. 

Passyngly,  exceedingly,  342. 

Pastors,  what  they  should  be, 
438. 

Pater  noster,  16,  176,  320,  421  ; 
tract  on,  198. 

Pater  noster,  the  best  prayer,  320. 
509  ;  taught  in  English  by 
friars,  429. 

Pateshull,  William,  an  escaped 
friar,  507. 

Paul,  an  exception  among  the 
Pharisees,  2,  294,  297 ;  ap¬ 
pealed  to  Caesar,  241,  520. 

Paul  withstood  Peter,  292. 

Pecock,  Bishop,  385. 

Pedderis,  pedlars,  12. 

Pees,  peace,  18. 

Peiere,  make  worse,  injure,  181, 
194,  250;  peyrynge,-.365  ;  pei- 
rid,  paired,  102 ;  perid,  32 ; 
peierid,  188.  ' 

Peyne,  pain,  penalty,  24,  56  ; 
peyny,  339. 

Peyned,  punished,  11. 

Peyneful,  laborious,  124. 

Peynted,  false,  hypocritical,  271. 

Peisble,  peaceable,  41 

Pellure,  fur,  12,  92,  148;  pelure, 
121  ;  peluris,  127. 


Penance,  false,  25,  160;  arbitrary, 
333  ;  danger  of  money  penance, 
334. 

Pencions,  annual  payments  out  of 
the  tithe  or  endowment,  97, 
503. 

Peny,  penny,  peny,  used  for 
money  generally,  67. 

Peny  clerkis,  account  keepers,  78, 
246. 

Pens,  pence,  69. 

Percy,  Lord  Henry,  x. 

Pere,  peer,  equal,  47  ;  peris,  183. 

Peris,  pears,  12. 

Perfit,  perfect,  2  ;  perfitere,  269  ; 
perfiteste,  157. 

Perfitly,  perfectly,  3. 

Perilousere,  more  perilous,  31. 

Perjury,  prelates  claim  sole  right 
to  punish,  213;  at  assizes,  278. 

Perpetual  aim s=: endowment,  12, 
384,  385,  388,  392,  476.  ^ 

Perpetuald,  perpetuated,  477. 

Perpetuities,  Christ  only  can  or¬ 
dain,  478. 

Perquisitiuys,  perquisites,  393. 

Perische,  pierce,  348  ;  persi]?,  288. 

Persecution  of  true  priests,  5,  130, 
177,  237,  279,  334;  to  death, 
9,  16,  87,  88,  94,  119,  134,  369. 

Personalities,  wrong,  298;  avoided 
by  Wyclif,  263. 

Persones,  parsons,  395. 

Pesable,  peaceable,  371. 

Pese,  V.  patch,  41. 

Pestilences,  177,513;  philosophers’ 
account  of,  307. 

Petir,  34,  38. 

Peter  was  Christ’s  vicar,  460 ; 
lodged  humbly  at  a  currier’s, 
471 ;  his  repentance,  381;  called 
Satan,  145,  410,  471. 

Petrus  Comestor,  489. 

Pharaoo,  215  ;  pharao,  373,  444. 

Pharisees,  religious  orders  like,  2, 
27,  312. 

Philemon,  414. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


561 


Physic  made  an  occasion  of  adul¬ 
tery,  10,  224,  492. 

Picchid,  pitched,  fixed,  307,  480. 

Piers  Plowman,  492,  493,  495, 
518,  528,  532,  533. 

Pierce  the  Ploughman’s  Crede, 
490,  523. 

Pies,  magpies,  194. 

Pilat,  241,  290;  pilatis  not  pre- 
latis,  63. 

Pile,  rob,  300;  piled,  118; 
piliynge,  88  ;  piling,  417. 

Pilgromage,  7,  103,  279,  343. 

Pyned,  punished,  213. 

Pipe  wi^  an  yuy  lefe,  372. 

Pistles,  epistles,  101 ;  pistlis,  157. 

Pite,  pity,  129. 

Pitee,  piety,  228,  304. 

Placebo,  vespers  in  the  office  for 
the  dead,  57,  177,  191,  494; 
placeboes,  15. 

Placis,  mansions;  14.  See  Mr. 
Skeat’s  note  on  Piers  Plowman, 
xiii,  246. 

Plate,  extravagance  in,  60,  92, 
279,  434. 

Plede,  go  to  law,  24,  66. 

Pledynge,  litigation,  93,  122 ; 

pletynge,  123,  373. 

Plee,  lawsuit,  litigation,  60,  61, 
116,  123,  146. 

Pleien,  play,  99. 

Pleies,  amusements,  6,  23,  1,52  ; 
pley,  mystery  play  (of  York), 
429. 

Pleyne]?,  complains,  38,  234  ; 

reji.  plene  hem,  388. 

Pleynt,  complaint,  308. 

Plenerly,  fully,  50,  104,  126. 

Plentifousli,  plentifully,  3 ;  plen- 
teuously,  68. 

Plesance,  pleasure,  369. 

Plesandeli,  pleasingly,  3  ;  ple- 
saunly,  288. 

Plesaunt,  pleasing,  16. 

Pluralities  sometimes  allowable, 
432. 


Poeuere,  poor,  195. 

Poynt  devyse  at,  exact,  complete, 
329. 

Poyntis,  (?)  appointments,  250. 

Poisies,  poems  (preached),  124. 

Polychronicon,  391. 

Pond,  pounds,  82;  pondis,  100. 

Ponderen,  consider  (?),  it  seems 
rather  to  bear  the  meaning  of 
pretend,  486. 

Ponysche,  35,  67. 

Pontificals,  books  containing  pray¬ 
ers  and  ritual  directions  for 
Bishops,  especially  those  needed 
in  exercising  the  offices  reserved 
to  the  Episcopal  order,  480. 

Poondis,  inclosures,  421. 

Popes.  See  Urban  Y.,  Urban  YI., 
Gregory  XI.,  Clement  YII. 

Pope,  Wyclif’s  views  as  to,  xv; 
meaning  of  the  wmrd,  471,  534, 
fallibility  of,  425,  461  ;  is  anti¬ 
christ,  89,  457,  462. 

Poralis,  poor  people,  14. 

Porerste,  poorest,  460. 

Porfirie,  447,  533. 

Portos,  portable  breviaries  (port- 
hors) ;  Lat.  portiforium  :  “  liber 
quern  portat  foras  sacerdos.” — 
Int.  to  Sarum  Breviary. 

Possessioners,  endowed  clergy,  1 1 , 
116,  et  seqq.,  506. 

Possidonye,  118,  506. 

Postlis,  apostles,  55,  462. 

Potestatis,  rulers,  181,  229. 

Pouert,  poverty,  5. 

Poverty,  as  professed  by  monks 
and  friars,  490. 

Poul,  2,  6,  19,  34,  241,  297. 

Pray,  prey,  123. 

Prayer,  effective  according  to  the 
good  life  of  him  who  prays,  117, 
169,  238,  274;  of  the  elect, 
77;  special,  16,  27,  134,  320, 
509. 

Prayer,  good  life  the  best,  76,  190, 
321. 


36 


662 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Prayer  not  the  special  work  of  a 
curate,  454. 

Pravelegies,  139;  pravylegies,  482 
(probably  spelt  thus  to  suggest 
a  connexion  with  pravus). 

Preaching,  a  priest’s  best  work, 
111,  189,  441;  frivolous,  see 
Chronicles,  Yerses;  license  re¬ 
quired  for,  57,  70,  85,  105. 

Predestinate,  Church  consists  only 
of,  78,  198,  501,  515. 

Predestination,  108,  111. 

Prefe,  proof,  384. 

Preie,  pray,  77 ;  preied,  14;  prei- 
ynge,  6. 

Preire,  prayer,  42. 

Preisen,  praise,  70;  preisynge,  66. 

Prelates  appointed  by  simony,  64 ; 
their  vices,  73  ;- their  extrava¬ 
gance,  88  ;  they  are  dumb  dogs, 
104;  too  fat  to  preach,  445. 

Prelates,  jurisdiction  of,  35,  213, 
496,  517. 

Prentis,  apprentices,  11,  185,  238. 

Presents  given  to  men  of  influence, 
129,  508. 

Presonen,  imprison,  211. 

Presthold,  priesthood,  78;  prestod, 
58,  88. 

Preue,  privy,  17,  104;  preuei,  5. 

Preuely,  secretly,  89. 

Preuyte,  secrets,  10;  preuytes, 
46. 

Prickid,  choked  with  thorns,  443. 

Priests  bound  to  preach,  58,  178  ; 
abuses  prevalent  among,  166, 
et  seqq. ;  are  too  numerous,  173, 
512. 

Priests  take  service  with  lords,  65, 
168,  242,  247,  394. 

Priests,  poor,  institution  of,  xvi ; 
charged  with  causing  disturb¬ 
ance,  27,  29,  138,  229,  264. 

Prikynge,  riding  fast,  hastening, 
24. 

Prime,  one  of  the  Canonical  Hours 
due  at  6  a.m.,  41. 


Principalite,  rule,  327. 

Prynte,  impress,  473. 

Pris,  price,  21,  70. 

Prisone,  imprison,  79;  prisoned,  79. 
Privileges  exempting  from  resi¬ 
dence,  424. 

Priuetees,  book  of.  Apocalypse, 
309. 

Priu3mge,  depriving,  267. 

Processe,  continuance,  64 ;  argu¬ 
ment,  statement,  367. 
Procurasies,  procuration  fees,  sums 
payable  to  bishops  or  archdeacons 
at  visitations,  92,  249,  456. 
Procuratours,  proctors,  agents,  9, 
60,  70,  91,  139;  proctours,  279. 
Proff,  proof,  70. 

Profltere,  more  profitable  (?)  (most 
likely  a  mistake  of  the  scribe 
for  perjitere),  269. 

Profren,  proffer,  18. 

Propre,  property,  40,  478  ;  have 
in  propre mpossess  as  one’s  own, 
461. 

Propre,  own,  private,  49. 

Proprely,  as  private  property,  49. 
Proprete,  ownership,  49. 

Proprid,  appropriated,  49,  317, 
353. 

Propring,  appropriating,  421. 
Prouendris,  prebends,  419. 

Proues,  proofs,  290. 

Proverbs  and  Proverbial  Expres¬ 
sions  : — 

Putten  a  veyn  J^orn  in  his  feet, 
50. 

Swyn  in  feen,  62,  156,  217. 
Charite  schuld  bigyne  at  hem- 
self,  78. 

Give  a  goose  and  charge  for  the 
garlic,  82. 

pe  fox  feyne]?  hym  dede  til 
«  briddis  comen  to  his  tounge, 
123. 

Beren  |>e  baner,  130. 

He  ]?at  handli];  pich  schal  be 
foulid  218. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


563 


"Wif  hook  or  wi]?  crok,  250. 
Doggis  in  a  poke,  319. 

Yuel  frute  witness!]?  ynel  rote, 
331. 

Go  pipe  wij?  an  yuy  lefe,  372. 
Gabriel  schal  blow  his  home, 
382. 

At  racke  and  at  manger,  435. 
Eish  out  of  water,  449. 
Prouyncials(mynystris),  officials  of 
the  Franciscan  order,  40. 
Psendo,  pretender,  hypocrite,  296, 
308,  479. 

Pupplische,  publish,  290. 
Purchasen,  acquire,  131. 
Purgatory,  201. 

Purgatory,  Pope  ought  to  empty, 
81,  501. 

Pursuen,  persecute,  5,  35,  44,  87 ; 

pursuynge,  22,  24,  87. 
Pnrsueris,  persecutors,  138. 
Pursuyt,  persecution,  5,  44. 
Purtenance,  belongings,  370. 
Purvey,  John,  141,  510. 
Purviance,  provision,  387. 

Putrie,  whoredom,  10. 

Putten  on,  charge  with,  slander, 
19. 

Queer,  choir,  192,  319. 

Queynte,  cunning,  212 ;  queyntely, 
cunningly,  144,  477. 

Queyntise,  cunning,  20  ;  ^  queyn- 
tises,  tricks,  218. 

Quekenyd,  quickened,  made  alive, 
131. 

Quellyng,  killing,  77. 

Queste,  legal  inquiry,  182,  278, 
290. 

Qwestyons,  book  of  (Augustine’s), 
quoted,  362,  375. 

Quyenals,  masses  said  for  the  dead 
during  five  years,  66. 

Quik,  living,  246;  quyke,  96; 
quic,  477. 

Quiken,  make  alive,  319,  452. 
Quiten,  repay,  requite,  173,  215. 


Eayme]?,  robs,  185.  See'M.w  Skeat’s 
Yotes  to  Piers  PI.,  p.  275. 

Raphael,  201. 

Ratellen,  chatter,  274. 

Raunge — seyn  a  more  raurige=: 
speak  at  greater  length,  332. 

Raunsonyd,  ransomed,  66. 

Realte,  royalty,  high  state,  14. 

Rebellion  of  1381,  xxvi,  226,  495, 
502. 

Rebelte,  rebellion,  31,  75,  86,  109, 
229. 

Recerven,  reserve,  98. 

Kechelesnes,  carelessness,  392. 

Recke,  v.  care,  44,  151  ;  recki]?, 
143. 

Redi,  ready,  24. 

Reeaumus,  realms,  305. 

llefreynen,  restrain,  207  ;  re- 
freyned,  278. 

Regalie,  kingly  rights,  130,  279, 
280,  292. 

Regnen,  reign,  68;  regnede,  481. 

Reisen,  raise,  185. 

Rekennynge,  reckoning,  33. 

Relekis,  relics,  false,  154. 

Releue,  lift  up,  raise,  58. 

Religion,  monastic  profession,  7. 

Religious,  regular  priests,  monks, 
friars,  etc.,  2. 

Renewelid,  renewed,  314. 

Rennen,  run,  22,  30;  renne]?,  100; 
rennynge,  31. 

Renneris,  runners,  23. 

Rennue,  increase,  profit,  320. 

Rents  for  sin,  184,  214. 

Repyndon,  Philip,  xxvii,  xxviii, 
xxix. 

Represente,  present,  47. 

Repreuen,  reprove,  9 ;  convince, 
30. 

Reprof,  disgrace,  23. 

Reproof  often  a  duty,  55,  292, 
296,  313  ;  should  be  welcomed, 
293. 

Resceyuen,  receive,  97 ;  resseyued- 
en,  469;  ressayuyng,  377. 


564 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Eeste,  quiet,  132;  leisure,  172. 

Eette,  repute,  reckon,  357. 

Eeuen,  rob,  15,  291. 

Eeuers,  plunderers,  243. 

Eeuersi]?,  for  resists,  286,  522. 

Eeues,  bailiffs,  195. 

Eeule,  V.  rule,  23. 

Eeulis,  rules,  7,  120;  rewel,  300. 

Keward,  regard,  21,  36,  96. 

Kewlelicbe,  regularly,  317. 

Rewme,  realm,  23. 

llhymes  out  of  place  in  sermons, 
124,  438. 

Eialte,  royalty,  379. 

Eibaudrie,  ribaldry,  204. 

Eichard  (Fitz-ralph),  primate  of 
Ireland,  128,  507. 

Eichessis,  riches,  16,  24. 

Eiching,  enriching,  445. 

Eichmond,  i. 

Eigge,  Chancellor  of  Oxford, 
xxviii,  xxix. 

Eijtwisnesse,  righteousness,  29. 

Eikene,  reckon,  425. 

Eitual,  novelties  in,  162. 

Eobert  grosted,  56,  123,  145, 

224. 

Eobes,  given  to  lawyers,  235. 

Eochester,  bishop  of,  xii. 

Eohrbacher,  xxxiv. 

Eome,  23,  102. 

Eome,  Court  of,  at  enmity  with 
England,  92 ;  nest  of  Antichrist, 
446. 

Eome,  pilgrimage  to,  66,  343; 
corruption  at,  23,  66,  93. 

Eome-renners,  agents  at  the  Papal 
Court,  23,  494. 

Eote,  root,  173;  rotid,  131; 
rotynge,  201,  256. 

Eote,  rot,  408. 

Eoten,  rotten  (used  most  often  as 
a  term  of  contempt,  for  corrupt, 
worthless),  19,  72. 

Eoune,  whisper,  343 ;  rownyng, 
100,  328,  336. 

Eownyngly,  whisperingly,  328. 


Eudenesse,  ignorance,  291. 

Saad,  steadfast,  21  ;  sadde,  79. 

Saaf,  safe,  36,  107. 

Sacchis,  sacks,  41. 

Sacraments,  new,  253. 

Sacrament,  what  it  is,  341 ;  con¬ 
fession  not  a,  341. 

Sacrament,  affected  by  the  worthi¬ 
ness  of  the  priest,  102,  287, 
522. 

Sacraments,  too  many,  244,  253. 

Sacrament  of  Lord’s  Supper.  8ee 
Host. 

Sacre,  consecrate,  480  ;  sacrid, 
465. 

Sacrynge  of  orders,  ordination, 
393. 

Sadnesse,  steadiness,  198. 

Saduces,  2. 

St.  Amour,  William  of,  489. 

Saints,  prayer  to,  xlii ;  merits  of, 
xix,  83. 

Saints,  not  always  safe  models, 
288,  382,  451  ;  some  cited  as 
examples,  205. 

Salisbury  Ordinal,  170,  192. 

Salomon,  8,  45,  76,  190,  231, 
291,  365  ;  Samon,  231  ;  de¬ 
posed  and  appointed  high 
priests,  241. 

Salvation,  our  own,  a  matter  of 
hope,  350. 

Samary,  Samaria,  415. 

Sanctuary,  abuse  of,  134,  280. 

Sanctus,  chanted  to  fanciful  music, 
169. 

Saracenes,  Saracens,  456 ;  saras- 
yns,  45  ;  sarsyn,  74,  98 ;  adul¬ 
terate  Christ’s  law  like  the 
Pope,  456. 

Saruandis,  servants,  362. 

Satanas,  3,  48,  87,  313  ;  un-- 
bounden,  3,  48,  89,  328,  332, 
357,  498. 

Satrap,  a  worldly  prelate,  7,  491. 

Sauoure,  know,  95. 


GLOSSAHIAL  INDEX. 


565 


Sautir,  psalter,  41,  156. 

Scala  Cell,  a  chapel  near  Eome, 
102,  504. 

Scarioth  (Judas),  Iscariot,  319, 
409,  461,  477  ;  sharioth,  296  ; 
schariotis,  330  ;  applied  to  the 
friar’s  bag-bearer,  49,  498. 

Scars,  sparing,  316,  473. 

Scarsly,  sparingly,  300. 

Scarste,  scarcity,  364. 

Scewi]?,  shews,  148. 

Schaak,  shake,  291. 

Schamefasteness,  modesty,  204. 

Schapellis,  chapels,  194. 

Schapen,  made,  352. 

Scharpliest,  most  sharply,  67. 

Schaueldours,  idle  wanderers,  va¬ 
gabonds,  249. 

Scheld,  shield,  261,  347  ;  schildis, 
155. 

Schepe,  sheep,  32;  schep,  172. 

Schepeherde,  shepherd,  238;  schip- 
ard,  374. 

Schepische,  simple,  silly,  212. 

Schism,  Great,  xv,  xviii,  19,  461. 
533. 

Schitte,  shut,  272. 

Schon,  shoes,  41. 

Schrewid,  wicked,  216. 

Schrewidnesse,  wickedness,  1 7, 

211. 

Science,  Wyclif’s  studies  in,  ii. 

Sclaundren,  slander,  5  ;  sclaun- 
drynge,  18  ;  offend,  scandalize, 
168. 

Sclandris,  slanders,  22. 

Sclaunderis,  slanderers,  14. 

Schulden,  should,  11  ;  schullen,  5. 

Scole,  university,  10,  156,  428. 

Scots,  stratagem  played  by,  99, 
504. 

Scripture,  how  to  be  interpreted, 
10,  89,  266,  343. 

Sect,  a,  what  it  is,  301. 

Seculeris,  laymen,  31. 

Seculerte,  lay  rule,  385. 

Sege,  throne,  230. 


Seie,  say,  82;  seyn,  5  ;  seist,  285  ; 
seij^e,  29  ;  seiynge,  3. 

Sey,  saw,  118. 

Seit,  set,  74;  seeit,  174. 

Seyntiwarye,  sanctuary,  280. 

Seke,  ask,  56. 

Selde,  sold,  67,  97. 

Selis,  seals,  66. 

Semen,  seem,  148 ;  seme]?,  be¬ 
seems,  becomes,  46. 

Senage,  synodals,  a  tax  paid  to 
the  bishop  by  clergy  coming  to, 
the  yearly  synod,  456. 

Sengie,  single,  unmarried,  73. 

Seniours,  elders,  used  apparently 
as  equivalent  to  priests,  303. 

Senses,  the  five,  tempt  to  sin,  216. 

Sensuris,  censures,  286. 

Sentence,  meaning,  201. 

Serabites,  monks  not  under  a  rule, 
12  ;  and  note,  493. 

Serfdom,  unjustly  enforced,  226, 
234,  520;  serfs  held  by  clergy, 
385. 

Sermonyalis,  ceremonial  laws,  285. 

Seremonyes,  ceremonies,  93  ; 
serymonyes,  276. 

Seruage,  serfdom,  bondage,  122, 
228,  450. 

Servants,  duty  of,  227. 

Seruen  of,  use,  make  use  of,  79. 

Seruese,  service,  285. 

Seruyces,  conditions  of  tenure,  26. 

Settyng,  assessment,  103. 

Seue,  follow,  30;  sewe,  105; 
sewyng,  299. 

Seurerly,  securely,  333. 

Shapen,  devise,  318. 

Shaualdours,  idle  wanderers, 
vagabonds,  210 ;  schaueldours, 
249. 

Shende,  put  to  shame,  318. 

Shewide  it  out,  gave  distinction  to 
it,  470. 

Shitte]?,  shuts,  67. 

Shoop,  made,  419. 

Shroof,  perf.  of  shrive,  329. 


566 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Sib,  akin,  437  ;  sibbe,  95. 

Siche,  such,  74. 

Sychou,  such  an  one,  47. 

Siynge,  sifting,  100; 

Sik,  sick,  46. 

Sike,  search  into,  231. 

Siker,  sure,  safe,  2,  21  ;  comp. 
sikerere,  118. 

Sikyrly,  surely,  19. 

Sikeren,  assure,  129. 

Sikernesse,  certainty,  security,  32, 
119. 

Sille,  sell,  13  ;  sillynge,  35. 

Sillere,  seller,  90. 

Siluerene,  of  silver,  6. 

Siluestre,  Sylvester  (Pope),  xxxix, 
377,  378,  380,  381,  445,  475, 
527. 

Symon  Magus,  67,  378. 

Symonient,  a  person  guilty  of 
simony,  23,  26,  64,  241,  378. 

Simony,  its  prevalence,  64,  166, 
237,245,  248  ;  definition  of,  377. 

Symonynge,  summoning,  30. 

Sin,  mortal  and  venial,  xxxvi,  338. 

Sin,  a  negation,  286,  522. 

Synage,  synodals,  249.  jSee  Se- 
nage. 

Singuler,  individual  (synguler 
wille=the  will  of  one  person), 
82. 

Synguleris,  individuals,  447. 

Sin  rents,  33,  35,  62,  72,  97,  156, 
184,  213,  237,  249,  276,  280, 
435,  496. 

Sire,  prefixed  as  title  to  a  priest’s 
name,  192. 

Sisouris,  holders  of  assize  (or  jury¬ 
men  ?),  234. 

Si]?,  si}>en,  si]7}>e,  since,  3. 

Skil,  reason,  36,47,66;  skyle,  481. 

Skileful,  reasonable,  432,  454. 

Skilefuly,  reasonably,  410. 

Skochen,  escutcheon,  99. 

Slee,  slay,  8;  sleen,  12;  slee]?,  270. 

Sleeris,  slayers,  151. 

Slei^tte,  trick, ,  199. 


Sleujje,  sloth,  159  ;  slou^te,  200. 

Slyh,  sly,  321. 

Slitterede,  slashed,  or  cut  in  tags 
and  streamers,  121. 

Smacchen,  smack,  taste,  299,  318. 

Smale  brekynge,  fanciful  or  florid 
music,  191. 

Smyttid,  stained,  352,  436,  446. 

Snybbe,  reprove,  297,313;  snyb- 
bynge,  127,  292. 

Socialist  teaching,  a  heresy,  227. 

Sodeyne,  sudden,  214. 

Sodom,  248,  251. 

Sodomy  among  friars,  6. 

Soget,  subject,  44. 

Soiorne, sojourn,  14;  soiouren,  129, 

Sokun,  sucked,  441. 

Soler,  an  upper  room,  380,  528. 

Solomon  deposed  a  high  priest, 
241. 

Somenour,  summoner,  457, 

Someres  garaenes,  games  played  at 
Midsummer  revels,  246.  Cf. 
Piers  Plowman,  viii.  22,  and 
Mr.  Skeat’s  note,  p.  137. 

Somone,  summon,  79,  146;  so- 
mene,  357  ;  somoned,  178  ; 
somnyd,  250  ;  sompned,  151  ; 
somonynge,  31. 

Sond,  sound,  38. 

Sonde,  sending  (sonde  of  be  holy 
goost),  292. 

Sone,  son,  21. 

Sonere,  sooner,  240  ;  sonner,  372. 

Song,  New,  76,  116,  162,  253; 
hides  the  words,  169,  177,  191 ; 
gives  headache,  191. 

Songen,  sung,  191. 

Sophymes,  sophisms,  6. 

Sore,  severely,  89. 

So]?,  sooth,  truth,  3  ;  soj^e,  85. 

So]?li,  truly,  20  ;  soj^eliche,  302. 

Sotil,  subtle,  cunning,  9. 

Soteltees,  tricks,  deceits,  20,  25. 

Soudyoures,  soldiers  (used  in  its 
original  sense  of  men  paid  to 
fight),  368. 


GLOSSARTAL  INDEX. 


567 


Soudon,  soldan,  sultan,  98. 
Souereyns,  rulers,  73. 

Souereynly,  supremely,  20. 

Sou^t,  looked  into,  studied,  23. 
Sounen,  tend,  306,  443 ;  sounes, 
353. 

Sourdow,  leaven,  2 ;  sourdou, 
299. 

Soutere,  cobbler,  425. 

Spain  claimed  as  subject  to  the 
Popes,  xxxiii. 

Sparwis,  sparrows,  21. 

Spede,  help,  43,  66  ;  sped!]?,  449  ; 
sped,  23. 

Spedy,  helpful,  42 ;  spedeful,  43. 

Spediy,  energetically,  247. 

Spenser,  dispenser  (of  alms  or  pro- 

visionsk  413. 

/  / 

Spensis,  expense,  186. 

Sperid,  fastened,  34 Iw. 

Spices,  species,  kinds,  72. 

Spicerie,  spices,  8. 

Spiritual  Franciscans,  39,  51. 
Spiritualte,  spiritualty  (tithes  and 
offerings  as  distinguished  from 
endowments),  276. 

Spouse  brekeris,  adulterers,  205. 
Spreswell,  i. 

Spuyng,  vomit,  25. 

Spuyle,  rob,  425  ;  spuyling,  417. 
Squeyeres,  attendants,  148. 
Stably,  firnaly,  75. 

Stablynge,  confirming,  229. 
Staciones  of  Fome,  80,  501. 
Stade,  state,  391. 

Statis,  conditions,  ranks,  25. 

Staat,  stead  (in  staat  of),  57. 
Stede,  place,  55,  480. 

Steying,  ascension,  448,  468. 
Stelle,  steal,  280. 

Stere,  stir,  9  ;  sterif,  27 ;  ster- 
ynge,  17. 

Sterynge,  impulse,  131  ;  stiryngis, 

200. 

Sterris,  stars,  113. 

Steruen,  die,  14,  217. 

Steuene,  Stephen  (St.),  110,  207. 


Stewards,  oppress  tenants,  239. 

Stide,  place,  318. 

Stie]7,  rises,  191  ;  stijen,  136. 

Stif,  strong,  317. 

Sty  fly,  strongly,  obstinately,  71, 
270. 

Stikide,  stabbed,  475. 

Stille,  silent,  112. 

Styngynge,  stinking,  166. 

Stiward,  steward,  129  ;  stiwardis, 
13,  239. 

Stok,  stock  or  stem  of  a  tree, 
hence  any  log  of  wood  ;  applied 
to  images,  7,  67. 

Stokes,  Peter,  xxvii. 

Stokune,  fastened,  341. 

Stond,  stand,  24 ;  stondi]?,  con¬ 
sists,  76;  stod,  78. 

Stonde  at  here  will = be  at  their 
mercy,  184. 

Strecche,  stretch,  435. 

Strecte,  strict,  129  ;  streit,  132. 

Streytly,  strictly,  285  ;  streyt- 
liche,  322. 

Stre5me,  constrain,  421. 

Strengyed,  strengthened,  23. 

Stressid,  distressed  upon,  234. 

S triers,  destroyers,  128. 

Stroie]?,  destroys,  83  ;  stryed,  467. 

Strong,  strict,  103. 

Study,  leave  of  absence  for,  244, 
250  ;  abused,  156. 

Studie,  apparently  used  for  pre¬ 
tence,  98. 

Studier,  student,  380. 

Subarbis,  suburbs,  364. 

Subsidies,  unfairly  levied  by  pre¬ 
lates,  103. 

Sudbury,  Simon,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  x,  xxv. 

Sue,  sueu,  follow,  17,  99;  swen, 
374;  sueden,  112;  suyden,  481 ; 
suynge,  99. 

Suerere,  swearer,  242. 

Suffragans,  assistant  bishops ; 
bishops  in  partibus  act  as,  225. 

Suffrage,  help,  303. 


568 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Suget,  subject,  19. 

Sullen,  shall,  78. 

Sumdel,  somewhat,  266  ;  sumdele, 
379. 

Summen,  some  men,  461. 

Sumned,  summoned,  69. 

Sunnest,  soonest,  23. 

Sunday,  observance  of,  280. 

Suren  of,  assure  against,  14. 

Susanne,  74;  sussanne,  205. 

Suspect,  suspected,  'part.  2,  33 ; 
causing  suspicions,  44. 

duster,  sister,  205  ;  sustris,  12. 

Sutere,  follower,  292. 

Swearing,  profane,  60,  120,  139, 
151,206,216,233,  278,  499; 
by  priests  or  monks,  120,  170. 

Swerd,  sword,  109;  swerid,  215. 

Swet,  sweat,  51 ;  swoot,  73. 

Swyn  in  ]7e  fen,  156,  217. 

Swyjjune  (St.),  382. 

Swolwyng,  swallowing,  100,  172; 
swelwynge,  123. 

Swolwis ;  whirlpools,  97. 

Tables,  backgammon,  152, 168,259. 

Taliage,  taxation,  229,  456 ; 

talliage,  144. 

Tally-sticks,  233,  519. 

Talow,  tallow,  104. 

Takyt,  take  it,  21. 

Tapitis,  carpets,  246. 

Tarien,  delay,  hinder,  184,  428 ; 
taried,  253. 

Taterynge,  gabbling,  192. 

Tatrid,  cut  in  streamers,  148;  cf. 
robes  made  of  scredes,  Wright’s 
Pol.  Poems,  ii.  252. 

Taverns,  priests  freqpent,  23. 

Tauten,  taught,  235. 

Taxes,  heavy,  144,  233,  510. 

Taxes,  clergy  claim  exemption 
from  86,  139. 

Taxes  enforced  by  excommunica¬ 
tion,  103,  505. 

Taxid,  valued,  415. 

Tey,  tied  up,  252. 


Told,  told,  2. 

Telle,  count,  49;  reckon,  esteem, 
480. 

Temperure,  temperance,  440. 
Tenants,  despoiled  by  impoverished 
lords,  283. 

Tenefulle,  sad,  sorrowful,  387. 
Tente,  heed,  372,  373. 

Teris,  tears,  300. 

Testament,  Old,  its  moral  laws  still 
binding,  285,  366. 

Testamentis,  wills,  fees  for  proving, 
393. 

Testeris,  fittings  at  the  head  of  a 
bedstead,  434. 

Tej^es,  tithes,  132. 
\),pluralm,Y^it\]>,  14;  wity]?,  89; 

leue]?,  do]?,  102;  be]?,  166. 
p,  imperative  or  optative  in,  dis- 
troie]?,  83;  stire]?,  140;  see]>, 
plural,  162. 
pef,  thief,  11. 

pefly,  thievishly  235 ;  ]?euely, 
389. 

Theresa,  St.,  xlvi. 

picker,  more  frequently,  328,  344. 

pise,  these,  2. 

po,  those,  20. 

Thomas  (St.  of  Canterbury),  120, 
382. 

poutes,  thoughts,  330. 

pral,  thrall,  bond,  58,  227. 

pridde,  third,  2. 

pries,  thrice,  6. 

prist,  thirst,  14. 

pristyng,  thirsting,  319. 

prittene,  thirteenth,  150 

pritti]?e,  thirtieth,  161. 

prof,  throve,  481. 

prungen,  thronged,  crowded,  319. 

prusty,  thirsty,  210. 

Tierce,  one  of  the  Canonical 
Hours,  41. 

Tillen,  draw,  obtain,  300. 
Tymothe,  303  ;  thymothe,  228. 
Tirauntrie,  tyranny,  72,  95. 
Tisynge,  enticing,  43. 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


569 


Tite,  Titus,  314. 

Tithes,  are  alms,  415,  421,  436  ; 
origin  of,  391  ;  due  to  good 
priests,  431. 

Tithes  should  be  withdrawn  from- 
wicked  priests,  132,  229,  418, 
435;  from  non-residents,  421; 
436,  453. 

Tithes,  enforcement  of,  132,  146, 
415,  453. 

Tyssington,  xxii. 

Tobie,  Tobias,  201. 

To-fore,  before,  71. 

Togidre,  together,  19. 

Toke,  took,  67. 

Tokens,fifteen,  before  doomsday,  19 

Told  bi,  prized,  300. 

Tonge,  tongue,  76. 

Ton,  the  one,  188;  toon,  432  ;  in 
both  cases  is  prefixed,  as  also 
in  the  phrase  ‘‘]7e  ton  ne 
toilier,”  190. 

Tooknyge,  betokening,  364. 

To-rent,  much  torn,  50. 

To  squatte,  crush  in  pieces,  squash, 
461. 

To]7er=the  other,  but  has  ‘J^e’ 
prefixed,  19. 

Touche,  prove,  22. 

Traieden,  betrayed,  99. 

Traitere,  treachery,  149  ;  traiterie, 
130  ;  traitre,  26  ;  traitoiirie,  65. 

Traytourly,  traitorously,  447.  , 

Translatid,  changed,  77. 

Transubstansiuge,  transubstanti- 
ation,  345. 

Traveilen,  v.  work,  156  ;  travaile, 
22;  to  trouble,  36,  75;  traveil- 
ynge,  15. 

Traueile,  work,  22  ;  travel,  300. 

Traueilous,  laborious,  92;  trauel- 
ously,  laboriously,  439. 

Trecchouris,  traitors,  239. 

T rentals,  211,  516. 

Tresoreris,  treasurers,  242. 

Tretable,  easy  to  persuade  (trans¬ 
lates  suadihilis),  305. 


Tree,  beam,  wood,  (neyj^er  stoon 
ne  tree),  323. 

Trentalis,  thirty  masses,  211,  222, 
224,  and  note,  516. 

Trewe,  true,  3  ;  trwe,  5. 

Triacle,  antidote,  417,  451. 

Tribute,  paid  by  Christ,  139,  230, 
456. 

Trinity,  the,  is  in  all  things,  208, 
516 ;  is  the  measure  of  all 
things,  321. 

Trinity,  the  Three  Persons  in, 
answer  to  the  estates  of  Lords, 
Clergy,  and  Commons,  114,  134, 
362. 

Trist,  suhs.  trust,  3;  triste,  83. 

Triste,  tristen,  v.  trust,  33,  78. 

Tristiliche,  confidently,  42. 

Tryuolis,  trifles,  trifling,  442. 

Trowe,  believe,  73,  288. 

Truths,  necessary,  469. 

Turn,  trick,  127. 

Tweie,  two,  40. 

Twynny,  in  twynnyir:  asunder, 
318. 

Variaunt,  varying,  301. 

Vauntage,  advantage,  302. 

Vein,  vain,  3. 

Vencusche,  vanquish,  435  ; 
vencu^sche,  436. 

Yenge,  revenge,  35  ;  vengid,  24. 

Yenemyn,  v.  poison,  286. 

Yenym,  poison,  100. 

Yeniaunce,  vengeance,  312. 

Yerrey,  true,  3;  verray,  19. 

Yerrely,  truly,  80. 

Verses,  preached,  124,  438,  532. 

Vertues,  mighty  works  {virtutes, 
Yulg.),  443. 

Vestments,  consecration  of,  62. 

Vicars,  incompetent,  116,  212, 
223,  425. 

Yikede,  wicked,  76. 

Yikeris,  vicars,  8,  30 ;  vekeris, 
76,  454. 

Yisely,  busily  or  carefully?  279. 


570 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Yiserid,  masked,  99,  503. 
Yisitation  fees,  249. 

Ynablen,  disable,  191,  319; 

vnabli]?,  344. 

Ynable,  incapable,  unfit,  23,  67  ; 
vnhable,  465. 

Yiteleris,  innkeepers,  174.  . 
Ynablete,  unfitness,  67,  260. 
Ynauysely,  inconsiderately,  383. 
Ynauysid,  inconsiderate,  389. 
YnbelefFul,  unbelievers,  45. 
Ynbleckid,  unstained,  211;  un- 
blekkid,  129. 

Ynderloute,  perf.  bowed  down, 
submitted,  46. 

Ynderlout,  submissive,  228. 
Yndernyme,  reprove,  292. 

Yndren,  one  of  the  Canonical 
Hours,  41,  497. 

Ynequite,  injustice,  394. 

Ynfree,  not  free,  284. 

Ynfredom,  slavery,  286. 
Yngrundid,  unfounded,  337. 
Ynhalwedid,  unhallowed,  69. 
Ynhilid,  uncovered,  412. 
Yniversity,  loose  life  at,  156. 
Ynknoud,  unknown,  38. 
Ynkunnynge,  ignorant,  33. 
Ynkunningness,ignorance,  159,379 
Ynlefful,  unlawful,  46. 

Ynmeble,  fixed,  used  of  property 
like  the  Fr.  immeuhle,  12. 

Yn mercy,  mercilessness,  72. 
Ynne]7is,  hardly,  with  difficulty, 
22  ;  vnnej^e,  25. 

Ynordynel,  inordinate,  310,  315. 
Ynpatience,  impatience,  70,  152. 
Ynpees,  disquiet,  286. 

Ynperfi^t,  imperfect,  302. 
Ynri^twisnesse,  unrighteousness, 
240. 

Ynskilfully,  unreasonably,  216. 
Yn  witty,  foolish,  158. 
Ynwyttynge,  not  knowing,  68 ; 

wnwyttyngge,  56. 

Ynworschipe  hymsilf,  lose  his 
dignity,  462. 


Yoide,  foolish,  36. 

Vois,  voice,  71. 

Yp,  upon,  24  ;  according  to,  64. 

Yphepid,  heaped  up,  in  full 
measure,  370. 

Yplond,  in  the  country,  176. 

Ypsodoun,  upside  down,  119  ; 
vpsodon,  98  ;  vpsodom,  210. 

Urban  Y.,  claims  tribute  from 
England,  vi. 

Urban  YI.,  xv,  xviii,  xxxi. 

Ysid,  practised,  428. 

Yss,  use,  453. 

Usury,  186,  238,  277,  521. 

Utterly,  thoroughly,  135  ;  finally, 
213. 

Wafreris,  cake-hawkers,  12,  493, 

Wagynge,  waking,  133. 

Wayn,  waggon,  258. 

Wayschen,  washed  off,  blotted 
out,  289 ;  wayschide,  462. 

Wayte,  watchman,  395. 

Wake,  watch,  300,  363  ;  wakynge, 
168. 

Walwe,  wallow,  83,  217,  261. 

Wanhope,  despair,  350. 

Wanne,  when,  130. 

Wantiden,  were  lacking,  427. 

War,  wary,  careful,  20,  65  ;  ward, 
33. 

War,  encouraged  by  the  clergv, 
59,  73,  90,  99,  132,  147,  176!! 

Warde,  care,  regard,  72. 

Warien,  curse,  18,  217,  234; 
warrie,  76. 

Warliche,  warily,  299. 

Warne,  forbid,  50. 

Wast,  vain,  useless  {cf.  W.  Y. 
Eccles.  ii.  26,  where  wast  of 
the  first  version  is  replaced  by 
superflu  in  second),  5,  88. 

Wasty,  wasteful,  129. 

Wasteris,  extravagant  persons,  102. 

Waxen,  grow,  345. 

Wedris,  storms,  211  ;  wederis, 
457. 


GLOSSAKTAL  INDEX. 


571 


Weeg,  wedge,  49. 

Weie,  way,  17  ;  weieje,  66. 

Weights,  false,  25,  148,  185,  199. 

"Weyhte,  weight,  321  ;  weitis, 
185. 

'We5deii,  lament,  312;  weylynge, 
374;  fretting?  (translating 
languens),  228. 

Welden,  have  command  of,  369. 

Welfare,  abundance,  good  cheer, 
61. 

Welle,  indeed  or  much  ?  18. 

Welle,  source,  66. 

Welschap,  beauty  of  figure,  4. 

Wem,  spot,  blemish,  304. 

AVenden,  go,  427. 

Wene,  think,  11;  wenyng,  423. 

Where,  whether,  84. 

AVerchynge,  working,  influence, 
44. 

Were,  wear,  50. 

Werie,  v.  curse,  35. 

Werk-bestis,  plough  oxen,  214. 

Werre,  war,  16;  werris,  9. 
werrynge,  warring,  147. 

Wettes,  weights,  25. 

AVexe,  wax,  101. 

Which e,  ark,  55ra. 

Who,  woe,  271. 

Whot,  knows,  77. 

AViche-craft,  witchcraft,  9. 

AVyclif,  birth,  i ;  studies  at  Oxford, 
ii ;  Master  of  Balliol,  iii.;  War¬ 
den  of  Canterbury  Hall,  iv  ; 
Commissioner  at  Bruges,  ix ; 
prosecuted  by  the  Bishops,  x  ; 
again,  xi ;  consulted  by  the 
Council,  xii ;  examined  at 
Lambeth,  xiv ;  trains  poor 
priests,  xvi ;  translates  Bible, 
xvii ;  his  attacks  on  Church 
abuses,  xviii ;  on  Transubstan- 
tiation,  xx;  publishes  his  Con¬ 
fession,  XXV  ;  his  teaching  con¬ 
demned  at  Blackfriars,  xxvii; 
driven  from  Oxford,  xxx ;  cited 
to  Borne,  xxxi ;  death,  xxxii ; 


his  personal  character,  xlv ;  his 
temper,  xlvi,  294,  312 ;  his 
moderation,  xl. 

W5"clif,  John,  vicar  of  Mayfield, 
iv?^. 

Wykeham,  William  of,  520. 
Wills,  extortions  connected  with, 

277,  393,  521. 

Wills,  protected  by  excommuni¬ 
cation,  48,  224,  498. 

Wilne,  inf.  will,  328. 

AVilful,  voluntary,  14,  69. 
Windows,  gay,  in  churches,  8,  181. 
Wine,  spiced,  13. 

AVirien,  worry,  24, 

AVis,  wise,  3;  wiss,  443. 

Wyste,  wisten,  knew,  44,  478  ; 
wist,  part.  20. 

Wi];-ynne  forj^e,  inwardly,  46. 
AVi]7-oute  for]?,  outwardly,  46 ;  wi]?- 
outen  forj^e,  354, 

AVij^seie,  contradict,  oppose,  160. 
Witnesses,  subornation  of,  74,182, 

278. 

AVitsontide,  43. 

Witt,  intelligence,  32  ;  meaning, 
343  ;  wittis,  senses,  20. 

Witte,  witen,  wite,  know,  37,  77, 
328  ;  wity]?,  89. 

Witti,  wise,  10 ;  comp,  wittiere, 
10. 

Wyttyngly,  knowingly,  63. 
Wlappid,  wrapped,  97,  123,  435. 
AVolen,  will,  23. 

Woluys  of  helle,  24,  149. 

Wombe,  belly,  6. 

Wombe-ioie,  pleasures  of  the  table, 
68,  119. 

Wondir,  wonderfully,  378. 
Wondirful,  making,  giving  ad¬ 
miration  {mirantes,  Yulg.)  308. 
Woned,  accustomed,  wont,  321. 
Wode,  mad,  raging,  25,  109  ; 

wood,  307. 

Woode,  madly,  5. 

Woodnesse,  madness,  fury,  313. 
Woodford,  xxiii,  xliii,  498. 


572 


GLOSSARIAL  INDEX. 


Woodland  tithes  on,  510. 

Worche,  work,  87,  227  ;  worsche, 
123  ;  worchi]?,  352. 

Wordli,  worldly,  3. 

Worschipen,  do  honour  to,  265. 
Worschipe,  subst.  honour,  13; 

worschipis,  34. 

Worschipful,  honourable,  14. 
WorJ^inesse,  dignity,  174. 

AVouke,  week,  454. 

AV^ow,  vow,  170  ;  wowes,  66. 
AVoxun,  waxen,  grown,  448. 
Wrast,  V.  tune,  wrasted,  340 ; 
wrastyng,  341  (wrest,  a  tun¬ 


ing  key,  is  used  in  the  “Legend 
of  Montrose,”  chap.  9). 

AYrathi]?  her,  is  angry,  354. 

Wra]7id,  angered,  43 ;  wraj^j^id, 

200. 

Wrotynge,  grubbing,  digging  with 
the  snout  like  swine,  147. 

Wurche,  work,  342. 

York,  miracle  play  acted  at,  429, 
530. 

Zacharie,  Zechariah,  270. 


STEPHEX  AUSTIN  AND  SONS,  PRINTERS,  HERTFORD. 


yiMv'' 


it,  '  r  V  i  ’  i*  j 

,  '  R‘  '  JJI  *►' 

1  M'.  '1 

['  n 

M  *0  1 

V  i 

B  '■- '.  1  {  f  '  i' 

1  ,  ♦ 

^  .1 

T'’  M 

1 

I'-' 

V 

G'C 

'•  '*  \j 

lA  *k  '  > 

f 

i  1  ■  > 

'  ijiif  r:  .w/, 

m 

V; 

i  1 

) 

'  '■ 

S>.'  •- 

'^;^VVV  w;u,> 

^  uw 

vW 

*v  :v  ■ 

';■■% 

H^M 

H:  /Avy<^ 

